Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XV (1900-1901)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1900 London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co. edition (Parts XXXVI-XL) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc15soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


VOLUME  XV.
(CONTAINING PARTS  XXXVI-XL.)

1900-1901.


The  responsibility  for  both  the  foxls  and  the  reasonings  in  papers  published
in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  loith  their  authors.


London  :

KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER and CO.,  Limited,
CHARING CROSS  ROAD.

1901.

[The  Bights  of  Translation  and  Reproduction  are  reserved.']


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2015


https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc15soci


i'ART  XXXYI.  PAGE

General  Meetings ..........  1

J I .  The  Fire  Walk. By  Andrew  Lang ......  2

II.  Discussion  of  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper. II. — By

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick  16

III.  Discussion  of  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper. III. —
Reflections  on  Mrs.  Piper  and  Telepathy. By  Andrew  Lang  39

IV.  On  Some  Philosophic  Assumptions  in  the  Investigation  of  the
Problem  of  a  Future  Life. By  F.  C.  S.  Schiller . .  53

Supplement.

^ I.  A  Study  in  Spiritistic  Hallucinations. By  Professor  Harlow

Gale ...... .....  65

J II.  A  Case  of  Alleged  Loss  i  f  Personal  Identity ....  90

]^  III.  Note  by  Mr.  F.  C.  S.  Schiller  on  his  Review  of  Professor
^  Miinsterberg's  "  Psychology  and  Mysticism " ...  96

,^^V.  Reviews  : —

Miss  A.  Goodrich-Freer  and  the  Marquis  of  Bute's  "The

Alleged  Haunting  of  B  House." By  Frank  Podmore  98

James  Braid's  "  Neurypnology,"  edited  by  A.  E.  Waite.  By

J.  Milne  Bramwell  101

Dr.  J.  M.  Creed's  "My  Experience  of  Hypnotic  Suggestion

as  a  Therapeutic  Agent." By  Chas  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.  103
Mr. H.  H.  Goddard's  "The  Effects  of  Mind  on  Body  as
evidenced  by  Faith  Cures." By  Professor  Harlow

Gale  105

"L'Ann^e  Psychologique." By  F.  W.  H.  Myers . .  105


PART  XXXVII.

General  Meetings 109

Presidential  Address. By  F.  W.  H.  Myers 110

PART  XXXYIII.

General  Meetings ..........  129

I. On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod. By  Professor  W.  F.
Barrett,  F.R.  S.

Book  II.

Tahlt  of  CvnUnts 130

Part I. Introductory .......  132

Part II. Experiments  by  the  Author ....  144

Part III. Cases  of  Good  Water  Supply  Found  . . .  104

Part IV. Experiments  with  sever  al  Dowsers  Independently  187

Part V. Experiments  in  Blindfolding  the  Dowser  . .  200

Part W. Cases  of  Amateur  Dowsers ....  214

Part  VII. Miscellaneous  Cases 226

Part  VIII. Profes.-ional  Dowsers  and  Their  Failures  . .  234

Part IX. Continental,  Colonial,  and  Californian  Cases .  243

Part X. Bleton,  the  Notable  French  Dowser. . .  257

■  Part XI. Automatic  Motion  of  the  Rod  ....  27'>

Part XII. The  Malaise  of  the  Dowser  and  its  Origin  . .  299

Part  XIII. Origin  of  the  Stimulus  to  Motion  of  the  Rod .  303

Appendices 315


Contents.


LEMENT.  '\ ;  ?  t\  / I  \/ c c  /?  "^c  t'?

Pseudo-possosslo^l^^'Ky  fVWoJ'k  IJriRij'' J  .
Reviews  : —

Mr.  M.  M.  'Pfetrpvo-^plofv^oyo'^  "  •'Dke.Sciervtjfic,  Investigation
of  Pliysw4l  .'PhenS^'ni^ija  lyith^Modiiirns.", By  Walter


Leaf,' Litt/D.' •  . .  416

M.  Caiiiille  Flammarioii's  "  L'Inconnu et  les  Problemes

Psychiques." By  Frank  Podmore ....  422
Dr.  C.  Lloyd  Tuckey's  "  Treatment by Hypnotism  and

Suggestion." By  G.  F.  Rogers,  M.D.  . .  .433

Mr.  Perciv.al  Lowell's  "  Occult  Japan  ;  or,  the  Way  of  the

Gods." By  the  Hon.  Everard  Feilding . . .  434
Dr.  A  Lehmann's  "  Aberglauben  und  Zauberei."  ByF.  C  S.

Schiller .........  437

Dr.  Paul  Gibier's  "  Psych  ism  ;  Analysis  of  Things  Existing."

By  Frank  Pobmore .......  441

Miss  Alice  Feilding's  "  Faith-Healing  and  Christian  Science."

By  G.  F.  Rogers,  M.D  443

III. The Fourth International Congress of Psychology.  By

Dr.  Frederik  van  Eeden .......  445

PART  XXXIX.
In  Memory  of  Henry  Sidgwick.— ( With  Portrait.) By  F.  W.  H.  Myers  449

PART  XL.

General  Meetings ..........  465

The  Development  and  Genealogy  of  the  Misses  Beauchamp  :  a  Pre-
liminai-y  Report  of  a  Case  of  Multiple  Personality. By  Dr.

Morton  Prince . . . . . . . . . .  466

Supplementary  Catalogue  of  the  Edmund  Gurney  Library . . .  484

Officers  and  Council  for  1900 . . 485

List  of  Members  and  Associates  ........  486

List  of  Members  and  Associates  of  the  American  Branch . . .  510


PEOCEEDI^^^GS

OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH,

PART  XXXYI.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS.


The  100th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  West-
minster Town  Hall  on  Friday,  June  23rd,  1899,  at  8.30  p.m.  ;  Dr.
Abraham  "Wallace  in  the  chair.

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  jNIyers  read  some  cases  of  the  Cure  of  Warts  by
Suggestion,  contributed  by  Mr.  C.  P.  Coghill :  an  article  by  Dr.
A.  R.  Wallace  on  the  "  Clairvoyance  of  Alexis  Didier,"  which  has
since  appeared  under  the  title  of  "  Extract  from  J'  E.  de  Mirville's
'  Des  Esprits  et  de  leurs  Manifestations  Fluidiques ' "  in  the  Pro-
ceedings, Part  XXXV. ;  a  paper  by  Mr.  F.  Podmore  on  "  Speaking
with  Tongues,"  and  a  short  paper  by  himself  on  "  Some  points  con-
nected with  Mrs.  Piper's  Trances."


The  101st  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
November  17th,  1899,  at  4  p.m.;  the  President,  Sir  William  Crookes,
in  the  chair.  •

A  paper  on  "  The  Fire- Walk  "  by  Mr.  Andrew  Lang  was  read  by
Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  and  is  printed  below.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett  read  "  A  further  paper  on  the  so-called
Divining  Rod,"  which  it  is  hoped  will  appear  in  the  next  Part  of
the  Proceedings.


The  102nd  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
December  15th,  1899,  at  8.30  p.m.;  Professor  Sidgwick  in  the  chair.

Some  extracts  from  a  paper  by  Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  entitled,
"  Experiments  in  illustration  of  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.
Piper,"  were  read  by  Professor  Oliver  Lodge.


2


Andreiv  La^ig.


[part


I.

THE  FIRE  WALK.
By  Andrew  Lang.

The  subject  of  this  paper  has,  pei'haps,  nothing  to  do  with
psychical  research.  The  phenomena  described  are  purely  physical,
nor  is  there,  apparently,  much  reason  to  suppose  that  they  have
any  cause  in  the  human  mind.  But,  in  history,  they  have  often
been  associated  with  anecdotes  of  miracles,  and  with  persons  who
had  credit  as  miracle-workers.  These  have  handled  or  walked
through  fire  without  any  lesion  or  cautery.  Of  course,  it  is  conceiv-
able, barely,  that  in  certain  abnormal  states  of  mind,  men  might  be
insensible  to  the  action  of  fire.  But  no  such  state  of  mind  would
prevent  fire  from  doing  its  normal  work  on  the  body.  Moreover,
I  shall  show  that  fire  failed  to  cauterise  the  naked  feet  of  a  norma,l
British  official,  whose  mental  condition  was  much  as  usual.

The  subject  occurs  everywhere  in  history,  legend,  folk-lore,  law  and
early  religion,  and  yet  nobody  has  thought  it  worth  while  to  collect
the  ancient  reports  and  to  compare  them  with  well-authenticated
modern  examples.  In  Mr.  Tylor's  celebrated  work.  Primitive  Culture,
only  one  or  two  casual  allusions  are  made  to  the  theme.  "  They  built
the  high  places  of  Baal,  in  the  valley  of  the  son  of  Ilinnom,  to  cause
their  sons  and  daughters  to  pass  through  to  Moloch,"  that  is,  to  pass
through  the  fire,  "  whether  in  ritual  or  symbolical  sacrifice"  [Primitive
Culture,  Vol.  II.,  p.  281).  As  a  supposed  rite  of  purification  the
ceremony  is  again  touched  upon  lightly  (Vol.  II.,  p.  429).  Again,
"  The  ancient  ceremony  of  passing  through  a  fire,  or  leaping  over
burning  brands,  has  been  kept  up  vigorously  in  the  British  Isles "
(Vol.  I.,  p.  85),  namely,  at  the  midsummer  ceremonies,  when  it  is,
or  was,  the  custom  to  jump  over,  or  run  through,  light  fires.  Nobody
would  guess  that  a  rite  of  passing  deliberately,  and  unscathed,  through
ovens  or  furnaces  yet  exists  in  Japan,  Bulgaria,  the  Society  Islands,
Fiji,  Southern  India,  Trinidad,  the  Straits  Settlements,  the  Isle  of
Mauritius,  and,  no  doubt,  in  other  regions.  We  must  distinguish
between  such  sportive  playing  with  fire  as  prevailed  recently  in  these
isles  and  the  more  serious  Fire  Ceremony  of  Central  Australia,  which
tests  endurance,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  apparent  contravention  of
a  natural  law,  on  the  other.  Again,  we  must  discount  the  popular
reply  that  the  hand  can  be  rapidly  plunged  into  molten  metal  and


XXXVI.]


The  Fire  Walk.


3


withdrawn  without  injury,  for  we  do  not  happen  to  be  concerned
with  such  a  brief  exposure  to  heat.  Once  more,  the  theory  of  the
application  of  some  unknown  chemical  substance  must  be  rejected,
because,  as  we  shall  prove,  there  are  certainly  cases  in  which  nothing
of  the  kind  is  done.  Moreover,  science  is  acquainted  with  no  sub-
stance— alum  or  diluted  sulphuric  acid,  or  the  like — which  will
produce  the  result  of  preventing  cauterisation.  Sir  William  Crookes,
at  least,  is  not  familiar  with  any  such  resources  of  science.  His
evidence  as  to  fire-handling  by  D.  D.  Home  is  familiar,  and  I
understand  that  Mr.  Podmore  can  only  explain  it  away  by  a
hypothesis  of  a  trick  played  in  a  bad  light,  by  means  of  an  asbestos
glove  or  some  such  ti'ansparent  dodge  [Studies  in  Psychical  Research,
pp.  58-59).  Perhaps  he  adds  a  little  "hallucination"  on  the  part
of  the  spectators.  But  asbestos  and  hallucination  are  out  of  the
question  in  the  cases  which  I  am  about  to  quote.  Home  was,
or  feigned  to  be,  in  a  state  of  trance  when  he  performed  with  fire.
The  seeress  of  Lourdes,  Bernadette,  was  also  in  religious  contem-
platioxi  when  she  permitted  the  flame  of  a  candle  to  play  through  her
clasped  fingers  (which  were  unscathed)  for  a  timed  quarter  of  an
hour.  1  Some  Indian  devotees,  again,  aver  that  they  "meditate"  on
some  divine  being  while  passing  over  the  glowing  embers,  and  the
Nis'tinares  of  Bulgaria,  who  dance  in  the  fire,  are  described  as  being
in  a  more  or  less  abnormal  mental  condition.  But  even  this  condition
is  absent  in  the  well-attested  Raiatean  and  Fijian  examples,  in  which,
also,  no  kind  of  chemical  preparation  is  employed.  Finally,  where
savages  are  concerned,  the  hardness  of  the  skins  of  their  feet  is  dwelt
upon.  But,  first,  the  sole  of  a  boot  would  be  scorched  in  the  circum-
stances, while  their  feet  are  not  affected  ;  next,  the  savages'  feet
were  not  leathery  (so  Dr.  Hocken  avers) ;  thirdly,  one  of  the
Europeans  who  walked  through  the  fire  at  Rarotonga  declares  that
the  soles  of  his  own  feet  are  peculiarly  tender.  Thus  every  known
physical  or  conjectured  psychical  condition  of  immunity  fails  to  meet
the  case,  and  we  are  left  wholly  without  an  ascertained,  or  a  good
conjectural,  "reason  why"  for  the  phenomena.

I  shall  begin  with  the  most  recent  and  the  most  authenticated
cases,  and  work  back  in  time,  and  in  civilisation.  Mr.  Tregear,  the
well-known  lexicographer  of  the  Maori  and  the  allied  Mangarova
languages,  lately  sent  me  the  twenty-ninth  number  of  The  Journal  of
the  Polynesian  Society,  March,  1899,  Wellington,  N.Z.  Professors
Max  Miiller  and  Sayce  are  Honorary  Members  of  the  Society,  which
studies  Polynesian  languages,  customs  and  conditions.  Mr.  Tregear
attests  the  upright,  truth-telling  character  of  the  British  official,  who


1  Dr.  Dozous  timed  the  "miracle." Boissarie,  Lourdes,  p.  49.


.4


Andrew  Lavg.


[part


is  the  narrator  of  his  own  experiment.  As  the  journal  is  not  widely
circulated  in  England,  I  quote  the  whole  of  the  brief  report.

TE  UMU-TI,
OR  FIRE-WALKING  CEREMONY.


By  Colonel  Godgeox,
British  Resident,  Rarotonoa.

In  tills  Journal,  Vol.  II.,  p.  105,  Miss  Teuira  Henry  describes  this
ceremony  as  practised  in  Raiatea,  of  the  Society  Group.  We  have  lately
received  from  Colonel  Gudgeon  the  following  account  of  his  experiences  in
walking  bare-footed  across  the  glowing  hot  stones  of  a  native  oven,  made  in
Rarotonga  by  a  man  from  Raiatea.  Since  the  date  of  the  paper  quoted,  it
has  come  to  light  that  the  Maoris  of  New  Zealand  were  equally  acquainted
with  this  ceremony,  which  was  performed  by  their  ancestors.  On  reading
Colonel  Gudgeon's  account  to  some  old  chiefs  of  the  Urewera  tribe,  they
expressed  no  surprise  and  said  that  their  ancestors  could  also  perform  the
ceremony,  though  it  has  long  gone  out  of  practice. — Editors.


I  must  tell  you  that  I  have  seen  and  gone  through  the  fire  ceremony  of
the  Umn-Ti.

The  oven  was  lit  at  about  dawn  on  the  20th  of  January,  and  I  noticed
that  the  stones  were  vei-y  large,  as  also  were  the  logs  that  had  been  used  in
the  oven  for  heating  purjDoses.

About  2  p.m.  we  went  to  the  oven  and  there  found  the  tohnntja  (a
Raiatea  man)  getting  matters  ready,  and  I  told  him  that,  as  my  feet  were
naturally  tender,  the  stones  should  be  levelled  down  a  bit.  He  assented  to
this,  and  evidently  he  had  intended  to  do  so,  for  shortly  after,  the  men  with
very  long  poles  that  had  hooks,  began  to  level  the  stones  flat  in  the  oven,
which  was  some  twelve  feet  in  diameter.  He  then  went  with  his  disciple
and  pointed  to  two  stones  that  were  not  hot,  and  instructed  him  the  reason
was  that  they  had  been  taken  from  a  morae,  or  sacred  place.

He  then  unwound  two  bundles,  which  proved  to  be  branches  of  a  large-
leaved  Ti  (or  Draccena)  plucked,  it  is  said,  from  two  of  these  trees  standing
close  together,  and  it  is  said  that  the  initiated  can  on  such  occasions  see  the
shadow  of  a  woman  with  long  hair,  called  te  varva  hino  (evil  spirit),  standing
between  the  trees.  The  right  hand  branch  is  the  first  plucked,  and  it  is
said  that  the  branches  bend  down  to  be  plucked.

So  much  for  the  Shamanism,  and  now  for  the  facts.  ■
The  tnhnnga  (priest)  and  his  tanira  (pupil)  walked  each  to  the  oven,  and
then  halting,  the  prophet  spoke  a  few  words,  and  then  each  struck  the  edge
of  the  oven  with  the  ti  branches.  This  was  three  times  repeated,  and  then
they  walked  slowly  and  deliberately  over  the  two  fathoms  of  hot  stones.
When  this  was  done,  the  tohunga  came  to  us,  and  his  disciple  handed  his  ti
branch  to  Mr.  Goodwin,  at  whose  place  the  ceremony  came  oS,  and  they
went  through  the  ceremony.  Then  the  fo/iH?if/a  said  to  Mr.  Goodwin,  ''I
hand  my  mana  (power)  over  to  you  ;  lead  your  friends  across."  Now,  there
were  four  Europeans — Dr.  W.  Craig,  Dr.  George  Craig,  Mr.  Goodwin,  and


XXXVI.]


The  Fire  Walk.


5


myself — and  I  can  only  say  that  we  stepped  out  boldly.  I  got  across
unscathed,  and  only  one  of  the  jjarty  was  badly  burned  ;  and  he,  it  is  said,
was  spoken  to,  but,  like  Lot's  wife,  looked  behind  him — a  thing  against
all  rules.

I  can  hardly  give  you  my  sensations,  but  I  can  say  this  : — that  I  knew
quite  well  I  was  walking  on  red  hot  stones  and  could  feel  the  heat,  yet  I  was
not  burned.  I  felt  something  resembling  slight  electric  shocks,  both  at  the
time  and  afterwards,  but  that  is  all.  I  do  not  know  that  I  should  recom-
mend every  one  to  try  it.  A  man  must  have  mana  to  do  it  ;  if  he  has  not,
it  will  be  too  late  when  he  is  on  the  hot  stone  of  Tama-ahi-roa.

I  cannot  say  that  I  should  have  performed  this  wizard  trick  had  I  not
been  one  of  the  fathers  of  the  Polynesian  Society,  and  bound  to  support  the
superiority  of  the  New  Zealander  all  over  Polynesia, — indeed  all  over  the
world. I  would  not  have  missed  the  performance  for  anything.

To  show  you  the  heat  of  the  stones,  quite  half-an-hour  afterwards  some
one  remarked  to  the  priest  that  the  stones  would  not  be  hot  enough  to  cook
the  ti.  His  only  answer  was  to  throw  his  green  branch  on  the  oven,  and  in
a  quarter  of  a  minute  it  was  blazing.  As  I  have  eaten  a  fair  share  of  the  ti
cooked  in  the  oven,  I  am  in  a  position  to  say  that  it  was  hot  enough  to  cook
it  well.

I  walked  with  bare  feet,  and  after  we  had  done  so,  about  200  Maoris
followed.  No  one,  so  far  as  I  saw,  went  through  with  boots  on.  I  did
not  walk  quickly  across  the  oven,  but  with  deliberation,  because  I  feared
that  I  should  tread  on  a  sharp  point  of  the  stones  and  fall.  My  feet  also
were  very  tender.  I  did  not  mention  the  fact,  but  my  impression  as  I
crossed  the  oven  was  that  the  skin  would  all  peel  off  my  feet.  Yet  all  I
really  felt  when  the  task  was  accomi^lished  was  a  tingling  sensation  not
unlike  slight  electric  shocks  on  the  soles  of  my  feet,  and  this  continued  for
seven  hours  or  more.  The  really  funny  thing  is  that,  though  the  stones
were  hot  enough  an  hour  afterwards  to  burn  up  green  branches  of  the  ti,
the  very  tender  skin  of  my  feet  was  not  even  hardened  by  the  fire.

Many  of  the  Maoris  thought  they  were  burned,  but  they  were  not,  at
any  rate  not  severely.

Do  not  suppose  that  the  man  who  directed  this  business  was  an  old
tohmuja.  He  is  a  young  man,  but  of  the  Raiatea  family,  who  are  hereditary
fire-walkers.

I  can  only  tell  you  it  is  mana — mana  tangata  and  mana  atua.

On  this  report  a  few  remarks  may  be  offered.  (1)  jSTo  preparation
of  any  chemical,  herbal,  or  other  sort  was  applied  to  the  Europeans,  at
least.  (2)  "  The  handing  over  the  mana,''  (or  power)  was  practised  by
Home,  sometimes  successfully  (it  is  alleged)  as  when  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall's
scalp  and  white  locks  were  unharmed  by  a  red-hot  coal  :  sometimes
unsuccessfully.  A  clergyman  of  my  acquaintance  still  bears  the
blister  caused  when  he  accepted  a  red-hot  coal  from  the  hand  of  Home,
as  he'informs  me  by  letter.  (3)  The  "  walk  "  was  shorter  than  seems
common :  only  twelve  feet,  four  paces.  (4)  A  friend  of  Colonel
Gudgeon's  was  badly  burned,  and  the  reason  assigned  was  a  good


6


Andrew  Lang.


[part


folk-lore  reason,  since  the  days  of  Lot's  wife,  of  Theocritus,  and  of
Virgil:  he  looked  l)ehind.  (5)  The  feeling  as  if  of  "slight  electric
shocks"  is  worthy  of  notice.  (6)  Colonel  Gudgeon  clearly  believes
that  a  man  without  mana  had  better  not  try,  and  by  mana,  here,  he
probably  means  "  nerve."  As  we  can  hardly  suppose,  in  spite  of
Home,  that  mana,  in  a  supernormal  sense,  can  be  "  handed  over  "  by
one  man  to  another.  Colonel  Gudgeon's  experience  seems  equally  to
baffle  every  theory  of  "  how  it  is  done."  Perhaps  we  can  all  do  it.
Members  of  the  Society  may  make  their  own  experiments.  Perhaps
Colonel  Gudgeon  faced  fire  in  a  manner  so  unusual  as  a  I'esult  of  Dr.
Hocken's  description  of  the  Fijian  rite  at  Mbenga,  an  isle  20  miles
south  of  Suva.  This  account  was  published  in  the  Transactions  of  the
New  Zealand  Institute,  Vol.  XXXI.,  1898,  having  been  read  before
the  Otago  Institute  on  May  10th,  1898,  and  is  here  reprinted  in  full
as  follows  : — ■

AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  FIJI  FIRE  CEREMONY.
By  Dr.  T.  M.  Hocken,  F.L.S.

Amongst  the  many  incidents  witnessed  during  a  recent  visit  to  the
tropical  islands  of  Fiji,  probably  none  exceeded  in  wonder  and  interest  that
of  which  I  propose  to  give  some  account  this  evening,  and  to  v.diich  may  be
api^lied  the  designation  of  "fire  ceremony."  It  is  called  by  the  natives
^' vilavilairevo."  In  this  remarkable  ceremony  a  number  of  almost  nude
Fijians  walk  quickly  and  unharmed  across  and  among  white-hot  stones,
which  form  the  pavement  of  a  huge  native  oven — termed  '^lovo  " — in  which
shortly  afterwards  are  cooked  the  succulent  sugary  roots  and  pith  of  the
Cordijline  terminali^,  one  of  the  cabbage  trees,  known  to  the  Maoris  as  the
and  to  the  Fijians  as  the  "  wia-sait'e."  This  wonderful  power  of  fire-
walking  is  now  not  only  very  rarely  exercised,  but,  at  least  as  regards  Fiji,
is  confined  to  a  small  clan  or  family — the  Na  Ivilanl;ata — resident  on  Bega
(  =  Mbenga),  an  island  of  the  group,  lying  somewhat  south  of  Suva,  and
twenty  miles  from  that  capital.

A  small  remnant  of  the  priestly  order  at  Raiatea,  one  of  the  Society
Islands,  is  yet  able  to  utter  the  preparatory  incantation,  and  afterwards  to
walk  through  tlie  fire.

It  exists  also  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  as  in  parts  of  India,  the  Straits
Settlements,  West  India  Islands,  and  elsewhere.  Very  interesting  accounts
of  the  ceremony  as  seen  at  Raiatea  and  at  Mbenga  are  to  be  found  in  the
second  and  third  volumes  of  the  Journal  of  the  Polynesian  Society,  and  in
Basil  Thomson's  charming  South  Sea  Yarns.  These  descriptions  filled  our
small  party  of  three — my  wife.  Dr.  Colquhoun,  and  myself — with  the  desire
to  witness  it  for  ourselves,  and,  if  possible,  to  give  some  explanation  of
what  was  apparently  an  inexj)licable  mystery.  Our  desires  were  perfectly
realised.

The  Hon.  Mr.  A.  M.  Duncan,  a  member  of  the  Legislative  Council  of
Fiji,  and  agent  at  Suva  of  the  Union  Steamship  Company,  to  whom  I
carried  a  letter  of  introduction  from  Mr.  James  Mills,  the  managing
director  of  that  com^jany,  was  most  courteous  and  obliging,  and  promised


XXXVI.]


The  Fire  Walk.


7


his  best  efforts  in  the  matter.  His  energy  and  ready  response  succeeded,
with  the  result  that  a  large  party  from  Suva  enjoyed  such  a  day  as  each  one
must  have  marked  with  a  red  letter.

It  was  necessary  to  give  the  natives  three  days  in  which  to  make  their
prej)arations — constructing  the  oven  and  paving  it  with  stones,  which  then
required  heating  for  thirty-six  or  forty-eight  hours  at  least  with  fierce  fires
fed  with  logs  and  branches.  They  had  also  to  gather  their  stores  of  food  to
form  the  foundation  of  the  huge  feast  whose  preparation  was  to  succeed  the
mystic  ceremony.  During  these  three  days  we  lost  no  opportunity  of
collecting  from  former  witnesses  of  the  ceremony  whatever  information  or
explanation  they  could  afford,  but  with  no  very  satisfactory  result :  the  facts
were  undisputed,  but  the  explanations  quite  insufficient.  Some  thought  that
the  chief  actors  rubbed  their  bodies  with  a  secret  preparation  which  rendered
them  fireproof.;  others  that  life-long  friction  on  the  hard  hot  rocks,  coral-
reefs,  and  sands  had  so  thickened  and  indurated  the  foot-sole  that  it  could
defy  fire  ;  but  all  agreed  as  to  the  bona  fides  ol  the  exliibition.  The  incident
recounted  in  the  Pohjnesian  Journal  was  also  confii'med — where  Lady
Thurston  threw  her  handkerchief  ujjon  the  shoulder  of  one  of  the  actors,
and,  though  it  remained  there  but  a  few  seconds  before  being  picked  off  by
means  of  a  long  stick,  it  was  greatly  scorched.  ^

The  story  or  legend  attached  to  this  weird  gift  of  fire-walking  was  told
us,  with  some  variation,  by  two  or  three  difierent  people,  and  it  is  mainly  as
follows  :  A  far-distant  ancestor  of  the  present  inheritors  of  this  power  was
walking  one  day  when  he  espied  an  eel,  which  he  caught,  and  was  about  to
kill.  The  eel  squeaked  out,  and  said,  "Oh  !  Tui  Na  Galita  ( =  Eng-Galita),
do  not  kill  me  ;  spare  me.  I  am  a  god,  and  I  will  make  you  so  strong  in
war  that  none  shall  withstand  you."  "  Oh,  but,"  replied  Na  Galita,  "  I  am
already  stronger  in  war  than  any  one  else,  and  I  fear  no  one."  "Well,
then,"  said  the  eel,  "I  will  make  your  canoe  the  fastest  to  sail  on  these
seas,  and  none  shall  come  up  with  it."  "  But,"  replied  Na  Galita,  "as  it  is,
none  can  pass  my  canoe."  "Well,  then,"  rejoined  the  eel,  "I  will  make
you  a  great  favourite  among  women,  so  that  all  will  fall  in  love  with  you."
"Not  so,"  said  Na  Galita,  "I  have  one  wife,  of  whom  I  am  very  fond,  and
I  desire  no  other."  The  poor  eel  then  made  other  offers,  which  were  also
rejected,  and  his  chances  of  life  were  fading  fast  when  he  made  a  final
eflbrt.  "Oh,  Na  Galita,  if  you  will  spare  me,  I  will  so  cause  it  that  you
and  your  descendants  shall  henceforth  walk  through  the  masaive  oven
unharmed."  "Good,"  said  Na  Galita,  "now  I  will  let  you  go."  This
story  varies  somewhat  from  that  told  in  the  Polynesian  Jownal.-

The  eventful  morning  was  blazingly  hot  and  brilliant,  and  the  vivid-blue
sky  was  without  a  cloud  as  we  steamed  down  towards  Mbenga  in  the
s.s.  "  Hauroto."  Mr.  Vaughan,  an  eminent  inhabitant  of  Suva,  who  has
charge  of  the  Meteorological  Department  there,  was  of  our  party,  and
carried  the  thermometer.  This  was  the  most  suitable  for  our  purpose
procurable  ;  it  was  in  a  strong  japanned-tin  casing,  and  registered  400°
Fahr. We  had  also  three  amateur  photographers.

1  I  have  not  seen  this  account. — A.  L.

2  See  also  Mr.  Thomson's  South  Sea  Yarns. — A.  L.


8


Andrew  Lang.


[part


Owing  to  the  numerous  coral-reefs  and  shallows,  we  finally  transhipped
into  the  "Maori,"  a  steamer  of  much  less  draught.  Aj^proaching  the  silent
verdure  clad  islet,  with  its  narrow  beach  of  white  coral  sand,  we  saw  a  thin
blue  haze  of  smoke  curling  above  the  lofty  cocoanut  trees  at  a  little  distance
in  the  interior,  which  sufficiently  localised  the  mysterious  spot.  We  now
took  the  ship's  boat,  and  soon,  stepping  ashore,  made  our  way  through  a
narrow  pathway  in  the  dense  bush  until  we  came  to  an  open  space  cleared
from  the  forest,  in  the  midst  of  which  was  the  great  lovo,  or  oven.

A  remarkable  and  never-to-be-forgotten  scene  now  presented  itself.
There  were  hundreds  of  Fijians,  dressed  according  to  the  rules  of
nature  and  their  own  art — that  is,  they  were  lightly  garlanded  here  and
there  with  their  fantastic  likulikns  of  grass,  ornamented  with  brilliant
scarlet  and  yellow  hibiscus  flowers  and  streamers  of  the  delicate  ribbonwood.
These  hung  in  airy  profusion  from  their  necks  and  around  their  waists,
showing  oS  to  advantage  their  lovely  brown  glossy  skins.  In  addition,
many  wore  clean  white  cotton  snlus,  or  pendant  loin-cloths.  All  were
excited,  moving  hither  and  thither  in  wild  confusion,  and  making  the  forest
ring  again  with  their  noisy  hilarity.  Some  climbed  tlie  lofty  cocoa-palms,
hand  over  hand,  foot  over  foot,  with  all  the  dexterity  of  monkeys.  The
top  reached,  and  shrouded  amongst  the  feathery  leaves,  they  poured  down  a
shower  of  nuts  for  the  refreshment  of  their  guests.

The  celerity  with  which  they  opened  the  nuts  was  something  astonishing,
and  afibrded  an  example,  too,  as  to  the  mode  of  using  stone  implements.  A
stout,  strong  stick,  8  ft.  long,  and  sliarpened  at  both  ends,  was  driven  into
the  ground,  and  a  few  smart  strokes  upon  it  soon  tore  from  the  nut  its  outer
thick  covering.  Tlie  upper  i^art  of  tlie  shell  w'as  then  broken  off  by  means
of  a  long  sharp-edged  stone  as  cleanly  and  regularly  as  the  lid  of  an  egg  is
removed  with  a  knife,  and  then  was  disclosed  a  pint  of  delicious  milk,  a
most  welcome  beverage  on  that  overpoweringly  hot  day.

The  great  oven  lay  before  us,  pouring  forth  its  torrents  of  heat  from
huge  embers  which  were  still  burning  fiercely  on  the  underlying  stones.
These  were  indeed  melting  moments  for  the  spectators.  The  pitiless  noon-
tide sun,  and  the  no  less  pitiless  oven-heat,  both  pent  up  in  the  deep
well-like  forest  clearing,  reduced  us  to  a  state  of  solution  from  which  there
was  no  escape.  Despite  this  the  photographers  took  up  their  stations,  and
others  of  us  proceeded  to  make  our  observations.  The  lovo,  or  oven,  was
circular,  with  a  diameter  of  25  ft.  or  30  ft.  ;  its  greatest  depth  was  perhaps
8  ft.,  its  general  shape  that  of  a  saucer,  with  sloping  sides  and  a  flatfish
bottom,  the  latter  being  filled  with  the  white-hot  stones.  Near  the  margin
of  the  oven,  and  on  its  windward  side,  the  thermometer  marked  lli°.

Suddenly,  and  as  if  Pandemonium  had  been  let  loose,  the  air  was  filled
with  savage  yells  ;  a  throng  of  natives  surrounded  the  oven,  and  in  a  most
ingenious  and  effective  way  proceeded  to  drag  out  the  smouldering  unburnt
logs  and  cast  them  some  distance  away.  Large  loops  of  incombustible
lianas  attached  to  long  poles  wei'e  dexterously  thrown  over  the  burning
trunks,  much  after  the  manner  of  the  head-hunters  of  New  Guinea  when
securing  their  human  prey.  A  twist  or  two  round  of  the  loop  securely
entangled  the  logs,  which  were  then  dragged  out  by  the  united  efforts  of
scores  of  natives,  who  all  the  while  were  shouting  out  some  wild  rhythmical


XXXVI.]


The  Fire  Walk.


9


song.  This  accomplished,  the  stones  at  the  bottom  of  the  oven  were
disclosed,  with  here  and  there  flame  flickering  and  forking  up  through  the
interstices.  The  diameter  of  the  area  occujaied  by  those  stones  was  about
10  ft.,  but  this  was  speedily  increased  to  a  spread  of  15  ft.  or  more  by  a
second  ingenious  method.  The  natives  thrust  their  long  poles,  which  were
of  the  unconsumable  wi-tree  {Spmidias  dulcis),  between  the  stones  at
intervals  of  perhaps  1  ft.  A  long  rope-like  liana — ira — previously  placed
underneath  the  poles,  and  1  ft.  or  2  ft.  from  their  extremities,  was  now
dragged  by  scores  of  lusty  savages,  with  the  effect  of  spreading  and  levelling
the  stones.  This  done,  our  thermometer  was  suspended  by  a  simple  device
over  the  centre  of  the  stones,  and  about  5  ft.  or  6  ft.  above  them  ;  but  it
had  to  be  withdrawn  almost  immediately,  as  the  solder  began  to  melt  and
drop,  and  the  instrument  to  be  destroyed.  It,  however,  registered  282°
Fahr.,  and  it  is  certain  that  had  not  this  accident  occurred,  the  range  of
400°  would  have  been  exceeded,  and  the  thermometer  burst.

During  all  these  wild  scenes  we  had  seen  nothing  of  the  main  actors — of
the  descendants  of  Na  Galita.  Doubtless  to  give  more  impressive  effect,
they  had  been  hiding  in  the  forest  depths  until  the  signal  should  be  given
and  their  own  sujjreme  moment  arrive.  And  now  they  came  on,  seven  or
eight  in  number,  amidst  the  vociferous  yells  of  those  around.  The  margin
reached,  they  steadily  descended  the  oven  slope  in  single  tile,  and  walked,
as  I  think,  leisurely,  but,  as  others  of  our  party  think,  quickly,  across  and
around  the  stones,  leaving  the  oven  at  the  point  of  entrance.  The  leader,
who  was  longest  in  the  oven,  was  a  second  or  two  under  half  a  minute
thei'ein.  Almost  immediately  heaps  of  the  soft  and  succulent  leaves  of  the
hibiscus,  which  had  been  gathered  for  the  jjurpose,  were  thrown  into  the
oven,  which  was  thus  immediately  filled  with  clouds  of  hissing  steam.  Upon
the  leaves  and  within  the  steam  the  natives,  who  had  returned,  sat  or  stood
pressing  them  down  in  preparation  for  cooking  the  various  viands  which
were  to  aflJbrd  them  a  sumptuous  feast  that  evening  or  on  the  morrow.

But  for  us  the  most  interesting  part  of  the  drama  was  over,  and  it  only
remained  to  review  observations  and  draw  conclusions.  Just  before  the
great  event  of  the  day,  I  gained  permission  to  examine  one  or  two  of  the
fire-walkers  prior  to  their  descent  into  the  oven.  This  was  granted  without
the  least  hesitation  by  the  principal  native  Magistrate  of  the  Rewa  district,
N'Dabea  by  name,  but  generally  known  as  Jonathan.  This  native  is  of
great  intelligence  and  influence,  is  a  member  of  the  Na  Galita  Clan,  and  has
himself  at  various  times  walked  through  the  fire.  On  this  occasion  he  took
no  other  part  in  the  ceremony  than  that  of  watching  or  superintending  it.
The  two  men  thus  sent  forward  for  examination  disclosed  no  peculiar  feature
whatever.  As  to  dress,  they  were  slightly  garlanded  round  the  neck  and
the  waist  ;  the  pulse  was  unaffected,  and  the  skin,  legs,  and  feet  were
free  from  any  apparent  application.  I  assured  myself  of  this  by  touch,
smell,  and  taste,  not  hesitating  to  a2:)ply  my  tongue  as  a  corroborative.  The
foot-soles  were  comjDaratively  soft  and  flexible — by  no  means  leathery  and
insensible.  Thus  the  two  Suvan  theories  were  disposed  of.  This  careful
examination  was  repeated  immediately  after  egress  from  the  oven,  and  with
the  same  result.  To  use  the  language  of  Scrijjture,  ' '  No  smell  of  tire  had
passed  upon  them." No  incantations  or  other  religious  ceremonial  were


10


Anclreiv  Lang.


[part


observed.  Though  these  were  formerly  practised,  they  have  gradually  fallen
into  disuse  since  the  introduction  of  Christianity.  I  did  not  succeed  in
procuring  the  old  incantation  formula ;  doubtless  it  was  similar  to  that  of  the
old  Raiatean  ceremony,  which  is  given  in  the  second  volume  of  the  Polynesian
Society's  Journal,  p.  106.

Whilst  walking  through  the  fire,  Dr.Colquhoun  thought  the  countenances
of  the  fire -walkers  betrayed  some  anxiety.  I  saw  none  of  this  ;  nor  was  it
ajjparent  to  me  at  either  e.^aniination.  The  stones,  which  were  basaltic,
must  have  been  white-hot,  but  due  to  the  brilliance  of  the  day  this  was  not
visible.

Various  natives,  being  interrogated  for  an  explanation,  replied,  with  a
shrug,  "  They  can  do  this  wonderful  thing  ;  we  cannot.  You  have  seen  it  ;
we  have  seen  it."  Whilst  thus  unable  to  suggest  any  exjjlanation  or  theory,
I  am  absolutely  certain  as  to  the  truth  of  the  facts  and  the  hona  fides  of  the
actors.  A  feature  is  that,  wherever  this  power  is  found,  it  is  possessed  by
but  a  limited  few.  I  was  assured,  too,  that  any  person  holding  the  hand
of  one  of  the  fire-walkers  could  himself  ^&,ss  through  the  oven  unharmed.
This  the  natives  positively  assert.

My  friend  Mr.  Walter  Carew,  for  thirtj'  years  a  Resident  Commissioner
and  Stipendiary  Magistrate  in  Fiji,  has  frequently  conversed  with  Jonathan
(referred  to  above),  who,  whilst  withholding  no  explanation,  can  give
none.  He  says,  "I  can  do  it,  but  T  do  not  know  how  it  is  done";  and,
further,  that  at  the  time  he  does  not  experience  any  heat  or  other
sensation.

Does  any  psychical  condition  explain  these  facts,  as  suggested  in  Lang's
Modern  Mythology  '(  I  certainly  did  not  observe  any  appearance  of  trance
or  other  mental  condition.  In  connection  with  this  Mr.  Carew  thinks  that
intense  faith  is  the  exjilanation,  and  that  if  this  were  upset,  the  descendants
of  Na  Galita  would  be  no  longer  charmed.  But  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  any
mental  state  can  prevent  the  action  of  physical  law.  HyjJnotism  and
anesthetics  may  produce  insensibility  to  pain,  but  do  not  interfere  with
the  cautery.

Many  of  the  so-called  fire  miracles  are  remarkable  indeed,  but  are
readily  exjjlained,  and  by  no  means  come  within  the  present  category.
Such,  for  instance,  as  plunging  the  hand,  which  is  protected  by  the
interposed  film  of  perspiration  assuming  the  globular  state  of  water,
into  boiling  lead.  Similarly,  many  conjuring  feats.  At  the  beginning
of  this  century  an  Italian — Lionetti — performed  remarkable  experiments
— rubbed  a  bar  of  red-hot  iron  over  his  arms,  legs,  and  hair,  and  held
it  between  his  teeth  ;  he  also  drank  boiling  oil.  Dr.  Sementini,  of
Naples,  carefully  examined  these  experiments,  and  experimented  himself
until  he  surpassed  the  fire-proof  ([ualities  of  his  suggestor.  He  found
that  frequent  friction  with  sulphurous  acid  rendered  him  insensible  to
red-hot  iron ;  a  solution  of  alum  did  the  same.  A  layer  of  powdered
sugar  covered  with  soap  made  his  tongue  insensible  to  heat.  In  these
and  similar  instances,  however,  an  explanation,  though  probably  not  a
very  sufficient  one,  has  been  given,  but  in  that  forming  the  subject  of
this  paper  no  solution  has  been  offered.  Lang's  chai:)ter  on  the  "Fire
Walk  "  should  be  consulted  ;  his  account  of  the  Bulgarian  Nistinares  is


\


XXXVI.]  The  Fire  Walk.  11

as  wonderful  and  inexplicable  as  anything  here  recited.  The  whole  subject
requires  thorough  scientific  examination.

My  next  case  occurs  among  a  civilised  race,  the  J apanese,  and  is
vouched  for  by  Mr.  Lafcadio  Hearn,  an  American  writer,  whose  book
I  have  not  at  hand,  and  by  Colonel  Andrew  Haggard  {The  Field,
May  20th,  1899,  p.  724).  Colonel  Haggard  saw  the  fire-walk  done  in
Tokio,  on  April  9th,  1899.  The  fire  was  six  yards  long  by  six  feet
wide.  The  rite  was  in  honour  of  a  mountain  god.  Ablutions  in  cold
water  were  made  by  the  performers,  and  Colonel  Haggard  was  told  by
one  young  lady  that  she  had  not  only  done  the  fire-walk,  but  had  been
"  able  to  sit  for  a  long  time,  in  winter,  immersed  in  ice-cold  water,
without  feeling  the  cold  in  the  least."  After  some  waving  of  wands
and  sprinkling  of  salt,  people  of  all  ages  walked  through,  not  glowing-
stones  in  this  case,  but  "  red-hot  charcoal."  "  I  examined  their  feet
afterwards,  they  were  quite  soft,  and  not  a  trace  of  fire  upon  them."
Colonel  Haggard  says  that  the  rite  is  "a  very  unusual  thing"  in
Japan  ;  many  of  the  Japanese  living  in  Tokio  had  never  heard  of  it
before.  Colonel  Haggard  was  unable  to  get  any  clear  answer  as  to
why  the  rite  is  performed.  The  priest  talked  something  about  a  good
God  who  had  power  over  the  bad  element  of  fire.  It  is  not  clear  how,
the  rite  being  so  unusual,  two  Japanese  ladies  told  Colonel  Haggard
that  they  had  "frequently  gone  through  the  fiery  ordeal."

If  any  one  is  anxious  to  know  the  particulars  of  the  rite  as
practised  in  the  isle  Mauritius,  he  may  communicate  with  our  police
officials  there,  who  annually  superintend  the  performp„nce.  Coolies
from  southern  India  do  just  what  is  done  by  Japanese  and  Fijians.
Our  administration,  however,  does  not  permit  women  to  pass  through
the  fire.

After  giving  these  recent  examples  in  Mauritius,  J apan,  Rarotonga,
and  an  isle  of  the  Fijian  group,  I  am  obliged  to  fall  back  on  the
evidence  already  set  forth  in  Chapter  XII.  of  my  book.  Modern
Mythology  (1897).  The  Bulgarian  practice  I  take  from  the  Recueil  de
Folk-lore,  de  Litterature  el  de  Science,  edited  by  the  Bulgarian  Minister
of  Public  Instruction,  with  the  aid  of  Drs.  Schischmanof  (whom  I
know  personally)  and  Mastov.  In  a  private  letter.  Dr.  Schischmanof
hints  at  extase  religieuse,  as  in  the  self-mutilations  of  Dervishes  and
Fakirs.  Their  performances  are  extraordinary  enough,  but  there  was
no  religious  ecstacy  in  the  little  Japanese  boy  of  six,  whom  Colonel
Haggard  saw  pass  through  the  fire,  none  in  Colonel  Gudgeon,  none  in
the  Fijians  observed  by  Dr.  Hocken.  The  fire-walkers  in  Bulgaria
are  called  Nistinares,  and  the  faculty  is  regarded  as  hereditary.  We
find  the  same  opinion  in  Fiji,  in  ancient  Italy,  and  in  the  Spain  of  the
last  century. In  Spain  the  fire-walkers  were  employed  to  help  to  put


12  Andrew'  Lang.  [part

out  fires.  The  story  is  given  in  the  essay  on  the  last  Eai-1  Marischal,
in  my  ComjMnioris  of  Pickle  (p.  24),  and  is  derived  from  d'Alembert's
account  of  the  Earl  :  "  There  is  a  family  or  caste  in  Spain,  who,  from
father  to  son,  have  the  power  of  going  into  the  flames  without  being
burned,  and  who,  by  dint  of  charms  permitted  by  the  Inquisition,  can
extinguish  fires."  The  Duchess  of  Medina  Sidonia  thought  this  a
proof  of  the  verity  of  the  Catholic  faith,  and,  wishing  to  convert  the
Earl,  asked  him  to  view  the  performance.  But  he  insisted  on  lighting
the  fire  himself,  and  to  that  the  Spaniards  would  not  consent,  the  Earl
being  a  heretic.

To  return  to  the  Bulgarian  Nistinares,  they  dance  in  the  fire  on
May  21st,  the  feast  of  Ss.  Helena  and  Constantine.  Great  fires  of
scores  of  cart-loads  of  dry  wood  are  made.  On  the  embers  of  these
the  Nistinares  (who  turn  blue  in  the  face)  dance  and  utter  prophecies,
afterwards  placing  their  feet  in  the  muddy  ground  where  libations  of
water  have  been  poured  forth.  The  report  says  nothing  as  to  the
state  of  their  feet.  The  Nistinare  begins  to  feel  the  effect  of  the  fire
after  his  face  has  resumed  its  wonted  colour  and  expression.

As  for  India,  I  may  cite  Mr.  Stokes,  in  The  Indian  Antiquary,
{II.,  190),  Dr.  Opjjert,  in  his  Original  Inhabitants  of  India,  (p.  480),
and  Mr.  Crookes,  in  Introduction  to  Pojmlar  Religion  and  Folk-lore  in
Northern  India,  (p.  10).  Mr.  Stokes  uses  evidence  from  an  inquest  on
a  boy  that  fell  into  the  fire  and  died  of  his  injuries,  at  Periyangridi.
The  fire-jiit  was  27  ft.  long  by  74  ft.  broad,  and  a  span  in  depth.
Thirteen  persons  walked  through.  Mr.  Stokes  did  not  witness  the
performance  (which  is  forbidden  by  our  law),  but  explains  that  the
fire  "  would  hardly  injure  the  tough  skin  of  the  sole  of  a  labourer's
feet." Yet  it  killed  a  boy  !

The  incredulous  say  that  the  fire-walkers  smear  their  feet  with  oil
from  the  fat  of  the  green  frog.  Dr.  Oppert  admitting  that  "  the  heat
is  unbearable  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  ditch,"  says  that  the
walkers  "as  a  rule  do  not  do  themselves  much  harm."  This  is  vague.
Equally  vague  is  the  reference  to  rumours  about  "a  certain  preservative
ointment."

In  Trinidad,  British  West  Indies,  Mr.  Henry  R.  St.  Clair,  writing  to
me,  describes  (September  14th,  1896)  the  feat  as  performed  by  Indian
coolie  immigrants.  He  personally  witnessed  the  rite,  which  was  like
that  described  to  me  by  Mr.  Stephen  Ponder.  In  both  cases,  the  per-
formers were  Klings.  The  case  witnessed  by  Mr.  Ponder  took  place  in
the  Straits  Settlements,  Province  Wellesley.  The  trench  was  about
20  yards  long  by  6  ft.  wide  and  2  ft.  deep.  A  pyre  of  wood,  4  or  5  ft.
high,  was  lighted  at  noon]  by  4  j^.m.  it  was  a  bed  of  red-hot  embers.
The  men,  who  with  long  rakes  smoothed  the  ashes,  could  not  stand  the
heat  "  for  more  than  a  minute  at  a  time.", A  little  way  from  the  end


xxxvl]


The  Fire  Walk.


13


of  the  trench  was  a  hole  full  of  water.  Six  coolies  walked  the  whole
length,  and  thence  into  the  water.  "  Not  one  of  them  showed  the
least  sign  of  injurj-."  They  had  been  prepared  by  a  "devil-doctor,"
not  a  Brahmin.  On  a  later  occasion  Mr.  Ponder  heard  that  one  of
them  fell  "and  was  terribly  burnt."

In  these  cases,  Trinidad  (and  Mauritius)  and  the  Straits  Settle-
ments, the  performers  are  South  Indian  coolies.  In  all  cases  there
were  multitudes  of  European  spectators,  except  in  Mauritius,  where,
I  learn,  Europeans  usually  take  no  interest  in  the  doings  of  the
heathen.

Turning  to  Tonga,  we  have  the  account  of  Miss  Teuira  Henry
{Polynesian  Journal,  Vol.  II.,  No.  2,  pp.  105-108).  The  sister  and
sister's  child  of  Miss  Henry  have  walked  over  the  red-hot  stones,
as  in  the  Earotonga  and  Fijian  cases.  The  ovens  are  30  ft.  in
diameter.  The  performance  was  photographed  by  Lieutenant  Morne,
of  the  French  Navy,  and  the  original  photograph  was  sent  to  the
Editor  of  the  Polynesian  Journal,  with  a  copy  from  it  by  Mr.
Barnfield,  of  Honolulu.  The  ceremony,  preparatory  to  cooking  the
ti  plant,  is  religious,  and  the  archaic  hymn  sung  is  full  of  obsolete
words.  Mr.  Hastwell,  of  San  Francisco,  published  a  tract,  which  I
have  not  seen,  on  the  Raiatean  rite,  witnessed  by  himself.  The  stones
were  "  heated  to  a  red  and  white  heat."  The  natives  "  walked
leisurely  across  "  five  times  ;  "'  there  was  not  even  the  smell  of  fire  on
their  garments  "  (cited  in  the  Polynesian  Journal,  Vol.  II.,  No.  3).
There  is  corroborative  evidence  from  Mr.  N.  J.  Tone,  from  Province
Wellesley,  Straits  Settlements,  in  the  Polynesian  Journal,  II.,  3,  193.
He  did  not  see  the  rite,  arriving  too  late,  but  he  saw  the  fire-pit,  and
examined  the  naked  feet  of  the  walkers.  They  were  uninjured.  Mr.
Tone's  evidence  is  an  extract  from  his  diary.

As  to  Fiji  there  are  various  accounts.  The  best  is  that  of  Mr.
Basil  Thomson,  son  of  the  late  Archbishop  of  York.  ]\Lr.  Thomson
was  an  official  in  Fiji,  and  is  a  well-known  anthropologist.  His
sketch,  in  his  South  Sea  Yarns  (p.  195,  et  seq.),  is  too  long  for
quotation.  The  rite  is  done  yearly,  before  cooking  the  masdive  (a
dracoena)  in  the  oven  through  which  the  clan  Na  Ivilankata  walk.
"  The  pit  was  filled  with  a  white-hot  mass,  shooting  out  little  tongues
of  white  flame."  "The  bottom  of  the  pit  was  covered  with  an  even
layer  of  hot  stones  .  .  .  the  tongues  of  fiame  played  continually
among  them."  The  walkers  planted  "their  feet  squarely  and  firmlv  on
each  stone."  Mr.  Thomson  closely  examined  the  feet  of  four  or  five
of  the  natives  when  they  emerged.  "  They  wei'e  cool  and  showed  no
trace  of  scorching,  nor  were  their  anklets  of  dried  tree-fern  burnt,"
though  "dried  tree-fern  is  as  combustible  as  tinder."  "The  instep  is
covered  with  skin  no  thicker  than  our  own,  and  we  saw  the  men  plant


14.


Andretv  Lang.


[part


their  insteps  fairly  on  the  stone."  A  large  stone  was  hooked  out  of
the  pit  before  the  men  entered,  and  one  of  the  party  dropped  a  pocket-
handkerchief  upon  the  stone  "when  the  first  man  leapt  into  the  oven
and  snatched  what  remained  of  it  up  as  the  last  left  the  stones."
Every  fold  that  touched  the  stone  was  charred.  Mr.  Thomson  kindly
showed  me  the  handkerchief.  He  also  showed  me  a  rather  blurred
photograph  of  the  strange  scene.  It  has  been  rudely  reproduced  in
the  Folk  Lore  Journal,  September,  1895.

Such  is  part  of  the  modern  evidence ;  for  the  ancient,  see  ^Eneid,
XI.,  784,  et  seq.  ;  Servius  on  the  passage  ;  Pliny,  Hist.  Nat.,  VII.,  2 ;
Silius  Italicus,  V.,  175.  This  evidence  refers  to  the  Hirpi,  of  Mount
Soracte,  a  class  exempted  from  military  service  by  the  Roman
Government,  because,  as  Virgil  makes  Aruns  say,  "  strong  in  faith  we
walk  through  the  midst  of  the  fire,  and  press  our  footsteps  in  the
glowing  mass."  The  Hirpi,  or  Wolves,  were  probably  a  Totem  group,
like  the  Wolf  Totem  of  Tonkaway  Red  Indians  ;  they  had,  like  the
Tonkaway,  a  rite  in  which  they  were  told  to  "  behave  like  wolves."
(Serv.,  JEneid,  VII.,  800).  The  goddess  propitiated  in  their  fire-walk
was  Feronia,  a  fire-goddess  (Max  Miiller),  or  a  lightning  goddess
(Kuhn),  or  a  corn  goddess  (Mannhardt).  Each  of  these  scholars  bases
his  opinion  on  etymology. You  see  that  scholars  differ  !

I  have  merely  given  evidence  for  the  antiquity,  wide  diffusion,
and  actual  practice  of  this  extraordinary  rite.  Neither  physical
nor  anthropological  science  has  even  glanced  at  it  (except  in  Dr.
Hocken's  case),  perhaps  because  the  facts  are  obviously  impossible.
I  ought  to  make  an  exception  for  Sir  William  Crookes,  but  he,
doubtless,  was  hallucinated,  or  gulled  by  the  use  of  asbestos,  or  both.
Perhaps  Mr.  Podmore  can  apply  these  explanations  to  the  spectators
whom  I  have  cited.  For  my  part,  I  remain  without  a  theory,  like  all
the  European  observers  whom  I  have  quoted.  But,  in  my  humble
opinion,  all  the  usual  theories,  whether  of  collective  hallucination
(photographic  cameras  being  hallucinated),  of  psychical  causes,  of
chemical  application,  of  leathery  skin  on  the  soles  of  the  feet,  and  so
on,  are  inadequate.  There  remains  "  suggestion."  Any  hypnotist,
with  his  patient's  permission  (in  writing  and  witnessed)  may  try  the
experiment.


Since  this  paper  was  written  I  have  seen  an  article,  "Les  Dompteurs
du  Feu,"  on  the  same  topic,  by  Dr.  Th.  Pascal  {Annates  des  Scie^ices
Psychiques,  July — August,  1899).  The  first  part  of  the  essay  is  an
extract  from  the  Revue  Theosopliique  Francaise.  No  date  is  given,
but  the  rite  described  was  viewed  at  Benares,  on  October  26th,  1898.
I  am  unable  to  understand  whether  Dr.  Pascal  is  himself  the  spectator,


XXXVI.]


15


and  narrator,  of  the  Revue  Theosophique,  or  whether  he  quotes  (he
uses  marks  of  quotation)  "  some  bthpr'Jwrlter.  The '  phenomena  were
of  the  usual  kind,  and  the'  vrriter,  Vxaminirig  the  feet  of  two  of  the
performers,  found  the  skin  of  the  soles  fine  and  intact.  In  four  cases,
in  which  the  performers  had  entered  the  fire  after  the  procession — with
the  Master  of  the  Ceremonies  and  two  excited  persons,  who  split  cocoa-
nuts  with  swords — had  gone,  there  were  slight  cauterisations,  healed
two  days  later.  The  author  of  this  passage  speaks  of  a  Brahmin
(apparently  "  The  Master  of  the  Ceremonies  ")  who  observed  to  Mr.
Govinda  Das,  "  that  the  control  of  the  fire  was  not  so  complete  as
usual,  because  the  images  of  the  sanctuary  had  been  touched  by
Mahomedans  and  others  in  the  crowd."

The  second  ease,  not  given  with  marks  of  quotation,  occurred  in  the
park  of  Maharajah  Tagore,  on  December  7th,  1898.  "A  Frenchman,
the  son  of  Dr.  Javal  of  Paris,  was  present."  The  narrator,  "nous,"  was
also  present  and  went  up,  after  the  rite,  to  venture  his  hand  in  the
furnace.  He  was  warned  that  the  Brahmin  had  left,  ten  minutes
before,  and  that  "the  fire  had  recovered  its  activity."  The  Maharajah,
however,  caused  the  ceremony  to  be  repeated,  and  some  minutes  after,
all  was  ready.  The  narrator  then  traversed  the  fire,  barefoot,  at  un
jxiii  trot,  "a  little  less  than  two  paces  a  second."  As  100  yards  can
be  run  in  ten  seconds,  this  trot  was  remarkably  slow.  He  felt  in  paces
one  and  two  a  sensation  of  burning,  in  the  five  following  paces  a  sensa-
tion of  intense  heat.  There  were  three  small  brown  marks  on  his  feet,
which  formed  blisters,  but  did  not  interfere  with  walking,  and  healed
"in  some  days."  He  now  learned  that  the  Brahmin's  j9?-eTOie?'  aide  did
the  ceremony  not  quite  successfully.  He  is  convinced  that,  but  for
the  ceremony,  he  would  have  been  seriously  injured.

The  third  case  was  at  Benares,  in  February,  1899.  Three  Hindoos
collided  and  fell  in  :  neither  they  nor  their  clothes  were  burned.

The  author  clearly  regards  the  performers  of  the  ceremony  as
able  "  to  tame  considerably  the  destructive  energy  of  the  fire."
This,  of  course,  is  the  theory  of  the  savage  devotees.  The  ceremony
was  only  a  procession  of  sacred  images  carried  in  a  glazed  sanctuary,
and  words,  not  known  to  the  spectator,  were  uttered  by  the  Brahmin.
Holy  water  was  sprinkled,  and  a  cocoa-nut  was  thrown  into  the  oven.
As  has  been  said,  incantations  are  pi'onounced  in  Fiji  and  elsewhere.
To  the  anthropologist  the  close  resemblance  of  the  rites  in  Polynesia
and  India  is  an  interesting  circumstance.  ^

The  subject  seems  to  me  to  deserve  further  examination  by  medical
experts.

1  In  the  World  Wide  Magazine  (December,  1899),  a  Japanese  lady  describes  the
performance  witnessed  by  Colonel  Haggard,  already  cited.


II.


DISCUSS rOM OF THE TRANCE PHENOMENA  OF

MRS.  PIPER.

II. — By  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  ■

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  remind  readers  of  the  Proceedings  of
what  the  evidence  concerning  Mrs.  Piper's  supernormal  powers  con-
sists ;  but  as  in  this  paper  I  propose  to  add  to  the  discussion  of  it
without  adding  to  the  evidence  itself,  it  may  be  as  well  briefly  to
describe  what  my  data  are.  The  first  paper  about  Mrs.  Piper  appeared
in  1890,  in  Proceedings^  Vol.  VI.  It  is  entitled,  "A  Record  of  Certain
Phenomena  of  Trance  "  and  consists  of  an  inti'oduction  by  Mr.  Myers,
an  account  of  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  England  by  Professor  Oliver
Lodge,  an  account  of  other  sittings  with  her  in  England  by  Dr.  "Walter
Leaf  and  a  brief  account  of  his  own  experiences  with  Mrs.  Piper  by
Professor  William  James ;  the  whole  extending  to  223  pages.  The
next  contribution  to  the  subject  was  "A  Record  of  Certain  Phenomena
of  Trance,"  by  Dr.  Richard  Hodgson,  which  appeared  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  VIII.,  in  1892,  and  which  is  a  paper  of  168  pages,  describing
and  discussing  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  America.  This  was  followed
in  1898  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XIIL),  by  "A  Further  Record  of  Certain
Phenomena  of  Trance,"  by  Dr.  Hodgson,  extending  to  298  pages,  and
this  again  by  a  paper  by  Professor  W.  Romaine  Newbold,  entitled,  "A
Further  Record  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance,  Part  II.,"  occupy-
ing 44  pages  of  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.  To  these  may  be  added  a
"  Discussion  of  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper,"  by  Mr.  F.
Podmore,  in  the  same  volume,  which, — though,  like  the  present  paper,
it  does  not  add  to  the  evidence, — throws  interesting  light  on  it.
Besides  the  above  published  papers,  I  have  through  the  kindness  of
Dr.  Hodgson  had  access  to  certain  unpublished  notes  of  sittings  held
previous  to  1898,  of  which  I  have  made  some  use  in  what  follows.
Further  evidence  has  been  accumulating  since  the  publication  of
Professor  Newbold's  paper,  and  both  Dr.  Hodgson  and  Professor
Hyslop  have,  I  understand,  important  further  light  to  throw  on  the
subject ;  but  of  this  I  know  nothing  at  present  in  detail.

So  much  for  the  da,ta ;  I  must  add  a  few  words  as  to  the  assump-
tions I  shall  make  regarding  the  origin  of  the  information  given  by
Mrs.  Piper.  In  the  first  place,  I  accept  the  conclusion  arrived  at,  as
Professor  Newbold  says,  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  7),  by  "every
one,  so  far  as  I  know,  who  has  studied  the  case  at  any  length,  that  it


XXXVI.] Discussion  of  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  17


was  not  consciously  got  by  Mrs.  Piper  during  waking  life  and  then
fraudulently  palmed  off  on  the  sitter  as  supernormal  "  ;  or,  as  Dr.  Leaf
puts  it :  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  559)  "  as  to  the  first  and  most
obvious  question,  whether  she  consciously  acquires  knowledge  with
regard  to  her  sitters,  with  the  intention  of  deceiving,  I  may  say  most
positively  that  I  regard  such  a  supposition  as  entii'ely  untenable."
Further,  I  do  not  believe  that  the  information  as  a  wliole  is  drawn  by
normal  means  from  the  mind  of  the  sitter ;  I  agree  with  Dr.  Leaf  that
"  the  more  I  consider  the  whole  of  the  evidence,  the  more  I  remain
convinced  that  it  gives  proof  of  a  real  supernormal  power,  subject,
however,  under  conditions  at  which  we  can  hardly  even  guess,  to
periods  of  temporary  eclipse,"  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  561) ;  or,  as
Professor  Lodge  says,  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  443),  "concerning  the
particular  means  by  which  she  acquires  the  different  kinds  of  informa-
tion, ...  I  can  only  say  with  certainty  that  it  is  by  none  of  the
ordinary  methods  known  to  Physical  Science."

What  explanation  then  can  we  propose  for  the  phenomena  1  In
discussing  this  question,  I  shall  assume  that  telepathy — in  the  sense  of
the  iaipression  of  one  living  mind  by  another  otherwise  than  thi'ough
the  recognised  channels  of  sense — -may  be  taken  as  provisionally
established  by  the  evidence  collected  by  our  Society  and  other
investigators.  This  being  granted,  I  agree  with  Professor  Lodge  {op.
cit.,  p.  451)  "  that  thought-transference  is  the  most  common-place
explanation  to  which  it  is  possible  to  appeal  "  in  the  case  of  Mrs.
Piper.  But  in  Dr.  Hodgson's  last  paper  he  endeavoured  to  carry  us  a
momentous  step  further.  He  concluded  that  the  hypothesis  that  we
are — in  some  instances,  at  least — in  communication  with  the  spirits  of
the  dead  through  the  entranced  Mrs.  Pijaer  is  now  practically  proved.
This  seems  to  me  to  be  too  tremendous  a  conclusion  to  base  on
observation  of  a  single  medium  ;  even  such  prolonged  observation  as
Mrs.  Piper  has  submitted  to.  I  fully  admit,  however,  that  there  is
very  considerable  evidence  for  it,  and  I  propose  to  adopt  it  as  a
working  hypothesis  for  the  purposes  of  the  present  paper.

Accordingly,  the  question  I  wish  to  argue  is  a  subsidiary  one,  which
arises  when  this  hypothesis  is  accepted.  Granting  communication  from
the  dead,  I  wish  to  argue  for  Telepathy  versus  Possession  as  the  mode
of  communication, — in  an  extended  sense  of  the  word  Telepathy,
which  I  must  begin  by  explaining.

So  far,  though  a  good  deal  of  evidence  has  been  collected  for  the
occurrence  of  telepathy  between  living  minds  both  spontaneously  and
experimentally,  it  has  not  been  of  much  use  to  formulate  hypotheses
as  to  what  telepathic  communication  consists  in  and  how  it  occurs,
because  we  have  not  been  able  to  get  the  phenomenon  sufHciently
under  control  to  give  us  a  chance  of  verifying  hypotheses  about  it.

c


18


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgiuick.


[part


But  it  may  safely,  I  think,  be  assumed  that,  gi'anting  the  existence  of
telepathy,  the  explanation  of  it  must  lie  in  one  of  two  lines.  It  may  be
a  physical  process — a  communication  between  brain  and  brain  analogous
to  light  or  electrical  induction  or  gravitation.  In  this  case  it  would
reveal  to  us  a  hitherto  unknown  sense,  an  unknown  power  of  the
human  body.  Or  it  may  be  a  spiritual  process, — a  communication
between  mind  and  mind  in  which  the  physical  world  is  not  concerned  ;
any  cerebral  change  in  the  percipient  being  a  consequence  of  it  and
not  a  part  of  its  cause.  In  this  case  it  would  tend  to  establish
scientifically  the  existence  of  mind  apart  from  body,  witli  the  further
chain  of  probabilities  that  the  mind  continues  to  exist  when  the  body
is  dead,  that  it  continues  able  to  carry  on  telepathic  communication
with  minds  in  the  body,  and,  indeed,  that  telepathy  is  of  the  nature
of  the  communication  of  disembodied  spirits  with  each  other.  Con-
versely, if  we  could  prove  the  existence  of  the  dead  and  their  power
of  connnunicating  with  the  living,  we  should  make  it  probable  that
telepathy  between  the  living  was  a  non-physical  process.

This  intimate  connection  between  the  possibility  of  communication
with  the  dead  and  a  theory  of  telepathy  makes  it,  I  think,  convenient,
when  we  are  discussing  the  evidence  for  the  former,  to  use  the  word
Telepathy  in  a  sense  wide  enough  to  include  any  communication
between  mind  and  mind  otherwise  than  through  the  recognised
channels  of  sense,  whether  the  minds  communicating  be  in  the  body  or
not,  and  it  is  in  this  sense  that  I  here  use  it.

The  thesis  then  that  I  wish  to  maintain  is  this  ;  Granting,  for  the
sake  of  argument,  that  the  evidence  concerning  Mrs.  Piper  proves,
not  only  that  there  is  telepathic  communication  between  her  trance
personality  and  living  persons,^  but  that  knowledge  is  in  some  way
derived  from  those  who  are  dead,  we  have  still  no  sufficient  reason  to
think  that  the  intelligence  actually  communicating  by  voice  or  writing
with  the  sitter  is  any  other  than  Mrs.  Piper  herself.  Call  it  Mrs.
Piper's  trance  personality,  dream  personality,  secondary  self,  subliminal
self,  or  what  you  will,  but  it  is  still  Mrs.  Piper  ; — Mrs.  Piper  in
communication  of  a  supernormal  but  partial  and  uncertain  kind  with
other  minds — minds  of  the  living  and  of  the  dead — and  conveying  to
the  sitter  by  voice  and  writing  the  information  thus  obtained,  mixed
up  with  much  that  has  been  acquired  or  imagined  in  a  normal  way.

I  am,  of  course,  aware  that,  compared  with  the  great  question
whether  communication  with  the  dead  takes  place  at  all,  the  question
whether  it  reaches  the  sitter's  waking  consciousness  through  Mrs.
Piper's  intelligence  or  directly  is  comparatively  a  small  one.  Never-
theless, for  those  who  answer  the  first  question  in  the  affirmative,  it  is

iSee  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  373,  for  Dr.  Hodgson's  view  as  to  this.


XXXVI.] Discussion  of  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  19


important  to  know  as  far  as  possible  how  the  communication  occurs,
and  for  those  to  whom  the  first  question  is  still  an  open  one,  the  second
may  have  an  important  bearing  on  its  solution  ;  for  the  facility  with
which  we  accept  new  facts  necessarily  depends  much  on  the  coherence
or  incoherence  of  the  theory  into  which  they  have  to  fit.  At  any  rate,
the  two  questions  are  distinct,  and  in  considering  the  bewildering
mass  of  Piper  evidence  it  cannot  but  be  advantageous  to  look  at  it
from  different  points  of  view  and  to  examine  each  question  in  detail,
and  as  far  as  may  be  by  itself ;  and  I  think  that  Dr.  Hodgson,  in  his
able  analysis  of  the  Piper  evidence,  has  hardly  done  justice  to  or
discussed  sufficiently  the  hypothesis  that  in  all  cases,  and  however  true
it  may  be  that  there  is  really  communication  between  the  living  and
the  dead,  the  intelligence  communicating  directly  with  the  sitter,
through  Mrs.  Piper's  organism,  is  Mrs.  Pij^er.

The  alternative  hypothesis  to  which  Dr.  Hodgson  inclines,  and
which,  even  when  not  explicitly  stated,  seems  constantly  to  be  assumed
in  his  summary  of  the  evidence  for  communication  from  the  dead,  is
that  spirits  other  than  Mrs.  Piper's  use  her  organism  when  she  is
entranced,  and  that  in  particular  the  spirits  of  certain  dead  persons
known  to  certain  sitters  speak  to  them  directly  with  her  voice  or  write
for  them  directly  with  her  hand.  This  is  the  hypothesis  I  wish  to
oppose.  It  is  the  obvious  alternative  to  the  hypothesis  which  I  am
about  to  advocate,  again  saying  emphatically  that  I  only  hold  it
provisionally  and  not  as  a  final  conclusion.  To  pass  a  final  judgment
on  the  whole  complicated  subject  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  utterances,  to
decide  what  we  can  regard  as  proved  by  them,  would,  I  think,  be
premature  ;  and  to  pass  judgment  on  parts  of  it  without  regard  to  the
whole,  and  without  further  experiment  with  other  persons  more  or  less
similarly  endowed,  would  be  rash.

The  fact  with  which  we  have  to  start, — and  which,  pri7na  facie,
gives  plausibility  to  the  supposition  that  when  jNlrs.  Piper  is  in  trance
the  intelligence  communicating  through  her  is  not  her  own, — is  that  it
invariably  says  it  is  some  one  else,  and  frequently  acts  a  part  unlike
Mrs.  Piper's  ordinary  personality  with  very  considerable  consistency.
My  own  expei'ience  has  been  solely  with  the  Phinuit  control,  and
those  sittings  in  which  I  have  taken  part  as  sitter  (as  distinguished
from  reporter)  have  been  bad — that  is,  have  afforded  no  indication
whatever  of  supernormal  knowledge.  Nevertheless  I  felt  as  others  do,
not  only  that  the  Phinuit  personality  did  not  confuse  itself  with  Mrs.
Piper's  normal  self,  but  that  the  sitter  was  under  no  temptation  so  to
confuse  it.  Conversation  with  it  differed  from  conversation  with  Mrs.
Piper  in  her  normal  state  as  naturally  as  conversation  with  one
acquaintance  differs  from  conversation  with  another.  I  have  no
doubt  that  the  case  for  regarding  the  communicating  intelligence  as  an

c  2


20


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


independent  individuality  seems  yet  stronger  when  it  represents  itself
as  being  an  intimate  deceased  friend  of  the  sitter's,  sustains  the  part
with  vigour,  and,  besides  sliowing  knowledge  which  it  is  difficult  to
suppose  to  be  derived  from  any  one  but  the  deceased,  exhibits  traits
characteristic  of  him  and  recognises  appropriately  his  friends  and
acquaintances.  And  the  illusion  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  that  two
seeming  individualities  are  capable  of  communicating  simultaneously,
one  by  the  A'oice  speaking  and  one  by  the  hand  writing.

It  is,  however,  well  known  through  experience  that  neither  the
assertions  nor  the  beliefs  of  secondary  personalities  are  in  themselves
worthy  of  credence,  any  more  than  one's  dream  impressions  are ;  and,
moreover,  that — as  may  be  seen  in  the  case  of  some  hypnotised
persons — they  can  often  by  suggestion  be  made  to  act,  and  apparently
believe  themselves  to  be,  any  given  character.  The  mere  assumption
and  successful  personation  by  the  trance  personality  of  a  character
different  from  Mrs.  Piper's  affords,  therefore,  no  sufficient  ground  for
believing  that  it  is  not  herself.  Nor  does  the  possession  by  the  trance
personality  and  the  normal  Mrs.  Piper  of  two  more  or  less  independent
chains  of  memory  prove  anything,  for  a  similar  distinctness  in  chains
of  memory  may  easily  be  observed  between  the  hypnotic  trance
personality  and  the  waking  personality  of  the  same  individual,  and
even  between  different  stages  of  hypnotisation  of  the  same  individual.
(See  Mr.  Gurney's  papers  on  "  The  Stages  of  Hypnotism,"  Proceedings,
Yol.  II.,  "Stages  of  Hypnotic  Memory,"  Vol.  IV.;  also  L' Automatisme
Psychologique,  by  Professor  Pieri'e  Janet.)

Nor  again  does  the  simultaneous  existence  of  two  apparently
independent  intelligences,  one  speaking  and  the  other  writing,  prove
anything,  for  this  phenomenon  too  may  be  observed  in  good  hypnotic
subjects  when  the  supposition  that  either  intelligence  was  any  other
than  the  subject's  own  would  be  obviously  absurd.  (See  Mr.  Gurney's
paper  on  "Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post-Hypnotic  States,"  Proceedings,
Vol.  IV.,  and  also  Professor  Janet's  book.)

The  only  thing  that  would  prove  the  communicating  intelligence
not  to  be  Mrs.  Piper  would  be  the  possession  of  a  stream  of  con-
sciousness provably  continuous  with  that  of  some  other  person  and
discontinuous  with  that  of  Mrs.  Piper.  Proof  of  this  would  be
exceedingly  hard  to  obtain,  because  if  telepathy  between  the  dead
and  the  living  be  possible,  we  may  suppose  either  active  prompting
of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  personality  by  another  spirit,  or  passive  com-
munity of  ideas  between  the  trance  personality,  the  sitter  and  the
spirit  of  the  deceased.  Either  might  enable  the  trance  personality  to
produce  a  semblance  of  possessing  the  stream  of  consciousness  of  the
deceased  within  the  limits  of  the  communications  that  occur.  The
trance  personality  actually  claims  sometimes  that  it  is  prompted,  as


xxxvl]  Discussion  of  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  21


above  suggested,  by  another  spirit.  For  instance,  in  a  sitting  of
Dr.  Thaw's  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  567),  when  his  friend  Dr.  H.
was  supposed  to  be  communicating,  not  directly,  but  through  Phinuit,
a  long  speech  was  made  so  characteristic  of  Dr.  H.  that  Dr.  Thaw,
wishing  to  know  whether  he  or  Phinuit  was  speaking,  said,  "  Can  you
tell  me  anything  about  Dr.  Phinuit  1 "  The  answer  was,  "  I'm  talking
to  you  myself,  j'ou  rascal ;  I'm  talking  for  him."  "  Well,"  said
Dr.  Thaw,  "  you're  trying  to  make  us  think  he's  talking,"  to  which
Phinuit  replied,  "  I'm  simply  telling  you  what  he  says.  I'm  trying  to
imitate  him."

It  will  be  replied  that  though  it  may  be  almost  impossible  to
produce  clear  proof  for  the  world  that  the  communicator  is  what  he
professes  to  be,  yet  in  spite  of  this  difficulty,  practically  adequate  proof
has  been  obtained  in  such  a  case  as  George  Pelham's.  For  in  this  case
there  is  so  much  that  is  characteristic  in  small  ways,  in  manner,
expressions  used,  etc.,  and  in  particular  so  unfailing  a  recognition  of
friends,  and  recognition  of  them  in  a  manner  appropriate  to  each,  that
for  those  who  knew  G.  P.  the  conclusion  is  inevitable  that  no  mere
prompting  by  G.  P.,  no  combination  of  reading  of  G.  P.'s  and  the  sitter's
minds  by  the  trance  personality  could  enable  it  to  give  so  exact  a
representation  of  him. The  communicator  must  be  G.  P.  himself.

It  is,  no  doubt,  impossible  for  one  who  has  not  had  the  special
experience  on  whicli  subjective  estimates  of  this  kind  are  based  to
judge  fully  of  their  value  ;  many  small  points  involved  can  hardly
be  conveyed  in  words,  and  others  are  of  too  intimate  a  nature  for  the
sitter  to  be  willing  to  publish  them.  I  think,  however,  that  the
importance  of  the  evidence  for  direct  communication  afforded  by  such
experiences  may  easily  be  over-estimated.  I  would  point  out,  in  the
first  place,  that  the  representation  given  of  the  deceased  person  must
from  the  nature  of  the  case  be  of  a  very  limited  kind.  For  instance,
when  the  soi-disant  G.  P.  communicates,  he  usually  does  so  in  writing,
the  whole  of  Mrs.  Piper's  body  except  the  hand  being  in  an  inert
condition.  At  the  best,  therefore,  he  is  limited  to  the  words  he
writes  and  to  the  possibilities  of  dramatic  representation  of  a  person's
whole  maniere  d'etre  through  the  movements  of  the  hand  alone.  The
handwriting,  it  will  be  remembered,  is  not  like  that  of  the  living  G.  P.
The  case  is  not  materially  improved  when  the  communication  is  by
spoken  words,  for  gesture  and  expression  and  voice  are  still  excluded
from  the  likeness,  "  and  the  language  shows  a  tendency  to  depart  more
or  less  from  the  language  that  would  have  been  used  by  the  com-
municator when  living"  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  332).  A  likeness
under  these  circumstances  must  bear  to  a  full  dramatic  representation
of  a  person  somewhat  the  relation  that  a  clever  pen  and  ink  sketch
done  in  a  few  strokes  bears  to  a  finished  portrait  in  oils. The  likeness


22


Mrs.  Henry  SiclgivieJc.


[PAET


may  be  unmistakable  in  both ;  but  that  in  the  sketch,  being  limited  to
a  few  salient  points,  requires  much  less  minute  knowledge  of  the
subject  to  produce.

In  the  second  place,  the  likeness  of  the  trance  personality  to  the
person  it  purports  to  be  does  not  strike  every  one  equally.  Thus  Miss
"VV.  writes  ( Proceedings,  Yol.  VIII.,  p.  29):  "The  clearly  marked
personality  of  that  friend,  whom  I  will  call  T.,  is  to  me  the  most
convincing  proof  of  Mrs.  P[iper]'s  supernatural  power,  but  it  is  a  proof
impossible  to  present  to  any  one  else."  Yet  her  mother  felt,  after  a
sitting,  that  "it  did  not  really  seem  likeT."  {Proceedings,  Voh  VIII.,
p.  33.)  And  Mr.  Marte,  a  friend  of  (i.  P.'s,  formed,  we  are  told,  an
opinion  entirely  unfavourable  to  Mrs.  Pipei",  from  which  I  infer  that
he  did  not  think  the  personation  of  G.  P.  successful.  [Proceedings,
Vol.  XIII.,  p.  429).

The  personation,  again,  is  sometimes  very  imperfect,  even  within  the
narrow  limits  possible.  Thus,  in  Miss  A.  M,  R.'s  experience,  the
communicator  purporting  to  be  her  friend  seems  to  have  presented  a
mixture  of  the  characteristics  of  that  friend  and  of  Phinuit.  She
writes  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  113)  : —

When  my  friend  H.  takes  control  of  the  medium,  it  seems  to  be  quite  a
different  personality  [from  Phinuit],  although  there  is  something  in  the  voice
or  manner  of  speaking  that  is  like  Dr.  P[hinuit].  The  voice,  however,  is
not  nearly  so  loud.  When  I  asked  him  once  why  this  was,  he  told  me
that  Dr.  P[hinuit]  was  right  by  him,  and  that  he  could  not  stay  a  moment
without  his  help.  In  a  great  many  little  ways  he  is  quite  like  what  my
friend  used  to  be  when  living,  so  much  so  that  I  am  afraid  it  would  take  a
great  deal  of  explanation  to  make  me  believe  that  his  identical  self  had  not
something  to  do  witli  it,  wholly  ajaart  from  the  medium's  powers,  or  from
anything  that  may  be  in  my  own  mind  concerning  him.

One  more  tiling  about  these  personations  of  known  individuals  I
may  notice.  They  seldom,  if  ever,  I  think,  profess  to  present  them-
selves in  propi'id  persond  at  once.  At  their  first  appearance  their
communications  purport  to  come  through  some  one  else  ;  or,  as  Dr.
Hodgson  expresses  it,  they  "  require  some  practice  in  handling  the
writing  mechanism,  and  at  first  the  assistance  of  Gr.  P.  or  some  other
experienced  amanuensis  has  usually  been  required."  {Proceedings,
Vol.  XIII,,  p.  376.)  Thus  at  first  Phinuit  speaks  for  G.  P.,  G.  P.
writes  for  John  Hart  when  he  first  communicates,  and  so  forth.  This
is  what  we  should  expect  to  happen  if  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  personality,
with  the  aid  of  the  sitters,  and  by  means  of  knowledge  accumulated
normally  and  supernormally,  gradually  acquires  a  more  or  less  coherent
conception  of  the  individual  it  ultimately  takes  itself  to  be.  So,  too,
on  this  hypothesis,  should  we  expect  the  gradual  improvement  in  the
personation  which  seems — in  some  cases,  at  least — to  occur.


XXXVI.] Discussion  of  Trance  Phenomena  of  Airs.  Piper.  23


So  far  I  have  tried  to  show  that  the  grounds  on  which  the  belief  is
based  that  the  direct  communicator  is  the  person  it  alleges  itself  to  be
may  easily  be  less  cogent  than  at  first  sight  appears,  even  when  that
person  is  known  to  the  sitters,  and  is  more  or  less  successfully  repre-
sented. I  now  go  on  to  show  that  the  communications  afford  in
certain  cases  positive  grounds  for  believing  that  the  direct  communicator
is  not  the  person  it  professes  to  be  and  probably  believes  itself  to  be,
and,  further,  that  it  is  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  personality.

Inconsistencies,  incoherences  and  contradictions  in  a  communi-
cator's account  of  himself,  oblivion  and  error  about  things  which  it
seems  inconceivable  that  the  real  person  should  have  forgotten  or  be
mistaken  about,  and  an  intellectual  standpoint  inferior  to  his  in  life
are,  it  will  be  admitted,  good  reasons  for  doubting  the  communicator's
claim  to  identity.  Suggestibility,  a  tendency  to  false  excuses  and
prevarication,  to  claim  powers  which  it  does  not  possess,  a  tendency
also  to  recur  foolishly  to  things  that  have  turned  up  at  previous
sittings  but  have  lost  their  interest,  are  characteristics  of  an  automatic
personality.  And  that  the  automatic  personality  is  here  Mrs.  Piper's
is  confirmed  by  certain  intellectual  limitations,  an  interest  in  certain
kinds  of  trifles,  and  certain  impressions  as  to  what  has  occurred,  which
the  communicator  exhibits,  and  of  which  the  origin  is  most  easily
found  in  Mrs.  Piper's  training  and  habits.  I  shall  try  to  illustrate
these  points  by  examples,

Phinuit  is,  of  course,  a  glaring  instance  of  a  communicator  whose
account  of  himself  is  inconsistent,  incoherent  and  altogether  impossible.
Mr.  Leaf  puts  the  case  briefly,  as  follows  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,
p.  560)  :—

That  Dr.  Phinuit  is  what  lie  gives  himself  out,  the  spirit  of  a  departed
Marseillais  physician,  I  may  say  at  once  that  I  do  not  see  the  least  ground
for  believing.  His  own  word  does  not,  in  view  of  his  moral  standard,  apart
from  other  considerations,  carry  even  a  presumption  of  veracity  ;  nor  has  a
single  one  of  the  numerous  statements  he  had  made  as  to  his  life  on  earth
proved  capable  of  verification.  On  the  other  side,  his  comj)lete  ignorance  of
French  is  a  positive  ground  for  disbelieving  him,  and  one  which  he  has  never
been  able  to  explain.

The  case  against  him  is  shown  to  be  even  stronger  in  the  report
made  by  Dr.  Hodgson  in  1892.  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  .50-54.)
Dr.  Hodgson  was  not  at  that  time  inclined  to  believe  Phinuit  to  be  a
"spirit,"  and  if  he  is  more  inclined  to  think  so  now,  it  is  because  the
G.  P.  control  vouches  for  him  in  some  sort.

The  group  of  communicatoi-s  whom  Dr.  Hodgson  refers  to  in  the
last  section  of  his  last  paper  on  Mrs.  Piper  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.
407-412) — the  so-called  "spirit  guides"  of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses — again
ai'e  apparently  so  hopelessly  at  sea  about  their  alleged  earth  life,  and  so


24


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivich.


[part


ignorant  al^out  Mr.  Moses  himself  and  what  they  were  supposed  to
have  taught  him,  that  I  cannot  see  how  it  is  possible  to  believe  them
to  be  what  they  represent  themselves  as  being.  Mr.  Moses'  "  spirit
guides,"  whether  phases  of  Mr.  Moses  or  not,  wrote  through  his  hand
that  they  were  the  spirits  of  certain  definite  persons  known  to  history.
The  names  the}^  gave  have  not,  I  believe,  been  published,  and  are
known  to  veiy  few  persons.  In  Mr.  Moses'  writings  they  appear  under
the  pseudonyms,  Imperator,  Mentor,  Rector,  Doctor.  If,  therefore,
they  could,  through  Mrs.  Piper,  give  the  unpublished  names  which  Mr.
Moses  has  left  on  record,  it  would  be  a  very  interesting  piece  of
evidence.  But  though  Mrs.  Piper's  hand  has  written  various  different
names  as  being  theirs,  none  are  right ;  and  not  only  are  wrong  names
given,  but  they  are  supported  for  a  time  with  insistence  and  detail,
only  to  be  rejected  afterwards  in  favour  of  others  equally  wrong.  The
soi-disant  Doctor,  for  instance, — in  Dr.  Hodgson's  MS.  records  of
sittings — claims  to  be  Homer,  who  sang  of  Troy,  and  is  indignant  when
it  is  doubted.  Mentor,  again,  maintains,  during  more  than  one  sitting,
that  he  is  Ulysses,  says  (Dec.  7th,  1896)  that  he  "often,  often"  sees
Telemachus,  and  that  Penelope — though  he  does  not  apparently
remember  her  name  till  Dr.  Hodgson  suggests  it  — is  with  him  always.
I  do  not  see  how  elaborate  false  statements  of  this  kind,  inconsistent
with  the  claims  of  the  communicators  to  be  Mr.  Stainton  Moses'
"guides,"  are  to  be  accounted  for  by  any  amount  of  difficulty  experi-
enced by  them  in  using  Mrs.  Piper's  organism  as  a  writing  machine.

The  soi-disant  guides  of  Mr.  Moses  are  guaranteed  by  G.  P.  just  as
Phinuit  is,  and  this  Dr.  Hodgson  seems  to  regard  as  a  reason  for
believing  in  their  independent  existence.  But  surely  it  may  be  equally
well  regarded  as  a  reason  for  believing  the  G.  P.  control  to  be  itself  a
phase  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  personality.  Moreover,  believing  in  G.  P.'s
guarantee  involves  us  in  difficulties,  for  he  is  capable  of  coiToborating
false  statements ;  e.g.,  Doctor's  statement  that  he  was  Homer.  And
further  (on  April  23rd,  1897),  Rector  warns  Dr.  Hodgson  "not  to  rely
too  much  upon  the  statements  made  as  tests,  so-called,  by  your  friend
George.  He  is  too  far  away  from  your  earth  now  to  be  clear  in  regard
to  tests,  test-conditions,  etc."  If  the  guaranteed  spirits  throw  doubt
on  the  trustworthiness  of  the  guarantors,  where  are  we  ?

As  an  instance  of  ignorance  and  mistake  about  its  own  name  in  a
personality  professing  to  have  been  known  to  the  sitter,  I  may  quote  a
remark  of  "Mrs.  M."  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  348. She  says: —

The  aunt  of  my  husband's  who  died  in  June,  1894,  has  often  sent  me,
through  Phinuit  or  my  husband,  some  ajopropriate  sounding  message,  and
twice  purported  to  write  herself,  but  never  seemed  able  to  give  her  own
name  correctly  ;  it  is  an  unusual  name,  probably  unique  in  this  country,  and
I  tried  to  get  it  written  a  number  of  times,  but  with  no  success.


XXXVI.] Discussion  of  Trance  Plienomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  25


If  the  writing  intelligence  was  really  the  aunt,  this  forgetfulness
of  her  name  is  odd,  but  it  is  still  more  odd  that  she  should  make
incorrect  guesses.

A  curious  instance,  not  yet  published,  I  think,  of  false  statement
by  the  communicating  intelligence  occurred  on  one  occasion  (March
7th,  1894)  when  Dr.  Hodgson  had  given  the  entranced  Mrs.  Piper
a  MS.  of  Dr.  Wiltse  to  hold.  Later  in  the  sitting  Dr.  Wiltse  himself
was  personated,  the  communicator  stating  in  a  confused  way  that  he
was  dead  and  his  body  in  the  water.  Dr.  Wiltse  is  well  known  to
readers  of  the  Proceedings  as  having  communicated  several  interesting
experiences  to  the  Society,  which  have  been  published.  In  reply  to
Dr.  Hodgson's  questions,  one  of  these  was  described  by  the  soi-disant
Dr.  Wiltse  sufficiently  for  identiticacion,  leaving  no  doubt  as  to  tlie
person  intended  by  the  communicator.  But  all  the  time  Dr.  Wiltse
was  alive  and  well  and  going  through  no  abnormal  experience  of  any
kind ;  nor  was  any  knowledge  shown  by  the  communicating  intelligence
of  his  actual  doings  or  surroundings.  We  may  surely  more  easily
attribute  this  personation  to  a  freak  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  personality
than  account  for  it  in  any  other  way.

Again,  is  it  possible  to  suppose  that  Mr.  Moses,  who  never  was  in
Professor  Sidgwick's  house,  should,  writing  with  Mrs.  Piper's  hand,
send  a  message^  "  when  you  see  my  friend  Sidgwick,  kindly  ask  him  if
he  remembers  the  evening  we  spent  together  at  his  own  liome  "  ?

Besides  specific  concrete  statements,  inconceivable  as  coming  from
the  person  the  communicator  professes  to  be,  we  find  evidence  in
certain  cases  of  a  much  lower  intellectual  standpoint  than  was  his
on  earth.  Take,  for  instance.  Professor  James'  account  of  the  "  E.
Control "  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  656)  :—

The  first  messages  came  tlirough  Phinuit  about  a  year  ago,  when,  after
two  years  of  non-intercourse  with  Mrs.  Piper,  she  lunched  one  day  at  our
house  and  gave  my  wife  and  myself  a  sitting  afterwards.  It  was  bad
enough  ;  and  I  confess  that  the  human  being  in  me  was  so  much  stronger
than  the  man  of  science  that  I  was  too  much  disgusted  with  Phinuit's
tiresome  twaddle  even  to  note  it  down.  When  later  the  phenomenon
developed  into  pretended  direct  speech  from  E.  himself,  I  regretted  this,
for  a  complete  record  would  have  been  useful.  I  can  now  merely  say  that
neither  then,  nor  at  any  other  time,  was  there,  to  my  mind,  the  slightest
inner  verisimilitude  in  the  personation.  But  the  failure  to  produce  a
more  plausible  E.  speaks  directly  in  favour  of  the  non-participation  of  the
medium's  conscious  mind  in  the  performance.  She  could  so  easily  have
coached  herself  to  be  more  effective. ^

Or,  again,  G.  P.,  when  he  ventures  on  philosophical  sul^jects,  is  apt
to  miss  the  point  in  a  way  which  I  understand  the  real  G.  P.  would

1  This  remark  is  true  also  of  the  personations  of  the  Stainton  Moses'  ' '  guides. "


26


Mrs.  Henry  SidgivicJc.


[part


not  have  clone  in  this  life.  I  know  Dr.  Hodgson  does  not  altogether
agree,  but  it  seems  to  me  impossible  to  read  the  following  more
detailed  account  of  the  sitting  of  which  part  is  briefly  described  in
Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  428,  and  believe  that  the  alleged  G.  P.
understood  the  questions  or  knew  what  he  was  talking  about.  No
difficulties  of  communication  or  interruptions  from  the  sitters  will
account  for  the  absence  of  relevancy  in  his  remarks.

M.  :  What  do  you  think  now  about  your  argument  on  one  and  the  many,
one  or  many  ?

G.  P.  :  "I  was  not  absolutely  wrong,  but  still  I  can  hold  a  little  different
argument  now,  John."  .

M.  :  What  do  you  think  now  about  the  multiplicity  in  the  universe  ?

G.  P.  :  "I  am  convinced  of  the  reality  of  the  ego ''

M.  :  He  is  getting  off  the  track  a  little  I  guess.

G.  P.  :  "which  I  want  to  explain  after  I  answer  your  questions."

M.  :  What  do  you  now  think  ?

G.  P.  :  "My,  the  world  will  still  go  on  multiplying  and  progressing  and
advancing  in  knowledge."

M.  :  What  do  you  now  think  of  the  appearance  of  unity  and  the  multi-
fariousness of  phenomena  ?  Is  there  really  a  unity,  or  is  it  all  contributed
by  our  intelligence  ?

G.  P.  :  "Oh,  Marte,  this  is  yes,  there  is  a  unity  most  certainly,  help  me
a  little  please."

M.  :  You  know,  George,  you  thought  that  the  appearance  of  unity  was  all
due  to  our  imagination  ?

G.  P.  :  "  This  light  is  weak  I  know,  but  I  have  answered  your  question  on
that,  and  told  you  I  was  wrong."  .

M.  :  What  do  you  think  of  cosmical  weather,  George  ?

G.  P.  :  "It  is  certainly  caused  by  .  .  .  [undecipherable]  .  .  .
[shaking  hands  with  M.  agam.]

"  that  helps  me  ;  ask  your  question  again. . .  ."

M.  :  What  do  you  think  about  cosmical  weather,  Chauncey  Wright's
cosmical  weather  ?

G.  P.  :  "  .  .  .  so  my  good  friends  can  understand  my  answer.  Marte,
you  know  what  I  mean. Oh,  you  were  right  most . . .  "

Mrs.  Howard  :  Write  again,  most  what  1 Absolutely  ?

G.  P.  :  "Emphatically,  it  is  not  atmospherical  weather."

Mrs.  Howard  :  George,  you  are  writing  so  fast  ;  now  wait  and  see  if
Hodgson  can  read  that.

G.  P.  :  "  Why  don't  ynu  help  me  " . .  .

R.  H.  :  We  can't  read  after  "  emi;)lmtically  "  ;  that  is  all  we  can  read.
G.  P.  :  "  Atmosj^heric  is  the  word,  now  I."

M. :  Well,  now  that  you  have  got  into  that  world,  George,  have  you  got
any  new  light  upon  the  character  of  natural  law  ?  Do  you  now  find  that
law  is . .  .

G.  P.  ;  "  Yes,  law  is  thought."

M.  :  Do  you  now  find  that  law  is  permanent  ?

G.  P.  :  "  Cause  is  thought."


XXXVI.] Discussion  of  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.


27


M.  :  That  doesn't  answer.
G.  P.  :  "  Ask  it."

M. :  Is  law  permanent,  or  is  it  only  transitory  result '?
G.  P.  :  "It  is  permanent"

M.  :  Then  do  you  agree  with  Chauncey  Wright  ?
G.  P.  :  "and  everlasting."

M.  :  Then  do  you  agree  with  Chauncey  Wright  ?
G.  P.  :  "  Most  certainly  on  that  point."

Mr.  Howard  :  What  do  you  think  of  his  views  on  cosmical  weather  ?
G.  P.  :  "He  knows  nothing,  his  theory  is  ludicrous."
M.  :  He  just  said  he  agreed  with  him. That  was  the  point  I  was  asking
about,  the  permanency  of  law.

Other  instances  of  communication  below  the  education  and  intelli-
gence of  the  supposed  communicator  will  be  found  in  a  subsequent
part  of  the  argument.

I  proceed  now  to  the  manifestation  of  characteristics  which  belong
to  automatism,  beginning  with  suggestibility.  The  following  is  an
instance  from  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  346. iMrs.  M.  writes  : —

On  February  15th  and  March  7  th,  1«95,  Miss  Edmunds  had  two  sittings
for  me  ...  I  asked  Miss  Edmunds  to  ask  my  husband  to  write  his  full
name,  which  was  not  on  my  visiting  card,  and  which  she  could  not  possibly  be
aware  of.  The  name  was  at  once  correctly  written,  but  for  some  reason  Miss
Edmunds  did  not  think  it  was  right,  and  asked  if  the  writer  was  quite  sure
of  it.  The  name  was  then  differently  written,  though  commencing  with
the  same  letter  R  (which  was  on  my  visiting  card).

Having  once  been  assumed,  it  becomes  established,  and  at  a  sitting
which  Miss  Edmunds  had  for  Mrs.  M.,  on  January  25th  of  the  follow-
ing year  (1896),  the  name  was  written  again  in  the  same  way,  though
Miss  Edmunds  then  knew  it  was  wrong,  and  knew  what  the  real  name
was.  Now  it  is  not  likely  that  Mr.  M.,  had  he  been  in  direct  communi-
cation with  Miss  Edmunds,  could  have  been  induced  by  the  mere
expression  of  a  doubt  to  substitute  a  name  that  was  not  his  for  the
true  one.  But  if  we  conceive  Mrs.  Piper,  dreaming  as  it  were,  and  in
partial  and  fragmentary  communication  of  a  telepathic  nature  with
other  minds,  such  as  appears  to  occur  between  percipient  and  agent  in
thought-transference  experiments,  the  whole  incident  falls  into  line
with  previous  experience. ^

In  this  particular  case  we  have  the  interesting  phenomenon  of  the
communicator  being  led  by  suggestion  off  the  right  track  on  to  a
wrong  one. But  any  one  who  has  had  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  will

1  It  should  be  noted  that  Mrs.  M.  believes  that  her  husband  had  actually  com-
municated through  Mrs.  Piper.  Her  summing  up  of  the  impression  the  whole  series
of  sittings  made  on  her,  given  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  3J8,  is  interesting  and
instructive.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  giving  of  a  wrong  name  was  combined  with
good  dramatic  impersonation.


28


3Irs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


remember  how  indications  given  by  the  sitter  are  followed  by  the
communicating  intelligence.  Mr.  Clarke,  whose  sittings  are  recorded
in  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  pp.  569-581,  notes  an  instance  of  such
following  of  an  intentionally  false  lead. Phinuit  says  (p.  574) ; —

' '  You  are  the  fellow  that  has  got  the  hole  in  the  ground  with  the  black
things  in  it."  (Sitter  :  "  Coals  ?  ")  "  Of  course,  do  you  think  I  am  a  fool  ?
There  is  something  to  come  from  that  hole  yet,  because  I  see  light  beyond  it."
[Note  by  the  sitter  :]  "  In  the  former  sitting  mention  had  been  made  of  a
town  lot  and  buildings  as  'interest  in  the  ground.'  The  vagueness  of  this
reference  is  here  developed,  by  a  question  intended  to  be  misleading,  into
definite  error."

Such  incidents  exhibit  a  form  of  the  "fishery" — to  use  Professor
Lodge's  word — so  much  practised  by  Phinuit,  and  which  appears  to
many  simply  a  fraudulent  attempt  to  get  from  the  sitter  the  informa-
tion to  be  reproduced  to  him  as  supernormally  acquired.  But  though
there  is  no  difficulty  in  supposing  a  trance  personality  guilty  of  such
deliberate  attempts  to  make  its  powers  seem  greater  than  they  are,  I
think  it  probable  that  much  of  the  apparent  fishery  is  unconscious,  and
merely  due  to  a  dream-like  readiness  to  take  ideas  indiscriminately,
whencesoever  they  come,  and  weave  them  into  a  whole.

A  disposition  to  assume  powers  not  possessed  and  to  resort  to
prevarication  and  false  excuses  to  account  for  ignorance  or  failure  are
moral  defects  which  are  well  known  to  be  frequently  exhibited  in
automatic  writing,  and  which  are  abundantly  exhibited  in  Mrs.  Piper's
trance  utterances,  whether  spoken  or  written.  I  have  said  moral
defects,  but  perhaps  it  would  be  more  correct  to  say  defects  partly
moral,  partly  intellectual.  The  habit  of  attributing  to  reason  actions
and  opinions  really  due  to  impulse  or  sentiment,  and  the  consequent
necessity  of  finding  plausible  reasons  afterwards  in  order  to  maintain
self-respect  as  a  reasonable  being,  is  common  in  human  nature,  and  the
man  who  does  it  usually  thinks  he  has  really  been  influenced  by  the
reasons  he  alleges  to  himself  and  others.  The  apparently  lower  moral
standpoint  of  the  automatic  personality  may  be  at  least  partly  due  to
abeyance  of  the  critical  faculty,  which  tends  to  render  the  powers
assumed  and  the  excuses  made  occasionally  so  absurd  that  it  is  difficult
to  believe  the  communicating  intelligence  to  have  taken  itself  in
by  them.

The  kind  of  thing  I  refer  to  is  well  described  by  Dr.  Leaf  in  the
following  passage  (Vol.  VI.,  p.  560)  : —

Phinuit,  in  fact,  exhibits  just  the  low  moral  tone  which  we  so  often  find
in  table-talking,  planchette,  and  other  manifestations,  as  we  now  regard
them,  of  the  secondary  self.  He  swears  freely,  and  indulges  in  slang  of  the
vulgar  New  England  sort,  in  a  way  quite  alien  from  the  manners  of  Mrs.
Piper.  This  is,  of  course,  a  trifle  ;  but  it  is  more  serious  when  we  find  him
continually  making  attempts  to  deceive. If  he  is  not  able  to  make  a  right


XXXVI.]  Discussion  of  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  29


statement,  he  is  always  ready  with  a  guess  of  more  or  less  ingenuity  to
conceal  his  ignorance,  or  at  least  with  some  ambiguity  or  subtei'fuge  which
should  make  a  show  of  turning  the  difficulty.  Hardly  a  sitting  passed
without  his  making  at  least  a  few  statements  which  were  altogether  wrong. i

As  a  particular  instance  of  Phinuit's  prevarication  I  may  quote  a
passage  in  a  discussion  of  him  by  Dr.  Hodgson  (Vol.  YIII.,  p.  50) : —

Concerning  his  inability  to  speak  French,  Phinuit's  original  explanation
to  me  was  that  he  had  lived  in  Metz  the  latter  part  of  his  life,  and  there
were  many  English  there,  so  that  he  was  compelled  to  speak  English,  and
had  forgotten  his  French.  I  replied  that  this  explanation  was  very  sur-
prising, and  that  a  much  more  plausible  one  would  be  that  he  was  obliged
to  use  the  brain  of  the  medium,  and  would  therefore  manifest  no  more
familiarity  with  French  than  she  possessed.  This — trite  enough — suggestion
appeared  to  Phinuit  also  more  plausible,  since  a  few  days  later  he  offered
it  himself  to  another  sitter  as  an  explanation  of  his  inability  to  sustain  a
conversation  in  French  !

But  no  one  denies  that,  whatever  Phinuit  may  be,  he  possesses  many
of  the  characteristics  of  an  automatic  personality,  and  I  may  be  asked
to  produce  instances  of  prevarication  in  other  personations.  Here,
then,  is  one  perpetrated  by  a  communicator  professing  to  be  Mr.  Stainton
Moses.  At  a  sitting  (recorded  in  MS.)  on  November  14th,  1896,  he
says  :  "  Give  my  love  to  .  .  .  Myers,  Watts,  Massey,  Wedgwood,
Bennett,  and  any  other  friends  who  may  inquire  for  me."  Dr.  Hodgson
naturally  I'eplies,  "  But  Wedgwood  is  with  you  now,  isn't  he  ? "  To
which  the  communicator,  with  obvious  insincerity,  rejoins,  "I  intended
this. He  just  mentioned  to  send  his  love  also."

G.  P.  is  the  supposed  communicator  in  the  following  case.  He
had  been  asked  at  a  previous  sitting  for  names  of  the  members  of  a
certain  association. He  says  : —

I  answered  part  of  that  question  [the  part  he  answered  was  correct],  but
did  not  give  the  names  of  the  other  two  people,  because  it  would  be  no  test,
because  I  told  her  [Mrs.  Hovvard]  the  names  of  the  other  two  in  life,  and  as
she  knows  them,  if  I  was  to  give  the  names  in  her  presence,  they  would
say  it  was  thought-transference.  No,  I  shall  reserve  the  two  names  to  tell
Hodgson  some  time  when  he  is  alone  with  me,  because  he  does  not  know
theui. [All  true.] {Proceedings,  Vol.  XIH.,  p.  303.)

Dr.  Hodgson  remarks  on  this,  "  Many  will  regard  this  as  perhaps
an  excuse  for  ignorance,  as  names  subsequently  given  were  not
correct,"  I  confess  to  being  one  of  tlie  many,  but  I  think  it  would  be
hard  on  G.  P.  to  attribute  the  false  excuse  to  him.

An  experiment  frequently  tried  in  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  is  to
ask  the  "  control "  to  visit  distant  people  or  places  and  report  what  is

(1  Cf.  also  Mr.  Myers'  remarks  on  automatic  personalities,  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,
p.  440.)


30


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgioick.


[part


seen.  The  communicator  generally  professes  to  be  able  to  do  this ;  but
the  profession  is  seldom  justified  by  the  results,  though  there  are
apparent  exceptions.  Now  that  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  personality  should
imagine  it  has  this  power,  and  should  accordingly  dream  that  it  visits
the  places — that,  in  fact,  Mrs.  Piper  dreaming  should  imagine  the
whole  thing — is  natural  enough  ;  but  it  is,  I  think,  going  out  of  our
way  to  complicate  hypotheses  by  attributing  the  dream  to  G.  P.  or
"George  Eliot."  While  the  series  of  hitherto  unpublished  sittings  to
which  I  have  more  than  once  referred  was  going  on,  Mr.  Myers  was
holding  a  series  with  another  medium  in  England.  It  had  been  arranged
between  him  and  Dr.  Hodgson  that  supernormal  communication
should,  if  possible,  be  established  between  the  two.  Mrs.  Piper's
"  controls  " — "George  Eliot"  especially — professed  to  visit  Mr.  Myers'
circle  and  to  give  and  receive  messages.  Not  once  was  there  a
glimmer  of  truth  in  what  was  said.  Mr.  Myers  wrote  :  "Yours  up  to
April  23rd  inclusive  received.  Not  a  vestige  of  truth  ;  no  messages
received;  whole  description  erroneous."  After  hearing  this,  "George
Eliot "  continues  to  assert  that  she  gave  the  messages,  and  saw  the
sitters,  and  when  Dr.  Hodgson  asks,  "  How  about  the  numerous
messages  that  you  brought  back  from  Myers  ?"  replies,  "We  would
ask  you  to  ask  him  to  consider  carefully  what  his  thoughts  were,  that
is,  those  not  ])ut  into  actual  speech."  Observe  that  it  is  not  merely
the  failures  that  I  lay  stress  upon,  but  the  reiterated  false  statements
that  things  have  been  seen  which  have  not  been  seen,  and  messages
received  that  have  not  been  received,  or  delivered  that  have  not  been
delivered.  We  find  (Vol.  XIII.,  p.  345)  Mrs.  M.'s  husband  similarly
professing  to  rej^eat  messages,  but  always  giving  them  quite  wrong,
except  in  one  case,  and  in  that  case  there  had  been  no  deliberate
experiment.  Of  the  same  character  are  the  incidents  connected  with
Miss  Hannah  Wilde's  letter,  of  which  Professor  James  gives  the
following  account  in  1890  (Vol.  VI.,  p.  657)  : —

Mrs.  Blodgett,  of  Holyoke,  Mass.,  and  her  sister,  devised,  before  the
latter  died,  what  would  have  been  a  good  test  of  actual  spirit  return.  The
sister,  Miss  H.  W.,  wrote  upon  her  death-bed  a  letter,  sealed  it,  and  gave  it
to  Mrs.  B.  After  her  death  no  one  living  knew  what  words  it  contained.
Mrs.  B.,  not  then  knowing  Mrs.  Piper,  entrusted  to  me  the  sealed  letter,
and  asked  me  to  give  Mrs.  Pijjer  some  articles  of  the  deceased  sister's
personal  apparel  to  help  her  to  get  at  its  contents.  This  commission  I
performed.  Mrs.  P.  gave  correctly  the  full  name  (which  even  I  did  not
know)  of  the  writer,  and  finally,  after  a  delay  and  ceremony  which  occupied
several  weeks  on  Phinuit's  part,  dictated  what  purported  to  be  a  copy  of  the
letter.  This  I  compared  with  the  oi-iginal  (of  which  Mrs.  B.  permitted  me
to  break  the  seal)  ;  but  the  two  letters  had  nothing  in  common,  nor  wore
any  of  the  numerous  domestic  facts  alluded  to  in  the  medium's  letter
acknowledged  by  Mrs.  Blodgett  to  be  correct. Mrs.  Piper  was  equally


xxxvl] Discussion  of  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piioer.  31


unsuccessful  in  two  later  attempts  which  she  made  to  reproduce  the  con-
tents of  this  document,  although  both  times  the  revelation  purported  to
come  direct  from  its  deceased  writer.

This  subject  of  Miss  Hannah  Wilde's  letter  continues  to  recur  at
sittings  long  after  the  above  passage  was  written,  and  always  with
equal  futility.  It  is  an  instance  of  the  foolish  return  to  a  subject
which  has  lost  its  interest,  which  we  find  in  cases  where  co-ordination
is  lacking,  as  in  automatic  writing  or  second  childhood.  Dr.  Hodgson
notices  this  characteristic,  and  describes  it  as  follows  (Vol.  Xtll.,
p.  333)  :—

That  the  writing  should  frequently— especially  towards  the  end  of  the
sitting,  as  the  communicator  becomes  exhausted  and  stupefied,  and  loses  the
power  of  inhibition — become  extremely  automatic  and  dreamy  is  to  be
expected  ;  and  questions  put  to  the  communicator  in  this  state  will  be
answered  by  the  first  vague  associations  that  rise  to  the  surface  of  the  failing
consciousness.  Not  only  is  this  the  case,  but  such  irrelevant  (as  they  may
be)  associatioiis  occasionally  tend  to  recur  at  later  periods,  when  the  com-
municator lapses  into  the  same  stage  of  dreaminess,  precisely  as  they  might
be  expected  to  do  in  ourselves.  For  example,  in  the  latter  part  of  Professor
Norton's  sitting  on  May  26th,  1894,  when  Professor  Norton  put  a  question
which  G.  P.  living  in  full  consciousness  would  have  answered  by  a  reference  to
an  essay  he  wrote  at  Harvard  on  Jane  Austen,  G.  P.  replied  by  references  to
what  he  had  written  about  Robert  Noyes  (pseudonym),  the  life  of  whom  he
liad  published  not  long  before  his  death,  and  to  articles  in  the  Sun,  a  New  York
paper  with  which  he  was  connected  at  the  time  of  his  death.  Professor
Norton  then  mentioned  Jane  Austen.  On  two  or  three  later  occasions,  at  the
end  of  a  sitting,  when  the  writing  became  particularly  dreamy,  the  name  of
Professor  Norton  apjjeared  in  connection  with  that  of  Jane  Austen.

The  difference  between  Dr.  Hodgson's  interpretation  of  this  dream-
like futility  and  my  own  is  that  he  is  disposed  to  attribute  it  to  the
difficulties  of  a  spirit  other  than  Mrs.  Piper  in  using  her  organism,
while  to  me  it  seems  an  indication  that  the  communicators  are  no
other  than  Mrs.  Piper  herself  in  trance.

vSo  far  the  qualities  I  have  wished  to  call  attention  to  in  the
communications — indications  of  suggestibility  and  so  forth — are  such
as  might  occur  in  any  automatic  writing.  But  it  somewhat  strengthens
the  case  to  note  that  there  are  many  things  in  the  communications
which  are  natural  enough  if  we  suppose  them  to  come  from  Mrs.
Piper,  but  decidedly  less  so  if  attributed  to  the  supposed  com-
municator. I  think  it  is  to  Mrs.  Piper's  own  interest  in  such
trifles  that  we  may  trace  the  frequent  recurrence  in  the  sittings  of
domestic  details — new  hats,  lost  pocket-handkerchiefs,  etc. — and  to  the
customs  of  Mrs.  Piper's  social  circle  that  we  may  trace  such  a  false
statement  by  the  supposed  G.  P.  as  the  following  : — In  answer  to  the
question,  "  Can't  you  tell  us  something . . . your  mother  has


32


j\Irs.  Henry  Sidgiuich.


[part


done?"  he  replies,  "I  saw  her  brush  my  clothes  and  put  them  away.
I  was  by  her  side  when  she  did  it."  As  a  matter  of  fact,  Gr.  P.'s
clothes  were  brushed  and  put  away  after  his  death,  as  Mrs.  Pelham
wrote,  not  by  herself,  but  by  "the  man  who  had  valeted  George."
G.  P.  was  not  likely  to  suppose  that  his  mother  would  personally  brush
his  clothes,  or  to  be  interested  in  the  matter  at  all  ;  but  in  Mrs.  Piper's
mind  the  idea  would  easily  associate  itself  with  the  ideas  of  his  death
and  his  mother.

Phinuit's  intellectual  attainments  were  notoriously  limited  to  Mrs.
Piper's.  We  have  already  referred  to  his  ignorance  of  French,  and
again  Dr.  C.  W.  F.  [Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  51)  questions  whether
Phinuit's  medical  knowledge  extends  "beyond  what  Mrs.  Piper  has
read  in  '  Domestic  Medicine.'  He  always  gives  the  common  or  vulgar
names  of  the  medicines  he  describes,  and  never  their  botanical  ones."
Similar  limitations  are  conspicuously  shown  in  references  to  history,
literature,  and  science.  We  may  take  the  statement  by  the  alleged
Sir  Walter  Scott  that  there  are  monkeys  in  the  sun  as  an  instance.
This  is  mentioned  by  Professor  W.  R.  Newbold  (^Proceedings,  Vol.
XIV.,  p.  48)  in  connection,  as  the  reader  will  remember,  with  a  very
curious  and  interesting  incident  indicating  thought-transference  from
a  distance  between  himself  and  Dr.  Hodgson  and  Mrs.  Piper,  which
I  need  not  enter  into  here.

The  most  glaring  instances  of  what  I  mean  naturally  occur  in  the
course  of  non-evidential  parts  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  utterances,  which
have  not  generally  been  published.  I  will  give  some  from  the  MS.
records  of  unpublished  sittings.  Here  is  a  biological  statement
made  on  January  27th,  1897.  Imperator  says,  the  "interior,"  the
"spirit,"  comes  in  "in  the  bird  and  the  monkey,"  not  in  the  horse
or  the  dog  ;  for  "  the  brain  of  each  is  of  a  lower  quality,  and  has
practically  no  mind."  Ail  birds  and  monkeys,  he  says,  have  "  in-
teriors," but  no  other  animal  except  man.  The  following  again  are
s|3ecimens  of  chemistry  and  physics.  Rector  says,  on  February  1st,
1897,  that  "  the  spiritual  ether  is  not  composed  of  oxygen  and
hydrogen  .  .  .  it  is  composed  of  the  finer  tissues  termed  lumini-
ferous  ether."  And  Imperator  tells  Dr.  Hodgson  on  February  5th,
1897,  that  "the  etherial  or  spiritual  body  is  composed  of  air,  light,
and  a  large  amount  of  hydrogen  "...  "heat,  light,  air,  hydrogen."
Later  in  the  sitting  he  says  "  it  is  known  to  us  as  ether,"  and  further
"  the  body  of  the  medium  becomes  filled  with  luminiferous  ether
until  it  is  so  distended  that  it  cannot  contain  any  more."
Dr.  Hodgson  naturally  expostulates  about  some  of  these  statements,
and  Imperator  accordingly  modifies  his  views  as  the  sitting  proceeds,
and  finally  arrives  at  the  assertion  that  "  the  ether  body  is  a  subtle
and  exquisite  matter  known  to  us  as  vacium . . . not  on  the


XXXVI.] Discussion  of  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  33


same  plane  as  hydrogen  at  all."  And  we  are  i-educed  to  a  still  more
hopeless  state  of  confusion  between  mind  and  matter  when  we  are
told  next  day  that  "  vacium  "  is  "known  as  love."  Confusion  in  all
this  there  undoubtedly  is,  but  it  is,  I  think,  clearly  the  confusion  of  a
person  talking  about  what  he  does  not  understand,  not  the  confusion
of  a  person  who  knows,  but  has  a  difficulty  in  expressing  himself.

And  the  same  is  true  of  the  communicator's  views  on  literary  and
historical  matters.  For  instance.  Mentor,  on  December  7th,  1896,
when  professing  to  be  Ulysses,  is  asked  by  Dr.  Hodgson  after  Achilles.
He  says  "the  murderer."  Dr.  Hodgson:  "He  slew  Hector."  Mentor:
"  Yes,"  and  later  he  explains  "  His  intentions  were  not  evil,  it  was
an  insane  impulse."  On  another  occasion  (June  4th,  1897)  "  George
Eliot "  describes  her  meeting  with  Bacon,  who  says,  "  You  have
questioned  my  reality.  Question  it  no  more.  I  am  Shakespeare."  On
March  30th,  1897,  again,  "George  Eliot"  met  "several  distinguished-
looking  gentlemen, — Shelley  and  Chaucer,  the  original  and  only
writer  of  '  Canterbury  Tales,'  then  Burns"  ...  "I  also  saw  the
original  Adam  Bede " . . . "also  Homer."

The  same  want  of  knowledge  is  shown  in  the  statements  of  Mrs.
Piper's  "  Imperator  "  about  Melchisedek  — such  as  that  "just  before
Israel  was  sent  into  bondage  "  Melchisedek  "  departed  and  returned  to
God"  (on  February  22nd,  1897),  or  (at  the  same  sitting),  that  "about
the  time  of  his  [Melchisedek's]  ascending  there  came  the  tribe  known
as  the  Jews."  Again  (February  23rd),  an  interval  is  assumed  between
the  days  of  Melchisedek  and  of  Abraham  during  which  "  none  better,
purer,  more  godlike  reigned  than  he."  After  this  Dr.  Hodgson  gave  a
brief  account  of  the  blessing  of  Abraham  by  Melchisedek,  and  the
next  day  (February  24th),  when  taxed  with  having  spoken  of  the  days
between  Melchisedek  and  Abraham,  Imperator  says,  "That  is  wrongly
registei'ed ;  there  was  no  time  between."  Again,  on  March  10th,
"  Imperator "  says  that  Melchisedek  reigned  spiritually  all  through
the  days  of  "  Abraham,  Moses,  Elijah  and  Elisha  down  to  the  days  of
King  David."  Now  Mr.  Stainton  Moses'  "  Imperator "  said  a  good
deal  about  Melchisedek  which  has  been  published  in  Spirit  Teachings,
and  which,  though  there  is  no  ground  for  supposing  it  to  be  all  true,
is  at  any  rate  sensible  and  coherent,  and  such  as  we  should  expect
from  an  educated  man.  A  comparison  of  the  account  given  by  Mrs.
Piper's  Imperator  and  Mr.  Moses'  Imperator  reveals  some  faint
resemblances  between  the  two — just  enough  to  suggest  that  Mrs.  Piper
had  seen  the  passages  in  S'pirit  Teachings,  as  was  doubtless  the  case,
since  Dr.  Hodgson  left  a  copy  with  her  on  January  27th.  The
reproduction,  if  reproduction  it  can  be  called,  is  certainly  not  what
one  would  expect  from  a  person  who  had  got  up  what  had  been  said  in
order  to  reproduce  it. But  on  the  other  hand,  the  remarks  I  have

■  D


34


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


quoted  and  referred  to  will  hardly,  I  think,  seem  to  any  one  to  be
those  of  a  person  who  understands  what  he  is  talking  about  and  is  only
hindered  from  making  it  clear  by  a  difficulty  in  manipulating  the
machinery  of  communication.  They  are  statements  which  can  only  be
explained  by  supposing  al)sence  of  knowledge.

The  illustrations  I  have  given  are,  I  think,  sufficient,  or  perhaps
my  readers  may  think  more  than  sufficient.  It  only  remains  briefly  to
recapitulate  the  argument.  We  have  presented  to  us  in  Mrs.  Piper's
trance  a  number  of  soi-dismit  different  personalities — some  of  them
known  to  have  lived  and  to  be  now  dead,  some  of  them  living,  some
probably  imaginary.  The  statements  and  the  intellectual  calibre  of
many  of  them  are  utterly  inconsistent  with  their  claims,  and  even  in
the  best  personations  there  are  lapses  which  cannot  easily  be  explained
if  we  are  in  direct  connnunication  with  the  professed  communicator.
These  lapses  and  limitations,  and  other  characteristics  of  the  communi-
cations, are  just  such  as  have  been  frequently  observed  in  secondary
personalities,  and  in  particular  correspond  to  what  we  should  expect
to  find  in  Mrs.  Piper's  secondary  personality  under  the  suggestive
influence  of  the  conditions  of  the  sittings.  I  am,  therefore,  driven
to  the  conclusion  that  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-intelligence  has  a  strong
tendency  to  unconscious  dramatic  personation  ;  and  is  continually
dreaming  itself  to  be  a  number  of  different  persons  under  the  influence
of  suggestion  (including  self  suggestion)  somewhat  as  an  oi'dinary
hypnotic  subject  can  be  made  by  suggestion  to  assume  different
characters  with  startling  dramatic  effect.  At  the  same  time — as
we  have  assumed  throughout — along  with  the  limitations  there  are
fragments  of  knowledge  exhibited  by  the  .trance  personality  in  some
sittings,  which  it  is  very  difficult  to  suppose  to  have  been  acquired
by  Mrs.  Piper  in  any  normal  way.  A  large  proportion  of  these
fragments  of  knowledge  are  in  the  minds  of  the  sitters,  some  are
in  the  minds  of  distant  living  persons,  and  a  few  were,  so  far  as
we  can  tell,  known  only  to  the  dead.  And  further  the  selection
and  grouping  of  some  of  these  fragments,  even  when  they  might
have  been  learnt  from  living  minds,  is,  as  Mr.  Hodgson  has  pointed
out,  sometimes  most  easily  explained  by  supposing  that  the  dead  are
partially  responsible  for  it.  Now,  if  we  may  assume  that  telepathy
is  possible  between  living  minds  and  between  the  minds  of  the  living
and  of  the  dead,  and  that  the  process  in  the  two  cases  is  similar,  we
find  that  our  facts  arrange  themselves  in  a  comparatively  simple
way.  Mrs.  Piper,  we  suppose,  has  in  trance  an  unusually  developed
telepathic  faculty.  As  in  telepathic  experiments  with  hypnotised
subjects,  ideas  come  to  her  in  more  or  less  dream-like  sequence  with-
out her  being  generally  able  to  trace  their  origin,  which  is  sometimes
telepathic  and  more  often  not.


XXXVI.] Discussion  of  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  35


It  is  introducing  a  complication  almost  gratuitously  to  suppose  that
communication  with  the  dead  is  different  in  kind  from  telepathic
communication  with  the  living,  and  that,  in  order  to  communicate,
the  dead  must  turn  out  Mrs.  Piper's  spirit  and  themselves  take  its
place  in  her  organism, — their  want  of  practice  in  using  it  being
the  cause  of  the  confusion  and  imperfection  of  the  communication.
Confusion  and  imperfection  we  certainly  find  ;  but  we  always  have
found  them  in  thought-transference  experiments,  and  we  do  not  try
to  account  for  this  by  supposing  that  the  agent's  spirit  makes  direct
use  of  the  percipient's  nervous  system  to  express  through  it  the  num-
bers or  diagrams  to  be  transferred  and,  owing  to  want  of  the  same
practice  in  using  the  percipient's  brain  that  he  has  in  using  his  own,
often  gives  the  wrong  number  !.  Why,  if  the  communication  occurs
at  all,  it  should  be  so  fragmentary  and  irregular,  we  cannot  tell.
Where  the  failure  in  the  transmission  occurs  we  do  not  know.  It  may
well  be  in  the  organism  ; — it  is  conceivable  that  potentially  and  sub-
liminally  all  minds  are  in  telepathic  communication,  though  the  results
emerge  into  consciousness  obscurely  and  incompletely,  and  often  not
at  all.  But  to  suppose  the  organism  to  be  the  cause  of  the  failure  is  a
very  different  thing  from  the  ponderous  hypothesis  that  another  spirit
uses  that  organism,  and  uses  it  imperfectly.

It  would  not,  however,  be  fair  to  call  the  hypothesis  of  spirit
possession  quite  gratuitous,  for  there  is  a  difficulty  in  the  telepathic
liypothesis  to  which  I  have  not  yet  referred.  It  is  that  agents  differ.
Some"  persons  in  the  body  seem  capable  of  acting  as  agents  when  others
are  not,  and  agents  in  the  spirit  similarly  vary  ;  but  while  we  can
suppose  that  the  difficulty  in  the  case  of  living  agents  is  physical  and
due  to  the  agent's  organism,  we  cannot  thus  account  for  it  in  the  case
of  the  dead.  It  is  probable  enough,  however,  that  the  difficulties  may
sometimes  be  psychical,  especially  as  this  would  be  analogous  to  our
experiences  in  daily  life,  when  the  difficulties  human  beings  have  in
making  themselves  understood  by  one  another  are  by  no  means  only
physical.

But  there  is  another  factor  playing  an  important  part  in  the
Piper  sittings  which  has  hardly,  I  think,  received  the  consideration  it
deserves,  and  to  which  these  differences  in  the  veridicality  of  the
communications  are  evidently  at  least  partly  due,  namely,  the  sitter.
The  success  of  sitters  in  obtaining  interesting  communications  varies,
as  we  know,  enormously,  and  there  are  persons  who  sit  with  Mrs.
Piper — have  even  sat  often  with  Mrs.  Piper — and  though  they  receive
plenty  of  communications,  receive  none  which  there  is  the  slightest
reason  to  suppose  supernormal  at  all.  It  is,  I  think,  the  case  that  the
sitter's  who  obtain  most  evidence  of  supernormal  communication  of
some  kind  are  those  whose  sittings  afford  evidence  of  supernormal

D  2


36


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


communication  of  all  kinds,  both  of  thought-transference  from  the
sitter  and  of  communication  with  the  dead  or  with  distant  living
minds.  If  it  were  only  a  question  of  information  derived  by  Mrs.
Piper  telepathically  from  the  sitter,  it  would  be  easy  to  attribute  the
failure  of  an  unsuccessful  sitter  to  his  being  a  bad  agent ;  but  a  good
sitter  seems  in  some  way  to  make  the  process  of  transmission  easier,
even  when  he  does  not  seem  to  be  the  source  of  the  information.

I  do  not  think  Dr.  Hodgson  has  attempted  to  explain  this.  He,
of  course,  recognises  the  fact,  and  says,  indeed  (Proceedings  XIII.,
p.  371),  "There  are  certain  persons  who  appear  to  be  almost  entirely
unsuccessful  as  regards  communications  from  their  '  deceased '  friends,
and  indeed  at  '  sittings '  altogether,  and  from  causes  which  apparently
inhere  in  themselves."  But  these  causes  appear  to  Dr.  Hodgson —
judging  from  what  he  says  further  on  in  the  same  paragraph — to  be
such  things  as  want  of  attention  or  of  desire  to  succeed ;  or,  again,  to
quote  his  words,  "It  may  even  be  that  the  state  of  mind  of  some
persons  is  actually  repellent  to  the  efforts  which  tlieir  '  deceased'  friends
make  to  communicate."  Such  causes  as  these,  no  doubt,  may  operate,
but  there  is  something  more.  I  speak  as  one  who  has  uniformly
failed,  whether  as  agent  or  percipient  in  thought-transference  experi-
ments, or  as  sitter  with  Mrs.  Piper  and  other  mediums,  and  I  am
sure  that  tlie  cause  is  not  want  of  sympathy  or  desire  to  succeed,  or
belief  that  success  is  possible.  After  years  of  failure  the  inevitable
absence  of  hope  may  have  a  damping  effect,  but  this  will  not  account
for  failure  when  hope  is  still  fresh.  I  think  it  is  certain  that  tlie  sitter
does  not  serve  only  as  an  attraction  to  his  deceased  friends,  but  that,
— granting,  as  I  am  doing  throughout,  the  genuineness  of  Mrs.  Piper's
power, — there  are  subliminal  qualities  in  the  sitters  which  make  the
exercise  of  this  power  possible  with  some  and  not  with  others.  Now
this  is  not,  I  think,  consistent  with  the  hypothesis  that  the  commu-
nicator in  the  other  world  uses  Mrs.  Piper's  organism  directly ;  for  if
so,  why  should  it  be  more  difficult  for  him  to  speak  or  write  for  A
than  for  B  ?  We  require  a  hypothesis  which  allows  for  all  three
minds — the  minds  of  the  deceased  friend,  of  Mrs.  Piper,  and  of  the
sitter — being  subliminally  concerned  in  the  result.

In  attempting  to  frame  such  a  hypothesis,  two  things  should,  I
think,  be  borne  in  mind.  First,  I  cannot  but  assume  that,  whatever
other  sources  of  information  Mrs.  Piper  may  draw  from,  she  does
sometimes  draw  telepathically  from  the  sitter's  mind.  Evidence
excluding  other  possible  sources  of  information  is,  almost  necessarily,
rare,  but  it  is  afforded  when  mistaken  ideas  of  the  sitters  are
reproduced.  As  instances  of  this  I  may  refer  to  an  experience  of  Pro-
fessor Newbold's,  given  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  pp.  9,  24  ;  also  to
an  attempt  of  G.  P.  to  describe  the  contents  of  a  letter  presented  by


XXXVI.] Discussion  of  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper.  37


Mrs.  Howard,  when  what  G.  P.  said  corresponded  not  with  the  actual
letter,  but  with  one  which  Mrs.  Howard  mistakenly  thought  she  had
presented  {Proceedinr/a,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  320).

Secondly,  our  other  investigations  have  produced  some  evidence,
though  not  a  great  deal,  pointing  to  the  possibility  of  telepathic  com-
munication between  the  dead  and  living  persons  in  a  normal  condition
(not  entranced) — evidence  of  the  same  kind,  though  much  less  in
amount  and  in  cogency,  as  that  which  appai'itions  at  the  moment  of
death  afford  of  telepathic  communication  between  the  dying  and  their
living  friends.  I  do  not  propose  to  go  into  this  here,  and  will  only
refer  the  reader  to  a  paper  by  Mr.  Gurney  and  Mr.  Myers  on
"  Apparitions  occurring  soon  after  Death,"  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,
and  to  Chapter  XVII.  of  the  "Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucina-
tions," Proceedings,  Vol.  X.  I  think  now,  as  I  and  the  other  writers
of  the  Report  thought  then,  that  the  amount  of  evidence  is  not  in
itself  sufficient  to  constitute  anything  like  a  conclusive  case  for  post
mortem  agency. Still  it  should  not  be  ignored.

Now,  obviously,  if  we  once  admit  that  telepathic  impacts  sometimes
reach  the  normal  consciousness  of  percipients  through  hallucinations,
there  is  no  need  to  suppose  that  those  which  do  so  are  all  the  telepathic
communications  which  occur.  An  unknown  proportion — perhaps  a
very  large  proportion — may,  for  aught  we  know,  never  rise  above  the
subliminal  consciousness ;  just  as  ideas  suggested  to  a  hypnotised
person  may  remain  entirely  unknown  to  him  when  he  is  awake,  or  may
in  some  cases  be  brought  to  his  waking  knowledge  by  his  own
automatic  action  or  by  a  suggested  hallucination.

If,  then,  it  be  granted  that  we  are  not  without  reason  for  thinking
that  Mrs.  Piper  may  be  in  telepathic  communication  with  the  sitter,
and  that  the  sitter  may,  without  knowing  it,  be  in  telepathic  relation
with  his  dead  friends  ;  and  also — what  seems  to  be  certain — that  tlie
sitter  plays  some  important  part  in  bringing  about  the  results  obtained
through  Mrs.  Piper,  is  it  not  conceivable  that  his  function  is,  to  some
extent,  that  of  a  channel  of  communication?  The  departed  spirit
communicates,  we  may  suppose,  telepathically  directly  with  his  friend
the  sitter,  but  this  communication  is  entirely  subliminal,  and  the  sitter
is  not  normally  conscious  of  it  at  all.  Mrs.  Piper  in  trance  receives
telepathically  impressions  from  some  sitters  which  do  rise,  partially  at
least,  to  her  trance  consciousness,  and  are  then  given  back  by  her  to
the  sitter  through  the  ordinary  channels  of  sense  in  speech  or  writing.

Mrs.  Piper  in  trance  plays,  on  this  hypothesis,  a  part  analogous
to  that  of  a  bad  mirror  reflecting  very  imperfectly  the  contents  of  the
sitter's  subliminal  consciousness,  coloured  and  distorted  by  the  con-
tents of  her  own.  She  does  for  the  sitter,  in  a  different  way,  exactly
what  a  veridical  sensory  hallucination  does. Such  a  hallucination —


38


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


say,  an  apparition  at  the  moment  of  death — is  generally  an  embodi-
ment of  many  associated  ideas  from  the  percipient's  own  mind
combined  with  what  we  may  suppose  to  be  the  immediate  result  of
the  telepathic  communication  from  the  dying  person.  The  percipient
will  see  his  friend  most  likely  in  clothes  of  a  familiar  aspect  and  with
a  familiar  expression,  in  a  position  fitting  in  with  his  own  physical
surroundings;  all  these  adjuncts  to  the  idea  of  the  friend  being
generally,  it  would  seem,  due  to  the  percipient's  own  associations  with
the  friend.  Similarly  we  may  suppose  that  Mrs.  Piper  derives  from
the  sitter  impressions  subliminally  received  hy  the  latter  from  the
dead,  combined  with  ideas  previously  in  the  sitter's  mind,  and  repro-
duces these  further  complicated  by  her  own  ideas.  Sometimes — indeed
generally — there  would  be  no  evidence  of  any  communication  from
the  deceased,  the  sitter's  own  ideas  being,  so  far  as  appeared,  alone
reflected.  Further,  it  would  not  be  at  all  inconsistent  with  the  hypo-
thesis that  Mrs.  Piper  should  herself,  as  well  as  the  sitter,  receive
in  some  instances  direct  communications  from  the  dead.  One  result,
we  may  observe,  would  follow  if  the  process  resembles  that  which  I
suggest.  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  personality  would  in  the  course  of  a
series  of  sittings  gradually  acquire  as  part  of  its  own  stock  of  ideas
a  definite  conception  of  the  deceased  agent,  and  as  this  happened,  it
would  become  more  and  more  difficult  to  distinguish  veridical  com-
munications from  those  for  which  Mrs.  Piper  alone  is  responsible.

Any  hypothesis  must,  with  the  very  small  amount  of  knowledge
we  at  present  have,  be  exceedingly  tentative,  and  the  one  I  have
ventured  to  suggest,  if  true  at  all,  can  only  be  a  very  rough  approxi-
mation to  the  truth.  The  mere  attempt  to  state  it,  probably  gives  a
misleading  definiteness  to  things  of  which  we  have  only  a  very  dim
perception.  But  I  know  of  no  other  hypothesis  which  seems  to  me  to
fit  at  all  even  the  very  limited  number  of  facts  which  we  can  regard
as  provisionally  established,  or  legitimately  assumed  to  be  so  for  the
purposes  of  the  present  discussion  ;  and  I  have  ventured  to  bring  it
forward  in  the  hope  that  it  may  suggest  lines  of  observation  and
experiment  which  may  throw  light  on  the  very  obscure  and  difficult
questions  involved  in  Mrs.  Piper's  phenomena.


XXXVI.]


3Irs.  Piper  and  Telepathy.


39


III.

DISCUSSION OF THE TRANCE PHENOMENA  OF

MRS.  PIPER.

III. — Reflections  on  Mrs.  Piper  and  Telepathy.
By  Andrew  Lang.

In  Di\  Hodgson's  "  Further  Record  of  Observations  of  Certain
Plienomena  of  Trance"  {Proceedings,  Part  XXXIII.,  pp.  284-413),  he
promises  to  consider  objections  to  his  provisional  hypothesis.  Such
objections  I  venture  to  produce,  In  1898  his  hypothesis  was  that
"the  chief  communicators"  (with  Mrs.  Piper)  "are  veritably  the
personages  that  they  claim  to  be "  (p.  406).  This  means,  of  course,
that,  in  Dr.  Hodgson's  opinion,  Mrs.  Piper  is  actually  "  possessed "
(in  the  old  phrase)  by  the  spirits  of  the  dead.  This  is  indeed  a
"far-going"  theory.  But  if  we  reject  it,  and  also  reject  the  idea
that  Mrs.  Piper  is  a  conscious  impostor,  and  in  collusion,  for  example,
with  such  people  as  "  Mrs.  Howard,"  we  must  try  to  produce  some
other  hypothesis.  The  hypothesis  of  telepathy  from  the  living  has
been  advanced,  and  has  been  met  by  Dr.  Hodgson  with  arguments
of  considerable  force.  Though  I  have  no  theory  to  offer  myself,
perhaps  I  may  be  allowed  to  make  a  few  remarks  on  the  problem ;
especially  as  regards  the  telepathic  explanation.  When  I  published
The  Making  of  Religion  in  1898,  one  of  my  purposes  was  to  set
forth  alleged  savage  parallels  to  the  "psychical  phenomena"  recorded
by  the  Society  as  occurring  among  civilised  peoples,  European  and
American.  Among  such  phenomena  occurs  the  "possession"  of  a
human  "  medium "  by  a  god  or  a  ghost.  When  the  medium  at
Delphi,  or  in  modern  Burmah,  China,  Polynesia,  savage  North
America,  New  Zealand,  or  Africa,  becomes  convulsive,  and  afterwards
utters  prophecies  or  other  statements  about  what  cannot  normally
be  known  to  him  or  her,  the  pre-scientific  theory  was  that  the  organisa-
tion of  the  medium  is  being  used  by  a  god  or  spirit.  But  this
"  spiritistic  "  theory  has  been  employed  by  mankind  to  explain
almost  every  kind  of  obscure  phenomenon,  and  has  in  every  field
been  rejected  by  science  ;  apparently  with  justice.  When  the  theory
is  now  revived  by  Dr.  Hodgson  to  account  for  the  singular  case  of
Mrs.  Piper, one cannot but regard it, a  priori,  with  extreme


40


Andreiv  Lang.


[part


suspicion.  There  are  other  grounds  for  distrust.  Thus  Dr.  Phinuit,
the  soi-disant  spirit  of  a  French  doctor,  is  notoriously  ignorant  of
French,  and  not  one  of  his  statements  about  his  earthly  life  admits
of  verification.  He  is,  or  was,  not  only  vulgar  beyond  belief,  but  also
tricky,  evasive,  false,  dishonest.  Thus  Professor  Peirce  (May  1st,  1892)
says,  after  a  "sitting,"  "Phinuit  seemed  to  me  to  be  constantly  groping
after  indications  from  me  to  correct  and  direct  his  intelligence,  and
in  some  cases  he  seemed  to  be  so  directed."  The  "sitting"  is  "a
struggle  for  knowledge  to  which  the  sitter  contributes."

I  know  how  much  some  Psychical  Researchers  dislike  evidence
from  anthropology,  but  a  Zulu  sitting  with  a  possessed  woman  could
not  be  better  described  than  in  Professor  Peirce's  words.  The  sitters
are  expected  to  give  indications  by  beating  the  ground  when  the
seeress  is  right,  and  the  seeress,  like  Mrs.  Piper,  constantly  asks
tentative  questions.  "Who's  Plerbert?"  "I  get  a  Maria  in  your
surroundings  1 "  with  a  pause  of  interrogation.  This  is  Mrs.  Piper's
method  :  compare  Callaway,  Religion,  of  the  Ainazidu,  pp.  361-374.
As  to  the  evidence  for  the  Zulu  method,  it  is  explicitly  set  forth
in  Bishop  Callaway's  Zulu  texts  and  translations ;  or  see  Making
of  Religion,  pp.  152,  153.  The  coincidence  of  Zulu  and  Piperian
methods  is  exact,  as  far  as  the  "  struggle  for  knowledge  to  which  the
sitter  contributes  "  is  concerned.  Professor  Trowbridge,  again,  was
"struck  by  a  sort  of  insane  cunning  in  the  groping  of  the  woman  after
something  intangible "  [Proceedings,  Part  XXXIII.,  p.  526).  Pro-
fessor Norton  thought  Mrs.  Piper's  conditions  "analogous  to  those  of
an  ill  person  dreaming  a  suggested  dream,  in  which  trains  of  dreams
to  which  the  dreamer  has  been  accustomed  are  modified  by  the  special
conditions  of  the  moment."  He  made  no  doubt  of  Mrs.  Piper's  good
faith,  but  what  is  the  good  faith  of  "an  ill  person"  in  a  dream
modified  by  the  sitters  ?

Thus  both  Phinuit  and  Mrs.  Piper's  performances  in  general  have
produced  the  worst  impression  on  various  and  most  intelligent
observers.  Professor  Macalister  says  :  "  I  let  her  see  a  blot  of  ink
on  my  fingers,  and  she  said  that  I  was  a  writer."  This  implies,  of
course,  that,  through  her  apparent  trance,  Mrs.  Piper's  normal  self
was  on  this  occasion  wide  awake  and  eager  to  catch  at  any  knowledge
that  could  be  normally  acquired.  Even  if  Mr.  Macalister  had  been
happier  in  later  sittings  that  blot  remains  indelible.  Mr.  Macalister
"  thought  the  whole  performance  an  imposture  and  a  poor  one."
Later,  an  American  author,  cited  as  Mr.  Marte,  who  knew  "  G.  P.,"
"  formed  an  opinion  entirely  unfavourable  to  Mrs.  Piper."  Dr.  Weir
Mitchell  is  a  thoroughly  qualified  observer  as  a  physician  and  a
man  of  the  world,  and  he  says  that  had  he  not  heard  Professor
James's  statements,  he  would  have  come  to  the  conclusion  "  that  the


XXXVI.]  Mrs.  Piper  and  Telepathy.  41


whole  thing  was  a  fraud  and  a  very  stupid  one."  Later  sittings,  of
course,  might  have  altered  that  opinion.  [Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  pp.
605-606  ;  Part  XXXIII.,  pp.  429-483).  Mr.  Barkworth,  as  far  as  his
own  experiences  went,  set  down  any  successes  to  muscle-reading.

I  might  quote  many  such  results,  but  what  cliietly  confirmed  my
own  suspicions  were  the  so-called  communications,  through  Mrs.
Piper,  of  Professor  Oliver  Lodge's  deceased  uncle.  I  have  not  space
for  a  detailed  comparison  of  what  Mrs.  Piper  said  with  what  was
said  by  a  surviving  brother  of  Mr.  Lodge's  uncle  as  to  some  in-
cidents of  their  distant  boyhood.  But  lately  I  went  through  the
two  accounts  with  a  member  of  the  Society,  certainly  not  prejudiced
against  ]\Irs.  Piper,  and  I  think  he  admitted  that  in  only  one  case  (the
possession  by  the  uncle  of  a  dried  snake  skin)  did  the  revelation  of
the  dead  really  harmonise  with  the  recollections  of  the  living  kins-
man of  Mr.  Lodge.  Of  course,  my  memory  may  exaggerate.  The
events,  moreover  (though  they  did  not  really  occur  at  all  as  the  dead
uncle  described  them),  were  exactly  such  as  do  arise  in  the  expe-
riences of  almost  every  human  boy.  Readers  can  examine  critically
the  two  statements,  and  decide  for  themselves  {Proceedings,  Vol.
VI.,  pp.  465-557).  For  these  and  other  reasons  I  conceived  that
Phinuit,  at  all  events,  was  only  a  morbid  secondary  personality  of
Mrs.  Piper's.  ISTow  such  personalities,  or  moods,  or  whatever  we  call
them,  are  notoriously  apt  to  be  dishonest,  detestable,  and  the  very
reverse  of  the  patient's  normal  character.  The  old  English  proverb
says  "Ale  is  another  man" — that  is,  the  alcoholic  mood  differs  from
the  normal  personalty.  The  character  of  the  dipsomaniac  (say.  Prince
Charles  Edward)  is  the  precise  contrary  of  the  victim's  original
character.  To  take  a  more  recent  instance.  The  Dundee  Advertiser
lately  (December,  1899)  published  the  sad  story  of  a  local  artisan.
He  got  "mad  drunk,"  doubtless  on  some  infamously  adulterated
whisky,  went  home  and  beat  his  mother  to  death.  He  then  strayed
out,  fell  into  some  water,  and  on  emerging  knew  what  he  had  done.
He  at  once  gave  himself  up  to  the  police.  Whisky  was  "another
man,"  and  a  much  worse  man.

Worse,  too,  than  the  normal  self  of  the  patient  is,  as  a  rule,  the
non-alcoholic  "secondary  personality;"  the  "preposterous  scoundrel,"
as  Professor  Shaler  calls  Phinuit.  In  "  unfortunate  subjects  of
abnormal  conditions  of  the  brain,"  says  Mr.  Huxley,  "  the  dis-
turbance of  the  sensory  and  intellectual  faculties  is  not  unfrequently
accompanied  by  a  perturbation  of  the  moral  nature,  which  may
manifest  itself  in  a  most  astonishing  love  of  lying  for  its  own
sake."  He  cites  a  case  of  a  soldier  whose  left  parietal  bone  was
fractured  by  a  bullet.  In  his  normal  life  he  is  honest,  intelligent,
and  kindly. In  his  abnormal  intervals  "  he  is  an  inveterate  thief,"


42


Andrew  Lang.


[part


and  all  his  proceedings  present  "  a  close  parallel  to  the  phenomena
of  somnambulism  and  of  mesmerism,"  including  examples  of  strange
lucidity.  Mr.  Huxley  cites  "  De  TAutomatisme  de  la  Memoire,"  by
Dr.  Mesnet,  in  JJTJnion  Medicate,  July  21st,  23rd,  1874.  His  own
text  is  in  Culture  and  Science,  22.3-231.  The  whole  storv  is  most
curious,  and  worthy  of  attention.

Now  not  only  is,  or  was,  Phinuit  dishonest  and  tricky,  but  even
"  G.  P."  frequently  gives  absolutely  false  information  when  asked
about  what  is  occurring  at  a  distance.  He  says,  for  instance,  that
his  father  is  writing  a  letter  (an  easy  guess)  when  he  is  not.  The
late  Mr.  Moses,  when  invited  to  give  the  real  names  of  Imperator  and
Co.  (his  "  controls ")  gives  wrong  names.  The  attempts  of  G.  P.  to
translate  Hdrep  i'jfj,a)v  6  iv  toIs  oupavo'is  (Part  XXXtV.,  p.  46j  read  as  if
part  of  Mrs.  Piper's  mind  was  guessing  on  the  lines  suggested  by
Pater  (pater  noster).  The  false  information  is  given  with  perfect
aplomb,  and  is  "not  right,  though  natural  enough,"  i.e.,  a  deliberate
guess  (Part  XXXIII.,  pp.  345,  34G,  347).  The  communicator  is
"  Mr.  H."

We  are  told  that  subtle  traits  of  the  dead  are  recognised  by  their
friends  in  these  communications.  Thus  a  husband  recognised  familiar
phrases  of  his  dead  wife's,  such  as,  "  Well,  I  should  say  I  had ! "
<'  Don't  I  ?  "  "  Well,  I  guess  !  "  {Proceedings,  Part  XXXIII.,  p.  504).
But  surely  these  phrases  are  excessively  common  in  the  conversations
of  American  women,  if  we  may  judge  by  the  dialogue  of  American
novels.  On  the  other  liand,  deliberate  evasiveness  and  calm  falsehood
were  not  the  traits  of  G.  P.  and  the  rest  when  alive.  Therefore  I
would  attribute  these  traits,  at  least,  to  Mrs.  Piper's  "  preposterous
scoundrel "  of  a  secondary  personality.

That  spirits,  in  the  next  life,  making  use  of  Mrs.  Piper's  brains,
nerves,  voice,  and  hands,  should  be  confused,  is  intelligible.  But
why  should  they  be  impudently  mendacious,  absurdly  ignorant,  and
furtively  evasive ;  fluent  in  twaddle,  and  "  groping "  when  a  simple
question  as  to  something  familiar  to  them  when  alive  is  asked,  that  is,
in  many  cases  1

If  Mr.  H.,  or  Pliinuit,  or  G.  P.  were  honourable  spirits,  they  would
say  that  they  don't  know,  when  they  don't  know.  They  would  not
give  false  information,  "  natui-al  enough  "  (easily  guessed),  but  totally
wrong.  Such  proceedings,  on  the  other  hand,  are  characteristic  of  a
secondary  personality,  which  is  occasionally  supplied  with  right  facts
by  guess,  muscle-reading,  or  even  telepathy.  Dr.  Hodgson  has  ably
argued  that  the  failures  and  confusions  "  fit  the  claim  "  of  spirits,
and  do  not  fit  the  theory  of  telepathy  (Part  XXXIII.,  pp.  391-396).
But  the  points  on  which  I  have  dwelt  do  assuredly  harmonise  with  the
notorious  character  of  the  secondary  personalities  of  people  honest  in


XXXVI.]


3fr$.  Piper  and  Telepathy.


43


their  normal  state.  And  these  points  do  not  fit  the  character  of
honourable  spirits,  eminently  the  reverse.  Mr.  ISTewbold  insists  on
this,  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Moses  (Part  XXXIV.,  p.  41).  Indeed  Mr.
Podmore.  with  his  views  of  the  performances  of  the  incarnate  Mr.
Moses  (Part  XXXIV.,  pp.  52-53)  must  regret  that  Mr.  Moses  and
his  crew  of  "  controls  "  have  invaded  Mrs.  Piper.

In  reviewing  my  book.  The  Jfakiiig  of  Religion  (Part  XXXIV.,
p.  131)  Mr.  Podmore  censures  my  remarks  on  Mrs.  Piper  (p.  151).
Dr.  Hodgson's  report  (Part  XXXIII.)  came  out,  as  I  said,  while  my
book  was  passing  through  the  press,  and  I  had  neither  space  nor  time
for  criticism.  I  mei'ely  said  that  the  report  did  not  win  me  to
Dr.  Hodgson's  opinion,  namely,  that  the  "  chief  communicators "
were  spirits  of  the  dead,  and  that  I  was  sure  my  own  dead  friends
would  steer  clear  of  Mrs.  Piper.  I  added  that  her  interest  for  me  was
"purely  anthropological."  If  she  deals  with  the  dead,  so,  apparently,
do  similar  savage  mediums.  If  the  pretence  is  rejected  in  their
case,  it  will  need  a  great  deal  of  evidence  to  prove  an  exception  for
Mrs.  Piper.

Another  example  of  this  argument  occurs.  Speaking  for  the
"spirit"  theory,  Dr.  Hodgson  says  (Part  XXXIII.,  p.  396)  that  the
best  results  are  got  by  treating  the  communicators  as  if  they  really
were  spirits.  "We  should  soothe  him  ....  express  sympathy,"
and  so  on.  The  Chinese  know  this,  and,  in  using  their  peculiar
planchette,  they  adulate  the  communicators,  and  set  out  for  them
wine,  fruit  and  cakes.  Even  English  planchettists  (not  believing  in
spirits)  address  the  "  communicators "  with  flattery,  and  think  that
the  results  are  improved.  Would  Dr.  Hodgson  argue  that  they  and
the  Chinese  are  dealing  with  real  spirits  ?  The  ai'gument  seems  as
good  in  one  case  as  in  the  other, — that  is,  granting  the  improvement
in  results.

So  far,  then,  I  think  that  the  "  communicators,"  even  the  best,  do
show  notes  of  the  dishonest  secondary  personality  of  Mrs.  Piper.
G.  P.,  to  be  sure,  recognises  Phinuit  as  a  real  entity,  a  spiritual  entity,
and  surely  G.  P.  should  know!  But,  if  so,  how  can  we  account  for
Phinuit 's  inability  to  prove  that  he  ever  e.visted  on  earth,  and  for  his
ignorance  of  French  'l  Dr.  Hodgson  says  that  many  things  are  in-
explicable by  his  tlieory  of  spirits,  just  as  many  "  biological  incidents  "
have  not  been  fully  e.Kplained  by  the  theory  of  evolution.  (Part
XXXIII.,  p.  406).  But  the  things  not  accounted  for  by  the  theory  of
spirits  are  obviously  of  a  moralhj  suspicious  nature,  and  include  a  very
low  moral  element.  This  is  not,  I  am  apt  to  think,  the  case  with  the
"  biological  incidents  "  unexplained  ;  perhaps  it  could  not  be.  Still,
the  spiritual  siipercheries,  after  the  fullest  allowance  for  the  confusion
of  a  spirit  dealing  with  Mrs.  Piper's  body,  donnent  furieiisement  a


44


Andrew  Lang.


[part


penser.  Thus  it  is  odd  that  when  asked  to  describe  distant  actions  by
Mrs.  Howard,  G.  P.  should  go  wrong  by  a  day,  while  he  is  quite  awake
to  our  mere  human  time  when  communicating  in  ordinary  sittings
(Part  XXXIII.,  pp.  304-308).  Perhaps  he  on!}'  succeeds,  as  is  sug-
gested, when  people  are  thinking  "  strongly  and  emotionally "  of
him.  (Let  us  remember  this.)  Still,  why  confuse  the  time?  The
volubility  of  G.  P.  in  platitude  contrasts  again,  as  I  have  said,
unpleasantly  with  his  accustomed  hesitation  when  asked  for  a  humble
test  of  his  identity.

There  is  another  point  on  which  I  venture  to  think  that  the
wonted  precision  and  fulness  of  Dr.  Hodgson's  notes  are  absent.
We  need  to  know,  in  each  case,  whether  the  sitter  did,  or  did  not,
hold  Mrs.  Piper's  hand,  and  we  also  need  to  know  how  long  the  sitting
was  in  point  of  time.  "We  must  have  information  as  to  the  chances  of
muscle-reading.

Very  singular  are  the  possibilities  of  muscle-reading,  of  which  I
give  an  example.  Experiments  were  recently  made  on  a  blind,  deaf
mute,  a  girl,  to  see  whether  she  was  utterly  without  hearing.  She
looked  pleased  when  music  was  played,  annoyed  or  alarmed  when
a  hideous  din  was  produced.  But  it  was  observed  that  she  was
tlien  holding  the  hand  of  a  lady,  her  instructress.  The  lady  being
placed  at  some  distance,  no  sound  that  could  be  made  affected  the
expression  of  the  child's  face.  No  doubt  her  sense  of  touch  was
exceedingly  keen,  but  so  may  be  Mrs.  Piper's,  when  entranced  and  in
contact  with  the  hand  of  her  "sitter."^

Though  Mr.  Podmore  accuses  me  of  "  liking  my  psychical  bric-a-brac
restored  and  decorated,"  whereas  Mrs.  Piper's  bric-a-brac  is  "battered
and  worm-eaten,"  I  do  not  feel  guilty  !  Even  in  a  book  written  only
for  entertainment  (i?oo^  of  Dreams  and  Ghosts),  I  investigated  historical
cases  by  the  aid  of  MSS.  and  rare  books,  and  Celtic  living  tradition.
Overcoming  the  inexpressible  tediousness  and  distastefulness  of  the
task,  I  have,  in  fact,  several  times  read  carefully  through  most  of  the
Piper  records.  I  must  now  confess  that,  taking  the  G.  P.  notes  alone,
I  think  there  is  primd  Jacie  reason  for  fui-ther  inquiry. Dr.  Hodgson

'  Tlie  case  referred  to  is  that  of  a  deaf,  dumb,  and  blind  American  child,  Helen
Keller.  See  Mind,  XIV.,  p.  30(J.  We  read,  "Whereas  Miss  Sullivan"  (the  lady
who  instructed  the  child)  "had  been  disposed  to  credit  her  with  some  inexplicable
mental  faculty,  it  now  appears,  on  closer  observation,  that  her  power  of  divining  the
thoughts  of  those  .she  is  with  may  be  wholly  explained  by  her  acute  perception  of
their  muscular  vibrations."  I  think  I  have  rather  overstated  the  case,  because  I
originally  took  it  at  second-hand  from  the  conversation  of  a  psychological  friend,  who
later  supplied  the  exact  reference.  This  is  instructive,  but  it  remains  true  that  the
child  showed  signs  of  appreciating  sounds  when  she  held  Miss  Sullivan's  hand  ;
and  not  when  Miss  Sullivan  placed  her  hands  on  a  table.  If  Miss  Keller  is  alive
and  well,  exfteriments  a  la  Piper  might  be  made  with  her,  if  she  entertains  no
objection.


XXXVI.]


Mrs.  Piper  and  Telepathy.


45


shows,  moreover,  that  written  reports  cannot  convey  the  same  impres-
sion as  is  produced  by  years  of  personal  experience;  and  there  must
be  strong  evidence  in  what  overpowers  /ti,s  scepticism.  Again,  we  are
not  permitted  to  know,  as  he  knows,  the  most  telling  evidence,  and
that  must  be  allowed  for  in  our  conclusions.

I  do  not  think  that  the  normal  Mrs.  Piper  makes  private  inquiries.
That  hypothesis  I  gladly  discard.  In  the  case  of  G.  P.  we  learn
(Part  XXXIII.,  p.  295)  that  he  died  by  an  accident,  in  New  York,  in
February,  1892,  Mrs.  Piper  was  then  in  New  York,  and  probably  read
about  the  affair  (G.  P.  being,  apparently,  a  more  or  less  notable
person),  in  the  newspapers.  She  could,  if  she  chose,  make  inquiries  ;
she  might  hear  gossip  (though  I  lay  no  stress  on  this),  and  G.  P.  did
not  begin  to  possess  her  till  several  weeks  later.  But  I  do  not
suppose  that  Mrs.  Piper  heard  of  Mr.  Hart's  studs  (once  G.  P.'s),  or
of  "  Katherine,"  and  of  circumstances  connected  with  her  which  M  r.
Hart  did  not  know  that  he  knew,  and  probably  never  Iiad  known.  I
would  incline  to  explain  these  things  (Part  XXXIII.,  pp.  297-298)  by
muscle-reading  (if  Mr.  Hart  held  Mrs.  Piper's  hand,  about  which
nothing  is  said),  or  by  telepathy.  In  M.  Bourget's  case,  his  hand  was
in  that  of  Mrs.  Piper,  and  she  took  a  very  long  time  to  give  him
information  which  he  certainly  thought  surprising.

Probably  Dr.  Hodgson  ought  to  record  the  time  occupied  in  a
conversation  which  may  look  very  short  in  print,  and  certainly  we
should  know  whether  the  sitter  held  Mrs.  Piper's  hand  or  not.  These
facts  Dr.  Hodgson  must  have  known  in  M.  Bourget's  case ;  my  recol-
lection is  that  M.  Bourget  told  me  that  he  held  Mrs.  Piper's  hand,  and
that  the  sitting  was  fairly  long.  He  remained,  even  so,  unable  to
explain  the  results,  as  he  has  said  in  print  {Figaro,  Januai-y  llth,
1895  ;  Proceedings,  Part  XXXIII.,  pp.  495-499).

I  recognise  the  importance  of  the  case  of  Mr.  Hart,  Katherine,
and  G.  P.'s  studs,  and  of  similar  examples.

We  now  come  to  the  Howards,  who  did  not  see  Mrs.  Piper  till
about  three  weeks  after  Mr.  Hart.  Here,  again,  I  do  not  know  if  these
most  intimate  acquaintances  of  G.  P.  held  Mrs.  Piper's  hand  during
the  sittings,  nor  is  the  time  occupied  by  the  conversations  given.
These  details  ought,  I  venture  to  think,  to  be  recorded.  On  the
hypothesis  of  Mrs.  Howard's  collusion,  almost  all  the  mystery  vanishes.
I  believe  in  no  such  matter  (knowing,  as  I  do,  nothing  about  Mrs.
Howard).  In  no  such  matter  do  /  believe,  but  it  is,  to  the  sceptic,  a
theory  more  acceptable  than  the  theory  of  possession  by  the  soul  of  a
dead  man.  But,  in  the  case  of  collusion,  Mrs.  Howard  (Part  XXXIIL,
p.  306)  would  have  told  Mrs.  Piper  what  she  was  going  to  do  on  April
28th  (when  Mrs.  Howard  was  to  have  a  sitting),  not  what  she  did  on
April  27th. It  was  what  she  did  on  April  27th,  that  G.  P.  described


46


Andrew  Lang.


[part


as  events  of  April  28tli.  Dr.  Hodgson,  in  a  similar  case,  suggests  that
Phinuit  was  "  getting  glimpses  into  the  mind  of  Mrs.  Holmes,  was
reading  off  some  of  her  past  experiences  "  (Part  XXXIV.,  p.  307).
So  Mrs.  Piper  mai/  have  read  in  Mrs.  Howard's  mind,  on  tlae  27th,
and  transferred  the  results  to  the  28th,  time  being  perhaps  rather
mixed  to  her  secondary  self.  Mrs.  Piper's  "  secondary  personality  "
was  as  likely  to  do  all  this  as  G.  P.  was ;  and  he  is  rather  less  of  a  vera
causa.  Phinuit,  by  the  way  (Part  XXXIII.,  p.  314)  does  not  seem  to
have  known  that  G.  P.  knew  Greek,  and,  indeed,  in  the  next  world  he
knows  very  little.

In  all  cases,  knowledge  by  G.  P.  of  what  occurs  here,  at  a  distance
from  his  sitter,  seems  to  be  "  obtained  indirectly  and  telepathically
through  the  minds  of  living  people,  rather  than  by  a  direct  visual
perception,  such  as  we  enjoy  "  (Dr.  Hodgson,  Part  XXXIII.,  p.  315).
If  this  be  true,  why  suppose  a  surviving  G.  P.  at  all  ?  Mrs.  Piper's
own  "  secondary  personality  "  may  be  able  to  do  all  that  G.  P.  (on  the
animistic  hypothesis)  is  supposed  to  do, — for  example,  could  reel  off,  by
aid  of  telepathy,  the  long  private  communications  to  Mr.  Howard  who
was  present  (Part  XXXIII.,  p.  322).  G.  P.  was  strongest  with  his
most  intimate  friends,  and  I  admit  that  one  does  not  see  Avhy  this
should  be  so,  if  G.  P.  is  only  a  function  of  Mrs.  Piper's  secondary
personality.  That  fact,  certainly,  seems  to  be  against  the  hypothesis
of  mere  telepathy  between  the  living.  We  can  scarcely  argue  that
G.  P.'s  friends  only  happened  to  succeed  best  with  Mrs.  Piper.

This  brings  us  to  the  question  whether  Mrs.  Piper's  remarkable,
though  direly  interrupted,  successes,  say  with  G.  P.,  are  due  to
information  from  the  spirit  of  that  gentleman,  or  to  telepathy  on  the
side  of  Mrs.  Piper,  tapping,  as  it  were,  the  minds  not  only  of  living
persons  beside  her,  and  often  known  to  her,  but  also  of  living  persons
distant,  and  unknown  to  her,  though  known  to  people  in  her  room.
To  this  obviously  wild  hypothesis  we  are  almost  driven,  if  we  reject
the  theory  of  fraud,  and  the  theory  of  communicating  spirits  of
the  dead.

The  hypothesis  of  fraud  rests  on  a  vera  causa  ;  thus  we  might
say  that  Robert  Houdin  was  bribed  to  give  a  false  testimonial  to  the
clairvoyance  of  Alexis  Didier.  On  David  Hume's  theory,  a  long  set
of  impostures  is  the  most  legitimate  explanation  of  Mrs.  Piper's
successes.  For  reasons  given  by  Dr.  Hodgson,  I  cannot  accept  the
theory  of  imposture  by  Mrs.  Piper,  in  her  normal  state.  For  one
thing  she  could  not  afford  the  expense  of  private  inquiries,  which
would  more  than  swallow  up  the  profits.

Turning,  then,  to  telepathy,  Dr.  Hodgson  argues  that  there  are
limitations,  which  gradually  disappear,  in  the  news  given  by  persons
recently  dead, and  there  are  limitations  at  first  sittings.  (Part


XXXVI.]


Mrs.  Piper  and  Telepathy.


47


XXXIII.,  p.  392.)  Moreover,  good  telepathic  living  agents  (as  they
seem  to  be)  fail  constantly  with  certain  dead  "  communicators."  But
G.  P.  was  very  lucid  at  first,  though  recently  dead,  and  dead  by  an
accident.  "First  sittings,"  "first  communicators,"  again,  may  be
confused,  but  the  confusion  may  be  due  to  the  living  "  agents  "  ;  in
fact,  as  far  as  I  see,  the  failure  may  always  be  due  to  living  agents,
dealing  with  another  living  agent,  Mrs.  Piper.  We  know  so  very  little
about  telepathy  that  we  can  hardly  argue  on  this  side  of  the  iuatter  at
nil.  Possibly  I  fail  to  grasp  Dr.  Hodgson's  full  meaning  in  pages
391-393.  "  That  memories  of  little  children  recently  dead  should  have
a  special  telepathic  agency"  seems  extremely  natural,  just  as  G.  P.
is  said  to  succeed  most  wlien  people  are  thinking  "  strongly  and
.-  .emotionally"  of  him.  People  do  think  "  strongly  and  emotionally"  of
dead  children,  and,  perhaps,  that  kind  of  thought  of  the  living  sitter  is
most  readily  caught  by  Mrs.  Piper.  Just  so,  if  persons  who  died  as
children  forget  childish  things,  as  we  are  told,  that  may  be  because
the  survivors,  after  many  years,  have  themselves  foi'gotten  them
(though  the  subliminal  self  never  forgets),  and  cannot  wire  them  to
Mrs.  Piper  by  telepathy  or  muscle-reading.  •  Regarding  the  effect  as  if
of  real  traits  of  the  personality  of  the  dead,  produced  on  the  living
who  knew  them,  it  is  evidence,  I  fear,  only  for  the  survivors  them-
selves. On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  like  the  late  G.  P.,  it  was  no  trait
of  his,  to  give  false  information  with  aplomb^  nor  was  it  like  the  late
Mr:  H.  to  repeat,  as  true,  what  was  only  a  "  natural  "  guess.  ^Thus  the
sitter  who  knew  the  dead,  may  think  he  recognises  personal  traits.
But  this  may  be  due  to  his  own  memory  of  these  traits,  which  are
telepathically  reproduced  by  Mrs.  Piper,  or  due  to  self-delusion,  and
certainly  other  very  important  moral  traits  of  the  dead  are  often
reversed,  and  unrecognisable.

"We  are  dealing  here  with  a  most  imperfectly  known  agency,
telepathy  ;  with  a  better-known  agency,  the  secondary  personality  ;
and  with  another  wholly  unknown  agency,  .spirits  of  the  dead.  The
preference  for  any  of  these  Laputan  alternatives  is  apt  to  be  decided
by  personal  bias.  But,  to  a  faint  extent,  telepathy  has  the  advantage
of  being  a  vera  causa.  The  advocates  of  telepathy,  attempting  to
explain  Mrs.  Piper's  successes,  may  fall  back,  as  Dr.  Hodgson  says,
on  "  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  from  the  living,  that  the  subliminal
consciousness  of  the  sitters,  and  also  of  distant  living  j)e7'sons,  might
be  drawn  upon  by  the  living."  Thus,  Mr.  Pelham  is  doing  something,
in  Washington,  with  a  photograph  of  his  son,  G.  P.,  and  G.  P.  reports
this,  at  Boston,  through  Mrs.  Piper.  The  explanation  (apart  fi'om
guess  or  collusion)  will  be  that  Mrs.  Piper  got  at  the  subliminal  con-
sciousness of  the  remote  Mr.  Pelham,  and  so  on  in  other  similar
cases. Such  a  telepathic  explanation  is  "  to  the  Greeks  foolishness."


48


Andre^u  Lang.


[part


Dr.  Hodgson  (Part  XXXTIT.,  p.  393)  cites  Mr.  Oliver  Lodge  thus  :
"  It  ought  to  be  constantly  borne  in  mind  that  this  kind  of  thought-
transference,  without  consciously  active  agency,  has  never  been
experimentally  proved.  '  How  can  you  experiment  consciously  in
the  unconscious  ?  But  Dr.  Hodgson  adds  that  the  successes  and
failures  do  not  show  any  direct  relation  to  the  conscious  minds  of
the  sitters.  Clairvoyance  of  Mrs.  Piper's,  or  communication  between
her  and  the  subliminal  self  of  Mr.  Pelham,  would  cover  tlie  case  of
the  photograph  at  Washington,  without  calling  up  the  ghost  of  G.  P.
But,  suppose  G.  P.  communicates  to  Mrs.  Piper  what  is  unknown  to
the  sitter,  but  known  to  A.  or  B.  at  a  distance,  who  are  known  to  the
sitter. Can  telepathy  be  forced  to  cover  that  1

Di\  Hodgson  puts  the  case  thus :  "  We  must  then  make  the
arbitrary  suppositions  that  Mrs.  Piper's  percipient  personality  gets
into  relation  with  the  minds  of  distant  living  persons,  (1)  who  are
intimate  friends  of  the  sitters,  at  the  time  of  the  sitting  "  (as  in  the
case  of  Mr.  Hart,  who  knew  the  Howards),  "  and  (2)  who  are  scarcely
known,  or  not  at  all  known,  to  the  sitter,"  but,  in  one  of  two  cases  at
least,  were  known  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  who  was  present  (Part  XXXIII.,
p.  394,  p.  372).  All  this  would  imply  "a  selective  and  discriminative
capacity  in  Mrs.  Piper's  percipient  personality  "  (as  in  the  personality
of  whoever  inflicts  a  telepathic  hallucination  on  a  person  at  a  distance),
and,  widening  this  theory  to  cover  all  cases,  "we  reach  a  conception
which  goes  as  far  as  the  '  spirit '  hypothesis  itself."

The  conception  does  go  as  far, — but  not  in  the  same  direction.  It
stretches  a  more  or  less  accepted  hypothesis, — telepathy  ;  it  does  not
introduce  an  old  but  discredited  hypothesis,  the  direct  action  of
the  dead.

Now  the  stretching  of  the  telepathic  hypothesis  was  almost
forced  on  me  (if  I  was  to  have  any  hypothesis)  during  Miss  Angus's
experiments  with  a  glass  ball.  I  presume  that  these  experiments
were  "  experimental,"  in  Mr.  Lodge's  sense  of  the  word,  but  I  am  not
certain.  {Making  of  Religion,  pp.  94-112.)  There  was  in  these
experiments,  apparently,  "a  selective  and  discriminative  capacity  in
'  Miss  Angus's  '  percipient  personality."  But  there  was  no  room  for
the  theory  of  the  spirits  of  the  dead,  for  all  concerned  were  alive.  To
be  sure  the  Polynesians  explain  all  water-gazing  by  a  theory  of  spirits,
but  Dr.  Hodgson  will  not  agree  with  the  Polynesians  (Ellis,  Poly-
nesian Researches,  II.,  p.  240).

Again  and  again  Miss  Angus,  sitting  with  man  or  woman,  described
acquaintances  of  theirs,  but  not  of  hers,  in  situations  not  known  to
the  sitters,  but  proved  to  be  true  to  fact.  Now  the  "  far-going  "
hypothesis  of  direct  clairvoyance  was  here  excluded  (in  most  cases,  not
all)  by  conditions  of  time. In  one  instance  Miss  Angus  described


XXXVI.]


Mrs.  Pi'per  and  Telepathy.


49


doings  from  three  weeks  to  a  fortnight  old,  of  people  in  India,  people
whom  she  had  never  seen  or  heard  of,  but  who  were  known  to  her
"sitter."  Her  account,  given  on  a  Saturday,  was  corroborated  by  a
letter  from  India  which  arrived  next  day,  Sunday.  In  another  case
she  described  (about  10  p.m.)  what  a  lady,  not  known  to  her,  but  the
daughter  of  a  matron  present  (who  was  not  the  sitter),  had  been  doing
about  4:  p.m.  on  the  same  day.  What  the  person  seen  was  doing  was
not  a  thing  familiar,  for  I  asked  that  question.  Again,  "  sitting  "
with  one  lady,  Miss  Angus  described  a  singular  set  of  scenes  much  in
the  mind,  not  of  her  "sitter,"  but  of  a  very  unsympathetic  stranger,
who  was  reading  a  book  at  the  other  end  of  the  room.  I  have  tried
every  hypothesis,  normal  and  not  so  normal,  to  account  for  these  and
analogous  performances  of  Miss  Angus.  There  was,  in  the  Indian
and  other  cases,  no  physical  possibility  of  collusion  ;  chance  coincidence
did  not  seem  adequate  ;  ghosts  weve  out  of  the  question,  so  was  direct
clairvoyance.  That  Miss  Angus  (who,  by  the  way,  was  in  the  most
normal  and  wide-awake  condition)  had  got  into  touch  with  the
Absolute,  and  was  making  discriminating  selections  from  the  stores  of
Omniscience,  did  not  seem  likely,  because  her  crystal  pictures  appeared
to  be  directed  by  the  mind  of  a  person  present,  not  always  the  sitter.
Nothing  remained  for  the  speculative  theoriser  but  the  idea  of  cross
currents  of  telepathy,  between  Miss  Angus,  a  casual  stranger,  the
sitters,  and  people  far  away,  known  to  the  sitters  or  the  stranger,
but  unknown  to  Miss  Angus.  Unpublished  examples  of  these  things
went  on  the  same  lines.  Miss  Angus  picked  up  facts,  unknown  to  the
sitters,  about  people  known  to  them  but  not  to  her.

Now,  suppose  that  Miss  Angus,  instead  of  dealing  with  living
people,  by  way  of  visions,  had  dealt  by  way  of  voice,  or  automatic
handwriting,  and  had  introduced  a  dead  "communicator."  Then
she  would  have  been  on  a  par  with  Mrs.  Piper,  yet  -with  no  aid
from  the  dead.  Her  cases  do  not  differ  from  Mrs.  Piper's  cases,
except  in  copiousness,  and  in  the  circumstance  that  her  condition
was  normal,  and  that  she  was  new  to  all  such  exercises.  Of
course,  like  Mrs.  Piper,  she  had  failures.  I  asked  her  to  try  to
see  the  room  of  a  person  known  to  me  by  correspondence  only,
a  person  whom  I  never  met  (it  was  a  room  in  Africa,  though
of  course  I  did  not  say  so),  and  she  failed.  It  was  trying  her
rather  high.  We  did  not  seek  to  improve  the  result  by  exclaiming
"  Dear  Tom,  Dick,  or  Harry,  in  Bengal,  Edinburgh,  or  the  Soudan,  or
the  Red  Sea,  do  try  to  appear  more  frequently  in  the  glass,"  as  Dr.
Hodgson  addresses  the  dead  "  communicators."  We  could  not  do  that,
because  the  essence  of  the  game  lay  in  Miss  Angus's  ignorance  about
Dick,  Harry,  and  Tom,  who  were  kept  private  in  the  mind  of  the
sitter. Otherwise  the  performances  of  Mrs.  Piper  and  Miss  Angus

E


50


Andrew  Lang.


[part


were  on  a  par  (except  for  the  deadness  of  the  persons  concerned),
granting  the  difference  of  the  methods  of  crystal-gazing,  on  one  hand,
and  of  trance-speaking,  or  automatic  writing,  on  the  other.

Not  to  rely  solely  on  Miss  Angus,  I  take  another  instance.  My
friend  Mr.  Lesley  is  known  to  the  world  as  a  man  of  business,  a
golfer,  and  a  composer.  He  can  see  crystal-pictures,  but  (like  most
of  my  acquaintances  who  possess  the  faculty,  including  my  cook)  has
hardly  any  interest  in  the  practice.  One  day  Mr.  Lesley  and  I  had
been  talking  about  a  lady,  unknown  to  him,  but  known  to  me,  though
I  had  never  seen  her  house.  Mr.  Lesley  began  to  look  into  a  glass
water-jug,  and  described  what  he  saw,  the  interior  of  the  hall  of  a
house,  with  a  good  deal  of  detail.  Neither  of  us  recognised  the
house.  I  happened  later  to  tell  this  to  the  lady  of  whom  we  had  been
talking ;  she  said,  "  Why,  that  is  my  house,"  and,  on  visiting  it,  I
found  that  in  all  resjDects  it  answered  to  Mr.  Lesley's  description.
It  may  be  a  common  type  of  hall,  but  I  do  not  remember  having  seen
one  like  it  elsewhere,  nor  did  Mr.  Lesley  know  any  such  place.

Now,  suppose  that  the  lady  who  occupied  the  house  had  been  dead.
And  suppose  that,  instead  of  looking  at  a  glass  water-jug,  Mr.  Lesley
had  gone  into  a  trance,  and  announced  that  the  dead  lady  was
speaking  with  his  voice.  Suppose  that  when  asked  for  a  test  she  had
described  the  hall  in  her  house  (which  was  unknown  to  me  and  Mr.
Lesley)  with  certain  curious  details.  Would  not  Dr.  Hodgson  argue
that  this  might  be  better  explained  by  the  hypothesis  of  communica-
tion through  her  spirit  than  by  telepathy  between  Mr.  Lesley  and
anybody  not  present  who  knew  the  house  ?  Yet,  as  its  owner  was
and  is  alive,  the  theory  of  a  spirit  is  wholly  impossible,  and  if  not
telepathy  a  trois,  then  some  other  non-spiritualist  theory  must  account
for  the  facts,  as  for  the  facts  in  ]\Iiss  Angus's  cases.

Miss  Angus's  successes  may  not  be  due  to  cross-telepathy,  nor  may
Mr.  Lesley's  success;  very  likely  that  is  the  wrong  explanation.  But
of  all  known  "  supernormal"  explanations,  that  alone  is  viable,  in  these
instances,  and  it  is  not,  I  think,  incapable  of  application  to  Mrs.
Piper's  cases.  Of  course  I  do  not  reject  the  explanation  by  spirits,
in  Mrs.  Piper's  case  ;  I  only  state  the  objections  which  occur  to  me,
combined  with  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Piper  is  saturated  with  the  animistic
hypothesis,  and  has  a  dishonest  secondary  personality,  if  not  dozens
of  such  personalities.  In  Miss  Angus's  performances  Mr.  Podmore
suggests  (Part  XXXIV.,  p.  130)  my  own  provisional  guess  of
telepathy  a  trois.  It  is  a  guess,  even  a  wild  Laputan  conjecture
But  we  are  here  concerned  with  Laputan  themes  and  speculations  ;
like  Mr.  Darwin,  we  are  making  "  fools'  experiments."  Dr.  Hodgson's
hypothesis  may  be  right ;  but,  in  this  region  of  dreams,  we  ought  to
hold  very  lightly  by  all  hypotheses ;  and,  surely,  we  ought  not  to


XXXVI.]


Mrs.  Piper  and  Telepathy.


51


argue  from  one  of  them  in  favour  of  that  old  belief,  the  posthumous
existence  of  the  human  spirit,  and  its  power  of  communicating  with
the  living,  through  a  living  organism.  This  is  to  base  faith  on  a
conjecture  about  conjectures.  Moreover,  in  ordinary  normal  material,
such  as  philological  or  anthropological  speculation,  we  often  see  how
science  overshoots  her  mark,  remaining  for  a  generation  in  sure
confidence  about  a  theory  which  the  next  generation  explodes.  We
ought  not  to  let  our  psychical  theories  affect  our  practical  beliefs.  To
do  that  may  be  to  prepare  for  ourselves,  or  for  our  successors,  a  cruel
disappoin  tmen  t.

My  objections  are  tendered  with  the  consciousness  that  Mrs.  Piper's
communications,  to  Mr.  Howard,  for  example,  are  far  more  copious
and  minute  than  the  visions  of  the  crystal  ball  gazer.  But  the  two
sets  of  automatisms  have  common  features  in  the  way  of  picking  up
knowledge,  not,  in  many  cases,  possessed  by  the  sitter,  though  familiar
to  some  other  living  person.  And  as  spirits  can  (I  suppose)  have
nothing  to  do  with  this  in  the  crystal  cases,  they  may  have  nothing  to
do  with  it  in  that  of  Mrs.  Piper.  Moreover,  the  visions  in  the  glass
ball  did  not  play  tricks,  or  give  false  information.  You,  the  sitter,
might  think  of  Tom  or  Dick,  and  nothing  might  appear  at  all  in  the
glass,  or  something  quite  unknown  to  everybody  might  appear.  But
Dick  or  Tom  were  not  seen  in  situations  which  they  never  occupied,  or
in  actions  which  they  never  attempted,  except  perhaps  in  two  cases,
apparently  suggested  by  the  expectations  of  the  sitters.  Possibly  these
cases  of  cross-telepathy  may  be  to  the  point.  On  Dr.  Hodgson's  side,
Mrs.  Piper's  re-creation  of  a  personality,  such  as  G.  P.,  for  example,  is,
at  his  best,  seems  indeed  a  very  difficult  argument  for  an  objector  to
meet.  Moreover,  the  conceivable  "form  of  consciousness"  of  Mrs.
I'lper,  "  like  a  dome  of  many-coloured  glass,"  with  colours  corre-
sponding, more  or  less,  to  many  personalities  of  the  dead,  is  indeed
"  very  much  an  unknown  quantity."  Alas,  the  whole  problem  is  a
series  of  unknown  quantities  !  We  remain  none  the  less  grateful  to
Dr.  Hod  gson  for  such  disinterested  labour  in  a  region  which  Professor
Shaler,  most  naturally,  found  uninteresting,  because  "  I  don't  see  how
I  can  exclude  the  hypothesis  of  fraud."  Frauds  by  secondary  person-
alities, I  fear,  can  hardly  be  excluded.  We  are  like  Porphyry,  so  many
centuries  ago,  in  his  wrestlings  with  "lying  spirits."  But,  unlike
Porphyry,  Dr.  Hodgson  has  not  been  discouraged.

Since  writing  this  paper  I  have  been  allowed  to  see  in  proof
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick's  "Discussion  of  the  Trance  Phenomena  of
Mrs.  Piper."!  We  agree  as  to  the  notes  of  the  "secondary  per-
sonality "  of  Mrs.  Piper  among  her  professed  communications  from

1  That  is,  the  paper  printed  above,  immediately  preceding  Mr.  Lang's.— Ed.

E  2


52


Andrew  Lang.


[part


the  dead.  We  agree  in  not  accepting  the  savage  theory  of  "  posses-
sion," at  least  at  present.  But  granting  telepathy  a  trois  (which
is  a  great  deal  to  grant),  I  see  no  reason  for  the  hypothesis  that
Mrs.  Piper  ever  receives  telepathic  communications  from  the  dead.
Has  she  ever  communicated  a  single  thing  that  was  known  to  a
dead  person,  but  to  no  living  man  or  woman  1  Such  are  my  doubts  ;
my  bias  is  a  desire  not  to  believe  that  the  dead  are  in  any  way
mixed  up  with  sittings  at  so  many  dollars.  Tt  would  not  surprise  me
if  some  normal  explanation  (at  which  I  cannot  guess)  were  finally  to
be  found  for  even  the  most  puzzling  of  all  these  phenomena.  I  am  not
quite  such  a  failure  as  Mrs.  Sidgwick  is  personally  as  an  intermediary
in  these  exjjeriments.  Twice  my  thought  has  (apparently,  and  in  the
absence  of  any  other  hypothesis  known  to  me)  been  "picked  up  "by
an  expei'imenter,  and  in  neither  case  was  it  my  surface  thought.
These  things  bias  one  in  favour  of  the  belief  that  there  is  something
here  into  which  it  may  not  be  waste  of  time  to  inquire.


XXXVI.]  On  Some  Philosophic  Assumptions.


53


IV.

ON  SOME  PHILOSOPHIC  ASSUMPTIONS  IN  THE
INVESTIGATION  OF  THE  PROBLEM  OP  A  FUTURE  LIFE.

By  F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


There  is  always  a  flavour  of  impertinence  about  the  intervention  of
a  philosopher  in  a  subject  of  scientific  research.  He  cannot,  as  such,
make  original  contributions  to  the  facts,  and  when  he  makes  an
attempt  to  criticise  the  contributions  of  others,  he  is  terribly  prone  to
do  so  from  the  a  'priori  basis  of  some  far-fetched  cosmic  theory  which
nobody  else  in  the  world  besides  himself  believes  in  or  even  under-
stands, and  so  becomes  comic  instead  of  cosmic.  If,  again,  he  contents
himself  with  ponderously  pondering  on  the  accepted  facts  of  a  science
he  becomes  a  bore,  consuming  time  and  getting  into  the  way  of  more
practical  workers.

It  seems  clear,  therefore,  that  the  usefulness  of  a  philosopher  is
very  limited.  It  is  undeniable  only  in  cases  where  he  is  needed  to
clear  out  of  the  way  other  philosophers  who  have  become  obstreperous
and  obstructive;  but  for  the  moment  there  did  not  seem  to  be  anybody
in  sight  whom  the  spirit  had  moved  to  vilipend  Psychical  Research
a  priori,  and  who,  therefore,  required  to  have  the  error  of  his  ways
brought  home  to  him  in  technical  language.

Hence  I  was  somewhat  at  a  loss  to  see  why  the  Council  of  the
S.P.R.  should  have  deemed  it  expedient  to  request  me  (at  very  short
notice)  to  write  a  paper,  the  purely  theoretical  character  and  hurried
composition  of  which  demand,  I  feel,  the  most  abject  apology.  Indeed,
I  could  not  have  been  induced  to  say  anything  at  all,  but  for  the
fact  that  philosophy  seems  to  me  to  have  also  a  function,  not  yet
mentioned,  which  may  enable  it  to  be  scientifically  suggestive  and
serviceable,  at  all  events  at  a  certain  stage  in  the  development  of  a
science.

The  function  in  question  is  that  of  discussing  the  working  methods
of  a  science,  of  exhibiting  their  full  scope  and  logical  implications  and
connections,  and  considering  the  merits  of  the  alternative  ways  of
treating  the  subject.  Such  a  critical  methodology  of  a  science  is
necessarily  dull,  but,  perhaps,  on  that  account,  all  the  better  adapted
for  philosophic  discourse.  And  in  view  of  the  intellectual  myopia
which  scientific  specialism  engenders,  there  are,  perhaps,  few  things
more  salutary,  as  an  unpleasant  medicine  is  salutary,  than  for  a


54


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part


science  to  become  conscious  of  the  working  assumptions,  or,  if  you
will  permit  me  so  to  call  them,  the  methodological  postulates,  on  which
it  proceeds.

In  the  case  of  Psychical  Research,  in  particular,  the  discussion  of
such  methodological  assumptions  seems  to  be  more  novel,  easier  and
more  useful  than  in  disciplines  which  have  reached  a  more  assured
position  among  the  sciences.  It  is  likely  to  be  more  novel,  because  of
the  novelty  of  the  whole  subject.  It  is  likely  to  be  easier  to  dissect  out
and  contemplate  in  abstraction  the  methodological  assumptions  of  an
inchoate  and  infant  science,  because  its  organism  is  not  so  strongly
knit  and  the  flesh  of  fact  does  not  so  closely  shroud  the  bone  of  method
by  which  it  is  supported  ;  it  is  still  in  a  low  stage  of  organisation  in
which  the  whole  may  be  taken  to  pieces  and  put  together  without
much  injury  to  the  vitality  of  its  parts.  An  advanced  science  on  the
other  hand  is  far  more  difficult  to  handle  :  it  imposes  on  the  philosophic
critic  by  its  very  mass  of  coherent  and  consistent  interpretation  ;  it
appeals  to  hira  by  its  noble  record  of  service  to  the  human  race  ;  it
crushes  him  by  the  sheer  weight  of  immemorial  authority.  In  it  facts
and  theories  have  long  been  welded  together  into  so  indissoluble  a  union
that  the  former  can  no  longer  be  questioned,  while  the  latter  have  for
the  most  part  risen  to  the  dignity  of  indispensable  '  necessary  trutlis  '
implied  in  the  very  natui'e  of  the  human  mind  and  underlying  the
whole  structure  of  human  knowledge.  We  gain  little  help  therefore
from  the  assumptions  of  sciences  like  mathematics  and  mechanics  in
considering  what  assumptions  should  he  made  in  a  new  subject  like
Psychical  Research  ;  we  learn  little  about  the  making  of  a  science
from  sciences  which  can  neither  be  unmade  nor  remade,  and  in  whose
case  it  requires  a  considerable  effort  of  philosophic  thought  to  realise
the  methodological  character  of  their  fundamental  postulates.  More
might  perhaps  be  learnt  from  the  assumptions  of  -parvenu  sciences
which  have  but  recently  obtained  full  recognition,  but  for  the  fact
that  a  critical  dissection  of  their  methods  is  decidedly  dangerous.
For  the  "  arhor  scieniiae "  seems  in  their  case  to  have  developed  a
symbiotic  arrangement  greatly  resembling  that  whereby  certain  trees
protect  themselves ;  just  as  any  attack  on  the  latter  is  ferociously
resented  by  a  host  of  ants  which  the  tree  provides  with  food  and
shelter,  so  any  interference  with  such  a  science  is  sure  to  draw
down  upon  the  mildest  critic  the  onslaught  of  an  infuriated  pro-
fessor who  lives  upon  the  science.  In  Psychical  Research,  on  the
other  hand,  no  such  danger  is  to  be  apprehended  ;  we  have  not  yet
developed  any  professionals  whose  mission  it  is,  as  William  James  has
wittily  remarked, 1  to  kill  out  the  layman's  general  interest  in  the


1  Huvian  Immorialitij,  init.


XXXVI.]


On  Some  Philosophic  Assitmijtions.


55


subject,  and  hence  the  philosopher  may  proceed  at  his  leisure  to  observe
how  the  science  is  made  and  to  try  instructive  experiments  with  its
working  methods,  without  fear  of  offending  vested  interests.

Again  a  philosophic  discussion  of  possible  methods  is  likely  to  be
more  useful  in  Psychical  Research  because  such  methods,  are  still
plastic  cartilage,  as  it  were,  which  has  not  yet  grown  into  rigid  bone,
and  may  be  moulded  into  a  variety  of  forms.  Hence  by  reflecting
betimes  upon  the  advantages  of  alternative  methods,  the  philosopher
may  flatter  himself  that  he  can  be  of  real  service  in  guiding  the
coui'se  of  investigation,  or  at  least  in  helping  it  to  avoid  certain
pitfalls.  Not,  of  course,  that  even  here  he  would  be  wise  to  pre-
sume to  lay  down  the  law  a  i^riori  as  to  the  actual  working  and
merits  of  the  various  methods ;  he  should  content  himself  with
expounding  the  logical  characteristics  which  sound  methods  in
Psychical  Research  must  possess,  and  explaining  why  exactly  they
must  possess  them.

I  do  not  propose,  however,  on  this  occasion  to  discuss  the
methodological  value  of  the  assumptions  made  in  Psychical  Ptesearch
generally,  but  only  in  so  far  as  they  aft'ect  the  question  of  a  future
life.  The  reasons  for  this  are  obvious.  The  possibility  of  a  future  life
provides  the  motive  force  in  our  inquiries.  It  is  true  that  the  S.P.R.
is  unique  in  aiming  to  solve  this  problem  in  a  scientific  way,  but
though  we  are  scientific,  we  may  yet  be  honest — in  avowing  the
existence  of  a  practical  motive.  If  attacked  on  this  score,  let  us  meet
our  critics  with  the  doctrine  that  in  this  respect  at  least  we  are  not
unique,  inasmuch  as  in  the  end  all  true  science  is  inspired  by  practical
motives,  and  that  it  is  the  fear,  no  less  than  the  hope,  of  a  future  life
that  renders  its  possibility  so  urgent  a  subject  for  scientific  considera-
tion. Moreover,  just  now  the  evidence  in  connection  with  Mrs.  Piper's
trances  seems  to  have  brought  this  possibility  well  above  the  horizon
of  the  S  P.R.,  while  at  the  same  time  much  confusion  and  prejudice
still  seem  to  prevail  about  it  which  philosophic  criticism  may  help  to
dissipate.

I  may  begin  by  passing  over  with  a  merely  formal  mention  the
assumptions  which  are  required  for  every  scientific  investigation.  As
a  matter  of  course  we  must  assuQie  that  the  phenomena  under
investigation  are  kuowable  and  rational  in  the  sense  of  being  amenable
to  determinable  laws.  The  need  for  this  assumption  is  so  plain  that
a  priori  attacks  dn  Psychical  Research  on  the  score  of  underminino-
the  fundamental  principle  of  all  scientific  research  can  hardly  be  put
down  to  anything  but  voluntary  or  involuntary  ignorance  of  the
grossest  kind.

ISlext  we  must  enunciate  a  methodological  axiom  with  which  at
first  sight  few  will  be  disposed  to  quarrel,  viz.,  that  we  must  proceed  to


56


F.  G.  S.  Schiller.


[PAKT


the  unknown  from  what  is  known  to  us.  The  remark  is  Aristotle's,^
and  I  may  be  suspected  of  quoting  it  merely  because  Oxonians  can
but  rarely  resist  the  temptation  of  quoting  Aristotle.  But  in  reality
it  is  not  such  a  truism  as  it  appears,  at  least  in  the  meaning  I  propose
to  put  upon  it.  It  means  in  this  connection  that,  both  psychologically
and  logically,  we  must  interpret  any  supposed  future  life  by  the  know-
ledge we  have  acquired  of  our  present  life.  It  is  a  methodological
necessity,  in  other  words,  that  we  must  project  this  world  into  the
next,  if  ever  we  purpose  scientifically  to  know  it.  Our  assumption  may
be  wrong  in  the  sense  that  it  may  be  wrecked  on  barrier  reefs  of  im-
penetrable fact — possibly  it  will  be — but,  right  or  wrong,  we  can  work
with  no  other  at  the  outset.  As  we  go  on  we  shall  no  doubt  detect  the
initial  crudities  of  our  assumptions,  and  correct  them  as  our  knowledge
grows.  But  whatever  differences  we  may  discover  between  the  two
worlds  must  rest  upon  the  postulate  of  a  fundamental  identity,  in
default  of  which  our  reason  would  be  merely  paralysed.  From  a
complete  otherness  of  the  other  world  nothing  would  follow  ;  a  future
life  in  which  everything  was  utterly  different  would  mean  nothing  to
us,  and  in  proportion  as  the  difference  grows  the  practical  efficacy  and
theoretical  knowableness  of  the  conception  diminish.

Now  this,  I  venture  to  think,  is  a  philosophic  result  of  considerable
practical  importance.

( 1 )  It  goes  a  long  way  towards  explaining  the  anomaly  of  the  feeble-
ness of  most  people's  religious  beliefs  about  the  future  life.  For  the
heavens  and  hells  of  the  various  religions,  in  spite  of  their  pretensions
to  evoke  forces  which  should  utterly  dwarf  the  three-score  years  and
ten  of  our  mortal  life,  are  found  in  practice  to  constitute  motives  so
weak  that  they  are  continually  routed  and  set  aside  by  the  trivial
temptations  of  the  moment.  The  reason  is  that  they  have  ordinarily
been  conceived  as  differing  too  radically  from  the  known  conditions  of
life  to  excite  the  same  serious  belief,  to  require  the  same  matter-of-fact
forethought  as,  e.g.,  next  year's  crops  or  to-morrow's  money  market.
And  so  the  belief  in  a  future  life,  even  where  it  has  not  been  degraded
into  a  merely  verbal  assent  to  a  traditional  formula,  has  commonly
lacked  that  intimacy  of  association  with  the  ordinary  concerns  of  life
which  is  needed  to  render  it  psychologically  efficacious  as  a  motive
to  action.

(2)  Again,  it  turns  out  that  the  spiritists  were  by  no  means  wrong
in  principle  when  they  proceeded  to  construe  the  future  life,  of  which
they  believed  themselves  to  possess  cogent  evidence,  very  much  on  the
lines  of  our  earthly  life.  Their  constructions  may  in  detail  be  as  crude
and  absurd  as  their  adversaries  allege — I  am  neither  familiar  enough


1  Eth.  Nich.  i,  3,  5.


XXXVI.]  On  Some  Philosophic  Assumptions.


37


with  the  literature  to  discuss  this  point  nor  convinced  that  they  ai'e —
but  it  is  a  mistaken  prejudice  to  reject  such  accounts  a  priori  as  too
trivial  or  undignified  to  be  asci-ibed  to  the  inhabitants  of  another
world.  Owing,  no  doubt,  to  the  unduly  tragic  view  we  have  come  to
take  of  death,  the  prejudice  that  the  decease  of  Brown,  Jones  and
Robinson  must  instantly  transmute  them  into  beings  of  superhuman
powers  and  tastes,  and  transport  them  into  regions  where  they  are
initiated  into  the  uttermost  ecstasies  and  agonies  of  the  scheme  of
things,  has  become  almost  universal.  Indeed,  I  have  often  been
amused  to  see  how  strongly  this  notion  influences  people  who  are  really
entire  disbelievers  in  the  possibility  of  any  future  life  ;  while  scoining
everything  '  supernatural,'  they  reject  the  spiritist's  version  thereof  as
not  super naticral  enough,  because  they  are  quite  sure  that  if  there  were
a  future  life  at  all,  it  would  have  to  be  as  full  of  angels  and  demons
as  what  they  would  call  'the  traditional  mythologies.'  In  a  more
respectable  form  the  same  feeling  shows  itself  in  the  large  number  of
persons  who  refuse  to  accept  the  evidence,  e.g.,  in  the  Piper  case,
because  they  do  not  like  the  sort  of  life  to  which  it  seems  to  point.
This  may  seem  a  somewhat  naive  ignoratio  elenchi,  but  the  psychical
researcher  can  hardly  afford  to  smile  at  it,  for  he  is  continually  having
it  impressed  upon  him  how  very  serious  are  the  obstacles  which  pre-
judices of  this  sort  form  to  the  discovery  and  recognition  of  the  facts,
and  how  manifestly  the  '  will  to  believe '  is  the  ratio  cog?ioscendi  of
truth.  Hence  a  systematic  challenge  of  the  whole  assumption  that
another  world  must  be  as  different  as  is  conceivable  (or  rather  incon-
ceivable) from  this,  may  serve  to  clear  the  atmosphere.

And  inasmuch  as  the  groundlessness  of  a  false  assumption  is  never
revealed  more  clearly  than  by  a  request  for  the  reasons  on  which  it
rests,  I  should  like,  for  my  own  part,  to  add  to  the  general  challenge
a  particular  request,  asking  philosophers  to  show  cause  why  a  hypo-
thetical '  other '  world  must  necessarily  be  conceived  as  out  of  time
and  out  of  space.  The  conviction  that  this  must  be  so  underlies,  I
am  sure,  much  of  the  high  philosophic  scorn  of  empirical  spiritism  and
popular  theology,  but  I  do  not  think  it  would  be  easy  to  support  it  by
a  valid  and  cogent  philosophic  argument.  For  so  long  as  temporality
and  spatiality  form  indispensable  characteristics  of  the  only  world  we
experience,  the  presumption  surely  is  that  they  will  pervade  also  any
other,  until  at  least  a  definite  method  has  been  suggested  whereby
they  may  be  transcended.

(3)  Thirdly,  it  must  be  recognised  that  the  methodological  principle
of  interpreting  the  unknown  by  the  known  tells  strongly  in  favour  of
the  simpler,  and  prima  facie  easier,  theory  of  the  agency  of  personal
spirits  as  against  the  more  complex  and  unfamiliar  notions  of  an
impersonal  clairvoyance,  or  subliminal  consciousness,  or  non-human


58


F.  a  S.  Schiller.


[part-


modes  of  cognition  by  gods,  devils  or  cosmic  principles  of  a  more  or
less  unknowable  kind.  I  am  very  far  from  thinking  that  we  should  in
such  matters  hastily  commit  ourselves  to  the  interpretation  which
jrrimd  facie  seems  the  most  plausible,  or,  indeed^  to  any  definitive
theory  whatsoever,  and  I  should  be  sorry  to  see  the  ingenious  attempts
to  provide  a  non-spiritistic  explanation  of  the  phenomena  in  question
prematurely  abandoned — if  only  on  account  of  their  excellence  as
mental  gymnastics — but  I  cannot  admit  that  such  attempts  are  one
whit  less  anthropomorphic  in  principle  than  the  '  spiritist '  hypothesis
(they  only  stray  further  from  their  human  model),  while  I  cannot  help
admitting  that  methodologically  they  are  more  cumbrous  and  so
considerably  inferior.

Admitting,  therefore,  that  as  a  working  theoi'y  the  hypothesis  of
the  persistence  after  death  of  what  we  call  the  human  personality
possesses  considerable  advantages  over  rival  theories,  let  us  inquire
further  by  what  methods,  resting  on  what  postulates,  that  theory  may
be  veritied.

(1)  We  may  rule  out  once  more  the  notion  that  such  a  future  life^
is  essentially  supernatural  in  character.  This  notion  has  been  a
favourite  with  believers,  but  it  is  easily  turned  into  a  terrible  weapon
iti  the  hands  of  their  adversaries.  For  the  supernatural  is,  as  such,
incapable  of  investigation,  and  belief  in  it  must  be  mere  faith,  exposed
to  every  doubt  and  jeer,  if,  indeed,  it  can  be  even  that,  seeing  that
a  real  faith  must  be  nourished  by  at  least  partial  and  prospective
verification  in  fact.  Hence  the  answer  to  this  notion  is  simply  this  i
that  if  the  future  life  be  really  '  supernatural '  in  the  sense  of  liaving
no  connection  of  any  sort  with  nature,  there  could  not  possibly  be  any
evidence  of  it,  and  it  would  have  to  be  for  us  non-existent  ;  while  if
there  be  evidence  of  it,  this  would  ipso  facto  include  it  in  the  widest
conception  of  nature,  and  render  the  nature  of  the  connection  between
this  world  and  the  next  a  legitimate  subject  for  scientific  research.
If,  therefore,  the  connection  be  rare  and  precarious,  the  reason  cannot
possibly  be  that  from  time  to  time  some  audacious  spirit  has  impiously
achieved  the  impossible  by  breaking  through  the  natural  order  ;  it-
must  be  in  the  peculiarities  of  the  natural  order  itself.  Or,  to  sum  up
in  a  single  phrase  a  discussion  which  would  long  have  become  needless
but  for  the  persistence  of  attempts  to  disj^ose  of  an  inconvenient-
investigation  of  facts  by  logical  quibbles  about  words,  if  '  supernature  '
is  to  be  retained,  it  must  not  be  in  the  sense  of  something  alien  and
hostile  to  'nature,'  but  strictly  as  meaning  a  higher  department  or
aspect  of  nature  itself.

(2)  We  must  suppose  a  certain  continuity  of  psychological  con-
stitution in  the  human  spirit  throughout  every  phase  of  its  existence.
Tills  does  not  imply  that  death  may  not  be  a  great  event,  involving  a.


XXXVI.]


On  Some  Philosopliic  Assumptions.


59


great  gain  (or  loss)  in  the  intensity  and  extent  of  consciousness  and
memory  ;  it  asserts  only  that  if  we  are  to  have  knowledge  of  a  future
life  at  all,  we  must  assume  that  the  general  characteristics  of  mental
life  will  persist.  Without  this  there  could  be  no  proof  of  '  spirit-
identity  ' ;  without  '  spirit-identity '  there  could  be  no  proof  of  a
future  life.  Unfortunately,  however,  this  assumption  of  ours  would
lead  us  to  expect  that  the  proof  of  'spirit  identity  '  would  be  difficult.
For  it  is  psychologically  far  more  probable  that  the  moral  character
and  the  feelings  would  traverse  the  shock  and  change  of  death
unshaken,  than  that  little  bits  of  knowledge  about  terrestrial  affairs
would  persist  in  equal  measure.  Yet  it  is  these  latter  that  afford  the
best  tests  of  '  spirit-identity.'

(3)  As  we  must  try  to  explain  all  the  facts  by  principles  already
known  to  be  valid,  we  must  account  for  the  remarkable  dissociation
between  this  world  and  the  next  by  the  principle  of  psychological
continuity.  That  such  dissociation  must  exist  will  hardly  be  denied  by
any  one  who  has  realised  how  very  rare  an  experience  a  'ghost'  is,  even
with  the  most  expert  of  ghost  seers  and  in  its  most  favoured  haunts.
But  it  vvould  seem  that  if  the  departed  still  retained  their  personality
and  psychical  continuity,  '  ghosts '  ought  to  be  more  plentiful  than
blackberries,  and  unhedged  by  that  divinity  which  makes  people  so
reluctant  to  make  a  clean  breast  of  their  ghost  stories.  Prima  facie,
therefore,  it  requires  explanation  that  in  spite  of  psychic  continuity  so
much  dissociation  should  prevail.

Nevertheless  it  may,  I  think,  be  shown  that  the  assumption  of
psychical  continuity  would  be  quite  compatible  with  the  prevalence
of  an  almost  complete  dissociation  between  this  world  and  the  next.
For  any  great  event  tends  to  dissociate  us  from  our  past,  and  this
would  apply  a  fortiori  to  an  event  like  death,  which  ex  hypothesi
launches  us  into  a  new  world.  A  new  world,  moreover,  would
engross  its  not  only  by  its  novelty,  but  also  by  the  practical  need  of
accommodating  ourselves  to  new  conditions  of  existence.  Hence  the
psychological  conditions  for  great  concern  about  the  world  we  had  left
behind  us  would  hardly  be  present.  This  argument,  moreover,  could
be  considerably  strengthened  by  psychological  observations  with
regard  to  the  interest  which  is  taken  in  the  affairs  of  our  world  by
the  aged.  For  it  would  be  unlikely  that  an  interest  which  had
already  grown  faint  should  effectively  maintain  itself  amid  the  dis-
tractions of  a  new  life.

And  even  if  the  desire  to  communicate  were  felt,  it  could  hardly  be
assumed  that  the  knowledge  and  power  to  do  so  would  at  once  be  at
the  disposal  of  the  new-comer,  who,  for  aught  we  know,  might  find
that,  as  upon  his  entry  upon  this  scene,  a  period  of  helplessness  and
dependence  analogous  to  infancy  had  to  be  passed  through.


60


F.  a  S.  Schiller.


[part


It  would  seem  probable,  therefore,  that  to  render  communication
effective,  quite  as  systematic  and  sustained  an  effort  would  be  needed
on  the  other  side  as  is  being  made  by  the  S.P.R.  on  this,  while  the
self-regarding  motives  for  making  it  would  be  indefinitely  less  potent.
For  while  each  of  us  ou(/ht  to  have^  a  strong  personal  interest  in  deter-
mining what  his  prospects  may  be  after  death,  no  such  case  could  be
made  out  for  a  retrospective  interest  of  the  departed  in  our  world.
And  in  their  world  the  prevalent  sentiment  might  esteem  it  better  to
leave  us  in  our  present  doubt  and  discourage  attempts  to  pry  into  the
possibilities  of  communication  with  another  world  still  more  strongly
and  sincerely  than  the  majority  of  us  do  now.  This,  indeed,  will
appear  the  more  probable  when  we  remember  that,  according  to  the
principle  of  psychic  continuity,  the  same  people  will  be  making  the
same  sentiment  in  both  cases.  Nevertheless,  it  is  conceivable  that  some
day  a  fortunate  coincidence  of  the  efforts  of  an  infinitesimal  minority
on  both  sides  should  succeed  in  establishing  spirit-identity  and  forcing
upon  the  reluctant  masses  of  men  the  scientific  fact  of  a  future  life
which  they  did  not  in  the  least  desire  to  have  so  established.  Even
then,  however,  we  should  still  be  very  far  from  any  definite  and
detailed  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  the  future  life  in  itself,  the
difiiculties  of  transmitting  which  would  increase  enormously  in  pro-
portion as  the  dissociation  between  the  two  spheres  of  existence
became  greater.

Thus  the  general  upshot  of  our  discussion  so  far  would  be  that  a
future  life  which  was  accessible  to  scientific  methods  of  proof  would
necessarily  appear  to  be  of  a  somewhat  homely  and  humdrum  character.
Broadly  speaking,  our  conceptions  of  it  would  rest  on  the  assumption  of
social  and  psychic  continuity,  and  they  would  tend  to  suppose  that  the
reward  and  punishment  of  the  soul  consisted  mainly  in  its  continuing
to  be  itself,  with  its  true  nature  revealed  more  and  more  clearly  to
itself  and  others.  Hence  there  would  be  but  little  room  for  epic  flights
of  a  lurid  imagination,  and  those  who  hanker  after  the  ecstasies  of  the
blessed  and  the  torments  of  the  damned  would  have  to  go,  as  before,
to  the  preachers  and  the  poets.  We  may,  however,  trust  these  latter
to  work  up  a  more  copious  material  into  pictures  quite  as  edifying  and
thrilling  as  those  of  Homer,  Dante  and  Milton.

I  have  assumed  hitherto,  without  a  hint  of  doubt,  the  general
possibility  of  the  conception  of  a  future  life.  But,  after  all,  this  also
is  an  assumption,  of  a  very  vital  character,  and  one  which  has  been
strongly  impugned  on  a  jjriori  grounds. I  shall  devote,  therefore,  my

1  I  emphasise  the  'ought,'  for,  as  a  matter  of  empirical  fact,  the  present  number
of  those  who  are  scientiticalli/  interested  in  the  question  to  the  extent  of  a  guinea  per
annum  ajDpears  to  be  about  1500  !


XXXVI.]


On  Some  PJtilosophic  Assumptions.


61


concluding  remarks  to  disposing  of  such  philosopliic  attempts  at  an
a  priori  suppression  of  the  question  and  to  stating  some  of  the
philosophic  considerations  which  lead  me  to  think  the  conception  of
a  future  life  a  valid  and  non-contradictory  one,  whether  or  not  we
can  find  empirical  evidence  of  its  actual  existence.  On  the  first  point
I  may  be  brief  :  I  should  not  deny  that  it  is  possible  to  devise  meta-
physical systems  which  will  render  the  persistence  of  the  indi\  idual
consciousness  improbable  and  even  impossible,  and  which  consequently
close  the  question  to  all  who  really  believe  them.  Personally,  I
believe  those  systems  to  be  demonstrably  wrong,  but  it  is  enough
for  our  purpose  that  they  should  be  gratuitous,  and  that  we  may,  at
least  equally  well,  adopt  metaphysical  views  which  leave  the  question
open,  or  even  lead  us  to  regard  a  future  life  as  a  priori  probable
enough,  and  needing  only  verification  a  postei-iori.

Hence,  speaking  for  myself — and  in  so  personal  a  matter  one  must
speak  for  oneself  if  one  wants  to  speak  to  the  point — I  cannot  at  all
appreciate  the  enormous  antecedent  difiiculty  which  so  many  philo-
sophers seem  to  feel  about  the  conception  of  a  future  life. Even  its
most  difticult  implications,  like,  e.[/.,  tlie  transition  from  one  world  to
anotlier,  seem  to  become  quite  easy,  if  we  start  from  the  proper  philo-
sophic basis. Let  us,  for  instance,  assume— as  I  think  we  must  do  in
any  case— the  philosophic  position  of  an  idealistic  experientialism.
I  use  this  clurnsy  phrase  to  designate  the  view  that  '  the  world '  is
primarily  'my  experience,'  plus  (secondarily)  the  supplementings  of
that  experience  which  its  nature  renders  it  necessary  to  assume,  such
as,  e.g  ,  other  persons  and  a  'real'  material  world. In  that  case  the
world,  in  which  we  suppose  ourselves  to  be,  is,  and  always  remains,
relative  to  the  experience  which  we  seek  to  interpret  by  it,  and  if  that
experience  were  to  change,  so  necessarily  would  our  '  real '  world.  Its
reality  was  guaranteed  to  it,  so  long  as  it  did  its  work  and  explained
our  experience  ;  it  is  abrogated  so  soon  as  it  ceases  to  do  so.  Hence
we  may  conceive  ourselves  as  passing  through  any  number  of  worlds,
separated  from  each  other  by  (partial)  discontinuities  in  our  experi-
ence, each  of  which  would  be  perfectly  real  while  it  lasted,  and  yet
would  have  to  be  declared  unreal  from  a  higher  and  clearer  point
of  view.

Nor  would  this  conception  remain  an  empty  form,  which  we  could
not  find  anything  in  our  experience  to  illustrate.  I  venture  to  afiirm
that  we  are  all  of  us  perfectly  familiar  with  what  it  feels  like  to  pass
from  one  world  into  another.  When  we  fall  asleep  and  dream,  we  pass
into  a  new  world,  the  space,  time,  persons,  and  laws  of  which,  though
they  persist  in  pi-inciple,  have  no  very  obvious  connection  with  the
corresponding  characteristics  of  our  waking  life.  It  is  true  that  the
reality  of  each  dream-world  is  very  precarious  :  it  is  dissolved  by  every


62


F.  G.  S.  Schiller.


[part


clumsy  interruption  from  a  more  '  real '  world,  in  the  ex  post  facto
judgment  of  which  the  dream-world  is  fleeting,  chaotic,  and  vin-
manageable.  Hence  the  consensus  of  common  sense  declares  dream
experiences  to  be  unreal — though,  it  may  be  noted,  it  has  taken  men
a  long  time  to  arrive  at  this  conclusion  and  to  disabuse  themselves
of  the  notion  that  after  all  there  must  be  a  literally  veridical  and
inspired  meaning  in  all  their  experiences.  What  has  not  been  realised
with  equal  clearness — probably  because  the  observation  seemed  to
have  no  direct  practical  bearing — is  that  the  existence  of  unreal
Avorlds  of  dream-experience  casts  an  indelible  slur  on  the  claim  of
our  present  waking  life  to  absolute  reality.  What  has  happened  once
may  happen  again,  and  when  we  wake  to  another  world  our  terrestrial
life  may  appear  as  grotesque  a  parody,  as  misleading  a  distortion,  of
true  reality  as  the  most  preposterous  of  dreams.

JSTow  this,  which  may  be  regarded  as  an  awakening  of  the  soul  from
the  point  of  view  of  the  subject  of  the  experience,  is  at  the  same  time
the  dissolution  of  his  dream-world  and  life.  That  is,  from  the  point
of  view  of  the  beings  that  interacted  with  him  in  that  world  and  life —
supposing,  of  course,  that  his  '  unreal '  experience  was,  as  even  dreams
are,  veridical  to  some  extent — it  is  his  withdrawal,  his  death.  Hence
the  "  paradoxes  about  death  "  which  I  have  already  had  the  honour  of
propounding  to  the  members  of  the  S.P.R.,i  and  to  which  I  am  now
trying  to  supply  a  sort  of  commentary.  "  No  man  ever  yet  perished
without  annihilating  also  the  world  in  which  he  lived,"  i.e.,  the  world  of
his  experience,  or  as  we  may  perhaps  say  with  still  )nore  accuracy,  the
objective  world,  in  so  far  as  it  was  assumed  to  explain  his  experience.
Moreover  "  no  man  ever  yet  saw  another  die,  but  if  he  had  he
would  have  witnessed  his  own  annihilation  "  :  inasmuch  as  he  could
never  see  the  other's  self  and  so  «  fortiori  could  not  observe  its
destruction  ;  what  he  saw  was  the  '  death '  of  a  '  body  '  which  was
merely  a  phenomenon  in  his  own  world  of  experience.  But  if,
per  inipossibile,  he  could  have  witnessed  the  destruction  of  the
subject  of  a  world  of  experience,  his  own  destruction,  as  a  phe-
nomenon in  such  a  world,  would  have  been  included  in  the
catastrophe.  Thus  both  these  paradoxes  are  designed  to  bring
out  the  essential  and  incurable  philosophical  ambiguity  of  'death.'-
Death  is  not  the  same  thing  for  him  who  experiences  and  for  him  who
witnesses  it.  It  forms  the  limiting  case  which  involves  the  breakdown
of  the  great  social  convention,  whereby  we  postulate  (for  practical
purposes)  a  common  world  which  is  experienced  by.  us  all.^  Even

1  In  the  S.P.R.  Journal  for  March,  1898,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  204.
-  Cf.  also  Riddles  of  the  Sphinx,  Ch.  XI.,  §8.

3  "The  world  is  the  greatest  of  all  conventions,  but  all  are  unconventional  enough
to  leave  it."— S.P.R.  Journal,  March,  1898.


XXXVI.]


On  Some  Philosophic  Assumptions.


63


during  life  that  convention  is  maintained  only  at  the  cost  of  excluding
from  reality  all  such  experiences  as  are  personal,  or  divergent,  or
incapable  of  forming  a  basis  for  common  action.  At  death  it  breaks
down  altogether,  and  the  long  suppressed  divergence  between  the
world  of  'my  '  experience  and  the  'objective'  world,  which  is  nobody's
experience  but  is  supposed  to  account  for  everybody's,  dominates  the
situation.

When  a  man  dies  his  relation  to  the  common  world  apparently
ceases,!  but  for  what  reason  we  cannot  say.  It  may  be  that  he  has
ceased  to  be  ;  it  may  also  be  that  he  has  ceased  to  interact  with  us —
until  we  also  have  followed  his  example.  Similarly  when  we  witness
a  death,  all  that  we  can  safely  and  scientitically  say  is  that  a  peculiar
feature  in  our  experience  which  impelled  us  to  assume  a  self-conscious
spirit,  analogous  to  our  own,  in  order  to  account  for  the  behaviour  of
the  complex  of  phenomena  we  called  the  body  of  our  fellow  man,  has
undergone  a  change  such  that  the  behaviour  of  his  '  body '  no  longer
warrants  the  inference  of  the  presence  of  his  'spirit.'  Again,  the
reason  may  be  that  the  spirit  is  destroyed,  or  that  it  has  ceased  to
animate  the  '  body.'  Thus  it  would  seem  as  though  all  that  could  be
affirmed  for  certain  about  death  was  that  it  was  a  disruption  of  the
common  world  in  which  spirits  acted  -together ;  what  else  or  what
more  it  was  would  remain  in  doubt — the  spirit  may  have  perished  or
it  may  have  '  passed  away.'

Thus,  so  far  as  philosophy  can  determine,  it  would  seem  as  if  the
chances  of  destruction  and  survival  were  exactly  equal  ajid  that  we
were  doomed  to  doubt  for  ever.  Nevertheless,  considerations  may
be  adduced  which  must  add  decisively  to  the  weight  of  the  latter
alternative.  For  it  should  be  noted  that  the  two  alternatives  are
not  equally  well  situated  with  respect  to  empirical  evidence.  No
conceivable  empirical  evidence  can  suffice  to  establish  the  destruction
of  the  soul  at  death,  because  none  can  even  be  relevant  to  the  issue.
For  it  can  only  concern  appearances  in  the  common  world  of  the
survivors,  it  can  only  prove  that  the  rupture  of  connection  with  it
at  death  is  utter  and  entire.  But  that  is  not  enough.  A  scientific
proof,  therefore,  of  the  annihilation  of  the  soul  is  rigorously  im-
possible. On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  such  intrinsic  impossibility
about  a  scientific  proof  of  the  persistence  of  consciousness  through
death ;  there  is,  in  fact,  no  particular  difficultj^  about  conceiving
empirical  evidence  sufficient  to  establish  this  doctrine  with  as  high  a
degree  of  certainty  as  we  have  for  any  of  our  beliefs  as  to  matters  of
fact. The  whole  difficulty  consists  in  getting  the  evidence. If  -we  had

1  "  To  die  is  to  cut  off  our  connection  with  our  friends  ;  but  do  they  cut  us,  or  we
them,  or  both,  or  neither?  " — Ibid.,  p.  205.


64


F.  G.  S.  Schiller.


[part


succeeded,  all  we  should  need  to  do  would  be  to  modify  our  original
assumption  that  death  meant  an  absolute  rupture  of  relations,  an  utter
dissolution  of  the  common  world.  We  should  have  to  say  instead,  that
death  altered  the  mode  of  communication  of  spirit  with  spirit,  i-ender-
ing  it  different  and  difficult  without  interrupting  it  altogether.  But,
properly  interpreted  and  manipulated,  the  common  world  would
persist  through  death.  What  exactly  would  be  the  nature  of  the
common  world,  thus  extended  to  include  a  life  after  death,  philosophy
could  not,  of  course,  forecast ;  that  would  remain  a  question  for
positive  research  to  determine.

Hence  it  is  manifest  that  I  have  reached  a  point  at  which  the
philosopher  must  modestly  stand  aside  ;  he  can  I'eassure  the  psychical
researcher  that  no  a  priori  impossibilities  block  his  way  and  that  no
authentic  fact  can  be  too  anomalous  to  be  explained ;  he  can  clear  his
eyes  of  the  prejudices  which  obstruct  a  clear  vision  of  the  goal,  but  its
actual  achievement  must  be  the  reward  of  the  courage  and  endurance
of  the  empirical  researcher  who  fights  his  way  to  it  step  by  step  through
thickets  of  complex  and  perplexing  fact,  and  barbed- wire  entangle-
ments of  hostile  human  prejudice.


XXXVI.] A  Stiul)/  in  Spiritistic  Hallucinations.


65


SUPPLEMENT.


I.

A  STUDY  IN  SPIRITISTIC  HALLUCINATIONS.
By  Professor  Harlow  Gale.

Dr.  E.  S.  was  a  physician  in  St.  Paul,  Minn,  with  a  special  reputation
for  success  in  diphtheria,  a  graduate  in  1872  of  Trinity  College,  Hartford,
and  of  Rush  Medical  College,  Chicago  ;  an  unusually  vigorous,  decisive,  and
intelligent  man.  He  was  a  disbeliever  in  religion  and  somewhat  offensively
so.  He  became  associated  with  people  below  his  own  intellectual  and  social
grade,  but  not  to  the  vicious  extent  wdiich  he  was  subsequentlj'  fond  of
exaggerating.  When  thus  about  45  years  of  age,  with  grey  hair  and  beard,
and  still  a  bachelor,  he  experienced  in  1894  a  sudden  and  dramatic  conversion
to  "  Christian  Spiritualism."  He  then  gave  up  all  practice  and  interest  in
his  profession  and  in  the  real  estate  business  to  which  he  had  chiefly  given
his  time  for  several  years,  and  devoted  himself  wdth  intense  single-
mindedness  and  enthusiasm  solely  to  the  propagation  of  this  faith.  With  a
small  independent  income,  he  did  not  make  it  a  money  business  nor  himself
a  professional,  but  in  shabby  clothes  and  with  the  barest  necessities  of  life
he  gathered  a  little  group  of  converts  about  him.  His  time  was  occupied  in
visiting  these  friends,  studying  his  Bible  and  reading,  and  holding  meetings
three  times  a  week  in  his  room  in  a  business  block.

In  about  two  years  he  came  into  communication'  with  Dr.  Hodgson,  to
whom  he  described  himself  and  his  work  in  the  following  characteristic
letter  : —

329J,  Jackson  Street,  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  May  1th,  1896.

(Dr.)  (I  presume  you  do  not  care  for  title)  Richard  Hodgson,
5,  Boylston  Place,  Boston,  Mass.

My  dear  Doctor  : — Your  esteemed  favour  of  the  5th  inst.  duly  received.
In  reply  will  try  to  be  brief.  In  the  first  place  I  wish  to  avoid  all  unnecessary
notoriety.  It  will  be  impossible  to  condense  more  than  tvi^o  years'  extensive
experiences,  and  the  accounts  of  hundreds  of  meetings,  into  a  single  letter.
Su{Ece  it  to  say  I  am  a  regular  physician,  graduated  in  1876,  at  Rush

1  This  first  communication  was  a  postal  card  as  follows  : — ■

329i,  Jackson-street,  St.  Paul.,  Minn.,  April  SOth,  1896.

My  dear  Sir, — You,  if  still  interested  in  your  great  work  for  your  Society,  and  care
for  them,  will — D.V. — receive  some  interesting  communications,  upon  my  assurance
of  such  being  welcome  from  me,  and  of  more  definite  knowledge  of  your  address.


66


Professor  Harlow  Gale.


[Supplement.


Medical  College  ;  am  a  graduate  of  an  Eastern  Institution  ;  am  now  forty
odd  years  of  age  ;  brought  up  a  Christian,  but  from  certain  disbeliefs  and
teachings  of  the  so-called  churches,  I  became,  if  not  an  infidel — I  think,
while  by  no  means  an  atheist,  I  was  an  infidel  in  belief,  and  certainly  in
practice  and  life — but  heard  voices  once  and  a  while,  and  saw  clairvoyantly,
but  did  not  understand  these  manifestations,  [nor]  try  to  bother  witli  them,
and  while  they  lasted—"  annoyed  me"  as  I  used  to  think — I  fancied  I  was
on  the  verge  of  insanity  :  finally  I  attended  a  spiritualist  meeting  with  much
cowardice  and  shamefacedness,  saw  what  tliey  called,  and  what  I  now  know
were  materialisations,  and  could  get  wlien  alone  table  rappings,  table-
tippings,  and  see  clairvoyantly.  But  the  table  rappings  and  table-tipjMngs
did  not  continue  long.  I  finally  met  a  business-man,  who  was  a  friend,  and
he  reluctantly  told  me  he  had  seen  Our  Saviour  many  times,  and  that  he  saw
and  communicated  with  his  late  wife  by  asking  God,  Our  Father,  in  the
name  of  .Jesus  Christ,  if  he  might  be  permitted  to  do  so.  His  late  wife  was
a  devout  Christian.  I  shook  hands  with  him  and  said  I  would  try  it  that
night.  I  wanted  to  see  my  mother  whose  body  had  been  buried  many  years
before.  I  prayed  The  Father,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  if  it  was  in
accordance  with  His  Will,  not  to  her  injury,  peace  or  discomfort,  and  for  my
good,  that  I  might  see  my  mother.  I  was  all  alone  in  my  then  bed-room,
doors  locked.  I  saw  her  immediately,  fully  recognised  her  and  was  very
thankful  for  the  vision.  Then  I  asked  God  in  Christ  Jesus'  name  to  let  me
know  the  truth  as  He  willed,  notwithstanding  my  former  infidelity,  so-called
science,  lies  of  priests,  preachers,  or  myself,  or  any  other  sources  of  errors.
I  began  to  see  more  clairvoyantly  ;  in  daylight,  and  to  write  automatically,
and  these  matters  were  often  (or  rather  never  found  not  to  be  true)  proven
true,  with  reference  to  past  events  or  future  events.  Never  once  untrue  ;
often  true.  I  began  holding  private  meetings  with  my  clairvoyant  friend,
who  had  for  over  twenty  years,  at  different  times,  seen  Jesus  Christ.  At
first  we  did  not  see  Hina  ;  but  our  own  friends,  and  many  of  the  departed
members  of  our  families  came,  and  gradually  brought,  introduced,  and  made
us  acquainted  with  persons  of  hundreds,  nay,  thousands  of  years  previously
existent  in  the  flesh.  They  talked,  my  friend  could  hear  and  distinguish
their  diff'erent  voices,  etc.  Finally  the  Master  came,  and  has  come  very
often  to  our  meetings  now  for  over  six  months.  He  has  cured  one  man  who
tells  me  he  has  been  "doctored"  for  over  ten  years  for  progressive  loco-
motor-ataxia, and  by  many  physicians.  I  have  taken  the  Master  by  His
substantial  Spiritual  Hand,  hear  Him  talk  to  me  often,  and  hear  many  others.
Now  the  Master  has  now  been  seen  by  twelve  different  people  ;  some  have
seen  Him  many  times.  We  are  informed  comjjaratively  few  will  see  Him
before  He  comes  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  a  thousand  years,  which
coming,  we  believe  and  have  been  informed,  would  be  a  spiritual  coming,  at
least,  to  the  hearts  and  minds  of  human  beings.  We  use  no  curtain.  The
Master  forbids  it.  We  gather  to  worship  Him,  have  seen  Him  accompanied
by  the  Blessed  Virgin,  Mary  Magdalene,  Martha,  Lazarus,  all  the  Apostles
and  many,  many  others.  Several  times  by  angels  (who  never  were  in  the
flesh).  His  messengers.  The  man  whom  he  cured  was  cured  instantly,
nothing  was  said  by  the  Master  about  curing  him.  When  the  man  went
away  from  the  meeting  he  could  walk  as  well  as  ever,  and  had  no  pain.


Part  XXXVI.] A  Stvxly  in  S'piritidic  Hallucinations.


67


Four  besides  himself  were  at  the  meeting  ;  the  ciu'ed  man  and  myself  only
saw  the  Master.  The  Master  spoke  briefly  to  me  ;  some  time  to  this  man,
who  said  he  heard  Him,  saw  Him,  and  felt  Him,  and  His  hands.  I  saw  and
heard  Him.  The  four  present  (besides  the  sick  man)  felt  the  sick  man,
who  while  mentally  happy,  was  wet  and  cold.  A  Dr.  Dunlap  has  seen  The
Master  and  others,  —Abraham  Lincoln  one  of  them — at  our  meetings.  He
only  saw  the  Master  once,  and  briefly.  Some  of  us  have  seen  the  Master
very  many  times,  and  for — sometimes — not  only  half-an-hour,  but  even  an
hour,  or  more,  at  the  time.  One  Jewish  gentleman  has  seen  him  when  alone,
once  in  a  town-j)lace  of  business —  in  Minn.,  recently  while  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  and  yesterday  while  with  me.  I  and  two  others  have  seen  the
Master  in  the  clouds  of  Heaven  (seemingly  to  me,  very  near  me)  ;  and  not
to  me  for  a  few  minutes,  but  for  a  long  while.  He  followed  me.  It  was  a
glorious  sight.  He  has  unlocked  doors  for  me.  He  reveals  himself  not  to
all  whom  I  wish.  My  wishes  seem  to  have  no  control  over  who  may  see
Him,  or  what  shall  occur,  or  whom  He  may  bring  with  Him.  Many  self-
righteous,  of  course,  call  me  insane.  I  rejoice,  remembering  His  words,  but
am  sorry  for  their  ignorance.  Subliminal  consciousness,  etc.,  and  such
theories  I  am  fully  awai'e  of.  I  can  only  say  they  do  not  work  with  me,  or
any  one  else  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  at  our  meetings.  Now  I  have  only  given
you  a  very  brief  outline  of  what  would  require  volumes  to  tell,  in  order,  and
with  details.  Perfect  sequence  of  occurrences  has  not  been  followed.  Tried
to  get  man  to  write  out  an  account  of  his  sickness,  and  cure  ;  but  cannot
prevail  upon  him  so  far.  He  will  tell  those  who  do  not  approach  him  "luii/i
a  jostling  air"  generally.  He  is  more  than  ordinarily  intelligent.  Was
not  what  is  called  "a  religious  man"  previous  to  my  talking  to  him  about
Christian  Spiritualism.  I  feel  the  spirits,  have  heard  them  sing  wonderful
music — two  electric  lights  burning  at  the  time, — had  them  take  hold  of  me
forcibly  indeed  ;  this  and  singing  when  aZone ;  not  expecting  anything  of  the
kind.  Have  seen  the  Dear  Lord  and  heard  Him  speak,  while  He  manifested
Himself  both  as  the  Saviour,  The  Infant  Saviour,  The  Father  and  The  Holy
Spirit.  As  the  Saviour  He  comes  in  a  brown  robe,  as  The  Father  in  a
wonderful  blue  robe,  as  The  Holy  Spirit  in  still  more  wonderful  and
dazzling  white  robe.  Often  in  all  ways,  with  a  golden  crown  upon,  or  high
in  the  air  above  His  head.  I  will  enclose  a  card  which  explains  itself.  He
often  says  "The  time  of  my  coming  to  the  whole  world  is  near  at  hand. "  "To
do  what  we  can  to  prepare  the  world  for  His  coming."  After  speaking  to  me
I  generally  ask  Him  to  give  some  mark  of  approval  or  disapproval  to  what  I
say  He  has  just  said  to  me.  He  generally  approves  by  gently  bowing  His
Head,  or  that  and  moving  the  hands.  Once  He  added  to  another  person
something  additional. Excuse  haste. — Yours,  etc.,  E  S^

1  Two  long  letters  of  ten  foolscap  pages  together  were  written  to  Mr.  Hodgson  on
two  successive  days  in  August  1896,  though  Dr.  S.  apologised  for  his  haste  and
having  been  too  busj'  to  write  before.  In  these  he  described  more  in  detail  the
materialisations  of  Christ  to  him,  specially  His  clasping  him  tightly  about  the  neck,
his  holding  St.  John  upon  his  breast  as  the  Master  had  done  at  the  last  supper,  and
enumerated  other  personages  visible  to  him  and  some  of  his  friends  as  Dante,  Beatrice,
Hypatia,  Julius  Cissar,  Pontius  Pilate,  Lincoln,  Hancock,  Garfield,  Admiral  Foote,
Washington,  Longfellow,  etc. Each  letter  ended  in  an  appeal  for  co-operative  study

F  2

I


68


Professor  Harlow  Gale.


[Supplement.


The  enclo.sed  card,  which  he  distributed  to  enquiring  friends,  was  as
follows  : —


H  Have  you  seen  the  Lord  ? If  not,  why  not  ? '  S

OS  ■  ■

|_j  He  says,  there  are  two  (2)  necessary  conditions. You  must  have  X

^  His  Commandments  : You  must,  also,  keep  them.  ^

(/)  "He  that  hath  My  Commandments,  and  keepetli  them,  he  it  is  ^

that  loveth  Me  ;  and  he  that  loveth  Me  shall  be  loved  of  My  Father  ;  X

*H  and  I  will  love  him,  and  will  mnnifcst  Mi/self  to  him.'' — St.  John,  ^

^  14th  Chapter,  and  21st  Verse.  "fl

l-l  Christ  Jesus  lias  been  seen  by  several,  now  in  the  flesh,  who  ^

believe  in  Him,  and  have  submitted  themselves  to  these  conditions.  tfl

fl  — Christian  Spiritualists.  ^

0  °

^  "And  My  reward  is  with  Me:" "To  give  every  man  ^

■;  according  as  his  work  shall  be."


[ON  THE  OTHER  SIDE  OF  THE  CARD.]

"  God  is  a  Spirit ;  and  they  that  worship  Him  must  worship  Him  in  spirit
and  in  truth. "

"  But  be  not  ye  called  Rabbi ;  for  One  is  your  Master,  even  Christ,  and  all
ye  are  brethren. "

"Except  ye  be  converted,  and  become  as  little  children,  ye  shall  not  enter
into  The  Kingdom  of  Heaven."

"Whosoever  therefore  shall  humble  himself  as  this  little  child,  the  same  is
greatest  in  The  Kingdom  of  Heaven."

"And  whoso  shall  receive  one  such  little  child  in  My  Name  reeeiveth  Me."

"Whosoever  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it;  but  whosoever  shall  lose  his
life  for  My  sake  and  the  Gospel's,  the  same  shall  save  it."

"What  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul?"

"  I  am  The  Good  Shepherd,  and  know  My  sheej),  and  am  known  of  Mine."
"  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  The  Kingdom  of  God."
i"I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock  ;  if  any  man  hear  My  voice  and  open  the
door,  I  will  come  in  to  him,  and  will  sup  with  him  and  he  with  Me."

This  letter  was  sent  by  Mr.  Hodgson  to  me  to  interview  Dr.  S.  I  thus
found  him  in  June,  189G  ;  and  in  a  long  interview,  which  he  could  with
difhculty  end,  went  over  the  above  events  in  more  detail. He  invited  me  to


of  his  phenomena.  "  I  cannot  find  people  with  brains,  sufficient  knowledge,  truth,
and  leisure,  and  with  the  heart  and  disposition  to  investigate  with  me  as  I  would,  and
•do  most  earnestly  wish  these  great  and  wonderful  manifestations  should  be  investigated.
The  so-called  Christians  are  too  much  in  the  dark,  too  ignorant,  or  too  indifferent.
And  the  infidels  do  not  believe  in  Jesus  Christ's  divinity,  and  therefore  they  never
can,  even  though  able  clairvoyants  often,  see  Him  at  all,  or  even  his  more  noted
Saints."  "O  for  intelligent,  pure-minded,  pure  devoted,  capable,  and  disinterested
fellow  helpers  and  investigators  ;  who  do  not  wish  notoriety,  nor  seek  selfish  aims,  and
who  could  afford  and  would  devote  the  time  to  obtaining  the  results."


Piirt XXXVI.] A  Study  in  Spiritistic  Hallucinations.  69

join  his  circle,  gave  me  the  names  of  ten  persons  who  had  seen  Christ  at  his
meetings,  and  kindly  started  me  off  alone  on  a  trip  to  interview  these
persons.  The  following  notes  of  a  seance  will  give  a  fair  sample  of  his
methods  and  results.  Though  he  usually  held  his  meetings  at  his  own  room,
he  occasionally  did  at  the  homes  of  his  friends,  and  this  one  was  held  at  the
house  of  Mrs.  F.  B.,  who  had  lately  become  a  professional  Clairvoyant  and
Healing  Medium.

"  633,  Cedar-street,  St.  Paul,  Sunday  evening,  June  7th,  1896.
"Thirteen  persons  present,  including  Mrs.  Gale  and  myself.  A  covered
lamp  gave  light  enough  for  one  to  distinguish  men  from  women  in  the  circle,
but  not  features.  Dr.  S.  sat  in  an  arm-chair  about  four  feet  from  the  ends
of  the  circle  in  front  of  a  pair  of  brown  portieres,  covering  a  double  door.
He  did  not  at  any  time  appear  to  be  in  a  trance  condition,  sat  upright  with
his  hands  on  the  arms  of  the  chair,  and  his  outline  at  least  was  visible  to  us
during  the  entire  meeting.  He  offered  prayer  and  there  was  frequent
singing  interspersed  during  the  eveiiing.  Several  times  he  urged  the  sitters
who  saw  anything  at  all  to  speak  of  it,  and  he  occasionally  asked  different
persons  if  they  did  not  see  this  or  that.  After  some  waiting  and  silence  Dr.
S.  said,  'The  Master  is  here  on  either  side.'  Mrs.  B.  said,  '  I  see  Him  in  a
brown  robe,  He  is  blessing  us.'  Dr.  S. :  '  I'm  so  glad  you  said  that,  for  I
felt  He  was  blessing  us.'  Then  Dr.  S.  gave  a  disconnected  religious  talk
which  he  said  the  Master  gave  through  him.  He  then  announced  General
Grant  as  there  for  Capt.  S.,  but  Capt.  S.  did  not  see  him,  though  he  had
seen  him  living.  The  General  then  purported  to  talk  through  Dr.  S.,
refei-ring  to  the  '  Little  Vedas.'  Mrs.  B.  said  she  saw  him  in  his  uniform
with  bright  buttons,  and  added  that  Henry  Ward  Beecher  was  there  by  Dr.
S's.  side  and  with  a  book  in  his  hand.  But  Dr.  S.  said,  '  Yes,  but  I  am  not
-through  with  General  Grant  yet.'  Beecher,  however,  also  gave  a  talk  about
the  Virgin  Mary,  etc.,  in  a  disjointed  way,  quite  uidike  his  natural  flowing
eloquence.  Dr.  S.  said,  '  What  is  back  of  me  on  the  curtain  ? '  Mi-s.  B.
'Across,'  and  through  suggestions  from  Dr.  S.  allowed  it  was  white  and
about  two  feet  high.  Asked  if  there  wasn't  something  at  the  foot  of  it,  Mrs.
B.  piped  up,  '  Mary  Magdalene.'  Discussion  between  them  about  the  hair,
which  had  'tawny  lights  in  dark  brown'  to  Dr.  S.,  but  to  Mrs.  B.  was
'  dark  brown  and  shiny  all  around.'

"Dr.  S.  saw  a  bunch  of  flowers  behind  Dr.  D.  and  said  they  were  coming
nearer  him,  whereat  Mrs.  B.  saw  a  whole  bushel  full  of  flowers  on  the  floor
in  front  of  Dr.  S.  Mrs.  W.,  next  to  the  place  where  the  flowers  were
described,  said  she  smelled  them  ;  Mrs.  B.  then  also  did  and  called  them
'  white  roses.'  One  other  lady  thought  that  possibly  she  smelled  them,  but
Dr.  S.  did  not  and  no  one  else.

"The  light  was  now  nearly  all  put  out,  though  patches  of  light  came
through  the  blinds  on  to  the  wall  and  curtain  back  of  Dr.  S.,  and  other
streaks  under  and  through  the  cracks  in  the  door  behind  him.  Dr.  S.  then
saw  a  high  back  chair  in  the  corner  of  the  room  by  Dr.  D.  and  with  peacock
feathers  about  it.  Mrs.  B.  then  described  an  Indian  man,  large  and  massive,
with  pompous  look,  and  called  him  Pocahontas.  Dr.  S.  asked  if  he  wanted
to  talk  and  Mrs.  B.  said,  'Yes,  he  nods  with  his  head.'  This  she  usually
said  for  the  advent  or  departure  of  each  figure. The  Indian  then  made


70


Professor  Harloiv  Gale.


[Supplement.


through  Dr.  S.  a  long  tirade  against  FitzHugh  Lee,  (as  they  finally  made
out  with  the  help  of  Capt.  S.)  for  murdering  an  Indian  and  fleeing  to  Cuba.
Capt.  S.  then  suggested  that  the  real  Pocahontas  was  a  girl,  and  a  young
man  sitter  sustained  this  fact.  Dr.  S.  cauie  to  the  rescue  of  Mrs.  B.  by
saying  he  '  got  it  as  a  man, '  etc.  Much  exhaustion  came  upon  Dr.  S.  after
this  Pocahontas  episode,  which  had  lasted  some  time,  and  he  asked  Mrs.  B.
to  describe  St.  Peter,  who  was  there.  So  Mrs.  B.  said  he  had  '  white  hair,
brown  beard,  shaggy  eyebrows,  somewhat  bald,  and  high  forehead ' ;  Dr.  S.
explaining  the  brown  beard  through  his  growing  younger  in  the  spirit
world  !  He  made  a  speech  through  Dr.  S.  in  which  he  promised  to  appear
to  us  all  in  our  homes,  especially  to  Capt.  and  Mrs.  S.  An  Indian  girl,  'Red
Clover,'  was  then  announced,  daughter  of  'White  Feather'  and  other
pedigree.  'Dear  Red  Clover'  was  a  great  favourite,  and  on  Dr.  S's  suggestion
shook  hands  with  Mrs.  W.,  so  that  Mrs.  W.  exclaimed,  '  Why,  I  believe  I
almost  see  her.'  She  also  made  a  speech  through  Dr.  S.,  who  thanked  her
for  iiaving  cured  a  sick  woman  lately  through  him.  Dr.  S.  saw  a  lily  over
between  Dr.  D.  and  Mrs.  Gale.  Dr.  D.  had  a  niece  named  Lily,  who  was
sick  ;  but  Dr.  S.  insisted  this  belonged  to  Mrs.  G.  Mrs.  B.  also  saw  it  '  as
tall  as  Mrs.  G. '  Then  followed  much  discussion  as  to  the  symbolical  mean-
ing of  this  lily.  It  was  decided  that  it  was  a  message  from  some  one,
perhaps  Mrs.  G.'s  mother.  But,  after  much  fishing  about  and  finding  from
Dr.  D.'s  direct  question  that  Mrs.  G.'s  mother  was  not  in  the  spirit  world,
Mrs.  B.  echoed  Dr.  S.'s  suggestion  of  its  being  from  an  aunt  (which  was
possible).  Then  with  relief  Dr.  S.  laughed  and  said  he  saw  a  turnip  with
the  lily.  Mrs.  B.  allowed  she  saw  something  'round,  long,  and  red  on  top.'
Then  followed  a  long  discussion  in  which  the  lily  and  turnip  were  finally
interpreted  to  mean  that  there  was  a  difl^erence  of  religious  opinion  between
Mrs.  G.  and  the  departed  aunt,  in  which  Mrs.  G.  must  get  rid  of  some
Unitarian  tendencies.  (It  came  out  in  some  later  conversations  that  this
association  of  Unitarianism  with  Mrs.  G.  had  been  gained  through  a
newspaper  notice  of  the  singing  of  my  cousin.  Miss  Gale,  in  the  Unitarian
Church  in  St.  Paul.)  Dr.  S.  then  asked  Mrs.  G.  if  she  was  not  con-
nected with  Universalists  or  Unitarians,  but  was  disappointed  to  find  her
a  heathen.

"The  Master  was  again  announced,  Dr.  S.  explaining  that  he  sometimes
sees  the  figures  behind  him,  'through  the  back  of  his  head.'  He  explained
the  Pocahontas  mistake  by  her  name  being  confused  with  the  real  one  of
Powhatan.  He  instanced  another  mistake  which  once  occurred  when  a  Mr.
Taylor's  father  was  given  as  dead,  but  when  found  living  was  given  as
'spiritually  dead,'  adding  'S.  could  not  help  it — it  upset  S.'

"  Dr.  S.  laughed  again  in  apparent  relief  and  said  he  saw  a  cow  and  a  lot
of  calves  there,  but  no  explanations  were  offered.  Coming  back  to  Mrs.  G.,
Dr.  S.  told  her  that  if  she  '  only  got  rid  of  some  little  things  and  in  fact  of
some  big  things,  and  kept  at  it,  she  would  be  able  to  see  and  develop.'
Then  followed  a  rambling  talk  about  a  Saracen,  'Pinoalto, '  with  some
prophecy.  Finally  Dr.  S.  asked  Mrs.  B.  if  she  saw  something  on  his  head,
and  she  saw  a  wreath  of  flowers.  The  meaning  of  this  was  not  enlarged
upon.  The  meeting  broke  up  and  ended  in  a  general  conversation.  Capt.
S.  asked  Dr.  S.  if  he  should  pay  Mrs.  B.  anything  and  he  replied,  'Just  as


Part  XXXVI,] A  St'iuly  in  Spiritistic  Hallucinations.


71


you  please.  lb  is  not  necessary,  but,  if  you  feel  like  it,  it  will  help  her
out.'  Whereat  Capt.  S.  paid  her  one  dollar,  but  no  one  else  seemed  to
give  anything."  ■

During  the  evening,  as  always  in  his  conversations.  Dr.  S.  made  frequent
reference  to  his  own  disinterestedness,  aver.'sion  to  notoriety  or  even  publicity,
and  showed  a  naive  pride  in  his  position  as  a  non-professional  medium  of
such  revelations  to  his  grateful  friends.

Aside  from  the  alleged  clairvoyant  perceptions  of  sight,  hearing,  touch,
and  smell,  described  by  Dr.  S.  and  Mrs.  B.,  the  only  other  persons
confessing  any  were  the  case  of  flower-odour  by  Mrs.  VV.  and  possibly  another
lady,  the  doubtful  touch  of  a  hand  by  Mrs.  W.  and  a  confession  from  Dr.  D.
—  extorted  after  repeated  urgent  suggestions  by  Dr.  S. — that  he  saw  a  light
on  the  curtain  which  might  possibly  be  a  head.  Mrs.  Gale  and  I  saw  nothing
except  the  streaks  and  patches  of  light  wliich  came  through  the  blinds  and
cracks,  and  the  changing  coloured  patches  of  the  retina's  own  light  projected
on  the  wall  or  curtain.  These  latter  we  could  of  course  see  just  as  well  with
the  eyes  closed.  The  alleged  perceptions  then  were  not  objective  as  in  the
ordinary  materialisation  seance,  where  every  one  f)resent  can  see  something
in  common,  however  much  the  objective  sense  perception  may  be  variously
enlarged  by  illusions.

In  an  interview  three  days  after  tliis  meeting  Dr.  S.  explained  that  in  his
experience  so  far  the  figures  had  maintained  about  the  same  degree  of  reality,
i.e.  "  etheriali.sation,"  and  only  "materialisation"  when  seized  by  the  hand.
He  considered  the  former  the  higher  manifestation,  tliough  that  began  with
him,  and  yet  he  desired  somewhat, — and  his  followers  still  more  —the  latter
form.  To  my  queries,  he  had  not  made  direct  expei'iments  of  seeing  the
figures  with  the  eyes  closed,  but  believed  he  could  and  did,  and  described
again  seeing  behind  him  "through  the  back  of  his  head.'"  About  darkness,
it  only  makes  the  colours  brighter,  otherwise  he  could  see  as  well  in  good
light,  which  they  sometimes  had  in  their  meetings.  Walking  with  me  in
bright  daylight  through  the  crowded  business  streets  he  would  describe,
in  pauses  between  his  greetings  to  his  many  ac(iuaintances,  the  figures  in  the
air  before  and  behind  us  and  which  were  accompanying  him.  In  all  these
communications  from  the  spirits  Dr.  S.  showed  great  earnestness  and
sincerity,  in  spite  of  some  levity  and  a  good  deal  of  common-placeness  quite
below  the  normal  level  of  his  intelligence  and  conversation.

"In  the  second  meeting  at  which  we  were  present  on  a  Monday  evening
in  .Tune,  1896,  in  Dr.  S.'s  own  room,  there  was  more  seriousness.  Here  Dr.
S.  sat  nearer  in  our  small  circle  of  only  eight  persons  and  with  a  background
of  a  large  black  cloth  on  tlie  wall  behind  him.  Though  he  turned  off  the
electric  light  in  his  room,  it  was  at  no  time  completely  dark,  for  various
streaks  and  patches  of  light  came  through  the  blinds  and  transom.  After
the  Master,  as  usual,  appeared  'a  little  Italian  girl  playing  a  harp,'  a
Jewish  girl  for  a  Mr.  Lazarus,  Zaccluens  for  quite  a  stay,  and  then  the  Table
of  the  Lord's  Supper  was  described  by  Dr.  S.  as  before  us  and  administered
spiritually,  Mrs.  B.  indicating  the  position  of  the  Master  in  his  service
around  the  circle.  Then  'Sophie,'  Mr.  A.'s  wife,  was  announced,  accom-
panied by  a  historical  Minnesota  Indian  squaw,  '  Old  Betz,'  who  brought
frogs'  legs  to  Mr.  A.  as  she  had  formerly  done  in  real  life. A  dove


72


Professor  Harloiv  Gale.


(Supplement.


also  brought  herbs  iu  an  envelope  to  Mr.  A.  from  his  wife.  Mr.  A.  was
greatly  moved  and  welcomed  her  with  great  emotion,  said  she  was  with  him
'every  hour  of  the  day  and  half  of  the  night.'  He  kept  asking  Dr.  S.
if  she  did  not  say  something  more,  and  Dr.  S.  described  her  as  looking  like
a  beautiful  young  girl  of  fifteen,  at  which  age  Mr.  A.  had  a  photograph  of
her.  Though  Mr.  A.  did  not  see  her,  he  said  he  felt  her  all  down  his  arm
and  knew  that  she  was  there.  Then  Mrs.  C  described,  as  standing  behind
me,  a  tall,  thin-faced,  black-coated  man,  who,  with  a  note-book,  was  taking  a
record  of  the  meeting.  He  could  not  reveal  his  identity  till  I  became  a
believer,  which  would  sui'ely  haj^pen  if  I  kept  searching  and  came  to  know
the  truth.

"In  this  circle  Mr.  A.  was  the  only  one  who  saw  anything  outside  of  Dr.
S.  and  Mrs.  B.  For  though  Mr.  A.  did  not  see  his  wife,  he  said  he  saw  two
figures  described  near  Mr.  Lazarus,  the  figure  behind  me,  some  flowers,  and
the  '  Master  as  a  child '  back  of  Dr.  S.  At  the  beginning  of  the  meeting,
however,  Dr.  S.  was  disappointed  that  Mr.  A.  did  not  see  and  moved  his
seat  to  the  middle  of  the  circle.  Dr.  S.  made  great  eiforts  in  vain  with  Mr.
La/.arus,  who  had  formerly  confessed  to  having  seen  something,  and  once
had  him  come  up  and  hold  his  (Dr.  S.'s)  hands.  In  addition  to  the  stray
lights  entering  the  room  and  the  retina's  projected  light  I  could  also  see
after  long  fixation  a  light  boundary  contrast  about  Dr.  S.'s  head.  On  my
describing  this  iu  response  to  Dr.  S.'s  frequent  questioning  of  each  of  us,
they  took  this  as  a  great  confession  and  were  enthusiastic  for  my  develop-
ment, which  Mrs.  B.  thought  might  possibly  come  in  a  year,  or  even  in  six
months,  though  her  own  had  required  nine  years.  Dr.  S.'s  last  words  to
us  were  characteristic  of  mucli  talk  during  the  evening  as  always, — 'Don't
think  S.  a  saint — I  wish  he  were  one.'  "

On  again  joining  the  circle  ten  months  later,  in  April,  1897,  I  found
much  the  same  group  of  devoted  fi'iends  and  enthusiastic  disciples  in  various
grades  of  "development."  The  aged  Dr.  D.  saw  a  great  deal,  and  though
"Sophie  "  did  not  come  to  Mr.  A.  he  groaned  in  joy  and  said  the  meetings
were  getting  better  and  better.  Methuselah  appeared  opportunely  for  Dr.
S.  to  ask  if  he  really  lived  to  be  969  years  old,  and  on  his  nodding  assent  Dr.
S.  explained,  with  the  confidence  of  authority,  how  some  St.  Paul  clergymen
had  tried  to  bring  his  age  within  our  historical  limits  by  a  new  explanation
of  the  ancient  Hebrew  system  of  reckoning  time.  A  beautiful  and
intellectual  Babylonian  female  figure  was  described  by  Dr.  S.  near  me,  and  I
was  told  to  rise,  wipe  my  hand,  and  she  would  take  it.  Dr.  S.  and  Mrs.  B.
said  she  did,  and  my  negative  confession  did  not  prevent  their  talking  much
about  it.  More  theological  metaphysics  had  grown  up  during  the  past  year,
"the  infant  word  "  e.tj.  being  quite  a  puzzle  to  the  newer  disciples.  On  my
student  companion  mildly  suggesting  that  perhaps  imagination  had  something
to  do  with  the  appearances.  Dr.  S.,  was  warmly  indignant,  gave  him  a  long
talk,  seized  his  head  violently  with  both  hands  and  asked  if  that  was
imagination,  for  so  they  came  to  him.

During  these  meetings  there  was  never  any  appearance  of  effort  at,  or
opportunity  for,  deception  ;  but  in  December,  189ii,  an  interesting  opportunity
occurred  to  test  Dr.  S.'s  faith  and  honesty. During  a  two-and-a-half  hours'


Part  XXXVI.] A  Study  ill  S'piritistic  Hallucinations.


73


interview  I  chanced  to  show  him  some  alleged  spirit  photographs  of  Mumler,
Boston,  which  I  had  just  got  from  one  of  the  best  known  photographers  in
St.  Paul,  and  though  he  had  never  seen  any  before  he  did  not  show  much
interest  in  them.  But  he  immediately  suggested  that  I  wrap  up  some  photo-
graphic plates  in  black  paper,  enclose  them  in  a  box,  seal  it  securely,  and  the
Master  had  given  him  to  understand  that  if  left  with  him  eight  hours  lie
could  perhaps  get  a  photograph  of  the  Master,  So  the  next  day  when  alone
in  a  dark  room  of  my  laboratory,  I  wrapped  two  4  by  5  plates  in  three  layers
of  black  paper  and  two  layers  of  black  clotli,  tied  them  with  a  string  and
sealed  tlie  knots,  packed  these  in  a  plate  box,  sealed  its  four  corners,  put
this  in  the  outside  cover,  sealed  a  string  around  the  whole,  took  drawings  of
all  these  strings  and  seals,  and  took  this  package  to  him  in  the  forenoon.
I  offered  to  come  later  in  the  day  and  develojj  the  plates  after  the  eight  hour
limit,  but  he  now  wanted  to  keep  tlieni  over  night.  So  two  days  later  we
met,  went  to  the  dark  room  of  Zimmerman  Bros.,  well  known  dealers  in
photograph  materials,  and  developed  the  plates  with  hydrochinon.  He  had
expressed  much  anxiety  that  the  box  should  not  go  into  any  other  person's
hands  and  that  I,  with  him  alone  present,  should  develop  the  plates.
Nothing  came  upon  the  first  jjlate  with  ten  minutes'  develof)ment,  though  we
examined  it  frequently,  and  nothing  on  the  second  plate  after  fifteen  minutes'
development.  Dr.  S.,  standing  by,  asked  many  questions  and  seemed  in
ignorance  of  the  process.  He  was  very  much  disappointed,  and  said  that  the
Master  told  him  Just  then — as  he  stood  in  a  listening  attitude — that  we  must
try  it  again  and  keep  at  it,  for  "according  to  your  faith  shall  it  be  unto  you."
Finally  after  the  Hypo  bath  Dr.  S.  spied  something  on  the  first  plate,  an
irregular  patch  about  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  said  it  was  a  face.  The  longer
he  looked  at  it,  the  more  certain  he  became,  till  after  a  few  moments  he  pointed
out — on  my  asking — the  nose,  chin,  beard,  and  long  hair,  as  he  had  described
them.  On  taking  the  plate  out  into  the  cellar  for  better  light  he  called  an
electric  light  repairer,  who,  on  the  Doctor's  suggestion,  admitted  it  was  a
face.  But  on  Mr.  Zimmerman  being  appealed  to,  he  said  there  was  nothing,  it
looked  like  a  plate  which  had  not  been  exposed.  And  on  the  Doctor's  calling
his  attention  to  this  face  in  the  corner,  he  wiped  the  plate  on  the  back  side
and  the  "face"  disappeared  with  the  dirt  and  water.  Somewhat  chagrined
at  this,  the  Doctor  hurriedly  left,  wliile  I  washed  the  plates,  dried  them,  and
still  could  find  nothing  on  them.  On  taking  all  the  wrappings  with  me  and
carefully  examining  them,  as  I  had  of  course  not  been  able  to  do  wlien  I
opened  the  V)oxes  and  wrappings  in  his  presence,  I  am  very  sure  he  had
made  no  attempt  to  open  the  box  when  in  his  possession.

A  month  later  I  told  him  I  was  ready  for  another  trial,  as  he  had  proposed.
But  his  faith  had  somewhat  weakened,  for  though  he  still  expects  some  time
to  get  these  material  proofs,  he  considered  it  for  the  present  premature  and
a  waste  of  time.  I  found  later  from  Mr.  Zimmerman  that  Dr.  S.  had
visited  him  after  our  failure,  and  his  weakening  of  faith  was  evidently  due
partly  at  least  to  Mr.  Zimmerman's  discouragement.  However,  toward  the
end  of  our  interview  he  wanted  me  to  bring  some  plates  as  before  and  sit
with  them  in  my  lap  during  a  meeting,  so  as  not  to  allow  them  out  of  my
possessiijn.  On  my  suggesting  a  camera  as  necessary,  he  thought  that
would  almost  surely  be  successful. But  as  the  main  point  of  testing  any


74


Professor  Harloiv  Gale.


[Supplement.


disposition  toward  trickery  had  been  tried,  it  did  not  seem  worth  while  to
continue  these  trials  further.

As  to  any  other  physical  or  real  evidence  of  the  existence  or  presence  of
his  spirits,  Dr.  S.  could  not  oflfer  anything  of  evidential  value.  He  asserted
that  a  door  had  been  unlocked  for  him,  showed  me  the  door  and  explained
the  conditions,  but  they  were  too  uncertain  to  amount  to  anything.  His  few
alleged  cases  of  the  communication  of  past  knowledge  from  the  spirits  were
not  even  reputable  cases  for  telepathy.  And  though  his  prophecies  were  a
great  source  of  pride  to  himself,  they  seemed  to  reveal  nothing  more  than
could  easily  be  accounted  for  by  chance  and  the  reproduction  of  his
knowledge  as  an  omnivorous  reader  of  newspapers.  (One  clay  before  his
departure  I  found  him  tearing  up  a  great  quantity  of  newspaper  clippings
which  he  had  collected  in  a  large  ledger.)  The  following  prophecy  printed
in  the  St.  Paid  Dispatch,  dated  and  published  August  12th,  1895,  was
characteristic  of  his  religious  life  and  dealt  with  current  newspaper  topics.

"  THE  BRIGHT  FUTURE.


"  JVhich  the  Spirits  Predict  for  the  Favored  Novth-West.


"  Geeat  Ckops  in  Store.


"roa  THE  NEXT  THREE  YEARS  THERE  WILL  BE  BOUNTIFUL  HARVESTS  TO  BE
GARl^ERBD  IN  THESE  STATES — TWIN  CITIES  WILL  BE  UNITE1>  IN  THE
NAME  OF  ST.  PAUL — CANALS  NOW  PRO-TECTED  WILL  BE  ACTUAL  FACTS,
AND  THE  GREAT  METROPOLIS  WILL  TEEM  WITH  THE  COMMERCE  OF  A
WORLD.

"  As  long  ago  as  last  February  the  Dispatch  printed  a  crop  jjrediction,
furnished  "by  spirits"  through  the  medium  of  a  favored  individual,  which
has  been  verified  with  wonderful  accuracy  of  detail.  The  spirits  now  furnish
another,  a  little  more  sweeping  in  its  scope,  which  is  appended:

"The  first  week  in  February,  1895,  a  Christian  spirit  was  permitted  by  The
Master,  to  impart  to  certain  people,  assembled  in  The  Name  of  the  Master,
and  worshipping  Him,  certain  very  important  revelations  about  certain  com-
ing events,  which  prophecies  have  all  been  verified  by  the  events  having
taken  place  in  the  meantime.  These  prophecies  given  in  February,  1895,
related  to  the  gi'eat  and  bountiful  crops,  which  would  be  given,  and  given  to
the  people  of  the  Northwest  by  the  Master  this  j^resent  year.

"Several  persons  can  testify  that  very  early  in  the  season  the  February
prophecies  were  made  known  to  them.

"There  have  lately  been  given  more  prophecies  of  still  greater  events
and  importance  to  the  people,  particularly  of  the  Northwest.  They  have  been
given  by  the  same  Chri.stian  spirit,  speaking  in  the  name  and  by  the  power
of  the  Master,  Christ  Jesus,  on  Aug.  7,  1895.  These  prophecies,  no
one,  not  disposed  to  believe,  need  believe.  The  persons  to  whom  they  have
been  given  do  believe,  and  are  th(jroughly  convinced  that  events  related
tlierein  to  come,  will  come,  for  tliey  have  proven  these  Christian  spirits
many  times,  and  in  many  matters  of  even  far  greater  importance  than  those


PartxxxvL] A  Study  in  Spiritistic  Hallucinations.  75

relating  to  material  prosperity  ;  that  is,  the  Divine  Government  of  the  entire
universe  by  God,  our  Heavenly  Father,  by  the  Divine  Son,  Jesus  Christ,
Our  Redeemer,  the  Master,  and  through  the  Master,  the  Holy  Ghost,  the
Spirit  of  Truth,  the  Comforter,  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  working  on  all  good
spirits,  whether  in  the  spirit  world,  or  still  in  the  flesh.  The  prophecies
made  Aug.  7,  1895,  are  briefly  as  follows  :

"First — That  the  present  crops  in  the  three  states  of  Minnesota,  North
and  South  Dakota,  all  these  prophecies  are  primarily  related  to  the  states
mentioned,  are  greater  than  any  estimates  yet  made,  and  suiDposed  to  be
reliable  by  the  general  public.  The  cvops  for  the  next  four  years  following
will  be  bountiful  in  these  same  three  states,  while  crops  in  certain  other
parts  of  -  the  world  during  part  of  the  same  period  will  be  less  than  the
average  crops  during  ordinary  j'ears,  excepting  Illinois  and  Indiana,  during
the  next  two  j'ears  will  bear  the  average  crops.  In  other  Northwestern
regions  the  crops  wDl  be  also  fair,  but  not  so  abundant  as  in  these  three
states.

"  Thirdly —That  a  great  waterway  will  be  made  within  the  next  ten
years,  and  great  ocean  ships  will  land  where  Minneapolis  now  is.

"Fourthly — The  next  great  change  will  be  that  the  Twin  Cities  will
become  one  great  city,  and  that  (greatly  enlarged),  the  united  cities  will  be
called  St.  Paul,  which  will  extend  many  more  miles  farther  eastward  and  a
great  many  more  miles  westward  ;  that  a  great  many  towns  will  spring  up
along  the  waterway  from  the  lakes  to  the  City  of  St.  Paul.

"  Fifthly — Other  great  events  mil  be  the  great  manufactories  for  manu-
facturing and  producing  by  electrical  processes,  iron  and  steel,  which  will
directly  employ  large  numbers  of  men,  and  especially  benefit  millions  of
people  in  the  states  of  Minnesota,  North  and  South  Dakota.  That  the
State  of  Minnesota  will  increase  in  population  very  many  hundreds  of
thousands  ;  and  that  most  of  the  now  waste  lands  will  be  cultivated  ;  that
Minnesota  will  become  one  of  the  favored  fruit  growing  sections,  and  that
the  climate  during  the  winter  will  become  much  warmer ;  that  great  and  large
boats  will  float  in  the  Mississippi  river,  to  what  is  now  called  Minneapolis,
from  the  South  and  from  the  Atlantic,  through  the  Great  Lakes  to  the  then
City  of  St.  Paul ;  that  ships  from  the  South  and  ships  from  the  North  will
be  locked  up  and  down  at  the  then  City  of  St.  Paul  and  other  points  neces-
sary to  the  successful  operation  of  this  great  waterway.

"  There  will  be  a  great  many  large  manufactories  in  successful  operation
in  the  then  City  of  St.  Paul,  particularly  in  rolling  mills,  and  iron  and  steel
manufacture.

"These  prophecies  are  of  the  true  Christian  spirits,  who  come  in  the
name  of  the  Master,  .Jesus  Christ,  and  in  and  by  Him  only.

"  True  Christian  Spirits."

Over  a  year  after  these  prophecies  I  heard  him  dispute  very  dogmatically
about  them  with  a  well-known  business  man  to  whom  he  was  formerly  family
physician.  He  once  wanted  me  to  see  our  large.st  miller  to  tell  him  about
some  kind  of  a  dredge  which  could  dig  the  river  channel  very  easily,  giving  me
axact  details  and  figures  as  it  had  all  been  given  him  by  the  spirits.


76


Professor  Harlotv  Gale.


[Supplement,


After  his  conversion  he  despised  his  former  profession  and  especially  the
medicine,  against  which  he  could  hardly  say  enough.  But  he  seems-
gradually  to  have  come  to  heal  through  the  alleged  niediumship  of  spirits.
After  one  or  more  cases  of  partial  relief  to  deafness,  his  first  and  still  his-
greatest  case  occurred  in  the  spring  of  189(i  and  is  referred  to  in  his  letter
above.  Mr.  A.,  having  been  a  railway  conductor  for  fifteen  years,  became
aftiicted  with  locomotor  ataxia  until  he  could  only  walk  with  difficulty  by  the
aid  of  a  cane.  He  consulted  the  president  of  Rush  Medical  College,  Chicago,
who  gave  him  something  for  partial  relief,  but  could  not  ofi'er  him  any  hope
of  cure.  Having  left  the  railway  and  become  the  proprietor  of  a  small  hotel
in  St.  Paul,  and  with  liis  lameness  now  about  four  years  old,  he  attended
one  of  Dr.  S's  meetings.  There  he  saw  the  Master  apjjroach  him  with  out-
stretched hands,  felt  tlie  liands  on  his  head,  heard  Him  say  something  ending:
with  "rise  and  walk,"  at  which  he  rose  and  walked  off  easily.  During  this^
laying  on  of  His  hands  he  "felt  as  if  burning  up,"  in  which  condition  Dr.  S.
had  all  tlie  ten  persons  jjresent  touch  Mr.  A.  Thougli  he  is  now  slow  in  his
speech  and  movements,  he  has  had  no  relapse,  and  as  I  have  seen  him  several
times  during  the  past  two  years  and  since  .shortly  after  his  cure  1  can  testify
that  he  walks  without  any  dragging  of  the  foot.  He  became  an  enthusiastic
Christian  as  well  as  Spiritualist,  by  far  the  most  consistent  and  devoted  of
Dr.  S.'s  followers,  and  has  "never  ceased  to  thank  the  good  Lord  daily  for
this  miracle."

At  meetings  since  this  Dr.  S.  would  occasionally  describe  the  "  Mastei''.'r
hiying  on  of  hands  "  for  some  one's  betterment.  He  said  that  an  Indian
spirit  also  had  effected  several  cures  at  patients'  homes.  These  healings
increased  until  during  his  last  year  in  St.  Paul  they  occupied  much  of  his
time.  He  had  moved  from  his  private  room  to  an  obscure  ottice,  and  though
primarily  for  better  quarters  for  his  tri-weekly  meetings,  yet  with  his
medical  library  again  set  up  and  his  plain  door  sign  of  Dr.  E.  S.,  he  was  in  a
better  situation  for  his  spirit  treatment.  Thus  one  day  in  January,  1898,  I
found  a  Mrs.  W.  there,  who,  after  her  testimony  as  to  the  spirits  she  had
seen,  described  the  stomach  trouble  for  which  she  had  gotten  relief  from  Dr.
S.  as  from  no  one  else,  though  she  had  travelled  about  considerably.  By
this  time,  however,  he  had  returned  somewhat  to  his  regular  medicine,  for
in  addition  to  the  spirit  treatment  he  also  gave  her  a  medical  prescription.
As  he  impressively  bade  her  good-bye,  never  expecting  to  see  her  again  on
earth,  she  was  greatly  moved  and  could  not  sufficiently  express  her  gratitude
to  him  for  her  bodily  relief  and  religious  awakening.  Two  of  his  later
patients  I  also  interviewed.  Mrs.  Johnson,  106,  East  Fairfield  Avenue,
West  St.  Paul,  though  she  came  to  the  door  on  crutches,  claimed  that  she
liad  been  greatly  helped  by  Dr.  S.  in  her  long-standing  rheumatism.  She  too
had  tlie  greatest  gratitude  for  this  relief  and  said  he  had  stimulated  her  to
liave  more  will  power  and  courage.  Frau  Haase,  on  the  River  Flats,  had
been  a  general  invalid  for  seven  years,  especially  witli  pains  in  her  back.
Without  any  medicine  Dr.  S.  had  made  her  a  new  woman,  and,  thougli  she
had  some  returns  of  pain,  can  now  will  them  away  herself.  Similar  cures-
she  now  makes  for  her  neighbours.  Her  gratitude  to  Dr.  S.  was  unbounded,
and  she  showed  a  painful  anxiety  for  his  safety  since  his  departure.  Almost
all  his  patients  were  women.


Partxxx^i.j A  Study  in  Spiritistic  Hallucinations.


77


He  had  frequently  spoken  of  his  stay  in  St.  Paul  as  being  uncertain,  said
that  he  might  leave  at  any  time,  and  showed  many  signs  of  unrest.  Finally
in  January,  1898,  I  found  him  really  packing  up  to  leave.  Mingled  with  his
customary  paradoxical  and  pseudo-humility  talk,  he  gave  as  one  of  his  reasons
for  leaving  that  all  his  followers  were  too  ignorant  and  he  himself  the  only
scholar.  He  seemed  discouraged  at  the  slowness  of  his  propagandism.  Also
he  complained  to  me  for  the  first  time  of  lack  of  financial  support.  The  aged
Dr.  D.,  a  retired  physician,  he  abused  roundly  as  "  too  stingy  to  come  "  to
him  more,  though  he  never  demanded  money  from  him  or  any  one.  Mr.  A.
was  the  only  one  who  had  given  him  money  at  his  meetings,  about  two  or
three  dollars  all  together,  and,  as  he  himself  said,  "had  been  repaid  a  dozen-
fold."  His  patients  gave  him  money  or  not,  spontaneously,  according  to
their  means.  Some,  as  Mrs.  J.,  insisted  on  paying  him  every  visit ;  others,
as  a  working  girl.  Miss  C,  paid  for  the  medicine,  in  case  he  added  any  to
the  spirit  treatment.  Others,  as  Frau  H.,  could  and  did  give  him  nothing.
But  he  felt  imposed  upon  by  some  who  could  afford  to  give,  but  who  did  not.
Thus  he  was  "not  making  his  office  rent,"  and  in  vigorously  tearing  up  his
great  collection  of  newspaper  scraps,  letters,  and  writings,  he  showed  his
righteous  and  violent  indignation.  And  it  seems  from  his  business  agent,  a
well-known  lawyer,  that  there  was  much  justification  for  this  feeling  ;  for  in
trying  to  help  financially  some  of  his  followers,  as  well  as  owing  to  depressed
business  conditions,  he  had  gotten  his  proj^erty  so  tied  up  and  his  income
therefrom  so  reduced  that  he  had  to  accept  whatever  any  one  ofi"ei'ed  him.
And  though  his  habits  of  living  were  the  simplest  and  cheapest,  yet  he  is
described  as  being  to  some  of  his  followers  "  generous  to  a  fault."  He  would
tell  no  one  but  his  agent  where  he  was  going,  and  though  his  friends  inferred
to  the  Klondike,  he  has  been  reported  as  in  Seattle,  Wash.'^  His  absence
was  to  be  for  an  indefinite  time  and  very  doubtful  if  he  ever  returned.
Thus  in  Lohengrin  mystery  and  with  evident  consciousness  of  a  mission  to
perform,  he  left  St.  Paul  in  February,  1898,  for  some  place  "where  he  would
be  very  busy."

To  judge  of  the  nature  of  Dr.  S.'s  own  spirits,  it  will  be  of  much  value  to
first  go  over  the  testimony  of  his  friends,  as  I  gathered  it  in  interviews  and
notes  at  the  time.  Mrs.  A.  J.  C,  a  widow  about  sixty,  mother  of  one  of  the
highest  legal  officers  of  the  state,  had  in  June,  1896,  seen  Christ  three  times
in  Dr.  S.  's  presence,  once  in  his  room  and  twice  in  different  houses  of  his
friends.  The  figure  appeared  in  vapoury  grayish  outline,  as  if  about  one
hundred  yards  off.  It  had  a  smooth  face,  hair  parted  in  the  middle,  a  crook
in  the  hand,  was  always  accompanied  by  two  female  figures,  one  being  Mary
the  Mother,  the  other  was  Dr.  S.'s  mother.  They  always  appeared  just
back  of  Dr.  S.  Though  the  room  was  dark,  she  could  see  the  faces  of  those
present.  Dr.  S.  had  at  the  outset  described  to  Mrs.  C.  and  her  friend  Mrs.
P.  how  the  Master  would  come,  and  she  saw  it  substantially  as  he  had
described,  though  Mrs.  P.  did  not. The  figures  appeared  suddenly  and  did

'  Prompted  by  a  newspaper  notice  of  IMr.  Hodgson's  article  on  Mrs.  Piper,  Dr.
S.  wrote  him  from  Chicago  in  September,  1898,  again  urging  as  in  the  above  letters  an
investigation  of  his  phenomena. He  was  then  engaged  in  commercial  life.


78


Professor  Harloiv  Gale.


[Supplement


not  form  gradually.  She  saw  them,  however,  also  with  her  eyes  closed  and
her  hands  held  before  her  eyes,  tryhig  this  experiment  several  times.  She
had  no  impression  that  it  was  the  Master  beyond  the  resemblance  of  the
figure  to  tlie  conventional  pictures  of  him  and  Dr.  S.'s  word.  Since  these
meetings  she  has  often  tried  in  the  twilight  to  call  ujj  voluntarily  these
figures,  but  not  succeeded.  However,  when  lonely  in  her  own  room  and
longing  for  her  mother,  she  can  suddenly  see  her  in  the  same  vapoury  way,
but,  when  anxiously  trying  to  do  so,  cannot  see  her.  Dr.  S.  had  originally
invited  her  in  tlie  hope  of  her  seeing  her  husband,  but  this  she  has  not
succeeded  in  doing.  Messages,  however,  of  no  special  purport  were  given  by
Dr.  S.  as  coming  from  the  late  Mr.  C.  Mrs.  C.  doubts  genuine  materiali-
sation, but  is  investigating  spiritualism  in  accordance  with  a  promise  to
her  husband  when  on  his  death-bed.  She  believes  that  as  a  girl  she  had
clairvoyant  power,  saw  occasional  figures  all  through  her  life  and  described
a  persistent  one  which  she  saw  constantly  during  the  months  preceding  the
birth  of  one  of  her  sons  and  which  she  believes  marked  the  whole  unusual
appearance  of  this  son.  Since  starting  her  investigation  of  spiritualism,  the
frequency  and  variety  of  these  figures  have  greatly  increased,  till  now,
(August,  1898),  she  has  seen  "hundreds."  She  still,  however,  much  to  her
sorrow,  has  never  seen  her  late  husband.  She  thinks  Dr.  S.  a  very  pure  and
high-minded  man,  but  eccentric  and  in  danger  of  being  unbalanced.

Mr.  A.,  who  exjjerienced  the  dramatic  cure  of  locomotor  ataxia,  has  seen
"lots  of  figures,  as  many  as  ten  about  Dr.  S.  at  once,"  and  still  (August,
1898)  sees  his  wife,  motlier,  and  the  Master  in  his  hotel  ;  but  he  thinks  he
has  seen  only  one  real  materialisation  and  that  was  once  when  his  mother
put  her  arm  about  him.  All  the  others  he  described  as  more  spirit-like,  and
yet  opaque  enough  that  he  cannot  see  objects  through  them.

Miss  McC,  about  thirty  years  of  age,  in  the  office  of  a  large  business
house,  had  seen  Christ  alone  and  with  a  friend  of  hers  before  she  knew  of
Dr.  S.  She  has  since  then  seen  him  at  Dr.  S's.  two  or  three  times  and  also
when  alone.  Thus  she  thought  that  Dr.  S.  claimed  too  much  in  his  special
privilege  as  the  medium  of  Christ's  appearance.  As  a  consumptive  she  was
having  treatment  from  Mrs.  B.,  the  professional  friend  of  Di.  S.,  "to  see  if
the  spirits  were  of  any  value  "  for  her  sickness.

Captain  E.  S.,  real  estate  agent,  is  a  spiritualist  through  his  wife,  who  is
an  amateur  medium.  They  both  have  been  twice  to  Dr.  S.'s  meetings,  but
neither  saw  anything,  "  although  Mrs.  S.'s  mediumship  is  strong."  A  pro-
fessional medium,  Mrs.  H.,  whom  they  once  took  with  them,  claimed  to  see  all-
that  Dr.  S.  did.  With  a  high  regard  foi  Dr.  S.,  Captain  S.,  however,  thinks
him  in  danger  of  being  unbalanced  by  exclusive  devotion  to  his  work.

T.  B.,  a  student  friend  of  mine,  and  now  a  physician,  visited  Dr.  S.  one
afternoon  in  June,  1896,  was  warmly  welcomed,  and  entertained  by  a  long
talk.  As  .1  sample,  apparently,  of  his  power,  Dr.  S.  volunteered  a  descrip-
tion of  B.'s  grandmother,  as  he  saw  her  playing  the  piano  ;  but,  on  learning
that  she  never  saw  a  piano,  he  symbolised  it  as  joy  at  B.'s  getting  on  the
right  track.  In  the  evening  B.  attended  one  of  the  regular  meetings.  The
usual  appearances  of  the  Master  were  described,  perfume  smelled.  Dr.  D.
saw  something,  Mr.  A.  got  excited  and  saw  everything.  Miss  McC.  saw
something. But  B.  neither  smelled  nor  saw  anything,  except  the  flickering


Part  XXXVI.] A  Stiichj  in  Spiritistic  Hallucinations.  79


lights  on  the  wall  which  came  tlirough  the  transom  or  window.  Dr.  S.  took
much  trouble  and  evident  pride  in  following  B.  up  with  long  letters  and
invitations  for  more  visits  and  meetings,  and  in  encouragement  for  liis  study
of  these  all-important  phenomena.

F.  F.  W. ,  a  German- Americaa  lawyer,  about  fifty,  was  introduced  to  me
with  much  explanation  at  lunch  one  day  by  Dr.  S.,  and,  on  walking  back  to
Dr.  S.  's  office  together,  he  urged  and  insisted  that  Mr.  W.  should  tell  .me
what  he  had  seen.  But  Mr.  W.  had  to  mildly  protest  that  he  himself  had
really  seen  nothing  as  yet,  but  was  merely  developing,  although  Dr.  S.  had
told  me  that  Mr.  W.  had  seen  General  Grant ;  but  Mr.  W.  admitted  that
Dr.  S.  had  correctly  told  him  about  his  having  met  General  Grant  in  the
south  part  of  Milwaukee,  soon  after  the  war.  In  a  subsequent  talk  with  me
alone,  Mr.  W.  described  tlie  varying  patclies  of  form  and  colour  which  he
had  seen  at  the  meetings,  and  which  were  evidently  the  retina's  own  light.
Mr.  W. 's  wife,  however,  sees  clairvoyantly,  and  was  successful  in  the  first
meeting  reported  above.  Though  Mr.  W.  has  no  confidence  in  professional
mediums,  he  believes  Dr.  S.  to  be  perfectly  sincere  and  genuine.

Frau  H. ,  one  of  his  patients,  a  middle-aged  woman,  besides  seeing  the
Master  at  Dr.  S.'s,  described  in  detail  her  seeing  Him  in  her  own  house.
But  she  has  not  seen  many  others  of  the  biblical  characters.

W.  B.,  lawyer  and  business  agent  of  Dr.  S.'s,  has  attended  three  or  four
meetings,  and  the  first  time  he  saw  nothing.  But  the  second  time,  on
fixating  with  effort  and  extreme  tension,  he  once  or  twice  saw  what  they
called  the  "  face  transfiguration,"  once  to  that  of  General  Grant,  although,
he  allowed,  tlie  whiskers  were  not  different  from  Dr.  S.'s.  He  is  sure  that
once,  anyway,  he  recognised  a  transfigured  face  before  any  one  else  described
or  named  it,  though  he  is  not  sure  wliether  he  first  spoke  of  it.  The  trans-
figured face  was  very  fleeting.  Having  been  warned  by  liis  wife  against
being  completely  hypnotised,  he  did  not  make  the  same  effort  to  see  at  the
next  meeting,  and  then  saw  nothing.  Mr.  B.  thinks  the  Doctor  has  tele-
pathic powers  from  his  own  account,  and  believes  him  thoroughly  honest
and  sincere.

There  is  only  one  witness  who  seems  to  me  of  no  evidential  worth,  and
that  is  the  professional,  Mrs.  B.,  who  was  only  occasionally  present  at  the
meetings,  though  she  happened  to  be  at  tlie  three  which  I  attended.  Her
ready  and  cheerful  manner  of  echoing  or  anticipating  all  the  usual  round  of
figures  described  by  Dr.  S.,  the  ridiculous  mistakes  she  made  (as,  for
example,  in  the  Pocahontas  matter),  the  business  way  in  which  she  adver-
tised herself  for  patients  and  encouraged  every  novice  to  sit  for  the
development  of  his  natural  mediumistic  powers,  the  transparent  super-
ficiality with  wliich  she  once  announced  her  starting  a  Bible  class  at  her
home  for  weekly  study — all  these  things  were  highly  susjjicious  of  her
genuineness,  and  quite  oj^posed  in  general  to  the  Doctor's  traits.  So  I
doubt  very  much  whether  she  really  saw  anything,  and  I  believe  she
deceived  him.  For,  to  my  expressed  objections  to  her  in  my  last  inter-
view with  him  in  January,  1898,  he  was  not  concerned,  and  believed  her
to  the  end  his  good  friend,  though  he  included  her  among  his  ignorant
followers.  But  Mr.  A.  tells  me  that  Dr.  S.  warned  him  and  otliers  "not
to  take  too  much  stock  in  what  she  said." Mr.  A.  liimself  had  become


80


Professor  Harloto  Gale.


(Supplement.


susjiieious  of  her,  as  having  too  much  imagination,  for  he  thought  it  was
strange  that  she  always  saw  what  he  did,  but  th;it  he  by  no  means  always
saw  what  she  described.  Another  reason  of  di.strust  which  he  gave  was
quite  characteristic  of  such  a  mental  c<jinposition,  viz.,  that  Mrs.  B.  had
told  him  that  his  wife  had  not  appeared  to  him  for  some  time  because
she  had  been  sick,  but  when  she  did  again  appear,  and  he  asked  her  if
the*  sickness  was  the  reason,  she  denied  it,  and  said  she  had  been  oft'  im
the  Master's  business.  There  is  a  possibility,  of  course,  that  she  may
have  been  in  collusion  with  Dr.  S.,  supposing  him  to  have  been  con-
.sciously  deceiving.

Wlien  then  we  come  to  the  question  of  Dr.  S.'s  own  genuineness,  two
components  of  his  character  must  be  specially  considered.  Fir.st,  he  had
undergone  an  intellectual  change  which  so  disturbed  his  mental  e(iuilibrium
that  he  was  carried  largely,  if  not  altogether,  over  that  vague  and  broad
transition  towards  the  category  of  the  insane.  When  a  man  with  the
scientific  education  of  a  physician  is  suddenly  "converted"  in  middle  life
to  the  literal  belief  in  biblical  theology  adojjted  by  Dr.  S.  ;  or  when,  in  other
words,  a  mature  mind  abandons  reasoning  by  facts  and  induction  for  t))e
theological  deduction  from  authority  and  for  poetical  analogies,  that  is  a
regression  to  unreasonableness.  And  Dr.  S.'s  unreasoning  in  this  sphere  made
him  dogmatic  and  imperious  in  other  things.  He  frequently  ridiculed  my
trying  to  get  at  the  "  chemical  basis,"  as  he  exjjressed  it,  of  his  spirits,  and
.said  I  could  never  see  till  I  joined  him  in  first  believing.  On  my  seriously
trying  to  explain  my  eff'orts  to  find  a  psychological  basis  for  his  spirits,  he
would  cut  me  short  authoritatively,  saying  lie  knew  all  those  things  and  that
they  had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  his  Christian  Spiritualism.  And  yet
I  could  not  find  that  he  had  seriously  studied  or  considered  any  natural
explanation  of  his  phenomena.  His  intense  emotional  concentration  in  this
subject  so  contracted  his  intellectual  life  that  he  had  no  longer  any  interest
in  the  overwhelming  mass  of  the  world  outside  his  narrow  theological  limits.

Secondly,  this  intellectual  concentration  of  attention  and  interest  was
accompanied  by  an  abnormal  heightening  of  the  feeling-component  in  his
cliaracter.  For  his  intense  pride  in  his  mission  showed  itself  constantly  in
many  forms.  It  often  became  laughable  under  the  cover  of  his  continual
pseudo-humility  talk, — "don't  think  S.  a  saint,"  "it's  no  credit  of  S.'s,"  "S.
is  a  mere  nothing."  Though  he  did  not  proselytize  to  any  one's  annoyance,
yet  his  greatest  happiness  was  to  get  some  one  to  whom  he  could  "talk
sjjirits  ; "  and  any  new  possible  convert  was  followed  uji  tenaciously  with
talks,  visits,  introductions  and  letters.  He  never  associated  himself  with
any  religious  or  spiritualistic  church  or  organisation,  but  evidently  had
more  pride  and  pleasure  in  forming  and  being  the  privileged  head  of  his
little  circle  of  followers.  When  I  asked  him  about  other  spiritualists  and
especially  what  he  thought  of  the  materialisation  phenomena,  then  being
given  at  our  neighbouring  N.  W.  Spiritualistic  Camp  Association,  he  would
only  say,  "  God  bless  them — perhaps  they  have  something  ;  "  but  he  never
seemed  to  have  had  there  or  elsewhere  any  experience  of  the  usual  clair-
voyant phenomena  and  cabinet  materialisation.  He  emphasised  the  fact
that  he  was  a  Christian  Spiritualist,  in  that  he  was  a  Christian  first  of  all
and  then  by  logical  necessity  a  Spiritualist,  which  he  feared  was  not  the


Part XXXVI.] A  Study  in  Spiritistic  Hallucinations.


81


order  or  relative  importance  with  most  Spiritualists.  He  explained  the  rare
appearances  of  Christ  and  other  biblical  characters  as  due  to  the  lower  plane
of  the  ordinary  mediums,  and  thus  by  inference,  the  special  communion  of
which  he  was  the  instrument  was  a  Divine  mark  as  surely  as  that  of  Parsifal's
and  Sir  Galahad's.  And  yet  the  number  of  his  followers  who  had  seen
the  Master — and  this  was  the  test  of  his  disciples — only  grew  from  twelve
in  June  1896  to  about  thu-ty  at  the  beginning  of  1897,  and  about  fifty  in
1898,  at  the  end  of  his  four  years'  activity  in  this  new  faith  in  St.  Paul.
So  in  this  case  then  we  find  the  delusion  of  grandeur,  which  is  so  commonly
a  characteristic  in  the  unbalanced  feeling-life.  The  pecuniary  motive  of  the
professional  was  absent,  and  the  only  apparent  motive  was  the  altogether
disproportionate  satisfaction  which  he  got  in  this  obscure  life  as  the  centre
of  his  heterogeneous  group  of  Christian  Spiritualists.

With  these  abnormal  intellectual  and  emotional  characteristics,  then,  I
think  it  most  probable  that  Dr.  S.'s  spirits  were  for  the  most  part  real  to
him  and  not  assumed.  It  seems  rather  probable  that  with  his  anxiety  for
success  and  converts  he  may  have  unconsciously  come  to  add  merely  verbal
details  or  even  whole  descriptions  to  his  ajjparently  real  sense  perceptions.^
But  that  the  Master  and  a  large  number  of  figures  were  honestly  real  to  him,
I  believe,  from  his  self-sacrifice  for  his  cause,  sincerity,  and  lack  of  sufficient
motive  for  complete  deception,  whether  conscious  or  unconscious.  But  the
only  visual  objective  reality  corresponding  to  the  spirits  seemed  to  be  the
projected  lights  of  the  retina,  stray  patches  and  streaks  of  light  entering
the  room,  and  perhaps  some  boundary-contrasts  and  after-images.  For  the
heai'ing,  touch  and  smell  perceptions  of  the  spu-its  and  spiritual  objects,  I
have  no  evidence  of  any  objective  reality.  Some  of  the  cutaneous  or
muscle  sensations  constantly  present  with  attention  and  some  singing  in
the  ears  may  have  been  the  nucleus  of  the  touches  and  voices.  Whether,
then,  these  alleged  clairvoyant  etherialisations  and  materialisations  should
be  catalogued  under  illusions  or  hallucinations  depends  on  whether  there
were  any  objective  perceptions  and  point  of  attachment.  This  objective
element  being  apparently  at  most  so  inconsiderable,  these  f)henomena  of
Dr.  S.'s  should  more  projjerly  be  classed  as  hallucinations  or  in  part  as
pseudo-hallucinations.-  This  is  probably  the  more  justifiable  from  Dr.
S.'s  own  statement  in  his  letter  above  that  before  his  conversion  he  "heard
voices  once  in  a  while  and  saw  clairvoj'antly,  but  did  not  understand  these
manifestations,"  and  was  annoyed  by  them  till  he  fancied  himself  on  the
verge  of  insanity.  With  this  exaggerated  or  even  pathological  tendency  to
hallucinations  came  the  suggestion  from  his  old  German  friend  of  seeing
Christ.  The  mental  changes  wrought  by  his  conversion  were  exactly  fitted
to  develop  this  hallucination  and  tlie  others  would  develop  most  naturally
by  association,  intense  attention,  and  hallucinatory  projection.

This  process  can  be  traced  in  his  followers  even  more  clearly.  The  most
instructive  witness  was  Mrs.  C,  with  a  hallucinatory  predisposition  from
girlhood,  and  who  only  needed  the  emotional  loneliness  of  her  widowhood

^  Compare  the  ease  of  the  Creery  Sisters:  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  V.,
p.  269.

-See  "Report  of  the  Ceusus  of  Hallucinations"  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  X.,
p.  76. Also  James's  Psychology,  II.,  p.  115.

a


82


Professor  Harloiu  Gale.


(Supplement.


and  the  directing  suggestion  of  Dr.  S.  to  immediately  see  the  Master.  Her
experiments  with  closed  eyes  show  all  her  figures  to  be  no  more  than  hallu-
cinations. Similar  is  the  case  of  the  hotel-keeper,  Mr.  A.,  in  his  loneliness
for  his  wife,  and  perhaps  some  predisposition  to  hallucination  as  shown  by
his  nervous  degeneration  in  locomotor  ataxia.  With  these  prepai'ations,  the
confident  assurances  of  Dr.  S.,  the  apparently  miraculous  relief  of  his  lame-
ness by  suggestion,  and  his  enthusiastic  acceptance  of  Dr.  S.'s  religion,  all
aided  in  giving  a  hallucinatory  objectivity  to  his  ideas  and  feelings  ;  while
for  other  followers  who  needed  more  training  in  attention  and  emotion,
Dr.  S.'s  method  was  well  fitted.  The  long  waiting  and  expectation  in
darkness,  the  enviable  descriptions  of  successful  "seeing,"  the  frequent
encouragement  and  urging  for  the  sitters  to  describe  anything  they  saw,
the  personal  interrogation  whether  they  did  not  see  this  or  that — all  this
aroused  partial  or  occasional  success.

This  case  of  spiritistic  hallucinations  is  of  special  interest,  it  seems  to
me,  as  being  so  comparatively  simple,  so  free  from  the  usual  confusion  of
accompanying  fraud,  unconscious  deception,  genuine  physical  phenomena  and
telepathy,  automatic  writing,  etc.  Thus  it  affords  a  clear  view  of  the  process
of  the  development  of  spiritistic  hallucinations,  helping  to  fill  an  evidential
gap  in  the  "  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,"  where  one  reported  case
gave  rise  to  the  remark  that  "  it  is  possible  that  habitual  attendance  at
spiritualistic  stances  may  lead  in  some  persons  to  the  seeing  of  apparitions
and  hearing  of  voices."  {FroceedinijH  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  X.,  p.  176.)  Mr.
Gurney,  from  his  study  of  the  earlier  Census,  had  also  thought  that  "it
must  be  admitted  as  possible  that  mere  verbal  suggestion  may  act  similarly
[i.e.,  to  hypnotic  collective  hallucinations]  on  certain  minds  at  certaia  times,
without  the  preliminary  of  any  definite  hypnotic  process."  {Phantasms  of
the  Living,  1886,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  187-8.)

In  helping  to  reduce  the  separation  between  suggestion  ni  the  con-
ditions of  hypnosis  and  of  normal  life  the  case  under  consideration  is  also
valuable.  For  the  late  progress  in  the  understanding  and  explanation  of
hypnotic  phenomena  has  been  by  freeing  them  from  the  marvellous  and
abnormal,  and  by  connecting  them  with  the  better  known  facts  of  our
normal  mental  life.

But  it  is  in  the  help  it  aflfoi-ds  in  explaining  some  parts  of  the  usual
medley  of  mediumistic  phenomena  that  this  case  is  more  immediately
valuable.  For  with  some  basis  of  genuineness,  the  usual  phenomena  of
any  medium  or  group  of  spiritualists  are  a  bewildering  conglomerate,  and
yet  an  apparently  homogeneous  whole,  because  they  are  usually  all  ex-
plained on  one  hypothesis.  But,  more  and  more,  in  all  psychological
phenomena  it  is  becoming  necessary  first  to  separate  the  phenomena  into
&s  many  categories  as  possible  and  then  seek  for  the  explanation  of  each
■class.  Throughout  my  acquaintance  with  this  case  I  have  had  continually
in  mind  its  possible  application  to  the  clearing  up  of  such  enigmas  as
the  experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses  and  the  high  testimony  on  record
to  the  marvels  of  D.  D.  H<ime.

There  was  much  in  common  as  to  characteristics  and  methods  between
Dr.  S.  and  Mr.  Moses. There  were  the  same  impatience,  obstinacy.


Part  XXXVI.] A  Stucly  in  Spiritistic  Hallucinations.  83


irritability,  lack  of  humility  and  stubbornness  of  mind.  ("The  Experiences
of  W.  Stainton  Moses,"  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IX.,
pp.  247,  252,  293).  Dr.  S.'s  professional  education  was  more  scientific,  but
his  social  environment  was  not  so  high.  There  was,  however,  on  the  whole
a  more  serious  religious  purpose  and  level  in  Dr.  S.'s  phenomena,  and  a
more  devoted  self-sacrifice  to  his  mission,  (ibid.,  j)p-  258  and  334  )  Both
were  amateur  mediums,  giving  their  manifestations  to  only  a  small  circle
of  friends,  Mr.  Moses  being  the  more  exclusive.  And  while  avoiding
notoriety,  both  were  willing  their  experiences  should  be  used  as  testimony
and  aided  in  their  publication.^  The  fundamental  motive  of  both  seemed  to
be  the  satisfaction  of  authority  and  leadership.  The  intellectual  character
of  the  witnesses  to  Mr.  Moses'  phenomena  were  higher  than  Dr.  S.'s,  but
there  were  similar  emotional  conditions  of  admiration,  unsuspiciousness  and
expectation.

When  one  now  reviews  Mr.  Moses'  phenomena  to  separate  any  possible
class  of  hallucinations,  it  is  of  course  impossible  to  draw  any  clear-cut  and
certain  lines.  Unfortunately  we  have  not  a  sufficiently  full  rejaort  of  the
methods  and  conversations  during  the  seances  to  judge  of  the  amount  of
verbal  suggestion.  But  it  seems  to  have  been  quite  suflicient  (as  in  ibid.,  p.
322,  in  Dr.  Speer's  Report)  for  the  training  of  expectation  until,  after
repeated  seances,  the  sitters  knew  by  association  what  to  expect  from  any
name,  sound,  light,  odour,  or  touch.  Some  of  the  visual  phenomena  seem
undoubtedly  hallucinatory.  Mr.  Moses  tells  us  that  the  most  successful
large  luminous  appearances,  as  well  as  the  most  perfect  musical  sounds,
occurred  when  he  was  in  a  state  of  unconscious  trance  (ibid.,  p.  268  and
276),  and  thus  we  must  usually  rely  directly  on  the  testimony  of  the  sitters.
The  luminous  haze  and  globes,  together  with  their  movements  described  by
Dr.  Thompson  (ibid.,  p.  274),  seem  quite  possible  as  hallucinations,  and
the  similar  ones  in  Dr.  Speer's  statement  (p.  275)  seem  to  have  been  held
by  a  probably  hallucinatory  hand  and  drapery,  even  if  the  lights  were
objective.  Here  the  process  of  verbal  suggestion  is  well  described,  when
the  ''controlling  spirit  informed  me  that  he  would  endeavour  to  place  a
light  in  the  medium's  hand.  Almost  immediately  a  light  came.  'Now  I  will
show  you  my  hand.'  A  large,  very  bright  light  then  came  up,  and  inside  of
it  appeared  the  materialised  hand  of  the  spirit.  He  told  me  that  the  folds
which  I  saw  around  the  light  were  drapery,  and  to  prove  it  he  brought  the
light  and  passed  the  di-apery  over  the  back  of  my  hand  several  times."

One  more  evident  case  of  hallucniation  was  in  Mr.  Moses'  "vision''
where  "Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  saw  misty  light  but  nothing  more"  (p.  293).
A  moving  column  of  light,  seven  feet  high,  with  a  large  glowing  mass  of
light,  the  cross  behind  the  medium's  head,  and  the  cluster  of  oblong  lights,
(p.  297)  may  have  been  partly,  if  not  wholly,  hallucinatory.  In  this  seance,
as  in  most,  the  description  is  not  full  enough  for  us  to  be  sure  that  objective
stray  lights  were  not  present  as  the  basis  of  illusions.  Dr.  Speer  is  said  in
Mr.  Moses'  account  to  have  first  seen  the  light,  and  Mrs.  Speer's  testimony

1  Dr.  S.'s  case  was  thus  more  similar  to  Mr.  Moses'  than  the  case  of  Mr.  Z.,
reported  by  Professor  Sidgwick  in  his  paper  on  " Di.sinterested  Deception"  in  the
Journal  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  27-J ;  for  Mr.  Z.'s  case  lacked  the  religious  and  publicity
motives.

G  2


Professor  Haiiow  Gale.


[Supplement.


to  it  is  wanting,  though  she  was  present.  Four  months  later  Dr.  Speer
recalls  seeing  "the  hand  and  arm."  (p.  306.)  Seven  months  after  these
other  phenomena  began,  the  first  human  figure  was  recorded  by  Mrs.  Speer.
"We  saw  a  form  surrounded  with  light,  standing  between  myself  and  the
medium."  (p.  302.)  But  it  is  not  mentioned  either  in  Mr.  Moses'  or  Dr.
Speer's  notes.  Again  four  months  later  Mr.  Moses  recorded  :  "Dr.  and  Mrs.
Speer  and  I  saw  a  ^figure  carrying  it  [scent]  apparently.  I  also  saw  a  figure
in  the  middle  of  the  table  when  the  lyre  was  sounded  there."  (p.  312.)
But  neither  Dr.  nor  Mrs.  Speer  testified  to  the  former  figure,  and  Mr.
Harrison,  who  was  present,  is  not  included  in  Mr.  Moses'  account  as  seeing
the  figure.

Dr.  Speer  alone  then  notes  the  beginning  of  numerous  lights: — "Be-
tween thirty  and  forty  spirit  lights  appeared,  many  of  them  as  large  as
large  oranges.  They  began  near  the  floor,  then  ascended,  and  at  last  by
request  came  within  our  circle,  so  that  we  might  have  touched  them.
Many  of  the  lights  were  amorphous,  or  rather,  formless.  They  succeeded
each  other  with  great  rapidity,"  (p.  313.)  At  the  next  seance  he  notes
similar  lights  emerging  from  the  aperture  of  the  curtain  of  a  cabinet
which  had  been  fitted  up,  and  in  which  Mr.  Moses  sat.  With  such
a  convenience  it  seems  more  probable  that  these  lights  were  produced
objectively  by  the  medium,  as  the  lights  are  said  to  have  cast  reflec-
tions upon  objects,  and  some  were  so  large  and  bright  as  to  show  the
whole  of  the  lintels  and  door  posts.  (p.  313.)  Under  these  cabinet
conditions  at  the  following  seance  Mr.  Harrison  seems,  from  Dr.  Speer's
notes,  to  have  seen  these  lights.  The  medium  having  suggested  going
upstairs  to  the  cabinet,  and  trying  for  lights,  Dr.  Speer  notes  that  "they
came  almost  immediately,  of  various  shapes  and  sizes,  some  very  large."
He  gives  rough'drawings  of  their  shapes  and  continues,  "  they  were  all  of  a
pale  bluish  green,  or  rather  greenish  blue,  tint.  Many  of  them  had  a
perfectly  distinct  hard  outline  and  bright  nucleus.  Mr.  Harrison  says  that
such  lights  could  by  no  possibility  be  imitated  [Mr.  H.  was  an  electrician],
and  imagines  that  they  were  produced  by  hands  holding  crystals  with  drapery
falling  on  them."  (p.  314.)  The  shapes  and  colours  of  these  lights  are
thoroughly  characteristic  of  the  projections  of  the  retina's  own  light.  It  is
suspicions  of  the  trustworthiness  of  the  medium's  account  that  Mr.
Harrison's  imagined  explanation  of  the  light  by  the  hand  and  drapery  in
Dr.  Speer's  notes  is  given  in  Mr.  Moses'  account  as  a  described  fact.  Again
Dr.  Speer  notes  ' '  a  large  number  of  splendid  lights,  apparently  held  by
hands,  were  seen  in  the  cabinet.  I  myself  saw  an  arm  apparently  holding
one  of  these  lights."  (p.  317.)  But  no  testimony  is  given  to  these  by  Mrs.
Speer  and  Dr.  Thompson,  who  were  jj^esent.  Another  similar  case  two
days  afterwards  occurred  at  which  Mr.  Percival  joined  the  family  group.

Again,  sitting  with  Dr.  Speer  alone,  Mr.  Moses  himself  records  having
"  witnessed  the  formation  of  some  eight  or  nine  very  beautiful  spirit  lights.
They  formed  quite  close  to  me  and  near  my  left  hand,  about  a  foot  from  the
floor,  floating  upwards  till  they  reached  the  level  of  the  table  and  became
visible  to  Dr.  Speer.  They  were  expressly  made  at  my  side,  instead  of,  as
usual,  at  my  back,  so  that  I  might  see  them.  They  seemed  to  develop  from
a  very  bright  speck,  about  the  size  of  a  pea,  until  they  attained  the  size  of  a


Part  XXXVI.] A  Stiuly  in  Spiritistic  Hallucinations.


85


soda  water  tumbler,  and  showed  a  soft  luminosity  like  pale  moonlight.  They
seemed  to  be  covered  with  drapery  and  to  be  held  by  a  hand.  They  faded
slowly  out,  remaining  visible  about  thirty  or  forty  seconds,  or  perhaps  a
minute.  The  largest  would  be  about  eight  inches  long."  (p.  319.)  As  Mr.
Moses  did  not  himself  usually  see  anything,  this  is  an  interesting  description.
For,  as  far  as  it  is  genuine,  it  is  characteristically  hallucinatory.  Dr.  Speer's
corroboration  to  this  seance  is  not  recorded  ;  but  the  next  day,  during  their
trip  together  in  Ireland,  he  records  that  "fifteen  great  lights  showed  them-
selves, varying  from  the  size  of  an  orange  to  that  of  a  shaddock."  (p.  321.)
The  next  day  Dr.  Speer  recorded,  in  a  longer  account  of  the  usual  lights
and  hands,  that  the  control  speaking  through  Mr.  Moses  "explained  the
process  of  making  the  li.ghts,  and  told  me  that  the  folds  I  saw  around  them
hanging  down  were  really  drapery,  which  he  would  prove  to  me.  He  then
brought  the  light  close  to  my  hand,  and  brushed  it  backwards  and  forwards
with  as  distinct  a  materialised  drapery  as  can  well  be  conceived.  This  feat
he  repeated  first  on  one  hand  and  then  on  the  other,  five  or  six  times,  at  the
same  time  directing  my  attention  to  the  character  of  the  light  and  the
tangibility  of  the  drapery."  (p.  323.)  This  is  an  excellent  example  again  of
the  suggestion  process,  though  a  later  direction  to  lean  forward  and  close  his
eyes  till  told  to  open  them  seems  to  complicate  any  explanation  with  a
probable  element  of  trickery.  The  more  permanent  visibility  of  a  cylindrical
light  is  recorded  later  ;  forty-five  minutes  being  given  by  Dr.  Speer  and
five  minutes  by  Mr.  Moses,  who  contrasts  this  with  the  other  lights  which
"have  faded  very  rapidly,  lasting  from  ten  seconds  to,  perhaps,  a  minute."
(pp.  325-6.)  This  discrepancy  of  its  permanency  is  apparently  a  mistake
of  Dr.  Sjjeer's  or  a  misprint,  for  later  he  records  the  same  light  "for  some
minutes." (p.  328.)

Mrs.  Speer's  account  is  again  given  at  another  seance  where  she  saw  "two
or  three  very  large  lights.  One  must  have  measured  with  its  drapeiy  quite
two  feet  in  height  ;  he  [the  control]  brought  it  close  to  my  face,  and  bruslied
my  hands  many  times  with  the  drapery  ;  he  also  touched  my  hand,  and  his
hand  felt  as  human  as  my  own.  The  lights  were  not  good,  as  Mr.  S.  M.
was  ill,  and  the  atmosphere  was  not  right,  and  this  interfered  with  their
development.  The  medium  then  said  he  saw  a  fresh  spirit  standing  by
Catherine."  (p  329).  Though  Mrs.  Speer  did  not  see  this  figure  she
noted  that  on  joining  the  medium  and  Dr.  Speer  and  "  sitting  down,  I  saw
a  bright  figure  standing  behind  Mr.  S.  M."  (p.  329.)  Neither  of  these
figures  was  seen  by  Dr.  Speer,  who  only  records  :  "  Three  splendid  lights
appeared  ;  an  arm  was  seen  [not  mentioned  as  seen  by  Mrs.  Speer  or  Mr.
Moses];  drapery  repeatedly  thrown  over  us."  (p.  329.)  Mr.  Moses'  own
explanation  of  these  lights  is  interesting.  In  this  seance  he  recorded  "a
number  of  lights,  some  of  which  were  comparative  failures,  the  nucleus  only
being  visible.  This  nucleus  Mentor  has  explained  that  he  brings  with  him,
and  in  unfavourable  conditions  he  is  not  able  to  surround  it  with  the
luminosity  which  he  gets  from  the  circle."  (p.  328.)  At  a  stance  three
weeks  later  he  recorded:  "When  we  went  up  into  the  cabinet  upstairs,
Mentor  made  some  very  clear  lights,  one  of  which  endured  over  four  minutes.
I  had  been  very  anxious  to  try  the  duration  of  the  light,  because  an  imitation
of  such  lights  is  made  by  phosphorised  oil  ;  but  lights  so  made  are  of  very


86


Professor  Harloiu  Gale.


[Supplement.


brief  duration.  I  believe  a  favourable  trial  would  sliow  that  Mentor's  light
would  last  seven  or  eiyht  minutes." (p.  331.)

In  the  published  notes  from  the  second  and  subsequent  years'  experiences
(Pcoceednw/.s  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XI.,  pp.  24  to  114),  we  will  not  follow  the  lights
more  in  detail.  Beyond  the  light  reported  by  Dr.  Speer  (ibid.  p.  31),  which
"remained  visible  for  upwards  of  forty  minutes"  and  the  Prophet's  little
liffht,  which  Mr.  Moses  records  as  giving  answers  tlirough  flashes  during  a
long  conversation  with  him  (p.  38),  and  whicli  so  seem  more  objective  than
hallucinatory,  there  is  notliing  new  as  compared  with  the  first  year's  lights.
In  only  four  cases  is  there  the  evidence  of  one  of  the  sitters  besides  Mr.
Moses.  But  a  very  suggestive  feature  in  these  later  experiences  is  the
increased  frequency  of  "visions"  and  human  figures  described  by  IMr.
Moses.  Only  three  figures  were  re[)orted  in  the  first  year,  one  by  Mrs.
Speer  (IX.  p.  302),  and  two  by  Mr.  Moses  (pp.  312  and  329),  and  on  the
hallucination  theory  we  should  expect  that  after  tlie  practice  and  suggestion-
training  of  the  first  months  there  would  be  an  increase  of  tlie  more  com-
plicated and  complete  figures  over  the  simpler  lights  with  their  partially
visible  hands,  arms,  and  drapery.

Mr.  Moses  recorded  that  he  saw  "  a  veiled  figure  standing  by  Dr.  S.  Mrs.
S.  could  see  the  light,  but  could  not  distinguish  the  figure."  But  later  in  the
same  seance  lie  was,  "  as  is  frequently  the  case,  clairvoyant,  and  described
the  face  of  the  Emperor,  his  waxed  imperial  and  moustache,  his  impassive
marble  face,  and  wmxnd  up  by  saying  he  was  a  '  regular  Mephistopheles.'
The  form  was  just  in  the  same  place  and  apparently  could  not  come  within
the  circle."  (XI.,  p.  33).  Dr.  Speer  records  this  of  tlie  "  clairvoyant  member
of  the  circle,"  (p.  34\  but  not  of  himself.

Now  occurs  tlie  first  record  of  one  of  Mr.  Moses'  curious  visions  which
he  had  experienced  twice  before.  (See  pp.  36,  37).  The  next  day  also,  "  on
coming  out  of  the  trance,  I  saw  and  described  the  spirit  as  one  of  command-
ing mien,  with  a  short  robe  girt  round  the  waist,  and  a  crown  with  a  cross  ^J*
in  the  centre,  just  as  the  Prophet  has  a  star.  In  his  hand  he  held  a  long
wand,  terminating  in  a  cross.  He  said  nothing,  and  gradually  faded  from
view."  (p.  37).  Again  a  few  days  later  Mr.  Moses  was  clairvoyant  and
described  his  grandmother  agtxin.  "She  had  a  child  witli  her.  I  also
described  the  Prophet  and  Theophilus,  and  several  spirits  who  were
apparently  at  the  ceiling  over  the  table,  and  were  showering  down  scent  "
(p.  38)  and  lie  "described  clairvoyantly  the  Prophet  and  the  Seer  together —
the  latter  a  young  and  very  beautiful  spirit,  the  Prophet  dignified  and  aged.
Also  Grocyn  and  a  tall  spirit  by  Dr.  Speer  whom  I  did  not  know.  There
was  a  deal  of  light  in  the  room."  (p.  40.)  This  latter  condition  Mrs.
Speer  described  as  the  room  being  "filled  with  spirit  liglit,  large  masses
floating  about  in  everj'  direction."  (p.  40.)  An  interesting  record  in  the
hallucinatory  objectivity  of  Mr.  Moses'  progress  now  occurred.  "In  the
midst  of  the  seance,  when  perfectly  clear  of  influence,  I  saw  Theophilus  and
the  Prophet.  They  were  as  clear  and  palpable  to  the  eye  as  human  beings
would  be  in  a  strong  light.  Placing  my  hand  over  my  eyes  made  no  difference,
but  turning  away  I  could  see  them  no  longer.  This  experiment  I  rej^eated
several  times.  I  also  saw  the  little  Catherine.  This  is  the  first  time  I  re-
member being  so  clairvoyant  in  a  seance  without  being  previously  entranced."


Part  xxxvT.) A  Stucly  i'li  Spiritistic  Hallucinatums.


8T


(p.  43.)  Five  more  figiu'es  are  recorded,  either  by  Mr.  Moses  or  Mrs.
Speer,  as  seen  by  Mr.  Moses  alone,  (pp.  4.5,  46,  48  and  58.)  "Once  two
very  clearly  defined  figures  were  near  Dr.  Thompson,  visible  to  both  of  us,"
(i.e.  to  Mr.  M.  and  Dr.  T.'s  son),  (p.  52)  but  the  latter's  evidence  is  wanting.
The  last  recorded  event  of  this  class  is  another  vision  of  Mr.  Moses'  (see
pp.  59  and  60).

These  records  extend  over  the  first  two  and  a  half  years  of  Mr.  Moses'
phenomena.  Of  the  later  experiences  of  the  last  three  years  the  son  of  Dr.
Speer,  Mr.  Charlton  T.  Speer,  has  given  a  very  suggestive  summary.
"  Numerous  lights  were  generally  visible  to  all  the  sitters.  The  lights  were
of  two  different,  kinds  — objective  and  subjective;  the  former  were  usually
like  small  illuminated  globes,  which  shone  brightly  and  steadily,  often
moved  rapidly  about  the  room  and  were  visible  to  all  the  sitters.  A  curious
fact  in  connection  with  these  lights  always  struck  me,  viz.,  that  looking
on  to  the  top  of  the  table  one  could  see  a  light  slowly  ascending  from  the
floor  and  to  all  appearances  passing  out  tlu  ough  the  top  of  the  table,  the
table  itself  apparently  not  affording  any  obstacle  to  one's  view  of  the  light.
It  is  a  little  difficult  to  explain  exactly  what  T  mean,  but  had  the  top  of  the
table  been  composed  of  plain  glass,  the  effect  of  the  ascending  light  as  it
appeared  to  one's  organs  of  vision,  would  have  been  pretty  much  the  same
as  it  was  seen  through  the  solid  mahogany.  Even  then,  to  make  the  parallel
complete,  it  would  be  necessary  to  have  a  hole  in  the  glass  top  of  the  table,
through  which  the  light  could  emerge.  The  subjective  lights  were  described
as  being  large  masses  of  luminous  vapour,  floating  around  the  room  and
assuming  a  variety  of  shapes.  However,  Dr.  Speer  and  myself  being  of
entirely  unmediumistic  temperaments,  we  were  only  able  to  see  the  objective
lights,  but  Mr.  Stainton  Moses,  Mrs.  Speer,  and  other  occasional  sitters
frequently  saw  and  described  those  which  were  merely  subjective.  Another
curious  point  in  relation  to  the  objective  lights  was  that,  however  brightly
they  might  shine,  they  never — unlike  an  ordinary  lamp — threw  any  radiance
round  them  or  illuminated  the  smallest  portion  of  the  surrounding  darkness
when  it  ivas  dai'k — in  the  slightest  degree."  (Proceedings  IX.,  pp.  345-6.)
It  seems  questionable  whether  the  objective  lights  here  described  were  not
partly  illusion,  if  not  hallucination.  The  latter  point  of  the  non-radiance  of
the  objective  light  is  contradictory  to  several  of  Dr.  Speer's  notes,  as  above
quoted. (See  P/'Ofeedwit/.!.- IX.,  p.  313.)

On  collecting  together  the  phenomena  of  hearing,  there  is  mucli  more
difficulty  in  separating  the  probably  hallucinatory  from  the  real  sounds.
But  with  an  undoubted  large  basis  of  real  sound  to  be  accounted  for,  there
is  besides,  in  the  details  of  localisation,  quantity  and  quality  of  sound,
much  which  can  most  probably  be  explained  as  illusion.  For  in  localisation,
e.g.,  we  know  experimentally  how  helpless  one  is  in  distinguishing  sound  as
front  or  back  and  as  to  distance.

In  my  own  experience  in  a  semi-professional  group  of  spiritualists,  some
raps,  which  I  made  on  the  legs  of  my  chair  in  the  middle  of  the  circle,  were
localised  by  one  of  the  circle  as  coming  from  a  bric-a-brac  cabinet  high  up
on  the  wall,  about  eight  feet  to  my  left,  and  this  was  acquiesced  in  by
others.  Again,  Mrs.  Gale  and  I,  at  a  materialisation  seance,  had  localised
the  sounds  of  a  mouth  organ  as  coming  from  the  cabinet  about  ten  feet  in


88


Professor  Harloiv  Gale.


[Supplement.


front  of  us,  until  Mrs.  Gale  stood  at  the  cabinet  curtain,  when  it  seemed  to
be  abr)ut  four  feet  to  her  right  ;  and  only  considerably  later  did  we  discover
that  it  came  from  a  sitter  immediately  in  front  of  us.

Tlie  "fairy  bells,"  described  by  Mr.  Moses  and  Mrs.  Speer,  show  well
these  possibilities  of  illusion,  if  not  of  hallucination.  Mrs.  Speer  records  :
"  I  then  heard  a  sweet  tinkling  sound  like  a  clear  bell  close  to  my  ear;  it
moved  and  played  in  front  of  the  medium,  who  was  still  deeply  entranced,
and  afterwai'ds  it  played  over  the  middle  of  the  table,  when  Dr.  S.  heard  it
for  the  first  time.  It  was  a  striking  manifestation  ;  the  notes  were  so  clear,
sweet,  and  low — we  named  it  'fairy  bells.'  "  And  again  :  "Before  meeting
this  evening  we  heard  the  '  fairy  bells  '  playing  in  different  parts  of  the
garden,  where  we  were  walking  ;  at  times  they  sounded  far  off,  seemingly
playing  at  the  top  of  souie  high  elm  trees,  music  and  stars  mingling  together,
then  they  would  approach  nearer  to  us,  eventually  following  us  into  the
stance  room,  which  opened  on  to  the  lawn.  After  we  were  seated  the
music  still  lingered  with  us,  playing  in  the  corners  the  room,  and  then
over  the  table  round  which  we  were  sitting." (XI ,  pp.  56  and  57-)

Clairaudience  is  only  reported  by  Mr.  Moses  himself  in  his  group  ;
and,  like  the  clairvoyance,  coming  more  often,  if  not  altogether,  after  the
first  year.  He  reports  a  long  conversation  with  a  figure,  "John  C."
{XI.,  p.  4.5),  and  "Judge  Edmunds"  (p.  49).  Mr.  Moses  gives  this  sug-
gestive description: — "The  peculiarity  of  the  stance  was  that  when  I
could  hear  the  sound  no  one  else  could,  and  vice  versa.  I  heard  by  clair-
audience and  not  by  natural  hearing,  being  very  deaf  with  my  cold.  On
request  I  was  enabled  to  hear  the  sound  with  ray  natural  ear,  but  I
described  it  long  before  it  was  heard  by  the  others,  and  heard  it  fre-
quently when  they  did  not.  At  the  same  time  I  was  unconscious  of
sounds  apparently  made  on  the  table  under  my  nose." (p.  50.)

In  the  sense  of  smell  the  phenomena  were  decidedly  material,  as  judged
by  Mr.  Percival's  account  (IX.,  pp.  272,  273),  and  Dr.  Speer's  :  "Scent
thrown  in  great  quantities — so  much  was  thrown  at  Mrs.  S.'s  eye  as  to
produce  excruciating  agony  and  congestion  of  the  eye,  with  almost  blind-
ness for  twenty-four  hours"  (p.  328);  and  after  a  "large  quantity  of
Sp.  Pulegii  .  .  .  the  dining-room  cloth  and  my  own  nether  habiliments
had  to  be  exposed  to  view  in  the  back  garden  ;  and  on  the  following
morning  our  dining-room  floor  and  passage  had  to  be  freely  fumigated
with  pastilles." (p.  339).

But  if  the  phenomena  of  smell  were  probably  not  hallucinatory,  those  of
touch,  again,  probably  were.  The  touch  of  drapery  on  Dr.  Speer's  hand
(pp.  275,  323)  was  promised  by  the  medium  as  proof,  and  thus  acted  as
a  most  natural  preparatory  suggestion.  As  in  the  other  senses,  Mr.  Moses'
own  experience  here  too  was  most  real.  He  records  :  — "  The  most  curious
part  of  the  stance  was  that  in  which  an  elaborate  attempt  was  made  to
relieve  my  bronchitis.  When  we  made  the  usual  break,  after  sitting  for  about
forty  minutes,  I  was  perfectly  conscious  of  two  materialised  hands  making
passes  over  my  head,  throat,  chest  and  back.  .  .  .  The  sensation  of
the  hands  was  perfectly  distinct  and  unmistakable." (XI.,  p.  49.)

In  reviewing  these  experiences  of  Stainton  Moses  for  a  probable  element
of  hallucination,  I  am,  of  course,  aware  that  any  reasonable  deduction  to


Part  XXXVI. A  Htucly  in  Spiritistic  Hallucinations.


89


be  made  on  account  of  this  explanation  from  the  unprecedented  variety
and  great  mass  of  his  spiritistic  phenomena  (see  IX.,  p.  336)  will  be
comparatively  small.  The  overwhelming  mass  of  the  phenomena  and  all
the  greatest  marvels  still  remain  unsolved.  But  from  these  I  think
another  indeterminable  amount  must  be  subtracted.  For  with  this  hallu-
cinatory tendency  in  the  simplest  phenomena,  it  seems  probable  that
both  Mr.  Moses'  and  his  witnesses'  accounts  of  the  physical  phenomena
are  unconsciously  exaggerated  and  distorted ;  and  this  to  a  degree  beyond
the  ordinary  possibilities  of  mal-observation,  owing  to  these  special  mental
characteristics  and  to  training  conducive  to  hallucinations  and  illusions.
(See  Davey  and  Hodgson  on  the  "  Possibilities  of  Mal-Observation  " :
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.,  381,  Vol.  VIII.,  252.)  Though,  as  has
been  said,  different  persons  will  make  vai'ious  estimates  of  the  amount
of  Mr.  Moses'  experiences  which  can  reasonably  be  accounted  for  by
hallucinations  and  illusions,  yet  it  seems  to  me  Dr.  S.'s  case  has  been
helpful  in  giving  us  materials  for  some  explanatory  reduction  of  these
puzzling  spiritistic  experiences.  How  the  larger  mass  still  remain-
ing can  be  explained  is  a  separate  question,  which,  though  out  of
the  bounds  of  this  paper,  I  cannot  but  think  can  be  similarly  analysed
as  due  to  automatic  writing,  some  small  residuum  of  perhaps  genuine
physical  phenomena  and  telepathy,  and  more  or  less  unconscious  and
disinterested  deception  prompted  by  the  jjleasure  of  leadership,  and
authority.  (See  Mr.  Podmore's  treatment  of  Mr.  Moses'  case  in  his
Studies  in  Psychical  Research,  1897,  pp.  115  to  119.)  Some  such  analysis
of  these  alleged  spiritistic  phenomena  seems  to  me  much  more  reasonable
than  Mr.  Myers's  disjunctive  that  "the  permanent  fraud  of  the  whole
group,  or  the  substantial  accuracy  of  all  the  records,  are  tlie  only  hypo-
theses which  seem  to  me  capable  of  covering  the  facts,''  (Proceedings,  IX.,
p.  254),  and  later,  having  excluded  the  former  alternative,  he  concludes : —
"I  therefore  regard  the  reported  phenomena  as  having  occurred  in  a
genuinely  supernormal  manner." (Proceedings,  Vol.  XI.,  p.  25.)

The  allowance  for  hallucination  in  the  high  testimony  to  the  phenomena
of  D.  D.  Home  has  been  suggested  and  followed  out  in  some  detail  in  Mr.
Podmore's  Sti(dies  in  Psychical  Research  (pp.  121-124).

Note. — For  the  study  of  hallucinations  the  greatest  work  by  far  is  the
"Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,"  by  Professor  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick
and  their  Committee  iu  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,
Vol.  X.,  1894,  pp.  25-422.  Chapters  IV.-XI.  deal  with  hallucinations  in
general,  apart  from  their  connection  with  the  evidence  for  telepathy.  See
also  report  on  the  earlier  census  and  treatment  of  it,  by  E.  Gurney  in
Phantasms  of  the  Living,  1886,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  457-518.

As  a  compendium  of  great  value  see  Parish  :  Hcdluciuations  and  Illvsio7is,
London,  1897.  For  a  shorter  treatment  see  James  :  Psi/chology,  1890,
Vol.  II.,  pp.  114-131.

In  connection  with  the  insane,  see  Ziehen :  Psychicdrie,  1897,  pp.  20-43.


90 A  Case  of  Alleged  Loss  of  Personal  Identity.  ^Supplement..


II.

A  CASE  OF  ALLEGED  LOSS  OF  PERSONAL  IDENTITY.

The  following  account  is  an  abridged  report  of  an  alleged  loss  of
personal  identity,  and  presents  many  features  difficult  of  interpreta-
tion, and  not  without  interest.  It  describes  the  history  of  a  Mr.  Hall,
discovered  at  Mankato,  Minnesota,  at  which  place  he  declared  that  he
could  not  recall  his  past  life.  Upon  further  investigation  this  past
life  was  traced,  and  many  conspicuous  fraudulent  facts  ascertained  in
connection  with  it.  The  man  had  an  obvious  reason  for  desiring  to
wreck  his  connection  with  the  j^ast :  and  an  attempt  to  evade  the
consequences  of  his  acts,  ingenious,  but  not  unparalleled,  might  appear
at  first  sight  the  simplest  explanation.  Yet  those  who  have  come  into
personal  contact  with  the  man  decline  to  accept  this  plausible
hypothesis.  The  case  seems  more  probably  one  of  those  obscure  cases
on  the  borderland  of  abnormal  personality — cases  where  it  is  so
difficult  to  ascertain  how  much  is  responsible  conscious  decision,  and
how  much  uncontrollable  epileptic  changes.

On  the  14th  of  October,  1896,  says  Professor  Harlow  Gale  :  —

A  gentlemanly  and  intelligent  Englishman  about  50  years  of  age  walked
into  Mankato,  Minnesota,  and  I'egistered  at  the  City  Hotel  as  "John
Harrison,  St.  Paul."  The  expenses  of  lodging  and  breakfast  having  ex-
hausted his  money,  he  left  the  hotel  the  next  morning,  and  wandered  about
town  all  that  day  and  the  following  niglit.  In  the  morning  he  returned  faint
and  weary  to  the  hotel,  told  the  clerk  he  had  no  money,  and  offered  his
umbrella  as  security  for  breakfast.  He  then  inquired  for  the  Bjjiscopal
Church,  and  thus  found  his  way  to  the  Rector  of  the  church.  Rev.  George
H.  Davis,  to  whom  he  said  he  could  not  recall  his  past  life.  He  knew  he
was  a  churchman,  showed  an  Episcopal  Prayer  Book,  recalled  having
presented  some  girls  from  his  Sunday  School  class  for  confirmation  at  some
Easter  two  or  three  years  ago  ;  had  been  in  the  liabit  of  acting  as  lay-reader
souiewhei-e,  and  had  perhaps  been  in  the  furniture  business.  He  knew,
however,  that  his  name  was  not  Harrison,  though  he  could  not  recall  his  real
name.  But  beyond  these  facts  he  said  he  remembered  nothing  ;  could  not
tell  whence  he  came  into  Mankato  (except  that  he  walked  by  a  bluff  and
across  a  bridge  into  town).  His  consecutive  memory  broke  off  at  tliat  point
two  days  before.  Having  asked  to  be  directed  to  a  physician,  Mr.  Davis
took  him  to  Dr.  J.  W.  Andrews,  corner  of  Cherry  and  2nd-streets,  to
whom  alone  he  told  the  same  story.  He  was  then  further  sure  that  his
wife  and  children  were  dead  ;  that  he  had  lost  his  valise  and  pocket-book,
t  did  not  know  where  or  when. He  thought  he  had  left  home  several


Part  XXXVI. ^4  Ccise  of  AUeyed  Lus^^  of  Personal  Identity.


91


weeks  ago;  had  had  means;  iiad  been  in  Winnipeg  ;  was  engaged  somewhere
in  business  for  himself,  and  that  this  was  the  first  attack  of  the  kind  he
had  had.  He  said  he  never  tasted  liquor,  and  was  in  apparent  good  health.
So  he  was  taken  to  the  hospital  to  await  the  probable  recovery  of  his  lost
memories.  A  week  after  his  admission,  hearing  of  the  cyclone  at  St.  Louis,
he  said  he  recalled  something  how  that  injury  looked.  Acting  on  this
suggestion,  Prof.  C.  F.  Koehler,  Psj'chologist  at  the  State  Normal  School  at
Mankato,  gave  him  a  railroad  map.  This  he  scanned  till  he  came  upon  the
Mobile  and  Ohio  railroad,  which  seemed  familiar  to  him.  Following  this
along  he  came  to  Fruitdale,  Ala.,  where  he  then  recalled  having  been  in  the
lumber  business.  After  this  experience  he  called  on  Mr.  Davis,  and  seemed
very  happy  at  being  on  the  track  of  his  identity.  Shortly  before  this  he
had,  after  some  apparent  effort,  recalled  the  name  of  Blanchard,  Chamber  of
Commerce,  Chicago,  with  whom  he  had  been  in  business.  Through  Dr.
Andrews  he  had  written  him,  telling  him  of  his  loss  of  identity,  and  asking
for  help.  Mr.  B.  replied  that  he  thought  he  recognised  the  man  from  Dr.
Andrews'  description,  and  would  come  from  Chicago  to  see  him,  whereat  he
was  happilj'  excited.  On  November  5th  Mr.  Blanchard  came,  was  gladly
received  by  his  former  business  associate,  who  now  recalled  the  saw-mill  and
most  of  the  people  in  his  employ.  On  Mr.  B.'s  telling  him  his  name  was
John  Hardcastle  Hall,  he  then  for  the  first  time  recalled  that  it  was.  He
could  not  remember  when  he  left  Fruitdale,  or  Mobile,  but  did  recall  being
in  Chicago  in  June.  Only  pleasant  recollections  seemed  to  return  to  Hall
as  he  cliatted  and  chuckled  along  witli  his  former  business  friend.

INIr.  B.  now  accused  him  in  severe  terms  of  dishonesty,  and  threatened
him  with  arrest.  But,  to  "liar,  forger,  embezzler,  defaulter,"  etc.,  Hall  only
listened  in  a  dazed  way,  and  with  a  surprised  and  hurt  expression.  He  knew
nothing  <>f  the  SiOO  drawn  in  Mobile,  nor  of  the  8300  borrowed  there,  nor
could  he  account  for  some  82,300  sent,  more  than  to  think  he  must  have
paid  it  out.  He  asked  why  he  should  have  been  so  anxious  to  send  for
Mr.  B.  if  such  things  had  occurred,  and  he  was  liable  to  be  prosecuted.

Mr.  Blanchard,  later  in  the  day,  gave  an  account  of  his  connection  with
J.  H.  Hall.  It  appeared  that  he  had  arrived  at  Fruitdale,  Alabama,  penni-
less ;  he  started  a  project  of  a  saw-mill  there,  securing  local  sujjport  ;  had
called  on  Mr.  Blanchard,  presenting  unexceptional  references,  none  of  them,
however,  extending  into  the  immediately  preceding  seven  years,  and  liad
finally  induced  him  to  provide  cajDital  for  the  saw-mill.  This  Hall  superm-
tended,  sending  monthly  reports  to  Blanchard  at  Chicago,  the  accounts  being
altogether  fraudulent,  Hall  intercepting  ;ill  the  money  instead  of  paying  the
employes.

"  Hall  was  industrious  to  a  high  degree,  feverishly  active,  the  first  at
the  mill  in  the  morning  and  the  last  to  leave,  always  going  hero  and  there,
but  accomplishing  nothing.  He  was  not  a  good  business  man,  yet  tlie
business  would  have  been  successful  had  he  acted  squarely.  He
was  a  master  of  lying  and  forged  letters,  and  carried  on  a  systematic  course
of  deception.  He  did  petty  thieving  when  he  could  have  gotten  more  from
me.  He  forged  a  letter  purporting  to  be  written  by  one  Slater  to  himself,
saying  that  the  writer  had  81,500  to  invest,  and  would  give  it  to  Hall  to  use  in
the  business  if  he  (Slater)  could  have  a  position. I  was  led  to  believe  that  this


92 A  Case  of  Alleged  Loss  of  Personal  Identity.  [Supplement.


was  done,  and  that  Hall  had  put  this  money  into  tlie  business  ;  yet  I  after-
wards learned  that  the  letter  was  a  forgery  and  not  attempted  to  be  an
imitation  of  Slater's  handwriting.  Slater  was  a  common  deck  hand  on  a
boat  and  had  no  money,  but  Hall  gave  him  a  good  position  to  keep  up  the
deception,  but  did  not  pay  him  anything.  Hall  put  no  money  into  the
business.

"  Hall's  non-payment  of  his  men  and  the  storekeepers  began  to  make  them
clamorous  for  money,  and  he  came  back  two  weeks  later  and  wanted  money.
I  had  none  then,  but  told  him  to  go  back  to  the  State  line  and  I  would
telegraph  him  $400  then.  This  was  done.  Hall  got  on  the  train  for
Fruitdale,  and  when  the  train  arrived  there  the  labourers  were  on  the
platform,  demanding  their  money.  The  foreman  rushed  in  and  stated  that
the  men  were  highly  excited  and  that  they  must  be  paid.  Hall  coolly  took
from  his  pocket  a  big  roll  of  bills  and  told  the  foreman  that  he  had  more
than  enough  money  to  pay  every  man.  He  then  took  from  another  pocket
a  big  package  of  what  purported  to  be  bills  and  handed  it  to  the  foreman,
saying  that  there  was  the  exact  amount  to  pay  the  men.  The  foreman  took
the  package  and  got  off  just  as  the  train  was  pulling  out.  He  found  on
examination  that  the  package  was  merely  paper  cut  up  and  shaved  down  to
the  size  of  bills  and  wrapped  in  paper.

"Hall  went  on  to  Mobile  that  night  and  borrowed  $300  from  a  friend  and
then  disappeared,  but  has  never  been  seen  or  heard  of  since,  until  I  met
him  to-day.  He  wrote  to  me  on  June  17th  on  stationery  of  a  prominent
Mobile  hotel  where  he  was  not  stopping,  saying  that  he  was  feeling  sick
that  day,  and  that  '  the  mental  strain  and  worry  of  the  last  14  days  has
almost  broken  me  up.'  This  was  the  day  that  he  disappeared  and  the  last  that
I  ever  heard  from  him.  He  got  about  $10,000  of  my  property  on  a  tissue  of
falsehoods.

"  Hall  was  the  reverse  in  his  habits  of  what  a  defaulter  usually  is.  He
was  frugal  and  stingy,  and  his  habits  were  correct,  and  he  never  tasted
liquor.  At  Chicago,  if  I  did  not  invite  him  to  my  house,  he  would  go  to  a
twenty  cent  lodging  house  and  a  ten  cent  lunch  counter.  He  does  not  act
differently  now  from  what  he  did  when  I  knew  him  before.  There  is  the
same  timid  hesitancy  in  his  bearing.  Although  he  was  a  systematic  embezzler,
I  shall  not  have  him  arrested  or  prosecute  him,  as  I  do  not  care  to  be
revengeful,  and  he  has  no  means  that  I  know  of.

"  His  is  a  most  curious  case.  I  don't  think  that  he  was  crazy  during  the
six  months  that  he  was  in  business  with  me,  and  I  am  at  a  loss  to  know
whether  he  is  feigning  his  j)resent  condition.  If  he  is,  whicli  I  think
probable,  he  may  Iiave  sent  for  me  on  account  of  being  oppressed  by  the
fear  of  arrest.  He  can  remember  the  good  that  he  has  done  and  forget  the
evil,  for  he  seems  not  to  remember  his  bad  deeds  in  Alabama." — Manltato
Free  Press.

In  a  final  private  conversation  with  Hall  the  following  day  before
returning  to  Chicago,  Mr.  B.  talked  very  kindly,  offering  to  forget  the  past
and  to  furnish  Hall  with  money  to  go  wherever  he  wished  to  make  a  fresh
start  if  he  would  only  tell  Mr.  B.  wliat  he  really  knew.  At  this  Hall  broke
down  in  tears  and  sobs,  but  could  recollect  nothing  more  and  could  not
accejDt  the  offered  assistance.


Part  XXXVI.]  A  Case  of  Alleged  Loss  of  Personal  Identity.  93


On  the  other  hand,  ;i  Mi'.  W.  P.  Stuart,  who  had  known  Hall  in
Fruitdale,  wrote  on  November  4th  to  the  effect  that  he  was  convinced  of
Hall's  honesty,  and  that  his  affairs,  although  involved,  would  have  been  l)y
no  means  hopeless  but  for  his  flight.  With  regard  to  the  question  of  Hall's
mental  condition,  a  letter  was  received  from  a  clergyman  who  had  known
him  in  Dallas,  Tex.,  and  who  spoke  of  him  as  having  been  temporarily
insane. In  response  to  enijuiries  there  came  the  following  letter  :  —

"  State  of  New  York — Manhattan  State  Hospital,

"  Ward's  Island,  New  York  City,

"  March  22nd,  1898.

"  A.  E.  Macdonaid,  M.D.,

"  General  Superintendent.

"  Male  Department,

"  Percy  Bryant,  M.D.,

"  Medical  Superintendent.

"  Dear  Sik,  — I  beg  to  say,  in  reply  to  your  inquiries,  that  on  the  27th
of  August,  1895,  a  patient  named  John  Harrison,  alias  Hall,  was  admitted
to  this  hospital.  The  patient  was  discharged  before  I  assumed  charge  here
as  Superintendent,  and  therefore  I  am  unable  to  give  you  any  information
derived  from  personal  observation.  He  was  discharged  November  12th  of
the  same  year,  and  sent  to  Dallas,  Texas,  where  his  parents  lived.  [?]  It
appears  from  the  records  that  correspondence  had  been  had  with  Rev.
Edward  Wickens,  of  Dallas.

"The  records  further  show  that  the  patient,  upon  admission  here,  was
dull,  depressed,  and  could  give  little  information  of  himself,  except  to  state
that  he  had  been  in  New  York  City  a  few  days.  It  also  appears  that  he
was  much  confused.  When  released  he  had  recovered  from  his  depression
and  physical  inactivity. — Very  truly  yours,

"  Percy  Bryant,
"  Medical  Superintendent.

"  Harlow  Gale,  Esq.,

"  Instructor,  Univ.  of  Minnesota,
"  Minneapolis,  Minn."

This  former  condition,  resembling  his  present,  except  with  only  a  few
days'  loss  of  memory,  occurred  then  shortly  liefore  the  starting  of  the
Fruitdale  lumber  scheme  in  which  he  interested  Mr.  Blanchard.

It  appeared  later,  from  articles  in  St.  Paul  papers,  that  in  1893  Hall  had
been  obliged  to  leave  Seattle,  where  he  had  had  the  management  of  a  large
box  factory.  But  no  serious  dishonesty  had  been  alleged  against  him  there.
His  career  in  Seattle  was  terminated  by  the  discovery  that  he  had  undergone
a  term  of  imprisonment  in  St.  Quentin,  California.  Of  the  particulars  of
this  affair  in  California  very  little  seems  to  be  known.  From  Seattle  Hall
went  to  Dallas  ;  then  followed  his  stay  at  the  N.Y.  State  Insane  Hospital,
and  some  time  after  that  the  Fruitdale  venture.  An  attempt  was  made  to
obtain  from  him  some  connected  account  of  liis  career  by  means  of
hypnotism,  but  witli  very  little  success.

'  Finding  no  employment  in  Mankato,  he  went  to  Minneapolis  in  December,
1896. There,  while  seeking  some  opening  in  business,  he  took  a  prominent


94 A  Case  of  Alleged  Loss  of  Personal  Identity.  [Supplement.


part  in  church  work,  and  won  the  good  opinion  of  his  neighbours.  But  in
the  autumn  of  1897  lie  disappeared  once  more,  leaving  behind  him  no  few
unpaid  bills  and  an  impaired  reputation.  He  was  in  Cincinnati  during  the
winter  of  1897-8,  and  since  then  nothing  more  has  been  heard  of  him.

After  examining  Hall's  career,  Professor  Gale  concludes  as
follows  : —

When  one  now  looks  back  at  this  strange  mental  composition  to  analyse
and  classify  it,  there  appear  to  me  two  important  characteristics  connecting
him  over  toward  the  insane  : —

1.  A  delusion  of  grandeur  ("  Grossewahn  "),  as  shown  in  his  restless
activity  and  pleasure  in  these  series  of  large  schemes  started  on  such  small
foundations.  His  absorption  in  them  was  intense,  leaving  him  no  interest
for  other  things  except  his  church.  In  my  interviews  with  him  he  could
not  get  away  from  talk  about  himself  ;  some  brain  micro-photographs,  which
I,  for  this  purpose,  showed  and  explained  to  him,  had  no  interest.  In  his
church,  even,  he  pushed  himself  forward  everywhere  in  an  unusually  com-
manding way.

2.  The  common  delusion  of  persecution  was  an  easier  explanation  of  his
series  of  failures  than  the  reasonable  and  evident  lack  of  foresight,  capital,
and  honesty.  But  no  such  reasoning  would  affect  him.  The  reversed
judgment  of  his  friends,  who  came  to  know  him  thoroughly,  was  explained,
too,  in  this  way.

With  these  two  characteristics  (which  are  only  exaggerations  of  the
normal  mental  components  of  pleasure  in  activity  and  success  and  of
suspicion)  is  specially  connected  the  question  of  his  consciousness  of,  and
responsibility  for,  his  dishonest  practices,  however  great  or  small  they
really  have  been.  That  he  is  not  a  deliberate  and  conscious  knave  or  even
deceiver  seems  to  me  reasonably  sure.  And  as,  therefore,  the  ordinary
motives  which  influence  the  average  mental  complex  do  not  come  into  his
consciousness  with  inhibitory  or  motor  force,  he  is  not  responsible  as  is  the
average  man.  His  case  is  of  much  interest  as  an  example  of  the  many
components  of  knowledge,  feeling,  and  motor  reaction  which  constitute  the
manifold  complex  "mind,"  and  the  limitless  variety  of  these  combinations,
with  the  wide  transition  region  between  sanity  and  insanity.  In  its  non-
responsibility  the  case  illustrates  the  modern  "necessity"  of  willing  as  a
reiga  of  law  in  mental  life  as  against  the  old  metaphysical  "  freedom."  His
would  be  a  case  for  restraint  and  not  punishment.

As  to  the  genuineness  of  his  loss  of  personal  identity,  it  seems  to  me,  in
some  degree  at  least,  genuine,  and  perhaps  entirely  so.  His  unstable,
nervous  temperament,  with  its  excessive  activity  and  disposition  to  worry
and  suspicion,  were  favourable  to  such  a  catastrophe.  For  the  first  collapse
in  August,  189.5,  though  only  of  short  duration,  there  seems  no  motive  for
deception,  except  to  gain  a  retreat  and  rest.  And  if  the  6rst  one  was
genuine,  the  still  greater  stress  of  circumstances,  which  culminated  in
June,  1896,  was  enough  to  cause  a  greater  mental  rupture.  However,
the  suspicious  limits  of  his  recovered  memories  remind  one  of  the  often
wonderfully  ingenious  reasoning  and  cunning  self-control  of  the  insane,
and  give  much  evidence  to  the  probability  that  with  some  real  loss  of


Part  XXXVI.]  A  Case  of  Alleged  Loss  of  Personal  Identity.  95


memories  he  consciously  or  unconsciously —as  it  seems  to  me  more  likely —
used  his  more  or  less  mental  break  to  cover  his  dishonesties.

I  am  fortunate  to  be  able  to  append  the  following  examination  of  Hall
by  Dr.  H.  A.  Tomlinson,  superintendent  of  the  St.  Peter  State  Hospital  for
the  Insane,  and  gratified  at  the  approach  of  my  conclusion  to  his  judgment
founded  on  such  greater  knowledge  and  experience.

Mm-ch  23rrf,  1898.
"The  man  was  undoubtedly  an  ejjileptic,  the  muscular  out-
break being  absent  and  replaced  by  the  establishment  of  so-called  double
•consciousness.  This  was  evidenced  by  his  conduct  and  history,  both  as
■given  by  himself  and  learned  from  others  afterwards.  I  did  not  know
anything  about  Mr.  Hall's  ever  having  been  in  a  hospital  for  the  insane,  but
■should  not  be  surprised  to  learn  that  he  had  been  in  several,  for  that  is  the
usual  history  of  such  cases.  I  did  not  make  any  notes  of  my  examination
of  this  man,  and  my  recollection  is  hazy  as  to  details.  I  remember,
however,  having  noticed  several  of  the  stigmata  of  degeneracy,  and  among
them  some  asymmetry  in  arterial  distribution  and  location.  Besides,  the
radial  artery  on  one  side  was  quite  small,  while  on  the  other  it  was
disproportionately  large.  Several  similar  cases  to  this  one  have  been
reported,  and  one  I  knew  myself  much  more  peculiar  than  this  one.
There  is  no  doubt  but  that  this  man  was  markedly  defective  morally,  and
traded  on  his  peculiar  mental  condition,  of  which  he  was  more  conscious
than  he  was  willing  to  admit  or  recognise.  These  cases  seem  very  clear  to
me,  presenting  only  exaggerations  of  those  characteristics  wliicli  make  the
confidence  man  and  dead-beat  conspicuous,  the  diflference  being  that  one
acts  with  definite  purpose  and  from  preconceived  plans,  while  the  other  is
the  creature  of  environment,  apparently  acting  automatically  upon  the
suggestions  of  those  around  them."

In  the  prosecution  and  preparation  of  this  study  I  wish  to  express  my
sincere  thanks  for  the  kindness  and  aid  of  Rev.  George  H.  Davis,  Dr.  J.  W.
Andrews,  Prof.  C.  F.  Koehler,  Mr.  E.  F.  Searing,  of  the  Mankato  Free  .
Press,  and  Dr.  H.  A.  Tomlinson.


96


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[Supplement.


III.

NOTE  BY  MR.  F.  C.  «.  SCHILLER
ON  HIS  Review  of  Prof.  Munsterberg's  "Psychology  and  Mysticism"
(in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Part  XXXV.,  p.  348).


I  am  infoi'iued  that  I  have  given  great  offence  to  Professor  Mtinsterberg
by  quoting  incompletely  (in  tlie  last  number  of  these  Proceedings,  p.  358)  a
passage  from  the  article  on  "Psychology  and  Mysticism,"  which  I  criticised
and  winch  he  has  since  republished  in  a  book  entitled  Psychology  and  Life.
I  feel,  therefore,  that  I  owe  Professor  Milnsterberg  the  reparation  of  a  full
quotation  and  the  readers  of  the  Proceedings  an  explanation  of  how  the
omission  came  about.

Professor  Miinsterberg's  full  context  runs  as  follows  {Atlantic  Mo)dhly,
p.  78;  Psyclioloiiii  and  Life,  p.  260):  "Why  do  I  avoid  these  seances?  It
is  not  because  I  am  afraid  that  they  would  shake  my  theoretical  views  and
convince  me  of  mysticism,  but  because  I  consider  it  undignified  to  visit  such
performances,  as  one  attends  a  variety  slum,  for  amusement  only,  without
atteinpting  to  explain  them,  and  because  I  know  that  I  should  be  the  last  man
to  see  through  the  scheme  and  discover  the  trick."

The  clause  which  I  have  italicised  was  omitted  by  me  (with  the  due
asterisks)  simply  because  it  seemed  to  me  to  convey  the  unjust  and
offensive  innuendo,  which  recurs  with  such  deplorable  frequency  in  his
article,  viz.,  that  no  one  can  be  supposed  to  take  an  honest,  serious  and
scientific  interest  in  the  topics  of  Psychical  Research.  Now  I  had  already
protested  against  this  assumption  on  p.  350  of  my  article,  and  so  did  not
think  it  necessary  to  draw  attention  to  a  passage  whose  only  novelty  seemed
to  consist  in  the  indication  it  seemed  to  afford  of  a  habit  of  attending  variety
shows  on  the  part  of  Professor  Miinsterberg.  Of  course  if  I  could  have
anticipated  that  this  omission  would  really  prevent  Professor  Miinsterberg
from  defending  himself  against  the  somewhat  damaging  charge  of  having
recklessly  misconstrued  the  whole  position  of  the  S.P.R.,  I  should  have  been
delighted  to  quote  him  at  any  length.

As  it  is,  I  regret  rather  that  I  quoted  so  much  and  did  not  omit  the  first
clause  also.  For,  I  may  point  out,  it  was  not  really  and  seriously  relevant  to
my  general  argument,  or  even  to  tlie  immediate  discussion,  which  at  that
point  consisted  mainly  of  "chaff"  about  the  "surpassing  innocency  of  his
character  '  to  which  Professor  Miinsterberg  had  so  ingenuously  confessed.

On  the  whole,  therefore,  I  may  assure  the  readers  of  Proceedings  that  my
position  with  regard  to  the  passage  complained  of  is  thoroughly  defensible,
though  I  forbear  to  sliow  this  moi'e  fully  lest  I  should  continue  to  give
oflence  to  Professor  Miinsterberg.

With  regard  to  that  gentleman  himself,  I  can  only  say  that  if  he  feels
hurt  I  am  sorry,  but  that  he  himself  provoked  the  tone  of  my  criticism  by


Part  XXXVI.] Note  on  Revievj  of  Professor  Milnsterberg.  97


the  tone  of  his  article.  The  S.P.Tl.  has  always  welcomed  criticism  ;  it  has
endured  much  that  was  not  always  inspired  by  that  fulness  of  knowledge
and  accuracy  of  statement  which  are  so  conducive  to  the  eflfectiveness  of  a
criticism.  But  the  time  has  come  when  it  need  no  longer  offer  both  cheeks
to  any  smiter  who  chooses  to  arm  himself,  not  with  reason,  but  merely  with
the  professorial  handle  to  his  name.  Nevertheless,  I  believe  I  am  expressing
only  the  general  sentiment  of  the  S.P.R.  in  saying  that,  as  soon  as  there  is
manifested  on  Professor  Miinsterberg's  side  any  disposition  to  drop  the  mis-
placed and  irritating  tone  of  professorial  superiority  and  a  priori  dogmatism,
there  will  be  no  persistence  in  the  persijia<je  which  was  needed  to  defend  the
interests  of  the  S.P.R.  from  being  crushed  by  the  weight  of  authority  in  the
eyes  of  the  general  public.  And  as  soon  as  it  is  admitted  by  Professor
Milnsterberg  that  on  our  side  also  there  are  men  who  are  honestly  desirous
of  truth  and  fact,  we  shall  readily  respond  by  admitting  that  truth  and  fact
are  far  more  likely  to  be  elicited  by  co-operation  for  truly  scientific
purposes  and  by  truly  scientific  methods,  than  by  recrimination.  And  even
if  co-operation  should  prove  impracticable,  the  field  of  psychology  is  surely
wide  enough  to  admit  of  the  toleration  of  those  who,  in  a  truly  scientific
spirit,  though  perhaps  with  more  than  the  usual  scientific  boldness,  have
ventured  to  penetrate  into  a  vast  and  intricate  mass  of  residual  phenomena.


H


98


Frank  Podmore.


[Supplement.


III.

REVIEWS.

The  All('(i('d  Haindi>ui  of  B  House,  indvding  a  journal  kept  during  the

tenancij  of  Colonel  Le  Mesurier  Taylor.  Edited  by  A.  Goodrich-Fbeer
(Miss  X.),  and  John,  Marquess  of  Bute,  K.T.  (London:  George
Redway.  1899.)

This  is  the  house  of  which  Mr.  Myers  wrote  to  the  Times  in  June,  1897  :

"I  visited  B  ,  representing  that  Society  [the  S.P.R.] . . .  and

decided  that  there  was  no  such  evidence  as  could  justify  us  in  giving  the
results  of  the  inquiry  a  place  in  our  Proceedinys."

From  the  evidential  standpoint  Mr.  Myers'  verdict  was  no  doubt  right ;
but  nevertheless  the  Editors,  who  prefix  the  above  quotation  as  a  motto  to
their  book,  are  in  uiy  judgment  fully  justified  in  publishing  the  result  of
that  inquiry.  Of  the  hundreds  of  accounts  of  haunted  houses  contributed
during  the  last  seventeen  years  to  the  Society's  archives,  we  have  very  few —
prubably  not  more  than  four  or  five — in  which  the  evidence  is  based,  to  any
considerable  extent,  on  contemporary  documents,  and  any  addition  to  this

small  number  is  therefore  very  welcome. ^ And  B House  is  a  fairly

typical  case.  The  Editors  bring  forward  what  appears  to  be  amf)le  proof  that
the  house  had  the  reputatitm  of  being  haunted  for  many  years  prior  to  their
visit,  though  the  manifestations  on  which  that  reputation  rested  would  seem
to  have  consisted  mainly  of  inexplicable  sounds  ;  there  is  but  little  first-
hand evidence  for  visual  phantasms  prior  to  1897,  and  where  first-hand
documents  are  quoted,  they  do  not  always  bear  a  date  (see  e.g.,  pp.  13  and
17).  But  the  phenomena  during  Colonel  Taylor's  tenancy  were  surprisingly
numerous  and  varied,  and  were  recorded  day  by  day  and  witli  all  needful
fulness.

For  all  that,  tlie  journal  is  quite  unimpressive.  Partly,  no  doubt,  this
very  want  of  iuipressiveness  is  a  tribute  to  tlie  excellence  of  the  record;
if  the  ghostly  siglits  and  sounds  in  other  haunted  houses  had  been  as  faith-
fully set  down  day  by  day,  they  might  be  found  to  make  even  duller
reading.

But  there  are  other  reasons  why  this  laborious  journal  of  "phenomena"
fails  to  ir.ijjress.  The  inexplicable  incidents  recorded  consist  mainly  of
sounds,  occurring  most  frequently  at  night,  but  not  seldom  also  in  the  day-
time, wliich  are  described  by  numerous  witnesses  as  being  unusually  striking,
distinct,  and  varied  in  character.  No  experiment,  however,  was  made  to
determine  the  actual  source  of  the  sounds. A  phonograph  is  mentioned

1  One  such  case  is  recorded  in  Proceedings,  VIII.,  p.  331,  another  in  Proceedings,
VI.,  p.  2oG. One  or  two  other  cases  will  be  found  in  the  Journal.


Part  XXXVI.]


Review.


99


in  the  early  part  of  the  book,  but  it  was  never  employed.  The  house,  as
the  Editors  inform  us,  stands  in  a  well-known  seismic  area  ;  but  a  seismo-
meter was  actually  introduced  only  on  the  last  night  of  the  tenancy,  when
the  noises  had  already  ceased  to  be  heard.  But  apart  frnm  the  use  of
instruments  requiring,  probably,  expert  handling,  there  is  much  that  might
have  been  done  and  was  not  done.  The  bedrooms,  or  some  of  them,  were
fitted  with  fixed  basins,  with  pipes  communicating  with  the  outer  air  ;  and
the  whole  house  was  furnished  with  a  .system  of  hot  water  pipes,  which
were  in  working  order  during  part  of  the  period  under  consideration.  Some
experiment  might  surely  have  been  made  to  determine  whether  these  metal
pipes,  contracting  or  expanding  under  changes  of  temj^erature,  had  anything
to  do  with  the  sounds  heard.  Miss  Freer  and  her  coadjutor  do  not  appear
even  to  have  determined  whether  or  not  the  sounds  which  they  described  day
after  day  were  objective.  Professor  Lodge  thinks  that  they  were,  but  "not
impressive,"  and  "not  distinct  enough  to  be  evidential"  (pp.  192-200).
Colonel  Taylor  writes,  ' '  I  heard  many  noises  in  the  night  during  my  stay  at

B  ,  but  they  were  of  much  the  same  sort  I  have  been  accustomed  to  hear

at  a  similar  time  in  other  houses.  T  think  that  some  of  our  witnesses  may
have  given  them  undue  prominence  under  the  influence  of  their  own
expectancy.  The  clairvoyant  visions  of  '  Ishbel '  in  the  grounds  are  not  of
great  evidential  value  for  the  scientific  world  in  general,  and  I  think  that
any  amount  of  '  voices '  could  be  read  into  the  noises  of  tlie  running  stream,
near  where  she  is  seen,  by  those  who  wished  to  hear.  Still  there  are  some
objective  noises  which  cannot  be  easily  accounted  for  in  an  ordinary  way  "
(p.  153).

But,  after  all,  the  main  reason  why  the  recital  of  these  various  mani-
festations fails  to  impress  us  has  still  to  be  told.  It  was  Miss  Freer  who
first  saw  a  ghostly  figure  ;  it  was  again  Miss  Freer  who  fii'st  heard  ghostly
noises,  and  throughout  these  records  it  is  Miss  Freer  who  is  most  frequently
and  most  ccmspicuously  favoured  with  "phenomena."  Miss  Freer  has
shown  that  she  knows  how  to  observe  clearly  and  how  to  record  accurately,
but,  for  all  that,  her  testimony  in  a  matter  of  this  kind  carries  very  little
weight.

Of  course  I  intend  nothing  in  derogation  of  Miss  Freer's  moral  and
intellectual  qualifications.  Miss  Freer's  testimony  to  ghostly  sights  and
sounds  fails  to  impress  because  she  is  liable,  in  a  quite  unusual  degree,
to  hallucinatory  experience,  and  because  many  of  her  hallucinations,  as
she  has  herself  shown  in  her  article  on  Crystal  Vision  (Proceedings  V.,
pp.  486  et  seq.),  are  purely  subjective,  being  merely  the  recrudescence
of  previous  sensory  or  intellectual  experiences.  Miss  Freer  is  not,  of
course,  responsible  for  this  mental  idiosyncrasy,  but,  obviously,  it  seriously
impairs  the  value  of  her  testimony  to  experiences  which  owe  their  in-
terest, for  mo.st  readers,  solely  to  the  presumption  that  they  may  not
be  of  a  purely  hallucinatory  order,  but  may  possibly  have  their  origin  in
telepathic  or  even  extra-human  sources.  But  we  are  entitled  to  ask  why
Miss  Freer  does  not  apply  to  her  visions  in  "haunted"  houses  the  same
canons  which  she  has  applied  with  conspicuous  success  to  her  visions  in  the
crystal.  When,  to  take  a  well-known  case.  Miss  Freer  saw  in  the  crystal  a
vision  of  a  sea-shore  succeeded  by  the  vision  of  a  huge  mouse  (Proceedings


]00


Frank  Podmore.


{Supplement.


v.,  p.  512),  she  found  the  explanation  of  the  incongruous  spectacle  in  the
revival  of  subconscious  images  called  up  in  her  mind  a  few  days  before  by
two  lines  of  poetry  : —

"  Only  the  sea  intoning,
Only  the  wainscoat  mouse."

Now  consider  the  following  experience  in  B  ■  House. "  In  the

afternoon  (February  6th,  1897)  an  experiment  was  made  with  the  apparatus
known  as  a  Ouija  board,  and  this,  as  is  very  often  the  case,  resolved  itself,
after  a  time,  into  automatic  writing.  There  is  in  the  library  a  portrait  of  a
very  handsome  woman,  to  which  no  name  is  attached,  but  which  shows  the
costume  of  the  last  century.  Her  name  was  asked,  and  the  word  '  Ishbel '
was  given  several  times.  ...  In  reply  to  questions  as  to  what  could  be
done  that  was  of  use  and  interest,  the  writers  were  told  to  go  at  dusk,  and
in  silence,  to  the  glen  in  the  avenue,  and  this,  rightly  or  wrongly,  some  of
those  present  identified  with  what  had  been  called  Scamp's  Copse"  (i.e.,  a
small  fir  plantation,  at  which  the  dog  had  twice  already  barked  uneasily).
They  went  to  the  copse  accordingly,  and  Miss  Freer  saw  there,  in  the  dusk,
the  figure  of  a  nun.  Upon  this  Miss  Freer  builds  a  theory  of  the  identity
of  the  nun  with  the  Ishbel  named  by  Ouija  ;  but  as  the  figure  seen  did  not
correspond  with  the  portrait  already  referred  to,  she  finds  the  original  of
her  vision  in  one  Isabella  (Gaelic,  Ishbel),  a  sister  of  a  former  owner  of  the
house,  who  had  actually  taken  the  veil.  Again,  since  the  figure  of  the  nun
as  seen  did  not  ajjparently  tally  with  the  figure  of  the  lady  whom  it  was
assumed  to  represent,  the  theory  is  still  further  elaborated  by  the  assump-
tion that  the  figure  seen  by  Miss  Freer  reflected  the  (hypothetical)  mental
picture  of  the  real  nun  formed  in  the  mind  of  a  former  inmate  of  the  house,
who  had  never  seen  the  lady  in  the  flesh  !  (p.  226,  etc.)  For  myself,  I
can  more  easily  believe  that  the  nun,  like  the  mouse,  had  her  birth  in  the
percipient's  imagination.

Whatever  view  we  take  of  the  matter,  it  is  a  point  of  some  interest  that
two  witnesses — one  other  lady  and  one  man,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Q., — after  they
had  heard  what  Miss  Freer  had  seen,  saw  the  nun  in  her  company  ;  and
that  several  persons,  when  the  burn  was  running,  heard  the  nun  and  her
companion  conversing.  The  only  other  experience  of  evidential  importance
was  the  vision  of  a  crucifix,  seen  independently  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Q.,  Miss
Freer,  and  a  gentleman  who  had  stayed  in  the  house  some  years  previously.
The  account  of  the  last  named,  however,  is  given  some  years  after  the
incident,  and  after  he  had  heard  of  the  later  experiences.

It  should  be  added  that  Miss  Freer  saw  one  or  two  other  human  figures,
and  dogs,  about  the  house  at  various  times  ;  that  a  servant  also  saw  a
figure,  and  that  a  visitor.  Miss  Langton,  had  a  dream  in  which  she  saw
the  figure  of  a  man,  afterward  recognised  from  her  description.  Of  the
pulling  oft'  of  bedclothes,  the  feeling  of  chill,  the  sensation  of  a  presence,  and
other  vague  feelings  of  the  kind,  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  speak.

The  phenomena  ceased  after  a  service  performed  by  a  Bishop  on  the
morning  of  May  6th.

Frank  Podbiore.


Part  XXXVI.]


Kevie'W.


101


Neuritpnoloyy :  ur,  The  Batiuiiale  uf  Nercom  Sleep  considered  in  rehition  to
Animal  Magnetism  or  Mesmerism,  and  illustrated  by  Numerous  Gases  of
its  success/id  Application  in  the  Relief  and  Cure  of  Disease.  By  James
Braid,  M.R.C.S.,  C.M.W.S.,  etc.  A  New  Edition,  edited  with  an
Introduction  Biographical  and  Bibliographical  embodying  the  Author's
later  Views  and  further  Evidence  on  the  Subject.  By  Aethuk  Edwakd
Waite. (London  :  George  Red  way  ;  1899.)

The  above  work  comprises  :  (1)  a  biograi^hical  introduction,  which  gives
a  short  account  of  Braid's  life,  and  a  more  extended  one  of  his  writings  ;
(2)  a  repi'oduction  of  the  original  edition  of  Neurypnology,  which  forms  the
greater  bulk  of  the  volume  ;  (3)  an  appendix  of  editorial  notes  chiefly  drawn
from  Braid's  later  woi'ks  ;  and  (4)  a  bibliography  of  Braid's  writings.

According  to  Mr.  Waite  little  is  known  about  Braid  in  this  country,  and
there  is  no  trustworthy  bibliography  of  his  writings.  His  later  works,  rare
and  almost  unknown,  have  been  traced  with  difficulty.  Mr.  Waite,  however,
claims  to  have  been  successful  in  his  researches,  and  presents,  as  their
result,  a  work  on  Braid  wliicli  he  asserts  to  be  substantially  complete.

Mr.  Waite  has  undoubtedly  rendered  a  service  to  hypnotic  literature,  but
he  has  not  made  the  most  of  the  material  collected,  and  his  work  is  neither
as  complete  nor  as  accurate  as  he  believes  it  to  be.  The  following  are  a  few,
amongst  many,  objections  which  might  be  ru'ged  against  it.  Thus,  we  are
told  that  the  discovery  of  hypnotisua  alone  lifted  Braid  out  of  the  groove  of
the  ordinary  practitioner.  This  is  incorrect.  Before  he  discovered  hypno-
tism. Braid  had  operated  on  262  cases  of  Talipes,  700  cases  of  Strabismus,
and  23  cases  of  Spinal  Curvature,  and  his  reputation  as  a  surgeon  attracted
patients  from  all  parts  of  the  country.

Although  Nevriipnolo(j]i  is  historically  interesting,  it  must  not  be
forgotten  that  it  was  written  almost  immediately  after  Braid  commenced
his  hypnotic  woi'k,  and  that  later  his  views  underwent  a  complete  change.
The  Frencli  translation  of  Nenrypnology  is  more  valuable  than  Mr.  Waite's
reprint,  as  in  an  appendix  of  36  pages  it  gives  a  full  translation  of  Braid's
last  manuscript,  containing  a  summary  of  his  more  iriatured  theories.  This
is  barely  referred  to  by  Mr.  Waite.

Some  passages  show  a  somewhat  unusu:il  want  of  care  in  compilation.
Thus  (pages  317  to  319)  a  case  of  torticollis  cured  by  suggestion  is  recorded
at  length,  and  we  are  told  that  a  year  later  there  had  been  no  relapse.  The
case  is  repeated  (pages  343  to  344)  along  with  the  fresh  statement  that
"whether  the  cure  was  permanent  does  not  appear  from  the  narrative."

The  bibliograjjhy,  to  which  Mr.  Waite  attaches  great  importance,  only
imperfectly  reproduces  those  I  myself  published  at  earlier  dates  {Brain,
Part  LXXIII.,  Spring,  1896  ;  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  Part  XXX.,  June,  1896  ;  Becne  de  V Hypnotisme,  June,  1898).
In  seven  of  the  works  referred  to  by  Mr  Waite,  the  title  is  wrong  or
incomplete  ;  in  twenty-one,  quoted  from  medical  journals,  neither  volume
nor  page  is  given.  The  only  new  material  is  two  unimportant  letters  in
reply  to  one  from  ''James  Simpson,  Esq.,  Advocate,"  erroneously  described
by  Mr.  Waite  as  "James  Singer,"  while  in  my  bibliographies  are  to  be
found  nine  of Braid's  writings  which are  omitted  from Mr.  Waite's.


102


./.  Milne  Bramwell.


[Supplement.


Further,  some  of  Braid's  works,  of  ^vhich  Mr.  Waite  has  been  unable  to
trace  a  single  copy,  have  long  been  in  my  possession.

According  to  Mr.  Waite,  Braid's  connection  with  the  debated  subject
of  phrenology  terminated  with  the  ijhreno-hypnotic  experiments  recorded
in  iS'enrypnoliXjy."  The  subject,  we  are  told,  remains  where  lie  left  it,
while  Dr.  Foveau  de  Courmelle's  verdict,  viz.,  that  the  jihenomena  are
as  likely  to  be  the  result  of  real  action  as  of  unconscious  suggestion,  is
accepted  by  the  unprejudiced.  Mr.  Waite  is  ignorant  of,  or  ignores.
Braid's  later  experiments.  From  these  Braid  concluded  that  all  phreno-
logical phenomena  were  the  result  of  direct  or  indirect  suggestion,  and
arose  either  from  a  previous  knowledge  of  phrenology,  or  from  a  system
of  training  during  hypnosis.  They  manifested  themselves  when  points
were  touched  which  audible  suggestion  had  taught  the  subjects  to  associate
with  particular  ideas.  Further,  pressure  upon  the  head  was  not  necessary,
and  the  associations  could  be  established  in  the  same  artificial  way  between
the  phenomena  and  other  jjarts  of  the  body.  Finally,  the  excitation  of  the
muscles  of  expression  was  capable  of  arousing  corresponding  ideas  in  the
subject's  mind.

It  is  certainly  surprising  to  be  told  at  the  present  day  that  the  jjhenomena
of  phrenology  are  as  likely  as  not  to  be  genuine.

Mr.  Waite'.s  account  of  Braid's  views  on  mesmei'ism  or  animal  magnetism
demands  serious  notice.  Formerly,  according  to  him,  it  was  generally  but
erroneously  believed  that  Braid  opposed  animal  magnetism  ;  thanks,  how-
ever, to  French  writers,  this  error  has  been  rectified.  Braid  was  the
champion  and  witness  of  animal  magnetism,  and  placed  the  central  fact  of
mesmerism  ])eyond  all  further  dispute.  In  opposition  to  this,  it  is  to  be
noted,  and  the  point  cannot  be  too  strongly  insisted  upon,  that  the  primary
and  cardinal  fact  upon  which  Braid  founded  all  his  theories  of  hypnotism
was  the  purely  subjective  origin  of  its  phenomena.  Everything  depended
on  the  physical  and  mental  condition  of  the  patient ;  not  on  the  volition
or  passes  of  the  operator  which  threw  out  magnetism,  or  called  into  action
some  occult  fluid  or  medium.  Braid  never  swerved  from  this  view.  Later
he  repeated  it  more  emphatically  and  demonstrated  experimentally  that  all
the  phenomena  attributed  to  magnets,  metals,  drugs  in  sealed  tubes,  could
be  equally  well  produced  by  direct  or  indirect  suggestion  when  the  exciting
agents  were  absent.  Thus,  a  wooden  magnet  acted  like  a  real  one  when
the  subject  was  deceived  as  to  its  nature,  whereas  a  genuine  one  produced
notliing  if  the  subject  did  not  know  it  was  there.

According  to  Mr.  Waite,  "The  metalo-therapeutic  theory  first  discovered
by  Bur(j  and  developed  by  Charcot,  inaugurated  a  new  era  of  hypnotism,
and  led  to  that  long  series  of  researches  connected  with  the  Salpetriere
School  of  Paris,  which  have  done  so  much  to  obscure,  if  not  indeed  to
tarnish,  the  rival  lustre  of  the  Nancy  School  of  Liebault. "

Thi.s  view  of  metallo-therapeutics  is  many  years  too  late.  The  views  of
Burq,  which  were  shared  by  Flliotson  and  the  mesmerists  of  his  day,  were
successfully  combatted  by  Braid.  Charcot  simply  revived  an  old  fallacy,
which  the  Nancy  School,  following  in  Braid's  footsteps,  again  overthrew.
As  far  back  as  the  International  Congress  of  Psychology  of  1892  the
Charcot  theories  had  practically  ceased  to  excite  scientific  interest.


Part  XXXVI.]


Review.


103


According  to  Mr.  Waite,  "It  has  been  rightly  observed  that  Bniid,  the
discoverer,  so  to  speak,  of  sugge.stion,  by  no  means  fully  realised  the
possibilities  of  suggestion  of  the  unconscious  kind,"  Bernheim,  and  other
writers  unacquainted  with  Braid's  later  works,  had  previously  made  similar
statements.  It  is  difficult,  however,  to  understand  how  Mr.  Waite  could
commit  a  like  error.  Braid  repeatedly,  clearly  and  emphatically  jiointed
out  that  unconscious  suggestion  accounted  for  all  the  phenomena  which  the
mesmerists  attributed  to  magnets,  metals,  and  occult  fluids.  Sometimes,  he
.said,  the  suggestions  were  given  in  their  most  obvious  form  by  the  operator
verbally  predicting  in  tlie  subject's  hearing  the  nature  of  the  phenomena
which  ought  to  appear.  At  others  they  were  given  less  directly  by  passes,
manijjulations,  excitation  of  the  muscles  of  expression,  etc.,  but  these  owed
their  power,  not  to  their  jjhysical  influence,  but  to  the  ideas  they  excited  in
the  subject's  mind.  When  all  forms  of  suggestion  were  rigorously  excluded
the  mesmeric  phenomena  did  not  appear.  This,  Braid  asserted,  proved  the
influence  was  a  mental  one  ;  were  it  electric,  suggestions  were  as  unnecessary
in  the  case  of  the  subject  as  in  that  of  a  galvanic  battery.

Apparently  Mr.  Waite  believes  in  animal  magnetism,  metallo-therapeutics
and  phrenology.  All  these  things  Braid  successfully  combatted,  and  to
attribute  to  him  any  belief  in  their  existence  shoAvs  an  absolute  failure  to
grasp  the  spirit  and  significance  of  his  teaching.

J.  Milne  Bk\m\vell.


My  Experience  of  Hyijuotic  Siujgestion  as  a  Therapeutic  Ageid.  By  Hon.
J.  M.  Creed,  M.L.C,  M.KC.S.  Eng.,  L.R.C.P.  Edin,,  Sydney.
(Sydney,  1899.)

This  paper  is  reprinted  from  The  Australian  Medical  Gazette,  of  January
20th,  1899,  and  was  originally  read  before  the  N.S.W.  Branch  of  the  British
Medical  dissociation,  on  December  23rd,  1898.  The  author  is  a  well-known
medical  man  and  a  member  of  the  Legislative  Council  of  New  South  Wales,
so  his  views  demand  attention.  He  has  been  using  hypnotism  in  his
practice  for  some  years,  and  he  recalls  his  experience  in  this  pamphlet.

The  interest  of  the  paper  is  almost  entirely  medical,  and,  like  Professor
Bernheim  of  Nancy,  the  author  hypnotises  patients  for  all  kinds  of  diseases,
and  finds  suggestion  relieves  symptoms,  even  where  it  does  not  cure  the
disease.  For  instance,  in  a  case  of  pleurisy,  accompanied  by  much  pain,  he
was  able  to  give  entire  relief  by  suggestion,  and  it  was  only  by  the  per-
sistence of  the  physical  signs  that  he  was  able  to  assure  himself  that  the
pathological  condition  still  existed.  As  he  points  out,  the  control  of  pain  is
a  very  important  matter  in  many  cases,  for  pain  lowers  vitality,  prevents
sleep,  and  retards  recovery.  This  is  especially  the  case  in  surgery,  where
mental  and  bodily  repose  are  greatly  conducive  to  satisfactory  and  rapid
rejjair.  Dr.  Creed  is  quite  enthusiastic  about  the  effect  of  suggestion  in
gastric  ulcer.  Here,  he  thinks,  it  acts  by  enabling  the  patient  to  take
nourishment  freely  without  pain,  and  so  cures  the  ulcers  by  improving
the  state  of  the  blood  and  raising  the  tone  of  the  system.

On  several  occasions  the  patient  has,  in  the  absence  of  the  surgeon,
been  able  to  control  pain  by  inducing  aniesthesia  by  a  prearranged  signal.


104


Dr.  Charles  Lloyd  Tuckey.


[Supplement.


For  instance,  Mr.  H.  burnb  his  hand  severely  with  molten  and  flamin£(
"  Chatterton's  compound,"  the  melting  point  of  wliich  is  very  much  higher
than  that  of  sealing-wax.  By  placing  the  forefinger  of  his  left  liand  to  his
lips  he  wa.s  able  to  inhibit  the  sensory  nerves,  and  though  the  injury  was
followed  by  deep  ulceration,  he  felt  no  pain  while  the  wound  was  healing.

Pain,  of  course,  serves  a  useful  purpose,  and  is  Nature's  danger-signal
to  direct  attention  and  care  to  the  part.  Without  it,  serious  injury  might
be  done  without  the  subject  being  aware  of  it,  as  sometimes  happens  in
hysterical  and  paralysed  persons.  But  pain  is  nearly  always  in  excess  of
requirements,  and  it  is  a  great  blessing  to  be  able  to  control  it.

Dr.  Creed  seems  to  have  been  vei-y  successful  in  asthma,  and  he  men-
tions a  curious  experience  in  this  disease.  The  patient  was  a  clerk  in  a
Government  office,  and  had  suffered  from  asthma  for  14  years.  Hypnotism
greatly  relieved  her,  and  she  only  got  attacks  when  she  took  cold.  When
away  from  Sydney,  she  used  to  write  to  the  doctor  and  ask  him  to  send
directions  by  telegraph,  and  these  suggestions  always  gave  her  relief.  On
one  occasion  he  was  away,  and  her  friends  arranged  that  a  telegram  should
be  sent  as  if  from  him  in  reply  to  her  note.  It  failed  to  relieve  her,  as  she
said  she  knew  somehow  it  was  not  genuine.  On  his  return  he  sent  another
telegram,  and  that  proved  successful.  It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  the
curative  agency  was  anything  but  expectant  attention  and  suggestion  in  this
case,  and  one  would  like  to  know  if  there  was  not  something  in  the  form  of
the  first  telegram  or  in  the  behaviour  of  her  friends  which  aroused  the
patient's  suspicions.

Dr.  Creed  has  treated  many  bad  cases  of  alcoholism  with  great  success  ;
and  he  says  that  no  one  who  is  a  good  hypnotic  subject  need  sufi'er  from
sea-sickness.

Like  all  medical  hypnotists,  Dr.  Creed  finds  liis  l)est  subjects  among  the
intellectual  and  healthy-minded  classes,  and  he  even  says  that  he  has
generally  found  hysterical  women  are  not  hypnotisable.  He  is  strongly  of
opinion  that  the  dangers  of  hypnotism  are  overstated,  and  he  contends  that
a  hypnotised  person  cannot  be  made  to  do  anything  opposed  to  his  waking
conscience.  There  we  must  beg  to  differ  from  Dr.  Creed,  and  we  think  it  is
much  better  not  to  minimise  the  dangers  of  liypnotism,  but  to  look  them  in
the  face  and  take  the  projjer  precautions  against  them.  Granted  that  a
person  of  strong  principle  cannot  be  induced  to  commit  a  crime  whilst  in  the
hypnotic  state,  or  by  means  of  post-hypnotic  suggestion  ;  but  we  know  that
many  people  only  refrain  from  doing  evil  from  expediency  or  fear.  These  are
the  weak-kneed  people  who  are  often  too  easily  influenced  without  hypno-
tism. By  suggestion  with  hypnotism  the  power  to  influence  them  is  greatly
increased,  and  the  danger  of  this  fact  is  not  decreased  by  ignoring  it.  The
remedy  is,  of  course,  easy.  Let  hypnotism  be  used  with  the  .same  pre-
cautions as  surround  the  administration  of  chloroform  or  laughing  gas.

There  is  one  other  feature  of  Dr.  Creed's  excellent  paper  which  we  think
might  be  amended  with  advantage.  It  is  too  much  a  record  of  success,  and
though  he  disclaims  considering  hypnotism  a  universal  panacea,  we  should
like  to  be  told  what  proportion  of  failures  he  has  met  with.  However,  in
this  respect  Dr.  Creed  is  in  good  professional  company,  for  medical  men  who
write  on  their  special  subject  are  notoriously  optimistic.


Part  XXXVI.]


Review.


105


It  must  be  a  matter  of  gratification  to  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research
to  see  one  of  the  subjects  Edmund  Gurney  and  its  other  founders  did  so
much  to  bring  to  the  front  now  occupying  a  recognised  and  honourable
position  as  a  therapeutic  agent.  This  is  shown  by  such  papers  as  this  by
Dr.  Creed,  and  is  a  sign  of  the  times.

Chas.  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.


The  Effects  of  Mind  on  Body  as  Evidenced  by  Faith  Cures.  By  Henry  H.
GoDDAKD,  A.M.,  Fellow  in  Psychology,  Clark  University.  (The
American  Journal  of  Fsychology,  Vol.  X.,  No.  3  ;  April,  1899,  pp.
431-502.)

The  author  here  presents  "a  brief  survey  of  the  field,  that  portion  of
the  data  which  is  of  most  psychological  interest,  and  some  of  the  con-
clusions, from  an  extended  study  of  mental  therapeutics.  We  hope  to
present  in  a  later  publication  an  extended  report  of  all  the  work  referred
to."  The  material  was  gathered  through  answers  to  a  syllabus,  personal
interviews  and  investigations  with  various  "  healers  "  and  their  patients,  and
from  the  literature  of  the  various  sects, — for  the  author  uses  "Faith  Cures"
as  comprehending  the  various  forms  of  distinctive  suggestion  treatment.
Christian  Scientists  are  largely  considered,  including  a  sketch  of  their
leader,  Mrs.  Eddy;  "Divine  Healers"  are  followed  up  in  the  large  move-
ment of  Dr.  Dowie,  of  Chicago,  and  the  itinerant  Schlatter  ;  and  "  Mental
Science "  as  the  most  reasonable  form,  through  its  founder.  Dr.  Quimby.
The  author's  "result  of  this  investigation,  extending  over  more  than  two
years,  is  the  absolute  conviction  based  upon  experience,  only  one  or  two-
items  of  which  we  can  give  here,  that  the  curative  principle  in  every  one  of
the  forms  is  found  in  the  influence  of  the  mind  of  the  patient  on  his  body.
In  other  words,  however  different  the  claims  and  the  method,  the  explana-
tion of  all  is  the  same."  These  religious  forms  of  suggestion  are  then
compared  with  cases  in  the  practice  of  regular  physicians  and  in  hypnotism.
After  a  review  of  the  failures  and  limitations  of  the  faith  cures,  the  con-
clusion is  that  their  "greatest  field  is  in  the  realm  of  prevention"  (p.  499),
and  that  "suggestive  therapeutics  must  take  its  place  by  the  side  of  drugs
rather  than  to  assume  to  supersede  them."  (p.  488.)  The  concluding
psychological  discussion  is  extremely  valuable.  Thus  the  whole  article  is
the  most  timely,  interesting  and  able  study  that  has  appeared  in  this  fruit-
ful field  since  Dr.  and  Mr.  Myers's  Mind-Ciire,  Faith-Cure,  and  the  Miracles
of  Loitrdes  {Proceedings  S. v. a,..  Vol.  IX.,  p.  160),  which  the  present  study
has  uufortunately  not  mentioned,  together  with  the  several  other  studies  on
tliis  subject  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.  But  a  wide  circle  of  students  awaib
Mr.  Goddard's  complete  report  with  impatient  eagerness. jj  0.^^^


L' Annee  Fsychologique,  Cinquieme  Annee. (Paris,  Schleicher  Freres.)

L'Annee  Fsychologique  for  1899  is  an  even  more  striking  monument  of
scientific  diligence  and  fecundity  than  the  previous  volumes  have  been.
The  contributors  of  important  articles,  besides  those  by  MM.  Binet  and


I


106


F.  W.  U.  Myers.


[Supplement.


Henri,  are  perhaps  this  year  more  numerous  than  usual.  But  the  amount
of  work  done  by  these  two  savants, — the  Editor  and  the  Secretaire,  de
Redaction, — .in  the  way  both  of  original  experiment  and  of  accurate  and
critical  analysis  of  the  work  of  others — seems  rather  to  increa.se  than  to
diminish.  Most  strongly  must  it  be  said  that  the  volume  is  an  indispensable
ajd  to  any  student  of  Psychology.

Yet  although  this  may  be  truly  affirmed,  it  is  only  fair  to  add  that  in
some  cases  the  subjects  of  research  seem  scarcely  of  sufficient  importance
to  occupy  for  long  the  attention  of  scientific  lainds.  The  elaborate  Biblio-
graphy contains  the  titles  of  2,558  books  or  articles  connected  with
Psychology  which  appeared  in  1898.  This  list  represents  a  great  mass  of
intellectual  effort,  from  which,  perhaps,  fewer  leading  ideas  have  in  fact
emerged  than  might  have  been  hoped  in  an  age  where  really  illuminating
generalisations  in  science  are  wont  to  be  so  promptly  pursued.

There  are  two  papers,  both  of  them  from  M.  Binet's  indefatigable  pen,
which  bear  on  subjects  which  have  been  discussed  in  these  Proceedings  :  one
is  on  Suggestibility,  one  on  "  L'illusion  de  fausse  reconnaissance,"  for  which
I  have  elsewhere  suggested  the  name  From,nesia.  To  speak  frankly,  both
these  papers  seem  to  me  to  illustrate  a  tendency  which  runs  through  all
this  mass  of  work, — a  tendency  to  treat  the  easy  parts  of  the  subject  with
completeness  and  mastery,  and  to  ignore  altogether  those  diffiadt  parts
which  we  in  these  Proceedings  do  make  honest,  if  not  always  convincing,
efforts  to  explain.  Thus,  the  article  on  Suggestibility  sets  forth  clearly  and
ingeniously  a  number  of  causes  which  predispose  to  the  supraliminal  recep-
tion of  suggestion  ;  but  it  scarcely  even  touches  on  the  profounder  puzzles
of  their  subliminal  reception, — apart  from  the  conscious  knowledge  of  the
subject,  and  beyond  the  domain  of  his  conscious  will.

Characteristically  enough,  we  find  in  the  course  of  this  article  a  long
analysis  of  an  everyday  experiment  of  Professor  Patrick's  in  automatic
script,  but  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-writings — from  which  that  very  paper  of
Professor  Patrick's  takes  its  rise — not  a  word.  The  easy  thing  is  additionally
explained  ;  the  difficult  problem — Dr.  Hodgson's  Report — remains  as  item
1,249  in  the  Bibliograjjhy  without  further  notice.

With  the  article  on  the  deja  «)(. — paramnesia  or  promnesia — the  case  is
somewhat  similar.  The  conclusion  reached  on  p.  742  is  merely  the  obvious
common-sense  one  which  explains  most  of  the  recorded  phenomena — but
not  all.  "The  memory  which  is  renewed  has  made  a  part  of  another  con-
scious state — call  it  A — at  the  moment  when  it  was  stored  up  in  the  mind,
whereas  the  subject,  when  he  recalls  the  memory,  is  in  conscious  state  B.
On  account  of  the  analogy  between  the  two  states,  the  earlier  perception  A
becomes  fused  into  the  actual  perception  B  ; — the  two  syntheses  are  brought
thus  into  a  sort  of  collision.  Tlie  Group  A  tends  more  or  less  to  reconstitute
itself,  in  spite  of  the  antagonism  of  the  Group  B  ;  there  is  a  struggle,  a
competition,  between  two  different  conscious  states,  resulting  in  a  dis-
tressing sense  of  duplication,  of  loss  of  personality.  One  feels  oneself
changed  and  no  longer  the  same,  because  the  forgotten  Group  A  recovers
activity  and  tries  to  supplant  the  actual  Group  B."

M.  Binet  does  not  claim  originality,  except  of  expression,  for  this
explanation,  which  is,  in  fact,  obviously  sufficient  for  the  commoner  cases.


Part  XXXVI.]


Review.


107


"We  may  lay  aside,"  he  says,  "the  hypothesis  of  cerebral  duality  due
to  Wigan,  and  that  of  telepathy  due  to  Lalande  ; — this  latter  hypothesis,
in  fact,  is  so  extraordinary  {tellement  bizarre)  that  one  cannot  understand
how  it  can  have  been  put  forward  in  our  times."  (Let  readers  who  do
not  think  it  worth  while  to  send  us  fresh  evidence  for  telepathy,  because
they  suppose  that  every  one  admits  it,  note  that  last  phrase  !)

Well,  it  may  be  that  neither  telepathy  nor  cerebral  duality  in  any  form
is  really  needed  here  ; — but  if  M.  Binet  wishes  to  make  certain  of  this,
he  should  first  manage  to  dispose  in  some  way  or  other, of  some  of  the  most
remarkable  of  the  cases  which  he  himself  cites.  If,  for  example,  J.  H.,
the  military  doctor,  did  in  truth  repeat  phrases  from  Ferdinand  le  Noceur,
before  they  Avere  uttered  by  the  actors, — as  Lalande  tells  us, —what  is  M.
Binet's  explanation  for  that  1

I  certainly  cannot  complain  if  M.  Binet,  with  all  he  has  to  read,  has
not  read  pp.  340-347  of  Vol.  IX.  of  the  S.P.R.  Proceedings.  Nor  can
I  expect  that  anything  which  I  have  there  advanced  is  at  all  a  final  solution
of  these  puzzles.  Nevertheless,  our  psychology  is  hardly  yet  so  profound
that  it  suffices  to  set  forth  with  clarity  ingenious  deductions  from  what  we
already  know.  The  history  of  far  less  complex  studies  should  teach  us  that
it  is  dangerous  to  assume  too  soon  that  any  given  science  has  for  us  no  more

^^P"'^^^-  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH,

PART  XXXVII.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS.


The  103rd  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  West-
minster Town  Hall,  on  Fridaj-,  January  26th,  1900,  at  i  p.m. ;  Sir
AViLLiAM  Ceookes  in  the  chair.

Mr.  F.  Podmore  read  a  paper  on  "Witchcraft  and  Poltergeists."

A  paper  by  Mr.  F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  "  On  some  Philosophic  Assump-
tions in  the  Investigation  of  the  Problem  of  a  Future  Life,"  was  read
by  Mr.  J.  G.  Smith.  This  paper  was  published  in  Part  XXXVI.  of
the  Proceedings.


The  104th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
March  2nd,  1900,  at  8.30  p.m.  ;  Professor  Sidgwick  in  the  chaii\

Miss  M.  H.  Mason  gave  an  account  of  two  cases  of  the  cure  of
warts  by  suggestion.

Some  extracts  from  part  of  Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop's  Report  of
his  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  were  read  by  Mr.  F.  Podmore.


The  105th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
May  18th,  1900,  at  8.30  p.m.  ;  the  President,  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Mters,  in
the  chair,  dehvered  the  Address  which  follows.


K


110


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[part


PRESIDENTIAL  ADDRESS
By  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Argument.

1.  Psychical  Research  is  no  longer  felt  to  need  tlie  recommendation
of  names  independently  eminent  in  other  branches  of  study.

2.  Yet  if  recognition  is  to  be  paid  primarily  to  actual  work  per-
formed for  our  Research,  the  name  of  Edmund  Gurney  must  occur  as
that  which  all  would  fain  have  honoured ; — the  man  whose  attitude
towards  our  Research  was  of  the  loftiest,  the  most  unselfish  kind  :  the
man  who  felt  most  strongly  the  sheer  moral  need  of  discovering  a
future  life,  if  the  cruel  injustices  of  this  life  are  to  be  conceived  as
compatible  with  a  Fii'st  Cause  wortliy  of  love  oi'  woi'ship.

3.  Foi'  most  men  the  quest  of  immortality  will  answer  to  a  stronger-
element  of  personal  desire  ; — although  such  desire  need  not  imply  bias
in  the  estimation  of  evidence.

4.  No  attachment  to  Christian  tradition,  no  recognition  of  the  need
and  value  of  liigh  intuitions,  should  blind  us  to  the  fact  that  only  on
truths  scientifically  demonstrated  can  a  woild-philosophy  or  woi'ld-
religion  be  based.

5.  Yet  the  facts  proved  by  Science  have  not  thus  far  been  adequate
to  satisfy  the  spiritual  needs  of  mankind.  May  not  Science  discover
further  facts  which  may  at  any  rate  prove  the  j)rea7nble  of  aU  reliyions  ?

6.  Such  is  our  attempt ; — for  we  believe  that  by  maintaining  unity  of
method  in  our  search  for  every  form  of  truth  we  have  the  best  chance
of  discovering  new  facts  of  deep  spiritual  importance.

7.  And,  in  fact,  this  line  of  inquiry  has  already  pointed  us  to  a
hidden,  subliminal  world  within  us, — and  through  that  world  to  an  un-
seen, but  responsive,  spiritual  world  without.

8.  And  if  the  messages  from  that  unseen  world  be  felt  at  present
to  be  inadequate  to  our  desires,  yet  our  faith  in  the  coherence  and
intelligibility  of  at  least  the  material  universe  should  lead  us  to  trust
that  clarity  and  dignity  cannot  be  permanently  lacking  in  any  system
of  communications  which  may  proceed  from  the  Universe  of  Spirit.

9.  We  seem,  iirdeed,  to  be  awakening  into  a  new  consciousness
of  tlie  living  solidai-ity  of  the  human  race,  in  this  world  and  the


XXXVII.]


Presidential  Address.


Ill


next,  which  will  afford  an  adequate  motive  for  utmost  effort  and
highest  hope.

10.  But  if  we  are  thus  to  gain  the  advantage  of  scientific  certainty
for  our  deepest  beliefs,  we  are  bound  in  return  to  treat  the  scientific
virtues  as  necessary  to  salvation.

11.  The  especial  function  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research
should  be  to  insist  upon  this  view,  and  to  form  an  advisory  centre  for
widespread  investigation.

12.  For  aid  in  this  task  we  can  address  our  claim  alike  to  the
scientific  and  to  the  I'eligious  world ;  our  wider  Science,  of  which
Religion  is  the  subjective  aspect,  must  come  not  to  destroy,  but  to
fulfil.


1.  When  I  heard,  in  absence  from  England,  that  the  Council  of
this  Society  had  done  me  the  honour  of  electing  me  as  its  President  for
the  current  year,  I  felt  that  a  certain  definite  stage  in  the  Society's
evolution  had  been  reached  at  an  earlier  date  than  I  should  originally
have  expected.

My  predecessors  in  this  Chair,  I  need  not  say,  have,  witli^out  excep-
tion, been  men  of  the  highest  distinction.  The  list  has  included  men
whose  leadei'ship  would  confer  honour  on  any  body  of  men  whatever  -
on  such  bodies,  for  instance,  as  the  British  Association  or  the  House  of
Commons.  We  have  been  grateful  to  these  eminent  persons  foi-  lending
the  sanction  of  their  names  to  our  early  beginnings.  And  we  have  other
names  in  reserve  of  similar  distinction  ; — destined,  I  hope,  some  day  to
adorn  our  list  of  Presidents.  Yet  for  the  curi'ent  year  the  Council
have  preferred  to  choose  a  man  who  has  little  claim  to  such  a  dis-
tinction, beyond  the  fact  that  he  has  worked  for  the  objects  which
our  Society  seeks,  from  days  even  before  the  Society's  formation  ; —
and  that  he  is  determined  to  go  on  thus  working  so  long  as  his
faculties  may  allow.  So  have  our  friends  chosen  ;  and  if  a  man  may
speak  thus  of  his  own  election,  I  think  that  the  choice  is  appropriate
enough.  For  the  time  has  come  when  we  may  fairly  indicate  to  the
world  that  we  believe  our  Society  can  stand  on  its  own  bottom ;  that
it  carries  on  a  branch  of  scientific  work  which,  although  novel  and
tentative,  is  legitimate  and  honourable  ;  and  therefore  that  we  do
not  need  to  put  forward  in  its  prominent  positions  only  those  names
which  have  been  made  independently  illustrious  by  good  work  of  other
kinds  performed  elsewhere.  As  representing  the  principle  that  tlie
plain,  unadorned  Psychical  Researcher  is  just  as  respectable  in  his  own
way  as  anybody  else,  I  am  proud  indeed  to  see  my  humbler  name
inscribed  after  the  names  of  Henry  Sidgwick,  Balfoui'  Stewart,  Arthur
Balfour,  William  James,  and  William  Crookes.

L


112


F.  W.  E.  Myers.


[part


2.  But  here  one  tliought  must  rise  ; — must  rise  for  all  who  knew  the
early  days  of  this  research,  but  most  of  all  for  me ; — Would  that
Edmund  Gurney  were  standing  where  I  stand  now  !  For  us  who  knew
him  best  the  years  since  he  left  us  have  but  served  to  illustrate  his
uniqueness  and  to  deepen  his  memory ; — have  made  us  feel  how  much
of  the  humorous  adventure,  the  sympathetic  fellowship,  the  deep  delight
of  this  research  of  ours  has  with  him  passed  irrevocably  away.  On
the  lighter  side  of  things,  we  can  never  renew  the  intellectual  enjoy-
ment of  those  years  of  our  small  beginnings  spent  at  his  side ; — watch-
ing how  his  ilashing  irony,  his  fearless  dialectic,  dealt  with  the  attacks
which  then  poured  in  from  every  quarter ; — with  the  floundeiing
platitudes  of  obscurantist  orthodox)^,  or  with  the  smug  sneers  of  ]3opular
science,  belittling  what  it  will  not  try  to  understand.  On  the  graver
side,  we  shall  hardly  see  another  example  of  jvist  that  attitude  of  mind
with  which  Gurney  entered  on  this  research, — and  which  made  for  us
so  deep  an  element  in  his  incomparable  charm.

For  in  that  many-chorded  nature  sympathy  was  the  deepest  strain  ; —
sympathy  which  flowed  forth  indeed  to  those  he  loved  in  such  penetrat-
ing and  intimate  tenderness  as  few  mortals  have  had  the  happiness  to
know, — but  which  expended  itself  more  widely  in  a  profound  compas-
sion for  the  nmltifoi'm  sorrows  of  men.  And  thus,  as  needs  must
happen  in  those  responsive  minds  which  hear,  in  the  Apostle's  words,
the  whole  creation  groaning  and  travailing  until  now,  there  came  to
him  the  conviction  that  the  question  of  life  after  death  was  the  only
test  which  we  could  really  apply  to  the  existence  of  a  Providence  ; —
nay,  that  it  was  no  mere  articidus  sfantis  aut  cadentis  Ecclesice,  but  in
sombre  earnest,  for  all  humankind,  the  articuhi.s  sfantis  aut  cadentis
Dei.  )Sti'angely  enough,  it  was  for  others  rather  than  for  himself  that
Gurney  desired  this  great  possibility  ;  his  own  mournful  and  stoic
temper  dwelt  little  on  any  personal  hope.  But  he  felt  that  if  the  First
Cause  has  summoned  into  life  on  earth,  though  it  were  but  one  single
man  alone,  miserable  amid  all  the  happy ; — one  single  soul  foredoomed  to
eternal  protest  and  inescapable  woe ; — then  that  First  Cause  is  not  a  God
to  whom  a  good  man  can  offer  love,  or  a  just  man  worship.  Alas  !  how
many  theologies  does  this  clear  moral  axiom  shrivel  as  with  burning  fire  !
how  many  philosophies  does  it  scatter  to  the  winds  ! — philosophies  of
men  walking  delicately  on  wordy  bridges  across  the  grim  abyss  of  things,
— satisfied  that  the  world  is  well  enough,  while  round  them  wronged,
degraded  lives  by  millions  are  perishing  in  agony  and  for  ever.  It  was
in  response  to  such  easy  optimism  that  Gurney's  logic  was  the  most
intolerably  trenchant,  his  sombre  silence  the  fullest  of  sad  scorn  ; —
for  in  truth  this  contented  blindness  of  sealed  spirits  is  in  itself  the
vilest  woe  of  man.  He  could  not  avert  his  eyes,  and  disport  himself
in  a  fool's  Paradise. He  could  not  weave  a  web  of  words,  and  stifle


XXXVII.]


Presidential  Address.


113


in  a  philosopher's  dream.  Suffer  me  to  apply  to  my  friend  for  a
moment  even  those  lofty  lines  in  which  a  great  poet  has  invoked  the
greatest : —

"Thou  that  seest  universal  Nature  moved  by  universal  Mind  ;
Thou,  majestic  in  thy  sadness  at  the  doubtful  doom  of  humankind."

3.  It  is  well  that  this  noble  figure  should  stand  at  the  entrance  of
our  research ; — should  show  how  unselfish  may  be  the  impulse  which
has  prompted  to  eager  labour, — eager  even  beyond  the  limit  which
physical  powers  allowed.  But  assuredly  the  mass  of  us  Psychical
Researchers  have  no  need  whatever  of  heroic  virtue.  We  have  enough
and  to  spare  of  such  motives  as  appeal  to  ordinary  men.  We  have  the
stimulus  of  intellectual  curiosity, -^more  richly  satisfied,  I  think,  in  ours
than  in  any  other  quest ; — and  beyond  this  most  of  us,  I  think,  have  the
healthful,  primary  desire  for  the  prolongation — the  endless  prolongation
— of  life  and  happiness.  I  know,  indeed,  that  for  various  reasons  some  men
of  strong  and  high  nature,  as  well  as  many  men  of  feebler  nature,  do  fail
to  feel  this  desire ;  but  on  the  whole  one  must  regard  that  form  of  Welt-
Schmerz  as  but  a  passing  mood  of  our  race's  immaturity, — as  what
physicians  call  a  n.eim>sis  of  development ; — one  must  admit  that  usually
when  a  man  cares  little  for  existence  this  is  because  existence  cares
little  for  him,  and  that  it  has  been  doubt  as  to  the  value  of  life  and  love
which  has  made  the  decadence  of  almost  all  civilisations.  Life  is  the
final  aim  of  life ;  the  mission  of  the  highest  Teacher  was  that  we
might  have  it  the  more  abundantly ;  and  the  universe  strives  best
towards  its  ultimate  purpose  through  the  normal,  vigorous  spirit  to
whom  to  live  itself  is  joy.  *

The  danger,  then,  for  our  I'esearch  will  lie  not  in  lack  but  in  excess
of  motive ;  our  minds  may  be  biassed  in  their  judgment  of  evidence  by
a  deep  instinctive  desire.  For  my  own  part,  I  certainly  cannot  claim
such  impartiality  as  indifference  might  bring.  From  my  earliest  child-
hood— from  my  very  first  recollections — the  desire  for  eternal  life  has
immeasurably  eclipsed  for  me  every  other  wish  or  hope.  Yet  desi7-e  is
not  necessarily  bias  ;  and  my  personal  history  has  convinced  myself —
though  I  cannot  claim  that  it  shall  convince  others  also — that  my
wishes  do  not  strongly  warp  my  judgment, — nay,  that  sometimes  the
very  keenness  of  personal  anxiety  may  make  one  afraid  to  believe,  as
readily  as  other  men,  that  which  one  most  longs  for.

For  when,  after  deriving  much  happiness  from  Christian  faith,  I  felt
myself  forced  by  growing  knowledge  to  recognise  that  the  evidence  for
that  culminant  instance  of  spirit  return  was  not  adequate,  as  standing
alone,  to  justify  conviction,  I  did  honestly  surrender  that  great  joy ;
although  its  loss  was  more  grievous  to  me  than  anything  else  which  has
happened  to  me  in  life.

.  L  2


114


F.  W.  H.  Mijer.s.


[part


Then  witli  little  hope — nay,  almost  with  i-eluctant  scorn — but  witli
the  feeling  that  no  last  and  least  chance  of  the  great  discovery  should
be  thrown  aside,  I  turned  to  such  poor  efforts  at  psychical  research  as
were  at  that  time  possible  ;  and  now  it  is  only  after  thirty  years  of
such  study  as  I  have  been  able  to  give  that  I  say  to  myself  at  last,
Habf'S  tntd  quod  mente  pefisti — "Thou  hast  what  thine  whole  heart
desired  ; " — that  I  recognise  that  for  me  this  fresh  evidence, — while
raising  that  great  historic  incident  of  the  Resurrection  into  new
credibility, — has  also  filled  me  with  a  sense  of  insight  and  of  thankful-
ness such  as  even  my  first  ardent  Christianity  did  not  bestow.

Yet  if  I  thus  find  the  happiness  which  sprang  from  far-reaching
Tradition  and  Intuition  surpassed  by  the  hapjDiness  which  spiings  from
a  nari'ower,  but  a  more  stable  range  of  demonstrated  fact,  I  nevertheless
speak  in'  no  spirit  of  reaction  or  of  ingratitude  towards  traditions  and
intuitions  which  must  yet,  for  many  a  century,  be  potent  for  the
salvation  of  men.  I  by  no  means  take  for  granted  that  any
scientific  inquiry,  any  induction  fi'om  eiupii'ical  facts,  can  afford
to  man  his  only  or  his  deepest  insight  into  the  meaning  of
the  Universe.  I  have  no  controversy  with  those  who  say  that
contemplation,  revelation,  ecstasy,  may  carry  deep  into  certain
hearts  an  even  profounder  truth.  I  recognise  also  that  our  Science  is
a  conventional  structure ;  that  it  rests  on  assumptions  which  we  cannot
fully  prove ;  or  which  even  indicate,  by  their  apparent  inconsistency,
that  they  can  be  at  best  but  narrow  aspects  of  some  underlying-
law  imperfectly  discerned.  All  this  we  may  all  admit ;  just  as  we
admit  the  inadequacy,  the  conventionality,  of  human  sj)eech  itself.
Speech  cannot  match  the  meaniiig  which  looks  in  an  houi'  of  emotion
from  the  eyes  of  a  friend.  But  what  we  learn  from  that  gaze  is
indefinable  and  incommunicable.  Our  race  needed  the  spoken  and
written  word,  with  all  its  baldness,  if  they  were  to  understand  each
other  and  to  grow  to  be  men.  So  with  Science  as  opposed  to  Intuitioii
Science  forms  a  language  common  to  all  mankind ;  she  can  explain
herself  when  she  is  misunderstood  and  right  herself  when  she  goes
wrong  ;  nor  has  humanity  yet  found,  at  any  rate,  since  that  great
wedding  between  Reason  and  Experience,  which  immortalises  the  name
of  Galileo, — that  the  methods  of  Science,  intelligently  and  honestl}'
followed,  have  led  us  in  the  end  astray.

It  is  only  in  the  region  of  inquiry  into  a  sjairitual  world — I  mean  a
world  of  immaterial  and  yet  individual  realities — that  these  truisms  are
still  in  danger  of  being  taken  for  paradoxes.  At  once  the  intimate
interest  and  the  extreme  obscurity  of  that  investigation  have  long
prevented  it  from  being  kept  fully  and  fairly  in  that  scientific  field
where  man's  attempts  at  all  other  knowledge  are  now  collected  and
appraised. In  their  rude  beginnings,  no  doubt.  Religion  and  Science


XXXVII  ]


Presidential  Address.


115


were  indistinguishable.  Tlie  savage  obsei'ved  such  scanty  facts  as  he
could  get  at,  and  tried  to  shape  both  his  practical  and  his  spii'itual  life
upon  that  observation.  But  his  need  of  a  theory  of  the  unseen  world
(to  put  his  vague  hopes  and  terrors  into  our  own  phraseology)  went  far
beyond  what  his  sci'aps  of  exjierience  could  teach  him.  "  What  must
I  do  to  be  saved  1 "  was  a  fjuestion  to  which  he  could  not  find,  yet
would  not  wait  for  an  answer.  He  fell  into  grotesque  fancies,  which
liis  experience  did  not  really  support ;  and  the  divorce  of  Religion  from
Science  at  once  began.

The  spiritual  need  which  thus  acted  on  the  savage  continues  to  act
on  the  civilised  man.  He  too  is  impelled  to  build  his  faith  on  grounds
outside  his  sphere  of  observation,  to  enlarge  the  safe,  general,  and  per-
manent formula  for  I'eligion  in  various  more  or  less  unsafe,  specialised,
and  transitory  ways.  For  it  is — may  one  not  say  1 — a  safe,  general,  and
permanent  formula  for  religion  if  we  regard  it  as  man's  normal  sub-
jective response  to  the  sum  of  known  cosmic  phenomena  taken  as  an
intelligible  whole.  Under  the  title  of  Natui-al  Religion  this  forms
at  least  an  element  in  all  the  higher  forms  of  faith.  Nevertheless  it  is
felt  to  be  inadequate ;  because  the  observable  phenomena  of  the
Universe,  so  far  at  least  as  they  have  yet  been  observed,  have  not  been
such  as  to  evoke  (save  in  some  few  minds)  the  full  hope,  the  full
devotion  which  our  developed  nature  yearns  to  feel.  To  live  by
Natural  Religion  alone  has  been  like  living  on  turnips  in  the  field.
Most  men  demand  their  spiritual  nutriment  in  a  more  assimilable  form.
The  philosophical  or  the  poetical  contemplation  of  Nature  has  not
satisfied  them  in  the  past ;  nor  can  they  hope  that  the  scientific  con-
templation of  Nature  will  satisfy  them  any  better  now.  They  turn
aside  from  the  ambiguous  pageant,  the  circumspect  scrutiny ;  they
specialise  the  name  of  Religion  upon  some  clear,  swift,  extra-scientific
knowledge  as  to  the  dealings  of  unseen  Powers  with  mankind.

On  such  knowledge,  or  supposed  knowledge,  the  peoples  of  East  and
West  have  stayed  in  many  fashions  their  soul's  desire  :  but,  neverthe-
less, we  all  know  too  well  that  even  yet  there  is  no  spiritual  food
attainable  in  the  precise  condition  in  which  it  will  meet  all  healthy
needs.  We  are  all  forced  to  feel  that  in  the  present  divided  and  un-
stable condition  of  beliefs  there  is  plausibility  in  the  Agnostic's  appeal
to  us  to  halt  and  mark  time  ;  in  his  insistence  that  we  have  not  really
evidence,  up  to  modern  standards,  which  can  support  any  definite  creed
in  matters  remote  from  ordinary  methods  of  proof.  Some  men,  indeed,
have  ventured  explicitly  to  reply  that  Christian  Faith  need  not  be
founded  on  the  same  kind  of  demonstration  as  Science ;  that  Tradition
and  Intuition  can  well  supply  her  outward  form  and  her  inward  glow.
Urged  among  those  who  have  much  of  consecrated  tradition,  of  noble
intuition  in  common,  this  high  claim  may  seem  convincing  as  the  gaze


116


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[part


of  a  friend.  But  it  has  the  inevitable  weakness  ah-eady  indicated.
Introduce  other  persons  of  different  race  but  equally  sincere,  tire
Buddhist,  the  Parsee,  the  Jew — nay,  the  saint  of  science,  like  Darwin
— and  you  can  meet  these  men  no  longer  on  the  ground  of  Christian
Tradition  or  Intuition — you  can  meet  them  on  the  ground  of  Science
alone.  Thus  even  among  spiritually-minded  men  we  seem  forced  back
into  the  view  that  Science  can  be  the  only  world-philosophy  or  world-
religion  ; — the  only  synthesis  of  the  Universe  which,  however  imperfect,
is  believed  in  semper,  ubique,  et  ah  omnibus,  by  all  who  can  under-
stand it.

5.  This  conclusion,  however,  as  already  implied,  at  present  satisfies
nobody.  The  Christian  says  that  it  is  mere  mockery  to  pretend  that
Science  can  be  the  base  of  Religion ;  for  it  tells  us  nothing  of  the
spiritual  world.  "  Naturally,"  replies  the  Agnostic,  hardening  into
Materialism ;  "  since  there  is  no  spiritual  world  of  which  to  tell."
"  The  Universe,"  cried  Clifford  triumphantly,  "  is  made  of  ether  and
atoms,  and  there  is  no  room  for  ghosts."

So  soon,  however,  as  the  man  of  science  takes  this  tone — so  soon  as
he  passes,  so  to  say,  from  Huxley  to  Clifford — he  loses  his  strong
position,  the  Agnostic's  raison  d'etre  Clifford  had  not  really  turned
over  his  atoms  thoroughly  enough  to  make  sure  that  no  ghost  was
hidden  among  them.  As  indisputably  as  any  worshipper  of  Mumbo-
Jumbo  had  that  eager  truth-lover  framed  an  emotional  synthesis  which
outran  his  Science.

Is,  then,  the  passivity  of  pure  Agnosticism  the  attitude  with  which
we  ought  to  be  content !  Ljncyramus  et  ignorabimus — should  this  be
the  single  clause  of  our  creed  %  Sui-ely  that  were  too  tame  a  suri-ender
to  the  Sphinx  and  her  riddle  ;  which,  in  the  old  story,  turned  out  after
all  to  be  rather  easy  to  guess.  Why  should  we  not  simply  try  to  find
out  new  facts  here,  as  we  have  found  out  new  facts  everywhere  else
where  we  have  looked  for  them  %  Just  here  we  have  not  looked  for
them  yet,  because  neither  the  priests  of  our  religions  nor  their  critics
have  till  now  been  disposed  for  the  quest.  The  priests  have  thought  it
safest  to  defend  their  own  traditions,  their  own  intuitions,  without  going
afield  in  search  of  independent  evidence  of  a  spiritual  world.  Their
assailants  have  kept  their  powder  and  shot  for  the  orthodox  ramparts,
ignoring  any  isolated  strongholds  which  foi'med  no  part  of  the  main
line  of  defence.

This  search  for  new  facts  is  precisely  what  our  Society  undertakes.
Starting  from  various  standpoints,  we  endeavour  to  carry  the  newer,
the  intellectual  virtues  into  regions  where  dispassionate  tranquillity  has
seldom  yet  been  known.  As  compared  with  the  claims  of  Theologians,
we  set  before  ourselves  a  humbler,  yet  a  difficult  task.  We  do  not  seek
to  shape  the  clauses  of  the  great  Act  of  Faith,  but  merely  to  prove  its


XXXVII.]


Presidential  Address.


117


preamble.  To  prove  the  preamble  of  all  reliyions  ;  to  be  able  to  say  to
theologian  or  to  philosopher  :  "  Thus  and  thus  we  demonstrate  that  a
spiritual  world  exists — a  world  of  independent  and  abiding  realities,
not  a  mere  '  epiphenomenon '  or  transitory  effect  of  the  material
world — a  world  of  things,  concrete  and  living,  not  a  mere  system  of
abstract  ideas ; — now,  therefore,  reason  on  that  world  or  feel  towards  it
as  you  will."  This  would  indeed,  in  my  view,  be  the  weightiest  service
which  any  research  could  render  to  the  deep  disquiet  of  our  time ; —
na)',  to  the  desiderium  orhis  catholici,  the  world-old  and  world-wide
desire.

G.  First,  then,  we  adopt  the  ancient  belief — implied  in  all  mono-
theistic religion,  and  conspicuously  confirmed  by  the  progress  of  modern
science — that  the  world  as  a  whole,  spiritual  and  material  together,  has
in  some  way  a  systematic  unity  ;  and  on  this  we  base  the  novel  pre-
sumption that  there  should  be  a  unity  of  method  in  the  investigation  of
all  fact.  We  hold  therefore  that  the  attitude,  the  habits  of  mind,  the
methods,  by  aid  of  which  physical  science  has  grown  deep  and  wide,
should  be  applied  also  to  the  spiritual  world.  We  endeavour  to
approach  the  problems  of  that  world  by  careful  collection,  scrutiny,
testing,  of  particular  facts  ;  and  we  account  no  unexplained  fact  too
trivial  for  our  attention.  Seeking  knowledge  before  edification,  we  aim
not  at  what  we  should  most  like  to  learn,  but  at  what  we  have  the  best
chance  of  learning  ;  we  dabble  among  beggarly  elements ;  we  begin  at
the  beginning.

Into  this  frame  of  mind  the  lonir  habit  of  our  race  in  matters
religious  has  made  it  difficult  fully  to  enter.  I  have  found  it  helpful
to  imagine  what  would  be  the  procedure  of  some  extraneous  inquirer
into  the  nature  and  fate  of  men — some  inquirer  exempt  fi'om  their
hopes,  their  fears,  their  presuppositions.

Let  us  suppose,  then,  that  "a  spectator  of  all  time  and  all  existence,"
a  kind  of  minor  Cosmotheorus,  as  Plato  might  call  him,  were  speculating
from  the  standpoint  of  this  planet,  as  to  what  was  likely  to  be  the  true
position  of  the  human  race  in  the  scheme  of  the  Universe.  Such  an
observer  would  be  compelled  to  start  from  the  facts  before  him.  He
would  begin  his  investigation,  therefore,  not  with  God  but  with  man.
He  would  analyse  the  faculties  of  which  he  found  man  possessed,  and
would  infer  in  what  environment  they  were  designed  to  ope-rate — of
what  system,  that  is  to  say,  of  cosmic  laws,  expressing  a  special
modification  of  the  ultimate  energy,  the  energy  contained  in  the  human
race  formed  an  integral  element.  His  first  discovery  would  be  that  the
obvious  material  environment,  which  is  all  that  most  men  know,  does
not  exhaust  the  faculties  nor  cover  the  jahenomena  of  human  life.
Most  of  man's  senses,  indeed,  he  could  explain  as  concerned  solely
with matter. Sight  he  could  not thus  explain ; and  the  study


118


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[part


of  light  would  lead  him  to  discover  the  etherial  environment — a  system
of  laws,  that  is  to  say,  which,  while  fundamentally  continuous  with  the
laws  of  matter,  does  yet  supply  a  new  conception  of  the  Cosmos,  at
once  more  generalised  and  more  profound.  But  still  the  central
problem  of  man's  being  would  remain  unsolved.  Life  and  thought
could  not  be  referred  to  the  working  either  of  aggregated  molecules  or
of  etherial  undulations.  To  explain  Life  by  these  two  environ-
ments would  be  as  impossible  as  it  had  been  to  explain  Light  by
the  material  environment  alone.  Might  there  not  be  yet  another
environment — metetherial,  spiritual,  what  you  will  1  Was  there  any
way  of  reducing  this  vast  and.  vague  problem  of  Life  to  manageable
definiteness Were  there  measurable  traces  of  human  faculty  working
in  apparent  independence  of  material  or  etherial  law  1  Such  traces,  if
he  sought  long  enough,  I  maintain  that  he  would  assuredly  find.  He
would  find  (as  we  have  found)  instances  of  tekesthesia,  or  perception
beyond  the  sensory  range;  instances  of  telepathy,  or  direct  communica-
tion from  mind  to  mind ; — nay,  telepathic  messages  from  the  so-called
dead — signs  and  ajoparitions  by  which  minds  discariiate  impressed  tliem-
selves  upon  minds  still  robed  in  flesh.  How  far  the  ether,  in  some  of
its  unknown  properties,  may  be  concerned  in  these  operations,  our
Cosmotheorus  might  be  better  able  to  guess  than  we.  To  him,  perhaps,
no  environment  would  seem  discontinuous  with  any  other  environment.
But,  at  any  rate,  here  would  be  definite  traces  of  a  new  environment
of  Life  and  Thought ;  traces  of  the  mutual  action  of  minds,  embodied
and  unembodied,  in  apparent  independence  of  matter.

I  must  not  here  follow  our  imagined  inquirer  further  ;  but  surely
we  leave  him  launched  upon  a  series  of  observations  and  experiments
which  have  no  inherent  flaw  in  their  basis,  and  no  assignable  limit  to
their  scope.

7.  I  have  dwelt  at  some  length  upon  this  line  of  argument,  because
I  think  that,  in  some  form  or  other,  it  is  our  duty  to  have  it  always
forthcoming,  our  dvity  to  set  it  ])efore  the  world  in  varying  expression,
until  our  age  is  really  convinced  that  this  great  branch  of  knowledge,
which  deals  with  things  unseen,  can  form  no  exception  to  those  rules  by
which  experience  shows  us  that  all  valid  knowledge  has  hitherto  been
won.  So  confident,  indeed,  do  I  feel  in  this  gradual  but  certain
method  of  approach — in  this  open,  unfrequented  way — that  even  if  it
had  thus  far  failed  to  lead  us  to  any  discovery,  I  should  feel  bound  to
pursue  it  still.  But  it  has  not  failed.  This  persistent  analysis  of  un-
explored faculty  has  revealed  to  us  already  far  more  than  I,  for  one,
had  ever  dared  to  hope.  I  may  surely  say  with  no  more  than  the
licensed  exaggeration  of  epigram,  that  our  method  has  revealed  to  us  a
hidden  world  within  us,  and  that  this  hidden  world  within  us  has  re-
vealed to  us  an  invisible  world  without.


XXXVII.]


Presidential  Address.


119


Within  eaeli  man,  1  say,  there  is  a  world  of  thought  and  of  percep-
tion which  lies  outside  the  margin,  beneath  tlie  threshold,  deeper  than
the  surface-tension  of  his  conscious  being.

"  We  were  the  first  that  ever  burst
Into  that  silent  sea."

We  at  any  I'ate  were  among  the  earliest  to  attempt  to  explore  and
map  out  that  strange,  submerged  region- — half  lumber-room  and  half
king's-treasury — where  amid  things  outworn  lie  things  unborn,  and
possibilities  of  our  unimaginable  Future  lurk  among  the  exuviw  of  our
immemorable  Past.  And  yet  in  this  confusion  all  is  implicitly  con-
gruous and  consecutive  ;  each  trace  of  faculty,  whether  it  lie  behind
our  actual  stage  of  j^rogress  or  before,  belongs  to  a  series  of  develop-
ments of  personality  whose  terms  have  no  assignable  limit ; — a  series
which  carries  us  onward  without  a  break,  from  dream  and  hallucina-
tion and  bewilderment,  up  to  the  utterances  of  discarnate  spirits  and
the  visions  of  ecstasy.

For,  in  truth,  from  the  minds  inward  vision  we  may  learn  more
than  from  the  seeing  of  the  eye ;  from  inward  audition  more  than
from  the  hearing  of  the  ear.  The  mdomatisms  which  steal  their  way
upward  from  hidden  depths  to  manifestation  amid  man's  sensory  per-
ceptions and  voluntary  acts  are  found  on  analysis  to  contain  elements
of  knowledge  not  attainable  in  any  noi'mal  fashion.  Such  knowledge
is  shown  in  telepathic  messages  between  living  men,  and  in  apparitions
which  tell  of  men  dj^ing,  and  in  evidential  messages  from  men  whom
we  call  dead.  All  this — in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  and  in  fourteen
volumes  of  Proceedings — I  claim  that  we  have  adequately  shown.
And  of  late  years  we  have  advanced  and  consolidated  these  frag-
mentary and  fugitive  indications  of  the  spirit's  survival  by  certain
records  of  trance-phenomena  and  spirit-possession  ; — I'ecords  as  yet
inchoate  and  imperfect,  yet  which  must  needs  be  faced  and  dealt
with  by  all  serious  men.

8.  But  here  I  must  needs  stay  a  moment  to  prevent  any  misunder-
standing. Throughout  this  address,  of  course,  I  am  speaking  for  myself
alone.  I  am  not  giving  utterance  to  any  collective  view,  but  to  my  own
view  of  the  general  drift  and  result  of  our  collective  action.  But  at
this  point  I  know  that  most  even  of  those  who  may  have  gone  with  me
thus  far  will, — and  quite  justifiably, — suspend  their  adhesion.  Few
even  of  my  own  colleagues  have  had  full  reason  to  believe  that  matter
of  real  importance  has  yet  been  received  from  behind  the  veil,  and  in
the  world  at  large  the  general  impression  that  even  those  messages
which  look  evidentially  as  though  they  had  come  from  discarnate  spirits
are  yet  practically  futile  and  incoherent  is  strongly  and  naturally
operative  in  checking  public  interest  in  what  seems  so  strangely  baffling
a  research.


120


F.  W.  II.  Myers.


[part


I  will  not  now  protest,  as  I  might  protest,  against  the  accuracy  of
this  general  impression  of  the  actual  facts.  Accepting  it  for  the  sake
of  ai'gument,  I  will  confine  myself  to  one  simple  line  of  a  priori  reason-
ing, which  seems  tome  sufficient  to  show  what,  in  the  supposed  case,  is
our  plain,  scientific  duty.  I  say,  then,  that  if  once  it  be  admitted,
— as  we  are  now  assuming,  for  argument's  sake,  that  it  is  admitted —
that  it  is  evidentially  probable,  that  some  of  these  messages  do  indeed,
in  however  indirect  or  confused  a  manner,  emanate  from  an  unseen
world, — then  it  is  a  blasphemy  against  the  faith  of  Science  to  doubt
that  they  must  ultimately  prove  to  be  of  serious,  of  supreme
importance.

The  faith  to  whicli  Science  is  sworn  is  a  faith  in  the  uniformity,  the
coherence,  the  intelligibility  of,  at  any  rate,  the  material  universe.
Science  herself  is  but  the  practical  development  of  this  mighty
postulate.  And  if  any  phenomenon  on  which  she  chances  on  her  onward
way  seems  arbiti'ary,  or  -incoherent,  or  unintelligible,  she  does  not
therefore  suppose  that  she  has  come  upon  an  unravelled  end  in  the
texture  of  things  ;  but  rather  takes  for  granted  that  a  rational  answer
to  the  new  problem  must  somewhere  exist, — an  answer  which  will  be  all
the  more  instructive  because  it  will  involve  facts  of  which  that  first
question  must  have  failed  to  take  due  account.

This  faith  in  the  uniformity  of  material  Nature  formulates  itself  in
two  great  dogmas — for  such  they  are  ; — the  dogma  of  the  Conservation
of  Matter,  and  the  dogma  of  the  Conservation  of  Energy.  Of  the
Conservation  of  Matter,  within  earthly  limits,  we  are  fairly  well
assured  ;  but  of  the  Conservation  of  Energy  the  proof  is  far  less  com-
plete, simply  because  Energy  is  a  conception  which  does  not  belong  to
the  material  world  alone.  Life  is  to  us  the  most  important  of  all
forms  of  activity  ; — of  energy,  I  would  say, — except  that  we  cannot
transform  other  energies  into  Life,  nor  measure  in  foot-pounds  that
directive  force  which  has  changed  the  face  of  the  world.  Life  comes
we  know  not  whence  ;  it  vanishes  we  know  not  whither  ;  it  is  inter-
locked with  a  moving  system  vaster  than  that  we  know.  To  grasp  the
whole  of  its  manifestation  we  should  have  to  follow  it  into  an  unseen
world.  Yet  scientific  faith  bids  us  believe  that  there,  too,  there  is
continuity  ;  and  that  the  past  and  the  future  of  that  force  which
we  discern  for  a  moment  are  still  subject  to  universal  Law.

Believing,  then,  that  the  whole  Cosmos  is  such  as  to  satisfy  the
claims  of  human  Reason,  we  are  iri'esistibly  led  to  ask  whetlier  it
satisfies  other  claims  of  our  nature  which  are  as  imperious  as  Reason
itself.  Infinite  Intelligence  would  see  the  Cosmos  as  infinitely  in-
telligent ;  but  would  infinite  Goodness  also  see  it  as  infinitely  good  ?

We  know  too  well  the  standing  difficulties  in  the  way  of  such  an
assumption. They  are  that  which  we  call  Evil,  and  that  which  we


XXXVII.]


Presidential  Address.


121


see  as  Death.  Now  as  to  Evil, — which  for  us  here  and  now  seems  so
ineffaceable  a  blot  on  the  idea  of  Omnipotence, — we  can  perhaps  never-
theless just  conceive  that  for  the  Cosmotheorus  all  these  defects  and
incompatibilities  of  human  impulse  and  sensibility  may  seem  as
relatively  infinitesimal  in  the  unimaginable  Sum  of  Things,  as  foi-
us  are  the  whirl  and  clashing  of  molecules  in  the  dewdrop,  which
cannot  mar  for  our  %asion  its  crystalline  calm.

But  death,  as  it  presents  itself  to  us,  cannot  be  similarly  explained
away.  If  it  be  really,  as  it  seems,  a  sheer  truncation  of  moral
progress,  absolute  alike  for  the  individual  and  for  the  race, — then
any  human  conception  of  a  moral  universe  must  simply  be  given
up.  "We  are  shut  in  land-locked  pools  ;  why  speak  to  us  of  an  in-
finite seal

What,  then,  should  be  the  impulse,  what  the  faith  of  Science,  if  she
finds  even  the  least  I'eason  to  suspect  that  this  truncation  is  in  fact
illusory  ;  that  on  the  moral  side  also  there  is  conservation  and  persist-
ence ; — conservation  not  only  of  such  ether-vortices  as  we  assume  to
underlie  our  visible  matter,  but  of  the  spiritual  systems  or  syntheses
which  underlie  the  personalities  of  men'? — persistence  not  onl}^  of  crude
transformable  energies,  but  of  those  specific  non-transformable  energies
which  inform  a  Plato  or  a  Newton,  and  which  seem  the  only  com-
mensurate object  towards  which  the  whole  process  of  evolution  can
tend  1  Surely  in  such  a  case,  whatever  dreaminess  or  confusion  may
mark  the  opening  of  intercourse  with  worlds  indefinitely  remote.
Science  should  summon  all  her  fundamental  trust  in  the  coherence,
the  intelligibility  of  things,  to  assure  her  that  the  dreaminess  must  jjass
and  the  confusion  clear,  and  that  the  veriest  rudiment  of  communica-
tion between  world  and  world  bears  yet  the  promise  of  completing  and
consummating  her  own  mighty  dogmas, — of  effecting  a  unification  of  the
universe  such  as  she  has  never  ventured  to  hope  till  now  1  What  are
our  petty  human  preconceptions  worth  in  such  a  case  as  this  1  If  it
was  absui'd  to  refuse  to  listen  to  Kepler,  because  he  bade  the  planets
move  in  no  perfect  circles,  but  in  undignified  ellipses ; — because  he
liastened  and  slackened  from  liour  to  hour  what  ought  to  be  a  heavenly
body's  ideal  and  unwavering  .speed  ; — is  it  not  absurder  still  to  refuse
to  listen  to  these  voices  from  afar,  because  they  come  stammering  and
wandering  as  in  a  dream  confusedly,  instead  of  with  a  trumpet's  call  ?
because  spirits  that  bend  nigh  to  earth  may  undergo,  perhaps,  an
earthly  bewilderment,  and  suffer  unknown  limitations,  and  half  remem-
ber us  and  half  forget  1

Nay  !  in  the  end  it  is  not  for  us  to  choose  ; — we  needs  must  join  in
this  communion  with  what  grace  we  may.  We  cannot,  if  we  would,
transform  ourselves  into  the  mere  cynical  spectators  of  an  irrational
universe. We  are  part  and  parcel  of  these  incredible  phenomena  ;  our


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[part


own  souls  shall  soon  be  feeling  the  same  attraction,  the  same  hesitancy,
upon  the  further  shore.

"  I  ;iin  the  doubter  and  the  doubt,
And  I  the  song  the  Brahman  sings."

Let  us  do  what  we  can,  then,  to  dignify  the  situation.  Let  us  try,  then,
whether  a  more  seriovis  response  on  our  part  may  enable  the  sender's  of
the  messages  to  speak  with  clearer  voice.  To  whose  care  indeed  has  such
response  been  hitherto  for  the  most  jaart  left  1  May  not  the  instances
where  adequate  precautions  have  been  taken,  adequate  record  made,  be
counted  on  the  fingers  of  one  hand  ?  Might  not  our  unseen  corre-
spondents turn  the  tables  on  us  when  we  complain  of  their  incapacity,  and
ask  whether  it  was  worth  while  to  do  better  for  the  "  domestic  muffs  "  of
Mme.  Blavatsky's  far-famed  cenacle,  or  for  the  sitters  at  the  "materiali-
sation seances  "  of  the  "  Vampires  of  Onset "  1

Assuredly  we  modern  men  have  taken,  in  other  quarters,  more
trouble  than  here  is  needed,  with  far  less  hope  of  reward.  What  lias
given  its  worth  to  the  study  of  comparative  religions  except  our  steady
effort  to  compi-ehend  and  to  co-ordinate  such  childish  and  stammering
utterances  as  have  marked  the  rise  in  one  nation  after  another  of  those
spiritual  needs  and  conceptions  which  make  in  the  end  the  truest  unity
of  the  race  of  man  1  What  should  we  have  learnt  from  the  Vedas,
from  the  Book  of  the  Dead — nay,  froin  the  Christian  records  them-
selves— had  we  approached  those  sacred  texts  in  the  spirit  alternately
of  Simple  Simon  and  of  Voltaire '?

9.  The  time,  I  think,  is  ripe  for  a  generalisation  wider  than  any
which  those  ancient  books  contain.  For  just  as  a  kind  of  spiritual
fusion  of  Europe  under  Roman  sway  prepared  the  way  for  Christianity
to  become  the  European  I'eligion,  so  now  also  it  seems  to  me  that  a
growing  conception  of  the  unity,  the  solidarity,  of  the  human  race  is
preparing  the  way  for  a  world-religion  which  expresses  and  rests  upon
that  solidarity  ; — which  conceives  it  in  a  fuller,  more  vital  fashion  than
either  Positivist  or  Catholic  had  ever  dreamed.  For  the  new  conception
is  neither  of  benefactors  dead  and  done  for,  inspiring  us  automatically
from  their  dates  in  an  almanac,  nor  of  shadowy  saints  imagined  to
intercede  for  us  at  Tribunals  more  shadowy  still  ; — but  rather  of  a
human  unity, — close-linked  beneath  an  unknown  Sway, — wherein  every
man  who  hath  been  or  now  is  makes  a  living  element ; — inalienably
incorporate,  and  imperishably  co-operant,  and  joint-inheritor  of  one
infinite  Hope.

Of  course,  I  am  not  here  supposing  that  any  human  gaze  can  pierce
deeply  into  the  world  unseen.  Such  communion  as  we  may  hold  with
spirits  in  any  degree  comparable  with  ourselves  must  needs  be  on  a
level  far  beneath  tlie  lowest  of  "  Thrones,  Dominations,  Princedoms,


XXXVII.]


Presidential  Address.


12.?


Virtues,  Powers"; — nay,  must  be  in  the  very  vestibule  and  antechamber
of  the  outermost  of  the  courts  of  Heaven.  These  souls  of  ours  are  but
infantum  animce  flentes  in  limine  jyrimo  ; — the  first  and  humblest  con-
scious links  in  a  wonderful  order ; — trembling  still  and  half-bewildered
at  a  future  vaster  than  we  know.  I  do  not  presume  to  forecast  what
we  may  come  in  time  to  learn ;  I  only  say  that  for  the  present  hour
there  will  be  enough  of  motive  to  urge  us  to  utmost  effort  to  rise  in  the
scale  of  being,  if  we  can  once  be  certain  that  such  noble  spirits  as  we
have  known  by  earthly  intercourse  or  earthly  record  do  still  concern
themselves  with  our  progress,  and  still  from  their  higher  vantage-ground
call  to  us  that  all  is  well.

Men  objected  of  old  to  Copernicus  that  if  our  earth  really  swept
round  the  sun  in  so  vast  an  orbit,  there  should  be  an  apparent  displace-
ment— a  parallax — in  the  position  of  the  fixed  stars.  >Such  parallax
was  long  sought  in  vain  ;  till  at  last  advancing  skill  detected  it  in
some  few  stars  nearer  than  the  I'est ;  and  our  relation  to  these  near
luminaries  proved  to  us  our  veritable  voyage  through  the  star-strewn
deep.  Perhaps  in  the  spiritual  world  as  well  we  have  strained  our  gaze
too  exclusively  on  luminaries  that  are  beyond  the  parallactic  limit  ;
and  eyes  tui'ned  steadily  on  some  nearer  brightness  may  teach  us  at
last  our  kinship  and  community  in  the  firmament  of  souls.

Not,  then,  with  tears  and  lamentations  should  we  think  of  the
blessed  dead.  Rather  we  should  rejoice  with  them  in  their  enfranchise-
ment, and  know  that  they  are  still  minded  to  keep  us  as  sharers  in
their  joy.  It  is  they,  not  we,  who  are  working  now  ;  they  are  more
ready  to  hear  than  we  to  pray  ;  they  guide  us  as  with  a  cloudy  pillar,
but  it  is  kindling  into  steadfast  fire.

Nay,  it  may  be  that  our  response,  our  devotion,  is  a  needful  element
in  their  ascending  joy  ;  and  God  may  have  provided  some  better  thing
for  us,  that  they  without  us  should  not  be  made  f)erfect ; — nt  non  sine
nobis  consummarentur.

10.  To  most  of  my  hearers  I  doubt  not  that  this  forecast  of  a  coming
co-operation  between  incarnate  and  discarnate  spirits  will  have  seemed
speculative  and  premature.  My  defence  is  that  I  believe  that  upon
our  own  attitude  towards  these  nascent  communications  their  progress
and  development  depend,  so  that  we  cannot  too  soon  direct  serious
attention  to  the  high  responsibilities  opening  on  our  view.  And  now
yet  another  practical  question  is  ready,  I  think,  for  immediate  discus-
sion. All  great  changes  in  speculative  belief  must  modify  in  some
way  man's  immediate  duty.  In  what  way  must  our  idea  of  duty  be
modified,  be  expanded,  if  a  religion  is  offered  to  us  which  no  longer
depends  on  tradition  and  intuition  only,  but  on  reason  also  and  on
experiment ;  which  is  not  locked  away  in  an  emotional  compartment  of


124


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[part


our  being,  nor  adapted  to  the  genius  of  special  races  alone,  but  is  oecu-
menical as  Science  is  oecumenical,  is  evolutionary  as  Science  is  evolu-
tionary, and  rests  on  a  permanent  and  provable  relationship  of  the
whole  spiritual  to  the  whole  material  world  \

No  full  answer  to  such  a  question  can  as  yet  be  attempted  or
divined.  But  one  point  is  clear  ; — and  on  that  point  it  is  already
urgently  necessary  to  insist.  We  must  maintain,  in  old  theological
language,  that  the  intellectual  virtues  have  now  become  necessary  to
salvation.  Curiosity,  candour,  care ; — these  are  the  intellectual
virtues; — disinterested  curiosity,  unselfish  candour,  unremitting  care.
These  virtues  have  grown  up  outside  the  ecclesiastical  pale ;  Science,
not  Religion,  has  fostered  them ; — nay.  Religion  has  held  them  scarcely
consistent  with  that  pious  spirit  which  hopes  to  learn  by  humility
and  obedience  the  secrets  of  an  unseen  world.  Here  surely  our  new
ideals  suggest  not  opposition  but  fusion.  To  us  as  truly  as  to  monk
or  anchorite  the  spiritual  world  is  an  intimate,  an  interpenetrating
reality.  But  its  very  reality  suggests  the  need  of  analysis,  the  risk  of
misinterpretation  ;  the  very  fact  that  we  have  outgrown  our  sacerdotal
swaddling-clothes  bids  us  learn  to  walk  warily  among  pitfalls  which
call  for  all  the  precautions  which  systematic  reason  can  devise.

Upon  a  new  scheme  of  beliefs,  attractive  to  the  popular  mind  as  the
scheme  which  I  prefigure,  a  swarm  of  follies  and  credulities  must
inevitably  perch  and  settle.  Yet  let  those  who  mock  at  the  weaknesses
of  "  modern  Spiritualism  "  ask  themselves  to  what  extent  either  ortho-
dox religion  or  official  science  has  been  at  pains  to  guard  the  popular
mind  against  losing  balance  upon  contact  with  new  facts,  profoundly
but  obscurely  significant  ?  Have  the  people's  religious  instructors
trained  them  to  investigate  for  themselves  1  Have  their  scientific
instructors  condescended  to  investigate  for  them  Who  should  teach
them  to  apply  to  their  "  inspirational  speakers  "  any  test  more  searching
than  they  have  been  accustomed  to  apply  to  the  sermons  of  priest  or
bishop  %  What  scientific  manual  has  told  them  enough  of  the  hidden
powers  within  tliem  to  prevent  them  from  ascribing  to  spiritual  agency
whatever  mental  action  their  ordinary  consciousness  may  fail  to  recog-
nise as  its  own  1

The  rank  and  file  of  Spiritists  have  simply  transferred  to  certain
new  dogmas — for  most  of  which  they  at  least  have  some  comjprehensible
evidence — the  uncritical  faith  which  they  were  actually  commended  for
bestowing  on  certain  old  dogmas, — for  many  of  which  the  evidence  was
at  least  beyond  their  comprehension.  In  such  a  case  ridicule  is  no
remedy.  The  remedy  lies,  as  I  have  said,  in  inculcating  the  intellectual
virtues ; — in  teaching  the  mass  of  mankind  that  the  maxims  of  the
modern  savant  are  at  least  as  necessary  to  salvation  as  the  maxims  of
the  medipeval  saint.


XXXVII.]


Presidential  Address.


125


11.  Now  here,  I  take  it,  lies  the  special,  the  characteristic  duty  of
the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.  It  is  a  duty  far  wider  than  the  mere
exposure  of  fraud  ;  far  wider  than  the  mere  production  of  specimens  of
patient  and  intelligent  investigation. Our  duty  is  not  the  founding  of

a  new  sect,  nor  even  the  establishment  of  a  new  science,  but  is  rather  .
the  expansion  of  Science  herself  until  she  can  satisfy  those  questions
which  the  human  heart  will  rightly  ask,  but  to  which  Religion  alone  has
thus  far  attempted  an  answer.  Or  rather,  this  is  the  duty,  the  mission,  of
the  coming  century's  leaders  of  spiritual  thought.  Our  own  more  special
duty  is  to  offer  through  an  age  of  transition  more  momentous  than  man-
kind has  ever  known,  that  help  in  steadying  and  stimulating  psychical  .
research  all  over  the  world  which  our  collective  experience  should
enable  us  richly  to  bestow.  Such  function  ought,  I  say,  to  be  ours
indeed.  We  alone  have  taken  the  first  steps  to  deserve  it.  I  see
<jur  original  programme  completely  justified.  -I  see  our  raison  d'etre
indisputably  established.  I  see  all  things  coming  to  pass  as  we
foresaw.  What  I  do  not  see,  alas  !  is  an  energy  and  capacity  of  our
own,  sufficient  for  our  widening  duty ; — enough  of  labourers  for  the
vineyard  so  ripe  for  harvest.  Speaking,  if  so  I  may,  for  the  remnant
of  that  small  company  of  labourers  of  the  first  hour  of  the  day,  I  must
confess  that  our  strength,  at  least,  cannot  suffice  for  the  expanding
task  : — nay,  could  not  so  suffice,  even  if  Edmund  Gurney  were  with  us
still ; — 71071,  si  ipse  meus  mmc  adforet  Hector.  Other  workers,  good
men  and  true,  have  joined  themselves  to  us; — but  we  have  need  of  many
more.  We  invite  them  from  each  department  of  science,  from  every
school  of  thought.  AVith  equal  confidence  we  appeal  for  co-operation
to  savant  and  to  saint.

12.  To  the  sava7it  we  point  out  that  we  are  not  trying  to  pick
holes  in  the  order  of  Nature,  but  rather,  by  the  scrutiny  of  residual
phenomena,  to  get  nearer  to  the  origin  and  operation  of  Nature's
central  mystery  of  Life.  Men  who  realise  that  the  etherial  environ-
ment was  discovered  yesterday  need  not  deem  it  impossible  that  a
metetlierial  environment — yet  another  omnipresent  system  of  cosmic
law — should  be  discovered  to-morrow.  The  only  valid  «  2^riori  pre
sumption  in  the  matter  is  the  presumption  that  the  Universe  is  infinite
in  an  infinite  number  of  ways.

To  the  Christian  we  can  speak  with  a  still  more  direct  appeal.
"You  believe,"  I  would  say,  "that  a  spiritual  Avorld  exists,  and  that  it
acted  on  the  material  world  two  thousand  years  ago.  Surely  it  is  so
acting  still !  Nay,  you  believe  that  it  is  so  acting  still ;  for  you  believe
that  prayer  is  heard  and  answered.  To  believe  that  prayer  is  heard  is
to  believe  in  telepathy — in  the  direct  influence  of  mind  on  mind.  To
believe  that  prayer  is  answered  is  to  believe  that  unembodied  spirit  does
actually  modify  (even  if  not  storm-cloud  or  plague-germ)  at  least  the


126


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[PAET


minds,  and  therefore  the  brains,  of  living  men.  From  that  belief  the
most  advanced  '  psychical '  theories  are  easy  corollaries.  You  may  reply,
indeed,  that  the  Church,  or  the  Bible,  has  told  men  all  of  the  unseen
world  that  they  need  to  know,  and  that  whatsoever  is  more  than  this
Cometh  of  evil.  What  say  you  to  this  argument  when  it  is  retorted  on
you  by  Omar  with  his  Koran  1 "

But  let  us  cease  to  speak  as  though  the  infinite  Unseen  World
were  a  mere  preserve  or  battle-ground  of  theologies.  If  every  dogma
ever  promulgated  from  tlie  Vatican  were  literal  truth,  Science  would
still  affirm  that  scarcely  anything  of  that  world  was  known.  If
Religion  be  more  than  "  the  guess  of  a  worm  in  the  dust,  and  the
shadow  of  its  desire,"  it  must  be  (I  say  once  more)  the  spirit's  normal
answer  to  objective  fact.  The  Cosmos  is  what  it  is,  and  Revelation
can  do  no  more  than  reveal  it.  Holiness  itself  must  be  the  reflection
of  a  reality  behind  the  veil.  If  this  be  so,  then  Science  has  come  not
to  destroy  but  to  fulfil  ;  Religion  must  needs  evolve  into  Knowledge ;
for  Religion  can  in  no  age  admit  an  aim  narrower  than  the  prayer  of
Cleanthes, — the  willing  response  of  the  soul  to  all  she  knows  of
cosmic  law.

Out  of  the  long  Stone  Age  our  race  is  awakening  into  conscious-
ness of  itself.  We  stand  in  the  dawn  of  history.  Behind  us  lies  a  vast
and  unrecorded  waste — the  mighty  struggle  himianam  condere  (jentem.
Since  the  times  of  that  ignorance  we  have  not  yet  gone  far ;  a  few
thousand  years,  a  few  hundred  thinkers,  have  barely  started  the  human
mind  upon  the  gi'eat  seons  of  its  onward  way.  It  is  not  yet  the  hour  to
sit  down  in  our  studies  and  try  to  eke  out  Ti'adition  with  Intuition —
as  one  might  be  forced  to  do  in  a  planet's  senility,  by  the  glimmer  of  a
fading  sun.  Dajjhni,  quid  antiquos  sicpiorum  suspicis  ortus  ?  The
traditions,  the  intuitions  of  our  race  are  themselves  in  their  infancy ;
and  bef(,>re  we  abandon  ourselves  to  brooding  over  them  let  us  at  least
first  try  the  upshot  of  a  systematic  search  for  actual  facts.  For  what
should  hinder  ?  If  our  inquiry  lead  us  first  through  a  jungle  of  fraud
and  folly,  need  that  alarm  us  1  As  well  might  Columbus  have  yielded
to  the  sailors'  panic,  when  he  was  entangled  in  the  Sai'gasso  Sea.  If
our  first  clear  facts  about  the  Unseen  World  seem  small  and  trivial,
should  that  deter  us  from  the  quest  ■?  As  well  might  Columbus  have
sailed  home  again,  with  America  in  the  offing,  on  the  ground  that  it
was  not  worth  while  to  discover  a  continent  which  manifested  itself
only  by  dead  logs.

One  final  word  to  each  main  division  of  our  critics  ; — to  those  first
who  have  been  disappointed  so  often  that  they  refuse  to  listen  to  any
furthei'  promise  of  news  from  the  Unseen  ; — and  then  to  those  who
relying  on  some  grander  revelation, — whether  received  from  without
them or from within, — disdain our  slow collective process  and


XXXVII.]


Presidential  Address.


127


comminuted  fragments  of  truth.  I  would  remind  tlie  Agnostic  that  a
pike  was  once  kept  in  the  same  tank  with  a  perch.  There  was  at  first
a  sheet  of  glass  between  them  ;  and  the  pike  bruised  his  nose  so  often
in  snapping  at  the  perch  that  in  time  he  gave  up  that  endeavour — as
the  Agnostic  his  endeavour  after  proof  of  a  spiritual  world — with  a
sigh  or  a  sneer.  Then  silently  the  transparent  screen  was  removed  ;
but  now  the  pike  was  so  con^'inced  that  his  prey  was  unreachable
that — like  the  Agnostic  in  presence  of  our  new  evidence — he  continued
simply  to  let  the  perch  alone.

For  those  other  men  I  will  resoi't  to  a  bold  metonymy,  and  will  sjoeak
of  that  great  incurrent  truth  to  which  each  man  severally  holds  under
the  figure  of  the  great  stone  at  Ephesus  which  fell  down  from  Juj^iter.
The  faithful  who  proclaimed  that  wondi'ous  fall  wei'e  essentially  in  the
right, — were  far  more  in  the  right  than  the  freethinkers  who  derided
it.  But  whence  and  why  that  stone  had  truly  fallen, — how  vast  the
significance  of  that  cosmic  trajectory  and  rushing  flame, — this  could
be  known  only  when  humble  labourers  had  catalogued  many  a  lesser
congener  of  the  mighty  mass  ;  and  had  gathered  the  meteoric  dust
from  the  ocean's  floor  ;  and  had  learnt  that  no  field  of  heaven  had
been  found  so  desolate  as  not  to  carry  still  the  impress  of  ultimate
energy  and  universal  law.


PROCEEDIi^GS

OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH,

PART  XXXVIII.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS.


The  106th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  AVest-
minster  Town  Hall  on  Friday,  June  22nd,  1900,  at  4  p.m.  ;  the
President,  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  in  the  chair.

The  President  read  parts  of  the  paper  on  "Pseudo-Possession"
which  is  printed  below.


The  lOTth  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Alonday,
July  16th,  1900,  at  8. .30  p.m.  ;  the  President  in  the  chair.

The  President  read  a  paper  on  "  Trance-Utterance  and  other
Phenomena  observed  with  jMrs.  Thompson."


M


130


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


I.

ON THE  SO-CALLED  DIVINING  ROD.

A  PSYCHO-PHYSICAL  RESEAKCH  ON  A  PECULIAR  FACULTY  ALLEGED  TO  EXIST  IN
CERTAIN  PERSONS  LOCALLY  KNOWN  AS  DOWSERS  :

By  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  etc.,

Professor  of  Experimental  Physics  in-  the  Royal  College  of  Science  for  Ireland.


BOOK  II.

TABLE OF  CONTENTS.


Part  I.

PAGE

Introductory. Objects  of  Investigation  : — Has  the  Dowser  a  Special

Faculty  ? If  so,  of  what  nature  ? Cause  of  Movement  of  Rod  132-143


Part  II.

Experiments  by  the  Author. §  1.  The  Carrigoona  Experiments.

§2.  Experiments  at  Kingstown ... ... ... ...  144-163


Part  III.

Cases  where  the  Dowser  found  a  Good  Supply  of  Underground
Water'  near  to  a  Useless  Well  or  Boring  previously  Sunk
to  as  Great  or  Greater  Depth  :  e.g.,  at — (1)  Shanklin,  (2)
Errol,  (3)  Lytes  Cary  (Somerset),  (4)  Sherburn-in-Elmet,  (5)  Tid-
dington  House  (Oxford),  (6)  Chelford  (Cheshire),  (7)  Welwyn,
(8)  Minting,  (9)  Haddington,  (10)  Aspley  Heath  (Bedford)  164-186


Part  IV.

Experiments  with  Two  or  More  Dowsers  Independently  Tried
ON  the  Same  Ground  :  at — (1)  Cheltenham,  (2)  Westbury-sub-
Mendip,  (3)  Thomastown,  (4)  Claverton  Manor,  (5)  Pontyberim,
(6)  Mayfield 187-199


Part  V.

Experiments  in  Blindfolding  the  Dowser  :  by — (1)  the  Author,
(2)  Mr.  Pease,  (3)  Lord  Winchilsea  and  othei's,  (4)  Mr.  Hoskyns,
(5)  Mr.  Westlake,  (G)  Mr.  Denison,  (7)  Dr.  Thouvenel,  (8)  Judge
Spinks,  (9)  Mr.  Withnell,  (10)  Mr.  Emerson 200-213


xxxviil]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


131


Part  VI.

Details  of  a  Few  Fukthek  Cases  of  Amateur  Dowsers  :  (1)  Sir  R.
Harington,  Bart.,  (2)  Mr.  E.  Hippisley,  (3)  Mr.  J.  H.  Jones,
(4)  Mr.  J.  D.  Enys,  (5)  Mr.  J.  F.  Young,  (6)  Mr.  R.  G.  D.  Tosswill,
(7)  Mr  G.  H.  Ward-Humphreys,  (8)  Mr.  G.  F.  Attree ...  214-225


Part  VII.

Miscellaneous  Cases  :  From  the  Rt.  Hon.  Sir  Edward  Fry,  Colonel _

King-Harman,  &c • 220-233


Part  VIII.

Professional  Dowsers  in  England  and  Wales  and  their  Probable
Percentage  of  Failures  :  §  1.  List  of  Dowsers  ;  §  2.  Recent
Cases  of  Complete  or  Partial  Failure  in  Water-finding  by  English
Dowsers  ;  §  3.  Percentage  of  Failures 234-242


Part  IX.

Continental,  Colonial  and  Californian  Cases  of  the  Use  of  the
Rod  in  the  Search  for  Underground  Water  :  §  1.  Continental
Dowsers  ;  §  2.  Californian  Dowsers  ;  §  3.  South  African  Dowsers  ;
§  4.  Australian  Dowsers 243-256


Part  X.

Bleton,  the  Notable  French  Dowser  of  the  Last  Century  257-275


Part  XI.

Involuntary  Muscular  Action  and  the  Motion  of  the  Rod,  Pen-
DULE,  or  Other  Autosoope.  Motoli- Automatism  :  §  1.  Evidence
of  the  Automatic  and  Uncontrollable  Motion  of  the  Rod  ;
§  2.  Evidence  of  Physiologists ;  §  3.  Consideration  of  Bleton's
Case  ;  §  4.  Apparent  Transmission  of  Motor  Automatism  ;  §  5.
Historical  Note • 276-298


Part  XII.

The  Malaise  of  the  Dowser  and  its  Origin 299-302


Part  XIII.

Origin  of  the  Stimulus  that  Gives  Rise  to  the  Motor-Automatism
OF  THE  Dowser:  §  1.  Is  it  Derived  through  the  Ordinary  Channels
of  Sense  ?  §  2.  Is  it  mere  Chance,  or  a  Supernormal  Perceptive
Power  ?  §  3.  Is  a  Physical  Cause  Likely  ?  §  4.  Probable  Explana-
tion of  Outstanding  Cases. Conclusions 30c

M  2


132


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Appendices.

A.  Report  on  some  Cases  of  Water-finding  by  the  Divining-rod,  by


E.  Westlake,  F.G.S 315

B.  Note  on  the  Geology  of  Somerset,  by  E.  Westlake,  F.G.S. ...  340

C.  U.se  of  the  Rod  in  the  Search  for  Mineral  Lodes. Mr.  Westlake's

Experiments  in  Dowsing  for  Miaerals  at  Sidcot ... ... ...  343

D.  Paramelle 352

E.  Evidence  of  Clairvoyance  in  Dowsei's  ... ... ... ... ...  359

F.  The  Zahoris 367

G.  Scientific  and  Literary  Opinion... ... ... ... ... ...  373


"  In  the  sciences,  that  also  is  looked  upon  as  property  which  has  been
handed  down  or  tanglit  at  the  Universities.  And  if  any  one  advances  any-
thing new,  ....  people  resist  with  all  their  might  ;  they  act  as  if
they  neither  heard  nor  could  comjDrehend  ;  they  speak  of  the  new  view  with
contemjit,  as  if  it  were  not  worth  the  trouble  of  even  so  much  as  an  investi-
gation, or  a  regard  ;  and  thus  a  new  truth  may  wait  a  long  time  l)efore  it
can  make  its  way."  {Gonversaiions  of  Goetlie  with  Ed:cniiann  and  So  ret ;
translated  by  J.  Oxenford  ;  Bc^hn's  Standard  Library,  1874,  pp.  47-8.)


PART  I.
Introductory.

After  my  previous  lengthy  paper  "  On  the  So-called  Divining
Rod,"  published  in  Part  XXXII.  (Vol.  XIII.)  of  our  Proceedings,  some
apology  is  due  for  a  second  paper  on  this  subject ;  the  more  so  as  the
subject  itself,  to  most  intelligent  people,  ajspears  a  contemptible  one
and  unworthy  of  prolonged  and  serious  scientific  inquiry.  It  certainly
is  not  one  I  should  have  chosen  for  investigation.  However,  having
been  virged  to  undertake  it,  those  who  may  have  had  the  patience  to
read  the  mass  of  evidence  given  in  my  former  paper  will  probably  have
come  to  the  same  conclusion  as  that  to  which  I  have  been  led, — in  spite
of  very  diflerent  preconceived  ideas, — namely,  that  the  whole  subject  is
one  eminently  worthy  of  careful  investigation  ;  not  only  as  a  question  of
folk  lore  and  of  historical  interest,  but  also  because  several  probleras
of  considerable  psychological  and  also  physiological  interest  appear  to
be  involved.  In  addition  to  which  the  main  problem  before  us  is  a
settlement  of  the  disputed  point  whether  mere  shrewdness,  an  "  eye
for  the  ground  "  and  experience  on  the  part  of  the  so-called  "  diviner  "
afford  a  sufficient  explanation  of  the  success  which  he  so  often  achieves.

It  is  true  that  the  subject  at  first  dispirits  and  repels  the
investigator  from  the  quantity  of  rubbish  that  overlays  it  and  the
credulity  and  ignorance  that  surround  it,  and  which  characterise  so
many  of  the  enthusiastic  votaries  and  writers  on  the  divining  rod,  both
in  ancient  and  modern  times But  this  is  equally  true  of  many  other


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


133


obscure  questions  which  this  Society  was  founded  to  investigate,  and
it  is  our  business  to  try  and  discover,  with  tlie  divining  I'od  of  science,
the  treasure  that  is  buried  beneath  any  soil.  As  Sir  John  Herschel
has  truly  said  of  scientific  research  in  general  : — "  He  that  has  seen
obscurities,  which  appeared  impenetrable,  suddenly  dispelled,  and  the
most  barren  and  unpromising  fields  of  inquiry  converted  into  rich  and
inexhaustible  springs  of  knowledge  on  a  simple  change  of  our  point  of
view,  or  by  bringing  to  bear  on  them  some  principle  which  it  never
occurred  before  to  try,  will  be  the  last  to  acquiesce  in  any  dispiriting
prospects."!

Before  entering  upon  the  discussion  of  the  fresh  evidence  I  have
collected,  it  may  be  convenient  to  those  who  approach  this  subject  for
the  first  time  if  I  briefly  state  by  whom,  and  the  purpose  for  which,
the  divining  rod  is  at  present  employed,  and  how  it  comes  to  pass  that
what  appears  at  first  sight  to  be  a  mere  relic  of  a  superstitious  age
survives  amid  the  scientific  light  of  the  present  day.  Readers  of  uiy
previous  report  will,  T  hope,  forgive  the  repetition.

There  are  in  the  country  districts  of  England  a  certain  class  of
persons  who  profess  to  be  able  to  discover,  without  geological  or  local
knowledge,  the  exact  location  of  any  underground  "spring"  or  subter-
ranean course  of  water  supply.-  For  this  purpose  they  usually,  but
not  always,  employ  a  forked  or  Y-shaped  twig,  generally  of  hazel  or
some  pliant  wood.  Grasping  the  ends  of  the  fork  in  a  particular
manner, — to  which  great  importance  is  usually  attached,  albeit  the
mode  of  holding  has  varied  in  late  years  in  an  amusing  manner, — the
holder  fixes  his  attention  upon  the  slightly  raised  point  of  the  twig,
and  thus  becoming  as  far  as  possible  oblivious  to  the  world  around,
he  traverses  the  ground.  When  supposed  to  be  approaching  the
hidden  source  the  twig  is  seen  to  quiver,  and  when  the  "diviner"
believes  he  is  vertically  over  the  "  spring,"  so  vigorous  is  the  motion  of
the  twig  that  it  forcibly  strikes  the  holder's  body,  and,  if  short  enough
to  escape  the  body,  rotates  rapidly,  though  the  holder  appears  to  be
doing  his  utmost  to  restrain  its  motion ;  a  fact  that  he  will  emphatically
corroborate,  and  which  seems  to  be  undeniably  proved  by  one  limb  of
the  twisr  being  often  snapped  across,  under  the  strain  of  the  opposing
forces.  The  holder  of  the  twig  generally  appears  much  exhausted  by
the  effort ;  in  some  cases  he  complains  of sickness  or  giddiness,

1  Discourse  on  the  Study  of  Natural  Philosophii,  p.  8.

- 1  put  the  word  spring  in  inverted  commas,  as  this  term  is  invariably  emploj  ed  by
the  "water-finder."  As  so  used,  it  is,  however,  often  a  very  misleading  expression.
In  order  to  remove  misconception  on  the  part  of  non-geological  readers,  I  have  given
the  reason  why  this  expression  is  usually  incorrect  in  an  Appendix  on  "Geological
Views  of  the  Distribution  of  Undei'ground  Water,"  which  will  be  found  in  my
previous  Report. See  also  Appendix  B.,  p.  340,  in  the  present  Report.


134


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


occasionally  the  pulse  rises,  he  breaks  out  into  a  violent  perspiration,
and  trembles  all  over.  As  a  rule  (but  not  always)  he  asserts  that  he
experiences  singular  sensations,  resembling  muscular  cramp,  when  he
is  over  an  underground  water-course.  These  sensations  are  so  well
marked  that  in  some  cases  he  discards  the  use  of  the  twig  and  trusts
to  his  sensations  alone. ^  If  now  the  place  be  carefully  noted  beneath
which  the  hidden  water-course  is  asserted  to  exist,  the  probability
.  is  that,  however  often  the  spot  be  crossed  by  the  holder  of  the  twig,
the  same  phenomena  recur,  even  when  his  attention  is  distracted,  or
another  and  independent  diviner  employed.  Further,  if  a  well  be  dug
at  the  spot  so  indicated,  water  will  usually  be  found  at  no  great  depth
below  the  surface.  These  water-finders,  or  diviners,  are  widely  and
regularly  employed,  not  by  ignorant  folk,  but  by  some  of  the  most
distinguished  and  clever  people  in  England,  by  Cabinet  Ministers  and
Judges,  2  by  shrewd  business  men  and  large  landowners  — men  not
likely  to  waste  their  money  on  a  silly  superstition.  In  parts  of  the
south-west  of  England,  in  Somersetshire  particularly,  these  water-
finders  are  held  in  high  esteem,  and  are  known  as  "  dowsers,"  and
their  rod  as  the  "dowsing  rod."

This  alleged  power  of  finding  underground  water,  when  to  an
ordinary  observer  there  appears  nothing  to  betray  the  presence  of
a  spring  below,  is  not  confined  to  a  professional  and  paid  class
of  men,  but  is  found  among  amateurs,  young  and  old,  male  and
female,  and  in  all  classes  of  society.  Nor  is  the  dowser  only  met
with  in  England ;  he  is  found  to-day  in  some  parts  of  France,
Italy,  Switzerland,  Germany,  Denmark,  Scandinavia,  and  Finland,  and
flourishing  in  the  United  States,  Canada,  Australia,  and  doubtless
in  other  places  of  which  I  have  no  direct  evidence.  Many  instances
of  the  wide  distribution  of  the  dowser  were  given  in  my  former  paper,
and  others  will  be  given  in  the  evidence  to  be  cited  later  on.

In  my  previous  paper  I  gave  an  account  of  fourteen  contemporary
English  dowsers,  all  of  whom  make  or  add  to  their  living  by  this  means,
and,  in  addition,  evidence  was  given  of  the  practical  use  of  the  rod  by
upwards  of  thirty  amateurs  of  both  sexes  and  ranging  over  every  class
in  society,  from  elderly  magistrates  to  young  children.  Since  then
several  other  dowsers,  both  professional  and  amateur,  have  come  under
my  notice  (see  p.  234).  I  have  not,  however,  found  any  Scotch  or
Irish  professional  dowsers,  though  these  countries  regularly  invite
the  services  of  English  dowsers. I  should  say  there  are  at  the  present

1  For  a  fuller  account  of  the  sensations  alleged  to  occur  in  dowsing  and  the
evidence  thereon  see  the  discussion  of  this  subject  in  my  previous  paper,  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  Part  XXXII.,  Appendix  D.

-  For  example,  Lord  Salisbury,  Lord  Lansdowne,  and  others  ;  see  also  the
testimony  of  the  Rt.  Hon.  Sir  Edward  Fry,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.,  etc.,  p.  226.


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


135


time  in  England  at  least  a  score  of  these  men  engaged  in  the  business
of  water  finding,  and  a  very  profitable  business  some  of  them  find  it
to  be.  Curiously  enough  I  have  come  across  no  women  professional
dowsers,  though  this  is  contrary  to  what  one  might  expect.

The  etymology  of  the  word  doivsing  rod  is  uncertain  ;i  it  is  first  men-
tioned by  the  philosopher  Locke  in  1691,  who  speaks  of  the  "deusing  rod
or  virgula  divina."  Locke  was  a  native  of  Somersetshire,  born  under  the
shadow  of  the  IMeadips,  aad  for  upwards  of  two  centuries  the  Mendips
have  been,  and  still  are,  the  radiating  point  aad  stronghold  of  the
dowser.  The  term  "  dowsing  rod  "  is  preferable  to  "  divining  rod,"
as  the  latter,  or  rather  its  Latin  equivalent  virgula  divina,  was  used
by  Cicero,  Tacitus  and  other  writers  of  antiquity  to  denote  a  wholly
different  thing,  namely,  divination  by  rods  or  bits  of  stick  ;  and  no
doubt  a  good  deal  of  the  prejudice  which  the  term  divining  rod  creates
at  the  present  day  is  due  to  the  fact  that  it  suggests  to  most  people
some  form  of  rhabdomancy.  The  forked  divining  rod,  or  virgula  Jurcata,
our  modern  dowsing  rod,  is  not  much  older  than  the  age  of  printing,
and  was  first  described  in  one  of  the  earliest  treatises  on  mining,
Agricola's  De  re  Metallica,  published  in  1546;  for  its  original  use  was  in
the  search  for  metallic  ores,  and,  thus  used,  it  spread  from  South  Germany
to  the  South  of  France  and  thence  over  Europe,  reaching  England
towards  the  end  of  the  16th  century.-  Not  until  the  17th  century  was
it  used  in  the  search  for  underground  water,  but  whether  for  ores  or
water,  the  business-like  way  in  which  it  was  employed  ^  distinguished
it  from  the  ancient  virgxda  divina,  the  efficacy  of  which  was  supposed
to  depend  on  the  ceremonies  and  Kabbalistic  words  which  accompanied
its  use.  But  among  the  superstitious  and  ignorant  some  of  the
pra,ctices  of  rhabdomancy  clung  to  the  new  rod  along  with  the  old
name;  hence  it  is  that  in  several  descriptions  of  the  divining  rod  from
the  16th  century  down  to  the  present  time  we  find  special  importance

1  See  Appendix  A  to  my  former  i^aper.  With  great  deference  I  am  inclined  to
believe  the  etymology  suggested  on  p.  261  of  that  Appendix,  viz.,  from  the  middle
English  duschcn,  to  strike,  is  after  all  the  most  likely  :  the  objection  raised  to  this
by  Professor  Skeat  on  the  ground  of  the  pronunciation  being  cloicz  is  much  weakened
if  not  destroyed  by  the  fact  that  it  is  very  frequently  pronounced  in  other  ways.
Moreover  I  find  that  when  the  rod  was  first  brought  to  England  at  the  end  of  the
16th  or  beginning  of  the  17th  century,  it  was  called  "the  striking  rod,"  schlag-rutke,
by  the  German  miners  who  brought  it  over.

-  In  Germany  the  word  wiinschel  riithe  {wishing  rod)  was,  and  is  still,  used  as  the
equivalent  both  of  the  old  divining  rod,  virgula  diohia,  and  the  more  modern  dowsing
rod,  the  virgula  /areata;  though,  as  mentioned  in  the  previous  foot-note,  the  German
miners  of  the  16th  century  called  the  latter  schlag-ruthe.  Several  German  writers,
long  before  the  age  of  printing,  speak  of  the  wiinschel  rutke,  and  a  forked  ictaischel
rathe,  it  is  true,  is  referred  to  by  one  Xithart,  a  German  writer  of  tlie  14th  century,
but  in  these  early  oases  it  was  the  ancient  magic  wand,  or  virgula  divina.

■*  This  is  well  seen  in  pictures  from  Agricola's  work  and  from  Sebastian
Munster's  Cosnwgraphy,  1.550,  one  of  which  we  give  later  on,  p.  343.


136


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


attached  to  the  day  of  the  month  the  diviner  was  born,  the  particular
kind  of  twig  employed,  the  day  or  hour  on  which  it  was  cut,  or  the
way  it  turns  for  underground  water  or  metallic  ores,  etc.

Here,  for  instance,  is  an  illustration  of  the  survival  of  this  super-
stition, and  also  of  the  use  of  the  rod  in  Jutland.  In  Kristensen's
Jyshe  Folkeminder  (Popular  Traditions  of  Jutland),  published  at
Kolding,  1888,  Vol.  IX.,  Section  822,  under  the  heading,  Folketro  unci
bonde  regler  (Popular  Beliefs  and  Farming  Rules),  the  following
passage  occurs  : —

It  has  been  a  general  custom  that,  when  a  well  was  to  be  dug,  word  was
sent  for  a  "water-shower"  {vand-vim-),  who  went  over  the  ground  with  a
forked  (kloftet)  willow-wand.  If  the  twig  began  to  twist  about  in  his
hand,  there  was  water  near  the  surface,  and  digging  could  be  begun  with
confidence.

Much  the  same  procedure  was  followed  to  discover  ore.  A  two-year-old
willow-shoot  was  taken,  which  was  forked  in  growth.  If  water  was  to  bo
found  it  must  be  of  a  different  age.  One  who  can  find  ore  may  not  be  able
to  discover  water  :  it  depends  upon  what  month  they  are  born  in.  ^

Those  who  have  had  experience  of  an  investigation  of  this
kind,  where  people  are  afraid  of  being  laughed  at  for  giving  their
testimony,  will  understand  the  labour  of  obtaining  accurate  evidence
of  eye-witnesses  who  are  willing  to  append  their  names.  The  cor-
respondence entailed  in  this  inquiry  has  been  endless  ;  not  far  short
of  6,000  letters  had  to  be  written  for  the  purpose  of  my  previous
report.  Upwards  of  200  cases  of  water-finding  by  dowsers  in  recent
years  have  been  investigated  ;  in  each  case  the  independent  evidence
of  disinterested  persons  who  had  witnessed  the  expei'iments  was  sought.
Generally  speaking  such  evidence  was  obtained,  the  witnesses  allowing
their  names  and  addresses  to  be  given.  Altogether,  152  cases  of  dowsing
were  cited  in  my  previous  paper  ;  of  these  140  were  successful, — that  is,
the  predictions  of  the  dowser  were  verified,  a  well  was  sunk  on  the
spot  and  water  found  at  the  place  indicated, — and  12  were  failures.

As  one  is  far  less  likely  to  hear  of  the  failures  than  of  the
successes  of  amateurs,  let  us  confine  our  attention  only  to  the  profes-
sional dowser.  Omitting  a  remarkably  successful  series  of  cases  by  an
American  dowser,  which  Dr.  Hodgson  kindly  investigated,  105  cases  of
British  professional  dowsers  were  given  in  my  former  paper  ;  of  these
95  were  successful  and  10  were  failures. That  would  make  the  record

1  I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  W.  A.  Craigie  of  Oxford  for  kindly  searching  Kri.stensen's
woi-ks  for  me,  and  for  tlie  translation  of  the  foregoing  passage.  Jvristensen  is  an
authority  on  Dani.sh  folk-lore,  though  his  books  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  British
Museum.  The  use  of  the  divining  rod  in  another  part  of  Scandinavia  is  referred  to
in  my  previous  paper,  p.  24.5.  Professor  Lochman,  of  the  University  of  Christiania,
recently  read  a  paper  in  that  city  in  which  he  said  his  scepticism  on  the  subject  had
been  overcome  by  his  own  personal  experience  with  the  rod.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  137


of  failure  less  than  10  per  cent.,  which  is  certainly  remarkably  small.
1  have  endeavoured  to  tind  the  percentage  of  failure  which  skilled
geologists  or  other  scientilic  e.xperts  have  made  when  they  are  con-
sulted as  to  water  supply, — for  failures,  and  sometimes  very  costly
failures,  they  have, — but  it  is  difficult  to  ascertain.  1  doubt  if  their
percentage  of  failure  is  less  than  the  average  dowser's  ;  probably  it
varies  very  much  with  the  individual  employed  in  each  case.^  As
might  be  expected,  some  professional  dowsers,  especially  those  who
are  fond  of  advertising  themselves  in  newspaper  paragraphs,  have  a
poor  record,  and  some  are  unadulterated  humbugs.  These  do  their
best  to  conceal  their  failures,  and  their  success  is  probably  no  greater
than  would  have  been  obtained  had  a  well  been  sunk  at  haphazard
without  their  aid.  For  in  many  districts  of  England,  the  water-bearing
area,  for  shallow  wells,  lies  over  a  large  extent  of  country,  and  in  such
districts  one  cannot  go  far  wrong  in  sinking  anywhere.

I  may  remark  here  that,  whilst  the  idea  of  the  illiterate  dowser
concerning  the  distribution  of  underground  water  is  often  most
grotesque,  yet,  if  I  may  venture  to  say  so,  it  is  not  impossible  that
the  geologist  has  a  good  deal  to  learn  on  this  subject.  Although,
as  Mr.  T.  V.'  Holmes,  F.G.S.,  remarks,  many  dowsers  think  water
exists  here  and  there  beneath  the  surface  of  the  ground,  like  a
pot  of  buried  coins,  instead  of,  as  is  often  the  case,  in  sheets,
wherever  a  permeable  stratum,  like  sand  or  gravel,  meets  an  imper-
meable one  like  clay  or  slate ;  yet  on  the  other  hand  the  wide
practical  experience  of  those  dowsers  who  are  well-sinkei-s  has  been  too
much  overlooked  by  geologists.-  Underground  watercourses  do  exist,
under  certain  geological  conditions,  and  it  is  here,  where  an  error
can  easily  be  made,  that  the  true  test  of  the  dowser  comes  in.  In
deep  artesian  wells  skilled  geological  knowledge  is  always  necessary,
but  even  this  sometimes  fails  completely.  Now  it  must  be  remem-
bered that  the  professional  dowser  is  sublimely  ignorant  of  geology
and  has,  in  general,  a  contempt  for  science, —  as  a  rule,  he  is  an
illiterate  man.  It  was  noticed  more  than  a  century  ago,  both  in
Germany,  France,  and  England,  that  "  peasants  who  do  not  puzzle  their
minds  with  doubts  or  reasonings"  (I  quote  from  Pryce's  famous  mining
work  of  1778)  are  the  most  successful  dowsers.  This  is  true  to-day.
The  well-known  dowser,  the  late  J.  Mullins,  was  a  working  mason
and  well-sinker,  and  his  success  as  a  dowser  in  the  discovery  of  under-
ground water  was  really  phenomenal  ;  he  rarely  was  at  fault,  and  I
think  we  may  take  it  he  was  the  most  remarkable  dowser  this  century
has  produced.

1  The  geologist,  however,  labours  under  restrictions  which  the  dowser  is  free
from  ;  see  on  this  Mr.  Holmes' letter,  p.  140.
- 2  III  support  of  this  view,  see  Dr.  A.  R.  Wallace's  letter  on  p.  374.


138  Professor  IF.  F.  Barrett.  [part

Two  cases  of  John  Mullins'  success  were  critically  and  fully
investigated  in  niy  former  papei' — one  at  Horsham,  on  the  estate
of  Mr.,  now  Sir,  Henry  Harben,  and  the  other  at  Waterford,  for
the  lai'ge  factory  of  Messrs.  Ricliardson.  In  both  of  these,  as
might  be  expected,  the  best  geological  and  engineering  advice  had
been  obtained  prior  to  calling  in  the  dowser.  It  was  only  when
the  resources  of  science  were  exhausted, — over  £1,000  having  been
spent  171  each  case  in  fruitless  sinkings  and  borings  in  different
places  on  the  estate, — that  Mullins  was  at  last  sent  for,  in  1889
to  Waterford,  and  in  1893  to  Horsham.  He  was  an  entire  stranger
to  the  neighbourhood  in  both  cases,  and  was  received,  not  unnaturally,
with  a  good  deal  of  suspicion.  At  Horsham  he  quickly  pointed
out  two  places  where  an  abundant  supply  of  water  would  be  found
within  a  moderate  depth,  and  his  predictions  were  verified  to  the
letter.  I  have  visited  the  spot  and  obtained  the  evidence  of  eye-
witnesses, including  Sir  H.  Harben,  and  at  my  request  the  place
has  been  visited  by  competent  geologists.  The  case  was  ably  discussed
from  a  geological  point  of  view  by  Mr.  T.  V.  Holmes,  F.G.S.,  past
President  of  the  London  Geologists'  Association,  and  Mr.  E.  Westlake,
F.G.S.,  in  my  previous  Report,  pp.  221-230  and  278-280.

The  case  of  Waterford  is  still  more  remarkable  ;  I  will  not  repeat
the  details,  which  will  bear  careful  study,  as  it  is,  I  think,  one  of  the
most  remarkable  cases  in  the  whole  voluminous  literature  of  the  rod.
SufEce  it  to  say,  that  the  rock  there  is  of  a  hard  slaty  nature  called
Ordovician,  it  is  hidden  beneath  a  surface  bed  of  some  40  ft.  of
boulder  clay  and  in  the  search  for  water  various  wells  and  borings  had
been  fruitlessly  made,  one  boring  being  over  1,000  ft.  deep.  Not  far
from  this  deep  and  useless  boring,  made  under  the  best  scientific  advice,
Mullins  found  the  twig  turn  vigorously  ;  he  traced  what  he  said  was  a
line  of  copious  water  supply — either  a  line  of  jointing  or  a  "  fault "
in  the  hidden  rock — and  fixed  on  one  point  as  being  the  best  to  sink
the  well,  asserting  water  to  the  extent  of  1,500  gallons  an  hour  would
be  found  at  a  depth  of  some  80  or  90  ft.  I  need  not  say  that
no  one  believed  him,  but  in  despair  a  boring  was  made  at  this  spot,
when  suddenly,  at  the  depth  of  81  ft.,  water  burst  up  the  bore  tube
and  rose  half  way  to  the  surface.  After  pumping  day  and  night,  the
supply  could  not  be  run  dry  ;  it  was  measured  and  the  yield  was  found
to  be  2,000  gallons  per  hour,  which  has  been  maintained  with  but
slight  fluctuations  from  1889,  when  the  experiment  was  made,  to  the
present  time,  a  period  of  eleven  years.  These  statements  have  the
advantage  of  being  corroborated  by  eye-witnesses  and  by  letters
written  at  the  time,  not  by  gullible,  ignorant  people,  but  by  educated
men,  including  a  well-known  local  geologist,  Mr.  Budd,  who  held  as
it  were  a  watching  brief  against  Mullins  ;  and  by  Mr.  Kinahan,  a


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


139


distinguished  geologist  of  H.M.  Irish  Geological  Survey,  as  well  as  by
Mr.  Richardson  himself.  In  fact  ]Mr.  Kinahan  (who,  as  one  of  the  best
Irish  geological  authorities,  was  consulted  by  Mr.  Richardson),  writes  to
me  :  "  As  far  as  the  actual  results  went  I  failed,  and  the  diviner
'  wiped  my  eye.'  "  jSTo  surface  observation  nor  experience,  nor  "  an
eye  for  the  ground  "  can  explain  this  Waterford  case,  nor  some  others
I  shall  refer  to  in  the  sequel.

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  opinion  of  competent  geologists  who
have  kindly  given  me  their  aid  in  this  inquiry,  several  cases  where  the
dowser  has  had  a  striking  success,  and  which  at  first  sight  appear  to
suggest  some  power  transcending  any  recognised  faculty,  were  found,
upon  geological  observation  on  the  spot,  to  be  capable  of  explanation
by  the  rapid  detection  of  surface  indications  of  underground  water
by  the  dowser.  This  will  be  seen  from  the  useful  geological  notes
Mr.  T.  V.  Holmes,  F.G.S.,  has  kindly  appended  to  some  of  the  cases
in  the  previous  and  also  in  the  present  Report.  A  fuller  investigation
of  several  cases  was,  at  my  request,  undertaken  by  Mr.  E.  Westlake,
F.G.S.,  who  has  made  a  special  study  of  hydro-geology,  and  whose
valuable  co-operation  throughout  this  inquiry  I  have  already  acknow-
ledged. Mr.  Westlake  selected  a  group  of  cases,  given  in  the  previous
Report,  which  appeared  to  be  evidential  of  some  special  faculty
possessed  by  the  dowser,  and  visited  each  of  the  places ;  the  result
of  his  investigations  is  given  in  the  able  paper  which  forms  an
Appendix  to  the  present  Report,  see  p.  315.  It  will  be  observed
that  Mr.  Westlake  is  of  opinion  that  many  of  these  cases  can  be
explained  without  calling  in  the  aid  of  any  novel  faculty  or  instinct
on  the  part  of  the  dowser — merely  a  sharp  eye  for  the  groiind  was
required.  At  the  same  time  we  must  remember  it  is  much  easier
to  prophesy  after  the  event  than  before  it,  and  it  remains  to  be  seen
whether  our  geological  friends  would  have  thought  the  location  of
the  site  in  these  cases  quite  as  obvious  before  the  well  had  been  sunk,
or  the  dowser  had  visited  the  spot,  as  it  seemed  to  be  afterwards.
However  that  may  be,  I  gratefully  accept  the  opinion  of  geological
experts,  and  will  here  quote  a  letter  which  expresses  Mr.  Holmes'
views  on  the  subject.

28,  Crooms  Hill,  Greenwich  Park,  London,  S.E.,

December  18A,  1899.

I  may  add  that  I  am  attracted,  not  repelled,  by  the  supernormal,  for
our  senses  must  give  us  extremely  limited  perceptions  of  things  as  compared
with  the  {)erceptions  jjossible  to  more  highly  gifted  beings.  Hence,  among
ourselves,  there  is  no  improbability  in  the  existence  of  powers  of  special  per-
ception in  individual  cases,  even  though  the  total  range  of  perception
may  not  be  supernormal.  Thus  if  the  line  A.B.  represents  the  normal  range
of  a  sense,  there  may  be  abnormally  gifted  persons  whose  range  is  not


140


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


greater,  but  is  more  extensive  at  one  end  of  the  scale,  if  correspondingly-
less  so  at  the  other,  like  the  line  CD.

A.  B.

C.  D.


However,  it  has  always  struck  me  that  while  stories  of  apparitions,  &c.,
are  treated  with  a  curious  ultra-scepticism  in  many  cases,  the  dowser's
claims  to  supernormal  powers  have  been  admitted  with  the  most  extra-
ordinary alacrity.  1

As  the  position  of  our  old  towns  and  villages  testifies,  the  men  who  knew
where  water  might  be  attained  at  a  depth  of  from  5  to  50  ft.  have  always
been  with  us.  Geologists  generally  do  not  trouble  themselves  with  water,
as  regards  supply  for  dwellings,  though  anxious  to  know  whether  the  super-
ficial formations  are  deep  sea,  shallow  sea,  estuarine  river,  glacial,  etc.
And  the  cholera  in  the  first  half  of  the  century  so  discredited  water  from
superficial  deposits  that  supplies  from  those  sources  have  not  been  trusted,
even  when  sufficiently  good.  Tire  dowser's  supply  is  voted  excellent,  and
he  is  triumphant  where  a  hydro-geologist  would  feel  that  he  would  be
deservedly  blamed  for  recommending  it,  should  it  become  polluted  and  cause
disease.

All  I  feel  is  that  an  eye  for  ground  can  do  very  much  and  can  be
immensely  developed  by  experience.  The  dowser  needs  no  geological  know-
ledge beyond  what  he  might  liave  had  a  century  ago.  The  most  remarkable
successes  of  dowsers  are  those  in  which  sensitiveness  to  the  proximity  of
water  cannot  have  helped  them,  while  their  views  as  to  its  distribution  seem
fatal  to  the  hypothesis  that  they  are  influenced  by  special  sensitiveness.
Somehow,  the  more  one  looks  into  cases,  the  more  the  supernormal  recedes.

I  quite  agree  with  you  that  the  twisting  of  the  twig — though  a  most
interesting  phenomenon — has  no  [direct  nor  invariable]  connection  with  the
nearness  of  underground  water.  rp y  jjo^jj^g

The  dowser  asserts  that  he  does  not  concern  himself  with  the
nature  of  the  ground,  but  is  guided  solely  by  the  twisting  of  his
forked  twig  or  by  some  peculiar  sensation  he  experiences.  In  this
case  one  would  have  expected  to  find  some  blind  dowsers,  as  the
blind  are  peculiarly  sensitive  in  some  directions,  but — though  I  know
the  extensive  literature  of  the  divining  rod  pretty  thoroughly — I
have  not  been  able  to  find  a  single  blind  dowser  in  any  country  in  the
world  during  the  four  centuries  the  dowsing  rod  has  been  employed.
It  may  be  urged  that  blind  people  could  not  engage  in  the  peregrina-
tions required  of  a  dowser,  nor  properly  hold  the  forked  twig  if  they
had  a  guide.  This  may  be  so,  but  I  do  not  think  it  is  the  true
answer,  for  I  can  find  no  account  of  the  sudden  and  involuntai'y
twisting  of  the  rod  in  the  hands  of  any  blind  person  under  any


^  By  sonic  persons,  certainly  not  by  geologists,  nor  by  the  Council  of  the  S.P.R.
nor  by  myself.—- W.F.B.


xxxvui.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


141


conditions  :  blind  people  may  not  have  been  tried,  and  1  intended,
had  time  permitted,  to  have  tested  the  inmates  of  a  blind  asylum.
The  true  explanation,  I  believe,  will  be  found  in  the  fact  that  the
rod  only  moves  in  the  hands  of  a  novice  when  he  has  seen  it  "work"  in
the  hands  of  somebody  else;  it  would  no  doubt  move  with  many  blind
people  if  they  had  previously  felt  the  hands  and  the  twig  of  a  dowser
M'hen  the  latter  is  twisting.  In  any  case  the  absurdity  of  imagining
there  is  any  direct  connection  between  underground  water  and  the
motion  of  the  so-called  divining  rod  is  seen  from  the  fact  that  the  first
use  of  the  rod  was  for  finding  underground  ores,  then  for  finding
buried  treasure,  then  for  tracing  lost  cattle  or  boundaries,  then  for  a
multitude  of  uses  in  the  moral  world  (until  its  employment  for  this
latter  purpose  was  forbidden  by  the  Inquisition  in  1701),  and  at  the
present  day  dowsers  profess  to  discover,  not  only  underground  water
and  mineral  lodes,  but  hidden  coins,  water  or  gas  pipes,  etc.,  by  the
twisting  of  their  rod.  Obviously,  therefore,  the  peculiar  involuntary
motion  of  the  rod  and  what  causes  this  motion  is  one  thing,  and  the
existence  of  an  alleged  dowsing,  or  water-finding,  faculty  is  quite
another.

Object  of  our  Investigation.
This  brings  us  to  an  important  point  in  our  investigation.  We
must  know  clearly  wJiat  we  are  seeking  for.  Is  it  for  the  cause  of
the  motion  of  the  dowsing  rod,  or  for  a  proof  or  disproof  of  an  alleged
"  dowsing  faculty,"  or  for  a  particular  explanation  of  that  faculty,
assuming  it  to  exist  ?  Now  it  will  be  found  that  nearly  every
scientific  investigator  of  the  divining  rod  during  the  last  100
years  has  set  out  with  some  theory  of  the  action  of  the  dowsing
rod,  which,  when  he  has  satisfactorily  demolished,  he  has  asserted
the  whole  thing  was  a  fraud.  Some  of  the  most  famous  names
in  French  scientific  history  a  century  ago,  when  they  showed  that
electricity  afforded  no  explanation  of  the  movement  of  the  divining
rod,  asserted  they  had  disproved  the  existence  of  the  alleged  faculty
itself.  Had  they  been  versed  in  the  history  of  the  subject,
they  would  have  found  that  a  century  prior  to  their  day  equally
eminent  French  savants  asserted  the  same  thing,  because  they  had
demonstrated  the  devil  was  not  the  cause  of  the  twisting  of  the  forked
twig.  And  now,  in  our  own  day,  no  less  eminent  French,  American,
and  English  men  of  science  assert, — electricity  and  the  devil  havino-
been  laid, — that  invohmtary  muscidar  action  on  the  part  of  the
dowser  finally  disposes  of  the  divining  rod  and  the  mystery  of  an
alleged  dowsing  faculty.  This,  of  course,  is  equally  erroneous.
Assuming  this  explanation  to  be  established,  all  that  it  explains
is  the  twisting  of  the  rod. Here  is  an  instance  of  this  fallacy.


142


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Mr  Emerson,  to  whom  T  have  ah-eady  referred^,  published  in  the
American  Journal  of  Science  {Silliman's  Journal)  for  1821  a  series  of
remarkable  cases,  showing  how  underground  water  had  been  found  by
dowsers  where  it  had  previously  been  sought  for  in  vain.  Five  years
later  he  was  led  to  an  ingenious  theory  of  the  motion  of  the  rod  as  due
to  involuntary  muscular  action,  an  explanation  we  may  readily  admit :
then  after  blindfolding  a  young  boy,  in  whose  hands  the  forked  twig
moved,  albeit  he  had  never  been  tested  as  a  dowser,  Mr.  Emerson
draws  the  following  sweeping  conclusions  from  the  failure  of  some
fallacious  experiments  which  we  have  given  later  on,  p.  212  : —

The  pretensions  of  diviners  are  worthless.  The  art  of  finding  fountains
and  minerals  with  a  succulent  twig  is  a  cheat  upon  those  who  practise  it,  an
offence  to  reason  and  to  common  sense,  an  art  abhorrent  to  the  laws  of
nature,  and  deserving  of  universal  reprobation.

I  venture  to  say  that  the  majority  of  scientific  men  who  have  read
Emerson's  papers  will  imagine  he  has  proved  his  assertions,  and  that  the
question  had  been  finally  settled  by  him,  just  as  in  Europe  it  was  con-
sidered that  Chevreul  in  1854  had  settled  the  question  by  a  similar
explanation,  forgetting  that  the  astronomer  Lalande  had  also  given  a
similar  explanation  in  1782.  What  a  hardy  perennial  this  superficial
and  easy  dismissal  of  the  whole  subject  is  may  be  seen  in  a  recent
letter  in  the  scientific  journal  Nature  (January  6th,  1898),  which  I
have  quoted  elsewhere,  p.  288.  Here,  once  more,  an  Amei'ican  professor
tells  us  "  the  whole  secret  of  tlie  divining  rod  "  is  to  be  found  in  the
involuntary  muscular  action  of  the  operator.

And  so  also  with  regard  to  blindfolding.  IE  well-conducted
experiments,  with  a  good  dowser,  show  that  blindfolding  prevents  the
dowser  from  fixing  on  the  same  spots  that  he  did  when  he  could  see, —
places  where  he  alleged  underground  water  to  exist, — all  we  have
proved  is  the  extreme  improbability  of  any  direct  influence  of  the
water  on  the  dowser,  or  any  clairvoyant  perception  on  his  part.
Failure  when  blindfolded  does  not  prove  the  dowser  to  be  a  charlatan,
but  merely  that  a  particular  physical  or  psychical  explanation  is  im-
probable. For  the  success  of  the  dowser  under  normal  conditions  may
still  be  due  to  some  instinct  or  faculty,  derived  from  a  rapid  but  sub-
conscious observation  and  interpretation  of  the  surface  indications  of
underground  water  or  mineral  lodes,  or  his  success  may  be  due  merely
to  experience  and  shrewd  observation,  which,  from  habitude,  has  almost
ceased  to  excite  a  conscious  effort  As  eyesight  would  be  necessary  in
either  of  these  cases,  the  dowsing  faculty,  if  there  be  such,  would  in
this  event  take  its  place  along  with  other  familiar  illustrations  of
keenness  of  perception  in  men  and  animals.

1  See  previous  Report,  p.  44.  Not  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson,  but  a  contemporary
and  namesake.


xxxviii.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


143


Let  us  therefore  clearly  recognise  in  our  experiments  what  is  the
aim  we  have  in  view.  A  particular  theory  may  be  proved  to  be  wrong,
but  the  important  point  is  to  obtain  trustimrthy  evidence  of  all  the
facts  in  each  case,  and  when  a  sufficiently  wide  range  of  evidence  is
before  us,  to  endeavour  to  arrive  at  some  explanation.  It  is  for  this
reason  that  I  have  been  compelled  to  burden  this  and  the  previous
Report  with  such  an  accumulation  of  cases,  for  the  subject  is  full  of
ditSculties  from  a  scientific  point  of  view,  and  any  explanation  we
may  give  must  be  based  upon  an  extensive  survey,  and  is  likely  to  be
either  a  tentative  or  a  complex  one.

We  may  summarise  the  objects  of  our  investigation  as  follows  : —

I.  Whether  the  alleged  claim  of  the  dowser  to  a  special  faculty,
or  even  facility,  in  the  discovery  of  underground  water  or  mineral
lodes  has  any  basis  in  fact,  and  if  so  : —

(i.)  Whether  this  is  due  merely  to  knowledge  acquired  by  the
dowser  from  experience  and  careful  observation  of  the  ground  ;  or

(ii.)  Whether  such  information  is  derived  by  some  instinctive
and  sub-conscious  process  of  observation  on  the  part  of  tlie
dowser,  or  perhaps  hyperfesthetic  discernment  of  surface  signs  too
faint  to  be  perceived  by  the  ordinary  observer  ;  or

(iii.)  Whether  there  is  evidence  of  any  supernormal  perception
by  the  dowser — that  is,  information  derived  subconsciously  other-
wise than  through  the  ordinary  channels  of  sense.

II.  The  evidence  for  and  the  explanation  of:  (i.)  the  sudden  and
often  uncontrollable  movement  of  the  rod  in  the  hands  of  the  dowser  ;
(ii.)  the  apparent  transmission  of  this  power  of  motor-automatism  from
a  sensitive  to  an  insensitive  person  ;  and  (iii.)  the  singular  malaise
and  convulsive  spasm  which  is  associated  in  so  many  dowsers  with  the
involuntary  motion  of  the  rod.

III.  The  History  and  Bibliography  of  the  subject.  These  have
been  prepared,  but  the  matter  is  so  voluminous  that  it  must  be
published  later  on.

I  propose  to  begin  with  No.  1 — further  tests  as  to  the  alleged
claims  of  the  dowser.


144


Professor  Tf.  F.  Barrett.


[part


PART  II.
Experiments  by  the  Author.


j:;  1. The  Carrigoona  Ex^jei'iments.

It  has  been  suggested  ^  that  the  most  satisfactory  test  of  the
alleged  claims  of  the  dowser  would  be  to  carry  out  some  experiments
under  my  own  personal  supervision,  boring  or  sinking  wells  in  places
where  the  dowser  indicated  water  would  or  would  not  be  found.  As  I
have  said  elsewhere,  this  can  only  be  a  very  restricted  test,  owing  to  the
expense  involved,  and,  unless  care  be  taken,  may  be  as  inconclusive
as  were  Professor  SoUas's  two  test  borings  described  in  the  previous
Report,  pp.  220  and  221.  However,  I  determined  to  make  the
attempt,  and  have  done  so  this  spring  and  summer,  with  the  results  I
will  now  give.  In  order  that  an  impartial  judgment  may  be  arrived
at  by  my  readers  a  somewhat  detailed  account  is,  I  fear,  unavoidable.

Certain  precautions  were  necessary  if  any  satisfactory  evidence  one
way  or  the  other  was  to  be  obtained.  (1)  The  place  chosen  must  be
one  entirely  unfamiliar  to  the  dowser,  and  no  opportunity  must  be
allowed  him  of  knowing  beforehand  where  the  experiment  is  to  be
made,  otherwise  the  dowser  might  make  a  prior  careful  examination
of  a  geological  map  of  the  district  (assuming  he  had  access  to  such
maps  and  could  understand  them  —  a  possible  assumption)  ;  such
examination  would  doubtless  yield  a  good  deal  of  valuable  information
to  a  clever  man.  (2)  The  district  selected  must  be  one  geologically
suitable,  that  is  to  say,  not  a  large  water-bearing  or  waterless  area,
the  character  of  which  he  might  discern  at  a  glance,  and  where  he
could  not  go  wrong  anywhere  in  predicting  water  or  no  water.
(.3)  The  dowser  should  be  taken  direct  to  the  place  and  not  allowed  to
get  any  information  from  persons  living  in  the  neighbourhood  as  to
the  position  of  any  existing  springs  or  wells.  (4)  The  persons  who
accompany  the  dowser  should  also  be  ignoi'ant  of  the  likeliest  spots
where  water  would  or  would  not  be  found,  lest  they  perchance
consciously  or  unconsciously  convey  their  knowledge  to  the  dowser.

These  conditions  were  all  successfully  met,  the  place  I  selected
— a  mountainous  region  in  the  co.  Wicklow,  four  miles  from  Bray —
admirably  fulfilling  the  geological  conditions  required,  and  a  region  I
believe  no  dowser  had  ever  visited.  I  wrote  to  two  or  three  of  the
best  known  English  professional  dowsers,  asking  them  if  they  could
come  over,  and  as  Mr.  Stone  replied  he  was  shortly  coming  to  Ireland,
I  arranged  to  see  him. On  his  arrival  he  had  no  idea  where  the


1  In  a  review  of  my  previous  Report  in  Nature,  October  14th,  1897.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


145


experiment  was  to  be  made,  nor  did  I  tell  him,  but  took  him
straightway  to  the  place.  My  friend  Mr.  B.  St.  G.  Lefroy  accom-
panied us  to  take  notes  as  an  independent  careful  observer,  and  the
memorandum  he  has  written  will  be  given  directly.  It  was  Easter
week,  1899,  and  the  day  was  fine.  Mr.  Stone  told  me  he  had  never
been  in  co.  Wicklow  before,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  is  quite  true.
Leaving  our  car  in  the  Rocky  Valley,  we  ascended  the  mountain  road
leading  round  a  hill  called  Carrigoona,  on  the  lower  slopes  of  which
there  are  patches  of  cultivated  ground,  but  the  quartzite  rock  of  which
the  hill  is  composed  juts  out  here  and  there,  though  the  hillside  is
generally  covered  with  two  or  three  feet  of  alluvial  soil,  on  which
gorse  and  heather  and  bracken  grow,  clothing  the  mountain  with  a
garment  of  beauty.  The  panorama  from  the  mountain-side  is  also
one  of  unsurpassed  beauty,  and  stirred  the  emotions  of  my  geological
friends  who  afterwards  visited  the  spot  with  me.

For  the  accompanying  geological  map  of  the  district  I  am  in-
debted to  the  kindness  of  H.  M.  Geological  Survey. The  field  we


y. X.  '^


^ -  MOUNTAIN  ^^^^-i


Scale:  Six  inches  to  the  mile. Quartzite  marked  thus,
Fig.  1.


first  went  to  is  on  the  eastern  side  of  Carrigoona  and  is  marked
E  on  the  map. The  ujjper  part  of  the  map  is  due  north. A  general


146


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


147


view  of  the  surrounding  country  is  shown  in  the  picture  opposite,
Fig.  2  ;  this  is  taken  from  a  rocky  eminence  on  the  south-eastern
corner  of  the  field  E  and  is  therefore  looking  nearly  west  :  Carrigoona
mountain  is  seen  on  the  right  hand  side  of  the  picture ;  only  the
summit  of  the  quartzite  knoll  in  the  middle  distance  is  visible  when  in
the  held,  where  the  boring  operations  are  seen  going  on  as  described
subsequently.!

Experiment  I.

Having  secured  the  necessary  permission,  I  took  Mr.  Stone  first  to
the  field,  E,  Fig.  1,  rather  over  an  acre  in  extent,  and  asked  him  to
begin  operations.  He  pulled  out  a  slender  forked  twig  from  his  pocket,
and  immediately  walked  round  the  field  ;  at  one  spot  the  twig  forcibly
I'evolved,  and  he  said  we  should  find  plenty  of  water  there,  less  than
15  ft.  deep.  The  spot  was  marked,  and  after  traversing  the  field  two
or  three  times  he  asserted  that  water  was  flowing  from  north  to  south
along  a  line  or  region  he  traced  out,  but  that  at  the  side  of  the  field  very
little,  if  any,  water  would  be  found.'-  "  Bore  anywhere  along  this  line,"
he  said  (see  dotted  line  in  Fig.  3),  "and  you  will  get  plenty  of  water,
but  very  little  or  none  over  there,"  i.e.,  on  the  east  side  of  the  field.
The  places  were  marked  and  subsequently  fixed  by  measurement,  so
that  the  marks  could  be  removed.  All  round  the  field  was  a  rough
stone  wall,  overtopped  to  a  height  of  8  ft.  or  9  ft.  by  a  thick  gorse
hedge,  so  that  it  was  impossible  to  see  a  plateau  of  rock  that  flanked
the  east  and  west  sides  of  the  field  beyond  the  boundary  wall ;  I
mention  this  for  a  reason  that  will  appear  presently.  The  field  was
on  the  mountain  side,  it  sloped  downwards  from  north  to  south,  was
uniformly  covered  with  grass,  and  had  no  trace  of  water  anywhere  on
the  surface.

Experiment  II.

From  this  field  we  crossed  the  mountain  and  went  to  an  enclosed
piece  of  the  commons  on  the  western  side  of  Carrigoona,  marked  W  on
the  map,  Fig.  1.  Here,  again,  I  asked  Mr.  Stone  to  select  two  test
places.  He  walked  I'ound  the  field,  but  there  was  no  motion  of  his
forked  twig.  It  so  happened  a  friend  had  purchased  this  field  in  order
to  erect  a  summer  cottage,  and  particulai'ly  wanted  to  find  a  spring.
Noticing  a  patch  of  rank  and  very  green  grass  I  asked  him  to  try  that
spot.  "  No  good,"  he  said  ;  "  it's  no  good  boring  anywhere  in  this
field  ;  there  is  little  or  no  water."  Pressed  to  try  once  more,  he  fixed
on  one  spot  as  best  to  bore,  but  said  only  a  little  water,  "of  no  use,"

'  I  have  to  thank  Mr.  Kendrew  for  the  photograph  of  which  Fig.  2  is  a  reproduc-
tion ;  unfortunately  the  reproduction  does  not  do  justice  to  the  original  photograph.

3  The  three  dots  on  the  field  E,  Fig.  1,  indicate  these  places,  and  where  the  bore-
holes were  subsequently  made.  The  dotted  line  across  the  map  is  supposed  to
indicate  a  line  of  "fault  "  in  the  rocks  :  but  this  is  only  a  geological  surmise.

N  2


148


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


would  be  found  :  this  place  was  marked.  It  is  the  more  northerly  of
the  two  dots  marked  in  W,  Fig.  1.

Experiment  III.

Three  weeks  later  a  country  gentleman,  Mr.  J.  H.  Jones,  of
Mullinabro  House,  Waterford — who  some  years  ago  accidentally
discovered  that  the  rod  moved  in  his  hands,  and  had  had  some  success
in  his  own  neighbourhood  as  an  amateur  dowser — kindly  agreed,  at


•pij.g g  Scale  1  inch  to  50  feet.

PLAN  OF  THE  FIELD.


my  request,  to  try  the  same  fields.  Mr.  Jones  had  never  been  in  that
district  before,  and  knew  nothing  of  the  places  marked  by  Mr.  Stone.
These  marks  had  been  carefully  removed  prior  to  Mr.  Jones'  visit.

As  before,  Mr.  Lefroy  accompanied  us,  and  we  agreed  to  let  Mr.  Jones
go  round  the  fields  alone,  so  that  no  hint  could  be  derived  from  any
involuntary  indications  on  our  part.  Mr.  Jones  used  a  small,  slender
forked  twig,  which  he  held  in  the  same  way  as  the  elder  Mullins.  We


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  149


went,  first,  to  the  larger  field  on  the  east  of  Carrigoona.  On  completing
his  perambulation  of  the  field  we  examined  the  places  marked  by  Mr.
Jones.  The  spot  where  the  twig  moved  most  vigorously  with  him,
and  where  he  was  confident  we  should  find  water,  was  not  a  foot
distant  from  the  place  selected  by  Mr.  Stone,  as  we  found  subsequently
by  measui'ement  with  the  tape.  This  was  at  No.  1,  in  Fig.  3.  Mr.
Jones  also  asserted  the  watercourse  ran  from  north  to  south  in  the  field,
in  the  same  direction  as  mai-ked  out  by  Mr.  Stone  ;  but  from  the
movement  of  the  twig  he  asserted  we  should  also  find  water  a  few  feet
on  the  east  side  of  the  place  marked  No.  1,  but  flowing  towards  Stone's
line.  We  then  crossed  the  mountain  to  the  smaller  field  on  the  western
side ;  after  Mr.  Jones  had  traversed  it  with  his  "  rod  "  he  said  much
as  Ml".  Stone  did,  that  very  little,  if  any,  water  would  be  found  there.

Borings.

It  was  not  until  July,  1899,  that  the  boring  apparatus  arrived.
Mr.  Stone  had  kindly  placed  it  at  my  disposal,  so  that  the  only
expense  incurred  was  for  labour  and  the  services  of  his  brother,  Mr.
E.  Stone,  who  was  a  skilful  working  engineer.  A  four-inch  bore-hole
was  made  in  each  case;  a  hardened  steel  "jumper"  and  the  usual  boring
tools  being  employed.  Fig.  4,  p.  146,  shows  the  boring  apparatus  at
work.  Mr.  E,  Stone  is  standing  on  the  left  of  the  picture,  and  the  men
are  boring  with  the  jumper.  The  thick  gorse  hedge  is  seen  round  the
field.  From  conversation  with  the  farmer  who  had  tilled  the
eastern  field  for  many  years,  we  expected  to  reach  the  bed  rock
some  6  ft.  below  the  surface,  and  I  anticipated  a  laborious  and
costly  boring  if  we  were  to  get  anything  better  than  surface
water.  As  I  had  taken  a  farmhouse  for  the  summer  on  the  northern
slope  of  Carrigoona,  I  was  able  daily  to  inspect  the  result  of  the
boring  operations.  We  commenced  at  the  spot  marked  No.  1  in
Fig.  3,  and  a  foot  below  the  surface  struck  a  very  hard  dry  clay  ;
this  went  on  for  a  depth  of  8  ft.,  with  slow  progress,  until  suddenly,
after  two  days'  work,  a  bed  of  sand  was  encountered,  through  which
the  "  jumper "  sank,  and  water  rushed  up  the  bore-hole  to  within
4  ft.  of  the  surface.  After  4  ft.  of  sand  a  bed  of  gravel  was  reached,
but  the  quantity  of  water  was  so  great  that  the  sides  of  the  lower
part  of  the  bore-hole  were  constantly  washed  in,  and  we  could  not
sink  deeper  until  a  lining  tube  was  obtained.  As  this  could  only  be
procured  in  London,  we  proceeded  to  test  the  east  side  of  the  field,
where  Mr.  Stone  said  little  or  no  water  would  be  got.  Here  No.  2
bore-hole  was  sunk,  and  nothing  but  a  hard  clay,  with  stones  intermixed
in  one  part,  was  met  with  till  the  rock  was  reached  at  a  depth  of
12  ft.,  when  a  little  water  was  found  between  the  rock  and  the
impermeable  stratum  above  it. I  made  them  continue  boring  to  a


150  . Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.  [part

depth  of  1  ft.  G  in.  into  the  solid-quartzite  rock,  but  no  more  water  was
obtained.  We  then  began  No.  3  bore-hole,  on  what  Mr.  Stone  called
the  "water-line."  The  boring  was  similar  in  its  results  to  No.  1,  the
water-bearing  permeable  stratum  being  struck  6  ft.  below  the  surface,


Fig.  4.

in  the  field,  looking  north.

and  abundant  water  rose  in  the  bore-hole.  The  boring  was  continued
when  a  bed  of  soft  plastic  clay  was  reached,  and  after  this  a  hard  clay
mixed  with  pebbles.  I  was  astonished  at  not  reaching  the  rocky  bed,
and  determined  to  continue  the  boring ;  after  we  had  gone  to  a  depth


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


151


No.  1  BoEE-HoLE,  20  ft.  deep.
Ahii/ndant  Supply,  rose  to  ift.  from  Surface.


No.  2  Bore-Hole,  15  ft.  deep.
Very  little  Water,  12  ft.  from  Surface.


Fig.  5.


of  22  ft.  we  were  still  in  the  clay,
and  were  so  impeded  by  the  constant
washing  in  of  the  sandy  stratum  that
we  had  to  abandon  the  boring,  the
lining  tubes  not  having  arrived.

Fig.  5  shows  sections  of  the
different  borings.  The  surface  of  bore
No.  1  is  6  in.  above  the  level  of  bore
No.  2,  and  3  ft.  above  the  surface  of
bore  No.  -3,  as  will  be  seen  subse-
quently in  the  cross  section  of  the
field,  Figs.  8  and  9.

So  far,  then,  Mr.  Stone's  pro-
gnostication had  proved  perfectly  cor-
rect, and  we  now  moved  the  boring
apparatus  to  the  field  on  the  western
side.  Here  I  made  them  sink  a  bore-


No.  3  BoRE-HoLE,  22  ft.  deep.

Abundant  crater,  rose  to  5ft.  from
Surface.


152


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


hole  at  a  spot  that  seemed  to  me  most  Hkely  to  yield  water,  where  the
ground  appeared  moister,  and  was  covered  by  a  patch  of  rank  grass.
The  boring,  No.  4,  in  Fig.  6,  proved  difficult  and  very  tedious.  Instead
of  clay  a  rocky  debris  mixed  with  clay  was  encountered  below  the
surface-soil ;  at  9  ft.  deep  the  bedrock  was  reached,  and,  thinking  we
might  strike  a  fissure  it  was  bored  to  a  depth  of  nearly  3  ft.,  but  not  a
drop  of  water  was  obtained.  Then  I  had  a  bore-hole  sunk  at  the  spot
fixed  on  by  Mr.  Stone  as  likely  to  yield  a  little  water,  but  "  no  use,"
as  he  remarked,  (this  is  No.  5  bore-hole)  ;  here,  after  the  shingle,  we

No.  4  BoEE-HoLE,  11  ft.  6  in.  deep.  No.  5  Bobe-Hole,  1(5  ft.  deep.

No  Water.  No  Water.


Fig.  6.  •


reached  a  hard  dry  clay,  and  continued  boring  through  this  until  the
rocky  bed  was  encountered  at  a  depth  of  14  ft.  from  the  surface,  but
no  trace  of  water  was  found.  This  field  slopes  sharply  down  from  east
to  west,  and  No.  5  bore-hole  is  at  some  10  ft.  lower  level  than  No.  4,
which  is  on  the  upper  eastern  side  of  the  field.  Finally,  I  had  a  small
trial  bore  made  at  the  lowest  point  in  the  field  adjoining  the  mountain
road,  but  only  dry  shingle,  and  no  sign  of  water,  was  met  with.  Here,
again.  Stone's  predictions  were  verified ;  there  might  have  been  a  little
water  between  the  impermeable  clay  and  the  rocky  bed  when  he  made
his  trial  at  Easter,  as  it  was  then  in  the  early  spi'ing,  after  rains. ^  The
borings  were  all  made  in  the  long  drought  we  had  during  the  summer

1  Subsequently,  after  the  summer  drought,  Mr.  Lofroy  noticed  a  little  water  at
the  bottom  of  this  bore-hole,  see  P.S.  to  his  memorandum,  p.  150.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  153


of  the  present  year ;  it  was,  therefore,  all  the  more  astonishing  to
find  such  a  good  supply  of  water  in  the  No.  1  and  No.  3  borings  in  the
eastern  field.

After  the  perforated  lining  tube  had  arrived  we  were  able  to  go  on
boring  in  No.  1  hole,  but  found  a  second  bed  of  clay  below  the  gravel,
and  reached  no  rock,  though  we  went  down  20  ft.  All  the  water  was
therefore  supplied  by  the  permeable  layer  between  the  two  impermeable
clays.  In  order  to  test  the  quantity,  I  procured  a  pump  and  15  ft.  of
iron  tubing,  and  found  that  No.  1  bore-hole  yielded  five  gallons  a
minute,  which,  if  the  supply  held,  would  be  equivalent  to  over  7,000
gallons  in  the  24  hours.  After  pumping  10  minutes,  however,  the
pump  choked,  and  the  water  was  then  found  to  stand  8  ft.  from  the
surface  ;  it  had  been  lowered  about  4  ft.  in  the  four-inch  bore-hole.
The  water  was  flowing  in  all  the  time  through  the  perforations  in  the
lining  tube,  but  not  sufficiently  rapidly  to  maintain  a  constant  level,  as
the  pump  was  a  powerful  one.  The  temperature  of  the  water  was  some
20  deg.  F.  below  that  of  the  air.  No.  2  bore-hole  contained  so  little
water  that  we  were  able,  in  a  few  minutes,  almost  to  empty  the  bore-
hole by  ladling  out  the  water  with  a  small  tin  can.  The  pump  had
to  be  sent  back  to  Dublin  for  repair,  and  another  trial  was  postponed
till  early  in  November,  as  my  geological  friends  thought  a  more  crucial
test  would  be  afforded  at  that  period  of  the  year.

I  will  now  give  the  account  of  Stone's  visit,  which  Mr.  Lefroy
kindly  sent  to  me.

August,  1899.

On  April  2nd,  1899,  Professor  Barrett  invited  me  to  accompany  him  and
Mr.  Stone,  an  English  "dowser,"  to  a  field  in  the  Rocky  Valley,  co.  Wick-
low.  We  drove  directly  from  Bray  station  to  the  field,  which  is  enclosed
by  a  high  stone  fence,  partly  covered  by  a  gorse  hedge.  The  configuration
of  the  immediately  adjacent  land  cannot  be  seen  from  the  field,  owing
to  its  situation  and  the  height  of  this  fence  and  hedge.  The  area  is  between
one  and  two  acres  in  extent.  Mr.  Stone  had  no  opportunity  afibrded  him  of
examining  the  surroundings  of  the  field  except  upon  the  side  of  approach,
nor  did  he,  I  fully  believe,  receive  any  information  on  that  subject,  to  which
he  made  no  reference  in  my  hearing,  and  was  apparently  indifi'erent.  I
watched  him  closely,  but  saw  no  sign  of  attention  on  his  part  to  surface
indications,  if  any  existed.

He  traversed  the  field  in  various  directions,  holding  a  fork  of  the
divining  rod  between  the  forefinger  and  thumb  of  each  hand.  His  manner
was  that  of  easy  confidence,  and  he  readily  maintained  a  conversation  at  the
same  time.  At  certain  points  the  rod  in  his  hands  was  violently  twisted.
One  of  these  points,  marked  "No.  1"  on  the  plan.  Fig.  3,  he  stated  to  be  that
most  suitable  for  boring  purposes  and  he  declared  that  a  sufiicient  supply
of  water  for  domestic  use  would  be  found  there  at  a  very  moderate  depth.
To  the  best  of  my  recollection  he  said  not  more  than  15  ft.,  but  of  this  I  am
not  now  certain. The  other  points  at  which  the  rod  was  notably  contorted


154  . Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.  [part

were  in  a  line  south  from  this,  which  he  attributed  to  the  existence  of  an
underground  watercourse.  The  direction  of  this  is  shown  on  the  plan  by
the  dotted  line.

The  positions  of  these  points  Professor  Barrett  and  I  measured  at  once
and  noted  on  a  rough  plan.  The  line  of  the  asserted  watercourse  was
marked  by  taking  the  distances  from  the  side  of  the  field.  Except  on
that  line,  only  very  slight  movements  of  the  rod  were  anywhere  observable,
and  an  area  in  the  eastern  portion  of  the  field  was  designated  by  Mr.  Stone
as  practically  waterless.  The  test  boring  subsequently  made  in  this  area  is
marked  "No.  2"  on  the  plan.

Un  April  22nd,  I  again  visited  the  place  with  Professor  Barrett  and  Mr.
Jones,  of  Waterford,  an  amateur  "dowser."  The  same  conditions  were
repeated.  He  saw  no  more  of  the  surrounding  land  than  was  strictly
unavoidable  and  appeai'ed  to  pay  no  attention  to  that  or  to  any  indications
other  than  those  furnished  by  the  "rod."  No  marks  had  been  left  by
which  the  places  selected  by  Mr.  Stone  as  yielding  water  could  have  been
identified  or  guessed  at.  Mr.  Jones  walked  over  the  field  as  Mr.  Stone  had
done,  the  "rod"  behaved  similarly  in  his  hands,  and  his  results  were
practically  the  same.  The  difference  of  a  foot  or  so  in  the  "best"  point
selected  may  be  reasonably  attributed  to  his  crossing  the  line  of  the  water-
course referred  to  at  a  different  point.

From  this  field,  which  is  on  the  eastern  side  of  Carrigoona  Hill,  we  went,
on  the  day  first  mentioned,  to  the  western  side,  and  Mr.  Stone  was  asked  to
find  a  spring  in  a  small  field  on  that  side.  He  walked  over  this  field  in  the
same  manner  with  the  rod,  and  said  that  no  water,  or  so  little  as  to  be
useless,  would  be  found  in  it, — that  there  were  traces  of  water  at  a  certain
spot,  but  that  it  would  be  "  no  good  boring."  Mr.  Jones  also  went  with  us
to  this  other  field  and  he  confirmed  what  Mr.  Stone  had  said  of  there  being
little  water  to  be  found  there.  g  ^  Lefroy.


P.S. — Since  the  borings  have  been  made,  I  have  measured  and  verified
their  positions  with  Professor  Barrett,  and  on  November  5th,  1899,  I  again
visited  Carrigoona,  and  made  a  careful  examination  of  the  borings.  In  the
field  on  the  eastern  side,  the  one  first  tried  by  Mr.  Stone,  I  found  the  water
in  boring  marked  No.  1  in  the  plan  [see  Fig.  3]  standing  G  ft.  from  the
ground  level.  The  water  in  boring  No.  3,  on  the  line  of  the  watercourse
alleged  by  Mr.  Stone  to  exist,  stood  6  ft.  3  in.  from  the  surface  of  the
ground.  The  boring  No.  2  was  dry.  In  the  field  on  the  western  slope  of  the
hill  I  found  the  upper  boring  [No.  4]  quite  dry,  and  the  lower  boring  [No.  5]
had  four  or  five  inches  of  water  in  it  [Fig.  6].  These  results  agree  with  the
predictions  made  by  Mr.  Stone,  and  also  by  Mr.  Jones,  before  the  borings
were  made.  g  g^j,  q.  j^^

Although  the  excellent  maps  of  the  Irish  Geological  Survey  had
given  me  a  general  knowledge  of  the  suitability  of  the  locality  chosen
for  the  experiments  before  they  were  made,  it  seemed  desirable  that
the  opinion  of  some  recognised  geological  authorities  should  be  obtained.
For  this  purpose  I  asked  some  of  my  geological  friends,  who  were


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


155


intimately  acquainted  with  the  geology  of  that  district,  to  visit  the
fields  where  the  experiments  were  conducted,  and  I  gratefully  acknow-
ledge their  kindness  in  doing  so  and  furnishing  me  with  the  accom-
panying valuable  reports.  It  would  have  been  fairer  to  the  dowser
had  I  asked  the  geologists  to  come  before  the  borings  were  made,  as
the  depth  (which  I  informed  them)  to  which  borings  ISTos.  1  and  3
were  made,  and  yet  no  rock  reached,  revealed  the  unsuspected  fact
that  the  field  was  on  the  site  of  an  ancient  and  deep  V-shaped
depression  or  narrow  valley  between  the  rocks,  probably  an  ancient
river  bed  now  filled  with  drift.  The  first  report  is  from  my  friend  and
colleague  Professor  Grenville  Cole,  F.G.S.,  the  professor  of  geology  in
the  Royal  College  of  Science,  Dublin.

AuguM  20th,  1899.

(i)  The  Rocky  Valley  is  cut  by  denudation  through  the  ancient  series  of
shales  and  sandstones,  altered  to  slates  and  quartzites,  which  occur  in  the
Sugar  Loaf  area,i  at  Bray  Head,  and  at  Howth.  Unless  a  fissure  were
fortunately  struck,  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  find  water  in  this  series.  It
is  not  a  water-bearing  series  in  itself,  as  is  well  known  to  residents  at
Howth,  who  are  in  the  habit  of  collecting  rain  and  surface-water.

But  in  the  Rocky  Valley  area,  considerable  deposits  of  glacial  drift  occur,
varying  from  clays  to  permeable  sands,  filling  all  the  ancient  hollows  carved
in  the  slates  and  quartzites.  A  trained  eye  readily  picks  out,  by  contour
and  the  green  or  cultivated  patches,  the  position  of  the  sands  and  gravels
where  they  abut  on  the  older  series.

The  heights  are  formed  of  .slate  and  quartzite,  on  which  heather  and
some  thin  bogs  accumulate.-  The  rainfall  on  these  is  considerable,  and
soaks  off  down  into  the  old  waterways,  carved  before  glacial  times,  in  the
rocky  bed.  As  these  hollows  are  full  of  drift,  the  drift,  where  sand  and
gravel  prevail,  .absorbs  the  water.  The  supply  at  any  point,  by  tapping  the
drift,  must  depend  greatly  on  the  extent  of  the  impervious  gathering-
ground  round  about,  and  would,  in  any  case,  probably  diminish  in  autumn
after  a  dry  sunnner.

(ii)  The  field  selected  for  boring  in  the  Rocky  Valley  shows  a  marked
green  surface,  with  the  hard  quartzite  .sloping  steeply  down  close  at  hand  on
either  side.  It  falls  towards  the  valley,  and  so,  evidently,  does  the  old
rocky  bed  under  the  infilling  of  drift.  Water  would  accumulate  in  the
infilling,  and  would  probably  flow  slowly  down  along  the  middle  line  of  the
old  hollow.  Its  constancy  may  be  doubted,  but  can  be  tested  satisfactorily
after  the  present  dry  season  (August,  1899).  A  trained  eye  would  certainly
select  the  central  fine  of  the  field,  along  the  ancient  stream-hollow,  for
boring.  ^  .  ^

GrRENVILLE  A.  J.  COLE.

iThe  '  Sugar  Loaf "  is  the  miserable  modern  name  g"iven  to  one  of  the  most
beautiful  and  impressive  mountains  in  the  co.  Wicklow,  a  mountain  rising  to-
nearly  1700  ft.  high,  and  flanking  one  side  of  the  Rocky  Valley  as  Carrigoona
does  the  other. — W.  F.  B.

2  This  refers  to  the  Sugar  Loaf,  as  there  are  no  bogs  on  Carrigoona.— W.F.B.


156


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


In  a  subsequent  letter  Professor  Cole  says  : —

I  think  a  professional  engineer  would  undoubtedly  bore  two  or  three
holes  along  the  line  under  which  the  two  rock  slojjes  at  either  side  meet ;
this  line  might  or  might  not  be  along  the  lowest  line  of  the  huinmocky
surface  of  the  field  above,  where  the  borings  were  made.  I  am  clearly  of
opinion  that  a  casual  visitor  who  knew  anything  about  general  conditions
of  water  supply  would  proceed  a  good  distance  from  the  obvious  rock  on
either  side  before  he  predicted  a  fair  water  supply.  But  I  also  feel  with
you  that  the  i-apid  survey  and  determination  in  two  minutes  or  so  [by  the
dowser]  show  either  exceptional  powers  of  observation  or  confidence  in
some  power  not  possessed  by  ordinary  engineers.


Fig.  7.
looking  east.


With  all  defei-ence  to  my  friend  Professor  Cole,  I  am  quite  sure
that  the  rocky  contour  immediately  on  each  side  of  the  field  was  not
observed  by  Mr.  Stone,  nor  could  it  be  seen  from  the  side  that  we
approached.  It  requires  a  trained  geological  eye,  after  traversing  the
ground  round  about,  to  arrive  at  the  conclusions  stated  by  Professor
Cole.  I  myself  had  been  over  the  place  dozens  of  times,  having  spent
two  summers  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  I  confess  that  before  the  borings
were  made  there  appeared  to  me  no  evidence  that  the  "hard  quartzite
sloped  steeply  down  close  at  hand  on  either  side,"  leaving  a  deep
ravine  filled  in  with  glacial  drift.  As  can  be  seen  to  some  extent  from
the  photograph  reproduced  in  Fig.  7,  to all  appearance  the  local


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


157


opinion  seemed  probable  enough — that  the  field  was  simply  a  layer  of
a  few  feet  of  clay  over  a  rocky  bed  which  was  nearly  level  from  east
to  west.i

It  was  desirable,  in  order  to  decide  the  question  as  to  the  exact
levels  of  the  respective  bore-holes,  that  a  careful  survey  of  the  field
should  be  made  For  this  purpose  my  friend  and  former  student,
Mr.  J.  A.  Cunningham,  B.A.,  kindly  assisted  me  in  taking  the  levels
shown  in  Figs.  8  and  9  on  the  next  page.  In  these  diagrams  the
vertical  scale  is  exaggerated  five  times  the  horizontal,  the  surface
depression  shown  in  Fig.  8  not  being  perceptible  in  the  field.  These
diagrams  illustrate  the  probable  geological  sections  of  the  field  from
bore-hole  No.  1  to  No.  '2,  nearly  west  and  east,  and  also  the  section
from  north  to  south.  It  will  be  observed  in  Fig.  8  that  the
nearly  dry  bore-hole  No.  2  is  actually  a  little  lower  than  the
water-bearing  hole  No.  1.  Possibly  water  might  be  found  between
Nos.  1  and  2  ;  in  fact,  Mr.  Jones  predicted  it  would  be  a  few
feet  to  the  east  of  No.  1.  But  this  can  only  be  settled  by  boring  at
intervals  across  from  west  to  east ;  I  hope  to  be  able  to  do  this
eventually.  As  the  bed  I'ock  was  not  reached  in  bore  holes  Nos.  1  and
3,  its  representation  in  both  sections  is  in  part  imaginary,  as  is  the
lateral  extent  of  the  layer  of  sand  in  Fig.  8.

For  the  next  memorandum  I  am  greatly  indebted  to  my  friend
Mr.  J.  R.  Kilroe,  of  H.M.  Geological  Survey  of  Ireland.  Mr.
Kilroe,  it  will  be  remembered,  gave  me  the  benefit  of  his  geological
knowledge  in  the  famous  Waterford  case  described  in  the  previous
Report,  and  on  the  present  occasion  he  at  once  responded  to  my
request  and,  at  considerable  inconvenience,  came  from  a  distance  on
purpose  to  inspect  the  field.

Carrigoona  Hill,  rising  to  the  moderate  height  of  802  ft.  above  the  sea,
commands  one  of  the  most  attractive  and  varied  panoramas  in  Wicklow.
From  its  foot,  eastward,  spreads  the  park-like  country  containing  and
adjoining  Kilruddery,  the  Earl  of  Meath's  demesne,  to  the  town  of  Bray
and  the  sea  beyond.  North-westward  the  hill  overlooks  the  Dargle  Valley
which  separates  it  from  the  Dublin  and  Wicklow  Mountains.  Southward
the  eye  is  attracted  by  the  valley  of  Killough,  from  which,  on  its  east  side,
rises  almost  precipitously  the  Great  Sugarloaf  Mountain  to  a  height  of
1,659  ft. — this  beautiful  conical  hill  being  separated  from  Carrigoona  by  the
narrow,  weird  gorge  known  as  the  Rocky  Valley.  Further  eastward  the
Little  Sugarloaf  Mountain  bounds  the  landscape  beyond  the  vale  of
Kilmacanoge.

The  hills  named  above— Carrigoona,  with  the  Great  and  Little  Sugarloaf
— constitute  a  group  standing  above  the  general  level  of  the  surrounding
country,  a  cii'cimistance  attributable  to  the  greater  resistance  offered  to

1  I  am  much  indebted  to  Mr.  Kendrew,  of  Dublin,  for  the  photographs  here
reproduced.  Mr.  Kendrew  happened  to  be  taking  some  photographs  in  the  neigh-
bourhood whilst  the  boring  was  in  progress.


158


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


WEST  EAST

WALL  ■  WALL


Fig.  8.

section  of  field,  east  and  west.

Horizontal  scale  1  in.  =  CO  ft.

Vertical  scale,  exaggerated  five  times,  \  in.  —  12  ft.

SOUTH  NORTH


WALL


Fig.  9.


SECTION OF FIELD, NORTH AND  SOUTH,

Horizontal  scale  1  in.  =  60  ft.

Vertical  scale,  exaggerated  five  times,  1  in.  =  12  ft.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


159


disintegration  by  quartzite,  which  forms  the  hills,  tlian  by  the  slate  rock
which  prevails  in  the  lower  ground.  Bands  of  slate  also  occur  with  the
quartzite  ;  and  the  results  of  unequal  denudation  are  apparent  in  the
uneven — in  some  places,  rugged — aspect  presented  by  the  higher  ground.

The  rocky  bed  is  largely  covered  with  a  mantle  of  glacial  drift,  which,
though  chiefly  occurring  in  the  low  ground,  is  of  fairly  general  distribution,
Testing  in  various  places  on  the  hill-sides,  and  partially  filling  hollows
"between  crags.  In  these  latter  cases,  the  drift  consists  of  local  rock
detritus,  chiefly  a  mixture  of  sand,  clay,  and  pebbles  of  slate  and  quartzite.
Limestone  pebbles  also  are  interspersed  in  the  drift  which  skirts  the  hill
slopes  ;  but  few,  if  any,  are  to  be  found  at  higher  elevations.  The  drift  in
the  latter  positions  usually  contain  lenticular  layers  of  sand  and  gravel,
which  form  favourable  reservoirs  for  underground  water.

Alluding  to  the  immediate  topography  of  the  ground  experimented  upon
(E,  Fig.  1),  it  is  situated  on  the  south-eastern  slope  of  Carrigoona  Hill,  adjoin-
ing the  Commons,  that  is,  the  heathery  and  rocky  portion  of  the  hill  near  its
summit.  Descending  the  slope,  one  observes  crags  of  quartzite  jutting  up
on  either  side  of  a  hollow,  which  is  jaartially  filled  with  drift  of  the  character
described  above.  The  south-eastern  drainage  of  the  hill  would  naturally
in  part  flow  along  this  hollow,  and  would  rapidly  disappear,  were  there
no  drift.  The  di'ift,  however,  intercepts  the  drainage,  and  would  merely
retard  its  flow  were  it  quite  porous  in  texture  ;  but  it  is  comparatively
impervious,  with  the  exception  of  the  sand  and  gravel  layers  ;  and  whatever
drainage-water  percolates  through,  reaches  and  is  retained  by  the  layers,
which  consequently  are  ready  sources  of  supply  when  tapped.  These  are
almost  horizontal,  probably  dipping  more  or  less  from  the  sides  towards  the
centre,  and  somewhat  basin-shaped  when  spreading  to  any  extent  over  the
area  occupied  by  the  field.  Hence,  when  such  a  stratum  is  pierced,  the  water
rises  to  a  heighc  in  the  boring  corresponding  to  its  head  in  the  basin-shaped
layer — higher  than  the  layer  at  its  centre  ;  and  practically  to  the  same  height
in  borings  which  tap  the  same  source — as  in  the  case  of  the  two  successful
borings  with  which  we  are  concerned  here.

Judging,  then,  from  geological  data,  the  nature  of  the  ground  would
suggest  as  the  most  promising  site  for  a  water-boring,  a  point,  say,  midway
between  the  quartzite  crags — perhaps  a  little  nearer  to  the  western  crag
than  the  eastern,  say  40  yds.  from  the  former  and  60  from  the  latter.  The
successful  borings  [Nos.  1  and  3]  have,  on  the  dowser's  advice,  been  put
down  some  22  yds.  from  the  west  side  of  the  field  (lying  immediately
between  the  crags)  and  some  70  yds.  from  the  east  side.

It  is  very  improbable — at  least,  very  diflicult  to  understand — that  a
merely  casual  visitor  to  the  place,  however  shrewd,  if  not  versed  in
geological  facts,  could  divine  the  existence  of  water  in  the  field  by  a
cursory  inspection,  much  less  indicate  with  any  accuracy  the  spot  and
depth  at  which  it  would  be  found.  The  success  attending  the  ex^oeriment
here  is  rendered  the  more  striking  by  the  dowser's  additional  prediction
that  water  would  not  be  found  in  the  other  field  at  the  west  side  of
Carrigoona  (W,  Fig.  1)  ;  though,  to  the  ordinary  observer,  there  would
appear  to  be  at  least  as  much  probability  of  finding  a  supply  in  this
place  as  in  the  one  above  described.  j  Kilroe


160


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Mr.  Kilroe  s  opinion  is  all  the  more  valuable  as  he  is  a  recognised
authority  on  the  "  drift,"  and  it  will  be  seen,  from  the  last  sentence  in
his  interesting  and  full  report,  that  he  regards  the  dowser's  prediction
as  very  curious  and  remarkable,  and,  a  fortAori,  still  more  striking
as  having  been  given  before  any  knowledge  of  the  nature  and  slope  of
the  underlying  ground  had  been  obtained.

For  my  own  part,  I  do  not  think  geological  knowledge,  nor  even
observation  of  the  rocks  of  the  neighbourhood,  has  anything  to
do  with  the  dowser's  success.  If  a  plausible  explanation  is  to  be
found,  it  is  much  more  likely  to  be  in  the  impression  made  upon
the  dowser  by  some  surface  indications  of  water.  This  impression
may  be  an  entirely  subconscious  one,  and  probably  is  more  effective
when  it  is  so,  and  it  ultimately  evokes  the  involuntary  motion  given
to  the  twig:  for  it  certainly  is  involuntary — a  purely  reflex  action — -in
a  genuine  dowser.

Although  there  were  absolutely  no  indications  of  water  in  the
experimental  field,  E,  Fig.  1,  yet  on  the  way  up  to  it  there  is  a  small
spring  (marked  .S'  in  the  map,  Fig.  1)  emerging  from  the  rock,
and  flowing  over  the  grass  beside  the  road.  This  spring  is  not
derived  from  the  field,  but  comes  from  quite  another  direction,
though  a  casual  observer  could  not  tell  this.i  A  little  beyond
there  is  also  evidence  of  some  feeble  springs.-  Mr.  Stone  may
have  rapidly,  and  more  or  less  unconsciously,  perceived  all  that  I
have  described,  and  when  he  traversed  the  field  his  subconscious
self  may  have  made  good  use  of  this  information,  and  drawn  a  very
happy  but  accidental  conclusion  therefrom.  It  could  hardly  have  been
his  conscious  self,  for  he  was  talking  to  me  of  other  matters  all
the  time,  and  appeared  quite  as  astonished  as  I  was  when  the  twig-
forcibly  leapt  up  and  twisted  round  as  he  crossed  the  dotted  line
on  Fig.  3.  There  was  a  barely  perceptible  contraction  of  the
muscles  of  the  hand  when  the  twig  thus  vigorously  turned ;  the
movement  is  one  that  I  never  yet  found  any  one  able  consciously  to
imitate  without  a  good  deal  more  visible  muscular  exertion.  But
that  matter  I  will  refer  to  again  later  on.

As  regards  Experiment  II.,  where  it  will  be  remembered  no  water
was  found,  there  is  in  one  corner  of  the  field  a  hole  some  6  ft.  deep,
with  the  debris  from  it  lying  about.  This  hole  is  quite  dry,  and,  of
course,  the  nature  of  the  surface-soil  can  be  seen  from  the  sides  of  the

1  There  is  a  famous  spring,  known  as  Silverwell,  that  gashes  out  of  the  qnartzite
rock  at  the  foot  of  the  Great  Sugarloaf  Mountain,  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  further
up  the  Rocky  Valley  ;  it  is  marked  S'  in  Fig.  1.

'-  Which  probably  have  their  origin  in  the  outcrop  of  the  layer  of  sand  shown  in
Fig.  9  ;  but  this  is  not  obvious,  as  the  turf  at  the  spot  is  simply  swampy,  and  a
stretch  of  dry  ground  intervenes  between  this  spot  and  the  field.


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


161


hole  and  the  debris,  which  consists  of  shingle  and  rocky  debris.  Mr.
Stone  passed  sufficiently  near  the  hole  to  have  examined  it  if  he  wished
to,  but  he  seemed  to  pay  not  the  least  attention  to  it.  Again,  however,
this  dry  hole  may  have  been  the  means  of  setting  his  subconscious
self  to  work,  and  have  led  to  the  result  already  described.  It  would,
however,  have  been  an  unsafe  induction  from  any  conscious  process  of
reasoning,  for  the  boring  No.  5  revealed  quite  a  different  material
beneath  the  surface  from  that  in  the  hole  and  in  No.  4  boring,  which
was  on  the  same  level  as  the  hole.

I  have  now  placed  on  record  all  the  information  about  these
experiments  which  my  geological  friends  and  careful  observation  have
enabled  me  to  obtain,  and  I  leave  the  matter  to  the  judgment  of  each
reader.

i  §  2. Experiments  at  Kingstotvn.

Experiment  IV.

When  Mr.  Stone  was  in  Ireland  he  came  to  Kingstown,  and  I  asked
him  to  see  if  he  could  find  any  underground  water  in  the  De  Vesci
grounds  which  are  in  front  of  my  house.  This  place  had  already  formed
the  subject  of  experiment,  see  Part  XXXII.,  p.  175.  Though  I  did
nob  inform  Mr.  Stone  of  this  fact,  he  might  possibly  have  read  of  it  in
the  previous  Report,  and  hence  I  do  not  attach  much,  if  any,  value
to  this  experiment,  though,  even  assuming  he  had  a  vague  recollection
of  the  plan  given  in  the  former  Report,  it  would  have  been  of  very
little  service  to  him.  Referring  to  that  plan  (p.  175)  the  site  of  a
disused  well  is  marked  :  it  is  entirely  concealed  beneath  the  lawn,  and
only  one  or  two  persons  know  of  its  existence.  The  rod  moved
vigorously  directly  Mr.  Stone  passed  over  this  spot,  and  he  asserted  a
spring  existed  below,  which  he  traced  across  the  gravel  path  to  the
centre  of  the  wood  marked  "  shrubbery "  on  the  plan ;  here,  he
declared,  a  plentiful  supply  of  water  would  be  found.  To  fix  the
place  a  snap-shot  photograph  was  taken  of  Mr.  Stone  at  this  moment,
see  next  page.  Mr.  J.  H.  Jones  also  tried  the  same  place  before  he
visited  Carrigoona  with  me,  and  he,  too,  from  the  prompt  motion  of
the  "rod,"  fixed  on  a  spot  very  close  to  that  selected  by  Mr.  Stears  and
Mr.  Stone.  There  is  no  doubt  water  does  exist  below  this  spot,  at  no
great  depth  ;  but  whether  it  is  generally  diffused  surface-water  or  not
1  have  no  means  of  knowing.  There  is  a  famous  ever-flowing  spring
on  a  lower  level  not  far  from  the  grounds,  but  this  was  unknown  to
the  dowsers.  More  to  the  point  is  the  fact  that  by  careful  observation
one  can  see  a  very  slight  circular  depression  on  the  evenly-covered
sward,  where  the  mouth  of  the  well  once  existed.  This  possibly  may
have  started  a  similar  subconscious  suggestion  in  each  case  ;  any

o


162


Professor  W .  F.  Barrett.


[part


information  or  involuntary  suggestion  from  myself  or  others  was
guarded  against.  In  any  case  the  experiment  cannot  be  regarded  as
of  much  value,  though  the  triple  coincidence  is  certainly  curious. ^

Experiment  V.

One  other  experiment  I  made  with  Mr.  Stone.  He  told  me  that
he  had  been  able  to  detect  buried  water  pipes  or  drains  when  water


Fig.  10.

snap-shot  of  mk.  stone  dowsing.


'  As  these  pages  were  passing  through  the  press  a  curious  incident  occurred  in  the
De  Vesei  grounds,,  which  removes  all  doubt  of  there  being  a  watercourse  at  one  of
the  very  spots  marked  by  all  three  dowsers.  Here,  after  long  continued  heavy  rain,
the  earth  suddenly  fell  in,  to  the  consternation  of  the  gardener  who  was  driving  a
lawn-mower  over  the  spot ;  a  deep  hole  was  left,  on  examination  of  which  by  myself
and  the  gardener  it  was  seen  that  an  ancient-built  watercourse  (still  carrying  water)
ran  some  .5  ft.  below  the  surface,  and  had  broken  in.  The  "  oldest  inhabitant  "  knew
nothing  of  this  watercourse  (for  it  was  not  a  mere  surface  drain),  and  apparently  led
to  the  old  well  which  is  supposed  to  be  there.


xxxviil]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  163


was  flowing  through  them,  and  he  at  once  consented  to  try  the
experiment  in  my  presence.  I  therefore  asked  him  to  come  into  my
garden,  under  the  surface  of  which  ran  a  water  pipe,  and  tell  me  when
the  water  was  running  or  not.  In  the  present  case  a  water  tap  was
turned  on  and  off  at  the  back  of  the  house,  completely  out  of  ear-shot
of  Stone,  who  was  in  the  front,  and  a  system  of  signals  was  arranged
so  that  I  knew  when  the  water  was  or  was  not  running  ;  the  signals
could  not  be  seen  by  Stone,  nor  would  he  have  known  their  meaning.
As  the  house  water  supply  comes  through  the  buried  garden  pipe,
when  the  tap  was  turned  on  at  the  back  a  flow  of  water  was  at  once
set  up  in  the  garden  pipe.  The  result  of  this  experiment  showed  that
the  number  of  times  Stone  proved  to  be  right  was  very  little  different
from  the  number  given  by  pure  chance  coincidence.  Hence  this
experiment,  so  far  as  it  goes,  was  adverse  to  the  dowser's  belief  that
he  could  detect  whenever  water  was  running  in  a  pipe.^  The  elder
MuUins,  now  dead,  was  often  successful,  I  am  informed,  in  a  similar
experiment,  though  I  do  not  know  what  precautions  were  taken ;
except  in  the  case  narrated  by  my  friend  Master  Bruce,  and  given
on  p.  83  of  the  previous  Report,  and  in  the  experiment  by  Mr.
Finch-Hatton  given  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  II.,  p.  102  ;  but  a  good
many  instances  of  success,  under  strict  conditions,  would  be  required
to  be  at  all  conclusive.  A  series  of  experiments  of  this  kind  were,
however,  tried  a  century  ago,  with  the  famous  French  dowser  Bleton,
and  the  results  were  certainly  very  remarkable  (see  p.  269).

This  ended  my  experiments  with  Mr.  Stone,  and  I  have  to  thank
him  for  his  ready  courtesy  in  submitting  to  any  test  I  wished,  not  only
without  fee,  but  at  some  inconvenience  to  himself,  as  he  put  off  an
engagement  in  England  in  order  to  stay  a  night  in  Kingstown  at  my
request.  I  intended  to  have  tried  blindfolding  him  and  taking  him
over  the  same  ground  the  following  day,  but  neither  he  nor  I  could
spare  another  day  just  then  ;  he  promised,  however,  to  submit  himself
to  that  test  when  I  or  any  friend  could  carry  it  out,  either  in  England
or  over  here.  An  account  of  a  successful  experiment  of  this  kind  with
Mr.  Stone  is  given  in  Part  Y.,  p.  210.


i  The  pipe  was  only  a  small  leaden  one,  about  5  in.  bore.  The  experiment  is  such
a  very  simple  one,  and  precautions  to  avoid  misleading  inferences  can  so  easily  be
taken,  that  I  hope  some  of  our  members  may  be  induced  to  test  any  dowser  in  their
neighbourhood  who  may  be  willing  to  try.  I  should  be  grateful  for  any  information
on  this  point.  Care  must,  of  course,  be  taken  that  no  other  taps  are  turned  on  in  the
house  whilst  the  experiment  is  in  progress,  and  that  no  sound  of  the  running  water,
either  in  the  pipe  or  from  the  tap,  reaches  the  dowser.

0  2


16i


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


PART  III.

Cases  where  the  Dowsee  found  a  Good  Supply  of  Underground
Water  near  to  a  useless  Well  or  Boring  previously

SUNK  to  as  great  OR  GREATER  DEPTH.


No.  1. The  Shanklin  Experiments.

Without  multiplying  the  evidence  needlessly,  I  will  now  give  a  few
more  cases  that  have  reached  me  where  a  useless  well  or  boring  having
been  sunk  ivithout  the  aid  of  the  dowser,  the  latter  found  a  good  supply
of  underground  water  hard  by,  and  at  a  less  depth. Some  forty  cases  of
this  kind  were  given  in  the  previous  Report ;  and  although  at  first
sight  such  cases  appear  to  aflbrd  strong  evidence  of  some  supernormal,
or  at  any  rate  some  peculiar,  faculty  possessed  by  the  dowser,  a  critical
investigation  on  the  spot  reveals  that  this  conclusion  is  unwarranted
in  many  cases. Assuming  that  the  dowser  has  a  keen  eye  and  con-
siderable experience  in  his  business,  such  successes  could  often  be
explained  by  shrewd  guesses  on  his  part. Most  geologists  who  have
so  far  overcome  their  prejudices  as  to  believe  the  dowser  may,  to
some  extent,  be  an  honest  man,  would  explain  all  his  successes  in
this  way,  attributing  them  to  a  conscious  exercise  of  his  power  of
observation. For  my  own  part,  I  venture  to  disagree  :  the  geologist
speaks  from  his  own  experience,  and  rarely  has  he  seen  a  dowser  at
work  or  investigated  the  evidence  on  his  behalf. It  is  certainly  not
by  a  conscious  exercise  of  his  powers  of  observation  that  the  dowser
usually succeeds ; sub-conscious  observation  and  interpretation  of
surface  indications  there  may  be, and  doubtless  often is — we  may
call  this  instinct  if  we  like. The  question  before  us  is,  can  we  stretch
this  explanation  to  cover  the  whole  ground  1 — for  we  are  bound  first  to
exhaust  every  known  or  possible  explanation. To  enable  the  reader
to  arrive  at  the  geological  evidence  in  the  cases  I  am  about  to  cite,
I  am  greatly  indebted  to  my  geological  friends,  Mr.  E.  Westlake,
F.G.S.,  and  Mr.  T.  V.  Holmes,  F.G.S. The  former  has  in  several
cases  conducted  a  critical  investigation  on  the  spot,  and  the  latter  has
in  many  cases  appended  valuable  geological  notes.

In  the  previous  report  {Proceedings  S.  P.  R.,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  60)
a  brief  account  is  given  of  the  success  of  two  amateur  dowsers  at
Shanklin,  in  the  Isle  of  Wight.  Subsequently  I  visited  the  spot  and
obtained  fuller  particulars  at  first-hand.  As  the  case  seemed  one
eminently  worthy  of  careful  geological  investigation,  I  requested  Mr.
Westlake,  F.G.S.,  to  make  an  independent  examination  and  report.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


165


Accordingly  he  did  so,  and  the  accompanying  able  report  which  he
has  drawn  up  is  the  result  of  his  inquiries.

Report  by  E.  Westlake,  F.G.S.

On  visiting  the  Isle  of  Wight  in  1897  at  Professor  Barrett's
request,  for  the  purpose  of  examining  the  cases  at  Wootton  and
Arreton,  criticised  in  the  columns  of  Nature,  I  took  occasion  to
inquire  into  some  experiments  at  Shanklin,  cited  on  p.  60  of  his
former  paper,  which  were  exceptional  as  having  been  made  by  mem-
bers of  the  Local  Board,  who  were  themselves  the  dowsers.  I  found
that,  though  three  or  four  eminent  geologists  had  been  previously
called  in,  they  had  altogether  failed  to  find  water,  while  the  three
dowsers  had  been  as  uniformly  successful.  As  the  strata  at  the  point
in  question  are  as  well  known  to  geologists  as  any  in  England,  this
result  was  rather  unexpected,  and  I  have  therefoi'e  taken  some  pains
to  get  at  the  circumstances.  After  visiting  the  place  on  four
occasions,  and  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Milman  Brown,  the
Chairman  of  the  District  Council  (who  has  revised  this  account),
and  others  concerned,  I  am  now  able  to  give  the  main  particulars,
which  to  make  intelligible  I  will  preface  by  a  few  words  on  the
geological  situation.

The  Shanklin  reservoirs  are  in  the  Gault  Clay  a  mile  south  of  the
town,  at  the  sources  of  the  small  stream  which  issues  in  the  Chine.
The  collecting  ground  is  the  southern  mass  of  the  Chalk  and  Upper
Greensand,  the  water  issuing  at  the  base  of  the  latter  where  it  rests
upon  the  Gault.  The  valley  is  a  right-angle  facing  the  north  and
east,  due  to  the  main  joints  in  the  Greensand,  which  run  E.  and  "W.
and  N.  and  S.  The  dip  of  the  strata  is  1  in  45  (1J°;  south.  Along
the  sides  of  the  valley  the  Greensand  has  a  local  inward  dip  of  from
2°  to  8°,  due  to  the  slipping  out  of  its  base  upon  the  Gault,  forming
fissures  which  increase  in  size  as  they  descend.  On  account,  however,
of  the  tendency  of  the  water  to  run  southwards,  the  valley  is  un-
favourably situated  for  springs,  and  on  its  sides  one  only  has  been
utilised,  viz.,  on  the  south  side  just  below  the  top  cottage.  The  Retreat;
the  remainder  are  in  the  copse  at  the  head  of  the  valley.

Greatwood  Copse,  the  scene  of  the  water-finding,  occupies  a  semi-
circular hollow  a  quarter  of  a  mile  wide  at  the  angle  of  the  valley.
The  efi"ect  of  this  hollowing  is  that  the  Greensand,  which  extends  for
a  quarter  of  a  mile  to  the  north,  obtains  in  the  copse  a  slight  southern
face  traversing  the  fissures  aforesaid,  and  it  is  here  that  the  springs
take  their  rise.  The  well  (to  be  described  presently)  which  was  sunk
at  a  spot  indicated  by  J.  Mullins,  the  late  famous  dowser,  is  placed  in
this  southern  face — the  very  best  place,  geologically  speaking,  i.e.,  on


166


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


the  above  theory  that  the  main  supply  comes  from  the  north-east  corner
of  Shanklin  Down.  As  the  consumption  of  water  in  the  town  has  been
continually  increasing  (in  1898  it  was  about  50,000  gallons  a  day),
while  the  supply  has  never  been  large  (about  40,000  gallons  in  Septem-
ber, 1898),  there  have  been  continual  efforts  to  augment  it,  which,  as
far  as  they  relate  to  our  inquiry,  are  as  follows  : —

The  first  wells  in  tlie  copse,  Mr.  Brown  informed  me,  were  sunk  in  1876
by  the  London  engineers,  Messrs.  Quick.  Tfie  east  well,  150  yards  west  of
the  road,  is  55  feet  deep,  and  held  (September,  1898)  9  feet  of  water  ;  its
cover  is  411  feet  above  Ordnance  Datum  (i.e.,  above  sea-level).  The  west
well,  20  yards  further  in,  is  420^  feet  O.D.,  and  ^^^t  deep,  with  10  feet
of  water.  There  is  thus  a  difference  of  only  1  foot  in  the  bottoms  of  the
wells.  They  are  connected  by  a  sub-water  heading  so  as  to  form  virtually
one  well,  and  by  a  middle  heading  for  syphoning  purposes,  the  floor  of
which  averages  383  feet  O.D.  They  supply,  I  am  informed  by  Mr.  E.  C.
Cooper,  the  town  surveyor,  about  4,000  gallons  a  day.  The  water,  when
syphoned,  stood  (September,  1898)  at  365  feet  O.D.  When  not  syphoned
it  stood  (December,  1899)  at  382  feet  O.D.  ;  in  winter  it  rises  till  it  over-
flows the  outer  sill  of  the  middle  heading  at  388  feet  O.D.

The  upper  heading,  which  is  close  by,  was  driven  without  expert  advice
above  a  wet  place  in  the  copse,  and  followed  the  water  in  a  westerly  direction
for  a  distance  of  from  400  to  500  feet.  This  heading  starts  at  a  level  of  401^
feet  O.D.,  at  a  point  15  yards  west  of  the  middle  heading  and  18  feet  above
it. (See  Fig.  12.)

About  1878  Mr.  H.  Bristow,  F.R.S.,  F.G.S.,  of  the  Geological  Survey,
was  consulted  by  the  Board,  and  visited  the  spot.  On  his  advice  the  upper
heading  was  extended  to  a  point  about  900  feet  west  of  the  entrance
directly  under  the  old  chalk  pit  on  Shanklin  Down,  but  without  getting  any
appreciable  addition  to  the  flow  of  water.  When  I  measured  it  in  December,
1899,  the  quantity  was  9,000  gallons  a  day,  wliich,  however,  is  below  the
average  ;  the  turncock,  Mr.  Whittington,  said  when  the  flow  was  good  it  was
double  this.  That  hardly  any  water  was  found  in  Bristow's  extension  is
probably  due,  as  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Topley,  F.R.S.,  in  a  subsequent  report,
to  its  having  been  driven  "  at  too  high  a  level  "  ;  "  water,"  he  adds,  "might
be  found  by  a  well  or  boring  at  the  far  end,  but  would  probably  not  rise  into
the  heading."

In  1885  the  Board  consulted  two  other  geologists,  Mr.  W.  Topley,
F.R.S.,  of  the  Geological  Survey,  whose  report  in  May  of  that  year  I  have
just  cited,  and  Mr.  Mark  Norman,  author  of  a  geological  guide  to  the  Isle  of
Wight,  but  their  schemes  of  sinking  to  the  Lower  Greensand  were  not  only
costly  but  problematical.

In  1893,  as  a  last  resort,  the  Board  called  in  Mr.  John  Mullins,  the
well-known  Wiltshire  dowser,  who  marked  several  spots  in  the  field  to  the
south  of  the  reservoirs,  but  the  conditions  were  too  onerous  for  them  to  sink
there.  On  their  own  land,  however,  by  the  S.  W.  corner  of  the  upper
reservoir,  which  was  from  50  to  100  yards  to  the  north  of  Mullins'  marks,
they  sank  a  well  30  feet  deep,  but  without  getting  water.  Then  they  got
Mr.  Parsons,  the  Brading  harbour-master,  to  bore  at  the  bottom  of  the  well


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


167


S  h


  ^ .  igicl^/iaiJc

a  n  k  L  I  Yb  \fi^^M^Q>^^'

Scale  cf  Feet

700 300 400  600  \  I Cjy^  ;;


own


ISOD


o


Great  wood  "/O.- \L  o  p  s  e


Fig.  11.

From  the  25  in.  Ordnance  Survey  Map  of  the  Isle  of  Wight,  1863,  with  additions  from  the

Geological  and  local  Surveys.

The  numbers,  337,  etc.,  indicate  height  above  sea  level. Strong  dotted  lines  are  the
400,  500,  and  600  ft.  contours  ;  faint  ditto  are  geological  boundaries. Asterisks  are
Mullins'  marks  as  remembered. The  watercourses  are  the  natural  drainage.


168


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


for  97  feet — i.e.,  to  127  feet  from  the  surface — but  he  got  no  water,  only-
bad  air,  \Yhich  suftocated  him,  his  son,  and  his  men,  who  were  all  found  dead
in  the  well  one  morning  in  July.  Mr.  Thorn,  of  Manchester,  continued  the
boring  from  200  to  300  feet  deeper  into  the  Lower  Greensand,  but  after
diminishing  the  bore  from  8  to  4  inches  the  Board  refused  to  sanction  a
further  reduction  and  the  boring  was  abandoned.  The  borehole  is  now
disconnected.  The  well  has  a  supply  from  surface  soakage  of  from  400  to
800  gallons  a  day,  which  is  not  used.  I  may  remark  on  the  foregoing  that
Mullins'  marks,  being  on  the  outcrop  of  the  Upper  Greensand,  offered  a
reasonable  prospect  for  finding  water,  whereas  the  site  chosen  for  the  well  at
a  level  of  373  feet  O.D.,  being  on  solid  Gault  clay,  could  have  only  a  little
from  surface  jjercolation.

In  1895  the  Board  consulted  Mr.  A.  Strahan,  F.G.S.,  of  the  Geological
Survey  (who  had  re-surveyed  the  district),  on  the  prospect  of  obtaining
a  supply  by  a  deep  boring  on  the  same  site.  In  his  report  of  September  of
that  year  he  says,  "I  do  not  think  there  is  a  more  favourable  site,  from  a
geological  point  of  view,  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood. "  His  plan,  like
that  of  Messrs.  Topley  and  Norman,  was  to  sink  some  400  to  700  feet,  and
pump  from  the  Ferruginous  Sands  below  the  sea-level;  "but  this,"  said
Mr.  Brown,  "  would  have  cost  us  a  great  deal,  and  he  could  not  promise  us
anything  certain  when  we  got  there."

Returning  to  Mullins'  operations,  it  appears  that  after  he  came,  early  in
1893,  two  members  of  the  Board,  Messrs.  Brown  and  Bailey,  who  had  found
the  twig  turn  in  their  hands,  started  dowsing  in  the  copse  on  their  own
account.  They  each  found  the  twig  turn  at  certain  places  nearly  coincident ;
one  of  these  places  they  found  to  be  the  same  spot  previously  fixed  upon  by
Mullins.  At  this  spot  (No.  1,  see  map.  Fig.  11)  they  sunk  a  well  26  feet
deep,  and  at  two  points  of  their  own  (Nos.  2  and  7)  they  sank  wells  28  feet
and  64  feet  deep.  Though  No.  1  is  only  100  yards  to  the  north  of  the
headings  and  No.  2  only  40  yards  south,  a  g(wd  supply  of  water  was  found
in  the  three  wells.  No.  1  supplied,  at  first,  7,000  gallons  a  day  ;  No.  2,
about  10,000  gallons.  No.  7  required,  at  first,  nine  days  to  pump  it  out  ;
at  the  present  time,  however,  it  only  supplies  about  2,000  gallons  a  day.
In  1895,  again  following  the  twig's  indications,  they  sank  four  more  wells
(Nos.  3,  4,  5  and  6),  in  all  of  which  water  was  found.  Nos.  3  and  4  have
supjalied  from  1,500  to  2,000  gallons  a  day.  No.  5,  when  dug,  had  2  feet  of
water  which  ran  freely,  but  has  since  failed.  No.  6  (72  feet  deejj)  has  not
been  connected  to  the  reservoir.  These  additional  supplies,  though  quite
inadequate  for  a  growing  town,  had,  said  Mr.  Brown,  kept  them  going  for
the  time  being.  The  height  of  the  ground  at  these  wells  (Nos.  1  to  7)  I
found,  by  levelling  from  St.  John's  Church,  to  be  415,  415,  413,  419i,  4475,
465  and  466  feet  (j.D.  All  the  wells  are  now  covered  over,  except  No.  7,
but  I  have  ascertained  their  respective  depths  to  be,  approximately,  26,  28,
28,  30,  33,  72  and  64  feet ;  their  bottoms  are,  therefore,  approximately,  389,
387,  385,  389|,  414^,  393  and  402  feet  O.D.  Hence,  except  in  No.  5,  the
water  lies  at  levels  between  the  middle  and  upper  headings,  showing  the
dowsed  water  to  come  from  the  same  stratum  as  that  in  the  other  wells  and
headings.  In  No.  7  the  water  stands  at  416i  feet  O.D.,  so  that  the  ex-
haustion of  No.  5  is  probably  due  to  its  not  having  been  sunk  deep  enough.


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


169


The  geological  position  of  Parson's  well  is  in  the  Gault  clay,  which
is  penetrated  after  the  first  100  feet,  the  remainder  of  the  boring  being
in  the  sandstones  of  the  Lower  Greensand  (Neocomian).  Quick's  wells
and  the  middle  heading  are  in  the  passage-beds  between  the  Gault  and
Upper  Greensand,  which  pass  into  one  another  insensibly.  The  upper
heading  is  mostly  in  the  Upper  Greensand,  the  base  of  which,  according
to  the  Geological  Survey,  is  a  little  below  the  path  in  the  copse,  and
coincides  nearly  with  the  400  feet  contour.  The  dowsed  wells  start  in
the  Upper  Greensand,  and,  except  No.  5,  penetrate  to  the  passage-beds.


Fig.  12.


Diagrammatic  Section  through  Greatwood  Copi?e  :  vertical  scale  (exaggerated  twice)

208  feet  to  one  inch.

The  dowsers'  wells,  shown  by  dotted  lines,  are  numbered  as  in  Fig.  11.

Parson's  boring  extends  to  double  the  depth  shown  in  the  above  diagram.

Tabulating  the  results  obtained  by  the  professionals  and  dowsers
respectively,  we  have  : —


Engineers'  and  Geologists'  Results.

Supply  when  good. Supply  at  worst.
Quick's  east  well 55  ft.  ~)  ^  >^  ^  ^  ,

,, west  ,, 65  ft.  V  syphon,  4,000  gals,  per  day

Submerged  heading ... 60  f t.  j

Middle  „ ... 120  ft.

Upper  „ about  900  ft.  f

Parson's  well  and  bor-~\


tiow,  20,000


9,000  gals.


ing,  not  connected  J


„  300  ft.


Total  1,500  ft.


24,000  gals.


9,000  ,,


1  This  estimate  agrees,  Mr.  Brown  tells  me,  with  a  measurement  of  25,000  gallons
made  by  the  surveyor,  Mr.  Colenutt. Parson's  well  is  surface  water  and  not  used.


170  Professor  TF.  F.  Barrett.  [pau'j'

Dowsers'  Results.

Supply  when  good. Supply  at  worst.


No.  1  well  (Mullins's) 26  ft.  flow  7,000  gals,  per  day 1,250  gals.

2 „  (B.  and  B.'s) 28  ft. „  10,000 -j

28  ft. ,,  2,000  V  „  „  0  „

33  ft. ,,  1,000  J

30  ft.  syphon 2,000 ,,  „  1

72  ft.  not  connected ? ,,  ,,  ?

64  ft.  pump 2,000 ,,  ,,  ?


3
5
4
6
7


Total  281  ft.  24,000  trals. „  1,250


The  dowsers'  first  total  includes  the  first  flows  (always  exceptionally
large)  for  Nos.  1  and  2 ;  in  the  second  total,  which  I  took  in
December,  1899,  after  a  very  dry  season,  most  of  the  wells  had  gone
dry.  Thus,  for  comparison  with  the  engineers'  total,  the  dowsers'
first  total  is  too  large,  and  the  second  too  small.  To  compare  the
water  found  by  them  respectively,  we  ought  properly  to  have  figures
either  for  all  the  first  flows,  or  for  some  time  when  the  springs  were
high  enough  to  get  flows  from  all  the  wells.  Mr.  Cooper  writes
(July  11th,  1900):  "I  think  if  you  put  the  value  of  the  [dowsers']
wells  at  their  best  as  a  third  the  value  of  the  headings,  you  will  then
be  stating  their  [relative]  value  very  fairly."  According  to  this
estimate,  and  taking  the  amount  of  excavation  into  account,  the
dowsers  obtained  nearly  twice  as  much  water  per  foot  as  the  other
water-finders.  Of  the  success  of  the  latter,  five-sixths  was  due  to
empirical  means,  one-sixth  to  the  engineers,  and  none  to  the  geologists
who  went  either  above  or  below  the  proved  water-bearing  bed.  The
dowsers  on  the  other  hand  went  straight  to  the  point  by  putting  their
wells  into  the  water-bearing  bed  itself.

The  relative  professional  failure,  however,  does  not  entitle  the
dowsers'  results  to  pose  as  mysterious.  The  top  of  the  Gault  is  typically
water-bearing  :  the  well-known  landslip  at  East  End,  a  mile  or  two
distant,  is  due  to  the  water  in  this  very  bed,  the  level  of  which  in  the
copse  was  known  from  Quick's  two  wells.  The  probability,  therefore,
of  some  water  at  this  horizon  no  geologist  would  doubt.  What  they
did  doubt  was  whether  a  useful  quantity  would  be  found  in  the  copse
by  driving  or  sinking  at  haphazard  :  thus  in  his  report  Mr.  Topley  says,
alluding  to  Mr.  Bristow's  attempt,  "  Galleries  have  been  driven  into
the  Upper  Greensand  for  the  purpose  of  intercepting  springs  .  .  .  and
I  cannot  recommend  any  further  experiments  in  this  direction."  The
subsequent  experiments  of  the  dowsers,  introducing  ex  hypothesi  a  new
method  of  discovery,  do  not  throw  light  on  the  problem  of  haphazard
sinking,  except  in  so  far  as  the  doubtful  utility  of  wells  Nos.  5  and  6
tends  to  show  that  a  useful  quantity  of  water  is  not  to  be  met  with


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


171


everywhere.  The  results  of  the  experiments  may  be  considered  under
their  (1)  qualitative  and  (2)  quantitative  aspects  : —

(1)  The  finding  of  some  water  in  all  the  dowsers'  wells  if  claimed
as  evidence  for  dowsing  involves  the  assumption  that  water  could  not
be  found  everywhere  by  sinking  into  the  passage  beds.  Between  this
and  the  geological  deduction  that  it  probably  could,  there  is  no  direct
evidence  to  decide.  Quick's  wells,  though  supporting  the  geological
view  as  far  as  they  go,  are  close  together,  and  inadequate  for  com-
parison with  the  dowsers'  seven  distributed  over  the  copse.

(2)  The  50  per  cent,  superiority  of  the  seven  dowsed  wells
assumes  that  Quick's  wells  represent  the  average  of  as  many  trials  by
ordinary  methods  ;  granting  this,  the  superiority  seems  too  slight  to
exclude  accident.  In  support  of  the  dowsers'  opinion  that  they  had  a
faculty  for  pitching  on  the  right  places,  Mr.  Brown  mentioned  that  in
one  or  more  wells  they  came  on  loose  rubble  like  that  filling  the
fissures  in  the  adjoining  quarries,  which  made  him  think  they  had  hit
on  a  "vent"  (water-bearing  fissure) :  this  was  confirmed  by  Mr.  Young,
the  sinker  of  wells  Nos.  2  and  7.  Failing  an  examination  of  the  wells
at  the  time,  we  can  now  only  judge  of  the  extent  of  this  feature  from
its  probable  consequences  in  an  increased  supply,  so  that  it  does  not
add  to  the  evidence.  Hence  the  dowsers'  success  cannot  I  think  be
pressed  in  either  aspect,  for  want  of  proper  terms  of  comparison.

There  remains  the  broad  result  that  for  equal  amounts  of  work
the  dowsers  got  twice  as  7nuch  water  as  the  engineers,  while  the
geologists  got  hardly  any.  As  regards  surface  signs  of  water  in  the
copse  I  did  not  notice  any  in  relation  to  the  dowsed  wells,  and  have
given  the  dowsers  the  benefit  of  assuming  there  were  none.  But  the
absence  of  a  reason  for  digging  somewhere  in  particular  may  lead  to
digging  nowhere,  and  in  such  cases  the  rod  may  succeed  by  supplying
a  motive  for  digging.  The  sceptic  may  urge,  "  the  dowser  turns  the
twig  and  fortune  does  the  rest."  We  .see,  however,  that  geological
explanations  of  dowsers'  successes  do  not  necessarily  show  that  the
geologists  would  have  found  the  water  themselves. — E.W.

No.  2. The  Errol  Case.

The  following  case  is  of  interest,  as  it  was  first  published  in  the
columns  of  one  of  the  leading  engineering  journals,  The  Engineer,  for
October  8th,  1897,  after  an  editorial  note  on  the  Divining  Rod.  The
writer  of  the  accompanying  letter  to  The  Engineer  is  a  member  of  a
well-known  engineering  firm  in  Perthshire  : —

Errol  Works,  Errol,  Perthshire,  October  1st,  1897.
Referring  to  your  article  on  the  above  subject,  as  you  say  of  your-
self, "  There  was  no  one  in  the  world  more  anxious  to  believe  that  these


172


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


divinations  were  hoaxes  than  I  was."  The  worst  of  it  is,  they  will  keep  on
succeeding.  I  will  give  you  my  own  experience.  A.  gentleman  in  this
parish — Mr.  Clark,  of  Taybank — started  above  where  he  thought  he  would
get  water.  He  went  down,  I  think,  over  460  ft.,  and  got  none.  He  heard
of  a  water-finder,  now  deceased — MuUins  by  name.  Of  course,  he  did  not
believe  in  him,  but  thought  he  would  give  him  a  trial.  A  lot  of  folks  turned
out  to  see  him,  amongst  them  the  Rev.  Robert  Graham,  LL.D.  My  father
and  I  were  also  present.  I  was  quite  sure  there  was  nothing  in  it.  Mullins
was  first  taken  to  the  bore  Mr.  Clark  had  in  progress.  He  was  not  told  it
was  a  failure.  He  was  taken  over  it  with  his  V-shaped  hazel  twig,  and
asked  how  much  water  would  be  got  there.  He  said,  "  You  may  go  down
hundreds  of  feet,  and  you  will  not  find  any  water."  He — Mullins— dis-
covered water  not  fifty  yards  from  this  bore.  He  indicated  its  course,  and
marked  it  by  pegs  driven  into  the  ground.  He  told  Mr.  Clark  if  he  went
down  40  ft.  to  50  ft.  he  would  get  so  many  gallons  of  water,  and,  if  what
he  said  was  not  true,  he  would  pay  for  the  digging  of  the  well.  Mr.  Clark
dug  it,  and  got  the  supply  named  at  the  depth  stated.  Mullins  held  the
ends  of  the  V-shaped  twig  in  his  hands — an  end  in  each  hand — firmly.
Whenever  he  came  over  running  water  the  twig  turned  round  and
round,  and,  if  held  long  enough,  the  twig  twisted  till  it  broke.  When
Mullins  had  the  twig  in  his  hands,  he  more  than  once  allowed  me  and
another  party  to  take  an  end  each,  where  the  twig  projected  past  his  hands.
We  held  on  as  hard  as  we  could,  and  with  the  turning  of  the  V  part  of  the
hazel  twig,  it  was  twisted  till  it  hung  by  the  bark.  Yet  another  proof.  I
took  the  V-shaped  wand  in  my  hand,  and  passed  it  over  running  water
without  any  result.  Mullins  laid  his  hands  on  my  wrists,  and  grasped  them
firmly,  when  the  twig  instantly  began  to  turn,  and  continued  tui-ning  till  he
removed  his  hands.  He  never  touched  the  twig  while  it  was  in  my  hands.
Whatever  folks  may  say  to  the  contrary,  there  is  something  in  it.  ' '  Facts
are  chiels  that  winna  ding,  and  darna  be  disputed."

Duncan  A.  Morton.

In  reply  to  my  inquiries  Mr.  Morton  writes  : —

Errol  Works,  Errol,  Perthshire,  October  lUh,  1899.

Yours  of  9th  inst.  came  duly  to  hand.  I  regret  that  I  never  replied  to
yours  of  October  14th,  1897.  As  I  have  not  much  time  at  my  disposal,  I
will  reply  as  briefiy  as  I  can  to  your  queries.  Before  Mullins  came,  Mr.
Clark  had  made  a  bore  430  ft.  deep,  and  got  little  or  no  water,  and  that  little
he  did  get  was  bad  and  generally  supposed  to  come  from  some  drains  or
something  of  the  kind.  Mullins  came  and  was  taken  over  the  bore  with  his
rod,  and  said,  "  You  can  go  down  a  thousand  feet  and  you  will  not  find  any
water  there."  He  discovered  a  spring  at  once  100  yards  from  the  bore  at  a
depth  of  40  ft. — an  abundant  supply  of  good  water — first-rate  water,  indeed.
Mr.  Clark  uses  it  yet,  though  there  is  a  district  supply  now  !  Mullins  said
water  would  be  got  at  a  depth  of  35  ft.  to  40  ft.,  and  if  not,  he  would  pay
for  the  digging  of  the  well.

I  was  as  determined  against  the  rod  as  any  man  alive  till  I  saw  it,  but  I
could  not  shut  my  eyes  to  facts.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


173


I  took  the  V-sliaped  hazel  wand  in  my  hand,  and  passed  over  where
Mullins  said  there  was  running  water.  The  twig  never  moved,  but  when-
ever Mullins  grasped  my  wrists  the  twig  turned  round  and  round  till  it
broke  and  hung  by  the  bark.  I  explained  all  this  in  my  letter  to  the
Engineer,  October,  1897.

I  saw  Mr.  Clark,  of  Taybank,  last  night,  and  he  gave  me  the  particulars.
Mullins  indicated  the  course  of  the  running  water,  and  Ave  put  in  pegs,  and
they  just  looked  like  (in  an  uneven  line)  the  wriggling  of  a  stream,  and  came
out  right  in  line  on  the  face  of  the  rising  ground  with  a  drain  which  Mr.
Clark  had  made,  and  which  he  said  cut  through  a  stream  of  water.

I  shall  be  glad  to  reply  to  any  further  inquiries  from  you.

Du^x'AN  A.  Morton.

I  have  also  heard  much  to  the  same  effect  from  Mr.  Clark,  and,  in
a  subsequent  letter,  Mr.  Morton  informs  me  he  has,  at  my  request,
seen  Mr.  Clark  again,  and  sends  me  the  following  additional  par-
ticulars. The  exact  depth  of  the  useless  boring  was  432  ft.  This
bore  first  went  through  a  stiff  blue  clay  or  marl,  turning  to  red
when  deeper  ;  the  water  that  was  eventually  obtained  was  insufficient
and  not  good.  Mullins'  well  was  dug  40  ft.  and  then  bored  to  a  total
depth  of  80ft.,  when  the  water  rose  to  within  12  ft.  of  the  surface;
in  spite  of  very  dry  weather  and  continual  use  it  has  never  fallen
below  17  ft.  from  the  surface.  It  was  the  old  Mullins,  now  dead,  who
was  employed.

Mr.  Holmes'  geological  comment  on  this  case  is  as  follows  : —

Looking  at  the  general  geological  map  of  Scotland  by  Geikie,  I  find  Errol  on
the  "  Old  Red  Sandstone  "  Series.  The  beds  pierced  in  the  deep  boring  were,
however,  it  is  said,  clay  or  marl.  (It  may  be  worth  remarking  that  a  name
such  as  Old  Red  Sandstone  only  implies  a  series  of  rocks  of  a  certain  relative
age  in  which  red  sandstone  is  the  predominant  rock.)  Of  course  clay  and
marl  are  not  likely  to  give  a  decent  water  supply  at  any  depth.  But  close  to
Errol  come  the  alluvial  deposits  of  the  Carse  of  Gowrie,  and  these  (or  any
other  alluvial  deposits)  would  give  a  flat  surface,  contrasting  in  the  most
marked  way  with  ground  where  Old  Red  Sandstone  formed  the  surface  beds,
and  might  furnish  a  good  supply  of  water  at  35  ft.  or  less.  I  don't  know
the  place,  but  the  rough  diagram  below  will  explain  the  general  difference.  If
the  river  Tay  ran  through  soft  clay,  the  slopes  outside  the  river  deposits
would  be  more  gentle  in  contour  than  would  be  the  case  with  harder  rocks,
but  the  practised  eye  would  hardly  fail  to  distinguish  between  slope  and  fiat
whether  on  the  Tay,  the  Trent  or  the  Thames.  rp  .y.

The  diagram  showing  the  conjectured  geological  section,  which  Mr.
Holmes  kindly  adds  to  his  note,  is  not  reproduced,  as  it  is  of  course
only  a  conjecture.  I  should  be  extremely  obliged  if  any  of  my  readers
in  Perthshire  would  make  further  geological  inquiries  into  this  case,  as
it  is  evidently  one  of  considerable  interest.  It  will  be  remembered
that  it  was  old  John  Mullins  who  was  the  dowser  in  the  famous


174


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Waterford  case,  which  was  so  fully  discussed  in  the  previous  Report.
The  useless  bore  in  that  case  was  over  1,000  ft.,  and  there  were
absolutely  no  surface  indications  to  guide  him.

No.  3. The  Lytes  Cary  ( Somerset )  Case.

The  following  is  a  very  interesting  case.  The  dowser,  in  this
instance,  was  an  amateur,  the  late  Mr.  E.  M.  Hippisley,  a  leading
surveyor  and  land  agent  in  Wells,  Somersetshire,  who  was  singularly
successful  as  an  amateur  dowser  (see  p.  216).  In  a  paper  on  his  own
experiences  in  dowsing  that  he  read  at  the  Bishop's  Palace,  in  "Wells,
in  April,  1892,  he  stated  : —

At  Lytes  Cary  [near  Kingsclon,  Taunton]  there  is  an  interesting  old
English  house  with  a  chapel  in  good  j^reservation,  which,  with  some
modern  [farmhouse]  buildings,  enclose  a  large  courtyard.  I  found  [by
dowsing]  on  the  south  side  near  the  garden,  indications  of  water,  and  had  a
well  sunk  25  ft.  deep,  in  which  the  water  rises  to  within  13  ft.  of  the  surface,
and  here  a  singular  incident  occurred.  During  the  past  year  part  of  the
paving  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  yard  gave  way,  when  an  old  well  was
discovered  45  ft.  in  depth,  but  no  water  in  it,  and  only  30  ft.  from  the
new  well.

Mr.  Westlake  kindly  went  over  to  Lytes  Cary  and  made  a  careful
examination  of  the  surroundings,  and  of  the  geological  conditions  as
well  as  the  facts  of  the  case. He  reports  to  me  as  follows  : —

May,  1900.

"  Lytes  Cary  is  in  the  southernmost  bend  of  the  river  Cary,  in
Somersetshire.  The  farmhouse  is  in  the  occupation  of  Messrs.  Porter
and  Porter,  who  aided  my  inquiries  in  every  way.  I  was  first  shown
the  sites  of  the  wells,  both  quite  covered  over  and  concealed  ;  they  are
about  40  ft.  apart.  The  old  well  was  carefully  built,  and  is  60  ft.  deep
(not  45  ft.,  as  Mr.  Hippisley  thought)  so  I  was  informed  by  the
estate  builder,  who  had  measured  it  himself.  He  told  me  also  that
Hippisley's  well  is  25  ft.  deep,  sunk  in  the  marl  all  the  way  down,  and
the  sides  are  strong  enough  to  stand  without  masonry. ^  It  still  con-
tinues to  give  an  abundant  supply  to  the  house,  and  contained  9  ft.  of
water  when  last  opened.  There  are  also  three  other  wells  on  the  N.
and  W.  of  the  premises,  about  190,  140,  and  80  ft.  distant  from
Hippisley's  well ;  one  of  them,  the  furthest  olf,  is  22  ft.  deep,  and
yields  a  small  supply  of  "suspicious"  water;  the  second,  which  once
contained  a  few  feet  of  foul  water,  has  been  filled  up  ;  and  the  third
was  long  ago  abandoned  and  used  as  a  cesspool.

"  The  farm  premises  are  all  on  level  ground.  The  strata  at  the
farm,  according  to  the  geological  survey,  are  Lower  Lias,  which,  as


1  This  does  not  necessarily  show  the  strata  were  different.


xxxviii.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


175


seen  in  quarries  about  a  mile  to  the  north,  consists  of  the  usual  thin
limestones  with  partings  of  marl,  and  has  little  permeability  except  in
the  vertical  joints.  The  beds  at  the  farm  appear  to  underlie  the
above,  but  there  are  no  surface  indications,  geological  or  otherwise,  to
show  that  water  is  more  likely  to  be  found  at  one  spot  than  another.
Had  the  existence  of  the  old  well  been  known  a  geologist  would  have
been  chiefly  concerned  to  avoid  its  proximity.  In  finding  water  so
near  it  Mr.  Hippisley  certainly  achieved  the  improbable,  though,  as
agent  for  the  estate,  he  was  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  place,
except  the  existence  of  the  old  dry  well,  which  had  been  lost  sight  of
by  all.  A  characteristic  of  the  Lower  Lias  is  to  hold  water  in  unsus-
pected fissures.  This  places  the  hydro-geologist  at  a  disadvantage,
and  renders  this  formation  a  suitable  ground  for  dowsing,  or  chance
discovery,  as  the  case  may  be.  I  have  referred  to  other  cases  of  the
dowser's  success  in  the  Lower  Lias  in  my  Report,  p.  315. — E.  W."

No.  4. The  Sherlnirn-in-Elmet  Case.

I  heard  that  Mr.  Stone  had  been  engaged  by  the  owner  of  some  pro-
perty at  Sherburn-in-Elmet,  Yorkshire,  to  find  a  water  supply  where  a
well,  over  150  ft.  deep,  already  existed,  but  had  run  dry,  and  that
Stone  had  predicted  by  the  "  rod "  that  an  abundant  supply  would
be  found  less  than  50  ft.  from  the  old  well  at  a  depth  of  60  ft.,  and
that,  upon  boring.  Stone's  prediction  was  verified  and  a  good  supply
obtained.  I  wrote  to  the  owner  of  the  property,  Mr.  Lolley,  for  an
exact  statement  of  the  facts,  and  had  the  following  reply  : —

Northfield  House,  Lovell  Road,  Leeds,  December  6th,  1899.

It  is  quite  true  we  had  a  well  70  ft.  deep,  and  had  bored  about  90  or
100  ft.  from  the  bottom  of  the  well  without  finding  water.  The  well  had
been  in  use  about  fifteen  years,  and  always  had  a  good  supply  until  an
artesian  well  was  sunk  in  the  low-lying  part  of  Sherburn,  after  which  we
seemed  to  lose  the  water.

Seeing  Mr.  Stone's  testimonials,  I  applied  to  him.  Mr.  Stone  visited
Sherburn  and  said  that  there  was  a  good  supply  of  water  some  60  ft.  deep
beneath  a  place  he  indicated,  about  15  yds.  from  the  old  well,  and  on  the
boring  being  carried  out  the  water  was  found  at  62  ft.  deep.

Walter  Lolley.

This  case  is  of  interest,  and  I  should  be  glad  of  some  further
information  concerning  it,  especially  of  the  geological  character  of
the  locality.  Sherburn-in-Elmet  is  midway  between  Leeds  and  York,
and  Mr.  T.  Y.  Holmes,  F.G.S.,  informs  me  it  lies  near  the  bottom
of  the  slope  of  the  Magnesian  Limestone,  which  here  dips  down  to
the  Old  Red  Sandstone  that  overlies  it  in  the  valley. I  wrote  to


176


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Mr.  Lolley  to  ask  if  he  had  kept  a  record  of  the  strata  bored  through,
and  he  rephes  : —

Leeds,  December  28th,  1899.
The  borehole  at  Sherburn  was  through  hmestone  and  clay,  the  rock  is
the  "  Magnesian "  limestone,  and  my  property  is  on  the  eastern  slope  of
this  ;  in  fact,  the  lower  part  of  the  village  further  east  is  on  the  alluvial
clay  of  the  Vale  of  York.  The  water  was  found  in  a  layer  of  gravel  and
clay  in  the  borehole  after  getting  tlirunijh  the  limestone.

Walter  Lolley.

No.  5. The  Tiddincjton  House  (Oxford)  Case.

The  following  letter  appeared  in  the  Farmer  and  Chamber  of
Agriculture  Journal  for  October  18th,  1897.  The  case  is  interesting
as  the  artesian  well  borers  were  attempting  to  bore  through  the
Oxford  clay,  whilst  the  dowser,  as  in  many  other  cases,  evidently  found
a  permeable  surface  stratum,  of  sand  or  gravel,  above  the  clay.

Tiddington  House,  Oxford,  October,  1897.
Being  without  water  for  my  garden  and  stable,  except  what  was  fetched
by  water  cart  some  distance  day  by  day  and  caught  from  rainfall,  and  this
altogether  unsatisfactory,  I  experienced  a  great  difficulty  in  getting  a  proper
water  supply,  and  eventually  decided  to  employ  a  firm  of  artesian  well  borers
to  bore  for  water  for  my  use  in  1883.  A  spot  was  decided  upon,  and  a
boring  put  down  to  a  depth  of  312  ft.,  which  cost  me  over  £300,  and  no
water  whatever  was  obtained  ;  all  I  have  for  my  money  is  the  piece  of
parchment  containing  the  sections  of  the  boring  and  a  few  samples  of  the
formation.

I  engaged  Mr.  Tompkins  to  search  my  property  for  a  water  supply
.  and  instructed  him  to  carefully  test  my  stable  yard,  as  this  was  the
site  I  was  most  anxious  to  find  water  on.  After  carefully  searching  this
property  he  reported  that  no  water  existed  there,  and  that  it  would  be  simply
useless  to  attempt  to  obtain  water  here.  I  then  informed  him  of  what  I  had
previously  done,  and  the  amount  of  money  I  had  uselessly  spent.  Thus  the
water-finder  proved  correct  in  his  first  test.

A  move  was  then  made  into  the  gardens,  and,  after  going  over  them,  the
water-finder  reported  a  stratum  of  water  was  running  across  the  corner  of  the
garden,  and  was  an  overflow  from  a  spring  above.  He  traced  up  this  stratum
of  water.  The  twig  he  was  using  was  a  white  thorn  cut  in  the  shape  of  a  V,
which  he  held  by  the  two  prongs  apex  downwards.  As  he  walked  over  this
stratum  of  water,  the  twig  kept  rising  in  front  of  him  until  he  came  to  the
head  of  the  spring  ^  in  the  upper  part  of  the  paddock  above,  when  it  turned
completely  over  and  over,  and  so  strong  was  the  ujjward  movement  of  the
rod  that  ic  bent  considerably  in  its  frantic  endeavour  to  turn  over,  and  on
being  held  firmly  by  the  water-finder,  it  broke  oft'  in  his  hand.  Naturally,
we  were  all  surprised  and  astonished  at  such  a  remarkable  occurrence.

1  This  is  an  absurd  but  favourite  expression  of  Mr.  Tompkins,  who  is  under  the
delusion  that  underground  water  originates  in  a  reservoir,  and  that  the  higher  up
you  trace  the  "  spring  "  the  more  copious  the  supply. — W.  F.  B.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


177


I  instructed  Mr.  Tompkins  to  prepare  me  an  estimate  to  sink  a  well  four
feet  diameter  in  the  clear,  and  to  supply  and  erect  a  wind  engine  and  storage
tank.  The  well  was  put  in  hand,  and  at  a  depth  of  30  ft.  water  was  struck.
The  well  was  steined  up  before  sinking  deeper,  and  a  strong  pump  put  down
to  keep  the  water  under,  and  before  sinking  many  feet  it  became  necessary
to  put  on  seven  men  to  keep  the  water  going.  From  the  inrush  of  water
the  bottom  men  were  working  up  to  their  knees  in  water,  and  the  moment
the  pump  and  buckets  stopped  they  were  in  danger  of  being  drowned  out.
The  work  proceeded  under  these  circumstances  for  a  week  or  so,  until  it
became  useless  to  continue  the  work  owing  to  the  abundance  of  water  ;
10,000  gallons  per  day  being  the  yield  of  the  spring  at  a  depth  of  37  ft.,  and
this  site  is  at  a  higher  elevation  than  my  stable  yard.  I  cannot  speak  too
highly  of  Mr.  Tompkins'  practical  success,  both  as  regards  his  finding  water
"and  the  satisfactory  way  in  which  he  has  carried  out  the  work.

G.  W.  Bennett.

In  reply  to  my  inquiries  Mr.  Bennett  confirms  the  statements  in
his  published  letter  and  adds  : —

Tiddington  House,  Oxford,  October  9th,  1899.
My  well  has  never  gone  dry,  neither  this  summer  nor  last,  though  it  gets
low  generally  about  November  or  December.  The  only  drawback  to  the
windmill  is,  I  find,  we  have  not  always  enough  wind  to  pump,  and  sometimes
we  are  four  or  five  days  without  wind  for  pumping  for  drinking  purposes.
There  are  [not]  and  never  have  been  any  wells  near  where  Mr.  Tompkins
found  the  water  with  the  divining  rod.

G.  W.  Bennett.

Mr.  Holmes'  comment  on  this  case  is  as  follows  : —

Oxford  stands  upon  "Oxford  Clay,"  the  thickness  of  which  varies  from
300  ft.  to  600  ft.  (Woodward).  But  over  the  greater  part  of  the  site  the
Oxford  clay  is  covered  by  gravel,  which  is  usually  from  8  ft.  to  20  ft.  thick.
And  gravel  on  a  higher  level  is  often  found  to  cap  the  plateaux  of  the
district.  I  do  not  know  whether  Tiddington  House  is  in  or  7teat  Oxford.
The  unsatisfactory  boring  c)f  312  ft.  was  evidently  in  the  Oxford  Clay.  But
the  satisfactory  supply  was  evidently  from  sand  and  gravel  lying  above  the
Oxford  Clay.  But  the  gravel  on  which  Oxford  stands  is  not  that  deposited
by  the  rivers  Isis  and  Cherwell,  but  is  of  the  higher  level  and  older  date.
Where  in  Oxford  and  its  suburbs,  between  the  Isis  and  Cherwell,  the  ground
is  covered  by  a  thick  mass  of  superficial  sands,  gravels,  etc.,  there  the  ground
is  likely  to  be  higher  than  where  the  Oxford  Clay  is  bare.  And  the  contours
of  the  ajround  will  tell  at  once  to  the  practised  eye  where  there  is  bare  clay
and  where  there  is  a  gravel-capping  above  it,  or  river-gravel  at  a  lower  level.
Of  course,  if,  in  this  case,  the  successful  sinking  had  been  in  the  gravel  of
the  Cherwell  or  Isis,  and  the  house  on  the  Oxford  Clay,  it  would  have  been
at  a  lower  level  than  the  house.  It  appears,  however,  to  have  been  at  a
-higher  level  than  the  house — or  at  least  the  stable  yard.  Gravel  seems  to
have  the  same  way  of  capping  the  highest  ground  in  the  Oxford  Clay
country  that  it  has  in  the  London  Clay  districts.

T.  V.  H.

p


178


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Mr.  Holmes'  geological  diagnosis  of  this  case  is  confirmed  by  the
following  letter,  which  I  i-eceived  in  reply  to  my  inquiry  as  to  any  surface
indications,  and  as  to  the  nature  of  the  boring  and  also  the  distance
apart  of  the  useless  boring  and  Tompkins'  well.  The  sand  or  gravel
bed  was  evidently  thicker  than  intimated  by  Mr.  Holmes,  and  no  doubt
the  rush  of  water  came  when  the  well-sinkers  got  close  to  the  under-
lying impermeable  clay.  All  the  same,  this  does  not  explain  hoiv
Tompkins  hit  on  the  right  spot,  for  "the  practised  eye"  of  the  well-
sinkers  who  put  down  the  useless  bore,  and  that  of  Mr.  Bennett's
gardener,  failed  to  discover  the  right  spot.

Tiddington  House,  Oxford,  January  3rd,  1900.

The  Tompkins  well  is  on  rather  a  higher  elevation  than  where  we  bored
in  1883,  and  is  quite  150  yards  from  that  boring.  The  Oxford  clay  is
certainly  capped  by  sandy  grit  or  gravel.  We  first  took  off  about  3  or
4  ft.  of  turf  mould  ;  then  went  into  a  red  sand  which  continued  some
25  or  30  ft.,  when  the  water  came  in  so  fast  they  could  not  go  on  digging
the  well.  To  the  ordinary  eye,  no  one  could  possibly  have  said  where  to  hit
upon  the  spring.  Mr.  Tompkins  went  backwards  and  forwards  in  a  zigzag
course  with  the  twig  till  he  came  to  what  he  calls  "the  fountain  head,"
where  he  cut  a  sod  out  of  the  turf  to  show  the  well-sinkers  where  to  begin
to  dig  the  well.

I  should  say  we  are  about  40  ft.  above  the  level  of  the  river  Thames,

which  connects  with  the  Isis  at  Dorchester,  Oxon.,  and  there  it  is  called

"  Thamisis  "  or  Thames. We  are  nine  miles  from  Oxford,  and  nearly  two

from  the  river  Thames.  r-i \-\7  -d

G.  vV.  Bennett.

;  No.  6. The  Chelford  (Cheshire)  Case.

The  following  letter  appeared  in  the  Manchester  City  Netvs  for
October  23rd,  1897.  The  writer  is  the  head  of  a  well-known  firm  of
chartered  accountants  in  Manchester.

Bella  Vista,  Heaton  Moor.

Having  noticed  the  great  amount  of  controversy  that  has  of  late  been
manifested,  together  with  the  number  of  articles  that  have  appeared  in
various  contemporaries,  on  the  so  called  divining  rod  as  a  means  of  discover-
ing water  supplies,  I  venture  to  give  you  an  account  of  my  recent  experience
with  a  water-finder  and  his  work.

Having  had  occasion  to  obtain  a  new  water  supply  for  a  house  in  Cheshire,
the  opinion  of  a  firm  of  artesian  well  borers  was  obtained.  They  recommended
that  at  a  certain  spot  an  artesian  well  should  be  sunk,  with  the  idea  of
tapping  a  spring  of  water,  and  at  the  same  time  to  have  the  advantage  of  an
artesian  well  to  ensure  absolute  purity.  Accordingly  a  contract  was  obtained
and  a  well  [boring]  made,  with,  the  hope  of  finding  a  supply  of  water  at  a
reasonable  depth ;  and  after  several  months'  work,  entailing  considerable  ex-
pense, boring  was  carried  to  a  depth  of  about  480  ft.  But  the  long  looked  for
supply  of  water  was  not  obtained,  and  after  trying  for  some  time  to  get  a
supply  of  water  from  this  deep  well,  I  found  that  it  was  almost  useless,  and


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


179


ill  the  end  had  to  be  abandoned  as  a  failure.  I  then,  for  the  first  time,
sought  the  advice  of  a  firm  of  water-finders  who  use  the  divining  rod,  and
having  made  an  appointment  with  Messrs.  John  Mullins  and  Sons,  Colerne,
Box,  Wiltshire,  I  met  a  member  of  their  firm  on  the  estate.

In  the  simplest  way  possible  he  began  to  prosjDecfc  the  grounds  for  what
he  called  a  spring,  or  water-bearing  strata.  Carrying  in  his  hands  a
V-shaped  hazel  twig,  holding  the  point  downwards,  with  one  fork  in  each
hand,  he  began  to  walk  across  the  lawn,  and  "after  walking  a  distance  of
about  twenty  yards  he  suddenly  stopped,  with  the  twig  automatically  twist-
ing in  his  hands.  He  declared  that  here  a  spring  existed  at  a  depth  from  the
surface  of  not  more  than  40  ft.  To  convince  me  that  he  could  not  govern
the  action  of  the  twig  in  his  hands,  he  requested  me  to  grip  the  ends  of  the
twig,  and  so  try  to  keep  it  from  turning,  but  in  trying  to  do  so  I  was  ([uite
powerless.  After  trying  for  some  minutes  to  gauge  the  volume  of  the
spring,  which  he  professed  to  do  by  the  action  of  the  twig,  he  then  gave
what  he  considered  to  be  the  approximate  yield  of  water  per  day,  and  i^ro-
ceeded  to  trace  the  direction  in  which  the  spring  was  running.  Having  gone
into  the  kitchen  garden,  he  said  the  sjjring  was  only  10  ft.  from  the  bore
which  had  previously  been  made  to  so  great  a  depth.

In  order  to  j^rove  that  he  had  faith  in  his  own  method,  he  asked  to  be
allowed  to  undertake  the  necessary  work,  and  to  obtain  the  supply  of  water
which  he  had  predicted,  at  the  same  time  undertaking  that  if  his  predictions
were  not  substantiated,  the  work  done  by  him  would  not  be  charged  for.  A
contract  was  entered  into  on  these  terras.  As  a  result,  the  well  has  been
made,  and,  at  a  depth  of  36  ft.,  a  good  sujjply  of  water  has  been  found.  The
water  is  of  excellent  quality.

I  venture  to  trouble  you  With  these  facts,  because  I  think  that  this
method  of  discovering  sj^rings  of  water  deserves  to  be  better  known.

Chakles  William  Na.smith.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Nasinith  for  some  additional  particulars  and
received  the  following  reply  : —

69,  Princess  Street,  Manche.ster,  June  (ith,  1898.

In  reply  to  yours  of  the  31st  ult.  re  the  water  supply  at  Mereleigh,  Chel-
ford,  I  have  very  little  to  say  beyond  that  which  I  gave  in  my  letter
addressed  to  the  City  News  of  October  22nd,  except  that  Mullins  was  quite
a  stranger  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  had  no  knowledge  of  the  subsoils.  He
first  found  the  spring  of  water  on  the  lawn,  and  traced  its  course  from  the
lawn  to  the  kitchen  garden,  and  the  site  he  selected  for  the  well  was  10  ft.
from  the  deep  bore,  and  at  this  site  the  well  has  been  made,  with  the  result
given  in  my  letter,  and  the  supply  is  still  satisfactory.

The  subsoil  where  the  spring  was  found  was  sand,  with  about  13  ft.
of  clay  on  the  surface  and  clay  below  the  level  of  the  sjaring,  but  it  apjjears
that  in  the  old  deep  bore  it  was  all  clayey.

No  other  authority  was  previously  consulted  beyond  the  firm  who  did  the
boring.  They,  I  believe,  worked  by  the  geological  chart  of  the  neighbour-
hood.

Chakles  William  Nasmith.


180


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Mr.  Nasmith  also  sent  me  a  plan  of  the  estate  with  position  of  the
useless  boring  and  MuUins  well,  but  this  adds  nothing  to  the  informa-
tion given  in  his  letter.  In  reply  to  Mr.  Nasmith,  the  artesian  well
borers,  Messrs.  Timmins,  wrote  to  the  local  papers  to  say  that  the  well
sunk  by  MuUins  merely  yielded  surface  water  and  was  therefore  unsafe
to  use  for  drinking,  that  the  surface  soil  was  sand  and  an  old  disused
well  sunk  in  this  sand  existed  close  by.  Mr.  Nasmith,  however,
maintains  that  the  Mullins  well  does  not  yield  surface  water,  but  is
sunk  below  an  impermeable  stratum  of  clay.  I  submitted  the  whole
correspondence  to  Mr.  T.  V.  Holmes,  who  writes  in  reply  as  follows:  —

28,  Crooms  Hill,  Greenwich  Park,

London,  S.E.,  Jnne  11th,  1898.

As  to  the  discrepancy  between  the  accounts  of  Timmins  and  Nasmith  as
to  the  strata  at  Chelford,  I  can  ofier  only  the  following  remarks  : — My
experience  of  the  sections  obtained  from  well-sinkers  and  borers  is  that  they
are  extremely  careful  as  to  details,  and  go  into  more  detail  than  a  geologist
usually  would.  The  well-sinker  will  not  mistake  darker-coloured  sand,  which
owes  its  special  hue  to  saturation  with  water,  for  clay.

Then,  if  we  suppose  that  there  were  locally  13  ft.  of  clay  at  the  surface,
the  water  found  in  both  old  and  new  wells  evidently  came  from  the  same
source,  the  lower  part  of  the  sand  ;  and  if  the  occasional  surface  clay  did  not
protect  the  old  well  from  surface  jjollution,  it  would  not  protect  the  new  one.

As  regards  the  deep  boring,  the  new  red  marl  would  be  mainly  what
might  be  termed  clayey,  and  its  top  would  probably  be  not  many  feet
below  the  level  of  the  water  in  the  sand.

I  enclose  a  rough  diagram  to  illustrate  the  general  nature  of  things.
The  alternatives  as  regards  water  in  tlie  district  are  evidently  that  you
either  get  it  from  the  surface  sand  and  gravel,  or  from  the  new  red
sandstone  hundreds  of  feet  below.  Any  surface  clay  (supposing  it  not  to
be  made  ground  ;  see  subsoils  memoir),  being  of  no  practical  importance.

T.  V.  Holmes.

It  is  clear,  therefore,  from  Mr.  Holmes'  letter  that  he  regards  the
clay  as  occurring  in  patches  on  the  surface  and  affording  no  real
protection  from  possible  pollution  from  surface  drainage.  In  reply  to
my  further  inquiries  Mr.  Nasmith  informs  me  that  the  old  condemned
well  was  18  feet  deep,  the  useless  boring  is  480  feet  deep,  whilst  the
new  well,  the  supply  from  which  he  informs  me  is  still  "  very  satisfac-
tory," is  36  feet  deep. Chelford  is  near  Alderley  Edge  in  Cheshire.

Sliallow  wells,  certainly,  often  yield  safe  potable  water,  as  is  seen
from  the  following  letter  which  I  received  from  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Geare
in  reply  to  my  inquiries  : —

Farnham  Rectory,  Bishops  Stortford,  May  2Glh,  1897.
In  reply  I  beg  to  say  that  Mullins,  junr.,  found  on  my  rectory  of  three
acres  a  splendid  spring  of  good  water  with  his  divining  twig  on  Seirtember


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


181


28th,  1893.  He  found  water  at  less  than  20  ft.  depth.  A  boring  was  made
and  a  well  (brick)  was  sunk  to  15  ft.  depth.  The  water  was  analysed,  and
found  good,  and  since  then  I  have  had  a  bountiful  and  unfailing  supply
through  a  rotary  pump  action,

I  may  add  that  Mullins  was  always  correct  as  to  depth  to  sink  a  well
and  the  best  place  to  bore.  His  was  a  first  visit,  and  no  test  previous  to
his  had  been  made.  j ^^^^^^  ^^^^^^^

Upon  which  Mr.  Holmes  remarks  : —

Whether  the  water  from  surface  beds  is  wholesome  or  not  depends
largely  on  the  density  of  the  poijulation  around  any  given  well.  Nobody
can  get  water  absolutely  pure.  But  the  poor  geologist  would  hardly  venture
to  recommend  surface  supplies,  for  finding  which  the  dowser  is  hailed  as  a
supernormally  gifted  benefactor.  T  V  H


No.  7. The  Welivyn  Case.

The  writer  of  the  next  letter  is  known  to  Mr.  F.  W,  H.  Myers,
who  kindly  sent  me  the  letter.

- . .  The  Node,  Welwyn,  Herts,  Octoher  30th,  1899.

I  sent  for  a  water  diviner  last  summer,  as  I  wanted  advice  about  the
water  supply  here,  our  well  not  being  satisfactory.  When  the  diviner  came
he  at  once  found  out  the  direction  of  the  spring  supplying  my  well  and
advised  me  to  make  a  heading  in  a  certain  direction  which  he  marked,  and
which  I  afterwards  carried  out,  150  ft.  below  the  surface.  The  well-sinkers
found,  before  they  had  carried  this  heading  6  ft.,  the  inrush  of  water  was  so
great  they  had  to  stop,  in  spite  of  a  steam  engine  which  kept  going  night  and
day  with  powerful  pumps.

After  trying  every  device  for  keeping  water  out  of  an  accumulator  house,
which  always  seemed  to  be  rising,  in  spite  of  a  concrete  floor  6  in.  thick,  the
same  diviner  told  me  exactly  where  a  spring  caused  the  trouble.  We  tapjjed
it  from  the  outside,  and  now  the  place  is  perfectly  dry.

I  held  one  side  of  the  forked  rod  myself  and  the  "  diviner  "  the  other,  and
when  we  came  to  water  [alleged  underground  water]  the  strain  was  so  great
on  my  fingers  I  was  obliged  to  ask  him  to  stop.  From  the  position  of  the
rod  it  was  absolutely  impossible  for  him  to  produce  the  pressure,  which  in-
creased with  the  strength  of  the  stream.  -.^  -r,

=>  Montague  Price.

The  last  paragraph  of  this  interesting  letter  I  will  refer  to  again
when  dealing  with  the  motion  of  the  rod.  In  reply  to  my  inquiries
as  to  the  name  of  the  dowser,  the  geological  strata,  and  whether  any
surface  indications  or  other  wells  existed  to  guide  the  dowser's  choice,
Mr.  Price  replies  as  follows  :  —

The  Node,  Welwyn,  Herts,  November  7th,  1899.
Anthony,  of  Huntingdon,  was  the  "diviner"  we  employed  here  last
June. Nobody  knew  where  the  spring  came  from  supplying  the  well.


1S2


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


When  the  "diviner  '  arrived,  being  Saturday  afternoon,  the  workpeople
had  gone  and  I  certainly  did  not  know  where  the  water  came  from.  I  was
with  liim  all  the  time  he  was  here,  and  he  did  not  go  down  the  well,  which  is
over  150  ft.  deep.

There  is  no  well  anywhere  near  the  existing  one,  and,  so  far  as  I  know,
there  was  no  surface  indication  to  guide  the  diviner.  In  fact,  he  found  the
spring  on  adjoining  property,  50  yards  from  the  well.  We  drove  the  heading
in  the  well  (already  existing)  150  ft.  below  the  surface  in  pure  chalk.  Other
springs  he  found  on  my  property,  but  I  had  no  occasion  to  try  them.

Montague  Price.

Mr.  Holmes  explains  this  case  as  follows  :  —

In  this  case  the  supply  from  a  well  in  the  chalk  150  ft.  deep  being
unsatisfactory,  the  dowser  simply  recommended  a  heading.  This  is  a
common  and  well-known  contrivance  in  such  cases.  Water  in  the  chalk,
the  great  water-bearing  formation  of  S.E.  England,  circulates  by  the
lines  of  bedding  and  jointing,  especially  the  latter.  Where  the  lines  of
jointing  are  feebly  developed  the  supply  of  water  from  the  chalk  is  usually
feeble — the  permanent  saturation  level  being  of  course  reached.  The  usual  plan
then  is  to  drive  a  heading  or  headings  in  order  to  tap  additional  joint  lines  ;
one  direction  being  about  as  good  as  anotlier.  T  V  H

Mr.  Holmes'  comment  on  the  geological  aspect  of  this  case  is  that
the  dowser  simply  advised  doing  what  a  skilled  engineer  or  geologist
would  recommend.  But  it  must  be  remembered  on  the  other  hand
that  the  dowser  probably  knew  nothing  of  geology  or  engineering ;  I
doubt  if  he  even  knew  that  the  well  was  in  the  chalk,  as  he  came  from
Huntingdon.  Assuming,  however,  he  knew  all  this,  and  was  a
geologist  in  the  bargain,  how  did  he  find  out  the  direction  in  which  to
make  the  heading  which  reached  so  large  a  supply  "before  6  ft.  "  had
been  driven  1  The  Richmond  headings  ^  were  driven  great  distances  in
the  chalk  under  the  advice  of  the  best  geologists  and  engineers,  and
yet  to  a  large  extent  failed  to  accomplish  their  purpose.  Was  it  by  a
mere  bit  of  luck  that  here,  as  in  many  other  cases,  the  dowser
succeeded '!

No.  8.  ■  ■

The  next  is  a  letter  addressed  to  Mr.  Stone,  the  dowser,  from  a
Mr.  Stevenitt.

Minting,  Horncastle,  hincolnshire,  February  7th,  1898.
I  beg  to  inform  you  that  I  dug  a  well  at  the  second  place  marked  by  you,
viz.,  about  20  yds.  from  the  stockyard  in  grass  field,  and  found  water.  I
dug  a  well  42  ft.  deep,  so  that  I  should  have  a  good  supply  for  the  yard.
We  have  plenty  for  ourselves  and  several  neighbours,  who  fetch  it  regularly


1  See  previous  Report,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  195.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


183


for  drinking  purposes.  I  feel  sorry  I  did  not  know  of  you  sooner  ;  it
would  have  saved  me  something  like  £200  in  boring  290  ft.,  where  I  only
found  salt  water  at  135  ft.  deep.  rp_  Stevenitt.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Stevenitt,  who  confirms  the  above  statement  and
tells  me  the  useless  bore  is  only  45  yards  from  the  well.  He  was  for
twenty-five  years  Superintendent  of  Police  in  the  County  Constabulary.
As  regards  this  case  Mr.  Holmes  remarks  : —

In  Lincolnshire  the  gratitude  for  good  water  at  42  ft.  on  the  part  of  Mr.
Stevenitt  is  most  intelligible.  May  it  never  be  polluted  by  soakings  from
the  stockyard  to  any  iniurious  degree.

T.  V.  H.

No.  9.

The  next  letter  is  from  the  Managing  Director  of  the  Bermaline
Maltings,  Haddington,  where  Mr.  Gataker  was  the  dowser  employed.

We  may  state  that,  previous  to  our  communicating  with  Mr.  Gataker,
we  had  decided  to  put  down  an  artesian  bore  at  a  different  part  of  our
ground.  On  arrival  Mr.  Gat;xker  started  over  the  ground  at  a  fair  speed
with  the  palms  of  his  hands  towards  the  earth.  After  proceeding  some
distance  he  was  able  to  locate  a  sjDring  at  the  end  of  our  new  maltings.  He
then  proceeded  over  a  strawberry  field  belonging  to  us,  and  at  about  70
yards  from  where  he  located  the  first  spring  he  located  another.  He
guaranteed  that  from  either  of  those  springs  we  would  get  a  supply  of  about
20,000  gallons  per  day  at  a  depth  of  from  100  ft.  to  150  ft.  We  put  down
a  4  in.  bore  at  the  first  spring,  and  are  pleased  to  say  that  at  a  depth  of  102  ft.
we  are  getting  a  supply  of  about  100,000  gallons  per  day,  and  the  water  is
coming  up  with  great  force.  We  believe  it  will  rise  to  about  40  ft.  above
the  surface.  We  tested  it  at  13  ft.,  when  it  overflowed  with  a  strong
pressure.

We  challenged  the  editor  and  readers  of  an  Edinburgh  evening  newspaper,
who  seem  to  think  that  water  was  to  be  found  in  any  part  of  our  ground,
to  put  down  a  similar  bore  half-way  between  the  two  springs  located  by  Mr.
Gataker  in  our  ground,  and  if  the  same  quantity  of  water  was  found  at  the
same  depth  we  would  pay  the  expense  of  putting  down  the  bore,  and  if  not
found,  the  party  challenging  was  to  pay  the  expense  ;  but  up  to  now  the
challenge  has  not  been  taken  up  by  any  one.

It  might  interest  your  readers  to  know  the  strata  the  bore  went  through,
and  we  have  much  pleasure  in  enclosing  you  a  copy  of  the  journal,  from
which  you  will  see  that  it  was  after  piercing  14  in.  of  the  fourth  layer  of
sandstone  that  the  water  was  struck,  and  as  soon  as  the  crust  of  this  layer
was  broken,  tlie  water  came  away  with  a  rushing  noise.

MONTGOMEEIE  AND  COMPANY  (LiMITED),

John  Montgomekie,

Managing  Director.


184


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


It  is  to  be  regretted  this  challenge  was  not  accepted,  as  it  would
have  been  a  very  crucial  test,  though,  from  geological  considei'ations,
we  are  disposed  to  think  the  newspaper  would  have  won.  Mr.
Montgomerie,  however,  in  his  letter  to  the  Edinburgh  newspaper,
states  his  reasons  for  believing  that  water  would  not  be  found  "  at
any  part  of  the  valley  of  the  Tyne." He  says  : —

Bermaline  Maltings,  Haddington,  January  14i/i,  1899.

During  the  excavations  for  the  new  bridge  here,  there  was  dug  out  a
hole  40  ft.  square  by  13  ft.  deep  alongside  our  mill  dam,  with  only  about
3  ft.  of  an  embankment  between  the  water  and  the  hole.  We  naturally
expected  that  this  hole  would  be  filled  up  with  water  rising  through  the
gravel  bed  ;  but  to  our  surprise  there  was  not  a  drop  of  water  came  up.
Any  water  that  found  its  way  into  the  working  came  in  at  the  north-east
corner — that  is,  the  corner  furthest  from  the  river.

There  is  a  firm  in  East  Lothian,  not  far  from  Haddington,  who  put  down
a  bore  without  calling  in  the  aid  of  a  "  water-finder."  They  have,  I  believe,
sunk  it  to  a  depth  of  660  ft.,  and,  failing  to  find  water,  have  had  to  abandon
the  bore.

I  should  l^e  glad  of  any  further  information  regarding  the  deep
bore-hole  here  mentioned,  as  neighbouring  artesian  wells  do  not
usually  vary  like  this.

In  reply  to  my  inquiries  Mr.  Montgomerie  states  that  his  success-
ful borehole  is  about  100  ft.  above  the  sea  level ;  he  sends  a  "journal
of  the  bore,"  showing  the  strata  passed  through.  First,  20  ft.  of
sand  and  gravel,  then  6  ft.  of  boulder  clay,  followed  by  19  ft.  of  fire
clay,  after  that  45  ft.  of  sandstone  and  what  are  called  "  faikes  "  in
alternate  layers,  then  8  ft.  of  marl,  and,  finally,  sandstone,  the  depth
of  the  bore  being  nearly  103  ft.

No.  10. The  Asjyley  Heath  (Bedford)  Case.

The  next  case  is  also  one  where  a  deep,  unsuccessful  bore  had  been
made  prior  to  the  dowser's  visit.  The  account  here  given  was  pub-
lished in  the  Midland  Counties  Herald  for  April  7th,  1»98.

A  Bedfordshire  gentleman,  Mr.  Plater,  wanted  water  for  his  house,  so  got
a  firm  to  sink  a  well  60  ft.  deep,  this  being  the  depth  at  whicli  it  was  expected
water  would  be  found.  However,  none  was  found,  and  then  sinking  was
continued  to  100  ft.  deep,  but  still  without  success.  A  bore  was  then  put
down  at  the  bottom  of  this  well  a  further  66  ft.  deep,  making  a  total  depth  of
166  ft.,  but  itill  no  water.  At  Mr.  Plater's  request  a  water  expert  visited
the  place,  and  said  it  was  useless  to  continue  working  at  that  spot,  for
no  water  would  be  found  ;  but  he  felt  absolutely  confident  that  by  sinking
a  well  at  a  spot  only  39  ft.  from  there,  there  ought  to  be  a  plentiful  supply
of  water  at  about  100  ft.  or  so.  Mr.  Plater  acted  on  his  advice,  and  at
116  ft.  an  abundant  supply  was  found.  The  old  well,  although  so  close,
is  said  to  be  still  as  dry  as  a  bone.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


185


I  wrote  to  Mr.  Plater,  enclosing  the  above  report,  and  obtained
the  following  reply  : —

Silver  Birch,  Aspley  Heath,  Woburn  Sands,  R.S.O.,

Odoher  im,  1899.

I  return  the  press  cutting  which  was  enclosed  with  your  letter  to  me  of
the  9th  inst. It  is  correct. In  reply  to  your  three  questions  : —

1.  As  stated  in  the  newspaper  cutting,  an  unsuccessful  attempt  was
made  to  a  depth  of  166  ft.,  at  which  we  had  bored  several  feet  into
Oxford  clay.

2.  No  further  useless  wells  or  borings  were  made  near  the  successful
well.

3.  There  is  an  ample  supply  of  water  obtained  from  the  well  sunk  on
the  spot  indicated  by  Mr.  Gataker.

I  may  state  that  my  property  at  Aspley  Heath,  Bedfordshire,  where  the
wells  were  sunk  in  1896,  is  about  500  ft.  above  sea  level.

Mr.  Gataker  stated  that  water  would  be  found  on  the  spot  indicated,
but  not  under  100  ft.  from  the  surface.

Arthur  C.  Plater.

Mr.  Holmes  remarks  :  "  The  boring  in  Oxford  clay  was  unsuccess-
ful, and  Mr.  Gataker  was  successful.  The  interesting  point  is  the
statement  in  the  newspaper  cutting  that  the  useless  well  was  only
39  ft.  from  the  good  one.  Mr.  Plater,  however,  does  not  seem  to
confirm  this  statement. — T.  V.  H."

I  wrote  again  to  Mr.  Plater  with  regard  to  this  latter  point  and
also  to  inquire  whether  he  was  present  when  the  dowser  visited  the
spot,  and  whether  he  could  tell  me  the  strata  bored  through  in  his
new  well. Mr.  Plater  replies  as  follows : —

Silver  Birch,  Aspley  Heath,  Woburn  Sands,  R.S.O.,

December  lUh,  1899.
In  reply  to  your  letter  the  distance  between  the  two  wells,  about  39  ft.,
is  quite  correct.  The  new  well  is  116  ft.  deep.  I  was  present  when  Mr.
L.  Gataker  expressed  his  opinion  that  water  would  be  found  at  a  depth  of
about  100  ft.  I  have  lost  my  record  of  the  strata  through  which  we  bored  in  the
old  well,  but  to  a  depth  of  about  90  ft.  sand,  with  occasional  layers  of  iron-
stone, formed  the  principal  feature  ;  at  about  130  ft.  we  bored  through  6  ft.
of  fuller's  earth,  and  after  more  sand  we  bored  into  the  clay  several  feet,
and  then  ceased  work.  I  think  the  water  in  the  new  well  is  on  a  bed  of
fuller's  earth.  The  level  of  the  mouth  of  the  new  well  is  about  14  ft.  lower
than  that  of  the  old. The  latter  is  now  used  as  a  rainwater  tank.

Arthur  C.  Plater.

Though  I  am  not  a  geologist,  the  explanation  of  this  case  appears
to  me  simple.  The  bed  of  fuller's  earth  found  at  a  depth  of  130  ft.
in  the  old  well  evidently  forms  the  bottom  of  the  new  well,  which  is


186


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


116  ft.  deep  and  14  ft.  lower  level  =  130  ft.  As  fuller's  earth  (a
silicious  clay)  is  a  nearly  impermeable  water  bed,  when  this  was  pierced,
as  in  the  old  well,  the  water  would  escape  into  the  sand  below  the  bed.
If  the  record  of  the  old  boring  was  shown  to  Mr  Gataker,  or  known  to
him,  the  explanation  of  his  successful  prediction  is  also  easy  ;  though
I  have  no  doubt  it  would  be  rejected  by  all  concerned,  as  dowsers
trust  more  to  themselves  than  to  any  information  given  them.

It  will  be  seen  from  the  notes  which  Mr.  Holmes  and  Mr.  Westlake
have  so  kindly  added  to  many  of  these  cases,  tliat  a  geological  explana-
tion of  ivhy  the  dowser  found  water  in  the  places  he  indicated  is  clear
enough.  The  important  point  is,  would  these  places  have  been  selected
by  a  shrewd  observer,  or  even  by  a  skilled  geologist,  before  the  dowser
had  visited  the  spot?  In  some  cases  this  might,  as  in  No.  10,  have
been  so ;  on  the  other  hand  a  considerable  body  of  evidence  exists  to
show  that  the  dowser,  though  ignorant  of  geology  and  an  entire
stranger  to  the  locality,  succeeded,  where  expert  geological  or  engineer-
ing advice,  aided  by  careful  local  observation,  completely  failed.
Those  who  have  taken  the  trouble  to  read  the  previous  Report  will
recall  several  cases  of  this  kind,  notably  the  Waterford  case  on
p.  106  et  seq.,  the  Horsham  case,  p.  117  et  seq.,  the  Uppingham  case,
p.  127  et  seq.,  Sir  Welby  Gregory's  case,  p.  96,  etc.

Then  again,  if  merely  shrewd  observation  and  considerable
experience  as  well-sinkers  afford  a  sufficient  explanation  of  the
dowser's  success,  how  are  we  to  explain  the  achievements  of  young
dowsers  and  other  complete  novices  1  Take  the  case  of  the  French
charity  boy  Bleton  recorded  in  Part  X,  p.  257,  or,  referring  to  the  previous
Report,  take  the  cases  of  the  eleven-year-old  Cornish  lad  given  on
p.  36,  Vol.  XIII.,  or  the  young  daughter  of  an  estate  agent  given  on
p.  33  et  seq.,  or  the  daughter  of  an  English  clergyman  on  p.  38,  or  the
young  son  of  another  clergyman  on  p.  39,  etc.,  etc.  Then,  too,  we
have  other  amateur  dowsers  of  all  ages  and  in  all  ranks  of  life,  whose
successes  in  the  discovery  of  underground  water  certainly  appear  at
first  sight  to  be  greater  than  mere  observation  or  good  luck  would
account  for.  Numerous  instances  of  this  were  given  in  the  pi'evious
Report,  and  a  few  additional  cases  of  successful  amateur  dowsers,  such
as  his  Honour  Sir  Richard  Harington,  Bart.,  are  quoted  later  on.

One  of  the  four  methods  suggested  by  me  to  test  the  pretensions
of  the  dowser  (see  p.  2-51  of  last  Report)  is  "separate  and  entirely
independent  examination  of  the  same  ground  by  different  dowsers."
The  evidence  on  behalf  of  this  test  I  will  now  proceed  to  cite.


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


187


PART  IV.

Experiments  with  Two  or  More  Dowsers  Independently  Tried
■  ON  THE  Same  Ground.

No.  1. The  Cheltenham  Experiments.

I  am  indebted  to  our  fellow-worker,  Lieut.-Colonel  Le  M.  Taylor,
of  Cheltenham,  for  the  following  interesting  report  of  his  own  and
other  experiments  at  Cheltenham.  It  appears  that  in  1896  the
Directors  of  the  Cheltenham  Steam  Laundry,  anxious  to  obtain  a
supply  of  water  for  the  laundry,  at  Colonel  Taylor's  suggestion  and  by
arrangement  with  him,  employed  two  dowsers,  independently  of  each
other,  to  locate  the  best  site  whereon  to  sink  a  well.  Colonel  Taylor
arranged  first  to  take  Mr.  Tompkins  to  the  laundry,  and  after  he  had
fixed  on  the  place  or  places  where  water  would  be  found,  the  laundry
directors  were  to  emploj'  a  second  dowser  and  the  results  were  to  be
compared.  The  following  is  an  abridged  account  of  the  proceedings
given  in  a  local  newspaper  : —

A  "  divmer  "  went  over  the  ground  a  week  or  so  ago  in  company  with
several  of  the  directors.  He  subsequently  wrote  a  report  which,  according
to  an  arrangement  unknown  to  the  diviner  himself,  the  directors  sealed  and
kept  strictly  secret.  As  business  folk,  the  directors  were  not  going  to  trust
to  the  decision  of  one  expert,  and,  therefore,  another  was  engaged  to  go
over  the  ground  on  Wednesday  in  company  with  other  directors,  who  did
not  know  what  the  result  of  the  former  experiment  was,  in  order  that  there
might  be  no  unconscious  collusion  or  "thought  reading,"  Mr.  Chesterman,
of  Bath,  the  chief  huntsman  on  this  occasion,  seemed  to  think  that  his  task
was  none  too  easy,  as  it  is  not  always  that  a  reliable  supply  of  water  can  be
found  in  a  small  field  of  clay  soil,  such  as  that  at  the  side  of  the  laundry  to
which  his  prospecting  was  restricted.  Taking  one  of  his  small,  slender
twigs,  he  held  it  in  front  of  him  with  his  arms  lowered  and  one  end  of  it  in
each  hand,  so  that  the  angle  of  the  fork  pointed  very  slightly  downwards,
about  three  feet  from  the  ground.  Thus  he  commenced  to  walk  slowly  in  a
straight  line  across  the  field.  Suddenly  the  twig  gave  a  turn  in  the
operator's  hands,  began  to  revolve,  and  continued  to  do  so  while  he  remained
within  the  area  in  which  he  experienced  the  "shock"  of  water.  The  two
directors  attempted  to  stay  the  revolving  motion  of  the  twig  while  the
operator  carried  it  over  the  afi'ected  area,  but  though  each  seized  one  end  of
it,  they  could  not  do  so,  the  ends  of  the  twig,  in  fact,  slightly  lacerating  their
fingers  as  it  turned  in  resistance  to  all  the  pressure  they  could  employ.
Similar  results  were  obtained  with  the  wire.  Then  Dr.  Cardew  walked  across
the  afiected  spot  with  the  twig  in  his  hands,  but  the  simple  apparatus  remained
quite  stationary  until  Mr.  Chesterman  placed  his  hands  on  the  doctor's  wrists,
when  it  began  to  revolve, — Cheltenham  Echo,  December  10th,  1896.


188


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


How  far  the  sites  fixed  on  by  the  two  dowsers  coincided  will  be
seen  from  Colonel  Taylor's  report  and  drawings,  which  I  now  append.

LlEUT.-CoLONEL  TaYLOR's  RePORT.

On  December  8th,  1896,  I  was  informed  that  Mr.  Chesterman,  of
Bath,  had  been  engaged  by  the  Directors  of  the  Hatherley  Laundry
to  "douse"  for  water  on  their  property,  and  that  he  was  to  arrive  the
next  day.  I  wrote  him  a  note  and  asked  him  to  call  on  me  when  he  had
finished,  which  he  kindly  did.  On  his  arrival  I  showed  him  my  plan
of  the  laundry  ground  and  asked  him  to  point  out  where  he  had  found
water.  The  dotted  lines  on  the  plan,  Fig.  13,  show  the  places  indicated
by  him,  and  these  agree  also  with  the  information  I  subsequently  got
from  Mr.  Wilkins,  one  of  the  directors,  who  accompanied  Mr.
Chesterman  during  the  experiment.  Mr.  Wilkins  also  told  me  that
Chesterman  had  found  indications  of  water  about  the  place  I  have
marked  E,  but  as  it  was  not  a  strong  stream,  no  more  was  done  about


Fig.  13.

Rough  plan  of  Hatherley  Laundry,  where  water-finding  experiments  were  tried,

November  and  December,  1896.
Tompkins  on  November  25th  traced  the  streams  marked  in  continuous  lines  and

recommended  Well  at  A,  estimated  at  80  ft.  to  yield  3,000  gals,  in  24  hours,  and

also  one  at  B,  but  not  so  strongly.
Chesterman  on  December  9th  traced  streams  marked  in  dotted  lines  and  recommended

Well  at  B,  108  ft.,  to  yield  3, 600  gals,  in  24  hours,  or  Well  at  C,  90  ft.,  to  yield  the

same  quantity,  or  one  at  D,  85,  to  yield,  however,  less.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


189


it.  Mr.  Chesterman  has  been  for  years  in  the  Indian  D.P.W.,  and
therefore  quite  understands  a  plan.  No  one  who  was  at  the  former
experiment  at  Hatherley  was  present  on  December  9th,  and  Mr.
Wilkins  did  not  open  the  envelope  containing  the  record  of  what  Mr.
Tompkins  had  done  till  the  trial  was  over.  Mr.  Chesterman  was  not
t-old  that  another  man  had  gone  over  the  ground,  though,  as  he  told
me,  he  suspected  it  after  he  had  completed  his  search  from  being  asked
what  he  would  say  if  another  finder  had  indicated  other  places.

All  parts  of  the  field  near  the  laundry  seem  equally  open  to  their
choice,  but  it  might  be  said  that  a  desire  to  make  things  pleasant  for
the  Laundry  Company  may  have  influenced  each  of  them  to  locate
water  near  the  engine  house,  well  knowing  that  water  would  most
likely  be  found  everywhere.^

Previous  to  Mr.  Chesterman's  visit  ]Mr.  Tompkins  had  been  to  my
place  to  conduct  the  experiments  on  finding  coins  already  sent  you,-


FiG.  U.

Rough  plan  of  Garden  behind  Colonel  Taylor's  house.

The  continuous  line  indicates  the  stream  found  by  Mr.  Tom]3kins,  November  23rd  ;
the  dotted  line  those  found  by  Mr.  Chesterman,  December  9th.

1  Colonel  Taylor  sends  a  geological  map  of  a  section  of  the  district,  taken  from
Murchison's  Geology  of  Cheltenham.  Sand  occurs  in  patches  up  to  30  feet  in  depth,
over  the  lias  formation,  which  latter  is  probably  some  300  or  400  feet  thick  at
Cheltenham  ;  shallow  wells  sunk  in  the  sand  would  yield  surface  water,  and  wells
sunk  70  to  130  feet  about  Cheltenham  frequently  yield  water,  which,  however,  is  more
or  less  saline.  But  the  laundry  experiment  is,  if  anything,  adverse  to  the  dowser.
— W.  F.  B.

-  These  experiments  will  be  given  in  a  subsequent  paper.— W.  F.  B.


190


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett


[part


and  I  had  also  asked  Mr.  Tompkins  to  indicate  any  place  in  my  garden
where  underground  water  would  be  found.  He  traced  the  line
of  an  underground  stream  and  I  marked  it  with  pegs  (about  four
inches  long)  driven  in  quite  to  their  head;  one  spot  g,  Fig.  14,  he
specially  noted.

I  told  Mr.  Chesterman  about  my  experiments  with  Mr.  Tompkins
and  asked  him  if  he  would  go  into  my  garden  and  try  to  locate  a
stream  found  by  the  latter.  He  kindly  consented.  It  was  quite  dark
when  we  went  out,  but  it  made  no  diflference  ;  in  a  short  time  he
found  water  at  /,'  Fig.  14,  and  said  the  stream  ran  parallel  to  the  road.
He  then,  passing  up  by  the  hedge,  found  the  rod  turn  at  the  point
when  he  said  he  was  crossing  a  stream.  I  put  down  my  hand  to  mark
the  place  with  a  peg  when  it  came  into  contact  with  the  end  of  the  peg
I  had  previously  put  in  to  mark  the  spot  Tompkins  had  selected.  It  was
much  too  dark  for  either  of  us  to  see  the  pegs  even  if  we  had  searched
for  them.  Chesterman  then  walked  down  the  centre  and  afterwards
the  inner  edge  of  the  tennis  ground  and  crossed  the  stream  at  n  and  i
respectively.  The  dotted  line  on  the  plan  of  my  garden  will  fairly  re-
present the  flow  of  water  underground  as  indicated  by  Mr.  Chesterman.

How  far,  from  these  experiments,  it  may  be  considered  that  the
subterranean  streams  influenced  these  two  men  I  cannot  say ;  I  think,
however,  something  more  than  chance  must  have  dictated  their  choice
of  ground.

Mr.  Tompkins  follows  his  stream  when  he  has  once  struck  it,  the
wand "  pointing  the  way  when  the  stream  takes  a  turn,  and  he
estimates  the  distance  underground  of  the  water  and  the  yield  by  the
position  assumed  by  the  rod  and  his  feelings  generally.

When  Mr.  Chesterman  discovers  a  stream  he  does  not  attempt  to
follow  it,  but  steps  back,  and  then  again  approaching  it  at  right  angles
marks  the  spot  where  he  first  feels  the  indication  of  water.  He  then
goes  some  paces  forward  so  as  to  cross  the  stream,  turns  round,  and
again  approaches  it,  marking  the  spot  where  the  water  is  again  first
felt.  By  dividing  the  distance  between  his  two  marks  he  gets  a  point
directly  over  the  water,  and  by  a  scale,  which  he  has  worked  out  from
experience,  he  judges  the  distance  below  at  which  the  water  is  flowing
by  the  distance  between  one  of  the  points  where  he  first  feels  the  water
and  the  point  immediately  over  it.

For  example,  when  the  horizontal  distance  is  15  ft.  the  water  will
be  20  ft.  below,  and  when  the  distance  on  the  ground  is  5  ft.  3  in.  the
stream  should  be  85  ft  under  the  surface.^

1  Colonel  Taylor  here  gives  a  plan  of  Chesterman's  method,  but  it  is  hardly
necessary  to  reproduce  it,  as  it  is  purely  imaginary  and  exactly  opposite  to  the
system  described  by  Mr.  Emerson  in  the  American  Journal  of  Science  and  followed
by  some  dowsers  in  England. — W.F.B.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


1


Every  dowser,  however,  uses  the  method  which  he  feels  answers
best ;  a  water-finder  whom  I  saw  at  work  two  or  three  years  ago  found
the  distance  of  the  water  underground  by  raising  his  rod  above  his
head  and  then  lowering  it  slowly  till  he  felt  "  first  contact "  of
influence  and  then  he  calculated  by  a  scale  he  had  made.

December  13th,  1896.  '  Le  M.  Taylor.

On  inquiry  I  learn  from  Colonel  Taylor  that  the  directors  of  the
laundry  have  not  sunk  a  well,  after  all,  at  the  place  indicated  by  the
dowsers,  as  they  feared.  Colonel  Taylor  says,  "  that  the  water,  when  got,
might  turn  out  to  be  '  Monkey  Brand.' "

No.  2. The  Westbury-suh-2Iendip  Exjjerhnents.

Among  the  numerous  letters  and  evidence  of  various  kinds  relating
to  the  divining  rod,  which  Mr.  Vaughan  Jenkins  (to  whose  painstaking
zeal  this  inquiry  owes  so  much)  has  kindly  sent  me,  there  is  a  good
deal  of  correspondence  relating  to  a  dowser  named  Thomas  Pavey,  of
Cheddar.  I  will  only  refer  to  one  case  where  the  late  Mr.  Nalder,  of
Westbury-sub-Mendip,  Wells,  Somersetshire,  employed  Pavey  and
another  dowser  quite  independently  of  each  other  to  go  over  his
ground  at  different  times.  I  condense  what  Mr.  Nalder  says  in  a
couple  of  letters  to  Mr.  V.  Jenkins  written  so  far  back  as  October  and
November,  1882  :—

"  I  got  the  two  men  [Mr.  Nalder  writes]  at  a  month's  interval
apart — quite  unknown  to  each  other  or  of  what  the  other  had  done — tc
test  my  field  for  water,  and  though  there  was  nothing  to  guide  them,  the
rod  moved  within  two  yards  of  the  same  spot  in  each  case ;  moreover
they  each  traced  the  same  direction  as  the  line  of  the  underground
watercourse.  In  other  parts  of  the  field  the  twig  would  not  work  (or
only  very  slightly),  but  it  moved  strongly  where  they  asserted  the
'  spring '  existed.  I  had  a  well  sunk  at  this  place  and  came  upon  a
splendid  water  supply  at  39  ft.  Below  the  surface  soil  we  passed
through  a  bed  of  gravel,  2  to  2^  ft.  deep,  then  came  upon  a  very  hard
dry  substance  called  by  the  well  sinker  '  wark.'  The  water  rose  in  the
well  up  to  within  2  ft.  of  the  top  and  remains  so.  The  well-sinker
told  me  he  had  sunk  five  wells  at  different  places  where  Mr.  Pavey
found  the  twig  moved  strongly,  and  in  each  of  the  cases  he  had
found  abundance  of  water."

In  a  subsequent  letter  Mr.  Nalder  writes  : —

Westbury-sub-Mendip,  Wells,  Somerset,  November  21st,  1882.

I  was  at  Cheddar  this  morning  speaking  to  my  butcher,  Mr.  John
Branch,  and  he  reminded  me  of  a  circumstance  I  had  quite  forgotten.  It
seems  he  came  over  to  Westbury  to  see  me  shortly  after  Mr.  Pavey  had


192


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


marked  out  the  spot  for  my  well,  and  as  Mr.  Branch  said  he  could  "work
the  twig,"  he  cut  a  forked  twig  from  the  hedge,  and  went  to  the  same  spot
marked  out  by  Mr.  Pavey,  and  of  which  there  was  not  the  least  sign  what-
ever, as  I  had  not  begun  the  well.  So  this  made  three  persons  who  had
found  the  spring  by  the  twig.  ^^^^  ^

There  was  some  correspondence  on  this  case  in  the  London  Times
during  October,  1882.  The  former  owner  of  Mr.  Nalder's  place  pooh-
poohed  the  thing  and  said  the  dowsers  were  only  joking,  to  which
Mr.  Nalder  properly  says :  "  If  so,  it  was  a  capital  joke  for  me."

No.  3. The  Thomastown  Experiments.

It  has  been  already  mentioned  in  the  Carrigoona  experiments  that
a  friend  living  near  Waterford,  Mr.  J.  H.  Jones,  was  an  amateur
dowser.  Mr.  Jones  tells  me  that,  having  seen  MuUins  locate  the  site
for  a  well  in  his  neighbourhood,  which  turned  out  remarkably
successful,  he  was  astonished  to  find  the  rod  also  moved  in  his  own
hands  and  he  writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

MulUnabro,  Waterford,  November  2dth,  1897.

I  began  experimenting  with  the  rod  as  a  sceptic — and  thoroughly
prejudiced  against  it,  and  thinking  that  its  action  in  a  diviner's  hands  was  a
mere  trick  or  sleight  of  hand— but  I  am  now  convinced  that  the  thing  is
genuine,  and  that  the  rod  is  moved  in  consequence  of  some  action  or
influence  produced  in  persons  susceptible  when  near  or  over  subterranean

.  '  J.H.Jones.

It  will  be  remembered  that  Mr.  Jones,  in  our  Carrigoona  experi-
ments, independently  pointed  out  the  same  places  that  Mr.  Stone
indicated  as  water-bearing  or  waterless.  Mr.  Jones  has  had
several  experiences  of  this  kind,  and  a  recent  one  is  worth  referring
to.  Water  was  much  needed  for  a  new  convent,  in  Thomastown,  co.
Kilkenny,  and,  after  some  unsuccessful  attempts  to  obtain  a  supply
had  been  made,  an  English  dowser  was  sent  for  ;  he  pointed  out  a
certain  region  in  the  convent  grounds  where  a  sujjply  of  underground
water  existed,  estimating  the  depth  at  about  80  feet ;  an  unlikely
place  it  seemed,  as  the  convent  field  was  at  some  altitude.  Mr.  Jones
was  asked  to  try  his  hand  independently,  knowing  nothing  of  the  place
pointed  out  by  the  English  dowser  and  having  nothing  to  guide
him.  The  result  was  that  he  fixed  on  the  same  place,  and  I  learn
that  any  possible  telepathic  influence  was  also  out  of  the  question.
Accordingly  a  well  six  feet  in  diameter  was  sunk  at  the  spot  indicated
as  best  by  both  dowsers.  After  passing  through  a  layer  of  surface
soil  and  rocky  debris,  the  solid  rock  was  encountered  at  the  depth  of
15  ft.  from  the  surface,  and  (at  a  cost  of  several  hundred  pounds)


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


193


the  well  was  sunk  in  a  hard  micaceous  quartzite.  The  Administrator
of  the  parish  writes  as  follows  to  Mr.  Jones  : —

Thomastown,  Co.  Kilkenny,  September  21st,  1899.
I  am  happy  to  say  that  we  have  got  water  on  the  exact  spot  pointed  out
by  you  and  Mr.  Wills  [the  English  dowser].  We  are  now  70  ft.  deep,  and
since  we  reached  60  ft.  water  has  come — so  far,  however,  in  small  quantities
insufficient  for  our  needs  ;  we  are  therefore  continuing  the  boring.  The
well-sinkers  declare  they  never  encountered  a  harder  stone.  It  is  getting
soft  at  one  side,  and  sand  is  coming  up  with  the  water,  a  good  sign.  All
the  springs  are  very  low  now,  and  we  expect  a  good  increase  of  water  during

the  winter.  ^  .  ,

John  Roe,  Adm.

P.S. — I  should  mention  the  water  is  increasing  every  day  for  the  past  week.

In  reply  to  my  inquiry  the  Rev.  J.  Roe  writes  : —

Thomastown,  co.  Kilkenny,  December  Sth,  1899.

In  your  letter  of  the  9th  ult.,  you  have  asked  me  three  questions  :  1st,
"Is  water  difficult  to  find  in  Thomastown,  etc.?"  I  may  state  that  water
is  not  very  difficult  to  find  here,  but  as  the  convent  is  situated  in  a  rather
elevated  position,  we  anticipated  considerable  difficulty  in  finding  water.  The
site  of  the  house  is  really  charming,  but  the  great  drawback  was  water  ;  in
fact,  some  wise  heads  told  us  we  should  never  get  it.  However,  we  were
determined  to  try  our  luck,  and  as  the  tradesmen  were  putting  the  finishing
touches  on  the  building,  we  began  sinking  operations.  The  spot  selected  at
first  was  about  12  yds.  from  the  kitchen  door.  The  men  worked  on  for  about
15  ft.  when  we  came  upon  tlie  rock.  We  were  very  doubtful  at  first  about
our  success,  and  having  come  upon  rock  so  soon  we  nearly  lost  courage,  and
dreaded  the  great  expense  necessary  even  in  trying  to  find  it.  I  consulted
Mr.  Hynes,  architect,  Cork,  and  he  advised  me  to  bring  over  Mr.  Gataker  or
his  man.  At  first  I  laughed  at  the  idea,  and  though  I  had  heard  and  read  a
little  about  the  divining  rod,  I  was  most  sceptical  as  to  its  results.  After
some  persuasion  I  communicated  with  Mr.  Gataker  and  he  sent  over  his
partner,  Mr.  Wills,  at  a  cost  of  of  £10.  When  he  arrived  he  looked  at  the
site  already  selected,  and  after  some  evolutions  of  his  rod  said  he  should
abandon  it,  as  there  was  only  a  very,  very  small  ripple,  and  at  great  depth.
He  then  went  through  the  whole  field  with  his  rod  and  marked  out  two  or
three  places  where  an  abundant  supply  of  water  could  be  obtained,  but
selected  a  rather  elevated  spot  in  preference  to  the  others.  He  said  we
would  niost  certainly  get  water  at  about  80  ft.  and  so  many  gallons  per  hour.
By  a  most  singular  coincidence  Mr.  .Jones  came  on  the  scene  accompanied
by  a  mutual  friend,  Mr.  O'Connell  (engineer),  Kilkenny,  and  this  brings  me
to  your  second  question.  We  invited  Mr.  J  ones  to  have  a  try  with  his  rod,
and  he  pointed  out  the  exact  spot,  and  traced  out  the  water  hi  the  same  line
as  Mr.  Wills  had  done.  They  were  quite  independent  of  one  another,  and
Mr.  Jones  knew  nothing  about  the  coming  of  the  English  dowser,  or  what  he
had  already  done.  Mr.  Jones  could  not  tell  the  depth,  nor  the  quantity,
etc.,  but  he  was  certain  there  was  a  strong  current  of  water.  I  noticed  in
the  operations  when  they  came  over  the  places  where  water  could  be  found,
Mr.  Wills'  rod  jumped  up  and  Mr.  Jones's  down.


194


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Third  question.  We  have  now  gone  down  about  75  ft.  and  the  men  have
ceased  to  sink  any  deeper,  as  we  consider  we  have  got  a  sufficient  supply
of  water  for  the  convent.  To-day  the  pumping  apparatus,  etc.,  has  arrived
from  some  English  firm,  and  I  expect  it  will  be  in  working  order  by  the
first  of  next  month.  I  need  not  tell  you  how  difficult  it  was  to  bore  through
the  rock  and  how  expensive  it  has  been  ujjon  us.  The  architect  was  anxious
that  we  should  go  deeper,  but  the  men  found  it  very  difficult  to  carry  on  the
blasting  operations,  because  of  the  constant  flow  of  water.  I  must  ask  you
to  excuse  me  for  the  long  delay  in  writing  this,  but  I  have  been  very  busy.
I  may  add  that  I  am  now  convinced  that  the  divining  rod  is  no  sham,
but  genuine,  and  I  cannot  explain  its  iniiuence  on  some  susceptible  people
when  they  come  over  or  near  water.  John  Roe  Adm

In  a  concluding  letter,  Father  Roe,  in  reply  to  my  question  why  he
did  not  in  the  first  instance  consult  a  geologist,  writes  as  follows . —
Thomastown,  co.  Kilkenny,  December  11th,  1899.

It  would  have  been  wiser  to  have  consulted  a  geologist  before  begin-
ning the  sinking  operations,  but  I  was  obliged  to  act  very  economically.
I  did  not  mean  by  "boring  "  a  small  borehole,  for  the  well  is  6  ft.  in
diameter  at  least  from  top  to  bottom  ;  I  only  used  the  word  as  a  jDumping
phrase.  I  did  not  intend  that  my  letters  should  be  published,  as  they  are
not  very  fit,  but  if  you  think  they  can  be  of  any  service  to  you  in  your
valuable  researches,  you  have  my  permission  to  use  them.

John  Roe,  Adm.

No.  4. The  Claverton  Alanor  Experiments.

In  the  previous  Report  (p.  95)  a  case  is  quoted  from  the  Pro-
ceedhigs  of  the  Bath  Field  Club  where  two  dowsers  independently  fixed
on  the  same  spots  in  an  estate  belonging  to  the  Deputy-Lieutenant
of  Gloucestershire^  Mr.  H.  T).  Shrine,  J. P.  As  one  of  these  dowsers  was
an  amateur,  and  an  Archdeacon,  the  case  is  above  all  suspicion  of
collusion,  and  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Vaughan  Jenkins  I
obtained  the  following  fuller  account  of  the  experiment  contained  in  a
letter  written  to  Mr.  V.  Jenkins  by  Mr.  Shrine,  who  was  an  eye-
witness. The  date  is  somewhat  remote,  but  the  facts  are  not  disputed.

Claverton  Manor,  near  Bath,  December  20th,  1882.

In  reply  to  your  (questions  relating  to  my  experience  of  the  use  of  the
divining  rod  for  the  discovery  of  water,  the  facts  are  these  : — About  twenty
years  ago,  intending  to  build  a  cottage  residence  on  the  top  of  Warleigh  Hill,
adjoining  the  hamlet  of  Conk  well,  I  employed  a  man  named  John  Mullins,  a
reputed  spring-finder  and  well-sinker  living  at  Colerne,  Wilts.,  to  find  water,
which  he  did  by  means  of  a  forked  twig  of  hazel  or  thorn.  He  was,  so  far  as
I  know,  an  entire  stranger  to  the  place,  and  could  not  have  known  anything
about  the  springs.  I  took  him  to  the  top  of  the  wood  in  a  flat  field,  the
subsoil  of  which  for  a  great  depth  was  known  to  be  oolite  rock. He  pointed


xxxviir.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


195


out  by  means  of  his  forked  twig  where  water  was,  in  his  opinion,  to  Vje  found
under  the  surface,  but  at  what  depth  he  did  not  pretend  to  say.  In  every
instance  where  he  said  he  found  water,  there  was  to  my  knowledge  a
spring  low  down  in  the  wood  in  a  line  with  the  spot  indicated.

He  afterwards  made  some  attempts  to  find  water  on  the  lawn  in  the
front  of  the  house,  and  traced  a  spring  upward  to  a  .spot  on  the  grass  plot  in
front  of  the  greenhouse  where,  some  years  before,  in  moving  a  large  arbutus
tree  we  had  found  a  spring  of  water.  To  test  the  man's  water-finding
powers  more  closely,  before  I  allowed  him  to  sink  the  well,  I  invited  my
friend  and  neighbour  Mr.  Earle — late  Rector  of  Monkton  Farleigh,  and  now
Archdeacon  of  Totnes,  who  had  the  gift  himself,  and  who  had  found  several
wells  by  this  process — to  meet  Mullins  in  the  field  near  Conkwell.  He  did
so,  and  though  unaware  of  "what  places  Mullins  had  selected,  they  both
agreed  in  a  very  remarkable  manner  in  the  spots  where  the  hidden  springs
were  ;  the  forked  twig  turned  with  him  at  the  same  places  as  with  Mullins.
On  this  conjunction  of  their  discoveries  I  decided  to  sink  a  well,  and  at  a
little  over  80  ft.  deep  we  came  to  a  bed  of  yellow  clay  and  found  water.  The
bed  was,  however,  too  thin,  and  the  men  sank  the  well  to  over  100  ft.  deep,
when  they  came  to  a  blue  marl  or  lias,  and  we  have  a  fair  supply  of  water
about  4  ft.  deep.

Since  then  and  quite  recently  Mullins  has  found  for  me  several  springs
in  Claverton  and  sunk  two  wells,  in  one  of  which  the  water  was  found  not
more  than  6  ft.  below  the  surface,  where  we  had  no  idea  there  was  any.  In
each  instance  of  his  finding  by  the  twig  a  spring  on  the  hill,  he  traced  it
down  to  an  existing  spring  unknown  previously  to  myself.  He  also  found
for  us  the  course  of  several  drains,  the  lines  of  which  had  been  forgotten  by
the  workpeople,  and  in  every  case  was  right  and  saved  us  much  trouble  in
digging.

It  certainly  appears  to  me  that  Mullins  is  himself  a  believer  in  the
divining  rod,  and  if  it  is  a  mere  trick  or  deception,  it  is  strange  that  he
could  not  communicate  it  to  his  own  son  who  works  with  him.  The  twig  on
the  approach  to  a  spring  curved  upwards  in  his  hands  without  the  least
appearance  of  action  on  his  part.

Henry  D.  Shkine.

No.  5. The  Pontyherim  Experinieufs.

Another  case  where  two  dowsers,  in  this  case  both  were  amateurs,
independently  fixed  on  the  same  spot  is  given  me  by  ]Mr.  J.  F.  Young,
of  Llanelly.  A  friend  of  Mr.  Young,  a  contractor,  was  building  some
cottages  at  Pontyberim,  a  mining  village  noted  for  its  anthracite  coal,
eight  miles  from  Llanelly.  Wishing  to  select  a  site  for  a  well,  the
contractor  asked  Mr.  Young  (who  is  well  known  in  the  locality  as  au
amateur  dowser)  to  come  over  and  fix  the  best  spot.  Mr.  Young  tells
me  he  had  never  been  to  the  place  before,  and  on  arrival,  after  casting
about  with  his  twig,  he  fixed  on  a  certain  line  along  which  he  asserted
underground  water  would  be  found.  Having  done  this,  he  begged
the  contractor,  Mr.  Williams,  to  try  the  rod  himself. This  he  did,  and


196


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


to  his  surprise  Mr.  Williams  found  the  rod  moved  vigorously,  and
apparently  spontaneously  at  the  same  place  found  by  Mr.  Young.
Then  Mr.  Young  went  out  of  sight  of  Mr.  Williams,  and  having  traced
the  course  of  the  water-bearing  fissure,  as  Mr.  Young  believed  it  to
be,  he  returned  and  asked  Mr.  Williams  to  do  the  same.  Aware  of
the  influence  of  unconscious  guidance  by  hand  or  look,  Mr.  Young
informs  me  that  he  took  special  care  to  avoid  this,  and  kept  out  of
sight  whilst  Mr.  Williams  tried.  On  subsequently  comparing  notes,
the  same  line  was  found  to  have  been  traced  by  both.  Mr.  Williams'
sister,  Mrs.  Rees,  to  whom  the  cottages  belong,  was  present,  and  adds
her  testimony.  I  have  received  independent  reports  from  both  Mr.
Young  and  Mr.  Williams.  Here  is  the  account  given  by  the  latter ;
after  relating  what  I  have  stated  above,  Mr.  Williams  says  : —

Pontyberim,  October  20th,  1899.

Mr.  Young  then  asked  me  to  stop  where  I  was,  while  he  went  to  the  side
of  the  building  in  order  to  trace  the  course  of  the  underground  water.  In  a
short  time  he  returned  and  begged  me  to  try  if  I  could  find  it.  I  did  so,  and
had  not  gone  far  before  the  curious  "electrified"  sensation  again  returned,
and  the  action  of  the  twig  could  be  seen  moving  over  a  certain  si^ot,  which
proved  to  be  the  same  as  that  located  by  Mr.  Young.

But  still  I  was  in  doubt  as  to  the  probability  of  the  existence  of  water
there  until  a  couple  months  after  that,  and  in  the  worst  of  the  last  dry
season,  I  resolved  to  put  it  to  the  test,  and  commenced  sinking  a  well  at  that
spot.  On  reaching  a  depth  of  14ft.  from  the  surface,  I  had  the  gratification
of  striking  on  a  strong  spring  of  clear  and  beautiful  water,  rising  since  to  5ft.
and  6ft.  in  the  well  and  so  it  now  continues,  a  result  of  much  importance  to
my  sister,  Mrs.  Rees.  j^^^^  Williams.

I  have  read  the  above  account  of  the  finding  of  the  spring  on  my
premises,  and  the  account  is  true  in  every  particular. Martha  Rees

No.  6. The  Mayfield  Experiments.

I  am  indebted  to  Dr.  Leadam  for  kindly  sending  me  the  following
detailed  account,  accompanied  with  a  map,  of  his  experiments  with
two  dowsers,  whom  he  tested,  independently  of  each  other,  on  his
estate  in  Sussex.  Mayfield  and  Stone  Mill  are  both  on  the  "  Hastings
Beds,"  a  series  of  sands  and  sandstones  alternating  with  clays ;  see
Topley's  memoir  on  the  Geology  of  the  Weald.

167,  Gloucester  Terrace,  Hyde  Park,  W.,  December  7th,,  1899.
I  have  a  small  property  near  Mayfield,  in  Sussex,  a  hilly  district
principally  soft  sandstone  formation  with  hard  sandstone  strata,  as  at  Tun-
bridge  Wells.

In  1895,  as  I  wanted  a  further  water  supply,  I  sent  for  Mr.  Gataker  ;
he  stated  he  had  never  been  in  the  place  before,  and  T  accompanied  him


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  1&7


throughout  the  experiment.  As  my  primary  object  was  to  have  an  in-
creased convenient  supply  for  the  farm  buildings  adjoining  Stone  Mill,  I  took
him  over  there,  and  he  soon  marked  a  spot,  C,  as  promising  a  good  supply
at  70  ft.  depth.  He  then  indicated  spots  D  and  E,  giving  from  50  to  70  ft.
as  the  probable  depth  ;  a  smaller  but  satisfactory  supply  at  F,  but,  as
he  remarked,  it  was  altogether  out  of  the  way  of  the  farm.

As  I  also  wanted  a  supply  for  the  small  house  at  the  Stock-yards,  I  then
took  him  round  there,  and  he  pitched  upon  A  as  a  spot  for  a  good  supply  at
80  ft.  I  then  told  him  that  I  believed  there  must  be  water  somewhere  near
the  surface,  as  an  underground  dairy  could  not  be  kept  satisfactorily  dry,  so
he  walked  round  the  house,  and  outside  the  garden  gate,  about  30  yds.  from
the  house,  he  marked  a  place,  B,  where  he  said  we  should  find  a  sufficient
supply  for  that  small  house  at  12  ft.  from  the  surface.  I  may  say  that  the
pond  drawn  near  there  is  a  surface  pond  and  nearly  dry  in  summer.

I  determined  to  try  first  at  B,  and  set  an  ordinary  well  sinker  to  dig  a
well ;  exactly  at  12  ft.  he  came  upon  water  in  a  stratum  of  blue  marl.
I  had  this  dug  down  to  20  ft.,  brought  the  pipe  for  a  house  pump  into
it,  and  it  has  been  in  constant  use  ever  since,  and  stood  steadily  at  about
12  ft.  from  the  surface  during  the  late  dry  summer  ;  though  neighbours  were
allowed  to  use  the  well,  the  water  did  not  sink  more  than  1  or  1^  ft.

Being  well  satisfied  with  this,  I  then  set  the  same  men  to  dig  a  well
at  E,  and,  after  digging  through  varying  strata,  the  man  below,  whilst
digging  in  rather  firm  rock  at  61ft.,  suddenly  called  out  to  be  hauled
up  as  the  water  rushed  up  in  volume  at  his  feet.  This  flow  was  estimated
at  300  gallons  per  hour,  but  there  is  a  stratum  of  broken  rock  and  rubbish
about  1^  ft.  above,  through  which  the  water  flows  away  ;  for  that  reason  and
its  distance  from  the  house,  and  a  suspicion  that  the  broken  stratum  in
some  way  rendered  the  water  unsatisfactory,  I  have  not  taken  it  into  use,
and  my  farm  people  have  continued  till  now  to  supply  themselves  from  the
small  stream  shown  in  the  map.

Having  determined  this  summer  that  I  would  dig  or  bore  somewhere
nearer  the  farmhouse,  I  thought,  before  doing  so,  that  I  would  have  another
diviner  over  to  see,  as  a  matter  of  interest,  to  what  extent  his  opinions
agreed  with  Mr.  Gataker's.  You  were  kind  enough,  in  answer  to  my
inquiry,  to  recommend  Mr.  Stone,  and  he  ca^^le  in  August.  He  also  had
never  been  in  the  place  before,  and  I  met  him  on  arrival  and  accompanied
him  round.

I  took  him  first  to  the  field  near  some  ponds  on  the  map  ;  the  ponds
were  certainly  hidden  by  trees,  and  are  in  a  dip  in  the  ground  so  that  Mr.
Stone  could  not  have  noticed  them.  He  marked  a  spot  at  G,  then  at  H,
and  traced  that  flow  back  towards  G,  all  at  about  70  ft.  depth.  Also  at  I,
and  at  K,  and  at  L,  a  large  flow,  "bubbling  up,"  as  he  expressed  it,  at  about
50  ft.  depth,  and  flowing  in  both  directions  from  there.  L  is  about  the
highest  point  in  the  field  (A  having  been  an  ordnance  survey  station).
He  then  marked  M  exactly  where  Mr.  Gataker  had  marked  C  four  years
before,  and  N,  0  and  P,  which  he  considered  one  stream  at  about  60  or
70  ft.  depth  or  rather  less,  and  when  I  afterwards  told  him  of  Mr.  Gataker's
markings  he  said  he  thought  his  own  places  better,  and  that  they  were
branches  of  the  same  supply. Similarly  he  marked  Q  and  R,  which  appeared


198


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


to  be  the  stream  which  Gataker  had  marked  at  F  on  its  way  to  the  meadow
at  the  bottom,  and  I  was  ah'eady  aware  that  somewhere  about  there  a  good
supply  was  coming  down  to  the  stream  and  percolating  into  it.

Mr.  Stone  recommended  boring  at  P,  and  I  accordingly  allowed  him  to
send  his  foreman  and  boring  took  to  do  it.  They  went  through  5  or  6  ft.  of
mould,  then  about  30  ft.  of  sand  rock,  unfortunately  a  very  hard  seam,  then
about  3  ft.  of  blue  clay.  At  42  ft.  6  in.  they  again  got  into  sand  rock,  and  in
that  at  47  ft.  reached  water,  which  rose  about  6  in.  up  the  bore  hole.  It
remains  at  about  that  level  and  is  estimated  at  200  gallons  per  hour,  but  I
have  not  yet  got  a  pump  fitted.  Before  writing  to  me  Mr.  Stone  advised
that  the  boring  should  be  carried  deeper  (I  think  there  was  no  justification


Fig.  15.

A  to  F  positions  marked  by  Mr.  Gataker.
G-  to  R ,,  ,, ,,  Stone.

Wells  sunk  at  B,  E  and  P.
Scale — About  1  in.  to  850  ft.,  approx.  6  in.  to  the  mile.  -

for  this,  as  I  considered  it  simple  speculation  and  stopped  it),  his  view  being
that  by  going  deeper  we  should  strike  a  stronger  spring  and  perhaps  have
the  water  fill  the  bore  hole  to  the  surface.  The  boring  showed  that  the
water-bearing  rock  (or  sandstone)  reached  to  58  ft.  6  in.,  then  blue  clay  to
61  ft.,  rock  to  65  ft.,  and  blue  clay  again  to  69  ft.  We  therefore  have,  in  my
opinion,  run  a  great  risk  of  losing  the  water  altogether.  The  layer  of  clay
from  40  ft.  to  42  ft.  6  in.  was  peculiar,  almost  black,  and  I  am  sending  you
by  parcel  post  a  sample  of  it,  and  if  there  is  any  peculiarity  about  it,  I  should
like  to  know.

T  will  report  later  to  you  the  working  of  the  supply  when  it  is  fixed.

W.  W.  Leadam.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


199


P.S. — With  two  streams  of  water  on  the  map  you  may  perhaps  wonder  at
the  need  for  boring,  so  I  must  explain  that  in  the  summer  time  the  mill
stream  is  so  small  that  it  takes  three  days  to  refill  the  millf)onds  after  use,
and  the  water  is  very  irony.  The  other  stream  is  only  just  enough  in
summer  to  supply  my  house  by  a  hydraulic  ram.  It  is  good  water,  and
appears  in  summer  entirely  supplied  by  percolation  from  the  water  stratum
indicated  by  the  diviner  at  F,  Q  and  R.

The  foregoing  case  is  instructive,  not  from  the  coincidence  of  the
spots  C  and  M  chosen  by  Gataker  and  Stone  independently,  a  coinci-
dence that  was  possibly  accidental,  but  from  the  illustration  it  affords
of  the  dowser's  notion  of  underground  water.  With  the  utmost
assurance,  wherever  he  goes  (if  his  rod  turns)  he  proceeds  to  trace  out
narrow  streams  of  water- flowing  underground,  just  as  streams  flow  on
the  surface.  Now  in  the  foregoing  case  the  geology  of  the  district  is
perfectly  well  known  and  underground  streams,  such  as  are  imagined
by  the  dowser,  are  out  of  the  question.

Mr.  Holmes  makes  the  following  remarks  on  the  foregoing  case : —

Mayfield  and  Stone  Mill  are  not  on  the  same  subdivision  of  the  Hastings
Beds,  but  they  agree  in  being  both  on  sandy,  not  clayey  beds.  Topley  gives
the  details  of  a  quarry  showing  36  ft.  of  stone  "at  the  curve  of  the  main
road  half  a  mile  West  of  Mayfield."  (p.  77.)  He  also  mentions  some  fine
natural  exposures  of  sandstone  rocks  (between  Mayfield  and  Stone  Mill)  as
"  continued  down  the  valley  towards  Stone  Mill."  Thus  the  dowser  there-
abouts would  have  not  only  the  evidence  of  hard  rock  interbedded  with  clay
or  other  soft  stuff,  deducible  from  the  contours  of  the  ground,  but  the
actual  sight  of  the  sandstone.  I  note  that  Dr.  Leadam  told  the  dowser
that  there  must  be  water  somewhere  near  the  surface  (par.  3),  as  an  under-
ground dairy  could  not  be  kept  dry,  near  B,  and  that  then  the  dowser
decided  that  there  was  water,  at  B,  12  ft.  from  the  surface — a  very  simple
deduction  therefrom.

Granting  the  dowser's  honest  faith  in  himself  and  his  rod,  it  is  easy  to
understand  how  he  might  say  to  himself  when  in  a  farm  yard,  or  other
enclosure  near  a  house, — "  That  would  be  a  convenient  spot  for  a  pump  or
well,  if  there  is  a  stream  of  water  there."  Any  other  dowser  would  probably
take  the  same  view  and  hence  both  would  try  that  spot  in  the  first  place  and
give  it  an  unconscious  preference.  T  V  H

Other  cases  of  two  or  more  dowsers  tried  on  the  same  ground
independently  of  each  other  are  given  both  in  the  present  Report  (see,
e.g.,  p.  203)  ;  and  in  the  previous  Report  eight  or  nine  such  cases  were
referred  to  and  some  particulars  given,  see  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  32,  40,
47,  70,  81,  89,  95,  and  210.  All  of  these  were  successful,  but  in
many  of  these  cases  the  exact  conditions  of  the  test  or  of  the  ground
are  insufficiently  described.  There  is,  therefore,  a  considerable  body
of  evidence  of  a  certain  value,  but  of  what  value  it  is  hard  to  say,
existing  upon  this  instructive  point.


200  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.  [PAET


PART  V.

Experiments  in  Blindfolding  the  Dowser.

In  the  previous  Pteporb,  pages  175  and  205,  I  described  some
experiments  made  by  myself  on  carefully  blindfolding  two  dowsers  and
noting  whether  they  were  able,  by  the  movement  of  the  rod,  to  indicate
the  same  spots  when  blindfolded  as  when  not  blindfolded.  If  there  be,
as  all  dowsers  and  most  of  their  supporters  believe,  a  subtle  influence
exerted  by  underground  running  water  upon  the  dowser,  then  blind-
folding should  make  no  difference.  The  same  remark  applies  if  the
dowser  be  psychically  sensitive,  possessing,  e.g.,  some  kind  of  clair-
voyance,— provided  always  the  dowser  is  at  his  ease,  i.e.,  if  he  joins
heartily  in  the  experiment.

In  all  experimental  work  it  is  essential  for  success  that  the
instruments  you  employ  are  suitable  for  the  purpose  in  view  and
also  in  good  order.  Having  selected  the  proper  instruments,  the
mental  atmosphere  in  physical  experiments  does  not  affect  the  results,
as  we  are  dealing  with  non-living  matter,  but  the  physical  conditions  are
all  important.  In  experiments  with  living  beings,  the  physical  surround-
ings (except  in  so  far  as  they  produce  discomfort)  are  unimportant,  but,
as  we  are  now  dealing  with  living  instruments,  our  experiments  are
sure  to  fail  or  be  inconclusive  if  the  instrumental  appliances  we  have  to
employ  are  out  of  order  ;  and  they  are  very  apt  to  be  deranged  by  a
sudden  change  in  the  psychical  conditions.  Modern  physical  and
chemical  research  has  taught  us  the  profound  influence  exerted  by  an
imperceptible  difference  in  the  materials  we  are  dealing  with  ;  the
tendency  of  all  psychical  research  is  to  reveal  that  an  influence  quite
as  profound  is  exerted  by  an  imperceptible  difference  in  the  mental
apparatus  we  employ.  Tliough  this  may  seem  quite  reasonable  and
obvious  to  most  of  us,  it  has  taken  physicists  200  years  to  learn  the
former  truth,  and  we  should  not  therefore  be  surprised  if  those  to
whom  psychical  research  is  new  overlook,  or  even  ridicule,  the  latter.

It  may  be  remembered  that  some  years  ago  Professor  Ray
Lankester,  F.R.S.,  published  an  account  of  some  experiments  he
had  made  in  blindfolding  a  dowser,  a  lad  named  Rodwell,  and  a
good  deal  of  public  interest  was  excited  by  what  Professor  Lankester
and  many  others  considered  to  be  his  complete  exposure  of  the
trickery  of  dowsers  in  general  and  of  this  lad  in  particular.  Now,
whilst  I  have  no  wish  to  be  an  apologist  for  this  dowser,  as  similar
experiments  which  I  made  with  him  (p.  205  of  the  last  Report)  were
inconclusive,  and  in  one  instance  adverse,  yet  it  must  be  remembered


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


201


that  Professoi'  Ray  Lankester,  though  a  distinguished  naturalist,  is  not
an  equally  distinguished  experimentalist.  His  scepticism  regarding
phenomena  that  do  not  lie  within  the  range  of  his  experience  might
almost  be  termed  ferocious,  and,  on  the  occasion  referred  to,  it  can
hardly  be  said  he  dealt  with  the  living  instrument — the  dowser —
as  gently  as  he  would  have  dealt  with  his  microscope.  Upon  this
point  I  may  perhaps  quote  a  sentence  from  a  letter  which  I  received
some  time  ago  from  Mr.  T.  V.  Holmes,  F.G.S.,  who  is  quite  as  keen  a
critic  as  Professor  Lankester,  but  somewhat  better  informed  in  all  that
relates  to  the  subject  of  the  present  research. Mr.  Holmes  writes  : —

With  regard  to  the  experiments  of  Professor  Ray  Lankester  on  the
alleged  power  of  Rodwell,  I  am  very  decidedly  of  opinion  that  no  result
of  any  value  could  be  obtained  unless  the  boy  was  quite  at  his  ease,  and  that
he  would  require  much  more  tact  and  geniality  to  put  him  at  his  ease  than
a  man  would.  Now  the  impostor,  or  semi-impostor,  shows  his  hand  to  the
genial  man,  and  is  rigidly  on  his  guard  in  the  presence  of  the  ungenial,  as
though  "sweetness  and  light"  never  co-existed  in  the  same  person.

This  is  a  sagacious  observation,  and  bears  out  what  I  have  already
said  with  regard  to  those  who  are  engaged  in  any  experimental  work
connected  with  our  Society.

No.  1. Experiments  hy  the  Author.

Returning  to  my  own  experiments,  described  in  the  previous
Report,  those  narrated  on  p.  175  were  made  at  Kingstown  with
Mr.  Stears,  who  readily  consented  to  be  blindfolded,  but  who  only
approximately  fixed  on  the  same  spots  when  he  could  not  see  as  when
he  could  see.  The  other  experiments  were  made  at  Wimbledon  (p.  205)
with  the  lad  Rodwell,  who  strongly  objected  to  be  blindfolded,  for  the
reasons  there  given,  but  who  at  last  consented  :  in  two  experiments
he  was  completely  wrong  and  in  a  third  he  was  fairly  correct.  It  may
be  urged  that,  Rodwell  being  blindfolded  against  his  will,  the  experi-
ment was  not  a  fair  one,  as  he  was  not  at  his  ease  ;  this  I  quite  admit.
Hence  I  can  only  regret  that,  taken  as  a  whole,  my  own  experiments
were,  as  I  have  said,  inconclusive.

No.  2. Air.  Pease's  Experiments.

Mr.  E.  R.  Pease  made  two  experiments  with  a  blindfolded
dowser,  which  are  described  in  his  report  on  the  divining  rod,  published
in  Vol.  II.  of  our  Proceedings,  p.  85.  These,  like  my  own  experiments,
were  inconclusive,  and  even  had  the  dowser  been  successful,  the  result
would  have  been  of  little  value,  as  it  is  stated  the  dowser  was  "led
over  the  same  ground  "  in  both  cases.  Unconscious  muscular  suggestion
might  well  have  vitiated  the  experiment.


202


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


No.  3. Experiments  by  Lord  Winchilsea  and  others.

But  there  is  a  good  deal  of  evidence  by  other  experimenters  on
the  blindfolding  of  dowsers.  Eight  cases  in  addition  to  my  own
experiments  were  given  in  the  previous  Report.  Some  of  these  are
with  amateur  dowsers,  as  Mr.  Golding,  of  Booking,  Essex,  p.  28  (in  all
cases  pages  refer  to  the  previous  Report,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.
XIII.);  and  Colonel  Aldworth,  D.L.,  of  co.  Cork  (p.  31),  and  also
a  young  farmer  he  mentions ;  another  case  is  given  on  p.  40.  A
careful  experiment  made  by  Mr.  J.  E.  Marshall,  of  Leeds,  with  the
dowser  Adams,  is  described  on  p.  48 ;  an  experiment  with  Lawrence,
on  p.  70  ;  and  with  the  late  J.  Mullins,  on  p.  95  ;  an  experiment  made
by  Sir  Welby  Gregory,  also  on  Mullins,  on  p.  97  ;  and  one  by  the  late
Earl  of  Winchilsea  (then  the  Hon.  Finch  Hatton,  M.P.)  also  on
Mullins  (same  page). Here  Earl  Winchilsea  states  : —

Mullins  was  then  blindfolded,  and  though  led  round  by  a  different  route,
again  fixed  on  the  same  spot.  At  first  he  overran  it  a  foot  or  so  and  then
felt  round,  as  it  were,  and  seemed  to  be  led  back  into  the  exact  centre  of
influence  by  the  twig.

This  experiment  is  more  fully  described  in  Proceedings  S.  P.  R.,
Vol.  II.,  p.  102.  In  this  case  it  was  the  discovery  of  a  pipe  of  running
water,  but  the  success  of  the  dowser  may  have  been  due  to  involuntary
muscular  suggestion,  as  Mr.  Finch  Hatton  states  he  "  led  "  the  dowser.
The  same  explanation  may  also  account  for  the  success  that  is  asserted
in  several  of  the  other  cases  mentioned  in  the  previous  Report,  though
unfortunately  the  particulars  respecting  them  are  too  meagre  to  be  of
much  value,  except  perhaps  in  the  case  given  by  Mr.  Marshall.

I  will  now  quote  some  further  cases  of  blindfolding  which  have
since  reached  me.  The  first  of  these  is  a  very  interesting  case,  and
here  again  J.  Mullins  is  the  dowser.  The  introductory  part  of  this
case  is  also  of  interest,  and  might  have  been  added  to  the  cases  given
in  Part  III.

No.  4. Mr.  Hoskyns"  Experime7its.

In  the  Somerset  and  Dorset  Notes  and  Queries  for  June,  1897,
the  Editor  publishes  a  letter  from  a  Mr.  H.  W.  Hoskyns,  written  to
him  on  January  2nd,  1889.  Mr.  Hoskyns,  whose  letter,  together
with  information  he  has  subsequently  sent  me,  I  abridge,  says  : —

Having  an  impure  supply  of  water  on  his  estate.  North  Perrott
Manor,  Crewkerne,  Somersetshire,  he  sent  for  the  late  John  Mullins,  the
well-known  dowser,  who,  by  means  of  the  rod,  fixed  upon  the  best  site  for
sinking  a  well,  estimating  the  water  to  be  about  25  ft.  below  the  surface.
The  well  was  sunk,  solid  rock  was  soon  encountered,  and  after  25  ft.  below
the  surface  had  been  reached,  and  a  considerable  thickness  of  rock  pierced,
still  no  water  was found. Suddenly,  however,  when  255  ft.  had  been


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


203


reached,  an  inrush  of  water  took  place,  so  rapid  that  the  men  had  to  be
hurriedly  withdrawn  from  the  well,  and  the  water  rose  23|  ft.,  or  2  ft.  from
the  surface,  and  has  given  a  constant  supi^ly  ever  since,  even  in  the  driest
summers.  An  old  well  near  contained  water  that  was  so  polluted  that  it
could  not  be  used,  though  the  well  had  been  cleaned  out  several  times.
The  spring  found  by  Mullins  has  given  a  constant  supply  of  pure  water.
Not  far  off,  Mullins  indicated  the  site  of  a  second  well,  which  proved
equally  successful.  Mr.  Hoskyns  adds  that  one  of  his  labourers  found  he
also  had  the  power  of  using  tlie  rod,  a  fact  corroborated  by  the  Editor,  the
Rev.  C.  H.  Mayo,  M.A.,  who  visited  the  spot.i

There  is  an  interesting  sequel  to  this.  In  consequence  of  Mr.  A.
Lang's  notes  on  my  previous  Report,  in  Longman'' s  Magazine,  Mr.
Hoskyns  wrote  to  Mr.  Lang  upon  the  subject,  and  the  latter  forwarded
nie  the  letter. Mr.  Hoskyns  writes  : —

Nortli  Perrott  Manor,  Crewkerne,  December,  1897.

With  regard  to  the  tests  suggested  by  Professor  Barrett  in  order  to
ascertain  the  reality  of  a  dowsing  faculty,^  the  following  appears  to  satisfy
Nos.  1  and  2,  i.e.,  separate  examinations  by  different  dowsers  independently
of  each  other,  and  blindfolding  the  dowser.  Mullins  having  on  his  visit  here,
in  1888,  given  several  (half-a-dozen  or  so)  indications  of  water  in  the  lane  by
the  two  cottages,  I  had  pegs  put  in  on  the  strip  of  grass  land  ojiposite  these
indications,  and  thrust  in  very  low,  so  as  only  just  to  be  seen  when  looked
for,  and  not  showing  above  the  grass,  so  that  the  cottage  children  should  not
pull  them  up  or  displace  them.  Some  rather  long  time  after,  when  I  had
made  up  my  mind  to  go  to  the  further  expense  of  making  a  draw-well  (not
a  deep  one)  for  the  cottages,  having  meanwhile  heard  that  a  labourer  on  my
estate,  one  George  Elson,  had  the  dowsing  power,  I  went  with  him  myself,
had  him  bandaged  tkihtly  and  deeply,  well  over  the  no.se,  and  in  addition  made
a  steady  man  keep  his  hands  over  the  bandage,  whilst  Elson  walked  down
the  lane  in  question,  holding  the  twig.  At  each  halt  that  he  made,  the  twig
turning  downwards  for  water,  I  looked  for  Mullins'  peg,  but  the  grass  had
grown  over  them  and  they  were  all  quite  undiscernible.  So  I  made  Elson
and  his  guide  (for  being  completely  blinded,  he  stumbled  occasionally)
scrape  a  mark  on  the  road  surface  with  their  boots.  When  we  had  come  to
the  end  of  the  lane,  I  returned  with  these  men  and  one  or  two  others

1  My  best  thanks  are  due  to  Mr.  Hoskyns  for  giving  every  facility  to  Mr.
Westlake,  F.G.S.,  who,  at  my  request,  kindly  visited  the  spot  and  made  a  careful
geological  examination  and  report  on  this  case.  Mr.  Westlake  reports  that  the  old
foul  well  was  probably  between  20  and  30  ft.  deep.  Mullins'  well,  about  18  yds.  distant,
is  sunk  in  the  Inferior  Oolite,  and  at  a  depth  of  ft-  water  rushed  rapidly  in
through  a  joint  in  the  rook.  This  well  gives  a  splendid  pure  supply,  even  when  the
river  is  nearly  dry  ;  the  water  is  probably  dammed  up  by  a  downthrow  of  FuUer's-
eartb,  which  passes  close  to  the  farm.  The  second  well  indicated  by  Mullins  is
50  yards  further  west,  is  only  18  ft.  deep,  and  does  not  give  so  continuous  a  supply.
All  three  wells  are  at  nearly  the  same  surface  level. — W.  F.  B.

2  See  p.  251  of  the  previous  Report.


•204


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[pAirr


(Elson  being  then  unblinded)  and  we  all  made  close  search  for  the  Mullins'
pegs,  every  one  of  tvhich,  without  exceptio'n,  proved  to  be  immediutdy  opposite
one  of  Elson's  boot-marks  on  the  road.  This  uneducated  labourer  could
have  had  no  geological,  or  even  rule-of-thumb,  knowledge  of  water-bearing
strata,  for  the  place  was  ([uite  strange  to  him.

The  only  objection,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  that  can  be  raised  to  this
extremely  interesting  test  is  that  the  guide,  who  kept  his  hand  on
the  bandage  over  the  labourer's  eyes,  might  have  known  where  the
pegs  were  placed,  and  unconsciously  tended  to  arrest  the  dowser  at
the  I'ight  spots,  in  fact,  a  case  of  "muscle-reading,"  as  in  the  so-called
willing-game.  This  is  likely  enough  if  the  pegs  were  discernible,  but
Mr.  Hoskyns  distinctly  says  they  were  not,  and  as  some  time  had
elapsed  since  Mullins  visited  the  place,  no  one  seems  to  have  remem-
bered the  exact  spots  where  the  pegs  had  been  put.  I  have  had  some
correspondence  with  Mr.  Hoskyns  about  this  interesting  experiment.
He  informs  me  that  Elson's  guide  knew  nothing  whatever  about
Mullins'  pegs  ;  involuntary  guidance  is  therefore  excluded.

No  5. Mr.  Westlake's  Ux2)eriments.

I  asked  Mr.  Westlake,  who  was  living  near  Crewkerne,  to  repeat,
with  Mr.  Hoskyns'  permission,  the  blindfolding  experiment  with  Elson.
Mr.  Westlake  reports  : —

On  April  24th,  1900,  I  went  witli  Mr.  Hoskyns  and  his  agent,  Mr.  Slade,
to  Pipplepen  farm.  I  walked  down  the  same  lane  with  Elson  to  a  little  stream
at  the  bottom,  a  distance  of  1,050  ft.,  in  the  course  of  which  his  twig  turned
seven  times.  I  then  carefully  blindfolded  him,  and  on  retracing  our  steps,
the  twig  turned  ten  times,  five  of  which  corresponded  nearly  or  quite  with
his  first  marks,  as  under  : —


Elson's  first  marks
when  not
blindfolded.

His  second  series  when
blindfolded.

Difference.

206  feet  2  inches

(1)

(2)

206  feet  8  inches
326  feet  7  inches

6  inches

406  feet  6  inches

(3)
(4)

429  feet  5  inches
564  feet  3  inches

648  feet

(5)
(6)
(7)

651  feet

680  feet  6  inches
742  feet  9  inches

+

3  feet

762  feet

872  feet

(8)

877  feec

+

5  feet

931  feet

(9)

934  feet

+

3  feet

985  feet

(10)

985  feet

none

XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


205


Elson  was  not  held,  and  was  only  told  (to  prevent  accidents)  to  keep  to
the  right  or  the  left.  The  results  may  have  been  somewhat  impaired,  first,
by  the  steward,  Mr.  Slade,  who  accompanied  us,  having  touched  Elson  with
a  stick  (with  a  view  to  guiding  him  straight)  at  the  points  1  and  5,  imme-
diately after  which  the  twig  turned  ;  and,  second,  there  was  more  or  less
conversation,  at  Nos.  8,  9,  and  10,  Slade  informing  Elson  that  he  had
passed  the  cottages  (a  landmark  between  7  and  8),  that  the  point  8  he  had
just  indicated  was  the  well  (by  the  roadside),  and  so  on.

In  view  of  such  sources  of  error,  I  think  Mr.  Hoskyns'  experiment  much
better  than  mine,  but,  as  I  understand  that  some  of  those  who  took  part  in
it  had  seen  MuUins'  pegs  when  they  were  put  in,  one  cannot  feel  certain
that  the  exi^eriment  was  an  absolutely  conclusive  one.

In  the  afternoon,  I  made  a  further  trial  with  Elson  in  an  orchard  at  North
Perrott,  where  he  had  previously  indicated  two  springs.  Slade  remained  at
a  distance.  Elson  having  found  the  points,  I  blindfolded  him  and,  starting
him  from  a  little  distance  and  directing  him  by  voice,  I  got  him  to  cross  his
marks.  He  thereupon  re-found  the  spots  three  times,  his  marks  at  one  of
them  being  only  a  yard  apart.  It  is  possible  he  may  have  been  able  to
reckon  the  distance  ;  and  I  noticed  also  towards  the  end  of  the  experiment
that  the  bandage  had  slipped  a  little,  and  I  could  see  the  upper  corner  of
his  left  eye,  so  that  he  may  have  been  guided  by  tlie  trees.  Thus  the  result
was  probably  inconclusive.

Elson's  hands  and  arms  are  very  muscular  ;  he  uses  stout  hazel  forks  and
grips  them  very  hard,  and  they  turn  downwards  with  corresponding  strength,
usually  breaking,  sometimes  at  the  fork,  but  generally  on  one  side  ;  he  then
takes  a  fresh  grip  nearer  the  fork,  and  so  on,  till  the  stick  may  be  used  up  to
within  an  inch  or  so  of  the  fork.  When  it  turned  over  the  stream  his  forearm
muscles  were  strongly  contracted.  He  says  it  usually  makes  his  left  thumb
numb,  and  that  he  feels  the  effects  in  his  biceps  the  day  after.  Mr.  Slade
said  Elson  had  found  water  for  many  of  the  neighbours,  and  had  never  had
a  failure.  The  farmer  also  told  me  Elson  had  predicted  water  at  another
point  half  a  mile  to  the  east  at  30  ft.,  and  that  it  was  found  at  27  ft.,  and
rose  to  within  5  or  6  ft.  of  the  surface. — E.  W.

No.  6. Mr.  Denison^s  Exjjeriments.

For  the  next  very  intei'esting  letter  I  am  indebted  to  my
friend,  Mr.  B.  St.  G.  Lefroy,  who  informed  me  that  a  Canadian
scientific  friend  of  his — Mr.  Denisoii,  of  the  Toronto  Meteorological
Observatory — had  been  making  some  experiments  in  blindfolding
an  amateur  dowser.  At  my  request  Mr.  Denison  kindly  sent  the
following  account : —

Denison  Square,  Toronto.

With  regard  to  the  experiments  with  the  "divining  rod,"  I  made  a  full
note  of  them  at  the  time  and  copy  the  following  from  my  note-book  : — June
19th,  1898.  Rode  over  to  Mr.  Harris'  residence  at  Clarksoii,  18  miles  west
of  Toronto.  At  dinner  Mr.  H.  told  the  following  story.  "Last  year  my
well  near  the  house  became  dry,  I  sent  for  a  well-digger  to  increase  depth.


206


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Before  doing  so  he  asked  permission  to  explore  with  a  hazel  wand  to
ascertain  if  another  spring  would  be  found  deeper  before  going  to  expense
of  digging.  He  said  he  had  discovered  a  stream  which  would  flow  into  the
well  from  west  to  east,  a  few  feet  below  present  level.  The  well  was  then
deepened,  and,  when  down  3ft.,  water  did  flow  in  from  the  west,  so  rapidly
it  was  diflicult  to  pump  fast  enough  to  enable  men  to  lay  the  bricks.  Ever
since  there  has  been  a  gi>od  supply  of  fine  water.  It  was  at  this  time  I  found
the  hazel  wand  would  turn  in  my  hands  also.  The  stick  was  Y-shaped,  and
held  firmly  by  both  hands  with  thumbs  turned  outwards."

After  dinner  I  got  Mr.  Harris  to  cut  a  forked  plum  stick  about  20  in.
long — he  had  used  a  hazel  before  and  felt  sure  plum  would  not  work  ;  how-
ever he  grasped  the  plum  switch  firmly,  as  explained,  holding  it  vertically
before  him.  As  he  approached  the  well,  the  stick  began  to  turn  down  in  jerks
until  when  over  the  stream  to  west  of  the  well  the  rod  turned  so  much  that
the  bark  was  twisted  near  his  hands.  Mr.  Harris  is  a  powerful  man  and
endeavoured  to  hold  the  rod  in  its  original  position.  I  then  got  him  to
explore  other  parts  of  the  lawn  and  at  100  ft.  from  latter  the  rod  again
turned  down.  I  then  hlindfuUhd  him  and  allowed  a  sceptic  in  the  party  to
turn  him  round  about  several  times  and  then  lead  him  in  diff'erent  directions;
but  when  he  came  over  the  first  and  second  s^Jots,  where  the  rod  turned
before,  it  again  twisted  down.  He  was  once  more  turned  about  and  asked
to  walk  as  requested  not  in  contact  with  any  one,  but  the  same  results
occurred. He  then  tried  an  ordinary  willow,  and  also  a  lilac

twig,  with  good O results. When  a  dry  stick  was  used

he  obtained  no  I  I  action.  Finally,  I  bent  fj  a  galvanised
wire  thus  : —  J  \  ^  When  Mr.  Harris  held  W  this  like  the
twig, it not  only  moved  downwards  but  twisted

round  to  such  an  extent  as  to  form  a  loop  thus  : —  which  assumed

its  natural  shape  as  he  moved  away  from  stream.

I  also  got  him  to  follow  a  stream  for  several  hundred  feet.  Mrs.  Harris
tried  without  any  result,  but  when  Mr.  H.  grasped  her  wrists  as  she
approached  the  spring,  the  rod  turned  forcibly.  One  daughter,  aged  15,  had
also  the  power.  When  Mr.  H.  held  the  rod  and  Miss  H.  grasped  his  wrists,
there  would  be  a  momentary  increase  in  the  vigour  of  the  rod  twisting,  and
when  the  daughter  held  the  rod  and  her  father  grasped  her  wrists,  a  similar
action  occurred.

Out  of  the  twelve  persons  who  tried  the  above  experiments,  two  had  the
power  well  developed,  two  slightly,  while  the  remaining  eight  almost  nil.
When  the  weaker  members  used  a  rod  over  4  ft.  long,  their  slight  muscular
action  was  clearly  shown  by  the  far  end  of  rod  turning  down.  When
Mr.  H.  held  the  rod  exactly  perpendicularly,  it  sometimes  turned  inwards
until  it  pressed  heavily  against  his  chest.  At  the  end  of  the  experiments
Mr.  Harris'  hands  were  considerably  blistered.

I  will  try  to  follow  uij  these  experiments.  o  -m-  t\

^  ^  F.  Napier  Denison.

It  is  to  be  hoped  tliat  Mr.  Denison  will  do  so,  as  the  letter  shows
him  to  be  a  very  careful  observer,  and  I  am  greatly  obliged  to  him  for
the  trouble  he  has  taken  in  tiie  matter. It  will  be  observed  that


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


207


Mr.  Denison  distinctly  states  that  in  his  second  expei'iment  the  blind-
folded dowser  was  7iot  in  contact  with  any  one,  and  yet  was  equally
successful.  This  is  therefore  an  important  and  excellent  experiment,
and  more  evidence  of  this  kind  is  much  to  be  desired.

In  these  experiments  with  about  2  in  12  persons,  or  say  16  per
cent.,  the  divining  rod  "worked,"  i.e.,  the  forked  twig  suddenly  revolved
independently  of  volition  of  the  holder.  I  should  say  this  is  not  an  im-
probable percentage,  although  in  1810,  Professor  Sementini  (the  Regius
professor  of  chemistry  in  the  University  of  Naples) — in  an  essay  he
published  entitled,  Pensieri  e  Sperimenti  sulla  Bacclietta  Divinitoria,
asserts  that  with  five  out  of  six  persons  on  the  average  he  found  the
"  rod "  would  move,  that  is  over  80  per  cent.  This  large  percentage
was  doubtless  due  to  the  position  of  unstable  equilibrium  in  which  the
rod  was  held,  though  it  is  possible  this  class  of  automatic  action  may
be  more  common  in  some  countries  than  others.  Another  savant,
Amoretti  (see  p.  246),  who  had  a  wide  experience,  states  that
he  found  about  20  per  cent,  of  those  he  tried  were  susceptible ;
this  fairly  agrees  with  my  own  estimate  above.  If  any  of  my
readers  who  are  interested  in  the  subject  will  try,  and  get  their
friends  to  try,  the  "rod,"  or  autoscope,  as  I  have  suggested  it  should
be  called,  and  let  me  know  with  what  success,  I  should  be  grateful.
The  method  of  holding  the  rod  is  fully  described  in  Appendix  C  to
the  last  Report.

It  will  be  noticed  that  Mr.  Denison  says  a  dry  stick  would  not
woi'k,  but  any  forked  green  twig  would  do  and  also  wire.  This  is  the
experience  of  many  others  who  can  use  the  rod  and  who  usually
attribute  it  to  the  dry  stick  being  a  non-conductor  of  electricity ;  it  is
very  improbable  that  electricity  has  anything  to  do  with  the  matter  ;
the  reason  is  doubtless  that  the  green  twig  is  more  supple  and  elastic,
for  whalebone  is  used  by  some  dowsers  in  preference  to  a  twig.

No.  7. — Dr.  ThouverieV s  Experiments.

The  next  evidence  is  a  remarkable  statement  made  a  century  ago
by  a  distinguished  and  learned  French  physician — Dr.  Thouvenel.

This  statement  refers  to  the  young  French  dowser,  Bleton  ;  the
evidence  relating  to  Bleton's  powers  as  a  water-finder  is  given  in  con-
siderable detail  subsequently,  pp.  257  et  seq.  Here  I  need  only  say  that
Dr.  Thouvenel,  having  heard  of  Bleton's  alleged  powers,  determined
to  test  them  thoroughly  from  a  scientific  standpoint.  He  did  so,
and  published  the  results  in  a  work  called  Memoire  physique  et
medicinal,  montrant  des  rapports  entre  les  jjhe'nomenes  de  la  baguette
divinatoire,  du  Magnetisme  et  de  V Electricite.  Paris,  1781.  A  second
memoir  was  published  later,  and  though  his  theory  of  the  divining


208


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


rod  was,  I  believe,  mistaken,  that  does  not  sMect  the  evidence  I  will
now  cite.  On  pp.  77-80  of  his  first  m^rnoire  Thouvenel  gives  a
summary  of  the  tests  he  made  with  Bleton  in  Lorraine:  The  follow-
ing is  a  translation  of  the  passage  : —

I  took  the  precaution  to  repeat  several  times  all  the  experiments  just
described  in  detail,  after  having  carefully  blindfolded  Bleton  ;  in  addition
his  arms  were  sometimes  fastened  behind  his  back  leaving  his  forearms  only
just  sufficiently  free  to  hold  the  baguette  at  the  extremity  of  his  fingers,
sometimes  even  confining  these  in  order  to  hinder,  if  possible,  all  mechanical
movement.  These  precautions  were  not  taken  for  my  own  satisfaction,  as  I
was  already  entirely  convinced.

T  conducted  Bleton  to  places  which  he  had  never  seen  ;  I  took  him
towards  springs  of  which  I  knew,  but  which  he  could  not  know  of,  at  other
times  over  ground  where  neither  of  us  knew  what  might  be  found.
Whenever  he  experienced  his  peculiar  sensations — and  the  baguette  had
repeatedly  turned  at  the  same  spot,  — I  then  led  him  far  away,  bringing  him
back  by  quite  different  roads,  still  with  his  eyes  bandaged.  .  .  .  When
he  had  followed  the  course  of  an  underground  spring —sometimes  for  more
than  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  across  mountains,  rock,  or  forests,  and  indicated
on  the  way  numerous  sub-divisions  of  the  same  spring — I  made  him  return.
He  then  re-conducted  me  himself,  though  still  blindfolded,  only  supported  by
one  arm,  to  the  point  from  which  we  set  out,  without  straying  a  single  step
from  the  line  previously  traced  and  marked  byjDCgs,  which  were  often  hidden
beneath  the  surface.  He  re-found  all  the  subterranean  rivulets  already
pointed  out,  and  followed  exactly  the  sinuosities  of  the  underground  stream.
It  frequently  happened  that  we  came  across  springs  whose  course  was
interrupted  by  walls,  terraces,  or  wide  ditches,  so  that  in  order  to  enable
Bleton  to  overcome  these  obstacles,  I  had  to  procure  ladders,  or  take  long
detours,  or  in  some  way  get  him  conveyed  across  ;  nevertheless,  although
blindfolded,  he  soon  regained  the  course  without  the  aid  of  his  eyes.
Sometimes  in  order  to  try  and  deceive  him,  if  his  senses  were  concerned,
I  placed  false  marks  as  if  to  indicate  a  spring  ;  sometimes  after  he  had
followed  a  spring  across  several  fields,  I  moved  the  pegs  some  feet  away
without  his  knowledge.  Nevertheless,  he  was  never  led  astray  and  always
rectified  such  errors.  In  fine  I  tried  all  sorts  of  ways  to  deceive  him,  and  I
can  testify  that  in  more  than  six  hundred  trials,  I  did  not  succeed  in  doing
so  one  single  time.

M.  Jadelot,  the  Professor  of  Medicine  in  Nancy,  Thouvenel  states,
was  a  witness  of,  and  co-operated  in,  all  his  experiments,  which
extended  over  a  space  of  two  months,  and  was  no  less  struck  than
he  was  with  the  strength  and  importance  of  the  evidence  obtained.

In  addition  to  the  foregoing  we  have  successful  blindfolding  tests
made  with  Bleton  by  a  small  committee  of  savants  quoted  in  No.  15  of
Part  X.,  p.  269.  What  are  we  to  say  to  the  above  evidence  1  It
is  true  that  Dr.  Thouvenel  mentions  that  he  "led  "  Bleton  when  bind-
folded,  and  therefore  involuntary  muscular  suggestion  may  possibly
account  for  most  of  the  success  of  Bleton,  but  the  results  appear  too


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  209


remarkable  and  too  uniformly  successful  to  be  wholly  explained  in  this
way  ;  nor  is  it  clear  that  Bleton  was  always  touched  by  Dr.  Thouvenel,
who,  it  must  be  remembered,  was  a  man  of  scientific  training  and  habit
of  mind.  Moreover,  if  the  blindfolded  dowser  succeeds,  as  in  Nos.  4,
5,  and  6,  when  involuntary  muscular  action  appears  an  inadequate
cause,  another  explanation  must  be  sought,  and  this  explanation  may,
if  established,  be  the  true  cause  of  success  in  some  of  the  other  cases
where  muscular  guidance  is  possible.

No  dowser  of  whom  we  have  any  knowledge  in  the  present
century  seems  to  have  rivalled  Bleton,  though  it  is  much  to  be
regretted  no  scientific  man  ever  took  the  trouble  carefully  to  test
the  remarkable,  powers  of  the  late  Mr.  W.  Lawrence,  of  Bristol,  and
Mr.  J.  Mullins,  of  Chippenham — names  that  will  be  familiar  to
readers  of  my  previous  Report.  It  will  be  noticed  that  Bleton,  like
Stone  and  other  dowsers,  mentions  the  peculiar  sensations  he  experi-
enced when  over  underground  water  ;  this  may  be  a  delusion,  but
the  coincidence  is  remarkable,  as  it  is  wholly  improbable  the  English
dowser  ever  heard  of  Bleton,  or  had  obtained  the  idea  from  him.

As  already  remarked,  I  do  not  know  of  any  blind  dowsers  ;  if  such
exist,  it  would  be  most  interesting  to  ascertain  what  degree  of  success
they  achieve.  Of  course,  if  there  be  any  supernormal  power  possessed
by  a  dowser,  it  is  improbable  that  blindness  would  be  prejudicial  to
its  existence.

I  will  here  add  two  or  three  cases  which,  though  startling  at  first
sight,  may  be  capable  of  explanation  by  muscular  guidance,  and  there-
fore I  will  not  weary  the  reader  with  multiplying  other  instances  of
this  kind  that  have  reached  me.

No.  8. Judge  Spmks'  Experiments.

A  striking  case  of  the  success  of  an  amateur  dowser  when
blindfolded  is  narrated  by  a  jadge  in  British  Columbia;  this  was  also
given  in  the  previous  Heport,  p.  27.  His  Honour  Judge  Spinks  writes
to  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  as  follows  :—

Vernon,  Okanagan,  B.C.,  Fehrucmj  27th,  1893.

The  rod  works  in  my  hands.  I  was  rather  sceptical,  and  thought  that
my  own  mind  might  work  in  some  unknown  manner  on  the  rod  and  cause  it
to  turn  down  where  I  fancied  there  ought  to  be  water.  .1  was  hlindfolded
and  led  about  with  the  wand,  for  about  an  hour  at  least,  until  I  could  not
hold  the  wand  upright  without  great  pain.  Each  time  the  wand  dipped,  a
peg  was  driven  into  the  ground  to  mark  the  spot.  I  was  walked  in  all
directions,  and  passed  over  the  same  ground  again  and  again,  but  in  no
instance  did  the  rod  fail  to  dip  when  it  came  to  a  peg.  I  have  sunk  two
wells  on  the  credit  of  the  wand,  and  in  both  instances  have  found  water,  in
both  these  instances  contrary  to  the  advice  of  the  well-sinking  experts.  The
power  appears  to  increase  rapidly  with  use. When  experimenting  with  the


210


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


rod  over  a  water  hose,  I  had  the  water  turned  on  and  off  several  times,  and
could  distmctly /t'e/  the  jar  that  one  hears  in  such  cases.

Ward  Spinks.

In  a  subsequent  letter  Judge  Spinks  gives  some  additional  evidence.
A  third  well  was  sunk  upon  the  indications  afforded  by  the  rod  and
also  proved  successful ;  between  two  of  the  wells  the  rod  would  not
move ;  there  the  foundations  of  liis  house  were  subsequently  dug  and
proved  dry,  though  "only  a  few  feet  fi-oni  being  immediately  between
wells  2  and  -3."  I  wrote  recently  to  Judge  Spinks  to  inquire  whether
the  pegs  were  put  in  before  he  was  blindfolded  and  if  some  one  led  him
all  the  time  he  was  unable  to  see.  To  this  I  received  the  following
reply  : —

Rossland  Club,  Rossland,  B.C.,  Jawiarij  12th,  1900.

It  is  some  years  since  Mr.  Streatfield  and  I  experimented  with  the

"  wand,"  and  my  memory  may  be  at  fault. As  well  as  I  can  remember,  the

facts  were  as  follows: — I  found  several  places  where  the  "wand"  dipped

and  marked  them  by  driving  pegs  into  the  ground. Afterwards  Mr.

Sti'eatfield  led  me  blindfolded  over  the  ground  and  the  "wand"  moved

over  every  peg,  I  believe  ;  I  then  led  him  and  the  "  wand"  dijjped  in  his

hands  as  it  did  in  mine  ;  he  was  blindfolded  also.  We  led  each  other  by  the

arm,  so  there  ims  contact. Of  late  years  I  have  been  travelling  too  much

to  make  experiments,  but  I  tried  the  "wand"  last  Fall,  and  was  surjiised

to  find  that  it  did  not  work  witli  me  as  it  use  to.  -itt

WARD  Spinks.

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  in  this  case  the  amateur  dowser  was
touched,  or  led,  by  a  friend  who  could  see,  and  hence  the  evidential
value  of  the  case  is  destroyed,  as  unconscious  muscular  guidance  might
account  for  the  success  achieved  when  blindfolded.


No.  9. Mr.  WitlineWs  Experiments.

The  next  case  relates  to  the  blindfolding  of  Mr.  W.  Stone,  evidence
of  whose  success  as  a  dowser  was  given  in  the  last  Report  and  also  in
the  preceding  pages.  The  following  Report  is  abridged  from  Mortons
Lincolnshire  Almanac  for  1899  : —

Some  two  years  ago  the  late  Mr.  J.  B.  Dunham,  the  firm  of  Messrs.
Dunham  and  Sons,  Horncastle,  commissioned  Mr.  Stone  to  find  a  sujDply  of
water  at  his  farm.  High  Toynton,  near  Horncastle,  where  it  was  needed
badly.  On  reaching  the  farm  Mr.  J.  B.  Dunham  declared  his  intention  of
putting  the  dowser  to  a  severe  test.  With  a  V-shaped  hazel  twig  cut  from
a  hedge  close  by,  the  diviner  went  over  the  ground  in  question,  a  field
located  on  an  incline  some  200  yds.  from  the  main  road,  and  soon  indicated
a  spot  where  he  averred  a  plentiful  supply  of  pure  water  would  be  found  at
a  depth  of  about  25  ft.  As  he  passed  and  repassed  over  this  particular  spot,
the  dowsing  twig,  held  in  the  manner  before  described,  turned  and  bent
comp)letely  over  towards  him.  The  two  si^ectators,  watching  every  move-
ment, candidly  informed  the  diviner  that  they  believed  the  turning  of  the


XXXVIII.]  Oil  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  211


twig  was  due  to  some  sharp  movement  on  the  part  of  the  holder,  and  Mr.
Stone  readily  acceded  to  the  request  that  each  in  turn  should  be  allowed  to
IkM  the  mystic  twig,  as  he  himself  held  it,  over  the  same  place.  But  do  as
they  would,  the  twig  never  moved  in  the  slightest  with  either.  Mr.  Stone
then  suffered  himself  to  be  completely  blindfolded  and  led  away  from  the
spot  which  he  had  indicated  as  the  place  where  water  would  be  found.  His
two  guides,  holding  his  arms  (in  the  hands  of  which  the  twig  was  loosely
held),  led  him  about  in  a  circle  and  then  in  a  zig-zag  fashion,  managing  by
devious  ways  to  lead  him  over  the  located  spot,  previously  marked  by  a
stake,  and  each  time  as  the  diviner  crossed  it  the  twig  curled  as  before.  At
the  same  time  those  on  each  side  of  him  distinctly  felt  a  twitching  in  the
diviner's  arms,  such  as  might  be  caused  bj^  an  electric  shock.  When  the
coverings  from  his  eyes  were  removed,  Mr.  Stone  remarked  that  he  knew
from  the  sensations  he  experienced  that  he  had  crossed  the  place  he  had
l)ointed  out  two  or  three  times.  <3ur  previous  doubts  were  removed  ;  and
more  particularly  was  tliis  the  case  when  a  short  time  afterwards  a  well  was
sunk  on  the  site,  and  a  most  excellent  spring  of  pure  water  found  at  a  depth
of  24  ft.  In  September  last  the  writer  journeyed  to  the  same  locale  and
fiHind  that  the  supply  of  water  was  as  good  and  as  strong  as  ever,  being-
even  more  tlian  was  required  on  the  farm.

Having  ascertained  that  tlie  writer  of  the  above  report  was  a
journalist  named  Llr.  F.  Withnell,  who  took  an  active  part  in  the
experiment,  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Withnell  to  inquire  whether  he  had  blind-
folded Mr.  Stone  effectively,  and  received  the  following  reply  : —

Neivs  Office,  Horncastle,  Lincolnshire,  September  15th,  1899.
The  Divining  Rod  was  a  tiling  unknown  to  me  before  I  came  into
Lincolnshire.  Therefore,  as  a  journalist  (of  fifteen  years'  standing,  and  a
member  and  officer  of  the  branch  of  the  Institute  of  Journalists  for  ten
years),  combined  with  a  scepticism  born  of  a  rough  life  and  much  travel
abroad,  I  determined  to  investigate  the  matter  for  myself.  I  will  vouch  for
the  particulars  contained  in  the  report,  and  if  necessary  can  give  you  the
names  and  addresses  of  other  persons  (men  of  standing  and  experience)  who
have  put  Mr.  Stone,  in  his  water  finding,  through  a  similar  ordeal,  and
assure  me  they  are,  as  the  result,  fully  convinced  of  Mr.  Stone's  power  of
finding  water,  and  even  gauging  the  depth  at  which  it  is  to  be  found  in
apparently  tlie  driest  of  places.

I  blindfolded  Mr.  Stone  personally  ;  closely  folding  a  silk  handkerchief
and  tying  it  tightly  over  his  eyes,  afterwards  pulling  a  close  texture  bag,
made  of  canvas,  over  his  head  and  twisting  the  mouth  of  it  round  his  neck.
There  was  no  mistake,  therefore,  that  the  blindfolding  was  thorough,  and
that  he  was  totally  unable  to  see  downwards.  Mr.  Stone  assured  me,  and
those  who  were  with  me,  that  he  had  never  before  been  over  the  ground,
and  that  it  was  purely  on  account  of  the  hazel  twig  turning  over  in  his  hands
that  he  was  able  to  say  that  water  would  be  found  at  that  spot.  I  was
thoroughly  satisfied  with  the  experiment  and  said  so,  and  my  companions
also  expressed  themselves  in  similar  terms.

I  have  been  with  Mr.  Stone  on  other  water-finding  excursions  since
then,  and  I  have  never  known  him  fail  in  his  findings  or  be  wrong  in  his

R  2


212


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


calculations  as  to  the  depth,  which  he  approximately  estimated  in  each  case.
He  informs  me  that  he  has  had  failures,  but  these  are  of  rare  occurrence
and  separated  by  long  intervals.  May  T  add  that  I  have  only  been  brought
into  contact  with  Mr.  Stone  professionally.  He  resides  at  Old  Bolingbroke,
which  is  nine  miles  distant  from  Horncastle,  where  I  live.

Fred.  C.  Withnell.

As  Mr.  Withnell  knew  the  spot  fixed  on  by  Mr.  Stone,  and  it
was  "  marked  by  a  stake,"  it  is  quite  possible  to  explain  Mr.  Stone's
success  in  this  blindfolding  experiment  by  some  involuntary  muscular
action  on  the  part  of  "  his  two  guides  holding  his  arms  ;  "  albeit  both
Mr.  Withnell  and  Mr.  Stone  have  written  to  me  subsequently,  stating
that  no  guidance  was  possible,  as  touching  was  excluded.  This  may
have  been  another  trial  at  the  same  place.  Here  is  Mr.  Withnell's
letter  : —

27,  Bridge  Street,  Horncastle,  Lincolnshire,  June  8th,  1900.
As  regards  my  account  of  the  blindfolding  of  Mr.  Stone,  I  certainly  wish
it  to  be  understood  that  Mr.  Stone  proceeded  alone  and  untouched  after
being  blindfolded  when  searching  for  water  on  Mr.  Dunham's  farm  at  High
Tointon  ;  the  onlj'  place  where  I  jDersonally  have  submitted  him  to  a  test.
After  Mr.  Stone  was  blindfolded,  I  and  the  late  Mr.  Beavis  Dunham  simply
led  him  away  from  some  paraphernalia  that  was  on  the  ground  and  against
which  he  might  have  stumbled,  and  then,  releasing  our  hold,  we  allowed  him
to  take  whatever  course  he  chose  to  take,  assuring  him,  on  his  own  request,
that  we  would  carefully  watch  him  and  give  him  a  warning  shout  if  in  his
peregrinations  he  appeared  likely  to  blunder  against  the  hedge.  As  he
walked  about  free  from  obstruction,  we  neither  touched  him  nor  called  out  to
him.  I  have  only  this  week  verified  this  by  conversation  with  two  others  who
were  on  the  ground  at  the  time,  viz. :  Mr.  Dunham's  foreman  and  another.

Fred.  C.  Withnell.

No.  10. Mr.  Emerson's  Experiments.

So  far  I  have  quoted  the  dowser's  success  when  blindfolded,  but  there
are  cases  of  failure.  I  have  mentioned  one,  when  I  tested  Rodv/ell  at
Wimbledon  in  1890.  Professor  Ray  Lankester's  test  of  the  same  lad
is  a  well-known  instance  of  failure,  and  the  following  case  of  failure  is
so  little  known  that  I  refer  to  it  at  some  length,  as  it  appeared  in  the
leading  scientific  organ  in  America,  the  American  Journal  of  Science,
now  called  Silliman's  Journal,  and  doubtless  had  much  influence  on
scientific  opinion  in  America.  The  investigator  is  the  Rev.  Ralph
Emerson,  who  five  years  previously  had  published  a  paper  in  the  same
journal  on  some  successful  experiments  with  the  divining  rod.  Mr.
Emerson's  paper  is  so  very  long  that  I  am  compelled  to  summarise
what  he  says  with  regard  to  the  blindfolding  experiment.

In  1821  he  found  at  a  farm  in  Ohio  that  a  successful  well  had  been  sunk
at  a  spot  indicated  by  a  "diviner,"  where  no  sign  of  water  previously  existed.


xxxviri.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


213


One  of  the  farmer's  sons,  a  lad  of  12,  discovered  the  rod  "worked"  in  his
hands,  and  it  was  this  young  lad  Mr.  Emerson  tested.  In  the  first  instance
the  young  dovvser,  with  his  eyes  open,  professed  to  trace  the  course  of  an
underground  vein  of  water,  the  position  being  marked  by  Mr.  Emerson  ;
the  boy  was  then  blindfolded,  led  a  short  distance  away  from  the  spot  and
told  again  to  trace  the  course  of  the  water.  He  did  so  and  the  rod  moving,
he  declared  he  was  over  the  spot ;  this  turned  out  to  be  perfectly  correct.
But  on  a  second  and  a  third  attempt  he  failed,  and  afterwards  "incessantly,"
so  that,  Mr.  Emerson  adds,  "there  could  be  no  mistake,  the  illusion  of  all
attraction  underground  vanished  at  once.  The  motion  of  the  rod  remained,
but  it  must  be  accounted  for  some  other  way."  Mr.  Emerson  then  shows
how  the  motion  of  the  rod  may  be  caused  by  a  very  slight  muscular  action  on
the  part  of  the  dowser  ; — this  part  of  his  paper  is  worth  notice  and  is  given
subsequently  (p.  287).  He  explains  the  success  of  the  blindfolded  lad  on  the
first  occasion  by  his  probably  keeping  count  of  the  steps  he  took,  but  that
his  incessant  failures  afterwards  were  due  to  his  losing  count,  and  hence  Mr.
Emerson  concludes  that  the  boy  was  a  "  young  fox  "  and  "  the  pretensions
of  the  diviner  are  worthless."

A  singularly  illogical  and  unscientific  conclusion,  but  one  very
characteristic  of  the  numerous  "  exposures  "  with  which  the  history
of  this  subject  abounds.  The  surprising  thing  is  that  a  precisely
opposite  conclusion  was  not  arrived  at,  viz.,  that  the  lad  was  not  right
every  time,  and  that  Mr.  Emerson  did  not  as  triumphantly  assert
that  he  had  conclusively  established  the  truth  of  a  mysterious
influence  exerted  by  the  "veins  of  water"  on  the  boy,  and  so  "set
the  question  for  ever  at  rest "  on  behalf  of  the  dowser.  For,  on
reading  the  account  carefully,  it  seems  that  Mr.  Emerson  in  every
case  was  holding  the  hlindfokled  hoy:  "I  took  hjni  lightly  by  the
elbow";  "I  guided  him  back";  "I  led  the  lad  to  the  next  spot
and  he  missed  it  again " ;  "I  led  him  to  and  fro,  but  he  failed
incessantly,"  etc.  Now,  if  the  boy  had  been  a  "young  fox,"  he  might
with  perfect  ease  have  been  right  every  time,  simply  by  allowing
himself  to  be  guided  by  the  muscular  indications  which  Mr.  Emerson
might  have  given  involuntarily  whenever  he  crossed  the  right  track,
just  as  successful  finds  are  made  in  the  "  willing  game."  The  whole
series  of  experiments  made  by  Mr.  Emerson  are  absolutely  valueless,
and  hence  his  conclusion  is  equally  so.  There  is,  further,  no  evidence
to  show  that  this  young  boy  was  a  "dowser"  at  all;  not  only,
therefore,  was  the  experimenter  unskilled,  but  the  instrument  he
employed  was  probably  defective,  and  a  confusion  of  thought  existed
in  the  experimenter  as  to  the  object  sought  for  (see  p.  141).


The  American  Journal  of  Science  and  Arts  (Silliman's),  Series  1,  Vol.  XI.
1820,  p.  201


214


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


PART  VI.

Details  of  a  Few  Further  Cases  of  Amateur  Dowsers.

Those  who  may  have  read  the  pi'evious  lleport  will  remember  the
numerous  cases  of  amateur  dowsers  that  are  there  cited,  particulars
being  given  of  upwards  of  twenty-five  individuals  of  both  sexes,  and  in
all  ranks  of  life,  who  had  discovered  by  accident  that  the  forked  twig
twisted  I'ound  in  their  hands,  and  had  used  its  indications  with  some
success  in  the  discovery  of  underground  water.  It  may  be  of  interest
if  I  now  give  somewhat  fuller  details  of  a  few  of  the  additional  cases
of  amateur  dowsers  that  have  reached  me.

No.  1. Sir  R.  Harington,  Bart.

Among  notable  persons  who  have  found  that  they  could  successfully
use  the  divining  rod,  and  who  have  made  use  of  its  indications  with
advantage,  may  be  mentioned  his  Honour,  Sir  Richard  Harington,
Bart.,  Chairman  of  Quarter  Sessions  for  Herefordshire.  In  the  County
Council  Times,  for  July  17th,  1897,  Sir  R.  Harington  published  the
following  interesting  letter  of  his  experience  with  the  rod  :  —

Whitbourne  Court,  Worcester,  July  llf/i,  1897.

I  discovered,  quite  by  accident,  and  at  the  age  of  fiftj'-seven,  that  I
possessed  this  power  [of  using  the  divining  rod].  I  was  building  a  new  lodge
to  this  place,  and,  desiring  to  find  a  water  supply,  I  sent  (more  from  curiosity
than  from  any  belief  in  its  efficacy)  for  the  gardener  of  a  neighbour,  who
was  said  to  be  able  to  use  the  divining  rod.  He  came.  I  watched  his
proceedings,  and  then  requested  him  to  allow  me  to  try  the  rod  myself.  I
did  so,  and,  to  my  great  surprise,  found  that  with  me  it  assumed  the  vertical
position  in  the  same  places  in  which  it  had  done  so  with  him.  He  discovered
water,  but  the  place  which  he  assigned  to  it  turning  out  inconvenient,  I
proceeded  to  investigate  on  my  own  account.  I  had  in  the  meantime  been
told  the  method  employed  to  estimate  the  depth  of  the  water  beneath  the
surface.  I  found  indications  of  water  at  a  depth  which  I  estimated  at  about
17  ft.  to  20ft.  I  caused  a  well  to  be  sunk,  and  a  small  supjDly  was  found  at
about  18  ft.  This,  however,  was  at  the  beginning  of  a  long  drought,  and
late  in  the  summer  the  supply  failed.  I  tried  again  at  the  same  place,  when
my  rod  told  me  there  was  water  about  10  ft.  deeper.  I  had  the  well
deej^ened,  and  found  more,  fortunately  just  within  the  28  ft.  limit,  and  there
has  since  (this  was  five  years  ago)  been  a  sufficient  and  unfailing  supply  for
the  use  of  the  lodge.

The  most  joractical  use  I  have  since  turned  my  power  to  is  the  discovery
of  leaks  in  a  large  artificial  piece  of  water  round  my  house.  This  for  some
distance  runs  parallel  to  the  course  of  a  brook  at  a  much  lower  level,  a  road


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  215


passing  along  the  top  of  the  embankment,  the  slope  of  which  is  covered  with
wood  and  undergrowth.  Occasionally  a  rat  or  rabbit  makes  a  hole,  which
draws  off  the  water,  and  is  difficult  to  find  by  ordinary  search.  I  always
find  it  easily  with  the  divining  rod.

I  have  never  been  at  the  trouble  to  ascertain  how  many  kinds  of  wood
are  serviceable,  but  the  peach  and  Spanish  chestnut  will  serve  with  me  as
well  as  hazel.

As  may  be  supposed,  I  am  not  constantly  searching  for  convenient  places
to  dig  wells  ;  but  I  occasionally  use  the  rod  for  the  purpose  of  showing
friends  how  it  acts,  and  they  generally  try  it  themselves.  I  very  rarely  find
any  one  v/ho  possesses  the  power  which  I  do  alone,  but  almost  invariably
when  the  person  who  cannot  use  it  alone  holds  one  end  of  the  fork  and  I
the  other,  it  works  ;  in  some  cases  more  strongly  than  with  myself  alone.
But  I  do  not  find  that  I  have  the  yjower  claimed  by  Mr.  Gataker  of
estimating  the  volume  of  the  water.  The  effect  on  me  is  the  same,  whether
it  is  a  mere  trickle  or  a  copious  current.

That  tlie  power  exists,  and  that  it  depends  on  some  natural  cause
connected  with  the  physical  idiosyncracy  of  the  individual  possessing  it,  the
operation  of  which  is  not  yet  understood,  I  cannot,  after  the  evidence  of  my
own  senses,  doubt.  To  stigmatise  the  action  of  those  who  do  possess  it  as
charlatanry  appears  to  mo  a  specimen  of  that  arrogant  ignorance  which
despises  what  it  cannot  understand.

I  may  add  that  the  extent  of  the  power  seems  to  vary  in  individuals.
For  example,  I  cannot  calculate  the  volume  ;  my  original  instructor  could
not  calculate  either  depth  or  volume,  and,  although  the  rod  usually  acts
when  lield  by  another  person  and  myself  as  above  described,  one  of  my
daughters  appears  to  have  a  kind  of  neutralising  power,  and  when  she  holds
one  end  of  the  fork  and  I  the  other,  it  will  not  act  at  all.

If  the  Local  Government  Board  official,  who,  I  understand,  threatens
Mr.  Gataker  and  his  fellows  with  prosecutions  under  the  Vagrant  Act,  will
do  me  the  honour  of  calling  here  at  any  time  when  I  am  at  home,  I  shall  be
happy  to  try  the  experiment  with  him,  and  let  him  try  for  himself — first,
whether  he  possesses  the  power  alone,  and,  secondly,  if  not,  whether  the
rod  acts  with  him  jointly  with  me.  His  scejjticism  will  not  affect  its  action.
The  power  is  obviously  purely  physical.

Richard  Haeington,
Chairman  of  Quarter  Sessions  for  Herefordshire.

In  reply  to  my  inquiries  Sir  Kichard  Harington  was  good  enough
to  write  me  at  length  confirming  the  facts  mentioned  in  his  published
letter,  and  he  also  states  that,  on  the  other  hand,  the  rod  seemed  to
give  him  a  wrong  indication  on  one  occasion.

In  a  chalk  soil  in  Essex  two  or  three  years  ago  it  indicated  water  on  a
friend's  property  near  the  surface.  My  friend  dug  down  to  the  depth
guessed,  but  found  none,  and  T  dissuaded  them  from  incurring  further
expenses,  lest  I  should  be  mistaken.

The  principal  practical  use  to  which  I  have  put  the  power  is  to  fix
the  locality  of  leaks  in  the  bank  of  an  artificial  piece  of  water,  and  in


216


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


determining  the  course  of  underground  drains  and  leaks  therefrom.  For
these  purposes  I  have  found  the  power  practically  useful.

Sir  Richard  Harington  in  reply  to  my  question  as  to  whether  he
could  give  me  any  further  particulai's  of  the  use  of  his  power,  or  the
dates,  etc.,  at  which  he  found  the  leaks  in  the  bank,  writes  as  follows  ;
after  giving  some  details  which  are  contained  in  his  published  letter,
he  adds : —

Whitbourne  Court,  Worcester,  October  22th,  1899.

It  has  occasionally  happened  that  leakage  into  the  brook  has  taken  place
through  rat  holes  and  the  like,  the  locality  of  which  my  servants  have  been
unable  to  discover.  When  this  has  been  the  case,  I  have  used  the  divining
rod,  which  has  always  told  me  correctly  where  the  leak  was.  I  cannot  give
dates,  but  the  event  has  occurred  on  two  or  three  occasions  during  the  last
ten  years.

The  piece  of  water  in  question  is  supplied  at  one  end  from  tlie  above-
mentioned  brook  by  means  of  a  culvert  of  some  length .

It  appearing  that  there  was  waste  of  water  in  this  culvert,  I  tried  the
divining  rod,  walking  parallel  to  it.  It  told  me,  as  the  fact  turned  out  to
be,  that  the  leaks  were  numerous,  so  many,  indeed,  that  it  was  useless  to
repair  the  culvert,  inside  which  I  had  to  lay  glazed  pipes.  This  took  place
in  the  year  1898.  Richard  Haringtox,  Bart.

The  use  of  the  "  rod  "  to  find  a  hidden  leak  in  a  culvert  or  reservoir
has  been  successfully  tried  by  otliers ;  see,  e.g.,  p.  41  of  my  previous
Report,  where  the  amateur  dowsers,  Messrs.  Young  and  Robertson,  inde-
pendently fixed  on  the  same  spot.  Mr.  Westlake,  F.G.S.,  has  recently
informed  me  of  another  case,  where  the  dowser,  R.  Pavey,  of  Cheddar,
did  the  same  thing  at  the  moat  round  the  Bishop's  Palace  at  Wells.
An  engineer  was  first  employed,  and  had  spent  £'20  in  trying  to  find
the  leak,  but  failed.  Pavey,  though  a  stranger,  found  the  leak  at  once,
and  it  was  then  stopped  at  a  cost  of  a  few  shillings.  Mr.  Westlake
visited  the  place  and  ascertained  the  facts  ;  he  states  the  engineer  was
much  impressed  by  Pavey's  success,  as  he,  after  careful  and  costly
examination  of  the  place,  had  failed.  Experiments  of  this  kind  are
worth  careful  repetition  under  strict  scientific  supervision.

No.  2. Mr.  E.  Eippisley.

One  of  the  most  successful  amateur  dowsers  of  whom  I  have
heard  was  the  late  Mr.  Edwin  Hippisley,  a  leading  man  in  Wells,
Somerset.  Mr.  Hippisley  was  a  member  of  the  Institute  of  Surveyors,
and  his  firm,  Hippisley  and  Sons,  are  the  principal  surveyors  and
land  agents  in  Wells.  At  a  meeting  of  the  Wells  Archreological
Society,  held  at  the  Bishop's  Palace,  in  Wells,  in  April,  1892,  Mr.
Hippisley  read  a  paper  on  his  experiences  with  the  dowsing  rod.  A


xxxvni.]


On  tJie  So-called  Divining  Rod.


217


verbatim  report  of  that  paper  appeared  in  the  Wells  Journal  for
April  21st,  1892,  together  with  an  interesting  discussion  that  followed,
in  which  the  Bishop  of  Wells,  who  was  in  the  chair,  the  Dean,  and
others  took  part.  Mr.  Hippisley's  paper  is  too  long  to  quote,  but  the
following  are  some  abridged  extracts  from  it.  Though  his  theory  (a
common  one)  is  improbable,  his  facts  are  of  considerable  interest.

In  using  the  rod  T  always  find  the  point  turn  upwards  to  a  nearly  vertical
position  when  approaching  an  underground  spring,  aud  it  reverses  its  action
after  the  spring  is  passed  over  :  upon  turning  round  and  walking  over  the
same  spot  the  same  thing  occurs.  The  only  theory  I  can  form  is  that  those
persons  who  have  the  "gift,"  as  it  is  called,  are  more  susceptible  to  electrical
action,  water  being  a  good  conductor  of  electricity,  and  that  the  rod  is
moved  owing  to  some  sensation  in,  or  electric  influence  on,  the  body  of  the
operator.

Mr.  Hippisley  then  proceeds  to  give  details  of  numerous  instances
of  his  discovery  of  underground  water  by  means  of  the  rod,  which
proved  of  great  practical  value.

For  instance,  at  the  Lodge  to  the  Cemeterj^  at  Portway,  at  the
Sanatorium  near  Axbridge,  at  cottages  near  East  Horrington,  at
Burcot,  at  Wookey  Hole,  and  at  two  or  three  other  estates  in
Somerset.  At  Cotford  Farm,  near  Taunton,  a  well  was  being  sunk
for  the  Western  Somerset  Asylum,  and  after  50  ft.  had  been  sunk,
Mr.  Hippisley,  by  means  of  the  rod,  directed  the  men  to  drive  a
heading  west  of  the  well,  when  a  largely  increased  supply  of  water
was  obtained.  Another  and  remarkable  case  at  Lytes  Gary  I  have
already  given  on  a  previous  page  (see  p.  174.)

No.  3. Mr.  J.  //.  Joiv's.

The  next  case  is  that  of  a  country  gentleman  to  whom  I  have
already  referred,  and  who  is  well-known  to  me,  Mr.  J.  H.  Jones,  of
Mullinabro,  near  Waterford.  In  answer  to  my  request  for  a  brief
account  of  his  experience,  Mr.  Jones  writes  as  follows  :  —

AYaterford,  Jawntry  3rd,  1900.

Some  few  years  ago,  a  friend  and  neighhdur  of  mine,  after  trying  in  vain
to  obtain  an  unj^olluted  water  supply  for  his  house,  decided  on  enlisting  the
services  of  Mr.  Mullins,  the  dowser.  I  was  asked  to  witness  the  experiments
and  was  glad  to  do  so.

Mr.  Mullins,  on  his  arrival  in  Waterford,  per  steamer,  drove  rapidly  to
his  client's  house  and  in  a  few  minutes  indicated  an  underground  water
supply  near  the  house  quite  unconnected,  as  he  alleged,  with  the  flow  to  a
polluted  pump-well  in  the  stable  yard  ;  he  pointed  out  a  favourable  spot  for
sinking,  where  subsequently  a  splendid  supply  uf  pure  water  teas  found  at
about  30  ft.  deep.  On  the  evening  of  Mullius's  visit,  I,  for  ctiriosity,  cut  a
forked  rod  similar  to  the  one  he  used,  and  experimenting  in  a  field  at  home,


21S


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


found,  to  my  surprise,  that  at  one  place  the  rod  turned  vigorously  in  my
hands.  Walking  onwards  in  a  zig-zag  direction  (similar  to  the  way  Mr.
Mullins  proceeded  in  tracing  an  underground  flow  of  water),  I  traced  the  line
of  flow  detected  by  me  until  I  found  its  outcrop  in  a  never-failing  spring  at
some  distance  from  the  place  where  I  first  found  the  rod  to  turn.  The
direction  of  the  flow  to  this  spring  greatly  surprised  me,  for  I  had  hitherto
imagined  that  the  spring  was  fed  from  a  lake,  the  water  from  which,  at  about
half-a-mile  from  the  spring,  disappeared  under  the  face  of  a  limestone  clitf,
emerging  in  a  short  distance.  Here,  I  iuaagine,  there  could  be  no  "sub-
conscious" influence  derived  from  my  knowledge  that  a  spring  existed  some
distance  from  where  I  first  felt  the  influence  of  the  rod,  inasmuch  as  the  line
of  flow  traced  out  by  me  by  its  means  was  in  a  direction  nearly  at  right
angles  to  my  preconceived  notion  of  the  direction  of  the  supposed  feeder  of
the  spring.

The  ensuing  evening  I  tested  myself  where  IMr.  Mullins  had  found  the
line  of  flow  for  my  friend,  and  I  found  I  could  trace  it  exactly  as  he  had
done.  Here  it  might  be  said  I  was  unconsciously  influenced  by  Mr.
Mullins's  action,  but,  as  I  traced  the  flow  for  some  fields  beyond  where  he
stopped  and  where  neither  of  us  had  any  idea  tlie  line  ran,  the  theory  of
the  influence  of  his  findings  on  me  seems  to  break  down.

The  above  experiments  converted  me  (in  spite  of  my  determiiaation  at
first  to  doubt  the  ho)ia  fides  of  the  dowser's  indications)  from  being  a
prejudiced  sceptic  to  being  a  confirmed  believer  in  the  genuineness  of  the
dowser's  claims  to  point  out  underground  flows  of  water.

What  is  the  mystic  influence  emanating  from  water,  and  why  it  should
produce  the  efi'ect  I  have  described  is  a  problem  for  scientists  to  solve.

It  is  marvellous  to  find  a  flow  of  water,  as  I  have  proved,  exercising  a
strong  influence  through  70  to  80  ft.  of  a  dense  quartzite  rock.

The  influence  is  in  my  case  independent  of  contact  with  the  ground.  It
effects  me  though  insulated  by  standing  upon  a  support  resting  on  glass.  I
can  feel  the  influence  of  underground  water  in  a  house  as  readily  in  the
topmost  storey  as  on  the  ground  floor.  I  can  also  feel  it— apparently  as
strongly  as  when  standing  on  the  ground, — when  I  am  riding,  driving,  or
travelling  by  rail,  and  this  not  over  predetermined  places,  but  o\ev  untried
ground.

Mr.  Jones  then  goes  on  to  describe  how  he  endeavoured  to  verify
tlie  accuracy  of  the  indications  given  by  the  rod  by  going  over  ground
that  had  been  previously  traversed  by  other  dowsers  before  he  was
acquainted  with  the  places  they  had  fixed  upon  as  water  bearing ;  the
result,  he  says,  convinced  him  that  some  peculiar  effect  was  produced
upon  him  by  underground  water,  an  effect  that  caused  a  certain
spasmodic  muscular  contraction  in  his  arms  and  hands,  thus  producing
an  involuntary  movement  of  the  I'od.  Mr.  Jones  states  that  on
approaching  the  spring,  the  point  of  the  rod  begins  to  creep  upward
and  is  more  or  less  violently  jerked  into  a  vertical  position  when
directly  over  the  water  ;  the  rod  he  recognises  as  merely  an  index  of
some  peculiar  impression  produced  upon  himself.


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Bod.


219


No.  4. Mr.  J.  D.  Enys,  F.  G.S.

In  the  preceding  Report  (Vol.  XIII.,  p.  7)  it  was  mentioned
that  the  President  of  the  Royal  Geological  Society  of  Cornwall,  Mr.
J.  D.  Enys,  F.G.S.,  was  an  amateur  dowser.  In  a  recent  letter  to  me
Mr.  Envs  says  : — ■

Enys,  Penryn,  Cornwall,  May  6th,  1900.

In  answer  to  your  questions  I  may  say  (1)  that  only  a  slight  feeling  is
produced  in  me  when  the  rod  commences  to  move  over  underground  water,
but  a  distinct  feeling  of  relief  when  I  let  it  go.  (2)  In  a  place  I  indicated
(which  place  was  also  chosen  by  the  dowser  who  showed  me  how  to  use  the
rod)  an  abundant  supply  of  water  was  reached  at  9G  ft.,  which  has  stood  the
test  of  the  late  dry  season.

The  clerk  of  my  Parisli  Council  here  (St.  Gluvias),  ]\Ir.  J.  Lowry,  tried
the  rod,  at  my  request,  over  a  place  where  I  knew  a  spring  existed  ;  suddenly
I  heard  him  cry  out,  with  genuine  surprise,  "  It  is  alive,  sir  ;  it  is  alive."
This  e.mctly  describes  the  sensation  when  the  rod  moves.  I  am  unable,  how-
ever, to  form  any  opinion  of  scientific  value  on  the  action  of  the  rod.

John  D.  Enys.

The  interest  of  this  letter  is  in  the  fact  that  not  only  is  Mr.  Enys
a  gentleman  of  high  standing  in  his  county,  but  he  is  also  an  able
geologist.  I  asked  Mr.  Enys  if  he  would  try  some  blindfolding
experiments,  with  precautions  to  avoid  unconscious  muscular  guidance
and  other  possible  sources  of  error,  but  he  has  not  as  yet  had  time  to
do  so. I  hope  he  will  pursue  the  subject.

No.  5. Jlr.  J.  F.  Young.

In  the  previous  Report,  I  referred  on  page  40,  to  two  amateur
dowsers,  Mr.  J.  F.  Young  and  Mr.  Robertson,  of  Llanelly,  S.  Wales,
who  have  written  a  little  book  on  the  divining  rod.  Mr.  Young  has
had  an  extensive  correspondence  with  me,  and  has  also  in  person
related  to  me  tlie  numerous  experiments  he  has  made  with  the  rod  in
the  attempt  to  arrive  at  some  solution  of  its  perplexing  movements.
I  have  been  much  struck  with  Mr.  Young's  enthusiasm,  intelligence  and
scientific  spirit,  and  it  may  be  interesting  to  put  on  record  the  follow-
ing account  which  Mr.  Young  has  sent  me  of  his  own  experience.
The  account  is  of  greater  interest  from  the  fact  that  Mr.  Young
was  unaware,  until  he  subsequently  read  my  previous  Report,  that
the  divining  rod,  like  planchette,  was  an  aiUoscope,  and  therefore  its
movements  were  profoundly  influenced  by  any  predetermined  idea  or
suggestion.  Mr.  Young's  experience  is  very  sinular  to  that  of  some
early  writers  on  the  rod,  such  as  Zeid^er,  who  in  his  Pantomysterium
gives  an  account  of  the  manifold  objects  which  excite  the  motion  of


220


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


the  rod,  and  hence  suggested  the  title  of  his  book.^  Mr.  Young  writes
to  me  as  follows  : — ■

Llanelly,  South  Wales,  Jnhj  Srd,  1897.
I  will,  with  your  permission,  place  before  you  some  of  my  personal
experiences  witli  the  "  rod,"  trusting  you  will  understand  I  am  only  a
struggling  tradesman,  with  but  little  learning  and  very  little  spare  time,  but
Vv'itli  an  earnest  desire  to  search  for  the  truth,  and  with  that  object  I  have
been  for  years  an  ardent  reader  of  mental  physiology,  and  psychological
books  of  all  kinds.

I  soon  became  convinced  that  the  movement  of  the  rod  was  due  to  an
involuntary  action  on  the  part  of  the  "diviner."  To  prove  this  I  have
watched  carefully  my  own  hands  (and  others')  and  in  every  case  when  the
subject  sought  for  has  been  found,  I  observe  a  difference  in  the  relation  of
one  hand  to  the  other  ;  there  is  in  my  own  case  a  slight  advance  of  the  right
hand.  In  other  cases  with  larger  rods,  I  note  the  arms  at  the  elbows,  which
are  usually  fixed  to  the  side,  give  greater  indications  of  a  closer  grip,  and  the
hands  are  clenched  together  ;  others  watching  have  confirmed  my  views.

What  causes  this  involunarj'  movement  of  the  muscles  I  cannot  say,  but
I  will  give  a  series  of  cases  where  it  is  produced  and  where  I  have  used  the
rod  successfully.

Water-finding  was  the  first  which  engaged  my  attention  ;  finding  the  rod
turn  in  my  hand,  I  tried  every  available  means  of  proving  the  reality  of  a
water-finding  faculty.  At  last  I  was  convinced  of  its  truth  and  its  useful-
ness to  mankind.  Electricity  is  generally  put  forward  to  explain  mysteries
we  know  nothing  of,  and  I  fell  into  this  same  trap.  I  set  to  work,  and  made
many  electrical  appliances  (which  gave  me  great  pleasure,  as  it  revealed  what
I  previously  knew  but  little  of)  to  test  the  matter,  both  in  relation  to  the
soil,  the  atmosphere  and  my  own  personality,  and  at  one  time  I  thought  I
had  it  within  my  grasp,  but  alas,  with  more  knowledge,  events  transpired
which  toppled  my  electrical  theory  over.  I  left  electricity  for  the  study  of
"Odic  Force,"  Animal  Magnetism,  Telepathy,  Clairvoyance,  Automatism,
etc.,  and  latterly  tlie  Spiritualist  hypotliesis,  including  in  its  wide  range  our
"  subliminal  consciousness,"  and  I  look  upon  this  last  as  one  that  meets  the
questions  at  all,  or  nearly  all  points ;  and  here  I  may  add  in  opposition  to
some  arguments  which  have  been  put  forth  by  some,  it  seems  to  me,  taken
on  the  lines  of  this  latter  theory,  it  becomes  a  proper  subject  for  investiga-
tion by  the  S.P.R.,  as  it  is  a  question  of  the  study  of  human  personality
and  not  of  the  rod.

I  take  it  that  the  different  sensations  and  experiences  of  different  water-
finders  is  a  matter  of  idiosyncrasy,  as  in  my  own  person  these  vary  according
to  conditions,  from  a  strong  convulsive  feeling  at  one  time,  another  a  state
of  ecstasy,  at  anotlier  a  peculiar,  unpleasant  feeling  at  the  pit  of  stomach,
and  latterly  a  quick  sliock,  darting,  as  it  were,  through  the  nervous  system

I  I  have  added  this  quaint  book  of  Zeidler's  to  our  S.P.R.  Library.  Its  title  is
Pantoriuistcri^ivi  odcr  das  Ncue  voni  Jahre  in  der  Wundschdruthc,  etc.,  Magdeburg,
1700.  It  has  eleven  plates  and  thirt3'-one  figures  of  diiferent  kinds  of  "  divining  rods,"
made  of  every  kind  of  forked  article,  such  as  tongs,  snuffers,  etc  Later  on,  I  will
make  further  reference  to  this  book,  an  excellent  abstract  of  which  has  been  made
for  me  by  Miss  Stukes.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


221


at  the  moment  of  the  perception.  This  sensation  belongs  especially  to
Class  fx  of  experiments  (see  below).

In  a  number  of  the  experiments  the  rod  seems  indispensable,  but  even
then  merely  as  an  indicator,  its  motion  being  a  notification  to  my  brain  that
the  influence  has  taken  place,  which  otherwise  would  not  have  reached  my
consciousness,  and  for  these  especially  delicate  tests  I  use  the  form  of
instrument  enclosed.  It  is  a  small  aluminium  fork,  light  and  delicate  to  the
touch,  and,  being  nearly  void  of  elasticity,  no  tension  can  be  put  on.  The
instrument  I  hold  lightly  between  finger  and  thumb  of  each  hand,  and  when
it  acts,  it  either  slowly  creeps  up  or  suddenly  twists  at  the  moment  of  the
impression.

The  experiments  for  convenience  of  reference  I  will  classify,  commencing
with  Class  A,  which  includes  all  experiments  with  water,  the  feet  in  every
case  coming  directly  or  indirectly  in  contact  with  the  soil,  the  latter  through
the  medium  of  a  horse,  or  some  form  of  conveyance,  or  amithing  that
touches  term  firma.  The  so-called  insulation  by  bottles  and  otlier  non-
conductors, or  even  rubber  boots,  may  be  traced  in  their  several  effects  to
imagination  on  the  part  of  the  water-finder.

I  have  made  some  very  critical  tests  in  this  direction,  and  have  found  all
so-called  insulation  a  failure.

I  may  here  remark  that  in  all  investigation  in  this  matter  (with  a  good
sensitive)  that  suggestion,  thought  or  spoken,  of  the  agent  plays  a  very
important  part.

Class  B  mcludes  the  finding  of  metals  of  all  kinds,  either  hidden,  buried,
or  lying  on  the  surface.  A  coin  or  two  may  be  (by  another  person)  hidden
with  some  opaque  covering.  The  hands  of  the  sensitive,  with  or  without  the
rod,  being  merely  passed  above  the  table,  its  whereabouts  is  at  once  localised
and  the  finger  goes  down  straight  upon  the  coin.  Telepathy  cannot  explain
this,  as  it  can  be  so  arranged  that  no  one  can  know  where  the  coins  lie.
With  the  case  of  coins  I  must  not  omit  to  include  the  singular  fact  that
where  metal  has  lain,  it  leaves  an  influence  for  many  hours,  which  can  in  tlie
early  hours  be  detected  as  well  as  the  coin.  Or,  on  a  country  road,  say,  but
seldom  used,  I  can  locate  the  track  of  the  wheel  and  the  spots  where  the
horse  has  trod.  A  wonderful  variety  of  experiments  can  be  made  under  this
group.

Class  C.  — The  finding  of  heat  rays  that  have  fallen  on  earth,  stone,  wood,
etc.  ;  of  a  shadow  or  line  of  light,  etc.

Class  D. — The  localising  of  a  given  spot,  say  a  square  inch,  on  which
sound  has  been  projected  closely  ;  this  vibration  soon  passes  away,  and  cannot
be  done  unless  tried  at  once.

Class  E. — Currents  of  electricity  in  a  wire  ;  but  this  is  difficult  to  prove,
as  the  influence  might  be  due  to  the  metal  and  not  electricity,  as  in  the  case
of  water  flowing  through  metal  pipes.

Class  F. — The  finding  of  a  locality  where  friction  has  been  made,  siiy
rubbing  a  floor,  carpet,  etc.,  if  dry.  On  a  dry  walk  it  is  successful  ;  on  a
wet  one,  not  so.

Class  Ci. — Under  this  heading  the  experiments  are  so  numerous  that  my
naming  two  or  three  will  give  you  an  idea  how  easy  it  would  be  to  extend


222


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


them  ;  tlie  plieuoniena  taking  place  here  are  reaUy  the  same  that  underlie
the  whole  of  the  phenomena  connected  with  the  divining  rod  faculty.

Mrs.  Young  (my  wife)  whom  I  shall  hereafter  call  the  agent,  and  myself
the  suhji'rt.

Expf.  1. — Picture  to  yourself  Mrs.  Y.  sitting  at  one  end  of  a  room  ;  a
certain  line  is  indicated  on  which  I  shall  walk  down  the  room  from  her  and
with  my  back  toward  her  ;  she  has  a  watch  before  her,  and  at  a  given  moment,
only  known  to  herself,  wills  me  to  stop  ;  that  moment  the  rod  moves  and  I
stop. Sometimes  when  in  good  form  I  can  do  so  minus  the  rod.

Expt.  2. — Mrs.  Y.  in  same  position  fixes  mentally,  unknown  to  me  (my
back  always  toward  her)  on  a  sprig,  flower  or  i^attern  on  the  carpet  iu  a
given  line.  I  start  on  the  quest ;  as  soon  as  my  foot  "  touches  the  spot,"  the
rod  moves.

E.i:jit.  3. — I  now  walk  along  near  the  wall.  Mrs.  Y.  has  fixed  on  a  spray,
flower,  jjieture,  bracket,  vase  or  some  such  small  object,  say  the  height  of
my  shoulder  or  head.  As  soon  as  I  get  oiDposite  the  signal  comes.  Many  of
these  are  conducted  by  the  agent  in  one  room  and  the  subject  in  anotlier.
You  will  observe  here  also  there  cannot  be  any  bodilj'  contact.

Expt.  4. — Cut,  say,  a  dozen  pieces  of  paj^er  all  alike,  an  inch  square,
mark  one  only,  as  you  like,  say  pencil  initials  or  a  number.  After  stirring
and  mixing  up,  place  all  on  floor  in  different  parts,  not  knowing  the  marked
one.  The  subject  walks  about,  and  ultimately  finds  the  marked  j^aper.  In
this  way  you  cut  out  thought-reading  or  telei^athy.

Expt.  5. — A  hair  from  head  or  beard  is  placed  on  the  floor,  the  subject,
of  course,  being  absent.  Tiie  agent  leaves  the  room,  accomjjanied  with  a
stranger  (wlio  is  not  in  the  secret)  to  see  fair  play  ;  or  the  subject  may  be
blindfolded  or  walks  backward.  As  soon  as  he  reaches  the  spot  his  rod
moves.  I  won't  trouble  you  with  more,  as  you  can  picture  to  your  mind's
eye  scores  of  similar  experiments,  those  above  narrated,  with  others  quite
as  extraordinary,  all  indicating  an  intelligence — call  it  what  you  will — not
under  our  eontrol.  It  is  almost  needless  to  add  that  times  occur  with  me
and  also  with  the  agent  when  this  cannot  be  clone,  and  there  are  times  when
the  power,  whatever  it  may  be,  appears  to  be  overflowing.  It  is,  however,
exhausting,  and,  after  half-a-dozen  experiments,  a  rest  is  required.  I  will
do  my  best  to  carry  out  any  other  experiments  you  may  suggest,  and  hope
what  I  have  recorded  may  be  of  some  use.

The  foregoing  experiments  must  simjsly  be  taken  for  what  they
are  worth  ;  they  are  not  quoted  as  of  evidential  value,  for  we  do  not
know,  e.y.,  how  far  any  involuntary  and  unintentional  signs  from  the
"  agent  "  may  have  reached  the  "  subject"  of  these  experiments.  The
detection  of  points  de  repere  by  hypnotised  subjects,  usually  attributed
to  hyperaisthesia,  resembles  jMi',  Young's  detection  of  the  track  of  a
horse,  etc.,  by  the  use  of  rod,  and  I  am  inclined  to  think  the  explana-
tion in  both  cases  is  similar.  I  have  given  this  letter  at  length,  as  it
demonstrates  the  all-important  part  played  by  any  suggestion  or  idea
in  producing  the  involuntary  muscular  action  that  causes  the  twisting


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divmrng  Bod.


223


of  the  rod.  It  further  shows  how  absurd  is  the  dowser's  notion  that
underground  water  7nust  be  indicated  when  the  forked  twig  twists
round  in  his  hands.

,- - Xo.  6. 3Ir.  R.  G.  D.  Tosswill.

Through  watching  Mr.  Young's  use  of  the  forked  twig  in  Devon-
shire, a  gentleman  at  Budleigh  Salterton,  Mr.  Tosswill,  found  the  twig
also  moved  when  he  held  it.  He  soon  became  an  enthusiastic  amateur
dowser,  and  sent  me  the  following  account  of  his  experience  after
reading  my  previous  Report : —

Budleigh  Salterton,  Devon,  October  13Wi,  1897.

The  first  time  that  1  saw  the  "  hazel  rod  "  u.sed  in  seeking  for  water  was
on  August  11th,  1897.

My  friend  who  used  it  was  searching  for  the  spot  underneath  which  a
small  stream  of  water  was  flowing  through  the  adit  of  an  old  disused  copper
mine.  He  asked  me  to  walk  alongside  him  and  closely  observe  the  move-
ments of  the  rod  as  he  passed  over  the  water.  I  did  so,  and  soon  observed
the  top  of  the  rod  quivei',  and  then  move  slowly  forward  and  outwards  awaj-
from  his  body,  until  the  point  of  the  rod  pointed  downwards  to  the  ground
at  his  feet.

He  then  asked  me  to  try  it,  and  walk  over  the  same  course  that  he  had
taken,  holding  the  rod  in  precisely  the  same  manner.  I  did  so,  holding  the
rod  perj^endicularly,  with  the  end  of  either  branch  laid  on  the  palm  of
each  hand,  with  fingers  and  thumbs  tightly  closed,  and  back  of  the  hands
downwards.

On  advancing,  I  fully  expected  to  find  that  if  the  rod  moved  at  all  in  my
hands,  it  would  do  so  in  precisely  the  same  manner  as  it  did  with  my  friend.
To  my  astonishment,  however,  I  found  that  on  coming  to  the  same  spot,  the
rod  quivered  slightly,  and  then  moved  towards  my  own  body,  hmards,  and
then  downwards,  pointing  to  the  ground.  This  was  exactly  in  the  opposite
direction  to  which  it  had  previously  moved  when  in  my  friend's  hands.

Since  then  I  have  used  the  hazel  rod  or  some  other  "  autoscope  "  nearly
every  day  in  seeking  and  tracing  underground  springs,  water  pipes,  drains,
hidden  coins,  etc.  Hazel,  willow,  beech,  thorn,  elm  and  honeysuckle  twigs,
as  also  copper  and  other  wire  rods  or  forks  that  I  have  used,  holding  them
perpendicularly  either  in  the  closed  hands  or  between  the  thumbs  and
forefingers,  move  always  in  the  same  direction,  i.e.,  inwards  and  towards
my  body,  and  then  downwards  pointing  to  the  ground.

Robert  G.  D.  Tosswill.

No.  7. Mr.  G.  II.  Ward-IIitmphreys.

In  the  Cheltenham  Examiner  for  March  24th,  lb97,  Mr.  G.  H.
Ward-Humphreys  gives  a  lengthy  report  of  his  first  experience  with
the  divining  rod,  which  affords  a  good  illustration  of  the  genesis  of
an  amateur  dowser  and  the  amazement — sliared  by  educated  as  well
as  illiterate  persons — excited  by  the  apparently  automatic  motion  of
the  twig.


224


Professor F.  Barrett.


[part


The  night  before,  Mr.  Gafcaker  had  expressed  the  belief  that  I  was  likely
to  possess  the  power  of  ' '  divination  "  ;  and  he  was  now  very  anxious  for  me  to
try  my  luck  at  once.  He  cut  several  twigs  and  armed  me  with  one,  and
then,  taking  me  down  to  the  side  of  the  lake  where  water  already  found
w-as  pouring  in,  he  suggested  I  should  walk  across  the  covered-in  stream.
This  I  did  three  or  four  times  in  succession,  holding  the  twig,  but  I  was
conscious  of  nothing,  nor  did  I  see  any  movement  of  the  twig.  He  then,
however,  laid  his  hands  upon  the  back  of  mine,  and  he  walking  backwards
in  front  of  me,  we  together  crossed  over  the  flowing  water.  Immediately
the  V-shaped  twig  turned  completely  round  in  my  grip.  Perhaps  it  is
unnecessary  to  say  anything  about  the  astonishment  with  which  I  regarded
this  extraordinary  movement  of  the  inanimate  twig.  But  what  happened
afterwards  was  even  more  remarkable  :  for,  on  going  round  to  unbroken
ground  upon  the  other  side  of  the  lake,  at  one  spot  I  felt  the  twig,  which
1  was  carrying  with  its  point  downward,  so  turn  in  my  hand  that  the  point
was  raised  through  an  angle  of  90deg.  Inquiries  elicited  the  fact  that  this
spot  was  exactly  over  a  stream  which  had  been  found  twelve  months  ago.
But  even  now  I  was  not  convinced  :  though  I  could  not  believe  that  the
others  were  deceiving  me,  I  thought  it  possible  that  I  might  be  deceiving
myself.  So  I  suggested  tbat  I  might  be  hi indf aided,  led  some  distance  from
the  spot  where  I  was  then  standing,  and  then  should  be  guided  in  such  a
direction  that  I  must  cross  the  line  of  the  same  stream.  This  was  done,
and  I  started  my  walk  at  a  distance  which  I  afterwards  found  to  be  about
60  yds.  away.  Walking  then  in  the  direction  I  have  indicated,  I  suddenly
became  aware  that  the  twig  was  commencing  to  move.  This  tendency  became
stronger  at  evei'y  step.  I  cast  to  the  right  and  to  the  left,  and  finally  guided
by  the  stronger  movements  of  the  twig,  walked  some  15  yds.  to  the  left  of
my  original  path  and  then  stopped,  the  twig  having  now  moved  through  an
angle  of  180  deg.  My  comjmnions,  who  had  hitherto  been  silent,  were  greatly
amused  at  the  sceptic  [the  writer] — who  found,  wheir  able  to  see,  that  he  had
stopped  about  3  ft.  away  from  a  peg  which  had  been  put  in  to  mark  the  site
of  one  of  Mr.  Gataker's  si)rings  ! After  this,  scepticism  vanished.

It  will  be  observed  tbat  Mr.  Ward-Humphreys  states  that  when
blindfolded  he  was  "led,"  so  that  the  explanation  of  his  success  in  that
case  may  be  due  to  the  involuntary  guidance  exercised  by  those  who
were  touching  him.  -  -

No.  8. Mr.  G.  F.  Attree.

In  the  Estates  Gazette  for  February  3rd,  1900,  Mr.  G.  F.  Attree,  an
auctioneer  and  estate  agent  of  Brighton,  gives  a  lengthy  account  of  his
experiences  as  an  amateur  dowser.  He  points  out  how  prejudiced  he
was  against  the  whole  subject  until,  after  watching  a  dowser  at  work,
he  discovered  to  his  surprise  that  the  twig  moved  in  his  own  hands,
twisting  round  whenever  he  came  to  the  places  marked  by  the  dowser.
He  goes  on  to  say  : —

The  operator  holds  the  two  ends  of  the  twig  so  that  the  point  of  the  V
is  at  a  right  angle  with  his  body  and  the  tliumb  of  each  liand  is  in  contact


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


225


with  one  end  of  the  twig.  In  this  position  he  walks  over  the  land  where  he
wishes  to  ascertain  what  springs  exist.  On  coining  over  running  water  (no
matter  how  deep  it  may  be  from  the  surface)  the  operator  feels  a  tingling
sensation  in  his  hands  and  arms,  and  the  twig  immediately  twists  over  until
its  point  has  completed  more  than  half  a  circle.

During  the  year  1898  I  spent  much  of  my  little  spare  time  with  the  twig,
frequently  testing  springs  which  I  could  prove  through  existing  wells,  and  by
this  means,  and  by  measuring  the  width  of  the  influence  on  the  surface  of
the  ground,  became  able  to  gauge  accurately  the  depth  and  strength  of  a
number  of  springs.  ...  I  cannot  say  why  so  few  persons  possess  the
power,  nor  what  the  current  is  that  passes  from  running  water  through  the
body  of  the  operator,  causing  the  twig  to  twist.  All  I  have  been  able  to
ascertain  is,  that  it  is  not  an  ordinary  electrical  current,  for  insulation  by
glass  or  indiarubber,  which  will  stop  the  one,  has  no  effect  upon  that  which
is  brought  into  force  in  water-finding.

Mr.  Attree  is  an  enthusiastic  believer  in  the  "  rod,"  and  objects  to
the  term  "  divining-rod  "  and  "  water-diviner,"  as  he  affirms  there  is  no
guessing  or  divining  or  pretending  practised  by  an  honest  water-
finder,  the  motion  of  the  rod  being  due  to  some  cause  beyond  the
control  of  the  operator  :  he  states  that  he  has  successfully  made  use  of
the  indications  of  the  rod  in  finding  "  springs  "  for  the  benefit  of  his
friends  and  neighbours.  Several  of  these  instances  are  given  by  Mr.
Attree,  and  I  have  recently  received  some  interesting  additional
evidence  of  Mr.  Attree's  faculty  as  an  amateur  dowser.

The  interest  of  this  case  is  the  additional  illustration  it  affords  (1)
of  the  involuntary  muscular  action  that  causes  the  motion  of  the
twig  ;  (2)  of  the  accompanying  peculiar  sensation  affirmed  by  so  many
dowsers;  (3)  of  insulation  not  affecting  the  motion;  (4)  of  the  im-
plicit belief  of  the  operator  that  whenever  the  rod  twists  the  presence
of  underground  water  must  be  indicated  ;  and  (5)  of  the  readiness  with
which  incredulity  becomes  credulity  when  something  (such  as  the
twisting  of  the  rod)  happens  contrary  to  the  sceptic's  expectation ;
the  dowser's  erroneous  views  about  "springs"  and  "  head  of  the
spring  "  being  forthwith  accepted  without  examination.


226


Professor  Tf.  F.  Barrett.


[part


PART  VII.

MiSCKLLANEOUS  CaSES.


I  will  here  add  a  few  stray  cases  that  do  not  come  under  the
previous  classification.  The  following  was  kindly  sent  me  by  the
Bight  Hon.  Sir  Edward  Fry,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.,  etc.  To  those  who
imagine  that  dowsers  are  only  employed  by  the  credulous  and
ignorant,  this  testimony,  from  one  of  the  highest  judicial  authorities
in  our  country,  who  is  also  a  man  of  science,  is  a  sufficient  reply.

Failand  House,  Bristol,  October  ISth,  1898.

I  have  sunk  in  four  places  for  water  near  here.  The  first  time  was  some
twenty-five  years  ago  at  Failand  House  Farm.  There  I  was  guided  by  Mr.
Lawrence,  a  well-known  dowser,  who  lived  somewhere  in  Gloucestershire.
I  sank  for  water  and  got  some,  but  subsequently,  under  Mr.  Merry-
weather's  advice, 1  I  deepened  the  well,  and  have  now  a  very  good  supply,
which  has  shown  no  signs  of  failure  even  during  the  prolonged  drought  of
this  year.

I  sank  a  well  about  20  ft.  in  Faulkner's  garden — on  my  own  selection
of  the  spot — got  no  water,  and  gave  up  the  pursuit.

About  six  years  ago  I  sank  a  well  near  this  house,  and  got  water  at,  I
think,  36  ft.  This  now  supplies  this  house  and  the  garden,  stables,  etc.,  etc.
The  site  was  chosen  by  a  dowser,  who  came  over  with  my  architect,  Mr.  Price,
of  Weston-super-Mare.

I  was  not  here  either  when  Lawrence  dowsed  for  the  farm  well,  or  Mr.
Price's  friend  for  the  well  near  this  house,  and  know  nothing  in  particular
about  their  proceedings.

I  consulted  Mr.  Merryweather  same  years  ago  about  sinking  a  well  near
this  house,  and  he  dowsed  and  thought  he  could  find  a  line  of  water,  but  I
did  not  act  on  that  suggestion.

Last  year,  wanting  to  get  a  water  supply  for  a  farm  (Lower  Failand
Farm — Parson's)  I  again  consulted  Mr.  Merryweather.  He  came  with  his
two  sons,  to  one  of  whom  he  attributes  the  power  of  dowsing,  and  I  went  over
the  ground  with  them,  and  he  ultimately  advised  me  to  drive  a  tunnel  into
the  hill.  He  did  this  work  for  me,  and  found  water,  though  it  has  failed
during  the  long  drought.  I  am  not  sure  whether  there  is  not  a  leak  in  the
tunnel.

There  is  no  doubt  a  good  deal  of  water  in  the  hill  on  wliich  all  the  land
in  question  lies,  but  how  far  it  is  to  be  found  everywhere  I  cannot  say.
I  rather  incline  to  the  belief  that  the  old  red  sandstone,  which  is  the  rock,
is  traversed  by  faults  or  lines  of  weakness,  and  that  down  these  the
water  passes.

1  Mr.  Merryweather  is  another  dowser.  See  previous  Report,  p.  72,  He  died
recently.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod. •  227


In  the  search  for  water  of  last  year  Mr.  Merryweather  certainly  did  not
rely  oa  the  watch  spring  alone. ^  He  considered  also  indications  of
water  on  the  surface  (from  the  character  of  the  herbage)  and  the  presence  of
small  springs  or  droppings  of  water  in  the  rocky  sides  of  the  lane,  from
"which  we  drove  the  tunnel.  He  has  been  a  well-sinker  for  years  before  he
took  to  dowsing,  and  would,  I  am  sure,  scout  the  notion  that  he  should
neglect  other  indications  of  water.  I  may  add  that  I  have  known  him  for
many  years — that  I  have  employed  him  not  only  as  before  mentioned,  but
on  other  matters  relating  to  drains,  etc.,  and  that  I  believe  him  to  be  a
thoroughly  honest  man.  Edward  Fry.

The  fact  mentioned  by  Sir  Edward  Fry  that  Merryweather  is  in
part  intentionally  guided  by  surface  indications  is  very  interesting.
This,  however,  is  not  usually  the  case  with  other  dowsers,  so  far  as  I
know.  The  value  of  surface  indications  is  referred  to  more  fully  in
another  part  of  this  paper.  Sir  Edward  Fry  also  sends  me  the  follow-
ing extract  from  a  volume  called  Memorials  :  Part  II.,  Personal  and
Political,  by  the  Earl  of  Selborne,  Vol.  II.,  p.  384-5.

In  a  letter  to  his  daughter,  the  Countess  of  Waldegrave,  under  date
September  25th,  189.3,  Lord  Selborne  writes,  after  referring  to  the  effects
of  the  drought : — "Willie"  (i.e.,  the  present  Earl  of  Selborne)  "brought
a  water-finder  from  Wiltshire  to  see  if  he  could  find  near  the  reservoir  any
underground  water  which  could  be  used  for  increasing  the  supply  there,
and  he  did  iind  it  as  he  said,  but  till  this  is  verified  by  sinking  to  the  neces-
sary depth  I  shall  suspend  my  belief,  though  the  same  man  has  been
successful  in  finding  it  at  Hatfield  and  for  Lord  Jersey."  To  this  a  note  is
added,  "  The  divining  rod  proved  successful."

There  are,  I  believe,  no  professional  dowsers  in  Ireland,  though
English  dowsers  are  in  considerable  request  in  certain  parts  of  the
country,  and  there  are  a  few  amateur  dowsers.  The  following  case  of
an  amateur  dowser,  who  is  a  farmer  in  the  co.  Tyrone,  has  lately
reached  me  through  a  friend  : —

Mullantean,  Stewartstown,  October  11th,  1899.
The  water-finder,  William  M'Crea,  who  lives  near  Stewartstown,  was
here  to-day,  and  found  two  springs  for  us.  It  is  really  wonderful  the  way
the  rod  turns  in  his  hands  ;  it  broke  nearly  in  two,  though  it  was  a  strong
piece  of  ash.  He  says  he  sleeps  badly  the  night  after  he  does  much  of  it,
and  at  the  time  it  feels  as  if  the  sinews  of  his  arms  were  being  torn  out.
He  first  tried  the  rod  about  twenty  years  ago,  when  an  uncle  of  his  came
from  America,  who  had  made  a  good  deal  of  money  there  by  finding  springs,
so  he  tried  if  he  had  the  power,  and  found  he  had.  He  can  tell  how  far  the
spring  is  down  by  counting  the  feet  from  where  the  rod  begins  to  tremble

1  Mr.  Merryweather,  like  the  late  Mr.  Lawrence,  always  preferred  to  use  a  long
piece  of  flexible  steel  rather  than  a  forked  twig  as  an  indicator,  or  "autoscope." —
W.  F.  B.

s  2


228


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


until  it  turns  over, — double  that  distance  is  generally  right,  but  he  won't
engage  that,  though  he  says  in  most  of  the  wells  sunk  he  has  been  right  to
a  foot  or  two.  He  has  found  a  fine  spring  lately  for  the  creamery  at  Moy,
and  it  has  done  well  ever  since.  He  can  tell  of  no  failure,  so  far,  that  he
has  had.  He  is  a  man  about  fifty  years  of  age,  and  has  a  good  farm  near
this,  so  he  does  not  do  it  for  money.  We  will  begin,  I  hope,  to  dig  our  well
soon,  and  I  will  let  you  know  how  it  gets  on.  The  spring,  he  asserts,  begins
on  a  hill,  and  continues  all  down  the  field  and  up  to  the  house,  I  suppose
400  yards  or  more,  and  that  it  could  be  tapped  anywhere  we  choose.

C.  M.  Kennedy.

I  have  also  received  other  cases  where  McCrea  was  successful,  but
he  dislikes  using  the  rod,  as  he  says  "it  seems  to  take  such  a  lot  out
of  me."

Through  the  kindness  of  friends  I  have  received  some  particulars
of  the  successful  use  of  the  rod  for  finding  underground  water  by  one
or  two  other  amateur  dowsers  in  Ireland,  such  as  the  late  Mr.  Thos.
Purvis,  of  Wexford,  of  whom  Mr.  J.  Haugliton,  of  Ferns,  co.  Wexford,
informs  me  that  Mr.  Purvis  enabled  his  family  to  obtain  a  splendid
supply  of  water  on  their  premises,  "as  abundant  to-day  as  forty  years
ago  when  the  well  was  sunk."

Colonel  King-Harman,  of  New  Castle,  Ballymahon,  Ireland,  is
another  Irish  amateur  dowser,  and  in  reply  to  my  inquiries  told  me
that  a  former  steward  of  his  had  been  a  successful  dowser  in  America  ;
Colonel  King-Harman  having  kindly  obtained  the  man's  address,
I  wrote  to  him  and  had  the  following  reply  in  answer  to  my
questions  : —

Whitfield  Farm,  Kilmeaden,  Co.  Waterford,  October  3()th,  1899.

My  exijerience  of  the  divining  rod  was  in  Manitoba,  Canada.  There  the
rod  proved  successful  every  time  but  once,  and  I  have  every  confidence
would  have  done  so  then,  but  we  struck  on  a  vein  of  sand,  and  the  well
would  not  hold  out.

I  dug  one  well  where  other  twelve  were  dry,  and  this  one  had  abundance
[of  water]  ;  it  was  finished  by  Government.  Other  six  wells  I  dug  myself
out  there,  on  the  condition  that  if  no  water,  no  wage.  All  that  I  had  to
guide  me  was  the  rod,  and  in  all  those  places  water  was  scarce.

I  cannot  give  the  addresses  of  all  I  dug  for,  but  by  writing  to  Mr.
Angus,  postmaster,  Logoch,  Manitoba  (for  whom  I  dug  the  first  well),  you
can  have  the  names  of  all  the  places.

I  have  tried  the  rod  in  Co.  Waterford  for  Major  Chavasse  on  very  dry
hilly  ground  ;  ho  has  not  yet  dug.

I  have  no  special  feeling  in  my  hands  or  body  when  the  rod  turns.

George  Mitchell.

In  Bibby's  Quarterly  (a  farming  journal)  for  November,  1897,  is  an
illustrated  account  of  a  Cornish  dowser  named  George  Williams,  who


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


229


lives  at  Falmouth.  It  seems  he  accidentally  discovered  that  the  rod
moved  in  his  hands^  and  was  successful  in  tracing  a  lode  by  its  means.
Subsequently  he  used  it  for  water,  and  several  cases  of  his  success  are
quoted.  I  wrote  to  the  author  of  the  article  for  further  particulars,
and  had  the  following  reply  :  —

Rosvean,  Falmouth,  Cornwall,  January  2(ith,  1898.
G-eorge  Williams  has  recently  foimcl  a  sf)ring  for  lue  in  the  country  near
Falmouth.  It  was  not  where  I  had  hoped  or  wanted,  but  his  hazel  rod
pointed  where  the  spring  was.  I  was  present  while  he  walked  all  over  the
field.  The  work,  he  says,  is  always  very  exhausting  to  him.  The  spring,  a
fine  jet  of  water  m  the  rock,  was  found  28  feet  below  the  surface.  No  one
present  knew  anything  about  a  watercourse  there,  and  there  was  nothing  to


suggest  it.


The  spring  at  the  vicarage  (built  on  the  hill  at  Budock)  was  70  feet  below
the  surface  ;  it  was  also  found  by  Williams.  Susan  E  Gay

In  a  subsequent  letter  Miss  Gay  tells  me  that  in  sinking  her  well,
a  solid  slaty  rock  was  encountered  and  dynamite  had  to  be  used ;  the
water,  when  reached  at  a  depth  of  28  ft.  was  so  abundant  that  "  even
through  the  drought  of  last  summer  it  was  never  below  6  or  7  ft."

I  visited  Falmouth  and  saw  the  place  where  Williams  found  a
water  supply  for  Miss  Gay.  It  certainly  seemed  an  unlikely  spot,  on
dry  rocky  ground  between  Budock  and  Penjerrick  :  the  geological
formation  is  a  clay  slate  (Devonian),  near  its  junction  with  the
granite ;  as  Mr.  Westlake  remarks,  "  water  tends  to  run  off  the
granite  into  the  fissures  of  these  slaty  rocks,  affording  an  excellent
testing  ground  for  the  dowser "  ;  here  and  there  the  water  makes
its  way  to  the  surface  as  seen  by  certain  "springs"  marked  on  the
map  not  far  distant.  I  had  an  interview  with  Williams ;  he  is  a
working  man,  a  mason,  and,  like  other  dowsei's,  has  the  most  child-
like faith  in  the  indications  of  his  "rod":  he  showed  me  several
testimonials  from  gentlemen  in  Cornwall  who  spoke  highly  of  his
services  in  finding  water  on  their  estates.  But  I  had  no  opportunity
of  making  a  personal  investigation  of  any  of  these  cases.  Miss  Gay
states  that  Williams  has  been  engaged  by  the  Great  AVestern  Railway
Company  to  "  dowse  "  at  Truro  for  water  and  that  he  has  worked  with
success  for  the  Ecclesiastical  Commissioners  on  various  occasions.

Among  the  dowsers  with  whom  I  have  had  some  correspondence  is
Mr.  H.  A.  Canning,  who  is  a  sanitary  and  hydraulic  engineer  at
Market  Lavington,  Wiltshire.  Mr.  Canning  tells  me  that  seeing  a
dowser  at  work  some  twenty-five  years  ago  he  tried  his  hand,  and
discovered  that  the  forked  twig  "worked  "  equally  well  with  him.  He
encloses  me  a  list  of  names  of  gentlemen  for  whom  he  has  been
successful  in  finding  water  by  the  indication  of  the  twig. In  one  case


230


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,


[part


the  twig  moved  at  a  spot  between  two  wells  100  ft.  apart,  which  gave
little  or  no  water;  on  sinking  at  the  spot  indicated,  an  abundant  supply
was  obtained.  This  may  be  so,  but  I  have  not  verified  the  statements.
Mr.  Canning,  in  a  letter  to  the  Standard  in  January,  1889,  states  that
upon  finding  the  rod  suddenly  move  at  a  certain  spot  he  was  then
blindfolded,  and  again  on  traversing  the  same  spot  the  rod  moved.
He  adds  there  was  an  unmistakable  but  indescribable  feeling  upon
approaching  the  spot  beneath  which  underground  water  existed,  a
sensation  that  could  not  possibly  be  avoided,  even  though  an  effort  was
made  to  do  so.  It  is  certainly  a  remarkable  circumstance,  whether
this  sensation  be  illusory  or  not,  that  for  200  years  the  great  majority
of  dowsers  in  all  parts  of  the  world  have  quite  independently  asserted
the  same  thing,  and  as  a  rule  believed  that  this  peculiar  sensation,  or
malaise,  existed  only  in  their  own  case.

An  interesting  account  of  an  East  Anglian  dowser,  Mr.  Child,
recently  appeared  in  the  Eastern  Daily  Press.  Mr.  Child,  who  was
formerly  in  business  in  Norwich,  now  lives  near  Hadleigh  in  Suffolk,
and,  like  the  majority  of  dowsers,  was  originally  a  Somersetshire  man.
When  living  near  Wells  in  Somerset  he  saw  a  dowser  at  work,  and
was  greatly  astonished  to  find  the  rod  twisted  round  in  his  own  hand
at  the  same  places.  Several  instances  of  his  success  are  given  in  the
newspaper  report  referred  to,  but  these  I  have  not  attempted  to  verify.

I  have  already  mentioned  a  Cheddar  dowser  named  Thomas
Pavey  (p.  191).^  The  son,  Rowland  Pavey,  of  Cheddar  Mill,  is  also  a
dowser,  but  has  lately  abandoned  the  use  of  the  forked  twig,  and
trusts  to  what  he  calls  a  "New  Science"  in  his  water-finding  ex-
peditions. What  this  mysterious  science  is  he  does  not  tell  the
public.  I  have  had  some  correspondence  with  Pavey,  and  his  letters
are  full  of  rhodomontade.  Though  he  will  not  tell  me  what  his
wonderful  secret  is,  he  assures  me  it  is  "  a  science  of  sciences,  and
to  keep  it  secret  is  keeping  hid  a  field  of  wonderful  discoveries  that
cannot  be  exhausted  by  scientists,  as  it  is,  I  believe,  the  outcome
of  a  higher  state  of  civilisation."  (!)  In  a  printed  circular  he  sends
me  he  states  that,  though  his  science  is  in  a  crude  state,  yet  the
"  science  of  geology  will  be  surpassed,  the  uplifting  of  mountains
and  what  lies  hidden  far  beneath  will  be  understood.  There  will
be  no  more  secrets  in  water-finding,  and  the  human  body  will  be
understood  as  it  never  was  before,"  beside  a  multitude  of  other
revelations,  which  he  enumerates,  ranging  over  the  universe !  In
spite  of  all  this  nonsense,  the  Rev.  H.  H.  Streeten,  who  writes  to

^  F,  H.  Pavey,  p.  234,  another  Cheddar  dowser,  is  a  connection  of  these  Paveys.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


231


me  from  Easton  Vicarage,  near  Wells,  tells  me,  in  answer  to  my
inquiries,  that  "Pavey  certainly  has  a  remarkable  knowledge  of  the
earth.  Hotv  he  has  acquired  this  knowledge  is  a  different  question,
but  in  localities  he  has  never  before  visited  he  will  in  a  short  time
tell  you  where  the  springs  of  water  are,  and  generally  he  will  say
at  what  depth  water  is  to  be  found  underground.  He  is  a  quiet,
nice-minded  man."  Mr.  Westlake,  who  has  visited  Pavey,  says  he
is  a  genuine  enthusiast,  with  a  firm  belief  in  his  "gift."  The  follow-
ing report  of  an  eye-witness  describes  how  Pavey  usually  goes  to
work  in  determining  the  depth  at  which  water  would  be  found  under-
ground. In  this  particular  case —

He  knelt  clown  on  one  knee  with  his  head  resting  on  one  hand,  and  gazed
downwards  for  about  half-a-minute,  afterwards  giving  it  as  his  opinion  that
it  would  be  necessary  to  go  down  approximately  60  ft.  As  he  predicted,  a
good  spring  was  struck  within  a  few  inches  of  the  depth  mentioned.  The
supply  is  plentiful,  as  is  evidenced  by  the  fact  that,  after  it  had  been  left
during  the  night,  three  hours  were  occupied  in  getting  sufBcieut  water  out
of  the  well  to  enable  a  commencement  to  be  made  in  lining  it  with  brick.

There  is,  however,  no  evidence  to  show  he  was  not  aware  of  the
depth  of  other  local  wells.


However  striking  some  of  these  cases  of  the  success  of  the  dowser
may  appear  to  the  lay  mind,  to  an  expert  field  geologist,  who  knows
the  district,  the  explanation  is  often  simple  enough.  Here,  for  example,
is  a  case  in  point.  Mrs.  Hollands,  of  Dene  Park,  Tonbridge,  kindly
sent  me  an  account  of  the  success  which  attended  the  dowser  (Mr.
Gataker)  at  her  place,  but  informed  me  they  had  not  made  any
previous  attempts  to  find  water,  and  adds  : —

Dene  Park,  Tonbridge,  October  llth,  1899.
We  dug  in  two  places,  and  found  water  about  the  depth  he  [the  dowser]
told  us^ — fifteen  to  twenty-five  feet. Two  of  these  wells  are  now  most  valu-
able, in  these  long  seasons  of  drought. Without  them  Ave  should  not  have
enough  water  to  supply  the  house  at  all.  ^^^^^  Hollands.

Mr.  Holmes,  F.G.S.,  remarks  on  this  case  : — -

At  Dene  Park,  near  Tonbridge,  a  gravel  patch  capping  the  Weald  Clay
seems  to  have  been  tapped.  I  learn  from  Topley's  Geological  Survey
Memoir  on  the  Weald  (1875)  that  there  are  many  outlying  patches  of  gravel
at  high  levels  in  that  district.  Dene  Park  is  rather  more  than  two  miles
north  of  Tonbridge.  Gravel  patches  are  mentioned  (p.  185)  as  existing  near
Starve  Crow  Farm  (about  half-a-mile  south-east  of  the  house  at  Dene  Park)
and  east  of  Little  Park  (about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  north  of  Dene  Park).  The
dowser  would  need  simply  a  good  eye  for  contours,  as  in  the  Oxford  case.


T.  V.  H.


232


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


In  addition  to  the  cases  which  I  have  already  cited,  I  have  before
me  a  number  of  other  illustrations  of  the  dowser's  success  in  finding
water,  and  very  often  correctly  estimating  the  depth  at  which  it  would
be  found.  In  these  cases,  however,  the  replies  I  have  received  to  my
inquiries  have  shown  that  no  previous  attempt  to  obtain  a  water
supply  had  been  made,  and  several  state  that  water  would  probably
have  been  found  without  the  dowser's  aid,  only  they  wanted  to  "make
sure "  before  sinking  a  well.  This  correspondence  has  also  shown
how  misleading  are  many  of  the  reports  appearing  in  some  of  the
provincial  newspapers.  These  reports  doubtless  give  the  dowser's  own
version  of  the  matter.  To  quote  a  typical  instance,  the  Bath  Chronicle,
which  appears  to  be  Mr.  Gataker's  favourite  organ,  contains  two
misleading  statements  in  its  issue  of  October  22nd,  1896.  One  is  as
follows  : —

Another  striking  testimony  to  the  ability  of  Mr.  Leicester  Gataker,  the
water  expert,  of  Bath,  has  just  come  to  hand.  In  the  face  of  much
scepticism  he  recently  undertook  to  supply  Mr.  Smith  Barry,  M.P.,  Cor-
dangan  Manor,  near  Tipperary,  [with  water]  for  the  purposes  of  a  dairy,  on
special  terms  of  "no  water,  no  pay."  He  foreshadowed  300  gallons  an
hour  at  from  25  to  35  ft.  deep.  On  this  he  at  once  started  his  men  to  carry
out  the  sinking  of  the  well.  At  a  depth  of  32  ft.  a  supply  of  400  gallons
has  been  obtained  as  a  result.

I  wrote  to  the  Right  Hon.  Smith  Barry  for  information,  and  his
estate  agent  (Mr.  G.  C.  Townsend)  replies  that  "  the  results  of  Mr.
Gataker's  work  here  have  not  been  sufhciently  successful  to  justify  me
in  giving  you  the  information  you  ask."

The  other  statement,  a  few  lines  above  in  the  same  paper,  is  as
follows  : —

Mr.  G.  Marshall,  of  Sarnesfield  Court,  Herefordshire,  was  getting  pretty
well  tired  of  well-sinking  at  the  time  he  engaged  the  services  of  Mr.
Leicester  Gataker,  but  his  latest  move  has  been  most  successful.

In  reply  to  my  inquiries  Mr.  Marshall  states  that  he  sunk  no  wells
before  Mr.  Gataker's  visit,  but  simply  made  "  catch-pits "  to  collect
surface  water. In  further  correspondence  Mr.  Marshall  informs  me  : —

Heralds'  College,  London,  E.C.,  Odoher  mh,  1899.
In  reply  to  your  questions —

1  and  2  Before  Mr.  Gataker  found  water  for  me  at  Sarnesfield  I  had
built  a  large  tank  and  attempted  to  collect  surface  water,  which  failed  me  in
a  dry  season.

3.  Mr.  Gataker  came  and  indicated  two  spots  within  a  short  distance  of
my  tank,  telling  the  number  of  feet  to  sink  the  wells  and  the  amount  of
water  I  should  find.  His  estimate  was  perfectly  correct,  and  since  I  have
had  the  wells  sunk  I  have  had  a  most  satisfactory  supply.  The  late  dry
summer  has  been  a  severe  test,  but  there  has  been  a  full  supply  of  water,


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


233


and  I  have  no  reason  to  believe  there  will  ever  be  otherwise.  It  is  curious
how  many  people  appear  to  have  the  power  of  water  finding  did  they  know
how  to  use  it.  Several  of  us  tried  when  ]\'Ir.  Gataker  was  at  Sarnesfield,  and
when  he  placed  a  twig  in  their  hands  it  moved,  but  with  myself,  although
Mr.  Gataker  gripped  me  firmly  by  the  wrists,  there  was  no  movement.

George  W.  Marshall.

Sarnesfield  is  near  Weobley,  about  ten  miles  north-west  of  Hereford.
I  asked  Mr.  Marshall  what  was  the  need  of  a  dowser,  as  probably
surface  water  would  be  found  anywhere  in  shallow  wells  at  Sarnesfield.
He  replies  : —

Heralds'  CoUege,  London,  E.G.,  October  Idth,  1899.

Of  course,  on  a  soil  like  ours  at  Sarnesfield,  which  is  on  stone,  you  can
get  water  anywhere  when  you  get  down  to  the  rock  ;  but  the  point  which
shows  Gataker's  skill  is  that  being  told  whereabouts  (a  mile  and  a  half  from
my  house)  I  wanted  water  found,  he  fixed  the  spots  to  sink  the  wells,  and
told  accurately  the  depth  to  go  and  the  quantity  of  water  which  would  be
found.  George  W.  Marshall.

Mr.  Holmes  remarks  : —

The  Gataker  cases  are  an  excellent  illustration — as  you  remark — of  the
deceitfulness  of  newspaper  reports.  Mr.  Marshall's  second  letter  reduces
very  considerably  the  atmosphere  of  wonder  enveloping  the  first.

T.  Y.  H.

Much-of  the  wonder  which  the  dowser  creates,  in  the  unscientific
mind,  arises  from  the  notion  which  he  invariably  fosters  that  under-
ground water  is  found  in  narrow  streams  or  "  springs,"  and  that
without  his  aid  in  hitting  upon  the  exact  spot  where  to  sink  a  well,
the  chances  are  you  would  have  missed  the  water  altogether.  It  is
true  that  in  certain  districts  the  geological  formation  causes  under-
ground water  to  be  found  in  fissures  or  narrow  streams,  and  there,  as
I  have  said  before,  the  real  test  of  the  dowser  is  to  be  found.  Such  a
formation  prevails  in  the  county  of  Somei'set,  as  Mr.  Westlake  has
shown  in  his  instructive  Appendix  (p.  31-5).  In  the  next  Part,  I
have  cited  some  failures  of  dowsers  and  the  probable  percentage  of
successes  they  obtain.  It  must,  however,  be  clearly  understood  that
neither  in  this  Report,  nor  in  the  previous  one,  have  I  selected  favour-
able cases  and  omitted  others  which  were  adverse.  Every  case  that
has  reached  me  has,  as  far  as  possible,  been  investigated,  either  by
correspondence  with  the  person  who  employed  the  dowser,  or  by  a  visit
to  the  spot  by  my  geological  friends.


234


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


PART  VIII.

Professional  Dowsers  in  England  and  Wales  and  their
Probable  Percentage  of  Failures.

§  1. List  of  Dotvsers  and  Hints  as  to  their  Employment.

It  may  be  convenient  in  concluding  this  part  of  our  work,  to
append  a  list  of  professional  dowsers  in  England  and  Wales.  The
stronghold  of  the  dowser  is  to  be  found  in  those  districts  where  the
geological  formation  renders  it  difficult  to  discern  underground  sources
of  water,  such,  for  example,  as  in  the  Lower  Lias  and  amid  the  lime-
stone regions  of  Somerset  and  Gloucestershire  and  in  the  South  of
France.  In  and  around  Cheddar  there  are  numerous  professional
dowsers ;  to  some  of  these  I  have  already  referred.  With  the  help
of  Mr.  Westlake  I  have  drawn  up  the  following  list  of  professional
dowsers  now  living  in  England  and  Wales.  No  doubt  there  are
several  others  of  whom  I  have  not  heard,  and  there  are,  of  course,  in
addition  numbers  of  amateur  dowsers,  some  of  whom  have  been
remarkably  successful.  It  will  be  noticed  that  even  in  this  im-
perfect list  no  less  than  eighteen  professional  dowsers  are  found  in
Somersetshire,  more  than  half  the  total ;  and  several  who  now  live
elsewhere,  such  as  Mr.  Child  and  Mr.  Stears,  originally  came  from
Somersetshire.

Dowsers  in  Somersetshire  : —

J.  Blake,  Hill  End,  Winscombe.

H.  Chesterman,  Anglo  Terrace,  Bath.

C.  Cross,  Hallatrow  Heath,  near  Radstock.

Thomas  Day,  Shipham  (miner).

Thomas  Foord,  Shipham  (labourer).

L.  A.  Gataker,  Weston-super-Mare.

J.  J.  Green,  Cheddar.

Thomas  Hawker,  Soraerton  (farmer).

W.  Hills,  Wells.

C.  Hole,  Keward,  Wells  (carter).

William  Kerslake,  Wells  (tailor).

W  Mere  weather  (jun.),  Bedminster,  Bristol.

Rowland  Pavey,  Cheddar  (miller).

F.  H.  Pavey,  Cheddar  (plumber).

C.  Sims,  Pilton.


xxxviil]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


235


Thomas  Thomas,  Worle,  Weston-super-Mare.
H.  WiUiams,  Pilton.

W.  R.  Wyburn,!  Woolavington,  near  Bridgwater  (farmer).

Dowser  in  Gloucetstershire  : —

D.  Lacey,  Yate.

Dowser's  in Wiltshire : —

H.  A.  Canning,  Market  Lavington  (sanitary  engineer).
H.  W.  Mullins,  Colerne,  Box.
B.  Tompkins,  Chippenham.

Doivsers  in  Dorset  and  Gornwcdl : —

W.  J.  Mitchell,  Cerne  Abbas  (sanitary  engineer).

G.  A.  Williams,  Merrill  Place,  Falmouth.

Dowsers  in Wales  ■ —

T.  Heighway,  Llandrindod  Wells.
W.  Hoskins,  Uplands,  Swansea.

E.  .  W.  Robertson,  Llanelly.

E.  Roth  well,  Cardiff

Doivsers  in  East  Ancjlia  : —

R.  Anthony,  Yelling,  Hunts  (farmer).

H.  Bacon,  Newport,  Essex.

J.  Blanchard,  Wisbech,  Cambs.

S.  T.  Child,  Capel  Mills,  Hadleigh,  Suffolk.

W.  Stone,  Bolingbroke  Hall,  Spilsby,  Lincolnshii'e.

Dowsers  in  Yorkshire  : —

F.  Rodwell,  Wensley.

J.  Stears,  Hessle  (near  Hull).

It  may  not  be  out  of  place  in  this  connection  to  give  one  or  two
practical  hints  to  those  who  intend  to  employ  a  dowser,  or  "  diviner,"
as  they  usually  like  to  be  called.

(1)  Ascertain  the  geological  conditions  of  the  place  where  a  water-
supply  is  wanted  :  in  numerous  cases  where  a  water-finder  is  employed
his  advice  is  wholly  unnecessary  (see  Appendix  A.  and  also  B.).

Since  the  above  list  was  printed  I  have  been  informed  that  Mr.  Wyburn  (a
member  of  the  Society  of  Friends)  takes  no  fee,  therefore  he  can  hardly  be  reckoned
among  professional  dowsers.  The  list  of  Somerset  dowsers  might  no  doubt  be  easily
extended  by  further  inquiry,  f.;/.,  George  Elson,  labourer  at  North  Perroth,  p.  205.


236


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


(2)  If  a  large  supply  is  wanted  and  a  deep  artesian  well  or  boring
to  be  made  eschew  all  dowsers  and  consult  a  good  hydro-geologist.i

(3)  If  only  a  naoderate  supply  is  required,  —  especially  in  certain
formations  where  geology  is  of  little  help, — select  a  couple  of  dowsers
of  good  repute,  and  let  each  give  his  opinion  unknown  to  and  inde-
pendently of  the  other.-

(4)  As  the  best  dowsers  I  know  have  been  more  or  less  illiterate
men,  their  loss  of  time  would  be  amply  repaid  by  offering  them  a
moderate  fee  and  travelling  expenses.

(5)  If  the  water-finder  is  willing  to  sink  or  bore  on  the  faith  of  his
opinion,  obtain  his  estimate,  and  if  found  to  be  reasonable,  offer  him
so  much  per  cent,  extra  on  the  condition  of  "  no  water  no  pay,"  taking
care  to  have  a  written  agreement  as  to  the  limit  of  expense  involved.^
What  this  extra  percentage  should  be  depends  on  the  geological  con-
ditions. Taking  the  country  indiscriminately,  15  per  cent,  would
probably  be  reasonable,  but  if  "fissure  water"  (see  p.  341)  pre-
dominates, and  moreover,  if  geologicad  advice  has  already  been  sought
and  on  trial  has  proved  a  failure,  an  extra  rate  of  25  per  cent,  is  not
unreasonable,  if  a  certain  supply  be  stipulated  for.

§  2. Recent  Cases  of  Complete  or  Partial  Failure  in  Water- Fielding

by  English  Do7vsers.

Though  nearly  every  professional  dowser  thinks  lie  can  be  no  more
mistaken  in  trusting  to  the  twisting  of  his  rod  for  the  indication  of
underground  water,  than  a  magnet  can  be  mistaken  in  its  selective
attraction  of  iron,  yet  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  the  dowser  is  by  no
means  free  from  mistakes.  He  has  his  failures,  sometimes  costly
failures  to  those  who  employ  him. Several  of  his  failures  I  detailed

^  Mr.  Westlake,  F.G.S.,  in  reference  to  this  adds  the  following  note: — "Even
where  deep  wells  are  necessary,  experience  has  shown  it  is  sometimes  advantageous
to  supplement  geological  advice  by  calling  in  a  dowser,  for,  though  a  definite  water
level  may  exist,  the  quantity  found  at  a  given  spot  is  often  a  matter  of  chance  :  such
a  case  I  saw  recently  near  Newbury,  where  the  dowser,  Tompkins,  had  found,  at  a
depth  of  over  100  ft.  in  the  chalk,  so  large  a  supply  that  steam  pum ping-gear  had  to
be  used,  whereas  in  two  or  three  other  wells  in  the  neighbourhood,  with  water  at
about  the  same  hydrostatic  level,  the  quantity  was  much  less.  It  is  difficult,  how-
ever, to  say  how  far  chance  coincidence  may  account  for  such  lucky  hits."

-  On  the  question  of  independent  examination  by  different  dowsers,  see  Part  IV.,
and  also  the  last  sentence  but  one  in  Professor  de  Mortillet's  letter,  p.  244.

•*  The  reason  for  this  will  be  seen  in  the  next  few  pages.  The  dowser  will  usually
make  a  rough  estimate  of  the  quantity  of  water  likely  to  be  found  and  the  dej^th  at
which  it  exists  ;  with  some  dowsers  this  estimate  is  often  wonderfully  close,  with
others  it  is  as  often  wrong.  It  is  desirable,  tlierefore,  to  bear  this  in  mind  and  also
that  the  quantity  of  water  yielded  by  all  shallow  wells  varies  largely  with  the  season
of  the  year.


xxxviii.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


237


in  the  previous  Report,  and  I  will  here  cite  a  few  more  that  I  have
since  met  with  ;  others  of  course  exist  that  I  have  not  heard  of.  But
whilst  I  have  been  obliged  to  omit  numerous  instances  of  the  dowsers'
success  which  were  of  no  evidential  value,  I  have  not  omitted  any  of
their  failures  which  were  verified  upon  inquiry  ;  meaning  by  failure,
complete  disappointment  of  the  expectations  raised  by  the  water-finder.

As  I  have  quoted  an  instance  of  Mr.  Gataker's  success  at  Aspley
Heath,  p.  185,  here  is  an  instance  of  his  failure  in  the  same  neighbour-
hood. It  is  contained  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Myers  from  a  friend  of  his
— the  daughter  of  a  former  Professor  at  Cambridge — who  writes  most
indignantly,  and  states  that  Mr.  Gataker's  predictions  were  not  in  any
way  fulfilled.  The  place  is  at  Woburn  Sands,  and  it  seems  that  before
Gataker's  visit  a  well  had  been  dug  about  70  ft.  deep  in  the  Oxford
clay  without  finding  water.  When  Mr.  Gataker  came,  he  fixed  upon  a
spot  where  he  said  a  large  water  supply  would  be  obtained — at  what
depth  is  not  stated.  A  well  was  dug  and  only  a  little  water  obtained,
even  when  headings  were  driven  radiating  from  the  sides  of  the  well.

The  writer  of  the  letter  suggests  that  the  investigation  of  every
dowser  should  be  confined  to  the  question  of  whether  "he  evei'  made  a
mistake,  for  if  water  were  not  found  in  the  place  and  at  the  depth
predicted  by  the  diviner,  I  should  consider  him  an  impostor."  I  am
afraid  this  "  short  way  "  with  dowsers  would  not  carry  the  investigation
very  far.  The  writer  concludes  by  expressing  a  wish  to  write  to  the
Spectator  "  on  the  wickedness  of  diviners  and  the  extraordinary  folly
and  credulousness  of  educated  persons  in  believing  in  them."

Other  dowsers  besides  Mr.  Gataker  have  their  share  of  failures,  in
spite  of  all  their  attempts  to  explain  them  awa,y.  Here  is  a  case  of  the
discomfiture  of  another  dowser,  related  in  detail  in  the  Daily  Mail  for
December  28th,  1897.  It  seems  that  a  member  of  the  Legislative
Council  of  Jamaica,  whilst  on  a  visit  to  England,  engaged  the  services
of  a  "diviner"  to  locate  the  site  for  wells  in  a  district  in  Jamaica
which  had  suffered  greatly  from  the  need  of  a  water  supply.  Handsome
terms  were  off'ered  by  five  parochial  boards  in  Jamaica  to  the  water-
finder,  who  on  his  arrival  in  their  neighbourhood  was  received  with
enthusiasm,  and  very  soon,  by  means  of  his  rod,  pointed  out  several
places  where  water  would  be  found.

At  Mandeville,  a  charming  village  in  the  hills,  he  pegged  out  part  of  the
course  of  a  subterranean  stream  and  retired  to  lunch  at  a  neighbouring
hotel.  In  his  absence  some  wags  removed  his  pegs  and  lined  out  a  totally
different  course.  On  his  return  the  diviner  took  up  the  new  direction  and
continued  it  for  over  a  hundred  yards  more,  and  did  not  discover  his
mistake  until  one  of  his  admirers  pointed  out  the  deception.  But  no
borings  for  water  had  yet  been  made,  and  the  authoritative  statements
of  the  diviner  were  unchallenged. At  length  the  necessary  implements


238


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


were  obtained,  and  an  attempt  was  made  at  several  points  to  reach  the
water  so  confidently  indicated.  At  one  point  where  water  was  predicted  as
at  a  depth  of  40  ft.,  a  boring  of  150  ft.  was  made,  with  the  only  result  that
no  water  could  be  found,  the  machinery  eventually  broke  down,  and  after
going  down  about  200  ft.,  the  borer  could  not  be  extracted.  The  same
ridiculous  result  occurred  in  other  places,  and  up  to  the  present  at  none  of
the  points  indicated  by  the  diviner  has  water  been  found.

Like  all  other  newspaper  reports,  this  needs  confirmation,  but  it  is
no  doubt  fairly  correct.  In  1897,  Mr.  Stears  informed  me  he  had  entered
into  a  contract  to  dowse  for  water  in  Jamaica,  and  he  no  doubt  was
the  unfortunate  dowser  employed.  Nor  is  this  the  only  costly  failure
he,  as  well  as  some  other  dowsers,  have  had.

In  the  previous  Report  (p.  173)  I  gave  some  details  of  a  failure  on
the  part  of  Mr.  Stears  which  led  the  Parish  Council  of  Bardney,
Lincolnshire,  to  a  very  heavy  and  useless  expenditure.  At  a  spot  in-
dicated by  the  dowser  they  bored  to  a  great  depth  and  found  no  water.
I  have  since  heard  from  Mr.  Hind,  the  Clerk  to  the  District  Council,
who  informs  me  they  continued  boring  to  a  depth  of  450  ft.,  at  a  cost
of  £300,  and  found  no  water.  The  bore-hole  then  caved  in.  Bardney
is  about  ten  miles  east  of  Lincoln.

As  I  have  pointed  out  again  and  again,  whatever  success  attends  the
dowser  is  mainly  due  to  his  discovery  of  a  inoderate  water  supply  yielded
hy  comparatively  shallotv  borings  or  wells,  i.e.,  from  15  to  50  ft.  deep
(see  previous  Report,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  235,  240,  etc.).
Hence  it  is  a  great  pity  that  District  and  County  Councils,  when  they
want  a  large  water  supply,  do  not  consult  a  good  hydro-geologist.
Mr.  C.  E.  de  Ranee,  F.G.S.,  one  of  the  best  authorities  on  water
supply,  published  in  1891  an  admirable  paper  on  2Vie  Underground
Waters  of  Lincolnshire,  wliicli  I  recommend  to  the  Bardney  District
Council.  They  will  find  in  it  a  record  of  deep  borings  not  far  from
their  own  town.

Another  case,  more  or  less  a  failure,  in  which  Mr.  Stone  was  the
dowser,  has  reached  me  from  Messrs.  Attenborough  and  Timms,  of
Northampton.  They  had  originally  sunk  and  bored  to  a  depth  of
70  ft.  at  Dassett  Sidings,  near  Burton  (between  Fenny  Compton  and
Kineton  railway  stations),  and  found  no  water.  Mr.  Stone  was  then
engaged,  and  with  his  rod  fixed  on  a  place  125  yds.  distant  where
he  stated  water  would  be  found:  "a  sufficient  supply,  he  thought,
Avould  be  reached  at  90  ft.,  but  the  exact  depth  he  could  not  say."
Here  Messrs.  Attenborough  bored  to  a  depth  of  over  100  ft.  ;  near
the  surface,  as  Stone  had  said,  a  little  water  was  met  with,  but  on
testing  with  an  artesian  pump  at  the  greater  depth,  "  the  result  was
unsuccessful,"  and  in  a  recent  letter  to  me  (June,  1900)  Messrs.
Attenborough  state:  "We  spent  a  great  deal  more  money  than  we


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


239


were  given  to  understand  would  be  necessary,  and,  seeing  no  prospect
of  success,  stopped  the  work  after  boring  to  over  100  ft."

Many  of  the  professional  dowsers  undertake  the  work  of  sinking
or  boring  for  water  at  the  spot  they  have  selected,  and,  as  in  the
above  case,  frequent  disputes  arise  from  this  cause,  the  dowser  wanting
to  go  on  boring,  at  his  customer's  expense,  when  he  fails  to  obtain  an
adequate  supply  of  water  at  or  beyond  the  depth  he  estimated.  It  is
necessary,  therefore,  to  warn  all  those  who  intend  employing  a  dowser
as  well-sinker  to  make  a  definite  arrangement  beforehand,  such  as  I
have  suggested  on  p.  236.

Mr.  Westlake,  in  the  course  of  his  investigations  in  the  south-west
of  England,  heard  of  some  half-dozen  cases  of  expensive  failures  on
the  part  of  the  dowsers  there  employed  ;  particulars  of  these  cases
and  the  names  of  the  dowsers  have  not  yet  reached  me.  Mr.  Gordon
Harris,  A.M.  Inst.  C.E.,  in  a  useful  paper  on  "Water  Supply  to
Country  Mansions,"  read  before  the  United  Service  Institution  on
December  4th,  1899,  after  referring  to  dowsing  for  water  and  my
previous  Report  on  this  subject,  mentions  a  case  where  a  dowser
predicted  a  water  supply  at  160  ft.  depth  on  an  estate  in  Hertford-
shire. Mr.  Harris,  being  consulted,  showed  that  as  the  London  clay
had  here  to  be  pierced  to  reach  the  chalk,  no  water  could  be  found
under  200  ft.  ;  a  boring  was  made  at  the  spot  and  geology  triumphed.

Mr.  T.  V.  Holmes,  F.G-.S.,  in  his  excellent  paper  on  the  Divining
Rod  published  in  the  Jounuil  of  the  Anthropological  Institute  for
November,  1897,  to  which  I  have  already  referred,  mentions  three  or
four  cases  where  dowsers  had  partially  or  completely  failed  ;  two  of
these  I  referred  to  in  the  previous  Report  (p.  236), — (1)  one  was  when
Mr.  Tompkins  was  employed  at  Porthcawl  in  Glamorganshire  ;  the
geological  formation  at  this  place  is,  I  find,  some  15  to  20  ft.  of  red
marl  and  shale,  resting  on  a  deep  bed  of  Triassic  Conglomerate  :  (2)
the  other  case  was  at  Ampthill  in  Bedfordshire,  where  10  to  20  ft.  of
the  lower  Greensand  rest  on  a  bed  of  Jurassic  clay  over  500  ft.  thick.
In  both  these  cases,  as  might  be  expected  geologically,  a  small  supply
of  water  was  found  not  far  below  the  surface,  and  no  increased  supply
after  boring  to  a  much  greater  depth.

These  two  partial  failures  are  of  considerable  public  interest,  as  the
dowsers  were  in  each  case  engaged  by  the  respective  District  Councils,
and  the  costs  incurred  were  disallowed  by  the  auditors  to  the  Local
Government  Board.  In  reporting  the  case  the  local  newspapers  state
that : —

Mr.  W.  A.  Casson,  the  Local  Government  Board  auditor,  in  giving  his
decision,  quoted  Professor  Barrett,  who  had  written  ;i  monograph  "  On  the
So-called  Divining  Rod,"  which  was  published  in  the  Fruceedintis  of  the
Society  for  Psychical  Research. Though  apparently  strongly  biassed  in


240


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[PAET


favour  of  diviners,  Professor  Barrett  admitted  that  their  general  ideas  of
water  were  absurd,  as  they  imagined  springs  to  exist  like  buried  treasure,
located  to  an  area  of  a  few  square  inches,  or  as  underground  rivers  which
they  professed  to  trace  within  an  inch  on  either  side.  He  (Mr.  Casson)
regarded  divination  as  a  survival  from  times  when  magic  and  witchcraft  were
generally  believed  in.

Like  many  others,  Mr.  Casson  was  misled  by  the  name  divining
rod  ;  he  should,  however,  be  more  careful  in  his  official  utterances;  if
he  had  read  my  report,  he  could  hardly  have  made  the  foolish  statement
that  I  was  "  strongly  biassed  "  ;  a  judge  or  a  jury  are  not  said  to  be
biassed  M'hen  they  arrive  at  a  decision  after  patiently  hearing  the
evidence  on  both  sides  that  has  been  brought  before  them.

The  reason  assigned  by  the  auditors  for  their  decision  was  that  the
diviners  made  a  pretence  of  claiming  some  supernatural  power  in
finding  underground  water  (this  is  a  mistake ;  no  dowsers  claim  such
power  ;  "  abnormal  "  is  meant),  and  it  was  stated  the  judges  had  laid
down  that

"the  pretence  of  a  power,  whether  moral,  physical,  or  supernatural,  with
intent  to  obtain  money,  was  sufficient  to  constitute  an  offence  within  the
meaning  of  the  law."

The  fees  charged  by  the  dowsers  were  therefore  illegal,  as  they
could  not  be  recovered  in  a  court  of  law.  In  addition,  the  Porthcawl
auditor  surcharged  the  District  Council  with  the  expenditure  on  the
boring,  amounting  to  over  £.500.^  Throughout  England  and  Wales
the  public  interest  excited  in  the  matter  was  great.  I  received  nearly
100  cuttings  from  various  newspapers  relating  to  the  subject ;  the
editors  for  the  most  part  lamenting  the  benighted  and  superstitious
practices  of  the  Porthcawl  and  Ampthill  councillors.  "  It  is  im-
possible," said  the  Leeds  Mercuri/  in  reference  to  this  case,  "  to
plumb  the  depths  of  human  credulity."-  But  the  surcharged  Councils
appealed,  and  ultimately,  in  answer  to  a  question  in  the  House  of
Commons,  on  August  7th,  1899,  the  President  of  the  Local  Govern-
ment Board,  the  Right  Hon.  J.  Chaplin,  upset  many  beliefs  by  stating
that  the  appeals  were  allowed  and  the  auditors'  decisions  reversed,
"  the  Board  having  been  advised  by  their  own  legal  adviser  that  the
reasons  assigned  by  the  auditors  for  making  the  disallowances  did
not  support  the  action  they  took  in  point  of  law." Hence,  after

^  Subsequently,  the  auditor  must  have  amended  his  decision  in  respect  to  this,  for
according  to  Mr.  Chaplin's  statement  in  the  House  of  Commons,  the  only  sums
disallowed  were  the  small  amounts  for  the  diviner's  fees.  The  best  accounts  of  the
Porthcawl  case  will  be  found  in  the  lengthy  reports  in  the  Cardiff  Western  Mail  for
July  20th,  1897.  ct  seq.  The  Ampthill  case  will  bo  found  fully  reported  in  the  Bedford
Times  for  June  5th,  1S97,  et  seq.

-  A  few  exceptions  to  this  general  outcry  were  to  be  found  in  some  iournals,
notably  Truth,  the  Evening  Standard,  and  the  Local  Government  Journal.


XXXVIII.]  Oil  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


241


this,  Urbcan  and  Rural  District  Councils  are  left  free  to  employ  any
competent  water-dnder  thej"-  choose  to  select,  whatever  method  he  may
employ.  This  is  surely  a  wise  decision,  founded,  I  expect,  less  upon
legal  views  than  upon  the  experience  which  Mr.  Chaplin  and  other
members  of  the  Government  have  had  of  the  usefulness  of  dowsers
on  their  own  estates.

§  3. Fercentage  of  Failures.

This  leads  on  to  the  question  of  the  percentage  oi  failures  of  different
dowsers.  I  have  tried  to  obtain  from  some  of  the  professional  "  water-
finders  "  a  record  of  all  the  places  they  have  visited  in  the  course  of  say
twelve  months,  so  that  by  inquiry  at  each  place  I  might  ascertain  the
number  of  successes  and  of  failures.  But  it  is  impossible  to  know  if
the  record  sent  is  a  complete  one.  I  have  received  from  two  dowsers  a
long  list  of  persons  and  places,  and  have  written  to  each  person  named
with  the  result  that  all  these  cases  were  more  or  less  successful,  but  the
failures  are  just  the  ones  that  are  not  likely  to  be  sent.  Mr.  Gataker
frankly  says  in  a  letter  to  me  that  he  has  had  occasional  failures,  which
he  cannot  account  for  except  by  his  state  of  health.  The  dowser  very
often  explains  away  a  failure  by  saying  the  depth  is  merely  greater  and
the  quantity  of  water  less  than  he  predicted,  but  all  depends  upon  how
much  greater  depth  or  how  much  less  water.  It  would  be  much  better
if  each  dowser  would  keep  a  faithful  record  of  all  his  engagements,  and
then  take  the  public  into  his  confidence,  and  give  the  results  of  his
work  and  references  to  each  of  his  employers.  This,  I  suppose,  we
can  hardly  expect  in  the  present  state  of  human  nature.

An  estimate  of  the  number  of  failures  on  the  part  of  professional
dowsers  may  perhaps  be  obtained  from  the  extra  charge  some  of  them
make  when  sinking  wells  on  the  "  no  water,  no  pay  "  system.  That  is
to  say,  they  agree  to  sink  a  well  for  a  certain  sum  at  the  spot  they
have  selected  by  the  rod,  and  if  water  is  not  found  at  the  place  they
predicted,  and  in  about  the  quantity  they  estimated,  then  no  charge  is
made  ;  the  loss  falls  on  the  dowser.  If  however,  all  turns  out  satis-
factorily, a  somewhat  higher  charge  is  made  for  sinking  the  well  than
an  ordinary  well-sinker  would  charge,  or  if  no  guarantee  be  given  by
the  dowser.  This  extra  charge  varies  with  different  dowsers,  and  is  of
course  their  insurance  against  failure;  it  expresses,  however,  something
more  than  the  percentage  of  absolute  failures,  for  water  may  be  found,
but  the  supply  may  be  insufficient,  or  the  depth  may  be  greater  than
was  allowed  for  in  the  contract.

I  have  inquired  what  this  extra  charge  is,  and,  as  might  be  ex-
pected, it  varies.  Mr.  Gataker  makes  an  additional  charge  of  25  per
cent,  on  the  "  no  water  no  pay"  system;  a  similar  additional  rate  is,  I

T


242


'Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


utiderstamJ,  charged  by  Mr.  Chesterman  ; '  Mr.  Tompkins  in  reply  to
my  inquiry,  says:  "25  to  30  per  cent,  extra  would  cover  the  risk";  Mr.
Stone  says  he  does  not  work  on  that  system,  but  would  bo  willing  to
undertake  work  on  the  terras  of  only  charging  out  of  pocket  expenses,
in  addition  to  his  fee,  if  water  is  not  found.'-  The  late  John  Mullins
(see  p.  75  of  ray  previous  Report)  made  no  extra  charge,  and  (as  a  rule)
was  willing  to  forego  all  payments  if  after  sinking  the  well  a  sufficient
supply  of  water  was  not  found.  His  sons,  who  carry  on  the  business,
and  one  of  whom  is  a  dowser  (see  p.  98  of  last  Report),  inform  me  "we
do  not  generally  make  any  extra  charge  for  giving  a  guarantee  of  find-
ing water  ;  on  three  occasions  only  we  chai-ged  15  per  cent,  extra  on  the
contract  for  making  the  well."  They  enclose  me  copies  of  some  of  their
contracts  for  large  amounts;  several  of  these,  T  notice,  contain  the  clause
"in  the  event  of  not  obtaining  a  supply  of  1,000  gallons  per  day  of
twenty-four  hours,  we  will  make  no  charge  for  the  work  done  "  But  a
thousand  gallons  per  da,y  is  a  very  small  supply  for  expensive  operations,
and  contaminated  surface  water  might  easily  yield  this  amount.

I  am  inclined  to  think  we  may  take  from  10  to  15  per  cent,  as
the  average  percentage  of  failures  which  occur  with  most  English
dowsers  of  to-day,  allowing  a  larger  percentage  for  partial  failures,
meaning by  this  that the quantity  of  water estimated and  the
depth  at  which  it  is  found  have  not  realised  the  estimate  formed
by  the  dowser. This  latter,  however, though  of great  practical
importance,  is  foreign  to  our  inquiry,  for  what  we  want  to  know  is
whether,  after  making  every  allowance  for  shrewdness  of  eye,  chance
coincidence,  and  local  or  geological  knowledge,  the  dowser  has  any
instinctive  or  supernormal  power  of  discovering  the  presence  of  under-
ground water. The  answer  to  this  question  is  to  be  found  by  a  study
of  the  cases  cited  in  this  and  the  previous  Report,  and  is  discussed  in
a  subsequent  Part  (p.  .303). Here  I  will  only  add  that  the  reader
who  has  followed  me  will  have  seen  how  absurd  is  the  dowser's  notion
that  the  mere  twisting  of  his  forked  twig  is  an  infallible  indication  of
underground  water. As  I  have  already  shown  (Vol.  XIII.,  p.  253),
the  movement  of  the  twig  is  due  to  a  sub-conscious  suggestion,  and
this  may  arise  from  many  causes  besides  the  assumed  influence  of
underground  water  on  the  dowser.

1  In  a  I'ecent  contract  between  the  District  Council  at  East  Knoyle  and  the
dowser,  Chesterman,  so  many  gallons  per  twenty-four  hours  were  stipulated  for,  and
a  certain  depth  not  to  be  exceeded.  The  contract  wa.s  taken  at  ordinary  rates,
Chesterman  to  receive  25  per  cent,  extra  if  he  succeeds  and  to  pay  all  if  he  fails :  as
the  District  Council  have,  I  understand,  already  lost  £150  over  a  well  sunk  upon
geological  advice,  they  have  made  a  good  bargain.

-  Thi.s  is  a  most  unsatisfactory  arrangement,  for  the  dowser,  being  the  contractor,
makes  himself  the  judge  of  what  is  an  adequate  supply  of  water  and  what  the  depth
of  the  boring  should  he. I  have  heard  some  complaints  of  Mr.  Stone  in  this  respect.


XXXVIII.]


Oil  the  So-called  Divining  RinJ.


243


PART  IX.

Continental,  Colonial,  and  Californian  Cases  of  the  Use  of  the
Rod  in  the  Search  for  Underground  Water.


g  1. Continental  Dowsers.

In  the  previous  Report,  on  p.  2.3,  I  mentioned  that  a  French  writer
had  published  in  1850  a  little  book  called  Histoire  de  V Hydroscopie  et
de  la  Baguette  Divinatoire,  and  I  spoke  of  the  author,  who  was  in
early  life  a  successful  and,  I  believe,  professional  dowser,  as  "a  M.
Mortillet."  I  was  unaware  at  the  time  that  the  author  was  the  same
person  as  Professor  Gabriel  de  Mortillet,  who  has  a  European  reputa-
tion, and  is  one  of  the  most  distinguished  anthropologists  in  France.
I  therefore  owe  an  apology  to  Professor  de  Mortillet,  and  expressed
this  in  sending  him  a  copy  of  the  Report.  It  is  often  remarked
that  it  would  be  of  gi'eat  value  if  a  competent  scientific  man  were
also  a  dowser,  and  could  give  us  his  personal  experience.  Here  we
have  a  case  in  point,  and  to  this  may  be  added  the  case  of  Mr.
Enys,  F.G.S.,  the  President  of  the  Royal  Geological  Society  of  Corn-
wall, a  letter  from  whom  is  quoted  on  p.  219.  Professor  de  Mortillet's
little  book  is  not  now  accessible  ;  the  author,  in  reply  to  my  inquiries,
writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

St.  Gerniain-en-Laye,  pres  Paris,  18  Decemhre,  1897.

Je  regrette  beaucoup  de  ne  pas  pouvoir  vous  eiivoyer  mon  Histoire  de
Hydroscopie.  Je  n'en  possede  pas  meme  un  exemplaire  chez  moi.  Je  vais
m'iaformer  s'il  en  existe  encore.  Elle  a  ete  publiee  a  Chambery  ;  si  j'en
retrouve,  vous  la  recevrez.

Pennettez-moi  de  vous  faire  de  sinceres  compliments  sur  votre  On  the
So-called  Divining  Eod.  Je  n'ai  fait  que  parcourir  ce  memoire,  mais  je
compte  bien  I'etudier  avec  tout  le  soin  qu'il  merite.

Je  mats  a  la  poste,  a  votre  adresse,  en  mem.e  temps  que  cette  carte,  un
numero  de  L' Tntermediaire  de  I'Afas,^  contenant,  page  23,  le  resume  de  mon
opinion  sur  la  Baguette  et  le  Pendule.  Je  vais  announcer  votre  memoire
dans  un  prochain  numero  de  L'Intennediaire  cle  I'Afas.

Agreez,  cher  Profe,sseur,  mes  remerciments  et  I'assurance  de  mon  haute
consideration.

G.  i)E  Mortillet.

1  The  word  Afas  is  taken  from  the  first  letters  of  the  Association  Francaise  pour
i'Avaucement  des  Sciences ;  this  excellent  journal  is  regularly  issued  as  an  organ  of
"  Notes  and  Queries  "  to  the  members  of  the  Association. — W.  F.  B.

T  2


244


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


As  the  summary  Professor  de  Morfcillet  gives  of  his  views  on  the
baguette  is  of  general  interest,  I  append  the  following  translation  of  the
communication  he  refers  to  in  L'A/as,  February,  1896  : —

The  name  "hydroscope  "  has  been  given  to  those  persons  who  experience
certain  special  sensations  on  passing  over  subterranean  watercourses.
Sometimes,  though  very  rarely,  the  sensation  is  sufficiently  strong  f<jr  the
subject  to  be  directly  conscious  of  it.  In  most  cases  hydroscopes  are
compelled  to  use  an  instrument  in  order  to  recognise  the  fact.  The  instrument
employed  is  either  a  pendulum  {ijendule)  or  a  rod.  The  pendulum  is  carried
in  the  hand,  so  that  the  least  trembling  of  the  arm  sets  it  in  motion.  As  to
the  rod,  it  is  a  twig  slightly  bent,  which  the  operator  rests  upon  the  index
fingers  of  each  hand  so  as  to  balance  it.  The  least  motion  of  the  fingers
towards  or  away  from  each  other  is  then  sufficient  to  displace  the  centre
of  gravity,  which,  passing  from  the  centre  of  the  rod  towards  the  ends,
and  from  the  ends  towards  the  centre,  naturally  causes  the  rod  to  turn.  But
this  is  not  the  true  divining  rod.  This  last  is  a  stem,  dividing  into  two
branches  nearly  of  equal  size,  and  forming  as  acute  an  angle  as  possible.
The  end  of  a  branch  is  grasped  in  each  hand,  and  it  is  bent  back  in  such  a
manner  as  to  be  in  tension  (resisting  the  pressure  of  the  hand).  These
recurved  and  bent  branches  endeavour  to  spring  back  to  their  original
straight  line,  which  causes  their  point  of  union  to  move.  To  use  this  rod,
an  equilibrimn  as  unstable  as  possible  is  set  up,  so  that  it  may  be  disturbed
by  the  least  nervous  jar,  which  will  cause  the  instrument  to  move.  Such  are
the  principles  governing  the  pendulum  and  the  rod.  The  nature  of  the
wood  is  a  matter  of  indifierence.  Hazel  is  preferred,  because  it  forks  more
frequently,  and  the  rods  are  more  flexible  than  is  the  case  with  other  trees.

Pendulums  and  rods  move  over  certain  points  in  the  hands  of  persons
who  are  especially  sensitive.  These  jDoints  are  supposed  to  be  over  under-
ground watercourses.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  this  is  generally,  but  not  always,
the  case.  I  have  seen  important  works  undertaken  merely  upon  indications
furnished  by  hydroscopy,  with  full  success.  But,  at  other  times,  I  have  seen
it  fail.

This  much,  however,  is  certain,  which  I  can  affirm  as  the  result  of
experience,  that  the  point  chosen  by  one  diviner  will  also  be  chosen  by
others  brought  from  a  distance,  and  completely  ignorant  of  the  preceding
experiments. A  real  phenomenon  to  study  does  therefore  exist.

What  has  discredited  this  phenomenon  is  the  attempt  to  employ  it  in
moral  matters,  such  as  the  search  for  robbers,  assassins,  etc.

I  would  call  special  attention  to  the  penultimate  paragraph,  as
expressing  the  opinion  of  a  distinguished  man  of  science  who  knows
what  he  is  talking  about.

It  will  be  noticed  that  Professor  de  Mortillet  refers  to  the  use  of  a
pendule  as  well  as  a  baguette.^ The  former  is  not,  I  believe,  anywhere

^  I  have  referred  to  the  so-called  pmdu^f  cxploratcur  in  the  isrevious  Report,
p.  10.  It  consists  simply  of  a  ring  or  little  ball,  suspended  by  a  thread  which  is  held
between  the  fingers,  and,  thus  held,  the  involuntary  motion  of  the  hand  sets  it


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  245


employed  by  dowsers  in  England,  but  it  is  in  use  in  some  parts  of
America,  and  is  described  in  an  article  in  an  American  journal,  the
Democratic  Revieiv  for  1850.  The  writer  calls  himself  "  An  Old  Rods-
man,"  and  states  that  some  divdaers  in  searching  for  metals  use  a
forked  twig,  or  two  pieces  of  whalebone,  and  others  a  "  small  metallic
ball  suspended  by  a  horse-hair  or  silk  thread.  As  the  operator
approaches  the  hidden  mine,  the  ball  deviates  more  or  less  from  the
perpendicular,  and  this  points  out  the  proximity  of  the  object  sought."
A  very  similar  ijendidc  is  referred  to  in  the  next  case,  as  employed  by
some  French  sowciers,  or  water- finders.  These  sourciers,  I  am  informed
by  those  in  the  South  of  France  to  whom  I  have  written,  are  to  be
found  in  Dauphine,  Savoie,  and  Beaujolais,  but  in  smaller  numbers
than  formerly. A  friend  in  France  wi'ites  as  follows  : —

Lyons,  ./h^;/  2nd,  1898.
M.  Raoul  do  Cazenove  (a  relative  of  Dean  Cazenove)  lately  built  himself
a  chateau,  and  after  all  was  finished,  found  he  had  everything  heart  could
desire  except  water.  He  knew  of  an  old  farmer  rejjuted  as  a  "sourcier, "
and  went  to  him.  He  consented  to  come,  but  as  he  expressed  it,  "for
love,  not  for  money,  as  I  never  intended  doing  it  again  ;  it  exhausts  me  so
terribly."  He  came,  found,  and  was  exhausted,  so  much  so  that  they  ha^l
much  ado  to  fit  him  for  returning  home.

I  wrote  to  M.  de  Cazenove,  who  kindly  sent  me  the  following
particulars  :- —

Chateau  du  Sober,  La  Salle,  Gard,  Juhj  lith,  1898.

I  am  ha^jpy  to  send  you  the  few  particulars  I  possess  on  the  subject.
Answering  your  two  questions,  I  may  .say,  1st,  since  thirty  years  or  so,  I
have  had  on  many  occasions  to  ask  the  "  sourciers'  "  services.  I  have  asked
their  help  fourteen  times ;  their  researches  have  been  successful  in  nine  cases.
Our  country  is  very  irregular,  abrupt  and  rocky  ;  so  no  wells  have  been
bored.  Water  is  to  be  found  in  digging  horizontal  galleries  ;  most  of  these
go  from  twenty  to  one  hundred  metres  [about  66  to  330  ft.] ;  many  are  bored
in  granite  ;  some  others  in  "calcaire"  [limestone].

2nd.  When  I  have  observed  the  "sourcier"  at  work  he  feels  a  particular
sensation,  or  nudaise,  which  increases  as  he  approaches  the  hidden  water.
Some  use  a  rod  ;  many  of  them  a  heavy  watch,  hanging  by  its  chain  ;  some
of  thein  don't  use  any  instrument.  We  have  a  lot  of  "sourciers"  in  the
country  (mountains  of  the  Cevennes) ;  some  of  them  are  amateurs,  many  are
professionals.  Their  estimation  of  the  depth  and  volume  of  water  is  quite
empirical  ;  hence  mistakes  and  frequent  decei^tions  result. Sometimes  their

oscillating;  aud  appears  to  endow  the  iKndule  with  a  sort  of  intelligent  a^otivity.  A
considerable  literature  has  arisen  over  the  pcndule,  a  toy  which  afresh  e.xcites  the
astonishment  of  succeedinf?  generations.  It  is  really  a  simple  form  of  "autoscope,"
and  can  claim  a  remote  antiquity,  divination  by  an  oscillating  ring  or  pcndule  having
been  used  by  the  ancients ;  it  was  employed  by  Hilarius  in  the  4th  century  to  ascer-
tain who  would  be  the  successor  to  Valens  ;  Chevreul,  in  his  Baguette  Divinatoire,
pp.  132  et  seq.,  gives  the  whole  passage.


246


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


long  exjDerieiice  furnishes  them  with  sufficient  indications,  but  they  have  no
rules  ;  only  personal  and  nervous  feeling.

Many  professional  "  sourciers  "  exist  in  France  in  various  parts.  I
remain  at  your  disposition  for  further  inquiries.

R,  DE  Cazenove.

Continental  ^'  Hydroscopes"  in  the  Early  Part  of  the  Century.

One  of  the  most  successful  water-finders  in  the  early  part  of  the
19th  century  was  the  French  Abb^  Paramelle  ;  he  did  not  employ  a  rod,
but  trusted  to  his  instinct,  guided  by  a  knowledge  of  hydro-geology
which  he  had  gained  through  careful  observation.  I  have  devoted  an
Appendix  to  Paramelle  (see  p.  352),  as  his  case  forms  an  instructive
contribution  to  our  research.

The  subject  of  Continental  dowsers  would  be  incomplete  without
reference  to  the  writings  of  Thouvenel,  Amoretti,  Count  Tristan  and
Baron  Du  Prel.  Dr.  Thouvenel  I  have  already  referred  to,  and  his
experiments  with  tlie  dowser  Bleton  are  given  in  the  next  Part.
Thouvenel,  towards  the  close  of  the  18th  century,  went  to  Italy  and
there  experimented  with  another  dowser,  or  "  hydroscope,"  a  lad
named  Pennet,i  who  professed  to  find  buried  metals  and  coal,  as  well
as  underground  water.  Some  of  the  results  were  so  surprising  that
the  great  naturalist,  Spallanzani,  was  much  impressed,  but  as  Pennet
was,  according  to  a  letter  published  by  Biot,^  subsequently  found
tricking  at  Florence,  Spallanzani  concluded  he  also  had  been  tricked
and  withdrew  his  former  opinion.  I  do  not  know  whether  Biot  had
reliable  evidence  for  his  statement,  for  we  all  know  that  with  many
sceptics  any  evidence  is  thought  good  enough,  if  it  serves  to  discredit
phenomena  new  to  science.

Amoretti,  who  vv^as  an  Italian  savant  of  some  note,  published
vai'ious  papers  on  liis  experiments  with  the  Divining  Rod,  chiefly  with
two  dowsers,  one  the  lad  Pennet,  and  the  other,  a  boy,  Anfossi."
In  Vol.  XIX.  of  the  Opuscoli  Scelti,  Amoretti,  in  a  letter  to  Fortis,

^  See  an  article  by  Dp.  Thouvenel  in  Melcmrjes  d'histoirc  natwellc  de  physique,
etc.,  Vol.  III.,  Paris,  1807.

-  Reprinted  in  18.58  in  his  Melanges  scienlifiqucs  ct  Utteraires,  torn.  II.,  p.  SO.
In  the  Bibliograijhy  of  the  Divinino;  Rod,  which  Mr.  Westlake  has  with  such
immense  industry  prepared,  numbers  of  papers  in  French,  Italian,  and  German  will
be  found  between  1800  and  1810,  arising  out  of  Dr.  Thouvenel's  investigations.

■*  Amoretti's  papers  on  the  divming  rod,  in  the  British  Museum,  are  mainly  found
in  the  Soc.  Ital.  dcllc  Scknr.c  for  1813  and  181G,  and  earlier  papers  in  the  Opuscoli  Scelti
sullc  Scienze  from  171(8  to  1804.  The  later  papers  were  published  separately  under
the  title  of  Delia  Rahdi>man:iii  ossia  Eletlrometria  animalc.  Part  I.  of  this  book  was
translated  into  German,  and  a  jiaper  on  the  same  subject  by  J.  W.  Ritter  added,
with  plates  showing  various  rods  held  both  by  hands  and  feet.  Some  of  Amoretti's
papers  were  also  translated  into  French  and  published  in  Fortis'  Memoircs.


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


247


dated  December,  1796,  states  :  (1)  That  an  Augustinian  friar  had,  by
means  of  the  rod,  found  an  underground  spring,  which  had  since
supplied  the  country  house  of  Signor  Dolbecchi ;  (2)  that  one  Sanzio,
a  surgeon,  found  his  pulse  rose  twelve  to  fifteen  beats  faster  per
minute  when  standing  over  subterranean  water  ;  (3)  that  an  insen-
sitive person  holding  a  divining  rod  became  sensitive  and  the  rod
moved,  when  his  hands  were  held  by  a  sensitive  [i.e.,  a  dowser] ;  (4)
particulars  are  given  of  a  sensitive  (a  boy)  who  could  locate  under-
ground water  by  his  feelings,  without  using  a  rod  :  Pennet  and
Anfossi  (other  sensitives)  also  said  the  same.  Amoretti,  like  Pro-
fessor Sementini,  Ritter,  and  others,  believed  in  the  close  connection
of  electricity  with  the  movement  of  the  rod.  The  Count  de  Tristan
was  likewise  fully  convinced  of  the  electric  origin  of  the  dowsing
faculty;  his  knowledge  of  physics  was,  however,  very  slight.  In  1826
he  published  the  result  of  numerous  experiments  with  the  divining
rod  in  the  valley  of  the  Loire  in  a  book  called  Beclierches  sur  qiuelques
effluves  ter7-estres.  An  outline  of  these  experiments  is  given  by  Dr.
Mayo,  F.R.S.,  in  his  excellent  book.  Truths  Contained  in  Pojndar
Superstitions,  and  by  Chevreul  in  his  Baguette  Divinatoire,  pp.  122
et  seq.

The  influence  of  "suggestion,"  whether  conscious  or  unconscious,
was  not  considered  nor  guarded  against  by  any  of  these  expesimenters,
nor  was  the  efiect  of  involuntary  muscular  action  sufficiently  recog-
nised till  later.  Hence  Amoretti,  Ptitter,  Tristan,  and  very  often
Thouvenel,  were  led  to  attribute  to  animal  electricity  phenomena  that
were  mainly  due  to  suggestion.  Thousands  of  experiments  have  been
made  and  volumes  written  on  the  divining  rod  and  the  pendule  (or
magic  pendulum),  all  of  which  are  valueless  owing  to  the  non-
recognition  of  this  source  of  error ;  I  will,  however,  return  to  this
later  on.

In  the  autobiography  of  that  learned  and  singular  man^  Zschokke,
an  account  is  given  on  p.  143,  of  several  dowsers  (or  Rhabdomantins,
as  Zschokke  calls  them)  whom  he  had  met  in  Switzerland  ;  tliey  are
to  be  found,  he  states,  in  almost  every  canton.  Dr.  Ebel,  of  Zurich,
a  well-known  geologist,  sent  Zschokke  one  of  these  dowsers  to  test;
he  adds  that  the  Abbot  of  St.  Urban,  in  Lucerne,  was  a  successful
dowser.  Zschokke  was  at  first  very  incredulous,  but  his  incredulity
disappeared  after  the  numerous  tests  to  which  he  subjected  a  young
female  dowser.

The  German  Dowser,  Beraz.

Du  Prel,  who  is  best  known  by  his  suggestive  work.  Die  Philosophie
der  Mystik  (admirably  translated  into  English  by  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey),
published  a  short  essay  on  the  Divining  Rod  {Die  Wiinschelruthe)  in


248


Prufessor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


1890.  In  this  essay  Du  Prel  gives  an  account  of  Beraz,  a  notable
German  dowser. The  following  is  a  translation  of  this  part  : —

[In  1888]  a  friend  in  the  South  asked  me  to  call  upon  Beraz,  the  spring-
finder  (who  is  since  dead,  but  who  lived  at  that  time  in  Munich),  and  to
make  arrangements  with  hiia.  It  was  necessary  to  find  springs  in  a  newly
laid  out  health  resort,  which  was  unprovided  with  a  water  supply.  My
friend  gave  me  (the  quite  unnecessai'y)  advice,  not  to  consult  any  learned
professors,  etc.,  on  the  subject  of  Beraz.  I  visited  Beraz,  and  while  waiting
for  his  appearance,  noticed — amongst  others — the  portrait  of  a  gentleman
hanging  in  the  room.  This  gentleman,  Beraz  informed  me,. was  his  maternal
grandfather,  Professor  Ritter  ;  I  naturally  asked  whether  he  were  the
author  of  the  Siderismm,  and  was  answered  in  the  affirmative. '  The
testimonials  that  Beraz  received  are  sufficient  testimony  to  his  powers.  As
the  subject  is  one  of  great  interest  to  the  public  generally,  and  to  land-
proprietors  especially,  I  give  a  few  dates  of  the  finding  of  springs,  with  the
places  at  which  they  were  found,  and  addresses  at  which  any  one  interested
may  obtain  full  proof  for  the  asking  : — The  Capuchin  Monastery  on  St.
Nicholas-berg  in  the  Wiirzburg  (1877) ;  the  Corporation  of  Gart,  near
Traunstein  (1876)  ;  the  Institute  of  Young  Ladies  at  Allotting  (1882)  ;
Narr's  Brewery  in  Zirudorf,  near  Ntirnberg  (1875),  the  Community  of
Algund,  near  Meran  (1882).

I  have  conversed  with  a  person  who  witne.ssed  one  of  Beraz's  experiments
on  an  occasion  when  he  announced  that  there  was  a  sjiiring  at  a  depth  of
80  ft.,  and  the  spring  was  found  at  83  ft.  I  do  not  doubt  but  that  Beraz  was
sometimes  unsuccessful,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  I  am  sure  that  many  an
enlightened  corporation  has  lavished  great  sums  on  bringing  water  to  their
towns,  which  they  might  have  obtained  much  more  reasonably  by  employing
a  spring-tinder.

In  the  London  Times  for  February  11th,  188.5,  I  find  the  following
account  of  water-finding  by  Beraz  in  Bavaria  : —

The  AUijemeine  Zeiking  gives  some  interesting  jjarticulars  of  remarkable
success  in  indicating  the  presence  of  water  springs  on  the  part  of  a  man
named  Beraz,  who  seems  to  be  a  recognised  authority  in  such  matters.  The
scene  of  his  performances  was  in  the  Bavarian  higiilands,  at  a  height  of
more  than  1,300  ft.  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  The  commune  of  Rothen-
berg,  near  Hirschhorn,  suffered  greatly  from  want  of  water,  and  invited
Beraz  last  autumn  to  endeavour  to  find  some  source  of  supply  for  them.  He
inspected  the  locality  one  afternoon  in  presence  of  the  public  authorities
and  a  reporter  of  the  Allgemeine  Zeitung,  and  announced  that  water  was  to
be  found  in  certain  spots  at  depths  which  he  stated.  The  first  spot  was  in  the
lower  villagt:,  and  he  gave  the  likely  dej^th  at  between  62  ft.  and  72  ft.,  adding
that  the  volume  of  water  which  the  spring  would  give  would  be  of  about  the
diameter  of  an  inch  and  a  quarter. After  incessant  labour  for  four  weeks,

^  Ritter's  Sidcrisirms,  Du  Pre!  remarks  in  another  place,  had  lain  uncut  in  the
Public  Library  of  Munich  from  1808  to  1887,  (q^rojMS  of  which  he  adds  very  truly
"  the  scepticism  of  many  is  merely  ignorance."  Ritter  conducted  some  investigations
on  the  divining  rod  in  Munich  in  180G,  with  an  Italian  named  Campetti.— W.  F.B.


XXXTIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


24>9


consisting  mainly  of  rock  blasting,  the  workmen  came  on  a  copious  spring-
of  water  at  a  deiDth  of  almost  67  ft.  What  he  declared  about  a  water  source
for  the  upper  village  was  very  singular.  He  pointed  to  a  spot  where  he
said  three  watercourses  lay  perpendicularly  under  one  another,  and  running
in  parallel  courses.  The  first  would  be  found  at  a  depth  of  between  22i  ft.
and  26  ft.  of  about  the  size  of  a  wlieaten  straw,  and  running  in  the  direction
from  south-east  to  north-west.  The  second  lay  about  42  ft.  deep,  was  of
about  the  size  of  a  thick  quill,  and  ran  in  the  same  direction.  The  third,
he  said,  lay  at  a  depth  of  about  56  ft.,  running  in  the  same  direction,  and  as
large  as  a  man's  little  finger.  The  actual  results  were  as  follows  : — The  first
watercourse  was  struck  at  a  depth  of  27-^  ft.,  running  in  the  direction  in-
dicated, and  having  a  diameter  of  one-fifth  of  an  inch.  The  workmen  came
on  the  second  at  a  depth  of  42|  ft.  :  it  had  a  diameter  of  o'jths  of  an  inch.
The  third  was  found  at  62i-  ft.  below  the  surface,  and  having  a  diameter  of
4ths  of  an  inch — all  three  running  in  the  direction  Beraz  had  indicated.

The  statements  made  by  the  reporter,  who  says  that  he  was  an  eye-
witness, ai'e  so  circumstantial  that  they  have  the  appearance  of  being
trustworthy,  but  it  is  to  be  regretted  they  were  not  the  subject  of
careful  inquiry  and  corroboration  at  the  time  ;  the  more  so  as  Rothen-
burg  is  in  the  very  centre  of  German  scientific  culture.  If  any  readers
of  this  Report,  who  may  be  visiting  Bavaria,  can  give  me  additional
information  on  this  case,  I  should  be  grateful.^  Assuming  the  facts  t&
be  as  stated,  they  are  of  the  greatest  interest  and  theoretic  importance,
for  this  case  must  be  classed  along  with  the  Waterford  case  and  a  few
others  of  a  similar  type.

In  J^Tasse's  Zeitschrift  fur  Psychische  Aertze  for  1821,  Professor
D'Outrepont,  Ph.D.,  of  Wiirzburg,  gives  some  interesting  facts  con-
cerniug  a  dowser  at  Malmedy  (a  town  on  the  Belgian  frontier)  with
whom  he  was  acquainted.  Mr.  E.  T.  Bennett  has  translated  Dr
D'Outrepont's  paper,  and  published  an  abridgement  of  it  in  the  S.  P.  R.
Journal  for  June,  1899,  p.  83.  It  is  therefore  accessible  for  those
readers  who  wish  for  further  information.

§  2.  Calif ornian  Dowsers.

Amid  the  mass  of  correspondence  which  has  reached  me,  often  from
distant  parts,  I  have  had  several  letters  from  California,  where  it
appears  there  are  sevei'al  professional  ore-finders  and  water-finders,  or
"  water  witches,"  as  they  are  often  locally  called.

1 1  have  to  thank  the  Editor  of  the  Tirties  for  sending  me  the  editorial  address  of
the  Allgemeine  Zeitung,  to  which  I  wrote  in  the  hope  that  the  reporter  referred  to
might  still  be  on  the  staff  of  that  paper  and  able  to  give  me  some  additional
confirmation  of  his  statements.  Unfortunately,  however,  I  learnt  in  reply  that  this
was  not  the  case ;  nor  could  the  Editor  of  the  AUcgeracine  Zeitung  ascertain  who  the
reporter  was  ;  Beraz,  he  informs  me,  is  dead  (Du  Prel  had  stated  this).


250


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


One  correspondent,  Mr.  B.  F.  Dixon,  of  Escondido,  California,  the
head  of  a  firm  of  oi'ange  growers,  writes  as  follows  : —

Escondido,  California,  November  22nd,  1897.

Having  read  a  review  of  youi-  treatise  on  the  Divining  Rod  in  the  papers
here,  the  following  facts  may  interest  yoii.

In  the  fall  of  1865  an  acquaintance  in  Kansas  had  engaged  a  person  to
locate  a  well  on  his  place.  The  man  held  a  forked  peach  twig,  which  moved
strongly  at  a  certain  spot.  Upon  my  laughing  at  such  utter  nonsense,  the
man  asked  me  to  try.  Treating  it  as  a  joke,  I  did  so,  holding  the  forked
twig  as  I  saw  it  held  by  the  water-finder.  To  my  astonishment,  at  the  spot
where  the  water- finder  had  marked,  I  felt  what  seemed  like  a  slight  electric
shock  and  immediately  the  forked  twig  turned  violently  in  my  hands.  I
held  the  stick  as  tight  as  T  could  to  prevent  it  moving,  but  it  tvvisted  right
round  to  the  ground.  I  was  dumbfounded  and  the  joke  was  turned  against
me.  A  well  was  sunk  at  the  spot  and  a  g(jod  su[iply  of  running  water
obtained.

When  it  became  known  that  I  was  a  "  water- witch,"  my  services  were
sought  for  and  I  have  since  located  a  large  number  of  wells,  without  making
any  charge.  I  have  been  surprised  to  find  how  accurate  the  indications  of
the  twig  have  turned  out  :  even  in  the  dejjth  I  have  r;irely  been  far  out  1  ^

Mr.  Dixon  states  he  could  give  me  many  instances  of  his  success
when  previous  attempts  to  find  water  had  failed.  He  quotes  one  case
of  his  in  considerable  detail,  which  I  will  abridge.  An  acquaintance
of  his  in  Kansas  had  spent  large  sums  in  sinking  several  wells  on  his
40  acre  farm,  but  had  got  no  water,  though  some  of  the  wells  were
70  ft.  deep.  At  last  he  begged  Mr.  Dixon  to  come  over  and  try  his
hand.  Mr.  Dixon  went  and  prospected  with  his  peach  twig  ;  he  was
surprised  to  find  the  twig  move  strongly  at  one  spot,  indicating  a
plentiful  water  supply,  which  he  estimated  at  only  18  ft.  deep.  It
suited  the  owner's  purpose  better  to  sink  a  well  a  few  feet  from  this
spot  and  at  a  depth  of  22  ft.  water  was  found  streaming  in  from  the
direction  indicated  by  Mr.  Dixon.  As  the  well  caved  in  shortly  after,
the  owner  decided  to  sink  a  walled-in  well  at  the  very  .spot  marked  by
the  twig,  and  at  less  than  20  ft.  from  the  surface  came  upon  so
abundant  a  supply  of  water  that  it  has  served  the  whole  farm  ever
since.  I  have  no  reason  to  doubt  the  accuracy  of  Mr.  Dixon's  state-
ments, but  it  is  desirable  to  have  them  confirmed  by  independent
observei's,  and  therefore  I  should  be  grateful  to  any  of  our  friends  in
California  who  may  live  near  Escondido  if  they  would  kindly  send  me
some  further  particulars.

Concerning  one  Californian  dowser,  a  Captain  Godfrey,  I  have
received  an  enormous  mass  of  correspondence,  forwarded  to  me  by


'  Mr.  Di.xon  does  not  say  hoiu  he  ascertains  the  depth  by  the  motion  of  the  twig.


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


251


Dr.  Hodgson  and  various  other  friends.  Some  of  the  evidence  is
remarkable,  and  I  hope  to  find  time  to  give  an  abridgement  of  it  at  a
future  time.  Captain  Godfrey  declares  he  is  so  powerfully  affected
by  the  neighbourhood  of  underground  veins  of  ore  or  running
water  that  he  is  made  quite  ill.  He  attributes  it  all  to  electricity  (!)
and  his  wife  writes  voluminous  letters,  asking  for  scientific  enquiry.
This  I  have  attempted  to  obtain,  but  Captain  Godfrey  declines  to
submit  to  any  tests.  Dr.  Hodgson  has  taken  much  trouble  over
this  case,  and  referred  me  to  one  of  the  members  of  the  S.  P.  R.
in  California,  Mr.  Radcliffe -Whitehead,  who  had  recently  visited
Captain  Godfrey.  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Whitehead,  and  had  the  following
reply  :  —

P.O.  Box  144,  Santa  Barbara,  California,  March  6fli,  1898.

I  called  on  Captain  Godfrey  in  Pasadena,  where  he  lives,  two  montlis
ago.  He  is  a  fine  old  man,  and  from  what  I  have  seen  and  heard  I  should
judge  him  to  be  above  all  suspicion  of  fraud.  From  the  statements  made
to  the  Society  and  similar  ones  made  to  me,  I  have  no  doubt  that  he  has
some  curious  faculty,  in  fact,  is  a  sensitive.

The  difficulty  of  going  further  with  this  case  lies  tluxs.  Captain  Godfrey
says  :—

1.  "I  don't  care  a  rap  for  the  scientific  aspect  of  my  case."

2.  "  I  suffer  physically  when  I  exjjerience  the  sensations  given  me  by
underground  streams  of  water  or  veins  of  metal."

3.  "I  don't  care  to  make  experiments,  nor  will  I  seek  for  water  for  a
fee.  I  will  only  do  so  if  I  am  to  liave  a  share  in  the  '  development '  (as  we
call  it  here)  of  said  water."

Now  I,  as  a  develoijer  of  water  on  my  own  land, — I  am  making  two
water  tunnels  at  this  time,  —  should  be  willing  enough  to  employ  Captain
Godfrey  to  "locate"  water  for  me  for  a  fee,  but  I  am  not  disposed  to  agree
to  his  terms,  though  I  have  complete  faith  in  his  honesty.

I  will  write  to  him  shortly  and  try  to  induce  him  to  change  his  mind,  but
as  he  has  lately  refused  a  neighbour  of  mine  who  made  a  similar  proposal,  I
confess  I  have  not  much  hope. However  nous  verruns. I  will  report.

Ralph  Eadcliffe- Whitehead.

In  a  subsequent  letter  Mr.  Radcliffe  Whitehead  informs  me  he  has
failed  to  induce  Godfrey  to  change  his  mind,  and  mentions  another
Californian  dowser  he  knows,  and  is  about  to  employ.  Anotlier
one  of  our  Californian  members,  to  whom  I  had  written  about
Captain  Godfrey,  after  undertaking  to  do  what  he  could,  writes  as
follows  : — •

2,727,  Ellendale-place,  Los  Angelos,  California,  U.S.A.,

February  17th,  1898.
My  own  experiments  have  been  witli  a  man  who  is  a  little  ashamed  of  his
power,  and  does  not  attempt  to  explain  it. He  is  honest  beyond  question,
and  has  submitted  to  such  complete  tests — being  tested  when  blindfolded  ;


252


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


finding  buried  waterpipes  ;  and  by  the  actual  discovery  of  water  in  places
where  it  v/as  least  to  be  expected — that  I  am  reluctantly  forced  to  believe
that  some  such  power  exists,  especially  as  a  comi^lete  test  satisfied  me  that  it
was  not  a  case  of  mind-reading.

I  have  no  knowledge  of  divining  for  water  without  a  rod,  but  one  of  my
farmers,  who  is  an  honest  and  clear-headed  fellow,  tells  me  that  in  his  Iowa
home  they  found  all  their  wells  by  aid  of  a  man  who  almost  had  convulsions
when  imssing  over  running  water.  He  gives  some  curious  cases  of  wells  so
found,  after  attempts  to  get  water  in  the  same  farms  without  his  aid  had
failed,  and  one  case  where  the  man  had  a  fit  at  a  house- warming,  and
declared  that  the  trouble  came  from  a  spring  under  the  house.  On  digging,
a  powerful  and  valuable  spring  was  discovered  near  the  surface.  If  you
value  such  evidence,  I  shall  be  glad  to  get  the  exact  facts  and  the  man's  name
foi  you.  Walter  Nordhoff.

Various  instances  of  the  use  of  the  rod  for  finding  underground
water  in  other  parts  of  the  United  States  and  in  Canada  were  given  in
the  previous  Report  on  pages  27,  44,  59,  62,  and  215-220.


§  3. South  African  Doiosers.

The  use  of  the  divining  rod  has  even  extended  to  Bulawayo.  In
an  article  in  that  able  English  journal,  the  Surveyor,  which  refers  to  the
"  cold  scrutiny  "  and  "  careful  dissecting  "  to  which  the  diviner  has  been
subjected  in  our  previous  Report,  the  following  instance  of  the  use  of
the  rod  in  Bulawayo  is  quoted  from  a  correspondent  to  a  South  African
newspaper  : —

Having  sunk  on  the  spot  located  through  the  medium  of  the  divining
rod,  I  have,  at  a  depth  of  30  ft.,  struck  the  water  ;  whereas  my  neighbour,
at  considerable  expense,  two  years  ago  sank,  on  the  same  line  and  only  30
yards  away,  to  a  depth  of  45  ft.  without  any  result  whatever.  I  am  now
convinced  of  the  great  expense  which  the  rod  may  save  in  sinking  for  water.

This  must  be  taken  for  what  it  is  worth,  as  no  names  are  given.  In
South  African  journals  for  August,  1897,  particulars  are  given  of  a
clerical  water-finder.

"  It  will  be  remembered,"  says  the  Grahamstown  Journal  "that  some
months  ago  the  Rev.  Father  Marconnes,  of  St.  Aidan's  College,  who  is  an
adept  in  the  use  of  the  divining  rod,  made  certain  predictions  as  to  the
finding  of  water  in  certain  spots,  which  he  pointed  out.  The  Government
steam  drill,  under  Mr.  J.  L.  Caithne.ss,  has  now  found  water  just  outside  the
Chronic  Sick  confines  at  Cape  Corps  Camp  on  the  Commonage.  The  water
was  found  at  a  spot  pointed  out  by  the  diviner.  It  was  first  tapped  at
21  ft.  by  an  excavation  Mr.  Caithness  was  making  to  get  his  bore  loose,
and  at  37  ft.  a  supply  of  quite  6,000  gallons  per  diem  was  tapped.  The
water  is  good  and  fresh. Again,  at  the  St.  Andrew's  College,  where  Father


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


253


Marconnes  pointed  out  a  spot,  and  said  there  was  water  at  40  ft.,  tlie  precious
fluid  has  been  tapped  exactly  at  40  ft.,  and  in  good  quantity."

Father  Marcouues  writes  in  a  subsequent  number  of  the  Grahams-
town  Journal  that  he  prefers  to  call  his  divining  rod  a  water  compass,
or  hydro-magnet,  as  it  is  a  "  scientific  instrument,"  and  clearly  indicates
that  electricity  is  the  true  cause  of  its  action  ;  he  does  not,  however,
give  any  evidence  in  support  of  his  belief.  I  do  not  quote  this  case  as
of  any  evidential  value,  for  I  have  not  been  able  to  verify  it,  and  more-
over there  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  water  would  not  have  been  found
without  Father  Marconnes'  aid,  but  I  give  it  simply  to  indicate  the
widespread  use  of  the  rod.

As  is  well  known,  the  divining  rod  was  frequently  used  during  the
17th  century  for  tracking  suspected  persons,  and  for  other  purposes  in
the  "moral  world."  Among  the  native  races  in  South  Africa  the  rod
appears  to  be  still  in  use  for  a  like  purpose.  Though  outside  the  range
of  the  present  Report,  the  following  incident  in  connection  with  the
siege  of  Mafeking  has  attracted  so  much  attention  that  I  will  brieiiy
refer  to  it  here.  A  Press  Association  telegram  appeared  in  the  English
newspapers  of  April  18th,  1900,  to  this  effect : —

April  5th.

Lieut.  Frank  Smitheman,  the  renowned  Matabele  scout,  got  through  the
Boer  lines,  and  arrived  here  yesterday,  carrying  an  Imperial  Government
despatch  for  Col.  Baden-Powell.  He  had  an  adventurous  journey,  spending
two  nights  in  coming  from  Ramatlilabama  on  foot.

Lieut.  Smitheman,  who  knows  every  inch  of  the  country,  was  accom-
panied by  a  clever  native  runner,  who  uses  a  divining  rod  to  ascertain  the
position  of  the  enemy.  This  rod  he  handles  after  the  fashion  of  the  Wilt-
shire water-finder,  thoroughly  believing  in  its  efficiency.

Lieut.  Smitheman's  feat  is  one  of  the  utmost  importance.  Only  two
whites  have  entered  the  town  since  the  beginning  of  the  investment.

Two  centuries  ago  (in  1692)  the  famous  dov/ser,  Jacques  Aymar,
became  notorious  by  his  discovery  (through  following  the  indications
of  the  rod)  of  the  murderer  of  a  poor  wine-seller  in  Lyons,  and  in  1703
he  was  employed  to  identify  the  Camisards  by  the  same  means.  Since
then  (owing  chiefly  to  the  rod  being  condemned  for  any  use  in  the
"moral  world,"  see  p.  258)  its  employment  for  criminal  purposes  has
disappeared  in  Europe.  Inquiry  may  prove  that  the  South  African
report  is  not  to  be  credited,  or  the  "  diviner  "  worthless,  but  the  case
of  Jacques  Aymar  is  as  well  attested  as  any  fact  in  history I  have
in  my  possession  a  mass  of  original  documents,  published  at  the  time,
which  place  the  really  extraordinary  character  of  Aymar's  discovery  of

1  The  best  modern  account  of  this  story  is  given  in  Figuier's  Histoire  du  Mer-
veilleux,  Vol.  II.,  Chap.  5.


254


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


tlie  murderer  of  the  Lyons  wine-seller  beyond  doubt.  ISTor  is  there
any  improbability  in  the  circumstance,  if  we  here  regard  the  dowser  as
a  bloodhound  following  a  trail,  which  his  sub-conscious  self  picks  up
and  indicates  through  the  involuntary  motion  of  the  rod  he  carries.


§  4. Aitstralian  Dotvsers.

In  the  previous  Report  (Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  45-47)  I  gave  an  account
of  four  successful  amateur  dowsers  in  Queensland  and  New  South
Wales.  Several  other  cases  of  Australian  dowsers  have  since  reached
me.  Two  cases  are  of  such  interest  that  I  will  briefly  refer  to  them,
as  in  both  these  cases  the  dowsers  were  gentlemen  of  good  standing
and  intelligence.

(1)  The  following  account  has  been  sent  me  by  Mr.  Yaughan
Jenkins  ;  it  was  published  in  the  Sydney  Stock  Journal  and  in  the
Armidate  Chronicle  (a  New  South  Wales  paper)  for  April  14th,  1900.
The  report  is  too  long  to  quote,  and  I  give  a  summary  of  its  essential
parts.

The  President  of  the  Armidale  Cattle  Show,  Mr.  F.  J.  White  (a  well-
known  man),  was  greatly  in  need  of  a  water  supply  on  his  estate,  Sauraarez.
For  twenty-four  years  that  his  family  have  lived  there  they  have  had  to  cart
water  from  a  distance,  as  did  their  predecessor,  Mr.  Thomas,  attempts  to
tind  water  on  the  jjlace  having  failed.  Eventually  Mr.  White  sunk  a  deep
well,  120  ft.  deep,  through  the  solid  rock,  but  no  water  was  reached.  A
friend  who  was  visiting  the  place  happened  to  be  an  amateur  dowser,  and,
seeing  the  useless  well,  offered  to  try  his  luck  with  the  divining  rod.  He
did  so,  and  the  rod  turned  vigorously  at  a  certain  spot.  Here  another  well
was  sunk,  and  at  35  ft.  water  was  struck,  it  rose  to  20  ft.  from  the  surface,
and  now  supplies  the  place  and  the  gardens.  Mr.  White  then  tried  the  rod
himself  and  found  to  his  surprise  it  turned  in  his  bands  :  trusting  solely  to
its  guidance,  lie  has  since  sunk  six  more  wells,  and  found  water  in  every  spot
so  indicated.  He  is  now  so  firmly  convinced  of  the  value  of  the  rod  that
he  has  recently  offered  to  pay  the  cost  of  digging  any  well  if  its  indications
turn  out  wrong.  Tlie  writer  of  the  article  went  as  a  sceptic  to  investigate
and  report,  hut  his  amused  incredulity  became  astonishment  when  he  found
the  twig  turned  in  his  hands  also.  He  remarks  :  "  I  don't  believe  in  that
twig  business,  but  the  facts  are  against  me. Will  somebody  explain  ? ''

The  foregoing  newspaper  report  must  be  taken  for  what  it  is  worth,
as  I  have  not  had  time  to  verify  it  by  independent  inquiries.

(2)  The  other  case  I  have  received  through  the  kindness  of  a
West  Australian  friend,  Mr.  E.  T.  Scammell,  37,  St.  Mary  Axe,
London,  E.G.  The  dowser  in  this  case  was  his  friend,  the  late  Mr.
E.  H.  Derrington,  for  many  years  an  Australian  journalist  of  higli


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


255


standing  and  uniu:peaclial)le  integrity.  At  my  request  Mr.  Scammell
obtained  a  lengthy  narrative,  accompanied  by  the  corroborative
testimony  of  independent  witnesses,  from  Mr.  Derrington.  This
account  is  of  interest  from  the  fact  tliat  Mr.  Derrington  became  a
very  successful  dowser  for  mineral  lodes,  particulars  of  which  will  be
given  in  that  part  of  our  work. Mr.  Derrington  writes  : —

Coolgardie,  W.  Australia,  Mmi  2Mh,  1898.

Newspaper  editorship  during  many  years  predisposed  me  to  regard  with
strong  scepticism  all  fads  and  faddists.  I,  with  courtesy,  declined  even  to
witness  experiments  with  the  so-called  "  divining  rod  " — a  name  as  absurd
and  untrue  as  any  I  have  ever  heard,  since  there  is  no  divination  in  the
whole  process.  Ignorance  and  credulity  may  still  employ  it,  but  no
educated  man  would  employ  it.  But,  some  fourteen  years  ago,  there
occurred  in  the  colony  I  have  made  mj'  home  for  now  nearly  half  a  century,
one  of  the  periodical  droughts  for  which  unfortunately  South  Australia  has
become  noted.  The  misery  and  ruin  in  the  out-lying  agricultural  districts
were  forced  upon  my  attention,  and  then  the  pretensions  of  tlie  water-
tinders  came  to  my  mind,  and  I  resolved  upon  an  imi^artial  investigation,
remembering  what  a  priceless  boon  would  be  conferred  if  hidden  sujjplies
of  water  could  be  discovered  in  the  waterless  districts.  I  applied  to  an
old  German  of  most  respectable  antecedents  and  strong  common-sense,  who
was  renowned  as  a  successful  exponent  of  the  art.  Without  giving  me  any
illustration,  he  at  once  placed  in  my  hand  a  V-shaped  eucalyptus  twig,  and
whilst  he  remained  at  the  entrance-gate,  requested  me  to  cross  from  one
side  to  the  other  through  his  garden.  I  did  so,  and  midway  was  astonished
by  the  twig  (held  by  the  paints  in  the  forks  of  the  thumbs,  the  fingers
being  closed  over  it  in  the  palms  of  the  hands)  suddenly  up-rising  and
standing  perpendicularly,  Kidirely  without  mij  volitimi,  and  falling  back  into
its  horizontal  position  when  I  had  passed  one  particular  spot.  I  repeated
the  experiment  a  number  of  times  with  the  same  result,  only  that  I  noticed
a  singular  sensation  as  of  an  electric  current  through  the  spine  whenever
the  twig  moved  as  described.  My  friend  watching  then  showed  me  that  I
had  stood  over  a  concealed  water-channel  fed  by  a  spring  from  the  upper  part
of  his  garden,  and  complimented  me  upon  being  the  most  sensitive  water-
tinder  he  had  ever  met.  This  was  my  first  acquaintance  with  this  unkncnvn
faculty.  I  laid  aside  scepticism  and  eagerly  made  use  of  this  method  to
assist  the  distressed  farmers  with  whom  I  came  into  contact.

I  have  since  made  very  numerous  experiments,  with  a  view  to  an
accurate  estimate  of  the  cause  and  effect  ;  and  I  have  submitted  to  a  variety
of  crude  tests,  many  of  which  were  designed  less  for  the  discovery  of
a  scientific  basis  than  to  throw  ridicule  upon  an  obscure  phenomenon.
Pseudo-scientists  are  prone  to  sneer  at  what  they  cannot  understand,  but
I  hold  there  is  in  asceitained  results  sufficient  ground  to  justify  the  hope
that,  at  some  not  far  distant  future,  a  possibility  of  effecting  economic  results
of  incalculable  value  in  the  discovery  both  of  underground  water  and  ore
by  means  of  the  so-called  divining  rod.

As  to  the  nature  of  the  influence  which  moves  the  rod,  I  am  inclined  to
believe  that  in  certain  sensitives  there  may  possibly  be  set  up  a  current  or


256


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


influence  by  the  electrical  currents  in  the  underground  water  or  metallic
veins.  For  I  discovered  subsequently  my  "galvanometer,"  the  rod,  moved
whenever  I  was  over  metallic  veins  or  even  metals  on  the  surface  of  the

S"^""'^'^-  E.  H.  Derrington.

In  the  foregoinc;  narrative  no  evidence  is  detailed  to  show  that  Mr.
Derrington's  predictions  were  verified  by  digging  or  boring,  nor  that  he
succeeded  when  other  means  had  failed ;  he  adduces,  however,  some
striking  evidence  of  his  success  in  the  discovery  of  mineral  lodes,  but
this  part  of  his  letter  I  will  give  in  another  place.  His  electrical
theory  sounds  a  plausible  one;  it  is  much  the  same  as  Dr.  Thouvenel's
a  century  ago,  but  is  unsupported  by  any  scientific  evidence  and  will
be  referred  to  later  on.  I  may  add  that  in  the  recent  obituary
notices  of  Mr.  Derrington  in  the  South  Australian  newspapers,  a
high  tribute  is  paid  to  him  ;  he  was  not  a  man  likely  to  be  led
astray  by  hasty  inferences  as  to  the  value  of  the  indications  afforded
by  the  divining  rod.

I  now  propose  to  give  a  somewhat  detailed  account  of  that
remarkable  French  peasant  lad,  Bleton,  whose  performances  as  a
water-finder  Dr.  Thouvenel  has  made  famous.


xxxviil]


Oa  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


257


PART  X.

Bleton,  the  Notable  French  Dowser  of  the  Last  Century.

Barthelray  Bleton,  to  whom  reference  has  ah'eady  been  made  (on
p.  20  et  seq.  of  the  previous  Report)  was  born  at  Bouvantes  in
Dauphiny,  somewhere  between  the  years  1740  and  1750. ^  He  was
the  son  of  a  poor  peasant,  was  brought  up  by  charity  in  one  of  the
Carthusian  monasteries  of  Dauphiny,  and  became  a  herdsman.  An
accidental  circumstance  seems  to  have  led  to  the  discovery  of  Bleton's
peculiar  faculty.  Here  is  the  account  which  I  find  given  by  one  of  Dr.
Thouveuel's  correspondents,  who  writes  from  Dijon  on  April  14th,
178],  and  who  adds  he  has  certain  pi'oofs  of  all  that  he  has  stated.-
The  following  extract  is  translated  from  the  original  letter  :  —

Bleton,  when  seven  years  of  age,  had  carried  dinner  to  some  workmen  ;
he  sat  down  on  a  stone,  when  a  fever  or  faintness  seized  him  ;  the  workmen
having  brought  him  to  their  side,  the  faintness  ceased,  but  each  time  he
returned  to  the  stone,  he  suffered  again.  This  was  told  to  the  Prior  of  the
Chartreuse,  who  wished  to  see  it  for  himself.  Being  thus  convinced  of  the
fact,  he  had  the  ground  under  the  stone  dug  up  ;  there  they  found  a  spring,
which,  I  am  told,  is  still  in  use  to  turn  a  mill.

A  similar  account  is  given  by  another  contemporary  quoted  by
Figuier,  and  by  the  writer  in  the  Monthly  Review  for  1782,  who
quotes  from  a  French  pamphlet,  the  writer  of  which  states  the
circumstance  is  "confirmed  by  many  local  witnesses."  Some  confirma-
tion of  the  foregoing  story  is  gained  from  a  remark  made  by  the  Prior
"de  la  Chartreuse  de  Lyon"  in  a  document  testifying  to  Bleton's
extraordinary  faculty  (quoted  by  Thouvenel)  that  Bleton  "  was  quite
as  well  able  to  detect  underground  water  when  he  was  seven  years  old
as  he  is  now." (March  3rd,  1781.)

In  any  other  part  of  the  world  except  Dauphiny  the  coincidence
of  the  boy's  illness  and  the  presence  of  an  underground  spring  would

1  Tiie  exact  date  of  his  birth  is  uncertain,  nor  is  it  of  any  consequence.  The  above
date  is  deduced  from  an  incidental  observation  in  the  evidence  about  to  be  cited.  In
1773,  as  api^ears  from  another  witness,  Bleton's  faculty  was  so  well  known  that  he
was  then  in  request  as  a  water-finder  or  soureier.  Our  principal  knowledge  of  Bleton,
as  will  be  mentioned  presently,  is  derived  from  the  writings  of  Dr.  Thouvenel,  one  of
Louis  XVI. 's  physicians  ;  he  always  spells  the  word  Bleton,  not  Bleton.

^  See  Dr.  Thouvenel's  Mimoire  Physique  et  Medicinal,  1781,  p.  251 ;  Monthly
Rcvicv),  1782,  Vol.  LXVIT.,  p.  55-1 ;  Figuier's  La  baguette  divinatoirc,  p.  365.  Figuier
quotes  from  a  letter  written  by  a  contemporary  of  Bleton  to  the  Editor  of  the
Journal  des  Spectacles.

U


258


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


probably  soon  have  been  forgotten.  But,  a  century  before,  Jacques
Aymar  and  his  rod  had  made  this  province  famous  for  its  diviners,
Aymar  having  been  followed  by  many  who  claimed  a  similar  "  gift."
As,  however,  the  Inquisition  had  forbidden  the  use  of  the  rod  in  the
"  moral  world,"  that  is,  for  tracing  criminals,  or  determining  boun-
dai'ies,  or  settling  lawsuits,  etc.  (its  use  for  these  purposes  having
become  a  most  mischievous  superstition  and  scandal),  these  diviners,
or  tourneurs,  were  chiefly  water-finders,  or  sonrciers.  Bleton  was
therefore  at  once  considered  to  be  a  new  and  sensitive  soiircier.  Some
tests  followed  which  confirmed  this  view.  Doubtless,  custom
demanded  that  he  should  have  a  rod,  and  the  subsequent  use  by
Bleton  of  a  nearly  straight  rod,  resting  on  the  forefingers  of  each
hand,  satisfied  the  sense  of  sourcier  propriety.  The  rod  was  very
slightly  curved,  and  rotated  more  or  less  rapidly  on  its  axis  when
Bleton  came  over  an  underground  spring.  Dr.  Thouvenel  states  he
counted  from  30  to  80  revolutions  per  minute,  and  upwards.

The  rotation  of  the  rod  was  doubtless  caused  by  involuntary
muscular  action  on  Bleton's  part.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  he
moved  it  intentionally ;  in  fact,  it  is  a  very  difiicult,  if  not  impossible,
feat  to  accomplish  by  volition,  except  to  one  long  practised  in  sleight
of  hand,  as  any  one  can  prove  who  supports  a  short  slightly-curved
stick  on  his  forefingers,  and  attempts  to  cause  it  to  rotate  from  "  30  to
80  times  a  minute."  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  reason  to  assume
any  other  motive  power  than  muscular  action,  as  the  famous
astronomer  Lalande  showed  that  Bleton's  rod  could  be  made  to  rotate
by  this  means.  To  this  I  have  already  referred  in  my  previous  paper,
and  will  quote  Lalande's  own  words  later  on,  on  p.  273.

How  Bleton  came  by  this  novel  form  of  rod  is  not  told  us.^
Possibly  it  was  a  survival  in  Dauphiny  of  an  old  type  of  the  virgula
divina.  A  straight  rod,  supported  horizontally  between  the  forefinger
and  thumb  of  each  liand,  is  described  and  depicted  on  the  title  page
of  that  interesting  old  book  on  the  divining  rod,  La  Verge  de  Jacob-

'  The  only  notice  I  can  find  of  the  peculiarity  of  Bleton's  rod  is  in  a  letter  "  from
a  distinguished  physician  "  cited  by  Thouvenel  in  support  of  Bleton's  faculty.  The
writer  says  (p.  277  of  Thouvenel's  Mtmoirc)  that  although  nearly  all  the  tourneurs,
i.e.,  dowsers,  he  has  known,  use  a  forked  rod,  yet  some  in  Germany  use  a  simple  rod,
very  slightly  curved,  placed  across  the  back  of  the  hand,  "ou  comme  Bleton,  sur
roxtremit^  des  deux  doigts  indicateurs."  This  reference  to  Germany  is  probably
taken  from  De  Vallemont's  Physique  Occulte  (1693)  where  there  is  a  picture  of  a  man
holding  the  rod  in  this  way  (see  next  woodcut).  Still  earlier,  in  1640,  the  learned
German  Jesuit,  A.  Kircher,  describes  a  straight-pivoted  divining  rod  which  rotates
when  held  hoviiiontally  between  the  forefingers  of  each  hand  (see  upper  figure  on  the
wood-cut,  Fig.  17).  This,  he  remarks,  he  has  seen  used  by  some  German  diviners :
see  Kircher's  Alagncs  sur  de  arte  Magnctica,  p.  721  of  the  1040  edition.

■-'  It  need  hardly  be  said  that  this,  like  every  other  early  work  on  the  divining
rod,  is  perfectly  worthless  from  the  point  of  view  of  modern  science.


XXXYiii.]  On  the  So-called  Divinimj  Rod.  259


(see  D  on  the  woodcut,  Fig.  16),  which  was  published  at  Lyons  in
1693.  In  the  third  chapter  of  this  book  the  writer  says  that  in
order  to  ascertain  if  a  person  really  has  the  faculty  of  finding  a
hidden  spring,  he  must  let  a  straight  stick  rest  across  his  hands,  in
the  jnanner  shown  in  the  lowest  figure  of  the  woodcuts  on  this  and  the
next  page ;  if  he  has  the  faculty  the  stick  begins  to  rotate.^  Bletoa
was  probably  tested  in  this  way,  and  subsequently  used  this  rotating
rod  as  the  outward  and  visible  sign  of  the  inward  commotion  he


Fig.  16.


experienced.  This  is  the  more  probable  as  the  little  book,  La  Verge
de  Jacob,  was  likely  to  be  well  known  in  Dauphin)',  being  published
at  the  neighbouring  town  of  Lyons,  where  also  Bleton  was  frequently
engaged. (See  also  the  woodcut  on  p.  274.)

The  singular  physiological  effect  produced  upon  Bleton  by  under-
ground springs  seems  to  have  been  retained  more  or  less  throughout  his

1  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  the  Editor  of  Pcai-son's  3Iaga-.inc  for  these  two
woodcuts  ;  Fig.  17,  he  may  be  interested  to  know,  was  originally  tal^en  from  Lebrun's
Lettrcs  qui  cUcouvrent  Villasioii  des  Ph  Uosophes  snr  la  Baguette,  Paris,  1693:  see  also  De
Vallemont's  La  Physique  Occulte,  1603.  De  Vallemont  says  the  rod  was  sometimes
held  in  the  ways  shown  in  Fig.  17.

u  2


260


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


4

[part


life.  A  sort  of  convulsive  spasm  seized  liim,  affecting  the  diaphragm
and  pulse.  Abundant  evidence  of  the  genuineness  of  this  "com-
motion "  is  given  by  a  number  of  unimpeachable  witnesses.  But  this
aspect  of  our  subject  I  will  return  to  in  a  later  section,  when  the
medical  report  Dr.  Thouvenel  gives  of  the  peculiar  symptoms  exhibited
by  his  "  patient  "  will  be  quoted.  Here  I  will  only  add  thatjBleton's
sensibility  appeared  to  vary,  being  greater  in  dry  weather  and  before
meals. It  entirely  ceased  during  an  illness  he  had,  and  did  not  return


Fig.  17.


until  three  months  subsequent  to  his  recovery.  The  rate  of  rotation  of
the  baguette  was  observed  closely  to  correspond  with  the  physiological
ettect  produced.  When  Bleton  moved  away  from  an  underground
spring,  the  symptoms  disappeared  as  rapidly  as  they  arose,  and  the
pulse  resumed  its  normal  rate.  Stagnant  water  appeared  to  make
no  impression  on  him,  nor  the  water  of  exposed  rivers,  lakes,  &c.
This  latter  is  indeed  a  singular,  and  at  first  sight  appears  a  suspicious
circumstance,  difficult  to  reconcile  with  any  physical  theory  of  the
phenomena.  But  equally  singular  is  the  fact  that  it  is  affirmed  by  all
diviners  from  the  time  of  Jacques  Aymar  in  1693  down  to  the  present


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


261


clay,i  and  not  in  one  country  but  wherever  the  divining  rod  is  in
use,  not  the  least  singular  fact  how  this  tradition  (if  it  be  only
such)  has  spread,  for  diviners,  as  a  rule,  are  illiterate  men,  ignorant
of  any  language  but  their  own.  Let  us  now  examine  what  experi-
mental evidence  history  has  preserved  on  behalf  of  Bleton's  alleged
powers.

The  principal  source  of  information  is  found  in  two  treatises
entitled  J/emoire  Physique  et  Medicinal,  by  Dr.  Thouvenel,  who  was  a
distinguished  French  physician.-  The  first  treatise  was  published  in
1781  and  the  second  in  178-1:,  and  both  are  almost  entirely  devoted  to
a  record  of  observations  with  Bleton  and  an  exposition  of  Thouvenel's
electrical  theory  of  the  phenomena.-^  The  best  English  summary  of
these  menioires  is  to  be  found  in  that  old  but  well  edited  register  of
current  literature,  the  Monthly  Review  for  1781,  1783,  and  1781.
There  are,  unfortunately,  few  details  given  by  Thouvenel  of  his
own  experiments  with  lileton.

No.  1. — Here,  however,  is  one,  which  he  says  is  a  complicated  test
to  which  he  submitted  Bleton.  I  will  give  an  abridged  translation
(pp.  69  and  70).

Over  a  stone  bridije,  of  one  arch,  pass  four  small  wooden  aqueducts,
carrying  water  to  Nancy.  Only  the  engineer,  who  had  never  seen  Bleton,
knew  the  e.xact  position  of  these  four  rows  of  pipes,  their  distance  apart,
depth  underground,  etc.,  the  whole  being  well  covered  by  earth  and  vegeta-
tion. He  gave  me  secretly  information  on  this,  of  which  Bleton  was  entirely
ignorant.  The  latter  was  then  taken  across  this  bridge,  as  though  to  return
to  the  town,  after  various  experiments  had  been  made  in  the  neighborhood,
and  without  being  told  that  fresh  experiments  were  to  be  made.  Just
before  reaching  the  bridge,  he  asserted  water  was  flowing  beneath  him,  and
the  sensation  ct>ntinued  with  slight  gaps,  while  crossing  and  in  front  of  the
bridge  to  a  distance  of  five  or  six  feet.  He  retraced  his  steps  several  times
before  finding  distinctly  the  four  channels,  and  was  much  astonished  to

1  In  1689  an  interesting  correspondence  (to  which  I  will  return)  took  place
between  those  acute  intellects.  Fathers  Malebranohe  and  Le  Brun,  on  this  very  point.
For  a  discussion  of  the  sensations  alleged  to  be  experienced  by  dowsers,  see
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Part  XXXII.,  Appendix  D.,  p.  272.

-  The  great  French  Biographical  Dictionary  gives  an  admirable  account  of
Thouveners  life,  which  deserves  to  be  more  widely  known.  Like  Dr.  Elliotson,  in
defence  of  mesmerism,  Dr.  Thouvenel  had  to  face  a  storm  of  obloquy  for  his  courage
in  defending  Bleton.  His  long  and  patient  investigations  were  treated  witb  contempt.
He  left  France  for  Italy  at  the  time  of  the  Revolution,  and  died  in  1815.

3  I  have  to  thank  M.  Rolland,  of  2,  Rue  des  Chautiers,  Paris,  for  enabling  me  to
obtain  a  copy  of  Thouvenel's  earlier  and  more  important  Menioire,  together  with
other  rare  French,  German  and  Italian  books,  pamphlets,  and  newspaper  cuttings
of  the  last  century  bearing  upon  the  bnyuette  divinatoire.  To  those  engaged  in
any  sfiecial  literary  research  I  can  heartily  commend  M.  Rolland's  courteous  help
and  excellent  agency.


262


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[PAKT


find  them  so  near.  He  was  then  told  that  they  were  simply  four  hollow  tree
trunks  made  to  serve  as  aqueducts.

Thouvenel  then  describes  other  tests  as  to  the  distance  apart  of
these  pipes,  and  remarks  that  as  a  small  stream  about  3  feet  wide  was
flowing  some  10  feet  beneath  the  bridge,  he  endeavoured  to  ascertain
what  effect  it  had  on  Bleton ;  a  careful  experiment  showed  that  the
agitation  of  the  diviner  and  the  rotation  of  the  baguette  sensibly-
increased  on  crossing  the  stream.  There  is  nothing,  however,  in  these
experiments  to  exclude  the  effect  of  telepathy  or  even  involuntary
suggestion  upon  Bleton's  mind.  It  is,  however,  only  within  recent
years  that  the  powerful  influence  of  suggestion,  both  on  mind  and
body,  has  received  the  attention  of  physiologists,  and  therefore  we
need  not  be  surprised  that  some  of  Thouvenel's  experiments  are
capable  of  a  difl'erent  interpretation  from  that  which  he  gave.  For
example,  he  found  that  when  his  sou?-cier  was  over  a  spring  and  the
baguette  turning  strongly,  the  convulsive  movements  of  the  body  and
the  rotation  of  the  rod  were  almost  arrested  the  moment  he  touched
Bleton  with  various  "magnetic  compositions  recently  electrified"!
Experiments  were  also  made  when  Bleton  was  insulated,  but  these
I  will  deal  with  in  another  part,  as  the  belief  that  insulation  stops
the  movement  of  the  rod  is  almost  as  widespread  as  that  of  the
different  effects  of  running  and  stagnant  water.

On  pp.  77-80  of  his  first  memoire  Thouvenel  gives  a  summary  of
the  tests  he  made  with  Bleton  in  Lorraine.  The  following  is  a
translation  of  the  passage  ^  : —

I  took  the  precaution  to  rej^eat  several  times  all  the  experiments  just
described  in  detail,  after  having  carefully  hlindf aided  Bleton  ;  in  addition
his  arms  were  sometimes  fastened  behind  his  back  leaving  his  forearms  only
just  sufficiently  free  to  hold  the  bagnctfe  at  the  extremity  of  his  fingers,
sometimes  even  confining  these,  in  order  to  hinder  if  possible  all  mechanical
movement.  These  precautions  were  not  taken  for  my  own  satisfaction,  as  I
was  already  entirely  convinced.

I  conducted  Bleton  to  places  which  he  had  never  seen  ;  I  took  him
towards  springs  of  which  I  knew,  but  which  he  could  not  know  of,  at  other
times  over  ground  where  neither  of  ns  knew  what  might  be  found.  When-
ever he  experienced  his  peculiar  sensations — and  whenever  the  baguette
repeatedly  turned  at  the  same  spot, — I  then  led  him  far  away,  bringing  him
back  by  quite  different  roads,  still  with  his  eyes  bandaged.  .  .  .  When
he  had  followed  the  course  of  an  underground  spring — sometimes  for  more
than  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  across  mountains,  rock,  or  forests,  and  indicated
on  the  way  numerous  sub-divisions  of  the  same  spring — I  made  him  return.
He  then  re-conducted  me  himself,  though  still  blindfolded,  only  supported  by
one  arm,  to  the  point  from  which  we  set  out,  without  straying  a  single  step


\  Already  quoted  in  Part  V.  on  "  Blindfolding  the  Dowser."


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Bod.


263


from  the  line  previously  traced  and  marked  by  pegs,  which  were  often  hidden
beneath  the  surface.  He  re-found  all  the  subterranean  rivulets  already
pointed  out,  and  followed  exactly  the  sinuosities  of  the  underground  stream.
It  frequently  happened  that  we  came  across  springs  whose  course  was
interrupted  by  walls,  terraces,  or  wide  ditches,  so  that  in  order  to  enable
Bleton  to  overcover  these  obstacles,  I  had  to  procure  ladders,  or  take  long
detours,  or  in  some  way  get  him  conveyed  across  ;  nevertheless,  although
blindfolded,  he  soon  regained  the  course  without  the  aid  of  his  eyes.
Sometimes  in  order  to  try  and  deceive  him,  if  his  senses  were  concerned,
I  placed  false  marks  as  if  to  indicate  a  spring;  sometimes  after  he  had
followed  a  spring  across  several  fields,  I  moved  the  pegs  some  feet  away
without  his  knowledge.  Nevertheless,  he  was  never  led  astray  and  always
rectified  such  errors.  In  fine,  I  tried  all  sorts  of  ways  to  deceive  him,  and  I
can  testify  that  vii,  more  than  six  hmulred  trials,  I  did  not  succeed  in  doing
so  one  single  time.

M.  Jadelot,  the  Professor  of  Medicine  in  Nancy,  Thouvenel  states,
was  a  witness  of,  and  co-operated  in,  all  his  experiments,  which
extended  over  a  space  of  two  months,  and  was  no  less  struck  than  he
was  with  the  strength  and  importance  of  the  evidence  obtained.
Another  distinguished  savant  who  was  converted  to  a  belief  in  the
baguette  was  M.  Sigaud  de  la  Fond,  whose  published  testimony
Thouvenel  quotes  (p.  289  et  seq.).  But  the  most  important  evidence
on  behalf  of  Bleton  is  contained  in  the  numerous  letters  and  affidavits
Thouvenel  appends  to  his  work.  These  are  the  replies  he  received
from  various  well-known  persons  who  had  employed  Bleton,  and
whose  opinion  he  had  asked.  I  will  quote  some  of  these  directly.
In  addition  to  the  foregoing,  Bleton  found  one  or  more  valuable
springs  (as  testified  by  letters  or  proces-t^erbaux)  for  the  Marquis  de
Torcy  in  Poiton,  for  the  President  of  Lamoignon  in  Basville,  for  the
Bishop  of  Laon  in  Annisy,  for  the  Count  d'Adhemar  in  Thun,  for  the
Duke  d'Uzes,  Count  de  la  Blanche,  Count  du  Bourg,  President
d'Ornacieux,  M.  de  la  Borde,  and  many  other  French  personages  of
distinction.  There  are  also  brief  statements  from  20  other  persons
for  whom  Bleton  found  'plusieurs  belles  sources,  in  addition  to  the  17
letters  or  affidavits  quoted  at  length  by  Thouvenel.  In  these  pieces
jtistijicatives  Thouvenel  as  a  rule  gives  only  the  initials  of  his  corre-
spondents ;  the  documents,  he  tells  us,  are  all  signed  and  some  legally
attested,  but  some  of  the  writers  might  object  to  their  names  being
published  ;  moreover,  he  adds  that  in  physics  names  add  nothing  to
the  facts  themselves.^

No.  2. — In  one  statement,  however,  this  rule  is  departed  from,
and  Thouvenel  humorously  prefixes  the heading : "  Proces  verbal

1  This  may  account  for  the  omission  of  his  own  name  (initials  only  being  given)
as  the  author  of  these  Memoircs.


26-t


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


sur  Bletoti  .  .  .  papier  timbre,  paraphe,  collationne,  etc.,  etc.  {Bon
pour  ceux  qui  aiment  ces  petites  formalites),"  and  the  testimony  is
certified  by,  and  attested  before,  a  list  of  signatories  whose  names
and  official  titles  are  appended.  In  this  case  the  evidence  of  the
various  municipal  officers  of  the  Commune  of  St.  Jean-en-Royant  in
Dauphiny  is  given.  Bleton  was  a  native  of,  and  resided  in,  this
commune  (Bouvantes  being  a  parish  therein),  and  the  proces-verbal
states  that  Bleton  had  possessed  the  gift  of  finding  springs  for  about
30  years,  and  had  practised  it  much  to  the  advantage  of  the  inhabitants
of  the  commune.  Specific  instances  are  then  cited  of  the  more
important  springs  Bleton  had  found  in  arid  ground — springs  which
were  still  running,  the  witnesses  affirm,  and  had  largely  increased  the
value  of  the  property  in  the  commune :  owing  to  these  discoveries,  fertile
and  productive  land  had,  in  several  places,  now  replaced  the  previously
barren  soil.  The  Chief  Clerk  of  the  neighbouring  commune  states  that
Bleton  found  for  him  an  ample  spring  in  a  district  where  no  water  was
previously  known  to  exist,  the  result  of  which  was  that  the  ground,
which  formerly  was  of  little  or  no  value,  now  is  a  valuable  property.
The  signatories  of  the  proces-verbal  further  testify  that  Bleton  had
discovered  during  the  preceding  20  years  a  quantity  of  springs  in
other  neighbouring  communes,  some  of  these  being  of  so  great  a
volume  that  machinery  was  worked  by  them.

No.  3. — Another  document  also  signed  by  M.  A.,  an  inhabitant
of  St.  Jean  de  Royant,  states  that  the  value  of  his  property  had
been  increased  tenfold  by  the  springs  discovered  on  it  by  Bleton.

No.  4. — The  Prior  of  the  Chartreuse  de  Lyon  testifies  (March  3rd,
1781)  that  Bleton  had  found  several  springs  for  him  and  had  not  once
been  mistaken,  though  his  estimate  of  the  depth  and  volume  of  the
water  he  acknowledged  to  be  conjectural.  Bleton's  discovery  of  his
liability  to  err  on  this  point  being,  he  adds,  the  only  progress  he  had
made  since  he  was  seven  years  old,  when  "  il  etoit  aussi  savant  qu'il
Test  actuellement."  The  Prior  states  that  when  he  held  Bleton's
wrist,  the  change  in  Bleton's  pulse  was  so  perceptible  upon  arriving
over  an  underground  spring  that  the  fact  was  as  obvious  to  him  as  to
the  sourcier,  a  baguette  being  pei'fectly  needless.

No.  5. — The  Chevalier  de  M  ,  formerly  Captain  of  the  Pied-
mont regiment,  testifies  that  he  has  been  convinced  of  Bleton's  powers
in  spite  of  the  prejudices  he  previously  entertained.  Having  put
Bleton  to  all  the  proofs  he  could  think  of,  he  never  once  found  him
mistaken.  "  Whatever  the  power  is,"  he  remarks,  "  it  is  not  the  mere
movement  of  the  baguette  that  astonishes  me — that  might  be  a  matter


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


265


of  skill— but  the  effect  on  Bleton's  pulse  and  nervous  system  were
unmistakeable,  and  these  cannot  be  simulated.  Moreover,"  he  con-
tinues, "j'ai  fait  toutes  les  chicanes  que  mes  doutes  m'ont  inspirees,"
until  doubt  became  impossible.  The  Chevalier  describes  in  detail  one
of  several  tests  he  made  ;  he  brought  Bleton  to  his  own  house,  arriving
after  dark  ;  in  passing  through  the  village,  which  Bleton  had  not  visited
before,  Bleton  suddenly  stopped  and  said  water  was  there ;  he  followed
it  in  the  darkness  and  arrived  at  a  spot  where  he  declared  the  spring
existed  ;  he  was  right ;  it  was,  in  fact  the  source  of  the  fountain  of
the  castle.  Other  tests  are  also  given  :  altogether  a  remarkable  and
weighty  testimony.

iSTo.  6. — M.  de  F.,  the  receiver  of  taxes  for  Autun,  states  that  a
strong  spring  was  discovered  on  his  place  by  Bleton.  In  order  to
test  the  sourcier,  M.  de  F.  afterwards  blindfolded  him,  and  took  him
over  the  same  ground ;  Bleton  marked  precisely  the  same  spots  he
did  previously  when  not  blindfolded ;  this  experiment  he  repeated
several  times.

jSIo.  7. — Dr.  de  C.  (a  neighbour  of  M.  de  F.)  took  Bleton  to  his
house,  where  Bleton  accurately  traced  the  course  of  the  water  pipes,  a
fact  confirmed  by  the  workmen  who  had  laid  them.

No.  8. — 21.  le  Comte  de  JI.,  of  Chagny,  describes  several  careful
tests  he  made  of  Bleton.  In  one,  after  Bleton  had  accurately  indicated
an  underground  spring  (the  existence  of  which  was  known  to  the
Count,  but  unknown  to  Bleton)  and  traced  its  direction,  which  was
noted,  the  Count  then  carefully  bandaged  Bleton's  eyes  with  a  thick
handkerchief,  and,  in  order  to  mislead  him,  turned  him  round  several
times ;  nevertheless  Bleton  correctly  indicated  the  same  course  of  the
spring,  in  spite  of  frequent  attempts  made  to  divert  him.  Holding  his
wrist,  the  Count  noticed  that  the  change  in  the  rate  of  Bleton's  pulse
was  very  marked  when  he  came  over  the  spring.

No.  9. — The  Bishop  of  JI.  describes  how  his  Archbishop  tested
Bleton's  ability  to  discover  running  water  :  (1)  Bleton  correctly  traced
the  buried  water  pipes  in  the  Archbishop's  grounds  when  water  was
flowing  through  them;  (2)  Unknown  to  Bleton  the  water  was  then
turned  off  and  he  was  asked  to  repeat  the  trial,  and  he  completely  failed
to  find  the  pipes ;  (3)  Again  the  water  was  secretly  turned  on,  and
Bleton  once  more  correctly  indicated  the  dii'ection  taken  by  the  pipes.

No.  10. — The  Chevalier'  de  S.,  commandeur  de  Malte,  states  that
many  years  previously  his  gi-andfather  had  made  several  attempts
to  find  water  at  his  Chateau  pres  de  la  Cote  de  Saint-Andre',  had


266


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


even  sunk  a  well  to  the  depth  of  seventy  feet,  which  had  to  be
abandoned.  The  Chevalier  de  S.,  and  his  brother,  the  President  d'O.,
in  1735  sent  for  a  soiircier  they  knew  of  who  traversed  the  estate,
using  an  iron  rod  they  had  picked  up  as  a  baguette.  Upon  their
expressing  surprise  at  his  ability  to  use  so  novel  a  divining  rod,  the
sourcier  replied,  "  the  rod  is  of  no  consequence,  it  is  the  peculiar
feeling  I  have  when  over  an  underground  spi'ing  that  guides  me."
In  1773  (thirty-eight  years  later)  the  Chevalier  heard  of  Bleton  and
sent  for  him.  On  his  arrival  he  was  taken  to  the  terrace,  where  the
rod  began  to  rotate,  and  the  site  of  the  well  was  correctly  indicated.
To  estimate  its  depth  Bleton  went  to  a  certain  distance  on  each  side,
the  rod  rotating  in  an  opposite  direction  as  he  moved  away  from  the
spring.  By  observing  the  distance  and  decreasing  force  of  the  rotation,
Bleton  estimated  the  depth  of  the  well  to  be  64  feet :  its  actual  depth
was  66  feet.

Bleton  was  then  taken  to  a  hill  behind  the  chateau,  when  he
pointed  out  the  existence  of  several  springs  in  the  spots  marked  ;  the
following  winter  a  well  was  sunk  at  one  of  these  spots  and  water
found  at  a  depth  of  18  feet,  a  narrow  layer  of  sand  being  struck  after
piercing  through  the  upper  very  hard  rock.  This  spring  has  never  run
dry,  even  in  times  of  great  drought.  Two  years  later  (in  1775)  Bleton
was  again  tested  on  the  same  estate  and  he  indicated  another  spring,
the  depth  of  which  he  estimated  at  33  feet ;  a  well  was  sunk  at  this
spot  and  the  prediction  was  verified.  Some  time  after,  the  two  springs
were  joined  by  underground  conduits  ;  these  conduits  Bleton  accurately
traced  when  he  was  again  summoned  to  the  chateau  in  1779.

In  1781  a  fourth  visit  to  this  estate  was  made  by  Bleton.  This
time  he  discovered  another  spring,  which  he  estimated  at  25  feet  deep;
a  well  was  sunk  and  at  35  feet  an  abundant  supply  of  water  was
obtained  ;  this  also  issued  from  a  layer  of  sand  beneath  the  hard
superincumbent  rock.

Some  experiments  were  then  made  by  the  President  d'O.  and  his
brother  as  to  the  movement  of  the  baguette  when  Bleton  was  placed  in
various  positions.  The  rod  turned  when  he  lay  on  his  back,  but  not
on  his  stomach,  nor  did  it  turn  when  it  was  placed  on  his  loins  when  he
was  lying  down.  Bleton  was  then  suspended  upside  down  and  the
baguette  placed  on  the  soles  of  his  feet ;  it  did  not  rotate.  Bleton,
however,  showed  them  that  when  the  rod  was  placed  nearly  perpen-
dicularly with  one  end  resting  on  the  palm  of  the  left  hand,  and  the
other  in  the  air,  encircled  by  a  ring  formed  of  the  finger  and  thumb  of
the  right  hand  placed  a  little  below  the  point,  the  baguette  "  pirouetted
slowly,"  when  over  a  spring.

This  interesting  document  ends  by  suggesting  the  desirability  of
placing  le  tourneur  de  baguette  on  a  sheet  of  resin  or  a  glass-legged


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divininf/  Bod.


267


stool  and  noticing  whether  his  peculiar  sensations  are  still  experienced,
or  whether  they  resemble  the  sensations  one  has  when  thus  insulated
and  connected  with  an  electric  machine.  If,  remarks  the  Chevalier,
running  water  gives  off  subtle  emanations,  they  must  be  comparable
to  those  of  light,  and  possibly  suffer  refraction  and  retlection  in  their
course.  The  document  is  signed  by  the  President  d'O.,  who  states
that  he  did  not  write  it,  but  he  approves  ;  and  that  the  facts  narrated
were  all  witnessed  by  him,  his  son,  the  Chevalier  de  S.,  and  other
persons,  and  he  adds  his  conviction  that  Bleton  employed  no
charlatanerie  in  any  of  his  proceedings.

JSTo.  11. — On  the  lands  of  the  Abbe  de  Vervains  there  were  certain
springs,  all  trace  of  which  had  long  been  lost ;  they  were,  however,
known  to  exist  from  the  ancient  title-deeds  of  the  estate.  A  lawsuit
hinged  upon  the  question  of  their  existence  being  actually  proved.
When  search  for  the  springs  had  been  made  in  vain,  Bleton  was  sent
for.  He  came  and  indicated  the  place  where  these  springs  existed.
Their  actual  existence  was  then  discovered,  and  the  lawsuit
terminated.!

No.  12. — ISurgeon-Major  N.,  of  St.  Geny  Laval,  neoA'  Lyons,  testifies
that  Bleton  came  to  a  part  of  his  estate  which  was  rocky  and  arid,
and  found  one  spot  where  the  baguette  indicated  a  considerable
spring,  which  he  estimated  to  be  at  a  depth  of  some  55  feet.  A  well
was  sunk,  but  no  water  found  at  this  depth.  Bleton  was,  therefore,
sent  for  again.  He  tested  the  ground  once  more,  asserted  confidently
that  a  good  spring  would  be  found  at  a  few  feet  lower,  remarking  that  he
was  often  mistaken  as  to  the  depth  when  it  was  over  30  feet.-  The
well  was,  therefore,  deepened,  and  at  7  or  8  feet  lower  so  powerful  a
spring  gushed  forth  that  it  was  impossible  to  sink  deeper,  as  the  water
rapidly  rose  in  the  well,  which  was  5  feet  in  diameter.  The  witness
adds,  "A  useless  land  has  thus  been  converted  into  a  meadow."

No.  13.— P.  /.  G.,  and  Seigneur  D.,  ConseiUer  du  Parlement  de  B.,
affirm  that  they  brought  Bleton  to  Tanyot,  in  Bourgogne,  where  he  was
subjected  to  various  tests,  three  of  which  are  cited  :  (1)  He  was  asked
to  find  the  course  of  some  water  pipes  that  had  been  laid  some  time
previously  and  which  were  completely  covered  by  earth  and  grass,
so  that  no  difference  was  apparent  on  the  surface  of  the  ground.
Bleton  immediately  discovered  the  position  of,  and  accurately  traced,

1  Quoted  from  the  Monthly  Review  for  1784,  p.  572.

-  There  is  evidently  a  misprint  in  the  French  text  here,  which  reads  "au-dessous
de  trente  pieds  "  ;  from  the  context  obviously  au-dams  is  meant.


268


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[PATiT


the  course  of  these  pipes.  (2)  He  was  asked  to  find  the  spring  which
supplied  a  neiglibouring  well,  and  to  estimate  its  depth.  This  he  did
quite  accurately,  and  stated  it  was  a  very  feeble  spring,  which  the
owner  of  the  well  certified  was  also  correct.  (3)  He  was  asked  to
find  a  supply  of  water  for  their  chateau.  For  some  time  he  searched  in
vain,  but  eventually  in  another  direction  he  found  six  small  spriiigs:
their  position  was  marked  by  pegs.  Upon  digging  at  these  spots,
springs  were  found  in  each  place  at  about  the  depth  and  volume
he  indicated.  These  springs  were  then  connected  by  a  deep  trench,
and  furnished  an  abundant  supply  of  water  for  both  house  and
garden.

It  is  needless  to  translate  and  summarise  the  other  documents,
which  contain  similar  es'idence.  Thouvenel's  treatise,  however,  is  not
the  only  source  of  our  information  about  Bleton.  Accounts  of  this
sourcier  ai-e  to  be  found  in  many  of  the  French  journals  of  that  period.
I  am  indebted  for  much  of  the  subsequent  evidence  to  the  excellent
and  impartial  narrative  of  Bleton  given  by  Louis  Figuier  in  the
seventh  chapter  of  the  second  volume  of  his  Ilistoire  du  Ilerveilleux,
which  contains  some  facts  1  have  not  met  with  elsewhere.

No.  14.  —  In  the  Journal  de  Paris  of  May  13th,  1782,  an  account
was  published  of  some  careful  experiments  made  to  test  Bleton's
powers  in  the  gardens  of  the  Luxembourg  under  the  direction  of
M.  Guillaumot  "intendant  general  des  batiments  du  roi,"  who  was
accompanied  by  inspectors  and  officials  of  the  gardens.  The  report
states  :  —

Sorti  du  Chateau  d'Eau,  Bleton  a  suivi  dans  la  campagne  I'aqueduc
d'Arcueil  avec  una  jarecision  telle  que,  pour  nous  servir  d'une  de  M.
Guillaumot,  si  ce  plan  venait  a  se  perdre,  on  le  referait  sur  les  traces
de  Bleton.

The  report  states  that  M.  Guillaumot  verified  from  the  plans  the
angles  and  sinuosities  made  by  the  (I  presume  subterranean)  aqueduct,
and  these  the  report  adds:  "nous  dirons  presque  matliematiques
designes  par  Bleton."  Two  days  later  the  experiments  were  repeated
in  the  presence  of  the  municipal  authorities  and  a  crowd  of  spectators.
The  report  states  :—

Ici  les  experiences  ont  ^te  telles  qu'a  I'exception  de  deux  seuls  tdmoins,
qui  avaient  publiquement  avance  qn'ih  ne  croiraient  pas,  meme  en  myant,
qu'  a  cette  exception  pres,  sur  cinq  cents  spectateurs,  il  n'en  est  pas
un  qui  n'ait  ete  convaincu  de  la  faculte  dont  est  doue  Bleton  de  suivre
les  eaux  .souterraines  aveo  la  plus  rigoureuse  precision.  Les  yeux  bandes,
la  baguette  posee  sur  les  doigts,  il  n'a  pas  quitte  Tembranchement  de
I'aqueduc.


XXXVIII.]


071  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


269


Other  trials  followed  in  the  presence  of  ministers  of  state,  ambas-
sadors, magistrates,  scientific  men  and  the  clergy,  and  the  Journal  de
Paris,  in  summing  up  the  experiments,  records  that  Bleton  followed

Jusqu'a  present,  de  notre  connaissance,  plus  de  quinze  milles  torses
des  conduites,  sans  avoir  jamais  commis  une  seule  erreur  et  sans  avoir
trouve,  dans  le  nombre  de  plus  de  six  mille  personnes,  un  seul  temoin  com-
petent qui  ait  pu  faire  une  objection  fondee.  11  a  ete  soumis  a  toutes  les
epreuves  les  plus  rigoureuses  qu'  ait  pu  suggerer  I'incredulit^,  menie  I'esprit
de  parti,  et  il  n'en  est  r^sulte  que  plus  de  lumieres,  plus  de  convictions  et
plus  d'etonnement.

No.  15. — Some  rigorous  experiments  were  made  by  a  committee  o£
six  savants,  who  drew  up  a  report  dated,  "Paris,  May  25th,  1782."
This  report,  which  was  signed  by  all  the  member.^,  states  that  Bleton,
having  been  blindfolded  with  extreme  care  by  a  succession  of  black
and  then  white  linen  bandages,  with  cotton  wool  stuffed  up  the  sides
of  his  nostrils,  was  taken  to  the  garden  of  one  of  the  members  of
the  committee,  wherein  a  water-pipe  ran  underground  to  a  distant
fountain.  The  jets  of  this  fountain  had  been  removed,  so  that  the
water  ran  into  the  basin,  and  off  through  an  overflow  pipe,  quite
noiselessly.  Here  Bleton  indicated  running  water  at  certain  spots
which  were  marked ;  he  was  then  made  to  retrace  his  steps  10  or  12
times,  and  it  was  found  that  the  haguette,  turned  nearly,  but  not  quite,
invariably  when  he  crossed  the  same  spots  :  at  the  places  where  the
water  entered  the  basin  and  where  the  overflow  pipe  discharged  he
was  always  right.  This  they  verified  at  least  a  dozen  times.  The
experiments  lasted  two  hours,  with  a  short  interval  for  rest ;  during
the  whole  time  Bleton  was  blindfolded,  and  during  part  of  that  time
M.  Thouvenel  was  not  present.

According  to  the  writer  of  the  article  in  the  Monthly  Revietv  for
1782  :—

These  successes  led  the  Queen  of  France  to  employ  Bleton,  and  the
springs  that  have  been  found  in  consequence  of  his  indications  liave
fertilised  and  embellished  several  arid  districts,  among  which  Trianon  is  a
striking  example,  as  that  delightful  seat  has  acquired  new  charms  by
Bleton's  discoveries.  ^

The  Editor  of  the  Journal  dis  Spectacles,  in  a  figure  of  speech,  we
must  assume,  states  that  Bleton,  by  his  discovery  of  numerous  springs,
had  changed  Dauphiny  from  an  arid  soil,  which  produced  nothing,  to
one  of  the  richest  in  France.  Dr.  Ginetz,  writing  in  the  Journal  de
Paris  for  November,  1807,  states  that,  "The  efficacy  of  the  baguette  is
nowhere  contested  in  Dauphiny. I  have  myself,"  he  says,  "frequently

^  Accordmg  to  Figuier,  however,  Bleton  had  some  failures  at  Trianou,  mistaking
averns  and  dry  conduits  for  underground  water.


270


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


observed  the  effects  of  the  baguette,  and  can  state  from  personal
experience  its  success  in  seeking  for  springs  and  metallic  veins."  ^

In  Thouvenel's  second  Mt'moire,  published  in  1784,  a  further
account  is  given  of  his  experiments  with  Bleton.  This  eminent  physi-
cian was  commissioned  in  1 783  by  Louis  XVI.  to  examine  and  report
on  the  mineral  and  medicinal  waters  of  France,  and  to  aid  him  in
the  discovery  of  any  fresh  mineral  springs,  he  obtained  permission
to  engage  the  services  of  Bleton.'-  Most  of  this  second  Memoire  is
therefore  occupied  with  tracing  hot  springs  and  mineral  waters,  with
conjectures  as  to  the  source  of  the  former,  and  attempts  to  verify  the
electrical  hypothesis  which  Thouvenel  had  formed,  of  the  influence  of
subterranean  springs  on  the  diviner.

We  need  not  concern  ourselves  with  the  latter,  as  the  experiments
cited  are  certainly  open  to  criticism,  and  would  only  excite  a  smile  in
the  wider  scientific  knowledge  of  the  present  day.  It  is,  however,
now  known,  as  Thouvenel  conjectui'ed,  that  there  are  subterraneous
electric  currents,  the  strength  of  which  fluctuates  in  various  places
and  from  time  to  time.  It  is  certainly  a  curious  coincidence,  if  it  be
no  more,  that  upwards  of  one  hundred  years  ago  this  French  physician,
on  the  faith  of  Bleton's  sensations,  maintained  that  these  electrical
manifestations  appeared  in  general  to  run  east  and  west.'^  Current
electricity  itself  was  not  discovered  till  ten  years  later,  the  existence
of  earth  currents  was  not  known  till  Barlow's  experiments  in  1819,  and
the  general  trend  of  these  currents  east  and  west  was  a  still  more
recent  observation.'*

1  It  was  in  Provence  (the  adjoining  province  to  Dauphiny)  that  Lady  Milbanke,
in  1772,  first  savif  the  use  of  the  divining  rod.  In  a  dry,  mountainous  region  north  of
the  Durance,  the  Marquis  d'Ansonis  had  found  water  by  a  soitrekr,  and  the  Marquis,
whose  faith  in  the  divining  rod  was  unbounded,  converted  Lady  Milbanke  to  his
views  after  witnessing  experiments  on  liis  estate.

-  Figuier  states  that,  owing  to  Bleton  having  indicated  the  existence  of  some
natural  oil  springs  on  this  expedition,  he  was  engaged  on  his  return  by  the  Govern-
ment Department  of  Mines  to  search  for  similar  springs  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Paris.  Figuier  adds,  the  high  sanction  thus  given  to  Bleton's  peculiar  faculty  shows
the  esteam  in  which  he  was  held,  and  distinguishes  him  from  the  common  run  of
tourncurs  dt  baguette.

3  Thouvenel  thought  that  the  electrical  effects,  east  and  west,  were  associated
with  all  metals,  except  iron,  which  he  affirms  gives  a  north  and  south  direction  ;  as  he
associated  the  latter  with  terrestrial  magnetism,  this  looks  as  if  the  results  of  his
experiments  were  often  vitiated  by  involuntary  svr/gcstion  on  Thouvenel's  part.

*  There  are  some  other  curious  observations  in  this  treatise  which  illustrate
Thouvenel's  scientific  spirit.  Thus,  by  the  aid  of  Bleton,  Thouvenel  traced  the
source  of  the  hot  springs  of  Bourbon  Lancy  to  a  mountainous  region  abounding  in
coal ;  not  only  so,  but  a  similar  result  appeared  constantly  to  occur  with  other  hot
springs  he  examined,  and  he  affirms  that  eventually  their  origin  was  to  be  found  in  or
near  masses  of  coal,  to  chemical  changes  in  which  he  attributes  their  high  temperature.
Geologists  would  not,  I  imagine,  endorse  this  view.  Variations  in  the  conductivity  of


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


271


Contemporary  Opinion  Adverse  to  Bleton.

Among  those  who,  after  experimenting  with  Bleton,  formed  an
unfavourable  opinion  of  his  reported  powers  was  the  AbW  Mongez,  one
of  the  principal  contributors  to  the  articles  on  Natural  Philosophy  in
the  Paris  Encyclopedie ;  but,  according  to  Dr.  Thouvenel,  these  ex-
periments were  intended  to  be  unfavourable,  and  the  experimenters,  by
designing  a  number  of  ingenious  tricks  to  deceive  Bleton,  in  reality
deceived  themselves.  Certainly  the  parti  pris  of  most  of  the  scientific
investigators  of  Bleton  was  very  evident,  and  to  a  large  extent  vitiated
both  the  experiments  made  and  the  conclusions  drawn  from  them.^
These  experiments  were  made  for  the  most  part  in  the  church  and
garden  of  St.  Genevieve  in  the  presence  of  sevei'al  savants.  An  account  is
given  of  them  in  the  Journal  de  Paris  for  June  16th,  1782,  and  jjroces-
verbaux  of  the  experiments  are  to  be  found  in  the  Jouryial  de  Physique
of  that  year. 2  It  is  needless  to  enter  into  the  details  ;  suffice  it  to  say
that  the  report  concludes  by  stating  that  Bleton  found  water  pipes,
springs,  etc.  on  all  sides,  whereas  there  were  no  water  pipes  and  no
springs  beneath  him.  The  attempt  to  explain  away  this  failure,  which
Thouvenel  made,  shows  that  believers  in  the  divining-rod  can  be  no  less
blind  and  prejudiced  than  their  opponents.  Doubtless  the  experiments
were  wholly  inconclusive  in  face  of  the  abundant  testimony  in  Bleton's
favour,  some  of  which  we  have  cited.  The  wiiter  in  the  Monthly  Review
seems  to  have  given  the  true  explanation  of  these  experiments.  Admit-
ting that  Bleton  did  fail,  he  remarks,  "  this  will  not  appear  surprising
when  we  consider  this  poor  timorous  man  led  about  blindfold,  harassed,
fatigued,  and  perplexed  with  cross  questions,"  and  he  adds,  "  even  the
Abbe  Mongez  admits  that  Bleton  was  sometimes  quite  correct."  In
fact,  as  the  Reviewer  I  have  already  quoted  justly  remarks  : —

"  The  public  have  no  curiosity  to  know  how  far  tricks  and  ingenious
means  of  deception  can  go  in  disconcerting  or  suspending  the  exercise  of

rocks  and  the  existence  of  past  or  present  volcanic  action, — in  a  word,  the  internal  heat
of  the  earth, — are,  I  believe,  the  sufficient  causes  now  recognised  :  but  we  must
remember  our  author  wrote  upwards  of  a  century  ago.

1  As  the  able  contemporary  reviewer,  to  whom  I  have  already  referred,  remarks
(Monthly  Review,  1782,  Vol.  LXVII,  p.  554),  "It  is  certainly  po.^sible  that  even  an
honest  zeal  for  the  discovery  of  imposture  or  enthusiasm  may  be  exerted  in  a  manner
not  perfectly  adapted  to  the  discovery  of  truth.  ...  It  is  observed  by  all  that
Bleton  is  uncommonly  timorous  and  easily  disconcerted,  even  so  far  as  to  suspend  his
impressions.  This  we  can  well  conceive,  be  his  talent  ever  so  real.  The  very  talent
seems  to  announce  a  sensibility  of  nerves  that  may  render  him  peculiarly  susceptible
of  perturbation.  Who  has  not  seen  schoolboj-s  of  the  most  retentive  memories  lose
the  remembrance  of  the  best  learned  lesson  by  being  intimidated  1 "

-  I  have  not  seen  these,  and  am  indebted  to  Piguier  for  the  references,  who  adds
that  Guyton  de  Morveau  (a  well-known  savant)  gave  some  interesting  details
about  Bleton  in  the  Journal  dc  Nancy.


272  Professor  W,  F.  Barrett.  [part

Bleton's  natural  talent ;  they  only  desire  to  know  whether  he  in  reality
possesses  this  talent,  when  left  to  himself  and  allowed  the  free  use  of  his
faculties."  ^

But,  like  all  other  dowsers,  Bleton  unquestionably  failed  at  times.
Figuier  names  four  places,  and  also  "  dans  quelques  autres  lieitx,"
where  wells  were  dug  at  the  spots  indicated  by  Bleton  and  no  water
found,  even  when  the  wells  were  sunk  to  a  depth  lower  than  had  been
estimated  by  the  sou7xier.  In  his  able  paper  on  the  Divining  Rod,
read  before  the  American  Institute  of  Mining  Engineers  in  1883,  Dr.
Rossiter  Raymond  quotes,  —  without,  however,  naming  his  authority, — -
several  instances  where  Bleton  failed  to  find  the  same  spot,  after  being
blindfolded,  that  he  had  indicated  previously.  These  experiments  are
probably  those  to  which  we  have  referred  on  the  last  page,  and  com-
mented on  by  the  Monthly  Revieiv  for  1782.-

After  the  lapse  of  a  century  it  is  instructive  to  notice  how  fre-
quently the  adverse  criticism  of  Bleton  arose  from  his  critics  assuming
a  particular  explanation  of  the  lad's  sensitiveness,  or  of  the  motion  of
his  rod,  and  having  demolished  their  theory,  they  roundly  asserted  the
boy  was  a  charlatan, — a  mode  of  argument  not  unknown  to  scientific
critics  of  the  S.P.R-.  at  the  present  day.

Thus,  Bleton's  sensitiveness  being  supposed  to  be  due  to  some
electric  influence,  he  was  mounted  on  an  insulating  stool  and  his  rod
at  once  ceased  to  move,  but  resumed  its  motion  when  he  was  on  the
ground.  A  famous  physicist,  Charles,  who  conducted  this  experiment
a  century  ago,  when  Bleton  was  on  the  insulating  stool,  secretly  con-
nected the  lad  with  a  wire  to  the  earth  ;  still  the  rod  remained  passive
although  the  insulation  was  destroyed.  Whereupon  Bleton  was  openly
denounced  as  a  charlatan  by  his  scientific  critic.  All  that  this  ex-
periment proves  is  the  influence  of  suggestion  on  the  motion  of  the
rod.  As  the  lad  knew  nothing  of  electricity,  he  must  have  been  told
that  the  insulating  stool  would  intercept  the  power,  and  so  the  rod
ceased  to  move  when  he  was  mounted  on  the  glass-legged  stool,  and  it
remained  motionless  when  the  insulation  was  destroyed,  as  care  had
been  taken  to  avoid  any  suggestion  of  this  reaching  Bleton.  I  made
a  precisely  similar  experiment  with  a  dowser  at  Waringstown,  in

1  Monthly  Review,  Vol.  LXVII.  p.  555.

"  This  is  the  case,  I  have  s?ince  ascertained.  Dr.  Raymond  has  derived  his  infor-
mation from  Figuier's  excellent  essay  on  the  Baguette  Divinatoirc,  published  a  few
years  ago,  but  he  does  not  give  the  facts  quite  correctly :  moreover,  following  the
example  of  many  others  who  ignore  what  they  cannot  explain,  he  dismisses  in  a  few
words  the  abundant  te-timony  that  exists  as  to  Bleton's  successes,  fairly  enough  given
by  Figuier,  and  emphasises  (in  fact,  exaggerates)  any  failures  that  were  reported.
Ohevreul  did  just  the  same  ; — see,  e.cj.,  f).  113  of  his  work  on  the  Baguette  Divinatoire,
published  in  1854.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  273


Ireland,  in  1896  (see  previous  Report,  Vol.  XITI.,  pp.  80  and  246),  and
the  result  was  exactly  the  same  ;  when  the  dowser  believed  he  was  not
in  electrical  connection  with  the  earth,  his  twig  ceased  to  move  ;  when
he  believed  he  was  electrically  connected,  the  forked  twig  instantly
twisted  round,  though  the  electrical  condition  was  the  same  in  both
cases.  The  object  of  my  experiment  was  to  dispose  of  the  widely
spread  but  mistaken  idea  that  insulation  prevents  the  motion  of  the
rod.  Even  on  his  own  hypothesis,  the  French  experimenter  with
Bleton  was  mistaken;  for  the  theory  that  some  electrical  injiuence
from  underground  water  affects  the  dowser,  and  so  starts  the  motion
of  the  rod,  is  not  touched  by  insulating  the  dowser  ;  as  every  tyro
knows,  standing  on  a  glass-legged  stool  merely  prevents  electric  con-
duction from  the  earth  and  does  not  impair  electric  induction.  This
latter,  though  a  plausible  hypothesis,  has,  however,  no  experimental
evidence  in  its  favour  and  need  not  be  here  discussed.

Again,  the  eminent  astronomer,  Lalande,  believed  he  had  conclu-
sively demonstrated  Bleton  was  a  rogue  because  he  established  the
fact  that  the  peculiar  rod  Bleton  employed  could  be  rotated  by  sleight-
of-hand.  The  fallacy  of  this  line  of  argument,  though  persisted  in  at  the
present  day,  has  already  been  pointed  out  (see  p.  141,  etc).  As,  how-
ever, Lalande  is  often  quoted  as  having  "exposed  "  Bleton,  it  is  worth
giving  in  extenso  the  communication  which  this  famous  savant  made  to
the  Journal  des  Savants,  (or  Scavans  as  it  was  then  spelt)  for  August,
1782,  p.  558.  Here  is  the  quotation  fi'om  the  copy  in  the  British
Museum  : —

"  Un  nomm^  Bleton,  ne  clans  un  village,  pres  de  Grenoble,  a  pretendu
avoir  un  propriete  extraordinaire  de  sentir  les  eaux  souterainnes  par  un
tremblemeut  convulsif.  Ce  sourcier,  ou  hydropyrete,  pla^oit  sur  ses  doits  une
baguette  ou  une  verge  de  metal,  courbee  en  arc,  et  on  la  voyoit  tourner
rapidenient.  Ce  stratagems  etait  plus  adroit  que  celui  des  sourciers  qui
courent  les  villages,  et  qui  marquent  des  sources  aux  paysans,  moyennant  la
plus  mince  retribution.  Ceux-ci  serrent  leur  baguette  dans  leurs  mains,  et
pour  peu  qu'on  ait  envie  des  regarder,  on  s'appergoit  facilement  qu'il  sufiit  de
ferrer  la  baguette  inegalement ;  sa  courbure  determiire  necessairement  un
mouvement  de  rotation  .  .  .  il  [Dr  Thouvenel]  n' etait  plus  assez  calme
pour  se  rendre  aux  raisons  de  ses  adversaires,  ni  meine  pour  appercevoir  la
petite  charlatannerie  dont  il  avait  ete  la  dupe  .  .  .  [il]  a  ete  parfaitement
seduit  par  I'addresse  de  Bleton,  a  faire  tourner  sur  ses  doigts  une  verge
courbe  de  metal ;  il  n'a  pasappercu  que  cela  tenoit  a  une  cause  mecanique.

En  etFet,  si  Ton  place  sur  deux  doigts  une  baguette  de  mdtal  courbee  en
arc,  de  maniere  que  le  sommet  de  Tare  soit  plus  bas  que  les  deux  extremites,
mais  que  le  tout  soit  presqu'en  equilibre,  le  plus  petit  rapprochement  de.s
doigts,  ne  fut-il  que  d'une  ligne,  suffira  pour  que  les  extremites  I'emportent
a  leur  tour,  et  que  le  sommet  de  I'arc  vienne  en  haut.  Si  on  les  ecarte,  a
I'instant  le  sommet  de  Tare  descendra,  et  avec  une  pareille  alternative,  le
mouvement  peut  continuer  aussi  longtemps  qu'on  le  jugera  a  propos.  Un

X


274


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


homiue  tres-exerce  n'a  besoin  pour  cela  que  cl'nn  leger  tremblement  qui  est  a
peine  sensible,  quand  on  n'est  pas  prevenu.

Faute  d'avoir  apperQu  ce  petit  mecanisme,  M.  Thoiivenel  a  fait  un  livre
sur  la  baguette,  mais  M.  Demours,  fils  de  I'Academicien  tres-connu,  a  fait
tourner  une  baguette  pareille  dans  une  assemblee  de  I'Academie  des
sciences,  de  maniere  a  lever  toute  espece  de  doute  k  cet  ^garde.

.  .  .  M.  Needham  .  .  .  cite  meme  quelques  faits  contre  les
pretentions  de  la  baguette,  qui  sent  renovellees  de  terns  a  autres  par  des


Fig.  18.


fripons,  ou  par  des  dupes.  Enfin,  M.  Paulet,  dans  la  Gazette  de  Sante  du
10  Juin,  1781,  s'est  moqu^  de  la  nouvelle  physique,  ainsi  qu'on  I'avait  fait
dans  le  dernier  siecle.

But  whilst  M.  de  Lalande  clearly  demonstrates  that  slight  mus-
cular action  can  move  the  rod,  somewhat  as  Bleton  moved  it,  he  does
not  trouble  to  make  any  enquiry  on  the  only  point  of  real  value,  viz.,
whether  Bleton  was  more  successful  in  finding  underground  water  than
cliance  or  shrewd  observation  would  account  for. Nevertheless,  the


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


275


weight  of  Lalande's  authority  crushed  Thouvenel  and  his  ])roteg6
Bleton.  It  was  taken  as  a  matter  of  course  that  the  latter  was
a  clever  trickster,  who  had  duped  the  public.  Conjuring  books
showed  how  to  work  the  rod  «  la  Bleton.  A  book  by  H.  Decremps,
called  Za  Magie  de'voilee,  published  in  Paris  in  1784-,  devotes  a  lengthy
chapter  to  this,  showing  not  only  how  to  rotate  a  slightly  curved  rod
(held  as  in  Fig.  18)  by  the  quivering  of  the  index  fingers,  but  also  how
a  manikin  can  be  made  to  imitate  the  search  for  water  in  this  fashion.
This  chapter  was  copied  into  the  Encyclopedie  Methodique  for  1792,
and  an  English  translation  of  Decremps'  book  was  published  in  1785
under  the  title  of  The  Conjurer  unmasked  .  .  .  ivith  directions  for
the  tricks  of  the  Divining  Hod.  But  the  whirligig  of  time  brings  its
revenge ;  Decremps,  whose  book  was  all  the  vogue  a  century  ago,  is
to-day  forgotten,  and  Bleton  is  now  the  subject  of  scientific  study.

The  rotation  of  Bleton's  nearly  straight  rod  was  no  doubt  due  to
the  same  cause  as  the  twisting  of  the  forked  twig  of  the  dowser  at  the
present  day,  viz.,  aii  involuntary  muscular  movement  arising  from
some  sub-conscious  suggestion  (see  p.  291)  ;  how  he,  in  common  with
other  dowsers,  derived  this  usually  correct  suggestion  of  underground
water,  when  no  one  else  knew  of  its  presence,  is  the  problem  that  we
must  consider  in  the  sequel  to  this  paper  (see  Part  XIII.).

Thouvenel  gives  no  picture  of  Bleton  nor  of  his  manner  of  holding
the  rod.  I  have  searched  through  many  works  in  the  hope  of  finding
a  picture  given  by  some  contemporary  writer  of  the  use  of  this  curved
rod,  and  at  last  discovered  the  accompanying  drawing  given  in  the
reprint  of  Amoretti's  papers  entitled  Rhahdomanzia,  from  the  copy  of
the  German  translation  of  which,  published  in  1809  (in  the  Royal
Society  Library),  Fig.  18  is  reproduced.  The  picture  shows  the  lad
Pennet  holding  the  rod  as  Bleton  did,  but  the  rod  appears  rather
larger  and  more  curved  than  Bleton's  rod.  Thouvenel,  and  afterwards
Amoretti,  experimented  with  Pennet  (see  p.  246).

Here  I  must  conclude  the  report  of  this  remarkable  dowser,  which
has  grown  to  a  length  much  greater  than  I  anticipated.  My  apology
must  be  that  it  is  the  first  time  a  full  summary  of  the  evidence  has
been  presented  to  the  English  public.


276


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett


[part


PART  XI.

Involuntary  Muscular  Action  and  the  Motion  of  the  Rod,
Pendule,  or  other  Autoscope. Motor  Automatism.


§  1.  Evidence  as  to  the  Involuntary  and  Uncontrollahle
Motion  of  the  Rod.
To  an  onlooker,  who  sees  a  dowser  at  work  for  the  first  time,  one
of  the  most  startling  things  is  the  sudden  and  apparently  spontaneous
motion  of  the  forked  twig,  a  motion  so  vigorous  that  one  of  the  limbs
of  the  twig  is  frequently  broken,  whilst  the  dowser  is  apparently  doing
his  utmost  to  restrain  its  motion.  The  common  explanation  of  a
sceptical  public  is  that  this  is  merely  a  trick  on  the  dowser's  part  to
mystify  his  dupes,  but  the  evidence  I  have  adduced,  both  in  the
previous  and  present  Report,  shows  that  this  view  is  quite  untenable.^
The  only  other  alternative  recognised  by  scientific  men  is  that  the
motion  of  the  twig  must  be  caused  by  some  involuntary  muscular
action  on  the  part  of  the  dowser.  It  is  true  Melancthon  and  the  rest
of  the  learned  world  of  the  sixteenth  century  thought  that  the  motion
originated  in  the  twig  itself,  and  was  a  necessary  consequence  of  the
"law  of  sympathy^,"  but  the  learned  Jesuit  Father  Kircher  (one  of
the  founders  of  experimental  science)  about  the  year  1650  showed  that
the  twig  itself  was  inert,  and  that  in  some  way  the  motion  was  com-
municated from  the  dowser  himself  ^  to  the  forked  twig.  Malebranche
and  Lebrun,  fifty  years  after  this,  urged  with  resistless  logic  that
the  explanation  of  the  divining  rod  was  to  be  found  in  the  sport  of
good-natured  or  mischievous  devils,  "  the  badinage  of  demons  " ;  but
whether  these  philosophers  thought  the  demons  got  hold  of  the  end  of
the  stick  and  twisted  it,  or  gave  supernormal  strength  and  skill  to
the  dowser,  I  do  not  know"^.  This  spirit  theory,  apparently,  is  the
view  of  some  people  at  the  present  day. Spirits  may  swarm  in  the

1  I  am  referring  to  honest  dowsers  ;  impostors  may  exist  here  as  elsewhere.

2  Every  age  has  its  fashionable  fetishes,  or  idola  theatri;  this  "  law  of  sympathy"
was  a  notable  idol  of  the  learned  world  in  the  16th  and  17th  centuries.  The  move-
ment of  the  rod  to  hidden  veins  of  metal  or  water  was  supposed  to  be  due  to  the
"  sympathy  "  between  certain  kinds  of  wood  and  metals,  etc.

3  See  Kircher's  Magnes  sivc  cle  Arte  Magnetica  (1640),  p.  724,  and  his  later  work,
Mundus  Subtcrrancus,  Vol.  II.,  p.  200.

^  Malebranche  refers  Lebrun  to  both  St.  Aug'ustine  and  Porphyry  in  support  of
his  view  that  the  devils  cannot  be  always  at  work  tempting  mankind,  but  must  have
moments  of  relaxation  like  human  beings  !  Hence  come  their  little  jokes  in  table
rapping,  opening  doors,  etc.,  so  Porphyry  thinks.  (See  Lettres  qui  decouvrent  Villiaion
des  philosophes  sur  la  baguette. Paris,  1093,  p.  230,  et  seq.)


XXXVIII.]  Oil  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


277


neighbourhood  of  mediums  and  dowsers,  only  it  needs  a  good  deal  of
evidence  to  prove  it,  and  it  will  be  some  time  before  science  will  accept
any  evidence  of  that  kind.  Hence  the  only  alternative  before  us  is
that  some  involuntary  and  more  or  less  unconscious  muscular  action
on  the  dowser's  part  causes  the  twig  to  turn  and  sometimes  break.

In  the  previous  Report  I  have  discussed  this  question  (see  pp.  243
and  244)  and  shown  that  the  curious  muscular  spasm,  which  probably
causes  the  motion  of  the  rod,  is  certainly  involuntary,  and, — when  the
rod  is  held  as  some  dowsers  hold  it, — cannot  be  intentionally  imitated
by  a  conscious  effort,  without  considerable  skill  in  legerdemain.  To
this  statement  the  only  criticism  I  have  received  is  from  those  who
maintain  that  this  is  an  inadequate  explanation,  and  that  the  evidence
points  to  some  power  beyond  involuntary  muscular  action.  Here  is
the  view  of  that  distinguished  naturalist  and  acute  observer.  Dr.
A.  R.  Wallace,  F.R.S.,  who  writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

If  the  rod  does  move  wholly  by  muscular  action,  it  does  not  at  all  affect
the  power  of  the  dowser  in  finding  water,  — but  the  fact  should  be  proved.
To  me,  the  evidence  you  adduce  shows  that  it  is  not  muscular  action,  and  if
this  can  be  proved  it,  of  course,  places  the  dowser  in  the  rank  of  a  physical
"  medium,"  which  I  have  always  held  him  to  be.  If  the  two  facts  you  state
are  facts  :  (1)  That  the  motion  of  the  rod  cannot  be  intentionally  produced
(by  any  novice)  without  visible  muscular  action  of  an  energetic  kind  ;  and
(2)  that  in  an  outsider's  hands,  holding  the  rod  for  the  first  time,  it  will
often  move  if  the  doirser  holds  his  tvrists,  and  with  no  conscious,  and  little
visible,  muscular  action  on  the  experimenter's  part, — then  it  follows  that
the  motion  is  not  produced  by  muscvlar  action  at  all,  but  is  a  physical
phenomenon  analogous  to  hundreds  of  others  occurring  in  the  presence  of
"  mediums."

I  think  you  should  have  said  :  "The  ohvious  explanation,  of  course,  is
that  the  rod  is  moved  by  the  hands  of  the  operator,  acting  consciously  or
unconsciously.  There  are,  however,  many  difficulties  in  the  way  of  this
view,  and  many  facts  which  seem  directly  opposed  to  it."  After  which  your
various  statements  would  follow  naturally.  Now,  they  seem  to  me  to  be  in
the  nature  of  a  non  sequitur  ' . .  .

Of  course,  I  am  a  confirmed  lunatic  in  these  matters,  so  excuse  the  ravings
of  a  lunatic,  but  sincere,  friend,  ^^^^^^^  ^  Wallace.

All  that  Mr.  "Wallace  writes  is  worth  attention  ;  it  would  certainly
have  been  wiser  on  my  part,  in  the  last  Report,  to  have  used  the  words
he  suggests  rather  than  the  more  dogmatic  phrase  I  employed.  Other
correspondents  have  also  urged  that  muscular  action,  whether  conscious
or  unconscious,  is  an  insufficient  explanation  of  the  phenomena  actually
observed.  In  the  Journal  of  the  S.  P.  R.  for  December,  1897,  Mr.
E.  T.  Bennett  cites  some  of  the  evidence  I  gave  in  the  previous  Report
in  support  of  this  view.  Mr.  Bennett  urges,  with  much  cogency,  that
as  Faraday's  explanation  of  table-turning  being  due  to  involuntary


278


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


muscular  action  is  now  recognised  as  inadequate  to  cover  all  the
phenomena  of  this  kind,  so  in  like  manner  this  explanation  fails  to
cover  all  the  cases  of  the  twisting  of  the  divining  rod,  and  hence  some
other  cause,  external  to  the  dowser,  is  probably  at  work.  There  is  no
doubt  some  force  in  Mr.  Bennett's  argument,  to  which  I  replied  in  the
same  number  of  the  Journal.

The  descriptions  given  by  different  observers  are  so  similar  that
we  may  take  them  as  correct,  and  certainly  it  would  seem  that  no
conscious  muscular  action  could  produce  the  effects  described.  Mr.
Bennett  {Journal  S.P.R.,  Dec-ember,  1897)  therefore  asks,  "Have  we
any  grounds  which  justify  us  in  attributing  to  unconscious  muscular
action,  physical  effects  which  it  is  beyond  the  power  of  conscious
muscular  action  to  produce?"  My  reply  is:  in  hypnosis,  somnambulism,
hysteria,  etc.,  subjects  can  perform  muscular  feats  impossible  to  them
in  their  normal  self-conscious  state.  Whatever  tends  to  concentrate
muscular  action  upon  one  single  dominant  idea  enables  the  subject  to
accomplish  what  otherwise  he  could  not  do.  Moreover  known  causes
must  be  assumed  as  operative  until  they  are  proved  to  be  inadequate.
The  two  facts,  (1)  and  (2),  named  by  Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace  in  his  letter,
are,  howevei",  sometimes  disputed,  and  it  is  therefore  desirable  to  cite
some  of  the  facts  already  given  and  add  further  information,  from
different  witnesses,  on  these  two  points.

The  violence  of  the  motion  of  the  rod  is  shown  in  numerous  cases
I  quoted  in  the  previous  Report.  Thus  on  p.  7,  Mr.  Enys,  F.G.S.,  who
is  an  amateur  dowser,  states  "  the  rod  broke  short  off  in  front  of  my
hands,  and  did  so  a  second  time  in  the  same  place,"  i.e.,  where  under-
ground water  existed.  On  p.  26,  Miss  Grantham  (daughter  of  Judge
Grantham),  describing  what  occurred  witli  the  Rev.  J.  Blunt,  another
amateur  dowser,  states  "  so  strong  was  the  impulse,  that  we  found
unless  Mr.  B.  relaxed  his  hold,  the  twig  broke  off  near  his  fingers."
Lady  Milbanke,  also  an  amateur  dowser,  had  the  same  experience,
p.  42.1  Percy  Olive  states,  on  p.  35,  that  when  he  held  the  rod

and  MuUins  put  his  hands  on  his  wrists,  the  rod  "twisted  round  in
my  hands  with  such  force  that  when  I  held  it  tight  it  broke."  Mr.
Cecil  WooUey,  of  Lincoln,  the  agent  to  Trinity  Oollege,  Cambridge,
states,  on  p.  242,  that  the  late  J.  Mullins  having  gone  over  the  ground
and  indicated  water  in  one  spot,  "  I  took  the  twig  in  my  own  hands
and  went  over  the  same  spot  with  no  result.  He  (J.  Mullins)  then  took
hold  of  my  wrists  without  touching  the  twig  himself  and  when  we
together  walked  over  the  same  place,  the  twig  turned  up  in  my  liands.
This  was,  I  suppose,  caused  by  muscular  action  on  my  part,  but  if  so,  it

1  The  pages  in  this  paragraph  all  refer  to  the  previous  Report,  Proccedinos
S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIII.


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


279


was  certainly,  as  far  as  I  was  concerned,  perfectly  unconscious  action.
My  mental  attitude  was  one  of  neutrality  !  "  Lord  Burton  makes  a
very  similar  statement,  p.  103.  Mr.  Budd,  a  geologist,  describes  what
occurred  with  MuUins  when  he  came  over  underground  water  at
Waterford.  He  writes,  p.  110,  "  Mullins  held  the  forked  twig  between
his  second  and  third  fingers  as  if  you  were  going  to  write,  the  point  of
the  fork  downwards.  At  No.  1  [i.e.,  over  the  spot  where  a  large
supply  of  underground  water  was  found]  the  point  lifted  itself  up,
until  it  turned  over  backwards  and  twisted  itself  until  it  broke  .  .  .
The  clerks  then  held  [another  forked  twig]  with  him,  and  held  his
hands  ;  always  the  same  eflFect."  In  another  place,  seeing  the  frantic
motion  of  the  twig  when  Mullins  came  over  underground  water,  a
gentleman  tried  to  stop  its  motion  by  gripping  the  twig  in  two  places
with  smiths'  tongs,  "  one  pair  securing  the  tips  and  the  other  the  fork,
but  the  contortions  still  went  on  between  the  points  lield,"  p.  87,
and  so  on.

In  the  present  Report  numerous  independent  witnesses  of  unim-
peachable integrity  and  some  with  high  scientific  attainments  testify
to  the  same  class  of  facts,  viz.  : — (1)  the  automatic  and  apparently
irresistible  motion  of  the  twig  in  the  hands  often  of  a  complete
novice,  and  (2)  that,  when  the  forked  twig  does  7wt  move  in  a  person's
hands,  if  the  dowser  takes  one  limb  of  the  twig,  or  even  places  his
hand  on  the  wrist  of  the  insensitive  person,  the  pi'eviously  inert  twig
now  turns  vigorously  and  often  breaks  in  two  in  the  eiFort  to  resist  its
motion.  As  regards  (1),  see  the  letter  from  the  President  of  the
Royal  Geological  Society  of  Cornwall  on  p.  219,^  who  states  that  the
clerk  of  his  Parish  Council,  on  finding  the  rod  suddenly  twist  in  his
hands,  called  out,  "  It  is  alive,  sir,  it  is  alive  !  "  Mr.  Enys  adds  :
"  This  exactly  describes  the  sensation  when  the  rod  moves."  Mr.
Dixon,  a  large  fruit-grower  in  California,  on  p.  250  states  :  "  I  held
the  stick  as  tight  as  I  could  to  prevent  its  moving,  but  it  twisted  right
round."  Mr.  Denison,  of  the  Toronto  Meteorological  Observatory,  on
p.  206,  gives  a  careful  record  of  the  violent  twisting  of  a  forked  plum
stick  or  bent  wire  used  as  a  divining  rod  by  an  amateur  dowser.  Mr.
Bennett,  of  Oxford,  on  p.  176,  refers  to  the  frantic  motion  and
ultimate  breaking  of  the  twig  "  held  firmly  "  in  the  dowser's  hands.
Other  similar  cases  will  have  been  noted  by  the  careful  reader.  As
regards  (2),  see  Mr.  Morton's  letter  to  The  Enyineer  given  on  p.  172  ;
Mr.  Morton  found  the  rod  would  not  move  in  his  hands,  but  when  the
late  John  Mullins,  the  dowser,  "laid  his  hands  on  my  wrists  and
grasped  them  firmly,  then  the  twig  instantly  began  to  turn  and  con-
tinued turning  till  he  removed  his  hands. He  never  touched  the  twig

1  The  pages  in  this  paragraph  refer  to  the  present  Report.


280


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


while  it  was  in  my  hands."  Mr.  Montague  Price,  in  his  letter  ou
p.  181,  states : — ■  , .  .  .

I  held  one  side  of  the  forked  rod  myself  and  the  "diviner"  the  other,  and
when  we  came  to  water  [alleged  underground  water]  the  strain  was  so  great
on  my  fingers  I  was  obliged  to  ask  him  to  stop.  From  the  position  of  the
rod  it  was  absolutely  impossible  for  him  to  produce  the  pressure,  which
increased  with  the  strength  of  t!ie  stream.

Ml'.  Denison,  of  Toronto,  states,  on  p.  206,  that  his  friend  "Mrs.
Harris  tried  without  any  result  ;  but  when  Mr.  H.  [who  was  an
amateur  dowser]  grasped  her  wrists,  as  she  approached  the  spring,  the
rod  turned  forcibly,''  and  so  on.

The  usual  practice,  after  watching  a  dowser  at  work,  is  for  some
of  the  onlookers  to  try  if  the  forked  twig  will  move  in  their  hands.
Grenerally  speaking,  one  or  more,  out  of  perhaps  ten  or  twelve  persons,
discover  to  their  astonishment  that  the  twig  curls  up  in  their  hands
at  the  same  places  at  which  it  did  with  the  dowser.  Here  is  such
an  experience. Mrs.  Hollands  writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

Dene  Park,  Tonbridge,  October  9th,  1899.

In  answer  to  your  note  of  inquiry  about  the  divining  rod,  the  wdiole

thing  is  rather  a  long  story,  but  the  practical  result  of  the  water  dowser's

visit  was  to  find  water  which  now  supplies  the  house. One  of  my  daughters

found  she  had  the  strange  power  which  moves  the  divining  rod,  and  it  works

for  her  now  quickly  over  any  spring. It  is  most  interesting,  as  you  can  feel

the  rod  if  you  take  one  side  of  it  and  take  one  of  her  hands,  she  holding  the

other  end  of  the  rod — it  struggles  up,  and  would  break  off  altogether  if  you

did  not  allow  it  to  move. My  daughter  has  since  found  several  springs  on

the  estate,  where  we  have  sunk  wells. They  have  stood  us  in  very  good

stead  these  last  dry  seasons.  „

Minnie  Hollands.

A  similar  experience  is  given  by  Miss  M.  Craigie  Halkett,  who
published  some  excellent  photographs  of  a  dowser  at  work  in  Sketch
for  August  2.3rd,  1899. Miss  Halkett  writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

Lauriston,  New  Eltham,  Kent,  September  8th,  1899.
The  man  depicted  in  the  photographs  is  not  a  water-finder  by  profession.
He  is  a  tenant  farmer  residing  at  Catcott,  a  village  near  Bridgwater,  and
merely  exercises  the  art  to  oblige  his  neighbours.  Several  of  the  country
people  in  this  neighbourhood  (Somerset)  have  the  gift.  It  has  never  been
known  to  fail.

Personally,  I  was  rather  sceptical  on  the  subject,  but  was  converted  by
tlie  stick  turning  in  my  hands  when  standing  over  a  spring.  There  were
about  six  persons  present  at  the  time  ;  all  tried  it,  but  it  would  turn  for  no
one  excepting  the  man  in  the  picture  and  myself.  I  experienced  a  sort  of
tingling  sensation  in  my  arms  and  wrists,  but  otherwise  was  quite  unaware
when  the  forked  stick  began  to  turn,  it  seemed  to  go  f)ver  so  quickly.

Maude  Ceaigie  Halkett.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


281


Miss  Halkett  does  not  say  how  she  knew  she  was  "standing  over
a  spring  "  when  the  twig  turned  in  her  hands  :  this  statement  is  very
characteristic  of  many  others  that  have  reached  me.

I  received  the  following  from  a  Civil  Engineer,  Mr.  J.  W.  Parry,
who  also  sent  me  an  interesting  article  he  had  written  on  water-finding,
which  appeared  in  the  Pioneer  of  India  : —

19,  Southmoor  Road,  Oxford,  November  2nd,  1898.

I  have  read  with  much  interest  your  work  on  "  dowsing  "  in  the  Psychical
Research  Society.  I  was  a  sceptic,  but  after  reading  the  140  cases  you
mention,  it  is  quite  impossible  to  doubt  any  longer.  I  was  lately  at  Padstow,
Cornwall,  where  the  following  authenticated  case  occurred  which  you  might
like  to  verify.

It  appears  a  dowser  was  lately  sent  for,  as  some  waterworks  were
projected.  The  squire,  Mr.  Prideaux-Brune,  and  his  two  daughters  came
to  see  the  operations  of  the  divining  rod.  On  a  spot  being  indicated  by  the
dowser,  one  of  the  young  ladies  said,  "  Oh  !  let  me  see  if  I  can  do  it."
Unfortunately,  she  had  not  the  gift,  nor  had  her  sister.  Squire  Prideaux-
Brune,  then  taking  the  twig,  walked  back  a  few  paces.  On  jaassing  the  spot
his  arms  shook  violently,  and  would  not  be  controlled.  The  young  ladies
were  laughingly  sceptical,  and  said,  "  Oh  !  papa,  you  are  humbugging."
He  replied,  "I  am  doing  nothing  of  tlie  kind,  and  can't  help  my  arms
shaking,"  or  words  to  that  effect.

You  do  not  mention  any  cases  as  occurring  in  India,  where  there  is  a
a  good  deal  of  so-called  divining.  I  have  seen  diviners  lying  naked  with  their
ears  to  the  ground,  pretending  that  they  could  hear  the  subterranean  water.
Don't  you  think  that's  somewhat  beyond  our  ken,  even  though  the  Asiatic
has  marvellously  sensitive  organs  of  hearing  on  certain  occasions  1

J.  W.  Paery,
Late  Executive  Engineer,  Indian  State  Railways.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Prideaux-Brune,  who  is  a  Deputy-Lieutenant  and
J.P.  for  the  county,  and  received  the  following  reply  :  —

Prideaux  Place,  Padstow,  Cornwall,  February  nth,  1899.

Some  months  ago  Messrs.  Merry  weather  sent  a  diviner  here,  so  I
witnessed  his  extraordinary  powers.  I  myself  manifested  a  dight  power,  and
when  the  diviner  held  my  wrists  it  was  intensified — one  man,  a  non-believer,
was  as  successful  as  the  diviner.  Another  man  attempted,  and  was  not  in
the  slightest  degree  affected,  even  when  the  diviner  held  his  wrists.  A  very
strong  man  tried  to  wrest  this  rod  from  the  diviner's  hands  without  success,
and,  finally,  in  the  struggle  the  rod  broke.  In  my  own  case  I  felt  the
muscles  in  my  arm  between  the  hand  and  the  elbow  for  a  day  or  two
affected  in  the  same  way  as  if  I  had  a  slight  electric  shock.

Charles  G.  Prideaux-Brune.

In  this  case,  as  in  the  former,  there  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  the
involuntary  motion  of  the  "  rod  "  had  any  connection  with  the  near-
ness of  underground  water.


282


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


I  will  now  cite  some  evidence  that  shows  (1)  how  little  visible  mus-
cular action  there  is  when  the  twii^j  moves  in  the  hands  of  a  dowser;  e.g.,
Mr.  A.  Lang  says  (see  below)  he  "could  detect  no  muscular  action;"  and
further  (2)  how  the  amateur  in  whose  hands  the  twig  turns  believes
he  is  exerting  his  will  and  muscular  force  to  jjrevent  its  motion.

In  Lcmgnian's  Magazine  (November,  1897)  Mr.  A.  Lang  writes  : —

I  have  tin-ice  been  with  amateurs,  in  whose  hands  a  twig  twisted  over
subterranean  water.  One  was  a  very  learned  professor  of  the  Greek  language,
who,  having  seen  the  thing  done  by  a  water-finder,  found  that  he  had  the
same  faculty.  The  second  was  a  land  bailiff,  who  had  discovered  his  gift  in
the  same  way,  and  employed  it  for  his  own  pur2Joses  on  his  employer's  estate.

The  third  was  a  lady,  whose  mother  had  the  faculty,  and  found  her
own  well  by  using  it.  I  tried,  in  company  with  each  of  the  three.  With  the
two  men  I  failed — my  twig  would  not  turn  where  theirs  turned.  It  did  twist
where  the  lady's  twisted,  and  the  sensation  was  curious  ["just  as  if  the
rod  were  alive,"  Mr.  Lang  adds  in  writing  to  me]  ;  but  I  am  inclined  to
fancy  that  the  mere  resistance  and  sjaring  of  the  wood  caused  it  to  jerk  itself
upwai'd  at  one  spot,  though  I  cannot  say  why  it  failed  to  do  so  at  other  spots.
The  bailiff  tried  holding  my  wrists  while  I  held  the  twig,  but  without  effect.
I  held  his  fingers,  when  the  twig  writhed  in  his  hands,  but  could  detect  no
muscular  action  on  his  part.  In  no  case  did  we  dig,  or  make  any  attempt
to  find  water  where  the  twigs  twisted  ;  all  we  were  able  to  do  was  to
examine  the  action  of  the  twig  ;  active  at  certain  spots,  passive  at  others.
The  forked  twig  is  so  held  that  you  resist  its  natural  spring.  Of  course,  no
twig  at  all  is  used  by  some  water-finders,  who  rely  on  their  sensations
merely,  and  speak  of  the  twig  as  a  mere  index  or  stage  property.

In  Sir  Herbert  Maxwell's  pleasant  book  of  sport  and  natural  history,
Memories  of  the  Months,  is  an  account  of  experiments  with  Mullins,  a
professional,  and  not  a  man  of  education.  Mullins  had  worked  at  Middleton,
and  Lord  Jersey  "  had  been  not  only  gratified,  but  astonished  at  his  success."
Experiments  were  next  made  at  Osterley,  before  scientific  characters  .  .  .
Mullins's  rod,  in  this  case,  "  twisted  so  violently  that,  when  he  held  it  tight,
it  broke  in  his  hand."  He  said  that  he  had  a  shivering  along  his  spine  on
these  occasions.  When  he  stood  on  a  plate  of  thick  glass  the  rod  did  not
twist,  which  he  attributed  to  the  non-conducting  of  electricity.  An
uneducated  man  always  chatters  about  electricity.  The  glass  acted,  if  at
all,  byway  of  negative  "suggestion."  Mullins  was  then  blindfolded,  but
here  Sir  James  Crichton-Browne  objected  that  the  blindfolding  was
inadequate.  The  researches  of  the  Psychical  Society  have  proved  (in  other
experiments)  that  practically  no  blindfolding  is  adequate,  or,  at  least,  is
beyond  susjjicion.  Sir  James  wanted  to  introduce  cotton  wool.  Mullins  said,
"Don't  you  believe  my  word  ? "  Sir  James  replied,  "  I  believe  nothing  but
what  I  see  "  (not  a  very  scientific  posture,  I  fear),  and  Mullins  would  not
play  any  longer.  He  was  an  uneducated  man  ;  he  did  not  understand  the
position  ;  he  took  Sir  James's  agnosticism  as  a  personal  affront,  and  so  the
matter  ended.  Nevertheless,  Sir  Herbert  says,  "were  I  in  straits  to  find
water,  I  should  employ  without  hesitation  a  professional  water-finder— rod
and  all — if  there  remains  one  as  successful  as  Mullins  was."


XXXVIII.]  071  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


283


Practically  the  dowser  finds  water  in  a  paying  ratio  of  successes  over
failures.  How  he  finds  it  he  probably  does  not  know  himself.  I  do  not
doubt  that  the  rod  is  wagged  (where  the  finder  is  honest)  by  unconscio^is
muscular  action,  as  in  "table-turning."  So  we  are  left  at  large  in  that
cheerful  and  luminous  field  of  inquiry,  the  PhilosojAy  of  the  Unconscious,
or  Subconscious.  Some  indication,  through  the  normal  senses  perhaps,  or
through  some  unexjjlored  sense,  reaches  the  successful  finder,  and,  uncon-
sciously obedient  to  this  hint,  he  unconsciously  uses  his  muscles  and  wags
the  stick.  I  conceive  that  to  be  the  humour  of  it,  but  a  large  number  of
experiments  is  needed  before  one  can  even  raise  a  good  presumption  in
favour  of  the  hypothesis.

The  following  letter  which  Dr.  Hodgson  has  sent  me  is  an  illus-
tration of  the  involuntary  and  apparently  uncontrollable  motion  of
the  rod  in  the  hands  of  a  mining  engineer,  who  tried  it  for  the  first
time : —

350,  East  69th  Street,  New  York,  July  23rd,  1892.

I  see  a  paper  on  the  divining  rod  in  Vol.  II.  of  your  Proceedings,  and
would  bring  to  your  notice  a  curious  experience  of  mine  with  regard  to  this
which  I  published  in  the  Engineering  and  Mining  Journal  of  December  9th,
1876,  which  created  quite  a  discussion  in  that  journal.

"I  was  much  interested  in  that  part  of  a  lecture  on  Mining  by  Professor
W.  Smyth,  F.R.S.,  of  the  Royal  School  of  Mines,  London,  relating  to  the  use
of  the  divining  rod  for  finding  mineral  veins  or  subterranean  springs  of  water,
and  published  in  your  journal  of  September  9th.  Because  a  reason  cannot
be  given  for  an  alleged  phenomenon  is  no  cause  why  it  should  not  exist,  or
if  existing,  why  it  should  not  be  inquired  into.  Most  of  the  discoveries  of
science  would  not  have  been  made,  had  inexplicable  phenomena  been  set
aside  as  being  unworthy  of  attention  because  no  reason  could  be  given  for
them  at  the  time  when  first  observed.

"I  have  heard  of  the  Cornish  Witch-hazel  from  my  childhood,  but
always  thought  it  a  fable  till  one  day  in  the  woods  of  Pennsylvania  one  of
my  men  mentioned  that  springs  could  be  found  by  means  of  a  forked  switch
of  any  kind  of  fresh  cut  hard  wood.  I  laughed  at  the  idea,  but  he  insisted,
so  I  made  a  trial  by  standing  astride  a  small  brook,  one  branch  of  the  fork
in  each  hand,  the  stem  standing  out  horizontally.  What  was  my  amazement
to  find  that  the  latter  bent  slowly  down  with  a  force  I  was  entirely  unable
to  counteract.  The  experiment  was  quite  suflicient  to  make  me  credit  all
that  had  been  attested  of  the  divining  rod,  though  I  have  never  tried  it
over  mineral  veins.

"Professor  Smyth  says  that  all  persons  are  not  able  to  produce  the
efi'ect,  which  may  very  well  be,  just  as  Spiritualists  pretend  that  some
persons  are  naturally  more  adapted  to  act  as  mediums  than  others.  And
may  not  the  power  exerted  by  them  on  chairs  and  tables  have  some  con-
nection with  the  force  manifested  by  means  of  the  divining  rod  ?  Unless,
indeed,  the  force  which  makes  the  twig  bend  be  caused  by  the  vital  power
of  the  person  holding  it.  These,  however,  are  the  very  questions  to  be
solved,  should  a  competent  person  take  them  up.


284


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


"I  am  glad  to  see  that  so  distinguished  a  man  as  Professor  Smyth  has
the  courage  to  assert  his  belief  in  what  it  is  the  fashion  to  consider  as  an
exploded  fallacy  by  persons  who  have  never  tried  it  or  made  proper  inquiries
regarding  it."

That  some  unknown  force  is  at  work  I  am  confident.  It  seems
melancholy  tliat  the  very  men  who  pooh-pooh  such  phenomena  merely
because  they  cannot  explain  them,  are  of  the  class  generally  called  scientific.

D.  COGHLAN.

Dr.  Hodgson  wrote  to  Mr.  Coghlan  suggesting  that  unconscious
muscular  action  was  the  probable  cause  of  the  motion  of  the  I'od ;  Mr.
Coghlan  replies  as  follows  : —

350,  East  69th  Street,  New  York,  Julij  29th,  1892.
Your  favour  of  yesterday  received. In  answer  to  your  suggestion  that  my
own  unconscious  muscular  force  caused  the  bending  of  the  rod,  I  can  answer
decisively.  No  !

When  I  said  to  my  informant  regarding  the  phenomenon  that  I  could  by
my  muscular  exertion  prevent  the  bending,  he  expressed  the  situation
forcibly  by  saying  the  bark  of  the  tvvig  would  be  first  twisted  off.  Of  course
in  this  he  exaggerated,  but  still  it  expressed,  rather  forcibly  to  be  sure,  the
tendency  of  the  twig's  point  downwards.  The  switch  is  held  with  the  palms
of  the  hand  turned  upward  and  the  branches  of  the  fork  grasped  firmly,  the
main  stem  projecting  horizontally.  I  cannot  conceive  how  any  unconscious
muscular  action  could  cause  the  horizontal  stem  to  become  vertical,  which
position  is  attained  by  a  twisting  of  the  fibres  of  the  wood.

I  have  lately  tried  the  same  experiment  under  what  I  considered  similar
circumstances,  but  failed  completely,  whether  owing  to  the  wood  used  not
being  of  the  proper  kind,  (for  you  may  remember  that  in  Cornwall  they
suppose  the  witch-hazel  the  proper  thing  to  use  in  searching  for  mineral
veins),  or  whether  owing  to  decay  of  nervous  power  on  my  part  through  age,  I

''^'''^"^  ^'^l^-  D.  Coghlan.

The  opinion  so  emphatically  expressed  by  Mr.  Coghlan,  that  the
motion  of  the  rod  was  not  due  to  any  muscular  action,  conscious  or  un-
conscious, on  his  part  is  shared  by  nearly  all  who  find  the  rod  twist  in
their  hands.  Here,  for  example,  is  one  of  numerous  instances  I  might
cite.  In  a  letter  published  in  the  Standard  newspaper  for  January  2nd,
1889,  Mr.  W.  Bell,  of  East-Lyss,  Petersfield,  states  that  after  seeing  a
dowser  at  work,  he  tried  the  forked  twig  himself  and  to  his  utter  amaze-
ment, when  he  came  near  the  spot  at  which  the  twig  moved  with  the
dowser,  he  saw  the  point  bend  forward  and  then  it  suddenly  turned
down  towards  the  ground  as  he  crossed  the  spot. He  adds  : —

Some  force  independent  of  my  will,  and  acting  contrary  to  my  muscular
resistance,  drew  the  point  of  the  twig  towards  the  earth.  Of  this  I  am  as
firmly  convinced  as  I  am  that  the  sun  rose  yesterday.  It  was  not  a  matter
in  which  I  could  have  been  self-deceived,  and  the  same  effects  could  not  be
produced  by  trickery  [voluntary  eflbrt  is  no  doubt  meant].


XXXVIII.]


071  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


285


In  the  same  number  of  the  Standard  a  professional  dowser,  J.
Blanchard,  of  Wisbech,  writes  to  say  that  he  has  "  proved  the  rod  is
not  moved  by  the  involuntary  action  of  mental  expectancy  on  the
muscles  of  the  performer  "  (!),  by  putting  on  a  pair  of  gloves,  when  the
rod  ceases  to  move,  No  doubt  the  rod  would  be  more  difficult  to
manipulate,  whether  voluntarily  or  otherwise,  with  gloves  on.  But  all
these  results,  however,  like  the  standing  on  insulating  supports,  etc.,
are  mainly  due  to  what  Mr.  A.  Lang,  in  the  passage  just  quoted,  calls
"  negative  suggestion."  That  is  to  say,  anything  which  gives  rise  to  a
sub-conscious  suggestion  determines  the  motion  or  arrest  of  the  rod.

In  connection  with  this  I  may  cite  the  distinguished  anthropo-
logist. Dr.  E.  B.  Tylor,  F.R.S.,  who,  in  a  lecture  delivered  at  Oxford  in
1883,  relates  his  experience  with  the  divining  rod  as  follows  : —

"  I  happened  to  be  staying  at  a  friend's  house  in  the  Mendip  district,
where  it  [the  divining-rod]  is  still  used  by  well-sinkers  and  miners,  and  at
my  request  a  regular  practitioner  was  sent  for.  ...  It  does  not  appear  that
he  fraudulently  moves  the  rod,  but  my  sensations  led  me  to  agree  with
Chevreul  that  the  slight  movements  of  the  hands  are  unconsciously  guided
to  accumulate  into  impulses  sufficient  to  cause  the  twig  to  dip  or  rise.  I
noticed  that  when  I  could  allow  my  attention  to  stray,  the  rod  would  from
time  to  time  move  in  my  hands  in  a  way  so  lifelike  that  an  uneducated
person  might  well  suppose  the  movement  to  be  spontaneous.  It  is  hardly
necessary  to  say  that  the  rod  always  moves  where  the  bearer's  mind  suggests
an  object."  [Dr.  Tylor  then  gives  an  amusing  illustration  on  this  point :
the  dowser  having  stated  the  rod  always  moved  when  he  reached  the  main
spring  underground,  the  rod  also  moved  over  a  watch,  the  dowser  suggesting
that  it  did  so  because  it  was  over  the  mahispHncj  of  the  watch  ;  his  mind,
Dr.  Tylor  remarks,  being  controlled  by  the  verbal  association  into  a  delusive
analogy  of  effects]  (Nature,  May  17th,  1883,  p.  58).

§  2. Evidence  that  the  Motion  of'  the  Rod  is  due  to  Unconscious

Muscidar  Action.

We  will  now  pass  on  to  evidence  which  shows  that  the  motion  of
the  rod  is  really  due  to  the  muscular  action  of  the  dowser,  notwith-
standing that  there  are  certain  positions  in  which  the  rod  is  held
where  it  seems  to  be  impossible  for  the  dowser  to  move  it.  Such,  for
example,  as  that  shown  in  the  plate  on  page  134,  in  my  previous
Report,  where  the  dowser,  Stone,  is  shown  holding  a  thick  forked  rod
depending  from  the  forefinger,  second  finger,  and  thumb  of  each
hand.  Mr.  Stone  himself  asserts  that  there  is  no  movement  of  his
fingers,  and  that  he  holds  the  rod  in  this  way  because  it  cannot  be
moved  by  the  dowser ;  but  a  careful  eye-witness,  Mr.  R.  J.  Charleton,
writes  to  me  as  follows  : — ■

I  must  contradict  the  assertion  that  no  movement  of  Mr.  Stone's  fingers
could  be  detected  whilst  he  is  using  the  divining  rod. I  watched  him  most


286


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


closely,  and  distinctly  noticed  that  his  forefingers,  second  fingers  and
thumbs,  between  which  he  held  the  ends  of  the  forked  stick,  were  strongly
compressed  upon  the  pliant  wood.  At  the  same  time  there  was  an  inward
twisting  action  of  the  fingers  which  had  the  effect  of  raising  the  apex  of  the
rod.  Tremendous  muscular  force  was  apparently  being  used,  to  such  an
extent,  in  fact,  that  the  operator's  hands  became  quite  swollen  and  tremulous
when  he  had  completed  his  experiments.  I  have  myself  been  able  to  verify
this  explanation  in  my  own  person  repeatedly,  though  I  could  not  move
such  thick  twigs  as  Mr.  Stone  employs,  but  his  muscular  development  is
greater  than  mine  and  he  is  in  constant  practice.

I,  too,  watched  Mr.  Stone  carefully  in  his  use  of  the  forked  rod.
In  the  Carrigoona  experiments,  the  sudden  lecqnng  v,p,  as  it  were,  of
tlie  twig  when  Mr.  Stone  came  to  the  position  No.  1  in  Fig.  3  was
most  remarkable,  tlie  more  so  considering  the  way  the  twig  was  held.
There  was  evidently  some  muscular  spasm,  as  Mr.  Charleton  says,  but
it  was  obviously  involuntary,  and  neither  I  nor  a  friend  who  was  with
me  could  imitate  the  action  by  any  conscious  exertion  on  our  part.

But  perhaps  the  best  testimony  is  afforded  by  the  following  letter
I  received  from  Mr.  J.  F.  Young,  of  Llanelly,  a  most  successful
amateur  dowser,  animated  by  a  truly  scientific  spirit.  Mr.  Young
was  at  first  inclined  to  think  that  the  movement  of  the  rod  was
entirely  spontaneous  and  quite  independent  of  the  dowser,  but  after  I
had  drawn  his  attention  to  the  matter,  he  writes  as  follows  :  "  T  see
tliat  the  motion  of  the  rod,  which  is  always  held  in  tension  by  the
water-finder,  is  really  due  to  unconscious  muscular  action ;  this  is
specially  noticeable  with  a  watch-spring  which  I  generally  employ.
In  fact,  I  am  so  convinced  in  this  matter,  after  endless  experiments,
that  I  defy  any  one  to  prove  the  contrary."  A  Somersetshire  incum-
bent, writing  in  Notes  and  Que7'ies,^  gives  corroborative  testimony,
and  states  that,  when  holding  the  rod  in  the  same  way  as  the  pro-
fessional dowser  he  employed,  "  the  harder  I  grasped  the  stick  to
prevent  it  turning,  the  more  it  turned,  till  at  last  it  broke  in  two,  and
hurt  the  hand  that  held  it."

But  this  is  no  new  explanation  of  the  motion  of  the  rod,  for  the
fullest  and  best  account  of  its  motion, — based  upon  experimental
evidence, — is  given  by  the  American  writer  to  whom  I  have  already
referred,  Mr.  Emerson,  in  the  pages  of  the  American  Journal  of  Science
(Sillhnan^s  Joiornal)  for  1826.  The  writer  shows  how  startling  and
apparently  miraculous  is  the  sudden  motion  of  the  rod,  in  the  hands  of
a  good  water-finder, — and  remarks,  if  there  be  a  fraud,  the  diviners  are
themselves  the  dtq^es.  It  is  true,  he  goes  on  to  say,  that  nearly  eveiy
one  can  urge  it  to  turn  in  a  fashion,  ljut  only  in  the  hands  of  a  very
few  does  it  move,  not  only  without  urging,  but  contrary  to  their  best


1  Series  1,  Vol.  X.  (1854),  p.  155.


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


287


effoi'ts.  He  himself  tried  again  and  again,  but  failed.  At  last,  one
day,  watching  a  young  and  successful  diviner,  he  noticed  the  peculiar
spirit  and  air  of  determination  with  which  he  handled  the  rod.

Hoping  to  catch  his  lively  manner  [Mr.  Emerson  says]  I  took  the  rod
and  tried  my  hand  again.  When  I  got  to  the  bank  of  the  rivulet  the  rod
began  to  move,  and  I  could  not  restrain  ifc.  He  who  for  the  first  time  in  his
life  has  received  an  electric  shock  will  recognise  the  sensation  which  I
experienced  when  I  felt  the  limbs  of  the  rod  crawling  round,  and  saw  the
point  turning  down  in  spite  of  every  effort  my  clenclied  hands  could  make
to  restrain  it.  In  this  contest  between  myself  and  the  rod  tlie  bark  was
strij^ped  off  the  twig.  The  secret  appeared  to  be  to  hold  the  rod  in  a
spirited  manner  [by  this  he  apparently  means  a  determined  and  confident,
not  a  weak  and  hesitating,  manner],  for  since  then  the  rod  has  never  failed
to  move  in  my  hands,  nor  in  the  hands  of  those  I  have  instructed.

Mr.  Emerson  then  gives  directions  how  to  hold  the  rod  in  order  to
exhibit  its  startling  motion  ;  if  the  diviner  releases  his  firm  grasp,  he
goes  on  to  say  : —

The  rod  can  no  more  turn  than  an  unbent  bow  can  throw  an  arrow.
By  grasping  the  forked  rod  smartly  the  bow  is  strained  and  then  if  the  rod
be  pliant  and  the  hands  moist,  it  will  creep  round  slowly  and  mysteriously.
But  if  the  rod  be  large,  its  motion  when  smartly  bent  may  become
ungovernable.  The  direction  of  the  motion  of  the  rod  forwards  or  back-
wards depends  on  whether  the  wrists  are  allowed  to  turn  to  their  natural
position  or  are  slightly  more  strained  outwards.

Two  large  goose  quills  tied  together  at  their  tips,  or  two  pieces  of
whalebone  similarly  fastened  and  held  as  a  divining  rod,  Mr.  Emerson
found  to  work  quite  as  well,  or  even  better,  than  a  forked  twig.  This
part  of  Mr.  Emerson's  paper  is  excellent,  but  of  course  explains
nothing  more  than  the  apparently  spontaneous  and  vigorous  motion
of  the  rod.i

Professor  Wadsworth,  of  Michigan  University,  has  recently  pub-
lished a  letter  in  JVature  -  giving  a  similar  explanation  of  the  motion

^  Mi-.  Thos.  Blashill,  F.R.I.B.A.  (late  superintendent  architect  of  the  London
County  Council)  has  sent  me  a  lengthy  and  careful  analysis  of  the  illustrations  given
in  my  previous  Report,  showing  the  method  of  holding  the  rod,  and  he  concludes
that,  "In  every  case  in  which  the  rod  is  shown  in  the  hands  of  the  water-finder,
while  he  is  actually  searching  for  water,  the  two  prongs  of  the  fork  are  bent,  some-
times slightly  but  often  very  considerably,  '  and  he  infers  that  this  bending  accounts
for  the  motion  of  the  rod.  No  doubt  a  considerable  strain  is  put  on  the  forked  rod
by  some  professional  dowsers,  but  not  by  all ;  the  explanation  of  the  motion  of  the
rod  is  not  quite  so  easy  as  Mr.  Blashdl  and  others  who  have  not  themselves  seen  it  in
use  imagine.  Even  Mr.  Emerson's  and  Mr.  Young's  statement  that  the  rod  is  always
held  in  a  state  of  strain  is  not  invariably  true.  Moreover  the  rod  used  by  Bleton  and
others  a  century  ago  simply  rested  on  the  two  forefingei-s  :  we  shall  deal  with  this  in
the  sequel.

"A  Mechanical  Theory  of  the  Divining  Rod,"  Nature,  January  6th,  1898.


288


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


of  the  twig  to  that  given  by  Emerson  seventy  years  previously.  It  is
amusing  to  see  how  entirely  ignorant  of  the  whole  subject  are  many
scientific  men  who  are  ready  to  instruct  us.  Professor  Wadsworth
says,  in  concluding  his  letter  : —

The  whole  secret  of  the  divining-rod  seems  to  lie  in  its  position  in  the
hands  of  the  operator,  and  in  his  voluntarily  or  involuntarily  increasing  the
closeness  of  his  grasp  on  the  two  ends  of  the  branches  forming  the  fork.
If  the  foregoing  conditions  are  fulhlled,  the  twig  will  always  bend  down —
water  or  no  water,  mineral  or  no  mineral.  Any  one  can  be  an  operator,  and
any  material  can  be  used  for  the  instrument,  provided  the  limbs  forming  the
fork  are  sufficiently  tough  and  flexible.

As  I  have  said,  any  one  can  twist  the  rod  if  it  is  held  in  a
particular  manner,  but  I  am  afraid  Professor  Wadsworth's  contri-
bution can  hardly  be  said  to  have  solved  ^'  the  whole  secret  of
the  divining  rod."

Just  as  a  pen  or  pencil  registers  conscious  acts  of  the  brain  by
small  muscular  motions  of  the  fingers,  so  the  divining  rod  indicates
sub-conscious  acts  of  the  brain  by  small  and  usually  involuntary  and  in-
sensible muscular  motions  on  the  part  of  the  so-called  diviner.  It  is  not
necessary  to  call  the  man  who  writes  or  who  reads  a  letter  "a  diviner,"
though  he  is  so  in  a  sense,  and  it  is  equally  unnecessary  to  call  a  man
"  a  diviner  "  who  employs  a  forked  stick  to  indicate  the  twitching  of
the  muscles  of  his  lower  arm.  Though  the  honest  dowser  himself
declares  he  does  not  move  the  forked  twig,  this  is  simply  a  proof  that
the  motion  is  to  him  both  involuntary  and  unconscious.  It  is  needless
to  labour  this  point,  but  it  may  be  worth  while  to  dispose  of  it  once
for  all.

How,  ask  several  correspondents,  can  a  man  move  a  stick,  the
motion  of  which  he  is  consciously  resisting  1  The  muscles,  it  is  urged,
cannot  simultaneously  be  doing  opposite  things.  It  certainly  looks
mysterious,  but  it  is  not  really  so  to  the  trained  physiologist.  Through
the  kindness  of  my  friend.  Dr.  Purser,  Professor  of  Physiology  at
Trinity  College,  Dublin,  I  have  been  able  to  have  this  question  tested
in  the  person  of  an  amateur  dowser,  an  Irish  gentleman,  to  whom  I
have  already  referred,  Mr.  J.  H.  Jones,  who  was  good  enough  to  allow
himself  to  be  made  the  subject  of  experiment  in  the  grounds  of
Trinity  College,  Dublin.  Dr.  Purser  subsequently  wrote  to  me  as
follows  :—  ^  December  Idth,  1897.

The  interview  with  Mr.  Jones  was  held  under  rather  unfavourable  circum-
stances, owing  to  the  storm,  but  I  think  I  was  able  to  see  the  movement  by
which  the  turning  of  the  stick  is  effected.  .

The  movements  by  which  the  stick  is  turned  are  : — (1)  A  rotation  of  the
forearms,  or  one  of  them  ;  (2)  a  flexion  of  the  inner  fingers,  by  which  the


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


289


stick  is  made  a  lever  of  the  first  order  with  very  short  distance  between  the
fulcrum  and  the  power,  or  perhaps  a  lever  of  the  third  order.  It  was
impossible  to  follow  the  movements  when  the  stick  was  rapidly  twirled,  or
when  Mr.  Jones  walked  rapidly  and  the  rod  suddenly  turned  and  he  said  :
"  There  is  water  here."  But  when  he  stood  over  the  place  where  he  said
underground  water  existed,  and  professed  to  struggle  against  the  motion  of
the  stick,  the  movement  was  evident,  and  I  had  no  difficulty  in  imitating
the  movements  myself,  although,  of  course,  not  so  dexterously  as  Mr.  Jones
did.  As  to  whether  the  movements  are  conscious  or  unconscious  I  cannot
express  any  opinion, — but  that  the  stick  is  moved  by  the  muscles  of  the
arm  and  not  by  any  occult  influence  cannot  be  doubted,  I  think,  by  any
reasonable  being.  -p  Purser.

To  the  lay  reader,  no  doubt,  there  is  considerable  difficulty  in  under-
standing how  this  explanation  covers  all  the  facts,  if  such  cases  as  those
I  have  quoted  earlier  are  correctly  described.  The  breaking  of  the
forked  twig  can  only  be  accomplished  by  a  rigid  grasp  of  one  of  the
forks,  and  a  rotation  of  the  twig  by  the  hand  holding  the  other  fork.
This  is  probably  what  occurs ; — the  skill  and  strength  required  to  do
this,  without  much  visible  motion  of  the  hand,  being  as  much  beyond
the  conscious  effort  of  the  dowser  as  the  feats  of  a  somnambulist  or
hypnotised  person  are  beyond  the  power  of  the  same  person  in  his
normal  state ;  and  the  physiological  explanation  is  probably  much  the
same  in  the  two  cases,  namely,  an  automatic  concentration  and  dis-
charge of  most  of  the  available  nervous  energy  of  the  individual  into
one  narrow  channel.  Only  a  trained  anatomist  is  competent  to  give
an  opinion  on  this  question,  for  he  knows  which  muscles  to  observe,
whilst  the  startling  effects  of  auto-suggestion  are  well  known  to
physiologists.

In  support  of  this  view  I  will  here  quote  an  extract  from  the  report
of  a  small  committee  who,  in  1894,  critically  examined  a  dowser  at
work.  The  committee  of  investigation  consisted  of  the  pathologist
and  the  assistant  physician  of  one  of  the  Bristol  hospitals,  Mr.  Mole,
F.R.C.S.,  and  Dr.  F.  H.  Edgeworth, — the  latter  having  made  neurology
a  special  study — and  the  Rev.  R.  A.  Chudleigh,  of  West  Parley
Rectory,  Wimborne,  Dorset.  Mr.  Cliudleigh,  who  acted  as  reporter,
though  not  an  M.D.,  has  made  a  life-long  study  of  both  physiology  and
pathology.  1  The  committee  were  therefore  well  qualified.  They  were
fortunate  in  securing  the  co-operation  of  a  skilful  amateur  dowser,  who
placed  himself,  as  well  as  his  estate  (on  the  border  of  the  Mendips),
entirely  at  their  service.  In  the  course  of  a  lengthy  report,  Mr.
Chudleigh  says  :  "  If  there  be  one  thing  which  is  perfectly  clear,  it  is

1 1  have  since  had  a  considerable  correspondence  with  the  Rev.  Mr.  Chudleigh,
and  have  been  much  struck  with  his  true  scientific  habit  of  mind  and  wide  range  of
knowledge.

Y


290


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


that  the  movement  of  the  wand  is  due  to  an  unconscious  muscular
contraction,  just  like  other  muscular  contractions,  except  that  it  is
unconscious."  Albeit,  he  goes  on  to  say,  "  The  violent  tremor  which
convulsed  the  over-strained  arm  is  itself  enough  to  suggest  witchcraft
to  an  ordinary  spectator,  and  yet  I  am  sure  that  it  is  nothing  more
than  what  is  known  as  muscle-clonus."  Anatomical  reasons  are  then
given  to  account  for  the  sudden  violent  motion  of  the  rod,  and  the
report  continues  :  "  A  precisely  analogous  phenomenon  is  seen  in  those
cases  where  a  spinal  wound  or  a  spinal  poison  throws  the  whole  body
into  universal  spasm ;  but  the  flexors  master  the  extensors  and  the
back  muscles  overpower  the  front  ones,  the  result  being  the  frightful
and  well-known  pose  called  opisthotonus."  The  writer  then  points
out  that  the  sudden  spontaneous  tension  of  the  muscles  of  the  arms
which  occur  when  the  dowser  believes  himself  to  be  over  a  spring  is
probably  due  to  auto-suggestion ;  '•this  auto-suggestion  makes  a  diviner
positively  tetanic  when  he  knows  or  thinks  that  water  is  present."^
The  symptoms  described  in  the  foregoing  were  more  strikingly
exhibited  by  the  late  Mr.  W.  Scott  Lawrence  than  by  most  other
dowseis ;  a  vivid  description  is  given  by  an  eye-witness  on  p.  69  of
the  previous  Report.^

Severe  muscular  spasm,  as  is  well  known,  can  be  caused  by  sugges-
tion in  hypnotic  subjects.  In  Hittell's  Somnambulism  and  Cramp,
New  York,  1860,  muscular  contractions  are  described  as  caused  by
auto-suggestion — e.g.,  "  If  Miss  At  ventured  to  eat  with  a  silver  spoon,
the  muscles  of  the  mouth  soon  became  rigid,  etc."  Every  physician  is
acquainted  with  cases  where  often  alarming  muscular  spasm,  as  of  the
glottis,  is  due  to  purely  ideo-motor  action.  "  The  idea  of  a  particular
motion,"  as  the  physiologist  MuUer  long  ago  remarked,  "  determines
the  current  of  nervous  action  towards  the  necessary  muscles,  and
gives  rise  to  the  motion  independently  of  the  will."  Dr.  Edgeworth
sends  me  an  instance  of  this  under  his  care  at  the  Bristol  Infirmary.
He  writes  : —

A  man  who  had  an  affection  of  the  spinal  cord  was  given  mercury
by  injections  into  his  arm.  His  legs  (the  part  affected)  got  well,  but  he
developed  the  idea  that  his  arm  had  been  poisoned,  and  as  a  result  has  a

1  See  Farm  and  Home,  May,  1894,  p.  132.

2  When  Lawrence  came  over  a  place  where  he  asserted  an  underground  spring
existed — and  which  proved  true  on  sinking  a  well  at  the  spot, — the  writer  states: —
"I  can  only  describe  the  antics  of  that  twig  as  a  pitched  battle  between  itself  and
tiim  !  It  twisted,  it  knocked  about,  it  contracted  and  contorted  the  muscles  of  his
hands  and  arms,  it  wriggled,  and  fought,  and  kicked,  until  it  snapped  in  two — and
then — what  made  it  painful  to  watch  until  I  got  used  to  it,  the  old  man  reeled,  and
clutched  hold  of  any  one  nearest  to  him  for  a  few  moments.  It  evidently  exhausts
him  very  much,  though  afterwards  I  asked  him  what  effect  it  had  on  him,  and  he
said  it  only  made  his  heart  beat  most  violently." — Letter  to  Mr.  W.  Whitalccr,  F.B.S.


XXXVIII.]  On  tke  So-called  Divining  Rod.


291


hysterical  paralysis  of  the  injected  arm.  These  auto-suggestions  are  very
ditScult  to  remove.  .  .  .  In  my  opinion  they  afford  an  explanation  of  the
motion  of  the  "  divining  rod."

F.  H.  Edgbworth.

■ §  3. Consider atio7i  of  Bleton^s  Motor- Automatism.

It  may  be  argued  by  some  readers  that  the  foregoing  explanation
of  the  motion  of  the  forked  twig  cannot  apply  to  the  singular  and
rapid  rotation  of  the  slightly  curved  rod  used  by  Bleton.  Certainly
the  facts,  as  cai'efully  narrated  by  Dr.  Thouvenel  on  pp.  53-76  of  his
first  Memoire,  were  very  curious  and  are  worth  attention.

In  the  first  place  it  is  wholly  improbable  that  the  rotation  of
Bleton's  baguette,  any  more  than  the  twisting  of  the  forked  twig  by
the  dowsers  of  to-day,  was  due  to  any  conscious  muscular  effort  on  the
part  of  the  sotircier  or  water-finder.  In  fact,  if  the  reader  will  try  to
rotate  a  slightly  curved  stick  resting  on  his  forefingers,  as  shown  in
Fig.  18,  p.  274,  he  will  realise  how  difficult  it  is  to  accomplish,  keep-
ing, withal,  his  hands  and  arms  as  far  as  possible  motionless.  But
difficult  as  it  is  to  imitate  this  motion,  it  is  not  impossible,  as  Lalande
showed  in  the  passage  I  have  quoted  on  p.  273,  though  I  have  no
doubt  the  attempt  to  imitate  the  rotation  was  a  very  clumsy  one.
For  the  effects  of  involuntary  muscular  action  are  surprisingly  difficult
to  imitate  by  voluntary  effort.  That  some  muscular  action  really  took
place  on  Bleton's  part  is  seen  from  Thouvenel's  own  admission,  opposed
as  he  was  to  this  idea.  On  p.  114  of  his  first  Memoire,  he  says,  in  a
passage  I  will  translate  : —

I  have  perceived  several  times  that  the  approach  of  the  arms  and  a
certain  tour  de  main  on  the  part  of  the  sourcier  [Bleton]  contributed  to
give  the  baguette  its  first  impulse  of  rotation  over  feeble  springs.

It  is  true  that  he  does  not  notice  this  at  other  times :  but  a  careful

observer  (M.  le  Comte  de  M  )  quoted  by  Thouvenel  on  p.  188  of

his  Memoire,  says  : —

I  have  reason  to  suspect  that  [the  motion  of]  the  baguette  is  a  little
aided  by  an  almost  insensible  movement  of  the  shoulder.

Albeit  the  Count  himself  tried  without  success  to  turn  the  baguette
at  a  spot  where  it  moved  with  Bleton.  Thouvenel  tells  us  Bleton
judged  with  singular  accuracy  of  the  volume  of  the  hidden  spring  by
the  rate  of  I'otation  of  the  baguette,  as  well  as  by  the  violence  of  the
convulsive  movements  of  his  body  which  simultaneously  occurred.^

1  I  have  mentioned  already  (p.  260)  that  the  motion  of  the  rod  with  Bleton  (as
with  some  dowsers  of  to-day)  was  subsidiary  to  the  convulsive  spasm  and  malaise
which  he  e.xperienced,  when,  as  he  alleged,  an  underground  spring  existed  beneath.

T  2


292


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Furthermore,  he  was  able  to  judge  of  the  depth  of  the  spring  in  the
following  manner:  on  leaving  the  spot  beneath  which  he  alleged  water
was  to  be  found,  the  baguette  ceased  to  turn,  but  when  he  had  gone  a
certain  distance  the  baguette  suddenly  gave  a  single  rotation  in  the
opposite  direction.  The  distance  at  which  this  occurred  from  the  spot
at  which  it  stopped  turning  was,  according  to  Bleton,  the  approximate
depth  of  the  spring.  The  results  given  in  the  depositions  quoted  by
Thouvenel  show  that  Bleton  was  usually  fairly  correct  in  his  estimate
of  the  depth  when  it  did  not  exceed  30  ft. ;  beyond  that  he  did  not
profess  to  be  able  to  judge.  One  witness,  however,  states  that  even
at  small  depths  Bleton  was  often  at  fault.

The  rate  of  rotation  and  the  retrograde  as  well  as  the  direct
motion  of  the  baguette  were  no  doubt  simply  ideo-motor  phenomena,
the  result  of  an  involuntary  muscular  effort  prompted  by  some  auto-
suggestion. The  difficulty  here,  as  elsewhere  in  our  inquiry,  is  to
trace  the  genesis  of  this  probably  subconscious  suggestion.

§  4.  Apparent  Transmission  of  Motor-Automatism  from  a  Sensitive
to  an  Insensitive  Person.

There  is,  however,  another  problem  connected  with  the  motion  of
the  rod  which  we  must  not  pass  over,  and  that  is,  the  remarkable  fact
so  frequently  noticed  that  when  the  dowser  lays  hold  of  the  wrist  or
hand  of  a  person  with  whom  the  rod  will  not  turn,  the  twig  instantly
moves.  I  have  quoted  numerous  instances  of  this  from  excellent  wit-
nesses on  pp.  278  and  279.  This  apparent  transmission  of  the  power  of
involuntary  muscular  action  was  noticed  by  Thouvenel  to  occur  with
Bleton  a  hundred  years  ago.  On  p.  59  of  his  Memoire  Thouvenel  says
that,  when  Bleton  placed  his  hngers  on  the  hand  of  a  person  with  whom
the  baguette  would  not  turn,  then  the  rod  instantly  rotated  when  they

approached  an  underground  spring. M.  le  Comte  de  M  ,  whom  I

quoted  just  now,  states  that,  whilst  the  baguette  would  not  move  in
his  hands,  yet  when  Bleton  held  them  the  rod  then  began  to  turn,
much  to  his  astonishment.  A  few  years  later  Amoretti  indepen-
dently discovered  the  same  thing  when  Pennet  touched  his  hands.  He
states  the  rod  then  turned  against  his  (Amoretti's)  will  whenever  he
stood  over  veins  of  metal.  I  have  referred  to  this  on  p.  247.  Compare
this  with  the  similar  experience  (only  with  a  forked  rod)  described  by
a  mechanical  engineer,  Mr.  Morton,  given  on  p.  172  of  the  present
Report,  or  with  the  precisely  corresponding  experience  of  an  able
lawyer  (the  land  agent  to  Trinity  College,  Cambridge),  Mr.  Woolley,
given  on  p.  278.

There  can,  therefore,  be  no  doubt  about  this  curious  fact,  which
seems  to  occur  most  conspicuously  only  with  notable  dowsers,  such  as


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


293


Bleton  and  the  late  J.  MuUins.  What  is  the  explanation  of  it?  I
expect  it  will  be  found  not  in  the  transmission  of  any  voluntary  or
involuntary  motion  from  the  sensitive  to  the  insensitive  person,  but  in
the  transmission  of  a  suggestion  to  the  latter.  If  so,  any  mode  of
impressing  such  a  suggestion  would  do  as  well,  if  it  be  emphatic  and
indirect.  The  charming  away  of  warts,  of  which  we  have  such  striking
and  well  authenticated  instances,  is  a  case  where  any  kind  of  indirect
suggestion  will  do,  if  it  be  strongly  impressed  on  the  reci2)ient.i

And  by  the  word  suggestion  is  meant,  as  Professor  Pierre  Janet
defines  it,  the  influence  which  one  perso7i  exercises  upon  another  iiidepen-
dently  of  the  voluntary  consent  of  the  subject.-  That  is  to  say,  certain
individuals  will  submit  to  a  foreign  influence  and  obey  it,  without
having  consented  or  intended  to  obey  and  without  even  knowing  they
were  obeying.  Now  the  influence  of  suggestion  is  most  strikingly  seen
in  these  involuntary  or  automatic  phenomena,  and  cases  analogous  to
the  apparent  transmission  of  the  motion  of  the  baguette  from  one
person  to  another  occur  with  the  pendule  and  in  the  so-called  willing
game.  If  one  person,  A,  finds  the  pendule  will  not  oscillate  in  his
hands  and  another,  B,  finds  it  does  oscillate  freely  with  him,  then
when  B  clasps  the  free  hand  of  A,  the  pendule  now  oscillates  for  A
or  the  direction  of  the  oscillation  can  be  instantly  changed  by  C
clasping  B's  free  hand,  and  again  changed  if  D  clasps  C's  other  hand
and  so  on  through  a  large  circle ;  B,  C,  and  D  desiring  the  change  to
occur.  Again,  in  the  "willing  game,"  I  found  in  1879  that
The  intervention  of  a  second  person  (who  was  ignorant  of  what  had  to  be
done)  between  the  wilier  and  the  subject,  the  hands  of  each  resting  on  tlie
shoulders  of  the  one  in  front,  did  not  seriously  interfere  with  the  result
attained.  3

Furthermore,  with  a  sensitive  subject,  if  the  operator  or  wilier
merely  placed  three  fingers  lightly  on  the  back  of  the  subject's  head,
the  latter  would  write  correctly  words  known  only  to  the  operator,
even  if  Greek  words  and  characters  were  used,  though  the  subject
knew  nothing  of  Greek. ^ Professor  Janet  gives  a  simpler  case  where

1  See  Jo!t?vKtZ  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  (1897-98),  pp.  7,  40,  96,  etc.,  also  an  admirable
work  by  Miss  Feilding  on  Faith-Healiwj,  Chaps.  I.  and  IV.  (Duckworth  and  Co.,
1899).  In  hypnosis  a  direct  suggestion  appears  effective,  whereas  in  the  normal  state
an  indirect  suggestion  seems  most  potent,  e.g.,  touching  or  stroking  the  warts,  tying
a  thread  round  the  wrist,  etc.  But  why  is  it  that  only  some  persons  have  this
suggestive  power ''.  Is  it  the  faith  of  the  charmer  in  his  remedy  or  the  faitli  of  the
patient?  And  why  h  faith,  with  its  necessary  self-surrender,  the  ncxv.i  between  the
conscious  and  the  sub-conscious  life?  the  powers  of  the  latter  being  so  miraculous,
because  so  foreign  to  the  former.

'-  VAatamatisrae  Psychologique,  by  Professor  Pierre  Janet,  p.  140  ;  see  also  Les
Suggestions  JBypnotiques,  by  Professor  Paul  Janet.

3  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  1882,  Vol.  I.,  p.  50.
Ihid.,  p.  51.


294


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


the  operator  holds  the  left  hand  of  the  subject  and  the  latter  with  his
right  hand  writes  the  words  known  only  to  the  operator. ^

If  we  admit  telepathy,  i.e.,  true  thought-transference,  as  a  vei-a
causa,  no  douVjt  it  plaj^s  an  important  part  in  many  of  these  phenomena
of  suggestion,  and  my  original  object  in  1879,  when  making  the  experi-
ments I  have  described,  was  to  show  that  the  theory  of  the  transmission
of  an  idea  by  involuntary  muscular  action  had  to  be  pushed  to  such  a
grotesque  extent  that  it  became  easier  to  believe  in  a  purely  mental,
rather  than  in  a  muscular  transmission  of  the  suggestion  made  by  the
operator.  Whichever  view  is  taken,  the  important  part  played  by
sugfjestioti  in  all  these  phenomena  is  unquestionable,  and  it  was  to
this  fact  I  drew  the  attention  of  psychologists,  I  believe  for  the
first  time,  in  a  paper  read  before  the  British  Association  so  long
ago  as  1876."

§  5. Historical  Note.

In  concluding  this  part  we  should  not  forget  that  one  of  the  first
scientific  men  in  this  century  who  drew  attention  to  the  varied  effects
of  involuntary  muscular  action  was  Chevreul.  In  his  work  on  the
divining  rod  (La  Baguette  Diviyiatoire,  Paris,  1854),  Chevreul  shows
how  the  rod  may  be  moved  in  this  way.  The  principle  which  Chevreul
enunciates,  and  which  he  maintains  accounts  for  many  diverse  phe-
nomena, is  one  with  which  we  are  now  of  course  perfectly  familiar ;  he
thus  expresses  it : —

Le  developpoment  en  nous  d'une  action  musculaire  qui  n'est  pas  le
produit  d'une  volonte,  niais  le  resultat  d'une  pensee  qui  se  porte  sur  un
phenornene  du  monde  exterieur,  sans  preoccupation  de  raction  musculaire
indispensable  a  la  manifestation  du  phenornene,  va  servir  de  centre  de
railliement  aux  faits  dissemines ;  je  le  desit^nerai  par  I'expression  de  principc
(In  2>embile  explorattn.r.'^

Twenty-one  years  before  the  publication  of  his  work  on  the
Baguette,  Chevreul  had  addressed  a  letter  to  the  famous  Ampere,
(published  in  the  Revue  des  Deux  Mondes  for  1833)  in  which  he
clearly  states  that  the  movement  of  the  pendide,  which  was  exciting
much  attention  at  that  time,  was  due  to  "  un  mouvement  musculaire
de  mon  bras,  quoique  insensible  pour  moi  "  and  he  points  out  the
intimate  connection  between  the  will  or  intention  of  the  operator  and
the  resultant  movement  of  the  little  ring  or  ball  suspended  by  a
thread  from  his  fingers.  He  thus  clears  away  a  mass  of  perplexing
and  misleading  observations  which  had  been  published  by  numerous

^  L'Automatisme  Ps>/chologiqiie,  p.  373. Paris,  1889.

2  Printed  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.  for  1882,  Vol.  I.,  p.  240.

"  Chevreul,  La  Baguette  Bivinatoirc,  p.  187.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


295


previous  experimenters  on  the  pendule,  all  of  whom  believed  some
intinirate  connection  existed  between  the  oscillation  of  the  little  ball
and  the  electric  state  of  the  operator  or  of  the  object  that  was  tested.^
A  German  savant,  Professor  Gilbert,  had  before  this  shown  in
Gilbert's  Annalen  der  Physik,  Vols.  26  and  27,  how  worthless
were  the  inferences  drawn  from  these  experiments  by  Ritter,
Amoretti,  Gerboin  and  others  ;  Gilbert  subsequently  published  his
papers  in  1808.2

In  the  numerous  papers  and  books  on  the  haguette  and  pendule  pub-
lished on  the  Continent  between  1796  and  1816,  the  controversy,  often
violent  in  tone,  does  not  turn  upon  the  main  question  whether  the
so-called  diviner  or  dowser  could  or  could  not  discover  underground
water  better  than  ordinary  mortals, — for  except  in  Thouvenel's  original
Memoire,  little  or  no  evidence  is  adduced  on  this  point — but  whether
"animal  electricity  "  was  or  was  not  the  cause  of  the  twisting  of  the
rod.  The  disputants,  as  visual,  cared  less  to  know  the  actual  facts  than
to  prove  their  particular  theory  to  be  true.  Moreover  the  attentioii  of
the  scientific  world  at  the  early  part  of  the  19th  century  was  directed
to  electricity  by  Volta  and  Galvani's  discoveries,  and  it  was  natural
that  many  investigators  should  see  in  the  sudden  and  mysterious
motion  of  the  baguette  and  the  pendule  an  effect  analogous  to  the
spasmodic  contraction  of  the  legs  of  a  dead  frog  which  Galvani  had
shown  was  due  to  an  electric  stimulus.  In  fact,  Volta  himself  was
consulted  and  took  part  in  some  of  these  experiments  with  the
baguette,  but  his  opinion  is  not  stated.

From  the  baguette  and  the  pendule  public  attention  was  afterwards
directed  to  "  table-turning,"  and  the  illustrious  Faraday,  in  18-54,  con-
clusively proved  by  experiment  that  it  was  quite  possible  for  the
sitters  to  ma1ce  tables  gyrate  by  involuntary  muscular  action  on  their
part.2 Chevi-eul  refers  to  Faraday's  experiments  on  p.  220  of  his

1  See,  for  example,  Professor  Gerboin's  Mecherches  Experimentalcs  sur  un  nouvcau
mode  de  Vaction  eUctrique,  Strasbourg,  1808;  or  Ritter's  and  Amoretti's  writings  from
1800  to  1807  on  Der  aninialische  electrometrie,  die  baguette,  und  der  pendel,  forming
the  subject  of  these  papers.

2  Kritische  Aufsdtze  iiher  die  in  Milnchen  wieder  erneuten  Versuche  mit  Schioefelkics-
Pendcln  und  Wilnschelruthen,  von  L.  W.  Gilbert,  Halle,  1808.  I  have  to  thank  Miss
E.  Stokes  for  making  an  abstract  for  me  at  the  British  Museum  of  this  and  other  old
German  and  Italian  works  on  the  subject  of  the  haguette  a.nd  pendule.

^  Faraday's  explanation  of  table  turning  is  undoubtedly  a  vera  causa  for  a  certain
class  of  so-called  spiritualistic  phenomena,  but  it  is  only  applicable  within  a  limited
range,  as  every  investigator  of  spiritualism  knows.  It  is  of  course  not  impossible
that  some  of  the  phenomena  of  the  divining  rod  may,  in  like  manner,  be  found  to
transcend  any  explanation  now  recognised  by  science  ;  for  the  varied  manifestations
of  automatism  insensibly  pass  from  the  normal  to  the  supernormal.  At  present,
however,  we  are  not,  in  my  opinion,  justified  in  assuming  the  motion  of  the  rod  to  be
explicable  by  other  than  known  causes.


296


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


work  on  the  Baguette,  and  groups  all  these  cognate  phenomena  under
one  common  explanation  :  the  essential  factors,  according  to  both
Faraday  and  Chevreul,  being — (1)  the  intention  of  the  operator  that
the  movement  should  take  place  in  a  certain  direction,  and  (2)  that  he
should  be  unaivare  he  is  exerting  any  effort  of  will,  or  any  muscular
force,  in  carrying  out  his  intention.  Professor  Ch.  Richet  has  more
recently  discussed  the  subject  with  wider  knowledge,  but  I  have  not
yet  read  his  work.^  Dr.  Liebeault'^  takes  much  the  same  view  as
Chevreul,  but  believes  that  the  dowser,  from  gazing  at  the  point
of  his  rod,  becomes  partially  hynotised,  a  view  that  I  have  also  sug-
gested, but  the  hypnosis,  if  it  exists,  is  certainly  very  slight  in  most
dowsers.

In  his  masterly  work,  U Automatisme  Psychologique,  Professor
Pierre  Janet  devotes  a  section  to  the  consideration  of  the  motion  of
the  divining  rod.  He  confirms  Chevreul's  view  as  to  the  involuntary
motion  of  the  rod  and  pendule,  but  he  goes  further  and  shows  that
these  automatic  actions  are  "i"  sans  le  vouloir,  et  2°  sans  le  savoir."
Chevreul  admits  the  first,  but  asserts  that  the  movements  are  due  to
a  conscious  intention  on  the  part  of  the  operator  to  make  the  rod
or  pendulum  move  in  a  certain  direction ;  the  knowledge  and  thought
of  the  operator  are,  therefore,  involved,  though  his  will  may  not
actively  co-operate.  Janet  shows  that  this  is  a  mistaken  view  ;  the
movement,  as  he  rightly  insists,  takes  place  without  the  conscious
intention  of  the  operator. He  remarks  : —

M.  Chevreul  pousse  aussi  loin  que  possible  rexplication  des  faits  par  la
tendance  au  mouveinent  cre^e  par  les  images  conscientes,  mais  quand  les
faits  depassent  cette  theorie,  il  retombe  dans  les  explications  banales  par
la  fourberie  et  la  simulation.  ...  II  faut  aller  plus  loin  que  M.
Chevreul  et,  apres  avoir  admis  des  actes  sans  volonte,  il  faut  parler  des
pensees  sans  conscience  [consciousness]  ou  en  dehors  de  notre  conscience.''

Chevreul,  we  see  from  the  foregoing,  was  no  exception  to  that
familiar  type  of  mind  which  fancies  trickery  or  simulation  afford  the
only  explanation  of  facts  that  lie  beyond  the  range  of  its  experience
or  its  theories.  In  one  of  his  conversations  with  Eckermann,  Goethe
shows  how  every  new  scientific  truth  has  to  encounter  the  fierce
opposition  of  this  class  (see  the  motto  on  p.  132).''

Dr.  Hodgson  sends  me,  as  this  sheet  was  passing  through  the  press,
a  case  (given  in  the  foot-note  on  next  page)  he  has  received  from  an

1  Des  mouvcmcnts  inconscicntes.  Paris,  1886.  This  work  is  dedicated  by  M.  Richet
to  Chevreul.

-  Le  Sommeil  provoque,  p.  24:1. Paris,  1889.

3  Zj'Automatismc  Psychologique,  p.  375. Paris,  1889.

*  Conversations  of  Ooethe  (Bohn'a  Standard  Library,  p.  47).


XXXVIII.]  071  the  So-called  Divining  Mod.


297


American  friend  which  illustrates  the  entire  inadequacy  of  Chevreul's
point  of  view.i

Professor  Pierre  Janet  goes  further  and  shows  that  in  these  and
other  phenomena  of  automatism,

II  y  a  done,  dans  certains  cas,  plus  qu'un  acte  automatique,  manifesta-
tion involontaire  d'une  image  visuelle  et  auditive  ;  il  y  a  une  veritable
action  sub-consciente,  une  veritable  collaboration  de  la  seconde  personnalite
avec  la  premiere. — (U Automatisme  Paychologique,  p.  374.)

The  class  of  persons  who  exhibit  one  or  more  of  the  varied  pheno-
mena of  automatism  are  those  whom  M.  Janet  calls  les  individus
suggestibles  ;  persons  who  are  readily  influenced  by  suggestion  from
within  or  without,  whose  mind  is  easily  dominated  by  a  single  idea.
This  may  explain  why  it  happens,  as  was  noticed  150  yeai'S  ago,  that
the  best  dowsers  are  not  educated  people,  but  more  or  less  ignorant
persons,  who — according  to  Pryce — {Mineralogia  Cornuhiensis,  p.  118)
"  hold  the  rod  without  puzzling  their  minds  with  doubts  or  reasonings."
Such  persons  best  exhibit  the  "  reflex  "  action  to  which  the  motion  of  the
rod  is  due,  the  prompting  of  suggestion  not  being  interfered  with  by
volition.  But  where  will  and  reason  are  supreme,  such  automatic  actions
are  brought  into  subjection  by  the  intelligence.  In  other  words,  when
our  conscious  self,  which  speaks  through  voluntary  muscular  movements,
is  dominant,  the  subconscious  self  is  submerged.  Hence  in  order  that
any  subconscious  suggestion  may  take  effect  in  some  form  of  automatic
action,  the  reason  and  will  must  be  in  abeyance.

/n  fine,  the  controlling  force  of  Suggestion  is  to  the  subconscious
life  and  its  expression  in  involuntary  nncscular  action  and  tissue-
change  what  the  Will  is  to  the  conscious  life  and  its  expression  in
voluntary  muscular  action.

Summary.

Summing  up  this  lengthy  discussion  we  see  that  the  curious
phenomena  attending  the  motion  of  the  so-called  divining  rod  are
capable  of  explanation  by  causes  known  to  science.  Tiiey  are  not
isolated  phenomena,  but  belong  to  the  large  group  which  exhibit  in
various  ways  the  play  of  motor  automatism,  and  illustrate  in  a
striking  manner  the  profound  effect  which  suggestion  has  in  deter-
mining, directing  or  modifying  these  phenomena.

1  "New  Lebanon,  N.Y.,  July  1st,  1900.  I  spent  a  whole  day  nearly  with  an  old
gentleman  here — afarmer,  rather  above  the  average  in  intelligence — a  man  of  much  local
influence.  He  says  that  ten  years  ago  he  laughed  at  the  witch-hazel  'superstition,'
thinking  it  nothing  more.  About  that  time  he  bought  a  farm,  which  he  found — after
buying — to  be  poorly  watered.  A  neighbour,  coming  with  a  threshing  machine,  had
difficulty  in  getting  water  for  his  engine.  This  neighbour  said  one  of  his  neighbours
had  found  water  with  the  'witch-hazel  crotch.'  My  man  sneered  at  the  idea.
Thresher  man  persisted  ;  didn't  know  that  it  would  work  with  him,  but  might  with
another. Got  a  stick ;  tried  it ;  woiddn't  work. Gave  the  stick  to  my  man.  The


298


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


When  some  instrumental  means  is  used  to  exhibit  these  involun-
tary muscular  movements,  it  is  desirable  to  employ  a  generic  term,
such  as  the  word  autoscoioe^  as  suggested  in  the  previous  Report.  The
divining — or  dowsing — rod  is,  therefore,  a  convenient  out-of-door
autoscope,  and  when  held  in  a  state  of  strain,  as  it  often  is,  becomes,
from  its  unstable  or  balanced  equilibrium,  very  sensitive  to  almost
imperceptible  muscular  action  on  the  part  of  the  dowser.  (See,  on  this,
Professor  de  Mortillet's  own  observations,  given  on  p.  244.)

As  I  said  in  the  previous  Report:  It  is  just  because  these  auto-
matic actions  appear  to  be  so  novel,  and  detached  from  ourselves,
that  they  are  apt  to  be  so  misleading  to  some  and  so  mischievous  to
othei's.  Interpreted  on  the  one  hand  as  the  play  of  a  wonderful  occult
force,  science  has  refused  to  have  anything  to  do  with  phenomena
which  seem  to  obey  no  physical  laws,  but  are  capricious  and  self-
determined  Interpreted  on  the  other,  truly  enough,  as  the  exhibition
of  a  free  and  intelligent  agent,  some  infernal  or  discarnate  spirit  has
been  fixed  upon  as  the  cause,  and  a  fictitious  authority  for  which  there  is
no  warrant  has  been  given  to  their  indications.  Whether  in  any  case
these  intelligent  automatic  movements  exhibit  information  outside  the
memory  of  the  individual  who  uses  the  autoscope ;  or  a  knowledge
beyond  that  which  may  have  been  unconsciously  derived  {a)  from  those
present  by  sign-reading  or  thought-transference,  or  (6)  from  the  sur-
roundings of  the  automatist,  by  his  hyperpesthetic  discernment  of  faint
indications,  is  a  problem  which  can  only  be  solved  so  as  to  gain  general
acceptance  by  long  and  patient  enquiry,  of  which  our  Proceedings
are  an  earnest,  and  to  which  this  monograph  may  afford  a  small
contribution.  ,

latter  took  it  merely  in  complaisance ;  walked  along  a  few  rods ;  suddenly  it  went
down.  He  couldn't  stop  it.  Thought  it  was  an  involuntary  muscular  contraction  ;
tried  it  again  ;  held  it  as  tightly  as  possible  :  passing  over  the  same  line,  a  few  rods
down  the  hill,  it  turned  again,  and  so  strongly  that  the  bark  '  peeled '  in  his  hands.
The  thresher  man  declared  there  was  water  beneath.  My  man  said  he  should  want
to  see  it  before  he  believed  it,  the  surface  giving  no  indication  of  it.  Thresher  man
wanted  water  for  his  boiler  and  dug.  Only  a  few  feet  down  struck  a  small  stream,
sufficient  to  feed  his  boiler.  Since  then  my  man  has  experimented  a  good  deal.  As
a  result  of  his  work,  he  now  has  a  small  reservoir  on  the  hillside  back  of  his  buildings,
in  a  place  where  no  water  was  known  before,  which  supplies  his  barn  the  year  round
and  affords  a  limited  supply  for  use  in  case  of  fire.  The  reservoir  is  fed  from  two
small  sDrings  discovered  by  the  turning  of  the  witch-hazel  fork  in  his  own  hands.
While  witli  me  he  walked  about  over  a  good  deal  of  territory.  The  fork  turned
down  every  time  he  passed  over  a  trickle  of  visible  water,  without  exception.  It
also  tvu'ned  several  times  where  no  water  was  visible  or  suggested.  In  two  of  these
places  I  and  a  man  with  me  dug  down  a  few  feet.  In  the  one  case  we  found  a  vein
in  the  rock  filled  with  iron  pyrites  crystals  ;  in  the  other  we  struck  a  sheet  of  solid
slats  rock  about  30  in.  down,  which  we  had  neither  tools  nor  time  to  drill  into
or  through :  there  is  an  old  tradition  of  lead  veins — from  which  the  Indians
used  to  smelt  out  lead — in  the  very  place  where  his  fork  turned  over  the  slate
rock."


XXXVIII  ]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


299


PART  XII.
The  Malaise  of  the  Dowser  and  its  Origin.

Nearly  all  dowsers  assert  that  when  the  rod  moves  in  their  hands,
or  when  they  believe  that  underground  water  is  beneath  them,  they
experience  a  peculiar  sensation,  which  some  describe  as  felt  in  the
limbs  like  the  tingling  of  an  electric  shock,  others  as  a  shivering  or
trembling,  and  others  as  an  unpleasant  sensation  in  the  epigastric
region.  With  all  there  is  more  or  less  of  a  convulsive  spasm,  some-
times of  a  violent  character.  This  malaise  is  very  marked  in  some
cases,  but  not  experienced  in  others.  That  these  physiological  disturb-
ances have  a  purely  psychological  origin  is  obvious — (1)  from  the  fact
that  they  are  not  experienced  when  the  dowser  is  off  duty,  that  is,
when  he  has  no  suspicion  that  he  is  in  the  neighbourhood  of  under-
ground water,  and  (2)  that  like  effects  are  not  produced  by  the  much
greater  masses  of  visible  water  in  rivers,  lakes,  or  the  sea.  The
interesting  point  is  that  these  psycho-physiological  phenomena  have
a  real  existence ;  they  exist  among  dowsers  in  all  countries,  and  can
be  traced  back,  as  historical  investigation  shows,  for  upwards  of  two
centuries.  In  the  preceding  Report  I  devoted  an  Appendix  to  this
subject,  and  to  avoid  repetition  would  beg  those  of  my  readers  who
are  interested  to  refer  to  the  cases  I  have  there  quoted. ^

Let  us  briefly  note  the  principal  facts.  In  the  first  place  it  is
not,  as  some  imagine,  only  when  the  "  diviner  "  is  in  the  presence  of
underground  tvater  that  this  physiological  disturbance  occurs.  In  the
Journal  des  Scavans  (Savants)  for  January,  1693,  a  copy  of  which  I
possess,  a  physician  of  some  note,  Dr.  Chauvin,  writes  that,  when  the
well-known  Jacques  Aymar  was  sent  for  to  trace,  by  means  of  his  rod,
the  murderer  of  a  Lyons  Marchand  de  Vin,  Aymar  was  taken  into
the  cellar  where  the  murder  was  committed  ;  suddenly  his  hagtiette
moved  violently,  and  he  was  seized  with  convulsive  spasms.  Dr.
Chauvin,  who  was  present,  adds  : — "  II  ne  fut  pas  plutut  entre  qu'il  se
sentit  tout  emu,  et  que  son  poux  s'eleva  comma  une  grosse  fievre."-

1  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  272,  et  sec/.

*  Aymar,  as  my  readers  probably  know,  set  out  on  the  track  of  the  murderer,
who  had  hitherto  baffled  all  the  attempts  of  the  police  to  discover  his  whereabouts,
and,  guided  by  his  hagvette,  tracked  him  "  for  45  hours  on  land  and  30  hours  on  the
water,"  crossing  and  recrossing  the  Rhone,  until  at  last  he  pointed  out  a  man,  found
in  a  soldiers'  camp,  as  the  assassin.  The  man  was  arrested,  taken  to  Lyons,  tried,
found  guilty,  and  subsequently  confessing  his  crime,  was  put  to  death  by  being
broken  at  the  wheel.  There  are  numerous  corroborative  official  depositions  in  this
remarkable  case  ;  among  others  is  iheproees  verbal  of  an  eye-witness,  M.  de  Vagny,
the  Procureur  du  Roi.  .


300


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


A  centui'y  later  another  distinguished  French  physician,  Dr.
Thouvenel,  independently  notices  much  the  same  thing  with  the
water-finder,  Bleton.  Dr.  Thouvenel  gives  a  detailed  medical  report
of  his  own  long-continued  observations,  and  states  that  when  Bleton
believed  he  was  over  a  subterranean  spring  he  was  seized  with  an
extraordinary  malaise,  which  affected  his  diaphragm  and  produced  a
sense  of  oppression  in  the  chest ;  at  the  same  time  a  shivering  sets  in
and  the  pulse  falls,  his  body  trembles,  and,  in  a  word,  he  exhibits
"all  the  characteristics  of  an  attack  of  convulsive  spasm."^  Similar
symptoms  manifested  themselves  in  the  Prior  of  a  convent  at  Autun,
who  was  an  amateur  dowser  and  contemporary  of  Bleton.  A  few
years  later  the  Italian  savant,  Amoretti,  noticed  the  same  symptoms
occur  whenever  the  lad  Pennet  came  over  a  vein  of  mineral  ore  or  of
coal.  Amoretti  states  that  a  surgeon,  Sanzio,  an  amateur  dowser,
found  his  pulse  accelerated  twelve  to  fifteen  beats  per  minute  when
the  rod  moved  in  his  hands  (see  p.  247).

Dr.  Mayo,  F.R.S.,  who,  as  Professor  of  Anatomy  and  Physiology
in  King's  College  and  in  the  College  of  Surgeons  in  London,  was  a
most  competent  observer,  describes  corresponding  symptoms  which  he
observed  in  1847  in  a  youth  in  Russia.  The  lad  had  never  seen  a
"  divining  rod  "  before,  but  when  Dr.  Mayo  instructed  him  how  to
use  it,  and  made  him  walk  over  a  spot  where  he  had  reason  to  believe
an  underground  spring  existed,  the  forked  twig  twisted  round,  much
to  the  lad's  astonishment,  and  at  the  same  time  Dr.  Mayo  states  the
lad  declared  that

he  felt  an  uneasy  sensation  which  quickly  increased  to  pain  at  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  and  he  became  alarmed,  so  that  I  bade  him  quit  hold  of  the  rod,
when  the  pain  ceased.  Ten  minutes  later  I  induced  him  to  make  another
trial  ;  the  results  were  the  same.^

As  Dr.  Mayo  was  apparently  unaware  of  Thouvenel's  writings,  he
could  hardly  have  anticipated  or  suggested  the  malaise  experienced  by
his  subject,  but  the  effect  observed  was  doubtless  due  to  the  same
psychological  cause  as  in  the  previous  cases.

Abundant  modern  instances  of  a  similar  physiological  disturbance
and  convulsive  spasm  occurring  with  various  dowsers  in  different
countries  will  be  found  in  the  cases  cited  in  the  previous  and  present
Report  (see,  e.g.,  pp.  230,  244,  245,  251,  252,  etc.).  Mr.  J.  F.  Young,
whose  experiences  as  an  amateur  dowser  are  given  on  p.  219,  says  : —

I  have  noticed,  when  divining,  unpleasant  and  peculiar  symptoms  always
occur  when  I  am  over  an  underground  spring  ;  often  a  convulsive  feeling  and
staggering  comes  on.

^  Memoirc  Physique  ct  Medicinal,  p.  53  ;  Paris,  1781.  The  passage  is  quoted  in
full  in  the  previous  Report,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  272  and  273.

^  Truths  Contained  in  Popular  Superstitions,  p.  18  ;  London  185G.


xxxviil]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


He  goes  on  to  describe  how  the  sensation  is  chiefly  felt  at  the
epigastrium,  and  that  his  father,  who  was  also  an  amateur  dowser,
used  to  stagger  and  vomit  when  the  rod  turned  in  his  hands.  An
experiment  was  once  made  with  old  Mr.  Young  to  test  whether  these
symptoms  were  genuine  ;  it  is  described  in  detail  in  my  previous
Report,  p.  276.  Mr.  Young  was  carefully  blindfolded  and  led  about
by  a  circuitous  route,  but  directly  he  came  over  the  spot  where  he  had
been  seized  with  these  symptoms  before,  and  which  had  been  purposely
marked,  "  he  reeled  as  before  and  would  have  fallen  if  I  had  not  held
him  up.  Directly  he  came  off  the  place  he  was  all  right."  The  con-
vulsions that  seized  the  famous  dowser,  Mr.  Lawrence,  whenever  he
came  to  a  place  beneath  which  he  asserted  underground  water  to  exist,
have  been  described  on  a  previous  page  (foot-note,  p.  290).

There  are  some  sceptical  friends  who  would  explain  these  phe-
nomena by  asserting  that  these  different  dowsers  conspired  to  exhibit
similar  symptoms  as  a  bit  of  stage  business  in  order  to  impress  the
onlookers.  It  is,  T  think,  unnecessary  to  waste  time  in  disputing
such  a  belief  if  any  one  cares  to  hold  it.

How,  then,  are  we  to  explain  these  curious  pathological  phe-
nomena? The  facts  are  certainly  incontestable  and,  I  venture  to  think,
deserve  more  attention  from  physiologists  than  they  have  yet  received.
They  are  not,  however,  peculiar  to  the  use  of  the  so-called  divining
rod,  but  are  found  to  exist  more  or  less  conspicuously  in  other  cases  of
motor  automatism.  Professor  Pierre  Janet  has  drawn  attention  to
very  similar  convulsive  phenomena  and  physiological  disturbances  as
associated  with  other  phases  of  automatism. ^  Prior  to  this,  how-
ever, in  the  first  volume  of  the  Proceedirigs  of  our  Society,  I  pointed
out  that  in  trials  with  the  "willing  game," — which  is  one  phase  of
these  varied  automatic  phenomena,  —  curious  physiological  disturb-
ances were  often  produced,  such  as  dizziness,  hysteria,  and  incipient
trance.  -  In  fact,  a  malaise,  manifesting  itself  in  different  ways,  and
with  different  degrees  of  intensity  in  different  subjects,  is  a  usual  con-
comitant of  motor  automatism  and  its  allied  phenomena.

The  singular  connection  of  visceral  sensation, — a  visceral  con-
sciousness as  it  were,— with  a  particular  psychical  state  is  familiar  to
us  all  in  emotion^.  Emotion,  in  fact,  is  a,  feeling  excited  by  an  idea  or
train  of  ideas,  and  therefore  the  sensations  experienced  by  the  dowser

1  L'Automatismc  P.njckologicjuc,  p.  208,  etc.  ;  Paris,  1889.

2  Proceedings  S.P.R.  for  1882,  Vol.  I.,  p.  57.

3  Professor  James  holds  that  our  feeling  of  the  bodily  changes  as  they  cccur  is
the  emotion  ;  he  writes,  "If  I  were  to  become  corporeally  anssthetie,  I  .should  be
excluded  from  the  life  of  the  affections,  harsh  and  tender  alike. ' '  Physiologically,
may  we  not  really  define  emotion  as  certain  visceral  or  vascular  disturbances,  set  up
by  sugrjcstion,  the  sensation  of  these  disturbances  being  the  feeling  of  emotion  ?


302


Professor  ^¥.  F.  Barrett.


[part


are  strictly  emotional  disturbances.  Whether  emotion  is  primarily  a
cerebral  process,  as  some  physiologists  maintain,  the  visceral  or
vascular  disturbance  being  secondary ;  or  whether,  as  other  eminent
physiologists  hold,  the  psychical  process  of  emotion  is  secondary  to  the
excitation  of  the  visceral  organs, — through  certain  stimuli  causing  the
discharge  of  a  nervous  impulse  into  those  organs,  — is  a  matter  that
does  not  concern  us  here,  albeit  physiologists  may  find  in  the  facts  I
have  cited  some  fresh  light  thrown  on  this  controversy.  The  point  of
interest  to  us  is  that  (1)  the  malaise  or  other  sensation  felt  by  the
dowser  is  probably  an  emotional  effect,  and  (2)  the  fresh  evidence
afforded  of  the  nexus  existing  between  emotion  and  muscular  action,
whether  this  latter  be  conscious  or,  as  with  the  dowser  and  his  rod,
unconscious.  As  Professor  Sherrington,  F.R.S.,  an  able  physiologist,
in  a  recent  paper  on  Emotion  [Nature,  Vol.  62,  p.  331),  has  said  : — "  It
would  be  consonant  with  what  we  know  of  reflex  action  if  the  spur
that  started  the  muscular  expression  should  simultaneously  and  of  itself
initiate  also  the  visceral  adjunct  reaction."

Furthermore,  in  many  cases  where  subconscious  acts  are  performed,
as  M.  Janet  points  out,  a  state  of  partial  catalepsy  supervenes.
Catalepsy,  as  Dr.  Ochorowicz  has  shown,  is  a  state  of  mono-ideism,^
that  is,  a  "  mental  condition  which  concentrates  every  action  upon
one  single  and  dominant  idea  and  is  not  counterbalanced  by  any
other."  Now  this  is  precisely  the  condition  of  the  dowser  when  he
"sets"  himself  to  dowse,  and  in  some  cases  he  passes  into  a  state  of
complete  catalepsy  when  the  idea  culminates.  It  is  not,  therefore,  a
question  of  underground  water  or  minei'al  ore,  but  merely  the  result
of  suggestion  acting  iip07i  a  state  of  mono-ideism.

The  malaise,  or  other  sensation  felt  by  the  dowser,  is,  therefore,  in
all  probability,  an  emotional  disturbance,  the  mind  being  dominated  by
<x  single  idea  and  the  subject  being  a  perso7i  on  whom  suggestion  is
ope7-ative  :  using  the  word  "  suggestion "  in  the  sense  which  I  have
already  defined  as  an  impression  or  influence  exercised  without  the
knowledge  or  consent  of  the  subject  being  concerned.

We  have  now  narrowed  the  issue  down  to  the  problem  of  "  how  does
this  subconscious  suggestion  arise  in  the  case  of  the  successful
dowser  1 " Here  we  enter  upon  the  final  stage  of  our  inquiry.


^  La  Suggestion  Maitalc,  p.  112  ;  Paris,  1887.


xxxviil]


Oil  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


803


PART  XIII.

Origin  of  the  Stimulus  that  gives  rise  to  the  Motor  Automatism

OF  the  Dowser.

§  1. Is  it  Derived  through  the  Ordinary  Channels  of  Sense  1

It  now  remains  for  us  to  try  and  ascertain  what  gives  rise  to  the
suggestion  or  stimulus  which  causes  the  involuntary  motion  of  the  rod
— in  other  words,  what  is  it  originates  the  motor  automatism  of  the
dowser?  What  is  it  "pulls  the  trigger"?  Evidently  this  suggestion
or  stimulus  cannot  be  purely  accidental  and  worthless,  for,  as  we  have
seen,  the  operations  of  a  good  dowser  are  attended  with  unquestion-
able success,  a  success  far  beyond  that  which  mere  chance  coincidence
can  account  for.  This  being  conceded,  we  now  turn  to  the  possible
explanations  already  stated  at  the  beginning  (p.  143).

(i.)  Is  this  success  due  merely  to  knowledge  acquired  by  the  dowser
from  experience  and  observation  of  the  grou,nd  and  perhaps  occasional
hints  from  bystanders  ?  In  that  case  success  would  be  arrived  at  by
an  exercise  of  judgment,  or  some  would  say  cunning  ;  shrewd  observa-
tion and  the  piecing  together  of  stray  information  would  be  the  main
business  of  the  dowser.  Under  these  circumstances  sub-conscious
suggestion  and  motor  automatism  are  wholly  out  of  the  question — the
motion  of  the  rod  must  be  a  purely  voluntary  act ;  and  if  so  the
forked  twig  of  the  dowser,  like  the  wand  of  the  conjuror,  becomes  a
piece  of  stage  property,  or  of  charlatanry,  to  mystify  the  public.  This
has  hitherto  been  the  usual  scientific  view,  but  it  is,  I  maintain,  now
proved  to  be  untenable  ;  the  motion  of  the  rod  is  unquestionably,  as
Professor  Janet  has  said,  "sans  le  vouloir  et  sans  le  savoir"  on  the  part
of  the  dowser.  It  is  quite  possible  the  experience  gained  by  the  dowser,
or  any  observations  he  has  made  on  the  spot,  may  be  of  service  to
him,  but  if  so,  it  must  lie  at  the  background  of  his  consciousness  and
not  form  part  of  a  process  of  reasoning.  We  are  thus  driven  to
inquire  : —

(ii. )  Is  this  information  or  suggestio7i  derived from  some  sub-conscious
process  of  observation  on  the  part  of  the  dowser^  or  hypercBsthetic  discern-
ment of  surface  signs  too  faint  or  complex  to  be  perceived  by  the  ordinary
observer  ?  There  is  much  to  be  said  on  behalf  of  this  view,  for  surface
signs  of  underground  water  do  exist  and  for  shallow  wells  such  signs
are  of  great  value  independently  of  geological  knowledge.  On  p.  248
of  the  previous  Report,  I  pointed  out  the  nature  of  some  of  these  signs,
and  since  that  Report  was  published,  an  excellent  little  Manual  on  the
discovery  of  water-sources  has  been  published  in  France,  wherein  the


304


Professor  W.  F.  Bai'vett.


[part


surface  indications  of  underground  water  are  very  clearly  set  forth. ^
Much  of  this  knowledge  goes  back  to  ancient  times.  Vitruvius,
Augustus  Csesar's  famous  engineer,  gives  a  lengthy  account  of  surface
signs  which  were  employed  in  his  day  to  find  underground  water  :
some  appear  fanciful,  but  many  are  still  in  use.  Pliny,  in  his  Natural
History,  refers  to  the  same  thing.  Moreover,  the  letters  of  Cassiodorus
(the  statesman  and  secretary  of  Theodoric,  King  of  the  Ostrogoths),
written  at  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century,  show  that  in  his  time
there  were  certain  people  held  in  high  repute,  and  called  "  Aquile.gi,"
who  appear  to  have  been  professional  water-finders.  Cassiodorus
explains  how  this  valuable  art  had  arisen  from  careful  observation  of
the  surface  of  the  ground,  etc.^  Now  the  modern  dowser  may  more
or  less  unconsciously  note  these  indications  and, — without  being  able  to
give  any  rational  explanation  of  how  it  comes  about,  —  the  impressions
made  upon  him  by  these  surface  signs  may  create  the  sub-conscious
suggestion  which  causes  the  involuntary  motion  of  the  rod.

The  extraordinary  success  of  the  Abbe  Paramelle  as  a  water-finder,
or  "  hydroscope  "  as  he  was  called,  supports  this  view.  Paramelle  tells
us  he  was  guided  entirely  by  the  knowledge  he  had  acquired  from  a
careful  study  of  the  surface  of  the  ground,  and  to  defend  himself  from
the  attacks  made  upon  him,  he  wrote  a  treatise  to  put  on  record  the
methods  he  employed.  As  this  work  appears  almost  wholly  unknown
in  England,  I  have  given  an  outline  of  it  in  Appendix  D,  see  p.  352  ;
to  this  I  would  refer  ray  readers.  But  the  rapidity  and  certainty
with  which  Paramelle  is  stated,  on  trustworthy  evidence,  to  have
located  the  site,  probable  depth  and  volume  of  water  in  wells  under
50  feet  deep,  can  hardly  be  accounted  for  by  an  exercise  of  ordinary
conscious  observation  and  judgment.  It  is  much  more  like  an  act  of
intuition,  for  between  1839  and  1854  he  had  located  10,000  sources
of  underground  water  and  his  failures  appear  to  have  been  only  from
5  to  10  per  cent,  of  the  whole.  Though  Paramelle  believed  he  could
teach  his  system,  his  pupils  did  not  achieve  their  master's  success  and
the  school  he  hoped  to  found  died  out.  On  the  whole,  there  can,  I
think,  be  little  doubt  that  the  French  Abbe  arrived  at  his  conclusions
sub-consciously,  though  he  employed  no  rod  to  give  automatic
expression  to  his  instinctive  opinion.

But  it  is  not  only  in  water-finding  that  the  trained  scientific
observer,  such  as  a  field  geologist,  is  often  less  successful  in  reading
surface  indications  than  those  who  appear  possessed  of  some  instinctive
discernment  of  the  signs  sought  for. Thus,  in  the  discovery  of  china

1  I  have  given  a  brief  notice  of  this  little  book  by  M.  Auscher  on  p.  382  of  the
present  Report.

-  See  Appendix  F..  p.  370.  -  •


XXX  VI II,]


On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


305


clay  (the  basis  of  our  best  English  china),  I  am  informed  by  a  high
autliority,  Mr.  Fred.  W.  P.  Jago,  that : —

The  workmen  in  the  china-clay  district  (near  St.  Austell,  in  Cornwall)
will  point  out  where  a  bed  of  china  clay  in  its  natural  state  of  decomposed
granite  lies  hidden  under  what  they  term  the  sla.d.  [Mr.  Jago  goes  on
to  say]  :  As  my  father  and  myself  have  been  engaged  in  this  kind  of  mining
for  nearly  seventy  years,  I  also  could  fairly  point  out  where  there  was  a  bed
of  china  clay  below  the  surface,  but  I  would  defy  the  scientific  geologist  to  do
so  from  his  insijection.

Yet  our  workmen  will  even  tell  you  the  extent  of  such  a  bed— from  their
knowledge  of  the  peculiar  formation  of  the  surface  of  the  ground— before  an
atom  of  the  clay  has  been  seen  or  dug  up  from,  say  8  or  10  feet  below.  The
term  slad  expresses  this,  but  it  is  as  hard  to  describe  as  it  would  be  for  one
to  describe  his  own  handwriting.

I  have  always  suspected  that  dowsers  have  a  somewhat  similar  knowledge
as  to  water  and  lodes.

Fked.  W.  p.  Jago.

Here  then  we  have  a  case  where  success  can  liardly  be  due  to  any
conscious  process  of  reasoning ;  the  judgment  seems  to  be  more  or  less
instinctive,  though  doubtless  it  has  been  gained  by  experience.  Much
the  same  thing  occurs  in  the  location  of  metallic  lodes.  From  very
early  times,  the  signs  of  underground  ore  have  been  noticed  by  miners,
references  to  these  indications  are  to  be  found  in  all  the  leading  works
on  mining  published  in  the  16th  and  ITth  centuries.^  A  distinguished
authority  on  mining,  the  late  Professor  Warington Smyth,  F.R.S.,

remarked  in  a  lecture  delivered  in  1869  :

There  is  some  foundation  for  the  idea  that  metallic  lodes  affect  vegetation ;
the  herbage  is  often  brighter  and  better  over  certain  lodes  and  worse  over
others.  A  certain  class  of  plants  will  grow  over  the  lode  and  not  on  adjacent
parts.  Veins  containmg  decomposing  iron  pyrites  are  slightly  warmer,  so
that  there  is  rather  a  higher  temperature  over  them  ;  dew  or  hoar  frost  will
not  lie  long  on  the  lode,  so  that  its  presence  can  be  traced  early  in  the
morning.  A  peculiar  odour  from  the  sulphurous  gases  pervades  the  direction
of  a  lode,  and  sometimes  at  night  a  faintly  luminous  appearance  is  seen  over
certain  metallic  lodes.  ^

As  we  shall  see  in  Book  III.,  the  dowser  has  gained  remarkable
success  not  only  in  finding  underground  water  but  mineral  lodes,  and
hence  the  probability  that  he  is  guided  by  some  surface  indications  is
greatly  increased  from  the  fact  that  such  indications  are  found  in  both
these  cases.  It  may,  however,  be  urged  that  ordinary  observation  and
judgment  would  be  sufficient  in  each  case  to  explain  success  without
assuming  any  instinctive  or  subconscious  process. But  this  view,  as

^  See  especially  G.  Agiicola's  De  Be  MctalUca,  Basle,  1516.

=  Similar  statements  will  also  be  found  in  the  9th  Edition  of  the  Encyc  Brit
under  the  article  "  Mining." See  also  Pryce's  Mineralogia  Cornuliensis,  etc.

Z


306


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


we  have  seen,  is  inconsistent  with  the  phenomenon  of  motor  auto-
matism, and,  moreover,  common  sense,  aided  by  observation,  knowledge
and  reasoning,  would  long  ago  have  displaced  the  dowser  had  the
latter  not  been  found  to  be  of  greater  practical  value.

It  must,  therefore,  be  admitted  that  if  surface  indications  deter-
mine the  suggestion  that  starts  the  automatic  motion  of  the  rod,  these
indications  are  not  deliberately  sought  for,  but  that  a  subconscious
and  hyjjercesthetic  discernment  of  faint  signs  that  escape  the  ordinary
observer  is  quite  j^ossihle  on  the  jMrt  of  the  siiccessfd  doivser.

]\Iany  instances  have  been  given  in  our  Proceedings  of  definite
motor  reactions,  sometimes  of  a  remarkable  character  quite  unaccom-
panied by  consciousness,^  and  many  illustrations  have  also  been  given
of  what  at  first  sight  appears  an  almost  miraculous  sense  of  perception,
really  due  to  a  transitory  hyperpesthetic  and  subconscious  condition  on
the  part  of  the  subject.-  It  is,  therefore,  I  think,  unnecessary  for  me
to  contend  further  that  the  foregoing  explanation  is  really  a  vera  causa,
but  I  now  proceed  to  show  that  it  is  not  the  ivhole  cause  and  may  really
play  a  very  unimportant  part  in  the  matter.

§  2.  Is  the  Suggestion  Pure  Chance  or  Derived  from  some  Super-
normal Source  of  Perception  .?
Whilst  the  explanation  just  given  may  cover  some  of  the  facts,  it
fails  to  explain  those  cases  where  surface  indications  of  underground
water  do  not  exist,  owing  either  to  the  surface  being  made  ground  or
covered  witli  buildings,  or  with  a  layer  of  30  or  40  feet  of  "  drift,"  or
the  water  itself  existing  in  fissures  or  cavities  so  far  beneath  the  surface
that  it  is  inconceivable  its  presence  could  be  indicated  by  any  super-
ficial signs.  Now,  an  attentive  study  of  the  cases  I  have  cited  in  the
present  and  the  previous  Report  shows  that  the  dowser's  success  is  not
limited  to  localities  where  surface  indications  may  be  conjectured.
Take,  for  example,  the  classical  case  of  Waterford,  so  fully  described
and  discussed  in  the  previous  Report,  pp.  106-117.  The  able  geologists
who  have  examined  that  case  clearly  show  that  surface  signs  could
have  nothing  to  say  to  the  dowser's  success. Take  again  in  the

^  Experiments  in  "normal  motor  automatism  "  form  the  subject  of  an  interesting-
paper  published  in  1896  among  the  ''Studies  from  the  Fsyohologioal  Laboratory  of
Harvard  University."

-  See  Professor  Gruebhard's  experiences,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  II.,  p.  4ll,an<l
many  .similar  illustrations  cited  by  Mr.  Myers  in  his  papers  on  the  "Subliminal  Self  "
published  in  our  Proceedings.  I  wonder  the  divining  rod  has  never  been  used  for
iceathcr  prognostication.  If  a  code  could  be  arranged  so  as  to  interpret  its  indications,
I  have  no  doubt  it  would  become  as  famous  in  foretelling  the  weather,  say  twelve
hours  ahead,  as  in  finding  underground  water  or  mineral  ores  ;  supposing  that  a  sub-
conscious discernment  of  faint  signs  really  occtirs  with  the  dowser.  Leeches  used  to
be  employed  as  weather  prophets  :  see  on  this  .subject  of  animal  presentiments  my
last  Report,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  250.


XXXVIII.]


Oil  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


307


present  Report  the  Errol  case,  p.  171,  when  the  same  dowser  (the  late
.John  Mullins)  was  employed,  or  the  Lytes-Cary  case,  p.  17-1,  or  the
Carrigoona  experiments,  p.  144-,  or  the  Shanklin  experiments,  p.  164,  or
the  case  of  Beraz,  p.  248,  or  many  of  Bleton's  cases,  p.  264,  or  others
I  might  quote.  All  these  cases  point  to  one  of  two  conclusions  —
either  they  are  the  result  of  chance  coincidence,  lucky  hits  on  the  part
of  the  dowser,  or  that  the  dowser  possesses  some  faculty  new  to  science.

Let  us  take  the  first  alternative.  What  are  the  chances  of  success
in,  say  the  Waterford  easel  Here  the  geologists  show  that  Mullins
must  have  hit  upon  a  line  of  fault  in  the  Silurian  rocks  "  80  ft.  below
the  surface,"  or  "a  porous  stratum  concealed  beneath  the  drift/'
— which  is  here  over  40  ft.  in  thickness  (see  the  Report  by  Mr.  J.  R.
Kilroe  of  the  Geological  Survey  of  Ireland,  given  in  my  former
Report,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,Vol.  XIII.,  p.  116).  Now  befoi'e  the  advent
of  Mullins  three  borings  (in  one  case  to  the  depth  of  1,000  ft.,  in
another  to  a  depth  of  392  ft.)  had  been  made  on  scientific  advice  in
places  near  the  spot  selected  by  Mullins ;  one  of  these  borings  had
been  made  on  the  advice  of  Mr.  Kinahan,  F.G.S.,  of  the  Geological
Survey,  and  yet  in  each  case  no  water  had  been  found.  The  chances
of  hitting  a  line  of  fault  or  porous  stratum  were,  therefore,  extremely
small.  I  have  talked  over  this  with  Mr.  Kilroe,  who  has  visited  the
spot  and  is  one  of  the  best  geological  authorities  on  that  district,  and
he  tells  mo  that  a  "lucky  fluke"  on  the  part  of  the  dowser,  though
conceivable,  is  almost  incredible.  This  also  was  evidently  the  opinion
of  the  local  geologist,  Mr.  Budd,  who  was  present  at  the  borings,  and
of  Mr.  Kinahan  himself.  Moreover,  Mullins  predicted  the  exact
depth  of  the  fissure  within  a  foot  or  two  and  was  right  in  the  volume
of  water  that  was  found.  These  are  contemporary  statements  made
by  those  who  were  at  first  prejudiced  against  the  dowser.

From  the  study  of  these  and  other  cases  I  have  therefore  been
driven  to  the  conclusion  that  neither  surface  signs,  nor  hyperoesthetic
discernment,  nor  chance  coincidence,  can  account  for  all  the  successes
of  a  good  dowser  like  Bleton  in  the  last  century  or  the  late  J.  Mullins
and  others  in  recent  times.  This  is  precisely  the  conclusion  which  Mr.
Westlake,  F.G.S.,  has  independentlj'  arrived  at  from  a  careful  geological
examination  on  the  spot  of  other  cases  selected  from  my  previous
Report,  see  Appendix  A.,  p.  337.  In  his  analysis,  Mr.  Westlake  assumes
the  dowser  knew  all  the  local  indications  of  the  underground  water,  and
he  is  disposed  to  read  back  into  the  dowser's  mind  the  hydro-geological
knowledge  which  v/as  gained  after  the  dowser's  well  had  been  sunk.
JSTotwithstanding  all  this,  Mr.  Westlake  concludes  that  a  certain
percentage  of  cases  (10  to  15  per  cent.)  defy  any  explanation  known  to
science  except  chance  coincidence.  Here  then  the  issue  is  knit.  Can
it  be  shown  that  the  outstanding  cases  are  explicable  as  merely  lucky

z  2


308


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


hits  due  to  pure  chance  on  the  part  of  the  dowser  ?  I  think  the
onus  probandi  of  this  must  be  left  to  those  who  challenge  our  methods
of  inquiry,  or  deny  the  existence  of  any  avenue  of  knowledge  other
than  the  recognised  channels  of  sense.

5^  3. Is  any  Physical  Cause  at  all  Likely  ?

In  seeking  for  an  explanation  of  these  outstanding  cases,  I  do  not
think  we  need  consider  any  physical  cause.  Recent  scientific  discoveries,
such  as  the  X-rays  and  wireless  telegraphy,  have  made  the  public
familiar  with  the  fact  that  bodies  like  earth  and  bricks  and  flesh,  which
are  opaque  to  light,  may  be  transparent  to  electric  waves.  But
though  the  penetration  of  opaque  bodies  by  invisible  radiation  has
long  been  known  to  scientific  men,  the  unscientific  mind  naturally  seizes
the  idea  that  just  as  electric  waves  have  been  shown  to  pass  unimpeded
through  walls  and  mountains,  so  some  electric  influence  from  under-
ground water  is  likely  to  pass  through  the  superincumbent  earth  and
affect  the  dowser.  But  then  we  must  assume  an  electric  influence  also
proceeds  from  mineral  ores  and  that  the  dowser  is  a  delicate  electroscope,
and  this  is  pure  assumption.  It  is  true  our  kiiowledge  of  the  world
around  is  very  limited,  but  200  years  ago  the  philosopher  Malebranche
showed,  from  the  uniformity  of  nature,  how  untenable  was  any
explanation  based  upon  an  imaginary  physical  influence  produced  by
underground  water  or  metals  upon  the  dowser.^  Whatever  effect  is
produced  by  undergroimd  water  or  ore  would  be  produced  in  a  greater
degree  by  the  proximity  of  water  or  ore  on  the  surface.  Nevertheless,
the  dowser  appears  quite  insensible  to  the  mass  of  water  in  a  river,
lake,  or  the  ocean,  or  to  masses  of  metal  or  ore  within  his  sight.

There  is,  however,  another  physical  hypothesis  which  is  more
plausible,  and  which  at  one  time  suggested  itself  to  me.  We  are
insensible  to  certain  physical  forces  which  are  ever  streaming  through
us,  such  as  the  magnetism  of  the  earth  ;  we  are  likewise  insensible  to
the  motion  of  the  earth  in  space,  but  we  should  become  alarmingly
sensible  of  the  latter  if  it  were  interrupted  or  suddenly  changed.  It
is  conceivable  the  dowser  may  be  a  person  gifted  with  a  sense  affected
by  any  slight  interruption  in  the  continuity  or  modification  of  the
lines  of  terrestrial,  magnetic,  or  electric  force.  Underground  fissures
may  be  imagined  to  produce  such  a  modification  or  want  of  continuity
in  the  ambient  field  of  force,  and  thus  their  presence  might  be
detected  by  certain  organisations.  But  I  do  not  attach  the  least
value  to  this  conception  as  an  explanation  of  the  success  of  the

1  See  "  Reponse  de  I'auteur  '  De  la  recherche  de  la  Verite  '  "  to  Father  Le  Brun,
published  in  the  Lcttres  qui  dccouvrent  Villusion  dcs  philosophes  sur  la  baguette,  p.  9,
ct  scq. Paris,  1693.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.  309


dowser ;  for,  inie'r  alia,  there  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  the  dowser
is  more  affected  than  ordinary  persons  by  any  of  the  physical  forces  ;
and  the  interruption  of  a  magnetic  lield  of  force  enormously  greater
than  that  due  to  the  earth  is  absolutely  unfelt  by  the  dowser.  'No,
the  key  to  the  mystery  that  remains  must,  in  my  opinion,  be  sought  in
the  psychical  and  not  in  the  physical  world.

§  4. Probable  Explanation  of  the  More  Remarhable  Successes

of  the  Douses:

There  is  abundant  evidence  in  our  Proceedings  that  the  information
subconsciously  given  by  some  automatists  often  transcends  the  ordinary
sense  perceptions.  Cases  of  so-called  clairvoyance  resting  upon  excellent
testimony  are  known,  see  e.g.,  the  cases  cited  in  Mrs.  Sidgvvick's  paper
on  the  "  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance,"  or  Dr.  Alfred  Backman's  "  Experi-
ments on  Clairvoyance,"  and  the  supplementary  papers  to  both  of
these  contained  in  Vol.  IX.  of  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  also  the
evidence  cited  by  Mr.  Myers  in  Vol.  XI.,  pp.  367-404.  It  is  true  the
science  of  to-day  does  not  recognise  any  such  super-sensory  extension
of  knowledge,  yet  nothing  is  clearer  to  those  who  have  made  a  careful
and  critical  study  of  psychical  phenomena,  not  only  that  telepathy  is  a
fact,  but  that  to  the  subconscious  or  subliminal  self,  the  elements  of
time  and  space  have  not  the  same  limitations  as  they  have  to  our
conscious  self.  Even  Schopenhauer,  in  his  Versncht  iiher  Geistersehen,
long  ago  said,  "  He  who  doubts  the  fact  of  clairvoyance  is  not  sceptical
but  ignorant."  This  is,  perhaps,  a  stronger  assertion  than  I  should
be  disposed  to  make,  but  of  the  reality  of  this  "  far  seeing  "  power,  I,
among  others,  have  had  indubitable  proof  after  carefully  conducted
experiments  with  persons  in  the  deep  hypnotic  state,  and  the  same
condition  is  often  seen  in  the  allied  state  of  somnambidism.  Those
who  on  a  priori  grounds  deny  the  possibility  of  any  such  transcen-
dental perceptive  power  should  read  the  conclusions  unanimously
arrived  at  by  the  nine  distinguished  members  of  the  French  Royal
Academy  of  Medicine,  who  were  appointed  by  the  Academy  to  report
.  on  mesmeric  phenomena.  After  live  years'  investigation  this  Com-
mittee presented  their  lengthy  Report  to  the  Academy  in  June,  1831.
They  state  they  began  the  inquiry  with  "inexperience,  impatience
and  distrust,"  which  at  first  militated  against  them.  Ultimately,
after  the  most  rigorous  tests,  they  "  conclude  with  certainty "  that
the  faculty  which  has  been  designated  clairvoyance  does  really  exist
in  certain  subjects  in  the  mesmeric  state.^

1  See  Colqiihouii's  translation  of  this  Report  published  in  1833.  In  an  Appendix
the  Editor  gives  several  remarkable  cases  of  clairvoyance,  attested  by  some  eminent
Continental  physicians  as  occurring  in  certain  cataleptic  patients,  who — like  the
dowser — appeared,  to  have  the  seat  of  this  perceptive  faculty  in  the  epig-astrium.


310


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


The  question  arises,  Is  this  condition  ever  found  in  persons
who,  h'ke  the  dowser,  are  in  their  normal  waking  state,  not  in  a
hypnotic  or  somnambulic  trance  ?  I  have  tried  to  put  this  ques-
tion to  the  test  of  experiment  with  an  amateur  dowser,  and  the
result  of  the  preliminary  experiments  (which  are  all  that  have  so
far  been  made),  affords  considerable  support  to  the  hypothesis  of
some  kind  of  clairvoyant  faculty  in  the  particular  dowser  tested.
I  have  given  an  account  of  these  experiments,  together  with  some
additional  evidence  bearing  on  the  same  subject,  in  Appendix  E.,
p.  359.1

Professor  Janet,  in  a  passage  I  have  quoted  on  p.  297,  points
out  that  evidence  of  a  secondary  personality  is  afforded  in  cases  of
motor  automatism  such  as  the  dowser  exhibits.  Now,  we  know
that  in  automatic  writing  the  secondary  self  frequently  exhibits
transcendental  sources  of  information;  the  Ego  seems  to  pass  beyond
its  usual  narrow  threshold  of  sensibility,  the  veil  is  lifted  which
hides  scenes  spatially  distant.-  Mr.  Myers  has  cited  cases  of
what  he  terms  cosmo'pathic  impressibility  on  the  part  of  the
autouiatist ;  that  is,  transcendental  impressions  which  come  to  men
from  the  surrounding  world,  impressions  "borne  like  seed  on  the  wind,
rather  than  wittingly  directed  towards  him  by  the  voluntary  or
involuntary  sympathy  of  any  assignable  intelligence. The  sensibility
of  the  dowser  may  be  of  such  a  kind,  but  humbler,  geopathic  and  not
cosmopathic.  I  have  no  doubt,  however,  that  in  years  to  come  we
shall  see  in  all  these  phenomena  the  manifestation  of  the  transcendental
Subject  which  lies  in  the  background  of  our  being,  and  remains
unrevealed  to  our  self-consciousness.  Thus  we  have  been  led  from  the
study  of  such  a  matter-of-fact  and  practical  question  as  the  discovery
of  underground  water  by  the  dowser  to  the  very  centre  and  mystery
of  our  complex  personality.

Here,  however,  we  do  well  to  remember  that  there  is  but  a  step
from  the  sublime  to  the  ridiculous.  For  the  emergence  of  the
subconscious  self  and  its  expression  in  some  form  of  motor  automatism
involves  the  more  or  less  complete  surrender  of  our  reason,  of  self-
consciousness  and  the  voluntary  control  over  our  actions  ;  the  reins
of  will  are,  as  it  were,  thrown  down  and  the  automatist  becomes  the

^  A  belief  in  the  existence  of  clairvoyance  among  certain  persons  in  the  normal
state  is,  I  find,  the  foundation  of  the  repute  in  which  the  so-called  Zahons  were  once
held.  As  the  Zahoris  are  sometimes  referred  to  in  modern  literature,  and  no  one  was
able  to  give  me  any  information  about  them,  after  some  search  I  was  able  to  obtain
the  historical  information  given  in  Ajipendix  F.,  p.  367.

Upon  this  subject  see  Baron  Du  Prel's  Philosophy  of  Mysticisra,  translated  by
Mr.  C.  C.  Massey.

Proceedings  S.P.E.,  Vol.  XI.,  p.  307.


XXXVIII.]


On  the  So-called  Diuinincj  Rod.


311


sport  of  every  wayward  impulse  or  passing  suggestion.^  Hence,  the
worthlessness  of  many  of  the  indications  and  messages  given  through
different  forms  of  autoscope,  whether  forked  rod,  tilting  table  or
scribbling  pencil.

We  may,  therefore,  expect  any  auto-suggestion  to  make  itself
apparent  in  the  motion  of  the  divining  rod,  and  this  is  the  case  ;  when,
however,  the  dowser  "  sets  himself,"  as  he  expresses  it,  then  the
indications  afforded  by  the  movement  of  his  rod  are  directed  towards
the  object  of  his  search,  and  the  suggestion  may  now  arise  :  (1)  from
various  hints  he  has  gathered  or  knowledge  he  possesses  becoming  un-
consciously operative  ;  or  (2)  from  his  subconscious  and  perhaps
hypersesthetic  discernment  of  the  surface  signs  of  underground  water
or  ore  ;  or  (3)  from  some  kind  of  transcendental  discernment  possessed
by  his  subconscious  self.  For  my  osvn  part,  I  am  disposed  to  think  that
this  last  cause,  though  less  acceptable  to  science,  will  ultimately  be
found  to  be  the  truer  explanation  of  the  more  striking  successes  of  a
good  dowser.-  My  reasons  for  thinking  so  are  :  (i)  the  success  which
certain  dowsers  have  achieved  in  discovering  underground  water,  when
surface  indications  were  out  of  the  question,  and  when  previous
borings,  as  deep  or  deeper,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  failed  to  discover
water ;  (ii)  the  success  which  has  attended  young  or  ignorant  dowsers,
such  as  Bleton,  who  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  an  intuitive  knowledge
of  the  surface  indications  of  underground  water  ;  and  (iii)  the  evidence
afforded  by  carefully  blindfolding  the  dowser.

The  only  alternative  explanation  in  these  cases  appears  to  me
to  be  that  of  chance  coincidence,  and  to  the  majority  of  thoughtful
persons  this  will  doubtless  seem  the  more  probable  alternative ;  but
the  probability  of  its  being  so  will  be  recognised  as  extremely  small  by
those  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  apply,  so  far  as  can  be  done,  the
doctrine  of  chances  to  the  facts  I  have  cited.  On  the  other  hand,  the
probability  that  an  explanation  is  to  be  found  in  some  extension  of
our  knowledge  of  human  personality,  something  new  to  science,  and
something  akin  to  what  has  been  termed  clairvoyance,  gains  consider-
able weight  from  a  critical  study  of  cognate  phenomena  described  in
our  Proceedings  and  elsewhere. And  surely,  even  if  the  majority  of

It  is  obvious  that  such  persons  cannot  be  as  fully  responsible  for  their  actions
as  the  rest  of  mankind.  Readily  influenced  by  their  environment  and  controlled  by
suggestion,  such  "  suggestible  persons  "  (among  whom  are  all  so-called  "mediums")
when  met  with  suspicion  and  the  suggestion  of  fraud,  frequently  exhibit  the  very
characteristics  their  critics  have  imagined  them  to  possess.  The  investigators,  in
fact,  have  unconsciously  suggested  the  rdle  that  the  subjects  have  played.

-  If  this  be  the  case,  the  dowser  ought  to  be  able  to  indicate  the  position  of  any
buried  object,  as  well  as  underground  water  and  mineral  lodes,  albeit  surface  indica-
tions in  these  latter  may  count  for  something.  I  have  dealt  with  this  wider  question
in  Appendix  E.,  p.  359.


312


Professor  ^¥.  F.  Barrett.


[part


cases  of  the  success  of  the  dowser  are  explicable  by  known  causes,  yet,
as  Kant  said  of  the  attested  story  of  Swedenborg's  clairvoyance,  "the
amazing  inferences  that  would  have  to  be  drawn  if  only  one  such
event  could  be  proved "  will,  I  hope,  stimulate  further  inquiry,  so
that  the  conclusion  I  have  reached  may  be  confiroied  or  disproved.

I  do  not  for  one  moment  profess  that  the  explanation  I  have  sug-
gested is  anything  more  than  a  provisional  and  tentative  one.  A  final
solutioji  is  not  likely  to  be  reached  until  the  subject  has  been  critically
examined  and  discussed  by  scientific  men  from  diffei'ent  points  of  view.
But  if  many  yeai's'  experimental  investigation  gives  me  any  right
to  expi'ess  an  opinion,  I  am  convinced  that  the  only  method  by  which
we  can  hope  to  bring  these  elusive  and  perplexing  phenomena  out  of
the  "disorderly  mystery  of  ignorance,"  in  which  they  have  lain
neglected  for  so  long,  into  the  "  orderly  mystery  of  science,"  is  by  a
careful  collection  of  trustworthy  evidence,  supplemented  by  experi-
mental investigation  wherever  it  is  possible,  and  then  by  the  fearless
suggestion  of  some  working  hypothesis  which  will  enable  future  in-
vestigators to  direct  their  inquiries  to  definite  issue,  and  thus
overthrow  or  establish  the  provisional  explanation  that  has  been
suggested.  This  is  obviously  the  method  by  which  the  whole  edifice
of  modern  science  has  been  reared ;  it  is  nothing  more  than  the
apjjlication  of  the  inductive  philosophy  to  psychical  research  And
we  may  confidently  expect  much  more  rapid  progress  in  this  difficult
region  of  inquiry  when  it  becomes  evident  that  there  is  not  only
something  to  investigate,  but  that  some  solid  addition  to  our  know-
ledge or  some  useful  practical  result  will  issue  from  the  inquiry.  A
larger  number  of  trained  investigators  will  then  be  attracted,  and
though  psychical  research  can  never  offer  the  commercial  stimulus
to  which  the  recent  development  of  electrical  science  is  almost
wholly  due,  yet  it  presents  to  us  many  problems  of  profound
interest.

For  thirty  years  those  of  us  who  founded  this  Society  have  striven
to  ascertain  whether  the  information  derived  through  the  recognised
channels  of  sense  embraced  the  whole  of  the  accessible  sources  of
knowledge;  whether  also  the  normal  phenomena  of  Nature, — manifested
to  us  as  the  accidents  of  izme,  space,  and  mass,  in  terms  of  which  all
natural  phenomena  may  be  expressed, — were  really  the  bed-rock  upon
which  the  whole  superstructure  of  human  science  must  be  raised  ;  or
whether  the  order  of  Nature  can  be  proved  to  contain  an  even  vaster
procession  of  phenomena  than  is  now  embraced  within  the  recognised
limits  of  science  :  in  fine,  whether  we  could  ever  reach  by  scientific
methods  the  profounder,  more  enduring,  and  transcendent  realities
that  lie  beneath  the  material  surface,  as  thought  lies  behind  its
utterance  in  language.


XXXVIII.]  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod.


313


There  are  some  avenues  of  approach  to  this  great  quest  which  seem
barred  to  many  earnest  searchers  after  truth ;  the  limitation  of  our
faculties  may  possibly  render  certain  pathways  to  knowledge  inaccess-
ible under  the  conditions  of  our  present  existence.  But  we  cannot,
a  priori,  condemn  any  inquiry  unless  it  has  been  conclusively  proved
to  be  phantasmal  and  worthless,  issuing  in  a  dreary  and  fatal  waste
of  human  effort,  or  beset  with  intellectual  and  moral  confusion  to
those  who  engage  in  it.  Such  warnings  can  hardly  be  said  to  apjaly
to  the  present  investigation.  And  if  the  outcome  of  our  inquiry  only
establishes  the  fact  that  what  appeared  supernormal  and  transcen-
dental is,  after  all,  explicable  by  an  extension  of  known  perceptive
powers,  even  then  our  time  will  not  have  been  wasted,  for  we  shall
have  enlarged  our  knowledge  of  human  faculty  and  human  usefulness.
For  my  own  part,  I  have  been  driven  to  believe  that  some  dowsers —

' '  Whose  exterior  semblance  doth  belie
The  Soul's  immensity  "
nevertheless  give  us  a  glimpse  of —

"  The  eternal  deep
Haunted  for  ever  by  the  eternal  mind."


Conclusion.


(1)  For  some  centuries  past  certain  individuals  locally  known  as
dowsers  have  declared  that  they  can  discover  the  presence  of  under-
ground water,  mineral  lodes,  coal,i  building  stone,-  or  other  buried
objects  which  may  be  sought  for  by  the  apparently  spontaneous
motion  of  the  so-called  divining  rod;  when  their  pretensions  have
been  tested,  the  result,  though  by  no  means  uniformly  in  their  favour,
has  been  so  remarkable  that  chance  coincidence  appears  a  wholly
inadequate  explanation.

(2)  Any  explanation  based  upon  trickery  or  unconscious  hints  from
bystanders,  or  the  detection  of  faint  surface  indications  of  the  con-
cealed object,  or  other  known  cause  is  insufficient  to  cover  all  the  facts.

(3)  The  viovement  of  the  rod  or  forked  twig  is  only  a  special  case
of  motor  automatism  exhibited  by  a  large  number  of  individuals,^

Both  Pennet  and  Bleton  were  tested  for  this  a  century  ago,  and  several
competent  witnesses  were  convinced  of  the  fact.

^  See,  for  example,  the  full  and  excellent  narrative  of  a  Belgian  dowser,  given  by
Professor  D'  Outrepoint,  translated  by  Mr.  Bennett,  Assistant-Secretary  of  the
S.P.  R.,  and  published  in  the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.  for  June,  ISD'J.

3  A  century  ago  Professor  Sementini  estimated  that  80  per  cent,  of  Italians  could
"work"  the  rod,  but  Amoretti  thinks  this  number  excessive;  he  gives  20  per  cent.
My  own  impression  is  that  Amoretti  is  not  far  wrong.  In  England,  perhaps,  one
or  two  in  every  dozen  persons  would  be  found  susceptible.


314


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett


[part


and  arises  from  a  subconscious  and  involuntary  "suggestion"  im-
pressed on  the  mind  of  the  dowser.

(4)  Accompanying  the  involuntary  and  usually  unconscious  mus-
cular contraction  which  causes  the  motion  of  the  forked  twig  or  rod,
many  dowsers  experience  a  peculiar  malaise  and  some  a  violent
convulsive  spasm.  This  is  a  psycho-physiological  effect,  akin  to
emotion.  Moreover,  the  state  of  mono-ideism  of  the  dowser  ci-eates
a  condition  of  partial  catalepsy  when  some  suggestion  causes  the  idea
to  culminate.

(5)  This  subconscious  suggestion  may  arise  from  a  variety  of
causes ;  sometimes  it  is  merely  an  auto-suggestion,  at  others  it  is
imconsciously  derived  through  the  senses  from  the  environment,  but
in  a  certain  number  of  those  who  exhibit  motor  automatism  the  sug-
gestion appears  to  be  due  to  some  kind  of  transcendental  perceptive
power.

(6)  Such  persons  appear  only  able  to  exercise  this  transcendental
faculty  when  their  normal  self-coiisciousness  is  more  or  less  in  abey-
ance, or  when  it  is  completely  submerged,  as  in  profound  hj^pnosis.

(7)  This  subconscious  perceptive  power,  commonly  called  "clair-
voyance," may  provisionally  be  taken  as  the  explanation  of  those
successes  of  the  dowser  which  are  inexplicable  on  any  grounds  at
present  known  to  science.

I  wish  to  add  a  word  of  hearty  thanks  to  the  Editor  of  our
Proceedings,  Miss  Johnson,  for  the  kind  assistance  she  has  rendered
in  the  reading  of  the  proofs  of  this  paper  and  for  many  useful
suggestions.


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  A.


315


APPENDIX  A.

REPORT ON SOME CASES OF WATER  -  FINDING BY  THE

DIVINING  ROD.

By  E.  Westlake,  F.G.S.

During  the  printing  of  Professor  Barrett's  paper  jDublished  in
July,  1897,  I  made  an  analysis  of  his  cases,  and  selected  forty  in  which
it  was  stated  that,  prior  to  the  dowser's  success,  a  deeper  but
unsuccessful  well  or  boring  had  been  made  in  the  immediate
neighbourhood.  These  are  cited,  at  the  foot  of  page  252  of  his  paper,
as  offering  presumptive  evidence  of  something  in  dowsing  beyond
chance  or  experience.  As  it  seemed  desirable  they  should  be  looked
into  from  a  geological  point  of  view,  I  have  since  undertaken,  a.t
Professor  Barrett's  request,  an  examination  of  twenty-one  of  them,  i.e.,
of  seventeen  published  in  his  paper  (Nos.  9,  17,  24,  26,  27,  286,
42,  43,  47,  48,  57,  60,  77,  90,  99,  105,  and  121),i  and  of  four  others
subsequently  received.  Beyond  aiding  in  their  understanding,  I  soon
found  that  geology  had  little  to  do  with  the  matter ;  the  dowser
does  not  profess,  and  probably  seldom  has,  a  knowledge  of  it ;  his
conclusions  seem  usually  drawn  from  more  obvious  considerations.

In  psychological  experiments,  essentially  modifiable  by  suggestion,
it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  have  the  conditions,  if  not  under  control,
at  any  rate  precisely  recorded  ;  if  they  are  not,  it  is  impossible  to
arrive  at  certain  results.  An  observer  coming  after  the  event  must
allow  that  the  dowser  7nai/  have  seen,  or  heard  of,  the  position  of
neighbouring  water,  and  have  drawn  his  conclusions  accordingly.-
This  I  have  done  throughout  the  paper,  with  the  result,  it  may  be,
of  minimising  marvels  that  really  exist :  if  so,  it  will  only  need
experiments  more  precisely  noted  to  lead  to  their  establishment.

Of  the  twenty-one  cases  I  examined,  live  were  in  the  South  and
sixteen  in  the  West  of  England ;  seventeen  similar  cases  in  the  North
and  East  I  was  unable  to  visit.  Those  in  the  Isle  of  Wight  I  saw  in
November,  1897;  those  in  Surrey  and  Sussex  in  June,  1898,  and
those  in  the  West  of  England  in  May,  1899.  I  have  arranged  them,
according to evidential considerations, in the following  groups,

1  These  numbers  refer  to  the  numbering  of  the  cases  given  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  XIII.,  Part  XXXII.

*  As  a  matter  of  fact,  dowsers  do  not,  as  a  rule,  seek  for  information  about  the
local  water  supply  ;  they  believe  so  firmly  in  their  "  gift,"  that  they  trust  implicitly
to  the  twisting  of  the  hazel  twig  to  guide  them.  Merryweather  is  the  only  dowser  of
whom  I  have  heard  that  looks  for  surface  indications  of  underground  water. —
W.F.B.


316


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


beginning  with  what  appears  the  weakest  evidence  on  behalf  of  the
dowser.

(a)  Too  old  for  evidence  to  he  now  ohtaiiiahle. Nos.  24,

vSodbury  ;  26,  Shepton  Mallet  gaol  ;  48,  Bristol ... Total  3

(b)  Where  the  old  well  ivas  too  deep} Yarlington  House ,,  1

(c)  Wliere  the  old  well  was  in  the  side  of  a  hill.  (See

Group  (d),  No.  28) „  -

(d)  Where  the  dowsers  well  was the  deepei: Nos.  9,

Evercreech  ;  17,  Sturminster ;  27,  Shepton  Mallet
Brewery;  28,  Locking;  Ladyswood  Park  ... ... „  5

(e)  Where  a  heading  ivas  driven  towards  known  water.

Nos.  42,  Henbury  ;  60,  Sliepton  Mallet  Station ... ,,  2

(f)  Wh^ere  the  doivser's  well  loas  jjlaced  near  known  ivater,

the  old  well  being  usually  remote.  Nos.  43,  Hedge-
cock's ;  47,  Park  Farm;  .57,  Norton  Hall;  77,
Arnold's;  90,  Wootton  ;  [ArretonJ  ;  121,  Stroud;
99,  Melksham „  7

(g)  Where  there  nvis  little  or  no  surface  sign  of  water.

Lytes  Gary;  Wimblehurst  Farm ;  105,  Toy  Farm... ,,  3

21

Group  (a) — Too  Old.
Owing  to  I'emoteness  of  date, I  have  been  unable  to  obtain
sufficient  information  about  these  cases  to  include  them  in  a  critical
examination,  but  append  the  following  notes  : —

No.  24.  Sodburij.— The  Rev.  R.  S.  Nash,  of  Old  Sodbury
Vicarage,  writes  that  in  1853,  the  date  of  the  publication  of  Phippen's
book,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Foster  was  rector  of  Dodingtou,  about  one  mile
S.W.  of  Sodbury.  The  Rev.  J.  A.  James,  the  present  rector,  informs
me  that  tliere  are  three  wells  on  the  premises,  the  deepest  of  which  is
about  60  feet.  The  water  in  it  stands  two  or  three  feet  from  the
surface,  and  has  never  been  lowered  to  20  feet  even  in  two  exception-
ally dry  summers,  so  that  nothing  is  now  known  about  the  alleged
tunnel.  The  strata  are  Lower  Lias,  as  in  the  celebrated  case  at
Shepton  Mallet  Station  (Group  (e).  No.  60),  to  which  this  is,  thei'efore,
closely  parallel.

No.  26.  Shepton  Mallet  Gaol. — I  am  informed  by  a  warder,  Mr.
J.  G.  Barnes,  that  all  the  wells  at  the  prison  are  filled  up ;  but  the
strata  being  Lower  Lias,  and  only  a  quarter  of  a  mile  west  of  the  well
in  No.  60,  the  geological  conditions  are  doubtless  similar.  '


1  Tlio  term  "old  well"  designates  the  deeper,  but  uiLsuccessful,  well  sunk  prior
to  the  dowser's.


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  A


317


No.  48.  Well  at  Mr.  Samuel  Lang's  Kennels,  Bristol. — Inquiries  in
Bristol  elicited  that  Mr.  Lang  had  not  been  heard  of  for  some  years.
Professor  Lloyd  Morgan,  F.R.S.,  tells  me  that  the  kennels  were  at
the  further  end  of  Cold  Harbour  Lane,  Redland,  on  Lower  Lias  or
Rhaetic,  so  that  we  have  here  another  case  of  a  tunnelled  well  in  this
formation.  Seven  out  of  the  eighteen  cases  which  follow  were  also  in
Lower  Lias,  which  thus  appears  to  present  conditions,  i.e.,  as  to
difficulty  of  finding  water,  which  are  adapted  to  the  dowser  s  art.

Group  (b) — Old  Well  Too  Deep.

Yarliyigton  House  [Additional  Case].  In  a  letter  to  Mr.  Andrew
Lang,  Mr.  T.  E.  Rogers,  M.A.,  Deputy  Chairman  of  the  Somerset
Quarter  Sessions,  Chancellor  of  the  Diocese  of  Bath  and  Wells,  etc.,
wr'ites  : —

Yarlington  House,  Wincanton,  December  4:th,  1897.

Over  fifty  years  ago  a  very  respectable  farmer  at  Ditcheat,  Kingston  by
name,  a  tenant  of  Squire  Dawes,  was  well  known  in  this  part  of  the  country
for  his  success  in  the  discovery  of  underground  springs.

In  my  own  case  he  was  attended  with  extraordinary  success.  My  grand-
father, when  building  this  house  in  1782,  sank  135  ft.  for  a  well,  and  only
then  came  to  a  very  slight  supply  ;  so  trifling,  that  after  having  for  some
few  years  drawn  up  water  with  the  aid  of  a  donkey,  he  closed  the  well
altogether,  and  used  to  send  nearly  half  a  mile  for  spring  water.  Upon  my
sending  for  this  man  Kingston,  in  184G,  he  found  a  spring  not  20  yards
from  the  old  well,  which  has  quite  sufficiently  supplied  the  house,  and  at  a,
depth  of  about  32  ft.

I  should  mention  that  Kingston  used  not  a  thorn  but  the  main-spring  of

a  watch. He  had  no  idea  how  the  action  was  produced,  and  was  not

conscious  of  any  sensation  passing  through  him. He  assured  me  that  the

influence  acted  with  equal  force  on  the  main-spring  in  his  hand  whether  the

spring  [of  water]  was  10  or  50  yards  deep. I  have  walked  with  him  holding

one  end  of  the  main-spring,  which  in  my  hand  was  perfectly  stiff  and

immobile,  while  the  end  in  his  hand  was  twisting  and  turning  so  violently

that,  unless  he  let  it  go,  it  must  inevitably  have  snapped  ;  and  on  some

occasions  it  did  absolutely  snap.  „ -n  -r.

T.  E.  Rogers.

On  visiting  Yarlington,  Mr.  Rogers  showed  me  the  sites  of  the  two
wells,  which  are  about  40  yds.  apart.  He  informed  me  that  the
depth  of  the  old  well  was  130  ft.  or  a  little  more,  and  that  the  water
in  the  new  well  was  found  at  a  depth  of  35  ft.  in  oolite.

At  the  entrance  lodge,  300  yds.  E.IST.E.  of  the  new  well,  and  on
the  same  level,  is  a  well  40  ft.  deep,  containing  5  ft.  of  water  :  the
lodgekeeper  said  it  was  a  good  supply,  sinking  only  3  ft.  in  the
driest  summers.

Mr.  Rogers  said  that  below  the  loose  oolite  (Inferior  Oolite)  which
forms  the  top  of  the  hill,  is  a  little  layer  of  marl,  and  below  this  a


318


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


sandy  loam  (Midfoi-d  Sands).  The  oolite  and  sands  are  seen  in  the
sides  of  the  road  going  down  to  Yarlington  village,  about  130  feet
below  the  house.

From  the  water  in  the  wells  at  the  house  and  the  lodo-e  occurring
at  the  same  level  in  the  same  horizontal  bed  of  limestone,  I  infer  that
it  is  held  up  by  the  marl  and  forms  a  continuous  stratum,  which  in
the  old  well  was  lost  by  penetrating  into  the  permeable  sands  below.

Since  writing  the  above,  I  see  that  sheet  18  of  the  Geological
Smwey,  which  was  published  July  5th,  1850,  four  years  after  the  new
well  was  sunk,  shows  a  line  of  fault  j^assing  N.  and  S.  exactly  over
it ;  but,  as  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  geological  maps  are
drawn  with  this  degree  of  accuracy,  it  is  more  likely,  if  a  fault  has
anything  to  do  with  the  matter,  that  the  old  well  was  on  it,  since  its
tendency  would  be  to  let  out  the  water  at  the  bottom — in  which  case
the  dowser  may  claim  whatever  credit  there  is  for  not  putting  his  well
on  the  same  line. Mr.  PiOgers  has  revised  the  foregoing.

Group  (c) — Old  Well  on  the  Side  of  a  Hill.
A  well  so  situated  is  no  evidence  for  any  unusual  faculty  in  a
dowser  who  finds  a  better  supply  in  the  interior  of  the  hill  at  a  slightly
higher  level,  especially  where  the  escarpment  is  steep  and  the  strata
rather  impermeable,  as  in  the  case  of  two  wells  (ISTos.  2  and  3)  on
either  side  of  Locking  churchyard  (see  Group  (d),  No.  28,  par  2  ;  p.  321).

Group  (d) — Dowser's  Well  the  Deeper.
No.  9.  Evercreech  Junction.  —  [An  unsuccessful  well  was  sunk  to  nearly  the
same  depth  as  a  second,  which  was  located  with  the  twig  6  yds.  from  it,  and
yielded  36,000  gallons  a  day. Date  about  1892. Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.
XIII.,  p.  33.]

The  well  at  Messrs.  Roles'  milk  factory  is  situated  a  few  yards
to  the  south  of  the  railway  station.  The  strata  are  the  upper  part
of  the  Lower  Lias.  The  proprietor  called  an  old  man  answering
to  the  name  of  Tommy,  v/ho  had  worked  in  the  unsuccessful  well.  He
said  it  was  from  50  to  55  ft.  deep  in  hard  blue  marl,  and  that  about
40  to  50  ft.  down  they  had  tunnelled  in  three  directions — in  one
direction  for  about  17  ft. This  well  is  now  filled  up.

The  new  well  is  12  to  15  ft.  distant  from  the  old  one.  The
proprietor  said  its  depth  was  from  65  to  67  ft.,  and  that  it  contained
over  40  ft.  of  water.  The  top  soil  consisted  of  10  to  12  ft.  of
yellow  clay,  blue  at  the  bottom,  and  below  this  55  ft.  of  very  hard
blue  marl  which  had  to  be  blasted,  but  which  fell  to  pieces  on  exposure
to  the  weather.  At  the  bottom  was  a  thin  seam  of  "  scale  "  or  hard
rock  about  half  an  inch  thick,  and  on  breaking  through  this  the  water
rose  quickly. About  3,000  gallons  a  day  are  used  for  the  milk  factory.


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  A.


319


At  Owley  Farm,  about  180  yds.  S.W.  of  the  wells  and  about  18  ft.
lower,  is  an  old  well  49  ft.  deep,  containing  44|-  ft.  of  water.  The
bottom  of  this  well  is  thus  on  a  level  with  that  of  Roles'  new  well,
and  the  water  in  it  also  stands  apparently  at  the  same  level.  From
this  we  may  infer  that  the  strata  are  approximately  horizontal,  and
that  the  same  stratum  of  artesian  water  has  been  tapped  in  each  case.
I  therefore  quite  agree  with  "Tommy,"  who  said,  referring  to  the
unsuccessful  well,  "  I  believe  if  we  had  gone  down  deeper  we  should
have  found  the  spring."  Mr.  H.  J  Roles,  to  whom  I  submitted  the
foregoing,  writes: — "Your  report  re  the  well  at  this  place  appears  to
me  to  be  correct."

The  local  opinion  of  the  ditEculty  of  finding  potable  water  is  shown
by  the  circumstance  that  the  supply  for  the  Junction  is  brought  by  rail.

Kg.  17.  Sturminster  Neivton. — [A  well  was  sunk  50  fb.  without  a  drop  of
water.  Mr.  J.  F.  Young  and  three  of  his  family  pointed  out  a  spot  a  few
yards  away  where  a  well  was  sunk,  which  at  a  less  depth  delivers  a  plentiful
supply. Froceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  40.]

The  wells  referred  to  by  Mr.  Young  are  situated  a  few  hundred
feet  from  an  escarpment  of  Corallian  rock  (Coral  Rag  on  Calcareous
Grit)  about  50  ft.  high,  facing  west  and  overlooking  the  river  Stour.
The  "  village  doctor,"  Dr.  J.  Comyns  Leach,  The  Lindens,  Sturminster,
informed  me  that  the  unsuccessful  well,  referred  to  by  Mr.  J.  F.  Young,
was  sunk  by  him  (the  doctor)  at  the  house  about  60  yds.  to  the  N.E.  of
his  own,  now  occupied  by  Di'.  R.  A.  Beaver.  It  was  first  sunk  to  a
depth  of  about  35  ft.,  when  it  held  16  ft.  of  water,  but  on  sinking  it
3  ft.  lower  the  water  was  lost.  In  June,  1893,  the  well  sinker  lost
his  life  in  the  well  from  bad  air,  in  consequence  of  which  it  was
abandoned,  after  going  to  a  total  depth  of  41  feet.

The  second  or  successful  well  is  30  yds.  from  the  first,  and  was
placed  at  a  convenient  spot  in  the  stable  yard  without  reference  to
any  predictions  by  Mr.  Young  or  his  family,  of  which  the  doctor  was
unaware. It  is  45  ft.  deep  and  holds  6  or  7  ft.  of  water.

Eighty  yai'ds  west  of  the  second  well,  there  is  at  the  doctor's  own
house  a  third  well  (marked  P.  on  the  Ordnance  map),  which  is  only
38  ft.  deep  and  holds  from  7  to  14  ft.  of  water,  according  to  the  season.
Hence,  as  these  three  wells  are  on  level  ground,  and  in  a  tolerably
pervious  rock,  there  is  nothing  remarkable  in  having  found  water  in
the  stable  well  below  the  bottom  of  the  unsuccessful  one.  Dr.  Leach,
wffo  has  revised  this  account,  never  had  to  pay  for  carting  water  ;
and  this  is  confirmed  by  Mr.  J.  F.  Young's  father,  Mr.  Robert  Young
(the  author  of  works  in  the  Dor.'^  ;  dialect),  to  whom,  as  also  to  Mr.
J.  F.  Young,  I  have  submitted  the  foregoing.  The  latter  writes  that
his  report  to  Professor  Barrett  was  first  sent  for  local  correction,  but


320


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


that  probably  part  of  the  information  sent  him  might  have  been  based
upon  hearsay.

No.  27.  Shepton  Mallet  Breu-enj. — [A  boring  was  carried  to  some  140  feet
without  success.  Then  the  water- tinder,  Sims,  indicated  a  spot  on  another
part  of  the  premises,  where  a  well  was  sunk  and  a  magnificent  spring  was
discovered  in  a  fault  of  the  rock  at  a  depth  of  40  feet.  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
Vol.  XIII.,  p.  49.]

The  diviner  in  this  case  was  Mr.  Chai'les  Sims,  a  professional
dowser,  now  living  at  Pilton,  a  village  rather  more  than  two  miles
from  Shepton  Mallet.  The  Anglo-Bavai'ian  Brewery  is  situated  on
a  submerged  island  of  Carboniferous  Limestone,  and  the  unsuccessful
well  was  sunk  in  the  front  yard,  through  Lower  Lias  and  Limestone,
to  a  depth,  according  to  a  foreman  who  had  been  present,  of  about
100  or  120  ft.,  the  lower  half  of  this  being  a  6  inch  boring.

Mr.  Sims'  well  is  in  the  hamlet  of  Bowlish,  500  yds.  distant  from
the  unsuccessful  well  and  95  ft.  below  it.  The  land  is  at  the  extreme
point  of  the  Company's  premises,  and  was  acquired  consequent  on
the  successful  sinking.  The  well  is  22  ft.  in  diameter  and  40  ft.
deep.  It  is  in  the  bottom  of  a  narrow  valley,  and  65  ft.  south  of  a
small  stream,  the  river  Sheppey,  which  runs  west  from  Shepton
Mallet.  Just  above  the  well  a  quarry  is  being  worked  in  littoral
Lower  Lias  limestones  without  the  usual  clayey  partings ;  on  the
other  side  of  the  valley,  200  yds.  to  the  north,  is  a  protrusion  of
Carboniferous  limestone ;  but  the  well  itself,  according  to  Mr.  Phillis,
a  geologist  formerly  at  the  brewery,  is  almost  certainly  in  Lias.

He  said  they  got  no  water  at  first  even  at  40  ft  ;  but  he  went
down  the  well,  and,  seeing  a  place  that  looked  damp,  told  them  he
thought  they  would  get  it  by  driving  there,  which  they  did,  and  it
was  found  to  drain  the  wells  in  Coombe  Lane  to  the  south.  The
water  came  in  from  both  sides  of  the  valley,  but  he  thought  it  too  far
from  the  stream  to  filter  through,  though  possible.  The  supply  was
insufficient  for  the  brewery,  and  is  now  discontinued  in  favour  of  that
from  an  open  spring  at  Darshill,  a  mile  lower  down  the  valley.

The  case  is  not  evidential  on  account  of  the  wells  being  so  remote
the  successful  one  being  also  the  lower  of  the  two,  and  placed  at  the
most  likely  spot  for  water. This  was  also  the  opinion  of  the  people
at  the  brewery  and  of  Mr.  Phillis,  who  have  both  revised  the  above.

No.  28.  Locking. — [Two  wells,  Nos.  3  and  4,  sunk  without  a  dowser,
33  ft.  and  12  ft.  deep  respectively,  are  dry  dui'ing  summer.  No.  1,  a  dowsed
well,  150  yds.  distant,  is  20  ft.  deep  and  has  a  constant  supply.  No.  2,  a
dowsed  well  on  the  Vicarage  lawn  120  yds.  distant,  is  31  ft.  deep  with  a
plentiful  and  constant  supjily. Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  50.]


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  A.


321


On  visiting  Locking,  in  company  with  our  informant,  Mr.  W.
G.  Hellier,  I  found  (refen-ing  to  the  sketch-map  given  on  page  51
of  Professor  Barrett's  paper)  that  just  north  of  well  No.  4  an  east
and  west  fault  throws  down  horizontal  Lias  on  the  north  against
Red  Marls  on  the  south.  The  marl  has  been  worked  out  by  a  stream,
and  the  dowsed  well  (No.  1 )  is  in  the  bottom  of  the  valley  not  far  from
the  same  ;  whereas  the  non-dowsed  wells  (Nos.  3  and  4)  are  near  the
top  and  bottom  respectively  of  the  steep  scarp  of  Lias,  and  are  not
less  than  30  and  10  ft.  respectively  higher  than  No.  1.  Hence,  as
No.  1  reaches  a  level  20  ft.  or  more  deeper  than  either  of  them,  the
occurrence  of  a  constant  supply  of  water  in  it  is  no  evidence  for
dowsing.

The  church  and  vicarage  on  the  top  of  the  hill  are  on  practically  .
level  ground,  which,  at  the  other  dowsed  well  (No.  2),  may  be  a  few
(say  5)  feet  above  No.  3  :  No.  2  is  also  stated  to  be  2  ft.  shallower,
and  to  contain  plenty  of  water.  On  the  other  hand,  No.  3  is  sunk  on
the  steep  side  of  the  hill,  which  cannot  be  expected  to  hold  water  so
well  as  at  No.  2,  some  50  yds.  back  from  the  edge.

Locking  is  the  only  place  where  I  did  not  take  measurements  ;
going  round  with  Mr.  Hellier  I  could  not  at  the  time,  and  it  did  not
seem  worth  while  to  return  for  the  purpose.  At  the  well  on  Sandford
Green,  which  we  next  visited,  I  found  the  measurements  had  been
correctly  given  by  Mr.  Hellier,  so  presume  those  he  gives  for  Locking
are  correct.  The  well  is  in  P^ed  Marl  of  the  Trias,  and  contained
19|  ft.  of  water.  The  site  of  the  old  well,  now  filled  up,  was  about
20  ft.  distant,  but,  as  no  record  of  its  depth  has  been  kept,  no
conclusion  can  be  drawn.

Ladyswood  Park  [Additional  Case]. — -The  following  paragraph
appears  in  the  Bristol  Times  and  Mirror  of  March  7th,  1891,  p.  16  ;
and,  with  the  words  in  brackets,  in  the  Mexlium  of  March  13th,
p.  167  :—

Ever  since  the  erection  of  the  new  mansion  at  Ladyswood  Park,  Sherston
Magna  [Wiltshire],  the  question  of  its  water  supply  has  been  one  of  trouble
and  serious  consideration.  A  few  years  ago.  Sir  T.  Dancer,  Bart.,  had  two
wells  sunk,  but  without  success  in  finding  water.  The  estate  having  recently
been  purchased  by  Mr.  Francis  Davis,  he  determined  to  requisition  the
services  of  Daniel  Lacy  [a  local  diviner].  Lacy  went  to  work  with  his  little
twig,  and  discovered  a  spring  about  15  yds.  from  the  two  existing  useless
wells.  He  at  once  set  his  men  to  work,  and  after  sinking  to  a  depth  of
60  ft.  found  an  abundant  spring,  the  output  being  practically  inexhaustible.

Ladyswood  Park  is  the  "  Ladyswood  Farm  "  of  the  old  one-inch
map ;  it  is  about  a  mile  S.E.  of  Sherston,  on  a  plain  of  Forest
Marble. On  visiting  Ladyswood  in  May,  1899,  Mr.  Davis  showed  me


322


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


the  position  of  the  three  wells,  and  said  he  had  just  measured  the
depth  of  Lacy's,  which  was  74  ft.,  and  that  the  water  stood  53  ft.
from  the  surface,  higlier  than  he  had  ever  known  it  before.  I  then
saw  Sidney  Lacy,  of  Sherston,  who  said  he  had  helped  his  father  sink
the  well,  which  was  in  thin  bedded  rock  much  the  same  all  the  way
down.  They  struck  the  water  at  the  bottom  after  putting  in  a  blast.
The  new  well  is  certainly  lower  than  the  old  one,  but  they  would  not
have  got  water  by  sinking  the  old  one  deeper,  because  his  father,  after
trying  the  stick,  said  they  would  not,  and  he  had  never  known  his
father  wrong.

With  regard  to  the  old  wells,  Sidney  Lacy  said  he  went  down  the
second  (B)  to  remove  the  pump,  and  should  think  the  depth  was  from
60  to  70  ft.,  but  couldn't  say  exactl3^  The  first  (A)  was  also  about
60  ft.  :  it  was  Lawrence,  of  Bristol,  who  dowsed  it  and  sunk  it.  Mr.
Davis  said  the  B  well  was  sunk  by  Mr.  Simon  Evans,  of  Sherston.
Evans  said  that,  as  near  as  he  remembered,  its  depth  was  44  or  54  ft.,
with  some  water,  and  tliat  on  boring  another  25  ft.  with  a  three-inch
bore  they  got  plenty  :  the  A  well  was,  he  said,  25  ft.  deep,  with  no
water.

As  water  in  thin-bedded,  horizontal  limestones  would  probably  lie
in  a  uniform  stratum,  the  failure  of  the  old  wells  is  sufficiently
explained  by,  according  to  Lacy's  figures,  their  not  having  been  sunk
deep  enough,  or,  according  to  Evans',  not  deep  enough  to  hold  the
water  met  with  in  his  boring.

Group  (e) — Heading  driven  towards  Known  Water.

No  42.  Henbury. — [In  this  case  Mr.  Crisp,  the  architect,  writing  in  1883,
says  that  when  water  was  required  at  Mr.  Butterworth's  new  house,  a
geologist  predicted  plenty  at  a  depth  of  150  ft.,  where  he  said  the  Mountain
Limestone  rested  on  a  bed  of  clay.  They  sank  150  ft.  and  bored  10  ft.,  but
found  no  water.  Then  the  diviner,  Lawrence,  predicted  water  about  20  ft.
from  the  well,  and  advised  driving  a  heading  about  100  ft.  from  the  surface.
They  drove  30  ft.,  and  got  a  good  and  regular  sujjply.  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
Vols.  II.,  p.  104,  and  XIII.,  p.  G7.]

Rockwell,  which  is  the  name  of  Mr.  Butterworth's  house,  now
occupied  by  Mr.  Frank  Jolly,  is  situated  on  the  north  side  of  the
road,  one  mile  S.W.  of  Henbury  and  five  from  Bristol.  The  well  is
in  Mountain  Limestone,  and  about  50  yds.  from  its  escarpment,
which  runs  parallel  to  the  Severn  and  shows  the  rock  much  faulted
and  contorted,  as  it  was  in  the  well.  This  escarpment  is  a  Triassic
cliff  flanked  by  a  beach  deposit  of  Dolomitic  Conglomerate.  On  the
lower  slopes  are  Red  Marls  which  help  to  hold  up  the  water  in  the
limestone ;  the  ground  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  at  Lawrence  Weston
being  120  ft.  or  more  below  the  ground  at  the  well


XXXVIII.]


A'ppenclix  A.


323


The  principal  point  omitted  in  previous  reports  of  this  case  is  the
existence  of  an  old  well  123  yds.  to  the  S.S.W.  of  Rockwell  well  and
123  ft.  deep,  with  water  standing  94  ft.  from  the  surface.  This
old  well  belongs  to  a  disused  Friends'  Meeting  House  :  the  place  is
now  called  Fern  Hill  and  is  occupied  by  Mr.  H.  Fedden.  At  Rockwell
well  the  ground  is  about  19  ft.  below  the  old  well,  and  the  water  stands
81  ft.  from  tlie  surface,  or  about  6  ft.  below  the  water  in  the  old  well,
which,  allowing  for  the  distance,  shows  both  wells  to  be  probably
in  the  same  stratum  of  water.  And,  as  Rockwell  well  is  150  ft.  deep,
the  bottom  of  it  is  75  ft.  below  the  level  of  the  water  in  the  old  Avell.
The  heading  at  Rockwell  runs  from  the  well  under  the  front  of  the
house,  which  lies  to  the  S.S.W.  The  length  of  the  heading,  Mr.  Jolly
told  me,  is  about  75  ft.  ;  but  Mr.  Crisp,  the  architect,  in  his  report
says  it  is  about  30  ft.  ;  and  Mr.  Mereweather,  the  contractor,  gives  it
as  24  ft.  ;  the  important  point  is  the  direction,  directly  towards
the  old  well.

Mr.  Mereweather  informed  me  that  the  Rockwell  well  was  sunk
without  getting  water  beyond  a  soakage  from  the  top  layers  after
rain;  he  noticed,  however,  a  damp  place  on  one  side  about  100  ft.
from  the  top ;  Mrs.  Bengough  then  tried  the  ground  with  a  divining
rod,  which  turned  at  a  point  16  ft.  from  the  well.  Mrs.  Bengough  in
her  own  account  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  II.,  p.  104)  says  the  distance
was  about  6  ft.,  and  that  Lawrence  came  later  the  same  afternoon,  and
in  the  presence  of  herself  and  of  many  persons  who  had  witnessed  her
trials,  pointed  to  the  same  place.  [Crisp  says  the  point  Lawrence
indicated  was  about  20  feet  from  the  well.]

Mr.  Mereweather  told  me  that  neither  Mrs.  Bengough  nor  Lawrence
went  down  the  well,  and  that  he  was  not  present  when  Lawrence  came.
But  as  we  cannot  now  be  sure  that  Mereweather's  infoi'mation  about
the  damp  place  had  not  reached  one  or  both  of  them  indirectly,  or  that
they  had  not  heard  of  the  old  well — which  indeed  the  old  house  itself
was  sufficient  to  suggest — it  remains  doubtful  whether  Lawrence's  in-
dication shows  more  than  knowledge  normally  acquired.  At  any  rate
he  proposed  the  obvious  course  of  driving  a  heading  in  the  direction  of
the  old  well,  and  25  ft.  below  the  level  of  the  water  in  it.

No.  60.  Shejjton  Mallet  St.ation. — [The  contractors  write  in  1882  that  in
1874  they  sank  a  well  103  (or  90)  ft.  through  blue  lias  rock  with  no  traces
of  water.  Then  John  Mullins  with  a  twig  predicted  an  abundance  at  15  (or
50)  ft.  from  the  well,  and  advised  a  heading,  on  driving  which  the  water
rushed  in  and  the  miners  rushed  out,  and  their  tools  and  watches  are  there
till  this  day. Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vols.  XL,  p.  107,  and  XIII.,  p.  86].

The  well  in  question  supplies  locomotives  at  Charlton  Station,  of
the  Somerset  and  Dorset  Railway,  on  the  eastern  side  of  Shepton


324


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Mallet ;  it  is  placed  between  the  rails  and  the  building  marked
"Tank"  on  the  25-inch  map.  My  principal  informant  here  was  Wm.
Baiss,  an  old  man  at  the  station,  who  said  that,  though  not  present
when  Mullins  found  the  water,  he  was  working  on  the  railway  near
by  and  heard  all  about  it.  He  said  they  sank  through  several  sorts
of  stone  to  a  depth  of  90  ft.,  without  water.  (Mr.  Hickes,  in  the
Daily  Graphic,  also  gives  the  depth  as  90  ft.  ;  Mr.  Whitaker,  the
locomotive  superintendent  at  Highbridge,  writes  that  it  is  now  about
80  ft.)  Then  about  8  or  9  ft.  from  the  bottom  they  drove  a  heading
ill  an  easterly  direction  through  some  blue  marl,  and  struck  a  spring
at  from  1.5  to  20  ft.  from  the  well.  No  red  marl  was  met  with,  and
he  thinks  the  well  is  probably  all  in  Lias.  Mr.  John  Phillis,  a  local
geologist  (who  has  revised  this  account),  agrees  in  this,  and  does  not
think  they  got  down  on  the  limestone  (Carboniferous),  the  nearest
outcrop  of  which  is  a  mile  distant.  The  engine-attendant  stated
that  they  pumped  some  20,000  gallons  a  day,  which  has  never  failed
even  in  the  driest  summers.  Mr.  Whitaker  says  that,  when  no
pumping  is  done,  the  water  stands  below  rail  level  about  37  ft.  in
winter  and  about  .51  ft.  in  summer.

At  a  point  280  yds.  north-east  of  the  well,  at  the  bottom  of  a
valley  in  which  runs  a  little  stream — the  river  Sheppey — rises  an  open
spring.  It  supplies  Charlton  brewery,  and  may  have  been  long  known,
as  the  Roman  Fosseway  passes  within  a  few  feet  of  it.  Its  escaping
level  is  4.3  ft.  below  the  ground  at  the  station  well,  and  hence  within  a
foot  of  the  average  level  of  the  water  in  it.

Close  by  the  station  well,  and  on  the  same  side  of  the  rails,  a
quarry  shows  15  ft.  of  Lower  Lias,  dense,  well-jointed  blue  and  white
limestones  in  beds  of  about  one  foot  thick,  alternating  with  from
one  to  three  inches  of  hard  blue  sandy  clay.  Notwithstanding  the
generally  impermeable  appearance  of  these  beds,  we  must  take  it  as
possible,  not  to  say  probable,  that,  with  a  head  of  50  ft.  of  water  at
a  point  variously  given  as  from  15  to  50  ft.  distant  from  the  well,
there  would  be  at  least  a  dampness  on  that  side.  In  the  account
written  by  the  contractors  in  1882  [Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  II.,
p.  107),  we  read  that  "on  his  arrival  he  [Mullins]  went  down  the
well,"  so  that  his  location  of  the  water  "  after  he  came  up  "  cannot
now  be  taken  as  showing  more  than  his  conscious  or  unconscious
observation,  or  inference  from  the  position  of  the  brewery  spring,
which  he  was  prolsably  told  of,  as  I  was.

Since  writing  this  I  have  seen  the  quarry  a  few  hours  after  heavy
rain  and  found  it  hold  the  water,  except  in  the  N.E.  corner,  where  a
main  joint,  running  exactly  in  the  direction  of  the  brewery  spring,
forms  a  swallow-hole.  It  was  doubtless  such  a  joint  as  this  that
Mullins'  heading  cut  into.


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  A.


325


Group  (f) — Dowser's  Well  near  Known  Water  ;  Old  Well

USUALLY  Remote.

No.  43  (the  same  as  No.  59)  Hedgecocks. — [The  architect,  who  in  1878
(or  1879)  was  erecting  a  house  for  Mr.  J.  T.  Renton,  at  Hedgecock's  Farm,
writes  in  1883  that  the  contractors  "proceeded  to  form  a  well  close  to  the
new  building,  and  had  bored  a  very  considerable  distance  without  coining  to
water."  Then  Lawrence  predicted  water  a  few  yards  from  the  boring,  and
they  sank  about  40  ft.  (some  42  ft.)  exactly  on  a  good  spring  B,  which,  he
believes,  continues  to  supply  the  house.  There  was  an  old  well  A  some
100yds.  distant  with  little  or  no  water.  Froceedings  S.P.R.,  Vols.  II.,  pp.
103-104;  and  XIII.,  p.  68.

In  1897,  W.  Renton,  son  of  J.  T.  R.,  writes  that  the  two  wells,  about
27  ft.  deep,  were  only  land  springs  and  apt  to  get  dry.  So  he  had  John
Mullins  divine  a  place,  C,  within  six  inches  of  which  he  found  a  good  supply
at  about  26  ft.  He  also  employed  Mullins  on  three  other  successful  wells.
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XTII.,  p.  86.]

Hedgecock's  Farm  is  on  the  border  of  Sussex  about  four  miles  N.W.  of
Horsham.  On  visiting  it  in  June,  1898,  I  found  it  in  the  occupation  of  the
Duchess  di  Santo  Teodora,  and  the  name  changed  to  Oakwood  House  ;  and
now  (1899)  to  Oak  Grange.  Mr.  Jupp,  a  well  sinker,  who  had  been  employed
on  Mullins'  wells,  told  me  there  were  three  wells  on  the  premises,  of  which
two  liad  been  found  by  Mullins  about  1893.  One  C,  at  the  back  of  the  house,
now  built  over,  is,  he  said,  in  hard  blue  marl  25  ft.  deep  with  only  2|  ft.  of
water,  and  can  be  pumped  out  in  about  twenty  minutes,  though  Mullins  said
there  was  water  sufficient  for  everything.  Another  well,  D,  marked  by
Mullins  close  to  the  road  some  50  yds.  west  of  the  house,  is  20  ft.  deep
in  blue  marl  and  has  a  good  lot  of  water.  Another,  E,  dug  about  1893
is  15  (or  30)  ft.  deep  and  supplies  the  vineries.

I  also  saw  a  new  well,  F,  that  had  just  been  sunk  100yds.  or  so  north
of  the  house,  43  or  44  ft.  deep  in  soft  dark  marl  (Weald  Ciay).  A  slight
spring  had  been  met  with  at  25  ft.  ;  and  at  40  ft.  in  a  dove-colored  marl
water  was  found,  which  rose  7  ft.  in  a  night  and  stands  about  21  ft.  from  the
surface.

Thus  against  one  unsuccessful  boring  we  have  at  least  six  successful
wells,  of  which  A  and  F  sunk  without  a  dowser  are  27  and  44  ft.  deep ;  while
the  dowsed  wells  B,  C,  and  D,  are  42,  25,  and  20  ft.  As  the  ground  is
approximatelj^  level,  I  infer  a  main  water-bearing  bed  at  about  40  ft.  and  a
minor  one  at  from  20  to  25  ft.

This  is  supported  by  the  occurrence  of  water  at  other  points  along  the
level  ridge  which  extends  from  Hedgecocks  over  two  miles  westwards  to
Rudgwick  (Ridgewick).  Thus  the  entrance  lodge  has  a  draw-pump  ;  the
adjoining  cottage,  15  ft.  lower,  has  a  well  25  ft.  deep  ;  Rudge  Farm,
600  yds.  W.,  has  a  draw-pump  ;  a  cottage  1,600  yds.  W.  has  a  well  18  ft.
deep  with  5  ft.  of  water  ;  and  a  quarter  mile  further  a  spring  rises  about
13  ft.  below  the  top  of  the  ridge.

This  ridge  is  the  first  high  ground  in  the  Weald  south  of  Leith  Hill,  and
represents  the  escarpment  of  a  hard  or  porous  bed  ;  which,  according  to
Topley  (Geology  of  the  Weald,  p.  104)  is  the  same,  "No.  2,  sand  and  sand-
stone," that  forms  the  water-bearing  bed  at  Warnham  Lodge,  1|  miles


326


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


E.S.E.— already  described,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  278-279.
The  elevation,  about  280  ft.  O.D.,  is  also  the  same.

At  Hedgecocks,  though  the  bed  is  less  permeable,  water  seems  to  have
been  found  everywhere  except  in  the  contractors'  boring,  the  actual  depth
of  which  I  have  been  unable  to  ascertain  ;  in  their  letter  (Vol.  II.,  p.  103)
they  do  not  refer  to  it  at  all.  If  as  deep  as  the  wells,  it  corresponds  with
the  dry  ground  in  the  Warnhaui  Lodge  bed.  The  case  is  intei'esting  from
the  successful  employment  of  two  leading  English  dowsers,  though  the
necessity  for  their  services  may  not  be  altogether  demonstrated.

No  47.  Park  Farm. — [Lawrence  marked  two  spots  at  each  of  which,
after  boring  10  ft.,  water  was  struck.  As  many  persons  said  water  miglit  be
found  anywhere  in  the  field,  the  tenant,  as  a  test,  bored  to  the  same  depth
midway  between  the  places,  and  found  the  subsoil  to  be  i:)erfectly  dry.
Proceed!,uj8  ^.-p.R.,  Vol.  XIII..  p.  71.]

This  is  the  same  place  as  the  "  Parks  Farm  "  of  the  old
one-inch  map  :  it  is  on  the  Gloucester  Road,  S.E.  of  Frampton-on-
Severn,  and  two  miles  north  of  Dursley  Junction.  The  subsoil  is  stiff
clay  of  the  Lower  Lias.  Lawrence's  well  is  just  outside  the  garden
gate,  and  is,  Mrs.  Prout  said,  25  ft.  deep  ;  10  yds.  south  of  it  is  a  pond
about  10  yds.  in  diameter  and  2  ft.  deep,  the  level  of  which  is  4|  ft.
uelovv  the  ground  at  the  well.

Sixty  yards  north  of  the  well  is  another  pond  about  15  yds.  in
diameter.  The  unsuccessful  boring  was  made  midway  between  these
ponds.

The  other  successful  boring  was  made,  I  was  informed,  by  a  man
on  the  farm,  about  20  yds.  to  the  north  of  the  north  pond  ;  he  said
they  got  at  the  bottom  a  sort  of  marly  stuff,  not  very  hard,  in  wliich
the  water  came.

Mrs.  Prout  said  that  the  water  in  Lawrence's  well  is  salt,  and  is
not  used,  and  that  all  the  water  to  Stonehouse  is  salt.  The  ponds  go
dry  in  summer,  but  Lawrence  came  at  the  end  of  March,  or  beginning
of  April,  when  they  were  full.

I  think  the  proximity  of  the  successful  borings  to  the  ponds  (10
and  20  yds.)  raises  a  presumption  of  their  connection ;  and  similarly
the  boring  midway  between  the  ponds  may  have  been  unsuccessful  on
account  of  its  comparative  remoteness.

I  have  not  been  able  to  communicate  with  Mr.  Prout,  but  the
steward,  Mr.  T.  T.  Vizard,  of  Dursley,  writes  in  regard  to  the  fore-
going : — "  Your  particulars  are,  so  far  as  I  know,  correct.  I  do  not
think  the  well  can  be  supplied  with  water  from  the  ponds  near,
because  I  believe  the  ponds  become  dry  in  the  summer,  but  that  the
well  always  contains  water."

Perhaps,  however,  as  the  w^ell  is  not  used,  it  would  be  safer  to  say
that  there  is  no  evidence  either  way,  as  water  would  remain  below
ground  after  drying  at  the  surface.


XXXVIII.]


Aiypendix  A.


327


No.  57.  Norton  Hall. — [A  neighbour  had  bored  through  over  1,200  ft.  of
Lias  clay,  then  over  100  ft,  more,  and  got  no  water  he  could  utilise.  At  the
lodge  local  well-sinkers  got  no  water  at  30  ft.  J.  Mullins  predicted  water
in  the  stable  yard  at  about  30  ft.,  which  was  found  at  about  that,  and  rose
20  ft.  Ho  also  predicted  close  to  the  house  a  very  strong  spring  about
20  ft.  down,  and  on  sinking  17  ft.  it  came  so  fast  they  could  sink  no  further.
Froceedings  S.P.R.,'  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  84.]

This  is  the  same  place  as  the  "  Lower  Nortou  Farm "  of  the
old  one-inch  map  :  it  is  three  miles  north  of  Campden.  The  Hall
stands  at  the  end  of  a  ridge  of  Lower  Lias,  ^h:  Bruce  said  that  che
"  gravel "  in  the  clay  consists  of  pebbles,  which  is  suggestive  of
Drift  (?).  He  gave  me  every  facility  for  examining  the  wells  at  the
house,  of  which  there  are  three,  viz  : —

(n)  An  old  well  in  the  hou.se  yard  25  ft.  deep,  and  11  ft.  9  in.  to
the  water supply  insufficient ;  this  had  been  shown  to  iEullins.

{b)  llullins'  well  in  the  stable  yard,  28  ft.  6  in.  deep,  and  8  ft.  9  in.
to  the  water.

(c)  Mullins'  well,  '•  clo.se  to  the  house,"  by  the  drawing-room  window,
17  ft.  deep,  and  1 1  ft  8  in.  to  the  water.

On  levelling,  I  found  c  to  be  6  in.  above  a,  and  a  2  ft.  5  in.  above  b.
Hence  the  water  in  b  and  c  is  at  the  same  level,  and  that  in  ci  7  in.
lower.  But  a  had  been  pumped  that  morning.  Hence  the  water  in
all  three  wells  is  on  a  level.  ^Ir.  Bruce  said  also  that  pumping  a
lowers  c. Hence  the  water  in  all  three  wells  is  in  the  same  stratum.

The  unsuccessful  well  at  the  entrance  lodge,  though  on  the  same
ridge  and  nearly  the  same  level  as  the  Hall,  is  GOO  yds.  distant.  It  is
probably  in  a  diflferent  stratum,  and  at  any  rate  is  too  remote  to  be  any
proof  of  the  absence  of  water  at  other  points  in  the  neighbourhood
of  a,  b,  and  c.

Mr.  Bruce,  who  has  revised  the  foregoing,  writes  : — "  I  have  always
thought  that  u;i??iecZia<e?i/ round  my  house  was  'Oolite'  ('Brash'  the
country  people  call  it)  but  only  a  little  on  the  surface  and  a  very
limited  area,  100  yds.  or  so."  If  stone  occurs  here  it  would  tend  to
form  a  natural  reservoir.  He  adds,  "The  deep  boring  is  at  Kift's
Gate,  li  miles  to  N.E.  of  this,  and  lies  a  good  deal  higher  "—i.e.,  on
or  near  Meon  Hill  (Marlstone,  or  top  of  the  Lower  Lias).

No.  77.  Arnold's.  — [The  owner  writes  that  the  old  well,  about  60  ft.  deep,
had  a  quite  inadei.juate  suj^ply,  and  was  bored  100  ft.  without  getting  more.
He  says,  "I  sent  for  W.  H.  Mullins,  and  he  said  there  was  w^ater  at  about
GO  ft.  deep  on  the  top  of  a  hill  300  yds.  from  the  old  well.  •  He  dug  a  well
on  the  site  and  found  water  at  a  depth  of  90  ft.,  and  now  we  have  an  abun-
dant supply." Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  99  ]

This  place  is  in  Surrey  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile  south  of
Holm  wood  Station,  and  is  all  on  the  upper  part  of  the  Weald  Clay.


328


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Mr.  Bayley  said  that  the  old  well  at  the  house  was  60  ft  deep  in  grey,
soapy,  shaley  clay,  and  gave  an  inadequate  supply  of  water  ;  it  was
bored  another  100  ft.  without  getting  any  more.

Mr.  W.  H.  Mullins'  well  is  about  650  yds.  distant  at  the  northern
extremity  of  the  property.  It  is  close  to  the  railway,  on  a  little  rising
ground  so  as  to  be  convenient  for  gravitation,  and  is  40  yds.  from  and
18  ft.  above  a  stream  of  water  which  is  fed  by  springs  from  Leith
Hill  and  flows  all  the  year  round.  Mr.  Bay  ley's  gardener  informed
me  that  the  well  was  sunk  99  ft.  deep  in  grey,  soapy  clay  without
stone  (Weald  Clay).  Tliere  were  little  springs  the  size  of  a  straw  all
the  way  down,  but  the  supply  was  small  — about  3  ft.  in  the  twenty-
four  hours — and  it  became  necessary  to  augment  it.

Between  the  well  and  the  stream  is  a  narrow,  flat  piece  of  ground
apparently  alluvial  in  character,  and  about  midway  on  this  the  rod
indicated  water.  Here,  6i  ft.  above  the  stream,  a  second  well  was
sunk  to  a  depth  of  10  ft.,  and  an  abundant  supply  was  found  which
rises  to  about  the  level  of  the  stream.  This  supply  is  carried  through
by  a  drain  into  the  first  well,  which,  in  Mr.  Bayley's  letter  {Proceedings
S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  99),  gets  all  the  credit  of  it.

As,  however,  I  see  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  water  comes  from
anywhere  but  the  adjoining  stream,  I  cannot  regard  this  case  as
showing  more  than  ordinary  observation.

No.  90.  JVoodskle,  Wootton,  Ide  of  Wight— [An  old  well,  B,  12  ft.  deep
had  a  small  supply  very  scarce  through  the  summer.  Auotlier  well,  A,  was
sunk  120  ft.  and  got  no  water.  The  diviner,  W.  Stone,  then  indicated  an
enormous  spring  at  a  point  200  ft.  from  and  on  the  same  level  as  B,  and
about  550  ft.  from  and  14  ft.  above  A.  Here  he  sunk  a  well,  C,  7  ft.  deep,
and  got  an  abundant  supply  nearly  always  running.  Proceedings  S.P.R. ,
Vol.  Xin.,  pp.  130-133.]

The  unsuccessful  well  A  (see  plan  on  p.  132  of  Professor  BaiTett's
paper)  is  about  22-5  yds.  (not  350,  as  Taylor  said)  to  the  north  of
Stone's  well,  and  about  50  to  60  ft.  lower  (not  14  ft.  1.  It  is
the  lower  part  of  the  Bembridge  Marls,  and,  as  it  is  stated  to  be
120  ft.  deep,  must  pass  through  the  Bembridge  Limestone  into  the
Osborne  Marls.

The  other  well  B,  according  to  Mr.  Taylor,  the  gardener  at  Woodside,
is  1 2  ft.  deep,  and  afforded  a  small  supply.  According  to  Mr.  W.  H.
Cole,  a  former  tenant  of  Wootton  Farm,  it  was  dug  when  the  Wood-
side  house  was  built,  about  1850,  and  the  water  was  brought  down
in  pipes.  Mr.  Stone's  statements,  that  it  is  "30  ft.  deep  and  no
water,"  and  that  "  the  owners  of  the  estate  had  never  been  able  to
obtain  water,"  are  incorrect.  This  well  is  in  sands  of  the  Hamstead
series.


xxxviil]


Appendix  A.


329


The  first  well  sunk  by  Stone  was,  Mr.  Taylor  informed  me,  at
a  point  about  20  yds.  to  the  east  of  B,  but  he  did  not  get  enough
water  and  tlie  well  was  abandoned  ;  if  so.  Stone's  statement  that  he
found  an  enormous  spring  in  ten  minutes  is  incorrect.

Stone  then  dug  the  well  C  60yds.  to  the  S.E.  of  B,  and  thence
carried  a  trench  about  80  yds.  to  the  south  as  far  as  the  road,  the
ground  at  all  these  points  being  practically  at  the  same  level.  This
trench  was  about  10  ft.  deep  and  cut  through  gravel  (Pleistocene
Plateau),  sand  (Hamstead  Beds),  and  some  clay  (Bembridge  Marls).
The  water  is  collected  by  a  drain  and  carried  into  C  ;  the  principal
flow  was  met  with  a  few  yards  from  C.

More  recently,  in  order  to  supply  another  house,  another  collecting
drain  has  been  carried  up  on  the  south  side  of  the  road,  and  curved
round  into  tlie  field  to  the  west  of  Stone's  drain,  so  as  to  head  off  the
further  end  of  it,  since  when,  Taylor  said,  there  has  been  a  noticeable
falling  off  in  the  supply.  Subsequently  also  to  Stone's  visit  a  sand  pit
has  been  opened  about  130  yds.  west  of  C,  showing  3  ft.  of  gravel  on
sand,  in  which  at  a  depth  of  15  ft.  a  body  of  water  was  found.  The
outcrop  of  this  sand  coincides  nearly  with  that  of  the  plateau  gravel  ;
the  two  together  forming  a  natural  reservoir  over  a  quarter  of  a  mile
wide  capping  the  hill.

Along  the  eastern  edge  of  the  hill  I  saw  some  ponds,  and  rills  of
water  running  down  to  the  creek  :  Mr.  Cole  said  there  were  nine
such  "  runs "  of  water  within  a  mile,  and  that  they  run  all  the
year  round.  I  also  discussed  the  matter  with  the  agent  for  the
Woodside  estate,  Mr.  George  Barton  of  Wootton  Farm,  with  Mt'.
W.  H.  Cole,  and  with  Mr.  John  Newbury  of  Wootton,  all  of  whom
agreed  that  there  was  water  everywhere  on  the  top  of  the  hill,  that
it  was  known  to  every  one,  and  that  it  did  not  want  a  divining  rod
to  find  it.  These  opinions  expressed  after  the  event  must  be  taken
for  what  they  are  worth  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  occurrence  of  water
at  other  points  on  the  hill-top,  and  in  particular  at  B,  60  yds.  distant,
fi'om  which  the  house  had  been  formerly  supplied,  was  a  matter  of
common  knowledge.

Arreton,  Ide  of  IViglit.^ — The  diviner,  W.  Stone,  writfss  that  a  dry  well
had  been  sunk  to  a  depth  of  about  50  ft.,  within  20  yds.  of  which,  he  says,
"I  discovered  in  a  few  minutes  a  spot  beneath  which  a  good  supply  of  water
was  flowing,"  and  all  the  natives  were  astonished  ;  "I  however,  guaranteed
a  spring  at  10  ft. . . . and  my  men  tapped  water  at  9  ft.,  which  quickly

1  This  case  was  quoted  from  tlie  ropoit  appearing  in  tlie  Hominy  Post,  and  was
given  foi'  what  it  was  worth.  It  has  notliiug  to  do  with  the  so-callod  evidential
cases,  and  is  only  included  in  Mr.  Westlake's  report  as  he  liappened  to  be  in  the
neighbourhood.  It  well  illustrates,  as  already  pointed  out,  the  untrustworthiness,
as  a  rule,  of  newspaper  reports  on  any  scientific  question. — W.  F.  B.


330


Professor  W.  F.  Burrett.


[part


rose  to  the  top,"  and  he  laid  it  on  to  the  rectory  and  village  by  gravitation.
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  130-131,  133.]

This  is  the  only  case  inserted  by  Professor  Barrett  without  local
inquiry,  which  he  asks  for  on  p.  133  of  his  paper  ;  as  such  it  was  not
numbered  or  claimed  as  evidence  ;  but,  liaving  been  published,  I  give
a  more  correct  version  as  showing  the  humours  of  the  subject.  The
vilhxge  of  Arretun  lies  at  the  foot  of  the  downs  that  form  the
central  Cretaceous  escarpment.  Besides  going  over  the  ground,  I
obtained  information  from  Mr.  George  Barton,  of  Wootton  Earm,  who
had  got  the  dowser  to  go  to  Arreton,  from  a  resident  at  Arreton,  and
from  Mr.  Orchard,  the  parish  clerk.

They  say  that  the  dowser's  quoted  statements  are  incorrect,  and
that  where  he  placed  his  first  reservoir  he  never  got  any  water  at  all.
He  was  so  sure  there  was  water  that,  before  getting  any,  he  began  by
making  a  large  reservoir  9  ft.  deep  with  pipes  down  to  the  cottages  on
the  S.W.  side  of  the  church.  There  was  rain  and  snow  at  the  time
(the  Daily  GrapJiic  of  April  18th,  lS9l!,  says  :  "  the  snow  on  the  16th
was  four  inches  deep  in  most  parts  of  the  Isle  of  Wight  "j  whicli  filled
the  reservoir  2  ft,  deep,  and  with  that  and  the  water  in  the  pipes  he
got,  when  tlie  tap  was  turned  on  at  the  cottages,  a  powerful  jet
which  was  photographed  ;  but  after  a  few  niinutes  it  ran  out  and  there
has  never  been  a  drop  since.  The  photograph  appeared  in  the  Daily
Graphic,  of  April  23rd,  under  the  heading  "  A  Water  Wizard  in  the
•Isle  of  Wight,"  together  with  a  statement  that  the  spring  had  proved
more  than  sufficient  to  supply  the  wants  of  the  village.

The  dowser  then  tried,  said  Mr.  Orchard,  to  find  a  spring  higher
up  the  hill  by  running  back  a  trench  from  the  top  of  his  tank,  but
when  he  got  22  ft.  deep  he  got  into  the  freestone  and  then  he  stopped,
because  he  knew  that  if  he  got  any  water  it  would  run  away.  This
point  would  be  some  30  yds.  north  of  the  reservoir.  Forty  yards
further  up  the  hill  Upper  Greensand  is  seen  dipping  40  deg.  into  the
hill,  and,  if  the  "freestone  "  forms  its  base,  then  the  dowser's  reservoir
and  trench  must  be  on  the  apex  of  a  wedge  of  Gault  Clay,  the  last
place  in  the  district  where  there  could  be  any  water.  Or  if  they
occupy  (as  according  to  the  new  six-inch  geological  map  they  do,
though  I  doubt  its  accuracy)  a  similar  position  on  the  outcrop  of  the
Carstone,  a  coarse,  hard  grit  beneath  the  Gault,  the  apex  of  this  mass
of  sand  rock  would  be  equally  incapable  of  holding  water.  If,  as  the
dowser  states,  an  unsuccessful  well  was  sunk  within  20  yds.  of  his,  to
a  depth  of  50  ft.,  without  finding  a  drop  of  water,  it  shows  that  the
water-level  in  tiiis  Neocomian  sandrock  is  still  lower.

Failing  to  find  water  here,  the  dowser  then  made  a  second  reservoir,
40  ft.  below  the  first,  on  the  east  side  of  some  marshy  ground  in  a
little  valley  above  the  churchyard,  and  thence  carried  a  drain  alongside


XXXVIII.]


Ajopenclix  A.


331


the  marsh  some  30  yds.  to  the  north.  This  reservoir  is  7  to  8  ft.  deep
to  the  spring  of  the  dome.  Its  bottom,  wliich  is  5  to  6  ft.  below  the
level  of  the  marsh,  is  a  peaty  "  sog  "  {Anglice,  saturated  bog)  through
which  the  water  rises  freely.  The  water  contains  iron  and  peat,  and  a
new  stipply  will  have  to  be  obtained.

This  case  is  only  quoted  as  an  illustration  of  the  untrustworthiness
of  statements  made  by  interested  parties  and  of  newspaper  reports.

No.  121.  Stroud. — [A  boring  had  been  made  to  a  depth  of  70  ft.  but  no
water  found.  At  a  point  300  yds.  distant  Mr.  Gataker  predicted  water  at
50  ft.,  and  a  good  spring  was  actually  found  at  45  ft.  Proceedings  P. B,.,
Vol.  XIII.,  p.  180.]

In  this  case  the  unsuccessful  boring  had  been  made  at  the
bottom  of  an  old  well  at  Farm  Hill  House,  in  the  terrace  at  the
top  of  the  lawn.  The  butler  who  showed  it  me  said  it  was  about
50  ft.  deep,  and  contained  plenty  of  water  except  one  very  dry
summer.  Before  Mr.  Gataker  came,  Messrs.  Orchard  and  Peer,  of
Stroud,  bored  some  20  ft.  at  the  bottom  of  it  with  the  idea  of
getting  more  water,  and  did  not.  This  firm,  who  are  not  professional
well-sinkers,  write  that  the  well  is  30  ft.  deep,  and  that  they  bored
35  ft.  deeper  in  clay,  clay  bats  and  marl  clay.  The  well  is  about
240  yds.  south  of  Gataker 's,  and  at  a  level  from  50  to  60  ft.  lower.
There  is  also  a  well  under  the  house  still  in  use.  These  wells  are  in
the  top  of  the  Upper  Lias.

Mr.  Gataker's  well  is  in  the  field  above  the  house  and  is  45  ft.
deep,  with  water  24  ft.  from  the  surface.  He  (Gataker)  said  the
water  would  be  found  60  ft.  down,  but  they  got  it  at  40  ft.  all
round  the  sides  of  the  well.  The  rock,  according  to  Mr.  Bastin,  the
gardener,  consisted  of  20  ft.  of  rock  rubble  and  sandy  freestone
(Inferior  Oolite  remanie),  with  yellow  clay  at  the  base  :  below  this
was  10  ft.  or  so  of  slate-coloured  clay,  and  several  feet  of  loose  reddish
grit  like  sea  sand,  and  gravelly  rubble  with  water  (Midford  Sands).

At  the  house  of  Mr.  Allen's  gardener,  110  yds.  west  of  Gataker's
well  and  from  6  to  7  ft.  above  it,  is  a  well  which  the  gai'dener,  Mr.
Harwood,  said  contained  plenty  of  water.  jMr.  Riley,  a  working
plumber  in  Stroud,  who  had  repaired  it  two  years  ago,  said  it  was
from  35  to  40  ft.  deep,  and  contained  more  than  5  and  less  than
10  ft.  of  water,  which  would  make  the  water  about  30  ft.  from  the
surface. Hence  the  water  in  Gataker's  well  stands  at  the  same  level.

There  is  also,  300  yds.  E.S.E.  of  Gataker's  well  and  from  60  to
70  ft.  below  it  in  the  same  field,  a  well  16  ft.  deep,  containing  8  ft.
of  water,  affording  a  small  but  good  supply  for  cattle.  About  50  yds.
short  of  this  a  spring  rises  in  wet  weather  and  form.s  a  bog  ;  this,
according  to  the  Survey  map,  marks  the  base  of  the  Midford  Sands.


332


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Also  along  the  ridge  going  to  Whiteshill  (called  "The  Plain" —
see  Geological  Survey,  sheet  34,  N.W.  corner),  from  quarter  to  half
a  mile  north  of  Gataker's  well  and  from  65  to  50  ft.  above  it,  are  five
wells  about  50  ft.  deep,  containing  from  3  to  13  ft.  of  water  at  the
base  of  the  Inferior  Oolite.

The  occurrence  of  these  wells  to  the  south,  west,  east  and  north
of  Gataker's  renders  it  probable  that  there  is  water  everywhere  in  the
field  ;  especially  as  it  is  on  the  outcrop  of  the  Midford  Sands,  which
are  the  main  water-bearing  bed  of  tlie  district.

Mr.  G.  P.  Milnes,  the  water  surveyor  at  Stroud,  who  had  had
charge  of  the  job  for  Mrs.  HoUoway,  agreed  with  me  that  the  case
did  not  need  a  dowser.

No.  99.  Melksliam. — [A  well  was  sunk  21ft.  and  bored  a  further  18  ft.,
but  no  water  of  any  consequence  was  met  with.  In  the  extreme  corner  of
the  field  Tompkins  predicted  water  at  not  over  25  ft.  At  30  (or  22)  ft.  a
spring  came  up  like  a  fountain,  and  has  yielded  a  plentiful  and  unfailijig
supply. Frocecdimis  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  146-148.]

The  town  is  situated  just  in  the  middle  of  an  Oxford  Clay  vale.
The  unsuccessful  well  was  sunk  in  the  meadow  at  the  back  of  the
butter  factory,  and  33  yds.  from  the  river  Avon.  It  contained  a  little
water  which  percolated  from  the  river.

Mr.  Tompkins'  well  is  from  80  to  90  yds.  to  the  W.S.W.  of
the  first  well,  and  50  yds.  from  the  river  and  from  10  to  12  ft.  above
it.  The  water  is  II  ft.  from  the  surface.  The  engineer  said  there
was  a  good  supply,  and  he  did  not  think  it  had  to  do  with  the  river.
The  soil,  Mr.  Maggs'  son  said,  was  stiff  white  clay  and  blue  marl
without  any  rock,  and  he  thought  was  mostly  made  ground,  as  they
found  pipes  and  old  chain.  Since  the  feather  factory  had  cut  a  drain
20  ft.  deep,  some  30  yds.  to  the  south  of  the  well,  it  had  not  had  so
much  water  ;  this  a  neighbour  confirmed,  and  said  that  lots  of  water
was  met  with  in  the  drain  at  the  point  nearest  to  the  well.  There  is
also  a  well  which  supplies  an  old  house  some  40  yds.  from  Tompkins
well  on  the  side  remote  from  the  river.

Hence,  as  Tompkins'  well  is  in  what  appears  to  be  an  alluvial  flat,
where  water  was  known  to  exist  within  50  yds.  on  either  side,  I  cannot
regard  its  occurrence  at  the  point  indicated  by  him  as  surprising.  He
did,  liowever,  find  a  much  larger  supply  and  at  a  greater  distance  from
the  river  than  in  the  first  well.

Mr.  J.  Maggs,  who  has  revised  the  foregoing,  writes: — "In  my
opinion  the  general  tendency  of  [your]  report  is  to  minimise  the
importance  of  Tompkins'  well.

"But  the  facts  are:  The  first  well  was  absolutely  useless  as  a  water
supply,  whilst  the  present  one  rarely  fails  to  supply  3,000  to  5,000


xxxviil]


Appendix  A.


333


gallons  daily.  Further,  Tompkins  was  unacquainted  with  the  neigh-
bouring well.  Water  was  found  at  the  precise  depth  named  by
Tompkins,  and,  when  tapped,  the  men  at  work  in  the  well  had  to
hurry  up  or  would  have  been  overwhelmed  with  the  sudden  rush."

Two  attempts  I  made  to  interview  the  well-sinker  failed,  so  that
I  cannot  say  whether  Tompkins  hit  on  a  permeable  stratum  in  the
Oxford  Clay  or  on  a  permeable  patch  in  tlie  river  alluvium.

Group  (g) — Little  or  No  Surface  Sign  of  Water.

Lytes  Cary  [Additional  Case]. — Here  water  was  found  by  a  dowser
at  a  depth  of  25  ft.,  and  only  40  ft.  from  a  dry  well  60  ft.  deep.
Further  off  were  two  or  three  other  wells,  one  of  which  contained
some  potable  water,  which  lessens  the  improbability  of  finding  it,  but
the  spot  remains  an  unlikely  one,  nor  could  I  discover  any  reason  for
its  selection. I  have  described  the  case  more  fully  on  pp.  174-175.

Wimblehurst,  Horsham  [Additional  Case]. — On  this  estate,  which
is  half  a  mile  north  of  Hcrrsham  station,  water  has  been  found  at  two
places  by  Mr.  W.  H.  Mullins  for  the  owner,  Mr.  E.  Allcard.  The
well  at  the  house  is  76  ft.  deep  and  supplies  about  500  gallons  a  day.
Fifty  yards  to  the  north  of  this,  Mullins  found  water  at  25  ft.  only ;
the  amount,  however,  that  has  been  pumped  daily  is  comparatively
small,  less  than  100  gallons.

At  the  farm  in  North  Heath  Lane,  about  350  yds.  further  north,
is  a  well  67  ft.  deep  which  always  went  dry  in  dry  seasons,  though
bored  to  83  ft.  In  October,  1897,  at  a  point  50  yds.  to  tlie  east,  Mullins
predicted  a  spring  at  70  or  80  ft.,  and  pi'oceeded  to  sink  on  the  terms
of  "no  supply,  no  pay."  Water  was  struck  at  54ft.,  and  the  well,
which  is  60  ft.  deep,  holds  10  ft.  of  water  and  yields  a  large  supply.
The  rock  consisted  of  sand  and  sandstones  of  varying  hardness  with
some  lignite  and  ironstone  ;  the  water-bearing  bed  being  a  dove-
colored  marl.  These  beds  are  the  Upper  Tunbridge  Wells  Sand  ;  and
being  of  freshwater  origin,  and  hence  usually  lenticular  and  patchy,
may  be  expected  to  hold  water  in  pockets.  We  have  here  a  com-
paratively large  body  of  water  standing  17  ft.  above  the  bottom  of
the  old  well  and  33  ft.  above  the  bottom  of  the  boring  ;  the  surface
of  the  ground  being  practically  level,  with  no  surface  indication
whatever  to  show  that  there  should  be  water  at  one  place  rather
than  another.

Since  writing  this,  I  hear  that  at  the  two  cottages  by  the  road,
130  yds.  S.W.  of  Mullins'  well,  there  is  a  well  (marked  p.  on  the  25
inch  map),  only  11  ft.  deep,  which  always  supplies  enough  water  for  the
two  houses.  Mullins  did  not  put  his  well  in  the  direction  of  this
surface  water ;  still  its  occurrence  diminishes  the  argument  from  its


334


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


absence  in  the  deep  well,  and  makes  chance  discoveiy  a  possible
alternative.

Mr.  Allcard,  who  has  revised  the  foregoing,  writes,  November
16th,  1899: — "The  well  at  the  two  cottages  has  been  dry  lately,
whereas  Mullins'  well  at  the  farm  has  given  a  good  supply  all  the  dry
summer.  AVhat  we  should  have  done  without  it  I  do  not  know,
and  I  recommend  any  one  wanting  water  to  employ  him,  and  not
waste  money  on  chance  on  their  own  account."

No.  105,  Toy  Farm. — [The  following  abstract  is  from  the  accounts  by
the  steward,  Mr.  T.  W.  Pickarel,  written  in  1893  and  1896  {Proceedings
S.P.R.,  Yol.  XIII.,  p.  154).  It  includes  additions  received  from  him  dated
November  6th  and  25th,  1899,  and  the  whole  has  had  his  revision  :  —

About  30  years  ago  a  well  was  sunk  at  tlie  Farm  for  some  distance,  and
then  abandoned  on  account  of  bad  air.  After  this  another  well  was  dug,
167  ft.  deep,  bub  no  water  was  found.  Some  short  time  before  1893  I
personally  took  the  depth  ;  it  was  then  quite  dry,  and  the  old  men  living  at
the  place  never  remembered  water  there.

In  1893  Mr.  Tompkins,  of  Cliippenham,  was  engaged.  I  purposely  met
him  at  the  station  and  drove  him  to  the  place.  He  had  no  idea  to  what
part  of  the  estate  he  had  to  go  until  he  got  there,  and  he  had  no  pi'ivate
conversation  with  any  of  the  men  there.  He  went  over  the  ground  tracing
all  the  springs  to  one  point,  450  ft.  from  the  old  well  and  from  8  to  10  ft.
above  it,  and  said  that  water  would  be  found  at  a  depth  of  70  ft.  I  have
marked  on  the  enclosed  tracing  from  the  25  in.  map,  as  near  as  I  can
recollect,  the  lines  he  traced  (they  form  a  star  of  six  sinuous  Imes  over
100  yds.  long).

After  he  had  found  the  place  for  the  new  well  I  took  him  to  the  old  well,
which  had  been  covered  up  with  strong  timber  ;  to  mark  the  site  there  was  a
small  heap  of  mould  on  which  cucumbers  were  growing.  I  sent  him  over
this  with  his  twig,  which  made  no  movement.  I  then  told  him  he  had  been
over  an  old  well  several  times  :  I  told  him  the  depth,  and  asked  him  how  he
thought  it  possible  to  find  water  nearer  the  surface  such  a  short  distance
away. He  replied  that  the  old  well  was  out  of  the  run  of  the  springs.

We  dug  at  the  spot  selected,  and  the  first  20  ft.  of  chalk  was  rubbly
[probably  decomposed].  Nearly  70  ft.  down  we  came  on  a  level  bed  of
solid  flint  about  6  to  9  in.  thick  ;  and  at  70  ft.  on  open  fissures  mostly
vertical,  which  were  wet  as  though  water  had  recently  passed  through  ;
there  was  a  very  slight  dribble  at  the  time.^  At  about  118  ft.  we  struck  two
springs  on  opposite  sides  of  the  well  giving  a  strong  supply,  and  sunk  an
additional  6  ft.  before  the  water  gained  the  upper  hand.  The  well  is  124  ft.
deep,  in  ordinary  wliite  chalk  with  flints,  whicli  continued  to  the  bottom.
The  well  holds  12  ft.  of  water,  the  same  as  when  first  dug. The  water  at

1  Through  one  of  these,  according  to  Mr.  Sherlock,  a  young  man  at  the  Farm,
a  draught  of  air  came  with  sucli  force  as  to  be  heard  at  the  surface,  showing  an
open  fissure  of  great  extent.  Uc  said  tlie  well  takes  an  hour  to  pump  out,  and
refills  in  twelve  or  less.


xxxviil]


Appendix  A.


335


the  bottom  came  through  vertical  fissures  and  horizontal  veins,  and  princi-
pally from  the  west  side  from  the  directions  Tompkins  had  named  from
either  end  of  the  plantation  (an  enclosure  on  the  hillside  to  the  W.  and
S.W.).  We  have  since  bored  some  20ft.  to  obtain  a  better  supply,  but  T  do
not  think  it  has  improved  it.  The  old  well  has  been  filled  in  with  the
chalk,  etc.,  from  the  new  one.]

This  I  regard  as  the  best  case  I  have  yet  met  with  in  favour  of
the  dowser.  The  farm  is  situated  in  a  remote  hollow  of  the  >Sussex
downs,  midway  between  Glynde  and  Newhaven.  The  valley  of  which
it  is  a  ramification  falls  into  the  sea  at  Bishopstone,  three  miles  to
the  south  :  half  way  down  the  Newhaven  Water  Company  are  pump-
ing a  considerable  supply  frou)  wells.  The  old  well  was  close  to  the
farm,  and  the  level  of  the  ground  at  the  well  is  about  260  ft.  above
the  sea.

The  new  well  is  150  yds.  further  up  the  valley,  and  about  22ft.
above  the  old  well.  Hence  the  water  standing  12  ft.  deep  in  the  new
well  has  a  level  of  no  less  than  77  ft.  above  the  bottom  of  the  old
well.  The  new  well  is  in  chalk  with  flints.  On  the  heaj)  from  it,  shown
in  the  photograph  (p.  337),  I  found  a  spine  of  Cidaris  sce-ptrifera,  which
is  common  in  the  zone  of  Micrnster  cor-angiiinum,  so  that  the  thick
flint-bed  70  ft.  down  is  probably  the  strong  and  constant  M.  cor-
anguinum-tahvilsir  described  by  Dr.  Rowe  as  occurring  between
Beachy  and  Seaford  Heads  about  62  ft.  above  the  zone  of  J/,  cor-
testiodinarium  [Proc.  Geol.  Assoc.,  1900,  Vol.  XVI.,  pp.  322,  323,  329,
332,  336,  Plate  IX.).  According  to  this  reading  the  new  well  is  sunk
entirely  in  the  M.  cor-anguinum  chalk  and  to  within  8  ft.  of  its  base;
which  last  may  account  for  finding  some  other  fossils,  as  two  or  three
specimens  of  Uolaster  placenta,  which  are  commoner  in  the  lower  zone.
The  bottom  of  the  old  well  is  similarly  57  ft.  deep  in  the  zone  of
M.  cor-testudinarium  and  52  ft.  above  its  base — it  being  109J  ft.  thick
on  the  coast  {Ibid.,  p.  327).

Water  in  the  chalk  usually  lies  at  a  gentle  gradient^  which  is
however,  modified  by  the  density  of  particular  beds,  and  by  the
presence  of  fissures.  In  the  lithology  of  the  beds  as  seen  on  the
coast  there  is  nothing  to  explain  the  absence  of  water  in  the  old
well,  or  its  preferential  occurrence  in  the  new  well,  which  is
doubtless  due  to  fissures. Water  in  chalk  usually  flows  in  fissures,

1  The  gradient  of  water  in  chalk  variei?  considerably,  e.g.,  13  ft.  in  a  mile
(Clutteibuck)  ;  45  and  47  ft.  in  a  mile  (B)and) ;  these  are  normal  conditions.
Exceptionally  we  have  93  and  102  ft.  in  less  than  a  mile  (Bland);  155  ft.  in  half  a
mile  (Lucas) ;  and  50  or  90  ft.  in  less  than  100  yards  (Anstead).  This  last,  which
Lucas  says  is  greater  than  he  had  ever  met  with,  is  the  only  instance  I  have  found  at
all  parallel  to  that  at  Toy  Farm.  (See  Prestwich's  Water-bearing  Strata,  p.  62,  and
Trans.  Inst.  Surveyors  for  1878,  Vol.  X.,  pp.  306-334.)


336


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


i.e.,  in  the  main  planes  of  jointing,  which  in  this  district,  as  shown  by
the  direction  of  the  valleys,  run  N.  and  S.,  and  E.  and  W.

The  narrow  valley,  approximately  N.  and  S.,  in  which  the  farm
lies,  is  slightly  sickle-shaped.  The  house  with  the  old  well  is  about  the
middle  of  the  handle,  so  to  speak,  and  the  new  well  at  the  ferrule  end,
the  valley  at  this  point  being  contracted  by  a  slight  bulge  from  the
east,  which  may,  and  probably  does,  indicate  the  position  of  an
underground  lissure.  With  this  may  be  taken  the  fact,  noted  by  the
steward,  Mr.  Pickard,  that  the  water  flowed  into  the  well  from  the
sides  of  the  valley  rather  than  from  its  upper  end.

Whether  Mr.  Tompkins  noticed  a  slight  surface  feature  of  this  kind
— I  did  not  myself  till  I  was  leaving  and  saw  it  foreshortened — and,
if  he  did,  whether  he  drew  the  right  inference  from  it,  may  be  doubtful.
I  think  a  geologist  at  any  rate  would  have  taken  no  account  of  it,  but
would  have  advised  deepening  or  tunnelling  the  old  well.^  We  must
remember,  however,  when  we  are  dealing  with  automatism,  that  the
mere  existence  of  a  difference  in  the  valley  unnoted,  still  less  reasoned
on,  by  the  dowser,  may  have  been  felt  by  his  subconsciousness,  intensely
alert  for  every  indication,  and  so  have  determined  his  action — on
which,  unlike  the  geologist,  he  can,  when  his  judgment  fails,  fall  back.
He  can  revert  to  that  prehuman  thinking  of  which  Cowper  says  : —
"  Reasoning  at  every  step  he  treads,  man  yet  mistakes  his  waj',  whilst
meaner  things  whom  instinct  leads,  are  rarely  known  to  stray."

Hence,  at  Toy  Farm,  we  have,  I  think,  either  a  case  of  discovery
by  automatism,  or  else  of  accidental  coincidence.  In  the  latter  con-
nection we  may  note  that  where  water  has  not  been  found  at  one
end  of  a  property  it  might  be  natural  for  a  dowser,  in  the  absence  of
anything  to  guide  him,  to  try  for  it  at  the  other  end,  where  also  the
pump  at  (p)  may  have  suggested  it.

Since  writing  the  foregoing  I  have  heard  from  Mr.  David  Caplin,
Messrs.  Duke  and  Ockenden's  foreman,  who  writes  in  reply  to
inquiries  :  —

New  Road,  Buxted,  November  27th,  1899.
By  what  I  can  remember  about  the  well  I  sunk  at  Toy  Farm,  the  chalk
down  to  about  60  ft.  was  of  a  very  hard  yellow  nature  with  a  lot  of  black
flints.  Below  this  for  about  10  ft.  there  were  places  where  I  should  tliink
water  had  been  passing  through  at  one  time.  From  70  ft.  to  about  110  ft.
the  chalk  was  in  more  of  a  block,  but  not  so  hard. The  remainder  of  the

1  Profe.ssor  Barrett  asks  what  a  geologist  would  have  done  under  the  circum-
stances, He  would  hardly  have  sunk  the  old  well  another  50  ft.  to  the  nodular
beds  in  the  H.  |j?rt«i(s  zone,  as  they  are  here  too  doubtfully  water-bearing;  and,
failing  a  damp  place  to  drive  on,  the  best  plan  would  have  been  to  drive  from  the
bottom  on  the  chance  of  cutting  fissures.  Water  could  so  have  been  found,  and  the
probable  quantity  and  cost  computed  from  similar  work  in  the  district,  as  at  the
Brighton  Waterworks.


XXXVIII.]  ■■ Appendix  A. ...  337


Fig.  19.
Plan  of  Toy  Farm.

Frorn  the  25 in.  Ordnance  Stirvoj  Map  of  Sussex.
The  .strong  dotted  line  is  the  300  ft.  contour. The  well  at  the  farm,  to  the  east  of  the
old  well,  is  a  storage  tank  :  the  pump  at  (jj),  connected  witli  a  storm- water  tank,  wa,s
removed  after  the  sinking  of  the  new  well,  dowsed  by  Tompkins.


Fig.  20.

General  view  looking  up  valley  from  Toy  Farm  ;  Tompkins'  well  is  at  corner
of  road  to  left  of  shed.

2  B


•338


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


sinking  was  in  a  mucli  whiter  chalk  with  black  veins  in  it,  and  we  did  not  get
any  watei'  till  within  about  2  ft.  of  the  fissure,  which  I  believe  is  about  6  ft.

■  from  the  bottom  of  the  well. There  were  two  fissures  coming  into  tlie  well,
not  opposite  one  another,  but  one  I  should  think  about  due  west  and  the
other  north-west,  and  there  was  no  water  coming  from  the  east  side  at  all.
This  rather  favours  Tompkins'  idea  of  springs  meeting  at  a  point

'  than  mine  of  a  main  east  and  west  fissure  ;  Mr.  Pickard,  however,
mentions  spi'ings  from  opposite  sides.  The  point  could  only  be  settled,
if  at  all,  by  examining  the  well,  which  I  was  unable  to  do  at  the  time
of  my  visit  owing  to  the  obstacles  of  the  pump  and  staging.


CONCLUSION.

Out  of  21  cases  of  a  water-supply  obtained  by  means  of  a  dowser,
which  I  have  now  personally  examined  on  the  spot,  there  are,  in  my
opinion,  only  three — the  three  last  described — which  may  be  called
evidential  of  some  supernormal  faculty.  To  these  may  perhaps  be
added  the  partial  evidence  at  Melksham  (No.  99)  ;  and  at  Warnham
Lodge  (No,  58,  described  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  279),  where,  though  the  bed
was  known  to  be  water-bearing,  the  dowser  had,  I  found,  succeeded
in  predicting  a  dry  place.  I  have  thus  met  with  from  three  to  five
cases,  or  from  15  to  25  per  cent.,  in  which  his  success  could  not  have
been  due  to  information  normally  acquired.

In  the  other  cases,  while  the  dowser  may  have  known  but  a  part
of  what  I  describe,  I  could  seldom  feel  certain  what  he  did  or  did  not
know.  From  what  I  have  seen  of  Somersetshire  dowsers  at  work,  I
agree  with  Professor  Barrett  that  they  do  not  seek  for  information —
neither  do  they  avoid  it,  and  in.  the  general  conversation  that  ensues
when  the  folks  come  out  to  see  the  watei-finding  it  would  be  surprising
if  something  was  not  said  about  existing  water.  Firmly  believing  in
an  external  force  moving  the  rod,  the  dowsers  seek  for  water  as  one
might  seek  for  iron  with  a  compass,  and  a  group  of  them  over  a
particular  peg  will  confirm  each  other's  indications  with  as  much
satisfaction  as  if  "  suggestion  "  had  never  been  heard  of.  But  as
Professor  Barrett  has  shown  that  the  involuntary  motion  of  the  rod
is  due  to  unconscious  suggestion,  of  normal  or  supernormal  origin,
— the  subconsciousness  standing  ready  to  act  on  the  slightest  hint — •
we  must  make  sure  that  normal  hints  have  been  kept  out  of  our  experi-
ments before  we  can  use  them  as  arguments  for  the  supernormal.  It
seems  to  me,  therefore,  that  most  of  the  success  in  dowsing  (say  three-
fourths)  may  be  attributed  to  information  reaching  the  dowser  in  a
normal  way,  the  subconscious  synthesis  of  which  determines  the
movement  of  the  rod.  The  evidential  fourth  may  be  due  to  chance
coincidence,  or  to  some  yet  undiscovered  faculty.


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  A.


339


■  The  popular  vogue  which  dowsing  has  obtained  in  this  country,
and  which  appears  to  be  increasing,  is  due  to  something  more  than
mere  success.  The  involuntary  but  visible  movement  of  the  twig
inspires  the  dowser  with  a  confidence  in  himself,  and  his  employers
with  a  confidence  in  him,  that  no  amount  of  reasoning  would.  This
confidence  in  subconscious  pronouncements,  which  is  as  old  as  humanity,
implies  here  a  belief  in  some  supernormal  relation  between  the  rod  and
water.  If  existing,  and  involving  the  dowser's  mind,  my  own  opinion
is  that  it  is  likely  to  show  itself  in  the  same  way  as  other  sub-
conscious faculty,  i.e.,  fitfully  and  occasionally.

It  is,  I  suppose,  well  within  the  mark  to  assume  that  three-fourths
of  most  automatisms  are  subjective,  i.e.,  revivals  of  memory,  or  dream-
like imagination,  and  that  one-fourth  is  a  liberal  estimate  for  the
supernormal.  To  suppose,  then,  that  the  supernormal  element  in
dowsing,  if  such  there  be,  will  appear  in  any  larger  proportion,  seems
to  me  highly  improbable.  We  may  expect  it  to  form  a  residuum
which  will  be  discovered  only  when,  as  in  stellar  parallax,  many
concurrent  causes  have  been  eliminated.  This  is  what  I  have
attempted  to  do  in  this  report.  .


Note.

[The  foregoing  able  report  by  Mr.  Westlake  shows  on  the  one
hand  the  value  of  investigation  on  the  spot  by  a  competent  geologist,
and  on  the  other  how  much  easier  it  is  to  be  wise  after  an  event  than
before  it.  Moreover,  with  laudable  anxiety  to  avoid  any  bias  in
favour  of  the  dowser,  Mr.  "Westlake  has  no  doubt  gone  to  the  opposite
extreme.  For  he  assumes  the  dowser  possessed  minute  local  and
stratigraphical  knowledge,  had  inspected  all  existing  wells,  and  had
ability  to  draw  inferences  from  all  these  data.  These  assumptions
are  not  justified.  The  dowser,  usually  an  ignorant  man,  is  brought
into  a  district  he  has  probably  never  seen  before,  he  asks  no  questions,  .
but  immediately  sets  to  work  perambulating  the  ground  with  his
forked  twig,  and  the  whole  business  is  over  in  a  very  short  time.
If  under  similar  conditions,  and  before  opening  the  ground,  a  field  .
geologist  would  tell  us  whether  the  dowser's  prediction  is  likely  to  be
right  or  wrong,  that  would  be  a  fairer  test  of  whether  the  dowser's
success  is  mainly  due  to  "a  sharp  eye  for  the  ground,"  and  I  hope  '
this  test  will  be  made  by  any  who  may  have  the  opportunity.  I
agree,  however,  with  the  general  conclusion  arrived  at  by  Mr.  West-  •
lake,  but  think  that  probably  a  larger  percentage  of  the  dowser's
success — especially  of  certain  dowsers — is  due  to  some  cause  at  present
unknown  to  science. — W.  F.  B.]

2  h  2


340


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


APPENDIX  B.

NOTE  ON  THE  GEOLOGY  OF  SOMERSET  IN  RELATION  TO

DOWSING.

By  E.  Westlake,  F.G.S.  .

The  mineralised  ridge  of  the  Mendip  Hills  just  above  the  middle
of  the  county  has  been  the  seat  of  mineral-dowsing  since  the  time  of
Queen  Elizabeth.  The  practice  was  probably  introduced  into  Corn-
wall simultaneously,  but  has  become  practically  extinct  for  this
purpose  in  both  localities.  In  Somersetshire,  however,  local  conditions,
favouring  the  later  application  of  the  rod  to  water-finding,  have  pre-
served its  use  to  the  present  day.  The  Mendip  itself  consists  of
permeable  Palseozoic  rocks — Mountain  Limestone  on  a  core  of  old
Red  Sandstone — in  which  the  water  for  the  most  part  sinks  to  too
great  a  depth  to  be  reached  by  wells.  It  is  the  Secondary  rocks  lying
to  the  north  and  south — the  Trias,  Lias,  and  Oolite — forming  what
De  Ranee  calls  a  "  supra-pervious "  series  and  yielding  underground
water,  which  have  determined  that  Somersetshire  and  not  Cornwall
shall  be  the  centre  of  water-dowsing.

The  two  last  (Jurassic),  which  occupy  about  half  the  area  of  the
county,  may  be  described  as  alternations  of  clays  and  limestones,  the
sand  beds  being  few  and  subordinate.  The  Oolites,  especially  in
the  upper  part,  consist  of  clays  often  of  great  thickness,  alternating
with  massive  limestones  forming  reservoirs  in  which  it  is  compara-
tively easy  for  a  geologist  to  predict  water ;  although  even  here,
the  limestones  being  well  consolidated,  success  where  quantity  is
required  may  depend  upon  the  accidental  striking  of  a  water-bearing
fissure.

In  the  Lower  lAas,  which  forms  most  of  the  low-lying  arable  land
of  the  county,  clays  and  limestones  alternate  every  few  feet  or  inches,
♦  and  are  alike  impermeable,  as  De  Ranee  indeed  terms  the  whole
formation.  When  uncovered  in  the  quarries  they  are  seen,  however,
to  be  traversed  by  cracks  and  occasional  faults,  like  much-skated-upon
ice,  which  allow  of  a  slow  percolation  and  the  storage  of  small  bodies
of  water.  ^  There  is  no  record  of  any  copious  supply,  and  the  finding
even  of  a  domestic  supply  depends  on  a  chance  meeting  with  these
water-bearing  joints  of  which  there  is  no  sign  at  the  surface.  This,
which  is  the  geologist's  extremity,  is  the  dowser's  opportunity  ;  or,  in

J  Water  not  only  sinks  through  the  Lias,  but  rises  through  it,  as  in  the  springs  of
Bath  and  Cheltenham.


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  B.


341


other  words,  it  is  not  surprising  that  where  common-sense  ends,  the
uncommon-sense  attributed  to  the  dowser  should  be  in  demand.  The
water,  it  is  true,  is  sometimes  impure,  the  fissured  character  of  the
formation  being  more  favourable  to  pollution  near  farms  or  villages
than  to  purification.  Thus  at  the  town  of  Somerton  the  well  water
was  analysed  by  the  Rivers  Pollution  Commission  and  found  to  be
nearly  all  dangerously  polluted. ^

We  may  note,  moreover,  that  dowsing  is  not  carried  on  on  the
Somersetshire  moorlands,  which  comprise  the  high- lying  impermeable
Devonian  areas  of  Exmoor  and  the  Quantocks  drained  by  surface
streams,  and  the  low-lying  alluvial  levels  debouching  on  the  Bristol
Channel  where  water  lies  near  the  surface.  Cornwall  also  consists  of
palaeozoic  clay-slate  ("  killas  ")  with  granite  and  other  igneous  rocks,
all  of  which  throw  off  the  water,  except  the  little  that  percolates  in
fissures.

There  are  two  main  types  of  underground  water — what  may  be
termed  hed-water,  or  seepage,  filtering  through  the  pores  of  beds ;  ^
and  fissure-ivatey;  or  drainage,  flowing  through  their  joints.^  The
first  type  characterises  permeable  beds,  the  second  the  impermeable.
To  the  latter  condition  the  consolidation  due  to  ages  tends  to  bring
all  the  aqueous  rocks  ;  all  the  igneous  are  so  from  the  time  of  cooling  :

1  The  local  dowser,  however,  an  old  farmer,  has  proved  equal  to  the  occasion,
and  pfuarantees  a  pure  supply  by  "andalyzing  "  the  water,  as  he  terms  it,  by  means
of  two  twigs  held  simultaneously.

2  There  is  no  English  term  for  this  :  "  interstitial  water,"  or  "  quarry- water,"  is
properly  the  water  held  in  the  capillary  pores  of  a  rock  and  not  expelled  short  of  dry-
ing. The  Scotch  dialect  word,  ieeparje,  is,  however,  used  in  the  United  States  to
designate  the  water  that  soaks  through  and  oozes  from  the  soil,  and  is  so  employed
by  Mr.  King  (see  under).  It  has  the  sense  of  oozaye,  and  contrasts  with  drainage
(water  flowing'  freely  in  non-capillary  channels).

3  The  movement  of  underground  water,  or  ground  water  as  it  is  called  (Germ.
Grundwasser) ,  has  just  been  elaborately  treated  in  two  papers  by  Messrs.  F.  H.
King  and  C.  S.  Slichter,  in  the  19th  Annual  Report  of  the  United  States  Oeoloyical
Survey,  1899,  Part  II.,  pp.  59-294,  295-384  ;  Washinyton.  The  motion  of  water  in  the
pores  of  beds,  typically  sands  and  sandstones,  is  very  thoroughly  discussed  both  from
the  experimental  side  and  from  the  mathematical  laws  of  capillarity.  The  avithors
allow,  however,  that  their  conclusions  are  radically  modified  by  the  occurrence  of
fissures,  and  that  the  actual  motion  of  the  water  is  very  different  from  what  it  would
be  in  homogeneous  beds  in  which  percolation  proceeded  through  the  pores
alone.  Thus,  in  the  Dakota  artesian  basin,  which  consists  of  Cretaceous  sands
and  sandstones  particularly  favourable  for  the  storage  and  transmission  of  water,  Mr.
King  shows  that  the  largest  theoretical  seepage,  or  capillary  flow,  is  only  one-sixth  of
the  observed  flow  (Ibid.,  p.  249),  so  that  about  80  per  cent,  must  take  place  through
fissures.  In  less  permeable  beds  this  proportion  is  probably  largely  exceeded.  Thus,
in  a  flume  of  the  West  Los  Angelos  Water  Company,  the  observed  flow  exceeded  the
largest  capillary  computed  nearly  tenfold  (Ibid.,  p.  255).  Mr.  Slichter  appends  a
list  of  79  papers  on  the  subject,  chiefly  in  German.


342


Professor'  W .  F.  Barrett.


[part


such  rocks  are  seen  in  the  Palaeozoic  of  Cornwall,  Wales,  the  Lake
district,  etc.  ^

Bed-water  is  the  more  tvsual  form,  in  the  sense  of  being  the  one
most  met  with  in  the  populated  lowlands.  But  as  we  pass  from  the
looser  rocks  in  the  south-eastern  counties  to  the  more  consolidated  in
the  west,  the  proportion  of  fissure-water  increases,  till  in  the  moun-
tains there  is  nothing  else.  Tending  to  keep  in  compartments,  it  is
difficult  for  a  geologist  to  predict  its  level,  and  still  more  its  exact
place  or  quantity.  In  these  Palffiozoic  districts,  however,  surface
water  is  usually  abundant  and  good,  and  the  dowser  is  superfluous  ;
and  so  also  in  the  Tertiary  where  the  rocks  hold  only  bed-water.
His  happy  hunting  ground  lies  therefore,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the
intermediate  conditions  of  the  Secondary  rocks,  such  as  exist  in
Somersetshire.

E.  W.


^  An  illustration  from  Llanelly  is  furnished  by  Mr.  J.  P.  Young,  who  says  in  a
letter  to  Professor  Barrett : — "  In  the  Coal  Measures  exposed  in  a  new  dock  near  here
numerous  springs  have  been  intersected,  issuing  with  considerable  force  through
fissures  in  the  rock,  some  of  which  were  horizontal  whilst  others  were  vertical.  In  a
new  coal  pit  they  are  sinking  near  my  residence  I  noticed  the  same  thing,  showing
beyond  dispute  that  underground  water  in  this  and  similar  districts  does  circulate
through  fissures,  or  follows  the  dip  of  the  strata,  and  that  intervening  portions  at
some  distance  below  the  surface  may  be  quite  dry. "


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  G.


343


APPENDIX  C.
Use  of  the  Rod  in  the  Search  for  Mineral  Lodes.

Owing  to  the  length  to  which  the  present  Report  has  grown,  I  have
been  compelled  to  postpone  the  publicatioia  of  the  mass  of  evidence


Fig.  21.

Frorn  G.  Aijricolas  "Z»c  Re  Metallka  "  (Baste,  1546).

1  have  collected  regarding  the  use  of  the  rod  in  the  search  for  mineral
veins. As  already  mentioned,  this  use  goes  back  to  a  period  long


344


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


anterior  to  the  first  employment  of  the  rod  in  the  search  for  under-
ground water.  The  introduction  of  the  virgula  divina,  or,  as  it  should
be  called,  virgula  furcata,  into  England  took  place,  I  have  little  doubt,
in  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  when  German  miners  were  brought
over  to  develop  the  mineral  wealth  of  Cornwall.  They  appear  to  have
brought  with  them  their  scMag-ruihe  (striking-rod)— our  modern
forked  divining-rod — and  the  phrase  "striking"  the  vein,  now  extended
to  "  striking  "  oil,  etc.,  is  probably  a  survival  in  modern  English  of  the
term  used  by  these  old  German  miners.  The  word  "  dowsing-rod  "  is,
I  venture  to  think, — with  all  deference  to  my  philological  friends, —
the  translation  of  schlag-riUhe  into  middle  English. (See  note  to  p.  135.)

On  p.  343  is  a  picture  (Fig.  21)  of  these  German  miners  at  work
with  their  virgula  furcata.  It  is  taken  from  the  edition  published
at  Basle  in  1546  of  the  great  folio  on  mining,  De  re  Metallica,  by
G.  Agricola.  Successive  scenes  are  shown  in  one  picture  :  at  A  the
dowser  is  traversing  the  ground  ;  at  B  he  has  struck  ore,  which
on  digging  is  subsequently  found  and  pointed  out  by  two  overseers.
The  cutting  of  the  rod  from  a  willow  is  seen  on  the  right.  The
serious,  business-like  air  of  the  men  holding  the  rod  is  evident ;  this
is  also  apparent  in  another  woodcut  to  be  found  in  an  edition  of
Sebastian  Munster's  Cosmography,  published  in  1550.  These  are  the
earliest  authentic  descriptions  and  representations  of  the  modern
forked  divining  rod  that  I  have  been  able  to  discover.  ^  Another  early
picture  of  dowsing  for  minerals  (from  a  rare  Italian  work  on  mining)
is  given  on  p.  345  ;  a  photograph  was  taken  by  permission  from  the
copy  in  the  British  Museum.

From  Cornwall  the  use  of  the  rod  spread  to  the  lead  mines  in  the
Mendips,  and  in  the  17th  century  it  was  widely  employed  in  the
search  for  ore  in  that  district  of  Somersetshire.  Billingsley,  in  his
General  Vietu  of  Somerset,  published  in  1797,  gives  a  lengthy  account  of
its  use  and  of  the  esteem  in  which  the  rod  was  held  in  his  time  for  the
discovery  of  lead  ore.  But  as  the  mines  became  exhausted  the
dowsers  found  employment  in  the  search  for  underground  water. A  few

1  Chfvreul  and  other  writers  attribute  the  earliest  description  of  the  rod  to  the
alchemist  who  went  by  the  name  of  Basil  Valentine,  quoting  a  passage  from  his
Letztes  Testament,  in  which  the  use  of  the  rod  {schlag-i-uthe)  in  the  search  for  ore
is  described,  and  erroneously  giving  a  date  in  the  15th  century  for  that  work.  The
first  edition  of  Basilius  Valentinus.  .  .  His  Last  Will  and  Testament  was  dated
1657,  and  translated  from  Fratris  B.  V,  .  .  Gelieime  Biicher  oder  letzes  Testament
(1645).  Mr.  Westlake  tells  me  that  this  is  abridged  from  Bergwerckschatz,  etc.
(1618),  edited  in  1600  by  Elias  Montanus,  a  physician  of  Brieg,  in  Silesia.  The
authorship  is  attributed  in  a  concluding  poem  to  Nicolaus  Soleas,  but  whether
— as  an  MS.  note  on  the  title-page  of  the  copy  in  the  British  Museum  says —
"  genuinus  Autor  h]  libri  fuit, "  is  uncertain.  This  earlier  work  describes  the
schlag-ruthe  and  other  rods  at  much  greater  length.


xxxviil]


Apjjendix  C.


845


Fig.  22.

From  M.  A.  Montalbano's  "  Pratica  Minerale  "  [Bologna,  1678).


346


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Somerset  dowsers  still  use  the  rod  in  the  search  for  lead  and  zinc  ore,
and  it  was  important  to  make  a  strict  experimental  test  of  such
dowsers, — under  the  supervision  of  a  competent  geologist, — before
they  disappeared  altogether.  Mr.  Westlake,  F.G.S.,  kindly  undertook
to  do  this  for  me,  and  the  authorities  of  the  Friends'  school  at  Sidcot
generously  placed  their  grounds  at  our  disposal  for  this  purpose.  The
following  Report  gives  the  result  of  Mr.  Westlake's  experiments  with
the  different  dowsers  he  employed.  Some  of  these,  however,  were
water,  and  not  mineral  dowsers.  This  should  be  borne  in  mind  in
reading  the  Beport,  for  if  the  detection  of  surface  indications  affords
an  explanation  of  the  dowser's  success,  as  some  maintain,  then  the
results  obtained  with  dowsers  unaccustomed  to  search  for  mineral  ore
ought  not  to  show  greater  success  than  chance  coincidence  would
account  for,  whereas  the  report  shows  that  they  do.


EXPERIMENTS  IN  MINERAL-DOWSING  AT  SIDCOT.
By  E.  Westlake,  F.G.S.

Dowsing  for  mineral  in  the  Mendips  has  been  practised,  as  we  know
from  various  historical  notices,  for  the  past  250  years.  On  visiting,  in
the  course  of  an  inquiry  into  water-dowsing  in  1899,  the  mining
villages  towards  the  western  end  of  the  hills,  I  found  that  mining
operations  had  ceased  some  eighteen  or  twenty  years  back.  I  inter-
viewed one  or  two  of  the  old  dowsers  still  living,  who  had  used
their  art  in  foi'mer  times,  but  found  it  was  not  now  possible  to  obtain
details  or  verification  of  the  circumstances.

The  only  course  open  seemed  therefore  to  be  to  make  fresh  trials
with  those  dowsers  who  professed  themselves  able  to  find  mineral.
Several  acres  of  land  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Winscombe  belonging
to  a  Friends'  school,  which,  while  known  to  be  mineralised,  had  not
been  mined,  offered  a  favourable  spot  for  experiment.  I  accordingly
went  over  the  ground  with  four  dowsers  independently,  viz. : —

(1)  Thomas  Day,  of  Shipham,  an  old  mining  dowser,  who  professes
to  be  able  to  find  lodes,  not  necessarily  mineralised.

(2)  Rowland  Pavey,  a  young  miller  of  Cheddar,  who  professes  to
find  underground  objects  by  some  secret  art ;  (had  not  found  mineral).

(3)  Thomas  Foord,  a  labourer  of  Shipham,  an  inexperienced  dowser.

(4)  William  Kerslake,  of  Wells,  a  tailor  and  professional  water-
finder  ;  (had  never  searched  for  minerals  before).

The  localities  tried  were  within  a  space  of  300  yards  east  and  west,
and  100  yards  north  and  south,  and  comprised  : —

(a)  An  old  cricket  field  west  of  the  school,  at  a  quarry  in  which
ore  had  been  found  some  twenty  years  since  by  Thomas  Day.

(b)  Some  ground  in  and  adjoining  the  girls'  tennis  court.


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  G.


347


(c)  A  burial  ground  in  which  ore  had  been  found  in  1866,  and  a
garden  adjoining.

(d)  A  ploughed  field  a  little  to  the  north.

The  soil  at  these  places  is  mostly  thin ;  the  underlying  rock  is  the
Dolomitic  Conglomerate  at  the  base  of  the  Trias,  which  consists  of
pebbles  of  various  Palteozoic  rocks,  the  whole  weathering  reddish,  and
having  a  southerly  dip  of  a  few  degrees.  The  rock  is  traversed  by
occasional  lodes  and  veins,  nearly  vertical,  running  east  and  west,  and
carrying  the  ores  of  lead,  zinc,  iron,  and  manganese ,  but  they  are
here  too  thin  to  have  been  worth  mining.

The  points  indicated  by  each  dowser  separately  I  marked  in
such  a  way  as  to  be  imperceptible  to  those  who  came  after,  and
I  also  so  arranged  that  they  did  not  have  an  opportunity  of
communicating  with  one  another.  I  went  round  with  each  dowser,
but  except  in  a  general  way  I  did  not  know  where  the  previous
marks  were,  and  thei'efore  sources  of  error  from  conscious  or  un-
conscious collusion  may  be  considered  excluded.  With  each  dowser
the  twig  turned  over  a  space  of  a  yard  or  two,  corresponding
probably  with  their  ideas  of  the  width  of  the  lodes,  and  I
marked  the  central  points.  Pavey  indicated  5  places.  Day  28,
Foord  2,  and  Kerslake  26.  The  marks  are  numbered  consecutively
1  to  61  on  the  accompanying  plan,  and  the  dowsers  who  indicated
them  are  distinguished  for  brevity  by  an  initial,  e.g.,  P3  =  mark  No.  3
indicated  by  Pavey  (see  plan  on  p.  350).

At  seven  places  two  of  the  dowsers  approximately  coincided  within
distances  varying  from  l^  ft.  to  8  ft.  Two  of  these,  adjoining  the
tennis  court,  I  found  to  be  in  made  ground,  and  did  not  open  up  on
account  of  the  expense.  Of  the  other  five  I  oiaened,  one  in  the  field
and  one  in  the  garden  showed  only  solid  rock  ;  in  the  remaining
three  we  found  a  well-defined  vein  of  ore.

At  three  other  single  marks  I  opened  up  there  was  no  sign  of  ore,
though  at  one  or  two  Mr.  Clark  thought  there  were  signs  of  a  lode.^
In  reckoning  the  dowsers'  success  their  marks  should  be  taken  as
extending  a  yard  on  either  side  the  centre.

The  results  are  given  on  the  next  page  in  tabular  form.

At  No.  4,  though  Kerslake's  mark,  K  56,  was  4  ft.  south  of  the
vein,  it  was  only  2  ft.  from  the  south  wall  (foot  wall)  of  the  lode,  and
1  ft.  from  the  buff  coloration  due  to  the  same,  and  was  hence  a  practi-
cal success.  Day's  mark  3  ft.  further  south  is  neither  a  success  nor
altogether  a  failure  ;  it  may  perhaps  reckon  as  half  successful.  This
No.  4  pair  of  marks  I  had  thought  before  digging  to  be  the  most

1 1  am  indebted  to  Mr.  George  Clark,  a  Mendip  and  Kimberley  miner  living  at
Winscombe,  for  the  interest  he  has  taken  in  these  experiments.


348


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


promising,  on  account  of  two  others,  D  33  and  K  58,  in  the  Friends*
burial  ground  on  the  east  side  of  the  hedge,  having  also  coincided
within  6  ft.


No.  I

Place.

Nos.  of
marks.

Distance
between
marks.

Length,
width  and
depth  of  hole
in  feet.

Nature  of  rock,  etc.

^  1

Old  cricket
field

D9,  P3

8  ft.

10  X  2  X  *

Conglomerate  with  an  inch
vein  of  calamine  (ZnCoj)
carrying  lumps  of  aalena
(PbS).  Vein  1ft.  "north
of  D  9  and  6  ft.  south
of  3  P.

ental  place!
at

2

D11,K44

U  ft.

6|  X  2  X 1

Solid  conglomerate.

3

Garden

D28,  K55

2 J  ft.

5x2x2
to  3

Decomposed  conglomerate
on  solid  ditto.

Five  coincidi
dug

4

» )

D30,  Ko6

2|  ft.

16x2x2^

Conglomerate  with  a  lode
9  ft.  wide  having  a  high
dip  to  N.,  and  carrying  a
half  inch  vein  of  galena.
Vein  4  ft.  north  of  K  56
and  7  ft.  north  of  D  30.

5

c

6
7

rtn  VT  a  1  fyvr^nn  ri

'J  lb.

7  y  9  4

t A  ^  A  ^

OoTio'lovYiP'raf.p  wihli  a  lonp^
carrying  an  inch  vein  of
galena.  Vein  3  ft.  north
of  D  33,  and  9  ft.  north
of  K  58.

WO  ditto
)t  dug  at

Tennis  court
? )

U  Li  ^  .tV  t)U

D  20,  K  54

0  It.

U  ft.

:}

These  points  are  on  the
strike  of  the  No.  1  vein.

H  s

(  ^

Old  cricket
field

K36

6x2xU

Conglomerate  with  an  E.
and  W.  joint, which  Clark
thought  might  widen  in
depth  and  carry  a  lode.

ee  single  mark;
dug  at

9

P4

—

6x2x3

3  ft.  rotten  conglomerate
on  solid  ditto.  Clark  said

tion  of  a  lode  here,"  but
there  were  no  defined
walls  or  sign  of  mineral.

Thr

10

V

Ploughed  field

P5

6x2x4

to  5

4  ft.  of  reddish  loam  on
conglomerate  :  no  min-
eral.

1  The  figures  in  this  column  correspond  with  the  large  black  figures  on  the  plan.


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  G.


349


Subsequently  to  the  above  dowsing  I  was  told  by  Frank  Knight
that  the  grave  of  William  Tanner,  who  died  November  8th,  1866,  had
yielded  lead  ore  ;  he  was  watching  the  meteors  of  that  date  from  the
school-house  roof,  and  noticed  that  the  grave-diggers  stopped  blasting,
thinking  the  end  of  the  world  had  come,  and  that  graves  were
superfluous ;  they  afterwards  sold  the  ore  in  Bristol  for  25s.  The
dowser  Day  was  aware  that  ore  had  been  found  in  one  of  the  graves,
and  after  he  had  made  his  marks  I  asked  him  to  point  it  out,  but  he
could  not  identify  it.  He  might,  of  course,  have  retained  some  latent
memory  of  its  whereabouts ;  still  as  the  gravestones  are  small,  uniform
in  size,  and  flat  on  the  ground,  and  hence  neither  legible  nor
distinctive  12  yds.  away,  I  was  interested  to  find  on  plotting  the
plan  that  his  mark,  D  33,  was  exactly  on  the  straight  line,  18  yds.
long,  joining  the  No.  4  vein  with  W.  Tanner's  grave.

At  this  point  (No.  5)  I  opened  the  gi-ound  to  verify  the  lode,  and
found  it  running  just  north  of  D  33  towards  a  point  2  or  3  yds.  north
of  the  grave  aforesaid.  Clark  said  it  was  "very  promising  lead-bearing
gi-ound,"  and,  on  sinking  in  it  to  a  depth  of  4  ft.,  we  struck  the  vein.
Day's  mark  was  1^  ft.  south  of  the  foot  wall,  and  3ft.  south  of  the
vein — another  success.  Kerslake's  mark,  K  58,  was  6  ft.  further
south  ;  so  that,  taking  the  two  sides  of  the  hedge,  each  dowser  made
one  decided  success  and  one  doubtful  one.

Taking  the  success  of  individual  dowsers.  Day,  the  miner,  was  right
in  2|  places  out  of  5  ( =  one  half).  As  he  had  in  former  years  seen
the  ore  at  the  adjoining  points,  and  knew  the  general  run  of  the  lodes,
it  m^iy  be  said  that  his  memory,  conscious  or  subconscious,  may  have
caused  the  twig  to  turn  at  the  right  places ;  and  this  view  is
favoured  by  the  circumstance  that  in  the  garden,  which  was  quite  shut
off  by  the  hedge  from  any  view  of  the  burial  ground,  he  was  5  ft.  off
the  lode.  Still,  in  making  this  criticism,  we  should  bear  in  mind  that
one  of  the  uses — according  to  Day,  the  chief  use — of  dowsing  in
practical  mining,  is  to  "pick  up  "  the  "lode  "  or  "  course  "  of  mineral
at  no  great  distance  from  its  working  face,  and  that  this  he  did  at
Nos.  9  and  33  with  absolute  accuracy,  and  of  course  without  the  ore
being  in  the  least  visible  anywhere.  Mr.  Knight  told  me  that  ore  had
also  been  found  at  the  school  at  the  S.W.  corner  of  the  inner  court,
near  D  27,  but  I  have  not  reckoned  this  anything  for  Day,  not  know-
ing how  far  he  knew  the  circumstances.

Kerslake,  the  tailor  from  Wells,  a  comparative  stranger  to  the
place,  was  right  in  places  out  of  5  (  =  one-third  nearly)  ;  I  may
have  told  him  that  ore  had  been  found  in  the  burial  ground,  but
beyond  this  his  success  was  not  derived  from  local  knowledge.

Pavey  had  a  partial  success  at  P  3  where  he  was  6  ft.  off  the  vein,
but  in  the  two  other  holes  dug  on  his  sole  indication  there  was  nothing


350


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[PAET


Fig.  23.


XXXVIII.]


351


whatever,  unless  we  reckon  Clark's  opinion  about  P  4.  His  propor-
tion of  success  was  thus  one-sixth.

Among  general  objections  which  may  be  taken  to  these  experiments,
which  I  could  only  do  quickly  and  extempore,  are  :  (1)  that  the  ground
was  known  to  be  mineralised  ;  (2)  that  the  miner  Day,  having  formerly
dowsed  over  the  property,  refused  to  waste  time  by  trying  over  the
northern  or  southern  portions  (he  made,  however,  one  N.  and  S.
traverse  of  the  cricket  field  without  result)  ;  (3)  that  to  save  the  time
of  the  other  dowsers  and  with  a  view  to  getting  coincidences  I  took
them  over  the  same  ground  ;  (4)  that,  by  way  of  encouraging  tb.em,  I
mentioned  to  one  or  other  that  ore  had  been  found  in  the  quarry  or
burial  ground,  and  must  therefore  assume  it  known  to  all.  While
such  points  make  it  difficult  to  calculate  whether  the  success  exceeds
chance  or  local  knowledge,  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  it  does.

The  probable  result  of  opening  the  ground  at  haphazard  may  be
judged  to  some  extent  by  the  section  exposed  in  the  turnpike  road,
which  lies  in  a  cutting  several  feet  deep  for  twice  the  distance  shown
on  the  plan,  but  shows  a  lode  only  at  one  place  opposite  the  quarry.
It  is  also  practically  certain  that  the  discovery  of  tlie  mineral  lodes
did  not  depend  on  any  surface  indications,  as  both  in  the  cricket  field,
garden,  and  burial  ground,  there  was  a  layer  of  turf  or  vegetable  soil
over  and  completely  concealing  the  lode.

These  experiments  in  their  practical  success  and  in  the  difficulty  of
proving  more,  are  in  a  line  with  ordinary  water-dowsing.  They  are,  I
think,  a  further  illustration  of  the  power  of  the  automatic  mind  to
gather  and  utilise  information  from  all  sources.  What  these  sources
are  can  only  be  settled  by  more  systematic  trials,  which  should  if
possible  take  the  form  of  tracing  known  objects,  the  chances  of  finding
which  can  be  calculated.  Such  are,  e.g.,  water  pipes,  gas  pipes,  electric
wires,  and  subways  carrying  water  or  mineral. ^  An  old  German
mining-book  describes  the  twig  as  used  to  find  where  to  sink  a  shaft
from  the  surface  of  the  ground  to  some  particular  point  in  the  mine.
With  known  objects  all  the  dowsers'  predictions  can  be  checked^  which
is  impossible  where,  as  in  the  above  experiments,  each  point  has  to  be
opened  up.  Opening  the  ground  to  find  unknown  objects  is  not  only
expensive  but  inconclusive,  as  the  dowser  may  always  maintain  that
the  object  will  be  found  at  a  greater  depth.

E.  W.


1  Mr.  Pavey  is,  I  understand,  prepared  to  trace  underground  objects  of  any  kind  ;
he  has  succeeded,  I  am  told  by  Mr.  M.  P.  Porch.  Magdalen,  Oxford,  in  finding
human  and  mammalian  fossils  in  the  Cheddar  Caves  beyond  the  result  of  chance
excavation.  '  .  .  .  ..


352


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


APPENDIX  D.
Paramelle.


The  story  of  the  Abbe  Paramelle  and  his  extraordinary  success  as
a  water-linder  (or  hydroscope  as  he  was  called)  is  so  little  known  in
England  that  it  is  worthy  of  more  than  a  passing  notice.  Paramelle
was  born  in  1790,  and  in  1818  was  appointed  cure  and  afterwards
Abbe  of  St.  Jean  L'Espinasse,  moving  from  there  to  St.  Cere  in  the
Department  of  Lot  in  the  south-west  of  France.  A  man  of  keen  obser-
vation and  scientific  spirit,  he  was  struck  with  the  remarkable  diflference
between  the  numerous  springs,  streams,  and  well-watered  area  of  the
eastern  half  of  the  Department  and  the  difficulty  with  which  water
was  obtained  in  the  twenty-four  arid  cantons  of  the  western  half.
Here  the  population  were  impoverished  by  having  to  expend  a  large
part  of  their  time  in  laboriously  carrying  water  from  distant  wells  to
supply  the  wants  of  their  families  and  their  cattle.  Prompted,  he
tells  us,  by  charitable  feelings,  he  spent  two  years  in  the  fruitless
search  for  springs,  in  the  hope  that  he  might  be  able  to  supply  the
poor  folk  of  the  arid  region  with  the  benediction  of  a  bountiful  water
supply.  In  this  he  failed,  and  got  the  reputation  of  searching  for  the
quantities  of  buried  treasure  which  the  English  were  supposed  to  have
left  behind  when  long  ago  they  evacuated  that  district.  He  then  set  to
work  to  compare  the  geological  characteristics  and  rainfall  in  the  two
regions  ;  the  arid  part  was  calcareous,  but  had  the  same  rainfall.  The
springs,  he  rightly  conjectured,  were  only  due  to  the  rainfall ;  where,
then,  did  the  rainfall  go  to  in  the  arid  region  ?  It  must  penetrate
the  soil  and  accumulate,  ultimately  making  its  way  underground  to
tlie  river  valleys.  Guided  by  his  own  observations,  Paramelle  was
gradually  led  to  put  his  theories  to  the  test,  and  found  them  verified.
He  then  travelled  further  afield,  and  at  last  he  tells  us  that  after  nine
years  of  exploration  and  observation  he  felt  sufficient  confidence  to  go  to
what  we  should  now  call  the  County  Council  of  the  Department  of  Lot
and  ask  them  to  place  a  certain  sum  at  his  disposal  to  test  his  theories
by  sinking  wells  in  certain  places  where  he  predicted  water  would  be
found  in  the  arid  communes.  The  Council  acceded,  and  in  1827
granted  him  a  sum  of  600  francs  to  make  experiments,  the  communes
that  were  benefited  to  contribute  an  equal  sum.  Eight  places  were
selected  by  Paramelle  in  as  many  communes,  but  it  was  considered  at
that  time  so  impossible  to  find  water  in  these  calcareous  plateaux  that
three  communes  refused  to  incur  the  expense,  though  five  who  did
were  in  each  case  rewarded  by  an  abundant  supply.


XXXVIII.]


A'jopendix  D.


353


In  the  proces  verbal  of  the  Council  of  the  Department  of  Lot  for
1829  these  remarkable  successes  are  recorded.  Paramelle, — now  the
learned  savant,  M.  I'Abbe  Paramelle, —  is  called  in  to  explain  his
theories,  and  a  further  sum  of  two  thousand  francs  placed  at  his
disposal  and  a  generous  I'ecognition  paid  to  his  learning  and  self-
sacrificing  devotion.  Two  years  later  the  Council  record  that  in
sixteen  out  of  seventeen  localities  the  predictions  of  Paramelle  had
been  verified,  a  perennial  water  supply  being  found  at  the  place,  depth,
and  of  the  volume  he  had  indicated.  His  fame  becoming  known,
applications  to  find  water  in  waterless  districts  poured  in  to  such  an
extent  that  with  his  Bishop's  permission  he  relinquished  his  ecclesiastic
duties  and  became  what  we  should  now  call  a  hydro-geologist,  what
he  called  a  "  geogiiostic,"  and  the  public  of  that  day  a  lujdroscope.
Disclaiming  the  infallibility  which  was  thrust  upon  him,  the  local
newspaper  accounts  of  the  period,  some  of  which  I  have  read,  all
speak  of  his  modesty  and  marvellous  success.  Many  explain  his
secret  as  a  gift  of  God,  others  as  the  work  of  the  devil.  The  poor
people,  however,  answered  very  much  in  the  words  of  the  blind  man
cured  by  our  Lord,  "  Whether  he  be  a  sorcerer  or  a  messenger  of
God  we  know  not ;  this  we  know,  that  whereas  we  were  perishing  for
want  of  water,  now  by  his  help  we  have  an  abundance."  By  per-
mission of  the  authorities,  Paramelle  hereafter  made  a  fixed  and
modest  charge  of  ten  to  forty-five  francs  for  his  services  in  each  case,
except  to  the  poor,  to  whom  no  charge  was  made  (I  am  afraid  this
would  not  satisfy  our  English  water-finders,  whether  geologists  or
dowsers),  and  for  twenty-one  years  he  spent  from  sunrise  to  sunset
every  day,  except  Sundays,  for  nine  months  in  every  year  at  the  work
of  water-finding.

In  184-3  the  proces  verbal  of  the  Council  General  of  Lot  records
that  in  their  department  alone  338  wells  had  been  dug  at  places
indicated  by  Paramelle,  and,  of  these,  305,  or  90  per  cent.,  yielded  an
abundant  supply  of  potable  water,  in  every  case  found  at  the  depth  he
had  predicted.  In  other  parts  he  had  also  found  683  sources  of  water
supply  ;  and  when  in  1854,  at  the  age  of  64,  he  practically  gave  up  his
active  work,  the  Abbe  asserts  that  in  25  years  he  had  located  over
10,000  sources  of  undergroimd  water,  and  he  estimated  that  between
8  and  9,000  wells  had  been  dug  at  the  sites  he  had  selected.  He
endeavoured  to  find  out  the  percentage  of  failures  he  had  had,  but  iu
spite  of  circulars  he  sent  out,  got  very  few  replies ;  he  believes,  however,
that  his  failures  were  under  5  per  cent,  of  his  total  trials.  Whether
5  per  cent,  or  10  per  cent.,  as  the  above  official  records  indicate  from  his
entire  results,  his  astonishing  success  is,  I  venture  to  think,  beyond
anything  I  have  heard  modern  expert  geologists  claim.  A  remarkable
testimony  to  the  value  of  his  work  I  found  in  an  old  number  of  the


354


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Journal  cV Agriculture  Pratique  for  April  1845.  The  Journal  quotes  a
letter  the  Prefect  of  Lot  wrote  to  the  Prefect  of  Versailles,  statinsr
that  up  to  that  time  about  6,000  new  sources  of  water  supply  in  30
departments  had  been  discovered  by  the  Abbe  Paramelle,  and  the
actual  money  value  of  the  springs  thus  found  was,  he  says,  estimated
at  not  less  than  four  to  five  million  francs.

In  1846  the  Academie  of  Reims  published  a  report  in  their
Comptes  Rendus  from  a  committee  of  six  of  their  members  appointed
to  enquire  into  Paramelle's  theory  and  work.  In  this  lengthy  and
careful  report  the  committee  express  their  high  opinion  of  Paramelle's
character  and  the  results  of  his  work,  and  quote  a  number  of  letters
and  certiticates  from  various  officials  in  different  parts  of  France,
testifying  to  his  success.  His  proportion  of  failures  is  estimated  as
rather  less  than  5  per  cent.  In  almost  every  instance  quoted,  the  depth
at  which  water  was  found  was  under  50  feet.  As  to  his  theory,  the
committee  report  that,  though  true  in  a  sense,  it  is  imperfect  and  not
always  applicable,  nor  do  they  consider  that  a  knowledge  of  it  would
enable  another,  not  possessed  of  Paramelle's  special  talents,  quick
recognition  of  all  surface  indications  and  long  practice,  to  be  equally
successful.  Paramelle  himself  declared,  however,  that  in  a  few  months
of  study  and  three  of  field  practice,  he  could  teach  anyone  of  ordinary
intelligence  all  that  he  knew.  That  might  be,  but  he  could  not
communicate  his  almost  unerring  instinct.^

Paramelle,  however,  unlike  most  prophets,  seems  to  have  had  more
honour  in  his  own  country  than  elsewhere.  His  success  was  declared
by  outsiders  to  be  impossible,  doubt  was  thrown  on  the  reality  or  per-
manence of  the  springs  he  had  found,  one  savant  asserts  that  his
procedure  was  unscientific  and  valueless,  whilst  a  writer  in  one  of
the  French  journals,  for  1842,  says  whatever  success  he  had  was  due
to  impressions,  sensations,  and  convulsions,  and,  doubtless,  diabolic
visions  that  he  experienced.  This  writer  adds:  "The  only  difference
between  Paramelle  and  other  sorcerers  is  that  he  conceals  the  diabolic
signs  he  receives,  glossing  over  his  magical  proceedings  with  a  lot  of
scientific  jargon."  ^  .

1  M.  Auscber,  in  his  recent  handbook  of  hydro-geology  {VArl  de  decouvrir  les
Sources;  Paris,  1899),  states  that  the  best  known  of  Paramelle's  pupils  was  M.  Amy
de  Pannessieres,  who  also  wrote  upon  the  discovery  of  underground  water.  But  I
do  not  know  of  his  writings  nor  of  any  record  of  his  success  as  a  water-finder.
M.  Auscher  refers  repeatedly  to  Paramelle's  work  and  successes,  although  his
theory  is  said  to  have  been  found  in  part  defective  or  erroneous.  Some  of  Paramelle's
occasional  failures  M.  Auscher  attributes  to  his  neglect  of  surface  indications,
such  as  the  comparatively  rapid  melting  of  snow  over  und;  rground  water,  local
mists,  the  character  of  the  vrgetation,  etc.,  but  of  some  at  least  of  these
Paramelle  was  aware,  and  it  is  difficult  to  know  to  what  extent  he  did  neglect  or
rely  on  them  in  practice.

2  L'Eclaireur  du  Midi,  Juillet,  1842.


xxxviil]


Ajypendix  D.


355


To  meet  his  critics  Paramelle  determined  to  publish  the  methods
which  had  guided  him.  He  states  that  in  1827  he  had  written  a
work  "on  the  art  of  discovering  springs."  This  he  revised  and
published  in  1856  ;  three  editions  were  quickly  sold,  a  German  trans-
lation was  made  by  the  Professor  of  Geology  in  Freiberg,  a  Spanish
translation  followed,  and  so  highly  was  the  work  esteemed  that  the
Spanish  Ministry  ordered  every  municipality  to  purchase  a  copy.  A
fourth  enlarged  French  edition  was  published  in  1896,  after  Paramelle's
death.  This  I  have  read,  and  if  the  earlier  ones  resemble  it,  I  do  not
hesitate  to  express  my  amazement  at  the  neglect  of  this  work  in
England.  The  wealth  of  geological  and  useful  practical  knowledge
gained,  through  field  observation,  by  this  French  Abbe  two  generations
ago  is  astonishing.  He  must  have  been  an  odd  mixture,  for  he
includes  in  his  work  a  number  of  laudatory  press  notices.  ^  Fr  om
these,  however,  we  gain  a  description  by  eye-witnesses  of  his  method
of  procedure ;  and  these  merit  some  attention.  First,  there  is  the
unimpeachable  evidence  of  one  of  the  most  distinguished  French
savmits,  M.  GeofFroy  St.  Hilaire,  who,  in  a  memoir  read  before  the
Paris  Academy  of  Sciences,  in  1836,  writes  as  follows  : — "  The  Abb^
Paramelle's  skill  in  discovering  springs  rests  on  the  science  of  observa-
tion, and  not  on  the  instinctive  movement  of  the  divining  rod.  He
has  acquired  by  practice  such  acuteness  of  observation  that,  after  a
single  and  rapid  inspection  of  the  surface  of  the  ground,  he  can
indicate  the  place  and  the  depth  of  any  underground  sources  that  may
exist.  His  success  has  been  so  remarkable  as  to  convince  the  most
incredulous."  Nearly  every  eye-witness  says  the  same  thing.  A
Journal  at  Aix  says  that,  "  Without  any  hesitation,  and  after  a  rapid
glance,  Paramelle  at  once  indicates  not  only  the  very  spot  where  to
sink  a  well,  but  the  depth  it  will  have  to  be  sunk  and  the  volume  of
water  that  will  be  obtained.  All  this  in  so  laconic  and  precise  a
fashion  that  scepticism  vanishes."  Another  journal,  Le  Rhutenois,
writes,  on  February  15th,  1837  : — "The  Abbe  Paramelle  simply  looks
round,  says,  '  Here  you  will  find  the  spring  at  such  a  depth  and  of
such  quantity ;  it  comes  in  this  direction,  and  the  water  will  be  of
such  and  such  a  quality  '  " ;  and  so  on,  in  upwards  of  a  score  of  other
Press  notices  which  are  included  in  the  chapters  XXX.  and  XXXI.
of  Paramelle's  work. Similar  testimony  is  borne  in  the  Report  of  the

1  It  is  possible  that  some  of  these  laudatory  notices  were  inserted  after  Paramelle's
death  by  the  editor  of  the  fourth  and  last  edition,  the  only  edition  I  have  been  able
to  consult.  This  contains  the  preface  to  the  third  edition,  published  in  ISGo  ;  in  this
preface,  which  Paramelle  himself  wrote,  he  states  that  in  spite  of  some  hostile
criticism,  none  of  his  statements  have  been  controverted,  and  after  exercising  the
greatest  care  in  revision,  he  has  found  nothing  essential  to  withdraw.  Hence,  he  adds,
the  present  (third)  edition  is  merely  a  reproduction  of  the  earlier  ones  with  some
additional  facts  and  quotations  which  support  the  conclusions  he  had  reached.

2  C  2


356


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Commission  appointed  by  the  Academy  of  Reims  already  referred  to,
and  in  a  paper  published  in  1835  by  the  French  Societe  Centrale
d' Agriculture,  LVII<=  Cahier,  p.  326.1

The  last  chapter  of  Paramelle's  book  gives  a  very  interesting
summarjr  of  the  various  methods  that  had  been  adopted  in  ancient  and
in  modern  times  {i.e.,  before  the  present  century)  for  the  purpose  of
discovering  underground  water  ;  to  this  part  of  our  subject  we  may
return  later.

What  then  was  the  secret  of  Paramelle's  method  1  This  he  has
disclosed,  or  professed  to  disclose,  in  his  book,  U Art  de  Decouvrir  les
Sov.rces.  He  did  not  use  any  form  of  divining-rod  ;  he  tells  us  the
rod  would  never  turn  in  his  hands,  though  he  had  often  tried  it,  and
he  regarded  the  users  of  the  baguette  with  undisguised  contempt,

The  hypothesis  upon  which  he  worked,  to  state  it  in  the  most
general  form,  was  that  underground  water  behaves  precisely  like
water  that  is  visible  on  the  surface  of  the  earth.  Just  as  in  the  latter
case  waters  that  are  precijjitated  upon  the  surface  of  the  earth  and
fail  to  penetrate  the  superficial  soil,  gather  into  rivulets  and  join
streams  and  rivers,  following  in  their  course  certain  suitable  channels,
so  must  underground  waters  behave.  Thus  the  waters  which  percolate
through  the  upper  earth,  on  reaching  a  bed  of  impermeable  rock  or
clay,  will  form  into  little  filaments  of  water,  these  will  unite  into
rivulets,  which  again  will  join  larger  subterranean  water  courses,  and
so  on  until  they  finally  reach  the  surface  or  possibly  emerge  in  the  bed
of  a  river  or  lake.  Throughout  their  course  they  will  follow  hollows,
depressions  or  folds  in  the  impermeable  stratum  analogous  to  those
in  which  surface  waters  flow.  The  position  of  these  underground
channels,  our  author  asserts,  can  be  determined  by  observation  of
the  surface.  This  branch  of  his  subject  Paramelle  explains  with
much  detail,  but  it  will  be  sufficient  here  to  give  a  bare  outline  of
his  views.

Subject  to  certain  exceptions,  it  may  be  said  that  he  held  the
conformation  of  the  surface  to  correspond  in  some  important  features
with  that  of  an  impermeable  stratum  beneath  it.  A  valley  or  longi-
tudinfil  depression,  whether  large  or  small,  marks,  he  says,  the  position
of  an  underground  stream.  In  broad  valley  bottoms  the  principal
watercourse  will  usually  be  found  on  the  line  of  intersection  of  the
sides.  Subsidiary  gullies  or  hollows  indicate  the  afiluents.  In  a  fairly
level  country,  where  the  depressions  can  be  only  slightly  mai'ked,  he
describes  how  it  is  still  possible  with  minute  precautions  and  by  close
observation  to  detect  them.  *

1  For  these  and  other  rare  papers  relating  to  Paramelle  I  am  indebted  to
M.  Rolland,  of  2,  Rue  des  Chantiers,  Paris,  whose  excellent  book  agency  I  have
l^reviously  had  to  thank.


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  D.


3o7


The  existence  of  such  outward  sigas  of  hidden  streams  of  water
Paramelle  attributes  to  the  natural  tendency  of  the  surface  to  conform
to  its  supporting  bed,  and  also  to  subsidence  due  to  the  constant
carrying  away  of  matter  by  the  underground  current.

The  quantity  of  water  likely  to  be  found  at  a  selected  point  he
estimated  from  the  ai'ea  drained.  The  quality  of  the  water  he  inferred
from  the  nature  of  the  soil  through  which  it  had  filtered,  and  the
depth  at  which  it  ran  mainly  from  ordinary  geologic  data.

Paramelle  did  not  claim  that  his  method  was  applicable  to  the
discovery  of  sheets  of  underground  water  or  water-logged  strata  of
wide  area,  or,  one  may  suppose,  to  water  at  a  great  depth.  The
former  case,  however,  he  believed  to  be  of  very  rare  occurrence,  and
to  others,  for  which  his  general  plan  would  be  unsuitable,  he  refers
candidly,  and  suggests  several  ingenious  considerations. ^

It  may  be  inferred,  from  the  foregoing  brief  sketch  of  Pararaelle's
views,  as  well  as  from  the  contemporary  notices  of  his  work,  that  his
success  lay  in  the  discovery  of  shallow,  or  what  are  sometimes  called
surface,  wells,  that  is,  wells  from  10  to  30  or  40  feet  deep,  and  his
observations  are  evidently  based  on  the  superficial  beds  which  lie  on
the  older  rocks.  As  Mr.  T.  V.  Holmes,  F.G.S.,  has  pointed  out  in  the
interesting  letter  I  have  akeady  published,'^  "  This  perception  of
water-bearing  surface  beds  is  quite  independent  of  a  knowledge  of
geological  structure.  Indeed  the  rise  of  geology  as  a  science  tended  to
put  this  older  knowledge  of  water-bearing  surface  beds  into  the  back-
ground. The  Geological  Survey  had  been  at  work  man}'  years  at  the
deep-seated  geology  of  England  and  Wales,  before  any  '  drift-maps,''
or  those  showing  these  superficial  beds,  were  even  thought  of. . .  .

1  Mr.  B.  St.  G-.  Lefroy,  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for  kindly  making,  at  my
request,  the  foregoing  concise  summary  of  Paramelle's  working  hypothesis,  writes  to
me  as  follows: — "Paramelle's  theory  can  hardly  have  been  developed,  c:c  post  facto,
to  disarm  the  popular  superstition  which  his  abnormal  success  created,  for  in  1829  a
local  French  journal  (quoted  on  p.  382  of  Paramelle's  work)  states  that  his  succes.s
was  based  on  geological  theories  he  had  arrived  at,  and  the  local  newspaper  reixirts
emphasise  the  fact  that  he  viewed  the  land,  in  some  cases  not  going  on  it  at  all.

"The  impression  which  he  makes  on  me  is  that,  granting  his  premises,  his
conclusions  are  drawn  with  admirable  common-sense  and  candour :  and  that  even  if
he  be  a  scientific  heretic,  twenty-five  years  of  observation,  a  naturally  good  eye  for
ground  and  some  modicum  of  truth  in  his  conjectures,  might  well  account  for  his
successes  without  invoking  any  supernormal  faculties.

"The  gist  of  the  difference  between  Paramelle  and  orthodox  geologists,  I  venture
(with  the  deference  of  conscious  ignorance)  to  submit  lies  in  the  question  : — Is  a
water-bearing  stratum  a  sponge  or  a  filter  ?  (I  mean  principally.  Of  course  it  must  be
both  to  some  extent).  If  the  latter,  would  not  his  view  be  correct — ex  necessitate  rei  ?
(Water  would  percolate  by  gravity  into  depressions).  Another  way  of  contrasting
Paramelle  and  hydro-geologists  might  be  to  say  that  the  former  fixed  his  mind  on  the
impermeable  stratum  while  the  attention  of  the  latter  is  mainly  directed  (I  think)  to
the  presence  or  absence  of  a  water-soaked  bed  above  it.

'^Proceedings  S.P.E,.,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  222.


358


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


But  geologists  seldom  bestow  much  thought  on  these  various  drift-beds
unless  interested  in  flint  implements."  Perhaps  I  may  here  add  paren-
thetically my  earnest  hope  that  good  "drift-maps"  of  the  whole  of
the  British  Isles  will  soon  be  published  by  the  Geological  Survey.  The
need  for  and  practical  value  of  such  maps  has  been  most  strongly
impressed  upon  me  during  these  investigations.  Both  Mr.  Kilroe  and
Mr.  Holmes  have  pointed  out  to  me  how  misleading  the  ordinary
maps  may  be  to  a  person  who  wishes  to  obtain  a  moderate  water
supply  by  sinking  a  well.

I  am  not  in  the  least  competent  to  give  any  opinion  upon  Para-
melle's  theories.  They  may  excite  a  smile  among  geologists  of  the
present  day,  or  they  may  awaken  interest  or  arouse  criticism.  In  any
case,  his  phenomenal  success  in  the  location  of  underground  water
needs  explanation,  even  assuming  that  he  did  not  discover  the  more
abundant  sources  found  in  deep  wells.  For  my  own  part,  I  believe
that  the  experience  he  had  gained  by  long  observation  in  the  field,
and  the  instinct  he  had  tlius  acquired,  accounted  for  a  good  deal  more
than  he  could  rationally  explain.  Hence,  like  the  successful  dowser
of  past  and  present  times,  it  was  his  sub-conscious  far  more  than  his
conscious  life  that  was  concerned  in  the  process  of  water-finding.  That
no  mere  knowledge  of  the  theories  he  sets  forth  in  his  book  will  enable
any  one  to  become  a  second  Paramelle  is  obvious  from  the  fact  that,
although  his  book  has  been  widely  read  on  the  Continent  during  the
last  seventy  years,  no  such  renown  has  been  subsequently  gained  by
any  Continental  water-finder,  nor,  I  believe,  by  hydro-geologists  any
where,  as  attached  to  this  simple-minded  French  Abbe.


XXXVIII.]


359


APPENDIX  E.
Evidence  of  Clairvoyance  in  Dowsers.

It  is  obvious  that  if  a  good  dowser  has  any  power  whatever  of
subconscious  supersensory  perception,  surface  indications  of  the  object
sought  for  will  have  very  little  to  do  with  his  success,  and  he
ouglit  to  be  able  to  tell  the  position  of  a  hidden  coin  or  any  buried
object  as  well  as  that  of  underground  water  and  mineral  lodes.  Now
it  is  well  known  that  the  majority  of  dowsers  from  the  earliest  times
have  always  asserted  that  they  could  do  this ;  in  fact,  the  first  use  of
the  divining  rod  was  for  the  purpose  of  discovering  buried  treasure.^
It  would  take  me  too  far  aside  from  my  present  purpose  if  I  entered
into  the  history  of  this  part  of  my  subject  and  the  evidence  that
exists  on  its  behalf ;  this  I  propose  to  do  in  another  paper.  It  is
sufficient  to  say  that  I  have  collected  a  lai'ge  amount  of  evidence
which  shows, — in  spite  of  my  strong  previous  belief  to  the  contrary, —
that  the  success  of  the  dowser  in  finding  concealed  objects  is  greater
than  seems  possible  to  account  for  by  chance  coincidence.  Indications
may  in  some  cases  have  been  unconsciously  afforded  by  those  present
who  knew  where  the  object  was  hidden,  but,  allowing  for  this  and
other  sources  of  error,  there  appears  to  be  in  these  experiments  a
degree  of  success  with  certain  good  dowsers  like  the  late  John
Mullins  that  points  to  the  existence  of  some  faculty  analogous  to
clairvoyance.-  With  several  amateur  dowsers  there  is  similar  evidence.
Mr.  Tosswill,  of  Budleigh  Salterton  (see  p.  223),  made  in  the  presence
of  two  witnesses  a  series  of  successful  experiments  in  tinding  con-
cealed coins,  every  care  being  taken  to  avoid  unconscious  indications

1  There  is  an  amusing  account  in  the  life  of  William  Lilly,  the  astrologer,  of  how
he  accompanied  Davy  Ramsey,  "his  Majesty's  clockniaker,"  in  the  year  1634,  to
search  for  buried  treasure  by  means  of  the  divining  rod  iu  the  cloisters  of  West-
minster Abbey,  the  Dean  having  given  permission,  and  how  the  demons  raised  a
storm  and  drove  them  away.  One  of  the  epigrams  of  Sheppard,  published  in  1651,
satirises  this  use  of  the  rod  ;  but  Continental  and,  to  a  less  extent,  English,  literature
of  that  and  an  earlier  period,  contains  frequent  reference  to  the  use  of  the  rod  for
finding  buried  treasure.  Even  so  recently  as  September  28th,  1882,  the  Paris  corre-
spondent of  the  London  Tines  relates  how  the  Government  Director  of  Fine  Arts
in  Paris  had  that  week  ordi-red,  in  his  official  capacity,  a  search  for  treasure  (sup-
posed to  have  been  buried  a  century  previously),  to  be  made  by  means  of  the  divining
rod.  The  search  was,  however,  fruitless.  A  leading  article  on  the  subject  appeared
in  the  Times  for  October  6th,  1882.

A  few  cases  were  cited  in  the  previous  Report.  See  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.
Xlir.,  pp.  78,  82,  84,  85,  94,  etc.


360


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


being  given  by  the  witnesses.  I  have  specially  to  thank  Mr.  Tosswill
for  his  kindness  in  assisting  this  inquiry,  and  taking  a  railway  journey
of  four  lioars  solely  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  these  tests  to  be  made.
Mr.  Young,  of  Llanelly  (see  p.  221)  has  made  similar  experiments
in  the  presence  of  a  previously  sceptical  witness.  Mr.  Jerman,
F.R.I  B.A.,  a  well-known  architect  in  Exeter,  who  is  an  amateur
dowser,  found  he  also  was  successful  on  making  an  attempt  at  finding
a  carefully  concealed  coin,  though  one  such  experiment  is  of  little
value.  Enouo-h  evidence,  however,  exists  to  make  it  worth  while
for  those  who  find  they  have  the  power  of  motor  automatism
to  pursue  somewhat  similar  experiments,  and  I  hope  this  will
be  done.

I  regret  that  I  have  not  made  more  experiments  of  this  kind  myself
with  different  dowsers.  The  fact  is,  I  was  for  a  long  time  entirely
sceptical  of  the  statements  made,  and  my  own  experience  confirmed
this  scepticism.  For  early  in  this  inquiry  I  made  some  exi^eriments
with  a  dowser,  Mr.  Stears,  on  concealed  masses  of  metal,  which  were
unsuccessful  ;  these  are  related  in  the  previous  Report,  p.  176.
Again,  Colonel  Taylor  made,  at  my  request,  a  careful  experiment
at  Cheltenham  with  the  dowser,  Mr.  Tompkins,  on  concealed  coins  ;
these  also  were  unsuccessful.  And  yet  both  these  dowsers  seem
to  have  had  singular  success  in  this  very  direction  on  other  occasions
with  different  experimenters.  It  is  natural  to  assume  such  success
was  due  to  careless  experiment.  Perhaps  so.  On  the  other  hand,  we
do  not  require  to  assume — we  know — how  very  fitful  are  the  psychical
conditions  which  ensure  success  in  any  experiments  connected  with
the  sub-conscious  state,  such,  e.g.,  as  telepathy.  Hence  it  would
be  an  error  to  attach  as  much  importance  to  the  failure  of  a
particularly  psychical  test  experiment  as  we  should  to  the  failure
of  a  corresponding  physical  experiment  the  conditions  of  which
are  known. ^

Recently  I  have,  however,  had  a  certain  amount  of  success  in
a  more  severe  test  to  which  I  submitted  this  hypothesis  of  "  clair-
voyance." In  my  correspondence  and  interview  with  Mr.  J.  F.  Young,
of  Llanelly,  who  is  a  member  of  our  Society — and  to  whom  I  have
frequently  referred  as  a  successful  amateur  dowser — I  found  that  he
had  occasionally  with  success  tried  automatic  writing.  I  therefore
asked  him  to  try  if  a  pencil  held  in  his  hand  would  write  certain

1  In  his  admirable  address  to  Section  A  of  the  British  Association  last  year,
Professor  Poynting,  F.R.S.,  pointed  out  how  essentially  different  are  the  results  to  be
expected  from  experiments  with  living  compared  with  non-living  matter.  He
remarks:  "Taking  the  psychical  view,  in  the  living  being  there  is  always  some
individuality,  something  different  from  any  other  living  being,  and  full  prediction  in
the  physical  sense,  and  by  physical  methods,  is  impossible."


XXXVIII.]  Appendix  E.  361

words  or  numbers  I  would  enclose  in  a  sealed  envelope  :  he  agreed.
Whereupon  I  printed  some  words  of  three  letters,  placed  them
between  a  fold  of  thick  paper,  and  enclosed  each  in  an  opaque
envelope  which  was  sealed  with  my  own  seal  as  well  as  otherwise
securely  fastened.  Three  such  envelopes  I  posted  to  Mr.  Young  at
Llanelly,  and  asked  him  to  try  if  by  automatic  writing  or  by  the  rod
he  could  ascertain  what  words  of  three  letters  I  had  written.  In
reply  he  said  : —

On  receiving  your  letter  I  gave  the  envelopes  to  my  sister-in-law,  who  took
charge  of  them  till  I  was  ready  to  make  the  experiment.  When  at  leisure
in  the  evening  she  gave  me  one  of  the  envelopes  marked  (3),  which  I  placed
inside  my  cap,  and  put  cap  and  envelope  on  the  top  of  my  bald  head.  I
sat  at  a  table,  as  usual,  with  a  pencil  in  my  hand,  and  made  up  my  mind  as
blank  as  possible,  patiently  waiting  till  my  hand  appeared  controlled  to
write  without  any  volition  on  my  part.  After  waiting  for  a  little  while  my
hand  suddenly  scribbled  out,  on  an  old  postcard  which  was  lying  near,  the
enclosed,  which  looks  like  O  N  W,  or  else  the  last  letter  is  E,  ONE.  I  send
the  230stcard  to  you  with  the  scribble  on  it.  Will  you  please  say  what  the
word  is  ? I  return  the  envelope.

I  found  the  experiment  very  tiring,  as  if  some  vital  force  were  ex-
hausted, and  will  try  the  other  envelopes  another  time.

J.  F.  Young.

P.S. — Before  posting  this  letter,  I  made  a  second  experiment  with
another  of  your  envelopes,  the  one  marked  (2).  First  I  tried  with  the
rod  in  my  hands,  my  sister  slowly  repeated  tlie  alphabet  aloud  ;  this  she  did
three  or  four  times.  After  the  first  repetition  the  rod  moved  at  the  letters
A,  B  and  C  and  no  others.  I  then  tried  automatic  writing  with  my  eyes
shut ;  the  enclosed  came,  starting  from  the  x  — it  looks  like  A.  B.  On
a  second  attempt  the  same  letters  came  somewhat  clearer.

On  receiving  the  envelopes  from  Mr.  Young  I  examined  them
cai-efully ;  they  had  not  been  tampered  with  in  any  way.  On  opening
No.  3,  I  found  the  word  ONE,  and  in  No.  2  the  word  CAB. Here  is


original.  repkoduction.
Fig.  24.


an  exact  reproduction  of  the  writing  Mr.  Young  sent  me.  Holding
the  writing  of  Fig.  24  sideways  the  last  letter  may  be  read  as  an  E,
and  in  Fig.  25  there  seems  to  be  an  attempt  at  the  letter  C  when  the
pencil  began  to  write. I  myself  had  no  idea  which  of  numerous


362


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


words  I  had  written  was  in  any  particular  envelope.  The  experiment^
therefore,  seems  a  fairly  good  one  as  a  preliminary  test,  and  encourages


llEPRODUCTION.

first  attempt.  second  attempt.

Fig.  25.

the  hope  that  a  more  extended  series  of  trials  may  yield  results  of  no
slight  value. 1

I  begged  Mr.  Young  to  try  the  third  envelope  and  let  me  know
the  result.  He  promised  to  do  so,  but  unfortunately  serious  illness
and  deatli  invaded  his  family,  and  after  his  own  recovery  he  has  nob
yet  felt  disposed  to  go  on  with  the  experiments.  Prior  to  his  experi-
ment with  my  envelopes,  he  gave  me  the  result  of  some  experiments
of  a  similar  kind  I  had  asked  him  to  make  in  his  own  way.  I  have
entire  confidence  in  Mr.  Young's  integrity,  but  the  results  which  I
will  give  must  be  taken  for  what  they  are  worth.  Mr.  Young  writes
on  January  5th,  1900  : —

I  made  a  few  trials  this  evening.  I  cut  some  squares  of  paper  all  alike,
put  a  number  of  one  figure  on  each,  then  turned  the  square  upside  down,

1  I  should  be  very  glad  if  any  of  my  readers,  who  find  that  a  forked  twig  held
between  their  liands  automatically  moves  when  they  pass  over  certain  spots,  would
make  some  experiments  to  ascertain  if  they  possess  an  incipient  clairvoyant
faculty.  Let  tliem,  for  example,  take  two  packs  of  cards,  spread  out  onf  pack  (or
one  suit  from  the  pack),  on  the  table,  faces  up,  draw  from  the  other  pack  (or  cor-
responding suit)  a  card,  face  down,  and  place  it,  unseen,  say  beneatli  tlie  waist-
coat;  this  humours  the  idea  (p.  366)  that  the  epigastrium  is  the  most  sensitive
seat  of  this  occult  vision.  Then  walk  slowly  round  the  table  on  which  the  cards
are  disposed,  note  if  the  twig  moves  over  any  particular  card,  and  compare  the
result  with  the  concealed  card.  Or  they  might  try  the  simpler  card  game  wliich
Mr.  A.  Lang  has  described  in  Lon//man's  Magazine,  Vol.  XXXI.,  p.  279:  viz.,  take
up  a  card  from  the  top  of  a  shuffled  pack  and,  without  looking  at  it,  try  if  some
vision  of  a  card  floats  into  the  mind;  then  compare  the  result  with  the  actual  card
held.  Mr.  Lang  finds  he  is  generally  successful  in  tliis  game  on  the  first  two  or
three  trials,  but  afterwards  his  guess  becomes  mixed  or  hopelessly  wrong  :  tlds  I
have  also  noted  in  thought-transference  experiments.  I  should  be  grateful  for  any
record  that  may  be  sent  to  me  (addressed  Kiiigstown,  co.  Dublin)  of  such  experi-
ments, or  of  any  similar  ones  that  may  suggest  themselves  to  my  readers.


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  E.


36a


2

4

7

5

3

2

9

3

6

1

X

4

7

5

X

2

9

X

6

1

shuffled  them  about  in  every  way,  and  then  picked  up  one  of  the  squares
with  ray  eyes  closed,  put  it  on  the  top  of  my  head  and  placed  my  cap  on,  it
fitting  close  to  the  crown  of  my  head.  Then  I  made  myself  as  passive
as  possible,  and  either  slowly  repeated  the  figures  till  a  certain  one  seemed
to  be  riglit,  or  the  impression  of  a  particular  figure  came  as  soon  as  I
put  the  cap  on  my  head;  when  it  came  thus  quickly,  it  was  invariably  right.
This  is  the  result,  and  the  order  in  which  I  took  up  the  figures,  of  course
one  at  a  time, x  denotes  a  wrong  guess  : —

Figure  on  square  .
Figure  guessed

The  experiment  was  very  exhausting,  so  that  I  could  not  go  on  any
longer.

It  is  curious  that  the  figure  3  should  both  times  be  wrong.  Mr.
Young  also  tells  me  he  was  successful  three  times  out  of  four  with  a
similar  experiment,  only  using  a  rod  in  his  hands  and  repeating  the
figures  to  himself.

Previous  to  making  these  experiments,  Mr.  Young  had  written  to
me  as  follows  : —

In  the  year  1893  I  had  a  remarkable  experience  when  out  water-finding
with  the  rod.  (It  happened  to  be  very  dry  weather  at  the  time.-  Whether
this  had  anything  to  say  to  it  I  don't  know,  but  this  peculiar  experience
ceased  when  rain  set  in.)  I  found  that  after  "  setting  "  myself  to  use  the
rod,  i.e.,  getting  into  an  abstracted  mental  condition,  lost  to  all  around,
when,  or  just  before,  the  rod  turned,  I  could, — as  it  were  clairvoyantly,
— see  the  underground  springs  and  actually  appeared  able  to  trace  them  out
as  I  walked  along.  My  friend  Mr.  Robertson,  who,  as  you  are  aware,  also
uses  the  rod  with  success  as  an  amateur  water-finder,  tells  me  he  also  had  a
similar  experience,  ^  and  we  have  since  read  that  a  "  diviner  "  named  Adams,^
a  Somerset  man,  frequently  asserted  the  same  thing.

All  this  may,  of  course,  be  a  mere  illusion,  but  that  it  is  occasion-
ally a  veridical  illusion  seems  to  be  indicated  not  only  from  the
subsequent  test  experiments  which  I  have  narrated,  but  also  from  the
fact  that  in  the  case  of  others  who  have  had  a  similar  experience,
water  has  been  found  beneath  the  spot,  though  previously  searched
for  in  vain  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood.

Here,  for  example,  is  such  a  case.  In  the  English  edition  of
Reichenbach's  researches  on  his  so-called  Od  force,  Dr.  Ashburner
devotes  a  lengthy  note  on  pp.  90-106  to  tlie  divining  rod,  and  gives  a
remarkable  instance  of  a  girl  who  when  mesmerised  appeared  to  be  an
excellent  dowser;  when  entranced,  if  the  hazel  twig  moved  in  her
hands,  she  exclaimed  she  saiv  the  water  a  few  feet  beneath  the  surface,
and  gave  a  vivid  description  of  it. Dr.  Ashburner  quotes  in  full  the

1  Mr.  Robertson  is  joint  author  with  Mr.  Young  of  a  little  book  on  the  divining
rod,  in  which  they  narrate  their  experience  and  give  a  good  deal  of  miscellaneous
information.— W.  F.  B.


364


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


letter  he  had  received  from  a  lady,  a  friend  of  his,  giving  a  minute
account  of  this  experiment,  which  was  made  in  a  field  adjoining  the
lady's  house  in  Hertfordshire.  At  the  spot  where  the  rod  turned  and
the  girl  declared  she  saw  the  water,  a  well  was  dug,  and  an  abundant
supply  of  good  water  ivas  found  a  few  feet  below  the  surface,  though
previously  the  lady  states  that  they  had  "very  bad  water  and  had
long  been  unable  to  find  a  good  spring."  ^

I  hope  that  some  tests  may  be  made  in  England  or  in  the  Conti-
nental schools  of  hypnotism  on  the  possible  dowsing  faculty  of  patients
under  hypnosis.  Of  the  occasional  "  lucidity  "  or  "  clairvoyance  "  of
subjects  in  the  deeper  hypnotic  trance  I  have  received  some  striking
evidence,  and  have  personally  verified  the  fact  in  one  very  sensitive
subject  whom  I  had  hypnotised.  ^

Though  of  very  slight  evidential  value,  it  may  be  worth  referring
to  the  curious  old  case  of  Parangue,  narrated  by  Figuier  in  Chapter
VIII.  of  his  excellent  treatise  on  the  Bagiiefte  Divhiatoire.  Parangue
was  born  near  Marseilles  in  1760,  and  when  quite  a  child  appeared
able  to  discern  clairvoyantly  the  presence  of  underground  water,  and
was  successfully  employed  at  several  places  for  this  purpose.  Figuier
is  naturally  somewhat  sceptical  about  this  case,  for  the  particulars  of

1  Thii3  took  place  more  than  50  years  ago,  and  it  seemed  hopeless  to  obtain  any
confirmation  of  this  case,  as  no  names  were  given  Viy  Dr.  Ashburner ;  but,  curiously
enough,  a  letter  was  .sent  me  from  a  lady  living  at  Waterford,  who,  writing  to  a
friend  apropos  of  my  previous  Repor',  gave  an  account  of  a  visit  she  paid  in  1847  to
her  aunt  in  Hertfordshire,  Miss  B.,  and  narrates  the  very  circumstance  described  by
Dr.  Ashburner  as  happening  in  her  aunt's  field  before  her  visit.  The  writer  confirms
several  of  Dr.  Ashburner's  statements,  that  the  girl  dowser  was  Miss  B.'s  lady's
maid,  and  also  that  Miss  B.  (who  narrated  the  facts  to  Dr.  Ashburner)  was  an
exceptionally  clever  and  intelligent  lady,  not  likely  to  be  mistaken,  and  that  there
had  previously  been  great  difficulty  in  getting  good  drinking  water,  but  the  spring
found  by  the  blindfolded  [this  is  probably  a  slip  of  memory]  girl  was  still  used  in  the
house.  Reference  is  made  to  Miss  B.'s  deep  interest  in  mesmerism,  but  not  to  any
mesmerising  or  clairvoyance  of  the  girl.  Miss  B.  probably  would  not  speak  of  this
to  her  young  niece.  My  correspondent  was  unaware  that  Dr.  Ashburner  had
written  anything  on  the  subject.

-  On  a  future  occasion  I  propose  to  pulilish  tlie  details  of  a  remarkable  case  of
this  kind  sent  to  mo  some  years  ago  by  a  competent  observer,  the  rector  of  a  large
parish  in  Cumberland,  who  was  also  Chairman  of  the  local  Bench  of  Magistrates.
The  subject  in  this  case  was  a  lady,  a  sufferer  from  chronic  illness,  who  had
greatly  benefited  bj-  hypnotic  treatment  carried  out  by  my  informant  under  the
direction  of  her  medical  attendant.  In  the  course  of  time  she  developed  what
appeared  to  be  a  clairvoyant  faculty,  and  the  particular  test  experiment  to  which
she  was  submitted, — and  which  I  carefully  investigated  and  verified  (so  far  as  it
was  possible)  at  the  time, — convinced  me,  as  it  had  already  convinced  my  in-
formant and  others,  that  sooner  or  later  science  will  have  to  admit  the  existence,
in  certain  cases,  of  a  supersensory  perceptive  power.  In  this  instance  any  ex-
planation based  on  fraud,  or  hypertesthesia  of  vision,  or  chance  coincidence,  or
tliought-transference  was  more  inconceivable  than  the  admission  of  some  faculty
new  to  science.  .


XXXYIII.]


Appendix  E.


365


which  he  quotes  the  Abbe  Sauri,  who  firmly  believed  in  Parangue,
and  who  states  that  the  child  was  thrown  into  a  paroxysm  whenever
it  was  brought  over  a  hidden  underground  spring.^

Whatever  value  is  to  be  attached  to  such  narratives  as  the  fore-
going, there  undoubtedly  exists  a  body  of  testimony  from  many  able
and  distinguished  men,  in  different  countries  and  in  different  pro-
fessions, who  have  become  convinced  by  personal  investigation  that
certain  persons  can  detect  the  presence  of  hidden  objects  in  some
transcendental  manner.  I  have  already  referred  on  p.  247  to  the
opinion  expressed  by  Zschokke.  He  was  a  man  of  great  erudition
and  versatility,  possessed  of  a  wide  knowledge  of  men  and  affairs,
holding  a  high '  position  as  member  of  the  Great  Council  of  State,
Lieut. -Governor  of  Basle,  and  historian  of  Switzerland.  He  is  there-
fore an  excellent  witness.  In  his  Autobiography,  first  published  in
1842,  he  states  : —

In  almost  every  canton  of  Switzerland  are  found  j)ersons  endowed  with
the  mysterious  natural  gift  of  discovering,  by  a  peculiar  sensation,  the
existence  of  subterranean  waters,  metals,  or  fossils.  I  have  known  many
of  them,  and  often  put  their  marvellous  talent  to  the  proof.  One  of  them
was  the  Abbot  of  the  Convent  of  St.  Urban,  in  the  canton  of  Lucerne,
a  man  of  learning  and  science  ;  and  another  a  young  woman,  who  excelled
all  I  have  ever  known.  I  carried  her  and  her  companion  with  me  through
several  districts  entirely  unkno'wn  to  her,  but  with  the  geological  formation
of  which  and  with  the  position  of  its  salt  and  sweet  w^aters  I  was  quite
familiar,  and  I  never  found  her  deceived.  To  detail  circumstantially  everj'
experiment  I  made  to  satisfy  myself  on  this  point  would  take  up  too  much
space  at  present,  but  the  results  of  the  most  careful  observation  have
compelled  ine  at  length  to  renounce  the  obstinate  suspicion  and  incredulity
I  at  first  felt  on  this  subject,  and  have  presented  me  with  a  new  phase  of
nature,  although  one  still  involved  in  enigmatical  obscurity.

The  evidence  on  behalf  of  clairvoyance  is  really  more  extensive
and  of  greater  weight  than  is  commonly  known,  and  those  who  contest
this  evidence  will  find  themselves  impaled  on  the  horns  of  a  dilemma  ;
they  must  either  admit  thought-transference  and  stretch  that  explana-
tion to  an  absurd  length,  or  they  must  admit  the  fact  of  clairvoyance,
— meaning  by  this  latter  the  transcendental  perception  by  certain
individuals  of  an  object  or  writing  which  cannot  be  seen  by,  and  is
unknown  to,  those  present.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  cases  of  clair-
voyance with  persons  not  in  the  mesmeric  sleep  usually  occur  with

1  In  an  article  on  Modern  Manic  by  INI.  Shele  de  Vere,  published  in  1873,  it  is
stated  that  "Catherine  Beutler,  of  Thurgovia,  Switzerland,  and  also  Anna  Maria
Briegger,  of  the  same  place,  were  both  so  seriously  affected  by  the  presence  of  w-ater
that  they  fell  into  violent  nervous  excitement  when  they  happened  to  cross  places
beneath  which  large  quantities  of  water  were  concealed,  and  became  perfectly
exhausted."  Long  ago,  a  Portuguese  lady,  one  Pedegacha,  is  a'so  stated  to  have  been
similarly  affected  by  underground  springs.


366


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


sufferers  from  catalepsy  or  some  allied  disorder.^  The  sense  of  vision
in  these  cases  (and  also  in  some  hypnotised  subjects)  appears  to  be
transferred  to  the  epigastrium ;  the  subject  pressing  the  card  or
writing  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach  in  order  "  to  see  it,"  as  if  the
viscera  were  the  seat  of  vision.  Now  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  this
inquiry  has  led  us  to  the  conclusion  tliat  some  dowsers  also  possess,  in
greater  or  less  degree,  a  subconscious  clairvoyant  faculty,  and  that
such  persons  exhibit  symptoms  of  induced  catalepsy  and  experience
singular  sensations  in  the  epigastrium  when  the  object  sought  for  is
transcendentally  "  perceived  "  by  them.  I  have  already  pointed  out
in  Part  XII.  that  the  visceral  sensations  of  the  dowser  are  probably
emotional  disturbances,  arising  from  a  psychical  state,  and  it  is  likely
enough  that  a  similar  explanation  accounts  for  the  cataleptic  subject
believing  he  sees  with  his  stomach,  the  sensation  being  there.  But
this  explanation  merely  accounts  for  the  secondary  effects  observed  ;
the  induction  of  the  psychical  state  still  remains  a  mystery.  And
here  it  seems  to  me  that  a  wholly  independent  and  different  investi-
gation should  ultimately  lead  to  conclusions  so  similar  to  those  arrived
at  by  other  investigators  nearly  a  centuiy  ago  can  hardly  be  a  mere
accident.  A  cause  common  to  both,  to  be  found  in  some  perceptive
power  new  to  science,  appears  primd  facie  to  be  indicated.


1  See  foot-note  on  p.  309.


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  F.


367


APPENDIX  F.
,  The  Zahoris.

In  a  footnote  on  p.  5  of  my  previous  paper  on  the  Divining  Rod
(^Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Part  XXXII.),  I  quoted  a  writer  in  the  Quarterly
Review  iov  1822,  p.  373,  who  states  that  "the  faculty  of  using  the
divining  rod  is  evidently  the  same  as  that  possessed  by  the  Spanish
Zahoi'is,  though  the  latter  do  not  employ  a  hazel  twig."  The  Spectator,
in  an  article  on  the  Divining  Rod  on  October  14th,  1882,  also  refers
to  the  Zahoris  in  the  same  casual  way,  as  if  every  one  knew  all  about
them.  On  inquiry  I  could  find  no  one  who  could  give  me  any
information  beyond  a  reference  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  as  given  in
Spanish  dictionaries.  Thus,  in  Lopes'  Spanish  Dictiona.ry  the  word
"  Zahori "  is  explained  as  follows  : — "  A  vulgar  impostor  pretending  to
see  things,  although  hidden  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  if  not  covered
with  blue  cloth."  Again,  "  Zahoria  "  is  said  to  be  "The  art  of  seeing
as  above.  The  performer  must  be  born  on  Good  Friday."  Neuman
and  Barretti,  in  thf^ir  Spanish  dictionary,  use  identically  the  same
words,  and  the  Dictionary  of  the  Royal  Spanish  Academy  has  a
similar  description,  ending,  "Lynceus  homo  subterranea  videns."

The  word  "Zahori"  is  really  from  the  Arabic,  meaning  "clear,"
"  enlightened  "  ;  it  was,  in  fact,  equivalent  to  the  term  a  "  clairvoyant,"
as  that  word  is  now  used.  The  same  root  occurs  in  Hebrew,  and
is  the  origin  of  the  title  "  Zohar,"  the  famous  bible  of  the  Kabbalists.^

It  seemed,  therefore,  to  be  a  matter  of  historical  interest  to
ascertain  what  was  known  concerning  these  Zahoris.  The  earliest
account  I  have  been  able  to  find  of  the  Zahoris  comes  to  us  from
Mexico  in  the  year  1.5.57.  It  is  contained  in  a  folio  volume  in  the
British  Museum,  entitled  Phisica  S2)ecjilatio,  etc.,  Mexici,  1557^
written  by  one  Alphonsus  (Gutierrez)  a  Vera  Criice.  This  work  was
reprinted  in  Salamanca  in  1559. In  his  discourse  on  the  Soul, — ■

1  The  Zohar  is  a  mystical  commentary  on  tlie  Pentateuch,  the  title  being  sug-
gested by  the  command  in  Gen.  i,  4,  "Let  there  be  light,"  with  the  exposition
of  which  the  work  begins  ;  it  was  compiled  between  the  3rd  and  13th  centuries.  The
"  Z  harites  "  were  an  ephemeral  Jewish  sect  of  theosophists,  swearing  by  the  Zohar  ;
founded  about  1750  they  had,  of  course,  nothing  to  do  with  the  Zahoris  of  two
centuries  before.

'-  I  have  to  thank  Mr.  E.  Westlake, — who  has  devoted  unwearied  patience  to  the
compilation  of  a  complete  bibliography  of  the  divining  rod, — for  the  discovery  of  this
rare  volume  in  the  British  Museum.  It  must  have  been  one  of  the  earliest  books
ever  printed  in  Mexico.  To  Miss  E.  Stokes  my  best  thanks  are  also  due  for  the
excellent  translation  of  this  and  other  passages  in  the  British  Museum.


368


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


De  Anima,  lib.  ii.,  specuJatio  ii.,  pp.  300-301  (or  pp.  376-377  of  the
Salamancca  edition),  Alphonsus  writes  as  follows  : —

S23eculation  II.  of  Enchanters,  Salutators,^  and  of  the  People  vnlgarly

called  Zahoris.

There  is  no  one  who  denies  that  there  may  be  such  an  arrangement
in  a  man's  eyes,  that  lie  may  be  enabled  to  see  at  a  great  distance  to
which  another  man's  eyes  cannot  reach. In  the  same  way  there  may  be
such  an  arrangement  as  to  enable  a  man  to  see  an  object  through  some
diaphanous  medium, whilst  other  eyes  are  incapable  of  discerning  the
shape  of  the  object  through  the  same  medium. But  I  cannot  conceive  that
any  one's  sight  can  be  so  constructed  that  lie  can  see  an  object  behind  a
wall  or  any  opaque  substance  ;  for  sight  is  the  effect  either  of  outward
transmission,  \i.<:.  from  the  eyes]  as  some  maintain,  or  of  inward  recejition,
as  the  majority  declare. It  is  not  clear  how  the  sliajje  of  anything  can  reach
the  eye,  when  it  is  hidden  in  the  earth,  and  behind  something  opaque  and
not  diaphanous  ;  for  how  would  it  pierce  through  the  earth  or  penetrate
the  stone  ? For  such  shape  would  necessarily  be  absorbed  on  coming  in
contact  with  an  t)paque  body,  and  could  not  find  transit,  because  it  is  not  a
diaphanous  body. Wherefore  such  shape  could  not  reach  the  eye,  neither
could  the  object  itself  be  seen. And  I  do  not  see  how  they  [the  Zahoris]  can
l^erceive  (as  they  say)  abscesses  or  humours  in  the  internal  organs  of  a  man,
(their  sight  not  being  impeded  by  the  body  or  clothes) ;  nevertheless  they
themselves  assert  that  they  can,  and  in  the  same  way,  on  entering  a  temple
where  dead  bodies  lie,  that  they  can  clearly  perceive  the  internal  organs  of
the  corpses,  if  they  cast  their  eyes  down. Nevertheless  I  do  not  give  full
credence  to  their  assertions. For  these  things  may  be  illusions  wrought  of
the  devil. JS^evertheless  I  do  not  condemn  them  ;  for  I  have  known  men
otherv/ise  upright,  who  have  declared  they  see  these  things. I  confess  I  do
not  know  what  cause  can  jjroduce  such  natural  power  ;  for  it  is  not  the  same
as  that  alleged  by  enchanters  and  salutators  ;  but  is  quite  different,  for
the  Zahoris  say  the  ubject  is  made  visible  by  natural  means,  by  radiating
its  shape  to  the  eye  ;  if  so,  it  is  necessary  that  the  medium  through  which  it
passes  should  be  diaphanous  ;  otherwise  the  shape  does  not  become  visible.
All  philosophers  say  that  air  and  water  are  diaphanous  mediums,  and  all
things  that  partake  of  their  nature  ;  but  the  earth  and  opaque  bodies  are  not
of  that  kind.

A  few  years  later  a  famous  Jesuit  of  Louvaiii,  Martin  Delrio,
published  his  great  work  Disquisitionum  Maijicarum  in  three  folio
volumes.  I  came  across  a  copy  of  this  work,  published  in  1599,  in  the
famous  library  founded  by  Archbishop  Marsh  in  Dublin."  In  the
first  volume,  ch.  iii.,  pp.  11  and  12,  of  this  work,  Delrio  refers  to

^  The  word  salutator  means  in  low  Latin  a  '-  pointer  out. "  The  index  finger  was
called  digitus  salutatorius,  not  only  from  its  being  used  for  familiar  salutation,  but
also  for  pointing  out. — W.  F.  B.

^  Mr.  Elworthy,  in  his  treatise  on  "The  Evil  Eye,"  refers  to  Delrio 's  work  as
published  in  1603.  This  must  be  a  later  edition.  My  own  slight  literary  researches  in
connection  with  the  history  of  the  Virgula  Divina  have  impressed  me  with  the
enormous  labour  and  erudition  displayed  in  Mr.  Elworthy's  classical  work.


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  F.


369


the  Zahoris  (he  calls  them  Zahuris),  and  the  following  translation
gives  the  principal  statements  he  makes  : —

A  race  of  men  in  Spain  are  known  who  are  called  Zahnris ;  we  may
name  them  Lynxes  ;  when  I  was  staymg  at  Madrid  in  the  year  1575,  such  a
boy  was  to  be  seen  there.  They  relate  that  these  people  see  things  that  are
hidden  in  the  inward  bowels  of  the  earth,  veins  of  water  and  treasures  of
metals,  and  corpses  placed  within  sarcophagi.  This  thing  is  most  fully  received
and  weU  known.  Not  only  Pindar,  Tzetzes,  and  other  poets  have  thought
this  possible,  but  philosophers  also  (e.g.,  Coel.  Rhodig.,  hb.  16),  some°of
whom  ascribe  this  power  to  a  melancholy  huraour.i  ...  I  think  they
know  veins  of  water  by  the  vapours  exhaled  from  those  places  morning  and
evening.  They  know  veins  of  metal  from  the  grass,  of  whatever  kind'^  that
usually  grows  there.  Treasures  and  corpses  I  would  consider  to  be  indicated
by  demons.  .  .  .  They  are  accustomed  to  restrict  this  faculty  of  seeing
to  certain  days,  the  third  and  sixth  day  of  the  week,  which  is  a  token
of  a  secret  pact.  Besides,  the  redness  of  the  eyes,  which  is  i^articularly
to  be  observed  in  Zahuris,  would  rather  injure  than  assist  clearness
of  sight.

It  is  interesting  to  note  the  prevalent  idea  of  that  period,  and
long  afterwards,  that  demons  have  the  principal  hand  in  the  discovery
of  hidden  treasure,  otherwise  Delrio's  conjectures  indicate  shrewd
observation  on  his  part. The  "redness  of  the  eyes"  is  a  curious  trait.

Another  reference  to  the  Zahoris  is  to  be  found  in  a  work
published  in  1643  by  Juan  Eusebio  Meremberg,  entitled  Curiosa
y  Ocidta  Filosop}da,  3rd  edition  ;  Madrid,  1643.  (Reprinted  in
Barcelona,  1645,  see  pp.  81-82.)  Chapter  LXXVI.  of  this  work  is
devoted  to  the  power  of  the  Zahoris,  and  the  following  is  a  trans-
lation of  the  chief  portion  (pp.  284-285)  : —

Less  is  heard  of  the  sight  of  the  modern  Zahoris,  though  it  cannot  be
taken  as  certain.  Celio  Rodiginio  favours  their  cause,  judging  that  there
may  be  a  natural  means  of  seeing  through  large,  opaque  bodies.  Another
attributes  what  they  say  they  see  to  the  effect  of  a  melancholy  humour.
This  would  be  a  good  explanation  if  facts  did  not  follow  their  imagination  or
sight ;  but  springs  are  found  where  they  point  them  out,  metal  where  they
say  they  see  it,  and  the  dead  with  all  their  marks  which  they  perceive,  so
that  it  must  be  attributed  to  some  other  cause  than  melancholy.

But  knowledge  of  where  water  is  to  be  found  underground  may  be
acquired  without  much  difficulty,  without  its  being  necessary  for  the  sight
to  pierce  the  earth.  It  was  the  ancient  office  of  the  Aquilegos,^  whose  art
was  the  knowledge  of  where  water  was  to  be  found,  at  what  depth,  and  of
what  qu.-ility  it  was.  Marcellus  wrote  of  these  things  among  the  Romans,
and  is  quoted  by  Cassiodorus. In  the  time  of  the  king  Theodoric  a

1  Melancholy  here  means  madness;  as  Milton  says,  "Moonstruck  melancholy,
moping  madness. — W.F.B.

-  Aqmle^is  (in  Latin)  was  one  skilled  in  seeking  out  water  ;  see  Facciolati's
Latin  Dictionary.— W.  F.  B.


370


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


very  celebrated.  Aquilegus  came  from  Africa,  whom  Theodoric  aifectionately
recommended  to  Apronianus  that  he  might  give  him  a  suitable  salary.  The
mode  of  discovering  the  water  was  by  the  presence  of  certain  herbs,  briars,
reeds,  and  other  green  trees,  by  certain  species  of  mosquitoes,  and  light
vapoui-s  which  arose  from  the  spot,  and  by  other  means  which  they  took,
such  as  placing  dry  wool  in  certain  parts  at  night,  well  covered,  to  see  if
it  would  be  found  damp.  Sweet  and  salutary  waters  are  qualided  by  the
south  and  east  wind,  and  the  heavy  and  less  salutary  fall  with  the  north  and
west  wind.  The  same  thing  may  be  urged  concerning  the  knowledge  of
mines  of  metal,  for  there  may  be  in  the  same  way  natural  signs  of  them,  and
certain  herbs  which  signify  their  presence.

As  to  the  assertion  that  the  Zahoris  can  see  the  buried  dead  and
certain  particular  marks  upon  them,  Alphonso  de  Vera-cruz,  in  the  second
book  of  his  Anima,  and  Father  Delrio,  on  the  Medea  of  Seneca  and  in
the  first  book  of  his  Magia,  attril)ute  this  to  evil  arts  ;  and  I  can  see  no
grounds  for  opposing  them,  the  more  so  that  the  power  of  the  Zahoris  is
limited  to  certain  days,  such  as  Tuesdays  and  Fridays,  which  to  me  is  a
suspicious  circumstance  ;  also  the  redness  and  inflammation  of  the  eyes
usually  found  among  these  people  seems  to  prove  that  they  rather  blind
their  sight  than  sharpen  it.

The  most  interesting  part  in  this  quotation  is  Niereraberg's  refe-
rence to  an  ancient  cult  of  water-finders,  or  "  aquilegos,"  as  he  calls
them.  In  the  State  papers  and  letters  of  Cassiodorus,  which  form
our  chief  knowledge  of  Theodoric,  king  of  the  Ostrogoths  (circa  a.d.
454-526),  whose  chief  minister  Cassiodorus  was,  the  reference  to  the
aquilegus  will  be  found  in  Epist.  LIU.,  lib.  3,  p.  58.  The  famous
Jesuit,  Father  Kircher,  in  his  Mund.  Sub.  lib.  5,  p.  266,  also  refers
to  the  method  employed  by  the  aquilex  (as  he  terms  it)  in  water-
finding.

Another  Spanish  writer,  Feyjoo,  in  his  Theatro  Critico  Universal,
Madrid,  1732,  tome  III.,  pp.  101-118,  published  a  paper  entitled
Vara  Divinatoria,  y  Zaliories.^  This  paper  is  principally  concerned
with  the  discussion  of  the  well-known  case  of  Jacques  Aymar,  whose
story  was  then  attracting  universal  attention.  In  section  VII.  the
Zahories  are  referred  to,  and  tlie  author  treats  them  with  scepticism,
remarking  that  the  multitude  is  generally  credulous,  and  among  all
people  men  of  critical  faculty  and  sound  judgment  are  few.  He
continues  : —

The  name  Zahoris  is  applied  to  a  class  of  men  of  whom  it  is  said  that
their  vision  penetrates  opaque  bodies,  thus  causing  to  appear  whatsoever
may  be  hidden  away  fathoms  deep  below  the  surface  of  the  earth.  Perhaps

1  My  friend  and  colleague,  Professor  J.  P.  O'Reilly,  Foreign  Secretary  to  the
Royal  Irish  Academy,  most  kindly  translated  the  whole  of  this  lengthy  Spanish
paper  for  me,  and  I  wish  here  to  express  my  great  indebtedness  to  my  learned  friend
for  this  and  other  laborious  translations  he  has  cheerfully  made  for  the  purpose  of  my
inquiry.


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  F.


371


we  have  inherited  them  ivom  the  Moors,  since  the  word  Zahuri  seems
Arabic.  1

It  cannot  be  advanced  that  this  virtue'  is  either  natural  or  sujoernatural  ;
consequently  it  must  be  condemned  as  either  feigned  or  as  superstitious.  It
is  not  natural,  since  light  does  not  penetrate  into  the  depth  of  opaque  bodies.
In  consideration  of  this  we  have  declared  (in  the  2nd  Vol.,  Second  Discourse)
as  fabulous  what  is  pretended  of  the  penetrating  vision  of  the  lynx,  and  at
present  we  will  include  under  the  same  rule  that  son  of  Aphareus,  King  of
the  Messenians,  to  whom  many  ancient  authors  attribute  the  same  excellence
of  sight  as  that  ascribed  to  the  lynx,  giving  him  in  consequence  the  title  of
"Lynx-eyed  "  (Linceo),  because,  said  they,  he  could  see  through  the  trunks
of  trees  and  rocks,  a  falsehood  which  ApoUonius,  in  his  poem  of  the
Argonauts,  immensely  exaggerates,  pretending  that  he  fathomed  with  his
vision  the  depths  of  the  earth,  even  to  being  able  to  see  what  was  taking
place  in  Hell.  Nor  do  I  think  that  more  credit  should  be  accorded  to  what
Varro,  Valerius  Maximus,  and  other  writers  tell  of  that  man  called  Strabo,
who  in  the  first  Punic  war  saw  from  the  promontory  of  Lilyboeum,  in  Sicily,
and  counted  the  vessels  which  were  leaving  the  port  of  Carthage,  the
distance  being  130  miles.  Even  were  the  atmosiAere  perfectly  diaphanous,
which  it  is  not,  there  would  still  be  the  difficulty  that  the  vessels  situated  at
a  distance  of  130  miles  would  form  in  the  centre  of  the  retina  an  angle  so
extremely  acute  that  the  image  would  be  insensible,  as  those  know  who  are
versed  in  optics.

As  little  can  it  be  alleged  that  the  talent  or  power  of  the  Zahoris  is
supernatural.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  not  credible  that  it  has  God  as  its
special  author,  since  it  is  a  virtue  whose  only  use  is  to  serve  greed.  It  is  not
announced  that  the  Zahoris  disinter  treasures  to  furnish  assistance  to  the
poor,  or  to  make  war  on  infidels.  In  the  second  place,  because,  neither  in
the  sacred  writings  nor  in  ecclesiastical  history  do  we  read  that  God  has
granted  this  virtue  as  a  permanent  habit  to  any  of  His  many  illustrious
servants.  How  then  can  it  be  believed  that,  while  refusing  it  to  all
these  His  most  intimate  friends.  He  has  reserved  it  for  men  in  no  way
remarkable  by  their  merits  ?  In  the  third  place,  supernatural  graces  are
not  limited  to  any  particular  nation,  and  of  Zahoris,  they  are  said  to  exist
only  m  Spain.

1  In  the  past  century  (says  the  Marquis  de  St.  Aubin,  tome  3,  lib.  4,  cap.  2)  it
was  declared  that  there  were  in  Spain  certain  men  who  saw  what  was  under  ground
to  a  depth  of  20  pike  handles  (picas).  Many  philosophers  failed  not  to  discover  (as
they  thought)  reasons  for  ijersuading  people  that  this  might  happen  quite  naturally.
He  then  states  that  the  Mercure  franrais  of  the  year  1728,  published  an  account  of  a
Portuguese  lady  (named  Pedegascha).  IShe  declared  she  saw  what  was  in  the  earth
to  a  depth  of  thirty  to  forty  fathoms,  but  as  regards  the  human  body,  she  could  not
see  into  it  if  clothed,  the  clothing  preventing  her  vision.  But  the  body  being  un-
covered, she  was  able  to  observe  all  the  interior  parts,  even  the  abscesses  or  any  other
defect  there  might  be,  as  well  in  the  humours  or  soft  parts  as  in  the  solid.  It  may  be
that  this  fable  had  its  origin  not  in  Portugal,  but  in  France.  But  this  author  does
not  give  credence  to  the  e.ustence  of  the  Zahoris,  justifying  himself  mainly  for  his
refusal  of  assent  to  my  testimony,  since  having  cited  my  work,  he  terminates  thus  :
"  The  testimony  of  this  Benedictine,  being  that  of  a  Spaniard,  is  of  great  weight  to
give  assurance  of  the  falsity  of  this  opinion." [Peyjoo  was  a  Spanish  Benedictine.]

2  D  2


372


ProfesfsoT  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Among  the  vulgar  there  is  the  belief  that  God  dispenses  this  grace  only
to  those  who  are  born  on  a  Good  Friday,  without  considering  that  there
should  be  an  infinity  of  Zahoris,  since  many  there  are  who  are  born  on  that
day.  Others  limit  the  power  to  the  circumstance  of  being  born  at  the
particular  moment  at  which  the  Passion  is  being  chanted.  Even  with  this
restrictioia  it  would  follow  that  there  should  be  in  the  whole  extent  of  Spain
from  700  to  800  Zahoris,  since  this  total,  more  or  less,  results  from  the
supposition  that  about  the  same  number  of  men  are  born  every  day  and
hour  of  the  year,  and  that  Spain  (including  Majorca  and  excluding  Portugal)
possesses  seven  and  a-half  millions  of  persons,  which  is  the  population
determined  by  Seiior  Don  Geronymo  de  Urtariz  in  his  excellent  work,  Theory
and  Pract  ice  of  Commerce  and  of  Sailing.  Consequently,  on  this  computation
there  would  not  be  a  province  of  Spain  which  had  not  four  or  five  dozens  of
Zahoris.  Where  are  they,  that  we  may  see  them  ?  Nor  can  it  be  said  that
those  who  pretend  to  this  grace  hide  it,  since  God  does  not  concede  virtues
that  thej'  may  be  of  no  use.

There  remains  then  but  to  say  that  this  virtue  is  superstitious,  and  that
those  who  exercise  it  have  a  compact,  either  exjDressed  or  implied,  with  the
devil.  In  truth,  the  work  of  extracting  gold  from  the  depths  of  the  earth
is  more  of  a  nature  to  be  attributed  to  diabolical  influence  than  to  the
Divine  assistance,  since  an  abundance  of  that  precious  metal  rather  promotes
vice  than  favours  virtue.  Such,  indeed,  appears  to  have  been  the  thought
of  the  ancients  when  they  pretended  that  Pluto,  the  infernal  divinity,  was
the  first  discoverer  of  mines  of  gold  and  silver.

The  author  then  goes  on  to  say  that  if  the  Zahoris  really  do  exist,
they  are  either  wizards  or  rogues,  and  he  prefers  to  think  the  latter,
as  the  former  would  involve  a  diabolical  compact,  a  far  greater  crime
than  being  a  mere  rogue.

I  have  quoted  this  extract  at  some  length,  as  it  gives  an  interesting
picture  of  the  habits  of  thought  of  a  learned  Spaniard  120  years  ago.
It  is  evident  the  writer  had  no  personal  knowledge  of  the  Zahoris,  his
information  about  them  appears  only  to  be  derived  from  traditional
stories  coming  from  a  preceding  century.  During  the  present  century
I  have  only  come  across  casual  references  to  the  Zahoris,  and  this  race
of  pretended  seers,  some  of  whom  possibly  may  have  had  supernormal
vision,  has  long  died  out,  even  the  very  meaning  of  the  word  being
known  to  comparatively  few.

In  concluding  this  note  I  wish  specially  to  acknowledge  my  in-
debtedness to  the  wide  learning  and  scholarship  of  my  friend  the  Ptev.
Maxwell  Close  M.A.,  for  much  kind  assistance  both  here  and  else-
where  in  this  research.


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  G.


373


APPENDIX  G.
Scientific  and  Literary  Opinion.

Before  closing  the  present  Report  it  may  be  instructive  to  refer  to
some  of  the  scientific  and  literary  reviews  of  the  previous  Report.
Before  doing  so  I  will  quote,  by  permission,  the  following  interesting
letters  sent  to  me  by  two  distinguished  men  of  science.

I  will  first  quote  a  letter  from  one  of  the  highest  authorities  on
geology.  Sir  Archibald  Geikie,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.,  etc.,  to  whom  my  hearty
thanks  are  due  for  writing  at  such  length  : —

28,  Jermyn  Street,  London,  S.W.,  Nonember  8th,  1897.
On  my  return  last  week  from  a  prolonged  tour  in  Eastern  Europe  I
found  among  the  papers  and  books  awaiting  me  your  Monograph  on  the
Divining  Rod,  and  I  spent  most  of  yesterday  in  reading  it.  First  let  me
thank  you  for  sending  me  a  copy  and  nest  congratulate  you  on  the
publication  of  so  fair,  temperate  and  interesting  a  statement  of  the
whole  case.

As  you  may  believe,  my  experience  has  chiefly  been  among  the  failures
of  the  dowsers,  and  I  have  necessarily  been  led  to  form  a  rather  low
estimate  of  these  men  and  their  pretensions.  But  your  narrative  leads  me
to  recognise  that  I  have  never  seen  the  other  side,  and  that  T  may  have  done
them  injustice.  It  seems  to  me  that  a  large  proportion  of  their  successes
are  such  as  any  intelligent  man,  giving  himself  up  to  the  observation  of  water
supply,  might  easily  accomplish  without  anything  more  than  mother  wit  to
guide  him.  It  is  most  diificult  to  get  accurate  information  regarding  their
failures,  and  the  true  proportion  these  bear  to  their  successes.  The  evidence
of  the  men  themselves  in  this  matter  is  not  wholly  satisfactory,  nor  is  that
of  their  employers  who  have  found  water.

In  all  such  matters  I  try  to  keep  my  mind  open.  There  are  so  many
mysteries  in  nature  that  one  learns  every  day  how  foolish  is  the  attitude  of
those  men  of  science  who  dogmatically  assert  that  such  and  such  phenomena
are  "bosh,"  "rot,"  "deception,"  "fraud,"  and  all  the  other  choice  terms
they  have  so  freely  at  command.  I  have  been  accustomed  to  look  at  the
dowsers  as  either  self-deceived  or  consciously  deceiving  others.  And  even
after  perusing  your  most  interesting  volume  I  am  not  prepared  at  once  to
abandon  this  attitude.  But  you  have  brought  forward  such  a  body  of
evidence  that  I  must  hold  my  judgment  in  suspense  for  a  time.  If  I  can  be
satisfied  that  there  is  any  instinct,  faculty,  or  whatever  you  choose  to  call  it,
whereby  a  man  can  detect  the  presence  of  underground  running  water,  I  shall
never  say  another  word  against  dowsing,  though  I  shall  still  thuik  some  of
the  dowsers  little  better  than  rogues.

If  there  is  such  an  instinct,  why  should  it  not  show  itself  as  unfailingly
in  a  young  and  inexperienced  hand  as  in  an  old  and  hardened  sinner  ?  You
attribute  some  of  the  failures  to  the  inexperience  of  the  performers. But  if


374


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[PAUT


the  effects  are  due  to  some  direct  reaction  of  the  water  below  upon  the

operator  above,  and  not  to  any  observation  or  reasoning  on  his  part,  it  may

be  open  to  question  whether  the  faculty  or  instinct  requires  experience  for

its  development.  .  ^

^  Arch.  Geikie.

Two  criticisms  are  contained  in  the  foregoing  interesting  letter  :
(1)  Sir  Ai'chibald  Geikie  suggests  that  a  large  proportion  of  the  suc-
cesses of  the  dowser  are  such  as  mother  wit  would  account  for.  The
evidence  adduced  in  the  present  Report  enables  us  to  judge  whether
this  is  so,  and  the  question  has  been  fully  discussed.  (2)  The  other
criticism  is  that  contained  in  the  last  paragraph  of  the  letter.  I  do
not  for  one  moment  believe  there  is  any  "  direct  reaction  of  the  water
below  upon  the  operator  above  "  ;  neither  a  direct  nor  an  indirect
action  of  a  physical  nature  is  at  all  probable.  If,  however,  the  dowser
is  able  to  detect  the  presence  of  underground  water  by  any  sub-
conscious process,  or  even  supernormal  instinct,  it  is  conceivable  that
experience  and  practice  may  consciously  or  subconsciously  be  of  some
assistance,  and  I  am  disposed  to  think  they  are.  Sir  Archibald
Ueikie  refers  to  his  experience  of  the  failures  of  dowsers.  I  wish
particulars  of  these  had  Ijeen  sent  to  me,  as  sometimes  they  rest
on  hearsay.  A  great  failure  of  MuUins  was  reported  at  Cai'low  and
referred  to  by  my  geological  friends.  Here  is  the  result  of  an
investigation  of  it  on  the  spot  whicli  I  asked  an  able  geologist  to
make  : —

Geological  Survey  of  Ireland,  Dublin,  July  16th,  1900.
I  have  made  inquiries  about  Mullins  at  Clonmel,  as  promised,  and  found,
to  my  disgust,  that  the  people  there  made  the  poor  man  drunk  and  turned
his  performances  into  a  laugh  !

J.  R.  KiLROE.

I  will  here  add  the  letter  of  another  distinguished  naturalist,
Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  who  writes  as  follows  : —

Parkstone,  Dorset,  Septemher  12th,  1897.
I  read  your  excellent  and  very  thorough  paper  with  the  greatest  pleamre,
and  noted  a  few  points  of  slight  disagreement  on  which  I  determined  to
write  to  you.

I  have  long  been  convinced  of  the  reality  of  the  power  of  the
"dowsers."  Your  resume  shows  how  impossible  it  is  to  convince  men
by  any  amount  of  evidence  till  the  time  is  ripe  for  them  to  receive  it.
The  large  amount  of  the  evidence  is  even  a  disadvantage.  Few  will  read
and  icei<ih  the  mass  of  evidence  you  have  collected,  and  I  have  no
doubt  many  of  the  sceptics  will  accuse  you  of  believing  anything  you
are  told.

Now  for  my  criticism.  At  p,  2.39  you  say  there  are  two  points  adverse  to
the  dowser — one  being  their  "absurd"  idea  of  the  general  distribution
of  undei'ground  water — either  as  springs  on  definite  spots  or  as  narrow


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  G.


37o


underground  rivers.  But  if  they  really  and  as  a  rule  believed  the  former — of
which  I  can  find  no  evidence  in  your  Report — it  would,  as  it  seems  to
me,  not  be  adverse  to  their  possession  of  some  exceptional  faculty,  but
in  their  favour.'  For  if  they  are  totally  ignorant  of  the  real  laws  of
water- distribution,  the  chief  objection,  that  they  work  by  acute  observation
and  knowledge,  falls  to  the  ground.  And  as  to  the  second  "absurd"
supposition — of  water  being  often  in  narrow  underground  streams  or
veins — if  your  evidence  proves  anything,  it  proves  that  it  is  often  a  fact,
and  how  can  believing  in  a  fact  of  nature  be  "absurd"?  Again,  the
whole  of  the  dowsers'  business  would  be  gone  if  the  geologists'  theory
of  saturated  strata  or  surfaces  was  always  or  generally  true.  For  then,
as  is  the  case  over  considerable  areas,  any  one  could  get  water  by  sinkmg
to  the  necessary  depths  to  reach  the  water-bearing  stratum.  Consequently,
in  such  districts  dowsers  are  never  required.  But  where  the  reverse  is
the  case — and  your  neighbour  may  have  a  good  well  at  30  ft.  while  you
sink  60  ft.  in  vain — in  such  districts  alone  the  dowser  is  employed;  hence,
to  hira,  all  the  available  evidence  shows  underground  water  to  be  strictly
limited.  If  he  jjrofesses  to  know  that  this  is  the  universal  mode  of
distribution,  of  course  he  would  be  "absurdly"  ignorant,  but  I  am  not
aware  that  he  ever  says  so  ;  whereas  the  geologists  do  say,  or  imply,
that  the  reverse  is  so  generally  the  case  tiiat  the  dowser  can  do  nothing
except  by  guess,  etc.,  etc.  !  If  either  of  the  two  is  "absurd,"  it  is  not
the  dowser.

Some  geologists  are  sublime  in  their  inconsistency.  One  geologic  critic
says  "any  cottager  could  have  given  the  same  advice"  as  the  dowser,
— as  if  in  a  district  where  "every  cottager"  knew  where  to  obtain  water,
any  man  would  be  fool  enough  to  get  either  a  dowser  or  a  geologist  to
find  it !

Mr.  Wallace  then  discusses  the  question  of  unconscious  muscular
action  as  the  cause  of  the  motion  of  the  rod,  but  this  part  of  his  letter
I  have  quoted  in  Part  XI.  when  dealing  with  that  subject.  As
before  remarked,  whatever  Mr.  Wallace  writes  is  worthy  of  most
careful  consideration,  for  his  opinions  generally  prove  to  be  right
in  the  long  run,  his  observation  being  keener,  and  his  range  of  know-
ledge wider,  than  most  of  his  critics.

In  connection  with  the  question  of  the  influence  of  evidence  on
belief  referred  to  in  the  second  sentence  of  Dr.  A.  R.  Wallace's  letter,
it  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  quote  here  the  opinion  of  one  of  the

1  I  stated  on  the  page  referred  to  by  Mr.  Wallace  that  according  to  geological
opinion  "  underground  water  usually  exists  in  wide  saturated  areas  "  and  this  opinion
was  discussed  more  fully  in  Appendix  B  to  the  ijrevious  Report.  At  the  same  time
I  ventured  to  say  that  the  evidence  cited  in  that  Report  iJointed  to  the  frequent
occurrence,  underground,  of  permeable  channels  as  well  as  permeable  areas,  and  hence
that  geologists  had  not  sufficiently  reci'gnised  the  truth  of  the  dowser's  point  of
view.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  dowser's  most  successful  achievements  are  just  in
those  districts  where  geologists  most  often  fail,  viz.,  in  regions  where  underground
water  does  exist  in  narrow  fissures  or  channels.  This  is  shown  in  Mr.  Westlake's
useful  Appendix,  p.  340.— W.F.  B.


876


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


earliest  and  best  friends  of  the  S.P.R.,  Mr.  0.  C.  Massey,  who  writes
to  me  as  follows  : —

I  am  more  than  ever  convinced  that  it  is  not  so  much  evidence  as  a
disposition  to  credit  it  that  is  wanted.  Is  there  such  a  tiling  as  a  purely
objective  standpoint  towards  evidence  ?  I  doubt  it,  as  also  I  doubt  that  any
evidence  whatever  can  avail  to  overcome  an  adverse  subjective  standpoint.
I  think  the  true  function  of  evidence  is  quite  misconceived  when  evidence  is
supposed  to  be  that  which  generates  belief. ■  ■  •  C C  Massey

There  is  much  truth  in  what  Mr.  Massey  says ;  whether  it  be  due
to  the  inertia  of  our  mental  processes,  which  tends  to  preserve  habits
of  thought  in  the  straight  line  along  which  they  have  been  started,  or
whatever  be  the  cause,  there  is  a  real  diificulty  in  believing  in  anything
unfamiliar  to  us,  and  it  requires  a  genuine,  and  often  painful  mental
effort  to  overcome  our  tendency  to  keep  on  the  old  lines  of  thought.
Hence  it  is  that  the  flimsiest  evidence,  if  it  appeals  to  our  preconceived
ideas,  is  usually  accepted  without  question  ;  whilst,  by  the  majority  of
people,  the  weightiest  evidence  is  rejected,  if  it  requires  a  dislocation
of  our  familiar  ideas.  This  is  amusingly  illustrated  by  a  story  recently
told  me  of  an  old  countrywoman,  who  firmly  believed  her  sailor  son,
when  he  mentioned  Pharaoh's  chariot-wheels  as  lying  on  the  shores  of
the  Red  Sea,  but  was  insulted  by  his  silly  stories  when  he  told  her  that
he  had  sqqti  flying  fish  !

On  page  221  of  my  previous  paper  I  refer  to  the  then  President  of
the  Geologists'  Association  of  London,  Mr.  T.  V.  Holmes,  F.G.S.,
as  having  i-ecently  read  a  paper  on  the  divining  rod  before  the
Anthropological  Institute.  That  paper  has  since  been  published  in
the  Journal  of  the  Institute,  and  I  have  to  thank  Mr.  Holmes  not
only  for  the  kind  reference  to  my  work  in  his  paper,  but  also  for  much
valuable  help  which  he  has  from  time  to  time  freely  given  to  me,  and
for  his  suggestive  criticisms  from  the  point  of  view  of  a  field  geologist.
And  here  let  me  say  that  in  the  practical  examination  of  this
question  the  co-operation  of  a  geologist  is  necessary.  With  the
exception  of  Mr.  Westlake,  F.G.S.,  whose  valuable  aid  I  have
already  acknowledged,  the  ditficulty  has  been,  just  as  in  other
departments  of  the  work  of  this  Society,  to  induce  those  to  give
us  their  help  whose  scientific  training  in  a  particular  direction  renders
them  specially  qualified  to  conduct  an  investigation  such  as  the  present.
If,  however,  I  may  judge  from  the  letters  that  have  reached  me  from
some  eminent  geologists,  the  evidence  given  in  my  previous  paper
renders  such  co-operation  less  improbable  in  the  future.

Turning  now  to  the  scientific  Press,  the  leading  organ  of  British
science,  Nature,  had  a  lengthy  review  of  the  Report,  a  review  which


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  G.


377


could  hardly  be  described  as  written  in  a  judicial  spirit.  ^  Neverthe-
less I  am  grateful  to  the  reviewer  for  his  kindly  personal  references,
and  for  drawing  my  attention  to  a  weak  piece  of  evidence  that
was  inserted  in  the  Report,  which  I  will  deal  with  first.

On  p.  130  of  the  Report  particulars  are  given  of  what  appears  to
be  a  good  case  on  behalf  of  the  dowser  at  Wootton,  in  the  Isle  of
Wight.  The  report  in  the  Morning  Post  was  confirmed  by  the  dowser,
and  also  by  the  owner  of  the  estate,  a  clergyman,  who,  in  reply  to  my
inquiries,  stated  that  "it  is  quite  true  that  he  [the  dowser]  discovered
an  abundant  supply  of  water  where  efforts  had  previously  been  made
in  vain."  The  Nature  reviewer,  speaking  from  personal  knowledge  of
the  place,  challenges  this,  and  says  that  three  useless  wells  were  sunk
by  the  dowser's  advice,  and  that  it  did  not  need  a  diviner  to  discover
water  where  it  was  eventually  found.  I  asked  Mr.  Westlake,  F.G.S.,
who  has  made  a  special  study  of  hydro-geology,  to  visit  the  place  and
report  to  me  :  he  kindly  did  so,  and  from  his  report,  contained  in
Appendix  A,  p.  328,  there  seems  little  doubt  that  this  case  affords  no
evidence  for  or  against  the  dowser.  It  appears,  howevei',  that  the
Nature  reviewer  is  inaccurate  in  one  respect.  After  visiting  the  spot
in  November,  1897,  and  making  careful  inquiries  from  residents  in  the
neighbourhood,  Mr.  Westlake  writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

I  found  that  local  opinion  did  not  coincide  with  that  of  the  reviewer  in
Nature.  My  informants,  Messrs.  Cole,  Turner,  Newbury  and  Barton,  said,
after  reading  the  review,  they  knew  nothing  about  the  three  useless  wells
which,  according  to  the  reviewer,  had  been  sunk  at  the  diviner's  instance  in
the  waterless  Oligocene  clays.  It  was  true  that  wells  had  been  sunk  in  these
clays  near  the  railway  station,  and  one  at  Woodside,  without  success,  but
they  had  not  been- located  by  diviners.  It  was  the  local  people  without  the
rod  who  made  these  mistakes,  and  as  they  were  jealous  of  the  diviner,  a
stranger  "  from  the  mainland,"  I  think  I  should  have  heard  of  any  mistake
he  made.  What  the  diviner  did  was  to  find  water  where  everybody — after
the  event — knew  it  was.  The  reviewer  says  it  "  did  not  need  a  diviner  to
discover"  it — meaning,  should  not  have  needed — with  which  last  I  quite
agree,  and  regard  the  Wootton  experiments  as  no  evidence  one  way  or
the  other.

Curiously  enough,  not  far  from  the  place  singled  out  by  the
geological  reviewer  in  Nature  is  a  case  where  the  geologist  failed  to
find  water  and  the  dowser  succeeded.  This  has  been  given  in  detail
in  Part  III.,  p.  164.

To  return,  the  "principal  criticism,"  remarks  the  Nature  reviewer,
"  we  have  to  make  on  Professor  Barrett's  collection  of  facts  is,  that  he
does  not  give  enough  weight  to  the  natural  tendency  of  mankind


1  Nature,  October  14th,  1897.


378


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


to  conceal  their  failures."  I  was  well  aware  of  the  difficulty  of
arriving  at  a  just  estimate  of  the  number  of  failures  on  the  part  of  the
dowser,  but  every  effort  was  made  to  ascertain  them,  and  this  point  is
specially  referred  to  at  the  outset  of  the  previous  Report  on  p.  4,  again
on  p.  63,  and  again  on  pp.  238  and  239.  As  I  wish  to  emphasise  this
aspect,  I  will  repeat  what  was  then  said  : —

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  (especially  among  amateur  dowsers)  one  is
more  likely  to  hear  of  success  than  failure,  and  therefore  an  extensive  and
searching  inquiry  is  necessary  before  any  safe  induction  can  be  dra\vn
(p.  239)  .  .  .  All  that  was  possible  in  the  present  investigation  was  to
make  the  range  of  evidence  as  wide  and  unbiassed  as  possible,  and  not
exclude  a  single  case  of  failui'e  that  was  substantiated.  This  has  been  done
(p.  238). (The  pages  refer  to  the  previous  Rej^ort.)

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that,  even  with  skilled  geologists,  failures
are  b}'  no  means  unknown  in  their  predictions  of  water  supply,  though
I  am  not  aware  of  any  treatise  on  hydro-geology  that  thinks  it
essential  to  arrive  at  and  set  forth  the  percentage  of  failures  which
different  geologists  have  had.  Because  some  people  have  had  a
costly  experience  of  the  vanity  of  human  opinion,  even  of  expert
geological  opinion,  that  is  no  reason  for  rejecting  the  indispensable
help  which  expert  geologists  can  give  in  selecting  a  suitable  site
for  the  boring  of  an  artesian  well.  It  is  true  they  sometimes  lead
to  an  outlay  of  ^19,600  to  no  very  obvious  purpose,  but  then
what  the  town  loses  in  water  and  rates,  geology  gains  in  strati-
graphical  knowledge.  To  some  of  these  scientific  gains,  at  the
cost  of  the  ratepayers,  I  have  referred  on  p.  235  of  the  previous
Report.  In  fact,  one  of  the  best  English  hydro-geologists,  Mr.
De  Ranee,  F.G.S.,  states  in  a  letter  to  me,  which  I  quoted  on
p.  234,  that  the  predictions  (as  regards  water  sources)  of  even
leading  geologists,  who  are  not  specialists,  "rest  upon  chance,"  and
he  would  not  be  surprised  to  hear  their  failures  were  as  numerous
as  the  dowsers' !  If  both  rest  upon  chance,  that  certainly  would  be  the
case,  but  if  either  the  dowsers'  or  the  geologists'  failures  are  notably
fewer  than  chance  would  suggest,  then  the  predictions  of  one  or
the  other  do  not  rest  upon  chance.  Obviously,  the  question  of  the
dowser's  success  is  one  thing ;  how  he  arrives  at  it  quite  another,  and
the  latter  is  a  matter  of  insignificance  to  any  one  who  merely  wants
to  sink  a  well.  A  scientific  inquiry,  such  as  I  have  attempted,  neces-
sarily embraces  both  these  questions.

Following  upon  this  review  is  a  letter  from  Mr.  Wadsworth,  of  the
Michigan  College  of  Mines,i  a  letter  which  was  largely  quoted  by  the


1  Nature,  January  6th,  1898.


xxxvni.]


Appendix  0.


379


English  press  as  exploding  the  whole  of  the  dowser's  claims.  ^  I  have
already  referred  to  and  quoted  from  this  letter  on  a  preceding
page,  p.  288,  so  that  I  need  only  say  that  Mr.  Wadsworth's  theory  is
a  little  belated,  apart  from  its  failing  altogether  to  account  for  the
correspondence  of  the  movement  of  the  rod  with  the  presence  of
underground  water.

I  will  now  briefly  refer  to  some  of  the  comments  on  the  Report
that  have  appeared  in  the  ordinary  newspaper  press.  A  large  collection
of  press  notices,  reviews  and  articles  based  on  that  report  have  reached
me^;  but  as  might  be  expected,  instructive  criticism  on  any  of  the
subjects  which  occupy  the  attention  of  our  Society  is  rarely  to  be
found  in  the  columns  of  the  ordinary  daily  or  weekly  newspaper  press,
with  the  honourable  exception  of  one  or  two  papers  such  as  the
Spectator,  and  from  erudite  critics  such  as  Mr.  A.  Lang,  to  whom
I  am  also  indebted  for  the  excellent  outline  of  the  Report  given  in
LonymanJ s  Magazine  for  December,  1897.

A  passing  reference  must  also  be  made  to  an  able  and  interesting-
review  of  the  Report  that  occupied  several  columns  of  that  influential
French  newspaper,  the  Journal  des  Debats.  The  review  was  signed,
and  was  from  the  pen  of  a  naturalist  and  critic,  M.  H.  de  Varigny,  to
whom  my  hearty  thanks  are  due  for  his  careful  study  and  summary  of
my  previous  paper,  and  also  for  some  useful  information  he  has
subsequently  sent  to  me.

A  well-known  Cardiff  newspaper  devoted  a  leading  article  to  a
concise  and  fair  outline  of  the  Report,  which  led  to  a  vigorous  and
protracted  correspondence  in  its  columns,  between  a  worthy  self-taught
local  geologist  and  our  friend  the  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer,  whose  kind
assistance  I  have  already  acknowledged,  and  to  whom  my  thanks  are
due  for  his  able  and  temperate  letters  in  the  Western  Mail.  I  am  also
indebted  to  the  editor  of  the  Ridmiond  Times  for  information  he  has
kindly  sent  me,  and  for  devoting  so  large  a  space  in  his  journal  to  an
outline  of  my  Report  and  its  discussion.

1  Mr.  Wadsworth's  theory  was  anticipated  by  his  own  countryman,  Mr.  Ralph
Emerson,  in  1826.  As  mentioned  in  my  previous  paper,  this  is  not  Ralph  Waldo
Emerson,  but  an  able  contemporary  of  his  who  entered  the  ministry  a  little  earlier
than  his  famous  namesake  ;  it  was  some  time  before  I  discovered  there  were  two  con-
temporary Ralph  Emersons,  probably  fellow-students.

It  is  only  right  that  I  should  here  acknowledge  the  care  and  skill  with  which
Durrant's  Press  Cutting  Agency  have  supplied  me,  not  only  with  these  press  notices,
but  also  with  many  hundreds  of  paragraphs  and  articles  on  the  subject  of  the  divining
rod  and  the  search  for  underground  water  in  general.  All  of  these  have  been  read
and  a  few  have  led  to  useful  correspondence,  but,  as  a  rule,  these  newspaper  extracts
are  wearisome  and  worthless.


380


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


Several  columns  of  a  weekly  journal,  the  New  Age,  were  also
devoted  to  a  friendly  discussion  of  the  report  and  on  the  S.P.R.
in  general.  The  article  is  signed,  and  the  writer,  Mr.  D.  Balsillie,
like  so  many  others,  assumes  that  a  plausible  explanation  of  any
obscure  phenomenon  is  probably  the  correct  one,  forgetting  that
any  experimenter  worthy  of  the  name  is  sure  to  have  exhausted
all  obvious  explanations  before  he  ventures  upon  the  publication
of  any  experiments  which  he  believes  point  to  some  fresh  addition  to
our  knowledge.  Mr.  Balsillie  takes  it  for  granted,  from  Hansen  and
Lehmann's  experiments,  that  nasal  whispering  "  explains "  thought-
transference,  and  says,  almost  in  Dr.  Scripture's^  words  : —

Thus  the  mystery  of  thought-transference  without  contact  has  been
cleared  up  in  a  way  which  any  one  can  verify  for  himself  who  has  access  to  a
psychological  laboratory.

This  has  been  so  conclusively  answered  by  Professor  Sidgwick  and
Professor  James  that  I  will  not  dwell  upon  it;  but  Mr.  Balsillie  draws
from  it  the  inference  that,  as  the  dowser  only  detects  running,  and
not  stagnant,  water,  he  pi'obably  derives  his  information  from  some
sub-conscious  perception  of  sound,  and  hence  he  adds  : —

It  might  he  worth  Professor  Barrett's  while  to  give  some  heed  to  what
we  have  said  above  about  the  psychological  explanation  of  thought-
transference.

The  possible  exaltation  of  sense  perception  on  the  part  of  the
dowser  has  been  dealt  with  in  the  previous  and  the  present
Report.

It  only  remains  for  me  to  thank  the  Editor  of  Light  for  the
full  and  excellent  summary  of  the  Report  that  appeared  in  his
journal.

A  brief  notice  of  two  books  on  the  divining  rod,  which  have  been
recently  published,  may  here  be  added.  Neither  of  these  books  has
any  scientific  or  literary  value.  One  is  an  extraordinary  medley,  written
by  an  enthusiastic  believer  in  the  rod,  and  the  other  is  simply  a  trade
advertisement  of  a  professional  dowser.  I  should  have  passed  them
both  over,  but  they  formed  the  points  d' ap^mi  for  two  interesting
articles  in  the  Daily  Neivs,  and  one  was  the  subject  of  a  lengthy  review
in  Nature,  usually  considered  a  scientific  journal."  The  first-named
book  is  by  Mr.  Beaven,  and  is  called  Tales  of  the  Divining  Rod.  It  is
quite  impossible  to  notice  this  book  seriously,  as  it  is  a  rhapsody  in
turgid  English  on  the  glorious  "mysteries  of  rhabdomancy,"  compiled
by  a  tenant  farmer  and  fruit  grower  of  Hereford,  who  has  found  the


1  The  New  Fsi/chologi/,  p.  200.

2  Nature,  November  2nd,  1899.


XXXVIII.]


Appendix  G.


381


dowser  of  considerable  use  to  his  fruit  farm.  Mr.  Beaven's  experience
of  the  rod  I  gave  in  the  previous  Report,  on  pp.  157  and  158,  but  in
his  book,  fiction  is  so  intermingled  with  fact  that  the  author  tells  us,
when  we  come  to  Chapter  XXI  : —

All  that  I  have  hitherto  written  concerning  the  divining  rod  has  been
mixed  more  or  less  with  the  imaginative  .  .  .  but  now,  to  the  end  of
the  book,  the  truth,  and  the  truth  only,  shall  be  stated.  That  at  least  is
my  intention.

This  laudable  intention  he  strives  to  carry  out  by  transposing
to  the  remaining  half  of  his  volume  a  large  part  of  my  previous
paper ;  but,  just  as  in  the  earlier  half  he  allowed  his  readers  to
guess  which  was  fact  and  which  fiction,  so  in  the  latter  half  he  leaves
them,  as  a  rule,  to  guess  which  are  his  own  words  and  which
are  mine.

Mr.  Beaven  tells  us  on  p.  201  his  theory  is  that,  owing  to  the
beneficence  of  the  Creator,  every

imprisoned  spring  sends  up  an  urgent  and  unmistakeable  message  to  the
surface  .  .  .  for  man's  special  benefit.  .  .  .  Were  those  electrical
influences  visible,  we  should  probably  see  every  hill  and  dale  dotted  over
with  electric  waving  mounds,  each  uprising  coil  containing  a  central  column
which  whirls  in  an  eccentric  manner  precisely  over  each  fountain  head  ;
while  connected  with  most  of  these  magnetic  mounds  are  electrical  currents
waving  on  the  earth's  surface  over  the  exact  track  of  every  subterranean
watercourse.  (!)

These  "  waving  electric  currents  "  are  perceived  by  certain  "  gifted
individuals"  who  have  a  "secretive  electric  power,"  etc.  But  I  need
not  proceed  further,  we  shall  all  agree  that  somebody's  brain  certainly
"whirls  in  an  eccentric  manner,"  and  Mr.  Beaven's  book  will  at  any
rate  afford  entertainment  to  any  scientific  man  who  happens  to
read  it.

The  other  book,  as  I  have  said,  is  an  advertisement  issued  by  the
dowser,  Mr.  B.  Tompkins,  who  writes  after  his  name  "  W.F."
(meaning  water-finder).  Mr.  Tompkins'  Theory  of  Water -finding  (as
his  book  is  called),  is  even  more  amusing  than  the  descriptive  letters
he  has  conferred  upon  himself  ;  his  theory  is,  of  course,  "  Electricity."
He  and  Mr.  Beaven  resemble  the  rustic  who,  describing  to  me  a
ghostly  light  he  had  seen  at  a  certain  spot,  said  (in  answer  to  my
inquiries  as  to  what  the  light  resembled),  that  "  it  was  just  like  an
electric  light."  When  I  asked  him  where  he  had  seen  the  electric
light,  he  replied  "  I  never  seen  it,  maister,  but  it  ii^ere  just  like  it."
So  Mr.  Tompkins  tells  us  all  about  electricity,  what  it  really  is,
how  it  moves  the  rod,  and  how  he  has  thus  been  able  to  "unfold  the


382


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


[part


bewildering  enigma  of  tlie  divining  rod  "...  and  how  he  trusts
ere  long  to  receive  the  reward  due  to  his  efforts.

Of  a  very  different  character  is  an  excellent  little  manual  on  the
discovery  of  underground  water  by  E.  vS.  Auscher,  entitled  V Art
de  decouvrir  les  Sources  (Paris,  Balliere,  1899).  This  book  is  not
meant  for  hydro-geologists,  but  to  meet  the  needs  of  those  who  require
a  general  knowledge  of  the  method  of  finding  underground  water.  It
also  includes  a  wide  range  of  subject  matter  subsidiary  to  its  main
object,  such  as  the  analysis  of  water,  the  best  methods  of  boring,  etc.
A  section  is  devoted  to  the  baguette  divinatoire  (divining  rod),  but
here  the  authoi',  like  so  many  other  writers  on  this  subject,  falls  into
numerous  errors,  not  only  in  the  history  of  the  bag^iette,  but  in  its
mode  of  use,  etc. He  states  (p.  144)  that

the  skill  of  the  operator  consists  in  moving  the  index  fingers  (les  index)  so
slightly  that  the  rod  appears  to  turn  automatically,  as  if  it  obeyed  a  super-
natural impulse.

And  yet,  a  few  pages  further  on,  the  author  states  that  the  dis-
tinguished members  of  the  commission  appointed  by  the  Paris
Academy  of  Sciences  to  inquire  into  the  baguette,^  arrived  at  the
conclusion  that  the  motion  of  the  rod  was  due  to  unconscious  muscular
action  on  the  part  of  the  operator.  Moreover,  M.  Auscher  appears  to
be  unaware  that  one  of  the  most  eminent  anthropologists  in  France,
Professor  Gabriel  de  Mortillet,  was  once  a  successful  dowser  with  the
baguette,  and  has  written  a  little  book  on  the  subject,  entitled  Ilistoire
de  Vhydrosco2ne  et  de  la  baguette  divinatoire,  which  was  published  in
1850.  M.  Auscher  often  refers  to  the  work  of  L'Abbe  Paramelle  as
a  water  finder,  and  speaks  of  him  with  a  certain  respect.  So  little
is  known  of  Paramelle  in  England  that  I  have  given  an  outline  of  his
life-work  and  book  in  Appendix  D  (see  p.  352),  and  have  devoted  some
space  to  a  discussion  of  his  methods,  in  so  far  as  they  relate  to  the
general  subject  of  this  paper.

As  these  sheets  are  passing  through  the  press  a  statement  has
appeared  in  sevei'al  English  and  foreign  newspapers  that  a  new  French
Commission  had  been  appointed  to  inquire  into  the  evidence  on  behalf
of  the  baguette  divinatoire  (divining  rod),  and  that  a  hydraulic  engineer
was  appointed  president  of  the  Commission,  giving  his  name  and
address.  After  several  futile  attempts  to  get  further  particulars,
I  received  at  last  two  badly  printed  circulars — one  advertising  the

1  "Referred  to  in  my  i^revious  Report,  p.  14.  The  facts  are  briefly  these  :  in  1853
the  French  Academy  nominated  a  Committee  of  three  eminent  men,  MM.  Chevreul,
Boussingault,  and  Babinet,  to  rejiort  on  a  paper  on  the  Baguette  Divinatoire  which
had  been  presented  by  a  M.  Riondet.  Chevreul  was  requested  by  his  colleagues  to
draw  up  the  report,  which  led  to  the  publication  of  his  work  on  the  Divining  Rod
in  1854.


XXXVIIl]


Appendix  G.


383


business  of  the  engineer  in  question  and  soliciting  the  favour  of
a  commission,  and  the  other  stating  that  the  Soci^te  Magnetique  cle
France  (whatever  that  may  be)  had  appointed  a  committee  of  five
persons,  chiefly  members  of  that  Society,  to  report  on  the  "apparatus"
employed  by  sourciers  to  seek  for  underground  water.  In  answer  to
inquiries  from  an  English  amateur  dowser,  the  business  president
of  this  so-called  commission  states  that  he  is  deputed  "to  make  a
precise  inquiry  into  the  mathematical  laws  (!)  of  the  hagnetfe,"  and  he
adds  his  opinion  that  money  ought  to  be  made  out  of  the  sourciers'
business.  From  which  the  scope  and  scientific  value  of  this  commission
may  be  inferred  ;  very  different  from  the  1853  Committee  referred  to
in.  the  foot-note  on  the  previous  page.


384  F. W.  H.  Myers.  [Supplement.


SUPPLEMEISTT.


1.

PSEUDO-POSSESSIOK.i  ■ ■  ,

By  F.  W.  H.  Myers.  '

I  have  selected  for  joint  discussion  two  books  which,  while  differing
widely  in  scope  and  purpose,  do  nevertheless  agree  in  furnishing
striking  examples  of  a  kind  of  study  which  is  at  present  of  prime
importance  to  the  psychologist.

Both  works  contain  careful  analyses  of  certain  cases  of  modified
or  multiplex  personality; — ranging  from  the  hysterical  idees  fixes  with
which  Dr.  Janet  deals,  to  the  complex  case  of  apparently  sane  and
healthy,  yet  enormously  active,  subliminal  mentation  which  forms  the
subject  of  Professor  Flournoy's  book.

Now  I  hold  that  all  accessible  modifications  of  personality  should  be
studied  in  detail  and  in  connection ; — so  that  all  may  ultimately  fall  into
their  place  in  that  long  series  which  extends  from  the  confines  of
insanity  on  the  one  hand  up  to  possession  and  ecstasy  on  the  other.

We  ought  through  such  study  to  attain  a  much  wider  concei^tion
than  of  old  of  the  possibilities  which  lie  hid  in  man.  For  the  psycho-
logist must  surely  feel  more  and  more  the  insufficiency  of  the  physician's
conception  of  ordinary  health  and  sanity  as  a  summit  from  which  all
other  states  constitute  a  decline.  It  will  not  do  any  longer  to  regard
human  nature  only  with  the  aim  of  maintaining  it  as  it  already  is.
That  is  the  doctor's  view,  and  it  was  the  necessary  view  for  science  to
begin  with  ;  but  the  time  has  come  for  disinterested  curiosity  as  well  as
for  mere  therapeutic  care.  There  exists  a  greater  range,  we  may  fairly
suppose,  in  the  scale  of  cosmic  existence  above  human  nature  than  there
exists  helotv  it;  and,  while  taking  care  not  to  narrow  or  injure  our  exist-
ing powers,  it  should  also  now  be  our  object  to  learn,  if  possible,  how
to  extend  them.  ,  Janet's  book  is  important  on  the  one  side ;  Flournoy's
takes  us  one  short  step  onwards  on  the  other.  Both  books  are  not
only  learned  and  painstaking  but  even  brilliant. Few  students  of

Nevroscs  et  Idees  fixes.  Vol.  I.  By  Professor  Pierre  Janet.  Vol.  II.  By  Pro-
fessor F.  Raymond  and  Professor  Pierre  Janet. (Paris,  1898. )

-  Des  Indes  a  la  planite  Mars:  etude  sitr  un  eas  de  Somnamhulisme  avec  Glossolalie.
Par  Th.  Flournoy.  (Paris  and  Geneva.  1900.)  [Translated  by  Daniel  B.  Vermilye,
under  the  title  of  From  India  to  the  j^lanet  Mars,  published  by  Harper  and  Brothers,
Ne^v  York  and  London,  1900,]


Part  XXXVIII.]


Pseudo-Possession.


385


morbid  psychology  have  ever  shown  an  acumen  equal  to  Dr.  Janet's  ; —
few  writers  on  matter  of  difficult  controversy  have  ever  produced  so
delightful  an  impression  of  absolute,  instinctive  candour  as  Professor
Flournoy.  The  literaiy  execution  is  in  each  case  first-rate,  and  the
mastery  of  these  works  is  one  of  the  most  agreeable  as  well  as  essential
tasks  of  the  experimental  psychologist.

To  begin  with  Professor  Janet.  It  must  be  remembered,  of  course,
that  the  aim  of  his  work  is  medical,  and  great  though  its  philosophical
interest  is,  a  certain  allowance  must  be  made  throughout  for  the
environment  of  the  Salpetriere.  In  that  atmosphere  human  beings  are
apt  to  get  divided  somewhat  too  simply  into  medecins  and  malades, —
mon  excelleHt  mattre  and  la  'pauvre  desequilihree.  In  hospital  lectures  it
is  not  easy  to  remember  that  there  is  a  great  world  outside  the  hosjaital
where  faculties  are  more  mixed  and  ideals  perhaps  more  expansive.

Once  outside  the  hospital — to  make  at  once  what  small  reserves  I
have  to  make  as  to  Dr.  Janet's  competence — this  acute  physician  walks
with  a  less  certain  step.  The  paper  on  ciystal-gazing,  for  instance,  in
Vol.  I.  of  the  present  work,  while  ingeniously  illusti'ating  such  part  of
the  subject  as  hospital  practice  can  teach,  does  yet  merely  evade  the
harder  problems  involved  ; — evades  them  so  adroitly  that  beyond  this
one  sentence  it  calls  for  no  comment  hei'e.^

Since  there  are  over  a  thousand  large  closely -printed  octavo  pages
to  deal  with  in  Professor  Janet's  book,  some  slight  preliminary  sketch
of  its  main  topics  will  be  of  use  to  the  reader.

The  first  volume  deals  with  experimental  studies  on  the  troubles  of
the  will,  the  attention,  and  the  memory ; — troubles  which  ai'e  in  most
cases  associated  with  idees  fixes  or  hypertrophies  of  some  one  "  systema-
tised  group  "  of  memories  or  emotions.

Thus  the  volume  contains  in  Chap.  I.  the  striking  case  of
"  Marcelle," — a  patient  in  whom  "aboulia,"  or  defect  of  will,  is  the  most
marked  of  many  symptoms.  Chap.  III.  is  devoted  to  cases  of  loss  of
memory ;  Chap.  IV.,  V.,  IX.,  to  other  extensive  confusions  and
disabilities,  induced  by  the  persistence  of  idees  fixes  below  the  conscious
threshold.  Chap.  X.  is  a  history  of  actual  pseudo-possession,  showing
the  mischief  wrought  by  a  fixed  idea  self -suggested  in  continued  reverie.
Other  chapters  on  allochiria,  hemianopsia,  contractures,  pai'alysis,  etc.,
show  these  subconscious  self-suggestions  operating  in  curiously  limited
and  definite  ways.

1  Since  I" shall  have  nothing  else  but  admiration  and  adhesion  for  Dr.  Janet's
work,  I  think  it  right  here  to  call  attention — his  own  attention  most  of  all — to  Mr.
Andrew  Lang's  criticisms  in  The  Making  of  Religion,  p.  3G7,  seq.  These  strictures,
coming  from  an  eminent  writer  who  is  assuredly  not  chargeable  with  any  parti  pris
in  favour  of  the  marvellous  ; — assuredly  not  lacking  either  in  urbanity  or  in  acumen  ; —
deserve,  I  think,  to  be  pondered  by  Dr.  Janet,  with  no  mere  thought  of  controversinl
rejoinder.


386


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Suiipleraent,


The  second  volume  contains  observations  on  no  less  than  152  cases.
Whether  the  disorders  are  classed  as  "psychical"  or  as  "somatic,"
they  all  illustrate  the  same  general  thesis ; — namely,  the  great  variety  of
ways  in  which  the  hypertrophy  of  some  idea,  impression,  impulse,  or
memory,  can  invade  and  disintegrate  that  human  personality,  which
needs  the  maintenance  of  an  equilibrium  Isetween  so  many  complex
and  competitive  agencies  within.

It  is  satisfactory  to  find  that  hypnotic  suggestion, — used  by  Dr,
Janet  with  great  patience  and  tact, — is  able  gradually  to  remove  a
great  number  of  these  mental  spasms  and  insistent  memories.  It  is
not,  of  course,  enough  to  make  the  suggestion  crudely  and  bluntly.  In
order  to  enable  it  to  take,  it  must  be  grafted  adi'oitly  upon  the  patient's
mental  condition  of  the  moment.  First  of  all,  one  must  discover  the
hidden  sources  of  her  trouble, — of  which  sources,  strangely  enough,  she
is  often  herself  unaware ; — and  then  one  must  gradually  suggest
successive  slight  modifications  in  the  painful  memory.  "  The  incident
which  gave  you  the  shock  was  not  so  bad  as  you  think ; — it  really
happened  thus  and  thus,"  says  Dr.  Janet, — until  at  last  the  old  horror  is
forgotten, — or  transformed  into  something  grotesque  or  innocuous.

Thus  one  patient  is  led  to  believe  that  the  haunting  word  "  cholera  "
is  really  the  name  of  a  Chinese  general ; — anothei',  who  has  loved  not
wisely,  but  too  well,  is  induced  to  see  the  lover  of  her  hallucinatory
memories  with  head  transformed  into  a  pig's ; — and  undergoes  a
revulsion  of  feeling,  a  la  Titania. (Vol.  II.,  p.  13.5.)

Another  curious  case  (Vol.  II.,  p.  256)  in  which  hypnotism  first
explained  the  trouble  and  then  did  much  to  amend  it,  is  that  of  a  boy
"  Ptou,"  whose  short  life  has  been  plentifully  interspersed  with  hysterical
"  fugues "  or  escapades,  of  which  (like  Ansel  Bourne,  Proceedings,
Vol.  VII.,  p.  221)  he  loses  all  memory  when  he  returns  to  normal  life.
He  comes  to  himself  suddenly, — in  a  forest, — in  a  convent, — in  a  street-
passage, — and,  as  I  say,  remembers  nothing ; — except  an  occasional
drenching  from  rain  or  river, — which  has,  in  fact,  for  the  moment,
partially  awakened  him  from  his  somnambulic  state.  Hypnotisation,
however,  brings  back  the  memory  of  the  "fugues"  (just  as  it  did  with
Ansel  Bourne),  and  we  find  that  they  have  all  been  the  working  out
of  an  idee  fixe, — that  of  going  to  sea  as  a  cabin-boy.  During  these
fugues  the  lad  was  anpesthetic,  and  consequently  endured  cheerfully
extraordinary  hai'dships,  allowing  liimself  with  perfect  insouciance  to
be  treated  by  rough  canal-men  like  a  beast  of  burden.  Hypnotic
suggestion  was  able  to  avert  these  fugues  whenever  the  boy  was  dimly
conscious  that  they  were  coming  on  ; — although  his  brain  was  too  pro-
foundly affected  to  make  the  prognosis  a  hopeful  one.

Many  of  these  cases  remind  us  of  the  narratives  of  Drs.  Breuer
and  Freud,  in  their  Studien  iiber  Hysteric,  noticed  in  S.P.ll.  Proceedings,


Part  XXX vm.]


Pseudo-Possession.


387


Vol.  IX.,  pp.  12-15.  I  give  as  a  sample  one  case  of  this  type,
(Janet,  Vol.  II.,  p.  234),  where  hysterical  attacks  depending  on  the
revival  of  a  scheme  of  emotion  (etat  emotif  systematique)  which  has
become  subconscious  are  cured  by  this  same  process  of  first  discovering,
and  then  gradually  removing,  the  alarming  memory.

A  girl  of  18,  designated  as  Lie,  has  suffered  for  two  years  from
almost  daily  convulsive  attacks.  Each  attack  constitutes  a  revival  of
a  past  scene,  constituting  in  rudimentary  form  a  secondary  state  of
personality.  The  attack  begins  with  syncope,  and  the  return  to
conscious  life  is  a  return  to  a  condition  of  terror,  with  cries  of  "  Lucien,
Lucien"  ; — as  if  apj^ealing  to  some  one  for  defence  ; — then  she  rushes  to
the  window  and  cries  "  Thieves  ! "  and  then  gradually  re-enters  her
ordinary  state.  Asked  what  she  can  remember  of  such  a  scene,  the
girl  can  recollect  nothing.  She  thinks  that  her  attacks  wei'e  originally
induced  by  distress  and  fear  at  the  sight  of  her  father's  drunkenness.
She  knows  no  one  called  Lucien.  She  came  to  Paris  alone,  and  there
seems  to  be  no  external  way  of  supplying  any  possible  defect  in  her
memory.

Hypnotism,  however,  comes  promptly  to  the  physician's  aid.
Thrown  into  the  hypnotic  sleep,  the  patient  recovers  at  once  the  details
of  a  tragic  story  of  her  childhood ; — of  an  insult  offered  to  her,  from
which  a  "  Lucien  "  had  defended  her  ; — and  of  a  theft  at  the  chateau
where  she  worked,  which  followed  a  few  daj^s  later.  These  terrifying
events  gave  rise  to  attacks  of  syncope,  somnambulism,  etc. ; — and  those
attacks  had  now,  in  theii'  turn,  obliterated  the  memory  of  the  events
from  the  patient's  waking  mind.  When  she  was  reminded  of  them,
they  gradually  recurred  to  her  ; — and  at  the  same  moment  the  convul-
sive attacks  which  had  been  troubling  her  more  or  less  ever  since  the
events  occurred,  entirely  ceased.

Here  is  another  remarkable  case  (p.  248)  of  the  efficacy  of  hypnotic
suggestion,  first  in  discovering  the  nature  of  a  mental  confusion,  and
then  in  curing  it.  A  young  officer,  Pk.,  is  brought  to  the  Salpetriere,
having  fallen  down  in  the  Champs  Elysees,  and  seeming  entirely
bewildered  on  rising  up  again.  Arrived  at  the  hospital,  he  holds  out
his  hand  to  Dr.  Janet  and  addi'esses  him  as  Dr.  N. — a  doctor  at  a
military  hospital  at  Brest.  Asked  what  he  means,  and  whei'e  he
supposes  himself  to  be,  he  replies,  "  We  are  at  the  military  hospital  at
Brest,  and  you  are  Dr.  N.  They  brought  me  here  a  few  days  ago — in
May,  1896."  As  a  matter  of  fact,  this  occurred  on  July  6th,  1895.
Next  day,  the  patient  is  in  a  different  phase,  and  knows  quite  well  that
he  is  in  Paris, — although  he  remembers  nothing  about  imagining  himself
to  be  at  Brest.  On  inquiry  it  appears  that  this  young  man  of  twenty-
eight  is  suffering  from  the  combined  effects  of  typhoid,  dysentery,
marsh-fever,  sunstroke,  an  unfortunate  marriage,  and  a  tendency  to

2  E  2


.388


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


absinthe.  These  troubles  have  made  him  hysteiical,  so  that  if  he
receives  any  shock  or  stimulus — as  a  threat  of  divorce  or  a  glass  of
bi'andy — he  is  apt  to  become  unconscious,  and  then  to  act  in  all  sorts  of
odd  ways,  till  he  wakes  up  again  in  sui'prise  and  with  no  recollection.

Fortunately  he  can  be  thrown  at  once  into  a  somnambulic  state
which  brings  back  the  memory  of  the  spontaneous  somnambulisms.
He  is  then  able  to  explain  how  he  came  to  suppose  himself  to  be  in  the
hospital  at  Brest  and  in  the  year  1896.  He  had,  in  fact,  while  walking
in  the  Champs  Elysees,  been  planning  to  apply  for  treatment  in  a
military  hospital,  and  calculating  that  l)y  about  May,  1896,  he  wovild
be  in  the  hospital  at  Brest,  where  he  knew  the  aforesaid  Dr.  N.
Falling  into  his  secondary  state,  he  had  no  longer  the  ability  to
distinguish  between  this  reverie  and  reality ; — and  the  continuing
reverie  substituted  itself  for  the  actual  suri-oundings,  so  that  he
imagined  himself  to  be  already  in  the  Brest  hospital, — as  if  his
calculation  liad  already  worked  itself  out.

So  soon  as  his  excessive  modifiability  had  thus  been  discovered,  it
was  comparatively  easy  to  give  him  the  suggestions  needed  to  set  right
his  habits  and  to  inspire  him  with  strength  for  the  future.  He  has
since  distinguished  himself  in  military  service  abroad.

The  stories  of  these  distressed  patients  are  not  always  thus  tragic.
The  characteristic  "anguish  of  doubt,"  for  instance, — the  recherche
angoissante  which  makes  many  lives  miserable, — may  centre  itself  on
some  subject  not  intrinsically  painful.  Thus  a  patient  of  Legrand  du
SauUe's  (as  Dr.  Janet  reminds  us)  suffered  from  a  perpetual  anxiety  to
feel  sure  whether  any  woman  whom  he  happened  to  have  met  was
pretty  or  plain.  An  attendant  was  paid  to  answer,  "  Plain,  sir  !  I
should  say,  decidedly  plain  !  "  to  each  inquiry ; — and  the  too  sensitive
heart  was  kept  at  rest.  But  on  one  occasion  his  master  asked  this  man
during  a  railway  journey  as  to  the  looks  of  the  young  woman  at  the
ticket- window  of  the  station  whence  they  had  started ; — and  the  man
was  stupid  enough  to  say  that  he  had  not  observed  her.  This  led  to  a
terrible  crisis,  and  the  valet  had  to  travel  back  the  whole  way  in  order
to  bring  his  report,  "  Plain,  sir  !  decidedly  plain  !  "

Another  disti'essing  but  somewhat  grotesque  case  was  that  of  a
kleptomaniac  who  stole  from  everybody,  but  especially  from  himself.
Worse  than  the  somnambulic  hero  of  an  old  Ingoldsby  Legend,  who
buried  a  fresh  pair  of  his  own  trousers  every  night  in  the  garden,
this  boy  could  keep  nothing  by  night  or  day  from  his  own  marauding
hands.  He  stole  from  himself  when  he  was  asleep,  but  he  stole  from
other  people  when  they  at  any  rate  were  wide  awake,  and  saw  perfectly
what  he  was  doing.  In  fact,  the  psychological  interest  of  this  case
lies  in  the  poor  fellow's  own  condition  at  the  moment  of  his  thefts, —
which  was  a  kind  of  semi-hypnotisation  by  involuntary  self-suggestion,


Part  XXXVIII.]


Pseudo-Possession.


389,


closely  resembling  the  half-hypnotised  state  into  which  an  awakened
subject  falls  when  the  time  comes  for  him  to  execute  some  post-hypnotic
suggestion.  This  unwilling  kleptomaniac  seemed  to  be  subject  to  a
permanent  self-suggestion  to  carry  off  any  object  which  he  particularly
noticed  ;  and  his  own  gaze  at  a  silver  spoon  would  throw  him  into  a
dreamy  condition  in  which  he  inevitably  put  that  spoon  in  his  pocket.

Another  melancholy  aberration,  which  is  not  without  its  comic
element,  is  described  by  Janet  under  the  heading  of  "  Dipsomania  of
cafe  au  lait,  complicated  with  kleptomania  of  petits  pains."

M™^  Pt.,  a  nervous  personage,  suffered  from  a  dyspepsia  which
her  doctor  mistakenly  attributed  to  dilatation  of  the  stomach.  He
limited  her  to  a  wineglass  of  liquid  at  each  meal,  and  made  her  live
mainly  on  dry  toast.  Her  husband  supported  the  doctor,  but  meantime
she  saw  him  drinking  cafe  au  lait  and  eating  rolls  with  gusto  and
freedom  ; — "  c'etait  -pour  elle  le  supplice  de  Tantale."  One  day  her
patience  gave  way.  When  her  husband's  back  was  turned,  she  threw
herself  upon  a  roll  which  he  had  left  on  his  plate,  then  rushed  to  the
cremerie,  and  made  herself  an  excellent  ca/¥  au  lait.  She  was  none  the
worse  for  it ;  her  husband  it  was  who  died.  After  his  death  the
passion  for  cafe  au  lait  grew  on  her,  so  that  when  her  stock  of  milk  was
exhausted  at  night  she  would  tread  her  room  in  anguished  longing  till
the  c7-emeries  opened  in  the  morning.  Not  venturing  to  drink  more
than  two  cups  at  the  same  cremerie,  she  would  wander  about  Paris  and
drink  at  various  shops  20  or  30  cups  per  day.

All  these  cups  she  duly  and  promptly  paid  for.  But  a  morbid
aggravation  came.  She  wanted  rolls  with  her  colFee  ;  but  now  that  there
was  no  one  to  forbid  her  the  rolls,  they  lost  their  savour, — the  savour
of  2Jetit  pain  defendu.  A  way  of  supplying  this  savour  occurred  to
her  ; — she  stole  the  rolls.  She  would  go  to  a  shop  and  pay  for  one  roll, —
and  adroitly  make  several  others  fall  into  a  Gampish  umbrella.  Having
collected  a  dozen  or  so,  she  would  go  home  to  eat  them,  and  start
again.

Now,  this  poor  woman — this  coffee-megalomaniac,  as  an  erudite
friend  of  Professor  Janet's  has  termed  her — becomes  not  infrequently
very  uncomfortable  inside.  She  detests  her  own  obsession,  her  idee  fixe  ;
— but  she  cannot  cure  herself  ;  nor  had  Pi'ofessor  Janet,  at  the  time  of
writing,  succeeded  in  curing  her.

A  grotesque,  yet  a  mournful  story!  a  tragedy  of  the  "free  breakfast
table  '  !  nay,  a  satire  on  all  the  inordinate  cravings  of  men,  whose
insatiability  is  the  penalty  for  their  self-abandonment,  and  which
disgust  by  the  very  fulfilment  of  desire.  Dr.  Janet's  book  contains
examples  of  "  fixed  subconscious  ideas  "  at  various  depths  of  submer-
gence ; — the  most  completely  forgotten  being  often  the  most  potent  for
mischief. A  fixed  memory  of  this  kind, — removed,  so  to  say,  from  the


390


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


general  mental  circulation, — may  act  in  precisely  the  same  way  as  an
actual  lesion  to  motor  nerves,  inducing  definite  physical  disabilities.

"  The  contraction  persists,"  says  Dr.  Janet  of  one  such  case  (Vol.  I.
p.  344)  "  because  the  emotion  persists,  involving  always  the  same
psychological  and  physiological  consequences.  It  is,  so  to  say,  a  fixed
emotion  ; — a  variety  of  fixed  idea  of  which  we  from  outside  can  see  only
one  exterior  manifestation,  while  the  patient  herself  is  unaware  of  the
interior  phenomenon  which  determines  it."

To  attempt  to  cure  such  patients  without  first  discovering  the
true  cause  of  mischief  by  some  automatic  message  (such  as  writing
or  crystal  vision  or  uttei'ance  in  hypnotic  trance)  which  emanates
from  subliminal  strata  of  their  being,  is  like  trying  to  open  a  secret
drawer  without  having  discovered  the  spring.  The  minute  and  patient
attention  which  Dr.  Janet  bestows  on  such  cases  contrasts  strikingly
with  the  rough  and  ready  methods  thought  good  enough  for  hysterical
patients  by  doctors  of  the  old  school.  It  means,  of  course,  one  more
application  of  true  scientific  method  to  problems  which  the  Philistine
physician  did  not  think  worth  his  science.  There  can  be  no  better
example  of  this  than  Dr.  Janet's  treatment  of  a  singular  problem  which
the  mistakes  of  brutal  ignorance  turned  in  old  times  into  a  veritable
scourge  of  our  race.  I  speak  of  demoniacal  possession ; — in  which
affliction  Dr.  Janet  has  shown  himself  a  better  than  ecclesiastical
exorcist.

I  give  here  a  typical  case  of  pseudo-possession.  Achille, — as
Professor  Janet  calls  him, — was  a  timid  and  rather  morbid  young  man;
but  he  was  married  to  a  good  wife,  and  nothing  went  siDecially  \7r0ng
with  him  until  his  return  from  a  business  journey  in  1890.  He  then
became  sombre  and  taciturn, — sometimes  even  seemed  unable  to  speak,
— then  took  to  his  bed  and  lay  murmuring  incomprehensible  words,  and
at  last  said  farewell  to  his  wife  and  children,  and  stretched  himself  out
motionless  for  a  couple  of  days,  while  his  family  waited  for  his  last
breath.

(Vol.  I.,  p.  382.) — "Suddenly  one  morning,  after  two  days  of  apparent
death,  Achille  sat  up  in  bed  with  his  eyes  wide  open,  and  burst  into  a
terrible  laugh.  It  was  a  convulsive  laugh  which  shook  all  his  limbs, —
an  exaggerated  laugh  which  twisted  his  mouth ; — a  lugubrious,  satanic
laugh  which  went  on  for  more  than  two  hours.

"  From  this  moment  everything  was  changed — Achille  leapt  from
his  bed  and  refused  all  attentions.  To  every  question  he  answered,
'There's  nothing  to  be  done  !  let's  have  some  champagne  !  it's  the  end
of  the  world  !  '  Then  he  uttered  piercing  cries  '  they  are  burning  me  ;
— they  are  cutting  me  to  pieces  ! '  "

After  an  agitated  sleep,  Achille  woke  up  with  the  conviction  that
he  was  possessed  with  a  devil. And  in  fact  his  mouth  now  uttered


Part  XXXVIII.]


Pseudo-Possession.


391


blasphemies,  his  limbs  were  contorted,  and  he  repeatedly  made  un-
successful eiforts  at  suicide.  Ultimately  he  was  taken  to  the  Salpetriere
and  placed  under  Professor  Janet,  who  recognised  at  once  the  classic
signs  of  possession.  The  poor  man  kept  protesting  against  the  odious
outrages  on  religion  which  he  attributed  to  a  devil  inside  him,  mo%n.ng
his  tongue  against  his  will.  "  Achille  could  say,  like  a  celebrated
victim  of  possession,  Pere  Surin,  '  It  is  as  though  I  had  two  souls ;  one
of  which  has  been  dispossessed  of  its  body  and  the  use  of  its  organs,
and  is  frantic  at  the  sight  of  the  other  soul  which  has  crept  in.'  "

It  was  by  no  means  easy  to  get  either  at  Achille  or  at  his  possessing
devil.  Attempts  to  hypnotise  him  failed,  and  any  remonstrance  was
met  with  insult.  But  the  wily  psychologist  was  accustomed  to  such
difficulties,  and  had  resort  to  a  plan  too  insidious  for  a  common  devil  to
suspect.  He  gently  moved  the  hand  of  Achille  in  such  a  way  as  to  sug-
gest the  act  of  writing,  and  having  thus  succeeded  in  starting  automatic
script  he  got  the  devil  thus  to  answer  questions  quietly  put  while  the
raving  was  going  on  as  usual.  "  I  will  not  believe  in  your  power,"
said  Professor  Janet  to  the  malignant  intruder,  "  unless  you  give  me  a
proof."  "  What  proof  ?  "  "  Raise  the  poor  man's  left  arm  without  his
knowing  it."  This  was  done, — to  the  astonishment  of  poor  Achille; —
and  a  series  of  suggestions  followed,  all  of  which  the  demon  trium-
phantly and  unsuspectingly  carried  out,  to  show  his  power.  Then  came
the  suggestion  to  which  Professor  Janet  had  been  leading  up.  It  was
like  getting  the  djinn  into  the  bottle.  "  You  cannot  put  Achille
soundly  to  sleep  in  that  armchair  !  "  "  Yes,  I  can  !  "  No  sooner  said
than  done, — and  no  sooner  done  than  Achille  was  delivered  from  his
tormentor, — from  his  own  tormenting  self.

For  there  in  that  hypnotic  sleep  he  was  gently  led  on  to  tell  all  his
story ; — and  such  stories,  when  told  to  a  skilled  and  kindly  auditor,  are
apt  to  come  to  an  end  in  the  very  act  of  being  told.

Achille  had  been  living  in  a  day-dream  ;  it  was  a  day-dream  which
had  swollen  to  these  nightmare  proportions,  and  had,  as  it  were,  ousted
his  rational  being ; — and  in  the  deeper  self-knowledge  which  the
somnambulic  state  brings  with  it  the  dream  and  the  interpretation
thereof  became  present  to  his  bewildered  mind.

The  fact  was  that  on  that  fateful  journey  when  Achille's  troubles
began  he  had  committed  an  act  of  unfaithfulness  to  his  wife.  A
gloomy  anxiety  to  conceal  this  action  pi'ompted  him  to  an  increasing
taciturnity,  and  morbid  fancies  as  to  his  health  grew  on  him  until  at
last  his  day-dream  led  him  to  imagine  himself  as  actually  dead.  "  His
two  days'  lethargy  was  but  an  episode,  a  chapter  in  the  long  dream."

What  then  was  the  natural  next  stage  of  the  dream's  development ']
"He  dreamt  that,  now  that  he  was  dead  indeed,  the  devil  rose  from  the
abyss  and  came  to  take  him.  The  poor  man,  as  in  his  somnambulic  state


S92


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


lie  retraced  the  series  of  his  dreams,  remembered  the  precise  instant
when  this  lamentable  event  took  place.  It  was  about  11  a.m.  ; — a  dog
barked  in  the  court  at  the  moment,  incommoded,  no  doubt,  by  the  smell
of  brimstone ; — flames  filled  the  room ; — numbers  of  little  fiends  scourged
the  unhappy  man,  or  drove  nails  into  his  eyes, — and  through  the  wounds
in  his  body  Satan  entered  in  to  take  possession  of  head  and  heart."

From  this  point  the  pseudo-possession  may  be  said  to  have  begun.
The  fixed  idea  developed  itself  into  sensory  and  motor  automatisms ; —
visions  of  devils,  uncontrollable  utterances,  automatic  script — ascribed
by  the  automatist  to  the  possessing  devil  within.

And  now  came  the  moment  when  the  veracity,  the  utility,  of  this
new  type  of  psychological  anal3^sis  was  to  be  submitted  to  yet  another
test.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  ordinary  physician  Achille's
condition  was  almost  hopeless.  Physical  treatment  had  failed,  and
death  from  exhaustion  and  misery  seemed  near  at  hand.  Nor  could
any  appeal  have  been  effective  which  did  not  go  to  the  hidden  root
of  the  evil  ; — which  did  not  lighten  the  load  of  morbid  remorse
from  which  the  whole  series  of  troubles  had  developed.  Fortunately
for  Achille,  he  was  in  the  hands  of  an  unsurpassed  minister  to  minds
thus  diseased.  Professor  Janet  adopted  his  usual  tactics ; — what
he  terms  the  dissociation  and  the  gradual  substitution  of  ideas.  The
incidents  of  the  miserable  memory  were  modified,  were  explained  away,
were  slowly  dissolved  from  the  brooding  brain ; — and  the  hallucinatory
image  of  the  offended  wife  was  presented  to  the  sufferer  at  what
novelists  call  the  psychological  moment, — with  pardon  in  her  eyes.
"  Such  stuff  as  ch'eams  are  made  of  !  " — but  even  by  such  means  was
Achille  restored  to  j^hysical  and  moral  health ;  he  leads  now  the  life  of
normal  man;  he  no  longer  "walketh  in  a  vain  shadow,  and  disquieteth
himself  in  vain."

The  title  of  "  pseudo-possession  "  which  I  have  given  to  this  review
is  partlj^  justified  by  the  case  just  described.  Yet,  as  we  shall  presently
see,  this  is  not  the  form  of  pseudo-possession  which  is  most  difficult  to
understand  and  classify.

In  Achille's  case  we  have  nothing  but  disease  and  delusion  ;  we
shall  presently  find  it  harder  to  explain  phenomena  one  stage  higher,
where  the  submerged  mental  action  is  complex  and  in  no  way  hurtful  ;
— yet  cannot  be  interpreted  as  evidencing  an  external  control.

I  will  conclude  my  notice  of  Dr.  Janet's  book  by  touching  on  a
cognate  problem  of  which  again  only  the  early  stages  have  come  under
his  observation ; — but  where  the  relation  of  each  stage  to  the  stage  above
it  is  as  yet  inextricably  obscure.  I  speak  of  ecstasy; — of  all  that  range
of  sensations  which  present  themselves  as  a  temjaorary  "standing-forth"
from  the  body,  with  more  or  less  conscious  or  definite  communion
with  or  entry  into  a  spiritual  world.


Part  XXXVIII.]


Pseudo-Possession .


393


This  phenomenon,  alleged  in  many  centuries  and  many  nations,  has
usually  been  explained  in  one  of  two  ways ; — neither  of  which  seems  to
me  satisfactory.

a.  In  the  first  place,  it  has  been  connected  by  theological  writers
with  the  dogmas  of  the  special  religion  in  which  they  believed  ; — and
which  their  ecstatic  visions  are  assumed  to  corroborate.  As  an  example
of  such  treatment  I  may  allude  to  the  recently  published  Bampton
Lectures  by  Dr.  Inge  on  Christian  Mysticism,  which  have  justly
atti'acted  admiration  from  their  tone,  alike  scholarly  and  devout.  Un-
fortunately, however,  these  qualities  are  not  sufficient  for  the  task  of
showing  that  there  is  any  real  connection  between  the  ecstasies  into
which  Pagans  and  Buddhists  just  as  much  as  Roman  Catholics  or
Protestants  have  fallen  and  the  dogmas  or  traditions  of  any  one  of  the
great  sections  of  the  Christian  Church.  The  impression  which  a  reader
familial'  with  the  operation  of  self-suggestion  is  likely  to  carry  away
from  Dr.  Inge's  book  is  i-ather  of  wonder  that  there  is  not  a  stronger
case  for  such  connection  ; — that  self-suggestion  has  not  given  a  more
decided  flavour  of  Christian  dogma  to  the  very  vague, — though  often
deeply  genuine, — accounts  of  ecstatic  experiences  which  Dr.  Inge  has
been  able  to  collect.  I  will  not  pursue  a  line  of  argument  which  it
would  be  invidious  to  press,  and  which  will  hardly  meet  with  any
scientific  opposition.

Rather  I  will  turn  to  the  other  habitual  type  of  explanation, — that
which  explains  away  all  ecstasy  as  a  mere  subjective  symptom — a
hysterical  experience  which  medical  science  should  treat  as  it  treats  an
idee  fixe  or  a  recurrent  contracture.

Here,  I  think,  is  just  one  of  the  points  where  the  psychologist
should  be  on  his  guard  against  the  physician.  The  psychologist,  as  I
have  so  often  said,  must  remember  that  there  are  phenomena  above
ordinary  human  nature  as  well  as  below  it,  and  that  if  anywhere  we
can  trace  an  ascending  series  of  vital  phenomena,  it  is  very  unlikely
that  we  are  ourselves  standing  at  that  series'  superior  limit.

There  is  undoubtedly  a  lower  limit  to  what  I  may  term  the  ecstatic
series  ; — a  rudimentary  or  hysterical  ecstasy  which  seems  to  be  nothing
more  than  a  mere  blankness  and  vacancy.  First  above  that  perhaps
we  may  place  two  cases  which  Dr.  Janet  briefly  mentions  ; — adding  (I
am  glad  to  see)  a  hint  that  he  may  return  to  the  subject  later.

The  first  of  these  cases  is  that  of  a  girl,  "  Celestine,"  who  is  a
definitely  hy.sterical  subject.  (Vol.  I.,  p.  302-3).  After  an  attack  of
hysterical  anger  she  remains  absolutely  motionless  on  her  bed,  arms
and  legs  stretched  out,  fists  closed,  and  teeth  clenched.

"This  condition,  which  may  be  prolonged  for  two  or  three  days
if  not  interfered  with,  is  psychologically  very  remarkable.  The
patient,  entirely  insensible  to  all  external  stimuli,  retains  a  certain


394


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Suppleiiit'iil.


consciousness  ;  she  has  complex  dreams,  which  she  has  forgotten  on
waking,  but  of  which  she  recovers  memory  in  hypnotic  trance.  These
varied  dreams  are  specially  characterised  by  a  feeling  of  well-being,
of  beatitude ;  the  patient  feels  no  link  with  earth,  is  unconscious  of
her  body,  and  seems  to  float  in  air.  I  have  noticed  the  same  feeling  of
beatitude  in  another  patient,  who  loses  the  possibility  of  motion  and
the  consciousness  of  her  body.  One  wonders  whether  there  is  any
relation  between  the  two  phenomena."

The  next  case  of  ecstasy  (Vol.  I.,  p.  95)  carries  us  one  step  higher,
and  occurs  in  a  woman  who  is  intelligent  and  not  amiesthetic,  but  who
presents  certain  symptonas  classed  by  Drs.  Raymond  and  Janet  as
hysterical — especially  stiymatisation — or  the  mark  as  of  a  wound
imitating  Christ's  Passion,  which  used  to  rank  as  a  sign  of  sanctity.
This  sfiymatisee's  wound  is  on  the  foot, — in  imitation  of  the  mark  of
the  nail.  Her  ecstasies  are  of  the  accustomed  saintly  type  ; — and  the
following  accidental  test  of  her  condition  during  ecstasy  forms  an
incident  probably  unique  in  the  long  history  of  stigmatises  from
S.  Francis  to  Louise  Lateau.

Dr.  Janet  was  collecting  series  of  reaction-times  from  various
subjects  ; — testing,  that  is  to  say,  the  quickness  and  regularity  with
which  they  could  make  a  motor  response  (as  pressing  a  button,  etc.)
to  some  irregularly  recurring  stimulus,  of  touch,  sound  or  sight.  Of
course  the  quicker  and  more  regular  the  response,  the  more  highly  does
the  experimenter  rank  the  attention  and  capacity  of  the  subject.

"This  subject,"  says  Dr.  Janet,  "was  very  docile,  and  tried  to  fix  her
attention  on  the  sound  of  the  signal  and  on  nothing  else.  But  after
about  a  quarter  of  an  houi',  I  jDerceived  that  an  unforeseen  incident
seemed  likely  to  disturb  the  experiment.  "Vk.  began  an  attack  of
ecstasy.  Her  eyes  half  closed,  her  head  sank  backward,  and  her  face
assumed  an  expression  of  beatitude.  .  .  .  Little  by  little  her  body
rose  on  tiptoe,  the  left  arm  ti^ok  a  horizontal  position,  and  she  placed
herself  in  the  attitude  of  crucifixion  which  is  common  in  her  ecstasies.
I  was  struck  by  observing  that  her  right  arm  did  not  raise  itself  as
much  as  usual,  for  the  top  of  the  forefinger  continued  to  touch  the
button  used  in  the  experiment  [intermpteiir).  Thus,  in  spite  of  the
comjjlete  ecstasy,  the  tracing  continues  to  be  produced.  I  prolonged
this  singular  experience  of  taking  reaction-times  during  a  religious
ecstasy  for  two  hours  and  a-half.  She  then  awoke,  but  with  a  remark-
able fidelity  to  her  promise,  she  continued  to  reply  to  the  signals  during
and  after  her  process  of  awakening,  so  that  I  was  able  to  get  a  graphic
reaction-curve  taken  before,  dui'ing,  and  after  the  ecstasy."

Omitting  details,  I  may  say  that  the  graphic  response  was  quickest
and  most  regular  during  the  heiglit  of  the  ecstasy; — in  spite  of  attempts
made  by  Dr.  Janet  to  disturb  the  subject  by  sudden  noises,  pinching,


Part  XXXVIII.]


Pseudo-Possession.


395


etc., — attempts  which  had  no  effect  at  all  in  distracting  her  from  her
duty,  although  she  must  have  felt  them,  since  she  retains  her  power  of
sensation  in  the  trance.

The  general  lesson  which  Dr.  Janet  draws  from  this  and  other
experiments  is  that  the  more  automatically  you  can  get  the  reaction
performed  the  better  it  is  performed  ; — in  short  that  subliminal  attention
is  more  trustworthy  than  supraliminal.  On  the  present  case  he  adds  the
following  reflections  : —

"Is  it  likely  that  Vk.,  during  the  crisis  of  ecstasy,  when  she  I'aises
to  heaven  a  face  of  beatitude — when  she  takes  the  position  of  cruci-
fixion,— is  bestowing  on  my  signals  a  closer  attention  than  at  the
moment  when  she  is  quietly  sitting  in  an  armchair-  with  nothing  to
do  but  to  listen  ?

"  Moreover,  she  does  partially  remember  her  ecstasies,  and  she  tells
us  of  the  unspeakable  joys  which  she  has  been  experiencing.  While
she  was  responding  to  my  signals  she  felt  herself  flooded  by  religious
emotion.  '  I  felt  an  ineffable  sweetness  on  my  lips ;  presently  they
closed  ;  a  torpor  stole  over  my  limbs,  hut  the  torpor  was  full  of  sweet-
ness.' Then  in  complete  ecstasy  :  '  I  saw  the  Holy  Sacrament  in  a
light,  a  radiance,  a  glory  inexpressible,  and  I  was  filled  with  unspeak-
able gladness.  A  voice  within  me  made  me  understand  that  by  the
act  of  communion  I  carried  Jesus  within  me  as  though  I  were  a  living
monstrance.'

"  But  I  will  not  here  discuss  (continues  Dr.  Janet)  the  ecstasies  of
this  patient ;  the  phenomenon  is  too  striking  to  be  ti'eated  thus  inci-
dentally. I  merely  remark  that  during  this  ecstasy  she  made  a  long
meditation,  not  without  philosophical  and  poetical  value,  on  the  union
of  the  soul  with  God.  I  observe  also  that  she  remembered  this  reflec-
tion, and  remembered  also  the  noises  which  I  made  in  the  room,  and  my
pinches  on  her  arm.  When  I  asked  her  as  to  the  special  point  of  her
attention  to  my  signals  and  her  own  answering  movements,  she
answered,  '  I  believe  that  I  kept  my  hand  on  the  machine,  as  you  told
me,  but  God  must  have  guided  my  hand  to  obey  your  orders,  for  I  was
not  myself  able  to  pay  them  any  attention.'  "

I  must  now  reluctantly  leave  Dr.  J anet's  book  ; — observing  only
that  in  the  midst  of  tliis  record  of  multiform  disintegrations  and  con-
tortions of  personality  we  have  here  come,  nevertheless,  upon  certain
signs  of  increased  faculty, — of  subliminal  steadiness  of  muscular
action  under  difficulties, — of  ecstatic  happiness,  and  even  of  intel-
lectual exaltation.

The  book  to  which  I  now  turn  has  for  readers  of  our  Proceedings
an  even  directer  interest.  It  happens,  no  doubt,  to  any  group  wliich
pursues  for  many  years  a  somewhat  unfamiliar  line  of  inquiry  that


396


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


those  of  their  points  which  are  first  assailed  get  gradually  admitted,
so  that  as  they  become  interested  in  new  points  they  may  scarcely
observe  what  change  has  taken  place  in  the  reception  of  the  old.  The
reader  of  early  volumes  of  our  Proceedings  will  often  observe  this  kind
of  progress  of  opinion.  And  now  Professor  Flournoy's  book  indicates
in  a  remarkable  way  how  tilings  have  moved  in  the  psychology  of  the
last  twenty  years.  The  book, — a  model  of  fairness  throughout, — is
indeed,  for  the  most  part,  critically  destructive  in  its  treatment  of  the
quasi-supernormal  phenomena  with  which  it  deals.  But  what  a  mass
of  conceptions  a  competent  psychologist  now  takes  for  granted  in  this
realm,  which  the  official  science  of  twenty  years  ago  would  scarcely
stomach  our  hinting  at !

One  important  point  may  be  noticed  at  once  as  decisively  corrobor-
ating a  contention  of  my  own  made  long  ago,  and  at  a  time  when  it
probably  seemed  fantastic  to  many  readers.  Arguing  for  the  potential
continuity  of  subliminal  mentation  (as  against  those  who  urged  that
there  were  only  occasional  flashes  of  submerged  thought,  like  scattered
dreams)  I  said  that  it  would  soon  be  found  needful  to  press  this  notion
of  a  continuous  subliminal  self  to  the  utmost,  if  we  were  not  prepared
to  admit  a  continuous  spiritual  guidance  or  possession.  Now,  in  fact,
with  Professor  Flournoy's  subject  the  whole  discussion  turns  on  this
very  point.  There  is  unquestionably  a  continuous  and  complex  series
of  thoughts  and  feelings  going  on  beneath  the  threshold  of  con-
sciousness of  M"'=  "Helene  Smith."  Is  this  submerged  mentation  due
in  any  degree  or  in  any  manner  to  the  operation  of  spirits  other  than
M"e  Smith's  own  ?  That  is  the  broad  question  ;  but  it  is  complicated
here  by  a  subsidiary  question  ; — whether,  namely,  any  previous  incar-
nations of  M"*'  Smith's, — other  phases  of  her  own  spiritual  history,
now  involving  complex  relationship  with  the  past, — have  any  part  in
the  crowd  of  personalities  which  seem  struggling  to  express  themselves
through  her  (juite  healthy  organism.

M^l*^  Smith,  I  should  at  once  say,  is  not,  and  never  has  been,  a
paid  medium.  She  occupies  a  leading  post  on  the  stall:'  of  a  large
mcdson  de  commerce  at  Geneva,  and  gives  seances  to  her  friends,  simply
because  she  enjoys  the  exercise  of  her  mediumistic  faculties,  and  is
herself  interested  in  their  explanation.

Her  organism,  I  repeat,  is  regarded,  both  by  herself  and  by  others,
as  a  quite  healthy  one.  M"**  Smith,  says  Professor  Flournoy,  declares
distinctly  that  she  is  perfectly  sound  in  body  and  mind,  in  no  way
lacking  in  equilibrium,  and  indignantly  repudiates  the  idea  that
there  is  any  hurtful  anomaly  or  the  slightest  danger  in  mediumship
as  she  practises  it.

"  I  am  so  far  from  being  abnormal,"  she  writes,  "  that  I  have  never
been  so  clear-sighted,  so  lucid,  so  capable  of  judging  rapidly  on  all  points,


Part  XXXVIII.]


Pseudo-Possession.


397


as  since  I  have  been  developed  as  a  medium."  jSTo  one  appears  to
dispute  this  estimate,  which  the  facts  of  M^i*^  Smith's  progress  in  lier
line  of  business  dist  i  ctly  confirm.

"  It  is  in  fact  incontestable  "  (continues  Professor  Flournoy)  "  that
Helene  has  a  head  extremely  well  organised  ;  and  that  from  a  business
point  of  view  she  manages  admirably  the  very  important  and  com-
plicated department  of  which  she  is  at  the  head  in  this  large  shop
where  she  is  employed  ; — so  that  to  accuse  her  of  being  morbid  simply
because  she  is  a  medium  is  to  say  the  least  an  inadmissible  jjetitio
2}rincipii  so  long  as  the  very  nature  of  mediumship  remains  a  thing  so
obscure  and  open  to  discussion  as  is  still  the  case.

"  It  is  clear  that  there  exist  amid  the  ranks  of  the  learned  faculty
certain  spirits  narrow  and  limited,  strong  in  their  own  specialities,  but
ready  to  cast  their  anathemas  at  whatever  does  not  fit  in  with  their
preconceived  ideas,  and  to  treat  as  moi'bid,  pathological,  insane,  every-
thing which  differs  from  the  normal  type  of  human  nature,  such  as  they
have  conceived  it  on  the  model  of  their  own  small  personalities. . .  .

"  But  in  the  first  place  the  essential  criterion  in  judging  of  a  human
being's  value  is  not  the  question  whether  he  is  in  good  or  bad  health,
like  or  unlike  other  people,  but  whether  he  fulfils  adequately  his  special
task, — how  he  acquits  himself  of  the  functions  incumbent  on  him,  and
what  may  be  expected  or  hoped  from  him.  I  am  not  aware  that  Miss
Smith's  psychical  faculties  have  ever  interfered  with  her  accom-
plishment of  any  of  her  duties  ; — rather  they  have  helped  her  therein  ;
for  her  normal  and  conscious  activity  lias  often  found  an  unexpected
assistance, — which  non-mediums  lack  ■ — in  her  subliminal  inspirations
and  her  automatisms,  which  eff'ect  a  useful  end.

"  In  the  second  place,  it  is  far  from  being  demonstrated  that  medium-
ship  is  a  pathological  phenomenon.  It  is  abnormal,  no  doubt,  in  the
sense  of  being  rare,  exceptional ; — but  rarity  is  not  morbidity.  The
few  years  during  which  these  phenomena  have  been  seriously  and
scientifically  studied  have  not  been  enough  to  allow  us  to  pronounce
on  their  true  nature.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  the  countries
where  these  studies  have  been  pushed  the  furthest,  in  England  and
America,  the  dominant  view  among  the  savants  who  have  gone  deepest
into  the  matter  is  not  at  all  unfavourable  to  mediumship  ;  and  that,  far
from  regarding  it  as  a  special  case  of  hysteria,  they  see  in  it  a  faculty
superior,  advantageous,  healthy,  of  which  hysteria  is  a  form  of
degenerescence,  a  pathological  parody,  a  morbid  caricature."

The  phenomena  which  this  sensitive  (Helene  Smith  is  Professor
Flournoy's  pseudonym  for  her)  presents  cover  a  range  which  looks  at
first  very  wide,  although  a  clearer  analysis  shows  that  these  varieties
are  more  apparent  than  real  and  that  self-suggestion  will  perhaps
account  for  all  of  them.


398


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


There  is,  to  begin  with,  every  kind  of  automatic  irruption  of
subhminal  into  supraliminal  life.  As  Professor  Flournoy  says  (p.  45) : — -
"  Phenomena  of  hypermnesia,  divinations,  mysterious  findings  of  lost
objects,  happy  inspirations,  exact  presentiments,  just  intuitions,  teleo-
logical  (purposive  or  helpful)  automatisms,  in  short,  of  every  kind ; —
she  possesses  in  a  high  degree  this  small  change  of  genius ; — which
constitutes  a  more  than  sufficient  compensation  for  the  inconvenience
resulting  from  those  distractions  and  moments  of  absence  of  mind
which  accompany  her  visions ; — and  which,  moreover,  generally  pass
unobserved."

And  here  I  reach  an  appropriate  point  at  which  to  remark  that
this  book  of  Professor  Flournoy's  is  not  the  first  account  which  has
been  published  of  M'^^  Helene.  Professor  Lemaitre,  of  Geneva,  printed
two  papers  about  her  in  the  Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques ; — first,  a
long  article  in  the  number  for  March-April,  1897, — then  a  reply  to
M.  Lefebure  in  the  number  for  May-June,  1897.  In  these  papers  he
distinctly  claims  supernormal  powers  for  M^^^  Helene, — implying  a
belief  in  her  genuine  possession  by  spirits,  and  even  in  her  previous
incarnations,  and  in  the  reality  of  the  extra-terrene  or  ostensibly
Martian  language.  I  read  these  paper's  at  the  time,  but  put  them
aside  as  inconclusive,  mainly  because  that  very  language,  on  which
M.  Lemaitre  seemed  most  to  rely,  seemed  to  me  so  obviously  factitious
as  to  throw  doubt  on  all  the  evidence  presented  by  an  observer  who
could  believe  that  denizens  of  another  planet  talked  to  each  other
in  a  language  corresponding  in  every  particular  with  simple  French
idioms,  and  including  such  words  as  quisa  for  quel,  qioise  for  quelle,
ve'teche  for  voir,  veche  for  vu  ; — the  fantastic  locutions  of  the  nursery.
M.  Lemaitre  remarks,  as  a  proof  of  the  consistency  and  reality  of  the
extra-terrene  tongue,  "  L'un  des  premiers  mots  que  nous  ayons  eus,
metiche,  signifiant  monsieur,  se  retrouve  plus  tard  avec  le  sens  de
homme."  That  is  to  say,  having  transmogrified  mo'>tsif'ur  into  metiche,
Helene  further  transmutes  les  messieurs  into  cee  metiche  ; — in  naive
imitation  of  ordinary  French  usage.  And  this  tongue  is  supposed  to
have  sprung  up  independently  of  all  the  influences  which  have  shaped
terrene  grammar  in  general  or  the  French  idiom  in  particular  !  And
even  after  Professor  Flournoy's  analysis  of  this  absurdity  I  see
newspapers  speaking  of  this  Martian  language  as  an  impressive
phenomenon  !

Very  possibly  the  same  critics  might  object,  say,  to  the  utterances
of  the  Thaw  children  through  Mrs.  Piper  (S.P.R.  Proceedings,  Part
XXXIV.)  as  too  trivial  and  childish  for  a  spiritual  world.  Yet  surely
it  should  hardly  be  needful  to  say  that  on  the  principle  of  continuity  a
child  passing  from  earth  into  that  world  will  still  be  occupied  with
childish  things  ; — while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  evolution  of  another


Part  XXXVril.]


Pseudo- Possession.


399


planet,  if  it  has  culminated  in  conscious  life  at  all,  can  hardly  have
culminated  in  a  conscious  life  into  which  we  could  all  of  us  enter
affably,  with  a  suitable  Ollendorff's  phrase-book  under  our  arms  ; —
"  e;w  cee  metiche  one  giide," — "  ici  les  hommes  (messieurs)  sont  bons," —
"  here  the  men  are  good  "  ; — and  the  rest  of  it.

Yet  I  am  bound  in  fairness  to  say  that,  judging  M.  Lemaitre  too
sweepingly  from  this  linguistic  standpoint,  I  assumed  that  one  remark-
able incident  which  he  quotes  could  probably  be  explained  away  ; —
whereas  Professor  Flournoy  has  not  really  explained  it  away  at  all.
This  is  the  case  of  Jea7i  le  Carrieur.  Stated  briefly,  it  is  admitted  that
Helene,  after  experiencing  a  hallucinatory  smell  of  sulphur  (charac-
teristic of  a  quarryman's  work),  had  a  vision  of  a  man  working,  never
known  to  her,  who  sent  a  message  to  a  M""^  Mirbel,  not  present  at  the
seance.  This  man,  and  the  scene  in  which  he  appeared,  were  clearly
recognised  by  M'""^  Mirbel  as  belonging  to  her  childish  memories ; —
while  it  is  most  improbable  that  the  little  incidents  in  question  should
ever  have  reached  H^lene's  ears.  M™<^  Mirbel  had,  however,  been
present  at  some  of  Helene's  seances,  and  Professor  Flournoy  thinks
that  on  one  of  these  occasions  the  subliminal  self  of  Helene  had  drawn
these  memories  telepathically  from  M""^  Mirbel's  mind.  This  kind  of
possibility,  of  course,  has  always  to  be  faced.  Its  relative  prohahility,
as  compared  with  spirit-influence,  has  to  be  infer'red  in  each  case  from
a  wide  group  of  experiences.  But  whatever  the  solution  which  we
adopt  for  this  incident  of  the  quarryman,  it  must,  I  think,  go  some
way  towards  proving  M'l^  Helene's  supernormal  gifts.

At  seances, — where  the  deeper  change  has  no  inconveniences, —
Helene  undergoes  a  sort  of  self-hypnotisation  which  produces  various
lethargic  and  somnambulistic  states.  And  when  she  is  alone  and  safe
from  interruption  she  has  spontaneous  visions,  during  wliich  there  may
be  some  approach  to  ecstasy.  At  the  seances  she  experiences  positive
hallucinations,  and  also  negative  hallucinations,  or  systematised
ansesthesiaj,  so  that,  for  instance,  she  will  cease  to  see  some  person
present,  especially  one  who  is  to  be  the  recipient  of  messages  in  the
course  of  the  seance.  "  It  seems  as  though  a  dream-like  incoherence
presided  over  this  preliminary  work  of  disaggregation,  in  which  the
normal  perceptions  ai-e  arbitrarily  split  up  or  absorbed  by  the  sub-
conscious ]3ei'sonality, — eager  for  materials  with  which  to  compose  the
hallucinations  which  it  is  preparing."  Then,  when  the  seance  begins,
the  main  actor  is  Helene's  guide  Leopold  (a  pseudonym  for  Cagliostro)
who  speaks  and  writes  through  her,  and  is,  in  fact,  either  her  leading
spirit-control  or  (much  more  probably)  her  most  developed  form  of
secondary  personality.

Helene,  indeed,  has  sometimes  the  impression  of  becoming  Leo23old
for  a  moment  (p.  117). Professor  Flournoy  compares  this  sensation  with


400


F.  W,  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


the  experience  of  Mr.  Hill  Tout  (S.P.R.  Proceedings,  Vol.  XI.,
p.  309),  who  feels  himself  hfconiing  his  own  father,  who  is  manifesting
through  him.  It  should  be  added  that,  although  somewhat  pompous,
Leopold  always  appears  both  sensible  and  dignified.  "Leopold,"  says
Professor  Flournoy  (p.  134)  "certainly  manifests  a  very  honourable
and  amiable  side  of  M^^e  Smith's  character,  and  in  taking  him  as  her
'  guide  '  she  has  followed  inspirations  which  are  doubtless  among  the
highest  in  her  nature."

The  high  moi'al  quality  of  these  automatic  communications,  on  which
Professor  Flournoy  thus  insists,  is  a  phenomenon  worth  consideration.
I  do  not  mean  that  it  is  specially  strange  in  the  case  of  M}^'^  Smith.
She  appears  to  be  (if  the  phrase  is  thought  permissible  in  describing
a  medium)  a  peison  of  remai'kably  well-i'egulated  mind.  One  is  not
surprised  that  her  subliminal  self  should  be  as  blameless  as  her  supra-
liminal. But  in  reality  the  remark  here  made  by  Professor  Flournoy
has  a  much  wider  application.  The  almost  universally  higli  moral
tone  of  genuinely  automatic  utterances, — whether  claimed  as  spirit
communications  or  proceeding  obviously  from  the  automatist  himself, —
has  not,  I  think,  been  sufficiently  noticed,  or  adequately  explained.  I
will  mention  two  points  which  have  struck  me  as  specially  noticeable.
In  the  first  place  I  have  read  many  pulpit  and  other  attacks  on
"spiritualism,"  under  which  name  all  automatic  utterance  is  commonly
included,  and  I  cannot  remember  any  instance  in  which  such  an
attack  has  been  made  effective  by  the  quotation  of  passages  of  immoral
tendency — base,  cruel,  or  impure.  The  attack,  so  far  as  I  know,  has
always  been  of  a  kind  which,  in  the  eye  of  the  philosoj^her,  is  rather
complimentary  to  the  writings  attacked.  For  it  seems  (and  this  is  the
second  point  to  which  I  wished  to  call  attention  here)  that  no  one  of
the  various  conflicting  Churches  has  been  able  to  claim  the  general
drift  of  automatic  messages  as  making  for  its  special  tenets.  The
various  controversialists,  where  they  have  been  candid,  have  admitted
moral  elevation,  but, — from  their  various  opposing  points  of  view, —
have  agreed  in  deploring  theological  laxity.

I  must  indeed  confess  myself  unable  to  explain  why  it  is  that
beneath  the  frequent  incoherence,  frequent  commonplaceness,  frequent
pomposity  of  these  messages  there  should  almost  always  be  a  substratum
of  better  sense,  of  truer  catholicity,  than  is  usually  to  be  heard  except
from  the  leading  minds  of  the  generation.  It  is  possible  that  in  some
hidden  way  the  Zeit-Geist  aff'ects  the  subliminal  strata  even  of  persons
superficially  narrow  and  bigoted  by  an  influence  urging  them  all  in
somewhat  the  same  direction  ; — so  that  the  best  available  thought  of  the
age  is  inspiring  the  age  more  profoundly  than  we  know.  And  it  is
possible  also  that  these  utterances  nmy  bear  in  reality  some  obscure
relation  to  truths  profounder  than  we  have  as  yet  normally  acquired.


Part  XXXVIIL]


Pseudo  Possession.


401


What  is  omitted,  indeed,  from  current  beliefs  is  as  significant  as  what
is  added  tliereto,  and  the  general  product  looks  more  like  a  very  poor
account  of  something  which  in  itself  is  great  and  new,  but  dimly
apprehended,  than  like  a  compromise  between  conflicting  dogmas,  or  a
selection  from  familiar  hortatory  themes.

Thus  mucli  I  think  it  was  fair  to  say  ; — or  I  may  speak  more  strongly
and  maintain  that  thus  much  it  was  a  positive  duty  to  insist  upon.  It
is  only  right  that  this  mass  of  communications,  taken  as  a  whole,  should
be  defended  from  the  random  accusations  of  journalist  or  pulpiteer.
Yet,  in  view  of  what  is  here  to  follow,  I  must  lose  no  time  in  defining'
the  limited  extent  to  which  my  support  of  automatic  messages  goes.

I  think,  then,  that  in  evidential  messages, — where  there  is  real  reason
to  believe  tliat  an  identified  spirit  is  communicating, — there  is  a  marked
and  independent  consensus  on  such  matters  as  these  spirits  profess
themselves  able  to  discuss.  And,  again,  in  non-evidential  messages, — •
in  communications  which  probably  proceed  from  the  automatist's
subliminal  self, — I  hold  that  there  is  a  remarkable  and  undesigned  con-
cordance in  high  moral  tone,  and  also  in  avoidance  of  certain  prevalent
tenets,  which  many  of  the  automatists  do  supraliminally  hold  as  true.
But  I  also  insist  that  these  subliminal  messages,  even  when  not  inco-
herent, are  generally  dream-like,  and  often  involve  tenets  which
(though  never  in  my  experience  base  or  immoral)  are  unsupported  by
evidence,  and  are  probably  to  be  referred  to  mere  self-suggestion.

Prominent  among  such  tenets  is  one  which  forms  a  large  part  of
M"e  Smith's  communications  ;  namely,  the  doctrine  of  reincaryiation,
or  of  successive  lives  spent  by  each  soul  upon  this  planet.

The  simple  fact  that  such  was  probably  the  opinion  hotlx  of  Plato  and
of  Virgil  shows  that  there  is  nothing  here  which  is  alien  to  the  best
reason  or  to  the  highest  instincts  of  men.  Nor,  indeed,  is  it  easy  to
realise  any  theory  of  the  direct  creation  of  spirits  at  sucli  different
stages  of  advancement  as  those  which  enter  upon  the  earth  in  the  guise
of  mortal  man.  There  must,  one  feels,  be  some  kind  of  continuity, —
some  form  of  spiritual  Past.  Yet  for  reincarnation  there  is  at  present
no  valid  evidence ;  and  it  must  be  my  duty  to  show  how  its  assertion
in  any  given  instance, — M"e  Smith's  included, — constitutes  in  itself  a
strong  argument  in  favour  of  self-suggestion  rather  than  extraneous
inspiration  as  the  source  of  the  messages  in  which  it  appears.

Whenever  civilised  men  have  received  what  they  have  regai-ded  as
a  revelation  (which  has  generally  been  somewhat  fragmentary  in  its
first  delivery)  they  have  natui'ally  endeavoured  to  complete  and
systematise  it  as  well  as  they  could.  In  so  doing  they  have  mostly
aimed  at  three  objects;  (1)  to  xmderslancl  as  much  as  possible  of  the
secrets  of  the  universe ;  (2)  to  justify  as  far  as  possible  Heaven's  deal-
ings with  men  ;  and  (3)  to  aiypropriate  as  far  as  possible  the  favour  or

•I  F


402


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


benefit  which  the  revelation  may  show  as  possibly  accruing  to  behevers.
For  all  these  purposes  the  doctrine  of  reincarnation  has  proved  useful
in  many  countries  and  times.  But  in  no  case  could  it  seem  more  appro-
priate than  in  this  last  revelation  (so  to  term  it)  through  automatic
messages  and  the  like.  And  as  a  matter  of  history,  a  certain  vigorous
preacher  of  the  new  faith,  kn(jwii  under  the  name  of  Allan  Kardec,
took  up  reincarnationist  tenets,  enforced  them  (as  there  is  reason  to
believe)  by  strong  suggestion  upon  the  minds  of  various  automatic
writers,  and  set  them  forth  in  dogmatic  works  whicli  have  had  much
influence,  especially  among  Latin  nations,  from  their  clarity,  symmetry,
and  intrinsic  reasonableness.  Yet  the  data  thus  collected  were
absolutely  insufficient,  and  the  Livre  des  Esprits  must  simply  rank
as  the  premature  formulation  of  a  new  religion, — the  premature
systematisation  of  a  nascent  science.

I  follow  Professor  Flournoy  in  believing  that  the  teaching  of  that
work  must  laave  directly  or  indirectly  influenced  the  mind  of  M"''
Smith, — and  is  therefore  responsible  for  her  claim  to  these  incarnations
previous  to  tJiat  which  she  now  undergoes  or  enjoys.

On  the  general  scheme  here  followed,  each  incarnation,  if  the  last
has  been  used  ai-ight,  ought  to  represent  some  advance  in  the  scale  of
being.  If  one  earth-life  has  been  misused,  the  next  earth-life  ought  to
afford  opportunity  for  expiation, — or  for  further  practice  in  the  special
virtue  which  has  been  imperfectly  acquired.  Thus  M"*^  Smith's  present
life  in  a  humble  position  may  be  thought  to  atone  for  her  overmuch
pride  in  her  last  incarnation, — as  Marie  Antoinette.

But  the  mention  of  Marie  Antoinette  suggests  the  risk  which  this
theory  fosters, — of  assuming  that  one  is  the  issue  of  a  distinguished
line  of  spiritual  progenitoi\s  ; — insomuch  that,  with  whatever  temporary
sets-back,  one  is  sure  in  the  end  to  find  oneself  in  a  leading  position.

Pythagoras,  indeed,  was  content  with  the  secondary  hero
Euphorbus  as  his  bygone  self.  But  in  our  days  Dr.  Anna  Kingsford
and  Mr.  Edward  Maitland  must  needs  have  been  the  Virgin  Mary  and
S.  John  the  Divine.  And  Victor  Hugo,  who  was  naturally  well  to
the  front  in  these  self-multiplications,  took  possession  of  most  of  the
leading  personages  of  antiquity  whom  he  could  manage  to  string
together  in  chronological  sequence.  It  is  obvious  that  any  number  of
re-born  souls  can  play  at  this  game ; — but  whei'e  no  one  adduces  any
evidence  it  seems  hardly  worth  while  to  go  on.  Even  Pythagoras
does  not  appear  to  have  adduced  any  evidence  beyond  his  ipse
dixit  for  his  assertion  that  the  alleged  shield  of  Euphoi'bus  had  in
reality  been  borne  by  that  mythical  hero.  Meantime  the  question  as
to  reincarnation  has  actually  been  put  to  a  very  few  spirits  who  have
given  some  real  evidence  of  their  identity.  So  far  as  I  know,  no
one  of  these  has  claimed  to  know  anything  personally  of  such  an


Part  XXXVIII.]


Pseudo- Possession.


403


incident ; — although  all  have  united  in  saying  that  their  knowledge
was  too  limited  to  allow  them  to  generalise  on  the  matter.

Helene's  previous  incarnations, — to  return  to  our  subject, — do
perhaps  suffer  from  the  general  fault  of  aiming  too  high.  She  has  to
her  credit  a  pre-incarnation  in  the  planet  Mars  ; — another  as  an  Indian
Princess ;  and  a  third  (as  I  have  said)  as  Marie  Antoinette.

In  each  case  there  are  certain  impressive  features  in  the  impersona-
tion ;  but  in  each  case  also  careful  analysis  negatives  the  idea  that  we
can  be  dealing  with  a  personality  really  revived  from  a  former  epoch,
or  from  a  distant  planet ; — and  leaves  us  inclined  to  explain  everything
by  "cryptomnesia"  (as  Professor  Flournoy  calls  submerged  memory),  and
that  subliminal  inventiveness  of  which  we  already  know  so  much.

The  Martian  pre-incarnation  was  naturally  the  most  striking  at
first  sight.  Its  reality  was  supported  by  a  Martian  language,  written
in  a  Martian  alphabet,  spoken  with  fluency,  and  sufliciently  interpreted
into  French  to  show  that  such  part  of  it,  at  any  rate,  as  could  he  com-
mitted to  writing  was  actually  a  grammatical  and  coherent  form  of
speech.

This  to  the  ordinary  reader  sounds  like  good  e^ddence.  To  the
student  of  automatisms,  on  the  other  hand,  as  I  have  already  said,  it
irresistibly  suggests  the  automatist's  own  subliminal  handiwork.  It
is  a  case  of  " glossolaly,"  or  "speaking  with  tongues"  ;  and  we  have  no
modern  case — no  case  later  than  the  half-mythical  Miracles  of  the
Cevennes — where  such  utterance  has  proved  to  be  other  than  gibberish.
I  have  had  various  automatic  hieroglyphics  shown  to  me,  with  the
suggestion  that  they  may  be  cursive  Japanese,  or  perhaps  an  old  dialect
of  Northern  China  ; — but  I  confess  that  I  have  grown  tired  of  showing
these  fragments  to  the  irresponsive  expert,  who  suggests  that  they  may
also  be  vague  reminiscences  of  the  scrolls  in  an  Oriental  tea-tray.

It  seems  indeed  to  be  a  most  difficult  thing  to  get  telepathically
into  any  brain  even  fragments  of  a  language  which  it  has  not  learnt.
A  few  simple  Italian,  and  even  Hawaian,  words  occur  in  Mrs.  Piper's
utterances,  coming  apparently  from  departed  spirits,  but  these,  with
some  Dutch  words  recently  given  through  another  sensitive,  form,  I
think,  the  only  instances  which  I  know.  And,  speaking  generally,
whatever  is  elaborate,  finished,  pretentious,  is  likely  to  be  of  subliminal
facture ;  while  only  things  scrappy,  perplexed  and  tentative  have
floated  to  us  veritably  from  afar.

Analysis  of  the  so-called  Martian  language  proves  it  to  be  no  excep-
tion to  this  rule.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  childish,  though  elaborate,  imitati(jn
of  French  ; — whose  true  parallel  lies  in  those  languages  of  the  nursery
which  little  brothers  and  sisters  sometimes  invent — as  a  tongue  not
understanded  of  their  elders.  The  outbursts  of  this  Martian  speech
are  noticeable  as  a  parallel  to  the  "  deific  verbiage,"  which  used  to

2  F  2


404


F.  ir.  H.  Myer^.


[Supplement,


throng  tlii'ough  the  lips  of  Mr.  le  Baron  [Proceedings,  Vol.  XII.,  p.  277),
and  for  a  long  time  impressed  itself  upon  him  as  having  some  reality
in  it  somewhere.

The  most  interesting  peculiarity,  indeed,  in  the  Martian  tongue  is
its  exclusively  French  formation  ; — which  would  seem  to  argue  its  elabo-
ration in  a  mind  familial'  with  Fi'ench  alone.  Now  M'^**  Smith, — who,
by  the  way,  is  no  linguist, — had  some  German  lessons  in  her  girlhood,
and  one  is  thus  led  to  the  curious  supposition  that  the  Martian  tongue
was  invented  by  some  element  in  her  personality  which  preceded  the
German  lessons.

I  fancy  tliat  I  have  mentioned  somewhei'e,  but  I  may  perhaps  recall
hei'e,  a  tiivial  exjierience  of  my  own  illusti'ative  of  this  ingenious
hypothesis  of  Professor  Flournoy's.  I  once  dreamt  that  I  saw  an
epitaph  in  Greek  hexameters  inscribed  on  a  wall, — of  which  on  waking
I  remembered  only  one  line —

Avrap  6  p.ev  Kara  y7]V  daXepov  kv(T6  baKVop^vov  irvp.

I  could  not  construe  this  line,  which  is,  in  fact,  nonsense  ; — till  I
remembered  in  a  sudden  flash  a  certain  sense  of  shame  felt  by  me  as  a
small  boy  at  having  thought  that  Kara  meant  under, — as  though  Kara  yt-jv

were  yrjs  /tarco-

The  line,  then,  had  a  meaning :  "  But  he,  indeed,  beneath  the
earth,  embraced  the  strong  consuming  flame — not  a  well-cln)sen
sentiment  for  an  epitaph,  perhaps,  but  yet  up  to  the  ordinary  level  of
one's  dreaming  self.  There  must,  then,  have  been  some  fragment  of  me
yet  surviving  from  innocent  boyhood,  and  blundering  subliminal ly  in
the  same  old  style.

1  This  fact  of  the  different  age  of  M"e  Smith's  life  to  which
her  hypnoidal  elucubrations  in  this  aspect  belong  seems  to  me  to
constitute  one  of  the  most  interesting  psychological  points  in  her
mediumship.  It  tends  to  show  that  her  secondary  personalities  are
pi'obably  in  their  origin — as  has  sometimes  been  suggested — phenomena
partly  of  reversion  in  the  ordinary  personality, — survivals  oi'  momentary
returns  of  inferior  phases,  overpassed  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time,  and
which  should  normally  have  been  absorbed  in  the  development  of  the
individual  instead  of  appearing  externally  in  sti'ange  proliferations.
Just  as  teratology  illustrates  embryology,  which  in  return  explains
teratology,  and  as  both  of  these  unite  in  throwing  light  on  anatomy,
similai'ly  one  may  hope  that  the  study  of  the  facts  of  mediumship  may
some  day  help  to  furnish  us  with  some  just  and  fruitful  view  of  noi-mal
psychogenesis, — which  in  I'eturn  will  enable  us  better  to  comprehend
tlie  appearance  of  these  singular  phenomena ; — so  that  psychology  in
general  may  thence  acquire  a  better  and  exacter  conception  of  human
personality.


Part  XXXVIII.]


Pseudo-Possession.


405


The  faculty  here  touched  upon — the  strong  re"viviscence  of  long-past
emotional  states — seems  to  me  eminently  characteristic,  at  any  rate,  of
artistic  and  poetical  genius.

The  artist  must  needs  desire  to  have  his  whole  life  to  draw  upon.
He  must  often  wish  to  live  in  the  past  more  vividly  than  in  the  present,
and  to  feel  again  what  he  has  felt,  even  more  than  to  see  again  what  he
has  seen.  Visual  and  auditory  memories,  pushed  to  absolute  vi"sddness,
become  hallucinations  of  vision  or  audition  ;  and  this  point  of  absolute
hallucination  few  artists  are  able  or  even  desire  to  reach.  But
emotional  or  affective  memory  may  for  some  gifted  natures  be  pushed
on  to  all  its  old  actual  vividness  with  pure  gain  to  art ; — nay,  if  the  man
himself  has  grown  more  capable  of  feeling,  then  the  revived  emotion
(like  certain  optical  memory-images)  may  even  go  beyond  the  oiiginal.

Thus  Sully  Prudhojnme  says,  in  speaking  of  a  hidden  insurgent
memory  of  this  type  :  "  C'est  meme  cette  reviviscence  qui  seule  me
permettrait  de  retoucher  les  vers  que  cette  petite  aventure,  si  ancienne,
m'a  fait  commettre,  et  de  faire  beneficier  de  I'experience  que  j'ai  acquise
dans  mon  art  I'expression  de  mes  sentiments  d'autrefois."  And  he  asks
whether  every  memory  of  feeling  does  not  assume  a  certain  character  of
hallucination.  Wordsworth  (as  Aubrey  de  Vere  has  told  us,  and  as  the
sonnet  "  Surprised  by  joy,"  shows)  had  very  much  the  same  experience.
And  Littre  {Revue  Positive,  1877,  p.  660)  describes  what  he  calls  the
"  affective  automnesia,*' — or  spontaneously  ai-ising  flow  of  emotion  with
which  quite  suddenly,  and  late  in  life,  he  remembered  losing  a  young
sister  when  he  was  ten  years  old  :  "  Ce  meme  e'venement  s'est  reproduite
avec  une  peine  non  moindre,  certes,  que  celle  que  j'eprouvais  au  moment
meme,  et  qui  alia  jusqu'a  mouiller  mes  yeux  de  larmes."^

This  train  of  reflections,  I  think,  well  illustrates  that  kinship
between  the  working  of  what  is  admitted  as  genius  and  the  dreamlike
subliminal  mentation  with  which  we  are  here  dealing,  of  which  I  have
often  spoken,  and  to  which  I  must  again  presently  recur.

Turning  now  to  the  Hindoo  pre-incarnation,  we  observe  that  it
offers  a  linguistic  problem  of  a  rather  different  kind.  Cei  tain  Sanscrit
letters  are  written,  and  certain  Sanscrit  words  are  uttered  ; — mixed,  it
is  true,  with  much  quasi-Sanscrit  gibberish,  and  not  exceeding  what  a
quick  eye  and  memory  might  pick  up  in  a  few  hours  from  a  Sanscrit
grammar.  Helene,  however, — whose  complete  good  faith  is  vouched
for  on  all  sides,  and  who  herself  undoubtedly  believes  with  her  whole
heart  in  the  spirit-hypothesis, — denies  that  she  ever  consulted  or  even
to  her  knowledge  saw,  a  Sanscrit  grammar.  Again,  M.  Flournoy's
careful  researches  have  shown  that  incidents  of  the  Indian  history,  or
pseudo-liistory,  on  which  the  narrative  of  this  incarnation  turns,  are


^  See  Ribot,  Psychologic  dcs  Sentiments,  p.  152.


406


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


undoubtedly  derived  from  a  particular  passage  in  a  rare  and  antiquated
Iiistory  of  India  by  de  Maries, — which  M"^  Smith  asserts  that  she
never  saw,  and  which  it  seems  very  improbable  that  she  should  have
seen.  This  knowledge  is  worked  up  in  a  way  indicating  considerable
familiarity  with  the  East,  and  quasi-Indian  tunes  and  gestures  are
employed  with  great  verisimilitude.

I  need  not  here  go  into  the  details  of  the  more  modern  and
.-iccessible  characterisation  of  Marie  Antoinette.

In  the  facts  which  I  have  already  given,  we  have  got  this  problem
reduced  to  its  narrowest  form  ;  and  I  shall  set  forth,  as  barely  possible,
ii  theory  which  Professor  Flournoy  has  not  invoked.  I  agi'ee  with  him
that  the  notion  of  the  truth  of  the  Indian  romance  must  be  quite
dismissed.  But  I  do  not  therefore  think  it  certain  that  M^^*^  Smith  must
have  unconsciously  seen  de  Maries'  history  and  a  Sanscrit  grammar.

On  the  contrary,  I  think  it  just  possible  that  the  knowledge  of
de  Maries  and  of  Sanscrit  may  have  been  clairvoyantly  acquired  by
M"*^  Smith's  subliminal  self, — or  even  may  have  been  communicated
to  that  subliminal  self  by  a  spirit  which  jnay  have  been  concerned  in
the  composition  of  these  romances.  I  should  defend  this  apparent
absurdity  somewhat  as  follows  : —

If  spirits  do  act  upon  human  minds,  they  probably  so  act  sometimes
to  amuse  themselves,  as  well  as  to  please  or  inform  us.  I  know  of  no
evidence,  indeed,  of  their  having  any  power  to  injvA-e  us,  but  I  think  that
there  is  a  good  deal  of  evidence  of  tricky,  playful  interference.  I  think
that  a  kind  of  literary  impulse  to  write  or  act  out  romances,  through
the  intermediacy  of  some  Imman  being,  is  perhaps  one  form  of  this
mj'stifying  intervention.  I  think  that  traces  of  such  a  phenomenon
wccurinthe  psychical  history,  for  instance,  of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses,  and
of  a  lady  .quoted  in  these  Proceedings  as  Miss  A.  The  possibility
can  hardlj'  be  tested ; — but  should,  I  think,  be  noticed  here.

I  pass  on  from  these  reincarnational  romances  to  certain  minor,  but
interesting  phenomena,  which  Professor  Flournoy  calls  teleological
(lutomatisiiis.  These  ai'e  small  acts  of  helpfulness — beneficent  synergies,
we  might  term  them,  in  contrast  with  the  injurioics  synergies,  or
combined  groups  of  hurtfid  actions,  with  which  hysteria  has  made  us
familiar.  We  have  already  printed  several  incidents  of  this  type  in  our
Proceedings  and  Journal.  (See,  for  instance,  the  trivial  but  instructive
case  of  Mrs.  Veri'all  and  the  envelopes,  Proceedings,  Vol.  XL,  p.  191.)

"  One  day,"  says  Professor  Flournoy  (p.  35),  "  Miss  Smith,  when
desiring  to  lift  down  a  lar'ge  and  heavy  object  which  lay  on  a  high
shelf,  was  prevented  from  doing  so  because  her  raised  arm  remained
for  some  seconds  as  though  petrified  in  the  air  and  incapable  of  move-
ment. She  took  this  as  a  warning,  and  gave  up  the  attempt.  At  a
subsequent  seance  Leopold  stated  that  it  was  he  who  had  thus  fixed


Part  XXXVIII.l


Pseudo-Possession.


407


H^l^ne's  arm  to  prevent  her  from  grasping  this  object,  which  was  much
too  heavy  for  her,  and  would  have  caused  her  some  accident.

"Another  time,  a  shopman,  who  had  been  looking  in  vain  for  a
certain  pattern,  asked  Helene  if  by  chance  she  knew  what  had  become
of  it.  Helene  answered  mechanically  and  without  reflection — '  Yes,  it
has  been  sent  to  M.  J.'  (a  client  of  the  house).  At  the  same  time  she
saw  before  her  the  number  1 8  in  large  black  figures  a  few  feet  from  the
ground,  and  added  instinctively,  '  It  was  sent  eighteen  days  ago.'
[This  was  in  the  highest  degree  improbable,  but  was  found  to  be
absolutely  correct.]  Leopold  had  no  recollection  of  this,  and  does  not
seem  to  have  been  the  author  of  this  cryptomnesic  automatism."

A  similar  phenomenon  has  also  been  noted  (p.  87)  Avhen  warning  is
conveyed  by  an  actual  phantasmal  figure.

M}^^  Smith  has  seen  an  appm-ition  of  Leopold,  barring  a  particular
road,  under  circumstances  which  make  it  probable  that  Smith
would  on  that  day  have  had  cause  to  regret  taking  that  route.  ( C/.
Apparition  seen  by  lady  near  open  lift ;  and  warnings  to  Socrates  to
change  his  route.  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  345,  and  Vol.  V.,  pp.
.540-542.)

The  next  question  is  as  to  whether  supernormal  faculty  of  any
kind  is  manifested  in  Helene's  phenomena.  There  does  appear  to  be
some  telepathy  (see  p.  363,  etc.),  and  of  telepathy  Professor  Flournoy
speaks  as  follows  : —

"  One  may  almost  say  that,  if  telepathy  did  not  exist,  it  would  be
necessary  to  invent  it.  I  mean  by  this  that  a  direct  action  between
living  beings,  independently  of  the  organs  of  sense,  is  a  thing  so  in
accord  with  all  that  we  know  of  nature  that  it  would  be  difficult  not
to  assume  its  existence  a  priori,  even  were  no  sign  of  it  perceptible.
How  could  one  believe,  indeed,  that  centres  of  chemical  phenomena
so  complex  as  the  nervous  centres  could  find  themselves  in  activity
without  transmitting  vai'ious  undulations, — X,  Y,  or  Z  rays, — passing
through  the  skull  as  the  sun  passes  through  glass,  and  going  on  to  act,
at  any  distance,  on  their  homologues  in  other  skulls  ?  It  is  a  mere
question  of  intensity.

•'  If  telepathy  is  considered  strange,  mystic,  occult,  suj^ernormal,
etc.,  it  is  because  this  charactei'  has  been  gratuitously  conferred  on
it  by  making  of  this  imponderable  link  between  organisms  a  purely
spiritual  communication  of  soul  to  soul,  independent  of  matter  and  of
space.  That  such  a  metaphysical  union  does  exist  I  am  ready  to
believe,  but  it  is  to  introduce  a  gratuitous  confusion  if  one  substitutes
this  problem  of  high  speculation, — which  abandons  the  strictly  scien-
tific ground  and  sets  aside  the  principle  of  psycho-physical  parallelism,
— for  the  empirical  problem  of  telepathy,  which  is  perfectly  concordant
with  that  parallelism  and  in  no  way  contradicts  established  science."


408


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


Now,  of  course,  it  lias  been  obvious  from  the  outset  of  our  re-
searches that  it  would  be  very  desirable  if  we  could  trace  some  relation
between  telepathy  and  ether-vibrations.  There  are  doubtless  endless
vibrations  waiting  to  be  explained ; — and  telepathy  is  a  plienomenon
greatly  in  need  of  an  explanation.  The  more  complex  any  object  is,
moreover,  the  more  strangely  it  will  vibrate  ; — and  the  more  sensitive
any  object  is,  the  more  strangely  will  it  receive  and  respond  to
vibrations.

Nevertheless  when  we  have  said  this, — as  Sir  W.  Crookes  has  said  it
with  great  impressiveness  (^Proceedinyi,  Vol.  XII.,  pp.  348—352), — we
have  said  nearly  all  that  can  be  said  for  the  vibration-theory  of  telepathy.
And  yet  the  real  diHiculties  of  the  subject  are  only  beginning.

It  is,  of  coui'se,  plain  that  if  we  are  to  get  any  true  notion  of  telepathy
we  must  in  some  way  generalise  from  our  own  petty  experiments  and
limited  observations.  No  one  supposes  that  the  few  emergent  cases
which  happen  to  have  become  accessible  to  our  view  comprise  the
whole  I'ange  of  what  must  by  its  very  nature  be  a  great  fundamental
law.

Now  the  generalisation  which  the  vibration-theoiy  calls  on  us  to
make  is  as  follows  :  Ether-vibrations  are  constantly  emanating  from
every  human  brain,  and  every  human  brain  is  capable  of  receiving  such
vibrations  and  of  representing  them  in  consciousness.

These  vibrations  are  assumed  to  radiate  in  all  directions  equally  (as
all  ether  waves  must  do),  and  to  be  unaffected  by  earthly  distances
or  earthly  objects ;  but  nevertheless  only  to  become  perceptible  when
they  impinge  upon  a  brain  which  is  fitted  to  receive  them  either  by
emotional  sympathy  or  by  some  natui'al  sensitivity.  Their  action  on
the  percipient's  brain  is  assumed  to  be  instantaneous  ; — although  we
may  allow  some  period  of  latency  before  they  represent  themselves  in
his  consciousness.  Of  course,  the  more  this  latency  is  insisted  on,  the
less  plausible  does  the  vibration-theory  become.

Again,  the  vibration  must  represent  itself  to  the  percipients  as  a
pattern  which  must  in  some  way  resemble  the  pattern  which  emanated
from  the  agent.  Thus,  to  recur  to  oui'  early  experiments  with  cards,
our  old  friend  the  two  of  diamonds  is  bound  to  be  the  two  of  diamonds
still  ;  or  if  it  cannot  come  out  as  the  two  of  diamonds  exactly,  it  yet
ought  to  get  as  near  it  as  it  can,  and  to  appear,  say,  as  the  two  of  hearts.
When  the  idea  to  be  communicated  becomes  more  complex, — and  most
ideas  are  more  complex  than  the  two  of  diamonds, — we  may  fairly  allow
a  wider  i-ange  of  similitude.  The  vibration-pattern  received  is  sup-
posed to  be  modified  by  the  recipient  brain ; — modified  often  out  of  any
2nctorial  resemblance  to  any  impi'ession  which  we  can  suppose  the
agent's  brain  to  have  despatched.  The  great  extent  of  such  apparent
modification,  indeed,  does  not  affect  the  vibration-theory  alone,  but  any


Part  XXXVIII.]


Pseudo-Possessi  on.


409


theory  of  telepathic  impact  as  opposed  to  excursive  presence,  or  invasion
on  the  agent's  part.  Gurney  repeatedly,  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
discussed  this  topic,  and  especially  that  form  of  difficulty  which  lies  in
the  habitual  appearance  of  the  agent's  perso^i  to  the  percipient ; — albeit
the  agent,  at  a  moment  of  death  or  crisis,  is  not  likely  to  be  thinking  of
the  aspect  of  his  own  body.  Gurney  argues,  however,  that  a  sense
of  one's  own  aspect  is  deeply  rooted  in  all  our  minds,  and  may
naturally  be  represented  to  others  as  a  part  of  any  message  which
comes  from  our  unconscious  strata.  But  such  a  theory,  difficult  in
any  case,  has  to  be  greatly  strained  if  we  are  to  suppose  that  a
pattern  of  brain-vibrations  which  for  the  agent  represent,  say,  the
shock  of  the  rupture  of  an  aneurism,  become  for  the  percipient  a
picture  of  a  smiling  gentleman  dressed  for  walking,  with  great  coat
and  cane.  (See  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  210,  Case  of
N.  J.  S.)

A  still  greater  difficulty  for  the  vibration-theory  is  presented  by
collective  telepathic  hallucinations.  It  is  hard  to  understand  how  A
can  emit  a  pattern  of  vibrations  which,  radiating  equally  in  all  direc-
tions, shall  affect  not  only  his  distant  friend  B,  but  also  the  strangers
C  and  D,  who  happen  to  be  standing  near  B  ; — and  affect  no  other
persons,  so  far  as  we  know,  in  the  world.

The  above  points  have  been  fair  matter  of  argument  almost  since
our  research  began.  But  as  our  evidence  has  developed,  our  conception
of  telepathy  has  needed  to  be  more  and  more  generalised  in  other  and
new  directions, — still  less  comjjatible  with  the  vibration-theor-y.  Three
such  directions  may  be  briefly  specified  here ; — namely,  the  relation  of
telepathy  (a)  to  telsesthesia  or  clairvoyance,  {b)  to  time,  and  (c)  to  dis-
embodied spirits,  (a)  It  is  increasingly  hard  to  refer  all  the  scenes  of
which  percipients  become  aware  to  the  action  of  any  given  mind  which  is
perceiving  those  distant  scenes.  This  is  especially  noticeable  in  crystal-
gazing  exj^eriments.  {h)  And  these  crystal  visions  also  show  what,  from
the  strict  telepathic  jjoint  of  view,  we  should  call  a  great  laxity  of  time
relations.  The  scryer  chooses  his  own  time  to  look  in  the  ball ; — and
though  sometimes  he  sees  events  which  are  taking  place  at  the  moment,
he  may  also  see  past  events, — and  even  future  events.  I  at  least  cannot
deny  precogriition,  nor  can  I  draw  a  definite  line  amid  these  complex
visions  which  may  separate  precognition  from  telepathy,  (c)  Precog-
nition itself  may  be  explained,  if  you  will,  as  telepathy  from  dis-
embodied spirits ; — and  this  would  at  any  rate  bi-ing  it  under  a  class  of
phenomena  which  I  think  all  students  of  our  subjects  must  before  long
admit.  Admitting  here,  for  argument's  sake,  that  we  do  receive  com-
munications from  the  dead  which  we  should  term  telepathic  if  we
received  them  from  the  living,  it  is  of  course  open  to  us  to  conjecture
that  these  messages  also  are  conveyed  on  ether-waves. But  since  those


410


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


waves  do  not  at  any  rate  emanate  from  material  brains,  we  shall  by
this  time  have  got  so  far  from  the  original  brain-wave  hypothesis  that
few  will  care  still  to  defend  it.

I  doubt,  indeed,  whethei'  we  can  safely  say  of  telepathy  anything
more  definite  than  this  :  Life  has  the  power  of  manifesting  itself  to  life.
The  laws  of  life,  as  we  have  thus  far  known  them,  have  been  only  laws
life  when  already  associated  with  matter'.  Thus  limited,  we  have
learnt  little  as  to  Life's  true  nature.  We  know  not  even  whether  Life
be  only  a  directive  Force,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  an  effective  Energy.
We  know  not  in  what  way  it  operates  on  matter.  We  can  in  no  way
define  the  connection  between  our  own  consciousness  and  our  organisms.
Just  here  it  is,  I  should  say,  that  telepathic  observations  ought  to
supply  us  with  some  hint.  From  the  mode  in  which  some  element  of
one  individual  life, — apart  from  material  impact, — gets  hold  of  another
organism,  we  may  in  time  learn  something  of  the  way  in  which  our
own  life  gets  hold  of  our  own  organism, — and  maintains,  intermits,  or
abandons  its  organic  sway.

Most  instructive  of  all  will  it  be  if  we  can  obtain  telejjathy  from
discarnate  spirits, — and  especially  if  we  could  get  any  glimpse  of  a  rela-
tion between  their  mode  of  being  and  the  cosmic  ether.  On  this  point
Professor  Flournoy  writes  as  follows  (p.  394) : —

"  It  is  obvious  that  the  hypothesis  of  spirits  involves  no  a  priori
impossibility  or  absurdity.  It  does  not  even  contradict,  as  is  sometimes
supposed,  that  fundamental  law  of  physiological  psychology — the
psychophysical  parallelism — which  insists  that  every  mental  phenomenon
must  have  a  physical  correlative.  Foi'  in  spite  of  our  habit  of  con-
sidering the  molecular  or  atomic  phenomena  of  the  brain,  the  cata-
bolism  of  the  neurones, — as  the  true  concomitant  of  the  conscious  pro-
cesses, it  is  quite  possible — it  is  even  probable  enough — that  these
molecular  movements  do  not  constitute  the  ultimate  physical  term
immediateljf  adjoining  the  mental  world  {cofoyant  le  monde  mental),  ,
but  that  the  true  physical  or  spatial  correlatives  of  psychological  or
non-spatial  phenomena  ought  to  be  sought  in  the  vibrations  of  that
imponderable  matter,  the  ether,  in  which  ponderable  atoms  and  mole-
cules are  plunged  somewhat  after  the  fashion  of  grains  of  dust  in  the
atmosphere."

I  quote  these  words  because, — obvious  as  their  contention  must
seem  to  all  thinking  persons, — it  is  common  enough  to  see  phrases  used
as  though  our  notions  were  still  bounded  by  the  molecular; — as  though
we  did  not  know,  as  certainly  as  we  know  anything,  that  the  great
mystery  of  existence  is  only  just  beginning,  in  that  inconceivable  world
of  ether,  precisely  where  our  utmost  analysis  fails  us,  and  our  mathe-
matics are  reduced  to  a  jungle  of  infinities  and  of  contradictions.


Part  XXXVIII.]


Pseudo-Possession.


411


And  now  as  to  the  question  of  possible  telepathy  from  the  dead  in
Helene's  case.  The  instance  with  most  in  its  favour  is  described  by
Professor  Flournoy  as  follows  (p.  406)  : —

In  a  sitting  at  my  house  (February  12th,  1899)  M>le  Smith  has  a  vision  of
a  village  on  a  height  covered  with  vines  ;  she  sees  a  small  old  man  coming
down  thence  by  a  stony  road.  He  looks  likes  a  "  demi-monsieur  "  ; — buckled
shoes,  large  soft  hat,  shirt-collar  unstarched,  with  points  rising  to  his  cheeks,
etc.  A  peasant  in  a  blouse  whom  he  meets  bows  to  him  as  to  a  personage  of
importance  ;  they  talk  a  patois  which  Helene  cann(jt  ft)llow.  She  has  an
impression  that  she  knows  the  village  ;  but  she  cannot  identify  it.  Soon  the
landscape  disappears,  and  the  old  man,  now  clothed  in  white  and  seen  in  a
luminous  space  [implying  that  he  is  in  the  next  world]  seems  to  come  nearer.
At  this  moment,  as  she  sits  with  her  right  arm  resting  on  the  table,  Leopold
dictates  with  the  forefinger,  Lower  her  arvi.  I  obey  ;  Helene's  arm  at  first
resists  strongly  ;  then  yields  at  once.  She  seizes  a  pencil,  and  during  the
usual  struggle  as  to  the  way  to  hold  it  [i.e.,  whether  in  her  own  habitual
fashion, — between  forefinger  and  middle  finger, — or  in  the  ordinary  way]
"you  are  squeezing  my  hand  too  hard  !  "  she  cries  to  the  imagined  little  old
man  who,  according  to  Leopold,  wishes  to  write  through  her; — "You  hurt
me  ;  don't  press  so  hard  ;  what  can  it  matter  to  you  whether  it  is  a  pencil  or  a
pen  ?  "  Then  she  drops  the  pencil  and  takes  a  pen,  and  holding  it  between
thumb  aiid  forefinger  writes  slowly  in  an  unknown  handwriting,  Cliaumontet
syndic.  Then  returns  the  vision  of  the  village  ; — we  wish  to  know  its  name ;
and  she  ends  by  perceiving  a  guide-post  on  which  she  spells  out  Ghessenaz, —
a  name  unknown  to  us.  Finally  having,  at  my  desire,  asked  the  old  man
the  date  when  he  was  syndic,  she  hears  him  answer,  lSo9.  Nothing  more
can  be  learnt ;  the  vision  disa])pears  and  giv6s  place  to  a  possession  by
Leopold,  who  in  liis  big  Italian  voice  talks  at  length  about  various  matters.  I
question  him  on  the  incident  of  the  unknown  village  and  syndic ;  his  answers,
interrupted  by  long  digressions,  are  to  this  efiect  :  "I  am  looking —
I  turn  my  thoughts  along  that  great  mountain  with  a  tunnel  in  it  whose
name  I  do  not  know  [Leopold, — the  soi-clisant  Cagliostro, — who  returns
fi'oin  the  18th  centmy,  is  naturally  not  well  up  in  modern  geograpliical
names ; — but  this  is  the  hill  of  Fort  de  I'Ecluse]  ;  I  see  the  name
of  Chessenaz, — a  village  on  a  height, — a  road  leading  up  to  it.  Look
in  that  village  ;  you  will  find  the  name  [Chaumontet]  :  try  to  verify
the  signature  ;  you  will  get  a  proof  that  the  signature  is  really  that  of
this  man."

I  ask  him  whether  he  sees  all  this  in  Hdlene's  memories — "No"  ; — or
whether  she  has  ever  been  at  Chessenaz  :—"  Ask  her;  she  will  know  :  I
have  not  followed  her  in  all  her  excursions."

Helene,  when  awake,  could  give  no  information.  But  next  day  I  found
on  the  majj  a  little  village  of  Chessenaz  in  the  department  of  Haute-Savoie,
at  26  kilometres  from  Geneva.

A  fortnight  later,  Helen  sees  the  vision  of  the  other  day  reapjjear  ; — the
village,  the  little  old  man  ; — but  accompanied  hj  a  cure,  who  seems  intimate
with  him,  and  wliom  he  calls  "  my  dear  friend  Bournier."  Leopold  promises
that  this  cure  will  write  his  name  for  Helen.


412


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


At  the  next  sitting  in  uiy  house,  March  19th,  I  remind  Leopold  of  this
promise  .  .  .  The  cure  at  last  takes  her  hand  as  the  syndic  had  done,
and  writes  very  slowly  the  words  Burnier  mlut.

I  wrote  to  the  Mairie  at  Chessenaz,  and  the  Mayor,  M.  Saunier,  was
good  enough  to  answer  me  at  once.  "During  the  years  1838  and  1839,"  he
said,  ' '  the  syndic  of  Chessenaz  was  Jean  Chaumontet,  whose  signature  I  find
in  various  documents  of  that  date.  We  had  also  for  cure  M.  Andre  Burnier,
from  November,  1824,  to  February,  1841,  during  which  period  all  the
actes  ell's  naissances,  etc.,  bear  his  signature.  But  I  have  found  in  our
archives  a  document  with  both  signatures,  which  I  send  you."

[Reproductions  of  actual  signatures,  and  of  signatures  given  by  MU«
Smith. The  handwritings  were  markedly  similar.]

Professor  Flournoy's  first  idea  naturally  was  that  M^'^  Smith  had
seen  at  some  time  or  otlier  some  acts  or  documents  signed  by  the
syndic  or  the  cu7'e  of  Chessenaz,  and  that  these  visual  impressions  had
reappeared  in  her  somnambulic  state,  and  had  served  as  internal
models  for  the  signatures  which  she  traced  in  trance.

Careful  inquiry,  howe^^ei',  made  it  clear  that  M"^  Smith  (whose
probity,  I  may  here  repeat,  is  beyond  question)  had  never  been  at
Chessenaz, — still  less  consulted  its  parish  archives.  Whether  the
handwriting  of  its  syndics,  before  the  cession  of  Savoy  to  France,
could  ever  have  fallen  under  her  eyes  in  some  old  record  or  certificate
belonging  to  friends  in  tliat  neighbourhood  is  a  question  incapable  of
absolute  proof.

As  the  matter  now  stands  I  cannot  claim  that  any  true  communica-
tion from  the  departed  has  as  yet  been  established  for  M^'^  Smith.  Her
case  is  still  on  the  verge  of  proof.

And  here  I  shall  of  course  be  met  with  the  inquiry  :  What  influence,
then,  must  the  case  of  M^''^  Smith  have  upon  your  interpretation  of
the  case,  say,  of  Mrs.  Piper  1  Can  you  maintain  that  there  is  a  funda-
mental difference  between  this  elaborate  case  of  pseudo-possession,  and
that  other  case,  so  closely  resembling  it,  in  which  you  claim  that
George  Pelham  was  no  mere  personification  effected  by  Mrs.  Piper's
subliminal  self?  Have  you  really  a  criterion  by  which  to  judge  the  two
groups  of  phenomena  1  and  can  you  explain  how  it  is  that,  if  funda-
mentally different,  they  are  superficially  so  much  alike  1

My  answer  to  the  first  question  must  be,  as  it  has  ever  been,  that  we
have  a  criterion, — consisting  not  in  the  manner  in  which  the  messages
are  given,  but  in  the  actual  evidential  content  of  those  messages  them-
selves. I  claim  that,  whereas  in  M^l^  Smith's  messages  there  is  hardly
any  real  indication  oi  an  individual  and  recognisable  focus  of  memories,
belonging  to  a  human  person,  and  such  as  no  other  known  person
could  simulate  ;  in  George  Pelham's  case  on  the  other  hand  there  is
such  indication  ; — pushed  so  far  as  to  render  it  highly  improbable  that
that  focus  or  chain  of  memories  is  decomposable  into  fragmentary


Part  XXXVIII.]  Pseioclo-Possession.  413

recollections, — is  a  mere  aggregate  of  scraps  of  knowledge  telepathi-
cally  gathered  from  many  quarters,  and  subliminally  fused  into  an
apparent  unity.  I  am,  in  short,  simply  more  confirmed  than  ever  in
my  conviction  (as  against  the  mere  facile  admissions  of  spiritist  writers)
that  a  strict  and  thorougli  analysis  of  automatic  messages  is  absolutely
essential, — and  will  result  in  showing  the  genuineness  of  a  very  few  of
these  messages  by  dint  of  their  intrinsic  evidential  superiority  to  all
the  rest.

To  the  second  question  asked  above, — as  to  the  explanation  of  the
similarity  between  pseudo-possession  and  true  possession,  I  reply  that
from  my  point  of  view  it  was  to  be  expected  that  such  cases  should
occur, — that  the  action  of  subliminal  phases  of  personality  upon  the
organism  should  reach  a  point  of  close  resemblance  with  the  action  of
external  spirits  uj^on  the  organism.

I  regard  the  human  organism  as  an  entity  whose  life,  as  apart  from
any  informing  spirit,  is  beyond  our  intellectual  gras23.  Whatever
independent  life  the  cells  of  my  organism  may  possess,  I  can  only
regard  that  organism  as  a  machine,  which  my  own  spirit  habitually
works — partly  supraliminally,  partly  subliminally — but  which  may
be  partially  woi'ked  also  by  some  other  incarnate  spirit  or  by  a
discarnate  spirit.  Each  of  these  controlling  agencies  necessarily
controls  the  organism  in  much  the  same  way ; — that  method  being-
determined  in  fundamentals  by  the  structure  of  the  organism  itself  ; —
in  detail  by  the  supi-aliminal  education  which  I  happen  to  give  to  the
organism.  Thus  the  power  of  making  cries  and  gestures  inheres  in  the
structure  of  the  organism ;  I  educate  this  power  into  speech  and
writing,  which  I  use  for  ordinary  conscious  purposes.

Now  suppose  that  some  submerged  phase  of  my  personality  gains
the  power  of  manifesting  itself,  it  will  have  to  use  the  accustomed
methods.  It  may  not,  indeed,  be  able  to  use  all  of  them.  It  may  not,
for  instance,  be  al)le  to  speak.  Or  it  may  not  have  the  whole  of  my
knowledge  at  its  command.  Thus,  to  take  the  weakest  case  of
subliminal  control,  a  fraction  of  myself  uses  my  organism  in  a  dream,
but  can  neither  make  me  write  nor  make  me  speak, — although  it  may
cause  restless  gestures.  Nor  has  the  dream  command  over  more  than
a  small  fraction  of  my  knoidedye ;  and  the  knowledge  over  which  it
has  command  msiy  be  knowledge  taken  from  a  far-back  period  of
my  historj-.

And  now  suppose  that  another  incarnate  spirit  telepathically
influences  my  organism.  In  order  to  do  this  it  can  use  practically  the
same  mechanism  which  a  dream  can  use.  It  can  affect  me  with
sensory  hallucinations,  or  it  can  prompt  me  to  brief  utterances  and
gestures,  like  those  of  somnambulism.  It  cannot,  as  a  I'ule,  do  much
more  than  this,  as  our  telepathic  cases  show.  Yet  sometimes,  especially


414


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[Supplement.


if  the  agent  is  asleep,  he  can  influence  the  percipient  to  automatic
writing  in  a  rather  more  prolonged  way.

Let  us  pass  on  to  the  fui-ther  hypothesis  that  a  discarnate  spirit  is
influencing  the  organism.  We  shall  now,  at  any  rate,  have  something
like  analogies  to  which  to  appeal.  Falling  back  upon  known  pheno-
mena, we  can  suggest,  for  example,  that  the  possessing  spirit  may  act
like  an  extraneous  idee  fixe,  developing  into  an  extraneous  secondary
personality.  It  is,  indeed,  througli  the  woi-king  out  of  this  parallel — •
here  merely  hinted  at — that  we  may  best  be  able  to  trace,  as  I  hope
may  be  some  day  possible,  a  real  continuity  between  subliminal  and
extraneous  influences  upon  the  ordinaiy  personality ; — and  to  discover,
perhaps,  that  spirit-control  (or  pneumaturgy)  may  play  the  same  part
in  expanding  our  ideas  of  multiplex  personality  as  hypnotism  has
already  played  in  exjsanding  our  ideas  of  hysteria  and  somnambulism.

Deferring  such  discussion  till  a  more  fitting  moment,  I  will  con-
clude witli  a  few  general  reflections  which  this  remarkable  case  of
Professor  Flournoy's, — nay,  which  even  some  of  Dr.  Janet's  morbid
cases, — seem  to  me  to  suggest  to  the  psychologist  who  cares  to  look  beyond
either  the  narrowing  hospital-walls  or  tlie  perplexing  seance-room.

The  chief  reflection  is  that  we  are  as  yet  but  in  a  childish  or
rudimentary  stage  of  our  use  of  the  human  brain.  That  brain  is  in
truth  (as  some  one  has  said)  but  "  a  virtual  organ  "  ; — an  oi'gan  en  voie
d'acqiiisition,  which  man  is  slowly  learning  to  use, — but  with  very
little  notion  either  of  how  it  came  to  be  what  it  is,  or  of  what  it
ultimately  may  be.

jSTo  one,  indeed,  knows  how  it  came  to  be  what  it  is.  No  one  has
even  plausibly  explained  that  great  difference  between  the  simian
and  the  savage  organ  which  seems  so  incommensurate  with  any  observa-
able  difference  between  the  hairy  chimpanzee  and  the  hairy  Aino.
Some  naturalists  argue  that  much  of  the  savage's  brain-power  must  lie
dormant ; — must  somehow  be  a  mere  reserve  for  the  later  calls  of  a
more  complex  existence.  If  this  be  admitted,  we  must  surely  go  on  to
admit  that  a  large  proportion  of  the  brain's  capacity  is  dormant  still.

I  do  not  mean  to  predict  tliat  our  race  will  necessarily  include  in  the
future  individual  minds  more  jaowerful  than  any  minds  in  the  past.
This  question  ultimately  depends  upon  that  unknown  factor, — the
nature  of  the  sources  from  which  spiritual  life  is  infused  into  mortal
organisms.  Let  us  admit  that  judging  by  the  last  two  thousand  years
we  have  little  ground  for  confidence  in  any  such  advance  of  the
highest  individual  level.  Let  us  not  be  rash  enough  to  prophesy
that  there  will  ever  be  a  sculptor  better  than  Praxiteles,  or  a  lyric
poet  better  than  Pindar.  Yet  the  important  fact  is  that  the  great
spirits  of  the  past  made  use  only  of  certain  portions  of  the  human
brain  which  had  through  some  historic  cause  been  the  first  to  be


Part  XXXVIII.]


Pseudo-Possession.


415


developed.  The  spirits  of  Pindar  or  Praxiteles  dwelt,  so  to  say,
in  the  palace-chambers  of  their  mysterious  habitation ;  they  knew
nothing  of  the  foundations  on  which  the  City  of  Mansoul  was  builded,
or  of  its  treasure-houses  in  the  living  rock.

Of  course  Helene's  intellect,  though  serviceable  enough  in  common  life,
is  not  of  a  calibre  to  confer  new  knowledge  or  delight  on  educated  men ;
but  for  Helene's  one-in-a-hundred  mind  substitute  the  one-in-a-million
mind  of  Louis  Stevenson  ; — let  him  dream — not  Helene's  insipid  tale  of
"Esenale,"  but  "Dr.  Jekyll  and  Mr.  Hyde,"  and  one  sees  at  once  the
advantage  of  relegating  voluntary  ends  to  automatic  execution, — and  so
at  once  saving  brain-centres  from  expensive  friction  and  getting  the
needed  thing  done  (like  those  reaction-time  measurements  of  Dr.
Janet's  during  ecstasy),  with  a  verve  and  a  completeness  which  conscious
effort  finds  it  hard  to  rival.  May  not  that  effortless  concurrent
utilisation  of  all  elements  of  the  personality  hold  ultimately  somewhat
the  same  relation  to  our  present  painful  thought  as  multiplex  tele-
graphy holds  to  the  old  slow  and  single  transmission  along  the  wire  1  ^

Let  us  frankly  confess  that  we  cannot  in  the  least  tell  what  the
brain  will  do  till  we  try.  The  assumed  balance  of  our  faculties  anfl
our  environment  is  altogether  chimerical.  The  environment  is  unknown
and  infinite,  and  the  faculties  must  simply  be  trained  as  far  in  every
direction  as  they  can.  We  have  attained  no  position  of  permanent
stability,  and  we  have  nothing  to  tell  us  a  j^riori  what  will  be  the  next
faculties  which  our  race  will  evolve.  And  yet  popular  science  some-
times speaks  as  though  nearly  everything  in  human  nature  had  been
observed  already  ! — as  though  normality  had  been  defined,  aberrations
classified,  a  mass  of  experience  acquired  which  our  successors  will  only
have  to  work  out  in  detail !  A  vain  conceit !  a  monstrous  prematurity  !
Rather  let  us  remember  that  only  by  an  abiding  consciousness  of  our
own  inevitable  childishness  can  we  prevent  those  successors  from
looking  on  our  religions  with  pity,  and  on  our  science  with  contempt ; —
while  they  analyse  with  a  smile  our  rudimentary  efforts  at  self-realisa-
tion,— remarking  "  how  hard  a  thing  it  was  to  found  the  race  of  man."


1  The  same  characteristics  were  observable  in  M^ie  Smith's  other  forms  of  mental
and  bodily  effort.  "It  may  be  remarked,"  says  Professor  Flournoy  on  this  topic,
' '  that  the  drawings,  embroideries,  and  other  artistic  works  which  were  at  all  times
the  favourite  occupation  of  her  leisure,  and  in  which  she  excels,  were  almost  always,
from  her  childhood  onwards,  not  copies  of  external  models,  but  products  of  her  own
invention,  marked  with  the  original  and  quaint  characteristics  of  her  inward  pictures.
Moreover,  these  pieces  of  handiwork  wrought  themselves  out  under  her  fingers  with
an  ease  and  a  rapidity  which  astonished  herself  ; — they  worked  themselves,  so  to  say."


416


Walter  Leaf.


[Supplement.


II.

REVIEWS.

The  Scientific  Investigation  of  Physical  Fhenomena  with  Mediums.  [Medinmi-
clieskiya  Fizicheskiya  Yavleniya  i  ikli  Nauchnoe  Izsledovanie.]  By  M.  M.
Petrovo-Solovovo. (St.  Petersburg,  1900.)

The  name  of  Mr.  Petrovo-Solovovo,  now  Secretary  of  the  S.P.R.  for
Russia,  is  well  known  to  our  members.  He  has  often  contributed  to  our
publications,  and  his  judicial  and  acute  mind  marks  him  out  for  a  valuable
inquirer  into  psychical  i^roblems.  We  heartily  welcome  his  new  book — the
most  important  publication  which  he  has  yet  essayed  in  this  region.  It  is
strictly  confined  to  a  review  of  the  work  which  has  been  done  in  the
scientific  ijivestigation  of  physical  phenomena,  and  discusses  no  theories  ;
it  hardly  even  shows  leanings.  It  is,  in  short,  at  once  a  most  useful  review
of  the  reports  of  previous  observers  and  a  criticism  of  their  methods  ;  and
it  contains,  moreover,  a  certain  amount  of  hitherto  uni^uljlished  observa-
tions. Most  of  these  refer  to  the  Russian  medium,  Sambor,  but  we  are
glad  to  see  a  chapter  of  experiments  from  the  pen  of  our  veteran  corre-
sponding member,  Mr.  Aksakolf,  to  whom  tlie  book  is  dedicated.  To
Sambor  we  will  return  presently,  first  giving  a  short  resume  of  the  rest
of  the  Ijook.

In  liis  Introduction  Mr.  Solovovo  tells  us  at  once  that  he  has  (most
wisely)  limited  liis  held  by  rigorously  excluding  all  reports  which  seemed
inadequately  guaranteed  either  by  the  competence  of  the  observers  or  the
conditions  of  their  experiments.  Mr.  Stainton  Moses,  for  instance,  appears
only  in  a  footnote,  on  the  ground  that  faith  in  his  reports  is  solely  founded
on  personal  belief  in  his  veracity.  (Jn  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Solovovo  does
not  exclude  exjjeriments  with  mediums  detected  in  fraud — to  have  done  so
would  indeed  have  reduced  his  work  almost  to  vanishing  point ;  but  while
duly  mentioning  such  detection  in  the  case  of  the  mediums  who  have  been
proved  fraudulent,  he  urges  that  tlie  fact,  wliile  calling,  of  course,  for
redoubled  vigilance,  does  not  invalidate  experiments  where  the  conditions
have  been  really  satisfactory.  He  discusses  very  soberly  and  wisely  the
difficulties  of  the  in(|uiry,  and,  after  rejecting  all  a  'priori  objections  to  the
possibility  of  the  asserted  phenomena,  admits  that  all  previous  experi-
menters, with  the  single  exception  of  Crookes,  have  left  something  to
desire  ;  hv.t  this  he  urges  not  as  an  argument  against  the  facts  themselves,
but  as  a  summons  to  further  and  more  scientifically  conducted  experiments.
The  spirit  of  his  Introduction  is,  in  short,  thoroughly  scientific  ;  he  himself
says  that  he  feels  himself  further  from  the  thorough-going  spiritist  than
from  the  hardened  sceptic.

From  tliese  preliminary  consideraticins  Mr.  Solovovo  passes  to  the  record
of  the  facts  themselves. Most  of  them,  if  not  familiar,  are  at  least  accessible


Part  XXXVIII.)


Kevietvs.


417


to  English  readers.  He  speaks,  in  chronological  order,  of  de  Gasparin's
experiments  on  the  movement  of  tables  without  contact  in  1854,  Hare's  in
1855,  and  the  Report  of  the  Committee  of  the  Dialectical  Society  in  1869 — a
body  of  observers,  by  the  way,  who  seem  to  be  unique  in  the  facility  with
which  they  obtained  physical  jjhenomena  almost  ad  libitum  with  unpaid  and
unprofessional  mediums.  On  tliis  follows  an  account  of  Sir  William  Crookes's
experiments,  especially  those  with  Home — a  series  of  observations  which,  as
Mr.  Solovovo  remarks,  still,  after  thirty  years,  stands  quite  alone  in  its  value
as  scientific  evidence  for  the  j^henomena  in  question.  Next  comes  an  account
of  Zollner's  experiments  with  Slade,  with  esijecial  reference  to  ' '  j^s^ssage  of
matter  througli  matter  "  in  the  jiroduction  of  knots  on  closed  loojjs  of  string,
and  in  this  chapter,  as  confirmatory  of  Zollner's  results,  are  included  the
Russian  experiments  with  Sambor.  Mr.  Solovovo  then  gives  a  brief  account
of  some  experiments  made  in  1883  by  Mr.  AksakofF  with  Mrs.  Fox- Jencken,
hitlierto  unpublished.  In  this  case  the  medium's  hands  were  held  l^y  one  of
the  sitters,  and  were  further  rendered  visible  by  being  laid  upon  a  surface  of
luminous  jDaint.  Under  these  conditions  oljjects  at  a  distance  from  the
medium  were  moved,  a  small  l^ell,  while  floating  in  tlie  air,  was  visible  owing
to  the  luminous  paint  with  which  it  was  coated  ;  the  sitters  were  touched  by
hands  not  belonging  to  any  of  them — hands  of  whicli  the  faint  outline  could
be  seen  against  the  various  luminous  surfaces,  and  of  which  marks  were  left
upon  smoked  pajjer  not  within  the  medium's  reach.  We  then  go  on  to  an
account  of  the  inquiry  into  "direct  writing"  on  slates  carried  out  by  the
S.  P.  R.,  where  Mr.  Davey's  experiments  played  so  remarkable  a  part.  The
importance  of  these  Mr.  Solovovo  fully  recognises  ;  but  he  is  still  of  opinion
that  the  testimony  of  Mr.  Eminette  Coleman  and  Professor  Coues,  who  say
that  they  saw  such  writing  actually  going  on  before  their  eyes  at  a  seance
with  Mrs.  Francis,  must  weigh  sufficiently  to  establish  the  possibility  of  the
phenomenon.  And  when  he  urges  that  those  members  of  the  Society  who
hold  tliat  Davey's  experiments  render  worthless  all  evidence  dependent  on
continuous  attention  should  have  refused  to  investigate  Eusapia  Paladino,  it
must  be  admitted  that  he  has  logic  on  his  side.  He  is  however  hardly
correct  in  supposing  that  this  criticism  affects  Mr.  Hodgson,  who  took  part
in  the  Cambridge  experiments  not  because  he  thouglit  them  of  any  value,  but
at  the  request  of  the  S.P.R.,  because  he  was  convinced  that  he  could
demonstrate  their  worthlessness.

An  account  of  Eusapia  herself  occupies  the  last  and  longest  section  of  the
book.  Mr.  Solovovo  himself  was  present  at  some  fifteen  sittings  witli  her,
first  at  Milan  and  afterwards  at  St.  Petersburg.  His  own  evidence,  however,
he  modestly  relegates  to  a  footnote,  admitting  that  he  was  not  satisfied  with
the  way  in  whicli  her  hands  were  held  on  most  occasions.  But  after  a  full
consideration  of  the  results  of  the  Cambridge  sittings,  he  comes  unhesitatingly
to  the  conclusion  that  in  spite  of  her  proved  deceit,  many  of  her  phenomena
are  genuine  ;  his  Ijelief  is  founded  mainly  upon  M.  Richet's  gradual  progress
from  scepticism  to  conviction,  and  on  Mr.  Myers's  final  adhesion  after  the
Cambridge  experiments  had  led  him  to  avow  his  disbelief.

But  the  special  interest  of  the  book  for  Western  readers  lies  ratlier,  as  I
have  already  intimated,  in  the  detailed  accounts  of  experiments  with  Sambor.
Some  of  these  have  already  appeared  in  the  Aunales  ilea  Sciences  Fsijchiques ;


418


Walter  Leaf.


[Supplement.


but  much  at  least  of  the  following  is,  I  believe,  naceessible  except  in  Russian,
and  deserves  translation  as  a  typical  sketch  of  Sambor's  phenomena,  thougli
from  the  point  of  view  of  evidence  it  leaves  something  to  be  desired.
The  first  j^ortion  of  this  very  remarkable  narrative  is  supplied  hy  Dr.
Fischer  from  his  own  notes  ;  the  remarks  interposed  are  in  Mr.  Solovovo's
words.

Seance  of  April  13th,  1894-,  in  the  rooms  <if  Mr.  S.  A.  BezsonoJ).

The  stance  began  at  9  p.m.  A  circle  of  fourteen  persons,  excluding  the
medium,  joined  hands,  holding  them  on  their  knees.  In  the  middle  of  the
circle  stood  a  small  oval  table,  on  which  were  laid  a  guitar  ;  a  handbell  ;  two
slates  tied  together  with  string,  the  ends  of  which  were  sealed  to  a  piece  of
cardboard  (a  piece  of  slate  pencil  was  placed  between  tlie  two) ;  a  sealed
envelope  containing  a  jDiece  of  pencil  and  a  clean  sheet  of  paper,  one  corner
of  which  had  been  torn  ofi'  and  kept  by  Mr.  F.  (two  members  of  the  circle
signed  their  names  on  the  enveloije)  ;  and  a  piece  of  string,  both  ends  of
which  were  sealed  to  a  card  with  the  seals  of  two  persons  present.  The
medium,  having  been  searched,  sat  with  his  back  to  the  fii'eplace,  and  Messrs.
Bezsonoif  and  V.  took  charge  of  him.  Tliose  present  began  to  sing,  and
the  lights  were  then  put  out.  By  the  heavy  breathing  of  the  medium  it  was
clear  that,  with  brief  intervals,  he  fell  some  four  or  five  times  into  a  trance,
during  which  luminous  stars  appeared,  chiefly  on  his  right  side.  Tlie  sitting
lasted  for  half  an  hour,  and,  after  an  interval,  was  resumed  at  10  p.m.  under
the  same  conditions,  excejjt  that  Mr.  V.'s  j)lace  next  the  medium  was  taken
by  Mr.  Tour.  The  light  was  again  jjut  out.  Luminous  stars  began  to
appear  frequently.  The  medium  stood  up  in  a  trance,  when  there  was  a
sudden  tinkling  on  almost  all  the  strings  of  the  guitar.  This  continued
audible  for  some  time,  as  though  some  one  were  running  fingers  over  the
strings.  A  piece  of  glass  coated  with  luminous  paint  lying  on  the  table  was
thrown  to  the  ground.  Then  there  was  a  sound  as  though  something  dropped
on  to  the  table  and  thence  to  the  ground — a  piece  of  stearine  candle,  as
appeared  later.  At  the  same  time  a  musical  box  standing  on  the  chimney-
piece  behind  the  medium  began  to  play  of  itself  ;  it  liad  run  down  at  the
beginning  of  the  seance  and  had  not  been  rewound.  An  interval  was  taken
at  10.30  and  the  sittings  resumed  at  11.  Those  present  rearranged  their
seats  and  the  medium  was  placed  with  liis  back  to  the  door  leading  to  the
next  room.  The  same  pair  as  before  took  charge  of  the  medium,  and  in
addition  Mr.  Tour's  right  hand  was  fastened  to  the  medium's  left  by  a  tape
wound  twice  about  the  medium's  wrist  and  fastened  with  fixed  knots.  Mr.
Bezsonoff  held  the  medium's  right  hand  in  his  left.  The  liglit  was  put  out.
After  a  short  time  the  medium  began  to  shiver  and  move  about.  He  was
sitting  on  an  Austrian  chair,  and  began  gradually  to  move  further  and
further  away  from  the  table,  so  that  the  rest  had  to  extend  the  chain
towards  him.  The  medium  suddenly  fell  to  the  ground  and  began  to  snore
loudly  and  groan.  The  two  who  were  holding  his  hands  declared  that  he
rose  into  the  air,  drawing  their  hands  after  him,  and  that  they  could  not  find
his  legs.  At  this  time  Mr.  Tour  moved  his  leg  round  over  the  part  of  the
floor  where,  to  judge  by  the  position  of  the  medium's  hands,  his  legs  should
have  been,  but  the  space  was  vacant. When  Mr.  Tour  mentally  desired  to


Pari  XXXVIII.)


Review.


419


know  where  the  medium's  legs  were,  he  suddenly  felt  on  the  hand  wliich  was
bound  to  the  medium  the  soles  of  two  feet,  which  convinced  him  that  the
medium  was  really  in  the  air.  On  the  other  side  Mr.  Bezsonoff  declared
that  the  medium  was  upon  him,  and  was  touching  him  with  his  hips.  The
medium  then  came  down  to  the  ground  and  again  rose  into  the  air  with  his
chair.  Mr.  Bezsonoff,  who  held  his  right  hand,  immediately  announced  this,
and  drew  forward  his  right-hand  neighbour's  hand  for  him  to  feel  the  chair
in  the  air.  During  all  this  time  there  were  two  or  three  flashes  of  stars.
After  this  Mr.  Bezsonoff  declared  that  an  Austrian  chair  was  hanging  by  the
back  on  the  hand  by  which  he  was  holding  the  medium,  and  had  slipped  on
to  it  from  the  medium's  hand.  The  medium  then  fell  with  violent  con-
vulsions on  to  a  sofa  close  by,  drawing  his  two  neighbours  with  him,  and
while  still  in  a  trance  called  for  light.  As  soon  as  it  was  turned  on  the
whole  party  saw  an  Austrian  chair  passed  by  its  back  over  Mr.  Bezsonofl's
left  hand,  with  which  he  was  holding  the  medium's  right  ;  the  medium  was
in  a  trance.

After  an  interval  of  half-an-hour,  the  sitting  was  again  resumed  at  twelve
midnight,  with  a  fresh  arrangement  of  sitters.  The  medium  sat  with  his
back  to  a  writing-table,  between  the  same  neighbours.  Mr.  Tour's  right
hand  was  again  fastened  to  the  medivnn's  left.  At  Mr.  Tour's  request,  the
guitar  was  laid  on  the  writing-table  outside  the  circle.  The  medium  sat  on  a
heavy  chair  of  ash-wood,  which  was  brought  in  from  the  entrance  hall.  The
light  was  put  out  and  ringing  began.  One  of  us  expressed  a  wish  to  hear
sounds  on  the  guitar,  but  stars  flashed  two  or  three  times  behind  the  medium
instead.  The  medium  fell  in  a  trance  ofl'  the  chair,  snoring  and  struggling.
His  right  hand  neighbour,  Mr.  Bezsonoff,  declared  that,  without  losing  hold
of  the  medium,  he  had  got  the  chair  on  which  the  medium  was  sitting  passed
over  his  arm  by  the  back  ;  and  the  next  minute  said  that  the  chair  had  been
taken  off  again.  One  or  two  minutes  later  the  medium's  left-hand  neighbour
declared  that  tlie  same  chair  had  been  passed  by  the  back  over  his  arm  which
was  tied  to  tlie  medium.  At  the  same  instant  all  the  strings  of  the  guitar
twanged  as  though  some  one  had  passed  a  finger  over  them.  The  medium
in  trance  called  for  light.  When  it  was  turned  on,  all  saw  the  above  named
chair  with  its  back  passed  over  Mr.  Tour's  arm  which  was  fastened  to  the
medium.  The  seance  closed  at  1  a.m.  Among  those  present  was  Mr.
Aksakoff.

Dr.  Fischer,  in  a  letter  to  me  of  July  29th,  1899,  adds  : — "The  medium
was  under  very  careful  control,  as  the  chair  experiment  was  not  unexpected,
but  was  particularly  looked  for,  though  we  were  by  no  means  sure  of  success.
During  the  sitting,  while  Mr.  Tour  had  his  right  arm  fastened  to  the  medium's
left,  and  in  addition  was  holding  the  latter's  hand  in  his  own,  we  kept  on
asking  him  if  he  was  holding  on,  or  noticed  any  attempt  of  Sambor's  to  get
free  from  the  fastening.  Mr.  Tour  definitely  and  categorically  asserted  that
no  such  attempts  were  made  by  Sambor,  and  that  he  was  holding  his  hand
very  firmly  all  the  time.  The  same  question  was  constantly  addressed  to
Mr.  Bezsonoff  on  the  other  side,  and  he  too  constantly  replied  that  the  hand
of  which  he  had  charge  never  escaped  for  an  instant  from  his  own."

We  have  been  favoured  with  a  very  curious  and  detailed  account  of  the
same  phenomena  by  Mr.  Tour. After  some  general  observations  on  the

2  G  2


420


Walter  Leaf.


[Supi)lement.


composition  of  the  circle  which  took  j^art  in  the  seances  with  Sambor  in  the
spring  of  1894,  and  on  the  occurrences  observed,  Mr.  Tour  continues  : —

' '  One  peculiarity  of  all  the  exjjerinients  carried  on  with  Sauibor  is  liis
extreme  restlessness  when  entranced.  He  is  constantly  twitching,  cracking
his  joints,  and  producing  groans  which  are  obviously  genuine  ;  he  sways  from
side  to  side,  and  slips  from  his  chair  to  the  floor.  It  is  needless  to  say  that
witli  a  man  of  Sambor's  youthful  and  rather  powerful  frame  such  experiments
are  very  fatiguing  for  both  his  neighbours.  Moreover,  the  close  atmosijhere
throws  him  into  a  violent  perspiration,  and  the  moisture  on  his  wrists,  in  spite
of  all  the  efforts  of  those  who  are  holding  him,  often  enables  him  to  slip  them
free  for  a  moment.  This  possibility  inevitably  undermines  an  observer's
faith  in  any  jjhenomena  where  there  is  room  to  susi:)ect  that  the  medium's
hand  may  have  been  employed  in  a  moment  of  freedom.  This  was  emphati-
cally the  case  with  myself  in  one  of  the  sittings  at  Mr.  BezsonofF's  in  the
spring  of  1894,  when  I  was  holding  the  medium's  hand  and  Mr.  Bezsonoflf  his
right.

"When,  in  the  midst  of  Sambor's  convulsions  and  struggles,  I  suddenly
felt  a  slight  pressure  on  the  right  arm  with  which  I  was  holding  the  medium's
left,  I  immediately  called  for  light.  I  then  saw,  like  the  rest,  an  Austrian
chair  h;inging  by  the  top  bar  on  my  right  arm  below  the  shoulder.  It  was
one  of  the  chairs  which  had  been  put  round  the  table  for  the  sitters,  wh.o  had
been  obliged  to  stand  up  owing  to  the  medium  having  risen  to  the  ceiling,  as
they  must  otherwise  have  Ijroken  tlie  chain.

"It  is  right  to  point  out  that,  in  our  jjrevious  sitting  that  evening,  a  chair
had  been  hiuig  in  precisely  the  same  manner  on  Mr.  BezsonofFs  arm  ;  a  fact
tcj  which  Some  of  those  jaresent  wished  to  attribute  great  importance.  Now,
when  exactly  tlie  same  thing  hajjpened  to  me,  I  remembered  for  certain  that
during  the  trance  and  levitation  of  the  medium  his  hand  had  more  than  once
slipped  out  of  mine  for  a  moment.  Of  this  I  told  those  who  were  present,
explaining  that  in  my  opinion  no  weight  should  be  laid  on  the  appearance  of
the  chair  on  my  arm,  as  it  might  have  been  seized  by  the  medium  during  one
of  the  moments  when  his  hand  was  free,  and  dropped  upon  my  arm  when  tlie
circle  was  reformed.  I  remember  that  my  shameless  incredulity  was  attacked
without  mercy  by  others  present,  and  Mr.  Aksakoff  and  Mr.  Pribytkoff,  if  I
am  not  mistaken,  tried  to  convince  me,  from  their  exjjerience  of  spiritism,
that  similar  jjlienomena  were  common  enough,  especially  with  weak  mediums  ;
and  that  if  anyone  doubted,  we  should  try  to  repeat  the  experiment,  but  this
time  with  hands  bound  together,  which  would  do  away  with  all  doubt.

"I  accepted  the  proposition  with  pleasure,  and  once  more  we  all  sat  round
the  table  in  a  circle.  I  took  control  of  the  medium  on  the  left,  and  my  right
hand  and  wrist  were  tied  to  Sambor's  left  with  a  plain  new  tape,  fastened
with  several  knots.  BezsonofF  took  control  of  the  right  side,  but  his  hand
was  not  tied  like  mine. The  light  was  put  out,  and  we  waited.

"The  usual  sparks  began  to  appear,  floating  in  curved  lines  through  the
air.  The  medium  fell  as  before  into  a  stormy  trance,  with  convulsive  move-
ments ;  he  then  rose  ti)  his  feet,  and  at  this  moment  I  felt  some  sort  of  touch
on  my  right  arm  near  tlie  shoulder.  As  I  could  not  use  my  liands  without
breaking  the  circle,  I  bent  my  liead  down  to  the  right,  and  with  my  temijle
struck  something  hard  below  my  shoulder  ; this  I  announced,  and  asked


fait  XXXVIII. ]


Review.


421


fiir  light.  It  was  turned  on,  and  there,  hanging  on  my  right  arm,  was  a
chair — not  a  drawing-room  chair,  but  a  heavy  arm-chair  from  the  hall  ;  one
that  had  not  at  the  beginning  of  the  seance  been  in  the  study,  the  door  of
which  had  remained  all  the  time  carefully  closed.  The  fastening  by  which
my  hand  was  attached  to  the  medium's  remained  perfectly  intact,  just  as  it
had  been  put  on  ;  the  knots  were  perfect,  and  the  efforts  with  which  they
had  been  drawn  tight  were  not  trifling,  as  the  livid  mark  of  the  tape  round
my  wrist  remained  visible  for  several  days.  The  whole  of  this  part  of  the
sitting  did  not  last  more  than  four  or  five  minutes.

"  Of  course  I  was  amazed,  and  my  incredulity  was  put  to  shame,  th(.iugh  it
would  not  capitulate  without  an  effort.  The  first  idea  that  flashed  across  me
was  that  there  might  have  been  some  remissness  on  the  part  of  the  medium's
right-hand  neighbour,  whose  hand  was  not  fastened  to  Sambor's  as  mine  was.
In  that  case  the  medium,  I  thought,  might  have  caught  the  chair  (on  the
apjoearance  of  which  through  the  closed  door  oi  the  study  I  did  n(jt  dwell)
with  his  riglit  hand,  and  s(_)mehow  or  other  got  through  the  aperture  in  the
back,  so  as  to  pass  it  on  to  my  arm.  I  now  sincerely  regret  the  slur  which  I
thus  cast  upon  Mr.  Bezsonoff,  whose  interest  in  the  investigation  of  truth
was  certainly  no  less  than  my  own  ;  but  facts  or  apjjearances  which  strike  at
the  ro(jt  of  convictions  which  have  grown  up  with  us  from  infancy  are  not  to
be  accepted  without  a  struggle  of  the  inner  consciousness.  In  my  blind
scepticism  I  tried  to  pass  the  back  of  the  arm-chair  over  Sambor  ;  hut  the
efforts  of  three  of  us  only  succeeded  in  getting  the  upper  aperture  3-i  in.
above  his  knee,  beginning  from  the  ground  ;  further  up  the  thighs  we  could
not  move  it,  for  the  dimensions  ot  the  aperture  were  only  10^  x  8|  in.  It
was  perfectly  clear  that  in  order  to  pass  the  aperture  in  the  chair-back  over
the  body  of  the  medium  it  would  have  been  necessary  to  slice  off  2  or  3  in.
of  both  his  sides  from  shoulders  to  thighs,  and  in  addition  to  prune  off  his
right  arm  !

' '  Foiled  in  this,  I  had  recourse  to  another  supposition :  how  was  the  chair
made  ?  Was  there  any  secret  flaw  in  it  ?  We  all  set  about  examining  it,
but  after  the  most  rigorous  search  could  find  no  ingenious  joints  or  secret
springs  of  any  sort.  The  chair  was  just  a  plain,  high-backed  arm-chair  of
ash-wood,  such  as  is  commonly  to  be  seen  in  entrance  halls,  and  sometimes
in  dining-rooms.

"There  was  nothing  for  it  ;  scepticism  had  to  sing  small  and  make  the
best  of  the  fact,  however  strange  at  the  present  stage  (ti  our  knowledge
of  nature."

Mr.  Tour  concludes  with  an  expression  of  his  conviction  that  none  of
the  phenomena  he  saw  with  Sambor  require,  or  even  suggest,  any  "trans-
cendental," supernatural,  or  spiritistic  explanation.  He  regards  them  as
manifestations  of  a  still  unknown  force  innate  in  the  medium,  and  perhaps
capable  of  development.

Mr.  Solovovo  points  out  that  the  narrative  of  Mr.  Tovu'  in  some  points
differs  from  that  of  Mr.  Fischer,  but  not  in  matters  which  touch  the  essence
of  the  problem.  The  most  noteworthy,  of  course,  is  the  discrepancy  about
the  chair  found  on  Mr.  Tour's  arm.  In  Dr.  Fischer's  notes,  written  at  the
time,  this  is  the  chair  on  which  the  medium  had  been  placed  when  the  circle


422


Frank  Podmore.


[Supp'ement.


was  fcirmed  ;  in  Mr.  Tour's,  written  five  years  later,  it  becomes  an  "  ajDport,"
brought  into  the  I'cjoin  through  a  closed  door.  We  have  evidently  another
instance  of  tlie  tricks  played  by  naemory  even  on  tlie  most  conscientious
witnesses,  and  a  warning  of  the  little  value  of  all  that  is  not  set  down  in
black  and  white  at  the  niouient.

It  only  remains  to  congratulate  Mr.  Solovovo  on  the  thorciughness  and
skill  witli  which  he  has  marshalled  his  facts,  and  on  the  sobriety  and  caution
of  his  criticism.  He  has  of  necessity  laid  the  greatest  weight  on  the  per-
sonal standing  and  scientific  reputation  of  his  witnesses  ;  but  it  must  not  be
forgotten  that  no  real  S(jlid  foundation  will  have  been  laid  for  the  scientific
establishment  of  these  investigations  till  the  mass  of  them  is  so  great  that
this  ijersonal  element  is  finally  eliminated.  This  will,  to  all  appearance,  be
a  long  task  ;  but  Mr.  Solovovo  has  contributed  a  valuable  stimulus  to  the
necessary  jjatience  and  perseverance  in  inquiry.

Walter  Leaf.


L'Ltcoiiitii  et  les  Problhnes  Psijchtqiics. Por  Camille  Flammariok.  (Paris,
1900.)

M.  Camille  Flammarion  is  known  in  this  country  not  merely  as  the
author  of  numerous  works  on  astronomy,  scientific  and  popular,  and  several
philoso23hical  romances,  but  also  as  one  who  has  almost  from  the  outset
taken  a  keen  interest  in  the  problems  of  Spiritualism  and  those  other  debat-
able phenomena  which  form  the  subject  matter  of  psychical  research.  His
ca I'd  of  election  to  the  "  Societe  Parisienne  des  etudes  spirites,"  signed  by
Allan  Kardec  himself,  is  dated,  he  tells  us,  November,  1861.  Between
thirty  and  forty  years  ago  his  name  was  very  familiar  in  this  country  as  that
of  a  scientitic  man  who  had  borne  testimony  to  the  reality  of  the  physical
plienomena  of  Spiritualism  and  as  an  adherent  of  the  Reincarnation  doctrine
then  current  among  the  French  Spiritists.  And  if  his  utterances  on  such
matters  have  of  late  yeai's  been  less  frequent  and  less  pronounced,  it  is  not
apparently  from  any  diminution  of  his  general  interest.

The  present  work  contains  the  results  of  an  appeal,  avowedly  suggested
by  our  own  Census  of  Hallucinations,  inserted  in  the  Annales  Politiqiies  et
Litteraires  and  other  Parisian  papers.  The  questions,  slightly  differing  fi'om
those  employed  in  our  own  census,  which  were  addressed  to  the  readers  of
the  A'imales,  ran  as  follows  : —

(1)  Have  yoH,  at  any  time,  experienced  when  awake,  a  clear  impression  of
seein'j  a  human  being,  or  hearing  him,  or  being  touched  by  him,  loithout  being
able  to  refer  this  impression  to  any  hnoivn  cause  ?

(2)  I>id.  S}ich  inipre»simi  coincide  with  a  death?

In  the  event  of  having  had  no  such  impression,  readers  were  asked  to
write  No  oa  a  postcard,  and  sign  it  with  name  or  initials.

In  the  result  M.  Flammarion  received  4,280  replies — 2,456  negative  and
1,824  affirmative.  Of  these  latter  he  has  selected  several  hundred  for
publication  in  the  present  work.

Of  course,  in  wi-iting  (p.  88)  that  his  questionnaire  is  analogous  to  the
Census  of  Hallucinations  conducted  by  a  Committee  of  the  S.P.R.,
M.  Flammarion  is  under  a  misconception. The  objects  achieved  by  that


Part  XXXVIII.]


Reviews.


423


Census  were,  no  doubt,  manifold  ;  but  two  of  the  primary  aims  were  to
ascertain  the  proportion  of  sane  persons  who  had  experienced  hallucinations,
and  of  such  hallucinations  to  ascertain  the  jwoport'wn  which  coincided  with
some  outside  event,  chiefly  death.  It  is  obvious  that  neither  of  these  aims
is  met  by  M.  Flammarion's  questionnaire.  Clearly  a  very  small  proportion
of  those  who  had  had  no  hallucinatory  experience  would  spend  two  sous  and
some  trouble  on  the  despatch  of  a  postcard.  And,  again,  of  those  who  had
experienced  hallucinations,  such  whose  hallucinations  were,  on  the  face  of
them,  significant,  would  naturally  be  much  more  likely  to  take  the  trouble
to  write  them  out  for  the  gratification  of  a  stranger.  Our  own  work  in  the
Census  has,  of  course,  familiarised  us  with  these  considerations  ;  but
M.  Flammarion  has  not  apparently  realised  their  importance,  for  in  one
place  (p.  222)  we  find  him  arguing  as  follows  : —

' '  If  these  things  were  hallucinations,  illusions,  freaks  of  the  imagina-
tion, the  number  of  those  not  coinciding  with  a  death  would  be  considerably
greater  than  the  number  which  do  so  coincide.  Now,  we  find  the  contrary
has  been  the  case.  My  inquiry  proves  it  to  demonstration.  I  asked  my
readers  to  be  good  enough  to  send  me  all  cases,  whether  coincidental  or  not.
[Of  the  cases  sent]  there  were  not  more  than  seven  or  eight  per  cent,  of
apparitions  without  coincidences.  Precisely  the  reverse  ought  to  have  been
the  case  if  we  were  dealing  with  hallucinations."

The  last  sentence  puts  the  case  in  a  nutshell.  The  reverse  ought  to  have
been  the  case,  and  if  M.  Flammarion's  inquiry  had  been  a  real  census,  he
would  no  doubt  have  found  that  the  reverse  is  the  case,  in  France  as  in
England.

It  must  sound  ungracious  thus  to  criticise  a  book  which  is  a  substantial
and  most  acceptable  contribution  to  our  knowledge  of  this  obscure  subject.
But  so  much  was  necessary  at  the  outset ;  and  before  proceeding  to  quote
some  of  the  illustrations  of  telepathy  given  in  the  book,  some  further
words  of  caution  are  necessary.  M.  Flammarion,  as  he  tells  us,  received
over  1800  affirmative  answers.  The  mere  work  of  reading  through  and
assorting  this  mass  of  correspondence  must  have  been  considerable.  It
would  clearly  have  been  a  most  laborious  task  for  one  man  to  undertake  the
further  correspondence  and  minute  inquiries  necessary  to  raise  these
preliminary  accounts  to  the  evidential  standard  which  the  S.P.R.  has  learnt
in  the  course  of  eighteen  years'  investigation  to  set  before  itself.  The
appeal  was  issued  only  in  the  spring  of  last  year.  If  M.  Flammarion  had
undertaken,  singlehanded,  to  write  in  all  cases  where  necessary  for  further
details,  to  examine  into  the  qviestion  of  other  hallucinations  experienced
by  the  percipients,  to  obtain  corroborative  evidence,  to  verify  dates,  to
interview  in  person  the  more  important  witnesses,  and  in  short  to  do  all
that  we  have  thought  it  necessary  to  do  in  the  course  of  our  inquiries,  the
result  of  his  labours  could  not  have  been  published  until  far  on  in  the  first
decade  of  the  coniing  century.  We  must  be  grateful  to  him  that  he  has
done  what  he  could,  and  we  must  remember  that  no  other  writer  probably  on
the  same  lines  would  have  effected  so  much.  I  spoke  just  now  of  corre-
spondents being  reluctant  to  take  the  trouble  of  writing  out  their
experiences  for  a  stranger.  But  it  was  no  doubt  precisely  because  M.
Flammarion  is  not  a  stranger  to  them  that  these  1,800  persons  who  have


424


Frank  Podmore.


[Supplement.


never  seen  him  in  the  flesh  have  been  willing  to  do  so  much.  They  have
read  his  works,  they  have  found  proflt  in  his  luminous  and  vivid  descriptions
of  the  vast  mechanism  of  the  heavens,  and  delight  in  the  fairy  tales  nf
Science  and  the  glimpses  of  unimagined  worlds  which  he  has  given  to  them.
And  having  received  so  much  they  have  been  glad  to  make  such  return  as
was  possible.

Excluding  cases  quoted  from  Phantasms  of  the  Living  and  other  public
sources,  M.  Flammarion  has  given  us  no  less  than  157  cases  of  apparitions
coinciding  with  a  death.  Fifteen  of  them  were  related  to  him  by  persons  of
his  acquaintance  ;  the  remainder  were  sent  in  answer  to  his  questionnaire.
Of  the  157  cases  the  greater  number  are  naturally  second  or  third  hand,  and
many  are  introduced  by  such  phrases  as  "  When  my  maternal  grandfather,
who  died  in  1882  at  the  age  of  eighty,  was  a  young  man  .  .  ."  Some  are
purely  traditional.  Again,  a  large  number  of  the  first  hand  cases  are
concerned  simply  with  inarticulate  noises,  such  as  raps,  clangs  and  heavy
thumps,  which  are  afterwards  found  to  correspond  in  time  with  a  death.
Such  noises,  as  not  being  prima  facie  of  human  origin  or  necessarily
suggesting  a  human  presence,  were  excluded  by  the  terms  of  our  own  Census
question  and  might  equally  have  been  held  to  be  excluded  by  the  terms  of
the  questions  already  quoted.  There  remain  perhaps  a  score  of  first-hand
cases  relating  to  visions  or  voices  definitely  suggesting  a  human  presence.
The  following  is  one  of  the  cases  received  from  his  own  acquaintances  which
induced  M.  Flammarion  to  undertake  his  more  extended  inquiry.

"  III.  (pp.  70,  71). — M.  Andre  Bloch,  a  young  musician  of  great  talent,
holder  of  the  prix  de  Borne  and  a  member  of  the  Astronomical  Society  of
France,  sent  me  quite  recently  the  following  account  of  an  incident  of  the
same  kind,  which  happened  in  1896 — only  the  other  day,  that  is  (C'est
rChier)  : —

"  Dear  Master, — In  .June,  1896,  during  the  two  last  months  of  my  stay
in  Italy,  my  mother  came  to  join  me  in  Rome.  She  lodged  close  to  the
Academy  of  France  in  a  family  boarding-house  in  the  Via  Gregoi'iana,  where
you  yourself  lodged.  As,  at  that  time,  I  still  had  a  piece  of  work  to
complete  before  returning  to  France,  my  mother  went  sight-seeing  in  the
city  alone,  in  order  not  to  interrupt  me,  and  only  joined  me  for  luncheon  at
the  Villa  Medicis  towards  noon.  One  day,  however,  I  saw  her  come  in,
about  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  quite  upset.  On  questioning  her,  she
replied  that,  whilst  dressing,  she  had  suddenly  seen,  close  to  her,  her  nephew
Rene  Kraemer,  who  looked  at  her  and  said  laughing,  '  Oh  !  yes,  I  am  really
dead.'

"Being  very  much  frightened  at  this  ajjparition,  she  had  hastened  to
join  me.  I  soothed  her  as  well  as  I  could,  and  then  I  kept  up  a  conversa-
tion on  other  topics.

"  A  fortnight  afterwards  we  returned  to  Paris,  after  having  travelled
through  part  of  Italy,  and  we  then  heard  of  the  death  of  my  cousin  Rene,
which  had  taken  place  on  Friday,  June  12th,  1896,  in  the  flat  in  which  his
parents  lived,  31,  rue  de  Mo.scou. He  was  fourteen  years  of  age.

"Thanks  to  a  certain  ]nece  of  woi-k  on  which  I  was  engaged  at  the  time
of  my  mother's  entrance,  I  was  able  to  ascertain  the  date  and  even  the  hour
of  the  incident.


Part  XXXVIII.]


Reviews.


425


"Now  on  that  day,  my  little  cousin,  who  had  been  ill  for  several  days
with  peritonitis,  began  the  struggle  with  death  at  about  six  o'clock  in  the
morning  and  died  at  noon,  after  having  several  times  expressed  a  wish  to
see  his  aunt  Bertha,  my  mother.

"  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  not  a  word  had  been  said  to  us  of  my  cousin's
illness  in  any  of  the  numerous  letters  which  we  received  from  Paris.  It
was  well  known  that  my  mother  had  a  special  affection  for  this  child,  and  that
she  would  have  returned  to  Paris  had  he  had  but  the  slightest  finger-ache.
They  had  not  even  telegraphed  the  news  of  his  death  to  us.

"I  must  add  that,  owing  to  the  difference  of  longitude,  when  it  is  six
o'clock  in  the  morning  at  Paris  the  clocks  at  Rome  indicate  the  hour  of
seven,  and  it  was  exactly  at  that  time  that  my  mother  had  this  vision.

"  Andk^  Bloch.

"  11,  Place  Malesherbes,  Paris."

The  case,  it  will  be  seen,  depends  upon  a  single  memory.  But  it  is
fairly  recent  (M.  Flammarion's  view  of  what  constitutes  quite  recent
evidence  differs,  it  will  be  seen,  from  (lurs)  ;  and,  though  technically
second  hand,  it  is  for  evidential  purposes,  at  any  rate  as  regards  the  bare
fact  of  the  vision  and  of  the  impression  made  by  it  on  the  percipient,  on  a
par  with  a  first  hand  case,  since  the  narrator  heard  of  the  vision  before  he
received  news  of  the  death.

No.  XVII.  is  an  interesting  case  and  is  again  recent.  M.  Georges
Merlet,  Juge  de  paix  at  Malesherbes,  on  the  evening  of  the  1st  December,
1898,  at  9.30,  experienced  a  violent  and  unaccountable  jpanic  which  appears
to  have  produced  a  quite  unusual  iuij)ression  upon  him.  The  next  morning
he  received  news  of  the  death  of  an  aged  uncle,  and  immediately  connected
it  with  the  panic  of  the  previous  evening.  The  death  had  in  fact  occurred
at  9.30  p.m.  Unfortunately  the  attack  of  panic,  in  itself  perhaps  not
unique,  or  sufficiently  distinctive,  was  not  connected  at  the  time  with  the
death.  Moreover,  as  the  Oxford  Tutor  said,  we  could  wish  that  it  had  been
a  nearer  relative.

The  next  case  is  less  recent,  but  attested  by  a  second  witness.

"XIX.  (p.  97).— On  December  4th,  1884,  at  half-past  three  in  the
morning,  I  was  wide  awake,  and  had  just  got  up,  when  I  saw  very
distinctly  the  apparition  of  my  brother  Joseph  Bonnet,  ensign  in  the
2nd  regiment  of  Spahis,  in  garrison  at  Batna,  in  the  province  of  Constantine
(Algeria).  At  that  time  he  was  engaged  in  the  manreuvres,  and  we  did  not
know  exactly  where  he  was.  My  brother  kissed  my  forehead,  I  felt  a
cold  shiver,  and  he  said  to  me  very  distinctly,  ^Good-bye,  Angela,  I  am  dead.'
Very  much  touched  and  quite  upset,  I  woke  my  husband  at  once,  saying
'  Joseph  is  dead  ;  he  has  just  told  me  so.'

"  As  that  day,  December  4th,  was  my  brother's  birthday  (he  had  com-
pleted his  thirty-third  year)  and  we  had  been  talking  of  this  anniversary  the
evening  before,  my  liusband  assured  me  that  this  apparition  was  only
inspired  by  my  own  thoughts  and  considered  it  the  result  of  nervous
excitement. During  the  whole  of  that  Thursday  I  was  quite  distracted.  At


426


Frank  Podmore.


[Supplement.


nine  o'clock  in  this  evening  we  received  a  telegram  ;  before  opening  it  I
knew  its  contents.  My  brother  had  died  at  Kenchela  (Algeria)  at  three
o'clock  in  the  morning.

"  ANGiiLA  EsPEKON,  nee  Bonnet."
"  I  certify  the  above  account,  given  by  ray  wife,  as  perfectly  accurate.

"OSMAN  ESPEEON.

"Retired  captain,  chevalier  of  the  Legion
of  Honour,  at  Bordeaux."

In  the  next  case  we  have  a  clairvoyant  vision,  said  to  have  been  related
at  the  time.  But  the  incident  again  depends  upon  a  single  memory.  It
should  perhaps  be  pointed  out,  however,  that  in  a  case  of  this  kind  it  is
difficult  to  estimate  and  quite  easy  to  exaggerate  the  weight  which  the
corroboration  of  the  second  witness  really  adds  to  the  original  statement.
With  members  of  the  same  household  constantly  occupied  with  the  same
interests  and  having  to  a  large  extent  the  same  common  memories,  any
circumstances  which  affect  the  memory  of  the  original  witness  will  tend  to
some  extent  to  affect  the  memory  of  him  who  corroborates.  If,  in  the  case
which  follows,  the  vision  had  grown  more  definite  with  years,  if  even
the  identification  of  the  vision  with  the  percipient's  mother  was  not  made
until  some  days  later,  it  is  possible  that  the  husband  would  still  be  found  to
corroborate  the  account  given  in  the  text.  Probably  few  husbands  could
afford  to  disappoint  legitimate  expectations  in  such  matters.

"XXX.  (pp.  104-5).— My  dear  mother  died  on  Saturday,  April  8th,
1893.  The  previous  Wednesday  I  had  received  a  letter  from  her,  in  which
she  told  me  that  she  was  not  suffering  very  much  from  her  heart  complaint,
and  spoke  of  an  expedition  she  had  made  on  Saturday,  April  1st,  near  our
country  house  at  Wasselonne.  I  had  been  intending  to  go  out  on  that
Saturday,  April  8fch.  I  dined  quietly  at  noon,  but  towards  two  o'clock  a
terrible  fear  possessed  me.  I  went  upstairs  to  my  room  and  threw  myself
into  an  armchair  where  I  burst  into  sobs.  I  saw  my  mother  lying  on  her  bed,
with  a  cap  of  gathered  muslin  on  her  head,  which  I  had  never  seen  her
wear,  and  dead.  My  old  servant,  uneasy  at  not  hearing  me  moving  about,
came  up  to  me,  and  was  surprised  to  see  me  in  such  despair.  I  told  her
what  I  had  seen,  and  how  afraid  I  felt.  She  would  have  it  that  my  nerves
were  out  of  order,  and  persuaded  me  to  finish  dressing.  I  went  out  of  the
house,  hardly  knowing  what  I  was  doing.  Five  minutes  later  I  heard  my
husband's  quick  step  behind  me  ;  he  was  bringing  me  a  telegram  :  '  No  hope.
Mother  will  not  live  through  the  night.'  'She  is  dead,'  I  said;  'I  know
1  have  seen  her.'

"  I  went  home  and  we  prepared  to  start  by  the  first  train.  It  was  half-
past  two  o'clock  by  Paris  time  when  I  saw  my  mother  on  her  deathbed,  and
three  h(^urs  later  we  learnt  by  telegram  that  she  had  died  suddenly  at  half-
past  three  o'clock  by  Strasbourg  time.  She  had  not  been  ill,  and  only  went
to  bed  two  hours  before  her  death,  complaining  of  cold  and  of  being  very
sleepy.  She  did  not  think  she  was  dying,  for  she  had  a  letter  read  to  her  by
my  father  who  was  standing  at  the  foot  of  the  bed.  She  did  not  ask  to  see
her  children,  but  I  think  she  must  have  thought  of  me  when  she  was  passing


Part  XXXVIII.]


Reviews.


427


away.  As  I  did  not  reach  Strasbourg  till  Monday,  about  eleven  o'clock,  my
mother  was  already  laid  in  her  coffin  ;  but  those  who  had  laid  her  out,
described  to  me,  just  as  I  had  seen  if,  the  muslin  cap,  which  they  left  on
when  they  buried  her.

"  A.  Hess.

"  Alby."

Strasbourg  time,  it  should  be  noted,  is  Central  Eurof)ean  time — that  is,
about  one  hour  in  advance  of  Parisian  time.

The  next  case  is  interesting  as  belonging  to  a  type  of  which  we  have  very
few  authentic  instances  ;  so  few,  indeed,  that  it  is  permissible  to  doubt
whether  such  incidents  do  really  occur.  The  present  case,  depending  again
upon  the  unsupported  memory  of  an  anonymous  narrator,  can  hardly  be
said  to  add  much  to  the  weight  of  the  evideuce.

"  XXXIII.  (p.  107).— On  the  22nd  January,  1893,  I  was  summoned  by
telegram  to  my  aged  aunt  of  eighty-four,  who  had  been  ill  for  several  days.

' '  On  my  arrival  I  found  my  dear  aunt  at  death's  door,  qjid  scarcely  able
to  speak.  I  took  up  my  place  by  her  bedside  and  did  not  leave  her  again.
Towards  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening  I  was  keeping  watch,  seated  in  an  arm-
chair near  her,  when  I  heard  her  call  with  astonishing  strength  :  '  Lucy  !
I/iicy  !  Lucy  ! '  I  got  up  quickly  and  I  saw  that  my  aunt  had  quite  lost  con-
sciousness, and  heard  the  death-rattle  in  her  throat.  Ten  minutes  later  she
drew  her  last  breath.  Lucy  was  another  niece,  and  my  aunt's  god-daughter;
she  did  not  come  to  see  her  as  often  as  my  aunt  wished  ;  my  aunt  had
several  times  complained  of  her  to  the  nurse.

"  The  next  day  I  said  to  my  cousin  Lucy  :  'You  must  have  been  very
much  surprised  to  receive  the  telegram  informing  you  of  our  aunt's  death."
She  replied  :  '  Not  at  all,  I  was  rather  expecting  it.  Just  imagine,  the
night  before,  about  ten  o'clock,  when  I  was  sound  asleep,  I  was  rudely
awakened,  hearing  my  aunt  call  me  "-Lucy.'  Lucy!  Lucy!"  I  could  not
sleep  for  the  rest  of  the  night. '  There  is  the  occurrence,  wliich  I  certify  to
be  quite  accurate,  and  ask  you  only  to  give  my  initials  if  you  publish  it,  for
the  town  in  which  I  live  is  made  up  for  the  most  part  of  frivolous,  ignorant
people  or  canting  hypocrites.  -j^  g

The  case  which  follows  is  remarkable  because  the  narrator  admits  that
she  cannot  prove  the  coincidence  to  be  exact.  In  the  numerous  secondhand
cases  here  recorded  I  have  not  found  one  in  which  the  coincidence  was
not  exact  to  the  hour — sometimes  even  to  the  minute,

"XXXVIII.  (p.  110).— It  was  a  few  days  before  July  24th,  1895  ;  I  had
had  just  undressed  mjself  and  was  standing  near  my  bed  ;  my  husband  was
in  his  dressing  room  at  the  time;  being  wide  awake,  I  saw  my  grandmother's
face  all  wrinkled,  much  more  puckered  than  in  reality,  and  as  wan  as  the
face  of  a  corpse.  This  passed  like  a  flash  of  lightning,  but  it  distressed  me
extremely.  I  did  not  say  anything  about  it  at  the  time,  such  things  always
appear  ridiculous  when  repeated,  and  the  next  day  my  mother  let  me  know
that  my  grandmother  had  had  a  serious  paralytic  seizure  which  had  rendered
her  quite  unconscious. She  died  indeed  a  few  days  afterwards. I  have  not


428


Frank  Pochnore.


[Supplement.


ascertained  whether  the  hour  at  which  I  had  seen  her  corresponded  with  the
time  when  she  lost  consciousness.  Being  an  ardent  Catholic,  aged  35  years,
the  wife  of  a  barrister,  everything  which  concerns  the  world  beyond  interests
me  extremely.  But  I  ask  you  not  to  make  my  name  known,  this  town
being  chiefly  made  up  of  empty-headed  people,  much  given  to  gossip.

"L.M.,  cT,  A."

In  the  next  case  we  have  the  simultaneous  occurrence  of  inexplicable
sounds  to  witnesses  at  a  considerable  distance,  the  impressions  coinciding
with  a  death.  Unfortunately  the  year  is  not  given,  but  perhaps  it  may  be
assumed  to  be  the  year  in  vvhich  the  narrative  was  written — i.e.,  1899.  It
is  not,  of  course,  a  strong  case.

"XLVII.  (pp.  116-117.)— On  the  night  of  the  19th  to  20th  May,  shortly
before  eleven  o'clock,  I  was  still  awake,  iny  wife  already  asleejj  at  my  side,
when  I  very  distinctly  heard  a  heavy  body  fall  on  the  floor  of  the  upper  story.
My  wife  at  once  sat  up  and  said,  '  What  is  the  matter  ? ' — 'A  loaf  must  have
fallen,'  I  replied. The  stock  of  loaves  was  kejjt  in  this  upper  room.

■'  While  I  was  speaking  we  heard  another  noise  similar  to  the  first,  then
a  third  much  louder.  I  then  got  up,  struck  a  light,  and  going  up  the
wooden  staircase  which  led  to  this  attic,  satisfied  myself  that  all  was  in  order
there,  and  the  loaves  in  their  places.  A  dread  presentiment  took  hold  of  me
concerning  my  brother  John,  who  was  ill  ;  but  I  did  not  let  it  appear,  and
when  my  wife  asked  me  what  had  caused  these  unusual  noises,  I  told  her,
that  I  might  not  frighten  her,  for  I  knew  her  to  be  very  nervous,  that  some
of  the  loaves  had  fallen.

"  The  next  day  what  was  my  astonishment  to  see  my  sister,  who  then
lived  at  Niines,  come  in  in  great  agitation.  She  told  me  that  about  eleven
o'clock  she  had  lieard  a  noise  on  her  table,  and  again  when  she  was  hardly
awakened  a  great  commotion  in  the  large  cupboard.  I  then  took  her  into
the  kitchen. 'John  is  dead  !  '  I  said — 'Yes,'  she  replied,  'it  was  he.'

"A  month  later  we  heard  that  our  dear  John  had  died  in  the  Birkaden
hospital  (Algeria)  during  the  night  of  the  19th  to  20th  May.

"  Mabius  Marioge,  R^moulin  (Garp).

Here,  again,  are  two  recent  cases  ;  the  fact  that  the  narrator  in  each  case
admits  not  having  ascertained  the  exactness  of  the  coincidence  gives  some
assurance  of  their  accuracy  in  the  main  circumstances.

"LXV.  (pp.  126-7). — Two  years  ago  my  brother  went  as  draughtsman
with  M.  de  Bonchamp's  expedition  to  explore  Africa.  I  had  had  no  news
of  him  for  a  long  time,  when  one  night  I  woke  with  a  start,  and  saw  my
brother  distinctly  killed  by  the  spear  of  a  savage.  This  occurrence  made
such  a  vivid  impression  on  me  that  I  remained  awake  till  morning,  and  was
haunted  by  the  vision  for  several  weeks.  A  few  weeks  later  I  received  the
news  of  my  brother's  death  in  Abyssinia  ;  he  was  killed  by  the  spear  of  a
savage  on  November  14th.  The  event  must  have  coincided  with  the  vision.
Unfortunately  I  omitted  to  write  down  the  exact  date  at  the  time.  I  can,
however,  affirm  that  my  vision  took  place  in  November.

"A.  Nyffbley -Potter,

"Kinchberg."


Pai  t  XXXVIII.]


Reviews.


429


"XCII.  (pp.  141-2). — I  was  making  a  stay  of  a  few  months  in  Zurich
when  one  day,  at  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  I  saw  some  one  who  I  knew
was  in  Italy  pass  along  the  street  in  front  of  my  window.  It  made  so
strong  an  impression  upon  me,  that  I  felt  uneasy  for  the  rest  of  the  day  and
told  one  of  my  cousins  about  it.  (I  was  wrong  not  to  make  a  note  of  the
exact  day  and  hour.)  A  few  days  later  I  heard  that  the  person  whom  I  had
seen  pass  (a  doctor  who  had  attended  me,  and  to  whom  I  was  much  attached)
had  just  died  suddenly  in  Italy  from  the  rupture  of  an  aneurism.  I  think  I
may  affirm  that  not  more  than  twenty-four  hours  elajjsed  between  the  time
of  the  apparition  and  that  of  this  doctor's  death.  The  doctor  died
December  25th,  1897.

"Lucy  Niedekhauser.

"  Mulhouse."

In  the  next  case  we  have  the  testimony  of  a  second  witness  before  the
event.

"  XCIV.  (pp.  142-3). — In  response  to  your  request  with  regard  to  facts
of  the  psychical  order,  [  beg  to  report  the  following  case.  My  father,  M.
Fleurant,  a  retired  sclioolmaster,  and  my  mother,  a  schoolmistress,  living  at
Thenay  (Indre),  will  vouch  for  its  authenticity.  It  was  in  1887,  in  the
month  of  February.  My  mother  had  then  at  Evreux  an  only  brother,
for  whom  she  had  a  great  affection,  and  who  on  his  side  made  much
of  her.

"  Unfortunately,  my  uncle  was  attacked  by  a  disease  which  was  to  bring
him  down  to  the  grave,  in  spite  of  science  and  of  the  good  nursing  of  his
family.  Towards  the  end  of  the  previous  year  my  mother  had  been  to  see
her  brother,  and  saw  for  herself  the  gravity  of  the  disease.  The  doctor
assured  her  that  the  end  was  more  or  less  near.

"  On  the  11th  of  the  month  already  mentioned,  towards  six  o'clock  in  the
evening,  my  mother  was  in  the  cellar  of  her  school,  and  came  up  from  it
overcome  with  indescribable  emotion :  she  had  heard  three  piercing  cries
addressed  to  herself  in  the  course  of  a  few  seconds  ;  they  seemed  to  come
through  the  air-hole  of  this  cellar,  which,  faced  north.

' '  She  said  to  my  father  :  '  My  brother  is  at  the  point  of  death  ;  I  have
just  heard  hiui  calling  '

"  The  next  day  but  one  she  received  a  letter,  dated  the  12th,  in  which
was  the  announcement  of  my  uncle's,  Ernest  Barth^lemy's,  death,

"  Mile  Blanche  de  Louvigny,  the  writer  {i.e.,  amanuensis)  of  this  letter,
who  had  nursed  the  invalid  up  to  his  last  moments,  said  that  he  had  in-
cessantly called  my  mother.  My  mother  has  often  repeated  these  details,
and  she  is  still  convinced  that  she  was  really  in  connection  with  her
brother  in  thought  for  a  few  moments,  although  she  cannot  explain
this  phenomenon.  I  acquaint  you  with  these  details,  hoping  that  they
may  be  of  ser\ice  to  j'ou  in  the  search  after  the  causes  which  produce
such  effects.

"  A.  Fleurant.

"  Schoolmistress  at  Reuilly,  at  the  present  time  living  with  her  jmrents

at  Thenay  (Indre)."


430


Frank  Podmore.


[Supplement.


"The  undersigned  certify  that  the  information  given  by  their  daughter
in  this  letter  is  most  precisely  accurate.

"G.  Fleurant.
"  Retired  Schoolmaster.

"  S.  Fleurant.
"  Schoolmistress  at  Thdnay  (Indre.)"

In  case  CIX.  M.  Flammarion  finds  it  necessary  to  append  a  note  that  he
is  not  responsible  for  the  opinions  expressed  by  his  contributors.  The
narrator  explains  that  when  a  child  of  twelve  he  was  encore  un  pen  decot,
and  in  the  habit  of  saying  his  prayers  nearly  every  evening.  One  evening
he  prayed  with  unusual  fervour  for  his  grandmother,  and  immediately  after
closing  his  eyes  had  a  vision  of  that  relative.  The  next  day  he  learned  that
his  grandmother  had  died  at  that  very  hour.  The  effect  of  that  experience
on  the  trained  intellect  of  a  French  schoolboy  was  singular.  "  De2:)uis  ce
moment, "  he  concludes,  "comme  je  m'etais  adresse  a  Dieu  pour  me  con-
server  ma  grand'mere  longtemps,  et  qu'il  ne  m'a  pas  exauce,  j'ai  cesse  avec
raison  de  croire  en  lui.  On  dit  qu'il  exauce  les  prieres  de  tous  ceux  qui  ont
recours  a  lui.  En  voila  une  preuve,  et  aussi  de  la  blague  qu'est  la  religion
catholique. Elle  ressemble  aux  autres  tout  simplement."

In  case  CXXX.  again  the  coincidence  is  not  exact.  But  there  are  some
fine  dramatic  touches  in  the  story  : —

"CXXX.  (pp.  166-7). — One  of  my  fellow  students  (I  am  a  lady  doctor)
had  gone  to  India  as  medical  missionary.  We  lost  sight  of  each  other,  as
often  happens,  but  we  were  still  attached.

"One  morning,  during  the  night  of  the  28th  to  29th  October  (I  was  then
at  Lausanne)  I  was  awakened  before  six  o'clock  by  little  knocks  at  my  door.
My  bedroom  opened  into  a  corridor,  which  ended  on  the  staircase  of  the
storey.  I  left  my  door  half-open  to  allow  a  big  white  cat,  which  I  then  had,
to  go  hunting  during  the  night  (the  house  swarmed  with  mice).  The  knocks
were  repeated.  The  night -bell  had  not  rung,  neither  had  I  heard  any  one
come  upstairs.

"  By  chance  my  eyes  fell  upon  the  cat,  which  was  in  its  usual  place  at  the
foot  of  my  bed.  It  was  sitting  up,  quivering  and  growling,  its  hair  on  end.
The  door  shook  as  though  moved  by  a  slight  gust  of  wind,  and  I  saw  a
figure  appear  wrapped  in  a  sort  of  vapoury  white  stuff,  like  a  veil  thrown
over  something  black.  I  could  not  distinguish  the  face  well.  The  figure
came  up  to  me.  I  felt  an  icy  breath  pass  over  me  ;  I  heard  the  cat  growl
furiously.

"  Instinctively  I  shut  my  eyes,  and  when  I  opened  them  again  every-
thing had  vanished.  The  cat  was  trembling  in  every  limb,  and  was  bathed  in
perspiration.

"  I  admit  that  I  did  not  think  of  my  friend  in  India,  but  of  another
person.  About  a  fortnight  later  I  heard  of  the  death  of  my  friend  during  the
night  of  the  29th  to  30th  October,  1890,  at  Srinaghar,  in  Cashmere.  I  heard
afterwards  that  she  had  succumbed  to  an  attack  of  peritonitis.

"  Marie  de  Thilo,
"Doctor  of  Medicine,  St.  Junien,  Switzerland."


Part  XXXVIII.]


Reviews.


431


Case  CLV.  presents  an  incident  which,  so  far  as  I  know,  could  be
paralleled  only  in  the  annals  of  witchcraft.  The  narrator,  who  does  not
give  the  date  of  the  incident,  was  a  boy  of  twelve  at  the  time.

"(p.  184). — Towards  half-past  seven  o'clock,  I  felt  a  box  on  my  ear  oi
extraordinary  violence.  I  bet^an  to  call  out  ;  my  mother  came  to  me  directly,
and  asked  me  what  was  the  matter.  I  told  her  that  I  had  been  struck  and
that  my  cheek  hurt  me  ;  besides  this,  my  mother  observed  that  iny  cheek
was  red  and  swollen.  Uneasy  at  what  had  happened  my  mother  was
impatient  for  my  father  and  brother  to  come  lioine.  My  father  did  not
come  in  till  nearly  nine  o'clock  ;  my  mother  told  him  at  once  what  had  taken
place,  and  when  she  mentioned  the  time,  my  father  replied,  '  It  was  just  that
time  when  her  grandmother  drew  her  last  breath.'  For  more  than  six
months  I  kept  the  marks  of  a  right  hand  on  my  right  cheek  ;  it  was  very
apparent,  especially  after  I  had  been  playing  and  my  face  was  redder,  the
traces  of  the  hand  being  white  ;  this  was  observed  by  hundreds  of  people.

"A.  Michel,

"Dyer  in  the  factory  of  Valabre,  near  Entraigues  (Vaucluse)."

The  next  case,  CLVL,  furnishes  us  with  a  well-mai'ked  instance  of  what
Professor  Royce  has  called  pseudo-presentiment.

"(p.  185). — Now,  this  same  day.  May  31st,  1895,  about  half-past  nine
in  the  morning,  whilst  my  wife  was  attending  to  domestic  duties  in  the
house,  our  little  girl,  then  at  the  age  of  two  years  and  a- half,  came  up  to  her
mother  and  said  in  her  baby  language  :  '  Mother,  look  at  godfather  (my
eldest  son  was  his  sister's  godfather),  look,  mother,  I  am  playing  with  him.'

"  'Yes,  dear,  play  away,'  answered  her  mother,  who  did  not  attach  any
importance  to  the  child's  words  at  the  moment.

"  But  the  little  girl  persisted,  in  spite  of  her  mother's  indiflerence,  and
added  :  '  But,  mother,  come  and  see  godfather — Look  at  1dm,  he  is  there !
Oh  !  How  nicely  he  is  dressed  !  !  I  '

' '  My  wife  noticed  that  while  she  was  talking  the  child  seemed  as  though
she  was  transfigured.  She  was  aroused  by  it  just  at  first,  but  soon  forgot
the  incident,  which  had  only  occupied  a  few  minutes.  It  was  not  till  two  <>v
three  days  later  that  she  remembered  all  the  details.

"  Shortly  before  noon  we  received  a  telegram,  informing  us  of  the
horrible  accident  which  had  befallen  our  dearly-beloved  son,  and  I  knew
later  on  that  death  had  taken  place  about  eight  o'clock.

"ROUGIS."

Villa  des  Tilleuls,  Salon  (Bouches  du  Rhone).

Psychical  research  has  no  use  for  details  which  are  not  remembered  until
two  or  three  days  after  the  receipt  of  the  news  which  gave  them  significance.

In  addition  to  the  apparitions  of  the  dying,  the  book  contains  a  few
instances  of  transmission  of  ideas  and  images  not  at  times  of  exceptional
crisis  ;  and  a  large  number  of  dreams,  telepathic,  clairvoyant,  and  prophetic.
As  these  cases  also  lack  corroborative  evidence  it  has  not  been  thought  worth
while  to  quote  any  illustrations  here.  M.  Flammarion's  own  attitude  to  the
subject  has  already  been  partly  indicated.  To  begin  with,  he  does  not
consider  that  the  apparitions  of  which  specimens  have  been  quoted  above


432


Frank  Fodmore.


[Supplement.


are  rightly  classed  as  Hallucinations.  We  know  what  hallucinations  are,  he
says,  and  we  know  how  they  are  caused,  and  these  aie  not  of  them  nor  do
they  proceed  from  similar  causes  (p.  221).  He  objects  therefore  to  the
title  "Hallucinations  telepathiques,"  given  to  the  French  abridgment  of
Phantasms  of  the  Liviiuj,  as  "  titre  inexact  et  denature  "  (p.  223)  ;  he  objects
equally  to  Mr.  Myers'  felicitous  coinage  "veridical  hallucinations"  (p.  248).
But  his  own  conception  of  the  nature  of  these  apparitions  is  a  little  ditScult
to  grasp.  He  has  no  doubt  that  they  are  caused  by  some  action  of  the
dying  man's  brain  ;  that  this  action  (psychic  force)  gives  rise  to  movements
in  the  ether  which  are  jjropagated  to  a  distance  like  any  other  ethereal
movements  :  and  affect  kindred  brains.  This  transformation  of  psychic
force  into  ethereal  undulations,  may,  he  suggests,  be  analogous  to  the  trans-
formation of  sound  into  electric  waves,  and  back  again  into  sound,  in  the
telephone  (p.  373).

Later,  after  explaining  that  the  object  of  his  researches  is  to  ascertain
whether  the  human  soul  has  an  existence  independently  of  the  body  and
survives  its  destruction  (p.  564),  he  proceeds  to  consider  which  of  the  forces
known  to  us  have  an  independent  existence.  Light,  heat  and  sound  are
clearly  not  independent  existences — they  are  only  sensations  produced  in
our  organism  by  ethereal  or  aerial  movements.  But  electricity,  he  is  inclined
to  think,  probably  exists  as  a  real  entity,  the  ether  being  an  electrical
substance  (p.  571),  and  in  considering  the  physical  effects  produced  on
kindred  brains  by  the  apparitions,  he  finds  himself  compelled  to  conclude
that  "something"  has  proceeded  from  the  dying  man.  Proximately,  no
doubt,  the  "something  "  is  but  an  ethereal  vibration,  as  in  the  case  of  light.
But  the  vibration  must  be  caused,  and  he  is  satisfied  that  no  anatomist  or
physiologist  would  venture  to  say  that  the  cause  would  be  found  in  the
physical  structure  of  the  brain  (p.  573).

But  it  may  be  argued,  as  against  M.  Flammarion,  my  organism  will  affect
not  merely  a  kindred  organism,  but  any  man  with  tlie  normal  complement  of
senses,  or  any  appropriate  mechanical  receiver,  at  a  distance  which  is  limited
only  by  the  imperfection  of  our  optical  and  other  physical  instruments.
What  is  the  difference  between  the  vibrations  starting  from  me  which  affect
my  friend's  eye,  and  those  equally  starting  from  me  and  equally  transmitted
by  the  ether,  which,  ax  hypothe.il,  affect  my  friend's  brain  direct  ?  If  the
one  of  the  two  vibrations  is  of  the  earth,  gross,  mechanical  and  subject  to
the  law  of  the  conservation  of  energy,  how  can  we  prove  that  the  other  is
not  also  ?  Or,  conversely,  if  these  prove  immortality  and  the  supremacy  of
the  soul  of  man,  h  ive  not  those  an  equal  claim  to  give  like  testimony  1  In
truth  M.  Flammarion  can  give  no  reasonable  grounds  for  the  faith  that  is
in  him.  He  distinguishes  between  the  origin  of  the  one  set  of  effects  and
the  other;  but  he  has  no  argument  to  offer.  "On  sent  la  une  propriete
inconnue,  non  de  I'organisme  physique,  mais  de  I'etre  pensant  (p.  573),
and  again  "Nous  ne  pouvons  nous  laisser  guider  dans  nos  jugements  (pie  par
le  sentiment  intime  qui  resulte  en  nous  de  la  discussion  des  pheiiomenes  "
p.  574).  M.  Flammarion  may  be  right  ;  but  he  must  give  up  talking  of
"scientific  methods"  and  "scientific  demonstration."

Frank  Podmoke.


Part  XXXVIII.]


Revieivs.


433


Treatment  by  Hypnotism  and  Suggestion:  or,  Psycho-Therapeutics.  By
C.  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.  Aberd.  Fourth  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.
(Bailliere,  Tindall  and  Cox,  20,  21,  King  William  Street,  Strand,
London,  1900.)

Cure  by  suggestion  is  perhaps  the  oldest  of  all  methods  of  treatment.
In  the  childhood  of  all  races  the  few  simples  used  for  their  known  power  as
drugs  pure  and  simple  were  largely  overshadowed  by  cliarms,  incantations,
and  fantastic  methods  of  cure  which  depended  for  their  eWect  on  their
power  over  the  imagination  of  the  patient.  In  those  early  times  the  priest
and  physician  were  usually  one  and  the  same,  and  it  followed  tliat,  until  quite
lately,  all  such  methods  of  cure  have  been  in  the  hands  of  priests,  soothsayers,
white  witches  and  the  numerous  tribe  whose  interest  it  was  to  keep  the  idea
of  the  supernatural  before  the  minds  of  their  patients  as  the  tru6  means  of
cure.  In  the  present  day,  even  in  the  most  civilised  parts  of  the  world,  we
still  have  miraculous  cures  at  grottoes  and  wells.  Christian  Scientists,  faith
healers,  and  quack  healers  of  every  descrif)tion.  It  is  a  matter  of  regret
that  almost  up  to  the  present  medical  men  have  been  so  much  prejudiced  by
the  element  of  obvious  quackery  and  humbug  surrounding  these  cures  as  to
confound  with  them  the  results  obtained  by  students  of  psycho-therapeutics.
The  comparatively  recent  emergence  of  the  art  of  medicine  from  empiricism
or  charlatanism  has  perhaps  made  the  present  professors  of  the  art  morbidly
sensitive  to  anything  wliich  smacks  of  that  dark  age,  and  which  it  is  difficult
to  analyse  by  the  scientific  methods  they  have  now  become  accustomed  to.
It  was  inevitable  in  starting  a  new  study  of  so  difficult  a  nature  that
numerous  mistakes  should  be  made  and  theories  promulgated  which  were
soon  to  be  proved  untenable.  The  English  medical  school  has  hardly  made
a  fair  allowance  for  this.  Part  of  the  reason  may  be  that,  whereas  in
Germany  and  France  large  numbers  of  works  on  the  subject  have  apjjeared,
in  England  the  books  which  have  debated  the  subject  in  a  fair  and  equable
manner  have  been  but  few,  and  some  of  the  most  notable  are  by  foreign
authors.  Dr.  Lloyd  Tuckey's  volume  states  the  case  for  psycho-therapeutics
in  a  manner  which  should  convince  an  impartial  critic  of  the  value  of  its
methods.  He  justly  insists  on  the  importance  of  such  a  j)owerful  aid  to  the
physician's  means  of  combating  disease.  His  quotation  of  Professor  Pitres
is  apt  and  to  the  point.  "Be  physicians,  gentlemen,  and  not  hypnotisers,
but  learn  to  apjjly  hypnotism  and  be  ready  to  use  it  in  suitable  cases."
With  all  the  resources  of  latter-day  scientific  research  at  his  disposal,  there
still  remains  a  large  field  of  disease  which  is  the  despair  of  the  physician.
A  large  section  of  it  consi>sts  of  diseases  caused  by  the  imagination  or  by
causes  which  have  had  their  first  effect  on  the  imagination.  These,  as  is
truly  pointed  out,  are  anything  but  imaginary  diseases.  It  is  in  these  cases
that  the  method  of  treatment  by  suggestion  strikes  at  the  root  of  the  evil  in
a  manner  that  no  other  kind  of  treatment  can  approach.  And  here  a  point
on  which  Dr.  Lloyd  Tuckey  lays  stress  may  well  be  emphasised.  This
method  does  not  weaken  the  will-power  of  the  patient,  but  strengthens  his
power  of  self-control.  The  dangers  of  hypnotism  have  always  been  a
bugbear  which,  like  many  others,  requires  but  careful  investigation  to
reduce  to  a  very  small  quantity.


434


G.  F.  Rogers.


[Supplement.


Though  the  main  use  of  hypnotism  must  be  in  diseases  of  a  psychical
nature,  yet,  as  Dr.  Lloyd  Tuckey  points  out,  the  influence  of  the  mind  over
the  i^rocesses  of  the  body  is  so  great  that  we  may  fairly  look  to  it  as  a  most
valuable  reinforcement  in  tlie  treatment  of  many  other  diseases.  We  all
know  the  value  of  personality  in  a  doctor's  curative  powers,  and  it  would  be
well  if  the  influence  of  mind  over  body  were  a  subject  which  all  medical  men
had  a  scientific  knowledge  of.  The  characteristics  enumerated  by  Dr.  Lloyd
Tuckey  as  necessary  for  the  successful  practice  of  psycho-therapeutics  for
curative  purposes  are  those  which  every  medical  practitioner  sliould  jjossess : —
"Firm  will,  unlimited  patience,  calm  temperament,  tact,  medical  knowledge
and  judgment."

The  common  belief  that  hysterical  and  mentally  unstable  people  are
specially  good  svibjects  for  hypnosis  is  here  well  refuted, — experience  shows
that  strong,  healthy,  intellectual  men  are  easily  influenced,  though  those
also  who  are  sick  and  reduced  in  bodily  strength  are  peculiarly  suscep-
tible. The  value  of  tlie  diflerent  methods  of  sending  to  sleep  is  discussed  ;
the  less  strain,  the  better.  No  mention,  however,  is  made  of  the  method  of
inducing  sleep  by  passes,  which  is  of  all  methods  the  one  that  imposes  least
strain  on  the  subject.  Charcot's  interpretation  of  the  hypnotic  state  and
method  of  inducing  it  is  in  my  opinion  rightly  condemned  in  favour  of  that
of  the  Nancy  School.  Many  interesting  cases  are  given  of  the  efi'ect  of  hypno-
tism on  various  diseases.  It  is  extremely  satisfactory  to  note  the  number  of
dipsomaniacs  cured,  one  third  of  two  hundred  cases.  The  shortness  of  time
required, — one  month, — also  contrasts  favourably  with  the  length  of  residence
found  necessary  in  homes  for  the  cure  of  such  cases.  The  relegation  of  the
jDractice  of  hyjanotism  to  the  hands  of  medical  and  other  scientific  men  is,
with  justice,  strongly  advocated.

In  a  treatise  on  the  therapeutic  side  of  hypnotism,  the  purely  psychical
side  has  necessarily  been  left  in  the  background.  Still,  to  the  student  of
Psychical  Research,  Dr.  Lloyd  Tuckey's  book  affords  many  valuable  hints  on
psychology.  I  do  not  know  whether  all  would  agree  with  the  statement
' '  that  vivid  consciousness  only  exists  when  nervous  imjiulses  are  sent
through  new  or  little-used  channels."  Education,  or  the  establishment  of
these  paths  as  easily  travelled  tracts,  is,  I  think,  required  to  attain  a  vivid
consciousness  of  resthetic  feelings.

In  the  course  of  so  many  years'  familiarity  with  the  hypnotic  state,  it  is
inevitable  that  many  of  the  psychical  phenomena  which  often  accompany  it
must  have  come  under  Dr.  Lloyd  Tuckey's  cognizance.  Although  he  rightly
deprecates  exjjeriment  on  p)atients,  yet  I  am  sure  he  must  have  accumulated
enough  material  for  a  treatise  on  the  workings  of  the  psychical  side  of  man
which  would  make  a  very  desirable  companion  to  the  present  lucid  work  on
Psycho-Therapeutics.  ^ ^^^^^^^  ^


Occult  Japan:  or.  The  Way  of  the  Gods;  an  Esoteric  Study  of  Japanese
Personality  and  Possession.  By  Percival  Lovi^ell.  (Houghton,
Mifflin  and  Co.,  Boston  and  New  York,  1894.)

When  the  normal  man  sees  the  word  "occult"  attached  to  the  title  of  a
book,  he  is  generally  disposed  to  shy  from  its  contents. Even  the  most


Part  XXXVIII.]


Reviews.


435


normal,  however,  need  have  no  apprehensions  in  approaching  Mr.  Lowell's
very  lively  and  entertaining  volume,  while  students  of  the  curious  class  of
phenomena  described, — phenomena  of  which  there  are  traces  in  varying  forms
from  earliest  times  to  the  present  day,  and  in  all  countries  from  farthest
East  to  farthest  West, — will  find  the  subject  dealt  with  in  a  manner  showing
much  care  and  observation.  Most  Orientals  are  apt,  as  a  rule,  to  withhold
their  marvels  from  the  eyes  of  strangers;  in  Japan,  however,  to  judge  from
Mr.  Lowell's  experiences,  there  seems  to  be  but  little  of  such  reticence.  So
readily  indeed  was  he  welcomed  by  the  priests  of  all  sects  to  the  performance
of  their  sacred  mysteries,  that  it  is  a  matter  for  astonishment  that  the  wide-
spread system  of  induced  divine  possession  which  he  was  thus  enabled  to
witness  should  have  waited  until  now  for  investigation.  Mr.  Lowell  even
supposes  that  the  very  existence  of  the  system  was  unknown  to  foreigners
until  he  himself,  as  the  result  of  a  chance  encounter  on  the  summit  of  the
sacred  mountain  Ontake,  was  led  to  explore  it.  While  practised  also  among
the  Buddhists,  Mr.  Lowell  is  inclined  to  trace  the  origin  of  these  esoteric
rites  to  Shinto,  the  primitive  religion,  which,  for  many  centuries  displaced  by,
and  interniingled  with,  imj^orted  Buddhism,  is  now,  as  a  consequence  of  the
nationalist  movement  of  1867,  restored  in  a  purified  form  to  popular  favour.
"Shinto,"  he  says,  "is  the  Japanese  conception  of  the  Cosmos.  It  is  a  com-
bination of  the  worship  of  nature  and  their  own  ancestors  ...  A  lack
of  psychic  develojament  has  enabled  these  seemingly  diverse  elements  to  fuse
into  a  homogeneous  whole.  Both,  of  course,  are  aboriginal  instincts.  Next
to  the  fear  of  natural  phenomena,  in  point  of  primitiveness,  comes  the  fear  of
one's  own  father,  as  children  and  savages  show.  But  races,  like  individuals,
tend  to  difierentiate  the  two  as  they  develop.  Now,  the  suggestive  thing
about  the  Japanese  is  that  they  did  not  do  so.  Filial  respect  lasted,  and  by
virtue  of  not  becoming  less,  became  more,  till  it  filled  not  only  the  whole
sphere  of  morals,  but  expanded  into  the  sphere  of  cosmogony.  To  the
Japanese  eye,  the  universe  itself  took  on  the  paternal  look.  Awe  of  their
parents,  which  these  people  could  comprehend,  lent  explanation  to  dread  of
nature,  which  they  could  not.  .  .  .  The  thunder  and  the  typhoon,
sunshine  and  the  earthquake,  were  the  work  not  only  of  anthropomorphic
beings,  but  of  beings  ancestrally  related  to  themselves.  In  short,  Shintd,
their  explanation  of  things  in  general,  is  simply  the  patriarchal  jjrinciple
projected  without  perspective  into  the  past,  dilating  with  distance  into
deity."  Hence  the  union  of  the  Jaj^anese  and  their  gods  into  a  kind  of  family
whole,  each  section  standing  on  terms  of  more  or  less  intimate  intercourse
with  the  other, — truly  a  communion  of  the  saints.  The  gods  vouchsafe  them-
selves daily  to  the  people  and  are  ever  ready  to  oblige  with  small  services,
either  by  way  of  working  a  miracle  or  so  when  required  for  the  entertain-
ment or  edification  of  their  children  and  admirers,  or  by  directly  entering
into  possession  of  one  of  them  in  order  to  converse  with  and  impart  useful
spiritual  information  to  the  rest.  It  is  with  "these  miracles  and  these  posses-
sions that  Mr.  Lowell's  book  mainly  deals.  Of  the  former,  it  is  clear  that
the  author  does  not  think  much.  The  chief  forms  of  miracles,  or  god-arts,
are  the  ordeal  by  hot  water  ;  the  ordeal  by  hot  coals — a  rite  very  similar  to
the  fire-walking  of  Fiji  recently  written  on  by  Mr.  Andrew  Lang  ;  the
walking  on  edges  of  sharp  swords  ;  and  the  calling  down  of  fire  from  heaven —


2  H  2


436


Everard  Feilcling.


[Supplement.


to  light  a  pipe  or  other  useful  end.  So  gracious  are  the  gods  that,  while
usually  reserving  these  manifestations  of  divine  skill  for  stated  festivals,
they  are  perfectly  willing,  by  j)i'ivate  treaty  with  their  prie.sts,  to  perform
these  prodigies  to  order,  at  any  time  or  jilace  that  may  be  convenient.
With  a  little  good  will,  and  perhaps  a  slight  tendency  to  suggestively  or
expectationally  induced  anajsthesia,  a  tougher  cuticle,  and  perhaps — •
for  the  more  sure  performance  of  the  last-named  miracle — a  convenient
burning-glass,  Mr.  Lowell  hints  he  could  have  done  just  as  well  him-
self, given  a  similar  audience.  A  good  stout  sole  and  some  useful  skill
to  tlie  thaumaturge ;  a  good  thick  skull  to  everybody  else  ;  and  the  gods
will  work  many  marvels.

So  much  for  the  miracles.  In  the  case  of  the  possessions,  or  induced
incarnations,  the  jjrobleui  is  more  obscure.  They  are  practised  by  many
different  sects,  each  with  its  own  rites  and  formulas  and  its  own  habitual
phenomena.  It  is  not  given  to  every  one  to  become  the  home  of  a  god,  and
he  wlio  would  achieve  it  must  undergo  an  apprenticeship,  long  or  short,
toils(jine  or  easy,  according  to  the  purity  of  the  apprentice, — such  purity
being  measured  according  to  his  initial  capacity  for  complete  vacuity  of
mind.  In  the  Shinshiu  sect  a  kind  of  Sunday-school  for  boys  and  girls
is  held,  in  which  instruction  is  given  in  the  art  of  temporarily  becoming  god
to  the  most  pious  young  people  of  the  parish, — a  Delphic  Academy,  in  fact,
for  the  cultivation  of  self-hypnotisation.  The  phenomena  develop  gradually.
An  apt  pupil  begins  with  convulsions  :  the  god  manifests  himself  by  causing
the  subject  to  engage  in  violent  gymnastic  performances,  somersaults  over  a
table,  climbing  round  a  cornice,  and  so  forth.  As  education  proceeds  he
begins  to  grunt  ;  later,  the  grunts  become  articulate  ;  then  comes  intelligible
sj^eech  ;  and  finally,  a  distinct  personality  is  developed  with  recognisable
attriljutes  distinguishing  it  from  other  and  succeeding  personalities.  For  a
full  account  the  reader  must  refer  to  Mr.  Lowell's  book.  The  similarity  of
the  phenomena  with  those  attending  the  performances  of  Western  mediums
dominated  by  "spirit"  controls  is  very  close.

And  the  explanation  ?  After  showing  the  educative  effect  on  the  trance
state  of  the  dominant  idea,  of  the  expectancy  of  the  subject,  Mr.  Lowell
traces  the  resemblance  of  the  j^ersonality  developed  to  the  personality  so
expected.  The  subject  believes  he  will  become  a  god — and  gradually  a  god
he  becomes.  The  subject  has  certain  initial  ideas,  simple  and  vague  enough,
of  the  behaviour  of  gods, — and  the  gods  behave  just  so.  A  long  process  of
self-annihilation  has  ended  by  annihilating  self  ;  the  ideas  are  habitual,
inherited,  racial ;  and  the  god  is  the  personification  of  the  racial  idea.

Could  we  wholly  annihilate  all  individual  abnormality,  could  we  have  the
perfectly  normal  man  for  subject,  "we  should,  as  the  trance  state  deepened
and  the  man  lost  himself,  see  him  lose,  first,  his  individual  characteristics,
then  his  family  traits,  then  the  habits  of  his  class,  and  so  down,  till  only  the
broadly  human  ones  survived.  The  trance  state  would  undo  what  evolution
has  done,  and  return  to  us  a  primeval  savage  in  the  body  of  an  end-of-the-
century  man."  The  man  has  become  his  own  ancestor!  "And  so,"  says
Mr.  Lowell,  with  joy  at  his  triumphant  paradox,  which  will  come  as  a  shock
ti )  such  as  have  not  foreseen  the  end  of  his  nimble  reasoning,  ' '  this  lands
us . . . at  an  unexpected  conclusion,  to  wit,  that  these  gods  are  really


Part  XXXVIII.]


Reviews.


437


what  they  claim  to  be.  .  .  .  We  are  viewing  the  actual  incarnation
of  the  ancestral  spirit  of  the  race.  ...  If  these,  his  [the  subject's]
ancestors  were  gods  in  the  past,  gods  they  are  that  descend  to  embodiment
to-day."

This  is  very  pretty,  yet  one  cannot  but  feel  that  for  this  bold  stroke
Mr.  Lowell  has  sacrificed  the  construction  of  a  theory  to  account,  not
only  for  Japanese  possessions,  but  for  all  other  allied  phenomena.  Dr.
Nevius  examined  them  in  China,  and  caUed  them  devils  ;  Dr.  Hodgson
in  America,  and  there  they  were  discarnate  spirits.  Is  Mrs.  Piper  nothing
but  her  own  great-grandmother  ?  Will  Mr.  Lowell  please  discuss  this  in
his  next  ?

EVEBAED  FeiLDING.


Aherglauhen  unci  Zauberei.  By  Dr.  Alf.  Lehmann,  Director  of  the
psychophysical  laboratory  in  the  University  of  Copenhagen.  Gcnnan
Translation  by  Dr.  Petersen  (Stuttgart,  Enke,  1898. Pp.  556.)

On  the  whole  this  is  a  good  book.  It  is  written  in  an  interesting,  lucid,
and  easy  style,  contains  a  good  deal  of  information  well-arranged  and  in  a
compact  form,  and  is  for  the  most  part  animated  by  a  spirit  of  reasonable
and  scientific  curiosity,  which  seems  to  aim  at  fairness  and  to  fall  short  of  it
only  occasionally  and  in  consequence  of  the  difficulty  of  stating  a  complicated
case  in  so  limited  a  space.  Dr.  Lehmann  is  commendably  free  from  the
virus  of  apriorism  and  the  habit  of  jumping  at  conclusions  without  investiga-
tion ;  he  does  not,  as  so  many  scientists  do,  hold  that  faith  in  the  infallibility
of  '  science'  (and  of  himself  as  its  exponent)  is  a  substitute  for  works,  and  his
ingenious  methods  of  experimentally  testing  and  illustrating  -the  assertions
of  others  often  make  real  contributions  to  the  subject.  In  fact  he  shows  so
much  of  the  spirit  of  the  true  psychical  researcher  that  one  is  disposed  to
welcome  him  among  the  select  band  of  experimental  psychologists  who  have
had  the  good  sense  and  the  courage  to  take  to  psychical  research.  Un-
fortuntitely,  however,  this  is  not  quite  possible  ;  for  owing  either  to  his
early  training  or  to  a  cautious  deference  to  popular  and  scientific  prejudice.
Dr.  Lehmann  occasionally  lapses  into  crudities  of  judgment  for  which
the  bulk  of  his  narrative  and  his  admissions  elsewhere  hardly  prepare
the  reader.

To  give  a  few  flagrant  examples.  In  his  historical  survey  of  ancient  sorcery
the  Jews  receive  a  '  favoured  nation '  treatment  which  it  would  be  hard  to
justify  on  scientific  grounds.  Per  contra  in  his  preface  Dr.  Lehmann  takes  up
quite  a  comic  and  Canute-like  attitude  of  one  stemming  the  rising  tide  of
superstition  Yet  in  the  rest  of  his  book  he  is  largely  occupied  in  showing,
with  great  skill  and  success,  how  most  or  all  of  these  superstitions  arose  as
well-meant,  though  erroneous,  attempts  at  a  scientific  explanation  of
phenomena.  Again  in  his  final  paragraph  he  warns  us  that  the  modern
'  occultists '  (among  whom  he  seems  for  the  moment  to  include  the  S.  P.  R.,
although  he  ordinarily  makes  much  and  appreciative  use  of  its  work)  have
burdened  their  consciences  with  a  terrible  responsibility  for  the  new  super-
stitions, to  which  he  fears  the  new  conceptions  of  telepathy,  subliminal


438


F.  G.  S.  Schiller.


[Supplement.


consciousness,  etc.,  will  lead.  Yet  in  the  body  of  his  work  he  found  these
new  conceptions  useful  and  even  indispensable.  He  admits  (p.  46'2)  that
there  is  no  intrinsic  absurdity  in  the  assumption  of  telejiathic  forces,  and,
on  his  own  showing,  their  assertion  has  at  least  enriched  science  by  the
discovery  (made  by  himself)  of  "  involuntary  whispering."  As  for  the  sub-
liminal, he  is  constantly  compelled  to  have  recourse  to  it  or  its  equivalents
in  explaining  hypnotic  phenomena,  automatisms,  etc.  Not  that  he  likes  it  :
indeed  he  has  to  explain  (p.  374  note)  that  he  prefers  to  use  the  term
^  imco)iscions'  in  such  cases  just  because  unconscious  ideas  or  states  of
consciousness  are  sheer  nonve7ise  (l),  while  ^subliminal'  and  'subconscious'
(though  intrinsically  preferable,  cf.  p.  431)  imply  theories.  Are  we  to  infer
from  this  that  it  is  scientific  to  adopt  a  nonsensical,  and  superstitious  to
adopt  a  workable  formula  ?

It  would  seem  then  that  of  Dr.  Lehmann  as  of  Dr.  Faust  it  must  be  said
Zvm  Seelen  wohnen,  ach,  in  seiner  Brust!"
and  if  in  this  review  attention  is  mainly  directed  upon  the  utterances  of  the
less  admirable  of  these  two  souls,  the  reason  assuredly  is  that  it  is  more
profitable  to  the  S.  P.  R.  (and  perhaps  also  to  Dr.  Lehmann)  to  discuss
points  of  difference  rather  than  of  agreement,  and  not  any  desire  to  detract
from  the  feeling  of  respect  in  reciprocating  which  the  S.  P.  R.  may  well
imitate  Dr.  Tichmann's  handsome  references  to  its  own  work.

Singling  out  points  for  criticism  on  this  principle,  I  may  mention  first
Dr.  Lehmann's  attempt  to  invalidate  Sir  Wm.  Crookes's  evidence  as  to  the
phenomena  observed  with  Home.  His  method  of  doing  this  is  to  quote,
against  Sir  Wm.  Crookes's  accounts  in  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science,  the
original  notes  published  in  the  Froceedings,  Part  XV.  (Vol.  VI.),  p.  98.
Between  these  two  versions,  he  holds,  such  discrepancies  exist  as  to  justify
the  conclusion  (1)  that  Crookes's  experiments  are  not  rigorously  scientific
but  a  product  of  his  imagination  (p.  270,  273)  and  (2)  that  he  either  had  no
inkling  of  the  importance  of  the  circumstaiices  which  were  omitted  in  his
first  account,  or  else  that  he  was  guilty  of  conscious  deception.

I  own  that  it  passes  my  comprehension  how  Dr.  Lehmann  should  have
arrived  at  conclusions  of  such  gravity  from  premisses  so  flimsy  as  those
which  he  adduces.  For  the  two  accounts  correspond  so  completely  in  all
essentials  that  it  seems  to  me  a  gross  exaggeration  to  speak  even  of  dis-
crepancies between  them,  and  the  only  legitimate  inference  would  seem  to
be  the  very  obvious  and  harmless  one  that  the  first  account  was  a  highly
condensed,  and  not  a  verbatim,  account  of  what  occurred.

But  in  condensing  his  report  Sir  Wm.  Crookes  was  only  availing  himself
of  the  universal  privilege  of  all  comj^etent  scientific  observers,  who  take  it
for  granted  that  they  may  be  trusted  not  to  omit  any  material  circumstance
from  their  descriptions.  No  doubt  in  this  case,  as  in  all  psychological
experimentation,  it  would  have  been  better  to  have  diverged  from  ordinary
scientific  practice  by  publishing  absolutely  complete  records,  but  then  Sir
Wm.  Crookes  wrote  long  before  the  S.  P.  R.  had  impressed  on  the  scientific
world  the  need  for  such  quixotic  caution,  and,  by  producing  what  Dr.
Lehmann  himself  calls  (p.  342)  "one  of  the  most  interesting  series  of
experiments  which  experimental  psychology  has  to  show,"  had  rendered  the
scientific  world  alive  to  the  possibilities  of  mal-observation  in  such  matters.


Part  XXXVIII.]


Reviews.


439


No  doubt  ib  was  this  change  in  the  situation  (due  to  Messrs.  Hodgson  and
Davey's  work)  which  led  Sir  Wm.  Crookes  to  publish  his  full  notes,  in  order
that  they  might  be  reconsidered,  if  necessary,  in  the  light  of  subsequent  know-
ledge. But  one  would  at  least  have  expected  his  critic  to  take  note  of  his
emphatic  declaration  that  he  finds  "nothing  to  retract  or  alter"  and  has
"discovered  no  flaw  in  the  experiments  then  made  or  in  the  reasoning  based
upon  them."  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  98.)  Instead  of  this.  Dr.  Lehmann
prefers  to  judge  by  his  subjective  impressions.  He  unfortunately  derived
from  Sir  Wni .  Crookes's  first  account  an  '  impression '  that  the  conditions
in  detail  had  been  exactly  analogous  to  those  of  physical  experimentation
(p.  271).'^  He  then  proceeds  to  derive  from  Sir  Wm.  Crookes's  notes  another
impression  that  the  conditions  were  very  like  those  of  ordinary  seances,  and,
being  impressed  with  a  discrepancy  which  exists  rather  in  his  impressions
than  in  the  actual  narratives,  he  summarily  declares  Sir  Wm.  Crookes's
whole  evidence  to  be  unworthy  of  credence  !

What  renders  his  cavils  the  more  surprising  is  that  he  himself  is  un-
wittingly sitting  in  the  same  glass  house  with  Sir  Wm.  Crookes.  His  own
report  on  the  experiments  in  'involuntary'  whispering  by  which  he  proposes
to  explain  telepathy  is  very  far  from  being  complete.  As  Professor  Sidgwick
pointed  out  in  the  criticism  published  in  these  Prvceeclincjs  (Part  XXXI.,
Vol.  XII.,  p.  299)  he  gives  only  highly  condensed  summaries  which  leave  a
good  deal  to  be  desired  in  several  important  respects.

Fortunately,  however.  Dr.  Lehmann  makes  admissions  in  the  present
volume  which  enable  us  to  fill  up  the  laeimce  in  his  former  evidence,  and
seem  to  me  to  throw  a  good  deal  of  light  on  his  explanation  of  telepathy,
though  they  do  not  exactly  strengthen  one's  belief  in  its  correctness.

In  the  first  place  it  appears  from  p.  455  that  Dr.  Lehmann  has  observed
in  himself  a  strong  natural  tendency  towards  vocal  automatisms  which  no
doubt  would  go  far  to  render  the  "involuntary  whispering"  theory  plausible
to  his  mind.

Again  we  find  on  p.  457-8  an  avowal  which  throws  quite  a  new  light  on
the  short  series  of  experiments  which  he  made  in  order  to  test  the  possibility
of  transferring  telepathically  visual  images,  before  he  adopted  the  idea  (of
the  'involuntary'  whisper).  (Philosophische  Studien,  XL,  4,  p.  473).  In
these  experiments  results  looking  very  much  like  telepathy  were  produced
when  Dr.  Lehmann  was  the  percipient,  while  his  colleague  Dr.  Hansen  failed
entirely.  '  Involuntary  '  whispering  being  then  taken  up,  the  first  type  of
experiment  was  abandoned  and  the  evidence  remained  inconclusive.  Dr.
Lehmann  indeed  regards  his  success  as  wholly  illusory,  but  the  passage
(referred  to  above)  in  his  present  volume  renders  it  possible  that  he  is
wrong.  He  there  tells  us  that  in  consequence  of  his  strenuous  efforts  in
seances  to  produce  automatic  writing^  he  got  into  such  a  state  of  excitement
and  neurasthenia  that  the  beard  on  one  side  of  his  face  dropped  out.
It  hardly  therefore  seems  too  audacious  a  suggestion  that  he  is  himself

^  It  is,  to  be  sure,  somewhat  strange  that  Dr.  Lehmann  should  have  got  such  an
impression,  for  it  appears  from  various  passages  that  he  has  attended  a  large  number
of  seances  and  is  quite  familiar  with  their  conditions.

2  Why,  by  the  way,  has  he  never  published  an  account  of  these  experiments  ?


440


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[Supplement.


something  of  a  '  medium,'  or — as  his  scientific  friends  would  call  it — of  a
neuropathic  subject,  and  that,  if  so,  there  may  really  have  been  a  trace  of
telepathy  about  the  experiments  which  he  did  not  persist  in.  {Cf.  also
p.  351,  where  he  all  but  writes  himself  down  a  '  medium  ').

Indeed,  we  might  proceed  to  extend  this  theory  to  his  later  experiments
and  to  jjoint  out  that  a  little  real  telepathy  would  help  greatly  in  the  inter-
pretation of  a  faintly  heard  and  quite  inarticulate  whisper,  if  only  their
inconclusiveness  were  not  already  quite  apparent  on  other  grounds,  i  Per-
sonally, I  feel  that  so  long  as  a  scientific  critic  of  telepathy  can  satisfy
himself  with  Dr.  Lehmann's  explanation  of  Mr.  Newnham's  experiments,
viz.,  by  '  unconscious  ideas  aroused  by  unnoticed  whisperings '  (p.  454)
we  are  still  a  long  way  from  an  explanation  of  the  matter.

Other  admissions  which  are  of  interest  in  view  of  Dr.  Lehmann's  general
position  are  found  on  pp.  338,  351,  and  456,  that  disbelief  leads  to  non-
observation,  and  that  even  fraudulent  mediums  need  not  ba  wholly  fraudu-
lent, but  may  exhibit  genuine  automatisms  which  contribute  to  their
success  and  difi'erentiate  them  from  ordinary  conjurors.  Indeed,  Dr.
Lehmann  declares,  on  the  strength  of  his  own  experience,  that  Mr.  Davey
was  probably  an  excellent  '  medium '  !

On  the  other  hand,  he  must  by  this  time  feel  that  he  was  a  little  hasty
in  writing  on  p.  457  that  in  consequence  of  the  '  exposure  '  of  Eusapia
Paladino  "  spirithm,  has  ceased  to  exist  as  a  scientific  problem.'"

Altogether  he  is  not  quite  fair  to  the  sjijiritist  theory.  He  tends  to
regard  it  as  intrinsically  superstitious  and  a  priori  inadmissible  (esp.
p.  471-2),  in  a  way  in  which  '  occultism,'  i.e.,  the  assumption  of  unknown
forces,  is  not.  He  is  consequently  puzzled  (p.  314)  to  understand  why  both
'  spiritism  '  and  '  occultism  '  have  so  often  been  held  together.  But  surely
a  moment's  reflection  would  have  shown  him  that  if  there  is  room  in  the
universe  for  undiscovered  forces,  '  spirits  '  may  be  among  them,  while  if  a
spirit  world  interacts  with  ours,  the  forces  whereby  this  occurs  are  prac-
tically unknown.  In  point  of  fact,  the  spiritist  hypothesis  is  intrinsically
as  good  as  any  other,  and  has  certain  well-marked  advantages,  if  it  is
treated  in  a  scientific  manner.  It  must  therefore  be  repeated  as  often
as  is  needful  that  superstition  consists,  not  in  holding  any  particular  theory,
but  in  the  way  in  which  it  is  held.

It  must  be  noted,  further,  that  Dr.  Lehmann  has,  curiously  enough,
omitted  all  account  of  the  modern  evidence  as  to  'haunted  houses.'

1  It  seems  to  me  a  strange  abuse  of  language  to  describe  the  whispering  as  'involun-
tary,' and  I  do  not  wonder  that  when  Professor  Sidgwick  tried  to  repeat  Dr.  Lehmann's
experiments  he  could  not  attain  to  the  '  in  voluntariness.'  The  fact  is  that  Dr.
Lehmann's  whisperings,  as  is  practically  admitted  by  Dr.  Hansen  (loc.  cit.  p.  503),
were  quite  voluntary  and  conscious.  The  agent  was  perfectly  aware  of  what  he
was  about  and  could  regulate  the  loudness  and  distinctness  of  his  whispers  to  a
nicety.  I  am  surprised  only  at  the  moderation  of  the  experimenters  in  limiting
the  percentage  of  their  successes  to  33  per  cent.  They  might  just  as  well  have
made  it  100  per  cent.  !  I  suppose  they  stopped  where  they  did  in  order  to
'mimic'  better  the  telepathic  series  of  the  S.P.R.  But  the  analogy  between
Messrs.  Lehmann  and  Hansen's  experiments  and  bona  fide  telepathy  seems  to
me  wholly  illusory.


Part  XXVIII.]


Reviews.


441


On  the  other  hand,  it  is  surprising  that  he  should  have  found  it  worth
while  to  mention  (p.  303),  and  apparently  to  credit  the  stories  of  the  '  buried
fakir.'  For  the  only  case  of  the  sort  which  is  evidentially  respectable  is,  I
believe,  that  which  seemed  to  occur  for  Ranjit  Singh's  benefit,  as  reported  by
Sir  Claude  Martin  Wade.  But  a  slight  reflection  upon  the  powers  of  political
intrigue  in  a  Hindu  court  to  bring  about  the  apjDarent  result  is  enough
to  render  the  story  extremely  suspect,  without  casting  the  slightest  doubt
on  the  good  faith  either  of  Sir  Claude  Wade  or  Ranjit  Singh  himself,  and
to  bring  out  the  great  scientific  rashness  of  crediting  the  alleged  fact  on
such  evidence.  Verily  Dr.  Lehmann  also  is  sometimes  capable  of  the  feat
of  swallowing  a  camel !

Typographically  there  are  few  errors,  except  that  Messrs.  F.  W.  H.  and
A.  T.  Myers  generally  appear  as  Meyrs.  In  Miss  X.'s  case  also  the  real
name  is  not  Goodrich  but  Goodrich-Freer.  This  error  is  perhaps  the  more
worth  correcting  as  it  occurs  also  elsewhere,  e.ij.,  in  Fouillee's  Psychologie
des  Idees-Forces  (11. ,  397,  etc.).

In  conclusion,  it  is  perhaps  permissible  to  express  a  hope  that  Dr.
Lehmann  may  find  himself  able  to  continue  his  experimental  investigations
of  subjects  whose  obscurity  has  long  been  a  disgrace  to  science,  and  that
when  he  does  so,  he  will  recogziise  how  greatly  co-operation  conduces  to  success,
and  that  not  only  in  the  collection  of  psychological  statistics.  Hitherto  he
seems  to  have  asked  and  received  little  aid  from  those  who  have  made  a
special  study  of  such  subjects,  but  Professor  Flournoy's  recent  success  has
shown  that  it  is  quite  possible  to  maintain  the  sympathetic  attitude  which
enlists  support,  without  derogating  from  the  demand  for  scientific  proof.

F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


Psychism:  Analysis  of  Things  Fxisting. By  Paul  Gibiee,  M.D.  (New
York  Bulletin  Publishing  Company. Fifth  Edition. No  date.)

Dr.  Gibier,  as  he  has  told  us  in  his  title  page,  is  Director  of  the  New  York
Pasteur  Institute  and  sometime  Assistant  Professor  of  the  Museum  of
Natural  Philosophy  at  Paris.  He  has  also  conducted  various  independent
investigations  as  to  bacteriology,  and  has  been  entrusted  by  the  French
Government  on  several  occasions  with  the  mission  of  studying  epidemics  of
cholera,  yellow  fever,  etc.  When  a  man  with  such  qualifications  under-
takes the  analysis  of  the  Cosmos,  his  views  are  certainly  entitled  to  a  respectful
hearing.  It  is  to  be  regretted,  indeed,  that  in  the  present  book  Dr.  Gibier
gives  us  so  few  detailed  accounts  of  his  own  experiences.  He  has  many
striking  facts  to  relate,  but  they  are  for  the  most  part  either  borrowed  from
other  writers  or  given  in  the  way  of  allusion  or  reference. .  Thus  he  tells  us
that  he  has  witnessed  the  phenomenon  of  "direct  spirit  writing"  at  least
500  times  (p.  229),  but  the  only  instance  here  quoted  occurred  in  the  pre-
sence of  the  medium,  Slade.  Dr.  Gibier  gives  an  account  of  this  experiment
written  by  a  thnd  person,  now  dead,  but  it  is  not  even  clear  whether  he
himself  was  present  (p.  211).  One  very  striking  series  of  sittings  with  an
American  medium,  "Mr.  S.,"  who  we  may  fairly  presume  to  have  been
Slade  himself,  he  does,  however,  describe  in  some  detail. The  sittings


442


Frank  Podmore.


[Supplement.


were  held  in  a  biological  laboratory  close  to  a  large  dissecting  room  at  the
College  Rollin,  in  Paris,  in  1886,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  casts  of
spirit  hands.  Some  plaster  of  Paris  was  placed  in  a  large  vessel  under  a
wire  cage,  on  which  the  sitters  placed  their  feet.  The  conditions  apparently
were  not  favourable  to  the  particular  form  of  manifestation  :  and  the
naedium  felt  bad  influences  about.  No  results  of  note  were  observed.  At
the  second  seance,  also,  no  casts  of  hands  were  obtained,  but  the  investi-
gators were  not  left  without  some  proofs  of  spirit  agency.  As  they  mounted
the  stairs  in  semi-darkness,  the  medium  in  advance,  a  glass  jar  was  thrown
on  the  stairs  by  an  unseen  hand  and  smashed  to  pieces,  and  in  the  stance
room  itself  the  medium  was  suddenly  jjossessed  of  a  violent  and  malicious
spirit,  and,  seizing  a  chair,  threatened  the  company  with  it.  Then,  to  quote
Dr.  Gibier's  account  of  the  impressive  scene  (pp.  204-205),  "He  advanced
on  us  [i.e.,  the  author,  his  friends  apparently  standing  aloof],  still  swinging
the  chair,  and  we  were  prepared  to  parry  with  our  stool,  when  suddenly,  we
know  not  by  what  force,  we  were  prompted  to  try  an  experiment,  said
to  be  infallible  in  such  occurrences,  which  had  been  taught  us  by  a  man
familiar  with  these  matters.  We  threw  aside  the  stool  which  we  held  and
advanced  Ijoth  hands  toward  the  unfortunate  entranced  one,  strongly  '  will-
ing '  he  should  become  immobilised.  We  pi'ojected,  as  it  were,  our  will
against  him,  adding  to  this  cerebral  effort  an  energetical  gesture.  The  effect
was  instantaneous,  and  we  were  the  first  to  be  surprised  at  the  happy  result  :
instead  of  liurling  the  chair  at  us  it  was  thrown  backward,  and,  although
quite  a  strong  one,  was  broken  past  the  possibility  of  x'epair.  '  S.'  became
as  if  struck  by  lightning,  his  body  was  shaken  with  a  convulsive  tremor,
brusquely  carried  three  or  four  yards  distant  from  where  he  stood,  and
dropped  on  the  floor  against  the  wall.  All  his  limbs  were  contorted,  his
joints  cracked,  and  finally  he  shrivelled  and  curled  up  like  a  ball."

It  was  tlirough  such  scenes  as  these  that  our  author  was  initiated  into
the  secrets  of  the  Cosmos.  Briefly,  for  him,  as  for  Hegel,  but  with  a  differ-
ence, the  factors  of  the  universe  are  threefold.  There  is  mind,  matter,  and
that  which  mediates  between  them — animic  or  ethereal  energy.  It  is  this
third  constituent  which  in  its  most  generalised  form  penetrates  as  ether  the
interstellar  spaces,  which  radiates  from  the  oj^erator  in  hypnotism,  which
forms  an  aura  round  the  entranced  subject,  which  can  be  manipulated  by
Eastern  Yogis  and  photographed  by  Parisian  savants.  In  a  word,  Dr.
Gibier  belongs  to  the  school  represented  in  modern  France  by  de  Rochas,
Baraduc,  Barety,  and  the  late  Dr.  Luys  ;  and  farther  back  by  Tardy  du
Montravel,  by  Mesmer,  and  by  the  long  tradition  of  the  Alchemists.  In
searching  through  his  pages  for  circumstantial  evidence  of  the  all-pervading
fluid,  I  have  found  instead  an  admirable  maxim  which  has  already  done  good
service  in  a  similar  capacity  for  students  of  the  Occult  in  this  country  : —
"  There  is  no  religion  higher  than  Truth."

But  Dr.  Gibier  gives  us  the  means  of  testing  for  ourselves  the  presence
of  the  animic  fluid.  Here  is  an  experiment  which  we  may  all  try  (pp.
127-8.)  "It  is  to-day  an  acquired  fact  for  all  those  who  study  the  question,
that  a  force,  wliich  can  very  easily  be  put  in  evidence,  sallies  forth  and  acts
at  a  distance  according  to  the  wish  of  the  active  subject,  or  operator  :  or
still,  when  we  come  to  the  passive  subject  this  force  manifests  itself  in


Part  XXXVIII  ]


Reviews.


443


the  percipient  under  the  influence  of  a  suggested  order  ;  or  again,  sjDon-
taneously  in  the  medium  during  a  passive,  conscious,  or  unconscious  state.
For  instance,  one  may  with  some  hypnotisable  subjects  make  the  following
experiment,  which  we  shall  call  the  experiment  of  Horace  Pelletier,
inasmuch  as  it  was  made  for  the  first  time  by  that  experimenter  under  the
following  conditions  : — If  one,  or  better,  several,  sensitive  subjects,  having
their  hands  placed  over  a  jar  of  water,  are  ordered  (verbal  suggestion)  to
cause  the  liquid  to  move  as  if  it  were  boiling  without  touching  it  :  one
may  after  a  relatively  short  time  (it  is  useless  to  wait  more  than  half-
an-hour  at  each  sitting)  see  the  water  beginning  to  ripple  at  first  and  then
moving  as  if  a  small  fish  were  disturbing  it  by  playful  evolutions  :  then  it
begins  to  bubble  as  if  it  were  boiling,  so  that  sometimes  it  overflows  and
partly  runs  out  of  the  jar  .  .  .  Mr.  Pelletier,  who  has  frequently
written  to  us  of  this  experiment,  has  not  mentioned  the  fact  that  the
subjects  sometimes  complain,  as  soon  as  the  experiment  is  begun,  of  a  pain  in
the  arms  and  hands."

When  our  readers  have  carried  out  this  experiment  for  themselves  to  a
successful  conclusion,  they  will  no  doubt  be  prepared  to  accept  Dr.  Gibier's
account  of  other  manifestations  of  the  animic  fluid.

Frank  Podmoee.

[Whilst  the  foregoing  notice  was  passing  through  the  press,  we  heard
with  much  regret  the  news  of  Dr.  Gibier's  sudden  death  through  an  accident.
Dr.  Gibier,  though  still  a  young  man,  had  already,  as  stated,  done  good
work  in  other  branches  of  scientific  inquiry  :  and  it  can  hardly  be  doubted
that  wider  knowledge  of  these  problems,  and  experiences  of  the  numerous
and  subtle  sources  of  error  which  beset  them,  would  have  led  a  man  of  his
abilities  and  scientific  acumen  to  emjjloy  in  his  psychical  inquiries  more
of  the  critical  faculty,  and  to  adopt  methods  of  investigation  more  in
harmony  with  those  which  he  had  already  employed  with  conspicuous
success  in  other  fields. — F.  P.]


Faith-Healing  and  Christian  Science. By  Alice Feilding. (London  :
Duckworth  and  Co.,  3,  Henrietta  Street,  W.C.  1899.)

This  book  mainly  consists  of  a  destructive  criticism  of  the  methods,
beliefs  and  claims  of  the  so-called  Christian  Scientists,  with  some  liints  as
to  the  principles  underlying  the  success  of  the  movement.  There  is  a  good
summary,  for  its  extent,  of  the  various  methods  of  faith-healing  from  early
times  up  to  the  present.  Kindred  hysterical  epidemics  are  also  dealt  with.
So  many  authors  have  been  consulted  that  it  seems  a  pity  no  bibliography
has  been  added  for  inquiries  into  the  subject.  Mrs.  Eddy's  Science  and
Health  furnishes  many  quotations  to  show  its  innate  foolishness  and  want
of  the  most  elementary  principles  of  logic.  Reiterated  and  overbearing
assertion  seems  to  be  the  keynote  of  the  book  and  its  system.  The  value-
lessness  of  inexpert  testimony  is  well  shown.  The  ways  and  means  of  Mental
Therapeutics  are  discussed  in  a  very  fair  and  open-minded  manner,  and  it


444


Frank  Podmore.


[Supplement.


is  shown  that  cures  claimed  by  Cliristian  Science  are  really  attributable  to
the  principles  of  mental  suggestion  now  becoming  more  widely  recognised,
especially  in  Continental  schools.  The  quotation  in  the  Appendix  from
Mr.  Haggard's  Prayer  for  a  Dyspeptic  affords  a  most  amusing,  and  yet
sorrowful,  examjjle  of  the  utter  confusion  in  which  the  mind  of  the
Christian  Scientist  seems  to  be  as  regards  the  elementary  jjrinciples  of
thought  and  reason.  "Help  us  to  stoutly  affirm  .  .  .  that  we  have
no  DysjDepsia,  that  we  never  had  Dyspepsia,  that  we  never  will  have
Dyspepsia,  that  there  is  no  such  thing,  that  there  never  has  been  any
such  thing,  and  that  there  never  will  be  any  such  thing.  Amen."  Cold
comfort  for  the  average  dyspeptic,  I  am  afraid.  I  should  recommend  any
friend  of  a  "Christian  Scientist"  to  try  the  effect  of  this  book  on  the
"Scientist's"  common-sense.  A  careful  record  of  the  results  might  jjrove
a  valuable  guide  to  the  inner  workings  of  that  modern  miracle  of  contra-
dictions— the  mind  of  the  Christian  Scientist.

G.  F.  RoGEES,  M.D.


Part  XXXVIII.] Fouvth  Congvess  of  Psychology.


445


III.

THE FOURTH INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS  OF
PSYCHOLOGY.

Paris,  Atigtist  30th  to  25th,  1900.

For  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  this  Congress  marks  an  epoch,
and  is  surely  the  most  decided  success  it  has  ever  had.  Yet  there  were  very
few  Englishmen  present,  and  at  the  former  Congresses  members  of  the
S.P.R.  were  much  more  prominent.  But  now,  as  it  seemed  to  me,  the  work
and  the  spu-it  of  the  English  society  met  with  less  resistance  and  a  more
general  acknowledgment  and  apjjrobation  than  at  any  of  the  three  previous
Congre.sses.

This  was  not,  however,  clear  at  the  outset.  In  the  two  opening  sjjeeches
by  Professor  Ribot  and  Professor  Ebl^inghaus,  describing  the  develoj^ment
of  Psychology  in  the  last  century  and  in  the  last  few  years,  the  work  of  the
S.P.R.  was  not  jsarticularly  in.sisted  upon.  Professor  Ribot  mentioned  it,
shortly  but  appreciatively  ;  Professor  Ebbinghaus  gave  it  no  place  among
the  characteristic  features  of  modern  psychology.  But  if  we  may  regard
the  members  of  the  Congress  as  a  truly  representative  body  of  modern
psychologists  their  attitude  afforded  evidence  of  a  remarkable  deviation
from  this  offtcial  standpomt.  For  if  there  was  anything  characteristic  in  the
comjjany,  it  was  the  general  interest  and  more  or  less  acknowledged  belief
in  things  that  some  ten  or  twenty  years  ago  would  have  been  pooh-poohed
and  called  unscientific, — supernatural,  occult,  or  mystical.

It  is  true  that  the  lines  of  psychology  are  not  well  marked  out  ;  its
limits  are  unknown,  its  borders  vague  and  ill-defined.  Under  the  same
flag  of  psychology  were  gathered  together  the  brain-anatomist,  the  psycho-
physiologist,  whose  laboratory  work  shows  no  essential  difference  from
that  of  the  physiologist,  the  speculative  philosopher,  the  spiritualist,  the
mystic,  the  Christian  priest,  the  Indian  Yogi.  We  hold  it  as  certain
that  many  members  of  the  Congress  did  not  at  all  acknowledge  the  right  of
the  majority  of  their  fellow-members  to  represent  the  science  of  psychology.
Still,  there  were  celebrated  names,  important  communications,  a  serious  and
dignified  tone.  And  yet  the  ojiposition  to  subjects  of  an  occult  or  mystical
character,  if  not  weak,  was  certainly  not  overpowering.

The  extremes  were  well  balanced  and  the  distribution  of  subjects  at
the  general  meetings  was  cleverly  and  impartially  arranged.  There  were
brilliant  demonstrations  of  brain-physiology,  showing  the  influence  of  dif-
ferent narcotics  and  toxicants,  and  also  of  passions  and  emotions,  on  the
cellular  elements  of  the  cortical  matter. i On  the  other  hand,  an  eloquent

1  Dr.  Paul  Heger  and  Dr.  Jean  Demoor  (Bruxelles),  Contrihvtions  a  la  pkysioloriie
de  la  coucke  corticale.


446


Dr.  Frederik  van  Eeclen.


[Supplement.


vindication  of  the  validity  and  imjjortance  of  that  most  ancient  and  venerable
doctrine  of  mystical  wisdom,  the  Indian  Yoga,  was  delivered  by  one  of  its
distinguished  followers,  T.  Ch.  Chatterji,  of  Benares.

It  was  remarked  by  Professor  Ebbinghaus,  as  a  peculiar  feature  of
modern  psychology  as  compared  with  the  psychology  of  a  hundred  years
ago,  that  the  old  psychology  had  a  religious  and  mystical  tendency,  while
the  modern  aimed  simply  at  becoming  a  science,  exactly  like  any  other
science.

But  it  is  useless  to  conceal  that  this  does  not  fully  meet  with  the  views
and  the  motives  of  the  S.P.R.  as  a  whole.  While  that  Society  is  extremely
anxious  to  proceed  along  strictly  scientific  and  unbiassed  lines,  many  of  its
members  seem  aware  at  the  same  time  that  (taking  religion  in  its  widest
and  deefjest  sense)  science  is  only  part  of  religion,  and  can  have  no  beneficial
efi'ect  without  a  deep  moral  conviction,  embracing  and  unifying  all  branches
of  science,  thus  giving  them  their  worth  and  true  meaning.

From  this  point  of  view  Psychology  is  the  tenderest  and  most  vital
organ  of  modern  science,  for  in  it  lies  the  link  between  the  science  of
exact  observation  and  speculative  and  mystical  thought.  In  fact,  psycho-
physiology,  which  consists  in  comjjarative  measurements  of  sense-impressions
and  the  founding  thereon  of  general  laws, — and  speculative  thought,  which
tries  to  express  verbally  the  most  jarofound  factors  of  our  being,  are
separated  by  an  immense  gulf,  and  can  hardly  be  brought  under  one  com-
mon name.  The  former  belongs  simply  to  the  great  edifice  of  natural
sciences,  as  a  subordinate  part,  the  latter  being  at  the  same  time  the
foundation  and  corner-stone  of  the  whole  building.

But  the  two  were  conjoined  here  under  the  name  Psychology,  and  it
seems  as  if  the  natural  relation  between  science  and  religion  can  only  be
restored  in  this  domain.

Readers  of  the  proceedings  of  the  Congress  will  easily  see  what  a  large
part  of  the  communications  consisted  of  what  I  may  call  the  material  of
psychical  research.  From  every  part  of  the  world  observations  were  forth-
coming about  mediumship,  trance,  thought-reading,  and  the  like.  And  what
readers  will  hardly  deduce  from  the  printed  reports  is  the  still  larger  part
that  these  matters  played  in  private  conversation.  Rumours  about  facts
showing  evidence  of  remarkable  faculties  were  rife,  and  it  is  not  unlikely
that  we  shall  hear  ere  long  of  communications,  from  a  German  source,  which
will  startle  many  disbelievers.  Only  caution  and  the  fear  of  shaking  the
well-earned  German  reputation  for  thoroughness  has  thus  far  withheld
them.

And  even  among  the  staunchest  rationalists,  the  most  rigid  believers  in
exact  science  without  any  mystical  basis,  there  was  a  milder  attitude  and  a
greater  interest  in  the  subject  than  I  had  ever  observed  before.  In  the
smile  wherewith  they  asked,  "Now,  do  tell  me,  what  did  principally  con-
vince you  ? "  there  was  something  of  a  glimmer  of  allowing  that  to  be
convinced  could  not  be  so  very  bad  after  all.  No  doubt  the  psychological
rule  of  the  crowd, — which  alleges  that  no  individual  can  keep  free  from  the
mental  influence  of  a  majority, — was  again  confirmed  here.

Another  remarkable  fact  was  the  foundation  of  the  Institnt  Psychique,  or
Fsycliologique. There  was,  of  course,  the  inevitable  quarrel  about  the  right


Parbxxxvm.] Fouvth  Congress  of  Psychology.


447


name,  this  time  not  without  some  significance.  We  may  have  our  doubts
and  fears  as  to  the  success  of  this  undertaking  of  M.  Yourievitch  ;  but  we
cannot  doubt  that  it  is  meant  to  be  a  great  international  development  of  the
work  of  the  S.P.R.

Our  President,  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  when  he  took  the  chair  in  June,
stated  that  his  election  was  remarkable  because  it  meant  the  acknowledg-
ment of  psychical  study  as  a  regular  science,  as  he  had  no  other  scientific
title  but  that  of  a  psychical  researcher.  Both  this  last  Congress  and  the
Institut  Psychique  seem  to  aiford  weighty  corroborations  of  his  statement.
People  who  devote  their  lives  solely  to  the  most  diiiicult  investigations  of
psychical  phenomena  are  no  longer  considered  for  that  reason  cranks,  or
scientific  outlaws,  who  may  fill  volumes  of  periodicals  and  hold  crowded
meetings  without  the  slightest  notice  being  taken  by  official  science.  Not
only  did  these  persons  form  a  large  part  of  the  Congress,  which  was  under
the  leadership  of  the  most  celebrated  scientists,  but  there  seems  to  be  a
chance  now  that  tliey  may  soon  possess  something  like  an  Academy  or
Classes  which  will  form  that  official  standard  which  is  at  present  more
lacking,  although  more  requisite,  in  this  particular  branch  of  science  than
in  any  other.

For  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  neglect  of  the  subject  by  academic
science  has  led  to  a  wild  and  profuse  growth  of  pseudo-science,  with  reckless
theories  and  worthless  observations.  So  there  is  great  need  of  sifting  and
pruning,  of  the  formation  of  a  high  and  consistent  standard  of  evidence,
which  may  be  done  by  co-operation  throughout  the  whole  world.  Can  the
study  of  the  phenomena  of  the  human  mind  be  thought  less  important  than
that  of  the  cosmical  bodies  ?

The  days  of  the  Congress,  August  20th  to  25th,  1900,  were  full  of  promise.
Nearly  every  communication  had  something  in  it  of  a  deep  and  startling
kind,  showing  prospects  of  dimly  foreseen  knowledge  ; — from  the  musical
wonder,  introduced  by  Professor  Richet, — the  piano-playing  and  composing
baby, — to  the  mad  and  hallucinated  frogs  of  Prince  TarkhanofF.^  So
marked,  indeed,  was  the  change  in  tone  that  even  the  young  Brahman's
confident  reiteration  of  ancient  Eastern  claims  to  a  higher  knowledo-e
attained  by  ascetic  methods  fell  no  longer, — as  it  would  assuredly  have  fallen
in  earlier  Congresses, — on  wholly  unsympathetic  or  unhopeful  minds.

Fredekik  vAjsi  Eeden.

Bussum,  Holland,  August,  1900.
[To  Dr.  van  Eeden's  report,  Mr.  Myers  adds  : — ]

Dr.  van  Eeden  has  modestly  omitted  to  notice  the  most  important  paper
dealing  with  definitely  supernormal  phenomena  which  was  submitted  to  the
Congress  ; — namely,  his  own  account  and  discussion  of  certain  sittings  with
which  he  has  been  favoured  by  Mrs.  Thompson.  This  paper  was  very  well
received  by  (I  believe)  the  largest  audience  which  met  during  the  Congress.

Two  other  papers  which  had  been  prepared  on  IVIi-s.  Thomjison's  phe-
nomena,— in  French  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  and  in  English  by  myself, — were

1  Prince  Jean  de  Tarkhanoff,  Illusions  et  Hallucinations  des  Grcnouilles  en  di-
pendance  de  leur  esjiece.


448


Fourth  Congress  of  Psychology.  [Supplement.


perforce  omitted  for  lack  of  time  ;  but  both  Professor  Richet  and  I  addressed
the  Congress  briefly  on  the  subject.  Professor  Moutonnier  also  gave  some
account  of  an  excellent  sitting  which  Mrs.  Thompson  had  given  him.  The
subject  of  trance-phenomena  and  "possession"  was  thus  frankly  admitted
within  the  purview  of  the  Congress,  and  it  is  hoped  that  the  various  papers
may  subsequently  appear  in  our  Proceedings.

Certain  other  paj^ers,  perhajis  intended  to  support  our  views,  suggested
to  nie  the  imminence  of  a  danger  from  which  our  obscurity  has  till  now  kept
us  fairly  free  ; — I  mean  the  danger  of  indiscriminate  popularisation.  This
cannot  possibly  be  avoided.  We  must  learn  to  submit  to  hearing  our  own
achievements  exaggerated, — and  at  the  same  time  mixed  up  with  narratives
and  opinions  for  which  we  have  no  intention  whatever  of  making  ourselves
responsible.  All  that  we  can  do  is  to  repeat  that  only  in  our  Proceedings
will  the  reader  find  any  authorised  account  of  our  work  ; — and  to  insist  that
our  object  is  still  to  stimulate  inquiry  far  more  than  to  propagate  beliefs.
We  are  not  missionaries,  but  researchers.

Finally  we  have  deferred  to  the  last  the  menti<.)n  of  a  paper  of  extreme
interest,  novelty,  and  importance,  by  Dr.  Morton  Prince,  which  we  hope
shortly  to  be  able  to  publish  in  our  Proceedings.  Students  of  ' '  secondary
personalities"  will  recognise  that  the  case  described  in  this  paper  is  absolutely
the  most  remarkable  which  has  yet  been  given  to  the  world.  It  is  fortunate
indeed  that  it  has  fallen  into  such  competent  hands,  and  Dr.  Prince's  com-
plete report  of  it  will  be  awaited  with  impatience.

F.  W.  H.  M.


PROCEEDIisrGS

OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH,

PART  XXXIX.


■2  I


1^' ■  ■^S'P


PnobnravuTE  by  Annan  5  Scns.GlaECDw.


From  a  Photograph  by  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  taken  in  1895.

Reproduced  by  permission.


452


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[part


IN  MEMORY  OF  HENRY  SIDGWICK.
By  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


"  From  Maximus  I  learnt  self-government,  and  not  to  be  led- aside
by  anything  ;  and  cheerfulness  in  all  circumstances,  as  well  as  in
illness  ;  and  a  just  admixture  in  the  moral  character  of  sweetness  and
dignity,  and  to  do  what  was  set  before  me  without  complaining.  I
observed  that  everybody  believed  that  he  thought  as  he  spoke,  and  that
in  all  that  he  did  he  never  had  any  bad  intention  ;  and  he  never  showed
amazement  and  surprise,  nor  did  he  ever  laugh  to  disguise  liis  vexation,
nor,  on  the  other  hand,  was  he  ever  passionate  or  suspicious.  He  was
accustomed  to  do  acts  of  beneficence,  and  was  ready  to  forgive,  and  was
free  from  all  falsehood  ;  and  he  presented  the  appearance  of  a  man  who
could  not  be  diverted  from  right  rather  than  of  a  man  who  had  been
im25roved.  I  observed,  too,  that  no  naan  could  ever  think  that  he  was
despised  by  Maximus,  or  ever  venture  to  think  himself  a  better  man."

These  simple  sentences,  in  which  the  Stoic  Emperor  describes  his;
honoured  teacher,  must  recall  to  all  of  us,  with  striking  appropriate-
ness, the  fi'iend  and  leader  whom  we  shall  see  on  eai'th  no  more.  There
are  others  better  qualified  than  I  to  retrace  and  estimate  his  manifold
activities  in  the  world  of  beneficent  action  and  of  lofty  thought.  I
shall  sjseak  of  him  only  in  two  capacities  ; — as  the  closest  and  most
revered  of  friends,  and  as  our  captain  in  the  great  enterprise  which  it
is  the  object  of  this  Society  to  pursue.

Yet  as  I  speak  I  shall  feel  the  perpetual  need  of  his  sanction  for
what  I  say ;  and  this  utterance  of  mine — the  fii'st  which  will  have
lacked  his  helpful  criticism — must  needs  be  of  all  utterances  that
which  needs  his  help  the  most.  No  one  but  himself  could  truly  depict
the  pi'ogress  of  that  subtle  and  all-embracing  intelligence,  and  my
sketch  will  be  but  a  blurred  projection,  where  the  master's  thought  i.s.
dimmed  and  deflected  by  passing  through  the  disciple's  mind.

It  is  just  forty  years  since  I  went  up  to  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,,
as  a  freshman  of  seventeen,  and  began  to  I'ead  with  Henry  Sidgwick  as.
my  private  tutor  in  classics.  But  he  soon  ceased  to  take  private  pupils
and  spread  liis  own  studies  over  a  wider  I'ange.  Even  then  he  was,  to-
use  George  Sand's  phrase,  toiirmente  des  choses  divines,  and  he  sought
whether  the  study  of  Oriental  languages,  of  ancient  philosophies,  of
history,  of  science,  would  throw  light  upon  that  traditional  Revelation
which  hung  before  him  with  so  much  of  attractiveness  in  its  promises.


xxxix  ]  In  Memwy  of  Henry  SidgwicJc.


453


so  much  of  iincerfcainty  in  its  origin  and  its  foundation.  The  theo-
retical result  of  these  studies  was  not  unusual ;  the  practical  outcome
was  academically  almost  unique.  Theoretically  he  concluded  that  the
Christian  tradition — so  long,  at  least,  as  it  remains  unsupported  by
cognate  evidence — is  not  strong  enough  to  upbear  the  oi'thodox  creed
as  to  the  existence  and  the  relation  to  mankind  of  a  spiritual  world.
Practically  he  determined  that,  as  he  was  no  longer  "a  bond-fide  member
of  the  Church  of  England,"  he  would  resign  his  Trinity  Fellowship,
which  was  held  upon  that  condition.

It  may  illustrate  the  bluntness  of  moi'al  perception  which  such  tests
engender,  if  I  add  that — even  while  myself  aggressively  orthodox — I
nevertheless  considered  that  the  vague  phrase  of  the  Declaration, —
which  had  been  substituted  for  a  definite  subscription  to  the  Articles —
permitted  the  retention  of  a  Fellowship  by  any  man  who  had  been  born
into  the  Church  of  England,  and  had  not  taken  any  overt  step  to  re-
nounce his  allegiance.  Sidgwick's  action,  however,  caused  no  surprise  ;
he  was  already  a  man  (as  George  Eliot  later  said  of  him),  whose
friends  tacitly  expected  him  to  conform  to  moral  standards  higher  than
they  themselves  cared  to  maintain.  His  resignation,  as  is  well  known,
brought  others  with  it ;  it  attracted  the  attention  of  Parliament,  and
exercised  some  real  influence  in  procuring  the  abolition  of  University
Tests.

In  single-hearted  devotion  to  the  Pight  and  Reasonable  there  was
no  period  of  life  in  which  Heniy  Sidgwick  had  much  to  learn.  But  I
shall  not  conceal, — what  is  indeed  to  his  credit, — that  in  some  other
directions  his  ultimate  character  was  largely  of  his  own  making.  .  I
cannot  claim  for  him  that  he  was  by  nature  one  of  those  men
o(Tois  SiSaKTov  fxijSev, — who,  like  his  friend  Charles  Bowen,  seem  born
to  attract  every  love  and  to  win  every  victory.  Those  who  knew
Sidgwick  only  in  later  life,  when  sympathy,  benignity,  the  very
ripeness  and  mellowness  of  wisdom,  seemed  his  predominant  traits,
would  be  surprised  to  know  of  the  coldness  with  which  he  was  regarded
by  many  contemporaries  and  juniors  in  his  early  student  days.  "High,
self-contain'd,  and  passionless,"  like  the  mystic  Arthur, — he  almost
seemed,  as  he  himself  wrote  to  me  later,  to  be  "cased  in  a  bark  of
selfish  habit,"  and  to  fulfil  all  righteousness  with  a  jejune  precision,
— almost  as  anxious  not  to  accord  too  much  to  his  neighbours  as  not
to  accord  too  little.  There  was  a  reserve,  a  preoccupation,  perhaps
also  a  proud  sensitiveness,  which  chilled  and  checked  in  him  the
natural  lavishness  and  abandon  of  youth.  But  he  became,  as  I
have  said,  the  faber  indolis  stim  ; — by  sheer  meditation,  by  high
resolve,  he  made  himself  such  as  we  all  know  him  ; — so  that  "  no
man  could  ever  imagine  either  that  he  was  despised  by  Maximus,
or  that  he  was  himself  a  better  man."  •.  :  .


454


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[part


Yet  pai'tly  also  I  ought  to  say  of  that  earlier  stage  of  his  character
that  it  was  /  who  "  half  despis'd  the  height,  To  which  I  would  not  or  I
could  not  climb,"  and  that  on  his  part  the  treasure  was  not  proffered
till  it  was  needed ; — that  his  lesson  of  wise  suspense  and  high  resolve
was  taught  to  those  only  who  had  found  the  world's  facile  pleasures
empty,  and  its  confident  solutions  vain.

My  own  entry  into  his  intimacy,  at  any  rate,  was  in  an  hour  of
deep  inward  need.

' '  Faith  at  her  zenith,  or  all  but  lost  in  the  gloom  of  doubts  that  darken
the  schools  "  : —

I  had  passed  through  all  these  stages,  and  visiting  Cambridge  again  in
1869  to  examine  for  the  Moral  Sciences  Tripos,  I  felt  drawn  in  my  per-
plexities to  Heniy  Sidgwick  as  somehow  my  only  hope.  In  a  star-light
walk  which  I  shall  not  forget  (December  3rd,  1869),  I  asked  him,  almost
with  trembling,  whether  he  thought  that  when  Tradition,  Intuition,
Metajihysic,  had  failed  to  solve  the  riddle  of  the  Universe,  there  was  still
a  chance  that  from  any  actual  observable  phenomena, — ghosts,  spirits,
whatsoever  there  might  be, — some  valid  knowledge  might  be  drawn  as
to  a  World  Unseen.  Already,  it  seemed,  he  had  thought  that  this  was
possible ;  steadily,  though  in  no  sanguine  fashion,  he  indicated  some
last  grounds  of  hope ;  and  from  that  night  onwards  I  resolved  to
pursue  this  quest,  if  it  might  be,  at  his  side.  Even  thus  a  wanderer
in  the  desert,  abandoning  in  despair  the  fair  mirages  which  he  has
followed  far  in  vain,  might  turn  and  help  an  older  explorer  in  the  poor
search  for  scanty  roots  and  muddy  water-holes.

This  was,  I  fear,  but  a  slow  and  late  conversion  to  the  sense,  which
so  many  men  had  already  reached,  of  Sidgwick's  penetrating  wisdom.
When  I  think  of  other  Trinity  men  whom  I  have  found  worthy  of
respect,  from  rather  before  my  own  date  to  rather  after  it, — of
Montagu  Butler,  R.  C.  Jebb,  G.  O.  Trevelyan,  Henry  Jackson, — of
Balfours,  Lytteltons,  Darwins, — of  W  K.  Clifford,  Lord  Rayleigh,
F.  W.  Maitland,  Walter  Leaf,  Henry  Butcher,  Edmund  Gurney,  and
the  rest ; — it  seems  to  me  as  though  all  these  had  been  prompter  than
I  to  ajDpreciate  that  which  in  the  end  I  knew  so  well.  Nay,  but  in  the
end,  perhaps,  of  all  these,  only  Arthur  Balfour  and  Edmund  Gurney
fell  into  quite  the  same  attitude  towards  Sidgwick  as  myself  : — the
attitude  as  of  "  companions  of  Socrates  "  : — as  it  were,  say,  a  Kritias  of
happier  omen,  a  Theages,  a  Simmias, — feeling  an  essential  stimulus  to
self-development  in  his  intellectual  search,  his  analysing  elenchus ; —
and  feeling  also  in  the  steadfastness  of  his  inward  aspiration  a
pi'ophylactic,  as  each  man  might  need  it,  against  dilettantism,  or  self-
indulgence,  or  despair.

How  strong  may  be  that  craving  for  Wisdom,  when  once  Wisdom
has  seemed  to  speak  with  us  in  the  voice  of  a  man  ! "  Beauty,"  says


XXXIX.]  In  Memory  of  Henry  Sidgwick.


Plato,  "  we  love  best,  because  we  see  her  clearest ;  Wisdom  with
bodily  eyes  we  canaot  see,  or  terrible  had  been  the  loves  she  had
inspired."

In  that  colloquy  of  which  I  have  spoken  above,  Sidgwick  and  I  had
caught  together  the  distant  hope  that  Science  might  in  our  age  make
sufficient  progress  to  open  the  spiritual  gateway  which  she  had  been
thought  to  close  ; — to  penetrate  by  her  own  slow  patience  into  the
vestibule  of  an  Unseen  World.

"I  sometimes  feel,"  he  wrote  to  me  in  1872,  "with  somewhat  of  a
profound  hope  and  enthusiasm,  that  the  function  of  the  English  mind,
with  its  uncompromising  matter-of-factness,  will  be  to  put  the  final
question  to  the  Universe  with  a  solid  passionate  determination  to  be
answered  which  mij,si  come  to  something."

Yet  the  mode  of  putting  this  idea  into  practice  was  hard  to  find.
We  were  forced  in  the  beginning  to  follow  pathways  trampled  for  the
most  part  by  quite  other  than  scientific  feet.  Our  efforts  of  the  first
few  years  (1872-6)  were  tiresome  and  distasteful  enough  ; — yet  what
were  they  in  comparison  to  the  hardship  which  a  naturalist  will  undergo
to  trace  (say)  the  breeding-ground  of  a  song-bird,  or  to  establish  the
relationships  of  a  worm  of  the  sea The  efforts  would  have  been  as
nothing  had  the  results  been  clear.  But  the  results  of  those  years
were  on  either  side  unsatisfactory ; — so  contradictory,  so  perplexing,
that  we  could  neither  feel  sure  that  there  was  nothing  discoverable,
nor  yet  that  any  valid  discovery  had  in  fact  been  made.  For  some
years,  indeed  (1876-1881),  we  worked  but  fitfully, — half-sickened  at
"  Craft,  with  a  bunch  of  all-heal  in  her  hand,  foUow'd  up  by  her  vassal
legion  of  fools."  Yet  even  those  years  were  not  lost.  Driven  perforce
to  question  ourselves  closely  as  to  the  validity  of  the  principles  from
which  we  had  started,  we  found  no  reason  to  desert  them.  Assuredly,
if  a  spiritual  world  has  ever  been  manifested  to  man, — has  ever  been
intermingled  with  this  material  scheme  of  things, — it  must  be  manifest,
must  be  intermingled  now.  The  failure  of  such  an  inquiry  as  ours  ; —
I  mean  the  ultimate  relinquishment  of  every  effort  in  this  one  direction
of  real  possibility  of  advance  ; — must  needs  prove,  if  not  a  death-
blow, yet  a  dire  discouragement  to  every  sacred  memory,  to  all
spiritual  hope.  It  would  be  hard  for  future  men  to  persuade  them-
selves that  what 'in  ages  of  knowledge  and  clarity  was  seen  to  be  fraud
and  illusion  had  yet  been  verity  and  revelation  in  the  confused
obscurity  of  the  Past.

And  thus  it  was  to  men  wearied  but  not  broken,  discouraged  but
not  despairing,  that  at  the  end  of  1881  a  fresh  call  to  exertion  came.
An  attempt  was  to  be  made,  under  somewhat  better  auspices  than  other
such  attempts  which  had  failed  before,  to  confront  spiritualistic  and
similar  beliefs  with  scientific  inquiry. Professor  Barrett  represented


45G


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[part


the  scientific,  Stainton  Moses  the  spirituaHstic  camp.  One  of  the
first  questions,  of  course,  was  whether  Sidgwick  would  join  in  the
proposed  Society.  Edmund  Gurney  and  I  made  our  adhesion  contin-
gent on  his  acceptance  of  the  Presidency ; — but  reported  to  him  that
tliere  seemed  indeed  to  be  a  chance  here  of  uniting  new  inquirers,  and
of  pushing  promising  experiments.

He  took  time  to  consider  his  reply  ; — a  reply  on  which  the  employ-
ment of  much  of  the  energy  of  liis  remaining  eighteen  years  of  life  in
fact  depended.  It  would  have  been  impossible  to  press  him  to  consent.
Admit  that  we  had  been  right  in  making  our  laborious  attempt ; — nay,
that  it  was  still  light  to  keep  a  watchful  eye  on  any  possible  opening
for  inquiry.  Yet  he  had  done  all  that  utmost  fairness  could  requii-e.
Ought  a  man  who  in  so  many  other  ways  could  definitely  advance
human  knowledge  and  human  happiness  to  turn  aside  and  commit
himself  anew — and  more  deeply  than  ever — to  the  gratuitous  quixotism
of  endeavouring  to  benefit  the  race  in  this  difficult  and  uncalled-for
way  1 — to  get  the  moon  for  a  child  who  had  not  even  cried  for  it  ?

"To  the  Jews  a  stumbling-block,  and  to  the  Greeks  foolishness."
Who  really  ivanted  the  new  knowledge,  even  if  we  could  manage  to
give  it  them  %  Men  satisfied  with  an  existing  revelation  did  not  desire
to  have  that  revelation  extended.  They  no  more  wished  to  have  their
unique  tradition  enrolled  and  justified  in  a  cosmic  order  than  those  old
warriors  wished  to  have  the  eclipse  which  routed  their  foemen  reduced
under  astronomical  law.  And  as  for  the  "  Greeks," — the  men  of
science  to  whom  we  desired  to  link  ourselves, — from  them  there  was
little  sign  as  yet  of  anything  but  compassion  or  scorn.

On  the  other  side  was  the  fact  that,  however  unsatisfactory  our
quest  might  have  thus  far  proved,  there  yet  had  never  been  (as  Sidg-
wick himself  had  said)  "  any  given  moment  at  which  we  felt  that  we
had  a  right  to  abandon  it."  Its  problems  were  still  absolutely
unsettled ;  and  it  was  still  possible  that  at  any  moment  light  might
come.  And  the  original  thesis  still  stood  firm — namely,  that  whether
or  no  it  be  possible  by  observation  and  experiment, — along  the  paths
of  science  patiently  pursued, — to  raise  the  human  race  into  ethical
stability, — the  Cosmos  into  intelligible  coherence  ; — at  any  rate  these
results  are  certainly  not  attainable  in  any  other  way.  Without  fresh
facts  none  of  us  can  get  any  further.  There  are  simply  not  enough
known  determinants  for  any  valid  solution.  What  use  in  fondling
hallowed  traditions,  or  in  juggling  with  metaphysical  terminology  1
Unless  the  human  race  can  find  more  facts,  it  may  give  up  the  problem
of  the  Moral  Universe  altogether.

Sidgwick  consented  to  become  the  fii'st  President  of  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research;  and  on  July  I7th,  1882,  delivered  an  Inaugural
Address  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  I.,  page  78)  which  in  its  freedom


XXXIX.]  In  Memory  of  Henry  Sidgwick.  457


alike  from  pretentiousness  and  from  contentiousness  set  a  precedent
from  which  he  never  departed.

Of  what  essential  value  his  services  were  to  the  new  bofly  has  been
well  shown  in  a  letter  recently  sent  by  Mr.  Podmore  to  the  Daily
Chronicle  : —

For  the  fii'st  few  years  of  its  existence  (except  for  an  interval,  during  which
he  stepped  aside  in  favour  of  the  late  Professor  Balfour  Stewart)  Mr.
Sidgwick  acted  as  president  of  the  Society.  But  the  bare  statement  of  that
fact  conveys  a  very  inadequate  idea  of  the  real  nature  of  the  services
rendered  by  him.  That  he  gave  largely — very  largely — of  his  personal
means  to  help  the  work  of  investigation  in  those  earlier  years  is  the  least  of
his  benefits.  He  presided  throughout  at  our  councils  ;  he  took  an  active
share  in  the  tedious  work  of  experiment,  of  examining  witnesses,  of
collecting  and  appraising  evidence  ;  the  lines  on  which  our  work  could  best
be  done  were  laid  down  by  his  advice  and  pursued  under  his  personal
direction  ;  all  the  publications  of  the  Society  were  issued  under  his  immediate
supervision.  That  of  late  years  he  has  delegated  to  others  many  of  these
functions  was  due  less  to  any  decay  of  his  personal  interest  in  the  work  of
investigation  than  to  the  feeling  that  his  immediate  supervision  of  all  details
was  no  longer  necessary.  But  he  has  throughout  these  eighteen  years  been
a  regular  attendant  at  our  meetings,  and  has  taken  a  constant  and  predominant
part  in  all  our  deliberations.  Whatever  position  the  S.P.R.  may  hold  to-day,
whatever  good  work  it  may  have  done  in  exposing  error  or  in  directing
attention  to  neglected  facts  in  human  psychology,  its  success  is  due,  in  the
largest  measure,  to  the  wisdom,  the  clear  insight,  the  ' '  particularly  sane
intellect "  (to  quote  the  words  of  youi'  memou-),  and,  above  all,  to  the  pre-
eminent justice  and  veracity  of  our  first  ]jresident.

No  other  man,  I  think,  could  have  filled  that  post  so  well  as  he.
We  had  before  us  no  straightforward  scientific  task,  such  as  could  be
planned  once  for  all,  and  then  parcelled  out  to  committees  for  execution.
What  was  needed  was  a  wide  and  scattered  inquisition  into  human
faculty  and  human  experience ;  an  inquisition  which  could  not  rely
only  on  familiar  canons  of  evidence,  but  needed  the  establishment  of
many  new  criteria,  consistent  with  each  other  and  with  the  old.  There
was  work  for  many  specialists,  but  at  the  head  of  all  there  was
manifest  need  of  a  philosoj^ker  in  the  widest  sense ; — of  a  man
accustomed,  like  the  author  of  the  Methods  of  Ethics  and  the  Principles
of  Political  Economy,  to  weigh  conflicting  opinions,  to  comprehend
and  meet  the  perplexities  of  varying  minds.

Moral  qualities  were  needed,  too ; — patience,  and  caution,  and
urbanity ; — and  above  all  a  certain  doggedness  and  fixity  of  resolve,
which  should  pui'sue  its  course  unbafiled  by  long  delays,  by  mortifying
defeat.  And  Sidgwick  possessed,  in  an  almost  unique  degree,  that
motive  for  dogged  persistence  which  lay  in  a  deep  sense  of  the  incurable
incoherence  of  the  intelligible  world,  as  thus  far  grasped  by  men.


458


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[part


More  thoroughly  than  any  other  man  known  to  me  he  had  exhausted
one  after  another  the  traditional  creeds,  the  accredited  speculations ; —
had  followed  out  even  to  their  effacement  in  the  jungle  the  advertised
patliways  to  truth.  Long  years  of  jaondering  had  begotten  in  him  a
mood  of  mind  alike  rare  and  precious  ; — a  scepticism  profound  and  far-
reaching,  which  yet  had  never  curdled  into  indifference  nor  frozen  into
despair.

His  controversial  urbanity,  indeed,  never  quite  concealed  the
clearness  and  even  the  sternness  of  his  perception  of  the  fallacies
which  both  Christian  apologetics  and  a  priori  metaphysics  too  often
hide  at  their  heart,  i  And  thus,  while  renewing  this  toilsome  quest  in
no  sanguine  spirit,  he  renewed  it  at  least  with  the  conviction  that  there
was  nothing  else  of  equal  moment  to  be  done ;  that  if,  where  religion
and  philosoi^hy  had  failed  in  establishing  certainty,  Science  were  to  fail
also,  "the  human  race,"  as  he  once  said  to  me,  "had  better  henceforth
think  about  these  matters  "  (the  basis  of  morals,  the  government  of  the
universe)  "as  little  as  they  possibly  can."

I  shall  not  here  attempt  to  define  the  various  conclusions — or  non-
conclusions — at  which  this  cautious  thinker  arrived  in  the  course  of
his  long  research.  I  will  quote  only  a  few  sentences, — for  him  of
unusual  definiteness, — to  which  he  signed  his  name,  at  the  close  of  that
laborious  statistical  inquiry  into  hallucinations  over  which  he  presided,
and  which  fills  the  tenth  volume  of  our  Proceedings  (Vol.  X.,  p.  394).

"  Between  deaths  and  ap2)aritions  of  the  dying  person  a  connection
exists  which  is  not  due  to  chance  alone.  This  we  hold  as  a  proved  fact.
The  discussion  of  its  full  implications  cannot  be  attempted  in  this
paper; — nor,  pei'haps,  exhausted  in  this  age."

Now,  it  is  true  indeed,  as  those  last  words  hint,  that  the  scientific
mind  of  the  actual  generation  is  scarcely  prepared  to  use  in  any  fruitful
manner — or  even  to  realise  with  full  clearness — a  discovery  so  far
remote  from  that  synthesis  of  knowledge  on  which  human  thought  is  at
present  mainly  engaged.  The  fact  alleged  has  few  existing  connections  ;
it  remains,  so  to  say,  on  the  mere  surface  of  the  hearer's  mind.  Yet  of
course  no  savatit,  no  philosopher,  can  deny  that  that  one  fact,  if  true,
constitutes  an  inlet  into  cosmic  laws  of  an  absolutely  new  kind ; —
suggests  operations  and  an  environment  of  which  we  have  hitherto
possessed  no  positive  knowledge  whatever.  It  forms  a  first  step  towai'ds
exactly  what  we  are  aiming  at, — namely,  the  discovery  by  scientific
methods  of  a  spiritual  world.  It  is  a  fact  whose  bare  existence  must
negative  much  previous  theorising  and  suspend  much  more  ; — must

1  Thoroughly  vSocratic  was  his  appeal  for  instruction  to  a  fellow-examiner,  when
revising  the  papers  of  some  ultra-Hegelian  young  man  :  "  I  can  see  that  this  is
nonsense  ;  but  is  it  the  ricjht  sort  of  nonsense  ?  "


XXXIX.]  In  Memory  of  Henry  Sidgwick.


459


negative  that  mechanical  materialism  which  asserts  that  "  the  world  is
made  of  ether  and  atoms,  and  there  is  no  room  for  ghosts ; " — must
suspend  that  obscurantist  timidity  which  assumes  that  we  ali'eady
know  as  much  as  we  ever  shall  know,  or  ever  ought  to  know,  as  to  the
soul  or  the  destiny  of  man.  The  attraction  of  straws  to  amber  was  in
like  manner  for  many  years  a  phenomenon  too  remote  from  existing
knowledge  to  sink  deep  even  into  the  most  eager  minds  :  yet  that
unexplained  physical  attraction  then,  like  this  unexplained  spiritual
attraction  now,  was  probably  the  phenomenon  of  greatest  pregnancy
offered  to  the  observation  of  men.

Thus  far,  perhaps,  but  hardly  farther,  may  one  here  insist  on  the
importance  of  the  psychical  work  accomplished  by  one  who  always
insisted  that  such  accomplishment  was  scarcely  to  be  looked  for  yet ;
that  we  pioneers  ought  to  be  well  content  if  we  could  prepare  the
scientific  mind  of  the  opening  century  for  a  forward  step  such  as  has
never  been  dreamt  of  till  now ; — prepare  the  unborn  workers,  in  every
realm  of  philosophy  and  religion,

To  cast  the  kingdoms  old
Into  another  mould.

It  has  been  said  of  Sidgwick  that  "although  he  was  the  most
influential  man  in  Cambridge,  he  founded  no  school."  Not  at  Cam-
bridge only,  but  over  all  the  civilised  world,  I  think  that  there  are
many  of  us  who  will  say  that  he  did  found  a  school,  and  that  we  are
his  scholars.  He  did  not  indeed  bequeath  to  us  his  wisdom  in  the
shape  of  crisp  metaphysical  bank-notes,  which  the  Universe  would
ultimately  decline  to  cash.  Nor  did  he,  like  the  old  man  in  the  fable,
tell  us  to  dig  everywhere  for  a  treasure  which  in  reality  was  only
to  consist  in  the  strengthening  of  our  own  minds.  Nay,  he  pointed  to
a  definite  spot ;  he  vigorously  drove  in  the  spade ;  he  upturned  a
shining  handful,  and  he  left  us  as  his  testament,  Dig  here.

We  can  claim  no  monopoly  in  his  spiritual  benefactions ; — but
so  far  as  in  us  lies  we  can  resolve  to  carry  on  our  work  in  his  spirit.
To  do  this,  we  must  remember  that  our  very  raison  d'etre  is  the
extension  of  scientific  method,  of  intellectual  virtues, —  of  curiosity,
candour,  care, — into  regions  where  many  a  current  of  old  tradition,
of  heated  emotion,  even  of  pseudo-scientific  prejudice,  deflects  the  bark
which  should  steer  only  towards  the  cold,  unreachable  pole  of  absolute
truth.  "We  must  recognise  that  we  have  more  in  common  with  those
who  may  criticise  or  attack  our  work  with  competent  diligence  than
with  those  who  may  acclaim  and  exaggerate  it  without  adding  thereto
any  careful  work  of  their  own.  We  must  experiment  unweariedly ;
we  must  continue  to  demolish  fiction  as  well  as  to  accumulate  truth ).
we  must  make  no  terms  with  any  hollow  mysticism,  any  half-conscious


460


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[part


deceit.  If  we  act  thus,  Ave  need  fear  nothing  for  our  adventure.  The
humblest  scouts  who  strive  loyally  to  push  forward  the  frontier  of
Science,  even  though  Science  at  first  disown  them,  are  sure  in  time
to  hear  her  marching  legions  possess  the  unfrequented  way.

Yet  one  thing  more.  To  conform  to  scientific  rule  and  procedure
is  a  task  within  the  power  of  diligent  men.  We  must  not  leave  that
undone  ; — but  if  we  would  follow  in  our  first  President's  steps,  there
is  something  harder  than  that  which  we  must  do.  Sidgwick  was  not
only  cautious,  systematic,  self-controlled,  he  was  also  unresting,  un-
deviating,  inwardly  ardent  to  the  end  ; — ^^possessed,  as  Plato  has  it,
with  that  "  iron  sense  of  truth  and  right "  which  makes  the  least
indication  of  intellectual  as  well  as  of  moral  duty  fall  on  the  heart
as  an  intimate  and  urgent  command : — nay,  which  bids  a  man  place
hope  and  joy  in  those  things  only,  "by  dwelling  on  which  it  is" — -
as  Plato  again  tells  us — "  that  even  God  is  divine."

In  ardour,  I  say,  rather  than  in  circumspection,  in  force  of  will
I'ather  than  in  pondering  hesitancy,  lay  the  true  core  of  Sidgwick's
life.  Even  his  affections — at  first  somewhat  narrowly  bestowed,  some-
what sternly  ordered — widened  and  deepened,  until  the  emotional
nature  became  as  rich  and  strong  as  the  intellectual.  Many  there  are
who  know  that  they  gave  him  of  their  best,  and  that  he  gave  of  his
best  to  them ; — not  a  few,  for  whom  the  Cambridge  gardens  and
avenues  will  seem  still  charged  with  a  sacred  intimacy,  and  haunted
by  a  quiet  voice,  and  fragrant  with  memories  of  some  help  or  guidance
of  long  ago ; — the  I'eason's  slowly-broadening  outlook,  the  heart's  slow-
stablished  calm.

"From  kindly  act  to  kindly  act,"  he  passed,  like  Marcus  Aurelius,
''with  memory  of  God."  Yet  even  the  calmest  existence,  if  sympathies
be  strong,  must  come  at  times  within  the  wind  of  some  tempest  which
has  swept  over  other  lives.  I  have  watched  him  play  his  part  in  a
great  tragedy ;  I  have  seen  with  what  delicate  comprehension,  with
what  inexhaustible  tenderness,  he  could  come  to  the  succour  of  some
innocent,  long-suffering  soul.  I  have  seen  him  also  in  the  joy  of  his
own  complete  and  fitting  guerdon  ;  a  bliss  which  came  to  him  through
the  affections,  and  was  founded  upon  the  deejD  community  of  upward-
striving  souls.  We  who  most  revered  Henry  Sidgwick  desired  for  him
no  earthly  honours.  Those  are  but  trivial  ornaments  for  the  life  of
such  a  man.  We  knew  that  the  Primal  Life  has  so  woven  our  lesser
lives  into  one  shining  fabric, — has  interlinked  our  human  hearts  in  the
unity  of  so  strange  a  joy, — that,  when  once  through  some  predestined
encounter  the  spirit's  kinships  have  been  stablished  for  ever,  there  is
no  need  for  further  questioning  as  to  the  recognition  or  recompense  of
even  the  best  and  wisest  soul.  Already  in  this  life  of  earth  heaven'
prizes  are  bestowed  with  lavish  hand  ;  there  is  no  man's  achievement


XXXIX.]  In  Memory  of  Henry  Sidgwick.


461


of  wisdom  or  virtue  which  one  woman's  reverence  cannot  amply
recognise,  one  love  •  extravagantly  repay.

And  still  through  all  personal  joy  or  sorrow,  loneliness  or  com-
panionship, there  lived  on  in  this  man's  heart  that  impersonal  ardour,
that  cosmic  passion,  which  from  suppression  takes  a  whiter  glow,  and
burns  in  the  penetralia  of  the  spirit,  a  silent  inextinguishable  flame.  I
have  said  above  that  our  life's  bark  should  be  steered  ever  towards  the
icy  pole  of  absolute  truth.  But  there  is  a  more  living,  a  truer  metaphor.
My  most  vivid  memory  of  my  friend  is  as  he  would  recite  to  me — and
I  have  never  known  man  or  woman  who  could  recite  poetxy  like  him —
that  noble  apologue  of  Seekers  which  was  the  central  expression  of  his
inward  life.  I  speak  of  Tennyson's  poem  of  "  The  Voyage,"  that
allegory  of  the  lifelong  quest  of  an  Ideal, — through  all  its  semblances
the  same  unknown  Reality, — whose  pursuit  is  more  entrancing  and
more  imperious  than  any  earthly  joy. •  .; ,. • .  ^

For  one  fair  Visicjn  ever  fled  '  .  '  '

Down  the  waste  waters  day  and  night,  .  ■  ".

And  still  we  follovv'd  wliere  she  led,

In  hope  to  gain  upon  her  flight.
Her  face  was  evermore  unseen.

And  fixt  upon  the  far  sea-line  ;
" But  each  man  murmur'd,  "  0  my  Queen,

I  follow  till  I  make  thee  mine."  "  ~

And  now  we  lost  her,  now  she  gieam'd

Like  Fancy  made  of  golden  air.
Now  nearer  to  the  prow  slie  seem'd

Like  Virtue  firm,  like  Knowledge  fair.
Now  high  on  waves  that  idly  burst,

Like  Heavenly  Hope  she  crown' d  the  sea.
And  now,  the  bloodless  point  reversed.

She  bore  the  blade  of  Liberty.

Nay,  and  the  last  stanza  also  spoke  his  indomitable  resoh^e  ; — and
not  the  less  characteristically  for  the  touch  of  self -mockery  with  which
the  poet  ends  the  song  : —

Again  to  colder  climes  we  came,

For  still  we  follow'd  where  she  led  :
Now  mate  is  })lind  and  captain  lame.

And  half  the  crew  are  sick  or  dead,  '
But  blind  or  lame  or  sick  or  sound.

We  follow  that  which  flies  before  :
We  know  the  merry  world  is  round.

And  we  may  sail  for  evermore.

To  these  hidden  fervours  Fate  vouchsafed  few  occasions  of  outward
enterprise,  of  manifest  heroism. She  left  him  content  with  the  inward


462


F.  W.  H.  Myers.


[part


uplifting,  and  the  unnoted  sacrifice,  and  the  secret  habit  of  honour.
Yet  at  last,  with  strangely  solemn  prevision,  came  to  him  that  last
opportunity  which  no  Fate  can  begrudge  to  us, — the  call  of  slow
creeping  Death.

I  learnt  his  sentence  from  his  own  lips  just  before  he  presided  at  a
meeting  of  the  Synthetic  Society,  at  which  Mr.  Arthur  Balfour  read  a
paper  upon  Prayer.  And  thus  it  came  about  that  my  friend's  last
utterance, — not  public,  indeed,  but  spoken  intimately  to  a  small  com-
pany of  like-minded  men, — was  an  appeal  for  pure  spirituality  in  all
human  supplication ;  a  gentle  summons  to  desire  only  such  things  as
cannot  pass  away.  I  will  not  say  how  his  countenance  showed  then
to  my  eyes ; — eyes  dimmed,  perhaps,  with  secret  knowledge  of  what
so  soon  must  be.

It  was  nearly  three  months  later  that  at  Terling  Place  I  bade  him
— I  will  not  say  a  last — farewell.  Peace  was  there,  without  and
within.  Before  the  open  window  lay  such  a  scene  as  Matthew  Arnold
had  desired  for  his  own  departing  : — -

Bathed  in  the  sacred  dews  of  morn  -  '  ^  ■

The  wide  aerial  landscape  spread  ; —
The  world  that  was  ere  I  was  born,

Tlie  world  tliat  lasts  when  I  am  dead.

Within  was  the  nobly  humble  spirit,  awaiting  the  great  advance-
ment, before  that  summer  prospect  of  august  serenity,  amid  that  group
of  steadfast  loves.  "As  I  look  back  on  my  life," — almost  his  last
words  to  me  were  these, — "  I  seem  to  see  little  but  wasted  hours.  Yet
I  cannot  be  sorry  that  you  should  idealise  me,  if  that  shows  that  I
have  made  my  ideals  in  some  degree  felt.  We  inust  idealise,  or  we
should  cease  to  struggle."

Idealisation  is  not  always  illusion.  That  was  not  illusion,  when
often  with  look  or  word  that  pointed  onward  and  upward  he  made  me
feel,  like  Plotinus  gazing  on  Justice  and  Virtue,  o6're  eampos  ovre  ewos
ouro)  Koka — "  neither  evening  star  nor  morning  is  so  fair."  Thi,t  was
not  illusion,  if  sometimes  the  veil  was  lifted  and  the  reality  was
clear ;  and,  like  Odysseus  when  at  the  end  of  all  his  wanderings  that
Figure  stood  by  him  in  the  way,  I  felt  that  through  those  eyes  shone
something  that  was  not  of  earth,  and  Heavenly  Wisdom  walked
beside  me  with  the  voice  and  semblance  of  my  friend.

IlnXAos  ' Adrjv.ilr],  Kovprj  Aii)S  aLyLo^oLn,
MtvTopi  etSofiivrj  ijfxfv  defxas  r]8e  Kcti  avSrjv.


XXXIX.]  In  Memory  of  Henry  Sidgivick.


463


[At  the  conclusion  of  Mr.  Myers'  address,  whicli  was  delivered  at  a
General  Meeting  of  the  Society  on  ]^ovember  17th,  1900,  Dr.  Oliver
Lodge  communicated  the  following  remarks]  : —

I  will  speak  no  word  of  compliment  concerning  the  utterance  to
which  you  have  just  listened  ;  for  it  has  been  a  soul-stirring  tribute
from  a  friend  to  a  friend,  and  as  such  is  sacred  and  above  outside
appreciation.

Nevertheless,  as  one  proud  to  reckon  himself  in  a  minor  degree  a
friend  of  Henry  Sidgwick,  as  one  who  by  mixing  in  the  world  of
science  has  learned  something  of  the  attributes  of  scientific  men,  I
should  esteem  it  a  privilege  to  be  permitted  to  bear  witness  to  the
eminently  scientific  type  of  mind  which  he  possessed.  Others  will  be
impressed  with  his  liberality,  his  public  spirit,  his  keen  interest  in
education,  his  brilliancy  as  a  man  of  letters  ;  I  will  speak  of  his
scientific  side  alone.  For  clear,  cautious  intellect  and  for  consummate
honesty  I  have  not  known  his  superior.  Physicists  will  understand
what  I  mean  if  I  say  that  for  critical  judgment  and  supreme  candour
he  stands  in  my  mind  on  a  level  with  Lord  Rayleigh.

The  word  honesty  or  candour  sounds  weak  and  commonplace  in
this  connection,  and  in  its  ordinary  acceptation  so  it  is  ;  but  there  are
degrees  of  candour  even  among  honest  and  candid  men,  and  in  Henry
Sidgwick's  case  the  commonplace  aspect  of  the  virtue  di'opped  off  and
something  of  singular  dignity  shone  forth.  Those  who  knew  him  best
may  best  realise  what  I  mean,  may  remember  instances  of  his  analysis
of  a  situation — his  comprehension  of  an  opponent's  attitude  ;  but  even
comparative  strangers  must  have  been  struck  with  it,  for  it  was  a  part
of  his  world-wide  reputation.  Others  might  be  accused  of  letting
their  intelligence  be  governed  by  their  emotions,  their  judgment  be
overpowered  by  their  hopes,  their  scientific  acumen  be  cloaked  by  their
ambition  to  be  of  service,  their  caution  be  melted  by  tlieir  enthusiasm :
— and  the  accusation  might  have  some  grain  of  truth,  why  not  ?  I
have  accused  myself  of  such  momentary  lapses  before  now.

But  such  criticism  of  Henry  Sidgwick  was  never  so  much  as  hinted
at:  no  one,  however  hostile  to  our  inquiry,  ever  imagined  that  Sidgwick
let  his  enthusiasm  warp  his  judgment  or  his  candour  be  coloured  by
his  hopes.  Other  faults  had  to  be  invented  for  him  :  over-coolness,
hyper-caution,  excessive  hesitation,  exaggerations  of  his  great  virtue,
we  have  heard  attributed  to  him  ; — yea,  I  myself  have  occasionally
felt  a  momentary  impatience  because  even  on  level  gi'ound  or  on  an


464


Dr.  Oliver  Lodge.


upward  slope  he  would  keep  a  tight  rein  ;  but  the  impatience  was
momentary ;  and  ample  justification  of  the  precaution  was  soon  per-
ceived in  some  dangerous  dip  close  ahead.

And  of  what  vital  moment  to  our  cause  this  reputation,  this
atti'ibute,  of  his  has  been  !  To  it,  more  perhaps  than  to  any  other
single  influence,  is  the  comparative  success  of  our  movement  due.  Our
researches  are  hardly  yet  recognised  by  oflicial  science,  it  is  true,  but
they  are  far  nearer  recognition  than  ever  before — far  nearer  than  they
were  twenty  years  ago.

And  this  recognition  is  important,  for  in  no  other  way  can  their
continuance  be  ensured  independently  of  the  lives  of  individuals.
Individual  men  of  genius  in  the  past  have  now  and  again  proceeded  as
far  as  we  have  in  actual  experience ;  but  their  influence  has  practically
ended  with  their  lives  ;  and  the  world,  momentarily  awakened,  has
lapsed  once  more  into  psychical  dark  ages.

So  it  may  be  again,  but  so  I  hope  that  again  it  will  not  be.  I
trust  that  now,  at  the  end  of  a  century  of  science,  a  new  science  has
been  born,  and  has  not  been  still-born.  If  it  should  live,  and  should
be  nurtured  by  the  goodwill  and  the  labour  of  generations  of  critical
and  jjainstaking  workers,  that  result  will  have  been  rendered  possible
not  solely  by  the  manifold  powers  and  energies  of  Edmund  Gurney
and,  of  some  still  living,  but  by  those  powers  and  energies  guided
and  curbed  and  directed  by  the  serene  sovereign  wisdom  of  Henry
Sidgwick.


FREDERIC  W.  H.  MYERS.

Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  born  February  6th,  184:3,  died
January  17th,  1901  ;  formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cam-
bridge ;  Honorary  Secretary  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,
1888-1899;  President  of  the  Society,  1900.

Commemorative  addresses  by  Dr.  Oliver  Lodge  and  others
will  be  delivered  at  the  next  General  Meeting,  on  March  8th,
and  afterwards  published  in  the  Proceedivigs.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH,

PAET  XL.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS.

The  108th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  West-
minster Town  Hall  on  Monday,  October  29th,  1900,  at  4  p.m.;  Mr.
H.  Arthur  Smith  in  the  chair.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett  gave  an  account  of  some  of  his  investi-
gations into  the  Divining  Rod,  the  full  report  of  which  appeared  in
Proceedings,  Part  XXXVIII.

The  109th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
November  16th,  1900,  at  4  p.m. ;  the  President,  Mr.  F.  W.  H.
Myers,  in  the  chair.

Mr.  J.  G.  PiDDiNGTON  read  the  paper  by  Dr.  Morton  Prince  on
"  The  Development  and  Genealogy  of  the  Misses  Beauchamp,"  which  is
printed  below.

The  President  gave  an  address  "  In  Memory  of  Henry  Sidgwick,"
which  appeared  in  Proceedings,  Part  XXXIX.

The  110th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  same  place  on  Friday,
December  14th,  1900,  at  8.30  p.m.  ;  Dr.  Lloyd  Tuckey  in  the  chair.

Mrs.  a.  W.  Verrall  read  a  paper  on  "  The  Trance  Phenomena  of
Mrs.  Thompson,"  which  it  is  hoped  will  appear  in  a  future  Part  of
Proceedings.

A  paper  by  the  Rev.  Stanley  L.  Krebs,  entitled,  "  A  Description
of  Some  Trick  Methods  used  by  Miss  Bangs,  of  Chicago,"  was  read  by
Mr.  F.  Podmore.

2  K


■166


Dr.  Morton  Prince.


[part


THE  DEVELOPMENT  AND  GENEALOGY  OF  THE  MISSES

BEAUCHAMP :

A  Preliminary  Report  of  a  Case  op  Multiple  Personality.^

By  Morton  Prince,  M.D.

Physician  for  Nervous  Diseases,  Boston  City  Hospital,  Boston,

Massachusetts.

What  I  propose  to  tell  in  this  paper  is  the  way  in  wliich  the
diiferent  personalities  of  Miss  Beauchamp  became  developed,  and  the
relation  wliich  they  bear  to  each  other  and  the  true  self.

From  a  great  mass  of  phenomena  manifested  by  this  case'^  (aboulia,
negative  hallucination,  crystal  visions,  co-existent  conscious  states,
automatic  writing,  etc.,  etc.)  I  have  selected  these  two  points  as  being,
it  seems  to  me,  the  most  important  involved  in  its  psychology.^

Miss  Beauchamp  is  a  person  with  several  personalities.  She  has  at
least  three,  besides  three  hypnotic  states,  and  during  the  past  two  or
three  years  these  three  persons  have  been  coming  and  going  apparently
without  any  law  or  order.  First  one  and  then  the  other  has  been
bobbing  in  and  bobbing  out,  while  each  one  of  them  claims  to  be  the
real  Miss  Beauchamp,  and  to  have  the  sole  right  to  existence  to  the
exclusion  of  the  others.  Each  has  objected  to  the  habits  and  doings  of
the  others  and  to  their  being  allowed  to  stay  and  to  any  consideration
being  shown  them.  It  has  not  been  easy  to  determine  which  of  two
personalities  at  least,  if  either,  is  the  real  self.  Cases  of  multiple
personality  are  not  very  uncommon,  but,  so  far  as  I  know,  no  attempt
has  been  made  to  determine  the  relation  which  the  different
personalities  bear  to  each  other.  They  have  been  regarded  as  more  or
less  isolated  phenomena,  each  personality  described  with  its  own

1  Read  at  the  International  Congress  of  Psycho' ogy,  Paris,  August,  1900,  under
the  title  ol  The  Problem  of  Multiple  Personalities.

2  Por  a  briefer  account  of  some  of  the  features  of  this  case,  see  Dr.  Morton
Prince's  "Experimental  Study  of  Visions,"  by  P.  W.  H.  Myers,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
Vol.  XIV.,  pp.  366  et  seg.— Ed.

'  I  hope  soon  to  publish  a  complete  and  extended  account  of  the  case  in  all  its
aspects.  I  regret  that  the  necessary  limitations  of  time  will  allow  only  a  superficial
treatment  here.


XL.]  A  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  467


peculiai'ities,  and  the  whole  as  representing  a  succession  of  psychical
events.

This  case  has  been  the  subject  of  a  continuous  study  for  at  least
three  years,  and  has  occupied  hundreds  of  hours  of  time.  Now,  as  the
end  of  this  study  comes,  to  me  at  least  it  seems  simple,  and  it  is
difficult  now  to  realise  the  complications  that  presented  themselves
during  this  long  period  of  time,  when  there  seemed  to  be  no  relation
between  the  one  thing  and  the  other ;  but  the  difficulties  have  been
very  great.

I  have  had  from  time  to  time  a  number  of  theories  regarding  the
case.  These  have  been  mere  working  hypotheses,  which  I  have  had  to
give  up  one  after  another ;  starting  with  one,  it  has  fulfilled  its  part
for  a  while,  and  then  I  have  had  to  give  it  up,  finding  it  completely
inadequate,  until  continued  study  has  given  what  I  believe  to  be  the
real  solution.

When  Miss  Beauchamp  first  came  under  observation  she  was  a
neurasthenic  of  a  very  severe  type.  She  was  a  student  in  one  of  our
colleges,  and  there  received  a  very  good  education.  But  in  consequence
of  her  neurasthenic  condition  it  was  simply  impossible  for  her  to  go  on
with  her  work.  She  was  a  wreck,  I  might  say,  in  body.  In  tempera-
ment she  is  a  person  of  extreme  idealism,  with  a  very  morbid  New
England  conscientiousness,  and  a  great  deal  of  pride  and  reserve,  so
that  she  is  very  unwilling  to  expose  herself  or  her  life  to  anybody's
.scrutiny.  This  has  been  one  great  difficulty  in  the  study  of  her  case.
To  tliis  I  would  add  that  she  is  a  person  of  absolute  honesty  of  thought
and  speech.  I  feel  sure  we  can  rely  upon  and  trust  her  absolutely  and
completely.  I  have  never  known  her,  nor  has  any  one,  I  believe,  known
her, — as  herself,  or  the  person  whom  we  call  herself, — in  any  way
to  indulge  in  any  deception.  Nevertheless,  every  safeguard  has  been
employed  to  guarantee  the  bond  fide  character  of  the  phenomena.

Now  she  came  to  see  me  in  this  neurasthenic  state,  but  I  found
treatment  was  of  almost  no  use.  The  usual  methods  were  employed
with  no  result,  and  it  seemed  as  if  her  case  was  hopeless.  Finally
I  concluded  to  try  hypnotic  suggestions.  She  proved  a  very  good
subject,  and  the  suggestions  produced  at  the  time  rather  brilliant
results.  In  hypnosis  she  went  easily  into  the  somnambulistic  state.
This  somnambulistic  state  came  later  to  be  known  as  B.  II.,  while  the
first  personality  with  whom  I  became  acquainted.  Miss  Beauchamp
herself,  was  known  as  B.  I.  Now  I  used  to  notice  that  as  B.  II.  she
was  continually  rubbing  her  eyes ;  her  hands  were  in  constant  motion,
always  trying  to  get  at  her  eyes.  Still  I  paid  very  little  attention  to
it,  or  placed  very  little  significance  in  this  fact,  merely  attiibuting  it
to  nervousness.  One  day  when  I  hypnotised  her  and  referred  to
something  that  she  had  done  in  a  previous  hypnotic  state, — that  is  to


2  K  2


468


Lt.  Morton  Prince.


[part


say,  something  that  she  had  said  or  done  in  a  previous  state  when
I  supjDOsed  she  was  B.  II., — she  denied  all  knowledge  of  it  and  said  it
was  not  so.  This  surprised  me,  and  I  attributed  the  denial  at  first  to
an  attempt  at  deception.  I  waked  her  up  and  put  her  to  sleep  again,
and  this  time  she  admitted  what  she  had  previously  denied.  This
rathei'  puzzled  me,  and  I  made  various  tests  to  deteimine  her  honesty
in  the  matter.  Tire  next  time  I  hypnotised  her  she  denied  what  she
had  previously  admitted,  and  so  it  went  on,  denying  and  then
admitting,  until  it  dawned  upon  me  that  I  was  dealing  with  an
entirely  different  personality,  and  this  proved  to  be  the  case.  It
turned  out  that  when  she  went  into  the  state  of  which  she  later  denied
the  facts,  she  was  an  entirely  distinct  and  separate  person.  This  third
personality,  which  then  developed,  came  to  be  known  as  B.  III.  We
had  then  three  mental  states,  B.  I.,  B.  II.,  and  B.  III.

B.  I.  knew  nothing  of  the  others.  B.  II.  knew  B.  I.,  but  no  more.
B.  III.  knew  both  B.  I.  and  B.  II.  Thus  far  there  was  nothing  very
unusual.

Now  B.  III.  has  proved  to  be  one  of  the  most  interesting  of  all
the  personalities  that  have  developed  in  the  case.  In  one  respect  it  is
one  of  the  most  remarkable  personalities,  I  think,  that  has  ever  been
exhibited  in  any  of  these  cases  of  multiple  personality,  as  will,  I  think,
presently  appear.  B.  III.,  like  B.  II.,  was  constantly  rubbing  her
eyes,  so  that  I  was  frequently  compelled  to  hold  her  hands  by  force  to
prevent  her  from  doing  so.  "When  asked  why  she  did  this,  she  said
she  wished  to  get  her  ej^es  opened,  and  it  turned  out  afterwards  that  it
was  she  who  was  rubbing  the  eyes  of  B.  II.  in  the  earlier  times.  At
this  time  I  prevented  B.  III.  from  opening  her  eyes  for  the  reason  that
I  feared  that,  if  she  got  her  eyes  opened  and  was  thereby  able  to  add
the  visual  images  of  her  surroundings  to  her  mental  life  as  B.  III.,
these  same  images  of  her  surroundings  which  she  would  also  have,  of
course,  when  she  was  B.  I.,  would  by  force  of  the  association  awaken
all  her  mental  associations  as  B.  III.,  and  that,  in  consequence,  B.  III.
spontaneously  would  be  constantly  coming  into  existence  of  her  own
accord.  This  afterwards  proved  to  be  the  case.  B.  III.  always
insisted  upon  having  her  ej-es  opened,  complaining  that  she  wished  to
see,  and  had  a  "right  to  see."  One  day,  some  time  after  this,  when
she  was  at  home,  owing  to  some  nervous  excitement,  she  was  thrown
into  the  condition  of  B.  III.,  and  then,  I  not  being  there  to  pre-
vent it,  she  rubbed  her  eyes  until  she  got  them  opened,  and  from
that  time  to  this  she  (B.  III.)  has  had  a  spontaneous  and  independent
existence.

This  personality  dates  her  whole  independent  existence  from  this
day,  and  she  always  refers  to  events  as  being  "before"  or  "after  she
got  her  eyes  opened." That  is  the  central  event  in  her  life,  just  as


XL.]


A  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.


469


mothers  date  periods  before  or  after  the  birth  of  a  child.  jSTow  this
personalitj^  came  afterwards  to  be  known  as  Sally  Beauchamp.  (The
name  Beauchamp  has  been  adopted  in  this  account  for  all  the  person-
alities.) She  took  the  name  for  fun  one  day,  a  name  that  she  got  out
of  some  book,  and  by  that  name  she  has  been  known  ever  since.  In
character  she  differs  very  remarkably  from  B.  I.  I  would  say  here
that  B.  I.  is  a  very  serious-minded  person,  fond  of  books  and  study,  of
a  religious  turn  of  mind,  and  possesses  a  very  morbid  conscientious-
ness. She  has  a  great  sense  of  responsibility  in  life,  and  with  those
who  know  her  trouble  is  rather  sad  and  depressed  in  her  general
aspect,  the  latter  the  result  of  the  general  troubles  and  tiials  of  her
life.  Sally,  on  the  other  hand,  is  full  of  fun,  does  not  worry  about
anything ;  all  life  is  one  great  joke  to  her ;  she  hates  books,  loves  fun
and  amusement,  does  not  like  serious  things,  hates  church, — in  fact  is
thoroughly  childlike  in  every  way.  She  is  a  child  of  nature.  She  is  not
as  well  educated  as  is  Miss  Beauchamp,  although  she  reads  and  writes
English  well ;  yet  she  complains  constantly  that  she  cannot  express
herself  easily  in  writing,  but  she  does  it  quite  well  all  the  same.  She
cannot  read  French  or  any  of  the  foreign  languages  whicli  ^liss  Beau-
champ knows,  and  she  cannot  write  shorthand  ;  in  short  lacks  a  great
many  of  the  educational  accomplishments  which  the  othei-  character
possesses.  She  insists,  although  of  this  I  have  no  absolute  proof,  that
she  never  sleeps,  and  that  she  is  always  awake  while  ]Miss  Beauchamp
is  asleep.  I  believe  it  to  be  ti'ue.  Then  JMiss  B.  is  a  neurasthenic,
Sally  is  perfectly  well.  She  is  never  fatigued  and  never  suffers  pain.
During  the  first  year  Sally  and  Miss  Beauchamp  used  to  come  and  go
in  succession.  At  first  whenever  B.  I.  became  fatigued  or  upset  from
any  cause,  Sally  was  likely  to  come.  The  periods  during  which  Sally
was  in  existence  might  be  any  time  from  a  few  minutes  to  several
hours.  Later  these  periods  became  prolonged  to  several  days.  It
must  not  be  forgotten  that  though  Miss  Beauchamp  knows  nothing
of  Sally,  Sally,  when  not  in  the  fiesh,  is  conscious  of  all  Miss  Beau-
champ's  thoughts  and  doings,  and  the  latter  could  hide  nothing  from
her.  Curiously  enough,  Sally  took  an  intense  dislike  to  B.  I.  She
actually  hated  lT:'r.  She  used  to  say  to  me,  "  Why,  I  hate  her.  Dr.
Prince  '  "  and  there  was  no  length  to  which  Sally  would  not  go  to
cause  her  anno3'H.nce.  She  would  play  every  kind  of  prank  on  her  to
make  her  miserable.  She  tormented  her  to  a  degree  almost  incredible.
While  Sally  would  never  do  anything  to  make  any  one  else  unhappy,
she  was  absolutely  remorseless  in  the  way  she  tormented  Miss  Beau-
champ by  practical  jokes  and  by  playing  upon  her  sensibilities.  For
example,  I  will  give  a  few  illustrations.  If  there  is  one  thing  which
Miss  Beauchamp  has  a  perfect  horror  of,  it  is  snakes  and  spidei'S.
They  throw  her  into  a  condition  of  terror. One  day  Sally  went


470


Dr.  Morton  Prince.


[part


out  into  the  country  and  collected  some  snakes  and  spiders  and
put  them  into  a  little  box.  She  brought  them  home  and  did  them
up  in  a  little  package,  and  addressed  them  to  Miss  Beauchamp,  and
when  B.  I.  opened  the  package  they  ran  out  and  about  the  room  and
nearly  sent  her  into  fits.  In  order  to  get  rid  of  them  she  had  to
handle  them,  which  added  to  her  terror.  Another  joke  was  to  take
Miss  Beauchamp  out  into  the  country  when  she  was  very  tired,  and  in
an  unfit  condition  to  walk  ;  that  is,  Sally  would  take  a  car  and  go  out
six  or  seven  miles  into  the  country  to  some  retired  place,  and  wake  up
Miss  Beauchamp,  who  would  find  herself  far  out  in  the  country  with
no  means  of  getting  home,  no  money  in  her  pocket,  and  nothing  for  it
but  to  walk.  She  had  to  beg  rides  when  she  could  from  j^assing
waggons,  and  come  back  tired,  worn  out,  used  up  for  a  week.

A  great  friend  of  Miss  Beauchamp,  to  whom  she  felt  under  strong
obligations,  had  asked  her  to  knit  a  baby's  blanket.  She  worked  on
that  ])lanket  for  neai'ly  a  year  ;  as  fast  as  she  would  get  it  near  com-
pletion, Sally  would  unravel  it,  and  then,  like  Sisyphus,  she  would  have
to  begin  the  task  again,  and  regularly  every  time  Sally  would  pull  the
whole  thing  to  pieces.  Finally  she  came  to  herself  one  day  and  found
herself  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  room  tied  up  in  a  perfect
network  and  snarl  of  worsted  yarn  ;  it  was  wound  round  the  pictures
and  then  round  and  round  the  furniture,  the  bed,  the  chairs,  herself,
and  she  had  to  cut  it  to  get  out  of  the  snarl.  Another  favourite  joke
of  Sally's  was  to  make  Miss  Beauchamp  lie.  She  had  the  power  when
she  pleased,  of  producing  aboulia,  and  also  of  making  B.  I.  say  and  do
things  against  her  will ;  for  after  a  fashion  she  can  get  control  of  her
arms  and  legs,  and  of  her  tongue.

Sally  made  her  tell  most  frightful  fibs.  For  instance,  when  asked
who  lived  in  a  small  squalid  little  house  at  the  side  of  the  road,  she
said  "  Mrs.  J.  G.,"  a  verj^  prominent  lady  in  society,  and  very  wealthy.
"  Why,  I  thought  she  was  rich  !  "  "  Oh,  yes,  but  she  has  lost  all  her
money  now."  Miss  Beauchamp  would  be  mortified  at  hearing  herself  tell
these  astounding  bare-faced  fibs,  which  her  listener  must  know  were  fibs,
but  she  could  not  help  it.  Again,  for  a  time  at  least,  Sally  put  B.  I.  on
an  allowance  of  five  cents  a  day.  She  would  find  the  money  waiting
for  her  in  the  morning  on  the  table  with  a  note  saying  that  it  was  her
allowance  for  the  day  and  she  could  not  spend  more.  Sally  took  away
her  postage  stamps,  and  if  Miss  Beauchamp  wrote  a  letter  it  had  first
to  be  exhibited  to  Sally,  and  if  Sally  approved  it,  it  was  posted ;  if  not,
it  did  not  go,  and  that  was  the  end  of  it.  Miss  Beauchamp  is  a  person
with  a  great  sense  of  dignity,  and  dislikes  anything  that  smacks  of  a
lack  of  decorum  or  of  familiarity.  Sallj-  had  a  waj'^  of  punishing  her
by  making  her  sit  on  a  chair  with  her  feet  upon  the  mantelpiece.
B.  I.  could  not  take  her  feet  down,  and  was  mortified  to  think  she  had


XL.]


A  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.


471


to  sit  that  way.  Sally  carries  on  a  correspondence  with  IVIiss
IBeauchamp,  writes  letters  to  her  pointing  out  all  the  weak  points  of  her
character,  dwelling  on  all  the  little  slips  and  foibles  of  her  mind,  telling
her  all  the  reckless  acts  and  secret  thoughts,  indeed,  everything  she  has
done  that  won't  bear  criticism.  In  fact,  when  slie  has  a  chance  to
stick  a  pin  into  her,  she  does  it.  When  Miss  Beaucliamp  wakes  in  the
morning,  she  will  find  pinned  up  on  the  wall  of  tlie  room  verses  con-
taining all  sorts  of  personal  allusions,  letters  calling  her  names,  telling-
fictitious  things  that  people  have  said  about  her ;  in  short,  doing
everything  imaginable  to  make  her  life  miserable.  Nevertheless,  at
times  when  she  goes  too  far,  Sally  has  got  frightened,  and  then  she
would  write  me  a  letter  and  ask  for  help,  saying  that  she  "  could  not
do  anything  with  Miss  Beauchamp,  and  I  really  must  help  her."

One  of  the  most  interesting  problems  is,  who  is  Sally  1  My  original
theory  about  Sally  was  that  she  represented  an  earlier  period  of  B.I.'s
life.  Fi'om  Sally's  childlike  peculiarities,  which  gave  the  impression  of
a  girl  of  about  thirteen  or  fourteen,  in  connection  with  cei'tain  other
evidences  of  a  more  mature  mind,  I  arrived  at  this  conclusion,  and
thought  that  probably  some  accident  had  happened  in  her  life  which
had  split  her  off  from  the  main  consciousness,  and  that  Sally  was  a
reversion  to  tliat  early  period  ]  but  this  theory  I  was  obliged  later  to
give  up.  Sally  as  an  individuality  goes  much  further  back  than  this  ;
she  goes  back  to  early  infancy,  and  has  gi'own  with  the  growth  of  Miss
Beauchamp.  The  theory  which  finally,  I  think,  has  been  demonstrated,
is  that  Sally  represents  the  subliminal  consciousness.

Although  B.  I.  knows  nothing  of  Sally,  Sail)'-  not  only  is  conscious
of  Miss  Beauchamp's  thoughts  at  the  moment  they  arise,  but  she  is
capable,  as  I  have  said,  of  controlling  her  thoughts  and  her  arms  and
legs  and  tongue  to  a  certain  extent.  Sally  can  produce  positive  and
negative  hallucination  in  B.  I.  and  frequently  does  so  for  a  practical
joke.  During  the  times  when  Salljr  is  in  existence,  B.  I.  is, — as  Sally
puts  it, — "  dead,"  and  these  times  represent  complete  gaps  in  Miss
Beauchamp's  memory,  and  she  has  no  knowledge  of  them  whatever.
"  What  becomes  of  her  1 "  Sally  frequently  asks.  Sally  is  never  "  dead."
Her  memory  is  continuous ;  there  are  no  gaps  in  it.  She  not  only
knows, — simultaneously,  as  I  said, — all  of  B.  I.'s  thoughts  and  emotions
and  sensations,  but  more  than  that; — Sally's  thoughts  ai'e  entirely
distinct  from  and  independent  of  B.  I.'s  thoughts,  with  which  they  are
co-existent,  but  not  identical.  B.  I.'s  thoughts  are  not  Sally's  thoughts.
Sally's  thoughts  co-exist  alongside  of  and  simultaneously  Avitli  B.  I.'s  ;
but  Sally's  mental  life  is  made  up  of  entirely  different  and  separate
thoughts  and  feelings  fi'om  B.  I.'s,  so  that  Sally  will  have  a  train  of
thought  at  the  same  time  with  B.  I.,  of  an  entirely  diiferent  nature.
All  this  is  also  true  of  the  relation  of  Sally's  mind  to  that  of  the  third


472


Dr.  Morton  Prince.


[part


personality — B.  IV. — who  came  later,  excepting  that  Sally  does  not
know  B.  IV. 's  thoughts.  While  either  Miss  B.  I.  or  IV.  is  thinking
and  feeling  one  thing, — is  depressed  and  self-reproachful,  for  example,—
Sally  is  feeling  gay  and  indifferent  and  enjoying  Miss  B.'s  discomfiture
and  perhaps  planning  some  amusement  distasteful  to  her.

Speak  to  either  B.  I.  or  B.  IV.  and  Sally  hears  you.  Say  something
that  Sally  alone  understands,  and  you  see  her  smile.  She  is  as  much
alive  as  the  other  consciousness.  The  only  difference  is  this,  that  her
consciousness  for  the  time  being  is  not  in  connection  with  the  body.
Then  Sally  remembers  things  in  the  past  that  B.  I.  knows  nothing
about  at  all,  things  that  she  apparently  never  was  conscious  of,  or
which  she  has  completely  forgotten.  The  most  remarkable  part  of
Sally's  personality,  I  think,  is  that  she  has  been  able  to  write  out  for
me  her  autobiography,  beginning  with  the  time  when  she  was  in  her
cradle,  which  she  remembers.  She  actually  describes  her  own  thoughts
and  feelings  as  distinct  from  B.  I.'s  all  through  her  childhood,  up  to
and  including  the  present  time ;  although,  as  she  says,  she  never  got  an
independent  existence  until  she  "got  her  eyes  open."  She  remembers
her  cradle,  draws  a  picture  of  the  bars  in  its  sides,  and  remembers  what
she,  as  distinct  from  Miss  Beauchamp,  tliought  at  the  time  when  she
was  learning  to  walk.  Then  B.  I.  was  frightened  and  wanted  to  go
back,  but  Sally  was  not  at  all  frightened  and  wanted  to  go  ahead.  She
describes  B.  I.  as  having  had  a  butterfly  mind  as  contrasted  with  her
own.  She,  as  a  small  child,  disliked  the  things  that  B.  I.  liked  and
vice  versa.  She  describes  her  school  life,  her  own  feelings  when  B.  I
did  things,  and  the  different  sensations  of  the  two  selves  when,  for
example,  B.  I.  was  punished  and  felt  badly,  and  she  herself  was
entirely  indifferent  and  without  remorse.  Thus  I  have  been  able  to
get  a7i  actual  autobiograjjhy  of  a  subliminal  consciousness,  in  which  are
described  the  contemporaneous  and  contrasted  merited  lives  of  tivo
consciousnesses,  the  siMiyninal  and  the  doyyiinant,  from  early  infancy  to
adult  life.  In  this  Sally  has  described  for  me  various  scenes  and
incidents  which  occurred  and  which  she  saw  during  her  early  life,  but
of  which  Miss  Beauchamp  is  entirely  ignorant.  These  usually  represent
scenes  which  occurred  while  B.  I.  was  absorbed  in  thought,  but  which
Sally  as  a  subliminal  noticed.  Taking  all  this  into  consideration, —
taking  the  present  relations  of  Sally's  thoughts  to  Miss  Beauchamp's
thought,  and  many  other  facts,  like  automatic  writing,  which  Sally
performs  with  ease,  and  uses  for  purposes  of  correspondence, — I  think
we  are  safe  in  saying  that  Sally  is  the  stMiminal  consciousness,  which
has  become  highly  developed  and  organised  and  obtained  finally  an
independent  existence,  a.nd  led  an  individual  life  of  its  own.

After  Sally's  escape  from  her  mental  Bastille,  the  two  went  on
leading  their  independent  lives,  coming  and  going  for  a  year  or  two.


XL.]


A  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.


473


until  one  day,  June  7th,  1899,  an  event  occurred  which  had  an  influence
upon  the  whole  history  of  this  case.  To  understand  it,  it  is  necessary
to  go  back  six  years,  to  the  year  1893.  It  appea;red  that  in  1893  Miss
Beauchamp  was  in  a  hospital  in  a  neiglibouring  city,  call  it  Provi-
dence. She  had  been  taken  with  the  fancy  that  she  would  like  to  be  a
nurse  (it  was  the  passion  of  her  life),  and  in  a  fit  of  idealism  she
entered  the  hospital.  One  night  she  was  sitting  in  her  room  with  a
friend,  a  Miss  L.,  when,  upon  looking  up,  she  was  startled  to  see  a  face  in
the  window.  It  was  the  face  of  an  old  friend  of  hers,  a  Mr.  "Jones,"  as
we  have  agreed  to  call  him,  whom  she  had  known  ever  since  she  was  a
small  girl,  and  who  had  been  a  sort  of  preceptor  to  her.  At  first  she
thought  it  was  a  hallucination,  but  she  presently  saw  that  it  was  a  real
person.  She  then  hastily  got  her  friend  out  of  the  room,  and  she
went  downstairs  and  out  of  the  side  door,  where  this  person  met  her.
It  appeared  that  this  person  was  in  Providence  on  his  way  to  New
.  York,  had  wandered  to  the  hospital,  and  seeing  the  ladder  had  climbed
it  for  a  joke,  and  looked  into  the  window.  Outside  the  hospital  door  an
exciting  conversation  occuri'ed.  It  was  to  her  of  an  intensely  disturbing
nature,  and  gave  her  a  tremendous  sliock.  Perhaps  I  should  say  here, —
as  I  have  told  so  much  of  the  story, — that  it  was  the  kind  of  thing  that
upon  the  ordinary  person  would  not  have  had  much  influence,  but  with
her  sensitive  and  idealistic  nature  she  exaggerated  it  and  gave  it  an
intensity  that  an  ordinary  person  would  not  have  given  to  it.  At  any
rate,  it  did  give  her  a  violent  shock.  The  surroundings,  too,  were
dramatic.  It  was  night,  and  pitch  dark,  but  a  storm  was  coming  up,
and  great  peals  of  thunder  and  flashes  of  lightning  heightened  the
emotional  effect.  It  was  only  by  these  flashes  that  she  saw  her
companion.  From  that  time  she  was  changed.  She  went  out  and
walked  the  fields  at  night  by  the  hour ;  she  became  nervous,  excitable
and  neurasthenic,  all  her  peculiarities  became  very  much  exaggerated
and  her  character  changed ;  she  became  unstable,  developed  aboulia,
and,  in  other  words,  changed  into  B.  I.  So  that  B.  I., — or,  more
correctly.  Miss  Beauchamp  modified  into  B.  I. — dates  from  the
time  of  that  scene  outside  the  hospital  that  night.  Sally,  too,  who
knows  the  inmost  soul  of  Miss  Beauchamp,  says  she  changed  after
that  night.

So  it  follows  that  the  Miss  Beauchamp  wlio  has  been  the  object  of
this  study,  has  been  educated  in  college,  and  been  the  solicitude  of
many  friends,  is  not  properly  speaking  the  original  Miss  B.,  but  a
modified  personality  rightfully  designated  as  B.  I.

On  the  afternoon  of  June  7th,  1899,  six  years  later.  Miss
Beauchamp  was  in  my  ofiice.  She  was  not  in  any  way  noticeably
different  from  her  usual  condition.  After  leaving  the  office  she  went
to  the  public  library,  as  was  her  custom. In  the  library  she  met


474


Br.  -Morton  Prince.


[PAKT


a  messenger,  who  quite  unexpectedly  brought  her  a  letter,  and  this
letter  was  from  the  person  whom  we  have  agreed  to  call  Jones.  The
letter  was  couched  in  almost  the  same  language  as  was  his  conversation
at  the  time  of  the  hospital  incident  in  1893.  It  threw  her  into  a  verj'
highl}^  excited  state,  and  she  actually  saw  a  vision ; — the  scene  outside
the  hosjjital  with  herself  and  Jones  as  the  actors,  and  actually  saw
herself  and  him,  and  saw  the  flashes  of  lightning  and  heard  the
thunder,  and  through  it  all  his  voice.  Under  the  influence  of  this
excitement  she  went  to  the  reading  room,  and  there  had  an  illusion.
In  the  evening  newspaper  she  saw  my  name  printed  in  large  letters  in
the  headlines,  in  place  of  that  which  was  really  printed,  the  name  of  a
relative  of  mine  who  had  died  that  morning.  Still  further  upset  by
this,  she  made  her  way  home.  It  was  not  until  many  months  after  this
that  I  learned  of  this  scene,  or  of  the  hospital  episode  in  1893,  so  that
it  was  long  before  I  found  the  key  to  the  sequel.  (As  will  appear,  if  I
had  known  of  it  all,  I  should  have  been  saved  many  hours  and  much
labour  in  the  attempt  to  understand  the  later  psychical  developments.)
All  I  knew  then  was  this.  After  returning  from  the  library,  Miss
Beauchamp  was  in  sucli  a  nervous  state  that  I  was  soon  sent  for.  On
arrival  I  found  her  in  a  very  nervous,  highly  excited  condition.  She
was  unable  to  sit  still ;  her  limbs  were  in  more  or  less  constant  motion.
Her  condition  was  one  that  I  had  frequently  seen  after  she  had  been
exposed  to  emotional  influences.  Presently  she  changed  completely.
She  became  quiet,  perfectly  natural,  talked  affably,  was  very  sociable,
and,  in  fact,  seemed  to  be  in  a  condition  in  which  I  had  never  seen  her
before, — more  natural  in  many  ways  than  I  had  ever  seen  her,  quiet
and  calm,  and  apparently  in  a  perfectly  healthy  state  of  body  and
mind  ;  but,  to  my  surprise,  I  found  that  she  did  not  know  me.  She
said  I  was  not  Dr.  Prince,  and  when  I  insisted  that  I  was,  she  laughed
and  took  it  just  as  if  I  was  talking  nonsense  to  her, — if  I  insisted  that
I  was,  well,  I  could  have  it  so,  but  she  knew  I  wasn't.  She  said  that
I  was  perfectly  reckless  in  coming,  that  I  ought  not  to  have  come,  and
then  I  discovered  that  she  was  under  the  impression,  in  fact  insisted,
that  I  had  come  in  through  the  window.  As  we  were  in  the  fourth
stoiy,  it  was  jjlain  that  she  was  also  under  an  illusion  as  to  the  place
where  we  Avere.  The  contrast  of  these  illusions  with  her  normality
in  other  respects  was  striking.  The  scene  lasted  some  little  time.
Finally  I  showed  her  my  name  in  my  watch.  She  underwent  a  slight
mental  shock.  A  change  came  over  her.  She  passed  through  a  brief
period  of  confusion  and  then  became  herself  again,  but  without  any  recol-
lection of  what  had  occurred.  The  essential  points  I  would  emphasise
are  that, — besides  appearing  perfectly  normal, — she  insisted  that  I
was  Jones,  imagined  we  were  sonaewhere  else,  that  I  had  come  in
through  the  window,  that  I  ran  great  lisks  in  coming  because  of  the


XL.]


A  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.


475


publicity,  that  I  ought  not  to  have  done  it,  and  that  it  was  a  foolish
thing  to  have  done.  Being  ignorant  of  the  preceding  events  j  ust  naii-ated,
it  was  not  clear  at  first  whether  this  was  simply  Miss  B.  under  an
illusion,  or  whether  it  was  a  new  personality  similarly  alFected.

To  cut  a  long  story  short  (for  it  took  a  long  time  to  unravel  the
mystery),  it  turned  out  to  be  a  new  personality,  who  had  at  this  moment
waked  up,  and  had  gone  back  six  years  in  her  life,  and  now  imagined
it  was  the  same  night  and  she  was  in  the  same  room  in  the  hospital
where  she  had  seen  that  face  in  the  window  in  1893.  The  impetus  to
her  awakening  had  evidently  been  given  by  the  shock  of  the  letter  and
the  vision  in  the  library  a  few  hours  before  ;  awakening  she  went
on  with  her  life  where  she  had  left  off,  with  the  last  vestige  of  memory,
which  was  seeing  Jones  at  the  window.  Under  the  influence  of  this
suggestion  (she  and  B.  I.  are  very  suggestible)  she  mistook  me  for
Jones,  and,  having  seen  him,  as  she  thought,  a  moment  before  (really
six  years  pi'eviously)  at  the  window,  inferred  I  had  entered  by  that
means.  The  impropriety  and  unwisdom  of  it  all  was  a  natural  thought.
This  new  personality  became  known  in  these  studies  as  B.  IV.

The  next  time  I  saw  B.  IV.  she  was  free  from  all  illusion,  but  I
Avas  struck  by  her  formal  and  distant  attitude.  It  soon  transpired  that
she  did  not  know  me  or  the  consulting  room,  where  B.  I.  had  been
time  and  again.  In  fact  she  knew  absolutely  nothing  of  the  events  of
the  past  six  years,  knew  nothing  of  B.  I.'s  life  in  college,  knew  nothing
of  the  friends  whom  B.  I.  had  made  during  these  years,  knew  nothing  of
me,  knew  nothing  of  any  of  these  events  whatsoever,  nor  later,  after  she
was  domiciled  as  one  of  the  Beauchamp  family,  did  she  know  anything
about  the  present  times  when  B.  I.  or  Sally  was  present.  From  this  it
follows  that  she  knew,  and  continued  to  know,  nothing  of  either  B.  I.
or  Sally,  or  that  there  ever  were  such  personalities.

It  took  her  a  long  time  to  accommodate  herself  to  the  new  order  of
things  and  to  take  up  the  thread  of  events.  Like  Rip  Van  Winkle,
she  did  not  know  that  the  world  had  moved  since  she  went  to  sleep.
Sally,  who  was  invaluable  as  an  informer,  used  to  report  that  she
seemed  to  live  in  the  past  and  used  to  speak  to  people  as  if  it  was  still
1893.  So  the  family  now  was  increased  by  one,  and  there  were  three
who  kept  changing  with  one  another.

B.  IV.  is  a  very  different  character  from  either  Sally  or  Miss
Beauchamp.  A  study  of  the  different  habits  of  thoughts,  tastes  and
emotions  of  these  three  people  has  thrown,  I  believe,  much  light  upon
the  psychology  of  character,  but  in  this  report  I  must  limit  myself  to  a
mere  outline  of  events.  There  were,  of  course,  gaps  in  the  memory  of
B.  IV.  (as  with  B.  I.)  corresponding  to  the  time  of  the  existence  of  the
other  two  personalities.  But  this  B.  IV.  was  never  willing  to  admit.
Unlike  the  others,  she  is  ii'ritable  and  quick-tempered,  and  resented  a.s


476


Dr.  Morton  Prince.


[part


an  impertinence — especially  as  she  regarded  most  of  us  as  strangers —
any  inquiry  into  her  piivate  thoughts  and  affairs,  and  above  all  any
interference  with  her  habits  of  life  and  private  conduct.  Though
anxious  to  know,  she  was  not  willing  to  ask  about  what  had  occurred
in  the  gaps  when  the  others  were  in  the  flesh,  and  so  was  in  the  habit
of  inferring  and  guessing,  at  Avhich  she  was  very  skilful.  She  was,  as
stated,  even  unwilling  for  a  long  time  to  admit  that  there  ^vere  gaps,
but  it  was  easy  to  convict  her  here  by  a  few  questions.  Aftei'  fibbing
and  inferring  and  guessing,  she  would  break  down  and  confess  she  did
not  know,  which  was  the  fact.

Now,  Sally,  although  her  mental  life  is  also  continuous  during  that
of  B.  IV.  (as  with  B.  I.)  an although  she  knows  everything  B.  IV.
does  at  the  time  she  does  it,  hears  what  she  says,  reads  what  she  writes,
and  sees  what  she  does,  nt^vertheless  Sally  does  not  know  B.  IV.'s
thought.'^.  Hei'ein  is  a  very  interesting  psychological  distinction
between  Sallj^'s  relation  to  B.  I.  and  to  B.  IV.  She  knows  B.  I.'s
inmost  soul,  she  can  only  'nfer  B.  IV.'s  thoughts  from  what  she  says
and  does.  But  Sally  studied  her  closely  and  soon  discovered  for  herself
that  B.  IV.  knew  nothing  of  the  past  six  years,  but  was  always
secretly  trying  to  obtain  inft  r  mation,  and  guessing.  Sally,  in  her
astonishment,  used  to  say  "  Why,  she  doesn't  know  anything,  she  is
always  fishing  and  guessing."  For  this  reason,  Sally,  until  she  leai-ned
to  know  B.  IV.  better,  had  a  great  contempt  for  her,  and  dubbed  her
the  "  Idiot,"  and  whenever  after  this  she  sjjoke  of  her,  it  was  as  the
"Idiot."  From  this  time  on,  Sally  transferred  her  hatred  from  B.  I.  to
the  "  Idiot."  She  came  to  regard  B.  I.  as  rather  a  poor  sort  of  creature
and  hardly  wortliy  of  her  consideration  anyway,  and  let  her  alone ;
but  B.  IV.  became  the  object  of  her  attacks.  But  B.  IV.  is  more
than  a  match  for  Sally,  who  is  really  afraid  of  her.  They  quarrel  like
cats  and  dogs.  One  of  the  most  curious  and  puzzling  things  was  the
cause  of  Sally's  hatred  of  B.  I.  It  was  unmitigated  jealousy.  She
was  jealous  of  the  attentions  B.  I.  received,  jealous  of  the  fact  that
people  liked  B.  I.  and  wanted  to  keep  her  in  existence  instead  of
herself,  and  therefore — difficult  as  it  is  to  conceive  of  a  person
jealous  of  herself — Sally  was  immensely  jealous  of  herself.

I  have  said  that  B.  IV.'s  memory  ceases  at  Providence  with
seeing  the  face  in  the  window.  She  can  tell  you  nothing  after  that,
and  knows  nothing  of  tlie  scene  outside  the  door.  Both  B.  I.  and
Sally  recall  and  describe  similarly  that  scene,  but  the  last  thing  B.  IV.
remembers  is  the  face  at  the  window  a  few  minutes  before. ^  As  one
method  of  corroboration  of  these  events,  I  produced  in  B.  IV.  a  crystal

1  The  lack  of  this  knowledge  was  afterwards  the  cause  of  much  trouble  to  B.  IV.,
which  was  strong  evidence  of  her  ignorance.


XL.]


A  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.


477


vision.  1  I  gave  her  a  glass  globe  to  look  at,  and  told  hei*  to  think  of
Providence.  As  she  looked  into  the  glass  she  was  horrified  to  see  there
the  scene  that  took  place  outside  the  hospital  door.  She  declared  with
much  excitement  that  it  was  not  true,  that  it  never  had  occurred,  and
this  she  repeated  again  and  again,  and  remonstrated  against  my
believing  it.  Like  B.  I.  in  the  Library,  she  saw  herself  by  flashes  of
lightning  standing  by  the  door  with  Jones.  She  saw  his  excited  manner,
and  heard  his  voice  between  the  peals  of  thunder.  She  saw  it  all  as  a
vision,  just  as  it  occurred.  She  was  startled  by  what  she  saw  and
experienced  over  again  all  the  emotion  of  the  original  scene.

I  am  obliged  to  omit  all  reference  to  the  extraordinary  misadventures
and  misunderstandings  of  these  three  personalities  brought  about  in  part
by  the  ignorance  of  B.  I.  and  B.  IV.  of  each  other,  and  the  consequent
conflict  of  their  plans  and  doings,  in  part  by  the  difference  of  the
characters  of  all  three,  and  in  part  by  the  mischievousness  of  Sally,
who  concocted  a  little  Midsummer  Night's  Dream  of  her  own,  and  as
Puck  (with  a  little  dash  of  lago)  played  her  pranks  upon  both.  Some
of  these  adventures  were  laughable  and  some  were  tragic,  as  when  in
despair  Miss  B.  I.  tried  to  commit  suicide  by  going  to  bed  with  the
illuminating  gas  turned  on,  and  Sally  came,  jumped  out  of  bed,
opened  the  window,  turned  off  the  gas,  and  saved  Miss  Beauchamp's
life.

Por  some  time  after  B.  IV. 's  appearance  I  adopted  the  theory  that
she  was  the  real  and  original  Miss  Beauchamp,  who  had  gone  to  sleep
in  1893  and  had  now  become  awakened.  It  followed  from  this  that
Miss  Beauchamp  No.  1,  whom  we  had  all  learned  to  know  and  respect,
who  had  been  educated  and  made  many  friends,  was  nothing  but  a
somnambulistic  person,  and  had  really  no  right  to  existence.  The
situation  was  a  tragic  one  :  a  cure  meant  the  annihilation  of  Miss
Beauchamp,  her  psychical  murder  aird  disappearance  as  a  person,  as
much  as  if  she  were  condemned  to  physical  death.  Under  this  theory
I  sought  to  keep  B.  IV.  and  annihilate  B.  I.

When  I  came  to  know  B.  IV.  better,  however,  it  became  evident
that  this  theory  was  incorrect.  However  normal  she  appeared  to  be
and  however  much  more  like  the  original  1893  Miss  Beauchamp  than
B.  I.  she  was  in  some  ways,  in  other  respects  she  was  less  like  her.
Morally  and  intellectually  she  lacks  many  qualities.  Por  instance,
unlike  the  original,  she  is  quick-tempered  (Sallj-  calls  it  "  a  nasty
temper "),  is  devoid  of  idealism,  is  unimpressionable ;  jaictures  and
books  do  not  affect  her,  she  hates  church  and  religion,  and  not  onlv
has  no  love  of  music,  but  has  lost  the  power  of  reading  it  and  playing

1  A  study  of  Visions  based  on  this  case  may  be  found  in  Brain,  1898.  See  also
Proceedings  S.P.E.,  Vol.  XIV.,  pp.  366  et  seq.


478


Dr.  Morton  Prince.


[part


the  violin.  So  the  tlieory  of  the  re-awakening  of  the  original  self  was
not  substantiated.

This  is  an  important  jjoint  fi-om  the  bearing  it  has  on  some
hysterical  phenomena,  and  I  regret  I  cannot  go  into  it  further  here.
When  a  hysteric  is  thrown  into  another  state — is  awakened,  as  I  witli
SoUier  would  prefer  to  put  it, — and  immediately  goes  back  to  a  day  on
which  an  accident  occurred  and  takes  up  the  thread  of  her  mental  life
at  that  moment,  with  ^.mnesia  for  all  succeeding  events, — does  it
necessarily  follow  that  the  new  state  is  more  normal  than  the  others,
and  is  the  original  self  l I  think  not.

Now  the  most  interesting  and  most  important  question  is,  what  is
the  relationship  between  all  the  personalities  ?  What  relation  do  they
bear  to  the  normal  personality ; — and  for  that  matter,  which  is  the
normal  Miss  Beauchamp ;  or  is  any  one  of  them  the  real  and  normal
individual?  Allow  me  a  few  moments  to  sketch, — and  it  must  be
literally  to  sketch  only — a  few  of  the  characteristics  of  B.  I.  and
B.  IV.  Sally  has  been  sufficiently  emphasised.  The  continuity  of
her  memory,  her  origin  in  and  slow  development  from  early  infancy,
her  persistence  as  a  subterranean  consciousness,  while  the  other
personalities  are  in  evidence,  the  co-existence  of  her  consciousness
simultaneously  with  those  of  B.  I.  and  B.  IV.,  her  power  to  influence
the  consciousness  of  these  others,  and  to  act  upon  their  body,  the
independence  of  her  thought,  her  power  to  express  her  thoughts
independently  in  writing  during  the  existence  of  the  other  two
persons ; — all  this  stamps  her  as  a  highly  developed  subliminal
consciousness,  who,  confined  in  the  chrysalis  until  1897,  broke  out
then  and  flew  away  as  an  independent  life.

But  B.  I.  and  B.  IV.,  who  are  they  %

One  thing  must  be  insisted  upon ; — namely,  however  normal  each
may  appear  superficially,  neither  is  quite  normal.  In  each  are  missing
some  of  the  attributes  of  the  oiiginal  Miss  Beauchamp,  but  in
B.  I.  the  departure  from  the  normal  is  the  least.  Her  neurasthenic
condition,  her  aboulia,  her  extreme  suggestibility,  by  which  negative
hallucination  can  be  produced  at  will,  her  exaggerated  sensitiveness  to
emotional  influences,  like  music  and  religion,  which  produce  certain
psychical  phenomena,  the  dominion  which  ideas  acquire  in  her  mind,
the  exaggeration  of  certain  traits  always  possessed  by  her,  her  tendency
to  disintegration,  by  which  she  at  times  loses  temporarily  certain
acquirements,  like  the  French  language  :  these  and  other  peculiarities
are  evidence  that  a  certain  amount  of  disintegration  took  place  in  1893
by  which  the  original  personality  became  fractured  and  modified.
Nevertheless,  it  would  be  an  exaggeration  to  aflirm  that  she  is  a  wholly
new  and  distinct  personality,  or  that  she  is  a  vigilambulist.  It  is  more
connect  to  say  that  certain  components  of  her  personality  have  become


XL.]


A  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.


479


disintegrated  from  the  rest,  certain  local  areas  of  her  brain,  as  I  have
elsewhere  put  it,^  have  gone  to  sleep.  The  original  self  has  become
modified  into  B.  I.

B.  IV.,  notwithstanding  her  greater  stability,  is  a  still  greater  de-
parture from  the  original  self.  Her  character  is  totally  different ;  her
general  attitude  towards  her  environment  has  changed,  for  there  is
missing  the  taste  for,  that  is,  the  normal  reactions  to  music,  literature
and  religion.  She  has  also  lost  her  knowledge  of  music.  She  has  no
emotionability,  excepting  bad  temper  ;  in  short,  .she  has  retained  some
characteristics,  and  lost  others  of  the  original  self.

Now  any  theory  we  adopt  must  explain  all  this,  as  well  as  the
particular  forms  of  amnesia  and  continuities  of  memory.  The  explana-
tion which  I  believe  to  be  the  correct  one  is  this  :  JSTeither  B.  I.  nor
B.  IV.  is  strictly  the  original  self,  nor  are  they  somnambulistic
personalities,  but  modifications  of  the  original  self.  The  original  Miss
B.  became  disintegrated  and  as  a  complete  psychical  composition  de-
parted this  life  in  1893.  B.  I.  and  B.  IV.  are  each  different  disinte-
grated parts  of  the  complete  Miss  Beauchamp.  In  the  disintegration
of  the  primary  consciousness  a  certain  portion  split  itself  off  and
became  dormant.  The  remainder  per.sisted  as  a  modified  personality —
B.  I.  Sufficient  remained  to  retain  the  memories  of  the  past,  which
from  this  time  became  organised  with  all  future  experiences  and  made
a  continuous  memory  and  personality.

The  split-off  dormant  portion  was  awakened  six  years  later  as  a
result  of  an  intense  excitation  of  its  constituent  memories  by  the
shock  in  the  Library,  and  in  the  awakening  wrenched  away  from  B.  I.
a  portion  of  her  mental  associations,  which  thus  became  common  to
both.  As  in  1893,  a  certain  number  of  groups  of  psychical  associations,
that  now  belonged  to  B.  I.,  remained  split  off  and  dormant.  Those  that
remained  awake  became  organised  into  another  personality  as  B.  IV.

It  is  as  two  circles  which  inter-
sect one  another.  A  part  of  each
circle  remains  outside  the  other,
while  a  part  of  the  field  is  common
to  both.

Thus  the  dominant  part  of
B.  IV. 's  consciousness,  being  awake
up  to  1893,  remembers  her  whole
life  until  that  date ;  but  being
asleep  from  1893  to  1899,  she  has
no  knowledge  of  the  events  of  this

1  ?ee  "A  Contribution  to  the  Study  of  Hysteria  and  Hypnosis,  etc.,"  in  the
Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  95.


480


Br.  Morton  Prince.


[part


period.  Waking  up  again  suddenly  in  1899,  she  goes  back  to  the  day
when  she  went  to  sleep,  as  would  any  pei'son  who  had  slept  an
unusual  number  of  days  and  nights.  Again,  B.  I.  and  B.  IV.  have
no  knowledge  of  B.  III.,  because  B.  III.  is  a  subliminal.  B.  I.  and
B.  IV".  have  no  knowledge  of  each  other,  because  the  essential
associations  of  one  are  asleep  when  those  of  the  other  are  in  activity.

Another  analogy  would  be  that  of  a  beam  of  white  light  passed
through  a  prism  and  disintegrated  into  its  component  rays.

So  we  may  imagine  that  the  catastrophe  of  1893  acted  like  a  prism
and  split  off  certain  rays  of  consciousness  and  left  a  mutilated
personality  B.  I.


Let  me  trace  the  order  of  events  as  illustrated  by  this  theory.

We  start  prior  to  1893  with  the  original  Miss  Beauchamp,  who  has
within  her  the  subliminal  consciousness.  This  subliminal  consciousness
during  all  the  early  life  has  no  independent  existence,  but  merely  the
ordinary  relations,  as  in  all  of  us.  Finally,  in  1893,  a  psychical  shock
is  sustained,  the  result  of  which  is  that  her  mind  is  put  through  a
prism  and  a  certain  number  of  rays  are  sepai'ated  from  the  I'est  and
are  developed  into  an  independent  personality  as  B.  I.  B.  I.  exists  for
six  years.  Then,  as  the  result  of  another  psychical  shock,  a  certain
number  of  these  rays  of  B.  I.  are  disintegrated,  rejoin  those  left  behind
in  1893,  and  form  B.  IV.  After  this,  owing  to  various  slighter  causes,
these  middle  rays  oscillated  backwards  and  forwards,  first  joining  the
rays  of  B.  IV.  and  then  of  B.  I.  and  together  making  these  alternating
personalities.

In  1897,  B.  III.,  the  subliminal  consciousness,  became  developed
and  acquired  an  independent  existence,  and  became  known  as  Sally ;
so  that  Sally  represents  the  subliminal  consciousness,  and  B.  I.  and
B.  IV.  simply  certain  disintegrated  elements  in  the  primary  supernatant
consciousness.  The  resiilt  is  that  neither  B.  I.  nor  B.  IV.  is  the  whole
original  Miss  Beauchamp,  but, — if  my  studies  have  led  me  to  the
right  interpretation, — the  original  self  is  a  combination  of  the  two.
If  this  be  true,  it  should  be  possible  to  combine  them  and  obtain  the
original  self.


XL.]


A  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.


481


All  this  might  be  expressed  in  more  technical  and  more  purely
psychological  language,  but  the  principles  would  not  be  made  clearer
thereby,  nor  would  the  knowledge  of  the  process  be  in  any  way  added
to.  Disintegration  means  suppression  of  function  of  centres  and  groups
of  centres,  and  severance  of  associations  between  centres.  Personality
probably  means  particular  composite  groupings  of  centres  by  associa-
tion processes.  A  difference  in  personality  probably  means  a  difference
in  the  composition  and  grouping.

As  to  the  jjhysiological  process,  it  must  be  that  there  exists
normally  some  kind  of  physiological  mechanism  which  allows  dis-
integration to  occur,  and  that  normally,  withhi  certain  limits,  such
disintegration  is  constantly  occurring  as  a  part  of  the  mechanism  of
normal  cerebration.  In  hysteria  this  physiological  mechanism  is
carried  to  an  extreme  and  pathological  degree.

Whatever  the  anatomical  change  may  be,  I  am  at  one  with  Sollier
in  believing  it  to  be  the  same  as  normal  sleep,  only  localised.^

To  go  back  for  a  moment.  There  remains  B.  II. ;  who  is  B.  II.  ?
Now  it  is  possible  to  hypnotise  B.  I.  and  also  B.  IV.,  so  that  both
of  these  hypnotic  states  are  quasi,  but  not  perfect,  personalities.
At  first  I  thought  these  hypnotic  states  were  separate  and  distinct,
and  the  one  was  called  B.  II.  and  the  other  B.  VI.  ;  but  afterwards  it
transpired  that  B.  I.  and  B.  IV.  hj^pnotised  became  the  same  person,
or  B.  II.  B.  II.,  then,  is  a  part  of  B.  I.  and  also  of  B.  IV.  Some
elements  common  to  them  both, — the  hypnotic  self  of  both, — in  her  will
are  combined.  If  you  ask  who  B.  II.  is,  .she  says  :  "  I  am  myself,"
or  ''I  am  B.  I.,"  or  "I  am  B.  IV."  or  "Both,"  or  "I  do  not  know—
I  am  both."  B.  II.  knows  the  thoughts  of  B.  I.  and  equally  knows
the  thoughts  of  B.  IV.,  but  B.  I.  and  B.  IV.  know  aothing  of  B.  II.

Now,  if  the  original  complete  Miss  Beauchami^  is  a  total  combina-
tion of  the  whole  of  B.  I.  and  of  B.  IV.,  then  if  we  could  put  I.  and  II.
together,  we  ought  to  get  Miss  Beauchamp.  This  I  was  able  to  do  by
suggestion  given  to  the  hypnotic  self,  B.  II.,  and  to  obtain  the  original
self  for  a  number  of  hours  at  a  time.  I  suggested  to  B.  II.  that  when
awake  as  B.  I.  she  would  know  all  about  B.  IV.,  and  as  B.  IV.  would
know  all  about  B.  I.  and  feel  and  think  as  B.  I.  did.  I  then  waked
her  up  successively  as  B.  I.  and  as  B.  IV.  In  each  case  she  knew  all
about  the  times  to  which  I  had  special  reference  when  I  gave  the
suggestions.  As  B.  I.  she  told  me  what  she  had  been  doing  as  B.  IV.,
and  as  B.  IV.  what  she  had  been  doing  as  B.  I  As  B.  I.  she  said  she
felt  like  herself  in  the  early  days  before  1893,  as  she  had  not  felt
for  years,  and  also  knew  what  she  had  done  as  B.  IV.,  which  I  had

1  See  "A  Contribution  to  the  Study  of  Hysteria,  etc.,"  in  the  Proceedings  of  the
Society  for  Psychical  Besearch,  VoL  XIV.,  pp.  9-5-6.

2  L


482


Br.  Morton  Prince.


[part


suggested  she  would  remember.  So  that  ia  her  sensations  and  acquire-
ments and  memory,  she,  when  thus  put  together,  to  all  ajypearances  was
the  original  Miss  BeauchamjJ.

This  new  personality  is  plainly  a  composite  of  B.  I.  and  B.  IV.  ;
not  only  in  memory,  but  in  character,  tastes,  and  general  make-up.
Sally  calls  her  "that  new  thing,"  and  has  very  little,  if  any,  control
over  her.  She  herself  does  not  know  which  she  is, — I.  or  IV., — but
says  she  is  both.  When  she  is  present,  Sally  tends  to  sink  out  of  sight
and  go  back — as  Sally  puts  it — "to  where  I  came  from."

This  final  synthesis, — the  construction  of  what  appears  to  be  the
original  self, — seems  to  me  akin  to  a  proof  of  the  correctness  of  the
diagnosis.

I  should  like  to  tell  something  of  the  way  in  which  the  subliminal
self  has  conti'ibuted  to  the  elucidation  of  some  of  these  problems,  by
listening,  so  to  speak,  to  the  thoughts  and  studying  the  characters  of
these  personalities,  and  reporting  her  observations ;  also  of  the  social
relations  of  the  members  of  the  "  family  "  amongst  themselves,  and  the
extensive  controvei'sies  carried  on  by  the  subliminal  self  by  means  of
automatic  writing ;  also  of  the  subliminal  communicating  by  speech
when  B.  I.  or  B.  IV.  are  in  existence,  and  of  the  positive  and  negative
hallucinations  created  by  this  self.  But  these  and  many  other  inte-
resting phenomena  must  be  left  to  a  more  extended  report.

Thei'e  is  something  unique  in  studying  the  laws  of  the  mind
through  the  intelligent  observations  of  a  subliminal  self.  This  is  but  a
brief  sketch,  and  includes  only  a  few  of  the  salient  features  of  this
study.


By  way  of  Summary,  I  would  offer  for  discussion  the  following  con-
clusions which  seem  to  be  justified  by  this  case  : —

(a)  The  subliminal  self  may  become  developed  into  a  true  inde-
pendent personality,  which  may  be  awake  contemporaneously  with  the
primary  consciousness,  or  may  be  alone  awake,  the  other  personalities
being  asleep.

(b)  Other  so-called  and  apparent  personalities  may  be  nothing  more
than  the  primary  self,  mutilated  by  disintegration.

(c)  The  absence  of  knowledge  and  hence  amnesia  on  the  part  of
the  primary  self  of  the  subliminal  is  dependent  on  the  normal  psycho-
physiological arrangements.

(d)  The  amnesia  of  one  mutilated  self  for  another  mutilated  self
is  due  to  disintegration  and  to  a  severance  and  rearrangement  of
psycho-physiological  associations.


XL.]  A  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.


483


(e)  Theoretically  any  number  of  per.sonalitie.s  are  possible,
according  to  the  number  and  direction  of  the  lines  of  cleavage.
Each  personality  would  depend  on  different  combinations  of  different
disintegrated  pieces  of  the  normal  self.

{/}  Personalities  may  develop  accidentally,  as  the  result  of
accidental  fracture,  without  design,  and  not  be  the  result  of  education.

(g)  The  subliminal  consciousness  is  not  necessarily  the  equivalent
of  the  hypnotic  self. '  •

(h)  Personalities  may  represent  any  different  psychical  compounds.
One  may  be  that  peculiar  group  of  psychical  elements  which  is  called
the  subliminal  self,  and  another  may  be  a  disintegrated  compound  of
the  ordinary  supernatant  self.

(i)  Two  or  more  personalities  may  have  successive  existences  in
time,  or  when  one  is  the  subliminal  self  they  may  be  co-existent.

(j)  Personalities,  including  the  subliminal  self,  may  be  hypnotised,
and  thus  the  personahties  may  become  still  further  disintegrated.


2  L  2


484


Edmund  Gurney  Library.


EDMUND GURNEY  LIBRARY.


SUPPLEMENTARY  CATALOGUE,  1900.


Additions  since  the  list  in  ^^Proceedings,"  Vol.  XIV.


Barth  (George),  Mesmerism  not  Miracle. (3  Parts,  bound  together)

London,  1853-4

BiNET  (A.),  On  Double  Consciousness  Chicago,  1898

 The  Psychology  of  Reasoning  Chicago,  1899

Braid  (Dr.  J.),  Hypnotism. Edited  by  A.  E.  Waite  London,  1899

Bramwell  (J.  Milne,  M.B.),  The  Phenomena  of  Hypnotism  and  the

Theories  as  to  its  Nature.  {The  British  Mediccd  Journal)  London,  1898

 Hypnotism. A  Reply  to  Recent  Criticism. (Brain)  London,  1899

 Hypnotic  and  Post-Hypnotic  Appreciation  of  Time  ;  Sec(Midary

and  Multiplex  Personalities. (Brain,  Pai-t  XC.)  London,  1900

 Dipsomania  and  its  Treatment  by  Suggestion.  (From  the  Proceed-
ings of  the  Siiciety  for  the  Study  of  Inebrietg,  June,  WOd)... London,  1900
Creed (Hon.  J. M.',  M.R.C.S.', L.R.C.P.'), My Experience  of

Hypnotic  Suggestion  as  a  Therapeutic  Agent.... ^i/t^iiei/,  N.S.W.,  1899
Flournoy  (Prof.  Th.),  Fro>n  India  to  the  Planet  Mars. From  the

French  by  D.  B.  Vermilye  London,  1900

Kastt  (Immanuel),  Dreams  of  a  Spirit  Seer. From  the  German  by

E.  F.  Goerwitz  London,  1900

Seelye  (H.  H.  ,  M.  A. ,  M.  D. ),  Psychotherapy.  Suggestion  as  a  Cause  and

Cure  of  Disease.  (Medical  Record,  September  2nd,  1899)  iVew;  York,  1899

Skeat(W.  W.),  Malay  Magic London,  1900

TucKEY  (C.  Lloyd,  M.D.),  Treatment  by  Hypnotism  and  Suggestion.

4th  Edit  London,  1900

Chabaneix  (Dr.  Paul),  Le  Subconscient  chez  les  Artistes,  les  Savants,

et  les  Ecrivains  Paris,  1897

Flournoy  (Prof.  Th.),  Des  Indes  a  la  Planete  Mars  Geneva,  1900

RocHAs  D'AiGLUN  (Lt.-Col.  de),  Le  Fluide  des  Magn^tiseurs.... Pan's,  1891

Lehmann  (Dr.  Alfred),  Aberglaube  und  Zauberei.  From  the  Danish.

By  Dr.  Petersen  StuttgaH,  1898

MuLLER  (Rudolph),  Naturwissenschaftliche  Seelenforschung,  Vol.  TIL

Lei2mg,  [1900]

Vervorn (Dr. Max), Beitrage zur  Physiologie  des  Centralner-
vensystems. Erster  Theil. Die  sogenannte  Hypnose  der  Thiere

  Jena,  1898

A  full  Catalogue  of  the  books  in  the  Edmund  Gurney  Library  was  printed
at  the  end  of  Vol.  V.  of  the  Proceedings.  Supplementchry  Catalogues  were
printed  at  the  ends  of  all  the  subsequent  Volumes.  Separate  copies  of  these
Catcdogues  are  still  on  hand,  o.nd  can  be  obtained  from  the  Secretary.


Ojfficers  and  Council  for  1900.


485


FORMER  PRESIDENTS.

Professor  H.  Sidgwick  . . . . .  1882-1884.

Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S. - - -  1885-1887.

Professor  H.  Sidgvvick ------  1888-1892.

Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S. - -  1893.

Professor  William  -James  (Harvard,  U.S.A.) -  1894-1895.

Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.  -----  1896-1899.


OFFICERS  AND  COUNCIL  FOR  1900.


president.
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.

vice-presidents.


The  Kight  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,

M.P.,  F.R.S.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.
Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  Columbia

University,  New  York,  U.S.A.


PROFESSORW.jAMES,Harvard,U.S.  A.
Professor  S.  P.  Langley,  Smithson-
ian Institution, Washington,  U.S.A.
Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.
The  Rt.  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Ripon.


COUNCIL.


TheRt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,  M. P.
A.  W.  Barrett,  M.B.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
J.  Milne  Bramwell,  M.B.
Montague  Crackanthorpe,  K.C.
The  Earl  of  Crawford  and  Bal-

CARRES,  K.T.,  F.R.S.
Hon.  Everard  Feilding.
Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D.
>[r.  Registrar  Hood.
Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.
Oliver  Lodge,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.
Professor  M  acalister,  M.  D.  ,F.  R.  S.
Charles  F.  G.  Masterman.


J.  G.  Piddington.

St.  George  Lane  Fox  Pitt.

Frank  Podmore.

Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.

George  F.  Rogers,  M.D.

Sydney  C.  Scott.

H.  Arthur  Smith.

H.  Bacington  Smith,  C.S.L

Sir  A.  K.  Stephenson,  K.C.B.,  K.C.

Professor  J.  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.

Charles  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.

J.  Venn,  D.  Sc.,  F.R.S.

Abraham  AVallace,  M.D.


HON.  TREASURER.
H.  Arthur  Smith,  7,  Queen's  Mansions,  Bioolc  Green,  London,  W.

HON.  SECRETARY.
.J.  G.  Piddington,  87,  Sloane  Street,  London,  S.W.

HON.  SECRETARY  FOR  RUSSIA.
Michael  Petrovo-Solovovo,  38,  Sergievslaiia,  St.  Petersburg.

SECRETARY  AND  TREASURER  OF  THE  AMERICAN  BRANCH.
Dr.  Richard  Hodgson,  5,  Boy  Is  ton  Place,  Boston,  Mass.,  LT.S.A.

ASSISTANT-SECRETARY.
Edward  T.  Bennett,  19,  Buckingham  Street,  Adelphi,  London,  W.C.


486


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.

{February,  1901.)


PRESIDENT.*


VICE-PRESIDENTS.

The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  10,  Downing-street,  S.W.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  Royal  College  of  Science,  Dublin.
Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  7,  Kensington  Park-gardens, London, W.
Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  Columbia  University,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Professor  Willi aji  James,  Harvard,  U.S.A.

Professor  S.  P.  Langley,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  U.S.A.
Lord  Rayleigii,  F.R.S.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.
The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Ripon,  The  Palace,  Ripon.

HONORARY  MEMBERS.

Alexander  N.  Aksakof,  6,  Nevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  Royal  College  of  Science,  Dublin.
Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,7,  Kensington  Park-gardens,  London,  W.
Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  F.R.S.,  Corfe  View,  Parkstone,  Dorset.
G.  F.  Watts,  R.A.,  Little  Holland  House,  Loudon,  W.

CORRESPONDING  MEMBERS.

Alexander  N.  Aksakof,  6,  Nevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg.

Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa,  906,  Rio  Janeiro.

Prof.  H.  Beaunis,  Villa  Josephine,  Route  d'i\.ntibes,  Cannes,  France.

Professor  Bernheim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy,  France.

Prof.  H.  P.  Bowditch,  M.D.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,  U.S.A.

PROFESSOR]SriCHOLAsM.BuTLER,Columbia  University,NewYork,U.S.A.

Dr.  Dariex,  6,  Rue  du  Bellay,  Paris.

Dr.  Max  Dessoir,  31,  Goltz  Strasse,  Berlin,  W.

Dr.  Fere,  37,  Boulevard  St.  Michel,  Paris.

Professor  Th.  Flournoy,  The  University,  Geneva.

Professor  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Dr.  Eduard  von  Hartmann,  Gross-Lichterfelde,  Germany.

*  The  Presidency  of  the  Society,  rendered  vacant  by  the  death  of  Mr.  F.  W.  H.
Myers,  will  be  filled  on  March  8th  ;  the  meeting  of  the  Council  at  which  the  election
would  have  been  made  having  been  postponed  on  account  of  the  death  of  the  Queen.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.  487


Professor  Pierre  Janet,  22,  Rue  de  Bellechasse,  Paris.

Dr.  a.  a.  Liebeault,  Nancy,  France.

Professor  J.  Li^geois,  Nancy,  France.

Professor  C.  Lombroso,  43,  Corso  Oporto,  Turin,  Italy.

Professor  E.  C.  Pickering,  Tlie  Observatory,  Cambridge,  Mass., U.S.A.

Th.  Ribot,  Office  of  tlie  Reviie  Philosophique,  Paris.

Professor  Charles  Richet,  1-5,  Rue  de  I'Universite,  Paris.

Professor  Sabatier,  Montpellier,  France.

Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  2,  Max  Joseph  Strasse,  Munich.

Dr.  H.  de  Varigny,  18,  Rue  Lalo,  Paris.

Professor  N.  Wagner,  Imperial  University,  St.  Petersburg.

Dr.  Otto  G.  Wetterstrand,  Stockholm.

Dr.  G.  0.  WiTTiG,  22,  Kornerstrasse,  Leipzig.

HONORARY  ASSOCIATES.

Alexander,  Mrs.  Kezia  E.,  Birmingham,  Mich.,  U.S.A.
Alrutz,  Dr.  Sydney,  Upsala,  Sweden.

Carlile,  W.  a.,  101,  Whitehead-road,  Aston,  Birmingham.
Coleman,  William  Emmette, Chief  Quartermaster's  Office,  Phelan

Building,  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Despard,  Miss,  77,  Chesterton-road,  North  Kensington,  London,  W.
Falcomer,  Professor  M.  T.,  Regio  Institute  Tecnik,  Alessandria.
FiNzi,  Dr.  George,  11,  Monte  di  Pieta,  Milan.
Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  2,  Newport-road,  Cardiff.
Glardon,  Rev.  Auguste,  Tour  de  Peilz,  Vaud,  Switzerland.
Goodrich-Freer,  Miss,  Sesame  Club,  29,  Dover-street,  Piccadilly,  W.
Grubb,  Edward,  M.A.,  22,  Crosby-road,  Birkdale,  Southport.
Haslam,  Prof.  F.  W.,  M.A.,  Canterbury  College,  Christchurch,  New

Zealand.

Hull,  Miss  P.  C,  134,  West  116th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Jenkins,  E.  Vaughan,  Energlyn,  38,  St.  Margaret's-road,  Oxford.
Keulemans,  J.  G.,  13,  Monte  Verde,  Southend-on-Sea.
Macdonald,  Rev.  J.  A.,  6,  Queen's-avenue,  Freshfield,  Liverpool.
Mangin,  Marcet,  102,  Rue  Erlanger,  Paris.

Murray,  Donald,  M.A.,  28,  West  8th-street,  New  York,  U.S.A.

NEWBOLD,WM.RoMAiNE,Ph.D.,Univ. of  Penna,Philadelphia,Pa.,U.S.A.

Nisbet,  E.  T.,  17,  Latimer-street,  Tynemouth.

OcHOROWicz,  Dr.  J.,  23,  Rue  Vladimir,  Warsaw.

Porter,  Miss,  16,  Russell-square,  London,  W.C.

Rogers,  E.  Dawson,  Ptose  Villa,  Church  End,  Fincliley,  N.

Shield,  Mrs.,  Bowers  Gifford  Rectory,  Essex.

Shufeldt,  Dr.  R.  W.,  Takoma  Park,  District  of  Columbia,  U.S.A.
Sugden,  Rev.  E.  H.,  B.A.,  B.Sc,  Bradford,  Yorkshire.


488


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Sutton,  Mrs.  K.  P.,  The  Higlilands,  Athol  Centre,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Wakk,  C.  Staniland,  The  Rosalie,  248,  57th-st.,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
WiLTSB,  Dr.  a.  S.,  Lancing,  Morgan  Co.,  Tenn.,  U.S.A.
WiNGFiELD,  Mrs.,  Belvidere  Place,  Church-road,  Wimbledon.

MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.

Names  of  Members  are  jyrinted  in  Black  Type.
Navies  of  Associates  are  printed  in  Small  Capitals.

Abernetiiy,  Mrs.,  10,  St.  Colene-street,  Edinburgh.
Adair,  Desmond,  Bank  of  England,  Plymouth.
Adams,  Mrs.,  4,  Brookside,  Cambridge.

Adamson,  Rev.  Henry,  Heathcote,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.
Adkins,  Henry,  J. P.,  Leyhill,  Northfield,  near  Birmingham.
AiNSLiE,  Douglas,  26,  Mount-street,  Grosvenor-square,  London,  W.
Alban,  Miss  Mary  H.,  Hotel  Bellevue,  Via  Nazionale,  Ptome.
Alexander,  Professor  S.,  M.A.,  The  Owens  College,  Manchester.
Allen,  Mrs.  M.  S.,  Picton  House,  Ealing.
Allin,  PtEV.  Thomas,  Donnington  Rectory,  Ledbury.
Amery,  W.  C,  34a,  Corporation-street,  Birmingham.
Anden,  Harold  A.,  Clarendon  House,  Woodford  Green,  Essex.
Appleyard,  Walter,  EndclifFe-crescent,  Sheffield.
Argles,  Miss  Edith  M.,  The  Deaiiery,  Peterborougli.
Armstrong,  Miss  C.  M.,  31,  Hereford-square,  London,  S.W.
Arnott,  T.  Davidson,  Port  of  Spain,  Trinidad,  B.W.I.
Ashburton,  The  Lady,  Kent  House,  Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.
AsHER,  Miss  Kate,  High  Laggary,  Row,  Dumbartonshire,  N.B.
Astley,  Miss,  3,  Halkin-place,  Belgrave-square,  London,  S.W.
Badelier,  Emile,  Rangoon,  British  Burmah.

Baggally,  Wortley  W.,  23,  Lower  Phillimore-place,  Kensington,  W.

Bagnell,  Mrs.,  22,  Down-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.

Baker, Mrs.  Charles, South Cliff Hotel,  Southbourne-on-Sea,

Christchurch,  Hants.
Balfour, The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.,M.P.,F.R.S.,  10,  Downing-st.,S.  W.
Balfour,  The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.,  M.P.,  24,  Whitehall-court,  S.W.
Balfour,  Miss,  10,  Downing-street,  London,  S.W.
Bannerman,  Colonel  P.  W.,  8,  Somers-place,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Bannon,  Mrs.,  1,  Hyde  Park-terrace,  London,  W.
Barclay,  Rev. Chas.W.,  M.  A.,TheVicarage,  Hertford  Heath,  Hertford.
Barclay,  Edwyn,  Urie  Lodge,  Ridgway,  Wimbledon.
Barkworth,  Mrs.,  Ewell  Castle,  Ewell,  Surrey.
Barlow,  Miss  J ane,  The  Cottage,  Raheny,  co.  Dublin.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Barrett,  Ashley  W^.,  M.B.,  7,  Cavendish-place,  Cavendish-square, W.
Harrington,  Hon.  Eric,  62,  Cadogan-place,  London,  S.W.
Bartholomew,  Colonkl,  Bantry  Lodge,  GlengarifF,  co.  Cork.
Baruch,  Edgar,  2,144,  University-avenue,  Berkeley,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Bates,  Colonel  C.  E.,  c/o  London  and  County  Bank,  1,  Connaught-

street,  London,  W.
Bates,  Miss,  c/o  London  and  County  Bank,  Maidstone.
Battersea,  The  Lady,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring.
Baudains,  Miss  M.  G.,  Parade  House,  Jersey.
Bayfield,  Rev.  Matthew  A.,  M.A.,  The  College,  Eastbourne.
Bean,  Rev.  Edwin,  M.A.,  The  School  House,  Brentwood.
Bective,  The  Countess  of,  Barnacre  Lodge,  Garstang.
Beer,  Mrs.,  7,  Chesterlield-gardens,  London,  W.
Behrens,  Harold  L  ,  West  View,  Victoria  Park,  Manchester.
Bell,  Charles  W.,  J.P.,  D.L.,  Yewhurst,  East  Grinstead,  Sussex.
Bell,  Ma.tor  Wm.  Morrison,  Thor,  Birchington,  Thanet,  Kent.
Bellasis,  Major  G.  M.,  Young's  Point,  Ontario,  Canada.
Bennett,  Edward  T.,  Devonshire  House,  Richmond,  near  London.
Bennett,  Ernest  N.,  M.A.,  Hertford  College,  Oxford.
Benson,  Mrs.,  Tremans,  Horsted  Wejmes,  Sussex.
Benson,  Miss  Annette  M.,  M.D.,  Cama  Hospital,  Bombay.
Berens,  Rev.  Randolph,  M.A.,  14,  Prince's-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Bergen,  Axel  von,  Harewood  Hill,  Darlington.
Berry,Mrs.  P.M.  Dickinson,  M.D., 60,  Welbeck-st.,Cavendish-sq.,W.
Best,  Mrs.  J.  Rycroft,  7,  Royal  Well-tei  race,  Cheltenham.
Bevan,  Miss  N.  H.,  Chalet  Passiflora,  Cannes,  France.
Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9,  Rutland-gate,  London,  W.
Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131,  Gloucester-road,  London,  S.W.
Beveridge,  Erskine,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B.
Bhisk,  Shanker  Aba,ji,  F.S.Sc,  A.S.A.  (Lond.),  c/o  the  Society  of

Architects,  St.  James's  Hall,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.
Bickfoed-Smith,  R.A.H.,  B.A.,  19,  Endymion-road,  Brixton  Rise,  S.W,
Bidder,  Mrs.,  10,  Queen's  Gate-gardens,  London,  S.W.
BiCKNELL,  Rev.  Clarence,  M.A.,  Villa  Rose,  Bordigliera,  Italy.
Bidder,  George  P.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcliam,  Surrey.
Biddulph,  The  Lady  Elizabeth  P.,  19,  Ennismore-gardens,  S  W.
BiELBY,  Horace  C.  V.,  31,  Grange  Mount,  Birkenhead.
Bigg,  Miss  Louisa,  40,  Chester-terrace,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
BiRRELL,  Mrs.,  Placilla,  Lansdowne-road,  Worthing.
Blackburn,  E.  M.,  The  Millbrook,  Brampton  Bryan,  Herefordshire.
Blackwood,  Mrs.,  Norton  Court,  Sittingbourne,  Kent.
Bois,HenryG.,  c/oH.Bois,  Esq.,  5,  Astwood-rd.,South Kensington, S.W.
Bois,  Herbert  G.,  4,  Clarendon-place,  Hyde  Park -square,  W.
Boldeeo,  Lieut.-Gen  eral  G.  N.,  20,  ^Vestbourne-gardens,  Folkestone.


490


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


BoLLAND,  Mrs.,  7,  Cranbury-terrace,  Southampton.
Bolton,  Miss  A.  J.,  B.A.  (N.Z.),  Church-street,  Buckingham.
BoNAZzA,  Carlo,  Hotel  Cavour,  5,  Via  Proconsolo,  Florence.
BoscQ  DE  Beaumont,  Gr.  du,  Airel  (Manche),  France.
BoTT,  Mrs.,  Somersal,  Derby.

BouLNOis,  H.  Percy,  M.Inst.C.E.,  7,  Devonshire-road,  Liverpool.

Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  at  Carey's,  Brockenliurst.

Bower,  James  Garton,  Junr.,  Earlham  House,  Norwich.

Bowness,  William  Wilson,  26,Cainpden-grove,  Kensington,  London,W.

Boyd,  C.  W.,  7,  Abbotsford-crescent,  St.  Andrews,  N.B.

Bramston,  Miss  A.  R.,  Withara-close,  Winchester.

Bramston,  Miss  M.,  St.  Grimbald's,  Winchester.

Bramwell,  J.  Milne,  M.B.,  2,  Henrietta-street,  Cavendish-square,W.
Brandreth,  Henry  S.,  Fairholme,  Weybridge.
Braysiiaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

Brewster,  Bertram,  5,  Primrose-mansions,  Battersea  Park,  S.W.
Brewster,  Mrs.  F.,  21,  Park-valley,  Nottingham.
Briggs,  Mrs.,  Welbury  Drive,  Bradford.
Brill,  Alice  B.,  M.D.,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Britten,  James,  F.L.S.,  126,  Kennington  Park-road,  London,  S.E.
Broderick,  Mrs.  Alan,  31,  Greenheys-road,  Liverpool.
Brooke,  Col.  C.  K.,  Army  and  Navy  Clul^,  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.
Brooke,  Lady,  Ranee  of  Sarawak,  Villa  Pvaffo  Bogliasco,  near
Genoa.

Brooke,  Rev.  Stopford  A  ,  M.A.,  1,  Manchester-square,  London,  W.
Brown,  Miss  May,  37,  Evelyn  mansions,  Westminster,  S.W.
Browne,  Edward  G.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cambridge.
Browne,  Mrs.  W.  P.,  Bidston,  97,  Gipsy  Hill,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.
Browning,  Oscar,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Bruhns,  Theodore,  Simferopol,  Russia.

Bryant,  Captain  G.  E.,  R.A.,  c/o  J.  M.  Edwards,  The  Elms,  Ramsgate.

Bryce,  J.  P.,  J. P.,  Bystock,  near  Exmouth,  Devon.

Bryce,  Miss  Kathleen,  15,  Campden  Hill- square,  W.

Bubna,  Count  Francis,  Upton  Towers,  Slough,  Bucks.

Buchanan,  H.  B.  M.,  B.  A.,  Hales,  near  Market  Drayton,  Salop.

BuLLEY,  Mrs.  Arthur,  Ness,  Neston,  Cheshire.

Burton,  Mrs.,  Logner  Hall,  Shrewsbury.

Bury,  Mrs.  Henry,  Mayfield  House,  Farnham,  Surrey.

Bury,  Rev.  Thomas  William,  M.A.,  15,  Linton-crescent,  Hastings.

Bushell,  Rev.  W.  D.,  M.A.,  Harrow-on-the-HiU.

Butt,  Lady,  76,  Elm  Park-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Buttemer,  Robert  William,  St.  Mary's,  Godalming.

Buttery,  J.  W.,  86,  Holbein  House,  Sloane-square,  London,  S.W.

Caillard,  Sir  Vincent,  Wingfield  House,  near  Trowbridge,  Wilts.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


491


Calcutta,  The  Rt.  Rev.  the  Bishop  of,  Calcutta.
Callaway,  Charles,  D.Sc,  M.A.,  16,  Monpelier  Villas,  Cheltenham.
Campbell,  Mrs.  Burnley,  Orraidale,  Colintraive,  Argyllshire,  N.B.
Campbell,  Colin  E.,  B.A.,  34,  Lower  Belgrave-street,  London,  S.W.
Campbell,  Mrs.  Napier,  81,  Ashley-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Campbell,  Lieut.  E".  D.  H.,  7th  Dragoon  Guards,  Colchester.
Campbell-Lang, Miss, c/o Professor Brunton,  LL.B.,  48,  West

Regent-street,  Glasgow.
Candler,  H.  A.  W.,  37,  Commercial-road  East,  London,  E.
Cannon,  Mrs.,  Hillcot,  Sharpies,  near  Bolton.
Carbery,  William  E.,  21,  Eldon-road,  Kensington,  W.
Carmichael,  Rev.  Canon,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  Ranelagh,  Dublin.
Carnarvon,  The  Earl  of,  13,  Berkeley -square,  London,  W.
Carnsew,  Miss  Rosamund,  18,  York-street  Chambers,  Bryanston-sq.,W.
Cathels,  Rev.  David,  M  A.,  The  Manse,  Hawick,  N.B.
Cave,  Charles,  J.  P.,  Binsted,  Cambridge.
Cazalet,  Mrs.,  Grenehurst,  Dorking.
Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Stocken  Hall,  Stretton,  Oakham.
Charters,  Jose,  Santiago  de  Chile,  Correo,  Casilla,  2152,  Republic  of

Chile,  South  America.
Charlton,  Miss  Frances  M.,  36a,  Victoria-rd.,  Kensington  Palace,  W.
Chase,  Capt.  W.  St.  L.,  V.C,  care  of  Messrs.  William  Watson  and

Co.,  28,  Apollo-street,  Bombay.
Chattock,  Prof.  Arthur  P.,  1,  Rockleaze-avenue,  Sneyd  Park,  Bristol.
Chichester,  Miss  May,  13,  Gloucester-place,  London,  W.
Childers,  Miss  F.  L,  261,  King's-road,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Chrouschoff,  Michel  de,  Binnbrooke,  Grange-road,  Cambridge.
Church,  Mrs.,  Hinton  House,  Byfield  R.S.O.,  Northamptonshire.
Clark,  W.  W^,  Denehurst,  Dorking.
Clark,  Miss,  Suffield  Park,  Cromer.

Clarke,  Francis,  17,  Hornsey  Rise  Gardens,  London,  N.

Clarke,  J.  F.  Howard,  M.D.,  M.R.C.S.,  99,  Shaftesbury-avenue,  W.

Clarke,  John  Henry,  M.D.,  30,  Clarges-street,  London,  W.

Clarke,  Robert  H.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.R.C  S.,  Clarence  Lodge,  Redhill.

Clarke,  Rev.  W.  J.,  186,  Bristol-road,  Birmingham.

Clayton,  Ch.irles  E.,  152,  North-street,  Brighton.

Clemens,  S.  L.,  Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Cleveland,  The  Duchess  of,  18,  Grosvenor-place,  London,  S.W
Clissold,  Edward  M.,  Fawley  Lodge,  Lansdown-road,  Cheltenham.
Clive,  The  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.
Close,  Rev.  Maxwell  H.,  M.A.,  University  Club,  Dublin.
Coffin,  Walter  H.,  F.L.S.,  94,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
CoGHiLL,  Col.  Kendal,  C.B.,  Castle Townshend,  nr.  Skibbereen,  co.  Cork.
Coleridge,  Miss  Christabel  R.,  Cheyne,  Torquay.


492


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Colling  WOOD,  Miss  A..  IVI.,  6,  Powis-scjuaie,  Bayswater,  W^.
Collins,  Sir  Robert  H.,  K.C.B.,  Broom  Hill,  Ciai-einont,  Eslier.
CoLLisoN,  Mrs.  Henry  C,  17b,  Great  Cumberland-place,  London,  W.
CoLTHURST,  Lady,  47,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.
CoLQUHOUN,  Daniel,  M.D.  (Lond.),  M.R.C.Pt  (Loud.),  High-street,

Dunedin,  New  Zealand.
Colvile,  Ma.t.-Cen.  Sir  Henry  E.,  C.B.,  24,  Chapel-st.,  Belgrave-sq.,  S,W.
Compton,  Lady  Alwyne,  7,  Balfour-place,  London,  W.
CooNEY,  Rev.  Stewart  E.,  M.A.,  28,  Donegall-passage,  Belfast,
Cope,  Rev.  C.  H.,  M.A.,  Churchills,  Caterham  Valley,  Surrey.
CoTTERELL,  James,  140,  Earlsfield-road,  Wandsworth  Common,  S.¥7'.
CoRT  van  der  Linden,  Dr.  P.  W.  A.,  Ministre  de  Justice,  Suriname-

street,  The  Ha^ue.
Coudenhove,  Count  Henry,  LL.D.,  Schloss  Ronsperg,  Bohemia,

Austria.

Cousens,  John  S.,  Wanstead,  Essex.

Cowan,  William  H.,  11,  Marlborough-road,  Bournemouth.
CowASJEE,  Bomanjee,  62,  Avenue-road,  Crouch  End,  N.
CowpER,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Spencer,  Hotel  Continental,  3,  Rue  Castig-
lione,  Paris.

Coxe,  Henry  R.  H.,  Indian  Civil  Service, United  Service  Club,
Calcutta.

Crackanthorpe,  Montague,  K.C.,  65,  Rutland-gate,  London,  S.W.
Crackantiiokpe,  Mrs.,  GO,  Rutland-gate,  London,  S.W.
Crawford  and  Balcarres,  The  Earl  of,  K.T.,  F.R.S.,  2,  Caven-
dish-square, London,  W.
Crawford,  F.  Marion, Villa  Crawford,  Sant' Agnello  di  Sorrento, Italy.
Crawford,  W.  C,  1,  Lockharton-gardens,  Colinton-road,  Edinburgh.
Crawshay,  Robert,  16,  Berkeley -square,  London,  W.
Crooks,  Miss,  Kensington,  South  Australia.
Crowe,  W.  Leadham,  42,  New  Broad-street,  London,  E.C.
Cruise,  Sir  F.  R.,  M.D.,  93,  Merrion-square,  W.,  Dublin.
Crump,  Harold  E.,  M.A.,

Cunningham,  G.,D.M.D.(Hai'vard,LT.S.  A.),  2,  King's-parade,  Cambridge.
CuRRiE,  Mrs.,  Warders,  Park-;ivenue,  Bedford.
CuRTOis,  Miss  Margaret  A.,  15,  Barton-street,  Westminster,  S.W.
CuSHiNG,  Mrs.  F.  W.,  4,  Rue  Chalgrin,  Paris.

Dakyns,  Henry  Graham,  M.  A., Higher  Coombe,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
Dallas,  Miss  H.  S.  A.,  116,  King  Henry's-rd.,  South  Hampstead,  N.W.
Damania,  Surgeon-Major  P.  J.,  National  Liberal  Club,  London.
Darley,  Lady,  Quambi,  Woollohra,  New  South  Wales.
Dartnell,  George  E  ,  Abbottsfiekl,  Stratford-road,  Salisbury.
Darton,  Hugh,  Beninghoe,  Hertford.

Darwin,  Mrs.  Francis,  Wychtield,  Huntingdon-road,  Cambridge.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


493


Davies,  Bevjamin,  26,  Moscow  Drive,  Liverpool.

Davis,  A.  E.,  F.R.C.S.  (Ed.),  L.R.C.P.I., 20,  Great  George-square,
Liverpool.

Davis,  Joseph  T.,  H0II3'  Bush,  Snaresbrook,  Essex.
Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  Gatefield,  Clarendon-road,  Lewisham,  S.E.
Davison,  Miss  Annie,  41,  Boland-gardens,  London,  S.W,
Davy,  Mrs.  E.  M.,  43,  Clanricarde-gardens,  London,  W.
Dawson,  Lieut.-Col.  Henry  P.,  Hartlington,  Burnsall,  Skipton.
De  Grey,  The  Countess,  1,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.
De  Trapford,  Mrs.  (iALFRiD,  13,  Alberaarle-street,  London,  W.
Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  M.A.,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  Rothesay,  N.B.
Dicksee,  Frank,  A.R.A.,  Greville  House,  3,  Greville-place,  St.  John's
Wood,  N.W.

Dill,  J.  F.  Gordon,  ]\I.A,,  M.B.,  6,  Brunswick-place,  Brighton.
Dixon,  Edward  T.,  4,  Cranmer-i-oad,  Cambridge.
Dixon,  Hugh  N.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  East  Park  Parade,  Northampton.
Dixon,  Prof.  W.  Macneile,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  Litt. D.,  5,  Carpenter-
road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
Dobbie,  a.  W.,  Gawler-place,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Dodge,  Miss  Mary  M.  H.,  39,  Brompton-square,  London,  S.W.
Donne,  Miss  A.  G.  M.,  19,  Powis-square,  Bayswater,  London,  W.
Donne,  Mrs.,  c/o  Messrs.  Holt  &  Co.,  3,  Whitehall-place,  London,  S.W.
Donnelly,  Mrs.,  Kendall-street,  Cowra,  New  South  Wales.
Dorchester,  The  Lady,  Greywell  Hill,  Winchfield.
DouGALL,  Miss  Lily,  463,  Elm-avenue,  Westinount,  Montreal,  Canada.
Douglas,  Rev.Dr.  G.  W., 239, Whitney-avenue,  Newhaven,Conn.,U.S.A,
DovETON,  F.  B.,  Karsfield,  Torquay.

DowsoN,  Mrs.,  L.K.Q.C.P.,  L.R.C.S.I.,  91,  Cheyne-walk,  Chelsea,  S.W.

Doyle,  A.  Conan,  M.D.,  Haslemere,  Surrey.  .

Drewry,  Mrs.  George,  Melrose,  Buxton.

Duke,  Thomas,  M.A.,  M.R.C.S.,  33,  Bilton-road,  Rugby.

Dulley,  Rev.  B.,  M.A.,  St.  Peter's  Clergy  House,  London  Docks,  E.

Duncan,  Harold  M.,  Hyde  Park-court,  Albert-gate,  S.W.

Duncan,  Mrs.,  Earlston,  Epsom-road,  Guildford.

Dunham,  Miss  Helen,  c/o  Messrs.  Morton,  Chaplin  and  Co.,  6,

Princes-street,  London,  E.C.
Dunsmure,  Mrs.,  .50,  Harrington-gardens,  London,  S.W.
DuTT,  R.  C,  CLE.,  Burdwan,  Bengal,  India.

Dyce,  Captain  Cecil,  (Retired)  Bengal  Staff  Corps,  22,  Ledbury-road,

Bayswater,  London,  W.
Eagle,  Frederick,  Devonia,  St.  Andrew's-road,  Henley-on-Thames.
Eardley,  Lady,  4,  Lancaster-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Earle,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  5,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.
Edelsten,  John  A.,  31,  Bold-street,  Warrington.


494


List  of  AI embers  and  Associates.


Egerton,  Miss  IM  ary  L.,  The  Cliff,  Torringfcon,  York.
Elder,  Frederick,  21,  Cleveland-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Elliot,  Gilbert,  Tednambury,  by  Bishops  Stortford,  Herts.
Elliot,  Gilbert,  10,  Hanover-square,  London,  W.

Elliot,  Miss,  c/o  Messrs.  Murray,  Hutchins  and  Sterling,  ll,Birchin-
lane,  E.C.

Elliott,  Sir  Charles  A.,  K.C.S.I.,  LL.D.,  Wressil  Lodge,  Wimbledon-
common.

Elliott,  Rev.  W.  A.,  54,  Kirkgate,  Shipley,  Yorkshire.

Ellison,  Rev.  John  H.,  M.A.,  The  Vicarage,  Windsor.

Elvey,  Miss  Mary  M.,  3,  Palace  Mansions,  Addison  Bridge,  W.

Elworthy,  Arthur  K.,  Foxdown,  Wellington,  Somerset.

Eno,  J.  C,  Wood  Hall,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.

Ermen,  Walter  F.  A.,  14,  Kent-street,  Great  Yarmouth.

Esterhazy,  Count  Michael,  Cseklesz,  Pressburg  County,  Hungary.

Evans,  Kirkiiam,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Falcke,  Dudley  C,  5,  Pump-court,  Temple,  London,  E.G.

Farmer,  W.  M.,  18,  Bina-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Farrer,  The  Lady,  3,  Whitehall-court,  London,  S.W.

Faulkner,  Miss  A.  A.,  Inglewood,  Barnt  Green,  Worcestershire.

Fawssett  Thomas,  97,Philbeach-gardens,  Earl's-court,  London,  S.W.

Feilding,  Hon.  and  Rev.  Basil,  Ph.D.,  The  Presbytery,  Snow-hill,

Wolverhampton.
Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  5,  John-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.
Feilding,  The  Lady  Louisa,  Broome  Park,  Betchworth,  Surrey.
Ffrench,  Mrs.  Sophy  A.,  Golovino,  Kanadei-station,  Syzran- Viazma

Railway,  Govt.of  Simbirsk,  Russia.
Field,  Allan  B.,  66,  Pepys-road,  New  Cross,  S.E.
Field,  E.  M.,  M.A.,  65,  Talbot-road,  Highgate,  N.  ■
Finch,  H.  Wynne,  Junr.,  M.A.,  6,  Oakley-crescent,  Chelsea,  S.W.
Fisher,  Rev.  J.  Hartman,  Nassau,  N.P.,  Bahamas.
FitzGerald,Desmond  G ., M.S.T.E.,94,  Loughborough-rd.,  Brixton,  S.W.
Florence,  Ernest  B.,  5,  Pump  court,  The  Temple,  E.C.
Ford,  Miss  Emily  S.,  Adel  Grange,  Leeds.
Ford,  Mrs.  Gerard,  7,  Mandeville-place,  London,  W.
Forrester,  Mrs.,  Tullibody  House,  Cambus,  By  Stirling,  N.B.
Foster,  Miss  Lucy  E.,  42,  Lexham-gardens,  London,  W.
Fotheringham,  W.  B.,  19,  St.  John's-road,  Southend-on-Sea,  Essex.
Eraser,  Col.  A.  T.,  R.E.,  Junior  Athenteum  Club,  Piccadilly,  W.
Freeman,  Miss  Adelaide  G,  Belgrave  Mansions,Grosvenor-gdns.,  S.W.
Freemann,  Rev.  H.  B.,  M.A.,  The  Yicarage,  Burton-on-Trent.
Fry,  Lewis  George,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.

Fry,  Oliver  A.,  M.A.,  41,  Portsdown-road,  Maida-vale,  London,  W.
Fry,  R.  E.,  B.A.,  11,  Palace  Houses,  Bayswater  Hill,  London,  W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


495


Galloway,  The  Countess  of,  17,  Upper  Grosvenor-stieet,  W.
GrARDiNER,  Rev.  Edward  R.,  M.A.,  Long  Wittenhara,  Abingdon.
Gardner,  Mrs.  Ernest,  c/o  Miss  Wilson,  33,  Ladbroke-square,  W.
Garet-Charles,  G.,  Breton  Lodge,  49,  Acacia-rd.,  St.  John's  Wood,  N.W.
Garner,  Edwin  T.,  Glendale,  Alexandra-road,  Selhurst,  Surrey.
Garth,  Henry,  M.B.,  CM.  (Edin.),  4,  Harrington-street,  Calcutta.
Gernet,  Miss  Nina

Ghose,  N.  N.,  the  Indian  Nation  Office,  43,  Bancharam  Unkoor's-lane,
Calcutta.

Ghosh,  Rai  Kali  Prasanna,  Dacca,  Bengal,  India.
Gittermann,  Rudolph  C,  Odessa,  Russia.

Godfrey,  Mrs.,  c/o  Col.  C.W.  Godfrey,  Bombay  Staff  Corps,  Poona,  India.
Goodhart,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  M.A.,  Lambourne  Rectory,  Romford.
Gordon,  George  H.,  1,  Clare-road,  Bristol.
Goring,  Lady,  Strettington,  Chichester.

GovER,  John  M.,  LL.D.,  5,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C

Govett,  The  Ven.  Archdeacon,  M.A.,  Gibraltar.

Gow,  William,  184,  Earl's  Court-road,  London,  S.W.

Graham,  Henry  Pi..,  8,  Marble  Arch,  London,  W.

Graham,  J.  W.,  B.A.,  Dalton  Hall,  Victoria  Park,  Manchester.

Graham,  William  W.,  4,  Elm-court,  Temple,  London,  E.C.

GRAY,ED\VARDW.,vSuRGEON-CAPTAiN,c/oMessrs.Holt,17,Whitehall,S.W.

Green,  Alan  B.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  B.C.,  31,  Cheyne-court,  Chelsea,  S.W.

Green,  Mrs.,  31,  Cheyne-court,  Chelsea,  S.W.

Green, C.T.,  M.R.C.S., L.R.C  P.(Lond.),31,Shrewsbury-rd  , Birkenhead.
Green,  Miss  Marian,  Wagner  House,  Belsize-grove,  Hampstead,  JST.W.
Greene,  Rev.  Henry,  M.A.,  St.  John's  Vicarage,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Greener,  W.  O.,  2,  Kent  Villas,  Ealing.
Greig,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Cottenham  Rectory,  Cambridge.
Griffith,  Mrs.  Robert  W.

Grignon,  Rev.  W.  S.,  M.A.,  30,  Blenheim-gdns.,  WillesdenGreen,  N.W.

Groom,  Ernest,  Dothill  Park,  Wellington,  Salop.

Grove,  Mrs.  Edward,  22,  Dover-st.,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.

Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  Shallow,  Ongar,  Essex.

Grunbaum,  O.  F.  F.,  B.A.,  D.Sc,  Ladbroke -grove,  London,  W.

Guinness,  Miss,  Tibradden,  Rathfarnhara,  Dublin.

Hackett,  James  T  ,  B.A  ,  71,  King  William-street,  Adelaide,  Australia.

Haig,  Mrs.  C.  E.,  Orchardwood,  Ascot  Heath,  Berks.

Hales,  Frank  N.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Halketi',  Miss  Katherine  E.,  24,  Holland-street,  Campden  Hill,  W.
Hall,  Wilfred,  Dilston  Hall,  Corbridge-on-Tyne.
Hall,  Mrs.  W.C,  3,  St.  Alban's-road,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Hamilton,  Bernard,  M.A.,  Hindhead  Brae,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
Hamilton,  Colonel  G.  Rowan,  Killyleagh  Castle,  co.  Down,  Ireland.


496


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Hamilton,  J.  J.,  70,  Cecile  Park,  Crouch  Hill,  London,  N.
Hamilton,  William  H.,  Glenburnie,  Werter-road,  Putney,  S.W.
Hannah,  Robert,  82,  Addison-road,  Kensington,  W.
Hansford,  Charles,  3,  Alexandra-terrace,  Dorchester.
Harding,  G.  Palmer,  Trouville,  France.

Hargreaves,  Miss,  Oakhurst,  Waterloo-road,  Birkdale,  Lancashire.
Harris,  Capt.  C.  S.,  76,  Woodstock-road,  Oxford.
Harris,  Mrs.  Leverton,  4,  Green-street,  Park-lane,  London,  W.
Hartshorn, Miss  C,  Messrs.  Brown,  Shipley  &  Co., Founder's  Court,  E.C.
Harvey,  Alfred  S.,  Hurstbourne,  Bishopswood-road,  Highgate,  N.
Hastie,  Miss,  c/o  Messrs.  Street,  30,  Cornhill,  London,  E.G.
Hay,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Alistair,  8,  Upper  Belgrave-street,  London,  S.W.
Hayes,  Frederick  W.,  12,  Westcroft-square,  Ravenscourt  Park,  W.
Heard,  George  Henry,  13,  Carlisle-avenue,  The  Hoe,  Plymouth.
Heard,  Richard,  37,  York-place,  Portman-square,  London,  W.
Hebert,  p.  Z.,  M.D.,  L.R.C.P.,  16a,  Old  Cavendish-st.,Cavendish-sq.,W.
Hehner,  Mrs.  Otto,  126,  St.  James'-road,  West  Croydon.
Henley,  Hon.  Ernest,  AVatford  Court,  Rugby.

Henniker-Major,  The  Hon.  Mary,  4,  Berkeley-street,  Piccadilly,  W.
Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1,  Argyll  villas,  Cheltenham.
Herbert.  Hon.  Auberon,  M.A.,  Burley,  Ringwood,  Hants.
Herringham,  Mrs.,  22,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C.
Herschel,  Colonel  John,  Royal  Engineer.s,  Slough.
Hewitt,  Mrs.,  Southernhey,  Knighton,  Leicester.
Hichens,  Rev.  Thomas  S.,  Guilsborough  Vicarage,  Northampton.
HiGFORD,  Miss  Katharine,  23,  Eaton-place,  London,  S.W.
HiLDYARD,  F.  W.,  Gwyder  Lodge,  Forest,  Snaresbrook.
HiLL-TouT,  Charles,  Trinity  College,  Vancouver,  B.C.
HoARE,  Mrs.  Henry,  1,  Seymour-street,  Portman-square,  London,  W.
Hocicen,  Thomas  M.,  M.R.C.S.  (Eng.),  F.L.S.,  Moray-place,  Dunedin,
New  Zealand.

HoDDiNG,  Miss,  Selwood  House,  Barnard's  Cross,  Salisbury.
Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Hogg,  Henry  R.,  M.A.,  Melbourne  Club,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Hole,  Rev.  Donald,  A.K.C,  2,  Busby-place,  Camden-road,  N.W.
Holland,  Hon.  Lionel  R.,  B.A.,  58,  Conduit-street,  W.
Holland,  Miss,  Niddry  Lodge,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Holland,  Otho,  Ferndene,  Parkstone,  Dorset.

Hollander,  Bernard,  L.R.C.P.,  62,  Queen  Anne-streeet,  Cavendish-
square,  London,  W.
HoLLiNS,  Mrs.  A.  E.,  8,  St.  George's  Terrace,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Hollond,  John  R.,  M.A.,  Wonham,  Bampton,  Devon.
Holmes,  Edmond  G.  A.,  4,  Rawlinson-road,  Oxford.
Holmes,  Rev.  Francis  William,  B.A.,  Poplar,  London,  E.


Lid  of  Members  and  Associates.


497


Holmes,  Mrs.  F.  W.,  Poplar,  London,  E.

HoLSTEix,  ilADAME  ALEXANDRA  DE,  29,  Avenue  cle  Wagram,  Paris.

Home,  Mrs.  Robert,  Beaufort  House,  Cheltenham.

Hood,  H.  J.,  M.A.,  115,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.

Hood,  Mrs.,  115,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.

Hooker,  Joseph  Stenson,  M.D.,  Clive  Vale,  Hastings.

Hooper,  Gordon,  L.D.S.R.O.S.,  21,  New  Cavendish-street,  Harley-

street,  London,  W.
HoPKiNsoN,  Prof.  Alfred,M.A.,B.C.L.,  The  Lodge,  32,  Heme  Hill,  S.E.
HoRRACK,  Philip  J.  de,  4,  Rue  du  General  Foy,  Paris.
HoRSLEY,  George  F.,  26,  Parliament  Hill-road,  Hampstead,  N.W.
HosKiNG,  William  H  ,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Masterton,  New  Zealand.
Hoskins,  Edmond  J.,  M.D.,  Surgeon-Major,  Hammam  Chambers,

76,  Jermyn-street,  London,  S.W.
Howard,  The  Lady  Mabel,  Greystoke  Castle,  Penrith.
Howe,  E.  R.  J.  Gambier,  .3,  Buckingham  Gate-gardens,  London,  S.W.
HuDDLESTON,  Mrs.,  Llwynderw,  Welshpool,  Montgomeryshire.
Hudson,  Norman  W.,  B.A.,  Pebble  Hill,  Limpsfield,  teurrey.
Hughes,  Ma.jor  H.  M.,  F.R.G.S.,  Rose  Bank,  Marden  Park,  Caterham

Valley,  Surrey.

Hughes,  Mrs.,  Gwynnondale,  Lanarthney  R.S.O.,  Carmarthenshire.
Hume-Rothery,  J.  H.,  B.Sc.  (Lond.),  The  Pines, Worcester  Pk.,Surrey.
HuMFREY,  Miss  L.  R.,  8,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  W.
Hunt,  G.  Angus,  M.H.C.S.  (Eng.),  Stoneleigh  House,  Clissold  Park,
London,  N.

HuNTiNGFORD,  Miss,  North  End  House,  Winchester.

Hutchinson,  F.  W.  H.,  M.  A.,  Brooklands  House,  Avenue,  Cambridge.

Hyamson,  Albert  M.,  Secretary's  Office,  General  Post  Office,  E.C.

Hyslop,  Dr.,  Bethlem  Hospital,  London,  S.E.

Tliffe,  Mrs.,  13,  Warnborough-road,  Oxford.

Infield,  H.  I.,  130,  North-street,  Brighton.

Ingham,  Charles  B.,  Moira  House,  Eastbourne.

Ingram,  Hon.  Mrs.  Meynell,  Temple  Newsam,  Leeds.

Innes,  Lady,  Winslow,  Darling  Point,  Sydney,  New  South  Wales.

Jackson,  Miss  E.  R.,  S.  Hilda's  School,  Clifton-road,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.

Jackson,  Rev.  F.,  The  Vicarage,  Newton-upon-Rawcliffe,  Pickering.

Jackson,  William  H.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  PenWartha,  Weston-super-Mare.

Jameson,  F.,  6,  Westbourne  Park-villas,  London,  W.

Jeaffreson,  Rev.  H.  H.,  M.A.,  Villa  degli  Angoli  Fiesole,  Florence.

Jebb,  Mrs.,  Springfield,  Newnham,  Cambridge.

Jeffreys  Mrs.,  Glandyfi  Castle,  Glandovey,  R.S.O.,  North  Wales.

Jeakes,  Rev.  James,  M.A.,  Rectory,  Hornsey,  London,  N.

Jehu,  Thomas  J.,  M.B.,  B.A.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.

Jeune,  Lady,  37,  Wimpole-street,  London,  W.


498


Lii^t  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


Jevons,  F.  B.,  Litt.  D.,  Hatfield  Hall,  Durham.

Johnes,  Mrs.,  Dolaucothy,  Llanwrda  R.S.O.,  South  Wales.

Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  Llandalf  House,  Cambridge.

Johnson,  Mks.  Amy  C,  141,  Walton-street,  Oxford.

Johnson,  Rev.  WAYLANi),LL.D.,Fredon,  Sussex  Co.,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.

Johnston,  Miss  M.  F.,  The  Writer's  Club,  Hastings  House,  Norfolk-
street,  Strand,  W.C.

Jones,  Captain  Hknry  Michael,  V.C,  H.B.M.  Legation,  Lima,  Peru.

Jones,  Sir  Lawrence  J.,  Bart.,  Cranmer  Hall,  Fakenham,  Norfolk.

Jones,  Miss  Constanck,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.

Jones,  Professor  P.,  64,  Via  S'''^-  Lucia,  Naples.  '

Jokdan-Smith,  Bexj.,  A.R.O.S.,  F.C.S.,  2,  Brook-villas,  Westfield-road,
Mansfield.  '  -  .  .

Kay,  H.  A.,  71,  Maida-vale,  London,  VV. '  '

Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  M.A.,  26,  Vanbrugh-park,  Blackheath,  S.E.

Kelso,  Commander,  R.N.,  Horkesley  Park,  Colchester.

Kerr,  George,  M.A.,  M.B.,  6,  St.  Colme-street,  Edinburgh.

King,  Miss,  -"jO,  Gloucester-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

KiNSGBURY,  George  C,  M.D.,  3,  Brighton-parade,  Blackpool.

Kingston,  H.  D.  R.,  M.D.,  Macra,  Eltham,  Kent.

Knight,  Charles  N.,  M.A.,  36,  Kensington  Park-road,  London,  W.

KnowleS,  Ernest,  Inglehurst  Park-road,  Bolton-le-Moors.

Knox,  Natpianiel,  Adelaide  Club,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Knutsford,  The  Lady,  75,  Eaton-square,  London,  S.W.

Kothen,  Baron  Axel  von,  27,  Mikealsgatan,  Helsingfors,  Finland.

Lach-Szyrma,  Rev.W.  S.,  M.A.,  F.R.H.S.,Barkingside  Vicarage,  Ilford.

Lafone,  A.  W.,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  Walton-on-Thames.

Laing,  R.M.,M.A.,B.Sc.,Boys'High  School,  Christchurch,New  Zealand.

Lambert,  Edward  W.,  F.R.G.S.,  13,  Great  James-st.,  London, W.C.

Lamplugh,  Rev.  David,  jNI  A.,  Rokeby  Rectory,  Barnard  Castle.

Lancaster,  Ernest  Le  C,  M.  B.,  Winchester  House,  Swansea.

Leadam,  Isaac  S.,  1,  The  Cloisters,  Temple,  London,  E.C.

Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  Crown  Hill,  Norwood,  S.E.

Leap,  Mrs.,  The  Green,  Marlborough.

Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.  D.,  6,  Sussex-place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
Leaf,  Mrs.  Walter,  6,  Sussex-place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
Lee,  Rev.  W.  T.,  4,  Edith-terrace,  Mount  Gold-road,  Plymouth.
Legge.  The  Lady  Frances,  Woodsome,  Huddersfield.
Lehmann,  Miss  B.  Hoyt,  22,  Walpurgis  Strasse,  Dresden.
Leigh,  W.  Austen,  M. A.,  Hartfield,  Roehampton,  S.W.
Leighton,  D.  E.  W.,  Madras  Club,  Madras.

Lendon- Bennett,  M., Granite  House, Putney-bridge-rd., Putney,  S.W.

Leopold,  Dr.  H.  M.,  8,  Vervei-sdyk,  Delft,  Holland.

Lethbridge,  Alan  B.,  26,  Oxford-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


499


Levy,  Mrs.,  16,  Campden  House-road,  Gampden  Hill,  London,  W.

Lewis,  C.  W.  Mansel,  Stradey  Castle,  Llanelly,  Carmarthenshire.

Leycester,  Mrs.,  6,  Cheyne-walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Librarian  (Hon.)  of  the  Constitutional  Club,  Northumberland-av.,W.C.

Librarian,  Grosvenor  Library,  Buffalo,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Guildhall  Library,  London,  E.G.  ■  ^

Librarian,  Leeds  Library,  Commercial-street,  Leeds. ' ■ " '-  ■

Librarian,  New  York  Public  Library,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Librarian  of  the  Public  Library,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Librarian  of  the  Public  Library,  Melbourne,  Australia.

Librarian,  School  of  Arts,  Brisbane,  Queensland.  •  ■

Limond,  Miss  Catherine,  15,  Eaton-terrace,  London,  S.W.

Lindsay,  R.,  L.R.C.S.,  M.B.,  The  Oaks,  Botley,  Hants.

Lloyd,  Major  Francis,  22,  Cadogan-square,  London,  S.W.

Lloyd,  Thos.  Edward,  .J. P.,  Goedraore,  Cai-digan.

Lodge,  Oliver,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  The  University,  Birmingham.

Lodge,  Robert,  Laurie  Lodge,  Meads,  Eastbourne.

Logan,  Miss  Isabel,  6,  Richmond-terrace,  Whitehall,  London,  S.W.

Lovell,  Reginald  H.,  449,  Collins-street,  Melbourne.

Lucas,  Henry,  "Hilver,"  St.  Agnes-road,  Birmingham.

Ludlow,  General  William, 1,744,  G  Street,  N.  W.  Washington,

B.C.,  U.S.A. • - ■" •. .  ^
LuNN,  Charles,  24,  Avonmore-road,  West  Kensington,  W.
Luxmoore,  Miss,  Bryn  Asaph,  St.  Asaph,  North  Wales.
Lyell,  David,  Ard-choille,  The  Ware  Road,  Hoddesdon,  Herts.
Lyttislton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Arthur,  The  Vicarage,  Eccles,  Manchester.
Macalister,  Professor  A.,  M.U.,  F.Pt.S.,  Torrisdale,  Cambridge.
MacColl,  Rev.  Canon  Malcolm,  M.A.,  Devonshire  Club,  St

James's,  S.W.

Macintyre,  John,  M.B.,  F.R.S.E.,  179,  Bath-street,  Glasgow.
Macky,  Dr.,  4,  Curzon-street,  May  fair,  W.

Malevsky-Malevitch,  Madame  S.,  23,  Millionnaia,  St.  Petersburg.
Manders,  H.,  F.R.C.S.,  33,  Gloucester-ter.,  Hyde-pk.,  London,  W.
Mann,  Rev.  Frederic,  M.A.,  Grange  House,  Chigwell,  Essex.
Mantell,  Miss  Bertha,  6,  Shalston  Villas,  Ewell-road,  Surbiton  Hill.
Markle,  George  B.,  Hazleton,  Pennsylvania,  U.S.A.
Marsh,  Edward  H.,  B.A.,  30,  Bruton-st.,  Berkeley-sq.,  London,  W.
Marshall,  Arthur,  13,  Belsize-a venue,  London,  N.W.
Marshall,  Dr.  Thomas,  25,  Caversham-road,  Kentish  Town,  N.W.
Marshall,  William  Cecil,  M.A.,  28,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.O.
Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78,  Vanbrugh-park,  Blackheath,  S.E.
Martin,  Miss  A.  E.,  15,  Thurloe-square,  South  Kensington,  S.W.
Martin,  Miss  Florence  R.,  65,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Martin,  Mrs.  J.  Biddulph,  17,  Hyde  Park  Gate,  London  S.W.


500


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Martineau,  Alfred  Edward,  14,  Lupus-street,  London,  S.W.
Mason,  Miss  M.  H.,  Morton  Hall,  Retford,  Notts.
Massey,  Charles  C,  124,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Masterman,  CharlesF.  G., M.  A.,  21,  Albany  Dwellings,  Caniberwell,S.E.
MATHEWS,G.B.,B.A.,9,Menai  View-terrace,UpperBangor,North  Wales.
Matthews,  F.H.,  Blairlodge  School^  Polmont  Station,  Stirlingshire, N.B.
Matthews,  Mrs.,  15,  Stanley-gardens,  London,  W.
Maud,  Miss  Constance,  Sanderstead  Rectory,  near  Croydon.
Maxwell,  Sir  John  Stirling,  Bart,  M. P.,  48,  Belgrave  square,  S.W.
Maxwell,  Joseph,  37,  Rue  Thiac,  Bordeaux,  France.
Mayo,  Ernest  S.  G.,  5,  Castle-arcade,  Cardiff.

Mayor,R.G.,  13, Charing  Cross-mansions,  CharingCross-rd., London,  W.C.
McClure,  Henry,  M.D.,  FairfaxHouse,  127,  Cromwell-rd.,  London, S.W.
McConnel,  H.  W.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.R.C.S  ,  Matlaske  Hall  Norwich.
McHuGH,  P.  A.,  M.P.,  Sligo.

McKerlie,  Miss  Helen  G.,  Monkstown,  co.  Dublin.
McLachlan,  David  B.,  Grosvenor  House,  Ridgway,  Wimbledon.
McLaren,  Mrs.  C,  43,  Belgrave-square,  London,  S.W.
McLaughlin,  E.  N.,  Trinity  Villa,  Spanish  Town,  Jamaica.
McLean,  Mrs.,  Hyde  Park-court,  Albert-gate,  London,  S.W.
McNeily,  a.  J.  W.,  Q.C.,  Supreme  Court,  St.  John's,  Newfoundland.
Meath,  The  Most  Rev.  the  Bishop  of,  Navan,  Co.  Meath.
Medeikos  e  Albuquerque,  Jose  de,  Rua  S.  Christovam,  36,  Rio
Janeiro,  Brazil.

Mellor,  Miss  Emily,  The  Cottage  Hospital,  Wellington,  Somerset.

Merrilees,  J.  F.,  M.D.,  Auburn,  Victoria

Metzger,  Daniel,  12bis,  Square  de  Champel,  Geneva.

Micklethwait,  Richard  K.,  Ardsley  House,  Barnsley.

Miers,  Ronald  H.  M.  C,  Lieut.,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  and  Co.,  16,  Charing

Cross,  London,  S.W.
Milburn,Rev.  R.G.,  M.  A.,  Hollywood  House,  Wimbledon  Common,  S.W.
Miles,  Miss,  Woodhill,  Gerrards  Cross,  Bucks.
Milford,  The  Lady,  16,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  W.
Miller,  Rev.  J.  Priest,  Surlingham  Vicarage,  Norwich.
Miller,  Mrs.  W.  Pitt,  Merlewood,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.
Milton,  John  Penn,  M.R.C.S.  (Eng.),  L  R.C.P.  (Lond.),  13,  North

Parade,  Penzance.
Mitchell,  Harry,  74,  Queen's-road,  Dalston,  London,  N.E.
MiTCHEL..,  Major,  Ballynure,  Grange  Con,  co.  Wicklow,  Ireland.
Mitchell,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  195,  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.
MiTCHiNER,  J.  H.,  Acacias,  Barham  Road,  South  Croydon.
Molesworth,  Sir  Guilford  L.,  K  C.T.E.,  Simla,  India.
Money,  Colonel  Gerard  Noel,  C.B.,  F.R.G.S.
Money-Coutts,  Francis  Burdett,Walsingham  House, Piccadilly, W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


501


MoNTEAGLE,  The  Lord,  K.P.,  Mount  Trenchard,  Foynes,  co.  Limerick.
MoNTEBELLO,  La  Comtesse  de,  44,  E,ue  Copernie,  Paris.
Montgomery,  Mrs.,  9,  Hartley-road,  Exmouth.

MoNTMORENCY,J.E.G.de,B.A.,L.L.B.,20,Old-bldngs.,Lincoln's  Inn,W.C
Moore,  General  Montgomery,  Gipsy  Lodge,  Norwood,  S.E.
Morell,  Mrs.  Waldo.,  '2i,  Dunster-avenue,  Rochdale,  Lancashire.
Morgan,  Rev.  Edward,  B.A.,  Penmark  Vicarage,  Cowbridge.
MoRisoN,  Mrs.  Miller,  Morison  House,  Hetland,  Ruthwell,  N.B.
MoRisoN,  Theodore,  M.A.,  Aligarh,  N.W.P.,  India.
Morris,  Charles  A.,  10,  Throgmorton-avenue,  London,  E.G.
Morton,  Mrs.,  1,  Old  Brighton,  Monkstown,  co.  Dublin.
MouL,  Mrs.,  12,  Queen's  Mansions,  58,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
MouLTON,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  c/o  Credit  Lyonnais,  Paris.
Moultrie,  Miss  Amy  J.  C,  44,  Ted  worth-square,  Chelsea,  S.W.
Mount-Temple,  The  Lady,  Babbacombe  Cliff,  Torquay.
Moynihan,  B.  G.A.,  M.B.  (Loud.),  The  General  Infirmary,  Leeds.
Muirhead,  Mrs.,  40, Marlborough-mansions,  Cannon-hill,  Finchley-
road,  N.W.

MuNRO,  H.  A.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Lulworth,  Bushey  Green,  Catford.
Murray,  Professor  Geo.  G.  Auie,  B.A.,  Barford,  Churt,  Farnham.
Murray,  Mrs.  G.  A.,  10,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  N.W.
Murray,  Colonel  Hugh  H.,  R.A.,  28,  Gower-street,  London,  W.C.
Murray,  Oswald,  3,  Compayne-gardens,  South  Harapstea<l,  N.W.
Murray, R. M., M. A., M.B., :\LR.C.P. (Edin.),  1  l,Chester-st.,  Edinburgh.
Murray,  T.  Douglas,  9,  Stratton-street,  Piccaddilly,  W.
Murray,  Hon.  Mrs.,  50,  Grosvenor-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Myers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Neate,  p.  J.,  F.G.S.,  M.T.M.E.,  Belsize,  Watts-avenue,  Rochester.
Nelson,  Rev.  George,  LL.D.,  St.  Michael's  Vicarage,  Bromley,  Poplar,  E.
Newmann,  Oscar  P.,  84,  Newman-street,  London,  AV.
Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  781,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  U.S  A.
NiCHOLLS,  Rev.  T.  B.,  M  A,,  St  Oswald's  College,  Tynemouth.
Nicholson,  Sir  Charles,  Bart.,  D.C.L., LL.D.,  M.D.,  Oakhurst,

Totteridge,  Herts.
NicoLSON,  Sir  A.,  K.C.I. E.,  C.M.G.,  British  Legation,  Tangier,  Morocco
Noble,  James  B.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  167,  Kennington  Park-road,  S.E.
Noel-Cox,  H.  L.  N.,  11,  Oxford-street,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Norman,  Mrs.  Herbert  G.  H., 5,  Southwell  gdns, S.Kensington, S.W.
Norris,  Professor  Richard,  M.D.,  F.R.S.E.,  Birchfield,  Aston,

Birmingham.

Nugent,  Mrs.  Arthur,  36,  Albion-street,  London,  W.

O'DoNNELL,  Elliott,  24,  Alma  road,  Clifton,  Bristol.

Ogilvie,  Mrs.  Robert,  c/o  R.  G.  Ross,  Esq.,  5,  Queen-st.,  Edinburgh.

Ogilvy,  Mrs.  N.  Hamilton,  Biel,  Prestonkirk,  East  Lothian,  N.B.


502


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Oman,  Charles  W.  C,  M.A.,  All  Souls'  College,  Oxford.

O'Neill,  Gregory  L.,  M.B.,  291,  Elizabeth-st.,  Syclney,TSrew South  Wales.

Opie,  Edward  A.  D.,  J. P.,  Pirie-streefc,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Orr,  Mrs.  Sutherland, 11,  Kensingfcon-park-gardens,  London,  W.

Pack-Beresford,  Denis  R.,  Fenagh  House,  Bagnalstown,  Co.  Carlow.

Pagan,  Miss  C,  Marston  Lodge,  Harrow.

Paget,  Lady,  Villa  Bellosguardo,  Florence.

Palliser,  Arthqr,  Jun'r.,  52,  Mount  Ararat,  Richmond,  Surrey.
Palmer,  Miss,  3,  Carlisle-place,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Panton,  D.  Morrieson,  84,  Park-street,  Grosvenor-square,  London,  W.
Passingham,  Mrs.,  Lake  House,  Prestbury,  near  Cheltenham.
Patterson,  C.  B.,  19,  West  31st-street,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Payne,  Ernest,  M.A.,  A.LE.E.,  Hatchlands,  Cuckfield,  Sussex.
Peacock,  Edwin,  M.R-.C.S.(Eng.),  L.S.A.(Lon.),Hazlemere,  Nuneaton.
Pedley,  Charles  Herbert,  Winterley  House,  near  Crewe.
Pennington,  Mrs.,  c/o  Messrs.  W.  Watson  and  Co.,  7,  Waterloo-
place,  London,  S.W.
Percival,  Mrs.,  2,  Soutliwick  Place,  London,  W.
Perdicaris,  Ion,  El  Minzah,  Tangier,  Morocco,  North  Africa.
Perez,  Dr.  Jorge,  Puerto  de  Orotava,  TeneriflPe,  Canary  Islands.
Perry,  E.  C.^  M.D.,  M.A.,  Superintendent's  House,  Guy's  Hospital,  S.E.
Pethybridge,  Walter,  3,  Rhodesia-road,  Clapham  Rise,  S.W.
Petrovo-SolovOVO,  Michael,  38,  Sergievskaia,  St.  Petersburg.
Phillips,  Rev.  J.  T.,  147,  Beaufort-hill,  Beaufort,  Mon.
Pickering,  Harold  J.,  L.D.S.  (Eng.),  52,  High-street,  Chippenham.
Pickering,  James  P^.,  A.LE.E. ,  5,  Carew-road,  Thornton  Heath.
Piddington,  John  George,  87,  Sloane-street,  London,  S.W.
Pilcher,  Giles  T.,  29,  Dawson-place,  London,  W.
Pitt,  St.  George  Lane  Fox,  Traveller's  Club,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.
Fitter,  PtOBERT  A.,  The  School  of  Medicine,  Middlesex  Hospital,  W.
Playford,  Louis  L.,  P.O.  Box,  377,  Johannesburg,  Transvaal,  S.  Africa.
Podmore,  Frank,  M.A.,  32,  Well-walk,  Hampstead,  N.W.
Pollock,  Miss,  50,  Wey mouth-street,  London,  W.
PoNSONBY,  Hon.  Mrs.,  2,  Wilton-terrace,  Belgrave-square,  S.W.
PoNSONBY,  Miss,  Rye  Vale,  Leixlip,  co.  Kildare.
PoNTiFEX,  Miss,  72,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Pope,  George  H.,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  Merchants'  Hall,  Bri.stol.
Porter,  Mrs.,  Sydney  House,  Westclifi'e-road,  Bournemouth.
Portsmouth,  The  Countess  op,  2,  Abbey-gardens,  Westminster,  S.W.
Powell,  Miss  Constance  M.,  5,  Campden  Hill-square,  London,  W.
Powell,  George  Thompson,  Rotherwood,  Sydenham  Hill,  S.E.
PowLES,  Lewis  Charles,  M.A.,  9,  Queen's  Gate-place,  London,  S.W.
PowYS,  Hon.  Mrs.  Fox,  29,  Albion-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Praed,  Mrs.  Campbell,  16,  Talbot-square,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


503


Prescott,  Miss  Frances  E.,  152,  Cromwell-road,  London,  S.W.

Pribitkof,  v.,  67,  Nevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg.

PuLLEN,  Miss,  Milton  View,  Elsecar,  Barnsley,  Yorkshire.

PuMPHREY,  Mrs.,  Derwent-hill,  Ebchester,  co.  Durham.  '  ■

PuRDiE,  Mrs.,  27,  Palace-court,  London,  W.  •  •

Pym,  Mrs.  Angela,  Bankside,  Lunhaiu-road,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.

Radnor,  Helen,  Countess  of,  12,  Upper  Brook-street,  London,  W.

Rae,  Roderic  H.,  103,  Sotheby-road,  Highbury-park,  N.

Raikes,  His  Honour  Judge,  K.C.,  The  Leat  House,  Malton.

Raikes,  Mrs.,  The  Leat  House,  Malton,  Yorkshire.

Rao,  D.  R.  Balaji,  B  A.,  B. L.,  High  Court  Vakil,  Singrachari-street,
Triplicane,  Madias,  India.

Ramsay,  Lady,  23,  Draycot-place,  Cadogan-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Ramsay,  Professor  William,  Ph.D.,  F.R.S.,  12,  Arundel-gardens,  W.

Ramsden,  Miss,  Bulstrode,  (Jerrard's  Cross,  Bucks.

Paper,  R.  W.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Oxford.

Rashdall,  Rev.  Hastings,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,  New  College,  Oxford.

Raupebt,  J.  G.  F.,  30,  Belsize-square,  London,  N.W.

Raworth,  Edwin,  5,  South  Park-road,  Harrogate.

Reade,  Herbert  V.,  6,  Scarsdale  Villas,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Reynolds,  Mrs.,  Millington  House,  Thelwall,  near  Warrington.

Rich,  Miss,  50,  Queen's-gate-terrace,  London,  S  W.

Richardson,  Frederic  W.,  F.C.S.,  Broad  Oak,  Oak  Avenue,  Bradford.

Rickard,  William  T.,  14,  Maitland-street,  Beeston  Hill,  Leeds.

Riddifoed,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Chalfont,  Barnwood,  near  Gloucester.

Ridley,  Henry  N.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  Singapore.

Ridley,  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Daleham-gardens,  London,  N.W.

Ritchie,  Miss  M.,  165,  Clapham-road,  London,  S.W.

RiTTER,  Miss,  Queen  Anne's  Mansions,  St.  James'  Park,  S.W.

Robb,  Mrs.,  46,  Rutland  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Roberts,  Rev.  W.  W.,  39,  Addison-gardens,  Kensington,  W.

Robertson,  George  M.,  M.B.,  Royal  Asylum,  Morningside,  Edinburgh.

Robertson,  Mrs.,  Nether  Scale  Hall,  Ashby-de-la-Zouch.

Robertson,  Miss  N.,  c/o  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  19,  Bucking-
ham-street, Adelphi,  London,  W.O.

Robin,  Percv  A.,  B.A.,  George-street,  Parkside,  Adelaide,  Australia.

Robinson,  Edward,  C.E.,  F.R.A.S.,  4,  Castelnau-gardens,  Barnes,
London,  S.W.

Robinson,  George  R.,  31,  James-street,  Liverpool.

Robinson,  Lady,  5,  Cromwell  Houses,  London,  S.W.

Robinson,  Dr.  William  Newsman,  Kadina,  South  Australia.

Rodewald,  Alfred  E.,  The  Albany,  Liverpool.

Rogers,  Rev.  E.  H.,  M.A.,  Foxley  Lodge,  West  Worthing,  Sussex.
Rogers,  George  F.,  M,A.,  M.D.,  -i,  King's  Parade,  Cambridge.


504


List  of  ill  embers  and  Associates.


Rogers,  R.  S.,  M.A.,  M.S.,  M.D.,  Flinders-street,  Adelaide,  South
Australia.

RoTCH,  C.  B  ,  Trinity  Hall,  Cambridge.

Rothschild,  Mrs.  Leopold  de,  5,  Hamilton-place,  London,  W.
RowE,  Alfred,  5,  Crossley-terrace,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Roxburgh,  R.,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.E.,  1,  Victoria-bdgs., Weston-super-Mare.
Riicker,  Professor  A.  W.,  F.R.S.,  19,  Gladhow-gardens,  S.W.
RuDOLPHi,  Eduard,  20,  Zabalcansky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg,  Russia.
Rumsey,  Mrs.  Almaric,  1,  Allison-gardens,  Dulwicli  Common,  S.E.
RuMSEY, Charles Almeric, M.A., 1, Allison-gardens,  Dulwich

Common,  S.E.
Russell,  Mrs.  Campbell,  Golden  Mead,  Chislehurst.
Russell,  Rev.  T.  H.,  St.  Martin's  Vicarage,  Gospel  Oak,  London,  N.W.
Ryves,  Miss  Miriam  G.  B.,  Bentley  Hall,  Fenny  Bentley,  Ashbourne,

Derbyshire.

Sadler,  Rev.  G.  T.,  B.A.,  96,  Erddig  road,  Wrexham.

Sa,jous,  Charles  E.  de  M.,  M.D.,  2,043,  Walnut-st.,  Philadelphia,  U.S.A.

Samaldas,  Lalubhai,  Chief Revenue  Officer,  Bhavnager,  Bombay

Presidency,  India.
Sampson,  Colonel  Dudley,  Buxshalls,  Lindfield,  Hayward's  Heath.
Sams,  Rev.  George  F.,  M.A.,  Emberton  Rectory,  Newport  Pagnell.
Sanders,  Mrs.,  33,  Buckingham-palace-mansions,  Grosvenor-gdns.,  S.W.
Sanderson,  J.  Murray,  B.A.,  London  Hospital,  London,  E.
Sartoni,  Signorina  Julia,  5,  Piazza  Donatello,  Florence.
Saunders,  Latimer  Henry,  Trevone  House,  Padstow.
Saunders,  Mrs.  W. H.  Radcliffe, 29,  Bramham-gardens,  South

Kensington,  London,  S.W.
Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  M.A.,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.
ScHRAM,  Miss  Lilian  M.E.,  178,  Earl's  Court-road,  London,  S.W.
Schreiber,  Major,  27,  Fopstone-road,  Earl's  Couit,  London,  S.W.
ScHUPP,  Dr.  Falk,  22,  Sonnenstrasse,  Munich.
Schuster,  Miss,  22,  Old  Queen-street,  Westminster,  S.W.
ScHWABE,  Mrs.  G.  S.,  Lieut.-Governor's  House,  Chelsea  Hospital, S.W.
Scott,  Sydney  C,  Hatherleigh,  28,  The  Avenue,  Gipsy  Hill,  London.
ScRiPPS,  T.  Cecil,  21,  Wynell-road,  Forest  Hill,  S.E.
Scull,  Mrs.,  The  Pines,  2,  Langland-gardens,  Hampstead,  N.W.
Sellin,  Professor  C.  W.,  Ausbacher  Strasse,  47,  iii.,  Berlin,  W.
Selous,  Edmund,  Wamil  Hal],  Mildenhall,  Sulfolk.
Selous,  Mrs  ,  Leafield,  Gibson's  Hill,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.
Seymour,  Admiral  Sir  E.  H.,  G.C.B.,  9,  Ovington-square,  S.W,
SiiADWELL,  Miss  Blanche,  Trewollack,  Bodmin.
Shand,Alexander  F.,  1,  Edwardes-place,  Kensington,  W.
Sharpe,  J.  W.,  M.A.,  Woodroffe,  Portarlington-road,  Bournemouth.
Shaw,Rev.  Charles  J.  M.,  The  Orchard,  Swanley,  Kent.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


505


Shaw,  Mrs.  W.  N.,  10,  Moreton-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Shirinbai,  Mrs.  N.,  Ranika,  Bhavnagar,  India.

Shove,  Miss  E.,  K.Q.C.P.I.,  M.B.,  25,  St.  Mark's  crescent.  Regent's
Park,  N.W.

Sidgwick,  Arthur,  M.A.,  64,  Woodstock-road,  Oxford.

SiDGWicK,  Mrs.  Edward,  25,  CoUingham-road,  S.W.

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  ISTewnham  College,  Cambridge.

Sims,  F.  Manley,  F.R.C.S.,  12,  Hertford-street,  Mayfair,  W,

Singleton,  John  R.,  34,  De  Vere  Gardens,  London,  W.

Sisley,  Richard,  M.B.,  Park-row,  Knightsbridge,  London,  W.

SivuDU,  Rayasam  Venkata,  B.A.,  Bezwada,  Madras  Presidency,  India.

Skeffington,  Joseph  B.,  M.A.,  LL.D.,  Waterford,  Ireland.

Smith,  Mrs.  Apsley,  Flore  House,  Weedon,  Northamptonshire.

Smith,  Miss  Beatrice  E.,  Lea,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.

Smith,  D.  R.  Crawfurth,  1,  Whitehall-place,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  G.  Albert,  St.  Ann's  Well,  Brighton.

Smith,  George  M.,  Custom  House,  Scarborough.

Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  7,  Queen's  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,  W.
Smith,  H.  Babington,  B.A.,  C.S.I.,  Stokeleigh,  Weybridge.
Smith,  Miss  J.  M.,  Hyde  Park  Court,  Albert  Gate,  London,  W.
Smith,  Martyn,  Abberton  Hall,  Pershore.

Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  46,  Johnson  Park,  Buffixlo,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Smith,  Reginald  A.,  B.A.,  78,  Cranwicli-road,  Amherst  Park,  London,  N.

Smith,  Mrs  F.  P.,  Barnes  Hall,  Sheffield.

Smith,  W.  Johnson,  Godmanstone  Manor,  near  Dorchester.

Snape,  Mrs.,  Markland  Hill,  Heaton,  Bolton.

Snow,  Chester  A.,  712,  Eighth-street,  Washington,  D.C.,  L^.S.A.

Sowrey,  John,  St.  Julians,  Robinson-road,  Tooting,  S.W.

Speer,  Charlton  T.,  Glenhurst,  The  Common,  Sutton,  Surrey.

Speer,  Mrs.  Stanhope,  Fairholme,  Ventnor,  Isle  of  Wight.

Spencer,  Cyril  E.,  Nicosia,  Cyprus.

Spencer,  Miss  Georgiana  M.,  25,  York -street,  Portman-square,  W.

Sperling,  Arthur,  J. P.,  Lattenlmry  Hill,  St.  Ives,  Hunts.

Spinks,  Judge,  Vernon,  British  Columbia.

St.  George,  Mrs.,  2,  Jervis-place,  Clonmel,  Ireland.

Stafford,  Mrs.,  9,  Fitzwilliam-square,  Dublin.

Stainforth,  Miss  Emily,  15,  Matheson-road,  West  Kensington,  W.
Stange,  Miss,  67,  Princes-gate,  London,  W.

Stanley,  Sir  Henry  M.,  G.C.B.,  DCL.,  LL.D.,  2,  Richmond-
terrace,  London,  S.W.
Stansfeld,  J.  B.  Evelyn,  M. A.,  Junior  Carlton  Club,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.
Stansfeld,  Miss,  The  Sesame  Club,  Dover-street,  Piccadilly,  W.
Stapley,  Mrs.,  33,  Bloomsbury-square,  London,  W.C.
Stead,  William  T.,  Cambridge  House,  Wimbledon,  S.W.


506  Lid  of  Members  and  Associates.


Stephenson,SirAugustusK.,K.C.B.,K.C.,46,Ennisinore-gdns,S.W.

Stepney,  Hon.  Lady,  3,  Chesham-street,  London,  S.  W.

Stevenson,  Andrew,  M.A.,  16,  Warrender  Park  Crescent,  Edinburgh.

Stewart,  jMrs.  C.  A.,  Larghan,  Coupar  Angus,  N.B.

Stewart,  Miss  Susan,  89,  Philbeach-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Stirling,  J.  M.  Morries,  Gogar  House,  Stirling,  N.  B.

Stone,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  5,562,  Clemens-avenue,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.

Stopp,  Paul,  c/o  Dresdner  Bank,  Dresden,  Germany.

Stout,  George  P.,  M.A,,  137,  Woodstock-road,  Oxford.

Strachey,  John  St.  Loe,  Spectator  O&lcq,  1  ,Wellington-st., Strand,  W.C.

Sturgks,  Mrs  William,  32,  Charles-sti-eet,  Berkeley-sq.,  London,  \V.  .

Sturgis,  Julian,  M.A.,  2,  Gloucester-place,  Portman-sq.,  London,  W.

Sullivan,  W.  R.  Washington,  Purleybury,  Purley,  Surrey.

Sqmmerson,  Samuel  J.,  West  House,  Darlington.

Sutton,  Mrs  ,  49,  Lexham-gardens,  London,  W.

Swan,  C.  A.,  10,  Delamere  street,  London,  S.W.

Sweeney,  Hubert  J.  P.,  Balliol  House,  Toynbee  Hall,  London,  E.

Sweeting,  Richard,  D.H.,  B.A.,  D.P.H., 6, Hereford  Mansions,

Heieford-road,  Bayswater,  W.
Swire,  Commander  H.,  R.I^.,  Buxton  Lodge,  Rodwell,  Weymouth.
SzENTiRMAY  DE  Darvasto,  Bela  Maria  -Joseph  de,  Austro- Hungarian

Consulate  General,  Salonica,  Turkey.
Tait,  Mrs.  W.  J.,  Castle  View,  Strood,  Rochester.
Talbot,  Captain  Frederick  G.,  Rifle  Brigade,  15,  Cromwell-road,  S.W.
Talbot,  The  Lady  Edmund,  26,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.
Tanner,  Slingsby,  104b,  Mount-street,  Berkeley-square,  W.
Tattersall,  James  Granville,  Hanover-square  Club,  London,  W.
Tattersall,  Robert  W.,  31,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.
Tattersall,  Wm.,  90,  High-street,  Oxford.

Taunton,  Mrs.  R.  H.,  Brook  Vale,  Witton,  near  Birmingham.
Taylor, Rev.  Arnold  D.,  B.A.,  Churchstanton  Rectory,Honiton,  Devon.
Taylor,  Rev.  Charles  J.,  M.A.,  The  Larches,  Banstead,  Surrey.
Taylor,  Miss  Edith,  9,  Milner  square,  London,  W.
Taylor,  Lieut.-Col.  G.  L.  Le  M.,  6,  College-lawn,  Cheltenham.
Tebb,  a.  E.,  M.D.,  9,  Langland-place,  Finchley-road,  Hampstead,  N.W.
Tebb,  Mrs.,  Rede  Hall,  near  Burstow,  by  Horley,  Surrey.
Temple,  Reginald  W.,  Ashley  House,  Shaftesbury-avenue,  W.C.
Terrill,  George  Morton,  M.D.,  336,  Post-street,  San  Francisco,
California,  U.S.A.,  (President  of  the  California  Psychical  Society).
Thackeray,  Mrs.  W.  G  ,  32,  Kidbrooke  Park-road,  Blackheath,  S.E.
Theobald,  Morell,  62,  Granville-park,  Levvisham,  S.E.
Thomas,  A.  C,  Korumburra,  Gippsland,  Victoria,  Australia.
Thomas,  Rev.  C.  D.,  High-street,  Toddington,  near  Dunstable.
Thomas,  J.  W.,  F.LC,  F.C.S.,  2,  Hampstead  Hill  Mansions,  N.W.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


507


Thompson,  I.  C,  F.L.S.,  F.R.M.S.,  53,  Croxteth-road,  Liverpool.
Thompson,  Mrs.  Edmond,  87,  South  Hill-park,  Hampstead,  N.W.
■  Thomson,  Edward  John,  Cxlen  Tower,  Great  Western-road,  Glasgow.
Thomson,  Prof.  J.  J.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Thomson,  W.  B.,  22,  VVallwood-road,  Leytonstone,  Essex.
Thornhill,  B.,  M.I.C.E.,  Geldeston,  Beccles,  Suffolk.
Thornton,  W.  M.,  M.Sc.  (Vict.),  Durham  College  of  Science,  Newcastle-
on-Tyne.

Thurn  and  Taxis,  H.I.H.  The  Princess  Alexander  of,  Lautschin,

Nimburg,  Bohemia,  Austria.
Thurstan,  F.  W.,M.A.,  21a,  High-street,  Eton,  Windsor.
Toby,  Ernest  G.,  23,  Southcote-road,  Tufnell  Park,  London,  N.
Trench,  J.  Townsend,  J.P.,  Kenmare,  Ireland.

Trevor,  Rev.  Thomas  Warren,  M.A.^  Penmon  A^icarage,  Beaumaris.
Tuckey,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  88,  Park-street,  Grosvenoi'-square,  W.
TuKER,  Miss  Mildred  A.R.,  4,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,  N.W.
Turner,  Alfred  E.,  Major  General,  C.B.,  21,Tite-st.,  London,  S.W.
Tweedale,  Mrs.,  Balquholly,  Tun-iff,  KB.
Tweedie,  David  M.,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
Tyrer,  Mrs.  W.,  Woodleigh,  Prescot.

Vacher,  William  H.,  54,  Addison  Mansions,  Kensington,  S.W.
Vailati,  Professor  Giovanni,  Crema,  Italy.
"Van  Eeden,  Frederick,  M.D.,  Bussum,  Holland.
Van  Renterghem,  A.  W.,  M.D.,  251,  Keisersgracht,  Amsterdam.
Venables,  Rev.  Herbert  A.,  M.  A.,  28,  Viale  Principe  Amedeo,  Florence.
Venn,  J.,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.,  Sefton  House,  Hard  wick-road,  Eastbourne.
Verrall,  Mrs.,  5,  Selwyn-gardens,  Cambridge.
Verrall,  Miss  M.  E.,  26,  Gloucester-place,  Brighton.
ViAN-WiLLiAMS,  PtEV.  H.,  3,  Waterloo-place.  North  Shields.
ViCKERS,  Mrs.,  26,  Queen's  Gate-gardens,  London,  S.W.
ViLLAMARiNA,  The  Marchesa  di,  Palazza  Reale,  Quirinale,  Rome.
ViLLiERS,  Miss  Adela  C,  41,  Lennox  Gardens,  London,  S.W
Wade,  Rev.  William,  19,  St.  Charles'-square,  North  Kensington,  W.
Walford,  Col.  Neville  L.,  R.A.,  1,  Ashburn  place,  London,  S.W.
Walker,  Miss  Madeline  J.,  28,  Norfolk-st.,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Wall,  Miss  M.  M.,  100,  Chelsea-gardens,  London,  S.W,
Wallace,  Abraham,  M.D.,  39,  Harley-street,  London,  W.
Warburton,  Rev.  W.  T.,  M.A.,  St.  James's  Vicarage,  Congleton.
Ward,  The  Hon.  Miss,  Castle  Ward,  Downpatrick.
Ward,  Wilfrid,  Molescroft,  Eastbourne,

Wardrop,  Mrs.,  10,  Lower  Belgrave-street,  Eaton-square,  S.W.
Warrender,  Miss  Margaret,  87,  Eaton-square,  London,  S.W.
Wassell,  H.  A,,  F.R,.A.S.,Addenbrook  Villa, Old  Swinford,Stourbridge.
Watson,  Mrs.  W.  C,  Colworth,  Bedford.


508


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Way,  William  R.,  Hillside,  Upminster,  Essex.
Webb,  Godfrey,  167,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Webber-Smith,  Colonel  James,  27,  Shaftesbury-avenue,  London,  W.
Wedd,  N.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Wells,  E.P.,  C.E.,  7,  St.  George's-mansions,  Bessborough-gardens,  S.W.'
Wells,  H.  G.,  Spade  House,  Sandgate.

Westcott,  William  Wynn,  M.B.,  D.P.H  ,  396,  Camden-road,  N.
Westekn,  Rev.  W.  T.,  M.  A.,  Bartlow  Rectory,  Linton,  Cambridgeshire.
Westlake,  Ernest,  F.G.S.j  Vale  Lodge,  Hampstead  Heath,  JST.W.
Whamond,  J.  Robbie,  15,  Langland-gdns,  Finchley-rd,  London,  N..W.
Wherry,  G.  E.,  F.R.C.S.,  Corpus-buildings,  Cambridge.
Whidborne,  Miss  C.  M.,  Charante,  Torquay.

Whishaw,  Mrs.  Bernhard,  Heathtield  Down,  Modbury,  S.  Devon.

Whitakkr,  Joseph  J.  S.,  Villa  Malfitano,  Palermo,  Sicily.

White,  Miss  E.  Hilda,  170,  Queen's-gate,  London,  S.W.

White,  Mrs.,  133,  Lordship-road,  Stoke  Newington,  N.

White  Leedham,  D.L.,  F.C.S.,  16,  Wetherby-gdns.,  London,  S.W.

Whitehead,  Miss  Mercia  D.,  34,  York-street  Chambers,  Bryanston-

square,  London,  W.
Whiting,  J.  Markby,  58,  Ted  worth-square,  Chelsea,  S.W.
WiGAN,  Rev,  Herbert,  M.A.,  Luddesdowne,  near  Gravesend.
WiGAN,  W.  L.,  Clare  Cottage,  East  Mailing,  Maidstone.
Wilberforce,  The  Ven.  Archdeacon,  M.A.,  20,  Dean's  Yard,  S.W.
Wild,  Ernest  E.,  B.A.,  LL.M.,  1,  Garden-court,  Temple,  London,  E.G.
WiLKiNS,  SiLVANUS,  15,  Victoria-street,  Westminster,  S.W.
Wilson,  Miss,  c/o  Miss  F.  Wilson,  The  Cottage,  West  Ay  ton,  York.
Wilson,  Robert,  M.I.C.E.,  7,  St.  Andrew's  Place,  Regent's  Park,N.W.
Willan,  Miss  F.  M.,  Mayfield  House,  Old  Ford-rd.,  Bethnal  Green,  E.
WiLLETT,  Mrs.,  Bedales,  Lindfield,  near  Haywards  Heath,  Sussex.
Williams,  A.  C.  Redshawe,  14,  Shei'borne-lane,  London,  E.G.
Williams,  J.  Fischer,  7,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.
Williams,  Rev.  Nelson  G.,M.A.,Ketteringham,Wymondham,  Norfolk.
Williams,  Colonel  S.  De  la  Grange,  Broomie  Close,  Sutton  Cold-

tield,  Birmingham.
Williams,  Miss  S.,  The  Reservoir,  Edgbaston,  near  Birmingham..
Willmott,  Miss  R.,  Warley  Place,  Great  Warley,  Essex.
WiNGFiELD,  H.  E.,  M.A.,  58,  Tedworth-square,  Chelsea,  S.W.
Wisden,  Lieut.  Thomas  F.  M.,  Broadwater,  near  Worthing.
WiTHERBY,  Arthur  George,  B.  A.,  8,  Kensington  Palace-gardens,  S.W.
Withers,  J.  J.,B.A.,  2,  Museum  Chambers,  Bury-st.,  Bloomsbury,  W.C.
Woeikow,  Alexis,  9  Moika,  St.  Petersburg.

Woodd,  Mrs.  Basil,  Leckby,  HoUington  Park,  St.  Leonard's-on-Sea.
Woodhull,  Miss  Zula  Maud,  17,  Hyde  Park-gate,  London,  W
Woods,  John  F.,  M.D.,  Hoxton  House  Asylum,  London,  N.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


509


Worsfold,  Mrs.  Basil,  3,  Pump  court,  Temple,  London,  E.G.

Worsley-RobertS,  Mrs.,  c/o  Messrs.  Lewis  and  Newton,  14,  South-
square,  Gray's  Inn,  London,  W.C.

Wright,  Mes.  Almroth  E.,  Iiigleside,  Netley,  Hants.

Wyld,  George,  M.D.,  7,  Westbourne-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Wyndham,  Hon.  Percy,  44,  Belgrave-square,  London,  S.W.

Yearsley,  p.  Macleod,  M.R.O.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Chalk-hill  House,  Kings-
bury-Neasden,  N.W.

Yorke,  Hon.  Alexander,  32a,  Orchard-street,  London,  W.

Young,  .James  F.,  Bryntesog  Villa,  New-road,  Llanelly,  South  Wales

Young,  Prof.  W.  H.,  883,  East  Main-street,  Columbus,  Ohio,  U.S.A.


N.B. — Members  and  Associates  are  requested  to  send  information  of  any
change  of  address  to  the  Assistant-Secretary,  19,  Buckingham  Street,
AnELPHi,  London,  W.C.  ..


510


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES  OF  THE  AMERICAN  BRANCH.

(February,  1901.)


Names  of  Members  are  printed  in  Black  Type.

Names  of  Associates  are  2)rinted  in  Small  Capitals.


All  Addresses  are  "  U.S.A."  except  wlten  another  Country  is  named.


Adams,  Mrs.  Albert  J.,  Netherland  Hotel,  59th-street  and  5th-a venue,

New  York,  N.Y.
Adams,  Miss  C.  C,  426,  Central  Park,  West  New  York,  N.Y.
Adams,  George  S.,  M.D.,  Insane  Hospital,  Westboro,  Mass.
Agelasto,  Michael  A.,  Box  244,  Norfolk,  Va.
Albery,  Mrs.  H.  M.,  Colusa,  Colusa  Co.,  Cal.
Albree,  John,  Junr.,  Swampscott,  Mass
Albrke,  Ralph,  187,  Western-avenue,  Allegheny,  Pa.
Alexander,  Don,  Blue  Ridge  Dispatch  Co.,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.
Allen,  C.  S.,  Rooms  114-115,  Burr  Block,  Lincoln,  Neb.
Ames,  Miss  Evelyn,  c/o  Messrs.  Whitby  and  Co.,  Florence,  Italy.
Anderson,  Professor  A.  W.,  Macalester  College,  St.  Paul,  Minn.
Arbuckle,  Mrs.  L.  J.,  Maury  City,  Crockett  Co.,  Tenn.
Arguelles,  Don  Pedro,  Collector  of  Customs,  N.  Laredo,  Mexico.
Arnold,  Miss  Fannie,  323,  North  17th-street,  Omaha,  Neb.
Atwood,  Dr.  G.  Wilson,  17,  Tremont-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Ayer,  Mrs.  H.  H  ,  c/o  New  York  World,  Manhattan,  New  York,  N.Y.
Baker,  Alfred  L.,  2,G41,  Prairie- Avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Bancroft,  Mrs.  John  C,  61,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Bancroft,  Miss  M  ,  Haddonfield  Training  School,  Haddon  Field,  N.J.
Baner.ti,  Prafulla  Ch.,  Dy.  Postmaster-General,  Dacca,  Eastern

Bengal,  India.
Barker,  Mrs.  C.  F.,  3,914,  Ellis-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Barrett,  Harrison  D.,  Box  3,  Needhara,  Mass.
Barrows,  C.  M.,  142,  Massachusetts-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Bartlett,  C.  J.,  Marlin,  Texas.

Bartlett,  James  W.,  211,  Central-avenue,  Dover,  N.H.

Bates,  Dr.  Mary  E.,  The  Westminster,  Copley-square,  Boston,  Mass.

Bayley,  Weston  D.,  M.D.,  s.e.  cor.  15th  k  Poplar-sts.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


511


Beam,  Mrs.  John  V.,  Jr.,  10,  West  30th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Beebe,  C.  E  ,  408,  West  9th-street,  Chattanooga,  Tenn.

Beeson,  Han.vibal  a.,  M.D.,  Leesburg,  Ohio.

Belden,  Mrs.  Amanda  W.,  4,722,  Woodlawn-a venue,  Chicago,  111.

Bengler,  Chas.  E.,  Box  2,851,  Boston,  Mass.

Berger,  Alex.,  c/o  Central  Granaries  Co.,  Lincoln,  Neb.

BiCKFORD,  R.  G.,  Newport  News,  Va.

Blakesley,  Theodore  S.,  721,  West  Harrison-street,  Chicago,  111.
Block,  Louis,  211,  Main-street,  Davenport,  Iowa.
Blodgett,  C,  M  D.,  c/o  General  Delivery,  San  Francisco,  Cal.
Blossom,  Miss  Mary  C,  46,  East  21st  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Boardman,  Hon.  W.  F.,  Department  of  the  Interior,  Ottawa,  Canada.
Boon,  Mrs.  E.  G.,  Villa  Emilia,  Alassio,  Liguria,  Italy.
Booth,  Mrs.  Lucy  C.  Great  Barrington,  Mass.
Boston,  C.  A.,  Saint  James,  Minn.

Both-Hendriksen,  Miss  Louise,  166,  Macon-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Bowditch,  C.  P.,  28,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Bowditch,  Professor  H.  P.,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.

Bowers,  E.  S.,  3,520,  Hartford-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Boyd,  Mrs.  Ella  F.,  Hyde  Park,  Mass.

Bradley,  Miss  A.  A.,  Hingham,  Mass.

Brewster,  Edwin  T.,  Andover,  Mass.

Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama.

Brooks,  Henry,  40,  State-street,  Room  16,  Boston,  Mass.

Brown,  Alfred  S.,  195,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.

Brown,  Henry  T.,  Hillcrest,  Winchester,  Mass.

Brown,  Mrs.  H.  T.,  Hillcrest,  Winchester,  Mass.

Brown,  Rev.  Howard  N.,  79,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Brown,  Ronald  K.,  320,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.

Brown,  Mrs.  Samuel  R.,  2501,  Farnam-street,  Omaha,  Neb.

Browne,  G.  H.,  24,  Garden-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Bruce,  Rev.  James  M.,  South  Broadway,  Yonkers,  N.Y.

Brush,  W.  Franklin,  16,  E.  37th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Buffet,  Dr.  E.  P.,  520,  Bergen-avenue,  Jersey  City  Heights,  N.  J.

BuLLARD,  Dr.-  W.  N.,  89,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Bulley,  R.  H.,  Canton,  Ohio.

Bullock,  Rev.  M.  A.,  645,  North  25th-street,  Lincoln,  Neb.
Bundy",  Mrs.  John  C,  624,  Sheridan-square,  Evanston,  111.
Burgess,  Dr.  O.  O.,  373,  Geary-street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.
Butin,  Dr.  J.  L.,  B-street,  Madera,  Cal.

Cabot,  Caroline  A.,  M.D.,  2,643,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.
Cahill,  Dr.  Eliza  B.,  The  Westminstei-,  Copley-square,  Boston,  Mass.
Callender,  Ira  S.,  Galesburg,  111.

Card-Catlin,  Mrs.  Lovisa,  726,  French-street,  Erie,  Pa.


512


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Carey,  Mrs.  A.  A.,  Fayerweather-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Carnochan,  Gouverneur  M.,  44,  New-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

CARPENTEii,  Mrs.  Franklin  R  ,  Dead  wood,  South  Dakota.

Carpenter,  Professor  G.  R.,  Columbia  University,  New  York,  N.Y.

Carpenter,  W.  O.,  Menominee,  Micliigan.

Carr,  Lucien,  163,  Brattle  street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Carrin'GTON,  Hereward,  622,  Nicollet-avenue,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Casey, Theodore  B.,The  Empire,333,Commonwealth-ave.,  Boston,  Mass.

Cassatt,  Miss  Mary,  10,  Rue  de  Marignan,  Paris.

Oaulkins,  Silas,  310,  Requena-street,  Los  Angeles,  California.

Channing,  Dr.  Wm.  E.,  9,  St.  James  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Chapman,  Hon.  Geo.  T.,  290,  Pearl  Street,  Cleveland,  Ohio.

Chard,  R.  J.,  347,  West  87th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Chard,  Thomas  S.,  534,  Noi-th  State-street,  Chicago,  111.

Chase,  G.  N.  (Lieut.  U.S.  Army,  Rtd.),  Neosho,  Missouri.

Chase,  Harvey  S.,  8,  Congress-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Chatwin,  James,  926,  Fairmount-avenue,  Phila.,  Pa.

Cheney,  Dr.  Frederick  E.,  120,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Cheney,  W.  T.,  Box  184,  Rome,  Ga.

Chick,  Frank  W.,  Madrid,  Franklin  Co.,  Maine.

Christine, G.  Maxwell,  A.M.,  M.D.,  2,043, N.  1 2th-st.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Clark,  Miss  F.  Bisnita,  578,  East  60th-street,  Chicago,  111.
Clarke,  Mrs.  Alice  J.,  506,  North  7th-street,  Vincennes,  Ind.
Clarke,  Miss  Rebecca  S.,  Norridgewock,  Maine.
Closson,  Dr.  James  H.,  53,  West  Chelton-avenue,  Germantown,  Pa.
Clothier,  Mrs.  F.  C,  55,  Day-street,  Fredonia,  N.Y.
Clough,  Albert  L.,  Box  114,  Manchestei-,  N.H.
Cockerill,  Mrs.  R.  D.,  Glasgow,  Mo.

CoE,  Mrs.  Andrew  J.,  P.O.  Drawer,  101,  New  Haven,  Conn.
Coe,  Miss  M.  A  ,  155,  Aspinwall-avenue,  Brookline,  Mass.
Coffin,  Abraham  B.,  Winchester,  Mass.

Coleman,  Geo  E.,  1,834,  California-street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.
Collins,  Wm.  G.,  330,  West  108th  street,  New  York,  N.Y.
CoNKLm,  Roland  R.,  524,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Cook,  Rev.  Chas.  H.,  Ph.D.,  Room  53,  Arapahoe  Building,  Arapahoe-

street,  Denver,  Colo.
CooKE,  Dr.  Joseph  B.,  269,  West  138th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Coolidge,  J.  T.,  JuNR.,  114,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Cope,  Porter  F.,  4,810,  Regent-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Cortazzo,  Miss  K.,  c/o  Baring  Bros.,  8,  Bishopsgate-st.,  London,  E.C.
CoRTis,  Miss  Grace  M.,  28,  West  59th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Coryell,  V.  M.,  20,  Lincoln-road,  Flatbush,  N.Y.
Cox,  Mrs.  Rowland,  310,  West  7th-street,  Plainfield,  N.J.
Cozens,  J.  C,  Amsterdam,  N.Y.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


513


Craigk,  Wm.  C,  409,  Chestnut-sfcreet,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Crane,  A.  J.,  218,  Walnut-street,  Montclair,  N.J.
Crosby,  Professor  W.  O.,  Institute  of  Technology,  Boston,  Mass.
Crothers,  Dr.  T.  D.,  Walnut  Lodge,  Hartford,  Conn.  :
Ourran,  Richard  L.,  114,  W.  34th-street,  New  York.
Currier,  Mrs.  Moody,  Manchester,  N.H.

Curtis,  W.  E.,  14,  W.  20th-street,  Manhattan,  New  York,  N.Y.
Gushing,  Miss  Eleanor  P.,  76,  Elm-street,  Northampton,  Mass.
Danforth,  Mrs.  Henry,  535,  West-avenue,  Rochester,  N.Y.
Davidson,  H.  A.,  179,  Montague-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Davis,  Dr.  D.  W.,  5,915,  Girard-avenue,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Dawson,  Miles  M.,  11,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.
Delabarre,  Prof.  E.  B.,  9,  Arlington-avenue,  Providence,  R.I.
Demming,  Ben.j.  W.,  Harrisburg,  Pa.

Derby,  Captain  George  McC,  3,232,  Prytania-st.,  New  Orleans,  La.
Des  Islets,  Professor  C.  M.,  69,  Wilson-avenue,  Allegheny,  Pa.
Devine,  Andrew,  14:5,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.
De  Witt,  Mrs.  Harriet,  Colorado  Springs,  Colo.
Dexter,  Mrs.  George,  39,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Dickey,  Calvin,  M.A.,  Rooms  45-46,  Lenox  Building,  90,  Washington-
street,  Chicago,  111.
DoANE,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Stockbridge,  Mass.
Dodds,  W.  H.,  518,  Fourth-avenue,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Dodge,  Joseph  T.,  346,  West  Washington-avenue,  Madison,  Wis.
Donaldson,  James  W.,  Ellenville,  N.Y.

Dorr,  Mrs.  C,  H.,  18,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Dorr,  George  B.,  18,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Dougherty,  Dr.  G.  F.,  Neoga,  111.

Dougherty,  Mrs.  Jeanie  W.,  The  Cairo,  Washington,  D.C.

Dow,  Alexander,  47,  West  43rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Drake,  Mrs.  A.  J.,  Auburndale,  Mass.

Draper,  George  Otis,  Hopedale,  Mass.

DuGGiN,  Mrs.  Chas.,  310,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Dunham,  Dr.  W.  R.,  64,  Main-street,  Keene,  N.H.

Dyer,  Walter  H.,  Knightsville,  Maine.

Hady,  T.  J,,  Atlanta,  Ga.

Eager,  George  R.,  Auburndale,  Mass.

Earl,  John  C,  76,  Kingston-avenue,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Edmunds,  Miss  L.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.

Eldred,  N.  J.,  Benton  Harbour,  Mich.

Eldridge,  Prof.  E.  H.,  The  Temple  College,  Broad  &  Berks-streets,

Philadelphia,  Pa.
Eldridge,  John  R.,  M.D.,  172,  Benefit-street,  Providence,  R.I.
Elliott,  Miss  Alma  C,  4,916,  Washington-avenue,  Chicago  111.


514


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Emerson,  C.  W.,  Emerson  College  of  Oratory,  Boston,  Mass.

EsTERLEY,  Mrs.  Geo.  W.,  1,115,  East  Capitol  Street,  AVashington,  i).C.

EsTY,  Professor  William  C,  Amherst  College,  Amherst,  Mass.

Evans,  Miss  Ella  K.,  186,  North-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Evans,  Mrs.  Glendower,  12,  Otis-place,  Boston,  Mass.

Evans,  Mark  G.,  409,  Mining  Exchange-building,  Denver,  Colo.

Farmer,  Miss  Sarah  J.,  Eliot,  Maine.

FiLLEBROWN,  Thos.,  M.D.,  D.M.D.,  l-'j?,  Newbury-street,  Boston,  Mass.
FiNNiGAN,  John,  61,  Beekman-street,  ISTew  York,  N.Y.
Fisher,  L.  S.,  Sparta,  Wis.

Flower,  Mrs.  Gkorge  W.,  615,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Forman,  G.  a..  Room  11,  St.  Clair-building,  Marietta,  Ohio.
FoRMAN,  Lawrence  C,  Room  11,  St.  Clair-building,  Marietta,  Ohio.
Foster,  Miss  L.  F.,  178,  West  82ad-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Frankland,  Frkderick  W.,  .346,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.
Franklin,  Mrs.  Anne  R.,  Tampa,  Florida.
Freeman,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Box  .322,  Hinsdale,  111.
Friendlich,  E.,  P.O.  Box  517,  Galena,  Kansas.
Fullerton,  C.  W^.,  94,  Dearborn-street,  Chicago,  111.
FuLLERTON,  PROFESSOR  G.  S.,  Univ.  of  Penn.,  West  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Fyke,  E.  E.,  M.D.,  Centralia,  111.

Gable,  Geo.  A.,  Room  319,  Wainwright  Building,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Gage,  Hon.  Lyman  J.,  1,715,  Massachusetts-ave,  Washington,  D.C.

Gale,  Prof.  Harlow  S.,  Univ.  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis,  Minnesota.

Gardiner,  Professor  H.  N.,  23,  Crafts  Avenue,  Northampton,  Mass.

Gardiner,  J.  Hays,  18,  Grays  Hall,  Harvard  Univ.,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Garland,  Miss  Caroline,  Librarian,  Public  Library,  Dover,  N.H.

Garvin,  M.  T.,  Lancaster,  Pa.

Gay,  Walter,  73,  Rue  Ampere,  Paris,  France.

Gehring,  Albert,  109,  Edgewater-street,  Cleveland,  Ohio.

Geiiring,  Dr.  J.  G.,  Bethel,  Maine.

Gerrish,  Dr.  F.  H.,  675,  Congress-street,  Portland,  Maine.
GoDDARD,  George  A.,  10,  Tremont-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Goodale,  Henry  Sterling,  Buckingham,  Va.
Goodnow,  H.  R.,  95,  Riverside  Drive,  New  York.
Graham,  T.  B.,  26,  West  50th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Grant,  Mrs.  Lincoln,  223,  Aspinwall-avenue,  Brookline,  Mass.
Gray,  Mrs.  John  C,  176,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Greene,  Bertram,  6,  Louisburg-square,  Boston,  Mass.
Gridley,  J.  N.,  Virginia,  111.

Griffin,  Mrs.  J.,  The  Pennoyer  Sanitarium,  Kenosha,  Wis.
Griffing,  Mrs.  Jane  R.,  124,  Lexington-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Grower,  George  G.,  Ansonia  Brass  and  Copper  Co.,  Ansonia,  Conn.
Hall,  James  P.,  6,  Poplar-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


515


Hand,  Miss  M.  Lilian,  413,  Lynn-street,  Yankton,  S.D.
Hanna,  Carl  L.,  49,  S.  Wade-avenue,  Washington,  Pa.
Hapgood,  Mrs.  Charles  H.,  Alton,  111.

Hardaway,  W.  a.,  M.D.,  2,922,  Locust-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Harris,  William  T.,  LL.D.,  1,.30;3,  P.-street,  N.W.,  Washington,  B.C.

Hartshorne,  Charles  IL,  2.39,  Washington- street,  Jersey  City,  N.J.

Harvey,  Anson  B.,  M.A.,  Wawa,  Delaware  Co.,  Pa.

Haworth,  George  D.,  Decatur,  111.

IIaynes,  Henry  W.,  239,  Beacon- street,  Boston,  Mass.

Hayvvard,  Alvinza,  San  Mateo.,  Cal.

Hebard,  Charles,  M.D.,  Mondovi,  Wis.

Heilner,  Bev.  S.  a.,  D.D.,  2,434,  Marshall-street,  Philadeli^hia,  Pa.
Hemenway,  Augustus,  Beadville,  Mass.

Hemmeter,  John  C,  Suite  12,  Bratenahl  Block,  Cleveland,  Ohio.

Henry,  Mrs.  Thos.  S.,  1,177,  Broad-street,  Newark,  N.J

Henshaw,  Mrs.  Harriet  A.,  The  Kempton,  Berkeley  and  Newbury-

streets,  Boston,  Mass.
Heysinger,  Dr.  Isaac  W.,  1,521,  Poplar-street,  Phila.,  Pa.
Heywood,  Charles,  Exchange  Court  Building,  New  York,  N.Y.
Hicks,  Ben,i.  D.,  Old  Westljury,  Queen's  Co.,  N.Y.
Higbee,  Col.  George  H.,  Burlington,  Iowa.
Hill,  Dr.  A.  Ross,  University  of  Nebraska,  Lincoln,  Neb.
Hillman,  Hugh  H.,  Bank  of  Commerce  Building,  Oklahoma,  O.T.
Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.
Hodgson,  Dr.  Thomas,  Gertrude-street,  Fitzroy,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Hoffman,  Prof.  F.  S,,  Union  College,  Schenectady,  N.Y.
HoLBROOK,  Francis  W.,  Haworth,  N.J.
Holbrook,  Levi,  P.  O.  Box  536,  New  York,  N.Y.
HoLBROOK,  Dr.  M.  L.,  46,  East  21st-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
HoLLADAY,  Prof.  Waller,  120,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.
Holmes,  Mrs.  Julia  Sadlkr,  132,  West  79th-st.,  New  York,  N.Y.
Holmes,  Rev.  S.  V.  V.,  724,  Delaware-avenue,  Bufialo,  N.Y.
Holt,  Henry,  29,  West  23rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Holt,  Dr.  L.  E.,  14,  West  55th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
HosKiN,  John,  4,100,  Locust-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
HoTCHKiss,  Mrs.  E.  Hubbell,  4,  Arch-street,  Norwalk,  Conn.
HowLAND,  Miss  B.  M.,  cor.  Carver  and  Museum-sts.,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Hudson,  Thomson  Jay,  10,  Ninth-street,  S,E.,  Wa.shington,  D.C.
Hughes,  Oliver  H.,  Hillsboro,  Ohio.
Huidekopee,  Mrs.  Arthur  C,  Meadville,  Pa.
Hunt,  Mrs.  George  S.,  165,  State-street,  Portland,  Maine.
Hunter,  Mrs.  M.  L.,  1028,  N.  Eutaw-street,  Baltimore,  Md.
HusE,  Wm.,  Klamath  Falls,  Oregon.
HusTED,  A.  D.,  M.D.,  73,  Allen-street,  Pittsburg,  Pa.

2  o


516


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Hutchinson,  Henry  E.,  1,180,  Dean-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  Columbia  University,  New  York,  N.Y.
Jaggab,  Rt.  Rev.  Thos.  A.  (Bishop  of  Southern  Ohio),  Smith  Cove,

Digby  Co.,  Nova  Scotia,  Canada.
James,  Dr.  H.  F.,  2,627,  Olive  street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
James,  Professor  William,  95,  Irving-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Jamison,  A.  B.,  M.D.,  43,  West  45th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Jefferson,  J.,  Buzzard's  Bay,  Mass.

Jenks,  Mrs.  P.  A.,  290,  Marlborough  street,  Boston,  Mass.

Jeschke,  Rev.  Harry,  Hackensack,  N.J.

Jessop,  Dr.  Halton  I.,  1,829,  Arch-street,  Phihi.,  Pa.

Jewett,  Professor  Franklin  N.,  Fi-edonia,  N.Y.

Johnson,  Charles  R.,  Box  492,  405,  Main-streot,  "Worcester,  Mass.

Johnson,  Professor  Roger  B.  C,  Miami  University,  Oxford,  Ohio.

JoLiNE,  Mrs.  Adrian  H.,  1,  West  72nd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Jones,  Miss  Alice,  Santa  Monica,  Los  Angeles  Co.,  Cal.

Jones,  C.  H.,  c/o  J.  P.  Willis  and  Bro.,  Galveston,  Texas.

Jones,  Francis  R.,  27,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Jones,  George  H.,  561,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Joss,  Rev.  A.  A.,  Bismarck,  N.D.

JuDAH,  Noble  B.,  2,701,  Prairie  avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Kempton,  C.  ay.,  c/o  Percy  B.  McCoy,  29,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.

Kennedy,  Harris,  M.D.,  Readville,  Mass.

Kimball,  Dr.  F.  H.,  Rockford,  111.

Kimball,  Miss  Hannah  P.,  325,  Oommonwealth-ave.,  Boston,  Mass.
KiN(iSBURY,  Hon.  B.  B.,  Box  1,107,  Defiance,  Ohio.
KiNiiAiDE,  T.  B.,  38,  Spring  Park-avenue,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.
Knowles,  Rev.  Edward  R.,  LL.D,,  Lock  Box  15,  Oxford,  Mass.
KoHNSTAMM,  Emil  V.,  Hotel  Etidicott,Colombus-a venue  and  81st-street,
New  York,  N.Y.

KoPTA,  Madame  Flora  P.,  Gut  Podmok  in  Podinok,  Post  Shiitten-

hofen,  Bohemia,  Europe.
Kreb>:,  G.  W.  C,  26,  E  ist  Baltimore-street,  Baltimore,  Md.
Krebs,  Rev.  Stanley  L.,  Reading,  Pa.  »
KuiiN,  Hamilton,  36,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Langley,  Professor  S.  P.,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.C.
Lavvrrence,  A.  E.,  1,  West  81-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Lawton,  Miss  Elizabeth,  c/o  Franklin  Tliomasson,  Arden  Lea,  Heaton,

Bolton,  England.
Lay,  W^ilfrid,  Ph.D.,  19,  Elm-street,  New  Rochelle,  N.Y.
Ledyard,  Mrs.  Pv..  F.  H.,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.
Leonard,  Thomas,  628,  N.  22nd-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
LiBBY,  Dr.  H.  F.,  687,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Librarian,  Bowdoin  College  Library,  Brunswick,  Maine.


List  of  Meiiibem  and  Associates.


517


Librarian,  Bryn  Mawr  College,  Bryn  Mawr,  Pennsylvania

Librarian,  Cambridge  Public  Libi-ary,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Librarian,  Cazenovia  Public  Library,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.

Librarian,  City  Library  Association,  Springfield,  Mass.

Librarian,  Enoch  Pratt  Free  Libi-ary  of  Baltimore  City,  Baltimore.

Librarian,  Hackley  Public  Library,  Muskegon,  Mich.

Librarian,  Lowell  City  Library,  Lowell,  Mass.

Librarian,  Maiden  Public  Library,  Maiden,  Mass.

Librarian,  Michigan  State  Library,  Lansing,  Mich.

Librarian,  Peoria  Public  Library,  Peoria,  111.

Librarian,  Public  Library,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Librarian,  Theological  Seminary,  Rochester,  N.Y.

Librarian,  University  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Librarian,  University  of  Nebraska,  Lincoln,  Nebraska.

LiNDSEY',  Bkn  B.,  7l2-71f,  People's  Bank  Building,  Denver,  Colo.

LiNDESLisY,  J.,  No.  200,  Yokohama,  Japan.

LipPiTT,  General  Francis  J.,  1,827,  Jefferson-place,  Washington,  D.C.
Llewellyn,  F.  T.,  B.A.,  C.E.,  1,012,  Hennen  J51dg.,  New  Orleans,  La.
Logan,  W.  S.,  58,  William-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
LoMBARDi,  C,  265,  14th-street,  Portland,  Oregon.
Long,  George  E.,  Box  D  ,  Jersey  City,  N.J.
LouGUNANE,  John,  G1,  Jackson-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
LouNSBERY,  Mrs.  Richard  P.,  12,  East  35i,h  Sr,reet,  New  York,  N.Y.
Low,  Clarence  F.,  14,  Audubon-place,  New  Orleans,  Louisiana.
LuKENS,  Dr.  Anna,  1068,  Lexington  avenue.  New  York,  N.Y.
Mackenzie,  George,  M.D.,  Somerton,  Pa.

Malusecki,  Rkv.  Fr.  Adalbert,  236,  S.  12th-street,  Reading,  Pa.

Marchand,  G.  L.,  112,  Clark-street,  Room  516,  Cliicago,  111.

Marshall,  L.  C,  East  Walpole,  Mass.

Marshall,  Mrs.  L.  C,  East  Walpole,  Mass.

Marson,  W.  G.,  311,  Sykes  Block,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Martin,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  409,  North  E.-street,  Tacoma,  Wash.

Martin,  Mrs.  Emma  H.,  24,  Phelps-avenue,  Rochester,  N.Y.

Marvin,  Walter  T.,  36,  Knox-street,  Cleveland,  Ohio.

Maser,  F.  E.,  c/o  National  Park  Bank,  214,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.

Mason,  R.  Osgood,  M.D.,  348,  West  58th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Mayo,  Miss  A.  L  ,  11,  Robeson-street,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.

McClellan,  Mrs.  Clara  D.,  Box  152,  Galena,  111.

McEwEN,  Alfred,  512,  La  Salle-a venue,  Chicago,  111.

McEwEN,  Mrs.  D.  C,  160,  Stirling-place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

McGee,  W.  J.,  Bureau  of  Anier.  Ethnology,  Smithsonian  Institution,

Washington,  D.C.
Means,  Miss  Evelyn  B.,  care  of  Miss  Gano,  Asheville,  N.C.
Mendenhall,  Mrs.  E.  R.,  1,804,  Green-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.


518


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Mercee,  Edward  W.,  M.D.,  157,  North  15th-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Meyer,  J.,  15,  South  3rd  street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Michael,  Mrs.  Helen  A.,  44,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Miller,  Mrs.  G.  S.,  Peterboro,  Madison  Co.,  N.Y.

Miller,  John  W.,  Snohomish,  Wash.

Millet,  Josiah  B.,  150,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Mills,  Rev.  Benj.  Fay,  Oakland,  Cal.

MoFFETT,  F.  L.,  204,  Flour  Exchange,  Minneapolis,  Minn.

Morgan,  W.  E.,  M.D.,  2,909,  Groveland -avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Morris,  Edward  L.,  42,  Summer-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Murphy,  Hon.  Franklyn,  1,027,  Broad-street,  Newark,  N.J.

MuRPiiY,  M.  J.,  614,  Center-avenue,  Bay  City,  Mich.

Myers,  W.  H,  M.D.,  157,  West  Wayne-street,  Fort  Wayne,  Ind.

Neeld,  a.  D.,  1,300,  Locust-street,  Allegheny,  Pa.

Newiiall,  Charles  L.,  Southbridge,  Mass.

Newton,  Mrs.  Mary  B.,  1,722,  Capitol-avenue,  Omaha,  Neb.

Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  D.D.,  781,  Madi.son-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

NicoLL,  Mrs.  Edward  H.,  20,  Berkeley-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

NiMS,  F.  A.,  Muskegon,  Mich.

Norbury,  Mrs.  J.  F.,  Plaza  Hotel,  5th-ave.  &  59th-st., New  York,  N.Y.

NoRBURY,  Miss  Mary,  19,  South-street,  Stamford,  Conn.

Norton,  Mrs.  F.  L.,  30,  Gloucester-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Nunn,  Dr.  Richard  J.,  5,  East  York-street,  Savannah,  Georgia.

Oaks,  L.  W.,  100,  Main-street,  Bradford,  Pa.

Oliver,  George  S.  J.,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.

Osborn,  General  F.  A.,  236,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Pace,  Phof.  E.  A.,  Catholic  University  of  America,  Washington,  D.C.
Park,  Dr.  PvOSWELL,  510,  Delaware-avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Parker,  Edward  W.,  78,  Montgomery-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Parsons,  A.  J.,  1,818,  N-street,  Washington,  D.C.
Parsons,  John  E.,  M.D.,  6,  Grove-street,  Ayer,  Mass.
Pavey,  Henry  A.,  Hillsboro,  Ohio.

Paxson,  W.  L.,  c/o  Messrs.  Baker  and  Hamilton,  San  Francisco,  Cal.

Paxton,  Miss  Josephine  E.,  24,  N.  College-street,  Carlisle,  Pa.

Payne,  Wm.,  13^  State  Street,  Columbus,  Ohio.

Peabody,  Mrs.  A.  P.,  47,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Peckham,  Orville,  First  National  Bank,  Chicago,  111.

Peebles,  J.  M.,  M.D.,  Box  2,382,  Battle  Creek,  Mich.

Pellew,  Mrs.  Henry  E.,  1,637,  Massachusetts-ave.,  Washington,  D.C.

Perry,  George  S.,  Binghampton,  N.Y.

Perry,  John  G.,  M.D.,  48,  East  34th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


519


PuiLLiPS,  Mrs.  J.  C,  Ju.vr.,  299,  Berkeley-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Philpott,  a.  J.,  c/o  liDsfon  Globe,  Boston,  Mass.
PixcriOT,  GiFFORD,  1,615,  R.  I.  Avenue,  Washington,  D.  C.
PixcoFF,  P.  A.,  c/o  U.  H.  Dadley  and  Co.,  cor.  Hudson  and  Daane-sts.,
Kew  York,  N.Y.

PiTZBR,  George  C,  M.D.,  935,  W.  Wtishington-street,  Los  Angeles,  Cal,

Platt,  J.  C,  333-335,  Fourth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Pope,  Miss  Theodate,  Box  176,  Fariuington,  Conn.

Post,  C.  \Y.,  Battle  Creek,  Michigan.

Powers,  Mrs.  Ellen  F.,  Townsend,  Mass.

Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  458,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Miss  Annie  C,  63,  Marlborougli-streeu,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Dr.  Charles  P.,  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  iCass.

Putnam,  George,  90,  Ames  Bailding,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Dr.  James  J.,  106,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Pyles,  Wm  F.,  Villa  Americana,  Estado  de  Sao  Ptmlo,  Brazil.

Quinby,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Bridge  water,  Mass.

Quincy,  Josiah  P.,  82,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Radcliffe-Whitehead,  Ralph,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.

Rand,  Mrs.  J.  L.,  49,  Kirkland-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Ransom,  Frank  H.,  137,  Main-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Ray,  Miss  Lydia  P.,  Franklin,  Mass.

Rayson,  Miss  Amy,  B.A.,  176,  West  75th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Rees,  Mrs.  Janet  E.  Ruutz,  371,  West  End-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Reid,  Dr.  H.  a.,  133,  Mary-street,  Passadena,  Cal.

Reiff,  Josiah  C,  247,  5th-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y^.

Reynolds,  Mrs.  James  B.,  184,  Eldridge-street,  New  York,  N.Y

Rice,  Mrs.  David  Hall,  2,  Wellington-terrace,  Brookline,  Mass.

Richardson,  G.  H.,  Pres.  Iowa  Valley  State  Bank,  Belmond,  Iowa.

Richardson,  M.  T.,  Box  236,  Ridgewood,  N.J.

Ring,  Dr.  Arthur  H.,  Arlington  Heights,  Mass.

Roberts,  B.  L.,  Canton,  Miss.

Robbins,  Miss  A.  M.,  207,  Huntingdon-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Robinson,  Mks.  C.  B.,  315,  W.  Broadwa}-,  Louisville,  Ky.
Rogers,  Da.  Oscar  H.,  346,  Broadway,  Nesv  York,  N.Y.
RoLFE,  Alfred  G.,  The  Hill  School,  Pottstown,  Pa.
Rontey',  Abel  M.,  506,  First-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.
Rose,  Byron,  North  Attleb.Drough,  Mass.

Royce,  Professor  Josiah,  103,  Irving-strest,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Russell,  Arthur  J.,  Minn.  Journal,  Minneapolis,  Minn.
Russell,  Mrs.  Henry  E.,  302,  Berkeley-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Ru.ssELL,  W.  H.,  P.O.  Box  984,  Baltimore,  Md.

Savage,  Rev.  Dr.  M.  J.,  Church  of  the  Messiah  Study,  34th-street
and  Park-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.


520


List  of  Mevihers  and  Associates.


Sawyer,  Edward  W.,  53,  Moreland-street,  Roxbury,  Mass.

ScHLiCHT,  Paul  J.,  149,  Broadway,  New  York,  N.Y.

Sears,  Mrs.  J.  M  ,  12,  Arlington-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Sedgwick,  Mrs.  H.  D.,  Junr.,  120,  E.  22ad  St.,  New  York,  N.Y.

Sharp,  Mrs.  Kate,  9,  Reichstrasse,  Dresden,  Germany.

Shaw,  Miss  Emma  G.,  2,  Dunreath-street,  Roxbury,  Mass.

Shaw,  Mrs.  G.  H,,  23,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Shed,  Z.,  1,G22,  Arapahoe-street,  Denver,  Colorado.

Sheets,  John  C,  c/o  Cincinnati  Sanitarium,  College  Hill,  Station  K,

Cincinnati,  Ohio.
Sherman,  Mrs.  B.  W.,  Box  404,  Riverside,  Cook  County,  111.
Shurtleff,  Rev.  E.  W.,  First  Congregational  Church,  Minneapolis,

Minn.

Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  46,  Johnson  Park,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Smith,  W.  J.,  345,  Sixth-avenue,  Box  869,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.
Smith,  W.  Lincoln,  Inst,  of  Technology,  Bo.ston,  Mass.
Sparhawk,  Dr.  Sam,  Burlington,  Vermont.
Stebbins,  Mrs.  John,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.

Steedman,  J.  G.  W.,  A.M.,  M.D.,  2,803,  Pine-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Stephenson,  Ernest  P.,  117,  AVest  5Sth  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Stephenson,  J.  E.,  Ansonia,  Ohio.

Sterling,  Mrs.  E.  C,  22,  Westmoi-eland-place,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Stevens,  Dr.  J.  F.,  Lincoln,  Neb.

Stevenson,  W.  C,  Hillsboro,  Ohio.

Stewart,  Joseph,  P.  O.  Department,  Washington,  D.C.

Stewart,  Mrs.  K.  G.,  Hillsborough,  111.

Stillman,  Mrs.  W.  0.,  287,  State-street,  Albany,  N.Y.

Stockton,  John  P.,  Junr.,  259,  Washington-street,  Jersey  City,  N.J.

Stokes,  J.  N.  P.,  118,  East  22nd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Stone,  Charles  W.,  68,  Chestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Stone,  Mrs.  Richard,  Junr.,  18,  Cliestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Straub,  Mrs.  Henrietta,  106,  Madison-street,  Syracuse,  N.Y.

Strekt,  Miss  Ida  M.,  191,  Prospect-avenue,  Milwaukee,  Wis.

Strickler,  O.  C,  M.D.,  Post  Office  Block,  New  Ulra,  Minn.

Sturgis,  Ciias.  Russell,  63,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Swift,  William  H.,  Wilmington,  Delaware.

Symonds,  Brandreth,  M.D.,  410,  West  20th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.

Tappan,  Miss  M.  A.,  44,  Beacon-street,  !3oston,  Mass.

Taylor,  Rev.  Elbert  B.,  The  Rectory,  Westminster,  Maryland.

Temple,  Rev.  H.  W.,  400,  Locust-st.,  Wiishington,  Pa.

Thaw,  A.  Blair,  M.D., Knobe  House, Frant, near  Tonbridge,

Thaw,  Mrs.  A.  Blair, j Sussex,  England.

Thompson,  E.  H.,  10,  Winthrop-street,  Water-town,  N.Y.

Thomson,  Dr.  W.,  1,426,  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


521


Thorndike,  S.  Lothrop,  62,  Devonshire-street,  Boston,  Mass.
TiGHE,  Judge  J.  G.,  350,  Fulton-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
ToTTEN,  Mrs.  Enoch,  1,708,  I-street,  Washington,  D.C.
Tower,  Miss  Ellen  M.,  Lexington,  Mass.
Tralles,  William  A.,  1,189,  West-avenue,  Buffalo,  JST.Y.
Tripp,  Dwight  K.,  1,521,  Marquette  Building,  Chicago,  III.
Tucker,  James  W.,  Cooperstown,  N.Y.

Turnbull,  Miss  K.  E.,  113,  East  39th-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Tweedy,  Edmund,  Newport,  Rhode  Island.

Twitciiell,  H.  E.,  M.D.,  323,  North  Third-street,  Hamilton,  Ohio.
Tyler,  Mrs.  Mosks  Coit,  5,  East-avenue,  Ithaca,  N.Y.
Tyson,  Mrs.  George,  311,  Dartmouth-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Van  Geison,  Dr.  Ira,  Pathological  Institute,  1,  Madison  Avenue,
New  York,  N.Y.

Van  Norden,  Rev.  C,  D.D.,  LL,.D.,  1,827,  H-st.,  Sacramento,  Cal.

Veazey,  I.  Parker,  Great  Falls,  Montana.

Vermilye,  Daniel  B.,  37,  Waverley-place,  Orange,  N.J.

Vischer,  Carl  V.,  M.D.,  1429,  Poplar-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Wadswortii,  E.  a.,  Grinnell,  Iowa.

Wait,  Marshall,  5,144,  Madison-avenue,  Hyde  Park,  Chicago,  111.
Walker,  John  A.,  260,  Montgomery-street,  Jersey  City,  N.J.
Ward,  Professor  Duren  J.  H.,  Ph.D.,  State  Agricultural  College,

Manhattan,  Kansas.
Ward,  Mrs.  L.  A.  Coonley,  620,  Division-street,  Chicago,  111.
Warren,  Lyman  Otis,  112,  Rockland-street,  Brighton,  Mass.
Waterman,  L.  E  ,  265,  Macon-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Watson,  Professor  William,  107,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Watts,  H.  M.,  "  The  Press,"  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Webb,  Mrs.  W.  G.,  "  Mon  Souvenir,"  St. Idene,  Parame,  Hie  et

Yilaine,  France.
Weeks,  Rufus  W.,  Pocantico  Hills,  N.Y.

Wells,  David  W.,  M.D.,  The  Westminster,  Copley-sq.,  Boston,  Mass.
Welsh,  Mrs.  Edward  L.,  1,422,  Spruce-street,  Philadelpliia,  Pa.
AVendell,  B.  R.,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.

Wetzel,  Geo.  H.,  118,  E.  Main-street,  Lancaster,  Ohio.

Wheeler,  William,  Concord,  Mass.

Whipple,  L.  E.,  272,  Madison-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

White,  Miss  Catharine  P.,  Grand  Haven,  Ottawa  Co.,  Mich.

White,  Miss  Clarissa,  Gambler,  Ohio.

White,  H.  Lawrence,  75,  Genesee-street,  Utica,  N.Y.

Whiting,  Miss  Lilian,  The  Brunswick,  Back  Bay,  Boston,  Mass.

Whitman,  Mrs.  Henry,  77,  Mount  Vernon  street,  Boston,  Mass.

Whiton,  Rev.  J.  M.,  Ph.  D.,  287,  Fourth-avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.

Wilcox,  Mrs.  H.  H.,  Box  626,  Honolulu,  Hawaiian  Islands.


522


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


WiLLARD,  Miss  Susanna,  3,  Berkeley-place,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Williams,  Charles  R.,  Indianapolis  News,  Indianapolis,  Ind.
Wilmarth,  Mrs.  Mary  H.,  The  Auditorium,  Chicago,  111,
Wing,  Isaac  H.,  liaylield,  Wisconsin.

Wolcott,  Mrs.  Roger,  173,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Wood,  John  B.,  346,  Jurnpa  Avenue,  Riverside,  Cal.
Woodman,  Walter,  M.D.,  Hubbard-park,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Wkay,  Miss  Eleanor,  c/o  Walpole,  Mass.
Wyllys,  Miss  R.,  18,  Louisburg-square,  Boston,  Mass.
Wyman,  Walter,  M.D.,  Surgeon-General,  U.S.,  The  Shoreham,  Wash-
ington, D.C.

Wynne,  Mrs.  M.  Y.,  63,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Yandell,  Miss  Maud,  315,  W.  Broadway,  Louisville,  Ky.


N.B. — Members  and  Associates  are  refiuested  to  send  information  of  any
change  of  address  to  The  Secretary,  5,  Boylston  Place,  Bo.ston,  Mass.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE  V  :

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


INDEX  TO VOLUME  XV.

(PARTS  XXXVI-XL.)
1900-1901.


ACHILLE,  A  Case  of  "  Pseudo-Possession" 390

Aksakoff',  Alexander  N.,  Seances  witli  Mrs.  Fox-Jencken 417

American  Branch  of  the  Society  for  Psycliical  Research,  List  of  Members  510
Angus,  Miss,  Experiments  in  Crystal  Vision  and  Kindred  Phenomena  48-50,  406

Animals,  Apparently  Affected  by  Psychical  Phenomena 100,  430

,, Apparitions  of 100

Anonymously  Contributed  Cases... ... ... ... 430

Automatism,  Intellectual  and  Moral  Aspect  of  Automatic  Messages,

F.  W.  H.  Myers  on 400,  401

,,  Motor. [See  Divining  Rod.)

"B—  House,  Alleged  Haunting  of,"  by  Miss  A.  Goodrieh-Freer  and  the

Marquess  of  Bute,  Review  of 98

B.,  P.  L.,  Case  recorded  by 427

BarkAvorth,  T.  P.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 41

Barrett,  Professor  W.  F.,  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod  1,  130

Beauchamp,  The  Misses,  A  Case  of  Multiple  Personality,  Dr.  Morton

Prince  on... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... .  4gg

Bernadette,  The  Seeress  of  Lourdes,  Alleged  "  Fire  Test"  with 3

Binet,  A.,  H.ypnotic  Researches  of 106,107

Bleton,  Tlie  French  Water- Finder. (5ee  Dowsers. )

Bloch,  Andre,  Case  recorded  by  .. .. ... ... ... ... ...  404

Blodgett,  Mrs.,  Experiences  with  Mrs.  Piper  30-31

Braid,  James,  "  Neurypnology,''  Edited  by  A.  E.  Waite,  Review  of  ...  101
Bramwell,  Dr.  J.  Milne,  Review  of  "Neurypnology."  by  James  Braid.

(Edited  by  A.  E.  Waite) ' "  !  101

Bourget,  P. ,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 45

Bourne,  Ansel,  The  Case  of ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  3gg

Bute, Marquess  of, K. T., and  A.  Cood rich -Freer,  "The  Alleged

Haunting  of  B —  House  "  by.  Review  of . gg

Chatterji,  T.  C,  on  Occultism  (International  Congress  of  Psychology)

446,  447

Child  Percipients 430^  431

"  Christian  Science,"  Alleged  Cures  by 105,  443,  444


ii


Index  to  Volume  XV.


Clarke,  J.  T.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 28

Clairvoyance,  Independent,  Evidence  for  the  Existence  of,  among  Dowsers

309,  310,  314,  359,  361-363

Zahoris,  Alleged  of 367

„  Telepathic 426,  428

Coghill,  C.  P.,  Cure  of  Warts  by  Suggestion 1

Congress,  Fourth  International,  of  Experimental  Psychology  (Paris,  1900)  445
Controls (See  Smith,  Helene,  Case  of).

Creed,  Hon.  J.  M., "My  Experience  of  Hypnotic  Suggestion  as  a

Therapeutic  Agent " — RevicAv  of 103

Crookes,  Sir  W.,  Experiments  with  D.  D.  Home 438,439

Crystal  Vision,  Janet,  Professor,  on ;  385

,, ,, Phenomena  of —

Memory  Revivals 99,  477

Retrocognitive 48,  49

Subjective ... ... ...  99

Telepathic 48-50

D'Alembert  on  the  Fire-walk  in  Spain ...  12

Death  Signs,  Knocks,  &c 428,  431

Didier,  A.,  Alleged  Clairvoj'ance  of ...  1

Discovery,  by  the  Divining  Rod,  of  Artesian  Springs 138,  147-150,  164-199,
;  203,  206,  209,  210,  214,  217,  226-233,  236,  245-246,  248,

263-270,  283,  297,  298,  313,  315-338,  352-358,  369

Coins 141,  189,  221,  223,  359,  360

,, Criminals 141,  244,  253,  299

Metals 141,  221,  245,  251,  256,  298,  359,  360,  371

,, Mineral  Lodes 141,  229,  245,  256,  283,  298,  305,  313,  343

,, Miscellaneous 141,  221,  244,  253,  313,  351,  369-371

„ Water 136-141,  144-383

„  ,, in  large  quantities 138,177-178,203,236,332

,, ■ ,, running  through  pipes  and  drains  141,162,163,195,202,

214-215,  216,  221,  223,  252,  261,  265,  267,  269
Divination,  Works  on 135,  136,  137,  207,  243,  246-249,  257-275,  294-297,  343,

352,  359,  364,  365,  367,  380,  381

Divining  Rod,  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett  on 132-383

(See  also  under  titles  —  Discovery,  Dowsers,  Dowsing,
Failures,  Geologists,  Localities,  Materials,  Movements,
Water.)

.. '  „  Analysis  of  Evidence  in  First  Report,  by  E.  Westlake  315-339

>i  Appendices  to  Report 315-383

■„  How  held  ...133,172,176,179,181,187,190,205-207,210,211,

■  •  "  217,  223-225,  227,  244,  258,  259,  260,  266,  269,  274,

  275,  279,  284,  287-289

Legal  Decisions  as  to  use  of 239, 240

„  Literature  and  Nomenclature  135,136,137,207,243,246-249,

257-275,  294-297,  343,  359,  364,  365,  367,  380,  381

„  Malaise  of  the  Dowser,  its  Origin 143, 299

. „  Motor  Automatism  (Involuntary  Action  of  the  Rod) 142,  143,

276,30.3,313

'  ,:,  Apparent  Transmission  of  .143,172,173,187,206,207,
■  ■ ; • ' 215,  224,  278,  292,  294


Index  to  Volume  XV.


iii


Divining  Rod,  Motor  Inability  to  restrain,  133,  143,  172,  176,  179,  181,  187,  205,

206,  224,  227,  276-286,  298,  317

»  ,, Origin  of  Stimulus 303-314

»  ,, ,, Cliance  Coincidence,  question  of ...  307-311

»  ,, ,, Clairvoyance,  indications  of ...  309-311,314,359

».> . ,, ,, Subconscious  Suggestion  and  Hyperivstliesia  143,
160,  161,  163,  221,  222,  262,  290,  293-297,  299-302,  303
„  Scientific  and  Literary  Opinions  on  Previous  Keport ...  373

,,  Sensations  Felt  by  Dowsers. 133,  134,  140,  143,  187,  196,  205,

208,  209,  211,  218,  219,  220,  222,  225,  227,  228,  229,
230,  245,  250,  251,  252,  255,  257,  260,  262,  264,  265,
279-282,  287,  290,  299,  302,  314,  364,  365

not  Felt 228,  317

Summary  of  Cliief  Points  of  Investigation 143,  313

Table  of  Contents 130

„  Theoretical  Conclusions 297,  299,  314,  338,  365,  366

Experiments  with,  described  by  : —

Aldworth,  Cel.,  202;  Allcard,  E.,  333;  Amoretti,  207,  292,  313;  Anglo- Bavarian
Brewery  Co.,  320  ;  Armidale  Chronicle,  254  ;  A  shburner,  Dr.,  303  ;  Attenborough,
Messrs.,  238  ;  Attree,  G.  F.,  224;  >4uscher,  M.,  304,  354,  382;  HalsiUie,  D  ,  380;
Barnes,  J.  G.,  316;  Barrett,  Prof.  W.  F.,  144-103,  201,  272,  286  ;  Bastable,  F.,
323  ;  Bath  Chronicle,  232  ;  Bath  Field  Club  Procccdim/s  1!J4  ;  Bay  ley,  E  K.,  327;
Beaven,  E  ,  380 ; Bell,  W.,  284;  Bengough,  Mrs.,  "323;  Bennett,  E.  T.,  277;
Bennett,  G.  W.,  170-178  ;  Bihhu's  Quarterlii,  228  ;  Blashill,  T.,  287  ;  Bristol  Times,
321;  Brown,  J.  Milmau.  105-171;  Bruce,  S.,  163,  327; Budd,  J.,  138,  279;
Burton,  Lord,  279  ;  Canning,  H.  A.,  229;  Cajilin,  I)  ,  330;  Cas.son,  W.  A.,  239,
240  ;  Cazenove,  E.  de,  245  ,  Charleton,  R.  J.,  285  ;  Cheltenham  Echo,  187  ;  Chelten-
ham. Examiner,  223  ;  Chevreul,  Prof.,  2!H,  382 ;  Chudleigh,  Rev.  R.  A.,  289  ;  Clark,
Mr  ,  173;  Clive,  P.,  278;  Coglan,  D.,  283,  284;  Cole,  VV.  H.,  328;  County  Coun-
cil Times,  214;  Daily  Mail,  237;  Democratic  Rcvieiv,  245;  Denison,  F.  N.,  205
279  ;  Derrington,  E.  H.,  255;  Dixon,  B.  F.,  250,  279;  D'Outrepoint,  Frof  ,  249,  313  ;
])u  Prel,  M.,  247  ;  Eastern  Dai  v  Press,  230;  Eme  son,  Rev.  R.,  142,  212,  379  ;
Engineer,  The,  171,  279;  Enys,  J.  D.,  219,  243,  278,  279;  Farmer  and  Chamber  of
Agricidture  Journal,  170  ;  French  Academy  Commission,  382  ;  French  Official
Reports,  263-269,  353,  354;  Finch-Hatton,  Hon.  M.  E.  G.,  lO;^,  202  ;  Fry,  Rt.
Hon.  Sir  E.,  226  ;  Gay,  Miss,  229;  Geare,  Rev.  J.  G.,  180;  Geikie,  Sir  A.,  373;
■O'rahamstown  Journal,  252; Grantham,  Miss,  278; Gregory,  Sir  W.,  202;
Halkett,  Miss,  280  ;  Harben,  Sir  H.,  138  ;  Harington,  SirR  ,  180,  214  ;  Haughton,
J.,  228;  Hellier,  W.  G.,  321 ;  Hickes,  T.  J..  324;  Hilaire,  (i.  St.,  355;  Hippis-
ley,  E.  M.,  174,  210,  333;  Hollands,  Mrs.,  231,  280;  Holloway.  Mrs.  A.,  331;
Ho'mes,  T.  V.,  201 ;  Hoskyns,  H.  W.,  202  ;  Jago,  F.  P.  W.,  305  ;  James,  Rev.  J.
A.,  310  ;  Jenkins,  Vaughan,  191,  194,  254  ;  Jolly,  F..  322  ;  Jones,  J.  H.,  192,  217  ;
Kennedy,  C.  M.,  227  ;  Kinahan,  G.  H.,  138-139 ;  Kristensen.  130  ;  Lalande,  273  ;
Lang,  A.,  282,  379;  Lankester,  Prof.  E.  Ray,  200;  Leach,  fir.  J.  C,  319;
Leadam,  Dr.,  196;  Lefroy,  B.  St.  G.,  153,  154,  205,  357  ;  Lolley,  \V.,  175;  Long -
nucn's,  282,  379;  Maggs,  J.,  332;  Manchester  Citi/  Neirs,  178;  Marshall,  G.  W.,
232  ;  Marshall,  J.  E.,  202;  Maxwell,  Sir  H.,  282  ;  Mayo,  Dr.,  300  ;  Mereweather,
W.,  323  ;  Midland  Counties  Herald,  184  ;  Mitchell,  G.,  228  ;  Montgomerie,  Messrs,
183,  184;  Morgan,  Prof.,  317;  Morninq  Post,  329;  Mortillet,  Prof.  G.  de,  243,
382;  Morton,  D.  A.,  171-173,  279  292;  Morton's  Li' coin  Almanac,  210;  Nalder
F.  J.,  191;  Nasmith,  C.  W.,  178,  Aature,  377,  380;  JVcw  A<jc,  380;  Noidhoff,
W.,  251  ;  Orchard,  Mr.,  3.30  ;  Paramelle,  Abbi^,  240,  352,  382  ;  Parry,  J.  W.,  281 :
Pease,  E.  R.,  201  ;  Pickard,  T.  W.,  334;  Plater,  A.  C,  184  ;  Pope,  G.  H.,  322  ;
Porch,  M. P.,  351  ;  Press  Notices,  379;  Price,  M.,  181,  280;  Prideanx-Brune,
C.  G.,  281;  Prout.  Mrs.,  320;  Purser,  F.,  288;  Radcliffe-Whitehead,  R.,  251;
Renton.  W.,  325;  Richardson,  Messrs.,  138;  Hoe,  Fr.  J.,  193;  Rogers,  T.  E.,
317  ;  Roles,  Messrs.,  318  :  Scammell,  E.  T.,  254  ;  Selborne,  Farl,  227  ;  Sementini,
. Prof.,  207,  313;  Shrine,  H.  D..  194;  Silliman's  Journal,  212,  Smyth,  Prof.,  W.,
283,  305 ;  i<(.7iierset  and  Dorset  Notes  and  Queries,  202  ;  Spinks,  Judge,  209  ;  Stand-
ard, The,  230,  284,  285 ;  Stevcnitt,  T..  182 ;  Streeten,  Rev.  H.,  230 ;  Taylor,  Lt.  Col,
187,  188,  360;  Tavlor,  W.,  328  ;  Thouvenel.  Dr.  P.,  207,  240,  257  291,  292  300  •
Times,  248,  359  ;  Tompkins,  B.,  381 ;  Tosswill,  R.  G.  D.,  223  ;  Townsend,  G.  C,
232;  Tylor,  Prof.,  285;  Varigny,  M.  H.  de,  379  ;  Wadsworth,  Prof.,  287,  378  ;


Index  to  Volume  XV.


Divining  Rod,  Experiments  with,  described  by  (continued)

Wallace,  Dr.  A.  R.,  277,  374  ;  Ward-Humphreys,  G.  H.,  223;  Wells  Journal,  217 ;
We&tern  Mail,  2-10;  Westlake,  E.,  138,  165,  186,  203,  204,  216,  229,  231,  236,  239,
307,  315,  346,  375,  37«  ;  Whitaker,  W.,  2!)0  ;  Williams,  J.,  106  ;  Withnell,  F.,  210-
212;  Woolley,  C,  278,  292  ;  Young,  J.  F.,  1!)5,  219-222,  286,  300,  319,  342,  363;
Zschokke,  247,  365.

"  Dowse  "  and  "  Dowser,"  Tlie  Words 135

Dowsers,  Names  of  [amateurs  in  italics].

Adams,  20?,  316;  Anthony,  R.,  181,  235;  Attrcc,  G.  F.,  224;  Aymar,  J.,  253,
258,  299,  370  ;  Bacon,  H.,  235  ;  Bailci/,  J.,  164  ;  Beraz.  247,  307  ;  Blake,  J.,  231  ;
Blanchard,  J.,  2.35,  285;  Hleton,  186,  207,  24G,  257,  291,  292,  300,  313  ;
Sci:  J..  278;  Branch,  J.,  191;  Broion,  J.  M.,  165171;  Canning,  H.  A.,  229,
235  ;  (5hesterman,  H..  187-191,  2.34,  242  ;  Child,  S.  T.,  2,30,  235  ;  Cross,  C,  234  ;
Day,  T.,  234,  346,  349,  351  ;  Dcrriv<itov,  E.  H.,  254,  255  ;  Dixon,  B.  F..  250,  279  ;
Earlc,  Archdmam.  195  :  Klson,  G.,  203-205,  235  ;  Enys,  J.  D  ,  219,  243,  278,  27  •  ;
Foord,  T.,  234,  346  ;  Gataker,  L.,  183,  184,  196,  215,  224,  232-234,  237.  239,  240,
241,  331  ;  Godfrcii,  CapL,  250 ;  Goldim.  H.  W. ,  202 ;  Green,  J.  J.,  234  ;  Hares,  'I'.,
318,  .320;  Harinr/ton,  Sir  R.,  Bart.,  186,  214:  Harriit,  Mr.  and,  Misx,  206,  280  ;
Hawker,  T.,  2.34;  Heighway,  T.,  235;  Hills  W.,  234  ;  Hippislci,  E.  M.,  11  i,
216,  333;  Hole,  <■.,  234;  Holkindf,  Miss,  280;  Hoskins,  W.,  235  ;  Jerman,  Mr.,
360;  Jones,  J.  H.,  148,  154,  161,  192.  217,  288;  Kerslake,  W.,  234,  .346,  8-19;
Kina-Harmnn,  Col.,  228;  King.ston,  316,  317;  Lacey,  D..  235,  321  ;  Lawrejice,
W.  S.,  202,  209.  226,  290,  301,  317,  322,  325,  326  ;  Loiorn,  J.,  219  ;  Marconnes,  Fr.,
252  ;  M'Orea,  W.,  227  ;  Merry  weather,  W  ,  226,  234,  315  ;  Millhanke,  L(td>i,  27S  ;
Mitchell,  G.,  228;  Mitchell,  W.  J.,  235;  MortiUct,  Prof.  (^f,  243,  244,  .382  ;
Mullins,  J.,  137,  138,  163,  165-170,  178.  192,  194,  202,  20.3,  209,  217,  242,278,
279,  282,  307,  325.  327,  338,  3,59,  .374;  Mullins,  W.  H  ,  180,  235,  327,  333;  Pnm
mcUc,  Able,  246,  304,  352,  382;  Paranrjvc,  364;  Pavey,  F.  H.,  234;  Pavey,
216,  230,  234,  340,  349,  .351  ;  Pavey,  T.,  191,  230  ;  Pennet,  246,  274,  275,  292,  313;
Purvis,  T.,  228  ;  HuhcrUon,  R.,  216,  219,  363;  Ro).)ertson,  R.  W.,  235;  Rodvvcll,
•  F.,  200,  201,  235;  Rothwell,  E.,  235;  Sim.s,  C,  234,  320;  Smart,  H.,  318;
Sninks.  Judfic,  209;  Stears,  J-,  161,  2.35,  237-238,  360;  Stone,  W.,  144-163,  175,
182,  192,  197,  209,  210,  2.35,  238,  2.39,  242,  285.  286,  328,  329,  377;  Strcat.field,  Mr.,
210;  Thomas,  T.,  235;  Tompkins,  B.,  176,  187  189,  235,  236,  239,  240,  242,  360,
381  ;  TosswiU,  H.  G.  D.,  22.3,  359,  360;  irard-Hv.mphreiis,  G.  H.,  223;  n  iiitc,  F
J.,  254;  Williams,  G.,  228,2.35;  Williams,  H.,  235  ;  Williams,  196;  Wills,
192-193;  Wyburn,  W.  K.,  2.35;  Younq,  J.  F.,  216,  219,  286,  300,  301,  319  ;
Zahoris,  The,  367.

Dowsers,  Clairvoyance,  Indications  of ... 309-311,314,359

,, Counties  where  the  Faculty  is  Commonest 234,  340

,, Experiments  with  two, or  more  (independently), on  same

ground 187,  236

,, Hints  as  to  Employment  of ...  2,35,236

,, Malaise  of,  its  Origin 299

Percentage  of 134,207

Professional,  List  of 234-2.35

,,  Confined  to  Men  ... ... ... 135

Dowsing,  Education  in  Relation  to 137

Faculty,  Argument  for  the  Existence  of 141-143

Health  in  Relation  to 241,260

Heredity  in 206,226,227,230,301

Intention,  or  "set  "of  mind,  in 272,273,282,285,311

(Sec  also  Divining  Rod,  Subconscious  Suggestion.)
Phenomena  of. (See  Divining  Rod.)
Dreams,  Revivals  of  Memory  in  ,  404

"  E,"  Communications  (through  Mrs.  Piper) 25

Ebbinghaus,  Professor,  on  Modern  P.sychology  (International  Congress)  445,  446

Ecstasy,  Discu-ssion  of •■•  392-395

Eddy,  Mrs.,  and  the  "  Ciiristian  Science  "  Cult 105,443


Index  to  Volume  XV.


V


E<lgeworth,  Dr.  F.  H.,  Case  contributed  by 290

Edmunds,  Miss,  Sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper 27

Eliot,  George,  Alleged  eomniunieations  from  (through  Mrs.  Piper)  30,  33
Esperon,  Madame,  Case  recorded  by 425

R,  Dr.  C.  W.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 32

Failures  by  Divining  Rod  to  Find  Coins  and  Metals  360

„  ,, Water  (complete  or  partial) 213,  228,  234,

236,  241,  271.  272,  325,  329-331,
373,  374,  377,  378

,,■ Proportion  to  Successes  136,  137,  169-171,  186,  234-242,  338,  339

(of  Engineers) ...  137,169-171,186,216
(of  Geologists)  137,169-171,186,377,378
Faith  Cures,  The  Effect  of  Mind  on  Kody  as  Evidenced  by,  by  H.  H.

Goddard,  Review  of 105

"  Faith  Healing  and  Christian  Science,  '  by  Alice  Feilding,  Review  of ...  443

,,  ,, Phenomena  of 66,76,293

Feilding,  Alice,  "  Faith  Healing  and  Christian  Science"  by.  Review  of  ...  443
Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  Review  of  "  Occult  Japan  "  by  P.  Lowell  ...  434
Fiji. (See  Fire  Walk,  I'henomena  of. )

"  Fire  Test,"  The,  Alleged  Phenomena  of ... .. .. ... ...  3,5

Fire  Walk,  The,  AndreAv  Lang  on 1,  2

,, ,, Among  Non-European  Races... ...  3-15,435

,, by  Europeans ... 4,  11,  12

,, ,, Ancient  Instances  of ... ... ... ... ...  ...2,14

,, ,, P.  LoM'ell  on  (Japan)  ... . ...  435

Fischer,  Dr.,  Sittings  with  the  Russian  Medium,  Sambor ... 418

Flammarion,  Camille,  "  L'Inconnu  et  les  Problemes  P.sychiques,"  by —

Review  of... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  422

Fleurant,  Mdlle.  A.,  Case  recorded  by  ... ... ... ... ... ...  429

Flournoy,  Professor  Th.,  "  Des  hides  a  la  Planete  Mars:  etude  sur  un

Cas  de  Somnambulisme,"  &c.  (The  Case  of  Helena  Smith).  Discussion

of— by  F.  AV.  H.  Myers 384

Folk-Lore  of  the  Divining  Rod,  &c 135,  136,  372

Fox-Jencken,  Mrs.,  Alleged  Mediumship  of 417

Future  Life,  Some  Philosophic  Assumptions  in  the  Investigation  of  the

Problem  of  a— F.  C.  S.  Schiller  on 53,  109

Gale,  Peofessoe  Haelow,  On  a  Case  of  Alleged  Loss  of  Personal

Identity 90

,,  ,,  A  Study  in  Spiritistic  Hallucination ...  65

,,  ,,  Review  of  H.  H.  Goddard's  "Effect  of

Mind  on  Body"  ... .. 105

Geikie,  Sir  A.,  On  Professor  Barrett's  First  Report  on  the  Divining  Rod  373

Genius,  Mechanism  of,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on .. 405,  415

Geologists,  Opinions  (and  Reports)  on  Divining  Rod —

Bristow,  H.,  16G  ;  Budd,  Mr.,  279,  307;  Cole,  G.  A.  J.,  1,55,  156;  De  Ranee,
C.  E.,  238,  378;  Harris,  G.,  239;  Holmeg,  T.  U.,  137-140,  104,  173,  17."i,  177,  180-
183,  185,  186,  201,  231,  233,  239,  357,  376  ;  Kilroe,  J.  R.,  157.  307,  374  :  Kinahan,
G.  H.,  138,  139,  307  ;  Paramelle,  Abbe,  352  ;  Phillis,  J.,  320,  321 ;  Strahan,  W.,
ItiS  ;  Topley,  W.,  166,  170,  199,  231 ;  Westlake,  E.,  1.38, 139,  164,  165,  186,  203,  204,
315,  340,  346.

Geology  of  Somerset  in  Relation  to  Dowsing,  E.  Westlake  on 340

Gibier,  Paul,  "  Psychism,"  by — Review  of ...  441


VI


Index  to  Volume  XV.


Goddard,  H.  H.,  "The  Effect  of  Mind  on  Body  as  Evidenced  by  Faith


Cures,"  by — Review  of  105

Goodrich-Ereer,  Miss  A.,  "The  Alleged  Haunting  of  B. —  House,"  by,  and

the  Marquess  of  Bute — Review  of ... ... ... ... ... ...  98

Gudgeon,  Colonel,  Account  of  "  Fire- Walking  "  in  Polynesia 4

Gurney,  Edmund,  Memorial  Library  Catalogue 484

Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  on  the  Work  of 112,  113

Haggard,  Colonel  A.,  Account  of  the  "  Fire  Walk"  in  Japan  ...  11,  15
Hall,  John,  Hardcastle,  A  Case  of  Alleged  Loss  of  Personal  Identity  ...  90
Hallucinations,  Collective,  as  an  Explanation  of  the  Physical  Phenomena

of  Spiritualism,  Professor  Harlow  Gale  on ... ...  82-89

A  Study  in  Spiritistic,  by  Professor  Harlow  Gale 65

Census  of  (M.  Flammarion's) ... 422

„  Collective 66,  67,  69-72,  77-80

„  ,, in  Haunted  Localities ... ...  100

„  Negative  399

,,  Simultaneous ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  428

„  Subjective 65-82,  399,  407,  474

,,  Veridical  ... ...  407

Hastwell,  Mr.,  Account  of  the  "  Fire  Walk"  in  Polynesia 13

Haunts,  Apparitions ... ... ... ... ... ... .. 99,  lOO

,,  ,,  Collectively  seen  100

Sounds 98-100

Touches 100

Henry,  Miss  Teiura,  Account  of  the  "  Fire  Walk"  in  Polynesia  4,  13

Heredity,  Psychical. (Sec  Dowsing.)

,, as  shown  in  Power  of  "  Fire-Walking" 5,6,9-12

Hess,  Madame  A. ,  Case  recorded  by 426

Hocken,  Dr.  T.  M.,  Account  of  the  "  Fire  Walk  "  in  Fiji 6

Hodgson,  R. ,  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper — Lang,  Andrew,  upon ...  39
,,  ,,  ,,  Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  upon  ...  16

Home,  D.  D.,  Alleged  Mediumship  of  3,  5,  82,  89,  417,  438,  439

Howard,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 44-46

Huxley,  T.  H.,  Case  recorded  by  .. 41,  42

Hydro-Geologist,  A  Noted. (Sec  Paramelle,  Abb^ )

Hypnotism,  Clairvoyance,  Independent 363,  364

,,  ,,  Telepathic 1

Curative 102-104,  386-392,  433,  434

,, Dangers  and  Safeguards 104

,, Hysteria  and  ... 434

., Intemperance  Cured  by . ... . 104,  434

„ Memory,  Conditions  of,  in  ... 106,  386,  387,  394,  467,  468,  481,  482

,, Metals  and  Drugs,  etc.,  Experiments  with 102

,, Suggestion,  Genesis  of 102,  386

,,  ,,  Self-suggestion,  Inhibition  of  Pain  by ... ...  104

Theories  of 442

Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 109

Identity,  A  Case  of  Alleged  Loss  of  Personal 90

Involuntary  Whispering,  Drs.  Lehmann  and  Hansen's  Experiments  in  ...  439


James,  Professor  W.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 25-30


Index  to  Volume  XV.  vii

Janet,  Professor,  on  the  Divining  Rod 296-297

Hypnotic  Researches  of 293-4,  296,  384

„  "  Nevroses et  Idees  Fixes," by — Discussion of,  by

F.  W.  H.  Myers 384

"Jean  le  Carrieur,"  Communications  (througli  Helene  Smith) 399

Keller,  Helen,  Case  of 44

Lalande,  A.,  Case  Recorded  by  .. .  107

Lang,  Andrew,  on  Crystal  Vision... ... ... ... ... ...  48-50

,, ,,  Experimental  Clairvoyance... ... ... ... ...  385

„ ,,  The  Fire-Walk 2

„ ,,  The  Divining  Rod 282,  379-

,,  ,,  Reflections  on  Mrs.  Piper  and  Telepathy 39

L'Annee  Psychologique  (1899) — Review  of ...  105

Leaf,  Walter,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 16,  17,  23,  2S

,,  "Scientific Investigation  of Physical Phenomena  with

Mediums,"  by  M.  Petrovo-Solovovo — Review  of  .  416

Le  Baron  A.,  a  Case  of  •'  Speaking  with  Tongues  " 403,  404

Lehmann,  A.,  "  Aberglauben  und  Zauberei  "  by.  Review  of ... ..  437

Lemaitre,  Prof. ,  Experiments  with  Helene  Smith 398

Leopold,  see  Helene  Smith,  Phenomena  of

Lesley,  Mr.,  Experiments  in  Crystal  Vi.sion ... ... ... ... ...  50"

Levitation,  Alleged  Phenomena  of 418-420

Localities,  Divining  Rod  used  in —


Amphill,  239,  240  ;  Aspley-Heath,  184,  237  ;  Arreton  (I.  of  W.),  329  ;  Australia,
254-256;  Bardney,  238;  Bishop's  Stortford,  180;  Bristol,  317;  California,  240-
252  ;  Campden,  327  ;  Carrigoona,  144-101,  102,  280,307  ;  Cailow,  374  ;  Catcott.
280;  Cheddar,  351;  Chelford,  178;  Cheltenham,  187:  Clarkson  (Toronto),  205;
Claverton  Manor  (Bath),  104;  Cordangan  Manor  (Tipperary)  232  ;  Crewkerne,.
202-205  ;  Dassett  Sidings  (Burton),  238  ;  Dene  Park  (Tonbridge),  231,  2<s0  ;  Errol,
171-174,  307;  Evercreech,  318  ;  Failand  House  (Bri>tol),  226  ;  Falmouth,  229;
Frampton-on-Severn,  326 ;  France,  207,  245.  240,  257,  352,  350  ;  Geimanv,  247-
249;  Haddington,  183;  Hedgecocks,  325 ;  Henhury,  322;  High  Tovnton,  210;
Holmwood  327  ;  Horsham,  138  ;  India,  281 ;  Jutland,  130  ;  Kingstown.  161-163  r
Locking,  320  ;  I.oraine,  208  ;  Lytes  Gary,  174,  307,  333  ;  MandevillR  (Jamaica),
237  ;  Manitoba,  228  ;  Mayfield,  196  ;  Melksham,  332,  338  ;  Minting,  182  ;  Newbuiy,
236;  Ohio,  212  ;  Padstow,  281;  Pontyberim,  105;  Porthcawl,  230,240;  South
Africa,  252  254  ;  Sarnesfield,  232,  233  ;  Shanklin,  164-171,  307  ;  Shepton  Mallet,
316.  320,  322;  Sherburn-in-Elmet,  175;  Sherston  Magna,  321;  Sidcot,  346;
Sodbury,  316;  Somerset  (various),  217,  34";  Spain,  367:  Stewartstown,  227;
Stroud  331  ;  Sturminster  Newton,  319  ;  Switzerlat  d,  365  ;  Thomastown,  192  ;
Tidding  House  (Oxfor.l),  176  ;  Toy  Farm,  334  ;  Vernon  (British  Columbia),  200  ;
Waterford,  138,  217,  279,  300,  307 ;  Wamham,  338  ;  Welwyn,  181  ;  Westbury-sub-
Mendip,  101;  Whitboume  Court  (Wore),  214  ;  Wimblehurst,  333  ;  Wmcanton,
317  ;  Woburn  Sands,  237  ;  Wooton  (I.  of  W.),  328,  376.

Localities,  Maps,  and  Diagrams  of 145,  148,  151,  152,  158,  167,  169,  188,  189,

198,  3.37,  350


Lodge,  Dr.  Oliver,  Sittings  -with  Mrs.  Piper 16,  17,  41,  48

,,  In  Memory  of  Henry  Sidgwick 46S

Lourdes,  Alleged  Miracles  at 3

Lowell,  Percival,  "Occult  Japan;  or  The  Way  of  the  Gods,"  by —

Review  of 434

M.  L.,  Case  recorded  by 427

M.,  Mrs.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 24,  27,  30-

Macalister,  Professor  A. ,  Sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper 40

Marcelle,  Case  of 385


vin


Index  to  Volume  XV.


Marioge,  M. ,  Case  recorded  by ... ... ... •i'28

Marte,  R. ,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 22,  26,  40

"  Martian  Language,"  The  So-called,  as  spoken  by  Helena  Smith  398,  403,  404

Mason,  Miss  M.  H. ,  Cure  of  Warts  by  Suggestion ... .  .  109

"  Materialisation,"  Alleged  Phenomena  of ... ... ... ... 83-88,  417

Materials  of  Divining  Rod —

Kinds  of  Wood  used... 1S3,  136,  176,  179,  194,  206,  207,  210,  215,  223,

244,  250,  255,  258,  283-284
Metallic  Wires  or  Springs ... 187,  207,  221,  223,  244,  245,  286,  317

Miscellaneous 220,  244,  245.  2n7

Matter  tlirongli  Matter,  Alleged  Passage  of 417,  419-421

Meetings  of  the  Society 1,  109,  129

Members,  Associates,  and  Hon.  Members  of  the  S.P.R. ,  List  of  ... 486,  488
,,  ,,  ,,  ,, American  Branch ...  510

Merlet,  G. ,  Case  recorded  by ... 425

Micliel,  A.,  Case  recorded  by .. ... ... ... ... ... ...  431

Mineral  Lodes,  Surface  indications  of ... ... ... ... ...  305,369

Mitchell,  Dr.  Weir,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 40

Moses,  W.  Stainton —

Alleged  Communications  from  (through  Mrs.  Piper)  ...  25,29,43
"  Controls"  of  Alleged  Communication  (through  Mrs.  Piper) 23,  24,

32,  33,  43

Mediumship  of 82-89,  406

Motor  Automatism. (See  Divining  Rod,  Motor  Automatism  of)

Motor  Impulses ... ... ... ... ... ... 406

Moutonnier,  Prof.,  Sittings  with  ^Irs.  Thompson  (International  Congress)  448
Movements  of  Divining  Rod —

Breaking 133,176,227,278-281,286,317

Inability  to  restrain  1.33,  143,  172,  176,  179,  181,  187,  205,  206,  224,  227

276-286,  298,  317

Miinsterberg,  Professor,  Note  by  F.  C.  S.  Scliiller  on  liis  Review  of

"  Psychology  and  Mysticism "  by ... ... .. ... ... ..  96

Muscle-Reading,  Possible  Scope  of ... • ....  44,45

Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  In  Memory  of  Henry  Sidgwick ... ...  452

,,  Presidential  Address ... ... ... ... ... ...  110

,,  Pseudo- Possession ...  ... ... ... .  384

Review  of  "  L'Ann^e  Psychologique " ... ... ...  105

-  ,,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper ... ... ...  1,  16

■  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Thompson  (International

C  'ngress  of  P.sychology) .. 447,448

„  Obituary  Notice  of ..  465

Narcotics  and  Toxicants,  Experiments  with  .. . .. .. .. ...  445

"  Neurypnology,"  by  James  Braid  (edited  by  A.  E.  Waite) — Review  of  ...  101

Newbold,  Professor  W.  Romaine,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 16,  32,  36

Niederhauser,  L.,  Case  Recorded  by ... 429

Norton,  Professor  C.  E.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 31,  40

Nyffeley-Potter,  A. ,  Case  Recorded  by 428

Obituary  Notices —

Myers,  Frederic  W.  H ... 465

Sidgwick,  Professor  Henry ... ... ...  v.. ... ...  452

"  Occult  Japan,"  by  P.  Lowell — Review  of ... ... ...  434


Index  to  Volume  XV.


IX


Officers  anil  Council,  List  of  (1900) 485

Oppert,  Dr.,  On  the  "Fire- Walk"  in  India ... .'' ...  12

Paladino,  Eusapia,  Alleged  Mediinnship  of 41 7  44Q

Paramelle,  Abbe,  The  Hydro-geologist,  Account  of 246,  304,  35-2,'  382

Paris,  Fourth  International  Congress  of  Psychology  (1900)  '  445

Pascal,  Dr.  T.,  "  Les  Donipteurs  du  Feu,"  Account  of  the  "Fire  Walk"

in  India ... .. ..  ...

Peirce,  Professor,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 40

IVUiaui,  George,("G.  P.")  Communications  (tlirough  Mrs.  Piper)  23,  24,  25-27,

r, • ,  T.  ... T.  -"^l' 40,  42-48

I  ercival,  b.  W.,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediuniship  of  VV.  Stainton  Moses  88

I'ersonality,  Problems  of 20,  90,  292,  297,  302,  310,  384,  436,  466

Dual  and  Multiplex 90,  384,  436!  466

Memory,  Conditions  of,  20,  90-95,  106,  386,  387,  392,  403,  467-482

,,  Identity,  Case  of  alleged  Loss  of 90

,,  Relationship  between  different  forms  of 478-483

,,  Secondary  Personalities,  Characteristics  of 20,  23,  28,  29,  34,  41,

50,  51,  311,  385-392,  400,  401,  403,  4'68-472,'474-482
(See  also  Pseudo-Possession  and  the  Cases  of  the  Misses
Beauchamp,  Mrs.  Piper,  and  Helene  Smith. )
Petrovo-Solovovo,  M.,  "  Scientific  Investigation  of  Pliysical  Phenomena

with  Mediums,"  Review  of " 4]g

"Physical  Phenomena"  (not  in  the  Presence  of  Paid  Mediums) ... ...  431

Piper,  Mr.s.,  Trance  Phenomena  of jg  gg  412

"  - >■  Differences between, and  those  of

Helene  Smith 412

" >> Lang,  Andrew,  on 39

" ), Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  on 412

" 'J ' Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  on 16

Podmore,  Frank —

Review: "The  Alleged  Haunting of B.—  House,"  by  Miss

Goodrich-Freer  and  the  Marquess  of  Bute  ' ...  98
"  L'Inconnu  et  les  Problemes  Psychiques,"  by  Camille

Flaniiriarion ... ... ...  422

"  Psychism,"  by  Dr.  Paul  Gibier 44I

Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Pijier jg

Ponder,  S.,  Account  of  the  "  Fire  Walk  "  in  the  Straits  Settlement  12
Pcssession  and  Pseudo-Posses.sion,  differences  between ... 399-400,  412-415

Telepathy  from  tlie  Dead  versus,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  on .. '  ...  "  ig

"  "  Living  yf«-*(«,  A.  Lang  on 39

Predictions,  Mediumistic ""

Presidential  Address,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers '..  Uq

Presidents  of  the  S.  P. R "'

Prince,  Dr.  Morton —

A  Case  of  Multiple  Personality 44g

The  Development  and  Genealogy  of  the  Misses  Beauchamii  '  4Gg

P.seudo-Possession,  Plienomena  of,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on  384

"  Intlications  of,  among  the  Japanese 4:^g

" ', and  Possession,  Differences  between ... 399,400  412-415
(See  also  Case  of  Helene  Smith).
Pseudo-Presentiment,  Po.ssible  Case  of

Psychology,  Fourth  International  Congre.ss  of  (Paris,  1900)... ,', "'  445


X


Index  to  Volume  XV.


Q.,  The  Rev.,  Evidence  as  to  the  Haunting  of  B —  House 100

R.,  Miss  A.  M.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 22

Reviews,  ...  96,  98,  101,  103,  105,  384,  416,  422,  433,  434,  437,  441,  443
Ribot, Professor, on  the  Development  of  Psychology  (International

Congress  of  Psychology) ... 445

Rogers,  G.  F.,  M.D.,  Reviews—

"Faith  Healing  and  Christian  Science,"  by  A.  Feilding ...  443

"  Hypnotism  and  Suggestion,"  by  Dr.  Lloyd  Tuckey 433

Rouge,  Case  Recorded  by .. 431

S.,  Dk.  E.,  Case  of,  A  Study  in  Spiritistic  Hallucination,  by  Professor

Harlow  Gale ... ... .. ...  65

Sambor,  The  Russian  Medium,  Alleged  Powers  of 416,  417

Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  Note  on  his Review  of  Professor  Miinsterberg's

"  Psychology  and  Mysticism  " 96

,,  Review: "  Aberglauben  und Zauberei," by  Dr.

Lehmann... ... 437

On  Some  Philosophic  Assumptions  in  the  Investiga-
tion of  the  Problem  of  a  Future  Life ... ...  53

Schischmanof,  Drs. and  Mastov,  Account  of  the  "Fire  Walk"  in

Bulgaria 11,  12

Self-Suggestion,  Power  of  290-293,  389

Slialer,  Professor,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper ... 41,  51

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry,  Discussion  of  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper  16
, ,  , , Spirit  Identity,  Examination  of  Alleged

Ca.ses  of  21-34

,, Telepathy  from  the  Dead  y.  "Possession"  16-38
Sidgwick,  Profes.sor  Henry —

In  Memory  of,  Lodge,  Dr.  Oliver,  by  .. 463

Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  by ...  452

Slade,  Henry,  Alleged  Mediumship  of 417,  441

Slate-Writing,  Alleged  Phenomena  of ... ... ... ... ...  417,441

Smith,  H61fene,  Trance  and  other  Phenomena  of —

Flournoy,  Professor,  on  ... 384,  396-415

Myer.s,  F.  W.  H.,  on 384,  396-415

Somnambulism,  Spontaneous ... ... ...  386-388

"  Speaking  with  Tongues,"  "  Martian  "  Language,  etc.,  through  H61ene

Smith 398,  399,  403-406

Speer,  Cliarlton  T.,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediumship  of  W.  Stainton  Moses  87
Speer,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Stanhope  T.,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediumship  of  W.

Stainton  Moses 83-89

Spirit-Identity,  Question  of— Mediumistic  Me.ssages  ... 16,  39,  399,  411,  412

,,  ,,  Cliaracteristic  Handwriting 412

{See  also  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper  and  Helene
Smith)

Spiritualism,  Mental  Phenomena  of — Mediumistic  Predictions 74

{Sec  also  under  Trance.)

Spiritualism,  Physical  Phenomena  of—

,,  Collective  Hallucination  as  an  Explanation  of ...  82-89

„ Lights,  Mu.sic,  Scents,  &c 83-89,  418-420

„ Miscellaneous „  ...  417-420,442


Index  to  Volume  XV.


xi


Siiiritualism,  Petrovo-Solovovo,  M.,  on  416

{See  also  under  "  Fire  Test,"  Levitation,  "  Materialisation,"
' '  Matter  through  Matter,  passage  of,"  "Slate-Writing. ")
St.  Clair,  H.  R.,  Account  of  the  "  Fire- Walk  "  in  the  West  Indies ...  12
StigmatLsation,  Phenomena  of ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  394

Stokes,  Mr.,  Account  of  the  "Fire  Walk  "  in  India 12

Subliminal  Con.sciousness —

Extensions  of  Faculty —

Ecstasy 394,  395

Memory  Revivals ... ... ... ... ... ...  407

Subconscious  observation  of  Dowsers  (See  Divining  Rod.)

Self  as  a  quasi-distinct  personality 468-472,  476,  477,  482

(See  also  Personality,  Problems  of.)
Suggestion  witliout  Hypnotism,  Cure  of  Warts  by ..1,  109,  293

Taylor,  Col.  Le  M.,  "Alleged  Haunting  of  B.  House,"  Phenomena

occurring  during  Tenancy  of ... ... ...  98

,,  on  Experiments  with  Divining  Rod ...  ...  187

Telepathy,  Experimental,  at  close  quarters.  Transference  of  Mental

Images,  &c 222,  439

,,  ,,  at  a  distance .  29-30

,,  ,,  and  Involuntary  W^hispering,  Drs.  Lehmann

and  Hansen's  Experiments  ... 439

,, Spontaneous,  Hallucinations  424,  425,  426,  427,  428,  429,  430

,,  ,,  ,,  Simultaneous 428

,,  ,,  Impressions 107,  425,  426

Thaw,  Dr.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 21

Thilo,  de,  Dr.  Marie,  Case  recorded  by  430

Thompson,  Mrs.,  Trance  Phenomena  of ... 447,448

Thomson,  Basil,  Account  of  the  "  Fire  Walk  "  in  Fiji 13

Time-reactions  during  Ecstasy , ...  394,395

Tomlinson,  Dr.  H.  A.,  Note  on  the  Case  of  J.  Hardcastle  Hall 95

Tone,  N.  J..  Account  of  tlie  "  Fire  Walk"  in  Polynesia 13

Tour,  Mr.,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediumship  of  Sanibor 418-421

Trance-Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper —

Fraud,  Possibilities  of 45,  46

Lang,  Andrew,  Discussion  of ... ... ... ... ... ...  39

Phinuit  Personality,  The 19-23,  28,  29,  32,  40,  41

Sidgwick,  Mrs. ,  Discussion  of  ... ... ... ., ... ...  16

Spirit-Identity,  Question  of ...  21-34,  41-52

Telepatliy  from  the  Dead,  Facts  Suggestive  of ... 17-19,  22,  34-38

Living 21-34,  41-52

Trance-Phenomena  of  Helene  Smith —

Flournoy,  Profes.sor,  on 384,  396-415

Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  on 384,  396-415

Speaking  with  Tongues 398,  399,  403-406

Spirit-Identity,  Question  of ... ...  399,411

Telepathy,  from  the  Dead — Facts  Suggestive  of ...  4H

,1  Living 399

Trowbridge,  Professor,  Sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper 40

Tuckey,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  Review  of  "Hypnotism  as  a  Therapeutic

Agent,"  by  Hon.  J.  M.  Creed 103


Xll


Index  to  Volume  XV.


Tuckey,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  "Treatment  by  Hypnotic  Suggestion," by —

Review  of 433

Van  Eeden,  Dk.  F.,  Report  of  the  Fourth  International  Congress  of

Psychology  (Paris,  1900) 445

Vk.,  Case  of  ." 394,  395

W.,  Miss  E.  G.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 22

Wade,  Sir  C. ,  Case  recorded  by  ... .. ...  441

AVaite,  A.  E.,  "Neurypnology,"  by  James  Braid,  edited  by — Review  of  101

Wallace,  Dr.  A.  R. ,  on  the  "Clairvoyance  of  Ale.xis  Didier,"  &c I

,,  ,,  Divining  Rod ... ... 277,  374

Warts,  Cure  of,  by  Suggestion 1,  109,  293

Water,  Depth  of,  how  alleged  to  be  found  by  Dow.sers 190,  191,  225,  227,  228,

231,232,236,291,292

Distribution  of.  Underground ... 133,  137,  238,  340,  374,  375,  382
„ Surface  indications  of,  139,  197,  199,  227,  231,  315,  324,  355-358,  369-370

Westlake,  E.,  F.G.S.,  Experiments  in  Mineral  Dowsing ... 346

,,  Note  on  the  Geology  of  Somerset,  in  Relation  to

Dowsing ... ... 340

■  ,,  Report  on  Some  Cases  of  Water  Finding  by  tlic

Divining  Rod .. ... 315

■ ■ (See  also  under  Divining  Rod,  Experiments  De-
scribed by,  and  Geologists.)

Wilde,  Hannah,  Communications  (through  Mrs.  Piper) 30

Willing-Game,  Indications  of  Malaise  in 301

Wiltse,  Dr.  A.,  False  Statement  concerning,  by  Mrs.  Piper's  Controls  ...  25
Witchcraft. (See  Zahoris,  Alleged  Supernormal  Powers  of.)
