Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XXXI (1921)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1921 Glasgow: Robert MacLehose and Co. edition (Parts LXXIX-LXXXI and Appendix) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc31soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE


Society  for  Psychical  Research


VOLUME  XXXI

(CONTAINING  PARTS  LXXIX,  LXXX,  LXXXI  &^  APPENDIX)

192I


The  respofisibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  in  papers
published  in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  zvith  their  authors


PRINTED  FOR  THE  SOCIETY  BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  COMPANY  LIMITED

UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  GLASGOW
1921

Agen/s  for  the  sale  of  publications:

LONDON  :  FRANCIS  EDWARDS,  83  High  Street,  Marylebone,  W.
GLASGOW:  MACLEHOSE,  JACKSON  &  CO.,  73  West  George  Street
AMERICA:  THE  F.  W.  FAXON  CO.,  83  Fran-cis  Street,  Bosto.s,  Mass.


All  rights  rise; fed


CONTENTS.


PART  LXXIX.
May,  1920.


I. In  Memory  of  Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S. By  Sir  Olver

Lodge,  F.R.S.  1

II.  In  Memory  of  Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  F.R.S. By  Sir

William  Barrett,  F.R.S.  - - - - -  l"^

III.  The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality. By  T.  W.

Mitchell,  M.D.  30

IV.  The  Psychological  Foundations  of  Belief  in  Spirits.  By

C.  G.  Jung,  M.D.,  LL.D.  -  75

Supplement.

Review  : — Dr.  Ernest  Jones's  "  Papers  on  Psycho-Analysis."

f<:v  By  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D. 94

(  Note  on  "  A  Record  of  Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena
of  Trance"  {Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.).  By  Sir  Oliver
LODGE,  F.R.S.  103


PART  LXXX.

November,  1920.

I. Presidential  Address. By  William  McDougall,  F.R.S.,

M.Sc,  M.B.  105

II.  Report  on  a  series  of  Cases  of  Apparent  Thought-Transfer-

ence  without  Conscious  Agency. By  Hubert  Wales  -  124
Supplement — Reviews  :

Dr.  Troland's  "  A  Technique  for  the  Experimental  Study
of  Telepathy  and  other  Alleged  Clairvoyant  Processes."

By  F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.  218

Professor  Sigmund  Freud's Totem  and  Taboo.  Resem-
blances between  the  Psychic  Lives  of  Savages  and

Neurotics." By  J.  C.  Flugel  224

Lieut.  E.  H.  Jones's  "  The  Road  to  Endor." By  W.  H.

Salter  229


198871


iv  Contents,

; .':  /  ■/■„•' \  \' </ ;-'';RaRT  LXXXI.

_  . , ,  .  .4pii.lL,  1921.
.  An  5I]^caiiiinat ion  of  •  Book'- tests  Obtained  in  Sittings  with  Mrs.


'  ' ' '  '  Leonard. By  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.

PAGE

§  1.  Introductory 242

§  2.  A  Case  where  the Communicator's  Memory  seems  the

Probable  Source  of  Information . . . - -  253

§  3.  Mrs.  Beadon's  Book-Tests 260

§  4.  Instances  of  Statements  about  Words  or  Sentences  in  a

Book  which  turn  out  to  be  Verbally  Accurate  - - -  270

§  5.  Some  Miscellaneous  Cases -------  289

§  6.  Special  Experiments  300

§  7.  Question  of  Cross-Correspondences -----  313

§  8.  Seemingly  Genuine  Mistakes,  and  others  -  -  -  338
§  9.  Discussion  of  Statements  which  may  throw  Light  on  the

Mode  of  Perception  of  a  Page  in  a  Closed  Book - -  349

§  10.  Conclusion  -  375

AjDpendix  A :  Note  on  Chance  in  Book-Tests - - -  379
,, B  :  Cases  of  Accurate  Description  of  Objects  in  con-
nection with  Book-Tests - - - -  386
., C  :  Supplementary  to  §  8 - - - - -  393
„ D  :  Supplementary  to  §  9  - - - - - -  398

APPENDIX  TO  PART  LXXXI.

Officers  and  Council  for  1921 417

List  of  Members  and  Associates - - - - - -  419

Index  to  Vol.  XXXI.  -  465


PROCEEDINGS

'OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

PART  LXXIX.
May,  1920.


I.

IN  MEMORY  OF
LORD  RAYLEIGH,  O.M.,  F.R.S.

By  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.

Lord  Rayleigh  was  the  second  President  to  die  during
his  tenure  of  office ;  and  it  is  well  that  the  Society
should  place  on  record  in  its  Proceedings  the  main  facts
in  the  life  of  one  whom  posterity — certainly  scientific
posterity — will  regard  as  in  many  respects  the  greatest
of  those  who  have  occupied  our  Presidential  chair.

Accordingly  I  extract  the  salient  facts  from  a  summary
made  for  Science  Progress,  by  his  one-time  assistant
and  constant  co-worker,  Sir  Richard  Glazebrook,  F.R.S.,
first  Director  of  the  National  Physical  Laboratory.

.John  William  Strutt,  third  Baron  Rayleigh,  was  born  on
November  12,  1842,  and  succeeded  his  father  in  the  title  in
1873.  He  took  his  B.A.  Degree  at  Cambridge  in  1865,  gradu-
ating as  Senior  Wrangler.  The  same  year  he  was  first  Smith's
prizeman,  and  in  1866  he  became  a  Fellow  of  Trinity  College.
This  position  he  held  until  the  time  of  his  marriage  in  1871
to  Evelyn,  daughter  of  IVIr.  James  Maitland  Balfour  of  Whittinge-
hame,  and  sister  of  the  Rt.  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour.  Two  of  their
sons survive him — Robert, his successor in the title,  now


2


Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.


[part


Professor  of  Physics  in  the  Imperial  College,  South  Kensington  ;
and  Arthur,  who  through  the  War  has  served  with  the  Grand
Fleet.

He  lived  at  TerUng  Place  in  Essex  until  1879,  when,  on
Maxwell's  death,  he  accepted  the  invitation  to  become  Caven-
dish Professor  of  Physics  at  Cambridge,  a  post  which  he  held
until  1884.  This  same  year  he  took  part  as  President,  at
Montreal,  in  the  first  meeting  of  the  British  Association  outside
these  islands.

In  1887  he  became  Secretary  of  the  Royal  Society,  an
office  retained  until  1896  ;  he  was  Professor  of  Natural  Philo-
sophy in  the  Royal  Institution  from  1887  to  1905  ;  and  he
held  the  high  office  of  President  of  the  Royal  Society  from
1905  to  1908.  In  this  latter  year  he  became  Chancellor  of
the  University  of  Cambridge,  in  succession  to  the  eighth
Duke  of  Devonshire.  He  was  closely  connected  with  the
National  Physical  Laboratory  from  the  time  of  its  foundation,
first  as  Chairman  of  the  Treasury  Committee  appointed  to
report  on  the  desirability  of  establishing  the  Laboratory,
then  as  chairman  of  the  Executive  Committee,  an  office
which  he  held  almost  up  to  the  time  of  his  death.

He  acted  as  adviser  to  the  Government  on  a  number  of
scientific  matters,  such  as  electrical  units,  explosives,  aero-
nautics, acoustical  questions,  and  many  others.  In  fog-
syrens  and  other  marine  safety  applicances  he  was  adviser
to  the  Trinity  House.

In  1905  he  became  a  Privy  Councillor  ;  he  was  also  one
of  the  first  members  of  the  Order  of  Merit.  In  1904  he  was
awarded  a  Nobel  Prize  ;  the  Royal  Society  gave  him  the
Copley,  the  Royal,  and  the  Rumford  medals  ;  he  was  an
Officer  of  the  Legion  of  Honour,  Foreign  Member  of  the
Institute  of  France,  and  of  many  British  and  Foreign  Scientific
Societies,  while  he  received  degrees  from  numerous  Universities
at  home  and  abroad.

At  Cambridge  he  commenced  that  great  series  of  Electrical
Measurements  which  established  on  an  accurate  basis  the
system  of  Electrical  Units  to  which  the  jsrogress  of  Electrical
Engineering  is  so  greatly  due.  ...  In  his  later  work  he  had
the  assistance  of  his  sister-in-law,  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  and  with  her
carried out his classical measurements on the Silver  Volta-


Lxxix.] In  Memory  of  Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.  3


meter  and  the  Latimer  Clark  Cell,  thus  establishing  definitely
the  units  of  resistance,  current, and  electromotive  force.

These  researches  illustrated  in  a  marked  degree  Lord
Rayleigh's  genius  as  an  experimental  physicist.  The  apparatus
employed,  except  when  high  precision  was  required,  was  of
the  simjolest  ;  that  which  came  nearest  to  hand  was  utilised  ;
and,  whether  at  the  Cavendish  Laboratory  or  at  his  private
laboratory  at  Terling,  visitors  were  astonished  at  the  means
by  which  results  of  surprising  accuracy — accuracy  which  has
only  been  further  substantiated  by  more  elaborate  research —
were  reached.  .  .  .

All  his  investigations  were  marked  by  the  same  character-
istics— a  clear  grasji  of  principles — a  fearless  courage  in  attack-
ing difficulties,  and  a  firm  determination  to  reach  the  truth.
For  many  years  past  he  has  been  recognised  and  revered  as
the  leader  of  Enghsh  Physical  Science.  The  public  knew
him  but  Uttle  ;  we  who  were  proud  to  be  his  pupils  and
his  helpers  realise  only  too  sadly  the  greatness  of  our  loss.

With  those  words,  so  far  as  applicable,  I  heartily
assoicate  myself  ;  and  I  append  some  critical  observations,
made  in  the  columns  of  Nature  by  his  great  successor
in  the  chair  of  experimental  Physics  at  Cambridge,  Sir
J.  J.  Thomson,  President  of  the  Royal  Society  and  now
Master  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

For  more  than  fifty  years  Lord  Rayleigh  put  forth  without
any  interruption,  and  without  a  trace  of  diminution  in  quality
or  quantity,  a  succession  of  researches  covering  almost  every
branch  of  the  older  physics.  He  must  during  his  career  have
published  nearly  400  papers  ;  not  '  one  of  these  is  common-
place, and  there  is  not  one  which  does  not  raise  the  level
of  our  knowledge  of  its  subject.  "  Collected  Papers  "  are  apt  to
form  a  kind  of  memorial  tablet  in  our  libraries  to  men  of
science,  but,  if  I  may  judge  from  my  own  experience,  Rayleigh's
are  a  remarkable  exception  ;  there  are  few,  if  any,  books
which  I  consult  more  frequently  than  these  volumes  and  froni
which  I  derive  greater  delight  and  benefit.  No  small  part
of  this  is  due  to  the  clearness  and  finish  with  which  they
are  written.

Rayleigh  had,  like  Kirchhoff,  the  spirit  and  feeling  of  the
Artist  in  the  preparation  and  presentation  of  his  papers.  His


4


Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.


[part


mathematical  analysis  seemed  to  flow  naturally  into  the  most
concise  and  elegant  form,  and,  whatever  might  be  the  difficulty
of  the  subject,  it  was  never  increased  by  any  obscurity  or
ambiguity  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  writer.  This  quality
was  so  ingrained  that  it  could  resist  the  rush  and  excitement
of  a  competition  as  keen  as  that  of  the  Mathematical  Tripos  ;
for  Avhen  he  was  Senior  Wrangler  in  the  Tripos  for  1865,
one  of  the  examiners  said  :  Sti'utt's  papers  were  so  good  that
they  could  have  been  sent  straight  to  press  without  revision.

Another  feature  brought  out  by  this  collection  of  papers
is  their  catholicity.  The  papers  are  indexed  under  the  headings
Mathematics,  General  Mechanics,  Elastic  Solids,  Capillarity,
Hydrodynamics,  Sound,  Thermodynamics,  Kinetic  Theory  of
Gases,  Properties  of  Gases,  Electricity  and  Magnetism,  Optics,
Miscellaneous  ;  and  there  is  such  a  goodly  array  under  each
of  these  headings  that  it  is  difficult  to  decide  in  which  branch
f)f  physics  his  work  was  the  most  important.  .  .  .

Whatever  may  be  the  subject  of  the  paper,  some  character-
istics are  always  apparent.  One  of  these  is  the  quite  ex-
ceptional power  Rayleigh  possessed  of  seeing  what  was  the
essence  of  the  question  ;  he  always  Avent  straight  for  the
critical  spot.  Another — perhaps  to  a  considerable  extent  the
result  of  the  last — was  the  remarkable  gain  in  clearness  any
subject  acquired  after  it  had  passed  through  his  mind,  which
was  like  a  filter  which  cleared  every  subject  passing  through
it  from  obscurity  and  error.  .  .  .

Another  characteristic  was  the  soundness  of  his  judgment.
I  question  if  in  this  respect  he  has  ever  been  surpassed  ;
his  mind  was  crystalline,  not  affected  by  any  cloud  of  pre-
judice ;  he  did  not  dislike  or  shy  at  an  idea  because  it  was
new,  neither  did  he  think  that  because  it  was  new  it  was
necessarily  better  than  the  old:  ...

His  book  on  the  Theory  of  Sound  may  be  said  to  have
found  the  subject  bricks  and  left  it  marble  ; it  is  ideal.

Finally,  concerning  his  public  spirit,  and  willingness  to
sacrifice  time  in  working  with  others,  Sir  J.  J.  Thomson
well  says  :

Though  Rayleigh  disliked  even  more  than  most  men  the
loss  of  time  inseparable  from  attendance  at  committees  and
meetings, he  took  his  full  share  of  such  work, and  it  has


Lxxix.] In  Memory  of  Lord  Eayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.  5

been  a  great  thing  for  British  science  to  be  able  to  call  to
its  councils  a  man  whose  judgment  was  never  influenced  by
prejudice  or  by  a  shadow  of  self-seeking.

To  these  authoritative  utterances  I  must  add  words
of  my  own.  It  is  difficult  to  convey  to  the  general
public  the  enthusiastic  admiration  felt  by  mathematicians
and  physicists  for  Rayleigh's  work.  It  is  as  distinguished
for  neatness  as  for  power.  His  well  prepared  mind  drove
straight  to  the  heart  of  a  problem,  and  his  mathematical
machinery  was  polished  and  copious  enough  to  be  able
to  attack  almost  any  problem  however  abstruse.

His  papers  are  necessarily  abstruse,  and  he  was  some-
times a  little  discouraged  by  the  way  in  which  at  the
time  they  sometimes  seemed  to  fall  flat,  merely  because
there  were  so  few  who  could  fully  understand  them.  That
is  a  real  difficulty  felt  by  those  who  are  working  on  the
heights  of  science,  the  atmosphere  is  bleak  and  cold.
Pure  mathematicians  do  try  to  encourage  each  other,  and
cordially  express  admiration  for  each  other's  work  ;  but
it  has  hardly  been  the  custom  for  applied  mathematicians
to  do  so.  In  time  no  doubt  the  papers  get  read, — at
least  whenever  someone  is  working  on  the  same  precise
branch  of  a  subject, — and  then  the  beauty  and  clarity
and  power  of  the  treatment  are  impressive,  but  even  now
several  of  the  papers  have  hardly  attracted  any  attention.
And  once  when  I  spoke  to  him  with  admiration  about
his  treatment  of  Capillarity  on  the  mathematical  side,  he
said  I  was  the  first  person  who  appeared  to  have  noticed
it,  certainly  the  first  who  had  spoken  to  him  about  it.

Probably  he  felt  that  he  was  to  a  great  extent  writing
for  posterity,  and  he  took  pains  to  collect  together  his
writings  up  to  1910,  in  five  substantial  volumes,  thereby
rendering  a  great  service  to  future  science,  and  performing
a  task  which  is  often  left  to  executors,  and  is  not  alwavs
very  satisfactorily  performed.

His  writings  show  signs  of  real  study  of  the  work  of
others,  and  copious  reading  ;  he  was  well  acquainted
with  the  work  of  foreigners,  and  often  took  up  some
subject  which  they  had  begun  in  a  suggestive  manner,
but  left  in  an  unfinished  and  loose  condition. His  work


6


Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.


[part


in  science  might  always  be  said  to  have  been  a  clearing
up  after  other  people  :  he  took  the  half-begun  problem
or  the  half-asked  question,  re-examined  it  from  the
beginning,  and  carried  it  through  to  a  sort  of  perfection.
So  that  when  he  had  finished,  it  would  remain  for  a  later
generation,  in  the  light  of  further  advance  and  a  general
rise  of  the  tide  of  scientific  knowledge,  to  carrj  the
matter  any  further.

Scientific  men  in  all  countries  are  constantly  making
use  of  Rayleigh's  theorems,  or  Rayleigh's  mathematical
expressions,  and  seldom  indeed  do  they  fail  to  stand  the
test  of  subsequent  impersonal  scrutiny.

If  asked  for  specific  instances  of  his  discoveries  it  is
not  easy  to  pick  out  jewels  from  the  setting.  Argon  is
the  one  achievement  which  can  stand  out  in  the  general
mind,  because  it  is  so  easily  intelligible.  In  that  respect
it  is  like  the  discovery  of  Neptune.  The  planet  before
discovery  was  trembling  on  the  lines  of  mathematical
analysis,  as  Argon  was  trembling  in  the  balance  during
the  delicate  long-continued  weighings  which  detected  its
existence.  Both  were  felt  by  recondite  means,  then
hunted  down,  found,  and  named.

Adams  and  Leverrier  had  the  assistance  of  Galle  of
Berlin  in  ferreting  out  the  stranger  planet.  Rayleigh  had
the  cooperation  of  Ramsay  in  actually  bringing  the
stranger  element  to  birth  ;  but  the  discovery  and  pioneer
work  were  Rayleigh's.  Says  Sir  J.  J.  Thomson,  :  "  Though
both  shared  in  running  down  the  hare,  it  was  Rayleigh
alone  who  started  it  ;  and  this  not  by  a  happy  accident
or  by  the  application  of  new  and  more  powerful  methods
than  those  at  the  disposal  of  his  predecessors,  but  by
that  of  the  oldest  of  chemical  methods — the  use  of  the
balance."

Ramsay  discovered  so  many  other  gases,  helium,  neon,
krypton,  etc.,  and  left  so  deep  and  abiding  a  mark  on
Chemistry,  that  his  disciples  can  afl^ord  to  be  generous
and  recognise  that  Argon  was  discovered  by  physical
means.

Rayleigh  had  done  all  but  the  consummation  of  the  work,
and  would  undoubtedly  have  discovered  the  atmospheric


Lxxix.] In  Memory  of  Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.  7

gas  alone,  had  he  not  by  a  friendly  letter  in  Nature
been  understood  to  invite  the  cooperation  of  his  chemical
confreres  at  a  certain  stage  of  the  research.  Most  men
who  had  gone  as  far  as  he  had  then  gone  would  have
been  ready  to  announce  something  like  a  conclusion,  but
Rayleigh's  caution  is  proverbial  and  that  was  not  his  way.

So  also  when  he  treated  of  our  kind  of  investigation,'
his  cautious  habit  and  deferred  judgment  prevented  his
expressing  himself  in  language  other  than  that  to  which
he  was  accustomed.  What  he  has  said  ought  to  carry
weight  among  other  scientific  men,  as  coming  from  him
but  to  the  public  his  utterance  may  sound  hesitating
and  doubtful  and  inconclusive.  When  he  had  thoroughly
worked  a  thing  out,  and  elaborated  his  mathematical
exposition,  he  could  be  clear  and  definite  enough.  One
or  two  examples  may  be  used  as  illustrations.

Lord Rayleigh's explanation of the blue of the  sky
though it  differs only  in  detail  from  previous  ideas,  is
a great improvement upon them in every way;  'and
he  worked  out  accurately  what  had  previously  heen  only
vague. This  is  typical  of  his  work. It  was  known  that
the blue must be caused by small separate  particles
smaller  than  the  waves  of  light, so  that  they  are  able
to affect  the smallest  waves most, reflecting  the  waves
which  cause  the  sensation  of  blue  more  than  the  red  or
the  green, but  it  was  thought  that  the  particles  which
did  this  must  consist  of  a  fine  grade  of  dust; and  there
was no accurate  or complete theory. (As a side  issue
we  may  remember  that  Mr.  Ruskin  rebelled  aesthetically
against  anything  so  beautiful  as  the  sky  being  caused  bv
the  suspension  of  foreign  matter,  or  anything  that  could
be  called  "  dust,"  however  fine. Fogs  and  mists  and  clouds
mignt be so caused but not sky-blue.) Lord  Rayleigh
examined  the  subject  mathematically  and  proved  that  the
dispersing or scattering particles which selected  and
reflected the smaflest waves of light were of  atomic
dimensions, and  were  accordingly  the  very  molecules  of
air  itself.

Among  other  simple  and  yet  typical  investigations  are
the  explanation  of  the  twinkling  of  stars  at  rising  and


Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.8.  [part

setting  and  the  complete  theory  of  the  colours  of  opal.
Opalescent  colours  had  been  thought  of  as  some  modifica-
tion of  the  colours  of  thin  plates— which  are  simple  to
explain  but  are  by  comparison  of  coarse  and  unattractive
appearance— but  Rayleigh  found  the  colours  of  opal  and
other  crystals,  Chlorate  of  Potash,  among  others,  were
singularly  pure  in  tone  and  could  only  be  explained  by
reflexion  from  a  succession  of  equidistant  strata,  each  of
which  reflected  a  barely  perceptible  amount  and  yet  which
in  the  aggregate  reflected  quite  a  fair  proportion  of  hght,—
of  hght  whose  wave  length  depended  on  the  distance  of

the  strata  apart.

He  illustrated  it  by  a  screen  of  muslin  disks  at  regular
distances  one  behind  another,  employed  as  a  reflector,
or  even  a  generator,  at  any  rate  a  selector,  of  a,  high
pitched  note.  The  theory  has  since  been  apphed  to
investigate  the  structure  of  crystals  by  X-rays,  and  even
to  the  constitution  of  atoms.

The  regular  arrangement  of  molecules  in  a  crystal  give
rise  to  stratifications  which  reveal  their  dimensions  by
the  wave  length  of  the  radiation  which  they  reflect.

The  twinkling  of  stars  low  in  the  horizon  might  easily
seem  an  indefinite  and  so  to  speak  lawless  phenomenon,
like  the  flickering  of  flames.  But  nothing  is  lawless  in
reality,  and  a  rising  star  twinkles  one  way,  while  a  setting
star  "twinkles  another  way;  and  if  they  be  examined
spectroscopically,  obstruction  bands  are  seen  to  move  down
or  up  the  spectrum,  from  right  to  left  for  a  rising,  and
from  left  to  right  for  a  setting  star.

Particles  or  irregularities  ui  the  earth's  lower  atmosphere
are  responsible,  in  combination  v/ith  the  rotation  of  the
earth .

All  manner  of  comparatively  insignificant  phenomena
attracted  his  attention— and  after  he  had  dealt  with
them  they  ceased  to  be  insignificant,  but  revealed  un-
suspected beauties.  Near  the  end  of  his  life  he  was  working
at  the  colour  of  beetles'  wings— as  always,  with  a  com-
bination of  accurate  observation,  careful  experiment,  and
refined  mathematical  analysis.  These  were  his  weapons
and  with  them  he  achieved  his  success.


Lxxix.] In  Memorij  of  Lord  Rmjleigh,  O.M.,  F .R.S.  9

The  examples  chosen  for  mention  here  are  chosen  for
their  simplicity  and  inteUigibility.  To  give  any  idea  of
Lord  Rayleigh's  mathematical  power,  and  of  the  way  ui
which  he  apphed  it  over  the  whole  realm  of  physics,  is
hopeless.  Senior  students  and  professors  of  Physics  will
find  a  wealth  of  material  in  the  five  volumes  and  future
supplementary  volume  of  Collected  Papers  for  many  years
to  come.

And  then  there  is  his  Theori/  of  Sound.  The  two
volumes  of  this  work  stand  out  as  a  landmark  in  science.
Nothing  more  complete  has  been  done,  and  the  results
obtained  for  the  acoustic  vibration  of  gases  and  solids
are  applicable  to  electrical  vibrations  also  ;  but  the
volumes  are  stiU  more  general,  they  contain  the  mathe-
matical theory  of  vibration  in  general,  and  of  waves-
waves  at  least  of  the  longitudinal  type.  Light  waves  are
dealt  with  in  a  compressed  and  unfortunately  shortened
article  in  the  last  volume  of  the  ninth  edition  of  the
Encydo'paedia  Britannica.

What  about  his  work  on  our  subject?  Many  members
wiU  remember  his  brilliant  and  humorous  address  when
he  did  us  the  honour  of  accepting  our  Presidential  Chair.

He  was  more  impressed  with  what  we  call  a  physical
phenomenon  than  with  those  which  are  purely  psychic.  He
had  not  paid  much  attention  or  devoted  much  first-hand
experiment  to  the  ordinary  phenomena  of  automatic  writing
and  trance  utterance.  He  knew  about  them,  of  course,
as  he  knew  of  our  experiments  in  telepathy,  but  they  did
not  seem  to  drive  home  the  security  of  conviction  which
his  cautious  mind  required.

Things  he  could  see  and  handle  impressed  him  more.
The  evidence  for  telepathy  he  apparently  thought  not
quite  conclusive  ;  though  he  made  the  remarkable  state-
ment that,  given  irrefragable  evidence  for  telepathy
between  living  persons,  he  would  have  no  difficulty  m
extending  it  to  telepathy  from  the  dead.  Few  of  us  at
any  time  could  have  said  anything  like  that.  For  myself,
at"^  any  rate,  long  ago  in  the  eighties  of  last  century,
telepathy  from  the  living  was  one  thing,  telepathy  from
the  dead  quite  another. I  regarded  thought  transference


10


Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.


[part


as  fairly  well  established  ; — the  activity,  the  existence
even,  of  dead  people,  I  confess  I  did  not  then  believe  in.
It  was  through  the  mediumship  of  Mrs.  Piper  in  1889
that  the  larger  question  began  to  force  itself  on  my
attention.

I  am  not  sure  whether  Lord  Rayleigh  had  sittings
with  Mrs.  Piper,  and  other  mediums  of  that  kind,  or
not.  But  he  did  have  sittings  with  physical  mediums,
and  he  was  non-plussed  by  the  results  obtained.  Well
instructed  about  fraud,  there  were  phenomena  which  he
observed — in  his  few  sittings  with  Eusapia  for  instance —
which  the  fraud  hypothesis  did  not  explain  ;  and  he
never  gave  way  to  the  easy  temptation  of  rejecting  every-
thing wholesale  :  although  it  is  true  the  things  which  he
had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  were  small  compared  with
some  of  the  things  which  I  myself  saw.

Caution  indeed  he  possessed  in  an  eminent  degree,  but
he  was  cautious  about  rejecting,  and  not  only  cautious
about  accepting.  He  realised  that  what  we  were  re-
sponsible for  was  careful  statement  of  truth,  and  that
it  was  as  posssible  to  err  on  the  popular  negative  side  as
on  the  unpopular  and  difficult  positive  side.  It  is  easy  to
obtain  credit  in  the  scientific  world  for  strong  sense  and
robust  intelligence  by  wholesale  denials,  and  such  an
attitude  is  politic  in  our  day  and  generation  ;  but  pro-
gress in  knowledge  can  only  be  made  if  some  pioneers
at  any  rate  are  willing  to  run  the  risk  of  harbouring
strange  guests  of  knowledge,  and  of  declaring  themselves
convinced  about  new  facts,  while  still  their  acceptance  is
regarded  as  a  sign  of  feeble  brain  and  lax  character.

That  Lord  Rayleigh  was  as  convinced  about  physical
phenomena  of  heterodox  type  as  some  of  us  have  gradually
grown  to  be,  cannot  be  said.  That  he  was  more  convinced
than  others  of  us,  is,  I  think,  true.  But  what  I  am  sure
of  is  that  if  he  were  absolutely  convinced  of  any  fact —
and  it  took  a  good  deal  to  convince  him — he  would
stand  up  for  the  truth  in  any  assembly  in  the  world,
and  not  be  debarred  from  utterance  for  fear  of  damaged
reputation. This  may  sound  easier  than  it  is.

But the reputation of a scientific man is a  delicate


Lxxix.] In  Memory  of  Lord  Eayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.  11

growth.  None  but  his  fellows  can  appreciate  his  work ;
the  popular  notion  of  him  must  depend  upon  their
opinion,  in  the  long  run  ;  and  if  skiUed  opinion  turn
against  him  his  day  is  done.  So  it  was  with  Thomas
Young,  in  the  early  years  of  last  century  :  in  spite  of
his  brilliant  pioneer  work,  as  we  now  see  it  to  have
been, — one  of  the  great  men  of  science  of  all  time, — he
was  intellectually  killed  by  Lord  Brougham  and  other
contemporary  critics,  and  at  the  present  day  is  practically
unknown  except  among  physicists.  Through  such  criticism
another  of  our  Presidents,  Sir  WilHam  Crookes,  had  to  go,
and  who  shall  say  that  he  was  not  weakened  thereby  as
well  as  distressed.  Through  such  criticism  Lord  Rayleigh
did  not  have  to  go  ;  he  was  never  suiificiently  and  com-
pletely persuaded  about  our  phenomena  to  find  it  necessary
to  declare  himself  coratn  populo.  But  he  did  take  a  keen
interest  in  our  subject ;  he  acted  on  the  Committee  of
Reference  and  passed  papers  for  publication  ;  and  at
length  he  allowed  himself  to  occupy  the  Presidential
Chair,  and  in  his  Presidential  Address  he  exposed  his
views.  Would  that  we  could  have  retained  longer  his
ripe  judgment  and  penetrating  intellect,  his  cautious
candour,  and  truly  religious  spirit.

He  was  the  last  of  the  giants  of  the  Victorian  Era  in
Physical  Science — Stokes,  Thomson  and  Tait,  Clerk  Maxwell
and  Rayleigh.  Cambridge  may  well  be  proud  of  its
alumni.  From  the  days  of  Isaac  Newton  to  the  present
day,  it  has  magnificently  upheld  the  fiag  of  Mathematical
Physics  ;  and  from  no  University  in  the  world  have
greater  men  in  this  branch  of  science  ever  emanated.


12


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


II.

IN  MEMORY  OF
SIR  WILLmi  CROOKES,  O.M.,  F.R.S.

By  Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.

We  have  to  mourn  the  loss  of  another  President  of  our
Society  who  was  also  a  most  eminent  scientific  man.
Sir  William  Crookes  passed  into  the  unseen  on  April  4th,
1919,  in  the  eighty-seventh  year  of  his  age,  and  scientific
men  in  every  country  throughout  the  world  mourned  the
loss  of  one  of  the  most  famous  and  indefatigable  workers
in  physical  science.  He  possessed — as  Sir  J.  J.  Thomson,
President  of  the  Royal  Society,  truly  remarked— unsur-
passed experimental  skill  and  the  instinct  of  selecting
those  particular  subjects  of  enquiry  which  enabled  him
to  be  a  pioneer  in  perhaps  a  greater  variety  of  subjects
that  any  sava7it  of  the  past  century.  Moreover,  Crookes'
fearless  courage  as  a  pioneer,  his  independence  of  spirit,
and  his  liberahty  of  thought,  were  coupled  with  the
sincerity  and  modesty  of  a  truly  great  man,  whilst  his
high  principle  and  affectionate  nature  made  his  character
as  beautiful  as  his  fame  was  great.

This  is  not  the  place  to  review  in  detail  the  wonderful
record  of  chemical  and  physical  researches  and  discoveries
with  which  Crookes  has  enriched  science.  It  may,  how-
ever, be  of  interest  to  notice  very  briefly  his  life  history
and  some  of  the  scientific  work  on  which  his  enduring
fame  will  rest.

Crookes  was  born  on  June  17th,  1832,  at  143  Regent
Street,  London,  where  his  father  had  established  a
successful  business.  Surely  we  owe  it  to  posterity  to
mark  the  place  of  birth  and  residence  of  famous  scientiiic


SIR  WILLIAM


CROOKES,


O.M.,  F.K.S.


■ :


i


I.XXIX.] In  Memonj  of  Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  Etc.  13

men  more  frequently  than  is  now  done.  A  tablet  should
"be  placed  on  the  house  in  Regent  Street  and  also  on  the
house  in  Kensington  Park  Gardens,  where  Crookes  died,
and  where  he  lived  from  1880  and  conducted  most  of  his
researches.  That  house  (according  to  Crookes'  statement
to  an  interviewer)  was  the  first  ever  lit  with  the  electric
licrht  all  the  glow  lamps  having  been  made  by  Crookes
hfmself,  he  having  been  one  of  the  first  to  bring  our
present  electric  lamps  to  practical  success,  an  honour
which  he  shares  with  another  member  of  our  Council,
Mr.  Lane  Fox-Pitt.

Crookes  had  no  university  training,  and  very  httle
regular  school  education;  he  studied  chemistry  at  the
old  Royal  College  of  Chemistry  in  Oxford  Street,  under
Professor  Hofmann  ;  a  place  I  know  well,  for  twelve
years  later  I  was  a  humble  student  in  the  same  college
under  the .  same  eminent  Professor.  Only  three  years  after
Crookes  had  entered  the  CoUege  of  Chemistry,  in  1851,  he
pubhshed  his  first  scientific  paper,  which  at  once  attracted
attention  both  in  England  and  Germany  and  marked  the
author  as  a  new  and  promising  young  chemist.  Crookes
was  then  assistant  to  Professor  Hofmann,  a  position  be
retained  till  1854,  when  he  was  appointed  superintendent
of  the  meteorological  department  of  the  Observatory  at
Oxford,  and  the  following  year  became  lecturer  of
Chemistry in Chester Training  College.

In  1856  Crookes  married  and  settled  in  London,  at
Mornington  Road,  Regents  Park,  moving  in  1880  to
7  Kensington  Park  Gardens,  where,  at  his  own  expense,
he  built  and  equipped  a  fine  chemical  laboratory.  Crookes
had  eight  children,— of  whom  four  sons  and  one  daughter
are  now  living.  Those  of  us  who  attended  the  funeral
of  Lady  Crookes  in  1917  and  saw  the  stricken  husband,
felt  that  Sir  Wilham  would  never  recover  from  the  loss
of  one  who  had  been  his  devoted  partner  for  sixty-one
years.  Nevertheless  with  rare  courage,  though  with
enfeebled  health,  he  returned  to  scientific  work  in  his
eighty-fifth  year  and  wrested  fresh  secrets  from  the
illimitable  storehouse  of  nature.

The  first  great  discovery  which  Crookes  made  (in  1861)


14


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


was  of  a  new  element,  a  metal  he  called  Thallium^
from  the  green  line  it  showed  when  its  vapour  was
examined  in  the  spectroscope.  This  splendid  instrument
of  research  had  then  recently  been  discovered,  and  it
was  Crookes'  right-hand  all  his  life.  He  became  in  fact
the  greatest  living  authority  on  spectroscopy,  so  much  so
that  when  the  gases  argon  and  helium  were  discovered  by
Rayleigh  and  Ramsay,  they  submitted  specimens  of  these
gases  to  Crookes  to  examine  ;  he  determined  their  novelty,
and  the  identity  of  helium  with  a  new  element  previously
found  in  the  sun.

The  revelation  of  a  new  element  sixty  years  ago  was
a  great  event,  and  Crookes'  discovery  of  Thallium  created
world-wide  interest.  He  isolated  the  element,  and  found  it
to  be  a  soft  white  metal  very  like  lead,  and  it  was  exhibited
in  this  state,  at  the  great  Exhibition  in  London  in  1862.  For
many  years  Crookes  exhaustively  studied  the  chemistry  of
Thallium,  he  found  its  various  compounds,  and  with  infinite
labour  determined  its  atomic  weight.  This  arduous  task
revealed  to  the  scientific  world  the  singular  experimental  skill,
and  the  wonderful  accuracy  of  Crookes'  work.  For  in  spite
of  more  recent  attempts,  and  more  modern  appliances,  the
atomic  weight  which  Crookes  found,  still  ranks  as  the  most
correct.

It  was  in  the  course  of  the  exceedingly  delicate  weighings
in  vacuo,  which  were  necessary  for  the  determination  of
the  atomic  weight  that  Crookes  discovered  a  new  fact,
Repulsion  by  radiation  in  high  vacua.  This  led  him  to  the
construction  in  1875  of  the  famous  Radiometer.  This  is  a
little  mill,  the  delicate  horizontal  vanes  of  which  are  in
vacuo,  and  rapidly  rotate  when  exposed  to  light.  The
motion,  however,  is  not  due,  as  first  thought,  to  the  mechanical
effect  of  light,  but  to  the  heating  of  the  blackened  face  of  the
vanes,  which  causes  a  repulsion  of  the  residual  molecules  of
air  within  the  exhausted  vessel,  and  thus  the  vanes  are  kicked
back  ;  a  continuous  motion  being  sustained  by  the  cooling
of  the  air  molecules  on  the  surface  of  the  glass  vessel.

The  very  high  exhaustion  of  glass  vessels — which
Crookes  carried  to  a  higher  state  than  had  ever  before
been  achieved — led  him in 1876,  to his  next  discovery.


Lxxix.] In  Memory  of  Sir  William  Croakes,  Q.M.,  Etc.  15

perhaps  one  of  the  most  far-reaching  and  epoch-m.aking
in  the  history  of  experimental  physics;  Crookes  found
that  when  an  electric  discharge  passed  throii^h  -these  ve'-y
highly  exhausted  glass  vessels,  the  residual  gas  within,  tiie^  .
glass  vessel  was  revealed  in  a  new  or,  as  he  called  it,  a
fourth  state  of  matter  ;  neither  solid,  liquid,  nor  gaseous.
The  stream  of  these  infinitely  minute  and  ultra-molecular
corpuscles,  driven  from  the  cathode,  or  negative  pole,
by  the  electric  discharge  behaved  like  a  beam  of  light  ;
they  threw  sharp  shadows  of  any  obstacle  in  their  path,
and  they  could  be  reflected  and  converged  to  a  focus
by  means  of  a  concave  mirror.  Objects  placed  at  this
focus  were  raised  to  intense  heat,  and  even  platinum
might  be  melted.  Precious  stones  when  thus  bombarded
by  these  ultra-gaseous  molecules,  showed  characteristic  and
brilliant  phosphorescence,  whilst  the  walls  of  the  glass
tube  on  which  these  cathode  rays  fell  glowed  with  a
green  phosphorescence,  now  familiar  to  us  in  the  X-ray
tubes.  In  fact,  Crookes'  "radiant  matter,"  or  cathode  rays,
became,  later  on,  the  source  of  Rontgen's  discovery  of  the
so-called  X-rays,  these  being  generated  by  the  impact
of  the  cathode  rays  upon  a  suitable  anode.

Some  twenty  years  after  Crookes'  discovery  of  the
cathode  rays  a  telegram  in  the  Times  newspaper,  at  the
end  of  the  year  1895,  announced  Rontgen's  discovery  of
the  X-rays,  to  which  many  substances  opaque  to  light
were  perfectly  transparent.  I  happened  to  have  had  in
my  possession  for  many  years  a  small  very  high  vacvium
tube  Crookes  had  made  and  given  me,  which  showed
the  green  phosphorescence  just  referred  to.^  After  reading
the  telegraphic  report  in  the  Times  I  coimected  up  my
little  "  Crookes  tube  "  with  an  induction  coil  and  succeeded
after  a  long  exposure  in  taking  a  photograph,  or  radio-
graph, of  my  spectacles  when  they  were  enclosed  in  their

1  This  small  vacuum  tube  had  the  two  platinum  electrodes  about  aa
inch  apart  and  was  made  for  the  j'lu'pose  of  showing  that  at  the  very
high  vacua  Crookes  obtained  the  electric  discharge  would  not  pass  even
from  a  coil  giving  a  12 -inch  spark  in  air.  In  course  of  time  its  vacuum
became  less,  a  discharge  passed  causing  a  brilliant  green  phosphorescence
on  the  walls  of  the  tube  around  the  anode.


16  ,  . Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.  [part

opaque  cardboard  case.  The  metal  rims  were  clearly  seen
and  also  the  glass  lenses  faintly  indicated.

.Early  in  189.6  a  Dublin  surgeon  brought  a  patient  from
his  hospital  to  my  laboratory,  in  the  hope  that  I  might
be  able  to  detect,  by  a  delicate  magnetometer,  the  position
of  a  broken  needle  that  the  patient,  a  maid-servant,  had
run  into  her  hand  a  year  before.  The  broken  needle  had
travelled  since  its  entrance  and  was  now  crippling  the
use  of  the  patient's  hand.  Repeated  attempts  to  find  and
remove  the  broken  needle  had  failed ;  the  magnetometer
showed  the  needle  was  there  but  failed  to  locate  its
exact  position.  Having  had  a  rudimentary  X-ray  tube
made,  I  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  good  radiograph  of  the
exact  position  of  the  needle,  which  the  surgeon  thereupon
removed  and  the  patient  recovered  the  use  of  her  hand.
This  was  I  believe  the  first  application  of  the  X-rays  for
surgical  purposes  ;  and  it  shows  how  narrowly  Crookes
missed  the  discovery  made  later  on  by  Rontgen.

The  dark  space  which  appears  round  the  negative  or
cathode  pole  in  a  vacuum  tube  is  known  as  the  "  Crookes
space,"  and  in  the  Bakerian  lecture  which  Crookes  gave
before  the  Royal  Society  in  1883,  he  considered  that  the
cathode  rays,  or  particles  of  "  radiant  matter "  discharged
from  the  cathode,  were  of  the  dimensions  of  molecules.  It
became  clear  to  Crookes  a  little  later  on  that  these
particles  were  ulf ra-molecular,  and  were  indeed  the  in-
finitely minute  corpuscles,  called  by  Dr.  Johnstone  Stoney
Electrons ;  and  this  he  expressed  in  his  paper  on  the
"  Stratification  of  Hydrogen,"  published  in  Proc.  Eoyal
Society,  vol.  79.  With  wonderful  prevision  he  wrote
nearly  forty  years  ago  :  "  We  seem  at  length  to  have
within  our  grasp,  and  obedient  to  our  control,  the  little
indivisible  particles  which  constitute  the  physical  basis
of  the  elements,"  and  he  goes  on  to  say,  "  we  have
actually  touched  the  borderland  between  the  known  and
the  unknown  which  for  me  has  always  had  a  peculiar
temptation.  I  venture  to  think  (he  adds)  that  the
greatest  scientific  problems  of  the  future  will  find  their
solution in this borderland or even  beyond."

This prediction has a double aspect, for so far  as


Lxxix.] In  Memory  of  Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  Etc.  17

psychical  phenomena  are  concerned  Crookes  kimself  spent
four  years  in  exploring  the  borderland  between  the  known
and  the  unknown ;  and  as  regards  physical  phenomena
Crookes'  cathode  rays  have  become  the  starting  point  of
a  series  of  astonishing  discoveries  of  great  practical  and
theoretical  importance.

Crookes"  scientific  prevision  is  further  seen  in  the  belief
he  publicly  expressed,  and  to  which  he  was  led  from  his
spectroscopic  researches,  that  the  so-called  elements  might
be  resolved  into  a  few  simpler  types,  which  he  termed
meta-elements,  and  that  therefore  the  alchemists'  dream
of  the  transmutation  of  metals  might  after  all  prove  to
be  true.  Years  later  Ramsay  and  Rutherford  proved
that  this  was  no  dream,  and  established  the  disintegration
of  the  radio-active  elements  into  bodies  of  lower  atomic
weight.  Crookes  himself  was,  I  believe,  the  first  to  discover
that  the  element  helium  could  be  obtained  from  the
disintegration  of  radium.

The  discovery  of  radio-activity  by  Becquerel  and  of
radium  by  Mdme.  Curie,  towards  the  end  of  the  last
century,  led  Crookes  to  make  a  series  of  important  investi-
gations, and  to  the  construction  of  the  Httle  instrument
which  he  called  the  Spinthariscope,  whereby  the  alpha
rays  emanating  from  radium  could  be  counted  ;  each
particle  producing  a  scintillation  on  a  small  zinc-sulphide
phosphorescent  screen.

Crookes'  researches  on  the  rare  earths  and  their  spectra
occupied  him  for  more  than  twenty  years  and  led  to  his
exhaustive  and  classical  study  of  the  element  Scandium
and  its  various  salts.  He  returned  to  this  subject  at  the
close  of  his  life  and  in  December,  1918 — only  a  few
months  before  his  death — sent  a  paper  on  his  investigation
of  the  "  Arc  Spectra  of  Scandium  "  to  the  Royal  Society.
As  he  was  then  eighty-six  years  old,  this  is  probably
an  almost  unique  record  of  mental  vigoru?  and  original
research  at  so  advanced  an  age  and  after  such  a  long  and
strenuous  life.

In  1898  he  was  elected  President  of  the  British  Asso-
ciation and  in  his  presidential  address  at  Bristol  he
pointed  out  that  a  gradual  exhaustion  of  the  wheat  crops


18


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


of  the  world  would  occur  from  the  want  of  fertilisers  ;
and  hence  the  necessity  of  creating  artificial  fertilisers  by
the  fixation  of  atmospheric  nitrogen.  He  urged  that  this
should  be  done  on  a  large  commercial  scale  to  avoid  a
future  catastrophe.  The  Germans  took  the  hint  and  led
the  way,  and  when  the  war  came  their  big  plants  for  the
fixation  of  atmospheric  nitrogen,  were  utilized  for  the
production  of  explosives,  otherwise  their  army  would  have
been  helpless.  We  are  now  turning  our  attention  to  the
warning Crookes gave us twenty-one  years  ago.

Time  will  only  allow  me  to  mention  in  passing  Crookes'
researches  on  diamonds.  For  this  purpose  he  visited  the
diamond  fields  in  S.  Africa  in  1896,  and  again  in  1905,
and  published  an  admirable  little  book  on  diamonds  in
1909.  Crookes  showed  that  minute  crystals  of  diamond
could  be  obtained  artificially  by  the  explosion  of  cordite
in  a  closed  steel  cylinder.

One  other  important  discovery  which  we  owe  to  Crookes'
later  years,  must  be  referred  to.  This  was  the  protection
of  the  eyes  of  glass  and  steel  smelters  from  the  intolerable
glare  of  the  molten  glass  or  metal.  Hitherto  no  trans-
parent substance  had  been  found  which  would  cut  off  the
invisible  and  hurtful  rays  from  the  white  hot  furnace.
Crookes'  aid  was  sought,  and  at  an  age  when  most  men
would  long  since  have  ceased  to  work,  he  threw  himself
into  this  problem,  and  after  long  and  painstaking  research
discovered  a  glass  with  onty  a  very  slight  yellow  tint,
that  cut  off  practically  all  the  injurious  rays.  These
"  Crookes  spectacles  are  now  widely  used.  He  might,
obviously,  have  derived  very  great  financial  benefit  from
this  discovery  bvit,  like  all  his  other  discoveries,  he  gave
it  freely  to  the  world.

In  reviewing  the  varied  and  prodigious  amount  of
original  scientific  work  accomplished  by  Crookes  during
his  lifetime  (of  which  I  have  only  given  an  imperfect
sketch),  it  is  astonishing  to  find  that  he  had  time,  not
only  for  his  protracted  psychical  investigations,  to  which  I
will  turn  directly,  but  also  for  numerous  other  occupations.
His  literary  work  was  large  enough  to  have  filled  most
men's  lives. He  founded,  owned,  and  for  half  a  century


Lxxix.] In  Memory  of  Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  Etc.  19

alone  edited  the  Cheynical  News,  the  leading  chemical  weekly
journal  ;  for  years  he  edited  and  wrote  for  the  Quarterly
Journal  of  Science.  It  was  in  this  quarterly  he  published
his  researches  on  spiritualism.  He  wrote  a  standard  text
book  on  Chemical  Analysis,  besides  numerous  important
works  on  the  applications  of  chemistry  to  the  arts,  the
industries  and  the  agriculture  of  our  country  ;  he  edited
in  addition  several  technical  books  and  numerous  scientific
reports.  Nor  was  he  a  recluse,  holding  aloof  from  society;
on  the  contrary  he  was  given  to  hospitality  and  enjoyed
dining  out  at  public  functions  or  with  friends  or  with  the
Council  of  the  S.P.R.,  and  for  some  forty  years  rarely
missed  the  monthly  dinner  of  the  small  group  of  like-
minded  friends  who  formed  the "  Ghost-Club."

Sir  W.  Tilden,  F.R.S.,  in  the  long  obituary  notice  of
Crookes  he  wrote  for  the  Royal  Society,  has  well  said  :

"  It  would  be  almost  impossible  to  enumerate  all  the
various  directions  in  which  Sir  William  Crookes  occupied
himself  in  connection  with  problems  of  public  interest  or
as  expert  adviser  to  the  Government,  but,  in  passing,
may  be  mentioned  his  work  in  the  disposal  of  town
sewage,  his  Reports  on  the  composition  and  quality  of
daily  samples  of  the  water  supplied  to  London  from  1880
to  1906,  and  his  services  as  Consulting  Expert  on  the
Ordnance  Board  from  1907  onwards  during  the  period  of
the  war.  Nor  should  it  be  forgotten  that  the  office  of
President  is  in  many  learned  societies  no  sinecure.  In
presiding  over  the  Chemical  Society  (1887-1889),  the
Institution  of  Electrical  Engineers  (1890-1894),  the  British
Association  (1898),  the  Society  of  Chemical  Industry  (1913),
and  finally  the  Royal  Society  (1913-14-15),  Sir  William
paid  close  attention  to  all  the  multifarious  details  of  each
Society.  He  also  served  as  Honorary  Secretary  to  the
Royal  Institution  from  1900  to  1913,  and  was  Foreign
Secretary  to  the  Royal  Society  from  1908  to  1912.  Every
man  of  science  among  his  contemporaries  will  be  read}"
to  affirm  therefore  that  the  numerous  honours  which  were
showered  upon  Crookes  by  the  most  distinguished  Academies
and  Universities  in  the  world  were  well  earned  and  very
fittingly  conferred. He  received  a  knighthood  in  1897  and


20


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.8.


[part


from  the  Royal  Society  the  Royal,  the  Davy,  and  the
Copley  Medals  ;  from  the  Royal  Society  of  Arts  the
Albert  Medal,  and  finally,  in  1910,  the  Order  of  Merit
was  conferred  upon  him  by  the  King."

This,  of  course,  is  the  highest  honour  our  Sovereign  can
bestow,  and  it  has  been  conferred  on  no  less  than  four
members  of  our  Society.  Nor  must  it  be  forgotten  Crookes
was  President  of  our  Society  from  1896  -1899,  he  was  a
valuable  member  of  our  council  and  a  contributor  to
our  Proceedings.  The  French  Academy  of  Sciences  gave
him  their  gold  medal  and  prize  of  3000  francs  and  elected
him  their  correspondent  in  1880.  It  is  singular  that  whilst
the  various  British  and  Irish  Universities  conferred  honorary
degrees  on  Crookes,  the  Scotch  Universities  appear  to
have  held  aloof ;  was  it  because  of  his  psychical  researches,
to  which  we  must  now  turn.


Crookes'  psychical  investigations  were  so  prolonged,  so
important  and  so  unique  that  I  should  have  preferred  to
have  devoted  a  special  meeting  of  our  members  for  their
review  and  discussion.

One  would  have  thought  Sir  W.  Crookes  would  have
been  the  most  unlikely  man  of  science  to  take  up  the
investigation  of  psychical  phenomena.  His  hands  at  the
time  were  full  of  pressing  scientific  and  literary  work ;
moreover,  his  somewhat  austere  temperament  and  his
passion  for  exact  data  and  extreme  accuracy  in  all  his
experimental  researches  naturally  suggest  that  he  would
look  with  scorn  on  the  contradictory,  loose  and  incon-
clusive psychical  evidence  which  existed  when  he  began
his  investigations.  The  truth  no  doubt  is,  as  he  stated  in
the  paper  I  have  quoted,  that  the  borderland  between  the
known  and  the  unknown  had  always  a  peculiar  attraction
for  him,  and  hence  as  a  patient  seeker  after  truth  he
set  to  work  to  examine  the  novel  and  perplexing  pheno-
mena which  seemed  to  occur  in  the  presence  of  a  medium-
istic  acquaintance  of  his  own.  His  psychical  investi-
gations were  mainly  concerned  with  what  are  called  the
physical  phenomena  of  Spiritualism, — and  they  engrossed
his  attention  from  1870  to  1874.


Lxxix.] In  Memory  of  Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  Etc.  21

In  the  first  paragraph  of  the  reprint  of  his  articles  on
the  "  Phenomena  of  Spirituahsm,"  Crookes  tells  us  that
he  "  considered  it  the  duty  of  scientific  men,  who  have
learnt  exact  modes  of  working,  to  examine  phenomena
which  attract  pubhc  attention,  in  order  to  confirm  their
genuineness  or  to  explain  the  delusions  of  the  honest,  or
to  expose  the  tricks  of  deceivers."  And  Crookes  adds,
"  That  certain  physical  phenomena  such  as  the  movement
of  material  substances,  and  the  production  of  sounds
resembling  electric  discharges,  occur  under  circumstances  in
which  they  cannot  be  explained  by  any  physical  law
at  present  known,  is  a  fact  of  which  I  am  as  certain,
as  I  am  of  the  most  elementary  laws  of  chemistry.  My
whole  scientific  education  (he  continues)  has  been  one
long  lesson  in  exactness  of  observation,  and  I  wish  it
to  be  distinctly  understood  that  this  firm  conviction  is
the  result  of  most  careful  investigation."

And  yet,  after  this  expHcit  statement,  by  one  of  the
highest  authorities  in  experimental  science  in  our  country,
Crookes  was  ostracised  by  those  who  had  never  given  an
hour's  serious  study  to  the  phenomena  in  question  !  As
is  well  known  Crookes  at  first  inclined  to  the  view  that
the  phenomena  were  due  to  some  new  force  emanating
from  the  medium  "  which  for  convenience,"  (he  says  in
his  first  paper),  "  may  be  called  the  Psychic  Force.'"
But  subsequent  investigations,  more  especially  the  marvel-
lous phenomena  he  witnessed  with  the  medium  Miss  Cook,
led  him  to  accept  more  or  less  completely  the  Spiritualistic
point  of  view.

It  is  imnecessary  to  detail  the  remarkable  series  of
experiments  which  Crookes  made  with  that  gifted  medium
Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  and  later  with  Miss  Cook.  In  the
Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.  for  1889,  Vol.  VI.,  Sir  W.
Crookes  published  a  lengthy  paper  entitled  "  Notes  of
seances  with  D.  D.  Home,"  and  in  the  discussion  that
followed  the  reading  of  Sir  0.  Lodge's  report  on  Eusapia
Paladino,  Crookes  gave  interesting  details  of  some  of  the
more  striking  phenomena  he  had  witnessed  in  Home's
presence,^ such as the  fire-test, the levitation of  Home,

1  See  S.P.R.  Journal  for  1894,  Vol.  VI.  p.  341.


22


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


I  PAKT


and  the  production  of  "  spirit "  hands  and  forms.  As
regards  the  handling  of  fire  Crookes  says  :

"  Several  times  I  saw  the  fire-test  both  at  my  own  and
at  other  houses.  Home  certainly  put  his  hand  into  the
grate  and  handled  the  red-hot  coals  in  a  manner  which
would  have  been  impossible  for  me  to  have  imitated  with-
out being  severely  burnt.  I  once  saw  him  go  to  a  bright
wood  fire  and  taking  a  large  piece  of  red-hot  charcoal,
put  it  in  the  hollow  of  one  hand,  and  covering  it  with
the  other  hand,  blew  into  the  extempore  furnace  till  the
coal  was  white  hot  and  the  flames  licked  round  his
fingers.  No  sign  of  burning  could  be  seen  then  or  after-
wards on  his  hands."

Several  other  competent  witnesses  like  Lord  Dunraven,
Sir  W.  Huggins,  O.M.,  Mr.  W.  M.  Wilkinson,  etc.  have
testified  to  this  fire  test.  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  gave  me  minute
details  of  how  a  white  hot  coal  was  placed  on  his  head
whilst  his  long  white  hair  was  unsinged,  and  no  pain  was
felt.i

Then  as  regards  levitation  Crookes  tells  us  he  has  seen
Home  rise  off  the  ground  and  that  he  passed  his  hands
under  and  around  him  when  in  the  air.  Several  times
the  chair  on  which  Home  sat  rose  up,  no  one  being
near  it,  all  present  saw  it,  Crookes  felt  under  the  legs  of
the  chair,  and  Home's  feet  were  all  the  time  tucked  up
on  the  chair.  General  Boldero,  a  friend  of  mine,  and
others  have  confirmed  these  statements.

As  trickery  and  every  normal  explanation  are  excluded
from  Crookes'  observations  there  remains  the  only  alter-
native, that  he  was  hallucinated,  by  some  subtle  hypnotic
influence  exercised  by  the  medium.  But  this  has  been
completely  disproved  by  eminent  investigators  like  Lord
Crawford,  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Lord  Rayleigh  and  others.^  Nor

1  If  I  may  refer  to  my  work  On  the  Threshold  of  the  Unseen,''
the  reader  will  there  find  in  Chapters  IV.  to  VI.  a  brief  resume  of  the
marvellous  phenomena  witnessed  and  critically  examined  by  Sir  W.
Crookes.

-  Count  Petrovo-Solovovo  has  ably  discussed  the  hallucination  theory
in  a  paper  published  in  Proc.  S.P.B.  Vol.  XXI.  p.  436  et  seq.,  and
has  shown  that  it  is  quite  inadequate  as  an  explanation  of  the  mar-
velloiis  phenomena  witnessed  by  Sir  W.  Crookes  and  others.


Lxxix.] In  Memory  of  Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  Etc.  23

can  we  say  Crookes  was  mad,  for  the  facts  are  testified
to  by  scores  of  other  sane  and  sensible  men.

Crookes  records  many  other  marvels  which  occurred
with  Home.  Thus  he  repeatedly  saw  a  hfe-like  human
hand  in  full  light  take  a  flower  from  a  vase  and  hand  it
to  him.  Yet  there  was  nothing  visible  but  the  dehcate
hand  of  a  lady,  no  body  was  seen  and  no  human  being
was  near.

Crookes  touched  this  hand  repeatedly  and  more  than  once
held  it  firmly, — resolved  not  to  let  it  escape.  There  was
no  struggle  but  the  hand  melted  away  into  vapour  and
faded  from  his  grasp.  That  was  precisely  my  own  ex-
perience once,  when  I  held  a  small,  so  called  spirit,  hand
that  touched  me.  The  hand  pulled  me  upwards  till  I  had
to  stand  on  a  chair  and  then  on  a  table  in  front  of  me,
grasping  the  hand  firmly  ;  it  suddenly  faded  away.  Lord
Rayleigh  says  if  Crookes  was  deceived  by  an  inflated
Tubber  glove,  still  the  rubber  would  remain  when  the
glove  deflated  in  Crookes'  hand.  .

It  must  be  remembered  that  Crookes  repeatedly  states
Home  always  refused  to  sit  in  the  dark.  In  fact
the  room  was  so  well  lighted,  Crookes  says,  that  not
only  could  he  see  everything  and  write  his  notes,  but
could  read  them  when  they  were  written.  Crookes
records  his  opinion  of  Home  as  one  of  the  most  upright,
honest  and  lovable  of  men,  who  insisted  on  every  pre-
caution being  taken  to  avoid  deception.  "  Don't  consider
my  feelings,"  Home  once  said  to  Crookes,  "  test  the
phenomena  in  every  way  you  can  devise."  No  wonder
that  we  find  Crookes  writing,  "  I  think  it  a  shame  that
whilst  Home  was  willing  and  anxious  to  place  himself  at
the  disposal  of  men  of  science  for  investigations  he  should
have  lived  so  many  years  in  London,  and,  with  one  or
two  exceptions,  no  one  of  weight  in  the  scientific  world
should  have  thought  it  worth  while  to  look  into  the  truth
or  falsity  of  things  which  were  being  talked  about  in
Society  on  all  sides."  ^

1  It  is  most  desirable  that  all  Crookes'  notes  and  papers  and  his
discussion  of  Home's  phenomena  at  the  S.P.R.  should  be  carefully
collected  and  published,  as  the  well-known  American  publishers,  Messrs.


24


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


We  must  all  heartily  concur  in  this,  and  it  is  a  strong-
argument  in  favour  of  our  Society,  which  was  not  founded
until  eight  years  later.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that
the  success  which  attended  all  Crookes'  researches,  whether
physical  or  psychical  were  largely  due  to  his  open  mind
and  fearless  courage  in  exploring  new  regions.  He  did  not,
like  so  many  men,  refuse  to  investigate  what  seemed
impossible,  he  followed  the  dictates  of  that  distinguished
scientific  man,  Sir  John  Herschel,  who  said,  "  the  natural
philosopher  should  believe  all  things  not  improbable,  hope
all  things  not  impossible.'"  Nor  did  he  hesitate  to  accept
what  he  had  once  firmly  proved.  Progress  in  knowledge
would  be  impossible,  if — like  a  recent  reviewer  in  our
Journal — he  expressed  doubts  of  what  has  already  been
established  quite  as  conclusively  as  the  existence  of
meteorites,  which  were  regarded  as  fabulous  stories  a
century  ago.  On  this  point  Lord  Rayleigh  made  inter-
esting and  pertinent  remarks  in  his  presidential  address
to  our  Society.

In  conclusion  I  must  briefly  refer  to  the  still  more
amazing  phenomena  Crookes  carefully  tested  with  another
medium.  Miss  F.  Cook.  Here  an  actual  human  form
appeared  calling  itseK  "  Katie  King."  Sometimes  this  form
showed  itself  and  the  medium  side  by  side.  Crookes  was
allowed  to  grasp  the  ghost  and  found  it  as  substantial
human  body  ;  in  fact,  it  appeared  in  all  respects
identical  with  a  living  woman.  So  much  so  that  Crookes
took  its  pulse  and  rate  of  breathing,  its  height,  and
examined  it  minutely  to  see  what  difference  there  was
between  it  and  the  medium.  He  found  the  figure  had
a  very  different  pulse  rate,  and  differed  in  many  other
respects.  Lady  Crookes  has  told  me  that  she  and  her
family  repeatedly  saw  this  ghostly  lady  when  the  medium
stayed  in  their  house.  That  it  spoke  to  them  and  was
as  natural  and  life-like  as  any  earthly  person.

No  wonder  everybody  was  incredulous,  and  said  Miss
Cook  (the  medium)  and  "  Katie,"  were  the  same  person,  or
that  she  had  a  clever  accomplice. Hence  Crookes  under-

H.  Holt  &  Co.,  wish  to  do.  I  have  given  in  an  Appendix  references
to  Sir  W.  Crookes"  contributions  to  our  Society.


Lxxix.] In  Memory  of  Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  Etc.  25

took  an  elaborate  investigation  which  lasted  five  months,
and  which  he  tells  us  completely  established  that  there
was  no  accomplice  and  that  ' '  Katie  King ' '  was  not  the
medium  Miss  Cook.  He  also  used  photography  to  test
the  matter.  He  was  himself  an  expert  photographer  and
so  was  his  assistant.  In  his  laboratory  he  fitted  up  five
complete  sets  of  photographic  apparatus,  and  each  time
had  several  plates  exposed  in  all  the  five  cameras.  These
he  developed  himself,  and  of  course  procured  his  own
photographic  plates.  Thus  he  obtained  forty-four  negatives
and  out  of  these  got  several  excellent  photographs  of  the
ghost  "Katie  King,"  who  appeared  somewhat  to  resemble,
but  was  more  beautiful,  than  the  medium.  The  photo-
graphs were  obtained  by  means  of  a  couple  of  brilliant
arc  electric  lamps  he  had  fitted  up  in  his  laboratory.

To  test  the  resemblance  of  the  ghost  form  to  the  medium
more  accurately,  Mrs.  Crookes  dressed  the  medium  in  a
white  robe  similar  to  that  worn  by  the  materialized  spirit,
and  when  the  latter  appeared  she  was  photographed  in
exactly  the  same  spot,  and  under  the  same  conditions,
as  the  medium  had  previously  been  photographed.  When
the  two  photographs  were  compared  it  was  seen  that
"  Katie "  was  half  a  head  taller  than  the  medium  Miss
Cook,  and  was  a  bigger  and  more  beautiful  woman.  Her
ears  were  not  pierced  whilst  the  medium  always  wore
ear-rings.  Previous  to  this  Crookes  had  devised  the  most
elaborate  and  admirable  electrical  tests,  witnessed  by
several  scientific  men,  which  proved  that  the  medium  had
not  moved  from  her  place  behind  a  ciu'tain,  when  the
ghost  Katie  appeared.

The  soidisant  Katie  having  told  Crookes  that  the  time
of  her  final  departure  was  near  at  hand,  he  invited  'the
medium  to  stay  at  his  house.  This  she  did,  bringing
only  a  small  unlocked  hand  bag  with  her,  and  was  con-
stantly under  the  close  supervision  of  Mrs.  Crookes.  After
dinner  she  was  taken  to  Crookes'  laboratory  (which  was
used  as  a  dark  cabinet),  and  laid  on  a  sofa  or  on  the
ground,  the  outer  door  was  locked  and  the  key  retained
by  Crookes.  Between  that  room,  which  opened  into
the  library, where the  observers were placed, a  curtain


26


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


hung.  Soon  after  the  medium  had  become  entranced
"  Katie  "  appeared,  and  when  about  to  be  photographed
wrapped  a  shawl  round  the  medium's  face  to  prevent
injury  from  the  powerful  electric  light.  Crookes  says,
"  It  was  a  common  thing  for  the  seven  or  eight  of  us
investigators  to  see  Miss  Cook  and  '  Katie '  at  the  same
time  under  the  full  blaze  of  the  electric  light.  .  .  .  We
saw  the  medium  move  uneasily  under  the  influence  of  the
intense  light  and  we  heard  her  moan  occasionally.  I  have
one  photograph  of  the  two  together,  but  '  Katie  '  is
seated  in  front  of  Miss  Cook's  head."  The  final  disappear-
ance of  "  Katie  "'  occurred  shortly  afterwards,  and  the
account  which  Crookes  and  others  wrote  of  it  at  the  time,
is  one  of  the  most  amazing  stories  in  the  history  of
spiritualism.  After  "  Katie  "  had  invited  Crookes  into  the
inner  room  or  cabinet,  where  Miss  Cook  was  lying  senseless
on  the  floor,  she  closed  the  curtain  and  told  Miss
Cook  to  wake  up,  as  she  must  leave  her.  Miss  Cook
woke  and  implored  "  Katie  "  to  stay  ;  this  she  could  not
do,  and  for  several  minutes  the  two  conversed  ;  then,
following  "  Katie's  "  instructions,  Crookes  tells  us  he  came
forward  to  support  Miss  Cook  "  who  was  falling  on  to  the
floor  sobbing  hysterically.  I  looked  round  but  the  white
robed  '  Katie  '  had  gone."  ^

One  hesitates  to  express  any  opinion  on  these  apparently
incredible  phenomena.  They  are  unique  in  the  records
of psychical research. No such startling  demonstration,

1  See  The  Plienomena  of  Spiritualism,  p.  111.  This  reprint  of  Crookes'
papers  and  letters  was  published  without  his  authority  or  revision.
No  date  and  no  reference  is  given  to  the  paper  from  which  the  above
is  quoted.  It  was,  I  find,  taken  from  a  letter  which  Crookes  sent  to
and  was  published  in  a  weekly  journal  called  The  Spiritualist,  long  since
defunct.  The  Editor,  Mr.  W.  H.  Harrison,  and  Mrs.  Ross  Church
(Florence  Marryat)  also  contributed  to  that  journal  their  reports  of
the  final  scene  with  '  Katie,'  and  from  these  reports  it  appears  '  Katie  '
cut  oft  locks  of  her  hair  and  white  robe  and  gave  them  to  those
present,  together  with  a  note  of  adieu  wliich  she  wrote  in  pencil  adding
"  Pensez.  d  moi.  May  21,  1874."  This  gives  the  date  of  the  sitting.
Full  particulars  are  given  in  Dr.  Fournier  d'Albe's  book,  New  Light  on
Immortality,  p.  256.  In  the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.  Vol.  XII.  p.  268,
is  a  disclaimer  by  Crookes  of  a  subsequent  account  of  this  scene  given
by  Mrs.  Ross  Church.


Lxxix.] In  Memory  of  Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  Etc.  27

under  stringent  conditions,  of  what  seemed  to  be  a
perfectly  natural  human  form,  yet  able  to  appear  and
disappear,  had  ever  been  observed  before.  The  only
parallel  (we  speak  with  reverence),  is  the  appearance  of  our
Lord  after  His  resurrection.  If  we  accept  that  cardinal
fact  of  the  Christian  religion,  we  have  less  difficulty  in
accepting  Crookes'  statements.

If,  however,  as  the  years  pass,  no  similar  phenomena
recur,  even  if  no  further  evidence  of  the  more  remarkable
phenomena  that  occurred  with  Home  can  be  obtained,
then  scepticism  will  be  more  legitimate  and  we  should
then  be  disposed  to  reject  what  many  of  us  now  accept.

Crookes,  we  must  remember,  was  one  of  the  most  exact
and  accomplished  experimental  investigators  the  world  has
known,  he  was  not  suffering  during  his  spiritualistic
experiments  from  any  mental  failure,  for  he  was  con-
currently conducting  other  scientific  work  of  great  value,
work  that  has  never  been  impugned.  The  hallucination
theory  Lord  Rayleigh  and  Court  Solovovo  have  discredited :
the  latter  well  says,  "  I  lay  it  down  as  a  general  pro-
position .  .  .  that  the  testimony  of  several  sane,  honest
and  intelligent  eye-witnesses  is,  broadly  speaking,  proof  of
the  objectivity  of  any  phenomenon.  If  there  are  people
who  maintain  an  opposite  view,  why,  let  them  make
experiments  themselves."  ^

Nor  can  it  be  said  that  Crookes  changed  liis  views
in  later  life  and  thought  he  had  been  deceived.  As  late
as  the  year  1916  Sir  W.  Crookes  authorized  the  editor  of
Light  to  publish  the  following  :

"  I  adhere  to  my  published  statements  and  have  nothing
to  retract  .  .  .  they  point  to  the  existence  of  another
order  of  human  life  continuous  with  this,  and  demonstrate
the  possibility  under  certain  circumstances  of  communion
between  this  world  and  the  next."  For  my  own  part,
honoured  as  I  have  been  for  nearly  fifty  years  with  the
friendship  of  this  eminent  savant,  and  knowing  as  we
all  do  Sir  W.  Crookes'  unchallenged  probit}^  and  love  of
truth,  T  look  forward  to  the  time  when  his  psychical
researches  will  be  fully  confirmed  and  accepted  by  science

^Proc.  S.P.R.  Vol.  XXI.  p.  477.


28


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


with  the  same  confidence  as  his  physical  and  chemical
researches  now  are.

It  may  be  said,  how  is  it  that  Crookes  obtained  results
which  other  psychical  researchers  have  failed  to  obtain.
The  same  remark  might  perhaps  be  made  about  the
extraordinary  richness  of  his  discoveries  in  pure  science.
Both  results  were  in  part  due  to  the  patient,  unwearying
zeal  and  the  ability  with  which  he  pursued  the  particular
object  of  his  quest — added  of  course  to  the  penetrating
intelligence  and  experimental  skill  he  possessed.  But  in
his  psychical  researches  we  must  recognize  that  he  had
the  good  fortune  to  experiment  with  one  of  the  most
gifted  mediums  (D.  D.  Home)  of  whom  we  have  any
knowledge.  We  must  await  another  such,  and  when  he
appears  let  us  follow  Crookes  in  his  methods  of  approach
to  the  subject.

Here  let  me  add  that  too  many  investigators  forget
that  the  mental  atmosphere  they  bring  is  almost  as  im-
portant as  the  part  played  by  the  medium ;  it  does  not
occur  to  them  that  their  co-operation  is  necessary.  No
advance  in  any  branch  of  science  would  have  been
possible  if  the  investigator  set  out  not  to  elicit  truth,  but
with  the  determination  to  expose  what  he  considered  was
fraud.  Moreover,  in  psychical  research  a  medium  is  a
sensitive  instrument  that  reacts  to  its  environment  ;  a
sitter  who  is  suspicious,  or  who  plays  the  fool,  may
entirely  inhibit  the  production  of  any  phenomena.

And  now  that  Crookes  himself  has  passed  into  the
unseen,  it  is  quite  possible  that  his  profound  interest  in,
and  knowledge  of  spiritualism,  may  enable  his  original
genius  to  devise  some  fresh  methods  of  communication
throiagh  the  veil, — some  proof  of  survival  more  convincing
than  any  we  now  possess.  It  was  so  after  the  passing
over  of  Frederic  Myers,  for  since  that  time  the  plausible
explanations  of  telepathy  from  the  living — as  the  source
of  all  messages  purporting  to  come  from  the  discarnate — —
has  been  disproved,  through  what  is  generally  believed
to  be  Myers'  intelligent  co-operation  in  the  spiritual  world.

Nor  are  there  wanting  glimpses  of  evidence  that  Crookes
in  very  truth is trying to communicate with us  from


xxxix.] In  Memory  of  Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  Etc.  29


the  unseen.  It  is  as  yet  too  soon  to  form  a  conclusive
opinion  on  this  subject,  but,  I  hope  later  on  to  contribute
a  paper  to  the  Society  where  the  evidence  will  be  critically
discussed.


APPENDIX.

CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  S.P.R.  BY  SIR  W.  CROOKES.

Journal,  VIII.,  p.  193


A  case  of  telepathy  or  coincidence  -
An  important  paper  entitled  "  Notes

of  Seances  with  D.  D.  Home  "  -
On  the  same  subject  in  discussing

Sir  0.  Lodge's  paper  on  Eusapia

Presidential  address,  abstract  -
Ditto  full  report

Ditto  before  British  Association,
part  relative  to  psychical  pheno-
mena ------

TSlote  on  the  "  Fire-test  "

See  also  Mr.  A.  Lang's  paper  on
this  subject - - -  -

Reply  to  Dr.  Lehmann's  criticism
of  Crookes'  experiments  with
D.  D.  Home  by  Dr.  Schiller

Note  by  Crookes  on  same  subject  -

Disclaimer  by  Crookes  of  certain
statements  made  as  to  demateriali-
zation  of  "Katie  King  "


Proc,  VI.,  p.  98  et  seq.

Journal,  VI.,  p.  341
et  seq.
VIII.,  p.  25
Proc,  XII.,  p.  338


XIV.  ,  p.  2
IX.,  p.  308

XV.  ,  p.  14


„ XV.,  p.  438
Joimial,  IX.,  p.  324


XII.,  p.  268


80


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


III.

THE  DORIS  FISCHER  CASE  OF  MULTIPLE
PERSONALITY.

By  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.

The  story  of  Doris  Fischer  has  been  told,  in  the  Pro-
ceedings of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,'^
by  Dr.  Walter  F.  Prince,  an  American  clergyman,  and
Dr.  James  Hyslop,  the  Secretary  of  that  Society.  It  is
a  story  of  dissociated  personality,  more  full}'  reported
than  any  hitherto  recorded,  and  in  some  respects  unique.
Dr.  Prince's  record  occupies  over  thirteen  hundred  pages
and  is  the  outcome  of  more  prolonged  and  more  con-
tinuous observation  than  is  usually  possible  in  such  cases.
His  unusual  opportunities  for  observing  the  many  pecu-
liarities described  by  him  arose  from  his  having,  at
an  early  stage  of  his  investigation,  adopted  Doris  as  his
daughter  and  brought  her  to  live  in  his  house.  Dr.
Hyslop 's  share  of  the  record  consists  of  over  eight  hundred
pages  in  which  he  advocates  a  spiritistic  interpretation
of  some  of  the  phenomena  of  multiple  personality,  and
claims  support  for  his  views  from  a  series  of  observa-
tions and  experiments  conducted  with  his  medium,  Mrs.
Chenoweth,  when  Doris  was  the  sitter.

In  trying  to  get  a  grasp  of  the  various  personalities
in  this  case,  two  courses  are  open  to  us ;  we  may  either
consider  the  personalities  in  the  historical  order  of  their
appearance,  or  we  may  consider  them  in  the  order  of
their  discovery  by  Dr.  Prince.  The  latter  is,  perhaps,
the  course  which  will  be  most  helpful  to  those  who  have
no  knowledge  of  the  case. What  can  be  said  about  the

1  Proceedinys  American  Soc.  for  Psychical  Research,  Vols.  IX.  X.  and  XI.


Lxxix. The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  31

order in which they arose in the hfe-history of  Doris
will  then  be  more  easily  understood.

Towards  the  end  of  October,  1909,  a  somewhat  forlorn
and  careworn-looking  girl,  twenty  years  of  age,  joined
the  Sunday  School  of  the  Episcopal  Church  of  which  Dr.
Prince  was  then  rector.  She  was  invited  by  Mrs.  Prmce
to  the  Pvectory  and  soon  became  a  frequent  visitor.
There  Dr.  Prince  made  her  acquaintance.  At  first  he
did  not  pay  much  attention  to  her  but  he  thought  there
was  something  odd  about  her.  She  seemed  to  be  "  singu-
larly mercurial  in  temperament  with  moods  that  passed
like  the  cloud  and  sunshine."  At  times  she  was  jolly
and  amusing.  At  other  times  she  was  sedate  and
melancholv.

T^Irs. Prince discovered that she slept Uttle at  home
and  began  to  encourage  her  to  come  to  the  rectory  in
the  evening  and  he  down. It  was  then  discovered  that
she  talked  in  her  sleep. At  times  she  appeared  to  be
describing visions of beauty, at times appeared to  be
sustaining  her  side  of  a  dialogue,  at  still  other  times  she
uttered  impatient  or  angry  ejaculations  or  seemed  to  be
threatening herself. In  this last mood she would  look
positively mahcious, clutch savagely at her hip,  which
was  supposed  to  be  tuberculous,  or  make  efforts  to  mal-
treat  other  parts of  her  body. Mrs. Prince  was  forced
to watch her every movement and often to hold  her
hands or  to  put  forth  all  her  strength  to  restrain  her
from injuring herself. This went on for about  eight
months,  and  the  nervous  and  physical  strain  entailed  by
her self-imposed task began to tell on Mrs.  Prince's
health. On  account  of  this  Dr.  Prince  suggested  that  the
girl  might  occasionally  try  to  sleep  on  the  lounge  in  his
study  where  he  could  keep  watch  on  her,  and  thus  arose
the  opportunities  for  the  prolonged  and  continuous  obser-
vations which  are  contained  in  the  "  Daily  Record."  Dr.
Prince began his observations on January 17th,  1911,
and next day started the records which he  continued
daily, with almost no exceptions, for more than  three
years. On  January 20th, it suddenly dawned on  him,
accompanied  by  wonder  that  it  had  not  done  so  before,


32


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


that  here  was  probably  a  case  of  dissociated  personaUty.
He  proceeded  to  test  his  hypothesis  and  was  very  soon
convinced  that  it  was  correct.

Underneath  the  Doris  that  he  knew,  who  afterwards
came  to  be  known  as  Sick  Doris,  he  discovered  a  person-
ality, child-hke  and  winsome,  to  whom  the  name  Margaret
was  given.  This  doubling  of  the  personality  was  the
explanation  of  some  of  the  oddities  that  had  struck  him
when  he  first  ioiew  the  girl.  When  she  had  appeared
forlorn  and  careworn  Sick  Doris  had  been  "  out  " — as
being  supraliminal  came  to  be  called.  When  she  had
been  }o\\y  and  amusing  Margaret  had  been  "  out  "  and
Sick  Doris  had  been  "in."

Although  Margaret  was  on  the  whole  a  very  lovable
personality  she  was  at  times  mischievous  and  malicious.
If  Sick  Doris  did  anything  of  which  Margaret  disapproved,
Margaret  would  take  her  revenge  at  night  during  sleep
by  clutching  at  the  hip  and  otherwise  maltreating  the  body.
This  habit  of  hers  was  the  original  cause  of  the  need
for  watching  and  restraint  during  sleep.  In  the  evening
of  January  22nd,  Sick  Doris  came  to  the  rectory  looking
very  jaded  and  miserable  and  was  evidently  suffering.
Presently  she  lay  down  and  went  to  sleep.  Margaret
came  and  clutched  savagely  at  the  hip  and  scratched
the  neck.  Dr.  Prince  remonstrated  in  vain.  Stern
commands  to  desist  had  no  effect  but  to  increase  the
manifestations.  The  scene  that  followed  is  so  important
for  the  understanding  of  the  case,  and  so  dramatic  in
character,  that  I  give  it  in  Dr.  Prince's  own  words :
"  Attempting  suggestion  I  began  to  say  impressively,
('  I  am  going  to  take  away  your  power.  You  are  growing
weaker.  You  are  losing  your  strength  ').  The  struggles
became  weaker.  Finally  I  said  ('  Your  strength  is  gone.
You  are  powerless  ').  All  striving  ceased,  the  face  changed,
and  she  [S.  D.l  awoke.  She  now  appeared  extremely
languid  and  spoke  with  difficulty,  but  said  that  she  felt
no  pain.  Her  vital  forces  seemed  to  be  ebbing  away
and  she  gradually  passed  into  a  condition  which  made
Mrs.  Prince  and  me  think,  not  for  the  first  time,  that  she
was  dying. Her  pulse  descended  to  54,  and  became  feeble.


IjXXIX.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  33

She  seemed  only  half  conscious,  but  occasionally  looked
wonderingly  at  the  two  who  were  sitting  by  her,  affected
by  their  impression  that  she  was  near  her  end.  At  length
she  murmured:  'Am  I  dying  ^  (I  think  so.)  Don't  you
want  me  to  go  ?  '  She  smiled  peacefully,  as  though  glad
both  to  go  and  to  know  that  she  was  to  be  missed.
She  looked  singularly  unhke  her  afternoon  self,  the  very
shape  of  her  face  altered — it  seemed  thinner,  as  though
she  had  passed  through  a  period  of  sickness  since.  Under
the  spell  of  considerable  emotion  I  was  looldng  into  her
eyes,  and  presently  her  gaze  fixed  upon  mine,  and  with
parted  hps  she  continued  to  look,  not  rigidly,  but  dreamily
and  peacefully,  while  we  waited  for  the  end  which  we
thought  so  near.  After  some  time  it  suddenly  struck
me  that  her  gaze  and  features  were  unnaturally  fixed —
I  stooped  to  examine  her.

Just  then  a  voice  issued  from  her  lips,  though  no  other
feature  moved  :  '  You  must  get  her  out  of  this.  She  is
in  danger.'  It  was  as  startHng  as  Mghtning  from  the
blue  sky.  Of  course  I  thought  it  must  be  Margaret
speaking,  but  there  was  a  calm  authority  in  her  tone
which  was  new.  I  shook  the  girl  gently,  her  face  did
not  change.  '  Shake  her  harder,'  the  voice  went  on.
'  Hurry  !  Hurry  !  '  It  was  evident  that  Doris  was  in
a  profoxmd  state  of  hypnosis,  and  I  began  vigorous
measures  to  bring  her  out,  with  the  result  that  her  eyes
rolled  and  her  limbs  moved.  Shaking  her  and  shouting
in  her  ear  brought  her  to  a  sitting  position.  '  Walk  her  !
walk  her  !  '  said  the  voice,  At  first  there  was  difficulty
in  carrying  out  this  order,  she  stumbled  and  tended  every
moment  to  collapse  upon  the  carpet.  Directions  occasion-
ally continued  to  issue  from  the  lips  .  .  .  directions  which
I  never  thought  of  disregarding,  they  were  delivered  with
such  authority  and  characterised  by  such  good  sense.
Finally  we  heard,  '  She  is  coming  to  herself  now  ;  she
will  be  aU  right  soon.'  No  more  directions  were  given,
and  almost  at  once  the  face  showed  more  animation  and
intelligence."

I  do  not  know  what  impression  the  account  of  this
singular  episode may produce on the mind of a  non-


34


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


medical  reader,  but  I  know  what  they  may  suggest  to
anyone  who  has  had  some  experience  of  hysteric  and
hypnotic  phenomena.  Dr.  Prince's  suggestions,  "  I  am
going  to  take  away  your  strength.  You  are  growing
weaker.  You  are  losing  your  strength.  Your  strength
is  gone.  You  are  powerless,"  were  more  potent  than  he
had  anticipated.  Not  only  did  they  cause  a  cessation
of  Margaret's  savage  movements,  but  they  produced,  as
suggestions  of  this  sort  may,  a  depressing  effect  on  the
whole  physical  organism.  Such  suggestions  given  to  a
person  already  in  enfeebled  health  may  bring  about  a
state  that  appears  very  alarming  and  may  easily  lead  one
who  is  unfamihar  with  such  phenomena  to  lose  his  head.
Dr.  Prince's  final  suggestion,  conveyed  in  his  reply,  "  I
think  so,"  given  to  the  question,  "  Am  I  dying,"  was
the  cUmax.  Something  was  bound  to  happen  and  the
patient's  only  way  of  appearing  to  carry  out  the  suggestion
short  of  actually  djdng,  was  to  go  into  a  deeper  stage
of  hypnosis.  This  was  faciUtated  by  the  fixed  emotional
gaze  which  the  situation  had  chanced  to  bring  about.

The  voice  that  came  Uke  a  bolt  from  the  blue  was  an
interesting  and  no  doubt  startling  phenomenon.  But
there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  voice  had  any
other  source  than  some  deeper  stratum  of  her  own  being.
This  deeper  and  more  sane  personaHty,  recognizing  that
Dr.  Prince  had  lost  his  bearings,  feels  the  need  to  take
control  herself,  and  she  issues  commands  which  he  duti-
fully obeys.  The  voice  was  the  voice  of  Sleeping  Margaret,
and  from  this  moment  she  dominates  the  scene,  she
doininates  Dr.  Prince,  and  she  does  so  to  the  end  of  the
whole  story.

The  futility  of  Sleeping  Margaret's  instructions  as  to  the
best  way  to  get  a  person  out  of  deep  hypnosis  gives  a
good  clue  to  her  natvu-e  and  origin.  Her  wisdom  was
the  wisdom  of  popular  belief  and  practice.  No  one  who
had  any  true  knowledge  of  hypnotic  phenomena  would
have  given  such  instructions,  and  no  one  having  any
practical  experience  would  have  acted  upon  them.  They
served  their  purpose,  it  is  true  ;  but  they  would  probably
have been equally efficacious if they had taken  some


Lxxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  35

other  form.  Their  efficacy  depended  on  the  fact  that  they
were  a  suggestion  from  within — -a  counter  suggestion  to
the  death  sentence  pronounced  by  Dr.  Prince,  a  counter
suggestion  made  strong  by  the  mil  to  live  inherent  in  her
being.

Dr.  Prince  had  now  discovered  three  personaUties  in
his  patient,  namely,  Sick  Doris,  Margaret,  and  Sleeping
Margaret.  About  a  month  after  the  discovery  of  the
last  named,  what  he  calls  the  central  secret  of  the  cai:e
was  disclosed  to  him  by  Margaret.  "  You  never  saw
the  Real  Doris  but  a  very  little — when  it  was  all  Doris,"
she  said  impressively,  and  went  to  sleep,  adding,  "  I  will
wake  Doris  so  that  she  will  be  all  Doris  for  a  little
while."  And  she  did  so.  Dr.  Prince  adds,  though  he
did  not  fully  comprehend  that  the  clear-eyed  girl  looking
wonderingly  about  her  was  the  primary  personality,  and,  as
such,  quite  another  than  Sick  Doris.

Still  another  personality  in  the  case  is  described  by
Dr.  Prince  on  grounds  that  perhaps  may  be  regarded  as
inadequate.  From  the  beginning  of  his  watching  Doris
asleep  he  had  at  times  observed  certain  somnambuhstic
phenomena  which  came  to  be  known  as  conversation-
recitals.  Only  one  side  of  the  dialogue — her  own — was  recited,
the  other  being  represented  by  pauses.  Late  in  his
observation  of  the  case  he  was  led  to  beMeve  that  these
recitals  were  produced,  by  an  inchoate  but  valid  person-
aUty  distinct  from  the  others,  and  to  this  personahty  the
name  of  Sleeping  Real  Doris  was  given.

Such  are  the  five  personahties  of  this  case  in  the  order
in  which  they  were  discovered  by  Dr.  Prince.  His  first
acquaintance  was  with  Sick  Doris,  whom  for  a  long  time
he  took  to  be  the  primary  personality.  Then  he  found
Margaret  and  Sleeping  Margaret.  Then  Margaret  dis-
closed to  him  the  existence  of  a  Real  Doris,  different
from  the  Sick  Doris.  Finally  he  beheved  there  was
still  another  personahty — Sleeping  Real  Doris,  and  this
belief  was  confirmed  by  Margaret  and  Sleeping  Margaret.

When  we  come  to  consider  these  different  personalities
in  the  historical  oider  of  their  appearance  instead  of  in
the  order  in  which  they  were  discovered  by  Dr.  Prince,


I


36 T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D. [part  j

i

we  find  that  almost  all  our  information  is  derived  from
one or more of the personalities themselves. But  so

consistently, on the whole, do their separate accounts  ;

fit  in  Avith  each  other,  that  we  are  justified  in  believing  i

that  the  history  of  their  origin  thus  obtained  is  in  some  \

sense true. Yet the story they tell is unique in the  \

records  of  multiple  personality  and  there  is  much  in  it  [

on  which  at  present  it  would  be  hazardous  to  venture  <

to  give  any  decided  opinion.  Very  briefly,  this  story  |
is  as  follows.

Doris  Fischer  was  born  in  1889. She  was  the  youngest  j

child  of  German  parents  who  Uved  in  poor  circumstances  |

in a  large  American  city. Her  father  was a drunkard,  j

and  one  day,  after  a  quarrel  with  his  wife,  he  took  up  \

Doris,  then  three  years  old, and  dashed  her  on  to  the  '\

floor. The  shock  to  Doris, caused  by  this quarrel  and  1

act  of  violence,  is  supposed  to  have  started  the  series  of  |
dissociations  which  gave  rise  to  the  different  personalities
already  enumerated.

Sleeping  Margaret,  so  called  because  she  manifested  only  i

when Margaret was asleep, is the chiel: source of our  ■

knowledge  of  the  lives  of  all  the  personalities  before  the  1

case  came  under  Dr.  Prince's  care. She  claimed  that  she  ]

herself was the first  to appear. She came during the  1

quarrel  between  the  parents,  just  before  Doris  was  thrown  j
on  the  floor. She  came  as  a  mature  personality  although

Doris  was  only  three  years  old  at  the  time. But  there  was  ;
no  outward  manifestation  of  her  presence  for  nineteen  years
and  her  existence  was  totally  unknown  and  unsuspected

until  Dr.  Prince  discovered  her  on  January  22nd,  1911.  \

Mentally, Dr. Prince says, she was the maturest of  j

them all, and  impressed  him as  if she were a  woman  j

of  forty. In  another  place,  however,  he  says  she  "  is  at  i

least  as  mature  as  R.  D.  is,  and  the  range  of  her  know-  i

ledge  is  greater." Whatever  the  degree  of  her  maturity  \

may  have  been,  she  claimed  that  she  had  been  the  same  |

from the  beginning. She  professed  never  to  sleep, but  ■

she  was  never  "  out  "  as  an  alternating  personality,  \
having control of the whole body, as Sick Doris  and

Margaret had when they were out. She never took  ^


Lxxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  37

control  of  the  body  to  any  great  extent  except  as  regards
the  vocal  organs,  and  then  only  when  Margaret  was
asleep,  or  at  a  later  stage,  when  Real  Doris  was  asleep.
She  claimed  to  persist  as  a  continuous,  co-consciousness
and  to  know  all  the  thoughts,  and  feeHngs,  and  actions
of  all  the  other  personahties  (except  S.  R.  D.).  She
said  she  saw  M.'s  thoughts  directly,  those  of  S.  D.
through,  or  reflected  from,  the  consciousness  of  M.,  and
those  of  R.  D.  as  reflected  from  the  consciousness  of
S.  D.  to  M.  and  again  from  that  of  M.  to  herself.  Dr.
Prince  says  she  was  the  only  one  of  the  group  who  was
not  suggestible.

The  advent  of  Margaret  was  stated  to  have  taken  place
a  few  minutes  after  Doris  had  been  dashed  on  the  floor.
With  trifling  discrepancies,  Margaret  and  Sleeping  Margaret
gave  the  same  accoimt  of  this  occurrence.  Here  is
Margaret's  own  original  description  of  it  :  "  When  Doris
was  three  years  old  I  came  one  night  when  she  was  lying
on  the  bed  crying  as  if  her  little  heart  would  break
because  her  father  had  thrown  her  on  the  floor,  well,
I  made  her  play  with  her  fingers  and  toes  and  finally
had  her  laughing  and  then  she  went  to  sleep."  This
description  impHes,  I  think,  that  Margaret  first  came  as
a  co-consciousness  and  not  as  an  alternating  personality,
and  I  have  been  unable  to  trace  the  record,  if  such
exists,  of  Margaret's  first  coming  "  out."

Margaret  was  in  many  respects  the  "  Sally  "  of  the
Doris  case.  She  grew  until  she  attained  the  age  and
capacities  of  a  child  of  ten,  and  remained  at  that  stage
until,  in  the  course  of  Dr.  Prince's  treatment  of  the
case,  she  began  to  decline.  Finally  she  disappeared  alto-
gether. ■  '  She  was  mentally  and  emotionally  a  child  of  not
more  than  ten  years,  with  some  extraordinarily  naive
notions  not  usually  carried  beyond  the  age  of  five  or  six.
Her  facial  expression  was  strikingly  child-Hke,  her
voice  in  speech  or  laughter  that  of  a  young  tom-boy,
her  point  of  view,  mental  habits,  and  tastes,  in  every
way  juvenile.  .  .  .  She  was  mischievous,  roguish,  witty,
a  consummate  mimic,  ingratiating,  winsome  and  altogether
lovable,  as  a  rule." Margaret  was  co-conscious  with  S.  D.


38


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


and  R.  D.,  and  knew  their  thoughts,  their  feelings  and
their  actions,  but  she  knew  nothing  of  S.  M.  She
claimed  that  her  knowledge  of  S.  D.  was  immediate  while
of  R.  D.  it  was  mediate,  reflected  as  it  were  from  S.  D.'s
consciousness  as  from  a  mirror.  Dr.  Prince  considered
her  the  most  suggestible  of  all  the  personahties.

From  the  age  of  three  to  the  age  of  seventeen  these
three  personalities  existed  side  by  side.  Doris  [R.  D.]
and  Margaret  alternated  one  with  the  other,  while
Sleeping  Margaret  remained  in  the  sub-conscious  as  a
silent  watcher  and  guardian  of  Doris's  welfare.

On  May  6th,  1906,  when  Doris  was  seventeen  years  old,
her  mother,  whom  she  adored,  died  after  a  few  hours'
illness.  Although  overcome  with  grief,  Doris  "  managed
to  retain  her  individuaUty  until  she  had  performed  the
last  offices  in  her  power  for  her  dead  idol,  whereupon
Margaret  took  her  place.  Almost  immediately  thereafter
a  terrible  pain  shot  through  the  left  cerebral  hemisphere,
M.  vanished,  and  a  new  personahty,  afterwards  to  be
known  as  Sick  Doris,  came  into  the  drama."

Sick  Doris,  on  her  first  appearance,  and  for  some  days
thereafter,  was  an  infantile  personahty,  at  least  as  regards
the  content  of  her  mind.  She  had  no  memory  of  anything
that  Doris  or  Margaret  had  ever  learnt.  She  Ivnew  no
one,  she  could  not  speak,  nor  could  she  understand  Avords
spoken  to  her.  She  could  walk  and  handled  objects  with
her  fingers,  but  she  hardly  Imew  how  to  eat  or  drink.
"  All  affection  was  gone  and  all  grief  ;  not  a  tremor
remained  of  the  mental  agony  of  a  few  moments  before.
She  was  as  one  born  with  an  adult  body  .  .  .  but  with
absolutely  no  memory  and  absolutely  no  knowledge."
But  she  had  a  "  maturely  inquiring  mind  "  and  she  very
soon  learned  many  things.  Her  progress  was  rapid  after
the  third  evening,  when  Margaret  undertook  her  tuition.
In  a  week  Sick  Doris  was  fairly  competent  to  get  along
though  she  had  many  difficulties  yet  to  meet.

The  Real  Doris  of  the  record  is  in  many  respects  the
most  elusive  and  most  unsatisfactory  of  ail  the  person-
alities described.  In  the  early  days  of  Dr.  Prince's
observation  of  the  case,  Real  Doris  very  seldom  appeared.


Lxxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  39

and  when  she  did  so,  her  time  "  out  "  was  so  short  that
there  could  have  been  Uttle  to  record  concerning  her
sayings  and  doings.  When  at  a  later  date  she  was  "  out  "
more  frequently  and  for  longer  periods,  Dr.  Prince
apparently  did  not  consider  it  necessary  to  reveal  her
character  and  disposition  as  fully  as  he  had  revealed
those  of  the  other  personalities.  His  own  afJection  and
esteem  for  her  has  blinded  him  to  the  fact  that  the
Real  Doris  of  his  record  entirely  fails  to  win  either  the
interest  or  the  liking  of  his  readers  in  the  way  that
Margaret,  for  example,  does.

The  only  detailed  account  of  Real  Doris's  mental  and
moral  characteristics  is  given  in  the  opening  pages  of  the
main  narrative.  But  it  is  expressly  stated  that  "  this  is
a  sketch  of  the  normal  personality  functioning  unhindered
by  the  other  personalities,  as  is  the  case  continually  now
that  she  is  cured."  Throughout  the  whole  record  the
Real  Doris  that  appears  as  an  alternating  personality,  at
first  fitfully  and  for  short  periods,  later  more  frequently
and  continuously,  is  explicitly  regarded  as  the  primary
personality  and  implicitly  as  a  normal  personahty.  Yet
there  is  plenty  of  evidence  to  show  that  the  alternating
Real  Doris  of  the  record  is  a  hysteric  personality  with
many  hysterical  stigmata.

The  fifth  and  last  personahty  in  the  case  appeared
about  a  year  and  a  half  after  the  advent  of  Sick  Doris.
Margaret  was  startled  when  going  up  a  flight  of  steps
and  fell,  striking  her  head  violently  against  an  earthen
crock.  As  a  result  of  this  fall,  Margaret  said,  "  a  little
crack  was  made  in  Real  Doris,"  which  led  to  the  somnam-
bulistic conversation-recitals  ascribed  by  Dr.  Prince  to
Sleeping  Real  Doris.  The  "  crack,"  however,  would  seem
to  have  affected  Sick  Doris  also,  for  some  of  Sick  Doris's
memories  appeared  in  the  recitals  as  well  as  those  of  real
Doris.  This  personality  may  be  disregarded  in  our
further  consideration  of  the  case.

The  problems  raised  by  the  Doris  Fischer  case  of
multiple  personahty  are  so  many  and  so  diverse  that  it
is  well  to  have  some  common  ground  from  which  we  may
view  them. Such  ground  may  be  found  in  the  interest


40


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


we  all  have  in  Psychical  Research.  But  although  we  all
have  in  common  some  interest  in  the  subject  matter  of
Psychical  Research,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  we
are  all  at  the  same  stage  of  inquiry.  Some  have  already
reached  conviction  in  regard  to  the  ultimate  object  of
our  quest.  Others  are  still  seeking  for  proof  of  the
occurrence  of  any  supernormal  happenings  whatsoever.
Both  groups,  however,  should  find  some  interest  in  the
Doris  case.  It  would,  indeed,  seem  to  provide  a  good
standpoint  from  which  to  view  the  whole  field  of  Psychical
Research.  From  it  we  may  look  backwards  over  the
wide  field  of  abnormal  psychology,  into  whose  mazes
Mr.  Myers  so  patiently  led  us  in  the  early  days  of  our
Society's  work  ;  or  we  may  look  forward  to  the  still
uncharted  country  whose  survej^  will  form  the  chief  work
of  this  Society  for  many  years  to  come.

Whatever  bearing  the  Doris  case  may  ultimately  be
found  to  have  on  the  higher  problems  of  Psychical
Research,  we  must  be  content,  for  the  present,  to  employ
the  elementary  principles  of  method  which  are  necessary
in  every  scientific  investigation.  We  must  try  to  arrange
our  data  in  some  sort  of  order.  The  facts  must  be
classified  and  their  correlations  with  other  facts  discovered.
In  doing  so  we  may  perhaps  be  able  to  reduce  the  observed
facts  to  more  generalized  terms,  and  this  is  perhaps  as
far  as  we  can  usefuUy  go  at  present.  We  may,  indeed,
indulge  in  tentative  hypotheses,  but  until  we  have  a
much  larger  number  of  trustworthy  observations  than  we
at  present  possess,  it  is  unhkely  that  our  formulations
regarding  the  problems  of  multiple  personahty  will  have
much  value.

Besides  the  obvious  ground  of  comparison  with  other
recorded  cases,  there  are  at  least  two  directions  in  which
we  may  usefully  look  when  we  try  to  find  something  with
which  to  compare  the  facts  observed  by  Dr.  Prince.  In
one  direction  we  find  many  similarities  or  analogies
between  Doris  phenomena  and  the  phenomena  of  Hysteria
and  Hypnosis.  In  the  other  direction  we  find  interesting
grounds  for  comparison  of  the  Doris  personalities  with
the  so-called  controls  of  mediumistic  trance.


Lxxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  41

The  relations  of  the  Doris  case  with  Hysteria  may  seem
too  obvious  to  be  mentioned.  From  one  point  of  view
it  is  just  a  case  of  hysteria,  and  its  symptoms  show,  not
resemblance  to,  but  identity  with  those  of  other  hysterical
conditions.  On  the  other  hand,  it  presents  so  many
unusual  features,  that  it  may  be  well  to  understand  what
we  mean  by  hysteria,  before  we  class  all  its  peculiarities
under  this  term.

Anaesthesia  was  regarded  by  Charcot  as  the  great
stigma  of  hysteria,  and  although  it  is  not  now  beheved
to  have  the  diagnostic  importance  formerly  ascribed  to
it,  we  may  still  look  upon  it  as  one  of  the  most  common
featm'es  of  the  disorder  and  the  one  best  suited  for  study
as  a  type  of  hysterical  disabihty.  Janet  showed  that  in
the  anaesthesia  of  hysteria  sensation  is  not  wholly  sup-
pressed as  it  is  when  anaesthesia  is  due  to  organic  disease.
Although  the  patient  has  no  supraUminal  perception  of
impressions,  such  as  pinpricks,  it  can  be  shown  by  various
devices,  that  perception  is  still  present  in  some  sub-
hminal  form.  We  have  in  these  experiments  the  simplest
illustration  of  that  division  or  dissociation  of  consciousness
which  reaches  such  remarkable  proportions  in  cases  of
multiple  personahty.

Janet  apphed  the  principle  of  dissociation  of  conscious-
ness throughout  the  whole  range  of  hysterical  disabilities,
and  it  became  common  to  regard  hysteria  and  dissociation
as  synonymous  terms.  Every  hysterical  symptom  was
due  to  dissociation  of  consciousness,  and  every  dissociation
of  consciousness  was  evidence  of  hysteria.

The  doctrine  of  dissociation  has  been  accepted,  in  a
general  way,  by  all  competent  authorities  ;  but  there  is
no  unanimity  of  opinion  in  regard  to  the  way  in  which
dissociation  is  brought  about.  Janet  looks  upon  dis-
sociation as  a  merely  mechanical  splitting  of  consciousness,
a  letting  go  of  certain  functions  because  the  personahty
is  too  feeble  to  hold  on  to  them.  Freud  puts  in  the
first  hne,  as  a  determining  factor  of  dissociation,  the
mental  conflict  that  ensues  when  incompatible  wishes  or
desires  arise  in  the  mind.  The  sphtting  of  consciousness
is  explained dynamically as  being  due  to a conflict  of


42


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


opposing  forces  within  the  personality.  From  the  merely
descriptive  standpoint  Janet's  work  has  been  the  more
important,  but  from  the  standpoint  of  interpretation  that
of  Freiid  has  been  far  more  fruitful.  Outside  the  work
of  the  psychoanalysts  we  have  no  real  understanding  of
hysterical  phenomena,  and  if  dissociated  personality  be
regarded  as  hysteria  its  true  mechanism  may  be  explicable
only  when  it  is  submitted  to  psychoanalytic  interpretation.

Hitherto  psychoanalysts,  so  far  as  I  know,  have  not
dealt  explicitly  with  the  phenomena  of  multiple  personaKty  ;
but  that  these  cases  can  be  interpreted  on  psychoanalytic
lines  I  have  no  doubt.  Many  of  the  data  necessary
for  such  an  interpretation,  in  so  far  as  these  can  be
provided  by  documentary  evidence,  are  to  be  found  in
the  Doris  Fischer  record.  But  even  if  such  an  inter-
pretation should  be  given,  there  would  still  be  left  many
important  problems, — subsidiary  problems,  perhaps,  from
the  analyst's  point  of  view,  but  important  problems  from
other  points  of  view,  such  as  those  of  Psychical  Research.

There  is,  for  example,  one  matter  on  which  the  des-
criptive work  of  Janet  is  more  helpful  in  the  consideration
of  these  cases  than  is  the  interpretive  work  of  Freud.
Janet  appeared  to  demonstrate  the  existence  of  conscious
subliminal  activity  in  his  hysterics,  and  there  is  no  more
striking  feature  of  the  Doris  case  than  the  mass  of
evidence  which  points  to  the  reality  of  the  co -consciousness
which  the  various  personalities  claim.  Freud  on  the  other
hand  denies  that  co-consciousness  ever  occurs.  In  a
communication  which  he  contributed  to  our  Proceedings
in  1912,  he  said  :  "I  venture  to  urge  against  this  theory
that  it  is  a  gratuitous  assumption  based  on  the  abuse
of  the  word  '  conscious  '  .  .  .  The  cases  described  as
sphtting  of  consciousness,  like  Dr.  Azam's,  might  better
be  denoted  as  shifting  of  consciousness, — that  function —
or  whatever  it  be — oscillating  between  two  difierent
psychical  complexes  which  become  conscious  and  un-
conscious in  alternation."  But  this  explanation  is  not
applicable  to  such  a  case  as  that  of  Doris  Fischer,  for  here
we  seem  to  have  good  evidence  of  two  or  more  psychical
complexes  being  simultaneously  conscious.


Lxxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  43

Thus  for  the  present  it  may  be  more  helpful  to  regard
the  hysterical  features  of  the  Doris  case  from  the  stand-
point of  dissociation  as  described  by  Janet,  whilst  bearing
in  mind  that  such  a  view  may  not  be  fundamentally
inconsistent  with  the  interpretive  methods  of  the  psycho-
analysts. Moreover,  we  may  hold  that  the  conclusions
arrived  at  by  the  use  of  these  methods  are,  for  certain
purposes,  irrelevant,  and,  in  regard  to  certain  special
problems,  inadequate.

But  if  we  are  to  regard  all  hysterical  symptoms  as
being  the  outcome  of  dissociation,  we  must  guard  against
Janet's  implication  that  every  dissociation  is  evidence  of
hysteria.  We  must  distinguish  between  dissociations
that  are  hurtful  and  those  that  are  indifferent  or  helpful.
It  would  be  well  to  restrict  the  use  of  the  word  hysterical
to  those  dissociations  which  result  in  defects  or  dis-
abilities. For  only  in  so  far  as  dissociation  causes  some
mal-adjustment  to  environment  can  it  be  looked  upon
as  a  disease.  We  should  be  prepared  to  find  dissociations
that  lead,  not  to  defects,  but  to  enhancements  of  the
natural  powers  ;  and  before  concluding  that  such  dis-
sociations must  tend  to  mal-adjustment,  it  might  be  well
to  ask  if  we  know  all  that  is  to  be  known  of  the  environ-
ment to  which  man  has  to  adjust  himself.

In  man  the  evolutionai'y  process  would  seem  to  be
no  longer  restricted  to  the  struggle  for  purely  biological
existence.  In  the  course  of  cultural  development,  in  the
growth,  of  the  moral  character,  conflicts  within  the  mind
take  the  place  of  the  conflicts  with  foes  or  circumstances
which  determine  biological  or  economic  survival,  and  the
internal  conflict  may  be  so  intense  that  the  unity  of
consciousness  is  sundered.  Such  conflicts  are  in  some
degree  common  to  all  mankind,  and  if  sometimes  they
lead  to  dissociation  and  sometimes  they  do  not,  we  must
suppose  that  the  different  results  must  be  due  either  to
differences  in  the  intensity  of  the  conflict  or  to  differences
in  the  inherent  liability  to  dissociation ;  or  both  of  these
factors  may  be  present  and,  indeed,  both  may  be  dependent
upon  some  common  underlying  peculiarity  of  psycho-
neural  organization. The  intensity  of  the  conflict  may  be


44


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


the  outcome  of  a  moral  or  aesthetic  hypersensitiveness
which  meets  with  rude  shocks  in  the  actual  experiences  of
life,  or  from  thoughts  that  arise  in  the  mind  in  relation
to  desires  whose  true  meaning  and  significance  are  ex-
plicable only  by  reference  to  more  primitive  forms  or
conditions  of  life.  The  inherent  liability  to  dissociation
must  be  correlated  with  some  psycho-neural  peculiarity
which  makes  dissociation  possible.

The  capacity  for  dissociation  may  be  supposed  to
depend  on  a  plasticity  of  psycho-neural  dispositions  which
permits  departure  from  habitual  modes  of  reaction.  In
the  earlier  stages  of  evolution  this  plasticity  is  exploited
solely  in  the  interests  of  biological  survival  and  is  slight
in  amount  ;  for  so  long  as  the  physical  struggle  for
existence  is  stiU  the  dominating  factor  in  evolution,  these
reactions  must  become  stereotyped  along  biologically  useful
lines,  and  only  so  much  plasticity  as  is  necessary  for
adaptation  to  common  environmental  changes  is  desirable.
Along  the  lines  of  growth  and  integration  psycho-neural
organization  leads  to  functional  and  structural  rigidity,
but  some  degree  of  plasticity  must  always  be  retained  at
the  gi'owing  point.

So  long  as  chai'acter  is  in  process  of  formation  there
is  always  a  growing  point  in  the  structure  of  the  mind.
It  is  at  the  growing  point  that  plasticity  will  be  found,
and  the  possibility  of  the  occurrence  of  dissociation  may
indicate  the  high-water  mark  of  mental  evolution.  We
speak  with  respect  of  persons  whose  nervous  systems  are
said  to  be  stable  ;  but  stable  nervous  systems  are  like
fossils  in  the  evolutionary  process.  They  record  the
attainments  of  the  past,  but  show  nothing  of  the  promise
of  the  future.  But  where  plasticity  and  instability  are
found,  dissociations  may  occur.  Some  of  these  may  have
survival  value  in  the  present  ;  some  may  have  survival
value  in  the  future  ;  while  some  will  be  inimical  to  the
well-being  of  the  individual  or  the  race.

With  the  safeguards  to  life  and  limb  afforded  to  the
individual  in  civilized  communities  it  is  no  longer  necessary
to  have  all  the  faculties  continuously  alert  to  every
environmental  change. The  mind  may  become  absorbed


Lxxix.]  The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  45

in  an  object  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  sensory  solicita-
tions without  any  danger,  and  if  the  psycho-neural  organ-
ization is  sufficiently  plastic  such  absorption  may  lead  to  a
true,  though  temporary,  dissociation  of  consciousness.  The
student  or  inventor  who  becomes  so  absorbed  in  the
object  of  his  pursuit  that  he  loses  touch  with  his  sm'-
roundings  and  is  oblivious  of  time  and  place,  may  be
said  to  have  consciousness  dissociated  ;  but  he  is  not
therefore  to  be  classed  as  a  hysteric.  The  poet  in  his
moments  oi  inspiration,  the  genius  of  any  kind  in  the
full  exercise  of  his  powers,  is  reacting  in  an  unusual  way
to  ordinary  stimuli,  and  his  doing  so  is  in  part  dependent
on  the  psycho-neural  plasticity  which  permits  it.

I  have  said  that  the  occurrence  of  dissociation  is
the  outcome  of  a  departure  from  habitual  modes  of  reaction,
and  that  we  have  no  right  to  conclude  that  dissociation
is  always  or  entirely  disadvantageous.  It  may,  indeed,
be  argued  that  in  some  cases  and  in  some  ways,  it  may
be  beneficial.  Dr.  Schiller  says,  in  his  review  of  the
Doris  Fischer  record  :  "  So-caUed  '  dissociations  '  are  not
mechanical  processes,  even  when  they  are  excited  by
bodily  injuries,  nor  are  they  whoUy  morbid.  What  stands
out  very  clearly  in  Doris  Fischer's  case  is  that  they  are
really  teleological — protective  reactions  to  alleviate  the
burden  of  living."  ^  This  is  in  substance  the  teaching
of  psychoanalysts.  The  neurosis  is  a  flight  into  sickness
in  order  to  escape  from  a  reality  that  is  unbearable.
Its  teleological  character,  however,  is  restricted  to  the
avoidance  of  mental  pain,  and  it  is  doubtful  if  any
psychoanalyst  would  admit  that  a  split-off  secondary
personality  is  ever  an  improvement  on  the  normal  '  whole  '
self.  The  most  he  would  admit  is  that  a  secondary
personaUty  may  contain  much  that  is  estimable  which
ought  to  belong  to  the  normal  self.  Thus  he  would  say
that  the  Real  Doris  would  have  been  much  improved  by
the  incorporation  in  her  character  of  those  traits  which
made  Margaret  so  lovable — traits  which  really  belong  to
Doris  and  have  been  unnecessarily  repressed.

The protective nature of dissociation, in the  sense

^Proceedings  S. P. R.,  Vol.  XXIX.,  p.  .395.


46


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


that  it  is  a  defence  reaction  against  unbearable  ideas,  is
admitted  by  iDsychoanalysts  just  so  far  as  they  consider  dis-  1
sociation to be a consequence of repression, but  some
ambiguity may be found to arise from assuming that  ;
dissociation  of  consciousness  can  always be directly  cor-
related  with repression. The  occurrence  of  a  splitting  of  ■
consciousness  in  hysteria  is  admitted  by  both  Janet  and
Freud,  but  on  Janet's  hypothesis  the  splitting  is  due  to
an inability of the self to assimilate certain  ideas  and
feelings  which  ought  to  belong  to  it. On  Freud's  hypo-
thesis the  dissociation  is  due,  not  to  an  inability  but  to
an  unwilHngness  of  the  personality  to  accept  or  acknow-
ledge  certain experiences as its own. Yet it must  be
observed  that  besides  this  difference  in  these  two  explana-
tions of  the  origin  of  dissociation,  there  is,  or  may  be,  a
further  difference  in  respect  of  the  mental  material  on  which  ,
the dissociation  is  supposed  to  bear. In a  '  hysterical  '
paralysis of the arm, on Janet's hypothesis, the ideas  i
and  feelings  related  to  the  use  of  the  arm  have  become  '
dissociated  from  the  personal  consciousness. But  accord-
ing to  Freud  dissociation  in  such  a  case  bears  primarily  |
on  a  totally  different  system  of  ideas. It  bears  on  some  |
wish-formation  which,  after  being dissociated  by  repression,  \
becomes '  converted  ' into this particular physical disa-  :
bility. But  the  motor  disability  is  itself  a dissociation,  i
as  Janet  has  shown,  and  it  is  not  a  dissociation  directly
due to repression. It seems to depend on some  con-
stitutional peculiarity — an '  adaptation for conversion  ' —
that  is  not  always  present.  '

When  a conscious wish is repressed  it may  be said  i
that  a  dissociation  occurs  in  so  far  as  something  that  was
in  consciousness  has  become  split  off  from  it  ;  but  when  i
the  repressed wish tries  to become conscious  again  and  |
succeeds  only  by  becoming  converted  into  a  paralysis  or  1
an anaesthesia, a further dissociation would seem  to
occur  ; for  here  again  something  that  was  in  conscious-  !
ness becomes split off from it. As a dissociation of  I
consciousness the repression of a wish may be  almost
negligible, but when the repressed wish becomes  con-
verted  into bodily paralysis or anaesthesia there is  no


Lxxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  47

mistaking  the  gap  in  the  field  of  consciousness  which
occurs.  On  the  other  hand  repression  may  involve  so
great  a  section  of  consciousness  that  the  presence  of
dissociation  may  be  made  manifest  by  the  amnesia  which
it  entails  ;  and  the  repressed  material  may  at  intervals
force  itself  to  the  surface  and  dominate  the  organism  in
somnambulistic  attacks  or  as  an  alternating  secondary
personality.

Even  if  it  cannot  be  maintained  that  dissociation  is
ever  a  wholly  beneficial  process,  it  is  noteworthy  that
even  in  admittedly  hysterical  dissociation  we  sometimes
find  evidence  of  increased  capacity  in  some  directions
combined  with  disabilities  in  other  directions  :  but  it  is
the  disabilities  and  not  the  unusual  abilities  that  justify
the  diagnosis  of  hysteria.  And  we  may  get  dissociations
in  which  the  disabilities  are  negligible  and  the  enhanced
powers  or  the  unusual  modes  of  functioning  are  the  only
noticeable  features.

In  illustration  of  this,  reference  may  be  made  to  the
considerable  number  of  persons  who  have  the  power  of
producing  automatic  writing.  Such  "  automatic  "  activities
must  be  regarded  as  the  work  of  dissociated  states  of
consciousness.  We  cannot  look  upon  them  as  true  auto-
matisms ;  such  a  view  seems  quite  untenable.  Nor
can  we  regard  them  as  being  evidence  of  hysteria,  for
the  persons  who  can  produce  automatic  script  are  often
far  from  being  hysterical  in  any  useful  sense  of  the  word.

There  is,  moreover,  a  considerable  body  of  evidence
in  support  of  the  belief  that  dissociated  activities  of  this
kind  are  sometimes  accompanied  by  the  manifestation  of
supernormal  powers,  such  as  telepathy  or  those  medium-
istic  phenomena  which  are  thought  by  some  people  to
afford  proof  of  spirit  communication.

If  we  accept  the  possibility  of  telepathy,  and  if  we
find  that  telepathy  is  observed  in  connexion  with  dis-
sociated states  more  frequently  than  with  states  in  which
no  dissociation  is  suspected,  we  must  conclude  that  we
have  here  an  instance  of  dissociation  leading  to  enhance-
ment of  the  natural  powers.  Whether  such  manifestations
of  supernormal  powers are necessarily accompanied  by


48


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[PAET


defects  in  other  directions  must  be  determined  empirically  ;
we  are  not  entitled  to  conclude  on  theoretical  grounds
that  it  must  be  so.  And  we  know  that  in  individual
instances  of  automatic  writers  or  trance  mediums,  it  is
often  extremely  difficult  to  justify  any  such  conclusion.
They  may  seem  to  be  as  well  adapted  to  life  as  their
fellows.

Here,  moreover,  comes  in  the  question  of  our  know-
ledge of  the  environment  to  which  man  has  to  adjust
himself.  If  there  is  a  transcendental  world  and  if  these
dissociated  states  are  a  means  of  getting  into  relation
with  it,  we  shovdd  perhaps  regard  these  individuals,  in
this  respect  at  least,  as  being  more  fully  adjusted  to  their
environment  than  ordinary  men  and  women  are.

When  we  consider  the  later  stages  in  the  evolution  of
human  personality  we  may  see  that  man's  environment
extends  beyond  his  physical  and  social  surroundings.
His  intellectual  aspirations  are  not  limited  by  utility,  his
emotional  needs  are  not  satisfied  by  intercourse  with  his
fellows,  his  moral  nature  transcends  the  obligations  of
civic  duty  and  social  service.  The  struggle  for  existence
is  no  longer  confined  to  the  interaction  between  the  self
within  and  the  not-self  without  but  is  transferred  to
the  veiy  centre  of  the  self  as  a  struggle  between  the
elements  which  enter  into  its  construction.  The  relative
dissociation  of  concentrated  thought  may  be  a  biological
gain,  the  repression  of  a  wish  that  is  incompatible  with
the  moral  nature  may  be  a  victory  for  the  struggling
personality,  but  the  paralysis  of  a  limb,  although  it  may
be  a  successful  means  of  defending  the  personality  against
an  unbearable  idea,  is  biologically  a  failure.  Personality
may  develop  at  the  expense  of  the  bodily  organism,  but
biologically  it  must  not.  For  although  the  struggle  of
conative  trends  within  the  self  may  be  necessary  for  the
evolution  of  the  moral  consciousness,  the  older  struggle  for
existence  of  the  whole  organism  can  never  be  abrogated.
Hysterical  symptoms  may  be  regarded  as  the  outcome  of
dissociative  processes  that  take  place  at  the  growing  point
in  the  development  of  personality  and  are  biologically
failures. When  dissociation  is biologically  helpful, or  in


Lxxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  49

no  way  injm'ious,  we  may  suppose  that  we  are  witnessing
phenomena  which  point  the  way  to  the  future  evolution
of  mind  in  man.

It  might  be  supposed  that  in  the  Doris  case  examples
of  hypnotic  phenomena  would  be  difficult  to  find,  for  Dr.
Prince  tells  us  that  his  experience  on  the  night  he  dis-
covered Sleeping  Margaret  determined  the  permanent
exclusion  of  hypnosis  in  the  after  conduct  of  the  case."'
But  anyone  who  reads  this  case,  and  fails  to  identify
with  hypnotic  phenomena  many  of  the  incidents  therein
recorded,  will  be  apt  to  misconceive  the  true  nature  of
these  incidents  and  to  regard  them  as  more  wonderful
or  more  unusual  than  they  really  are.

T  open  the  record  at  random  to  look  for  an  example
of  the  kind  of  incident  I  have  in  mind.  My  eyes  fall
immediately  on  the  foUomng  passage  :  "at  about  2  p.m.
I  suggested  to  M.  that  she  close  her  eyes  and  sleep.
She  laughed  and  looked  at  me  with  an  expression  which
showed  that  she  kncAv  what  I  was  after.  She  did  not
seem  inclined  to  close  her  eyes  so  I  began  to  say,  '  You
are  sleepy.  Your  eyelids  are  heavy,'  etc.,  and  the  hds
dropped  and  in  a  minute  she  was  asleep."

Or  take  the  following  incident  :  "I  took  R.  D.  to  a
dentist  to  have  some  teeth  fiUed.  ...  As  soon  as  she
was  in  the  chair  I  took  her  hand  and  dii'ected  her  to
close  her  eyes,  but  this  she  seemed  unable  to  do.  The
moment  the  work  began  she  went  to  sleep.  .  .  .  She
continued  unconscious  and  motionless  until  two  teeth  had
been  filled,  then  M.  awoke.  I  put  her  to  sleep  by  the
suggestion  process,  and  a  thu'd  cavity  was  bored."  ^

In  the  light  of  such  incidents  and  many  others  of  a
similar  land,  I  confess  I  do  not  know  what  Dr.  Prince
means  when  he  says  that  he  did  not  employ  hypnotism
in  his  treatment.  For  he  was  on  these  occasions  employ-
ing the  most  usual  method  of  inducing  hypnosis,  and  was
as  truly  a  hypnotist  as  was  Liebeault  or  Bernheim  when
they  introduced  this  method  more  than  thirty  years  ago.

^  Cf.  the  cases  of  self -induced  anaesthesia,  while  undergoing  dental  treat-
ment, of  Mrs.  Thompson  and  Mrs.  Verrall,  both  automatic  writers
(Proc,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XVIII.,  pp.  107-111).

D


50


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


But  the  knowledge  that  Dr.  Prince  actually  used  hypnotic
methods  is  hardly  necessary.  The  hypnotic  character  of
many  of  the  phenomena  stares  us  in  the  face  on  almost
every  page  of  the  record.  And  if  we  fail  to  realize  that
between  Dr.  Prince  and  his  adopted  daughter  there  was
at  all  times  the  same  rapport  as  exists  between  the
hypnotist  and  his  patient,  much  that  is  famihar  or
commonplace  may  seem  obscure  and  mysterious.

It  is  not  only  those  incidents  that  may  have  been  due
to  suggestion,  conscious^  or  unconsciously  given  by
Dr.  Prince,  that  reveal  the  hypnotic  character  of  many
of  the  Doris  phenomena.  Every  suggestion  from  without
before  it  is  efficacious,  has  to  be  "  accepted,"  and  thus
becomes  really  a  suggestion  from  within.  This  is  probably
true  of  all  hjrpnotic  suggestion.  It  is  demonstrably  true
of  suggestion  in  trained  hypnotic  subjects.  For  in  trained
hypnotic  subjects  we  have  a  sort  of  new  integration  of
consciousness  at  the  hypnotic  level,  which  is  practically
an  incipient  secondary  personahty, — a  personahty,  capable
of  independent  judgment,  on  whose  goodwill  the  success
of  all  suggestion  from  without  depends.

If  a  person  be  deeply  hypnotized  at  the  first  attempt
and  a  suggestion  be  made  that  he  will  perform  some
simple  action  at  a  specified  time  after  awaking  from
hypnosis,  the  action  will  be  duly  carried  out  although
there  is  no  conscious  recollection  of  the  suggestion,  and
its  performance  will  be  characterized  by  all  the  peculiarities
of  suggested  post-hypnotic  acts.  Such  suggestions  are
usually  given  in  the  form  of  commands,  and  the  popular
notion  of  hypnotic  compulsion  is  mainly  derived  from  the
witnessing  of  such  experiments.  If,  however,  this  same
person  be  frequently  hypnotized,  and  if  during  hypnosis
he  be  talked  to,  and  encouraged  to  talk,  as  if  he  were
in  the  ordinary  waking  state,  it  may  then  be  said  that
we  are  dealing  with  a  hy|Dnotic  personahty  rather  than
with  a  hypnotized  person.  Such  a  personality  may  show
no  difference  from  the  waking  personality  except  as
regards  memory.  In  the  waking  state  all  the  events  of
the  hypnotic  state  are  forgotten,  while  in  the  hypnotic
state  all  the  events  of  the  waking  state  are  remembered..


Lxxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  51

If  now  a  suggestion,  to  be  fulfilled  after  hypnosis,  be
given,  it  is  not  necessary  to  assume  any  tone  of  com-
mand. It  may  be  put  in  the  form  of  a  request,  and,
if  it  is  assented  to,  its  fulfilment  will  be  indistinguishable
from  an  ordinary  post-h5rpnotic  act :  or  the  choice  of  the
act  to  be  performed  may  be  left  to  the  hjrpnotic  person-
ality, and  the  hypnotist  may  be  left  in  ignorance  of  the
action  determined  upon.  Yet  here  again  its  fulfilment,
after  hjrpnosis,  is  indistinguishable  from  an  ordinary  post-
hypnotic act,  and  the  subject  himself,  in  the  waking  state,
may  regard  it  as  having  its  origin  in  a  suggestion  from
the  hypnotist.

It  may  thus  be  seen  that  any  idea  or  intention  arising
in  the  hypnotic  stratum  of  consciousness,  vv^hether  spon-
taneously or  by  suggestion  from  without,  may  work  itself
out  in  the  waking  state  in  ways  indistinguishable  from
those  that  are  characteristic  of  post-hypnotic  suggestions.
The  personahty  formed  at  the  hypnotic  level  has,  there-
fore, what  we  may  call  suggestive  power  over  the
personahty  at  the  higher  level  ;  and  I  would  assert  that
when  there  are  several  personalities  in  co-conscious  series,
whether  they  are  artificial  products  or  have  arisen
spontaneously,  this  same  relation  subsists  between  them
all.  Any  idea  arising  in  or  entering  into  the  mind  of
a  co-conscious  personahty  may  have  suggestive  power  over
the  personalities  above  it  in  the  series, — that  is  to  say,
personahties  to  whom  it  stands  in  the  hypnotic  relation
of  lino  wing  but  being  unknown  by  them.

The  importance  'of  this  conception  in  its  apphcation  to
the  Doris  personahties  is  most  apparent  when  we  consider
the  part  played  by  Sleeping  Margaret  in  the  therapeutic
management  of  the  case.  Dr.  Prince  says  :  "  She  was
my  chief  coadjutor  in  the  case,  though  Margaret  was
also  generally  anxious  to  help,  studied  the  progress  of
R.  D.  and  gave  valuable  information.  But  Sleeping
Margaret  studied  the  interior  situation  unremittingly,
watched  the  result  of  my  experiments  and  reported  there-
on, suggested  measures  which  often  proved  of  great
importance,  and  made  predictions  as  to  the  development
of  the  case  which  were  nearly,  not  quite,  always  justified


52


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


by  the  event."  Dr.  Prince  says  Sleeping  Margaret  was  j
his  chief  coadjutor.  I  am  incHned  to  think  she  was  his  j
commander-in-chief,  while  he  was  her  hard-working  chief-  j
of -staff.

Successful  prediction  of  the  course  of  the  illness  is  a
common  feature  in  hysteria  when  the  dissociation  is  at
all  profound,  and  especially  when  anything  of  the  nature
of  a  secondary  personahty  has  developed.  The  usual
explanation  of  this — and,  so  far  as  it  goes,  no  doubt  the
true  explanation — is  that  the  prediction  is  a  self-suggestion,
a  suggestion  from  within,  whose  fulfilment  brings  its  own
verification.  And  I  would  maintain  that  the  predictions
of  Sleeping  Margaret,  and  the  measures  recommended  to
Dr.  Prince  by  her,  brought  about  their  own  fulfilment
because  they  were  examples  of  that  suggestive  power  i
which  a  co-conscious  personality  can  bring  to  bear  on
personalities  to  which  it  stands  in  hypnotic  relation.

It  is  only  by  keeping  in  mind  the  remarkable  results
of  suggestion  in  dissociated  states  and  the  preponderating  |
part  played  by  suggestion  from  within  rather  than  from
without,  that  we  can  bring  any  order  into  the  multifarious  ,
phenomena  of  this  case.  One  unique  feature,  and  one  |
which  to  me  seems  inexplicable  except  in  the  light  of  |
these  considerations,  is  the  fate  of  the  secondary  person-  !
alities  in  the  process  of  Doris  Fischer's  restoration  to  j
health.  '

Sick Doris, immediately after being installed in Dr.  |
Prince's household, and  Margaret  at  a  later  date,  began
to  decline  in  their  faculties  and  powers ;  and  the  decline
took  the  curious  form  of  a  gradual  retrogression  towards  j
childhood  and  infancy  before  they  finally  disappeared.

Sick  Doris  was  the  first  to  be  affected  by  the  change
of  environment  brought  about  by  the  removal  from  her
old  home.  She  began  to  lose  her  memories  and  to  be
"  out  "  less,  while  her  lost  memories  became  absorbed  by
Real  Doris  who  now  began  to  come  more  frequently,  |
and  to  stay  longer,  as  an  alternating  personality.  As
Sick  Doris's  memories  disappeared  her  manner  changed,
becoming  more  cold  and  reserved.  Her  bodily  anaes-
thesia  deepened until she could neither feel, taste, nor  ,


Lxxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  53

smell.  Her  vision  gradually  narrowed  and  shortened.
She  grew  more  childish  and  apathetic,  she  became  unable
to  read,  and  her  vocabvilary  diminished  until  she  had
only  a  very  small  stock  of  words.  She  finally  reached
complete  mental  infancy,  not  only  as  to  the  content  of
her  mind,  but  also  as  to  her  power  of  thought.  In  the
end  she  could  not  walk,  stand,  or  sit,  and  when  she  could
retrogress  no  farther  she  just  ceased  to  come.  After
being  the  dominant  personahty  for  nearly  five  years  she
made  her  last  appearance  four  months  after  Doris  went
to  five  in  Dr.  Prince's  home.

The  getting  rid  of  Margaret  was  a  much  slower  process,
but  it  followed  the  same  general  course  as  that  followed
by  Sick  Doris.  The  methods  adopted  to  facihtate  her
dechne  and  departure  varied  in  many  ways  from  those
found  to  be  efficacious  with  Sick  Doris,  but  the  final
result  was  in  its  main  aspects  the  same.  In  the  case
of  Margaret,  however,  the  regression  to  childhood  was
more  definite  and  precise  in  regard  to  details,  and  the
return  to  childish  ways  of  thought  and  speech  gave
evidence  of  being  a  return  to  the  ways  of  the  life  which
she  had  actually  lived  as  an  alternating  personality  in
Doris's  childhood.

This  was  impossible  in  the  case  of  Sick  Doris,  for  she
had  never  been  a  real  child  in  her  own  personality.
When  she  first  appeared  she  was,  it  is  true,  an  infantile
personality  as  regards  the  content  of  her  mind,  but  in
her  regression  she  does  not  seem  to  have  retraced  her
steps  through  this  infantile  fife.  It  seemed  rather  as  if
the  forces  directing  the  process  of  her  extinction  had  led
her  backwards  through  an  abstract  sort  of  infancy  which
was  not  the  infancy  of  anyone  in  particular.  With
Margaret  it  was  different.  It  appeared  to  be  her  own
childhood  she  was  retracing.  Moreover,  there  was  this
further  difference,  that  when  the  mental  regression  of
Margaret  had  brought  her  to  the  age  of  five,  she  dis-
appeared and  came  no  more.  She  never  became  truly
infantile  as  Sick  Doris  had  done.

The  fate  of  Sick  Doris  and  of  Margaret  had  been  the
subject  of  much  speculation  by  these  personahties  them-


54


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


selves  and  also  by  Sleeping  Margaret  and  Dr.  Prince.
At  the  beginning  of  his  treatment  of  the  case  Dr.  Prince
regarded  Sick  Doris  as  the  primary  personality,  and  his
efforts  were  directed  towards  reinstating  her  as  the  per-
manent personahty  and  banishing  Margaret.  He  some-
times told  Sick  Doris  that  Margaret  appeared  to  be
weakening  and  that  eventually  she  would  be  got  rid  of.
But  Margaret  was  of  a  different  opinion.  She  said  she
knew  that  Sick  Doris  would  go  first  and  teased  her  by
teUing  her  so.  Sick  Doris  was  somewhat  worried  by
Margaret's  assertions  but  believed  that  Margaret  would
be  the  one  to  go.

At  an  early  period  of  the  treatment  Dr.  Walker  of
the  University  of  Pittsburg  was  consulted  on  this  matter.
He  gave  it  as  his  opinion  that  Sick  Doris  would  be
assimilated  with  Real  Doris  but  that  Margaret  would
never  blend.  At  first  Margaret's  opinion  of  her  own
fate  was  that  she  would  join  up  with  Real  Doris.  "  We
are  going  to  be  one,"  she  said.  But  three  days  after
Dr.  Walker  had  expressed  his  opinion  she  said,  speaking
of  Sick  Doris's  decline  :  "  We  don't  want  her,  any  way.
ME  NEXT  !— loudly  and  archly— isn't  that  right  papa  ?  "

Two  days  later  Sleeping  Margaret  enters  into  the
drama  for  the  first  time  since  the  night  of  her  discovery.
She  asserts  that  Sleeping  Margaret  and  Margaret  are  in
a  sense  one,  and  she  expresses  the  opinion  that  "  both
Margarets  will  eventually  disappear.  As  to  Sick  Doris
she  is  disappearing,  '  going  into  Real  Doris,'  has  in  good
part  already  gone."  About  a  week  later  she  informs  Dr.
Prince  that  "  Margaret  is  getting  to  be  a  little  child.  She
always  was  a  girl  but  she  is  getting  younger  and  younger.
I  think  that  is  probably  the  way  that  she  will  disappear.
(Do  you  think  she  will  come  to  have  the  mind  of  a
baby  ?)  Probably  not  really  a  baby,  but  the  mind  of  a
very  small  girl."  At  the  same  time,  in  reply  to  the
question  :  Who  do  you  think  will  go  first,  you  or  Margaret  ?
she  replied  :  "I  don't  know  ;  probably  we  will  go  to-
gether." (How  do  you  think  that  S.  D.  will  go  ?)
"  Why,  she  is  going  now  Don't  you  see  that  she  is
going  ? She  remembers  hardly  anything.  .  .  . She  will  get


Lxxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  55

weaker  and  weaker,  and  all  of  a  sudden  she  will  be
gone  and  not  come  back."  Some  weeks  later  when  Mrs.
Prince  said  something  about  Margaret  blending  with  Real
Doris,  Sleeping  Margaret  spoke  up  decidedly,  "  No,  she
will  disappear.  The  difference  is  that  S.  D.  was  separated
from  the  R.  D. (And  wasn't  Ml) No,  she  just  came."

Thus  early  in  the  treatment  of  the  case  the  different
personalities  had  fairly  clear  notions  of  the  course  they
had  to  run.  At  a  later  date  Sleeping  Margaret,  however,
seems  to  have  changed  her  mind  about  her  own  future
and  also  about  her  own  nature.

The  way  in  which  Sick  Doris  and  Margaret  disappeared
is,  so  far  as  I  know,  unique  in  the  records  of  multiple
personality  ;  and  although  we  may  agree  with  Sleeping
Margaret  that  no  two  cases  are  exactly  ahke,  it  would
seem  very  unhkely  that  this  mode  of  disappearance  of
secondary  personahties  should  not  have  been  met  with
before,  if  it  is  an  inherent  or  natural  pecuKarity  of  the
Doris  Case.  I  must  confess  that  I  am  incKned  to  regard
the  whole  course  followed  by  Sick  Doris  and  Margaret
in  their  disappearance  as  having  been  largely  brought
about  artificially, — in  the  sense  that  their  mode  of  going
was  not  a  necessary  part  of  their  going.  Their  going
was  necessary  if  Doris  was  to  be  cured,  but  they  might
have  been  got  rid  of  in  some  other  way.  Not  that  I
would  decry  Dr.  Prince's  management  of  the  case.  On
the  contrary,  I  think  no  one  can  read  his  record  without
a  profound  feeUng  of  admiration  for  his  patience  and  his
skill.  All  I  mean  is  that  if  Dr.  Prince,  and  especially
if  Sleeping  Margaret,  had  by  any  chance  come  to  have
had  different  notions  as  to  the  course  to  be  run  and  the
measures  to  be  adopted,  then  an  equally  good  end  might
have  been  attained  though  the  way  might  have  been
different.

It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  suggestion  from  without
is  all  that  is  necessary  in  a  case  such  as  this.  Secondary
personalities,  although  they  may  be  suggestible  enough  in
some  respects,  are  often  impervious  to  suggestions  from
without  directed  towards  their  own  exorcism,  or  even
towards  the  disappearance  of  symptoms  which  seem  to  be


56


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


within  their  control.  Yet  when,  by  any  means,  they  can
be  got  to  predict  the  disappearance  of  morbid  symptoms^
these  symptoms  disappear  in  the  same  sudden  and  un-
accountable way  as  do  similar  sj^mptoms  in  ordinary
hysteria  in  response  to  suggestion  from  without.

This  peculiarity  was  forced  on  my  attention  in  a  case
of  hysteria  with  incipient  multiple  personality  which  I
reported  to  this  Society  some  years  ago.^  I  was  struck
by  the  unequal  success  of  suggestion  in  this  case.  Some
symptoms  disappeared  instantly  at  the  first  suggestion  ;
others  seemed  to  be  quite  uninfluenced,  no  matter  how
often,  or  how  impressively,  appropriate  suggestions  were
given.  It  soon  became  evident  that  the  symptoms  which
were  easily  relieved  were  those  which,  in  her  waking
state,  the  patient  asked  me  to  relieve,  or  those  to  the
relief  of  which  I  had  gained  her  free  and  unqualified
assent  during  hypnosis.  Why  she  came  to  desire  the
relief  of  one  symptom  more  than  another  I  do  not  know  ;
but  it  was  clear  that  once  she  got  the  idea  that  I  could
remove  it,  the  symptom  in  question  alw^ays  disappeared,
and  if  she  did  not  have  such  idea  it  did  not.  Sometimes
I  expressed  a  doubt  as  to  my  ability  to  remove  it,  but
what  she  predicted  always  came  to  pass.

Thus  so  far  as  suggestion  affects  the  course  of  cases
of  this  kind  it  would  seem  essential  that  it  should  be,
in  some  sense,  a  suggestion  from  within.  The  idea  of
the  course  to  be  followed  must  somehow  arise  in,  or  gain
admission  to,  the  patient's  mind,  and  act  with  suggestive
force  at  some  hypnotic  level.  The  possibility  of  such  an
occurrence  in  cases  of  co-conscious  secondary  personalities
is  shown  by  the  case  I  have  recorded,  and  it  may  be
useful  to  bear  such  a  possibility  in  mind  in  connection
with  the  Doris  case,  especially  with  regard  to  the  re-
gression to  child-like  states  which  preceded  the  final
disappearance  of  Sick  Doris  and  Margaret.

In  continuing  our  comparisons  of  the  data  supplied  by~
the  Doris  case  with  those  derived  from  other  sources,
we  are  led  beyond  the  individual  features  presented  by
it  to  a comparison  of  the case  as  a  whole  with  other

Wroceediwjn,  S.l'.R.,  Vol.  XXVI.  p.  286.


Lxxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  57

cases  of  multiple  personality.  We  may  try  to  find  out
if  knowledge  of  the  Doris  case  helps  us  in  any  way  to
classify  these  cases,  or  if  we  can  find  a  place  for  it  in
any  classification  we  may  provisionally  have  adopted.

In  attempting  to  classify  cases  of  multiple  personality
we  start  with  the  assumption  that  in  every  instance  we
have  to  deal  with  some  sort  of  dissociation  or  division
of  the  self.  Until  such  an  assumption  is  clearly  shown
to  be  false  or  inadequate,  we  are  not  justified  in  ascribing
to  any  other  source  the  secondary  personalities  which  they
may  reveal.  We  must  suppose  that  such  unity  and
continuity  as  the  self  ordinarily  displays  has  in  some  way
become  disrupted,  and  a  basis  of  classification  may  be
found  if  we  can  discover  the  lines  of  cleavage  along
which  such  disruptions  most  commonly  do  or  may  take
place.  To  know  where  to  look  for  these  fines  of  cleavage
we  must  first  know  what  sort  of  unity  the  self  has  and
in  what  it  consists.

We  may  distinguish  between  the  unity  of  consciousness
and  the  unity  of  the  self.  When  we  speak  of  the  unity
of  consciousness  we  should  refer  only  to  the  unity  which
is  observed  within  the  field  of  consciousness  and  to  the
continuity  which  normally  chai'acterises  the  stream  of  con-
sciousness. The  unity  of  consciousness,  thus  understood,
depends  on  the  immediate  contiguity  of  the  components
of  a.ny  present  moment  of  consciousness  and  the  contiguity
of  the  successive  moments  in  the  transition  from  one  to
another  which  constitutes  the  stream  of  consciousness.

Disruption  of  the  unity  of  the  field  of  consciousness
is  observed  in  the  common  symptoms  of  hysteria  such  as
anaesthesia,  where  some  part  of  the  conscious  field  that
ought  to  be  supraliminal  has  become  subliminal.  Dis-
ruptions of  the  continuity  of  the  stream  of  consciousness
are  exhibited  in  the  amnesia  of  hysterical  fugues  and  still
more  clearly  in  that  of  multiple  personality.  Such  unity
and  continuity  of  consciousness  is  a  necessary  and  im-
portant part  of  our  conception  of  personality,  but  in  this
there  is  also  impHed  a  higher  unity  of  the  self  which  is
not  dependent  on  a  mere  contiguity  of  elements.  This
unity  is  essentially  a  conative  unity. It  is  a  unity  and


58


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


continuity  of  interests  and  purposes.  It  is  a  unity  that
is  not  given  in  the  structure  of  the  mind  but  is  some-
thing that  the  self  can  aspire  to,  and  it  may  be,  by
struggle  attain.  In  the  struggle  towards  this  ideal,
character  is  formed,  and  when  such  unity  as  may  have
been  attained  is  disrupted  the  resulting  change  in  person-
ality will  reveal  itself  change  in  character  and
conduct.

There  are  thus  at  least  two  directions  from  which  we
may  approach  the  problem  of  classification  of  secondary
personalities.  From  one  point  of  view  we  may  regard
them  as  breaches  in  the  continuity  of  the  stream  of
consciousness.  From  another  point  of  view  they  appear
as  disturbances  of  that  relative  unity  of  the  self  which
we  know  as  character.

In  a  former  communication  to  this  Societj^  ^  I  tried  to
divide  all  secondary  personalities  into  two  great  groups,
the  basis  of  division  being  the  memory  relations  existing
between  the  different  selves.  In  the  first  group,  of  which
the  BI  and  BIV  personalities  of  the  Beauchamp  case  are
examples,  there  is  reciprocal  amnesia  between  the  different
selves.  BI  had  none  of  BIV's  memories  and  BIV  had
none  of  BI's.  When  BIV  succeeded  BI  as  an  alternating
personality,  BIV  knew  nothing  of  what  BI  had  been  doing
during  the  time  that  BI  was  "  out  "  ;  and  when  BI
succeeded  BIV,  BI  was  equally  ignorant  of  what  BIV
had  been  doing.

In  the  second  group,  of  which  "  Sally  "  of  the  Beau-
champ  case  is  an  example,  the  amnesia  occurs  in  one
direction  only.  BI  did  not  know  Sally,  but  Sally  knew
BI.  When  Sally  gave  place  to  BI,  BI  came  on  the  scene
quite  ignorant  of  what  Sally  had  just  been  doing,  hwt
when  Sally  succeeded  BI  she  had  full  knowledge  of  what
BI  had  been  doing.  Moreover,  Sally  claimed  to  have  been
present  as  a  co-conscious  personality,  distinct  from
BI,  during  the  period  of  BI's  emergence,  and  to  have
been  aware,  at  all  times,  of  BI's  thoughts  and  actions.
Secondary  personalities  of  this  kind  may  be  referred  to
as  belonging  to  the  co-conscious  type.

1  Pro<:ntdinu!>,  S.  P.  R. ,  Vol.  XXVI. ,  p.  2.57.  ' ' ■  '  '


Lxxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  59

On  reading  the  Doris  record  we  are  at  once  struck  by
the  fact  that  all  the  personalities,  with  the  negligible
exception  of  S.  R.  D.,  may  be  arranged  in  a  co-conscious
series.  If  we  regard  the  personalities  in  such  a  series
as  having  different  thresholds  we  may  say  that  the
personahty  formed  at  a  higher  level  is  always  amnesic
for  the  personalities  that  may  occur  below  it,  while  the
personahty  formed  at  a  lower  level  is  always  co-conscious
with  those  that  may  occur  above  it.  Thus,  in  the  Doris
case,  as  we  have  seen,  S.  M.  knew  all  the  thoughts  and
feeUngs  and  actions  of  all  the  other  personahties.  M.
was  ignorant  of  S.  M.,  but  knew  all  the  others  above
her  in  the  series.  S.  D.  had  no  direct  knowledge  of
M.'s  experiences  and  was  also  ignorant  of  S.  M.,  but  she
knew  the  experiences  of  R.  D.  R.  D.  had  no  direct
knowledge  of  any  of  her  secondary  states.

Divisions  of  the  self  based  upon  amnesia  and  co-
consciousness,  although  interesting  to  the  psychologist,
are  not  the  ones  that  appeal  most  strongly  to  the  ordinary
reader.  So  long  as  a  man's  character  is  but  little  altered,
a  gap  in  his  memory  of  his  own  doings  excites  little
wonder  or  comment.  But  if  he  shows  any  marked
change  in  his  character  and  conduct,  whether  it  be
accompanied  by  loss  of  memory  or  not,  his  friends  will
say  he  is  "  a  different  man."  And  so  it  may  be  that,
in  the  history  of  Doris  Fischer,  many  will  be  more  im-
pressed b\^  the  differences  in  the  characters  of  the  person-
alities than  by  the  pecuharities  of  the  memory  relations
subsisting  between  them.  It  would  seem  very  desirable
that  some  classification  of  secondary  personalities,  based
upon  character  rather  than  upon  memory,  should  be
attempted.

The  most  superficial  examination  of  ourselves  or  our
fellows  will  reveal  to  us  that  when  we  speak  of  unity
of  character  we  are  referring  to  an  ideal  unity,  and  that
in  actual  Ufe  we  know  hardly  any  but  a  relative  unity
in  this  respect.  We  are  all  subject  to  moods  in  which
our  capacities  and  achievements  fall  short  or  surpass  those
that  we  regard  as  pertaining  to  our  true  selves.  At
times  we  may  follow  interests  and  pursue  ends  that  are


60


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[PART


inconsistent  or  incompatible  with  our  main  purposes,  and
only  the  stern  necessities  of  life  may  debar  us  from  giving
rein  to  these  different  sides  of  our  character.  For  most
of  us  some  limitation  of  interests  and  systematization  of
purposes  must  be  submitted  to.  William  James  expressed
this  in  his  own  inimitable  way  when  he  wrote  about  the
rivalry  and  conflict  of  the  different  selves  that  may  be
found  in  all  of  iis.

'■  With  most  objects  of  desire,"  he  says,  "  physical
nature  restricts  our  choice  to  but  one  of  many  repre-
sented goods,  and  even  so  it  is  here.  I  am  often  con-
fronted by  the  necessity  of  standing  by  one  of  my
empirical  selves  and  relinquishing  the  rest.  Not  that  I
would  not,  if  I  could,  be  both  handsome  and  fat  and
well  dressed,  and  a  great  athlete  and  make  a  million  a
year,  be  a  wit,  a  hon-vivavt,  and  a  lady-killer,  as  well  as
a  philosopher,  a  philanthropist,  statesman,  warrior,  and
African  explorer,  as  well  as  a  '  tone-poet  '  and  saint.
But  the  thing  is  simply  impossible.  The  miiUonaire's-
work  would  run  counter  to  the  saint's  ;  and  the  hon-
vivant  and  the  philanthropist  would  trip  each  other  up  ;
the  philosopher  and  the  lady-killer  could  not  well  keep-
house  in  the  same  tenement  of  clay.  Such  different
characters  may  conceivably  at  the  outset  of  life  be  alike
possible  to  a  man.  But  to  make  any  one  of  them
actual,  the  rest  must  more  or  less  be  suppressed."  ^

When  a  splitting  of  personality  occurs  these  suppressed
selves  seem  to  find  their  opportunity,  and  we  may  some-
times interpret  the  character  of  a  secondary  personality
as  being  the  outcome  of  tendencies,  potential  in  the
original  structure  of  the  self,  which  had  been  suppressed
or  subordinated  to  the  purposes  that  had  been  chosen
and  the  ends  that  had  been  pursued.

In  James'  list  of  the  empirical  selves  which  he,  with
some  reluctance,  put  aside,  no  mention  is  made  of  one
which,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  is  common,  perhaps,
to  all  mankind.  James  may  have  been  of  too  robust  a
nature  ever  consciously  to  feel  the  wish  to  be  a  child
again  ; but weaker spirits, when they find life  hard,.

^  Principles  of  Psycholoyy,  Vol.  I.  pp.  309-310.


txxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality .  61

tnow  well  the  craving  for  the  dependence  and  irresponsi-
"bility  of  childhood.  The  self  that  does  not  want  to  grow
up  may  be  detected  in  some  of  the  most  lovable  of  our
adult  friends  ;  and  when  dissociation  occui's  we  need  not
be  surprised  to  find  that  sometimes  a  child-hke  secondary
personality  is  revealed.

Several  examples  of  this  may  be  found  in  the  records.
"  Twoey  "  and  "  The  Boy  "  in  the  case  of  Alma  Z.  were
child-like  personalities.  More  than  one  of  the  secondary
states  of  Mary  Barnes  exhibited  childish  traits.  Mx.
Hanna,  in  his  secondary  state,  was  described  as  being
"  pure  and  innocent  as  a  child."  The  secondary  state
of  Mary  Reynolds  was  child-hke  in  its  cheerful  gaiety  and
boisterous  love  of  jests.  Sally,  of  the  Beauchamp  case,
was  incorrigibly  a  child.  And  now  in  the  Doris  case
we  have  Margaret, — one  of  the  most  fascinating  and
lovable  of  all  the  child  personalities  revealed  in  these
states.  Further,  it  may  be  noted,  that  the  '•  controls  "'
in  mediumistic  trance  have  not  infrequently  had  the
semblance  of  being  child  personalities.

Thus,  we  might  classify  secondary  personalities  according
as  they  are  child-like  or  grown-up,  but  it  is  doubtful  if
such  a  division  would  be  very  helpful.  There  are  perhaps
more  fundamental  lines  of  cleavage  to  be  discovered
along  which  disruptions  of  the  unity  of  the  self  may
take  place.

If  we  examine  character  as  a  whole  and  try  to  see  of
what  elements  it  is  built  up,  or  along  what  lines  it  grows,
we  may  notice  that  it  displays  certain  features  which
correspond  to  the  three  fundamental  modes  of  our  being
conscious.  We  know  objects,  we  are  affected  by  them,
and  we  act  upon  them.  So  we  may  say  we  have  an
intellectual  or  cognitive  character,  an  emotional  character,
and  a  practical  character.  Our  intellectual  character
expresses  the  whole  of  our  power  to  know  and  to  think,
but  like  each  of  the  modes  of  experience  it  requires  for
its  fulfilment  the  co-operation  of  the  other  two.  Growth
in  knowledge  is  accompanied  by  and  dependent  on  grow^th
in  interest  and  desire.  In  the  main  we  think  and  know
the  things  that  are  of  practical  importance  to  us,  though


62


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[PABT


at  the  higher  levels  of  development  thinking  and  knowing
may  obtain  an  interest  on  their  own  account.  Our
knowledge  to  be  of  use  must  be  organized  into  systems
which  are  at  least  congruous  and  coherent  within  them-
selves, and,  as  an  ideal,  into  systems  which  are  congruous
and  coherent  one  with  another.

The  intellectual  character  by  itself  is  a  relatively  un-
important part  of  man's  personality.  His  knowledge
grows  in  the  service  of  his  interests  and  desires,  and
these  are  shown  by  what  he  does  rather  than  by  what
he  knows.  Our  emotions  reveal  our  interests  in  things
and  our  attitude  towards  them,  and  our  whole  interest
in  things  and  our  attitude  towards  them  form  our
emotional  character.  In  the  development  of  the  emotional
character  the  primary  emotions  and  their  complex  com-
binations undergo  a  gradual  systematization.  This  is  in
part  effected  by  the  objects  that  arouse  them,  since  they
belong  to  particular  spheres  of  interest  such  as  material,
social,  moral  and  religious  spheres.  But  the  emotions
aroused  by  any  object  will  depend  on  the  aspect  pre-
sented, for  different  emotions  may  be  aroused  by  the  same
object  under  different  aspects  or  situations.  Such  a
system  of  emotions  organised  about  an  object  has  been
termed  by  Mr.  Shand  a  sentiment,  and  the  formation
of  sentiments  is  the  most  important  factor  in  the  growth
of  the  emotional  character.

It  is  not  very  profitable,  however,  to  consider  the
emotional  character  apart  from  the  practical  character.
Doing  is  the  end  of  both  knowing  and  feeling.  Our
practical  character  is  being  formed  when  our  interest  is
in  what  we  shall  do,  rather  than  in  what  we  know  or
how  we  feel.  It  grows  out  of  the  striving  aspect  of
experience,  but  implies  knowledge  of  ends  that  are
desirable.  It  also  implies  the  power  to  choose  from  the
ends  that  may  be  represented  in  consciousness,  those  that
are  most  desirable,  and  ability  to  control  the  impulses
that  are  opposed  to  their  realization.  Success  in  the
building  up  of  the  practical  character  depends  on  habitua-
tion in  the  seeking  of  right  ends,  in  the  habitual  acting
up  to  ideals  and  resolves. It  is  this  actual  seeking  of


Lxxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  63

ends  that  distinguishes  the  practical  character  from  the
intellectual  and  emotional  characters.

The  three  characters  can  be  considered  separately  only
as  abstractions.  Each  of  them  may  have  a  unity  within
itself,  but  the  unity  of  character  as  a  whole  requires
theii-  integration  ;  and  any  want  of  balance,  harmony  and
cohesion  between  them  may  determine  a  line  of  cleavage
along  which  personality  may  disintegrate.

The  Doris  case  seems  to  show  some  evidence  of  dis-
integration along  such  lines  of  cleavage.  Sleeping  Margaret
was  the  embodiment  of  the  intellectual  character.  She
was  cold  and  unemotional  and  she  never  did  anything.
She  appeared  to  be  of  a  "  highly  analytical  and  philo-
sophical mind,"  she  was  "  never  known  to  wander  in  her
speech  or  to  oscillate  ui  the  clearness  of  her  understand-
ing." "  Her  facial  expression  was  usually  that  of  philo-
sophical calmness,  though  she  would  ofter  smUe  sedately,
or  even  break  out  into  laughter."

If  Sleeping  Margaret  was  all  intellect,  Margaret  was  all
feeling  and  emotion.  She  was  demonstrative  and  affec-
tionate. Though  amiable  as  a  rule  she  had  occasional
fits  of  sullenness  and  even  of  rage.  She  was  a  child  of
the  emotions  with  the  emotions  of  a  child.  She  never
developed  beyond  the  age  of  ten,  but  it  was  her  intellec-
tual expansion  that  first  became  curtailed.  At  one  time  she
used  to  assist  Real  Doris  with  her  lessons,  but  two  years
before  the  schooling  was  over  she  ceased  to  help  because
the  exercises  had  become  too  advanced.  She  had  the
emotional  character's  dislike  of  monotony  and  restraint.
The  Real  Doris  of  those  school  days  had  no  easy  time,  for
incessantly  there  emerged  in  her  consciousness  the  clamours
of  Margaret,  '•  Come  on  !  let's  go  out !  "  or  Margaret  would
come  as  an  alternating  personality  and  cut  some  ridiculous
caper  which  set  the  room  in  a  giggle.

If  Sleeping  Margaret  was  the  intellectual  side  and
Margaret  the  emotional  side  of  Doris,  then  Sick  Doris
was  preponderatingly  the  practical  side.  After  her  advent
she  was  the  only  one  of  the  group  who  appeared  to  do
things.  For  five  years  she  was  the  dominant  personality
who  bore  the  brunt  of  all  the  hardships  and  the  excessive


64


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


and  prolonged  exertions  which  the  poverty  of  the  family
entailed.  She  was  characterized  by  woodenness  of  ex-
pression. She  was  lacking  in  humour,  in  conceptions
of  the  abstract,  and  in  other  respects.  To  the  end  she
was  lacking  on  the  side  of  the  affections,  but  she  was  a
slave  to  her  narrow  conceptions  of  duty.

This  way  of  looking  at  secondary  personalities  may
seem  fanciful  and  not  very  profitable.  And  indeed  it
is  likely  that  more  commonly  we  should  find  the  line  of
cleavage  running  through  the  emotional  and  practical
characters,  which  are  hardly  separable,  rather  than
between  them.  Could  we  do  so  it  would  be  consonant
with  our  most  recent  knowledge  of  the  nature  and  source
of  psychical  dissociation.  Everything  points  to  the
emotional  life  as  being  the  source  from  which  the  dis-
integrating forces  are  derived.  Here  is  to  be  found  the
subterranean  fire  which  in  volcanic  action  bursts  the
bonds  that  keep  the  self  a  unity  of  endeavour.

The  emotional  conflict  that  ensues  when  incompatible
wishes  arise  in  the  mind  may  be,  as  the  Freudians  main-
tain, the  one  constant  factor  in  all  psychical  dissociation.
But  to  search  for  the  lines  of  cleavage  which  may  thus
be  established  would  necessitate  a  long  and  arduous
examination  of  the  unconscious  roots  of  the  emotional
life.  The  knowledge  we  already  possess  on  this  matter
has  not  yet,  so  far  as  I  know,  been  applied  to  well-
marked  cases  of  multiple  personality,  and  this  is  neither
the  time  nor  the  place  to  attempt  it  ;  but  when  it  is
done  we  shall  perhaps  be  within  sight  of  some  basis
whereon  to  found  a  scientific  or  natural  classification  of
these  states.

In  the  meantime  we  may  make  ixse  of  provisional
classifications  of  a  moi'e  superficial  kind,  and  we  may  here,
as  in  other  matters,  arrange  our  data  in  groups  determined
by  the  end  we  have  in  view.  We  have  good  authority
for  saying  that  each  science  or  art  may  form  its  classifi-
cation of  things  "  according  to  the  properties  which  fall
within  its  special  cognizance,  or  of  which  it  must  take
account  in  order  to  accomplish  its  peculiar  practical  end."
As  students  of  Psychical  Research  we  may  ask  whether


Lxxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  65

secondary  personalities  show  any  peculiarities  which  fall
within  our  special  province.  If  they  do,  we  may  use
these  peculiarities  as  a  basis  for  classification.

In  many  of  the  recorded  cases  of  multiple  personality
some  evidence  of  the  occurrence  of  supernormal  phenomena
has  been  given,  and  if  there  are  any  cases  in  which  there
is  no  such  evidence,  then  we  may  divide  all  cases  of
multiple  personality  into  those  which  provide  evidence  of
the  supernormal  and  those  which  do  not.  Or,  more
conveniently,  all  the  secondary  selves  revealed  in  these
cases  may  be  divided  into  those  that  give  evidence  of
possessing  supernormal  powers  and  those  for  which  no
such  claim  can  be  made.

That  in  the  cases  hitherto  recorded  some  apparently
supernormal  phenomena  have  been  observed  cannot  be
denied.  In  some  instances  the  prejudice  of  the  observer
has  almost  blinded  him  to  their  occurrence  or  has  led
him  to  record  them  only  shamefacedly  in  a  footnote.
In  other  instances  his  credulity  has  caused  him  to  see
evidence  of  spirit  possession  or  obsession  in  the  common
symptoms  of  hysteria  as  well  as  in  less  usual  phenomena.
In  the  earlier  records  of  the  Doris  case  we  are  fortunate
in  having  had  an  observer  who,  if  not  trained  in  the
methods  of  science,  was  at  all  events  apparently  scrupu-
lously careful  and  unbiassed.  Towards  the  end  of  his
conduct  of  the  case  Dr.  Prince  was  undoubtedly  more
favourably  inclined  towards  spiritistic  hypotheses  ;  and  in
the  observations  of  Dr.  Hyslop,  set  out  at  great  length
in  the  third  volume  of  the  record,  we  recognize  the  work
of  a  spiritist  whose  views  are,  I  imagine,  of  an  extreme
kind.

The  incidents  recorded  by  Dr.  Prince,  of  which  some
supernormal  explanation  may  be  called  for,  are  numerous,
but  not  many  of  them  come  up  to  the  evidential  standard
required  by  our  Society.  Dr.  Prince  often  has  to  admit,
about  some  particular  incident,  that  taken  by  itself  it
cannot  be  regarded  as  evidential,  and  that  it  has  to  be
read  in  the  light  of  other  similar  incidents  in  other  parts
of  the  record.  This  is  a  procedure  we  are  only  too  prone
to adopt in the investigation of the supernormal.  As


66


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


rule  of  method  it  is  probably  fundamentally  false.  A
collection  of  half-truths  can  never  prove  the  whole  truth
about  anything.  The  accumulation  of  doubtful  cases
would  rather  tend  to  magnify  the  doubt.

All  the  personalities  in  the  Doris  case  are  said  to  have
had  supernormal  experiences.  The  Real  Doris  claimed
that  when  she  was  quite  small  she  used  sometimes  to
see  things  which  afterwards  came  true.  When  she  was
away  from  home,  at  work,  she  sometimes  got  the  im-
pression of  seeing  her  mother  doing  something,  and  when
she  got  home  at  night  would  learn  that  her  mother  had
been  doing  that  thing  just  at  the  time  she  saw  her.
The  last  experience  of  the  kind  was  on  the  day  before
her  mother  died.  She  saw,  "  pictured  in  the  glass  panel
of  the  door,"  her  mother  lying  on  a  lounge  with  her
face  turned  towards  the  wall.  The  vision  was  repeated
three  times,  and  at  last  Doris  became  alarmed  and  went
home.  She  found  her  mother  in  the  position  foreseen  in
the  vision,  very  ill  and  half -conscious.  She  died  a  few
hours  later.

After  the  advent  of  Sick  Doris  the  Real  Doris  appears
to  have  lost  this  clairvoyant  faculty,  but  she  was  still
subject  to  auditory  and  visual  hallucinations.  On  one
occasion  she  said  she  was  sitting  in  the  hen-yard  holding
a  chicken,  looking  down  at  it.  She  saw  a  shadow,  looked
vip,  and  saw  her  dead  mother,  just  as  plainly  as  she  had
ever  seen  her,  dressed  in  a  calico  dress  which  she  wore
when  Doris  was  a  child  about  eight  years  old.  The
occurrence  of  this  vision  was  corroborated  by  Margaret
and  Sleeping  Margaret,  but,  as  Dr.  Prince  says,  "  of  course
this  isn't  evidence."  :

Sick  Doris  not  infrequently  during  her  first  year  had
a  hallucination  of  the  mother  standing  or  walking  at  her
right  side.  Sometimes  she  felt  a  touch,  or  she  became
otherwise  conscious  of  a  presence,  and  turned,  only  to
get  a  fleeting  glimpse.  Sleeping  Margaret  said  that
"  S.  D.  had  these  apparitions,  R.  D.  never.  S.  D.  never
had  seen  the  mother  living,  yet  she  saw  her  as  she
looked  in  her  house  wrapper.  Perhaps  it  was  from  M.
thinking  a  great  deal  about  the  mother."


Lxxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multi-pie  Personality.  67

One  clairvoyant  incident  in  which  S.  D.  was  the  per-
cipient is  recorded  in  some  detail.  "  (What  are  you
thinking  about  ? )  Something  I  would  like  to  ask  about
Adelaide.  (Well,  ask  it.)  But  it  is  silly  ...  I  would
like  to  find  out  if  she  was  looking  into  a  shop -window
between  one  and  two  o'clock  to-day.  I  imagined  she
was.  It  must  have  been  after  quarter  past  one.  She
was  dressed  in  blue  and  wore  a  turban.  Her  back  was
turned,  and  she  was  stooping  and  looking  at  something
in  a  dry-goods  store  window.  I  don't  know  what  it
was,  but  it  seems  as  if  it  were  something  like  a  cushion."

In  the  evening  Dr.  Prince  called  up  Adelaide  by  tele-
phone. "  (Were  you  out  between  1.15  and  2  tliis  after-
noon ?)  Yes.  (Where  chd  you  go  ?)  Let  me  see.
I  went  to  a  drug-store.  (How  were  you  dressed  ?)  In
a  blue  suit.  (Did  you  wear  a  turban  ?)  Yes.  .  .  .  (Did
you  look  intently  into  a  shop  window  ?)  Yes,  I  believe
I  did.  (What  Idnd  of  a  shop  ?)  A  dry-goods  store.
(Was  it  a  cushion  that  you  were  looking  at  ?)  I  believe
so, — yes."  On  the  following  day  Adelaide  was  seen  by
Dr.  Prince  and  made  a  statement  about  her  visit  to  the
drug-store.  On  the  way,  she  said,  she  had  stopped  and
examined  a  pillow-cushion  in  a  dry-goods  shop  window.
She  had  almost  forgotten  the  fact  when  Dr.  Prince  called
her  up,  but  afterwards  recalled  it  distinctly.

It  is  unfortmiate  that  corroboration  of  the  veridical
character  of  S.  D.'s  vision  was  obtained  in  response  to
so  many  leading  questions.  Dr.  Prince  says  he  had  to
ask  them  "  to  recall  so  trivial  an  incident  as  looking
into  the  shop-window."  But  even  so,  they  might  surely
have  been  worded  less  suggestively  than  "  Did  you  wear
a  turban  ?  "  "  Was  it  a  cushion  that  you  were  looking
at  ?  "  For  evidential  purposes  it  is  probably  better  to
fail  to  get  corroboration  at  all  than  to  get  it  in  such
a  way.

The  majority  of  the  supernormal  incidents  in  the  case
are  connected  with  Margaret.  She  is  the  only  one  who
showed  what  appears  to  have  been  genuine  telepathic
power.  One  of  the  best  examples  is  that  in  which  she
told  Dr. Prince  : "  You  wrote  to  a  man  named  Prince


68


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


to-day^ — to  Dr.  Prince.  .  .  .  You  wote  about  Doris.  .  .  .
You  asked  him  how  someone  was  getting  on."'  The  facts
were  that  Dr.  Prince  had,  that  afternoon,  without  acquaint-
ing anyone  with  his  intention,  written  to  Dr.  Morton
Prince  for  the  first  time.  He  wrote  chiefly  about  Doris.
He  did  not  ask  how  anyone  was  getting  on,  but  he  did
very  distinctly  debate  in  his  mind  whether  to  ask  him
if  Miss  Beauchamp  was  still  mentally  stable.  He  took
pains  to  make  it  impossible  that  anyone  should  see  him
write  either  the  letter  or  the  addi'ess  on  the  envelope,
mentioned  to  no  one  that  he  had  written,  and  while  alone
put  the  letter  where  no  one  could  possibly  get  at  it.

When  Margaret  made  announcements  of  this  kind  it
was  always  after  she  had  gazed  steadily,  with  a  look  of
interested  amusement,  into  Dr.  Prince's  eyes.  She
claimed  that  she  saw,  not  what  he  was  consciously
thinking  at  the  moment,  but  what  was  "  passing  like  a
parade  down  underneath."

On  another  occasion  Margaret,  who  had  been  kept  in
ignorance  of  the  existence  of  Sleeping  Margaret,  surprised
Dr.  Prince  hj  stating  that  she  knew  there  were  three
personahties,  and  that  Sleeping  Margaret  was  the  name
of  the  third  one.  She  said  she  saw  it  in  his  thoughts.
But  the  fact  that  this  knowledge  was  in  the  possession
of  S.  M.  robs  this  instance  of  all  evidential  value  so  far
as  telepathy  between  Margaret  and  Dr.  Prince  is  in
question.

An  example  of  what  used  to  be  called  '•  travelling
clairvoyance  "  is  recorded  of  Margaret.  She  had  claimed
that  she  could  leave  Doris  and  go  back  to  her  old  home
and  see  what  was  happening  there.  Dr.  Prince  asked
her  if  she  could  go  anywhere  else  and  she  said  she  could
"  if  Doris  knows  the  people."  So  Dr.  Prince  asked  her
to  go  to  the  house  of  a  Mr.  S. — "  the  first  house  after
a  big  one  on  the  left  "  in  a  certain  avenue.  When  she
"  came  back "  she  reported  :  "I  went  into  the  hall.  I
think  it  was  the  right  house,  the  second  from  Colorado
Avenue  on  the  left.  (Yes.)  I  only  saw  a  httle  girl,
going  through  the  hall.  Her  hair  was  cut  bobbed,  and
she  had  a  ribbon  on  one  side. I  could  see  into  the  dining


Lxxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  69

room,  and  saw  dishes  on  the  table.  There  was  no  one
else.  I  was  scared  and  did  not  go  into  any  other  part
of  the  house, — just  the  haU  where  the  little  girl  was.
(Was  there  any  food  on  the  table  ?) No,  just  dishes."

Next  day  Dr.  Prince  called  up  Mrs.  S.  and  ascertained
a  number  of  facts  which  were  favourable  to  the  view,
though  not  very  conclusive,  that  some  clairvoyant  faculty
had  been  in  operation.  One  of  these  facts  was  that
"  Marie  did  .  .  .  pass  through  that  haU  alone  at  just
about  the  time  of  M.'s  alleged  vision."  At  a  later  date
Margaret  declared  that  "  she  made  a  mistake  and  entered
the  wi'ong  house,  but  that  the  httle  girl  whom  she  saw
was  really  Marie  ;  that  she  had  seen  her  since  and
recognized  her."  Afterwards  Sleeping  Margaret  stoutly
affirmed  the  same.  Here  Dr.  Prince  leaves  the  matter.
He  seems  to  have  made  no  effort  to  find  out  if  Marie
had  passed  through  the  hall  of  this  second  house  about
the  time  of  M.'s  alleged  vision.  He  was  becoming  in-
clined to  accept  any  declaration  of  Sleeping  Margaret  as
good  evidence  which  needed  no  corroboration.

Although  Margaret  is  the  only  one  who  gives  good
evidence  of  possessing  supernormal  powers,  most  readers
of  the  record  will  come  away  from  it  with  the  impression
that  Sleeping  Margaret  is  the  source,  more  than  any  of
the  other  personahties,  of  the  supernormal  atmosphere
which  pervades  the  story  as  a  whole.  Yet  when  we  try
to  find  out  why  this  should  be  so,  we  find  it  difficult  to
explain.  Apart  from  the  claims  she  made,  towards  the
end,  as  to  her  own  nature  and  powers,  there  is  httle  in
the  record  to  suggest  that  she  needs  any  supernormal
explanation.  But  there  is  good  evidence  of  Dr.  Prince's
growing  behef  that  Sleeping  Margaret  was  something
supernatural,  and  this  behef  is  subtly  suggested  to  the
reader  throughout  hundreds  of  pages  of  a  very  engrossing
story.  In  the  end  one  is  almost  ready  to  beUeve,  with
Dr.  Prince,  that  Sleeping  Margaret  is  a  spirit.

When  she  first  began  to  talk  about  herself  Sleeping
Margaret  seemed  to  think  that  she  and  Margaret  were
in  some  sense  one,  and,  consequently,  that  when  Margaret
went  she  would  go  too  ; but  as  time  went  on  she  made


70


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


many  assertions  about  herself  which  are  incompatible
with  her  earlier  statements.  At  first  she  implied  that  there
was,  to  begin  with,  a  very  close  relation  between  herself
and  Margaret,  if,  indeed,  they  were  not  one  and  the
same  personality,  but  that  they  had  become  "  separated  "
after  Doris  came  to  live  with  Dr.  Prince.  Later  she
claimed  that  she  came  as  a  mature  personahty  when
Doris  was  three  years  old.  But  when  Dr.  Prince  asked
her  to  explain  how  she  could  have  come  from  baby
Doris  and  have  a  mature  mind,  all  she  could  say  in  reply
was,  "  Well,  Margaret  was  brighter  than  Real  Doris."
Her  new  claims  were  obviously  so  much  opposed  to  her
original  statements  that  she  seemed  embarrassed  when
the  question  of  her  own  origin  and  status  was  broached,
and  for  a  long  time  she  either  denied  knowledge  on
these  points  or  refused  to  discuss  them.

Dr.  Prince  was  greatly  puzzled  to  account  for  Sleeping
Margaret's  character  and  powers,  and  on  November  10th,
1911,  he  suggested  to  her  that  perhaps  she  was  a  spirit.
This  she  strenuously  denied,  and  she  persisted  in  her
denial  for  many  months.  During  the  first  period  of  his
investigation  of  the  case  Dr.  Prince  would  seem  to  have
had  no  partiality  towards  a  spiritistic  interpretation  of
any  of  the  phenomena.  But  in  September,  1911,  Dr.
Hj^slop  paid  him  a  visit  and  examined  Doris.  Prom  this
time  onward  Dr.  Prince's  attitude  appears  to  have  under-
gone a  gradual  change,  and  he  became  obviously  more
disposed  to  beUeve  that  Sleeping  Margaret  was  some
kind  of  spirit  possession.

This  change  in  Dr.  Prince's  attitude  may  not  have  been
without  effect  on  the  opinion  of  Sleeping  Margaret  herself.
In  her  early  references  to  her  own  going  she  did  not
appear  to  make  any  distinction  between  the  nature  of
her  own  final  disappearance  and  that  of  Margaret.  But
as  time  went  on  her  remarks  on  this  topic  were  con-
sonant with  Dr.  Prince's  growing  opinion  that  she  was  not
a  mere  secondary  personality  in  the  sense  that  Sick  Doris
and  Margaret  were.  In  June,  1913,  she  said  :  "  I  shall
go  a  day  or  two  before  Margaret  does.  ...  I  shall  be
in sight of her [R.  D.] after that until I know  that


Lxxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  71

she  is  safe.  ...  I  will  always  know  how  she  is  getting
on,  and  if  I  am  needed  I  shall  come  back."

Her  prediction  that  she  would  go  a  day  or  two  before
Margaret  did  was  not  fulfilled,  but,  she  said,  "  this  was
not  because  she  was  deceived  in  her  foresight,  but  because,
for  what  appeared  to  her  good  reasons,  she  changed  her
mind."  The  only  ostensible  reasons  for  her  remaining
after  Margaret's  departure  (April  19th,  1914)  were  that
Dr.  Prince  liked  her  to  come  and  desired  her  to  give
some  proof,  which  she  had  promised,  regarding  her  real
nature.

Although  in  1911  she  had  denied  that  she  was  a  spirit,
nevertheless  her  claims  regarding  her  own  nature  and
powers  became,  from  that  time  onwards,  more  and  more
consonant  with  such  a  belief.  She  maintained  that  when
she  chose  she  could  "  go  away,"  that  is,  leave  the  body
of  Doris,  and,  when  away,  she  said  she  was  attending
to  her  own  affairs.  Towards  the  end  her  occupation
when  away  was  said  to  be  the  preparation  of  the  "  proof  "
which  she  had  promised  regarding  her  own  nature.  This
proof,  so  often  promised,  never  came  ;  but  she  asserted
that  an  attempt  towards  it  had  been  made  in  the  course
of  some  experiments  in  automatic  writing  which  Dr.
Prince had  conducted  with  Doris.

Just  as  she  failed  to  give  the  proof,  so  also  she  failed
to  give  any  actual  demonstration  of  supernormal  powers.
She  did,  however,  take  credit  for  one  incident  which
greatly  impressed  Dr.  Prince.  One  night,  in  the  midst
of  a  graphic  and  interesting  dream,  there  was  suddenly
interjected  into  it  his  name,  "  Walter,"  thriUing  in  its
distinctness,  which  instantly  shattered  the  dream  and
woke  him.  Sleeping  Margaret  claimed  that  it  was  she
who  called  him.  She  said  she  had  been  practising  to
see  if  she  could  speak  while  Real  Doris  was  asleep  with-
out waking  her.  "  I  began,"  she  explained,  "  by  saying
'  Papa '  softly,  I  spoke  louder  and  louder  and  she  paid
no  attention,  then  I  said  '  Walter,'  because  that  is  a
good  round  word,  and  finally  I  spoke  it  loudly."  Dr.
Prince  could  not  understand  how  she  made  him  hear  at
such  a  distance  (25  ft.)  and  why  it  did  not  wake  Mrs.


72


T.  W.  Mitchell  M.D.


[part


Prince,  who  hears  much  better  than  he  does.  So  he
asks  :  "  Did  she  make  me  hear  by  normal  utterance,  or
did  she  speak  to  me  '  herself,'  as  she  some  time  ago
intimated  that  she  would  try  to  do — that  is,  not  through
Real  Doris's  hps  ?  "

Although  at  this  time  Sleeping  Margaret  does  not  seem
to  have  claimed  that  she  made  Dr.  Prince  hear  other-
wise than  "  through  the  ordinary  channels  of  sense,"
Dr.  Prince's  doubt  seems  to  have  found  congenial  soil
in  her  mind.  Some  months  later,  at  a  time  when  Dr.
Prince  was  pressing  her  for  "  the  proof,"  she  began  to
claim  that  on  various  occasions  she  had  tried,  unsuccess-
fully, to  make  him  hear  at  a  distance.  Then,  once  again,
Dr.  Prince  had  a  dream  spoilt  by  the  irruption  of  the
word  ■■  Walter,"  and  again  he  was  mystified  as  to  the
source  of  the  sound  which  woke  him.  He  canvasses  the
explanations  which  might  be  proposed  by  an  outsider.
These  are,  (1)  Mrs.  Prince  was  fooling  him,  (2)  Mrs.  Prince
spoke  his  name  in  her  sleep,  (3)  the  word  was  uttered
by  the  lips  of  the  girl  in  her  room  and  he  heard  it
where  he  lay.  (4)  the  girl,  in  normal  or  abnormal  state,
actually  came  to  his  side  and  uttered  the  word.  All
of  these  he  finds  good  grounds  for  rejecting,  although
if  the  word  was  really  uttered  by  anyone  his  third  hypo-
thesis would  seem  to  afford  the  most  likely  explanation.
Dr.  Prince's  slight  deafness,  and  the  40  feet  which  separated
him  from  the  sleeping  Doris,  are  more  than  counter-
balanced by  the  rapport  which  existed  between  them..
Unfortunately,  however,  for  the  whole  story,  Sleeping
Margaret  said  she  was  not  responsible  for  the  voice  on
this  occasion.

Unfortunately,  also.  Sleeping  Margaret  did  not  always
speak  the  truth.  Indeed,  this  failing  was  common  to
all  the  secondary  personalities  in  the  case.  Sick  Dorig
for  a  long  time  imposed  upon  Dr.  Prince  belief  in  her
hysteric  fabrication  that  she  had  a  diseased  hip,  and
tried  also  to  get  him  to  think  she  was  a  great  artist.
Margaret  was  often  detected  in  child-like  romancing,  but
she  could  not  help  giving  notice  of  her  inventive  moods  by
dancing  eyes  and  an  amused  manner. Sleeping  Margaret


Lxxix.] The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality.  73

at  first  made  statements  about  herself  which  are  at
variance  with  later  ones  and  was  sometimes  evasive  in
other  matters.  These  departures  from  the  truth  she  ex-
plained as  being  due  to  her  unwillingness  at  first  to  admit
her  true  nature  and  her  desire  to  shield  Real  Doris  when
she  thought  Dr.  Prince  was  getting  too  inquisitive.  Dr.
Prince  was  apparently  not  a  little  perturbed  by  the  men-
dacity of  his  secondary  foster-children,  and  he  is  never
tired  of  reiterating  that  Real  Doris  was  absolutely  truthful.

Some  time  in  August  1914  it  was  decided  that  Doris
should  go  to  New  York,  for  the  purpose  of  taking  part,
as  sitter,  in  some  experiments  which  Dr.  Hyslop  was
anxious  to  try  with  his  medium  Mrs.  Chenoweth.  On
August  25th,  in  response  to  a  request  from  Dr.  Prince
that  before  she  went  to  New  York  she  should  make
some  declaration  about  herself.  Sleeping  Margaret  made  a
statement  in  writing  in  which  she  definitely  claimed  that
she  was  a  spirit,  and  had  been  sent  by  some  one  liigher  to
guard  Doris  when  she  was  three  years  old.  When  she
had  finished  her  statement,  Sleeping  Margaret  said  :  "  There,
you  may  beHeve  as  much  of  that  as  you  like,  and  you
may  question  me  about  it  if  you  want  to."

With  the  visit  to  Nev/  York  the  story  of  Doris  Fischer
enters  upon  a  new  phase.  At  this  point  Dr.  Prince's
record  comes  to  an  end  and  Dr.  Hyslop  takes  up  the
tale.  The  atmosphere  now  is  frankly  spiritistic,  and
perhaps  only  those  who  have  had  personal  experience  of
such  phenomena  as  Dr.  Hyslop  records  are  justified  in
criticising  either  his  methods  or  his  conclusions.  These
are  far  removed  from  the  methods  and  conclusions  of
orthodox  science,  and  also  from  those  of  many  workers
in  Psychical  Research  whose  opinions  are  entitled  to
respectful  consideration.

Dr.  Hyslop's  contention  is  that  the  phenomena  of
secondary  personality  are  often  demonstrably  due  to  dis-
carnate  spirits.  He  admits  that  "  we  shall  have  first
to  prove  the  existence  of  spirits  in  order  to  apply  the
hypothesis  to  cases  of  secondary  personality  in  any  form
whatever."  But,  needless  to  say,  he  does  not  prove  the
existence of spirits. He assumes that this has  been


74


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


already  done.  He  says,  "  I  take  that  fact  as  adequately
proved  for  all  intelligent  people."  He  appeals  to  the
whole  cumulative  mass  of  facts  on  record,  and  he  dis-
misses telepathy  from  account  "  as  not  worth  serious
consideration  as  a  rival  of  spiritistic  theories."  The
adoption  of  such  an  attitude  in  the  present  state  of  our
knowledge  can  only  alienate  the  sympathies  of  many  who
are  ready  to  approach,  with  open  minds,  all  the  problems
of  Psychical  Research.


LXXix.] Psychological  Foundations  of  Belief  in  Spirits.  75


IV.

THE  PSYCHOLOGICAL  FOUNDATIONS  OF
BELIEF  IN  SPIRITS

By  C.  G.  Jxjng,  M.D.,  LL.D.

Read  at  a  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  on  July  4,  1919.

If  we  look  back  into  the  past  of  mankind,  we  find —
among  many  other  religious  convictions — a  universally
spread  belief  in  the  existence  of  phantoms  or  ethereal
beings  dwelling  in  the  neighbourhood  of  men,  and  influenc-
ing them  invisibly,  yet  verj^  powerfully.  These  beings
are  frequently  supposed  to  be  the  spirits,  or  souls,  of
the  dead.  This  belief  is  to  be  met  with  among  most  highly
civilized  men,  as  well  as  among  Australian  negroes  who
are  still  living  at  the  level  of  the  palaeolithic  age.  Among
Western  peoples,  however,  belief  in  the  influence  of
spirits  has  been  counteracted  by  the  development  of
natural  science  and  inteUectual  criticism  during  the  last
150  years,  so  that  among  the  educated  of  to-day  it
has  been  almost  completely  suppressed  together  with
other  ultra-scientific  convictions.

But  just  as  these  latter  beliefs  still  exist  among  the
masses,  belief  in  spirits  also  is  far  from  being  entirely
extinguished.  The  "  haunted  house,"  for  instance,  has
not  yet  disappeared  from  the  most  business-like  or  intellec-
tual cities,  nor  has  the  peasant  yet  ceased  to  believe
in  the  bewitching  of  his  cattle.  On  the  contrary,  a
recrudescence  of  belief  in  spirits  occurred  even  in  an
age  of  materialism,  which  is  the  inevitable  consequence
of  intellectual  enlightenment.  It  was  not  a  recrudescence
of  obscure  superstitions,  but  of  an  interest  in  its  essence


76  C.  G.  Jung,  M.D.,  LL.D.  [part  '

scientific, an intense desire to direct the searchlight of  '
truth on to the dark chaos of facts. The illustrious  '
names of Myers, Sidgwick, Gurney, Wallace, Crookes,  ^
Zoellner  and  many  other  prominent  men, are  associated  '
with the rebirth and the rehabilitation of the ancient  i  '
belief  in  spirits. Even  if  the  real  nature  of  the  observed  '
facts  be  disputed,  even  if  the  explorers  may  be  accused  [
of errors, and sometimes of self-deception, there still  '
belongs to them the immortal merit of having  thrown
the  whole  of  their  authority  on  to  the  side  of  non-material
facts,  regardless  of  public disapproval. They  faced  aca-
demic prejudices, and did not shrink from the cheap  j
derision  of  their  contemporaries  ; even at a time when  |
the intellect of  the educated  classes was spellbound by  i
the  new  dogma  of  materialism,  they  dvevi  public  attention  'i
to  phenomena  of  an  irrational  nature,  contrary-  to  accepted
convictions.

These men typify the reaction of the human  mind
against the senseless and desolating materialistic  view.
Considered  from the standpoint of  history it is not  to
be wondered at that so-called "  spiritual  "  phenomena
should be used as an efficient weapon against  the
mere testimony of the senses, because belief in  spirits
has always been a defence  against mere sensationalism.  I
This  is  the  case  with  the  primitive  man,  whose  complete
dependence upon nature makes concrete  circumstance
of  the  greatest  importance  for  him. One  must  remember
the manifold distresses and needs of his life,  placed
amongst hostile neighbours and dangerous animals,  and
often  harrowed  by  a  merciless  nature. His  keen  senses,
his cupidity, his  deficient  self-control,  all  expose him to  i
adverse experiences. Hence he is always in  danger
of  losing  that  mystic  and  supernatural  something  which
alone  makes  man  a  man. But  his  belief  in  spirits,  or
rather in the spiritual, delivers him from the  fetters
of  a  merely  tangible  and  visible  world  again  and  again.
It is this irrational function that forces on him  the  l
certainty of spiritual reality, whose laws and  demands
are to be followed as carefully and as  conscientiously
as those relating to physical nature. Primitive  man


1


Lxxix.] Psychological  Foundations  of  Belief  in  Spirits.  11

really  lives  in  two  worlds.  This  concrete  world  is  for
him  at  the  same  time  a  spiritual  world.  The  objective
world  is  undeniable,  and  for  him  the  spiritual  world  has
an  equally  positive  existence.  This  is  not  only  his
opinion,  but  rather  a  naive  perception  of  spiritual  pheno-
mena, projected  from  his  unconscious  on  to  the  concrete
object.  Wherever  such  naivete  is  lost  through  the  dis-
illusioning touch  of  contact  with  Western  civilization
and  its  disastrous  "  enlightenment,"  then  also  his  feelings
of  awe  in  relation  to  the  spiritual  law  disappear,  and
consequently  he  degenerates.  Even  Christianity  cannot
save  him  from  degeneration,  because  in  order  to  have
a  beneficial  effect  on  man,  such  a  highly  developed
religion  demands  a  highly  dilierentiated  psyche.

Thus  "  spiritual  "  phenomena  are  for  the  primitive  an
immediate  experience  of  an  ideal  or  spiritual  reality.

If  it  be  asked,  what  are  primitive  "  spirit  "  phenomena,
we  may  answer  that  the  seeing  of  apfaritions  is  the
most  frequent  phenomenon.  It  is  generally  assumed
that  this  seeing  of  apparitions  is  commoner  among  primi-
tives than  among  civilized  people,  and  that  it  is  due
to  nothing  but  superstition.  It  is  generally  held  that
educated  people  do  not  have  such  visions,  unless  they
are  iU.  It  is  quite  certain  that  civilized  man  makes
use  of  the  hypothesis  of  spirits  incomparably  less
frequently  than  the  primitive.  In  my  view,  however,
and  according  to  my  experience  as  a  physician,  the
psychological  phenomenon  which  the  primitive  attributes
to  a  spirit  is  quite  as  common  among  civilized  men.
The  only  difference  is  that  where  a  primitive  speaks
of  ghosts,  the  European  speaks  of  dreams  and  phantasies
and  neurotic  symptoms,  and  attributes  less  importance
to  them  than  the  primitive  does.  He  gives  them  too
little  weight,  and  on  account  of  this  undervaluation  the
European  regards  many  things  as  morbid  which,  under
another  aspect,  would  be  highly  interesting  and  highly
important.  Therefore,  owing  to  this  rationalizing,  what
are  living  entities  for  the  primitive  become  for  him
morbid  symptoms.  Men's  perceptions  are  the  same  as
they  always  were, but  we  interpret  them  in  a  different


78


C.  G.  Jung,  M.D.,  LL.D.


[part


way,  and  the  modern  way  enfeebles  them,  making  an
incomprehensible  illness  of  them.  But  the  psychological
fact  in  itself  is  not  invalidated  by  a  modern  interpretation.
If,  indeed,  a  highly  civilized  and  enlightened  European
IS  obliged  to  live  in  primitive  conditions  for  a  long  time,
it  often  happens  that  he  has  some  unusual  experiences
which  defy  a  rationalistic  interpretation.

One  of  the  essential  determinants  of  belief  in  spirits
IS  the  dream.  Persons  appear  in  most  dreams,  and  the
primitive  believes  them  to  be  spirits  or  souls.  The  dream
has  for  him  an  incomparably  higher  value  than  for  a
civiUzed  man.  He  is  usually  a  good  deal  taken  up  with
his  dreams  ;  he  talks  much  of  them  and  attributes  an
extraordinary  importance  to  them.  When  he  talks  of
his  dreams  he  is  frequently  unable  to  discriminate  between
them  and  actual  facts.  They  are  quite  real  to  him.  A
competent  explorer  of  primitive  psychology  says  :  "  Le
reve  est  le  vrai  dieu  des  primitifs."  To  the  civiKzed
man  as  a  rule  dreams  appear  to  be  valueless  ;  yet  there
are  some  individuals  who  attribute  a  high  importance  to
them,  at  least  to  particularly  weird  and  impressive  dreams.
Such  impressive  dreams  make  one  understand  why  the
primitive  should  suppose  them  to  be  inspirations.  It
IS  of  the  essence  of  an  inspiration  that  there  must  be
something  that  inspires,  a  spirit  or  a  ghost,  although
the  modern  mind  would  not  draw  such  a  conclusion.
The  appearance  of  the  dead  in  a  dream  seems  a  par-
ticularly strong  argument  for  the  primitive  belief  in
spirits.

Further  grounds  for  belief  in  spirits  are  found  in  psycho-
genic nervous  diseases,  especially  those  of  a  hysterical
character,  which  are  not  rare  among  primitives.  As
such  troubles  arise  out  of  psychological  conflicts,  mostly
of  an  unconscious  order,  they  appear  to  the  naive  mentality  .1
as  if  caused  by  certain  persons,  living  or  dead,  who  are
in  some  way  connected  with  the  individual's  conflict.  If
the  person  is  dead,  the  assumption  that  his  spirit  is
persecuting  the  living  is  easily  arrived  at.  As  the  origin
of  pathogenic  conflicts  frequently  goes  back  to  early
childhood  and  is  connected  with  memories  of  the  parents,


LXXix.] Psychological  Foundations  of  Belief  in  Spirits.  79

it  naturally  follows  that  the  spirits  of  relatives  are  par-
ticularly revered  or  feared  by  primitives  ;  hence  ancestor
worship  is  universally  spread.  Worship  of  the  dead,
in  the  first  place,  is  undertaken  as  a  protection  against
their  malevolence.  Experience  in  the  psychological  treat-
ment of  nervous  patients  shows  again  and  again  how
great  the  influence  of  the  parents  is,  even  when  they
have  been  long  dead.  The  psychological  after-effects
of  the  parents  are  so  important  for  an  individual's  fate
that  one  can  easily  understand  the  significance  of  ancestor
worship.

Mental  diseases  have  also  great  influence  in  causing
belief  in  spirits,  particularly  those  which  are  accompanied
by  hallucinations,  either  of  a  delirious  or  katatonic  char-
acter, belonging  chiefly  to  the  Dementia  Praecox  class,
which  is  the  commonest  form  of  mental  disorder.  Always
and  everywhere  insane  persons  have  been  regarded  as
possessed  by  evil  spirits,  and  this  belief  is  supported  by
the  patients'  hallucinations.  The  patients  are  less  tor-
mented by  their  visions  than  by  the  voices  they
hear.  The  voices  are  often  those  of  relatives  or  at  least
of  people  connected  with  the  patient's  psychological
conflicts.  It  is  also  fairly  common  to  hear  the  voice
of  God  or  of  the  devil.  It  appears,  of  course,  to  the
naive  mentality  that  such  voices  come  from  spirits.

When  speaking  of  belief  in  spirits  of  the  dead  reference
must  also  be  made  to  belief  in  souls  of  the  living,  the
latter  belief  being  a  correlate  of  the  former.  In  the
primitive  conviction  the  ghost  is  generally  the  spirit
of  a  dead  person,  hence  it  must  before  have  been  the
soul  of  a  living  person.  This  at  least  is  held  where
the  belief  that  man  has  only  one  soul  prevails.  But
man  is  frequently  supposed  to  have  two  or  more  souls,
one  of  which  is  more  or  less  independent  and  relatively
immortal.  In  such  a  case  the  "  spirit  "  of  the  dead
is  only  one  of  the  several  "  souls  "  of  the  living.  Hence
it  is  only  a  part  of  the  psyche, — a  psychical  fragment,
as  it  were.  Thus  belief  in  souls  is  an  almost  necessar}''
condition  of  belief  in  spirits,  at  least  so  far  as  the  spirits
of  the  dead  are  concerned. The  primitive  is  convinced


80


C.  G.  Jung,  M.D.,  LL.D.


[part


that  there  are  not  only  such  spirits,  but  also  elementary
demons,  who  are  not  believed  to  have  ever  been  human
souls  or  psychical  fragments  of  them.  I

Before  discussing  the  grounds  for  belief  in  souls  I
wish  to  sum  up  the  facts  already  mentioned.  I  have
pointed  out  three  main  sources  of  the  belief  in  spirits
which  are  accessible  to  science  :  viz.  the  seeing  of  appari-
tions, the  phenomenon  of  the  dream,  and  the  pathological
disorders  of  the  psyche.

The  commonest  of  these  grounds  of  belief  is  the  dream.
What  does  modern  science  know  of  the  dream  ?  A
dream  is  a  psychological  product  originating  in  the  sleeping
state  without  conscious  motivation.  In  a  dream  con-
sciousness is  neither  fully  awake  nor  fully  extinguished  ;
there  is  still  a  small  amount  of  consciousness.  There  is,
for  instance,  nearly  always  some  consciousness  of  the  ego,
but  rarely  of  the  ego  as  it  appears  to  a  consciousness
iully  awake.  It  is  rather  a  limited  ego,  sometimes
peculiarly  transformed  or  distorted.  The  dream-ego  is,
as  a  rule,  a  mere  fragment  of  the  conscious  ego.  The
ego  is  a  psychic  complex  of  a  particularly  solid  kind.
As  sleep  is  seldom  dreamless,  we  may  assume  that  the
complex  of  the  ego  rarely  ceases  to  be  active.  Its
activity  is  but  restricted  by  sleep.  The  psychic  contents
of  the  dream  appear  to  the  ego  just  like  those  external
phenomena  which  appear  to  it  in  the  waking  state.  Hence
it  happens  that  we  find  ourselves  in  situations  like  those
in  real  life,  but  rarely  exercise  thought  or  reason  about
them.  As  in  our  waking  state  things  and  human  beings
enter  our  field  of  vision,  so  in  the  dream,  psychic  contents,
images  of  different  kinds  enter  the  field  of  consciousness
of  the  dream-ego.  We  do  not  feel  as  if  we  were  pro-
ducing the  dreams,  but  rather  as  if  they  came  to  us.
They  do  not  submit  to  our  direction,  but  obey  their
own  laws.  Obviously  they  are  autonomous  complexes,
which  form  themselves  by  their  own  methods.  Their
motivation  is  unconscious.  We  may  therefore  say  that
they  come  from  the  unconscious.  Thus,  we  must  admit
the  existence  of  independent  psychic  complexes,  escaping
the  control  of  our  consciousness  and  appearing  and  dis-


Lxxix.] Psychological  Foundations  of  Belief  in  Spirits.  81

appearing  according  to  their  own  laws.  From  our  waking
experience  we  are  convinced  that  we  produce  our  thoughts
and  that  we  can  produce  them  when  we  wish.  We  also
think  we  know  where  our  thoughts  come  from,  and  why,
and  to  what  end  we  have  them.  If  it  should  happen
that  a  thought  takes  possession  of  us  against  our  will,
or  if  it  unexpectedly  disappears  against  our  will,  we  feel
as  if  something  exceptional  or  morbid  had  happened.  It  seems
as  if  the  difference  between  the  waking  and  the  sleeping
states  were  extraordinary.  In  the  waking  state  the
psyche  is  apparently  controlled  by  our  conscious  motivation,
but  in  the  sleeping  state  it  seems  to  produce  strange  and
incomprehensible  ideas,  which  force  themselves  on  us
sometimes  quite  against  our  intention.

Similarly  the  vision  comes  like  a  dream,  but  in  the
waking  f.tate.  It  enters  consciousness  concurrently  with
the  perception  of  real  objects,  being  an  emergence  of  un-
conscious ideas  into  the  continuity  of  consciousness.

The  same  phenomenon  takes  place  in  mental  disease.
The  ear  does  not  only  perceive  the  vibrations  of  sound,
but  it  also  seems  to  hear  thoughts,  which  are  not  the
immediate  contents  of  the  conscious  mind.^  Besides
the  judgments  made  by  intellect  and  feeling,  opinions  and
convictions  arise  forcing  themselves  upon  the  individual,
apparently  based  upon  perceptions,  but  in  reality  derived
from  unconscious  ideas. Such  are  delusions.

These  t5rpes  of  phenomena, — dreams,  waking  visions
and  mental  disease, — depend  on  the  fact  that  the  psyche
as  a  whole  is  not  an  indivisible  unity,  but  a  more  or
less  divided  totality.  Although  the  separate  parts  are
connected  with  each  other,  they  yet  are  relatively  inde-
pendent of  each  other.  Their  independence  extends  so
far  that  certain  of  the  psychic  fragments  are  very  rarely,
or  perhaps  never,  associated  with  the  ego.  I  have
called  those  fragments  autonomous  complexes,  and  I
founded  my  theory  of  complexes  upon  their  empirical
existence.  According  to  this  theory  the  ego-complex
forms the centre of our individuality. But the  ego-

^  There  are  also  some  exceptional  cases  where  the  voices  loudly
repeat  the  conscious  thoughts  of  the  individual.


82


C.  G.  Jung,  M.D.,  LL.D.


[part


complex  is  but  one  among  several  complexes.  The  other
complexes  are  more  or  less  associated  with  the  ego-
complex  and  thus  far  they  are  conscious.  But  they  also
can  exist  for  some  time  without  being  associated  with
the  ego-complex.

A  striking  and  well-known  example  thereof  is  the
conversion  of  St.  Paul.  Although  the  moment  of  a  con-
version seems  sometimes  qiiite  sudden  and  unexpected,  yet
we  know  from  repeated  experience  that  such  a  fundamental
occurrence  always  has  a  long  period  of  unconscious
incubation.  It  is  only  when  the  preparation  is  complete,
that  is  to  say,  when  the  individual  is  ready  to  be  con-
verted, that  the  new  view  breaks  forth  with  great  emotion.
St.  Paul  had  already  been  a  Christian  for  a  long  time,
but  unconsciously  ;  hence  his  fanatical  resistance  to  the
Christians,  because  fanaticism  exists  chiefly  in  individuals
who  are  compensating  for  secret  doubts.  The  incident  of
his  hearing  the  voice  of  Christ  on  his  way  to  Damascus
marks  the  moment  when  the  unconscious  complex  of
Christianity  became  conscious.  That  the  auditory  pheno-
menon should  represent  Christ  is  explained  by  the  already
existing  unconscious  Christian  complex.  The  complex,
being  unconscious,  was  projected  by  St.  Paul  on  to  the
external  world  as  if  it  did  not  belong  to  him.  Unable
to  conceive  of  himself  as  a  Christian,  and  on  account  of
his  resistance  to  Christ,  he  became  blind,  and  could
only  regain  his  sight  through  submission  to  a  Christian,
that  is  to  say,  through  his  complete  submission  to  Chris-
tianity. Psychogenic  blindness  is,  according  to  my  ex-
perience, always  due  to  an  unwillingness  to  see,  i.e.
to  understand  and  to  accept,  what  is  incompatible  with
the  conscious  attitude.  This  was  obviously  the  case  with
St.  Paul.  His  unwillingness  to  see  corresiDonds  with  his
fanatical  resistance  to  Christianity.  This  resistance  was
never  wholly  extinguished,  a  fact  of  which  we  have  proof
in  the  epistles.  It  broke  forth  at  times  in  the  fits  he
suffered  from.  It  is  certainly  a  great  mistake  to  call
his  fits  epileptic.  There  is  no  trace  of  epilepsy  in  them,
on  the  contrary,  St  Paul  himself  in  his  epistles  gives
hints  enough  as  to  the  real  nature  of  the  illness.  They


Lxxix.] Psychological  Foundations  of  Belief  in  Spirits.  83

are  clearly  psychogenic  fits,  which  really  mean  a  return
of  the  old  Saul-complex,  repressed  through  conversion,
in  the  same  way  as  there  had  previously  been  a  repression
of  the  complex  of  Christianity.

Science  does  not  allow  us  consistently  with  intellectual
honesty  to  explain  the  case  of  St.  Paul  on  supernatural
grounds.  We  should  be  compelled  to  do  the  same  with
many  similar  cases  within  our  medical  experience,  which
would  lead  to  conclusions  antagonistic  both  to  our  reason
and  feeling.

Autonomous  complexes  appear  in  dreams  and  visions,
in  pathological  hallucinations  and  delusions.  Being  strange
to  the  ego  they  always  appear  as  if  externalized.  In
dreams,  they  are  often  represented  as  other  persons  ;
in  visions,  they  are  visibly  projected  into  space  ;  the
same  is  the  case  with  voices  in  insane  people,  in  so  far
as  they  are  not  ascribed  to  persons  in  the  patients'
surroundings.  Ideas  of  persecution  are  very  often  as-
sociated with  persons  to  whom  the  patient  attributes
the  qualities  of  certain  of  his  unconscious  complexes.
The  patient  feels  these  persons  to  be  hostile  because
his  ego  is  hostile  to  the  unconscious  complex,  just  as
Saul  resented  the  complex  of  Christianity  which  he  could
not  acknowledge.  He  persecuted  the  Christians  as  repre-
sentatives  of  his unconscious  complex.

"  Spirits,"  viewed  from  this  standpoint,  are  unconscious,
autonomous  complexes  which  appear  as  projections  because
they  are  not  associated  with  the  ego.

I  mentioned  before  that  belief  in  souls  of  the  living
is  a  logical  correlate  of  belief  in  spirits  of  the  dead.
Whilst  spirits  are  felt  to  be  strange  and  incompatible
with  the  ego,  souls  seem  to  belong  to  it.  The  primitive
feels  the  proximity  or  the  influence  of  the  spirit  as  some-
thing disagreeable  or  dangerous  or  uncanny,  and  he  is
much  easier  in  his  mind  when  the  spirit  is  banished.  It
is  otherwise  with  the  loss  of  a  soul,  which  feels  to  him
like  an  iUness,  and  he  may  also  attribute  physical  illness
to  the  loss  of  a  soul.  Children  may  not  be  beaten,
because  their  souls,  if  outraged,  might  withdraw  from
them. So the soul is something that seems  normally


84


C.  G.  Ju7ig,  M.D.,  LL.D.


[part


to  belong  to  a  man,  but  the  spirits  seem  to  be  some-
thing that  normally  should  not  be  near  him.  He  avoids
visiting  "  haunted "  places  and  touching  things  supposed
to  be  inhabited  by  spirits,  unless  he  is  doing  so  for  pur-
poses of  magic.

The  plurality  of  souls  is  a  plurality  of  relatively
autonomous  complexes  like  the  plurality  of  spirits.  The
soul  complexes  seem  to  belong  to  the  ego  and  the  loss
of  them  appears  morbid  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  spirit
complexes  ought  to  be  separate  from  the  ego.  Their
association  v/ith  it  means  illness,  and  their  dissociation
from  it  means  healing.  Thus  primitive  pathology  knows
two  causes  of  illness,  namely,  the  loss  of  a  soul  and  the
possession  by  a  spirit.  According  to  these  primitive  beliefs
we  may  postulate  the  existence  of  certain  unconscious
complexes  which  normally  belong  to  the  ego,  and  certain
others  which  normally  do  not  belong  to  it,  i.e.  which  ought
to  remain  wholly  unconscious.  The  former  are  the  soul
complexes,  the  latter  the  spirit  complexes.

This  discrimination,  current  among  primitives,  corre-
sponds exactly  to  my  theory  of  the  unconscious.  Ac-
cording to  my  view,  the  unconscious  is  divided  into  two
spheres.  One  of  these  is  what  I  call  the  ■personal  un-
conscious. It  includes  all  those  psychic  contents  which
are  forgotten  during  the  course  of  life.  Their  traces
still  exist  in  the  unconscious,  even  if  their  conscious
reproduction  has  become  impossible.  Moreover,  the
personal  unconscious  contains  all  those  subliminal  im-
pressions or  perceptions  which  have  too  little  energy  to
reach  consciousness.  The  unconscious  combinations  of
representations  belong  thereto,  in  so  far  as  they  are  too
feeble  and  indistinct  to  become  conscious.  Finally,  the
personal  unconscious  includes  all  psychic  contents  which
are  incompatible  with  the  conscious  attitude.  As  a  rule
this  involves  a  whole  group  of  psychic  contents.  These
contents  appear  to  be  inadmissible  above  all  on  account  of
their  moral,  aesthetic,  or  intellectual  deficiency.  A  man
cannot  always  feel  and  think  in  a  beautiful,  good  and
true  way,  and  in  trying  to  keep  up  an  ideal  attitude
everything inconvenient is automatically repressed.  If


Lxxix.] Psychological  Foundations  of  Belief  in  Spirits.  85

one  function,  for  instance  thought,  is  especially  developed
and  is  dominating  the  conscious,  then  the  function  of
feeling  is  naturally  repressed  and  falls  therefore  into  the
unconscious.

The  other  part  of  the  unconscious  is  the  super-personal
or  collective  unconscious.  The  contents  of  the  collective
unconscious  are  not  personal  but  collective  ;  i.e.,  they  do
not  appertain  to  one  individual  only,  but  at  least  to  a  group
of  individuals  and  as  a  rule  to  a  whole  nation,  and
finally  to  the  whole  of  mankind.  The  contents  of  the
collective  unconscious  are  not  acquired  during  an
individual's  life,  but  are  congenital  instincts  and
primordial  forms  of  apprehension,  the  so-called  archetypes
or  ideas.  Although  the  child  possesses  no  congenital
representations,  it  yet  possesses  a  highly  developed  brain
with  possibilities  of  functioning  in  a  definite  way.  The
brain  is  an  ancestral  inheritance.  It  is  the  organic  result
of  the  psychic  and  nervous  function  of  the  whole  ancestry
of  man.  Thus  the  child  brings  into  life  with  him  an
organ  read}^  to  function  in  the  same  way  that  it  has
functioned  through  all  previous  ages.  There  in  the  brain
are  the  pre-formed  instincts  and  also  the  primordial
types  or  images,  the  foundations  upon  which  mankind  has
always  formed  his  thought  and  feeling,  which  includes  the
whole  wealth  of  mythological  motives.  It  is,  of  course,
not  easy  to  prove  the  existence  in  a  normal  man  of  the
collective  unconscious,  but  there  are  obvious  traces  of
mythological  images,  at  least  in  his  dreams.  The  existence
of  a  collective  unconscious  is  more  easily  disclosed  in
certain  cases  of  mental  derangement,  especially  in  Dementia
praecox.  There  one  sometimes  meets  with  an  astonishing-
development  of  mythological  imagery.  Certain  patients
develop  symbolic  ideas  which  can  never  be  accounted
for  by  the  experience  of  their  individual  life,  but  only
by  the  history  of  the  human  mind.  What  is  displayed
is  a  sort  of  primitive  mythological  thinking  producing  its
own  primordial  forms  unlike  normal  thinking,  which
makes  use  of  personal  experience.

The  personal  unconscious  contains  complexes  belonging
to the individual which form an indispensable part  of


86


C.  G.  Jung,  M.D.,  LL.D.


[part


bis  ps3^chic  life.  When  any  complexes  which  ought  to
be  associated  with  the  ego  become  unconscious,  either  by
repression,  or  by  decrease  of  their  potentiality,  the  indi-
vidual has  a  feeling  of  loss  ;  when  a  lost  complex  again
becomes  conscious,  for  instance  by  psychotherapeutic  meas-
ures, he  experiences  an  increase  of  psychic  energy.  The
cure  of  neurosis  is  often  effected  in  this  way.

When,  on  the  contrary,  a  complex  of  the  collective
unconscious  associates  itself  with  the  ego,  the  individual
is  impressed  by  the  strangeness  of  these  contents.  They
are  felt  to  be  uncanny,  supernatural  and  often  dangerous.
They  may  sometimes  be  felt  as  helpful  interventions  of
supernatural  powers,  but  more  often  as  injurious  influences
of  a  morbid  nature,  and  these  result  in  actvial  physical
illness,  or  psychic  alienation  from  normal  life.  An
individual's  consciousness  is  always  altered  by  the  associa-
tion of  contents  which  ought  normally  to  remain  unconsci-
ous. If  the  physician  succeeds  in  removing  such  a
morbid  association  from  consciousness,  the  patient  feels
as  if  relieved  from  a  burden.  The  sudden  intrusion  of
such  strange  contents  often  takes  place  in  the  early
stages  of  Dementia  praecox.  Patients  encounter  queer
thoughts,  the  world  seems  changed,  people  appear  to  have
strange  and  distorted  faces,  etc.

While  the  contents  of  the  personal  unconscious  are  felt
to  belong  to  one's  own  psyche,  the  contents  of  the  collec-
tive unconscious  appear  to  be  strange  to  one's  own
psyche,  as  if  they  came  from  outside.  The  reintegration
of  a  personal  complex  has  the  effect  of  relieving  and  often
of  healing  ;  whereas  the  intrusion  of  a  complex  of  the
collective  unconscious  is  a  disagreeable  and  even  dangerous
phenomenon.  It  appears  to  have  a  supernatural  quality  ;
in  other  words,  it  is  accompanied  by  a  feeling  of  awe.

The  parallelism  of  this  theory  with  the  primitive  belief
in  souls  and  spirits  is  clear.  Souls  correspond  to  the
complexes  of  the  personal  unconscious,  and  spirits  to  those
of  the  collective  unconscious.  The  scientific  standpoint
gives  the  prose  of  the  matter  when  it  calls  the  awful
and  revered  beings  that  inhabit  the  shadows  of  the
primaeval  forests "  psychological  complexes." But  if  we


Lxxix.] Psychological  Foimdations  of  Belief  in  Spirits.  87

consider  the  extraordinary  role  played  by  belief  in  souls
and  spirits  in  the  history  of  mankind,  we  cannot  be
content  with  the  mere  statement  of  the  existence  of  such
complexes;  we  must  study  the  nature  of  these  complexes
further.

The  existence of  complexes  is easily demonstrated  by
means of the association experiment. This  experiment
consists in a very simple procedure: the  experimenter
caUs  out  a  word  to  the  test-person  and  the  test-person
immediately  replies  with  the  next  association  coming  into
his  mind. The  reaction-time,  i.e.  the  lapse  of  time  be-
tween the  stimulus  word  and  the  reply,  is  measured  by
a  stop-watch. One  would  expect  all  simple  words  to  be
followed  by  an  equally  short  reaction-time,  and  all  difficult
or  rare  words  to  cause  a  prolonged  reaction-time.  But
as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  reaction-times  differ  far  less  on
this  than  on  other  accounts. Some  very  long  reaction-
times  are  unexpectedly  produced  by  very  simple  stimulus
words,  and  in  the  same  case  there  may  be  no  delay  m
replying to quite unusual stimulus words.  Through
careful examination of the test-person's  individual  psy-
chology, I  discovered  that  a  prolongation  of  the  reaction-
time  is  usually  due  to  interference  by  a  feehng  associated
with  the  stimulus  word  or  with  the  reply. The  feehng
itself always depends upon the fact that the  stimulus
word  has  struck  a  complex. Prolongation  of  the  reaction-
time  is  not  the  only  symptom  that  discloses  the  existence
of  a  complex. There  are  many  others  which  I  cannot
now  enumerate.

The  complexes  revealed  by  means  of  the  association
experiment  usually  concern  things  which  the  test-person
would  prefer  to  keep  secret;  often  things  of  a  painful
nature,  of  whose  very  existence  he  is  unconscious.  When
a  stimulus  word  strikes  a  complex,  the  test-person  may
have  no  associations  at  all,  or  a  super-abundant  supply
of  them,  so  that  choice  is  momentarily  impossible.  Hence
we  see  that  disturbed  reactions  are  indicated  in  many
ways  other  than  by  a  prolongation  of  time.  Moreover,
if,  having  completed  the  series  of  tests,  we  ask  the  test-
person  to  repeat  the  answers  he  gave,  we  find  that  the


88


C.  G.  Jung,  M.D.,  LL.D.


[part


normal  reactions  are  remembered,  while  those  connected
with  the  complex  are  easily  forgotten.

The  properties  of  the  autonomous  complex  can  be
summed  up  from  these  facts.  The  complex  creates  a
disturbance  of  mental  reaction  ;  it  delays  or  distorts  the
reply  ;  it  produces  an  inconvenient  reaction,  or  it  sup-
^)resses  the  memory  of  the  former  reply.  It  interferes
with  the  conscious  and  interrupts  our  intentions  ;  therefore
we  call  it  autonomous.  When  we  try  the  experiment  on
a  neurotic  or  insane  person,  we  discover  that  the  com-
plexes disturbing  the  reactions  belong  in  fact  to  the
main  content  of  the  psychic  derangement.  These  com-
plexes not  only  disturb  the  experimental  reactions,  but
are  also  determinants  of  the  morbid  symptoms.  I  have
examined  cases  where  the  test-person  replied  to  specific
stimulus  words  with  incoherent  and  apparently  meaningless
words,  breaking  out  against  his  conscious  intention,  as
if  a  strange  being  had  spoken  through  him.  Such  words
belong  to  the  unconscious  complex.  Complexes  when
excited  by  external  stimuli  can  produce  sudden  confusion,
or  violent  emotion,  depression,  anxiety-states  and  all
sorts  of  mental  disturbances.  Complexes  behave  just
like  independent  beings,  so  that  the  primitive  theory  of
spirits  seems  an  excellent  formulation  for  them.

We  may  carry  this  parallel  further.  Certain  complexes
arise  on  account  of  painful  experiences  in  a  person's  life,
causing  psychic  wounds  which  may  not  heal  for  years.
It  often  happens  that  a  painful  experience  suppresses
certain  vital  qualities  in  an  individual.  Then  a  personal
unconscious  complex  is  originated.  The  primitive  might
appropriately  regard  it  as  the  loss  of  a  soul,  for  indeed
certain  parts  of  the  psyche  have  disappeared.  A  great
number  of  complexes  arise  in  such  a  way.

But  there  is  another  no  less  important  source  of  com-
plexes, and  while  the  one  just  described  is  easily  com-
prehensible, since  it  concerns  the  conscious  life,  the  other
is  obscure  and  difficult  to  understand,  since  it  has  to  do
with  perceptions  and  impressions  of  the  collective  uncon-
scious. Usually  the  individual  does  not  realize  that  such
perceptions are derived from the unconscious  ;  rather.


Lxxix.] Psychological  Foundations  of  Belief  in  Spirits.  89

it  seems  to  him  as  if  they  were  due  to  external  and
concrete  facts.  He  thus  rationahzes  internal  impressions
of  an  unknown  nature.  But  they  are  really  irrational
and  ideal  contents  of  his  own  mind,  of  which  he  was
never  before  conscious  ;  they  are  not  due  to  any  of  his
external  experiences.  Primitive  language  expresses  such
facts  not  inaptly  when  it  describes  them  as  invisible
ghosts  approaching  man  from  the  other  side,  namelj^  from
the  world  of  shadows.  It  seems  to  me  that  impressions  of
this  kind  arise  v/hen  grave  external  occurrences  shake
the  individual  to  his  very  foundations,  so  that  his  whole
previous  attitude  breaks  down,  or  when  certain  contents
of  the  collective  unconscious  obtain  such  an  access  of
energy  that  they  are  able  to  influence  the  conscious.

This  may  also  take  place  when  the  life  of  a  nation  or
of  a  large  group  of  human  society  undergoes  a  profound
change  of  a  political,  social  or  religious  nature.  Such  a
change  involves  a  transformation  of  the  psychological
attitude.  Changes  in  history  are  generally  attributed  to
external  causes.  But  I  hold  the  view  that  the  greatest
cha^nges  in  human  history  are  to  be  traced  back  to  internal
causal  conditions,  and  that  they  are  founded  upon  internal
psychological  necessity.  For  it  often  seems  that  external
conditions  serve  as  mere  occasions  on  which  a  new  attitude
long  in  preparation  becomes  manifest.  The  development
of  the  Christian  era  is  an  example  of  this.  Political,
social,  and  religious  conditions  influence  the  unconscious^
since  all  the  factors  which  are  suppressed  in  the  conscious
religious  or  philosophical  attitude  of  human  society
accumulate  in  the  unconscious.  This  gradual  accumulation
means  a  gradual  increase  of  the  energy  of  the  unconscious
contents.  Certain  individuals  gifted  with  particularly
refined  intuition  become  aware  of  the  change  going  on  in
the  collective  unconscious  and  sometimes  even  succeed  in
translating  their  perceptions  of  it  into  communicable
ideas.  The  new  ideas  spread  more  or  less  rapidly  in
proportion  to  the  preparedness  and  readiness  in  the
unconscious  of  other  people.  In  proportion  to  the  more
or  less  universal  unconscious  preparation  people  are  ready
to  accept  new  ideas,  or  else  to  show  particular  resistance


^  i

90  C.  G.  Jung,  M.D.,  LL.D.  [part  i

to  them.  New  ideas  are  not  only  the  enemies  of  old  ]
ones,  but  they  also  often  appear  in  an  extremely  un-  j  i
acceptable  form.

Whenever  any  contents  of  the  collective  unconscious
become  animated,  the  conscious  feels  disturbed,  more  often,
it  appears,  in  a  disagreeable  than  in  an  agreealjle  way.
This  may  be  due  to  the  fact  that  disagreeable  experiences
always  make  a  greater  impression  than  agreeable  ones.
In  any  case  animation  of  the  collective  unconscious
creates  a  certain  confusion  in  the  conscious.  If  this
animation  is  due  to  a  complete  breakdown  of  all  conscious  !
hopes  and  expectations,  the  danger  arises  that  the  un-
conscious may  take  the  place  of  conscious  reality.  Such
a  state  is  morbid.  We  actually  see  something  of  this
kind  in  the  present  Russian  and  German  mentality.  An
outbreak  of  violent  desires  and  impossible  phantasies
among  the  lower  strata  of  the  population  is  analogous  to
an  outburst  from  the  lower  strata  of  the  unconscious  in
an  individual.  In  the  case  of  Russia  and  Germany  what  '
we  see  is  the  visible  and  concrete  collapse  of  two  great
nations.

But animation of the unconscious may begin  from
within,  in  the  absence  of  a  definite  external  catastrophe.  |
In  such  a  case  it  is  due  to  the  gradual  development  of  a  i
new psychological attitude in the  depths  of  a  nation's  j
mentality. Thus,  in  an  epoch  of  worldliness  and  material-
ism an idealistic attitude maj' slowly develop in the  ,
unconscious. For  example, the evolution  of Christianity  I
was  not  due  to  the  collapse  of  the  Roman  empire.  It
origiiiated  at  the  time  of  the  Pax  Romana, during  the
epoch of the Empire's greatest splendour and power.  |
Such  a  new  era  is  conditioned  by  developments  that  are
taking place practically in everybody, that is, by  a
process in the collective unconscious. In  everybody
at  such  a  time,  unconscious  energy  disturbs  the  conscious,
but the individual in such a case does not consider  '
himself ill, because he is not different  from his fellow  ,i
beings. He simply takes part in a collective  trans-
formation, whose origins and aims remain  unconscious.
The individual may be unhappy and distressed, and  |


Lxxix.] Psychological  Foundations  of  Belief  in  Spirits.  91

probably  has  genuine  reasons  for  his  sadness,  for  social
and  political  conditions  will  suffer  greatly  from  the  funda-
mental changes  going  on.  He  will  not,  however,  have
the  typically  morbid  feeling  of  one  whose  unconscious
becomes  disturbed  on  accovint  of  painful  experiences  of  an
individual  nature.

The  animation  of  the  collective  unconscious  does  not
always  create  disturbances,  for  it  may  also  work  bene-
ficially, but  it  always  carries  with  it  something  of  a
supernatural  character.  Owing  to  this  the  effect  of  the
collective  unconscious  is  always  beyon-d  the  grasp  of
man.  At  one  time  it  helps,  at  another  time  it  destroys
him.  It  is  never  to  be  relied  upon.  Therefore  primitive
man  is  especially  subject  to  the  fetters  of  the  unconscious.
Yet  among  primitive  civilizations  we  already  find  attempts
to  conjure  the  supernatural  power  and  influences  of  the
unconscious.  Amongst  primitives  there  are  peculiarly
intuitive  individuals,  sometimes  of  superior  intelligence,
namely,  sorcerers.  They  are  supposed  to  know  how  to
handle  demons.  In  history  the  primitive  tribal  sorcerer
is  the  man  who  originates  psychological  methods  and
teachings  which  aim  at  domination  of  the  supernatural.
The  rites  and  legends  he  invents  represent  qualities  of
the  unconscious  as  he  conceives  of  them.  Thus  he  trans-
lates some  inner  experiences  into  human  language  and
creates  the  foundations  of  the  history  of  the  human  mind.
Our  intellect  is  born  from  mythology,  and  mythology  is
nothing  but  a  translation  of  inner  experience  into  the
language  of  pictures.  Thus  spirits  are  transformed  into
mind.

A  weU-known  instance  of  the  spirit  translated  into
language  and  teaching  is  the  miracle  of  Pentecost.  To
the  Gentiles  the  apostles  seemed  in  a  state  of  mental
confusion,  because  they  were  under  the  influence  of  the
spirit,  viz.  a  phenomenon  of  the  coflective  unconscious.
But  from  this  state  they  derived  the  words,  the  images
and  the  power  to  teach  the  world.  Through  the  transla-
tion of  unconscious  contents  into  comprehensible  language,
the  power  of  the  spirit,  in  other  words,  the  energy  of
the unconscious complex, becomes transformed into  a


92


1^  C.  G.  Jung,  M.D.,  LL.D.


[part


powerful  idea,  which  enables  the  human  mind  to  free
itself  from  the  fetters  of  demoniacal  influences.

As  souls  are  parts  of  the  individual  psyche,  so  spirits
are  parts  of  the  collective  psyche.  Souls  are  complexes
split  off  from  and  lost  to  the  conscious  ;  spirits  are  com-
plexes of  the  collective  unconscious,  which  replace  a  lost
adaptation  to  reality,  or  which  compensate  for  the
inadequacies  of  large  groups  of  men.

What  are  regarded  as  spirits  of  the  dead  are  psycho-
logically created  in  the  following  way  :  When  an  individual
dies,  the  psychological  attachment  of  his  relatives'  feehngs
is  cut  off.  The  attachment  represents  the  application  of
a  certain  quantity  of  psychic  energy.  When  the  applica-
tion of  this  energy  becomes  impossible,  through  the  death
of  its  object,  there  only  remains  the  idea  or  image  of
the  dead.  The  energy  is  now  applied  to  this  image,  and
when  the  attachment  has  been  intense,  the  image  remains
alive  and  forms  a  spirit.  As  the  spirit  takes  away  a
certain  amount  of  energy  from  real  life,  he  may  be
injurious.  Primitives,  therefore,  frequently  say  that  when
a  man  dies  he  changes  his  character  in  an  unfavourable
way  and  seeks  to  do  as  much  damage  as  he  can  to  the
living.  Obviously  this  opinion  originates  in  the  fact  that
a  persistent  attachment  to  a  dead  person  makes  life  seem
less  worth  living,  consequently  less  worthy  of  effort.

I  have  given  you  an  outline  of  a  conception  of  the
spirit  problem  from  the  viewpoint  of  modern  psychology.
I  have  confined  myself  to  the  limits  of  science  and  have
purposely  avoided  the  question  whether  spirits  are  real
or  concrete  objects,  and  whether  their  independent  exist-
ence can  be  proved  concretely.  I  avoid  this  question
not  because  I  regard  it  as  futile,  but  because  I  am  not
competent  to  discuss  it  from  a  scientific  standpoint,
having  no  evidence  in  my  possession.  I  think  you  are
as  conscious  as  I  am  of  the  fact  that  it  is  most  difficult
to  find  reliable  evidence  for  the  independent  and  objective
reality  of  a  spirit.  The  usual  spiritistic  proofs  offered
are  as  a  rule  nothing  but  psychological  products,  depend-
ent  upon the unconscious of the percipient. Even  the


Lxxix.] Psychological  Foundations  of  Belief  in  Spirits.


so-called  physical  efiects  always  depend  upon  the  co-
operation of  the  percipient  and  seem  to  be  exteriorized
effects  of  unconscious  complexes.  I  am  personally  con-
vinced of  the  reality  of  such  facts,  but  I  cannot  accept
them  as  evidence  for  the  independent  reality  of  spirits.

These  phenomena  form  a  special  chapter  in  psychology.
Science  must,  I  think,  confine  itseK  to  the  limits  of
cognition,  for  science  is  essentially  intellect  ;  it  means
the  application  of  one  undoubted  psychological  function,
namely,  thought.  But  intellect  is  only  one  among  several
psychological  functions,  and  therefore  does  not  suffice
to  give  a  complete  picture  of  the  world.  Feeling,  for
instance,  which  is  another  psychological  function,  some-
times arrives  at  different  convictions  from  those  of
intellect,  and  we  cannot  always  prove  that  the  convictions
of  feeling  are  necessarily  inferior  to  those  of  the  intellect.
We  have  also  subhminal  perceptions,  which  are  not  at
the  disposal  of  the  intellect,  and  which,  therefore,  are
missing  in  a  merely  intellectual  picture  of  the  world.
So  we  must  admit  that  our  intellectual  conceptions  are
deficient  so  far  as  a  complete  comprehension  of  the  world
is  concerned.  But  when  we  make  use  of  intellect,  as
is  the  case  in  science,  we  have  to  adapt  ourselves  to  the
demands  of  intellectual  criticism,  and  we  must  limit
ourselves  to  the  scientific  hypothesis  so  long  as  there  is
no  reliable  evidence  against  its  validity.


94


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


SUPPLEMENT.


EEVIEW.

Papers  on  Psycho-Analysis.  By  Ernest  Jones,  M.D.,  M.R.C.P.
(Lond.).  Second  edition,  1918.  Pp.  viii,  715.  (Balliere,
Tindall  &  Cox.)

This  book,  as  its  title-page  indicates,  is  a  revised  and  enlarged
edition  of  Dr.  Ernest  Jones'  Papers  on  Psycho- Analysis,  first
published  in  1912.  On  its  first  appearance  it  consisted  of
t-\\  enty  chapters  ;  in  the  new  edition  one  of  these  has  been
omitted  and  twenty-one  new  ones  have  been  added  ;  thus  the
new  edition  is,  roughly,  twice  the  size  of  the  old  one.  It  is
written  in  exposition  of  the  ^^•orks  of  Professor  Freud,  to  whom
it  is  dedicated  as  a  token  of  the  author's  gratitude.

The  pajoers  are  grouped  under  five  headings  as  follows  :
General  Papers,  Papers  on  Dreams,  Papers  on  Treatment,
Clmical  Papers,  Papers  on  Education  and  Child  Study.  In
each  of  these  groups  some  papers  are  more  technical  than
others,  and  some  readers  may  -with  advantage  study  them  in
a  slightly  different  order  from  that  in  which  they  are  arranged.
It  would,  for  example,  be  helpful  to  those  who  are  new  to
the  subject  if  they  passed  from  the  General  Papers  to  the  two
chapters  which  deal  with  the  miconscious  mental  life  of  the
child,  before  going  on  to  the  more  technical  expositions  con-
tained in  other  parts  of  the  book.  For  nothing  is  more
conducive  to  a  true  appreciation  of  the  meaning  and  signifi-
cance of  Freudian  teaching  than  a  clear  understanding,  from
the  beginning,  of  what  is  implied  by  the  term  '  The  Uncon-
scious '  ;  and  in  no  part  of  his  work  does  Dr.  Jones  explain
this  more  lucidly  than  in  these  two  papers.  The  short  but
valuable paper  on  The Unconscious and  its  significance  for


LXXIX.


Review.


95


Psychopathology  will  be  more  fully  appreciated  if  it  is  read  in
conjunction  with  the  two  papers  on  the  unconscious  mind  of
the  child.

Dr.  Jones  refers  to  three  principal  current  uses  of  the  word
'  unconscious,'  two  of  which  he  summarilj^  dismisses  in  favour
of  the  Freudian  conception.  The  fii'st  of  these  is  where
'  imconseious  '  is  regarded  as  a  sjoionym  for  '  non -mental.'
This  attitude,  he  points  out,  begs  the  ^hole  question,  by
assuming  that  no  mental  processes  can  exist  that  are  not
accompanied  by  consciousness  or  a\\areness.  When  used  in
this  sense  the  word  has  no  place  in  psychological  discussion,
for  psychology  is  concerned  v,ith.  mental  states  and  processes.

There  is  less  justification  for  Dr.  Jones'  somewhat  scornful
rejection  of  the  second  conception  of  the  unconscious  which
he  associates  with  the  names  of  Hartmann,  F.  W.  H.  Myers
and  Jung.  This  may  seem  an  odd  assortment  of  names
to  bring  together  as  supi^orting  any  particular  vie\v  of  the
unconscious,  but  Dr.  Jones  finds  something  common  to  the
views  of  these  three  writers  which  leads  him  to  do  so.  Thej^
uphold  Avhat,  he  says,  may  be  called  the  '  limbo  '  conception,
"  for  in  it  the  unconscious  is  regarded  as  an  obscure  region
of  the  mind,  the  content  of  w^hich  is  largely  characterized  by
neglect  and  oblivion."  We  are  reminded  here  of  what  Myers
said  about  the  subliminal — that  it  is  part  lumber  room  and
part  treasvu-e  house.  Dr.  Jones  has  apparently  little  faith  in
the  existence  of  the  lumber  room  and  he  is  frankly  shocked  at
the  possibility  of  the  treasure  house.  He  regards  it  as  curious
that  writers  viho  support  the  Umbo  conception  should  believe
in  the  co-existence  in  the  unconscious  of  two  groups  of  ideas
which  do  not  seem  to  have  any  genetic  relation  to  one  another.

The  third  conception  of  the  unconscious  is  the  psycho-
analjiiic  one  developed  by  Freud.  This  conception.  Dr.
Jones  says,  differs  sharply  from  the  other  two  in  that  it  is
"  a  purely  inductive  one,  being  built  up  step  by  step  on  the
basis  of  actual  experience  without  the  introduction  of  any  a
priori  speculative  hypothesis."  But  the  -writers  whom  Dr.  Jones
associates  with  the  '  limbo  '  conception  would  also,  no  doubt,
claim  that  their  conceptions  ere  arrived  at  in  a  similar  \ya.y  ;
and  even  Hartmann  might  have  denied  that  his  h\'pothesis
was  a  priori. Myers,  most  assuredly,  regarded  his  conception


96  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.  [part

of  the  subliminal  as  "  a  purely  inductive  one  built  up  step  by
step  on  the  basis  of  actual  experience  "  ;  and  Jung  declares
that  he  felt  forced  to  abandon  the  Freudian  conception  off
the  unconscious  just  because  of  his  actual  experience  in  psycho-
analysis. The  hypotheses  introduced  by  Myers  and  by  Jung
are  m  no  sense  a  priori,  but  are  legitimate  hjrpotheses  put
forward  to  subsume  the  facts  observed  by  them  in  their
respective  fields  of  investigation  ;  and  the  true  ground  of
criticism  of  their  conceptions  must  be  sought  in  questioning
the  actuality  of  their  alleged  facts,  rather  than  in  denying  the
legitimacy  of  the  hypotheses  which,  they  employ.

It  is  noteworthy,  in  this  connexion,  that  the  first  statement
made  by  Dr.  Jones  regardmg  the  Freudian  unconscious,— the
one  on  which  he  lays  the  greatest  stress  and  the  one  he  con-
siders  of  most  fundamental  importance,— is  not  a  statement
of observed fact but an hypothesis. This statement is  to
the  effect  that  the  existence  of  the  unconscious  is  the  result  of
repression. But  the  fact observed  in the process  of  psycho-
analysis is  not  '  repression  '  but  '  resistance.' It  was  from  his
experience  of  resistance  to  the  emergence  of  pathogenic  memories
that Freud got the idea of repression. He thought  the
force which caused the resistance in psycho-analysis  must
be  the  force  which  origmally  caused  the  forgetting." Thus  he
came  to  formulate  his  hypothesis  of  repression; and  so  well
did  it  serve  his  purpose,  so  fruitful  did  it  become  in  account-
ing for  the  nature  of  the  imconscious  contents  revealed  by
psycho-analysis,  so  wide  ^\  as  the  field  of  investigation  in  which
it  seemed  to  be  applicable,  that  this  hypothesis  has  become
the  corner  stone  of  psycho-analytic  theory.

The  other  attributes  of  the  unconscious  enumerated  by
Dr.  Jones  are  more  strictly  facts  of  observation.  These  are
(1)  its  dynamical  nature,  (2)  its  relation  to  the  primary
instincts,  (3)  its  infantile  nature  and  origin,  (4)  its  illogical
character,  and  (5)  its  predominantly  sexual  character.  These
attributes  are  summarized  in  the  statement  that  "  the  uncon-
scious is  a  region  of  the  mind,  the  content  of  which  is
characterized  by  the  attributes  of  being  repressed,  conative,
instinctive,  infantile,  imreasoning  and  predominantly  sexual."

The  Repression  Theory  in  its  relation  to  memory  is  dealt
with  at  length  in  Chapter  V. This  paper  was  read  before  the


LXXIX.


Review.


97


British  Psychological  Society  in  1915,  and  was  in  a  sense  a
continuation  of  a  discussion  which  took  place  at  a  meeting  of
that  Societ}^  in  the  previous  year.  Consequently  a  considerable
part  of  this  paper  is  devoted  to  a  criticism  of  the  views  of
those  who  took  part  in  that  discussion.  Some  of  these  views
were  put  forward  so  tentatively  that  they  hardly  merit  Dr.
Jones'  attention  in  a  work  of  this  kind.

Of  the  five  chapters  on  Dreams  only  one  is  entirely  new, —
a  short  paper  on  dream  manipulation  of  numbers  ;  but  some
alterations  have  been  made  in  the  older  papers  and  some  new
matter  has  been  added.  The  paper  on  Freud's  Theory  of
Dreams  has  long  been  recognized  as  one  of  the  best  short
expositions  of  this  subject,  and  the  value  which  it  had  in  its
original  form  is  enhanced  by  the  additions  made  to  it  in  the
present  volume.

Some  of  these  are  perhaps  a  result  of  the  criticisms  to
which  the  Freudian  theory  of  dreams  has  been  subjected
during  the  past  few  years,  especially  by  the  Zurich  School.
Although  Dr.  Jones  remains  a  staunch  upholder  of  pure
Freudian  doctrine,  some  traces  of  concession  to  the  contentions
of  his  critics,  or,  at  least,  some  change  of  emphasis  in  the
presentation  of  his  own  views,  may,  here  and  there,  be  detected
Thus,  for  example,  in  speaking  of  the  distortion  of  the  true
dream  thoughts  in  the  dream  as  related  by  the  dreamer  he
says  :  "  The  core  of  Freud's  theory,  and  the  most  original
part  of  his  contribution  to  the  subject,  resides  in  his  tracing
the  cause  of  this  distortion  mainly  to  a  '  censor '  which
interposes  an  obstruction  to  the  becoming  conscious  of  un-
conscious psychical  processes."  In  the  first  edition  this  sen-
tence did  not  contain  the  word  '  mainly  '  ;  the  distortion  was
ascribed  to  the  censor  without  qualification.

The  Freiidian  '  censor '  has  been  a  favourite  theme  of  the
critics,  and  too  much  stress  has  perhaps  been  laid  on  the  objec-
tion to  the  anthropomorphic  character  which  this  hypothesis  has
assumed.  For  if  any  force  ^dthin  the  personality  does  perform
the  work  which  is  attributed  to  the  censor,  it  is  convenient  and
legitimate  to  refer  to  it  by  this  name.  If  criticism  is  directed
against  this  conception  it  should  take  the  form  of  questioning
whether  there  is  any  such  force  at  work  and  whether  it  does
produce  the  effects  which  are  claimed  to  be  due  to  its  action.


98


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


One  of  these  effects,  in  which  the  activity  of  the  censor
was  given  predominant  if  not  exclusive  importance,  is  the
'  distortion  '  in  dreams.  In  a  new  paragraph  in  his  papef  on
Freud's  Theory  of  Dreams  Dr.  Jones  refers  in  more  detail  to
what  he  probably  had  in  miad  when  he  introduced  the  word
'  mainly  '  in  the  sentence  quoted  above.  In  addition  to  the
action  of  the  endo-psychic  dream  censor  in  causing  the  trans-
formation of  the  latent  into  the  manifest  content  of  the  dream,
he  refers  to  two  other  factors  which  are  also  at  work  One
of  these  is  the  '  regression  '  by  which  the  ideational  material  of
the  dream  is  presented  to  consciousness  in  the  form  of  'Hhe
raw  material  of  its  sensorial  imagery."  The  other  important
factor  leading  to  distortion  is  the  process  of  symbolism.

The  occurrence  of  regression  and  of  symbolism  in  the  forma-
tion of  dreams  has,  of  course,  been  insisted  on  from  the
beginning  in  Freud's  theory  of  dreams,  and  that  they  formed
part  of  the  mechanism  of  distortion  was  generally  accepted  ;
but  it  did  not  appear  that  they  were  to  be  regarded  as  factors
of  distortion  separate  from,  and  irrespective  of,  the  activity
of  the  censor.  Regression  was  ascribed,  partly  at  least,  to  the
resistance  of  the  censor ;  and  the  adoption  by  the  dream  of
the  language  of  symbolism  was  regarded  as  a  compulsion
enforced  in  the  same  way.

The  relation  of  the  dream  censor  to  the  dream  symbolism
is  still  not  quite  clear.  In  his  latest  contribution  to  the
subject  in  Chapter  VII.  (the  Theory  of  Symbolism)  Dr.  Jones
tells  us  that  "  Symbolism  arises  as  the  result  of  intra-psychical
conflict  between  the  repressing  tendencies  and  the  repressed  "  ;
and,  again,  that  "  the  symbol  is  a  substitute  for  the  primary
idea,  compulsorUy  formed  as  a  compromise  between  the
tendency  of  the  unconscious  complex  and  the  inhibiting  factors."
No  distinction  seems  to  be  drawn  between  the  endo-psychic
dream  censor  and  the  '  repressing  tendencies,'  or  the  '  inhibiting
factors,'  concerned  in  symbol  formation,  and  in  so  far  as  the
censor  and  the  repressing  tendencies  signify  the  same  thing,
there  would  seem  to  be  no  reason  for  regarding  the  process
of  symbolism  as  a  factor  of  dream  distortion  distinct  from
the  action  of  the  endo-psychic  dream  censor.

But  the  process  of  symbolism  is  "  one  that  seems  to  be
bound up with the very nature of the unconscious  mind


LXXIX.]


Review.


99


itself  and  undoubtedly  related  to  its  ontogenetic  and  phylo-
genetic  history."  This  reminds  us  of  Jung's  teaching,  that
thinkmg  in  symbols  is  the  only  mode  of  thinking  open  to
the  imconscious ;  and  if  this  be  so,  the  emergence  of  uncon-
scious thoughts  in  dream  is  independent  of  the  activity  of
the  di'eam  censor,  for  they  are  already  sufficiently  distorted
to  evade  his  vigilance.  There  would  at  least  seem  to  be  a
difference  between  unconscious  thoughts  gaining  admission  to
consciousness  owing  to  the  fact  that  they  are  already  suffi-
ciently distorted  to  evade  the  censor,  and  the  admission  of
thoughts  only  after  they  have  been  compelled  by  the  censor
to  undergo  distortion  through  condensation  and  displacement
or  regression  towards  sensorial  imagery.

In  Chapter  VII.  the  Theory  of  Symbolism  is  dealt  with  at
considerable  length,  and  an  effort  is  made  to  bring  order  into
a  region  where  hitherto  there  has  been  much  confusion.  It  is
a  valuable  contribution  to  a  subject  of  fimdamental  importance,
and  may  with  confidence  be  regarded  as  an  authoritative
exegesis  of  Freudian  doctrine  on  this  topic.

Dr.  Jones  passes  in  review  the  many  ap])lications  of  the
words  '  symbol  '  and  '  symbolism,'  and  desires  to  restrict
what  he  regards  as  true  symbolism  to  that  mode  of  indirect
representation  which  fulfils  the  demands  of  Freudian  theory.
He  maintains  the  thesis  that  true  symbolism,  in  the  strict
sense,  is  to  be  distinguished  from  other  forms  of  indirect
representation.  Besides  certain  attributes  which  would  be
generally  conceded  as  appertaining  to  ideas  and  acts  denoted
by  the  words  '  symbol  '  or  '  symbolic,'  true  symbolism,  in  the
Freudian  use  of  the  word,  possesses,  in  addition,  a  number  of
other  attributes  which  distinguish  it  from  the  rest  of  the  group.

The  most  important  of  these  is  the  peculiarity  that  the
symbol  always  represents  unconscious  material.  By  this  is
meant,  not  so  much  that  the  concepts  symbolized  are  not
known  to  the  individual,  as  that  the  effect  investing  the
concept  is  in  a  state  of  repression  and,  therefore,  vmconscious.
Also  the  process  of  symbolization  is  carried  out  unconsciously.
The  comparison  between  the  idea  symbolized  and  the  symbol
has,  as  a  rule,  not  been  present  to  consciousness  at  all.

Another  feature  of  the  true  symbol  is  its  almost  constant
meaning. The possible variation in meaning is  exceedingly


100  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.  [paet  I

restricted.  Further,  the  use  of  a  symbol  is  not  dependent
on  individual  factors  only,  more  important  determining  factors
being  those  that  are  common  to  large  classes  of  men,  or,
more  often,  to  mankind  as  a  whole.  An  individual  carmot
give  a  regular  symbol  a  different  meaning  from  anyone  else.
He  can  merely  choose  his  symbols  or  make  new  ones.

Other  characteristics  of  the  true  symbol  are  its  evolutionary
basis  and  the  linguistic  connections  that  may  be  traced  between
the  \\'ord  denoting  the  symbol  and  the  idea  symbolized.  One

of  the  most  striking  features  of  true  symbolism  is  the  remark-  \

able  ubiquity  of  the  same  symbols  among  different  races  and  j

at  different  epochs  of  the  world's  history,  and  in  many  different  i

fields  of  thought,  such  as  dreams,  wit,  insanity  and  poetry.  i

The conception of symbolism thus formulated admits of  j

certain  statements  being  made  which  would  not  apply  if  the  j

nature  of  the  process  of  symbolism  were  less  restricted. Thus  •

it  is  said  that  "  all  symbols  represent  ideas  of  the  self  and  i
the  immediate  blood  relations,  or  of  the  phenomena  of  birth,

love and death." They represent the most primitive ideas  |

and interests imaginable. These ideas represent the most  j

repressed  part  of  the  mind,  and  "  only  what  is  repressed  is  |
symbolized  ; only  what  is  repressed  needs  to be  symbolized.

This conclusion is the touchstone of the psycho-analytic  j

theory  of  symbolism."  j

It  is  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  this  precise  use  of  the  word  i

'  symbol '  in  Freudian  writings,  for  there  are  many  authors  '

of repute, both  in psychopathology and  in other  fields of  j

investigation,  who  habitually  use  this  term  in  a  much  wider  j

sense. Dr.  Jones  deals  with  this  matter  at  some  length  in  |

an  examination  of  the  views  of  what  he  calls  the  post-psycho-  |

analytic  school,  represented  by  Adier,  Jung,  Maeder,  Silberer,  |

Stekel,  with  then-  English  followers,  Eder,  Long,  and  NicoU.  \

He  regards  Silberer  as  the  only  member  of  this  school  who  |

has  made  a  positive  contribution to  the  theory  of  symbolism,  |

and  he  gives  a  critical  abstract  of  the  work  of  this  writer.  I

One  important  point of  dispute between  the  two schools  ■

is  the  relation  of  the  symbol,  in  "the  mythological  stage  of  I

knowledge,"  to  the  idea,  the higher  form  of  truth,  that  will  \

later  replace  it. Is  the  later,  more  objective  form  of  know-  !

ledge  already implicit in  the  symbol  ? Has the symbol  a  i


LXXIX.]


Review.


101


meaning  for  the  future  ?  Silberer  does  not  definitely  answer
this  question,  but  Dr.  Jones  thinks  that  Jung  would  unhesi-
tatingly answer  it  in  the  affirmative  in  all  cases.  Dr.  Jones,
himself,  expresses  an  opinion  directly  opposed  to  Jung's  teach-
ing. "  I  do  not  ■  think,"  he  says,  "  that  the  future  idea  is
implicit  in  the  symbol ;  on  the  contrary,  the  existence  of  the
symbol — to  be  more  accurate,  the  symbolic  use  of  the  symbol —
is  often  the  very  thmg  that  is  preventing  the  idea  from
being  formulated."

Closely  related  to  what  Jung  understands  by  the  prospective
meaning  of  symbolism  is  that  aspect  which  Silberer  refers  to
as  its  anagogic  significance.  By  this  is  meant  "  the  mystical,
hermetic,  or  religious  doctrme  that  is  supposed  to  be  con-
tained in  the  symbol.  The  symbol  is  taken  to  be  the  expres-
sion of  a  strivmg  for  a  high  ethical  ideal,  one  which  fails  to
reach  this  ideal  and  halts  at  the  symbol  instead  ;  the  ultimate
ideal,  however,  is  supposed  to  be  implicit  in  the  symbol,
and  to  be  symbolized  by  it."  Jung  claims  that  the  recogni-
tion of  the  intrinsic  value  of  a  symbol  leads  us  to  constructive
truth  and  helps  us  to  live.

At  this  point  in  his  examination  of  the  views  of  Silberer
and  Jung,  Dr.  Jones  abandons  criticism.  He  says  :  "  Along
this  path  the  post-psycho-analytic  school  loses  itself  in  a
perfect  maze  of  mysticism,  occultism,  and  theosophy,  into
which  I  do  not  propose  to  penetrate ;  Silberer  implicitly,
and  Jung  explicitly,  abandon  the  methods  and  canons  of
science,  particularly  the  conceptions  of  causality  and  deter-
minism, so  that  I  may  consider  myself  absolved  from  the
task  of  attempting  to  unravel  the  assumptions  that  have
culminated  in  their  latest  views.  As  the  philosophers  would
say,  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  adhere  to  one  universe  of
discourse."

But  the  universe  of  discourse  may  always  be  sufficiently
one  so  long  as  the  problem  to  be  solved  is  one,  and  the
possibility  of  the  futm-e  idea  being  implicit  in  the  symbol  is
part  of  the  general  problem  of  purposes  and  ends.  Adherence
to  a  scientific  dogma  is  no  vu-tue  if  the  dogma  is  not  relevant
to  the  facts  to  be  explained  ;  and,  to  many,  the  dogma  of
mechanistic  determinism  seems  irrelevant  to  the  facts  of
man's  pm'posive  life. If  striving  for  a  high  ethical  ideal  be


102


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


a  real  factor  in  the  determination  of  thought  and  conduct,
and  if  the  ultimate  ideal  be  implicit  in  tlie  symbol,  a  purely
mechanistic  psychology  will  never  discover  it.

Another  important  matter  on  which  Dr.  Jones  differs  from
some  members  of  the  post-psycho-analytic  school  is  in  the
explanation  he  gives  of  the  miiformity  and  ubiquity  of  what
may  be  called  anthropological  symbols.  These  symbols  recur
in  folk-lore,  mjrthology,  and  dreams,  at  all  times  and  in  all
places,  and  some  writers,  notably  Jimg,  maintain  that  this
can  be  accounted  for  only  by  supposing  that  these  symbols
are  inherited  as  such  and  form  part  of  the  innate  endowment
of  the  mind.  Dr.  Jones  holds  the  view  that  the  individual
child  re-creates  such  symbolism  anew  and  that  "  the  stereo-
typy is  due  to  the  uniformity  of  the  human  mind  in  regard
to  the  particular  tendencies  that  furnish  the  source  of  symbol-
ism,— i.e.  to  the  uniformity  of  the  fundamental  and  perennial
interests  of  mankind."

It  would  be  out  of  place  here  to  discuss  in  any  detail  the
more  purely  medical  papers  which  form  the  larger  part  of
this  volume.  There  are  two  new  chapters  on  treatment  and
eight  new  clinical  papers,  all  of  ^hich  are  of  great  value  and
interest  to  the  psychopathologist.  A  useful  glossary  of  tech-
nical terms  is  appended  to  the  new  edition  and  a  good
index  is  supplied.

T.  W.  Mitchell.


Lxxix.]  Note  on  "  Observations  of  Phenomena  of  Trance."


NOTE  ON  "  A  RECORD  OF  OBSERVATIONS  OF
CERTAIN  PHENOMENA  OF  TRANCE."

By  Sib  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.

In  an  article  published  in  Proceedings,  8.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,  on  p.  460,
at  the  top  of  the  page,  reference  is  made  to  a  statement  made  by
Phinuit  during  a  sitting  I  had  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  Liverpool  in  1889,
from  which  I  quote  the  following  sentences  :

Phintiit  told  me  to  take  the  watch  out  of  its  case  (it  was  the  old-
fashioned  turnip  variety)  and  examine  it  in  a  good  light  afterwards,
and  I  should  see  some  nicks  near  the  handle  which  Jerry  said  he  had
cut  into  it  with  his  knife.

Some  faint  nicks  are  there.  I  had  never  had  the  watch  out  of  its
case  before  ;  being,  indeed,  careful  neither  to  finger  it  myself  nor
to  let  anyone  else  finger  it.

I  recall  this  because  recently,  during  the  British  Association
Meeting  at  Bournemouth  in  September,  1919,  a  cousui  of
mine  whom  I  had  never  previously  seen,  and  who  has  been
most  of  his  life  m  South  America,  introduced  himself  to  me
and  related  many  reminiscences  of  our  joint  uncles,  in  days
partly  concurrent  with  and  partly  preceding  the  period  during
which  I  knew  them.  This  cousm  is  Mr.  Frederick  L.  Lodge,
who  had  corresponded  with  me  about  an  experience  of  his
wife's,  the  uicident  beuig  related  by  me  m  my  book.  The
Survival  of  Man,  page  74.  I  had  no  further  communication
with  Mr.  F.  L.  Lodge,  except  those  specified  in  the  book,  and
I  had  not  realised  exactly  who  he  was.  I  found  at  Bourne-
mouth, however,  for  the  first  time  that  he  was  a  son  of  one
of  my  uncles,  and  that  he  had  been  born  in  1846,  so  that
his  memories  date  back  earher  than  my  own.  Among  many
recollections  of  his  father  and  my  other  senior  uncles,  who
were  considerably  older  than  my  own  father,  he  told  me
stories  of  Uncle  Jerry  and  his  blindness,  one  of  which  I  asked


104


Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S. [part  lxxix.


him  to  put  into  writing.  This  morning,  September  I6th,  1919,
accordingly,  he  sends  me  the  following  :

When  Uncle  Jerry  was  staying  at  Grafrath  in  Germany,  consiilting
an  oculist  (he  was  then  totally  blind),  I  used  to  accompany  him  in  his
daily  walks,  and  on  one  occasion  as  we  were  sitting  by  the  road-side
he  had  his  gold  repeater  watch  in  his  hand  and  was  whittling  away
at  it  with  his  penknife.  I  asked  him  what  he  was  doing,  and  he  replied
that  he  was  marking  it,  so  as  to  know  it  by  the  touch  ;  I  believe  it
was  on  the  shank  near  the  ring,  whether  he  succeeded  in  making  a
mark  I  do  not  remember.  At  the  time  of  your  seance  with  Mrs.  Piper
the  watch  was  in  the  possession  of  his  brother  Robert  at  Highgate,
but  I  believe  no  mark  could  be  discovered  then.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

PART  LXXX.
November,  1920.


I.

PRESIDENTIAL  ADDRESS.

Delivered  at  a  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  on  July  19,

1920.

By  William  McDougall,  M.B.,  F.R.S.

I  WILL  Dot  attempt  to  express  my  sense  of  the  great
honour  you  have  done  me  in  electing  me  to  the  presi-
dency of  this  Society.  That  sense  is  much  accentuated
by  the  fact  that  my  predecessor  in  this  chair,  whose
loss  we  all  deplore,  was  so  great  a  man ;  a  man  of  science
so  great  that  his  name  will  remain  among  those  few
which  the  English  people  will  ever  cherish  with  pride
and  gratitude.  Our  Society  was  fortunate  indeed  in
being  able  for  many  years  to  claim  him  as  a  member,
and  stiU  more  fortunate  in  that  he  consented  to  occupy
this  chair  before  he  was  called  away.

In  looking  with  mingled  pride  and  humihty  at  the
list  of  former  Presidents  of  the  Society,  I  cannot  avoid
remarking  that  one  only  of  them  was  primarily  and
professedly  a  psychologist.  I  mean  of  course  William
James,  the  man  who  more  than  all  others  has  been  for
me  the  shining  leader,  the  perfect  exponent  of  scientific
candour  and  courage.


106


William.  McDougall,  M.B.,  F.R.S.  [part


I  notice  also  that  but  few  other  names  of  professed
psychologists  appear  on  our  roll  of  membership.
I  am  moved  by  these  facts  to  offer  some  slight  apology
and  explanation  on  behalf  of  my  professional  colleagues  ;
for  surely  they,  bej-ond  all  other  men  of  science,  should
have  felt  the  call  to  support,  if  only  by  passive  member-
ship, the  work  and  reputation  of  this  Society.  They,
by  special  knowledge  and  training,  are  or  should  be  better
equipped  than  any  others  to  evaluate  the  work  of  the
Society,  to  criticise  it,  or,  better  still,  actively  to  co-
operate in  it.  The  fact  that  the  great  majority  of  them
stand  aloof  requires  some  consideration ;  for  it  is  capable
of  being,  and  in  some  quarters  has  been,  interpreted  in
a  sense  detrimental  to  our  work.  It  may  be  said —
here  is  a  body  of  men  on  whose  judgment  the  public
may  best  rely  in  forming  its  opinion  about  Psychical
Research,  and  that  judgment  seems  to  be  adverse  ;  for
the  bulk  of  them  do  not  support  the  work,  even  to  the
small  extent  of  joining  the  Society.  This  conclusion
would,  I  think,  be  false.  The  explanation  of  the  fact
is in  the main to be found  in a different  direction.

An  open  mind  towards  the  phenomena  which  the
Society  investigates  is  far  commoner,  I  am  sure,  among
men  of  science,  than  appears  to  the  general  public.  This
opinion,  which  I  venture  to  express  in  this  highly  re-
sponsible position,  is  founded  not  only  upon  my  personal
contacts  with  men  of  science,  but  also  upon  the  fact
that  only  one  scientific  creed  logically  permits  the  de-
duction that  these  alleged  phenomena  do  not  and  cannot
occur.  That  creed  is  dogmatic  materialism  :  and  although
that  creed  can  still  claim  a  few  confident  exponents,  it
is  distinctly  out  of  fashion  at  the  present  time.  How-
ever materialistic  may  be  the  dominant  habit  of  thought
among  men  of  science,  there  are  but  few  of  them  who
will  confess  to  a  whole-hearted  acceptance  of  materialism
as  a  philosophic  creed.  The  bulk  of  them  are  sufficiently
well  educated  to  know  that  as  such  it  is  untenable  ;
and  also  to  know  that  from  it  alone  can  they  logically
deduce  the  impossibility  of  the  alleged  phenomena.  The
grounds  of  the  aloofness  of  so  many  men  of  science  from


LXXX.]


Presidential  Address.


107


the  work  of  our  Society,  in spite  of  their  minds  being
more  or  less  open  to  conviction  in  its  sphere,  are  many
I  and complex. It  would  perhaps not be altogether  un-
I  profitable to attempt to describe and examine  them.
I  But  for  my present  purpose I wish to point out  one
j  only of  them, one by  no means discreditable  to  those
[  who  are  influenced  by  it. I  mean  a  sense  of  responsi-
biUty towards  .  the public. Men of science are  afraid
lest,  if  they  give  an  inch  in  this  matter,  the  pubhc  will
take  an  ell  and  more. They  are  afraid  that  the  least
display of interest or acquiescence on their part  may
promote  a  great  outburst  of  superstition on  the  part  of
the  public,  a  relapse  into  behef  in  witchcraft,  necromancy,
and the black  arts  generally, with all the moral  evils
which must accompany the prevalence of such  beliefs.
For  they  know  that  it  is  only  through  the  faithful  work
of men of science during very recent centuries  that
these  debasing  behefs  have  been  in  large  measure  banished
from  a  small  part  of  the  world  ;  they  know  that,  through-
out  the rest of the world, these superstitions  continue
to  flourish,  ready  at  any  moment  to  invade  and  over-
whelm  those small areas of enlightenment. They  know
that such overwhelming of those areas must  plunge
their populations back among  the grovelling fears  and
the cruel and hateful practices which have been  the
scourge and torment of mankind since that  remote
age when the race became endowed with the  two-
edged and dangerous weapon of imagination.  Now
the  psychologists,  just  because  they  of  all  men  must  be
regarded as best equipped to judge of these  difficult
matters, feel this responsibility more acutely than  any
other  class  of  scientific  men. Further— they  feel  a  great
responsibility for the reputation of their own  science
and are afraid of doing it an injury. Any  physicist,
like  the  great  physicists  who  have  adorned  and  strength-
ened  this Society, may display an active interest  in
Psychical Research without the least risk of injury  to
the reputation of his science. Physical science  stands
firmly  established  in  the esteem of  all  men  ; for  it  is
clear  to  all  that  it  has  provided  the  material  basis  of


108


William  McDougall,  M.B.,  F.R.S.


[part


our  civilisation.  Psychology  stands  in  a  very  different
position.  It  is  only  beginning  to  assert  its  position
among  the  sciences  ;  the  general  public  and  even  some  of
our  universities  still  regard  its  claim  to  be  a  science,
and  a  science  of  high  practical  value,  with  doubt  and
suspicion.  In  face  of  this  situation  the  academic  psycho-
logist is  rightly  cautious.  His  attitude  may,  I  think,
be  succinctly  and  concretely  expressed  by  saying  that  he
is  afraid  of  the  left  wing  of  our  Society,  and  that,  if
the  Society  consisted  only  of  its  right  wing,  he  would
come  in  and  co-operate  cheerfully  and  profitably.  But
both  wings  are  necessary  to  our  Society ;  we  cannot
hope  to  fly  to  any  good  purpose  on  one  alone.  It  has
been  the  great  virtue  of  our  Society  that,  in  spite  of
differences  of  opinion,  sometimes  acute,  it  has  kept  the
allegiance  of  men  and  women  of  so  widely  different
views  in  respect  to  its  problems.  My  own  conviction
is  that  the  risk  I  have  indicated  must  be  run.  I  myself
belong  very  decidedly  to  the  right  wing  ;  but  I  recognise
the  importance  of  the  left  ;  I  recognise  also  the  right
of  its  members  to  their  opinions,  and  I  esteem  the
driving  power  and  the  freedom  of  speculation  which
come  from  the  left  as  essential  to  the  success  of  our
work.

The  importance  of  the  work  of  our  Society  seems  to
me  to  justify  the  taking  of  some  risk.  But  that  work
does  not  really  add  to  the  risk  of  relapse  into  barbaric
superstition ;  rather  it  is  our  best  defence  against  it.
For  Pandora's  box  has  been  opened,  the  lid  has  been
slightly  hfted,  and  we  are  bound  to  go  on  and  to  explore
its  remotest  corner  and  cranny.  It  is  not  only  or  chiefly
the  work  of  this  Society  that  has  raised  the  lid  a  little
and  exposed  us  to  this  danger.  The  culture  of  Europe
has  for  a  brief  period  rested  upon  the  twin  supports
of  dogmatic  affirmation  and  dogmatic  denial,  of  orthodox
religion  and  scientific  materialism.  But  both  of  these
supports  are  crumbling,  both  alike  sapped  by  the  tide
of  free  enquiry.  And  it  is  the  supreme  need  of  our
time  that  these  two  pillars  of  dogmatism  shall  be  replaced
by a single solid  column of knowledge on which  our


LXXX.]


Presidential  Address.


109


culture  may  securely  rest.  It  is  the  policy  of  sitting  on
the  lid  of  the  box  that  is  risky ;  a  danger  and  threat
to  our  civilisation.

I  have  said  that  I  belong  to  the  extreme  right  of  our
Society,  and  I  fear  that  I  may  shock  and  hurt  some  of
our  members  of  the  left  by  the  following  remark,  which
nevertheless,  I  feel  I  am  bound  to  make.  It  is  conceiv-
able to  me  that  we  may  ultimately  find  the  box  to  have
been  empty  from  the  first,  as  empty  as  some  of  our
dogmatic  critics  assert  it  to  be.  Even  then  I  should
maintain  that  the  work  of  our  Society  in  boldly  exploring
its  recesses  and  showing  its  emptiness  to  the  world  had
been  of  the  very  greatest  value.  But  I  do  not  anticipate
this  result,  though  I  do  not  dread  it.  As  regards  our
positive  conclusions  and  their  value  I  will  say  only  this,
I  beheve  that  telepathy  is  very  nearly  established  for
an  time  among  the  facts  recognised  by  Science,  mainly
by  the  work  of  this  Society.  If  and  when  that  result
shall  have  been  achieved,  its  importance  for  Science  and
Philosophy  will  far  outweigh  the  sum  of  the  achievements
of  all  the  psychological  laboratories  of  the  universities
of  two  continents.

As  regards  the  other  main  hnes  of  enquiry  of  our
Society,  I  confidently  hold  that  nothing  hitherto  estab-
lished by  Science  or  Philosophy  can  be  shown  to  imply
that  these  enquiries  must  have  a  purely  negative  result.
Our  conclusions  must  be  founded  eventually  upon  just
such  collection  and  critical  sifting  of  the  empirical  evidence
as  our  Society  has  resolutely  pursued  for  nearly  forty
years.  During  these  forty  years  a  whole  generation  of
devoted  workers  has  passed  away.  But  what  are  forty
years  in  the  great  procession  of  knowledge  !  Even  though  it
were  clear  that  four  hundred  years  will  be  needed  for  the
attainment  of  definite  conclusions,  we  ought  not  to  shrink
from  the  task,  or  falter  by  the  way.  The  supreme  importance
of  the  problems  before  which  we  stand  would  justify  an  in-
definitely great  expenditure  of  time  and  energy  upon  them.
For  the  interests  of  our  culture  and  civihsation  demand
that  the  present  chaos  of  conflicting  opinions  and  pre-
judices shall  be  replaced  by  clear  and  definite  knowledge.


110


William  McDougall,  M.B.,  F.R.8.  [part


After  these  few  remarks  in  the  nature  of  a  confession  |
of  my  attitude  towards  our  works,  I  propose  to  devote  \
the  remainder  of  my  time  to  formulating  a  speculative  i
suggestion,  which  may  have  value  as  a  working  hypothesis
for  some  branches  of  our  work. The  suggestion  is  not
a  new  one  ; what  I  have  to  say  is  merely  an  attempt  to  ■
develop a little an old idea in the light of  modern
knowledge.^ Some  years  ago I  published  a  book,  Body
and Mind, in which I maintained that, however we  i
conceive the body, we are compelled to conceive our  \
conscious  mental  life  as  the  activity  of  a  unitary  being
endowed  with  the  faculties  of  knowing,  feeling  and  striv-
ing, the  ego,  soul,  or  self. It  has  been  made  a  reproach
to  me  that  the  long  argument  of  that  book  came  to  an
end just when it began to be really interesting.  My
present  purpose  is  to  outline  another  step  of  the  argu-
ment,  to add one more chapter  to the book. In  the
years  that  have  passed  since  its  publication,  I  have  been
much concerned both practically and theoretically  with
cases  of  nervous  disorder. Now  these  cases  of  functional
nervous  disorder  have  been  widely  held  to  make  untenable
that  conception  of  the  unitary  ego  to which  the  argu-
ment of  my  book  had  pointed. In  such  cases  we  often
seem  to  find  evidences  of  the  division  of  the  self  into  two  |
or  more  parts,  each  of  which  seems  to  be  endowed  with
the fundamental faculties of mind, conscious knowing,  j
feeling and striving, a striving that expresses itself  in
part in the control of bodily movements. To  many
thinkers  the  facts  of  this  order  seem  to  shew  that  the  j
stream of consciousness is, like any other stream,  a
composite  structure,  something  that  is  composed  of  separ-
able parts  ; for,  they  say,  if  it  is  capable  of  being  broken
into  parts,  it  must  consist  of  such  parts,  and  must  be
conceived  as  formed  by  the  coming  together  of  such  parts,  j

1  It  is  the  notion  of  '  monads  '  which  came  down  to  us  from  Leibnitz.  !
In  recent  years  it  has  been  developed  as  the  basis  of  a  plurahstic  ,
metaphysic  by  Prof.  James  Ward  (in  his  Pluralism  and  Theism)  and
by  his  disciple  Mr.  C.  A.  Richardson  (in  his  Spiritual  Pluralism).  R.
H.  Lotze  may  be  claimed  as  its  chief  exponent  in  the  nineteenth
century  :  and  Mr.  Gerald  Balfour  (in  his  presidential  address)  has
urged  its  claims  upon  the  attention  of  this  Society.


LXXX.]


Presidential  Address.


Ill


Thus  they  arrive  at  the  notion  of  consciousness  as  a
sort  of  stuff  which  may  be  variously  combined,  broken
up  and  recombined,  much  as  a  stream  of  water  or,  let
us  say,  of  treacle,  may  be  split  into  minor  streams  and
recombined.  Some  then  speak  of  a  cosmic  reservoir  of
this  stuff,  some  of  which  is  somehow  filtered  through  a
screen  in  tiny  trickling  streams  to  form  the  conscious-
ness of  you  and  me  and  each  of  us.  Others  speak  of
a  mind-dust,  ultimate  elements  or  atoms  of  conscious-
ness, which  may  be  brought  together  in  greater  or  lesser
masses  or  streams  to  form  what  each  of  us  calls  his  con-
sciousness.

If  I  am  asked — has  my  more  intimate  study  of  these
cases  of  divided  personalities  led  me  to  accept  this  way
of  regarding  consciousness  ;  has  this  way  forced  itself
upon  me  as  an  inevitable  conclusion  from  the  facts  ? —
I  reply — not  in  the  least.  The  argument  for  the  unity
of  the  ego  seems  to  me  as  strong  and  conclusive  as  ever.
And  that  other  way  of  regarding  consciousness,  as  a
stuff  which  can  be  divided  into  smaller  or  united  into
larger  streams,  seems  to  me  just  as  impossible  and  false
as  ever  it  did.  Do  I  then  deny  the  facts  on  which  the
critics  of  the  ego  rely  1  No — I  accept  these  facts  as
estabhshed.  I  believe  we  are  compelled  to  recognise
that  sometimes,  and  not  infrequently,  a  single  human
organism  or  person  is  the  seat  of  more  than  one  stream
of  conscious  knowing,  feeling  and  striving,  more  than
one  train  of  mental  activity  ;  and  that  these  trains  may
be  not  only  distinct,  but  may  be  in  acute  opposition  and
conflict  one  with  another,  just  as  really  as  I  may  be  in
conflict  with  you,  a  conflict  of  purposes,  of  efforts  towards
different  ends.

If  my  former  conclusion  holds  good,  it  follows  that
each  of  such  distinct  streams  of  purposive  effort  is  the
activity  of  a  unitary  self  or  ego.  Are  we  then  to  fiy
to  the  ancient  theory  of  possession,  whenever  we  observe
evidence  of  such  multiphcity  of  distinct  mental  activities
within  a  single  organism  ?  By  no  means.  The  obvious
and,  I  believe,  inevitable  inference  from  the  facts  is  that
I  who  consciously  address  you  am  only  one  among  several


112


William  McDougall,  M.B.,  F.R.S.


[part


selves  or  egos  which  my  organism,  my  person,  comprises.
I  am  only  the  dominant  member  of  a  society,  an  as-
sociation of  similar  members.  There  are  many  purposive
activities  within  my  organism  of  which  I  am  not  aware,
which  are  not  my  activities  but  those  of  my  associates.
I  am  conscious  at  any  moment  only  of  those  processes
within  the  organism,  and  of  those  impressions  from  with-
out, which  it  is  most  .necessary  that  I  should  take  cog-
nisance of.  And  I  consciously  control  and  adjiist  only
a  few  of  the  executive  processes  of  my  organism,  those
only  which  are  of  primary  importance  for  my  purposes.
But  I  and  my  associates  are  all  members  of  one  body ;
and,  so  long  as  the  whole  organism  is  healthy,  we  work
harmoniously  together,  for  we  are  a  well- organised  society,
the  members  of  which  strive  for  a  common  good,  the
good  of  the  whole  society.  My  subordinates  serve  me
faithfully  in  the  main,  provided  always  that  I  continue
to  be  resolute  and  strong.  But,  when  I  relax  my  control,
in  states  of  sleep,  hypnosis,  relaxation  and  abstraction,
my  subordinates,  or  some  of  then,  continue  to  work  and
then  are  apt  to  manifest  their  activities  in  the  forms  we
have  learnt  to  call  sensory  and  motor  automatisms.
And  if  I  am  weak  and  irresolute,  if  I  do  not  face  the
problems  of  life  and  take  the  necessary  decisions  for
deahng  with  them,  then  conflict  arises  within  our  system,
one  or  more  of  my  subordinates  gets  out  of  hand,  I
lose  my  control,  and  division  of  the  personality  into
conflicting  systems  replaces  the  normal  and  harmonious
co-operation  of  all  members  in  one  system.  And  in
extreme  cases  such  a  revolted  subordinate,  escaped  from
the  control  of  the  dominant  member  or  monad,  may
continue  his  career  of  insubordination  indefinitely,  acquir-
ing increased  influence  over  other  members  of  the  society
and  becoming  a  serious  rival  to  the  normal  ruler  or
dominant.  Such  a  rebellious  member  was  the  famous
Sally  Beauchamp,  and  such  was,  I  suggest,  the  childish
phase  of  the  Doris  Fischer  case.  All  such  automatisms
imply  literally  a  dis-association  of  the  society  or  associa-
tion.^

1  See  Appendix,  p.  121.


Lxxx.]  Presidential  Address.  113

We  may,  I  think,  see  a  close  analogy  between  the
organisation  of  such  a  society  of  selves  and  that  of  an
army.  At  headquarters  sits  the  general  or  commander-
in-chief.  Through  a  radiating  system  of  telephone  wires
he  constantly  receives  reports  which  inform  him  of  the
general  condition  and  activities  of  each  part  ;  and  chiefly
his  attention  at  any  moment  is  given  to  the  reports
from  areas  of  greatest  activity.  But  he  is  not  made
acquainted  with  every  detail  of  the  life  and  activity  of
the  army  ;  the  reports  which  reach  him  have  passed
upwards  through  a  hierarchy  of  officers  of  successively
higher  rank ;  at  each  stage  they  have  been  condensed
and  epitomised  ;  and  from  those  parts  of  the  whole
organisation  where  everything  is  going  on  smoothly  in
routine  fashion  no  report  is  made.  Thus  his  information
is  always  highly  general  ;  it  is  the  cream  skimmed  from
the  whole  mass  of  facts.  His  powers  of  attention  and
assimilation  permit  him  only  such  epitomised  and  highly
condensed  information.  In  the  same  way,  the  orders
that  he  gives  are  general  only.  He  decides  and  gives
orders  only  on  the  larger  movements.  The  working  of
them  out  in  detail  is  effected  by  the  descending  series
of  members  of  the  hierarchy  ;  his  orders  are  concerned
only  with  new  adjustments  and  movements  of  the  whole
or  its  parts  ;  and  to  those  parts  which  are  executing
routine  actions,  he  issues  no  orders  ;  to  do  so  would
diminish  rather  than  increase  their  efficiency  ;  it  would
be  a  needless  and  unwarranted  interference  with  his
experienced  subordinates,  who  exercise  at  their  discretion
an  authority  delegated  by  him.

Especially  if  any  disorder  or  disharmony  of  the  parts
of  the  system  arises,  his  authority  is  required  to  restore
order  ;  he  continues  to  suffer  pain  or  distress  which  dis-
tracts his  attention  from  all  other  duties  until  the  disorder
is  rectified.

This  analogy  gives  us,  I  suggest,  a  true  picture  of  the
life  of  the  human  organism.  One  great  difference  obtains
between  the  two  systems  of  our  analogy.  In  the  army
the  general's  touch  with  all  parts  of  the  organism  is
effected  through a  material  system  of  written  and  printed


114


William  McDougall,  M.B.,  F.R.S.


[part


orders  and  telephone  wires  and  dispatch  riders.  In  the
organism  on  the  other  hand  communication  between  the
members  seems  to  be  direct,  that  is  to  say  it  seems  to
be  of  the  nature  of  reciprocal  telepathic  rapport,  in
large  part  at  least.  But  still  the  dominant  monad  is
in  direct  rapport,  not  with  every  member  of  the  system,
but  only  with  those  immediately  beneath  him  in  the  hier-
archy ;  and  the  same  seems  to  be  true  of  every  member
of  the  system.  Thus  my  consciousness  is  not  a  '  col-
lective consciousness,'  it  is  not  a  fusion  of  the  minor
consciousnesses  of  the  subordinate  members  of  my  organ-
ism. By  our  fundamental  postulate  such  fusion  is
impossible.  It  is  rather  a  condensed  essence  of  all  their
separate  and  distinct  consciousnesses  ;  it  reflects  what
in  them  is  most  essential,  whatever  is  most  necessary  for
me  to  know ;  and  this  is  presented  to  me  in  a  conveniently
condensed  and  elaborated  form.  That  this  is  really  true
we  see  on  considering  any  complex  act  of  perception,
as  when  I  perceive  visually  a  complex  field  of  objects.
Between  the  impressions  on  my  sense  organ  and  the
completed  perception  there  intervenes  a  large  amount  of
synthetic  activity  of  truly  mental  nature  ;  this  is  the
work  of  my  subordinates.  And  only  certain  features
of  the  whole  field  in  which  I  am  most  interested  come
fully  to  my  consciousness  in  elaborated  detail  ;  much  of
the  rest  of  the  field  remains  outside  my  consciousness,
but  nevertheless  plays  a  part  in  determining  the  total
reaction  of  my  organism,  subconsciously  as  we  say,  i.e.
through  the  work  of  my  subordinates.

And  in  executing  any  complex  bodily  action,  I  make
the  decision  or  choice  of  action  and  issue  a  general  order,
but  of  the  details  of  its  execution  I  remain  for  the  most
part  unconscious,  although  these  details  are  guided  by
mentally  elaborated  impressions  on  my  sense  organs,
again  the  work  of  my  subordinates.

Let  us  see  how  this  conception  throws  Ught  upon  certain
forms  of  automatism  so  trequent  and  widespread  as  to
fall  within  the  bounds  of  the  normal.  In  sleep  I,  the
dominant  member  of  my  system,  become  passive  and  inert ;
I  cease  to  send  out  controlling  messages. My  subordinates.


liXXX.]


Presidential  Address.


115


released  from  my  controlling  purposes,  may  continue
to  be  alert  and  to  think  their  own  thoughts  ;  and  these
are  more  or  less  reflected  in  my  passive  self  as  dream-
images  and  dream -thoughts.  Since  the  modes  of  activity
of  these  subordinates  are  more  primitive,  nearer  to  the
purely  organic  and  instinctive,  than  my  own  (for  we
must  suppose  that  the  mental  functions  are  delegated
to  them  in  an  order  corresponding  to  their  positions  in
the  hierarchy,  the  most  primitive  to  those  lowest  in  the
scale,  the  less  primitive  to  those  nearer  to  myself)  the
dream  shews  those  archaic  primitive  and  intuitive  qual-
ities which  have  been  so  well  pointed  out  by  Dr.  C.  G.
Jung.  And  they  come  to  my  consciousness  as  some-
thing wholly  foreign  to  myself,  in  the  shaping  of  which
my  purposes  and  my  thinking  have  had  no  share.

In  hypnosis  also  I  am  passive  and  my  subordinates
work  independently  of  my  control.  They  may  receive
and  understand,  retain  and  execute  suggestions  of  which
I  remain  unconscioixs.  And,  if  they  carry  out  these  sug-
gestions in  the  posthypnotic  period,  I  may  be  surprised
to  find  myself  performing  actions  of  which  I  have  no
intention  and  no  prevision  ;  and,  if  I  attempt  to  inhibit
or  prevent  such  actions,  I  may  be  aware  of  a  real  diffi-
culty in  doing  so,  i.e.  a  difficulty  in  controlhng  and
subduing  the  efforts  of  my  subordinates.

Frequently  I  form  an  intention  and  initiate  a  train  of
action  for  its  execution  and  then  I  may  turn  my  attention
to  other  topics,  while  my  faithful  subordinates  continue
to  work  towards  the  end  prescribed.  To  take  a  very
simple  instance,  I  form  the  intention  to  go  to  a  certain
place  and  start  out  ;  then,  though  I  may  be  wholly
occupied  with  thoughts  of  other  things,  my  purpose  is
duly  achieved  by  my  organism,  i.e.  my  subordinates.  Or,
a  more  complex  instance,  I  may  set  out  to  play  a  piece
of  music,  and,  having  begun,  may  engage  in  conversation
on  other  topics,  while  the  execution  of  my  purpose  never-
theless continues  to  unroll  itself  through  processes  which
involve  a  great  amount  of  mental  activity,  including  the
appreciation  at  every  step  of  the  complex  musical  sounds
which  my  fingers  call  from  the  instrument.


116


William  McDougall,  M.B.,  F.R.S.


[part


This  view  of  the  nature  of  a  person  thus  renders  in-
telHgible  many  facts  of  our  normal  mental  hfe  which
on  any  other  view  remain  paradoxical ;  and  it  solves  the
difficulty  of  reconciling  the  facts  of  automatism  and
divided  personality  with  the  fundamental  principle  of  the
unitary  ego  or  self  as  the  ground  of  the  unity  of  con-
sciousness. And  we  can  apply  it  successfully  to  solve
another  great  difficulty,  namely  the  apparent  dependence
of  memory  on  the  integrity  of  tbe  brain.  The  facts
which  seem  to  imply  this  dependence  have,  ever  since
they  began  to  be  discovered,  formed  a  principal  support
of  materialism.  The  facts  are  that  destruction  of  this
or  that  part  of  the  brain  seems  to  deprive  me  of  certain
memories  or  memory  functions.  And  the  assumption  of
materialism,  reached  by  an  inference  from  these  facts,
is  that  destruction  of  the  whole  of  my  bi'ain  would
deprive  me  of  all  memories.

Now  the  view  I  am  putting  before  you  assumes  that
each  monad  of  my  system  retains  the  memory  of  its  own
activities.  Hence  I  myself  retain  no  memory  of  a  multi-
tude of  the  mental  activities  by  which  the  life  of  my
whole  organism  has  been  governed ;  namely  of  all  those
that  belong  to  my  subordinates.  Nevertheless  these  or
many  of  them  are  normally  at  my  disposal.  By  suitable
direction  of  my  attention  I  can  secure  their  reflection
in  my  consciousness  as  dreamlike  images  of  the  past.
And  in  hypnosis  there  seems  to  be  no  limit  to  the
extetat  to  which  this  process  may  be  carried,  remote
events  and  details  to  which  my  attention  was  never
directed  being  reflected  to  my  dreaming,  passively  re-
ceptive self.

We  may  fairly  assume  that,  when  a  part  of  my  brain
is  destroyed,  some  grave  disorder  of  my  functional  rela-
tions with  some  of  my  subordinates  must  ensue,  so  that
I  can  no  longer  command  their  memories,  and  these  are
for  all  practical  purposes  lost  to  me.  But  in  spite  of
such  loss  of  some  part  of  the  memories  which  normally
are  at  my  service,  I  retain  the  memories  of  those  ex-
periences which  were  most  truly  my  own,  and  those
powers of thought and feeling and  command  which  I


LXXX.]


Presidential  Address.


117


have  developed  by  my  own  efforts  in  pursuit  of  the
ends  which  I  have  chosen  of  my  own  vohtion.

If  this  is  true  of  the  destruction  of  any  one  part  of
my  brain,  we  may  infer  that  it  would  be  true  also  in
the  event  of  the  destruction  of  all  its  parts.  Whether
there  would  then  remain  to  me  any  capacity  for  sensory
experience  and  sensorial  imagination  seems  to  me  an
obscure  question  that  must  be  left  open  at  the  present
time.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  sensorial  perception
and  imagination  are  essentially  the  expression  of  the
interaction  of  the  monads.  If  that  be  true,  then,  unless
and  until  I  should  enter  upon  relations  with  some  other
society,  become  a  working  member  of  some  other  system,
I  should  enjoy  only  imageless  thought.

This  way  of  regarding  the  effects  of  brain-injuries  upon
memory  seems  to  be  compatible  with  all  the  facts.  And
there  is  one  class  of  facts  which  it  seems  impossible  to
interpret  in  terms  of  any  other  hypothesis.  I  refer  to
the  effects  upon  sense-perception,  produced  by  destruction
of  certain  parts  of  the  sensory  cortex  of  the  brain,  as
recently  demonstrated  by  the  brilliant  researches  of  Dr.
Henry  Head.^  These  researches  seem  to  have  shewn
that,  when  certain  sensory  areas  are  destroyed,  leaving
intact  the  basal  ganglia  of  the  brain,  the  patient  does
not  lose  altogether  the  capacities  of  sensory  experience
with  which  the  destroyed  areas  are  concerned.  Rather
he  retains  the  capacity  for  the  corresponding  qualities
of  sensation  ;  but  these  sensory  experiences  are  now  of  a
crude  undiscriminating  kind.  The  change  may  be  roughly
expressed  by  saying  that  impressions  on  the  sense  organs
which  normally  initiate  delicate  intellectualised  perceptions,
evoke  in  such  patients  only  crude  sensations.  On  the
view  I  am  putting  before  you,  we  may  interpret  such
facts  as  follows.  The  sense  impressions  are  normally
transmitted  through  a  hierarchy  of  monads,  undergoing
further  elaboration  at  each  level,  until  they  are  reflected
to  the  dominant  in  a  highly  elaborated  form,  conveying
delicate  spatial,  temporal,  and  other  meanings.  The
injury  to  the  brain  throws  the  higher  members  of  this

^  Reported  in  a  series  of  papers  in  recent  volumes  of  Brain.


118


William  McDougall,  31. B.,  F.R.S.  [part


hierachy  out  of  action.  In  consequence  the  lower  mem-
bers must  now  report  directly  to  the  dominant ;  just
as,  if,  in  an  army,  the  superior  officers  of  a  division  are
thrown  out  of  action,  reports  to  headquarters  must  be
sent  forward  by  subordinate  officers  of  the  division,  who,
lacking  the  special  experience  of  their  incapacitated
superiors,  will  report  crudely  and  inadequately,  so  that
their  reports  will  reach  headquarters  lacking  the  intel-
lectual elaboration  and  condensation  which  normally
characterise  them.  That  seems  to  be  a  quite  satisfactory
interpretation  of  the  facts  of  this  order,  and  I  can  con-
ceive of  no  alternative  ;  and  I  find  in  this  strong
confirmation  of  the  hypothesis.

You  will  observe  that  I  take  the  spatial  relations  of
the  parts  of  the  brain  to  be  significant  of  some  real  and
important  relations.  But  I  do  not  mean  to  bind  myself
to  the  view  that  the  material  world  and  its  spatial
relations  as  perceived  by  us  is  exactly  what  it  appears
to  be.  Nor  do  I  apply  to  the  monads  any  metaphysical
adjectives,  such  as  timeless  or  eternal  or  immortal  or
indestructible  or  indivisible  ;  to  do  so  would  be  to  go
beyond  the  warrant  of  the  facts,  it  would  gratuitously
involve  us  in  difficulties,  and  it  is  quite  unnecessary.
For  the  purposes  of  science  we  may  with  advantage
leave  the  metaphysical  questions  on  one  side  ;  we  need
not  enquire  whether  what  we  call  the  body  is  merely
the  appearance  to  us  of  the  system  of  monads,  i.e.  we
need  not  attempt  to  choose  between  a  dualistic  and  a
monistic,  or  a  pluralistic  metaphysic.  It  is  for  the
metaphysicians  to  adapt  their  speculations  to  the  results
of  scientific  research  as  these  are  brought  to  light  and
formulated  in far-reaching  hypotheses.

The  hypothesis  which  I  sketch  in  vaguest  outline
brings  before  our  minds  a  host  of  new  questions  to
which  we  cannot  at  present  return  any  definite  answers.
But  this  does  not  in  any  sense  detract  from  its  value
or  raise  any  presumption  against  it.  Any  such  far-
reaching  hypothesis  must  have  this  result,  which  is  indeed
evidence  of  its  value  as  a  guide  to  research.  Among  such
questions  tliree  stand  out  very  prominently  for  my  mind.


LXXX.]


Presidential  Address.


119


First,  Plato  described  the  soul  as  a  charioteer,  con-
trolling with  more  or  less  success  a  team  of  powerful
unruly  creatures,  the  passions,  which  draw  him  along  in
reckless  fury.  This  has  usually  been  regarded  as  a  liter-
ary metaphor.  May  we,  in  the  light  of  the  view  I  am
putting  before  you,  take  this  description  to  be  literally
true  ?  In  other  words — is  each  of  the  great  primary
instinctive  tendencies  of  our  nature  the  peculiar  function
of  some  one  subordinate  monad  ?  It  is  a  possibility
that  deserves  consideration.

Secondly,  what  is  the  relation  of  the  dominant  monad
to  heredity  and  evolution  ?  Is  he  not  only  the  ruler  of
his  society,  but  also  the  patriarch  and  progenitor  ?  I
do  not  see  how  we  can  avoid  the  assumption  that  the
monads  are  propagated  by  a  process  analogous  to  bud-
ding. And  this  process  must  be  of  two  kinds.  On
the  one  hand  a  throwing  off  of  a  bud  which  contains
all  the  potentialities  and  powers  of  the  progenitor  and  is
capable  of  becoming  the  progenitor  of  a  new  society
and  hence  of  governing  the  whole  development  of  a  new
individual  organism.  On  the  other  hand,  a  process  of
budding  off  subordinates  to  which  only  subordinate
powers  are  delegated.  And,  since  the  development  of
the  individual  mirrors  that  of  the  race,  we  must  suppose
that  these  functions  are  delegated  in  an  order  which
recapitulates  that  delegation  of  functions  which  must
have  'been  the  essential  process  in  the  specialisation  and
differentiation  of  racial  types.  Such  specialisation  and
differentiation  of  functions  within  the  organism  can  only
have  been'  combined  with  continued  effective  integration
of  the  organism  through  such  extensive  delegation  of
functions  combined  with  continued  dominance  of  the
parent  monad.

Lastly,  there  is  the  question  of  the  bearing  of  this
view  upon  the  great  problem  which  for  so  many  members
of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  is  or  should  be
its  predominating  interest,  the  problem  of  life  after
death.  Well,  adoption  of  our  hypothesis  would  necessitate
a  development  of  our  view  of  the  life  after  death  of  the
body, one directly  in  line with the development  which


#


1


120  William  McDougall,  M.B.,  F.R.S.  [part

that  view  has  already  undergone  in  the  slow  process  of  !
cultural  evolution.  Primitive  man  conceived  the  dead  as
having  still  not  only  the  bodily  form  and  organs  but  also  j
the  dress  and  ornaments  and  weapons  which  they  bore  in  '
this  life.  Then  these  external  adjuncts  of  personality  were  |
given  up,  and  men  were  content  to  conceive  the  dead  ;
as  having  the  naked  bodily  form  and  organs  only.  ;

By  a  further  and  comparatively  recent  step,  the  con-  j
ception  of  the  dead  was  purged  of  the  material  embodi-  I
ment,  and  men  learned  to  think  of  them  as  spirits  devoid  !
of  bodily  form  ;  but  they  continue  to  expect  that  the  '
departed  soul  should  retain  every  mental  function  and  \
the  memory  of  every  mental  activity  manifested  through-  '
out  the  life  of  the  organism.  .  But  now,  I  suggest,  we
have  to  make  a  further  step  and  piirge  our  conception  !
still  further.  I,  if  I  survive  the  dissolution  of  my  bodily  ■
organism,  shall,  by  our  hypothesis,  retain  only  those
functions  which  I  have  not  delegated  but  have  developed
by  active  exercise  and  those  memories  which  are  most  !
truly  mine,  the  memories  of  my  own  activities.  And  '
after  all  is  not  this  truly  a  gain,  an  advance  of  our  i
conception  ?  Does  it  not  represent  that  purification  from  j
dross  and  from  the  lower  elements  of  which  so  many  ;
seers  have  spoken  ?

Further,  it  would  seem  to  follow  that,  just  as  in  this  '
life I live  effectively  and  fully  only  by  actively  partici-  ;
pating  in the  life  of  an  intimately  organised  society  of  j
like  members,  so  hereafter  can  I  hope  to  live  richly  and
satisfactorily  only  by  entering  into  and  playing  an  active  ;
part  as  a  member  of  some  other  society  which  will  de-
mand my  faithful  co-operation  and  service. For  we  are
essentially  social  beings  ; outside  of  and  apart  from  such
intimate  communion,  our  selves  would  have  no  meaning
and  no  value,  and  perhaps  could  not  be  said  to  live  or  ;
be  conscious  in  any  intelligible  sense  of  those  words.  '

I  venture  to  think  that  these  considerations  may
afiord  some  guidance,  if  they  are  kept  in  mind  when  we
confront  the  baffling  problems,  the  perplexities  and  dis-
appointments which  seem  to  be  the  lot  of  those  bent  upon
the  major  quest  of  Psychical  Research.  .;

•I


LXXX.]


Presidential  Address.


121


APPENDIX.

I  WOULD  draw  attention  to  Dr.  Morton  Prince's  discussion  of  his
celebrated  case  B.  C.  A.  {Journal  of  Abnormal  Psychology,  October
1919).  This  case  was  closely  similar  in  many  respects  to  the  better
known  case  of  Miss  Beauchamp.  I  accept  almost  all  the  inter-
pretations that  Dr.  Prince  arrives  at  in  his  illuminating  discussion
of  this  case ;  but  I  would  point  out  that  all  his  facts  and  almost
all  of  his  interpretations,  in  terms  largely  of  instinctive  conative
tendencies,  are  all  perfectly  compatible  with  the  view  I  am  advocating.
Further,  Dr.  Prince  makes  certain  observations  and  admissions  which
are  difficult  to  reconcile  with  any  other  view.  I  cite  one  of  these  as
follows  :  "  This  feeling  by  a  secondary  personality  that  certain  conscious
experiences  belong  or  belonged  to  her  own  personal  consciousness  or
ego  and  that  others  do  not,  or  did  not,  belong  is  a  common  pheno-
menon in  such  cases  and  is  of  great  significance.  It  is  a  phenomenon
which  justifies  the  inference  that  the  relation  which  one  system  of  ideas
bears  to  that  which  we  call  the  ego  is  different  from  that  of  the  other
system ;  it  is  a  phenomenon,  too,  which  must  be  taken  into  account
in  solving  the  problem  of  the  ego.  When  we  study  the  records  of
cases  of  multiple  personality  we  find  as  a  frequent  observation  that
the  secondar3'  personality  distinguishes  between  the  conscious  experi-
ences which  belong  to  itself  and  those  which  belong  to  the  principal
personality,  and  to  other  secondary  personalities,  if  more  than  one.
This  differentiation  is  based  upon  the  feeling  of  self-consciousness  being
attached  to  the  foirner  and  not  to  the  latter.  It  is  not,  therefore,
simply  a  matter  of  the  experiences  occurring  at  different  chronological
epochs.  Indeed  the  two  different  sets  of  experiences  may  be  synchron-
ous, one  being  conscious  and  the  other  co-conscious"  (p.  241).  Dr.
Prince  also  writes — "  The  bearing  of  amnesia  on  the  principle  of  multiple
personality,  perhaps,  needs  a  few  words.  From  the  facts  as  they
developed  in  this  case,  it  must  be  obvious  that  the  presence  or  absence
of  amnesia  in  no  wa3'  affects  the  reality  of  altered  or  secondary  person-
ality. It  was  quite  as  much  a  personality  (i.e.  the  secondary)  before
the  development  of  amnesia  as  afterwards.  Before  this  appeared  the
patient  as  A  in  no  way  differed  in  characteristics  (other  than  amnesia)
from  what  she  was  afterwards,  and  the  same  is  true  of  B.  The
amnesia  simply  made  the  contrast  between  the  phases  more  ob-
trusive ;  that  was  all.  If,  therefore,  following  the  amnesia  each  phase
can  be  rightly  interpreted — and  of  this  there  can  be  no  doubt — as  a
dissociated  personality,  the  same  must  be  true  of  it  antecedent  to  loss
of  memory "  (p.  276).  Here  we  see  Dr.  Prince  rightly  repudiates  the
view  (which,  I  think,  may  be  rightly  associated  with  the  name  of
Prof.  Janet),  that  the  alternating  personalities  are  merely  parts  of  the
memory  continuum  disconnected  from  one  another.  And  the  facts  re-
ported are  difficult  to  reconcile  with  any  view  other  than  the  view
that  the  personalities  or  selves  of  the  dissociated  condition  already
existed  as  distinct  selves  before  their  dissociation  was  effected.  The
dissociation  seems  to  have  been  completed  or  achieved  in  or  by  hyp-
nosis, as  shewn  in  the  following  passage  : — "  A  few  days  after  the  B

I


122  William  McDougall,  M.B.,  F.R.8.  [part


personality  had  appeared  in  hypnosis  this  phase  spontaneously  waked
and  alternated  as  it  had  previously  done  with  the  A  complex.  But
now  .  .  .  there  was  amnesia  on  the  part  of  A  for  B.  The  explanation
for  this  is  undoubtedly  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  a  new  synthesis
and  more  complete  dissociation  of  the  B  complex  {i.e.  from  .4)  had
taken  place  through  the  experience  of  hypnosis.  Analogous  pheno-
mena I  have  observed  in  making  experimental  observations,  but  it
would  take  us  too  far  away  to  enter  into  this  question  here  "  (p.  276).
The  suggestion  is  that  hypnosis  impaired  the  rapport  between  A  and
B  ;  and  the  facts  related  imply,  it  mil  be  seen,  that  A  and  B  existed
as  distinct  selves  before  the  dissociation.  I  suggest  that  such  impair-
ment of  rapport  is  of  the  essence  of  hypnosis,  as  of  normal  sleep  also.

In  the  same  number  of  the  Journal  of  Abnormal  Psychology,  Prof.
C.  E.  Cory  of  the  Washington  University  describes  a  well-marked  case
of  divided  personality  of  a  type  somewhat  different  from  Dr.  Prince's
two  classical  cases.  In  some  respects  it  is  even  more  favourable  than
those  cases  to  the  hypothesis  sketched  in  this  address,  and  more  difficult
to  reconcile  witli  any  other.  The  case  exhibited  alternation  of  two
distinct  personalities,  A  and  B.  "  Although  A  has  been  changed  in
some  ways  by  the  dissociation  her  memory  is  continuous  with  the
origmal  self.  i?  is  a  secondary  personality."  Prof.  Cory  finds  good
evidence  of  '  co-consciousness  '  of  both  A  and  B.  The  following  extracts
illustrate  this  point  and  also  the  probability  that  B  existed  as  a  distinct
self  before  her  emergence  in  control  of  the  bodily  organism.  "  The
perception  of  the  submerged  self,  and  this  is  true  of  both  A  and  B,
is  never  quite  the  same  as  those  received  when  in  the  active  role.
From  repeated  descriptions  of  A  and  B  of  how  the  world  appears
when  they  see  it  subconsciously  I  get  the  impression  that  it  is  the
same  only  less  real.  B  has  described  it  as  '  seeing  it  through  a
window,  then  going  outside.'  In  thi.s  manner  she  says  she  saw  the
world  for  years  before  she  '  got  out.'  ...  As  subconscious,  the  content
of  iJ's  vision  may  differ  from  that  of  A.  She  may  note  many  things
which  escape  .4.  She  says  she  has  often  seen  things  in  a  shop  window
that  A  did  not.  Both  can  read  a  page  at  the  same  time.  .  .  A
reports  that  her  hand  has  turned  the  page  before  she  was  ready,  B
having  sBready  finished  it.  .  .  .  If  B,  as  subconscious,  is  deeply  dis-
turbed, say  depressed  or  angry,  A  may  also  experience  some  distress,
possibly  some  shade  of  the  same  emotion,  or  it  may  be  a  general
feeling  of  uneasiness.  If  B  is  so  disposed  she  can  determine  to  a
large  extent  ^'s  reactions  to  situations  and  people."  Again — "  B's
memory  is  in  some  respects  good,  even  remarkable.  Her  memory  of
A'a  early  life  is  much  better  than  .4's.  During  these  descriptions  by
B,  A  sees  these  scenes  of  her  childhood  pass  before  her,  reproduced
much  as  they  might  be  in  hypnosis.  .  .  .  Unlike  many,  perhaps  most,
cases  of  dissociation  each  of  these  two  selves  is  conscious  of  what  the
other  does,  that  is,  when  either  appears  she  is  aware  of  what  the
other  has  done.  There  are  thus  no  gaps  in  the  conduct,  and  as  far
as  the  actual  conduct  goes  there  is,  therefore,  no  amnesia.  But  the
inner  thought  that  lies  back  of  an  act  is  known  only  as  much  as  the


LXXX.]


Presidential  Address.


123


other  sees  fit  to  reveal.  In  this  regard  they  are  related  much  like
any  two  friends  that  know  each  other  well."  B  also  produced  evidence
in  support  of  her  claim  that  she  could  force  a  dream  upon  A,  or,
remaining  awake  while  A  slept,  awake  her  at  any  required  time.  A
modus  Vivendi  was  established  between  the  two  personalities,  an  agreed
alternating  dominance  of  A  and  B.  "  The  strain  on  A  with  B  sub-
conscious (i.e.  before  emergence  of  B  to  occasional  dominance)  seems
to  have  been  greater  than  it  is  under  the  present  modus  vivendi.  As
it  is,  her  peace  depends  upon  sharing  life  occasionally  with  B.  Unless
this  is  done  B  creates  disturbances  both  mental  and  physical  that
are  highly  undesirable."  These  few  extracts  from  this  record  of
observations  (which  seem  to  have  been  made  with  a  care  and  knowledge
that  inspire  confidence)  illustrate  not  only  '  co-consciousness '  but
also  reciprocal  influence  between  the  two  co-conscious  personalities,
and  they  seem  quite  inconsistent  with  any  view  which  would  regard
the  alternation  of  the  two  personalities  as  merely  the  expression  of  dis-
continuitj'  of  two  trains  of  memory.


124


Hubert  Wales.


[part


II.

A  REPORT  ON  A  SERIES  OF  CASES  OF  APPARENT
THOUGHT  TRANSFERENCE  WITHOUT  CON-
SCIOUS AGENCY.

By  Hubert  Wales.
Introductory.

On  the  3rcl  of  August,  ''918,  I  received  a  letter  from  a
total  stranger — not  an  uncommon  occurrence  with  nie.
On  this  occasion,  the  immediate  cause  was  the  pubhcation
in  a  newspaper  of  half  a  dozen  hues  I  had  written  on
some  subject  connected  with  psychical  research.  My
correspondent,  it  appeared,  was  a  Miss  Jane  Samuels,
and  I  gathered  from  her  remarks  and  from  subsequent
communications  that  she  was  in  charge  of  a  stationery
and  fancy-goods  shop  in  London,  to  which  printing  and
photographic  branches  were  attached.

She  began  the  letter  by  asking  me  if  I  were  interested
in  telepathy  from  the  dead  or  from  the  living.  That
way  of  opening  communication  between  us  seems  in
itself  to  call  for  a  passing  comment.  The  popular  or
spiritualistic  view,  as  is  well  known,  regards  communication
from  the  dead  and  supernormal  communication  between
the  living  as  two  separate  and  distinct  processes,  not
only  without  fellowship,  but  almost  antagonistic  ;  and
Miss  Samuels,  I  learnt  later,  though  not  an  avowed
member  of  the  spiritualistic  body,  keeps  up  a  running
and  interested  association  with  it.  To  me  it  seems  that,
if  the  dead  survive  and  can  communicate  with  us  at
all,  the  means  can  only  be  telepathic.  It  would  appear,
therefore,  that  the  introductory  words  of  Miss  Samuels's
letter  were  fitted,  with  a  happy  intuition,  to  the  ideas
of  its  addressee,  who  is  now  expressing  his  views
on  the  subject,  publicly,  for  the  first  time.


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transference. ,  125

My  correspondent  went  on  to  say  that,  for  the  previous
five  years,  she  had  noticed  that  certain  impressions  of
hers  (I  am  giving  the  gist,  I  do  not  profess  to  be  quoting
the  exact  words,  of  the  letter)  corresponded  in  a  marked
degree  with  the  thoughts  of  her  friends,  particularly
with  those  of  one  friend,  Mr.  H.  H.  Fuller,  at  one  time
the  manager  of  her  photographic  department,  but  then
in  the  army  and  ^quartered  at  the  Curragh  Camp  in
Ireland,  where  he  was  employed  in  teaching  photography
to  pilots  and  observers  of  the  Air  Force.  I  have  learnt
later  that  these  impressions  are  obtained,  for  the  most
part,  though  not  exclusively,  during  sleep,  and  take,
I  imagine,  primarily,  though  again  not  exclusively,  a
visual  form  ;  but  Miss  Samuels  appears  to  distinguish
them  in  themselves,  apart  from  their  veridicality,  from
ordinary  dreams.^

The  next  time  I  was  in  London,  which  happened  to  be
in  about  a  week,  I  went  to  see  Miss  Samuels.  I  found
her  the  antithesis  of  the  type  of  person  usually  associated
with  mysterious  powers — active  and  energetic  to  the
point  of  restlessness  and  exceedingly  talkative  and  full
of  spirits.  One  could  hardly  conceive  her  getting  her
mind  into  a  state  of  passivity  for  a  transitory  moment.
She  was  frankly  (indeed,  proudly)  Jewish,  and  very
much  interested  in  her  "  telepathy."  (The  question  was
quite  candidly  begged  on  her  part— dreams,  notes,
drawings,  thoughts  and  feehngs,  of  certain  kinds,  were
all  "  my  telepathy.")  In  the  course  of  three  short
caUs  I  made  upon  her — aU  during  a  week's  visit  to
London  in  August,  1918 — she  showed  me  over  her  shop
and  business  premises,  introduced  me  to  her  assistants,
took  my  photograph  and  talked  to  me  in  the  intervals  of
attending  to  customers.  These  three  interviews  occupied
altogether  perhaps  an  hour  or  an  hour  and  a  half  :
I  had  not  seen  her  before,  and  I  have  not  seen  her  since.

In  the  course  of  these  talks,  I  arranged  with  her  to
make notes of her impressions, which she had  not

1  See  Proc,  Vol.  XX.,  p.  148,  for  an  apparently  similar  distinction,
by  Mrs.  Verrall,  in  her  own  case,  between  '  vivid  impressions  in  sleep  "
and  "  the  ordinary  dream."


126


Hubert  Wales.


[PAET


previously  been  in  the  habit  of  doing,  having  merely  related
such  of  them  as  she  chanced  to  remember  the  next  day.
This,  let  me  say  at  once,  she  has  heroically  done,  night
after  night,  for  several  months,  taking  a  note-book  to
bed  with  her,  and  making  notes  at  all  manner  of  un-
earthly hours,  whenever  she  happened  to  wake,  often
in  the  dark.  As  one  who  does  not  take  at  all  kindly
to  .exerting  himself  after  he  has  got  to  bed,  I  feel
particularly  that  those  of  us  who  are  interested  in  getting
to  the  bottom  of  the  questions  upon  which  this  paper
touches,  owe  her  a  debt  of  gratitude  for  having  put
herself  to  this  considerable  inconvenience  in  the  interests
of  scientific  research.  She  was  to  post  the  notes  to  me
at  once,  and  I  undertook  to  forward  copies  of  them  to
Mr.  Fuller  for  his  comments.

This  procedure,  which  was  carried  out  from  10th  August
to  4th  November,  1918,  produced  some  striking  corre-
spondences, but  I  coiild  see  no  way  of  getting  them
on  a  sound  evidential  basis.  Mr.  Fuller  was  not  in  a
position  (he  was  a  private  in  the  army)  to  obtain  written
corroboration  of  his  statements,  and— though  I  had  no
reason  to  doubt  his  bo7ia  fides  and  have  since  become
perfectly  satisfied  of  it,  and  though  small  discrepancies
were  noted  in  his  comments  with  apparent  care— it  was
impossible  to  prove  that  the  stories  upon  which  the
correspondences  depended  were  not  sheer  invention  and
that  the  noting  of  discrepancies  was  not  "  the  perfection
of  acting."  Fortunately,  however,  I  found  an  increasing
tendency  in  Miss  Samuels' s  notes  of  her  impressions  '
to  correspond  with  incidents  affecting  my  own  thoughts,
and,  since  I  was  usually  in  a  position  to  obtain  written
corroboration  of  my  statements  in  regard  to  them,  I
gradually  concentrated  upon  these,  and  ultimately  dis-
continued forwarding  the  notes  to  Mr.  Fuller.

The  most  remarkable  results  obtained  t-hrough  him,  I
think,  were  in  respect  of  the  apparent  transference '  of
bodily  sensations,  particularly  pains.  There  was  such
a  degree  of  accurate  correspondence  of  this  kind,  according
to  Mr.  Fuller's  comments,  that  I  got  tired  of  copying
and  forwarding  the  notes,  and  at  last  asked  Miss  Samuels


LXXX.]


Apparent  Thought  Transference.


127


not  to  trouble  to  send  more,  since  there  appeared  to
be  no  object  in  further  piling  up  coincidences.  These
percepts,  I  gathered  from  Miss  Samuels,  do  not  form
part  of  her  regular  sleeping  impressions,  but  are  obtained
in  the  normal  waking  state  at  all  hours  of  the  day,
are  sometimes  so  severe  as  to  cause  her  to  resort  to
"  real  remedies  "  (though  she  appears  never  to  have
any  difficulty  in  distinguishing  them  from  her  "  own
pains  "),  and  the  time  coincidence  is  usually  pretty  exact.
She  told  me,  and  I  think  Mr.  Fuller  did  too,  that,  when
she  first  obtained  these  particular  impressions,  she  was
Liable  to  get  the  right  kind  of  sensation,  in  the  right
locality,  but  on  the  wrong  side  of  the  body — e.g.  a  cut
on  the  third  finger  of  the  right  hand  would  emerge  as
a  cut  on  the  third  finger  of  the  left  hand.  I  cannot
say  if  either  of  them  knew  that  a  similar  peculiarity
has  been  observed  in  the  case  of  other  percipients.  A
list  of  these  impressions,  with  Mr.  Fuller's  comments,  is
given  in  the  Appendix  (p.  213).  They  have,  I  think,
an  evident  bearing  on  the  curious  power  evinced  by
some  mediums  and  their  controls  to  diagnose  ailments.^
(Compare  Mr.  Guthrie's  experiments  at  close  quarters,
reported  in  Proceedings,  Pt.  IX.)  I  have  observed  no
correspondences  in  respect  of  bodily  sensations  in  my
own  case,  at  least  no  more  than  can  easily  be  assigned
to  chance.

In  her  first  letter  Miss  Samuels  told  me  that,  if  Mr.
Fuller  deliberately  tried  to  convey  a  thought  to  her,  she
did  not  get  it,  though  she  sometimes  got  a  sense  of  effort.
My  experience  has  confirmed  this.  I  feel  bound  to  say,
however,  that,  finding  my  thoughts  were  apparently
communicated  without  trouble,  I  have  made  no  persistent
or  particularly  strenuous  attempts  consciously  to  transmit
them.  I  remember,  one  evening,  trying  for  some  time  to
concentrate  my  mind  on  the  buffalo  picture  which  has  been
the  subject  of  a  successful  thought  transference  experiment
(reproduced  in  Proceedings,  Pt.  LXIX.,  p. 312),  to  form

1  Miss  Samiiels  tells  me  she  has  often  seat  Mr.  Fuller  homely  remedies
for  ailments  of  which  she  %vas  cognisant  only  through  corresponding
symptoms  in  herself.


128


Hubert  Wales.


[part


a  mental  image  of  it  and  so  on  ;  but  nothing  in  the
least  suggesting  it  appeared  subsequently  in  Miss  Samuels' s
notes.  On  another  occasion  I  struck  the  back  of  my  left
hand  repeatedly  with  the  bristles  of  a  hair-brush,  till
I  drew  blood  ;  but  since  Miss  Samuels  remained  indifferent
to  my  sufferings,  I  did  not  repeat  the  experiment.
Whether  or  not,  with  more  persistence,  I  might  ultimately
have  succeeded  in  transmitting  a  thought  by  active
endeavour,  it  remains  the  fact,  as  will  be  seen,  that
Miss  Samuels  "s  veridical  impressions  have  rarely  corre-
sponded with  anything  even  in  the  main  current  of
my  thought,  but  with  incidental  reflections,  transitory
impressions  about  trifles,  sometimes  with  things  I  have
merely  overheard  and  of  which  I  have  consciously  retained
only  an  imperfect  knowledge.  On  her  side  Miss  Samuels
says  similarly  :  "I  seem  to  have  little  to  do  with  the
matter,  only  like  a  telephone,  just  to  receive  all  kinds
of  messages."  For  these  reasons  I  do  not  regard  what
follows  as  a  record  of  experiments  in  a  strict  sense  of
the  term — for,  as  Andrew  Lang  (I  think  it  was)  said,
you  cannot  experiment  consciously  in  the  unconscious —
but  of  systematic  observations  of  spontaneous  phenomena.

The  instances  of  apparent  thought  transference  with
which  I  propose  to  deal  in  this  report,  consisting  in
the  main  of  correspondences  with  my  own  thoughts,  have
occurred  in  a  period  of,  roughly,  eight  months,  from
about  the  middle  of  August,  1918,  to  about  the  middle
of  April,  1919.  During  this  time  Miss  Samuels  has  sent
me  notes  of  her  impressions,  with  few  exceptions,  daily —
sometimes several sheets, sometimes only a few  words.

It  is  manifestly  out  of  the  question  that  I  should
attempt  to  lay  before  the  Society  the  whole  of  this
mass  of  material,  or  even  a  large  proportion  of  it.
Moreover,  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  making  a
classification  of  Miss  Samuels's  impressions,  so  as  to  give
some  idea  of  the  ratio  of  success  to  failure,  as  regards
correspondence  with  my  thoughts,  are  exceptionally  great,
because  of  her  apparent  liability  to  be  influenced  by  a
variety  of  agents.  For  this  reason  it  seemed  useless
to try to make any such classification for the  period


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transference.


129


subsequent  to  4th  November,  1918,  when  I  ceased  to
send  copies  of  Miss  Samuels' s  notes  regularly  to  Mr.
Fuller.  The  tabular  statement  which  follows,  therefore,
is  limited  to  the  period  from  17th  August,  1918,  when
Miss  Samuels  first  attributed  impressions  to  my  agency,
to  4th  November,  1918.  I  have  counted  everything  in  the
notes  for  this  period,  except  impressions  attributed  by
Miss  Samuels,  at  the  time  of  despatching  the  notes,  to
some  other  person  than  myself,  or  in  regard  to  which  some
other  person  has  noted  a  suggestive  correspondence  with
his  or  her  thoughts.  This,  of  course,  takes  no  account  of
possible  agents  who  cannot  be  traced,  of  the  difficulty
of  remembering  transitory  thoughts  about  trivial  things
even  for  a  day  or  two,  or  of  occasional  possible  unwilling-
ness on  the  part  of  a  person  suggested  as  the  agent  to
acknowledge  correspondence.  (For  an  instance  of  denial
see  Case  XLVIII.  below.)  But  any  error  introduced  from
these  causes  is  error  on  the  safe  side,  so  the  amount
of  success  shown  may  be  taken  as  a  minimum.

Another  difiiculty  has  been  to  decide  what  constitutes
a  single  impression.  Usually  the  line  dividing  one  from
another  is  pretty  clear,  and  Miss  Samuels  not  uncommonly
has  indicated  it  in  her  notes  ;  but  occasionally  it  is
blurred,  and  occasionally  a  topic  recurs,  other  matters
intervening  between  the  references.  In  the  latter  cases
I  have  counted  as  one  impression  all  references  to  the
same  subject,  whether  scattered  or  compact.

The  following  are  illustrations  of  the  standard  I  have
set  up  and  tried  to  maintain  in  assigning  impressions
to  particular  categories.  "  Some  poor  people  are  worried
about  paying  their  rent,  it's  really  only  a  small  amount  "
(Case  XI.)  I  have  put  in  Class  2,  as  veridical  but
confused.  Had  the  form  been,  "  Someone  is  worried
about  some  poor  people  paying  their  rent,"  I  should
have  put  it  in  Class  1.  The  note  concerning  trays  and
clips  (Case  XXXI.)  I  have  put  in  Class  1,  in  spite  of
its  confusion,  the  exact  correspondence  with  the  dimensions
of  the  trays  and  with  the  number — 4 — bringing  it  above
the  standard.  These  two  I  regard  as  good  examples  of
border-line  cases.


130


Hubert  Wales.


[part


In  the  sub-classification,  the-  distinction  between  corre-
spondences that  are  undistinctive  and  those  that  are
confused  was  often  difficult  to  make,  and  little  reliance
can  be  placed  upon  it.  The  cases  placed  under  these
heads  are  of  very  different  values,  ranging  from,  e.g.,  the
note  "  Someone  drinks  and  it  goes  down  the  wrong  way,"
which  corresponded  with  a  very  rare  misfortuije  of  that
nature,  in  my  case,  on  the  evening  preceding  the  date
of  the  impression,  to  such  an  indefinite  and  generally
applicable  statement  as  "  a  railway  line  crossed."  I
should  perhaps  make  clear,  in  regard  to  this  Class  2,
that  my  classification  means  that  each  correspondence
included  in  it,  considered  individually,  can  be  attributed  to
chance  without  strain.  It  is  necessarily  a  very  much
more  troublesome  matter  so  to  deal  with  the  whole  two
hundred  as  a  block.


Classification  of  Miss  Samuels'' s  im'pressions  from  nth
August  to  4th  November,  1918,  inclusive,  with  the
exceptions  mentioned  in  the  text.


Class  1.

Class  2.

Class  3.

Total.

Veridical  to  a
degree  diffi-
cult to  attri-
bute to
chance.

Wholly  or  partially
veridical,  but  un-
distinctive, con-
fused or  antecedent
in  time.

No  correspon-
dence with
the  remem-
bered thoughts
of  H.  W.

16

200

159

375

Sub-classification  of  Class  2.

Undistinctive.

Confused.

Antecedent  in
time.

Total.

106

78

16

200

This  means,  it  will  be  seen,  that  the  notes  have  usually
presented some correspondence with my thoughts,  and


LXXX.]


Apparent  Thouglit  Transference.


131


that  those  containing  striking  veridical  detail  have
occurred  at  the  rate  of  one  or  two  a  week.

Of  the  cases  discussed  in  this  paper,  I  have  counted  in
the  first  Class,  II.,  III.,  IV.,  V.,  VI.,  VII.,  VIII.,  XII.,  XIII.,
XXX.,  XXXI.,  XXXII.,  XXXIII.,  XXXVI.  and  XLI.
(flats  incident)  ;  had  they  come  within  the  period  I  should
have  counted  also  in  this  class  XIV.,  XVIII.,  XIX.,
XX.,  XXI.,  XXV.  (kitten  incident),  XXVI.,  XXIX.,
XXXV.,  XXXVII.  and  possibly  XXIV.  ;  the  remainder
of  those  cited  in  which  I  have  a  part  are  in  Class  2.

During  the  first  five  weeks  of  the  eight  months  covered
by  the  observations  IMiss  Samuels  was  sleeping  nightly
at  Maidenhead,  then  she  slept  for  a  week  at  Harrow,
and  since  has  been  altogether  in  London,  except  for
odd  visits,  of  a  night  or  two  at  a  time,  to  such  places
as  Margate  and  Bournemouth.  These  changes  of  place
have  had  no  noticeable  effect  upon  the  results  ;  about
the  same  average  of  veridical  impressions  has  been  main-
tained throughout.  I  have  been  at  my  home  at  Hind-
head,  forty  miles  from  London,  during  the  whole  period,
except  for  two  visits  of  a  night  at  a  time  to  London,
without  the  knowledge  of  Miss  Samuels.^  It  is  worth  remark-
ing, for  its  bearing  on  the  momentous  question  whether
telepathy  (assuming  its  occurrence)  be  a  psychical  or  a
physical  phenomenon,  that  Miss  Samuels  has  many  times
told  me  that  the  impressions  which  appear  to  her  to
come  from  Mr.  Fuller  (and  which  usually  have  had  an
apparent  correspondence  with  his  thoughts)  are  far  clearer
and  easier  to  remember  than  those  which  appear  to
her  to  come  from  me  ;  indeed,  as  will  be  seen  later,  she
has  repeatedly  attributed  to  my  agency  impressions,
which  have  proved  to  be  veridical  as  regards  me,  because
of  their  relative  feebleness.  Mr.  Fuller,  as  has  been
said,  was  stationed,  at  the  time,  at  the  Curragh  Camp,
near  Dublin,  a  distance,  I  think,  of  about  400  miles
from  London  ;  while  I,  according  to  information  derived
from  the  nearest  milestone  to  my  house,  am  forty  miles

1  These  visits  both  took  place  during  the  period  when  Miss  Samuels
was  sleeping  in  London.  Nothing  of  interest  occurred  in  her  notes
on  either  occasion.


132


Hubert  Wales.


[part


from  Hyde  Park  Corner.  There  is,  I  understand,  a
sympathetic  link  between  Miss  Samuels  and  Mr.  Fuller ;
between  the  former  and  me  there  is  no  link  beyond
our  common  interest  in  the  phenomena.

I  have  been  careful  to  tell  Miss  Samuels  nothing  of
my  personal  circumstances  or  relationships,  either  in
my  few  talks  with  her  or  in  my  subsequent  letters  and
comments  on  her  notes.  It  seemed  to  me  to  be  necessary,
in  order  to  maintain  her  interest,  to  tell  her  in  general
terms  when  she  correctly  described  or  referred  to  matters
which  had  been  in  my  thoughts,  and  I  have  accordingly
done  so  ;  but  I  think  I  have  contrived  to  word  these
statements  without  giving  her  substantially  more  information
than  the  percept  itself  contained.

She  does  not,  for  instance,  know  at  the  time  of  writing —
and  probably  will  not  know  until  she  reads  this  report —
whether  I  am  married  or  single.^  In  very  many  cases
I  have  told  her  merely  that  particular  notes  were  "  appro-
priate "  or  "  relevant  "  or  "  good  "  or  something  similar.
She  understands  the  reason  for  this  reticence  and  has
fully  approved  it.  Only  one  thing  I  can  remember
having  let  slip — that  I  occasionally  do  some  gardening.
That  was  in  August,  1918,  when  I  was  talking  to  her
in  her  shop  ;  but  in  any  case,  no  doubt,  the  fact  would
have  had  to  be  regarded  as  an  easy  inference  from  the
circumstance  that  I  live  in  the  country.  She  has  told
me  that  she  has  once,  some  years  ago,  been  to  Hindhead
for  a  day,  and  knows,  therefore,  its  general  features,
particularly  that  it  is  on  a  hill,  amid  trees.

Before  I  proceed  to  quote  extracts  from  the  notes
and  my  contemporary  comments,  there  is  some  necessary
information  regarding  them  to  be  given.  The  notes
have  been  written,  as  I  have  said,  for  the  most  part
in bed, and often in the dark  ; for Miss Samuels,  I

1  I  find  that  in  the  1918  edition  of  Who's  Who  only  the  titles  of
my  books  and  my  address  are  given.  I  have  some  impression  that
I  furnished  rather  fuller  particiilars  for  the  1919  edition,  but  not  enough
to  impair  any  correspondence  discussed  in  this  paper.

Who's  Who,  I  think,  is  a  source  of  leakage  liable  to  be  overlooked.
I  have  found,  for  instance,  that  Mrs.  Verrall's  address,  at  the  time
it  emerged  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script,  was  given  in  it.


LXXX.]


Apparent  Thought  Transference.


133


understand,  does  not  sleep  alone,  but  with  a  sister,
whom  she  has  had  to  be  careful  not  to  disturb.  In
view  of  these  circumstances,  they  are,  on  the  whole,
wonderfully  clear  ;  but  occasionally  words  are  illegible
and  occasionally  short  passages  are  written  over  others.
For  several  months  she  usually  sent  me,  in  addition  to
these  rough  notes,  typed  copies  of  them  which  she  made
herself  after  reaching  her  shop.  For  my  transcriptions
I  have  used  the  rough  notes  whenever  it  has  been  possible
to  do  so,  resorting  to  the  typed  copies  only  in  cases  where
the  degree  of  illegibility  in  the  originals  was  such  that
no  consecutive  meaning  could  be  extracted  from  them.

There  have  been  often,  indeed  usually,  verbal  discre-
pancies between  the  rough  notes  and  the  typed  copies.
I  have  ignored  these  where  the  sense  is  unafiected,  but
in  cases  where  there  is  any  shade  of  variation  in  the
meaning,  I  have  given,  within  square  brackets,  the  typed
version,  in  addition  to  the  original  version.

Where  the  sense  is  beyond  doubt,  I  have  corrected
the  spelling.  Miss  Samuels  is  frankly  an  atrocious  speller,
though  she  has  never,  I  think,  reached  the  heights  of
phoneticism  attained  by  an  automatist  mentioned  in  aii
early  volume  of  the  Proceedings,  who,  asked  to  spell
"  psychical,"  produced,  supraliminally.  "  sicickle,"  and
subhminally  [per  planchette)  "  cicicle."  Miss  Samuels
is  the  last  person  in  the  world  who  would  pretend  that
she  can  spell  "  psychical,"  but  I  think  she  knows  it
begins  with  a  "p."  I  have  also  added,  very  guardedly,
again  where  the  meaning  is  not  in  doubt,  a  little  punctua-
tion.

Part  I.

Cases nsr which the Aggregate seems to  Exclude

Chance-Coincidence.

I  give  first  a  series  of  extracts  from  the  notes,  with
comments,  chosen  primarily  with  a  view  to  showing  that
we  are  not  dealing  with  chance  coincidence.  It  will  be
understood,  of  course,  from  what  I  have  already  said,  that
they  occur  in  the  midst  of  a  very  considerable  amount


134


Htibert  Wales.


[part


of  matter  which,  at  best,  is  only  partially  veridical.  It
is  apparent,  even  if  we  are  satisfied  of  a  telepathic  con-
nection, that  inspirational  flashes  are,  as  Mrs.  Sidgwick
has  said  in  another  context,  "  much  adulterated  by  the
automatist's  own  mind."  Afterwards  I  propose  to  give
some  extracts  from  the  notes  which  appear  to  present
points  of  interest  for  examination  on  other  grounds.

It  will  be  noticed  that,  in  several  instances,  my  con-
temporary notes  are  not  followed  by  any  corroborative
statements.  This  is  because,  in  the  case  of  slight  or
uncertain  correspondences,  I  have  not  felt  justified  in
bothering  my  friends  to  write  statements  ;  because,  in
some  cases,  the  subject  of  the  correspondence  is  a  docu-
ment which  is  in  itself  corroborative  ;  and  because,  in  a
considerable  number  of  cases,  the  correspondence  is  based
on  some  thought  or  trivial  incident  known  to  me  alone.

In  the  quotations  that  follow,  omitted  words  or  passages,
which  are  shown  by  dots,  always  relate,  or  apparently  so,
to  matters  unconnected  with  the  impression  discussed.


I.

Extract  from  Miss  Sammls's  notes  {received  August  22,  1918).
August  21,  1918. 6.30  a.m.

I  am  tying  or  doing  something  with  rope  in  a  garden.

These  mixed  thoughts  are  so  faint  and  indistinct  that
I  think  they  came  from  or  comaected  with  Mr.  Wales.

The  garden  or  round  the  garden  needs  the  ground  to
be  loosened,  not  only  the  lawn  grass  cut.  There  seems
to  be  2  gardens.

By  a  later  post  I  received  the  following  additional
note  from  Miss  Samuels,  not  having  communicated  with
her  in  the  meantime  :

Be  garden  notes  of  21.8.18— the  lawn  had  been  cut-
but  edges  or  borders  where  [sic]  found  fault  with.


Lxxx.]  Ajp'parent  Thought  Transference.  135


Note  written  by  H.  W.  on  August  22,  1918,  after  receiving
the  first  note  above,  but  before  receiving  the  second.

The  first  thing  I  did  in  the  garden,  after  my  return
home  on  the  15th  August,  was  to  tie  down  some  rose
shoots  with  string.  The  soil  of  the  flower  beds  certainly
needed  loosening  and  the  lawns  mowing  ;  in  fact  the
place  struck  me  generally  as  looking  rather  lost  and
overgrown.  I  mowed  the  tennis  lawn  on  Monday  (the
19th),  having  been  thinking  of  doing  so  for  several  days
before.  I  have  done  no  gardening  smce  I  returned  besides
cutting  the  grass  and  tying  the  rose  shoots.  The  flower
and  kitchen  gardens  here  are  quite  distinctly  separated  :
they  are,  in  fact,  two  gardens.^

II.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels' s  notes {received  September  2,
1918).

September  1,  1918. 7.20  a.m.

A  lost  train  by  a  second. Remark  '  Alone  in  London.'
I  should  thmk  these  few  things  came  from  Mr.  Wales
they  seem  so  faint  and  difficult  to  remember.

Note  written  by  H.  W.  on  September  2,  1918.

A  niece  who  has  been  staying  with  us,  when  she
returned  home  on  Saturday  (August  31,  1918)  lost  the
train  by  which  she  intended  to  travel,  but  it  was  by
considerably  more  than  a  second.  In  consequence  of
this  train  being  missed,  there  was  some  doubt  as  to
whether  the  father  of  the  child  (she  is  16  or  17)  would
be  at  Waterloo  to  meet  her,  as  arranged. We  could  not

^  I  obtained  the  following  corroborative  statement,

23rd  August  1918.  When  I  brought  the  letters  to  the  Long
Hovise  on  the  afternoon  of  Tuesday  last,  the  20th  August,  Mr.
Hubert  Wales  was  cutting  the  grass  borders  of  his  lawn.

Habey  Hills,  Postman,
but, on re-reading Miss Samuel's notes, I incline to think that  by
"  edges  or  borders "  in  the  second  note  (which,  apparently,  is  explana-
tory of  the  first)  is  meant,  not  the  grass  edges,  but  the  flower  borders.


136  Hubert  Wales.  [part

get  in  touch  with  him  on  the  telephone,  and  my  wife
became  exceedingly  anxious  on  account  of  the  possibility
of  the  child  having  to  cross  London  alone.

III.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels's  notes {received  September  6,
1918).

September  5,  1918. 6.5  a.m.

A  young  man  in  uniform  (naval  I  think)  or  very  like
it  [typed  copy,  '  a  young  man  in  a  uniform  like  a  naval
one  ']  unexpectedly  arrives.  He  is  rather  thin  and  dark.
Someone  is  led  [word  doubtful,  looks  like  '  bled,'  in
accompanying  tjrped  copy  it  is  transcribed  '  told  ']  to
take  their  mind  back  a  good  many  years  to  when  he  was
a  little  boy  .  .  .  When  the  young  man  arrived  most
of  the  other  people  seemed  upstairs.  I  see  him  sitting
down  waiting  .  .  .

What  slight  telepathy  there  is  seems  to  be  from  Mr.
Wales  as  it's  fauat  .  .  .

I  omit  my  contemporary  note,  which  is  rather  long,
since  the  facts  are  given  in  the  following  corroborative
statement  by  my  wife  :

September  6,  1918.
A  nephew  of  my  sister-in-law,  who  is  my  near  neighbour,
arrived  at  her  house  on  Wednesday  morning  [September  4,
1918],  at  an  unexpectedly  early  hour,  and  could  find
neither  his  host  or  hostess.  He  is  a  cadet  at  Osborne
and  was  wearing  his  uniform.  My  husband,  in  speaking
of  his  arrival  later  in  the  day  or  next  day,  said  that
whenever  he  heard  of  or  saw  the  youth  he  was  always
reminded  of  a  rather  touching  incident  in  the  boy's  earlj^
life,  which  he  related  to  us.

I  need  only  add  that  the  young  man  is  thin  and  dark,
and  that  I  heard  my  daughter  call  out  to  someone  on
the  Wednesday  (September  4,  1918)  that  he  had  arrived
and  had  found  no  one  at  home  to  receive  him.  I
assumed  at  the  time  that  he  would  wait,  but  I  learnt
later,  after  receiving  Miss  Samuels's  notes,  that,  in  fact.


1


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transference.  137

he  had  gone  to  the  house  of  another  relative  and  had  a
meal.  This  is  of  some  interest,  I  think,  as  indicating
that  any  supernormal  power  in  operation  is  telepathy,
not  clairvoyance  (if  there  be  such  a  power  independent
of  telepathy).

IV.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels' s  notes {received  September  30,
1918).

September  29,  1918. 8.30  a.m.

Rather  a  thin  tall  black  horse  being  led  in,  someone
remarks  on  [typed  copy  '  its  ']  thin-ness,  and  someone
else  retorts,  '  Well,  he's  Irish,  you  know.'

I  again  omit  my  contemporary  note  and  quote  my
wife's  corroborative  statement  :

October  1,  1918.
I  have  more  than  once  lately  talked  in  my  husband's
presence  of  a  young  officer  I  know,  an  Irishman,  whom
I  met  riding  his  black  race-horse  on  the  road.  This
seemed  rather  to  surprise  my  husband,  though  I  think
he  was  only  taking  it  home  after  exercise.  The  second
time  I  met  him  he  was  leading  the  horse  by  a  halter,
it  had  a  saddle  on  but  no  bridle.

Again  there  is  some  indication  that  it  is  my  impressions,
rather  than  the  facts,  that  correspond  with  Miss  Samuels's
notes.  When  I  heard  my  wife  tell  this  story,  I  assumed
(it  appears  wrongly — I  fear  I  was  not  paying  very  close
attention,  she  was  speaking  rather  to  my  daughter  than
to  me)  that  the  young  man  was  using  this  light  race-horse
as  a  road  hack,  and  I  certainly  expressed  surprise  and
expostulation.  Neither  my  wife  nor  I  could  remember
whether,  in  reply,  she  referred  to  his  nationality,  but  it
is  not  improbable.  She  says  that  she  considered  him
somewhat  eccentric.  Another  feature  of  some  interest,
as  pointing  to  the  telepathic  emergence  of  latent  thoughts,
lies  in  the  fact  that,  when  I  received  Miss  Samuels's
note,  I  had  forgotten  the  colour  of  the  horse  and  that

K


138


Hvhert  Wales.


[part


my  wife  had  spoken  of  seeing  it  being  led,  and  I  had
only  a  vague  impression  that  the  owner  was  Irish.

V.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels's  notes  {received  October  3,  1918).
October  2,  1918. 4  a.m.

Earl's  Court  Road

•  ■  •

.  .  .  the  first  items  seem  to  come  from  Mr.  Wales,
at  least  the  Earl's  Court  Road  does  .  .  .

There  is  no  outlying  street  in  London,  or  probably  in
any  large  town,  so  familiar  to  me  as  the  Earl's  Court
Road  ;  for  I  lived,  for  three  years  before  I  was  married,
twenty-three  years  ago,  in  a  small  street  just  off  it,
Earl's  Court  Gardens,  and  my  future  wife  lived  in  a
street  off  the  other  side  of  it.  My  contemporary  note
states  that  I  had  been  thinking  at  this  time  of  my
early  life,  and  had  been  telling  a  story  about  it,  but
that  I  had  no  conscious  recollection  of  having  been
thinking  of  this  particular  period.

VI.

Extract  from  Miss  SamueWs  notes  {received  October  14,  1918).
October  13,  1918. 6.30  a.m.,  in  bed.

Dear  Mr.  Wales,  I  write  my  personal  letters  to  you
for  you,  not  to  be  showaa  to  people  who  laugh  at  them,
I  feel  that  one  was  shown  to  someone,  and  they  loudly
laughed. I've  just  got  this,  6.30  a.m.

I  have  to  ask  for  indulgence  in  this  case.  Circum-
stances (the  nature  of  which  may  be  inferred)  debar  me
from  printing  my  contemporary  note,  and  adding  a
corroborative  statement,  as  I  should  have  liked  to  do.
I  can  only  say  that  Miss  Samuels's  complaint  was  quite
justified.  There  had  been  loud  laughter  (on  the  evening
of  either  the  11th  or  12th  Oct.)  on  the  part  of  a  young
niece of mine, and, though I felt somewhat  ashamed


LXXX.]


Apparent  Thought  Transference.


139


and  changed  the  subject,  I  also  felt  in  some  degree  to
blame,  for  having  provided  the  opportunity.^  One  detail,
however,  in  Miss  Samuels's  note  is  incorrect.

This  case  is  one  of  several  (another  will  be  quoted
later — Case  XLVIII.)  which  suggest  that  a  percipient  may
obtain  telepathically  information  'which  the  agent  does
not  wish  to  send.

VII.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels's  notes  [received  October  17,  1918).
October  16.  1918. 3.40  a.m.

A  memory  of  Paris,  a  man  crying  in  a  curious  voice
La  Matin  [typed  copy,  '  Le  or  La  Matin,  a  newspaper.']
A  slope  walked  up  some  zig-zag  steps  in  centre  to  save —
a  few  steps  can  be  used  instead  of  going  round  all  the
way  [typed  copy,  '  a  long  slope,  but  half  way  some
twisted  steps  are  there  so  that  one  need  not  go  all  the
way  round.']

[From  accompanying  letter]  I  think  the  memory  of
Paris  must  be  yours.

Note  written  by  H.  W.,  October  17,  1918.

My  thoughts  have  turned  repeatedly  lately  to  a  visit
I  made  to  Paris  some  years  ago.  I  have  a  distinct
recollection  of  hearing,  on  that  occasion,  a  newsvendor
in  the  street  calling  '  Le  Matin,  Le  Journal.'  There
was  nothing,  I  think,  markedly  peculiar  in  his  voice,
but  it  is  an  odd  little  thing  I  have  always  remembered,

^  An  analogous  incident  is  the  following  :
Extract  from  Letter  from Miss Samuels to H.  W., dated iSeptember  4,
1918, received September 5, 1918 (the only note of  an  impression
received  from  Miss  Samuels  on  this  day)  :

7.15.  p.m. I  feel  you  are  thinking  deeply  of  me.
Note  written  by  H.  W.  September  5,  1918.

This  certainly  was  a  fact ;  for  the  post  came  in  about  that
time  bringing  two  letters  from  Miss  Samuels  (nothing  else  except
a  book)  which  I  read  immediately.  I  had  not  told  Miss  Samuels
the  times  of  the  postal  deliveries  ;  indeed,  until  the  last  few  days,
the  evening  post  has  arrived  about  four.  When  reading  the
letter  quoted  above,  in  which  she  refers  to  this,  I  looked  at  the
clock:  it  was  exactly  7.15.  No  doubt  yesterday  I  got  my  letters
about  the  same  time.


140


Hubert  Wales.


[part


and  often  since  I  have  repeated  the  words  to  myself,
trymg  to  imitate  his  accent.  During  that  visit  1  went
almost  daily  to  see  a  friend  who  lived  on  Montmartre.
I  have  a  dim  impression  that  a  flight  or  flights  of  steps
near  his  road  saved  a  walk  round  ...

I  wrote  to  the  French  friend  I  visited  in  Paris,  enquiring
about  steps.  In  his  reply,  received  December  30,  1918,
he  said  there  were  no  steps  near  his  particular  road,
but  that  there  were  two  flights  leading  to  the  top  of
Montmartre.  "  Both  steps  are  not  zig-zagging,  but  cut
at  every  10  or  twelve  degrees  by  a  kind  of  platform  to
make  them  easier  to  ascend."  He  enclosed  a  plan
showing  the  position  of  the  steps.

No  doubt  everyone  who  goes  to  Paris  hears  '  Le  Matin  '
called,  but  in  my  case  the  incident  undoubtedly  has  a
special  significance.  I  can  remember  the  corner  where
the  man  stood,  and  the  quiet,  unemotional  voice  in  which,
at  regular  intervals,  he  said  the  words.  Scores  and
hundreds  of  times  since  have  I  repeated  them  to  myself.
It  has  become,  in  fact,  one  of  those  foolish,  private
little  habits  which  we  are  all  liable  to  contract.  To  me
personally  this  reference  is  almost  the  most  impressive
thing  in  the  series.

It  was  probably  a  letter  I  received  about  the  middle
■of  September  from  the  friend  I  had  visited  at  Montrnartre
(a  letter  referred  to  in  my  notes  regarding  possible  tele-
pathic precognition,  see  below,  p.  201)  which  revived  in
my  mind  this  memory  of  Paris.  It  began  :  "  Where  is
the  time  we  met  in  Paris  and  I  took  you  to  different
places  ? It  will  never  come  again."

VIII.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels' s  notes  {received  October  21,  1918).
October  20,  1918. 6.30  [a.m.].

Someone  wishes  to  dye  their  hair,  in  fact  the  feeling
is  so  strong  I  feel  I  have  had  my  own  hair  cut  and
dyed.  [Typed  copy,  '  Someone  wishes  to  dye  their  hair
red,  also  to  have  it  bobbed.']


LXXX.]


Apparent  Thought  Transference.


141


Note  written  hy  H.  W.,  October  21,  1918.

A  few  days  ago  I  received  a  letter  from  a  friend  in
India  [a  woman]  which  contained  the  following  :  '  My
hair  is  going  very  grey  which  gives  me  horrid  twinges
of  remembrance  ...  I'd  dye  it,  but  I  don't  Imow  of
anything  good.'  I  thought  she  would  be  very  unwise
to  do  so  and  intend  to  say  so  when  I  reply.  A  niece  of
mine,  who  lives  here,  has  recently  had  her  hair  '  bobbed.'
[This  is  the  niece  referred  to  in  Case  VI.]


IX.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels's  notes  {received  October  25,  1918).
October  24,  1918. 2.15  a.m.

A  large  empty  untidy  stable.

Key  tied  to  string.

Someone  packing  an  oblong  wicker  basket  like  a  motor
picnic  basket,  it  is  over-filled  and  difficult  to  shut  down.

Extract  from  accompanying  letter  to  H.  W.

I  think  most  of  to-day's  comes  from  you.

Notes  ivritten  by  H.  W.,  October  25,  1918.

We  have  a  large  four- stall  disused  stable  ...  It  is
certainly  very  untidy. I  go  into  it  almost  daily.

I  use  every  day,  with  scarcely  an  exception,  a  key  with
a  piece  of  string  fastened  to  it,  attachmg  a  label.  It
opens  the  door  of  an  outhouse,  where  we  keep  the  logs
of  wood  we  are  now  using  in  the  sitting-rooms  in  place
of  coal.

I  pack  an  oblong  basket  such  as  Miss  Samuels  describes
with wood  for  the drawing-room fire daily. The  word


142


Hubert  Wales.


[part


'  packing  '  is  quite  descriptive,  for  I  lay  the  blocks  care-
fully upon  one  another  to  economise  space.  The  basket
is  often  filled  beyond  the  top,  but  it  has  no  lid.

[These  three  items]  are  quite  typical  of  the  routine
of  my  life  just  now,  when  both  labour  and  fuel  are
scarce.

I  quote  the  above  as  instances  of  the  small,  isolated,
undeveloped  references  (no  one  of  which,  manifestly,  has
by  itself  any  evidential  value)  which  form  the  bulk  of
Miss  Samuels's  veridical  notes.

X.

Further  extract  from  Miss  Samuels's  notes  of  October  24,  1918.

Some  talk  or  thinking  about  the  Mecroupohs  [sic]  Coy
(a  firm  who  cremate  and  bury  people)  [typed  copy  '  some
talk  about  a  firm  that  conducts  funerals  and  cremations
who  run  a.  railway  line  of  their  own.'].

From  accompanying  letter  to  H.  W.

I  think  most  of  to-day's  comes  from  you.

A  few  years  ago,  needing  some  information  about
cremation  for  the  purjDoses  of  a  work  of  fiction,  and  being
familiar  with  the  name  of  the  London  Necropolis  Company
from  seeing  their  private  railway  station  outside  Waterloo,
I  walked  down  to  and  looked  at  their  premises,  without
going  in,  but  to  take  a  note  of  their  address.  Subse-
quently I  entered  into  correspondence  with  them.  They
were  most  kind,  supplying  me  with  literature  and  all
the  information  in  their  possession  and  putting  me  in
touch  with  the  Cremation  Society,  to  whom  I  ought
to  have  applied  in  the  first  instance,  since  the  London
Necropolis  were  not,  as  I  had  supposed,  solely  concerned
with  cremation,  but  undertook  also,  and  on  a  much
larger  scale,  burials.  My  contemporary  note  states  that,
for  a  reason  there  given,  I  had  been  thinking  about
undertakers  at  the  date  of  Miss  Samuels's  note.


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transference.


143


XI.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels's  notes  {received  October  27,  1918).
October  26,  1918. 4.20  a.m.

Some  poor  people  are  worried  about  paying  their  rent,
it's  really  only  a  small  amount.

From  accompanying  letter  to  H.  W.

I  think  most  of  to-day's  is  from  you.

I  epitomise  my  contemporary  note.  When  the  gardener
who  lives  in  my  cottage  was  called  up  for  the  army,
I  decided,  as  a  matter  of  principle,  to  charge  his  wife  a
very  small  rent — 3s.  6d.  a  week.  I  knew  she  could
afford  to  pay  it,  yet  she  ultimately  fell  more  and  more
into  arrears,  and  about  the  date  of  Miss  Samuels's  note
the  matter  was  somewhat  worrying  me — whether  to  take
the  easy  course  and  let  things  slide  or  to  press  for  the
amount  due.


XII.

Further  extract  from  Miss  Samuels's  notes  of  October  26,  1918.
7.30  a.m.

I  am  in  a  forest  or  at  the  edge  of  one,  elephants  near
me — I  am  told  to  lie  still,  I  am  hiding  in  a  round  tent,
an  animal  smells  all  round  the  edge  [tj^ed  copy  '  of
where  I  am  hiding,  I  am  laying  {sic)  flat  on  my  face  ']
...  I  see  two  pictures  one  of  a  background  of  taU  trees
and  creeping  men  and  women  and  animals  at  the  foot,
they  seem  frightened  and  running  away.  ...  I  had
to  he  still  [typed  copy  '  re  forest  picture  ']  as  the  elephants
treaded  [sic]  nearly  on  my  hair  (I  seem  to  be  a  woman)  .  .  .

From  accompanying  letter  to  H.  W.  :

1  think  most  of  to-day's  is  from  you.


144


Hubert  Wales.


[part


Extract  from  a  letter  to  H.  W .  from  a  friend  {a  woman)
in  India,  received  about  the  middle  of  October,  but
re-read  on  the  2\st  of  that  month  and  probably  also
later,  for  it  is  the  letter  which  contains  a  reference  to
dyeing  hair.

In  one  place — in  fact  for  several  marches,  we  were
haunted  by  man-eating  tigers,  the  coolies  were  very
frightened  and  will  only  go  several  together  through  the
thick  jungle,  and  it  certainly  was  eerie  thinking  one
might  suddenly  come  on  Mr.  Stripes,  and  be  pounced
on  ;  the  worst  of  these  brutes  is  they  always  take  a
woman  in  preference  to  a  man  .  .  .  one  of  them  has
already  killed  over  100  people.

It  may  be  said,  in  regard  to  the  reference  to  elephants,
which  suggests  India,  that  there  have  been  other  allusions
in  Miss  Samuels's  notes  which  have  struck  me  as  possibly
symbolic.^  The  reference  to  hair  is  noticeable,  for  Miss
Samuels,  of  course,  had  no  normal  means  of  connecting
the  present  impression  with  the  previous  one  about
dyeing  hair.  The  phrase  "  I  seem  to  be  a  woman  "  is,
I  think,  of  some  interest,  too,  since,  in  spite  of  this,
she  attributed  the  percept  to  my  agency.

XIII.

Extract  from,  Miss  Samuels's  notes  {received  in  typed  copy
only,  Noimnber  4,  1918).

November  3,  1918. 3  a.m.

A  flat  parcel  being  carefully  packed  in  a  shiny  drab

colour paper, the size about the size of these  sheets

^  An  alternative,  or  perliaps  complementary,  explanation  of  the  ele-
phants is  offered  by  the  following  annotation  on  Miss  Samuels's  note
by  Miss  Howard  (one  of  Miss  Samuels's  assistants)  sent  to  me  before
either  knew  of  the  correspondence  with  my  thoughts  :

I  have  been  reading  a  book  called  Travellers'  Tales,  and  in  one
chapter  a  man  writes  about  some  elephants  in  a  forest.  One  of
the  travellers  that  was  in  quest  of  some  elephants'  tusks  was
trampled  upon  by  some  ele25hants,  but  I  don't  think  they  went
near  his  head.

This  note,  it  will  be  seen,  just  fills  the  gaps  in  the  correspondence
witli  my  thoughts.


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transference.  145


[llin.  x8|m.]  or  a  little  larger  but  not  much,  depth
about  the  space  between  these  Lines  [about  -J-  in.].

From  accompanying  letter  to  H.  W. :
I  think  to-day's  comes  from  you.

Note  written  by  H.  W.,  November.  4,  1918.

I  sent,  a  little  while  ago,  some  valuable  prints  by
post.  I  packed  them  exceedingly  carefully  (with  sheets
of  cardboard)  in  three  layers  of  covers,  each  separately
pasted  down  and  addressed.  The  process  took  me  a
considerable  time,  about  an  hour.  The  outer  wrapping
was  rather  a  light  coloured  glazed  brown  paper.  The
package  when  completed  was  practically  identically  of  the
shape  and  size  described  by  IVIiss  Samuels.  On  referring
to  my  notes  I  find  that  I  packed  this  parcel  on  October
9,  1918,  and  despatched  it  by  registered  ^Dost  on  October
22,  1918.  I  received  an  acknowledgment  of  it  on
October  27,  1918.

Corroborative statement by the recipient of the  package
{received  November  12,  1918).

The  package  of  engravings  measuring  12  x  9  and  J  in.
deep  were  very  carefully  packed  in  shiny  drab  coloured
\\Tapping.  I  received  same  quite  safely  on  October  24,
1918.

It  will  be  noticed  that,  in  this  case,  assuming  a  tele-
pathic connection,  the  transmission  or  emergence  of  the
thought  was  apparently  considerably  deferred.

XIV.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels's  7iotes  (received  November  9,  1918).
November  8,  1918. 4  a.m.

A  noble  looking  old  man  led — makes  a  strong  speech.
[The  following  added  in  accompanying  letter.]  The  old
man,  he  was  very  ill  or  was  going  blind,  was  a  very
striking  memory  of  a  theatre  picture  or  of  a  painting,
he  wore  draped  clothing  as  did  some  other  figures  in
the  foreground.


146


Hubert  Wales.


[part


On the  evening of November  7,  1918,  as  I noted at  j
the time of receiving Miss Samuels's note, I read  Mr.  j
Piddington's  paper,  in  the  newly  pubhshed  Part  of  Pro-  \
ceedings,  entitled  "  Fresh  Light  on  the  '  One-Horse  Dawn  '
Experiment." It is unnecessary to transcribe my  con-
temporary note, epitomising  this  paper. It  will be seen  j
that  the  extract  quoted  above appears to contain nine  ;
correspondences with it  : for it dealt with a man  i
(Oedipus) (1)  who  was  old, (2)  who  was  of  noble  birth  '
and  character, (3)  who  was  led, (4)  who  made  a  strong
speech (Mr. Piddington  made a  point of his  impressive
speech  before  his  death,  discussing  it  and  quoting  from  it),  j
(5) who was  a character  in a  play, (6)  who was  ill,
(7) who was blind, (8) who wore draped  clothing,  and
(9)  who  was  accompanied  by  others  who  also  wore  draped
clothing. Indeed, the note, so  far  as it  goes,  contains
nothing  irrelevant, for  the  reference  to a  painting  is  an
alternative. I  may  add  that,  when  reading  Mr.  Pidding-
ton's paper,  I  conceived  Oedipus,  for  some  reason,  going
off  the  stage  at  the  back,  after  making  his  final  speech,
so  that  the  other  actors, in  relation  to  him, would  be
in  the  foreground.

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  apparent  thought  transference  in
this  case  is  exclusively  of  the  part  of  Mr.  Piddington's  paper  i
deaUng  with Oedipus, not  of  the  part  dealing  with  Mrs.
Verrall's  script. It  is  the  case  that,  while  I  was  interested  in
Mr. Piddington's paper from a literary point of  view,
his arguments seeking to identify Oedipus with Mrs.  <
Verrall's  "  old  man  in  a  white  robe  turned  to  the  east  "  !
did  not  carry  conviction  to  my  mind.  .  j

I  have  no  difficulty  in  accepting  Miss  Samuels's  state-  I
ment  that  she  does  not  read  the  S.P.R.  publications.

1

XV.  .  I

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels's  7iotes  {received  November  12,  1918).  j
November  11,  1918. 2.45  a.m.

Something  hidden  under  tree  roots.  [The  following  is
added  on  the  back  of  the  succeeding  page,  '  A  young  lady
helps  the  boy  to  find  and  hide  things  under  tree  *  roots.']  I


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transference.


From  accompanying  letter  to  H.  W.  :

I  will  not  say  who  the  things  are  from,  unless  I  get
very  clearly,  as  they  seem  lately  nearly  all  to  come
from  you.

Note  written  bij  H.  W., November  12,  1918.

Either  at  dinner  on  Saturday  (November  9,  1918)  or
at  supper  on  Sunday  (November  10,  1918)  ray  daughter
mentioned  '  Monte  Cristo,'  and  that  led  the  conversation
to  other  writers  besides  Dumas  who  had  used  the  theme
of  hidden  treasure  m  fiction.  I  mentioned  Poe,  having
in  mmd  his  story  called,  I  thmk,  '  The  Gold  Bug,'  wherein
a  man,  by  suspendmg  the  bug  by  a  thread  from  the
branch  of  a  tree,  is  guided  to  the  position  of  the  treasure
hidden  beneath  its  roots.

XVI.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels' s  notes  {received  December  6,  1918).

December  5,  1918. 8.30  a.m.  London.

Someone  is  shewing  me  some  Cinema  films  also  photo-
graphs [typed  copy  '  or  photographs  ']  and  puts  in  my
hand  a  glass  this  shape  [circular  sketch]  which  makes
the  pictures  seem  more  life-like  also  the  right  way  up.
.  .  .  The  pictures  at  Cinema  or  show  of  some  kmd  seemed
in  or  on  a  funny  shaped  thmg  above  the  heads  of  the
people,  something  like  an  old-fashioned  camera  obscura
that  used  to  be  on  Ramsgate  Pier  years  ago,  although
that  would  be  lower  on  the  ground  than  the  thing  I  was
shown  over  last  night.

Note  written  by  H.  W., December  6,  1918.

During  this  week  I  have  been  readuig  F.  W.  H.  Myers's
paper  on  crystal  visions  in  Part  XXIII.  of  the  Proceedings
S.P.R.  He  alludes  several  times  to  the  effect  produced
when  the  percipient  looks  at  the  picture  through  a
magnifying  glass.  ...  On  page  501  he  says  :  ^  The
unintelhgible  pictures,  on  the  other  hand,  remind  one
of  a  series  of  views  thrown  on  the  table  of  a  camera
obscura.'


148


Hubert  Wales.


I  quote  the  above  as  an  instance  of  the  apparent
dramatizing  of  a  scene  by  the  subliminal  consciousness
of  the  percipient  in  order  to  bring  out  an  unusual  terra
or  idea.  There  are  other,  though  less  striking,  cases  in
my  records  suggesting  the  same  thing.

XVII.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels' s  notes  {received  December  7,  1918).
December  6,  1918. 3.15  a.m.  London.

Two  old  [typed  copy  '  very  old  ']  bound  nos  of  the
"  Strand  Mag."

My  daughter's  corroboration  of  my  note (which  I  omit,  as
superfluous)  :
December  7,  1918.

I  have  just  lately  been  reading  stories  in  old  bound
volumes  of  the  "  Strand  Magazine,"  which  I  have  fetched
one  or  two  at  a  time  from  my  father's  study.

The  volumes  are  the  oldest,  beginning  with  No.  1  and
ending  with  No.  10.

XVIII.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels  s  letter  {received  January  6,  1919).
January  5th,  1919.

I  now  remember  a  quarto  page  of  black  heavy  childlike
handwriting starting  right  at  the  very  top  of  the  page.

Note  ivritten  by  H.  W., January  6,  1919.

This  describes  precisely  the  handwriting  of  a  regular
correspondent  of  mine  [an  elderly  woman].  She  writes
on  post  quarto  sheets  (about  9  in.  by  7  in.)  and  always
begins at  the extreme top  of  the  page.

An  addressed  envelope  and  the  top  of  a  sheet  of  paper
are  given  as  specimens  on  the  opposite  page.


150


Hubert  Wales.


[part


XIX.

Extract  froin  Miss  Samuels's  notes  {received  January  8,  1919).
, January  7,  1919. 8.25  [a.m.].

I  am  dressed  in  a  black  dancing  dress  [tjrped  copy,
'  black  evening  dress']  cut  low,  piece  of  black  riband
at  neck.


Extract  from  a  letter  to  H.  W.  from,  a  niece  staying  at
Brightmi,  dated  January  2nd,  1919,  received  January
4:th,  1919.

Then  in  the  evening  we  toddled  off  to  the  Hotel  Metro -
pole  on  our  own,  had  dinner,  and  went  to  the  dance
there  ...  I  looked  like  a  first-class  adventuress  with
my  hair  waved,  so  that  it  aU  sticks  upwards,  and  a  band
round  my  forehead  [sketch  of  a  girl's  head  with  a  black
band  round  the  forehead]  and  frightfully  low  new  black
evening  dress.

Extract  from  H.  W.'s  reply,  written  and  posted  January  5th,
1919.

Miss  S.  has  sent  nothing  important  of  late  such  as
the  item  you  mention  [not  quoted  in  this  paper] —
I  anticipate,  however,  shortly  getting  comments  from
her  anent  certain  animadversions  on  fat  Jewesses  and
shocked  allusions  to  a  girl  in  a  '  frightfully  low  '  black
evening  gown.

There  is  a  small  point  here  again  which  bears  upon
the  question  between  telepathy  and  clairvoyance.  In
my  niece's  sketch  the  band  round  the  girl's  head,  being
filled  in  with  ink,  looked  black,  and  I  probably  thought
of  it  as  black.  I  learnt  later  that,  in  fact,  the  ribbon,
was  silver.

It  was  this  niece  who  nearly  got  me  into  trouble  by
lier  untimely  laughter  !


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transference.  151


XX.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels' s  notes  (received  January  21,  1919).
January  20,  1919.

Enquiries  about  the  health  of  an  elderly  lady.  She
is  threatened  with  paralysis.

Note  written  by  H.  W.,  January  21,  1919.

The  health  of  an  aunt  of  mine — an  elderly  woman —
has  been  a  good  deal  on  my  mind  recently.  She  has
had  one  paralytic  stroke  .  .  .  and,  as  in  all  such  cases,
there  is  fear  of  others.  My  wife  is  going  to  be  m  her
neighbourhood  this  week  and  hopes  to  call.  She  has
spoken  of  this  to  me  two  or  three  times.


XXI.

Further  extract  from  Miss  Samuels' s  notes  of  January  20,  1919.

A  dehcious  dessert  yellow  and  pink  like  warm  ice
cream.

Note  written  by  H.  W.,  January  21,  1919.

A  few  months  ago  ^,  when  I  was  dining  at  a  restaurant,
the  head  waiter  rather  ceremoniously  placed  an  elaborate
looking  sweet  on  my  table.  It  was  of  the  shape  of  a
book,  the  groundwork  of  pale  yellow,  with  the  words
'  Blue  Flame  '  (the  title  of  one  of  my  novels)  in  pink
icing  on  it.  Spirit  was  burning  round  it,  which  gave
me  the  impression  that  it  was  warm,  and  I  was  considerably
surprised,  when  I  tasted  it,  to  find  that  it  was  iced.
I  may  have  thought  of  this  iricident  recently.


^  It  was  in  August,  1918,  during  the  visit  to  London  when  I  made
acquaintance  with  Miss  Samuels.


152


Hubert  Wales.


[part


Corroborative  letter  from  the  friend  (a  woman)  who  dined
with  me  on  the  occasion  referred  to  in  my  note,  dated
March  3,  1919.

Dear  Mr.  Wales,  I  often  think  of  the  '  Blue  Flame '
dinner  we  had  together  at  the  Florence,  and  what  a
surprise  Mons  Rene  [should  be  Rena]  gave  us  in  the
sweet  he  had  prepared  .  .  .  When  the  waiter  appeared
carrying  something  on  a  silver  tray  we  saw  at  once  it
was  something  special,  and  on  further  inspection  we  saw  a
model  of  your  book  '  Blue  Flame,'  and  to  make  it  better
still  when  he  put  a  match  to  it  the  real  blue  flames
danced  all  round  it  and  it  was  just  perfect.  I  can
see  it  now — a  pale  yellow  colour  with  the  title  and  your
name  in  pink  with  two  marguerites  made  of  sugar  in  the
opposite  corners  ...  I  remember  also  that  at  the  first
taste  you  had  rather  a  shock  finding  it  was  icy  cold,  as
you  told  me  afterwards  you  were  expecting  to  find  it
quite  warm — in  reality  the  outside  was  composed  of  wafer
like  biscuit  while  the  inside  was  purely  ice  cream.

The  receipt  of  the  January  Journal,  announcing  the
forthcoming  meeting,  would,  for  certain  reasons,  almost
certainly  lead  my  thoughts  to  this  episode.  I  do  not
appear  to  have  made  a  note  of  the  date  when  I  received
it,  but  I  find  that  the  printed  slip  enclosed  with  it,
announcing  the  meeting,  is  dated  January  15th.  The
relevance  of  the  apparently  paradoxical  phrase  "  warm
ice  cream  "  is,  I  think,  somewhat  remarkable,  and  suggests,
as  do  many  other  references,  that  there  must  at  times
be  an  element  other  than  visual  in  Miss  Samuels' s  percepts.

XXII.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels's  notes  {received  January  27,  1919).
January  26,  1919. 8.45  a.m.

Someone  does  not  like  being  left  alone  in  the  house.

I  give  my  wife's  corroboration  of  my  contemporary
note. It  was  written  on  January  30th,  1919,  as  follows  ;


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transference.


153


My  daughter  and  I  went  away  on  a  visit  from  22nd
to  29th  January,  1919,  leaving  my  husband  alone  in  the
house  except  for  the  servants.

I  have  no  recollection,  however,  of  feeling  unduly
depressed  on  account  of  this  quite  temporary  circumstance.

xxin.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels's  notes  {received  February  21,  1919).
February  20,  1919. 7.35  a.m.

A  lady  has  broken  her  leg.

I  quote  the  above  as  a  good  instance  (there  are  many
others)  of  the  tendency  of  Miss  Samuels's  impressions  to
correspond,  not  with  the  main  current  of  my  thought
at  the  moment,  but  with  reflections  incidental  to  it.
On  February  6th,  1919,  my  wife  underwent  a  small  surgical
operation,  involving  the  administration  of  an  anaesthetic,
the  attendance  of  a  nurse,  and  a  week  or  two  in  bed,
I  was  naturally  much  preoccupied  and  anxious  about
this  for  some  time — more,  perhaps,  than  most  people
would  have  been,  for  I  have  a  dread  of  operations —
but  Miss  Samuels's  notes  betrayed  no  knowledge  of  the
circumstances.  Two  years  before,  however,  nearly  to  a  day,
my  wife  broke  her  leg  ;  and  the  subsequent  illness  almost
necessarily  revived  memories  of  this  earlier  trouble.  We
often  talked  of  it,  recalled  incidents  in  connection  with
it,  and  compared  the  circumstances  in  the  two  cases.  My
wife  occupied  the  same  bed  in  the  same  room  as  on  the
former  occasion,  and  each  time  had  an  attendant  hospital
nurse  sleeping  in  the  adjoining  dressing-room.

XXIV.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels's  notes  {enclosed  in  letter  dated
and  postmarked  February  28th,  1919,  received  March  3rd,
1919  1).

False  Vandyke  beard  (made  with  soap  suds).

1  It  was  by  an  odd  chance  that,  on  the  only  occasion  I  can  remember
when  Miss  Samuels  neglected  to  date  her  notes,  her  letter  was  delayed
in  the  post.

I.


154


Hubert  Wales.


[part


Note  written  by  H.  W.,  March  3,  1919.

Several  times  lately,  after  soaping  my  face  for  shaving,
it  has  struck  me  that  this  gave  me  the  appearance  of
having  a  small  Vandyke  beard.  Once  or  twice  I  have
thought  it  rather  suited  me,  and  I  have  wondered  if  I
should  grow  one  !  To  the  best  of  my  recollection  it  is
only  lately  that  I  have  been  struck  by  this  effect.  It
is  definitely  a  small,  pointed,  as  distinguished  from  a
square,  beard  that  is  suggested.

This  is  another  of  the  references  that  can  never,  I
think,  produce  upon  others  the  ef?ect  it  produces  upon
me  ;  for  no  doubt  many  men,  when  they  are  shaving,
think  that  they  appear  to  have  short,  white  Vandyke
beards.  Would  such  a  thought,  however,  naturally  occur
to  a  woman  ?  Miss  Samuels,  it  will  be  seen,  does  not
refer  to  shaving,  but  merely  records  apparent  nonsense
about  a  false  beard  made  with  soap-suds.

A  few  days  after  writing  the  above  notes,  in  turning
back,  for  another  purpose,  over  my  records  of  Miss
Samuels's  impressions,  I  came  upon  the  following,  which
had  suggested  nothing  to  me  at  the  time  :

January  21,  1919. 1.45  a.m.

....  I  saw  a  dapper  little  man  sharp  features,  grey
Vandyke  beard  and  moustache  (like  Captain  Kettle  but
grey.)  .  .  .  The  old  gentleman  seemed  connected  with
lots  of  old  wood  and  looking  glass  and  also  a  broken
table.

Noteworthy  points  in  this,  I  think,  are  the  allusions  to
'  looking-glass  '  and  the  statement  that  the  beard  and
moustache  were  '  grey.'  For  my  daily  connection  with
'  lots  of  old  wood '  see  my  notes  to  Case  IX.  above.
There  is  a  small  table  among  the  rubbish  in  the  outhouse
referred  to,  but  I  hardly  think  it  is  broken,  though  there
are  many  broken  things  in  the  place.  In  Miss  Samuels's
notes  for  February  8,  1919,  again,  the  single  word  "  Van-
dyke "  occurs.  Was  she  jogging  my  memory  or  was  I
jogging  hers  ?  In  either  case,  the  efforts  were  apparently
ultimately  successful,  for  the  subsequent  allusion  to  a  "  false  "


LXXX.]


Apparent  Thought  Transference.


155


beard  and  to  "  soap  suds  "  gave  me  the  clue.  I  should,  perhaps,
add  that  I  am  not  grey  naturally  or  old  looking,  and
am  entirely  clean  shaven.

XXV.

Miss  Samuels's  notes  {received  April  5,  1919).  [Complete
notes  transcribed,  numbers  in  brackets  inserted  by
H.  W.)

AprU  4,  1919. 7  [a.m.].

(1)  A  pencil  sketch  of  a  woman,  I  draw  the  shadow  in
the  neck  also  full  skirt  and  right  hand,  in  line  work.
[Rough  sketch  enclosed  of  neck  shadow  and  skirt,  with
the  words  added]  I  seemed  myself  to  do  it.

(2)  A  tiny  black  kitten  chases  another,  but  someone
pulls  it  by  the  tail  and  throws  it  back  into  the  room.

(3)  Someone  trying  a  new  song.

Notes  written  by  H.  W.,  April  5,  1919.

(1)  On  April  3,  1919,  I  received  by  post  a  pencU  sketch
of  a  woman— no  skirt  visible,  but  she  is  shown  sitting
on  a  draped  seat,  represented  by  perpendicular  lines,  as
in  Miss  Samuels's  skirt  sketch.  The  original  of  the
drawing  made  the  sketch  herself.

(2)  A  night  or  two  ago,  not  last  night,  probably  the
night  before  (AprU  3,  1919)  when  I  went  into  the  pantry
to  lock  up,  the  cat,  who  sleeps  there  with  the  kitten,
ran  out,  followed  by  the  kitten.  I  managed  to  catch
the  kitten  by  its  tail  as  it  was  trotting  down  the  hall,
but  had  to  go  much  further  to  get  the  cat.  I  then
took  them  back  to  the  pantry,  and  no  doubt  threw  them
down  when  I  got  there,  for  they  were  a  trouble  to  carry
together  [both  struggling].  Neither  is  black  and  neither
is  tiny.

Miss  Samuels  must  be  assumed  to  have  known  that
I  have  cats,  for  there  have  been  many  references  to  them
in  her  notes,  which  I  have  usually  told  her  were  ajopro-
priate,  or  something  to  that  effect  ;  but  that  would
not,  of  course,  account  for  the  coincidence  regarding
catching by its tail a kitten that was running  after


■  }

156  Hubert  Wales.  [paet

another.  My  recollection  of  that  incident  is  quite  clear
and  definite — its  back  slipped  under  my  hand,  but  I  just
got  it  by  the  tail.  |
(3)  On  April  1,  1919,  a  niece  came  to  tea.  Afterwards,
when  I  was  in  my  study,  I  heard  her  trying  over  songs,
preparatory  to  having  a  singing  lesson.

Impression  (2),  like  the  "barn  or  house"  incident
related  below  (p.  179),  seems  to  indicate  that  some  part
of  Miss  Samuels  had  a  better  knowledge  of  the  truth
than  ultimately  reached  paper  ;  for  a  kitten  cannot  "  chase  "
another  until  it  has  passed  the  "  tiny "  stage,  unless
that  word  be  given  an  unduly  wide  meaning.  My  kitten
was  six  months  old  at  the  time  of  the  incident.  !

This  case  is  one  of  those  which  (no  doubt,  largely
because  of  their  trivial  subjects)  make  little  impression
at  the  first  glance,  but  which,  on  closer  examination,  (1
reveal  a  striking  string  of  coincidences.  It  wiU  be  seen
that  in  the  following  particulars  it  corresponded  with  an
actual  incident :  (1)  there  were  two  kittens  concerned
(one  really  a  cat)  ;  (2)  they  were  outside  a  room  ;  (3)  one
was  running  after  the  other  ;  (4)  somebody  caught  one  ;
(5)  it  was  the  hind  one  ;  (6)  it  was  caught  by  its
tail ;  (7)  it  was  put  back  into  the  room.  In  regard  to
the  incorrect  statement  about  the  caught  kitten  being
black,  it  is  perhaps  worth  remarking  that,  about  then,  I  jj.
had  said  several  times  severely  to  my  kitten  (which  is
grey  and  white)  that  it  was  obvious  to  me,  judging  from
its  deplorable  condition,  that  it  had  spent  some  time
in  the  coal  shed.


XXVI.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels's  notes  {received  April  11,  1919).
April  10,  1919. 4.30  [a.m.].

An argument on the telephone re 2/10. £50 also  is
mentioned.


LXXX.]


Apparent  Thought  Transference.


157


Note  written  by  H.  W.,  April  12,  1919.

I  have  recently  received  accounts  from  two  publishing
firms  [the  only  two  with  whom  I  have  business  relations]
— the  first  enclosed  a  cheque  for  £50.  7  ;  the  second  (which
I  received  on  April  9,  1919)  enclosed  a  cheque  for  2/4.
I  feel  there  must  be  some  mistake  about  this  latter
amount,  which  is  far  less  than  I  expected,  and  have
entered  into  correspondence  about  it.  I  did  not  remember
the  exact  amounts  of  the  cheques  and  have  had  to  refer
to  papers  to  write  this  note  :  I  knew  only  that  one
was  for  fifty  pounds  and  something,  the  other  for  two
shUhngs  and  something.

Corroboration  is  provided  by  two  documents  addressed
to  me,  in  the  following  terms  :

(1)  From  Hughes  Massie  c&  Co.,  Literary  Agents  :

Hubert  Wales,  Esq.,  London,  April  1th,  1919.

Dear  Sir,  We  have  received  from.  Messrs.  CasseU  &  Co.
cheque  for  2/6  on  account  of  Roys  on  "  Thirty  Days  "
and  have  pleasure  in  sending  herewith  our  cheque  for  2/4
representing  such  amount  less  commission.  .  .  .  Yours
faithfully

pp  Hughes  Massie  &  Co.

[The  enclosed  cheque,  which  I  still  have  in  my  possession
at  the  time  of  writing,  is  dated  April  8th.]

(2)  From  John  Long,  Ltd.,  Publishers  :

London,  S.W.  1,  18^^  March  1919.

Dear  Mr  Wales,

Herewith  please  find  statements  of  additional  sales
of  books  of  yours,  in  various  editions,  to  the  end  of  last
year.  In  terms  thereof  enclosed  is  my  firm's  cheque
for  £50.  7. Formal  receipt  in  course  will  obhge.

Yours  very  truly,

John  Long.

I  have  only  to  add  that  the  statement  about  the
telephone  is  wrong  ;  I  never  use  a  telephone  if  I  can
avoid  it  ;  the  "  argument "  or  discussion  is  proceeding
through  the  post.  I  noticed,  however,  during  my  few
short  visits  to  Miss  Samuels's  shop,  that  her  telephone


158  Hubert  Wales.  [part  !

was prominently in use. In this respect the case  is
one of several (see particularly XLIII. and  LI.  (2)
below) which suggest that the setting of a  veridical
impression  is  often  provided  by  the  percipient's  ownassocia-  j
tions.

XXVII.

The  following  does  not  purport  to  be  telepathic,  but ;
in view of Miss Samuels's apparent ability to  obtain
knowledge  of  my  thoughts  supernormally,  of  which  I  have
given  instances,  is,  I  think,  worth  transcribing.

Extract  from letter  from Miss Savmels to H.  W.,  dated
8.30  'p.m.,  August  28,  1918,  received  August  30,  1918.

I  wonder  if  I  shall  like  "  The  Purpose,"  I  think  I
shall,  anyhow  most  of  it  .  .  .  [three  or  four  lines  omitted]
I  expect  my  notes  are  not  at  all  new  but  they  help
to  explain  me  and  my  modes  of  thought,  if  I  do  think  ?
Or  do  we  all  read  too  much  and  father  other  people's
thoughts  ?

Extract  from  the  first  essay  in "  The  Purpose  "  hy  H.  W .
{published  January  1914)  (pp.  16-17)  :

Somebody  said  quite  recently — I  wish  I  could  remember
who  it  was — that  most  people  read  too  much  and  think
too  little.  I  do  not  think  you  can  travel  very  far  without  |
finding  out  that  that  is  true.  You  meet  people  constantly
who  can  talk  fluently  about  what  others  have  thought —
they  have  Maeterlinck  and  Nietzsche  and  many  others  at
their  finger  [!]-tips — but  they  never  go  on  to  give  expression  :
to  any  thoughts  of  their  own  that  have  sprung  from  their
reading.  They  become  storehouses  and  mechanical  dis-
seminators of  what  Milton  calls  "  usurped  opinions."

I  wrote  and  asked  Miss  Samuels,  without  giving  her
my  reason  for  asking,  if,  at  the  time  she  wrote  to  me,  she
had  received  the  book  from  the  library.  She  replied
(September  1,  1918)  that  she  had  not,  and  in  a  later  :
letter  spontaneously  complained  that  she  had  still  been
unable  to  obtain  it.^


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transference.


1  While  this  paper  has  been  passing  through  the  press,  a  similar  coinci-
dence in  connection  with  this  same  book.  The  Purpose,  has  occurred
with  another  correspondent,  Miss  F.,  of  Watford  (full  name  and  address
known  to  the  Society).  Miss  F.  has  had  other  experiences  which
suggest,  so  far  as  they  go,  the  telepathic  acquisition  of  information
from  me,  emerging,  for  the  most  part,  not,  as  in  the  case  of  Miss
Samuels,  in  dreams,  but  in  waking  hallucinations  (apparitions  of  me).
The  references  corresponding  with  The  Purpose,  however,  occurred,  as
with  Miss  Samuels,  in  the  course  of  an  ordinary  letter,  suggesting
nothing  supernormal  on  its  face,  but  which  reached  me,  again  as  in
the  case  of  Miss  Samuels,  at  a  time  when  I  had  reason  to  think  Miss  F.
would  shortly  read  that  book,  because  I  knew  it  to  be  in  the  hands
of  a  mutual  friend,  from  whom  I  expected  her  to  borrow  it.  The
corresponding  passages  are  as  follows  :

Extract  from  letter  fro7n  Miss  F.  to  H.  W.,  received  August  20,  1919.

I'm  reading  '  Wuthering  Heights '  again,  and  although  at  first
it  repels  me,  the  characters  are  so  very  rough  and  barbarous  that
one  almost  shudders — at  least  I  do — I'm  fascinated  and  it  grips
me  stronger  each  time.  The  people  in  it  somehow  fit  in  with
the  rugged  scenery  of  Yorkshire.  ...  I  think  the  Bronte  women
were  wonderful,  and  although  I  like  '  Jane  Eyre  '  tremendously,
I  always  come  back  to  Emily's  book.  I  know  it  is  not  nearly
so  popular  as  Charlotte's  works.  I  do  hope  you  won't  mind  me
writing  like  this  and  I  don't  suppose  you'll  agree  with  me  in
my  views.  Each  time  I  read  Emily  Bronte's  book  I  feel  what
a  tragedy  her  life  was — and  to  be  only  28  or  29,  I  forget  which,
when  she  wrote  it  and  to  die  at  30  !

I  endorsed  this  on  November  23,  1919  :

Compare  The  Purpose  pp.  248-9.  Miss  F.  informed  me  that
she  had  not  read  this  book,  though  she  had  had  it  in  her  hands
at  the  house  of  a  friend  [who  had  borrowed  it  from  a  library].
[The  following  added  on  November  29,  1919.]  I  had  seen  Miss  F.
only  twice  at  the  time  of  the  receipt  of  this  letter.  I  had  not
mentioned  my  views  of  '  Wuthering  Heights  '  to  her,  and  I  have
no  recollection  of  speaking  on  the  subject  of  the  Brontes  at  all.
She  insists  that  she  had  not  read  the  passage  in  '  The  Purpose '
or  even  glanced  at  it.

Extracts  from  ''The  Purpose"  (pp.  248-51).

One  of  the  greatest  artists  who  has  lived,  in  my  view,  was
Emily  Bronte.  In  her  book  Wuthering  Heights  she  introduces
you,  one  after  another,  to  a  collection  of  human  beings  who  repel
you  without  exception.  .  .  .  You  feel  it  will  be  impossible  to  go
through  a  volume  in  the  company  of  this  sinister  and  barbarous
crew.  The  descriptions  of  the  rugged  scenery  presently  bring
you  a  little  comfort.  .  .  .  The  story  grips  and  you  continue
reading ; and, long before the end, you have realized that  the


160


Hubert  Wales.


[part


XXVIII.

The  following  is  an  instance  of  apparent  thought-
transference  from  another  agent.  I  quote  it  because  of  the
unusual  feature  it  contains  in  the  indication  of  the  verbal
transmission  of  a  thought— because,  in  other  words,  the
agent,  without  consciousness  of  his  act,  appears  to  have
succeeded  in  the  task  of  "getting  a  name  through."

When  I  called  on  Miss  Samuels  on  August  9,  1918,  she
gave  me  a  slip  of  paper  containing  notes  roughly  jotted
down.  These,  she  said,  were  the  notes  she  had  made
of  her  impressions  of  the  previous  morning,  and  added
that  she  had  sent  a  copy  of  them  to  Mr.  Fuller  in  Ireland
for  his  comments.  (I  am  giving  the  facts  from  my
contemporary  note.)  The  paper  was  headed  "8/8/18,"
and  the  first  note  was  as  follows  (I  transcribe  from  the
original  document)  :
ill

nauseaum

ele

My  contemporary  note  proceeds  :

She  [Miss  Samuels]  told  me  orally,  when  she  gave  me
the  notes,  that  the  first  phrase — which  she  pronounced
"  il  nauseam  " — was  sounding  in  her  ears  when  she  woke,
that  she  imagined  it  to  be  Italian,  but  that  she  had
no  knowledge  of  languages.

rough characters harmonize perfectly with the rough  Yorkshire
moors  and  are  their  complement.  .  .  .

There  is  a  glamour  resting  on  that  book  and  its  author  which
appeals to me almost more than anything in the history  of
literature.  .  .  . She  wrote  Wuthering  Heights  when  she  was  twenty-
eight  and  died  at  thirty.  .  .  . Charlotte  was  afraid  of  Wuthering
Heights ; she shuddered at the nightly readings.  .  .  . This  is
to  suggest  nothing  in disparagement  of  the  author  of  Jane  Eyre
and  her  wonderful  gifts. [A  passage  appreciative  of  Jane  Eyre.]
One  can  perceive  that  enthusiastically, and  yet  place Emily  .
as  far  above  Charlotte  as  Charlotte  was  above  Anne.
Both  this  case  and  that  given  in  the  text  are,  of  course,  evidentially
weak, because  of  the  impossibility  of  proving  that  my  correspondents
had  not  read The  Purpose  or  any  part  of  it; but the  independent
occurrence  of  these  parallel  incidents,  each  in  connection  mth  a  person
whom  there  is  other  reason  to  consider  possessed  of  telepathic  percep-
tivity, is,  I  think,  at  least  a  suggestive  coincidence.


Lxxx.j  Apparent  Thought  Transference.  161


She  told  me,  too,  I  remember,  that  the  duplication  of
the  first  word  was  due  to  alternative  attempts  on  her  part
to  reproduce  the  sound  in  'writing.

I  called  again  on  Miss  Samuels  on  August  14,  when
she  gave  me  a  letter  which  she  told  me  she  had  received  that
morning  from  Mr.  Fuller  and  also  an  envelope,  bearing  her
printed  address,  which  she  said  had  enclosed  it.  The  envelope
bore  the  postmark  :

[Undecipherable  word]  Camp. 12  Aug.  18.

The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  letter  :

[Mr.  FuUer's  fuU  address]  Curragh,  Ireland.
Monday  noon  [12th  August,  1918].
.  .  .  Perhaps  the  strangest  experience  we  have  yet  had
is  that  connected  with  the  two  words  you  have  quoted,
the  actual  spelling  as  I  saw  it  was  IL  NAUSEAUM ;  these
words  I  saw  written  in  thick  blue  pencil  in  printed  letters
as  I  have  put  them,  on  white  paper  and  stuck  up  on
a  waU  on  the  edge  of  the  camp.  I  don't  know  whether
I  have  ever  told  you,  but  if  I  come  across  words  I  cannot
understand,  I  keep  repeating  them  to  myself,  as  you
remark  you  kept  repeatiiag  them.  These  words  evidently
are  not  Latin,  nor  French  ;  at  all  events  I  have  never
come  across  them  before  ;  if  French  I  should  feel  disposed
to  translate  them  as  "It  is  nauseating  "  or  as  we  might
say,  "It  is  sickening."  Now  what  do  they  mean  and
who  could  have  pasted  them  up  in  the  Curragh  and
why.  ...  H.  H.  Fuller.

The  omitted  portion  of  the  letter  is  mainly  comment
on  other  items  in  Miss  Samuels's  notes.  In  these,  though
Mr.  Fuller  finds  correspondence  with  his  thoughts,  he
points  out  confusion  and  discrepancies.  I  cite  one  of
these  matters,  as  relevant  to  the  question  of  the  good
faith  of  the  witnesses.  Among  the  notes  on  the  paper
handed  to  me  by  Miss  Samuels  on  August  9  was  the
following  :

bowl  or  bath  vdth  deep  cover.
Mr  FuUer's  comment  on  that  was  as  follows  :


Pi
t'

'I

162  Hubert  Wales.  [part

The  deep  bowl  I  cannot  trace,  unless  it  is  the  baths
we  have  here  ;  they  are  rather  primitive  and  have  wooden
covers.  H

I  judge  from  the  form  of  this  comment  that,  in  the
copy  of  her  notes  sent  to  him  by  Miss  Samuels,  the
words  "  or  bath  "  were  omitted.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Fuller,  asking  him  if  he  felt  quite  clear
that  he  had  not  mentioned  the  words  "  il  nauseaum "  to  '
Miss Samuels at  any time  before August 8, and  if  he  i
could  obtain  corroborative  testimony  to  his  seeing  them.
The  following  is  an  extract  from  his  reply,  dated  August
25,  1918  :

Now  to  reply  to  your  two  queries,  firstly,  "  II  nauseaum."  '
I  am  confident  that  these  words  were  not  sent  to  Miss  |  ■
Samuels,  as  a  matter  of  fact  they  must  have  been  written  i
by  her  to  me  on  the  day  following  the  evening  on  which  i
I  saw  them  ; I  did  not  write  them  until  I  replied  to  i  i
that  letter  and  corrected  the  spelling. The  words  puzzled  !
me  for  an  hour  or  two  and  were  then  dismissed  from  my  t
mind, I  gave  them  no  further  thought  until  I  received
her  letter,  then  went  round  to  make  sure  of  the  spelling ;
but  the  paper  had  been  removed  either  by  human  agency  I
or the  rain the  latter  I  fancy, as  the  night  had  been
a  very  wet  one. Unfortunately I  was  quite  alone  when  f
I  came  across  them,  and,  as  I  say,  gave  no  further  thought
to  them  untU  the  arrival  of  Miss  Samuels'  letter.

The  manifest  weakness  of  this  remarkable  case  is  that
it  rests upon  the bo7ia  fides of  Miss  Samuels  and  Mr.

Fuller,  who  were  practically  strangers  to  me.  The  whole  j
thing  might  have  been  prepared  for  me. I  feel,  however,

that — apart  from  the  confidence  in  their  sincerity  I  have  i

since come to have — the subsequent correspondence of  j

Miss  Samuels's  notes  with  my  thoughts  is  strong  !i
presumptive  evidence  in  their  favour.

J

That is my first instalment of extracts. I do not  1

know  to  what  extent  it  may  seem  to  Members  of  the  i>

Society and others that a  case  is made out. For  my  i

part,  I  feel  satisfied,  after  allowing  for  the  large  admixture  1


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transjermce.


163


of  irrelevant  matter,  that  all  the  correspondences  recorded
above  cannot  reasonably  be  referred  to  chance.  Call
it  telepathy  or  what  you  will,  there  seems  to  me  to  have
been  acquisition  of  knowledge  by  some  means  other
than  the  sensory  channels  of  common  experience.  For
those  who  may  be  of  the  same  opinion,  I  propose  to
relate  next  some  cases  which,  assuming  a  telepathic
connection,  seem  as  if  they  might  be  of  interest  to  examine
on  other  grounds.

Before  proceeding  to  do  so,  I  may  perhaps  make  a
few  general  remarks.

Although  she  recognises  that  willing  or  concentration
by  the  agent  are  ineffective  in  her  case.  Miss  Samuels
is  impressed  by  the  popular  view  that  telepathic  com-
munication is  conditioned  or  facilitated  in  some  way
by  the  agent  directing  his  thoughts  upon  her  ;  and  she
has  been  fruitful  of  suggestions  as  to  how  I  might  think
of  things  "  in  connection  with"  her.  After  repeated
experiments,  however,  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that
whether  I  think  of  things  "  in  connection  with  "  her  or
think  of  her  at  all  has  practically  no  influence  on  the
results.  In  many  of  the  most  striking  cases,  I  think
in  the  majority,  the  correspondences  have  concerned
matters  which  have  affected  my  mind  without  the  remotest
conscious  thought  of  Miss  Samuels.  In  other  words,  the
subjects  of  her  veridical  notes  have  nearly  always  been
unexpected  by  me.^  Even  the  "  black  evening  dress
cut  low,"'  though  I  had  told  my  niece  facetiously  that  I
anticipated  it,  took  me  by  surprise  when  it  came ;  and
the  "  black,  heavy,  childlike  handwriting,''  although,  as
will  have  been  seen, correct  to the  smallest  detail,  set

^  The  following  is  an  exception,  though  the  coincidence  is  not  strong
enough  to  exclude  chance.  On  October  22,  1918,  I  made  the  following
note  :  "  Thought  of  B.  S.  on  bicycle  being  knocked  over  by  a  sheep."
Miss  Samuels's  notes  of  the  next  day  contained  :  "  A  large  St.  Bernard's
dog — a  sheep."  There  was,  in  fact,  in  the  incident  I  had  had  in  mind,
though  not  mentioned  in  my  note,  a  dog  on  the  other  side  of  the
sheep.  I  can  recollect  no  other  allusion  to  a  sheep  in  Miss  Samuels's
notes,  but  there  have  been  many  to  dogs.  I  should  add,  perhaps,
that  the  making  of  the  note  did  not,  in  this  instance,  mean  that  I
had  concentrated  on  the  thought — I  made  it  merely  as  an  aid  to
memory.


164


Hubert  Wales.


[part


me  vaguely  wondering,  for  a  time,  if  I  knew  any  writing
like  it.  On  the  other  hand,  there  have  been  things
which  I  have  hoped  Miss  Samuels  would  get — to  which
my  thoughts  have  turned  again  and  again  with  that
hope — which  she  has  not  got  or  got  anything  at  all
resembling.  I  remember,  among  others,  an  incident  of  a
mongoose  and  an  incident  of  a  gramophone.  After
these  eight  months  of  observation  and  analysis,  I  cannot
put  my  finger  on  any  cause  or  condition  which  appears
to  have  an  influence  on  the  selection  of  one  thought
rather  than  another  for  transference.  It  seems  almost
as  if  some  mind  other  than  my  conscious  mind  chose
the  subjects,  chose  with  evidential  requirements  steadily
in  view,  and  chose,  on  the  whole,  from  that  standpoint,
remarkably  well.^  I  can  tell  no  more  what,  from  out
my  stock  of  thoughts  and  memories,  is  likely  to  find  a
place  in  Miss  Samuels's  notes  than  I  can  tell  what  is
likely  to  find  a  place  in  my  remembered  dreams.  Indeed,
many  of  her  impressions  in  sleep  as  related  by  her  might
have  been  my  own  dreams.

During  the  whole  period,  however — in  the  course  of
which  I  have  received  many  hundreds  of  notes — I  have
not  noticed  a  single  instance  of  correspondence  with
one  of  my  dreams,  though  I  am  a  prolific  dreamer  and
often  retain  a  very  fair  recollection  of  dream  incidents
for  a  day  or  two,  or  longer.^  There  have  been  one
or  two  correspondences  with  those  comparatively  rare
vivid  visual  images  or  auditory  impressions  one  is  liable
to  get  in  a  somnolent  state,  usually,  in  my  case,  just
after  waking.  In  a  few  other  cases  of  such  impressions
I have apparently been the percipient, but these  have

'  Note,  for  example,  in  Case  XLIII.  below,  the  correspondence  with
one  of  the,  comparatively,  very  few  stories  I  have  not  published.  There
have  been  no  correspondences  with  published  stories.

^  Since  the  above  was  written,  on  the  night  of  April  28-29,  1919,  I
dreamt  of  a  human  body  (apparently  dead)  without  arms.  Miss  Samuels's
notes  of  the  preceding  day,  received  the  next  morning,  contained  the
following  :  "A  young  lady  about  25  to  28  without  arms."  This
does  not,  however,  affect  the  statement  in  the  text,  for,  if  the  thing
were  not  due  to  chance,  I  was  apparently  the  percipient,  since  my
impression  was  the  later  of  the  two.


LXXX.]


Apparent  Thought  Transference.


165


not  been  numerous  enough  for  any  conclusion  to  be  based
on  them.^

I  have  noticed  some  tendency  to  periodicity  in  the
occurrence  of  Miss  Samuels's  veridical  impressions.  Many
days  have  sometimes  passed  without  anything  cropping
up  in  the  notes  that  was  applicable  to  me  ;  at  other
times,  two  or  three  striking  correspondences  have  come
close  together,  even  in  the  same  set  of  notes.  Bright
luminaries  (such  as  are  most  of  those  I  have  quoted)
have  been  frequently  surrounded  by  a  cluster  of  small
stars.  About  the  time  of  the  receipt  of  the  "  memory
of  Paris  "  note,  (Case  VII.),  for  example,  there  was  quite
a  number  of  minor,  isolated  references,  relevant,  so  far
as  they  went,  to  my  visit  to  Paris,  but  not  specially
connected  with  it  by  Miss  Samuels.  This  is,  no  doubt,
to  some  extent  (though  I  think  not  entirely)  accounted
for  by  the  fact  that  the  occurrence  of  a  correspondence
necessarily  turns  my  thoughts  anew  to  the  incident  upon
which  it  is  based.

V

I

'  Pakt  II.

Some  Cases  which,  assuming  a  telepathic  connection,

[:  seem worth EXAMINING AS THROWING LIGHT ON  ITS

f  NATURE.

In  the  extracts  from  my  records  which  I  now  proceed
to  give  I  have  not  thought  it  necessary  to  mark  omissions
by  dots,  except  in  cases  where  it  is  important  to  show
the  precise  place  where  words  are  left  out.  In  all
instances  I  have  included  every  word  that  appears  to  be
connected  with  the  particular  impression  discussed.

The  circumstance  that  many  of  Miss  Samuels's  notes
have  been  seen  by  two  or  more  possible  agents  inde-
pendently has  provided  an  excellent  trap  for  chance-
coincidences.  I  quote  first  one  of  these  catches,  for  it
gives  an  idea  of  how  near  one  may  expect  to  get  to  the
detail  of  a  thought  by  chance  alone.

^  They  all  occurred  in  the  week  between  the  receipt  of  Miss  Samuels's
first  letter  and  my  first  visit  to  her  shop.


1-66


Hubert  Wales.


[part


XXIX.

Extract  from Miss  SamueWs  notes {received November  Q,
1918).

November  5,  1919. 8.45  a.m.

Some  children  or  young  people  learning  to  dance,  one
cried  about  something.

On  the  same  day  that  I  received  the  above  I  received
also  the  following  comment  upon  it  by  Miss  Sylvia  Howard,
one  of  Miss  Samuels's  assistants,  a  young  girl  of  fifteen
or  sixteen,  but  who  looks  older,  who  has  on  many  occa-
sions sent  me  notes  indicating  some  correspondence  between
incidents  affecting  her  thoughts  and  Miss  Samuels's
impressions  :

I  generally  go  to  a  club  on  Monday  evenings  for  dancing
and  other  amusements.  When  I  went  last  night  [Novem-
ber 4,  1918]  there  were  not  many  ladies  there,  and  those
that  were  there  were  dancing  and  took  no  notice  of
me,  and  though  I  did  not  cry  I  felt  very  much  like
doing  so.

Note  tvritten  by  H.  W.,  November  6,  1918.

At  dinner  on  November  4,  1918,  my  daughter  talked  most
[of]  the  time  about  some  children  learning  to  dance  (she  had
been  seeing  them)  and  of  one  making  another  cry  or
nearly  so.

My  wife's  corroborative  statement,  dated  November  6,  1918.

Two  evenings  ago  we  talked  at  dinner,  in  my  husband's
presence,  of  some  children  having  dancing  lessons,  and
my  daughter  told  of  one  naughty  little  thing  who  was
unkind  to  another  and  nearly  made  her  cry.

I  noticed  that  the  words  "  or  young  people "  in  Miss
Samuels's  original  notes  were  not  in  the  body  of  the
script,  but  were  inserted  between  the  lines.  Upon  my
asking  her  about  this,  she  admitted  that  she  had  added
these  words  after  she  had  reached  the  shop  and  heard
Miss  Howard's  story — giving  (I  believe  quite  honestly)
a  turn  to  the  fading  memory  of  her  percept  in  keeping
with  her  assistant's  experience. It  will  be  seen  that  there


LXXX.]


Ap-parent  Thought  Transference.


167


is  no  correspondence  between  them,  except  the  general
circumstance  of  dancing,  if  the  words  quoted  are  elimi-
nated.

Distortion  by  Automatist.

I  extract  next  some  cases  suggesting  the  confused  and
distorted  emergence  of  information  telepathically  acquired.

XXX.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels' s  notes  {received  August  18,  1918).
{Transcribed  from  copy  typed  by  Miss  Samuels.)

Copy  of  Telepathy  notes  made  in  bed  5.45  a.m.  received
the  17th  August  by  Miss  Jane  Samuels  (in  Maidenhead).

I  feel  that  most  of  these  impressions  come  from  or
[are]  connected  with  Mr.  Wales.

I  see  some  pictures  or  prints  laying  {sic)  on  a  table,
a  slave  market  picture  I  think  [Miss  Samuels 's  original
notes  have  '  kmd  of  thmg  '  instead  of  '  I  think  '].  A  nude
woman  pale  tone  in  skin,  not  white  I  mean  [original
notes  have  '  not  quite  white  I  should  say  ']  the  woman
is  being  held  [original  notes,  '  I  think  ']  by  two  men
one  each  side.  I  do  not  pick  up  the  picture,  I  look  at
it  in  passing.

Sketch  here  of  position  of  slave  market  picture.

[Rough  sketch  of  raised  platform  or  dais  of  two  steps  ;
on  the  top  step  rudimentary  outline  of  figure,  marked
'  nude  golden  skinned  woman,'  with  an  upright  oval  on
either  side  marked  '  man,'  '  man,'  ;  below  the  dais  circles
marked  '  people  looking  up.']

Note  written  by  H.  TF., August  18,  1918.

A  day  or  two  before  my  visit  to  London  [on  August  8,
1918 — date  fixed  by  contemporary  note],  after  1  had
made  Miss  Samuels 's  acquaintance  by  correspondence,  but
before  I  had  met  her,  I  looked,  for  a  particular  puri^ose,


168


Hubert  Wales.


[PAET


at  some  prints  [of  engravings]  in  my  possession.  The
first,  which  forms  a  sort  of  decorative  frontispiece  to
the  rest,  shows  a  nude  woman  seated  on  a  throne  or
ornate  chair,  apparently  somewhat  raised  up,  with  an
embroidered  footstool  under  her  feet.  There  is  a  man's
head  on  either  side  of  her,  but  these  are  not  in  her
environment,  but  are  vignetted  in  ovals  amid  scroll  work.
There  are  no  other  figures  ui  the  picture,  and  it  is  not
intended  to  represent  a  slave  market  or  similar  scene,  but
is,  as  I  have  said,  a  decorative  design.  I  looked  at  it
on  this  occasion  only  casually  in  passing,  going  on  to
the  other  prints,  which  I  [had]  spread  on  my  desk —
not  on  a  ...  table.  The  female  figure  in  the
print  alluded  to  is  dark  :  she  is  probably  Italian,  as  are
certainly  the  men.  I  have  made  no  attempt  to  transmit
any  of  these  thoughts  to  Miss  Samuels,  but,  on  account
of  the  particular  matter  in  my  mmd,  I  have  thought  of
these  prints  since  the  occasion  mentioned.

In  spite  of  the  confusion,  there  are,  I  think,  in  the
note  quoted  above,  correspondences  with  my  thoughts
difficult  to  assign  to  chance.  Miss  Samuels,  it  will  be
seen,  got  a  correct  impression  of  a  picture  with  the
somewhat  unusual  grouping  of  a  single  nude  female  figure,
seated  on  something  raised,  between  two  men  ;  ^  that
this  was  one  of  a  series  of  "  pictures  or  prints  "  spread
out  on  a  table  [desk]  ;  and  that  it  was  looked  at  only
cursorily  in  passing.

Many  of  Miss  Samuels's  impressions  suggest  muddled
dreams  I  might  have  expected  to  have  as  the  result
of  antecedent  experiences  or  thoughts  ;  but  since,  in  these
cases,  from  their  nature,  the  correspondence  is  rarely
closer  than  could,  without  undue  strain,  be  referred  to
chance,  it  would  be  tedious  to  relate  them.

The  following  are  further  instances  of  confused  corre-
spondence.

1  There  is  an  evident  implication,  I  think,  that  the  men  were  clothed
— as  they  are  in  my  print.


LXXX.]


Apparent  Thought  Transference.


169


XXXI.

Extract  from  letter  from  Miss  Samuels,  dated  August  27,
1918  (received  August  28,  1918).

Dear  Mr.  Wales,

No  telepathy,  all  mixed  up  with  thoughts  from
my  own  relations,  the  only  one  that  might  be  something,
and  yet  seems  more  Uke  my  own  shop  is,  that  I  saw
4  shallow  trays  or  box  lids,  the  bordering  edge  about
as  wide  as  the  spaces  on  this  paper,  the  traj-s  were  about
also  as  large  as  this  paper  [11  in.  by  8f  in.,  mth  If  in.
margins]  filled  well  filled  with  an  assortment  of  things
like  pins  or  clips.  ...  I  handle  the  things  in  the  trays,
move  my  fingers  about,  as  if  I  liked  the  feel  of  the
things.

Extract  from  note  written  by  H.  W., August  28,  1918.

A  few  days  ago,  finding  my  method  of  attaching  together
the  papers  connected  with  these  experiments  with  ordinary
paper  fasteners  rather  inconvenient,  when  the  papers  were
continually  being  added  to,  I  looked  up  "  letter  files  "  in
Harrod's  fist,  with  the  idea  of  ordering  some.  They
tm-ned  out  to  be  much  heavier  and  more  elaborate  thuigs
than  I  expected  :  two  or  three  of  the  illustrations  repre-
sented trays  of  just  the  size  and  shape  described  by
Miss  Samuels,  with  clip  attachments.  [The  size  given
in  one  case  is  12  by  8f  by  1|.]  I  thought  these  were
altogether  too  clumsy  for  my  purpose,  and  ultimately
ordered  four  simple  letter  clips.^  I  ordered  a  box  of
paper  fasteners  at  the  same  time.  .  .  .  My  edition  of
Harrod's  List  appears  to  be  neither  dated  nor  numbered,
but  it  is  one  almost  certainly  issued  before  the  war.  The
illustrations  of  letter  files  at  which  I  looked  are  on
pp.  302-3.

Later  note. Before she could  have  received  my  note
on  her  impression  Miss  Samuels  sent  me  a  letter  file.

^  I  still  have  these  four  clips ;  they  proved  to  be  quite  useless  for
my  purpose.

M


170


Hubert  Wales.


[part


XXXII.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels' s  notes  {received  Septernber  2,  1918).

7.20  a.m. September  1,  1918.  Bournemouth.

I  am  'Rith  2  men  or  I  am  one  of  2  men  (it's  mixed)
been  playing  perhaps  golf  or  some  game.  One,  however,
has  a  thing  which  looks  hke  a  patent  seat  that  can  be
carried  about,  when  open  or  a  part  puUed  out,  it  can
be  sat  upon.  Leaving  the  rather  small  field  where  they
have  been,  they  speak  to  a  village  boy  who  seems  rather
simple  when  asked  some  question.  The  boy  is  fair.  .  .  .
I  should  think  these  few  things  come  from  Mi-.  Wales.
[Added  in  accompanj^ng  letter.]  The  man  you  had
some  game  vdth  was  rather  a  big  man,  or  bigger  than
you.

Note  written  by  H.  W., September  2,  1918.

The  friend  I  met  and  talked  with  the  other  day  (August
28,  1918)  [reference  to  a  previous  note]  is  one  mth  whom
I  have  often  played  goH — in  fact,  he  is  the  Secretary  of  the
local  golf  club — but  I  have  not  played  with  him  or  anyone
recently.  He  is  a  massively  built  man,  but  not  more
than  medium  height — about  my  height,  but  probably
weighs  [half  as  much  again].  I  have  a  dim  impression
that  I  have  seen  another  member  of  the  Club,  a  man
who  is  somewhat  decrepit,  using  such  a  portable  seat  as
Miss  Samuels  describes,  when  playing  golf.  ...  In  the
days  when  I  played  golf  here  habitually  one  of  the  best
known  of  the  caddies  was  a  youth  of  somewhat  weak
intellect,  what  is  called  "  a  natural."

Later  7iofe.  I  learn,  upon  enquiry,  that  there  is,  in
fact,  a  member  of  the  Golf  Club  who  uses  a  portable
seat  while  playing.

Corroborative  letter  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Hindhead  Golf  Club.

Aiml  30,  1919. Golf  Club,  Hindhead.
Dear  IVIr.  Hubert  Wales,

I  perfectly  recollect  meeting  you  on  the  Ports-
mouth road  and  whilst  you  walked  back  with  me  we
spoke  about  telepathy.  It  is  a  fact  that  a  member  here
often  takes  out  with  him  a  portable  stick  seat — which  he


LXXX.]


Apparent  Thought  Transference.


171


sits  on  when  tired.  Yes  for  many  years  we  had  as  a
caddie  a  youth  of  weak  intellect.

On  this  day  Miss  Samuels's  notes  contained  also  the
reference  to  a  missed  train  and  the  remark  "  Alone  in
London." (Case  II.)

XXXIII.

Extract  fr 07)1  Miss  Samuels's  notes  {received  October  26,  1918).
October  25,  1918. 6  a.m.

Brass,  figure  of  a  v/oman  on  it.  [The  following  in
typed  copy.]  A  brass  coloured  thing  shaped  something
like  a  tray  -with  the  nude  study  of  a  woman  on  it  half
facing  the  looker,  she  seems  to  be  floating  or  swimming.

After  I  had  told  her  that  the  above  had  some  meaning
for  me,  Miss  Samuels  wrote,  on  October  28,  1918  :

The  brass  or  copper  [I  had  probably  mentioned  copper]
tray  I  saw  very  clearly — there  was  some  remark  about  the
position  of  one  leg,  or  a  thought  about  it,  I  think  the
remark  was  that  she  had  long  legs.

Note  written  by  H.  W., October  26,  1918.

A  small  bright  polished  tray  ^^dth  glasses  upon  it  is
placed  hi  my  study  every  evemng.  On  first  reading
Miss  Samuels's  note  I  had  the  impression  that  this  tray
was  brass,  but  on  closer  reflection  realized  that  it  is
copper.  It  is  always  placed  on  the  same  table  in  a  corner.
On  the  wall  [above  it]  on  the  left  and  slightly  in  front,  as  one
faces  the  table,  there  hangs  a  small  framed  picture  of  a  nude
woman.  She  is  lying  face  do-wtiwards,  her  head  raised
[half  facmg  the  looker]  resting  on  her  arms  which  are
slightly  extended,  reading  a  book  ;  her  hips  are  also  a
Httle  raised.  As  seen  in  a  bad  Ught,  as  I  usually,  indeed
almost  invariably,  see  it,  in  this  dark  corner,  the  attitude
is  distinctly  suggestive  of  a  woman  smmming.  Every
night,  before  gomg  to  bed,  when  often  the  room  is  hghted
only  by  my  bedroom  candle,  I  drmk  some  water  [at]
this  table,  and  my  eye  is  generally  caught  by  this  picture
of  the  woman  "  half  facing  "  me.


I


172  Hubert  Wales.  [part  '  i;

The  friend  (a  Frenchman)  who  gave  me  this  little  i  h
photogravure  gave  me  also  a  statuette,  also  of  a  nude  •  f
woman.  This  figure  has  exceptionally  long  legs — a  feature  li
which  my  friend  was  careful  to  point  out,  for  he  considered  !  ji
it  a  beauty.  I  have  never  agreed  with  him — for  the  1|
proportions  seem  to  me  rather  masculine  than  feminine  w
— but  when  I  look  at  this  long-limbed  statuette,  I  think  tj
of  him  and  his  remark.  I  (1

I cannot, however, say, to the best of my present  :
recollection,  that  the  idea  that  the  attitude  of  this  v/oman
in  the  picture  suggested  swimming  had  occurred  to  me  before
the  receipt  of  Miss  Samuels's  note. Besides  the  above,  the  '  |
notes  for  this  day  contained  one  clear  correspondence  with
my  thoughts  ^  and  another  somewhat  confused.

XXXIV.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels's  notes  [received  October  30,  1918).  ;

October  29,  1918. 7  a.m.  I  ^

Some American or Canadian [typed copy '  sisters  ']

invite  me  [typed  copy  '  someone  ']  to  a  very  nice  tea  ...
Such  as  they  [the  notes]  are  they  are  from  Mr  Wales.

Note  written  by  H.  W., October  30,  1918.

There is a Canadian Camp here. My daughter  and
niece  have  .sometimes  been  invited  to  the  messes  to  tea,
and  have  come  bade  with  Avonderful  stories  of  the  luxuries
provided in these non-rationed places — pints of cream,  i\
fruit cakes, and sugar-icing galore, according to their  is
accounts.

The  above  illustrates  a  point  of  which  there  are  a  good
many  examples  in  the  notes — namely,  that  the  introduction
by  Miss  Samuels  of  words  or  phrases  to  her  typed  copies,
made  some  hours  after  the  reception  of  the  impressions
and  when  her  memoiy  of  them  is  doubtless  beginning  ^
to  fade,  is  apt  to  mar  what  would  otherwise  have  been  i

1  This  was  a  reference  to  "  a  secret  letter,"  the  fact  being  that,  on

the previous  afternoon, according to my contemporary note, I  had

received "  a  letter without an address heading and signed with an  i

agreed  sign,"  so  that  I  alone  coiild  identify  the  writer.  i


LXXX.]


Apparent  Thought  Transference.


173


exact  correspondence  wi'tli  matters  affecting  my  thoughts.
The  note  quoted  would  have  been  completely  veridical
but  for  the  insertion  of  the  word  "  sisters,"  which  had
no  meaning  for  me.  I  had  not,  of  course,  informed
Miss  Samuels  that  we  had  a  Canadian  Camp  here  ;  and
any  reference  to  it  in  a  newspaper  would  probably  have
called  it  merely  "  Bramshott  Camp,"  without  indication
that  it  was  near  Hindhead,  which  is  in  another  county.

XXXV.

The  following  suggests  a  "  portmanteau."
Extract  from  Miss  SamueWs  notes  {received  February  21,  1919).

February  20,  1919.  7.35.

I  saw  yesterday  or  the  day  before  a  curious  -writing
or  letter,  the  signature  looked  at  a  certain  angle,  it  looked
like  a  small  cock  or  hen  about  this  size  [rough  sketch
of  hen].

Note  written  by  H.  W.,  February,  21,  1919.

I  have  a  correspondent  who  signs  her  letters  with  the
drawing  of  a  bee,  generally  at  a  slight  angle.  I  received
a  letter  from  her  on  February  19,  1919.  I  have  another
correspondent  who  signs  her  letters  with  the  word
"  Chicken."  I  received  a  letter  from  her  on  February  12,
1919,  or  about  then.^

Note,  March  24,  1919.  I  wrote  the  above  [i.e.  transcribed  it  for  this  papei  ],
to  the  best  of  my  recollection,  in  the  afternoon  or  evening  of  Friday  last  (March
21,  1919).  The  following  is  an  extract  from  Miss  Samuels's  notes  for  March  22,
1919,  received  this  morning  :

Overslept  myself  and  can  only  remember  one  silly  item — a  rather
large  flea.

Rather  large  ! I  append  a  specimen  of  this  bee  signature.


Note,  March  25,  1919.  Miss  Samuels  has  come  nearer  the  truth
this  morning  (at  any  rate,  as  regards  size)  with  the  following  (March  24,
1919)  :

I  also  see  some  funny  animal — a  toy  perhaps — a  [doubtful  word,
loolcs  like  '  jap  ']  beetle  or  spider  perhaps,  mostly  legs.
I told Miss Samuels yesterday that her "  rather large flea "  was
a  bigger  and  more  reputable  insect, but  this  letter  crossed  with  the
above  note,  as  the  dates  indicate.


174


Hubert  Wales.


[part


The  notes  of  this  date  also  contamed  the  reference  to'
a  broken  leg. (Case  XXIII.)

XXXVI.

The  following,  though  somewhat  long,  seems  worth!
transcribing,  for  it  provides  distinct  evidence  pointing
to  the  mixing  and  dramatizing  of  information  telepathically
acquired  with  the  stock  of  the  percipient's  normal  memory.  |

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels' s  notes  {received  October  3,  1918,
and transcribed 'partly from the rough 7iotes,  partly,
from  the  tyjml  copy,  the  former  being  in  places  confused
and  illegible).  :

4  a.m. October  2,  1918.

A  reception  at  Mx.  Wales'  house.  I  see  Mr.  Wales  in
a  room  with  a  good  many  people,  more  ladies  than  men.
I  get  a  thought  of  the  Haymarket  also  Regents  Park.
I  seem  to  be  looldng  for  Mr.  Wales.  I  enter  a  front
■  room  [tyi:>ed  copy  '  smaller  room  ']  and  see  a  young  lady
restmg,  my  entrance  disturbs  her,  her  hat  is  lined  with
green  silk  [typed  copy  '  on  later  thoughts  it  may  be  a
green  light  shade.']  I  find  Mr.  Wales  at  last  in  a  small
back  room  [typed  copy  '  another  room  at  the  back  ']
(the  '  I  '  in  this  case  seems  to  be  Jane  Samuels)  sketch
of  room  enclosed.  [Rough  plan  enclosed  (see  reproduc-
tion).] The  room  is  very  nice  and  settees  are  draped
with  light  coverings  [original  notes,  '  Indian  table  covers
or  light  rugs.']  m.  Wales  seems  very  pleased  to  see
me  but  is  annoyed  that  I  meet  one  lady,  she  seems
to  be  trimming  her  naUs,  I  note  her  hands  and  nails
are  well  shaped,  she  wears  her  nails  a  little  too  pointed
however.  A  smallish  man  [description  on  plan  '  rather  |
small  elderly  man  ']  is  sitting  near  the  window  in  a  high
backed  chak,  and  is  looking  at  and  handing  round  some
cUm  looking  pictures  and  photos,  one  at  the  bottom  is  a
coloured  one  which  he  keeps  at  the  bottom  of  the  pile.  I
seem  to  be  hurried  off  a  party  is  going  to  the  theatre—
the  Haymarket.  Mr.  Wales  is  very  anxious  that  I  do  not
forget my impressions of rooms and the people.  The


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transfer mce.  175

nicest  iady  is  the  most  plain  but  she  is  charming.  There
is  also  a  man  to  show  us  out  (my  sister  seems  to  appear
at  the  last)  so  we  bow  at  the  door  and  go.  The  lady
]VIr.  Wales  does  not  really  hLo  has  been  cutting  the  skin
round  her  nails.  When  Mr.  Wales  first  tries  to  make
me  see  him  he  is  alone  the  room  is  dark  except  for  the
Ught  shining  straight  in  his  face.  ...  I  enjoyed  my
visit  to  Mr.  Wales'  house  very  much  and  admired  the
draped  things.  I  shook  hands  with  Mr.  Wales  on  leaving
but  not  anyone  else  in  the  room.

The  notes  for  this  date  also  contain  the  reference  to
Earl's  Court  Road  (Case  V.).

It  is  more  convenient  in  this case to use my  con-
temporary note  as  a  guide  to  the  facts,  instead  of  quoting
it  verbatim. I  will  deal  first  with  the  features  suggesting
telepathy. On September 30, on entering a room,  I
disturbed my wife, who, unknown to me, was  resting
there on a sofa. The table lamp in my study  has
a  green  shade— the  only shade in the room. I  spend
most of my time  in  this  room  and  am  usually  alone.
After  dark  the only  light I use  is this small  electric
table lamp  on  my  desk. When people enter the  room
I have  difficulty in seeing them at first, because  the
hght (which  is  between  the  door  and  me)  shines  straight
in  my face. The  plan  enclosed  by  Miss Samuels  shows
the position of seven objects. Of these, five  — "  door,"
"  sofa,"  "  fireplace,"  "  tall  backed  chair  "  and  "  window  "—
correspond with such objects in my drawing-room  and
are placed in the right relative positions. The "  tall
backed chair  " is conspicuously right. The  remaining
two  are  a  "  desk,"  placed  behind  the  sofa,  where  there
is,  in  fact,  a  cabinet,  and  a  "  settee,"  placed  in  a  position
where  there  is  an  easy  chair. (See  plan  of  the  room  repro-
duced.) It  is  not  a  back  room,  but  it  is  back  in  relation
to  my  study. The window  corresponding with  that  in
Miss Samuels's sketch  plan  looks  out  at  the  back,  but
the room contains another window. It is small  for
a drawing-room (18 by 16 ft.),  certainly small for  a
"  reception " such as Miss Samuels indicates. We  had


176


Hubert  Wales.


[PAET


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transfere7ice.  177

had  no  reception,  however,  or  anything  of  the  kind  ;
but  Miss  Samuels's  description  of  two  of  the  people  of
her  visionary  reception  correspond,  so  far  as  they  go,
with  two  visitors  who,  about  this  time,  had  come  on
separate  occasions  to  tea.  The  first,  who  came  abovit  a
week  before  the  date  of  Miss  Samuels's  impression,  was  a
woman  who  was  working  on  the  land,  and  who  talked
a  good  deal  about  her  nails  and  how  she  managed  to
care  for  them.  I  can  remember  her  holding  up  her
hands  and  looking  at  her  nails  as  she  spoke.  They  were
not  pointed — on  the  contrary,  she  said  that  she  kept
them  short — but  the  mention  of  nails  inevitably  sends
my  thoughts  to  a  woman  I  used  to  know  who  cut  her
nails  to  sharp,  inelegant  points.  It  is  the  case  that,
for  some  reason,  I  did  not  much  take  to  the  woman
who  talked  of  her  nails,  and  I  was  quite  conscious  of
this  at  the  time.  The  second  visitor  came  on  the  day
preceding  the  date  of  Miss  Samuels's  note — that  is,  on
October  1,  1918.  She  is  a  plain  woman,  but  a  particvilarly
nice  one.  That  is  not,  of  course,  an  unusual  combination,
but  in  this  case  it  was  the  subject  of  conversation  both
before  and  after  her  visit,  there  were  references  to  the
superficial  judgment  of  men  (she  is  unmarried)  and  so
on.  About  ten  days  before  the  date  of  the  impression
I  showed  a  third  visitor  (this  time  one  staying  in  the
house)  photographs  of  Miss  Samuels  and  Mr.  Fuller,
deliberately  withholding  a  second  photograph  of  Miss
Samuels.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  only  unity  of  these
various  visits  and  incidents  (which  all  took  place  in  the
drawing-room)  is  that  provided  by  the  retrospective
vision  of  my  mind.  I  have  no  particular  association
with  the  Haymarket,  beyond  that  it  forms  part  of  the
address  of  a  firm  of  publishers  with  whom  I  have  had
a  business  connection  for  about  fifteen  years,  and,  except-
ing occasional  walks  there,  none  with  Regents  Park.  The
impression  of  light  draperies  is  conspicuously  wrong  as
regards  the  drawing-room  ;  the  main  articles  of  furniture
in  that  room  are  covered  with  dark  purple  velvet  and  the
curtains  are  of  plain  shades  of  lighter  purple.  There
is nothing  in  the least oriental about  it. The "  small


178


Hubert  Wales.


[part


elderly  man  "  and  the  man-servant  suggested  nothing
to  me.

I  now  come  to  the  features  of  the  vision  which  appear
to  have  been  suggested  by  Miss  Samuels's  normal  memories.
I  .  told  her,  briefly  and  generally,  the  extent  to  which
her  impression  corresponded  with  matters  in  my  thoughts.
I  fear  she  was  disappointed  that  I  could  not  tell  her
she  had  described,  literally  and  exactly,  an  actual  occur-
rence ;  but  on  October  13,  having  probably  been  thinking
about  the  matter  in  the  meantime,  she  wrote  :

The  little  old  man  belongs  to  me.  As  you  will  note,
I  state  "  my  sister  now  seems  to  be  with  me  a  man-
servant shows  us  out,"  etc.  That  is  a  memory  from
her  or  from  myself  as  we  were  together.  .  .  He  is  a
very  rich  relation  of  ours,  who  we  do  not  know  very
well,  and  when  war  broke  out  [I  went  to  see  him].  He
does  keep  a  tall  man-servant  or  did  in  1915.^

One  is  tempted  by  this  case  to  the  speculation  that
Miss  Samuels's  subliminal  consciousness,  having  received
a  telepathic  impact,  produced  a  picture  of  the  relative's
room,  as  the  closest  approximation,  available  in  her
stock  of  memories,  to  the  arrangements  of  my  drawing-
room  ;  and  hence,  perhaps,  the  mistakes,  not  only  about
the  little  old  man  and  the  man-servant,  but  also  about
the  light  draperies  and  the  misplaced  articles  of  furniture.
I  feel  pretty  sure,  at  least,  from  my  observations,  that  Miss
Samuels  can  get  an  impression  of  nothing  that  is  quite
new  to  her,  quite  foreign  to  her  knowledge  and  thoughts.^

^  Miss  Samxiels  told  me  in  later  letters  (April  26  and  April  28,  1919)
that  he  lives  in  Hay  Hill — which  possibly  suggested  Haymarket- — and
that  many  years  previously  the  family  had  lived  in  Portland  Place,
which  is,  of  course  (as  Miss  Samuels  knows)  close  to  Regents  Park.

2  This  has  its  countei-part,  I  think,  in  svipraliminal  action.  I,  at
least,  find,  when  writing  fiction,  that  I  always  have  in  mind  some
room  (or  other  place,  as  the  case  may  be,  but  usually  a  room)  I  have
known.  I  cannot  produce  and  sustain  a  sheerly  invented  mental
picture.  No  doubt,  for  purposes  of  description,  I  could  deliberately
and  by  effort  set  up  in  my  mind  a  kind  of  architect's  plan  of  a  strange
room,  as  a  dramatist  does  of  a  stage,  but  that  would  hold  only  while
I  was  actually  concentrating  on  description  ;  as  soon  as  I  proceeded
to  the  action  of  the  story,  a  room  known  to  me  would  inevitably
be  presented  to  my  mind's  eye  as  the  scene  of  it.


LXXX.]


Apparent  Thought.  Transference.


179


Oedipus,  for  example  (Case  XIV.),  came  out  as  a
scene  in  a  modem  theatre  or  picture.  JVIiss  Samuels,
doubtless,  has  little  or  no  knowledge  of  C4reek  history
and  literature  ;  but  she  has  attended  an  art  school,
and  so  it  is  not  surprising  to  find  that  references  to
"  draped  figures  "  and  so  on  come  out  with  facility.

XXXVII.

Another  instance  of  this  apparent  inabilit}^  to  obtain
impressions  of  anything  alien  to  her  experience  is  the
following.

The  structure  of  the  house  I  occupy  is  unusual  :  it
is  built  all  on  one  floor,  extending,  as  its  name  suggests,
over  a  long  piece  of  ground,  and  the  rooms  have  no
ceilings  but  are  open  to  the  rafters.  Miss  Samuels's
notes  have  never  specifically  referred  to  thsse  peculiarities
■ — it  is  extremely  probable  that  she  has  no  knowledge
of  any  house  of  the  same  type — but  those  for  March  21,
1919,  contained  the  following  significant  item  :

Inspect  old  rambling  barn  or  house,  everything  to  be
cleared  out,  except  Landlord's  fixtures,  such  as  old-
fashioned  fireplaces  etc.

It  will  be  seen  that,  although,  in  writing  her  note,
J  Miss  Samuels  uses  the  word  barn "'  (apparently  the
nearest  she  could  get,  through  her  normal  knowledge,
to  the  kind  of  building  she  wished  to  describe)  the
reference  to  "  old-fashioned  fireplaces "  indicates  that
some  part  of  her  knew  that  it  was  not  a  barn.

The  next  day,  March  22,  1919,  produced  the  following  :

And  a  very  vague  remembrance  of  being  in  an  old
house  again  in  a  bad  state  of  repair.

The  "  again  "  evidently  comiects  this  with  the  impression
of  the  previous  day,  so  she  definitely  commits  herself
to  a  house  and  abandons  the  barn.  The  reference  to
"  a  bad  state  of  repair  "  is  relevant.  The  house  has
been  much  on  my  mind  of  late,  as  we  have  unexpectedly
(on  March  5,  1919)  received  notice  to  leave  it  in  September.
I  have  been  asked  to  buy  it  ; its  bad  state  of  repair,


180


Hubert  Wales.


[part


particularly  as  regards  some  of  the  floors,  is  one,  but
not  the  main,  objection  to  doing  so.  The  old-fashioned
fireplaces  are  a  feature  of  the  house, — indeed,  the  landlord's
fixtures  generally,  library  shelves  and  cupboards,  but
particularly  the  fireplaces.^

The  only  other  note  for  March  22,  1919,  is  that  about
"  a  rather  large  flea  "  (see  footnote  to  Case  XXXV.).

XXXVIII.

The  following  is  another  of  the  rare  cases  where  there  is
at  least  a  confused  correspondence  with  something  in
the  main  current  of  my  thought,  as  distinguished  from
trivial  and  transitory  impressions.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels' s  notes  {received  March  28,  1919).
March  27,  1919.  7.30.

A  senciable  \sic\  letter  received  relating  to  spiritualism,
written  of  [sic']  cream  or  yellow  thin  paper,  this  shape
[7|x4f  ins.]  but  larger.  The  letter  seems  addressed
to  me,  it  also  seems  from  my  Father  (who  is  dead)
so  I  am  afraid  it  is  very  mixed  in  my  mind,  it  also
seems  to  have  my  unusual  pet  name  on  it  or  a  word
of  three  letters  "  pet  "  of  course  it  may  be  "  Sir  "  or
"  Sis."  The  first  two  paragraphs  of  the  letter  aie  very
stricldng  [sic]  (if  you  read  the  letter  you  liked  it).

Note  written  by  H.  W.,  March  28,  1919.

Within  the  last  month  I  have  received  two  important
letters  from  ]\'Ii's.  Sidgmck  (the  second  is  dated  March  17)
which  have  much  occupied  my  mind  and  led  to  my
preparing  a  paper  for  the  S.P.R.  from  these  notes.  Neither
touched  on  spiritualism  [though  both  were  concerned
with  psychical  research]  ;  but  Miss  Samuels  gives  that
word  a  very  wide  significance,  and  I  think  avoids  the
word  "  psychical,"  which  she  has  difficulty  in  spelhng.
Both  letters  are  witten  on  paper  8f  x  6|  ins.  of  a  faint

'■  Since  the  text  was  written  everything  in  the  house  "  except  landlord's
fixtures  such  as  old-fashioned  fireplaces  etc."  has  been  "  cleared  out."
As  I  walked  through  the  empty  rooms  in  September  or  October,  1919,
I  thought  of  Miss  Samuels's  note.


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transference.  181


buff  tint  ;  both  begin  "  Dear  Sir,"  a  form  sufficiently
unusual  in  any  but  the  business  letters  I  receive  for
me  to  notice  it.  The  first  two  sentences  of  the  second
letter  are  of  particular  importance,  for  they  state  Mrs.
Sidgwick's  opinion  of  some  extracts  from  these  notes
that  I  had  sent  her  ;  the  second  sentence  contains  the
words  "  very  striking."  Though  not,  of  coiu-se  addressed
to  Bliss  Samuels,  the  letter  is  concerned  v.'ith  her  and
mentions  her  name.  In  view  of  the  authorship,  no  one
will  be  surprised  that  it  is  "  senciable  "  ;  and  I  certainly
liked  it.

On  March  29,  1919,  I  wrote  to  Miss  Samuels  asking
her  what  was  the  pet  name  of  three  letters  to  which
she  had  aUuded,  and  if  her  father  had  used  it.  I  also
put  the  following  question  :  "  What  do  you  understand
by  a  paragraph  ?  "  In  her  reply,  dated  March  31,  1919,
she  said  that  the  pet  name  was  "  pet,"  as  stated  in
the  note,  and  that  her  late  father  had  always,  called
her  by  it.  The  transition  of  ideas  from  this  to  the
relevant  "  Sir "  is  difficult  to  follow.  Replying  to  the
second  question,  Miss  Samuels  said  :  "  My  understanding
of  a  paragraph  is  part  of  a  sentence,  yet  can  stand  alone.".
I  have  felt  diffident  of  pursuing  the  interrogation  to  the
extent  of  asking  her  what  she  understands  by  a  sentence,
but  I  suspect  it  is  what  most  of  us  understand  by  a
paragraph.

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  say  that  I  had  not  told  Miss
Samuels  that  I  was  in  correspondence  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick
or  anyone  on  the  subject  of  her  phenomena.

XXXIX.

The  following  is  an  apparent  case  of  confused  emergence
in  which  Mr.  FuUer  seems  to  have  been  the  agent.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels' s  notes  {handed  to  H.  W.,
August  9,  1918).  {These  are  the  notes  containing  the
words  "  ill  nauseaum,"  Case  XXVIII.)

August  8,  1918.


182


Hubert  Wales.


[part


3  storey  small  printing  office.  Centre  one  room  file
of  newspaper  (or  like)— very  narrow  space  to  pass— about
a  foot.

Extracts  from  contemporary  yiotes  by  H.  W.

Miss  Samuels  told  me  [in  reference  to  "  file  of  newspaper
or  like  "],  when  she  gave  me  her  notes,  that  she  had
had  an  impression  of  something  Uke  a  double  printing
frame,  the  shape  of  an  inverted  V.  She  showed  me  a
single  printing  frame  and  explained  how,  in  [a]  double
one,  another  would  stand  with  its  back  to  it  ....  in
reference  to  "  very  narrow  space,"  that  she  had  some
impression,  in  connection  with  this,  of  the  thick  circular
posts  by  which  ships  are  made  fast  to  quays.

Neither  Miss  Samuels  nor  I  could  remember  the  name
of  these  posts  at  the  time,  but  I  now  know  it  is  "  cap-
stan." I  gather,  from  the  form  of  his  reply,  that  she
embodied  these  oral  explanations  in  the  copy  of  the  notes
she  sent  to  Mr.  Fuller.

Mr.  Fuller's  comments  {for  method  of  recei'pt  see  Case  XXVIII.).

The  typecase  or  newspaper  file  is,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
a  fitting  connected  with  the  new  tanks  that  are  worrying
Fritz — when  I  say  that  the  fitting  is  very  suggestive  of
a  double  typecase,  I  have  said  all  I  can  say  without
offending  D.O.R.A.

The  difficulty  of  getting  round  a  post  or  something : —
Our  planes  are  R.E.  8.  type,  the  cockpit  in  which  the
photographer  sits  is  so  small  there  is  scarcely  room  to
turn  round  when  standing  up  and  as  there  is  a  small
revolving  stool  (like  a  piano  stool)  in  the  centre,  we
experience  great  difficulty  in  fitting  in  our  cameras,  as
the  long  lens  is  put  through  a  hole  in  the  floor  of  the
'bus.i

It  will  be  seen  that,  whereas  Miss  Samuels's  impression
related  wholly  to  one  subject — the  arrangements  in  "a
small  printing  office  " — the  correspondence  noted  by
Mr. Fuller concerned two separate and distinct  things.

'  A  .slang  name  for  an  aeroplane.


Lxxx.]  A-pparent  Thought  Transference.  183

A  printing  office  is  familiar  to  Miss  Samuels,  but  "  'buses  "
and  "  tanks,"  no  doubt,  are  not.

Possible  Transference  of  Latent  Thonghts.
I  turn  next  to  some  cases  suggesting  the  transference
of  the  agent's  latent  thoughts.  Three  have  already
been  referred  to,  the  Irishman's  black  horse  (IV.),  The
Paris  steps  (VII.),  and  the  portable  seat  (XXXII.).  The
following  are  others.

XL.

Extract  from  Miss  SamneW s  notes  {received  September  22,  1918).
4.5  a.m. September  21,  1918.  Harrow.

A  hospital  Red  Cross  train  comes  in  on  another  plat-
form,  so I do not  see the first  train  gUde out.  One
patient  says  "  I  am  in  no  pain  now,  it  will  not  be  long  "
— he  seems  to  ask  the  nurse  for  a  leaf  to  hold.
The  first  part  of  this  connects  with  a  preceding  note
and is possibly veridical (see below, Case LI.).  There
was  nothing  in  the  remainder  which conveyed  anything
to  me  at  the  time  of  its  receipt, but  on  October  29,
1918,  I  wrote  the  following  comment  :

I recently [since the receipt of Miss Samuels's  note]
chanced  to  re-read  Browning's  "  Evelyn  Hope  " — a  poem
I  have  read  often  before  and  admire — and  noticed  that
the  following  lines  occur  in  the  last  stanza  :
"  So,  hush — I  will  give  you  a  leaf  to  keep —
See,  I  shut  it  inside  the  sweet  cold  hand."

Some  months  before  the  date  of  Miss  Samuels's  note
— I  think  about  six  or  eight — I  had  carefully  read
"  Evelyn  Hope  "  in  connection  with  some  remarks  I
wrote  for  the  S.P.R.  Journal  upon  Mrs.  Verrall's  "  Hope,
Star  and  Browning  "  script.  It  will  be  remembered
that,  in  Browning's  poem,  the  leaf  is  put  into  the  hand
of  a  dead  girl  :  in  Miss  Samuel's  vision  it  is  asked  for
by  a  patient  who  says  "  it  will  not  be  long."


184


Hubert  Wales.


[part


In  reply  to  a  question  Miss  Samuels  wrote,  on  March  25,
1919  :  "  No,  I  have  never  read  any  of  Browning's  or
anyone's  poems,  not  my  line  .  .  .  The  only  Evelyn
Hope  I  know  is  an  actress."

This  is,  again,  a  case,  like  those  concerned  with  the
man  crying  Le  Matin  (VII.)  and  the  false  Vandyke
beard  made  of  soap-suds  (XXIV.),  which  must,  I  think,
necessarily  fail  to  make  upon  others  so  strong  an  impression
as  it  made  upon  me.  When  I  read  Miss  Samuels's  note,
I  was  struck  by  the  oddness  of  the  phrase  "  a  leaf  to
hold."  Why  a  leaf  ?  It  seemed  such  a  strange  thing
for  a  dying  man  to  desire.  Had  it  been  a  flower,  I
should  have  thought  nothing  about  it.  And  then,  when,
a  few  weeks  later,  I  chanced  to  re-read  Browning's  Evelyn
Hope,  I  remembered  that,  on  my  first  reading  of  the
poem,  I  had  been  struck  in  precisely  the  same  way  by
the  oddness  of  the  idea  "  a  leaf  to  keep."  Why  a  leaf  ?
It  seemed  such  an  unromantic  thing  to  put  into  a  dead
girl's  hand. I  thoiight  he  must  mean  a  petal  of  a  flower.


XLI.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels's  7iotes  {received  October  10,  1918).

3.10  a.m. October  9,  1918.
Mr.  Mee.

When  I  received  this,  I  had  a  strong  impression,
almost  a  certainty,  that  I  had  seen  the  peculiar  name
before,  but  I  could  not  track  the  impression  to  any-
thing definite,  so  left  the  note  uncommented  upon.  On
October  15,  1918,  however,  I  wrote  the  following  :

I  have  just  chanced  to  notice  that  there  is  a  book
on  my  study  shelves,  a  "  Children's  Encyclopaedia,"  which
bears  on  its  back  the  words  "  Edited  by  Arthur  Mee."

When  my  eye  was  caught  by  the  name,  I  was  filling
a  pipe  from  a  tin  standing  on  a  ledge  beneath  the  book-
shelves, idly  glancing  round  as  I  did  so.  I  must  have
done  the  same  thing  in  the  same  place  hundreds,  per-
haps thousands,  of  times  before.


LXXX.]


Apparent  Thought  Transference.


185


The  notes  for  this  date  contained,  besides  the  above,
three  or  four  having  suggestive  correspondences  with  my
thoughts,  among  others,  the  following,  just  after  a  refer-
ence to  "an  old  lady  "  described  as  "an  Italian  or
gipsy  "  :

I  see  a  high  block  of  flats  and  seem  to  go  to  a  small
room  at  the  top.

Upon  that  I  commented,  October  10,  1918  :

I  read,  a  few  days  ago,  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.  for
October,  a  case  concerned  with  a  woman  "  who  lives
alone  at  the  top  of  a  high  block  of  flats."

This  woman  is  referred  to  as  "  Mme.  R.,"  and  it  is
stated  that  "  she  still  takes  the  liveliest  interest  in  the
outer  world "  ;  so,  no  doubt,  I  thought  of  her  as  foreign
and  elderly.

XLII.

After  receiving  Miss  Samuels's  notes  for  October  26,
1918,  I  told  her  that  the  forest  scene  (Case  XII.)  was
appropriate  to  some  of  the  contents  of  a  letter  I  had
received  from  a  friend  in  India.  On  October  29,  1918,  I
received  from  her  the  following  note,  dated  October  28.
1918  :

Another  half  remembered  item— I  think  your  friend  in
India  has  dogs,  I  seemed  to  see  two  pressing  close  to
her  side.

At  the  time  I  thought  this  was  quite  wrong,  for  my
impression  was  that  my  friend  was  by  no  means  a
"  doggy  "  woman  ;  but  on  the  following  day  (October  30,
1918)  I  wrote  the  following  note  :

On  looking  over  some  "  snap-shots  "  sent  me  by  this
friend  since  she  has  been  in  India,  I  find  that  in  three
or  four  of  them  she  has  been  taken  Avith  a  dog  or  dogs
with  her,  four  or  five  different  dogs  appearing  in  them.

In  a  subsequent  letter  from  India,  replying  to  one  in
which I told her of Miss Samuels's impressions,  my

N


186


Hubert  Wales.


[part


friend  told  me  she  had  two  dogs  of  which  she  was  par-
ticularly fond,  "  a  lovely  brown  dachshund  whom  I
adore,  and  Tatcho,  a  small  white  fox  terrier."  No  doubt,
she  had  told  me  the  same  thing  before,  but  it  had  dropped
out  of  my  conscious  memory.

XLIII.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels' s  notes  {received  March  27,  1919).
March  26,  1919.  7.30.

A  photo  of  a  bearded  man  called  the  Stranger.

Note  written  by  H.  W.,  March  27,  1919.

Many  years  ago,  quite  twenty,  I  wrote  a  story,  which
was  never  published,  about  a  bearded  man,  called  "  The
Stranger."  I  have  just  had  to  hunt  up  the  MS.,  in  a
parcel  at  the  back  of  a  cupboard,  to  see  if  the  man  had
a  beard,  though  I  had  an  impression  that  he  had.  It
is  most  exceptional  for  me  to  give  a  character  a  beard ;
I  can  think  at  the  moment  of  no  other  instance.

References  to  photographs  are  common  in  Miss  Samuels's
notes.  No  doubt  the  fact  that  she  is  in  the  photographic
business  begets  a  tendency  of  dream  images,  whatever
their  source,  to  take  this  form.  There  have  been  many
indications  of  the  same  general  tendency  :  compare  the
reference  to  a  telephone  in  Case  XXVI.  The  feeling
left  on  my  mind  is  precisely  that  described  by  Mrs.
Salter  in  discussing  Mrs.  Piper's  phenomena  {Proceedings,
Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  353)  :  "  It  is  as  though  vague,  unattached
ideas  were  presented  to  the  mind  of  the  medium,  and
were  by  her  provided  with  an  imaginary  and  inappropriate
setting."

XLIV.

In  the  following  case  an  objective  event  makes  it
probable  that  I  had  recently  been  thinking  about  the
subject  suggested  by  the  note,  though  I  had  no  conscious
recoUection  of  doing  so.


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transference.


187


Extract  from Miss  SamueWs  notes  {received  February  28,
1919).

Thursday,  2.2.19  [should  be  27.2.19].

In  a  shop  or  auction  room,  inspection  of  old  vases
clocks,  etc,  etc, — 3  special  forks  attract  attention,  offer
to  exchange — pickpockets.

Gower  Street.

Catching  a  thief  and  trying  to  make  him  confess  and
go  straight  in  future.

Note  written  by  H. W.,  February  28,  1919.

On  Tuesday  or  Wednesday  evening  (February  25  or  26,

1919)  I  received  a  letter  from  a  friend,  Mme  d'A  u,  of

whom  I  had  heard  nothing  for  a  very  long  time,  asking
me  to  go  and  see  her. I  became  acquainted  with  Mme

d'A  u  through  a  great  friend  of  hers  Mme  A.  Since

they  are  very  much  together,  are  both  foreign  and  both
young  and  good  looking,  I  necessarily  associate  them  in
my  mind.  I  don't  think  it  would  be  possible  for  me
to  think  of  one  wdthout  thinldng  of  the  other.  When
I  first  loiew  Mme  A.,  she  lived  in  Gower  Street,  and
I  several  times  went  to  see  her  there.  [I  have  known
no  one  else  who  lived  in,  or  was  connected  with.  Grower
Street.]  She  once  stayed  with,  us  for  two  or  three  weeks,
and  during  that  time  had  her  pocket  ])icked  in  Self  ridge's
shop  [losing  her  purse],  which  was  a  serious  trouble  to
her  [and  we  had  to  give  her  some  temporary  help]  as
her  resources  at  that  time  were  very  limited.

This  case  seems  to  invite  a  comparison  with  com-
munications purporting  to  come  from  the  dead.  Had
Mme  A.  been  dead,  and  had  I  been  given  "  Gower  St."
and  "  In  a  shop — pickpockets  "  as  evidence  of  the  identity  -
of  a  purporting  communicator,  I  should  assuredly  have
known  who  was  meant  and,  I  think,  have  felt  that  the
identifying  details  were  well  chosen.  But  these,  as  will
have  been  seen,  are  very  meagre.


188  Huhert  Wales.  [part

Possible  Transference  of  Associated  Ideas.

Besides  this,  case  there  have  been  a  good  many  which
have  suggested  the  transference  of  associated  ideas.  One
of  the  most  curious  is  the  following.


XLV.  I

On  9th  April,  1919,  I  made  one  of  my  rare  visits
to  London,  having  been  thinking  of  doing  so,  of  course,
on  the  preceding  day.  On  April  10th,  after  my  return
home,  I  received  Miss  Samuels's  notes  of  her  impressions  ^
dated  the  morning  of  April  9th.  They  contained  the
following  :

A lot  of  white  birds  come  fljang  past,  I  put  out  my  ;  i
hand,  one  comes  quite  near  to  see  if  there  is  any  food,  I  >>
as  there  is  not  he  flies  away  with  the  rest. [In  accom-
panying letter] the white birds were the clearest, like  ;
small  gulls.  ^'

Now, a  few  years  ago, whenever  I went  to  London,  f
I bought buns at Waterloo and fed the gulls  as
I crossed  Hungerford Bridge. They would come flying  p
all round  me, almost taking the  food  from my hands,  i
I had not consciously been thinking of this at the  d
time of Miss Samuels's note, but, as I have said,  j
I  had  been  thinking  of  my  visit  to  London. I  have  been
there  only  three  times  in  the  eight  months  covered  by  the
observations.


Telepathy  as  against  Clairvoyance.

The  following  case,  in  addition  to  several  quoted
in  other  connections  (notably  the  "  reception,"  Case,
XXXVI.),  suggests  that,  if  information  be  obtained
super  normally,  the  means  is  telepathic,  rather  than  by
any  sort  of  direct  vision.


Lxxx.]  Ajrparent  Thought  Transference.


189


XLVI.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels's  notes  {received  January  6,  1919).
Januaiy  5,  1919. 5  a.m.

I  am  holding  a  water  bottle  by  the  neck  like  this
[rough  sketch  of  bottle  with  fluted  top  and  hand  holding
it]  [typed  copy  '  which  is  fluted  with  4  divisions  '].  I
wake  up  thinking  I  am  holding  a  real  bottle  it  is  so
clear.

The notes for this day contain also the  description
of  the  "  childlike  writing  "  (Case  XVIII.)  as  well  as  some
other  suggestive  correspondences.
Note  written  by  H.  W.,  January  6,  1919.

This description exactly corresponds with our  table
water-bottles, one of  which  I  use several  times  dally — ■
the  tops  of  the  necks,  instead  of  being  circular,  are  divided
into  four  spouts  as  in  IVIiss  Samuels's  sketch.
On examining one of the water-bottles  afterwards,
however,  I  found  that  the  mouth  was  divided,  not  into
four  spouts,  as  I  had  supposed,  but  into  three.

It  is  perhaps  worth  saying  that  this  water-bottle,
Frank  C'raig"s  picture  (the  possible  source  of  one  of  Miss
Samuels's  notes  not  included  in  this  report),  the  bright,
polished  tray  and  the  small  photogravure  of  a  nude  woman
in  a  swimming  attitude  (Case  XXXIII.)  all  occupy,  in
the  evening,  a  particular  corner  of  my  study  near  the
door,  which  catches  my  eye  the  last  thing  at  night,
as  I  go  to  bed.  I  have  noticed  no  such  apparent  con-
centration upon  any  other  part  of  the  house.  There
is  one  other  object  in  the  corner — a  small  brown  photo-
gravure of  trees.  This  also  has  formed  the  subject  of
a  correspondence,  but  it  belongs  properly  to  the  cases
in  which  there  is  a  prima  facie  suggestion  of  precogni-
tion (see  below,  p.  205).

Casual  Agency.

I  extract  next  a  few  cases  suggesting  casual  agency-
cases,  that  is,  in  which  the  apparent  agent  is  neither
Mr.  Fuller  nor  I.


190  Hubert  Wales.  [part

XLVII.  <

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels' s  notes  {received  September  22,  1918).

4.5  a.m. September  21,  1918.  Harrow.

An  old  [typed  copy  '  elderly  ']  lady  wants  the  Southamp-
ton train.  They  find  they  have  to  change  into  front
end  of  train.  I  seem  to  take  4  tickets.  There  is  an
old  gentleman  also,  tall.  Lots  of  luggage  [typed  copy
'  hand  luggage  ']  .  .  .  Connected  with  buying  the  tickets,
more  money  was  wanted.  I  remember  a  10/-  note  and
3  extra  shillings.  [Typed  copy,  '  There  is  a  question
of  money  I  seem  to  want  more  than  the  10/-  note  and
3  odd  shillings  that  I  hold  in  my  hand.']

I  found  nothing  in  this  to  correspond  with  my  thoughts,
and  Mr.  Fuller  returned  to  me,  without  comment,  on
September  30,  1918,  the  copy  I  had  sent  him.  On
October  7,  1918,  however,  I  received  through  Miss
Samuels  a  letter  from  a  friend  of  hers.  Miss  C.  Thorpe.
She  is  not,  I  understand,  a  great  or  intimate  friend  of
Miss  Samuels's,  but  merely  one  of  the  many  people  with
whom  she  is  on  pleasant  terms  ;  and  she  "  blew  into  "
her  shop  one  day.  The  letter,  which  was  dated  October
5,  1918,  is  as  follows  :

Dear  Mr  Wales,  Miss  Samuels  has  just  been  showing
me  some  of  her  notes,  and  strangely  enough  about  a  train
bound  for  Southampton,  on  which  an  elderly  lady  and
myself  were  travelling.  We  had  to  get  into  the  end
of  this  train  because  part  of  it  was  being  left  at  Win-
chester, and  two  gentlemen  saw  us  off,  taking  2  platform
tickets,  making  4.  But  somehow  I  lost  my  ticket  and
only  had  [a]  10/-  note,  so  we  had  a  quarrel  with  the
porter.  He  ended  by  taking  my  address  as  I  refused
to  pay.  We  were  also  worried  as  my  friend  had  a  lot
of  luggage,  a  dressing-case  containing  all  her  jewellery,
and  we  had  to  leave  it  in  the  cloak  room.

I  wrote  to  Miss  Thorpe,  asking  her  if  she  could  re-
member the  date  or  approximate  date  of  the  train  inci-
dent. The  following  is  an  extract  from  her  reply,  dated
October  27,  1918,  received  October  29,  1918  :


LXXX.]


Apparent  Thought  Transference.


191


Dear  Mr  Wales,  Thank  you  so  much  for  your  letter.
Yes,  I  think  I  can  give  you  the  exact  date,  as  I  was  on
leave,  it  was  the  20th  September,  I  was  on  my  way  to
Winchester  where  my  people  live  and  have  to  travel  on  a
Southampton  train. ^

Since  Miss  Thorpe  was  travelling  to  Winchester,  where
a  part  of  the  train  was  slipped,  she  would  evidently
have  to  change  into  the  back,  not  the  front,  end  of
the  train.  It  will  be  seen  that,  in  her  first  letter,  she
does  not  state  which  end  it  was  ;  and  the  presumption
is  that  this  omission  was  due  to  the  fact  that  she  was
not  able  to  state  that  it  was  the  front  end.  I  refer  to
this  point  because  it  appears  to  bear  on  the  question
of  bona  fides.  Had  the  statement  been  a  concoction,
or  an  exaggeration  of  a  slight  coincidence,  there  would
have  been  no  apparent  reason  why  she  should  not  have
made  the  correspondence  exact  ;  but  the  letters,  I  think,
indicate  the  natural  desire  of  an  honest  witness,  while
keeping  within  the  bounds  of  fact,  to  make  the  most
of  the  hits  and  the  least  of  the  misses.  It  is  worth
noting,  too,  in  this  connection,  that  though  Miss  Samuels
appears  to  have  shown  a  number  of  her  sets  of  notes,
on  the  5th  of  October  and  later,  to  Miss  Thorpe,  the
latter  claimed  correspondence  with  her  thoughts  only
in  the  cases  of  the  Southampton  train  and  some  small
undistinctive  references  such  as  "a  stopped  up  pipe."


XLVIII.

The  following  case  not  only  points  to  casual  agency,
but  suggests,  like  the  laughter  incident  (Case  VI.)  and
some  others  not  quoted,  that  thoughts  may  be  trans-
mitted which  the  agent  does  not  wish  to  send.  In
this  instance,  for  obvious  reasons,  I  substitute  pseu-
donyms for  the  real  names.


1  This  letter  was  received  direct  from  Miss  Thorpe — not  through
Miss  Samuels — and  was  headed  with  the  Chelsea  address  to  which
1  had  written.


192  Hubert  Wales.  [part

Miss  Samuels's  yiotes  [received  September  2,  1918.

6.30  a.m. August  31,  1918.  Bouknemouth.

I  feel  like  a  girl  who  has  met  a  tall  unpleasant  slopioy
kind  of  man  and  is  only  thinking  how  I  can  get  away
from  him,  before  he  annoys  me  by  perhaps  trying  to
kiss  me.

(There  was  no  other  note  on  this  day.)

Miss  Samuels  told  me,  when  she  sent  the  above,  that
she  thought  the  impression  came  from  a  young  friend
of  hers,  Miss  Ray  Peveril,  a  girl  of  about  16  ;  that,
upon  her  return  to  London,  she  had  asked  her  if  she
had  had  any  corresponding  experience  ;  but  that  Miss
Peveril  had  replied  that  she  had  not.  A  few  days  later,
however,  on  the  7th  of  September,  I  received  the  follow-
ing letter  from  Mrs.  Holbrook,  a  friend  of  Miss  Peveril
and  also  of  Miss  Samviels,  dated  6th  September,  1918  :

Miss  Samuels  has  just  asked  me  to  write  about  the
man  wanting  to  Idss  a  gnl,  the  tall  man,  she  had  the
telepathy  while  in  Bournemouth.  Miss  [Peveril]  told
me  about  the  incident,  but  when  Miss  Samuels  asked
her  about  it  she  would  not  admit  it  at  all,  as  Miss  Samuels
had  told  her  not  to  fhrt.  But  I  think  you  ought  to
know  when  things  are  correct.  Miss  [Peveril]  will  often
tell  me  things  she  would  not  like  to  tell  Miss  Samuels.

In  a  letter  bearing  the  same  date  as  the  above  Miss
Samuels  wrote  :

You  will  have  a  httle  letter  from  Mi-s  [Holbrook]  about
that  tall  man  who  frightened  [Ray]  while  I  was  at  Bourne-
mouth. He  did  try  to  kias  her  but  she  would  not  admit
it  to  me,  but  she  did  to  Mrs  [Holbrook].  So  without
telling  the  gii'l  we  are  telling  you,  to  clear  up  the  point.

There  is  a  manifest  suggestion  here,  as  elsewhere,  of
the  absence  of  inhibitory  power  in  the  subliminal  strata,^
or  at  least  of  failure  always  to  exert  it,  whether  we
regard  the  agent  as  impressing  the  percipient,  or  the
percipient as reading the thoughts of the agent.  One

1  A  case  strongly  suggesting  such  an  absence  of  inhibitory  power  is
recorded  in  the  Journal  for  March,  1920,  pp.  174-5.


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transference.


193


or  two  cases,  which  I  cannot  relate  privately,  far  less
publish,  appear  to  indicate  that  even  the  most  personal
and  secret  thoughts  of  our  intimate  lives  are  not  immune
from  transference  telepathically.

Most  people,  I  find,  are  rather  startled  by  the  sugges-
tion that  there  are  latent  powers  in  us,  which,  if  they
become  universal,  would  deprive  us  of  the  ability  we
have  hitherto  enjoyed  to  keep  certain  things  to  our-
selves. It  seems  to  me  that  that  feeling  is  based  on  some
misconception  of  what  such  a  state  of  general  mind
reading,  if  in  course  of  time  it  is  to  be  developed,  would
imply.  It  would  put  a  premium  on  sincerity.  Your
neighbour  would  know  your  affairs,  but  you  would  know
his,  and  your  knowledge  would  be  your  defence.  Only
hypocrites,  as  it  appears  to  me,  have  any  serious  reason
to  fear  the  approach  of  the  day,  if  it  is  to  come,  "  when
the  secrets  of  all  hearts  shall  be  disclosed."

On  the  whole,  however,  I  feel  inclined  to  infer  from
these  incidents — what  most  people  must  have  inferred
from  a  consideration  of  the  phenomena  of  professional
mediums — that  the  subliminal  knows  the  supraliminal's
business.  In  this  case  my  business  was  to  obtain  evi-
dence about  telepathy,  evidence  of  its  u.tmost  reach  and
power.  Had  my  subliminal  consciousness  known  that,
in  the  interests  of  obtaining  that  evidence,  I  should  be
willing  to  be  placed  personally  in  a  disconcerting  position,
it  would  have  known  no  more  than  the  truth.  Similarly
Miss  Peveril,  at  the  bottom  of  her  heart,  might  have
had  some  motive  for  desiring  the  disclosure  of  the  informa-
tion contained  in  Miss  Samuels's  note.

Miss  Samuels  has  told  me  repeatedly  that  she  receives
what  she  regards  as  telepathic  impressions  from  her
near  relatives,  with  whom  she  lives  and  who  to  a  large
extent  share  her  thoughts  ;  but  since  she  appreciates  that
it  would  be  almost  impossible  to  make  these  evidentially
cogent,  she  does  not  send  me  notes  of  them.

Evidence  of  the  possible  agency  of  total  strangers
is  necessarily  difficult  to  obtain.  Indeed,  there  would
appear  to  be  no  way  of  obtaining  it  except  by  chance


194


Hubert  Wales.


[part


or  the  concurrence  of  some  public  event.  The  two
following  cases  seem  just  worth  quoting  in  this  connec-
tion, though  it  will  be  manifest  that,  at  the  most,  they
only  hint  at  the  possibility  of  such  a  wide  telepathic
sweep.

XLIX.

Extract  from  Miss  Samtiels's  notes  {received  August  27,  1918).
26th  August,  1918.

I  now  remember  that  I  hear  people  talking  about  the
war,  that  some  big  operation  is  taking  place  in  Egjrpt.

The  date  is  important.  At  the  time  I  received  the
note  I  thought  the  suggestion  it  contained  very  improb-
able :  public  attention  was  directed  wholly  upon  France,
where  the  tide  was  just  turning,  nothing  had  been  heard
of  the  Egyptian  forces  for  so  long  that  they  had  almost
been  forgotten,  and  to  me,  at  least,  it  seemed  that
everything  pointed  to  an  intention  to  concentrate  upon
the  West  and  attempt  nothing  further  in  the  minor
theatres.

On  the  31st  of  August  I  noticed,  at  the  foot  of  a
column  in  a  newspaper,  and  filed,  the  following  report  :

Holy  Land  Activity.
The  Turks  report  "  great  movement  on  the  part  of  the
enemy  at  the  mouth  of  the  Jordan."

On  the  3rd  of  September  I  came  upon  the  following,
similarly  at  the  foot  of  a  column  :

Items  from  Abroad.
The  great  heat  in  Palestine  is  rapidly  moderating  and
men  and  horses  are  in  fine  fighting  trim.

It  was  on  the  21st  of  September,  1918,  nearly  a  month
after  the  date  of  Miss  Samuels's  note,  that  the  papers
reported  the  opening  movements  of  General  Allenby's
operations  in  Palestine,  which  led  to  such  important
results.  It  may  be  added  that  General  Allenby,  in  his
despatches,  referred  to  the  troops  under  his  command
as  the  "  Egyptian  Expeditionary  Force."


Lxxx.]  Appareiit  Thought  Transference.  195


It  will  be  seen  that  there  is  no  suggestion  of  pre-
cognition here — merely  of  obtaining  telepathically  know-
ledge of  decisions  and  arrangements  which  were  not
permitted  to  pass  the  Censor.  That  great  miUtary  pre-
parations were  going  on  in  Egypt  at  the  time  of  Miss
Samuels's  note,  though  few  people  knew  it,  is  evidently
a  fact.  But  manifestly  the  possibility  cannot  be  ex-
cluded that  small  newspaper  paragraphs,  similar  to  those
quoted,  may  have  appeared  before  I  began  to  look  for
them,  and  that  Miss  Samuels  may  have  seen  and  sub-
consciously retained  an  impression  of  them.

L.

Extract  from  Miss  Samuels's  notes  {received  September  11,
1918,  transcribed  from  Miss  Samuels's  typed  copy).

6.45  a.m.  September  10,  1918.  Maidenhead.

I  am  in  a  large  house  in  a  foreign  town  yet  with
English  people.  The  room  has  two  very  large  windows,
the  house  is  white  stone  fronted,  the  Avlndows  have  stone
balconies  [original  notes  '  in  French  style  ']  yet  it  is
above  the  street  level,  the  windows  face  a  wde,  well
kept  street.  Suddenly  some  ladies  enter,  one  asks  if
she  can  hide  under  the  sofa.  I  am  so  surprised  and
stimned,  stanchng  unable  to  move,  when  suddenly  the
streets  are  filled  with  fleeing  people  in  a  j^anic.  I  hear
cries,  shouts,  I  see  a  shot  fired  near  left  hand  window,
the  other  people  in  the  room  are  standing  too  frightened
and  stunned  to  move.  I  snatch  up  a  young  child  and
dash  out  of  room  into  passage — the  awful  din  continues.
I  am  terribly  frightened,  full  of  terror  and  walie  up  still
frightened.

This  suggested  nothing  to  me  at  the  time  of  its  receipt.
I  thought  vaguely,  I  remember,  of  Brussels.

On  the  12th  of  September,  1918,  the  papers  published
the  following  telegram  under  prominent  headings  :

Washdstoton,  Wednesday  [September  11,  1918].
A  despatch  from  the  American  Legation  in  Christiania
says  that,  according  to  reliable  information  received  there.


196


Hubert  Wales.


[part


Petrograd  is  burning  in  twelve,  j^laces  and  an  indiscriminate
massacre  is  proceeding  in  the  streets.

A  telegram  from  Stockholm,  in  similar  terms,  also
dated  "  Wednesday,"  was  printed  the  same  day.

Several  Indejmident  Agents.
LI.

Though  it  involves  some  repetition,  I  give  in  full
Miss  Samuels's  notes  for  21st  September,  1918,  for  they
provide  a  good  instance  of  the  apparent  access  of  infor-
mation telepathically  from  several  independent  agents.
The  numbers  in  brackets  are  inserted  by  me  for  con-
venience of  reference.

4.5  a.m. September  21,  1918.  Harrow.

(1)  An  old  [typed  copy  'elderly']  lady  wants  the
Sontliampton  train.  They  find  they  have  to  change  into
front  end  of  train.  I  seem  to  take  4  tickets.  There  is
an  old  gentleman  also,  tail.  Lots  of  luggage  [typed
copy  '  hand  luggage.]  [  The  following  is  added  in  a  later
part  of  the  notes.]  Connected  with  buying  the  tickets
more  money  was  wanted.  I  remember  a  10/-  note  and
3  extra  shillings.

(2)  I  hear  the  name  "  Whillets  "  [typed  copy '  Willets.'].

(3)  A  hospital  red  cross  train  comes  in  on  another
platform,  so  I  do  not  see  first  train  glide  out.  One
patient  says,  "  I  am  in  no  pain  now,  it  will  not  be  long  "
he  seems  to  ask  the  nurse  for  a  leaf  to  hold.

(4)  Mr.  Wales  was  very  happy  last  night,  he  laid  {sic)
on  a  sofa  or  lounge  and  knew  he  was  happy.  (To  be
happy  and  know  you  are  happy  is  a  double  happiness  !).

(5)  [in  typed  copy  orJy]  I  am  powdering  my  neck.

(6)  6  oc.  p.m.  20.9.18.  [Miss  Samuels's  London  address.]
Numb  sensation  all  up  left  arm,  ujDper  part — from  Ireland,
I  expect.

(7)  Also  about  2  p.m. Pain  in  big  toe  nail.

(1)  For  comments  on  this  by  Miss  C.  Thorpe  see
Case  XLVII.


LXXX.]


Apparent  Thought  Transference.


197


(2)  This  impression  appears  to  have  been  entangled
with  the  previous  one  about  the  Southampton  train.  ^
In  a  subsequent  letter  (September  23,  1918)  Miss  Samuels
said  that  she  seemed  to  hear  the  word  called  out,  and
thought  it  was  either  the  name  of  "  someone's  groom  "
or  of  an  "  unknown  wayside  station."  I  refer  to  this
as  another  example  of  very  many  cases,  the  majority  of
which  I  have  had  no  space  to  quote,  which  indicate
that  the  form  of  the  emergence  of  an  idea  has  no  neces-
sary connection  whatever  with  its  significance  in  the
apparent  agent's  mind.  (Other  instances  of  this  included
in  this  paper  are  XXVI.  and  XLIII.  above.)

My  contemporary  note  on  this  name  seems  over  long
for  the  occasion,  so  I  do  not  quote  it  in  full.  It
states  (giving  instances  of  specific  thoughts)  that,  for
some  days  just  previous  to  the  date  of  Miss  Samuels's
note  I  had  been  thinking  much  about  Mrs.  Willett's
script,  puzzling  particularly  over  the  difiiculty  involved
in  the  confusion  of  the  greater  and  lesser  Ajax  [Pro-
ceedings, Part  LXIII.,  p.  168),  indicating,  as  it  does,  on
the  one  hand,  a  mistake  too  gross  to  be  attributed  to  the
purporting  communicator,  and,  on  the  other,  too  much
classical  knowledge  to  be  attributed  to  Mrs.  Willett  herseK.
Possibly  this  very  set  of  notes,  pointing  to  the  receipt  of
information  telepathically  from  a  variety  of  sources,  may
contribute  something  to  the  solution  of  the  problem.^

1  References  to  trains  and  railways  are  very  common  in  Miss  Samuels's
notes,  occurring  considerably  oftener,  probably,  than  those  to  any  other
subject.  The  next  favourite  topic  is,  perhaps,  jewellery  and  finery
generally,  particularly  pearls.

2  In  connection  with  my  contemporary  note  to  this  case  there  occurred
a  good,  and  rather  amusing,  instance  of  the  untrustworthiness  of  memory
even  for  a  week.  I  stated  in  the  note,  without  the  smallest  suspicion
that  I  was  saying  anything  but  the  exact  and  literal  truth,  that  a  few
days  earlier  I  had  written  Miss  Samuels  "  a  long  letter  "  upon  the  subject
of  The  Baptism  of  Statins  "  and  "  The  Ear  of  Dionysius "  cases,  but
had  not  mentioned  the  name  of  the  mediiun.  Subsequently  it
occurred  to  me  that  the  best  evidence  of  this  would  be  the  letter
itself,  so  I  wrote  and  asked  Miss  Samuels  to  return  it  to  me.  She  sent
me  all  my  recent  letters,  and,  with  some  difficulty,  I  found  among  them
the  one  I  wanted.  It  was  a  postcard.  The  date  it  bore  was  16  Sep.
1918,  exactly  a  week  before  the  date  of  the  note.  It  was  the  case
that  it  did  not  mention  the  name  of  Mrs.  Willett.


Hubert  Wales.  [p^^t

Miss  Samuels  told  me  upon  enquiry— and  I  have  no
difficulty  in  accepting  her  statement— that  she  had  never
heard  of  Mrs.  Willett.

(3)  Miss  .Samuels  wrote  to  me  on  October  5,  1918  :  "  Miss
Thorpe  is  an  ambulance  driver,  and  saw  the  Red  Cross
tram  arrive."  On  October  29,  1918,  I  received  a  letter
from  Miss  Thorpe  dated  from  an  "  A.I.F.  Garage  "  For
my  comment  on  the  second  part  of  this  note,  indicating
a  correspondence  with  a  latent  thought  of  mine,  see  Case

(4)  Note  written  hy  H.  W.,  September  22,  1918.

It is a fact that I was particularly comfortable  on
Friday  evening  (September  20,  1918),  for  I  had  allowed
myself  the  first  fire  of  the  season, and, after  shivering
for  several  nights  in  deference  to  the  apparent  wishes  of
the fuel controUer, the change was decidedly  pleasant;
and, furthermore, smce I was nominaUy "keeping  the
fire  alight"  for  the  feminine  members  of  the  household,
who  were  out,  my  joy  was  not  impaired  by  any  intrusive
remarlis by the voice of conscience. I sat first on  a
sofa,  afterwards  in  an  easy  chair  before  the  fire. I  was
reading mth great enjoyment WiUiam James's  review
of "Human Personality" in Proceedings, SPR  Vol
XVIII.  ■  '

In her accompanying letter Miss Samuels added  a

detail  which  increases  the  correspondence.

(5)  Letter from Miss Sylvia  Howard  to  H. W.  {received
through  Miss  Satnuels,  September  22,  1918).

Miss  Samuels  has  just  shown  me  her  notes  of  September
21,  1918,  and  the  last  one  about  powdering  I  think
is  to  do  with  me.  On  Tuesday  last  [September  17.
1918]  I  distinctly  remember  powdering  my  neck  as  it
was  very  brown  owing  to  the  sun.  Last  night  I  looked
for  the  powder  box  but  could  not  find  it.

Since  this  item  is  not  included  in  the  original
notes,  It  must  be  understood  that,  as  happened  in  another

iFor  another  incident suggesting  the  influence of two agents  upon
one  impression  see  Case  XII.,  footnote.


LXXX.]


Apparent  Thought  Transference.


199


case/  it  was  possible  for  it  to  have  been  inserted  after
Miss  Samuels  had  heard  Miss  Howard's  story.  But  of
course  no  stress  is  laid  upon  this  trivial  correspondence,
considered  individually.

(6)  (7)  I  much  regret,  in  view  of  the  special  interest
of  the  set  of  notes  as  a  whole  (which  of  course  was
not  apparent  to  me  at  the  time)  that  these  two,  owing  to
an  oversight  (Miss  Samuels  had  omitted  them  from  her
typed  copy),  were  not  sent  to  IMr.  Fuller.  He  returned
the  remainder  without  comment.  Had  the  full  notes
been  sent  to  him,  it  would  have  been  most  exceptional
had  he  noted  no  correspondence  with  these  bodily
sensations.  Attributing  them  to  him,  it  will  be  noticed
that  the  impressions  from  the  four  apparent  agents  con-
cerned emerge  in  sequence,  those  attributed  to  Mr.  Fuller,
though  last  in  the  notes,  being  first  in  order  of  time.

"Rapport"  Objects.
I  have  tried  two  experiments  of  sending  "rapport"  objects
to  Miss  Samuels. On  the  whole,  the  results  were  negative.^

Mistakes  Resembling  Mishearing.

There  have  been  a  few  incidents,  in  the  course  of  the
observations,  that  have  oddly  suggested  mishearing.  For
instance,  on  one  occasion,  September  24,  1918,  Miss
Samuels's  notes  contained,  "  Vinegar  is  good  to  clean  a
long  sword."  Had  the  last  word  been  "  saw "  instead  of
"  sword,"  this,  absurd  as  it  seems,  would  have  been
quite  appropriate  to  certain  trivial  circumstances  affecting
my  mind  at  the  time.  Again,  on  November  21,  1918,
the  notes  contained,  "  Winnie,  William."  "  Winnie  "  was,
and  is,  meaningless  to  me.  Had  it  been  Willie,"  the
two  names  would  have  been  highly  relevant  ;  more  so,
perhaps, than any two that could have been  given.

1  See  above,  Case  XXIX.

-  Miss  Samuels  had  no  faith  whatever  in  the  efficacy  of  these  articles
in  her  own  case,  and  so  far  misconstrued  my  object  in  sending  them
as  to  attempt  to  forward  one  of  them  to  a  public  medium.  Fortunately
she  was  unable  to  carry  out  that  project,  since  it  appeared  that  the
"  mediimi  "  concerned  had  temporarily  retired  from  business,  on  the
advice  of  the  police.  •


200


Hubert  Wales.


[part


With  agent  and  percipient  separated  by  forty  miles,
there  can  evidently  be  no  question  of  involuntary  whisper-
ing ;  so  that,  if  these  cases  are  not  due  to  chance,  they
seem  to  require  the  hypothesis  that  Miss  Samuels's  supra-
liminal consciousness  can  mishear,  or  appear  to  mishear,
her  subliminal.

That  something  in  the  nature  of  mishearing  between
strata  of  consciousness  may  occur,  I  feel  pretty  sure
from  my  own  slight  experience  of  sensory  automatism.
I  have  a  distinct  recollection,  upon  one  occasion,  of
mishearing  the  word  "  hope  "  for  "  propose  "  and  having
it  corrected.  I  wanted  the  word  to  be  "  propose  "  and
tried  to  make  it  "  propose  " — it  was  concerned  with
the  producing  of  evidence  of  identity — and  I  still  retain
a  vivid  impression  of  the  firm,  somewhat  admonitory,
tone  in  which  was  repeated  the  words,  "  which  we  ho'pe
to  give  you."

Perhaps  I  may  add  that  it  never  was  given.  And  I
have  since  come  to  feel  that,  in  withholding  it  (pre-
suming it  could  have  been  obtained)  my  providential
guardian — which  in  this  case,  at  least,  was  clearly  my
subliminal  self — did  me  a  considerable  service.  For,  had
evidence  been  forthcoming  which  suggested  the  identity
of  some  discarnate  mind,  I  should  probably  have  found
it  difficult  afterwards  to  bring  an  unbiassed  judgment
to  bear  upon  the  question  of  the  nature  of  these  per-
sonalities of  automatic  states.  At  present  I  can  see
no  reason  to  regard  them,  wherever  they  occur,  however
lifelike  and  seemingly  independent  they  may  be — and
whether  or  not  there  be  at  times  a  telepathic  agent,
incarnate  or  discarnate,  conscious  or  unconscious,  in  the
background — as  other  than  the  creations  of  this  same
inexhaustibly  fertile  underlying  self.^

Apparent  Premonitory  Im.pressions.

I  referred  in  the  early  part  of  this  paper  to  certain  of
Miss  Samuels's  veridical  impressions  that  were  antecedent

^  By  this  I  do  not  suggest  an  indefinite  number  of  secondary  per-
sonalities, but  characters  built  up  subliminally,  as  a  novelist  builds  up
characters  supraliminally.


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transference.


201


in  time.  I  give  a  list  of  some  of  these,  with  my
comments,^  briefly,  in  parallel  columns.  The  numbers
in  brackets  are  mine.


Miss  Samuels's  Notes  of
HER  Impressions.

August  15,  1918.  5.50.  Written

in  bed  on  waking.
(1)  A man in green  and

gold uniform twangs  at

a  harp.

/


August  20,  1918. 9  a.m.

(2)  Someone  pulUng  some-
thing long  out  of  his
mouth.


September  9,  1918. 2.45  a.m.

(3)  One  envelope  seems  larger
than  the  others  .  .  .
seems  from  France  or
from  a  Frenchman.


September  22,  1918. 2.45  a.m.
(4)  I see all that  is  left  of
a  watch  after  it  has  been


Incidents  affecting  the
Thoughts  of  H.  W.


(1)  When I was  returning

from  London  on  the
afternoon  of  15th  August,
1918,  a  soldier  in  the
railway  carriage  twanged
at  a  guitar.  He  did  not
appear  to  know  the  name
of  the  instrument,  and
his  comrades  made  wrong
suggestions.

(2)  At  tea  on  the  23rd  August

I  had  to  take  surrepti-
tiously from  my  mouth
a  long  piece  of  string
which  had  got  into  the
war  jam.

(3)  On  16th  September  I
received  a  letter  from
France  from  a  French-
man, dated  8th  September.
This  is  my  only  French
correspondent  and  he
rarely  writes.

(4)  In the Daily Mail  of

25th September I  saw


^  These,  in  every  case,  are  based  on  contemporary  notes,  though  the
latter  from  considerations  of  space  are  not  always  quoted  verbatim.


202

in  a  fire  or  affected  by
the  war.


September  26,  1918. 7  a.m.

(5)  Someone  says  "  There,
ihafs  an  oak  tree,"
pointing  to  some  very
beautiful  trees.


September  28,  1918. 6.30  a.m.

(6)  [Typed  copy]  A  gentleman
enters  a  room,  a  lady
is  laying  {sic]  down  on  a
sofa  or  settee,  but  [he]
does  not  notice  her  at
first,  she  seems  to  be
asleep.


October  9,  1918. 7.15  a.m.

(7)  I  seem  to  look  from  a
good  height  down  to  a
railway,  and  see  electric
and  steam  trains  running,
and  people  cUmbing  stairs,
etc.


[part

a  reproduction  of  a  photo-
♦  graph  of  a  watch  wliich
had  been  damaged  in  the
war.  The  bullet  was  still
imbedded  in  it. .  j

(5)  On  26th  September  at
about  5  p.m.,  I  was
sitting  talking  to  a  friend
in  the  window  of  my
study,  when  he  suddenly
pointed  to  a  large  oak
among  the  trees  in  the
grounds  and  said  "  Oh,  if
it  were  mine,  I  should  have
that  oak  tree  down."

(6)  On the morning of  the

30th  September  I  went
into  the  drawing-room
with  some  wood  logs,
supposing  it  to  be  empty.
Wlien  I  got  well  into
the  room  I  was  slightly
startled  to  notice  my
wife  lying  on  the  sofa —
a  most  unusual  occurrence
at  that  hour.  She  seemed
to  be  dozing.

(7)  On 9th October  about

8  p.m.  my  wife  and
daughter,  who  had  been
to  London,  told  me
they  had  climbed  the
stairs  from  the  Tube
at  Waterloo,  instead  of
using  the  lift — a  most
exceptional  thing  to  do.


Hvbert  Wales.


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transference.


203


October  11,  1918. 6.25  a.m.
(8)  I  nearly  fall  off  some  step
ladders.


(8)  On  the  afternoon  of  12th
October  I  was  on  a
short  ladder,  in  an
awkward  position,  sawing
a  branch  from  a  tree.
I  rather  feared  I  might
fall  and  wondered  if  Miss
Samuels  would  get  an  im-
pression of  the  feeUng.  I
received  her  note  later.


November  9,  1918. 2.45  [a.w.].
(9)  [Original notes]  Sudden
news of a death,  quite
unexpected.

[Typed  copy]  News  of
the  sudden  death  of  a
man.

A  man  in  scholastic
dress  [typed  copy]  wear-
ing a  mortar  board.

November  19,  1918. [No  time
stated.']

(10)  A  piece  of  rose-bush  held
in  hand.


December  3,  1918.  [No  time
stated,  but  almost  certainly
early  morning. 1

(11)  A  cut  hand.


(9)  When  I  went  in  to  dinner,
about  8  p.m.  on  9th
November,  mj^  wife  start-
led me  by  telUng  me
of  the  sudden  death  of
a  neighbour— Dr.  Selwyn.
Both  the  news  and  the
death  were  sudden.

He had been  head-
master of  Uppingham.


(10)  On  the  afternoon  of
20th  November  I  re-
planted and  re-trained  a
rose-bush.  This  occurred
before  Mss  Samuels's  letter
containing  her  notes  arrived.


(11)  About  2  p.m.  on  3rd
December  I  heard  my
wife  call  to  my  daughter
that  she  had  cut  her
finger "  rather  badly."


Hubert  Wales.  [part


204

December  15,  1918. 9  a.m.
(12)  I am dressed in  white
and without moving  my
limbs  yet  am  sidmming  or
gliding  along the  ground
at  a  great  rate.
December  22,  1918. 8.30  [a.m.].
I seem to float  about
a  foot  from  the  ground.
December  29,  1918. 9.15  a.m.

I  float  suddenly  again.


January  5,  1919. 9.30  a.m.

(13)  A  trolly  of  girls  in  cos-
tume like  from  Chu  Chin
Chow.


January  9,  1919. 8.15  a.m.

(14)  Someone  says  they  would
not  be  frightened  if  they
saw  one or  1,000  ghosts.


(12)  On  the  evening  of  8th
January,  1919,  I  read
the  following  in  Proceed-
ings S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,
p.  248:  "There  it  was
I  first  saw  the  figure.  .  .  .
At  first  I  thought  him  of
great  height,  but  afterwards
remarked  that  he  was  glid-
ing some  distance  (at  least
a  foot)  above  the  ground."

I  received  the  volume
from  the  S.P.R.  Library
only  on  8th  January.


(13)  On  9th  January  I  saw
reproduced  in  the  Daily
Mail  a  photograph  of  a
lorry  load  of  theatrical  girls
in  costume,  on  their  way  to
a  ball.  Immediately  above
was  a  photograph  of  the
Chu  Chin  Chow  company  in
costume  in  a  motor  bus.


(14)  On  10th  January,  at
9  p.m.,  I  read  a  ghost
story  in  Proceedings  S.P.R. ,
Vol.  VI.,  p.  256.  Two
sisters,  sitting  alone  in  a
house  at  night,  hear
mysterious  sounds.  One
was  afraid  to  explore.
The  other  said  :  "  I  will
go  and  not  be  afraid  though
10,000  men  are  against  me."


LXXX.]


Apparent  Thought  Transference.


205


January  21,  1919.  1.45  a.m.

(15)  An engine  without  a

train — a  train  without  an

engine.


(15)  On  21.st  January,  about
midday,  I  saw  a  traction
engine  trying  to  get  up
a  short,  sharp  hill.  It
had  left  its  truck  behind
while  thus  engaged,  so
that  I  saw  engine  without
truck  and  truck  without
engine.


January  26  [mistake  for  27,  re-
ceived 28]  1919. 7.15  [a.m.].
(16)  A  brown  photo  of  trees.


(16)  There  hangs  in  a  corner
of  my  stud}',  near  the
door,  a  small  brown
photogravure  of  trees.
("The  Avenue  "  by  Hob-
bema.)  As  I  was  going
to  bed  on  the  night  of
January  27,  1919,  this
caught  my  eye,  and  I
thought,  "  Miss  Samuels
has  never  got  that."  ^

(17)  On  29  April  my  wife  told
me  that,  when  out  that
morning,  she  found  herself
in  the  butcher's  Avithout  her
umbrella,  remembered  she
had  left  it  in  the  clock-
man's,  and  had  to  go  back
there  for  it  in  a  shower  of
rain.

My  statements  in  regard  to  3,  4,  5,  6,  and  13  are
corroborated  by  other  documents.  Particularly,  the  dated
sheet  of  the  Daily  Mail  referred  to  in  the  remarkable
case about a van-load  of girls in costume "  like  from

1  She  had  obtained  correspondent  impressions  with  everything  else
in  this  corner,  see  p.  189.


April  27,  1919. 5  a.m.

(17)  A  lady  remembers  the  spot

where she lost  her  um-

berella  [sic].


206


Hubert  Wales.


[part


Chu  Chin  Chow "  (together  with  Miss  Samuels's  dated
note,  endorsed  by  me  with  the  date  of  receipt)  can  be
seen  at  the  rooms  of  the  Society ;  it  is  too  large  to
reproduce  here.

I  ought  to  say,  perhaps,  that,  when  I  embarked  on
these  observations,  I  did  not  anticipate  getting  such
correspondences  as  are  set  out  in  the  above  table  ;  indeed,
my  mind  was  so  strongly  set  against  anything  suggestive
of  precognition,  that  for  some  time  I  made  only  rough
pencil  notes  of  these  incidents.  I  regarded  the  whole
subject  with  suspicion,  it  seemed  to  me  to  owe  its
being  to  the  popular  demand  for  fortune  telling,  and
I  could  hardly  read  anything  about  it  with  patience.
I  felt  that  to  obtain  knowledge  of  the  future,  except
in  so  far  as  it  could  be  inferred  from  the  present,  was
impossible,  whatever  supernormal  powers  or  agencies  one
was  prepared  to  postulate ;  and  metaphysical  arguments
about  the  reality  of  time  found  in  my  mind  a  most
unreceptive  soil.  If  such  a  personal  confession  be  of
any  interest,  I  will  frankly  admit  that  I  have  been
shaken  somewhat  (though  not  dislodged)  by  the  number
of  missiles  of  the  kind  shown  in  the  table  with  which
Miss  Samuels  has  bombarded  me.

Analysis  of  the  cases  above  recorded,  however,  reveals
that  many  of  them,  perhaps  most — even  if  the  coincidences
appear  too  close  to  be  attributed  to  chance — may  be
explained,  by  one  means  or  another,  without  invoking
prevision.  Some  of  these  routes  of  escape  may  seem
to  us  tortuous  and  uninviting  ;  but  the  question  to  be
considered  is  whether,  even  so,  they  do  not  demand  less
strain  upon  probability  than  does  the  supposition  that,
in  any  circumstances  or  by  any  agency,  things  which
other  facts  do  not  enable  us  to  anticipate  can  be  known
before  they  have  taken  place.

Consider,  for  example,  the  third  item — the  Frenchman's
letter.  It  wiU  be  seen  that,  at  the  date  of  Miss  Samuels's
note,  this  letter  had  been  written  and  probably  posted,
though  it  had  not  then  reached  me.  It  is,  therefore,
possible  to  suppose,  if  we  accept  telepathy  at  all,  that
Miss  Samuels  had  received  by  this  means,  news  of  its


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transference.


207


despatch  from  my  French  friend,  either  direct  or  via
the  trans-marginal  regions  of  my  mind.  And  we  can
resort  to  a  similar  hypothesis  in  Case  9  :  for  Dr.  Selwyn's
death  (which,  I  learn  upon  enquiry,  occurred  on  the
8th  of  November)  took  place  a  few  hours  before  Miss
Samuels  wrote  her  note,  though  I  did  not  hear  of  it
until  a  day  later.  In  this  instance,  however,  since  I
was  not  personally  acquainted  with  Dr.  Selwyn  or  any
of  his  family,  it  can  hardly  be  supposed  that  I  acted
as  a  connecting  link,  or  mutual  point  of  rapport,  between
one  or  more  of  them  and  Miss  Samuels.  Furthermore,
we  are  left  with  a  small  unexplained  residuum  in  the
matter  of  the  suddenness  of  the  news  (though,  no  doubt,
most  announcements  of  death  are  almost  necessarily
sudden)  and  the  general  circumstance  that  the  stress  of
Miss  Samuels's  note  seems  to  be  laid,  less  on  the  death,
than  on  the  hearing  of  it.

Next,  consider  the  incidents  of  the  step-ladder  and  the
rose-bush  (8  and  10).  In  these  cases,  the  fulfilment
of  the  prophecy  (so  to  put  it)  rested  upon  action  on  my
part  ;  so  again  we  have  open  to  us  an  emergency  exit
from  the  hypothesis  of  precognition.  Miss  Samuels^  it
may  be  urged,  having  obtained,  during  the  coui'gj,^  of
these  experiments,  a  close  knowledge  of  my  ge^xeral
activities  and  thoughts,  armounced  in  advance  actions,
which  she  either  knew  I  was  likely  to  perform  or  sub-
sequently (but  before  her  notes  could  arrive)  caused  me
to  perform  by  telepathic  suggestion — the  whole  process
being  subliminal.

Even  in  the  case  of  the  van-load  of  chorus  girls  (13),
a  path  can  be  found  to  lead  us  at  least  part  of  the
way  out  of  our  difficulty.  This  coincidence,  I  may  perhaps
say  parenthetically,  was  to  me  the  most  impressive  of
those  which  suggest,  prima  facie,  a  knowledge  of  the
future.  For  the  picture  conjured  up  by  Miss  Samuels's
note  seemed  so  preposterous,  so  fantastic,  so  removed,
with  dreamlike  inconsequence,  from  the  world  of  sober
fact,  that  I  felt  incUned  to  laugh  at  it,  until,  a  few
days  later,  I  was  startled  by  seeing  the  reproductions
of the photographs in a newspaper I had picked  up.


208


Hubert  Wales.


[part


But even here, as I have indicated, the material  of
the corresponding details was not all in  the future  at
the  time  Miss  Samuels  wrote  and  posted  her  note.  Doubt-
less,  there were numbers of  people who, at that  time
knew  all  about  the  proposal  to  transport  theatrical  com-
panies in costume, from the theatres to the ball,  in
commercial vehicles of various kinds. It is  necessary,
however, frankly to recognise that this does not  quite
clear us  ; since it is difficult to see how anyone  can
have  known  before the night of 8th  January, that,  of
the many flashlight photographs of these  proceedings
which,  no  doubt,  were  taken,  the  two  chosen  for  repro-
duction and  placed  in  contiguous  positions,  in,  at  least,
one newspaper, would represent a lorry-load of  chorus
girls  and  the  company  of  Chu  Chin  CJioiv.

I  will  leave  this  subject  by  reminding  Members  of  the
Society  of  a  passage  in  Lord  Rayleigh's  Presidential  Ad-
dress :  "  We  live  in  times  which  are  revolutionary  in
science  as  well  as  in  politics.  Perhaps  some  of  those
who  accept  extreme  '  relativity '  views,  reducing  time  to
merely  one  of  the  dimensions  of  a  four-dimensional  mani-
fold may  regard  the  future  as  differing  from  the  past
n  than  north  differs  from  south  "  (Proc,  Pt.  LXX VII

p.  '  1^.

General  Conclusions.

The  observations  as  a  whole,  considered  in  relation
to  other  observations  and  to  experiments  in  thought
transference,  have  suggested  a  hypothesis  to  my  mind,
which  I  tentatively  put  forward.  It  may  have  something
m  it  or  it  may  be  quite  unworthy  of  consideration.
It  is  this  :  that  what  we  have  been  accustomed  to  call
telepathy  may  comprise  two  utterly  distinct  phenomena,
as  widely  divided  as  the  poles,  indeed,  far  more  widely.
I  mean,  there  may  be  a  physical  phenomenon — some-
thing, conceivably,  in  the  nature  of  the  popular  "  brain
waves,"  carried  by  the  ether— operating  over  limited
distances  and  where  there  is  no  considerable  material
obstruction  between  the  transmitting  and  receiving  brains  ;


Lxxx.]  Apparent  ThougJit  Transference.


209


and  there  may  be  also  a  psychical  phenomenon — requiring
to  contemplate  the  mind  as  existing  .independently  of
the  organism  and  having  a  different  relation  to  space  from
the  organism — occurring  in  all  conditions  and  circumstances,
but  observable  mainly  where  there  is  such  distance  or
obstruction  between  agent  and  percipient  as  to  exclude  the
physical  phenomenon.^  At  any  rate,  one  cannot  help  being
struck  by  the  fact  that,  in  the  large  number  of  experiments
in  thought  transference  at  close  quarters,  reported  in  the
Proceedings,  it  has  again  and  again  been  found  that
separation  of  agent  and  percipient,  by  distance  or  material
obstacles,  has  been  followed  by  diminution  or  complete
cessation  of  the  success  obtained  when  there  was  no
such  separation.  It  does  not  seem  to  me  that  theories
of  lack  of  confidence  on  the  part  of  experimenters  and
so  on  can  wholly  and  satisfactorily  account  for  this.
It  was  particularly  marked  in  the  long  series  of  experi-
ments with  hypnotised  subjects  conducted  by  Mrs.
Sidgwick  in  1889  and  1890.  The  results  obtained,  in
the  course  of  those  experiments,  with  agent  and  per-
cipient in  the  same  room,  were  very  impressive  ;  with
agent  and  percipient  in  adjoining  rooms,  success,  though
much  diminished,  persisted  to  a  degree  considerably
beyond  what  chance  would  have  given,  and  so  (as  it
seems  to  me)  put  out  of  court,  as  an  explanation,  the
theory  of  involuntary  whispering  or  other  sensory  cause  ;
with  the  experimenters  more  widely  separated  there  was,
to  quote  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  report  {Proc,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  547),
"practically no success," though "nearly four  hundred

^  Since  writing  the  above,  I  have  discovered  that  a  similar  query
was  propounded  by  Myers  :  "  Is  there  one  and  only  one  form  of
influence  which  is  not  communicated  by  the  ordinary  channels  of
sense  ?  Or  is  there  an  influence  which  is  felt  by  a  percipient  only
when  the  agent  is  very  near  him  ?  and  another  influence  which  the
percipient  feels  equally  when  the  agent  is  at  an  indefinite  distance  ?  .  .  .
Speaking  for  myself  only,  I  am  inclined  provisionally  to  accept  the
hypothesis  that  more  than  one  form  of  force,  or  at  least  more  than
one  form  of  receptivity,  is  concerned  in  the  phenomena"  {Proc,  Vol.  IV.,
p.  176).  And,  from  a  reference  there  given,  the  same  point  appears
to  be  urged  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  which  I  had  not  read.  Myers,
however,  does  not  seem  disposed  to  draw  any  sharp  distinction  between
a  psychical  and  a  physical  phenomenon,  or  even  between  mind  and  matter.


210


Hubert  Wales.


[part


trials  were  made  with  Miss  B.  as  percipient,  and  the
agent  or  agents  either  in  a  different  building  or  divide^
from  her  by  at  least  two  closed  doors  and  a  passage."
Yet  we  find,  in  such  cases  as  those  above  recorded,  as
those  obtained  experimentally  by  Miss  Miles  and  Miss
Ramsden,  reported  in  Vols.  XXI.  and  XXVII.  of  Pro-
ceedings, as  those  pointing  to  the  inducement  of  hypnosis
at  a  distance,  as  those  noted  in  numerous  experiments  in
hypnotic  "  clairvoyance,"  and  particularly  as  those  common
experiences  called  shortly  "death  coincidences,"  that  the
intervention  neither  of  distance  nor  of  innumerable  ma-
terial obstructions  between  agent  and  percipient  appears
to  have  the  smallest  influence  of  any  kind  upon  the
transference  of  thought.  To  me,  in  the  light  of  my
own  experiences  and  of  those  apparently  allied  to  which
I  have  referred,  the  impediment  to  success  so  frequently
encountered  when  a  single  wall  has  divided  the  experi-
menters is,  if  we  are  dealing  with  the  same  phenomenon,
inexplicable.^

The  observations  recorded  in  this  paper  have  an  evi-
dent bearing  upon  the  consideration  of  phenomena  pur-
porting to  be  communications  from  the  dead.  I  do
not  feel  competent  to  discuss  that  aspect  in  any  detail,
since  I  have  never  had  a  sitting  with  a  medium — to
use  a  question-begging  word,  but  one  difficult  to  avoid.
All  I  will  venture  to  say  is,  that  the  unconscious  or
subconscious  telepathic  agency  indicated  (especially  if
the  observations  be  confirmed  by  other  observations,  as
they  are  themselves  confirmatory  of  certain  observa-
tions of  crystal  vision)  manifestly  offers  an  alternative
explanation,  extending  far  beyond  the  range  of  telepathy
from  the  sitter,  of  some  at  least  of  the  phenomena  which
take  a  spiritistic  form.  They  appear,  in  particular,  to
make  it  gratuitous to  invoke the agency of  discarnate

I  It  shoiild  be  pointed  out,  however,  that,  even  at  the  closest  quarters,
if  there  were  no  sensory  communication,  the  difficulty  with  regard  to
a  code,  which  Lord  Rayleigh  considered  an  objection  to  a  physical
theory  of  telepathy  more  fundamental  even  than  the  failure  to  get
attenuation  with  distance  {Proc,  Pt.  LXXVII.,  p.  288)  would  still  apply.


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transference.


211


minds  to  account  for  knowledge  of  contemporary  events
occurring  at  a  distance  from  the  automatist,  and,  I  think,
(speaking  of  course  from  a  strictly  evidential  point  of
view)  of  facts  in  the  past,  emerging  as  the  memories
of  someone  deceased,  wheii  they  are  all  known  to  a  single
living  person..  I  think,  however,  that  the  observations
suggest,  equally  clearly,  that  a  percipient's  power  of
utihzing  knowledge  extracted  from  the  living  may  prove
to  have  limits.  I  have  found  no  trace  of  a  capacity
so  to  group  information  collected  as  to  suggest  the  unity
of  any  mind  other  than  that  of  the  apparent  agent.
In  saying  that,  I  am  thinking,  of  course,  primarily
of  the  mind  of  a  dead  person  ;  for  had  there  been  such
grouping  as  to  suggest  the  mental  unity  of  someone
hving,  one  would  naturally  have  regarded,  that  person
as  the  agent.  I  have  referred  to  a  tendency  for  various
allusions  to  matters  relevant  to  a  particular  topic  (as,
for  instance,  the  memory  of  Paris)  to  occur  for  days
and  weeks,  when  that  topic  has  been  brought  to  the
front  of  my  mind ;  and  if  such  specialized  allusions  were
unmixed  with  other  veridical  matter,  it  might  well  be
made  to  appear  that  they  emanated  from  a  sharer  of
the  experiences,  whether  living  or  dead.  I  can  recall,
however,  in  the  voluminous  records  of  her  impressions
which  Miss  Samuels  has  sent  me,  no  sustained  isolation
of  notes  corresponding  with  my  memories  associated  with
a  particvdar  person  ;  and  it  should  be  pointed  out,  in
regard  to  the  Paris  references,  that,  even  if  we  extract
these  from  their  setting  and  look  at  them  by  themselves,
it  is  still  the  unity  of  my  mind,  not  that  of  my  French
friend,  that  is  suggested  :  for  he  knew  nothing,  for
instance,  of  the  Le  Matin  incident.

I  feel,  too,  that,  in  considering  cross-correspondences,
due  weight  should  be  given  to  the  indications,  as  I
have  put  it,  that  the  subhminal  knows  the  supraliminal's
business,  and  may  be  able  and  willing,  when  such  is
the  latent  desire  of  the  automatists  or  either  of  them,  to
transmit  messages  telepathically  in  a  form  which  suggests
the  intervention  and  direction  of  a  third  mind.  My
personal experiences of automatism, both motor  and


212


Hubert  Wales.


[part


sensory,  have  inspired  me,  I  confess,  with  a  high  respect
for  the  powers  of  the  subliminal  self  ;  and  it  seems
particularly  to  shine  in  artifices  which  insinuate  the
action  of  a  discarnate  intelligence.  I  do  not  feel,  as
do  some,  that  there  is  anything  "  fiendish  "  in  subliminal
activity  of  that  kind  ;  I  am  more  disposed  to  see  in
it  merely  a  reflection  of  the  desire,  probably  latent  in
most  of  us,  whether  we  admit  it  or  not,  to  find  that
there  is  life  after  death.

Having  touched  upon  this  subject,  I  would  like  to
say,  in  conclusion,  (though,  in  doing  so,  I  feel  I  am  only
reiterating  what  has  been  better  said  by  others)  that,
in  spite  of  the  inroad  made  upon  the  spiritistic  inter-
pretation of  certain  mediumistic  phenomena,  the  effect
upon  my  mind  of  the  observations  I  have  recorded  has
been  to  make  survival  and  communication  seem  more
probable  than  they  previously  seemed  :  because,  by
reinforcing  the  evidence  already  accumulated  in  favour
of  a  psychical,  as  against  a  physical,  theory  of  tele-
pathy, (1)  they  point  to  there  being  something  in  man
capable  of  intelligent  action  apart  from  the  material
organism,  something  unconfined  by  conditions  of  space
and  perhaps  even  by  conditions  of  time,  and  (2)  they
indicate  the  practical  possibihty  of  mind  communicating
with  mind  independently  of  matter.


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transfereyice.  213


APPENDIX.


(1)  Cramp  again
cold  water.


from


my


(2)  Not  my  pains,  I  was
massaging  the  right  arm
of  a  man  who  had  sprained
it.


The  following  list  includes  all  references  to  bodily
sensations  in  Miss  Samuels's  notes  which  I  sent  to  Mr.
Fuller. The  numbers  in  brackets  are  inserted  by  me.

Miss  Samuels's  Notes.  Mr. Fuller's  Comments.

August  10,  1918.

(1)  Little bodily aches  and

pains  I  used  to  get
from  IVIr.  Fuller  during
the  day  when  he  worked
in  the  shop.

August  11,  1918.

(2)  I  feel  that  I  am  a  man

and  rubbing  my  arm
from  elbow  to  wrist  and
back,  the  left  arm,  am
very  surprised  and  an-
noyed to  find  a  lump  as
large  as  a  small  egg
near  wrist.  I  keep  on
rubbing  till  it  is  pushed
back  into  the  mustle  [sic].

August  14,  1918.

(3)  I  thinli  I  forgot  to  give

you  a  slip  re  Mr.  Fuller,
stating  that  13th  ins.,
about  5.45  to  6  p.m.  and
for  at  least  an  hour
later,  I  felt  a  numbness
of  the  right  leg  from
knee  to  foot,  I  sent  it
to  him  first  ...  he  will
not  have  received  it
yet,  as  I  only  posted  it
this  morning.  1

1  I  sent  no  copy  of  this  note  to  Mr.  Fuller  in  addition  to  that  stated
by  Miss  Samuels  to  have  been  sent  by  her.


(3)  Quite  correct,
standing  for


had  been
s  a  long

stretch  of  hours  on  con-
crete, no  exercise.  For
once  you  have  not  trans-
posed, it  reaUy  was  the  right
leg.


214


Hubert  Wales.


[PABT


August  20,  1918.
(4)  A  bad  top  headache  start- (4)  One  of  my  regulars,
ing  from Monday  dinner


time  lasting  all  night.


(5)  IVIr. Fuller wrote and (5)  Pains accompanying  influ-
asked for some camphor  enza  cold,

as  he  had  a  pain  in
chest,  but  yesterday  I
had  reflected  pains  below
and  all  round  body,  just
where  a  deep  body  belt
would  lie.


8.45  p.m.  Wed.  [August  21,
1918.]

(6)  I  feel  a  pain  at  the
end  of  the  first  finger  of
the  right  hand  (this  from
Ireland).


4.30,  August  23,  1918.
(7)  I  have  had  for  the  last
hour  between  3  and  4  p.m.
and  [sic\  most  frightfully
fainting  feeling  from  Ire-
land, faint  from  want  of
food  feeling,  not  a  headache
faint  feeling.


(6)  Have contracted  amidol

poisoning.  This  pain  wiU
probably  be  experienced
daily  by  Miss  Samuels,
possibly  in  all  fingers,
particularly  the  right  ones.^

(7)  Miss Samuels was  quite

correct  as  to  sensation
and  day,  but  it  was  in
the  forenoon,  the  result
of  going  without  breakfast.


1  I  did  not  of  course  communicate  this  anticipation  to  Miss  Samuels.
The  following  is  an  extract  from  a  letter  from  her  to  me,  dated  August
28,  1918,  received  30th  :  "  Today  my  finger  next  to  the  little  finger
on  my  right  hand  had  a  pricked  sensation."  Later  Miss  Samuels
sent  me,  for  a  reason  unconnected  with  this,  a  letter  to  her  from  Mr.  Fuller,
dated  "  Wed.  noon  "  [August  28,  1918],  received  by  me  on  September  2,
1918.  It  contained  the  following  words  :  "  Have  also  got  developer
poisoning  again."  This,  from  its  form,  appears  clearly  to  be  the  first
mention  ot  the  matter  to  Miss  Samuels.


LXXX.]


Apparent  Thought  Transference.


215


September  2,  1918.
(8)  During last night I had (8)  From Ireland is  quite
a  pain  bottom  right  side  correct,
of spine (from  Ireland
I  expect).


September  3,  1918.
(9)  For  some  days  I  have
noticed  during  the  day-
time a  pain  in  the  left
ear,  not  all  day,  it  comes
on  now  and  again.


(9)  [Continuation  of  above
comment.]  Also  No.  5.
[This  is  9  in  the  present
numeration.]


September  8,  1918.

(10)  Saturday  evening — a  pain

in  right  instep.  [No  comment.]

(11)  Headache from  Ireland
Sunday  morning.


2.45  a.m. September  9,  1918.

(12)  Burning  feeling  in  chest
(just  below  chest  on
stomach)  caused,  I  think,
by  ]\Ir.  Fuller  leaning
up  against  sometliing  hot.

(13)  IVIr.  FuUer's.  right  hand
very  painful  tonight.


(12)  I  plead  guilty,  the  paia
was  not  caused  by  leaning
on  something  hot,  but
had  a  desire  for  a  hot
poultice.

(13)  Too  true.


5  a.m.  September  23,  1918.
(11)  I  feel  someone  has  pain
or  stiffness  in  the  upper
thighs  especially  the  right
one.

(15)  My  left  toes  also  my
right  instep  still  bother
me  a  bit,  I  mean  the
condition  I  get  from  other
people.


(14)  This  I  expect  also  refers
to  me.  The  result  of  a
chill  etc.  when  returning
from  leave.

(15)  [No  comment.]


216


Hubert  Wales.


[PAET


September  28,  1918. 6.30  a.m.

(16)  Sharp  pain  back  of
neck  and  between  shoul-
ders, the  pain  is  shghtly
on  the  left  side.


October  3,  1918.
(17)  Pain  in  right  foot  toes.


Sat.  evening  7.45  p.m.  [October

5,  1918.]
(18)  Still pain in right  foot

toes.


6.25  a.m. October  11,  1918.
(19)  A ijain is felt in  the
left  arm  about  five  inches
from  wrist.


3.20  a.m.  October  19,  1918.
(20)  The  palm  of  my  right
hand  seems  to  have  a
burning  feeling,  also  part
of  the  wrist,  the  right
hand.


(16)  How  my  aches  and  pains
must  be  blessed,  this
also  refers  to  me,  not
caused  through  the  effort
in  picking  up  the  (ap-
parent) 10s.  note  [refer-
ence to  another  of  Miss
Samuels's  notes]  but
through  the  draughts  in
the  windows  here.


(17)  Pain in right toes  is
correct.


(18)  Pain in right  toes  is

correct. [Same  comment

as  above — notes  returned
together.]

(19 Guilty, but only  cramp
or  stiffness  through
cramped  up  in  bed,  which
are  7iot  feather  beds.


(20)  [No  comment.]

[Contemporary  note  by
H.  W.,  after  observing
absence  of  comment  by
Mr.  Fuller  :  '  I  have
lately  been  doing  a  lot  of
sawing,  which  has  raised
a  small  l)lister  in  the  palm
of  my  right  hand.']


Lxxx.]  Apparent  Thought  Transference.


217


October  19,  1918.

(21)  Mr.  FuEer  is  treating  me
to  a  headache  in  a  new
place  as  sketch  enclosed,
jaerhaps  he  also  has  eye
strain.  Shaded  part  re-
presents pain.  [Rough
sketch  of  face,  part  over
nose  and  each  eye  shaded.]
Pain  sharp  at  top  of
nose.  I  felt  aU  this
early  in  bed  this  morning.

Memo  : October  22,  1918.

(22)  A  pain  left  [?  felt]  in
the  left  ^vrist,  a  pricking
pain.

(23)  At  the  back  of  the
right  hand  also  a  hm-t
feeling,  like  a  knock.

(24)  Also  I  note  the  last  few
days  no  desire  to  eat
the  midday  meal.

These  bodily  feelings
usually  come  from  Ire-
land.

4  p.m.  Monday,  November  4,
1918.

(25)  At  12.10  Mr.  Fuller  had
a  very  sharp  pain  in
the  right  temple,  it  didn't
last  long  with  me  but  was
intense  while  I  felt  it.

(26)  Late  this  afternoon  I
felt  my  bead  was  wooUy
and  heavy  all  day.

(27)  Saturday  [November  2, 1918]
I  noted  a  pain  in  the
longest  finger  on  the  right
hand,  the  middle  joint.


(21)  Quite  correct.


(22)  [No  comment.]


(23)  Me  agam.


(24)  Ditto.


(25)


(26)  1  Gi^ilty  as  usual.


(27)


218


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part


i

SUPPLEMENT.  !


REVIEWS.  f

A  Technique  for  the  Ex'perimeyital  Study  of  Telejyathij  and  Other
Alleged  Clairvoyant  Processes.  A  Report  on  the  Work
done  in  1916-17  at  the  Harvard  Psychological  Laboratory,  i
under  the  gift  of  Mrs.  John  Wallace  Riddle  and  the
Hodgson  Fund.  By  Leonaed  Thompson  Teoland,  Albany,
N.Y. Pp.  26.  j

One can  imagine that the '  reaction  ' of an  old-fashioned
psychical  researcher on  a fu'st  reading of  this paper  would
be Horatian, and would take the form of (1)  Parturiunt
mantes  !  and  (2) YanMcos  odi,  ^Jtier,  apparatus  !  but  he  would
be wrong  if he did not thereupon continue his search  for  j
grains of sense amid masses of  what may  fauiy be  caUed
academic chaff. For the S.P.R. ought certauily to have  a
laboratory, and  if  it  had  one  as  good  as  that  of  Harvard
University,  it  would  find  that  psychologists  flocked  to  it,  and
that  its  own  reputation  in  the  scientific  world  went  up  by
leaps and bounds. Much allowance should, moreover,  be
made  for  the  conditions  under  which  Dr. Troland  laboured.
Years  ago  Harvard  had  become  the  beneficiary  of  a  '  Hodgson
Memorial  Fund,' since  it  is a  principle of  the  management
of  every  American  university  (as  of  the  Catholic  Church)  to
take any endowment that  is offered (even  were  it  for  the
purpose  of  communicating  with  Mars  !), and  never  to  reject
an  endowment merely because it did  not  quite approve  of
its  object  or  its  terms.i But  nothing  in  the  way  of  Psychical
Research  was  done  with  the  proceeds  of  the  Fund  until  Mrs.
Riddle  gave  a  further  sum  in  order  to  start  research.  Then

^  As  Oxford  University  did  the  Squire  Law  .Scdiobirsliips.


LXXX.]


Review.


219


something  had  to  be  done,  though  possibly  not  without  an
arriere  pensee  (as  in  the  Seybert  case  in  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  and  the  Stanford  case  in  California)  that  a
negative  issue  to  the  investigation  would  be  more  desirable
than  the  opposite,  and  would  liberate  the  funds  for  academic-
ally more  convenient  purposes.  At  any  rate  Dr.  Troland
was  the  first  '  researcher  '  to  be  appointed,  and  as  nothing
more  appears  to  have  been  clone  since  1916-7,  the  idea  cannot
be  entirely  excluded  that  this  Report  is  a  huge  joke  !  At
the  expense  either  of  Psychical  Research,  or  of  experimental
psychology.  In  the  absence,  however,  of  independent  evidence
that  Dr.  Troland  is  jDossessed  of  the  sense  of  humour  and
audacity  to  play  such  a  trick,  I  dare  not  press  this  hyiDothesis,
and  must  (with  a  little  reluctance)  review  his  Re23ort  as
intended  to  be  serious.

Taking  it  thus,  the  first  difficulty  one  encounters  is  the
amount  of  its  irrelevance,  and  the  enormous  disproportion
between  apparatus  and  achievement.  (1)  If  we  regard  it  as  the
aim  of  his  research  to  determine  whether  or  not  '  telepathy  '
occurs,  and  whether  the  alleged  communication  between
two  minds  unable  to  do  so  by  recognized  methods  can
be  tested  by  apparatus  which  will  indisputably  exclude  all
vitiation  by  (a)  fraud,  (b)  unconscious  bias,  the  initial  homily
on  scientific  method  is  irrelevant.  If  it  were  not,  it  would
be  highly  objectionable,  as  involving  either  the  dogmatic
assumption  of  a  materialistic  metaphysic,  or  a  '  behaviori^  '
method  of  psychological  experimentation,  of  disputable  applica-
tion, or  both.  As,  however.  Dr.  Troland  does  not  need  the
notion  of  '  the  reflex  arc  '  to  read  off  his  instruments,  his
use  of  it  is  simply  irrelevant.

(2)  Having  artificially  ruled  out  any  reference  to  psychic
process  in  his  version  of  psychological  method,  Dr.  Troland
proceeds  to  call  the  appeal  made  to  it  by  those  who  do  7wf
so  rule  it  out,  a  '  break  '  or  '  gap  '  in  the  physical  series.
On  his  own  showing  this  is  indefensible.  His  method  cannot
recognize  any  '  interaction  '  between  psychical  and  physical,
and  therefore  cannot  recognize  such  'gaps.'  It  can  only  look
for  lihysical  antecedents  of  physical  events.  So  if  it  were
experimentally  proved  that  the  thoughts  I  was  formulating
in  Oxford  were  being  instantaneously  recorded  in  New  York


220


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[PABT


by  Dr. Hyslop, the  logical  inference  would  be, not  to  'tele-
pathy, ' but to some (unknown) physical connexion  between
us.i It  would  be  Dr. Troland's  duty  to  search  Dr.  Hyslop
for  '  wireless  '  apparatus. Furthermore,  his  method  gives  him
no  right  whatever  to  regard  the  two  physical  series  occurring
in  our  bodies  as  interrupted,  and  to  connect  them  by  a  '  gap.'
For  there  would  be  no  '  gap  '  in  -mij  thoughts  and  acts,  which
would go on continuously after I had '  telepathed  ' to  Dr.
Hyslop. Neither  would  there  be  a  '  gap  '  in  his  life,  as  he
recorded  what  Dr.  Troland  would  subsequently  discover  to  be
a  '  telepathic  '  message. It  is,  therefore,  purely  arbitrary  for
Dr.  Troland  to  assume  that  he  is  dealing  with  a  single  '  reflex
arc,'  one-half  of  which  is  located  in  one  body,  and  the  other
in  another. Prima  facie,  what  he  is  dealing  with  is  a  curious
coincidence,  or  (conceivably)  an  influence  of  one  organism  on
another. But if it be true that scientific method  cannot
recognize any but physical processes, it follows  necessarily
that this influence imist be mediated  physically. And,  of
course, there  is  plenty  of '  ether  ' to close  all '  gaps.'  On
the  other  hand,  if  it  is  permissible  in  psychology  to  recognize
psychic process, it can easily be interpolated between  the
'  afferent  ' and the '  efferent  ' neural process, and we  can
attribute  to  it  the  function  of  choice  between  possible  reactions.
Nor  will  it be more impossible  in principle  to conceive  a
mind  as  reacting  on  another  brain  than  on  its  own.

(3)  The  technical  terminology  Dr.  Troland  invents  to  lend
a  cachet  to  his  theory  is  amusing  but  irrelevant.  Schizo-
kinesis  has  a  solemn  sound,  and  the  boldest  would  think
tAvice  before  they  exposed  themselves  to  '  afferent  '  or  '  efferent  '
Schizoneurosis.  But  one  would  have  liked  to  have  seen  Dr.
Troland  hesitate,  and  use  a  little  Humian  criticism  on  himself,
before  he  began  to  talk  about  "  the  usual  physical  chain  of
causation  binding  the  central  and  motor  processes  with  the
object  "  (p.  6).  For  it  is  well  to  avoid  the  pitfaUs  in  the
old  philosophic  terminology  before  plunging  into  innovations.

(4)  The  elaborate  description  of  Dr.  Troland's  apparatus,
good  as  it  is,  and  great  as  is  the  credit  it  does  to  his  in-
genuity, seems  disproportionately  long.  The  apparatus  is  no
doubt a great advance on any that was available  before.

1  This  wa-s  written  before  Dr.  Hyslop's  lamented  demise.


LXXX.]


Review.


221


Henceforth  mechanical  '  timers,'  '  counters,'  '  stimulus-shufiflers  '
and  '  totallers  '  (though  not  perhaps  essential  to  successful
experimentation)  ought  to  find  a  place  in  every  well-equipped
psychical  laboratory.  But  Dr.  Troland  is  so  much  taken  up
with  them  that  he  quite  forgets  to  give  his  readers  a  plain
account  of  how  he  actually  experimented.  We  are  told
indeed  that  the  two  experimenters  "  were  seated  in  very
comfortable  Morris  chairs  on  opposite  sides  of  a  small  table,
the  distance  separating  their  heads  being  about  6  feet.  Both
subjects  faced  in  the  same  direction.  The  experiments  were
carried  out  in  complete  darkness,  and  a  screen  placed  in  the
centre  of  the  table  also  served  to  shut  off  their  view  of  each
other.  The  room  in  which  the  work  was  done  was  heavily
carpeted,  and  was  rendered  sound-proof  by  double  walls  and
double  doors.  The  control  mechanism  was  in  another  room
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  buUding,"  etc.  (jjp.  21-2).  .  One
gathers,  though  one  is  not  told,  that  the  experiment  consisted
in  the  agent's  looking  at  a  '  stimulus-field '  on  which  a  square
was  electrically  lighted  up  either  on  the  right  or  on  the  left
of  an  illumined  circle,  while  the  '  percipient  '  moved  a  '  reaction
key  '  to  the  right  or  to  the  left,  the  agreement  of  two  '  rights  '
or  lefts  constituting  the  rightness,  a  disagreement  the  wrong-
ness,  of  the  response.  Presumably  (though  this  is  not  stated)
the  percipient  could  not  possibly  see  the  '  stimulus -field.'  On
this  most  vital  and  relevant  point  nothmg  is  said,  any  more
than  on  the  psychic  idiosyncrasies  of  the  experimenters.

(5)  What  did  all  this  preparation  lead  up  to  ?  In  605
experiments  the  direction  of  the  stimulus  and  the  reaction
movement  coincided  284  times.  The  probable  number  being
haK  of  605,  there  was  actually  a  considerable  deficiency  in
right  responses  !  As  Dr.  Troland  says  (p.  23),  "  this  would
appear  to  be  indicative  of  '  negative  telepathy,'  or  in  other
words,  it  would  suggest  that  exposure  of  the  stimulus  to  the
agent  prevented  the  percipient  from  making  the  right  reaction
in  a  certain  number  of  cases.  This  is  a  kind  of  result
which  has  little  interest  for  the  popular  mind,  because  tele-
pathy is  commonly  supposed  to  increase  the  chances  of  a
correct  guess,  instead  of  decreasing  them.  However,  from
a  coldly  scientific  point  of  view,  '  positive  telepathy  '  is  no
more  interesting  or  probable  than  '  negative  telepathy.'  There


222


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part


is  not  the  slightest  reason  for  rejecting  a  depression  of  coinci-
dences below  chance  as  non-significant,  when  an  equal  elevation
above  chance  figures  would  have  been  hailed  as  real  evidence."  He
admits  that  his  '  depression  '  lies  "  well  within  the  range  usually-
allowed  for  chance  'fluctuations  of  sampling,'  "  but  calculates  that
"  the  odds  are  about  14  to  1,"  that  it  is  7iot  purely  casual.

Unfortunately  he  does  not  note  how  his  anomaly  was  pro-
duced. It  was  due  to  a  heavy  excess  of  failures  (199  to
155)  in  half  his  experiments,  the  '  40-second '  series,  in  which
the  agent  was  allowed  only  15  seconds  to  perceive  his  stimulus.
The  '  80-second  '  series,  with  the  stimulus  exposed  for  30
seconds,  gave  a  slight  excess  of  right  reactions  (129  to  120).
Also  while  it  is  true  that  all  anomalies  must  be  significant,
their  significance  need  not  be  the  same.  If  the  experimenters
are  both  trying,  a  '  positi\^e  '  anomaly  would  mean  that  they
were  succeeding,  a  '  negative  '  that  their  very  efi^ort  was  causing
its  own  frustration.  Hence  (on  the  assumption  always  that
the  psychic  condition  of  the  experimenters  may  make  a  differ-
ence), one  might  suggest  that  very  short  exposures  were  '  fluster-
ing,' i.e.  so  disturbing  as  to  tend  to  generate  an  '  anxiety
neurosis  '  and  to  inhibit  the  right  reaction.  On  the  other
hand,  long  exposures  might  yield  a  difl^erent  result  and  a
distinctly  supernormal  number  of  successes  ;  while  at  some
intermediate  length  of  exposure  a  series  indistinguishable  from
chance  might  be  obtained.  Nevertheless  all  three  series  would
really  tell  in  favour  of  telepathy.  This  is  clearly  one  of
many  lines  of  experiment  that  should  be  pursued.

In  any  case  Dr.  Troland's  experiments,  as  they  stand,  prove
little.  He  has  obtained  no  conclusive  results.  That  only
means  that  605  experiments  between  himself  and  Mr.  Murphy,
under  the  conditions  and  with  the  method  stated,  yielded  no
positive  evidence  that  either  was  interested  in,  or  cognizant
of,  the  contents  of  the  other's  '  stimulus-field.'  The  reason
might  only  be  that  he  had  succeeded  in  maximizing  the  lack
of  human  interest  which  renders  psychological  laboratory  ex-
periments so  woefully  inadequate  as  clues  to  the  normal  be-
haviour of  so  emotional  a  being  as  the  human  soul.

We  may  grant,  indeed,  that  he  has  devised  apparatus  which
facilitates  the  accurate  recorcUng  of  conditions,  the  elimination
of  the  researcher's personal equation, and the  mathematical


LXXX.]


Review.


223


calculation  of  the  chances.  But  he  does  not  appear  to  have
asked  himself  the  important  question,  '  Wai  my  apparatus
work,  with  me,  in  the  field  for  which  it  is  designed  ?  '  If  it
doesn't,  little  can  be  inferred.  It  may  be  that  it  was  the
wrong  apparatus  for  the  pm-pose  ;  or  that  it  could  be  made
to  work  by  changing  some  of  the  many  conditions  involved.
It  might  be  that  the  wrong  persons  were  employed,  and  that
both  the  experimenters  were  congenitally  devoid  of  '  telepathic  '
sensitiveness.  Or,  agam,  it  might  be  that  no  apparatus  could
cope  with  the  subject. But  of  this  there  is  no  evidence.

I  should  demur  equally  to  Dr.  Troland's  exaggerated  esti-
mate of  the  aid  of  mathematics.  He  says  (p.  25)  that  "  if
data  cannot  be  presented  in  such  form  that  they  can  be  dis-
cussed mathematically,  they  camaot  furnish  the  basis  of  scientific
generalizations."  But  mathematical  treatment  is  neither  the
primary  aim  nor  the  first  achievement  of  a  science.  It  gener-
ally comes  rather  late  in  the  career  of  a  science.  The  primary
aim  must  everywhere  be  to  obtain  control.  Once  this  is  gained,
we  can  experiment  at  pleasure,  and  measure,  if  we  please.
But  measurement  as  such  is  no  guarantee  of  scientific  success.
Else  its  laborious  measurements  would  long  ago  have  put
experimental  psychology  on  a  par  with  physics.  And  it  is
precisely  because  it  has  not  obtamed  practical  control  over  the
soul  that  its  measurements,  have  been  so  futile.  Moreover,  it
is  this  same  lack  of  control  which  has  been  the  great  obstacle
in  Psychical  Research.  He  who  discovers  how  to  control  the
soul,  with  or  without  machinery,  wiU  ipso  facto  fulfil  the
desire  of  psychology  to  be  a  science,  in  fact  as  well  as  in
ambition.  Until  then,  it  should  moderate  its  exultation  over
its  '  truly  scientific  '  character  as  compared  with  more  back-
ward inquiries.

But  I  agree  with  Dr.  Troland's  conclusion  (p.  26)  that  "  the
average  academic  psychologist  will  look  upon  the  above  pro-
posals as  a  waste  of  good  technique  upon  a  hopeless  situa-
tion." No  doubt  he  -wiU,  unless  psychical  researchers  can  get
their  machinery  to  work  and  their  '  phenomena  '  to  appear.
But  is  it  too  sanguine  to  hope  that  when  our  present  President
takes  over  the  command  of  the  Harvard  Laboratory  he  w\l\
provide  the  required  '  stimulus  '  and  Dr.  Troland's  researches
will  be  continued  ?  F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


224  J.  C.  Fliigel.  [part

Totem  mid  Taboo. Resemblances  between  the  psychic  lives  of
Savages and Neurotics. By Professor Sigmund  Frefd,
LL.D. Authorized English Translation by A. A.  Brill,
Ph.B.,  M.D.,  xii. +  268. 10s.  6d.  net.
Prof.  Freud  seldom  writes  on  any  subject  without  contribut-
ing much  that  is  novel,  much  that  is  profoundly  illuminating
and  suggestive, and  at  the  same  time not  a  little  that  is
startling  and  disconcerting  in  its  apparent  remoteness  from  the
lines  of  everyday  thought. This  general  rule  is  weU  exemplified
in  the  present  small  volume,  which  contains  a  collection  of
four  essays  originally  pubUshed  in  the  psychoanalytical  peri-
odical /magro. The  main  purpose  of  the  book  is,  as  the  sub-
title  indicates, the appUcation of knowledge gained in  the
treatment  of  nem'otic  patients  to  the  problems  connected  with
the  mentahty  and  social  life  of  primitive  peoples.

In  the  first  chapter  on  the  "  Savage's  Dread  of  Incest,"  the
phenomena of Exogamy, Avoidances and other  prohibitions
of  a  sexual  nature  are  passed  in  review,  and  an  attempt  is
made  to  show  that  these  prohibitions  are  dii'ected  against  the
(usuaUy  unconscious)  tendency  to  incest— the  same  tendency
that  is  observed  in  the  "  (Edipus  complex  "  of  the  neurotic
In  certain  of  his  previous  works  Freud  had  shown  that  the
myth  of  (Edipus.  (who  unwittingly  Idlls  his  father  and  marries
his  mother)  gives  expression  to  tendencies  that  represent  the
logical outcome  of  a  very  fundamental  form of  reaction  of
the developing human muid to the family  envkonment—
tendencies  which  are, however,  inconsistent  with  the  ethical
standards  of  adult  life  accepted  by  the  conscious  personahty,
and  which  are  therefore  repressed  into  the  Unconscious.  Such
repression  does  not,  however,  constitute  annihilation,  and  the
repressed tendencies continue to exercise an influence  over
thought  and  behaviour  ; the  conflict  between  these  tendencies
and  the  repressing  tendencies  opposed  to  them  giving  rise  to
the  neurosis. In  the  present  chapter  evidence  is  brought  to
show  that  this  same  conflict  is  at  work  in  the  mind  of  the
savage,  who  by  his  own  sterner  method  of  taboo  endeavours
to  achieve  mastery  over  the  same  primitive  impulses  as  those
with  which  the  civilised  neurotic  has  to  contend. In  other
words, the sexual  prohibitions of the savage are  concerned
with  the  very  same  persons  {e.g.  mother,  sister,  mother-in-law,


LXXX.]


Review.


225


etc.,  in  the  case  of  a  man)  as  those  to  which  the  repressed
desires  of  the  neurotic  are  directed.  The  universahty  and
social  character  of  the  prohibitions  in  the  case  of  savages
indicate  that  the  conflict  is  in  a  sense  more  acute  among
them  than  among  civilised  peoples,  who  have  achieved  a  more
thorough  mastery  of  the  primitive  passions  concerned  ;  the
neurotic,  however,  by  the  severity  of  his  conflict  showing  a
tendency  to  regress  in  this  respect  to  the  savage  level.

In  the  second  chapter  on  "  Taboo  and  the  Ambivalence  of
Emotions,"  it  is  sho"mi  that  taboo  has  certain  important  char-
acteristics in  common  with  "  compulsion  neurosis  ;  "  this
correspondence  pointing  to  a  fundamental  similarity  between
the  psychic  mechanisms  involved  in  the  two  cases.  In  both
cases  there  is  a  powerful  compulsion  combined  with  the  absence
of  any  adequate  conscious  motivation.  In  both  cases,  more-
over, there  is  a  strong  tendency  for  the  characteristic  mental
attitude  to  extend  to  other  objects  and  situations  than  those
to  which  it  had  originally  reference  and  for  this  attitude  to
give  rise  to  serious  inhibitions  and  cumbersome  ceremonial
performances  ;  the  restriction  on  the  freedom  of  action  thus
brought  about  being  again  in  both  cases  very  considerable.
Applying  to  taboo  the  conceptions  regarding  mental  conflict
and  rejjression  arrived  at  by  the  psychoanalytic  study  of  the
compulsion  neuroses,  Freud  concludes  that  "  taboo  is  a  very
primitive  prohibition  imposed  from  'udthout  (by  an  authority)
and  directed  against  the  strongest  desires  of  man.  The  desire
to  violate  it  continues  in  the  unconscious,"  the  taboo  being,
in  fact,  an  externally  imposed  proliibition  directed  against  the
very  same  tendencies  of  human  nature  as  those  against  which
are  aimed  the  internal  prohibitions  of  the  neurotic.

If  this  conclusion  is  correct,  we  should  expect  to  find  evi-
dence of  conflict  (or  ambivalence  of  emotions,  to  use  a  term
of  Bleuler's  that  is  now  very  generally  adopted  by  j^sycho-
analytic  writers)  in  the  actual  details  of  taboo.  When  we
examine  these  details,  we  find  that  such  evidence  is  not
wanting.  Thus,  as  Freud  here  shows,  the  taboo  of  the  dead
arises  as  the  result  of  a.  conflict  between  conscious  sorrow,
corresponding  to  an  attitude  of  afi:ection  towards  the  departed,
and  unconscious  joy  resulting  from  repressed  hatred.  While  the
dead  were  still  alive  and  Avith  us,  their  desires  often  conflicted


226


J.  C.  Fliigel.


[part


with  our  own,  and  we  (the  living)  were  often  tempted  to  wish
in  the  innermost  recesses  of  our  mind  that  those  whose  presence
thus  interfered  with  the  fulfihnent  of  our  own  wishes  could  be
removed  safely  out  of  our  way.  Now  that  Dearth  has  gratified
these  secret  desires,  we  behave  as  if  these  desires  had  really  been
effective,  and  guiltily  imagine  that  the  dead  -will  surely  take  re-
venge on  us  for  the  murderous  thoughts  that  we  have  harboured.
In  so  doing,  we  avail  ourselves  of  the  psychological  mechanism  of
projection — so  common  in  certain  forms  of  neurosis — by  which
we  endeavour  to  free  ourselves  of  unwelcome  thoughts  and  tenden-
cies by  attributing  them  to  others  ;  in  this  case  our  own  hostile
feelings  towards  the  dead  are  attributed  to  the  dead  themselves,
who  are  then  supposed  to  harbour  enmity  against  ourselves.
Hence  the  very  widespread  fear  of  the  dead  and  the  consequent
necessity  of  avoiding  contact  with  them  which  manifests  itself  in
the  taboos  :  as  in  the  case  of  all  pathological  fears,  a  fear  origin-
ally directed  against  our  own  unconscious  desires  has  here
been  converted  into  a  fear  of  somethmg  outside  ourselves — a
fear  which  in  its  new  form  is  quite  unreasonable,  and  has
no  reference  to  reality.

Similar  considerations  are  sho\vn  to  apply  to  two  other  sets
of  taboos — those  connected  with  enemies  and  with  rulers  respec-
tively, and  the  chapter  closes  with  an  interesting  and  suggestive
discussion  of  the  relation  of  taboo  to  conscience  and  morality.

In  the  third  chapter  on  "  Magic,  Animism  and  the  Omnipo-
tence of  Thought,"  Freud  indicates  the  parallelism  between
the  systems  of  thought  involved  in  Magic  and  Animism  on
the  one  side  and  Neurosis  on  the  other.  In  both  there  is
discoverable  that  "  omnipotence  of  thought  "  (a  phrase  taken
from  one  of  Freud's  own  patients),  that  mistaldng  of  thoughts
for  outer  realities  which  distinguishes  the  unconscious  levels
of  the  mind.  In  this  Freud  is,  of  course,  only  carrying  a
step  further  the  conclusions  of  authorities  such  as  Tylor  and
Frazer,  who  had  already  pointed  out  that  Magic  resulted  from
a  failure  to  distinguish  between  "  the  order  of  ideas  and  the
order  of  nature,"  "  an  ideal  connexion  being  mistaken  for  a
real  one  "  (the  two  chief  Itinds  of  magic,  hom<jeopathic  and
contagious,  corresponding  to  the  association  of  ideas  by  simi-
larity and  contiguity  respectively).  Magic,  according  to  Freud,
differs  from  Animism  in  that,  while  in  the  former  omnipotence


LXXX.J


Review.


227


of  thought  is  manifested  in  a  pure  form,  in  the  latter  this
omnipotence  is  "  projected  "  on  to  imaginary  spiritual  beings,
many  of  the  undesirable  mental  tendencies  being  thus  got  rid
of  in  the  same  way  as  the  death  wishes  to  which  we  have
aheady  referred.  At  the  more  advanced  stage  of  Rehgion
Man  hands  over  his  original  omnipotence  to  the  gods,  though
indirectly  he  still  retains  some  remnants  of  it  through  his
power  of  influencing  the  gods  by  prayer,  sacrifices  or  threats.
At  the  still  higher  level  of  scientific  thought,  this  omnijjotence
is  abandoned  altogether,  except  in  so  far  as  science  enables
us  to  control  Nature  by  understanding  her  laws.

In  the  fourth  chapter  on  "  The  Infantile  Recurrence  of
Totemism,"  after  a  review  of  the  main  theories  regarding
Totemism  and  Exogamy  and  their  relations  to  each  other,
Freud  compares  the  attitude  of  jsrimitive  man  towards  his
totem  with  the  attitude  sometimes  adopted  by  neurotic  children
towards  a  certain  class  of  animals.  Psychoanalysis  of  animal
phobias  occurring  in  childhood  has  shown  that  the  dreaded
animal  is  often  treated  as  a  symbolic  I'epresentative  of  the
father,  the  confhcting  love  and  hate  originally  directed  to  the
father  being  displaced  on  to  the  animal.  If  we  assume  that
the  totem  of  primitive  peoples  is  also  a  father  symbol  (an
assumption  that  is  justified  by  the  very  close  correspondence
between  the  attitude  of  child  and  savage  respectively  towards
the  animal  concerned),  many  of  the  characteristics  of  totemism
are  largely  explained,  e.g.  the  fact  of  the  totem  being  regarded
as  an  ancestor,  the  identification  of  the  present  members  of
the  tribe  with  the  totem,  the  general  prohibition  of  IdlUng
the  totem  combined  with  the  occasional  solemn  sacrifice  of
the  animal  and  the  taboo  on  sexual  relations  between  members
of  the  same  totem,  i.e.  the  coimexion  between  Totemism  and
Exogamy,  a  connexion  that  had  puzzled  so  many  of  the
earlier  authorities.  If  Totemism  springs  from  the  father-
regarding  aspects  of  the  CEdipus  complex,  it  is  only  natural
that  it  should  be  combined  with  Exogamy,  which  (as  several
of  the  most  eminent  writers  on  the  subject  have  independently
recognised)  constitutes  a  reaction  against  incest  tendencies.
The  two  closely  connected  institutions  thus  represent  the
two  aspects  of  the  OEdipus  complex,  i.e.  the  deske  to  Idll
the  father  and  marry  the  mother. The  reaction  against  the


228


J.  C.  Flilgel.


[part


former  desire  is  of  course  responsible  for  the  prohibition  of
killing  the  totem  animal  (father  representative).  The  occa-
sional exceptions  to  this  rule,  as  when  the  totem  is  solemnly
sacrificed  and  eaten,  are  themselves  of  the  greatest  interest
as  revealing  the  ambivalent  attitude  towards  the  father,  and
Freud's  analysis  of  the  totemic  feast,  which  is  based  to  some
extent  ujDon  the  previous  work  of  Robertson  Smith,  con-
stitutes perhaps  the  most  fascinating  portion  of  the  book,
reveahng  as  it  does  in  a  most  striking  way  the  wonderful
complexity  of  human  motive  and  throwing  at  the  same  time  a
flood  of  light  upon  the  history  and  meaning  of  a  great  number
of  religious  observances,  including  the  central  rite  of  the
Christian  Church.

Within  the  small  compass  of  this  book  Prof.  Freud  has
compressed  a  very  considerable  mass  of  material  that  should
be  of  the  greatest  interest  to  the  psychologist  and  anthro-
pologist. No  doubt  many  of  his  conclusions  will  afford  matter
for  controversy,  and  it  must  be  admitted  that  as  regards
detail  there  are  many  points  where  difficulties  suggest  them-
selves, and  where  wider  knowledge  may  necessitate  modification
of  the  views  here  put  forward.

In  the  opinion  of  the  present  writer,  however,  Prof.  Freud's
m.ain  conclusions  as  here  set  forth  are  not  only  in  themselves
correct,  but  (Avhen  ta.ken  in  conjunction  with  the  work  of
Jones,  Rank,  Reik  and  other  psychoanalytic  students  in  the
same  field)  will  be  found  to  have  opened  a  new  and  most
important  chapter  of  comparative  psychology.

Freud's  works  present  a  task  for  the  translator  that  is  by
no  means  easy,  but  Dr.  Brill  has  been  much  more  successful
in  this  case  than  in  some  of  his  earlier  translations.  Certain
errors  and  inconsistencies  in  the  references  (a  matter  of  some
importance  in  a  work  of  this  character)  should  be  corrected
in  a  second  edition  ;  the  titles  of  English  works  being  some-
times incorrectly  given,  while  the  titles  of  German  works  are
sometimes  quoted  in  German  and  sometimes  in  English,  even
where  translations  do  not  appear  to  exist  or  where  the  page
reference  is  to  the  original.  There  are  also  occasional  obscuri
ties  and  inelegancies  in  the  text,  but  on  the  whole  the  meaning
is  clearly  rendered,  and  the  book  in  its  English  guise  should
find  many  readers.  J.  C.  Flugel.


LXXX.]


Review.


229


The Road to Endor. By Lieut. E. H. Jones,  I.A.R.O.
(John  Lane,  The  Bodley  Head,  London,  W.)

The  successful  attempts  by  certain  British  officers  to  escape
from  the  Turkish  prison  camjj  at  Yozgad  have  resulted  in
the  publication  of  two  of  the  most  exciting  books  relating
to  the  War  :  Four  Huridred  and  Fifty  Miles  to  Freedom,  and
The  Road  to  Endor.  As  narratives  of  combined  daring,  endurance
and  ingenuity,  the  two  books  may  rank  equal,  but  the  latter  has
a  peculiar  interest  for  all  persons  interested  in  psychical  research.

In  February,  1917,  Lieut.  Jones,  with  three  or  four  of  his
companions,  began  experimenting  with  a  ouija-board.  The  first
attempts,  though  made  principally  with  the  object  of  relieving
the  tedium  of  prolonged  imprisonment,  were  serious  but  fruit-
less, as  the  board  would  write  nothing  but  meaningleste  com-
binations of  letters.  Then,  when  they  were  all  about  to  give
up  in  disappomtment,  the  "  Devil  of  Mischief,"  as  Lieut.  Jones
puts  it,  prompted  him  to  "fake"  replies  to  his  companions'
questions,  purporting  to  come  from  a  very  communicative
spirit  named  "  SaUy."

Lieut.  Jones  played  the  game  with  his  fellow-prisoners
strictly.  He  never  claimed  that  the  phenomena  which  so
much  intrigued  them  were  genuine.  He  invited  them  to
apply  any  test  they  liked  and  form  their  own  conclusions.
As  a  first  precaution,  however,  he  decided  not  to  make  the
board  work  except  when  he  had  as  fellow-sitter,  Dr.  O'Farrell.
This  led  the  rest  of  the  camp  to  believe  that  the  results  were
due  to  some  mysterious  "  rapport  "  between  the  two.

"  SaUy "  was  joined  by  "  Silas  P.  Warner "  and  several
other  communicators.  They  predicted  the  course  of  the  war,
or  reported  events  of  which  news  had  not  yet  reached  the
sj^ectators,  and  as  these  statements  frequently  turned  out
to  be  true,  their  reputation  steadily  increased.  With  equal
success  they  referred  to  facts  concerning  the  private  lives
of  persons  who  supposed  these  facts  known  only  to  themselves.
Careful  records  were  kept  for  the  benefit  of  the  S.P.R.,  which,
it  is  to  be  feared,  has  not  yet  received  them.

Various  tests  were  applied,  but  the  Spook  triumphantly
surmounted  them  all.  First  Lieut.  Jones  and  Dr.  O'Farrell
were blindfolded, then the board was placed upside  down


230


W.  H.  Salter.


[part


so  that  the  letters  on  it  were  invisible,  but  in  each  case,
after  a  short  interval,  answers  were  forthcoming  as  rapid  and
as  satisfactorjr  as  before.  Finally  the  Spook  was  subjected
to  a  more  elaborate  and  apparently  conclusive  test.  The
order  of  the  letters  on  the  board  was  altered,  and  duplicate
and  triplicate  boards  with  the  altered  order  were  prepared.
The  mediums  were  blindfolded  and  then*  hands  placed  on
the  original  board,  which  had  not  been  shown  to  them  after
the  order  of  the  letters  on  it  had  been  altered.  The  duplicate
and  triplicate  boards  were  placed  in  another  room,  and  the
trijolicate,  which  was  of  small  size,  made  to  revolve  within
the  duplicate.  The  officers  who  made  the  triplicate  revolve
left  the  room  before  it  had  stopped  running.  The  test  was
whether  the  Spook  could  write  on  the  original  board  according
to  a  code  formed  by  the  duplicate  and  triplicate  in  conjunction.
It  did,  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  investigators,  and  its  reputa-
tion was  thereby  finally  assured.

Meanwliile  the  Turldsh  Commandant  of  the  Camp,  Kiazim
Bey,  had  become  interested,  and  sent  the  Camp  Interpreter,
an  unpleasant  person  called  Moise  Eskenazi,  but  more  generally
known  in  the  Camp  as  the  Pimple,  to  report.  So  deeply
impressed  was  the  Pimple  that  Kiazim  became  anxious  to
enlist .  the  services  of  the  Spook  in  tracing  a  buried  Armenian
treasure.  The  Spook  was  only  too  willing  to  oblige,  as  Lieut.
Jones  conceived  the  idea  that  the  treasure -hunt,  if  conducted
under  strict  psychic  instructions,  might  be  made  to  lead  to
his  removal  from  Yozgad  to  some  point  nearer  the  sea,  from
which  escape  would  be  relatively  an  easy  matter.

About  this  time  Lieut.  Jones  joined  forces  with  Lieut.  Hill,
an  Australian  airman,  whose  determination  to  escape  was  as
great  as  his  own.  At  a  camp  entertainment  they  gave  a
highly  successful  exhibition  of  stage-telepathy.  Lieut.  Jones,
blindfolded,  named  articles  handed  to  Lieut.  Hill  by  members
of  the  audience,  read  the  numbers  of  banknotes,  told  the
time  of  watches,  etc.  Few  mistakes  were  made,  and  if  the
whole  camp  was  not  convinced  it  was  genuine  telepathy,
none  could  explain  how  it  was  done.  Lieut.  Hill  thus  became
accepted  as  Lieut.  Jones's  fellow-medium.

Between  them  they  fooled  the  Pimple  and  Kiazim  Bey  to
their  hearts'  content. Under  the  Spook's  directions  they  were


LXXX.  1


Review.


231


confined  in  a  separate  building,  ^Yhere  frequent  seances  with
the  Pimple  were  held.  The  story  of  the  treasure-hunt,  while
most  entertaining  and  exciting,  is  too  long  and  complicated
to  set  out  here.  Suffice  it  to  say  that,  after  the  discovery
of  important  and  mysterious  clues,  the  Bey  became  nervous
as  to  his  fate  in  the  event  of  the  matter  becoming  known
to  his  mihtary  superiors,  and  decided  to  back  out  of  it.

Lieuts.  Jones  and  Hill  were  thus  reduced  to  their  last  hope  of
escape,  namely  to  get  repatriated  by  simulating  madness.  For
this  purpose  they  had  to  reveal  to  some  of  their  fellow-
prisoners,  including  Dr.  O'Farrell,  that  the  whole  of  the  pheno-
mena of  the  ouija-board  and  the  telepathy  exhibition  were
faked,  and  it  was  only  with  great  difficulty  that  they  succeeded
in  convincing  them  that  this  was  so.  Dr.  O'Farrell  then
coached  them  carefully  as  to  the  symptoms  of  the  different
types  of  madness  they  were  respectively  to  simulate.

To  the  Pimple  and  Eaazim  the  Spook  explained  that  the
apparent  madness  on  the  part  of  the  mediums  was  produced
by  psychic  control,  in  order  that  they  might  be  sent  to
Constantinople,  whence  the  treasure-hunt  could  be  more  satis-
factorily directed.  The  two  Ueutenants  were  examined  by
local  Turkish  doctors,  who  expressed  the  opinion  that  they
were  mad.  The  Spook  then  dictated  a  telegram  wliich  Kiazim
sent  to  the  War  Office  at  Constantinople  suggesting  that  the
two  officers  should  be  sent  there  for  observation,  and  the
War  Office  concurring,  off  they  set  under  the  Pimple's
escort.

After  a  wearisome  journey  the  three  arrived  at  Constantin-
ople. Here  Lieuts.  Jones  and  Hill  had  to  submit  to  a  far
more  rigorous  medical  examination  than  at  Yozgad.  For
several  months  they  were  kept  under  close  observation  by
mental  speciaUsts,  both  Turkish  and  European.  Both  on  their
journey  to  the  capital  and  while  in  hospital  there,  the  sufferings
they  endured  to  maintain  their  deception,  from  prolonged
self-starvation  and  other  causes,  would  liave  broken  down  the
resolution  of  all  but  exceptional  men.  Eventually,  however,
their  endurance  was  rewarded :  the  speciaUsts  reported  them
of  unsound  mind,  and  they  were  sent  to  Smyrna  for  repatria-
tion. By  the  time  they  reached  Alexandria  the  armistice
had  been  signed.


232


W.  H.  Salter.


[part


Kiazim's  actions  came  to  the  knowledge  of  his  superiors
and  he  was  conrt-martialled.  This  may  have  chilled  his
ardour  for  psychical  research.  The  Pimple  was,  however,
in  June,  1919,  notwithstanding  rumours  of  fraud  which  had
reached  him,  a  convinced  believer,  and  so  far  as  is  known,
he  may  be  so  stiU.  The  S^oook  had  changed  his  whole  moral
outlook ;  it  had  made  him  a  comparatively  honest  man,
persuaded  him  to  restore  stolen  property,  and  to  volunteer
for  active  service,  and  held  out  hopes  to  him  of  becoming
a  central  figure  in  the  religious  revolution  which  was  shortly
to  sweep  over  the  world.  It  is  to  be  feared,  however,  that
when  peace  with  Turkey  is  restored,  he  wiU  consider  the
S.P.R.  too  lukewarm  and  unprogressive  a  body  to  apply  for
membership.

Kiazim  and  Moise  were  of  course  easy  dupes,  but  it  may
be  worth  enquiring  in  some  detail  how  Lieut.  Jones  avoided
for  so  long  the  detection  of  his  fellow-prisoners.  They  might
fairly  have  been  described  as  a  picked  company.  In  addition
to  the  technical  naval  and  military  attainments  shared  by
them  all,  many  of  them  had  knowledge  of  various  branches
of  science,  or  had  achieved  success  in  different  kinds  of  busi-
ness. Almost  every  occupation  in  life  was  represented,  except,
fortunately  for  Lieut.  Jones,  that  of  investigator  for  the  S.P.R.
And  yet,  given  a  man  of  Lieut.  Jones's  powers  of  memory
and  visualisation,  and  of  the  smartness  in  eliciting  information
by  fishing  questions,  developed  by  his  experience  as  a  magis-
trate in  Burma,  the  deception  was  "  as  easy  as  falling  off  a
log."  At  every  possible  stage  his  victims  delivered  themselves
up  bound  hand  and  foot.

Dealing  first  with  the  mechanical  tests,  that  is  to  say,  those
designed  to  prove  whether  or  not  the  mediums  could  produce
intelligible  replies  under  conditions  apparently  excluding  fraud,
we  note  that  the  tests  were  inadequate  in  conception  and
carelessly  executed,  and  that  the  results  were  still  more  care-
lessly observed.  Thus  when  Lieut.  Jones  was  blindfolded,  he
could  (as  usually  happens  when  the  bhndfolding  is  done  by
amateurs)  see  quite  sufficiently  for  his  purpose.  When  the
ouija-board  was  turned  upside  down,  his  companions  failed
to  observe  that  he  had  made  nicks  in  the  edge  of  the  board,
so that by an exercise of visual memory, he could  locate


LXXX.]


Review.


233


any  letter  as  clearly  as  if  the  board  were  lying  right  side  up
before  his  open  eyes.  They  further,  on  the  ground  of  his
failure  to  remember  his  part  in  a  pantomime,  attributed  to
him  a  bad  memory  for  things  in  general,  whereas,  m  fact,
as  this  test  and  numerous  other  incidents  show,  he  had  an
exceptionally  good  one.

The  test  with  the  duplicate  and  triplicate  boards,  although
faulty  in  conception,  should  have  caught  Lieut.  Jones  out,
if  only  it  had  been  conducted  with  reasonable  care.  The
main  defect  in  conception  was  the  complexity  of  the  test,  the
duplicate  and  triplicate  boards  being  intended  to  furnish  a
code  unloiown  both  to  Lieut.  Jones  and  the  investigators,
and  so  to  exclude  any  possibility  of  telepathy  between  them.
But  this  complexity  in  fact  defeated  its  ends,  as  each  factor
which  was  designed  to  act,  and,  given  caution  and  discretion,
would  have  acted,  as  an  additional  check,  merely  served,
in  the  atmosphere  of  carelessness  which  prevailed,  as  an
additional  loophole  of  escape.

The  first  mistake  was  in  the  preparation  of  the  "  original  "
board.  Instead  of  selecting  an  entirely  new  order  of  letters,
the  investigators  retained  the  order  so  well  known  to  Lieut.
Jones,  merely  transposing  three  pairs  of  letters,  one  of  the
pairs  consisting  of  the  adjacent  letters  DV,  which  thus  became
VD.

Then  one  of  the  investigators  came  into  a  room,  where
Lieut.  Jones  was  sitting,  holding  the  board  with  the  new  order
of  letters  in  his  hand.  This  gave  Lieut.  Jones  sufficient  time
to  memorise  the  new  order,  which  as  regards  20  out  of  26
letters  simply  reproduced  the  old  order ;  he  failed,  however,
to  note  the  transposition  of  the  V  and  D.  Notwithstanding
this,  the  investigators  were  positive  that  the  mediums,  when
the  test  was  made,  had  had  no  opportunity  of  seeing  the
new  board.

Accordingly,  when  the  test  began  and  Lieut.  Jones  was
blindfolded,  he  knew,  apart  from  his  error  of  observation
as  to  D  and  V,  what  was  the  order  of  the  letters  on  the
board  placed  before  him.  To  succeed,  however,  he  still  required
two  items  of  information ;  (1)  which  way  the  board  was
turned,  i.e.  which  were  the  letters  nearest  to  him  and  which
furthest, and (2) how  many  places  to  the  right  or  left  of

9.


234


W.  H.  Salter.


[PABT


any  particular  letter  on  the  duplicate  board  the  same  letter
was  to  be  found  on  the  triplicate  board.  Both  these  gaps
in  his  knowledge  were  speedily  filled  through  slips  on  the
part  of  the  investigators.

The  blindfolding  was  so  imperfect  that  he  could  see  the
edge  of  the  board  nearest  him,  so  that  when  the  board  was
asked  whether  it  could  write  on  the  new  arrangement  of
letters,  the  reply  came,  "  Yes,  ask  something."  It  was  then
asked  to  write  in  code,  the  triplicate  board  having  in  the
meantime  been  made  to  spin,  and  produced  a  long  series  of
the  letters  BMX.  This  puzzled  the  investigators,  who,  not
of  course  knowing  the  code,  thought  it  might  be  the  code
for  "  Yes."  One  of  them  accordingly  went  to  the  other
room,  and  came  back  saying, "  Can't  make  it  out  : it's  not

code  for  '  Yes.' BMX  is  V  ." Here  he  was  interrupted,

but  not  before  he  had  given  Lieut.  Jones  sufficient  information
to  reconstruct  the  whole  code,  subject  to  the  error  that  V
was  in  fact  on  all  the  three  test-boards  one  place  further  to
the  left  than  he  supposed.  Code  messages  were  thereupon
freely  produced.

Now  the  revolving  triplicate  had  stopped  in  such  a  position
that  each  letter  on  it  was  twelve  places  to  the  left  of  the
corresponding  letter  on  the  duplicate,  and  this  was  the  code
on  which  the  messages  ought  to  have  been  written.  Owing,
however,  to  the  double  accident,  (1)  of  Lieut.  Jones's  mistake
as  to  the  relative  positions  of  V  and  D,  and  (2)  of  V  being
the  letter  the  identity  of  which  had  been  revealed,  Lieut.
Jones  was  working  to  an  imaginary  code  in  which  twenty-two
of  the  twenty-six  letters  were  one  place  further  to  the  left
than  in  the  real  code,  two  were  two  places  further  to  the
left  and  two  were  in  the  right  position.

When  the  investigators  came  to  de-code  the  messages  at  first  they
found  they  made  nonsense,  but  finally  they  triumphantly  declared
that  the  Spook  had  been  "  coding  their  code  "  by  "  writing
one  letter  to  the  left  all  the  way  through."  As  appears
from  the  last  preceding  paragraph,  careful  de-coding  would
have  shown  that  sense  could  only  be  obtained  by  abandoning
this  principle  as  regards  four  letters  of  the  alphabet.  As
Lieut.  Jones  says,  "  The  proportion  of  cases  in  which  the
letter  appeared  one  to  the  left  of  where  it  should  be  was


LXXX.]  Review.  235

great  enough  to  make  the  investigators  believe  that  the  Spook
was  purposely  writing  in  this  way.  They  either  did  not
notice,  or  passed  over  as  negligible,  the  four  exceptions.  Yet
in  these  exceptions  lay  the  clue  to  the  trick."

He  was  equally  skilfxil  and  equally  successful  in  establishing
the  evidential  nature  of  his  messages.  These,  as  already
mentioned,  related  both  to  public  and  private  events.  As
regards  the  first  class  he  had  to  rely  on  information  given
to  him  in  letters  from  the  outside  world,  which  he  disclosed
to  the  Camp  exclusively  through  the  Spook,  and  on  deductions
and  inteUigent  anticipations  based  on  the  contents  of  his
fellow-prisoners'  letters,  and  to  trust  to  events  to  justify
him,  as  they  not  infrequently  did.  His  companions  appear
to  have  given  the  Spook  credit  for  all  his  hits,  and  not  to
have  marked  his  misses.  Thus,  about  the  time  America
came  into  the  War,  the  Spook  stated  that  a  large  expedi-
tionary force  was  being  got  ready  for  transport  to  Vladivos-
tock,  full  details  of  the  number  of  ships,  equipment,  etc.,
being  given.  Now  the  details  as  to  tonnage,  etc.,  corresponded
to  what  would  actually  have  been  requked  for  a  force  of  the
size  mentioned,  and  as  Lieut.  Jones  was  supposed  to  be  quite
ignorant  as  regards  the  overseas  transport  of  troops,  it  seemed
certain  that  some  supernormal  source  of  knowledge  had  been
tapped.  Lieut.  Jones  happened,  however,  to  have  sufficient
knowledge  of  the  subject  to  frame  a  plausible  answer,  and
the  fact  that  nothing  further  was  heard  of  the  expedition
did  not  damage  either  his  or  the  Spook's  reputation.

As  regards  the  private  news  revealed  by  the  board  it  would
be  difficult  to  improve  on  Lieut.  Jones's  own  account  of  the
"  Louise  "  incident,  the  main  part  of  which  is  here  set  out
verbatim.

Ovir  War-news  Spook  had  occupied  the  stage  for  the  early
part  of  the  evening,  and  had  just  announced  his  departme.
We  asked  him  to  send  some  one  else.

"  Who  are  you  ?  "  said  Alec.  As  he  spoke  the  door  opened
and  "  Antony  "  came  in,  and  stood  close  to  my  side.

"  I  am  Lomse,"  the  board  spelt  out.

I  felt  Antony  give  a  little  start  as  he  read  the  message.  With-
out a  pause  the  Spook  went  on  :
"HeUo,  Tony!"

"  This  is  interesting,"  said  Tony. (That  was  give-away  n\maber  2.)


236


W.  H.  Salter.


[part


"  Go  on,  please ;  tell  us  something."

I now  knew  that  somewhere  Tony  must  have  met  a  Louise.
That  was  a  French  name. So  far  as  I  knew  he  had  not  served
in  France ; but  he  had  served  in  Egypt. One  night, a  month  i
or  so  before,  in  talking  of  Egyptian  scenery,  he  had  mentioned  I
a  long  straight  road  with  an  avenue  of  trees  on  either  side  that
"  looked spiffing by moonlight," and ran for miles across the  il
desert. It  struck  me  at  the  time  that  there  was  nothing  parti-  |
cularly "  spiffing "  about  the  type  of  scenery  described  ; nothing,  i
at any rate, to rouse the enthusiasm he had shown, and his  !
roseate  memory  of  it  might  have  been  tinged  by  pleasant  com-
panionship. Remembering this, I ventured to say more  about
Louise. Nothing  could  be  lost  by  risking  it.

"  You  I'emember  me,  Tony  ?  "  asked  the  Spook.

"  I  know  two  Louises,"  said  Tony  cautiously.

'  Ah  !  not  the  old  one,  mon  vieux,"  said  the  Spook.  [
(Now  this  looks  as  if  the  Spook  knew  both,  but  a  little  refiec-  i:

tion  shows  that,  given  two  Louises,  one  was  quite  probably  older

than  the  other.)  I
Antony  was  delighted.  !
"  Go  on,"  he  said  ;  "  say  something."  i
"  Long  straight  road,"  said  the  Spook  ;  "  trees — moonlight."  i
"  Where was that  ?  " asked Tony. There was a  sharpness

about  his  questioning  that  showed  he  was  hooked.

"  You  Imow,  Tony  !  "  !
"  France  ?  "  j
"  No,  no,  stupid  ! Not  France  ! Ah,  you  have  not  forgotten,  j

mon cher, riding in moonlight, trees and sand, and a  straight

road — and  you  and  me  and  the  moon."

"This  is  7nost  interesting,"  said  Antony. Then  to  the  board:
"  Yes,  I  know  ;  Egypt — Caii'o."

"  Bravo,  you  know  me. Why  did  you  leave  me  ? I  am  in  trouble."

This  was  cunning  of  the  Spook.  Tony  must  have  left  her,  because
he  had  come  to  Yozgad  without  her.  But  Tony  did  not  know  this.
He  was  too  interested,  and  his  memory  carried  him  back  to  another
parting.

"You  told  me  to  go,"  said  Tony.  "I  wanted  to  help" —
which  showed  he  hadn't  !

"  But  you  didn't — you  didn't — you  didn't  !  "  said  the  Spook.

Tony  ran  his  hands  through  his  hair.  "  This  is  quite  right
as  far  as  it  goes,"  he  said,  "  but  I  want  to  ask  a  few  questions
to  make  sure. May  I  ?  "

"  Certainly,"  said  Doc.  and  I.

He  turned  to  the  board  (it  was  always  amusing  to  me  to  notice
how  men  had  to  have  something  rnaterial  to  question,  and  how  they
never  turned  to  the  Doc.  or  me,  but  always  to  the  board.  Hence,
I  suppose,  the  necessity  for  "  idols  "  in  the  old  days).

"  Have  you  gone  ba — •"  he  checked  himself  and  rubbed  his  chin.

"  No,"  he  went  on. "  I  won't  ask  that. — Where  are  you  now  ?  "


LXXX.]  Review.  237

He  had  already  without  knowing  it,  answered  his  own  question,
but  he  must  be  given  time  to  forget  it.

"  Ah,  Tony,"  said  Louise,  "  you  were  a  dear  !  I  did  love  so  your
hair."

This  was  camouflage,  but  it  pleased  Tony.

"  Where  are  you  now  ?  "  Tony  repeated,  thinking,  no  doubt,  of
soft  hands  on  his  hair.

Why  did  you  not  help  me  ?  "  said  Louise.

"  Look  here,  I  want  to  make  sure  who  you  are. Where  are  you
now  ?  "

"  Are  you  an  unbeliever,  Tony  ? C'est  moi,  Louise,  qui  te  parle  !
"  Then  tell  me  where  you  are,"  Tony  persisted.
"  Oh  dear,  Tony. I  told  you  I  was  going  back. I  went  back  !  "
"  By  jove  !  "  said  Tony,  "  that  settles  it. Back  *o  Paris  !  "

The  stage  "  telepathy  "  was,  of  course,  done  in  accordance
with  a  pre-arranged  code,  which  is  set  out  in  full  in  one
of  the  appendices  to  the  book,  and  is  weU  worth  careful
study.

It  will  be  seen  that  Lieut.  Jones  possesses  in  a  very  high
degree  all  the  qualities  that  go  to  the  constitution  of  a  success-
ful fraudulent  medium.  Fortunately  both  his  inclinations  and
his  official  duties  prevent  his  adopting  this  career.  On  the
principle,  however,  that  the  best  gamekeepers  are  made  of
converted  poachers,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  he  will  see  his
way  to  collaborating  with  the  Society  in  the  detection  of
fraud.  He  would  be  an  ideal  investigator  of  a  kind  never
more  needed  than  at  the  present  time,  especially  if,  by  contact
with  those  who  have  for  long  done  research  work  for  the
Society,  his  experience  were  somewhat  widened,  and  his  present
tendency  to  excessive  dogmatism  thereby  slightly  corrected.

For  certainly  dogmatism  is  the  great  blemish  on  Lieut.
Jones's  book.  He  is,  of  course,  too  logical  and  cautious  to
assert  in  so  many  words  that,  because  he  "  faked "  psychical
phenomena  so  as  to  deceive  his  companions,  therefore  no
genuine  psychical  phenomena  exist.  He  doubtless  reflected  that
he  would  have  exposed  himself  to  the  retort,  "  In  that  case,
because  you  and  Lieut.  Hill  simulated  madness  so  as  to  deceive
the  mental  experts,  do  you  say  that  there  is  no  such  thing
as  real  madness  1  "  What  he  does  suggest  is  that  he  produced
phenomena  as  remarkable  and  varied  as  those  produced  by
any  medium,  under  conditions  at  least  as  rigorous  as  those
to which mediums are ever  subjected, and that  therefore


238


W.  H.  Salter.


[part


fraud,  which  was  certainly  the  cause  in  his  own  case,  cannot
be  eliminated  as  a  possible  explanation  of  the  others.  It
is  no  doubt  due  to  the  paucity  of  psychical  literature  at
Yozgad  prison  camp  that  Lieut.  Jones  has  committed  himself
to  this  untenable  position.

If  postal  arrangements  had  permitted  free  communication
between  Yozgad  and  Hanover  Square,  and  the  records  of
the  sittings  had  been  forwarded,  as  they  were  made,  to  the
officers  of  the  S.P.R.,  it  would  very  soon  have  been  pointed
out  to  Lieut.  Jones's  companions,  that  they  would  be  wise
to  attach  little  importance  to  the  "mechanical"  side  of  the
Spook's  performances,  e.g.  the  writing  of  coherent  messages
on  the  "  ouija  "  board  when  reversed,  or  when  the  "  mediums  "
were  blindfolded.  Their  attention  might  have  been  drawn
to  even  more  remarkable  results  produced  under  more  stringent
conditions  by  persons  who  admitted  they  faked  the  results,
but  successfully  concealed  their  modus  operandi,  to  the  slate-
writing,  for  instance,  of  Mr.  S.  J.  Davey,  as  recorded  in  Vol.
III.  of  the  Society's  Journal  (1887-1888).

Mr.  Davey's  performances  and  the  discussion  which  followed
them  are  of  especial  interest  as  showing  that  from  the  earliest
days  of  the  S.P.R.  it  was  generally  recognised  that  the  only
evidence  of  the  supernormal  origin  of  communications,  to
which  any  importance  could  safely  be  attached,  was  that
based  on  the  contents  of  the  communications,  and  not  on  the
apparent  impossibility  of  producing  them  except  by  super-
normal agency.  It  would  appear  from  his  book  that  Lieut.
Jones  would  claim  that,  even  judged  by  this  standard,  he
produced  results  as  remarkable  as  any  obtained  through  pro-
fessedly genuine  mediums.

But  in  point  of  fact  Lieut.  Jones  was  working  under  con-
ditions far  more  favourable  to  fraud  than  the  average  medium
enjoys.  He  was  one  of  a  small  group  of  men  shut  up  together
for  months  and  even  years  :  to  relieve  the  tedium  of  captivity
they  freely  told  each  other  all  sorts  of  details  of  their  past
lives,  both  before  and  during  the  War,  and  then  forgot  they
had  ever  told  them  :  they  shared  with  each  other  news  from
the  outside  world  :  and  finally,  as  the  book  clearly  shows,
they  none  of  them  had  the  sUghtest  idea  of  the  precautions
necessary  to  exclude  fraud.


LXXX.]


Review.


239


Very  different  is  the  lot  of  a  professional  medium.  Any
member  of  the  public  may  obtain  a  sitting  with  him.  Many
of  his  sitters  wUl  no  doubt  be  as  guileless  as  Lieut.  Jones's
victims,  allowing  themselves  to  be  "pumped,"  or  of  their
own  accord  giving  away  vital  information  without  knowing
that  they  have  done  so.  But  not  all  will  be  of  this  class  :
from  time  to  time  the  medium  will  be  confronted  with  sitters
he  has  never  seen  before,  to  whose  identity  and  previous
history  he  has  not  the  slightest  clue,  who  say  little  (if  any-
thing), and  keep  a  careful  note  of  what  they  say  to  him
and  he  says  to  them.  If  they  have  more  than  one  sitting,
they  carefully  check  anything  said  by  the  medium  at  the
later  sittings,  to  see  whether  he  is  worldng  on  any  statement
made  or  hint  given  at  a  previous  sitting.  Nor  is  the  possi-
bility of  the  medium  making  enquiries  between  the  sittings
overlooked.  Private  detectives  have  even  been  employed  to
discover  whether  anything  of  tliis  kind  has  been  done  (see
Vol.  XXX.,  p.  342,  of  the  S.P.R.  Proceedings).

It  may  be  admitted  that,  even  when  every  conceivable
precaution  has  been  taken,  it  is  impossible  to  guarantee  with
absolute  certainty  that  the  medium  has  not  obtained  by  normal
methods  unknown  to  the  investigators,  information  purporting
to  be  derived  from  supernormal  sources.  The  records  of  the
S.P.R.  are,  however,  full  of  cases  where  mediums  have  dis-
played knowledge  which,  if  not  supernormal  in  origin,  could
only  have  been  obtained  by  them  by  collusion  with  third
parties,  carefully  elaborated  and  concealed  with  miraculous
skill.  On  this  hypothesis,  to  account  for  some  of  the  "  book-
tests  "  given  through  Mrs.  Leonard,  one  must  assume  that
Mrs.  Leonard,  with  the  connivance  of  her  sitter's  servants,
secretly  introduced  into  her  sitter's  private  apartments  within
a  particular  period  of  a  few  days,  an  accomplice  with  a  good
worldng  knowledge  of  classical  Greek.  Most  people,  when
faced  with  the  alternative  of  assuming  this  or  of  accepting
some  supernormal  means  of  communication,  find  that  the
latter  course  makes  less  demands  on  their  credulity.

Lieut.  Jones  must,  however,  be  aware  that  those  who  think
there  is  something  more  in  professed  supernormal  communica-
tions than  can  be  explained  by  chance  or  fraud,  do  not  rest
their  case  entirely  on  results  obtained  from  professional  mediums,


240


W.  H.  Salter.


[part  lxxx.]


even  from  mediums  who,  as  Mrs.  Piper,  have  been  kept  under
close  observation  by  trained  investigators  over  a  long  period.
Much  of  the  most  interesting  material  which  has  engaged  the
Society's  attention  has  come  from  amateur  automatists,  whose
bona  fides  is  entirely  above  suspicion.

Particularly  is  this  the  case  with  regard  to  telepathy,  whether
spontaneous  or  experimental.-  In  the  nature  of  things  tele-
pathic experiments  are  not  worthy  of  serious  consideration
unless  the  bona  fides  of  both  agent  and  percipient  is  un-
doubted, and  there  is  no  clearer  proof  of  the  inadequacy  of
Lieut.  Jones's  companions  as  investigators  than  their  willingness
to  attach  importance  to  stage  performances  like  those  of
Lieut.  Jones  and  Lieut.  Hill.  It  may  be  hoped  that  by  this
time  they  (and  Lieut.  Jones  also)  may  have  found  an  oppor-
tunity to  study,  e.g.  Prof.  Gilbert  Murray's  experiments  (see
Vol.  XXIX.  of  Proceedings),  and  thereby  to  learn  on  what
grounds  the  case  for  a  serious  examination  of  the  subject
really  rests.

Notwithstanding  these  unfortunate  blemishes  the  book  is
one  which  deserves  the  careful  study  of  all  interested  in
Psychical  Research.  Much  may  be  learnt  from  it  as  to  the
ease  with  which  investigators  even  of  a  high  standard  of  general
ability  can  be  deceived  by  a  medium  with  sufficient  brains
to  take  advantage  of  apparently  unimportant  slips  and  neglig-
ences, and  as  to  the  untrustworthiness  of  any  tests  which  are
not  carried  out  with  the  most  rigorous  and  exacting  attention
to  detail.

W.  H.  Salter.


PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE


Society  for  Psychical  Research


PART  LXXXI.


April,  1921.


AN  EXAMINATION  OF  BOOK-TESTS  OBTAINED  IN
SITTINGS  WITH  MRS.  LEONARD.


§  2.  A  Case  where  the  Communicator's  Memory  seems

THE  Probable  Source  of  Information  - - -  253
§  3.  Mrs.  Beadon's  Book-Tests . . - - -  260
§  4.  Instances  of  Statements  about  Words  or  Sen-
tences  IN A Book which turn out to  be

Verbally  Accurate  -  270

§  5.  Some  Miscellaneous  Cases  289

§  6.  Special  Experiments  300

§  7.  Question  of  Cross-Correspondences - - -  313
§  8.  Seemingly  Genuine  Mistakes,  and  others - -  338
§  9.  Discussion of Statements which may  throw
Light  on  the  Mode  of  Perception  of  a  Page

IN  A  Closed  Book  349

§  10.  Conclusion - - - . .. . . -  375

Appendix  A  :  Note  on  Chance  in  Book- Tests - -  379
B  :  Cases of Accurate Description  of
Objects in connection with  Book-


By  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


Page


1.  Introductory


242


C
D


Tests

Supplementary  to  §  8
Supplementary  to  §  9


386
393
398


242


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgtvick.


[part


§  1-

Introductory.

The  so-called  book-tests  we  have  to  examine  are  attempts
by  Mrs.  Leonard's  control  Feda  to  indicate  the  contents
of  a  particular  page  of  a  particular  book  vt^hich  Mrs.
Leonard  has  not  seen  with  her  bodily  eyes,  and  which
is  not,  at  the  time  of  the  sitting,  known  to  the  sitter.
For  example,  Feda  might  tell  the  sitter  that  the  com-
municator wants  him  to  go  to  the  book-case  between
the  fireplace  and  the  window  in  bis  study,  and  in  the
third  shelf  from  the  bottom  to  take  the  seventh  book
from  the  left  and  open  it  at  the  48th  page,  where  about
one-third  of  the  w&j  down  he  will  find  a  passage  which
may  be  regarded  as  an  appropriate  message  from  the
communicator  to  him.  In  the  most  typical  cases  the
interior  of  the  sitter's  residence,  and  sometimes  even
the  sitter's  name,  is  u.nknown  to  Mrs.  Leonard.  The
sitter  himself  is  milikely  consciously  to  remember  what
book  occupies  the  exact  place  indicated,  and  even  if  he
has  read  the  book,  which  he  often  has  not,  it  is  prac-
tically certain  that  he  does  not  know  what  is  on  the-
specified  page.

A  good  book-test  therefore  M^ould  exclude  ordinary
telepathy  from  the  sitter  as  an  explanation,  and  would
make  it  extremely  difficult  to  suppose  that  Feda  derives
her  information  from  any  living  human  being.  It  would
seem  that  either  she  is  capable  of  exercising  pure  clair-
voyance— that  is,  obtaining  knowledge  of  physical  appear-
ances which  are  out  of  the  range  of  any  one's  senses  ;  ^

1  The  term  clairvoyance  is  sometimes  used  to  express  externalised
or  semi-externalised  vision  of  "  spirits  "  such  as  Mrs.  Leonard  in  trance
(or  Feda)  appears  to  have.  I  have,  however,  been  accustomed  to
use  it  in  the  above  defined  sense,  though  without  any  implication  of
analogy  to  the  sense  of  sight.  It  is  called  by  Myers  in  Human
Personality  Telaesthesia.


LXXXI.]


A71  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


243


or  else  that  she  is  in  communication  with  some  spirit,
in  or  out  of  the  body,  who  has  this  power.  It  is  as
excluding  telepathy  from  the  sitter  that  Feda  professes
interest  in  the  book-tests.  She  will  say  to  a  sitter  who
has  not  had  one  before  :  "  He  [the  communicator]  wants
to  give  you  one  of  the  book-tests  .  .  .  tests  tha.t  prevent
people  thinking  it  is  telepathy,"  or  "  this  test  is  to  do
away  with  any  idea  [you]  may  have  of  telepathy."  It
is  noticeable  that  the  book-tests  in  this  collection  are
always  given  through  Feda  as  an  intermediary.  Even
communicators  who  themselves  on  occasion  control  directly,
such  as  A.  V.  B.,  are  represented  as  dictating  their
book-tests  to  Feda.  Feda,  however,  is  not  generally
represented  as  herself  perceiving  the  inside  of  the  closed
book. That  is  the  function  of  the  communicator.

The  origin  of  book-tests  is  not  exactly  known  to  us,
and  probably  cannot  be  ascertained;  for  Mrs.  Leonard's
waking  knowledge  of  what  passes  while  she  is  in  trance
is  at  most  very  imperfect,  and  we  are  of  course  not  in
touch  with  all  who  have  sat  with  her.  Nor  do  we  know
when  they  first  began.  We  have,  however,  a  large  collection
of  book-tests  given  in  1917,  1918,  and  January  1919  ;
and  I  think  it  is  probable  that  if  they  occurred  before
1917  they  v/ere  at  any  rate  infrequent,  or  we  should
have  heard  of  them  more.  Our  collection  is  ?o  mis-
cellaneous one.  It  contains  first  a  great  many — about  63 —
received  by  Miss  Radclyffe  Hall  and  (Una,)  Lady  Troubridge
(either  together  or  one  of  them  alone)  as  sitters,^  and
very  carefully  recorded  and  annotated  by  them.  These
I  shall  call  the  A.  V.  B.  book-tests,  the  communicator
being  the  same  A.  V.  B.  who  took  a  leading  part  in
the  Leonard  sittings  reported  by  Miss  Radclyffe  Hall
and  Lady  Troubridge  in  their  paper  recently  published  in
the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXX.

Then  we  have  twelve  received  by  Mrs.  Salter,  purport-
ing to  come  from  her  father,  Dr.  A.  W.  Verrall,  whose
name  is  familiar  to  readers  of  the  Proceedings  as  a  com-
municator  in the "  Statins  " and "  Ear of Dionysius  "

^  When  Miss  Radclyffe  Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge  sat  together  with
Mrs.  Leonard,  as  they  usually  did,  one  or  other  acted  as  note-taker.


244  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.  [part  |

j

cases. These  I  shall  call  the  A.  W.  V.  book-tests. And  |
further  we  have  book-tests  received  by  about 37 other  1
sitters,  one  or  more  by  each — the  Rev.  C.  Drayton  Thomas
has  sent 19 — and  examined  so  far  as  possible  by  Lady
Troubridge  or  Mrs.  Salter.

It  is  noticeable  that  throughout  this  collection  of
book-tests  each  sitter  has  his  or  her  special  communi-
cator. Thus  in  book-tests  received  by  Miss  Radclyffe
Hall  or  Lady  Troubridge  (whom  for  short  I  will  call
M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.,  as  they  call  themselves  in  their
own  paper  above  mentioned)  the  communicator  is  alwaj^s
A.  V.  B.,  though  occasionally  A.  W.  V.  or  some  one
else  is  also  said  to  be  present  and  taking  part.  Similarly
in  those  received  by  ]\Irs.  Salter,  A.  W.  V.  is  always
the  communicator,  though  sometimes  accompanied  by  ;
Mrs.  Verrall  or  by  A.  V.  B.  Mrs.  Beadon's  communicator  !
is  always  her  husband,  and  so  on.

It  will  have  been  perceived  from  the  general  descrip-
tion  I  have  given  of  a  typical  book-test,  that  the  plan  j
of  referring  the  sitter  to  a  particular  page  for  "  a  message  "  '
gives  great  opportunity  for  vagueness.  And  in  fact  in
some  cases  no  indication  whatever  is  given  of  the  nature
of  the  message,  and  in  some  cases  the  description  is  of
the  slightest.  It  seldom  happens  that  the  sitter  can  say
beforehand  from  Feda's  description  exactly  what  he
expects  to  find.  It  is  often  almost  presented  to  him
as  a  kind  of  puzzle,  as  if  the  communicator  said  :  "  See
if  you  can  guess  what  I  mean  when  I  say  there  is  a
message  for  you  on  such  and  such  a  page."  It  would
be  an  error,  however,  to  suppose  that  on  almost  any
page  of  any  book  something  that  may  pass  as  a  message
may  be  found ;  and  there  is  of  course  still  less  proba-
bility that  when  indications,  even  vague  ones,  of  the
nature  of  the  message  are  given,  the  message  when  found
will  conform  to  them.^  The  difficulty  is  in  deciding
what  we  may  legitimately  expect  in  the  way  of  accidental
coincidences  ;  and  this  difficulty  will  be  with  us  in  a
good  many  of  the  cases  to  be  considered. It is  obviously

^  In  Appendix  A  will  be  found  some  experiments  in  random  correspon-
dences.


Lxxxi.]  A71  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


245


i


a  matter  on  which  people  are  hkely  to  forra  different
judgments  to  some  extent,  and  in  which  bias  might  come
in.  For  this  reason  I,  as  a  person  outside  the  experiments,
have  been  asked  to  report  on  the  evidence  collected.  I
have  had  nothing  to  do  with  collecting  it,  and  have
no  successful  book-test  to  contribute,  so  that  it  is  perhaps
easier  for  me  to  approach  all  the  cases  from  an  equally
outside  point  of  view,  than  it  might  be,  e.g.  for
Lady  Troubridge  or  Mrs.  Salter,  who  might  possibly  be
thought  in  danger  of  judging  their  own  cases  differently
from  the  book-tests  received  by  others.  These  ladies
therefore  asked  me  to  undertake  the  Report.

Before  proceeding  with  it  I  had  better  say  that  I  have
taken  no  personal  part  in  verifying  the  tests,  having  simply
accepted  the  records  as  furnished  to  me,  both  of  what  was
said  at  the  sittings  and  of  the  subsequent  verification.
This  verification  has,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  been  very
carefully  carried  out  in  every  instance  I  have  made  use  of.
Here  and  there  I  have  asked  a  question  to  make
certain  points  clear,  but  that  is  all.  In  quoting  the
records  of  Feda's  remarks  I  have,  in  order  to  make
easier  reading,  ventured  to  modify  the  childish  mode  of
speaking — omitting  the  lisping  I's  for  r's  and  some  of
the  mispronunciations.  I  have  also  occasionally  put  full
stops  for  commas  in  quoting  from  records,  but  never
where  the  sense  would  be  thereby  altered.

It  should  be  understood  from  the  beginning  that  many
book-tests  and  items  of  book-tests  are  complete  failures,
and  that  apparent  precision  a.nd  fulness  of  detail  in  what
the  communicator  says,  and  confidence  expressed  by  him
that  the  test  should  be  a  good  one,  are  no  guarantee  of
success.  I  have  endeavoured  to  tabulate  roughly  the  number
of  successes  and  failures  in  the  cases  before  us.  Roughly
speaking,  out  of  about  532  items,  rather  over  a  third  were
completely or approximately  successfiil.^ But I do  not

^  The  following  are  further  details.  There  were  34  sitters  whose
book-tests  were  verified  (2  others  failed  to  send  us  their  notes,  and
3  others  were  unable  to  identify  the  book-case  in  which  the  book  was  said
to  be).  These  sitters  had  among  them  146  sittings  at  which  book-tests
were  given, and  at  these  sittings  about  532  separate  book-test  items.


246


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


tliink  this  really  tells  us  very  much  ;  first,  because
the  classification  is  difficult  and  uncertain,  and  secondly,
because  the  evidential  importance  of  successes,  as  unlikely
to  occur  by  chance,  varies  enormously.

Assuming  the  success  of  smy  book-test  under  examina-
tion to  be  beyond  what  ca.n  be  attributed  to  chance,
we  have  to  ask  three  questions  about  the  supernormal
knowledge  displayed — meaning  by  supernormal  knowledge
that  not  normally  possessed  by  Mrs.  Leonard.  First  was  it,
or  may  it  have  been,  possessed  by  the  sitter,  and  therefore
possibly  obtained  telepathically  from  him  1  Correct  des-
cription of  the  bookcase  and  its  surroundings  and  of  the
outside  of  the  test-book,  or  books  near  it,  is  usually
of  this  kind,  for  a  bookcase  in  the  sitter's  home  must
as  a  rule  be  assumed  known  to  him,  and  the  appearance
and  titles  of  the  books  in  it  are  likely  to  have  passed
under  his  eye.  Some  experiments  were,  however,  tried
in  which  special  precautions  were  taken  to  exclude  know-
ledge by  the  sitters  of  what  books  stood  in  particular  places.

A  second  question  is,  was  the  knowledge  possessed
by  any  other  human  being  who  can  be  supposed  in
touch  with  the  mediiim  or  the  sitter  ?  There  are  three
cases  in  our  collection  where  the  books  are  located  in
a  house  unknown  to  the  sitter,  but  well  known  to  a
previous  sitter.  These,  however,  were  not  ver}^  successful
as  book-tests.^

A  third  question  is,  was  the  knowledge  possessed
by  the  communicator  before  his  death,  so  that  his  memory
may  be  the  source  drawn  on  ?  In  the  absence  of  the
first  and  second  possibilities  the  third  would  of  course,  if
clairvoyance  be  excluded,  give  us  evidence  of  survival.

If  all  these  three  questions  are  answered  in  the  negative,
but  only  then,  do  we  seem  driven  to  assume  pure  clair-

occurred,  not  including  statements  about  titles  or  other  outside  things.
The  number  of  items  at  a  sitting  varied  from  1  to  15.  These  532  items
may  be  classed  as  92  successful  ;  100  approximately  successful ;  204
complete  failures ;  40  nearly  complete  failures ;  96  dubious.  Taking
the  first  two  classes  together  we  may  say  that  about  36  per  cent,  of
the  attempts  were  approximately  successful.

■'•  They  are  referred  to  on  other  grounds  on  pp.  372-374.


LXXXI.]


A71  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


247


voyance — a  knowledge  of  plwsical  appearances  not  obtained
through  anybody's  senses.^  Evidence  for  this  it  will  be
remembered  is  at  present  very  scanty,^  whether  we  sup-
pose the  perceiving  mind  to  be  incarnate  or  discarnate,
so  that  it  would  be  extremely  interesting  if  it  could
be  established  through  book-tests.  According  to  Feda,  it
is  generally  clairvoyance  exercised  by  the  communicator
that  is  the  source  of  the  knowledge  shown.  It  will  be
observed  that  the  three  above-named  sources  of  super-
normal knowledge — the  sitter,  other  living  persons,  and
the  memory  of  the  communicator — may  work  together,
or  any  two  of  them  ma)^  and  when  they  do  so  mauj
perhaps  fortify  each  other.  It  would  be  interesting  to
discover,  if  we  could,  whether  knowledge  possessed  by  both
sitter  and  supposed  communicator  is  more  likely  to  reach
the  control  Feda,  than  that  possessed  by  the  sitter  alone.

In  order  that  the  reader  may  know  something  of  what
he  is  embarking  upon  I  will  conckide  this  introductory
section  with  a  typical  book-test  which,  I  think  it  will
be  admitted,  is  decidedly  good,  though  not  as  complete
as  we  could  wish.  It  is  accompanied  by  a  remarkable
display  of  knowledge  of  external  things  near  the  book,
which  must  apparently  have  had  a  supernormal  origin.

^  I  have  in  this  hst  of  possible  sources  of  information  ignored  one
suggested  by  Feda  because  I  cannot  profess  to  understand  it.  It  is
that  previous  readers  of  the  book  have  left  recognisable  psychic  traces
on  it.  As  she  puts  it  on  one  occasion  (see  below,  p.  357),  "  When
reading  the  book  they  have  in  a  way  psychometrised  the  book  and  left
a  thought."'  This  would  seem,  however,  to  involve  something  analogous
to  clairvoyance  whatever  interpretation  we  put  upon  it.

^  The  most  important  work  that  has  been  done  on  the  subject  with
any  success  was  a  series  of  experiments  carried  out  by  Prof.  Charles
Richet,  of  which  the  account  was  published  in  the  Proceedings  of  the
S.P.R.,  Vol.  v.,  in  an  article  entitled,  "Relation  de  Divers  Experiences
sur  la  transmission  mentale,  la  Lueidite,  et  autres  Phenomenes  non
explicables  par  les  Donnees  Scientifiques  actuelles."  For  clairvoyance,
or  as  Professor  Richet  calls  it,  Lueidite,  see  pp.  77-116  of  that  article.
The  experiments  were  done  with  different  hypnotised  subjects,  who  tried
to  describe  or  reproduce  drawings  in  closed  envelopes  held  near  them,
no  one  knowing  the  contents  of  the  particular  envelope.  \Vliat  may
be  regarded  as  success  was  obtained  in  somewhat  over  10  per  cent,  of
the  experiments,  which  is  about  three  times  what  chance  produced  in  a
series  of  parallel  experiments.


248


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


The  book-test  in  question  was  an  A.  V.  B.  one  on
September  12,  1917.  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.  were
both  present,  one  of  them,  as  was  their  wont,  recording.
Feda,  who  has  her  nicknames  for  most  sitters  and  com-
municators, caJls  A.  V.  B.  Ladye— a  nickname  used  by
A.  V.  B.'s  friends  in  her  hfetime  (see  Proc.  XXX.,  p.  344).

F.i  Now,  to-day  she  [A.  V.  B.]  wants  to  give  another  one  [i.e.
book-test].  She's  skipiomg  back  to  [M.  R.  H.'s]  own
books,  it's  the  books  that  go  from  the  window.
[This  particular  set  of  bookshelves  had  been  identified  in
connexion  with  previous  book-tests,  so  its  mention  here
is  not  evidential ;  but  in  view  of  what  follows  it  must
be  remembered  that  at  this  time  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.
were  anonymous  to  IN'Irs.  Leonard.  It  js  believed  that
she  did  not  loiow  their  names,  and  it  is  almost  im-
possible to  suppose  that  she  had  ever  been  at  M.  R.  H.'s
flat.]

F. {s.v. But there couldn't be nineteen books, Ladye  !)

Could  there  be  nineteen  books  in  a  row  ?
S.  Yes.

F. She  saj^s  it's  the  nineteenth  book  from  the  window.
S. On  what  shelf  ?

F. There. (Here  Feda  indicates  the  height  with  her  hand.)

S.  I  would  like  to  get  that  height  correct.  I  will  stand  up-
and  you  shall  touch  me  just  about  where  you  think  that
that  shelf  would  come  on  my  body.  (Feda  touches  sitter's
sldrt  just  barely  below  the  top  of  a  side  pocket  in  the  skirt.).

F.  She  says  it's  the  nineteenth  book  and  the  fifty-twoth  page,
and  it's  near  the  top  of  the  page,  but  it's  not  the  first,
sentence.

S. What's  it  about  ?

F.  Feda  can't  make  this  out.  Oh  what  does  she  mean  ?  This
is  funny  !  (Feda  begins  pulling  at  [an  ornament  worn
by  the  sitter].) She  says,  in  a  way,  it  has  a  bearing  on  this.

S. Do  you  mean  this  [ornament]  that  you  are  touching  ?

1  In  dialogues  quoted  in  this  paper  F. .stands  for  Feda  and  S. for  ■
the sitter. Feda has a way of  interspersing her conversation  with
asides, generally  addressed  to  the  communicator  but  sometimes  appa-
rently  to herself. These asides are enclosed in round brackets  and.
preceded  by  the  letters  s.v.  standing  for  sotto  voce.


Lxxxi.]  An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.  249

F.  Yes.  Well,  she  says,  if  you  go  back  in  your  mind  to  that,
what  you  will  find  on  page  fifty-two,  will  take  you  back
^  to  something  connected  with  that.  (Here  Feda  touches
the  [ornament]  again.)  She's  laughing,  she  says  that
even  though  if  read  in  one  way  it  is  connected  with  that
[ornament],  yet  in  another  way  it  will  fall  into  line
with  the  other  messages.  It  can  be  read  in  two  ways.
She  says,  a  person  reading  it  who  did  not  loiow  the
connection  of  the  [ornament]  would  read  it  only  as
being  appropriate  to  the  other  messages.
[This  means  as  referring  in  some  way  to  psychical  research
which  previous  book-test  messages  to  M.  R.  H.  and
IT.  V.  T.  had  been  interpreted  as  doing.]

F,  [continuing]  Now  Avhat  is  she  doing  '?  Feda  don't  know
what  this  bit  means,  but  she's  showing  Feda  a  picture.
She  just  flashed  it  up  before  Feda.
[Feda  jjroceeds  to  describe  a  picture,  quickly  identified  by
the  sitters  as  a  small  painting  called  "  Le  Canape  Bleu,"
which  was  hanging  close  to  the  book-case  in  question,
a  photogravure  of  it  is  given  opposite.  The  description,
though  not  quite  correct,  is  I  think,  and  I  believe  every
one  would  agree,  unmistakable.  The  description  is  as
follows  :]

F.  It's  somebody  sitting  down  without  many  clothes  on.
[This  was  said  in  rather  a  shocked  tone  suggesting
disapproval  of  the  absence  of  clothes.]  They're  bending
down  like  this.  (Feda  assumes  a  pose,  she  bends  far
forward  from  the  waist,  extends  her  right  arm,  and
drops  her  face  on  to  the  extended  arm.)

S. What  more  can  you  see  ?  .

F.  WeU,  one  leg  seems  to  be  a  bit  over  the  other,  like  this.
(Feda  assumes  a  position  with  her  legs  as  well  as  she
can  do  under  a  skirt  ;  she  elevates  the  right  thigh  till
it  almost  touches  her  body,  dropping  at  the  same  time
the  left  leg  till  the  knee  nearly  touches  the  ground.)
You  can  only  see  one  leg  plainly,  the  other  one  seems
to  be  underneath  it.  [This  is,  of  course,  not  an  accurate
bit  of  description.]  Feda  thinks  it  is  something  that
you've  got.

S. Which  of  us  ?


250


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


F.  Feda  thought  it  was  Mrs.  Una  [U.  V.  T.]  but  Feda  isn't
sure  because  Ladye  can  often  give  things  through  you
[one  for  the  other]  so  Feda  won't  say  which.  Fe|ia
won't  jump  her  on  to  that  just  yet.

S. Ca,n  you  see  what  the  figure  is  lying  or  sitting  on  ?

F.  It's  not  lying,  it's  sitting,  because  Ladye  can  make  Feda
do  it  on  this  chair.  There's  something  that  looks  to
Feda  rather  round.

S. She  gives  this  picture  after  mentioning  the  books  ?

F.  Yes,  while  giving  the  test  about  the  books,  suddenly  that
picture  came  quick  up.  Feda  sees  that  she  hasn't  got
much  clothes  on,  the  woman  hasn't.  Ladye  says  you
must  put  it  in  more  artistic  language  than  Feda's.  Do
you  know,  she's  showing  it  to  Feda  in  a  funny  kind  of
way  like  black  and  Avhity  looking,  the  figure  seems  to
show  up  light  against  dark  ;  but  Feda  can't  see  any
colour.  [The  actual  colouring  of  the  picture  is  very
sombre  and  neutral,  the  white  figure  standing  out  against
a  dark  background ;  the  jet  black  hair  of  the  woman
enhancing  the  black  and  white  effect  which  seems  to
have  been  caught  by  Feda.]  She  says  something  about
something  with  four  lines  going  down.  Feda  thinks  it's
something  to  do  with  v/hat  the  figure  is  sitting  on.  She's
laughing.

S. There's  no  mistaldng  now  where  the  books  are.

F.  She  says,  no,  she  thinks  now  that  she  loiows  them  by
heart.  It's  a  funny  position  in  that  picture.  It's  silly
Feda  thinks,  because  you  can't  see  the  face.  Oh  !  Feda
sees  that  the  fingers  aren't  quite  straight,  Feda  sees  that
three  of  them  are  curved  in  rather,  but  the  forefinger
sticks  out  straighter,  it's  like  this  ;  (Feda  takes  a  pose
with  her  right  hand,  showing  the  second,  third,  and
fourth  fingers  curved  in,  but  the  forefinger  sticldng  out
almost  straight)  Ladye 's  showing  Feda  that  the  wrist
and  hand  make  rather  a  smooth  outline,  not  showing  the
■ bones  or  knuckles  much,  like  you  see  sometimes.

This  ends  all  the  portion  of  the  sitting  connected  with  the
book-test.  The  picture  so  minutely  and  so  nearly  accurately
described belongs, of course, to the external class  of


I.XXXI.]  An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.  251

things — those  known  to  the  sitters  and  possibly  tele-
patheticaily  learnt  from  them.  But  it  should  be  noted
that  the  description  is  not  entirely  in  accordance  with
their  conscious  recollection  of  the  picture.  They  thought
&t  the  time  that  the  description  of  the  position  and
appearance  of  the  right  hand,  which  was  really  accurate,
was  wrong.  We  cannot,  however,  assume  that  they  had
not  retained  a  correct  impression  subliminally.

Another  important  point  to  note  is  that  the  picture
had  been  well  known  to  the  communicator  in  her  life-
time, so  that  her  memory  may  have  been  the  source
of  information.  She  may  have  "  flashed  it  up  before
Feda "  from  her  own  mind.  It  had  been  bought  after
being  seen  at  an  exhibition  by  A.  V.  B.  and  M.  R.  H.
together,  and  it  had  afterwards  hung  in  their  house.
The  room  in  which  the  picture  hung  at  the  time  of  the
sitting  was  not  known  to  A.  V.  B.  in  her  lifetime,^  nor
therefore  the  proximity  of  the  picture  to  the  bookcase.
Articles  of  furniture  and  other  objects  which  had  belonged
to  or  were  familiar  to  A.  V.  B.  were  in  the  room,  and
some  of  these  were  on  later  occasions  well  described  by
Feda  (see  Appendix  B).

I  now  turn  to  the  verification  of  the  part  constituting
the  book-test  proper.  The  shelf  whose  height  had  been
indicated  proved  to  be  one  from  which  the  books  of  two
previous  book-tests  had  been  selected.  These  two  volumes
had  been  temporarily  removed  for  purposes  of  verification
and  annotation,^  and  this  introduced  a  difficulty.  For
owing  to  the  fact  that  the  trance  personalities  affirmed  that
book-tests  were,  generally  speaking,  prepared  at  an  in-
definite time  beforehand — not  selected  and  read  at  the
time  of  communication — Feda  had  been  previously  assured
that  the  books  at  the  flat  would  not  be  moved.  It  was
hoped  by  this  means  to  avoid  doubt  as  to  what  the
order  of  the books  had  been  at  the  time  of  selection.

1  Strictly  speaking,  A.  V.  B.  Imew  M.  R.  H.'s  fiat  in  an  unfurnished
condition,  but  she  died  before  it  was  furnished  and  occupied.

2  Miss  Radclyffe  Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge  made  a  practice  of  includ-
ing in  their  records  a  full  copy  of  the  whole  of  any  page  on  which
a  message  was  stated  to  be.


252


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


Unfortunately  it  produced  in  this  instance  another  ambi-
guity. Were  the  conspicuous  and  carefully  marked  empty
spaces  belonging  to  the  temporarily  absent  books  to  be
counted  as  books  in  arriving  at  the  nineteenth,  or  were
they  not  1  Without  looking  inside  the  books,  it  was
decided  that  the  nineteenth  volume  from  the  window,
in  the  sheH  as  it  should  be,  not  in  the  shelf  as  it  was
at  the  moment,  must  be  taken  as  the  one  meant.  This
proved  to  be  Orval,  or  the  Fool  of  Time,  by  Owen  Meredith.
It  had  belonged  to  the  communicator,  and  had  indeed
been  presented  to  her  by  the  avithor  in  1878.  It  had
not,  to  the  best  of  their  belief,  ever  been  read  or  even
opened  by  M.  R.  H.  or  U.  V.  T.  The  poem  is  in
dramatic  form,  and  the  line  indicated — namely,  one  near
the  top  of  page  52,  but  not  the  first  sentence — in  fact
the  line  following  the  first  full  stop  is  :

To-day — to-morrow — yesterday — for  ever  !

This  line  must,  I  think,  be  regarded  as  conforming  in
some  degree  to  both  of  the  two  things  affirmed  by  Feda
about  the  passage  near  the  top  of  page  52.  Feda  said  it
would  be  found  appropriate  to  the  ornament  which  she
touched,  and  also  in  some  way  to  psychical  research.  Now
the  ornament  had  a  history  causing  it  to  be  regarded  in  a
marked  degree  with  a  sentiment  v/hich  might  be  summarised
in  the  words  of  the  line  ;  and  as  to  psychical  research,  it
was  the  hope  of  proving  the  continuation  of  individual
life  beyond  the  grave,  or,  as  we  sometimes  express  it,
life  "for  ever,"  that  led  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.  to
devote  much  time  and  energy  to  psychical  research.
I  think  then  that  it  must  be  admitted  that  without
any  straining  we  find  up  to  a  certain  point  the  double
appropriateness  required.  Is  it  sufficient  to  exclude
accidental  coincidence  ?  Our  decision  must  depend,  partly
at  least,  on  an  accumulation  of  similar  evidence  in  other
cases.  But  we  may  be  allowed  to  express  a  natural
wish  that  the  description  here  and  elsewhere  had  been
a  little  more  definite — that  we  had,  for  instance,  a
correspondence  as  unmistakable  and  complete  as  that
of  the picture  with  Feda's description  of  it. It  would


LXXXI.]


A71  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


253


have  been  more  satisfactory  if  the  hne  could  have  been
quoted,  or  if  \fe  had  been  told  that  the  words  "  yesterday  "
and  "  for  ever  "  occurred  in  it,  or  that  the  line  implies
continuation  through  life  and  after  death.

As  regards  the  question  of  the  communicator's  memory
here  as  a  source  of  knowledge,  we  may  no  doubt  assume
that  she  had  read  the  poem,  and  read  it  in  this  particular
volume.  But  it  is,  I  think,  very  improbable  that,  if
she  remembered  the  line,  she  associated  it,  in  this  life  at
any  rate,  with  the  number  on  the  page  on  which  it  occurs.
That  is  an  association  that  we  do  not  make  in  reading,
unless  there  is  some  special  reason  for  it.

§  2.

A  Case  where  the  Memory  of  the  Communicator  seems

THE  MOST  LIKELY  SoURCE  OF  INFORMATION.

I  will  next  quote  a  case  in  which  the  memory  of  the
communicator  seems  almost  certainly  to  be  the  source
of  information — so  much  so  that  if  accurately  described
it  serves  as  evidence  of  the  communicator's  identity  in
the  same  kind  of  way  as  would  the  reading  of  a  sealed
letter  after  the  writer's  death.  The  test  was  received
by  Mrs.  Hugh  Talbot,  and  is  one  of  the  earhest  book-
tests  of  which  we  have  a  record.^  It  was  given  on
March  19,  1917,  but  most  unfortunately  was  not  recorded
in  writing  till  the  end  of  December  of  the  same  year.
This,  of  course,  greatly  diminishes  the  value  of  the  record,
though  happily  we  have  the  testimony  of  two  witnesses,
besides  the  sitter,  who  were  aware  of  what  Feda  had
said  before  verification.

Mrs.  Talbot's  report,  written  out  and  sent  to  Lady
Troubridge  on  December  29,  1917,  is  as  follows  :

Two  sittings  \\ith  ]Mrs.  Leonard  were  arranged  for  me
through  Mrs.  Beadon  last  March,  one  for  Saturday  17th  at
5  p.m.  and  the  other  at  the  same  hour  on  Monday  the

1  We  have  pne  earlier — namely  one  received  by  Mr.  Kenneth  Richmond
on  Feb.  13,  1917.  It  conforms  to  the  ordinary  tj-pe,  and  is  distinctly
interesting  though  somewhat  confused. I  do  not  quote  it  in  this  paper.


254


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


19th.  Mrs.  Leonard  at  this  time  knew  neither  my  name
nor  address,  nor  had  I  ever  been  to  her  or  any  other
medium,  before,  in  my  life.

On  Monday  the  first  part  of  the  time  was  taken  up  by
what  one  might  call  a  medley  of  descriptions,  all  more  or
less  recognisable,  of  different  people,  together  with  a
number  of  messages,  some  of  which  were  intelligible  and
some  not.  Then  Feda  (as  I  am  told  the  control  is  called)
ga\'e  a  very  correct  description  of  my  husband's  personal
ajipearance,  and  from  then  on  he  alone  seemed  to  speak
(through  her  of  course)  and  a  most  extraordinary  con-
versation folloAved.  Evidently  he  was  trying  by  every
means  in  his  power  to  j)rove  to  me  his  identity  and  to
show  me  it  really  was  himself,  and  as  time  went  on  I  was
forced  to  believe  this  was  indeed  so.

All  he  said,  or  rather  Feda  for  him,  was  clear  and  lucid.
Incidents  of  the  past,  known  only  to  him  and. to  me  were
spoken  of,  belongings  trivial  in  themselves  but  possessing
for  him  a  particular  personal  interest  of  which  T  was
aware,  were  minutely  and  correctly  described,  and  I  was
asked  if  I  still  had  them.  Also  I  was  asked  repeatedly  if
I  believed  it  was  himself  speaking,  and  assured  that  death,
was  really  not  death  at  all,  that  life  continued  not  so
very  unlike  this  life  and  that  he  did  not  feel  changed  at
all.  Feda  kept  on  saying  :  '"Do  you  believe,  he  does
want  you  to  Imow  it  is  really  himself."  I  said  I  could
not  be  sure  but  I  thought  it  must  be  true.  All  this  was
very  interesting  to  me,  and  very  strange,  more  strange
because  it  all  seemed  so  natural.  Suddenly  Feda  began  a
tiresome  description  of  a  book,  she  said  it  was  leather  and
dark,  and  tried  to  show  me  the  size.  Mrs.  Leonard  showed
a  length  of  eight  to  ten  inches  long  with  her  hands,  and
four  or  five  Avide.  She  (Feda)  said  "It  is  not  exactly  a
book,  it  is  not  printed,  Feda  wouldn't  call  it  a  book,  it
has  writing  in."  It  was  long  before  I  could  connect  this
description  with  anything  at  all,  but  at  last  I  remembered
a  red  leather  note  book  of  my  husband's,  which  I  think
he  called  a  log  book,  and  I  asked  :  "  Is  it  a  log  book  ?  "
Feda  seemed  puzzled  at  this  and  not  to  know' what  a  log
book  was,  and  repeated  the  word  once  or  twice  then  said


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Booh-Tests.


255


''  Yes,  yes,  he  says  it  might  be  a  log  book."  I  then  said
"  Is  it  a  red  book  ?  "  On  this  point  there  was  hesitation,
they  thought  possibly  it  was,  though  he  thought  it  was
darker.  The  answer  was  undecided,  and  Feda  began  a
wearisome  description  all  over  again,  adding  that  I  was  to
look  on  page  twelve,  for  something  witten  (I  am  not  sure
of  this  word)  there,  that  it  would  be  so  interesting  after
this  conversation.  Then  she  said  "  He  is  not  sure  it  is
page  twelve,  it  might  be  thirteen,  it  is  so  long,  but  he
does  want  you  to  look  and  to  try  and  find  it.  It  would
interest  him  to  Imow  if  this  extract  is  there."'  I  was
rather  half  hearted  in  responding  to  all  this,  there  Avas  so
much  of  it,  and  it  sounded  purposeless  and  also  I
remembered  the  book  so  well,  having  often  looked  through
it  wondering  if  it  was  any  good  keej)ing  it,  although
besides  things  to  do  with  ships  and  my  husband's  work
there  were,  I  remembered,  a  few  notes  and  verses  in  it.
But  the  chief  reason  I  was  anxious  to  get  off  the  subject
was  that  I  felt  sure  the  book  would  not  be  forthcoming  ;
either  I  had  thro^vn  it  awaj^,  or  it  had  gone  with  a  lot
of  other  things  to  a  luggage  room  in  the  opposite  block
of  flats  where  it  would  hardly  be  possible  to  get  at  it.
However,  I  did  not  quite  like  to  say  this,  and  not  attach-
ing any  importance  to  it,  replied  rather  indefinitely  that
I  would  see  if  I  could  find  it.  But  this  did  not  satisfy
Feda.  She  started  all  over  again  becoming  more  and  more
insistent  and  went  on  to  say  "  He  is  not  sure  of  the
colour,  he  does  not  know.  There  are  two  books,  you  will
know  the  one  he  means  by  a  diagram  of  languages  in  the
front."  And  here  foUoAved  a  string  of  words,  in  what
order  I  forget  "  Indo-European,  Aryan,  Semitic  languages,"
and  others,  repeating  it  several  times,  and  she  said  "  There
are  lines,  but  not  straight,  going  like  this  " — drawing  with
her  finger  lines  going  out  sideways  from  one  centre.  Then
again  the  words,  "  A  table  of  Arabian  languages,  Semitic
languages."  I  have  tried  to  put  it  as  she  said  it,  but  of
course  I  cannot  be  sure  she  put  the  names  in  that
order.  What  I  am  quite  sure  of  is  the  actual  words
she  used  at  one  time  or  another.  She  said  all  the  names
and  sometimes  "  table,"  sometimes  "  diagram  "  and  some-


6  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivich.  [paet

times  "drawing,-'  and  all  insistenthj .  It  sounded  absolute
rubbish  to  me.  I  had  never  heard  of  a  diagram  of
languages  and  all  these  Eastern  names  jumbled  together
sounded  like  nothing  at  all,  and  she  kept  on  repeating
them  and  saying  this  is  how  I  was  to  know  the  book,  and
kept  on  and  on  '•  Will  you  look  at  page  twelve  or  thirteen.
If  it  is  there,  it  would  interest  him  so  much  after  this
conversation.  He  does  want  you  to,  he  wants  you  to
promise."  By  this  time  I  had  come  to  the  conclusion
that  what  I  had  heard  of  happening  at  these  sittings  had
come  to  pass,  viz.  that  the  medium  was  tired  and  talkmg
nonsense,  so  I  hastened  to  pacify  her  by  promising  to  look
for  the  book,  and  was  glad  when  the  sitting  almost  at
once  came  to  an  end.

I  went  home  thinking  very  little  of  all  this  last  part  ;
still, after  telUng my sister and  niece all that I  con-
sidered the  interesting  things  said  in  the  beginning,  I  did
mention  that  in  the  end  the  medium  began  talking  a  lot
of  rubbish  about  a  book,  and  asldng  me  to  look  on  page
twelve  or  thirteen  to  find  something  interesting. I  was  to
know  the  book  by  a  diagram  of  languages. After  dinner,
the  same  evening,  my  niece,  who  had  taken  more  notice
of  all  this  than  either  my  sister  or  myself,  begged  me  to
look  for  the  book  at  once. I  wanted  to  wait  till  the  next
day,  saying  I  knew  it  was  all  nonsense. However,  in  the
end  I  went  to  the  book-shelf,  and  after  some  time,  right
at  the  back  of  the  top  shelf  I  found  one  or  tAvo  old
notebooks  belonging  to  my  husband,  which  I  had  never
felt  I  cared  to  open. One,  a  shabby  black  leather,  corre-
sponded in  size  to  the  description  given, and  I  absent-
mindedly  opened  it,  wondering  in  my  mind  whether  the
one  I  was  looking  for  had  been  destroyed  or  only  sent
away. To my utter astonishment, my  eyes  fell on  the
words, Table  of  Semitic  or  Syro-Arabian  Languages,"  and
pulling  out  the  leaf, which was  a  long  folded  jjiece  of
paper  pasted  in,  I  saw  on  the  other  side  "  General  table
of  the  Aryan  and  Indo-European  languages." It  was  the
diagram  of  which  Feda  had  spoken. I  v/as  so  taken  aback
I  forgot  for  some  minutes  to  look  for  the  extract. When  I
did  I  found  it  on  page  thirteen. I  have  copied  it  out  exactly.


IXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


257


I  cannot  account  now  for  my  stuiDidity  in  not  attaching
more  importance  to  what  Feda  was  trying  to  say  about
the  book,  but  I  was  so  convinced,  if  any  book  was  meant,
it  was  the  red  book.  This  one  I  had  never  opened,  and
as  I  say  there  was  Httle  hope  of  getting  the  other,  nor
did  I  feel  there  could  be  anything  in  it  my  husband  would
want  me  to  see.  Also  it  was  only  my  second  sitting.
I  knew  nothing  of  mediums  and  the  descriptions  seemed  so
endless  and  tedious. I  can't  see  why  now.

(Signed) Lily  Talbot.

1  Oakwood  Court.  ^

Page  13  of  Notebook.

"  I  discovered  by  certain  whispers  which  it  was  supposed
1  was  unable  to  hear  and  from  certain  glances  of  curiosity
or  commiseration  which  it  was  supposed  I  was  unable  to
see,  that  I  was  near  death.  .  .  .

Presently  my  mind  began  to  dwell  not  only  on  happiness
which  was  to  come,  but  u23on  happiness  that  I  was  actually
enjoying.  I  saw  long  forgotten  forms,  playmates,  school-
fellows, companions  of  my  youth  and  of  my  old  age,  who
one  and  all,  smiled  upon  me.  They  did  not  smile  with
any  compassion,  that  I  no  longer  felt  that  I  needed,  but
with  that  sort  of  kindness  which  is  exchanged  by  people
who  are  equally  happy.  I  satv  my  mother,  father,  and
sisters,  all  of  whom  I  had  survived.  They  did  not  speak,
3^et  they  communicated  to  me  their  unaltered  and  unalter-
arble  affection.  At  about  the  time  when  they  appeared,
I  made  an  effort  to  realise  my  bodily  situation  .  .  .  that
is,  I  endeavoured  to  connect  my  soul  with  the  body  which
lay  on  the  bed  in  my  house  .  .  .  the  endeavom:  failed.
I  was  dead.  ..."

Extract  from  Post Mortem. Author  anon.  (Blackwood
&  Sons,  1881.)

I  do  not  attempt  to  reproduce  the  diagram  of  lan-
guages, which  is  complicated,  but  Feda's  description  of
it  as  having  lines  going  out  from  a  centre  is  correct ;
this  branching  out  from  points  and  from  lines  happens
repeatedly.


258


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


Mrs.  Talbot  wrote,  at  Lady  Troubridge's  request,  to
her  iiiece  and  her  sister,  askmg  them  to  write  down  what
they  remembered. Their  account  follows  :

Miss  Bowyer  Smyth's  Account.

On  March  19,  1917,  niy  aunt,  Mrs.  Hugh  Talbot,  had  a
sitting  with  Mrs.  Leonard.  When  she  came  home,  her
sister,  Mrs.  Fitzmaurice,  and  I,  asked  her  about  it.  Among
other  things  she  said  she  had  been  told  to  look  for  "  a
book,  but  not  exactl}^  a  book,  a  sort  of  note  book."  She
would  know  the  book  by  a  '"  drawing  about  languages  "  in
the  beginning  of  it  and  on  page  12  or  13  she  would  find
something  interesting.

My  Aunt  did  not  seem  at  all  impressed  or  interested,  in
fact  she  thought  the  whole  thing  sounded  such  nonsense
that  she  was  sure  it  was  no  use  looking  for  the  book  ;
the  size  of  which  had  also  been  indicated  by  the  medium
with  her  hands,  namely  about  eight  or  ten  inches  long.

It  was  not  till  after  dinner  that  night  that  Mi's.  Fitz-
maurice and  I  persuaded  her  to  look  for  the  book,  she
was  so  firmly  convinced  it  would  be  no  use.  She  finally
got  out  some  old  and  dusty  note  books  of  her  late
husband's,  and  in  one  found,  first  a  table  of  languages,
and  on  page  twelve  or  thirteen  the  sensations  of  a  man
passing  through  death.  I  remember  the  whole  incident
quite  clearly,  as  it  seemed  to  me  so  unusual  and  interest-
ing, especially  as  my  Aunt  had  evidently  never  opened  or
read  these  n^ote  books  before,  in  fact  it  took  her  a  con-
siderable time  to  find  them  and  she  at  first  thought  she
had  not  kept  them.

(Signed) Doris  Bowyer  Smyth.

Charmouth,  18.12.17.

Mrs.  Fitzmaurice  s  Account.

On  Monday,  March  19,  1917,  my  sister.  Mis.  Talbot,  had
her  second  sitting  with  Mrs.  Leonard.  She  had  already
had  one  very  interesting  one,  so  that  my  niece.  Miss
Bowyer  Smyth,  and  myself  were  very  anxious  to  hear  about
it. My  sister  repeated  as  far  as  she  could  everything  the


Lxxxi.]  An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.  259

medium  had  said  and  mentioned  particularly  that  she  had
been  asked  to  look  for  a  certain  book.  She  asked  the
medium  what  kind  of  book,  and  she  was  told  it  was  a
book  with  a  diagram  or  table  of  languages  in  the  front.
My  sister  said,  is  it  what  they  call  a  "  log  "  book,  and  the
medium  immediately  said  "  Yes,  yes  a  log  book,"  and  that
she  was  to  find  page  twelve  or  thirteen.  My  sister  in
telling  us  spoke  as  if  this  were  nonsense  and  I  personally
did  not  pay  much  attention  about  the  book.  I  was  so
much  more  interested  in  certain  remarks  jDurjoorting  to
come  from  my  brother-in-law,  for  to  me  who  knew  him  so
well  they  seemed  so  exactly  Uke  what  I  could  imagine
his  saying  ;  they  seemed  to  bear  his  personality.

Later  on,  at  the  end  of  dinner,  my  sister  went  to  a
book  case  in  the  dining  room  to  look  for  the  book  (I  do
not  remember  asking  her  to  do  so,  though  my  niece  says
we  both  asked  her  to),  but  she  suddenly  gave  an  exclama-
tion of  surprise  and  handed  me  across  the  table  a  leather
note  book  open  at  page  twelve  and  thirteen  and  there  we
found  an  extract  which  was  plainly  what  she  had  been
told  to  look  for.  It  described  the  sensations  of  a  man  who
had  died,  or  nearly  died.  I  have  forgotten  it  exactly,  but
I  know  it  described  a  man  whose  spirit  was  passing  away,
and  what  he  felt  when  he  saw  the  faces  of  his  jjeople
round  his  bed.  And  on  turning  to  the  front  pages  of  the
book  we  found  the  diagram  of  languages  which  had  been
mentioned  in  his  effort  to  describe  through  the  medium
which  book  the  extract  was  in,  for  it  appears  there  were
two  books  somewhat  similar.

To  us  my  sister's  interview  seemed  intensely  interesting
and  I  have  written  it  down  as  far  as  I  can  exactly  how
I  remember  it.

(Signed) Mabel  Fitzmatjrice.

December  20,  1917.

It  is  evident  that  even  the  discovery  of  the  diagram
of  languages  revived  no  recollection  in  Mrs.  Talbot  of
ever  having  seen  it  before,  and  this  makes  it  difficult
to  suppose  that  the  knowledge  shown  by  the  communi-
cator was  derived  telepathically  from  her. At  the  same


260


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


time  it  will  be  generally  agreed  I  think  that  the  coin-
cidence is  quite  beyond  what  can  reasonably  be  attributed
to  chance.  Further,  the  quotation  on  page  13  of  the
notebook  seems  quite  appropriate  ;  and  we  may  even
regard  it  as  probable  that  had  contemporary  notes  been
taken  of  what  was  said  at  the  sitting,  the  truth  of  the
statement  attributed  to  the  communicator  that  the  quota-
tion "  would  be  so  interesting  after  this  conversation  "
would  have  been  still  more  apparent.  The  incident
must,  1  think,  rank  among  the  best  single  pieces  of
definite  evidence  we  have  for  memory  of  their  earth  life
in  communicators,  and  therefore  of  personal  identity.  But
it  is  scarcely,  strictly  speaking,  a  book-test.


§  3.  ■  •

Mrs.  Beados's  Book-Tests  and  Comments  thereon.

The  interesting  incident  just  described  is  not  a  book-test
proper  because  it  does  not  furnish  evidence  of  know-
ledge by  the  communicator  of  present  facts  not  within
his  memory,  nor  within  the  knowledge  of  living  human
beings.  Of  this  there  are  no  specimens  among  the  book-
tests  so  striking  as  either  the  vision  of  the  picture  described
in  §  1,  which  may  have  been  derived  either  from  telepathy
or  from  memory,  or  as  Mrs.  Talbot's  test  described  in  §  2,
which  looks  like  a  case  of  memory.  Still  there  are  some
striking  cases,  and  to  some  of  these  we  may  proceed.

I  will  begin  with  the'  book-test  received  on  September  29,
1917,  by  Mrs.  Beadon,  the  lady  who,  as  mentioned  above,
introduced  Mrs.  Talbot  to  Mrs.  Leonard.  The  communi-
cator was  her  husband,  Colonel  Beadon.  Mrs.  Beadon
reports  Feda  as  saying  :

In  a  squarish  room  some  books  in  the  corner,  not  quite
in  the  corner  but  running  by  the  wall  to  the  corner  from
the  window  a  row  of  books.  (Feda  indicated  by  a  gesture
of  her  hand  a  shelf  across  a  corner  and  said  '  it  is  not
that.')  Counting  from  right  to  left  the  fifth  book,  p.  71.
Feda  is  not  sure  if  it  is  17  or  71. (After  repeating  both


LXXXI.J


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


261


numbers  several  times  Feda  says  she  is  sure  it  is  page  71 —
second  paragraph  or  about  middle  of  the  page.)  On  page  71
will  be  found  a  message  from  him  to  you.  The  message
will  not  be  as  beautiful  as  he  would  like  to  make  it,  but
you  will  understand  he  wants  to  make  the  test  as  good
as  he  can.  On  the  same  shelf  is  a  book  in  dirtyish
brown  cover  and  a  reddish  book  and  an  old  fashioned
book.

(1)  It  refers  to  a  past  condition

(2)  But  has  also  an  ajiplication  to  the  present.

(3)  It  is  an  answer  to  a  thought  which  was  much  more
in  your  mind  at  one  time  than  it  is  now, — a  question
which  was  once  much  in  your  mind,  but  is  not  now,
especially  since  you  have  known  Feda.

(4)  On  the  opposite  page  is  a  reference  to  fire.

(5)  On  the  opposite  side  is  a  reference  to  light.

(6)  On  the  opposite  side  is  a  reference  to  olden  times. —
These  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  message  but  are  just
tests  that  you  have  the  right  page.

(7)  On  the  same  page  or  Opposite  page  or  perhaps  over
the  leaf  a  very  important  word  begimiing  with  S.

(I  asked  if  it  was  the  top  shelf,  and  Feda  said  "  yes."
It  turned  out  that  there  was  only  one  shelf.)

Verification .

Six  out  of  the  seven  indications  of  the  message  are
found  to  be  clear.

The  room  proved  to  be  the  dining  room  of  [address
given]  my  mother's  house  where  I  was  staying  temporarily.
Mrs.  Leonard  had  never  been  inside  the  house  at  all.
There  was  a  book  shelf  across  the  corner  as  well  as  the
one  on  which  the  test  book  was  to  be  found.  The  room
was  not  square  ;  one  end  was  squared,  the  other  end
octagonal.  There  was  an  old  volume  of  Dryden's  poems
and  the  others  as  described  on  the  same  shelf.  The  fifth
book  from  right  to  left  was  a  volume  of  poems  by  Oliver
Wendell  Holmes  (Routledge  pocket  library  edition).  I  had
never  read  0.  W.  Holmes'  poems — Page  71  and  17  had
the  same  thought  expressed  on  both.


262  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

Page  71,  second  paragraph,  has  the  following:

"  The  weary  pilgrim  slumbers,
His  resting  place  unknown,
His  hands  were  crossed,  his  lids  were  closed,
The  dust  was  o'er  him  strown  ;
The  drifting  soil,  the  mouldering  leaf
Along  the  sod  were  blown.
His  mound  has  melted  into  Earth
His  memory  lives  alone."

[The  commmiicator]  was  killed  in  action  in  Mesopotamia.
He  was  buried  by  chaplain  and  officers  the  same  night
near  where  he  fell.  The  officer  in  charge  wrote  that  all
traces  of  the  grave  had  been  carefully  obliterated  to  avoid
desecration  by  the  Arabs.

(1)  The  poem  ("  The  Pilgrim's  Vision  ")  refers  to  early
settlers  in  America — "  refers  to  a  past  condition."

(2)  It  has  an  apjalication  in  this  verse  to  the  com-
municator's own  case.  He  received  reverent  burial,  his
resting  place  unknown

(3)  It  was  a  question  in  my  mind  constantly  at  one
time  whether  it  would  be  possible  to  identify  the  spot
with  the  help  of  the  officers  present,  and  when  the  war  is
over  to  mark  it  with  a  cross.  I  have  thought  very  little
of  that  lately  and  have  not  felt  concerned  as  I  did  at
first  that  his  grave  was  unmarked  and  unknown.

On  the  opposite  page  is  the  following  verse  ;

(4)  Still  shall  the  fiery  pillar's  ray

Along  the  pathway  shine,

(5)  To  fight  the  chosen  tribe  that  sought

(6)  This  Western  Palestine.

The  reference  to  fire,  light  and  the  journey  of  the
Israelites  fulfils  (4),  (5)  and  (6).

(7)  The  important  word  beginning  with  S  I  cannot  place
definitely.  This  is  the  only  point  that  is  micertain.  Out
of  seven  indications  six  are  fulfilled.  [Mrs.  Beadon  has
since  informed  us  that  there  is  a  poem  caUed  "  The
Steamboat  "  on  the  next  page,  that  this  title  headed  the


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


263


page  in  capital  letters,  and  the  page  was  all  about  steam-
boats. This  was  her  first  book-test  and.  she  was  very
critical,  otherwise  she  does  not  think  she  would  have  said
she  could  not  trace  the  im]Dortant  word  beginning  with
"  S  "  on  the  next  page.  At  the  time  she  thought  it  far-
fetched to  take  it  as  more  than  a  comcidence,  but  now
she  thinks  it  is  what  was  intended.  And  certainly  it
corresponds  to  the  statement  made  about  it.  It  is  an
important  word  on  the  page,  if  not  connected  with  the
message.]

Mrs.  Beadon  goes  on  to  point  out  that  on  page  17,  the
other  page  mentioned  by  Feda,  the  subject  of  an  un-
marked grave  also  occurs,  but  near  the  bottom  of  the
page  ;  and  on  the  opposite  page  appear  the  words  fire
and  sunset  glow.  Between  these  two  pages,  17  and  71,
she  could  not  find  any  page  which  fulfilled  the  conditions
of  the  message  at  all.

The  appropriate  verse  on  p.  17  is  ;

The  Indian's  shaft,  the  Briton's  ball,

The  sabre's  thirstmg  edge.
The  hot  shell  shattering  in  its  fall.

The  bayonet's  rending  wedge,
Here  scattered  death  ;  yet  seek  the  spot,

No  trace  thine  eye  can  see.
No  altar, — and  they  need  it  not

Who  leave  their  children  free.

]\'Irs.  Beadon  tells  us  that  this  seems  to  her  more
appropriate  in  some  w^ays  than  the  verse  on  p.  71  ;  and
though  agreeing  with  what  is  said  below  about  Feda's
frequent  uncertainty  as  to  which  way  to  place  the  numerals
forming  the  page  number — of  which  she  has  herself  had
experience — she  w-rites  :

In  this  case  I  got  the  impression  from  [Feda]  that
"  they "  on  the  other  side  had  chosen  both  [pages]  and
were  uncertam  which  to  proceed  mth.  ...  It  seems  to
me  that  page  17  gave  the  main  message  far  the  best.
But  on  p.  71  they  were  able  to  give  more  of  the  secondary
tests  that  strengthen  it. Taking  both  17  and  71  leaves


264  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.  [part  i

no  room  for  doubt  as  to  the  message,  or  for  coincidence.  '
My  reasons  for  preferring  page  17  are

[I.]  that  it  is  essentially  a  soldier's  message  about  a  i

battlefield. Page  17  gives  the  conditions  of  a  battlefield  i

and  hot  fighting.  ,  i

II.  It  mentions  "  the  Indian's  shaft,  the  Briton's  ball."
It  was  a  feature  of  the  war  in  Mesopotamia  that  mixed  |
troops were employed — Indian and British brigaded to-  •
gether. My  husband  was  commanding  Indian  troops.  |

III.  Above  all  I  was  told  the  main  message  was  about  i
a  question  that  had  occupied  my  mind  a  good  deal  and  \
troubled  me  at  one  time. This  question  was  whether  it
would  be  possible  to  erect  a  memorial. This  is  answered  I
on  p.  17. "  No  altars — and  they  need  them  not  who  leave  i
their  children  free." I  felt  this  was  what  they  wanted
to say — that their achievement would be their  best
memorial.

On  p.  71  there  is  no  reference  to  its  being  a  soldier's  i
message,  no  reference  to  a  battlefield. Nor  is  there  any  j
reference to the  main Cjuestion — altars  " or memorials  |
to-  their  fame. I  ■  felt the expression ''weary  pilgrim"
very  inapplicable  to  the  state  of  mind  expressed  in  his
letters,  written  uj)  to  the  very  day  before  he  was  killed.
So  altogether  I  feel  page  17  gave  the  message  and  p.  71
strengthened  and  supplemented  it.  ,1

That  both  these  pages  should  be  as  appropriate  as  they
are  is  in  any  case  very  remarkable,  and  Mrs.  Beadon's  1
reasons  for  believing  both  to  have  been  intentionally  re-  j
ferred  to  seem  to  me  strong. If  she  is  right,  this  double  j
reference is very interesting and important. It  must,
however, be  borne  in  mind  that  the  kind  of  hesitation
that Feda showed here in deciding  between  two pages  |
with numbers of  which the component  numerals  are  in  )
reversed  order,  is  often  shown  by  her  in  other  cases  when  j
it  is  in  no  way  justified  by  the  content  of  the  pages.
For instance, on September 25, 1918, in an A.  V.  B.  j
test,  Feda  says  :  I

"  What  she  wants  you  to  look  for  is  the  4th  book  from  |
the  left,  on  the  floor. Wait  a  minute,  Ladye,  two  ? Can't  ■


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


265


see  it  Ladye  !  Three  eight,  three  eight,  eight  three  ?  Yes,
eight  three,  half  \\'ay  down,  she  says  not  only  halfway
down,  but  all  that  part  just  there  seems  to  speak  not
only  of  a  place,  but  also  of  an  environment  that  you  and
Ladye  had  been  in  on  the  earth  plane.  Now  Mrs.  Twonnie
[Feda's  name  for  M.  R.  H.]  that's  right,  and  she  hopes  it
will  be  interesting  ;  'cos  she  says  it  is  evidential,  'cos  it
does  speak  about  a  place,  and  it's  personally  evidential,
'cos  it  speaks  of  a  place  that's  connected  with  her.  [Feda
adds  that  on  the  opposite  page  at  the  top]  she  certainly
thought  she'd  got  a  word  that  conveyed  stockings  to  her.

This  test,  in  spite  of  apparent  definiteness,  was  a  com-
plete failure.  Nothing  relevant  was  found  on  either
page  83  or  38,  nor  on  pages  opposite.  Feda  seems  on
other  occasions  to  recognise  a  difficulty  about  the  order
of  the  figures  as  one  generally  affecting  her.  Thus  she
says  in  an  A.  V.  B.  sitting  on  September  11,  1918  :
"  Page  two  0,  twenty  ;  that's  a  nice  number,  'cos
it  couldn't  be  0  two,  you  see."  ^  Whether  the  difficulty
is  genuine  is  of  course  another  question.  It  may  be
part  of  Fela's  affectation  of  childishness.  On  the  other
hand,  as  I  have  suggested  further  on  (p.  365),  it  may
perhaps  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  numerals
constituting  the  number  are  sometimes  perceived  by  Feda
as  built  up  separately  by  the  communicator.

To  go  back  to  Mrs.  Beadon,  there  seems,  so  far  as  we
can  judge  from  eight  sittings,  to  have  been  a  propor-
tion of  success  considerably  above  the  average  in  the
book-tests  received  by  her.  2  One  very  successful  one
occurred  in  the  course  of  a  communication  too  private
to be reported to us, though Lady Troubridge  was

1  Other  cases  of  doubt  on  Feda's  part  as  to  the  order  of  the  numerals
will  be  found  below.

-  The  fact  mentioned  above  (p.  244)  that  each  sitter  has  his  or  her
special  communicator  and  that  for  book-test  purposes  they  form  an
inseparable  pair,  prevents  our  being  able  to  judge  whether  a  higher
average  of  success,  such  as  Mrs.  Beadon's,  is  due  to  quaUties  in  the
communicator,  or  the  sitter,  or  the  combination  of  the  two.  It  is  true
that  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.  had  at  their  sittings  a  communicator
common  to  both,  but  they  were  almost  always  both  present — one  as
sitter  and  one  as  note-taker.


266  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

informed  in  confidence  of  the  evidence  concerning  the
book-test.  Here  is  another  "  message  "  received  on  March
16,  1918. Mrs.  Beadon  reports  :

Feda.  "  A  single  row  of  books  over  a  window  "  (aside  Feda
said  "  You  mean  beside  a  window  of  course — people  do
not  put  books  over  windows— no  ?  ")  "He  will  have  it
that  tlie  books  are  over  a  ^vindow.  The  window  is  not
set  hke  ordmary  windows  with  the  glass  put  in  plain—
this  is  set  differently— the  glass  put  m  strongly  with  thick
kind  of  ridge.  Is  there  a  smik  in  look  about  this  window  ?
Mr.  Will  does  not  know  how  else  to  describe  it  but  you
v/iU  know  what  he  means  by  sunk  in."

About  this  description  Mrs.  Beadon  says  :

In  the  library  at  [Mrs.  Beadon 's  house]  there  is  a  single  row
of  books  over  each  of  two  small  windows. The  window  panes
are  a  fancy  shape  heavily  set  m  lead  which  makes  a  ridge
round  each  pane. The  windows  are  on  each  side  of  the
fire  place  hi  a  recess  sunk  back  from  the  rest  of  the  room.
After statements — one right and one wrong— about  a
picture and a date in another book "  a little  further
to  the  right,"  the  report  continues  :

Feda.  "  The  books  are  on  the  left  and  you  must  count  3rd
book  from  the  left,  p.  92.  It  is  a  message  about  the  Uttle  girl
whose  foot  was  being  treated.^  It  is  what  he  is  wishing  and
desirmg  for  her.  He  is  very  much  interested  in  this  test-
it  is  that  which  he  hopes  she  will  attain  while  she  is  in
the  physical  body. He  wants  her  to,  and  he  thinks  she  will."

Taking  the  books  over  the  left-hand  window  and  count-
ing the  3rd  book  from  the  left  is  a  volume  of  a  set  of
Cowper's  poems. Page  92  has  this  verse  :

Farewell — endued  with  all  that  could  engage
All  hearts  to  love  thee,  both  in  youth  and  age,
In  prime  of  life,  for  sprighthness  enroU'd
Among  the  gay,  yet  virtuous  as  the  old.^

1  This  child,  aged  seven,  and  the  remedial  treatment,  had  been  referred
to  by  the  communicator  at  a  previous  sitting.

2  These  are  "Lines  composed  for  a  memorial  of  Ashley  Cowper,  Esq.,"
and  they  occur  on  the  92nd  page  of  Vol.  III.  of  Cowper's  poems
published  in  London  by  Baldwin  Cradock  &  Joy  in  1817.


LXXXI.]


A)i  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


267


This  corresponds  quite  appropriately  to  the  description
of  the  "  message."  But  unfortunately  Feda  went  on  to
speak  of

"  Page  73  (about  half  way  down  he  thinks)  is  almost
hke  an  allusion  to  her  foot  —  read  it  quite  literally.  It
is  almost  as  if  it  gave  a  clue  to  the  identity  of  the  child."

and  at  this  place  Mrs.  Beadon  found  nothing  appropriate.
A  failure  like  this  accompanying  closely  a  success  cannot
but  weaken  our  estimate  of  the  latter,  and  this  sort  of
mixture  is  common  in  the  book-tests  we  are-  examining,
though  I  think  it  occurs  less  in  Mrs.  Beadon's  than  in
those  received  by  other  sitters.  It  is  impossible  to  say
in  a  case  like  this  whether  some  passage  in  a  book  was
really  perceived  by  the  communicator  but  its  whereabouts
wrongly  described,  or  whether  the  whole  thing  was
imagination.  It  may  have  been  pure  invention  or  guess-
ing on  Feda's  part,  but  if  we  accept  as  not  accidental
the  success  in  the  same  sitting,  it  seems  probable  that
the  erroneous  impression  also  seemed  to  Feda  to  reach
her  from  a  source  outside  herself.  If  it  did  we  may
suppose  that  she  misunderstood  and  repeated  wrongly
what  she  was  told.  There  are  obviously  several  oppor-
tunities for  error,  besides  misapprehension  of  the  passage
alluded  to  ;  for  the  room,  or  the  shelf,  or  the  place
of  the  book  in  the  shelf,  or  the  number  of  the  page,
or  the  part  of  the  page  on  which  the  message  occurs
may  be  wrongly  described.

A  rather  curious  instance  of  persistent  failure  to
describe,  or  at  least  to  bring  to  the  minds  of  the  sitters,
the  place  where  the  book  in  question  was  to  be  found,
occurred  to  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.  in  September  1917.
A  book-test  was  given  and  elaborated  on  September  5  and
at  two  subsequent  sittings,  it  being  stated  that  the
book  was  at  a  flat  which  the  two  ladies  had  visited.
But  they  have  been  quite  unable  to  identify  the  flat.
In  this  instance  and  others^ it  is  possible  perhaps  that

^  Mrs.  Stuart  Wilson  was  given  a  book-test  on  .January  31,  1918,
but  she  was  quite  unable  to  find  the  book-ease,  thougli  its  supposed
surroundings  were  elaborately  described  and  she  tried  several  houses.


268


Mrs.  Henry  Siclgwick.


[part


the  failure  was  in  the  memory  of  the  sitters.  In  the
following  instance,  however— and  in  some  others— it  is
clear  that  the  description  was  in  fault.  Mr.  G.  H.  S.,
on  June  2,  1917,  was  told  by  Feda  :

She  wants  you  when  you  get  home  to  go  to  the  room
where  the  books  are.  She  is  showing  Feda  a  dark  room
with  books  all  round  it  and  she  is  pointing  to  the  third
book  on  the  second  shelf  from  the  floor,  quite  close  to  the
door ;  and  she  says  on  page  19  you  will  find  a  message
from  her.  ,

Mr.  G.  H.  S.,  who,  in  the  course  of  the  sitting,  had
had  some  communications  from  the  same  communicator
which  seem  to  have  been  remarkably  veridical,  says
about  this  :  "I  felt  that  this  was  padding,  as  there  is
no  such  room  or  bookcase  ..."  And  in  reply  to  further
enquiries  he  says  :

I  have  carefully  examined  the  book  indicated  in  every
book-case  in  the  house,  and  there  is  no  possibility  of
result.  I  think  the  whole  section  wrong  because  the  tone
of  the  voice  was  quite  lifeless  and  different  during  this
section,!  and  the  detailed  description  of  the  room  where
the  books  were  supposed  to  be  (much  more  detailed  than
I  have  rej)roduced  it)  was  quite  obviously  wrong,  so  far  as
concerns  every  house  in  which  I  have  lived.

This  failure  in  a  rather  good  sitting  is  more  interest-
ing than  similar  failures  experienced  by  sitters  who  have
received  no  communications,  or  hardly  any,  affording
evidence  of  supernormal  knowledge.  I  may  remark  here
that,  as  far  as  I  can  learn,  the  bad  book-tests  in  the
collection  before  us  usually  occur  at  sittings  otherwise
poor.  The  most  successful  sitters  may  of  course  at
times  have  very  poor  sittings,  and  they  may  at  times
receive  elaborate  book-tests  consisting  of  a  considerable
number  of  items,  which  give  no  good  results  at  all.

There  are  sometimes  indications  pointing  to  genuine
mistakes or confusion as distinct from random  state-

1  Sitters  who  have  sat  often  witli  Mrs.  Leonard  tell  me  that  this
lifeless  kind  of  voice  does  not  always  mean  failure  in  commimication.


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


269


ments.  For  instance,  as  regards  this  point  of  the  book-
shelves meant,  Mrs.  Beadon  had  the  following  experience.
On  November  24,  1917,  which  was  apparently  her  next
sitting  to  that  of  September  29,  at  which  the  book-
test  described  above  (page  260)  was  given,  the  communi-
cator made  a  remark  abont  that  test  being  all  right
except  one  point.  A  little  discussion  about  it  followed
till  Feda  said  :

"  He  is  afraid  he  is  getting  the  conditions  of  the  test
mixed  with  the  one  he  wants  to  give  you  to-day.  He  is
afraid  it  will  spoil  it."

(I  said  we  had  better  leave  it  alone  and  get  the  new
test.)  Feda  was  afraid  they  had  got  it  mixed  with  the
conditions  of  the  former  test.  She  said  "  Anyway  it  is  the
same  shelf — the  same  place  as  last  time."

Particulars  follow  about  other  books  on  the  shelf,  and
then  "  Left  to  right  second  book  page  39  is  a  message.*'
Of  this  some  description  is  given,  and  Feda  proceeds  :
"  He  thinks  .  .  .  about  page  3  is  a  reference  to  some  place
where  you  were  together  long  ago — before  you  were
married."  Mrs.  Beadon  went  at  once  to  her  mother's
house,  where  was  the  shelf  on  Avhich  was  the  book  of  the
previous  test,  but  there  was  nothing  at  all  on  that
shelf  to  correspond  with  the  test."  In  her  room  at  her
own  house  "  there  is  a  book-shelf  in  the  corner  running
towards  the  window  "  which  she  believes  to  be  the  one
that  should  have  been  given.  All  the  particulars  given
about  the  titles,  etc.,  of  other  books  besides  the  test-
book  were  appropriate  ;  and  if  we  may  regard  the
second  and  tliird  books  from  the  left  as  amalgamated,  the
messages  were  right  too — the  third  page  of  the  second
book  having  on  it  the  name  of  an  appropriate  place,
and  page  39  of  the  thix'd  book  an  appropriate  mes-
sage. There  is  too  much  error  here  for  us  to  use  the
case  as  evidential,  but  there  is  a  method  in  the  errors
which  certainly  suggests  mistakes  or  confusion  rather
than  reckless  statements  aided  by  chance.

Later  in  this  paper  I  discuss  some  similar  methodical
errors  as  regards  volumes  and  pages.


270


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


§  4.

Instances  of  Statements  about  Words  or  Sentences
IN  A  Closed  Book  which  turn  out  to  be  Verbally
Accurate.

I  propose  now  to  give  some  cases — there  are  not  very  many
and  they  are  of  different  values  evidentially- — where  a
statement  that  a  particular  word  or  sentence  is  to  be
found  in  a  particular  part  of  a  particular  book  is  found
to  be  correct — cases  where  there  is  no  vagueness  as  to
the  message.

But  before  doing  so  I  may  remark  that  it  not  in-
frequently happens  that  what  Feda  says  about  one  page
turns  out  to  be  true  not  of  that  page  but  of  the  pre-
ceding or  following  page.  For  this  she  and  the  com-
municators have  their  explanations,  which  we  shall  have
to  consider  later  when  dealing  with  their  theories  as  to  the
mode  of  perception.  In  the  meanwhile  it  must  be
remembered  that  by  allowing  the  two  pages  adjacent
to  the  one  named  to  count,  we  multiply  the  chances
of  accidental  success  by  three.

The  first  case  in  chronological  order  which  I  shall
quote  occurred  in  a  sitting  the  Rev.  C.  Drayton  Thomas
had  on  November  8,  1917. He  reports  :

"  Another  book  test  ;  the  same  bookshelf  as  the  last  and
the  fifth  book  on  the  shelf.  Page  65  will  have  a  reference
to  contrast  in  shades  of  colour. Take  literally."

[On  reaching  home  and  examining  the  shelf  Mr.  Thomas]
"  noticed  that  there  remained  the  empty  space  whence  .  .
the  previous  week's  test  book  had  been  taken.  The  fifth
book  on  the  shelf,  neglecting  of  course  the  vacant  space. ^
was  No  Friend  like  a  Sister  by  R.  N.  Carey.  Macmillan.
1908."  [A  book  Mr.  Thomas  had  not  read.  On  p.  64
facing  page  65  was  found  the  sentence  :]  "  Don't  we  all
Ivnow  the  woman  who  is  fond  of  pink,  who  adores  pink
roses  and  chiffons,  and  wears  them  blandly  with  pre-
posterous shades  of  green  and  blue."

^  The  mode  of  counting  adopted  here  was  it  will  be  observed  the
reverse  of  that  adopted  by  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.  on  Sept.  12,  1917  ;
see  above,  p.  232.


Lxxxi.]  An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.  271

In  this  case  we  cannot  at  any  rate  complain  of  want
of  definiteness,  though  we  must  admit  doubt  as  to  the
book  intended.

The  next  I  will  take  occurred  at  an  A.  V.  B.  sitting
on  November  21,  1917.  It  was  a  failure  in  spite  of  the
striking  coincidence,  for  the  word  was  not  found  in  the
right  book,  but  it  may  possibly  be  instructive.  Feda
said  that  in  the  fitst  book  in  the  right-hand  corner  at
about  a  height  indicated,  in  a  certain  book-case,  on
page  12  figures  one  and  two  that  makes  twelve ")
near  the  top  of  the  page  would  be  found  "  Charleroi,^
a  name  like  that.  It  sounds  like  Charleroi  .  .  .  lower
down  nearer  the  middle  is  where  the  message  is.""  Some-
thing is  then  said  about  the  message,  and  two  other
statements  made  about  things  to  be  found  on  that  page
or  possibly  the  next.  Nothing  whatever  that  could,  be
considered  applicable  was  found  in  the  book  and  page
indicated.  But  in  describing  the  shelf  Feda  had  said
that  Ladye  "  shows  books  in  a  row,  and  it  seems  as  if
there's  another  book  pushed  behind  it."'  Now  this
was  not  true  in  the  case  of  the  shelf  indicated  by  its
height  from  the  ground,  but  it  was  true  of  the  shelf
above  this,  and  of  no  other  shelf  in  the  bookcase.  The
book  behind  the  others  was  towards  the  left-hand  end
of  the  shelf,  and  this  led  to  the  first  book  at  the  left-
hand  end  of  this  sheK  being  examined.  There  was
nothing  relevant  on  page  12,  but  on  page  13  facing  it
and  at  the  top  of  the  page  was  the  word  Charolois."  ^
The  coincidence  was  certainly  remarkable,  and  it  is  curious
that  the  indications  given  .should  have  led,  though  in  a
round  about  way,  to  the  word.  On  the  other  hand,
there  was  nothing  else  on  the  pages  in  question  corres-
ponding to  what  Feda  had  said,  and  this  of  course
weighs  on  the  side  of  the  coincidence  being  accidental.

The  next  case  I  will  take — following  chronological
order — occurred in an A.  V.  B. sitting on January  2,

This  was  the  notetaker's  contemporary  rendering  of  Feda's  pro-
nunciation of  a  name  evidently  foreign.

-  The  book  was  a  volume  of  Carlyle's  French  Bevolution.


272


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


1918.  The  items  of  the  book-test  were  fairly  successful
all  through.  After  giving  "  messages "  from  two  books
Feda  contimies  :  ■%

On  p.  57  of  the  first  book  there  is  something  rather
more  personal  than  the  rest  that  she's  given  to-day.  It's
near  the  bottom  of  the  page,  and  she  says  there's  a
distinct  httle  message  there,  which  she  would  like  you  to
hold  like  a  little  light  in  front  of  j^ou  as  coming  from  her,
a  little  light  to  show  you  the  Avay  through  the  difficulties
which  have  been,  and  are  encompassing  you.  She  says
that  sometimes  she  thinks  of  herself  as,  or  rather  it  is
that  she  tries  to  be,  a  little  light  so  as  to  attract  your
eyes,  so  that  while  your  feet  are  stumbling  over  obstacles,
your  eyes  are  fixed  on  a  light  that  you  foUoAV.

The  book  was  Chronique  du  Regne  de  Charles  IX.,
by  P.  Merimee,  and  in  the  three  last  lines  of  p.  57
are  the  words  :  "  Quelques  figures  s'y  montraient  un
instant  avec  des  lumieres  et  clisparaissaient  aussitot."
What  I  have  taken  as  definite  in  the  description  of  the
"  message  "  is  the  word  light.  It  is,  however,  not  stated
that  this  word  will  be  found  in  the  "  message,"  and  I
should  hardly  have  taken  this  as  a  specimen  of  a  word
being  definitely  indicated  and  found,  had  it  not  been
for  another  message  about  lights  on  August  24,  1918,
which  I  will  quote  presently.  First,  I  must  quote  from
the  report  of  the  sitters  on  the  book-test  of  January  2,
1918 — the  one  now  under  discussion — what  they  say  about
the  topic  of  the  "  little  light,"  as  it  shows  that  there
was  an  appropriateness  which  would  not  otherwise  be
obvious. They  say  :

We  will  turn  to  a  recurrence  of  this  topic  of  the  "  little
light"  wliich  is  to  be '  found  during  the  A.  V.  B.  control
which  followed  the  Feda  Control  during  the  sitting.  .  .  .
These  are  the  words  upon  which  we  must  rivet  our
attention.  A.  V.  B.  is  speaking  to  M.  R.  H.  and  says  :
"  Have  you  seen  a  little  light  again  ?  because  I've  tried  to
■show  you  a  little  light  several  times,  and  once  I  thought
you  saw  it,  it  was  quite  lately."  M.  R.  H.  replied  "  Yes,
I  told  Una  about  it." A.  V.  B.  said  : "  I  think  you  were


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


273


writing  at  the  time."  ...  It  was  correct  to  say  that
M.  R.  H.  was  writing  at  the  time  when  she  observed  the
light,  and  apropos  of  this,  M.  R.  H.  remarked  :  ''I  must
be  getting  clairvoyant."  Towards  the  end  of  the  control
A.  V.  B.  returned  to  the  subject  of  the  light,  saying  that
when  M.  R.  H.  saAv  it  it  was  because  she,  A.  V.  B.,  was
showing  it  ;  apropos  of  the  light  A.  V.  B.  remarked  "  that's
me."  She  said  further  that  she  could  not  always  hold  the
light  that  she  showed  very  long.  Or  rather,"  she  added,
addressing  M.  R.  H.,  "  You  cannot  hold  it  in  the  ether."
We  have  in  these  two  references  to  a  little  light  given,
first  during  the  Feda  control  [in  the  book-test]  and  then
during  the  A.  V.  B.  control,  a  mixture  of  the  literal  and
metaphorical.

The  A.  V.  B  book-test  given  nearly  eight  months
later — on  August  24,  1918 — was  very  like  the  one  just
described,  but  the  "  message  "  about  lights  was  more
definite  and  successful,  though  some  other  statements
made  were  not  true.  As  on  Jatiuary  2,  reference  apart
from  the  book-test  was  made  in  the  course  of  the  sitting
to  lights  seen.  Almo.st  at  the  beginning  of  the  sitting
Feda  said  :

She  says  did  you  know  she'd  been  trying  to  show
you  lights  while  you  was  away  ?  She  tried  three
times.

M.  R.  H. What  does  she  think  she  produced  ?

Feda.  She  thinks  she  did  produce  something,  but  not  quite
a  usual  one.  She  says  she  Avanted  to  produce
a  usual  one,  but  she  didn't  l-aiow  why  but  it
seemed  in  a  way  to  alter  when  she  manifested  it.
To  start  Avith,  she  says  it  wasn't  blue,  sh-e  seemed
to  get  from  you  that  it  wasn't.

M.  R.  H. That's  quite  right.

U.  V.  T. From  which  of  us  did  you  get  that  impression  ?

Feda.  From  you  Mrs.  Twonnie.  She  showed  it  three  times,
but  she  thought  IMrs.  Una  (U.  V.  T.)  saw  it  as
well,  in  fact  she  says  there  was  an  occasion  when
Mrs.  Una  saw  it  a.nd  you  didn't.

M.  R.  H. That's  quite  correct.


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

She  says  isn't  it  funny,  she  thought  she  was  making  ,
a  blue  one,  and  didn't  know  it  wasn't  blue  till  |
she  got  it  from  you  afterwards  ;  she  says  she  was  f
speaking  of  it  to  some  one  afterwards,  and  they  i
said  that  that  was  how  materialised  spirits  often  ^
didn't  look  the  same  as  they  thought  they  did.  ^
She's  quite  right,  I  saw  them  on  one  or  two  occa-
sions and  Una  did  too.  '

r

Commenting  on  this,  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.  state  i
that  both

are  in  the  habit  from  time  to  time  of  seeing  hallucina-  ^

tory  lights  .  .  .  which usually  take the  form of  sudden  1

small  blue  sparks  [and]  are  purported  to  come  according  j

to the Leonard phenomena from A.  V.  B.  .  .  . During  j

their  holiday  prior  to  this  present  sitting  M.  R.  H. and  i

U.  V.  T.  had  both  seen  these  lights,  though  unfortunately  '

never  at  the  same  time.  .  .  . After  having  given  the  book-  i  (

test,  which  she  did  towards  the  end  of  the  Feda  control,  j

A.  V.  B. again returned to the subject of  her  "  spirit  t

lights  "  during her  personal control  at the end of the  !

sitting, when she said that U.  V.  T. had been excited  i

when  she  saw  one  of  the  lights,  and  impUed  that  she  had  \

been a little startled. That statement was correct, for  j

U.  V.  T.  had  seen  a  light  over  the  foot  of  M.  R.  H.'s  bed  j

that  had  not  in  the  least  resembled  anything  that  she  had  |

previously  witnessed,  it  was  much  larger  being  about  the  \

size  of  a  large  grape  fruit  but  oval  in  shape  and  somewhat  i

yellow  in  colour.  ^  j

To  return  to  the  book-test,  Feda,  after  describing  the  1

shelf,  says  :  |l  I

It's the first  '  book counting from left to right.  ...

Page  three  six,  thirty-six — wait  a  minute  Ladye — halfway  i

down, there's a message there  .  .  .  showing something  \

about  the — while  you  were  away — wait  a  minute — she  says  |

you'll  have  to  put  several  dashes  before  you've  finished  !  |
It  refers  to  the  lights  she  showed — it's  rather  a  funny  one,
but  it  refers  in  quite  an  appropriate  way  to  the  lights  she
showed. She  says  joerhaps  it's  not  exactly  comic,  but  you'll

I


274
Feda.


M.  R.  H.


LXXXI.]


A71  Examination  of  Bool-Tests.


275


think  it's  a  quaint  way  for  her  to  have  put  it.  Above  it  on
the  same  page,  quite  close  to  it  is  a  funny  word  which
seemed  to  her  like  Daemonee  or  Demonees.  .  .  .

On  p.  36  of  the  book  indicated  ^  beginning  on  the
fifteenth  line  from  the  top  in  a  page  of  twenty-seven
lines  occur  the  following  words  :

"  Over  it  from  time  to  time  swift  flashes  of  light  would
rise  and  tremble  in  the  gloom  like  will-o'-the-wisps  over  a
church  yard."

No  word  like  "  demonees "  appears  on  the  page,  and
this  statement  must  be  reckoned  as  definitely  wrong.
If,  however,  "  demons  "  was  the  idea,  there  is  something
suggestive  of  such  beings  in  the  scene  described.  The
following  is  the  description  in  a  shortened  form  :

"...  ghostly  poplars  .  .  .  night  was  gloomy  and  chilly,
a  low  weird  wind  .  .  .  night-bird  shrieked  painfully  .  .
Far  out  in  front  the  carnage  was  in  full  swing,  the  red
fury  of  war  .  .  .  and  darts  of  flame,  ghastly  red  .  .  .
Round  Fitzgerald  was  the  flat  dead  country,  black  and
limitless,  and  over  it  from  time  to  time  swift  flashes  of
light,"  etc.

Assuming  real  perception  of  the  pages  of  a  closed  book
to  be  possible,  can  we  suppose  such  perception  to  be  a
mixture  of  the  vague  and  the  definite  such  as  may
enable  the  operating  intelligence  to  select  deliberately  a
sentence  about  flashes  of  light,  and  at  the  same  time
to  get  an  impression  from  the  general  sense  of  the  page
that  a  word  like  demon  occurs  in  it  ?

Continuing  the  consideration  of  book-tests  in  which
verbal  exactness  is  shown,  and  returning  to  chronological
order  disturbed  by  the  obvious  advantage  of  taking  the
two  cases  about  "  lights  "  together,  I  will  take  next
one  that occurred  at an  A.  V.  B. sitting on  March  6,

^  The  book  was  The  Brown  Brethren  by  Patrick  MacGill,  London,
1917,  and  had  not  been  opened  or  read  by  either  of  the  sitters.  It
was  one  of  a  lot  of  second-hand  books  bought  to  fill  this  particular
book-case  with  unread  books  with  a  view  to  book-test  experiments.


I


276


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


1918.  Perhaps  we  can  hardly  say  that  exact  verbal
correspondence  is  shown  between  the  description  given
and  the  passage  indicated,  but  it  is  at  any  rate  some-
thing very  near  it.  The  sitters  are  told  to  look  in  the
book-case  in  M.  R.  H.'s  study — second  shelf  up,  the
third  book  from  left  to  right.

the  page  called  two  eight,  twenty  eight,  near  the  top,  is
a  message,  what  she  thinks  you  and  Mrs.  Twonnie  think
about  the  new  feeding  rules,  and  the  dire  consequences
thereof.  That's  a  silly  message  !  You'll  recognise  it  as  it's
something  what  she  heard  you  saying,  she  says  it  describes
it  exactly.

The  book  proved  to  be  the  second  volume  of  Carlyle's
Frederick  the  Great  (London  :  Chapman  and  Hall).  There
was  nothing  relevant  on  p.  28,  but  on  p.  27,  which  is  at
the  back  of  p.  28  on  the  same  leaf,  in  lines  3  to  5,
occur  the  words  :  "  What  pleasure  there  can  be  in  having
your  household  arrangements  tumbled  into  disorder  every
New  Year,  by  a  new-contrived  scale  of  expenses  for
you  I  never  could  ascertam."  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.
tell  us  that  they  had  constantly  said  lately  that  the
food  problem  was  becoming  past  a  joke,  as  one  never
knew  where  one  was  with  regard  to  finances.

The  next  example  occurred,  again  in  an  A.  V.  B.
sitting,  on  April  3,  1918,  when  the  word  "  music  "  was
indicated,  and  found  in  the  passage  referred  to.  The
book  as  described  was  the  sixth  from  left  to  right  on  a
certain  shelf. Feda  continues  :

The  page  what  is  called  twenty  eight,  the  lower  part  of
the  page  (s.v.  something  that  will  remind  you  of  her
music).  She  doesn't  mean  that  it  will  be  just  a  little
reminder,  but  something  that  will  definitely  refer  to  her
music.  And  page  forty,  same  book,  near  top,  something
she  hoped  people  did  not  think  of  her  music  :  she
hoped  they  didn't  regard  her  music  in  that  light.  And
page  72  near  the  top  as  well,  the  way  she  hojaed  they  did
think  of  it.


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


277


Verification.

Upon  p.  28,  eighth  line  from  the  bottom,  appear  the  words
"  an  occasional  wisp  of  music."

Upon  p.  40  nothing  relevant  was  found,  but  on  p.  39,
at  the  back  of  page  40,  on  the  ninth  line  from  the
top  occur  the  words  : "It  only  disgusts  me  !  "

Upon  p.  72,  seventh  and  eighth  lines  from  the  top,
occur  the  words  :  "  She  thrashed  her  own  heart  that
through  her  hands  it  might  warm  his."  On  the  face
of  it  these  last  words  do  not  appear  very  relevant,  but
they  might  perhaps  be  regarded  as  referring  metaphoric-
ally to  emotional  playing  and  singing,  and  A.  V.  B.
was  noted  for  putting  heart  and  feeling  into  her  singing.

Other  statements  made  in  connection  with  book-tests
on  this  occasion  were  some  more  or  less  right  and  some
wrong.

The  next  book-test  which  we  may  call  verbally  exact
that  I  shall  quote  was  an  A.  W.  V.  (see  p.  244)  one  given
on  April  23,  1918.  The  sitter,  Mrs.  Salter,  recorded  for
herself,  and  the  communicator  A.  W.  Verrall  professed  to
be  helped  by  A.  V.  B.  The  book-test  which  consisted  of
several  items  was  interesting  throughout  though  not  always
correct,  and  the  interest  is  added  to  by  the  fact  that
the  books  referred  to  were  in  M.  R.  H.'s  flat,  which  up
to  that  time  had  never  been  visited  by  Mxs.  Salter.
The  item  that  concerns  us  now  is  the  following.  The
row  of  books  meant  having  been  clearly  indicated,  Feda
says  :

The  second  book  from  the  left  he  thinks  on  the  first
page — he's  practically  sure  it's  the  first  page — he  says  it's
rather  silly  but  they  noticed  it — all  the  matter  on  that
page  has  a  kind  of  j)lay  on  Mrs.  Twonnie's  name — her
surname.  Isn't  that  a  funny  one  ?  It  actually  mentions
something  that  is  her  name.  He  doesn't  think  the  first
page  is  a  full  page  it's  part  of  a  page.  It  mentions  her
name  in  another  sense.

There  was  nothing  relevant  in  the  second  book  on
the  shelf  ; but  if  we  may  take  "  the  second  book  from


278


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivich.


[part


the  left  "  as  meaning  the  second  book  from  the  previously
mentioned  one  from  which  two  tests  had  been  given
and  which  was  itself  the  fourth  book  from  the  left-
hand  end  of  the  row,  the  book  referred  to  was  II  Salotto
della  Coyitessa  Maffei,  by  R.  Barbiera  (jNIilan,  1914).

This  mode  of  counting  was,  there  is  some  reason  to
believe,  adopted  by  A.  W.  V.  on  February  28,  1918,
and  it  is  explicitly  mentioned  as  a  possible  one  on  April
11,  1918,  when  Feda  reports  A.  W.  V.  as  saying:  "The
fifth  book,  not  the  fifth  from  the  first,  but  counting  the
first."  The  ambiguity  is  to  be  regretted,  but  assuming
II  Salotto  della  Contessa  Maffei  to  be  the  book  meant,
"  Salotto "  must  be  the  word.  It  occurs  no  less  than
six  times  on  the  first  page,  though  only  half  of  that
page  is  covered  in  print.  In  the  Italian  dictionary
consulted  it  is  given  under  Sala  thus  :  "  Sala  dim.
salotto,  etc.,  aug.  salone,  a  hall  or  saloon,  the  principal
room  of  the  house."  This  seems  to  justify  the  assertion
that  "  Salotto "  represents  M.  R.  H.'s  (Miss  Radclyffe
HaU's)  name.  "  After  all,"  as  Mrs.  Salter  says,  "  the
communicators  were  not  setting  out  to  give  us  a  scholarly
rendering  of  Italian.  They  were  only  making  '  a  kind
of  play  '  on  the  name  Hall,  and  a  certain  license  is
always  permitted  in  puns.'  "

It  detracts  somewhat  from  the  value  of  this  book-test,
as  a  book-test  in  the  strictest  sense,  that  the  word
"  Salotto  "  appears  in  the  title  on  the  back  of  the  book,
though  rather  inconspicuously.  It  cannot  possibly  have
been  in  the  sitter's  (Mrs.  Salter's)  mind,  however,  as  she
had  not  seen  the  books  and  knew  nothing  about  them,
except  that,  a  good  many  book-tests  having  been  taken
from  books  in  M.  R.  H.'s  study,  the  latter  had  recently
substituted  a  fresh  set  of  books.  Mrs.  Salter  did  not
even  know  that  some  of  the  new  books  were  Italian
ones.  She  and  Mrs.  Leonard  were  alone  on  this  occasion.
Mrs.  Leonard  had  never  been  in  M.  R.  H.'s  study.

The  next  instance  I  shall  describe  occurred  in  an
A.  V.  B.  sitting  of  May  15,  1918,  and  concerns  names.
The  book-tests  were  said  to  be  given  jointly  by  A.  V.  B.


liXXXi.]  An  Examination  of  BooJc-Tests.


and  A.  W.  Verrall.  In  the  course  of  them  A.  W.  V.  says
that  he  thinks  of  M.  R.  H.,  U.  V.  T.,  and  ^s.  Salter
as  the  bridge  builders. Feda  continues  :

F.  He says  bridges can't be builted  from one  side

only,  he  says  it  must  be  prepared  from  both  banks,
and  he  says  everything  that  is  done  in  the  way
of Psychical manifestation, always has to  be
done  from  both banks ;  it's  an  alternative  name
for you [s.v. Bridge builders  !). Feda  thuiks
that's  a  nice  name  ! Now,  about  the  middle  of
that  second  shelf  down,  there's  a  book  whose  title
suggests  what  it  is  youre  spamimg  by  buildmg
the  bridge. Spanning  ? Yes,  what  you  are  span-
ning over,  he  says,  is  a  better  way  to  put  it,  by
building  the  bridge. He  thinks  that  one  ought  to
jump  at  you,  it  ought  to  be  a  very  easy  one  to
find,  ifs  what  you're  bridging  over,  what  you're
ehminating by building the bridge. Now,  when
you've  got  that  book,— Mr.  Arthur's  [Feda's  name
for  Dr.  Verrall]  found  the  book,  but  there  is  a  bit
more  in  it  than  that. Ladye  says,  take  the  book
out and open it,  and  inside  the book, at  the
very beginning {s.v. Ar-lett-er-sia). It  doesn't
start  with  R,  it  starts  A^dth  Let,  as  near  as  Feda
can  get  it,  ifs  hke  Leticier,  it's  a  word  that  the
book  is  about,  but  it  should  be  mentioned  at  the
beginning  part ;  it's  a  funny  sounding  name.
M.  R.  H. Of  a  person  or  a  thing  ?
F.  A  person.

M.  E.  H. Is  she  sure  about  that  ?

F.  Yes. Now  wait  a  minute,  that  isn't  what  she  reaUy

wanted  you  to  open  the  book  for  ;  that  just  came
into  her  mind  and  she  remembered  it  ;  but  at  the
beginning  before  you  come  to  the  proper  reading
part,  there's  something  that  will  remind  you  of
something  that  you  and  she  did  together  in  the
early  days,  it's  connected  with  circumstances  and
conditions  that  were  round  you  for  some  months,
not just for a  week or two. [S.v.  Yes,  wait


280


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


a  minute.)  It  was  a  happy  period,  not  ?^whappy.
But  Ladye  says  that  all  the  early  part  was  happy,
even  though  for  a  while  she  was  anxious  about
you,  she  was  anxious  about  you,  it  was  a  happy  time.

No  appropriate  title  was  found  exactly  in  the  middle
of  the  shelf,  but  the  seventh  book  from  the  exact  middle
towards the  left was called The Unseen World,  which,
since  it  is  between  this  world  and  the  unseen  world  that
the metaphorical bridge extends, seems sufficiently  to
fulfil  the  requirements. The subject-matter of  the  book
confirms this, for as M.  R.  H.  '  and U.  V.  T. put it  :
"The  whole  object  of  the  book  is  to  point  out  in  most
unmeasured  terms  the  fact  that  an  absolutely  impassable
gtdf  lies  between  those  in  this  world  and  those  in  the
next." The  author  of  this  book  is  Alexius  M.  Lepicier,
whose  name  appears on  the title  page,i and  also  upon
the  page  prior  to  the  preface  in  a  paragraph  consisting
of  the  written  authority  from Rome  for  the  publication
of  the book. The  resemblance of  Leticier  and  Lepicier
seems  too  close  to  be  attributed  to  chance,  and  Feda's
pronunciation of the name was rendered by  the
note-taker before verification.^ The syllable  rendered
"  Ar  " in  the  first  attempt  at  the  name  may  have  been
meant  for  the  initial  of  the  Christian  name*^  pronounced
as it would be in French. The book, however, is  in
English,  and  there  is  no  indication  of  its  being  a  trans-
lation, though the name of the author is  apparently
French. Feda  is,  of course,  wrong  when  she says  that
"  Leticier  is  a  word  that  the  book  is  about." In  -this
connexion  something  said at the next A.  V.  B.  sitting
(May  22,  1918)  may  be  referred  to. Feda  said:

She  wants  to  explain  she's  got  to  be  very  careful,  'cos
once  or  twice  when  she's  been  sensing  what  she's  thought

lit  also  appears  without  initials  of  Christian  names  on  the  back  of
the  book,  which  fact,  as  in  the  last  case,  diminishes  the  value  of  the
test  as  a  book-test  in  the  strict  sense.

2  The  note-taker  (U.  V.  T.'s)  first  impression  was  that  Feda  was
trying  to  say  the  English  Christian  name  Letitia  with  an  "  s  "  sound
instead  of  an  "  sh  "  sound  to  the  second  "  t."  This  she  corrected
to  "  Leticier."  .  ■


LXXXI.]


A71  Exarnination  of  Book-Tests.


281


was  only  the  title  of  a  book,  she's  got  the  name  of  the
author.  On  one  occasion  at  any  rate,  she  got  the  name
of  the  author  mixed  up  with  it,  and  thought  that  it  was
part  of  the  title,  and  she  would  like  you  to  be  prepared
for  that,  in  case  she  does  it  again.  .  .  .  Do  you  know
she's  sure  that  on  one  occasion  the  name  of  the  author
suggested  more  to  her  than  the  title,  and  if  they  happens
to  be  very  close  together  she's  very  likely  to  get  'em
mixed  up,  'cos  she  senses  a  little  run  right  through.  And
she  says  if,  as  sometimes  happens,  the  author's  name  is
only  on  the  inside — (s.v.  It  don't  happen)  she  says  yes  it
does — she  wouldn't  be  so  likely  to  get  it  mixed.

It  is  thought  by  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.  that  these
words  probably  refer  to  the  mistake  made  a  week  before
in  connection  with  Lepicier,"  but  the  author's  name
is  not  very  close  to  the  title,  at  least  not  on  the  outside.

The  same  Latin  paragraph  preceding  the  preface  of
this  book,  and  authorising  its  publication,  which  contained
the  name  Lepicier,  also  contained  in  a  conspicuous  way
the  word  "  Romae."  This  reminded  M.  R.  H.  of  a
very  happy  period  in  1912  when  she  and  A.  V.  B.
stayed  for  several  months  in  Rome.  It  was  happy  in
spite  of  the  fact  that  M.  R.  H.  caught  Roman  fever,
and  was  for  a  time  seriously  ill  and  A.  V.  B.  anxious
about  her.  They  took  a  keen  interest  in  the  clerical
side  of  Roman  life  during  that  visit,  so  that  the  clerical
wording  of  the  paragraph  is  in  an  appropriate  key.
This  item  of  the  book-test  is  also  therefore  successful.
There  is  a  good  deal  that  is  of  interest  throughout  the
book-test  of  this  day,  and  I  shall  refer  to  it  again  in  §  7.

The  next  to  be  referred  to  in  the  present  connexion
was  also  more  or  less  successful  all  through.  It  occurred
in  an  A.  V.  B.  sitting  on  August  28,  1918.  The  shelf
having  been  clearly  indicated  and  the  fifth  book  from
left  to  right  in  it  specified,  Feda  goes  on  :

On  page  what  is  called  one  four  of  this  book,  fourteen,
wait  a  minute,  something  made  her  feel,  gave  her  a  feeling
of  heat,  something  hot,  heat,  about  half  way  do^vn  that


1


282  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

I^age.  But  she'd  better  explain,  it  might  come  from  two
sources,  it  might  come  from  a  mention  of  heat,  like  a  hot
sun,  or  a  hot  fire,  or  it  might  come  from  a  mention  of
great  anger,  but  spoken  of  as  heat  ;  in  fact  she'd  be
obliged  if  you'd  tell  her  which  it  is  next  time  you  come.

The  book  indicated  proved  to  be  Larhneadotv,  by
MarmacUike  Pickthall,  and  had  not  been  read  or  opened
by  the  sitters.  The  pages  have  thirty-three  lines.  On
the  sixteenth  line  of  p.  14  occur  the  words  "  ardent
patriot,"  which  give  heat  in  the  metaphorical  sense,
and  on  the  fifteenth  line  of  p.  15,  facing  p.  14,  occurs
the  word  "  bonfire,""  which  gives  heat  in  the  literal
sense.  When  the  book  is  closed  the  words  "  ardent "
and  "  bonfire  "  almost  touch  each  other.  There  is  a
certain  interest  in  this  in  view  of  the  alleged  liability
to  confusion  between  two  pages  facing  each  other.  It
may  be  added  that  a  good  deal  of  angry  feeling  con-
nected with  the  bonfire  is  referred  to  in  the  chapter
in  which  pp.  14  and  15  occur.

The  imperfect  knowledge  claimed  by  the  communi-
cators of  passages  referred  to  in  book-tests — and  the
kind  of  imperfection — are  well  illustrated  by  this  case.
Sometimes  it  is  claimed  that  their  knowledge  is  increased
after  the  tests  have  been  verified  by  the  sitters.  For
example,  on  October  2,  1918,  in  a  discussion  as  to
whether  the  beginning  or  the  end  of  a  sitting  was  the
more  favourable  time  for  book-tests,  Feda  says  of  A.  V.  B  :

F.  She  says  that  now  she's  so  much  more  in  touch  with
you  and  Mrs.  Twonnie  when  you're  away  from  here  [i.e.
from  the  medium's  house],  she  is  able  to  know  whether
the  book-tests  are  good  or  bad.

The  next  case  of  exact  indication  I  shall  quote  is
rather  different  in  character.  It  occurred  in  the  A.  V.  B.
sitting  of  October  2,  1918,  from  which  I  have  just  quoted.
On  this  occasion  the  book-test  items  were  not  as  a  whole
very  satisfactory.  There  was  nothing  that  could  be
described  in  an  unqualified  manner  as  a  failure,  but  the
correspondence between the indications given and  the


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


283


words  or  passages  found  were,  I  should  say,  in  the
case  of  five  items  either  not  striking  or  rather  forced  ;
and  in  a  sixth,  where  the  appropriateness  of  the  message
found  was  clear  and  decided,  there  was  not  only  an
ambiguity  as  to  which  of  two  rows  of  books  was  meant,
but  also  a  difficulty  in  knowing  how  to  count  the  page.
The  seventh  item  is  the  one  I  am  about  to  quote.
After  speaking  of  a  book  whose  title  suggests  submarines
and  the  harm  they  do,  which  the  sitters  afterwards
identified  as  The  Still  Water  Tragedy,  Feda  said  :

P.  {s.v.  Wait  a  minute,  can't  see  it  ! Some  one  lying

down  ?)  Feda  don't  understand  what  she  means,
but  she  keeps  on  showing  Feda  a  little  picture  as
if  some  one  was  lying  down  in  it.  This  picture
seems  to  have  something  very  white  either  round
it  or  very  close  to  it,  "cos  she  shows  Feda  like  a
gleam  of  white.

U.  V.  T. What  is  this  connected  with  ?

F.  She  says I  want  you  to  bear  in  mind  at  what

point  in  the  sitting  I  give  this  "  ?

U.  V.  T. Slie  gives  it  after  reference  to  submarines.

F.  She  says  "  Well,  when  you  get  to  that  point  you

should see the pictme." (Here Feda  suddenly
bends  sideways  in  her  chah.) Feda  feels  they're
not  lying  on  their  backs. Oh  ! she  says  she  must
remark  by  the  way  that a  person  lying  down  is
in  no  way  reminiscent  of  submarines,  but  when
you  find  this  person  lying  down,  you'll  find  in  a
very near vicinity something that, to a  great
extent, is  connected  with submarines. She  says
she  knows  she's  correct  about  this,  but  that  though
what  she's  giving  is  correct  to  the  letter,  when
you finds  it it will be different to what  you
expect. NoAv she says "Is it clear that  I'm
giving  this  picture as  likely  to be  foimd  after
you've found the book to do with  submarines,
and that after you've found the picture  you'll
again be reminded of submarines, though  the
picture has nothing whatever to do with  sub-
marines."


284


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Now  about  three  weeks  before  this  sitting  the  books
in  that  bookcase — the  large  one  in  M.  R.  H.'s  study,  from
which  a  good  many  book-tests  had  been  taken — had
by  M.  R.  H.'s  orders  been  entirely  rearranged  by  a
housemaid,  who  on  one  or  two  of  the  shelves  had  put
two  rows  of  books,  with  the  smaller  ones  at  the  back,
and  it  was  in  the  back  row  that  The  Still  Water  Tragedy
and  a  book  apparently  referred  to  just  before  had  been
found.  To  get  at  them  for  purposes  of  verification  the
books  in  front  of  them  had  to  be  moved,  and  among
these  was  a  book  called  The  Celebrity  at  Home,  by
Violet  Hunt,  which  stood  exactly  in  front  of  The  Still
Water  Tragedy.  On  the  side  of  the  cover  of  this  book,
invisible  as  the  book  stood  in  the  shelf,

is  [to  quote  the  recorders]  a  picture  representing  an
interior.  In  the  foreground  is  a  little  girl  lying  stretched
out  sideways  in  a  large  low  arm-chair  with  her  cheek
upon  her  hand,  and  the  angle  at  which  the  child  is
reclining  is  such  that  she  must  be  said  to  be  lying  down.
This  picture  is  coloured,  and  in  it  are  two  very  striking
splashes  of  white.  The  child  to  begin  with  is  dressed
entirely  in  white,  and  her  head  is  surrounded  by  the  white
upholstery  of  the  back  of  the  chair ;  then  at  the  back,
but  to  the  left  of  the  child,  is  another  large  splash  of
white,  representing  the  window  in  the  room.  [White,  they
continue,]  is  by  far  the  most  consj)icuous  and  striking
[element  in  the  colouring.]

If  we  suppose  that  the  communicator  knew  that  the
book  with  the  picture  on  it  would  have  to  be  moved
to  find  the  book  she  connected  with  submarines,  she
would  be  right  in  thinldng  that  "this  picture  is  hkely
to  be  found  after  youVe  found  the  book  to  do  with
submarines."  In  the  further  statements  "  that  after
you've  found  the  picture  you'll  again  be  reminded  of
submarines,"  and  that  what  would  remind  them  would
be  something  in  the  very  near  vicinity  of  the  picture,
it  seems  probable  that  the  second  book  from  The  Celebrity
at  Home  in  the  same  row  was  referred  to.  This  book
was  A Poor  Mans House, by  Stephen  Reynolds.  The


LXXXI.j


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


285


whole  book  deals  with  the  sea  and  the  life  of  fishermen,
and  it  had  been  a  favourite  of  A.  V.  B/s,  who  had
read  it  aloud  to  M.  R.  H.

This  incident  of  the  picture  is  interesting,  because,
though  the  description  is  less  detailed,  it  is  of  the  same
nature  as  that  of  the  "  Canape  Bleu "  painting  given
on  September  12,  1917  (quoted  above,  p.  249),  and
that  of  the  little  statuette  of  Adeline  Genee,  which
followed  at  the  sitting  under  discussion  (see  Appendix  B).
But  it  differs  in  the  very  important  particular,  that
whereas  the  knowledge  shown  of  the  painting  and  the
statuette  may  have  been  derived  by  telepathy  from
the  sitters,  aided  perhaps  by  the  memory  of  the
communicator,  neither  of  these  sources  seem  likely  to
have  been  available  in  the  same  way  in  the  present
case.  For,  as  already  said,  the  picture  was  not  visible
as  the  book  stood  on  the  shelf  ;  and  even  if  M.  R.  H.
and  U.  V.  T.  had  any  subconscious  memory  of  the
picture  on  the  book  at  all,  they  were  not  con-
scious of  the  presence  of  the  book  in  the  shelves.  It
is  true  that  M.  R.  H.  had  read  the  book  long  ago,  and
must  then  have  known  of  the  picture  on  the  cover,
but  U.  V.  T.  had  never  read  it,  and  both  are  confident
that  they  had  not  seen  it  in  referring  to  books  in  the
bookcase.  There  is  no  particular  reason  to  suppose
that  A,  V.  B.  had  read  it,  though  she  may  have  done  so.

The  perception  of  this  picture  may  therefore  have
been  of  the  same  nature  as  that  of  insides  of  books,
and  it  is  for  that  reason  that  I  have  classed  it  with
book-tests  here.  At  the  same  time  it  was  not  inside
a  book,  and  therefore  was  more  likely  to  have  been  noticed
than  a  "  message  "  in  a  book -test  proper.  For  instance,
the  housemaid  who  re-arranged  the  books  may  have
observed  it  particularly.  Moreover,  we  have  no  case
of  the  inside  of  a  book  being  visualised  by  Feda  (as
distinct  from  the  communicator)  in  the  way  this  picture
was. For  a  discussion  of  this  point  see  below  p.  370.

It  is  of  some  interest  that,  immediately  after  the
book-tests  of  this  day,  Feda  went  on  to  describe  with
considerable  accuracy  various  things  in  the  room.  Part


286


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


of  what  she  said,  and  in  particular  the  description  of  the
statuette  of  Adehne  Genee  referred  to  above  is  quoted  in
Appendix  B,  p.  386.  Peda  was  apparently  in  a  visualising
vein  that  day.

I  will  conclude  this  set  of  cases,  where  the  corre-
spondence between  Feda's  statement  and  the  passage
indicated  is  verbally  defiziite,  with  a  quotation  from  an
A.  W.  V.  sitting  on  January  4,  1919.  U.  V.  T.  was
recording  for  the  sitter,  Mrs.  Salter.

F.  ...  books  where  you  {i.e.  Mrs.  Salter]  live,  wait  a
minute,  window — window — near  window — side — side — You
never  can  show  me  books  plainly  there  !  Feda  means
where  you  Uve  ;  he  never  can  ;  I  get  at  it  only  by
worrying  him,  but  he  keeps  on  saying  "Books  near  a
window."  [Mrs.  Salter  was  living  at  the  time  at  The-
Crown  House,  Newport,  Essex.  There  is  only  one  shelf  of
books  there  near  a  Avindow.  These  were  standing  in  a
single  row  on  the  same  wall  as  the  window,  immediately
to  the  right  of  it,  in  a  small  unused  bed-room.  They  had
been  placed  there  some  weeks  earlier  by  Mr.  Salter  with  a
view  to  book-tests.  Some  of  them  were  new  books  bought
by  him  in  London  and  placed  in  the  shelf  without  Mrs.
Salter  seeing  them,  and  some  of  them  were  taken  from
other  shelves  in  the  house.  Mrs.  Salter  loiew  nothing  of
the  order  in  which  these  books  were  placed,  and  did  not
enter  the  room  in  which  they  were  until  she  went  there
to  verify  this  test.  Information  about  these  books  cannot
therefore  have  been  derived  entirely  from  her  mind.]

F.  ...  About  the  middle  of  this  shelf,  as  he  stepped  back
and  looked  at  it  something  made  a  contrasting — What  did
you  say  ?  A  contrasting  note  just  about  the  middle.  .  .
What  he  gives  me  the  idea  of  is  that  the  contrasting  note
is  colour,  and  rather  striking.  [Mrs.  Salter  comments  :
There  are  several  rather  marked  contrasts  in  the  colour  of
these  books  ;  about  the  middle  of  the  shelf  a  book  in  a
bright  yellow  paper  cover  was  standing  next  to  a  green
book.]  Go  to  the  left  of  that  shelf,  the  second  book  from
the  left. What  did  you  say  ? An— what  ? While  he  was


Lxxxi.]  An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.  287

feeling  for  this  book  he  got  an  idea  of  Wedgewood,  china,
Wedgewood;  he's  not  sure  if  it  was  from  the  book  or
very  close  to  it,  but  as  he  wented  to  feel  that  second
book  the  words  Wedgewood  china  seemed  to— he  laughs,
and  says  they  seemed  to  smite  him.  He  says  it  sometimes
seems  when  you  get  em  well,  they  seems  to  do  that  ;
(Feda  smites  her  hands  together).  [The  only  interpretation
Mrs.  Salter  can  suggest  of  this  is  that  the  three  books  on
the  left,  including  the  test  book,  are  bound  in  shghtly
varying  shades  of  light  blue,  resembling  Wedgewood  china
blue,  with  patterns  stamped  on  them  in  black.]

We  may  take  it  then,  that  the  book  meant  and  its
place  is  sufficiently  well  indicated.  The  first  test  given
is  somewhat  spoilt  by  a  muddle  about  the  page.  Feda
first  says  25,  and  corrects  this  to  35,  saying  the  3  was
badly  made  by  the  communicator.  There  was  nothing
appropriate  on  p.  35,  but  on  p.  25  there  was  a  more
or  less  appropriate  sentence.  It  would  not,  however,
have  been  a  good  specimen  of  the  kind  of  exact  corre-
spondence wdth  which  we  are  dealing  at  the  present
moment. Feda  then  continues  :

F.  Page  15  of  the  same  book,  half  ^vay  down  or  a  little
above  perhaps,  it  speaks— wait  a  minute,  speaks— do  you
want  to  give  the  position  exactly  ?  He's  makmg  a  fine
across  halfway  down  the  page,  and  the  position  is  about
a  quarter  of  an  inch  above  that  line,  he's  got  a  reason
for  doing  that,  on  that  line,  a  quarter  of  an  inch  above
half  way  down  that  page,  there's  a  word  or  words
which  will  form  a  cross-correspondence.  .  .  .  Can't  you
tell  Feda  what  it  is  ?  He  says  "No  I  can't."  That's
why  he's  given  the  position  on  the  page,  that's  so  as
you  won't  have  to  look  about.

S. Can  he  say  ^^•hat  it  corresponds  with  1

F.  Yes  he's  trying.  Well  he's  taking  me  a  journey  to  a
place  by  the  sea  ...  ;  some  one  in  this  place  is
connected  with  the  other  half  of  the  cross-correspondence.
[To  communicator]  Can't  you  give  me  a  letter  ?  G.  G.  G.
is connected with it.  Not C m.  Arthur?)

No,  G. An  attempt  is  being  made  to  get  this  through


288


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


in three different quarters. You're one of  the three.  I
He  means  through  the  book  test. And  there  are  two
others, that's  why  he's  so  careful  about  the  position.
He  thinks  three  particular  words  should  be  taken  from
this  line. He  feels  it  has  already  come  through  in  one
quarter.  .  .  . One,  he  feels  sure  has  been  given  through,
either  wholly  or  partly, and  a  letter  M  is  connected  \
with  it  too,  a  person. Is  it  on  the  earth  plane  or  in  I
the  spirit  world  ? No  he  doesn't  seem  to  want  to  be
asked. Oh  ! a  long  pole.

S. A  long  pole  ?  '

F.  I've  got  to  say  those  Avords,  and  he's  pretending  to  show
me  a  long,  long  pole  in  his  hand.  (Feda  indicates  by
gesture  with  extended  arm  some  one  grasping  a  long
upright  pole  or  stick.)

S. Like  a  staff  ?

F. It's sticking up and it looks straight. (Again  indicates
holding  on  to  a  perpendicular  stick.) But  there's  some-
thing at  the  top  what  takes  off  the  straightness — er —
Mr. Arthur says that's very important. While he's  '
telling  me  that,  I  get  a  funny  feeling  as  if  the  funny  .
pole  means  something  very  important.

The book designated proved to be Daisy Miller,  by
Henry  James. In  the  middle  of  p. 15  is  the  following  j

passage :  'i

"  I  should  like  to  know  where  you  got  that  pole,"  she  \
said.  i
■'  I  bought  it  !  "  responded  Randoljih.  ,

This  passage,  Mrs.  Salter  found,  begins  almost  exactly  i

a quarter of an inch above the middle of the page,  :

a  line drawn at  the  middle running  along  the bottom  (

of  the word "pole." This pole is described  on  p. 14  I

as  an  alpenstock,  and  on  p.  12  as  a  long  alpenstock,  so  ;

there  is  no  doubt  as  to  its  length  ;  but  there  is  nothing  j

to  suggest  that  it  is  anything  but  straight  all  the  way  up.  j

It  has  been  suggested  to  me,  however,  that  fancy  alpen-  ^

stocks,  such  as  tourists  buy,  often  have  a  chamois  horn  i

fixed  at  the  top,  and  that  it  would  be  quite  natural  to  j

imagine  Randolph's  to  be  of  this  type.  ^

.-  !


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


289


As  regards  cross-correspondences,  I  am  not  aware  that
any  connected  with  pole  "  has  occurred.  It  is,  however,
noteworthy  that  Mrs.  Stuart  Wilson  who,  as  readers  of
the  S.P.R.  Proceedings  are  aware,  has  experimented  with
Mrs.  Salter  on  cross -correspondence  lines,  has  christened
her  subconscious  mind  Randolph,"  after  "  Randolph
jVIiller,  whose  family  couldn"t  live  up  to  him  — i.e.  the
Randolph  mentioned  in  the  passage  from  Daisy  Miller
quoted  above.  This  fact  had  been  recorded  before  the
book-test  was  given,  but  has  never  been  published.

I  here  conclude  instances  of  book-tests  in  which  the
passages  to  be  found  are  described  with  verbal  accuracy  ;
but  it  will,  I  think,  be  worth  the  student's  while  to  refer
to  some  cases  given  in  the  next  section,  which  in  some
ways  or  some  degree  approximate  to  the  verbal  exact-
ness of  correspondence  between  the  message  as  indicated
and  as  found  which  has  characterised  the  cases  in  the
present  section.

§  5.

Some  Miscellaneous  Cases.

I  WILL  again  follow  chronological  order,  and  take  as
the  first  case  in  this  section  an  A.  V.  B.  book-test  of
September  19,  1917.  It  is  interesting,  because  the
"  message  found  in  the  exact  place  indicated  was  quite
remarkably  appropriate,  though  unfortunately  only  very
vaguely  described  beforehand  ;  and  because  through  refer-
ence to  an  ornament  which  had  been  possessed  by  her
the  communicator  seems  to  show  knowledge  of  the  book
in  which  the  ''  message  "  was,  though  apparently  unable
to  give  its  name  directly.  The  case  has  some  analogy
with  the  A.  V.  B.  book-test  of  the  previous  week,
September  12,  1917,  described  above  (p.  248).  I  will
now  quote  the  record.

r.  She  says  she  does  think  she's  getting  on  well  with

book  tests.
M.  R.  H. Yes  she  is.


290


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivich.


[part


F.  She's  got  another  one. She  thinks  you  may  laugh

at  this  one,  at  all  events  at  a  part  of  it.  She's
laughing  herself.  She's  touching  something,  Mrs.
Twonnie  {s.v.  What  do  you  say  Ladye  1  with
glass  on  ?)  Mrs.  Twonnie,  she  keeps  on  showing
Feda  as  if  she  had  a  ribbon  hanging  down  with
a  piece  of  glass  on  it.  It's  like  a  black  ribbon.
She's  put  it  on  herself,  you  see.  .  .  .  It's  some-
thing she  wore  on  the  earth  plane,  and  the
ribbon  hangs  down  to  about  here,  to  her  waist.

Further  attempts  are  made  to  describe  something
dangling  on  that  black  ribbon,  rounded,  but  not  like  a
ball,  shiny,  light  coloured,  and  not  very  big,  with  a
pattern  on  it,  in  shape  like  a  pat  of  butter,  etc.,  etc.,
etc.

F.  Now  she  thinks  you  will  know  that  thing,  though  it's  not
the  thing  that  is  important.  The  importance  is  about  a
book  test.  She  goes  back  to  your  books  now,  to  the  ones
near  the  window,  and  she  is  taking  the  sixth  book  from
the  window.  1  Oh  !  and  she's  showing  Feda  that  the  page
is  one  hundred  and  eight.  Feda  sees  that  it's  on  the
lower  part  of  the  page.  Ladye  says  that  it's  about  two
thirds  of  the  way  down  as  near  as  she  can  tell,  that  there
is  a  message  that  has  a  bearing  on  her  feeling  toward
you,  but  also,  in  a  very  peculiar  way,  perhaps  in  a  way
that  an  uninitiated  person  would  not  understand  unless  it
was  pointed  out  to  them,  the  message  refers  to  that  thing
on  a  black  ribbon,  to  the  conditions  of  it.  You  know
pretty  Avell  what  things  she  did  have  hanging  and  she
thinks  that  message  will  point  to  which  one  of  them  she's
meaning.

The  book  proved  to  be  Dickens's  The  Old  Curiosity
Shop,  and  the  sentence  beginning  exactly  two-thirds  of
the  way  down  p.  108  is  "  talked  of  their  meeting  in
another  world  as  if  he  were  dead  but  yesterday."
Reunion  between  M.  R.  H.  and  A.  V.  B.  in  another
world  is  a  frec^uent  topic  at  M.  R.  H.'s  sittings  with
Mrs. Leonard, so that the "  message " is very  appro-

^  The  height,  of  the  sheh'  was  clearly  given  later.


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


291


priate,  though  no  doubt  many  others  might  have  fulfilled
the  prescribed  condition  of  bearing  on A.  V.  B."s  feelmg
towards M.  R.  H. The message itself does not  refer
to the thing on a black ribbon, but that thing  was
connected  with  an  old  curiosity  shop,  and  therefore  with
the  book  in  which  the  message  was.  and  in  a  way  that
woidd  not  be  obvious  to  the  uninitiated. But  it  must  be
achnitted that the ornament was not clearly  identified.
A.  V.  B.. it appears, possessed a number of  ornaments
worn upon a ribbon or a chain, and answering  more
or  less  to  the  description  given  by  Feda. That  descrip-
tion, which  I  have  given  in  a  much  abbreviated  form,
strikes  M.  R.  H. as  being  of  the  nature  of  a  composite
of several of these ornaments. M.  R.  H. had  herself
presented  several  of  these  to  A.  V.  B.,  picking  them  up
in old curiosity shops. One particular ornament  that
comes to her mind in connection with Feda"s  descrip-
tion was  a .  very  fine  piece  of  jade, circular, carved  on
both  sides,  and  highly  pohshed,  and  very  like  a  circular
flat  pat  of  butter,  as  Feda  says. This  A.  V.  B.  always
wore  upon  a  ribbon  or  a  piece  of  black  velvet,  though
M.  R.  H. does not think the ribbon was long  enough
to allow it to  come  as  far  as the waist. It  was  pur-
chased by  M.  R.  H.  at  a  big  Chinese  warehouse  in  the
city  that  deals  in  valuable  Chinese  curios,  many  of  them
old.

We  could  not  base  a  case  for  clairvoyance  on  this
incident  alone,  but  in  spite  of  its  defects  it  seems  to
me  very  striking.  In  the  first  place  it  is  almost  certain,
I  think,  that  some  intelligence  was  aware  that  the  book
indicated  was  The  Old  Curiosity  Shop,  or  why  connect
with  it  an  object  or  objects  worn  by  A.  V.  B.  and
obtained  at  old  curiosity  shops  ?  ^  But  the  knowledge
impUed  could  only  have  been  acquired  svipernormally.
M.  R.  H.  was  at  this  time  still  anonymous  to  Mrs.
Leonard,  who  had  moreover  never  seen  her  flat.  Most
likely  M.  R.  H.  could  not  have  consciously  described
the exact position in a large bookcase of the book  ;

1  It  should  perhaps  be  stated  that  the  words  The  Old  Curiosity
Shop  "  appear  as  the  headline  of  the  page  containing  the  message.


292


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


but  even  if  consciously  or  subconsciously  she  knew  it,
Feda  could  only  have  obtained  it  from  her  mind  by  tele-
pathy— that  is,  by  a  supernormal  method.  And  in  this
connexion  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  M.  R.  H.  at
first  failed  to  observe  the  relation  between  the  ornament
and  the  book,  probably  because  Feda  made  the  mistake
of  connecting  it  with  the  "  message "  in  the  book.  It
was  only  after  the  connexion  had  been  suggested  by  I
Mr.  Piddington  that  M.  R.  H.  perceived  it.

Then  again  the  extreme  appropriateness  of  the
"  message  "  found  in  the  exact  position  on  the  page
given — an  appropriateness  to  M.  R.  H.'s  feelings  and
attitude  of  mind  and  also  to  the  general  tenor  of  the
A.  V.  B.  communications — seems  beyond  chance,^  though
the  description  beforehand  of  the  nature  of  the  message
to  be  found  was  so  slight  and  vague.  Altogether  we
have  what  looks  like  real  knowledge  of  the  book  and  its
contents,  and  a  real  memory,  though  perhaps  a  confused
one,  of  the  ornaments  worn  by  A.  V.  B.  It  is  perhaps
instructive  that  all  this  was  apparently  combined  •  with
a  want  of  power  somewhere  to  get  the  information
clearly  out.

In  the  following  book-test,  given  in  an  A.  V.  B.
sitting  on  September  26,  1917,  we  are  told  that  at  a  1
place  on  a  page  indicated  will  be  found  a  summary,  j
and  at  that  place  on  the  page  facing  the  one  named,  i
there  is  a  summary,  though  not  so  described.  There  i
are  also  there  a  date  and  a  foreign  word  as  predicted.  |

After  indicating  accurately  and  clearly  a  certain  shelf  in
a certain bookcase from which no book-test had been  I
previously  selected  (it  was  a  house  occupied  by  U.  V.  T.
into  which  Mrs.  Leonard  had  not  been),  Feda  goes  on  ;

P.  This  time  you  must  count  from  right  to  left. (To  i

A.  V.  B.) now Ladye, show Feda most par-  ■

ticularly  j)lease,  now  don't  pull  out  a  book  till  i

Feda can count, one, two, three, do wait a  i

1  I  have  lately  read  through  The  Old  Curiosity  Shop  with  this  incident  1
in  mind,  and  my  impression  is  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  in  it  !
another  equally  appropriate  message.  -  ij


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


293


minute  Ladye  !  one,  two,  three,  wait  a  bit.  Mrs.
Una  she  won't  be  content,  till  Feda  tells  you
something  else  first.  She  says  that  on  the  back
of  the  book,  you  know  what  she  means,  the
narrow  part  what  sticks  out  a  little,  what  you
would  call  the  back,  there  is  an  ornamental  piece
in  gilt.  (Feda  begins  drawing  a  round  on
U.  V.  T.'s  arm.)  It  looks  Hke  gilt  to  Feda.  The
shape  is  not  like  a  star  quite,  it  is  a  funny  kind
of  marking,  but  seems  round  in  shape  and  it  is
not  unlike  a  star.  It  is  the  fourth  book,  page
one  hundred  and  twenty  seven.

U.  V.  T. Whereabouts  on  the  page  must  we  look  1

F.  About halfway  down. She is  not quite sure,  but

she  thinks  there  is  a  date  on  that  page  ;  it  seems
like  a  date  because  there  is  a  big  number  that
seems  like  you  would  have  for  a  year.  Oh  !  Oh  !
and  there  is  a  word  on  that  page  that  is  in  a
foreign  language.

U.  V.  T. What  is  the  message  about  ?

F.  She  says  it  differs  from  the  others  in  character.

U.  V.  T. How  ?

F.  She  -says  you  won't  think  the  message  itself  very

interesting  except  in  a  scientific  way.

U.  V.  T.  Does  it  follow  the  general  trend  ?  [i.e.  does  it  in  any
way  refer  to  Psychical  Research]

F.  Yes,  but  it  sort  of  knits  two  or  three  of  the  other

messages  together.  That  is  to  say,  and  this  is
awfully  important, — oh  !  wait  a  moment,  she
wants  to  get  a  word  to  explain  her  meaning,  it
has  a  bearing  on  the  other  messages  in  a  way
that  might  be  that  of  an  unprejudiced  onlooker
giving  an  opinion  on  the  other  messages,  almost
like  a  little  summary.  She  says  you  will  find  it
will  have  that  meaning  if  you  take  it  quite
literally.  The  word  summary  is  very  important.
Listen,  she  says  this  should  be  a  very  important
test,  out  of  the  ordinary,  not  just  a  nice  message
like  she  gives  you  sometimes,  but  very  important
evidentially. It  looks  like  a  dull  book  to  Feda,


i


294


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PAET


with  the  pages  closely  written  all  over,  no  nice
little  paragraphs  and  things.  The  book  looks  like
a  dull  dark  colour,  but  she  shows  Feda  that  in
the  vicinity  there  is  a  book  with  a  bluey  green
cover.  There  is  a  word  rather  like  Sim,  Sim
something,  wTitten  on  a  book  that  is  quite  close
to  the  other  one.


The  book  was  found  to  be  Vol.  III.  of  The  Boyal
Navy,  a  History,  by  Sir  William  Laird  Clowes  and  others
(Sampson,  Low,  Marston  &  Co.,  1898).  It  was  bound
in  a  dark,  dull-blue  colour,  and  below  the  title  upon
its  back  was  an  octagonal  design  in  gilt,  something
between  a  circle  and  a  star  in  shape,  about  the  size
of  a  sixpence,  and  rather  conspicuous.  This  design
appears  also  upon  its  companion  volumes,  but  upon  no
other  book  in  the  bookcase.  A  bluey  green,  or  greeny
blue,  volume  was  found  upon  the  same  shelf,  but  the
word  Sim  or  any  word  beginning  with  that  syllable
could  not  be  discovered  on  any  book  in  the  case.^  As
to  the  inside — pp.  126  and  127  which  faced  each  other
were  uncut.  On  p.  127  nothing  appeared  answering  to
the  description.  But  the  middle  part  of  p.  126  was
occupied  by  a  paragraph  in  smaller  type  than  the  rest.
This  is  a  cj^uotation  from  Captain  Mahan  summarising
the  tactical  lessons  afforded  by  the  two  naval  encounters
between  English  and  French  squadrons  in  the  year  1747.
A  date  (viz.  1747)  and  a  foreign  word  (viz.  "  melee,"
which  is  printed  in  italics)  occur  in  the  course  of  it.
Moreover,  the  quotation  may  well  be  called  "  a  little
summary,"  though  the  word  is  not  used.  But  by  no
effort  of  the  imagination  can  we  regard  the  passage  as  a
summary  of  previous  "  messages  "  or  as  connected  with
these.

In  the  A.  V.  B.  sitting  of  October  10,  1917,  we  have
messages  in  two  books  defined  by  their  relation  to  each
other.  The  shelf  intended  having  been  clearly  defined,
Feda  said  :


1  Can  "  Sir,"  the  title  of  the  author,  have  been  the  syllable  meant  ?


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


295


She  wants  to  say  at  once  that  it's  the  12th  book  [left
to  right],  and  the  28th  page  .  .  .  the  message  is  in  there
but  the  fourteenth  book  on  the  11th  page  has  got  also  a
message  which  refers  to  the  same  subject.

Ladye  says  that  in  the  first  book  that  she  mentioned,  that
is  the  12th  book  on  the  shelf,  it's  lower  do^vn  the  page  than
in  the  second  book  she  spoke  of  which  is  the  14th  on  the
shelf.  Wait  a  minute,  Ladye  saj='s  that  the  message  in  one
contradicts  the  message  in  the  other  a  little.  She  says  she
is  only  mentioning  that  as  part  of  the  test.

The  books  proved  to  be  Vols.  II.  and  III.  respectively
of  Naval  Tracts  of  Sir  William  Monson,  issued  by  the
Navy  Records  Society  ;  and  the  sentences  on  the  pages
named  which  seemed  most  appropriate  as  messages
were,  in  the  first  named  volume,  the  third  and  fourth
line  from  the  bottom  of  the  p)age  :

"  No  man  can  receive  blame  thereby  ;  all  is  to  be
attributed  to  the  want  of  experience  ..."

In  the  second  book,  ninth  to  twelfth  lines  from  the
bottom  of  the  page  :

We  are  young  and  able,  and  he  that  will  not  beUeve  us
may  try  us.  .  .  .  We  shall  be  better  than  those  that  went
before  us.

The  sitters  suggest  that  these  "  messages  "  may  apply
first  to  their  want  of  experience,  and  secondly  to  their
zeal  and  energy  in  Psychical  Research.  However  this
may  be,  the  relative  positions  of  the  messages  on  the
pages  is  correctly  specified,  and  they  do  a  little  con-
tradict each  other,  since  the  first  blames  want  of  experi-
ence for  failure,  and  the  second  exalts  youth  and  vigour,
conditions  where  experience  is  likely  to  be  defective.

In  both  these  books  the  pages  were  uncut.

The  pages  were  also  uncut  in  a  book-test  given  by
A.  V.  B.  a  week  later  (October  17,  1917),  when  the
pages apparently indicated — there  was a  little  ambiguity


296


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


about  the  shelf — contained  in  the  position  defined  two
verses  of  the  ballad  "  You  Gentlemen  of  England,"
describing  a  storm  at  sea,  which  an  incident  in  the
travels  together  of  A.  V.  B.  and  M.  R.  H.  made  specially
appropriate  as  a  message  to  M.  R.  H.

An  A.  V.  B.  book-test  received  on  March  27,  1918,
is  worth  recording  as  an  instance  of  fairly  full  indication
of  what  was  to  be  found.  The  communicator  is  A.  V.  B.,
and  A.  W.  Verrall  is  represented  as  co-operating.  With  a
little  beating  about  the  bush  the  shelf  is  at  length  clearly
indicated,  and  on  it  the  fourth  book  from  left  to  right.
This  proved  to  be  Prescott's  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,
Vol.  III.  (an  edition  published  at  Philadelphia),  Feda
says  :  ' •  1

F.  {S.v.  Parts  of  this  book  is  written  in  two  kinds  of
print,  one  written  in  one  kind,  one  in  another  and  then
back  again.)  Not  like  just  one  word  written  differently.
[This  is  true,  as  there  are  voluminous  notes  through-
out.] Wait  a  minute  now,  the  page  nine  four.  Wait  a
minute — Mr.  Arthur  [i.e.  A.  W.  Verrall] — {s.v.  it's  more  to
do  with  Mr.  Arthur  than  herself,  yes,  it  indicates  where
pomts  of  kno\\iedge  meet,  she's  gomg  like  this  with  her
fingers).  (Feda  places  the  points  of  her  four  fingers
together.)  It  refers  to  a  ]Dart  of  his  Earth  life.  He  had
to  make  two  conditions  meet  and  it  wasn't  very  easy  to
do  it.  This  sliould  remind  Mrs.  Nellie  [his  daughter,
Mrs.  Salter]  of  the  circumstances.  It's  at  the  top  of  the
page  but  not  quite  at  the  top.

[In  the  correct  position  are  the  words  :  nor  the  rapidly
declining  state  of  her  own  health,  had  power  to  blunt
the  energies  of  her  mind  " — a  sentence  which,  altering
the  pronoun,  all  Dr.  Verrall's  friends  will  agree  applies
with  great  appropriateness  to  him  during  the  last  years  of
his  life.]

Feda  continues  :

F.  Turn  back  in  that  book  to  the  beginning  part  of  that
same chapter, the chapter that page 94 falls in  .  .  .


LXXXI.]


A71  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


297


there's  an  allusion  to  a  subject  that  Mr.  Arthur  was
interested  in.

[In  the  second  line  of  the  chapter  occur  the  words
"  phantoms  of  a  dream,"  which  may  perhaps  have  been
the  allusion  meant — the  subject  being  Psychical  Research.]

F.  Now  she  says  at  the  very  beginning  part  of  the  same
book,  the  first  page  of  the  proper  reading — this  is  to  do
with  Ladye  .  .  .  there's  something  there  connected  ^ith,  or
that  will  remind  you  of  the  ceremony  she  spoke  of  through
Feda  a  few  sittings  ago.

[On  the  first  page  of  the  reading  matter  the  word
"  Rome  "  occurs  and  it  was  at  Rome  that  the  ceremony
probably  referred  to  took  place.]

These  two  latter  points  about  the  book,  therefore,
if  not  of  great  importance,  at  any  rate  cannot  be  re-
garded as  failures.

M.  R.  H.  had  at  one  time  read  Prescott's  Fer'dinand  and
Isabella.

The  following  is  a  case  where  the  position  of  the  book
was  unmistakeably  indicated,  and  where  the  "  message  "
was  well  described  (as  far  as  the  description  goes),  and
knowledge  shown  of  the  context.  But  yet  the  surround-
ings of  the  book,  or  at  least  its  relation  to  other  books,
was  apparently  very  imperfecta  apprehended.  The  sitting-
was  an  A.  W.  V.  one  on  April  11,  1918.

F.  The  tests  are  from  him  [Dr.  Verrall]  and  your  lady  [Mrs.
Verrall].  (S.v..  show  Feda  where  the  book  is.  In  the
sitting-room,  a  single  book  on  a  small  table.)

S. Where  is  the  table  ?

F.  Feda  don't  think  it's  a  sitting  room.  Not  a  proper  table,
the  top  of  a  piece  of  furniture.  In  a  bedroom,  yes,  a
bedroom,  not  close  to  a  door,  across  the  room.  This  is  not
a  proper  test.  He  got  it  in  case  it  wasn't  moved.  He
thought  he'd  see  what  he  could  get  out  of  it.  Some
part  of  the  book  must  have  lines  of  poetry.  He's
showing  two  little  lines,  not  across  the  pages.  Page  31
of  that  book. It's  more  to  do  with  your  lady.  Near


298


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


the  top  a  message  from  your  lady,  suggests  places  and
conditions  of  places  that  you  would  know  she  would  like
to  be  in.  Suggests  beautiful  places  she'd  like  to  be  in.
It  suggests  a  description  of  places  she  is  in  now.  There's
something  just  before  the  message  that  disqualifies  this,
spoils  it.  If  you  were  to  read  the  first  part,  it  would  be
wrong  altogether  for  what  she  wants  to  convey.  The
actual  message  cannot  be  mistaken.  It  suggests  beautiful
places  like  what  she's  in  now.  You'd  say  :  "  I  know
she'd  like  that."'  But  what  conies  before  would  dis-
qualify it. That's  all  for  that  book.

[Mrs.  Salter  writes  about  this  :]

There  are  only  two  bedrooms  at  [the  house  in  question]
which  have  any  books  in  them  (I  did  not  examine  the
servants'  bedrooms),  my  own  and  a  spare  room.  In
my  room  there  were  no  books  lying  on  top  of  a  piece
of  furnitui'e.  .  .  In  the  spare  room,  which  contains  no
bookcase,  seven  books  had  been  placed  horizontally  on
the  top  of  a  small  wardrobe  at  the  opposite  corner  of
the  room  from  the  door.  On  the  evening  of  April  11,
1918,  I  found  these  books  lying  in  three  piles,  two  and
two  and  three.  It  was  not  accurate  therefore  to  speak
as  Feda  does  of  a  single  book.  So  far  as  the  position  of
the  books  goes  the  test  might  apply  equally  well  to  any
of  the  seven.  But  fortunately  a  further  hint  is  given
which  seems  to  identify  the  book.  Feda  says  that
"  part  of  the  book  must  have  lines  of  poetry ;  he's
showing  two  little  lines  not  across  the  pages."  Of  the
seven  books  in  question  six  are  in  prose  ;  the  seventh
is  a  volume  of  Tennyson  printed  in  double  columns,  so
that  the  allusion  to  ' '  little  lines  ' '  is  particularly  apt.
Page  31  is  almost  entirely  occupied  by  the  poem  entitled
"  Mariana  in  the  South.".  .  .  In  the  upper  part  of  the
left-hand  column  [appear  the  lines]  :

Nor  bird  would  sing,  nor  lamb  would  bleat.
Nor  any  cloud  would  cross  the  vault
But  day  increased  from  heat  to  heat,
On  stony  drought  and  steaming  salt,


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


299


Till  now  at  noon  she  slept  again,
And  seemed  knee-deep  in  mountain  grass,
And  heard  her  native  breezes  pass,
And  runlets  babbling  down  the  glen.

[Mrs.  Salter  continues  :]  I  take  it  that  reference  is  in-
tended to  [the  last  four  of  these]  lines.  My  mother  was
always  exceedingly  fond  of  mountain  scenery  and  air  ;
she  and  my  father  visited  Switzerland  or  the  Italian
Alps  almost  every  summer  for  many  years,  and  if  visits
to  the  mountains  are  possible  "  on  the  other  side  "  they
would  certainly  be  something  my  mother  would  greatly
enjoy.  The  lines  begin  almost  exactly  one-third  of  the
way  down  the  page.  It  is  not  therefore  quite  exact  to
say  that  they  are  "  near  the  top  of  the  page,"  but  they
are  entirely  in  the  upper  half.  The  rest  of  the  poem,  in
contrast  to  these  lines,  describes  the  jilace  in  which
Mariana  actually  is, — bare,  hot  and  dusty.  This  seems
to  give  a  special  point  to  the  statement  that  "  there's
something  just  before  the  message  that  spoils  it,"  etc.

The  other  items  of  the  book-tests  of  this  day  are  not
strikingly  good  or  bad,  but  they  contain  tw^o  indications
of  possible  connexion  with  work  published  by  the  S.P.R.,
as  I  have  pointed  out  below,  pp.  325,  333.

On  reading  in  proof  this  account  of  the  book-test  of
April  11,  1918,  Mr.  Piddington  was  reminded  of  some
notes  Mrs.  Verrall  had  sent  to  him  during  her  last  illness,
when  she  knew^  she  was  dying. ^  He  looked  these  up,  and
found  the  following  dated  May  20  [1916]  and  posted  May  31  :

Don't  look  for  communications  "  for  some  time.  If
I  have  any  choice,  I  shall  have  a  long  and  dreamless
sleep  followed  by  a  very  long  holiday  with  A.  W.  V.  in
whatever  over  there  is  most  like  the  upper  valleys  of  the
Italian  Alps.

The  correspondence  of  this  note  (which  the  sitter,  Mrs.
Salter,  had  not  seen)  with  the  "  message  ''  and  the  passage
in "  Mariana in the South  " seems remarkable, and  is

1  Mrs.  Verrall  died  on  July  2,  1916.  There  are  other  notes  written
when  she  was  dying  which  testify  to  her  love  of  Alpine  scenery  and
Alpine  flowers.


300


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


strengthened  by  the  fact  that  in  any  book-test  supposed,
to  be  given  by  Mrs.  Verrall  her  husband  has  been  in-
variably associated  with  her,  and  I  am  told  this  is  so  in
other  communications  through  Mrs.  Leonard  attributed  to
Mrs.  Verrall.

§  6.  •

Special  Experiments.

In  the  course  of  their  sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard,.
M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.  tried  different  experiments  in
book-tests  with  a  view  especially  to  testing  the  possibility,
or  impossibility  of  the  knowledge  shown  being  obtained
through  telepathy  from  themselves.

Thus  in  November  and  December,  1917,  a  few  books
were  taken  by  U.  V.  T.  blindfolded  from  one  bookcase
and  locked  up  in  another.  The  books  could  not  be  seen
in  their  new  position,  and  no  one  knew  what  books
had  been  placed  there.  The  experiment  had  been  ex-
plained to  Feda,  and  at  three  sittings  attempts  to  give
book-tests  from  these  particular  books  were  made.  The
result  was  not  brilliant,  and  showed  nothing  conspicuously
and  undeniably  right,  but  it  did  not  markedly  differ
from  the  average.

On  another  occasion — July  17,  1918 — an  attempt  was
made  to  get  A.  V.  B.  to  describe  a  book  deliberately
selected  by  U.  V.  T.  The  experiment  was  almost  the
converse  of  the  last.  Feda  was  told  on  July  11  that
the  book  would  be  taken  from  the  neighbourhood  of  one
selected  by  A.  V.  B.  for  a  previous  book-test,  and  would
be  placed  in  a  specified  shelf.  The  book  chosen  was  a
French  one  called  Amitie  Amoureuse,  and  consisted  of  a
series  of  letters  exchanged  between  a  man  and  a  woman.
It  had  been  a  favourite  of  A.  V.  B.'s,  but  had  not  been
read  by  M.  R.  H.  U.  V.  T.  had  read  it  rather  recently.
Feda  failed  to  give  its  number  in  the  shelf,  but  ultimately
got an unmistakable approximation to the title,^  and

1  At  first  she  got  no  nearer  than  "  it  sounds  a  bit  like  Asia — Asieu."
Later  on,  however,  she  spelt  it  out  as  A.M.U.R.E.U.S.E.  and  then —
using  the  continental  pronunciation  said  "  Amici,  Amois — no  not  that
Amit —  .  .  .  Amiei,  Amise,  Amieie."


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


301


several  correct  and  partially  correct  impressions  about  the
inside,  though  these  were  fragmentary  and  not  very
striking.

A  row  of  Italian  books  was  tried  in  March  and  April,
1918.  Feda  was  told  that  the  message  should  be  chosen
from  books  in  a  certain  place,  but  not  that  these  were
in  a  foreign  language.  U.  V.  T.  is  well  acquainted  with
Italian,  and  A.  V.  B.  also  knew  it,  as  did  two  other
communicators — Dr.  Verrall  and  one  "  E.  A." — who  also,
according  to  Feda,  selected  or  assisted  in  selecting  book-
tests  from  this  row  for  their  respective  sitters.  The
five  sittings  concerned  with  these  Italian  books  joroduced
the  average  amount  of  success  in  book-tests.  One  of
them — an  A.  W.  V.  sitting  on  April  23,  1918 — which
was  rather  unusually  successful,  was  additionally  inter-
esting because  at  the  time  the  sitter,  Mrs.  Salter,  had
never  been  at  M.  R.  H.'s  flat,  and  did  not  know  any-
thing about  the  books  in  the  row  in  question.  Any
direct  influence  from  the  sitter's  knowledge  is  therefore
here  excluded.  An  item  of  this  book-test  has  been
given  above,  p.  277.

But  the  most  important  experiment  was  with  Greek
books — Greek  being  a  language  unknown  to  M.  R.  H.
or  U.  V.  T.,  or  to  Mrs.  Leonard,  or  the  supposed  com-
municator, A.  V.  B.  The  experiment  was  suggested  by
the  latter  on  September  18,  1918,  as  follows  :

F.  She  [i.e.  A.  V.  B.]  says  she's  perfectly  aware  now  that  it
isn't  the  actual  word  she  gets,  but  the  idea  of  it.'^  She
says  "...  I'm  sure  it  Avould  not  matter  if  the  words
were  written  in  Japanese.  I  think  I  could  sense  them."
She  says  "  do  you  know  that  unless  I  were  to  find  out
just  by  accident  that  there  was  something  different  about
the  books,  if  all  the  books  in  your  room  in  London  were
written  in  a  language  I'd  never  seen  or  heard,  I  probably
should  not  kiaow  the  difference.".  .  .  She'd  like  to  try
the  experiment  Mrs.  Twonnie.  She  says  if  you  could  get
hold  of  two  or  three  books  of  any  kind  written  in  a

It  is  interesting  that  this  was  said  just  after  A.  V.  B.  had  been
referring  to  a  word  beginning  with  V.  like  Vodka.  See  below,  pp.  339
and  356.


302


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwicl-.


[part


language  you  could  prove  she  didn't  know,  and  that  you
were  sure  the  medium  didn't  know,  and  that  you  and
Mrs.  Una  would  not  know,  it  would  be  good.  That's  what
she  wants  ;  you  won't  know  whether  she's  right  or  wrong
till  you  get  it  interpreted.  She  saj^s  if  only  she's  as
successful  in  that  as  she  has  been  in  many  of  her  book-
tests,  peoples  wouldn't  know  how  to  explain  it,  would
they  ?  .  .  .  She  says  you  might  borrow  the  books  from
some  Society  or  Library — she  means  she  w^ould  like  books
if  possible  that  somebody's  read.

It  was  decided  to  use  Greek  books  for  this  experiment,
and  in  the  first  instance  to  borrow  some  from  Mrs.  Salter.
The  experiment  was  first  tried  on  October  30,  1918.
But  it  should  be  noted  that  when  M.  R.  H.  told  A.  V.  B.
on  October  26,  that  she  would  put  the  books  in  j)osi-
tion  the  next  day,  A.  V.  B.  made  a  remark  which  indi-
cates at  least  a  suspicion  that  Greek  would  be  the
language  used— a  very  natural  guess.  Feda  represented
her  as  saying  :

F.  She  says "  I  must  say  something  about  them  [the

books]  now.  I  feel  that  there  are  two  ways  of
giving  that  language  .  .  .  there  are  two  different
ways  of  expressing  oneself  in  that  language,  so
different  that  unless  one  had  learnt  both  ways
the  one  would  seem  like  a  foreign  language  to  the
other."

M.  R.  H. Quite  right.

F.  She only  wanted  to  say  that  so  that  you  should

know  she  had  an  inkling  ;  that  she  knew  what
you  were  doing.

This  looks  like  a  reference  to  the  difference  between
modern  and  classical  Greek — and  assuming  A.  V.  B.  to
know  or  to  have  guessed  that  the  books  were  in  Greek
and  presumably  concerned  with  ancient  Greece,  we  have
to  consider  how  far  the  things  said  about  them  at  the
seven  sittings  during  which  the  experiment  was  carried  on
were  beyond  what  might  naturally  be  inferred  or  guessed.
Rather  unfortunately  she  said  so  many  things  about  these


LXXXI.]


A71  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


303


books  ^  that  one  feels  the  HkeHhood  of  successful  chance
shots  is  considerable.

I  will  give  all  the  items  of  the  tests  of  October  30,
1918,  with  the  corresponding  verification  or  the  reverse
after  each.

I.  "  Starting  at  the  left,  the  seqond  book.  This  book
.  .  .  gave  her  a  sense  of  changing  manners  .  .  .  taking  the
book  as  a  whole,  changing  times,  manners,  methods."

[The  book  was  Demosthenes'  Orationes,  Vol.  I.  The
above  statement  might  refer  to  speeches  delivered  under  a
variety  of  circumstances,  or  more  generally  to  any  book
dealing  with  ancient  Greece  as  compai-ed  with  modern  times.]

II.  "  Page  13 — Revolution.  She  can't  tell  you  where  on
the  page  it  is.  That  isn't  the  message,  that's  only  to
show  that  she  could  sense  certain  conditions  independent
of  language."

[The  pages  of  the  text  are  not  numbered.  Omitting
preface,  introduction,  etc.,  and  counting  pages  from  the
beguming  of  the  text,^  the  13th  is  part  of  the  second
Olynthiac.  It  contains  a  word  which  may  be  translated
'■  Revolution  "  in  the  sentence  "  You  must  show  a  com-
plete change  and  revolution  in  your  mode  of  life."  Also  it
is  said  that  Philip  of  Macedon's  "  own  power  and  rule  at
home  will  be  shown  to  be  rotten,"  which  is  suggestive  of
revolution.]

III.  "  There  is  a  message,  half  way  down  the  page — no
not  quite  half  way  down,  a  third  of  the  way  down  ;  a
message  which  refers  to  your  and  IVIrs.  Una's  work  to-
gether, and  to  certain  elements  of  that  work.  .  .  .  This
could  not  apply  to  any  one's  work  ;  you  will  find  it
applies  particularly  to  yours  and  Mrs.  Una's."

^  This  kind  of  complexity  in  book-tests  increased  as  time  went  on.
In  the  summer  of  1917  a  single  book-test  consisting  of  one  item  would
be  given.  During  December,  1918,  and  January,  1919,  the  average
number  of  items  (excluding  titles)  was  9.  The  average  number  of
such  items  in  sittings  concerned  with  Greek  books  was  10|.

-  At  a  subsequent  sitting  on  Nov.  13,  A.  V.  B.  herself  prescribes  this
procedure.


304


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


[Beginning  just  above  one-third  down  the  page  is  a
sentence  which  may  be  translated  :  "  It  is  our  duty  to
give  help  to  the  people  of  Olynthus,  and  whatever  means
anybody  holds  to  be  the  best  and  the  quickest  are  good
enough  for  me."  If  for  '  to  the  people  of  Olynthus  '  we
read  '  in  psychical  research,'  this  might  perhaps  be  regarded
as  an  appropriate  message.]

IV.  "  Boris— Boris —  It's  a  name  that  seems  to  be
prominent  in  the  book.  Boris — Borisee — -Boris  She  goes
back  to  Boris  every  time  {s.v.,  you  doii't  think  it's
Borissi,  Ladye  ?)  No,  she  goes  back  to  Boris  ;  Feda  does
not  know  why  she  is  sapng  that,  Feda  thinks  it's  a  name
that's  in  the  book  prominently  ;  she  doesn't  think  you'll
have  to  go  far  for  it.

[At  the  beginning  of  the  book  in  a  list  in  Latin  of  the
MSS.  of  Demosthenes,  the  first  mentioned  is  Parisinus
2934  (pronounced  according  to  modern  usage  Pariseenus).
The  Avord  occurs  eight  times  conspicuously  in  the  list  of
MSS.,  and  six  times  (with  different  case  endings)  in  the
preface.  This  word  approximates  in  sound  more  or  less  to
'  Borisee,'  and  it  is  perhaps  noteworthy  that  '  Borissi  '
which  does  not  similarly  approximate  is  rejected.]

V.  "  On  page  one  eight,  18,  she  got  a  feeling  of  writing
being  alluded  to  .  .  .  that's  all  from  this  book  for  the
moment."

[There  appears  to  be  no  allusion  to  writing  on  page  18,
but,  on  the  opposite  page  (19),  the  words  rois  ypdifaa-iv —
those  who  wrote — occur.]

VI.  "  Very  close  to  this  book,  she  says  she  should  feel
it  must  be  one  of  those  next  to  it  .  .  .  she  got  a  feeUng
of  .  .  .  Lore  or  Fables,  superstition.  She  got  that  very
strongly  ;  she's  not  sure  which  side  of  it  it  would  be,  but
it  was  very  close  to  the  second  book  while  she  was
sensing  it."

[Next  to  the  volume  of  Demosthenes  on  the  left,  the
first  book  in  the  row,  was  Plato's  Republic,  where  lore,
fables  and  superstition  are  discussed  at  considerable  length.]


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


305


[Feda  liere  makes  a  digression  to  say]

F.  Do  you  know  she  got  ...  a  feeling  like  a  different
type,  a  different  way  of  making  letters,  .  .  .  it's
as  if  the  letters  was  drawed  differently."

U.  V.  T. I  understand  that.

F.  It's  not  just  only  as  a  test  that  she's  giving  this.
She  wants  to  convey  to  j'^ou  that  it's  an  important
point  whether  the  spirit  or  control  understands  the
lettering  and  reads  the  messages  by  the  shape  of
the  letters,  or,  as  she  has  stated,  gets  the  sense  by
sensing  the  spirit  or  thought  of  a  message.

VII.  and  VIII.  F.  Now  she  wants  to  take  the  third
book  from  the  left  end  of  the  xo^\,  the  next  book
to  the  one  she's  spoken  of  at  first.  On  page
2  .  .  .  there  seemed  to  be  a  description  of,  or
an  allusion  ...  to  an  Eastern  j)lace,  she  felt  that
it  took  her  to  Asia,  not  Eastern  Europe  .  .  .
■  and  she  got  an  old  feeling  A^ith  it  .  .  .  as  if  this

' place .spoken of  .  .  .  was old. But from  these
books she got that feeling often, of old  con-
ditions .  .  .
M.  R.  H. That's  quite  correct.

F.  ...  She's  sure  that  this  third  book  took  her  back
more  than  2000  years  ...  far  more  than  2000
-  .  3^ears  she's  laughing  and  she  says  especially  on
pages  2  and  4.  She  says  "possibly  on  pages  1
and  3  too,  but  that  doesn't  concern  me;  I  felt
them  on  pages  2  and  4."

[The  third  book  from  the  left  Avas  Thucydides'  History,
Books  I. -IV.  The  pages  are  not  numbered.  On  the
second  page  from  where  Thucydides's  own  writmg  begins
are  allusions  to  Ionia  and  to  the  Trojan  war — that  is  to
places  in  Asia.

The  "  old  feehng  "  is  appropriate.  The  first  five  or  six
pages  of  Thucydides  give  a  sketch  of  the  quite  early
history  of  Greece,  which  takes  us  back  some  3000  years.
The  feeling  of  great  antiquity  might,  as  A.  V.  B.  suggests.


306  , Mrs.  Henry  Sidgtvick.  [part

have  been  got  as  well  from  pages  1  and  3  as  from  pages
2  and  4,  but  there  is  perhaps  a  point  in  her  reference
to  these  last.  That  to  page  2  may  be  explained  by  the
reference  on  it  to  Troy,  and  page  4  may  have  been  the
source  of  the  statement  numbered  below  as  X.]

But before going on to this A.  V.  B.  discusses  at

some  length  how  something  might  strike  her  on  one  page

and not on the next, though even more  emphatically

present  on  the  latter. And  then  she  goes  on  to  say  :

IX.  F.  Wait  a  minute.  Oh  !  is  it  the  third  one  ?  are
you  sure  it's  the  third,  Ladj^e  ?  Feda's  not  sure
that  she's  sure  herself,  {s.v.  Excuse  me)  She
says  that  in  the  third  book.
U.  V.  T.  That's  the  one  we've  just  been  talking
about.

F.  {s.v.  Feda  don't  think  you  think  so  yourself !)
Feda  thinks  it's  close  to  the  third  one.  but  she's
not  quite  sure  !  {s.v.  Well,  I'll  say  the  third  one)
There's  the  picture  of  a  man  reminded  her  of  an
old-fashioned  engraving  or  print.-  She  felt  he  was
not in ordinary clothes, in fact certain  parts

of  his  anatomy  which  are  usually  covered,  were

not  covered.  But  he  has  some  kind  of  drapery,
folded,  or  in  folds,  she  doesn't  quite  know  how  to
say  it,  but  she  thinks  folds  is  right;  and  she  says
she  somehow  got  the  idea  of  a  stick,  or  something
shaped  like  a  stick.  (Feda  extends  her  hand,  and
makes  a  gesture  of  closing  her  fingers  round  a
stick.)  Like  that.  And  she  says  it's  in  book
three,  but  Feda  thinks  it's  in  a  book  near  ;  'cos
Feda  can  tell  when  Ladye's  a  bit  uncertain  her-
self. But  when  she  thinks  she's  got  it  right,  she'a
obstinate  and  won't  give  in,  and  then  Feda  can
•  feel  through  her,  when  she's  uncertain  and  won't
say  so.

[The  description  given  suggests  several  well-known  Greek
statues,  and  notably  one  of  Demosthenes  often  reproduced
in  editions  of  his  speeches,  but  none  of  the  Greek  books
used  in  the  experiment  contained  any  illustrations.]  i


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


307


X.  F. She's  still  got  some  more,  she  says  she  got  an

idea  from  this  third  book  .  .  .  She  says  imita-
tion— very — seerest — form — what's  that  ?  Imitation
is  very  seerest  form — Oh  Ladye,  do  talk  about
something  sensible  !

M.  R.  H.  She  wants  you  to  say  that  imitation  is  the
sincerest  form  of  flattery.

F.  She  says  she  doesn't  want  to  finish  it  that  way,
she  says  she  does  and  she  doesn't,  she  wanted  to
•  say  it  was  an  imitation,  and  she  didn't  know
how  else  to  get  it  in.  .  .  .  She  keeps  on  inter-
rupting herself  and  she's  talking  about  the  third
book,  and  giving  something  from  it  which  might
also  be  got  from  the  other  books,  she  thinks  it
very  likely  would.  .  .  .  She  got  head  dresses,  an
idea  of  head  dresses,  head  dresses  of  some  peculiar
kind,  and  also  some  rather  extraordinary  manner
of  dressing  the  hair,  or  not  dressing  it  she  says.

[As  will  be  noticed  no  page  is  named  here.  If  we  may
assume  that  the  last  page  mentioned,  namely  p.  4,  is
meant,  this  item  is  remarkably  good,  for  on  that  page  we
get  in  the  following  passage  both  a  pecuUar  head-dress  and
the  idea  of  imitation  (by  the  lonians).  Speaking  of  the
Athenians  Thucydides  says  :  "  The  leading  men  in  the
wealthy  class  through  this  soft  manner  of  life  until  quite
recently  wore  linen  tunics  and  tied  up  their  hair  in  a
top-knot  fastened  with  a  golden  grasshopper.  From  which
it  came  about  that  the  leading  men  of  Ionia,  for  kinship's
sake,  largely  adopted  the  same  style."]

XI.  Feda  proceeds  : "  a  feeling  of  embroidery."

[There  is  no  mention  of  embroidery  on  page  4  or  on  the
neighbouring  pages,  but  the  above  allusions  to  luxury  and
splendour  in  dress  suggest  it.]

XII.  F.  A  feehng  of  a  crescent  (Feda  draws  in  the
air  a  crescent  shape  .  .  .)  Can  you  see  it  ?  Oh
she's  doing  more  than  that  now  ;  she's  giving  a
round,  a  circle.  ...  It  made  her  think  of  the
skies and of certain large — she says I  can't


308


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


.  think of  the  word, what  you  call  the sun  and

the  moon."
M.  R.  H.  Planets.

F.  (Giggles). Feda could have  told her that!  She
says  that's  right, certain  large  planets, but  she
- ' ■ says "  I mean one  large and  important  planet
more  than  any  other."

[Possibly  a  reference  to  page  14  of  the  volume  of
Thucydides  where  there  are  allusions  to  "  Solar  eclipses  "
at  the  time  of  the  Persian  War.  Or  to  the  lunar  eclipse
which  plays  an  important  part  in  Thucydides'  Book  VII.,
contained  in  the  fourth  volume  on  the  shelf.]

XIII. and  XIV. F. Take this  third  book  again,  and
open  it  at  the  end. Turn  over  four  leaves  with
.  '  reading  stuff  on  them.

M.  R.  H. Backwards  ?

F. Yes, backwards, and on  the fourth one  when
you've  turned  it  down,  it  seems  to  allude  to  con-
" : ■. .. ditions  which  are  prevalent  now  in  the  world,  to
■ ' ,  ■ . do  with  the  war. Now  you  understand  that's  on
■■  '  the  back  of  the  fourth  leaf  when  you've  turned  it

'  •  ■  . " down,  it  would  be  on  the  right  side  of  the  book
■  ■ wouldn't  it.
' • M.  E.  H. Yes.  :  "

'  '  F. Well, at  the very bottom of the next  page

'  •  backwards, going towards the beginning of  the

i' , ' book,  right  at  the  bottom  of  that  page,  there's
:' ' just  a  word — she  says: "I  think  it's  only  one
word,  it  may  be  two,  but  I  think  it's  only  one
,. word"  that  she  so  strongly  wishes  you,  she  says
you'll  know  she  particularly  wishes  it  just  now,
■'..■■'■I : ' just  lately. That's  all  about  those  books.

[The  last  leaf  of  the  volume  is  a  blank  fly-leaf.  The
next  leaf  to  this,  backwards, has  only  thirteen  lines  of
I- print  on  it  and  these  on  one  side  only,  the  other  side
1  { being  blank. Moreover  immediately  below  the  last  line  of
-  the  Greek  text  is  a  short  note  in  Latin  which  reads  :  "At
;  the  end  of  the  fourth  book." Assuming  that  this  page
represents  the  end  of  the  book  at  which  we  are  to  ojoen


LXXXI.]


An  Examinatio7i  of  Book-Tests.


309


and  from  which  we  are  to  count,  and  turning  over  four
leaves  we  come  to  a  page  on  the  back  of  the  fourth  leaf
on  which  are  several  possible  allusions  "  to  conditions
which  are  prevalent  now  in  the  world."  It  might  with
little  modification  have  been  said  of  Germany  that  "  their
affairs  were  controlled  by  a  small  faction  which  had  no
intention  of  relinquishing  its  powers,  but  was  afraid  for
itself  lest  the  true  facts  should  be  known."  "  Expecting  a
naval  descent  "  might  have  been  said  of  Germany  or
England  ;  "  Removed  the  women  and  children,"  of  places
in  France.

But  the  most  striking  coincidence  is  that  at  the  very
bottom  of  the  next  page  backwards,"  namely  in  the  middle
of  the  last  line,  occurs  the  Greek  word  for  an  armistice
(eKexeipia) — which,  remembering  that  the  date  of  the  sitting
was  ten  days  before  the  signing  of  the  armistice,  seems
singularly  appropriate.]

Of  these  fourteen  items  II.,  VII.,  VIII.,  XIV.  seem
definitely  right ;  V.,  VI.,  X.,  XIII.  perhaps  right,  but
with  elements  of  doubt  ;  I.,  III.,  IV.,  XII.  very  dubious  ;
XI.  probably  wrong ;  IX.  certainly  wrong.  Thus  stated
numerically  the  success  was  far  above  the  average  ;  but
how  far  individual  successes  are  to  be  regarded  as  beyond
the  probability  of  guesswork  is  another  question.

As  the  books  used  were  Mrs.  Salter's,  and  Mrs.  Salter
had  before  this  date  had  a  good  many  sittings  with
Mrs.  Leonard  and  acted  as  note-taker  at  others,  the
question  of  telepathy  from  her  is  worth  considering.  It
appears,  however  that  she  had  never  regularly  used
the  copies  of  Thucydides  and  Demosthenes  in  question.
She  may  have  occasionally  used  them  to  refer  to,  but
in  reading  those  authors  she  had  used  other  annotated
editions.

This  was  by  far  the  most  successful  effort  made  by
A.  V.  B.  in  connection  with  the  Greek  books.  It  would
be  tedious  to  go  through  all  the  seven  sittings  at  which
the  experiment  was  tried,  and  I  will  therefore  only
mention  important  points  in  the  remaining  ones.  The
sittings took place on November 13 and December  8,


310


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


18  and  28,  1918,  and  on  January  1  and  15,  1919.  Of
these  the  first  two  need  not  detain  ns.  But  on  December
18  there  was  a  success  of  some  interest.  Eight  successive
items  were  complete  failures,  and  then  Feda  said  that
on  p.  5  of  the  third  book  from  the  left,  about  half
way  down  there  was

F.  rather  a  good  description  of  a  place  that  Ladye's

fond  of.  .  .  .  She  says  "  And  I  want  to  qualify
what  I  said  about  being  fond  of  it,  and  to  say
interested  in  it,  you  will  know  that  I  was  indeed
interested  in  this  place,  but  fond  of  it  is  not
quite  the  right  word."  She  says  you  [i.e.
M.  R.  H.,  U.  V.  T.  was  not  present  on  this
occasion]  have  something  in  your  possession  con-
nected with  the  place,  Mrs.  Twonnie,  she's  pre-
tending to  fold  something.  (Here  Feda  makes  a
gesture  of  folding  something  with  her  hands,  her
gesture  would  be  applicable  to  folding  a  piece  of
paper,  to  making  a  fold  in  material,  or  to  folding
such  a  thing  as  a  folding  photograph  frame.)
Wait  a  minute,  you  mean  Mrs.  Twonnie  has  this
thing  now  ?  Yes,  you's  got  the  thing  that's  con-
nected with  the  place.  It's  only  a  small  thing.^ —
Stamp,  Stamp.  (Here  Feda  makes  a  gesture  of
stamping  an  impression  with  a  stamp  or  seal.
She  does  this  on  M.  R.  H.'s  arm,  and  the  meaning
of  her  gesture  is  quite  unmistakable.)  What  is  it
Ladye  you  are  trying  to  make  me  do  ?

M,  R.  H. I  understand,  it  s  stamping.

F.  Yes,  but  not  the  foot ; with  the  hand,  and  it's  not

a  postage  stamp.

[After  some  more  talk  Feda  adds]

F.  Ladye doesn't say this, but I  ought to tell  you

what  I  think.  The  thing  that  she  speaks  about
I  don't  think  folds  up  itself,  but  something  out-
side it  does.  I  tell  you  it  was  the  way  she  was
holding  it  made  me  think  that  it  folded.

All  this  description  by  word  and  gesture  was  taken
as  indicating  a  letter  received  by  post. The  book  was


LXXXI.]


All  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


311


Euripides,  Vol.  I.  Beginning  to  count  the  pages  with  the
argument  prefixed  to  the  play,  we  find  about  haK  way
down  the  fifth  page  "  the  wintry  land  of  Thrace."  Taking
the  ancient  Thrace  as  equivalent  to  a  considerable  part
of  the  modern  Balkans,  A.  V.  B.  was  interested  in  it
in  the  latter  part  of  her  life  as  the  region  in  which
Admiral  Troubridge  was  worldng  on  the  staff  of  the
Crown  Prince  of  Serbia,  and  M.  R.  H.  had  received
letters  from  him  from  there.

On  January  1,  1919,  again  occurred  two  successful
items  of  some  interest  :

F.  She  says  .  .  .  she  wouldn't  care  to  be  described  in  appear-
ance quite  as  some  one  is  in  this  book.  There  is  some
one  described  in  appearance — or  at  any  rate  an  indication
given  of  their  appearance.  .  .  .  It's  just  an  inchcation,
but  one  which  would  be  quite  clear  and  definite.  She
says  now  that  this  description  what  she  would  not  like
appUed  to  her  is  in  the  vicinity  of  [the  last  item].  She
can't  tell  you  whether  it's  on  the  same  page  or  not  but
it's  very  close.  [The  page  referred  to  was  p.  9  of  the
2nd  book  from  the  right.]

[The  volume  proved  to  be  the  Iliad  of  Homer,  Books
XIII. -XXIV.  The  pages  were  unnumbered  and  some
pages  at  the  beginning  had  been  torn  out.^  To  arrive  at
page  9  the  pages  Avere  counted.  On  the  lower  part  of
the  ninth  page  so  arrived  at  occur  the  words  translated
by  Lang,  Leaf  and  Myers  "  Hephaistos  the  Lame."  I  am
told  that  the  word  translated  "  lame  "  might  be  rendered
"  crooked,"  or  -with  twisted  Umbs  " — which  meanings  are
more  appropriate  to  A.  V.  B.'s  remark.]

^  This  had  been  done  to  prevent  any  one  suggesting  that  a  person
who  did  not  know  Greek  might  have  inferred  from  a  translation  on
what  page  of  the  original  would  occur  the  equivalent  of  something
selected  in  the  translation.  This  possible  flaw  in  the  conditions  of
their  experiment  having  struck  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.,  they  discarded
after  December  18  the  books  borrowed  from  Mrs.  Salter  and  substituted
eleven  second-hand  volumes  out  of  which  they  tore  and  destroyed  an
uncertain  number  of  pages  at  the  beginning  and  end — afterwards  keeping
the  -I'olumes  in  a  locked  book-case.  This  mutilation  of  the  books  was
not  commented  on  by  A.  V.  B.


312


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


[Feda  goes  on  to  page  66  of  the  same  book  and  after
a  partially  correct  statement  about  two  buildings  being
mentioned  on  it,  says]  "Just  at  the  bottom  of  the
same  page  there's  a  word  suggests  dancing  to  her  .  .
She  only  throws  that  in  she  says."

[On  the  fourth  line  from  the  bottom  of  the  page
counted  as  66,  occurs  the  name  "  Meriones  "  in  connexion
with  J]]neas  throwing  a  spear  at  him.  Meriones  jumped
aside,  and  near  the  top  of  page  67  (facing  page  66)  is
the  taunting  remark  of  JSneas  referring  to  this  : —
"  Meriones,  swiftly  should  my  spear  have  stopped  thy
dancing  for  ever,  good  dancer  as  thou  art,  if  I  had  but
struck  thee."  If  Meriones  is  the  word,  the  perception  of
that  name  at  the  bottom  of  one  ]3age  and  of  the  associa-
tion of  dancing  with  it  on  the  next  appear  here  to  be
combined.]

After  one  or  two  more  items  the  sitters  were  referred
to  the  third  book  in  the  row,  which  proved  to  be  Thucy-
dides,  V.-VIII.  About  this  book  no  less  than  eight
statements  were  made  referring  to  five  different  pages,
and  some  of  them  apparently  very  definite.  But  not  a
single  point  was  correct.  Either  the  whole  thing  was
imagination  or  invention,  or  the  position  of  the  volume
meant  was  incorrectly  given,  or  Feda  had  got  the  paging
wrong.  The  book,  though  bought  at  second-hand,  was
uncut,  and  did  not  therefore  fulfil  A.  V.  B.'s  desire  that
it  should  have  been  read  by  some  one.  But  though
we  can  imagine  that  its  unread  condition  might  prevent
A.  V.  B.  "  sensing  (as  she  called  it)  the  contents,  it
is  vejy  difficult  to  suppose  it  would  make  her  "  sense "
them  definitely  and  wrong.  Moreover,  no  hint  was  given
that  A.  V.  B.  perceived  the  book  had  not  been  read.
On  one  or  two  occasions  things  have  been  rather  success-
fully said  about  pages  which  proved  to  be  uncut. ^  And
it  is  of  course  no  new  thing  for  definite  statements  to
be  made  which  proved  untrue  about  pages  that  had
been  read.  That  has  constantly  happened  throughout
the book-tests. It is very doubtful therefore  whether

^  See  above,  pp.  294,  295.


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Bool-Tests.


313


any  value  can  be  attached  to  the  view  attributed  to
A.  V.  B.  and  other  communicators,  that  it  is  important
that  the  pages  which  they  attempt  to  sense  should  have
been  read.

The  book-tests  of  January  15,  1919,  were  the  last
taken  from  the  Greek  books,  and  they  were  not  very
successful.  M.  R.  H.,  at  the  end  of  the  sitting,  sug-
gested that  the  experiment  should  be  discontinued  for
a  time,  and  A.  V.  B.,  who  was  controlling,  replied  :

A.  V.  B.  I'm  not  sure  we'll  have  to  do  any  more,  it  was  only
necessary  to  prove  that  language  made  no  differ-
ence to  me.  It's  the  thought  that  matters  ;  that's
how  I  get  your  thoughts  so  clearly,  never  mind
what  language  you  spoke  in  or  thought  in.

Estimating  the  success  obtained  in  the  experiments
with  these  Greek  books  purely  numerically,  it  seems  to
be  about  the  same  as  that  of  the  book-tests  in  the  aggre-
gate, and  slightly  greater  than  that  of  the  A.  V.  B.
tests  as  a  whole.  Moreover,  some  of  those  I  have  quoted
seem  to  me  striking,  though  perhaps  none  are  of  the
very  first  quality.

Question  of  Cross-Correspondence.

In  the  book-tests  of  January  4,  1919,  quoted  and  dis-
cussed above  pp.  286-289,  we  found  the  communicator
talking  of  cross-correspondences,  and  a  connexion  was
pointed  out  which  may  have  been  more  than  accidental
between  the  book-tests  on  that  clay  and  the  automatism
of  Mrs.  Stuart  Wilson.  A  good  deal  was  said  at  different
times  in  the  course  of  the  book-tests  before  us  about
intended  cross-correspondences,  and  some  investigation
seems  called  for  into  the  question  what  evidence  there
actually  is  for  any  connexion  between  these  book-tests  and
other  automatisms,  or  other  circumstances  connected  with
psychical  research,  which  are  known  to  us.  Unfortunately
the  evidence  is  not  very  decisive,  and  helps  us  less  than


Mrs.  Heyiry  Sidgwick.  [part

I  could  have  wished  in  forming  a  judgment  on  book-  |
tests,  while  at  the  same  time  it  is  difficult  to  do  justice  I
to  it  without  going  into  considerable  detail.  I  mention  J
this  as  I  think  some  readers  may  jjrefer  to  omit  this  !i
section.

There are various statements as to plan and  system
in series of book-tests. For instance, after the  first
book-test given to M.  R.  H. by A.  V.  B. on July  18
1917,  Feda  said  ;

If  this  one  comes  right,  which  she  thmks  it  ought  to,
she  will  want  to  do  some  more,  so  that  when  they  are
collected  and  jmt  together  all  of  them  should  read  like  a
little  letter  from  her  to  you,  containing  advice  and  counsel.
.  .  .  She  says  "  If  I  can  get  two  or  three  so  that  number
two  follows  pretty  well  on  number  one,  and  number  three
foUows  on  number  two,  it  will  be  interesting."

Similarly,  after  the  second  book-test  received  by  the
E,ev.  C.  Drayton  Thomas,  on  September  6,  1917,  he
reports  Feda  as  saying  :

That  these  tests  would  be  so  arranged  as  to  form  a
sequence.  When  concluded  they  would  reveal  a  con-
secutive progression  of  thought  and  thus  make  it  im-
possible for  people  to  say  that  they  were  the  result  of
coincidence.  Mr.  Myers  was  planning  them,  and  they  were
carried  out  by  a  sort  of  co-operation  between  him  and  my
[Mr.  Drayton  Thomas's]  .father.

Again,  on  November 17,  1917, at  an  A.  V. B.  sitting,
Feda  remarks  :

"  Ladye  says  it's  very  important  to  keep  tests  that  seem
wrong,  not  only  your  own  tests,  because  they  may  fit  in
like  a  puzzle  and  she  thinks  the  failures  may  be  the  most
important  of  all  when  fitted  together."

I  have  failed  to  trace  any  evidence  that  these  plans
were  successfully  carried  out.  Later  come  statements
about  intended  cross-correspondences.  Thus,  on  November
21,  1917,  in  the  course  of  an  A.  V.  B.  sitting,  A.  V.  B.
said  during  a  personal  control  : —

A.  V.  B. I'm  going  to  interfere  with  other  people's  sittings.


LXXXI.]


A?i  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


315


U.  V.  T. Have  you  been  playing  any  monkey  tricks  Ladye  ?

A.  V.  B.  Yes,  I  have,  they  will  know  presently,  they  can't
know  all  at  once,  they  may  not  find  it  out  all  at
once,  but  I  am  going  to  try  to  do  cross-corre-
spondences.^

U.  V.  T. What  ?

A.  V.  B. Yes  I  am  and  I  shall  do  it.

• M.  R.  H. and U.  V.  T. remark on this that "  At

any  rate  as  soon  as  Mrs.  Salter  became  a  Leonard  sitter,
land  began  to  receive  book-tests  [i.e.  on  November  15,
!  1917] they began to look as though intended by  the

communicator, A.  W.  V., to have  some  connexion  with

script."

A  month  later,  December  22,  1917,  at  a  sitting  of
Mrs.  Beadon's,  Feda  is  reported  as  saying  :

You  know  he  [the  communicator]  told  you  at  first  about
a  series  of  book  tests.  In  each  one  there  is  something  that
tacks  on  to  the  last  one,  in  the  principal  message  of  the
tests  !  The  other  bits  of  the  test  are  just  to  show  you
that  you  have  got  it.

Are  you  alive  to  the  fact  that  there  may  be  a  curious
kind  of  cross-correspondence  going  on.  Something  you  get
and  don't  quite  understand  may  fit  in  to  something  some
one  else  is  getting.  So  in  the  end  you  will  get  a  personal
message  for  yourself  in  which  you  can  read  his  mind,
but  also  something  for  other  people.  It  will  fit  together
Mke  in  sections.

Five  days  later,  December  27,  1917,  a  sort  of  ampli-
fication of  this  was  given  at  an  A.  V.  B.  sitting.  Feda
says  :

F.  She  says  that  Avhat's  coming  through  now  in  these

book -tests  is  nothing  like  as  interesting  as  it  wil}

1  In  June,  1917,  M.  R.  H.  had  arranged  the  experiment  in  cross-
•eorrespondence  described  below,  p  330.  Nothing  came  of  this,  and
1  do  not  know  whether  the  word  cross-correspondence  had  been  used
in  connexion  with  it.  But  in  any  case  it  is,  of  course,  quite  likely
that  the  word  may  have  been  used  by  some  one  in  the  presence  of
Mrs.  Leonard,  in  or  out  of  trance,  so  that  no  importance  attaches  to
its  use  by  the  trance-personalities.


1


316  Mrs.  Hennj  SidgivicJc.  [part

be  when  all  the  words  are  i)ut  together  and
you  lind  the  Cross.  {S.v.  You  mean  cross-i
correspondence  Ladye  ?)  She  says  to  Feda  "  You:
say  what  I  say,  say  the  Cross."  Ladye  says  she
thinks  that  she  herself  and  many  of  the  chief
movers  in  these  book-tests  will  be  able  to  tell  you
when  they  are  complete.  She  says,  make  the  j
Cross  this  way.  (Feda  draws  the  Cross  in  the
shajie  of  an  X  in  the  air.)
U.  V.  T. That's  a  St.  Peter's  Cross.  '  '

She  says  put  it  that  way.  Now,  she  says,  that
some  things  she  says  to  Feda  this  way  that  you
don't  understand,  will  have  a  more  important
meaning  for  the  future  than  you  think.  She  says
you  will  understand  about  the  Cross  ;  she  says
that's  how  it  will  be  ;  she  says  put  it  down  and
draw  it.  She  says  something's  being  worked  out,
and  that  all  evidential  tests  are  only  leading  up
to  a  climax.  .  .  . She  says  it's  very  important.

It  is  probable,  I  think,  that  the  cross  described  in
this  passage  is  a  fanciful  interpretation  by  Feda,  em-
broidered on  a  misunderstanding  of  the  topic  of  cross-
correspondences.  However  this  may  be,  this  topic  is
dwelt  on  at  other  sittings  about  this  period.  It  is
noteworthy  that  in  November  and  early  December,  1917,
arrangements  for  working  for  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research  were  being  discussed  with  Mrs.  Leonard,  and  an
agreement  was  entered  into  with  her  to  work  for  the
Society  for  three  months  beginning  January  14,  1918.

On  January  16,  1918,  Feda  says  for  A.  V.  B  :

Be  very  careful  and  put  a  big  mark  beside  what  she
is  going  to  say  now  and  put  down  the  time  exactly.
She  says  :  "I  can't  feel  ivhat  they're  doing,  but  I  feel  as
if  some  one  is  trying  to  get  through  something  to  me
{s.v.,  something  to  do  with  a  ladder— a  ladder)."  She
says  you  are  to  put  down  every  syllable  as  she  says
it  {s.v.  They  always  do  !)  "  Some  one  wants  me  to
say  something,  it's  coming  to  me  in  a  roundabout  way,
from  some  one  on  the  earth  plane  originally,  and  it's  being


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


317


carried  to  me — or  transmitted  to  me,  by  some  one  in  the
spirit  world.  Ladder — ladder — and  the  letter  B.  B.  B  "  .  .  .
(s.v.  Aster  .  .  .  Aster  .  .  .  Aster  .  .  .  Uster.  Feda  can't
get  that  Ladye,  a  passage  or  street)  ...  she  says
"...  I  can't  get  any  more  than  that  but  it  feels  as  if  it's
being  telegraphed  to  me."

Some  more  is  said  about  this  supposed  cross-corres-
pondence, and  it  is  suggested  that  "  the  Society  "  will
be  able  to  throw  light  on  it,  but  nothing  came  of  it
so  far  as  is  known. Then  Feda  goes  on  :

The  sitters  ought  to  pay  particular  attention  to  any
name  or  initial  that  is  given  through  at  certain  points  of
their  sittings.  She  thinks  it's  more  than  likely  that  a
cross-correspondence  may  be  arranged  in  a  pecuhar  way
that  she's  been  told  to  explain  .  .  .  they  may  make  use
of  certain  messages,  or  matter  which  is  quite  appropriate  to
the  sitters,  or  as  messages  to  be  transferred  to  the  sitters.
She  says  "  we  may  make  use  of  these  in  a  double  sense  ;
we  shall  sometimes  give  a  letter,  a  second  letter  which
will  give  the  ke5Tiote  after,  if  possible  we  shall  choose  a
letter  which  is  connected  with  the  sitter's  conditions,  so  as
not  to  make  what  would  appear  to  be  a  muddle  ;  but  we
shall  try  to  inter-weave  a  cross-correspondence  in  that
waj."

Ladye  says  that  she  thinks  that  it  won't  be  the  sittings
that  will  be  interesting,  it  will  be  what  will  come  out  of
them,  the  chain.  And  the  points  of  people's  book-tests,
and  she  says  don't  forget,  the  wrong  book-tests  are  not  to
be  discarded  but  placed  together.

Ladye  says  "  it  strikes  me  we  are  working  for  the
Society  to-day,  but  it's  so  much  better  you  should  know
what  they  are  trying  to  do,  so  as  if  they  succeed  you
won't  be  in  the  dark."  .

So  far  as  we  know  this  elaborate  plan  did  not  come
off  at  all,  though,  as  I  shall  show,  there  are  indications  of


1


'^IS  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivich.  [part

attempts  at  cross-correspondence.  Before  describing  these,
however,  I  will  turn  to  the  A.  W.  V.  book-tests,  in  which
we  find  what  looks  like  an  attempt  at  connexion  with
other  S.P.R.  work.  The  first  two  A.  W.  V.  book-tests
were  given  on  November  15,  1917,  and  January  14,  1918,
respectively,  the  latter  at  the  first  sitting  given  under
the  auspices  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.  In
the  first  the  book  indicated  ^  proved  to  be  Dr.  Verrall's
own  copy  of  Jebb^s  edition  of  the  Antigone  of  Sophocles.
Feda  said  :

He's  going  to  give  two  tests  together.  On  the  8th  page
there's  a  reference  to  a  place  you'll  recognise,  rather  near
the  top  of  the  page.  It's  aijpropriate  to  him.  On  p.  57
there's  a  message  from  him  to  you,  about  half  way  down
the  page.  It's  appropriate  to  past  conditions  balanced  up
with  the  present.  There's  an  important  word  beginning
with  H.  in  the  sentence.  They're  appropriate  words  from
him  to  you.  On  page  8  there's  a  description  of  a  place
he  had  to  do  with."

On  this  Mrs.  Salter  comments:  ij

On  page  8  are  the  opening  lines  of  the  jjlay,  and  Jebb's
commentary  printed  just  below  begins :  "  Scene.— The
same  as  in  the  (Edipus  Tyramms,  viz.  an  open  space
before  the  royal  palace  ...  at  Thebes."  I  think  it  may
fau-ly  be  said  therefore  that  "on  the  8th  page  there  is  a
reference  to  a  place  you'll  recognise,  rather  near  the  top  of
the  page.  It's  appropriate  to  (my  father)  "  and  again  "  on
p.  8  there's  a  description  of  a  place  he  had  to  do  with."
My  father  certainly  had  to  '"do  with  "  Thebes,  not  only
as  a  classical  scholar,  but  also  as  having  edited  the  Seven
against  Thebes  of  iEschylus.

On  p.  57  the  passage  which  would  appear  to  be  indicated
is  Jebb's  translation  of  Antig.  255-256  :  "  The  dead  man
was  veiled  from  us,  not  shut  within  a  tomb,  but  lightly
strewn  with  dust,  as  by  the  hand  of  one  that  shunned  a
curse." (The  Guard  is  describing  the  finding  of  Polynices'

iThe  shelf  was  not  quite  clearly  described,  but  I  think  there  is  no
real  doubt  as  to  which  was  meant.


LXXXI.]


Examination  of  Book-Tests.


319


body  after  Antigone  has  covered  it  with  earth.)  When
I  first  read  these  words  I  did  not  think  they  were  appro-
priate as  a  message  from  my  father,  but  when  I  read
Jebb's  comment  on  Hne  256  (the  note  begins  on  p.  57,
just  below  the  translation  and  runs  on  to  p.  58)  I  found
that  he  quotes  as  a  jjarallel  passage  Horace,  Odes,  1.  28,
.  .  .  This  particular  ode  of  Horace  has  figured  pro-
minently in  reports  on  scripts,  see  e.g.  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
Vols.  XXII.,  XXIV.,  XXVI.  It  is,  moreover,  associated
with  my  father  because  the  origin  of  the  "  Horace  Ode
Question  "  [so  much  discussed  in  Proceedings]  was  a  letter
written  by  Mr.  Myers  to  mj^  father  expressuig  disagree-
ment with  something  my  father  had  said  in  an  essay
concerning  this  Ode  (see  Proceedings  S.P.R..,  Vol.  XXII.,
p.  406).  Also,  in  my  father's  edition  of  --^^schylus'  Seven
against  Thebes,  in  his  comments  on  lines  1028-1030,  spoken
by  Antigone,  he  writes  :  "  She  explains  her  meaning  in
line  1030.  The  expression  is  intentionally  contemptuous.
To  what  purpose  is  it  to  forbid  biirial,  when  the  handful
of  earth  necessary  for  the  rite  can  be  carried  in  a  maiden's
robe  ?  The  requirement  of  religion  was  satisfied  by  the
mere  sprinlding  of  dust  three  times  upon  a  corpse.  Cf.
Soph.  Ant.  255  (see  Jebb,  p.  57)  .  .  .  Hor.  Od.  I.  28  .  .  ."
If  the  passage  in  Jebb,  p.  57,  is  the  one  indicated  by
Feda,  presumably  the  "  important  word  beginning  with
H."  is  Horace.

It  is  the  apparent  reference  to  Horace's  Odes  I.,  28,
that  here  constitutes  the  connexion  with  other  S.P.R.
work.  But  it  was  published  work,  and  there  is  therefore
no  evidence  of  any  supernormal  knowledge  apart  from
the  essence  of  the  book-test — namely,  the  absence  of  any
normal  knowledge  of  what  was  on  the  page  indicated.
I  have  quoted  more  of  the  record  than  is  required  to
bring  out  the  reference  to  the  Horace  Ode,  because  the
rest  perhaps  connects  this  book-test  with  the  next  one — that
given  at  Mrs.  Salter's  next  sitting  on  January  14,  1918.
On  this  occasion  U.  V.  T.  acted  as  recorder  :  at  the
November  sitting  Mrs.  Salter  had  recorded  for  herself.
The  record  begins  as  follows  :


320


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


F. {s.v. What  you  say  ?)  About  a  book  ?  when  you  corned

to  Feda  last  time.  (s.v.  You  tried  to  give  about  a
book  ?)

S. , Yes,  and  it  was  quite  a  success.  .,


F.  He  says  he's  got  another  one  to-day,  it's  a  little  dis-
connected with  the  previous  one.  He  tried  to  get
one  what  would  fit  in  with  and  follow  on  the  other
experiment.  He  couldn't  do  that,  but  he  says  that
so  long  as  he  tells  you  when  a  test  is  disconnected
it's  almost  as  good  as  if  it  were  connected.  ...  It's
in  the  same  place  as  the  other  was  [the  height  of
the  shelf  is  then  indicated]  ....  (s.v.  One,  two,
three)  five,  it's  the  fifth  book  counting  from  left
to  right  ...  p.  73.  (s.v.  Near  the  top  is  a
message  .  .  .)  He  wants  you  to  take  it  as  a  per-
sonal message  from  him,  but  it  has  a  bearing  on
your  attitude  towards  some  one  else.  Some  one  on
the  earth  plane,  not  in  the  spirit  world.  He's
builded  up  a  letter  D,  but  he  can't  tell  Feda  whether
it's  a  man  or  a  woman  ;  he  says  "  Only  take  what
I  can  give."  He  says  "D  is  an  important  word
connected  with  tlie  imjDort  of  the  message.".  .  .  It's
rather  a  peculiar  message  he  says,  but  he  wants  to
give  them  rather  differently  to  the  \^'ay  other  peoples
does.  He  wants  to  give  them  on  a  line  of  his  own.
He  says  the  last  one  was  a  bit  diffwent,  of  a  different

■  . ^ type  to  the  ones  what  others  gives.  .  .  . He  says

it's  near  the  top  of  the  page,  not  quite  at  the  top.
Wait  a  minute  ; you  know  it's  difficult  to  tell  which

\-:  ■ page they mean when the pages face each  other.

:  It's  either  on  the  page  he  spoke  of  or  on  the  opposite

page,  there's  a  number  or  a  word  in  different  char-
acters to  the  usual.  If  it's  a  number  it's  more  than
one  figure,  it  must  be  two  or  more  characters  to  it,
•  because  if  it  were  not  like  that  it  wouldn't  look  like
a  word. It's  in  different  characters  to  the  rest  and

■  '  there's  a  word  near  it  (he  says  he's  only  suggesting

a  word)  a  word  like  Genesis  is  near  to  the  word  in


LXXXI.J


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


321


peculiar  type.  He  thinks  that  he's  got  the  fii-st  two
syllables  of  the  word  right  if  not  the  rest.

S. He  means  that  the  word  begins  with  Gen-ne  ?

F.  Yes,  that's  it.  He  says  that  this  book  is  not  the  kind
of  book  what  every  one  would  read,  it  would  appeal
■  to  a  particular  class  of  people.  It's  not  what  is
called  a  pop-u-lar  book.  He  supposes  that  everyone
would  know  about  it,  but  not  care  to  read  it.  It's  a
good  book  he  says,  not  a  cheapy  book,  and  it's  a
well  wi'oten  book,  but  not  very  interesting  all  tlirough  ;
many  peoples  woulchi't  think  it  interesting  at  all.
He's  interested  in  the  things  in  that  book.  He's
smiling.  You'd  better  put  down  that  he's  smiling,
sometimes  that's  rather  important.  .  .  .  He  says
"  Since  I  passed  over  I've  had  opportunities  of
becoming  acquainted  with  the  subject  of  that  book,
of  understanding  it  in  a  different  way  to  what
I  could  when  1  was  on  the  earth  plane."  And  you
know  the  page  what  he's  just  given,  page  73,  well,
just  close  to  that  page,  there's  mention  of  a  subject
upon  which  he  has  now  changed  his  mind  since  he
passed  over.

S. Does  the  mention  come  before  or  after  page  73  ?

F.  He  thinks  it  comes  after.  He  says  he's  almost  sure  it's
after,  (s.v.  Writing  ?  Oh  !  yes,  but  nothing  to  do
with  a  book  test  ? What  about  then  ?)

The  book  proved  to  be  Jebb's  edition  of  Sophocles's
(Edi'pus  Coloneus  (Camb.  University  Press,  1885),  and  again
Dr.  Verrall's  own  copy.  It  has  a  long  introduction  of
eighty-two  pages,  but  Mrs.  Salter  found  nothing  relevant
on  p.  73  of  the  introduction.  Turning  to  the  text  of  the
play,  the  words  from  Jebb's  translation  which  appear
on  the  upper  part  of  p.  73  are  part  of  a  conversation
between  (Edipus  and  his  daughter  Ismene  relating  to
the  question  whether  GEdipus's  death  and  burial  should
take  place  in  Thebes  or  Attica.  Beginning  at  the  fourth
line  from  the  top  of  the  page,  the  passage  runs  thus  :

Oe.  Will  they  also  shroud  me  in  Theban  dust  1

Is.  Nay,  the  guilt  of  a  kinsman's  blood  debars  thee,  father.


Y


322


Mrs.  Henry  S id g wick.


[part


Oe.  Then  never  shall  they  become  my  masters.
Is.  Some  day  then  this  shall  be  a  grief  for  the  Cadmeans.
Oe.  In  what  conjunction  of  events,  my  child  ?
Is.  By  the  force  of  thy  wrath  when  they  take  their  stand
at  thy  tomb.

Oe.  And  who  hath  told  thee  what  thou  tellest,  my  child  ?
Is.  Sacred  envoys  from  the  Delphian  hearth.

Mrs.  Salter  notes  that  she  can  find  in  these  words  no
personal  message

bearing  on  [her]  relations  "wdth  some  person  on  the  earth
plane,  but  [adds]  the  choice  of  this  passage  appears  to  be
of  some  interest  in  connexion  with  [Mr.  Piddington's]
j)aper  on  "  The  One  Horse  Dawn  Experiment."  I  have
marked  the  line  which  I  understand  he  takes  as
having  a  reference  to  his  paper  [viz.  By  force  of  thy
wrath,  etc.].  The  Avords  "  take  their  stand "  are  under-
lined in  pencil  in  the  text,  and  in  the  margin  in  my
father's  wi-iting  are  the  words  "  be  stoj)ped  by,"  i.e.  he
dissents  from  Jebb's  rendering  and  substitutes  another  of
his  own.  The  holding  up  of  the  invaders  at  the  tomb  of
Oedipus  is,  I  beheve,  the  jooint  of  interest  to  [Mr.  Pidding-
tonj,  so  that  this  marginal  note  of  my  father's  may  have
some  relevance.  The  line  I  have  marked  is  two  and  a
quarter  inches  from  the  top  of  an  eight  and  a  half -inch  page.
D.  is  said  to  be  an  important  word  connected  with  the  import
of  the  message,  that  is  the  first  letter  of  it.  Presumably  this
M'ord  is  "  Delphian,"  since  the  message  Ismene  is  bringing  to
Oedipus  has  been  told  by  envoys  from  the  oracle  at  Delphi.

The  statement  that  either  on  j).  73  or  the  opposite
p.  7  2  there  is  a  number  or  word  in  different  characters  to  the
usual  would  seem  to  apply  best  to  p.  72,  the  upper  half
of  which  is  occupied  by  the  Greek  text  corresponding
to  the  translation  on  p.  73.  But  the  notes  occup3dng
the  lower  halves  of  both  pages  are  pej^pered  over  with
words  in  Greek  type.  On  p.  72,  in  a  note  concerning
"  a  kinsman's  blood,"  are  quoted  two  Greek  words  with
the  root  yeve,  suggesting  "  Genesis,"  and  in  the  same
note  is  a  reference  to  the  burial  rite  given  by  Antigone
to Polynices. The  remarks about  the book not  being.


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


323


a  popular  one  but  interesting  to  Dr.  Verrall  are  obviously
true.  But  as  to  her  father's  having  "  had  opportunities
since  he  died  of  becoming  acquainted  with  the  subject
of  that  book " — i.e.  the  death  of  (Edipus — "  of  under-
standing it  in  a  different  way  to  what  [he]  could  ...  on
the  earth  plane,"  or  to  the  mention  on  or  near  p.  73  of  a
su-bject  upon  which  he  has  changed  his  mind  since  he
passed  over,  Mrs.  Salter  had  no  suggestion  to  make  unless
it  were  that  the  subject  may  be  death.

It  is  worth  noting  that  in  both  these  book-tests  the
passages  indicated  occur  in  plays  of  Sophocles  edited  by
Jebb.  Both  passages  refer  to  burial,  or  at  least  to  the
shrouding  in  dust  which  formed  an  essential  part  of
funeral  rites,  and  in  both  cases  we  are  led  to  footnotes
by  Jebb  dealing  with  this  subject — the  footnote  in  the
(Edipus  Coloneus  of  the  second  book-test  referring  to  the
Antigone  of  the  first  ;  while  in  the  rirst  book-test  the
footnote  refers  to  Horace's  Odes  I,  28,  which  not  only
is  itself  a  topic  connected  with  S.P.R.  work,  but  again
refers  to  the  shrouding  with  dust.  There  is  therefore
a  certain  connexion  between  the  two  book-tests  which
may  have  been  more  than  accidental,  notwithstanding
Feda's  statement  that  A.  W.  V.  had  failed  "  to  get  one
that  would  fit  in  with  and  follow  on  the  other  experiment."

However  this  may  be,  there  certainly  seems  to  be  a
connexion,  as  Mrs.  Salter  observes,  between  the  book-test
of  January  14,  1918,  and  a  paper  Mr.  Piddington  had  been
engaged  in  writing  between  November  8  and  December
22,  1917,  entitled  F^irther  Light  on  the  One  Horse  Davm
Experiment,  the  point  of  which  was  to  show  that  an  old
man  in  wliite  going  towards  the  East,  spoken  of  a  good
many  times  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  in  the  course  of  that
experiment,^  and  in her  script  and  that  of  other  auto-

1  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  "One  horse  dawn  experiment"  was
one  in  which  Dr.  Verrall  in  his  lifetime  tried,  without  Mrs.  Verrall's
knowledge,  to  get  a  certain  Greek  phrase  from  Euripides  to  emerge  in
her  automatic  script.  The  success  was  only  partial,  but  interesting.
Mrs.  Verrall's  account  of  it  will  be  found  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.,
pp.  156-167.  There  have  been  various  discussions  on  it,  the  last  being
the  paper  by  Mr.  Piddington  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXX.,  p.  176,  re-
ferred to  in  the  text.


324


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


matists  later,  was  CEdipus  dressed  in  funeral  garb  and
passing  to  Ms  death.  He  showed  that  QSdipus  was
connected  with  the  One-Horse  Dawn  experiment  by  a
note  in  Jebb's  edition  of  the  CEdipus  Tyrannus,  which
quotes  the  phrase  from  Euripides  which  was  the  subject
of  the  experiment,  and  also  refers  to  passages  in  the
QiJdipus  Goloneus — the  book  selected  for  the  book-test —
these  passages  being  also  apparently  referred  to  in  the  scripts
connected  with  the  old  man  in  white.  Mr.  Piddington's
paper  was  never  read  to  the  Society,  and  was  not  pub-
lished till  November,  1918  (see  Proceedings  S.P.B.,  Vol.
XXX.,  p.  176).  He  had,  however,  mentioned  the  matter
vaguely  to  Mrs.  Salter  on  November  14,  1917^ — the  day
before  the  first  of  the  two  book-tests.

Allowing  for  a  great  deal  of  confusion,  I  think  we  may
go  further  than  Mrs.  Salter  does  in  noting  a  connexion
between  the  paper  and  the  book-test,  and  may  trace
a  definite  attempt  at  not  only  reference  to,  but  comment
on,  the  subject  of  the  paper.  On  this  supposition  the
reference  to  a  passage  in  the  CEdipus  Goloneus  referring
to  his  burial  may  fairly  be  taken  as  a  personal  message
from  A.  W.  V.,  and  as  having  a  bearing  on  Mrs.  Salter's
attitude  to  some  one  on  the  earth  plane — namely  Mr.
Piddington.  The  important  word  D,  "  connected  with  the
import of the message," might be Dawn ; it  will  be

^  The  following  is  a  memorandum  written  by  Mr.  Piddington  on
Nov.  17,  1917,  after  seeing  the  record  of  the  book-test  of  Novem-
ber 14  :

"  On  Wednesday,  Nov.  14,  1917,  I  had  a  few  minutes'  conversation
with  Mrs.  Salter,  in  the  course  of  which  I  told  her  that  I  thought
I  had  found  the  explanation  of  various  references  in  the  [One  Horse
Dawn]  M.  V.  scripts  which  had  hitherto  remained  miexplained.  .  .  .
I  added  that,  if  my  interpretation  were  right,  it  was  in  my  opinion
extraordinary  that  A.  W.  V.  had  never  seen  what  these  references
meant.  I  think  I  said  that  the  references  in  question  were  explained
by  a  passage — or  by  a  note  on  a  passage — in  a  Greek  play  which
A.  W.  V.  must  have  known  and  which  I  knew  [Mrs.  Verrall]  had
read.  I  had  meant,  ajter  speaking  of  other  ?)iatters,  to  ask  [Mrs.  Salter]
whether  she  had  got  any  editions  of  Sophocles'  Oed.  Tyr.  that  her
father  had  used,  and,  if  so,  whether  she  would  let  me  see  them.  But
I  forgot  to  do  this.  I  am  quite  certain  that  I  did  not  mention
Sophocles  or  any  of  his  plays."


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


325


noticed  that  nothing  is  said  by  Feda  about  its  being  a
word  in  the  selected  passage.  The  "  line  of  his  own "
on  which  A.  W.  V.  wants  to  give  messages  might  be
cross-correspondences  or  connexion  with  other  S.P.R.
work.  The  opportunities  of  understanding  that  book  in
a  different  way  from  what  he  could  before  might  refer
to  what  he  now  knows  about  the  introduction  of  (Edipus
and  Jebb's  note  on  o/o^wi'oi'  into  the  One-Horse  Dawn
experiment — for  neither  Dr.  Verrall  nor  the  automatist,
Mrs.  Verrall,  had  perceived  this  at  the  time — and  the
subject  upon  which  he  had  changed  his  mind  would  be
the  idea  that  he  was  the  sole  agent  in  that  experiment,
or  that  it  worked  out  simply  as  a  partially  successful
attempt  at  thought  transference  from  himself  to  his
wife.  Feda's  aside  about  "  Writing  ?  Oh  yes,  but
nothing  to  do  with  a  book-test  ?  What  about  then  ?  "
would  refer  to  the  automatic  writing,  especially  of  ]\Irs.
Verrall  in  the  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  experiment.

Possibly  it  is  some  confirmation  of  the  hypothesis  that
Mr.  Piddington's  paper  was  in  the  communicator's  mind,
that  when  at  a  Leonard  sitting  on  April  11,  1918,
A.  W.  V.  again  gives  a  book-test  from  the  (Edi'piis
Coloneus.  Feda  says  that  the  passage  indicated  "  refers
to  recent  discoveries  of  a  scientific  nature,  and  very
interesting  to  ]\Ir.  Arthur."  In  this  case,  however,  if
Mr.  Piddington's  paper  is  meant  by  the  "  recent  dis-
coveries," we  must  suppose  that  the  reference  to  the
CEdijms  Coloneus  as  a  whole  is  all  that  is  significant,
as  nothing  markedly  relevant  is  to  be  found  on  the
page  indicated  (p.  65)^  of  either  the  introduction  or  the
text.

It  is  interesting  (though  not  a  book-test)  that  on
January  18,  1918,  when  Mr.  Gerald  Balfour  was  the
sitter  and  ]\Ir.  Piddington  the  note  taker — both  being
present  at  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Leonard  for  the  first  time
— an  old  man  in  white  turned  towards  the  East  was
mentioned  early  in  the  sitting  as  probably  a  "  guide."
I  quote  the  relevant  part  of  the  record  in  the  footnote

^  Page  65,  however,  is  occupied  by  part  of  the  same  conversation
as  p.  73,  and  leads  up,  therefore,  to  Oedipus's  burial  place.


326


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


below.^  Mr.  Balfour  had  recently  read  Mr.  Piddington's
paper  in  manuscript,  and  Mr.  Piddington  happened  to
have  it  with  him  at  the  sitting  shut  up  in  an  attache
case,  and  had  looked  at  it  in  the  train  coming  up  to
the  sitting.

Another  interesting  point  in  this  connexion  is  the
following,  which,  however,  is  not  easy  to  interpret.  On
February  8,  1918,  a  Mrs.  T.  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.
Leonard— Sir  Oliver  Lodge  taking  notes.  She  was  told
that  on  p.  74  (near  the  top)  of  the  fourth  book  in  the
second  shelf  from  the  bottom  of  a  certain  set  of  shelves
was  to  be  found  "  an  encouraging  message  about  the
book  ^  he  was  speaking  of  just  now.  He  hopes  that  the
book  ^  will  fulfil  the  hope  expressed  in  this  message."  As
it  turned  out,  the  indication  of  the  position  of  the  test-
book  was  by  no  means  clear.  The  description  of  the
bookshelves  was  not  very  accurate,  but  it  was  decided
that  a  certain  set  was  meant.  It  was  then  doubtful
which  was  the  second  shelf  from  the  bottom.  Were
the  two  lowest — which  were  made  for  music — to  be
counted  or  not  ?  It  was  decided  to  ignore  them,  and
to  count  as  the  shelf  meant  the  second  of  those  con-
taining reading  books.  Then  there  was  a  doubt  whether
in  arriving  at  the  fourth  book  a  pamphlet  of  sixteen
pages,  almost  hidden,  was  to  be  counted.  Counting
this, the fourth book was a volume of poems  by

1  [After  one  or  two  preliminary  words]  "  There  is  two  spirits  here —
two  elderly  gentlemen.  .  .  .  Both  pleased  to  see  you.  .  .  .  They've
got  another  man  with  them — in  white  robes.  Looks  to  Feda  as  if
he  comes  from  the  East.  A  tall  man.  Feda  feels  he  lived  on  the
earth  plane  himdreds  of  years  ago.  Feda  thinks  he  comes  from  the
East  because  he  turned  towards  the  East.  He  points  in  that  direction
{i.e.  eastwards).  He  lived  long  ago  on  the  earth  plane ;  but  he  has
been  to  you  before,  and  has  been  with  you  as  your  guide.  He  wears
long  white  garments,  and  he  has  often  tried  to  shov>'  himself  to  you.
Instead  of  seeing  him  he  says  you  hear  him.  Don't  know  what  this
means.  You  hear  him,  he  says,  this  (Feda  thinks  it's  not  right) — he
says  he  makes  you  hear  him  through  the  ear  that  you  can't  hear
Feda  by.  Sounds  like  nonsense.  [Mr.  Balfour  had  explained  to  Mrs.
Leonard  before  the  sitting  that  he  was  temporarily  deaf  of  one  ear]."

^  The  book  mentioned  here  as  well  as  earlier  in  the  sitting  was  not
any  book  selected  for  book-test  purposes.


Lxxxi.]  An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.  327

d'Aimunzio,  on  p.  74  of  which  are  stanzas  about  an  unknown
Itahan  soldier's  grave  in  the  desert,  which  seemed  irrele-
vant. The  fifth  volume  had  not  seventy-four  pages.
The  fourth  volume  in  the  sheK  below  this  was  then
taken.  It  proved  to  be  a  volume  of  S.P.R.  Journal  and
Proceedings  for  1903  bound  together.  There  were  two
pages  numbered  74.  On  the  page  74  belonging  to  the
Journal  is  part  of  the  report  of  a  discussion  at  a  meet-
ing of  the  Society  at  which  INIrs.  Verrall  read  :  "  A
Further  Account  oi  Experiments  in  Automatic  Writing,"
including  an  account  of  the  "  One-Horse  Dawn "  experi-
ment. The  fourth  line  on  p.  74  begins  a  paragraph
in  a  speech  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  as  follows  :

Mrs.  Verrall  seemed  to  be  of  opinion  that  this  was  not
a  case  of  telepathy  between  herself  and  the  lady  con-
cerned, but  that  there  might  be  some  further  inteUigence
at  work.  This  he  felt  himself,  not  only  in  this  instance,
but  Avith  regard  to  the  first  experiment  [i.e.  the  "  One
Horse  Dawn "  experiment]  that  it  was  possibly  not  Dr.
VerraU's  mind  actmg  upon  Mrs.  Verrall's,  but  some  other
inteUigence,  that  was  trying  to  give  the  sentence  required.^

This  does  not  seem  to  correspond  very  well  with  the
description  given  of  the  message  that  was  to  be  found.
Nor  was  the  book  containing  it  found  in  what  appeared
to  be  the  place  described.  But  it  is  remarkably  appro-
priate to  Mr.  Piddington's  paper,  to  which,  as  shown
above,  other  book-tests  may  refer.  Was  this  pure  coin-
cidence ?  Or  was  it  intended  by  the  communicator  at
]\'Irs.  T.'s  sitting  with  IMrs.  Leonard  ?  Or  can  we  suppose
in  cases  like  this  and  the  "  Charolois  "  case  above
(p.  271)  that  the  investigators  are  perhaps  supernormally
guided to the book  1  '  But then how account for  the

1  That  there  was  probably  some  other  inteUigence  concerned  is  of
coiirse  the  moral  of  Mr.  Piddington's  paper.  It  is  therefore  worth
mentioning  that  he  had,  till  after  the  verification  of  Mrs.  T.'s  book-test,
entirely  overlooked  and  forgotten  this  discussion  of  the  "  One-Horse
Dawn"  experiment  in  1903.  It  was  only  after  being  told  by  Sir
Oliver  Lodge  about  the  result  of  this  book-test  that  he  included  the
reference  to  the  meeting  in  Appendix  D  of  his  paper  {Proc.  S.P.R.,
Vol.  XXX.,  p.  229).


328


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


page  being  mentioned  by  Feda  ?  It  should  be  noted
that  Mrs.  T.  knew  nothing  of  Mr.  Piddington's  paper
either  at  the  time  of  the  sitting  or  when  she  verified
the  book-test.  Nor  did  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  the  note
taker,  know  about  it  till  March  12,  more  than  a  month
after  the  sitting.  It  is  interesting  that,  as  he  informs  us,
Mrs.  T.  told  him  that  on  turning  up  p.  74  of  the  Journal
for  1903,  she  felt  a  certainty  that  it  was  the  page  meant,
though  she  did  not  understand  the  application

This  is,  I  think,  all  that  occurred  connecting  book-
tests  with  Mr.  Piddington's  paper.  I  now  turn  to  some
other  things  which  may  be  regarded  as  cross-correspond-
ences. One  occurred  on  January  23,  1918,  in  an  A.  V.  B.
book-test,  when  it  was  asserted  that  there  was  a  link
between  the  book-test  and  something  got  through  Mr.
Drayton  Thomas.  I  think  the  book-test  is  worth  quoting,
notwithstanding  the  fact  that  there  is  a  doubt — due
perhaps  to  confusion  caused  by  interruptions  by  the  sitter
— as  to  which  of  two  rooms  and  shelves  Peda  intended  to
describe,  and  that  the  first  interpretation  produced  no
appropriate  result.  And,  moreover,  notwithstanding  the
necessity  of  a  good  deal  of  explanation  if  the  points  of
the  book-test  and  of  the  supposed  cross-correspondence
are  to  be  made  clear.  After  statements  about  the  shelf,
Feda  proceeds  :

r.  i^ine  book,  left  to  right,  page  83.  .  .  .  It's  rather  near

the  top  of  the  page  about  a  quarter  of  the  way
down  Ladye  thinks.  {s.v.  Wait  a  minute  Ladye
please,  a  reference  to  what  ?  to  Mrs.  Twonnie'&
work  ?)  Whai  work,  this  work  ?  No.  Day  like
crystal  cup,  poetry  .  .  .  there's  a  reference  on  that
page  to  the  poetry,  and  particularly  to  that  poem
about  the  big  Indian  and  Mocassins.  .  .  .  She
says  "  I  say  it  has  a  reference  particularly  to  that
poem,  but  it  refers  to  it  in  a  very  pecuhar  way.
Don't  expect  to  see  actual  words  from  the  poem

^  The  contemporary  note  made  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  on  this  point
has  been  mislaid,  but  Mr.  Piddington,  who  saw  it  at  the  time,  entirely
confirms  his  recollection.


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


329


repeated."  But  she  says  you'll  see  a  reason  for
her  picking  that  particular  poem,  wait  a  minute,
she  says  the  test  will  answer  itself.  .  .  .  Ladye
says  she's  got  a  particular  reason  for  wanting  to
get  this  book  test  through.  She  says  the  very
fact  of  what  she  tried  to  do,  and  practically
failed  in,  is  the  reason  why  she  tried  to  give  this
to-day.  She  says  :  "  you  know  what  I  am  re-
ferring to  ?  "
Yes.

She  won't  say  any  more,  but  she  was  particularly
anxious  to  get  this  through  to-day.  Oh  and  there's
a  link  up  with  this  test  and  something  she  got
through  the  parson.  It's  something  she  got
through  since  he  came  here  last  time.  .  .  .  Ladye
says  he  can't  have  given  it  away.  She  says  do
you  think  she's  given  that  definitely  enough,  she
means  what  it  refers  to.

Yes.

She  says  that  it  not  only  refers  to  the  words  of
the  poem,  but  to  the  conditions  around  it  and
connected  v,^th.  it,  vet  outside  of  it.


She  thinks  this  should  be  a  good  book  test.  She
says  you've  noticed  that  she's  gone  off  the
ordinary  lines,  she's  been  trymg  more  and  more
difficult  things  as  she  went  on.  She  said  she  must
speak  about  the  parson.  She  says  she  thinks  he
thought  that  her  last  test  given  through  him
came  from  some  one  else.
Pv.  Hi  I  have  never  found  anything  in  his  script  that
apphed  to  what  she  said  here.

She  feels  sure  she  has  got  something  through.  She
makes  a  particular  point  to-day  of  saying  this,
she  says  it's  got  something  to  do  with  what  she
tried  to  get  through  Mxs.  Salter.


The  poem  above  referred  to  was  an  unpublished  and
unprinted  poem by  M.  R.  H., called Snoiv  in  Virginia,


330


Mrs.  Heyiry  Sidgwick.


[part


which  had  been  a  favourite  of  A.  V.  B.'s.  The  first
verse  is  :

The  Day  is  Hke  a  crystal  cup
In  which  the  Hmpid  air  brims  up  ;
A  goblet  that  the  sun  shines  through
In  gleams  of  golden  shot  with  blue.
Around  us  lies  the  endless  snow
That  over  all,  above,  below,
Like  some  great  hunter  in  the  night
Has  stalked  in  mocassins  of  Avhite.

It  had  been  arranged  with  A.  V.  B.  in  June,  1917,
that  she  should  try  to  get  at  least  a  few  words  of  this
verse  written  in  Mrs.  Salter's  automatic  script.  ]\Irs.
Salter  was  at  that  time  unacquainted  with  Mrs.  Leonard,
and  knew  nothing  of  the  experiment,  but  it  was  explained
to  A.  V.  B.  who  she  was,  and  the  verse  ^  was  carefully
repeated  to  Feda,  who  practically  knew  it  by  heart.
On  one  or  two  occasions  A.  V.  B.  said  that  she  thought
she  had  succeeded,  but  as  it  was  understood  from  Mr.
Piddington  (who  saw  Mrs.  Salter's  scripts)  that  she  had
not  done  so,  she  was  told  that  the  experiment  had
apparently  failed.  It  is  to  this  she  refers  in  the  words  :
"  what  she  tried  to  do  and  practically  failed  in."

Another  cross-correspondence  experiment  is  referred  to
in  the  statements  by  Feda  above  given — one  said  to  have
been  initiated  by  A.  V.  B.  herself,  who  according  to
Feda  had  for  some  little  time  been  endeavouring  to
influence  the  semi-automatic  or  "  inspirational "  writing
of  one  of  Mrs.  Leonard's  sitters,  the  Rev.  C.  Drayton
Thomas,  referred  to  above  by  Feda  as  '  the  parson."
He  knew  experiments  were  being  attempted,  and  sent
his  script  to  M.  R.  H.  for  comparison.  She  had
received  a  batch  on  January  19,  four  days  before  the
sitting  under  discussion,  and  had  read  it  but  not  ex-
amined it  carefully.  Mr.  Thomas's  last  sitting  with
Mrs.  Leonard  had  been  on  January  3,  1918.

So  far  in  explanation  of  the  allusions  made  by  Feda
in  the  above  extracts  from  the  sitting  of  January  23.

But  both  the  book  indicated  and  Mr.  Thomas's  script


Lxxxi.]  An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.  ■  331

seem  to  correspond — not  so  much  with  the  stanza  from
M.  R.  H.'s  poem  which  I  have  quoted  and  which  Feda
knew,  as  with  two  later  stanzas  which  it  is  very  im-
probable she  had  ever  heard  or  seen.  The  poem,  as
already  said,  had  not  been  printed.  These  stanzas  describe
the  snow-clad  earth  as  a  woman  lying  at  rest  :

The  runners  of  our  sleigh  scarce  mar
The  \'irgin  wliiteness  stretching  far
Beyond  the  road  on  every  side,
In  folds  of  silence,  soft  and  wide.
The  great  earth  has  no  heed  or  care
For  two  lone  travellers,  everywhere
Her  spirit  seems  to  contemplate
Some  inner  myster3''  of  fate.

Impassive,  wonderful  and  still.
She  bows  to  the  Creator's  will,
With  pale  hands  folded  on  her  breast,
Resigned  and  happy  and  at  rest.
Yet  deep  within  her  heart  who  knows
What  throbbing  vein  of  rapture  flows
As  like  a  Saint  of  bygone  days,
She  ponders  the  Almighty's  ways.

The  test-book  (according  to  the  second  interpretation
of  its  place,  made  without  reference  to  its  content)
was  Fair  Rosamond,  by  Thomas  Miller.  On  p.  83,
beginning  on  the  ninth  line,  in  a  page  of  thirty-seven
lines,  occur  the  following  words  :

We  have  seen  the  white  woman,  and  I  have  stood
withm  a  lance's  length  of  her,  and  she  seemed  asleep,  with
all  that  look  of  "winning  misery,  which  leads  mankind  to
pity  her,  when  she  seizes  on  them,  and  sinks  into  the
deep  earth.

As  in  the  poem,  there  is  a  reference  here  to  a  mystical
white  woman  asleep  and  connected  with  the  earth.

In  Mr.  Thomas's  script  of  January  17,  1918,  were
found,  on  examination  by  M.  R.  H.  (among  a  great
deal  that  appeared  to her  suggestive  only  of  the  sub-


332  Mrs.  Henry  Sidg^vick.  ■  [fart

conscious  Mr.  Thomas),  the  following  words  in  a  little
line  by  themselves  :  "  Saints  everlasting  rest."  These
words  may  be  the  result  of  an  attempt  by  A.  V.  B.  to
get  through  Mr.  Thomas  an  allusion  to  the  last  stanza
of  M.  R.  H.'s  poem,  where  the  snowclad  earth  is  compared
to  a  saint  at  rest.  If  so,  we  have  in  the  poem  the
"  link  up  "  with  the  book-test  of  January  23,  1918,  of
which  Feda  speaks  above,  and  we  can  understand  why
a  great  point  is  made  of  getting  this  particular  test
through  on  this  particular  day — the  first  on  which  M.  R.  H.
and  U.  V.  T.  had  a  sitting  after  Mr.  Thomas'  script  was
produced.

It  should  be  said  that  other  remarks  about  the  test-
book  were  not  very  satisfactory.  A  word  like  "  swahng
or  soualing  "  stated  to  be  at  the  beginning,  could  not  be
found,  and  a  frontispiece  said  to  be  in  that  book  or  the
one  next  it  was  not  well  described,  though  it  was  true
that  the  test-book  had  a  frontispiece.

In  view  of  the  failure  to  describe  clearly  the  place
where  the  book  of  this  book-test  stood,  M.  R.  H.  and
U.  V.  T.  had  the  curiosity  to  examine  the  eighty-fifth
page  of  the  ninth  book  in  several  other  shelves.  Nowhere
on  any  of  these  pages  was  there  found  anything  even
vaguely  suggestive  of  M.  R.  H.'s  poem.  It  is  perhaps
noteworthy  that  in  a  second  book-test  attempted  immedi-
ately afterwards  at  the  same  sitting,  the  description  given
of  the  situation  of  the  book  was  so  vague  and  indefinite
that  no  attempt  was  made  by  the  sitters  to  identify  it.
Feda  complained  that  A.  V.  B.  "  can't  make  out  where
it  is.  She  once  saw  it  as  if  it  were  lying  on  top  of
some  things  on  the  table,  but  as  she  saw  it  some  time
ago  she  don't  suppose  it's  there  now."  Yet  a  good
deal  is  said  about  the  appearance  of  the  book,  its  size,
etc.,  and  wide  margins  ;  and  it  is  asserted  that  on  p.  27
would  be  found  something  "  that  you  certainly  never
meant  as  a  prophecy,  but  which  has  now  turned  out
as  a  prophecy,  and  a  true  one  too."  Feda  continues  :
"  She  can't  give  Feda  the  position  on  that  page,  but
she  looked  to  Feda  as  if  she  was  pointing  half  way
down, but  there's  not  an  awful  lot  of  writing  on  one


I


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


333


page, and that makes it difficult because it's  spreaded
out."

On  January  30,  1918,  at  an  A.  V.  B.  sitting,  it  is
again  distinctly  stated  that  a  cross-correspondence  is
being  attempted.  After  referring  unmistakably  to  Mr.
Gerald  Balfour,  who  had  recently  had  two  sittings  with
Mrs.  Leonard,  Feda  says  :

It's  got  something  to  do  with  him.  Wait  a  minute.
(s.v.  Tliis  is  by  way  of  being  a  little  cross.)  [Then  very
loud]  :  Cross-correspondence  .  .  .  {s.v.  She  says  it  will
refer  to  something  that  Feda  said  to  him  last  time  ;  it's  a
cross  in  a  way  with  his  book-test.)

[Later  on  Feda  tries  vamly  to  get  a  name  perhaps
meant  for  Dionysius  ^  and  says  :]

This  book-test  what  she's  given  to  you  to-day,  and  the
gentleman  what  came  to  Feda  [i.e.  ]\Ir.  G.  W.  Balfour]
and  his  test  what  he  got,  is  all  hnked  up  together  with
this  name.

As,  however,  in  the  attempt  at  a  book-test  for  Mr.
Balfour  the  account  of  the  place  where  the  book  was  to
be  found  was  too  confused  for  anything  to  be  made  of
it,  the  supposed  cross-correspondence  naturally  could  not
be  discovered,  and  the  book-test  of  the  30th  threw  no
light  on  it.

In  the  course  of  the  book-tests  on  April  11,  1918,
already  twice  referred  to  (p.  297,  §5,  and  above,  p.  325),
besides  the  reference  by  A.  W.  V.  to  the  (Ediims  Coloneus,
there  was  also  the  following  passage  :

F.  The  first  book  .  .  .  from  the  left  on  the  second  sheK,  p.  71,
halfway  down  ...  It  refers  to  something  they've  tried  to
do  through  you.  They've  [i.e.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Verrall]  got  it
through  partly,  they've  succeeded  partly.  They  hope  to  do
much  more.  One  word  in  particular  will  suggest  that,  a
word  of  about  six  or  seven  letters.  One  particular  word
apphes  it.

The book designated proved to be A Cornpanion  to

1  If  so,  Feda  got  among  other  attempts  as  far  as  Deosyn.


334  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivich.  [part

Latin  Studies,  edited  by  Dr.  J.  E.  Sandys  (Cambridge
University  Press,  1910).  On  p.  71,  and  also  on  p.  70
facing  it,  is  a  list  of  bee-plants,  wild  flowers,  etc..  men-
tioned in  Latin  poetry,  with  references  to  Virgil,  Horace,
Ovid.  Perhaps  the  word  "  Casia  "  on  p.  71,  just  above
the  middle  ("  Casiam  "  on  p.  70)  may  be  the  one  specially
referred  to.  There  is  a  good  deal  about  bee-plants  in
the  scripts  of  various  automatists  (see  especially  Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  XXV.,  pp.  246-248,  on  Mrs.  Holland's
script  of  March  2,  1910)  ;  but  if  the  communicator  means
that  some  attempt  was  being  made  at  the  time  to  get
Mrs.  Salter  to  write  about  bee  plants,  it  failed.

The  next  apparent  attempt  at  a  cross-correspondence
was  in  an  A.  V.  B.  book-test  on  May  15,  1918.  This-
has  already  been  partly  quoted  and  discussed  in  another
connexion  (see  above  p.  278).  In  the  cross-correspondence,
if  it  was  one,  the  titles  only  of  selected  books  are  referred
to,  not  the  insides,  so  that  I  have  hesitated  about  includ-
ing it  here,  but  have  decided  to  do  so  because  it  seems
to  me  sufficiently  interesting  and  perhaps  illuminating
to  be  well  v/orth  study.  A.  W.  V.  was  represented  as
co-operating  with  A.  V.  B.,  but  Mrs.  Salter,  it  must  be
remembered,  was  not  present. Feda  says  :

Now  the  shelf  she's  on  now  is  the  one  underneath  the
first  test  shelf, and  on  this  shelf,  to  the  very  left,  left
of this shelf underneath the  first test sheK. {s.v.  Mr.
Arthur  has  picked  a  book  ?) It's  right  at  the  end,  nearly,
a  book  v/hose  title  should  be  a  watchword  for  you  and
Mrs.  Una  and  Mrs.  NeUie  [i.e.  Mrs.  Salter]  ; he  says  it's
an  excellent  watchword.  .  .  . It's  something  for  you  all  to
keep  in  front  of  you  and  to  Imow  that  in  very  truth  it
will  be  your  watchword  ; he  says  you'll  understand  why  ;•
it's  all  linked  up  \\dth  the  work  that  you're  doing.  .  .  .
{s.v. You know  that in forming a bridge — ^the  bridge-
builders) No,  you  haven't  got  it  quite  right it's  that  he
thinks  of  you  as  the  bridge  builders.  .  .  . Within  a  span
of  the  last-mentioned  book  is  a  book  whose  title  suggests
what he just said about you being bridge  builders,
it's  a  .  .  .  alternative  name  for  you,  but  he  does  think  of


Lxxxi.]  An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.  335


' you as the bridge builders. He says bridges can't  be
builted  from  one  side  only.

And  so  forth,  as  quoted  on  p.  279,  leading  on  to  the
indication  of  a  book,  the  title  of  which,  The  Unseen
World,  suggests  what  is  being  bridged  over.

It  was  decided  by  the  sitters  on  examination  that  the
first  of  the  two  books  indicated  in  this  extract  must  be  the
third  book  from  the  left,  entitled  Nova  Solyma — or,  as
more  fully  described  on  the  title  page,  "  Nova  Solyma.
The  Ideal  City  or  Jerusalem  Regained."  It  deals  with
the  voyage  of  a  man  to  this  ideal  city.^  The  New
Jerusalem  is  not  an  inappropriate  watchword  for  those
engaged  in  seeking  for  evidence  of  survival  and  a  better
world,  as  M.  R-.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.  were  doing.

The  second  of  the  two  books  indicated  the  sitters
took  to  be  Kiphng's  Captains  Courageous,  which  was
three  volumes  off  from  Nova  Solyma,  and  the  title  of
which  might,  by  a  stretch,  be  taken  as  an  alternative
to  "  bridge  builders  "  for  pioneers  in  psychical  research.

From  the  point  of  view  of  possible  cross-correspondences,
however,  the  main  interest  of  the  passage  I  have  quoted
centres  in  "  bridge  builders,"  which  is  not  apparently
associated  by  Feda  T^ith  any  particular  book  but  serves  as
a  link  between  the  two  books  indicated.  Later  in  the
sitting,  after  book-tests  had  been  disposed  of,  Feda  stated
that  A.  V.  B.  had  tried  to  get  a  message  through  to
M.  R.  H.  somewhere  else,  and  Feda  suggested  that  this
message  might  have  got  mixed  up  with  some  one  else's
sitting.  This  is  of  course  conceivable,  and  it  might  have
happened  without  any  one  realising  it.  But  Feda  sud-
denly introduced  the  name  IVIrs.  Nellie  {i.e.  Mrs.  Salter),
saying,  "  Do  you  know  if  JVIrs.  NeUie's  been  anywhere  ?  "
and  again,  "  Feda  feels  it's  something  to  do  mth  Mrs.
NeUie,  and  that's  perhaps  what  brought  Mr.  Arthur  here
as  well  as  the  book-test."  ^

1  It  was  translated  from  the  Latin  original  by  the  Rev.  Walter
Begley,  and  attributed  by  him  to  Milton,  though  the  authorship  is
unknown.

2  At  the  beginning  of  this  sitting  surprise  had  been  expressed  by
Feda at "  Mr. Arthur's " coming. She continued, "  He's pleased  tO'


336


Mrs.  Henry  SidgivicJc.


[part


On  seeing  the  report  of  this  sitting  it  at  once  struck
Mrs.  Salter,  who  had  not  very  recently  been  to  any  sitting
of  any  kind  (her  last  was  with  Mrs.  Leonard  on  April
23rd),  that  the  intention  might  be  to  say  that  there  had
been  some  recent  attempt  to  send  a  message  through  her
own  automatic  script.  She  accordingly  looked  this  up.
Her  script  of  April  27th— the  only  piece  produced  by  her
between  Feb.  15th  and  May  23rd— (the  day  on  which  she
first  saw  the  record  of  the  Leonard  sitting  under  discus-
sion) was  very  scrappy.  It  begins  :  "  Vanitas  vanitatum
• — the  bridge  and  the  river — misericordiam  Domini.  .  .  ."
Taking  account  of  the  occurrence  of  "  bridge,"  both  in
this  script  and  at  the  Leonard  sitting,  and  the  sugges-
tion at  the  latter  that  a  connexion  with  Mrs.  Salter  is  to
be  sought,  it  seems  very  possible  that  we  have  here  an
attempt  at  a  cross-correspondence,  which  has  only  partially
succeeded — the  failure  being  perhaps  in  Mrs.  Salter's  script
which  got  as  far  as  bridge,  but  not  to  bridge  builders.
Mrs.  Salter  has  had  earlier  references  to  a  bridge  in  her
script,  and  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  are  references  to  bridge
building.  See,  for  instance,  a  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  of
February  25,  1907,  quoted  in  a  paper  by  Mr.  Piddington
in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXVI.,  p.  236.

I  stretch  my  hand  across  the  vaporous  space  .  .  .  the
lucid  interspace  of  world  and  world.  Well  that  is  bridged
by  the  thought  of  a  friend  bridged  before  for  your  passage
but  to-day  for  the  passage  of  any  that  will  walk  it,  not  in
hope  but  in  faith.  The  bridge  has  been  built  from  our
side,  it  is  our  thought  that  builds  it — but  it  rests  on  a
pier  of  your  founding— not  yours— of  you  only— of  all  of
yours.

This  speaks  of  building  and  to  some  extent  of  building
from  both  ends  ;  but  in  a  much  later  script  of  Mrs.
Verrall's— October  17,  1915— a  script  that  has  not  been
pubhshed — is  written  "  bridge  builders  are  we  all,  and  a

come,  but  he  has  a  funny  feejing  that  some  one  asked  him  to  come,
or  suggested  his  coming,  he  doesn't  laiow  quite  which,  but  he  had
a  feeling  he'd  caught  a  current  as  if  some  one  had  asked  him  to  come
here  and  wondered  if  he'd  give  a  message."


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Boole-Tests.


337


bridge  must  be  built  from  both  sides/'  which  is  almost
exactly  the  expression  put  by  Feda  into  the  mouth  of
Dr.  Verrall.

The  New  Jerusalem  or  the  Heavenly  City,  it  may  be
remarked,  is  also  a  topic  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts,  as
readers  of  Mr.  Piddington's  paper  on  the  Horace  Ode
Question  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXVI.  (see  pp.  185-211,  or
in  particular,  p.  157),  are  aware.  An  association  of  ideas
taking  us  from  a  metaphorical  "  New  Jerusalem  "  to  the
building  of  a  metaphorical  bridge  leading  thereto  is  not
unnatural.

Another  kind  of  association  of  ideas,  it  is  worth  noticing,
may  be  responsible  for  the  transition  from  "  bridge
builders  "  to  Captains  Courageous."  The  latter,  as
already  said,  is  the  title  of  a  volume  of  Kipling's  works —
and  there  is  a  story  called  The  Bridge  Builders  in
another  volume  of  his.^  Mrs.  Salter  tells  us  that  Dr.
Verrall  was  a  great  admirer  of  some  of  Kipling's  work,
and  that  The  Bridge  Builders  was  a  favourite  of  his.  In
the  course  of  conversation  with  IVIrs.  Leonard  a  fortnight
after  this  sitting,  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.  endeavoured  to
find  out  what  she  Imew  of  Kipling's  books.  M.  R.  H.,
apropos  of  holiday  reading,  remarked  "  that  she  did  not
much  care  for  novels,  but  was  rather  fond  of  Kipling,"  to
which  Mrs.  Leonard  replied  that  she  was  afraid  she  did
not  know  Kipling,  and  did  not  think  she  had  ever  read
anything  of  his.

This  apparent  attempt  at  cross-correspondence  on  May
23,  1918,  is  the  last  I  have  found  in  the  book-tests  sub-
mitted to  me  except  that  of  January  4,  1919,  considered
above  (pp.  286-289).

■  In  one  of  the  book-tests  quoted  above — January  14,
1918  (see  p.  320) — Feda  represents  A.  W.  V.  as  saying
that  "  he  wants  to  give  them  [i.e.  messages]  on  a  line  of
his  own.  He  says  the  last  one  was  a  bit  different — of  a
different  tjrpe  to  the  ones  what  others  give." This  is  true

^  The  Day's  Work.  This  volume  was  actually  in  another  part  of  the
book-case,  but  there  is  no  indication  that  the  communicators  were
aware  of  this.


338  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgiviclc.  [part  i

if  the  connexions  pointed  out  above  between  some  of  the
A.  W.  V.  book-tests  and  S.P.R.  work,  pubhshed  and  un-
pubhshed,  was  intentional  ; for  it  certainly  occurs  more  in.  1
proportion  in  A.  W.  V.  book-tests  than  in  others. There  i  '
are  moreover  differences  in  type,  though  not  very  easy  to
define, in other series. The question may be asked  '
whether through these differences of type in  the
"  messages," or  through the appropriateness of some  of
them to the circumstances, tastes, or character of  the
supposed communicator, we can get evidence of  his
identity. I do not  think  that, except  in  Mrs.  Talbot's
case  described  in  §  2,  this  evidence  is  clear  and  definite
enough  to  be  of  much  use  by  itself  ; and  it  is  often  of
course difficult  to judge how  far  the selection may  be
influenced  by  the  sitter's  mind,  or  by  the  library  selected  ;
from. But  the  appropriateness  of  some "  messages  " un-  |
doubtedly  adds  to  the  weight  of  evidence  for  the  identity  |
of  communicators  afforded  by  appropriateness  to  them  of  i
communications  in  manner  and  matter — an  appropriateness
manifested  in  communications  concerning  other  things  as  i
well as book-tests. The main interest of book-tests as  '  i
such,  however,  lies  not  in  the  evidence  they  may  afford  ]
for  the  identity  of  the  communicators,  but  in  the  evidence  j
for  clairvoyance.  I

§8.

SEEMmoLY  Genuine  Mistakes,  and  Others.  '

I  PROPOSE  in  this  section  to  put  together  some  instances
where  there  seems  evidence  of  a  genuine  mistake  in
indicating  the  shelf,  volume,  or  page.  ■  •

By  a  genuine  mistake  I  mean  that  though  the  com-
municator was  trying  to  convey  to  the  sitter  something
that  he  really  knew,  yet,  through  confusion  of  his  own  or
Feda's,  the  indication  received  was  false.  A  genuine
mistake  implies  real  knowledge.  A  mere  statement  that
something  will  be  found  in  a  place  where  it  is  not  found
may,  of  course,  be  a  genuine  mistake,  but  there  is  gener-
ally no  evidence  that  it  is.  So  far  as  internal  evidence
goes, it may just as well  be a  random aiid  erroneous


■'5


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


339


guess.  If,  however,  two  or  more  things  are  predicated  of
(say)  a  particular  page,  and  turn  out  to  be  true  of  another
page,  then  there  is  evidence  as  far  as  it  goes,  that  the
wrong  page  has  been  named  by  mistake.

I  called  attention  on  p.  269  above  to  a  case  where
there  seemed  reason  to  think  that  a  genuine  mistake
occurred  about  the  bookcase  intended.  In  the  case  I  will
now  quote  it  seems  possible  that  the  row  of  books  in  a
set  of  shelves  was  given  wrongly,  though  one  could  wish
that  the  test  had  been  a  little  more  definite  and  successful.
The  sitting  in  question  was  the  A.  V.  B.  one  of  Sep-
tember 18,  1918  :

F.  Now  she  wants  to  give  a  book-test. She  says  it's  in

; •  the  big  lot  of  books  in  London  [that  is,  a  set  of

shelves  in  M.  R.  H.'s  study].  Now  it's  the  third
row  of  books  up.  She  says  "  I'm  not  saying-
shelves  to-day,  it's  the  third  roiv.'"

M.  R.  H, She's  counting  the  books  on  the  floor  I  suppose.

F.  Yes  she's  counting  the  books  on  the  floor. It's  the

sixth  book  from  the  left.  She  says  "  He  feels  like
a  friend  of  mine."  There's  a  funny  name  con-
nected with  this  book  beginning  with  V.  She  says
"  I  was  going  to  say  Vodka,  but  I  don't  think
that's  right,  but  it's  a  name  like  that."  She  says
you  won't  have  to  hunt  for  the  name,  you'll  find
almost  immediately  that  it  has  a  great  deal  to  do
with  the  book.  Now  take  this  book  and  open  it
at  two,  four,  page  twenty-four,  and  about  a  third
of  the  way  doAvn  the  page  you'll  find  a  message
which  will  take  you  back  to  conditions  connected
with  the  last  year  of  Ladye's  earth  life.  She's
also  giving  Feda  a  name  beginning  with  a  G  that
should  either  be  on  that  jsage,  or  in  close
proximity  to  it,  beginning  with  a  G,  but  it  felt  to
her  like  Gwendoline.

The  phrase  "  He  feels  like  a  friend  of  mine  "  is  inter-
preted by  the  sitter  as  meaning  that  the  book  selected
was  one  A.  V.  B.  had  known  well  in  her  lifetime.^  This

1  Feda  is  liable  to  use  "he"  and  "him"  for  "it."


340


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.  '.  [part


cannot  be  affirmed  of  the  sixth  book  in  the  third  row  up,
nor  in  this  book  can  any  other  things  said  about  the
test-book  be  discovered.  On  the  other  hand,  the  sixth
book  in  the  shelf  below,  which  was  The  Life  of  Voltaire  by
S.  G.  Tallentj^re,  was  a  great  favourite  of  A.  V.  B.'s.  It
had  been  read  aloud  by  her  to  M.  R.  H.,  and  because
they  both  liked  it  so  much  was  specially  bound  by
A.  V.  B.  and  given  by  her  to  M.  R.  H.  It  contains  an
inscription  to  this  effect  in  A.  V.  B.'s  writing.  If  this
was  the  book,  the  name  beginning  with  V,  like  "  Vodka,"
and  that  has  a  great  deal  to  do  with  the  book,  must  be
"  Voltaire."  The  name  like  "  Gwendoline  "  on  p.  24  or  in
close  proximity  to  it  must  be  "  Genonville,"  which  occurs
twice  on  p.  25.  The  message  about  a  third  of  the  way
down  p.  24,  which  was  to  take  M.  R.  H.  back  to  con-
llitions  connected  with  the  last  year  of  A.  V.  B.'s  earth
/ife,  cannot,  however,  be  found  ;  unless,  indeed,  it  consists
in  the  name  "  Oedipe."  Pages  24  and  25  both  deal  with
this  play  of  Voltaire's,  and  the  name  occurs  twice  on
p.  24,  and  three  times  in  the  first  third  of  p.  25,  facing
p.  24.  In  the  last  year  of  A.  V.  B.'s  life  she  had  an
alarming  affection  of  the  sight  which  led  M.  R.  H.  to
fear  she  might  be  going  blind,  and  the  name  Oedipus  of
course  suggests  blindness.  This  suggestion  for  the  "  mes-
sage "  is,  however,  rather  far  fetched,  and  none  of  the
test  is  definitely  successful  enough  for  us  to  lay  much
stress  on  it.  But  if  we  accept  the  genuineness  of  book-
tests  on  other  grounds,  this  one  is  suggestive  of  a  possibly
genuine  mistake  about  the  shelf.

A  possibly  genuine  mistake  about  the  volume  intended
occurred  at  an  A.  V.  B.  sitting  on  December  8,  1918.^
Three  "  messages  "  were  given  from  three  different  pages
of  what  was  described  as  the  fifth  volume  from  the  end
of  the  shelf.  This  proved  to  be  a  copy  of  the  Bible,  and
the  failure  to  find  anything  relevant  was  complete.  But
just  before  the  fifth  book  was  mentioned,  a  picture  of  a
lady-  described  as  somewhat  out  of  proportion,  had  been

^  This  was  a  day  on  which  tests  from  the  experimental  Greek  books
were  attempted,  but  in  the  earlier  section  of  the  book-tests,  with  which
we  are  here  concerned,  English  books  were  referred  to.


Lxxxi.]  An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.  341


spoken  of  as  easily  to  be  found  in  one  of  the  first  few
books  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  shelf.  Such  a  drawing
was  found  as  the  frontispiece  of  the  seventh  book — the
only  book  in  the  left-hand  half  of  the  shelf  with  any
pictures  in  it  at  all.  This  led  the  sitters  to  look  in  this
seventh  book  for  possible  messages  conforming  to  indica-
tions given  for  the  fifth  book.  The  result  was  that  on
each  of  the  three  pages  named,  and  in  the  position  on
the  page  described,  what  might  be  regarded  as  an  appro-
priate message  was  found.  The  appropriateness  is  not  of
the  simple  and  obvious  kind  which  can  be  seen  by  any
one  at  a  glance.  It  requires  in  each  instance  a  good  deal
of  explanation.  This  explanation  M.  R.  H.  gives,  and  in
my  opinion  makes  out  a  reasonable  case.  I  will  not
trouble  the  reader  with  it  here,  but  if  he  wishes  to  judge
for  himself  he  will  find  the  particulars  in  Appendix  C,
p.  393.  The  fact  that  "  messages  "  regarded  as  appro-
priate by  a  sitter  who  is  not  very  easily  satisfied,  were
found  in  the  assigned  places  in  the  seventh  volume  and
not  at  all  in  the  fifth,  suggests  strongly  that  it  was  the
seventh  volume  that  was  intended  and  not  the  fifth — that,
in  fact,  a  genuine  mistake  had  occurred.

We  have  one  or  two  instances  of  apparent  confusion
between  two  volumes  used  on  the  same  day  in  book-tests
— an  item  belonging  to  one  being  assigned  to  the  other
and  vice  versa.  A  possible  case  of  this  occurred  on  July
17,  1918,  at  a  sitting  I  have  referred  to  more  than  once
(pp.  300,  360,  362),  and  will  be  found  in  Appendix  C,  p.  394.
But  a  more  striking  case  of  what  looks  like  a  genuine
mistake  of  this  kind  occurred  in  an  A.  W.  V.  sitting  of
February  28,  1918.  I  had  better  quote  the  greater  part
of  the  book-tests  of  that  day,  as  there  are  other  elements
of  interest  in  them.  The  communicator.  Dr.  Verrall,
having  with  some  dilficulty  described  the  shelf,  Feda  says  :
"  The third book — wait — {s.v.  : Wait a minute  seven

three — not three seven)  ...  the 73rd page, near  the

top  .  .  . It's  a  message  to  you  .  .  .  from  your  lady  [i.e.

Mrs.  Verrall]  as  well  as  from  Mr.  Arthur  [i.e.  Dr.  Verrall] ;

and  it  suggests'  Unity. Unity's  a  word  he  keeps  on  saying,


342


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivich.


[part


Unity,  and  it  describes  in  a  few  words — at  least  he  only-
means  you  to  take  the  few  words  that  are  at  the  place
indicated — it  describes  how  Mr.  Arthur  and  your  lady
stands  together  ;  stands  to  each  other.  But  he  means  it
also  as  something  that  embraces — embraces  you  too."

[The  book  jjroved  to  be  H.  G.  Wells'  First  and  Last
Things  :  A  Confession  of  Faith  and  Rule  of  Life.  P.  73  is
part  of  a  section  called  "  Indi\aduality  an  Interlude."
Wells  is  talking  of  what  he  calls  "  the  synthesis  of  the
species,"  "  the  real  solidarity  of  humanity,"  and  on  page  72
and  73  he  is  dealing  with  the  physical  synthesis  of  the
human  race  due  to  the  intermingling  of  ancestry  from  the
earliest  times.  It  is  difficult  to  find  anything  appropriate
as  a  message  to  the  sitter  (Mrs.  Salter)  from  her  parents,
but  there  seems  distinctly  a  point  in  emphasizing  the  word
"  Unity  "  as  descriptive  of  what  Wells  is  saying.  At  the
top  of  p.  73  the  words  "  link  of  blood  "  might  perhaps  be
taken  as  the  message.  At  the  bottom  of  p.  72,  opposite
p.  73,  occurs  the  sentence  "  One  Tartar  chieftain  in  the
Steppes  may  have  given  a  daughter  to  a  Roman  soldier
and  sent  his  grandsons  east  and  west  to  interlace  the
branches  of  every  family  tree  in  the  world."  I  quote  this
for  a  reason  that  will  appear  presently.]

After  giving  another  item  from  the  same  book,  which  to
make  easier  reading  I  have  relegated  to  Appendix  C  (see
p.  396),  Feda  continues  :

Further  along  on  the  same  shelf,  {s.v.  Wait  a  minute
will  you  please.)  It's  a  book  what  is  called  number  eight,
it's  from  right  to  left  still,  eighth  book  ...  he  can't
give  you  the  page  in  this,  but  the  beginning  of  the
book,  the  beginning  of  the  proper  part  of  it  touches
on  a  subject  he  was  very  interested  in  but  only  tem-
porarily, but  you  will  remember,  in  fact  he's  quite  sure

:  there  are  books  or  papers  in  existence  which  will  prove  he
was  interested  in  it.  It's  not  a  subject  he  is  particularly
interested  in  now  {s.v.  and  yet  he  regarded  it — what  do
you  say  ?) as one  of  the  foundation  things  that  go  to

;  make  up  all  he  knows  now,  and  it  was  certainly  neces-
sary for  him." . .  "  '


liXXXI.]


A)i  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


343


[There  is  a  doubt  here  whether  the  eighth  book  in  the
shelf,  or  the  eighth  book  from  the  one  previously  referred
to  is  meant.  Both  methods  of  counting  appear  to  be
used,  and  from  an  explanation  attributed  by  Feda  to  Dr.
Verrall  on  April  11,  1918  "The  fifth  book,  not  the  fifth  from
the  first  [from  which  tests  had  just  been  taken]  but
counting  the  first  "  looks  as  if  counting  from  the  book
previously  referred  to  seemed  to  him  the  more  natural  plan.'-
As  the  eighth  book  from  the  previous  one  gives  the  best
results,  I  will  assume  that  was  meant.  It  was  a  school
edition  of  Racine's  Les  Plaideurs  published  in  1887.  This
it  will  be  remembered  is  a  skit  on  law  courts  and  litiga-
tion. Now  Dr.  Verrall  read  law  for  three  years,  and  was
called  to  the  bar,  though  he  did  not  practice,  before  he
returned  to  Cambridge  to  take  nj)  the  work  of  teaching
classics.  A  reference  to  law  as  a  temporary  but  very
important  interest  of  his,  and  one  with  which  the  book  is
connected,  is  therefore  appropriate.  There  is,  no  doubt,
documentary  evidence  to  prove  his  interest  in  law  ;  and
there  is  also  documentary  evidence  to  prove  his  interest  in
the  play.  For  in  1907  this  play  and  one  of  Moliere's  were
acted  at  Cambridge,  and  Dr.  Verrall,  much  interested  in  the
performance,  wrote  two  articles  on  them  in  the  Cambridge
Review.  In  the  second  of  these  he  referred  to  the  well-
known  speech  of  Petit- Jean,  and  raised  a  small  literary
point  concerrung  one  line  of  it.  This  speech  begins  about
halfway  down  p.  99  of  the  selected  book — a  fact  I  shall
have  to  refer  to  presently.]

Feda  continues  :  "...  It's  at  the  proper  stufi  you
start  {s.v.  :  Now  wait  a  minute,  an  interesting  date  ?)
an  interesting  date,  just  previously  mentioned  too.  It
mentions  a  date  just  previously  on  which  he  took  an
important  step  in  his  life  ;  it's  the  same  book,  and  just
before  the  reading  stuff.  {s.v.  Wait  a  minute  now.  Yes,
before — to  take)  He  says  it's  awful  funny,  but  in  order
to  take  this  important  step  in  his  life,  he  went  up  steps.
It's  to  be  taken  literaUy,  but  when  you  thmk,  you  wil]


1  See  also  sitting  of  April  23,  1918  (pp.  277-278  of  this  paper).


J^rs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

realise  he  certainly  did  have  to  go  up  steps.  It  was  a
pleasant  thing  in  his  life,  not  ?iwpleasant."

[It  occurred  to  Mrs.  Salter  at  once  that  an  event  in  her
father's  life  which  would  fulfil  these  conditions  well  would
be  taking  a  degree  at  Cambridge,  not  only  because  he
would  go  up  steps  literally  to  take  it,  i.e.  the  steps  of  the
Senate  House,  but  because  to  describe  "  taking  a  degree  "
as  "  taking  a  step  "  is  almost  a  pun  on  the  word  degree.
The  year  of  publication  of  the  edition  of  Les  Plaideurs
under  discussion,  1887,i  is  mentioned  at  the  beginnina  of
it ;  and  in  1887  Dr.  Verrall  took  his  degree  as  Do^ctor
of  Letters  at  Cambridge  University.]

Feda  next  says  : "  Wait  a  minute. Ninety-nine  ?  Pa<^e
99  of  that  same  book.

Mbs.  Salter.  He's  doing  a  lot  of  them  ?
Feda.  He  likes  those  {s.v.  :  on  p.  99  of  the  same
book,  wait  a  bit,  it's  what?)  Referring  to  speaking  of
branches.  He  says  to  Feda  that  Feda's  not  got  to  try
and  interpret  for  him,  he  says  "  sjoeaking  of  branches'^
.B.R.A.N.C.H.  and  is  it  E.S.?  Yes,  E.S.  that's  right,  and
he  smiles  and  says  "  suggesting  the  family  tree."  Well,  he
says  that  he  hkes  to  do  as  much  detail  as  he  can,  not  just
one  thing,  'cos  if  it's  only  one  thing,  they  says  it's
coincidence.  He  takes  such  a  lot  of  trouble!  'Tis  a
awful  funny  test.

[Now,  as  remarked  above,  on  p.  99  of  Les  Plaideurs
occurs  the  speech  of  Petit-Jean,  and  this  cannot  be  said
to  speak  of  branches  or  the  family  tree.  But  the  coinci-
dence of  these  words  with  the  sentence  at  the  bottom  of
p.  72  of  Wells's  book  quoted  above,  about  interlacing  the
branches  of  every  family  tree  in  the  world,  is  very  remark-
able. The  conclusion  is  almost  irresistible  that  confusion
has  occurred— that  the  communicator  meant  to  refer  the
sitter  to  Wells's  book  for  the  "family  tree,"  and  in  speak-
ing of  p.  99  of  Les  Plaideurs  had  in  mind  Petit-Jean's

^This  date  appears  similarly  at  the  beginning  of  the  eighth  book
on  the  shelf,  which  was  a  copy  of  Moli^re's  Les  Precieuses  Ridicules-
in  the  same  school  edition  as  Les  Plaideurs.


Lxxxi.]  An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


speech  and  the  documentary  evidence  of  his  (the  communi-
cator's) interest  in  it.  But  the  mistake,  if  it  was  one,  is
curious.  Where  did  the  confusion  come  in  ?  Was  it  an
error  of  memory  in  the  communicator,^  or  a  faihn-e  of
Feda's  to  report  correctly  ?  Did  she  leave  something  out
which  should  have  come  between  the  mention  of  p.  99  and
the  reference  to  branches  ?  Did  Mrs.  Salter's  interrupting
remark,  innocent  as  it  seems,  break  the  thread  ?]

An  instance  of  apparent  confusion  between  two  pages  of
the  same  volume  is  reported  in  an  A.  V.  B.  sitting  on
January  30,  1918— the  message  for  which  the  sitter  was
referred  to  p.  87  being  found  as  she  believes  on  p.  17,
and  vice  versa.  The  appropriateness  of  the  messages  thus
found  appears,  however,  to  be  a  little  doubtful— at  least
as  regards  the  one  on  p.  87— and  in  any  case  to  involve
circumstances  of  a  private  nature.  I  therefore  do  not
attempt  to  describe  them.  That  we  have  here  a  possible
instance  of  an  exchange  of  pages  must  be  taken  on  the
authority  of  M.  R.  H.

Good  evidence  of  a  genuine  mistake  between  two  adjoin-
ing pages  occurred  in  an  A.  V.  B.  sitting  on  April  24,
1918  :

F.  It's  the  eighth  book,  the  page  is  98  .  .  .  and  it's  about
halfway  down  .  .  .  The  top  part  of  the  pages  seems  like
a  mass  of  writing  all  close  together,  with  no  little  spaces
hke  paragraphs,  and  not  quite  halfway  down  there's  a
break  in  it  ;  then  it  goes  on  again,  you  see.  She  thinks
it's  interesting  if  you  can  sense  these  little  things.  Also
p.  98  appeared  to  her  to  fall  on  the  right-hand  side  of  the
book.  ...

Now  there's  a  message  on  this  ninety-eight  page,  and
the  message  would  not  be  exactly  halfway  down,  a  little

1  The  communicators  are,  it.  will  be  remembered,  represented  as
getting  up  book-tests  beforehand  and  coming  to  the  sitting  primed
with  them.  On  one  occasion,  June  11,  1918,  Dr.  Verrall  is  said  to
explain  his  comparative  success  in  book-tests  by  his  trained  memory.
Feda  says  :  "  Mr.  Arthur  had  trained  his  memory  here.  He  could
fix  a  fact  in  his  mind  and  bring  it  up  again."


346


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


bit  lower. It's  a message  what  could  be  applied  to  the
present  conditions  on  the  earth  plane,  this  is  not  one  of
the personal messages. She says that this quite  short
sentence would contain something that would have  a
bearing  on  the  condition  on  the  earth  plane.  .  .  .  Some-
thing that  she  thinks  could  be  applied  to  the  war  and  its
effect  upon  conditions.
The book proved to be The Scarlet Pimpernel  by
Baroness Orczy,  translated  into  Spanish. No  appropriate
message  was  found  on  p. 98,  nor  were  the  other  state-
ments true  of  that  page. P. 99,  facing  it,  was  on  the
right-hand  side. It  had  an  unbroken  paragraph  occupying
the  first  twelve  lines  of  a  page  of  thirty-four  lines — another
beginning with line 13 — and below the middle of  the
page,  between  half  and  two-thirds  down,  occurs  the  sen-
tence "  the  brave  man  who,  unknown  to  fame,  had  rescued
hundreds  of  lives  from  a  terrible  often  unmerciful  fate."
It  is  thought  that  "  terrible,"  in  Spanish  "  horrendo,"  is
the  "  something  "  in  a  quite  short  sentence  that  could  be
applied  to  the  war. Feda  immediately  afterwards  speaks
of  "  these  terrible  conditions  "  as  applied  to  the  war  in
describing another  book  that  is to be  looked  for.  One
could, as usual, wish the "  message  " had been  more
precisely  described. Still  there  is  one  that  will  pass  on
p. 99  though  not on  p. 98, and  two other  statements
made  about  p.  98  are  not  true  of  that  page  and  are  true
of  p.  99.

Another  instance  of  the  same  thing  occurred  in  an
A.  V.  B.  sitting  on  September  26,  1917  (see  above,  p.  294).
Three  statements  are  made  about  p.  127  which  prove  true
of  p.  126  facing  it.

A  similar  case  occurred  to  Mr.  Drayton  Thomas  on
November  8,  1917.  I  quoted  among  verbally  accurate
indications  of  "  messages  "  one  on  that  day  (see  above,
p.  270).  Its  only  defect  was  that  while  described  as  on
p.  65  it  proved  to  be  on  p.  64  facing  it.  Two  further
messages  which  followed  immediately  were  assigned  to
p.  65  of  the  same  book,  but  were  not  to  be  found  there,
and  in  Mr.  Thomas'  opinion  were  adequately  represented  on
p. 64. A  fourth  indication  of  a message  followed,  this


LXXXI.]


A71  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


347


time assigned to the page opposite p.  65 backwards —


fourth  said  to  be  on  p.  64  and  also  found  there.  This
last  fact  makes  the  mistake  in  the  other  three  more  diffi-
cult to  understand.  But,  as  already  said  (p.  270),  the
mistake  of  a  page  for  that  next  it,  especially  facing  it,  is
a  common  one.  It  is  discussed  with  the  explanations  given
by  the  communicators  in  the  next  section.

I  have  tried  to  find  evidence  of  what  may  be  called  the
opposite of a genuine mistake, evidence that  elaborate
descriptions  not  only  correspond  to  nothing  in  the  place
indicated  but  have  no  real  perception  behind  them  at  all.
Of  course  one  suspects  this  when  every  item  turns  out  to
be  wrong  in  the  book-tests  of  a  particular  day,  which  has
happened  on  various  occasions  ; and  in  one  instance  at
least  there  seems  to  be  some  definite  reason apart  from
mere  failure  for  attributing  the  book-tests  offered  to  Feda's
imagination. It  is  in  the  A.  V.  B.  sitting  of  September  4,
1918. The  book-tests  were  given  at  the  end  of  a  long  and
rather  poor  sitting,  in  the  course  of  which,  at  A.  V.  B.'s
request,  U.  V.  T.  had  told  her  of  the  successful  finding  of
references  to  literal  and  metaphorical  "  heat "  on  certain
pages as predicted  by  Feda on  August 28 (see  above,
p. 281). The book-tests of September 4  began with  a
similar  statement  about  growth ;  Feda  says  that  A.  V.  B.
is  not  sure  whether  a  mention  of  growth  on  a  given  page
will  be  of  growth  vegetable,  floral,  or  mental. No  mention
of  growth  was  found. On  August  28  there  had  been  a
good  description  of  an  unpublished  poem  of  M.  R.  H.'s  ;
on  September  4  an  attempt  is  again  made  to  describe  a
poem  of  hers,  but  it  is  not  successful,  and  at  best  is  a
mixture of two or three published  poems. Other  items
appear  to  be  reminiscent  of  previous  book-tests.  Altogether
the attempt at book-tests  of September 4  appears,  as
M.  R. H. and  U.  V.  T.  say,  "to  be a  kind  of  hotch-
potch of previous tests. It appears to consist of  a
number of details carelessly slung together at the  last
moment  of  the  Feda  control,  details  remembered  perhaps


348


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgividc.


[part


by  Feda  or  picked  from  [some]  stratum  of  the  medium's
mind."  At  the  next  A.  V.  B.  sitting  (September  11),
A.  V.  B.,  herself  controlling,  refers  to  this  test  having
gone  wrong,  and  adds  :  "  Do  you  know  I  got  the  scheme
wrong,  somehow  it's  as  if  I  start  a  pattern,  and  if  I  get
the  first  bit  wrong  all  the  other  goes  wrong  too.  Wrong  f
lorong  !  "  This  is  an  explanation  that  might  perhaps  apply
in  some  cases,  but  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  it  can  do  so
in  the  case  in  question.

In  one  or  two  cases  an  item  definitely  suggests  guessing.
For  instance,  in  an  A.  V.  B.  sitting  on  November  13,
1918,  when  the  Greek  books  were  being  dealt  with,  Feda
reports  that  A.  V.  B.  is  reminded  of  something  Syrian
or  Assj^rian,

And  small,  low  houses,  built  many  of  them  of  wood,  and
something  which  she  was  not  sure  of,  .  .  .  long  broad
stretches  of  land,  but  villages  dotted  here  and  there  .  .  .
The  whole  book  seemed  to  deal  Avith  it,  and  trees  with
straight  trunks  .  .  .  the  trees  had  not  got  nice  little
branches  all  the  way  down,  all  at  the  top  !  .  .  .  And
people  Avith  robes  or  gowns  ;  things  wrapped  round  them.
Squatting.

The  book  specially  referred  to  was  a  volume  of  Euri-
pides. In  this  case  it  was  known  by  the  control  that  the
books  were  in  a  language  unknown  to  her,  and  it  was
suspected  that  they  were  in  ancient  Greek,  and  this  clue
may  have  suggested  an  eastern  country.  In  an  ordinary
book-test  the  possible  range  is  so  indefinite  that  we  are
unaware  of  any  clue  at  all,  and  have  not  therefore  any
means  of  judging  whether  any  one  statement  is  more
likely  to  be  a  guess  than  another.  The  form  of  the  com-
municator's impression  in  the  description  just  quoted  seems
to  have  been  visual,  and  it  may  have  been  a  vision  of
eastern  scenery  called  up  by  association  of  ideas.  On  the
other  hand,  we  may  have  a  purely  imaginary  description
of  a  scene  supposed  by  the  communicating  intelligence  to
be  appropriate.


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


349


§9-

Examination  of  the  Records  for  Indications  of  the
Mode  of  Perception  of  a  Page  in  a  Closed  Book.

As  already  mentioned  there  are  a  good  many  cases
where  the  "  message "  is  found  not  on  the  page  named
but  in  the  corresponding  position  on  an  adjoining  page,
especially  on  the  page  facing  the  page  named  when  the
book  is  closed.  As  the  communicator  on  January  19,
1918,  said  to  the  sitter,  Mrs.  Kennedy,  "  It's  awfully
difficult  for  me  to  see  if  it's  that  or  that  page.  (Here
Feda  put  her  two  hands  side  by  side,  as  if  each  were  one
side  of  an  open  book.)  But  I'm  praptically  sure  it's  31,
and  it's  certainly  one  of  the  two,  31  or  facing  it."  I  have
in  book-tests  already  quoted  given  several  instances  of
this.  In  two  cases  (p.  346)  three  things  said  about
one  page  proved  true  of  the  page  facing  it — affording
distinct  evidence  of  a  genuine  mistake.  In  another — the
one  in  which  the  communicator  having  expressed  doubt
whether  heat  in  a  literal  or  metaphorical  sense  was
alluded  to 'halfway  down  the  page  named,  words  implying
such  meanings  were  found  respectively  on  that  page  and
the  one  facing  it  (see  pp.  281-2) — suggesting  that  facing  each
other  thus  they  had  simultaneously  impressed  themselves
on  the  communicator.  A.  V.  B.  through  Feda  attempted
on  January  10,  1918,  to  explain  the  tendency  to  this
particular  kind  of  mistake.  I  will  give  the  passage.
Speaking  of  an  item  in  a  previous  book-test  which  I  have
not  quoted,  U.  V.  T.  says  :

U.  V.  T. There  Avas  one  point  that  was  actually  \^Tong.  .  .  .

She  gave  a  message  as  being  on  a  certain  page,
and  instead  of  being  on  the  page  that  she  gave,
the  message  was  on  the  opposite  page,  not  on  the
opposite  side  of  the  page,  but  on  the  page  that
lay  facing  the  page  she  had  given  .  .  .  it's  a
mistake  that  she's  rather  fond  of,  she's  made  it
two  or  three  times.

r.  She  knows  she  does  that,  she  says  it's  most  awfully

difficult. She  says  she  is  not  apt  to  get  the  other


350


Mrs.  Henry  Siclgwick.


[part


side  of  the  leaf.  It's  when  the  power  lies  in
between  the  jDages  that  it's  difficult,  she  says  if
the  page  were  open  it  would  be  all  right,  the
trouble  is  sensing  it  in  a  closed  book.  She  says
she  just  had  to  gauge,  the  way  you  gauge  the
height  of  a  certain  building,  she  wonders  some-
times that  she  can  find  the  j^age  at  all.
The  sentence  was  very  clear,  but  on  the  opposite
page.

Very  likely  and  sometimes  it  will  be  in  the  right

position  on  the  page.
Yes  it  was.

She  says  it  is  so  difficult  when  the  pages  are  touch-
ing each  other.

I  give  this  for  what  it  is  worth,  but  it  does  not  seem
to  furnish  much  illumination,  and  I  doubt  whether  either
Peda  or  A.  V.  B.  understand  very  much  about  the  matter
— at  least  when  communicating. ^  As  to  A.  V.  B.'s  view
that  she  is  not  apt  to  get  the  other  side  of  the  leaf — it  is
true  that  this  mistake  is  less  common  than  the  one  we
have  been  discussing,  but  it  does  occur,  and  I  have  in
fact  given  two  instances  (see  above,  pp.  275  and  276,
A.  V.  B.  book-tests  of  March  6  and  A^vil  3,  1918).  In  |
each  case  the  correspondence  between  the  "  message  "  and
what  had'  been  said  about  it  was  fairly  good,  and  in  each
case  the  place  on  the  page  was  correct,  but  the  page  was
the  one  at  the  back  of  the  page  named.

1  Feda on one occasion (.January 23, 1918) implies that A.  V.  B.
is  not "  all there  "  when  communicating. She  says  "  Feda  sometimes-
thinks  when  Ladye  is  saying  what  that  part  of  her  that's  in  this  room
thinks  right,  that  some  part  of  her  mind  what  can't  get  through  here  '
is  saying,  '  No  that's  not  right.'  " On  another  occasion  (April  24,  1918)  !|
Feda  says  the  same  sort  of  thing  about  herself. "  You  know  Ladye  says
it's  so  extraordinary,  but  she  has  to  act  upon  Feda  sometimes  in  a  way  j
Feda  don't  understand  when  she's  in  the  medium,  and  she  was  afraid  ii
Feda  wouldn't  take  up  the  reference  to  Raymond  [Lodge],  so  she  had
to  worry  to  get  a  word  that  would  suggest  Raymond  to  Feda  ; [she  I
had  talked  about  dislodging  some  of  the  books]. She  says  she's  done  !
that  often  and  she's  wondered  if  you  had  guessed  she  was  doing  that,  j
and  how  carefully  she  has  to  lead  Feda  to  a  new  idea. Feda  knows-
that,  'cos  when  Feda's  in  the  medium  she's  only  got  like  half  of  Feda's
own  sense,  she's  not  half  so  clever  as  when  she's  out  of  the  medium  !  "


U.  V.  T.
F.

U.  V.  T.
F.


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


351


In  the  course  of  A.  V.  B.'s  explanation  just  quoted  she
says  she  wonders  that  she  can  find  the  page  at  all.  This
wonder  we  shall  most  of  us  share  with  her,  and  if  we
could  clear  the  matter  up  we  should  probably  have  gone
a  long  way  towards  explaining  successful  book-tests.  In
whatever  way  the  pages  may  be  arrived  at,  they  are
identified  by  a  number — usually  the  number  printed  on
them — and  the  number  is  conveyed  to  Feda  either  by  a
visual  or  oral  impression.  Thus  on  November  22,  1917,
discussing  the  failure  of  the  day  before  ("  Charolois  " — see
above,  p.  271),  Feda  says  of  A.  V.  B.  :  "She  showed  the
numbers  to  Feda  separately,  one,  two,  like  that.  M.  R.
Yes  and  you  said  12."  In  some  cases,  e.g.  the  A.  W.  V.
sitting  of  January  4,  1919  (quoted  from  on  p.  286  above),^
Feda  implies  that  the  communicator  draws  for  her  the
numerals  required,  or  as  it  is  sometimes  described,  builds
them  up. Feda  says  :

You  open  this  second  book  at — what  ?  Two — um — two —
wait  a  minute,  you've  given  me  two  and  three.  All  riglit,,
I  got  it  wrong,  I  thought  he  showed  me  two  and  five.
It's  a  three  and  a  five.  He  made  the  three  not  lilce  that
(Feda  draws  in  the  air  a  very  curved  and  defined  figure  3).
but  rather  short.  (Feda  draws  in  the  air  a  hastily  formed
figure  3  with  very  httle  curve  in  the  middle  and  hardly
any  curve  up  at  the  lower  part.)  Like  that,  not  a  very
big  curl  round.  [As  a  matter  of  fact  if  there  was  any
sense  in  this  item  of  the  book-test  the  page  meant  was
p.  25,  not  35.]

On  another  occasion  (A.  W.  V.,  October  19,  1918)  Feda
says  to  the  communicator  :  "I  can't  see  the  number,  build
it  up  again — 48."  Compare  also  p.  353  below,  "  She's
building  up  an  8  distinctly."  And  again,  "  Oh,  now
she's  building  up  another  page  "  [meaning  its  number]
(A.  V.  B.,  January  10,  1918).  We  also  have  comparisons
between  the  building  up  (or  the  Tvoriting)  of  different  com-
municators. Thus  Feda  says  of  Mrs.  Verrall,  who  on
January  4,  1919,  was  indicating  page  4,  "  She  makes  her
fours  very  clear  and  distinct,  not  thick  and  sprawly  like
with  a  thick  pen,  fine  ones." Again  (A.  V.  B.,  January  30,


352


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich. ^  !


[PAET


1918),  "Do  you  know  when  Ladye  makes  what  you  call
a  1  [the  numeral  as  in  17]  she  doesn't  always  make  it
quite  clearly. There's  a  little  wobble  to  him."

It  is  clear  that  methods  such  as  these  of  making  Feda
apprehend  the  page  would  be  consistent  with  any  mode  of
its  apprehension  by  the  communicator.  But  the  statements
we  get  from  communicators  about  this  are  not  very  con-
sistent. There  cannot,  one  would  think,  be  any  special
difficulty  in  "  sensing  "—to  use  their  own  non-committal
expression— the  number  of  a  page  if  other  things  on  the
page  can  be  "  sensed."  Indeed  the  numbers  do  seem  to
be  sensed,  at  least  in  a  general  way,  for  on  one  occasion
(A.  V.  B.,  January  15,  1919)  Feda  says  :

F.  Oh  wait  a  bit — what  ?  {s.v.  Some  pages  not  numbered)

she  wondered  if  some  pages  were  not  numbered
U.  V.  T. Why  ?

^-  Not  in  this  book  but  in  one  of  the  foreign  books

[the  Greek  books]  she  was  sensing  she  was  sure
that  the  pages  were  not  numbered  ...  it  seems
so  strange  to  her.

[The  pages  of  a  Homer  from  which  some  items  of  the
book-tests  of  this  day  were  taken  were  not  numbered.  In
referring  to  the  Greek  books  before,  the  fact  of  pages  in  some
of  them  being  unnumbered  was  not  alluded  to  by  A.  V.  B.]

The  order  of  proceeding  for  the  communicator,  one
would  suppose,  would  be  first  to  decide  on  a  "  message  "
in  the  book  ^  and  then  ascertain  on  what  page  it  is  ;  and

'  Sometimes  the  communicator  offers  to  throw  light  on  his  method  of
selecting  messages. Thus,  in  an  A.  V.  B.  sitting  of  Dec.  4, 1918,  we
find  Feda  saying,  "  On  page  20  of  the  same  book,  almost  at  the  top  of
the  page,  there  seemed  to  her  to  be  a  reference  to  a  clock  striking.  She
says,  '  I'll  tell  you  how  I  found  that,  I  was  trying  to  get  through  an
idea  to  you  suggesting  a  time  for  your  passing  over.' But  she  says
she  was  disappointed,  for  all  she  could  get  was  about  a  clock  striking,
and  it  was  too  vag-ue  to  give  the  message,  but  she  thought  it  would
interest  you  to know  what  she was  looking  for and  what  she  got,
and  why  she  got  it." As,  however,  nothing  relevant  was  found  either
on  p. 20  or  the  page  opposite,  we  are  left  in  doubt  whether  the  soi-
-disant  A.  V.  B.  was not simply romancing in what she said.  The
book,  by  the  way,  was  a  new  volume,  straight  from  the  shop,  and  so
far  as  the  sitters  knew,  unread  by  anyone.


Lxxxi.]  An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.  353

if  his  mode  of  perception  were  visual  he  would  in  general
do  this  most  easily  by  reading  the  number  printed  on  the
page.  In  most  cases  this  seems  in  fact  the  simplest
interpretation  of  the  phenomena  presented  to  us.  But
there  are  difficulties.  The  following  item  in  the  A.  V.  B.
book-tests  of  October  2,  1918,  illustrates  one  of  them  :

F.  Take  the  second  book  from  the  right. Eight.  Only

eight  Ladye  ?  Wait  a  minute  you  must  get  that
clear.

U.  V.  T. Only  eight  Ladye  ?

F.  Well  she's  building  an  eight  up  distinctly.

U.  V.  T. Is  that  all  of  the  number,  Ladye  ?

F.  Yes,  it's  page  eight,  and  the  lower  part  of  the  page,

,  but  not  right  at  the  bottom  she  doesn't  think  .  .  .
is  a  message  about  the  turning  of  recent  important
events  in  the  war.  She  says  recent  events,  do  you
see.

The  book  proved  to  be  A  Fearful  Besponsibility  and
Tonellis  Marriage  by  W.  D.  Howells.  As  is  often  done,
its  pages  are  numbered  counting  in  the  title-page,  preface,
etc.,  but  no  numbers  are  printed  on  any  pages  till  the
opening  page  of  the  reading  matter  proper.  This  page  in
the  present  case  is  numbered  9,  so  that  there  is  no  page
marked  8.  The  sitters  decided  that  the  eighth  page  from
the  beginning  of  the  reading  matter  proper  must  be
meant,  namely,  the  page  marked  16.  In  the  lower  part
of  this  page  was  found  the  sentence  :  "As  Americans,
they  must  respond  to  any  impulse  for  Freedom,"  etc.,
which  seems  to  conform  fairly  well  to  what  is  said  about
the  "  message  " — the  entry  of  the  Americans  into  the  war
a  few  months  previously  being  a  very  important  recent
event  and  an  important  cause  of  the  turning  of  the  tide
in  favour  of  the  allies.  Now  if  this  really  was  the  sentence
intended  by  the  communicator,  how  did  she  come  to  call
the  page,  page  8  ?  She  seems  to  have  hesitated  a  little
about  it.  Perhaps  she  had  to  go  through  a  calculation  like
the  sitters,  and  perceiving  that  the  first  page  of  the
reading  matter  was  called  p.  9,  concluded  that  p.  16  being
the  eighth page  of  reading  matter  would  be  regarded  as


354  ■ Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

p.  8  by  the  sitters.  If  so  the  conclusion  was  unwise^
for  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  sitters  would  have
been  better  satisfied  by  being  told  to  look  at  p.  16.

The  communicators,  or  Feda  for  them,  deny  at  times,
however, that they see the page-number at all. For  |
instance, at a sitting on December 2, 1917, during  a
book-test  the  following  dialogue  is  reported  between  the
sitter  (Professor  B.)  and  Feda  :

S. What  is  the  title  of  the  book  ?

F.  He  doesn't  know.  He  can't  read,  can't  see  it.  •  '  ^
S. Can't  read  ?

F. No,  he  can't  read,  but  he  gets  a  sense  of  the  meaning.

S. Then  how  can  he  read  "  Page  87  "  ?  %

F. He  does  not. He  makes  an  estimate  like  you  would  know

the height of a tower without measuring it. It's  not

exact.

S. Who  wrote  the  message  ?  ..

(No  answer.)
S. In  what  language  is  it  ?
F. Can't  tell.

[The  "  message  "  was  said  to  be  one  "  to  cheer  you  up.  !
It  draws  a  comparison  between  the  past  and  the  present."
A  passage  conforming  to  this  was  found  in  the  correct  1
situation  on  p.  86  [that  is,  facing  p.  87],  but  it  was  in  a
volume  not  properly  speaking  in  the  place  indicated  in
the  shelves,  though  surrounded  by  other  books  more  or
less  such  as  described  by  Feda.]

Again,  in  the  book-tests  of  April  23,  1918,  A.  W.  V.  is  !
represented  by  Feda  as  saying  :  i

Turning  back  in  the  same  book,  p.  13,  he  says  many  |
people  have  a  difficulty  in  getting  the  second  test  .  .  .  it's  '
a  matter  of  weighing  up  and  calculating,  but  he's  going  on

trying.  |

i

This idea that page numbers are arrived at through  '\
estimating  by  measurement,  gauging,  weighing  up,  is  fre-
quently mentioned,  and  it  is  of  course  well  adapted  to  |
explain how books without page numbers, or partly  i
mutilated,  may  be  dealt  with. It  is  also  consistent  with  I


Lxxxi.]  An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


355


the  assertion  that  pages  over  100  are  more  difificult  to
"  sense." Thus  on  April  24,  1918,  Feda  says  for  A.  V.  B. :

She  wanted  to  tell  you  that  she  finds  it  so  much  easier
to  sense  things  near  the  beginning  of  a  book. She  gets  a
little  lost  when  she  gets  too deeply  into  the  book.  It's
i; like  a  man  measuring  a  long  length  ; the  first  yard  or  two
is  accurate,  then  he  loses  himself.^

But  though  "  weighing  up  "  fits  certain  kinds  of  cases,
it  does  not  fit  others.  How,  for  instance,  when  there  is  a
long  introduction  separately  paged  from  the  text,  is
"weighing  up"  applied?  Such  a  case  is  quoted  on  p.  321
above  in  the  A.  W.  V.  book-test  of  January  14,  1918  ;
p.  73  is  named,  but  nothing  relevant  discovered  on  p.  73
of  an  introduction  of  eighty-two  pages.  What  is  believed
to  be  the  "  message  "  is  found  on  p.  73  of  the  text.  Are
we  to  suppose  that  A.  W.  V.  noticed,  or  remembered,  that
there  was  an  introduction  and  was  careful  to  omit  that,
and  only  "weigh  up"  from  the  beginning  of  the  text?
If,  on  the  other  hand,  he  observed  the  number  printed  on
the  page  and  used  that  to  describe  it,  the  matter  seems
comparatively  simple.

An}''  difficulty  about  "  sensing  "  the  number  printed  on
a  page  is  presumably  of  the  same  nature  as  that  of
getting  an  exact  impression  of  other  things  on  it.  And
about  this  there  are  the  same  apparent  inconsistencies.
The  communicators  are  concerned  to  explain  to  us  that
they  "  get  the  idea,  the  thought,  more  than  the  written
word "  (A.  V.  B.,  October  12,  1918).  "  I  sense  a  senti-
ment. I  don't  get  the  exact  words"  (communicator  on
January  19,  1918,  book-test  quoted  from  above,  p.  349).
"  She  might  tell  you  that  two  volumes  of  the  same
subject  or  book  is  one,  because,  as  she  explained  before,
she  senses  a  line  of  thought  or  expression  more  than  little
material  things  such  as  bindings  and  such  things  "  (A.  V.  B.,

1  There are one or two quite good book-tests quoted above  with
pages  over  100,  but  I  think  it  is  true  that  pages  much  over  this  are
not  used  in  the  tests  under  examination. The  sceptic  might  say  that
this  is  because of the risk  of  the  book  indicated  proving  to be  so
I  small  as  not  to  contain  a  himdred  pages.


356  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [paet  is?

January  30,  1918).  And  of  course  any  genuine  "  sensing
of  the  Greek  books  by  a  communicator  ignorant  of  the
Greek  alphabet  imphes  that  it  is  the  idea,  the  thought
more  than  the  written  word,  that  is  apprehended — unless
the  ignorance  disappears  on  the  other  side,  or  the  com-
municator is  assisted  by  others  who  know.

Nevertheless,  those  readers  who  have  followed  so  far  will
know  that  in  some  cases  at  least  it  seems  to  be  the  actual
word  or  its  appearance  that  is  perceived — not  any  idea
behind  it.  For  instance,  "  She  thinks  there  is  a  date  on
that  page  ;  it  seems  like  a  date  because  there  is  a  big
number  that  seems  like  you  would  have  for  a  year "
(A.  V.  B.,  September  26,  1917,  quoted  above,  p.  292).
And  when  we  are  told,  as  often  happens,  that  the  passage
indicated  is  to  be  taken  literally,  which  means  that
verbally  it  will  serve  as  a  "  message,"  but  that  its  mean-
ing in  its  own  context  is  to  be  ignored — awareness  of  the
actual  words  is  certainly  suggested.  '

There  are  cases,  again,  where  the  communicator  calls
attention  to  particular  letters  on  a  page.  For  instance,  an
attempt  to  give  a  word  composed  of  certain  letters  on
certain  pages  was  made  by  A.  V.  B.  on  February  20,
1918.^  It  came  to  nothing  and  may  well  have  been  mere
talk,  so  that  it  cannot  be  used  as  evidence  that  letters  as
such  are  perceived.  But  in  other  cases  there  are  indica-
tions of  success.  Thus  on  September  27,  1917,  Feda  says
for  the  communicator  :  "  She  says  that  the  few  words  she
has  picked  just  there  have  the  initials  of  some  of  her  friends
and  relations."  At  the  place  in  the  page  indicated  were
found  "  three  words  beginning  with  capitals — namely  M,
S,  and  E,"  which  initials  were  "  applicable  to  the  com-
municator herself  and  to  friends  and  relations."

Another  thing  of  rather  frequent  occurrence  is  the
description  of  a  name  on  a  page  by  its  initial  and  perhaps
second  letter  and  number  of  syllables.  There  is  an
example  in  the  case  given  above  on  pp.  339-340  where
"  a  funny  name  "  beginning  with  V  like  Vodka  is  men-
tioned— meaning  apparently  Voltaire.  Or,  again,  on  April
24,  1918  (in  the  book-test  quoted  above,  pp.  345-346) :  ,

'  For  particulars  see  Appendix  D,  p.  398.


{k
was


4


Lxxxi.]  An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.  357


A  word  kept  impressing  itself  on  her,  she  couldn't  sense
its  meaning,  but  she  got  the  impression  that  the  letters
might  form  a  word  such  as  Rosalie  ...  Or  it  was
Rosalene,  or  Rosalende.  She  couldn't  get  it  quite  rightly,
but  the  word  she  sensed  seemed  to  occupy  a  prominent
position  in  the  chapter  what  she  was  sensing.  She's  sure
it  must  have  been  on  p.  98  or  very  close.

The  word  Robespierre  occurs  on  p.  100,  and  it  will  be
remembered  that  this  is  a  case  where  98  should  apparently
aave  been  99.

All  this  leaves  us  in  great  bewilderment  as  to  what  is
really  apprehended  as  well  as  to  how  it  is  apprehended.
That  we  should  not  understand  the  "  how "  is  no  doubt
natural,  for  knowledge  of  a  passage  in  a  closed  book  can
bardly  be  obtained  by  means  of  any  bodily  senses  such  as
we  are  acquainted  with,  and  it  would  therefore  be  very
difficult  to  explain  to  us  what  occurs  even  apart  from  any
difficulty  in  getting  the  explanation  through.

It  is  true  that  communicators  sometimes  offer  as  a  kind
of  explanation  one  involving  in  a  way  perception  through
the  bodily  senses — those  of  previous  readers.  They  say  it
is  much  more  difficult  for  them  to  get  information  from  a
copy  of  a  book  which  no  one  has  read.  Thus,  when  Mrs.
Kennedy  on  January  19,  1918,  asked  the  communicator
(her  son)  how  he  could  sense  what  was  in  a  book  when  it
was  not  in  MS.  but  had  become  merely  a  matter  of  signs
set  up  at  a  printer's  office  without  thought  as  to  meaning,
the  reply  was  :

Everyone  who  has  read  a  book  has  left  what  you
might  almost  call  a  sort  of  aui'a.  When  reading  the  book
they  have  in  a  way  psychometrized  the  book  and  left  a
thought.  A  book  straight  from  the  printers  w'ould  not  be
at  all  good,  very  difficult.  It  is  something  like  a  person
who  has  been  in  a  room  five  hundred  years  ago,  and  has
left  there  an  impression.

Again,  at  an  A.  W.  V.  sitting  on  March  1,  1918,  Feda  says  :

F. Mr.  Arthur's  good  at  sensing  the  outside  of  books.  He
thinks  it's  easier  to  sense  outsides,  because  so  many  people


358  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick. '  [part

have  read  outsides  of  books,  and  in  a  way  imprinted  the
thoughts  back  on  the  books,  registering  their  thoughts  on
the  books  in  the  psychic  ;  almost  reprinting  the  title  in
psychic  letters.  He's  got  a  feeling  neither  he  nor  any
other  spirit  could  sense  a  book  which  had  come  straight
from  the  printers  and  never  been  perused.  It  would  make
a  difference  who  had  read  the  book.  If  he  took  a  book
which  only  one  person  had  read,  according  to  the  mental
concentration  of  that  person  he  would  be  able  to  get  tests
from  that  book.  Like  a  psychic  book.  Like  a  medium
getting  conditions  through  a  ring  or  letters,  but  they
couldn't  get  the  conditions  unless  they'd  caught  them  from
the  person.  It's  like  haunting.  There's  no  such  thing  as  a
spirit  haunting  a  jjlace.  It's  a  thought-form  imprinted  on
ether.

Yet  again  on  April  3,  1918,  M.  R.  H.  had  a  discussion
with  A.  V.  B.  (through  Feda)  on  the  subject.  The
question  of  adding  to  the  books  from  which  book-tests
might  be  selected  had  been  raised.

^ .  1 ■ . /•<(.,( r.(;i-;  •

M.  R.  H. I  could  buy  some  new  ones.

F.  No, she  says  she  doesn't  want  that, 'cos  if  you

bought  'em  you  would  have  to  read  'em  first,

M.  R.  H.  Why  ?  We've  had  tests  from  books  that  have  never
been  read  by  either  of  us.

F.  She  says  some  one  had  read  them.

M.  R.  H.  No,  in  one  case  the  book  was  fresh  from  the  pub-
lisher. ..

F.  ,  She  says  she  wasn't  aware  of  that.  She  says  you
know  how  people  have  one  volume  of  the  same
, ,  book  with  the  pages  all  altered — you  Imow  hovv^  in
-  one  edition  page  26  would  have  a  different  thing

printed  on  it  to  what  it  would  have  in  another
edition  ?

M.  R.  H. Yes,  different  editions  are  differently  paged.

F.  If  you'd  got  an  edition  what  nobody  had  read  at

all,  it  would  be  very  difficult,  if  it  was  fresh  from
the  press.  She  says,  don't  forget,  these  are  all
only  theories,  'cos  book-tests  are  comparatively  a
;  .  new  idea,  but  this  is  how  they  think  they  do  it.


LXXXI.]


A71  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


359


M.  R.  H.  Then  I  can  buy  books  that  lots  of  people  have  read
in  the  edition  I  buy  ?

¥.  -  ■•  Yes,  she  says  it  wouldn't  matter  if  you'd  not  read
them,  as  long  as  some  one  has,  she  says  it
=  !  .  '  doesn't  matter  about  you  as  you.  She  thought
you  wanted  to  get  books  from  the  press.

M.  R.  H. Why  is  it  that  some  one  must  have  read  the  books  ?

F.  ■  'Cos they've left an impression of what  they've

thought  of  the  book  on  every  part  they've  read.

M.  R.  H.  But  what  would  happen  if  we  put  a  new  volume
that  no  one  has  actually  read  in  that  volume  ?

F.  v  I  She  says  it  will  make  it  difficult  ;  she  can  do  it,  but
it's  like  extracting  a  essence  from  a  bulk.  She
says  it's  difficult  to  explain  in  words  what  people
on  the  earth  plane  can  understand.  She  knows
Avhy  it's  difficult  but  she  can't  explain.

M.  R.  H. I  will  try  and  buy  second-hand  copies  from  libraries.

F.  Yes,  she  says  that  would  do  very  well.

The  communicator  herself  here  tells  us  that  this  idea —
that  previous  reading  of  a  page  by  some  one  through  their
ordinary  senses  facilitates  the  reading  of  it  by  the  com-
municator without  the  use  of  senses  at  all — is  only  a
theory,  and  we  cannot  say  that  it  is  a  theory  which  is
well  supported  by  the  facts.  For  there  is  no  adequate
evidence  that  an  uncut  book  is  more  difficult  to  "  sense  "
than  one  which  has  been  read.  In  several  of  the  book-
tests  I  have  quoted  the  page  referred  to  was  uncut  (see
pp.  294-296).

It  is  of  course  conceivable  that  an  uncut  page  has  been
read  by  some  one — say  the  binder,  or  even  by  a  person
glancing  through  the  book,^  but  the  probabilities  are  much
against  this.  There  is,  moreover,  no  instance  I  think  of
the  communicator  calling  attention  to  the  fact  that  a  page
referred  to  was  uncut.  And  the  impressions,  right  or
wrong,  alleged  to  be  derived  from  pages  which  prove  to
be  uncut  are  described  with  as  much  fulness  and  detail  as
others. '  ' ■  ■

'In  one  case  (A.  V.  B.,  Oct.  26,  1918)  in  which  a  fair  amount  of
success  was  obtained,  the  page  was  in  a  group  of  uncut  pages,  and
lso  placed  that  it  could  not  be  read  at  all  without  cutting.


360


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


The  communicator's  account  of  what  is  on  a  closed  page
is  generally  merely  descriptive  and  does  not  give  anj^  hint
of the mode of perception. There are, however, cases  i
where he tries to describe his impression in terms of  |
different senses — seeing, hearing, and  feeling — and others  j
where  what  is  said  seems  to  imply  sensory  impressions.  |
By  "  feeling,"  it  is  true,  a  general  impression  is  often  all  |
that  is  meant. But  this  is  not  always  so. We  get  both  j
meanings in remarks made at an A.  W.  V. sitting  on
November  23,  1918. Feda  says  :  i

There's  something  French about this book, he  got a  i
feeling  of  something  French. French,  yes,  that's  right. He  \
got  that  feeling  not  about  this  page,  but  several  times  as  j  \
he  was  feehng  about.  ! !

[As  a  matter  of  fact  there  was  nothing  French  about  the  j
book  in  question,  but  there  may  have  been  confusion,  as.  | )
the  statement  would  have  been  true  about  a  book  referred  i

to  just  before.]  \

.. ■ .  I

We  have  the  same  use  of  feel  ("he  wented  to  feel  that  \'\
second  book  ")  in  a  case  quoted  above  (p.  287).  ^

The  following  is  an  example  of  hearing  being  referred  to.  i|
It was on July 17, 1918, in a very nearly successful  '\
attempt by A.  V.  B. to get at the  liame  of  the  book  i
Amitie Amour  euse, which was being experimented with  ;
(see  above,  p.  300). Asked  what  was  the  first  letter  of  the  I
word,  Feda  repeats  the  question  and  continues,  "  It  would  \
be  A. Yes,  it  sounded  to  her  like  A,  the  pronunciation  i
is  A. She  can't  always  see  a  letter  but  it  sounded  hke  i
that." Another  good  example  of  description  in  terms  of
sound  occurred  in  Mr.  Drayton  Thomas's  sitting  of  March
28,  1918,  when  it  was  said  :  "  A  word  is  on  that  page  which  i
has  the  sound  of OSAPH  ;  it  is  not  a  common  word."  |
Mr.  Thomas  thinks  the  word  "  philosophy  "  was  referred  to.
We  may  note  that  in  the  experiment  with  Greek  books
referred  to  above  (p.  304)  if  "  Boris,  Borisee  "  was  really
an attempt at "  Parisinus," the impression not  quite
caught  by  some  one — the  communicator  apparently — was  ;
an oral one. Instances might be multiplied  from  cases
which turned out failures, as when Feda  remarked  on

i


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


361


September  20,  1918  :  "  On  this  page  there's  a  name  or
word  what  sounded  to  him  [A.  W.  V.]  like  Bar-ba-does.
That  isn't  anything  he  wanted  to  give  as  a  message,  but
as  he  sensed  it  he  thought  he  might  as  well  give  it."
I  understand  that  no  such  word  was  found,  so  we  are
left  in  doubt  whether  the  impression  was  derived  from
"  sensing "  or  imagination,  and  can  therefore  base  on
it  no  conclusions  as  to  the  mode  of  "  sensing."

Visual  impressions  seem  to  be  implied  in  such  references
to  initials  as  are  quoted  above  (p.  356),  and  on  the  same
page  the  sentence  about  what  "  seems  hke  a  date  because
there  is  a  big  number."  See  also  on  p.  320  above  :  "  a
number  or  a  word  in  different  characters  to  the  usual.  If
it's  a  number  it's  more  than  one  figure,  it  must  be  two
or  more  characters  to  it,  because  if  it  were  not  hke  that
it  wouldn't  look  like  a  word."  And  again  on  the  next
page  :  "he  thinks  that  he's  got  the  first  two  syllables
of  the  word  right  if  not  the  rest  "  ;  this  last,  however,
might  have  been  an  auditory  impression.

The  following  remark  of  Feda's  about  A.  W.  V.  (on
October  19,  1918)  distinctly  affirms  a  visual  impression  :

When  he  was  sensing  these  books  he  got  for  the  time
being  a  peculiar  clarity  of  vision  which  enabled  him  to  see
even  words  on  the  pages,  and  he  finds  this  morning  he  can
even  reproduce  them  to  a  certain  extent.

As  a  comment  on  this,  however,  it  is  interesting  to  note
that  it  is  an  introduction  to  a  statement  that  he  had  seen
the  word  "  Caelebs "  (this  was  spelt  by  Feda  letter  by
letter)  which  he  had  certainly  not  seen  on  the  page  in
question,  though  he  may  have  been  aware  that  the  page
was  about  a  bachelor.  If  so,  the  visual  impression  would
seem  to  have  arisen  out  of  the  idea.  The  whole  incident
is  of  some  interest  in  this  connexion,  and  I  have  quoted
it  in  Appendix  D.

It  would  seem  that  impressions  of  pictures  which  are
described  critically  or  with  detail  must  be  visual.  There
are  not  many  such  descriptions  of  pictures  said  to  be  in
books,  but  one  case  was  given  above  (p.  340-1)  where  a
picture  of  a  lady  out  of  drawing  is  mentioned.  Another


362


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


occurred  on  September  19,  1917,  also  at  an  A.  V.  B.  sitting.
Feda  says  :

Oh  !  she  says  there's  a  book  near  the  special  one  that
when  you  open  it  has  got  a  picture  in  it,  a  picture  of
rather  a  simpering  female  in  rather  an  exaggerated  and
out  of  date  dress,  with  the  figure  all  squeezed  into
unnatural  lines.

[Eight  books  from  the  selected  book,  which  was  The  Old
Curiosity  Shoj)  (see  pp.  289-292),  was  one  called  Madame,  by
Julia  Cartwright,  the  frontispiece  of  which  is  the  portrait
of  Princess  Henrietta  of  England  in  the  exaggeratedly
tight-laced  costume  of  the  period,  and  having  an  un-
deniably simpering  expression.]

A  picture  was  described  with  still  more  detail  on
December  8,  1918  (see  above,  p.  306),  but  in  this  case
there  was  no  such  picture  in  any  of  the  books,  and  the
visual  impression,  if  really  arising  out  of  the  book-tests,
must  have  been  the  result  of  association  of  ideas— the
book  specified  suggesting  the  idea  of  (say)  Demosthenes,
and  this  idea  suggesting  a  picture  of  an  ancient  Greek
which  had  probably  been  seen  by  the  medium.  If  this
was  so,  the  phenomenon  may  be  classed  with  the
impression  just  referred  to  of  having  seen  the  word
Caelebs  upon  the  page.  Another  erroneous  impression
about  the  Greek  books  seems  to  have  assumed  a  more  or
less  visual  form  in  the  description  of  an  Eastern  Country
quoted  above,  p.  348,  as  suggesting  guessing.

In  the  following  case  (A.  V.  B.  book-tests  of  July  17,
1918,  points  in  which  have  already  been  referred  to  on  pp.
300  and  360),  a  visual  impression  in  some  respects  analogous
to  the  last  mentioned  seems  to  have  been  experienced  by
the  communicator.  It  was  not  I  think  visualized  by  Feda,
though  this  is  not  certain,  as  the  account  is  confused  ;  for
Feda  begins  as  if  she  were  being  shown  something  and
goes  on  as  if  she  were  trying  to  repeat  a  verbal  descrip-
tion :

F,  {s.v.  Wait  a  minute,  what  are  you  showing  Feda  ?)  Feda
must  give  it  to  you  just  as  she  says,  or  Feda  might  get  it
^vrong. At  the  beginning  of  the  book,  a  street— a  road—


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


363


many  people  passing — repassing  ;  a  town  a  long  way  off,
crowds  —  many  people  —  Solin  —  Sorin  —  Silon  —  Sirone  —  it
sounds  like  this.  A  word  she  felt  written  sounds  like
T.H.Y.R.O.N.E.

Now  there  was  no  such  description  in  the  book,  nor  was
there  any  picture.  But  the  book  opens  with  the  intro-
duction to  each  other  of  the  hero  and  heroine  at  a  soiree
in  Paris,-^  and  the  scene  described — omitting  the  words
street  and  road — might  be  suggested  by  the  idea  of  a
soiree,  while  the  words  beginning  with  S  might  be  attempts
at  soiree  or  salon  or  both.  This  is  of  course  highly  con-
jectural. No  word  hke  T.H.Y.R.O.N.E.  was  found.

A.  V.  B.  affirms  on  December  28,  1918,  that  she  cannot
always  distinguish  between  pictures  and  verbal  descrip-
tions. As  neither  was  found  in  this  particular  instance,  it
is  doubtful  how  much  importance  can  be  attached  to  her
statement,  which  may  be  mere  padding,  but  I  think  the
passage  is  worth  quoting  as  possibly  containing  at  least
elements  of  truth.

F.  She  thinks,  too,  there  are  illustrations  or  diagrams  of

■  >  some kind  in it. One looked to her  like  the

mouth  of  a  cave  or  cavern.
U.  V.  T. Are  these  pictures  ?

F.  And  another  looked  like  a  flag — Ladye  are  these  real

pictures,  or  is  it  a  thing  what  seemed  like  that  ?
■'I'.' !' No,  they  seemed  to  her  to  be  actual  pictures  or
diagrams.

U.  V.  T. Why  does  she  say  they  seemed  ?

F.  She  says  : "  111  tell  you. I  have  to  be  very  careful

■■  ■■J  '  not  to  let  a  vivid  description  convey  a  picture  of
the  thing  to  me."  She  says  :  "  You  see  every-
thing I  get  from  books  in  the  way  of  description
appears  like  a  picture  to  me,  and  vice  versa."  .  .  .
Wait  a  minute.  Yes,  Ladye,  I  know.  You  know
the  parson  man  [Mr.  Drayton  Thomas]  ?  His
father  kept  thinking  that  on  a  page  it  spoke  of

1  This  was  of  course  known  to  the  sitter  U.  V.  T.  as  the  book  was
for  experimental  purposes  selected  by  her  and  she  had  recently  partly
read  it  (see  p.  300).


364


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


columns,  and  it  was  really  a  picture — He  didn't

know  it  was  a  picture.^
U.  V.  T. Then  if  we  do  not  find  a  picture  we  look  for  a

description  and  vice  versa  ?
F.  Yes,  exactly,  but  when  she  gives  it  as  being  on  a

certain  page —

U.  V.  T.  I  understand,  what  she  means  is  when  she  says  "  a
quarter  of  the  v/ay  down  a  certain  page  "  then  it's
a  message  in  words.

F.  It  is  not  very  likely  to  mean  a  picture  unless—

suppose  she'd  got  the  word  "  bird  "  near  the  top
of  the  page,  and — you  do  mean  this,  Ladye  ?
Yes,  she  says  seriously,  and  in  the  picture  there
happened  to  be  a  bird  near  the  top  of  the  page,
then  even  if  she  knew  it,  she  might  not  be  able
to  tell  you  through  Feda  that  she  knew  it.  She
says  :  "  Of  course  I'm  exaggerating,  but  it's  quite
possible  !  "  .  .  .  She  says  you  do  understand  that,
don't  you  ?

U.  V.  T. It  interests  me  and  I  understand  it  quite  well.

F.  She  saj's  : "  You  do  understand  too  that  I'm  not

always able  to  explain  even  when  I  know  it  ?  "

.  .  .  She  says  it's  Feda  that's  the  difficulty.
U.  V.  T. Very  likely.

F.  I  don't  think  I  am,  it's  this  (touches  Mrs.  Leonard's

body).

It  might  perhaps  be  worth  while  trying  with  a  sheK
full  of  illustrated  books  whether  there  is  any  indication
that  pictures  are  more  easily  "  sensed  "  than  letterpress.

I  think  it  may  be  instructive,  in  connexion  with  the
question  of  the  degree  or  mode  of  perception  in  book-
tests,  to  examine  how  they  are  presented  to  Feda— dis-
tinguishing, that  is,  between  Feda  and  the  communicator.
Whatever  Feda  and  the  communicator  may  be,  they  are

1  I  have  not  got  the  record  of  this  experience  of  Mr.  Drayton  Thomas.
I  quote  it  here  because  Mr.  Thomas  sometimes  talks  over  with  Feda
the  results  of  his  book-tests,  so  that  it  is  possible  that  the  idea  of  the
interehangeability  of  descriptions  and  pictures  may  have  come  from
him.


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


365


dramatically  and  I  think  in  their  own  consciousnesses —
certainly  in  Feda's — quite  distinct  personalities  throughout
the  sitting.  To  Feda  the  communicator  is  an  individual,
to  a  great  extent  visible,  whose  sensations  and  other
experiences  she  does  not  necessarily  share,  and  who  com-
municates with  her  in  various  ways.  One  way  is  by
language  heard  and  which  Feda  can  sometimes  repeat
verbatim.  (I  say  heard  because  that  is  how  Feda  ex-
presses it,  not  as  meaning  that  it  is  heard  with  Mrs.
Leonard's  bodily  ears  of  course.)  Another  way  is  by
symbolic  gestures.  "  She  nods  her  head "  (A.  V.  B.,
March  20,  1918).  "  He's  smiling "  (see  above,  p.  321).
"  Ladye  is  going  like  this  (Feda  draws  herself  up  and
looks  stern)  "  (A.  V.  B.,  October  23,  1918).  "  It  seems  to
Feda  to  be  halfway  through  the  book,  because  Ladye  is
showing  Feda  a  book  and  putting  her  finger  in  to  show
Feda  the  place "  (A.  V.  B.,  January  9,  1918).  "  A  book
whoso  title  makes  him  feel  horribly  cold.  He's  pretending
to  shiver.  ...  It  doesn't  really  Mrs.  Nellie  "  (A.  W.  V.,
June  11,  1918).  "What  you  doing,  Ladye?  I'll  show
you  what  she's  doing.  She  puts  down  her  hand  and  she's
pretending  to  pick  up  the  carpet  "  [apparently  to  suggest
a  Persian  carpet].  (A.  V.  B.,  November  5,  1918.)  "  He's
pretending  to  show  me  a  long,  long  pole  in  his  hand "
(see  above,  p.  288).  Similar  instances  might  be  multiplied
almost  indefinitely.

Another  visual  method  is  for  the  communicator  to  write
or  "  build  up  "  the  objects,  e.g.  numbers,  which  he  wishes
Feda  to  understand.  Examples  of  this  have  been  given
above,  p.  351.  Feda  seems,  sometimes  at  least,  to  think
this  method  clearer  than  the  oral  method.  "  If  she  shows
Feda  the  page  [meaning  apparently  its  number]  it  makes
it  much  more  clear  to  Feda.  Twenty  and  a  five, — 25  "
(A.  V.  B.,  January  16,  1918).  I  think,  however,  that  this
method  may  possibly  be  responsible  for  the  doubt  Feda
is  liable  to  express  as  to  the  order  of  the  numerals.  If
they  are  "  built  up  "  separately  it  may  not  be  obvious
how  they  should  be  arranged.  In  the  following  case  it  is
perhaps  doubtful  whether  what  was  shown  to  Feda  was
symbolic action of the communicator, or a vision  of  a


366


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


shelf.  "  The  books  doesn't  all  match  there.  He's  showing
different  shapes  and  sizes  "  (Mr.  Kittermaster,  January  25,
1918).  But  that  the  communicator  does  at  times  convey
to  Feda  what  he  wants  her  to  explain  to  the  sitter  by
means  of  visions— and  often  very  vivid  ones — of  the  room
and  shelves  in  which  selected  books  are,  of  the  outsides  of
books,  and  of  other  objects  in  the  room,  no  one  who  has
read  this  paper  thus  far  will  doubt.  Good  instances  are
found  in  the  description  of  the  picture  "  Le  Canape  Bleu  "
(p.  249  et  seq.),  of  the  statuette,  etc.,  quoted  in  Appendix  B,
and  in  other  cases.

A  very  conspicuous  instance  of  this  kind  of  vision  of
external  objects  being  given  to  Feda  occvirred — -not  in
connexion  with  book-tests,  which  had  not  begun  then — on
October  30,  1916,  and  is  described  in  the  paper  by  Miss
Radclyffe  Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge  lately  published
{Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXX.,  p.  459).  Feda  says  :
"  She's  showing  Feda  a  square  room,  it's  a  sitting  room,"
and  a  remarkable  description  of  Lady  Troubridge's  drawing-
room  followed,  given  by  Feda  as  though  seeing  it.

The  following  is  a  rather  quaint  way  of  describing  a
similar  vision.  At  an  A.  W.  V.  sitting,  January  14,  1918,
Feda  says  :  "  He's  picked  the  same  shelf  as  he  choosed
last  time,  and  now  he's  trying  to  show  Feda  a  glumpse — ■
no  a  glimpse  of  that  place,  like  through  a  hole."  A
description  of  a  bookcase  and  part  of  the  room  at  Mrs.
Salter's  house  follows,  which  appears  to  have  been  fairly
correct.

Sometimes  Feda  seems  to  be  led  into  the  room  of
which  she  is  to  have  a  vision.  The  following  case  is
probably  an  example  of  a  vision  of  this  kind,  and  it  also
illustrates  disagreement  between  the  communicator  and
Feda  as  to  the  interpretation  of  what  is  seen.  It  hap-
pened on  January  2,  1918,  at  an  A.  V.  B.  sitting.  Feda
says  :

Is  the  shelf  in  a  part  of  the  room  nearest  the  window
Ladye  ?  Now  are  you  sure  Ladye  ?  because  Feda  thought
it  was  near  the  fireplace.  Yes,  it  is  the  fire-place  too.
Ladye  may  think  it's  near  the  window  because  as  you
come  into  the  room  you  walk  towards  the  fire-place  when


(

Lxxxi.]  An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.  367

you  want  to  walk  to  the  window.  Feda  thinks  that  Ladye
is  mistaldng  the  window  for  the  fireplace.  Oh  yes  ;  Ladj^e
says  Feda  is  more  right  than  she  is,  the  books  are  near
the  fire-place.  It  seems  to  Feda  there  is  one  shelf  about
this  high.  (Indicates  with  her  hand  a  certain  height.)  Is
that  about  4  feet  high  ?

[The  books  were  near  the  fire-place.]

The  following  from  A.  V.  B.,  December  8,  1918,  is  an
example  of  Feda  being  apparentlj^  shown  things  from
different  points  of  view  :

F.  Wait  a  minute  Ladye.  Now  show  me  the  room.  Furni-
ture like  a  sitting-room.  It's  a  bit  more  oblong  Ladye
thinks,  but  it  looks  about  square  to  Feda  what  she's
showing  does.  But  she  thinks  that  it's  actually  oblong
rather.  Wait  a  minute.  Coming  in  at  the  door  you  gets
the  feeling  of  across  the  room,  but  she  keeps  taking  me  to
a  corner,  not  in  the  middle  of  a  wall  ;  and  round,
something  round  in  the  corner.  I  don't  think  it's  right
in  the  corner,  but  it's  close  to  the  corner,  but  she's
pointing  to  the  corner  and  saying  "  books."

[The  description,  as  far  as  it  goes,  is  fairly  correct.]

These  visions  of  Feda's  vary  no  doubt  in  vividness,  and
it  may  be  that  it  is  when  a  portion  of  the  vision  is  very
vivid  that  Feda  speaks  of  it  as  "  flashed  up  "  before  her.
This  happened,  it  will  be  remembered,  in  the  case  of  the
"  Canape  Bleu  "  picture  (see  above,  p.  249).  The  expression
is  used  again  at  an  A.  V.  B.  sitting  on  July  3,  1918.
After  indicating  clearly  from  the  communicator's  descrip-
tion the  shelves  meant  and  the  place  of  the  book,  Feda
continues  :

F.  IVIi's.  Twonnie,  do  you  haj)pen  to  know  if  at  the

corner  to  the  left  of  one  of  the  shelves  there's  a
rather  big  book  with  some  very  much  smaller
books  next  to  it  ?

M.  R.  H. I  can't  remember.

F.  She's  showed  it  to  Feda  in  a  flash,  one  book  looked

.;-  .  so  thin  that  you'd  hardly  call  it  a  book  at  all,

and  one  of  the  books  she  showed  Feda  in  a  flash


368


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


has  a  green  cover.  Feda  has  to  be  very  careful
over  colours,  'cos  she  (touches  medium)  don't
know  blues  and  greens  apart.

On  this  M.  R.  H.  comments  :

In  the  left-hand  corner  of  the  second  shelf  from  the
bottom  there  was  found  to  be  an  ordinary  sized  novel,  of
average  height*  and  thickness,  and  next  to  it  was  a  very
small  book,  much  smaller  than  the  novel,  next  to  this
again  was  a  book  so  thin  as  to  be  scarcely  more  than  a
pamphlet;  then  followed  six  books  all  considerably  under
the  average  size  of  those  in  the  case,  and  two  of  these
books  have  green  covers.  Upon  all  the  other  shelves  of
the  case,  or,  at  least,  at  the  corners  of  all  the  other
shelves,  the  books  are  more  or  less  uniform  in  size."

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  test-book  is  not  included  in
this  clearly  seen  group.  The  test-book  was  stated  to  be
in  the  same  case  but  in  the  fourth  shelf  from  the  bottom,
the  first  book  to  the  left.  It  proved  a  fairly  successful
book-test,  but  as  there  was  some  confusion  about  what
page  was  meant,  and  as  the  "  message  "  related  to  private
affairs,  I  have  not  quoted  it.

The  communicator  apparently  sometimes  uses  an  induced
vision  of  an  absent  person  to  suggest  him  to  Feda  ;  thus
on  January  30,  1918,  an  A.  V.  B.  sitting,  Feda  says  :

What  is  she  bringing  him  in  for  .  .  .  the  gentleman  what
comes  to  speak  to  Feda  ;  she  says  you  know  him  ;  he's
been  twice  here.  She's  showing  him  to  Feda.  Feda  knows
v/hat  he  looks  like.

[What  is  obviously  a  description  of  Mr.  Gerald  Balfour
follows,  and  a  reference  to  the  letter  G.^]

Feda  sometimes  has  vivid  visions  which  do  not  appar-
ently represent  anything  real.  Thus,  on  February  16,  1918,
at  a  sitting  of  Mrs.  Beadon's,  Feda  said  :

Page  82,  about  halfway  down,  a  message  about  your
progress  together.

^  Mr.  Balfoiir  had  had  two  sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard  a  few  days
before  this.


Lxxxi.]  An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.  ■  369

Feda  doesn't  know  if  this  has  anything  to  do  •with  the
message,  but  he  is  showing  Feda  a  very  vivid,  distinct
picture  of  you  and  him  with  faces  lifted  up  and  light
streaming  on  them.  You  are  going  up  hill,  with  feet  in
the  dark,  hand  in  hand,  looking  to  the  light.  Feda  thinks
it  may  have  to  do  with  the  message.

[Mrs.  Beadon  notes  :  "I  can  find  nothing  of  this  on  p.  82."]

Yet  another  way  in  which  the  communicator  expresses
his  meaning  is  by  imparting  to  Feda  motor  impulses —
causing  her  to  move  in  particular  ways.  At  the  A.  V.  B.
sitting  referred  to  above  (December  8,  1918)  :

(Feda  points  to  the  top  of  a  small  oak  cabinet  to
the  right  of  the  medium)  .  .  .

U.  V.  T.  Are  you  trying  to  get  the  height  of  the  shelf  from
which  she  has  selected  books  ?

r.  I  thought  you  were  Ladye  ! She  shakes  her  head,

yet  she  has  an  object  in  saying  that  height.  It's
a  line  to  go  from,  she  says  it  was  rather  im-
portant she  thought  to  give  that  height.  What
are  you  trying  to  do  Ladye  1  Don't  know  what
A^ou  wants  me  to  do.  She  keeps  on  moving  my
hand  like  that  (Feda  raises  her  hand  to  about  the
top  of  the  medium's  cabinet,  then  makes  a  gesture
of  patting  a  horizontal  surface)  ...  I  think  by
m.aking  me  move  my  hand,  she  wants  to  make
me  know  that  that's  the  top  of  the  thing.

Or,  again,  on  December  22,  1918  :

F.  Look,  as  you  goes  into  the  room  they's  there.  (Feda  now
points  in  front  of  her  as  though  the  books  vt-ould  be
opposite  the  entrance  of  the  room.)  She's  guiding  my
hand.

I  think  it  probable  that  when  Feda  draws  figures  or
letters  in  the  air  for  sitters  to  interpret,  as  often  happens,
she  is  sometimes  acting  under  motor  impulse,  not
apprehending  what  is  meant  herself  until  she  has  made  the
movement.


370


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


There  is  a  suggestion  that  Feda's  assumption  of  the
attitude  of  the  figure  in  "  Le  Canape  Bleu  "  picture  is  at
least  partly  an  automatic  movement,  not  pure  imitation^
for  when  asked  whether  she  can  see  what  the  figure  is
lying  or  sitting  on,  she  replies,  "  It's  not  lying,  it's  sitting,,
because  Ladye  can  make  Feda  do  it  on  this  chair "  (see
above,  p.  250).

I  am  inclined  to  regard  it  as  of  some  significance  that
among  these  modes  of  communication  between  the  com-
municator and  Feda,  the  one  that  produces  the  most
vivid  impression — a  vision  of  the  object  to  be  described,
such  as  Feda  had  of  "  Le  Canape  Bleu  "  picture — is  never
used  for  conveying  the  idea  of  the  inside  of  a  closed
book.  Indeed,  Feda  hardly  ever  (I  will  deal  with  possible
exceptions  presently)  represents  herself  as  seeing  the  page
or  part  of  it.  Closed  books  remain  closed  books  to  her^
and  she  only  repeats  to  the  sitter  what  the  communicator
explains  to  her  by  word  or  sign.  Is  this  because  the
communicator's  own  impression  is  not  of  the  vivid  order
required  to  make  Feda  see  a  vision  ?  Certainly  in  a
general  way  it  seems  to  be  rather  vague  and  fragmentary.
The  reader  will  prol)ably  here  object  that  in  the  case  of
the  picture  of  a  child  lying  down  (see  pp.  283  ei  seq.),.
which  I  quoted  among  instances  of  book-tests  described
beforehand  with  verbal  accuracy,  Feda  did  have  a  vision
of  it  similar  in  kind  to  the  one  she  had  of  "  Le  Canape
Bleu,"  though  perhaps  less  complete.  This  is  true,  but
then  the  picture  was  not  inside  a  book.  It  was  on  the
cover,  and  though  not  visible  without  moving  the  books,
its  position  may  well  have  been  known  to  some  one.  In
fact  it  seems  very  likely  that  a  binding  so  unusual
among  the  books  in  question  was  specially  noticed  by  the
housemaid  jvho  had  recently  rearranged  them,  if  not  by
others.  I  am,  in  fact,  disposed  to  think  that  the  unusual
feature  of  Feda's  having  a  vision  of  this  picture  is  an
argument  for  its  not  having  been  "  sensed  "  by  the  com-
municator in  the  same  way  as  a  book-test  proper,  and
for  the  knowledge  of  it  not  having  been  obtained  purely
by  clairvoyance.


LXXXI.]


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


371


An  incident  occurred,  however,  at  an  A.  V.  B.  sitting
on  December  18,  1918,  which  suggests  a  kind  of  vision
by  Feda. The  record  is  as  follows  :

F.  She's  not  sure  whether  this  is  on  page  6  or  on  the  pre-
ceding page,  but  she  just  wants  to  describe  something.
She's  showing  it  to  Feda.  There's  the  page.  (Here  Feda
indicates  the  page  of  a  book  by  gesture.)  I  could  draw
it  I  think.  (M.  R.  H.  .  .  .  hands  the  block  and  a  pencil
to  Feda.  Feda  proceeds  to  draw  three  long  wavy  lines
indicative  of  writing,  she  then  makes  a  scratchy  mark  on
the  paper  remarking  there's  a  star."  She  then  draws
four  short  wavy  lines,  remarking  "  these  is  short  lines."
She  then  draws  a  circle  and  says  that  A.  V.  B.  is  not
quite  certain  regarding  the  position  of  that  circle,  but  that
she  thinks  it  comes  about  there  on  the  page.  Feda  then
draws  four  more  long  lines  ;  saying,  "  these  is  long  again,
that's  how  the  page  is.")

Whether  Feda  here  conceived  herself  as  copying  from  a
model  of  the  page,  or  as  drawing  from  the  communicator's
directions,  is  not  clear,  but  I  think  the  latter.  It  is  not
important,  however,  as  the  drawing  "  does  not  seem  to
reproduce  anything  on  the  pages  "  indicated.

Feda  does  not  take  pains  to  distinguish  between  de-
scribing her  own  direct  impressions  and  repeating  what  the
commumcator  tells  her,  and  some  ambiguities  occur.  But
if  the  records  of  the  book-tests  are  read  carefully,  it  will,
I  think,  generally  appear  clearly  that  the  latter  is  meant.
In  a  few  cases,  however,  the  expressions  used  may  perhaps
be  more  naturally  interpreted  as  meaning  that  Feda
herself  saw  the  page.  The  most  distinct  instances  of  this
which  I  have  noticed  were  two  that  occurred  at  A.  V.  B.
sittings  on  November  22  and  28,  1917,  respectively.  On
November  22  Feda  said  :

On  the  page  which  is  called  75, — Feda  can  see  more
clearly  to-daj^ — near  the  top,  there  is  a  message  that  refers
to  tlie  general  state  of  affairs  now,  but  in  a  way  as
affecting  j^ou,  Mrs.  Twonnie.  Wait  a  minute,  there  is
something  more,  a  word,  something  important  that  has  to
do  with  this  book,  is  a  word  like  Roscommon,  that's  the


372


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


nearest  Feda  can  get  to  it,  and  there's  an  important  word
on  the  title-page  beginning  with  a  P.  This  is  a  kind  of
feeler,  so  that  she  [the  communicator]  can  get  the  feeling
of  that  [book]  case  more.

If  the  seeing  more  clearlj^  hj  Feda  refers  to  her  seeing
the  figures  75  "  built  up  "  for  her,  and  if  when  she  says
that  Roscommon  is  the  nearest  she  can  get  to  the  word,
she  means  it  is  the  best  approximation  she  can  get  to  the
communicator's  pronunciation  of  the  word — and  such  inter-
pretations are  not,  I  think,  strained — we  are  left  with
nothing  here  about  Feda  "  sensing  "  the  page  herself.

Again  on  November  28,  1917,  Feda  says  :

There's  a  funny  sounding  word  like  Adiosis,  Adiosis,
that  word's  in  the  beginning  of  the  book  on  the  title-pages.
Then  she  says  Assiosis,  no,  that's  not  quite  it,  but  it
begins  with  an  A,  and  it  seems  to  Feda  to  suggest  that
sound,  and  it  feels  to  Feda  like  a  three-syllabled  word,
not  a  little  word.

Here  everything  turns  on  whether  "  feels  to  Feda  "  can
apply  to  her  apprehension  of  what  the  communicator  is
saying,  and  it  seems  to  apply  just  as  well  to  that  as  to
a  more  direct  apprehension  of  the  page  in  the  closed  book.

Feda's  exact  meaning  is,  however,  of  less  consequence
than  it  might  have  been,  because  these  particular  tests
were  both  complete  failures.  In  the  first  there  was  no
appropriate  message  on  p.  75,  no  word  at  all  like  Roscommon
could  be  found,  nor  was  there  a  word  on  the  title-page
beginning  with  P.  And  on  November  28  no  word  like
Adiosis  or  Assiosis  was  found  in  the  beginning  of  the  book,
and  the  word  Anco7ia  in  italics  in  the  preface  is  the  only
approach  to  Feda's  three-sjdlabled  word  beginning  with  A,
and  that  certainly  does  not  sound  like  Assiosis.  If,  there-
fore, Feda  on  these  occasions  did  have  any  kind  of  direct
impressions,  there  is  no  reason  to  think  they  were  impressions
of  real  pages.

One  fact  must  be  noticed  in  connexion  with  Feda's
share  in  the  book-tests. There  were  three  occasions  when


LXXXI.J


An  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


373


the  usual  procedure  was  changed — or  at  least  the  dramatic
mise-en-scene — and  Feda  represents  herself  as  helping  to
select  the  book-tests.  The  three  occasions  were  at  A.  V.  B.
sittings,  in  each  case  following  shortly  after  a  sitting  which
Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell  had  had  with  Mrs.  Leonard,  Lady
Troubridge  being  present  as  note-taker.  In  each  case  Feda
and  A.  V.  B.  profess  to  have  gone  together  to  Dr.  Mit-
chell's house,  where  neither  Mrs.  Leonard  nor  the  sitters
had  been,  to  select  a  book-test  for  him.  The  first  occa-
sion was  on  May  9,  1918.  At  the  beginning  of  the
sitting  Feda  says  :

Ladye's  here  .  .  .  Mrs.  Twonnie  it's  about  a  book  test,
but  the  book  test  isn't  for  you,  only  as  she  helped  to  do
it.  She  and  Feda  did  it,  only  she  did  the  best  part  of
it — it's  for  Mrs.  Una's  Doctor  man  what  corned  yesterday.
She  only  did  it  last  night.

The  second  occasion  was  on  July  6,  1918. Feda  begins  :

She's  going  to  give  a  book  test  for  the  doctor  first.
Feda  couldn't  get  it  last  time.  Feda  don't  know  if  he
stopped  Feda  last  time.  Feda  had  a  feeling  as  if  he  was
trying  to  think  of  some  'ticular  books.  Feda  oughtn't  to
have  told  him  she  was  going  to  get  one.^  Feda  has  been
and  got  one  now,  and  Ladye  was  there  too,  so  Feda'U
ask  her  to  help  to  remember.

A  Uttle  further  on  Feda  remarks  apropos  to  the  book-
test  proper,  "  Ladye  you  help  Feda  to  get  that  exactly
as  it  was  said  before."  And  again,  "  Sometimes  she
[A.  V.  B.]  notices  things  what  Feda  doesn't."

The  third  occasion  was  on  October  12,  1918.  Feda
says  :

Now  wait  a  minute — {s.v.  Ladye  you  remind  Feda,  'cos
Feda's  been  there  too)  [a  description  of  the  room,  etc.,
follows]. We  got  the  books  on  the  third  shelf  up,  .  .  .

1  All  this  refers  to  a  sitting  of  which  I  have  not  seen  the  record,-
Dr.  Mitchell  notes,  "  When  Feda  said  [at  the  previous  sitting]  she  was
going  to  give  me  another  test  my  mind  reverted  at  once  to  a  particular
shelf  where  I  wanted  her  to  make  the  test  because  the  .books  there
were  not  psycho-therai^eutic  books."


374


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


on  this  third  shelf  we  took  the  sixth  book  .  .  .  The  page
was  a  one  and  a  nine,  one  nine,  nineteen,  and  it  was  the
top  part  of  the  page.  You  know  Ladj^e  and  Feda  founded
it,  but  it's  from  the  gentleman  who  was  speaking  to  him
at  the  sitting,  and  it's  a  message  from  him  to  the  doctor
man  {s.v.  Wait  a  minute.  This  is  where  you'll  have  to
help  Feda,  Ladye).  Oh  it's  a  message  from  that  gentleman
to  the  doctor,  about  his  work,  not  the  spirit's  work,  but
the  doctor's  .  .  .  but  Ladye  says  it  might  apply  not  only
to  his  work,  but  to  his  general  conditions  as  well.

From  this  point  Feda  drops  out  as  a  co-percipient,  and
quotes  and  paraphrases  what  A.  V.  B.  says  in  the  usual
style.  She  comes  in  again  possibly  at  the  end  in  the
word  "  we  "  in  a  cjuoted  sentence  :  "  She  [A.  V.  B.]
says  '  I  suppose  he  does  know  that  we  get  the  idea,  the
thought,  more  than  the  written  word,  doesn't  he  ?  '  "

I  may  remark  that  in  these  three  attempts  at  book-
tests,  though  there  are  some  things  quite  wrong,  there  are
interesting  points — e.g.  a  description  of  a  peculiar  arrange-
ment of  book  shelves  in  a  room  quite  unknown  to  medium
and  sitters  and  away  from  London.  Again  a  direction  to
"look  on  the  outside  of  a  book  within  a  span  of  the  test
book,  and  you'll  find  something  that  will  distinctly  remind
him  of  the  gentleman  who  spoke  to  him  the  other  day."
The  name  of  the  purporting  communicator  referred  to  was
Grainger  Stewart,  and  twelve  inches  from  the  test  book
was  a  book  by  J.  A.  Stewart.  But  the  book-tests  proper
were  not  very  satisfactory.

If  it  be  asked  what  was  the  meaning  of  this  peculiar
intervention  of  Feda's  in  these  particular  book-tests,  I  can
only  suggest  dramatic  appropriateness.  As  they  were  given
at  sittings  of  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.,  at  which  A.  V.  B.
was  the  habitual  communicator,  she  had  to  appear,  but
she  had  no  connexion  with  Dr.  Mitchell  and  was  not
supposed  to  know  him.  On  the  other  hand,  Feda  had
made  great  friends  with  him,  and  may  have  been  supposed
to  supply  the  necessary  connexion.  This  suggestion  is  of
course  on.  the  sceptical  side,  and  is  moreover  mere  con-
jecture. Others  may  think  of  a  better  explanation.


jLXXXI.]


A)i  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


375


§  10.
Conclusion.

This  concludes  my  examination  of  the  book-tests  sub-
mitted to  me,  and  it  only  remains  to  sum  up — a  thing
I  find  it  particularly  hard  to  do,  for  the  evidence  is  so
mixed.

It  is  impossible  to  doubt,  I  think,  that  Mrs.  Leonard  in
trance  has  supernormal  powers.  Evidence  given  in  this
paper  alone  goes  far  to  prove  telepathy,  at  least  from
the  living,  and  in  one  case  (Mrs.  Talbot's,  see  above,
§  2)  apparently  from  the  dead.  But  is  there  sufficient
evidence  to  convince  us  of  the  possibility  of  clair-
voyance— the  acquisition  of  knowledge  of  physical  things
■otherwise  than  through  the  bodily  senses  of  some  one.
There  are  cases  that  look  remarkably  like  it,  though
never  so  distinct  and  unmistakable  and  free  from  error
as  we  could  wish.  But  they  are  mixed  up  with  cases
suggesting  no  knowledge — normal  or  supernormal  at  all.
These  apparent^  false  cases  are  uttered  with  the  same
kind  of  confidence,  the  same  appearance  of  interest,  the
same  amount  of  detail  as  the  apparently  genuine  ones,  and
there  is  no  means  of  distinguishing  false  from  true  till
verification  is  attempted.  When  we  do  verify  we  find
•every  shade  of  success  or  failure,  from  undeniable  suc-
cesses, through  those  which  we  hardly  know  whether  to
count  as  exhibiting  any  success  at  all,  to  undeniable
failures.

This  mixture  of  true  and  false  need  not  by  itself
surprise  us.  We  know  that  mth  automatists,  and
especially  those  who  sit  to  order  like  Mrs.  Leonard,  there
is  much  in  automatic  speaking  or  writing  that  we  may
call  mere  dream  stuff,  even  where  there  is  evidence  that
some  things  said  have  a  supernormal  origin.  Book-tests
liaving  become  for  the  time  being  almost  part  of  the
routine  of  communication  with  certain  sitters,  Feda  may
reel  them  oft'  more  or  less  mechanically,  and  without
herself  knowing  whence  the  impulse  comes  and  whether
"the alleged  inspiration  is real or imaginary. And  there


376


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


will  be  degrees  of  completeness  in  success,  whether  the
success  is  due  to  clairvoyance  or  to  chance.

A  more  serious  obstacle  perhaps  to  accepting  clair-
voyance as  the  explanation  of  book-tests  lies  in  the
difficulties  and  bewildering  inconsistencies  in  what  is  said
about  the  mode  of  identifying  the  page,  and  about  the
kind  of  thing — forms  or  ideas — perceived  on  it.  On
account  of  its  want  of  consistency  most  of  such  talk  has
to  be  swept  aside  as  very  probably  nonsense,  and  if  we
accept  clairvoyance  as  a  fact  v/e  must  admit  that  so  far-
we  know  nothing  at  all  as  to  what  it  consists  in.  We
chiefly  know  that,  at  least  in  Mrs.  Leonard's  case,  it
generally  seems  indistinct  and  vague.

Our  acceptance  or  not  of  clairvoyance  as  a  fact  must
then  depend  solely  on  our  judgment  whether  the  successes
recorded  are  more  than  we  can  suppose  chance  to  have
produced  in  a  kind  of  case  in  which  the  chances  are  very
hard  to  estimate,  and  in  a  matter  which  is  at  present
disconnected  with  all  our  established  knowledge  and  there-
fore very  hard  to  believe.

On  the  whole,  I  think  the  evidence  before  us  does
constitute  a  reasonable  prima  facie  case  for  belief,  and  that
in  future  we  must  reckon  with  clairvoyance  as  a  possi-
bility to  be  taken  account  of  in  interpreting  mysterious
happenings.^

^  Of  course  in  this  paper  I  have  not  by  any  means  quoted  every
incident  which  may  be  regarded  as  affording  some  evidence  of  clair-
voyance, but  I  have  quoted  those  which  seem  to  me  to  have  most
weight.  It  may  interest  the  reader  to  know  which  half  dozen  of  the
cases  in  this  collection  appear  to  me  the  most  convincing — those  which
it  is  least  possible  to  exj)lain  by  chance.  Different  people  would  prob-
ably judge  differently,  and  one  might  oneself  feel  somewhat  differently
at  different  times,  but  I  think  I  should  select  the  following  six  cases,
which  I  do  not  put  in  order  of  merit.

[a)  The  first  case  mentioned  in  the  paper,  where  a  passage  in  a
book  is  connected  with  an  ornament  worn  (A.  V.  B.,  Sept.  12,  1917  ;
see  above,  p.  248).  (b)  The  message  to  Mrs.  Beadon  about  her  husband's
burial  (Sept.  29,  1917  ;  see  above,  p.  280).  (c)  A.  V.  B.'s  second  message
about  lights  (Aug.  24,  1918  ;  see  above,  p.  273).  (d)  A.  W.  V.'s  state-
ment about  a  long  pole  (Jan.  4,  1919  ;  see  above,  p.  286).  (e)  Mariana
in  the  South  (A.  W.  V.,  April  11,  1918;  see  above,  p.  297).  (/)
A.  W.  V.  about  the  family  tree,  etc. — the  book-tests  of  this  day  as-
a  whole  (Feb.  28,  1918  ;  see  above,  p.  341).


LXXXI.]


All  Examination  of  Book-Tests.


377


Granting,  then,  that  pure  clairvoyance  can  sometimes  be
exercised,  I  think  the  present  records  suggest  a  thing
which  may  be  worth  keeping  in  mind  in  future  experi-
ments, namely,  that  telepathy  and  clairvoyance  are  prob-
ably in  some  way  closely  connected.  Telepathic  clair-
voyance— perception  of  external  things  not  known  to  any
one  present  but  known  to  some  one  somewhere  ^ — probably
merges  into  pure  clairvoyance,  while  the  line  between  more
ordinary  telepathy  and  telepathic  clairvoyance  is  not  a
well-marked  one.  I  think  it  is  likely  that  the  processes
not  only  merge  into  each  other  but  that  they  may
sometimes  operate  simultaneously.  The  idea  is  not  of
course  a  new  one.  Professor  Charles  Richet  in  the
paper  describing  his  experiments  in  clairvoyance  to  which
I  referred  the  reader  in  a  footnote  on  p.  247  maintains
that  "  Cette  telepathie  n'est  qu'un  cas  particulier  d'un  fait
bien  plus  general — la  faculte  de  connaissance  des  somnam-
bules."  And  Myers  in  Human  Personality  frequently  points
out  that  Telsesthesia  [i.e.  clairvoyance]  merges  into  tele-
pathy—that the  distinction  between  them  "  cannot  be  made
fundamental."  (See  e.g.  Vol.  I.  p.  136.)  But  my  object  in
speaking  of  it  is  not  theoretical  but  practical.  By  keeping  in
mind  the  probable  connexion  of  telepathy  and  clairvoyance  we
may  get  a  helpful  clue  in  experimenting.  If,  for  instance,
telepath}^  of  some  sort  comes  into  operation  in  what  we
may  call  the  approaches  to  the  book-test  proper — in  the
finding  of  the  volume  and  its  surroundings — this  may
facilitate  the  clairvoyant  perception  of  the  inside  of  the
book  which  sometimes  follows.  The  perception  of  the
surroundings  may  itself  be  partly  telepathic  and  partly
clairvoyant.

It  is  perhaps  doubtful  whether  book-tests  with  Mrs.
Leonard  in  the  form  dealt  with  in  this  paper  should  be
continued  indefinitely,  as  their  continuance  might  lead  to
staleness,  and  might  increase  a  habit  of  producing  auto-

1  For  Telepathic  Clairvoyance  see  a  collection  of  cases  and  a  discussion
by  myself  entitled  "  On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance  "  in  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.,  pp.  30-99  and  3.56-369.  Also  "  Experiments  in
Clairvoyance"  by  Dr.  Alfred  Backman  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.,
pp.  199-221).


378


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part  lxxxi.]


matically  imitation  book-tests.  But  if  any  new  form  of
experiment  to  demonstrate  clairvoyance  is  designed,  it
would  i  be  well  to  keep  in  mind  that  an  avenue  admitting
of  telepathy  with  the  sitter  may  be  a  useful  approach  to
the  test  proper.

That  further  experiments  should  be  tried  with  Mrs.
Leonard  and  others  is  much  to  be  desired,  for  more
evidence  is  greatly  needed.  But  if  pure  clairvoyance  is  a
reahty,  and  if  we  are  on  the  verge  of  estabhshing  this
scientifically  as  the  experiments  before  us  seem  to  show
the  importance  of  the  investigation  carmot  l^e  overrated.


APPENDIX  A.


A  Note  on  Chance  in  Book-Tests.

I  SAID  on  p.  244  that  it  would  be  an  error  to  suppose
that  on  abnost  any  page  of  any  book  something  that  may
pass  as  a  message  may  be  found,  and  there  is  of  course
still  less  probability  that  when  indications,  even  vague
ones,  of  the  nature  of  the  message  are  given,  the  message
j  when  found  will  conform  to  them.  As  a  test  of  this
I  tried  the  following  experiment.  I  selected  almost  at
random  from  the  book-tests  before  us  a  promise  of  a
"  message  with  something  quite  definite  and  objective
in  it — meaning  by  objective  something  that  has  nothing
specially  to  do  with  the  particular  sitter  or  the  sitter's
relation  to  the  communicator.  The  one  selected  was  from
the  second  book-test  received  by  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.,
and  was  the  first  of  their  book-tests  answering  to  the
required  conditions.  It  occurred  in  their  sitting  of  August
.5,  1917,  and  ran  as  follows  :

F.  There's  another  book,  it's  the  seventh  book  on  the  same
shelf  [as  on  the  preceding  occasion]  and  she's  speaking  of
page  19.  She  says  that  should  contain  a  message  too.
Wait  a  minute.  {s.v.  A  message  about  what,  Ladye  ?)
She  says  that  it  has  some  bearing  on  what  is  called
death.  Ladye  thinks  it  is  a  little  bit  stupid,  but  she
wants  you  to  look.

(I  may  remark  in  passing,  though  it  is  irrelevant  to  my
•experiment,  that  the  test  can  only  be  regarded  as  a
partial  success.  The  book  in  question  proved  to  be  a
volume  of  poems  by  D.  G.  Rossetti,  and  p.  19  is  part  of
a  poem  called  "  A  Last  Confession "  and  purports  to  be
a  death-bed  confession  to  a  priest.  Such  a  confession,
implying  of  course  the  idea  of  death,  may  be  said  to  have

.379


380


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


some  bearing  upon  death  ;  but  there  is  nothing  specifically
about  death  on  p.  19.)

Returning  to  my  experiment.  In  a  large  room  lined
with  books  I  selected  twelve  at  random  without  looking
at  them,  defining  them  by  their  places  in  different  shelves,
and  in  each  case  I  noted  the  page  and  the  part  of  the
page  where  the  message  was  to  be  looked  for.  My  list
came  out  as  follows.  In  the  left-hand  column  is  the  title
of  the  book  and  in  the  right-hand  column  the  sentence
occurring  in  the  position  defined  beforehand.


(1)  Poems  of  Emily  and  Anne
Bronte,  "  The  Teacher's
Monologue,"  j).  52,  J  down.


(2)  Ivingsley's Hypatia, p.  7,
omitting  preface,  \  down.


(3)  The  Amber  Witch,  p.  105,

\  down.

(4)  Ch.  Ivingsley's  Poems,  p.  8,

\  down  [the  page  on
which  is  the  selected  sen-
tence is  in  the  introduc-
tion, which  is  numbered
continuously  with  the
text].

(5)  Sir Alfred Lyall's  Verses

written  in  India,  "  Raj-
poot Rebels,"  p.  27,  §
down.


Now,  as  I  watch  that  distant  hill
So  faint,  so  blue,  so  far  removed,
Sweet dreams of home  my

heart  may  fill.
That  home  where  I  am  known

and  loved.

"  And  obeyed  he  was,  with
a  loyal,  reasonable  love,  and  yet
with  an  implicit  soldier-like
obedience."

"  Why  Katie  Berow  her
little  pig  had  died  ?  "

"  If,  however,  this  book
shall  cause  one  Englishman
honestly  to  ask  himself,  '  I,  as
a  Protestant,  have  been  accus-
tomed to  assert  the  purity  and
cbgnity  of  the  offices  of  hus-
band, wife  and  parent  .  .  .  '

"  From the banks of  the
Ganges  holy,
From the towers of  fair
Lucknow,
They  have  driven  us  surely
and  slowly.
They  have  crushed  us  blow-
on  blow."


xxxxi.] An  Examination  of  Book-Tests. Ai)'pendix  A.  381


(6)  Burns' Poems, Vol.  II.,

"  The  Inventory,"  p.  12,
• \  down.

(7)  Fronde's Short  Studies  on

Great  Subjects,  p.  14,  I
down.


{8)  Le  Diable  Boiteux  or  the
Devil  upon  Two  Sticks,
Vol.  I.,  p.  47,  ^  down.


(9)  Swift's  Miscellanies,  Vol.  I.,
"  Sentiments  of  a  Church-
of-England  Man,"  p.  79,
\  do"mi.


(lO)  Mahan's  Influence  of  Sea
Power  upon  the  French
Revolution  and  Empire,
Vol.  II.,  p.  102,  \  down.


"  And  gin  ye  tax  her  or  her
mither,

B'the  Lord,  ye'se  get  them
a'  the  gither."

"  They  have  perceived  that
if  they  would  be  men  and  not
beasts,  they  must  control  their
animal  passions,  prefer-  truth
to  falsehood,  courage  to
cowardice,  justice  to  violence,
and  compassion  to  cruelty."

But  being  firmly  resolved
not  to  place  any  Monks  in  it,
in  whom  the  virtues  of  Chas-
tity, Sobriety,  and  Humility
do  not  eminently  shine,  he
was  very  much  puzzled  in  the
choice."

"  They  would  have  it  that  a
Crown  is  a  Prince's  Birthright,
and  ought  at  least  to  be  as
well  secured  to  him  and  his
posterity  as  the  inheritance  of
any  private  man."

"  Bonaparte  on  his  side  had
been  no  less  active,  although
he  sought  by  the  secrecy  of
his  movements  to  avert  alarm
and  postpone,  if  possible,  the
war  which  for  his  aims  was
premature.  Orders  were  given
that  reinforcements  for  the
colonies  should  go  forth
rapidly,  ere  peace  was
broken."


382


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


(11)  Ambidexterity, by  John
Jackson,  p.  81,  J  do^vn.


"  The  general  conclusions
arising  from  the  entire  course
may  be  stated  as  follows  : —
Results — (1)  No  preference  was
shown  for  either  hand  so  long
as  there  was  no  violent  mus-
cular exertion  demanded."


(12)  CarlyWs  Early  Life,  by  "  The  article  on  Luther
J.  A.  Froude,  p.  201,  |  which  Carlyle  had  offered  for
down.  the  '  Edinburgh  '  could  not  get

itself  accepted.  Napier  recog-
nised that  Luther  was  a  noble
subject,  but  he  could  not
spare  space  for  the  effective
treatment  of  it."

None  of  these  passages  can  be  said  to  have  any  bearing
on  the  selected  message — i.e.  any  "  bearing  on  what  is
called  death " — except  No.  3  about  "  the  little  pig."
In  No.  5,  however,  the  following  lines  occur  in  another
part  of  the  page  :  "  When  the  army  has  slain  its  fill.
When  they  bid  the  hangman  cease "  ;  and  in  No.  8
at  the  top  of  the  page,  "  must  shortly  make  up  his
accounts  in  the  other  world,  he  is  grown  scrupulous."
And  in  several  cases  there  is  something  connected  with,
death  on  the  page  preceding  or  following  the  selected  one — -
namely,  in  No.  1,  "  When  Emma's  bier  was  borne  away  "  •
in  No.  5,  the  preceding  page,  They  have  slain  the
best  of  my  kin."  "  But  our  fighting  never  shed  English
blood,"  and  on  the  page  following  the  selected  one.  "  There
is  no  more  life  for  me "  ;  in  No.  7,  p.  13  {apro-pos
to  the  fall  of  the  Tower  of  Siloam).  "  But  the  guilty
had  perhaps  long  been  turned  to  dust  ''  ;  in  No.  8,  in.
the  page  following  the  selected  one,  is  an  account
of  two  young  men  killing  each  other  in  a  quarrel
over  cards  ;  in  No.  9,  page  preceding,  "  upon  the  death
of  a  Prince  among  us,  the  administration  goes  on";
top  of  page  following  the  selected  one,  "  protects  and
encourages his profession  ; and therefore although  he


Lxxxi.] An  Examination  of  Book-Tests. Appendix  A.  383

should  manifestly  prescribe  poison  to  all  his  patients
whereof  they  should  immediately  die."  If,  therefore,  we
allow  ourselves  to  count  the  thirty-six  pages  obtained  by
taking  the  selected  pages  and  two  adjacent  ones,  with-
out regard  to  position  in  page,  we  do  get  a  refer-
ence of  some  sort  to  death  on  ten  pages,  or  rather
over  a  quarter  of  the  whole  ;  and  we  do  get  such
a  reference  in  some  part  of  three  out  of  the  twelve
selected  pages,  though  in  one  case  only  in  the  prescribed
part  of  the  page.

The  probability  of  success  in  what  I  have  called  vague
messages  is  harder  to  judge  of  because  it  is  more  difficult
to  eliminate  the  subjective  element.  For  instance,  in
descriptions  so  vague  as  :  "A  message  straight  from  our
boy  to  us  "  (promised  to  a  sitter  in  September,  1917)  ;
or  "A  sort  of  message  for  you  ;  he  says  it  isn't
the  words  he  would  choose,  but  he  thinks  you  will  know  "
(received  by  another  sitter,  November  29,  1917)  ;  or
"  These  few  words  he  wants  you  to  take  as  a  message  "
(received  by  a  third  sitter  on  April  9,  1918)  ;  it  is
clear  that  the  passage  indicated  might  prove  to  have  an
appropriateness  obvious  to  the  sitter,  though  undiscoverable
by  an  outsider  ignorant  of  the  circumstances.^  As  an
illustration  of  this,  let  us  suppose  that  in  Mrs.  Beadon's  case
(p.  261  above)  what  she  was  told  about  the  passage
indicated  had  stopped  after  "  on  p.  71  will  be  found  a
message  from  him  to  you.  The  message  will  not  be  as
beautiful  as  he  would  like  to  make  it,  but  you  will  under-
stand he  wants  to  ma.ke  the  test  as  good  as  he  can."  If
it  had  stopped  here  the  test  would  have  been  considerably
less  good  than  it  is  as  it  stands,  but  the  appropriateness
of  the  passage  indicated  to  the  circumstances  of  the
communicator's  burial  would  still  have  made  the
"  message "  a  striking  one.  But  of  these  circumstances
we- should  have  known  nothing  had  not  the  sitter  informed
us. As outsiders, without  knowledge of  the special  cir-

^  As  a  matter  of  fact  in  the  first  two  of  triese  cases  notiiing  relevant
was  found,  and  in  the  third  the  sitter  (Miss  Purdon)  has  so  far  failed
to  send  us  promised  annotations.


384


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


cumstances,  we  can  only  judge  a  book-test  when  some
sort  of  indication  of  the  sort  of  message  we  are  to  find
is  given.

We  have  such  indications  when  a  message  of  hope  or
encouragement  without  further  definition  is  promised — as
in  the  following  three  cases  :

(1)  "A  message  from  C —  which  he  wants  you  to
remember  to  cheer  you  up.  It  draws  a  comparison
between  the  past  and  the  present."  (Prof,  and  Mrs.  B.,
December  2,  1917. See  above,  p.  354.)

[Verification  :  "  The  brave  little  soldier  is  gone  into  the
presence  of  his  Chief  away  in  the  Eternal  City,  .  .  .  For
the  boys  who  are  Christ's  faithful  soldiers  and  servants
here  shall  continue  that  service  in  joyous,  untiring  youth
in  the  great  land  beyond."  This  would  be  an  appropriate
message,  but  if  it  was  the  one  intended  the  position  of
the  book  was  wrongly  described.]

(2)  "A  message  from  him  to  you.  He  wants  you  to
remember  it  when  you  feel  sad  about  him.  It  is  a
message  directly  from  him  to  you.  He  sometimes  sees
depression  in  you.  He  sees  it  and  wants  to  sweep  it
away.  The  message  is  meant  to  do  that."  (Mrs.  John,
May  1918.)

[Nothing  appropriate  was  found  in  the  book  indicated.
Feda  afterwards  said  she  had  made  a  mistake  as  to  where
it  was.]

(3)  "A  message  to  his  mother,  a  kind  of  hope  or
encouragement." (Mrs.  and  Miss  Morris,  March  2,  1918.)

[The  book  indicated  was  a  Church  Service,  on  the  pre-
scribed page  of  which  is  Isaiah  Ixv.,  verses  19  to  25.
These  verses  are  of  an  encouraging  nature,  though  not
strictly  appropriate.]

In another kind of vague message the  characteristic

indicated  is  definite  and  objective,  but  admits  of  very  wide

interpretation.  As  instances  we  may  take  three  cases
reported  by  the  Rev.  C.  Drayton  Thomas  :


Lxxxi. An  Examination  of  Book-Tests. Appe^idix  A.  385

(4)  "  Feda  said  that  on  page  53  is  something  about
striving  :  that  it  suggests  endeavouring  and  holds  out  a
promise  through  that  endeavour." (September  6,  1917.)

[Verification  :  On  the  page  indicated  begins  St.  Augus-
tine's account  of  his  conversion,  and  as  Mr.  Thomas  says,
"  While  neither  the  word  '  striving  '  nor  '  endeavouring  '
appears  on  the  page,  the  story  is  one  about  inward  strife
and  determined  endeavouring  of  spirit  to  escape  from  an
evil  manner  of  life.  A  strife  and  an  endeavour  which
ended  in  triumphant  success."]

(5)  At  Mr.  Thomas's  next  sitting  Feda  says  :  "  The
message  ...  is  about  endeavour  again,  but  under  different
conditions  and  aspects  from  last  time."  (September  29,
1917.)

[Verification  :  The  sentence  indicated  was  :  "  Whatever
did  you  do  to  make  her  understand  ?  "  and  related  to  the
efforts  of  the  heroine  in  a  story  to  make  a  very  deaf  old
woman  tell  her  the  way  home.]

(6)  The  message,  it  is  said,  "  refers  to  an  enviable  frame
of  mind." (October  18,  1918.)

[Verification  :  JVIr.  Thomas  takes  a  passage  about  our
Lord's  passion  to  be  the  one  referred  to.  In  it  occur
the  words  "  the  love  that  sacrificed  ;  that  gave  up  all
for  love  of  all."  i)

In  the  above  six  cases  we  have  promises  of  messages  on
three  subjects,  viz.  :  Hope  and  encouragement,  endeavour,
an  enviable  frame  of  mind.  Should  we  be  likely  to  find
such  messages  on  pages  taken  at  random  ?  Could,  for
instance,  any  of  the  twelve  passages  used  in  the  above
■experiment  about  death  be  regarded  as  appropriate  ?
They  will  serve  for  passages  selected  at  random  as  well
as  any  others.  I  think  the  answer  must  be  that  no7ie  of
them  could  be  regarded  as  messages  of  hope  and  encour-

^  Mr.  Thomas  arrives  at  this  passage  by  counting  the  pages  of  the
preface  with  those  of  the  text  though  not  numbered  continuously.
He  sometimes  in  counting  tlie  pages  omits  the  preface  even  when  it
is  numbered  continuously  with  the  text.


386


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PARr


agement.  One  of  them  (No.  7)  might  perhaps  be  taken  as.
referring  to  enviable  frames  of  mind.  On  the  other  hand,,
five,  namely,  (7),  (8),  (10),  (11),  (12),  might  in  different
ways  be  regarded  as  referring  to  endeavour — which  shows
what  a  very  wide  interpretation  the  subject  admits  of.
In  (7)  we  have  the  endeavour  to  "be  men  and  not
beasts  "  ;  in  (8)  the  endeavour  to  choose  suitable
monks  ;  in  (10)  the  endeavour  to  prepare  secretly  for  war  ;
in  (11)  the  reference  to  "  violent  muscular  exertion "
seems  to  imply  endeavour  ;  in  (12)  the  article  on  Luther
endeavours  to  "  get  itself  accepted."  I  do  not  say  that
we  should  be  right  in  accepting  these  as  satisfactory
messages,  but  they  are  hardly  less  to  the  point  than  those
mentioned  above  as  found  by  Mr.  Thomas  by  following  to
the  best  of  his  ability  the  instructions  given.

This  note  is  not  of  course  intended  to  give  any  standard
by  which  to  measure  the  j^robabilitj^  or  improbability  that
something  more  than  chance  has  been  at  work  in  success-
ful book-tests.  I  do  not  believe  any  exact  calculation  to
be  possible  in  such  complicated  and  heterogeneous  material
as  that  with  which  we  are  dealing.  And  in  any  case
my  experiments  are  far  too  few  to  base  conclusions
upon.  So  far  as  they  go,  however,  they  tend  to  confirm
the  view  that  on  the  one  hand  chance  is  not  an  easy
explanation  of  success  in  even  simple  messages  when
definite  ;  and,  on  the  other,  that  success  when  the  indica-
tions given  are  susceptible  of  wide  interpretation  is  not  of
much  value  evidentially.


APPENDIX  B.

Cases  of  Accueate  DESCBiPTioiir  or  Objects  in  the
Stjrrotjndings  of  the  Books. (See  p.  286.)

Statuette  of  Adeline  Genee.

At  an  A.  V.  B.  sitting  on  October  2,  1918,  following  on
book-tests  described  above  (p.  282-6) — the  book-tests  having


Lxxxi.] An  Examination  of  Book-Tests. Appendix  B.  387


been  taken  from  the  large  bookcase  in  M.  R.  H.'s  study —
Feda  continues  :

F.  [s.v. Cross  near  the  books  ?) She thought  there

was  a  cross  either  on  or  near  the  books.
U.  V.  T. Yes,  we  understand  that  I  think.

F.  It  must  be  close  though  'cos  she  seems  to  see  it

when  she  gets  to  the  books.

U.  Y.  T.  Right.

[A  large  and  conspicuous  box-wood  crucifix  had
recently  been  placed  on  the  writing  table  which
stood  less  than  4  feet  from  the  book.]

F.  [s.v. And a little figure — a small one.)  Feda

don't  think  ifs  just  a  head,  it  seems  to  show
■  '  ,  the  body  like  too.  It's  a  very  light  colour,  she
seemed  to  see  that.

U.  V.  T. Where  ?

F.  Where  1 Didn't  you  see  it  near  the  books,  Ladye  ?

Wasn't  it  near  the  books  1  Feda  thought  you  A^  as
talking  about  the  books  !  Feda  don't  know  where
she  means  now.  Don't  you  mean  near  the  books  ?
No.  It's  not  near  the  books,  but  it's  a  little
figure  she's  very  interested  in.

U.  V.  T. Can't  j^ou  show  it  Ladye  ?

F.  She  showed  it  for  a  moment,  it  was  not  just  a  head

and  shoulders.
U.  V.  T. Well,  what  position  is  it  in  1

F.  Not  just  standing  straight  up  hke  this. (Feda  lets

her  arms  drop  loosely  at  each  side,  hanging
straight  down.)  What  you  want  to  do  vdth.  the
hands.  Ladye  ?  What  is  it  1  (Feda  puts  one
.  hand  over  the  other  and  bends  forward  from  the
waist  slightly.)

U.  V.  T. Don't  bother  to  try  if  it's  too  difficult.

F.  Wait  a  minute. (Feda  places  one  hand  on  her  hip

\\Tith  the  fingers  spread  out  straight.  Then  she
tries  violently  to  bunch  her  coat  and  skirt  up
under  her  hand,  and  having  partially  succeeded
she  places  the  hand  on  the  bunched  material  A\'ith
the  fingers  again  extended,  she  then  slightly  turns


388


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


-  the  hand  so  that  the  fingers  are  extended  towards

the  front.)  The  fingers  is  straight  and  spreaded
out  in  front,  but  the  thumb  isn't.  The  fingers
isn't  together  they're  spreaded  out,  and  the  elbows
is  sticking  out.  (Here  Feda  makes  a  pose  ;  she
places  a  hand  either  side  of  her  waist  with  all  the
fingers  pointing  forward.  She  then  begins  smooth-
ing down  and  making  a  gesture  of  pinching  in  the
waist  with  the  two  hands.)  Mrs.  Una,  it's  pointed
like  that.  (Here  Feda  indicates  a  tight  waist  and
a  pointed  bodice.)  This  isn't  near  the  books.
Lady  says  there's  something  so  silly  about  the
lower  part ;  she  says,  "  I  don't  really  think  it's
silly  myself,  but  there's  something  a  little  incon-
gruous about  it  here."  (Feda  strokes  her  shins.)
She  says  it's  when  you  balance  it  with  the  other
part,  there's  something  not  quite  right  here.
(Feda  touches  her  shins  and  feet.)  It's  not  right
with  the  upper  part.

U.  V.  T. She's  right.

F.  She  says  you  ought  to  have  noticed.

U.  V.  T. Ought  I  ?

F.  She  says  yes,  she  says  you  should  have  noticed  that

even  more  than  Mrs.  Twonnie.
U.  V.  T. Why  ?

F.  'Cos  she  gets  that  as  being  something  exceptional  in

you.  Though  Mrs.  Twonnie  might  see  it,  you'd
notice  it  more  quickly  than  Mrs.  Twonnie,  she
says  it  might  come  very  near  to  annojdng  you.
Now  wait  a  minute.  (Feda  draws  a  curved  line
just  above  the  bust,  with  her  finger,  as  if  indicat-
ing a  decollete  bodice  ;  she  then  makes  a  gesture
as  if  bringing  a  piece  of  material  or  something  up
from  the  waist  and  under  the  arm  to  meet  the
line  she  has  already  indicated.)  It's  some  line,
she  keeps  drawing  a  line.  (s.v.  Is  it  under  the
arms  or  over  1)  She's  drawing  as  if  it's  under
the  arms,  it  seems  to  come  from  the  arm-pit,  but
there's  also  something  what  she  does  here.  (Feda
draws a line from the shoulder down to  the


Lxxxi.] An  Examination  of  Book-Tests. Appendix  B.  389


breast.)  And  there's  something  here.  (Feda  makes
a  gesture  of  a  circular  nature  across  the  top  of
the  head.)  It's  as  if  it  stucked  out  from  the  head
a  little.  Feda  don't  think  the  head  is  quite
straight.  (Feda  drops  her  chin  and  pulls  it  in  a
little.)  "Tisn't  like  this,  Mrs.  Una  (Feda  pokes  her
.  .  chin  in the air), it's like this more.  (Repeats

gesture  of  dropping  chin,  and  begins  tapping  her
feet  loudly.)
U.  V.  T. What's  she  doing  now  1

F.  This. (Feda  extends  her  feet  and  places  them  in  the

second  position.)  Wait  a  minute,  it  seems  as  if
this  ought  to  belong  to  some  time  ago,  it's  not
something  very  new,  or  if  it  is  Ladye  says  it's
pretending  to  belong  to  some  time  ago.  {s.v.  Also
it  takes  her  away  from  London,  habits  and  con-
ditions away  from  London.)

U.  V.  T. I  don't  understand  that.

F.  She  says  you  ought  to.

U.  V.  T. Oh  yes  I  do  ?

[Feda  goes  on  to  describe  a  basket  as  near  the  little
figure,  and  adds,  "  there's  something  close  that
reminds  her  of  a  fish  '"  [cf.  below,  p.  391,  2].  She
says  .  .  .  .  "  Well,  the  basket  is  close  as  well,  but
•  ^  fish  she  knows  is  right.  Peoples  doesn't  keep  fish
and  books  together.  Well  she  says  some  do."
Some  small  objects  then  described  are  identified
as  a  paper-cutter  and  other  things  on  the  writing
table.]

As  regards  the  little  figure,  the  recorders  tell  us  that

At  the  extreme  other  end  of  the  room  from  the  book-
case there  stands  upon  a  table  a  little  white  plaster
statuette  of  Adeline  Genee  by  U.  V.  T.  The  statuette
measures  lOf  inches  including  the  base.  The  dancer  is
represented  in  full  ballet  skirts,  short,  and  sticking  out
upon  the  hips,  the  arms  are  akimbo,  the  fingers  are  spread
out  and  are  pointing  forward,  whereas  the  thumbs  are
pointing  in  the  opposite  direction,  and  the  waist  of  the
figure is represented as being  tiny, and the bodice  is


390


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


pointed.  There  is  every  reason  why  A.  V.  B.  should  be
interested  in  this  little  statuette.  She  was  very  familiar
with  it,  as  it  stood  in  M.  R.  H.'s  study  Avhen  she  and
A.  V.  B.  were  living  together.  Also  M.  R.  H.  bought  the
statuette  some  time  before  she  met  U.  V.  T.,  and  as  U.  V.  T.
is  A.  V.  B.'s  cousin,  and  a  very  old  friend,  it  is  natural
that  A.  V.  B.  should  be  interested  in  her  artistic  work.  .  .  .
Feda  says  that  A.  V.  B.  says  there  is  something  silly
about  the  lower  part,  something  a  little  incongruous.  .  .  .
M.  R.  H.  cannot  remember  that  A.  V.  B.  ever  remarked
on  the  legs  and  feet  of  the  statuette  being  faulty,  during
her  lifetime  ;  but  U.  V.  T.  states  that  they  are  distinctly
faulty,  and  that  she  herself  knew  from  the  first  that  they
did  not  balance  properly.

We  need  not  compare  further  in  words  the  description
given  by  Feda  with  the  statuette,  as  the  photogravure
which  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T  have  kindly  allowed  us  to
append  will  enable  the  reader  to  do  this  for  himself  We
need  only  add  that  the  statement  that  "  it  seems  as  if
this  ought  to  belong  to  some  time  ago,"'  or  at  least  to
pretend  to  do  so,  is  correct  for  the  role  assumed  by  the
dancer  as  represented.  When  the  statuette  was  modelled
Madame  Genee  assumed  the  cost'ume  worn  by  her  in  an
early  Victorian  ballet.  The  further  statement  that  the
statuette  takes  A.  V.  B.  away  from  London  is  in  U.  V.  T.'s
opinion  meant  to  refer  to  the  fact  that  the  statuette  was
completed  and  cast  at  Pau.  The  question  arises  whether
the  statuette  can  have  been  known  to  Mrs.  Leonard.  At
the  time  it  was  produced,  eleven  or  twelve  years  before
this  sitting,  it  had  a  remarkable  success,  and  over  three
hundred  models  in  different  materials  were  sold.  Mrs.
Leonard  might  therefore  have  come  across  a  copy.  On  the
other  hand,  it  was  never  put  upon  the  public  market  and
was  therefore  never  on  sale  in  shops.  There  has  been
nothing  of  recent  date  to  bring  it  before  the  public  afresh,
and  as  it  is  signed  (in  an  inconspicuous  place)  with
U.  V.  T.'s  maiden  name,  it  seems  unlikely  that  Mrs.
Leonard  would  have  connected  it  with  her  had  she  come
across  it.  It  seems  certain  that  Mrs.  Leonard  had  not  been
at  M.  R.  H.'s  flat.


MADA:\IE  ADELINE  GENEE.

This  photograph  represents  the  original  bronze  statuette  from  which  the
plaster  east  referred  to  in  tlie  text  was  made. Tlie  oast  lias  since  been  bmken.

[To  face  p.  390.


x,xxxi.] An  Examination  of  Book-Tests. Appendix  B.  391


The  mention  of  the  ba^sket,  which  follows  the  description
of  the  statuette,  has  a  certain  theoretic  interest,  for  at  the
elate  of  the  sitting  there  was  no  basket  in  the  room.
When  M.  R.  H.  is  living  in  London,  however,  a  small
basket  belonging  to  her  spaniel  is  frequently  placed  a  few
feet  away  from  the  statuette  and  still  nearer  to  the  large
oak  cupboard  on  which  stands  the  cast  of  Verrocchio's
figure  of  the  boy  clasping  a  dolphin,  referred  to  apparently
here  and  also  on  April  10,  1918.

On  that  day,  April  10,  another  interesting  though  less
detailed  description  of  an  object  in  M.  R.  H.'s  study  was
given :

Crystal  Ball  and  Tazza.

F.  There's something close to the drawers, by  the

drawers,  that  reminds  her  of  "  The  day  is  Uke  a
crystal  cup."  [A  line  from  a  poem  by  M.  R.  H.
which  had  been  repeated  to  Feda.]  Don't  alter
one  word,  it  may  only  remind  you  of  a  part  of
that  saying  ;  you  may  say  there  are  tAvo  parts  of
it,  one  supplies  one  part  of  it,  and  one  another.
.  .  .  She  says  if  you  keep  those  words  just  as
she  said  them,  there  are  two  objects  close  to  the
thing  with  drawers,  and  they  both  supply  two
essential  elements  of  that  line.

[Now  there  was  in  the  room,  but  not  close  to  the
thing  with  drawers,  a  small  Japanese  Tazza  com-
posed of  a  dish  standing  on  a  tripod,  the  centre
of  the  dish  forming  a  species  of  cup,  having  an
upstanding  collar  of  bronze  over  an  inch  in  depth.
M.  R.  H.  has  always  used  this  to  stand  a  rock-
crystal  ball  in.  She  did  this  in  A.  V.  B.'s  life-
time, and  has  continued  to  do  it  ever  since.  We
have  therefore  the  bronze  Tazza  standing  for
"  cup  "  and  the  crystal  ball  for  "  crystal  "  in  the
line  quoted. Feda  continues  :]

JF.  ... She  says  the  area  in  which  the  things  will  be

found  would  be  in  a  circle  drawn  close  round  the
drawers. [s.v. Wait  a  minute, a  fish  !  peoples


392  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.  [part

don't have fishes in their rooms,  they smells  !)
She  says  there's  something  that  suggests  a  fish  in
that  room.
M.  R.  H. I  place  that.

F.  Feda  don't  like  that,  but  Ladye  says  it's  all  right.

{■s.v.  Not  in  rooms  !  fish  in  a  room  !)
M.  R.  H. I  place  it.

F.  (s.v.  Fish  1 It  is  a  fish,  and  day  is  like  a  crystal

cup  again.)  Feda  must  say  it  like  she  says  it.
Feda  mustn't  alter  it,  must  she  ?  She  thinks  it's
pretty  complete  as  it  is.

[The  tazza  and  crystal  were  not  near  the  thing  with
drawers — that  was  a  mistake.  But  they  were  on  a
shelf  of  a  large  piece  of  furniture  on  the  top  of
which  stood  a  reproduction  of  Verrocchio's  "  Boy
with  a  Dolphin  "  (referred  to  also  later  on  October
2,  1918).  So  that  the  reference  to  the  fish  looks
like  a  correction  of  the  previous  statement  as  tO'
the  position  of  the  things  referred  to.]

Another  attempt  of  A.  V.  B.  to  describe  the  crystal
ball  occurred  on  October  12,  1918,  and  is  perhaps  worth
quoting,  if  only  because  it  is  rather  amusing.  In  the-
course  of  an  attempt,  more  or  less  successful,  to  describe
various  objects  in  the  room,  Feda  said  :

F.  You  ought  to  have  a  ball  there  too,  a  hard,  cold

ball.  If  you  put  it  to  your  face  it  would  make
you  jump  it's  so  cold.

M.  R.  H. I  place  that.

F.  ■  It  seems  to  Feda  to  have  a  kind  of  shine  or  polish
on  it,  and  it  gives  Feda — is  it  light  or  something  I
It  gives  Feda  reflection  in  it.  Ladye  says  she
always  feels  she  wants  to  get  into  the  middle  of  it.

M.  R.  H.  Good.

F.  She  says  : "It  always  makes  me  long  to  get  right

into  the  centre  of  it.  I'm  not  laughing  or  talking
nonsense.  I  thought  you  would  jump  at  it."
She  says  "  That's  my  place,  i?i  it,  not  outside  it,
this  ball  expects  me  to  be  inside  it."


Lxxxi.] An  Examination  of  Book-Tests. Appendix  C.  393

[Feda  goes  on  to  say  that  it  is  "  near  something
shaped  like  that,"  making  gestures  which  may
have  been  meant  to  indicate  the  shape  of  the
tazza.]


APPENDIX  C.

Supplementary  Extracts  from  Book-Tests  quoted  in

Section  8.

"  Messages  "  and  explanations  in  the  book-test  of  December  8,
1918,  referred  to  on  p.  340  ;

F.  ...  page  eight  one,  eighty  one  page,  oh,  the  lower  part
of  the  page  ...  a  message  for  Mrs.  Twonnie  from  Ladye
suggesting  something  she  would  like  Mrs.  Twonnie  to  do
and  to  feel  with  regard  to  Ladye.  Ladye  says  that  Mrs.
Twonnie  already  does  it  to  a  certain  extent,  but  that  she
is  to  do  it  more.

[The  words  on  the  lower  part  of  page  81  of  the  seventh
volume  (which  Avas  Mrs.  Molesworth's  The  Children  of  the
Castle)  regarded  as  appropriate  are  "  You  see  me  ?  "  said
in  the  story  by  a  s^iirit  to  a  child,  who  replies  "  I  see
you,  and  I  see  your  eyes."

M.  R.  H.  had  often  at  sittings  said  how  much  she
wished  she  could  see  A.  V.  B.,  and  A.  V.  B.  had  appar-
ently implied  that  she  probably  would  some  time.  As  has
been  seen  above  (pp.  272-274),  she  had  got  as  far  as
seeing  hallucinatory  lights  which  A.  V.  B.  claimed  that  she
had  produced. Feda  goes  on  :]

F.  Wait  a  minute,  um — well  hold  it  for  a  minute  Ladye
'cos  I  can't  remember  if  you  don't.  Page  two  of  the  same
book  about  halfway  down,  describing  by  using  one  or  two
words,  Ladye's  opinion  of  Mrs.  Twonnie 's  father  at  the
sittings,  she  thinks  that  that  will  interest  you  more  than  it
would  him.

[Li  the  ninth  line  of  p.  2,  or  counting  a  space  the  tenth
line,  in  a  page  of  twenty-five  lines  occur  the  words  "  wise


394


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


and  clever."  Now  M.  R.  H."s  deceased  father  had  been,
so  to  speak,  putting  his  oar  in  at  A.  V.  B.  sittings.  At  a
recent  sitting  A.  V.  B.  had  said  he  was  alarmingly  clever
as  a  communicator — unusually  brilliant,  she  thought,  which
she  laughingly  implied  rather  alarmed  her,  lest  he  should
take  up  too  much  of  her  (A.  V.  B.'s)  time.  She  sug-
gested that  M.  R.  H.  should  give  him  some  sittings
entirely  to  himself. Feda  contmues  :]

IF.  Page  5  of  the  same  book  at  the  bottom  of  the  printing
on  the  page  is  something  that  suggests  a  measure  which
has  to  be  taken  with  him  with  regard  to  the  sittings,  she's
laughing.

[UiDon  the  last  line  but  one  of  the  page  is  the  word
"  severe."  A.  V.  B.  has,  it  aj^pears,  always  evinced  a
certain  severity  towards  M.  R.  H.'s  father  Avhen  he  wishes
to  monopolise  what  she  regarded  as  her  time,  and  not  long
before  this  sitting  refused  to  let  him  communicate  for  more
than  a  few  minutes,  as  he  was  interfering  with  a  book-test.]

Extracts  from  the  A.  V.  B.  sitting  of  July  17,  1918,
referred  to  on  jj.  341  ;

[Feda  has  been  giving  for  A.  V.  B.  what  profess  to
be  particulars  about  a  book  selected  by  U.  V.  T.
(see  above,  p.  300  et  seq.).  She  had  spoken  about
a  verse  or  allusion  to  verses  and  U.  V.  T.  asks  at
what  part  of  the  book  this  occurred,  and  an
excliiange  of  remarks  between  M.  R.  H.  and
U.  V.  T.  follows  ; then  Feda  says  :]

F.  You'd  better  let  her  go  on,  short — short — eleven,
p.  11  speaks  of  magic.  You  wouldn't  think  so,
but  it  does,  it  speaks  of  magic.  Page  11,  about
halfway  down.  Some  of  the  pages  seems  to  have
unusually  wide  margins,  or  not  only  wide  margins
but  a  good  deal  of  blank  space,  as  if  a  space  left
here  and  there  for  some  purpose.  But  p.  11,  the
words  there  certainly  suggest  magic  to  her,  and  in
a  very  definite  way  too.  She  says  "  I  don't
■  ,  always  get  the  actual  word  like  '  magic,'  but  I  say
  that  the  words  very  definitely  suggested  magic."


ixxxi.] An  Examination  of  Book-Tests. Appendix  C.  395

[Of  the  above  statements  it  is  untrue  that  there  is
anything suggestive of magic on p. 11. It  is
untrue  that  the  book  has  unusually  wde  margins  ;
but  it  is  true  that  there  is  a  good  deal  of  blank
space,  for  the  book  is  witten  as  a  series  of  letters,
some  of  which  are  quite  short. Feda  goes  on  to
give  several  other  particulars— some  doubtful  and
' some  true— about  this  book,  Auitie  Amoureuse.]
[After  finishing  with  this  she  goes  on  :]
F.  Oh  dear  ! she's  got  another  .  .  . It's  the  threeth

.  shelf  upwards,  the  third,  not  counting  the  books
on  the  floor,  and  it's  the  very  first  book  .  .  .
from  the  left.  On  page  three,  three,  thirty-three,
there's  a  little  message  about  halfway  down  what
is  about  the  work  {s.v.  What  work  ?).  The
■ ■  work, she says.  .  .  . She says it's a nice  en-

couraging message  about  the  work  that  you  and
jVIrs.  Una  is  doing  for  Ladye.  'Cos  she  says  she
always  feels  you  are  doing  it  for  her,  so  you  must
read  the  message  in  that  light.  'Cos  she  says,
supposing  an  impossibility  and  that  she  couldn't
have  had  you  and  Mrs.  Una,  she  would  have  had
to  have  some  instrument,  some  one  to  work
through,  'cos  she  says  it's  her  work  given  to  her
on  the  other  side,  not  07ily  for  personal  reasons  ;
she  had  to  help  the  earth  plane,  but  she  could
never  have  got  through  the  work  she  has,  'cos  she
could  never  have  got  the  evidence  through  without
you  and  Mrs.  Una,  but  she  would  have  had  to
worry  any  one  what  could  be  worried  in  order  to
get  through  what  she  could.  She  says,  now  of
course  it  is  considering  an  impossibility,  but  you'll
see  that  in  the  wording  of  the  message  on  the
thhty-third  page.
M.  R.  H.  That  she'd  have  had  to  have  found  somebody  else  ?
^  yo,  it  just  suggests  what  she's  just  been  talking

about.

[The book indicated was found to be  Rudyard
Kipling's  Kim. On  p.  33  there  was  nothing  even


396


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


remotely  relevant.  But  on  p.  3— and  it  is  just
possible  that  the  repeated  "  three  "  (see  above),
may  have  been  meant  to  emphasise  that  number
and  not  to  signify  33 — on  p.  3  halfway  down
(namely,  on  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  lines,
of  a  page  of  thirty-three  lines)  occur  the  words.
"  it  is  always  so  when  men  work  magic."  A
great  success  would  of  course  have  been  scored
had  these  words  been  found  halfway  down  p.  II
of  Amitie  Amoureuse.  On  the  other  hand,  on  the
latter  page,  beginning  on  the  twelfth  line  of  a
page  of  twenty-four  lines,  occur  the  words  :
"  Nous  avons  tant  et  tant  cause  et  si  intimement
que,  bon  gre  mal  gre,  contre  les  convenances,
contre  vos  scrupules,  notre  amitie  a  ete  definitive-
ment  fondee."  These  words  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.
regard  as  conforming  well  to  the  conditions  laid
down  for  the  "  message  "  to  be  found  on  p.  33  of
Kim.  For  there  had  been  long  and  intimate  talks
between  Ijiem  as  to  the  advisabihty  or  the  reverse
of  their  collaborating  in  psychical  research  before
they  made  up  their  minds  to  do  so,  and  their
friendship  was  thus  definitely  founded.]

This  case  is,  I  think,  less  convincing  than  the  one-
quoted  in  the  text,  not  only  because  the  assumption  that
p.  3  of  Ki7n  was  meant  is  a  very  doubtful  one,  but
because  the  method  of  the  mistake  if  it  was  a  genuine  one
is  less  easy  to  grasp.  It  does  not  seem  as  if  any  omission
of  Feda's  or  inexact  repetition  by  her  of  what  she  was
told  at  the  moment  would  account  for  it.  It  is  more  like
a  mistake  in  repeating  something  that  had  been  learnt
by  rote.

Item  from  the  A.  W.  V.  book-test  of  February  28,  1918,.
omitted,  from  the  text  {see  above,  p.  342)  :

On  page  48  of  the  same  book — oh  !  he  can't  tell  you
where  on  the  page,  wait  a  minute,  it  describes  the  state  of
place  that  he's  in  now,  the  conditions  he's  in  now,  and


Lxxxi.] An  Examination  of  Book-Tests. Appendix  C.  397


that  your  lady's  in  now.  Not  their  relative  positions  to
each  other,  but  what  they's  both  in.  All  the  messages
they's  giving  to-day  is  connected  together.  Now  he's
tr^dng  to  give  the  position  of  the  message  on  p.  48.  It's
lower  down  than  the  message  on  p.  73,  he  thinks  it's
about  haKway  down,  or  a  little  lower.

[On  Y>.  48  of  Wells's  book  is  the  latter  part  of  a  short
section  entitled  "  My  Primary  Act  of  Faith."  The  refer-
ences in  it  to  the  general  scheme  of  the  universe  in  which
there  is  "  order  and  co-ordination  as  distinguished  from
haphazard  "  and  to  the  "  ultimate  rightness  and  significance
of  things  "  are  not  inappropriate,  but  I  agree  with  Mrs.
Salter  that  this  part  of  the  test  can  hardly  be  considered
successful.]

Now,  just  near  that  book — he's  having  a  joke  now,  but
it's  a  test — there's  a  title  ;  it's  within  a  span  of  the
test-book.  (Feda  makes  a  gesture  of  spanning  a  distance,
using  the  extended  thumb  and  middle  finger  as  a  measure.)
There's  a  title  suggesting  a  state  or  condition  that  he's
very  glad  he  didn't  go  to.  He  says  he  might  tell  you
that  while  he  was  sensing  the  two  first  tests,  he  had  no
idea  of  sensing  the  third,  but  then  he  saw  it,  and  it
suggested  the  extreme  opposite,  so  he  thought  he  might
give  it.

[There  is  no  book  answering  to  this  description  within
the  distance  indicated  by  Feda,  but  in  the  same  shelf,
twenty-two  inches  to  the  right  of  the  Wells  book,  is  an
edition  of  tiie  Purgatory  of  Dante  which  may  fairly  be
said  to  supply  what  is  needed.  It  has  the  word  "  Purga-
tory "  in  large  letters  across  the  back  of  the  book.]


398 .  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgioick.  '  .  [part


APPENDIX  D.

Extracts  from  Book-Tests  supplementary  to  Section  9'
(Examination  of  Alleged  Modes  of  Perception).

Attempt  to  form  a  ivord  by  'j^icking  out  letters  from  dijferenf
pages — A.  V.  B.  sitting  on  February  20,  1918 — referred'  to-
on  p.  356  ;

F.  You  must  take  the  book  after  the  test-book,  iher

fourth  book  {s.v.  On  the  first  page,  take  the
first  letter  on  the  first  page,  the  first  letter  of  the
first  Avord  on  tlie  first  page)  and  write  him  down.
Then  on  the  tliird  page,  take  one  of  the  letters  of
the  first  word  {s.v.  Whicli  one  ?).  Put  that
down.  Wait  a  minute,  on  page  9  do  tlie  same,  it
looks  hke  the  third  letter  to  Feda,  of  tlie  first
word  on  page  9.  Do  the  same  with  pages  2,  4,,
and  8.  She  says  after  page  9  take  page  2,  and
talie  tlie  fourth  letter  of  the  first  word.  Oh  !
she's  not  sure  that  the  first  word  has  four  letters,
if  not,  you  must  count  letters  not  words.  She's-
got  a  feeling  it  hasn't  four  letters,  so  she's  pre-
paring you  she  says.  This  is  an  exjoeriment,  and
she  says  she  won't  inflict  it  on  you  a  second  time-
if  it  is  not  successful.  Then  page  4  comes  next
.  .  .  second  letter  on  that  page  .  .  .  Now  page  8-
{s.v.  Oh  dear  !  this  is  awful  !)  just  at  the  top-
of  the  loage  what  is  called  8,  it  gives  a  word  what
is  the  key  to  what  the  other  letters  spell.  She-
says  no  spirit  has  ever  attempted  this  before.

U.  V.  T. It's  like  an  acrostic.

M.  R.  H.  There  was  that  page,  page  9,  where  we  weren't  told'
what  letter  it  was  in  the  first  word.

F.  No, 'cos she's forgotten  ! Feda thinks she  was;

hoping  she'd  remember,  but  she  didn't.  ...

M.  R.  H.  On  all  these  pages  there  will  appear  the  title  of  the-
book  ;  do  you  vnsh  it  ignored  ?


I


1


Lxxxi.] An  Examination  of  Book-Tests. Appendix  D.  399

F.  She  says,  absolutely  .  .  .  oiily  the  reading  matter  on

all  the  pages  she's  given.

The  letters  in  question  proved  to  be  G.  A. F  -  (for  the

IbJ

first  word  on  p.  9  was  "  of  "  and  the  third  letter  "  b  ")
R.  0.,  which  seem  meaningless.  The  key-word  on  p.  S
has  not  been  identified.  The  test  must  therefore  be
regarded  as  a  failure,  and  so  far  as  we  can  tell  it  may
simply  have  been  patter  of  the  control  with  no  meaning
behind  it.  In  this  case  it  would  of  course  throw  no  light
on  the  mode  of  perception  since  nothing  would  have  been
perceived.

Extract  from  the  A.  W.  V.  Sitting  on  October 19,  1918,
referred  to  on  p.  361.

The  book-test  began  on  this  day  with  a  failure.  Then
some  good  things  were  said  about  titles  of  books,  after  which
Feda  goes  on  :

Now  he's  jumping  to  the  third  row  up  .  .  .  Now  the
very  first  book  on  the  third  row  on  the  left.  {s.v.  That's
him — page  \^  hat  ?  Wait  a  minute  then,  please,  IVIr.  Arthur  ;
I  can't  see  the  number,  build  it  up  again — forty-eight.^)
Forty-eight,  four  eight,  not  quite  halfway  down  the  page,
there  is  a  reference  to  certain — certain  conditions — {s.v.
She  [Mrs.  Salter]  was  not  born  then  !)  conditions  which
hajopened  in  his  life  about  twenty  years  ago  .  .  .  He  says
it  might  be  nineteen,  it  might  be  twenty-one,  but  he  says  :
"  I'm  putting  it  at  twenty,  and  I  think  that's  very  near
it."  Certain  conditions  which  would  apply  to  his  life  .  .  .
twenty  years  ago.  When  he  was  sensing  these  books  he
got  for  the  time  being  a  peculiar  clarity  of  ^^sion  which
enabled  him  to  see  even  words  on  the  pages,  and  he  finds
this  morning  he  can  even  reproduce  them  to  a  certain
extent. 2  Now  on  the  page  o^^posite  to  48,  almost  level
with  the  message  given,  he  seemed  to  see  a  very  peculiar
word  that  suggested  these  letters  to  him  :  C,  A,  E — {s.v.
What? C,  A,  E,  what  comes  after  that? L  ?)  L,  E,  B.

•"■Quoted  above,  p.  351.  ^  Quoted  above,  p.  361.


400


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


(s.v.  Have  you  missed  something  out,  Mr.  Arthur  1  He's
stopping  and  shaking  his  head.)  No,  he  says  this  will  do,
S.  (s.v.  Is  that  near  enough  to  it  ?)  Yes  he  says  it's  near
enough.  And  now  he  says  there's  a  reason  why  he  showed
that,  that  word,  think  of  it.  He  says  he  had  reason  in  his
earth  life  to  think  of  that  word,  that's  why  he  noticed  it
in  that  book.  On  the  page  opposite  48,  it  is.  He  wants
to  say,  if  you  find  this  word  exactly  as  he  gives  it,  will
you  tell  Mrs.  Una,  so  that  she  can  tell  him.

The  book  proved  to  be  The  Second  Woman  by  Norma
Lorimer.  There  was  nothing  on  page  48  relevant  to  any-
thing that  happened  to  Dr.  Verrall  twenty  years  ago.  But
Feda  is  apt  to  be  vague  about  time,  and  if  she  had  said
about  thirty-five  years  ago  it  would  have  agreed  with  the
statement  that  Mrs.  Salter  was  not  born  then,  and  the
words  "  an  appointment  which  permitted  of  his  marrying,"
which  occur  about  a  quarter  of  the  way  down  the  page,
might  have  been  taken  as  applicable.  When  Dr.  and  Mrs.
Verrall  were  first  engaged  it  was  not  possible  for  fellows
of  colleges  to  marry,  and  he  might  have  had  to  leave
Cambridge  and  seek  work  elsewhere.  But  in  1882  this
restriction  on  marriage  was  removed.

Caelebs,  the  Latin  for  bachelor,  does  not  occur  on  the
opposite  page  (p.  49),  but  the  page  deals  with  a  bachelor
about  to  marry,  and  if  we  may  suppose  that  in  giving  the
test  from  p.  48  he  was  thinking  of  the  impossibility  at  one
time  of  marrying  and  keeping  his  Cambridge  appointment,
the  word  Caelebs  may  be  carrying  on  the  same  train  of
thought.  But,  if  so,  it  must  have  come  in  by  association
of  ideas — not  by  "  sensing  "  the  word  itself.


END OF  APPENDIX.


A  SUGGESTED  NEW  METHOD  OF  RESEARCH.


By  W.  Whately  Smith.

Some  months  ago  I  suggested,  in  a  letter  to  the  Journal,
that  it  might  be  possible  to  apply  the  word-association
test as  a  means  of  investigating  the  psychological  status
of  the  "  controls "  of  mediumistic  trance.  At  that  time
I  contemplated  relying  solely  on  the  actual  words  given
by  the  personalities  under  examination  in  answer  to  the
stimulus  words  of  the  test.  As-  a  result  of  recent  experi-
mental work,  however,  I  have  been  able  to  devise  a
method  of  research  which  appears  to  be  far  better  adapted
to  the  end  in  view.  This  method  I  propose  to  describe
here.  Its  object  is  to  determine,  by  purely  objective
means,  whether  the  "  controls  "  of  mediumistic  trance  are
the  independent  discarnate  entities  which  they  claim  to
be  or  whether  they  should  be  regarded  as  "  secondary
personalities "  strictly  analogous  to  those  with  which
psychopathologists  are  familiar.  The  importance  of  obtain-
ing a  solution  of  this  problem  needs  no  emphasis.

For  the  benefit  of  readers  who  are  unacquainted  with
the  word-association  test  I  may  briefly  describe  it  as
follows  :

The  experimenter  calls  out  to  the  subject,  one  by  one,
a  list  of  words — usually  100  in  all — and  the  subject  is
instructed  to  reply  to  each  word  as  it  is  called  out,  as
quickly  as  possible,  with  the  first  word  which  occurs  to
him,  regardless  of  whether  it  "  makes  sense  "  or  not.
He  must  not,  of  course,  prepare  his  answer  before  the
word  is  called  out.  The  words  of  the  list  are  called  the
"  stimulus-words "  and  the  subject's  replies  the  "  reaction
words."'

The  time  which  elapses  between  the  calling  out  of  the


402


Tf.  Whafely  Smith.


[part


stimulus  word  by  the  experimenter  and  the  subject's
answering  is  commonly  measured  in  fifths  of  a  second
with  an  ordinary  stop-watch  and  this  interval  is  known
as  the  "  reaction-time."

It  has  been  found  that  any  marked  prolongation  of  the
reaction-time  is  generally  a  sign  that  the  stimulus  word
has  awakened,  by  association,  a  group  of  ideas  of  strong
emotional  significance  to  the  subject — most  usually  of  a
painful  or  disagreeable  nature.

Some  account  of  the  method,  illustrated  by  a  striking
example,  will  be  found  in  the  Proceedings.  Vol.  XXIV.
pp.  676  and  677.  The  classical  work  on  the  subject  is
Jung's  Studies  in  Word  Association  and  most  works  on  the
technique  of  psycho-analysis  deal  with  it  in  greater  or  less
detail.

The  length  of  the  reaction-time,  coupled  with  the
observation  of  certain  other  signs,  is  a  good  enough  guide
for  most  practical  purposes,  but  it  is  too  unreliable  and
too  susceptible  to  fortuitous  interference  to  be  of  much
value  for  precise  quantitative  work.  It  is,  among  other
defects,  liable  to  prolongation  hy  causes  quite  other  than
the  intensity  of  the  emotion  or  "  affective  tone  "  ^  evoked
by  the  stimulus  word  and,  as  will  appear  later,  it  is  the
affective  tone  which  we  wish  to  measure.

A  far  more  delicate  and  precise  method  of  doing  this
is  afforded  by  the  phenomenon  known  as  the  "  psycho-
galvanic reflex.*'

It  has  been  found  that  if  a  weak  electric  current  is
passed  through  the  human  body,  between  suitable  points,
the  amount  passing,  as  measured  by  a  galvanometer,  is
increased  i  f  any  stimulus  is  applied  which  arouses  emotion,
or  causes  a  change  of  "  affective  tone  "  in  the  person
under  examination.  In  other  words  the  resistance  of  the
body  (of  the  skin  to  be  accurate)  is  lowered  whenever
the  subject  experiences  what  may  loosely  be  called  a
"  wave  of  emotion."  Given  a  suitable  subject  under
good  conditions,  this  test  is  extremely  delicate  and,  as  I

^  The  term  "  affective  tone  is  more  strictly  accurate  than  "  emotion."
Those  who  are  unfamiliar  with  psychological  terminology  may  regard
the  words  as  approximately  synonymous.


LXXXI.]


Suggested  Neio  Method  of  Research.


403


have  recently  showTi  by  experiment,  is  capable  of  dis-
criminating shades  of  affective  tone  with  far  greater
nicety  than  the  reaction-time.  As  a  result  of  the  recent
observation  and  statistical  analj'^is  of  some  12,000  reactions
in  the  word-association  test  with  some  seventy  different
subjects,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  as  a  measure
of  affective  tone  this  reflex  is  incomparabl}'  superior  to
the  reaction-time  for  quantitative  work.^

I  myself  have  always  used  an  ordinary  D"  Arson  val
galvanometer  (resistance  about  92  ohms)  in  conjunction
with  a  Wheatstone  bridge  of  which  the  external  resist-
ance was  formed  by  two  zinc -plate  electrodes,  covered
with  wash-leather  and  soaked  in  salt-solution,  which  were
applied  to  the  palm  and  back  of  the  subject" s  left  hand.

With  this  arrangement  excellent  reactions  to  the  word-
association  test  can  be  obtained  from  the  great  majority
of  subjects  and  it  is  most  striking  to  see  how  a  person
who  steadily  gives  reactions  of,  say,  10  to  15  scale  divisions
for  the  majority  of  stimulus  words  will  suddenly  give
one  of  50  or  60  or  more  when  a  word  is  called  out  which,
for  some  reason  or  other,  arouses  an  emotionally  significant
group  of  ideas. ^

In  order  to  understand  how  these  facts  can  be  utilised
for  the  investigation  of  trance  personalities  it  is  necessary
to  ask  ourselves  ivhy  a  word  should  arouse  intense  emotion

^  The  chief  points  of  superiority  are  :

(i)  It  is  not  under  voluntary  control.

(ii)  It  is  not  affected  by  purely  "  intellectual  "  difficulties  such  as

may  misleadingly  prolong  the  reaction-time.

(iii)  The  galvanometer  deflection  appears  to  be  very  approximately

proportional  to  the  intensity  of  the  affective  tone  no  matter
how  great  it  maj'  be.  while  prolongation  of  reaction-time
is  not.

(iv)  Subject to  certain  teclmical reservations  which  would  be  out

of  place  here,  the  galvanometer  detects  both  pleasant  and
unpleasant  tone  while  the  reaction-time  tends  to  indicate
only  the  latter.

'  For  the  benefit  of  those  who  are  ignorant  of  electrical  matters  I  may
briefly  paraphrase  the  foregoing  by  saying  that  any  evocation  of
emotion  is  accompanied  by  a  change  in  the  electrical  properties  of  the
skin  which  can  be  accurately  measured  by  the  use  of  suitable  apparatus.
This  change  is  very  closely  proportional  to  the  intensity  of  the  emotion
evoked  and  can  be  used  with  confidence  as  a  measure  of  it.


404


W.  WJmtely  Smith.


[part


in  one  person  and  little  or  none  in  another.  The  reason
is,  of  course,  that  the  word  is  associated  in  the  mind  of
the  first  person  with  emotional  or  exciting  experiences,
while  it  has  no  such  association  in  the  second  case.  The
affective  tone  aroused  in  a  given  subject  by  a  stimuhis
word  is,  in  fact,  determined  by  and  is  a  function  of  that
subject's  experience.  But  the  experience  of  every  indi-
vidual is  unique  and  inasmuch  as  the  reactions  to  stimulus
words  are  determined  by  experience  we  should  conse-
quently expect  these  reactions  to  be  correspondingly
unique  for  each  individual  tested.  The  actual  degree  in
which  they  will  be  so  must  depend,  of  course,  on  the
kind  of  stimulus  words  used.  There  a.re  certain  words
suggesting  ideas  of  universal  interest  which  produce  strong
reactions  in  almost  everyone  and  it  is  obvious  that  a  list
containing  a  large  proportion  of  such  words  would  bring
out  the  differences  between  individuals  much  less  clearly
than  one  consisting  entirely  of  words  which  could  only
excite  emotion  by  virtue  of  their  associations  with  experi-
ences peculiar  to  the  particular  individual  concerned.
Subject  to  this  condition,  however,  we  would  confidently
anticipate  on  general  psychological  grounds  that  a  subject's
reactions  to  a  list  of  words  would  be  uniquely  character-
istic of  that  subject.

But  before  we  can  use  these  considerations  in  the
construction  of  a  method  of  research  it  is  necessary  to
test  their  validity  by  experiment  and  to  obtain  some
quantitative  criterion  for  future  use.  This  I  have  recently
been  able  to  do.

In  order  to  approximate  as  closely  as  possible  to  the
ideal  of  a  list  containing  no  words  of  universal  interest,
I  deleted  from  my  original  list  the  twenty  words  which
in  previous  experiments  had  been  found  to  arouse  the
most  intense  affective  tone  in  subjects  as  a  whole.  I
replaced  them  by  twenty  other  words  which  I  judged
less  likely  to  arouse  intense  affective  tone  in  the  average
subject.

I  need  not  here  go  into  other  minor  points  of  technique
and  methods  of  computation  which  I  adopted  in  order
to  render  the  results  obtained  as  free  as  possible  from


LXXXI.]


Suggested  Neiv  Method  of  Research.


405


the  effects  of  accidental  errors.  My  object  was  to  ascer-
tain whether  the  extent  of  the  agreement  between  the
reactions  given  by  any  two  individuals  was  saliently  less
than  that  between  the  reactions  given  by  any  one
individual  on  different  occasions.  In  other  words  :  do  the
reactions  of  subject  A  taken  on  different  occasions  agree
between  themselves  more  closely  than  they  agree  with  the
reactions  of  subject  B  ?  If  so  is  the  difference  sufficiently
marked  to  enable  us  to  determine  whether  two  sets  of
reactions,  of  unknown  origin,  emanate  from  the  same
individual  or  from  two  different  individuals  ?  ^

The  extent  to  which  any  two  series  of  measurements
(in  this  case  reactions  to  stimuh)  agree  can  be  calculated
and  expressed  with  mathematical  precision  in  the  form
of  a  Coefficient  of  Correlation.  This  is  a  figure  which  may
have  any  value  between  +rO  for  two  series  which  agree
perfectly  and  -I'O  for  two  which  disagree  perfectly.
Series  which  are  wholly  unrelated  will  give  a  coefficient
of  correlation  of  0.  Thus  the  two  series  1,  7,  8,  11,  56,
49,  18,  3,  14  and  3,  21,  24,  33,  168,  147,  54,  9,  42,  will
give  a  coefficient  of  +  TO  because  each  increases  or  decreases
in  precise  conformity  to  the  other.  On  the  other  hand
the  series  7,  12,  9,  8,  4,  7,  6,  12,  2,  3,  increases  and
decreases  in  a  manner  precisely  opposite  to  the  behaviour
of  the  series  7,  2,  5,  6,  10,  7,  8,  2,  12,  11, — when  one
increases  the  other  proportionately  decreases— and  the
coefficient  of  correlation  between  these  two  will  be  -  I'O.

The  method  whereby  this  figure,  expressive  of  the
extent  of  agreement  between  two  series  of  observations,
is  calculated  is  familiar  to  statisticians  but  need  not  be
described  here  :  the  point  is  that  if  we  are  given  two
series  of  measurements  we  can  assess  their  agreement
in  a  wholly  unambiguous  fashion.

If,  then,  we  are  right  in  conjecturing  that  the  psycho-
galvanic reactions  to  a  suitable  list  of  words,  is  uniquely
characteristic  of  the  subject  tested,  the  coefficient  of  corre-

^  In  order  to  eliminate  chance  variations  and  to  obtain  representative
sets  of  reactions  I  caused  each  of  my  subjects  to  undergo  repeated
tests  from  which  average  figures  could  be  obtained.  These  tests  were
spread  over  a  period  of  about  a  month  in  each  case.  In  the  interests
of  simplicity  I  omit  details.


406


W.  Whately  Smith.


[part


lation  between  series  of  reactions  (or  of  average  reactions
obtained  from  general  tests)  which  are  derived  from  the
same  individual  should  be  very  appreciably  higher  than
that  given  by  series  taken  from  different  individuals.

I  accordingly  calculated  the  correlations  (a)  of  each
individual  with  himself  and  (6)  of  every  individual  with
every  other.  ...

The  results  were  as  follows  : .■'  . . ^ '  -


It  is  obvious  that  these  figures  represent  a  pretty  high
degree  of  agreement  ;  there  are  two  "  freaks  namely.
Pi  with  the  very  high  value  of  +'98  and  P6  with  the
very  low  value  of  +  -42.  But  one  would  expect  a  distri-
bution of  values  of  this  kind.

The  figures  for  the  agreement  of  individiaals  with  each
other  are  :


Correlations  of  Individuals  ivith  Themselves.


Subject  Pi  gave  a  value  of  +  -98
„ P2 „ „  +-72
„ P3 „ „  +70
P4 „ „  +-60
„ P5  „  +-68

„ P6 „ „  +42


Mean +  -68


Subjects  PI


and  P2  gave  a  value  of  +  -19

P3  „  „  -02

„ P4  „  „  +12

„ P5  „  „  -01

,, P6  „  „  +-02

„ P3  „  „  +15

„ P4  „  „  +19

Po  „  „  +-18

P6  „  +-01

„ P4  „  „  +-46

„ Po  +-14

„ P6  „  „  --24

„ Po  ,,  „  +-23

P6  „  „  --04

„ P6  „  --13


Mean  +.08


xxxxi.] Suggested  Nev:  Method  of  Research.  407

It  will  be  noticed  that  with  one  exception,  these  values
are  very  markedly  lower  than  those  given  by  individuals
with  themselves,  which  is  in  accordance  with  expectation.

The  first  class  of  coefficients  are  grouped  round  a*  typical
value  of  about  +"70,  so  to  speak,  while  the  second  set
are  similarly  grouped  round  a  typical  value  of  about  +-10.

It  would  be  possible,  by  working  out  a  very  large
number  of  such  coefficients,  to  obtain  frequency  distri-
butions "  in  each  class  and  thence  to  calculate  the  mathe-
matical probability  that  any  given  coefficient  subsequently
obtained  belonged  to  one  class  or  to  the  other.  That
is  to  say  we  could  calculate  the  precise  chance  that  a
coefficient  of  correlation  between  two  series  of  reactions
of  unknown  origin  had  arisen  from  correlating  the  re-
actions of  the  same  individuals  or  of  two  different
individuals.

For  practical  purposes,  however,  such  experiments  are
"unnecessary  and  we  can  say  with  considerable  assurance
that  any  coefficient  greater  than  -f5  is  tmlikely  to  have
proceeded  from  correlating  the  reactions  of  two  different
individuals  and  that  one  of  less  than  -i--3  is  unlikely  to
represent  a  single  individual.

Now  let  us  suppose  the  test  to  be  apphed  to  a  suitable
trance  medium,  first  in  the  normal  state  and,  second,
under  control.  (It  will  of  course  be  advisable  to  apply
the  test  several  times  in  each  state  in  order  to  obtain
average  reactions.)  We  shall  thus  obtain  two  series  of
reactions  of  which  one  will  be  characteristic  of  the  normal
personality,  the  other  of  the  "  control."  If  we  then  work
out  the  coefficient  of  correlation  between  these  two  series
the  result  should  throw  considerable  light  on  the  question
of  whether  the  control  personality  is  really  identical  with
the  normal  personality  or  not.

If  the  two  series  of  reactions  were  substantially  the
same,  if,  that  is  to  say,  the  coefficient  proved  to  be  of
the  same  order  as  those  obtained  by  correlating  individuals
with  themselves  (about  +"6  or  more)  we  should  conclude
that  the  "  control "  is  really  no  more  than  a  different
version,  so  to  speak,  of  the  normal  personality  and  deter-
mined  by the same mental content. Even this  would


408


W.  Whatehj  Smith.


[part


constitute  a  very  considerable  advance  in  positive  know-
ledge of  mediumistic  states.

But  if  the  two  series  were  radically  different,  if  the
coefficients  were  of  the  same  order  as  those  obtained  by
correlating  the  reactions  of  different  individuals  (about
+  "3  or  less)  then  even  the  most  sceptical  of  orthodox
psychologists  would  be  forced  to  consider  very  seriously
the  claim  of  the  "  control  to  be  regarded  as  an  inde-
pendent personahty  totally  distinct  from  that  of  the
medium.^

The  first  of  these  alternatives  would  be  confidently
expected  by  most  psychologists  and  would  occasion  little
surprise  to  students  of  Psychical  Research.-

But  the  second  possibility  demands  somewhat  closer
consideration.  There  are  two  ways  in  which  the  con-
clusion that  the  control  is  a  personality  distinct  from  that
of  the  medium  could  be  evaded.

The  first  of  these  is  by  attribviting  the  result  to  chance.
This  could,  in  general,  be  met  by  repeating  the  experiment
with  other  mediums.  If  necessary  the  question  could  be
reduced  to  terms  of  exact  mathematical  probability  by
performing  a  sufficient  number  of  tests  on  normal  persons
to  enable  us  to  calculate  the  precise  chance  that  the
apparent  independence  of  medium  and  control  was  acci-
dental. This  would  be  extremely  laborious  and  would
not,  in  practice,  prove  necessary  :  if  the  coefficient  of
correlation  between  medium  and  control  were  as  low  as,
say  +'2  in  two  or  three  experiments,  their  independence
would  be  established  with  a  very  high  degree  of  pro-
bability  and the precise magnitude of that  probability

^  It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  an  indeterminate  result  might  be
obtained.  A  coefficient  of  correlation  of  +  -4,  for  example,  would  not
be  helpful  if  the  above  figures  are  taken  as  a  standard  of  comparison.
This  contingency  can  to  some  extent  be  guarded  against  by  using  the
agreement  of  the  medium  with  herself  and  of  the  control  with  itself
as  a  basis  of  comparison  for  the  agreement  of  the  medium  with  the-
control.

^  It  must  be  tinderstood  that  I  am  here  referring  to  what  I  may
term  "general"  controls,  of  the  type  to  which  "Rector,"  "  Phinuit  "
and  "  Feda  "  belong,  as  opposed  to  'personal'"  controls  such  as
Hodgsonp,  MyerSj,,  or  the  "  A.V.B."  control  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Leonard.


Lxxxi.] Stiggesfed  New  Method  of  Research.


409


would  be  of  no  practical  interest.  It  is  worth  remember-
ing, however,  that  the  method  is  of  a  nature  amenable
to  rigid  mathematical  treatment  if  required.

The  other  line  of  criticism  would  involve  the  supposition
that  a  secondary  personality  can  be  determined  by  a  mass
of  experience  completely  cut  oS  from  that  which  deter-
mines the  normal  personahty.  In  my  opinion  this  supposi-
tion is  not  justified  by  our  knowledge  either  of  psycho-
logical mechanisms  in  general  or  of  the  phenomena  of
secondary  personahty  in  particular.  We  know,  to  be
sure,  that  experiences  extending  over  a  considerable  period
may  be  whoUy  forgotten  and  rendered  completely  in-
accessible to  consciousness  so  far  as  the  voKtion  of  the
patient  is  concerned  ;  such  amnesias  are  a  common  enough
feature  of  pathological  cases.  But  we  also  know  that
these  dissociated  tracts  of  experience  are  not  dead  and
inactive,  not  segregated  into  completely  watertight  com-
partments or  separated  by  an  impassable  gulf  from  the
rest  of  the  mental  content.

If  an  emotional  experience  within  the  forgotten  period
is  stimulated  by  an  appropriate  word  in  an  association
test  the  subject  reacts,  although  he  may  remain  com-
pletely amnesic  to  the  incidents  which  invest  the  word
■with  its  emotional  significance.^  Similarly  the  "repressed"
material  familiar  to  psycho-analysts  gives  rise  to  reactions
when  it  is  stimulated,  although  it  cannot  come  directly
into  consciousness.

This  shows  that  the  fact  of  a  mass  of  experience  being
"  dissociated "  and  inaccessible  to  consciousness  does  not
mean  that  it  cannot  be  reached  by  stimuli  or  that  it
cannot  influence  reactions.  Hence,  although  the  normal
personahty  may  be  wholly  amnesic  to  and  unconscious
of  the  experiences  which  determine  the  characteristics  and
behaviovir  of  the  secondary — abnormal — personality,  we
should,  by  analogy,  expect  that  these  dissociated  experi-

^  This  is  well  paralleled  by  what  happens  in  the  case  of  functional
anaesthesia  in  connection  with  which  the  term  "  dissociation  "  is  also
used.  A  patient  will  not  be  conscious  of  a  painful  stimulus  applied
to  the  functionally  anaesthesic  areas  but,  if  connected  to  the  galvano-
meter, he  will  react  just  as  well  as  he  does  when  the  stimulus  is  applied
to  the  normallj-  sensitive  areas  of  his  body.


410


W.  Whately  Smith.  ^


[part


ences  would  none  the  less  influence  the  reactions  of  the
normal  personality,  and  conversely.

That  this  is  actually  so  is  indicated  by  the  work  of
Prince  and  Peterson  on  the  "  A.C.B.  "  case.^  These
experimenters  selected  words  which  were  known  to  be  of
emotional  significance  to  the  subject  in  one  of  her  states
and  then  applied  them  to  her  as  stimuli  when  in  a
clifferent  state.  They  found  that  larger  psycho-galvanic
reflexes  were  evoked  by  these  words  than  by  indifferent
words,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  in  the  second  state  the
subject  was  amnesic  to  and  ignorant  of  the  incidents
which,  experienced  in  the  first  state,  had  invested  the
words  with  their  significance.

All  the  available  evidence  suggests,  therefore,  that  if
the  "  control "  of  mediumistic  trance  is  no  more  than  a
secondary  personality  of  the  medium,  we  ought  to  obtain
substantially  identical  series  of  reactions  no  matter  whether
the  stimuli  are  applied  to  the  normal  or  to  the  control
personality.

It  would,  of  course,  be  very  desirable  to  confirm  this
by  comparative  experiments  on  subjects  whose  mutations
of  personality  are  without  doubt  purely  pathological ;  but
such  cases  are  rare.

I  may  point  out  here  that  it  is  quite  possible  that
a  "  general "'  control  might  give  reactions  substantially
identical  with  those  of  the  normal  medium,  while  a
"  personal "  control  might  give  quite  difi^erent  results.
If  this  were  so  we  should  have  good  reason  for  supposing
that  the  former  is  a  secondary  personality  and  the  latter
really  the  separate  individual  which  it  purports  to  be.

I  myself  anticipate  with  some  confidence  that  ' '  general
controls  would  prove to be  secondary  personalities,  but
the  issue  seems  more  doubtful  in  the  case  of  "  personal
controls.

I  need  hardly  add  that  to  prove  that  either  or  both
varieties  of  control  are  merely  secondary  personalities
would  still  leave  open  the  problem  of  the  ultmiate  origin
of  evidential  matter.

I  have  necessarily  omitted  to  deal  with  many  details

^Journal,  of  Abnormal  Psychology,  1908.


Lxxxi.] Suggested  New  Method  of  Research.  411

of  technique  and.  procedure  which  it  would  be  necessary
to  consider  in  the  actual  application  of  this  method  to  a
concrete  case.  Nor  have  I  discussed  various  incidental
ways — such  as  the  study  of  the  "  reaction  type  " — -in
which  the  experiment  might  throw  additional  light  on  the
problems  concerned.  The  object  of  this  paper  is  not  to
deal  exhaustively  with  technical  points,  but  rather  to
explain  the  general  nature  of  the  proposed  method  of
experiment  and  of  the  results  which  may  reasonably  be
expected  to  accrue  from  its  application.

The  chief  advantages  which  the  method  offers  appear
to  me  to  be  as  follows  :  .  ■:

(i)  It  is  an  entirely  new  line  of  attack.

(ii)  The psycho -galvanic reactions observed are  not

under  voluntary  control  and  fraud  is,  therefore,
automatically  and  completely  excluded.

(iii)  The  method  is  strictly  scientific  and  psychological.

It  is  entirely  objective  ;  measurements  are  read
off  a  scale  and  subjected  to  purely  mathematical
treatment ;  no  element  of  judgment  or  inter-
pretation enters  into  the  experiment  at  all.  The
results  cannot,  therefore,  be  influenced  by  any
subjective  bias  on  the  part  of  the  experimenters,
whether  conscious  or  unconscious.

(iv)  The experiment does not depend on  obtaining

"  evidential  material "'  of  any  kind.  The  usual
complications  and  uncertainties  arising  from  the
possibility  of  cryptomnesia  and  telepathy  are  there-
fore absent.

(v)  The experiment can be repeated as often as  is

required  with  any  number  of  different  mediums.
Provided  that  the  same  hst  of  words  is  always
used,  the  results  may  be  collated  no  matter  from
what  different  sources  or  at  what  intervals  of
time  they  are  obtained.

(vi)  Whatever the nature of the conclusions  which

might  be  drawn  from  the  experiment,  critics
could  be  provided  with  complete  data,  in  the  form
of  definite  measurements  and  calculations  and
invited to repeat the experiment in  their  own


412


W.  Whately  Smith.


[part  LXXXI.j


laboratories.  This  cannot  be  said  of  any  other
method  of  psychical  research,
(vii)  If  occasion  arose  it  would  merely  be  a  matter  of
prolonged  experimentation  to  enable  us  to  state
definitely  the  precise  mathematical  chance  that
a  "  control is  determined  by  a  mass  of  experi-
ence completely  isolated  from  and  independent  of
that  which  determines  the  normal  personality  of
the  medium.  (This  is  equivalent,  in  my  opinion,
to  the  question  of  whether  the  "  control "  is
really  to  be  regarded  as  an  independent  person-
ality. )

In  view  of  these  considerations  I  suggest  that  an  early
opportunity  might  profitably  be  sought  for  applying  the
method  to  the  investigation  of  a  suitable  case  of  trance-
mediumship.  •  >  a


APPENDIX.


1.  Letter  from  the  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour  to
Mr.  Whately  Smith.

Fisher"s  Hell,  Woking,
February  17,  1921.

Dear  Mr.  Whately  Smith,

Your  interesting '  Paper  on  A  Suggested  Neiv  Method
of  Research  has  been  sent  to  me  in  proof,  and  as  you  asked
me  to  let  you  have  any  criticisms  of  it  which  occurred  to
me,  you  may  perhaps  think  the  following  remarks  worthy
of  your  consideration.

Your  argument  requires  us  to  accept  as  scientifically  esta-
blished that,  in  the  case  of  secondary  personalities  recognised
as  such,  substantially  identical  series  of  reactions  are  regularly
obtained  to  whatever  state  "  of  the  individual  the  stimuli
are  applied.  This  may  be  true,  but  I  venture  to  think  that
far  more  experimental  evidence  is  necessary  before  it  can
be  regarded  as  firmly  established.

Let  us,  however,  assume  it  as  a  working  hypothesis,  and
consider  the  further  conclusions  to  which  you  think  your
proposed  method  of  investigation  may  legitimately  lead.

As  an  illustration,  suppose  the  method  apiDlied  to  Mrs.
Leonard  and  to  Feda,  and  that  substantially  identical  reactions
are  obtained  from  Feda  and  from  the  medium  in  her  normal
state.  This  would  show  that,  so  far  as  the  method  ivent,
no  distinction  could  be  d^a^^^l  between  the  case  of  Feda  and
that  of  the  undoubted  secondary  personalities  hitherto  experi-
mented upon.  But  it  would  not,  and  could  not,  prove  that
Feda  was  not  an  independent  conscious  personality  "  control-
ling "  the  medium,  unless  we  make  the  further  assumption
that  such  an  independently  conscious  personality  would  exhibit
the  same  kind  of  difference  in  the sizes of its  reactions  as

413


414


W.  Whately  Smith.


[part


compared  with  those  of  the  medium  as  is  found  to  exist
between  two  individuals  with  two  distinct  bodies.  Now  this
is  a  very  big  assumption  indeed  ;  for  whatever  the  nature
of  the  contiol  may  be,  it  is  of  the  essence  of  the  case  that
control  and  medium,  at  all  events  for  the  time  being,  have
a  single  body  in  common.

Next  suppose  that  the  reaction  series  obtained  showed
differences  similar  to  those  presented  by  two  normal  individuals.
From  this  it  would  be  legitimate  to  conclude  that  the  nature
of  the  dissociation  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Leonard  and  Feda
was  different  from  that  observed  in  admitted  cases  of  double
personality.  But  it  would  not  be  safe  to  go  further  and  infer
that  Feda  was  an  independent  personality  controlling  Mrs.
Leonard.  For  it  would  still  be  possible  to  contend  that  a
difference  in  the  nature  of  the  dissociation  was  of  itself
sufficient  to  account  for  the  differences  in  the  reaction  series.

By  far  the  most  interesting  case  would  arise  if  the  reaction
series  were  found  to  be  substantially  the  same  as  between
Feda  and  the  medium,  and  substantially  different  as  between
Feda  and  (say)  A.  V.  B.  when  in  full  control.  This  would
certainly  be  suggestive  ;  but  even  in  that  event  I  am  not
quite  clear  what  conclusions  respecting  the  nature  of  the  two
controls  could  properly  be  drawn  from  it.

Please  understand  that  I  am  far  from  saying  that  the
experiments  you  suggest  are  not  well  worth  making,  if  it  is
found  possible  to  make  them.  Only  I  doubt  whether  they  are
capable  of  throwing  as  much  light  on  the  question  you  particu-
larly wish  to  resolve  as  I  gather  from  your  Paper  you  anticipate.

Believe  me.  Yours  very  truly,  G.  W.  Balfoctk.


2.  Mr.  Whately  Smith's  Reply.

42  Trumpington  Street,
Cambridge,  February  21,  1921.

Dear  Mr.  Balfour,

I  am  very  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  valuable
criticisms  of  my  paper.  In  answer  to  them  I  should  like
to  say,  first  of  all,  that  I  do  not  claim  that  experiments  on


Lxxxi.] Suggested  Neic  Method  of  Research. Ajyperidix.  415


the  lines  suggested  would  be  conclusive  ;  but  I  believe  that
they  are  capable  of  giving  fairly  reliable  indications  which  will
assist  us  in  forming  judgments  about  the  i^roblems  involved.

I  quite  agree  that  much  more  experimental  evidence  is
needed  before  we  can  regard  the  substantial  identity  of  the
reactions  obtained  from  two  alternatmg  personalities  Ioiowti
to  be  pathological  as  an  invariable  feature  of  such  states.
But,  as  pointed  out  in  my  paper,  all  the  available  evidence
points  this  way  at  present.

I  do  not  think  that  the  fact  of  the  control  using  the
medium's  body  invalidates  the  assumption  (I  should  prefer
to  say  the  presumption)  that  the  former,  if  an  independent
entity,  would  give  reactions  different  from  those  of  the  medium.
This,  surely,  A\ould  only  obtain  if  the  control  were  also  using
the  medium's  7m7id.  For  the  magnitude  of  the  reaction  to
a  given  word  depends  on  that  word's  emotional  significance
which,  in  turn,  is  determined  by  the  associations  which  the
word  has  acquired  as  a  result  of  the  individual's  experience.
If  the  experiences  of  medium  and  control  are  identical  I  cannot
see  how  one  can  call  them  separate  personalities  and.  if
different,  then  the  emotional  significance  of  various  words
and  the  magnitudes  of  the  corresponding  reactions  should  be
different  also.

It  is,  of  course,  possible — though  not,  I  think,  probable —
that  the  medium's  mind  is  implicated  in  the  process  of  control
as  well  as  her  body  (assuming  the  existence  of  discarnate
entities)  and  if  this  is  so  one  would  expect  that  the  stimulus
words  giving  large  reactions  with  the  medium  in  her  normal
state  would  do  so  also  when  under  control,  but  that  one
would  find,  in  addition,  other  large  reactions  peculiar  to  the
control  herself.  Careful  comparison  of  the  records  should
make  it  possible  to  detect  this,  although  the  quantitative
indications  of  the  correlation  coefficient  would  be  obscured.

I  think  the  whole  value  of  the  method  really  turns  on  the
question  of  whether  the  dissociation  which  gives  rise  to
alternating  personalities  of  the  pathological  order  can  result
in  the  segregation  of  masses  of  experience  into  water-tight
conpartments  "  in  such  a  way  as  to  render  the  various
complexes  and  constellations  inaccessible,  or  accessible  in  a
markedly  lessened  degree,  to  stimulus  words. To  discuss  this


416


W.  Whately  Smith.


[part  lxxxi.]


thoroughly would necessitate an exhaustive  psychological
treatise,  but  so  far  as  I  can  ascertain  there  is  no  reason  for
supposmg  it  to  be  the  case. On  the  contrary,  all  the  facts
of Hypnosis, Dream, Psycho-analytic procedure.  Amnesias,
Cryptomnesias,  Multiple personalities, Hysteria, etc.,  seem  to
me  to  indicate  that  although  considerable  tracts  of  experience  I
may, by repression, be rendered incapable of coming into  i
consciousness  they  are  none  the  less  readily  accessible  to  the  i
appropriate  stimuli  and  capable  of  exerting  their  full  influence
upon  the  reactions  and  behaviour  of  the  individual.  i
This  view I  hope  shortly  to  justify  in  detail  in  another  |
place.

With  renewed  thanks  for  your  letter. — Yours  very  truly,

W.  Whately  Smith.


FORMER  PRESIDENTS  OF  THE  SOCIETY  FOR  PSTCHICAL  RESEARCH.


Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  -  1882-84.
Professor  Baifour  Stewart,

F.R.S., 1885-87.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  -  1888-92.
The  Right  Hon.  a.  J.  Balfofr,

M.P.,  O.M..  F.R.S., - - -  1893.
Professor  William  James,  - -  1894-95.
Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  1896-99.
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,- - -  1900.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.  -  1901-03.

SiE  William  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  -  1904.
Professor  Charles  Richet,  -  -  1905.
The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,-  1906-07.


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  -
H.  Arthur  Smith,  -

Andrew  Lang.

Rt.  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Car-
penter, D.D., - - -  .
Professor  Henri  Bergson,  -
F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc,  -
Professor Gilbert  Murray,

LL.D.,  Litt.D..
L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D..  D.D.,  -
The  Ut.  Hon.  lord  Rayleigh,

O  M.,  F.R.S., - - -  -
W. McDougall,  F.R.S.,  M.Sc,
M.B., - - - -  -


1908-09.

1910.

1911.

1912.
1913.
1914.

1915-10.
1917-18.

1919.
1920.


OFFICERS  AND  COUNCIL  FOR  1921.

PRESIDENT.
Wm.  M'Dougall,  F.E.S.,  M.Sc,  M.B.


VICE-PRESIDENTS.


Et.  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  O.M.,
F.R.S.

Kt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.

Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.

George  B.  Dorr.

L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.,  D.D.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  D.Sc.


Professor  Gilbert  Murray,  LL.D.
Litt.D.

J.  G.  PiDDIXGTON.

F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  D.Litt.,LL.D.

Sir  J.  J.  Thomson,  O.M.  F.R.S.


COUNCIL.


W.  W.  Baggallt.

The  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.

Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.

Rev.  M.  a.  Bayfield.

Sir  George  Beilby,  F.R.S.,  LL.D.

Captain  Ernest  N.  Bennett.

The  Hon.  Everard  Feilding.

L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.,  D.D.

Sir  Lawrence  J.  Jones,  Bakt.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.

T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


Pro  F.Gilbert  Murray,  LL.D., Litt.D.

J.  G.  Piddington.

Miss  M.  Radcltffe-Hall

W.  H.  Salter.

F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.

Sydney  C.  Scott.

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  D.Litt.,LL.D.
W.  Whately  Smith.
Charles  Lloyd  Tdckey',  M.D,
V.  J.  Woolley,  M.D.
M.  B.  Wright,  M.D.


HON.  TREASURER.

W.  H.  Salter,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.

HON.  SECRETARIES.

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.
V.  J.  Woolley-,  M.D.,  St.  Thomas's  Hospital,  London,  S.E.

HON.  EDITOR  AND  RESEARCH  OFFICER.
Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.

SECRETARY  AND  LIBRARIAN.
Miss  I.  Newton,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.

AGENTS  FOR  AMERICA.
The  F.  W.  Faxon  Co.,  83  Francis  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

2e


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.


July,  1921.

President— Wm.  M'Dougall,  F.R.S.,  M.Sc,  M.B.

Vice-Pkbsidents.

The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  4  Carlton

Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,  Fishers  Hill,  Wokmg,  Surrey.
Sir  WiUiam  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  31  Devonshire  Place,  London,  W.  1.
George  B. Dorr, 18  Commonwealth  Avenue, Boston,  Mass.,

U.S.A.

L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.,  D.D.,  Shotover  Edge,  Headmgton,  Oxford.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  Normanton,  Lake,  Nr.  Salisbury.
Professor  Gilbert  Murray,  LL.D.,  Litt.D.,  82  Woodstock  Road,
Oxford.

J.  G.  Piddington,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.
F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  D.Litt.,  LL.D.,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,
W.  1.

Sir  J.  J.  Thomson,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  Truiity  Lodge,  Cambridge.

Honorary  Members.

Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  31  Devonshire  Place,  London,  W.  L
Madame  Curie,  Faculte  des  Sciences  de  Paris,  Laboratoire  de

Physique  Generale,  12  rue  Cuvier,  Paris.
Miss  Alice  Johnson,  Meadowside,  Grantchester  Meadows,  Cam-
bridge.

Count Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  c/o  Madame  Woyevodsky,

25  Dawson  Place,  London,  W.  2.
Sir  Joseph  J.  Thomson,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  Trinity  Lodge,  Cambridge.


420


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Corresponding  Members.

Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa  906,  Rio  Janeiro.

Professor  H.  Beaunis,  Villa  Printemj)s,  Le  Cannet  (Alpes  Mari-

times),  France.
Professor  Henri  Bergson,  32  Rue  Vital,  Paris.

President  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  University,  New  York,
U.S.A.

Dr.  Max  Dessoir,  Speyererstrasse  9,  Berlin,  W.

Professor  Dr.  Freud,  ix.,  Berggasse  19,  Vienna.

President  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

^Irs.  William  James,  95  Irving  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Professor  Pierre  Janet,  54  Rue  de  Varenne,  VII'^,  Paris.

Dr.  C.  G.  Jung,  Seestrasse  228,  Kusnacht,  E.  Zurich,  Switzerland.

M.  Maurice  Maeterlinck,  32  rue  Perronet,  Neuilly-s.-S.,  France.

Professor  Wm.  Romaine  Newbold,  Ph.D.,  Univ.  of  Pennsylvania,

Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Dr.  Morton  Prince,  458  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Dr.  Walter  F.  Prince,  c/o  The  American  Society  for  Psychical

Research,  44  East  23rd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Professor  Charles  Richet,  15  Rue  de  I'Universite,  Paris.
Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  3  Max  Joseph  Strasse,  Munich.

Honorary  Associates.
Alrutz,  Dr.  Sydney,  Upsala,  Sweden.

Bx'owning,  Oscar,  Palazzo  Simonetti,  via  Pietro  Cavallmi,  Rome.
Dallas,  Miss  H.  A.,  Innisfail,  Crawley,  Sussex.

Falcomer,  Professor  M.  T.,  Regio  Institute  Tecnico  e  Nautico,
Venice.

Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  63  Newbridge  Road,  Bath.
Gow,  David,  5  Queen  Square,  Southampton  Row,  London,  W.C.  1.
Grubb,  Edward,  9  SoUershott  West,  Letchworth,  Herts.
Hill,  J.  Ai'thur,  Claremont,  Thornton,  Bradford.
Muirhead,  Professor  J.  H.,  The  Rowans,  Balsall  Common,  nr.
Coventry.

Sage,  M.,  33  Rue  de  Coulmiers,  XIV^  Arrt.,  Paris.

Stawell,  Miss  F.  Melian,  33  Ladbroke  Square,  Notting  Hill  Gate,

London,  W.  11.
van  Eeden,  Frederik,  M.D.,  Walden,  Bussum,  Holland.


lxxxl]


Members  and  Associates.


421


Members  and  Associates.

A7i  asterisk  is  prefixed  io  the  names  of  Members.

Abemethy,  jNIrs.,  Foreland,  The  Park,  Cheltenham.
Acland-Hood,  Lady  Helena.

Adair,  Desmond,  Little  Flixton,  Forest  Road,  Worthing.
Adamson, T., 16  Dominion Buildings, Edmonton,  Alberta,
Canada.

*Agar,  JVIrs.  J.  S.,  c/o  Messrs.  Agar,  Cross  &  Co.,  Carlton  House,

llD  Eegent  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
Agelasto,  Michael  A.,  Armstead  Bridge  Court,  Apt.  206,  Armstead

Bridge  Road,  Norfolk,  Va.,  U.S.A.
Aglen,  F.A.,  Inspectorate  General  of  Customs,  Peking,  China.
Albree,  John,  Swampscott,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Alden,  H.  W.,  21  Edison  Avenue,  Detroit,  Michigan,  U.S.A.
Alexander,  Professor  S.,  Victoria  University,  Manchester.
Allan,  Miss  J.,  Torrance,  East  Kilbride,  Lanarkshire.
Allan,  Percy,  M.D.,  Crogdene,  Croham  Road,  South  Croydon,

Surrey.

Allen,  B.  M.,  14  Gainsborough  Gardens,  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.  3.

Allen,  Professor  H.  J.,  c/o  The  National  Bank  of  India,  26  Bishops-
gate,  London,  E.G.  2.
Allen,  WiUiam,  M.B.,  20  Sandyford  Place,  Glasgow.
Alston,  iVIrs.  Rowland,

*Ames,  Major  C.  G.,  East  India  United  Service  Club,  16  St.  James's

Square,  London,  S.W.  1.
^Anderson,  Lady,  Ballydavid,  Waterford,  Ireland.
Anderson,  Mrs.,  Brackenboro',  Bramhall,  Cheshire.
Anderson,  Brig.-General  A.  T.,  R.A.,  Low  Hill  House,  Spetchley,
Worcester.

Anderson,  F.,  2  South  Troy  Avenue,  Ventnor  City,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
Anderson,  Mrs.  Henry  C,  25  Fountainhall  Road,  Edinburgh.
*Andersson,  C.  R.,  Koping,  Sweden.

Andrews,  Dr.  Marion  B.,  73  Shrubbery  Avenue,  Worcester.
Anstey,  Lieut. -Colonel  E.  C,  R.A.,  Junior  Naval  and  MiUtary

Club,  96  Piccadilly,  London,  W.  1.
*Appleby,  Joseph,  Famley,  Great  Crosby,  Liverpool.
Armstrong,  Charles  W.,  Caixa  196,  S.  Paulo,  Brazil.


422


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Armstrong,  Miss  M.  M.,  57  Redington  Road,  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.  3.

Arnold,  Mrs.  A.  E.,  98  Masbro'  Road,  London,  W.  14.
=^Arnold-Forster,  Mrs.  H.  0.,  Basset  Down,  Swindon,  Wilts.
Ashcroft,  Mrs.,  Ladies'  Athenaeum  Club,  32  Dover  Street,  London,
W.  1.

*Ashcroft,  Rev.  Harold,  Wesley  College  House,  Royapettah,  Madras,
S.  India.

*Aspland,  George  D.,  10  Elsworthy  Road,  London,  N.W.  3.
*Assheton-Smith,  Lady,  c/o  Lady  Montgomery,  25  Bruton  Street,
London,  W.  L

Atwater,  Horace  G.,  Norfolk,  St.  LaAvrence  Co.,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
*Auden,  Harold  A.,  Studley,  Whitehedge  Road,  Garston,  Liverpool.

Aune,  E.,  Raub,  Pahang,  Federated  Malay  States.
*Aiin6n,  Marquis  de,  Palazzo  di  Spagna,  Rome.

Austen,  Harold  W.  C,  M.D.,  2  Freeland  Road,  Ealing,  London,
W.  5.

Babcock,  Mrs.  Bernie,  512  Palm  Street,  Little  Rock,  Arkansas,
U.S.A.

Bacon,  Mrs.  Sewell,  Highground,  Waterford  Rd.,  Oxton,  Birken-
head, Cheshire.

*Baddeley,  Colonel  C.  E.,  C.M.G.,  1  Glyn  Mansions,  Addison  Bridge,

London,  W.  14.
Baddeley,  Miss  Florence  A.,  Cathedral  House,  Gloucester.
*Baggally,  Wortley  W.,  7  Sillwood  Place,  Brighton.
Baggally,  Mrs.  W.  W.,  7  Sillwood  Place,  Brighton.
*Baha,  M.,  c/o  Librairie  Ikbal,  2  Sublime  Porte,  Constantinople.
Turkey.

Baikie,  W.  S.,  Southend,  Stromness,  Orkney  Islands.
Bailey,  Cyril,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.
Bailey,  Hon.  Mabel,  Hay  Castle,  Hay,  by  Hereford.
*Bailey,  Professor  T.  P.,  University  of  the  South,  Sewanee,  Tenn.,
U.S.A.

Baker,  Alfred,  L.,  141  So  La  Salle  Street,  Chicago,  lU.,  U.S.A.
■"^Baker,  Mrs.  Charles,  27  Kensington  Gardens  Square,  London,
W.  2.

*Baker,  Rev.  F.  C,  69  Cunningham  Park,  Harrow,  Middlesex.
Baker,  Miss  Mabel,  21  Landsdowne  Avenue,  Slough,  Bucks.
*Baldwin,  Mrs.,  1  Gloucester  Place,  London,  W.  1.
*Balfour,  Miss,  4  Carlton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.


LXXXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


423


*Balfour,  Right  Hon.  A.  J.,  M.P.,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  4  Carlton  Gardens,

London,  S.W.  1.
*Balfour,  Right  Hon.  G.  W.,  Fishers  HiU,  Wokmg,  Surrey.

Banner,  Mrs.,  Triven,  Benson-on-Thames,  WaUingford,  Berks.
*Barcellos,  A.  M.  S.,  77  Fort  Street,  GeorgetowTi,  British  Guiana.

Barclay,  Edwyn,  8  Egerton  Terrace,  London,  S.W.  3.

Barclay,  Mrs.  Edwyn,  8  Egerton  Terrace,  London,  S.W.  3.

Baretti,  Mrs.,  156  Mill  Lane,  West  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.  6.
*Barker,  Mrs.  C.  F.,  Gladstone  Hotel,  Chicago,  III,  U.S.A.

Barkley,  Dr.  M.,  Box  162,  Carlyle,  111.,  U.S.A.

Barkworth,  Mrs.,  Ladies'  Imperial  Club,  17  Dover  Street,  London,
W.  1.

*Barlow,  Miss  Katharine,  St.  Valerie,  Bray,  Co.  Wicklow,  Ireland.

Barrett,  Lady,  M.D.,  31  Devonshire  Place,  London,  W.  1.
*Barritt,  E.  H.,  J.P.,  White  House,  Layer  Breton,  Kelvedon.
*Barrow,  J.  R.,  Chittagong,  Bengal,  India.

Baruch,  Edgar,  563  I.  W.  Hellman  Building,  Los  Angeles.  Cal.,
U.S.A.

Basden,  Miss  Isabel  K.,  21  The  Drive,  Hove,  Sussex.
*Batchelor,  E.,  I.C.S..  Chhindwara,  Central  Provinces,  IncUa.
*Bates,  J.  Edwin,  M.B.,  55  Murray  Road,  Wimbledon,  London,
S.W.  19.

*Battersea,  The  Lady,  Aston  Cluiton,  Trmg,  Herts.
*Batty,  IVIrs.  V.  Roy,  40  Harley  House,  Regent's  Park,  London,
N.W.  1.

*Bayley,  Weston  D.,  M.D.,  1524  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Bayfield,  L.  Arthur.  Park  Grange,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
*Bayfield,  Rev.  M.  A.,  The  Rectory,  Hertingfordbury,  Hertford.

Baynes,  W.  E.  C,  Assiut,  Upper  Egypt.
*Bazett,  Miss  L.  Margery,  The  Firs,  Redhill,  Surrey.
*Beadon,  Mrs.,  at  11  Cheyne  Walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Beattie,  Ivor  Hamilton.

*Beckett,  W.  N.,  D.Sc,  Lieut.  R.N.,  c/o  Messrs.  Stilwell  &  Sons,

42  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Beenhouwer,  J.,  4  Wesperzijde,  Amsterdam,  Holland.
*Behrens,  Captain  Clive,  Swinton  Grange,  Malton,  Yorks.

Behrens,  Noel  Edward.
*Beilby,  Sir  George,  F.R.S.,  LL.D.,  11  University  Gardens,  Glasgow.

Belaribi,  Mrs.,  Bartlands,  Holt  Heath,  Worcestershire.


424


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Bell,  Miss  Alison  H.,  Exmoor,  Quickley  Lane,  Chorley  Wood,  Herts.
*Bell,  Dr.  Mary  C,  17  Gower  Street,  London,  W.C.  1.
*Benedict,  Professor  H.  Y..  University  of  Texas,  Austin,  Texas,
U.S.A.

Bennett,  Colin  N.,  Escot,  Penzance,  Cornwall.
*Bennett,  Captain  E.  N.,  12  Prince  Arthur  Road,  Hampstead.
London,  N.W.  3.

*Bennett,  Mrs.  E.  N..  12  Prince  Arthur  Road,  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.  3.

*Bennett,  Captain  John  G.,  Aviemore,  Cambridge  Road,  Wimbledon,
London,  S.W.  20.
Benson,  Miss  A.  M.,  M.D.,  c/o  Messrs.  H.  S.  King  &  Co.,  65  Cornhill,
London,  E.C.  3.

Benson,  Arthur  C,  C.V.O.,  The  Old  Lodge,  Magdalene  College,
Cambridge.

*Benson,  E.  F.,  25  Brompton  Square,  London,  S.W.  3.

Benton,  Dr.  J.  R.,  Gainesville,  Florida,  U.S.A.
*Benton,  W.  E.,  18  Emanuel  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.  3.
*Beresford,  J.  D.,The  White  House,  East  Claydon,  Wmslow,  Bucks.

Bergen,  Axel  von.  Abbey  Road,  Darhngton,  Durham.

Berrington,  Rev.  Leslie  G.,  Churchover  Rectory,  Rugby.
*Berry,  Mrs.  F.  M.  Dickinson, M.D., 21  Wimpole  Street, London,  W.  1.
*Bertie,  L.  W.  H.,  M.A.,  The  Nook,  110  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.

Betton,  C.  Steuart,  c/o  Grindlay  &  Co.,  54  Parliament  Street,
London,  S.W.  1.

Bevan,  Arthur  0.,  Tow-iisend  House,  Nantmch,  Cheshire.

Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131  Gloucester  Road,  London,  S.W.  7.

Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9  Rutland  Gate,  London,  S.W.  7.

Bibesco,  H.H.  Prince  Antoine,  114  Grosvenor  Road,  London,
S.W.  1.

Bidder,  George  P.,  Cavendish  Corner,  Hills  Road,  Cambridge.
*Bigg,  Miss  Louisa,  2  York  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.  1.
*Binney,  Lady  Marjory,  Pamj^isford  Hall,  nr.  Cambridge.
*Binney,  Rev.  Maximilian  F.  B.,  The  Vicarage,  Ringwood,  Hants.

Black,  Mrs.,  24  Abbey  Buildings,  Tower  Bridge  Road,  London,
S.E.  1.

Blackburn,  A.  J.,  Aruba  House,  The  Leazes,  Burnopfield,  Durham.
Blacklock,  Miss  C,  Lewie,  Ditchlmg,  Hassocks,  Sussex.
Blane,  Miss  Edith  H.,16  St.  Augustine's  Mansions,  Vincent  Street,
London,  S.W.  1.


lxxxl]


Members  and  Associates.


425


Blathwayt,  W.,  Eagle  House,  Batheaston,  Bath.
Bligh,  Stanley  M.,  28  Grosvenor  Road,  London,  S.W.  1.
Bloemfontein,  The  Right  Rev.  the  Lord  Bishop  of,  Bishop's  Lodge,

Bloemfontein,  O.R.C.,  S.  Africa.
Bois,  H.  G.,  c/o  Messrs.  Robertson  Bois  &  Co.,  12  Fenchurch

Street,  London,  E.G.  3.
*Bolton,  Edward  J.,  Wood  Bank,  Oakamoor,  N.  Staffs.
Bond,  F.  Bligh,  F.R.I.B.A.,  Cintra  Lawn,  St.  Mark's,  Cheltenham.
*Bond,  Major  W.  C,  O.B.E.,  Shalesbrook,  Forest  Row,  Sussex.
Bond,  Mrs.  W.  C,  Shalesbrook,  Forest  Row,  Sussex.
Bonus,  A.  R.,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,

S.W.  1.

Boothroyd,  A.  E.,  c/o  Mrs.  Dore,  64  Redington  Road,  Hampstead,

London,  N.W.  3.
Booyalsky,  Jean  de,  54  Rue  de  la  Liberte,  Liege,  Belgium.
Bosanquet,  Miss  Theodora,  38  Cheyne  Walk,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Boustead,  IVIrs.,  9  Rutland  House,  Cheniston  Gardens,  Kensington,

London,  W.  8.

Bouwens, B. G.,  Old  Manor House, Littleton,  Shepperton,
Middlesex.

Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  Careys,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.
*Bowditch,  C.  P.,  Ill  Devonshire  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Bow-en,  Miss  Anna  C,  210  E.  Main  Street,  Batavia,  N.y.,  U.S.A.

Bower,  James  Garton,  Junr.,  Earlham  House,  Norwich.
*Bowyer,  John  F.,  Lieut.,  R.N.,  53  Evelyn  Gardens,  Kensington,
London,  S.W.  7

*Bowyer,  Mrs.  John  F.,  53  EveljTi  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,
S.W.  7.

*Bowyer,  Lieut. -Colonel  W.  G.,  Weston  Manor,  OLney,  Bucks.
*Bowyer,  Mrs.  W.  G.,  Weston  Manor,  Olney,  Bucks.

Box,  Alfred  Marshall,  Woodlands,  14  Magrath  Avenue,  Cambridge.

Boxer,  Miss  Cecile  F.,  Firwood,  Alum  Chine,  West  Bournemouth.

Boxer,  Major  H.  C,  Firwood,  Alum  Chine,  West  Bournemouth.

Brabrook,  Sir  Edward  W.,  C.B.,  Langham  House,  Wallington.
*Bradley,  Miss  A.  A.,  Hingham,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Bradley,  Professor  A.  C,  54  Scarsdale  Villas,  Kensington,  London,
W.  8.

Bradley,  F.  H.,  Merton  College,  Oxford.
*Brandt,  Rudolph  E.,  4  Fenchurch  Avenue,  London,  E.C.  3.
Bray,  F.  E.,  17  The  Boltons.  London,  S.W.  10.


426


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Brewster,  Bertram,  59  Madeley  Road,  Ealing,  London,  W.  5.
Brierley,  Mrs.  D.  F.,  21  Woodville  Gardens,  Ealing,  London,
W.5.

Bristowe,  The  Hon.  L.  S.,  Le  Chalet,  Fermain  Bay,  Guernsey.
*Broad,  C.  D.,  Litt.D.,  159  South  Street,  St.  Anckews.
Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama,  U.S.A.
Brooke,  Colonel  C.  K.,  Army  and  Navy  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.  1.

Brooke,  E.  G.  de  C,  Brushford,  Dulverton,  Devonshire.
*Brooke,  J.  R.,  1  Mitre  Court  Buildings,  Tem^^le,  London,  E.C.  4.
*Brooks,  R.  Birkett,  R.N.,  The  Chantry,  Hoby,  Leicester.

Brown,  Captain  A.  D.  Burnett,  M.C.,  Greenhurst,  Beaconsfield,
Bucks.

*Brown,  B.  G.,  46  Regent  s  Park  Road,  London,  N.W.  L
*Brown,  B.  H.  Inness,  24  Broad  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Brown,  Charles,  M.B.,  Inglewood,  Pathhead,  Kirkcaldy.

Bro^vn,  Mrs.  Frank  Clifton,  Stanford  Place,  Faringdon,  Berks.
*Brown,  Haydn,  L.R.C.P.,  Manor  Lodge,  Chislehurst,  Kent.
*Brown,  Wm.,  M.D.,  D.Sc,  14  Welbeck  Street,  Cavendish  Square,
London,  W.  1.

Browne,  Professor  Edward  G.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cam-
bridge.

*Browne, Rev.  Geoffrey  E., 19  Elm  Park  Gardens,  London,
S.W.  10.

Browne,  0.  H.,  Hyderabad,  Deccan,  India.

*Browne, Mrs. A. Scott, Buckland Filleigh,  Highampton,
N.  Devon.

Brownrigg,  Lady,  White  Waltham,  Maidenhead,  Berks.
*Bryans,  G.,  Court  Royal,  King's  Cliffe,  Brighton.
*Bubb,  Henry,  J.P.,  UUenwood,  near  Cheltenham.
*Buchan,  Mrs.  J.,  Elsfield  Manor,  Oxford.

*Buchanan,  Lieut. -Colonel  H.  M.,  Medical  Headquarters,  4th  N.Z,

Inf.  (Res.)  Brigade,  Sling  Camjo.  Bulford,  Salisbury.
*Buist,  Mrs.,  Swalcliffe  Lea,  Banbury,  Oxon.
Bullard,  Dr.  W.  N.,  89  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Buller,  Professor  A.  H.  Reginald,  University  of  Manitoba,  Winnipeg,
Canada.

*Bulley,  Mi'S.  Arthur,  Ness,  Neston,  Cheshire.
*Bullough,  Edward,  6  Huntingdon  Road,  Cambridge.
Burnett,  Miss  Ethel,  Crathes  Castle,  Crathes,  N.B.


LXXXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


427


Burnham,  Mrs.,  Staindrop  Lodge,  Chaiaeltovra,  Sheffield.

Burns,  Nesbitt,  M.B.,  The  Lodge,  Highbridge,  Somerset.

Burrard,  JMrs.  Charles,  c/o  Lloyds  Bank,  Ivnightsbridge  Branch,
Brompton  Road,  London,  S.W.  1.

Burton,  Mrs.  Harry,  25  via  dei  Bardi,  Florence,  Italy.
*Bury,  Henry,  Mayfield  House.  Farnham,  Surrey.

Bury,  Mrs.  Henry,  Mayfield  House,  Farnham,  Surrey.
*Bush,  E.,  11  Silver  Street,  Wakefield,  Yorks.

Bushell,  Miss  S.  D.,  The  Hermitage,  Harrow-on-the-Hill.
*Busk,  Mrs.,  6  Wadliam  Gardens,  London,  N.W.  3.

Butler,  Mrs.  Charles,  Rock  House,  Chudleigh,  Devon.

Butt,  Lady,  c/o  London  Joint  City  &  Midland  Bank,  South  Ken-
sington Branch,  Gloucester  Road,  London,  S.W.  7.

Buttemer,  Robert  Wm.,  St.  Mary's,  Godalming,  Surrey.

Butterworth,  Miss  A.  M.,  9  Huskisson  Street,  Liverj^ool.

Caccia,  Major  A.  M.,  7  Norham  Gardens,  Oxford.

Cadell,  Mrs.  Lewis,  Brae  Lodge,  Murrayfield,  Edinburgh.

Caird,  Mrs.  Henryson,  34  Woronzow  Road,  St.  John's  Wood,
London,  N.W.  8.

Cairns,  Rev.  David  S.,  D.D.,  62  Hamilton  Place,  Aberdeen.

Call,  Major  Felix,  D.S.O.,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co.,  16  Charing

Cross,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Campbell,  Lady  Archibald,  Coombe  Hill  Farm,  Kingston-on-
Thames,  Surrey.

Campbell,  j\Irs.  Burnley,  Ormidale,  Glendaruel,  Colintraive,  Argyll
shire.

*CampbeU,  Mrs.,  Arduaine,  LochgiljDhead,  N.B.
Campbell,  Colin  E.,  9  Lower  Belgrave  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
Campbell,  Rev.  R.  J.,  Christ  Church  Vicarage,  Westminster.
London,  S.W.  1.

*CampbeU-Lang,  Miss,  c/o  Professor  Brunton,  LL.B.,  180  Hope

Street,  Glasgow.
Candler,  H.  A.  W.,  37  Commercial  Road  East,  London,  E.  1.
Candler,  Miss  M.  I.,  37  Commercial  Road  East,  London,  E.  1.
*Carden,  W.  A.,  M.R.C.S.,  BothavUle,  O.F.S.,  S.  Africa.
*Carew,  Mrs.  R.  T.,  Ballydavid,  Waterford,  Ireland.
*Carlton,  Arthur,  J.P.,  Colehurst,  Worcester.
^Carnarvon,  The  Earl  of,  1  Seamore  Place,  London,  W.  1.
*Carpenter,  iVIrs.,  43  Teignmouth  Road,  Cricklewood,  London,

N.W.  2.


428


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Carrington,  Hereward,  Ph.D.,  504  West  111th  Street,  New  York
City,  U.S.A.

Carruthers,  Mrs.  W.,  c/o  Bank  of  Montreal,  9  Waterloo  Place,  Pall
MaU,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Carter,  Mrs.  H.  A.,  Mena  House,  St.  Erth,  Hayle,  Cornwall.

Case,  Miss  A.  J.,  35  Elm  Bank  Mansions,  Barnes,  London,  S.W.  13.

Cathels,  Rev.  David,  The  Manse,  Hawick,  Scotland.

Cave,  Captain  A.  L.,  Sherwood,  Newton  St.  Cyres,  Devon.
*Cave,  Charles  J.  P.,  Stoner  Hill,  Petersfield,  Hants.

Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Alford  House,  Alford,  Somerset.

Chadwick,  Mrs.  EUis,  St.  Moritz,  Parkstone,  Dorset.
*Chadwick,  Miss  M.  W.,  34  Brunswick  Square,  London,  W.C.  1.
*Chambers,  John,  MokojDcka,  Hastings,  Hawkes  Bay,  New  Zealand.
*Champion  de  Crespigny,  Mrs.  Philip,  Artillery  Mansions,  West-
minster, London,  S.W.  1.
*Chanee,  Colonel  H.,  Army  and  Navy  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.I.

*Chapman,  C.  F.,  Susses  Lodge,  Kingston  Hill,  Surrey.
Chapman,  E.  G.,  Belsize,  Friern  Watch  Avenue,  N.  Finchley,
London,  N.  12.

Charles, Clifford P., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., Bancroft,  Hitchin,
Herts.

Charlton,  Miss  Frances  M.,  23  Kensington  Square,  London,  W.  8.
Chatterjee,  A.  K.,  Deputy  Magistrate  and  Collector,  P.O.  Birham-

pur.  District  Murshidabad,  Bengal,  India.
Chattock,  Arthur  P.,  D.Sc,  Heathfield  Cottage,  Crowcombe,  nr.

Taunton,  Somerset.
Cheney,  Dr.  Frederick  E.,  64  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,

Mass.,  U.S.A.

Childe-Pemberton,  Miss  A.  H.,  The  Wyche  Cottage,  Malvern.
Chitty,  Hubert,  M.S.,  M.B.,  46  Pembroke  Road,  Clifton,  Bristol.
Chubb,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Longf organ.  The  Ridgway,  Wimbledon,  London,
S.W.  19.

Clapham,  Mrs.  H.  H.,  50  South  6th  Street,  San  .Jose,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Clapham,  J.  H.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Clark,  Mrs.  Cecil,  c/o  Bank  of  Canada,  Port-of -Spain,  Trinidad,
B.W.I.

Clark,  Rev.  F.  H.  H.,  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge.
*Clarke,  Eno  E.,  5  Prince  s  Gardens,  Ealing,  London,  W.  5.
Clarke,  Ronald  Stanley,  The  Ship  Hotel,  Crediton,  Devon.


LXXXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


429


Clarkson,  Mrs.  St.  John,  8  Milner  Street,  Cadogan  Square,  London,
S.W.  1.

Clay,  The  Hon.  Mrs.,  11  Tite  Street,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
Clayton,  Mrs.  C.  E.,  Holmbush  Lodge,  Woodmancote,  nr.  Henfield,
Sussex.

Clive,  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.
Closson,  Miss  Olivia  T.,  Apt.  405  The  Woodward,  Connecticut

Avenue,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
*Clowes,  Major  C.  E.,  Arthur's  Club,  69  St.  James's  Street,  London,

S.W.  1.

*Clwyd,  Lady,  Brjmgwenallt,  Abergele,  N.  Wales.
Coates,  Mrs.,  Hazel  well,  Cheltenham.

*Coates,  Mrs.  G.,  Hotel  Britannique,  Corso  Vittorio  Emmanuele,
Naples,  Italy.

Cobden- Sanderson,  Mrs.,  15  Upper  Mall,  Hammersmith,  London,
W.  6.

Cockle,  Rev.  Francis  T.,  The  Rectory,  Swinford,  Co.  Mayo,  Ireland.

Coe,  Miss  M.  A.,  195  Via  Le  Alessandro  Villa,  Florence,  Italy.
*Coggin,  Rev.  F.  E.,  White  Lodge,  Meads,  Eastbourne.

Coleridge,  IVIiss  Christabel  R.,  Cheyne,  Torquay.

Collins,  Miss  M.,  29  Glenluce  Road,  Blacklieath,  London,  S.E.  3.
*Collis,  Miss  Beatrix,  74  Walton  Street,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.

Colquhoun,  Daniel,  M.D.,  44  High  Street,  Dunedin,  New  Zealand.

Compton,  Henry,  1709  Sills  Street,  Fort  William,  Ontario,  Canada.
*Connor,  Rev.  John  M.,  D.S.O.,  10  Ormonde  Avenue,  Cathcart,
Glasgow.

♦Constable,  F.  C,  GrenviUe,  Lansdown,  Bath.

Conway,  Lady,  47  Romney  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Cook,  A.  G.  H.,  The  Villa,  Washington,  Co.  Durham.

Cooper,  Rev.  F.  W.,  Prestwich  Rectory,  Manchester.

Cooper,  Mrs.  P.  H.,  283  South  Street,  Morristown,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
*Coote,  J.  F.,  The  White  House,  Coltishall,  Norwich.

Cornford,  Rev.  Bruce,  43  Havelock  Road,  Portsmouth.

Cornish,  J.  Easton,  The  Water  Works,  Alexandria,  Egypt.
*Corry,  Miss  Lucy,  13  Argyll  Road,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.  8.

Cort  van  der  Linden,  P.  W.  A.,  Councillor  of  State,  59  Koning-

innegraeht.  The  Hague.
*Cory,  Mrs.,  7  Ferry  End,  Bray-on-Thames,  Berks.

Cotesworth,  Miss  Lihas  E.,  45  Westminster  Mansions,  Great  Smith
Street,  London,  S.W.  1.


430


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Cotterell,  Miss  Alice,  1g  Montagu  Mansions,  Portman  Square,

London,  W.  1.
*Courage,  Mrs.,  The  Mount,  Ifielcl,  Crawley,  Sussex.
*Cowan,  Sir  W.  H. ,  M.P. .  The  Crow's  Nest,  Fairwarp,  Uckfield,  Sussex.
Cox,  Mrs. Eowland, 310 West 7th  Street, Plainfield,  N.J.,
U.S.A.

Coxe,  Henry  R.  H.,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  &  Co.,  54  Parliament

Street,  London,  S.W.  L
Cozens,  J.  C,  Brigus,  Conception  Bay,  Newfoundland.
*Craig,  Miss  Helen  M.,  Quinta  da  Cabeya,  Cintra,  Portugal.
*Cranston,  Mrs.,  c/o  Guaranty  Trust  Co.,  50  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.  1.

Craufurd,  Commander  Quentin  C.  A.,  R.N.,  c/o  Admiralty,  London,
S.W.  L

*Creasy,  Mrs.,  Glen  Eyre,  Bassett,  Hants.

Crook,  A.  H.,  4  Torres  Buildings,  Kowloon,  Hong  Kong.
*Crosfield,  J.  J.,  Gwernyfed  Park,  Three  Cocks,  R.S.O.,  Wales.
*Crosfield,  Miss  M.  C,  Undercroft,  Reigate,  Surrey.

Crouch,  H.  N.,  Sumrnerfield,  Weston  Park,  Bath.
*Cunliffe,  Walter  R.,  34,  The  Grove,  Boltons,  London,  S.W.  10.
*Currie,  Mrs.,  7  Sunderland  Terrace,  Bayswater,  London,  W.  2.
*Curtois,  Miss  Margaret  A.,  53  Romney  Street,  Westminster,
London,  S.W.  L

Curzon  of  Kedleston,  The  Earl,  Hackwood,  Basingstoke,  Hants.

Dale,  J.  Gilbert,  68  Holland  Park,  Kensington,  London,  W.  IL

Damant,  Mrs.  H.  C,  Kendal  Mount,  Totland  Bay,  Isle  of  Wight.

Daniell,  Mrs.  Averell.
*Danson,  F.  C,  74  Bidston  Road,  Birkenhead.

D'Arcy,  Rev.  G.  J.  A.,  The  Vicarage,  Worksop,  Notts.
*Davies,  Benjamin,  Wi If ord,  Chase  Green  Avenue,  Enfield,  Middlesex.
*Davies,  D.  Berrington  G.,  J. P.,  Parcygors,  Llechryd,  Cardiganshire.

Davies,  Mrs.  G.  R.,  Glenlaggan,  Parton,  N.B.

Da  vies,  Miss  M.  H.  Lloyd,  Lynton,  Curzon  Road,  Hoylake,  Cheshire.
Davis,  A.  E.,  F.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  71  Rodney  Street,  Liverpool.
*Davis,  Mrs.  Kennard,  The  School  House,  Woodbridge,  Suffolk.
Davis,  Romney  R.,  Old  Grove  House,  The  Grove,  Hampstead,

London,  N.W.  3.
Davis,  Mrs.,  46  Sussex  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
*Davison,  Miss  Annie,  4  Ranelagh  Grove,  Pimlico  Road,  London,
S.W.  1.


lxxxl]


Members  and  Associates.


431


Davison,  Miss  R.,  Milverton,  Wilmslow  Road,  Alderley  Edge,
Manchester.

Davys,  Lieut. -Colonel  G.  I.,  I.M.S.,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  &  Co.,

Hornby  Road,  Bombay,  India.
Dawes,  Mrs.  Frank,  11a  Portland  Place,  London,  W.  1.
*Dawson,  Captain  G.  de  H.

Dawson,  Lt. -Colonel  Henry  P.,  Hartlington  HaU,  Skipton.
Day,  Rev.  Dr.  E.  H.,  Newton  House,  Belmont,  Hereford.
Day,  Miss  Mabel  K.,  15  Elgin  Court,  Elgin  Avenue,  London,  W.  9.
Dearmer,  Rev.  Dr.  Percy,  Corner  House,  Radnor  Place,  London,
W.  2.

De  Gramont,  Comte  A.,  179  Rue  de  I'Universite,  Paris,  France.
*De  Grave,  Miss  D.  M.,  Pioneer  Club,  Park  Place,  St.  James's,
London,  S.W.  1.

Deichmann,  Baroness,  Abbey  Lodge,  Regent's Park,  London,
N.W.  1.

De  Jong,  Dr.  K.  LL  E.,  Beeklaar,  356,  The  Hague.
*De  Koven,  Mrs.  Anna  F.,  1025  Park  Avenue,  New  York  City
U.S.A.

Deland,  Mrs.  Lorin  F.,  35  Newbury  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Delap,  Alfred  D.,  Priorsland,  Carrickmines,  Co.  Dublin,  Ireland.
Denny,  Rev.  H.  L.  L.,  St.  Mark's  Vicarage,  66  Myddelton  Square,

London,  E.C.  1.
De  Trafford,  Mrs.  Galfrid.

*Dewar,  Lady,  The  Old  Farm,  Havant,  Bants.
*Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  Rothesay.  Scotland,
de  Winton,  Mrs.  R.  F.,  c/o  Post  Office,  Box  591.  PorterviUe.  Cal.,
U.S.A.

De  Wyckoff,  Joseph,  Arlena  Towers,  Ramsey,  N.J.,  U.S.A.

Dickie,  H.  Elford,  British  Consulate,  Madrid,  Spain.

Dickinson,  Miss,  Trebrea  Lodge,  Tintagel,  Cornwall.

Dickinson,  Miss  A.  J.,  3a  Clareville  Grove,  London,  S.W.  7.  and
Poultry  Court,  Painswick,  Gloucestershire.

Dickinson,  G.  Lowes,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Dicksee,  Frank,  R.A.,  3  Greville  Place,  London,  N.W.  6.
*Dimmock,  Mrs.  H.  P.,  77  MayowRoad,  Sydenham,  London,  S.E.  26.
*Dingwall,  E.  J.,  c/o  The  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,

44  East  23rd  Street,  New  York,  U.S.A.
*Diver,  Mrs.,  7  Leinster  Square,  Bayswater,  London,  W.  2.
*Dixon,  Edward  T.


432


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Dixon,  Hugh  N.,  17  St.  Matthew's  Parade,  Northampton.
*Dixon,  Professor  W.  Macneile,  LL.B.,  Litt.D.,  2  South  Park

Terrace,  Hillhead,  GlasgOAv,  W.  "  '

Doane,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Doe,  George  M.,  Enfield,  Great  Torrington,  N.  Devon.
Donne,  Mrs.,  c/o  Messrs.  Holt  &  Co.,  3  Whitehall  Place,  London,

S.W.  1.

*Dougall,  Miss  Lily,  Cutts  End,  Cumnor,  Oxford.
Douglas,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  W.,  5  East  88th  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.,
U.S.A.

*Dove,  J.  S.,  R.N.,  80  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.  L
Dowson,  Mrs.,  Landhurst  Wood,  Hartfield,  Sussex.
Dowson,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Felixstowe,  The  Park,  Nottingham.

*Doyle,  Sir  A.  Conan,  M.D.,  Windlesham.  Crowborough,  Sussex.
Drew,  Ringrose  C,  Kota  Tirigzi,  Johore,  via  Singapore,  Federated
Malay  States.

Drewry,  Mrs.  George,  4  Calverley  Park,  Tunbridge  Wells.
Driesch,  Professor  Dr.  Hans,  Universitiit,  Lindenstrasse  38,  Coin.
^Dudley,  James,  M.Sc,  23  Albert  Road,  Wimbledon,  London,
S.W.  19.

*Du£f,  J.  R.  K.,  100  Sunningfields,  Hendon,  London,  N.W.  9.
*Duncan,  Harold  M.,  c/o  Dr.  G.  W.  Stewart,  Oak  Lane,  Philadelphia,
U.S.A.

*Duncan,  Mrs.,  Earlston,  Ej)som  Road,  Guildford,  Surrey.

Dunne,  D.  P.,  Yetholme,  Liverpool  Road,  Birkdale,  Southport.
*Dutton,  Miss  A.,  Somerdon,  Sidmouth,  Devon.
*Duveen,  Mrs.  Geoffrey,  15  Stratton  Street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.  1.
*Eade,  D.H.,.SpecialSurgical  Hospital. Ducane Road, London,  W.  12.

Eastwood,  H.  E.,  The  Conservative  Club,  74  St.  James's  Street,
London,  S.W.  1.
*Eckstein,  Mrs.,  18  Park  Lane,  London,  W.  1.

Edelsten,  Colonel  John  A.,  8  Beach  La\TO,  Waterloo,  nr.  Liverpool.

Edie,  H.  S.  Ker,  c/o  Messrs.  Thos.  Cook  &  Son,  Ludgate  Circus,
London,  E.C.  4.

*Edwardes,  Mrs.  Dyer,  Prinknash  Park,  Patnswick,Nr.  Stroud,  Glos.
*Ekin,  James,  West  Rocks,  Grand  Parade,  Eastbourne,  Sussex.
*Elder,  Frederick,  57  Antrim  Mansions,  Haverstock  Hill,  London,
N.W.  3.

Eldred,  Fleet-Paymaster  E.  H.,  R.N.,  c/o  Capital  and  Counties
Bank,  Ltd.,  Southsea,  Hants.


LXXXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


483


*Ellershaw,  Major  Henry,  R.A.F.,  124  Pembroke  Road,  Clifton,
Bristol.

Elliot,  Miss  A.  I.  M.,  Women's  University  Settlement,  44  Nelson

Square,  Blaclvfriars  Road,  London,  S.E.  1.
Elliot,  Mrs.  Gilbert,  87  Victoria  Street,  Westminster,  London,

S.W.  1.

Elliott,  Captain  B.  H.,  R.A.,  Oakleigh,  Godstone,  Surrey.
*Ellis,  Herbert,  The  Gynsills,  Groby  Road,  Leicester.
Emmerson,  Robert,  M.D.

Emmet,  Rev.  C.  W.,  University  College,  Oxford.
Engall,  John  S.,  62  Goldsmith  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.  3.
Eno,  H.  L.,  Princeton,  iSIew  Jersey,  U.S.A.
Entee,  Professor  B.  A.,  Samaldas  College,  Bhavnagar,  India.
*Enthoven,  Mrs.  F.  V.,  33  Cambridge  Square,  London,  W.  2.
Ersldne,  Mrs.  Gratney,  The  Buries,  Bishopstrow,  Warminster,
Wilts.

Evans,  W.  A.,  Ingle  wood,  Ratcliffe  Road,  Leicester.

Everard,  Captain  H.  N.,  R.A.M.C.,  21  Denning  Road,  Hampstead,
London,  N.W.  3.
*Farrer,  The  Dowager  Lady,  Idlerocks,  Stone,  Staffordshire.
*Farrer,  H.  M.,  81  Eaton  Terrace,  London,  S.W.  1.

Farwell,  Mrs..  Roanoke,  Chorley  Wood  West,  Herts.

Faulkner,  W.  B.,  52  South  Molton  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Faustinus,  F.,  Sondre  Fasanvej  97",  Valbj^  Copenhagen,  Denmark.
*Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  161  St.  James's  Court,  Buckingham  Gate,
London,  S.W.  1.

Felkin,  Mrs.,  119  Grosvenor  Road,  London,  S.W.  1.
*FeUowes,  The  Hon.  Lady,  Honmgham,  Norwich.

Fergusson,  Rev.  A.  W.,  The  Manse,  Dundee.
*Femald,  Mrs.  C.  B.,  4  Marlborough  Road,  London,  N.W.  8.
^Findlay,  J.  Arthur,  Woodside,  Beith,  Ayrshire.
*Fisher,  Mrs.  C.  D.  Corbett,  8  Heathgate,  London,  N.W.  11.

Fisk,  Rev.  George,  c/o  The  Kailan  Mining  Administration,  Chin-

wangtao,  Chihli,  N.  China.
*Fitch,  Hugh  B.,  31  Campden  Grove,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
*Fleetwood-Hesketh,  Major  C.  H.,  Stocken  Hall,  Stretton,  Oakham,
Rutlandshire.

^Fletcher,  L.  S.,  3  Dr.  Johnson's  Buildmgs,  Temple,  London,
E.C.  4.

*Flude,  Mrs.,  Glyn  House,  Argyle  Road,  Bognor.


434


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Fliigel,  J.  C,  11  Albert  Road,  Regent "s  Park,  London,  N.W.  1.
*Foot,  Miss  Katharine,  c/o  Morgan,  Harjes  &  Co.,  14  Place  Vendome,
Paris.

Footner,  Mrs.,  187  Ebury  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Ford,  Mrs.,  124a  King's  Road,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Forman,  Josef,  c/o  Messrs.  Agar-Hutton  &  Coe,  6  Princes  Street,
Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.

Forman,  Colonel  R.  H.,  A.M.S.,  East  India  United  Service  Club,
St.  James's  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.

Forrester,  Mrs.  Robert,  Annfield,  Stirling,  N.B.

Fortescue,MissFrances,Winterbourne,  Winchester  Road,  Worthing.

Foster,  Mrs.  Garland,  Nelson,  B.C.,  Canada.

Fotheringham,  W.  B.,  17  Upper  High  Street,  Worthing.
*Foulger,  Howson  R.,  26  Hyde  Park  Square,  London,  W.  2.
*Fox,  Mrs.,  Fawe  Park,  Keswick,  Cumberland.

Fraenkel,  Dr.  Joseph,  101  East  94th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Francis,  Mrs.  Francis.

Franldin,  The  Hon.  Mrs.,  50  Porchester  Terrace,  London,  W.  2.

Franks,  Mrs.,  51  Dacre  Hill,  Rock  Ferry,  Birkenhead

Freeman,  Miss  Adelaide  C,  Queen  Anne's  Mansions,  London,  S.W.  1.

Freeman,  Rev.  H.  B.,  The  Vicarage,  Burton-on-Trent,  Staffs.
*Frith,  Mrs.,  The  Rectory,  Oundle,  Northants.

Frost,  Lowell  C,  M.D.,  1905  Vista  Street,  Hollywood,  Los  Angeles,
Cal.,  U.S.A.

Frostick,  J.  A.,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.
*Fry,  Miss  Agnes,  Failand  House,  Failand,  near  Bristol.
*Fry,  Lewis  George,  Stonycroft,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.

Fryer,  Mrs.  F.,  9  St.  Peter's  Grove,  York.
*Fullerton,  Colonel  J.  D.,  172  Gloucester  Terrace,  Hyde  Park,

London,  W.  2.
*Fulton,  Mrs.  Hamilton,  35  The  Close,  Salisbury.

Gabb,  F.  B.,  at  70  Avondale  Road,  South  Croydon,  Surrey.

Gage,  Lyman  J.,  Point  Loma,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Gantz,  Mrs.,  3  South  Place,  Letchworth,  Herts.

Gardiner,  Professor  H.  N.,  187  Main  Street,  Northampton,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

*Gardner,  Mrs.,  3a  White  Gables,  Wood  Vale,  Forest  Hill,  London,
S.E.  23.

*Gardner,  Rev.  A.  R.  L.,  52  Beaufort  Mansions,  Chelsea,  London,
S.W.  3.


LXXXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


435


*Gaskell,  Mrs.  J.  B.,  Roseleigh,  Woolton,  Liverpool.
Gates,  Rev.  Horatio,  355  Oakland  Avenue,  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  U.S.A.
Gatliff,  H.  E.  C,  Balliol  CoUege,  Oxford.

*Geiger,  F.  J.,  643  Land  Title  BuUding,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
GeUert,  J.  W.,  c/o  Box  396,  G.P.O.,  Adelaide,  S.  Australia.
*George,  Mrs.,  88  Prince  of  Wales  Mansions,  Prince  of  Wales  Road,

Battersea  Park,  London,  S.W.  11.
*George,  H.  Trevelyan,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P..  33  Ampthill  Square,

London,  N.W.  1.
*Gibbms,  Mrs.  C.  E.,  Wansbeck,  45  Norfolk  Road,  Brighton.
Gibson,  Professor  W.  R.  Boyce,  D.Sc,  Ennerdale,  Tower  Street,
Surrey  Hills,  Melbourne,  Australia.
*Gill,  A.  Wilson,  M.D.,  Chatterley  Cottage,  Hanley,  Stoke-on-Trent.
Gilson,  R.  Gary,  King  Edward's  School,  Birmingham.
*Ginwala,  F.  J.,  373  Hornby  Road,  Fort,  Bombay,  India.
*Girdlestone,  Mrs.  Frank,  The  Bridge  House,  Sible  Hedingham.
Essex.

Girod,  Madame,  4  Avenue  Hoche,  Paris.
Glasson,  J.  W.,  I.C.S.,  51  St.  George's  Road,  Harrogate.
Gledstone,  Miss  May,  73  Gleneldon  Road,  Streatham,  London,
S.W.  16.

Glenconner,  Lady,  34  Queen  Anne's  Gate,  London,  S.W.  1.
Glenny,  George  C,  Old  Croft,  Stanwix,  Carlisle.
Glenny,  Mrs.  G.  C,  Old  Croft,  Stanwix,  Carhsle.
Glidden,  Walter  S.,  13  Centre  Street,  Bath,  Maine,  U.S.A.
Glover,  Cedric  H.,  35  Albert  Road,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.  3.
*Godowsky,  Leojjold,  626  South  Alexandria  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,
Cal.,  U.S.A.

Goedhart,  P.,  Koningen  Maria  Straat  18,  The  Hague.
*Goldschmidt,  Mrs.  Beni  de,  Clarefield,  Pinkney's Green,  Maidenhead,
Berks.

*Golledge,  V.  F.  Hedworth,  Hazlewood  Lodge,  Enfield.
Gooch,  G.  P.,  South  ViUa,  Campden  Hill  Road,  London,  W.  8.
*Goodden,  Mrs.  Robert,  The  Cheyney  Court,  The  Close,  Winchester.
*Goossens,  Mrs.  F.  W.,  14  Aynsley  Court,  Winnipeg,  Manitoba,
Canada.

Gough,  A.  B.,  Ph.D.,  Sandcroft,  Upper  Bridge  Road,  Redhill,
Surrey.

Gough,  Rev.  E.  P.,  The  Vicarage,  Chiswick,  London,  W.  4.
*Gould,  Mrs.,  8  Elsham  Road,  London,  W.  14.


436


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Gover,  J.  M.,  K.C.,  LL.D.,  5  New  Square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,
W.C.  2.

*Gowan,  Commander  C.  H.  B.,  R.N.,  United  Service  Club,  Pall
Mall,  London,  S.W.  1.
Gower,  John  H.,  Mus.Doc.  (Oxon.),  23  East  18th  Avenue,  Denver,
Colo.,  U.S.A.

Graham,  J.  W.,  Dalton  Hall,  Victoria  Park,  Manchester.

Graham,  Mrs.  W.  P.  Gore,  69  Grosvenor  Street,  London,  W.  L

Grahame,  Miss  Helen,  c/o  Mrs.  Taylor,  71  Edith  Road,  London,  W.
*Grant-Suttie,  Major  H.  F.,  R.A.,  R.A.  Mess.,  Shorncliffe,  Kent.

Green,  'Mis.  Alan  B.,  Riviere  House,  Phillack,  Hayle,  Cornwall.

Green,  Mrs.,  Northcott,  Chesham  Bois,  Bucks.

Green,  H.  W.,  35  Gate  Street,  Sedgley,  nr.  Dudley.
*Greene,  J.  G.,  34  Stiles  Street,  Elizabeth,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.
*Greenwood,  L.  H.  G.,  Emmanuel  College,  Cambridge.

GrenfeU.  Prof.  B.  P.,  D.Litt.,  Queen's  CoUege,  Oxford.
*Grenfell,  Field-Marshall  Lord,  G.C.B.,  G.C.M.G.,  St.  Rode,  Bourne-
mouth.

Grew,  J.  C,  c/o  American  Legation,  Copenhagen,  Denmark.

Grey,  E.  H.,  Windermere,  Belmont  Avenue,  Wickford,  Essex.
*Grey,  R.  C,  Ballycogoran,  Killaloe,  Co.  Clare,  Ireland.

Grignon,  IVIiss  A.  E.,  41  Filton  Avenue,  Horfield,  Bristol.
*Griswold,  Willard  S.,  436  Hartwell  Avenue,  Waukesha,  Wis.,
U.S.A.

Grosvenor,  Hon.  ]\'Ii-s.  R.  C,  13  Motcomb  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
Grottendieck,  W.  G.,  Charlotte  de  Bourbon  Str.  8,  The  Hague.
*Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  Southwold,  Suffolk.

*Gunnell,  A.  Mortimer,  F.R.A.I.,  F.R.Met.Soc,  Broomfield  Park
College,  New  Southgate,  London,  N.  11.
Gurbaxani,  Professor  H.  M.,  D.J.  Sind  College,  Karachi,  Sind,  India.
*Guttwoch,  Charles,  7  Kingswood  Avenue,  Queen's  Park,  London,
N.W.  6.

*Gwyn,  W.  J.,  8  NetherhaU  Gardens,  South  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.  3.

*Hackett,  James  T.,  Widows'  Fund  Building,  GrenfeU  Street,
Adelaide,  S.  Australia.

Haldar,  Professor  Hiralal,  39/3b  Sukeas  Street,  Calcutta.
*Hall,  Captain  Basil,  R.N.,  7  Clarence  Parade,  Southsea,  Hants.

Hall,  R.  D.,  c/o  W.  H.  Hart,  Esq.,  Sutton-on-Hull,  Yorks.

Hall,  Wilfred,  9  Priors  Terrace,  Tynemouth,  Northumberland.


LXXXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


437


Hambro,  Lady,  4  Norfolk  Street,  Park  Lane,  London,  W.  L
*Hamilton  and  Brandon,  The  Duchess  of,  Hamilton  Palace,  Lanark-
shire.

Hamilton,  jNIrs.  C.  M.,  Fulton  Apartments,  1064  W.  7th  Street,  Los

Angeles,  Cal,  U.S.A.
Hamilton,  J.  J.
Hamilton,  W.  Bernard.

Hammond,  ]VIiss  Winifred  B.,  386  East  51st  Street,  Portland,
Oregon,  U.S.A.

Harmes,  Mrs.,  c/o  London  County  and  Westminster  Bank,  1  Con-
naught  Street,  London,  W.  1.
Hanson,  Mrs.,  Pleasaunce  Cottage,  Dormans  Park,  Surrey.
Hardeman,  Miss  Frances  E.,  Beulah,  Green  Lane,  Godalming.
Harding,  Miss  A.  K.,  34  Colville  Terrace,  London,  W.  11.
Hardwick-Terry,  Mrs.  E..  Urquhart,  BoxAvell  Road,  Berldiamsted.
*Hare,  Dr.  A.  W.,  59  York  Road,  Birkdale,  Lanes.
Hargreaves,  Miss,  115  Clarence  Gate  Gardens,  Regent's  Park,
London,  N.W.  1.

Harper,  IMiss  E.  K..  The  Apple  Gate,  Coombe  Hill  Farm,  nr.

Kingston-on-Thames,  Surrey.
Harriman,  T.  G.,  M.D.,  2500  East  2nd  Street,  Long  Beach,  Calif.,

U.S.A.

^Harrington,  E.  J.,  21  Hampstead Lane, Highgate,  London,
X.  6.

Harris,  Alan  C,  c/o  Messrs.  Morgan,  Harjes  &  Co.,  14  Place
Vendome,  Paris.

Harris,  JVIiss  Agnes  G.,  8  Cambridge  Place,  Falmouth,  Cornwall.
*Harris,  Rev.  C,  D.D.,  Colwall  Rectory,  Malvern.
*Harris,  Mrs.  Herbert  A.,  22  Bina  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  5.
*Harris,  Lady,  98  Gloucester  Terrace,  London,  W.  2.
*Harris,  Hon.  J..  Lyndhurst,  Hampshire.

Harris,  jMrs.  W.  F.,  The  Willows,  Westbourne  Avenue,  Hull.
^Harrison,  Francis,  Rochester  Cottage,  St.  LawTence-in-Thanet,
Kent.

Harrison,  William,  17  Tirlemont  Road,  Croydon,  Surrey.
*Hart,  IVIrs.  H.  Burcham,  Eshott, Eastbury  Road,  Northwood,
Middlesex.

Hart,  Mrs.  H.  H.,  H.B.  "  Zephyr,"  Srinigar,  Kashmir,  India.
Hart,  General  Sir  Reginald  Clare,  V.C.,  K.C.B.,  K.C.V.O.,  39  West
Cliff  Road,  Bournemouth.


438


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Hartness,  James,  Springfield,  Vermont,  U.S.A.

Hartshorn,  Miss  Cornelia,  Ware  Hall,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Harvey,  G.  H.,  P.O.  Box  254,  Quebec,  Canada.
*Haslam,  Oliver  H.,  Sand  Ridge,  St.  Anne's-on-the-Sea,  Lanes.

Hasler,  Miss  K.  M.,  East  Mount,  Brunswick  Road,  Douglas,  Isle
of  Man.

Hassan,  Princess  Aziza,  139  Mahmoudia,  Alexandria,  Egypt.
Hastie,  Miss,  c/o  Messrs.  Street,  30  Cornhill,  London,  E.C.  3.
Hastings,  Rev.  J.  H.,  The  Manor  House,  Halton,  Lancaster.
Hastings,  Mrs.  L.  M.,  13  Washington  House,  Basil  Street,  London,
S.W.  3.

*Hatton,  G.  C,  51  Harrington  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  7.
Hauxhurst,  Mrs.  W.,  Columbus  Avenue  and  East  6th  »Street,

Mount  Vernon,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Hawarden,  CaroHne  Viscountess,  13  Lingfield  Road,  Wimbledon,

London,  S.W.  19.
Hawker,  Mrs.  George,  55  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  3.
Hawker,  Miss  Elizabeth,  55  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  3.
Hawley,  Miss  Zoe,  129  Church  Street,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
Hayes,  Rev.  Joseph  W.,  West  Thurrock  Vicarage,  Grays.
*Hayley,  Guy  W.,  11  Cleveland  Square,  London,  W.  2.
*Hayley,  Mrs.  G.  W.,  11  Cleveland  Square,  London,  W.  2.
Head,  Miss  Alice  L.,  52  Pembridge  Villas,  Notting  Hill  Gate,
London,  W.  11.

*Heape,  Mrs.  Walter,  10  King's  Bench  Walk,  Temple,  London,
E.C.  4.

Heard,  G.  H.,  Percy  Villa,  Front  Street,  Tynemouth.
Heath,  George  H.,  5  Roughdown,  Boxmoor,  Herts.
Heaton,  Guy,  51  Westcliff  Road,  Bournemouth.
Hedley,  Dr.  E.  P.,  Howick  Road,  Town  Hill,  Maritzburg,  S.  Africa.
*Hefford,  Percy  H.,  387  Pershore  Road,  Selly  Park,  Birmingham.
Heller,  Rabbi  James  G.,  3634  Reading  Road,  Cincinnati,  Ohio,
U.S.A.

Hemenway,  Mrs.  Augustus,  Readville,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Henderson,  J.  J.,  494  Fifth  Avenue,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Henderson,  Miss  Lilian,  The  Sesame  Club,  29  Dover  Street,  London,
W.  1.

*Hendrix,  J.  A.,  Marion,  Ala,  U.S.A.
Henrici,  Jacob,  201-203  Chestnut  Street,  Meadville,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1  Argyll  Villas,  Cheltenham.  ,


LXXXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


439


Herriot,  JVIiss  E.  F.,  2  Sunningdale  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,
W.  8.

Herschel,  Colonel  John,  F.R.S..  Royal  Engineers,  Slough,  Bucks.
Heseltine, JVIrs., 19 Launceston Place, Kensington,  London,
W.  8.

Hesketh,  Thomas,  42  Castle  Hill  Avenue,  Folkestone,  Kent.
*Heyer,  J.  C,  LL.D.,  20  Sarphatistreet,  Amsterdam.

Hej^mans,  Prof.  G.,  Ubbo-Emmiussingel  2,  Groningen,  Holland.
*Hichens,  Rev.  Canon  A.  S.,  The  Rectory,  Penicuik,  Midlothian.
*Hichens,  Mrs.  Cyril,  The  Almners,  LjTie,  Chertsey,  Surrey.

Hichens,  Mrs.  W.  Lionel,  15  Buckingham  Palace  Gardens,  London,
S.W.  L

*Hicks,  Miss  Lucy,  36  Westminster  Mansions,  London,  S.W.  1.

Higbee,  Colonel  George  H.,  Burlington,  Iowa,  U.S.A.

ffildyard,  F.  W.,  14  Lambridge,  Bath.
*Hillard,  Miss  Mary  R.,  West  over  School,  Middlebury,  Conn.,
U.S.A.

Hillman,  E.  Haviland,  4  Somers  Place,  Hyde  Park,  London,
W.  2.

*Hillman,  Hugh  H.,  White  Cross,  Banwell,  Somerset.
Hills,  Miss  H.  D.,  58  Lupus  Street,  St.  George's  Square,  London,
S.W.  1.

Hoare,  Fred  H.,  37  Fleet  Street,  London,  E.C.  4.
Hoare,  Mrs.  Henry,  20  Montagu  Street,  Portman  Square,  London,
W.  1.

Hobart-Hampden,  Rev.  A.  K.,  6b  Roland  Houses,  London,  S.W.  7.
*Hobson,  Walter  D.,  Tan-y-Bryn,  Bangor,  N.  Wales.
*Hockliffe,  Mrs.  Ernest,  Littlebrook,  Uppingham.

Hodding,  Miss.  28  The  Close.  SaUsbury.

Hodson,  L.  J.,  LL.B.,  The  Mill  House,  Robertsbridge,  Sussex.
Hoernle,  Professor  R.  F.  Alfred,  Armstrong  College,  Newcastle-
on-TjTie.

*Hogg,  Henry  R.,  23  Hornton  Street,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.

Hoggan,  Mrs.  Frances,  M.D.,  22  Harrington  Road,  London,  S.W.  7.

Holder,  Henry  L.,  Monkbarns,  Wheatlands  Road,  Harrogate.

Holding,  Sam,  Columbia,  Tenn.,  U.S.A.

Holland,  Miss,  1a  Holland  Park,  London,  W.  11.

Hollander,  Bernard,  M.D.,  57  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Hollick,  Captain  A.  J.,  9  Eaton  Gardens,  Hove,  Sussex.
*Hollick,  Mrs.  A.  J.,  9  Eaton  Gardens.  Hove,  Sussex.


440


Members  and  Associates.


[part


HoUins,  Mrs.,  24  Sussex  Place,  Eegent's  Park,  London,  N.W.  1.
HoUins,  ]\Ii-s.  A.  E.,  Dunsfold  Rectory,  Godalming,  Surrey.
Holme,  Strachan,  Bridgewater  Offices,  Walkden,  Manchester.
Holmes,  Miss  Lilian,  Marnwood,  West  End  Avenue,  Pinner,
Middlesex.

*Holmyard,  R.,  5  Hedgerow  Lane,  Clifton,  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
*Holt,  Henry,  19  West  44th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Holt,  Miss  M.  D.,  Bryans'  Ground,  Presteign,  Radnorshire.

Homan,  C.  H.,  12  Sogaden,  Christiania,  Norway.

Home,  Miss  Georgina,  Halcyon  Club,  13/14  Cork  Street,  London,
W.  1.

Home,  Miss  Mary  M.,  34  Victoria  Road,  London,  W.  8.
*Home,  Mrs.  Robert,  b/78  Portsdo^^^l  Road,  Maida  Vale,  London,
W.  9.

Home,  Walter,  CLE.,  34  Victoria  Road,  London,  W.  8.

Hookham,  Philip,  15  Chad  Road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.

Hope,  Lieut. -Commander  R.  H.  K.,  R.N.

Hopkinson,  Mrs.,  EUerslie,  Adams  Road,  Cambridge.

Hopi^in,  J.  C,  310  Sears  Building,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Horridge,  Miss  J.  G.,  43  Alexandra  Road,  Southjaort.
*Horwood,  C.  Baring,  D.Sc,  F.C.S.,  Royal  Automobile  Club,  Pall

Mall,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Hoseason,  A.  G.,  The  Bungalow,  Tanworth-in-Arden,  Birmingham.

Hotblack,  Frank  A.,  Fairfield,  Hambledon,  Hants.

Howden,  Mrs.,  11  Eton  Terrace,  Edinburgh.
*Howell,  Mjs.,  Ethy,  Lostwithiel,  Cornwall.
*Howell,  Mrs.  Philip,  5  Carlyle  Square,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.

Howgrave-Graham,  Captain  A.  H.,  M.C.,  Box  59,  Randfontein,
Transvaal.

Hubbard,  Mrs.  Cyril,  New  Lodge,  Coleman's  Hatch,  Sussex.
Hude,  Mrs.  Anna,  Ph.D.,  35  Vestre  Boulevard,  Copenhagen,  B.
Hudson,  Miss  Alice,  Meads  Court,  Eastbourne.
Hudson,  Miss  Katie  E..  Meads  Court,  Eastbourne.
*Hudson,  Morris,  St.  Cuthbert's,  Bathampton,  Somerset.
Hughes,  Professor  Alfred,  Eastnor  House,  Malvern  Link
Hume-Rothery,  J.  H.,  Mendip  House,  Headington  Hill.  Oxford.
Humphreys,  E.  Noel,  Caerycaee,  Hoole,  Chester.
Humphreys,  T.  H.  A.,

Hunkin,  Rev.  J.  W.,  M.C.,  C.F..  126  Huntingdon  Road,  Cambridge.
Hurwitz,  W.  A.,  Ph.D.,  Cornell  University,  Ithaca,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.


LXXXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


441


Hutchinson,  F.  W.  H.,  Grove  LawTis,  St.  Albans,  Herts.
*Hyslop,  George  H.,  M.D.,  200  Cliatterton  Parkway,  White  Plains,

New  York,  U.S.A.
Imamura,  Prof.  Shinkichi,  Clinic  for  Psychiatry,  Imperial  Univer-
sity, Ivioto,  Japan.
Ince,  Miss  Gladys,  P.O.  Box  No.  14,  Madras,  S.  India.
*Ingham,  Charles  B.,  Moira  House,  Eastbourne.
Ingram,  Miss  M.  I.,  The  Priory,  Wimbledon  Common,  London,
S.W.  19.

Innes,  C.  E.,  31  Randolph  Crescent,  London,  W.  9.
Innes,  ]\'Iiss  H.  K.,  4  Greycoat  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Irving,  Rev.  W.  S.,  Oxenhall  Vicarage,  Newent,  Glos.
Isaac,  Miss  Edith,  The  Lodge,  Kempsey,  Worcester.
Jacks,  L.  P.,  LL.D.,  D.D.,  Shotover  Edge,  Headington.  Oxford.
James,  Brig. -General  C.  H.  L.,  C.B.,  United  Service  Club,  London,
S.W.  1.^

*James,  Major  E.  A  H.,  Newtown,  Newbury,  Berks.

James,  Henry,  10  East  10th  Street,  New  York,  U.S.A.

James.  Mrs.  Joseph,  Southwood,  Barnt  Green,  Birmingham.
*James,  Miss  S.  Boucher,  High  Park,  Bideford,  N.  Devon.
*Jameson,  David,  New  Castle,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

*Janson,  E.  W.,  11  Eaton  Mansions,  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.
Jaye,  William  R.,  Moray  House,  Ryde,  I.W.
*Jeboult,  F.  M., 19  Edith  Villas,  West  Kensington,  London,
W.  14.

*Jekyll,  Miss  D.,  17  Nevern  Mansions,  Earls  Court,  London.  S.W.  5.

Jenkinson,  W.  E.,  Highthorn,  King  Cross  Road,  Halifax,  Yorks.

Jennings-Bramly,  IMrs.,  Hampton  Court  Palace,  Middlesex.  ,

Jennings-Bramly,  Mrs.,  Asolo  (Treviso),  Italy.
*Jephson,  Miss  S.,  Sybil  Hill,  Raheny,  Co.  Dublin.

Job,  H.  S.,  51  Hampton  Road,  Teddington,  Middlesex.

Johnson,  Charles  R.,  340  Main  Street,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Johnson,  Miss  F.  C,  25  York  Street  Chambers,  Bryanston  Square,
London,  W.  1.

Johnson,  Mrs.,  Abbot's  Bay,  nr.  Keswick.
*  Johnstone,  Hon.  Gilbert,  43  Wilton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.  1.

Johnston,  R.F., Chang  Wang  Hutung,  The  Old  Drum  Tower  Road,
Peking,  China.

Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Meldon  House,  Weston-super-Mare.
*Jones,  Miss  F.  E.,  89  Marylebone  High  Street,  London,  W.  1.


442


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*  Jones,  Mrs.  Gordon,  54  Stratford  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
Jones,  J.  Herbert,  7  Kitchener  Drive,  Orrell  Park,  Liverpool.

*  Jones,  Sir  LawTence  J.,  Bart.,  39  Harrington  Gardens,  London,

S.W.  7.

*Jones,  Miss  Lilian  I.,  120  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.  9.

*  Jordan-Smith,  Benjamin,  Orchardlea,  Grosvenor  Road,  Caversham,

Reading.

Joscelyne,  A.  F.  Cecil,  65  Richmond  Road,  Dalston,  London,
E.  8.

*Judah,  Noble  B.,  2701  Prairie  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Judd,  Mrs.  Sylvestre  Dwight,  163  Maple  Street,  Maiden,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

*Karstaedt,  L.,  6015  Washington  Avenue,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
*Kellett,  Mrs.  Kelsall,  Hurst,  Burwash,  Sussex.

Kelly,  Miss  Eleanor  B.,  Windy  Harbour,  Ashwell,  Baldock,  Herts.
*Kelso,  Captain,  R.N.,  Horkesley  Park,  Colchester,  Essex.

Kelso,  Mrs.  H.  J.,  425  W.  Church  Avenue,  Knoxville,  Tenn.,  U.S.A.

Kenneth,  H.,  Lindley.  BycuUah  Park,  Enfield,  Middlesex.
*Kennion,  T.  Alfred,  c/o  Canadian  Bank  of  Commerce,  Mexico  City,
Mexico  D.F.

Kenway,  Mrs.,  Mendip  View,  Winscombe,  Somerset.

Ker,  Miss,  Napier  Lodge,  Strathblane,  Glasgow.
*Kerr,  George,  M.B.,  6  St.  Colme  Street,  Edinburgh.

Kerr-Clark,  Lady,  Moore  Abbey,  Monasterevan,  Ireland.
*Ker-Seymer,  Mrs.,  12  St.  Leonard's  Terrace,  Chelsea,  London,
S.W.  3.

Kershaw,  Mrs.  Ronald  H.,  Seacourt,  Hayling  Island,  Hants.
*Kimball,  Miss  H.  P.,  Psychic  Research  Library,  25  Marlborough

Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
King,  Miss  R.  Estelle,  19  Highfield  Road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
*King,  H.  P.  Locke,  J. P.,  Brooklands,  Weybridge,  Surrey.
*King,  Dr.  W.  A.  D.,  1  Bishop's  Place,  Paignton,  Devon.
*Kingscote,  Mrs.,  4  Southwick  Crescent,  London,  W.  2.
*Kingsford,  Miss  S.  M., 5  Doneraile  Street,  Eulham,  London,
S.W.  6.

Kingsley,  Mrs.,  Thistle  Cottage,  Albert  Road,  Hendon,  London,
N.W.  4.

Kittermaster,  Rev.  Digby  B.,  Dame  Armstrong  House,  Harrow-

on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.
Knight,  Charles  N.,  7  Marlborough  Buildings,  Bath.


LXXXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


443


Knight, Maxwell, 18 University Mansions, Putney,  London,
S.W.  15.

*Knoblock,  Edward,  G2,  The  Albany,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.  L
*Konig,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  44  Rutland  Gate,  London,  S.W.  7.
Laing,  R.  M., Ogilvie,"  Cashmere  Hills,  Christchurch,  New
Zealand.

Lamb,  Charles  George,  65  Glisson  Road,  Cambridge.

Lambert,  G.  W.,  86  Chester  Square,  London,  S.W.  L
*Larken,  E.  P.,  98  Warwick  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.  14.

Latshaw,  Allen,  Berwyn,  Penn,  LT.S.A.

Lauritzen,  Severin,  Holte,  Denmark.

Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  Woodcroft,  Oxted,  Surrey.

Leaf,  Mrs.  A.  H.,  Woodcroft,  Oxted,  Surrey.

Leaf,  Miss  E.  M.,  4  Barton  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Leaf,  F.  A.,  Lmcoln  House,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.
*Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.D.,  6  Sussex  Place,  Regent's  Park,  London,
N.W.  1.

^Leaning,  Mrs.  S.,  Elmstead,  Epsom  Lane,  Tadworth,  Surrey.
*Le-Apsley,  James  H.  M.,  M.D.,  43  X.  El.  Molino  Avenue,  Pasadena,
Cal.,  U.S.A.

Ledyard,  JVIrs.  R.  F.  H.,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Lee,  Blewett,  c/o  Ilhnois  Central  Railroad  Co.,  32  Nassau  Street,
New  York,  U.S.A.
*Lee,  Dr.  H.  D.  C,  Technical  College,  Huddersfield.
*Legg,  W.  A.,  14  Victoria  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Leigh,  Lord,  Stoneleigh  Abbey,  Kenilworth,  War\vickshire.
*Leigh-Pemberton, Mrs.  Percy, 19  Eccleston  Square,  London,
S.W.  1.

Lenon,  J.  W., Wellington Club, Grosvenor  Place,  London,
S.W.  1.

Leon,  Mrs.  Philip,  4m  Montagu  Mansions,  Portman  Square,
London,  W.  1.

Leonard,  Thomas,  223  W.  School  Lane,  Germantown,  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  U.S.A.

Le  Patourel,  Miss  M.  L.,  26  Walpole  Street,  Chelsea,  London,
S.W.  3.

Leshe,  Rev.  G.  Lindsay,  The  Manse,  Eddleston,  Peeblesshire.
Leshe,  James,  1029  Cory  don  Avenue,  Winnipeg,  Canada.
*Lethbridge,  Alan  B.,  Stockwood  House,  nr.  Kejmsham,  Somerset.
Lewin,  Rev.  C.  H.,  St.  John's  Parsonage,  Keswick.


444


Members  cmd  Associates.


[part


Lewis,  David  J.,  United  States  Tariff  Commission,  Washington,
D.C.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Public  Librarj'  of  Adelaide,  Australia.

Librarian,  Adelbert  College  of  Western  Reserve  University,  Cleve-
land, Ohio,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Amsterdam  Free  Library,  Amsterdam,  New  York,
U.S.A.

Librarian,  Binghamton  Public  Library,  Binghamton,  New  York,
U.S.A.

Librarian,  Birmingham  Public  Libraries,  Reference  Department,

Ratcliff  Place,  Birmingham.
Librarian,  Boston  Athenaeum,  lOi  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,

U.S.A.

Librarian,  Bowdoin  College  Library,  Brunswick,  Maine,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Public  Library,  etc..  Church  Street,  Brighton.
Librarian,  Public  Library  of  the  District  of  Columbia,  Washington,
D.C.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Library  of  Congress,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Librarian  (Hon.)  of  the  Constitutional  Club,  Northumberland

Avenue,  London,  W.C.  2.
Librarian,  The  John  Crerar  Library,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Enoch  Pratt  Free  Library  of  Baltimore  City,  Baltimore,

Md.,  U.S.A.

^Librarian,  General  Theological  Seminary,  Chelsea  Square,  New
York,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  The  Grosvenor  Library,  Buffalo,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Guildhall  Library,  London,  E.C.  2.
Librarian,  Hacldey  Public  Library,  Muskegon,  Mich.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Harvard  College  Librar}',  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Imperial  Library,  Metcalfe  Hall,  Calcutta,  India.
*Librarian,  Iowa  State  Library,  Des  Moines,  Iowa,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Jamsetjee  Nesserwanjee  Petit  Institute,  Hornby  Road,
Bombay.

Librarian,  Free  Public  Library  of  Jersey  City,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Leeds  Library,  Commercial  Street,  Leeds.
Librarian,  Leland  Stanford  Junior  University,  Calif.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Library  Association,  Portland,  Oregon,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Meadville  Theological  School,  Meadville,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Mercantile  Library,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Minneapolis  Athenaeum,  MinneapoUs,  Minn.,  U.S.A.


LXXXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


445


Librarian,  Natal  Society  and  Central  Library,  Pietermaritzburg,
Natal,  S.  Africa.

Librarian,  Newberry  Library,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society,  Newcastle-upon-
Tyne.

Librarian,  Public  Library,  New  Bridge  Street,  Newcastle-upon-
Tyne.

Librarian,  New  Hampshire  State  Library,  Concord,  N.H.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Public  Library  of  New  South  Wales,  c/o  Messrs.  Truslove

&  Hanson,  153  Oxford  Street,  London,  W.  1.
Librarian,  New  York  Public  Library,  c/o  Messrs.  Stevens  &  Brown,

4  Trafalgar  Square,  London,  W.C.  2.
Librarian,  Ohio  State  Library,  Columbus.  Ohio,  U.S.A.
*Librarian,  Omaha  Public  Library  and  Museum,  19  and  Harvey

Streets,  Omaha,  Nebraska,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Pennsylvania  State  Library,  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Public  Library,  Salt  Lake  City^  Utah,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Seattle  Public  Library,  Seattle,  Washington,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Norsk  Selskap  for  psykisk  Forskning,  Nordahl  Bruns-

gade  22,  Christiania,  Norway.
Librarian,  Selskabet  for  psykisk  Forskning,  Graabrodretorv  7,

Copenhagen,  Denmark.
Librarian,  Theological  Seminary,  Rochester,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Theosophical  Society,  23  Bedford  Square,  London,

W.C.  1.

Librarian,  The  University,  Aberdeen.

Librarian,  General  Library  of  the  University  of  Chicago,  Chicago,

111.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  University  Library,  Glasgow.

*Librarian,  University  of  Iceland,  Hellusund  3,  Reykjavik,  Iceland.
Librarian,  University  of  IVIinnesota  Library,  Minneapohs,  Minne-
sota, U.S.A.

Librarian,  University  of  Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  University  of  Sydney,  New  South  Wales,  Austraha.
Librarian,  Victoria  Pubhc  Library,  Melbourne,  Austraha.
Librarian,  Wellesley  College,  Wellesley,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Dr.  Wilhams'  Library,  Gordon  Square,  London,  W.C.  1.
Librarian,  Yale  University  Library,  New  Haven,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
*Llewellin,  ]Mrs.  W.,  Upton  House,  nr.  Poole,  Dorset.
Lloyd,  Judge  Frank  T.,  Camden,  N.J.,  U.S.A.


446


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Lloyd,  Miss  Julia,  Hillside,  Berkswell,  nr.  Coventry.
Lodge,  Miss  E.  C,  Lady  Margaret  Hall,  Oxford.
*Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  F.R.S.,  Normanton,  Lake,  Nr.  Salisbury.
Lodge,  Robert,  Compton  Wood,  28  Carlisle  Road,  Eastbourne.
Lombardi,  C,  2817  Routh  Street,  Dallas,  Texas,  U.S.A.
Long,  Miss  Constance,  M.D.,  48  Gordon  Square,  London,  W.C.  1.
Lubbock,  Mrs.  Geoffrey,  Greenhill,  Sutton- Veny,  Wiltshire.
Lucy,  Miss  Mabel,  1  Laurence  Mansions,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
Ludford-Astley,  Mrs.  A.  G.,  8  Sloane  Terrace  Mansions,  London,
S.W.  1.

Lunn,  Arnold,  Palace  Hotel,  Montana,  Sur  Sierre,  Switzerland.
Lyall,  Mrs.,  16  York  Street  Chambers,  Bryanston  Square,  London,
W.  1.

*LyaU,  Major  Edward,  D.S.O.,  19  Victoria  Road,  Darlmgton.

Lyell,  Major  A.  G.,  68  Uj^per  Richmond  Road,  London,  S.W.  15.
*Lyon,  Miss  C.  C,  Ashcroft,  Prestwood,  Great  Missenden.

Lyttelton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Alfred,  16  Great  College  Street,  Westminster,
London,  S.W.  1.

*Macaulay,  Miss  Gertrude  F.,  Cairnbrae, 109  The  Boulevard,

Westmount,  Montreal,  Canada.
Macdonald,  Prof.  Duncan  Black,  Hartford  Theological  Seminary,

Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
Macdonald,  Miss  Isabelle  M.,  M.B.,  47  Seymour  Street,  Portman

Square,  London,  W.  1.
*Macdonald,  James,  Post  Office,  Port  Harcourt,  West  Africa.
*Macfarlane,  Mrs.  Scott  B.,  c/o  Lieut. -Comdr.  S.  B.  Macfarlane,

U.S.S.  Camden,  c/o  Postmaster,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Mackay,  N.  Douglas,  M.D.,  Dall-Avon,  Aberfeldy,  Perth.
^Mackenzie,  Lieut.-Colonel  H.  G.  G.,  D.S.O.,  M.D.,  29  Fitzjames

Avenue,  West  Kensington,  London,  W.  14.
Mackenzie,  Miss  Maud  R.  R.,  56  South  Eaton  Place,  London,
S.W.  1.

Mackenzie,  Lady  Muir,  22  Draycott  Place,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Mackie,  Dr.  John,  Ockbrook,  nr.  Derby.

Mackintosh,  Robert,  3  Frognal  Lane,  London,  N.W.  3.

Macldin,  Miss  Helen  E.,  141  Inverness  Terrace,  London,  W.  2.
*MacLellan,  Mrs.,  5  Langham  Street,  London,  W.  1.

Madders,  Mrs.  H.  F.,  87  Hampstead  Way,  London,  N.W.  4.
*Maddison,  Mrs.,  5  Langham  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Magrane,  Mrs.  Victor,  Woodsford  Rectory,  Nr.  Dorchester,  Dorset.


Lxxxr.]


Members  and  Associates.


447


Mahler,  Mrs.  John,  Bronygarth,  Oswestry,  Salop.
Mainwaring,  Mrs.,  11  Wilton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.  1.
Malda,  Luis,  Gante  No.  1,  Mexico  City,  Mexico.
Mallet,  Right  Hon.  Sir  Louis,  G.C.M.G.,  C.B.,  Wardes,  Otham,
Maidstone,  Kent.
*Mander,  Geoffrey  Le  Mesurier,  Wightwick  Manor,  Wolverhampton.
*Manfield,  Miss  Muriel  R.,  63  Delaware  Mansions,  London,  W.  9.
Mann,  Rev.  Frederic,  Coombe  Dale,  Coombe  Road,  South  Croydon,
Surrey.

*Manning,  Miss  H.  T.,  102  Central  Avenue,  Plainfield,  New  Jersey,
.  U.S.A.

Mansell,  Andrew  Evans,  Mount  Vernon,  Melton  Mowbray,  Tas-
mania.

Mantell,  Colonel  A.  M.,  10  Sion  Hill,  Bath.

Mappillay,  K.  I.  V.,  Puthumadam,  Chennithalay,  Mavelikaray,

Travancore,  S.  India.
Marriott,  Mrs.,  9  Trinity  Crescent,  Folkestone,  Kent.
*Marsden-Smedley,  Mrs.,  Lea  Green,  Matlock,  Derbyshire.
Marsden,  E.,  12  Ellerdale  Road,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.  3.
Marsh,  Edward  H.,  5  Raymond  Buildings,  Gray's  Inn,  London,

W.C.  1.

Marston,  Charles,  J.P.,  Afcot,  Compton,  nr.  Wolverhampton.
*Marston,  Commander  G.  M.,  R.N.,  Park  Lodge,  Albert  Gate,

Kjiightsbridge,  London,  S.W.  1.
Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  Osbornes,  Liphook,  Hants.
Marten,  Rev.  G.  H.,  St.  Mark's,  Purley,  Surrey.
*Martin,  E.  Le  Breton,  20  Portland  Place,  London,  W.  1.
Martin,  Mrs.  J.  Biddulph,  Norton  Park,  Bredon's  Norton,  near
Tewkesbury.

Martin,  T.  B.,  Woodlands,  Snaresbrook,  London,  E.  18.
*Martindale,  Miss  B.,  4  Piazza  Paganica,  Rome,  Italy.

Martineau,  Alfred  Edward,  Aitchison  College,  Lahore,  India.
*Mason,  Miss,  211  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass,  U.S.A.

Mason,  Miss  H.  M.,  Morton,  Eureka  Road,  Rondebosch,  Cape  Town,
S.  Africa.

*Mather, Mrs., Langholme Bridge Cottage, Broughton  Beck,
Ulverston.

*Mather,  Rev.  Herbert,  Royal  Automobile  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.  1.

*Mathews,  Dr.  F.,  Welsh  Row  House,  Nantwich.


448


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Mathews,  H.  N.,  Aldwick  House,  Bognor,  Sussex.
Matthews,  Dr.  Caroline,  13  Longton  Grove,  Sydenham,  London,
S.E.  26.

*Maunsell,  G.  A.,  35  Upper  Gloucester  Place,  London,  N.W.  1.

Maxwell,  Dr.  Joseph,  37  rue  Thiac,  Bordeaux,  France.
*Maxwell,  Sir  John  Stirling,  Bart.,  PoUok  House,  Pollokshaws,  N.B.

Mayor,  R.  G.,  11  Campden  Hill  Square,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.

M'Alpme,  Sir  Robert,  Knott  Park,  Oxshott,  Surrey.

MXIlellan,  Mrs.  Clara  D.,  Briarcliff  Manor,  New  York,  U.S.A.
*M'Carthy,  Mrs.,  Christ  Church  Vicarage,  Luton,  Beds.
*M'Connel,  D.  R.,  M.A.,  The  Camp,  Steep,  Petersfield,  Hants.

M'Connel,  Mrs.  D.  R.,  The  Camp,  Steep,  Petersfield,  Hants.

M'Connel,  H.  W.,  M.B.,  M.R.C.S.,  Matlaske  Hall,  Norwich.

M'Connel,  Mrs.,  Matlaske  Hall,  Norwich.

*M'Dermott,  Captain  F.,  I.A.,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co., Bombay,  India.
M'Dougall,  William,  F.R.S.,  M.Sc,  M.B.,  Emerson  Hall,  Cambridge,

Mass.,  U.S.A.
M'Gusty,  G.  A.,  35  Leeson  Park,  Dublin,  Ireland.
M'Intyre,  Mrs.,  25  St.  John  Street,  Oxford.
*M'Kay,  H.  G.,  St.  Bede's  School,  Duke's  Drive,  Eastbourne.
M'Keever,  Buell,  3900  Lake  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
*M'Kenna,  Mrs.  Theodore,  24  Bryanston  Squ?^re,  London,  W.  1.
M'Laren,  Rev.  David  J.,  The  Manse,  Trhiity  Gask,  Auchterarder.
M'Lauchlan,  G.  M.,  c/o  Miss  Geddes  M'Lauchlan,  Ravenswood,

West  Linton,  Peeblesshire.
*M'Master,  Mrs.  John  Bach,  2109  De  Lancey  Place,  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  U.S.A.
M'Neile,  Rev.  R.  F.,  Redgate,  Uppingham.

M'Vickar,  Mrs.  John  A.,  c/o  Munro  &  Co.,  4  Rue  Ventadour,  Paris.
Mead,  G.  R.  S.,  47  Campden  Hill  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
Meek,  Maximilian  de,  Grosvenor  House,  Kasr-el-Nil,  Cairo,  Egypt.
Meebold,  Alfred,  Heidenheim,  Wurtemberg.

*Meek,  Mrs.,  The  Cottage,  Templesheen  Road,  East  Sheen,  London,
S.W.  14.

Megson,  Albert,  Fern  Villa,  Headlands,  Ossett,  Yorks.

Mehrji,  Munchershaw  Hormusji,  M.D.,  3  Batlivala  Villa,  Sleater

Road,  Bombay,  India.
Meissner,  Mrs.  de,  1524  31st  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
*Menon,  Dr.  M.  P.  K.,  50  West  End,  Queensbury,  Nr.  Bradford,

Yorks.


LXXXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


449


*Merton,  Gerald,  Slopes,  Woldingham,  Surrey.
*Micklethwait,  Richard  K.

^Mikuska,  Professor  Viktor,  Masarykova  303,  Pardubice,  Czechoslav
Republic.

Milburn,  Rev.  R.  Gordon,  Black  Bridge,  Beaulieu,  Hants.
*]VIiles,  Miss,  59  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  3.
*MiUard,  ]\Irs.  Almira  B.,  c/o  The  American  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  44  East  23rd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

jVIiller,  Mrs.  Carolyn  A.,  Gainesville,  Florida,  U.S.A.
*Mirlees,  W.  J.,  Shelf ord,  Cambs.

*Mitchell,  T.  W.,  M.D.,  Hoath  Cottage,  Hadlow,  nr.  Tonbridge.
*Moncrie£f,  Captain  M.  M.,  Hemley,  Woodbridge.
*Montague,  Mrs.,  Penton,  Crediton,  Devon.
Monteagle, The Lord, K.P.,  Mount Trenchard,  Foynes,  Co.
Limerick.

Monypenny,  Mrs.  A.  E.  G.,  5  Talbot  Square,  London,  W.  2.
*Moore-Brabazon,  Lieut. -Colonel  J.  T.  C,  11  Ennismore  Gardens,

London,  S.W.  7.
*Moore,  His  Honour  Judge,  42  Acacia  Road,  London,  N.W.  8.

Morier,  Mrs.,  65  Hamilton  Terrace,  London,  N.W.  8.
*Morley,  Mrs.  Evelyn,  7  Green  Street,  Park  Lane,  London,  W.  1.

Morris,  Miss  D.  M.,  Corner  House,  Laleham-on-Thames,  Middx.

Morris,  ^Irs.,  Comer  House,  Laleham-on-Thames,  Middx.
*Morse,  Major  John,  Vinchelez-de-Haut  Manor,  St.  Ouen,  Jersey,
C.I.

Morton,  Mrs.  P.  N.,  73  West  La  Crosse  Avenue,  Lansdo^\^le,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Morton,  Miss  Mary,  15  Greville  Road,  London,  N.W.  6.
Moses,  E.  J.,  c/o  Messrs.  E.  D.  Sassoon  &  Co.,  4  Mission  Row,  Cal-
cutta.

Moss-Blundell,  F.  B.,  19  Lebanon  Park,  Twickenham,  Surrey.
*Muir,  ^Irs.  W.  E.,  Rowallan,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
Muirhead,  Mrs.  James  F.,  19  Lancaster  Road,  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.  3.

*Mullens,  Mrs.,  31  Lowndes  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Mullins,  Colonel  W.  B.,  Ambersham  House,  Midimrst,  Sussex.
Murphy,  Gardner,  Dept.  of  Psychology,  Columbia  University,
N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Murphy,  Miss  Imogen  H.,  23  Somerset  Terrace,  Duke's  Road,
London,  W.C.  1.


450


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Murray,  Professor  Gilbert,  LL.D.,  Litt.D.,  82  Woodstock  Road,
Oxford.

Murton,  Miss  Josephine,  Marnwood.  West  End  Avenue,  Pinner,
Middx.

*Musgrave,  Geoffrey,  Selukwe,  S.  Rhodesia,  S.  Africa.
*Myers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  12  Cleveland  Row,  St.  James's,  London,
S.W.  1.

*Myers,  L.  H.,  Twyford  Lodge,  East  Grinstead.
*Nash,  Miss  Diana,  2611  Guilford  Road,  Cleveland  Heights,  Cleve-
land, Ohio,  U.S.A.
*Nation,  CajDtain  Cecil,  R.E.,  59  St.  James's  Court,  London,  S.W.
*Naylor,  M.  C,  9  Brackley  Road,  Chiswick,  London,  W.  4.
NeUd,  Miss  Maria,  27  Brompton  Square,  London,  S.W.  3.
Neustadter,  Louis  W.,  461  Mission  Street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.,
U.S.A.

*Neville,  Lady,  Banstead  Place,  Banstead,  Surrey.
*Newbold,  Eric,  11  Oakhill  Road,  Surbiton,  Surrey.
*Newcastle,  The  Duke  of.  Clumber,  Worksop,  Notts.

Newton,  Miss  F.  E.,  156  Sloane  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.

Newton,  Heber,  Oamaru,  New  Zealand.

Newton,  Miss  I.,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.

Nicholson,  Lady,  6  Kensington  Court,  London.  S.W.  7.
*Nicoll,  Mrs.  DeLancey,  3  Seaniore  Place,  Park  Lane,  London,
W.  1.

*Nicolls,  Brig.-General  E.  G.,  C.B.,  19  St.  Andrew's  Road,  Bedford.
*Ninnis,  Roger  E.,  M.B.,

*Nisbet,  E.  T.,  Birnieknowes,  Cullercoats,  Northumberland.
Niven,  G.,  Shiantelle,  Aldrington  Road,  Streatham  Park,  London,
S.W.  16.

Noel,  Miss  Frances,  Becket  House,  Thaxted,  nr.  Dunmow,  Essex.

Noel-Cox,  H.  L..  M.D.,  F.R.A.S.,  65  Elgin  Mansions,  Elgin  Avenue,
London,  W.  9.
*Noltee,  A.  C,  Buitenzorg,  Java,  Dutch  East  Indies.
*Norlind,  Ernst,  12/13  Upper  Bedford  Place,  London,  W.C.  1.

Norris,  Stuart,  3  Birchfield  Road,  Birmingham.

Northcote,  Rev.  H.,  St.  Margaret's  Parsonage,  New  Galloway,  N.B.

Nott,  William  F.,  22  Chancery  Lane,  London,  W.C.  1.

Nutter,  Miss  H.  G.,  6  Acacia  Road,  Norbury,  London,  S.W.  16.

Odell,  S.  W..  410  Citizens  Savings  Bank  Building,  Pasadena.  Cal.,
U.S.A.


Lxxxi.]  Members  and  Associates.  451

Ogilvie,  Mrs.  Robert,  c/o  R.  G.  Ross,  Esq..  11  St.  Colme  Street,
Edinburgh .

Ogle,  Lieut. -Colonel  N.,  c/o  GrincUay  &  Co.,  P.O.  Box  93,  Bombay.
*  Oldham,  Mrs.,  11  Albany  Villas,  Hove.

I Oldham,  G.  F.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Dunelm,  Haden  Road,  Old
HiU,  Staffs.

Oman,  Sir  Charles  W.  C,  Frewin  Hall,  Oxford.
*Onslow,  Hon.  H.,  Clandon  Park,  Guildford.
Osborne,  Miss  H.,  2  Northcote  Mansions,  Heath  Street,  Hampstead,
London,  N.W.  3.
*Osmaston,  ]\Irs.,  Stoneshill,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.
*Owen,  A.  S.,  Keble  College,  Oxford.
Owen-Williams,  Mrs.,  Ridgeway,  nr.  Narberth,  Pembrokeshire.
Oxenham,  Mrs.,  3  Baring  Crescent,  Exeter.
I Pack-Beresford,  Denis  R.,  J.P.,  Fenagh  House,  Bagenalsto^^^l,  Co.
,  Carlo  w.

t Pagan,  Mrs.  G.  L.,  6  Clarendon  Crescent,  Edinburgh,
i Paget,  Sir  Richard,  74  Strand,  London,  W.C.  2.

Page-Turner,  F.  A.,  J. P.,  15  Palmeira  Square,  Hove,  Sussex.
*Paley,  G.  A.,

*Palmer,  Mark,  B.A.,  33  Fitzjames  Avenue,  West  Kensington,

London,  W.  14.
*Parkin,  John,  Blaithwaite,  Carlisle.
*Parr,  F.  C,  The  Gables,  Norfolk  Road,  Margate,  Kent.
Parr,  W.  H.,  10  Westbury  Park,  Bristol.
Parsons,  Ambrose,  Said  House,  Chiswick  Mall,  London,  W.  4.
' Parsons,  Karl,  Speedwell,  Northwood,  Middlesex.

^Parsons,  Miss  Llewellyn,  99  Park  Avenue,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Parsons,  N.  M.,  68  Kensington  Park  Road,  London,  W.  11.
t Patel,  F.  J.,  L.R.C.P.,  West  View,  Middle  Colaba,  Bombay.

Paterson,  Miss  Mary  N.,  Royal  Marine  Hotel,  Ventnor,  Isle  of
Wight.

Paul,  J.  Rodman,  505  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Pease,  Mrs.  J.  R.,  Sesame  Club,  29  Dover  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Peck,  IVIiss  Charlotte  L.,  Maidencombe  House,  St.  Mary  Church,.
S.  Devon.

r Peck,  Geo.  L.,  The  Wellington  Apts.,  19th  and  Wahiut  Sts.,
Philadelphia,  Penn.,  U.S.A.
Peckham,  Orville,  1320  N.  New  Jersey  Street,  Lidianopolis,  Md.,
U.S.A.


1

I


452


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Pedley,  Chas.  H.,  Winterley  House,  nr.  Crewe.

*Penniiigton,  Mrs.  Henry,  279  Trinity  Pvoad,  Wandsworth  Common,

London,  S.W.  12.
Penny,  W.  R.,  Railway  Stores  Department,  S.A.  Railways,  Salt

River,  nr.  Cape  Town,  S.  Africa.
Perceval,  Hon.  Mrs.  Dudley.  153  Church  Street,  Chelsea,  London,

S.W.  3.

*Perdicaris,  Ion,  The  Manor  House,  Chislehurst,  Kent.
Perkins,  Miss  S.  R.,  c/o  Dr.  Perkins,  57  Harley  Street,  London,
W.  1.

Perrott,  P.  D.  M.,  24  Bridge  Road,  Worthing.

Perry,  Sir  E.  Cooper,  M.D.,  3  Albert  Court,  Kensington  Gore,

London,  S.W.  7.
Perry,  Horace  H.,  Court  Royal,  144  King's  Cliff,  Brighton.
Perry,  T.  S.,  312  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Perry,  Mrs.  T.  S.,  312  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Pfau,  A.  R.,  Junr.,  Mankato,  Minnesota,  U.S.A.
*PhiUimore,  Hon.  Mrs.,  Kendals,  Elstree,  Herts.
*Pickard,  Mrs.  Fortescue,  41  Hertford  Street,  Park  Lane,  London,
W.  1.

*Piddington,  J.  G.,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.
*Piercy,  Major  B.  H.,  94  Piccadilly,  London,  W.  1.
*Pigott,  Percy,  416  Hessle  Road,  Hull.
Pigou,  Professor  Arthur  Cecil,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
*Pilcher,  Giles  T.,  Treen,  Frith  Hill,  Godalming,  Surrey.
*Pinney, Miss Ida A.,  17  Doune  Terrace, North  Kelvinside,
Glasgow.

Piper,  John  E.,  LL.B.,  10  Herondale  Avenue, Wandsworth  Common,

London,  S.W.  18.
Pithapuram,  The  Rajah  of,  Pithapuram,  Godavari  Dist.,  Madras

Presidency,  India.
Place,  Rev.  C.  A.,  Lancaster,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Platt,  Mrs.  Evelyn,  22  Chesham  Place,  London,  S.W.  1.
Plenty,  E.  P.,  Hill  House,  Wash  Hill,  Newbury,  Berks.
Plowden,  Mrs.,  6  Westcliffe,  St.  John's  Road,  Eastbourne.
Pollard,  J.  EUery,  L.R.C.P.,  7  Esme  Road,  Sparkhill,  Birmingham.
*PoUard,  W.  H.,  M.B.,  343  Hagley  Road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
*Pollock,  Mrs.  Hugh,  13  Cresswell  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  5.
Ponsonby,  Hon.  Mrs.  C.  B.,  14  West  Halkin  Street,  London,
S.W.  1.


LXXXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


453


*Pontifex,  Dudley  D.,  73  Alleyn  Park,  West  Dulwich,  London,
S.E.  21.

*Poole,  H.  J.,  9  Millerfield  Place,  Edinburgh.

Pooley,  H.  F.,  Scotter,  Well  Walk,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.  3.
*Poore,  Mrs.  J.  B.,  17  Rosemount  Road,  Bournemouth  West.
Portsmouth,  The  Countess  of,  Hurstbourne  Park,  Whitchurch,
Hants.

Post,  Mrs.  Wm.,  St.  Lucie,  Fla.  ;  and  Buckhannon,  W.  Va.,
U.S.A.

*Potter,  John  Wilson,  219  Ashley  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
Powell,  C.  Berkeley,  J.P.,  283  Metcalfe  Street,  Ottawa,  Canada.
Powell,  Ellis  T.,  D.Sc,  Rosedene,  Brondesbury  Park,  London,
N.W.  6.

*Powell,  Mrs.,  Ashdown  Place,  Forest  Row,  Sussex.

Powles,  Lewis  Charles,  Bother  Cliff,  Rye,  Sussex.
*Preedy,  Kenelm.  77  Warwick  Road.  London,  S.W.  5.
*Price,  H.,  Royal  Societies'  Club,  63  St.  James's  Street,  London,

S.W.  1.
*Prideaux-Brune,  H.,

Prindle,  H.  E.,  New  Paltz,  Ulster  Co.,  New  York,  U.S.A.
*Proctor,  Captain  G.  Norman,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co.,  Hornby  Road,
Bombay,  India.

*Pulver,  S.  H.,  Dunedin  House,  Basinghall  Avenue,  London,  E.G.  2.
*Pumphrey,  Mrs.,  Hindley  Hall,  Stockfield-on-Tyne.

Putman,  Miss  Irene,  328  Wahiut  Avenue,  San  Diego,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Pye,  W.  A.,  Priest  Hill,  Limpsfielcl,  Surrey.

*Pynsent,  R.  B.,  New  University  Club,  St.  James's  Street,  London,
'  S.W.  1.

Quackenbos, John D.,  M.D.,  37  West  73rd  Street,  New  York
City,  U.S.A.

*Quinby,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Bridgewater,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Radcliffe-Whitehead,  Ralph,  Woodstock,  Ulster  Co.,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
*Radclyffe-Hall,  Miss  M.,  7  Trevor  Square,  Ivnightsbridge,  London,
S.W.  7.

Rae,  J.  Burnett,  M.B.,  61  Harley  Street,  London,  W.  1.

Raikes,  E.  B.,  Drayton  Old  Lodge,  Norwich.

Raikes,  Mrs.,  Beomonds,  Chertsey,  Surrey.
*Raines,  Lady,  46  Sussex  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.  2.
*Rajagopaliengar,  R.  V.,  Royampet,  Tiruvadi  P.O.,  Tanjore  Dt.,
Madras  Presidency,  India.


454


Merahers  and  Associates.


[part


*Rampling-Rose,  Major  W.,  Llyndir  Hall,  Rossett,  nr.  Wrexham.  '

Ramsden,  Miss,  16  Incognito  Gade,  Christiania.  }'
*Randell,  Rev.  J.  Mickley,  3  Park  Mansions,  Vauxhall  Park,  !

London,  S.W.  8.  |
*Ransom,  Francis,  Newlands,  Hitchin,  Herts.  \
*Rashdall,  The  Very  Rev.  Hastings,  The  Deanery,  Carlisle.  |
*Rashleigh,  John  C.  S.,  M.D.,  Throwleigh,  Okehampton,  Devon.

Rawlinson,  Rev.  G.  C,  20  Holbein  House,  London,  S.W.  1.  '\
*Rawsthorn,  Mrs.,  Yew  Trees,  Ashton-on-Ribble,  Preston.  |
*Rayleigh,  The  Dowager  Lady,  65  Cadogan  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  3.  ^

Reade,  Herbert  V.,  C.B.,  181  Queen's  Gate,  S.  Kensington,  London,  i'
S.W.  7.  i

Ready,  Miss  E.  A.,  74  Regent  Road,  Leicester.  i
*Reckitt,  Miss  Juliet  E.,  20  Dulwich  Wood  Park,  Upper  Norwood,  'i
London,  S.E.  19.  j
*Reeves,  Mrs.  M.  S.,  31  Pembroke  Square,  London,  W.  8.  |

Regina  Madre,  S.  M.  La,  Palazzo  Margherita,  Rome.  '

Reid,  Mrs.,  Crescent  House,  Effingham  Road,  Surbiton.  j
*Reid,  J.  Kenelm,  M.D.,  39  Linden  Gardens,  London,  W.  2.  ^

Rendall,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  H.,  Dedham  House,  Dedham,  Essex.
*Rhondda,  Sybil  Viscountess,  Llanwern,  Newport,  Mon.  i
*Richardson,  Dalton,  M.D._,  404  Scarborough  Building,  Austin,  ,
Texas,  U.S.A.  \

Richardson,  Frederick  W.,  County  Analyst's  Office,  Hustlergate,  j
Bradford.  I

Richmond,  Kenneth,  St.  Merryn,  North  Cornwall.  j

Riddle,  Mrs.,  Hillstead,  Farmington,  Corm.,  U.S.A.  ■;
*Ridley,  Henry  N.,  F.R.S.,  C.M.G.,  7  Cumberland  Road,  Kew,  '
Surrey.  j

Ridley,  M.  Roy,  11  Percival  Road,  Chfton,  Bristol.  I
*Ridley,  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Daleham  Gardens,  London,  N.W.  3.  ;

Ridley,  The  Viscountess, 10  Carlton  House  Terrace,  London,  |


Ritchie,  A.  J.,  Oriental  Club,  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.
Ritchie,  Thomas,  J.P.,  Conservative  Club,  St.  James's  Street,
London,  S.W.  1.

Riviere,  Mrs.  Evelyn,  10  Nottingham  Terrace,  York  Gate,  London,
N.W.  1.

Rix,  Rev.  A.  H.,  The  Vicarage,  Shelf  near  Halifax,  Yorks.
*Roach,  0.  A.,  401  Cedar  Street,  San  Antonio,  Texas.


S.W.  1.


lxxxl]


Members  and  Associates.


455


Robbins,  Judge  Rufus  M.,  West  Palm  Beach,  Florida,  U.S.A.

Roberts,  W.  M.,  Bar  Harbour,  Maine,  U.S.A.

Robertson,  Mrs.  J.  G.,  90  Regent's  Park  Road,  London,  N.W.  1.

Robinson,  George  R.,  25  Water  Street,  Liverpool.

Robson,  Hon.  Kathleen,  26  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.  L

Rogers,  Edmund  J.  A.,  M.D.,  CM.,  222  West  Colfax  Avenue,
Denver,  Colo.,  U.S.A.

Rogers,  Rev.  F.  C,  St.  John's  Vicarage,  Colchester,  Essex.
*Rogers,  George  F.,  M.D.,  4  King's  Parade,  Cambridge.

Rogers,  T.  Percival,  Henleaze  Park,  Westbury-on-Trym,  Glouces-
tershire.

*Rose,  T.,  Sunnyside,  Harold  Wood,  Nr.  Romford,  Essex.

Ross,  Samuel,  67  WiUis  Street,  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Russell,  i\Irs.,  68  Madeley  Road,  Ealing,  London,  W.  5.
*Russell,  Mrs.  E.  S.,  Bryans'  Ground,  Presteign,  Radnorshire.
*Rust,  Dr.  Montague,  Boyndie,  West  Newport,  Fife.
*Ryan,  Mrs.  E.,  51  Hallam  Street,  London,  W.  I.

Ryder,  Miss  M.  L.,  122  Pevensey  Road,  Eastbourne.

Ryves,  Miss  Evangeline,  Damory  Cottage,  Walton-on-the-Hill.

St.  Hill,  Mrs.,  Thimble,  Littlewick  Green,  Berks.
*St.  John,  Brig. -General  G.  F.  W.,  C.B.,  Picton  House,  Llandowror,

St.  Clears,  Carmarthenshire.
*Salter,  F.  R.,  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge.
*Salter,  W.  H.,  The  Crown  House,  Newport,  Essex.
^Salter,  ]\Irs.  W.  H.,  The  Crown  House,  Newport,  Essex.

Samaldas, Hon. Lalubhai, 99  Apollo  Street,  Fort,  Bombay,
India.

*Sassoon,  Mrs.  Alfred,  Weirleigh,  Matfield  Green,  Kent.
Savill,  Mrs.,  M.D.,  7  Devonshire  Place,  London,  W.  1.
*Savory,  Ernest  J.  C,  61  Carey  Street,,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,
W.C.  2.

*Savory,  H.  J.,  7  Shamrock  Street,  Napier,  New  Zealand.
*Scatcherd,  Miss  F.  R.,  14  Park  Square,  Regent's  Park,  London,
N.W.  1.

Schaaf,  Albert  E.,  2034  East  83rd  Street,  Cleveland,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
*Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  D.Sc,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.

Schofield,  Mrs.,  30  Argyll  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
*Schoff,  Wilfred  H., 110  Montgomery Avenue, Cynwyd,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Scott,  ]\Iiss  A.  D.,  Darent  Hulme,  Shoreham,  nr.  Sevenoaks.


456


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Scott,  Rev.  D.  D.,  C.F.,  The  Manse,  Onehunga,  Auckland,  New
Zealand.

*Scott,  Lieut. -Colonel  G.  B.,  27th  Punjabis,  c/o  Henry  S.  King  &

Co.,  9  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.  L
Scott,  Captain  J.  E.,  Chelsfield,  Sneyd  Park,  Bristol.
Scott,  Mrs.  Minturn,  Waterside  Coj)se,  Liphook,  Hants.
*Scott,  Sydney  C,  92  Westbourne  Terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.2.
*Scott,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  3  New-nham  Walk,  Cambridge.
Scott,  W.  Sibbald,  M.B.,  Irwell,  Winchcombe,  Glos.
Seabra,  Alberto,  M.D.,  rua  15  de  Novembre  No.  9,  SaO  Paulo,
Brazil.

*Sebastien,  C,  Sanchez,  Samana,  Re^^ublica  Dominicana,  W.  Indies.
Sedgwick,  Mrs.  H.  D.,  120  E.  22nd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Selborne,  The  Earl  of,  K.G.,  Blackmoor,  Liss,  Hants.
Sellers,  Miss  R.  A.,  Wellesley  Girls'  High  School,  Naini  Tal,  India.
*Sempill,  Colonel  The  Master  of,  c/o  Naval  Dejjt.,  Tokyo.  Japan.
Seton-Karr,  Captain  H.  W.,  8  St.  Paul's  Mansions,  London,  W.6.
*Sewell,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  21  Royal  York  Crescent,  Clifton,  Bristol.
Seymour,  Admiral  of  the  Fleet  Sir  E.  H.,  O.M.,  G.C.B.,  G.C.V.O.,
Hedsor  View,  Maidenhead  Court,  Maidenhead,  Berks.
*Seymour,  Miss  E.  F.,  South  Cottage,  Pirbright,  Surrey.
Shackleiord,  Hon.  Thomas  M.,  Room  420,  American  National

Bank  Building,  Tampa,  Florida,  U.S.A.
Shakes]Dear,  Mrs.,  12  Brunswick  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,
W.  8.

Shand,  Alexander  F.,  1  Edwardes  Place,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
Shastri, B. G., Railway Magistrate and Registrar,  Udaipur

(Mewar),  India.
Shaw,  Arnold  E.,  Grove  House,  Asplej^  Guise,  Beds.
*Shaw,  Mrs.  Bernard,  10  Adelphi  Terrace,  Strand,  London,  W.C.  2.
Shaw,  Rev.  Sir  Charles  J.  Monson,  Bart.,  The  Rectory,  Wrotham,
Kent.

Shaw,  Lady,  10  Moreton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
Sheldon,  Miss  M.,  The  High  School,  Bargate,  Grimsby.
Sheets,  J.  C.

*Shewan,  R.  G.,  c/o  Shewan,  Tomes  &  Co.,  Hong  Kong,  China.
*Shove,  Miss  E.,  M.B.,  30  York  Street  Chambers,  Bryanston  Square,
London,  W.  1.

Sibly,  F.  Arthur,  LL.D.,  Haywardsfield,  Stonehouse,  Glos.
*Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.


lxxxl]


Memhers  and  Associates.


457


Silver,  Mrs.  Kingston,  33  Marsham  Street,  Westminster,  London.
S.W.  1.

Silvester,  Captain  R.  S.,  27  St.  John's  Hill,  Clapliam  Junction,

London,  S.W.  11.
*Sime,  Mss  E.  Boyd,  35  Anson  Road,  Tufnell  Park,  London,
N.  7.

*Sime,  J.  Boyd,  Dean  iVIills,  Hawick,  N.B.

*Simmonds,  Miss  C.  E.,  33  Clarence  Gate  Gardens,  London,  N.W.  1.
Simpson,  IVIiss  Price,  Beech  Barns,  Alton,  Hants.
^Sinclair,  Miss  May,  1  Blenheim  Road,  St.  John's  Wood,  London,
N.W.  8.

Singh,  Amar,  Hoshiarpur,  Punjab,  India.
*Slight,  L.,  66  Wadham  Road,  North  End,  Portsmouth.
Sloggett,  Lieut. -General  Sir  Arthur,  K.C.M.G.,  K.C.B.,  6s  Bicken-
hall  Mansions,  London,  W.  1.
*Sloss,  ]\Irs.,  c/o  Societe  des  Nations,  Geneva,  Switzerland.
Smith,  Adolphe,  12  Crookham  Road,  Fulham,  London,  S.W.  6.
Smith,  Miss  Beatrice  E.,  Lea,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.
Smith,  G.  Albert,  Rosedene,  7  Melville  Road,  Hove.
*Smith,  H.  Arthur,  7  Queen's  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,  W.  6.
Smith,  Sir  H.  Babington,  C.B.,  121  St.  James's  Court,  Buckingham

Gate,  London,  S.W.  1.
Smith,  J.  Hoyle,  Spring  Bank,  Eccles,  Lancashire.
*Smith,  Right  Hon.  J.  Parker,  J. P.,  D.L.,  41  Drumsheugh  Gardens,
Edinburgh.

Smith,  Rev.  Sidney  M.,  Holy  Trinity  Vicarage,  Halifax,  Yorkshire.

Smith,  Mrs.  WiUiam,  c/o  The  Royal  Bank  of  Australia,  18  Bishops-
gate,  London,  E.G.  2.

Smith,  WiUiam  Hawley,  2039  Knoxville  Avenue,  Peoria,  111.,  U.S.A.

Smith,  Rev.  WiUiam  J.,  St.  Marnock's  Manse,  Kilmarnock.
*Smith,  W.  Whately,  Rackenford  Lodge,  Weybridge,  Surrey.
*Smith,  Mrs.  W.  Whately,  Rackenford  Lodge,  Weybridge,  Surrey.
*Smithson,  Mrs.,  42  Tilehouse  Street,  Hitchin,  Herts.

Snow,  Mrs.,  1  Brown  Road,  Hoe  Street,  Walthamstow,  Essex.

Soley,  Mrs.,  66  Holbein  House,  Sloane  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.

Southern,  H.,  24  Carholme  Road,  Forest  HiU,  London,  S.E.  23.

Spencer,  Major  R.  E.  E.,  Walbottle  Hall,  Newburn-on-Tyne.

Spens,  William,  Corpus  Christi  CoUege,  Cambridge.
*Spranger,  John  A.,  4  Via  Micheli,  Florence,  Italy.

Stacey,  F.  C,  5  Fulready  Road,  Ley  ton,  London,  E.  10.


458


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Stanton,  Rev.  Horace  C,  Ph.D.,  D.D.,  1818  Arch  Street,  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  U.S.A.
*Stanton,  Mrs.,  Armscote,  Stratford-on-Avon.

Steel,  Mrs.,  Court  o'  Hill,  Tenbury,  Worcestershire.

Stephens,  Mrs.,  Hotel  Continental,  rue  Castiglione,  Paris.

Stephens,  W.  F.,  Mahe,  Seychelles,  via  Bombay.
*Sterling,  Miss  F.  M.,  Home  Wood,  Hartfield,  Sussex.
*Stevenson,  Mrs.,  52  Abinger  Road,  Bedford  Park,  London,  W.  4.

Stevenson,  A.  Creery,  Streeve,  Church  Circle,  Farnborough,  Hants.

Stewart,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Larghan,  Coujiar  Angus,  N.B.

Stewart,  Miss  M.  A.,  Queen  Anne's  Mansions,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Stobart,  Mrs.  St.  Clair,  7  Turner's  Wood,  Hampstead  Garden
Suburb,  London,  N.W.  4.

Stoehr,  Miss,  Hotel  Belvedere,  Bordighera,  Italy.

Stout,  Professor  George  F.,  Craigard,  St.  Andrews,  N.B.

Strachan,  W.  M.,  Strood  Park,  Horsham,  Sussex.
*Strachey,  John  St.  Loe,  Spectator  Office,  1  Wellington  Street,

Strand,  London,  W.C.  2.
*Stradling,  Capt.  R.  E.,R.E., Civil  Engineering  Dept.,  The  University,
Birmingham.

Stratton,  F.  J.  M.,  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cambridge.
Streatfeild,  W.  H.  R.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  42  Ovington  Square,
London,  S.W.  3.

Strode,  Miss  E.  L.  C,  63  Lonsdale  Road,  Barnes,  London,  S.W.  13.

Strutt,  Captain  Hon.  A.  C,  R.N.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.
*Strutt,  Hon.  Richard,  Rayleigh  House,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
*Sturdy ,  Edward  T. ,  Norburton,  Burton  Bradstock,  Bridport,  Dorset.
*Summerson,  F.  C,  222  South  Norwood  Hill,  London,  S.E.  25.

Swaine,  Mrs.  R.  C,  Letch  worth  Lane,  Letch  worth,  Herts.

Swainson,  Miss  F.  J.,  Stonecross,  Kendal.
*Swainson,  Miss  M.,  23  Warrington  Crescent,  London,  W.  9.
*Swayne,  Mrs.  Noah  Haynes,  Junr.,  Drawer  N.,  Ardmore,  Pennsyl-
vania, U.S.A.

Swinburne,  Mrs.,  The  Manor  House,  Southwick,  Sussex.
Tait,  Mrs.,  St  Andrew's  House  Club,  31a  Mortimer  Street,  London,
W.  1.

Tait,  Mrs.  W.  J.,  LismuUen,  Arthur  Road,  Wimbledon  Park,
London,  S.W.  19.
*Talbot,  Mrs.  Hugh,  1  Oakwood  Court,  Kensington,  London,  W.  14.
*Talbot,  P.  Amaury,  c/o  The  Secretary,  Lagos,  Nigeria.


1


Lxxxi.]  Members  and  Associates.  459

*Tatham,  A.  T.,  ^lountain  Rise,  Pietermaritzburg,  S.  Africa.
Tatliam,  Hon.  Justice  F.  S.,  D.S.O.,  Parkside,  Alexandra  Road,
Pietermaritzburg,  S.  Africa.
*Taylor,  Miss  E.  Waring,  23  Warrington  Crescent,  Maida  Hill,

London,  W.  9.
*Taylor,  H.  Dennis,  Stancliffe,  The  Mount,  York.
*Taylor,  Mrs.  Lewis  S.,  Yacht  Violeta,  c/o  Royal  Cornwall  Yacht

Club,  Falmouth.
*TeUing,  W.  H.  Maxwell,  M.D.,  29  Park  Square,  Leeds.
Temple,  Reginald  W.

Tennent,  W.  J.,  69  Essex  Street,  Masterton,  New  Zealand.

Thatcher,  ]\Irs.  G.  R.,  20  Alexandra  Road,  Ivingston  Hill,  Surrey.
*Thaw,  A.  Blair,  1  Via  Lazzaro  Spallanzani,  Rome,  Italy.
*Thesiger,  Mrs.  Ernest,  6  Montpelier  Terrace,  London,  S.W.  7.
*Thomas,  Rev.  C.  D.,  South  Hill  Lodge,  Bromley,  Kent.

Thomas,  Miss  Edith  J.,  Mynydd  Ednyfed,  Criccieth,  N.  Wales.

Thomas,  Ernest  Seymour,  The  Residencj",  Alexandria,  Egy23t.
*Thomas,  Miss  S.  E.,  368  Alexandra  Park  Road,  Wood  Green,
London,  N.  22.

Thompson,  Edwin,  Woodlands,  13  Fulwood  Park,  LiverjDool.
Thompson,  Sir  Matthew  W.,  Bart.,  39  Steeles  Road,  Haverstock

HiU,  London,  N.W.  3.
^Thompson,  Owen,  K.C.,  2  Arkwright  Road,  Hampstead,  London,

N.W.  3.

*Thomson,  Edward  J.,  6  Windsor  Terrace  West,  Kelvinside,  Glasgow.
Thorburn,  Rev.  T.  J.,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  21  St.  Helen's  Road,  Hastings.
Thornley,  Miss  F.  J.,  36  Downleaze,  Stoke  Bishop,  Bristol.
Thorp,  Richard,  Colenso  Hill,  Napier,  New  Zealand.
Thrupp,  T.  C,  Claremont,  Woodlands  Road,  RedliiU,  Surrey.
Thurston,  Rev.  Herbert,  31  Farm  Street,  Berkeley  Square,  London,
W.  1.

Tipping,  Miss  K.,  7  Lansdowne  Circus,  Leamington.
*Todd,  Miss  C.  E.,  1  Clarence  Road,  Teddington,  Mddx.
Torkildsen,  Vilhelm,  Bergen,  Norway.

Tottenham,  Miss  Mary  T.  A.,  Ballycurry,  Ashford,  Co.  Wicklow,
Lreland.

*Trethewy,  A.  W.,  4  St.  James's  Place,  London,  S.W.  1.

Trevor,  The  Lady  Juliet,  16  Upper  Brook  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Trotter,  Mrs.,  Chatley,  Norton  St.  Phihp,  Bath.  |
*Troubridge,  Lady,  7  Trevor  Square,  Kjiightsbridge,  London,  S.W.  7.  ^

I


I


460


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Tubby,  Miss  G.  Ogden,  5  West  47th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Tucke.y,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  27  Silverdale  Road,  Eastbourne.
Tudor,  Owen  S.,  Friday's  Hill,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
*TugweU,  Mrs.  Arthur,  49  St.  Catherine's  Road,  Southbourne,
Bournemouth.

*Turner,  Miss  J.,  B.A.,  14  Endsleigh  Street,  London,  W.C.  1.

Tuson,  K.  H.,  Lieut.,  R.E.,  Brompton  Barracks,  Chatham.
*Tyrone,  The  O'Neill  de,  59  rua  das  Plores,  Lisbon,  Portugal.
*Tyrrell,  G.  N.,  Torbay  House,  Parkstone,  Dorset.

Tyrwhitt,  Rev.  H.  M.,  19  The  Glebe,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.  3.

Ulman,  Mrs.  Jacob  A. ,  Brooklandville,  Baltimore  County,  Md. ,  U.S.A.
*Upton,  Miss  Florence  K..  21  Great  College  vStreet,  Westminster,
London,  S.W.  1.

Van  Deren,  H.  S.,  Nashville,  Tenn.,  U.S.A.

*Van  Loon,  Dr.  F.  H.,  c/o  Hoofdbureau  B.G.D.,  Weltevreden,  Java.

Van  Meurs,  H.,  Schenck-de-jong-weg  6,  Buitenzorg,  Java.

Van  Renterghem,  A.  W.,  M.D.,  1  Van  Breestraat,  Amsterdam.

Vatcher,  Mrs.,  21  St.  Leonard's  Road,  Ealing,  London,  W.  13.
*Venancourt,  Comte  de,  7  Rue  Duperre,  Paris.
*Verney-Cave,  Hon.  Mrs.,  Stanford-on-Avon,  Rugby.

Verrall,  Miss  M.  E.,  The  Lydd,  West  Hoathly,  Sussex.
*Vett,  Carl,  Strandvej  6  Str.,  Copenhagen,  Denmark.

Vyvyan,  Mrs.  T.  C.  Poldhu.  Richmond,  Natal,  South  Africa.

Wagner,  W.  Q.,  St.  John  Street,  Melrose,  Johannesburg,  S.  Africa.

Waite,  Miss  E.  V.,  Ackworth,  Station  Road,  Epping,  Essex.
*Wales,  Hubert,  Homewood  Heath,  Hinclhead,  Surrey.
*Waley,  S.  D.,  18  The  Green,  Kew,  Surrey.

Walker,  Mrs.  Claude.  12  Southwood  Court,  Hampstead  Garden

Suburb,  London,  N.W.  4.
Walker,  Miss  Madeline  J.,  107  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.  7.
Walker,  Miss  May  C,  National  Provincial  Bank,  Llandudno,

N.  Wales.

*Walker,  Lieut.-Col.  P.  L.  E.,  36  Princes  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  7

Walker,  R.  A.,  RoUeston,  Stretton,  Cromer  Road,  Bournemouth.

Walker-Munro,  Mrs.,  Rhinefield,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.
*  Wallace,  Abraham,  M.D.,  Wendela,  Harrow-on-the-HiU,  Middlesex.

Wallace,  C.  A.,  1  Adelaide  Avenue,  Belfast,  Ireland.

Walsh,  Rev.  A.  Digby,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Club,  Pall  MaU,
London,  S.W.  1.

Walsh,  Correa  M.,  Belleport,  Long  Island,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.


LXXXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


461


Wanderley,  F.  M.,  Corumba,  Matto  Grossa,  Brazil.
Wang,  C.  Y.,  Rue  de  Paris  Extension,  Hankow,  China.
*Warburton,  A.  P.,  c/o  A.  Scott  &  Co.,  Rangoon,  Burma,  India.
Ward,  Hon.  Kathleen,  Aughnacloy  House,  Killiney,  Co.  Dublin,
Ireland.

*Warner,  Rev.  D.  V.,  1370  Greene  Avenue,  Westmount,  Montreal,
Canada.

Warren,  iVIrs.  Fiske,  8  Mount  Vernon  Place,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Warrender,  Miss  Margaret,  50  Wilton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.  1.

WasteU,  Mrs.,  The  Rowans,  Crowborough,  Sussex.

Watson,  Mrs.  Milne,  73  Eccleston  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.

Watson-Taylor,  Mrs.,  Dibleys,  Blewbury,  Didcot.

Webster,  ]Mrs.  Julia  C,  Swanton,  Vermont,  U.S.A.

Weinberg,  Dr.  A.  A.,  Helperoostsingel  2,  Groningen,  Holland.
*Weinberg,  Harry  J.,  North  Road,  The  Park,  Nottingham.
*Wellesley,  Victor  A.  A.  H.,  C.B.,  20  St.  Loo  Mansions,  St.  Loo
Avenue,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.

Wemyss,  Countess  of,  23  St.  James's  Place,  London,  S.W.  1.

Western,  P.  J.,  Cambridge  Mission,  Delhi,  India.
*Westlake,  Ernest,  Godshill,  Fordingbridge,  Salisbury.
*Weston,  James,  37  Queen  Street,  Worthing,  Sussex.

Weston,  Miss  Lena  E.,  Rumbers  Hill  House,  Tunbridge  Wells,
Kent.

*Westray,  Mrs.,  25  Cavendish  Road  West,  St.  John's  Wood,  London,
N.W.  8.

*Wetterstad,  Dr.  S.,  Bondernes  hus,  Christiania,  Norway.

Wheeler,  C.  Bickersteth,  80  Hamilton  Terrace,  London,  N.W.  8.

Whitaker,  Joseph  J.  S.,  ViUa  Malfitano,  Palermo,  Sicily.
*Wliitehead,  Miss  Mercia  D.,  St.  Mary's,  Trumpington,  Cambridge.
*Whitfield,  A.  Stanton,  F.R.Hist.S.,  Bentley  Moor,  Walsall,  Staffs.
*Whitmee,  A.  C,  Homelands,  Fortis  Green,  London,  N.  2.

Whiton,  Rev.  J.  M.,  Ph.D.,  65  West  127th  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Wigan,  W.  L.,  Clare  Cottage,  East  Mailing,  Maidstone,  Kent.

Wild,  Miss  Ida,  Old  Larkshayes,  Dalwood,  Axminster,  S.  Devon.

Wilding,  Mrs.,  11  Essex  Street,  Strand,  London,  W.C.  2.

Wilkins,  Mrs.,  10  Grosvenor  Square,  Rathmines,  nr.  Dublin.

W^ilkins,C.  F.,  c/o  Messrs.  H.  S.  King  &  Co.,  9  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Wilkins,  Rev.  H.  J.,  D.D.,  Redland  Green,  Bristol,  Glos.
*Wilkmson,  Mrs.  L.  G.,  Cromwell  House,  Haresfield,  nr.  Stonehouse.


4G2


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Wilkinson,  Miss  Marian,  S.,  Ford  Cottage,  Water  End,  York.
Wilkinson,  Sidney,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  49  Rodney  Street,  Liver-
pool.

Willcocks,  Miss  M.  P.,  35  Pennsylvania  Road,  Exeter.

Willett,  Miss  Cicely,  c/o  Standard  Bank,  Simon's  Town,  Cape
Province,  S.  Africa.

Williams,  Mrs.  Glynne,  7  Berkeley  House,  Hay  Hill,  London,  W.  1.

Williams,  Mrs.  S.  R.,  12  Lorne  Road,  Oxton,  Cheshire.

Williamson,  Mrs.,  The  Copse,  Brook,  Godalming,  Surrey.
*Williamson,  John,  M.D.,  Heathfield,  18  College  Road,  Epsom.
*Williamson,  The  Very  Rev.  Dr.  Wallace,  44  Palmerston  Place,
Edinburgh.

Williamson,  Mi's.,

W^illiams -Walker, Dr. A., National Hospital, Queen  Square,

London,  W.C.  1.
WiUis,  Grant  B.,  173  W.  Second  Street,  Mansfield,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
*Willock,  Mrs.  C.  J.,  Elderton  Lodge,  Thorpe  Market,  Norwich.
Wilson,  Charles  J.,  Derlamogue,  Ailesbury  Park,  Dublin.
*Wilson,  Mrs.  C.  M.,  Queen  Anne's  Mansions,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Wilson,  Mrs.  C.  Stuart,  Gresham  House,  Sharia  Sulieman  Pasha,
Cairo,  Egypt.

Wilson,  Mrs.  H.  J.,  12  Cheyne  Court,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
Wilson,  Percy,  48  Clarendon  Road,  Putney,  London,  S.W.  15.
*Wilson,  R.  S.,  c/o  Peirce  Leslie  &  Co.,  Ltd., Calicut,  Malabar
Coast,  Lidia.

*Winby,  Lieut. -Col.  L.  P.,  39  Upper  George  Street,  London,  W.  1.

Wingham,  T.  A.,  174  Aberdeen  Avenue,  Hamilton,  Ontario, Canada.

Wise,  Miss  A.  Stewart,  16  West  Kensington  Gardens,  London,  W.  14.

Witherby,  Arthur  George,  Newtown  Grange,  Newbury,  Berks.
*Wodehouse,  The  Lady  Isabel,  Kimberley  House,  Wymondham.
*Wolf,  Franciso  Eugene  de,  P.O.  Box  269,  Bristol,  Rhode  Island,
U.S.A.

*Wood,  Richard,  Roseville,  Sunday's  Well,  Cork.
*Wood,  T.  Eugene,  The  Limes,  Kedleston  Road,  Derby.

Woodhull,  Miss  Zula  M.,  Norton  Park,  Bredon's  Norton,  near
Tewkesbury,  Gloucestershire.

Woods,  Miss  Alice,  St.  Ives,  Radlett,  Herts.

Woods,  Miss  C.  E.,  13  Cowley  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W".  1.
Woollett,  Lieut. -Colonel  W.  Charles,  F.S.A.,  4  The  Ridges,  Farn-
boro',  Hants.


LXXXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


463


*WooUey,  F.  Duke,  M.D.,  2  Palace  Court,  London,  W.  2.
WooUey,  V.  J.,  M.D.,  18  Freta  Road,  Bexley  Heath,  Kent.
*Worsfold,  Mrs.  Basil,  3  Plowden  Buildings,  Temple,  London,
E.G.  4.

Wrangham,  W.  H.,  78  Barmouth  Road,  Wandsworth,  London,
S.W.  18.

*Wriford,  ]\Ii-s.,  21  Bullingham  Mansions,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Wright,  Captain  A.  F.,  M.C.,  Trent  Valley  House.  Lichfield.
*Wright,  G.  E.,  Has  Madoc,  York  Road,  Guildford,  Surrey.
*Wright,  Maurice  B.,  M.D.,  4  Devonshire  Place,  London,  W.  1.

Wynn,  John,  Lieut.,  Widney,  Solihull,  Warwickshire.

Yaraschenko,  Madame,  La  Cava,  Bordighera,  Italy.

Yeats,  W.  B.,  4  Broad  Street,  Oxford.

Younghusband,  Sir  Francis,  3  Buckingham  Gate,  London,  S.W.  1.
Zeehandelaar,  Dr.  I.,  39  Sarphatistraat,  Amsterdam,  Holland.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

INDEX  TO  VOL.  XXXI
(PARTS  LXXIX-LXXXI)

1920-21

Adaptation  to  reality.  On  the  difficulties  of  -  -  43-45,  48-49
American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Proceedings  of  -  -  30
Amnesia  in  dissociation  and  secondary  personalities  47,  57,  58-59,

121-123,  409-410,  416

Anaesthesia  of  hysteria - -  41,  46,  52-53.  57.  409  (footnote)

,,  Self-induced  49  (footnote)

Apparitions,  a  prmiitive  '"  spirit phenomenon  - - -  77.  80

Association  experiment.  Procedure  of - - - 87-88,  401-402
Psycho-galvanic  reactions . . . .  402-403
,,  ,,  Suggested  application  of,  for  the

investigation  of  trance-controls - - -  401-416
Automatic  writing  the  work  of  dissociated  states  of  consciousness  47-48

B.  C.  A.  case  of  multiple  personality  - - - -  121-122,410

Balfour,  The  Rt.  Hon.  Gerald  W.—

Criticism of W. Whately Smith's A Sugge-ited  New

Method  of  Research  - - - - - -  413

,, Author's  reply - - - - - - -  414

Notion^of  Monads  and  psychical  research - - 110  (footnote)
Sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard  - - -  325-326,  333,  368  (footnote)
Barnes,  Mary,  Case  of - - - - - - - -  61

Barrett,  Sir  William,  In  Memory  of  Sir  William  Crookes  -  -  12
Beadon,  Mrs.,  Book-tests  received  by  -  -  244,  260-269,  383
Beauchamp  Case  of  multiple  personality - - - 58,  61,  112,  121


466


Index  to  Vol.  XXXI. [parts  lxxix.-


Body  and  Mind,  Author's  comments  on  the  argument  in  -  -  110
Book-tests,  A71  examination  of,  obtained in  Sittings  with  Mrs.

Leonard. By  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick -----  242

Introductory . . .  242-253

General  description  of  book-tests . - . .  242-244

Typical  case 247-250

Main  interest  338

Origin  243

Earliest  record ------ 253  (footnote)

Tabulation  of  successes  and  failures - - - -  245-246

Case  where  the  communicator's  memory  seems  the  probable

source  of  information ------  253-260

Cases  of  accurate  description  of  objects  near  - - -  386-393

Crystal  Ball  and  Tassa 391-393

"  Le  Canape  Bleu  "  -  -  -  249-251,  260,  285,  366,  367,  370
Statuette  of  Adeline  Genee - -  285,  286,  366,  386-391

Cases,  Some  Miscellaneous 289-300

Chance,  Question  of

244,  252,  260,  270,  271,  280,  302-303,  376,  379-386
Cases  which,  to  the  author  of  the  report,  appear  least  possible

to  explain  by  chance . - . .  376  (footnote)

Experhnent  to  test  the  probability  of  chance 379-383,  385-386
Communicator  and  Control,  distinct  personalities  in  their  own

consciousnesses ------  364-365

,, Mental  condition  of,  when  communicating.  Control's

statement  on  - - - - - - 350  (footnote)

,, Modes  of  communication  between, 350  (footnote),  351-352,

364-372

,,  Building  up 365-366,  372

., Feda's  uncertainty  as  to  the  order  of  the
figures forming  the page  number,

260-261,  263,  264-265,  365

„  Motor  impulses 369-370

,,  Oral - - - -  365

,,  Symbolic  gestures  365

„  Visions 366-369,  370-371

Communicators —

A.  V.  B. See  below,  Book-tests.

Dr.  and  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall. See  below,  A.  W.  V.  Book-tests.
Others. See  below.  The  book-tests  of  individual  sitters.
Conclusion ---------  375-378

Cross -correspondence.  Question  of  - - - - -  313-338

Examination  of  the  records  for  indications  of  the  mode  of

perception  of  a  page  in  a  closed  book - -  349-374,  398-400
Comniunicators'  statements  on  the  way  the  pages  are  arrived

at 350,  352,  353-355


LXXXI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXXI.


467


Book-tests —

Communicators  on  the  mode  of  apprehending  the  printed  matter

355-364,  399-400

„  on  the  method  of  selecting  messages  352  (footnote)

Experiments,  Special 300-313

Identity,  Personal,  of  the  commmiicator,  evidence  of  253,  260,  338
Instances  of  statements  about  words  or  sentences  in  a  closed

book  which  turn  out  to  be  verbally  correct - -  270-289
Knowledge  of  external  things  near  the  book-tests

247,  249-251,  260,  283-286,  366-367,  370,  386-393
Mistakes,  Seemingly  genuine,  and  others 268-269, 338-348,  349,

393-397

Message  found  not  on  the  page  named  but  in  corresponding

position  on  an  adjoining  page 270,  271,  276,  277,  281-282,

294,  304,  345-347,  349-350,  357
Conmiunicator's  explanation -----  349-350
Mrs.  Beadon's  Book-tests  and  Comments  thereon  244,  260-269,  368-

369,  376  (footnote),  383
Note  on  Chance  in  Book-tests  .....  379-386
Soxirce,  Possible,  of  the  supernormal  knowledge  displayed —

Clairvoyance 246-247,  291-292,  375-378

Cases  which,  to  the  author  of  the  report,  are  most  convincing

376  (footnote)

Memory  of  the  communicator - -  246,  251,  253-260.  285,  292,

345  (foot-note)

Telepathy  from  the  dead ... - 253,  260,  338,  375
,, from  the  sitter  or  other  living  persons  246,  250-251,  259,

260,  285.  300,  301,  309,  375

Book-tests  included  in  the  above  report —

A.  Y.  B.,  243,  244,  248-253,  264-265,  267,  271-286,  289-297,  300-313,
314-317,  328-333,  334-337,  339-341,  345-346,  347-348,  349-
353,  355-357,  358-359,  360,  362-364,  365-370,  371-374,
376  (footnote),  379,  386-396,  398-399

Messages  about  lights 272-275

„ and  A.  W.  V., - - - 277-281,  296-297,  301,  334-337
A.  W.  v.,  243-244,  277-281,  286-289,  296,  297-300,  301,  315,  318-325,
333-338,  341-345,  351,  354,  355,  357-358,  360,  361,  365,
366,  376  (footnote),  396-397,  399-400
„ and  Mrs.  Verrall  - -  244,  297-300,  333,  341,  351

Sitters,  Individual,  received  by —

Mrs.  Beadon ....  244,  260-269,  376  (footnote),  383

Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell 373-374

Miss  Radclyffe-Hall. See  above,  A.  V.  B.

S.,  G.  H. '  268

Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter. See  above,  A.  W.  V.


468


Index  to  Vol.  XXXI.


[parts  lxxix.-


Book-tests,  etc.,  Sitters,  Individual-
Mrs.  T.,  apiDarently  connected  with  Mr.  Piddington's

paper  on  the  "'  One-Horse-Dawn  "  Experiment  326-328

Mrs.  Hugh  Talbot 253-260,  338

Rev.  C.  Drayton  Thomas - 244,  270,  314,  346-347,  360,

364  (footnote),  384-385,  386
Apparent  connexion  with  an  A.  V.  B.  book-test  328-329,

330-332

(Una)  Lady  Troubridge. 5'ee  above,  A.  V.  B.
Mrs.  Stuart  Wilson,  unidentified - - - 267  (footnote)
Several  other  sitters'  book-tests.  Reference  to 253  (footnote),

268,  333,  349,  354,  357,  384
,, apparently  connected  with  Mr.  Piddington's  Further  Light

on  the  "  One-Horse-Dawn  "  Experiment 322,  323-325,

326-328


Chenoweth,  Mrs.,  Mediumship  of,  reference  to  -  -  -  -  30,  73
Clairvoyance,  in  a  case  of  dissociated  personality  -  66,  67,  68-69
connection  with  telepathy  -  -  -  -  377-378
,,  Helpful  clue  in  experimenting  -  377,  378
definition  of,  and  use  of  the  term  - - 242,  246-247

evidence  for.  On  the 375-377

experimental  work  on  247  (footnote),  377  (footnote)

Possible  som-ce  of  Book-tests 246-247,  291-292,  375-378

Telepathic  377

Communications  purporting  to  come  from  the  dead. See  Book-
tests.

Telepathy  between  the  living  and  its  bearing  iipon  210-212
Communicators —

A.  V.  B.  ;  Dr.  and  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall ;  and  others.  See

Book-tests  obtained  in  sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard.
Uncle  Jerry,  Reference  to  ------  103

Complexes,  Jting's  theory  of 80-83,  84,  85-89

„  On  the  nature  of  87-88

,,  ,, source  of  87-92

Consciousness,  Problems  of  110-120,  121-123

„  Theory  of  co-consciousness  - -  42,  121,  122-123

unity  of -  57,58,110-120,121-123
,, Distinction  between,  and  unity

of  the  self - - - -  57

See  also  Dissociation.

Control  :  A.  V.  B. 272-273,  313,  348

Hallucinatory  Lights 272-275

Controls,  A  suggested  method  of  investigation  of  the  psycho-
logical status  of  401-416

,, Distinction  between  general  and  personal 408  (footnote),  410


LXXXI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXXI.


469


Cook,  Florence,  Sir  William  Crookes  on,  reference  to  - - 21,  24-26
Cory,  Professor  C.  E.,  A  case  of  dual  personality - -  122-123
Crookes,  Sir  William,  In  Memory  of  - - - - - -  12

,,  Psychical  investigations  20-29
,,  contributions  to  the  Proceedings  and  Journal  29

Davey,  S.  J.,  Reference  to  the  slate-writing  of  - - - -  238
Dissociated  Personality. See  The  Doris  Fischer  Case.
Dissociation  of  consciousness,  a  beneficial  process 43,  45,  47,  48-49
,,  Capacity  for  and  possibility  of - - - -  44

On  the  origin  of 41-49,64,112

„ Repression  and -------  45-47

Source  of  secondary  personalities - - - 57-58,  64
,, Supernatural  powers  in  states  of 47-48,  65-69,  71-72
Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Personality  - - - - 30,  112

History  31-39

Hypnotic  phenomena  - - - - . 32-34,  40,  49-50

Hysterical  features - - - 32-34,  39.  40,  41,  43,  51-52,  72
Problems  raised.  Discussion  of ----- -  39-74

Psychoanalytic  interpretation,  Data  for - - - -  42

Secondary  personalities.  Disposition  and  character 30-31,  32-39,

61,  63-64,  72-73

„  „  Memory  relations  existing  between  59

,,  Mode  of  disappearance  - - -  52-55

Source  of  -  -  -  -  57-58,  64
Spiritistic  interpretation  of  "  Sleeping  Margaret,"'  On  the  -  69-73
Suggestive  power  of  co-conscious  personalities,  examples  of  -  51-55
Supernormal  aspect --------  65-74

Incidents 65-69,  71-72

Dream,  On  the  phenomenon  of  the,  80,  83,  85,  94,  97,  98-99,  101,  102,

114-115,  416

,, Primitive  interpretation - - - - - -  78,  80

Dreams,  Telepathic. See  Mr.  Wales'  Report  on  Apparent  Thought-
transference  without  Conscious  Agency.

Ego  or  Self,  Unity  of  the  - - - -  57-58,110-120,121-123

FiTZMAURiCE,  Mrs.,  Evidence  contributed  by  -  -  -  258-259
Fliigel,  J.  C,  Review  of  Freud's  Totem  and  Taboo.  Resernhlances

between  the  Psychic  Lives  of  Savages  and  Neurotics  - -  224
Freud,  Exposition  of  the  works  of - - - - -  94-102
Freud's  theories,  of  dissociation  of  consciousness - 41-42,  46,  64
dreams - - -  94,  97,  98-99,  100,  102

magic 226-227

the  Unconscious  - - - - 94,  95,  96,  224
„ Totem  and  Taboo. Resemblances  between  the  Psychic  Lives  of
Savages  and  Neurotics. Review  of  224


470


Index  to  Vol.  XXXI.


[PARTS  LXXIX.-


Fuller,  H.  H.,  Thought-transference  attributed  to  the  agency  of  125,
126-127,  129,  131-132,  160-162,  181-183,  199,  213-217


Hallucinations,  Auditory  and  visual,  in  a  case  of  dissociation  -  66

Hanna,  Mr.,  Reference  to  the  case  of - - - - -  61

Harvard  Psychological  Laboratory,  Experimental  study  of  tele-
pathy and  alleged  clairvoyant  processes - - - -  218

Head,  Dr.  Henry,  the  effects  upon  sense-perception  of  injuries  to

the  brain - - - - - - - - -  -117

Hodgson  Memorial  Fund,  Report  on  the  work  done  in  1916-17

imder - - - - - - - - - -  218

Home,  D.  D.,  Sir  William  Crookes  on.  Reference  to  - - -  21-23


"  Horace  Ode  Question,"  apparent  Book-test  reference  to  318-319,  323
Howard,  Miss  Sylvia,  Evidence  contributed  by  144  (footnote),  166,  198
Hypnosis,  Phenomena  of  34-35,  40,  49-52,  55-56,  115,  116,  121-122,  210,

416

Hyslop,  Dr.  J.  H.,  On  the  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Per-
sonality 30,  65,  73-74

Hysteria,  Phenomena  of  34,  39,  40,  41-43,  46,  47,  48,  52,  56,  57,  72,  416
Primitive  "  spirit  "  interpretation -----  78

In  Memonj  of  Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  F.R.S. - - -  12
,, Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.  1

James,  William,  President  of  the  Society . - - -  105
,,  ,, On  suppressed  selves  in  human  personality -  60

Janet,  Dr.  Pierre,  On  dissociation  and  hysteria 41-42,  43,  46,  121
Jones,  Dr.  Ernest,  Papers  on  Psycho -Analysis. Second  editioyi.

Review  of  ---------  94

,,  Lieutenant  E.  H.,  The  Road  to  Endor.  Review  of  -  -  229
Journal  of  Abnormal  Psychology,  Dr.  Morton  Prince's  discussion

of  the  B.  C.  A.  Case  of  multiple  personality  - 121-122,  410
,, Professor  C.  E.  Cory's  case  of  dual  personality  - -  122-123
Jung,  Dr.  C.  G.—

The  Psychological  Foundations  of  Belief  in  Spirits  -  -  75
Studies  in  W ord-Associatioyi,  Reference  to  . - .  402

Theory  of  Complexes 80-83,  84,  85-89

the  Dream 80-82,83,115

Symbolism  100,  101

The  Unconscious . . . .  84-87,  95,  96,  99

"  Le  Canapk  Bleu  "  -  -  -  249-251,  260,  285.  366,  367,  370
Leonard,  Mrs.  Osborne,  Trance  phenomena  of. See  Mrs.  Henry

Sidgwick's  Examination  of  Book-tests.
Life  after  death,  Development  of  views  of  - - - -  119-120
Lights,  Hallucinatory 272-275


LXXXI.]


Index  io  Vol.  XXXI.


471


Lodge,  F.  L.,  Evidence  contributed  by - - - -  103-104

Lodge,  Sir  Oliver —

In  Memory  of  Lord  Bayleigh  1
Note  on  "  A  Record  of  Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of

Trance  "  103

M'DouCxALL;  William,  F.R.S.,  Presidential  Address  - - -  105
Memory,  Apparent  dependence  of,  on  the  integrity  of  the  brain  116-118
,, Relations  existing  between  Secondary  Personalities -  59
Miles,  C,  Experiments  in  Thought-transference,  Reference  to -  210
Mitchell,  Dr.  T.  W.,  The  Doris  Fischer  Case  of  Multiple  Per-
sonality ------  30

,,  Review  of  Dr.  Ernest  Jones's  Papers  on

Psycho-Analysis,  second  edition  - -  94
,,  ,,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard  and  Book-tests

received -----  373-374

Monads,  The  notion  of -------  110-123

Bearing  on  question  of  Survival  - - - -  119-120

Exponents  of  1 10  (footnote)

Multiple  Personality. See  Personality.

Mj-ers,  F.  W.  H.,  On  the  Subliminal,  reference  to - - -  95-96
„ Telepathy  ----- 209  (footnote)
,, ,, ,, TeliBsthesia ------  377

Neuroses,  Parallelism  between  certain  priniitive  Systems  of

Thought  and 224-228

Note  on  "  .4  Becord  of  Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of

Trance" . . -  103

CEdipus,  Apparent  reference  to,  in  ^Irs.  Leonard's  trance -  325-326
"One  Horse  Dawn"  Experiment,  Further  Liqht  on - -  323-324
Book-tests  apparently  connected  with - 322,  323-325,  326-328
Q^dixDus,  Apparent  reference  to,  in  Mrs.  Leonard's  trance  325-326
Telepathic  impressions  apparently  connected  with -  145-146

Perovsicy-Petrovo-Solovovo, Count, On  the  hallucination

theory,  reference  to  22  (footnote),  27

Personality,  Human,  Problems  of —

Conception  of  its  nature  and  evolution  43-45,  48-49,  57-63,  110-116
Disintegrating  forces. See  Dissociation  of  Consciousness.
Multiple,  Cases  of,  reference  to  - 42,  58,  61,  112,  121-123

,, Discussions  on. See  The  Doris  Fischer  Case  ;  also

Journal  of  Abnormal  Psychology.
,, Secondary  Personalities —

Child-hke - - - - - - -  60-61


472


Index  to  Vol.  XXXI. [parts  lxxix.-


Personality,  Human,  Problems  of —

Multiple,  Secondary  Personalities —

Classification,  Discussion  on  the  problem  of  -  58-65
,,  based  on  memory  - -  58,  59

,, „ Character - -  59-61
Fundamental  lines
of  cleavage -  61-64
,,  ,,  possession  of  Super-

normal power -  65
Co-conscious  type  - - - -  58,  59,  122

Extinction  by  gradual  regression  to  childhood

and  infancy  52-55
Memory  relations  between - -  58-59,121-123
Monistic  view . . - .  116,121-123
Soui'ce  --------  57

Spiritistic  inter]3retation  -  -  -  30,  73-74
Suggestive  power  in  co-conscious  series

51-52,  55-56,  123

Supernormal  powers -----  65

Trance-controls,  Question  of their  identity

with  -------  401-416

See  also  Theories  of  :  Complexes,
and  The  Unconscious.

"  Peveril,"  Miss  Ray  - - - -  192

Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  On  the - - - 10,  20-27
The  hallucination  theory - - - - -  22  (footnote),  27
Piddington,  J.  G.,  Further  Light  on  the  "  One  Horse  Dawn"  Ex-

■periment.  Reference  to - - -  322,  323-326,  327-328

Piper,  Mrs.,  Note  on  the  trance  phenomena  of  -  -  -  -  103
Post -psycho -analytic  School  .  .  -  .  -  loO,  101,  102
Presidential  Address  by  Dr.  W.  M'Dougall  -  -  -  -  105
Primitive  psychology  in  regard  to  belief  in  souls  and  spirits

76-80,  83-84,  88,  89,  91,  92
Systems  of  thought,  parallelism  between  certain,  and

neiu-oses 224-228

Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  Discussion  of  the  B.  C.  A.  case  of  multiple

personality  112-122,  410

Prince,  Dr.  Walter  F.,  and  the  Doris  Fischer  Case

30-40,  49-50,  51-55,  65-73
Psj^chical  research,  Attitvide  of  psychologists  and  other  men  of

science  to  106-108

Psycho-Analysis,  Papers  on,  by  Dr.  Ernest  Jones,  Review  of  94
Psychoanalysts  and  the  phenomena  of  multiple  personality -  42,  45
,,  On  the  teaching  and  work  of - -  42,  43,  45,  46,  64

Psychology  and  Psychical  Research -----  106-108


LXXXI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXXI.


473


Radclyffe-Hall,  Miss M.,  (and (Una) Lady  Troubridge),
Book-tests  received  by. See  Book-tests  :  A.  V.  B.
A  Series  of  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard,  Reference  to -  366
Ramsden, Miss H., Experiments in  tliought-transference,

Reference  to -------- -  210

'■  Randolph,  '  a  possible  cross -correspondence  between  a  Book-
test  and  Mrs.  Stuart  Wilson's  aiitomatism - - 289,  313
Rayleigh,  Lord,  Iti  Memory  of ------ -  1

Presidential  Address,  Reference  to - 208,  210  (footnote)
,, Psychical  research,  work  on - - - - 7,  9-11

Record,  A,  of  Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance,''^

Note  on,  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge ------  103

Report,  A,  on  a  Series  of  Cases  of  Apparent  Thought-transference

without  Conscious  Agency -------  124

For  detailed  references,  see  under  Thought-transference.
Repression,  Psychoanalytic  theory  of . - - - 96-97,  224
Reviews —

Freud's  Totem  and  Taboo. Resemblances  between  the  psychic

lives  of  Savages  and  Neurotics -----  224
Dr. Ernest Jones's Papers on Psycho-Afialysis,  Second

edition ---------  94

E.  H.  Jones's  The  Road  to  Endor  229

Dr.  L.  T.  Troland's  A  Technique  for  the  Experimental  Study

of  Telepathy  and  Other  Alleged  Clairvoyant  Processes -  218
Reynolds,  Mary,  Reference  to  the  case  of  - - - - -  61

Richet,  Professor  Charles,  Experiments  in  Clairvoyance,  Refer-
ence to ------  247  (footnote),  377

Road,  The,  to  Endor,  by  E.  H.  Jones. Review  of - - -  229

St.  Paul,  Conversion  of,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  theory  of

Complexes - .  82-83

Salter,  W.  H.,  Review  of  The  Road  to  Endor  .  .  .  .  229
Salter,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Script  of,  Experiment  to  influence,  through

A.  V.  B.  - - 330,  335-336

,, Sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard  and  Book-tests  received.
See  Book-tests  :  A.  W.  V.  and  Mrs.  Verrall.
Samuels,  Miss  Jane. See  "  Report  on  a  Series  of  Cases  of
Apparent  Thought-transference  without  Conscious  Agency."
Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  D.Sc,  On  dissociation -----  45
,, Review  of  Dr.  L.  T.  Troland's  A  Technique  for  the  Experi-
mental Study  of  Telepathy  and  Other  Clairvoyant  Processes  -  218
Secondary  Personalities. See  Personality,  Multiple.
Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry,  An  Examination  of  Book-tests  obtained  in

Sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard - - - - -  241
For  detailed  references,  see  under  Book-tests.
„ Experiments  in  Thought-transference.  Reference  to  209-210


474


Index  to  Vol.  XXXI.


[parts  lxxix.-


Silberer,  Dr.,  On  the  theory  of  Symbolism  - - -  100-101

Smith,  W.  Whately,  A  Suggested  New  Method  of  Research - 401,  414
Smyth,  Miss  D.  Bowyer,  evidence  contributed  by - - -  258
Society  for  Psychical  Research —

Members  and  Associates,  List  of  -  - - - -  419

Offioers  and  Coimcil  for  1921 - - - - - -  417

On  the  work  of  the  Society . . . .  39-40,106-109

Spirits,  Existence  of,  from  the  viewpoint  of  modern  psychology  -  92-93
Interpretation  of,  by  the  theory  of  Complexes - -  83.  92
Sjjirits,  The  Psychological  Foimdations  of  Belief  in - - -  75
Statuette of Adeline Genee. See "  Book-tests obtained  in
Sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard  :  Cases  of  Accurate  description
of  objects."'

Studies  in  Word-Association,  by  Dr.  C.  G.  Jung,  Reference  to  -  402
Subliminal  activity  and  communications  purporting  to  come

from  the  dead  210-212

,,  Myers's  conception  of  the - - . . .  95-96

Suggested,  A,  New  Method  of  Research,  by  W.  Whately  Smith -  401
Criticism  of - - - - - - - - -  413

,, Author's  reply  to - - - - - -  414

Suggestion,  Hypnotic  50-51
Relations  subsisting  between  hj^pnotic  personalities

in  co-conscioiLS  series ------  51

,,  from  within,  in  cases  of  secondary  personalities  51-52,  55-56
Survival,  bearing  of  the  conception  of  monism  upon  the  cjuestion

of  119-120

,,  evidence  of  personal  identity  -  -  -  253,  260,  338
Symbolism,  The  Psycho-analytic  theory  of - - -  98-102

Talbot,  Mrs.  Hugh,  Book-test  .  .  .  .  253-260,  338
Technique,  A,  for  the  Experi^nental  Study  of  Telepathy  and  Other

Alleged  Clairvoyant  Processes,  by  L.  T.  Troland. Review  of  218

Telacsthesia,  On  377

See  also  Clairvoyance.
Telepathy  and  clairvoyance,  Probable  close  connexion  of  - -  377
„ at  a  distance. See  "  Thought-transference,  Report

on  Cases  of,  without  Conscious  Agency."
„ between  the  living  and  its  bearing  upon  communica-
tions purporting  to  come  from  the  dead -  210-212

Experimental  218

See  also  Thought-transference,
from  the  dead.  Question  of - - 253,  260,  338,  375
„ in  connexion  with  dissociated  states  - 47-48,  67-68

On  the  evidence  for 9,  109,  240

„ Question  of  the  nature  of  the  processes  concerned  208-210,  219
Against  the  jjhysical  theory - 210  (footnote),  212


LXXXI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXXI.


475


Thomas,  Rev.  C.  Drayton. See  under  Book-tests.

Thorjae,  Miss  C,  Evidence  contributed  by  -  190-191,  196,  198

Thought-transference,  Experimental,  Reference  to - -  209-210
Thought-transference  without  Conscious  Agency,  A  Report  on  a

Series  of  Cases - - - - - - - -  124

Apparent  premonitory  impressions - - . . .  200
^ Bodily  sensations  transmitted - . . -  126-127,213
Cases  in  which  the  aggregate  seems  to  exclude  chance-
coincidence  - - - - - - -  133

,, which,  assuming  a  telepathic  connexion,  seem  worth

examiiring  as  throwing  hght  on  its  nature - -  165
Casual  Agency - - - - - - - - -  189

Chance-Coincidences  ......  165-167

Classification  of  percipient's  impressions - - - -  130

Distortion  by  automatist  - - - - - -  167

Effort  inhibits  transference - - - - -  127-128

Independent  Agents - - - - - - - -  196

Mistakes  resembhng  mishearing  - - - - - -  199

Possible  transference  of  associated  ideas - - -  188
,,  ,, latent  thoughts - - - -  183

"  Rapport  "  objects -  199
Telepathy  as  against  clairvoyance - - - - -  188

Totem  and  Taboo. Resemblances  between  the  psychic  lives  of

Savages  and  Neurotics,  by  Freud. Review  of - - -  224
Trance-controls  and  secondary  personalities 40,  47-48,  61,  65,  401-416
,,  On  the  Cjuestion  of  their  identity - -  401-416

Trance  phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper,  Note  on  - - - -  103

Troland,  Dr.  L.  T.,  A  Technique  for  the  Experimental  Study  of

Telepathy  and'  other  Alleged.  Clairvoyant  Processes. Review  of  218
Troubridge,  (Una)  Lady  (and  Miss  Radclj^ffe-Hall),  A  Series  of

Sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard,  Reference  to - - - -  366

,,  Book-tests  received. See  Book-tests  :  A.  V.  B.

Unconscious,  The,  of  the  Child  94,  95

,, Parallelism  of  Jung's  concejDtion  of,  with  the  primitive

belief  in  souls  and  spirits - - - 84,  86-87,  88
Theories  of .... 84-86,  88-92,  94,  95,  96
Unitary  ego  or  self.  Theory  of  - -  57-58,110-120,121-123

Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  Communications  purporting  to  come  from.
See  Book-tests  :  Communicators.

Script  of 336-337

Visions,  Waking,  On  the  phenomenon  of  - - - -  81,  83

Primitive  "  spirit  "  interpretation ....  77,  80


476


Index  to  Vol.  XXXI.


[lxxix.-lxxxi.]


Wales,  Hubert,  A  R&port  on  a  Series  of  Cases  of  Apparent

Thought-transference  without  Cotiscious  Agency - - -  124
For  detailed  referencas,  see  under  Thought-transference.
Wilson,  Mrs.  Stuart,  A  possible  cross -correspondence  between  a

Book-test  and  the  automatism  of  ^ - 289,  313

,, Unidentified  book-test  . _ _ . 267  (footnote)

"  Word-association  "  test. See  Association  experiment.
