Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XXVII (1914-1915)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1914 Glasgow: Robert MacLehose and Co. edition (Parts LXVIII-LXX) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc27soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research


VOLUME  XXVII

(CONTAINING  PARTS  LXVIII,  LXIX,  LXX)
I914-I915


The  responsibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  in  papers
published  in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  with  their  authors


PRINTED  FOR  THE  SOCIETY  BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  COMPANY  LIMITED
UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  GLASGOW
1915

Agents  for  the  sale  of  publications  :

LONDON  :  FRANCIS  EDWARDS,  83  High  Street,  Marylebone,  W.
GLASGOW:  JAMES  MACLEHOSE  &  SONS,  61  St.  Vincent  Street
AMERICA:  THE  W.  B.  CLARKE  CO.,  26-28  Tremont  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

All  rights  reserved


Digitized  by

the  Internet  Archive

in  2015

https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc27soci


CONTENTS


PART  LXVIII.
January,  1914.

PAGE

I.  A  Reconstruction  of  some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."  By

Alice  Johnson.

Synopsis,  ..........  1

Introduction, .........  4

Chapter  I.  Cross-correspondence  : "  Ave  Roma  Immor-

talis,"  11

,, II.  The  Theory  of  Cross-correspondences  and  the

Latin  Message, ......  24

,,  III.  Cross-correspondence  : "  Hope, Star  and

Browning,"  .......  28

„  IV.  Cross-correspondence  :  "  Alexander's  Tomb,"  50
,, V.  The  avrbs  ovpavbs  aKu/xwi'  Incident, . .  77
,,  VI.  Cross-correspondence  :  "  The  Clavigers," .  127
,,  VII.  Some  General  Conclusions, . . .  .143

List  of  Illustrations,  . . . . . . .  .156

II.  Presidential  Address. By  Professor  Henri  Bergson.

Translated  by  H.  Wildon  Carr,  D.Litt., . . .  .157
Supplement  :  Review  :

Mr.  Hereward  Carrington's  "  Personal  Experiences  in

Spiritualism."  By  Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  17(i
Thought -Transference — Experimental. By John  E.

Coover,  Ph.D.,  186

PART  LXIX.
July,  1914.

I. Philosophy,  Science,  and  Psychical  Research  :  A  Presiden-
tial Address. By  F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc,  . .  .191

II.  Some  Recent Scripts affording  Evidence of  Personal

Survival. By  the  Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour,  .  221

III.  Note  on  the  Same  Scripts. By  the  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield,  244

IV.  A  Further  Study  of  the  Mac  Scripts. By  Helen  de  G.

Verrall, .........  250

168817


iv  Contents


PAGE

V. Experiments in Thought-Transference. By  Clarissa

Miles  and  Hebmione  Ramsden  279

VI. To  Clear  the  Air. By  the  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield, . .  318

VII.  The  History  of  Marthe  Beraud.  By  Helen  de  G.  Verrall,  333

SPECIAL  MEDICAL  SUPPLEMENT.

VIII.  Recent  Experience  in  Hypnotic  Practice. By  Sidney

Wilkinson,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  370

IX. Some  Auto-Suggested  Visions  as  illustrating  Dream-
Formation. By  V.  J.  Woolley,  M.D., . .  .390
X. Pseudo -Physical  Phenomena  in  the  Case  of  Mr.  Griin-

baum. By  Alice  Johnson, .....  400
Review  :  Professor  S.  Freud's  "  Psychopathology  of  Everyday
Life  "  (Translated  by  Dr.  A.  A.  Brill).  By  Constance
E.  Long,  M.D.,  411

PART  LXX.
May,  1915.

I. Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought -Transference.  By

Helen  de  G.  Verrall .......  415

II. A  Discussion  of  the  Willett  Scripts.

I.  By  Hereward  Carrington, .....  458

II.  By  Ivor  Lloyd  Tuckett,  M.D., ....  466

III.  By  the  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield,  474

Review  :  Dr.  Morton  Prince's  "  The  Unconscious,  The  Funda-
mentals of  Human  Personality,  Normal  and  Abnormal."

By  F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc  492

Officers  and  Council  for  1915, .......  507

List  of  Members  and  Associates,  .......  508

Index  to  Vol.  XXVIL,  548


PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE


Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LXVIII.

January,  1914.


I.

A  RECONSTRUCTION  OF  SOME  "CONCORDANT
AUTOMATISMS."

By  ALICE  JOHNSON.
SYNOPSIS.

PAGE

Introduction -  4

Correspondences  between  scripts  cannot  be  compared,
with  a  series  of  experiments  in  telepathy,  because  the
latter  is  made  up  of  isolated  units,  whereas  the  scripts
of  a  single  automatist  are  all  continuous.  The  methods
of  interpretation  that  we  apply  to  them  are  similar  to
those  generally  applied  to  works  of  literature  ;  examples.
The  obscurities  in  the  scripts  are  clue  partly  to  their
alhisiveness  and  conciseness,  and  partly,  it  is  suggested,
to  the  "  author's  "  wish  to  conceal  his  meaning  from
the  "  writers,"  in  order  to  prevent  the  action  of  tele-
pathy between  them,  till  his  experiment  is  complete,

A


2


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Recent  study  has  shown  the  meaning  of  much  that  PAGE
was  obscure  in  some  already  published  scripts,  and
some  of  the  results,  with  a  number  of  scripts  hitherto
unpublished,  are  given  in  the  present  paper.

Chapter I. Cross-correspondence  : "  Ave Roma  Im-

mortalis  " -  ....  11

Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  relating  to  this  topic  were  first
interpreted  as  alluding  to  Raphael's  picture  of  St.  Leo's
meeting  with  Attila.  It  now  appears  that  they  allude
also  to  the  Columns  of  Trajan  and  Marcus  Aurelius,
a  detail  in  the  former  of  which  was  copied  in  Raphael's
picture.  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  give  a  bird's-eye  view
of  the  history  of  Rome,  to  which  Mrs.  Holland's  corre-
sponding script  appropriately  applies.

Chapter  II. The  Theory  of  Cross-correspondences  and

the  Latin  Message  ...  -  24

Summary  of  the  Latin  Message  Experiment,  showing
its  place  in  the  order  of  events  and  of  cross-correspon-
dences.

Chapter III. Cross-correspondence  : "  Hope,  Star,

and  Browning  " -  ...  -  28

Mrs.  Holland's  contributions,  hitherto  unpublished,  to
this  case.  References  in  her  script  to  Professor  Mait-
land. Tabular  summary.

Chapter IV. Cross-correspondence  : "  Alexander's

Tomb  " -  -  -  50

Discovery  that  this  phrase  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  re-
ferred to  Alexander  de'  Medici,  who  was  buried  in  one
of  the  two  Medici  tombs  at  Florence  ;  and  that  other
allusions  to  the  Medici  occur  in  other  scripts,  especially
through  the  Laurel,  which  was  the  emblem  of  Lorenzo
the  Magnificent.  Summary  of  facts  about  the  Medici
and  their  tombs  which  are  referred  to  in  the  scripts  ;
description of the two tombs. Detailed  discussion


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


3


of  the  scripts  of  Mrs.  Holland,  Mrs.  Verrall,  Mrs.  Piper,  PAGE
Miss  Verrall,  the  "  Mac  "  family,  and  Mrs.  Willett,
relating  to  this  case. Chronological  summary.

Chapter  V. The  avrog  ovpavos  aKVfxwv  Incident  -  77

General  summary  of  the  incident.  Detailed  report  :
Mrs.  Verrall 's  choice  of  a  test-question  to  be  put  to
MyerSp  ;  references  to  the  subject  in  the  Piper  sittings
and  in  the  scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall,  Miss  Verrall,  and
Mrs.  Holland  emoted  and  discussed.  Chronological
summary.

Chapter  VI. Cross-correspondence  :  "  The  Clavigers  "  127

Connected  with  "  Ave  Roma  immortalis  "  and  with
auTO?  ovpavog  aKu/mcov.  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  quoted
and  analysed  ;  her  references  to  Hercules  and  St.  Peter,
the  Club-bearer  and  Key-bearer,  also  to  binding  and
loosing,  and  to  St.  Sebastian,  interpreted  as  alluding  to
the  Church  of  San  Pietro  in  Vincoli.  Mrs.  Holland's
scripts  ;  her  references  to  Leah  and  Rachel  and  Moses
interpreted  as  alluding  to  the  tomb  of  Julius  II,  in  the
same  church.  Euripidean  references  in  Mrs.  Piper's
and  Mrs. Holland's  scripts. Chronological  summary.

Chapter  VII. Some  General  Conclusions  -  143

The  scripts  are  a  composite  product,  the  knowledge
and  mental  activities  of  the  "  writers  "  being  moulded
under  the  guidance  of  a  supervising  intelligence, — the
"  author."  Examples  of  cases,  showing  in  a  graduated
scale  the  apparent  influence  of  the  "  author "  as  a
more  and  more  important  factor  :  (1)  "The  One-Horse
Dawn  "  ;  the  "  author  "  faintly  indicated  through
the  rational  use  made  of  a  fact  completely  forgotten
by  the  experimenter.  (2)  "  Ave  Roma  immortalis  ;
the  fresh  points  brought  forward  in  this  paper  show  hi
the  combination  of  the  scripts  of  the  two  writers  more
intelligent  mental  action  and  reasoning  than  can  easily
be  attributed  to  either  writer  alone. (3)  The  "  Sevens  "


4


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Case  ;  the  compounding  of  two  separate  topics  in  the
scripts  of  six  writers  suggests  the  influence  of  a  single
"  author  "  on  all  of  them.  In  order  to  avoid  the  in-
fluence of  living  experimenters  or  of  writers  on  the
scripts,  it  is  necessary  for  the  "  author  "  to  conceal  his
design  from  them  till  his  own  experiment  is  complete.
One  device  is  to  allude  to  some  specific  but  unfamiliar
feature  of  a  familiar  object,  so  that  they  do  not  recognise
the  allusion.  Examples  :  the  allusions  to  the  Columns
of  Trajan  and  Marcus  Aurelius  ;  to  the  tomb  of  Julius
II.,  and  to  the  Medici  tombs.  But  the  "  author  "  must
ultimately  reveal  his  design, — e.g.  by  showing  through
the  script  of  one  writer  unsuspected  connections  between
the  scripts  of  two  other  writers.  Example  :  "  Alex-
ander's Tomb."  Evidence  afforded  in  this  case  by
the  writers'  misinterpretation  of  their  own  scripts  that
the  "  author  "  had  apparently  succeeded  in  concealing
his  design  from  them.  The  connection  between  the
scripts  of  two  writers  given  hi  1907  in  a  third  writer's
script  was,  in  fact,  not  recognised  till  1912,  when  it
was  observed  that  the  "  author "  had  revealed  it  in
1910  through  the  script  of  a  fourth  writer.  Continued
study  makes  it  more  and  more  difficult  to  explain  the
mass  of  cross-correspondences  as  due  to  the  unaided
subliminal  powers  of  the  writers.


List  of  Illustrations  -  156


INTRODUCTION.

The  increasing  complexity  of  commentaries  on  the  automatic
scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall,  Mrs.  Holland,  Mrs.  Piper,  and  others,
as  well  as  some  recent  criticisms,  suggests  the  desirability  of
a  few  preliminary  remarks  on  the  nature  of  the  phenomena
dealt  with.

It  has  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  they  differ  in  several  ways
from  typical  experiments  in  telepathy  between  living  per-
sons. In  the  latter  case,  each  experiment  can  be  counted
as  successful,  partially  successful,  or  a  complete  failure.  If,


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."  5

therefore,  the  experiments  are  limited  to  a  specified  set  of
objects  to  be  guessed,  such  as  a  pack  of  playing-cards,  it
is  possible  to  state  precisely  whether  the  success  is  more
than  would  probably  be  obtained  by  chance,  and  if  so,  how
much  more.  Even  if  the  experiments  are  not  thus  limited,
it  is  still  possible  to  say  how  many  of  them  have  been  suc-
cessful, though  in  that  case  we  can  only  judge  by  general
considerations  of  common-sense  whether  the  amount  of  success
is  more  than  could  reasonably  be  attributed  to  chance.

The  coincidences  between  the  scripts  of  different  auto-
matists  cannot  be  estimated  as  such  experiments  can,  because
there  is  no  way  of  deciding  what  should  be  regarded  as  the
ecpiivalent  of  an  experiment  :  we  cannot  say  that  so  many
experiments,  or  what  is  ecpaivalent  to  so  many,  have  been
tried.  Further,  the  coincidences  obviously  vary  so  much
in  importance  that  their  mere  number  can  have  no  significance,
while  the  scripts  also  vary  greatly  in  length  and  as  to  the
number  of  topics  contained  in  each.

From  these  causes  alone  no  mathematical  estimate  of  the
amount  of  coincidence  as  compared  with  the  amount  that
might  have  been  obtained  by  chance  is,  or  can  ever  be,
possible  in  the  case  of  the  scripts.  And  this  is  one  reason
why  the  inferences  to  be  drawn  from  them  cannot  be  stated
in  a  brief  and  explicit  form.

But  there  is  a  still  more  fundamental  difference  between
experiments  in  telepathy  and  correspondences  between  scripts.
A  typical  series  of  experiments  is  composed  of  isolated  units,
like  throws  of  dice,  when  each  throw  is  a  separate  matter,
complete  in  itself  and  exercising  no  influence  whatever  on
any  of  the  other  throws.  On  the  other  hand,  a  script  repre-
sents an  emergence  of  ideas  from  the  automatist's  subliminal
consciousness,  so  that  it  is  potentially,  if  not  actually,  con-
tinuous with  all  the  other  scripts  of  the  same  automatist.
Therefore,  if  a  script  is  treated  by  itself  as  an  isolated  unit,  most
of  its  significance  will  probably  be  missed  ;  just  as  the  words
and  actions  of  a  hypnotised  person  might  be  completely
misunderstood  by  persons  who  were  ignorant  of  the  events
of  his  previous  hypnotic  states.

The  scripts  have  therefore  to  be  analysed  very  carefully  ;
all  the  allusions  made  to  any  topic  at  different  times  should


6


Alice  Johnson.


[part


be  compared  together  ;  and  when  this  is  done,  it  often
happens  that  a  passage  that  has  seemed  vague  and  meaningless
becomes  clear  and  significant  through  the  light  thrown  on
it  by  other  scripts.

"  Search  the  scriptures  and  the  dust  shall  be  converted
into  fine  gold,"  as  the  Mac  script  observed  1  in  connection
with  references  to  Sesame  and  Lilies,  obviously  meaning
that  the  same  sort  of  careful  verbal  study  should  be  applied
to  the  scripts  that  Ruskin  applied  to  a  portion  of  Lycidas
in  the  lecture  Sesame  ;  and  a  few  instances  may  be  given
to  show  that  the  usual  way  of  treating  literary  problems  is
actually  very  much  like  our  way  of  treating  the  scripts.

The  three  following  quotations  from  Dante  illustrate  the
fact  that  passages,  which,  when  isolated,  appear  vague  or
meaningless,  may  throw  light  on  one  another  and  become
clear  when  put  together  :

(1)  "  The  next  who  followeth  [in  the  ejebrow  of  the  eagle],  .  .  .
to  give  place  to  the  £>astor,  made  himself  a  Greek  "  (Par.  XX.  55).

(2)  "  Then  ...  I  saw  the  eagle  descend  down  into  the  body
of  the  car  [i.e.  the  Church],  and  leave  it  feathered  with  his
plumage  "  {Purg.  XXXII.  124).

(3)  "  Ah,  Constantino  !  to  how  much  ill  gave  birth,  not  thy
conversion,  but  that  dower  which  the  first  rich  Father  took  from
thee  !  "  (Inf.  XIX.  115).

These  passages  are  shown  to  be  connected  by  the  same
kind  of  internal  evidence  that  leads  us  to  regard  certain
scripts  as  connected,  viz.  by  their  having  points  in  common.
Between  (1)  and  (2)  are  two  points  in  common  :  the  Eagle
(generally  representing  in  Dante  the  ideal  Roman  Empire)
and  the  Pastor  or  the  Church.  The  connection  between  (1)
and  (3)  is  also  twofold— the  "Pastor"  and  the  "Greek"  of
(1)  being  equivalent  to  the  "Father"  and  "  Constantine  "  of
(3).  Thus  (3)  throws  light  on  (1)  and  (2),  and,  when  we  consider
Dante's  known  views  on  the  relation  of  Church  and  State,
it  becomes  clear  that  all  three  passages  allude  to  the  tradition
(believed  by  him)  that  Constantine  transferred  the  capital  of
the  Roman  Empire  to  Constantinople  out  of  gratitude  to

1  See  Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  307.


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


7


Pope  Sylvester  for  curing  him  of  leprosy,  and  with  the  object
of  leaving  to  the  Pope  and  his  successors  the  sovereignty
over  Italy.  This  explains  the  allegory  in  (2),  by  showing
that  the  feathers  shed  by  the  Eagle  are  equivalent  to  the
"dower"  in  (3).

From  the  point  of  view  of  understanding  the  passages,  it
does  not,  of  course,  matter  that  they  are  historically  incor-
rect ;  the  only  question  is  what  Dante  meant  ;  and  it  appears
that  he  is  expressing  in  a  brief  and  concise  way  both  the
supposed  facts  and  his  own  condemnation  of  the  action
which — through  its  giving  rise  to  the  temporal  power  of
the  Papacy — he  believed  to  be  at  the  root  of  most  of  the
evils  of  his  time.

Similarly,  it  is  of  no  consequence  for  the  purposes  of  inter-
pretation whether  the  scripts  are  historically  or  linguistically
correct  ;  the  only  essential  question  is,  what  is  the  meaning
intended  to  be  conveyed  by  the  writing  ;  and  this  can  often
be  made  clear  by  putting  two  or  more  passages  together.

In  the  next  instance,  the  recurrence  of  the  same  striking
phrase  in  two  different  works  by  the  same  author  affords
evidence  of  a  continuity  of  thought  between  the  two  occa-
sions :

(1)  "  But  thought's  the  slave  of  life,  and  life  time's  fool."

(Hotspur's  dying  sj^eech  in  King  Henry  IV.,  Part  I.)

(2)  "  Love's  not  Time's  fool,  though  rosy  hps  and  cheeks

Within  his  bending  sickle's  compass  come."

{Sonnet  CXVI.)

I  think  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  Shakespeare  in  this
second  passage  was  remembering  and  alluding  to  the  first,1
just  as  one  script  may  allude  to  a  much  earlier  one.

Again,  the  combination  of  the  same  words,  phrases,  or
ideas — none  very  striking  hi  itself, — in  two  widely  separated
passages  of  the  same  work  is  evidence  of  continuity  of  thought

1  The  date  of  composition  of  the  Sonnets  is  supposed  to  have  spread  over
a  number  of  years,  and,  the  one  quoted  being  late  in  the  series,  it  is  probable,
though  not  certain,  that  it  was  written  after  King  Henry  IV.  The
internal  evidence  afforded  by  a  comparison  of  the  two  quotations  makes
it,  I  think,  almost  certain  that  the  second  was  the  later  one.


8


Alice  Johnson.


[part


between  the  two  passages.  Thus  in  Browning's  Aristophanes'
Apology,  near  the  beginning,  we  find  :

"  O'er  this  world
Extends  that  realm  where,  '  as  the  wise  assert,'
Philemon,  thou  shalt  see  Euripides
Clearer  than  mortal  sense  perceived  the  man  !  "

And  after  a  great  deal  of  intermediate  matter,  ineluding
the  translation  of  a  whole  play  of  Euripides,  Philemon  him-
self says  :

"  Grant,  in  good  sooth,  our  great  dead,  all  the  same,
Retain  their  sense,  as  certain  wise  men  say,
I'd  hang  myself — to  see  Euripides  !  "

Here  there  is  no  exact  verbal  parallelism,- — the  nearest
being  "  as  the  wise  assert  "  and  "  as  certain  wise  men  say  "  ;
but  the  general  similarity  both  of  words  and  of  ideas  is  so
great  that  it  seems  certain  that  in  the  second  passage  Brown-
ing was  deliberately  referring  back  to  the  first.

One  more  instance  will  illustrate  another  important  point
in  our  argument  about  scripts.

Lamb,  in  his  poem  On  an  infant  dying  as  soon  as  born,
writes  :

"  Shall  we  say  that  Nature  blind,
Check'd  her  hand,  and  changed  her  mind,
Just  when  she  had  exactly  wrought
A  finish'd  pattern  without  fault  ?
Could  she  flag,  or  could  she  the,
Or  lack'd  she  the  Promethean  fire  .  .  .
That  should  thy  little  limbs  have  quicken 'd  ?  "

Though  the  central  idea  of  this  passage — the  creative  Pro-
methean fire — is,  of  course,  to  be  found  in  many  writers,  the
fact  that  Lamb  was  especially  familiar  with  Othello  makes  it,
to  my  mind,  pretty  certain  that  he  was  here  borrowing  from
Othello's  solilocjuy  before  he  killed  Desdemona  :

"  Once  put  out  thy  light
Thou  cunning'st  pattern  of  excelling  nature,
I  know  not  where  is  that  Promethean  heat
That  can  thy  light  relume."

{Othello,  Act  V.,  Sc.  2.)


lxviii.]  Some  -i  Concordant  Automatisms."


9


There  are,  it  will  be  seen,  other  slight  resemblances  between
the  two  passages  ;  but  my  view  that  Lamb  derived  his  "  Pro-
methean fire  "  from  this  rather  than  from  other  sources  is
based  not  so  much  on  the  resemblances  as  on  what  is  known  of
his  intimate  knowledge  of  the  play.

Similarly,  we  may  trace  fragmentary  phrases  in  the  scripts
to  literary  sources  with  which  the  automatists  are  known
to  be  familiar.  E.g.  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  (see  below,
pp.  45  and  114)  I  trace  "  the  perfect  strength  "  (March  20,  1907)
to  Rossetti's  Blessed  Damozel  ;  and  "  a  billowy  cloud  "  (April  8,
1907)  to  Browning's  Last  Ride  Together,  because  both  these
poems  are  very  well  known  to  her.  If  the  phrases  had  occurred
in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  I  should  feel  much  less  confidence  as  to
their  origin.  It  follows  that  there  may  be  cases  in  which  the
fact  that  something  is  within  an  automatisms  normal  knowledge
adds  to  the  evidence  for  supernormal  interaction  hetween  the
scripts  of  different  automatists.  See  e.g.  the  composite  Brown-
ing-Tennyson quotation  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  April  8,
1907,  below,  p.  112.

The  scripts  are  like  the  literary  productions  of  cultivated
writers  in  that  subjects  are  often  alluded  to,  instead  of  being
definitely  mentioned,  and  the  allusion  often  implies  some
literary  or  historical  association,  so  that  a  great  deal  of  meaning
is  sometimes  contained  in  a  single  short  phrase.  But  they  carry
us  a  step  further  than  ordinary  literary  productions  in  this
way  :  for,  whereas  in  studying  a  poem,  such  as  the  Divina
Commedia  or  Aristophanes'  Apology,  we  often  find  light  thrown
on  one  passage  by  (among  other  things)  another  passage  in
the  same  poem  ;  in  studying  the  scripts,  we  often  find  that
light  is  thrown  on  the  script  of  one  writer  by  a  passage  in  the
script  of  another  writer,  when  there  has  been  no  normal  com-
munication between  the  two  writers.  In  the  case  of  the  poem,
the  continuity  of  thought  is  naturally  to  be  accounted  for  by
its  being  all  the  work  of  the  same  author.  And  the  continuity
of  thought  throughout  the  scripts  would  suggest  that  their
continuity  is  to  be  accounted  for  in  a  similar  way, — namely,
that  they  too  are  all  essentially  due  to  the  same  author.

I  here  use  the  words  "  author  "  and  "  writer  "  to  express
two  different  things. By  the  word  "  author "  I  mean  the


10  Alice  Johnson.  [part

intelligence — whether  one  or  several — behind  the  scripts  ;
and  by  the  word  "  writer  "  I  mean  the  person  who  performs
the  act  of  writing, — the  automatist.  An  author  may  either
write  his  own  compositions  or  get  some  one  else  to  write
them  for  him.  But  the  terms  may  be  used  without  prejudice
as  to  what  the  relation  of  the  author  to  the  writer  is,  and
without  implying  any  view  as  to  the  "  author's  "  nature.

If  the  different  scripts  are  not  all  essentially  due  to  the
same  "  author,"  we  must  suppose  that  the  supernormal  con-
nections between  them  are  the  result  of  telepathy  between  the
writers,  aided  perhaps  by  telepathy  to  the  writers  from
the  investigators  in  charge  of  the  scripts.  We  have  seen  that
the  scripts  are  obscure  in  the  same  way  that  literary  works  are
often  obscure,  through  their  allusiveness  and  their  great  con-
ciseness. But  they  have  also  special  obscurities  of  their  own,
—due,  as  I  believe,  to  the  "  author's  "  deliberate  intention  to
prevent  their  being  understood,  so  as  to  prevent  the  ideas
being  transferred  telcpathically  from  one  writer  to  another,  and
thus  to  afford  evidence  of  his  own  independent  activity.  The
problem  before  the  "  author,"  on  this  hypothesis,  is  to  express
the  fragments  of  a  cross-correspondence,  distributed  among  the
scripts  of  two  or  more  writers,  in  so  veiled  and  obscure  a  form
that  no  one  will  guess  what  they  mean,  and  yet  so  explicitly
that,  when  once  the  clue  is  found,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of
their  meaning.1  To  combine  these  two  conditions  must
be  a  task  of  great  difficulty,  and  one  in  which  he  may  not
always  succeed.  But  the  hypothesis  that  this  is  his  aim
gives,  at  least,  a  perfectly  rational  explanation  of  the  nature
of  the  scripts.

This  deliberate  concealment  of  his  meaning  on  the  part  of  the
"  author  "  is  comparable  with  the  precautions  taken  in  experi-
ments in  telepathy  between  two  living  persons,  to  prevent
the  percipient  discovering  by  normal  means  the  idea  which
the  agent  is  trying  to  transfer  to  him  telepathically.  In  this
latter  case,  material  obstacles  are  used  to  prevent  the  physical
action  of  the  senses  :  we  put  up  an  opaque  screen  or  wall
between  agent  and  percipient,  or  we  separate  them  by  a
great  distance  in  space. Our  "  author,"  on  the  other  hand,

1  The  Riddle  of  the  Sphinx  is  a  simple  but  excellent  instance  of  this
kind  of  enigma


lxviii.] Some  "  Concordant  Automatism*."


has  to  prevent  the  mental  action  of  telepathy  between  the
writers,  and  he  does  this  by  interposing  between  them  the
mental  barrier  of  the  unintelligibility  of  the  scripts.

I  do  not,  of  course,  mean  to  assert  that  all  the  obscurities  in
the  scripts  are  due  to  the  deliberate  intention  of  the  "  author  "  ;
some,  no  doubt,  may  arise  from  his  failing  to  convey  to  the
writer  exactly  what  he  wished  to  express.  But  in  a  great
many  cases,  what  we  took,  after  careful  study,  to  be  vague
and  incoherent  or  meaningless  statements  have  been  found,
on  further  investigation,  to  have  a  clear  and  rational  meaning,
which  shows  that  there  is  much  more  intelligence  behind
the  scripts  than  for  long  we  supposed  ;  and  we  believe  that
there  is  still  much  more  to  be  discovered  in  them.

The  cases  given  in  this  paper  relate  to  scripts  many  of
which  have  been  published  in  whole  or  in  part  in  earlier  reports,
especially  in  my  first  report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  script  in  Proc,
Vol.  XXI.,  and  Mr.  Piddington's  paper,  "  A  Series  of  Con-
cordant Automatisms,"  in  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.  Since  some  of
the  most  essential  points  were  then  missed  for  want  of  the
proper  clues,  it  will  be  convenient  to  quote  here  again  the
greater  part  of  the  scripts  in  question,  as  well  as  a  number  of
hitherto  unpublished  ones  ;  and  I  propose  to  do  this  as  far  as
possible  in  the  chronological  order  of  the  scripts,  so  that  the
reader  may  judge  how  one  event  led  on  to  the  next.


CHAPTER  I.

Cross-Correspondence: "  Ave  Roma  Immortalis."

"  The  destiny  of  the  Eternal  City  is  without  doubt  the  con-
ception which,  throughout  the  long  roll  of  human  history,  has
come  nearest  to  the  unchangeable  and  the  divine."

(F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Classical  Essays  ;  Virgil,  p.  152.)

"  And  even  as  it  was  not  in  truth  the  great  ghost  of  Hector
only,  but  the  whole  nascent  race  of  Rome,  which  bore  from  the
Trojan  altar  the  hallowing  fire,  so  it  is  not  one  Saviour  only,  but
the  whole  nascent  race  of  man — nay,  all  the  immeasurable  progeny
and  population  of  the  heavens — which  issues  continually  from


L2


Alice  John  son.


[part


behind  the  veil  of  Being,  and  forth  from  the  Sanctuary  of  the
Universe  carries  the  ever-burning  flame."

(F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.,  p.  292.)

This  ease,  in  which  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Holland  only
were  concerned,  was  first  published  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXI.,
pp.  297-303.  The  scripts  were  then  interpreted  as  alluding
to  Raphael's  picture  of  the  meeting  of  Pope  Leo  I.  (St.  Leo)
with  Attila,  King  of  the  Huns,  in  452.  As  Attila  with  his
army  approached  Rome,  the  Pope  went  out  unarmed  to
persuade  him  to  retire.  In  the  picture,  reproduced  below
(Plate  I.),  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  the  two  chief  guardian
saints  of  the  city,  are  seen  descending  from  the  sky,  as  in
the  traditional  story,  to  reinforce  the  appeal  of  the  Pope.
St.  Peter  carries  his  two  keys,  and  also  a  sword  in  his  other
hand  ;  St.  Paul  bears  his  usual  emblem,  the  sword.  Attila,
on  the  black  horse  in  the  centre,  starts  back  in  terror  from
the  vision.

The  scripts  were  as  follows  :

{Mrs.  Verrall' s  Script  of  March  2,  190(3.)

(Drawing  of  bulrush)  bulrushes

non  tali  auxilio  invenies  quod  velis
non  tali  auxilio  nee  defensoribus  istis  1
[Not  with  such  help  will  you  find  what  you  want.
Not  with  such  help,  nor  with  those  defenders  of  yours]
Keep  the  two  distinct— you  do  not  hear Avrite  regularly — give
up  other  things.

Primus  inter  pares  ipse  non  nominis  immemor — cum  eo  frater
etsi  non  sanguine  animo  consanguineus  ii  ambo  tibi  per  aliam
vocem  mittent — post  aliquot  dies  bene  quod  dicam  comprehendere
2>otes. usque  ad  illud  vale.

[First  among  his  peers,  himself  not  unmindful  of  his  name  ;
with  him  a  brother  related  in  feeling,  though  not  in  blood.  Both
these  will  send  a  message  to  you  through  another  woman.  After
some  days  you  will  easily  understand  what  I  say  ;  till  then  farewell.]

Mrs.  Verrall  recognised  the  first  Latin  passage  as  being  a
quotation  from  the  Aeneid, — the  words  used  by  Hecuba

1  Virgil,  Acn.  II.  521.


lxviii.]  Some  "  Con  cord 'an  f  Automatisms."


L3


when  she  saw  the  aged  Priam  putting  on  his  armour  in  the
vain  hope  of  defending  Troy  against  the  Greeks,  who  had
already  entered  it ;  but  the  second  Latin  passage'  had  no
meaning  or  association  for  her.  She  showed  the  script  to
Dr.  Verrall  on  the  same  day,  and  asked  him  who  was  described
as  "  Primus  inter  pares."  He  answered  "  The  Pope,"  and  he
also  said  that  he  saw  a  connection  between  the  two  Latin
passages,  but  he  did  not  tell  her  what  it  was.

His  mention  of  the  Pope  probably  had  some  influence  on
her  next  script,  which  was  :

{Mrs.  VerralVs  Script  of  March  4,  1906.)
Pagan  and  Pope. The  Stoic  persecutor  and  the  Christian.
Gregory  not  Basil's  friend  ought  to  be  a  clue  but  you  have  it  not
quite  right.

Pagan  and  Pope  and  Reformer  all  enemies  as
you  think

Crux  significationem  habet. Crucifer  qui  olim  fertur.
[The  cross  has  a  meaning. The  Cross-bearer  who  one  day  is
borne.]

The  standard-bearer  i.:  the  link.
To-morrow's  news  will  help.

This  script  was  also  shown  to  Dr.  Verrall  on  the  same  day,
and  he  said  that  the  same  intention  was  shown  in  the  words
"  Pagan  and  Pope,"  etc.  ;  but  he  still  did  not  tell  Mrs.  Verrall
to  what  he  thought  it  alluded.

The  words  had  reminded  Mrs.  Verrall  herself  of  the  well-
known  episode  in  Bunyan's  Pilgrim's  Progress,  of  the  "  Cave
where  two  Giants,  Pope  and  Pagan,  dwelt  in  old  time,"
and  by  which  "  Christian  went  without  much  danger  "  :  but
this  did  not  account  for  the  "  Stoic  persecutor,"  avIio,  of  course,
both  she  and  Dr.  Verrall  saw  could  be  no  one  but  Marcus
Aurelius.

On  the  following  day  she  wrote  again  :

(Mrs.  VerralVs  Script  of  March  5,  190G.)
It  was  the old  story  nothing  new. You  have  not  heard.
Clock  beat  with  time  and  a  bell


14


Alice  Johnson.


[part


what  more  unlikely  and  yet  all  true.

Leonis  pelle  sumpto  claviger  in  scriptis  iam  antea  bene  denotatus.1
Corrigenda  sunt  quaedam.

[The  club-bearer  (or  key-bearer)  with  the  lion's  skin  already
well  described  before  this  in  the  wri tings.  Some  things  are  to
be  corrected.]

Ask  your  husband  he  knows  it  well

stant  hide  columnae  relicta  Calpe

[There  stand  the  columns  where  Calpe  has  been  left.]

iam  finis  [That  is  the  end.] no  you  have  left  out  something

assiduo  lectore  columnae  2

[The  columns  (broken)  by  incessant  reading]

The  above  three  scripts  having  been  seen  by  no  one  except
Dr.  and  Mrs.  Verrall,  and  Dr.  Verrall  alone  having  inter-
preted them  as  referring  to  Raphael's  picture,  Mrs.  Holland,
on  March  7,  1906,  produced  a  script  in  which  the  following
occurred  :  3

Ave  Roma  immortalis.  How  could  I  make  it  any  clearer  with-
out giving  her  the  clue  ?

On  March  11,  190G,  Mrs.  Verrall  received  from  me  a  copy
of  this  passage  and  read  it  to  Dr.  Verrall.  He  then  told  her
that  it  applied  appropriately  to  what  he  had  regarded  as  the
subject  of  her  own  scripts,  and  explained  that  he  had  taken
them  to  refer  to  Raphael's  picture.  It  is  to  be  noted  that
Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  March  2  had  said  that  she  would
receive  a  word  or  a  message  from  another  woman,  and  that
"  after  some  days  you  will  easily  understand  what  I  say  "  ;
while  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  March  7  observed  "  How  could
I  make  it  any  clearer  without  giving  her  the  clue  ?  " — thus
indicating  a  connection  with  the  script  of  another  auto-
matist,  presumably  with  regard  to  Rome.

To  most  readers  it  might  appear  that  a  clue  to  these  scripts

1  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Feb.  13,  1903,  had  contained  a  pun  on  the  two
meanings  of  the  Latin  claviger,  "  key-bearer "  and  "  club-bearer,"  with
an  unmistakeable  allusion  to  the  Hercules  Furens  of  Euripides.

2  See  Juvenal,  Sal.  I.  13.

3  For  the  whole  of  this  script,  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXL,  pp.  294-295.


lxviii.J  Some  <!  GoWc'or  Stint  Automutism-s.^-'  15

was  badly  wanted,  and  intteed:,  jp£.'.  jRJajT.weU  in  his  recent
criticism  of  the  case  ' (Pr'odeediregs, '  'Vefc  .'XX'VI.',  pp.  77-80)
denies  altogether  their  appropriateness  to  the  picture.1  Before
proceeding  to  analyse  them  in  detail,  it  may  be  useful  to
summarise  briefly  the  history  of  the  picture.

Raphael  had  been  summoned  to  Rome  by  Pope  Julius  II.
to  decorate  the  Vatican,  etc.,  and  when  Julius  II.  died,  in
1513,  he  continued  to  work  for  the  next  Pope,  Leo  X.  The
four  pictures  in  the  Stanza  dell'  Eliodoro  were  painted  by
him  (1512-1514)  to  symbolise  the  divine  help  afforded  to  the
Church  against  external  and  internal  enemies,  with  special
reference  to  the  recent  expulsion  of  the  French  from  Italy
by  those  two  Popes  and  the  victory  of  the  Papacy  at  the
Lateran  Council  of  1512-1517.  Three  of  the  four  pictures  2
illustrate  the  supremacy  of  the  spiritual  power — in  the  per-
son of  the  Head  of  the  Church — over  the  material  power.
One  represents  Heliodorus  driven  out  of  the  Temple  by  an
apparition  of  three  angels  (2  Maccabees,  III.,  24-27),  sym-
bolising the  expulsion  of  the  French  from  the  States  of  the
Church  by  Julius  II.  ;  another,  the  deliverance  of  St.  Peter
from  prison  by  an  angel,  symbolising  the  escape  of  Leo  X.
(then  a  Cardinal)  from  the  French  in  1512,  after  he  had  been
taken  prisoner  by  them  at  the  battle  of  Ravenna  ;  the  third
is  the  turning  back  of  Attila  by  Leo  I.,  with  the  miraculous
help  of  the  two  Apostles,  symbolising  the  expulsion  of  the
French  from  Italy  by  Leo  X.  after  the  battle  of  Novara  in
1513.  The  Pope  in  the  picture  is  a  portrait  of  Leo  X.,  who
also  appears  in  it  as  one  of  the  Cardinals,  since  he  was  a
Cardinal  when  Raphael  began  to  paint  it.

Keeping  these  circumstances  in  mind,  we  may  go  on  to
consider  the  scripts  in  detail.

1  As  in  several  other  cases,  Dr.  Maxwell  ignores  or  misrepresents  many
of  the  fundamental  features.  He  ignores  the  close  relationship  between
Troy  and  Rome,  which  could  hardly  fail  to  be  in  the  mind  of  any  one
quoting  from  the  Aeneid.  He  says  that  the  application  of  the  phrase
primus  inter  pares  to  the  Pope  is  doubtful.  This  is  a  mistake  ;  the
phrase  is  constantly  used  with  reference  to  the  claims  of  the  Papacy.
He  also  ignores  all  the  circumstances  connected  with  the  painting  of  the
picture  and  what  it  was  intended  to  symbolise, — to  much  of  which  the
scripts  are  appropriate.

2  The  fourth  picture  is  the  Miraculous  Mass  of  Bolsena


Hi


«  "AUee  Johnson.


[part


Mrs.  VerrAll's'  Script  of  March  2,  1906.

This  opens,  not  inappropriately,  with  a  reference  to  the
failure  of  Priam — with  his  merely  material  weapons  of  defence
— to  guard  Troy,  the  parent  city  of  Rome,  from  the  assault
of  the  Greeks.

"  First  among  his  peers  "  I  take  to  denote  Leo  I.,  since  the
phrase  primus  inter  pares  was  frequently  and  is  still  used  of
the  Pope  with  reference  to  the  primacy  claimed  for  him  as
the  successor  of  St.  Peter  and  Bishop  of  Rome.

"  Not  unmindful  of  his  name  "  may  be  very  appropriately
applied  to  Leo's  conduct  on  this  occasion,  and  the  application
has  in  fact  been  suggested  by  historians.  In  450  Attila  had
been  persuaded  by  St.  Lupus  to  draw  off  his  troops  from
pillaging  Troyes  ;  in  452  he  was  persuaded  by  St.  Leo  to  retreat
from  Rome.  "  The  Barbarian  quailed  to  his  spell,  as  he  had
quailed  to  that  of  Lupus  of  Troyes,  and  according  to  a
tradition  which  is  not  very  well  authenticated,  he  jocularly
excused  his  unaccustomed  gentleness  by  saying  that  he  knew
how  to  conquer  men,  but  the  lion  and  wolf  (Leo  and  Lupus)
had  learnt  to  conquer  him."  1

The  Pope  is  representative  of  St.  Peter,  and  the  script
seems  to  pass  suddenly  from  him  to  St.  Peter,  as  in  a  dream
one  person  may  change  into  another  :  "  With  him  a  brother
related  in  spirit  though  not  in  blood"  this  "  him  "  meaning,
I  think,  St.  Peter  and  the  two  spiritual  brothers  being  St.
Peter  and  St.  Paul.  They  might  appropriately  be  so  called,
since  they  worked  together  for  the  conversion  of  Rome,  and
are  said  to  have  been  confined  together  in  the  Mamertine
prison,  and  to  have  been  martyred  on  the  same  day  of  the
year,  or,  according  to  some  (e.g.  St.  Gregory),  actually  on  the
same  day.2

1  Hodgkin,  Italy  and  her  Invaders,  Vol.  II.,  p.  161,  quoted  by  Cunning-
ham, An  Essay  on  Western  Civilisation  in  its  Economic  Aspects,  p.  20.

2  "  The  sword  of  St.  Paul  [as  in  Raphael's  picture]  is  often  associated
with  the  key  of  St.  Peter,  notably  as  marking  in  calendars  the  29th  of
June,  the  day  set  apart  by  the  Church  for  celebrating  the  martyrdom
of  both  "  {Lives  and  Legends  of  the  Evangelists,  Apostles,  and  other  Early
Saints,  by  Mrs.  Arthur  Bell; London,  1901,  p.  105).


LXVT.TT.]


Some  "Concordant  Automatisms.


I  7


Mrs.  Verrall's  Script  or  March  4,  1906.

"  Pagan  and  Pope.  The  Stoic  persecutor  and  the  Christian."
These  words  were  regarded  by  Dr.  Verrall  as  a  vague  reference
to  Raphael's  picture  (partly  erroneous,  because  the  "  Stoic
Persecutor  "  had  nothing  to  do  with  it)  ;  but  I  feel  no  doubt
that  the  phrases  refer  to  the  fact  that  Pope  Sixtus  V.  in  1588
placed  a  statue  of  St.  Peter  (the  first  "  Pope  "  of  Rome)  on
the  top  of  the  Column  of  Trajan,  where  a  statue  of  the  Emperor
Trajan  (the  "  Pagan  ")  had  once  stood  ;  and  similarly  in  1580
placed  a  statue  of  St.  Paul  (the  "  Christian  *')  on  the  Column
of  Marcus  Aurelius,  where  a  statue  of  Marcus  Aurelius  ("  the
Stoic  Persecutor"')  had  originally  stood.

Illustrations  of  these  two  Columns  are  given  below  (Plate  II.
and  Plate  III.),  the  two  Apostles  being  distinguished,  as  in
Raphael's  picture,  by  their  usual  emblems  of  the  keys  and
the  sword.

The  Forum  of  Trajan  1  (built  107-113  a.d.)  consisted  origin-
ally of  a  large  open  space,  the  Forum  proper,  entered  by  the
Arch  of  Trajan  at  one  end,  and  leading  at  the  other  into  the
Basilica  Ulpia,  a  large  roofed  building  with  colonnades  all
round  the  inner  walls.  Beyond  was  a  small  quadrangular
open  space,  containing  the  Column  ;  on  each  side  of  which
was  a  building  containing  respectively  the  Greek  and  Latin
Libraries  of  the  Bibliotheca  Ulpia.  Beyond  these  again  was
the  Temple  of  Trajan.  The  two  libraries  were  the  largest  of
all  the  public  libraries  in  Rome,  and  they  were  used  for  literary
discussions  and  poetical  recitations  up  to  the  end  of  the  seventh
century  a.d.

The  part  now  excavated  consists  only  of  the  space  sur-
rounding the  Column  and  part  of  the  area  of  the  Basilica
immediately  in  front  of  it,  in  which  some  fragments  of  the
pillars  have  been  arranged  in  rows.  The  bas-reliefs  which  run
spirally  round  the  Column  represent  scenes  from  Trajan's
Dacian  campaigns,  from  101  a.d.  onwards.

The  original  Forum,  which  was  built  by  the  Greek  archi-

1  For  a  full  description  of  the  Forum,  see  The  Remains  of  Ancient  Borne,
by  J.  Henry  Middleton,  Vol.  II.,  and  Bom  und  die  Campagna,  von  Dr.  Th.
Gsell  Fels  (Meyers  Beisebiicher).

B


IS


Alice  Johnson.


[part


tect,  Apollodorus  of  Damascus,  was  richly  decorated  with
sculptures  and  metal-work,  and  was  the  most  splendid  archi-
tectural achievement  of  Imperial  Rome.  During  the  Middle
Ages  it  formed  an  almost  inexhaustible  quarry  for  marbles  used
in  countless  churches  and  palaces  of  Rome.  A  few  of  the
sculptural  groups  have  been  preserved  through  their  having
been  removed  and  built  into  the  Arch  of  Constantine  (312  a.d.),
and  these  are  among  the  finest  existing  specimens  of  Graeco-
Roman  decorative  work.  In  one  of  them  Trajan  is  seated  on
a  throne,  below  which  are  various  standing  figures  whom  he  is
addressing,  one  a  woman  with  a  child.  "  Some  such  relief
as  this,  or  perhaps  the  common  subject  of  Trajan  raising  a
kneeling  province,  was  probably  the  origin  of  the  beautiful
story  of  Trajan  and  the  widow  quoted  by  Dante  "  1  (see
below).

The  Column  of  Marcus  Aurelius  stood  originally  in  front
of  the  temple  which  was  dedicated  to  him,  and  the  whole  was
surrounded  by  a  peribolus  forming  a  sort  of  Forum  like
Trajan's,  but  smaller.  The  Column  was  built  in  imitation  of
Trajan's,  being  of  the  same  height  and  encircled  in  the  same
manner  by  spiral  bas-reliefs,  which  represent  scenes  in  four
campaigns  of  Marcus  Aurelius  against  the  German  tribes
north  of  the  Danube  in  167-179  a.d.  It  is,  however,  distinctly
inferior  in  workmanship.  It  stands  in  the  middle  of  the  present-
Piazza  Colonna,  which  thence  derives  its  name.

Incidentally  it  may  be  noted  that  a  reference  to  "  the  Stoic
persecutor  and  the  Christian  "  is  appropriate  as  coming  from
Myersv,  since  both  were  men  for  whom  F.  W.  H.  Myers  had
a  special  admiration,  as  shown  by  his  poem  St.  Paid  and
his  essay  on  Marcus  Aurelius  (Essays — Classical,  pp.  177
et.  seq.),  in  which  he  compares  and  contrasts  the  two  men.

The  story  of  Trajan  and  the  widow  who  begged  for  justice
on  the  murderers  of  her  son,  which  he  delayed  one  of  his
campaigns  to  grant,  is  twice  referred  to  by  Dante.  In  Purga-
torio,  X.  73-9G,  he  describes  this  as  one  of  the  sculptured
scenes  depicted  on  the  marble  side  of  the  first  terrace  of  the
Mount  of  Purgatory.  In  Paradiso,  XX.  (43-48,  and  100-117)
Trajan  "  who  consoled  the  widow  for  her  son  "  appears  among

1  J.  H.  Middleton,  The,  Bemains  of  Ancient  Borne,  Vol.  II.,  p.  30,  foot-
note.


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


19


the  six  just  men  who  constitute  the  eye  of  the  Imperial  Eagle.
In  both  cases  Dante  refers  to  the  legend  (repeatedly  mentioned,
e.g.  by  Thomas  Aquinas)  that  it  was  through  the  prayers  of
Gregory  that  the  soul  of  Trajan  was  delivered  from  hell,
and  "  returning  to  the  flesh  where  it  abode  short  space,
believed  in  him  who  had  the  power  to  aid  it  ;  and  believing
kindled  into  so  great  flame  of  very  love,  that  at  the  second
death  it  was  worthy  to  come  unto  this  mirth.''  1

This  Gregory  was  Gregory  the  Great  (Pope  Gregory  I.,
590-604),  one  of  the  "  four  Latin  Fathers,"  and  there  seems
no  doubt  that  it  is  to  him  the  script  alludes  in  saying  :

"  Gregory,  not  Basil's  friend,  ought  to  he  a,  clue."  The  Gregory
who  was  Basil's  friend  was  Gregory  of  Nazianzus,  he  and
Basil  being  two  of  the  "  four  Greek  Fathers."  These  two
were  referred  to  in  an  early  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's,  dated
March  15,  1901  (sec  Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.,  pp.  142-143,  and
343)  ;  which  is  probably  the  reason  why  the  other  Gregory
is  here  described  in  this  negative  way.  The  latter's  close
connection  with  Trajan  justifies  the  remark  that  "  Gregory
ought  to  be  a  clue."  In  his  time,  much  of  Trajan's  Forum  was
still  remaining  in  its  original  splendour.

"  Pagan  and  Pope  and  Reformer — all  enemies  as  you  think  "
seems  to  be  a  further  allusion  to  the  same  topic,  implying
that  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  these  personages  are
necessarily  enemies.  The  epithet  "Reformer"  might  well
be  applied  to  Gregory  I.

"  The  cross  has  a.  meaning — the  cross-bearer  who  one  day  is
homer  This  is  probably  another  reference  to  St.  Peter,
who  was  crucified  and  is  frecmently  represented  in  art  with
a  cross.

Returning  to  the  phrase  Primus  inter  pares  in  the  script  of
March  2,  1906,  this  seems  to  make  a  link  with  the  present
script,  for  it  is  at  least  as  appropriate  to  Gregory  I.  as  to
Leo  I.,  if  not  more  so.  The  feebleness  of  the  Emperors  at
Constantinople  had  led  gradually  to  so  much  increase  in  the
power  of  the  Pope  that,  by  the  time  of  Gregory  I.,  he  had
become  the  practical  ruler  of  Rome,  organising  the  national
defences  and  treating  with  barbaric  invaders,  while  insisting
at  the  same  time  on  his  spiritual  authority. "  Gregory  at

1  Paradiso,  XX.  112-117  (Temple  Edition,  trans,  by  Wicksteed).


20


Alice  Johnson.


[part


the  very  least,"  says  a  recent  writer  in  the  Saturday  Review,1
"  claimed  to  be  'primus  inter  pares,  the  supreme  governor  of
the  Christian  society  .  .  .  [But]  there  is  no  trace  in  these
earlier  centuries  of  the  imposing  Hildebrandine  [Hildebrand
=  Gregory  VII.]  claim  for  the  Papacy  to  be  supreme  over
all  earthly  jurisdictions  and  magistracies."

There  appears  then  to  be  a  general  connection  between  the
two  topics  dealt  with  in  the  two  scripts,  namely,  Raphael's
picture  and  the  Columns,  in  the  predominant  part  played  by
the  Pope  and  also  by  the  two  Apostles  in  both  cases.  In  the
picture  the  Apostles  are  overawing  Attila  and  his  Huns  ;  on
the  Columns  they  are  triumphing  over  two  Pagan  Emperors
who  persecuted  the  Christians.

There  is  also  a  special  connection  in  the  fact  that  Raphael,
who,  like  other  cultivated  men  of  his  time,  took  an  interest
in  Roman  antiquities  (as  shown  by  the  introduction  of  the
Colosseum  and  other  ruins  into  the  background  of  his  picture),
copied  the  scale  armour  of  his  Huns  from  that  of  the  Sarmatian
soldiers  on  Trajan's  Column.2  My  illustrations,  Plate  IV.  and
Plate  V.,  show  this.  On  the  Column,  the  horses,  as  Avell  as
the  soldiers,  are  clothed  in  scale  armour,  whereas  Raphael,  as
a  painter,  naturally  prefers  to  leave  his  horses  unclothed.

Mrs.  Verrall's  Script  op  March  5,  1906.

The  facts  that  reference  is  here  made  to  an  earlier  script  about
a  "  claviger"  and  that  in  the  script  apparently  indicated  (see
p.  14)  the  word  is  used  in  its  double  sense  of  club-bearer  and
key-bearer,  with  an  allusion  to  the  Hercules  Furens,  make  it
practically  certain  that  here  too  "  claviger  "  is  to  be  taken
in  its  double  meaning,  and  as  referring  (among  other  things)
to  Hercules,  especially  as  the  Pillars  of  Hercules  are  men-
tioned shortly  afterwards.  It  also  seems  clear  that  the
"  lion's  skin  "  is  intended  as  a  double  reference  to  Hercules,
the  wearer  of  the  lion's  skin,  and  to  another  "  claviger  "
(key-bearer),  viz.  St.  Leo,  who  also — if  our  interpretation  is

1  Saturday  Review,  Nov.  16,  1912  ;  in  a  review  of  Sir  Henry  H.  Howorth's
St.  Gregory  the  Great.

2  This  fact  is  stated  in  E.  L.  Seeley's  Artists  of  the  Italian  Renaissance,
p.  270,  and  in  Dr.  ORell-Pels'  Rom  mid  die  Campagna,  p.  577.


LXVIII.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


2]


correct- — had  been  "  already  denoted  before  this  in  l/te  scripts,"
viz.  in  that  of  March  2,  1006.

"  Stant  inde  columnae  relicta  Calpe  (there  stand  the  columns
where  Calpe  has  been  left)."  Mrs.  Verrall  tells  me  that  "  Calpe
relicta "  is  a  phrase  from  Juvenal  (Sat.  XIV.  270).  In  a
passage  describing  the  greed  for  gain  which  takes  men  to
sea,  in  spite  of  its  perils,  he  says  that  "  leaving  Calpe  far
behind,  they  will  hear  the  sun  hiss  in  the  waters  of  Hercules,"
referring  to  a  notion  that  if  you  went  far  enough  west  you
might  hear  the  sun  hiss  as  he  sank  into  the  sea.

Mayor's  note  on  this  passage  is  :  "  Calpe  (Gibraltar)  and
Abyla  on  the  opposite  coast  were  known  as  the  Pillars  of
Hercules,  which  are  often  spoken  of  as  the  extreme  west.  .  .  .
Yet  even  this  '  world's  end  '  the  adventurer  leaves  far  behind
him."

Thus  it  seems  that  the  mention  of  Hercules  in  the  script
leads  ou  to  the  "  columnae  "  of  Hercules,  which  in  their
turn  lead  on  to

"  Assiduo  lectore  columnae  (the  columns  [broken]  by  inces-
sant reading)."  This  is  another  phrase  from  Juvenal  (tiat.  I.
13),  occurring  in  a  description  of  a  reader  who  recited  or
declaimed  with  so  much  vehemence  as  to  break  the  "  plane-
trees,  marbles  and  columns  "  of  the  house  in  which  he  was
reciting.

In  the  autumn  of  1012  I  told  Mrs.  Verrall  of  my  interpreta-
tion of  her  script  of  March  4,  1006,  as  alluding  to  the  Columns
of  Trajan  and  Marcus  Aurelius,  and  discussed  it  with  her.
She  then  told  me  that  Dr.  Verrall  and  she  were  in  Rome  only
once,  in  March,  1802,  when,  among  other  things,  they  had
seen  and  been  specially  interested  in  Raphael's  pictures  in
the  Vatican.  Dr.  Verrall  had  also  studied  Trajan's  Column,
and  made  notes  on  certain  obscure  points  in  the  inscription
on  its  base,  and  certain  points  of  comparison  between  it  and
the  Column  of  Marcus  Aurelius.  Later  he  wrote  a  paper
on  the  subject  which  was  read  at  a  meeting  of  the  Cambridge
Philological  Society,  but  has  not  been  published.  Mrs.  Verrall,
after  telling  me  about  it,  found  the  MS.,  and  looked  through
it.  She  tells  me  that  there  is  no  mention  in  it  of  St.  Peter
or  St.  Paul.  Though  she  and  her  husband  both  probably
knew  at  the  time  of  their  visit  to  Rome  that  the  statues  of  St  .


22


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Peter  and  St.  Paul  had  been  put  in  the  place  of  the  original
statues  at  the  top  of  these  Columns,  she  was  sure  that  they  had
taken  no  interest  in  the  fact  ;  and  indeed  when  I  told  her  of
it,  she  did  not  remember  that  she  had  ever  heard  it  before.
It  seems  certain  that  Dr.  Verrall  had  not  detected  any  allusion
to  the  Columns  in  the  scripts,  probably  because  he  was  thinking
only  of  their  allusions  to  Raphael's  picture.

In  his  note  written  on  March  11th,  1906, 1  he  said  that  the
first  script  "  did  in  fact  instantly  recall  to  me  the  picture
mentioned  (doubtless  only  because  I  am  specially  familiar
with  it)  ;  "  and  the  two  later  ones,  in  the  words  "  Pagan,"
"  Pope,"  "  reformer,"  "  Crucifer,"  "  Leonis  "  and  "  Claviger  "
seemed  to  him  to  be  carrying  on  the  allusions  to  the  picture,
though  apparently  mixed  with  erroneous  or  irrelevant  details.

In  another  cross-correspondence  related  below,  "  The  Clavi-
gers,"  we  shall  find  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  apparently  influenced
again  by  reminiscences  of  this  visit  to  Rome,  and  again  the
points  that  emerge  in  the  scripts  are  subsidiary  details  of
what  she  had  seen,  unnoticed  or  but  little  noticed  by  her  at
the  time.

Mrs.  Holland's  Script  op  March  7,  1(J06.

"  Ave  Roma  immortalis.  How  could  I  make  it  any  clearer
without  giving  her  the  clue  ?  "

If  we  take  all  the  allusions  to  Rome  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts
given  above  and  re-arrange  them  in  the  chronological  order
of  the  events  alluded  to,  we  shall  see  that  they  give  within  a
very  short  compass  a  sort  of  bird's-eye  view  of  the  history
of  Rome,  though,  no  doubt,  with  many  important  omissions.
The  scripts  begin — appropriately  enough — with  the  fall  of
Troy.  The  reference  is  given  in  the  words  of  Virgil.  Then
we  come  to  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  who  introduced  Christianity
into  Rome  ;  to  Trajan,  the  type  of  Roman  justice,  who  built
the  most  magnificent  Forum  of  the  city  ;  to  Marcus  Aurelius,
the  Stoic  Philosopher ;  to  Pope  Leo  I.,  whose  repulse  of
Attila  has  been  regarded  as  the  first  important  indication
of  the  growing  political  influence  of  the  Papacy  ;  to  Gregory  I.,
who  completed  the  transformation  of  the  Roman  State  into

1  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXI.,  p.  299.


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."  23

the  Roman  Church.  As  to  the  two  Popes  for  whom  Raphael
painted  his  picture  of  St.  Leo  meeting  Attila,  Julius  II.  brought
both  Michael  Angelo  and  Raphael  to  Rome  to  adorn  the
Vatican,  pulled  down  the  old  Church  of  St.  Peter's,  because  it
was  not  large  enough  to  contain  the  magnificent  tomb  which  he
had  planned  for  himself  (which  tomb,  by  the  way,  forms  an
essential  factor  in  a  later  cross-correspondence,  see  below,  p.  137),
and  began  to  build  the  present  St.  Peter's.  Leo  X.  was  the
great  patron  of  art  and  literature  ;  he  founded  the  University
of  Rome,  and  added  largely  to  the  art  treasures  of  the  Vatican  ;
it  was  he  also  who  started  the  sale  of  Indulgences,  which  roused
the  protest  of  Luther,  and  so  brought  to  a  head  the  gathering
forces  of  the  Reformation.

Finally,  Sixtus  V.  (1585-1590),  who  put  the  statues  of
St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  on  the  two  Columns,  was  the  Pope
chiefly  responsible  for  the  planning  and  rebuilding  which
has  given  the  city  its  modern  appearance.  He  laid  out  on
the  north-eastern  heights  a  series  of  long  straight  streets,
regardless  of  ancient  landmarks,  and  built  a  great  acmeduct
for  the  supply  of  that  region.  Under  him,  the  dome  of  St.
Peter's,  planned  by  Michael  Angelo,  was  completed.  He
also  built — for  a  summer  residence  for  the  Popes — the  Quirinal
Palace,  which  was  taken  possession  of  by  Victor  Emanuel
in  1870,  and  became  thenceforth  the  Royal  Palace  of  Italy.

It  seems  then  that  there  is  much  more  point  than  was
at  first  apparent  in  the  application  of  Mrs.  Holland's  phrase
"  Ave  Roma  immortalis  "  to  the  scripts  which  involve  this
history.  The  history  is  all  implicit  in  the  scattered  items  of
Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts,  but  it  is  latent,  or,  as  we  may  say,  held
in  solution  in  them,  till  Mrs.  Holland's  "  Ave  Roma  im-
mortalis "  gives  the  final  touch  which  crystallises  it  into
form  and  without  which  we  might  never  have  observed  its
existence.

Of  all  the  cities  which  now  hold  a  first  rank  in  the  world,
Rome  has  the  longest  continuous  history,  and  the  influence
that  it  has  exercised  and  still  exercises  over  the  human  race
is  perhaps  hardly  to  be  exaggerated.  Some  part  of  the  senti-
ments associated  with  the  name  are  expressed  in  the  two
passages  from  the  writings  of  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  which  are  quoted


24


Alice  Johnson.


[part


at  the  head  of  this  chapter.  Midway  between  the  two  might
be  placed  his  adaptation  of  Virgil's  line,

"  So  great  a  work  it  was  to  found  the  race  of  Rome,"

into

"  So  hard  a  matter  was  the  birth  of  Man."  1

With  the  second  passage — written  towards  the  end  of  his
life  2 — may  be  compared  the  allusions  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script
of  March  5,  1906,  to  the  voyager  who  has  left  far  behind  him
the  pillars  of  Hercules  and  sails  out  into  the  western  sea  to
seek  new  lands  and  fresh  adventures.  This  theme  is  further
developed  in  the  scripts  given  below  under  the  headings
"  auras  ovpavos  uKVjuow  "  and  "  The  Clavigers."


CHAPTER  II,

The  Theory  of  Cross-Correspondences  and  the
Latin  Message.

About  a  month  after  the  cross-correspondence  just  described
had  occurred,  viz.  in  April,  1906,  the  theory  that  cross-
correspondences  were  expressly  designed  to  provide  evidence
for  something  transcending  telepathy  between  the  minds  of
the  automatists  was  first  definitely  formulated,  as  stated  in
my  first  report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  script  (Proceedings,  Vol.
XXI.,  p.  362,  and  pp.  369-391).  In  the  autumn  of  the  same
year  Mr.  Piddington  and  I,  in  view  of  the  sittings  with  Mrs.
Piper  which  were  about  to  be  held  in  London,  devised  the
experiment  of  a  "  Latin  Message  "  to  be  addressed  to  MyersP
in  Latin.  The  original  English  version  of  the  Message  was
as  follows  :

We  are  aware  of  the  scheme  of  cross-correspondences  which
you  are  transmitting  through  various  mediums,  and  we  hope  that
you  will  go  on  with  them.

1  "  The  Implicit  Promise  of  Immortality  "  (The  Renewal  of  Youth  and
other  Poems,  p.  53).

2  In  March,  1899.


L  XVIII.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


25


Try  also  to  give  to  A  and  1>  two  different  messages,  between
which  no  connection  is  discernible.  Then  as  soon  as  possible  give
to  C  a  third  message  which  will  reveal  the  hidden  connection.

It  appeared  to  us  that  if  the  experiment  succeeded  and
cross-correspondences  of  the  desired  type  occurred,  they
would  afford  almost  conclusive  evidence  of  the  agency  of  a
mind  external  to  those  of  all  the  automatists,  and  might
afford  strong  evidence  of  the  identity  of  this  mind.

The  conversations  with  MyersP  about  this  experiment  are
recorded  in  detail  by  Mr.  Piddington  in  Proceedings,  Vol.
XXII.,  pp.  312-414,  and  a  good  deal  of  ink  has  since
been  spilt  over  the  secondary  question  of  whether  MyersP
had  enough  "  Myers  "  in  him  to  be  able  to  translate  the
Latin  in  which  the  Message  was  delivered  to  him.  The
primary  question,  of  course,  was  whether  "  Myers  "  understood
the  purport  of  the  Message  1  and  could  prove  his  understanding
to  us  by  'producing  the  kind  of  cross-correspondence  we  wanted.

My  excuse  for  reverting  to  the  subject  now  is  that  in  Mr.
Piddington's  original  report  and  generally  in  the  subsequent
discussion,  the  assumption  has  been  made  that  "  Hope,  Star
and  Browning  "  was  the  cross-correspondence  especially
intended  to  meet  our  wishes,  and  the  discussion  has  mostly
turned  on  its  appropriateness  to  the  Latin  Message.

Some  of  the  clues  lately  found  to  the  real  meaning  of  many
of  the  scripts,  however,  show  that  several  other  cases — in
particular  that  described  below  under  the  heading  <:  Alex-
ander's Tomb  " — conform  much  more  definitely  than  "  Hope.
Star  and  Browning  "  to  the  type  asked  for  in  the  Message.

Meanwhile  I  give  the  latter  case  first,  for  the  sake  of  includ-
ing in  it  the  contributions  to  the  subject  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script,  which  have  not  yet  been  published.

To  make  these  intelligible,  I  prefix  a  joint  chronological
summary  of  the  Latin  Message  Experiment  and  the  most
important  allusions  to  ';  Hope,  Star  and  Browning  "  made
in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  these  two  topics  being  inextricably
mingled  in  her  case.

1  An  interesting  discussion  of  the  intelligence  shown  by  MyersF  in  this
experiment  is  to  be  found  in  Mrs.  Hude's  paper  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXVI.,
pp.  147-170.


26


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Mr.  Piddington  was  in  charge  of  all  the  sittings  here  referred
to  up  to  March  13,  1907,  inclusive,  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick  was
in  charge  of  the  later  ones.  Mrs.  and  Miss  VerralFs  scripts
were  during  this  time  being  sent  to  Mr.  Piddington,  so  that
he  might  test  the  correctness  of  MyersP's  statements  about
them.  When  a  statement  was  found  to  be  correct,  he  as  a
rule  informed  MyersP  of  it.  For  these  and  all  other  details
of  the  case,  his  original  report  must  be  referred  to.

As  to  the  automatists'  knowledge  that  the  experiment  of
the  Latin  Message  was  to  be  tried  :

(a)  Mrs.  Verrall  was  fully  acquainted  with  it.

(b)  Miss  Verrall  must  be  assumed  to  have  known  some-
thing about  it,  since  she  was  present  at  the  sitting  of  Dec.  19,
1906,  when  part  of  the  message  was  dictated  to  Mrs.  Piper
in  trance.1

(c)  To  Mrs.  Piper  the  subject  was  mentioned  only  while
she  was  in  trance,  and  the  Message  was  dictated  in  Latin  to
the  trance-personalities.

(d)  Mrs.  Holland,  who  was  in  India  at  the  time,  knew
nothing  whatever  about  the  experiment,  and  did  not  even
know  till  near  the  end  of  March,  1907,  that  Mrs.  Piper  had
come  to  England  to  give  us  sittings.

The  knowledge  or  ignorance  of  the  automatists  about  the
Latin  Message  had  of  course  no  bearing  on  the  evidential
value  of  the  cross-correspondences,  but  it  might  have  had
some  effect  on  the  wording  of  the  scripts.

Chronological  Summary  of  the  Latin  Message  Experiment.

During  the  first  half  of  Nov.,  1906,  J.  G.  P.  and  A.  J.  com-
posed the  English  version  of  the  Message.

Nov.  16  or  17,  1906.  Dr.  Verrall  was  asked  to  translate  it
into  Latin.

Nov.  26,  1906. Dr.  Verrall  made  the  translation,  which  was

received  by  J.  G.  P.  on  Nov.  27.
Dec.  17,  1906. J.  G.  P.  dictates  the  first  sentence  of  the

Message  in  Latin  to  MyersP.
Dec.  19,  24,  and  31,  1906. J.  G.  P.  continues  the  dictation

of  the  Message  to  MyersP.

1  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  316.


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


27


Jan.  2,  1907.  J.  G.  P.  finishes  dictating  the  Message  to
MyerSp,  who,  at  the  end  of  the  sitting,  says  "  United
we  stand,  divided  we  fall."

Jan.  10,  1907.  J.  G.  P.  suggests  to  MyersP  that,  when  pro-
ducing a  cross-correspondence  between  the  scripts  of
Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Holland,  he  should  add  to  each
script  some  such  sign  as  a  triangle  within  a  circle.

Jan.  23,  1907.  MyersP,  a  propos  of  the  Latin  Message,  says
he  believes  he  can  send  a  message  which  will  please
J.  G.  P.

Feb.  6,  1907.  MyersP  says  he  will  reply  to  the  Latin  Mes-
sage as  soon  as  he  can.

Feb.  11,  1907.  MyersP  says  Mrs.  Verrall  has  got  Hope,  Star
and  Browning  in  her  script.

Feb.  11,  1907  {later  in  the  day).  J.  G.  P.  takes  Mrs.  Verrall's
scripts  of  Jan.  23  and  Jan.  28,  1907  (see  below),  to  cor-
respond to  this  statement,  and,  reading  Abt  Vogler  for
the  first  time,  concludes  that  the  line,  "  That  out  of  three
sounds  he  frame,  not  a  fourth  sound,  but  a  star,"  would
be  especially  appropriate  to  the  Latin  Message.

Feb.  12,  1907.  J.  G.  P.  tells  MyersP  that  he  was  right  in
saying  Mrs.  Verrall  had  got  Star,  Hope  and  Browning
in  her  script.

Feb.  26,  1907.  J.  G.  P.  asks  HodgsonP  to  tell  MyersP  that
Mrs.  Verrall  had  drawn  a  triangle  within  a  circle  in  one
of  her  scripts.

Feb.  27,  1907. MyersP  says  that  Star,  Hope  and  Browning

is  his  answer  to  the  Latin  Message.
Mar.  6,  1907. MyersP  says  he  said  Bird  and  Paradise  in

connection  with  the  triangle  and  circle,  and  refers  again

to  Browning,  Hope  and  Star.
Mar.  13,  1907. MyersP  says  the  circle  was  connected  with

Browning,  Hope  and  Star,  and  also  calls  the  circle  a

Ring.

Mar.  20,  1907.  MyersP  refers  again  to  Browning,  Hope
and  Star.

April  8,  1907. MyersP  says  that  one  of  the  other  automatists

has  drawn  a  Star  and  a  Crescent.
May  6,  1907. MyersP  says  he  long  ago  gave  the  word  Music

in  this  connection.


28


Alice  Johnson.


[part


CHAPTER  111.

Cross-Correspondence  :  "  Hope,  Star  and  Browning."

Four  automatists,  Mrs.  Piper,  Mrs.  Holland,  Mrs.  Verrall
and  Miss  Verrall,  were  concerned  in  this  case.  The  part
played  by  Mrs.  Piper  is  summarised  above,  and  the  dates  of
Myersp's  statements  should  be  compared  with  those  of  the
scripts  of  the  other  automatists,  which  are  given  below  in
chronological  order.

Mrs.  Holland's  scripts  were,  as  usual,  being  sent  from
India  to  me,  and  she  knew  nothing  of  what  was  being  pro-
duced by  the  other  automatists ;  while  Mrs.  Verrall,  the
only  one  to  Avhom  I  gave  any  information  about  Mrs.  Hol-
land's scripts,  saw  those  here  dealt  with  for  the  first  time
on  Feb.  19,  1907 — that  is,  after  all  her  own  and  Miss  Verrall's
scripts  relating  to  this  subject  had  been  written.

Here,  as  throughout  this  paper,  some  of  the  scripts  quoted
may  seem  to  have  but  a  vague  and  dubious  connection  with
the  topics  of  the  cross-correspondence.  But.  since  the  references
in  them  appear  to  be  continuous  with  the  more  definite  and
explicit  references  in  other  or  later  scripts,  I  include  the
vaguer  scripts  as  well  as  the  others,  on  the  general  principles
explained  in  my  Introduction  ;  for,  if  these  vaguer  scripts  are
really  continuous  with  the  others,  it  is  probable  that  they  really
refer  to  the  same  topics.

Thus,  in  the  following  script,  it  would  seem  that  the  topics
arc  only  beginning  to  emerge  :

(Mrs.  Holland's  Script  of  Dec.  3,  1906.)

Nowell — "  (So  doth  the  Greater  Glory  dim  the  less  "  1
liundell —
Rundall —

1  "  Portia.  How  far  that  little  candle  throws  his  beams  !

So  shines  a  good  deed  in  a  naughty  world.
Nerissa.  When  the  moon  shone,  we  did  not  see  the  candle.
Portia.  So  doth  the  greater  glory  dim  the  less."

(Merchant  of  Venice,  Act  V.  Scene  I.)


LXVTII.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms"


29


Arundell — No  not  of  Wardour — the  Norfolk  family — For  them
a  short  lived  joy —

"  Ah  Starry  hope  that  didst  arise
But  to  be  overcast  "  1

[The  rest  of  the  script  refers  to  another  subject.]

This  script  gives  Star  and  Hope  in  conjunction,  and  in  the
immediate  context  of  the  first  quotation  occurs  the  -word
Moon,  while  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  Feb.  3,  1007  (cpioted
below)  occur  "  the  crescent  moon  and  the  star,"  with  draw-
ings of  both  ;  and  MyersP  on  April  8,  1007  (see  above),  stated
that  through  "  the  other  light  "  he  had  drawn  a  star  and
also  a  crescent 2  in  connection  with  this  cross-correspondence.
He  also  stated  on  March  6,  1907,  in  referring  to  the  same
subject,  that  he  had  given  "  Paradise  "  as  one  of  its  items,3
while  Mrs.  Holland's  "  Starry  Hope  "  is  quoted  from  a  poem
entitled  To  One  in  Paradise,  and  should  be  compared  with
"  the  hope  that  leaves  the  earth  for  the  sky  "  in  Mrs.  Verralks
script  of  Jan.  28,  1907,  given  below.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  Moon,  implicitly  referred  to  in  the
above  script  of  Mrs.  Holland's,  is  clearly  a  full,  or  nearly  full
moon,  while  the  Moon  of  Miss  Verrall's  and  Mrs.  Piper's  scripts
is  a  Crescent.  But  we  find  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  March
20,  1907,  below,  pp.  42-46,  which  contains  more  definite
references  to  this  cross-correspondence,  that  the  Moon  again
occurs  implicitly, — that  is,  in  the  context  of  a  quotation  given
in  the  script, — and  this  time  it  is  a  Crescent  Moon.

This  is  an  instance  of  what  has  just  been  explained  : — since
the  Moon  in  the  second  script  seems  clearly  one  of  the  topics
of  the  cross-correspondence,  and  since  the  first  script  appears
continuous  with  the  second,  there  is  reason  to  regard  the
Moon  of  the  first  script  as  an  item  of  the  same  cross-corre-
spondence.

1  "  Ah.  dream  too  bright  to  last  !
Ah,  starry  Hope  ! that  didst  arise
But  to  be  overcast  !  "

(E.  A.  Poe,  To  One  in  Paradise.)

-  For  full  details,  see  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  76.

3  For  full  details,  see  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  72  and  339.


30


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  next  script  to  be  quoted  is  again  a  vague  one  :

(Mrs.  Holland's  Script  of  Dec.  4,  1906.)
The  grey  church  tower  1

A  very  scattered  family  this  Christmas — and  yet  hardly  more
so  than  three  years  ago.

"  Pray — if  thou  canst  in  hope — but  ever  pray
Though  hope  he  weak  and  faint  through  long  delay —
Pray  in  the  darkness  if  there  be  no  light  "  2

"  I  will  be  quiet  and  talk  to  you
and  reason  where  you  are  wrong."  3

[The  rest  of  the  script  refers  to  another  subject.]

Here  the  first  quotation  contains  the  word  "  hope,"  empha-
sised by  being  twice  repeated  ;  and  is  immediately  followed
by  a  quotation  from  Browning.

The  next  script  is  one  of  Mrs.  VerraH's,  which  was  begun
at  12  noon  on  Dec.  17.  190G,  immediately  after  Mr.  Pidding-
ton  in  London  had  dictated  the  first  sentence  of  the  Latin
Message  to  Mrs.  Piper  in  trance.  Though  Mrs.  Verrall  did
not  know  on  what  day  the  experiment  with  Mrs.  Piper  would
begin,  she  was  aware  that  it  was  to  be  tried,  and  this  script
seems — in  part  at  least — to  reflect  her  own  conception  of  it.
But  the  particular  symbolism  employed — which,  for  brevity,
we  may  call  "  the  music  of  the  spheres  " — became,  as  will
be  seen,  one  of  the  main  items  of  this  cross-correspondence.

1  This  phrase  constitutes  a  possible  cross-eorrespondenco  with  Mrs.  Piper.
See  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  40.

2  Hartley  Coleridge,  Prayer.  The  words  italicised  are  underlined  in  the
original  script.

3  Browning,  James  Lee's  Wife,  IV.  :

"  I  will  he  quiet  and  talk  with  you,
And  reason  why  you  are  wrong.
You  wanted  my  love — is  that  much  true  ?
And  so  I  did  love,  so  I  do  :

What  has  come  of  it  all  along  ?  "


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


31


(Mrs.  VerralVs  Script  of  Dec.  17,  1906.) 1
Revolving  axes

Revolving  spheres  the  mystic  music  make
Revolving  spheres  the  harmony  began
Harmonious  sound  scarce  audible  to  man
But Then  from  every  several  unit  of  the  whole
Joined  the  majestic  music  of  the  Soul

no  no

Majestic  music

No — you  dont  see  what  I  want — begin  again.

Revolving  spheres  the  harmony  began —

A  diapason  manifest  to  man —

Each  single  unit  played  its  several  part

Discoursing  symphony  with  god-sent  art

Till  the  majestic  music  of  the  whole

Throbbed  in  pulsation  : — and  the  throbbing  Soul

Saw  through  the  sound  the  burning  of  the  flame

Felt  the  lost  Presence — to  the  Presence  came.

Much  of  the  phraseology  of  this  script  is  derived  from  two
sources  (both  familiar  to  Mrs.  Verrall),  viz.  (1)  Dryden's  Song
for  St.  Cecilia's  Day,  especially  the  lines  :

"  From  harmony,  from  heavenly  harmony.

Tins  universal  frame  began  :

From  harmony  to  harmony
Through  all  the  compass  of  the  notes  it  ran,
The  diapason  closing  full  in  Man.

As  from  the  power  of  sacred  lays
The  spheres  began  to  move."

and  (2)  the  translations  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers  of  two  Greek
Oracles2  (Essays — Classical,  pp.  97  and  99),  especially  the  lines  :
"  0  God  ineffable,  eternal  Sire,
Throned  on  the  whirling  spheres,  the  astral  fire,

1  Mr.  Piddington  discusses  this  script  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.
309-311,  and  328-330.

2  The  first  of  these  two  oracles  was  found  on  a  leaf  of  the  manuscript
which  contains  Porphyry's  letter  to  Marcella.  The  second  was  given  at
Delphi  to  a  friend  of  Porphyry's  who  enquired,  "  Where  is  now  Plotinus'
soul  ?  "


32  Alice  Johnson.  [part

Hid  in  whose  heart  thy  whole  creation  lies, —

The  whole  world's  wonder  mirrored  in  thine  eyes, —

Thee  the  first  Number  and  harmonious  Whole,
Form  in  all  forms,  and  of  all  souls  the  Soul."

"  Once  by  God's  grace  was  from  thine  eyes  unfurled
This  veil  that  screens  the  immense  and  whirling  world,
Once,  while  the  spheres  around  thee  in  music  ran,
Was  very  Beauty  manifest  to  man  ;  "

The  metro  of  this  latter,  it  will  be  noticed,  is  the  same  as
the  metre  of  the  script.  But  the  script  embroiders  on  the
ideas  thence  derived,  adding  something  of  its  own.  In  par-
ticular the  phrase

"  the  throbbing  Soul
Saw  through  the  sound  the  burning  of  the  flame  "

seems,  as  Mr.  Piddington  observed  in-  his  Report,  to  fore-
shadow the  quotation  from  Abt  Vogler  :

"  That  out  of  three  sounds  he  frame,  not  a  fourth  sound,  but  a
star,"

which  played  so  important  a  part  later  in  tire  cross-cor-
respondence.

{Mrs.  Holland'*  Script  of  Dec.  19,  1906.)

....  Pace — Pax — it  is  only  in  appearance  that  the  life  appears
unduly  brief  or  all  too  swiftly  terminated  in  reality  the  wheel  had
run  full  circle.  .  .  .

"  Into  a  darkness  quieted  by  hope."  1


No — the  water  has  a  whirling  sweep — but  not  a  circular  whirl-
pool like  one.

1  Browning,  Sordcllo,  Book  I.


LXVIII.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


33


Pink  may-blossom  on  the  trees  near  the  drive —
Qui  bien  ayme  tarcl  oublye.

Why  not  that  motto  for  the  ring — it  applies  to  both  sides — .  .  .  .

H. December  21st,  don't  you  remember  ?

M—

A  white  frost  in  January  but  not  before —

This  script,  as  stated  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  219,
was  produced  on  the  day  of  Professor  F.  W.  Maitland's  death,
and  Mrs.  Verrall,  to  whom  I  showed  it  (on  Feb.  19,  1907)
thought  that  some  passages  in  it  were  meant  to  refer  to  him.
"It  is  only  in  appearance  that  the  life  appears  unduly
brief  ..."  had  a  certain  appropriateness,  as  he  was  only
56  when  he  died.  But  Mrs.  Verrall  attached  more  importance
to  the  words  "  H.  December  21st,  don't  you  remember  ?
M."  since  it  was  on  Dec.  21,  1906,  that  she  heard  of  Pro-
fessor Maitland's  death  (which  had  occurred  in  the  Canary
Isles),  whereas  on  Dec.  21  of  the  previous  year  she  had  heard
of  Dr.  Hodgson's  death.  Further,  "  the  pink  may-blossom
on  the  trees  near  the  drive  "  was  appropriate  to  her  house,
well  known  to  Professor  Maitland  ;  while,  in  accordance
with  the  punning  habits  of  scripts,1  it  may  be  supposed  that
"  May  "  (the  name  by  which  Mrs.  Verrall's  friends  call  her)
implies  a  connection  of  the  script  with  her  in  two  respects,
both  in  regard  to  her  friend,  Professor  Maitland,  and  as  con-
taining a  cross-correspondence  with  her  own  script.

Some  confirmation  of  the  supposed  reference  here  to  Pro-
fessor Maitland  is  afforded  by  the  facts  that  Mrs.  Holland's
script  of  Oct.  17,  1906,  appeared  to  be  premonitory  of  his
last  voyage  to  the  Canary  and  of  his  death  (see  Proceedings,
Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  217)  ;  and  that  her  script  of  March  20,  1907
(see  below,  p.  42),  undoubtedly  refers  to  him,  contains  further
allusions  to  "  Hope,  Star  and  Browning  "  and  seems  closely
connected  with  this  script  of  Dec.  19,  1906  ;  though  on  March
20,  1907,  she  was  unaware  that  these  earlier  scripts  had  been
interpreted  as  referring  to  Professor  Maitland.

1  Thus  in  Miss  Verrall's  scripts  of  Feb.  3  and  17,  1907,  below,  the  phrase
"  Song  birds  pipe  their  tune  "  and  the  allusions  to  the  Pied  Piper  are  clearly
references  to  Mrs.  Piper.

C


*


34


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  context  of  the  quotation  in  the  script  from  Sordello  1
is  as  follows  :

"  For  he  is  thine  !
Sordello,  thy  forerunner,  Florentine  !
A  herald-star  I  know  thou  didst  absorb
Relentless  into  the  consummate  orb
That  scared  it  from  its  right  to  roll  along
A  sempiternal  path  with  dance  and  song,

Still,  what  if  I  ...  .

....  launch  once  more
That  lustre  ? Dante,  pacer  of  the  shore
Where  glutted  hell  disgorgeth  filthiest  gloom,
Unbitten  by  its  whirring  sulphur-spume —
Or  Avhence  the  grieved  and  obscure  waters  slope
Into  a  darkness  quieted  by  hope  ;

I  would  do  this  !  "

Here  then  the  quotation  from  Browning  contains  the  word
Hope  and  is  taken  from  a  passage  describing  Sordello  under
the  image  of  a  Star,  which  pursued  its  "  path  with  dance  and
song,"  an  allusion  to  "  the  music  of  the  spheres."

The  drawing  which  follows  this  quotation  in  the  script,
and  the  next  sentence,  which  clearly  refers  to  the  drawing,
allude,  no  doubt,  to  the  "  grieved  and  obscure  waters  "  of  the
line  preceding  the  one  quoted.

"  Qui  bien  ayme  tard  oublye.  Why  not  that  motto  for  the
ring  ?  It  applies  to  both  sides."  I  regard  this  as  an  allusion
to  the  following  passage  from  The  Ring  and  the  Book  (Book  I.)  :

"  A  ring  without  a  posy,2  and  that  ring  mine  ?
0  lyric  Love,  half  angel  and  half  bird
And  all  a  wonder  and  a  wild  desire,

1  It  will  be  remembered  that  Sordello  was  an  Italian  poet — like  Virgil,  a
native  of  Mantua — whom  Dante  met  in  Purgatory.

2  In  the  completo  edition  of  Browning's  Poems,  edited  by  A.  Birrell  (the
notes  to  The  Ring  and  the  Book  being  by  F.  G.  Kenyon),  the  following  foot-
note is  attached  to  this  word  :  "  Posy  :  a  motto  or  rhyme,  engraved  inside
a  ring."


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


35


When  the  first  summons  from  the  darkling  earth

Reached  thee  amid  thy  chambers,  blanched  their  blue,

And  bared  them  of  the  glory — to  drop  down,

To  toil  for  man,  to  suffer  or  to  die, —

This  is  the  same  voice  :  can  thy  soul  know  change  ?

Hail  then,  and  hearken  from  the  realms  of  help  !  "

"  Qui  bien  ay  me  tard  oublye  "  is  of  course  a  very  appro-
priate motto  for  Browning's  Ring,  and  the  phrase  "  it  applies
to  both  sides,"  if  taken  to  mean  that  it  applies  both  to  heaven
and  earth,  fits  in  closely  with  the  whole  sentiment  of  his
half  mystic  and  half  personal  appeal  to  "  Lyric  Love."  It
is  also  very  appropriate  to  the  general  gist  of  Abt  Vogler,  and
especially  to  these  lines  (Stanza  IV.)  :

"  And  the  emulous  heaven yearned down, made  effort  to
reach  the  earth,
As  the  earth  had  done  her  best,  in  my  passion,  to  scale
the  sky."

It  will  be  seen  that  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Jan.  28,  1907,
quotes  both  from  the  above  passage  in  The  Ring  and  the  Booh
and  from  Abt  Vogler.

{Mrs.  Verrall's  Script  of  Jan.  23,  1907.)
Justice  holds  the  scales.

That  gives  the  words  but  an  anagram  would  be  better
Tell  him  that — rats  star  tars  and  so  on. Try  this.
It  has  been  tried  before

r  T  a  T  s rearrange  those  five  letters or  again  tears

stare

seam

same
and  so  on

Skeat  takes  Kate's  Keats stake  steak.
But  the  letters  you  should  give  to-night  are  not  so  many — only
three

a  s  t

The  anagrams  in  this  script  are  to  be  compared  with  those
in^Miss  Verrall's  script  of  Feb.  17,  1907,  given  below.  The
last  three  letters  are  probably  the  beginning  of  the  word
"  aster,"  with  which  the  next  script  opens.


36


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(Mrs.  Verrall's  Script  of  Jan.  28,  1907.)


Aster  [star]

Tepee?  [sign,  or  wonder]

the  world's  wonder  1

And  all  a  wonder  and  a  wild  desire.2

The  very  wings  of  her

A  WINGED  DESIRE

viroTTTepos  epm  [winged  love]

Then  there  is  Blake

and  mocked  my  loss  of  liberty.3

But  it  is  all  the  same  thing — the  winged  desire

e'/Qcos  irodeivos  [passion]  the  hope  that  leaves  the  earth  for  the
sky —  Abt  Vogler —  for  earth  too  hard  that  found  itself  or
lost  itself — in  the  sky.


That  is  what  I  want — ■
On  the  earth  the  broken  sounds

threads
In  the  sky  the  perfect  arc.

1  See  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Essays — Classical,  p.  97,  quoted  in  the  text  above.

2  Browning,  The  Ring  and  the  Book,  quoted  in  the  text  above.

3  "  He  loves  to  sit  and  hear  me  sing,

Then  laughing,  sports  and  plays  with  me  ;
Then  stretches  out  my  golden  wing,
And  mocks  my  loss  of  liberty."

(Blake,  Song: "How  sweet  I  roamed  from  field  to  field.")


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."  37

The  C  major  of  this  life  1

But  your  recollection  is  at  fault

ADB  is  the  part  that  unseen  completes  the  arc.

Mr.  Piddington  had  asked  MyersP  on  Jan.  16,  1907  (see
summary  of  Latin  Message  above)  to  add  to  the  scripts  of
Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Holland  some  such  sign  as  a  triangle
within  a  circle  when  producing  a  cross-correspondence  between
them.  It  will  be  noticed  that  this  particular  sign  appears
in  this  script.

"  The  ivorld's  wonder  "  is  a  quotation  from  a  poem  to  which
Mrs.  Verrall's  own  script  of  Dec.  17,  1906,  alluded  ;  while
"  all  a  wonder  and  a  wild  desire  "  is  a  quotation  from  a  passage
in  The  Ring  and  the  Book  to  which  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of
Dec.  19,  1906,  as  I  believe,  alluded  (see  above).

The  leading  idea  of  the  script  is  clearly  Love,  or  Passion, —
emphasised,  as  the  leading  ideas  are  apt  to  be,  by  various
devices.  The  word  itself  occurs  only  twice, — both  times  in
its  Greek  form,2 — but  several  of  the  quotations  turn  on  it,
namely  :

(1)  "  O  lyric  Love,  half  angel  and  half  bird,
And  all  a  wonder  and  a  wild  desire."

(2)  The  "  Prince  of  Love  "  who,  in  Blake's  song,  imprisons
the  lover  in  a  cage  and  mocks  his  loss  of  liberty  ;  and  (3)  the
"  passion  that  left  the  ground  to  lose  itself  in  the  sky."

The  reminiscences  of  Abt  Vogler  in  this  script  are  of  special
interest.  In  most  cases  the  phrases  are  not  taken  direct  from
the  poem,  but  compounded  out  of  two  or  more  phrases  in  it,
so  that  a  single  sentence  is  ingeniously  turned  to  express
two  or  more  ideas,  as  in  several  other  cases  given  in  this  paper.
While  the  number  of  allusions  seem  to  point  to  a  general
reference  to  the  whole  poem,  the  individual  variations  are  all,
as  I  believe,  intentional. I  will  give  the  original  passages

1  Browning,  Abt  Vogler.

2  Somewhat  similarly  in  the  case  of  the  cross-correspondence  Thanatos,
Mrs.  Verrall  on  April  29,  1907,  produced  a  script  containing  four  quota-
tions involving  the  notion  of  Death,  but  the  word  itself  occurred  once  only,
as  mors  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  299).


38


Alice  Johnson.


[part


in  full,  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  alluded  to  in  the
script  :

(1)  "  The  high  that  proved  too  high,  the  heroic  for  earth  too  hard,

The  passion  that  left  the  ground  to  lose  itself  in  the  sky,
Are  music  sent  up  to  God.  ..."

Here  note  that  the  script  substitutes  "  hope  "  for  "  pas-
sion,"— a  device  probably  intended,  as  Mr.  Piddington
pointed  out,  to  emphasise  "  hope  "  by  drawing  attention
to  it,  for  no  one  familiar  with  the  poem  could  fail  to  notice
the  misquotation,  and  Mrs.  Verrall,  in  her  contemporary
notes,  remarked  on  it.

The  script  too,  instead  of  "  to  lose  itself,"  has  "  that
found  itself  or  lost  itself," — thus  hinting  at  the  conception  of
individual  persistence,  as  contrasted  with  that  of  absorption
into  a  greater  whole,  which  is  suggested  by  the  original
phrase.1

(2)  "  But  here  is  the  finger  of  God,  a  flash  of  the  will  that  can,

Existent  behind  all  laws,  that  made  them  and,  lo,  they  are  !
And  I  know  not  if,  save  in  this,  such  gift  be  allowed  to  man,
That  out  of  three  sounds  he  frame,  not  a  fourth  sound,
but  a  star."

(3)  "  On  the  earth  the  broken  arcs  ;  in  the  heaven,  a  perfect  round.'

These  two  passages  from  the  poem  are,  I  take  it,  repre-
sented in  a  highly  concise  and  conglomerate  manner  in  the
script  by  :

Aster  [star]  rtpas  [a  sign  or  wonder].  .  .  .
On  the  earth  the  broken  sounds — threads —
In  the  sky  the  perfect  arc

"  The  finger  of  God  "  is  a  Biblical  phrase,  used  in  connec-
tion with  something  done  as  a  sign  of  the  power  of  God,  e.g.,
"  Then  the  magicians  said  unto  Pharaoh,  This  is  the  finger
of  God  "  {Exodus,  viii.  19),  referring  to  the  plagues  of  Egypt  ;

"  If  I  with  the  finger  of  God  cast  out  devils,  no  doubt  the
kingdom  of  God  is  come  upon  you  "  {Luke,  xi.  20)  ;

1  Somewhat  similarly  MyersP,  quoting  from  Abt  Vogler,  attempted  to
improve  on  his  text  when  he  said  that  he  had  "  returned  to  breathe  in  the
old  world  which  is  not  however  better  than  our  new  " — in  the  sitting  of
May  1,  1907  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  380).


LXVIII.]


Some Concordant  Automatisms. "


39


The  tables  of  the  Law  given  to  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai  were
"  written  with  the  finger  of  God  "  {Exodus,  xxxi.  18).

In  the  poem  the  Sign  is  the  "  Star  "  made  "  out  of  three
sounds."  Mr.  Piddington  concluded  later  that  Myersv  had
intended  to  point  to  this  sign  as  symbolising  the  Latin  Message.

The  odd  variant  given  in  the  script  of  the  well-known  line,

-  "  On  the  earth  the  broken  arcs  ;  in  the  heaven  a  perfect  round,"

has  also,  I  think,  a  special  meaning  ;  but  this,  with  the
rough  drawings  that  follow  it,  will  be  best  discussed  in  con-
nection with  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  March  20,  1907,  given
below,  pp.  42-45.

Next  in  chronological  order  comes  :


A  green  jerkin  and  hose  and  doublet  where  the  song  birds  pipe
their  tune  in  the  early  morning

therapeutikos  ek  exotikon  [a  healer  from  aliens]


{Miss  Verrall's  Script  of  Feb.  3,  1907.)


a  monogram


the  crescent  moon


remember


like  a  thunder  riven  oak  the  grim  remains
stand  on  the  level  desolation  of  the  plains
a  record  for  all  ages  of  the  span
which  nature  gives  to  the  weak  labour  of  a  man


The  word  "  pipe,"  with  "  a  healer  from  aliens  "  is  probably
meant  as  an  allusion  to  the  Pied  Piper  of  Hamelin,  especially
as  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  Feb.  17  (given  below),  which,  like


40


Alice  Johnson.


[part


this  one,  contains  the  word  "  star  "  and  a  drawing  of  a  star,
refers  unquestionably  to  that  poem.  "  Pipe  "  is  also  in-
tended, I  have  little  doubt,  as  a  punning  reference  to  Mrs.
Piper,  indicating  that  the  script  contains  a  cross-correspondence
with  hers.

There  is  a  connection  with  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Jan.
28,  1907,  in  the  (apparent)  allusion  to  a  poem  by  Browning,
in  the  "  Star,"  and  in  the  "  bird,"  for  Mrs.  Verrall  had
recorded  on  Jan.  29  that  she  thought  her  script  was  an
attempt  at  "  Bird,"  through  the  words  "  wings  "  and
*:  winged,"  and  Abt  Vogler  ("Vogler"  =  fowler).

On  Feb.  11,  1907,  MyersP  stated  that  Hope,  Star  and
Browning  had  appeared  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script.  Later  in
the  day  Mr.  Piddington,  studying  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts,  con-
cluded that  those  of  Jan.  23  and  28  were  referred  to.  He
communicated  this  success  to  Mrs.  Verrall,  who,  with  a  view
to  encouraging  her  daughter,1  gave  her  on  Feb.  15  a  general
description  of  the  incident,  substituting  imaginary  words  for
the  original  ones.  For  "  Star,"  "  Planet  Mars  "  was  sub-
stituted, for  "  Hope  "  "  Virtue,"  and  for  "  Browning  "
"  Keats."  Nothing  was  said  to  Miss  Verrall  about  the  script
of  Jan.  23,  but  she  was  told  that  a  five-letter  anagram  had
constituted  part  of  the  success  on  Jan.  28.  Her  next  script
was  as  follows  :


when  she  sees  it
Miss  Verrall  had  done  very  little  automatic  writing  up  to  this  date.


(Miss  Verrall's  Script  of  Feb.  17,  1907.)
androsace  (?)  Carthusian  candelabrum


many  together


that  was  the  sign  she  will  understand


LXVIII.]


Some


"  Concordant  Automatisms.'"


4  1


diapason  Sta  ttmtuiv  pvdfios  [rhythm  through  all]
No  arts  avail

the  heavenly  harmony  m  £</»;  o  wkarmv  [as  Plato  says]
the  mystic  three  (?)  [scribble]
and  a  star  above  it  all
rats  everywhere  in  Hamelin  town
now  do  you  understand Henry  (?)

In  regard  to  the  anagrams  in  Mrs.  and  Miss  VerralPs
scripts,  a  sheet  of  paper  was  discovered  in  August,  1907,
among  Dr.  Hodgson's  rough  notes  at  Boston,  in  which  several
of  them  occurred.1

Dr.  Hodgson's  anagrams  included  :  "  rates,  stare,  tears,
aster  "  ; "  star,  tars,  rats,  arts."

Mrs.  Verrall's  anagrams  (on  Jan.  23  and  Jan.  28,  1907)
included  : "  rats,  star,  tars  ;  " "  tears,  stare,  aster,  teras."

Miss  Verrall's  anagrams  (on  Feb.  17,  1907)  were  :  "  arts,
star,  rats."

There  are  other  obvious  connections  between  Miss  Ver-
rall's script  of  Feb.  17  and  Mrs.  Verrall's  of  Jan.  28.  Miss
Verrall's  star  which  "  was  the  sign  "  is  equivalent  to  Mrs.
Verrall's  "  aster  Tenets."  Miss  Verrall  has  also  an  allusion
to  Browning  in  the  phrase  "  rats  everywhere,  in  Hamelin
town  "  {Pied  Piper).  The  "  diapason,  rhythm,"  and
"  heavenly  harmony  "  in  this  script  are  also  to  be  compared
with  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Dec.  17,  1906,  above,  which,  of
course,  Miss  Verrall  had  not  seen.

Further,  the  phrases  :  "  No  arts  avail — the  heavenly  har-
mony— the  mystic  three  and  a  star  above  it  all,"  seem  to  point
to  certain  lines  in  Abt  Vogler,  especially  :

"  It  [i.e.  both  painting  and  poetry]  is  all  triumphant  art,  but

art  hi  obedience  to  laws  .  .  .
But  here  [i.e.  hi  Music]  is  the  finger  of  God,  a  Hash  of  the  will

that  can,  .  .  .

That  out  of  three  sounds  he  frame,  not  a  fourth  sound,  but
a  star."

Thus,  two  of  Miss  Verrall's  anagrams,  "  arts,"  "  star,"
belong  to  Abt  Vogler,  though  the  reference  is  not  given  in

1  The  episode  is  fully  related  in  Mr.  Piddington's  report,  Vol.  XXII  ,
pp.  64-GG,  where  a  reproduction  of  the  sheet  of  paper  is  given.


42


Alice  Johnson.


[part


the  script  ;  while  her  third  anagram  "  rats  "  is  referred  to
the  Pied  Piper.

The  next  script  is  Mrs.  Holland's  of  March  20,  1907,  which,
as  shown  by  postmarks,  was  the  last  one  she  produced  before
hearing  in  a  letter  from  me  that  we  were  now  having  sittings
with  Mrs.  Piper  in  London.

{Mrs.  Holland's  Script  of  March  20,  1907.)

All  last  month  was  so  grey  and  chill  that  the  flowers  of  February
have  waited  until  March —  Hellebore  and  aconite  are  only  lately
unfolded —  Now  comes  the  first  flame  of  spring — the  golden
crocus —  Dearer  to  me  than  all  the  Italian  (?)  bounty — profligate
bounty — of  blossoms  too  plentiful  to  seem  truly  those  of  spring —

I  begin  to  understand  that  though  transmigration  as  ye  appre-
hend it  is  but  a  partial  truth — yet  do  we  hold  together  as  the
nucleus  of  stars  or  as  the  notes  that  form  the  perfect  chord —
I  must  wait  before  going  on  for  the  completion  of  the  chord —
or  for  the  two  remaining  lives,  that  are  as  stars  in  my  constellation.
Very  unlike  many  of  my  imaginings.

A  peculiarly  long  upper  lip  but  the  face  is  raised  to  beauty  by
the  eyes — large — luminous  grey — and  by  the  noble  lift  of  the
brow  above  them —

The  left  hand — a  twisted  finger.

The  mist  is  clearing  from  the  ground  even  as  earth  mists  do —
Be  not  unhappy  that  the  stars  are  yet  hidden —  They  at  the
last  will  be  revealed — but  content  ye  now  with  the  waft  of  a  robe
bearing  a  memory  with  it — the  print  of  an  unforgotten  foot.

Memory — ever-dwelling  thought — constant  faithful  memory  is
the  true  ghost-compeller  On  our  side  many  remember  faith-
fully but  our  memories  need  to  be  met  by  an  answering  memory
ere  comes  the  perfect  strength —

Dressed  in  black — a  large-eyed  woman — long  limbed — large
mouthed  Avith  slack  voluble  lips — "  How  poor  an  instrument  may
do  a  noble  deed  "  1 —

1  Cleopatra.  "  Let  him  come  in. What  poor  an  instrument
May  do  a  noble  deed  !  he  brings  me  liberty."

(Referring  to  the  Clown  that  brings  her  the  basket  of  figs  with  the  asp.)
Antony  and  Cleopatra,  Act  V.,  Scene  2.


LXVIII.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


43


The  inveterate  jarring  note.  F  (•)  6 —  23 —  13 —  No  the  8th
is  purposely  omitted — And  Memory  dies  without  Love.

G.  M-T.1

This  script,  though  containing  only  one  complete  quota-
tion, is  full  of  literary  reminiscences  in  a  slightly  veiled  form.
Thus  the  first  paragraph  refers  to  "  the  ground  flame  of  the
crocus  "  (Tennyson,  The  Progress  of  Spri?ig)  ;  and  the  phrases
immediately  following  this  are.  I  think,  a  sort  of  summary  of
Browning's  Home-Thoughts,  from  Abroad  :

"  Oh,  to  be  in  England,
Now  that  April's  there

And  though  the  fields  look  rough  with  hoary  dew,
All  will  be  gay  when  noontide  wakes  anew
The  buttercups,  the  little  children's  dower,
— Far  brighter  than  this  gaudy  melon-flower  !

The  second  paragraph  seems  to  contain  several  references
to  Abt  Vogler  :

"  Transmigration  as  ye  apprehend  it  is  but  a  partial  truth  "
suggests  :

"  The  wonderful  Dead  who  have  passed  through  the  body  and
gone

But  were  back  once  more  to  breathe  in  an  old  world  worth
their  new."

(The  phrase  in  the  script  may  perhaps  also  allude  to  Horace's
Ode  I.  28,  which  refers  to  re-incarnation,  and  about  which  a
question  had  been  put  on  Mrs.  Verrall's  behalf  to  MyersP  on
Jan.  23,  1907.2)

"  Yet  do  we  hold  together  as  the  nucleus  of  stars  or  as  the
notes  that  form  the  perfect  chord.  I  must  wait  before  going  on
for  the  completion  of  the  chord,  or  for  the  two  remaining  lives
that  are  as  stars  in  my  constellation ."

1  These  are  the  initials  of  Lady  Mount-Temple,  who  is  several  times  men-
tioned in  Mrs.  Holland's  early  script  (see  Proc,  Vol.  XXI.,  pp.  208-209).
Mrs.  Holland  knew,  from  reading  Human  Personality,  that  she  was  an  old
friend  of  Mr.  Myers's.

2  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  397  et  seq.,  and  below,  p.  81.


44  Alice  Johnson.  [part

I  interpreted  this  immediately  after  reading  it  as  an  allusion
to  the  line  :

"  That  out  of  three  sounds  he  frame,  not  a  fourth  sound,  but
a  star."

But  I  now  take  the  whole  paragraph  to  be  a  sort  of  com-
posite reference  to  this  and  a  number  of  other  lines  in  Abt
Vogler,  especially  :

(1)  "  And  the  emulous  heaven  yearned  down,  made  effort  to
reach  the  earth,

As  the  earth  had  done  her  best,  in  my  passion,  to  scale  the
sky."

(2)  "  For  earth  had  attained  to  heaven,  there  was  no  more  near

nor  far."

(o)  "  I  will  be  patient  and  proud,  and  soberly  actpiiesce.

Give  me  the  keys. I  feel  for  the  common  chord  again."

There  are  no  exact  verbal  parallels  between  the  poem  and
the  script,  but  both  (like  the  Holland  script  of  Dec.  19,  1906)
represent  a  communion  or  co-operation  between  heaven  and
earth.

"  A  s  the  nucleus  of  slurs  or  as  the  notes  tlud  form  the  perfect
chord  "  seems  to  be  a  composite  allusion  to  the  two  lines  :

"  That  out  of  three  sounds  he  frame,  not  a  fourth  sound,  but

a  star  "

and

"  On  the  earth  the  broken arcs  ; in  the  heaven,  a  perfect
round."

I  pointed  out  above  that  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Jan.  28,
1907,  also  makes  a  composite  reference  to  these  very  lines
in  the  phrases  :

Aster  T€/xis  ....
On  the  earth  the  broken  sounds

threads
In  the  sky  the  perfect  arc.

It  is  further  to  be  noted  that  both  scripts  seem  to  use
certain  terms  both  in  their  musical  and  in  their  mathematical
senses. Mrs.  Holland's  "  perfect  chord "  suggests  both  a


Lxvni.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


45


combination  of  notes  sounded  together  and  (through  the
implicit  allusion  to  Abt  Vogler)  the  straight  line  between
the  two  ends  of  an  arc  of  a  circle.  Mrs.  Verrall's  "  broken
sounds — threads  "  and  "  the  perfect  arc  "  also  point  to  chords
in  both  senses  of  the  word.

But,  while  the  poem  speaks  of  a  "  perfect  round,"  the
two  automatists — both  of  whom  are  extremely  familiar  with
the  poem — refer,  the  one  to  a  "  perfect  chord  "  and  the  other
to  a  "  perfect  arc."

As  if  to  emphasise  this  misquotation  or  adaptation  of  the  line,
Mrs.  Verrall's  script  (see  above,  p.  36),  gives  two  geometrical
drawings,  the  first  showing  a  segment  of  a  circle  with  its  chord
and  its  arc,  and  the  second  representing  a  complete  circle,
below  which  is  added  the  remark  :

"  A  D  B  is  the  part  that  unseen  completes  the  arc."

With  this  compare  the  Holland  script  :

"  /  must  wait  before  going  on  for  the  completion  of  the  chord,
or  for  the  two  remaining  lives  that  are  as  stars  in  my  constellation."

Abt  Vogler,  the  optimist  with  a  passion  for  personal  im-
mortality, thinks  only  of  the  perfection  to  be  attained  in
heaven.  In  the  scripts  we  find  Abt  Vogler's  conception
enlarged  by  the  thought  that  inspired  F.  W.  H.  Myers's  poem
Venice, — that  perfection  is  not  to  be  attained  all  at  once, —

"  The  race  of  angels  is  the  race  of  men  ;
Their  vanished  light  is  on  our  vision  shed,
Nor  even  their  joy  without  us  perfected."  1

The  same  idea  is  emphasised  still  more  strongly  in  a  later
passage  of  the  same  Holland  script  :

"  Memory — ever-dwelling  thought — constant  faithful  memory
is  the  true  ghost -com  peller.  On  our  side  many  remember  faithfully ,
but  our  memories  need  to  be  met  by  an  answering  memory  ere
comes  the  perfect  strength."

"  The  perfect  strength  "  is,  I  have  no  doubt,  an  allusion  to
Rossetti's  Blessed  Damozel,  the  context  of  the  phrase  in  that
poem  being  as  follows  :

"  The  sun  was  gone  now  ;  the  curled  moon
Was  like  a  little  feather
Fluttering  far  down  the  gulf  ;  and  now

1  See  Mr.  Piddington's  paper  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXVI.,  pp,  174-220.


46


Alice  Johnson.


[part


She  spoke  through  the  still  weather.
Her  voice  was  like  the  voice  the  stars
Had  when  they  sang  together.

'  I  wish  that  he  were  come  to  me,

For  he  will  come,'  she  said.
'  Have  I  not  prayed  in  Heaven  ? — on  earth,

Lord,  Lord,  has  he  not  pray'd  ?
Are  not  two  prayers  a  perfect  strength  ?

And  shall  I  feel  afraid  ?  "'

It  will  be  seen  that  several  other  of  the  leading  ideas  or
items  of  the  cross-correspondence, — viz.  the  crescent  moon,
the  stars,  and  the  music  of  the  spheres, — are  to  be  found  in
these  verses.  Mrs.  Holland  is  very  familiar  with  this  poem,
as  well  as  with  Abt  Vogler,  which  confirms  the  view  that  her
phrase  is  quoted  from  it.

References  to  Professor  F.  W.  Maitland.

In  the  last  paragraph  of  the  script  we  find  :

"6—23—13—  No,  the  8th  is  purposely  omitted.  And
Memory  dies  without  Love."

Substitution  of  letters  of  the  alphabet  for  these  numbers  1
gives  the  initials  F.  W.  M.,  and  "  the  8th  is  purposely  omitted  "
clearly  means  that  they  do  not  refer  to  F.  W.  H.  M.  (Myers).
F.  W.  M.  are  the  initials  of  Prof.  Maitland.

Mrs.  Verrall  points  out.  to  me  that  the  allusion  to  Browning's
Home- Thoughts,  from  Abroad  (which  begins  "  Oh,  to  be  in
England,  Now  that  April's  there  ")  in  the  first  paragraph  of
this  script  was  appropriate  to  Professor  Maitland,  since  April
was  the  regular  month  for  his*"return  to  England  from  the
Canaries  ;  also  that  the  opening  of  the  script  of  Dec.  26,  1906,
below,  suggests  Browning's  companion  poem,  Home-Thoughts,
from  the  Sea,  which  describes  scenery  that  he  might  pass  on  his
voyages  to  and  from  the  Canaries,  as  he  often  went  by  ships
that  touched  at  Gibraltar  or  Tangier,  and  so  down  the  western
coast  of  Spain.  She  tells  me  that  he  was  a  great  admirer  and
constant  reader  of  Browning. It  is,  therefore,  interesting  that

1  The  full  names  of  Richard  Hodgson  and  Roden  Noel  were  similarly
indicated  by  numbers  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  ;  see  Proc.,  Vol.  XXI.,  pp.
304  and  320.


lxvitt.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."  47


three  out  of  the  four  Holland  scripts  alluding  to  him  (viz.
those  of  Dec.  19  and  26,  1906,  and  March  20,  1907)  refer  to
poems  of  Browning's.

It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  an  earlier  script  of  Mrs.
Holland's,  that  of  Oct.  17,  1906.  had  been  interpreted  by
Mrs.  Verrall  (on  January  29,  1907)  as  premonitory  of  his
death,  and  that  of  Dec.  19,  1906,  given  above,  as  referring  to
it. In  a  third  script  his  name  had  been  given,  as  follows  :

(Mrs.  Holland's  Script  of  Dec.  26,  1906.)

England — Old  England — Thoughts  across  the  sea — Thalassa

1865— Not  a  long  life—

M— M— F.  W.  M. Mary  B.

Mary  Maitson —

Maitland— Baitson— M.  B. — F.  W.  M.

There  had  seemed  to  be  many  years  of  work  before  them  both —
One  to  whom  the  dead  past  grew  living —
"  Where  History's  Muse  the  memorial  was  keeping
Of  all  that  the  dark  land  [sic]  of  Destiny  graves  "  1

On  receiving  this  script  I  wrote  to  Mrs.  Holland,  saying
that  it  referred  to  Professor  Maitland  and  Miss  Mary  Bateson,
both  of  whom  had  recently  died,  and  asking  if  she  had  seen
any  newspaper  notices  of  them.  I  added  that  Professor
Maitland's  death  had  probably  been  telegraphed  to  India.
She  replied  to  me  on  Feb.  5,  1907  :  "  Professor  Maitland's
death  was  telegraphed  out  here  ;  his  name  was  unfamiliar  to
my  ignorance  and  I  did  not  notice  any  reference  to  it  in  the
script.2  ...  I  saw  a  rather  long  obituary  notice  of  Miss
Mary  Bateson  in  the  Queen."

Mary  Bateson,  Lecturer  in  History  at  Newnham  College,
Cambridge,  was  Professor  Maitland's  most  distinguished
pupil,  and  well  known  to  historical  scholars  through  numerous
articles,  especially  on  obscure  constitutional  and  legal  problems

1  "  While  History's  Muse  the  memorial  was  keeping
Of  all  that  the  dark  hand  of  Destiny  weaves."

(T.  Moore,  "  While  History's  Muse")
-  Mrs.  Holland  sends  me  the  originals  of  her  script  and  does  not  keep  copies
for  herself,  so  that  her  subsequent  knowledge  of  them  depends  on  her  recol-
lection.


48


Alice  Johnson.


[part


connected  with  the  history  of  mediaeval  boroughs.  The  date
of  her  birth,  1865,  was  given  in  the  article  in  The  Queen  (of
Dec.  8,  1906)  referred  to  by  Mrs.  Holland,  but  Professor  Mait-
land  is  not  mentioned  in  that  article.

She  died  on  Nov.  30,  1906  ;  Professor  Maitland  attended
her  funeral  at  Cambridge,  and  the  last  paper  he  wrote  was
an  obituary  notice  of  her,  which  appeared  in  The  Athenceum
of  Dec.  8,  1906,  signed  "  P.  W.  M."  On  Dec.  8  he  sailed  for
the  Canary,  was  taken  ill  on  the  voyage,  landed  on  Dec.  13,
and  died  in  the  night  of  Dec.  19-20.

It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  Mrs.  Holland  saw  this  article,
as  well  as  that  in  the  Queen  (though  she  only  remembered
seeing  the  latter),  and  that  when  she  read  the  telegraphic
announcement  of  Professor  Maitland's  death,  she  put  the
two  announcements  together  subliminally  and  so  produced
the  script.

At  the  time  that  I  wrote  to  enquire  about  her  knowledge
of  Professor  Maitland,  I  was  unaware  of  the  earlier  refer-
ences to  him  in  her  script  (of  Oct.  17  and  Dec.  19,  1906),
since  these  had  not  yet  been  interpreted.  Consequently,
when  she  produced  her  script  of  Mar.  20,  1907,  she  knew
nothing  of  those  earlier  allusions,  and  therefore  could  have
had  no  normal  reason  for  associating  him  with  the  script  of
Dec.  19,  1906.  Yet  this  latter  and  the  script  of  Mar.  20,
1907,  seem  closely  linked  together  through  their  contributions
to  the  cross-correspondence  "  Hope,  Star  and  Browning,"  and
through  their  references  to  Prof.  Maitland,  while  the  phrase
"  Memory  dies  without  Love  "  (March  20,  1907)  is  very  similar
to  "  Qui  bien  ayme  tard  oublye  "  (Dec.  19,  1906).

The  four  scripts  here  discussed  are  the  only  ones  out  of
the  whole  mass  produced  by  Mrs.  Holland  and  in  my  posses-
sion which  contain  any  mention  of  or  allusion  to  Professor
Maitland.

The  following  Table  shows  the  dates  at  which  the  prin-
cipal topics  of  this  cross-correspondence  occurred  in  the
scripts  of  the  various  automatists.  The  round  brackets  indi-
cate that  the  topic  appeared  on  that  date  in  an  implicit  form
only, — that  is,  generally  speaking,  in  the  context  of  a  quota-
tion which  was  given  explicitly.


LXVTIT.]


Som.e  "  Concordant  Automatisms.'


II


50


Alice  Johnson.


[part


CHAPTER  IV.

Cross-Correspondence  :  "  Alexander's  Tomb."

Some  of  the  scripts  classified  under  the  above  heading  were
published  in  Mr.  Piddington's  report  (Proc,  Vol.  XXII.)
under  the  cross-correspondences  "  Library,"  "  Laurel  Wreath,"
and  "  Light  in  West."  A  re-classification  has  become  necessary
since  the  discovery  (in  July,  1912)  that  the  Alexander  of
"  Alexander's  tomb  "  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  March  17,
1907,  was  not  Alexander  the  Great,  as  we  had  all  assumed,
but  Alessandro  de'  Medici,  who  was  buried  in  one  of  the
two  famous  Medici  tombs  erected  by  Michael  Angelo  in  the
Sagrestia  Nuova  of  the  Church  of-  San  Lorenzo  at  Florence.1
This  discovery  made  it  clear  that  a  number  of  other  passages
in  the  scripts  referred  to  the  same  tombs.

The  allusions  in  these  scripts  to  more  or  less  well-known
facts  in  the  history  of  the  Medici  family  will  perhaps  be  more
easily  understood  if  prefaced  by  a  consecutive  summary  of
the  facts  alluded  to,2  together  with  a  genealogical  tree  of  the
Medici  chiefly  concerned,  as  follows  : —

Piero  (il  Gottoso)
b.  1416  ;  d.  1469


Lorenzo  (ii  Magnifico)
b.  1449  ;  d.  L492


Giuliano
b.  1453  ;  d.  1478


PlETRO

(the  Unfortunate)
b.  1471  ;  d.  1503
I

Lorenzo
(Duke  of  Urbino)
b.  1492  ;  d,  1519


Giovanni
(Leo  X.)
b.  1476  ;  d.  1521


Giuliano
(Ducde  Nemours)
b.  1479  ;  d.  1516


Giulio
(Clement  VII.)
7>.  1478;  d.  1534

i

Alessandro
ft.  1511  :  d.  1537


1  I  owe  this  clue  to  a  friend  of  mine,  who  has  on  more  than  one  occasion
made  valuable  suggestions  about  the  meaning  of  the  scripts.

2  Most  of  the  historical  information  in  this  section  is  derived  from  The
Medici,  by  Colonel  G.  F.  Young  (Second  Edition;  London,  John  Murray.
1911;  two  vols.).  This  is  the  only  complete  history  of  the  Medici  family
in  existence,  and,  among  those  that  I  have  consulted,  seems  to  be  based  to
an  unusual  degree  on  original  authorities  and  to  embody  the  results  of  the
most  recent  researches.


LXVIII.]


Rome  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


51


The  Laurel.

The  Laurel,  which  plays  so  large  a  part  in  this  cross-cor-
respondence, was  the  special  emblem  of  Lorenzo  the  Magni-
ficent, derived  from  the  play  on  the  Latin  form  of  his  name,
Laurentius,  in  accordance  with  the  punning  habit  of  the
time.  In  February,  1469,  when  he  was  19  years  old,  a  splendid
tournament  was  held  at  Florence,  to  celebrate  his  betrothal
to  Clarice  Orsini.  The  dress  worn  by  him  on  this  occasion
is  represented  in  Benozzo  Gozzoli's  fresco  of  the  Magi  (part
of  which  is  reproduced  in  Plate  VI.),  where  Lorenzo — the
third  and  youngest  of  the  Three  Kings — appears  riding  on
the  great  white  horse  which  had  been  presented  to  him  by  the
King  of  Naples  for  the  tournament.  On  the  trappings  of
this  horse  are  the  Medici  arms,  the  seven  balls,1 — afterwards
reduced  to  six.  "  The  device  on  his  standard  Avas  a  bay-
tree,  one  half  dry  and  dead-looking,  and  the  other  half  green,
with  the  motto  (worked  in  pearls)  Le  temps  revient,  symbolising
that  a  time  of  youth  and  joy,  after  the  winter  of  [his  grand-
father] Cosimo's  old  age  and  [his  father]  Piero's  ill-health,  was
now  to  supervene."  2  At  this  tournament  Lorenzo  was  the
victor,  and  the  bay-tree  which  forms  a  back-ground  to  his  face
in  the  fresco  represents  his  device.  A  tall  standard  laurel  is
also  seen  above  his  horse's  head,  and  several  other  groups  of
laurels  are  conspicuous  in  other  parts  of  the  picture.

The  frescoes,  painted  for  Piero  il  Gottoso  on  the  walls
of  the  chapel  of  the  Medici  (Riccardi)  Palace  by  Benozzo
Gozzoli,  are  the  only  samples  now  remaining  in  the  Palace
of  all  the  art  treasures  that  it  contained  in  the  times  of  Cosimo,
Piero  and  Lorenzo.  The  Journey  of  the  Three  Kings  is  made
a  vehicle  for  references  to  the  history  of  the  Medici,  and  to
all  that  they  had  done  for  Florence  up  to  that  time.  Two
chief  episodes  are  referred  to  :

(1)  The  Council  of  Florence  in  1439,  which  had  included
John  VII.  (John  Paleologus),  the  last  but  one  Emperor  of
Constantinople,  represented  in  the  fresco  as  the  second  of
the  Three  Kings,  and  Joseph,  the  Patriarch  of  Constantinople,

1  The  reproduction  is  on  too  small  a  scale  to  show  these  details,  %vhich  are
clear  in  photographs.

2  Col.  Young,  The  Medici,  Vol.  I.,  p  160.


52


Alice  Johnson.


[part


represented  as  the  First  King.  This  Council  had  brought  to
Florence  the  most  learned  men  of  the  time,  and  so  had  furthered
the  revival  of  the  ancient  learning  which  the  Medici  did  so  much
to  foster.  And  it  was  in  consequence  of  the  hospitality  shown
to  them  in  1439  that,  when  Constantinople  was  taken  by  the
Turks  in  1453,  the  Greek  scholars  who  were  driven  out  took
refuge  in  Florence.

(2)  The  Tournament  of  1469,  in  which  the  young  heir
of  the  family  had  distinguished  himself.  Lorenzo  appears,
as  said  above,  as  the  Third  King.  Behind  him  is  his  grand-
father, Cosimo,  riding  a  white  horse,  on  whose  trappings
are  the  Medici  arms,  and  his  own  private  crest  of  the  three
peacock's  feathers  with  the  word  Semper — the  motto  of  the
first  three  Medici — above  them  ;  next  to  Cosimo  is  his  brother
Lorenzo  on  a  mule  ;  in  the  left  corner  Piero  il  Gottoso,  and
next  to  him  his  younger  son  Giuliano,  on  a-  white  horse  with
a  jewel  in  its  forehead.

In  1475  another  famous  tournament  took  place.  Lorenzo,
who  was  now  head  of  the  family,  used  the  same  standard
as  at  the  previous  one, — the  bay-tree  which  had  appeared
dead  putting  forth  fresh  leaves,  with  the  motto  Le  temps
revient.  On  this  occasion,  his  brother  Giuliano  was  the  victor,
so  that  the  tournament  was  known  as  La  Giostra  di  Ghdiavo
<Jp"  Medici,  under  which  title  a  celebrated  poem  on  it  was
composed  by  Politian.  In  this  poem  Politian,  in  allusion
to  the  tournament's  Queen  of  Beauty  (the  beautiful  Simonetta
Cattaneo),  describes  the  birth  of  Venus.  And  Botticelli's
Birth  of  Venus  follows  closely  the  lines  of  Politian's  poem,
which  is  adapted  from  one  of  the  Homeric  hymns.  In  the
picture  (reproduced  in  Plate  VII.)  the  laurel  grove  on  the  sea-
shore, which  spreads  out  over  the  nymph  and  partly  over  the
head  of  Venus,  symbolises  Lorenzo,  who  was  called  by  Politian
"  the  Laurel  who  sheltered  the  song-birds  that  carolled  to  the
Tuscan  spring,"  in  allusion  partly  to  his  own  poems  and  partly
to  his  patronage  of  the  poets  of  his  time.

Politian  on  another  occasion  spoke  of  Lorenzo's  great  friend,
Pico  della  Mirandola,  as  "the  Phoenix  who  rested  in  the  Laurel."
partly,  I  suppose,  as  a  pun  on  his  name,  "  the  bird  of  wonder."

When  in  1512,  the  Medici  family,  who  had  been  banished
in  1494.  were  recalled  to  Florence,  the  rule  of  the  city  was


LXVIII.]


Some


Concord  ant  A  u  to  ma  t  isms.


53


at  first  placed  in  the  hands  of  Giuliano  (Due  de  Nemours),
third  son  of  Lorenzo  the  Magnificent,  and  afterwards  in
those  of  Lorenzo  (Duke  of  Urbino),  son  of  Pietro  the  Unfor-
tunate, who  had  died  in  exile,  Cardinal  Giovanni  (afterwards
Leo  X.)  and  his  cousin  Giulio  directing  their  policy.  With  a
view  to  attaching  the  youthful  nobles  to  their  family,  the  Medici
formed  two  Societies,  one  called  the  Company  of  the  Diamond,
which  was  headed  by  Giuliano,  and  the  other  called  the  Coni-
parry  of  the  Branch,  which  was  headed  by  Lorenzo.  These
Companies  gave  feasts  and  pageants,  in  imitation  of  those
held  in  former  years  at  Florence.1  The  badge  of  the  Diamond
was  derived  from  certain  crests  of  the  elder  Medici,  and  the
Branch  was  that  of  the  dry  laurel  putting  forth  new  leaves,
which  was  the  tournament  device  of  Lorenzo  the  Magnificent.
(Of.  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Feb.  6,  1907,  below,  p.  61.)  It  is
important  to  note  that  the  Laurel  was  thus  the  emblem  of
the  younger  as  well  as  of  the  elder  Lorenzo.

In  1524  the  celebrated  Medici  Library,  founded  by  Cosimo
and  largely  added  to  by  Piero  and  Lorenzo,  was  moved  to
the  building  in  which  it  is  now  located  (in  the  cloisters  of  San
Lorenzo),  which  was  designed  and  constructed  by  Michael
Angelo.  Hence  it  became  known  as  the  Library  of  San
Lorenzo,  or  the  Laurentian  Library.  (Cf.  Mrs.  Verrall's  script
of  Feb.  6,  1907.)  It  is  described  by  Col.  Young  as  "  the
parent  of  all  the  great  libraries  of  Europe."  It  is  familiar  to
classical  scholars  from  its  giving  a  name  to  well  known  MSS.,
in  particular  the  Laurentian  MS.  of  Sophocles.

The  Medici  family  were  for  the  third  time  exiled  from
Florence  in  1527,  immediately  after  the  sack  of  Rome.  Two
years  later,  the  Imperial  army  marched  on  Florence,  which
surrendered  after  being  besieged  for  ten  months  ;  and  in
1532,  through  the  influence  of  Clement  VII.,  Alessandro  dc'
Medici  was  made  Duke  of  Florence.

Alessandro,  who  passed  for  the  son  of  the  younger  Lorenzo,
was  actually  the  son  of  Clement  VII.,  his  mother  being  a
mulatto  slave.  From  his  woolly  hair,  thick  lips  and  generally
negro-like  appearance  (see  his  portrait  by  Bronzino,  repro-
duced in  Plate  VIII.),  he  was  called  II  Moro  (the  Moor).  (Cf.

1  See  Artists  of  the  Italian  Renaissance  ;  translated  from  the  Chroniclers
and  arranged  by  E.  L.  Secley  (Chat to  and  Windus,  London,  1U07),  p.  257.


54


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Piper  sitting  uf  Feb.  20,  1907.  and  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of
March  27,  1907.)  The  live  years  of  his  rule  represent  the
darkest  period  of  Florentine  history.  "  A  historian  of  his
own  time  calls  him  a  '  creature  who  would  have  disgraced
even  the  deadliest  epochs  of  Roman  villainy  ';  while  another
describes  him  as  '  one  whose  excesses  were  as  controllable
by  human  reason  as  those  of  a  beast  of  the  forest.'  "  1

On  the  night  of  January  5,  1537,  he  was  murdered  by
his  young  relative  Lorenzino,  of  the  younger  branch  of  the
Medici  family,  in  a  room  in  the  latter's  house,  adjoining  the
Medici  Palace.  Lorenzino  then  fled,  and  the  Duke's  body
was  discovered  next  evening  by  his  own  servants.  His  death
was  kept  secret,  and  the  body  was  hurriedly  prepared  for
burial,  "  and  on  the  following  night  was  carried  by  a  few
servants  with  great  secrecy  to  the  church  of  San  Lorenzo,
and  without  any  religious  service  was  hurriedly  placed  in
the  sarcophagus  containing  the  remains  of  Lorenzo  (Duke  of
Urbino)."  2  (Cf.  Lk  Alexander's  tomb  "  in  Miss  Verrall's  script
of  March  17,  1907.)

The  New  Sacristy  of  San  Lorenzo  had  been  originally
planned  by  Leo  X.  while  on  a  visit  to  Florence  in  1516,  with
the  intention  that  it  should  contain  six  tombs, — those  of  his
father  Lorenzo  and  uncle  Giuliano,  and  of  the  four  members
of  the  family  who  were  then  living,  namely,  himself,  his
brother  Giuliano,  his  cousin  Giulio  (afterwards  Clement  VII.),
and  his  nephew,  Lorenzo.  Michael  Angelo,  to  whom  the
commission  was  entrusted,  worked  on  it  at  intervals  through
various  vicissitudes  of  fortune,  including  the  siege  of  the
city,  when  he  was  in  charge  of  the  fortifications,  up  to  the
year  1534,  when  on  the  death  of  his  protector,  Clement  VII.,
he  was  obliged  to  flee  from  Florence,  his  life  being  in  danger
from  the  tyrant  Alessandro.  Only  two  of  the  tombs  were
ever  completed,  namely,  those  of  the  younger  Lorenzo  and
the  younger  Giuliano.  The  bodies  of  Lorenzo  the  Magnifi-
cent and  his  brother  Giuliano  were  originally  buried  in  the
same  tomb  in  the  Old  Sacristy  of  San  Lorenzo.  In  1559
their  bodies  were  removed  to  the  New  Sacristy  and  buried
there  under  the  statues  of  St.  Cosmo  and  St.  Damian,  the
patron  saints  of  their  family  ;  but  no  monument  was  erected

1  Col.  Young,  The  Medici,  Vol.  I.,  p.  497. 2  Op.  cit.,  Vol.  I.,  p.  508.


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


55


to  either  of  them.  The  two  Medici  Popes,  Leo  X.  and
Clement  VII.,  were  buried  at  Rome.  So  the  five  Medici
actually  buried  in  the  New  Sacristy  are  the  two  Lorenzos,
the  two  Giulianos,  and  Alessandro, — these  five  including  the
most  famous  and  the  most  infamous  of  the  family.

The  two  tombs,  of  which  illustrations  are  here  given  (Plates
IX.  and  X.),  are  :

(a)  That  of  Lorenzo,  Duke  of  Urbino,  with  the  seated
statue  of  Lorenzo — the  figure  known  as  11  Pensieroso  (not
a  portrait  of  the  Duke) — above,  helmeted,  and  hence  "  with
everlasting  shadow  on  his  face,"  1  and  the  two  recumbent
figures  below,  representing  Dawn  (the  woman)  and  Twilight
(the  man)  ;  otherwise  called  Morning  and  Evening.

(&)  That  of  Giuliano,  Due  de  Nemours,  with  a  seated  statue
of  Giuliano — again  not  a  portrait — above,  and  two  recum-
bent figures  below,  representing  Day  (the  man)  and  Night
(the  woman).  The  latter  is  the  most  famous  of  all  the  statues
and  the  only  one  which  has  symbolic  objects  attached  to  it,
namely,  the  tragic  mask,  the  owl,  and  the  sack  of  poppy-
heads  on  which  the  left  foot  of  the  figure  is  resting.

The  faces  of  the  two  men,  Twilight  and  Day,  were  left
unfinished  when  Michael  Angelo  fled  from  Florence  to  escape
the  vengeance  of  Alexander,  who  thus,  besides  being  buried
in  one  of  the  tombs,  was  partly  responsible  for  the  present
condition  of  both  of  them.

The  figures  were  no  doubt  intended  to  symbolise  the  recent
and  contemporary  history  of  Florence, — the  Day  referring  to
the  golden  times  of  Lorenzo  the  Magnificent,  Michael  Angelo's
first  patron,  and  the  Twilight  and  Night  the  time  of  dark-
ness and  tyranny  under  Alexander.  The  meaning  of  the
statue  of  Night  is  indicated  in  some  verses  written  by  Michael
Angelo  himself  (in  reply  to  some  by  Giovanni  Battista  Strozzi 2)
and  thus  translated  by  J.  A.  Symonds  :

"  Sweet  is  my  sleep,  but  more  to  be  mere  stone,
So  long  as  ruin  and  dishonour  reign  ;

1  Mrs.  Browning,  Oasa  Guidi  Windows.

2  La  Notte  che  tu  vedi  in  si  dolce  atti
Dormir,  fu  da  un  Angelo  scolpita
In  questo  sasso,  e  perche  dorme,  ha  vita  :
Destala,  se  nol  credi,  e  parleratti.


56


Alice  Johnson.


[part


To  hear  nought,  to  feel  nought,  is  my  great  gam  :
Then  wake  me  not,  speak  in  an  under-tone."  1

The  New  Sacristy  and  its  tombs  are  also  described  in
poems  by  Mrs.  Browning,  Swinburne,  and  Rogers,  and  the
statue  of  Night  in  the  following  sonnet  by  Wordsworth  :

"  Night  speaks  :

(Jrateful  is  Sleep,  my  life  in  stone  bound  fast

More  grateful  still  : while  wrong  and  shame  shall  last,

(hi  me  can  Time  no  happier  state  bestow

Than  to  be  left  unconscious  of  the  woe.

Ah  then,  lest  you  aAvaken  me,  speak  low.

Grateful  is  Sleep,  more  grateful  still  to  be

Of  marble  ;  for  while  shameless  wrong  and  woe

Prevail,  'tis  best  to  neither  hear  nor  see.

Then  wake  me  not,  I  pray  you.  -Hush,  speak  low.

Come,  gentle  Sleep,  Death's  image  though  thou  art,

Come  share  my  couch,  nor  speedily  depart  ;

How  sAveet  thus  living  without  life  to  lie,

Thus  without  death  how  sweet  it  is  to  die."

(Wordsworth, Michael  Angelo  in  reply  io  the
Passage  upon  his  statue  of  Night  Sleeping.)

1  now  proceed  to  give  the  scripts  in  which  we  find  the  cross-
correspondence.  The  phrases  in  the  first  ones  are,  it  will  be
seen,  of  a  vague  and  general  character.  But  they  seem  to
be  continuous  with  and  to  lead  up  to  the  later  more  explicit
passages,  and  it  is  on  this  ground  that  I  interpret  them  as
alluding  to  the  Medici  Tombs.

(Mrs.  Holland's  Script  of  Nov.  9,  1906.)

The  shadow  is  very  clear  and  black  and  appears  almost  as
weighty  as  the  substance —

"  The  best  of  this  kind  are  but  shadows  "  2

ShadoAv-shapes —  Did  Margaret  trace  the  connection  back  in
her  analytical  mind.  .  .  .

1  The  original  verses  are  as  follows :

"  Grato  m'e  '1  sormo,  e  piu  l  esser  di  sasso,
Mentre  che  il  danno  e  la  vergogna  dura ;
Non  veder,  non  sentir,  m'e  gran  ventura ;
Pero  non  mi  destar,  deh  !  parla  basso  !  "

2  Midsummer  Night  a  Dream,  Act  V.,  Scene  1.


LXVIII.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


57


The  "  shadow  "  here  seems  to  be  the  first  emergence  of  the
•'  Light  and  Shadow — Shadow  and  Light  "  of  Mrs.  Holland's
script  of  March  27,  1907,  below,  which  I  take,  for  reasons  there
given,  to  refer  to  the  statues  of  Day  and  Night  on  the  Medici
tombs.  Cf .  "shadow  "  in  Holland  scripts  of  Nov.  28  and  Dec.  L 2,
1906,  below,  which  seem  to  continue  the  topic  of  this  script.

"  Margaret  "  is  no  doubt  Mrs.  Verrall,  Avho  is  frequently
so  referred  to  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  ;  the  occurrence  of
the  name  here  and  in  the  next  script  seems  to  indicate  that
a  cross-correspondence  with  Mrs.  Verrall  is  intended.

{Mrs.  Holland's  Script  of  Nov.  13,  1900.)
There  is  no  place  for  doubt  or  any  fear —
"  In  a  voice  that  she  will  know

Margaret  "  1
No — no — not  Percy — John —
A  wreathed  garland  of  deserved  bays  2  [sic]
Since  life  had  grown  more  pale  than  Death —
Waking  more  husht  than  Sleep —
The  second  son —

"  There  is  no  place  for  doubt  or  any  fear  "  is  perhaps  con-
nected with  the  implicit  reference  to  "  human  fears  "  in  the
first  line  of  the  script  of  Nov.  21,  1906,  below.

In  this  script,  again,  as  in  that  just  quoted,  we  have  the
name  "  Margaret."

"  A  wreathed  garland  of  deserved  bays  "  is  the  first  emer-
gence of  the  important  topic  Laurel  Wreath,  which  connects
with  the  Medici,  as  explained  above  ;  it  is  to  be  noted  that,
as  in  many  other  cases,  the  most  important  word  is  emphasised
by  a  misquotation, — the  substitution  of  "  bays  "  for  "  praise."

"  Since  Life  had  grown  more  pale  than  Death
Waking  more  husht  than  Sleep —  "

These  lines  (which  are,  I  think,  original)  seem  to  combine
Symonds'  and  Wordsworth's  versions  of  Michael  Angelo's
verses,  quoted  above  ;  or,  in  any  case,  to  refer  to  the  statues
on  the  Medici  tombs.

1  Matthew  Arnold,  The  Forsaken  Merman.

2  "  A  wreathed  garland  of  deserved  praise,

Of  praise  deserved,  unto  Thee  I  give."

(George  Herbert,  A  Wreath.)


58


Alice  Johnson.


[part


{Mrs.  Holland's  Script  of  Nov.  21,  1906.)
A  slumber  did  my  spirit  steal 1  [sic]

Laurence

The  poem  of  which  the  first  line  is  quoted  in  the  script
would  be  an  apt  description  of  the  statue  Night,  and  has
certain  definite  resemblances  to  Wordsworth's  sonnet  on  that
statue,  cpioted  above.  Cf.  especially  "  Grateful  is  Sleep,  my
life  in  stone  bound  fast  "  with  "  A  slumber  did  my  spirit  seal,"

left  unconscious  of  the  woe  "  with  "  I  had  no  human  fears  ;  "
and  "  'Tis  best  to  neither  hear  nor  see  "  with  "  She  neither
hears  nor  sees."

The  name  "  Laurence  "  at  the  end  of  the  script  bears  out
my  interpretation  of  it  as  referring  to  the  Tombs.

{Mrs.  Holland's  Script  of  Nov.  28,  1906.)

....  The,  dark  was  not  alarming— but  the  strangely  shaped
shadows  frightened  her.  .  .  .

Fin  de  nuit — an  anagram  name  or  rather  a  symbolical  one —
dawn  as  it  were. Night's  end.  .  .  .  2

Here  we  have  again  "  dark  "  and  "  shadows "  which  I
take  to  refer  to  the  Night  ;  and  "  dawn  " — presumably  a
reference  to  the  statue  of  Dawn.  These  three  words,  here
italicised,  are  the  only  ones  that  are  underlined  in  the  whole
of  the  original  script.  The  important  topic  Dawn  is  further
emphasised  by  the  pun  on  it,  which  serves  the  double  pur-
pose of  drawing  attention  to  the  word  and  indicating,  through
the  allusion  to  Mrs.  Piper's  early  "  control,"  Phinuit,  that
she  is  to  bear  a  share  in  the  cross-correspondence.

1  "  A  slumber  did  my  spirit  seal,
1  had  no  human  fears  ;
She  seem'd  a  thing  that  could  not  feel
The  touch  of  earthly  years.

No  motion  has  she  now,  no  force  ;

She  neither  hears  nor  sees  ;
Roll'd  round  in  earth's  diurnal  course,

With  rocks,  and  stones,  and  trees."

(Wordsworth,  A  slumber  did  my  spirit  seal.)

2  To  this  Mrs.  Holland  added  a  contemporary  note  :  "  On  reading  it  over,
the  last  sentence  suggests  Mrs.  Piper's  '  Dr.  Phinuit.'  "


LXVIII.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms.'"


59


(Mrs.  Holland's  Script  of  Dec.  12,  1906.)
The  shadow  and  the  sleep — The  Dream  and  the  Awakening.  .  .  .

I  take  the  first  of  these  phrases  to  refer  to  the  statue  of
the  sleeping  Night  and  the  second  to  that  of  the  Dawn,  who
is  generally  described  as  awaking  from  troubled  dreams.

{Mrs.  Verrall's  Script  of  Dec.  24,  1906.)

*  Let  there  be  light  he  said  and  there  was  light 1

And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  first  day.*

The  reference  has  been  given  before  but  I  think  not  understood.

largas luminis  oras [Shores  full  of  light.]

The  western  fight  that  flooded  all  the  room

Sic  vos  non  vobis. ahena  utitur  voce  non  sua

Ego  feci  — j —

quern  Rectoreru  Directorem  cognoscis.

[So  you  not  for  you. He  uses  another  voice  not  his  own.  I
have  done  it,  whom  you  know  as  Rector  the  director.]
The  prayer  of  Ajax  was  for  fight.2

Whereas  most  of  Mrs.  Holland's  references  hitherto  have
been  to  the  Shadow  or  the  Dark  (Night),  Mrs.  Verrall's  first
contribution  to  the  cross-correspondence  lays  stress  on  the
complementary  topic  of  Light  or  Day,  the  word  Light  being
repeated  several  times,  as  is  often  the  case  with  important
words  in  the  scripts.  "  The  evening  and  the  morning  "
probably  means  the  Twilight  and  Dawn  statues.

We  come  next  to  some  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  which  do
not  properly  belong  to  this  series,  but  are  only  introduced
here  in  their  chronological  order,  because  in  the  course  of
them  the  word  "  Wreath  "  was  inadvertently  mentioned  to
Mrs.  Verrall  and  may  possibly  have  had  some  influence  on
her  subsequent  script,  although  it  seems  clear  from  the  con-
text that  the  "  wreath  "  alluded  to  by  Rector  was  a  wreath
of  roses,  while  the  wreath  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  was  of  Laurel.

**  Between  asterisks  in  mirror- writing.

1  Genrsis,  i.  3.  2  Iliad.  XVTT.  647.


60


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  held  on  Jan.  2,  1907.)
(J.  G.  1'.  present  alone.)

(Myers  communicating) I  said  Wreath  to  Mrs.  Verrall.
Wreaths.

J.  G.  P.  A  wreath — a  wreath  of  flowers  '.
Yes  but  plural.

Wreaths  of  roses  in  her  hair  entwined.  .  .  .
(Rector  communicating) I  am  Rector  friend.  .  .  .
I  feel  .  .  .  that  the  word  Wreaths  has  been  received  by
Mrs.  Verrall.

(Extract  from  record  of  sitting  -with  Mrs.  Piper  held  on  Jan.  21,  1907.)

(Present,  Mrs.  Verrall  and  J.  G.  P.)
J.  G.  P.  The  friend  [i.e.  Mrs.  Verrall]  is  here  and  will  come  and
sit  by  you.

(Rector  communicating) thank  you. We  are  glad  to
see  you  again.
Miis.  V.  Thank  you.

and  hope  you  will  be  able  to  U.D.1  our  messages  better
when  you  are  not  present, [i.e.  that  she  will  get
them  clearly  in  her  script.]
Mrs.  V.  Yes.

We  can  help  very  much,
did  you  U.D.  about  the  wreath  I
Jibs.  V.  "  the  wreath  "  ?

did  you  U.D.  about  it  ?
Mrs.  V.  1  don't  understand  about  the  wreath.
J.  G.  P.  (to  Mrs.  Verrall) I  understand.

all  right  neither  does  our  friend  [i.e.  J.  G.  P.J  U.D.  what

we  mean  now.
We  will  tell  him  later.

[Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  held  on  Jan.  23,  1907.)
(Present  :  J.  G.  P.  alone.)

(Rector  communicating)  we  are  rather  sorry  we  men-
tioned wreath  before  her  [i.e.  Mrs.  Verrall]  but  we
did  so  inadvertently.

1  In  the  Piper  script,  "  U.D."  is  used  as  an  abbreviation  for  any  part  of
the  verb  "  to  understand."


LXVIII.]


Some  "Concordant  Automatisms.'


61


J.  G.  P.  It  doesn't  matter. Besides,  when  }rou  said I  didn't
understand  about  "  wreath,"  that  put  Mrs.  Verrall
off  the  track,  I  fancy,
yes very  good, as  it  is  a  very  good  thing  to  try.
we  do  not  wish  to  spoil  it.

R.

This  shows  that  Rector  recognised  that  he  had  made  a
blunder  in  mentioning  the  word  "  Wreath  "  in  Mrs.  Verrall \s
presence.  Cf.  record  of  Piper  sitting  of  March  4,  1907,  below,
p.  66.

(Mrs.  VerralVs  Script  of  Feb.  6,  1907.)
Lama,  and  another

There  is  some  great  obstruction  this  morning  help  to  remove  it.
This  must  not  occur  again  tell  him  that.
Put  not  your  light  under  a  bushel.1

K.O. blue  riband  and  five  pointed  star

The  great  Library  has  already  gone  before  Hugh  Le  Despenser
the  branch  that  should  have  grown full  straight

Apollo's  laurel  bough  2
You  don't  get  it  right  but  some  of  this  is  true

I  think  it  is  a  jewelled  dagger
three  curved  objects  and  a  point

I  cant  see  what  all  this  means  but  I  am  told  to  say  it  to
you

1  Cf.  Luke,  xi.  33,  and  Matthew,  v.  15.

s  "  Cut  is  the  branch  that  might  have  grown  full  straight,
And  burned  is  Apollo's  laurel  bough,
Tli at  sometime  grew  within  this  learned  man."

Marlowe,  Doctor  Faustvs  (referring  to  the  death

of  Faustus).


62


Alice  Johnson.


[part


APOLLO'S LAUREL  BOUGH
There  is  also  some  point  in  the  Library —
Put  together  the  Library  and  the  bough
Laureatus  [laurelled]


perhaps  no  more  than  that


a  laurel  wreath  CsA


Corona  laureata  [laurel  crown] has  some  meaning  here
With  laureate  wreath  his  brow  serene  was  crowned.
No  more  to-day

await  the  better  news  that  brings  assurance  with  a  laurel  crown.

The  name  "  Laura  "  means  Laurel.  Thus,  Byron  speaks
of  Petrarch  as

"  Watering  the  tree  which  bears  his  lady's  name
With  his  melodious  tears."  1

As  to  the  "  great  Library  "  and  "  Hugh  Le  Despenser,"
in  a  script  produced  by  Mrs.  Verrall  on  April  25,  1906,
occurred  the  names  Althorp  and  Lord  Spencer,  with  a  refer-
ence to  a  Library  (presumably  the  Althorp  Library),  so  that
a  subliminal  recollection  of  this  may  have  led  by  association
of  ideas  to  the  name  "Despenser"'  following  the  mention  of
the  "  Library  "  here.

This  is  an  instance — others  are  given  below — where  there
is  evidence  that  the  automatist  attached  to  her  script  a  mean-
ing which  is  almost  provably  not  the  meaning  of  the  intelligence
behind  the  script.  For  later  on  we  are  told  to  "  put  together
the  Library  and  the  [laurel]  bough,"  which  is  meaningless
in  relation  to  the  Althorp  Library,  but  highly  significant  if
— as  I  hold — the  Lanrentian  Library  is  meant.

As  just  observed,  it  is  conceivable  that  the  word  "  Wreath  "
may  have  been  introduced  into  this  script  because  it  had
been  mentioned  to  Mrs.  Verrall  at  a  Piper  sitting  ;  but  it
is  clear  that  the  Laurel  and  not  the  Wreath  is  the  main  sub-


Childe  Harold's  Pilgrimage,  Canto  IV.,  xxx.


LXVITT.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms.'


63


ject  of  the  script,- — the  former  occurring  ten  times  (as  Laura,
the  branch,  Apollo's  laurel  bough,  Apollo's  laurel  bough,
the  bough,  laureatus,  a  laurel  wreath,  corona  laureata,  laureate
wreath,  laurel  crown)  while  the  latter  occurs  only  four  times
(as  a  laurel  wreath,  corona  laureata,  laureate  wreath,  laurel
crown)  after  six  previous  mentions  of  the  Laurel  in  other  forms.

"  The  Branch  "  and  "  Apollo's  laurel  bough  "  I  regard  as
allusions  to  the  Company  of  the  Branch  (of  laurel)  of  Lorenzo,
Duke  of  Urbino,  and  the  Bay-tree  device  of  Lorenzo  the
Magnificent,  described  above  ;  while  the  whole  quotation  :

"  Cut  is  the  branch  that  might  have  grown  full  straight
And  burned  is  Apollo's  laurel  bough  "

would  form  an  appropriate  epitaph  for  the  Medici  buried  in
the  New  Sacristy.

The  association  of  "  Apollo's  laurel  bough "  with  the
Library  would  be  especially  appropriate  to  the  Laurentian
Library  (see  above,  p.  53)  both  in  regard  to  the  connection  of
its  name  with  Lorenzo  and  hence  with  the  laurel,  and  because
its  founders  might  by  poetic  or  literary  licence  be  compared
with  Apollo  in  their  patronage  of  the  arts.

References  to  the  Laurel  were  next  made  by  Mrs.  Piper
in  two  consecutive  sittings.

On  the  first  occasion,  the  passages  connected  with  this
subject  were  given  during  the  "  waking-stage,"  when  Mrs.
Piper  speaks  instead  of  writing.  Her  speech  is  then  sometimes
rather  indistinct  and  more  or  less  incoherent,  and  whatever
is  not  intelligible  is  taken  down  as  far  as  possible  phonetically.

(Extract  from  record  of  words  spoken  during  the  waking-
stage  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  of  Feb.  26,  1907.)

Fairies.  (??)

(Hand  points.) George. — All  right.

J.  G.  P.  Say  that  again.

There  is  George. Whatever  is  it  ?
Morehead.*  (?)

*  In  his  original  record,  Mr.  Piddington,  not  understanding  this  word,
on  both  occasions  wrote  first  "  Moo."  then  wrote  "  r  "  over  the  second
"  o,"  and  continued  the  word  as  "  Morehead.''  But  in  recording  his
question  (see  top  of  p.  64).  he  spelt  the  word  "  Moorhead."


64  Alice  Johnson.  [part

J.  0.  P.  11  Moorhead  "  1

Morehead  *  (?)  (or  some  such  name  or  word)
laurel — for  laurel.
J.  G.  P.  Say  that  again.

for  laurel. I  say  I  gave  her  that  for  laurel.
Good-bye. (addressed  apparently  by  Mrs.  Piper  to  the
spirit.)

J.  O.  P.  No,  before  you  say  good-bye  ask  him  to  repeat  that.

I  gave  her  that  for  laur-el. [I  noted  at  the  time  that

the  first  syllable  "  laur  "  was  clear,  and  the  second

syllable  indistinct. — J.  G.  P.]
J.  G.  P.  Spell  it.

Laur-el  (or,  "  Laur-ie  "  ;  the  second  syllable  being  again
indistinct.)
J.  G.  P.  L — a — u. Is  that  right  ?
Aphasia,  aphasia.

Mr. Headman. H is it  ? Herdman. Thurl.  There's
George  [i.e.  George  Pelham.]  ....

T  thought  I  heard  some  one  say  it  was  George.  That's
the  window. Weren't  you  over  by  the  window  1
J.  G.  P.  Do  you  remember  what  George  said  ?

Well,  let  me  think.  You're  Mr.  Piddington,  aren't  you  ?
Something — I  think  he  said  something  about — let  me
see.  Well,  I  think  it  was  something  about  laurel
wreaths,  lau — rel  [sic]  wreaths  he  tell  her.
J.  G.  P.  (mistaking  the  last  three  words  for  a  proper  name)
"  Hetella  "  ?

(Irritably)  He  tell  her. He  would  tell  her. Oh  !  you
make  me  so  cross.  .  .  Tell  her  about.

(Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  held  on  Feb.  27,  1907.)
(Present  :  J.  G.  P.  alone.)

(Myers  communicating) I  am  too  [weak]  to  tell  it  to-day.
my  thoughts  wander.

J.  0.  P.  Let  me  say  good-bye.  On  third  after  coming  we  meet  again.

good-bye  God  be  with  you.

*  See  note  on  previous  page.


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


or,


J.  G.  P.  Good-bye,  and  thanks  again — many  thanks,
listen.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

I  gave  Mrs.  Verrall
laurel  wreath

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  quite  right  ;  she  got  it.1
and  I  said  Hodgson.

J.  G.  P.  "  Hodgson  "  ?

yes  would  give  the  next.

J.  G.  P.  I  don't  know  about  that  ;  I'll  look,
she  may  not  have  received  it  but

J.  G.  P.  No  ;  but  she  got  "  laurel  wreath  "  clearly.
I,  (written  while  J.  G.  P.  was  speaking)
Yes  I  gave  her  that
and  as  the  spirit  of  the  light
Returned  to  its  body  2 I  tried  to  grasp  it —
Grasp  the  spirit  so  as  to  give  it  you  last  time.

J.  G.  P.  I  heard  it  quite  well  : "  laurel  wreath."
Yes all  right I  go  now
I  cant  think  more  my  thoughts  wander.
Farewell
Myers.

Thus,  in  these  sittings,  besides  the  statement  "  I  gave
Mrs.  Verrall  laurel  wreath,"'  we  have  the  name  "  Moorhead  "
(or  "  Morehead  ")  connected  with  "  laurel."  Mr.  Piddington,
being  unable  to  attach  any  meaning  to  this,  conjectured  that
he  might  have  misheard  what  Mrs.  Piper  said,  and  that  the
word  she  really  uttered  was  "  laureate."  3  I  feel  no  doubt,
however,  that  his  record  was  correct  (see  "  Alexander  Moors
Head  "  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  March  27,  1907,  below,
p.  70).

1  Mr.  Piddington  was  referring  to  Mrs.  VerralPs  script  of  Feb.  6,  1907,
quoted  above.

2  That  is,  during  the  waking-stage  of  Mrs.  Piper's  previous  sitting.

3  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  99.

E


66


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  next  script  to  be  quoted  is  another  of  Mrs.  Piper's  :

(Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  held  on  March  4,  1907.)

(J.  G.  P.  present  alone  at  this  point)

(Rector  communicating)  I  wish  to  explain  one  more
thing  i.e.  when  I  gave  Mrs.  V.  the  message  about
Laurel  wreath  I  purposely  said  Laurel  so  as  (hesita-
tion)

make  the  message  clear.
J.  G.  P.  "  so  as  make  "  ?

(Hand  negatives.)
J.  G.  P.  "  to  make  "  ?

(Hand  assents  and  writes)  to  make  the  message  clear
after  having  mentioned  wreath  here.  I  thought  it
wiser  to  add  more  to  it.

J.  G.  P.  You  mean  that,  as  you  had  mentioned  "  wreaths  "  here
in  Mrs.  Verrall's  presence,  you  purposely  added  a
distinctive  word  to  "  wreath  "  in  order  to  strengthen
the  evidence  ?

(Hand  assents.)
J.  G.  P.  Yes,  I  had  already  understood  that.

thank  you. Goodbye  if  you  have  nothing  for  me.

This  completes  the  record  of  everything  relating  to  the
mention  of  the  word  "  Wreath  "  to  Mrs.  Verrall  at  the  Piper
sitting  of  Jan.  21,  1907,  see  above,  p.  60.

The  next  script  which  contributes  to  the  cross-correspondence
is  :

(Mrs.  Hollands  Script  of  March  13,  1907.)
Oh  Rama — Ram  1 —

Mere  paper — untouched  by  any  hope  of  inspiration —

That  strange  and  complex  silence  which  is  compact  of  an  infinite
number  of  small  incessant  noises —

The  far  shore  of  a  very  still  and  tideless  sea —

Poor  finite  ambitions,  and  the  sorrow  that  if  ye  could  but  realize
it  is  over — finally  swallowed  up  in  the  void  of  nothingness  long
ere  the  tear  it  invokes  dries  upon  the  cheek.

1  Mrs.  Holland  noted  on  this  :  "  I  see  the  script  begins  '  Oh  Rama — Ram,'
an  invocation  to  a  Hindu  deity  which  is  a  frequent  street-cry  here."


LXVIIT.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


07


Where  birchen  boughs  with  hazel  mingle  1 —
The  green  book — not  the  blue  one — the  fuller  version —
two  trees  have  been  killed  by  the  frost — but  the  twigs  of  the

old  elm  are  thickening  with  buds  again — The  miracle  of  spring.
No  conscious  recollection, it  is  unreasonable  to  expect  that

immediately.

"  She  knew  she  had  waded  bosom  deep

Along  Death's  bank  in  the  sedge  of  sleep  " —
But  a  wild  gleam on  a  shaken  shoal.

We  gain  the  same  goal  through  different  gates.  What  need  for
violent  wail  if  to  one  it  is  the  gate  of  the  sea — to  another  a  passing
in  sleep — to  another  the  long  wasting — the  tooth  of  a  fell  disease  to
another — a  few  drops  of  sleeja — to  another  the  crash  and  jar  and
conflict  of  a  railway  accident — The  passing  is  nought —

Home  again — but  it  is  such  an  early  Easter —  Sweet  of  the  year
has  hardly  begun —

The  second  child — because  of  innocence —  And  for  all  the
sacrament  of  pain —

One  star  in  the  crimson  West

And  the  East  is  cold  and  grey
And  the  weary  earth  shall  turn  to  her  rest

At  the  end  of  the  winter's  Day.

How  many  times  ere  I  be  dead
Must  I  the  bitterness  of  dying  know  ?

Much  of  this  script  will  be  dealt  with  below,  under  the
heading  "  avro<s  ovpavo<s  clkviawv"  p.  106  ;  but  I  give  the
whole  of  it  (except  a  short  passage  at  the  end  referring  to  a
different  topic)  here,  because  the  quotations  seem  to  carry
on  the  themes  of  Mrs.  Holland's  scripts  of  Nov.  and  Dec.,
1906,  above,  and  lead  up  to  her  script  of  March  27,  1907,
below,  which — as  will  be  seen — contains  clear  allusions  to  the
Medici  Tombs.  The  quotations  in  this  script  (except  the
first)  are,  I  think,  intended  to  suggest  the  Night  and  Day,
and  Evening  and  Morning  of  the  Tombs.

1  "  The  violet  in  her  greenwood  bower,

Where  birchen  boughs  with  hazels  mingle."

(Scott,  The  Violet.)


08


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  context  of  the  second  quotation  is  as  follows  :

"  The  night  lay  deep  on  Rose  Mary's  heart,
For  her  swoon  was  death's  kind  counterpart ;
The  dawn  broke  dim  on  Rose  Mary's  soul, —
No  hill-crown's  heavenly  aureole,
But  a  wild  gleam  on  a  shaken  shoal.

She  knew  she  had  waded  bosom-deep
Along  death's  bank  in  the  sedge  of  sleep  :
All  else  was  lost  to  her  clouded  mind  ;
Nor,  looking  back,  could  she  see  defin'd
O'er  the  dim  dumb  waste  what  lay  behind."

(D.  G.  Rossetti,  Rose  Mary,  Part  III.)

This  description  is  very  similar  to  those  in  the  earlier  scripts
just  mentioned,  and  is  appropriate  to  the  figures  of  the  two
women,  Night  and  Dawn,  of  the  Tombs.

The  verse  in  the  script  beginning  :  One  star  in  the  crimson
West  is,  I  believe,  original,  though  the  third  line  is  probably  a
reminiscence  of  "  And  the  weary  Day  turned  to  his  rest "
in  Shelley's  poem,  To  Night.  It  is  appropriate  to  the  man's
figure,  Twilight,  and  also  gives  the  word,  Day,  which  is  the
name  of  the  other  man.

The  last  quotation  in  the  script  is  :

"  My  God,  how  many  times  ere  I  be  dead
Must  I  the  bitterness  of  dying  know  ?  "

These  are  the  opening  lines  of  the  second  of  a  pair  of  sonnets
by  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  entitled  respectively,  "  Would  God  it
were  Evening,"  and  "  Would  God  it  were  Morning  "  {The
Renewal  of  Youth  and  other  Poems,  pp.  82-83).  This,  then,
gives  us  again,  by  implication,  Evening  and  Morning.

It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  melancholy  and  despondent  tone
of  all  these  literary  allusions  is  highly  appropriate  to  the
subject  of  the  Tombs.

{Miss  VerralVs  Script  of  March  17,  1907.)

Alexander's  tomb  quinque  et  viginti  annos  post  urbem  conditam
[five-and-twenty  years  after  the  founding  of  the  city]

with  fire  and  sword  to  purge  the  altar, not  without  grief.


L  XVIII.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


69


laurel  leaves  are  emblem

laurel  for  the  victor's  brow.

Say  not  the  struggle  nought  availeth  1

Sesame  and  lilies arum  lilies

when  the  darkens  [sic]  on  the  quiet  land

scarlet  tulips  all  in  a  row

"  Alexander's  tomb."  The  combination  of  this  script  with
the  following  one  by  Mrs.  Holland  makes  it  in  my  view  certain
that  the  tomb  meant  is  not — as  we  all  supposed  at  the  time
— that  of  Alexander  the  Great,  but  that  of  Alessandro  de'
Medici,  described  above,  p.  54.

The  Latin  sentence  following  the  words  "  Alexander  s  tomb  "
has  definite  meaning  in  connection  with  another  topic  not
dealt  wdth  in  this  paper.

"  Laurel  leaves  are  emblem — Laurel  for'  the  victor's  brow."
This  is  especially  appropriate  to  the  bay-tree  that  had  appeared
dead  putting  forth  fresh  leaves  which,  as  stated  above,  was
the  device  on  the  standard  of  Lorenzo  the  Magnificent  at  the
tournament  of  1469,  and  Lorenzo  was  the  victor  in  that
tournament.

{Mrs.  Holland's  Script  of  March  27,  1907.)

Birds  in  the  high  Hall  Garden  2 —
Not  Maud  Sylvia —

The  poor  right  hand  is  so  dreadfully  tired  at  the  wrist  not  in  the
ball  of  the  thumb —

[The  following,  as  far  as  "  right  way  up,"  is  in  mirror-writing,  and
as  far  as  "  toto  dum  "  is  written  with  the  left  hand.]

Take  the  left  hand — only  it  is  not  your  right  hand  that  is  tired.

Peter  is  the  second  one —

But  M.  [?]  can  see  [?]  it  right  way  up

Hold  it  to  the  mirror. The  shining  world  of  looking  glass.

1  Clough,  Say  not  the  struggle  nought  availeth.

2  "  Birds  in  the  high  Hall-garden

When  twilight  was  falling,
Maud,  Maud,  Maud,  Maud,

They  were  crying  and  calling."

(Tennyson,  Maud,  XII.)


TO


Alice  Johnson.


[part


I  sprained  my  wrist  once


K.


Talem  [?]  uttorque  [?']  surgit
absulem  [?]  lux toto  dum  [?]


Sine  ab  horos  [?]  tenebrae.

Via  obscura  vita  lucit

And  o'er  the  flats  the  singing  of  the  sea —

Ebbed  like  the  thought  of  long  forgiven  wrong —

The  abiding  horror  to  me  Avas  that  of  darkness —  Let  sorrow
take  any  other  shape  it  will —  Love  and  Sorrow —  Sorrow  and
Love — as  inevitably  as  Light  and  Shadow — Shadow  and  Light —

The  sundial  at  Broadmeadows what  was  the  motto  ?

Not  Jane's  husband — the  other  one — Alexander — Moors  Head —
Antres  vast  and  deserts  idle  1 —

One  not  easily  jealous.2 Benisshna  cara —


I  give  the  whole  of  this  script,3  although  much  of  it  is,  or
seems  to  be,  incoherent,  since  it  includes  one  of  the  most
essential  links  in  the  cross-correspondence — the  name  "  Alex-
ander Moors  Head."

"  Birds  in  the  high  Hall-gar  den."  This  quotation  seems  to
be  introduced  on  account  of  its  context,  the  next  line  being
"When  twilight  was  falling."  "Twilight"  is  one  of  the
figures  on  "  Alexander's  tomb."

The  Latin  words  are  difficult  to  decipher,  and  are  partially
incorrect,  but  there  is  no  doubt  about  the  words  "  lux  "
(light),  "  tenebrae "  (darkness,  especially  the  darkness  of
night),  and  "  obscura  "  (dark).  And  these  ideas  are  em-
phasised by  their  repetition  in  the  later  passage  of  the  script,
which  contains  the  words  "  darkness,"  "  Light  and  Shadow — ■
Shadow  and  Light."  I  take  these  words  to  refer  to  the  statues
of  Day  and  Night  on  the  second  Medici  tomb.

1  Othello,  Act  I.,  Scene  3.  2  Othello,  Act  V.,  Scene  2.

;!  For  Mr.  Piddington's  original  comments  on  this  script,  see  Proc.,  Vol.
XXII.,  pp.  225-227,  and  261-202.


The  tall  mast, but  this  one  is  not  at  sea.


lxviii.J


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


71


"  Alexander  Moors  Head."  This,  combined  with  Mrs.
Piper's  "Moorhead"  (Feb.  26,  1907)  and  Miss  Verrall's
"  Alexander's  tomb  "  (March  17,  1907)  seems  to  prove  that
the  person  meant  is  Alexander  de'  Medici,  who,  as  stated
above,  p.  53,  from  his  woolly  hair,  thick  lips  and  negro-like
appearance,  was  known  as  "  The  Moor."  The  quotations  from
Othello  which  follow  indicate  that  "  Alexander  Moors  Head  "
was  the  same  kind  of  Moor  as  Othello,  that  is,  not  a  real  Moor,
but  a  negro,  the  negroes,  as  well  as  other  Africans,  being
commonly  called  Moors  1  at  that  time.  Othello  is  described
in  the  play  once  as  "  The  thick-lips  "  and  several  times  as
"  black  "  or  "  sooty  "  ;  and  the  portraits  of  Alexander  de'
Medici  (see  Plate  VIII.)  show  his  strongly  marked  negro
traits.

The  drawings  of  masts  at  the  end  of  the  script  led  me  at
first  to  interpret  "  Alexander  Moors  Head  "  as  Dr.  Alexander
Muirhead,  for  I  took  the  masts  to  represent  wireless  telegraphy
apparatus,  and  knew  that  Mrs.  Holland  had  taken  some
interest  in  the  subject  of  wireless  telegraphy  (though  she
knew  nothmg  of  it  scientifically)  in  connection  with  Sir  Oliver
Lodge.  There  had,  in  fact,  been  a  punning  reference  to  the
Lodge-Muirhead  system  in  her  script  of  May  15,  1906,  besides
an  earlier  reference  in  her  script  of  January  17,  1904,  which
was  discussed  under  the  heading  "  The  Diamond  Island
Incident  "  in  Proc,  Vol.  XXV.,  p.  293.  The  significance  of
this  misinterpretation  is  discussed  in  the  final  section  of  this
paper,  see  below,  pp.  153-154.

The  next  script  to  be  quoted  was  produced  a  considerable
time  after  the  one  last  given.  But  as  Mr.  Piddington's  report
was  not  published  until  October  19,  1908,  and  the  automatists
here  concerned  were  strangers  to  all  of  us,  they  could  not  have
known  anything  about  the  scripts  or  the  cross-correspondences
discussed  in  that  report.  An  account  of  the  experiments
of  these  automatists,  whom  we  call  the  "  Mac  "  family,  was
given  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper  on  "A  New  Group  of  Experi-
menters," in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  264-318,  and  certain
cross-correspondences  between  their  script  and  Mrs.  Holland's
were  given  in  my  "  Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script,"
in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXV.,  pp.  222,  234-236,  and  193-198.

1  Hence  the  word  blackamoor.


72


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  only  point  that  concerns  us  here  is  the  following  extract
from  a  script  by  Miss  E.  and  Mr.  A.  Mac  : —

(Mac  Script,  Oct.  7,  1908.)


Dig  a  grave  among  the  laurels


The  drawing  is  obviously  intended  for  a  laurel  wreath,  and
the  combination  of  the  "grave"  with  "the  laurels,"  together
with  the  fact  that  the  script  contains  an  allusion  to  Sesame
and  Lilies  (see  Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.- 291-292),  and  so  con-
nects with  Miss  Verrall's  of  March  17,  1907,  shows,  I  think,
that  the  Medici  tombs  are  meant.

The  next  script  to  be  quoted  was  again  produced  after  a
long  interval  ;  but  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Willett's  script  during
the  early  part  of  1910  contained  a  number  of  cross-correspond-
ences with  the  earlier  scripts  of  other  automat  ists,  as  related
in  my  Third  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  script  (Proc,  Vol.  XXV.,
pp.  218-293)adds  considerably  to  the  probability  that  the  connec-
tion in  this  case  also  was  supernormal,  and  not  accidental.

At  the  time  of  producing  this  script,  Mrs.  Willett  had  seen
the  reports  on  the  scripts  which  had  been  already  published
(i.e.  up  to  Proc,  Part  LX.  inclusive)  but  she  did  not  know
that  there  had  been  any  allusions  to  the  Medici  tombs,  these
not  having  been  made  out  until  two  years  after  she  wrote.

(Mrs.  Willett's  Script  of  June  10,  1910.)

....  Myers  The  Laurentian  tombs Dawn  1
Milton's  Allegro  and  Pensive  Words
Songs  of  Innocence  and  the  Songs  of  Experience

Now  he  would  write  a  third  to  make  the  triology  [sic]  Songs
of  Completion  of  Fulfilment

Who  Avill  write  these  songs  of  Promise  and  Songs  of  Fulfilment
We  sang  the  songs  of  Promise  in  the  dim  twilight  of  the  dawn.  .  .  .

1  Mrs.  Willett  noted  on  this  at  the  time  :  "I  take  this  as  a  reference  to
the  Medici  tombs  in  Florence. They  are  in  San  Lorenzo."


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


73


As  indicated  in  her  note,  Mrs.  Willett  was  well  acquainted
with  these  tombs,  having  stayed  in  Florence  for  some  time.
But  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  script  does  not  use  the  ordinary
name,  "  Medici  tombs,"  but  calls  them  instead  by  a  name
which  is,  I  believe,  never  used, — "  The  Lauren tian  tombs."
The  intention  seems  to  be  to  point  to  their  association  with
the  Laurel,  and  so  to  link  this  script  with  those  containing  the
cross-correspondence  on  the  Laurel,  which  Mrs.  Willett  did
not  at  this  time  know  to  be  an  emblem  of  Lorenzo  de'  Medici.

The  "  Dawn,"  "  Twilight  "  and  "  Dawn  "  are  no  doubt
references  to  the  figures  so  named.

"  Milton's  Allegro  and  Pensive  words  "  is  obviously  an  appli-
cation of  the  titles  of  Milton's  two  poems,  L' Allegro  and  II
Penseroso  to  the  statues  of  the  two  Dukes,  one  of  whom  is
commonly  called  by  the  latter  title.

Finally,  I  quote  some  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-utterances,  in
which  the  combination  of  "Meditation"  (  =  11  Pensieroso)
with  "  the  sleeping  dead  "  and  "  laurels  "  makes  it,  I  think,
certain  that  the  allusion  is  to  the  Medici  tombs.

(Extract  from  record  of  Sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  July  8,  1910.)
(Sitters,  Sir  Oliver  and  Lady  Lodge)

(Words  spoken  by  Mrs.  Piper  during  the  waking-stage,  as  follows  :)
Myers.  Meditation

(She  then  whispered  a  verse,  only  a  few  words  of  which  could
be  heard,  as  follows  :)

  meditation  .  .  .

  sleeping  dead

Laurels  round

  ever  grow.

Meditation  links  it.

(On  being  asked  to  repeat,  she  said  :)

Churchyard  tree

  walked  with  gorgeous  1  feet

  about  the  sleeping  dead.

Meditation  links  it

Life  open  peace  completes  the  semblance
Let's  stick  to  the  old  never  mind  the  neAv.

1  From  comparison  with  the  sitting  of  July  10,  1910,  below,  it  seems  clear
that  this  word  was  "  cautious,"  misheard  as  "  gorgeous."


74  Alice  Johnson.  [part

{Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  July  16,  1910.)
(Sitters,  Miss  Johnson  and  Sir  Oliver  Lodge)
(E.  H.  communicating)
Meditation

O.  J.  L.  Yes,  I  want  to  understand  about  that.

Connects  it
O.  J.  L.  Links  it  %

Yes.

O.  J.  L.  I  cannot  find  a  poem  called  Meditation

Meditation  conies  out  in  Mrs.  Holland's  also  will  appear
at  Mrs.  W.'s. Wait  for  it.

O.  J.  L.  Yes,  all  right,  but  let  me  ask  you  :  Jji  the  waking-stage
last  time  Myers  recited  a  verse  of  a  poem,  but  I  could
not  get  it  down  quite. Could  you  write  the  poem  ?

Elegy

I'll  get  Myers  to  repeat  it  for  me.

As  through  the  graveyard's  lone  retreat

my  Meditation  led

Slow  I  walked  with  cautious  feet

above  the  sleeping  dead.

Meditation  clinches  it

O.  J.  L.  Can  you  tell  me  if  it  is  an  original  poem  ?

No  he  quoted  it.
O.  J.  L.  Does  he  wish  to  say  where  he  quoted  it  from  ?

Elegy.

O.  J.  L.  Do  you  mean  Gray's  Elegy  ?
Yes  1

But  Meditation  will  play  a  most  interesting  part
O.  J.  L.  Yes,  I  understand,  a  C.C.

And  the  last  two  lines  through  both  lights
Wait  for  them.

Times  around  Helen  coming  slowly  2


1  Note  by  Sir  O.  J.  L.  :  "  This  must  bo  an  instance  of  an  accepted  but
erroneous  suggestion."

2  These  words  were  indistinctly  written,  and  probably  incorrectly  deciphered.


Lxvm.] Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


To


Helen  V

Wait  for  it wait  for  it
( W  aking-stage)

Come  into  the  garden,  Maud  1

As  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  observed,  it  is  pretty  clear  that  his
suggestion  of  Gray's  Elegy  was  wrongfully  adopted,  for  the
lines  given  are  not,  as  stated,  a  quotation  from  that  poem,
and  neither  of  the  words  "  Laurels  "  or  "  Meditation  "  occurs
in  it.  But  the  general  resemblance  in  situation  and  sentiment
between  the  supposed  quotation  and  the  Elegy  suggests  that
some  vague  recollection  of  the  latter  was  in  the  mind  of  MyersP.

It  is  worth  noting  that  while  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  March
27,  1907,  given  above,  quotes  a  line  from  Maud:

"  Birds  in  the  high  Hall-garden,"

the  next  line  of  which  is  :

"  When  twilight  was  falling  "  ;
Mrs.  Piper  quotes  :

"  Come  into  the  garden,  Maud,"
the  next  line  of  which  is  :

"  For  the  black  bat,  Night,  has  flown."

So  that  these  two  quotations  may  be  said  to  give  (implicitly)
between  them  Twilight,  Night  and  Dawn,  that  is,  three  out  of
the  four  figures  on  the  Tombs.

Chronological  Summary  of  the  Cross-Correspondence
"  Alexander's  Tomb."

1906,  Nov. 9  (Mrs.  Holland's  Sc.).  Shadow— shadows— sha-
dow shapes  Margaret
Nov.  13  (Mrs.  H.'s  Sc.).  Margaret — A  wreathed  garland

of  deserved  bays — Death —
Sleep.

Nov.  21  (Mrs.  H.'s  Sc.).  A  slumber  did  my  spirit  steal

Laurence

1  Tennyson,  Maud,  XXII.


7<i


Alice  Johnson.


[part


1906,  Nov.  28  (Mrs.  H.'s  Sc.).  Dark — shadows — Fin  de  nuit —

Dawn

Dec.  12  (Mrs.  H.'s  Sc.).  Shadow  —  sleep  —  Dream  —

Awakening

Dec.  24  (Mrs.  V.'s  Sc.).  Light  —  light  —  Evening  and

Morning — Western  light

1907,  Jan.  21. Mrs.  V  err  all,  at  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  is

asked  by  the  latter  "  Did  you  understand

about  the  wreath  ?  "
Feb.  G (Mrs.  V.'s  Sc.). Laura — Apollo's  laurel  bough —

The  Library  and  the  bough
— a  laurel  Avreath — Corona
laureata — laureate  wreath —
laurel'  crown

Feb.  26  (Mrs.  P.).  Moorhead  —  Moorhead  —  Lau-

rel— laurel — laurel  wreaths

Feb.  27  (Mrs.  P.'s  Sc.).  I  gave  Mrs.  Verrall  laurel  wreath
Mar.  13  (Mrs.  H.'s  Sc.).  {Implicit) Night and Day  ;

Evening  and  Morning
Mar.  17  (Miss  V.'s  Sc.). Alexander's  tomb — laurel  leaves

laurel  for  the  victor's  brow
Sesame  and  Lilies

Mar.  27  (Mrs.  H.'s  Sc.).  Darkness— Light  and  Shadow

— Shadow  and  Light — Alex-
ander Moors  Head

1908,  Oct.  7 (Mac  Sc.).  Dig  a  grave  among  the  laurels

Sesame  and  Lilies  [implicit)

Oct.  19.  Proc,  Vol.  XXIL,  containing  Mr.  Piddington's
Report,  published.

1910,  June  10  (Mrs.  W.'s  Sc.).  The  Laurentian  tombs — Dawn

— twilight — dawn

July  8 (Mrs.  P.).  Meditation  —  sleeping dead — ■

laurels

July  16  (Mrs.  P.'s  Sc.). Meditation  —  sleeping  dead  —

Meditation  clinches  it.

1912,  July.  "  Alexanders  tomb  "  identified  as  one  of  the  Medici
Tombs.


LXVIII.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


77


CHAPTER  V.

The  avTog  ovpavos  ukv/uwp  INCIDENT.

"  We  need  a  summons  to  no  houri-haunted  paradise,  no  pas-
sionless contemplation,  no  monotony  of  prayer  and  praise  ;  but
to  endless  advance  by  endless  effort,  and,  if  need  be,  by  endless
pain.  Be  it  mine,  then,  to  plunge  among  the  unknown  Destinies,
to  dare  and  still  to  dare  !  "  (F.  W.  H.  Myers.)

Summary  of  Chapter.

It  may  be  useful  to  prefix  to  this  long  and  complicated  sec-
tion a  general  account  of  the  course  of  events,  though  it  must
be  understood  that  the  force  of  the  coincidences  cannot  be
given  in  a  summary,  nor  can  they  be  estimated  without  a
detailed  study.

The  episode  is  initiated  by  a  remark  made  to  Mrs.  Verrall
at  a  Piper  sitting  which  reminds  her  of  an  early  script  of  hers
about  calm  on  high  summits  above  storm.  She  then  deter-
mines to  ask  Myersp  what  are  his  associations  with  the  words
auras  ovpavo?  uku/jluiv  (a  phrase  from  Plotinus,  meaning  "  The
Heaven  itself  waveless,"  prefixed  to  a  poem  on  Tennyson  by
Myers,  and  taken  from  a  Plotinian  passage  describing  trance
or  ecstasy,  which  is  quoted  in  Human  Personality).

On  the  day  after  the  question  was  put,  MyersP  gives  (on
Jan.  30,  1907)  what  appears  to  be  a  paraphrase  of  a  line  in
the  poem  and  an  apparent  reference  to  In  Memoriam.

Mrs.  Verrall's  script  (Feb.  12)  refers  to  several  of  Tenny-
son's poems  :  Voyage  of  Maeldune,  Merlin  and  The  Gleam,  (?),
Passing  of  Arthur,  and  Lucretius.  These  references  relate
not  to  Calm  only — like  the  Greek  phrase — but  to  storm  and
adventure,  expressing  the  contrast  between  the  Active  and
Contemplative  life  which  seems  to  be  the  essential  topic  of
this  section.  The  poems  quoted  from  are  familiar  to  Mrs.
Verrall  ;  but,  as  Mr.  Piddington  five  years  later  notices,  two
quotations  which  the  script  combines  are  derived  from  two
different  passages  in  the  Odyssey,  which  two  passages  he  finds
to  be  combined,  as  in  the  script,  in  the  Dissertationes  of  the


78


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Neo-Platonist  Maximus  of  Tyre,  a  book  unknown  to  Mrs.
Verrall,  but  known  to  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

Mrs.  Verrall's  next  script  (Feb.  20),  which  refers  again  to
Peace  and  to  Adventure,  contains  what  I  take  to  be  an  allusion
to  Myers's  poem  The  Renewal  of  Youth,  which  is  definitely
alluded  to  again  in  her  script  of  March  11  and  in  Mrs.  Piper's
of  March  13.

On  Feb.  25,  Miss  Verrall's  script  gives  expression  to  the
Active  ideal,  through  a  quotation  from  Browning's  Epilogue  ;
and  on  the  same  day  Mrs.  Verrall  insists  on  the  need  for  "  the
help  of  all  who  labour  in  this  cause  "  (meaning,  no  doubt,
the  co-operation  of  several  automatists)  to  bridge  the  space
between  world  and  world.

Next  day  Mrs.  Verrall  hears  of  her  daughter's  quotation
from  Browning  on  the  day  before,  and  her  script  proceeds
to  enlarge  on  the  contrast  between  Tennyson,  "  the  seer  who
knew  "  and  Browning,  "  the  fighter."

This  is  the  only  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  belonging  to  this
section,  or  to  the  subsidiary  section  of  "  The  Clavigers  "
(Chapter  VI.,  below),  in  which  any  reference  to  Browning
occurs,  whereas  every  one  of  her  scripts  of  this  section  (except
those  of  Feb.  20  and  Mar.  4 — the  latter  a  "  Claviger  "  script)
contains  quotations  from  or  allusions  to  poems  by  Tennyson.

Similarly,  Mrs.  Piper,  who — it  is  to  be  noted — did  not
know  that  the  avro?  ovpavos  uKvfxon>  question  had  anything
to  do  with  Tennyson,  makes  no  reference  to  Browning,  but
alludes  in  four  different  sittings  to  In  Memoriam,  and  in
three  to  Crossing  the  Bar,  the  latter  being  the  particular  poem
alluded  to  in  Myers's  poem  on  Tennyson.

On  the  other  hand,  Miss  Verrall's  single  contribution  to  the
subject  consists  in  a  quotation  from  Browning.

Mrs.  Holland,  again,  in  this  section  and  in  the  subsidiary
section  of  "  The  Clavigers  "  makes  important  contributions
to  the  subject  through  significant  quotations  from  three
different  poems  by  Browning,  whereas  her  only  reference  to
Tennyson  (apart  from  possible  reminiscences  of  Crossing  the
Bar  and  In  Memoriam  on  March  13  and  April  8),  consists  in
three  words  combined  with  one  of  her  Browning  quotations
(on  April  8).

To  return  to  the  chronological  order  of  events, — Mrs.


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


79


Verrall  on  Feb.  26  quotes  from  Crossing  the  Bar,  and  refers
to  Elijah  on  Mount  Horeb  and  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai,  which
latter  she  takes  afterwards  to  imply  a  verse  in  In  Memoriam.

On  March  6  she  quotes  from  In  Memoriam  verses  about
Calm.

On  the  same  day  Mrs.  Piper  refers  to  In  Memoriam  ("  Arthur
Hallam  "),  and  gives  the  same  quotation  from  •  Crossing  the
Bar  that  Mrs.  Verrall  had  given  on  Feb.  26.

On  March  11  Mrs.  Verrall  refers  to  passages  about  Plato
in  two  poems  by  Myers, — Stanzas  on  Mr.  Watts'  Collected
Works  and  The  Renewal  of  Youth,  connecting  these  with  "  a
verse  in  Tennyson."  These  and  previous  scripts  lead  her
to  a  careful  study  of  In  Memoriam,  from  which  she  concludes
that  Tennyson,  like  Plotinus,  specially  associated  the  calm
of  external  nature  with  the  condition  of  ecstasy,  and  that
this  was  why  F.  W.  H.  Myers  had  chosen  the  words  from
Plotinus  as  a  motto  to  his  poem  on  Tennyson.

The  close  parallelism  between  Tennyson's  description  and
that  of  Plotinus  in  this  respect  had  not  hitherto  been  noted
by  writers  on  Tennyson  ;  it  seemed,  then,  that  knowledge  not
possessed  by  Mrs.  Verrall  had  emerged  in  her  script.

On  March  13,  MyersP  states  (correctly)  that  he  has  given
Mrs.  Verrall  a  message  about  Crossing  the  Bar,  and  refers
to  In  Memoriam  ("  Arthur  Hallam  ")  again.  He  also  refers
to  a  description  of  death  in  The  Reneival  of  Youth.

On  the  same  day,  Mrs.  Holland  quotes  lines  about  death
from  another  poem  of  Myers's  in  the  same  volume  ;  with  other
references  to  different  ways  of  dying,  and  the  phrase  "  A  very
still  and  tideless  sea."

On  March  18,  Mrs.  Holland  again  describes  different  ways  of
dying.

On  April  8,  she  again  speaks  of  the  calm  of  external  nature
in  the  words  :

"  Peace  on  the  great  heart  of  the  heaving  sea
And  on  the  rocks  that  fringe  the  ocean,  peace."

In  connection  with  a  contrast  of  the  Active  and  Contemplative
("  Leah  and  Rachel  ")  she  gives  a  composite  quotation  from
Browning  and  Tennyson,  and  apparently  alludes  to  Moses
with  a  quotation  from  Browning  analogous  to  the  Tennysonian


so


Alice  Johnson.


[part


quotation  associated  with  Moses  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of
Feb.  26.

On  April  8,  Mrs.  Holland's  script  also  speaks  of  an  after-
glow in  the  East ;  Mrs.  Verrall's  says  "  Rosy  is  the  East,"
and  in  Mrs.  Piper's  waking-stage  the  phrase  "  Light  in  West  "
is  uttered.

In  the  same  waking-stage  Mrs.  Piper  speaks  of  "  Francis  "
and  "  Roland  Les  Val."  This  seems  to  be  explained  on  April
29  by  the  mention  of  Francis  of  Assisi,  whose  experiences  in
his  retreat  on  La  Verna,  given  to  him  by  Roland,  is  shown  to
be  closely  parallel  to  the  experiences  of  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai.

On  April  29  MyersP  in  connection  with  the  Greek  words
also  mentions  other  great  visionaries — Swedenborg,  St.  Paul,
and  (?)  Dante  and,  on  April  30,  Socrates, — apparently  with
special  reference  to  the  vision  premonitory  of  his  death.

On  May  1  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  repeats  some  of  the  topics
previously  given  in  it.  Finally,  on  May  6,  1907,  MyersP  states
that  Plotinus  is  his  "  answer  "  to  the  Greek  words.

Detailed  Report.1

This  is  one  of  three  cases  belonging  to  this  period  in  which  a
test-question  put  to  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-personalities  seemed
to  be  the  starting-point  of  one  or  more  cross-correspondences.

In  one  case — the  "  Latin  Message,"  summarised  above —
the  especial  aim  of  the  question  was  to  elicit  evidence  of
the  action  of  an  intelligence  independent  of  the  minds  of
all  the  living  persons  concerned, — whether  automatists  or
investigators.

In  the  other  two  cases — "  Horace  Ode  "  and  "  avros  ovpavo?
anu/j-wv  " — the  question  was  planned  by  Mrs.  Verrall  with  a
special  view  to  obtaining  evidence  of  the  identity  of  the
intelligence  communicating  through  Mrs.  Piper  whom  we  call
Myersp.

It  followed  from  the  circumstances  of  these  experiments
that  the  different  automatists  were  not  all  in  the  same  position
with  regard  to  them,  as  they  are  in  spontaneous  cases  of
cross-correspondence.

(a)  Mrs.  Verrall  knew  that  the  three  experiments  were

1  The  first  report  of  this  ease  was  given  by  Mr.  Piddington  in  Proa,  Vol.
XXII.,  pp.  107-171.


lxvhi.] Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."  81

being  tried,  and  allusions  to  all  of  them  naturally  appeared
in  her  scripts.  In  the  case  of  the  Latin  Message,  her  know-
ledge of  the  experiment  could  not,  of  course,  help  her  in  any
way  to  produce  the  evidence  desired.  But  in  the  case  of
her  own  two  questions,  she  knew  something  about  what
answers  would  be  appropriate.  More  knowledge  of  the
topics,  however,  seemed  to  be  shown  in  her  scripts  than  was
normally  possessed  by  her.  Further,  cross-correspondences
between  her  scripts  and  those  of  the  other  automatists
occurred.

(b)  To  Mrs.  Piper  the  three  questions  were  put  while  she
was  in  trance,  and  they  were,  of  course,  never  mentioned  to
her  when  she  was  in  any  other  condition.  One  question  was
put  to  her  in  Latin  ;  another  related  to  the  meaning  of  a
Greek  phrase  (avTos  ovpavo?  atajficov)  ;  and  the  third,  the
Horace  Ode  question  ("  Which  Ode  of  Horace  entered  into
your  [i.e.  F.  W.  H.  Myers's]  inner  life  ?  ")  was  one  which
it  was  impossible  that  Mrs.  Piper  could  have  answered  from
her  own  normal  resources.

(c)  Miss  Verrall  had  some  knowledge  of  the  Latin  Message
experiment  (see  above,  p.  26),  but  none  of  the  other  two.

(cl)  Mrs.  Holland  (in  India)  was  in  complete  ignorance  of
all  the  experiments.

The  "  Horace  Ode  question  "  was  put  by  Mr.  Piddington
to  Myersp  for  the  first  time  on  January  23,  1907.  Passages
relating  to  it  were  found  hi  the  scripts  of  Mrs.  Piper  and  of
Mrs.  Verrall  only,1  and  have  been  fully  described  and  dis-
cussed by  Mr.  Piddington  in  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  397-407  ;
Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  150-169  ;  and  Vol.  XXVI.,  pp.  174-220  ;
also  by  Mr.  G.  W.  Balfour  in  Vol.  XXVI.,  pp.  221-230.

The  gist  of  these  passages  was  to  suggest  a  contrast  between
the  despairing  view  of  man's  destiny  after  death  taken  in
the  Horace  Ode  and  in  some  of  F.  W.  H.  Myers's  early  poems,
and  the  hopeful  view  of  his  later  poems  ;  the  contrast  being
expressed  through  cross-correspondences  between  the  scripts
of  Mrs.  Piper  and  of  Mrs.  Verrall.

Experiments  of  a  kind  somewhat  similar  to  these  had
been  tried  in  earlier  days  with  Mrs.  Piper  by  Dr.  Hodgson

1  There  is  also  a  possible  reference  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  March  20,
1907,  see  above,  p.  43.

F


82


Alice  Johnson.


[part


and  other  investigators  ;  that  is,  they  had  tried  to  obtain
evidence  of  the  identity  of  alleged  communicators  by  asking
questions  on  scientific  or  literary  topics,  the  answers  to  which
would  presumably  be  known  to  the  communicators,  but
would  be  considerably  beyond  Mrs.  Piper's  normal  knowledge.
No  very  satisfactory  results  had  been  obtained.

The  present  experiments  were  not  only  more  successful
than  previous  ones  in  the  amount  of  literary  knowledge
shown  by  Myersp,1  but  a  new  and  very  important  element
was  added  in  that  parts  of  the  answers  to  the  questions  were
given  through  other  automatists  besides  Mrs.  Piper,  one  at
least  of  whom — Mrs.  Holland — knew  nothing  of  the  questions.
This  result  was  not  expected  by  the  experimenters,  and,
indeed,  the  whole  upshot  was  far  more  complicated  than
they  had  expected,  the  various  topics  overlapping  one  another
and  mingling  together  in  the  scripts  in  a  way  difficult  to
disentangle.  These  topics  have  been  classified  as  far  as
possible  to  help  the  reader  to  follow  them  ;  but  he  should
bear  in  mind  throughout  that  several  subjects  were  being
treated  of  contemporaneously  in  all  the  scripts  and  that  some
of  them  turned  out  to  be  curiously  interconnected.

The  Horace  Ode  topic  has  already  been  dealt  with  ex-
haustively in  the  Proceedings,  and  need  not  here  be  referred
to  again.  But  the  discovery  of  allusions  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script  to  the  avros  ovpavo?  ukv/xwv  topics  entailed  a  further
study  of  all  the  scripts  concerned  with  them,  in  the  course
of  which  other  discoveries  were  made.  The  scripts  are  there-
fore given  again  here.

The  avroi  ovpavos  cucv/ulmv  Question.

The  question  was  devised  by  Mrs.  Verrall  under  the  follow-
ing circumstances  :

At  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  Jan.  15.  1907, 2  Mrs.  Verrall
and  Mr.  Piddington  being  present,  MyersP  said  that  he  had
given  Mrs.  Verrall  the  message  :

"  Celestial  Halcyon  days."

1  Still  more  interesting  results  in  this  line  were  obtained  later  by  Mr.  Dorr
in  his  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  March  to  May.  1908.  See  Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.,
pp.  31-200.

2  See  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  104.


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


83


Mrs.  Verrall  did  not  remember  that  any  such  phrase  had
occurred  in  her  script,  but  on  Jan.  22,  while  on  her  way  to
another  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  she  wrote  the  following  :

(Mrs.  VerraU's  Script  of  Jan.  22,  1907.)

A  thousand  years  shall  roll
A  thousand  aeons  pass
Ere  the  imprisoned  soul
Shall  see  as  in  a  glass
Darkly,1  a  vision  dim
Flit,  phantomlike  and  fair,
A  breath,  a  fairies'  whim
Thro'  the  encircling  air.

Clasp  not  the  half-seen  shade
As  once  Anchises'  son,
Let  the  faint  vision  fade
Till  all  thy  race  be  run
Then  in  the  broader  light
That  floods  the  world  super N
Clear  to  the  sharpened  sight
Hold  fast  the  One  Eterne  !

Mrs.  Verrall  thought  that  the  main  point  of  this  script  lay
in  the  word  "  Supern,"  and  on  the  following  day  she  remem-
bered that  the  word  "  supernal  "  had  occurred  in  her  script
of  July  3,  1903,2  which  was  as  follows  :

For  her  a  message  of  peace — contemplation  on  high  summits —
stillness  in  the  air.  .  .  .

The  storm  and  Avhirlwmd  consume  the  blue  clear  space  between
the  worlds,  but  the  supernal  peace  is  undisturbed.

The  last  sentence  seems  to  represent  the  fundamental  idea
of  "  halcyon  days," — an  interval  of  calm  between  storms.
But  the  main  point  of  the  script  seems  to  be  that  while  halcyon
days  in  this  world  are  transitory,  in  the  celestial  world  they
are  unending.  Thus,  as  MyersP  claimed,  the  idea  of,  though
not  the  phrase,  "  celestial  halcyon  days,"  would  seem  to  have

1  Cf.  "  For  now  we  see  through  a  glass,  darkly  ;  but  then  face  to  face  "
(1  Cor.  xiii.  12).

2  Quoted  in  full  in  Proc.  Vol.  XX.,  p.  04.


84


Alice  Johnson.


[part


appeared  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  though  this  might  never
have  been  observed  but  for  the  occurrence  of  the  word
"  Supern  "  in  her  script  of  Jan.  22,  1907.  After  her  sitting
with  Mrs.  Piper  on  that  day,  Mrs.  Verrall  tried  to  think  of
some  question  to  put  to  MyersP,  with  a  view  to  testing  if  he
had  access  to  the  memories  of  F.  W.  H.  Myers, — the  question
of  course  to  be  one  which  it  would  seem  impossible  that  Mrs.
Piper  should  answer  from  her  own  normal  resources.

Mrs.  Verrall  thought  that  some  Greek  quotation  would  be
a  good  subject  for  the  test-question,  and  on  the  evening  of
Jan.  23,  1907,  it  suddenly  occurred  to  her  that  the  words
Kai  avros  ovpavbs  clkv/uloov  would  serve  the  purpose.1

These  words,  followed  by  the  name  of  the  author,  Plotinus,
but  by  no  further  reference,  and  with  no  translation,  occur
once  in  Myers's  published  works,  namely,  as  the  motto  to  a
poem  "  To  Tennyson  "  in  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry,
p.  117.  They  may  be  translated  as  :  "  And  the  very  Heaven
waveless."  They  are  taken  from  a  passage  in  Plotinus'
Enneades,  V.  2-3,  which  was  translated  as  follows  by  F.  W.  H.
Myers  in  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.,  p.  291  :

The  Vision  which  dissolves  for  a  moment  the  corporeal  prison-
house  ; "  the  flight  of  the  One  to  the  One."

"  So  let  the  soul  that  is  not  unworthy  of  that  Vision  contem-
plate the  Great  Soul ;  freed  from  deceit  and  every  witchery,  and
collected  into  calm.  Calmed  be  the  body  for  her  in  that  hour,  and
the  tumult  of  the  flesh ;  ay,  all  that  is  about  her,  calm  ;  calm  be
the  earth,  the  sea,  the  air,  and  let  Heaven  itself  be  still.  Then  let
her  feel  how  into  that  silent  heaven  the  Great  Soul  floweth  in.  .  .  .
And  so  may  man's  soul  be  sure  of  Vision,  when  suddenly  she  is
filled  with  light  ;  for  this  light  is  from  Him  and  is  He  ;  and  then
surely  shall  one  know  His  presence  when,  like  a  god  of  old  time,
He  entered  into  the  house  of  one  that  calleth  Him,  and  maketh  it
full  of  light."

It  seems  clear  that  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Jan.  22,  1907.
was  largely  based  on  a  subliminal  recollection  of  this  passage.

Mrs.  Verrall,  having  informed  no  one  of  her  proposed  experi-
ment, determined  to  put  the  question  to  MyersP  at  her  next

1  This  decision,  with  the  reasons  for  it,  was  recorded  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  diary
of  Jan.  24,  1907,  quoted  in  full  in  Pror.,  Vol.  XXIT.,  pp.  140-141.


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."  85

sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  on  Jan.  29,  1907.  In  the  event  of
a  complete  answer  being  given,  Mrs.  Verrall  expected  :

(1)  a  translation  into  English  of  the  words  uut6$  ovpavos
aKUjuwi' ;

(2)  a  reference  to  Myers's  poem  on  Tennyson  ;

(3)  a  reference  to  Plotinus  and  the  latter  part  of  Human
Personality.

The  question  was  put  in  the  following  terms  :

{Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  Jan.  29,

1907.)

(Present  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mr.  Piddington.)
Mrs.  V.  If  I  say  three  Greek  Avords,  could  you  say  what  they
remind  you  of  ?
I  might  grasp  the  words  and  I  might  not  but  I  could  try
Mks.  V.  Yes. You  could  either  translate  them  into  English,  or
tell  me  of  what  they  make  you  think.
Do  what  ?

Mrs.  v.  Tell  me  of  what  they  remind  you.

Oh  yes,  of  what  they  remind  me. But  what  have  they  to
do  with  our  experiments  ?
Mrs.  V.  I  think  you  have  spoken  of  them  to  me  before,  or  some-
thing like  them.
Yes.

Mrs.  V.  If  I  speak  them  now,  you  can  tell  me  now  or  later  what
they  remind  you  of.
Very  good.

Mrs V.  avTus  ovpavbs 1  aKVfjMV

Spell  it.

[Mrs.  V.  then  spelt  out  the  words  by  their  English  lettering,
and  MyerSp  wrote  them  down  in  English  letters,  add-
ing :]

I  will  certainly  reply  if  I  live  and  I  can  U.D.

1  It  was  subsequently  observed  that  this  word  had  been  mentioned  to
Mrs.  Piper  in  a  sitting  held  on  June  21,  1895,  by  Professor  Newbold,  who
repeated  to  G.  P.  in  Greek  "  Our  Father  who  art  in  heaven,"  and  tried  to
make  him  translate  it,  which  he  ultimately  succeeded  in  doing.  Sec  Proc,
Vol.  XIV.,  p.  46.


86


Alice  Johnson.


[part


At  the  next  sitting,  on  Jan.  30,  1907,  Mrs.  Verrall  and
Mr.  Piddington  were  again  present.

(Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  Jan.  30,

1907.)

(Present  :  Mr.  Piddington  and  Mrs.  Verrall.)
(Myers  communicating.)
(To  Mrs.  V.)  Noav  my  answer  to  three  different  questions  you  have

asked  me  shall  be  given  to  our  friend  while  he  is  alone

and  you  are  not  present  here

I  also  said  something  about  stars
Mrs.  V.  What  about  stars  ?

I  said  satelite  [sic]  and  stars  beam  brightly
Mrs.  V.  Can  you  repeat  the  phrase  ?

Yes  similar  to  this — did  you  receive  it  ?
Mrs.  V.  I  have  had  something  about  this  and  will  look  it  up.

Thank  you.

Mrs.  V.  You  said  you  had  spoken  to  me  of  Celestial  Halcyon
Days.  I  couldn't  remember  it,  but  I  have  found  it
now.

I  told  you  my  dear  friend  that  my  memory  was  better
than  yours  on  some  points

I  mentioned  Larches  I  think  to  you  before
Laburnum

(Waking -stage)

I've  been  x.  .  .  . Horace  .  .  . Paradise  .  .  .
shores  meet  you  there. I  did  say  it
J.  G.  P.  Say  that  again.

Say  the  words  so  fast  Ulysses
hurries  too  fast  for  meaning.  .  .  .

1  As  usual,  during  the  first  part  of  the  waking-stage  a  good  many  words
were  inaudible.  The  mention  of  "  Horace  "  shows  that,  as  stated  during
the  sitting,  the  trance-personality  was  thinking  of  the  questions  put  to
Myers,,  by  Mrs.  Verrall.


LXVIII.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


87


"  Satellite  and  stars  beam  brightly  "  looks  like  a  vague
reminiscence  of  the  following  lines  from  Myers's  poem  on
Tennyson  :

"  0  closing  shades  that  veil  and  droAvn
The  clear-obscure  of  shore  and  tree  !
0  star  and  planet,  shimmering  down
Your  sombre  glory  on  the  sea  !  "

Cf.  "  Chiaroscuro  "  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Feb.  20,  1907,
beloAv,  p.  91,  which  is  probably  derived,  from  the  same
passage.

The  words  "  Larches  "  and  "  Laburnum  "  in  the  above
reminded  Mrs.  Verrall,1  as  they  would  probably  remind  any
reader  of  Tennyson,  of  the  lines  :

"  When  rosy  plumelets  tuft  the  larch,

And  rarely  pipes  the  mounted  thrush  ;
Or  underneath  the  barren  bush
Flits  by  the  sea-blue  bird  of  March."

(In  Mem.,  XCI.)

and

"  Laburnums,  dropping -wells  of  fire."'

(In  Mem.,  LXXXIII.)

The  fact  that  "  Larch  "  was  written  by  MyersP  not  long
after  he  had  been  reminded  of  the  phrase  "  Celestial  halcyon
days  "  suggests  that  he  was  actually  thinking  of  the  verse
in  In  Memoriam  just  quoted,  since  this  speaks  of  "  the  sea-
blue  bird  of  March,"  i.e.  the  king-fisher,  or  halcyon.  Cf.
"  purple  and  sea-blue  "  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  April  8,
1907,  below,  p.  112.

Ulysses  "  may  be  a  reference  to  Tennyson's  poem
"  Ulysses,"  which  is  closely  associated  with  In  Memoriam,
as  Tennyson  himself  said  of  it  :

"  Ulysses  was  written  soon  after  Arthur  Hallam's  death  and
gave  my  feeling  about  the  need  of  going  forward  and  braving  the
struggle  of  life  perhaps  more  simply  than  anything  in  In
Memoriam."  2

1  Mrs.  Verrall  did  not,  of  course,  make  any  comment  on  these  words  at
the  sitting.

-  Tennyson  :  A  Memoir,  Vol.  I.,  p.  19G.


88


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  fact  that,  as  Mrs.  Sidgwick  tells  me,  Tennyson's  Ulysses
had  been  mentioned  to  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-personalities  by
Dr.  Hodgson  at  one  or  more  of  his  sittings  with  her  proves  that
they  knew  there  was  such  a  poem,  and  so  adds  to  the  proba-
bility that  Myersp  was  referring  to  it  when  he  said  "  Ulysses."

After  this  sitting  of  Jan.  30,  1907,  Mrs.  Verrall  had  no
further  intercourse  with  Mrs.  Piper  of  any  kind  until  the
sitting  of  April  29,  1907  (see  below,  p.  110).  One  of  her
own  scripts  is  the  next  to  be  quoted  :

{Mrs.  VerralVs  Script  of  Feb.  12,  1907.)

The  voyage  of  Maeldune  faery  lands  forlorn  and  noises  of  the
western  sea.

thundering  noises  of  the  western  sea.

It  is  about  Merlin  and  Arthur's  realm  Merlin's  prophetic
vision —

'  all  night  long

mid  thundering  noises  of  the  western  sea  '

and  how  he  would  not  go — the  passing  of  Arthur.

And  then  the  island  valley  of  Avilion

where  blows  not  any  wind  none  nor  ever  falls  the  least  light —
no  not  that  but  you  have  the  sense

there  falls  no  rain  nor  snow  nor  any  breath  of  wind  shakes  the
least  leaf.

I  will  try  to  get  the  idea  elsewhere  conveyed — but  it  is  hard
and  I  know  I  have  failed  before.

Why  will  you  not  put  the  signature  %
Surely  you  know  now  that  it  is  not  you.

F.W.H.M.

"  The  voyage  of  Maeldune  "  probably  refers  to  Tennyson's
poem  of  that  name.  The  voyage  of  Maeldune,  who  was  a
sort  of  Irish  Ulysses,  was  in  the  western  sea,  "  the  great
ocean  that  has  no  ending,"  1  and  the  islands  he  met  with
might  well  be  described  as  "  faery  lands  forlorn,"  which  is  a
phrase  from  Keats's  Ode  to  a  Nightingale  :

"  The  same  [song]  that  oft-times  hath
Charm 'd  magic  casements,  opening  on  the  foam
Of  perilous  seas,  in  faery  lands  forlorn."

1  Lady  Gregory,  A  Book  of  Saints  and  Wonders,  "  The  Voyage  of  Maeldune."


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


89


It  is  also  the  title  of  a  poem  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers  (see  Frag-
ments of  Prose  and  Poetry,  p.  142)  containing  the  phrases  :
"  that  heaven-high  vault  serene  "  and  "  unearthly  calms,"
and  suggestive  in  general  of  the  lines  from  In  Memoriam  (XI.),

"  And  in  my  heart,  if  calm  at  all,
If  any  calm,  a  calm  despair,"

which  are  quoted  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  March  6,  1907,
see  below,  p.  97.

"  Noises  of  the  western  sea  "  and  the  similar  phrases  follow-
ing it  are  no  doubt  reminiscences  of

"So  all  day  long  the  noise  of  battle  roll'd
Among  the  mountains  by  the  winter  sea  ;  "

and

"  Where  the  moving  isles  of  winter  shock
By  night,  with  noises  of  the  northern  sea."

(Tennyson,  Morte  d' 'Arthur  and  The  Passing
of  Arthur.)

Merlin's  'prophetic  vision  was  interpreted  by  Mrs.  Verrall
on  March  15,  1907,  as  a  reference  to  Tennyson's  poem,  Merlin
and  The  Gleam,  read  by  her  then  for  the  first  time.  In  the
Preface  to  the  Memoir  of  Tennyson,  this  poem  is  explained
as  his  literary  autobiography,  and  the  lines  :

"  Arthur  had  vanish'd
I  knew  not  whither,
The  king  who  loved  me
And  cannot  die  ;  "

as  a  joint  reference  to  King  Arthur  and  Arthur  Hallam.

The  first  version  of  The  Passing  of  Arthur  was  Morte
d' 'Arthur,  and  the  first  draft  of  this  was  written  shortly  after
Arthur  Hallam's  death,  between  Sections  XXX.  and  XXXI.
of  In  Memoriam.1  It  is  of  course  obvious  to  any  student  of
Tennyson  that  the  conception  he  formed  of  King  Arthur
was  closely  bound  up  in  his  own  mind  with  his  conception  of
Arthur  Hallam  ;  but  this  special  connection  between  the
two  poems  was  unknown  to  Mrs.  Verrall  till  she  read  the
Memoir  of  Tennyson  for  the  first  time  on  May  18,  1907.

1  See  Tennyson  : A  Memoir,  Vol.  I.,  p.  109.


90


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  next  part  of  the  script  alludes  to  part  of  Arthur's  fare-
well to  Sir  Bedivere  :

^  I  am  going  a  long  way  .  .  .
To  the  island-valley  of  Avilion  ;
Where  falls  not  hail,  or  rain,  or  any  snow,
Nor  ever  wind  blows  loudly."

But  in  Oet.,  1910,  Mr.  Piddington  noticed1  that  the  words
in  the  script  "  Nor  ever  falls  the  least  light  "  are  taken  from
the  following  passage  from  Tennyson's  Lucretius  :

"  The  Gods,  who  haunt
The  lucid  interspace  of  world  and  world,
Where  never  creeps  a  cloud  or  moves  a  wind,
Nor  ever  falls  the  least  white  star  of  snow,
Nor  ever  lowest  roll  of  thunder  moans,
Nor  sound  of  human  sorrow  mounts  to  mar
Their  sacred  everlasting  calm  !  and  such,
Not  all  so  fine,  nor  so  divine  a  calm,
Not  such,  nor  all  unlike  it,  man  may  gain
Letting  his  own  life  go."

("  The  lucid  interspace  of  world  and  world  "  is  cpioted  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  of  Feb.  25,  1907,  and  May  1,  1907,  given
below,  pp.  93  and  124.)

The  first  of  these  Tennysonian  passages  is  based,  as  Mr.  Pid-
dington observes,  on  Odyssey,  IV.  566-568,  and  the  second  on
Odyssey,  VI.  43-45,  so  that  a  reference  to  the  two  Odyssey
passages  is  combined  in  a  single  passage  of  the  script.  The
combination  may  be  attributed  to  subliminal  memory,  since
Mrs.  Verrall  is  familiar  with  the  two  passages  in  the  Odyssey,
and  with  the  two  Tennysonian  passages.  Mr.  Piddington,
however,  discovered  the  same  combination  of  the  two  Odyssey
passages  in  a  single  sentence  of  the  Dissertationes  (XVII.  10-11)
of  the  Neo- Platonic  philosopher,  Maximus  of  Tyre,  in  a  passage
describing  the  conditions  whereby  a  man  while  still  embodied
may  attain  to  the  vision  of  God.  (Gf.  Mrs.  Holland's  script
of  April  16,  1907,  "To  fly  to  find  Euripides,"  and  comments
on  it,  below,  pp.  139-142.)  Mrs.  Verrall  had  never  read
the Dissertationes, but a passage in F. W.  H.  Myers's

1  For  full  particulars,  see  Proc,  Vol.  XXVI.,  pp.  245-200.


LXVIII.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


91


"  Essay  on  Greek  Oracles  "  (Essays — Classical,  p.  60),  shows
that  Myers,  who  was  deeply  read  in  Neo-Platonic  literature,
had  at  least  some  acquaintance  with  Maximus  of  Tyre.

There  is  thus  a  special  appropriateness  in  this  composite
reference  in  the  script,  both  in  connection  with  the  auras
ovpavos  cucv/utov  topic  and  as  purporting  to  be  inspired  by
Myers.

(Mrs.  Verrall's  Script  of  Feb.  20,  1907.)
Chiaroscuro

non  semper  possum  tibi  confidere  hortatioiies  meas.  sed
ausculta.

[I  camiot  always  confide  to  you  my  exhortations,  but  listen.]
There  are  messages  for  you  in  Monday  and  Wednesday's  words

not  on  Tuesday. To-day  is  important. Sit  still  and  help — it  will

not  come  to  you but  to  Piddington.


no  the  word  is  very  difficult  to  give


Print  it  Rector.
Behind  the  darkening  billows  there  is  peace
Peace — and  the  Light  that  never  Avas On  Land  or  Sea  [sic]  1
No  not  right  but  partly. Do  not  write — sit  still  and  wait.
Behind  our  darkness  there  is  light.
'  High  Emprize  ' adventure  forth — a  full  sail
Argosy '  comes  beetling  forth  '.

"  Chiaroscuro  "  is  probably  a  reminiscence  of  "  the  clear-
obscure  of  shore  and  tree  "  in  the  third  verse  of  Myers's
poem  on  Tennyson,  which  seemed  to  be  alluded  to  hi  the
Piper  sitting  of  Jan.  30,  1907,  see  above,  p.  87.  The  word
"  clear-obscure  "  also  occurs  in  The  Renewal  of  Youth  (p.  223)
in  a  passage  relating  to  Tintoretto's  pictures.

Mr.  Piddington  has  shown  (Proc,  Vol.  XXVI.,  p.  212)

1  "  The  light  that  never  was,  on  sea  or  land."

(Wordsworth,  Peele  Castle  in  a  Storm.)


!>2


Alice  Johnson.


[part


that  much  of  this  script  points  to  Myers's  poem  Venice  and
relates  to  the  Horace  Ode  question.  It  also  refers  explicitly
to  the  general  topic  of  this  section, — Peace.

The  last  phrases  are  clearly  reminiscent  of  The  Merclmnt
of  Venice  (Act  I.  Sc.  1)  :

Salarino.  "  There  where  your  argosies  with  portly  sail,

Like  signiors  and  rich  burghers  on  the  flood,
Or,  as  it  were,  the  pageants  of  the  sea,
Do  overpeer  the  petty  traffickers,
That  curtsy  to  them,  do  them  reverence,
As  they  fly  by  them  with  their  woven  wings.

Salanio. Believe  me,  Sir,  had  I  such  venture  forth.  ..."

The  phrases  selected  out  of  this  passage  by  the  script
point  again  to  the  Adventurer,  already  referred  to  in  the
script  of  Feb.  12,  1907  ("  The  voyage  of  Maeldune  ")  and  so
to  the  contrast  of  Active  and  Contemplative  that  will  be
seen  later  to  form  an  essential  factor  in  this  cross-cor-
respondence.

Next  comes  a  short  script  by  Miss  Verrall,  who  was  then
at  Cambridge,  but  knew  nothing  of  her  mother's  experiment,
or  of  her  scripts.

{Miss  Verrall's  Script  of  Feb.  25,  1907. 5.30  p.m.)

Many  ties  that  bind

in  the  silence  of  the  sleep  time.1

About  an  hour  later,  Mrs.  Verrall,  not  having  seen  her
daughter's  script,  produced  the  following  :

{Mrs.  Verrall's  Script  of  Feb.  25,  1907. 6.45  p.m.)

Not  each  but  all  United  stand  — a  firm  knit  band  —but,
single,  fall.2

1  "At  the  midnight  in  the  silence  of  the  sleep-time,
When  you  set  your  fancies  free,
Will  they  pass  to  where — by  death,  fools  think,  imprisoned —
Low  he  lies  who  once  so  loved  you,  whom  you  loved  so  ?  "

(Browning,  Asolando  : "  Epilogue.")

2  Mrs.  Verrall  knew  that  the  phrase  "  United  we  stand,  divided  we  fall  "
had  occurred  in  Mr.  Piddington's  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  Jan.  2,  1907,
being  apparently  a  reference  by  MyersP  to  the  Latin  Message.


LXVIII.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


93


Test  the  weakest  link  but  even  that  stands  firm

I  stretch  my  hand  across  the  vaporous  space,  the  interlunar
space  1 — 'twixt  moon  and  earth, — where  the  gods  of  Lucretius  quaff
their  nectar.

Do  you  not  understand  ?

The  lucid  interspace  of  world  and  world

Well  that  is  bridged  by  the  thought  of  a  friend,  bridged  before
for  your  passage,  but  today  for  the  passage  of  any  that  will  walk
it,  not  in  hope  but  in  faith.

The  bridge  has  been  built  from  our  side,  it  is  our  thought  that
builds  it- — but  it  rests  on  a  pier  of  your  founding, — not  yours — of
you  only, — of  all  of  yours

Non  tua  opera,  sed  omnibus  adiuvantibus  qui  in  ista  causa
laborant

[not  by  thy  help,  but  with  the  assistance  of  all  who  labour  in
this  cause.]

not  tua  [thy]  but but  vestra  [your]  he  means

R

but  he  does  not  talk  our  language.

"  Where  the  gods  of  Lucretius  quaff  their  nectar."  The
passage  from  Tennyson's  Lucretius  alluded  to  in  this  script
is  quoted  in  full  above,  p.  90,  in  connection  with  the.  script
of  Feb.  12,  1907.  But  the  word  "nectar"  does  not  occur
in  Lucretius  and  the  above  phrase  seems  to  be  a  composite
reference  to  that  poem  and  a  passage  in  The  Lotos-Eaters  :  2

"  On  the  hills  like  Gods  together,  careless  of  mankind.
For  they  he  beside  their  nectar,  and  the  bolts  are  hurl'd
Far  below  them  in  the  valleys.  ..."

The  intention  is,  I  think,  to  contrast  the  calm  of  indifference
of  these  Gods,  and  the  inglorious  ease  of  the  Lotos-Eaters,
both  with  the  ecstatic  calm  to  which  Plotinus  aspired,  and
the  "  High  Emprise  "  of  the  Active  Adventurer.

On  the  following  morning,  Feb.  26,  1907,  Miss  Verrall
told  her  mother  that  she  had  written  on  the  previous  after-
noon a  script  containing  the  words  "  in  the  silence  of  the  sleep-

1  Cf.  airs.  Verrall's  script  of  May  1,  1907,  given  below,  p.  124.

2  Spedding,  in  reviewing  Tennyson's  early  poems  in  the  Edinburgh  for
April,  1843,  says  :  "  The  gods  of  the  Lotos-Eaters,  it  is  worth  knowing,  are
altogether  Lucretian." Lucretius  was  published  in  1868.


94


Alice  Johnson.


[part


time."  Both  she  and  her  mother  were  familiar  with  the  poem
from  which  this  was  quoted,  and  the  information  obviously
influenced  Mrs.  Verrall's  next  script,  which  was  as  follows  :

(Mrs.  Verrall's  Script  of  Feb.  26,  1907.)

(Two  drawings  of  a  crown.)
S.  Stephen's  iron  crown

But  why  should  the  Emperor  wear  it  ?  a  Magyar  crown.  Divide
the  rule

Every  act  on  [sic]  has  its  own  use

I  have  tried  to  speak  with  you  to-day  but  it  was  not  possible.
Listen  now

ch5tos  ovpa i<os  d.KVfiwv  I  think  I  have  made  him  understand  but
the  best  reference  to  it  will  be  made  elsewhere,  not  Mrs  Piper  at
all.  I  think  I  have  got  some  words  from  the  poem  written  down—
if  not  stars  and  satellites,  another  phrase  will  do  as  well.  And  may
there  be  no  moaning  at  the  bar — my  Pilot  face  to  face.1

The  last  poems  of  Tennyson  and  Browning  should  be  compared.
There  are  references  in  her  writing  to  both — Helen's  I  mean.

The  fighter  fights  one  last  fight,  but  there  is  peace  for  him  too
in  the  end — and  peace  for  the  seer  who  knew  that  after — after — the
earthquake  and  the  fire  and  the  wind — after,  after,  in  the  stillness
comes  the  voice  that  can  be  heard

No  more  now.

"  Some  words  from  the  poem  ...  if  not  stars  and  satellites,
another  phrase  will  do  as  well."  The  poem  in  question  is
Myers's  poem  on  Tennyson,  to  which  Mrs.  Verrall  had  traced
the  words  "  Satellite  and  stars  "  in  the  Piper  sitting  of  Jan.
.30,  1907,  above,  p.  87.

The  poem  is  on  the  death  of  Tennyson  and  it  alludes  definitely
to  his  Crossing  the  Bar,  but  to  no  other  of  his  poems.  This,
though  not  the  last  poem  composed  by  him,2  is  almost  certainly
what  the  script  means  by  "  the  last  poem  of  Tennyson,"  and  it
may  fitly  be  so  called,  since  he  gave  special  directions  that  it
should  be  placed  at  the  end  of  all  complete  editions  of  his
works.

It  is  obvious  from  the  other  references  in  the  script  that

1  Tennyson,  Crossing  the  Bar. Cf.  Piper  Sitting  of  March  0,  1907.  below.
-  The  last  was  The  Silent  Voices.


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


95


"  the  seer  who  knew  "  is  Tennyson,  and  "  the  fighter  "  Brown-
ing, as  interpreted  by  Mrs.  Verrall  at  the  time.

The  "  last  poem  "  of  Browning  is  clearly  that  quoted  from
in  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  Feb.  25,  1907,  above,  namely,  the
"  Epilogue  "  in  the  volume  entitled  Asolando.  which  was  pub-
lished on  the  day  of  his  death,  December  12,  1889.  In  this
poem  he  tells  his  friends  that  he  wishes  them  to  think  of  him
after  his  death  as  holding  to  the  same  ideals  of  activity  and
progress  that  he  had  during  life,  when  he

"  Never  turned  his  back  but  marched  breast  forward,  .  .  .
Held  we  fall  to  rise,  are  baffled  to  fight  better,
Sleep  to  wake."

So,  he  urges  them,  when  death  comes

"  In  the  bustle  of  man's  work-time

Greet  the  unseen  with  a  cheer  !
Bid  him  forward,  breast  and  back  as  either  should  be,
'  Strive  and  thrive  !  ' cry  '  Speed, — fight  on,  fare  ever
There  as  here  !  '  "

But  the  phraseology  of  the  script, — "  The  fighter  fights
one  last  fight,  but  there  is  peace  for  him  too  in  the  end," —
is  derived  more  directly  from  Browning's  Prospice  :

"  I  was  ever  a  fighter,  so — one  fight  more,
The  best  and  the  last  !  "

"  And  the  elements'  rage,  the  fiend-voices  that  rave,
Shall  dwindle,  shall  blend,
Shall  change,  shall  become  first  a  peace  out  of  pain.  ..."

This  reminiscence  leads  on  not  unnaturally  to  the  "  still
small  voice  "  heard  by  Elijah  on  Mount  Horeb  after  the
wind,  the  earthquake,  and  the  fire  (I.  Kings,  xix.  9-13).

Mrs.  Verrall  herself,  however,  did  not  consciously  recognise
the  allusion  to  Elijah  at  all,  but  interpreted  this  part  of  the
script  at  the  time  as  referring  to  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai,  when
"  there  were  thunders  and  lightnings  and  a  thick  cloud  upon
the  mount  and  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  exceeding  loud.  .  .  .
And  mount  Sinai  was  altogether  on  a  smoke,  because  the
Lord  descended  upon  it  in  fire  : and  the  smoke  thereof


96


Alice  Johnson.


[part


ascended  as  the  smoke  of  a  furnace,  and  the  whole  mount
quaked  greatly.  And  when  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  sounded
long  and  waxed  louder  and  louder,  Moses  spake  and  God
answered  him  by  a  voice  "  (Exodus,  xix.  16-19).

Later,  when  Mrs.  Verrall  concluded  that  the  essential  part
of  the  answer  to  her  question  on  avros  ovpavos  olkv/j-wv  was
to  be  found  in  the  description  of  trance  in  In  Memoriam,
XCV.  (see  below,  p.  101),  it  seemed  to  her  that  the  supposed
allusion  to  Moses  was  the  first  emergence  in  her  script  of
In  Memoriam,  the  last  verse  of  Section  XCVI.  being  :

"  But  in  the  darkness  and  the  cloud,
As  over  Sinai's  peaks  of  old,
While  Israel  made  their  gods  of  gold,
Altho'  the  trumpet  blew  so  loud."

This  view  was  recorded  by  Mrs.  Verrall  on  June  25,  1907.

My  interpretation  of  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  April  8,  1907
(see  below,  p.  113),  as  alluding  to  Moses,  was  made  some
years  later,  and  on  entirely  independent  grounds.

Now  it  is  clear  that  the  wording  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  script —
"  after  the  earthquake  and  the  fire  and  the  wind,  in  the  still-
ness comes  the  voice  that  can  be  heard  " — is  derived  from
the  story  of  Elijah  rather  than  from  that  of  Moses.  But  the
interpretation  that  she  herself  places  on  her  script  at  the
time  must  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  factors  in  the  total  mental
impression,  which  is  partially — but  probably  never  more
than  partially — expressed  in  the  script.  It  must,  then,  be
held  that  the  script  refers  to  both  Moses  and  Elijah.  This
is  extremely  natural,  considering  the  great  similarity  between
the  two  stories  ;  and  considering  also  that  Moses  and  Elijah
were  associated  together  in  the  Transfiguration,  which  also
took  place  on  a  "  high  mountain,"  apart  from  the  multitude,
and  when  also  a  voice  from  heaven  was  heard  out  of  a  cloud.1

All  these  associations  were,  of  course,  familiar  to  Mrs.
Verrall,  though  she  did  not  consciously  think  of  them  at  the
time.  But  there  is  another  close  connection  between  the
Old  Testament  histories  of  Moses  and  Elijah,  of  which  both
she  and  Mr.  Piddington,  as  well  as  myself,  happened  to  be
ignorant,  viz.  that  Mount  Horeb  and  Mount  Sinai  are  two

1  Matt.  xvii.  1-5.


lxviii.] Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."  97


different  names  used  in  different  parts  of  the  Bible  for  the
same  mountain.  Li  It  has  been  shown  by  Dillmann  that  the
Elohist  and  Deuteronomy  always  use  the  name  Horeb  for  the
same  mountain  which  the  Jahvist  and  the  Priestly  Code  call
Sinai  "  (Encyclopaedia  Britannica  :  Article  "  Sinai  ").  This  is
by  most  authorities  identified  with  the  mountain  now  called
St.  Catherine,  the  name  being  derived  from  the  great  monastery
of  St.  Catherine,  the  most  famous  of  the  monasteries  built  in
early  Christian  times  in  the  Sinaitic  peninsula.  From  this
monastery  a  path  of  granite  steps  was  constructed  up  to  the
top  of  "  the  Mountain  of  the  Law."  .

(Mrs.  Verrall's  Script  of  March  6,  1907. 10.45  a.m.)

I  have  tried  to  tell  him  of  the  calm  the  heavenly  and  earthly
calm  but  I  do  not  think  it  is  clear.  I  think  you  would  understand
if  you  could  see  the  record. Tell  me  when  you  have  understood.

Calm  is  the  sea.

and  in  my  heart  if  calm  at  all,  if  any  calm,  a  calm  despair.  That
is  only  part  of  the  answer — just  as  it  is  not  the  final  thought,  the
symphony  does  not  close  upon  despair — but  on  harmony.
So  does  the  poem. Wait  for  the  last  word

Tuus bene  scis  quis  [sic]  tale
scribat. Nomen  non  facile  tibi  in  charta  ponere
Tuus  igitur  pro  amico  interpretare.

[Yours.  You  know  well  who  writes  so.  It  is  not  easy  to  you
to  put  the  name  on  paper.  Yours,  therefore,  interpret  as  your
friend.]

This  is  the  first  of  the  scripts  belonging  to  this  topic  in
which  a  quotation  from  In  Memoriam  occurs,  though,  as
stated  above,  Mrs.  Verrall  had  thought  that  MyersP's  men-
tion of  "  Larches  "  and  "  Laburnum  "  in  the  sitting  of  Jan.
30,  1907,  pointed  to  In  Memoriam.  In  the  section  here  cpioted
(XI.)  every  stanza  begins  with  the  word  "  calm  "  :

"  Calm  is  the  morn  without  a  sound,

Calm  as  to  suit  a  calmer  grief  "

"  Calm  and  deep  peace  on  this  high  wold.  ..."
"  Calm  and  still  light  on  yon  great  plain.  ..."

G


98


Alice  Johnson.


[part


"  Calm  and  deep  peace  in  this  wide  air,

These  leaves  that  redden  to  the  fall  ;
And  in  my  heart,  if  calm  at  all,
If  any  calm,  a  calm  despair  :

Calm  on  the  seas,  and  silver  sleep,

And  waves  that -sway  themselves  in  rest,
And  dead  calm  in  that  noble  breast

Which  heaves  but  with  the  heaving  deep."

On  the  morning  of  the  same  day,  the  name  "  Arthur  Hal-
lam  "  was  mentioned  for  the  first  time  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,
as  follows  :

(Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  March  6,  1907,

beginning  at  11.15  a.m.)

(Present  :  Mr.  Piddington.)
Cloudless
Sky

Horizon

It  was  given  like  this

J.  G.  P.  Yes  ?

A  cloudless  sky  beyond  the  Horison  [sic]

( Waking-stage) — 1

(Present  :  Mr.  Piddington  and  Miss  Newton.)

.  .  .  Moaning  at  the  bar  when  I  put  out  to  sea.  .  .  .  Arthur

Hallam
Arthur  Hallam

Good-bye. Margaret. I'm  so  glad  I  came.  .  .  .
There  was  some  man — Arthur  Hallam. Myers  said  it  was
he — he  about.  .  .  .

"  A  cloudless  sky  beyond  "  a  horizon  which  seems  to  be
represented  by  a  straight  line  can  hardly  mean  anything
else  than  a  cloudless  sky  beyond  the  horizon  of  a  calm  sea,
so  that  the  phrase  seems  to  point  clearly  to  the  Plotinian
description  of  the  elements  at  peace.

1  For  a  more  detailed  report,  of  this  "  waking-stage,"  see  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,
pp.  150-152.


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."  99


In  the  waking-stage  is  given  the  same  quotation  from  Crossing
the  Bar  that  had  appeared  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Feb.  26,
1907.  Crossing  the  Bar,  as  mentioned  above,  is  alluded  to  in
Myers's  poem  on  Tennyson.  To  this  quotation  in  the  waking
stage  is  added  a  reference  to  hi  Memoriam  which  was  not
one  of  the  things  expected  by  Mrs.  Verrall  in  an  answer  to
her  question  about  avros  ovpavo?  aicvficov,  but  which  was  clearly
pointed  to  in  her  own  script  of  the  same  day  (March  6,  1907)
as  part  of  the  proper  answer  to  the  question.

The  next  script  connected  with  the  subject  is  one  by  Mrs.
Verrall,  who  had  heard  nothing  of  any  references  to  it  by
Mrs.  Piper  since  her  own  sitting  with  the  latter  on  Jan.  30,
1907.

(Mrs.  VerraM's  Script  of  March  11,  1907.)

With  violet  buds  their  heads  were  crowned
violaceae

odores [violet-coloured  scents]

Violet  and  olive  leaf  purple  and  hoary  1

The  city  of  the  violet  and  olive  crown.
News  will  come  of  her. of  Athens

The  shadow  of  the  Parthenon.  It  is  a  message  from  Plato  that
I  want  to  send —  It  has  been  given  elsewhere  but  should  be  com-
pleted here.  It  is  about  dim  seen  forms,  half -seen  in  the  evenings
gray  by  a  boy  and  afterwards  woven  into  words  that  last —  I  want
to  say  it  again.  I  think  there  is  a  verse  in  Tennyson  about  it.
Plato  and  the  shadow  and  the  unseen  or  hah  seen  companionship —
shapes  seen  in  the  glimpses  of  the  moonlit  heights.

To  walk  with  Plato  or  some  phrase  like  that,
with  voiceless  communing,  and  unseen  Presence  felt
No  you  dont  get  it  right

Presences  on  the  eternal  hills
that  is  better

The  Presence  that  is  in  the  lonely  hills
That  is  all  for  now  wait.

The  paragraph  beginning  "  The  shadow  of  the  Parthenon  "

1  Cf.  Swinburne,  Erechtheus,  1.  145.


100


Alirp  Johnson..


[part


seems  to  allude  jointly  to  passages  in  two  poems  by  F.  W.  H.
Myers  :

(1)  "  So  gazed  on  Phidias'  Warrior-maid,

Methinks,  iEgina's  kingly  boy.1  .  .  .
Then  as  he  walked,  like  one  who  dreamed,

Thro'  silent  highways  silver-hoar.
More  wonderful  that  city  seemed,

And  he  diviner  than  before  ; —
A  voice  was  calling,  All  is  well ;

Clear  in  the  vault  Selene  shone,
And  over  Plato's  homestead  fell

The  shadow  of  the  Parthenon."  2

(2)  "  Or  one  from  Plato's  page  uplifts  his  head,

Dazed  in  that  mastering  parley  of  the  dead,
Till  at  dark  curfew  thro'  the  latticed  gloom
What  presence  feels  he  in  his  lonely  room,
Where  mid  the  writ  words  of  the  wise  he  stands
Like  a  strange  ghost  in  many -peopled  lands."  3

"  I  think  there  is  a  verse  in  Tennyson  about  it — Plato  and
the  shadow  and  the  unseen  companionship."  This  seems  to
be  explained  by  the  more  explicit  reference  to  the  "  shadows
in  Plato's  cave  "  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  March  25,  1907
(see  below,  p.  129).  In  that  script  special  stress  is  laid  on  the
distinction  between  the  shadow  and  the  reality  represented  by
it  ;  and  the  "  verse  in  Tennyson  "  here  mentioned  is  probably
In  Mernoriam,  XCIII.,  especially  :

"  No  visual  shade  of  some  one  lost,

But  he,  the  Spirit  himself,  may  come
Where  all  the  nerve  of  sense  is  numb  ;
Spirit  to  Spirit,  Ghost  to  Ghost.

Descend,  and  touch,  and  enter  ;  hear

The  wish  too  strong  for  words  to  name  ;
That  in  this  blindness  of  the  frame

My  Ghost  may  feel  that  thine  is  near."

1  Plato,  who,  according  to  one  tradition,  was  born  at  ^Egina.

2  "  Stanzas  on  Mr.  Watts'  Collected  Works  "  (The  Renewal  of  Youth  and
other  Poems,  pp.  117-118).

a  The  Renewal  of  Youth,  p.  212.  •


LXVIII.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


101


"  Presences  on  the  eternal  hills,  etc."  These  phrases  seem
to  be  reminiscences  of  two  Wordsworthian  passages  :

"  The  silence  that  is  in  the  starry  sky,
The  sleep  that  is  among  the  lonely  hills."

(Song  at  the  Feast  of  Brougham  Castle.)

"  For  images  of  other  worlds  are  there  ;
Awful  the  light,  and  holy  is  the  air.
Fitfully,  and  in  flashes,  through  his  soul,
Like  sun-lit  tempests,  troubled  transports  roll  ;
His  bosom  heaves,  his  Spirit  towers  amain,
Beyond  the  senses  and  then  little  reign.

And  oft  when  that  dread  vision  hath  past  by,
He  holds  with  God  himself  communion  high,
There  where  the  peal  of  swelling  torrents  hits
The  sky -roofed  temple  of  the  eternal  hills."

(Descriptive  Sketches  taken  during  a  Pedestrian
Tour  among  the  Alps.)

Here  we  have  a  continuation  of  the  topic  of  visions  in
the  solitude  of  mountain  heights,  like  those  of  Moses  and
Elijah  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Feb.  26,  1907,  above.

The  references  in  her  script  to  Tennyson,  with  the  intro-
duction of  In  Memoriarn,  and  in  particular  the  combination
of  Plato  and  Tennyson  as  both  aware  of  "  unseen  companion-
ships "  in  the  script  of  March  11,  1907,  led  Mrs.  Verrall  to
believe  that  there  must  be  a  more  definite  connexion  between
In  Memoriarn  and  the  passage  from  Plotinus  than  she  had
hitherto  recognised.  She  therefore  re-read  the  poem  carefully
in  the  light  of  her  script,  and  was  struck  by  the  resemblance
in  language  as  well  as  in  thought  between  Sections  XCIV.-
XCV.,  which  describe  the  poet's  trance  and  its  antecedent
conditions,  and  the  passage  in  Enneades  V.  (quoted  above,
p.  84)  where  Plotinus  describes  the  antecedent  conditions
required  for  ecstasy, — Tennyson,  like  Plotinus  demanding  a
condition  of  calm  in  the  external  world,  as  well  as  in  the
individual  soul.1

This  discovery  seemed  to  Mrs.  Verrall  partly  at  least  to

1  An  article  on  this  subject  was,  at  Professor  A.  C.  Bradley's  suggestion,
contributed  by  Mrs.  Verrall  to  the  Modern  Language  Review  (Vol.  II.,  No.  4,
July,  1907).


102


Alice  Johnson.


[part


explain  why  F.  W.  H.  Myers  had  chosen  the  motto  auros
ovpavog  ukvijlwv  for  his  poem  on  Tennyson,  in  which  he  wrote  :

"  Once  more  he  rises  ;  lulled  and  still,
Hushed  to  his  time  the  tideways  roll ;
These  waveless  heights  of  evening  thrill
With  voyage  of  the  summoned  soul."

Mrs.  Verrall  had  of  course  realised  that  this  referred  to
Tennyson's  Grossing  the  Bar — his  desire  that  there  might
"  be  no  moaning  of  the  bar  "  when  he  "  put  out  to  sea  " —
and  to  the  fulfilment  of  this  desire  at  the  time  of  his  death.
But  (as  Mr.  Piddington  observed  *)  "  a  much  deeper  significance
attaches  to  the  choice  of  the  motto  when  it  is  recognised  that
Tennyson  himself,  like  Plotinus,  desired  conditions  of  external
peace  before  attaining  in  life  the  trance  condition,  in  which
he  felt  as  though  he  had  communion  with  the  unseen  world."
There  is  no  suggestion,  either  in  Myers's  poem  or  elsewhere  in
his  writings,  that  he  associated  the  Plotinian  passage  with
Tennyson  because  of  its  resemblance  to  Sections  XCIV.-
XCV.  of  In  Memoriam,  so  that  the  script  purporting  to  be
inspired  by  him  gave  a  new  and  cogent  explanation  which
could  not  be  derived  from  his  own  published  works.

Mrs.  Verrall  recorded  the  conclusions  she  had  come  to  on
these  points  in  her  diary  of  March  12,  1907  (which  is  quoted
at  length  in  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  145-146),  and  on  the  fol-
lowing day  brought  a  summary  of  this  entry  with  full  explana-
tions and  references  to  London,  and  gave  it  to  me  in  a  closed
envelope  to  be  given  to  Mr.  Piddington  after  his  sitting  with
Mrs.  Piper  on  the  morning  of  that  day.

{Extract  front  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  March  13,  1907.)
(Present,  Mr.  Piddington.)
(Myers  communicating.)
I  referred  to


1  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  123.


lxviii.'I  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


103


J.  G.  P.  Well  ?

saying  I  had  crossed  it. yes  did  she  U.D.
J.  G.  P.  You  said  it  to  whom  ?

both  lights  .  .  .

J.  G.  P.  I  have  not  looked  yet. I  purposely  did  not  look.

[MyerSp  then  refers  to  the  Latin  Message  and  other  topics.]
I  saw  Mrs.  Verrall  and  gave  her  a  sign  like  this


and  said  I  have  crossed  it. I  thought  she  might  get  a
glimpse  of  my  U.D.  of  her  Greek
J.  G.  P.  I  have  a  message  from  her  for  you,  but  before  I  give  it,
will  you  describe  in  a  word  the  thing  which  you  said
you  crossed  ?
BAR

J.  G.  P.  I  see  ; I  understand. Now  I'll  give  you  Mrs.  Verrall's
message  ;  and  when  you  have  got  all  the  messages  that
you  have  prepared  off  your  mind,  I  will  look  at  Mrs.
Verrall's  script  and  see  if  they  have  come  through.
Very  good.

you  remember  some  lines  I  quoted  before  I  passed  out  ?
J.  G.  P.  Well,  what  were  they  ?

I  quoted  my  own  in  which  I  referred  to  Stare,  etc.
If  I  can  make  you  U.D.  his  meaning  I  will  not  enter  into
detail  as  it  takes  too  much  light.
J.  G.  P.  I understand. You mean "  Hippocratic stare." 1  I
understand  that  [meaning,  "  I  understand  the  reference,
though  not  its  immediate  relevancy."

Note  by  J.  G.  P.]
Yes,  I  also  referred  to  this  in  a  message  to  her  recently  2

1  This  was  a  phrase  used  by  Myers  in  his  poem,  The  Renewal  of  Youth,
see  below.

2  At  a  sitting  on  Jan.  14,  1907,  at  which  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mr.  Piddington
were  present,  MyersP  had  said  to  Mrs.  Verrall  :  "  Do  you  recall  anything
about  hyprocratic  stare  ?  " and  she  had  assented.


104


Alice  Johnson


|  PART


J.  G.  P.  Yes,  I  see.

you  may  get  that  also.

[Other  topics  then  referred  to,  including  the  Lathi  Mes-
sage and  "  Browning,  Hope  and  Star."]

(J.  G.  P.  then 1  gives  Mrs.  Verrall's  message  to  MyersP ;  the
message  being  that  she  now  knew,  through  information
given  hi  her  own  script  since  her  last  sitting  with
Mrs.  Piper  on  Jan.  30,  1007,  why  avrbs  ovpavbs  aKVjxwv
had  certain  associations  for  Myers  ;  and  that  she
understood  the  reference  to  Larches  and  Laburnum
made  by  Myers  P  at  that  sitting.)

Very  good.

[other  topics  referred  to]

(Hodgson  communicating.)
Did  Mrs.  V.  draw  a  bar.  .  .  .

J.  G.  P.  [After  looking  for  the  first  time  at  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts
of  March  11  and  12,  1907:]  She  wrote:  "May  there
be  no  moaning  at  the  bar,"  2  but  she  didn't  draw
a  bar.

When  I  put  out  to  sea.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.

Why  didn't  you  say  so  before

J.  G.  P.  It  was  some  days  ago  she  wrote  it,  and  1  was  looking  out
for  a  picture.

1  am  not  so  sure  that  I  gave  her  this  full  impression  but
I  did  quote  those  lines  to  her.  I  also  quoted  them  to
this  light  3

J.  G.  P.  That  is  so. I  know.  .  .  .

For  fear  that  you  would  not  U.D.  Bar  I  [drew]  it  for
her  and  said  Hallam. did  you  get  it

1  Mr.  Piddington  at  this  time  had  not  seen  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  March
11,  1907,  and  knew  nothing  of  the  conclusions  she  had  come  to  about  the
associations  of  the  Greek  words  for  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

2  See  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Feb.  26,  1907,  above,  p.  94.

3  On  March  0,  1907. See  above,  p.  98.


LXVin.J  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."  105


J.  G.  P.  I  think  not. I  am  nearly  sure  not.

Arthur  Hallani.  ... I  mean  I  gave  it  to  the  spirit  of
this  light  while  it  was  returning
J.  G.  P.  You, did,  you  did.

I  did  that  so  as  to  connect  the  words  with  its  author's
[?]  individuality.

{Waking-stage)

[Various  inaudible  words,  the  only  one  that  came  out

clearly  being  :]
Death  .  .  .

Yes,  Faith,  Hope,  Charity.
I'll  give  it-
Reseat — resquiat

[I  have  little  doubt  that  "  requiescat  "  was  meant. —

Note  by  J.  G.  P.]
I  send  my  love  across  the  heavenly  shore
I  know — I  know —  Farewell
That's  all  they  said.  .  .  .
All  the  stars  of  all  the  skies  to  me  divine
[last  three  words  uncertain]

I  say  Mr.  Myers  is  in  the  light.  He's  so  handsome,  and
that's  a  window  or  a  door  ;  and  I  don't  want  to  say
any  more  if  you  don't  understand.  They  said  the
grave  had  never  any  terrors  for  him.  .  .  .

*'  I  quoted  my  own  [lines]  in  which  I  referred  to  Stare,  etc."
The  reference  here  is  to  a  passage  in  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  paper
"  In  Memory  of  F.  W.  H.  Myers  "  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XVII.,
pp.  1-10. Speaking  of  Myers's  last  illness,  Sir  Oliver  wrote  :

In  the  intervals  of  painful  difficulty  of  breathing,  he  quoted
from  one  of  his  own  poems  (The  Renewal  of  Youth.  .  .  .)  :

"  Ah,  Avelcome  then  that  hour  which  bids  thee  he
In  anguish  of  thy  last  mfirruity  !
Welcome  the  toss  for  ease,  the  gasp  for  air,
The  visage  drawn,  and  Hippocratic  stare.  ..."
Death  he  did  not  dread.


Cf.  in  the  waking-stage  of  this  sitting  :  "  They  said  the
grave  had  never  any  terrors  for  hini  [i.e.  Myers]."


106


Alice  Johnson.


[part


It  must  be  assumed  that  Mrs.  Piper  had  read  this  paper  ;
but  Myersp's  explicit  reference  to  The  Renewal  of  Youth — the
only  one  which  I  have  detected  in  the  Piper  sittings — seems
worth  noting,  since,  on  the  same  day,  March  13,  1907  (see
below),  Mrs.  Holland's  script  quoted  from  a  poem  in  the  same
volume,  "  How  many  times  ere  I  be  dead,  Must  I  the  bitter-
ness of  dying  know  ?  "

The  above  being  the  last  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  of  which
Mr.  Piddington  was  to  take  charge,  he  met  Mrs.  Verrall  in
the  afternoon,  and  told  her  of  the  words  "  Cloudless  sky
beyond  the  horizon  "  given  by  MyersP  on  March  6,  1907,
and  also  read  out  to  her  the  passages  (quoted  above)  relevant
to  ai/Tos  ovpavos  aKVfxwv  in  the  sitting  of  March  13  ;  after
which  she  gave  him  the  account  which  she  had  brought
that  morning  of  her  discovery  of  certain  special  Plotinian
allusions  in  In  Memoriam.

On  the  same  day  Mrs.  Holland,  in  India,  in  complete  ignor-
ance of  the  experiments  that  were  going  on  and  all  the  scripts
that  were  being  produced  in  England,  made  the  first  refer-
ences to  the  topics  of  this  cross-correspondence  that  I  have
detected  in  her  script,  as  follows  :

{Mrs.  Holland's  Script  of  March  13,  1907. 12.45  p.m.)
Oh  Rama — Ram —

Mere  paper — untouched  by  any  hope  of  inspiration —

That  strange  and  complex  silence  which  is  compact  of  an  infinite

number  of  small  incessant  noises —

The  far  shore  of  a  very  still  and  tideless  sea —

Poor  finite  ambitions,  and  the  sorrow  that  if  ye  could  but  realize

it  is  over — finally  swallowed  up  in  the  void  of  nothingness  long

ere  the  tear  it  invokes  dries  upon  the  cheek.

Where  birchen  boughs  with  hazel  mingle — 1
The  green  book — not  the  blue  one — the  fuller  version —
two  trees  have  been  killed  by  the  frost — but  the  twigs  of  the

old  elm  are  thickening  with  buds  again — The  miracle  of  spring.

1  "  The  violet  in  her  greenwood  bower,

Where  birchen  boughs  with  hazels  mingle."

(Scott,  The  Violet.)


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms. "


107


No  conscious  recollection — it  is  unreasonable  to  expect  that
immediately.

"  She  knew  she  had  waded  bosom  deep

Along  Death's  bank  in  the  sedge  of  sleep  " —
But  a  wild  gleam  on  a  shaken  shoal.1

We  gam  the  same  goal  through  different  gates.  What  need  for
violent  wail  if  to  one  it  is  the  gate  of  the  sea — to  another  a  passing
in  sleep — to  another  the  long  Avasting — the  tooth  of  a  fell  disease
to  another — a  few  drops  of  sleep — to  another  the  crash  and  jar
and  conflict  of  a  railway  accident — The  passing  is  nought —

Home  again — but  it  is  such  an  early  Easter — Sweet  of  the  year
has  hardly  begun —

The  second  child — because  of  innocence — And  for  all  the  sacra-
ment of  pain —

One  star  in  the  crimson  West

Aid  the  East  is  cold  and  grey
And  the  weary  earth  shall  turn  to  her  rest

At  the  end  of  the  winter's  day.

How  many  times  ere  I  be  dead

Must  I  the  bitterness  of  dying  know  '{

This  script  lias  already  been  given  above,  p.  66,  in  the
section  "  Alexander's  Tomb,"  since  I  interpreted  some  of
the  passages  in  it  as  alluding  to  the  Medici  Tombs,  while
others  belong  to  the  present  section.

"  The  far  shore  of  a  very  still  and  tideless  sea  "  with  some
other  phrases  scattered  through  the  script — "  the  passing  is

1  "  The  night  lay  deep  on  Rose  Mary's  heart,
For  her  swoon  was  death's  kind  counterpart  ;
The  dawn  broke  dim  on  Rose  Mary's  soul, —
No  hill-crown's  heavenly  aureole,
But  a  wild  gleam  on  a  shaken  shoal.

She  knew  she  had  waded  bosom-deep
Along  death's  bank  in  the  sedge  of  sleep  :
All  else  was  lost  to  her  clouded  mind  ;
Nor,  looking  back,  could  she  see  defin'd
O'er  the  dim  dumb  waste  what  lay  behind."

(D.  G.  Rossetti,  Rose  Mary,  Part  III.)


108


Alice  Johnson.


[part


nought,"  "  home  again,"  "  one  star  in  the  crimson  west  " —
suggests  the  first  two  verses  of  Grossing  the  Bar  :

"  Sunset  and  evening  star,

And  one  clear  call  for  me  !
And  may  there  be  no  moaning  of  the  bar,
When  I  put  out  to  sea,

But  such  a  tide  as  moving  seems  asleep,

Too  full  for  sound  and  foam,
When  that  which  drew  from  out  the  boundless  deep

Turns  again  home."  •

Mrs.  Holland's  "  far  shore  of  a  very  still  and  tideless  sea  "
has  also  some  resemblance  to  phrases  in  the  scripts  of  other
automatists,  e.g.  "  Calm  is  the  sea  "  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script
of  March  0,  1907  ;  "  May  there  be  no  moaning  at  the  bar  "
in  Mrs.  Verrall's  of  Feb.  26  and  Mrs.  Piper's  of  March  6,  1907  ;
and  "  A  cloudless  sky  beyond  the  horizon  "  in  Mrs.  Piper's
of  March  6,  1907.

The  paragraph  beginning  "  We  gain  the  same  goal  .  .  .  "
describes  different  ways  of  dying,  more  or  less  analogous  to
the  descriptions  in  "  the  last  poems  of  Tennyson  and  Brown-
ing "  (see  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Feb.  '2ii,  1907).

The  verses  at  the  end  of  the  script  were  interpreted  in
Chapter  IV.  (p.  08),  for  reasons  there  given,  as  alluding
to  the  figures  of  Day  and  Night,  and  Morning  and  Evening
on  the  Medici  Tombs.  But  I  believe  that,  just  as  a  single
phrase  in  a  script  may  combine  two  distinct  literary  allusions,
so  it  may  refer  jointly  to  two  items  in  a  cross-correspondence
or  to  two  different  cross-correspondences,  and  I  think  that
this  is  the  case  with  these  verses.  The  topic  of  East  and
West  given  in  them  is  resumed  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of
April  8,  1907  (see  below,  p.  110),  which  in  several  other
respects,  as  will  be  seen,  is  closely  connected  with  this  script.

"  How  many  times  ere  I  be  dead
Must  I  the  bitterness  of  dying  know  ?  "

is,  as  already  said,  taken  from  the  second  of  a  pair  of  sonnets
by  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  called  "  Would  God  it  were  Evening  "
and  "  Would  God  it  were  Morning  "  (The  Renewal  of  Youth


LXVIIL]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


109


and  other  Poems,  pp.  82-83).  The  titles  of  these  sonnets
are  taken  from  Deuteronomy,  xxviii.  67,  the  conclusion  of
the  curses  pronounced  by  Moses  for  disobedience  to  the  Law
given  on  Mount  Sinai.

The  next  script  again  refers  to  different  ways  of  dying  :

{Mrs.  Holland's  Script  of  March  18,  1907. 1.45  p.m.)

The  memory  of  it  is  like  a  great  black  shadow  that  blots  ou
half  the  sky — •  No  reference  is  intended  here  to  the  physical  suf-
fering but  the  mental  misery  can  hardly  be  overestimated  and  I
have  not  yet  fully  recovered  from  the  horror  of  it —  The  Valley
of  the  Shadow  1  in  soberest  truth.  No  glib  phrases  or  generalities
of  statement  can  possibly  apply  to  all  after  lives — any  more
than  they  apply  to  all  your  present  lives —  The  individual  experi-
ence differs  in  each  case  and  is  greatly  modified  by  the  inherent
sensitiveness  the  individual  idiosyncrasy  of  each  one  undergoing
the  experience  of  another  life —  For  me,  my  experience  differed
absolutely  from  his —  a  sudden  passing  naturally  differs  from  a
gradual  wearing  away —  I  groped  my  way  slowly  across  the
threshold — with  faltering  feet  and  feeling  hands — he  was  flung
across  it  with  no  consciousness  of  impending  departure.  There
is  respite  here  from  the  old  doctrine  of  inevitable  compensation
otherwise  I  might  point  out  that  the  sudden  painless  passing  is
handicapped  on  the  other  side  by  a  prolonged  period  of  cloudiness
or  mental  inability  to  cope  with  a  new  environment — while  the
frame  that  on  your  side  of  the  threshold  has  been  gnawed  by  the
tooth  of  pain — submitted  to  the  refiner's  fire — sees  clearly  from
the  moment  of  the  passing — has  taken  the  first  degree

Next  come  two  scripts  produced  on  the  same  day  by  Mrs.
Verrall  and  Mrs.  Holland.  I  will  quote  both  and  then  comment
on  the  two  together.

(Mrs.  Verrall's  Script  of  April  8,  1907. 3  p.m.)

[Talbot  Forbes]  will  tell  you  to-night  what  I  said  for  his  mother
to  hear.

The  words  were  from  Maud,  but  you  did  not  understand.  Rosy
is  the  east  and  so  on.

1  "  Though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  "  (Psalm
xxiii.  4).


110


Alice  Johnson.


[part


You  will  find  that  you  have  written  a  message  for  Mr.  Pidding-
ton  which  you  did  not  understand  but  he  did. Tell  him  that.
No  more  now — write  again  this  evening

{Mrs.  Holland's  Script  of  April  8,  1907. 1  p.m.)

There  was  no  real  reason  for  his  action  but  it  would  be  hardly
fair  to  deduce  cowardice  from  it —  More  probably  a  natural  dislike
of  giving  pain —  Under  the  circumstances  it  was  excusable  if  not
allowable —

Peace  on  the  great  heart  of  the  heaving  sea —
And  on  the  rocks  that  fringe  the  ocean  peace —
A  sobbing  weeping  wind — that  flings  the  rain  against  the  window
panes  like  handfuls  of  small-shot.  There  is  no  hail  it  only  sounds
like  hail —  The  poor  blossom  buds  on  the  plum  and  cherry  trees —
and  alas  for  the  fat  green  buds  of  the  tulips  that  held  such  glowing
promise

The  walk  that  leads  to  the  kitchen  garden  is  all  different  this
year —  I  shall  miss  the  bold  green  clump  and  the  honest  round
red  faces  of  my  peonies —  And  the  pink  tinted  fringed  petalled
delicately  scented  substitutes  will  not  be  the  same  to  me —

Yes —  those  of  us  who  are  here  are  bound  to  shrink  from
changes  in  the  places  we  have  known  and  loved — it  impedes  the
vibrations —

Is  the  Paradiso  mental  relaxation  ? I  should  recommend  prose —
English  prose — fiction —
The  constellation  of  Orion

The  tall  spire  shows  above  the  mellow  redness  of  the  wall —  Do
you  remember  that  exquisite  sky  when  the  afterglow  made  the
East  as  beautiful  and  as  richly  coloured  as  the  West —  Martha
became  as  Mary — and  Leah  as  Rachel —

"  With  such  a  purple  and  sea  blue  grace
Love  settling  unawares  " —
He  the  strong  smiter the  earth  compeller —
A  billowy  cloud  heavy  with  blessing — -

The  Brides  Day  How  many  years  ago  ?  Are  the  bells  remem-
bered ?

Mrs.  Holland's  "  Peace  on  the  great  heart,  of  the  heaving
sea,  etc.,"  seems  to  be  a  reminiscence  of  In  Memoriam,  XI.
(the  section  quoted  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  March  6,  1907)  :


lxviii.J  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


Ill


"  Calm  on  the  seas,  and  silver  sleep,

And  waves  that  sway  themselves  in  rest,
And  dead  calm  in  that  noble  breast
Which  heaves  but  with  the  heaving  deep."

This  phrase  of  Mrs.  Holland's  also  recalls  "  The  far  shore  of  a
very  still  and  tideless  sea  "  in  her  script  of  March  13,  1907,
above,  and  is  a  still  closer  paraphrase  of  the  immediate  context
of  cwto?  ovpavo?  aKVfxwv  —  "Calm  be  the  earth,  the  sea,  the
air."

"  The  Paradiso."  This  is  only  the  third  reference  to
Dante 1  in  the  whole  of  Mrs.  Holland's  script  from  July,
1903,  up  to  this  date,  and  it  is  of  interest  because  references  to
Dante  were  for  the  first  time  appearing  in  the  scripts  of  other
automatists,  viz.  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  on  April  3  and  6,  1907, 2
and  in  Mrs.  Piper's  on  April  29,  1907  (see  below).  At  a  later
period,  allusions  to  Dante  became  more  frequent.

"  The  constellation  of  Orion.'''  In  view  of  the  clear  cross-
correspondence  of  the  next  paragraph  with  Mrs.  Verrall's
"  Rosy  is  the  east,"  it  may  be  conjectured  that  Orion  too  is
"  from  Maud," — a  reminiscence  of

"  Orion's  grave  low  down  in  the  west."

{Maud,  Part  III.)

Mrs.  Verrall's  phrase,  "  Rosy  is  the  east,"  alleged  by  her
script  to  come  from  Maud,  is  a  misquotation  from  Maud,
Part  I.  xvii.  :

"  Go  not,  happy  day,

From  the  shining  fields,
Go  not,  happy  day,
Till  the  maiden  yields.

Blush  from  West  to  East,

Blush  from  East  to  West,
Till  the  West  is  East,

Blush  it  through  the  West.

1  The  two  previous  ones  occurred  on  March  15,  1905,  and  Sept.  25,  1906.

2  See  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  227-8,  237  and  262-264.


112


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Rosy  is  the  West,

Rosy  is  the  South,
Roses  are  her  cheeks,

And  a  rose  her  mouth."

Thus  "  Rosy  is  the  east  "  refers  not,  as  might  be  supposed,
to  a  sunrise,  but  to  a  sunset,  and  so  corresponds  closely  to
the  phrase  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  the  same  day,  "  when
the  afterglow  made  the  East  as  beautiful  and  as  richly  coloured
as  the  West."  The  latter,  on  the  other  hand,  seems  to  allude
by  way  of  contrast  to  the  lines  in  the  Holland  script  of  March
13,  1907  (see  above,  p.  107)  :

"  One  star  in  the  crimson  West

And  the  East  is  cold  and  grey."
"  Martha  became  as  Mary,  and  Leah  as  Rachel."  This
sentence,  with  what  follows,  links  together  the  topics  of  this
cross-correspondence  with  others  which  it  will  be  convenient
to  treat  separately  below  (Chapter  VI.)  under  the  heading
"  The  Clavigers."  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  cross-
correspondence  now  under  discussion,  Martha  and  Mary,  and
Leah  and  Rachel  are  simply  two  instances  of  the  contrasted
Active  and  Contemplative  types.

"  With  such  a  purple  and  sea-blue  grace
Love  settling  unawares  "

is  a  miscpiotation  from  Browning's  James  Liee's  Wife  (V.  v.),
the  original  being  :

"  With  such  a  blue  and  red  grace,  not  theirs, —
Love  settling  unawares  !  "
The  misquotation  is  especially  significant  ; for  I  feel  no
doubt  that  the  substitution  of  'L  purple  and  sea-blue  "  for
"  blue  and  red  "  indicates  a  composite  allusion  to  James
Lee's  Wife  and  to

"  the  sea-blue  bird  of  March  "
in  In  Memoriam,  XCI. This  line  by  itself  would  account
only  for  "  sea-blue  "  ;  but  in  the  Memoir  of  Tennyson  (Vol.
II.,  p.  4),  Tennyson,  writing  to  the  Duke  of  Argyll  on  this
verse,  remarks  :

As  to  "  sea-blue  birds  "  etc.,  defendant  states  that  he  was  walk-
ng  one  day  in  March  by  a  deep-banked  brook,  and  under  the


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."  113


leafless  bushes  he  saw  the  king-fisher  flitting  or  fleeting  under-
neath him,  and  there  came  into  his  head  a  fragment  of  an  old
Greek  lyric  poet  "  aXnropfyvpos  eiapos  opvis,"  "  The  sea-purple  or
sea-shining  bird  of  Spring,"  spoken  of  as  the  halcyon.

During  the  first  week  in  January,  1907,  Mrs.  Holland  had,
as  she  told  me  in  a  letter  dated  Jan.  10th,  been  reading  the
Memoir  of  Tennyson,  and  out  of  the  fifteen  scripts  (including
the  one  under  consideration)  written  since  she  read  it,  three
besides  this  one  contain  passages  that  are  clearly  to  be  traced
to  it.  It  therefore  seems  to  me  practically  certain  that  her
misquotation,  "  purple  and  sea-blue,"  is  derived  from  Tenny-
son's letter  just  quoted.

This  view  is  confirmed  by  the  passage  in  the  earlier  part
of  the  same  script,  "  Peace  on  the  great  heart  of  the  heaving
sea,"  which  would  aptly  describe  the  "  halcyon  days  "  of
spring,  when  the  kingfisher  is  supposed  to  build  its  nest  on
the  sea.

We  have  here  then  a  contribution  to  the  central  topic  of
the  cross-correspondence,  and,  in  view  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  remark,
"  The  last  poems  of  Tennyson  and  Browning  should  be  com-
pared "  (see  her  script  of  Feb.  20,  1907,  above,  p.  94),  it  is
noteworthy  that  it  is  given  in  the  form  of  a  composite  Brown-
ing-Tennyson quotation.

"  He  the  strong  smiter — the  earth  compeller."  I  take  this
to  be  a  reference  to  the  two  most  famous  miracles  of  Moses  :

(1)  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  C4o  on  befoi'e  the
people,  and  take  with  thee  of  the  elders  of  Israel  ;  and  thy
rod,  wherewith  thou  smotest  the  river,  take  in  thine  hand,
and  go.  Behold,  I  will  stand  before  thee  there  upon  the  rock
in  Horeb  ;  and  thou  shalt  smite  the  rock,  and  there  shall
come  water  out  of  it,  that  the  people  may  drink.  And  Moses
did  so  "  (Exodus,  xvii.  5,  6).

In  the  version  in  Numbers  (xx.  11)  the  smiting  is  further
emphasised  :  "  Moses  lifted  up  his  hand  and  with  his  rod
he  smote  the  rock  twice  :  and  the  water  came  out  abundantly."

(2)  When  at  the  word  of  Moses  "  the  ground  clave  asunder
that  was  under  [Korah,  Dathan  and  Abiram].  And  the
earth  opened  her  mouth,  and  swallowed  them  up,  and  their
houses,  and  all  the  men  that  appertained  unto  Korah,  and

H


114


Alice  Johnson.


[part


all  their  goods.  Tliey,  and  all  that  appertained  to  them,
went  down  alive  into  the  pit,  and  the  earth  closed  upon
them  :  and  they  perished  from  among  the  congregation  "
(Numbers,  xvi.  31-33).

I  base  this  interpretation  not  merely  on  the  appropriateness
of  the  script  phrases  to  these  incidents,  but  chiefly  on  a  special
association  between  the  Leah  and  Rachel  of  the  script  and
Moses  in  the  cross-correspondence,  "  The  Clavigers,"  given
below,  pp.  135-137.

"  A  billoxoy  cloud  heavy  with,  blessing."  Cf.

"  Hush  !  if  you  saw  some  western  cloud
All  billowy -bosomed,  over-bowed
By  many  benedictions — sun's
And  moon's  and  evening  star's  at  once —

And  so,  you,  looking  and  loving  best,
Conscious  grew,  your  passion  drew
Cloud,  sunset,  moonrise,  star-shine  too
Down  on  you,  near  and  yet  more  near,
Till  flesh  must  fade,  for  heaven  was  here  !  "

(Browning,  The  Last  Bide  Together.)

This  verse  is,  I  think,  the  origin  of  the  phrasing  of  the
script.  But  the  words  are,  I  believe,  intended  to  be  applied
to  the  "  thick  cloud  "  upon  Mount  Sinai,  which  is  so  con-
stantly referred  to  in  the  Mosaic  narrative,1  e.g.  :

"  And  Moses  went  up  into  the  mount,  and  a  cloud  covered  the
mount.  And  the  glory  of  the  Lord  abode  upon  mount  Sinai,  and
the  cloud  covered  it  six  days  :  and  the  seventh  day  he  called  unto
Moses  out  of  the  midst  of  the  cloud.  And  the  sight  of  the  glory
of  the  Lord  was  like  devouring  fire  on  the  top  of  the  mount  in
the  eyes  of  the  children  of  Israel.  And  Moses  went  into  the  midst
of  the  cloud  and  gat  him  up  into  the  mount  :  and  Moses  was  in
the  mount  forty  days  and  forty  nights  "  (Exodus,  xxiv.  15-18).

If  this  script  refers,  as  I  believe  it  does,  to  Moses,  it  is  note-
worthy that  while  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  alludes  only  to  the

1  Another  "  cloud  "  associated  with  Moses,  which  might  more  aptly  be
described  as  "  heavy  with  blessing,"  was  the  "  pillar  of  cloud  "  which  was
the  sign  of  divine  protection  and  guidance  to  the  Israelites  throughout  their
wanderings  in  the  wilderness  (Exodus,  xiii.  21,  etc.).


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


115


contemplative  side — to  his  communion  with  God  on  Mount
Sinai — and  connects  this  with  a  verse  from  Tennyson  (In
Memoriam),  Mrs.  Holland's  supplements  it  by  laying  stress
on  the  active  side  of  his  life, — "  He  the  strong  smiter— the
earth  compeller," — and  then  goes  on  to  point,  as  I  think,
to  the  communion  on  Mount  Sinai  through  a  quotation  from
Browning,  the  whole  being  in  harmony  with  the  idea  of  the
combination  of  the  Active  and  Contemplative  expressed  in
the  preceding  part  of  the  script.


(Extract  from  report  of  sitting  of  Mrs.  Piper  on  April  S,  1007.)

(Present,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  only.)

E.  M.  R.  Do  you  remember  what  the  name  of  Imperator  as  given
by  Mr.  Stainton  Moses  was  ?
St.  Something.  Ignatius.
E.  M.  S.  "  Ignatius  "  ?

I  have  been  trying  to  give  that  to  Mrs.  Verrall  also.
E.  M.  S.  St.  Ignatius. You  have  been  trying  to  give  it  through  Mrs.
Verrall  ?

Yes,  but  it  is  not  the  name  of  + no I  shall  go  over
this  and  see  if  I  can  recall.
E.  M.  S.  Good.

Wasn't  one  Francis  ?
E.  M.  S.  Francis  ?

Yes.

E.  M.  S.  Rector  said  the  other  day  his  name  was  Francis  once.1

And  wasn't  the  other  St.  Something  ?
E.  M.  S.  "  Saint  "  something  ?

Yes. I  will  try  and  recall  this  for  you —

( Waking -stage)

  See  about  Roland. Les  Val.

Good-bye.  .  .  .
Light  in  West
I'll  tell  you  more

If  I  can  reach  over  the  bar,  I'll  repeat  this  letter.  .  .  .


1  At  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  Jan.  2,  1907,  Mr.  Piddington  only  being
present,  he  asked  Rector  what  his  name  was,  and  Rector  answered  :  "  My
name  is  Francis,  or  was  when  I  was  in  the  body."


116


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  above  is  linked  with  Mrs.  Holland's  and  Mrs.  VerralFs
scripts  of  the  same  date  by  the  phrase  (in  the  waking-stage)
""  Light  in  West,"  combined  with  "  If  I  can  reach  over  the
bar," — an  obvious  reference  to  Crossing  the  Bar.

"  Francis  "  seems  to  be  explained  by  the  mention  of  Francis
of  Assisi  in  the  sitting  of  April  29,  1907,  below.  Whether
or  not  there  is  any  justification  for  the  apparent  statement
that  "  Rector  "  represents  St.  Francis,  the  reference  to  Francis
in  the  sitting  gives  a  meaning  to  the  remark  in  the  waking
stage,  "  See  about  Roland — Les-  Val  ;  "  for  I  conjecture  that
"  Les  Val  "  is  an  attempt  at  La  Verna  (otherwise  called  Alverna
or  Alvernia),  the  mountain  given  to  St.  Francis  by  the  Tuscan
noble,  Roland  of  Chiusi  di  Casentino,  where  he  received  the
stigmata.  The  experiences  of  St.  Francis  on  the  Mount  of
La  Verna  were,  as  explained  in  detail  below,  closely  analogous
to  those  of  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai.  It  is  therefore  noteworthy
that  he  should  be  mentioned  in  a  Piper  sitting  on  the  same
day  that  Mrs.  Holland's  script  contained  phrases  which  were
interpreted  on  other  grounds  as  allusions  to  Moses.

{Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mis.  Piper  on  April  29,

1907.)

(Present  Mrs.  Verrall  and  A.  J.)
(Myers  communicating)

When  I  referred  to  the  Greek  words  I  referred  to  a  pic-
ture also. Did  you  U.D.  it  ?
Mrs.  V.  Do  you  mean  when  you  spoke  to  me  you  referred  to  a
picture  ?
Yes,  when  you  were  not  here
Mrs.  V.  I  have  had  some  references  to  a  picture,  but  not,  I  think,
in  connection  with  those  three  Greek  words.
No,  but  I  gave  you  some  reference  to  it  here  and  later  I
referred  to  it  again  when  you  were  not  here
Mrs.  V.  Yes,  wait  a  moment. I  think  I  must  have  this  clear.
May  I  go  through  it  ?
Yes  do.

Mrs.  V.  When  I  was  last  here  I  gave  you  three  Greek  words  and
I  asked  fur  their  meaning  and  associations. You  have


LXVIII.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


117


given  me  the  meaning  through  this  light  and  have  given
me  direct  the  explanation  of  the  associations  which  I
did  not  know.  You  have  also,  so  I  am  told,  given
one  association  through  this  light.  The  only  thing  now
to  complete  it  would  be  to  say  through  this  light  the
name  of  the  Greek  author  of  those  words.

[The  word  "  author  "  was  not  at  first  heard  and  had  to
be  repeated.]

Oh  I  U.D. Author. Oh  yes  I  did  not  catch  it.  You
mean  my  reference  to  Horace
Mrs.  V.  "  My  reference  to  Horace  "  ?

(Hand  shakes) Confusion  about  your  questions, he  is

thinking  of  that  question  also.  also.
Mrs.  V.  Yes,  yes.

[after  a  remark  about  the  Horace  question]

I  remember  my  reference  to  the  Greek  Avords  well,  this

was  what  brought  to  my  mind  the  thought  about
Sasia Saisia too  bad

Mrs.  V.  Print  it.

Francis

S  i  a  a No  you  do  not  U.D.  me  R.
Mrs.  V.  No,  I  know  I  don't.

I  said  the  last  sentence  which  1  gave  you  was  u  k  u  m  en1
Best  to  U.D.  each  word  separately  if  you  can  and  it  will

be  easier  to  U.D.  him.  R.
I  gave  it  here  several  times  and  I  thought  you  U.D.  it
Mrs.  V.  Yes. What  was  it,  Rector,  that you gave me  '{  A
message  about  Horace  ?
Yes

Mrs.  V.  No,  I  don't  think  the  message  has  been  given  to  me  about
Horace. I  have  no  knowledge  of  it.

Oh  yes. I  think  there  is  still  some  muddling  wait  and
I  will  explain

1  did  not  mean  Horace  at  all he  Mr.  Myers  means  Del
Del

Borg Yes S  w  Borg S  w  Borg

1  This  is  no  doubt  intended  for  (Lkvuwv.


118


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Mrs.  V.  Swedenborg  ?
Yes

Mrs.  V.  You  gave  me  a  message  about  Swedenborg.
Yes  I  did

Mrs.  V.  Yes,  you  did,  and  1  found  it  true.

thank  you  now  you  U.D.  Yea  one  tiling  more  cleared
up  at  last

Mrs.  V.  Yes.

now  listen 1  referred  to  another  character  both  here

and  when  you  were  alone
1  wish  to  go  back  to  St.  Paul
my  reference  to  azure a  blue  sea
azure.  .  .  .

look  out  for  the  words  I  am  trying  to  give  you  now  D.  etc.
D.  etc.

Mrs.  V.  Date  1 First  letter  is  I)  ?
begins  with  D

Mrs.  V.  I  know  the  word. 1  told  it  to  my  husband  yesterday.
Shall  I  say  it  %

Yes— What  is  it  %

Mrs.  V.  Dante.

Y^es  yes Very  good  indeed  but  not  right  yet  keep  on

and  it  will  come.
[Later  in  the  sitting  the  name  "  Dante  "  was  written

after many attempts and apparently with  much

difficulty.]

( W  aking-stage)

All  right  I'm  glad  Inferno  Myers.  .  .  .  the  unknown
deity.  .  .  .  Dante's  Inferno —  what  else  matters.  .  .  .
ai'ros  I  have  answered — there's  no  Inferno  here —  I
want  to  say  more — I  wandered  lonely  as  a  cloud —
Myers — Hallam — Arthur Hallam.  .  .  .

As  stated  above,  this  was  the  first  time  that  Mrs.  Verrall
had  seen  Mrs.  Piper  or  had  any  intercourse  with  her  since
the  sitting  of  Jan.  30,  1907.  It  was  not  unnatural,  therefore,
that  some  confusion  ensued  from  her  not  always  understanding


LXVIII.J


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms'


119


to  what  topic  MyersP  was  alluding.  Thus  the  "  picture  "
mentioned  by  him  as  connected  with  "  the  Greek  words  "
was  almost  certainly  the  drawings  of  the  '!  Bar  "  in  the  sitting
of  March  13,  1907  (see  above,  p.  102)  ;  whereas  when  Mrs.
Verrall  replied  that  she  had  had  "  some  references  to  a  picture,"
she  meant  Raphael's  picture,  which  was  one  of  the  subjects  of
the  cross-correspondence  "  Ave  Roma  "  (see  above,  p.  12).

MyerSp  seems  at  first  confused  between  the  "  Horace  Ode  "
question  and  the  "  Greek  words  "  question  (both  having  been
put  to  him  originally  by  Mrs.  Verrall),  but  almost  immedi-
ately realises  that  they  are  distinct,  and  spontaneously  connects
with  the  latter  "  Sasia  Saisia  Francis  S  i  a  a."  There  can,
I  think,  be  little  doubt  that  by  this  St.  Francis  of  Assisi  is
meant.  He  then  goes  on — apparently  in  the  same  connection
— to  refer  to  Swedenborg,  St.  Paul  and  "  a  blue  sea  "  (which
must  imply  a  cloudless  sky)  ;  and  to  a  word  beginning  with
D.,  which  Mrs.  Verrall  suggests  is  Dante.  In  the  waking
stage  he  mentions  "  the  unknown  deity," — probably  in  refer-
ence to  St.  Paul's  sermon  at  Athens  {Acts,  xvii.  23), — and
repeats  the  name  "  Arthur  Hallam."

Swedenborg  and  St.  Paul  are  spoken  of  in  Human  Person-
ality, Vol.  II.,  p.  261,  as  among  "  the  strong  souls  who  have
claimed  to  feel  [the  transcendental  ecstasy],"  together  with
Elijah,  Plotinus,  Dante,  Wordsworth  and  Tennyson  (among
others),  all  of  whom  have  been  referred  to  in  the  course  of
this  cross-correspondence.  It  is  therefore  appropriate  that
MyerSp  should  mention  them  here.

St.  Francis  of  Assisi,  who,  as  we  have  seen,  was  probably
the  Francis  mentioned  in  the  Piper  sitting  of  April  8,  1907,
is  of  special  interest  in  this  connection  on  account  of  the
close  parallelism  between  what  must  be  regarded  as  the  crown-
ing event  of  his  life — the  retreat  on  the  Mount  of  La  Verna
during  which  he  received  the  stigmata — and  the  experiences
of  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai,1  referred  to  in  the  scripts  of  Mrs.
Verrall  and  Mrs.  Holland.  The  parallelism  is  referred  to  in
general  terms  by  more  than  one  of  his  early  biographers,  but

1  It  is  of  course  probable  that  the  Franciscan  Legend  was  moulded  to
some  extent  on  the  Mosaic  Legend,  and  that  this  accounts — at  least  in  part — ■
for  the  resemblances  between  them.  My  argument  relates  only  to  the  resem
blances,  and  is  not  affected  by  any  question  as  to  what  caused  them.


120


Alice  Johnson.


[part


has  not,  so  far  as  I  know,  been  worked  out  in  detail.  It  may
therefore  be  worth  while  to  give  it  more  fully  here.

The  Mount  of  La  Verna  (otherwise  called  Alverna)  in  Tus-
cany was  given  to  St.  Francis  1  by  a  Tuscan  noble,  Roland  of
Chiusi  di  Casentino,  as  a  place  where  he  and  his  friars  might
found  a  solitary  retreat.  (See  "  Roland — Les  Val  "  in  the
Piper  sitting  of  April  8,  1907.)  He  went  there  with  Friars
Masseo,  Angelo  and  Leo,  accompanied  by  a  peasant  on  whose
ass  St.  Francis  rode.  On  their  way  up  the  mountain,  the
peasant  suffered  greatly  from  thirst,  and  St.  Francis  by  virtue
of  his  prayers  caused  a  spring  to  gush  out  of  a  hard  rock
where  water  had  never  been  seen  before  or  since  ;  as  Moses
brought  water  out  of  the  rock  in  Horeb  (  =  Sinai).

After  they  reached  the  place  chosen  for  the  friary,  St.
Francis  stayed  there  for  a  short  time  with  the  other  friars.
Later  he  sought  for  a  more  solitary  and  more  secret  place,
in  which  to  keep  the  fast  of  St.  Michael,  and  a  little  cell  was
made  for  him  on  the  further  side  of  a  great  chasm.  Friar
Leo  alone  came  with  him  to  this  retreat,  but  remained  always
at  a  distance  from  him  except  when  at  certain  hours  he  came
to  bring  him  food.  In  this  solitary  place  St.  Francis  spent
the  forty  days  of  the  fast.  Similarly,  Moses  was  accompanied
for  some  way  up  Mount  Sinai  by  Aaron,  Nadab,  Abihu,  and
seventy  elders  ;  and  went  on  further  alone  with  his  minister
Joshua,  and  remained  in  the  mount  forty  days  and  forty
nights  {Exodus,  xxiv.).

One  night  in  the  early  part  of  September,  Friar  Leo,  going
to  take  food  to  St.  Francis,  saw  him  praying  in  the  wood.
Then  he  saw  a  flaming  torch  2  come  down  from  heaven  and
rest  on  the  head  of  St.  Francis,  and  out  of  the  flame  he  heard
a  voice  speaking  in  words  which  he  could  not  understand,
but  afterwards  St.  Francis  told  him,  "  God  was  in  that  flame
thou  sawest,  who  spake  to  me  in  that  vision,  even  as  of  old
He  had  spoken  to  Moses."

On  the  morning  of  Holy  Cross  Day  (Sept.  14,  1224),  before

1  The  account  of  St.  Francis  here  given  is  taken  from  The  Little  Flowers
of  St.  Francis,  trans,  by  T.  Okey.

2  Cf.  the  Pentecostal  "  cloven  tongues  like  as  of  fire  "  (Acts,  ii.  3),  associated,
e.g.  in  Keble's  Whitsunday  hymn,  with  the  manifestations  to  Moses  on  Mount
Sinai.


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms.''  121

dawn,  St.  Francis,  praying,  saw  the  vision  of  the  Seraph
and  received  the  stigmata.  Then  the  whole  mount  of  La
Verna  seemed  for  about  an  hour  to  flame  forth  with  so  brilliant
a  light  that  it  was  reported  by  some  shepherds  to  the  friars.
Also  some  muleteers,  thinking  the  sun  had  risen,  arose  and
saddled  their  beasts.  Then  they  saw  that  light  wane  and
the  real  sun  rise.

Cf.  "  The  sight  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  [upon  Mount  Sinai]
was  like  devouring  fire  on  the  top  of  the  mount  in  the  eyes
of  the  children  of  Israel  "  {Exodus,  xxiv.  17).

St.  Francis,  having  completed  in  solitude  the  forty  days'
fast  of  St.  Michael,  "  descended  from  the  mountain,  bearing
with  him  the  likeness  of  the  Crucified,  engraven,  not  on  tables
of  stone  or  of  wood  by  the  craftsman's  hand,  but  written  on
his  members  of  flesh  by  the  finger  of  the  Living  God."  1  Cf.
"  He  gave  unto  Moses,  when  he  had  made  an  end  of  communing
with  him  upon  Mount  Sinai,  two  tables  of  testimony,  tables
of  stone,  written  with  the  finger  of  God  "  {Exodus,  xxxi.  18)  ;
and  "  And  the  tables  were  the  work  of  God,  and  the  writing
was  the  writing  of  God,  graven  upon  the  tables  "  {Exodus,
xxxii.  1G).

St.  Francis  is  also  compared  by  St.  Bonaventura  to  Elijah  :
"  [He  was]  wholly  set  on  fire  by  the  kindling  of  the  Seraph,
and,  like  the  prophet,  borne  aloft  in  a  chariot  of  fire  ;  where-
fore it  is  reasonably  proven  and  clearly  apparent  from  the
witness  of  his  whole  life  that  he  came  in  the  spirit  and  power
of  Elias."  2

We  find  too  that  his  ecstasy,  like  that  of  Plotinus,  was
(according  to  St.  Bonaventura)  associated  with  the  calm  of
external  nature  :  "In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  aforesaid
Mount  Alverna,  before  that  the  holy  man  had  sojourned
there,  a  cloud  was  wont  to  arise  from  the  mountain  and  a
fierce  hailstorm  to  lay  waste  the  fruits  of  the  earth.  But
after  that  blessed  vision,  to  the  amazement  of  the  inhabitants,
the  hail  ceased,  that  the  excellence  of  that  heavenly  appari-
tion and  the  virtue  of  the  stigmata  that  were  there  imprinted
might  be  attested  by  the  very  face  of  the  heavens,  made
calm  beyond  its  wont."

1  Life  of  St.  Francis,  by  St.  Bonaventura  (trans,  by  Miss  E.  Gurney  Salter).

2  Prologue  to  St.  Bonaventura's  Life.


122


Alice  Johnson.


[part


{Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  April  30,

1907.)

(Present  :  A.  J.  and  afterwards  Mrs.  Verrall.)
(Myers  communicating)

I  promised  to  give  my  reply  to  the  Greek  words  and  as
soon  as  I  saw  the  light  departing  I  caught  Rector  and
gave  it  to  him  and  he  will  now  give  it  to  you
A.  J. Yes,  do,  please.

As  I  believe  it  will  be  a 'better  proof  of  identity  than  it
would  be  if  I  gave  it  to  Mrs.  V. Do  you  U.D.
A.  J. Yes,  quite.

Well  my  reply  to  the  Greek  words  is  this They  reminded

me  of  Homer's  Illiard  [sic]
[After  a  little  general  conversation  between  A.  J.  and
MyeiSp,  Mrs.  Verrall  comes  in,  and  Myersp  repeats  to
her  that  he  has  given  "  Homer's  Illiard  "  to  A.  J.  as
his  reply  to  the  Greek  words. After  some  talk  about
the  Horace  Ode  question,  etc.,  Myersp  referred  again
to  the  Greek  words  :]
You  asked  for  author's  name. It  reminded  me  of  Pa  Soc
Socr  tse
Mrs.  V.  Socrates  ?

Yes — it  reminded  me  of  Homer  also. I  got  Socratese
in  my  mind,  and  it  came  through  your  question.  .  .  .

( Waking-stage)

(Jlad  there's  some  one

Thanatos —  Thanatos  1 —  Glad  I'm —  Thanatos —  San.

arpal  okim  ajjpecky  oan  alon — akonoos — .  .  .  .
[These  words,  which  were  written  down  phonetically  by

A.  J.,  were  probably  intended  for  the  Greek  words.]

With  Thanatos  of.  "  Moaning  at  the  bar  when  I  put  out
to  sea  "  in  the  waking  stage  of  March  6,  1907,  and  "  Death  "
in  the  waking  stage  of  March  13,  1907. The  word  "  Thanatos  "

1  This  word — the  Greek  for  "death  " — had  been  mentioned  to  and  trans
lated  by  G.  P.  at  some  sittings  held  by  Dr.  Hodgson  and  Professor  Newbold
in  1895  (see  Proc,  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  47),  so  that  it  must  be  assumed  that  Mrs.
Piper  knew  what  it  meant.


lxviii.] Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


123


had  also  been  mentioned  in  the  waking  stage  on  April  17  and
April  23,  1907,  and  was  treated  in  Mr.  Piddington's  report  1
as  a  separate  cross-correspondence,  corresponding  with  "  Mors,
etc.,"  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  April  16,  1907  (see  below,
p.  139),  and  various  references  to  Death  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
script  of  April  29,  1907.

Mrs.  Verrall  did  not  at  the  time  of  this  sitting  see  any  point
in  the  reference  to  Socrates  and  Homer's  Iliad  in  connection
with  the  Greek  words.  But  later  she  remembered  a  passage
relating  to  Socrates  in  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  273-4,
as  follows  :

Surely  even  that  special  jDremonitiou  which  is  sometimes  spoken
of  as  a  thing  of  terror, — the  warning  or  the  promise  of  earthly
death, — should  to  the  wise  man  sound  as  a  friendly  summons,  and
as  a  welcome  home.  Let  him  remember  the  Vision  which  came  to
Socrates  in  the  prison-house  ; — then,  and  then  only,  showing  in
an  angel's  similitude  the  Providence  which  till  that  hour  had  been
but  as  an  impersonal  and  invisible  Voice  ; — but  iioav  the  "  fair  and
white-robed  woman,"  while  friends  offered  escape  from  death,  had
already  spoken  of  better  hope  than  this,  and  had  given  to  Achilles'
words  a  more  sacred  meaning, — "  On  the  third  day  hence  thou
comest  to  Phthia's  fertile  shore."

It  does  not  seem  probable  that  Mrs.  Piper  had  read  this
passage  ;  and  even  if  she  had,  it  is  very  improbable  that  she
would  have  realised  that  "  Achilles'  words  "  are  a  line  from
the  Iliad,  no  indication  to  that  effect  being  given  in  the  book.
If  it  was  to  this  that  MyersP  referred,  it  fits  in  closely  with
his  other  associations  with  ch'to?  ovpavos  olkv/ulcop,  namely,
Crossing  the  Bar,  and  Death.

(Mrs.  Verrall's  Script  of  May  1,  1907.)

Evangel 2

then  speed  the  word

1  See  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  295-304.

2  A  probable  reference  to  the  Evangelist  St.  Mark,  since  the  same  word  is
used  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Oct.  27,  1905,  in  connection  with  St.  Mark  ;
and  on  May  13  (1907) — the  date  given  later  in  this  script — she  produced  a
script  interpreted  by  Mr.  Piddington  to  refer  to  Myers's  poem  Venice,  in
which  St.  Mark  is  mentioned  rather  prominently  (see  Proc,  Vol.  XXVI.,
pp.  184  ct  seq.).


124


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Sleep  Death's  twin  brother  1

I  stretch  my  hand  across  the  gulf  of  time — that  was  said  before
to  you.  the  intervening  space  twixt  world  and  world,  the  lucid
interspace.2  I  want  you  to  try  a  special  experiment.  On  May  13
wait  for  a  message  I  cannot  tell  how  it  will  reach  you — but  there  is
some  special  interest  in  that  day.  Tell  Helen  too — she  might  help.
Don't  ask  more — a  veil  is  best — but  in  the  end  you  will  understand
and  find  the  record  complete.

Try  to  say  the  eagle  soaring  over  Plato's  tomb.

(Drawing  of  bird  with  large  outspread  wings.)

write  sloAvly  for  him  to  repeat  again

v  a  G  i  t  u  s  Wailing

kwkvtos  [wailing.]

We  cease  and  may  the  blessings  of  the  Most  High  rest  on  you
all  Farewell  (— 1~)  R

"  /  stretch  my  hand  .  .  .  the  lucid  interspace "  refers  us
back  to  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Feb.  25,  1907,  see  above,
p.  93,  while  in  her  script  of  Feb.  12,  1907  (p.  88)  occurred  the
words  "  Nor  ever  falls  the  least  light  .  .  .  ",  quoted  from
the  same  passage  in  Lucretius.

"  The  eagle  soaring  over  Plato's  tomb.'''  This  phrase  (used
of  Plotinus  and,  of  course,  familiar  to  Mrs.  Verrall)  is  quoted
twice  in  Human  Personality,  Vol.  I.,  p.  120  and  Vol.  II.,  p.
201.  It  is  also  quoted  in  Myers's  Classical  Essays  ;  Greek
Oracles,  p.  98,  just  before  his  translation  of  the  Oracle  given
at  Delphi  in  answer  to  the  question  "  Where  is  now  Plotinus'
soul  ?  "  some  reminiscences  of  which  appeared  in  Mrs.  Ver-
rall's script  of  Dec.  17,  1906,  see  above,  p.  31.

Finally,  the  name  Plotinus  was  given  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,
as  follows  :

(Extract  from  report  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  May  6,  1907.)
(Present  :  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  A.  J.)
(Myers  communicating)

1  "  When  in  the  down  I  sink  my  head,

Sleep,  Death's  twin-brother,  times  my  breath  ;
Sleep,  Death's  twin-brother,  knows  not  Death,
Nor  can  I  dream  of  thee  as  dead  :  "

(Tennyson,  In  Mcmoriam,  LXVIII.).

2  Tennyson,  Lucretius.


Lxvni.] Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."  125


Will  you  say  to  Mrs.  Verrall

Plotinus
E.  M.  S.  I  will. What  is  that  ?

My  answer
E.  M.  S.  C4ood

To  autos  ouranos  oknmen
E.  M.  S.  Very  good  indeed. She  will  be  very  glad. I  believe
that  is  what  she  wanted.


Chronological  Summary  of  the  avro<;  oupavo^  aKVfxwv  Incident.
1907.

Jan.  15  (Mrs.  P.). Statement  that  the  message  "  Celestial

Halcyon  days  "  had  been  given  to
Mrs.  V.

Jan.  22  (Mrs.  V.). Script  containing  word  "  supern."  Mrs.

V.  is  reminded  by  this  of  an  early
script  containing  word  "  supernal."

Jan.  23. Mrs.  V.  determines  to  ask  MyersP  what  are  his

associations  with  oi'tos1  ovpavo?  ciKVfjLwv.

Jan.  29. At  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  Mrs.  V.  puts  this

question  to  MyersP.

Jan.  30  (Mrs.  P.). Satellite and stars beam  brightly

(?  Myers,  To  Tennyson)  Larches  and
Laburnum  (?  In  Mem.)  Ulysses
(?  Tennyson's  poem).

Feb.  12  (Mrs.  V.). Voyage of Maeldune. Noises of  the

western  sea.  Merlin's  prophetic
vision.  The  Passing  of  Arthur.
Where  blows  not  any  wind,  etc.
(Refs.  to  Tennyson's  poems,  involving,
perhaps,  a  ref.  to  Maximus  of  Tyre.)

Feb.  20  (Mrs.  V.).  Chiaroscuro  (?  ref.  to  Myers's  To  Tenny-
son and  Renewal  of  Youth)  Peace.
Adventure  forth.

Feb.  25  (Miss  V.).  In  the  silence  of  the  sleep-time  (Brown-
ing's Epilogue).

Feb.  25  (Mrs.  V.). The  lucid  interspace  of  world  and  world

— where  the  gods  of  Lucretius  quaff


126


Alice  J oh m son.


[part


their  nectar  (Tennyson's  Lucretius  and
Lotos-Eaters).

Feb.  26. Mrs.  V.  hears  of  Miss  V.'s  quotation  from  Browning.

Feb.  26  (Mrs.  V.).  Stars  and  Satellites  (Myers,  To  Tenny-
son). May  there  be  no  moaning  at
the  bar  (Tennyson,  Grossing  the  Bar).
The  fighter  fights  one  last  fight  (Brown-
ing, Epilogue  and  Prospice).  After
the  earthquake,  the  fire  and  the  wind
(Moses  on  Sinai, — mentioned  in  In
Mem.,- — and  Elijah  on  Horeb).

Mar.  6  (Mrs.  V.). Calm  is  the  sea,  etc.  (Tennyson,  In  Mem.).

Mar.  6  (Mrs.  P.).  Cloudless  sky  beyond  the  horizon.  Moan-
ing at  the  bar.  Arthur  Hallam  (Tenny-
son, Crossing  the  Bar  and  In  Mem.).

Mar.  11  (Mrs.  V.). The  shadow  of  the  Parthenon. Plato —

dim-seen  forms — half  seen  (Myers,  On
Watts'1  Works  and  Renewal  of  Youth).
A  verse  in  Tennyson,  Plato  and  the
shadow,  etc.  (Tennyson,  In  Mem.).
Presences  on  the  eternal  hills — the
lonely  hills.

Mar.  11-12. Mrs.  V.  finds  close  parallelism  between  Plotinus'

view  of  conditions  necessary  for  trance
and  Tennyson's  in  In  Mem.,  XCIV.-

xcv.

Mar.  13  (Mrs.  P.). I  said  to  Mrs.  V.  I  had  crossed  the  Bar

(Tennyson,  Crossing  the  Bar).  My
own  lines  in  which  I  referred  to  Stare
(Myers,  Renewal  of  Youth).  Arthur
Hallam  (In  Mem.).  Death.

Mar.  13  (Mrs.  H.). The  far  shore  of  a  very  still  and  tideless

sea.  We  gain  the  same  goal  through
different  gates  [of  death].  How  many
times  ere  I  be  dead,  etc.  (Myers,
Sonnet  in  Reneival  of  Youth  vol.).

Mar.  18  (Mrs.  H.). Description  of  different  ways  of  dying.

Apr.  8  (Mrs.  V.). Rosy  is  the  East  (Tennyson,  Maud).

Apr.  8  (Mrs.  H.). Peace  on  the  great  heart  of  the  heaving

sea, etc. The afterglow made  the


LXVIII.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms'*


127


East  as  richly  coloured  as  the  West —
Leah  became  as  Rachel —  With  such  a
purple  and  sea-blue  grace,  etc.  (Brown-
ing, James  Lee's  Wife,  and  Tennyson,
In  Mem.).  The  strong  smiter — the
earth  compeller  (?  Moses).  A  billowy
cloud  (Browning,  Last  Ride  Together).

Apr.  8  (Mrs.  P.). Francis. Roland. Les Val. Light  in

West.  If  I  can  reach  over  the  Bar
(Crossing  the  Bar).

Apr.  29  (Mrs.  P.). Sasia  Saisia  Francis  Siaa  Swedenborg —

St.  Paul — a  blue  sea.  The  unknown
deity.  There's  no  Inferno  here.  Ar-
thur Hallam  (In  Mem.).

Apr.  30  (Mrs.  P.). Greek  words  reminded  me  of  Homer's

Illiard  [sic]  and  Socrates.  Thanatos.

May  1  (Mrs.  V.). Sleep,  Death's  twin  brother  (In  Mem.).

The  lucid  interspace  of  world  and
world  (Tennyson,  Lucretius).  The
eagle  soaring  over  Plato's  tomb  (Plo-
tinus).

May  6  (Mrs.  P.). Plotinus  is  my  answer  to  autos  ouranos

okumen  [sic].


CHAPTER  VI.

Cross-Correspondence  : "  The  Clavigers."

This  cross-correspondence  is  closely  linked,  as  will  be  seen,
with  the  "  Ave  Roma  immortalis  "  case  of  a  year  before,  and
with  the  avTo?  ovpavo?  ukv/awv  case  that  was  going  on  con-
temporaneously. It  is  linked  with  the  former  through  its
allusions  to  Hercules  and  St.  Peter,  the  Club-bearer  and
the  Key-Bearer  ;  to  Pope  Julius  II.  and  to  Rome  ;  and  with
the  latter  through  its  allusions  to  Plotinus,  to  East  and  West,
to  Moses  and  to  Leah  and  Rachel.  But  so  many  topics  are
involved  that  it  seemed  best  to  treat  separately,  as  far  as


128


Alice  Johnson.


[part


possible,  those  that  for  convenience  have  been  classified
under  the  present  category.

The  first  two  scripts,  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  are  so  clearly  con-
nected together  that  I  will  first  quote  both  and  then  comment
on  the  two  combined.


/xaivo/xevos  6  'H/oa/vA?;? [Herakles  is  mad].

Hercules  Furens  [The  mad  Hercules].  Tell  your  husband  from
me  there  is  a  passage  in  the  Herakles  not  understood,  about  the
pillar  and  the  tying  to  it.  An  old  story  lies  behind  that  but  it  means
something  in  Euripides  that  A  W  V  has  not  yet  seen.  Tell  him
to  look  at  it  again — it  is  the  passage  about  the  pillar  and  the  thong —
the  pillar  at  the  foot  of  wh.  lay  the  dead  children.  Tell  your  hus-
band to  read  that  again — not  to  mind  the  mythology  but  to  see
another  point  wh.  will  please  him.

I  have  long  wanted  to  say  this  but  the  words  were  never  there
— now  all  the  words  are  there  and  I  think  I  have  made  the  meaning
clear  ask  elsewhere  for  the  Bound  Hercules.  'Hpa/v-A?;?  Xvo/xevos
[Unbound  Heracles]  is  the  sequel.

Binding  and  loosing  Seo-juoto-i  Xvtols  [with  fetters  that  may
be  loosed.]  not  adamantine  fetters  1  but  fetters  that  link  and
loose.  Something  about  snapping  his  bonds  in  sunder.  Tell
A  W  V  he  will  understand.

{Mrs.  Verrall's  Script  of  March  25,  1907.)

Claviger  the  bearer  of  the  Key  and  Club
clavem  gerens  trans  Pontem


trans  Helles  pontem  et  insuper  mare  ad  urbem  antea  Byzantineam
postea  de  ipsius  nomine  nominatam. [bearing  the  key  (or  club)


{Mrs.  Verrall's  Script  of  March  4,  1907.)


1  Cf.  Aeschylus,  Prometheus  Vinchts,  11.  <i  and  64.


lxviii.] Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms.''


129


across  the  Bridge  across  Helle's  bridge  and  over  the  sea  to  the
city  formerly  Byzantine  afterwards  called  from  his  own  name.]

The  Club  and  Key — East  and  West —  look  for  the  Eastern  sign
of  the  Club  ex  pede  Herculem  [from  the  foot  (you  may  know)
Hercules]  The  Hercules  story  comes  in  there  and  the  clue  is  in
the  Euripides  play  if  you  could  only  see  it.

Bound  to  the  pillar — I  told  you  before  of  Sebastian, — it  is  the
same  story  of  the  archer  and  the  binding  to  the  pillar.

1  want  a  special  message  to  get  to  you.  I  have  tried  several
times,  but  you  have  not  understood.  I  don't  know  where  it  Avent
wrong.  But  let  Piddington  know  when  you  get  a  message  about
shadow, — remember  the  Virgilian  line  indignantis  sub  umbras  1  [to
the  angry  shades].  To  you  they  are  shadows — like  the  shadows  in
Plato's  cave,  but  they  are  shadows  of  the  real.

quae  cum  vides  bene  comprehendere  possis  quae  tibi  nunc  fusco
colore  obdita  paene  obscurata  videntur,  et  tamen  in  somniis  ali-
cpiando  UMBRARUM  volitantia  corpora  percipis- — immo  pro
corporibus  animas  dicere  melius —

quae  tibi  per  somnum  mentem  immortalia  tangunt

haec  cape,  quis  captis  non  [sic]  desine

[which  when  you  see  you  will  well  understand  what  now  hidden
with  dark  colour  seems  to  you  almost  obscured  and  yet  in  dreams
sometimes  you  see  the  flitting  bodies  of  SHADES — rather  for  bodies
it  were  better  to  say  souls.  The  immortal  things  that  touch  your
mind  in  sleep,  seize  them  and  when  they  are  seized  do  not  cease.]

no,  not  that

summum  adtingere  [to  attain  the  highest]  comes  in
It  means  that  there  and  thus  does  this  mortal  put  on  immortality,2

by  keeping  hold  of  the  things,  the  true  things  seen  in  sleep.  Why

could  he  not  say  that  ? It  seems  simple  enough  to  me.
et  nos  attingimus  caelum  [we  too  attain  heaven]
But  when  so  many  things  flit  through  the  mind  it  is  hard  to

seize  and  hold  only  what  is  true. I  think  I  have  this  time.  Ask

if  he  understands.

The  shadow  of  a  shade

that  is  better umbrarum  umbras  [shades  of  shades]

a-Kias  eiSoXov  [the  image  of  a  shade]  was  what  I  wanted  to  get

written.  Good-bye.

1  Virgil,  JEneid,  XII.  952,  "  indignata  sub  umbras."

2  See  I.  Cor.  xv.  53.

I


130


Alice  Johnson.


[part


As  to  the  script  of  March  4,  1907,  the  Hercules  Fur  ens
of  Euripides  was  one  of  the  plays  included  in  Dr.  Verrall's
studies  of  Euripides,  but  neither  he  nor  Mrs.  Verrall  was  able
to  conjecture  what  particular  point  in  the  story  had,  as  alleged
by  the  script,  been  missed  by  him,  nor  has  any  further  light
been  thrown  on  this  since.

The  latter  part  of  the  script  lays  stress  on  the  contrast
between  the  Bound  and  the  Unbound  Heracles.  In  the  play
the  tying  of  Heracles  to  the  pillar,  after,  in  his  madness,  he
had  killed  his  wife  and  children,  is  an  important  incident,
but  there  is  no  particular  point  in  the  untying  after  he  recovers
his  reason.  "  Bound  and  Unbound,"  however,  naturally
suggests  Prometheus,  as  is  further  indicated  by  the  phrase
"  adamantine  fetters  "  (borrowed  from  the  Prometheus  Vinctus
of  iEschylus) — fetters  from  which  he  was  delivered  by  Heracles.
I  take  it,  then,  that  the  general  intention  of  this  script  is  to
point  to  the  contrast  of  Binding  and  Loosing, — a  topic  which
is  carried  on  and  developed  in  the  script  of  March  25,  1907.

This  script  by  its  opening  reference  to  the  Claviger — the
bearer  of  the  Key  and  Club — refers  back  to  Mrs.  Verrall's
script  of  March  5,  1906  (see  above,  p.  20),  in  which  the
Claviger  had  been  interpreted  by  Mrs.  Verrall  herself  as  a
joint  allusion  to  Hercules  and  St.  Peter.  It  may  then  be  taken
as  certain  that  this  script  too  refers  to  St.  Peter  as  well  as  to
Hercules.

But  Mr.  Piddington  1  pointed  out  that  the  only  Latin  writer
who  uses  "  Claviger  "  in  the  sense  of  'L  Key-bearer  "  is  Ovid,
who  in  Fasti,  I.  applies  the  term  to  the  two-headed  Roman
deity  Janus.  Janus  holds  in  his  right  hand  a  staff  and  in
his  left  a  key  ;  he  is  the  door-keeper  of  the  courts  of  heaven,
and  with  his  double  face  is  able  to  see  the  East  and  the  West
at  the  same  time.  In  the  same  book  of  the  Fasti  Ovid  calls
Heracles  "  Claviger,"  viz.  "  Club-bearer."

The  epithet  Claviger,  then,  suggests  three  different  charac-
ters, Heracles,  Janus,  and  St.  Peter.  Heracles  is  partly
Eastern,  partly  Western,  and  his  Club  is  one  of  the  signs  of
the  Oriental  elements  in  his  mythology. Janus  is  a  purely

1  I  here  summarise  the  comments  on  this  script  made  by  Mr.  Piddington
in  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  253-258  ;  but  the  reader  who  is  interested  in  the
classical  allusions  should  refer  to  that  report  for  full  details.


LXVHI.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


131


Western  deity,  but  the  Key  with  which  he  opens  and  shuts,
and  his  power  of  seeing  the  East  and  West  simultaneously
are  instances  of  various  antithetical  powers  attributed  to  him.
To  St.  Peter,  an  Oriental  and  first  bishop  of  the  Western
Church,  belongs  the  Power  of  the  Keys,  which  admit  into
or  exclude  from  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  and  the  power  of
binding  and  loosing.1

Further,  St.  Peter,  according  to  one  tradition,  was  mar-
tyred on  the  Janiculum,  the  hill  of  Janus  ;  while  Ovid  has  a
story  that  Heracles  was  the  first  to  throw  dummy  figures
instead  of  live  human  beings  from  the  Sublician  Bridge  into
the  Tiber  as  sacrifices  to  Vulcan,  this  being  the  oldest  bridge
across  the  Tiber,  and  leading  straight  to  the  Janiculum.

The  words  "  trans  pontem  trans  Hellespontem "  seem  to
involve  a  play  on  pontem  and  (Helles)  pontum  which  can
allude  only  to  Xerxes  ;  for  it  was  he  who  built  the  pontem
(bridge)  between  Abyclos  and  Sestos  by  means  of  which  the
Persian  army  crossed  Helles  pontum  {i.e.  the  sea  of  Helle.  or
the  Hellespont)  to  Greece.  The  point  of  this  allusion  is  probably
as  another  instance  of  the  union  of  East  and  West.

"  The  city  formerly  Byzantine,  afterwards  called  by  his  own
name  "  is  of  course  Constantinople,  to  which  Constantine
removed  the  seat  of  the  Roman  Empire  after  he  became  sole
ruler  of  the  East  and  West  portions  of  it.  The  Asian  part
of  the  Empire  naturally  became  more  closely  bound  up  with
the  West  through  this  action  of  Constantine 's.

The  latter  part  of  the  script,  beginning  :  "I  want  a  special
message  to  get  to  you  .  .  .  ",  is  the  part  that  is  connected  with
the  avros  ovpavos  aKUfiwv  incident,  being  no  doubt  founded,
at  least  partly,  as  Mrs.  Verrall  herself  observed,  on  a  quota-
tion from  Plotinus  in  Human  Personality  (Vol.  II.,  p.  290,  on
the  page  preceding  that  from  which  the  Plotinian  passage
quoted  above,  p.  84,  is  taken)  as  follows  :

When  from  that  cloud  encompassing  of  unforgetful  souls  some
voice  is  heard, — as  long  ago, — there  needs  no  heroism,  no  sanctity,
to inspire the apostle's kiriOvfua  eZs  to  dvaXva-ai,  the  desire  to

1  "  I  will  give  unto  thee  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  :  and  whatso-
ever thou  shalt  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in  heaven  :  and  whatsoever
thou  shalt  loose  on  earth  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven  "  (St.  Matthew,  xvi.  19).
Cf.  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Mar.  4,  1907.


132


Alice  J  oh  v  sow.


[part


lift  our  anchor  and  to  sail  out  beyond  the  bar.  ...  "As  the
soul  hasteneth,"  says  Plotinus,  "  to  the  things  that  are  above,  she
.will  ever  forget  the  more  ;  unless  all  her  life  on  earth  leave  a
memory  of  things  done  well.  For  even  here  may  man  do  well,  if
he  stand  clear  of  the  cares  of  earth.  And  he  must  stand  clear  of
their  memories  too  ;  so  that  one  may  rightly  speak  of  a  noble  soul
as  forgetting  those  things  that  arc  behind.  And  the  shade  (if
Herakles,  indeed,  may  talk  of  his  own  valour  to  the  shades  ;  but
the  true  Herakles  in  the  true  world  will  deem  all  that  of  little  worth  ;
being  transported  into  a  more  sacred  place,  and  strenuously  engag-
ing, even  above  his  strength,  in  those  battles  in  which  the  wise
engage."

In  this  passage  Plotinus  is  alluding  to  Odyssey,  XL  601-3,
where  a  distinction  is  drawn  between  the  shade  (e'lSwXov)  of
Heracles  in  Hades  and  Heracles  himself  (auras')  in  Heaven.
Mr.  Piddington  points  out  that  the  same  lines  in  the  Odyssey
must  have  been  the  source  of  Tennyson's
"  No  visual  shade  of  some  one  lost

But  he.  the  Spirit  himself,  may  come.  ..."

(In  Memoriam,  XCIII.)

(This  stanza  has  already  been  quoted  in  commenting  on
the  reference  to  Tennyson  and  Plato  in  Mrs.  Verralks  script
of  March  11.  1907,  see  above,  p.  100.)

The  same  words,  e'lSajXov  1  and  auras ,  are  used  in  the  same
sense  in  Plato's  allegory  of  the  prisoners  in  the  cave,  which
is  referred  to  in  the  script  of  March  25,  1907.

The  meaning  of  all  the  latter  part  of  the  script  seems  to  be
that  the  images  seen  in  trance  or  ecstasy  are  in  themselves
unreal,  but  that  they  represent  a  reality  : — "  like  the  shadows
in  Plato's  cave,  bat  they  are  shadows  of  the  reed."

San  Pietro  in  Vincoli.
Since  the  script  of  March  25,  1907,  was  taken  by  Mrs.
Verrall  to  refer  to  St.  Peter  as  well  as  to  Hercules,  I  think
there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  "  binding  and  loosing  "
and  "  snapping  his  bonds  in  sunder  "  of  March  4,  1907,  also

1  It  is  interesting  that  the  word  "  eidolon  "  was  used  in  some  early  scripts
of  Mrs.  Holland's,  commented  on  in  my  first  report,  Proc,  Vol.  XXI.,
pp.  215-218.  The  note  on  it  supplied  to  me  by  Mrs.  Verrall  and"  there
printed  was  not  written  until  March,  1908.


LXVIII.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


133


refer  to  St.  Peter  as  well  as  to  Hercules,  the  two  scripts  being
so  closely  connected  together.  The  phrase  "  binding  and
loosing  "  refers,  I  take  it,  to  the  powers  attributed  to  the
Apostle,  which  were  in  some  respects  analogous  to  those
attributed  to  Hercules  (e.g.  in  the  hitter's  delivery  of  Pro-
metheus from  his  bonds).  "  Something  about  snapping  his
bonds  in  sunder  "  refers,  I  think,  to  the  chains  with  which
St.  Peter  himself  was  bound  in  prison.

Two  imprisonments  of  St.  Peter  1  are  recorded  :  (1)  when  he
was  imprisoned  by  Herod  in  Jerusalem  and  delivered  by  an
angel,  when  "  his  chains  fell  off  from  his  hands  "  and  the  iron
gate  "  opened  to  them  of  his  own  accord  "  (Acts,  xii.  1-10)  ;
(2)  when,  as  asserted  by  some  early  ecclesiastical  writers,  he
was  confined  with  St.  Paul  in  the  Mamertine  prison  at  Rome
for  eight  or  nine  months  up  to  the  time  of  his  martyrdom.

The  church  of  San  Pietro  in  Vincoli  in  Rome,  to  which  1
believe  that  special  reference  is  made  in  these  scripts  and  in
a  corresponding  one  of  Mrs.  Holland's,  contains  as  its  chief
relic  the  chains  alleged  to  be  those  with  which  St.  Peter  was
bound  in  the  Mamertine  prison.

There  are  a  number  of  different  legends  as  to  the  acquisi-
tion of  these  chains  by  the  church.  According  to  one  version,
they  were  sent  originally  to  Jerusalem,  and  afterwards  pre-
sented by  the  Bishop  of  Jerusalem  to  Eudoxia,  who  put  one
in  the  Basilica  at  Constantinople  and  sent  the  other  to  her
daughter,  the  Empress  Eudoxia  at  Rome.  The  latter  built
the  church  as  a  shrine  for  the  chain.  Shortly  afterwards  the
second  chain  was  sent  to  Rome  and  miraculously  united  itself
to  the  first.2  The  miracle  was  beheld  in  a  vision  by  Pope
Leo  I.3  ;  the  day  on  which  it  occurred,  August  1st,  being
always  afterwards  kept  as  a  festival  when  the  sacred  chain
is  exhibited.

In  the  sacristy,  where  the  shrine  containing  the  chain  is
kept,  is  a  picture  by  Domenichino  of  the  freeing  of  St.  Peter
from  prison,  and  a  copy  of  the  same  picture  is  in  the  church
itself.

1  Besides  the  occasion  when  he  and  St.  John  were  "  put  in  hold  "  for  a
single  night  at  Jerusalem  (Acts,  iv.  3.)

2  Rom  und  die  Campagna,  by  Dr.  Th.  Gesell  Fels,  p.  80fi.

3  See  Hare's  Walks  in  Rome,  Vol.  II.,  p.  50.


134


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Tins  church,  then,  may  be  said  to  represent,  as  perhaps  no
other  church  does,  St.  Peter  Bound  and  Unbound,  both  in
the  East  and  in  the  West  ;  which  latter  feature,  together
with  the  union  of  the  Roman  chain  with  that  from  Con-
stantinople, is  another  instance  of  the  combination  of  West
and  East  which  we  have  seen  to  be  one  of  the  factors  of  the
whole  complex  cross-correspondence.

St.  Sebastian.

"  /  told  you  before  of  Sebastian,  it  is  the  same  story  of  the
archer  and  the  binding  to  the  pillar."

St.  Sebastian  is  of  course  often  represented  in  art  as  bound
to  a  pillar  (like  Hercules  in  the  Hercules  Furens)  and  generally
as  pierced  with  arrows.  The  pillar  and  the  arrows  suggest
an  association  with  Hercules  ;  but  I  believe  that  the  main
intention  of  the  script  is  again  to  point  to  the  church  of  San
Pietro  in  Vincoli.  One  of  the  chief  features  of  this  church
is  a  remarkable  old  mosaic  of  St.  Sebastian,  described  by  Dr.
Gsell  Eels  as  a  unique  example  of  the  Byzantine  influence
in  Rome,1  and  reproduced  in  the  illustration  given  below
(Plate  XI).

A  fresco  in  the  church  ascribed  to  Pollajuolo  represents
the  translation  of  the  body  of  St.  Sebastian,  as  Depidsor
Pestilitatis,  from  the  catacombs  to  the  church.  This  occurred
during  the  plague  of  680,  when  a  citizen  dreamt  that  it  would
cease  as  soon  as  the  body  of  St.  Sebastian  was  brought  into
the  church  and  an  altar  erected  to  him.  A  tablet  near  the
altar  tells  the  story  of  the  plague  and  its  cessation.

From  this  time  onwards  St.  Sebastian  was  invoked  as  a
protector  against  the  plague,  and  his  fame  gradually  spread
through  the  whole  of  Europe.2

Mrs.  Verrall  was  in  Rome  once  only,  in  March,  1892,  as
related  above  in  connection  with  the  "  Ave  Roma  immortalis  "
cross-correspondence  (see  p.  21),  and  a  note  in  her  diary
records  that  she  visited  S.  Pietro  in  Vincoli  on  March  30,
1892. When,  in  the  autumn  of  1912,  I  mentioned  to  her

1  Rom  und  die  Campagna,  p.  810.

2  See  Hare's  Walks  in  Rome,  Vol.  II.,  p.  52  ;  and  Mrs.  Arthur  Bell's  Lives
and  Legends  of  the  Evangelists,  Apostles  and  other  early  Saints,  p.  239


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."  135

that  the  Church  contained  a  famous  mosaic  of  St.  Sebastian,
she  remembered  nothing  about  it.  But  when  later  I  showed
her  a  photograph  of  it,  she  wrote  :

On  reflection  I  am  sure  that  we  must  have  seen  the  St.  Sebastian
mosaic.  The  photograph  of  it  brought  it  back  to  me  vividly,
and  we  were  very  much  interested  in  mosaics  and  went  to  all  the
churches  where  there  were  any  interesting  mosaics.  What  I  did
not  and  do  not  recall  is  that  this  mosaic  was  in  the  church  of  San
Pietro  hi  Vincoli.

(Mrs.  Holland's  Script  of  April  8,  1907.)

Is  the  Paradiso  mental  relaxation  ? I  should  recommend  prose
— English  prose — fiction.
The  constellation  of  Orion.

The  tall  spire  shows  above  the  mellow  redness  of  the  wall —
Do  you  remember  that  exquisite  sky  when  the  after  glow  made
the  East  as  beautiful  and  as  richly  coloured  as  the  West — ■  Martha
became  as  Mary — and  Leah  as  Rachel —

"  With  such  a  purple  and  sea  blue  grace
Love  settling  unawares  "
He  the  strong  smiter  the  earth  compeller
A  billowy  cloud  heavy  with  blessing —

The  whole  of  this  script  is  given  above  (p.  110)  in  connec-
tion with  aiiros  oi>fjavo<s  aKUfxwv,  as  exemplifying  the  contrast
or  union  of  the  East  and  the  West,  and  of  the  Active  and
Contemplative  types.

The  mention  of  Martha  and  Mary  with  Leah  and  Rachel
indicates  that  the  idea  at  the  back  of  the  script  was  not  the
Biblical  conception  of  Leah  and  Rachel,  but  the  mediaeval
conception  of  them  as  the  Old  Testament  "  types  "  cor-
responding to  the  New  Testament  Active  and  Contemplative
"  types  "  of  Martha  and  Mary.  The  most  famous  literary
expression  of  this  idea  of  Leah  and  Rachel  occurs  in  Dante's
Purgatorio,  and  the  mention  of  the  Paradiso  earlier  in  the
script  shows  that  the  scribe  had  Dante  in  mind.  Rachel  is
mentioned  several  times  in  the  Commedia,  but  Leah  occurs  once


136


Alice  Johnson.


[part


only,  and  then  with  Rachel,  in  the  following  passage  (Purga-
torio,  XXVII.  92- 108), 1  in  which  Dante  describes  his  dream
before  the  dawn  of  the  day  on  which  he  entered  the  Earthly
Paradise  :

"  sleep  fell  on  me,  sleep  which  oft  doth  know  the  news  ere  the
fact  come  to  pass.

In  the  hour,  methinks,  when  Cytherea,  who  seemeth  ever  burning
with  fire  of  love,  first  beamed  from  the  east  on  the  mount,

meseemed  to  behold  in  a  dream,  a  lady,  young  and  fair,  going
along  a  plain  gathering  flowers  ;  and  singing  she  said  :

'  Know,  whoso  asketh  my  name,  that  I  am  Leah,  and  go  moving
my  fair  hands  around  to  make  me  a  garland.

To  please  me  at  the  glass  here  I  deck  me  ;  but  Rachel  my  sister
ne'er  stirs  from  her  mirror,  and  sitteth  all  day.

She  is  fain  to  behold  her  fair  eyes,  as  I  to  deck  me  with  my  hands  :
her,  contemplation  ;  me,  action,  doth  satisfy.'  "

This  passage  gives  us  Leah  and  Rachel  only  ;  Martha  and
Mary  are  not  mentioned  in  the  Commedia  at  all,  but  in  the
Temple  Edition  there  is  a  note  to  this  passage  as  follows  :

[In]  this  third  and  last  vision  of  Dante's  .  .  .  Leah  and  Rachel,
the  Old  Testament  types  of  the  Active  and  Contemplative  Life
appear  to  him.  ...  In  the  New  Testament  the  types  are  repre-
sented by  Martha  and  Mary,  see  Convivio,  IV.  17  ;  85-111.

On  the  other  hand,  Gary's  Translation  of  Dante  has  the
following  note  on  Purgatorio,  XXVII.  101  :

By  Leah  is  understood  the  active  life  as  Rachel  figures  the  con-
templative. Michel  Angelo  has  made  these  allegorical  personages
the  subject  of  two  statues  on  the  monument  of  Julius  II.  in  the
church  of  S.  Pietro  in  Vincoli.

Conversely  Dr.  Gsell  Pels,  in  speaking  of  the  Leah  and
Rachel  of  the  tomb,2  refers  to  Purgatorio,  XXVII.  108.  Since,
further,  it  is  well  known  that  Michael  Angelo  greatly  admired
Dante,  and  earnestly  desired  to  be  allowed  to  erect  a  monu-

1  Temple  Edition  ; translation  by  Thomas  Okey.

2  Rom  und  die  Campagna,  p.  808.


LXVIII.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


137


meiit  to  him  at  Florence  instead  of  labouring  at  the  tombs
of  persons  in  whom  he  took  no  interest,  there  seems  little
doubt  that  his  Leah  and  Rachel  were  intended  to  embody
Dante's  conception  of  them.  In  any  case  his  is  the  most
famous  representation  of  them  in  art,  as  Dante's  is  in  litera-
ture, and  I  believe  that  the  script  alludes  to  both.

If  this  interpretation  is  correct,  we  should  expect  to  find
in  the  script  some  allusion  to  the  most  famous  feature  of  the
tomb  (and  of  the  Church  of  San  Pietro  in  Vincoli),  namely,
the  statue  of  Moses  ;  and  this,  I  believe,  is  to  be  found  (as
suggested  in  the  previous  chapter,  p.  113)  in  the  phrase  "  He
the  strong  smiter,  the  earth-compeller."  This  is  a  not  in-
appropriate description  of  the  Moses  of  the  tomb,  which
represents  the  active  ruler,  lawgiver,  and  judge,  and  not  the
contemplative  side  of  Moses'  life. (See  below,  Plate  XII.)

Mrs.  Holland,  who  is  unfamiliar  with  Dante's  works,  knew
nothing  of  the  passage  about  Leah  and  Rachel  in  the  Purgatorio.
She  has  never  been  to  Rome,  and  consequently  has  not  seen
Michael  Angelo's  Moses  ;  nor  did  she  know  that  it  is  placed
between  statues  of  Leah  and  Rachel  until  I  told  her  of  this
fact,  having  myself  discovered  it  some  time  after  Leah  and
Rachel  had  been  mentioned  in  her  script.  She  had  attached
no  meaning  to  "  the  strong  smiter,  the  earth-compeller."

Michael  Angelo  was  working  at  this  tomb  at  intervals  for
a  great  part  of  his  life,  1505-1545.  It  was  originally  ordered
in  1505  by  Julius  II.,  who,  as  mentioned  above  (see  p.  23),
pulled  down  the  old  St.  Peter's  church,  and  planned  and
began  the  present  building  (of  San  Pietro  in  Vaticano),
with  a  special  view  to  its  containing  his  own  tomb,  which
was  planned  on  a  colossal  scale,  with  some  forty  statues  in
marble  and  bronze,  besides  bas-reliefs  and  ornamental  figures.
After  the  death  of  Julius  II.  in  1513,  the  work  was  stopped
for  a  time  and  resumed  at  intervals  by  the  orders  of  his  rela-
tions. The  tomb  was  finally  placed  in  San  Pietro  in  Vincoli,
of  which  he  had  been  Cardinal.  Of  the  figures  on  it,  Moses
is  by  Michael  Angelo,  and  Leah  and  Rachel  are  either  his
work,  or  at  least  designed  by  him  and  executed  partly  by
him  and  partly  under  his  supervision.  The  Virgin  and  Child,
and  the  Prophet  and  Sibyl,  above,  were  also  designed  by
Michael  Angelo.


138


Alice  Johnson.


("part


The  two  "  Bound  Captives  "  or  "  Slaves  "  now  in  the
Louvre  were  executed  by  Michael  Angelo  for  the  tomb,  as
were  the  four  unfinished  figures  now  in  the  Grotto  Buon-
talenti  of  the  Boboli  Gardens  at  Florence.  One  figure  from
each  of  these  sets  is  shown  in  Plates  XIII.  and  XIV.  They
were  meant  to  represent  the  provinces  conquered  by  the
warlike  Pope  Julius  II.

If  I  am  right  in  thinking  that  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  of  March
4  and  25,  1907,  refer  to  this  church  (which,  as  explained  above,
represents  St.  Peter  Bound  and  Unbound)  and  to  St.  Peter's
powers  of  binding  and  loosing,  it  seems  not  unreasonable
to  conjecture  that,  in  the  repeated  phrases  about  binding  and
persons  bound  to  pillars,  etc.,  which  no  doubt  apply  primarily
to  Hercules  and  St.  Sebastian,  a  secondary  reference  is  intended
to  these  symbols  of  the  material  power  not  only  claimed  but
freely  exercised  by  a  Pope  who  acted  as  a  Club-bearer  rather
than  a  Key-bearer.

[Extract  from  report  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  April  8,  1907.)
(Present  :  Mrs.  Sidgwick  only.)
(Myers  communicating)

Do  you  remember  euripides.
E.  M.  S.  What  is  that  ? lt  Euripides  "  ?  1

I  meant  to  say  Harold.
E.  M.  S.  "  Harold  "  ?

Yes  well

E.  M.  S.  To  whom  did  you  say  "  Harold  "  ?
to  Mrs.  V.

An  extract  from  a  later  part  of  the  same  sitting,  about  St.
Francis,  is  given  above,  p.  115,  and  the  phrase  "  Light
in  West,"  uttered  in  the  waking-stage  is  linked  with  Mrs.
Holland's  "  the  afterglow  made  the  East  as  beautiful  and
as  richly  coloured  as  the  West "  of  the  same  date.  The
mention  of  "  Euripides  "  here  links  with  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts

1  Mrs.  Sidgwick  noted  that  she  had  no  doubt  of  the  reading  but  for  its
apparent  irrelevance,  since  she  did  not  then  know  that  the  name  had  occurred
in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script.


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


139


of  March  4  and  25,  1907,  discussed  above,  and  with  Mrs.
Holland's  immediately  below.

(Mrs.  Holland's  Script  of  April  16,  1907.)
Maurice. Morris.  Mors.

And  with  that  the  shadow  of  death  fell  upon  him  and  his  soul
departed  out  of  his  limbs.

Leopold — Lucus  [?]
Margaret

To  fly  to  find  Euripides  Philemon

1  want  you  to  understand  me  but  1  have  so  few  chances  to
speak — it's  like  waiting  to  take  a  ticket  and  I  am  always  pushed
away  from  the  pigeon  hole  before  I  can  influence  her  mind —  No
the  scribe's —

A  peck  of  pickled  pepper  1 —

The  first  part  of  this  script  was  treated  by  Mr.  Piddington
(in  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  297)  as  a  separate  cross-correspond-
ence, connected  with  "  Thanatos  "  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  on
Apr.  17,  23,  and  30,  1907  (see  above,  p.  122),  and  with  various
references  to  Death  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  April  29,  1907.

The  scripts  of  these  three  automatists  are  no  doubt  closely
connected  together  on  this  point  ;  but  the  reference  to  Death
in  Mrs.  Holland's  is  also  linked  with  the  mention  of  Euripides
later  in  the  same  script,  for  this,  as  will  be  seen  immediately,
refers  especially  to  the  death  of  Euripides.

Mr.  Piddington,  in  his  original  comments  on  the  latter  part
of  this  script,2  suggested  that  the  combination  of  "  Leopold  "
with  "  Euripides  "  was  intended  to  link  it  with  the  "  Euripides  "
and  "  Harold  "  of  Mrs.  Piper's  script  just  quoted,  Leopold  and
Harold  being  the  names  of  Mr.  Myers's  two  sons.

"  A  peck  of  pickled  pepper  "  is  no  doubt  one  of  the  punning
references  to  Mrs.  Piper  that  are  so  frequent  in  all  the  scripts.
This  particular  one  had  been  used  by  Mrs.  Holland  on  June
13,  1906  :  "  The  next  pick  of  pickled  pepper  will  be  rather
a  surprising  one. Mrs.  Piper  is  becoming  an  Eddyite."  3

"  Margaret  "  in  the  Holland  script  almost  always  means

1  "  Peter  Piper  picked  a  peck  of  pickled  pepper."

2  See  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  215-217. 3  This  statement  was  incorrect.


140


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Mrs.  Verrall.  The  two  names  (one  explicit  and  the  other
implicit)  seem  to  indicate  that  a  cross-correspondence  with
both  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Piper  is  being  aimed  at.

"  Lucas  1 — To  fly  to  find  Euripides — Philemon."  This  is
a  reference  to  Browning's  Aristophanes''  Apology  ;  including
a  Transcript  from  Euripides  ;  being  the  Last  Adventure  of
Balaustiou.  The  "  Transcript  from  Euripides  "  is  Browning's
translation  of  the  Hercules  Fur  ens  ;  so  that  we  find  in  this
script  the  fulfilment  of  the  statement  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script
of  March  4,  1907  :  "  Ask  elsewhere  for  the  Bound  Hercules."
Balaustiou,  the  "  Wild-pomegranate-flower,"  is  "  the  lyric
girl  "  from  the  island  of  Rhodes,  who  saved  a  shipful  of  her
fellow-countrymen  by  reciting  to  the  Sicilians  the  Alcestis  of
Euripides,  in  return  for  which  they  allowed  the  ship  that
was  carrying  her  to  take  refuge  in  the  harbour  of  Syracuse
from  pursuing  pirates.2  This  is  the  subject  of  the  poem
Balaustiou' 's  Adventure  ;  including  a  Transcript  from  Euri-
pides, i.e.  Browning's  translation  of  the  Alcestis.  Balaustion
is  therefore  especially  associated  with  the  two  plays  of  Euri-
pides dealing  with  the  adventures  of  Heracles.

In  the  second  poem  she  is  fleeing  from  Athens  after  its
concpiest  by  Sparta.  On  the  voyage  she  tells  her  fellow-
travellers,  of  whom  the  dramatist  Philemon  is  one,  how
Aristophanes  with  his  boon-companions  came  to  her  house  a
year  earlier,  on  the  night  that  the  news  of  Euripides'  death
reached  Athens,  and  how  she  then  recited  the  Hercules  Fur  ens,
the  original  tablets  of  which  had  been  given  to  her  by  Euri-
pides himself,  in  memory  of  her  first  adventure  with  his  other
Heracles  play,  as  a  parting  gift  when  he  left  Athens.

The  association  of  Philemon  with  Euripides  in  the  script
shows  that  the  reference  is  to  Aristophanes''  Apology.  The
phrase,  "  To  fly  to  find  Euripides,"  is  derived  from  two  pas-
sages in  it  :  one  is  the  opening  of  the  final  section  of  the  poem,
the  words  being  spoken  by  Balaustion  :

And  see  if  young  Philemon, — sure  one  day
To  do  good  service  and  be  loved  himself, —
If  he  too  have  not  made  a  votive  verse  !

1  The  fourth  letter  of  this  word  in  the  original  script  is  doubtful  ;  it  might
be  a  or  u. I  follow  Mr.  Piddington's  reading  of  it  as  u.

2  The  story  is  from  Plutarch,  but  Balaustion  is  Browning's  own  creation.


LXVIII.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


141


"Grant,  in  good  sooth,  our  great  dead,  all  the  same,
Retain  their  sense,  as  certain  Avise  men  say,
I'd  hang  myself — to  see  Euripides  !  "  1

The  other  passage,  which  is  near  the  beginning  of  the  poem,
is  clearly  connected  with  this,  both  by  its  general  tenor  and
by  the  double  introduction  of  the  phrase  "  as  the  wise  assert  .
Here  too  Balaustion  is  addressing  Philemon  :

Why  should  despair  be  ? Since,  distinct  above

Man's  wickedness  and  folly,  flies  the  wind

And  floats  the  cloud,  free  transport  for  our  soul

Out  of  its  fleshly  durance  dim  and  low, —

Since  disembodied  soul  anticipates

(Thought-borne  as  now,  in  rapturous  unrestraint)

Above  all  croAvding,  crystal  silentness,

AboAre  all  noise,  a  silver  solitude  : —

Surely,  Avhere  thought  so  bears  soul,  soul  in  time

May  permanently  bide,  "  assert  the  wise,"

There  live  in  peace,  there  Avork  in  hope  once  more —

0  nothing  doubt,  Philemon  !  .  .  .

Belie Are — o'er  falsehood,  truth  is  surely  sphered,

O'er  ugliness  beams  beauty,  o'er  this  Avorld

Extends  that  realm  where,  "  as  the  wise  assert,"

Philemon,  thou  shalt  see  Euripides

Clearer  than  mortal  sense  perceived  the  man  !

With  this  Ave  may  compare  the  passage  (quoted  beloAv)
from  the  Dissertationes  of  Maximus  of  Tyre,  in  which  Mr.
Piddington  discovered  the  same  combination  of  two  passages
from  the  Odyssey  that  he  found  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of
Feb.  12,  1907  (see  above,  p.  90).  Mrs.  Verrall,  it  will  be
remembered,  produced  the  combination  through  a  composite
quotation  from  Tennyson's  Passing  of  Arthur  and  Lucretius  ;
Avhile  Mrs.  Holland's  script  gives  (implicitly)  a  general  parallel
to  the  Maximus  passage  through  a  quotation  from  BroAA'ning,
which — characteristically — speaks  of  work,  as  well  as  of  peace,
in  the  future  life.

Maximus  (like  BroAvning)  speaks  of  the  A'ision  that  may

1  The  last  three  lines  are  a  translation  of  lines  actually  written  by  Philemon.
His  introduction  into  the  poem  is  an  anachronism,  as  ho  was  not  born  until
about  302  B.C.,  that  is,  43  years  after  the  death  of  Euripides.


142


Alice  Johnson.


[part


be  seen  for  a  while  by  the  soul  that  is  still  embodied  as  an
anticipation  of  what  it  will  look  on  permanently  when  freed
from  the  body  (I  give  Mr.  Piddington's  paraphrase  1  of  the
Dissertationes,  XVII.  10-11)  :

If  with  upright  and  steadfast  soul  a  man  gaze  without  growing
dizzy  on  that  unsullied  light,  and  look  not  back  earthwards  ;  if
he  stop  his  ears,  and  turn  his  sight  and  all  his  other  senses  inwards
upon  himself  ;  if,  utterly  unheeding  of  earthly  cares  and  afflictions,
of  pleasures  and  honours,  of  glory  and  infamy,  he  let  himself  be
led  by  true  reason  and  steadfast  love  .  .  .  then,  as  he  goes  thither-
wards and  leaves  the  world  behind  him,  always  that  which  is  in
front  of  him  shall  grow  clear  and  brilliant,  preluding,  as  it  were,
the  Godhead.  So,  as  he  travels  on,  he  shall  hear  the  Godhead,
and,  the  journey  done,  shall  behold  it  face  to  face.

Yet  his  journey's  goal  is  not  the  firmament  of  heaven,  nor
such  bodies  as  are  therein,  .  .  .  but  he  must  pass  beyond  these,
and  overstep  the  firmament  until  he  reach  the  real  goal  and  its
perfect  calm,

"  Where  neither  is  great  winter-storm,  nor  is  it  ever  wet
with  rain  ;  but  most  clear  air  is  spread  about  it  cloudless,
and  the  white  light  floats  upon  it  "  ;

and  where  no  fleshly  affection,  such  as  vexes  the  wretched  soul

here  below,  can  trouble  the  vision.

"  Lucus  "  in  the  script  no  doubt  means  Awco?,  the  ruler
of  Thebes,  a  character  in  the  Hercules  Furens.  In  accordance
with  his  habit  of  using  the  English  u  for  the  Greek  v,  Browning
transliterates  this  name  as  Lukos  (instead  of  Lycus,  Lykus,
or  Lykos),  so  that  the  script  version  "  Lucus,"  like  the  com-
bination of  Philemon  with  Euripides,  points  to  Browning's
poem  rather  than  to  the  original  play.

Chronological  Summary  of  "  The  Clavigers."

1907.

Mar.  4  (Mrs.  V.). Hercules Furens. The binding to  the

pillar.  Euripides.  Ask  elsewhere  for
the  Bound  Hercules.  Hercules  Un-
bound is  the  sequel.  Binding  and
loosing.

*See  Proc,  Vol.  XXVI.,  p.  240.


LXVIII.]


Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


143


Mar.  25  (Mrs.  V.).  Claviger — the  bearer  of  the  Key  (Peter)

and  Club  (Hercules).  East  and  West.
Hercules.  Sebastian  (Church  of  S.
Pietro  in  Vincoli).  The  shadows  in
Plato's  cave — shadows  of  the  real.
The  true  things  seen  in  sleep.  The
shadow  of  a  shade,  etc.

Apr.  8  (Mrs.  H.). East  and  West. Leah  became  as  Rachel

(Church  of  S.  Pietro  in  Vincoli).  With
such  a  purple  and  sea-blue  grace,  etc.
(Browning,  James  Lee's  Wife,  and
Tennyson,  In  Mem.).  The  strong
smiter — the  earth  coinpeller  (?  Moses —
Church  of  S.  Pietro  in  Vincoli).  A
billowy  cloud  (Browning,  Last  Ride
Together).

Apr.  8  (Mrs.  P.). Euripides — Harold.

Apr.  10  (Mrs.  H.). Mors. The  shadow  of  Death.  Leopold.

Lucus.  To  fly  to  find  Euripides.
Philemon  (Browning,  Aristophanes"
Apology,  including  translation  of  the
Hercules  Furens).


CHAPTER  VII.

Some  General  Conclusions.

Continued  study  of  the  scripts  seems  to  make  more  and
more  evident  what  we  began  to  suspect  long  ago — namely,
that  the  part  played  by  the  "  writers  "  is  by  no  means  a
passive  one.  They  are  not  like  machines  in  the  hands  of  an
external  operator  with  no  will  or  initiative  of  their  own  ;
it  seems  rather  that  their  own  minds  are  working  actively,
but  under  the  guidance  of  a  supervising  intelligence — what  I
have  called  above  the  "  author.''  The  result  is  a  joint  com-
position, in  which,  however,  it  sometimes  seems  possible  to
disentangle  the  product  of  the  writer  from  the  product  of  the


144


Alice  Johnson.


[part


"  author,"  and  I  propose  to  attempt  this  in  regard  to  some  of
the  cases  given  above.

But  in  the  first  one — "  Ave  Roma  immortalis  " — there  are
hints  of  the  influence  of  yet  another  person,  namely,  Dr.
Verrall  ;  and  this  may  be  instructively  compared  with  "  The
one-horse  dawn  "  case  in  Mrs.  Verrall' s  first  Report,1  when
Dr.  Verrall  in  1901  made  a  definite  attempt  to  convey  to
her  telepathically  the  three  Greek  words  ixovoiruihov  e?  aa>,
and  fragments  both  of  the  Greek  words  and  their  English
equivalents,  as  well  as  allusions  to  them,  appeared  in  her
script.

The  words  were  taken  from  a  passage  set  for  translation  in
one  of  the  papers  in  the  Classical  Tripos  Examination  of  1873,
in  which  Dr.  Verrall  had  been  a  candidate.  But  among  the
script  references  to  them  occurred  the  remark —

Find  the  herb  moly  that  will  help — it  is  a  guide  tlVTei  Kai
Te'Ao?  X)/\f/e/f  [sic].  [Seek  and  you  will  find  at  last,  or,  Seek  and
you  will  grasp  the  end.]

One  of  the  most  familiar  associations  in  English  2  literature
with  "  the  herb  moly  "  is.  of  course,

"  that-  moly
Which  Hermes  once  to  wise  Ulysses  gave  "

in  Milton's  Comus,  and  Mrs.  Verrall  thought  that  her  script
was  alluding  to  this.  Some  three  years  later  she  found  that
the  passage  containing  these  lines  had  been  set  as  the  subject
for  Latin  Hexameters  in  the  same  Tripos.  The  recollection
of  this  had  entirely  gone  from  Dr.  VerralFs  mind,  so  much  so
that  even  the  sight  of  the  passage  in  Comus  (after  Mrs.  Ver-
rall had  made  the  discovery  in  the  spring  of  1005)  did  not
revive  in  him  any  memory  of  having  translated  it  in  the
Tripos.

Thus  Mrs.  VerralFs  script  had  registered  not  only  an  existing
mental  impression  of  her  husband's,  but  also  a  completely

1  Proc,  Vol.  XX.,  pp.  150-107.

-  Some  of  our  foreign  critics,  such  as  Dr.  Maxwell,  have  not  always  suffi-
ciently considered  that  phrases  in  the  scripts  which  are  unfamiliar  to  them
may  at  once  suggest  to  an  English  reader  some,  to  him  well  known,  literary
association


LXVIII.]


Som,e  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


145


forgotten  past  impression,  once  closely  associated  with  the
first.

It  is  conceivable  that  the  idea  of  the  "  herb  moly  "  came
into  the  script  through  telepathy  from  Dr.  Arthur  Myers
(who  had  died  about  7  years  before)  who  had  been  a  fellow-
candidate  with  Dr.  Verrall  in  the  Tripos  of  1873  and  an  inti-
mate friend  of  his,  and  to  whom  some  parts  of  the  script
seemed  to  allude.  But,  if  this  case  stood  alone,  it  would  no
doubt  seem  more  probable  that  Dr.  Verrall  had  been  the  tele-
pathic agent  both  in  regard  to  what  he  deliberately  and  con-
sciously tried  to  transfer  (the  words  hovoitwXov  e?  aw),  and
in  regard  to  what  he  certainly  did  not  consciously  try  to
transfer,  namely,  the  lines  from  Comus  which  must  have
been  within  his  subliminal  recollections.

In  ordinary  experiments  in  telepathy  we  meet  occasionally
with  cases  where  some  subliminal  idea  of  the  agent's  seems
to  have  been  transferred  to  the  percipient,  though  it  is,  I
think,  very  rarely  one  which  has  so  completely  lapsed  from
memory  as  in  this  case  of  Dr.  Verrall's.  Also,  what  happened
in  this  case  was  something  more  than  the  mechanical  repro-
duction of  a  lapsed  impression.  Not  only  did  "  the  herb  moly  "
emerge,  but  it  was  coupled  with  the  remark  that  it  would
help — would  be  a  guide.  Somebody,  then,  not  only  remem-
bered "  the  herb  moly  ",  but  was  able  to  reason  in  an  intelligent
way  about  it.  The  recollection  may  be  attributed  to  Dr.
Verrall's  subliminal  mind  ;  it  is,  I  think,  less  easy  to  attri-
bute to  him  the  power  of  putting  together  subliminally  the
two  impressions — one  supraliminal  and  the  other  subliminal —
and  reasoning  upon  them  in  this  way.  The  mental  action
involved  suggests  some  one  with  a  more  complete  grip  of  the
whole  circumstances  than  he  presumably  had.

Ave  Roma.

In  the  "  Ave  Roma  "  case,  there  is  no  clear  evidence  that
Dr.  Verrall  exercised  any  influence  at  all  ;  we  know,  at  least,
that  he  had  no  intention  of  doing  so  ;  and  from  the  fresh  facts
as  to  the  meaning  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  adduced  in  this
paper,  it  looks  as  if  he  had  had  less  influence  on  them  than
was  surmised  at  the  time,  and  as  if  the  action  of  the  "  author  "

K


146


Alice  Johnson.


[part


head  been  a  larger  factor  in  the  whole  cross-correspondence
than  was  represented  in  my  first  report  on  it.

Dr.  Verrall,  it  appears,  guessed  correctly  the  meaning  of
the  first  script  as  referring  to  Raphael's  picture  ;  he  did
not  tell  Mrs.  Verrall  what  he  had  guessed,  but  it  might  be
imagined  that  he  had  telepathically  influenced  her  next  scripts.
Here,  however,  the  "  author  "  intervenes  ;  and — the  first
subject  having  been  guessed — gives  her  a  totally  different
subject  for  the  second  script,  while  wording  it  in  such  a  way
that  it  might  be  thought  to  be  only  a  continuation  of  the
first  subject.  And  this  was  what  we  all  originally  took  it
to  be.

The  riddle  in  this  second  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  answers
fairly  well  to  the  definition  given  at  the  beginning  of  this
paper, — something  so  veiled  and  obscure  that  no  one  guesses
its  meaning  at  the  time,  and  yet  so  explicit  that  when  the
clue  is  found,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  meaning.

"  Pagan  and  Pope  ;  the  Stoic  Persecutor  and  the  Christian  ;
Gregory — not  Basil's  friend — ought  to  be  a  clue."  Here  are
two  pairs  of  associated  persons,  and  a  fifth,  somehow  con-
nected with  them.  One  only  of  the  five  persons  is  described
quite  explicitly, — the  "  Stoic  Persecutor,"  who  can  only  be
Marcus  Aurelius.  "  Gregory  "  may  be  one  of  several  Gregorys,
but  it  is  pretty  clear  from  the  whole  context  that  he  must  be
a  Pope,  and  he  must  have  some  relation  to  the  two  pairs.
Mrs.  Verrall  imagined  at  the  time  that  there  might  be  some
reference  in  the  script  to  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  but  did  not
think  that  this  completely  explained  it,  since  it  accounted
only  for  the  Pagan,  Pope,  and  Christian.  On  the  other  hand,
my  solution  of  the  five  persons  as  Trajan  and  St.  Peter,  Marcus
Aurelius  and  St.  Paul,  and  Pope  Gregory  I.,  fits  the  script
exactly,  and  I  think  that  any  one  who  reads  the  whole  case
can  hardly  doubt  its  correctness.

Here  the  facts  given  in  the  scripts  are  within  the  knowledge,
supraliminal  or  subliminal,  not  only  of  Dr.  Verrall,  but  of
Mrs.  Verrall  ;  but  the  special  point  selected  for  mention  in
the  script — the  connection  of  the  Columns  with  St.  Peter
and  St.  Paul — is  one  so  unfamiliar  to  them,  or  so  unimportant
in  their  eyes,  that  neither  of  them  recognised  the  allusion  to
it,  and  when  I  told  Mrs.  Verrall  of  it,  she  could  not  remember


LXVIII.]


Some  "Concordant  Automatisms.'"


147


that  she  had  ever  heard  the  fact  before.  My  full  discussion
of  the  case,  however,  shows  that  this  point  adds  considerably
to  the  significance  of  the  whole  cross-correspondence  by
helping  to  complete  the  rough  sketch  of  an  outline  of  the
history  of  Rome,  which  I  take  to  be  implied  in  it.

I  think  it  is  difficult  to  attribute  either  to  Dr.  Verrall  or  to
Mrs.  Verrall  the  intention  to  give  a  thumb-nail  sketch  of  the
history  of  Rome,  such  as  can  be  elicited  from  the  scripts.  If
I  am  right  in  thinking  that  the  intention  is  there,  it  must
rather  be  attributed  to  the  "  author."

Another  essential  feature  in  the  case  is  the  connection
with  Mrs.  Holland's  script.  The  intention  to  make  some
such  connection  was  not  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  conscious  mind,
because  it  was  not  one  of  the  days  fixed  for  her  experiments
with  Mrs.  Holland.  Still  less  was  the  intention  in  Dr.  Ver-
rall's mind  ;  he  was  interested  only  in  interpreting  Mrs.
Verrall's  scripts.  Nevertheless,  if  the  connection  between  the
scripts  of  the  two  writers  had  been  only  a  simple  and  straight-
forward similarity  in  phrasing  or  idea,  we  should  naturally
put  it  down  to  telepathy  between  them.  But  it  is  far  from
being  simple  and  straightforward.  It  involves  not  simple
reproduction,  but  a  good  deal  of  reasoning  and  intelligence.
The  fresh  facts  adduced  in  this  paper  show  that  the  Holland
phrase  "  Ave  Roma  immortalis  "  is  even  more  appropriate
to  the  Verrall  scripts  with  their  summary  of  Roman  history
than  it  appeared  when  the  case  was  first  published.

Somebody  must  have  grasped  the  whole  gist  of  those  scripts,
in  a  way  that  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Verrall  certainly  had  not  con-
sciously grasped  them,  to  be  able  to  make  so  intelligent  a
summing  up  of  them.  And  the  Holland  phrase  "  How  could
I  make  it  any  clearer  without  giving  her  the  clue  ?  "  shows
that  somebody  was  reasoning  about  them  in  a  way  no  one  of
us  up  to  that  time  had  consciously  reasoned  ;  somebody  saw
the  advantage  of  their  obscurity  for  evidential  purposes  as
no  one  of  us  saw  it.

The  Sevens  Case.

Another  case  where  there  are  indications  of  the  telepathic
influence  of  a  living  person  other  than  one  of  the  automatists
is  the  much-discussed  "  Sevens  Case  "  (Prnc,  Vol.  XXIV..


148


Alice  Johnson.


[PART


pp.  222-258).  It  will  be  remembered  that  six  automatists
were  concerned  in  this  case,  and  that  the  cross-correspondence
combined  in  itself  two  main  topics,  one  (a)  coinciding  with
the  contents  of  a  sealed  envelope  which  Mr.  Piddington  had
planned  to  transmit  posthumously,  variations  on  the  theme
of  Seven,  and  the  other  (b)  various  passages  from  Dante  having
relation  to  the  number  Seven.  The  second  topic  was  unknown
to  Mr.  Piddington,  since  he  was  very  unfamiliar  with  Dante's
works,  and  had  taken  no  interest  in  them  until  a  later  date,
when  allusions  were  beginning  to  be  found  to  them  in  the
scripts.  The  combination  of  the  Dante  allusions  with  Seven
cannot  therefore  be  put  down  even  to  a  subliminal  association
of  ideas  in  Mr.  Piddington's  mind.  If  the  Sevens  appeared  in
the  scripts  through  his  agency,  somebody  else  was  responsible
for  introducing  Dante  with  the  sevens.  Further,  two  of  the
automatists,  Miss  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Frith,  alluded  independently
to  a  certain  episode  in  Dante  which  it  appears  had  never
been  known  to  either  of  them.

This  case  was  analysed  and  discussed  fully  in  my  first  report
of  it.  I  there  sought  to  show  that,  while  in  many  instances
individual  phrases  in  the  scripts  could  be  traced  to  some
normal  source,  a  supernormal  cause  had  to  be  premised  for
the  large  number  of  coincidences  between  the  scripts  of  dif-
ferent writers  ;  and  that  while  some  of  these  coincidences
might  be  supposed  to  be  clue  to  telepathy  from  one  person
(Mr.  Piddington)  and  some  to  telepathy  from  another  (Mrs.
Verrall),  they  could  not  all  be  so  derived.  But  they  were
all  connected  together  into  a  coherent  scheme  which  was
strongly  suggestive  of  the  design  of  a  single  mind,  and  since
there  were  great  difficulties  in  the  way  of  supposing  the  whole
of  this  scheme  to  be  due  either  to  Mr.  Piddington  or  to  Mrs.
Verrall,  it  looked  as  if  some  other  rrfind — altogether  outside
our  circle — was  at  work.

I  suggested  that  this  other  mind — the  "  author  " — surveying
and  selecting  from  the  ideas  normally  arising  in  the  minds  of
the  automatists  and  of  Mr.  Piddington.  and  making  some
use  of  the  play  of  telepathy  between  them,  had  moulded
these  materials  and  influences  for  his  own  purposes  and  so
produced  the  cross-correspondence.

In  the  final  part  of  my  third  report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  script


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms.''


149


(P/'oc,  Vol.  XXV.,  pp.  282-293)  the  function  of  selection  in
the  production  of  scripts  was  further  discussed.  It  was  sug-
gested that  the  mental  resources  and  activities  of  the  writers
played  an  important,  if  not  an  essential,  part  in  the  whole
business,  the  main  work  of  the  "  author  "  being  to  determine
which  of  their  whole  stock  of  ideas  shall  emerge  in  the  scripts.
On  this  hypothesis  it  will  be  an  advantage  to  the  "  author  "
to  employ  writers  with  a  large  and  varied  stock  of  ideas,  each
with  numerous  literary  and  other  associations,  which  will
provide  him  with  ample  material  for  building  up  various  and
complicated  designs  by  combining  the  scripts  of  different
writers.  In  other  words,  the  more  educated  and  the  more
intelligent  are  the  writers,  the  more  opportunity  is  afforded
to  the  "  author  "  for  demonstrating  his  independence  of  them.

In  the  present  paper,  special  stress  is  laid  on  the  necessity
that  the  "'  author  "  is  under  of  concealing  his  design  from  all
of  us  till  his  experiment  is  complete.  The  necessity  is  of
course  purely  for  experimental  purposes.  The  "  author  "  is
acting,  as  suggested  above,  in  the  same  way  that  an  agent
in  telepathic  experiments  acts  when  he  conceals  the  object
that  he  is  looking  at  from  the  percipient,  so  as  to  prevent  the
latter  from  gaining  a  knowledge  of  it  through  the  normal
sensory  channels.  Our  "  author  "  has  to  take  still  further
precautions  to  prevent  the  writers  from  acquiring  knowledge
telepathically.  He  will  then  be  able  to  go  on  influencing  the
scripts  without  being  interfered  with  by  the  influence  of  the
experimenters,  or  the  self-suggestions  of  the  writers.

One  of  the  devices  apparently  used  for  purposes  of  con-
cealment is  to  allude  to  some  minor  and  unfamiliar  feature
of  an  object,  instead  of  to  a  familiar  one  which  would  be
likely  to  reveal  it  at  once.  Thus  Mrs.  Verrall's  phrase  "  Pagan
and  Pope — the  Stoic  Persecutor  and  the  Christian  "  alludes,
if  my  interpretation  is  right,  to  a  definite  fact  in  regard  to
the  Columns  of  Trajan  and  Marcus  Aurelius,  but  a  fact  that
would  have  hardly  any  interest  or  importance  in  the  eyes  of
the  great  majority  of  people — at  least,  in  the  present  day —
who  are  interested  in  the  Columns, — a  fact  that  probably
passes  altogether  unnoticed  by  the  mass  of  sight-seers  in
Rome.


i;>o


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Again,  in  referring  to  the  tomb  of  -Julius  II.,  Leah  and
Rachel  alone  are  explicitly  mentioned  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script ;
Avhile  the  feature  for  which  the  tomb  is  world-renowned,  the
statue  of  Moses,  is  given  implicitly  only.  People  go  to  see  it
primarily  to  see  Moses  ;  the  Moses  is  certainly  the  first  associa-
tion that  would  arise  in  one's  mind  on  hearing  the  monu-
ment mentioned  ;  and  the  figure  of  Moses  alone  is  constantly
reproduced,  whereas  it  is  very  rare  to  find  illustrations  showing
more  of  the  tomb  than  his  single  figure.  Mrs.  Holland,  as
mentioned  above,  was  to  the  best  of  her  belief  ignorant  that
it  was  placed  between  figures  of  Leah  and  Rachel.

A  still  more  striking  instance  is  "  Alexander's  Tomb."
It  is  a  fact  that  Alessandro  de'  Medici  was  buried  in  the  tomb
of  the  younger  Lorenzo  ;  but  this  is  probably  the  first  time  on
record  that  the  tomb  has  been  described  as  Alexander's.
Other  features  of  it  are  widely  known  ;  the  one  fact  that
generally  drops  out  of  sight  is  the  one  selected  for  mention
in  the  script, — and  this,  too,  in  the  script  of  Miss  Verrall  who,
there  is  every  reason  to  believe,  was  ignorant  of  it  (see  below,
p.  152).

It  is  a  commonplace  of  psychology  that  only  a  selection,  and
a  small  selection,  of  the  sensory  stimuli  that  reach  the  brain
result  in  conscious  impressions.  We  notice  a  few  items,  and
a  few  only,  of  our  surroundings.  We  notice,  for  instance,
those  that  somebody  else  has  pointed  out  to  us,  or  those  that
happen  to  have  attracted  our  attention  when  we  first  saw  the
place  and  which,  therefore,  strike  us  as  familiar  when  we  see
it  again.  But  we  might  fail  to  recognise  a  representation  of
a  known  place  or  object  if  the  different  items  in  it  had  not  the
same  relative  conspicuousness  that  they  have  in  our  idea
of  it.  Even  a  photograph  often  looks  odd  and  unfamiliar,
because  the  sensitivity  of  a  photographic  plate  is  not  exactly
the  same  as  the  sensitivity  of  the  retina,  apart  from  the  fact
that  there  is  of  course  no  mental  selection  determining  what
is,  or  what  is  not,  prominent  in  a  photograph.

But  now  let  us  suppose  that  the  mental  selection  of  percep-
tions was  the  reverse  of  what  it  usually  is  ;  suppose  that  all
our  subliminal  perceptions  became  supraliminal  and  vice
versa  ;  suppose  we  noticed  the  items  we  had  never  noticed
before,  and  failed  to  notice  all  those  we  had  noticed  before.


Lxvm.]  Some  "  Concordant.  Automatisms."  151

Everything  would  then  appear  unfamiliar  to  us  ;  we  should
not  recognise  anything  we  saw.  It  would  be  difficult  to
imagine  a  more  complete  disguise.

This,  I  would  suggest,  is  the  sort  of  disguise  that  the  "  author "'
infuses  into  the  scripts,  in  the  cases  just  mentioned,  by  selecting
the  unfamiliar  instead  of  the  familiar  items,  and  the  disguise
was  for  long  effective.

On  the  working  hypothesis  that  the  *'  author  "  wished  to
conceal  his  meaning  in  order  to  prevent  the  writers  from
helping  each  other  telepathically,  we  devised  the  experiment
of  the  Latin  Message.  One  of  the  cases  most  closely  approxi-
mating to  that  type  previously  published  was  the  one  given
in  my  third  report  on  Mrs.  Holland,  when  the  subject  of
Prometheus  bringing  fire  from  heaven  as  a  gift  to  men  was
given  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Sept.  23,  1908  ;  the  subject
of  Time  and  Eternity  was  given  in  Miss  Verrall' s  of
Nov.  19,  1908;  and  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Dec.  30,  1908
(produced  of  course  in  ignorance  of  the  two  others)  combined
these  two  separate  subjects  in  a  quotation  from  Shelley's
Prometheus  Unbound  (see  Proc,  Vol.  XXV.,  pp.  255-261).

The  cogency  of  this  and  similar  cases,  as  evidence  for  the
agency  of  an  "  author  "  distinct  from  the  writers,  depends  on
the  greater  or  less  difficulty  of  attributing  the  ideas  to  the
minds  of  the  writers  :  it  seems  very  improbable  that  Mrs.
Verrall  associated  the  Prometheus  of  her  script  with  Time
and  Eternity,  and  very  improbable  that  Miss  Verrall  asso-
ciated the  Time  and  Eternity  of  her  script  with  Prometheus  ;
consequently  it  looks  as  if  the  association  came  into  Mrs.
Holland's  script  from  some  mental  source  other  than  their
minds.

Alexander's  Tomb.

The  case  of  "  Alexander's  Tomb  "  is  an  almost  perfect
instance  of  the  Latin  Message  type  ;  the  essential  items  being
distributed  between  the  three  automatists,  Mrs.  Piper,  Miss
Verrall  and  Mrs.  Holland,  as  follows  :

(Mrs.  Piper.) Moorhead. I  gave  her  that  for  laurel.

(See  p.  64.)

(Miss  Verrall.) Alexander's  Tomb. Laurel. (See  p.  68.)
(Mrs.  Holland.) Alexander  Moors  Head. (See  p.  70.)


152


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Here,  as  suggested  in  the  Latin  Message,  two  different
messages,  "  Moorhead  "  and  "  Alexander's  Tomb,"  between
which  no  connection  is  discernible,  are  given  to  two  different
writers,  Mrs.  Piper  and  Miss  Verrall  ;  and  shortly  afterwards
a  third  message,  "Alexander  Moors  Head  "  is  given  to  a
third  writer,  Mrs.  Holland,  which  ultimately  reveals  the  hidden
connection  between  the  first  two.  The  "  author,"  it  is  to  be
noted,  has  somewhat  improved  on  our  plan  by  getting  both
the  first  two  writers  to  put  "  Laurel  "  in  their  scripts,  showing
that  a  connection  existed  between  them,  and  that  therefore
the  two  scripts  should  be  compared.  But,  even  after  the
discovery  that  "  Alexander's  Tomb  "  was  one  of  the  Medici
tombs,  it  is  hardly  conceivable  that  any  one  would  have  seen
the  connection  between  this  and  "  Moorhead  "  if  Mrs.  Holland's
script — written,  of  course,  in  complete  ignorance  of  the  other
two — had  not  contained  the  combination  "  Alexander  Moors
Head."

In  some  cases  where  the  items  of  a  cross-correspondence  are
distributed  between  the  scripts  of  several  writers  in  such  a
way  as  to  suggest  the  design  of  an  outside  mind,  it  is  possible
to  surmise  that  the  items  which  were  absent  from  a  writer's
script  were  present  in  her  subliminal  consciousness  and  might
have  been  transferred  thence  telepathically  to  the  mind  of
another  writer.  But  this  can  hardly  occur  unless  the  writer
has  some  knowledge  of  the  topic  of  the  script.  As  to  the
knowledge  possessed  by  the  writers  in  this  case,  I  think  it
may  be  regarded  as  certain  that  Mrs.  Piper,  who  wrote  first,
knew  practically  nothing  of  the  Medici  or  of  the  Medici  tombs,
and  nothing  at  all  of  Alexander  de'  Medici.  Miss  Verrall,
who  wrote  second,  makes  the  following  statement  :

I  have  never  been  to  Florence,  and  therefore  have  never  seen
the  Medici  tombs.  Before  my  script  was  written  I  knew  of  their
existence,  but  I  have  no  conscious  recollection  of  ever  seeing  any
reproductions  of  them  ;  on  this  point,  however,  I  cannot  be  cpiite
certain.  I  have  never  made  any  special  study  of  the  history  of
the  Medici  family,  and  have  only  a  vague,  general  knowledge
concerning  it.  I  had  never  to  my  belief  heard  of  Alexander
de'  Medici,  until  Miss  Johnson  spoke  of  him  to  me,  at  the  time
that  she  was  writing  her  paper. I  had  supposed  the  phrase  in


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


153


my  script  "  Alexander's  tomb  "  to  refer  to  Alexander  the  Great,
merely  because  he  is  the  person  one  thinks  of  first,  whenever  the
name  is  mentioned.

Helen  de  G.  Verrall.

Mrs.  Holland  stayed  in  Florence  for  some  months  a  good
many  years  ago  and  consequently  knows  the  tombs  ;  but  her
script  about  "  Alexander  "  was  written  a  month  after  Mrs.
Piper's,  and  ten  days  after  Miss  Verrall's,  which  makes  it
impossible  to  regard  her  as  the  originator  of  the  topic,  except
on  the  hypothesis  that  she  designed  the  cross-correspondence
subliminally,  and  purposely  withheld  her  contribution  to  it.  till
the  contributions  of  the  other  automatists  were  completed

Further,  there  is,  I  think,  internal  evidence  in  the  scripts
themselves  that  the  writers  not  only  failed  to  understand  them,
but  that  they  positively  misinterpreted  them.  It  is,  indeed,
difficult  to  attach  any  meaning  at  all  to  Mrs.  Piper's  utterance
"  Moorhead — laurel — for  laurel — I  say  I  gave  her  that  for
laurel." This,  taken  alone,  sounds  like  incoherent  nonsense.

But  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  "  Alexander's  tomb  "  is  connected
with  "  laurel  leaves,"  and  "  laurel  for  the  victor's  brow."
This  naturally  suggests  Alexander  the  Great  ;  we  all  supposed
at  the  time  that  he  was  the  person  meant,  and — since  Miss
Verrall  had,  as  she  believes,  never  heard  of  Alexander  de'
Medici — she  too,  subliminally  as  well  as  supraliminally,  must
have  put  the  same  interpretation  on  it.

In  Mrs.  Holland's  script,  again,  "  Alexander  Moors  Head  "
is  connected  with  drawings  of  masts  and  the  words  "  The  tall
mast,  but  this  one  is  not  at  sea."  This  must  mean  the  tall
masts  (150  feet  high)  of  the  Lodge-Muirhead  wireless  telegraphy
apparatus  used  in  the  "  Diamond  Island  experiment  "  referred
to  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  January  17,  1904  (see  Proc,
Vol.  XXV.,  pp.  293  et  seq.)  ;  and  since  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's
experiments  in  wireless  telegraphy  had  been  referred  to  on
several  other  occasions  in  her  script,  once  with  a  punning
reference  to  the  Lodge-Muirhead  system,  I  felt  no  doubt  that
"  Alexander  Moors  Head  "  meant  Dr.  Alexander  Muirheacl.
I  think  there  is  strong  ground  for  believing  that  this  was  also
the  view  of  Mrs.  Holland's  subliminal  self.  Otherwise,  why
the  masts  %


154


Alice  Johnson.


[part


But  when  we  get  a  real  clue  to  the  meaning  of  the  scripts,
we  find  that  many  phrases  in  them  have  more  point  than
appeared  at  first.  Miss  Verrall's  "  Laurel  leaves  are  emblem  "
has  a  special  application,  as  I  have  shown,  to  the  younger,
as  well  as  the  elder,  Lorenzo  de'  Medici,  and  hence  to  his
tomb-fellow  Alexander,  but  is  only  in  a  vague  and  general
way  appropriate  to  Alexander  the  Great.  In  Mrs.  Holland's
script,  Twilight,  and  Light  and  Darkness,  have  a  special
application  to  the  tomb  of  Alexander  de'  Medici,  but  none  to
Dr.  Alexander  Muirhead.  In  the  same  script,  her  quotations
from  Othello  ("  Antres  vast  and  deserts  idle,"  "  One  not
easily  jealous  "),  following  the  name  "  Alexander  Moors  Head,"
were  regarded  by  me  as  an  ordinary  instance  of  association  of
ideas  ; — "  Moors,"  I  imagined,  had  suggested  Othello  the
Moor.  There  is,  however,  no  point  in  putting  together  Othello
and  Dr.  Muirhead  ;  whereas  there  is  a  definite  point  in  putting
together  Othello,  the  Moor  of  Venice,  and  Alexander  the
Moor,  of  Florence.  It  looks  then  as  if  the  "  author,"  out  of
a  number  of  associations  with  "  Moors  Head,"  has  deliberately
and  carefully  selected  one  that  fits  in  admirably  with  his
special  purpose  and  has  influenced  the  writer  to  express  it,
and  has  then  left  her  subliminal  mind  free  to  select  another
association — "  the  tall  mast  " — in  order  to  show  what  her  own
subliminal  interpretation  of  the  script  is.

The  Medici  tombs  and  topics  associated  with  them  frequently
recurred  in  the  various  scripts  from  1906  onwards.  We  had
not  understood  them  and  the  "  author  "  was,  presumably,
aware  of  our  misinterpretations  and  failures  to  understand.
Some  time  later,  in  June,  1910,  he  gave  the  main  topic  ex-
plicitly in  Mrs.  Willett's  script,  in  the  phrase  "  The  Laurentian
tombs."  No  one  of  us,  however,  observed  the  relevance  of
this  to  the  other  scripts  until  in  July,  1912,  we  came  upon  the
fact  of  Alexander  de'  Medici's  burial  in  one  of  those  tombs.
It  then  became  apparent  that  the  "  author  "  had  in  Mrs.
Willett's  script  given  the  solution  of  his  enigma.

But  the  critic,  if  he  admits  the  general  soundness  of  my  argu-
ment, may  object  that  the  cross-correspondences  seem  to  be
a  series  of  rather  childish,  if  ingenious  puzzles,  amounting  to
little  more  than  a  trial  of  wits  between  the  "  author  "  and


lxviii.]  Some  "  Concordant  Automatisms."


155


ourselves,  and  I  am  acutely  aware  that  the  present  paper  is
likely  on  the  face  of  it  to  heighten  this  impression.  Granting
that  the  "  author  "  is  trying  experiments,  many  may  be  repelled
by  the  apparent  inappropriateness  of  their  subject-matter  to
the  question  of  survival.

In  reply  to  this,  I  would  urge  in  the  first  place  that  if  the
"  author  "  can  prove  his  independent  activity,  the  means  he
chooses  for  this  purpose  will  justify  themselves.  I  would
next  point  out  that,  while  the  cross-correspondences  between
the  scripts  of  different  writers  seemed  at  first  to  consist  merely
of  verbal  similarities  or  coincidences  of  topic,  further  study
showed  that  they  were  far  more  complicated  and  elaborate
than  we  had  supposed,  involving  many  more  scripts  and  often
several  different  subjects  ;  sometimes  including  items  of
literary  or  historical  interest  unknown  to  the  writers  whose
script  furnished  the  cross-correspondence  and  characteristic
in  many  ways  of  the  supposed  "  author,"  and  in  general  more
and  more  difficult  to  explain  on  the  hypothesis  of  the  unaided
subliminal  powers  of  the  writers.  Since  this  further  study
has  already  been  so  fruitful,  it  seems  not  unreasonable  to  hope
that,  if  continued,  it  may  reveal  in  the  scripts  meanings  of  a
deeper  import  than  has  hitherto  been  suspected.

These  meanings  will,  however,  only  be  appreciated  at  their
true  value  by  persons  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  make  a
serious  study  of  the  cross-correspondences,  for  it  is  chiefly  in
these  that  the  significance  of  the  scripts  is  manifested.  I  have
tried  to  show  that  they  must  be  studied  in  much  the  same  way
that  ordinary  literature  is  studied,  since  in  point  of  fact  they
are  a  kind  of  literature.  But  the  problems  involved  in  them
must  appeal  equally  to  the  intellectual  curiosity  of  the  literary
man,  of  the  scientist,  and  of  the  philosopher.


156


Alice  Johnson


[part


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS.

PLATES  I.  to  V.  illustrate  the  "  Ave  Roma  immortalis "  case,  see

pp.  11-24.

Plate I. — Raphael. — Meeting  of  Leo  and  Attila.

Plate  II. — Column  of  Trajan.

Plate  III. — Column  of  Marcus  Aurelius.

Plate  IV.  —Detail  of  Raphael's  Meeting  of  Leo  and  Attila.

Plate V. — Detail  of  Trajan's  Column.

Plates  VI.  to  X.  illustrate  the  "  Alexander's Tomb " case,  see
pp.  50-76.

Plate VI. — Benozzo  Gozzoli. — The  Procession  of  the  Magi.
Plate VII.— Botticelli.— The  Birth  of  Venus.
Plate  VIII. — Bronzino. — Alessandro  de'  Medici.
Plate IX. — Tomb  of  Lorenzo,  Duke  of  Urbino.
Plate X. — Tomb  of  Giuliano,  Duke  of  Nemours.

Plates  XI.  to  XIV.  illustrate  the  "  Clavigers"  case,  see  pp.  127-143.
Plate XL — Mosaic  of  St.  Sebastian.
Plate XII. — Tomb  of  Pope  Julius  II.
Plate  XIII. — Michael  Angelo. — A  Slave.
PLATE  XIV. — Michael  Angelo. — A  Bound  Captive.


Plate  II.


COLUMN OF  TRAJAN.


Plate  III.


COLUMN OF  MARCUS  AURELIUS.


Plate  IV.


detail  or  Raphael's  meeting  of  leo  and  attila.


Plate  V.


DETAIL  OF  THE COLUMN  OF  TRAJAN.


Plate  VIII.


Miliar!  Plioto

BRONZINO.  ALESSANDEO  BE'  MEDICI.


Plate  IX.


TOMB OF  LORENZO, DUKE OF  URBINO.


Plate  X.


TOMB OF GIULIANO, DUKE OF  NEMOURS.


Plate  XI.


MOSAIC  OF  ST.  SEBASTIAN.


TOMB OF  POPE  JULIUS  II.


Plate  XIII.


MICHAEL  ANGELO.  A  SLAVE.


Plate  XIV.


MICHAEL  ANGELO.  A  BOUND  CAPTIVE.


Lxvm.J


Presidential  Address.


157


II.

PRESIDENTIAL  ADDRESS.

Delivered  on  May  28th,  1913.
By  Professor  Henri  Bergson.
Authorised  Translation  hy  H.  Wildon  Carr,  D.Litt.

Ladies  and  Gentlemen,

Let  me  say  at  once  how  much  I  appreciate  the  great
honour  you  have  done  me  in  electing  me  President  of  your
Society.  It  is  an  honour  I  am  conscious  I  have  done  nothing
to  deserve.  It  is  only  by  reading  that  I  know  anything  of
the  phenomena  with  which  the  Society  deals  ;  I  have  seen
nothing  myself,  I  have  examined  nothing  myself.  How  is
it  then  that  you  have  come  to  choose  me  to  succeed  the  great
and  eminent  men  of  science  and  letters  who  have  occupied
in  turn  the  presidential  chair,  most  of  whom,  while  univer-
sally recognised  for  their  knowledge  and  ability,  have  also
been  men  whose  minds  were  particularly  pre-occupied  with
the  study  of  these  mysterious  phenomena  ?  If  a  jest  on  such
a  subject  may  be  allowed,  I  might  say  that  here  is  a  case  of
telepathy  or  clairvoyance  ; — you  felt  from  afar  the  interest  I
was  taking  in  your  researches,  you  perceived  me,  across  the
two  hundred  and  fifty  miles  of  space  which  separated  us,
attentively  reading  your  Proceedings  and  following  with  keen
curiosity  your  work.  The  ingenuity,  the  penetration,  the
patience,  the  tenacity  you  have  shown  in  the  exploration  of
the  terra  incognita  of  psychical  phenomena  appear  to  me  truly
admirable. But  still  more  than  the  ingenuity  and  the  pene-

L


158


Professor  Henri  Berg  son.


[part


tration,  still  more  than  the  unwearying  perseverance  with
which  you  have  continued  your  course,  I  admire  the  courage
which  it  required,  especially  during  the  first  years,  to  struggle
against  the  prejudices  of  a  great  part  of  the  scientific  world,
and  to  brave  the  mockery  which  strikes  fear  into  the  boldest
breast.  This  is  why  I  am  proud — prouder  than  I  can  say —
to  have  been  elected  President  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research.  I  have  read  somewhere  the  story  of  an  inferior
officer  whom  the  chances  of  the  battle, — the  death  or  wounds
of  his  superiors, — raised  to  the  honour  of  the  command  of
his  regiment  ;  all  his  life  he  thought  of  it,  all  his  life  he  talked
of  it,  the  memory  of  those  few  hours  suffused  his  whole  exist-
ence. I  am  that  inferior  officer,  and  I  shall  always  pride
myself  on  the  happy  chance  which  has  set  me — not  for  a  few
hours,  but  for  some  months — at  the  head  of  a  valiant  regiment.

Whence  come  the  prejudices  which  for  so  long  a  time  we
all  have  had,  and  which  some  have  still,  in  regard  to  psychical
studies  ?  Why  is  it  that  men  of  science,  who  consider  it
quite  natural  that  under  their  direction  we  should  pursue
apparently  insignificant  laboratory  investigations,  and  who
think,  with  good  reason,  that  there  is  nothing  insignificant
in  science,  yet  manifest  such  repugnance  towards  researches
like  yours,  and  even  hesitate  to  regard  them  as  scientific  ?
That  is  the  point  on  which  I  wish  to  speak.  Far  from  me
is  the  intention  of  criticising  their  criticism  for  the  sake  of
criticising.  It  seems  to  me  that  in  philosophy  the  time  given
up  to  refutation  is  generally  time  lost.  Of  the  many  attacks
directed  by  so  many  thinkers  against  one  another,  what
remains  ?  Nothing,  or  next  to  nothing.  That  which  counts,
that  which  lasts,  is  the  positive  truth  we  bring  out  ;  the  true
affirmation  itself  displaces  the  false  idea,  and  without  the
trouble  of  refuting  any  one,  proves  to  be  the  best  refutation.
But  quite  another  thing  is  here  in  question  than  either  re-
futing or  criticising.  I  want  to  show  that  behind  the  pre-
judices of  some,  the  mockery  of  others,  there  is,  present  and
invisible,  a  certain  metaphysic,  unconscious  of  itself,  uncon-
scious and  therefore  inconsistent,  unconscious  and  therefore
incapable  of  continually  remodelling  itself  on  observation  and
experience  as  every  philosophy  worthy  of  the  name  must
do, — that  moreover  this  metaphysic  is  natural,  due  to  a  bent


LXVIII.]


Presidential  Address.


159


contracted  long  ago  by  the  human  mind,  and  on  that  account
our  whole  interest  is  to  search  it  out  behind  the  criticisms
or  the  mockeries  which  conceal  it,  in  order  to  put  ourselves
on  guard  against  it  :  we  shall  thus  prevent  it  from  acting  on
ourselves,  prevent  it  from  raising  artificial  obstacles  on  our
own  path.  But  before  I  enter  on  that  question  which  is
concerned  with  the  subject-matter  of  your  studies,  I  wish
to  say  a  word  on  the  method  you  follow,  a  method  which  I
can  well  understand  is  disconcerting  to  a  certain  number  of
men  of  science.

There  is  nothing  more  displeasing  to  the  professional  student
than  to  see  applied  to  a  science  of  the  same  order  as  his  own
a  method  usually  confined  to  subjects  of  a  quite  different
order.  He  holds  to  his  methods  as  the  workman  to  his  tools.
It  was  William  James,  I  think,  who  defined  the  difference
between  the  professional  and  the  amateur  by  saying  that
the  latter  interests  himself  especially  in  the  result  obtained,
the  former  in  the  way  in  which  we  obtain  it.  Well,  the  pheno-
mena with  which  you  are  occupied  are  undeniably  of  the  same
kind  as  those  which  form  the  subject-matter  of  natural  science,
whilst  the  method  you  follow,  and  that  you  are  obliged  to
follow,  has  often  no  relation  with  that  of  any  of  the  sciences
of  nature.

I  say  they  are  facts  of  the  same  kind.  I  mean  by  this
that  they  are  subject  to  laws,  and  that  they  are  capable  of
being  repeated  indefinitely  in  time  and  in  space.  They  are
not  facts  like  those,  for  instance,  with  which  the  historian
deals.  History  does  not  repeat  itself.  The  battle  of  Auster-
litz  was  fought  once  and  it  will  never  be  fought  again.  It
being  impossible  that  the  same  historical  conditions  should
ever  be  reproduced,  the  same  historical  fact  cannot  be  re-
peated ;  and  as  a  law  expresses  necessarily  that  to  certain
causes,  always  the  same,  there  will  correspond  an  effect,  also
always  the  same,  history  strictly  speaking  has  no  bearing
on  laws,  but  on  particular  facts  and  on  the  no  less  particular
circumstances  in  which  they  were  brought  to  pass.  The  only
question  here  is  to  know  if  the  event  did  really  take  place
at  such  and  such  a  definite  moment  of  time  and  at  such  and
such  a  determinate  point  of  space,  and  in  what  way  it  was
brought  about. On  the  contrary,  a  veridical  hallucination, —


100


Professor  Henri  Bergson.


[part


the  apparition,  for  instance,  of  a  dying  man  to  a  relation  or
friend  hundreds  of  miles,  it  may  be,  separated  from  him, —
is  a  fact  which  if  it  is  real,  is  uncmestionably  the  manifestation
of  a  law  analogous  to  physical,  chemical  and  biological  laws.
Suppose,  let  us  say,  that  this  phenomenon  was  due  to  an
influence  exercised  across  space  by  the  consciousness  of  one
of  the  two  persons  on  the  consciousness  of  the  other  ;  suppose,
in  other  words,  that  the  two  human  consciousnesses  were
able  to  communicate  without  visible  intervention,  that  there
was  what  you  call  "  telepathy."  If  telepathy  is  a  real
fact,  it  is  a  fact  that  is  capable  of  being  repeated  indefinitely.
I  go  further,  if  telepathy  is  a  real  fact,  it  is  very  possible
that  it  is  operating  at  every  moment  and  everywhere,  but
with  too  little  intensity  to  be  noticed,  or  else  it  is  operating
in  the  presence  of  obstacles  which  neutralise  the  effect  at
the  same  moment  that  it  manifests  itself.  We  produce  elec-
tricity at  every  moment,  the  atmosphere  is  continually  elec-
trified, we  move  among  magnetic  currents,  yet  millions  of
human  beings  lived  for  thousands  of  years  without  having
suspected  the  existence  of  electricity.  It  may  be  the  same
with  telepathy.  But  that  matters  little.  What  is  indis-
putable in  any  case  is,  that  if  telepathy  is  real,  it  is  natural,
and  that  whenever  the  day  comes  that  we  know  its  conditions,
it  will  no  more  be  necessary  to  wait  for  a  veridical  hallucination
in  order  to  obtain  a  telepathic  effect  than  it  is  necessary  for
us  now,  if  we  wish  to  see  an  electric  spark,  to  wait  until  the
sky  gives  us  a  display  during  a  thunderstorm.

Here  then  is  a  phenomenon  which  it  would  seem  ought,
by  reason  of  its  nature,  to  be  studied  in  the  manner  of  a  physical,
chemical  or  biological  fact.  But  not  at  all  :  you  are  obliged
to  begin  with  an  entirely  different  method,  one  which  stands
midway  between  that  of  the  historian  and  that  of  the  magis-
trate. Did  the  veridical  hallucination  take  place  in  the  past  ? —
You  study  documents,  you  criticise  them,  you  write  a  page
of  history.  Is  it  a  fact  of  to-day  ? — You  proceed  to  a  kind
of  judicial  enquiry  ;  you  examine  the  witnesses,  confront
them  with  one  another,  and  weigh  the  value  of  their  evidence.
For  my  part,  when  I  bring  to  mind  the  results  of  the  admir-
able enquiry  you  have  conducted  continually  during  more
than  thirty  years,  when  I  think  of  all  the  precautions  you


LXVIII.]


Presidentia  I  A  ddress .


161


have  taken  to  avoid  error,  when  I  see  that  in  most  of  the
cases  you  have  retained  an  account  had  been  given  to  one
person  or  to  more  than  one,  often  even  noted  down  in  writing
by  them,  before  the  hallucination  was  recognised  as  veridical,
when  I  take  into  account  the  enormous  number  of  the  facts,
and  especially  their  resemblance,  the  family  likeness  between
them,  the  agreement  of  so  many  witnesses  independent  of
one  another,  all  examined,  their  testimony  weighed  and  sub-
mitted to  criticism, — I  am  led  to  believe  in  telepathy,  just
as  I  believe  in  the  defeat  of  the  Invincible  Armada.  My
belief  is  not  the  mathematical  certainty  that  the  demon-
stration of  Pythagoras'  theorem  gives  me,  it  is  not  the  physical
certainty  that  I  have  of  the  law  of  the  fall  of  bodies,  but  it
is  at  least  all  the  certainty  that  we  obtain  in  a  historical
or  judicial  matter.

But  it  is  just  this  which  is  disconcerting  to  so  many  minds.
They  find  it  strange  that  we  should  have  to  treat  historically
or  judicially  facts  which,  if  they  are  real,  surely  obey  laws,
and  ought  then  it  seems  to  be  amenable  to  the  methods  of
observation  and  experiment  used  in  the  natural  sciences.
Arrange  for  the  fact  to  be  produced  in  a  laboratory,  they
will  receive  it  gladly  ;  till  then  they  hold  it  suspect.  Just
because  "  psychical  research  "  cannot  for  the  present  proceed
like  physics  and  chemistry,  they  conclude  it  is  not  scientific ;
and  as  the  subject  of  that  research  has  not  yet  taken  that
simple  and  abstract  form  which  opens  to  a  fact  access  to  the
laboratory,  they  are  pleased  to  declare  it  unreal.  Such,  I
think,  is  the  "  subconscious  "  reasoning  of  some  men  of
science.

I  discover  the  same  feeling,  the  same  disdain  for  the  con-
crete, at  the  root  of  the  objections  that  are  raised  against
such  and  such  of  your  conclusions.  I  will  cite  only  one  ex-
ample. Some  time  ago  I  was  at  a  dinner  party  at  which
the  conversation  happened  to  turn  on  the  phenomena  which
your  Society  investigates,  more  particularly  on  the  facts  of
telepathy.  There  was  an  eminent  physician  present,  one  of
our  leading  men  of  science.  After  listening  attentively  for
some  minutes,  he  joined  in  the  conversation,  expressing  him-
self as  nearly  as  I  remember  in  these  words  :  "  All  that  you
are  saying  interests  me  very  much,  but  I  ask  you  to  reflect


1G2


Professor  Henri  Bergson.


[part


before  drawing  a  conclusion.  I  also  myself  know  an  extra-
ordinary fact.  And  of  this  fact  I  guarantee  the  authenticity,
for  it  was  related  to  me  by  a  lady  who  is  very  intellectual
and  whose  word  inspires  me  with  absolute  confidence.  The
husband  of  this  lady  was  an  officer.  He  was  killed  in  the
course  of  an  engagement.  Well,  at  the  very  moment  at
which  the  husband  fell,  the  wife  had  the  vision  of  the  scene,
a  clear  vision,  in  all  points  conformable  to  the  reality.  You
may  perhaps  conclude  from  that,  as  this  lady  did,  that  it
was  a  case  of  clairvoyance  or  of  telepathy  ?  .  .  .  You  will
forget  one  thing  only,  and  that  is  that  it  has  happened  many
times  that  a  wife  has  dreamed  that  her  husband  was  dead
or  dying  when  he  was  quite  well.  We  notice  cases  in  which
the  vision  turns  out  to  be  true,  but  take  no  count  of  the
others.  Were  we  to  make  the  full  return,  we  should  see
that  the  coincidence  is  the  work  of  simple  chance."

The  conversation  turned  off  in  I  know  not  what  direction  ;
there  was  no  question  of  serious  discussion,  it  was  neither
the  time  nor  the  place  for  it.  But  when  we  left  the  table
a  very  young  girl  who  had  been  listening  attentively  came
and  said  to  me,  "  It  seems  to  me  that  Doctor  X.  .  .  .  argued
wrongly  just  now.  I  do  not  see  what  the  fallacy  in  his  argu-
ment was,  but  there  must  have  been  a  fallacy."  Yes,  indeed,
there  was  a  fallacy  !  The  young  girl  was  right  and  the  learned
doctor  was  wrong.  He  shut  his  eyes  to  what  was  concrete
in  the  phenomenon.  He  argued  thus  :  "  When  one  dreams
that  a  relation  is  dead  or  dying,  either  it  is  true  or  it  is  false  ;
either  the  person  is  actually  dying  or  he  is  not  dying.  And
consequently,  if  the  dream  proves  true,  it  is  necessary  in  order
to  be  sure  that  it  is  not  an  effect  of  chance  to  compare  the
number  of  cases  in  which  it  has  proved  true  with  the  number
of  cases  in  which  it  has  proved  false."  He  did  not  see  that
the  apparent  force  of  his  argument  rested  on  the  fact  that
he  had  substituted  for  the  description  of  the  concrete  and
living  scene, — the  officer  falling  at  a  given  moment  in  a  definite
spot  with  such  and  such  soldiers  around  him, — this  abstract
and  dead  formula  : — "  The  lady  in  dreaming  was  dreaming
what  was  true  and  not  what  was  false."  Ah,  if  we  accept
this  transposition  into  the  abstract,  we  must  then  indeed
compare  in  abstracto  the  number  of  true  cases  with  the  number


LXVIII.]


Presidential  Address.


163


of  false  ;  and  we  shall  find  perhaps  that  there  are  more  false
than  true  and  our  doctor  will  be  right.

But  this  abstraction  consists  in  neglecting  that  which  is
essential  in  it, — the  picture,  that  the  lady  perceived,  and  which
was  found  to  be  identical  with  a  scene  very  distant  from
her.  Do  you  suppose  that  a  painter  portraying  part  of  a
battle  on  his  canvas,  and  trusting  to  his  fancy,  could  be  so
well  favoured  by  chance  as  to  find  that  he  had  produced
the  likeness  of  real  soldiers,  present  that  clay  at  a  battle,  in
which  they  had  stood  in  the  attitudes  he  had  portrayed  ?
Evidently  not.  The  calculus  of  probabilities  to  which  the
doctor  made  appeal  would  in  this  case  show  that  it  is  im-
possible, because  a  scene  in  which  definite  persons  take  definite
attitudes  is  a  thing  unique  of  its  kind ;  because  a  human  face,
even  taken  alone,  is  already  unique  of  its  kind;  and  conse-
quently each  personage — much  more  the  scene  which  includes
them — is  decomposable  into  an  infinity  of  details  all  inde-
pendent of  one  another ;  so  that  there  must  have  been  an
infinite  number  of  coincidences  in  order  that  chance  should
make  a  fancied  scene  the  exact  reproduction  of  a  real  scene  :
in  other  words,  it  is  mathematically  impossible  that  a  picture
drawn  from  the  painter's  imagination  should  portray  part  of  a
battle  such  as  it  is.  Well,  the  lady  who  had  the  vision  of  a  part
of  a  battle  was  in  the  situation  of  that  painter  ;  her  imagina-
tion executed  a  picture.  If  the  picture  was  the  reproduction  of
a  real  scene  it  must,  by  every  necessity,  be  because  she  was  in
communication  with  that  scene,  or  with  a  consciousness  that
had  the  perception  of  it.  I  do  not  need  to  compare  the  number
of  "  true  cases  "  with  the  number  of  "  false  cases  "  ;  statistics
have  nothing  to  do  with  it  ;  the  unique  case  which  is  presented
to  me  is  sufficient  when  I  consider  it  with  what  is  concrete  in
it.  That  is  why,  if  it  had  been  an  occasion  to  discuss  with
the  doctor,  I  should  have  said  to  him  :  "  I  do  not  know  if
the  story  which  was  told  you  is  exact  ;  I  do  not  know  if  the
lady  of  whom  you  speak  had  the  vision  of  the  actual  scene
which  was  going  on  at  the  time  far  away  from  her  ;  but  if
this  was  proved  to  me,  if  I  could  be  sure  that  even  the  coun-
tenance of  one  soldier  unknown  by  her,  present  at  the  scene,
had  appeared  to  her  such  as  it  was  in  reality, — then,  even  if
it  should  be  proved  to  me  that  there  had  been  thousands  of


164


Professor  Henri  Bergson.


[part


false  visions,  and  even  though  there  had  never  been  a  veridical
hallucination  except  this  one,  I  should  hold  the  existence  of
telepathy, — or  of  a  cause,  whatever  it  be,  able  to  make  us  per-
ceive objects  and  events  situated  beyond  the  normal  portal
of  our  senses, — to'  be  strictly  and  definitely  established."

But  enough  on  this  point.  I  come  to  the  deep-seated  cause
which,  in  directing  the  activity  of  workers  in  science  exclu-
sively in  another  direction,  has  until  now  retarded  the  pro-
gress of  "  psychical  research."

I  have  heard  persons  interested  in  your  works  express
surprise  that  modern  science  should  have  so  long  neglected
the  facts  with  which  you  deal,  when  it  ought  in  virtue  of  its
experimental  character  to  be  interested  in  researches  which
may  some  day  give  rise  to  a  host  of  new  experiences.  But
we  must  understand  what  it  is  that  we  call  the  experimental
character  of  modern  science.  Modern  science  has  created  the
experimental  method ;  so  much  is  certain  ;  but  it  does  not
follow  that  it  has  enlarged  the  field  of  experience  which  existed
before  it.  Quite  the  contrary,  it  has  often  narrowed  it  ;  and
moreover  it  is  in  that  that  its  force  lies.

When  we  read  the  ancient  writers  we  are  struck  by  seeing
how  they  had  observed  and  even  experimented.  But  they
observed  by  chance  and  in  it  mattered  not  what  direction.
In  what  did  the  creation  of  the  "  experimental  method  "
consist  ?  Simply  in  taking  certain  processes  of  observation  and
experiment  which  already  existed,  and  instead  of  applying
them  in  all  possible  directions,  making  them  converge  on  to
one  single  point,  measurement, — the  measurement  of  such  or
such  a  variable  magnitude  of  which  we  suspect  that  it  may  be
a  function  of  such  or  such  other  variable  magnitudes,  equally
measurable.

"  Law  "  in  the  modern  sense  of  the  word  is  rightly  the
expression  of  a  constant  relation  between  magnitudes  which
vary.  Modern  science  is  the  offspring  of  mathematics,  begotten
on  the  day  when  algebra  had  acquired  sufficient  force  and
pliability  to  be  able  to  enfold  reality,  to  draw  it  into  the  net
of  its  calculations.  First  appeared  astronomy  and  mechanics
under  the  essentially  mathematical  form  that  the  moderns  have
given  them.  Then  was  developed  physics — a  physics  equally
mathematical. Physics  gave  rise  to  chemistry,  this  also  being


LXVIII.]


Presidentia I  Address .


1(35


founded  on  measurements,  on  comparisons  of  weights  and
volumes.  After  chemistry  came  biology,  which  without  doubt
has  not  yet  taken  the  mathematical  form  and  is  not  near
doing  so,  but  which  seeks  none  the  less  by  means  of  physiology
to  bring  the  laws  of  life  under  those  of  chemistry  and  physics, —
that  is  to  say,  indirectly  under  those  of  mechanics.  So  that,
in  short,  our  science  always  tends  to  the  mathematical  form
as  to  an  ideal.  It  seems  essential  to  it  to  measure,  and  wherever
calculation  is  not  yet  applicable,  Avherever  it  must  limit  ioself
to  a  description  or  to  an  analysis  of  its  object,  it  arranges  to
set  before  itself  only  that  side  of  the  object  capable  of  one
clay  becoming  measurable.

Now,  it  is  of  the  essence  of  mental  things  that  they  do
not  lend  themselves  to  measurement.  The  first  movement
of  modern  science  was  bound  then  to  be  to  find  out  whether
it  was  not  possible  to  substitute  for  the  phenomena  of  the
mind,  phenomena  which  are  measurable,  and  which  could  be
their  equivalent.  We  see,  as  a  fact,  that  consciousness  is
bound  in  some  way  or  other  to  a  brain.  So  modern  science
seized  upon  the  brain,  took  hold  of  the  cerebral  fact, — the
nature  of  which,  indeed,  we  do  not  know,  but  we  do  know  that
it  must  finally  resolve  itself  into  movements  of  molecules
and  atoms,  that  is  to  say,  into  facts  relevant  to  mathematics,
— and  determined  to  consider  the  cerebral  as  the  ecpiivalent
of  the  mental.  All  our  mental  science,  all  our  metaphysics,
from  the  seventeenth  century  until  the  present  day,  is  pene-
trated with  the  idea  of  this  equivalence.  We  speak  of  thought
and  of  the  brain  indifferently  ;  either  we  consider  the  mental
a  simple  "  epiphenomenon  "  of  the  cerebral,  as  materialism
does,  or  we  put  the  mental  and  the  cerebral  on  the  same  level,
regardhig  them  as  two  translations,  in  different  languages,
of  the  same  original.  In  short,  the  hypothesis  that  there
is  a  strict  parallelism  between  the  cerebral  and  the  mental
appears  eminently  scientific.  Instinctively,  philosophy  and
science  tend  to  cast  aside  whatever  would  contradict  this
hypothesis  or  fit  ill  with  it.  And  this  at  first  sight  appears
to  be  the  case  with  the  facts  which  "  psychical  research  "
deals  with,  or  at  least  it  might  be  so  with  a  good  number
of  them.

Well,  the  moment  has  come  to  consider  closely  this  hypo-


16G


Professor  Henri  Bergson.


[part


thesis,  and  to  see  what  it  is  worth.  I  will  not  insist  on  the
difficulties,  the  theoretical  absurdities,  which  it  raises.  I  have
shown  elsewhere  that,  taken  literally,  it  is  a  self-contradiction.
I  add  that,  prima  facie,  it  is  contrary  to  all  likelihood  that
nature  has  indulged  in  the  luxury  of  repeating  purely  and
simply  in  the  language  of  consciousness  what  the  cerebral
cortex  accomplishes  in  the  form  of  atomic  or  molecular  move-
ment. A  consciousness  which  is  only  a  duplicate,  which  does
not  intervene  actively,  would  doubtless  have  long  since  dis-
appeared from  the  universe,  supposing  it  had  ever  been  pro-
duced. Do  we  not  see  that  our  actions  tend  to  become  un-
conscious in  the  measure  and  degree  that  habit  renders  them
mechanical  ?  But  I  will  not  insist  on  these  theoretical  con-
siderations. What  I  claim  is  that  the  facts,  looked  at  without
any  prepossession,  neither  confirm  nor  even  suggest  the
hypothesis  of  parallelism.

There  is  one  function  of  thought,  indeed, — one  only, — that
experience  has  been  able  to  prove  is  localised  in  a  certain
region  of  the  brain  :  I  refer  to  memory,  and  more  particularly
to  the  memory  of  words.  We  have  not  the  least  reason  to
suppose  that  judgment,  or  reasoning,  or  any  other  faculty
of  thought,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  is  attached  to
such  or  such  determinate  cerebral  processes.  But  maladies
that  affect  the  memory  of  words,  or,  as  they  are  called,  cases
of  aphasia,  on  the  contrary  do  correspond  with  definite  lesions
of  certain  cerebral  convolutions  :  so  that  it  has  been  thought
possible  to  consider  memory  as  localised  in  the  brain,  and
the  visual,  auditory  and  motor  recollections  of  words  as  de-
posited inside  the  cortex, — veritable  photographic  plates  which
preserve  old  luminous  impressions,  veritable  phonographic
disks  which  are  registers  of  sound  vibrations.  If,  in  short,
we  examine  narrowly  all  the  facts  alleged  in  favour  of  an
exact  correspondence  and  of  a  kind  of  adherence  of  the  mental
to  the  cerebral  life  (I  set  aside,  it  goes  without  saying,  the
case  of  sensations  and  movements,  for  the  brain  is  certainly  a
sensori-motor  organ),  we  see  that  these  facts  reduce  them-
selves to  the  phenomena  of  memory,  and  it  is  the  localisation
of  aphasia,  and  that  localisation  alone,  which  seems  to  bring
a  beginning  of  experimental  proof  to  the  support  of  the  paral-
lelist  doctrine.


LXVIII.]


Presidential  Address.


167


Now,  a  more  profound  study  of  the  various  cases  of  aphasia
shows  decisively,  in  my  opinion,  the  impossibility  of  consider-
ing the  recollections  as  plates  or  as  records  deposited  in  the
brain,  and  the  impossibility  of  admitting  that  it  can  really
be  in  the  brain  that  recollections  are  preserved.  I  cannot
enter  here  into  the  details  of  the  criticism  that  I  have  made
elsewhere  of  the  current  interpretation  of  aphasia,  a  criticism
which  appeared  paradoxical  at  a  time  when  a  certain  con-
ception of  aphasia  was  accepted  as  a  dogma,  but  which  patho-
logical anatomy  has  itself  come  forward  to  support  in  these
last  few  years  (I  refer  to  the  works  of  Professor  Pierre  Marie
and  of  his  pupils).  I  will  confine  myself  to  recalling  to  you
my  conclusions.  What  appears  to  me  to  stand  out  clearly
from  an  attentive  study  of  the  facts,  is  that  the  characteristic
cerebral  lesions  of  the  various  forms  of  aphasia  do  not  touch
the  recollections  themselves,  and  consequently  that  there  are
not  recollections  stored  in  such  and  such  regions  of  the  cerebral
cortex,  which  the  malady  would  destroy.  Those  lesions  really
make  the  evoking  of  recollections  impossible  or  difficult  ;  they
concern  the  mechanism  of  recall,  and  that  mechanism  only.
More  exactly,  the  function  of  the  brain  in  this  case  is  to  give
the  mind,  when  it  has  need  of  such  or  such  a  recollection,  the
power  of  obtaining  from  the  body  a  certain  attitude,  or  certain
nascent  movements,  which  offer  to  the  recollection  sought
for  an  appropriate  frame.  If  the  frame  is  there,  the  recol-
lection will  come  of  its  own  accord  to  insert  itself  into  it.
The  cerebral  organ  prepares  the  frame  ;  it  does  not  furnish
the  recollection.  That  in  my  view  is  what  an  attentive  study
of  the  maladies  of  word-memory  proves,  and  it  is  also  what
the  psychological  analysis  of  memory  in  general  would  lead
us  to  expect.

But  if  we  now  examine  the  other  functions  of  thought,
the  hypothesis  of  a  strict  parallelism  between  the  mental
life  and  the  cerebral  life  is  not  at  all  what  the  facts  most
naturally  suggest  to  us.  On  the  contrary,  in  the  work
of  thought  hi  general,  as  in  the  particular  case  of  memory,
the  brain  appears  to  us  to  be  charged  with  the  task  of  impres-
sing on  the  body  the  movements  and  attitudes  which  act
what  the  mind  thinks,  or  what  the  circumstances  invite  it
to  think. I  have  expressed  this  elsewhere  by  saying  that


168


Professor  Henri  Bergson.


[part


the  brain  is  an  "organ  of  pantomime."  And  that  is  why,  as
I  have  also  said  elsewhere,  "  If  any  one  were  able  to  look
inside  a  brain  in  its  full  activity,  to  follow  the  going  and
coming  of  the  atoms,  and  to  interpret  all  that  they  were
doing,  he  would  doubtless  know  something  of  what  was
going  on  in  the  mind,  but  he  would  know  very  little.
He  would  know  only  just  what  can  be  expressed  in  bodily
gestures,  attitudes  and  movements, — what  the  state  of  the
soul  might  contain  of  action  in  course  of  accomplishment  or
simply  nascent ;  the  rest  would  escape  him.  As  regards  the
thoughts  and  feelings  which  were  being  unrolled  within  the
consciousness,  he  would  be  in  the  situation  of  a  spectator
seeing  distinctly  all  that  the  actors  were  doing  on  the  stage,
but  not  hearing  a  word  of  what  they  were  saying."  Or  yet
again,  he  would  be  like  a  person  who  could  only  know  a  sym-
phony by  the  movements  of  the  conductor  directing  the
orchestra.  Indeed,  the  cerebral  phenomena  are  to  the  mental
life  just  what  the  gestures  of  the  conductor  are  to  the  sym-
phony :  they  outline  the  motor  articulations,  they  do  nothing
else.  In  other  words,  we  should  find  nothing  of  the  operations
of  the  mind,  properly  speaking,  inside  the  brain.  Except  its
sensorial  functions,  the  brain  has  no  other  part  than  to  play
the  mental  life.

I  recognise,  however,  that  this  "  pantomime  "  is  of  primary
importance.  It  is  by  it  that  we  insert  ourselves  in  reality,
that  we  adapt  ourselves  to  it,  that  we  respond  to  the  call  of
circumstances  by  appropriate  actions.  If  consciousness  is
not  a  function  of  the  brain,  at  least  the  brain  maintains  con-
sciousness fixed  on  the  world  in  which  we  live  ;  it  is  the  organ
of  attention  to  life.  That  is  why  a  cerebral  modification,
even  a  slight  one, — a  passing  intoxication  by  alcohol  or  opium,
for  example,  (all  the  more  a  lasting  intoxication  like  those
which  no  doubt  most  often  cause  insanity,)  may  involve  a
complete  perturbation  of  the  mental  life.  It  is  not  that  the
mind  is  there  directly  affected.  It  is  not  necessary  to  believe,
as  we  often  do,  that  the  poison  has  sought  out  such  or  such
a  mechanism  in  the  cerebral  cortex  which  is  the  material
aspect  of  reasoning,  that  it  has  deranged  this  mechanism,
and  that  it  is  on  that  account  that  the  patient  raves.  But
the  effect  of  the  lesion  is  that  the  mechanism  is  thrown  out


LXVIII.]


Presidential  Address.


of  gear,  and  thought  can  no  longer  insert  itself  exactly  in
things.  An  insane  person,  suffering  from  the  delusion  that
he  is  being  persecuted,  can  still  reason  very  logically  ;  but
his  reasoning  is  out  of  line  with  reality,  outside  reality, — as
we  reason  in  a  dream.  To  direct  our  thought  towards  action,
to  bring  it  to  prepare  the  act  that  the  circumstances  call
for, — it  is  for  this  that  our  brain  is  formed.

But  in  doing  this  it  canalises,  and  also  it  limits,  the  life
of  the  mind.  It  prevents  us  from  turning  our  eyes  to  right
and  left  of  us,  and  it  prevents  us  also  as  far  as  possible  from
turning  to  look  back  ;  it  would  have  us  look  right  before  us  in
the  direction  in  which  we  have  to  go.  Is  this  not  already  clear
in  the  operation  of  memory  of  which  we  have  just  spoken  ?
Many  facts  seem  to  indicate  that  the  past  is  preserved  even
down  to  its  slightest  details,  and  that  there  is  no  real  forgetting.
You  know  it  is  related  that  persons  resuscitated  after  drown-
ing or  hanging  declare  that  in  some  few  seconds  they  had
the  panoramic  vision  of  the  totality  of  their  past  life.  I
could  cite  other  examples,  for  the  asphyxia  has  nothing  to
do  with  the  phenomenon,  although  it  has  been  said  that  it
has.  An  Alpine  climber  slipping  on  a  precipice,  a  soldier
round  whom  all  at  once  a  hail  of  bullets  falls,  will  sometimes
have  the  same  vision.

The  truth  is  our  whole  past  is  there  always,  and  to  perceive
it  we  have  but  to  look  back  ;  only,  we  cannot  and  we  must
not  look  back.  We  must  not,  because  our  end  is  to  live,  to
act  ;  and  life  and  action  look  forward.  We  cannot,  because
the  cerebral  mechanism  is  fashioned  to  this  work, — to  mark
from  us  the  past,  to  let  at  each  moment  only  that  pass
through  which  can  throw  light  on  the  present  situation  and
favour  our  action  :  it  is  by  this  very  obscuring  of  all  our
recollections,  except  only  that  which  is  of  interest  and  which
our  body  already  outlines  by  its  "  pantomime,"  that  it  recalls
this  useful  recollection.  Now  should  the  attention  to  life
grow  weak  for  a  moment  (I  do  not  mean  voluntary  attention,
that  which  depends  on  the  individual,  but  an  attention  im-
posed on  the  normal  man,  what  may  be  called  "  racial  atten-
tion ")  then  the  mind  which  has  of  force  been  kept  till  then
looking  forward,  lets  go  the  tension  and  by  that  turns  itself
to  look  back  ; the  totality  of  its  past  appears  to  it.  The


170


Professor  Henri  Bergson.


[part


panoramic  vision  of  the  past  is  due,  then,  to  a  sudden
disinterestedness  of  life  produced  in  certain  cases  by  the
menace  of  a  sudden  death.  Until  then  the  brain,  so  far
as  it  is  the  organ  of  memory,  has  been  keeping  the  atten-
tion fixed  on  life, — narrowing  usefully  the  field  of  mental
vision.

But  what  I  say  of  memory  is  equally  true  of  perception.
I  will  not  enter  here  into  the  details  of  a  proof  that  I  have
given  elsewhere.  It  will  be  enough  if  I  repeat  that  every-
thing becomes  obscure  and  even  incomprehensible  if  we  regard
the  cerebral  centres  as  organs  capable  of  transforming  material
vibrations  into  conscious  states ;  that,  on  the  contrary,  all
becomes  clear  if  we  see  in  those  centres  (and  in  the  sensory
nerve-endings  with  which  they  are  connected)  instruments
of  selection  charged  with  choosing,  in  the  immense  field  of
our  virtual  perceptions,  those  which  are  to  be  actualised.
Leibniz  said  that  each  monad,  and  therefore  a  fortiori  each
of  those  monads  that  he  called  spirits,  carries  within  it  the
conscious  or  unconscious  representation  of  the  totality  of
things.  I  should  not  go  so  far  ;  but  I  think  that  we  perceive
virtually  many  more  things  than  we  perceive  actually,  and
that  here  once  more  the  part  that  our  body  plays  is  that  of
shutting  out  from  the  field  of  our  consciousness  all  that  is
of  no  practical  interest  to  us,  all  that  does  not  lend  itself  to
our  action.  The  sense  organs,  the  sensory  nerves,  the  cere-
bral centres,  canalise  then  the  influences  from  without,  and
thus  mark  the  various  directions  in  which  our  own  influence
can  be  exercised.  But  in  doing  so  they  narrow  the  field  of
our  vision  of  the  present,  just  as  the  cerebral  mechanisms
of  memory  limit  our  vision  of  the  past.  Now,  just  as
certain  useless  memories,  or  "  dream  "  memories,  may  slip
into  the  field  of  consciousness,  availing  themselves  of  a  moment
of  inattention  to  life,  may  there  not  be  around  our  normal
perception,  a  fringe  of  perceptions,  most  often  unconscious,
but  all  ready  to  enter  into  consciousness,  and  in  fact  entering
in  in  certain  exceptional  cases  or  in  certain  predisposed  sub-
jects 1  If  there  are  perceptions  of  this  kind,  it  is  not  only
psychology  in  the  strict  meaning  of  the  term  that  they  con-
cern ;  they  are  facts  with  which  "  psychical  research  "  could
and  ought  to  concern  itself.


LXV1II.]


Presidential  Address.


171


Let  us  not  forget,  moreover,  that  it  is  space  that  creates
the  sharp  divisions,  the  exact  distinctions.  Our  bodies  are
external  to  one  another  in  space  ;  and  our  minds,  in  so  far
as  they  are  attached  to  those  bodies,  are  external  to  one  an-
other. But  if  they  are  attached  to  the  body  only  by  a  part
of  themselves,  we  may  conjecture  that  for  the  remainder  of
them  there  is  not  also  this  sharp  separation.  Far  am  I  from
thinking  that  personality  is  a  simple  appearance,  an  ephemeral
reality,  or  a  dependence  on  cerebral  activity  !  But  yet  it
is  very  possible  that  between  various  personalities  there
are  continually  taking  place  changes,  analogous  to  the  pheno-
mena of  endosmosis.  If  such  endosmosis  exists,  we  can  fore-
see that  nature  will  have  taken  every  precaution  to  neutralise
its  effect,  and  that  certain  mechanisms  must  be  specially
charged  with  the  duty  of  throwing  back  into  the  unconscious
the  presentations  so  provoked,  for  they  would  be  very  em-
barrassing in  everyday  life.  One  or  another  of  these  presenta-
tions might  yet,  however,  at  times  pass  through  as  contraband,
especially  if  the  inhibiting  mechanisms  were  functioning  badly  ;
and  these  again  would  be  facts  with  which  "psychical  research  "
would  be  concerned.

The  more  we  become  accustomed  to  this  idea  of  a  con-
sciousness which  overflows  the  organism,  the  more  natural
and  probable  we  find  the  hypothesis  that  the  soul  survives
the  body.  Were,  indeed,  the  mental  moulded  exactly  on  to
the  cerebral,  were  there  nothing  more  in  a  human  conscious-
ness than  what  could  be  read  in  a  human  brain,  we  might
have  to  admit  that  consciousness  must  share  the  fate  of  the
body  and  die  with  it.  But  if  the  facts,  studied  without  any
prepossessions,  lead  us  on  the  contrary  to  regard  the  mental
life  as  much  more  vast  than  the  cerebral  life,  survival
becomes  so  probable  that  the  burden  of  proof  comes  to  lie
on  him  who  denies  it  rather  than  on  him  who  affirms  it  ;  for,
as  I  have  said  elsewhere,  "  the  one  and  only  reason  we  can
have  for  believing  in  an  extinction  of  consciousness  after
death  is  that  we  see  the  body  become  disorganised ;  and  this
reason  has  no  longer  any  value,  if  the  independence,  however
partial,  of  consciousness  in  regard  to  the  body  is  also  a  fact
of  experience."

Such,  briefly  stated,  are  the  conclusions  to  which  an  im-


172


Professor  Henri  Berg  son.


[fart


partial  examination  of  the  known  facts  leads  me.  That  is
to  say,  I  regard  the  field  open  to  psychical  research  as  very
vast,  and  even  as  unlimited.  This  new  science  will  soon
make  up  the  time  lost.  Mathematics  goes  back  to  the  ancient
Greeks  ;  physics  has  existed  now  for  three  or  four  hundred
years  ;  chemistry  dates  from  the  eighteenth  century  ;  biology
is  nearly  as  old  ;  but  psychology  dates  from  yesterday,  and
psychical  research  is  almost  contemporary.

Must  we  regret  the  time  lost  ?  I  have  sometimes  asked
myself  what  would  have  happened  if  modern  science,  instead
of  setting  out  from  mathematics  to  turn  its  direction  towards
mechanics,  physics,  and  chemistry,  instead  of  bringing  all  its
forces  to  converge  on  the  study  of  matter,  had  begun  by  the
consideration  of  mind,— if  Kepler,  Galileo,  and  Newton,  for
example,  had  been  psychologists.

We  should  certainly  have  had  a  psychology  of  which  to-day
we  can  form  no  idea,  any  more  than  before  Galileo  we  could
have  imagined  what  our  physics  would  be  :  a  psychology
that  probably  would  have  been  to  our  present  psychology
what  our  physics  is  to  that  of  Aristotle.  Foreign  to  every
mechanistic  idea,  not  even  conceiving  the  possibility  of  such
an  explanation,  science  would  have  enquired  into,  instead  of
dismissing  a  priori,  facts  such  as  those  you  study  ;  perhaps
"  psychical  research  would  have  stood  out  as  its  principal
preoccupation.

The  most  general  laws  of  mental  activity  once  discovered
(as,  in  fact,  the  tundamental  laws  of  mechanics  were  dis-
covered), we  should  have  passed  from  mind,  properly  so
called,  to  life  :  biology  would  have  been  constituted,  but  a
vitalist  biology,  quite  different  from  ours,  which  would  have
sought,  behind  the  sensible  forms  of  living  beings,  the  inward,
invisible  force  of  which  the  sensible  forms  are  the  manifesta-
tions. On  this  force  we  have  to-day  taken  no  hold  just  be-
cause our  science  of  mind  is  still  in  its  infancy  ;  and  this  is
why  men  of  science  are  not  wrong  when  they  reproach  vitalism
with  being  a  sterile  doctrine  :  it  is  sterile  to-day,  it  will  per-
haps not  be  so  always,  and  it  probably  would  not  have  been
so  now  had  modern  science  at  its  origin  taken  things  at  the
other  end.

Together  with  this  vitalist  biology  there  would  have  arisen


LXVIII.]


Presiden tied  Address.


173


a  medical  practice  which  would  have  sought  to  remedy  directly
the  insufficiencies  of  the  vital  force  ;  it  would  have  aimed  at
the  cause  and  not  at  the  effects,  at  the  centre  instead  of  at
the  periphery  ;  healing  by  suggestion  might  have  taken  forms
and  proportions  of  which  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  form  the
least  idea.  So  would  have  been  founded,  so  would  have
been  developed  the  science  of  mental  activity.

But  when  this  science,  following  the  manifestations  of  mind
step  by  step  from  higher  to  lower,  passing  life  and  living
matter,  had  come  at  last  to  inert  matter,  it  would  then  have
stopped  abruptly,  surprised  and  dismayed.  It  would  have
tried  to  apply  its  accustomed  methods  to  this  new  object
and  it  would  have  obtained  no  hold  on  it,  just  as  to-day  the
processes  of  calculation  and  measurement  have  no  hold  on
the  things  of  the  mind.  It  is  matter  and  not  mind  which
in  this  case  would  have  been  the  realm  of  mystery.

Suppose,  then,  that  in  an  unknown  land — let  us  say  America,
but  an  America  not  yet  discovered  by  Europe — there  had
been  developed  a  science  identical  with  our  actual  science,
with  all  its  mechanical  applications.  It  might  then  have
happened  that  from  time  to  time  some  fishermen,  venturing
far  out  from  the  coast  of  Ireland  or  Brittany  would  have  seen,
far  off  on  the  horizon,  an  American  ship  moving  at  full  speed
against  the  wind, — a  steamship,  let  us  say.  They  would  have
come  and  told  what  they  had  seen.  Would  they  have  been
believed  ?  Probably  not.  They  would  have  been  mistrusted
just  in  proportion  as  those  to  whom  they  told  the  tale  were
learned  and  imbued  with  a  science  which  would  have  been
psychological  in  direction,  the  reverse  of  physics  and  mechanics.
And  it  would  have  been  necessary  to  constitute  a  Society  like
yours — but  in  this  case  a  Society  for  Physical  Research —
which  would  call  witnesses  before  it,  judge  and  criticise  their
tales,  and  establish  the  authenticity  of  the  "Apparitions  "  of
steamboats.  And  then,  as  this  Society  would  have  been  able
for  the  moment  to  use  only  this  historical  or  critical  method,
it  would  not  have  been  able  to  overcome  the  scepticism  of
those  who  would  have  challenged  it — since  it  believed  in
the  existence  of  these  miraculous  boats — to  construct  one  and
make  it  work.

This  is  a  dream  in  which  I  indulge  at  times. But  whenever

M


174


Professor  Henri  Bergson.


[part


I  do  so,  quickly  indeed  I  wake  from  it  and  say  to  myself  :
no,  it  was  neither  possible  nor  desirable  that  the  human  mind
should  have  followed  that  direction.  It  was  not  possible,
because  mathematical  science  was  already  in  existence  at  the
dawn  of  the  modern  era,  and  it  was  therefore  necessary  to
begin  by  drawing  from  it  what  it  had  to  give  for  our  know-
ledge of  the  world  in  which  we  live  :  we  do  not  let  go  the
prey  to  grasp  what  may  be  only  a  shadow.  But  supposing
it  had  been  possible,  it  was  not  desirable,  even  for  psycho-
logical science  itself,  that  the  human  mind  should  have  applied
itself  first  of  all  to  it.  For  though  without  doubt,  had  there
been  expended  on  psychological  science  the  amount  of  work,
of  talent  and  of  genius,  which  has  been  consecrated  to  the
sciences  of  matter,  the  knowledge  of  mind  would  have  been
pushed  very  far  ;  yet  something  would  have  been  always
lacking,  something  of  inestimable  price  and  without  which
all  the  rest  would  lose  much  of  its  value  :  the  precision,  the
exactness,  the  anxiety  for  proof,  the  habit  of  distinguishing
between  what  is  simply  possible  or  probable  and  what  is
certain.

Do  not  think  that  these  are  qualities  natural  to  intelligence.
Humanity  did  without  them  for  a  very  long  time  ;  they  would
perhaps  never  have  appeared  in  the  world  at  all  had  there
not  existed  formerly  a  small  people  in  a  corner  of  Greece
for  whom  nearly  so  was  not  enough  and  who  invented  pre-
cision. Mathematics — that  creation  of  the  Greek  genius —
was  it  here  the  effect  or  the  cause  ?  I  do  not  know  ;  but
undoubtedly  it  is  by  mathematics  that  the  need  of  proof
has  been  passed  on  from  intellect  to  intellect,  taking  more
and  more  place  in  the  human  mind  as  mathematical  science,
through  mechanics,  has  embraced  an  ever  greater  number
of  the  phenomena  of  matter.

The  habit  of  bringing  to  the  study  of  concrete  reality  the
same  requirements  of  precision,  of  exactness,  of  certitude,
which  are  characteristic  of  the  mathematical  mind  is,  there-
fore, a  habit  we  owe  to  the  sciences  of  matter  and  that  we
should  never  have  had  without  them.  That  is  why  science,
had  it  been  applied  in  the  first  instance  to  the  things  of  mind,
would  probably  have  remained  uncertain  and  vague,  how-
ever far  it  might  have  advanced  ; it  would,  perhaps,  never


LXVIII.]


Presidential  Address.


175


have  distinguished  between  what  is  simply  plausible  and  what
must  be  definitely  accepted.  But  to-day  that,  thanks  to  the
sciences  of  matter,  we  know  how  to  make  that  distinction
and  possess  all  the  qualities  of  mind  that  it  implies,  we  can
adventure  without  fear  into  the  scarcely  explored  domain  of
psychological  realities.  Let  us  advance  therein  with  a  prudent
boldness,  disencumbering  ourselves  of  the  bad  metaphysics
which  cramps  our  movements,  and  the  science  of  mind  will
yield  results  which  will  surpass  all  our  hopes.


M  2


170


Count  Perovsly-Pelrovo-Solovovo.


[part


SUPPLEMENT.


REVIEW.

Personal  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  (including  the  official  account
and  record  of  the  American  Palladino  seances).  By  Hereward
Carrington.  (T.  Werner  Laurie,  Ltd.,  Clifford's  Inn,  London,
n.d. Pp.  274. Price,  7s.  6d.  net.)

That  indefatigable  enquirer,  Mr.  Hereward  Carrington,  has  given
psychical  researchers  another  valuable  work.  Like  a  former  book
by  the  same  author,  The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,,
fraudulent  and  genuine,  it  falls  into  two  parts.  Part  I.  deals  with  the
author's  personal  experiences  in  the  domain  of  physical  "  medium-
ship  "  with  mediums  other  than  Eusapia  Palladino  ;  Part  II.  deals
exclusively  with  the  latter.  The  results  recorded  by  the  author
in  Part  II.  are  chiefly  positive ;  in  Part  I. — with  one  doubtful  ex-
ception— exclusively  negative.

The.  following  is  a  brief  summary  of  the  cases  and  experiments
described  in  Part  I.  :

(Pp.  2-19.)  The  Windsor  (Nova  Scotia)  Poltergeist.  A  palp-
able fraud  and  easily  proved  to  have  been  such.  Trickery  con-
fessed without  hesitation  by  all  the  persons  concerned,  with  the
exception  of  Judge  X.  of  the  Probate  Court,  who  was  the  first  to
reveal  the  case  to  the  world  at  large,  and  who  refused  to  believe
in  trickery,  even  after  Mr.  Carrington  had  sent  him  his  report
fully  stating  the  facts.  Of  course,  such  incidents  are  familiar
to  us.

(Pp.  20-45.)  Experiments  in  the  Lily  Dale  camp.  Fraud
throughout  at  sittings  with  Norman  ("spirit-photography"  and
slate-writing),  Mrs.  M'Coy  and  Mrs.  Pemberton  ("  trumpet-
mediums  "),  Joseph  Jonson,  Mrs.  Moss  and  Nichols,  materialising
mediums.  Note  this  interesting  remark  in  connection  with  an
incident  at  a  materialisation  seance  :

"  The  curtains  were  pulled  aside  and  I  [Mr.  Carrington]  put


LXVIII.]


Review.


177


my  face  close  to  the  opening,  since  it  was  so  dark  I  could  see  nothing.
And  there  in  the  dim  twilight  of  that  seance  room  I  beheld  one
of  the  most  ghastly,  most  truly  terrifying  faces  I  have  ever  seen.
...  I  regarded  the  face  intently  and  it  was  gradually  withdrawn
into  the  shadow  of  the  cabinet,  and  the  curtains  pulled  over  it.
/  am  certain  that,  had  I  been  in  an  excited  and  unbalanced  frame
of  mind  at  that  moment,  I  should  have  sworn  that  the  face  actually
melted,  away  as  I  looked  at  it.  ...  I  can  now  quite  easily  see  how
investigators  can  swear  to  the  melting  away  of  a  face  before  their
eyes  after  my  own  experience." (Pp.  31,  32.)

Some  space  is  then  devoted  to  Keeler's  slate-writings,  which
Mr.  Carrington  feels  bound  to  admit  "  are  the  most  puzzling  pheno-
mena of  their  kind  "  he  has  "  ever  witnessed,  and  justly  bear  out
the  contention  that  Keeler  is  far  and  away  the  cleverest  slate-
writing  medium  in  America  "  (p.  35).  Subsequently,  however,
Mr.  Carrington  obtained  proof  of  his  trickery  also  (substitution
of  slates  and  pellets).  Analysis  of  the  contents  of  his  slate-writing
messages  at  any  rate  shows  that  he — or  his  "  guides  " — will
take  up  any  hint  dropped  by  the  sitter  whether  corresponding
with  actual  fact  or  not.  For  the  sake  of  impartiality  it  should
be  noted,  however,  that  Mr.  Carrington  confesses  he  is  "  quite
unable  to  explain  many  stories  which  have  been  told  "  him  "  by
apparently  good  observers  of  Keeler's  slate-writing."  "All  that
I  can  say  is  that  my  own  sittings  were  certainly  fraudulent,  that
competent  investigators  unite  in  thinking  his  mediumship  fraudu-
lent, and  that  he  has  been  seen  resorting  to  trickery  on  several
occasions  "  (p.  48).  I  think  this  will  be  enough  ground  on  which
to  base  an  opinion.

Pp.  57-69  are  devoted  to  "  phenomena  witnessed  in  private
circles  " — with  equally  unsatisfactory  results.  The  following  re-
marks, however,  are  curious  :

"It  is  probable  that  most  striking  and  peculiar  manifestations
have  been  witnessed  in  this  maimer,  such  strange  phenomena
indeed  that  I  cannot  relate  them  in  this  place  for  fear  of  ridicule.
No  one  knows  precisely  what  takes  place  in  certain  spiritualistic
gatherings  ;  but  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  some  very  strange
things  happen  at  such  times — phenomena  which  even  the  average
spiritualist  is  unaware  of.  But  this  is  only  an  intuition,  for  which
I  can  offer  no  proof  "  (p.  57).

I  do  not  much  believe  in  "intuition,"  and  I  think  such  remarks


178


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


are  misplaced  in  a  serious  work.  Moreover,  Mr.  Carrington  ex-
presses himself  too  diplomatically.  Does  he  believe  these  "  very
strange  things  "  genuine,  or  is  he  simply  puzzled  by  them,  or  what  ?

(Pp.  70-75.)  Account  of  a  fraudulent  materialisation  seance
with  De  Witt  Hough.

(Pp.  76-94.)  The  Bangs  sisters.  Mr.  Carrington's  experience
corroborates  that  of  the  Rev.  Stanley  Krebs,  who  exposed  their
chief  method  (so  far  as  "  direct  writing  "  was  concerned)  in  the
S.P.R.  Journal,  Vol.  X.,  pp.  5-16.  On  the  other  hand  their  "  direct  "
pictures  or  paintings  have  also  been  explained  and  duplicated,
first  by  Mr.  David  P.  Abbott  ;  then  by  Mr.  William  Marriott  ("  Dr.
WUmar  "),  both  well-known  professional  conjurers.

Pp.  95-124  are  devoted  to  the  so-called  "  great  Amherst  mystery,"
— a  notorious  Poltergeist  case — again  in  Nova  Scotia.  The
occurrences  in  question  happened  in  1878  and  1879.  They  formed
the  subject  of  a  book  by  Mr.  Walter  Hubbell,  now  out  of  print,
bearing  this  title.  In  1908  Mr.  Hubbell  revisited  Amherst  and
obtained  from  the  surviving  citizens  of  the  town  a  document  bear-
ing sixteen  signatures,  "  which  certainly  has  some  historical  value
and  seems  to  support  the  authenticity  of  the  phenomena  to  a  great
extent  "  (p.  103).  Mr.  Carrington  also  collected  additional  in-
formation in  the  shape  of  personal  interviews  with  the  "medium,"
Esther  Cox  (still  living),  and  her  sister,  Mrs.  Teed.  He  seems
on  the  whole  to  have  been  favourably  impressed,  though  he  cannot
help  remarking  (p.  120)  :

"  It  may  be  objected  to  all  this,  of  course,  that  I  give  the  con-
firmatory evidence  of  only  one  person  and  that  person  the  sister
of  the  medium,  one  who  would  naturally  wish  to  shield  her  younger
sister  against  all  charges  of  fraud  or  imposture."

I  confess  I  think  the  objection  a  serious  one.  Still  the  case  is
interesting  ;  and  the.  thanks  of  all  "  psychical  researchers  "  are
due  to  Messrs.  Hubbell  and  Carrington  for  having  done  so  much
to  improve  the  evidence.  IF  ever  "  Poltergeist  phenomena  "  are
finally  acknowledged  to  be  a  "  fact  in  nature,"  "  the  great
Amherst  mystery"  may  certainly  fairly  claim  to  be  a  good  speci-
men of  it. It  all  depends  on  the  "  IF  "  !

Part  II.  of  the  book  deals  with  Eusapia's  American  seances.
Extracts  from  the  accounts  of  some  twenty-seven  sittings  are
given,  many,  in  fact  most,  of  these  accounts  being  stenographic.
Some  of  the  incidents  described  look  interesting,  and  this  obser-


LXVIII.]


Review.


179


vation  applies  chiefly  to  the  table-levitations.  But  on  the  whole
the  impression  produced  on  the  reader's  mind  is  of  the  vaguest
possible  kind.  I  do  not  even  specially  refer  to  the  undoubted
fact  of  Eusapia  having  been  repeatedly  caught  hi  the  act  of  de-
ception. No  ;  but  the  character  of  the  performances  is  unfor-
tunately such  that  the  question  of  genuineness  does  not  move
one  inch  further  towards  solution.  And  this  is  especially  true
hi  regard  to  the  kind  of  control  admitted.  Conditions  of  control
again  and  again  found  to  be  unsatisfactory  and  unlikely  ever  to  settle
the  question  are  used  throughout.  And  the  margin  of  difference
between  the  probably  fraudulent  and  the  possibly  genuine  is  so
narrow  as  to  grow  quite  imperceptible.  So  one  finally  asks
oneself:  Is  it  possible  that  "phenomena"  so  strikingly  alike  are
due  to  causes  so  utterly  different  ?

In  a  short  paper  I  contributed  some  two  or  three  years  ago  on
my  personal  experiments  with  Eusapia  hi  Naples  (S.P.R.  Proceed-
ings, Part  LXIL,  pp.  59-63),  I  called  special  attention  to  the  "  cabi-
net phenomena  "  of  the  famous  medium  from  the  point  of  view
of  the  unsatisfactoriness  of  the  general  conditions  of  control.  Here
I  said  "  matters  ought  to  be  seriously  mended  before  we  investi-
gate them  further."  And  I  am  still  of  this  opinion.  The  hand
control  Eusapia  usually  admits  when  "  cabmet  "  phenomena
occur  "  is  practicaUy  non-existent."  "  She  throws  every  obstacle
in  the  way  of  this  control.  .  .  .  She  constantly  changes  the  re-
spective position  of  her  limbs — both  feet  and  hands.  The  latter
especially  are  a  regular  perpetuum  mobile.  Now  this  circumstance
is  extremely  important,  for,  as  the  conditions  of  control  are  per-
petually and  ceaselessly  changing,  illusions  of  memory  as  to  the
exact  conditions  under  which  something  occurred  are  eminently
apt  to  spring  up."

I  do  not  even  think  that  the  presence  of  a  shorthand  writer
will  always  eliminate  this  very  important  source  of  error.

Apart  from  this  we  have  some  evidence — scanty  evidence,  it
is  true,  but  which  ought  not  to  be  altogether  neglected — tending
to  show  that  "  mediums  "  are  occasionally  able  to  induce  in  the
person  controlling  them  (in  one  at  a  time  only,  I  thhik)  something
like  a  negative  tactile  illusion  or  hallucination,  which  enables  them
to  liberate  one  hand  for  a  few  seconds  without  the  "  controller  "
becoming  aware  of  the  circumstance.  I  refer  especially  to  my
wife's  account  prhited  in  the  same  number  of  the  Proceedings,


ISO


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.  [part


pp.  05-07,  and,  of  course,  to  my  numerous  experiments  in  "  chair-
threading  "  with  the  late  Sambor.  But  if  so,  it  is  plain  that  only
those  of  Eusapia's  cabinet  phenomena  should  "  count  "  in  which
both  her  hands  are  visible.  Are  there  many  such  on  record  ?
Yes,  I  know  there  are  ;  but  were  the  medium's  feet  always  satis-
factorily controlled  on  such  occasions  ?  On  p.  177  of  his  new
work,  speaking  of  seance  xv.;  Mr.  Carrington  says  :

"  The  greatest  care  was  exercised  in  the  control  ;  yet  several
striking  phenomena  occurred.  Of  these  perhaps  the  most  note-
worthy were  the  series  of  touches  which  occurred  ...  on  both
controllers  at  the  same  time,  when  both  Eusapia's  hands  were  held
by  the  right  controller.'''

Mr.  Carrington  italicises. I  will  also  italicise  :

How  were  the  medium's  feet  controlled  at  the  time  ?  And  what
evidence  is  there  that  she  did  not  -produce  these  touches  with  her  foot  ?
We  want  also  more  precise  details  about  the  alleged  simultaneity
of  these  touches.

In  view  of  these  general  remarks  Mi'.  Carrington  will,  I  hope,
excuse  my  declining  to  discuss  in  detail  the  evidence  he  brings
forward  for  the  genuineness  of  Eusapia's  American  sittings.  I
consider  that  such  evidence  is  hi  her  case  vitiated  ab  ovo.  I  am
speaking  at  least  of  the  "  cabinet  phenomena."  As  for  the  table
levitations,  I  have  already  mentioned  that  they  seem  to  me  some-
times striking  and  deserving  in  general  of  renewed  investigation,
and  this  in  spite  of  the  crushing  exposure  in  this  domain  also  which
fell  to  the  lot  of  poor  E.  P.  in  the  United  States.

In  a  "  Note  on  the  sittings  held  at  Columbia  University  "  (pp.
210-222),  Mr*.  Carrington  blames  the  learned  investigators  for  not
carrying  out  a  series  of  scientific  tests  planned  by  himself  and
Professors  Wood  and  Trowbridge.  Seeing,  however,  that,  accord-
ing to  Mr.  Carrington,  these  seances  "  were  almost  entirely  blank,
the  fourth  being  of  such  a  nature  as  to  leave  on  the  mind  of  Pro-
fessor Wilson  the  strongest  possible  impression  of  fraud  "  (p.  220),
and  hi  view  on  the  other  hand  of  E.  P.'s  well-known  dislike  to
the  use  of  any  paraphernalia  not  previously  employed  by  her  at
the  sittings — to  her  misoneism  hi  short  (to  use  the  late  Professor
Lombroso's  term) — such  barrenness  of  results,  nay,  even  such
abstention  on  the  part  of  the  American  scientists,  does  not  at  all
astonish  me.  Mr.  Carrington  asks  :  "  When  such  elaborate
precautions  had  been  made,  how  was  it  that  no  new  experiments


LXVIII.]


Review.


181


were  tried  ?  How  was  it  that  not  one  of  the  means  we  had  devised
.  .  .  was  actually  employed  and  put  into  execution  ?  .  .  .  The
answer  to  these  questions  has  never  been  forthcoming." — Well,
Mr.  Carrington,  I  have  just  ventured  to  suggest  one.

Chapter  XII.  (222-256)  contains  an  elaborate  "  Theoretical  dis-
cussion "  which  would  be  profoundly  interesting  and  instructive,
IF  (again  !)  we  could  but  be  sure  that  the  phenomena  are  genuine  !
It  is  true  that  the  author  assumes  "  that  their  genuine  character
is  proved  by  the  records  themselves."  Well  and  good.  It  is
certainly  a  very  remarkable  and  instructive  fact  that,  after  all
that  has  happened  since  the  Naples  seances  of  1908,  Mr.  Carring-
ton should  still  so  strongly  adhere  to  his  belief  in  the  genuineness
of  Eusapia.  His  opinion  is  entitled  to  the  greatest  consideration
and  respect.  But  I  know  many  psychical  researchers  who,  with-
out being  even  now  a  priori  prejudiced  against  "  physical  pheno-
mena," will  think  it  very  hard  to  follow  him.

Let  us  look  through  a  very  interesting  chapter  nevertheless.
On  p.  225  Mr.  Carrington  says  that  he  was  inclined  to  believe  at
first  that  some  of  the  "  phenomena  "  were  the  direct  result  of  the
medium's  own  will.  Now  he  seems  to  think  on  the  contrary  that
"  she  cannot  control  them,  far  less  ensure  their  success  "  (p.  226).
"  The  impression  made  upon  the  majority  of  the  sitters  is  that
the  phenomena  are  due  to  some  unrecognised  force  emanating
from  the  body  of  the  medium,  and  that  they  are  not  spiritistic
in  character  "  (p.  227).  On  the  other  hand,  "  it  must  be  acknow-
ledged that  the  longer  any  one  group  of  experimenters  sits  with
Eusapia,  and  the  more  satisfactory  the  conditions,  the  more  start-
ling do  the  phenomena  become  and  the  more  indicative  of  an
external  intelligence."  On  the  whole  "we  have  not  advanced  at  all
in  the  comprehension  of  the  phenomena  "  (p.  229)  :  a  satisfactory
conclusion  !

On  p.  230  the  author  discusses  the  question  why,  "  when  the
sitters  on  both  sides  of  Eusapia  are  touched  simultaneously,  they
are  touched  in  about  the  same  place."  The  explanation  Mr.
Carrington  suggests  is  the  following  :

"  Both  sides  of  the  medium's  body  are  practically  alike  in  their
anatomical  structure.  If,  therefore,  there  be  an  externalisation
of  vital  force,  it  seems  probable  that  this  externalisation  would
take  place  from  both  sides  of  the  body  {i.e.  from  the  same  nerve
ends  on  both  sides)  simultaneously,  because  of  the  correspondence


182


Count  Perovsky-Pelrovo-  Solovovo.


[part


and  sympathy  between  the  two  sides.  If  a  nervous  current  origi-
nated in  the  brain  or  spinal  cord,  and  Avas  shot  outward  to  the
periphery,  it  would  pass  along  the  nerve  tracts  on  both  sides,  and
(granting  that  externalisation  takes  place  at  all)  would  consequently
be  externalised  on  both  sides  in  the  same  manner  and  about  at
the  same  time.  Upon  such  a  theory,  one  wonders  why  simultaneous
touching s  are  not  recorded  more  frequently,  and  it  must  be  admitted
they  are  comparatively  rarer (The  italics  are  mine.)

I  confess  I  have  another  explanation  to  offer,  but  perhaps  some
people  will  think  it  a  too  simple  one  !

On  p.  234  the  question,  "  Why  use  a  cabinet  at  all  %  "  is  dis-
cussed. Mi'.  Carrmgton  states  "  frankly  "  (why  does  he  require
particular  frankness  in  this  case?)  that  "a  cabinet  is  generally
employed  by  mediums  to  facilitate  fraud."  But  with  Eusapia
the  case  is  different  :  "  she  does  not  sit  inside  the  cabinet,  but,  on
the  contrary,  outside — a  foot  or  more  distant  from  the  curtains
behind  her,  held  hand  and  foot  [?],  and  there  is  no  apparent
contact  or  connection  between  her  and  the  cabinet  during  a  large
portion  of  the  seance."

Against  such  a  representation  I  feel  bound  to  protest.  And  I
hope  the  reader  will  not  object  to  my  quoting  again  what  I  wrote
on  this  very  subject  some  years  ago.  In  discussing  M.  Courtier's
report  in  Vol.  XXIII.  of  our  Proceedings  (p.  588)  I  said  :

"  To  return  to  Eusapia  :  a  light  seance  of  hers  with  the  curtain
is,  I  think,  evidentially  at  least  equivalent  to  a  totally  dark  seance.
When  first  introduced  this  curtain  was  supposed  to  serve  a  reason-
able purpose  :  it  would  ensure  for  part  of  the  room  the  necessary
condition  of  darkness  whilst  allowing  the  medium  to  remain  in
full  view.  As  a  matter  of  fact  it  simply  complicates  matters,
hampers  investigation,  and  generally  speaking  plays  a  part  which
— with  all  due  respect  to  the  medium — I  may  be  permitted  to
call  simply  disreputable  !  "

And  again  in  a  foot-note  to  the  same  page  :

"  It  has  in  particular  a  certain  way  of  being  thrown  over  the
table  and  covering  the  medium's  hands  which  may  very  well  serve
a  certain  purpose,  only  it  will  not  be  the  purpose  of  scientific  re-
search. When  its  lower  end  is  thus  spread  over  E.  P.'s  hands
she  will  still  keep  on  moving  them,  at  times  showing  one  or  both,
at  times  concealing  them  again.  And  while  this  is  going  on,
'  phenomena  '  will  occur  now  and  then,  and  it  requires  a  certain


LXVIII.]


Review.


183


straining  of  attention  to  note  whether  both  hands  were  visible
simultaneously  with  such  and  such  '  manifestations  '  or  not.  At
times  a  hand  will  also  appear  between  the  two  halves  of  the  cur-
tain ;  and  as  the  result  of  all  this  hand-moving  the  sitters  may
very  easily  be  led  to  believe  that  they  saw  all  the  three  hands  at
once,  whilst  in  fact  they  did  not.  At  some  sittings  with  E.  P.
in  St.  Petersburg  in  the  spring  of  1898  I  specially  noticed  that
this  was  just  the  case  ;  and  yet  at  least  one  other  sitter  was  found
to  believe  and  assert  the  contrary,  until  I  positively  assured  him
that  he  was  mistaken.  In  the  present  instance,  therefore,  light
engenders  an  error  for  which  there  Mould  have  been  no  room  in
the  dark."

To  this  view  I  still  emphatically  adhere.

On  pp.  235-240  Mr.  Carrmgton  deals  with  "  the  second  great
objection  to  these  phenomena  " — darkness.  Here  I  agree  with
him  a  good  deal.  I  do  not  think  that,  provided  that  all  other
conditions  are  eminently  satisfactory,  the  fact  of  a  seance  taking
place  hi  the  dark  is  an  insuperable  objection.  No  :  I  even  prefer
an  honestly  dark  seance  to  some  aoi-discmt  "light"  ones.  For
I  greatly  value  unpretentiousness.  Let  us  have  even  totally  dark
sittings,  provided  all  the  other  conditions  are  strict  "  test-con-
ditions "  (I  mean  this  seriously)  ;  and  wait  for  a  real  medium  to
turn  up. I  am  afraid  we  shall  have  to  wait  a  long  time.

The  fact  is  that  absence  of  light  is  by  no  means  the  only  con-
dition demanded  by  mediums  ;  there  are  many  others  and —
strange  to  say— all  these  conditions  are  invariably  such  as  to  facili-
tate fraud.  If  after  all  genuine  phenomena  exist,  such  a  coinci-
dence is  nevertheless  extremely  unfortunate  and  extraordinary.

On  p.  247  Mr.  Carrington  describes  the  following  incident  which
he  thinks  "  most  instructive  "  :

"  The  question  of  '  control  '  had  come  up,  and  Eusapia  was
protesting  that  her  controllers  did  not  hold  her  securely  enough.
She  said  in  effect  :  '  Do  hold  me  securely,  do  hold  me  tightly,  be-
cause, if  you  don't,  I  am  liable  to  do  these  things  niyself  ;  I  have
a  tendency  to  do  them,  and  I  want  you  to  prevent  that  tendency
from  becoming  active  and  permitting  me  to  produce  these  pheno-
mena. I  beg  of  you,  therefore,  to  control  me  securely,  for  I  warn
you  that,  if  you  do  not,  I  am  likely  to  perform  certain  actions
automatically,  when  in  trance,  which  will  be  interpreted  as  fraudu
lent.' I  think  this  statement  is  most  significant."


184


Count  Perovsky-Petrbvq-  Solovovo.


[part


Has  it  never  occurred  to  Mr.  Carrington  that  it  might  have
occurred  to  E.  P. — who  is  undoubtedly  a  very  intelligent  and
shrewd  woman — that  such  statements  of  hers,  if  supposed  by  her
hearers  to  have  been  made  in  all  earnestness,  might  prove  very  useful
in  the  way  of  exonerating  her  from  suspicions  of  conscious  fraud  ?
There  is  nothing  very  improbable  in  such  a  supposition.

Mr.  Carrington  notes  that  "  as  regards  personal  idiosyncrasies,
it  may  be  said  that  ha  many  respects  Eusapia  is  entirely  different
from  almost  every  other  medium.  .  .  .  For  example,  most  mediums
can  obtain  better  results  for  an  individual  who  is  more  or  less
'  mediumistic  '  or  '  psychic'  Eusapia  does  not."  "  Again  it  is
usually  believed  that  better  results  can  be  obtained  for  women
than  for  men  .  .  .  but  Eusapia  says  that  in  her  case  it  makes
no  difference  at  all  "  (pp.  249,  250).  We  have  a  saying  in  Russian
which  runs  thus  :  "  Vsiakiy  molodetz — na  svoi  obrazetz,"  which  may
be  translated  somewhat  as  follows  :  "  Every  fellow  acts  hi  his
own  fashion  "  ;  and  this  saying  will  fit  the  mediumistic  tribe  admir-
ably. The  variety  of  the  "  conditions  "  supposed  to  be  required
by  the  "  phenomena  "  almost  surpasses  the  variety  of  the  pheno-
mena themselves  !  Conditions  alleged  to  be  absolutely  necessary
in  one  case  are  altogether  wanting  hi  another  and  only  partly
present  hi  a  third  one.  And  yet  in  all  this  boundless  variety  one
uniform  feature  is,  it  is  true,  conspicuously  present  throughout  :
the  conditions  are  such  as  the  medium,  not  the  sitter,  desires.

Mi'.  Carrington's  book  ends  with  an  Appendix  devoted  to  the
"  need  of  a  psychical  laboratory."

It  begins,  on  the  other  hand,  with  a  Preface  containing  a  quota-
tion from  Count  [sic]  Aksakoff's  Afiimism  and  Spiritism,  which
may  appropriately  close  this  review. Says  M.  Aksakoff  (pp.  xi-xii):

"  In  the  decline  of  life  I  ask  myself  sometimes,  '  Have  I  in  truth
done  well  to  have  devoted  so  much  time  and  toil  and  money  to
the  study  and  the  publication  of  facts  in  this  domain  ?  Have
I  not  struck  into  a  blind  road  ? — followed  an  illusive  hope  ?  Have
I  not  wasted  my  experience,  with  no  result  to  justify  all  my  pains  ?  '
Yet  always  I  seem  to  hear  the  same  reply  :  '  A  life  on  earth  can
have  no  higher  aspiration  than  to  demonstrate  the  transcendental
nature  of  man's  behig — to  prove  him  called  to  a  destiny  loftier
than  the  phenomenal  existence  he  knows.'  I  cannot,  then,  regret
that  I  have  devoted  my  whole  life  to  the  pursuance  of  this  aim  ;
although  it  be  by  methods  which  science  shuns  and  spurns — methods


LXVIII.]


Review.


185


which  I  hold  far  trustier  than  any  other  which  science  has  to  show.
And  if  it  be  in  the  end  my  lot  to  have  laid  one  stone  to  that  temple
of  the  Spirit,  upbuilt  from  century  to  century  by  men  of  true  heart,
this  will  be  the  highest  and  the  only  recompense  which  ever  I
strove  to  gam."

Mr.  Carrington  seems  to  agree  entirely  with  this  optimistic
attitude.  May  I  add  that  I  do  so  but  partially  ?  Certainly,
the  more  I  advance  hi  age,  the  more  I  am  inclined  to  think  that
the  road  is  blind  indeed  and  the  hope  illusive.  I  wish  I  had  spent
the  energy  I  have  devoted  to  investigation  hi  the  domain  of
(Spiritism  on  some  altogether  different  aim.  I  think  the  results
might  have  been  somewhat  more  fruitful.

But  such  reflections  are,  perhaps,  inappropriate  hi  a  review
dealing  with  Psychical  Research  :  I  had  therefore  better  stop,
not,  however,  without  first  thanking  Mr.  Carrington  for  the  pleasure
a  perusal  of  his  very  interesting  work  has  afforded  me.


Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


186


John  E.  Coooer,  Ph.D.


[part


THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE— EXPERIMENTAL.1

By  John  E.  Coovbb,  Ph.D.

(Fellow  in  Psychical  Research,  Leland  Stanford  Jr.  University,

California.)

The  question  of  thought-transference  curiously  remains  open
in  spite  of  the  reports  in  these  Proceedings  and  elsewhere  of
decidedly  favourable  experimental  results.  It  will  be  remem-
bered that  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick  found  that  two  hypnotized
reagents  2  made,  on  good  days,  14-1  per  cent,  and  11*4  per-
cent, right  guesses  on  Lotto-Blocks,  as  against  a  probability
of  P23  per  cent.,  in  354  and  263  experiments  respectively  ;  3
and  that  Richet,  from  789  successful  cases  out  of  2927  guesses
on  playing  cards  by  eleven  normal  reagents,  as  against  a
probability  of  732,  concluded  that  "  suggestion  mentale  "  is
to  a  small  degree  a  common  human  capacity.4

Perhaps  reluctance  in  accepting  such  results  as  final  is
founded  largely  upon  statistical  facts.  The  11,130  guesses
of  digits,  by  27  normal  reagents,  collected  by  the  American
S.P.R.,  yielded  but  10"  17  per  cent,  right  cases  as  against  the
probability  of  10  per  cent.  ;  5  and  Preyer  showed  by  the  records
of  the  Sachsische  Lotterie  that  inductive  probability  removes

1  This  resume  covers  part  of  the  work  in  Psychical  Research  conducted  in
the  Department  of  Psychology  at  the  Leland  Stanford  Jr.  University,  Cali-
fornia, during  the  year  1912-1913,  which  will  be  more  fully  reported  else-
where. The  research  was  endowed  by  Thomas  Welton  Stanford,  of  Melbourne,
Australia.

-  Throughout  this  article,  the  words  "  experimenter  "  and  "  reagent  "  are
used  as  equivalent  respectively  to  what  in  the  publications  of  the  S.P.B.  are
always  called  "  agent  "  and  "  percipient." — Ed.

3  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.  (1889-1890),  pp.  128-170.

4  Richet  :  "  La  suggestion  mentale  et  le  calcul  des  probabilites,"  Revue
Philosophique,  1884,  Vol.  XVIII.,  pp.  609-G74.

6  Proceedings  of  the  American  S.P.R.,  Vol.  I.  (1885-1889),  p.  28.


LXVIII.]


Thought-Transference — Experimental.


187


the  basis  of  Richet's  contention.1  Theoretical  considerations,
however,  also  stand  in  the  way  :  the  psychological  law  of
the  sensorial  gateway  for  all  impressions  from  the  outer  world
demands  that  facts  contradictory  of  it  shall  be  carefully  and
repeatedly  scrutinized.  Evidently  those  successful  experiments
need  repetition  under  the  control  of  the  psychological  labora-
tory.

The  object  of  the  following  experimentation  was  (1)  to
further  test  Richet's  supposition  of  a  common  "  suggestion
mentale,"  or  to  find  a  "  norm  "  for  normal  people,  (2)  to
acquire  in  the  course  of  experimentation  statistical  material
suitable  for  establishing  a  "  practical  "  probability  with  which
to  check  the  application  of  theoretical  probability  to  experi-
mental results,  (3)  to  rigorously  control  the  experimentation
to  the  end  of  discovering  among  regularly  varied  factors  the
conditions  of  success,  and  (4)  to  analyse  the  subjective  pro-
cesses to  the  end  of  determining  what  elements  of  experience
contribute  to  certainty  in  making  a  guess,  and,  in  the  case
of  success,  of  learning  if  the  impression  upon  which  a  judgment
is  based  is  in  the  same  sense-mode  as  that  entertained  in  the
mind  of  the  experimenter.

Three  series  of  guessing,  aggregating  5000  experiments,
were  made.

General  Method.

The  reagent  sat  comfortably  with  his  back  to  the  experi-
menter and  closed  his  eyes  to  avoid  visual  distraction  during
the  interval  of  impression  ;  after  each  experiment  he  recorded
his  guess,  and  noted  introspections  in  a  tabulated  form  under
the  following  headings  :  (1)  Was  the  mind  in  a  thoroughly
receptive  mood  ?  (2)  Imagery  :  (a)  Kind,  (b)  Vividness  (grade
from  A  to  D),  (c)  Temporal  course  (occurring  at  beginning,
middle,  end,  quickly,  slowly,  persistent,  intermittent),  (d)
Spatial  attributes  (to  the  right,  left,  back,  front,  —  metres)  ;
(3)  Certainty  of  guess  :  (a)  Grade  (from  A  to  D,  and  use  "  pure
guess"),  (b)  Why?  (if  the  grade  is  high).

Before  each  experiment  the  experimenter  shook  a  dice-box
and  determined  by  the  spots  whether  the  card  should  be
"  imaged  "  or  "  not  imaged,"  and  if  the  former,  in  what  way

1  Preyer,  W.  :  Die  Erkl&rung  des  Oedankenlesens. Leipzig  :  Grieben,  1880.


188


John  E.  Coover,  Ph.D.  [part


it  was  to  be  entertained  in  his  mind  ;  after  drawing  his  card
or  block  by  chance,  he  gave  one  tap  on  his  chair  to  signal
to  the  reagent  the  beginning  of  the  experimental  period  of
15  to  20  seconds  ;  in  case  the  material  was  "  imaged,"  he
made  this  imagery  as  vivid  as  possible  and  assumed  a  deter-
mined attitude  of  will  that  the  reagent  should  get  the  impres-
sion ;  he  gave  two  taps  to  signal  the  close  of  the  experiment,
and  after  the  reagent  had  recorded  the  guess  he  recorded  the
card  or  block,  and  indicated  in  what  kind  of  imagery,  if  in
any,  it  was  held.  From  25  to  50  guesses  were  made  on  one
day.

I.  "  The  Feeling  of  being  Stared  at."  1

Some  years  ago  Titchener  2  found  the  belief  in  "  the  feeling
of  being  stared  at  "  to  be  common  in  his  junior  classes  in
Psychology,  proved  it  groundless  in  experiments  in  the  labora-
tory, and  suggested  general  psychological  reasons  for  it.
With  students  in  our  beginning  courses  in  psychology  the
belief  is  also  common  :


Women.  Men.

No.  %  No.  %

78  74  68  60

77  91  61  80

44  86  51  86

55  96  65  80


Ten  students  who  commonly  experienced  this  feeling  and
had  confidence  in  its  reliability,  were  chosen  from  a  class
in  general  psychology  for  experimentation.  They  made  100
guesses  each.  Right  cases  varied  from  43  to  56  ;  per  cent,
of  the  grand  total  was  50' 2,  as  against  a  probability  of  50.

The  feeling  was  experienced  in  the  laboratory,  and  judg-
ments were  delivered  with  five  degrees  of  certainty  (decreasing
from  A  to  "  pure  guess  ")  over  which  they  were  distributed
as  follows  :

A  B  C  D "  Pure  Guess."  Total.

Number  15 332 264  61  36  708

Per  cent.  Right  67 50 48-8 54-1 61  50-8

1  A  more  detailed  report  of  this  experiment  will  be  found  in  the  American
Journal  of  Psychology,  Oct.  1013.  Vol.  XXTV.,  pp.  570-575.

2  Science,  1898,  Vol.  VITT.,  p.  895.


lx  viii.  ] Thought-Transference — Experimental.


180


Analysis  of  introspections  shows  that  a  feeling  of  certainty
is  contributed  to  the  guess  by  (1)  some  attribute  or  content
of  the  imagery,  such  as  vivid  imagery  of  the  experimenter,
staring  ;  vividness,  liveliness,  persistence  of  this  imagery,  etc.  ;
(2)  Kinaesthetic  sensations  or  images,  such  as  an  almost
irresistible  impulse  to  turn  around,  uncomfortable  sensations
localized  at  the  back  of  the  neck,  feeling  of  the  eyes  drawn
toward  an  imaged  line  of  connection  with  the  experimenter,
etc.  ;  (3)  Inferences  from  sound  impressions  resulting  from  the
experimenter's  manipulation  of  the  apparatus,  such  as  the
rustle  of  clothing,  lengthened  interval  before  the  tap,  etc.

These  factors  make  up  the  essential  process  at  work  when
the  reagent  has  the  "  feeling  of  being  stared  at,"  and  are
responsible  for  the  reagent's  confidence  in  the  reliability  of
the  feeling.

Apart  from  supposed  verification  of  the  belief,  therefore,
psychological  ground  for  it  consists  in  attributing  an  objective
validity  to  commonly  experienced  subjective  impressions  in  the
form  of  imagery,  sensations,  and  impulses.  From  this  common
tendency  spring  Hallucinations  and  Motor  Automatisms.


II.  Guessing  of  Playing -Cards.

Thirty  students  (12  of  them  men),  favourably  inclined
toward  telepathic  phenomena,  well  representative  of  normal
people,  taking  their  special  work  in  15  different  departments
in  the  university  and  registering  from  14  different  States,
made  100  guesses  each,  with  the  following  result  :

"  Not  Imaged."  Total


Card.

Colour.

No.

Suit.

guesses

Right  cases

37

731

119

377

1454

Per  cent.  Right

2-5

50-3

8-2

25-6

Probability

2-5

50

10

25

"  Imaged."

Total

Card.

Colour.

No.

Suit.

guesses.

Right  cases

42

748

157

378

1546

Per  cent.  Right

2-7

48-4

10-2

24-5

Probability

2-5

50

10

25

Guesses  given  with  a  high  degree  of  certainty  do  not  cor-
relate with  Right  cases,  and  do  not  occur  more  often  in  the


190


John  E.  Coover,  Ph.D. [part  Lxvni.]


"  imaged  "  than  in  the  "  not  imaged  "  experiments,  nor  does
the  imagery  contributing  to  that  certainty  correspond  to  the
kind  of  imagery  or  impression  the  experimenter  held  in  his
mind  ;  analysis  of  introspections  indicated  elements  common
to  subjective  experience  as  responsible  for  the  higher  grades
of  certainty  ;  but  as  to  those  elements  the  reagents  varied  :
19  depended  dominantly  upon  visual  imagery,  3  upon  kin-
aesthetic,  3  upon  kinaesthetic-auditory,  4  upon  mixed  imagery,
and  1  upon  almost  no  imagery.

III.  Guessing  of  Lotto-Blocks.

One  reagent,  trained  in  laboratory  work  and  favourable
toward  the  telepathic  hypothesis,  made  1000  guesses  with
the  following  results  :

Tens  Units

Whole  No. Tens Units for for Trans-  Total
Correct. Correct.  Correct  Units. Tens, posed.  Guesses.

"Not  Imaged" 1-18%  11-1% 9-1%  7-4%  8-0%  0-8%  502

"Imaged" 1  00 12-8 10-2 6-6 6-0 1-23  498

Probability  1-23 12-5 10 6-9 6-9  0-85

Highly  graded  guesses  again  do  not  correlate  with  Right
cases,  and  do  not  occur  more  frequently  in  the  "  imaged  "
than  in  the  "  not  imaged  "  experiments,  nor  does  the  imagery
correspond  to  the  imagery  or  impression  held  in  the  mind  of
the  experimenter.

Introspections  show  that  impressions  came  in  four  different
kinds  of  imagery  :  Visual,  kinaesthetic,  auditory,  kinaesthetic-
auditory.  The  higher  grades  of  certainty  were  contributed
by  (1)  Vividness  of  the  imagery,  (2)  its  early  appearance,
(3)  flashing  out,  and  (4)  persistence.

The  research  will  be  continued  with  normal  people  in  the
hope  of  finding  the  beginnings  of  whatever  capacities  are
later  found  in  working  with  "  sensitives,"  upon  whom  experi-
ments are  now  being  made.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LXIX.
July,  1914.


r.

PHILOSOPHY,  SCIENCE,  AND  PSYCHICAL
RESEARCH  :

A  PRESLDENTL4L  ADDRESS,

Delivered  on  June  29th,  1914,

By  F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.

It  was  with  no  little  hesitation  that  I  accepted  the  great
honour  to  which  the  Council  of  our  Society  has  this  year
elected  me.  For  I  am  not  at  all  sure  that  a  philosopher
ought  to  be  called  upon  to  preside  over  a  Society  which  has
scientific  exploration  for  its  aim,  the  more  so  when  its  researches
are  as  arduous  and  prolonged  as  ours.  For  the  philosophic
temper  seems  to  be  contemptuous  of  the  minute  details  which
count  for  so  much  in  science,  and  impatient  of  the  slow  but
unceasing  advances  which  constitute  the  normal  progression
of  a  science. They  contrast  too  much  with  the  procedure  of


192


F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


the  speculative  method,  with  its  spectacular  flights,  gorgeous
guesses,  and  hazardous  predictions,  which  it  flatters  itself
can  be  guaranteed  by  reasoning  a  priori.  But  the  more  I  see
of  philosophic  interventions  in  scientific  questions,  the  more
sceptical  I  become  about  their  value,  and  the  more  doubtful
whether  irrefragable  proofs  that  a  thing  must  be  so  render
it  in  the  least  more  likely  that  it  is  so  in  fact.  The  deductive
arguments  from  general  principles,  to  which  philosophers
are  addicted,  therefore,  seem  to  be,  not  only  useless,  but
positively  mischievous.  They  always  assume  what  we  none
of  us  know,  to  wit,  where  the  limits  of  the  possible  are  laid
down.

But  amid  such  doubts  I  take  heart  again  when  I  think
of  the  grand  succession  of  philosophers  who  have  presided
over  the  destinies  of  our  Society  before  me.  Henry  Sidgwick,
William  James,  and  Henri  Bergson  rank  with  the  greatest
names  in  the  philosophy,  not  only  of  our  day,  but  of  all
time.

And  they  have  all  served  us  nobly.  Henry  Sidgwick  was  a
chief  among  our  founders,  our  first  and  most  essential  Presi-
dent, who  nursed  the  Society  through  the  perils  of  infancy.
Well  do  I  remember  those  days,  though  it  is  now  over  thirty
years  ago,  when  to  profess  an  interest  in  Psychical  Research
meant  to  incur  an  imputation  of  insanity.  We  should  hardly
have  lived  down  the  unreasoning  prejudices  that  poisoned
the  social  atmosphere,  had  we  not  been  guided  so  long  by  the
counsels  of  a  man,  whose  genius  for  common-sense  stood
between  us  and  almost  inevitable  condemnation  for  cranki-
ness, and  whose  stainless  candour  shielded  us  against  attacks
both  from  within  and  from  without  in  the  pursuit  of  an  enter-
prise in  which  fraud  and  self  deception  are  a  perpetual  danger.

To  William  James  we  owe,  not  only  the  claim  which  the
support  of  the  greatest  psychologist  of  all  time  has  given  us
upon  all  succeeding  investigators  of  his  science,  but  also  the
discovery  of  Mrs.  Piper  and  a  number  of  most  brilliant  and
inspiring  papers.

About  Henri  Bergson,  the  first  metaphysician  who  has
radically  challenged  the  stupid  old  tradition,  which  has  come
down  from  the  Eleatics,  that  time  is  unreal  and  change  im-
possible, I  will  say  nothing  for  the  moment. You  must


lxix.] Philosophy,  Science,  and  Psychical  Research.  193


all  have  read  the  charming  Address  which  delighted  and
instructed  us  so  much  last  year,  and  I  mean  to  take  up  one
or  two  of  his  points  later.

It  is  clear  therefore  that  our  Society  has  been  most  fortunate
in  its  philosophers.  And  this  is  the  more  surprising  because
one  does  not  usually  associate  the  patronage  of  scientific
adventures  with  philosophers.  When  they  are  not  '  specu-
lating '  on  their  own  account,  they  seem  as  a  rule  to  play  for
safety,  and  to  content  themselves  with  ex  post  facto  1  reflec-
tion '  on  the  work  of  others.  This  conception  has  been  classi-
cally formulated  in  Hegel's  famous  comparison  of  philosophy
with  the  owl  of  Minerva,  which  takes  flight  only  at  nightfall.1
He  meant,  presumably,  that  it  loves  obscurity,  gets  on  the
wing  when  the  day's  work  is  done,  and  pursues  its  prey  in
the  dark.  I  am  afraid  this  is  only  too  true  of  much  philo-
sophy, and  it  explains  why  men  of  affairs  and  men  of  science
as  heartily  despise  the  ex  post  facto  explanations  of  philoso-
phers after  the  event  as  they  suspect  their  a  priori  dogmatism
before.

But  it  is  not  true  of  all  philosophy,  and  was  not  true  of
the  great  philosophers  who  have  supported  us,  and  of  whom
I  may  claim  to  be  not  only  a  successor,  but  also  in  some  measure
a  follower.  There  is  another  and  a  truer  philosophy,  which
by  way  of  contrast  with  the  philosophy  of  the  owl  we  may
call  that  of  the  Lark.  It  conceives  the  duty  of  philosophy
to  be,  not  a  priori  speculation  and  ex  post  facto  reflection
merely,  but  the  preliminary  exploration,  which  heralds  man's
conquest  of  new  realms  of  knowledge.  So  it  rises  above  the
common  clods  of  earth  and  soars  carolling  to  the  sky,  pointing
out  to  men  the  upward  and  onward  way.  Or,  in  less  poetical
language,  it  is  possible,  and  at  times  even  essential,  to  prepare
the  way  for  science  by  ingenious  guessing,  and  this  is  why
so  many  of  the  successful  scientific  conceptions  have  originated
with  philosophers.  I  will  remind  you  only  of  Anaximander's
anticipations  of  Darwin,  of  the  Atomism  of  Democritus,
of  Heraclitus's  discovery  of  the  Universal  Flux,  of  the  Stoic
doctrine  of  the  periodical  conflagrations  of  stellar  systems,
of  Descartes's  adoption  of  the  Mechanical  Theory,  of  Berkeley's
Immaterialism,  of  Kant's  Nebular  Hypothesis. There  was

1  Preface  to  the  Philosophy  of  Right,  s.f.


194


F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


nothing  owlish  about  these  guesses  ;  if  they  erred,  it  was
from  excess  of  daring.

There  is  lastly  the  philosophy  of  that  self-sacrificing  bird
the  Pelican,  which  does  not  selfishly  seclude  itself  in  the
contemplation  of  the  eternal  and  immutable  and  indifferent,
but  tries  to  be  useful  and  beneficial  to  men.  And  the  Pelican
is,  I  am  proud  to  remember,  the  totem  of  my  own  College.1
But  the  Pelican  must  follow  in  the  wake  of  the  Lark.  For
there  is  need  of  Daring  in  intellectual,  as  in  warlike,  adventures,
and  we  particularly  need  the  spirit  of  the  lark,  if  we  would
rise  above  our  actual  horizon  and  explore  the  undiscovered
country.

But  in  what  direction  is  it  best  worth  exploring  at  present,
and  to  what  points  can  your  attention  be  most  usefully
directed  ?  These  were,  of  course,  questions  I  had  to  consider.
It  seemed  to  me  that  in  our  present  era  of  incipient  exploration
of  the  psychic  terra  incognita  I  could  best  serve  the  cause  by
discussing  some  problems  of  our  proper  logical  equipment,  and
by  clearing  away  certain  metaphysical  obstructions  which
beset  the  minds  of  many.  I  hope  however  you  will  not  be
terrified  by  hearing  that  I  am  going  to  talk  both  logic  and
metaphysics,  and  will  not  make  up  your  minds  in  advance
that  I  am  going  to  be  unintelligible.  Logic  is,  I  know,  uni-
versally respected,  though  no  one  reads  it  ;  while  those  who
read  metaphysics  mostly  do  so,  one  feels,  not  to  be  enlightened
so  much  as  to  have  their  sense  of  the  inscrutable  mystery
of  everything  stimulated  and  augmented.  We,  however,
as  scientific  pioneers,  must  go  armed  with  a  logic  that  we
can  use  as  an  instrument  to  cut  a  clear  path  through  the  wilder-
ness, and  must  not  be  afraid  of  bogies,  metaphysical,  or  other-
wise. Indeed  it  may  be  that  by  going  ahead  boldly  we  shall
not  only  advance  our  own  subject  but  perform  a  notable
service  both  to  metaphysics  and  to  logic.

Let  me  start,  therefore,  from  an  important  and  interesting
fact  to  which  Prof.  Bergson  has  directed  our  attention.2
The  evidence  of  psychic  phenomena,  which  we  collect,  is
primarily  historical,  and  has  to  be  ascertained  according
to  the  canons  used  by  the  historian  and  the  lawyer,  rather

1  Corpus  Christi — though  we  also  own  to  the  owl.
-Proc.  Vol.  XXVI.,  p.  464  f.


lxix.] Philosophy,  Science,  and  Psychical  Research.  195

than  by  the  methods  of  the  laboratory  experimenter.  Now
this  profoundly  true  remark  indicates  the  great  gulf  which
exists  between  our  procedure  and  that,  not  only  of  the  exact,
but  also  of  the  experimental,  sciences.  For  you  see  a  historical
event  occurs  once,  and  is  not  to  be  repeated.  History  never
repeats  itself.  Julius  Caesar  was  assassinated  only  once,
and  if  we  wish  to  know  how,  and  how  large  precisely  was
the  rent  the  envious  Casca  made,  we  must  get  the  historical
eye-witnesses  to  record  their  evidence  accurately  and  at
once,  and  compare  and  criticize  their  several  accounts.  That
too  is  essentially  what  we  have  to  do  with  our  ghost  stories,
etc.  If  we  are  lucky,  and  get  hold  of  the  story  while  it  is  still
fresh  and  the  witnesses  are  still  alive, — and  this,  I  am  glad
to  note,  we  are  being  allowed  to  do  much  oftener  than  formerly
— we  can  proceed  to  strengthen  our  historical  evidence  by
applying  the  methods  of  the  law-courts.  We  can  question
our  witnesses  and  cross-examine  them  to  a  certain  extent.
But  we  cannot,  as  a  rule,  repeat  the  experience.  We  cannot
summon  spirits  from  the  vasty  deep  at  will,  and  cinemato-
graph their  performances,  in  order  that  if  they  do  anything
we  did  not  observe  closely  enough,  we  can  make  them  do  it
over  again  slowly.  In  short,  we  can  experiment  not  at  all,  or
hardly  at  all.  Consequently  we  cannot  multiply  our  evidence
at  will,  nor  crush  our  critics  by  its  accumulating  weight.

But  worse  remains  to  be  confessed.  Our  evidence  does
not  accumulate  in  the  strict  sense  at  all.  The  longer  we  keep
it,  the  worse  it  gets,  and  that  through  no  fault  of  its  own.
It  wastes  insensibly  away  through  the  mere  efflux  of  time,
and,  so  far  from  growing  greater  with  the  growth  of  interest,
our  scientific  capital  is  composed  of  wasting  assets.

The  reason  is  quite  simple.  The  strength  of  our  evidence
depended  on  our  securing  first-hand  records  from  trustworthy
witnesses  and  getting  them  competently  examined  and  criticized
by  honourable  investigators.  So  long  as  our  witnesses  and  our
investigators  are  alive,  therefore,  they  can  confront  the  hostile
sceptic  in  person,  and  will  have  the  support  of  those  who
know  them  and  believe  in  them.  But  as  the  original  witnesses
and  investigators  pass  away,  their  evidence  inevitably  under-
goes a  serious  and  progressive  loss  in  value.  Coming  generations
have  nothing  to  go  by  but  a  paper  record,  and  a  record  of  its


196


F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


recorders.  They  can  know  neither  the  witnesses  nor  the
investigators  personally,  and  hence  the  value  of  the  evidence
may  shrink  incalculably.  Whoever  wants  to  disbelieve  it
has  merely  to  get  up  and  say  the  witnesses  were  liars  or  lunatics.
'  Why  don't  these  marvels  happen  now  ?  Certainly  they
seem  weU  attested  ;  but  what  if  the  records  were  biased  or
fraudulent  ?  Anyhow  they  are  not  up  to  modern  scientific
standards.'  Nor  can  any  one  refute  him.  At  present  even
those  of  us  who  have  discovered  nothing  at  first  hand  (and
their  numbers  are  regrettably  large)  can  yet  reply  '  such
insinuations  are  absurd  ;  we  have  known  Edmund  Gurney
and  Henry  Sidgwick  and  Frederic  Myers  and  Richard  Hodgson,
and  William  James,  and  they  were  all  honourable  men,  in
whose  integrity  and  intelligence  we  could  safely  put  our
trust.'  But  will  any  one  be  able  to  feel  this  as  strongly
100  or  1000  years  hence  ?  Surely  we  must  recognize  that
however  fully  and  carefully  we  record  our  cases  now,  it  is
simply  a  question  of  time  for  them  to  become  as  inadequate
for  scientific  purposes  and  as  unconvincing  to  our  successors
as  the  records  of  similar  events  in  the  past  had  become  to  us.
In  other  words  we  must  recognize  it  as  an  intrinsic  limitation
of  historical  evidence  that  it  can  hardly  ever  be,  and  can
never  remain,  scientifically  adequate,  and  that  therefore
our  evidence  also  can  never  be  made  scientifically  cogent,
so  long  as  it  remains  historical.

We  labour,  then,  under  a  serious  disability.  But  is  it
incurable  ?  The  answer  must  be,  yes  and  no.  Yes,  in  so
far  as  we  continue  to  depend  on  crude  evidence  :  for  the  crude
evidence  is  always  historical,  even  in  the  sciences.  All  scientific
discoveries  are  in  the  first  place  historical  events.  That
Newton  had  the  law  of  gravitation  suggested  to  him  by  the
fall  of  the  apple,  that  he  made  certain  calculations  and  pre-
dicted the  orbit  of  the  moon,  that  his  predictions  failed  at
first  because  his  data  were  wrong,  and  afterwards,  when
he  had  got  hold  of  better  ones,  succeeded  (approximately),
are,  or  are  believed  to  be,  historical  facts,  without  which  our
law  of  gravitation  would  not  have  come  into  being.1  Nor

1  Of  course  if  some  one  else  than  Newton  had  subsequently  propounded  the
same  formula,  there  would  still  have  been  a  set  of  historical  circumstances
conditioning  the  discovery.


lxix.] Philosophy,  Science,  and  Psychical  Research.  197

does  our  recognition  of  it  as  an  '  eternal '  truth  exempt  it
from  dependence  on  such  facts.  If  it  is  to  remain  '  true,'
it  needs  a  continuous  supply  of  historical  verifications  ;
its  predictions  must  continue  to  come  true  and  never  fail.
If  at  any  time  a  gravitating  body  should  be  observed  to  move
unpredictably,  a  question  would  arise  about  the  truth  of
Newton's  law,  and  it  might  have  to  be  amended.  Even  the
best  established  laws  of  nature,  therefore,  rest  in  fact  on  a
finite  number  of  historical  observations,  and  in  the  case  of
laws  which  can  be  verified  only  with  difficulty,  or  at  long
intervals,  that  number  is  by  no  means  large.  It  takes  seventy-
eight  years  (more  or  less)  to  verify  the  orbit  of  Halley's  comet,
and  it  would  seem  that  at  most  abort  forty  reappearances  of
this  luminary  are  on  record.  The  atomic  weight  of  some
of  the  rarer  metals  has  probably  not  been  calculated  more
than  three  or  four  times,  and  finally  there  are  whole  sciences
(like  palaeontology)  in  which  important  conclusions  repose
upon  single  historical  observations  as  to  where  a  bone  was
found  in  a  bed.  Thus  the  name  and  fame,  nay  the  very
existence,  of  Pithecanthropus  erectus,  the  '  Missing  Link,'
depend  on  the  truthfulness  and  competence  of  Dr.  Eugene
Dubois's  assurance  that  he  had  found  a  cranium  sufficiently
near  a  thigh  bone  for  both  to  be  attributed  to  the  same
creature.  In  all  these  cases  any  source  of  error  in  the
historical  data  may  radically  vitiate  all  the  beliefs  that  are
built  upon  them.

So  far  then  our  evidence  does  not  differ  from  that  on  which
all  science  ultimately  rests,  and  it  is  a  mistake  to  imagine
that  crude  historical  evidence  can  be  dispensed  with.  Even
the  sciences  that  predict  most  boldly  and  successfully  rest
on  historical  evidence  and  individual  witnesses,  and  depend
on  confirmation  by  experience.  Nor  do  the  mathematical
sciences  form  a  real  exception.  For  though  in  their  case  we
seem  to  be  free  to  make  what  assumptions  we  please,  and  to
work  them  out  as  consistently  as  we  please,  the  only  thing
that  guarantees  to  our  procedures  any  relevance  or  applica-
bility to  the  course  of  real  events  is  that  we  should  have
happened  to  hit  upon  assumptions  which  turn  out  to  be  service-
able idealizations  of  reality.  However  enthusiastic  therefore
we may  be about  the exactness and  apriority  of  pure


198


F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


mathematics,  we  must  leave  the  truth  of  applied  mathematics
essentially  empirical.  There  is  nothing  in  the  number-system
to  secure  that  it  shall  always  be  supplied  with  things  that
can  be  numbered,  nothing  in  any  geometry  to  guarantee  a
supply  of  shapes  that  can  be  treated  as  if  they  were  geometrical.
Thus  it  is  their  actual  application  to  reality  which  raises  the
value  of  mathematics  above  that  of  difficult  games  with
imaginary  counters.

Nevertheless  it  is  not  true  that  the  sciences  are  wholly
dependent  on  truthful  records  of  events.  Their  truths  are
historical,  but  not  merely  historical,  and  herein  lies  the  real
difference  between  their  materials  and  ours.  This  difference
consists  essentially  in  the  extent  to  which  the  data  can  be
controlled.  Where  there  is  control  enough  to  experiment,
there  is  always  a  possibility  in  theory,  and  usually  in  fact,
of  indefinitely  repeating  and  multiplying  the  evidence,  on
which  the  truths  of  the  sciences  rest.  If,  therefore,  there  is
any  dispute  about  the  evidence,  it  is  possible  to  repeat  the
experiments  questioned,  with  special  attention  to  the  doubtful
points,  or,  better  still,  to  devise  such  new  and  improved  forms
of  them  as  will  meet  the  objections  urged.  Thus,  though  the
evidence  is  historical  and  its  amount  may  actually  be  small,
more  can  be  manufactured  on  demand,  and  it  is  therefore
scientifically  adequate.

The  existence,  therefore,  of  such  experimental  control
revolutionizes  the  logical  situation.  It  justifies  an  entirely
different  method  of  discussion  and  an  entirely  different  notion
of  proof.  It  puts  '  dialectical  '  disputation  and  logic-chopping
out  of  court  altogether.  When  a  doubt  arises  whether  a  pheno-
menon has  been  correctly  observed,  it  is  no  longer  necessary
to  go  into  the  pros  and  cons  of  a  historical  record,  and  to
dispute  about  the  honesty  and  competence  of  the  observers
with  critics  who  may  be  bitterly  prejudiced  for  all  sorts  of
reasons  that  are  not  revealed — not  because  a  good  case  cannot
often  be  made  out  in  their  favour,  but  because  it  is  no  longer
worth  while.  It  is  much  simpler  and  more  satisfactory  to
repeat  the  experiments,  and  so  to  make  fresh  evidence.  Thus
when  in  the  early  days  of  wireless  telegraphy  the  Marconi
Company  first  claimed  to  have  transmitted  a  signal  across
the  Atlantic,  and  this  claim  was  disputed,  there  did  not  arise


lxix.] Philosophy,  Science,  and  Psychical  Research.  199

a  literary  controversy  as  to  what  exactly  happened  on  this
particular  occasion.  The  company  simply  went  on  perfecting
its  apparatus  until  it  got  through  so  many  messages  of  such
importance  that  it  was  no  longer  worth  the  captious  critic's
while  to  dispute  its  achievement.  In  short,  where  there  is
experimental  control  the  decisive  appeal  is  to  facts,  and  not
to  dialectical  reasoning  and  argument,  though  it  has  taken
mankind  a  long  time  to  learn  this,  and  some  philosophers
may  still  behave  like  the  Aristotelians  who  refused  to  look
through  telescopes,  lest  they  should  see  the  satellites  of  Jupiter
revolving  round  their  primary  and  behold  a  visible  refutation
of  their  master's  astronomy.

It  follows  that  in  Psychical  Research  also  we  should  aim,
not  so  much  at  establishing  that  any  particular  '  super-
normal '  event,  say  a  message  from  the  departed,  did  veritably
happen  at  a  particular  time,  but  at  getting  such  a  grasp  of
the  conditions  of  such  events  that  they  can  become  predictable
and  '  normal.'  We  live  in  a  beleaguered  city  that  is  hedged
round  and  beset  by  death  :  it  is  no  great  relief,  even  if  we
can  believe  it,  that  from  time  to  time  a  sporadic  message  should
get  through  the  blockading  lines  ;  what  we  need  is  to  be  assured
of  a  free  line  of  communication  with  our  friends  without,  that
will  render  our  life  the  outpost  of  a  larger  scheme.  That  the
real  '  G.P.'  or  Frederic  Myers  communicated  through  Mrs.
Piper  on  this  occasion  or  that,  we  shall  never  be  able  to
establish  to  every  one's  satisfaction ;  but  we  may  perhaps  learn
so  to  regulate  the  conditions  of  trance,  automatism,  and  other
forms  of  so-called  '  mediumship,'  that  they  will  yield  results,
as  in  the  natural  sciences,  which  progressively  increase  in  value
and  trustworthiness,  until  they  cease  to  be  laboratory  experi-
ments, and  enter  into  our  ordinary  practice  and  outlook  upon
life.  How  in  fact  that  is  to  be  achieved  I  cannot,  unfortunately,
tell  you  ;  for  that  would  be  the  real  discovery,  and  one  of  the
most  momentous  men  could  make.  But  we  are  far  more
likely  to  make  it,  if  we  make  it  clear  to  ourselves  that  it  is
the  discovery  to  aim  at.

Experimental  control  similarly  changes  the  notion  of
'  proof.'  It  liberates  us  from  the  illusion,  which  still
vitiates  so  much  of  the  argument  on  both  sides  in  Psychical
Research,  that  it  is  in  our  power  or  duty  to  contrive  a  single


200


F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[PART


unexceptionable  and  final  experiment  or  observation  which
will  constitute  an  absolute  and  coercive  proof  of  a  disputed
belief  once  and  for  all,  and  silence  sceptics  for  ever  after.
Once  we  capitulate  to  this  logical  superstition,  we  are  not
only  bound  to  reject  much  valuable  and  scientifically  suggestive
evidence  that  for  one  reason  or  another  does  not  come  up
to  this  standard  of  '  proof,'  and  to  engage  upon  a  wildgoose
chase  of  an  impossibly  perfect  case,  but  we  are  also  committed
to  endless  arguments  as  to  whether  a  particular  observation
does  or  does  not  reach  the  standard.  But  a  really  experi-
mental science  does  not  allow  its  progress  to  be  impeded  in
this  way.  It  says  to  the  objector — '  you  don't  think  our
evidence  good  enough.  Well,  I  will  not  dispute  with  you
about  case  A,  which  you  reject  ;  but  here  are  also  cases  B
and  C,  and  D,  and  so  forth  to  any  extent,  which,  though
not  one  of  them  is  ideally  perfect,  are  not  subject  to  the  same
objections  as  A.'  Thus,  by  the  indefinite  accumulation  of
evidence,  even  the  strongest  prejudices  are  slowly  overpowered.

It  is  possible  therefore  for  a  scieuce,  i.e.  a  systematic  inter-
pretation of  a  number  of  facts,  to  become  certain  and  indisput-
able, even  though  none  of  its  constituent  facts  are  per  se
beyond  cavil.  And  conversely,  if  a  scientific  investigation
is  put  into  a  position  in  which  its  evidence  is  not  allowed
to  accumulate,  it  can  never  be  secured  against  cavils,  and
remains  exposed  for  ever  to  attacks  which  experimental
control  would  justify  it  in  ignoring.

It  follows  moreover  that  much  of  the  criticism  to  which
our  evidence  is  subjected  is  mistaken  and  rests  upon  bad
logic.  It  is  assumed  that  proof  must  rest  upon  absolute
certainties,  and  cannot  accrue  from  a  confluence  of  proba-
bilities. It  is  then  shown  that  no  part  of  the  evidence  taken
piecemeal  is  absolutely  unexceptionable.  It  is,  thereupon,
rejected  as  inconclusive,  and  it  is  inferred  that  nothing  has
been  proved.  But  this  is  really  to  imply  that  evidence  must
never  be  allowed  to  accumulate,  that  probabilities  have  no
logical  value,  and  that  the  sort  of  evidence  on  which  most  of
the  sciences  rely  is  worthless.  It  would  clearly  be  inept  on
our  part  to  acquiesce  in  a  procedure  which  first  requires  us
to  prove  scientific  novelties  by  one  single  historical  case,
and  then  condemns  us  for  failing  in  this  impossible  attempt.


lxix.] Philosophy,  Science,  and  Psychical  Research.  201

It  is  evident  then  that  experimental  control  would  not  only
give  us  power  to  amass  evidence  to  our  hearts'  content,  but
would  enormously  improve  our  logical  position.  If  we  had
such  control,  even  to  a  slight  extent,  we  should  no  longer
need  to  waste  time  and  ingenuity  in  arguing  with  sceptics
about  the  precise  weight  of  particular  pieces  of  evidence  or
to  strain  after  one  single  invulnerable  piece  de  conviction.
We  could  calmly  let  the  evidence  accumulate  for  what  it  was
worth,  and  devote  our  energies  to  the  extension  and  improve-
ment of  that  control,  convinced  that  in  the  long  run  it  is  not
possible  to  deny  the  status  of  truth  to  knowledge  which  has
shown  itself  to  be  real,  by  proving  itself  useful  and  by  becoming
a  power  in  the  world.

It  seems  then  that  in  Psychical  Research  also  we  cannot
convince  others,  nor  in  the  end  perhaps  ourselves,  that  our
discoveries  are  real,  unless  they  conform  to  the  type  which
the  pragmatic  philosophy  assigns  to  all  genuine  knowledge,
i.e.  unless  they  increase  our  power  over  the  course  of  events.
Indeed  I  do  not  know  of  any  case  which  bears  out  more
strikingly  the  correctness  of  the  pragmatic  analysis  of  know-
ledge. What  other  case  is  there  of  alleged  knowledge  which
is  as  ancient,  as  important,  as  passionately  defended  and
attacked,  as  the  occult  and  mysterious  occurrences  which  our
Society  has  for  the  first  time  in  human  history  essayed  to
subject  to  systematic  investigation  ?  And  about  what  alleged
knowledge  also  have  disputes  raged  so  interminably  ?  Why  ?
The  testimony  to  the  genuineness  of  this  whole  realm  of  know-
ledge is  doubted  and  repudiated,  because  those  who  claimed
to  possess  such  knowledge  have  never  been  able  to  show  that
it  could  stand  the  pragmatic  test,  that  they  had  the  pheno-
mena under  control,  and  that  it  yielded  them  real  power.
Hence  the  world  has  never  been  willing  to  acknowledge  that
they  possessed  real  knowledge.

Let  me  illustrate  this  point  from  a  delightful  book  which
exhibits  a  rare  combination  of  philosophic  and  spiritual  insight,
Prof.  L.  P.  Jacks's  All  Men  are  Ghosts  (pp.  4-7).

Turning  the  tables  upon  us,  one  of  his  characters  declares
that  "  Ghosts  who  believe  in  the  existence  of  human  beings
often  regard  them  as  idiots.  To  communicate  with  such
imbeciles  is  to  court  an  insult,  or  at  least  to  expose  the


202


F.  C.  8.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


communicating  spirit  to  an  exhibition  of  revolting  antics  and
limited  intelligence.  From  their  point  of  view,  men  are  a
race  of  beings  whose  acquaintance  is  not  worth  cultivating."
By  the  majority  of  ghosts  "  belief  in  the  existence  of  beings
like  yourself  is  regarded  as  betokening  a  want  of  mental
balance.  A  ghost  who  should  venture  to  assert  that  you,
for  example,  were  real  would  certainly  risk  his  reputation,
and  if  he  held  a  scientific  professorship  or  an  ecclesiastical
appointment  he  would  be  .  .  .  made  the  victim  of  some
persecution.  .  .  .  The  ghosts  have  among  them  a  Psychical
Research  Society  which  has  been  occupied  for  many  years
in  investigating  the  reality  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  planet.

"A  friend  of  mine,  who  is  a  Doctor  of  Science,  and  extremely
scornful  as  to  the  existence  of  spirits,  is  actually  undergoing
examination  by  the  ghosts.  .  .  .  Some  assert  that  he  is  a
low  form  of  mental  energy  which  has  managed  to  get  astray
in  the  universe.  Others  declare  that  he  is  a  putrid  emanation
from  some  kind  of  matter  which  science  has  not  yet  identified,
without  consciousness,  but  by  no  means  without  odour.
They  allege  that  they  have  walked  through  him.  ..."

"By  the  vast  majority  of  ghosts  the  proceedings  of  the  Society
are  viewed  with  indifference  and  the  claim,  which  is  occasionally
made,  that  communication  has  been  established  with  the
beings  whom  we  know  as  men  is  treated  with  contempt.  The
critics  point  to  the  extreme  triviality  of  the  alleged  com-
munications from  this  world.  They  say  nothing  of  the
least  importance  has  ever  come  through  from  the  human
side,  and  are  wont  to  make  merry  over  the  imbecility  and
disjointed  nonsense  of  the  messages  reported  by  the  mediums*
for  you  must  understand  that  there  are  mediums  on  that
side  as  well  as  on  this.  Some  time  ago,  two  questions,  pur-
porting to  come  from  this  world,  reached  the  ghosts.  One
was  '  What  will  be  the  price  of  Midland  Preferred  on  Jan.
1,  1915  ?  ' The  other,  '  Will  it  be  a  boy  or  a  girl  ?  '  "

Why  do  you  laugh  at  these  questions  ?  Are  they  not
psychologically  natural  questions  for  us  to  ask,  and  questions
about  what  it  concerns  men  greatly  to  know  ?  Nay,  are
they  not  logically  good  test  questions,  and  would  not  correct
answers  to  them  unquestionably  be  convincing  ?  Could
any  one  persist  in  disbelieving  the  genuineness  of  supernormal


lxix.] Philosophy,  Science,  and  Psychical  Research.  203

communications  if  they  conveyed  information  bearing  so
directly  on  his  vital  interests  ?  And  if  he  did,  should  we  not
confidently  expect  one  who  was  blind  to  the  advantages  of
such  valuable  information  to  be  speedily  eliminated  by  natural
selection  ?  Whatever,  therefore,  may  be  the  idiosyncrasies
of  individuals,  the  race  has  to  be  empirically-minded  enough
to  believe  whatever  is  enforced  by  a  long  course  of  successful
and  valuable  prediction.  You  may  convince  yourselves  of
this  by  an  illustration  taken  from  an  ingenious  tale,  by  Mr.
H.  G.  Wells,  if  I  remember  rightly,  of  a  race  of  men  con-
genially blind,  in  whose  midst  by  some  freak  of  atavism  a
child  was  born  gifted  with  sight.  Being  a  seer,  he  became
•of  course  a  prophet ;  i.e.  he  was  able  to  predict,  super  normally,
a  vast  number  of  events  which  duly  came  to  pass.  He  could
foretell  to  his  blind  fellows  that  if  they  walked  on  so  many
yards  in  a  certain  direction  they  would  run  into  a  rock  or
encounter  a  bull,  and  would  of  course  himself  avoid  many
dangers  he  could  see  approaching.  At  first,  of  course,  his
claim  to  be  possessed  of  an  additional  sense  and  a  consequential
extension  of  his  means  of  knowing  would  be  scouted,  and
fraud,  coincidence,  or  lying  be  alleged  in  explanation  of  his
feats  ;  but  in  the  end  the  regular  success  of  the  seer's  pre-
dictions and  the  superior  adaptations  which  they  rendered
possible,  i.e.  the  practical  value  of  his  endowment,  would  force
the  reluctant  blind  to  admit  the  existence  of  a  sense  they  did
not  possess.  And  if  they  reflected  intelligently  on  this  result,
they  would  perceive  also  that  here  was  one  way  in  which
practical  value  could  establish  '  theoretic  '  truth.

Why  then  are  questions  of  the  sort  that  Professor  Jacks
satirizes  felt  to  be  absurd  ?  Their  absurdity  lies  in  their
naive  assumption  that  they  are  equally  interesting  to  the
denizens  of  another  world,  to  whom  they  are  supposed  to  be
addressed,  and  are  not  merely  natural  questions  for  us  to
ask,  but  also  for  them  to  answer.  They  presuppose  a  com-
munity of  interests  between  the  two  worlds,  which  seems  to  us
presumptuous  and  absurdly  unlikely.

Yet  there  is  nothing  in  itself  absurd  in  presuming  a  com-
munity of  interests.  Unless  we  can  find  or  make  such  a  thing,
we  can  hardly  hope  to  establish  any  effective  communication.
It  is  no  use  trying  to  ring  up  any  one  on  the  telephone  who


204


F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


does  not  want  to  converse  with  you,  because  he  knows  you  will
bore  him  with  your  personal  affairs  in  which  he  takes  no  interest.

The  flaw  in  these  questions  lies  in  the  one-sidedness,  blind-
ness, and  egotism  of  the  st.  adpoint  from  which  they  are
asked.  If  we  want  to  enter  into  communication  with  other
worlds,  we  must  endeavour  to  ask,  not  only  questions  to
which  the  answers  would  be  of  value  to  us,  but  also  questions
which  will  seem  worth  answering  to  those  we  address.  And
this  I  think  we  have  so  far  failed  to  do.  Whether  we  conceive
them  to  have  been  addressed  to  angels,  devils,  spirits  of  the
departed  or  '  elementals,'  our  questions  must  have  seemed
intolerably  silly,  and  (as  a  rule)  the  answers  have  paid  us
out  in  kind.  It  may  well  be,  therefore,  that  the  value  of  the
responses  we  have  elicited  has  been  so  small,  because  we  have
been  so  stupid  ;  it  would  be  unscientific  to  infer  from  our
failures  either  that  no  communication  is  possible  or  even  that
it  has  not  occasionally  in  some  measure  been  achieved.  But,
as  a  rule,  the  few  who  have  not  been  too  engrossed  in  mundane
affairs  to  interest  themselves  in  such  attempts  have  asked
for  information  either  about  spiritual  spheres,  and  got  de-
scriptions that  were  humanly  quite  unveriiiable,  or  about
such  of  their  earthly  affairs  as  could  hardly  be  subjects  of
interest  and  competence  to  the  denizens  of  other  worlds.
They  have  not  contrived  questions  of  interest  to  both  sides,
which  would  yield  evidential  answers.

I  do  not,  however,  wish  to  imply  that  the  fault  is  wholly
on  our  side.  It  may  well  have  been  that  the  only  common
interest  to  which  we  could  hitherto  appeal  was  precisely
the  personal  one,  viz.  the  desire  to  get  through  a  message
of  greeting  and  consolation  to  those  whom  death  had  left
bereaved.  That  certainly,  rather  than  the  purely  scientific
desire  to  extend  our  knowledge,  has  been  the  driving  force
in  such  researches  as  there  have  been  on  our  side.  And  why
not  also  on  the  other  ?  Such  personal  messages  have  not
infrequently  convinced  those  for  whom  they  were  intended.
But,  unfortunately,  they  can  rarely  be  made  to  appear
evidential  to  the  world  at  large,  which  cannot  judge  the
facts,  and  naturally  suspects  the  bias  of  those  who  can.

Success  in  Psychical  Research,  therefore,  seems  to  need
not  merely  systematic  and  continuous  effort  on  our  part,


lxix.] Philosophy,  Science,  and  Psychical  Research.


205


organized  with  much  larger  resources  both  in  men  and  money
than  the  world  has  yet  placed  at  our  disposal,  but  also  intelli-
gent co-operation  in  what,  for  purposes  of  reference  alone,
I  ma,y  call  the  '  spirit  '  world.  And  on  both  sides  the  efforts
made  will  have  to  be  prompted  largely  by  a  scientific  desire
to  break  down  the  barriers  that  evidently  exist  between  the
different  phases  of  being.  These  barriers,  if  a  '  spirit '  world
exists  at  all — and  I  have  elsewhere  shown  that  there  are  no
reasons,  scientific,  philosophical  or  theological,  why  there
should  not  be  one 1— are  probably  mainly  psychological  in
character,  and  no  more  substantial  than  the  flimsy  fences
that  restrict  the  grazing  of  the  Alpine  cow.

In  other  words  we  need  a  S.P.R.  on  the  other  side  as  well
as  on  this.  And  if  we  may  trust  the  gradually  hardening
convictions  of  those  who  have  most  intimately  and  laboriously
studied  at  first  hand  the  complicated  evidence  of  Cross-Cor-
respondences, we  seem  to  be  getting  something  of  the  sort,
as  more  and  more  of  those  who  were  devoted  to  Psychical
Research  in  a  lofty  scientific  spirit  join  the  majority.  But
I  fear  that  the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  Psychical  Research
must  be  even  greater  on  the  other  side  than  on  this.  For  a
variety  of  reasons,  largely  discreditable  and  therefore  unavowed,
Psychical  Research  is  far  from  popular  on  earth.  There  are
pretty  good  reasons  why  it  should  be  even  more  unpopular
in  the  beyond.  For  the  conditions  are  much  less  favourable.
No  one  can  seriously  and  honestly  contend  that  it  is  a  good
thing  that  we  should  know  nothing  about  what  death  means
to  what,  again  for  the  purpose  of  provisional  reference,  I
must  call  the  individual  soul,  and  about  what  may  befall  it
after  that — for  I  greatly  doubt  whether  the  sentiments  of  those
who  say  that  knowledge  would  destroy  the  merit  of  faith
have  been  interpreted  aright.  But  it  is  easy  to  conceive
that,  once  the  ordeal  of  death  is  passed,  it  may  seem  in  a
high  degree  repugnant,  unnecessary,  and  degrading  to  allow
one's  thoughts  to  dwell  on  the  dreadful  past  and  to  attempt
to  resume  relations  with  a  world  like  ours.  It  would  at  any
rate  demand  some  leisure  and  a  high  degree  of  unselfishness
and  independence  of  a  social  sentiment  which  would  doubtless

1  Cf.  Riddles  of  the  Sphinx,  Ch.  XI. ;  Humanism,  Ch.  XVII. -XIX. ;  Studies
in  Humanism,  Ch.  XX.


206


F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


denounce  communication  with  our  earthly  sphere  as  dis-
gustingly '  bad  form,'  and  make  its  reprobation  felt  in  appro-
priate ways.  So  it  would  accord  with  what  we  know  of  human
nature  that,  if  we  survive  death,  we  shall  continue  to  live
for  the  future  rather  than  in  the  past,  and  to  be  sensitive  and
submissive  to  social  sentiment.

We  have  come  then  upon  a  number  of  grave  intrinsic
obstacles  to  Psychical  Research  :  (1)  In  trying  to  establish
communications  with  other  worlds  we  are  probably  dealing
with  forces  which  are  not  seriously  interested  in  us,  or  nothing
like  as  much  as  we  are  in  them  ;  (2)  At  present  these  forces
are  beyond  our  control.

(3)  We  have  scarcely  any  more  control  over  the  forces
at  our  end  of  the  line,  which  we  could  use  as  instruments
of  exploration.  For  the  1  physical  '  forces,  which  we  have
learnt  to  some  extent  to  control  and  use,  seem  to  fail  us  here.
There  seems  to  be  very  little  analogy,  and  an  almost  absolute
difference  of  kind,  between  the  '  physical  '  and  the  '  psychical.'
And  though  I  quite  believe  that  in  the  end,  when  we  have
made  as  serious  and  sustained  efforts  to  understand  the
psychical  as  we  have  the  physical,  and  considered  the  whole
antithesis  in  a  philosophic  manner,  this  difference  will  turn
out  to  be  as  arbitrary  and  fictitious  in  fact  as  it  historically
was  in  origin,  it  is  at  present  unfortunately  true  that  psycho-
logists have  not  yet  succeeded  in  making  the  methods  which
are  effective  in  the  physical  sciences  work  in  the  psychical.

Nor  have  they  succeeded  as  yet  to  any  important  extent
in  devising  any  methods  which  are  distinctively  psychical.
Hence  psychology  at  present  seems  to  concern  itself  chiefly
with  the  multitudinous  rivalries  of  alternative  descriptions
of  the  psychic  processes  or  data,  all  of  which  rest  on  arbitrary
abstractions  and  fictions,  and  none  of  which  exhibit  any
decisive  superiority  by  working  better  than  their  competitors
and  showing  themselves  more  extensively  applicable  to  the  life
of  psychic  beings.1  In  other  words,  psychology  at  present  stands

1  Perhaps  these  remarks  do  not  apply  quite  so  definitely  to  the  descriptions
of  '  functional '  psychologies  as  to  '  structural,'  nor  to  the  hypnotic  and
'  psycho-analytic  '  methods  of  practical  psychologists  like  Morton  Prince,
Boris  Sidis  and  Freud,  which  have  to  some  extent  verified  themselves  by
yielding  actual  cures.


lxix.] Philosophy,  Science,  and  Psychical  Research.


207


the  pragmatic  test  hardly  any  better  than  Psychical  Research.
Some  day  it  may  supply  us  with  real  knowledge  about  the
'  soul.'  which  we  can  apply  and  act  on;  but  that  day  is  not  yet.1

(4)  This  inadequacy  of  psychology  and  of  its  knowledge
of  the  '  soul  '  brings  me  to  the  last  point  to  which  I  can  draw
your  attention  to-day,  viz.  the  general  inadequacy  of  the
conceptions  with  which  we  have  to  operate  in  analysing  the
phenomena  that  are  offered  us.

That  our  notions  should  be  inadequate  is  not  of  course
astonishing  in  itself.  For  the  conceptions  in  use  everywhere
embody  merely  the  knowledge  on  record,  and  nothing  more
can  be  extracted  from  them  than  was  put  into  them  by  the
researches  which  consolidated  their  '  meaning.'  Consequently
it  is  the  regular  and  normal  experience  of  every  progressive
science  to  find  that  its  initial  conceptions  were  inadequate
and  have  to  be  extensively  modified  as  its  knowledge  increases.
History  also  attests  that  many  centuries  of  groping  often  pre-
cede the  discovery  of  suitable  conceptions  that  will  effectively
analyse  and  handle  the  phenomena  a  science  studies.  The
palmary  example  occurs  in  the  history  of  physics.  From  the
beginnings  of  Greek  science  the  human  intelligence  strove
for  over  2000  years  to  hit  upon  conceptions  that  would  lead
to  a  fruitful  treatment  of  physical  phenomena.  Men  naturally
took  their  first  cues  from  the  apparent  sensible  qualities
of  bodies,  and  laboured  perseveringly  to  explain  their
behaviour  by  assuming  the  antitheses  of  !  hot '  and  '  cold,'
'  heavy  '  and  1  light,'  '  thick  '  and  '  thin,'  '  rest  '  and  '  motion,'
etc.,  and  the  elemental  character  of  '  earth,'  '  water,'  '  air,'
'  fire,'  and  sometimes  '  ether.'  But  all  these  efforts  proved
vain,  and  it  was  not  until  Galileo  and  Descartes  in
the  seventeenth  century  that  physics  arrived  at  mechanical
conceptions  that  would  really  work.  After  that  progress
was  assured,  not  because  '  absolute  '  truth  had  been  attained
and  nature  was  wholly  (or  even  in  part)  '  mechanical,'  but
because  the  mechanical  conceptions  gave  the  physicist  the
experimental  control  which  enabled  him  progressively  to

1  Teachers  are  often  found  to  make  similar  complaints  of  existing  psychology.
For  they  too  desire  to  use  it,  and  find  that  psychological  speculations  have
not  yet  come  down  to  the  concrete  mental  life,  while  psychological  experi-
ments presuppose  conditions  that  are  too  remote  from  those  of  their  problems.

O


*


208


F.  C.  8.  Schiller,  D.Sc


[part


improve  his  weapons.  The  physical  conceptions  now  in  use — •
1  atoms,'  '  ether,'  '  electrons,'  '  quanta,'  etc. — are  not  such  as
would  impress  themselves  on  an  a  'priori  philosopher  as  self-
e violently  true,  or  even  reasonable,  and  they  would  have
appeared  incredible  and  absurd  to  primitive  man  ;  but  they
work  so  well  that  they  silence  our  prejudices.

In  Psychical  Research,  I  venture  to  think,  we  are  still  in
the  groping  stage.  As  Prof.  Bergson  has  pointed  out  so
lucidly,  the  Psychical  is  only  just  becoming  a  subject  of  scientific
interest.  Man's  first  preoccupation  (of  natural  necessity)
was  with  the  outside  world  ;  what  study  of  the  psychical
there  was  devolved  upon  magicians  and  priests.  But  the
magicians,  not  being  endowed,  pursued  it  in  a  narrowly  com-
mercial spirit  with  an  eye  only  to  their  personal  power  and
profit  ;  the  priests,  though  endowed,  were  so  on  the  wrong
lines,  and  evolved  an  intolerance  and  conservatism  that  was
even  more  deleterious  scientifically  than  the  impostures  of
the  magicians  :  neither,  moreover,  had  any  conception  of  the
need  for  scientific  progress.

The  net  result  is  that  we  not  only  have  no  suitable  con-
ceptions even  for  preliminary  use  in  psj^chical  researches,
but  have  had  our  minds  thoroughly  confused  by  the  vague-
ness and  ambiguity  of  the  current  terms  and  obstructed  by
various  inappropriate  notions  that  spring  from  applying  to
the  psychical  false  analogies  from  the  physical  world.

The  peculiar  badness  of  our  initial  notions  here  seems  to
be  largely  due  to  the  fact  that  they  are  forced  upon  us  by
an  unnatural  conspiracy  of  common-sense  and  metaphysics.
Common-sense  normally  looks  only  to  the  immediate  need,
and  devises  notions  adequate  to  the  practical  purposes  of
ordinary  life,  and  in  this  it  usually  succeeds.  Metaphysics,
ideally,  should  however  criticize  the  limitations  of  these  notions,
and  open  our  eyes  to  wider  possibilities.  But  in  this  case  it
has  not  fulfilled  its  proper  function,  but  merely  reduced  the
common-sense  notions  to  uselessness  and  absurdity,  while
so  infecting  common-sense  with  its  paradoxes  that  it  is  hard
to  disentangle  its  original  meaning.

From  lack  of  time  I  will  exemplify  these  strictures  from
two  only  of  the  notions  we  have  to  use,  those  of  '  soul '  and
of  '  reality.'


lxix.] Philosophy,  Science,  and  Psychical  Research.  209

(I.)  The  conception  of  'soul,'  as  we  have  lately  been  re-
minded by  Mr.  McDougall's  admirable  book  on  Body  and
Mind,  is  one  of  immemorial  antiquity,  and  enormous  elasticity.
It  embraces  and  expresses,  in  varying  proportions,  the  notions
of  a  principle  to  explain  life,  consciousness,  spontaneous
mobility,  breathing,  sleeping,  dreaming,  and  possibly  others.
It  is  conceived  as  material  or  immaterial,  as  simple,  multiple,
or  both  at  once,  as  the  real  man,  or  as  a  shadowy  reflex,
as  separable  from  its  body  and  capable  of  inhabiting  others,
usually  as  surviving  death  and  often  as  pre-existing  birth.
Needless  to  say,  it  is  a  pretty  slippery  conception  to  handle,
and  hard  to  pin  down  to  any  definite  formula.  But  on  closer
examination  it  will  be  found  that  every  one  of  this  bewildering
variety  of  functions  assigned  to  the  '  soul  '  by  primitive  thought
is  intended  to  solve  a  real  problem,  and  that  the  conception
of  soul  is  never  otiose.  Primitive  man  is  not  learned  enough
to  construct  purely  verbal  problems  and  to  pay  himself  in
words  ;  common-sense  therefore  always  conceives  the  '  soul '
as  a  principle  of  real  explanation.

But  when  we  turn  to  metaphysics  the  situation  is  greatly
altered  for  the  worse.  The  great  philosopher  of  the  soul  is
Plato,  and  in  him  most  of  the  primitive  notions  about  the  soul
jostle  each  other  with  little  or  no  attempt  to  unify  them.
But,  animated  by  an  ascetic  dread  of  the  sensible  world,  Plato
proceeded  to  invent  also  the  attribute  of  immateriality  and
the  notion  of  pure  spirit,  which  have  ever  since  had  a  succes
fou  in  philosophic  circles.  He  thus  paved  the  way  for  the
philosophic  elaboration  of  the  soul  into  a  '  spiritual  substance,'
absolutely  different  in  kind  from  the  body,  which  could  be
proved  to  be  immortal  a  priori,  because  it  was  simple  and
therefore  indissoluble,  and  could  support  all  its  changing
'  accidents  '  as  an  immutable  substratum.  The  intention  of
all  this  metaphysical  defining  was  of  course  to  demonstrate
the  soul's  immortality  without  recourse  to  any  laborious
interrogation  of  experience.  But  the  actual  effect  was  not
only  to  fail  to  do  this,  but  to  render  the  notion  of  soul
scientifically  useless,  and  unintelligible,  even  as  metaphysics,
because  incapable  of  performing  the  function  assigned  to  it
by  definition.  As  conceived  by  philosophy,  therefore,  the  soul
became  a  meaningless  principle.


210


F:  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


To  justify  this  briefly,  I  may  point  out — (1)  that  the  '  im-
materiality '  ascribed  to  the  soul,  so  far  from  facilitating  a
genuinely  idealistic  interpretation  of  the  world,  really  con-
travened it.  A  genuine  idealism  has  to  try  to  conceive  all
reality  as  existing  for  spirit,  and  as  in  some  sense  ultimately
spiritual.  It  must  hold,  therefore,  that  the  external  world
also  is  spiritual  in  its  nature,  and  cannot  admit  that  there
is  any  real  incompatibility  between  apparent  materiality
and  real  spirituality.  This,  however,  leaves  the  '  immaterial  '
functionless.  Idealism  has  no  need  to  postulate  with  Plato
an  immaterial  world  to  be  the  true  home  of  an  immaterial
soul  which  has  inexplicably  fallen  from  its  high  estate  and
is  yearning  to  return  to  it  :  nor  need  it  chill  the  aspirations
of  the  natural  man  with  the  uncomfortable  and  unimaginable
institutions  of  '  heavens  '  compounded  according  to  the
Platonic  recipe.  It  can  argue  rather  that  if  it  is  not  incon-
sistent with  the  spirituality  of  reality  to  reveal  itself  as  a
sensible  and  material  world  now,  it  need  not  ever  be  so,  and
can  infer  that  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  is  a  forecast  of  perfection
logically  sounder,  as  well  as  more  agreeable,  than  the  thinly-
veiled  negations  of  non-sensible  being  out  of  space  and  time.

(2)  However  verbally  invulnerable  a  priori  proofs  of  the
soul's  immortality  might  be,  they  could  never  demonstrate
that  the  metaphysical  definitions  of  the  notion  were  empirically
applicable  to  reality,  and  that  '  souls '  coming  up  to  their
specifications  were  in  fact  possessed  by  anybody.  This
unavoidable  defect,  which  clings  to  the  method  of  a  priori
reasoning  everywhere,  renders  real  proof  of  matters  of  fact
essentially  empirical  and  takes  all  the  effectiveness  out  of
the  philosophic  arguments  about  immortality.

(3)  As  a  matter  of  fact  these  verbal  '  proofs  '  of  the  soul's
immortality  were  far  from  invulnerable,  and  Kant  had  no
difficulty  in  pointing  out  their  obvious  gaps  and  flaws.  A
'  simple  substance  '  cannot  indeed  perish  by  dissolution  into
'  parts,'  which  it  has  not  got  ;  but  that  need  not  save  it  from
fading  out  completely.  Nor  is  the  soul  properly  called  '  simple.'
Rather  it  is  '  one  '  for  some  purposes  and  '  many  '  for  others,1
and  its  unity  embraces  an  infinite  complexity. A  really

1  Even  the  philosophers  who  most  strenuously  insist  on  its  '  unity  '  cannot
manage  without  ascribing  to  it  '  parts  '  and  '  faculties.'


lxix.] Philosophy,  Science,  and  Psychical  Research.  211

simple  soul-atom  would  be  perfectly  useless  theoretically,
and  perfectly  intolerable  practically.  It  is  moreover  undis-
coverable  in  psychic  life,  as  Hume  proclaimed,  and  if  it  could
be  found,  could  certainly  not  be  identified  with  our  true  self.

(4)  But  the  most  maladroit  blunder  of  all  was  to  conceive
the  soul  as  '  a  substance,'  taken  in  the  sense  of  an  immutable
substratum.  For  in  the  first  place  this  notion  of  substance
was  inappropriately  modelled  upon  the  common-sense  notion
of  '  things,'  which  serves  us  so  effectively  to  group  together
the  changing  appearances  of  the  external  world.  But  the
course  of  inner  experience  flows  very  differently.  Nothing,
even  remotely,  thing-like  appears  in  it,  nothing  requiring  to
be  hung  upon  the  peg  of  '  substance.'  A  '  soul '  is  composed
of  '  processes,'  not  of  '  things,'  and  even  its  '  permanence  '  is
that  of  a  stream  and  not  that  of  the  rock  it  carves  into.  It
is  in  unceasing  change,  and  neither  immutable,  nor  required
to  be  so.  For  an  immutable  soul  would  be  incapable  of  learn-
ing by  experience,  and  no  one  wishes  to  have  such  a  stupidly
ineducable  soul.1  What  we  want  is  to  change  and  yet  to  be
'  the  same,'  to  preserve  our  '  identity  '  in  changes  (preferably
for  the  better),  and  the  only  spot  in  the  universe  where  the
possibility  of  this  feat  seems  to  be  revealed  to  us  is  in  our
personal  experience.  And  even  if  we  overlooked  these  differ-
ences, the  notion  of  substance  does  not  explain  even  the  nature
of  '  things.'  No  one  has  ever  been  able  to  conceive  how  a
'  substance  '  functioned,  how  its  '  attributes  '  '  inhered  '  in  it,
or  how  an  immutable  substratum  could  guarantee  to  '  things  '
their  identity  and  permanence.  For  the  changes  which
pass  over  the  '  thing  '  do  not  touch  its  '  substance,'  nor  can
the  '  substance  '  exercise  any  influence  on  the  course  of  the
changes.  There  is  not  even  an  imaginable  connexion  between
the  '  substance  '  and  its  '  accidents  '  ;  and  there  are  no  means
of  knowing  what  is  happening  to  the  former,  because  ex  hypothesi
all  we  ever  know  is  the  behaviour  of  the  latter.  The  truth
is  that  this  notion  of  '  substance  '  is  not  functional  at  all,
and  explains  nothing  either  about  '  things  '  or  about  '  souls.'
It  is  no  wonder  therefore  that  modern  psychology  has  no  use
for  a  metaphysical  soul  of  this  sort.

1  Except,  apparently,  some  philosophers  (as  Schopenhauer),  for  whom
time  is  '  unreal,'  and  therefore  learning  illusory.


212


F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


It  should  be  clear  by  now  that  we  must  get  a  better  notion
of  substance,  before  we  can  get  a  helpful  notion  of  soul,  that
will  enable  us  to  attack  the  complexities  of  our  psychic  nature
as  they  are  beginning  to  reveal  themselves  in  the  phenomena
of  multiple  personality,  trance,  automatism,  and  what  we  have
ventured  to  label  '  telepathy.'  Unfortunately  I  have  no  time
on  this  occasion  to  suggest  the  positive  developments  of  the
notion  of  soul  that  might  advantageously  be  tried.1

(II.)  The  defects  and  ambiguities  of  the  term  '  reality '  are
still  more  mischievous.  For  they  enter  into  and  vitiate  all
inquiries  into  the  reality  of  anything  ;  so  that,  even  if  we  had
succeeded  in  meaning  something  definite  by  '  soul,'  we  could
hardly  discuss  whether  '  souls  '  were  '  real '  until  we  had  settled
what  we  meant  by  '  reality.'

The  particular  point  however  I  want  to  make  to-day  is
that  in  Psychical  Research  we  are  specially  concerned  with
the  ambiguities  of  '  reality.'  We  are  continually  endeavour-
ing to  test  '  facts  '  of  sorts,  which  lay  claim  to  '  reality  '  in
some  sense,  and  to  assign  their  proper  sense  to  each,  and  in
this  process  we  may  often  have  to  revise  or  modify  the  classi-
fications of  realities  which  are  good  enough  for  the  purposes
of  ordinary  life  and  even  of  the  sciences,  and  in  the  end  may
even  have  to  declare  thoroughly  shallow  and  inadequate
beliefs  which  are  almost  universally  accepted.  For  example,
if  there  is  anything  about  which  ordinary  persons,  philo-
sophers and  scientists  may  be  said  to  agree  it  is  that  the  simple
and  proper  answer  to  the  question  '  How  many  real  worlds
are  there  ?  '  is  '  One  !  '  ;  and  yet  it  is  impossible  to  concern
oneself  at  all  seriously  with  psychical  phenomena  without
feeling  that  this  answer  is,  so  far,  quite  an  unwarranted  piece
of  simplification.

The  first  sense  of  '  reality  '  is  the  merely  formal  sense  to
which  formal  logic  restricts  itself.  It  constitutes  anything
an  object  of  discourse,  and  must  be  possessed  by  anything
talked  about,  however  nonsensical  and  absurd  it  may  be.
But  as  this  sort  of  reality  is  presupposed  in  every  real  inquiry,
it  may  perhaps  be  dismissed  as  unimportant.

We  next  find  that  the  other  senses  of  '  reality  '  are  derivative

1  Some  hints,  however,  together  with  a  reconstruction  of  the  conception
of  substance,  will  be  found  in  Humanism,  Ch.  XII.


lxix.] Philosophy,  Science,  and  Psychical  Research.  213

from  two  main  sources.  To  the  first,  which  we  may  call
the  psychological,  anything  is  '  real  '  that  is  experienced,
and  moreover  as  it  is  experienced,  and  nothing  is  unreal  that
any  one  can  be  got  to  experience.  It  follows  that  errors,
illusions,  hallucinations,  dreams,  etc.,  are  all  possessed  of
this  sort  of  reality.  The  '  imaginary  '  pains  of  hysterical
patients  also  are  real  in  this  sense.

The  second  main  sense  we  may  call  the  pragmatic  and
explain  by  saying  that  for  it  the  '  real '  is  the  important.  Its
classical  description  by  James  declares  that  "  whatever
things  have  intimate  and  continuous  connexion  with  my  life
are  things  of  whose  reality  I  cannot  doubt."  1  In  this  sense
'  reality  '  is  clearly  a  value,  and  admits  of  gradations,  and  is
essentially  relative  to  purposes  and  their  order  of  importance.
It  is  this  sense  which  dominates  our  sciences  and  our  ordinary
life.  The  common-sense  beliefs  of  ordinary  life  have  an
indefeasible  reality,  because  they  are  undeniably  important.
So  are  the  realities  of  ethics  and  politics,  and  the  other  opinions
which  have  social  currency.

The  realities  of  the  sciences  are  less  universally  impressive  :
for  though  the  objects  of  every  science  are  of  course  real  for
it,  however  fictitious  and  abstract  they  may  seem  to  common
sense,  like  e.g.  the  realities  of  mathematics,  and  however
little  interest  we  may  take  in  them,  many  of  us  manage  to
avoid  any  very  intimate  contact  with  the  realities  of  many
sciences.  Yet  even  in  such  cases  we  have  to  concede  that,
in  so  far  as  the  sciences  are  important  for  life,  the  reality  of
the  '  realities  '  they  posit  must  be  admitted.

It  is  however  to  be  noted  (1)  that  all  the  realities  mentioned
are  (or  are  supposed  to  be)  common,  i.e.  to  be  shared  by  many,
and  not  to  be  in  their  nature  objects  only  for  a  single  per-
cipient. The  one  exception  to  this  which  common-sense
allows  is  the  reality  of  pleasures  and  pains.  We  are  willing
to  admit  that  our  fellow  creatures  have  feelings,  although  we
can  never  apparently  feel  them.  But  the  pragmatic  reasons
which  compel  us  to  make  this  exception  are  so  obvious  that  it
only  confirms  our  contention  that  the  '  real '  is  the  important.

(2)  All  these  positive  values  which  we  call  realities  are
haunted  by  negative  counterparts,  variously  named  '  errors,'

1  Principles  of  Psychology,  Vol.  II.,  p.  298.


214


F.  G.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


'  failures,'  '  unrealities,'  etc.  Neither  our  science  nor  our
public  opinion  is  actually  infallible,  though  it  is  often  con-
tended that  ideally  they  should  be.  We  try  to  put  the  blame
for  such  failures  on  the  fallibility  of  individuals,  and  label
them  '  subjective,'  although  most  errors  are  collective  and
popular,  and  every  truth  starts  its  mundane  career  as  the
discovery  of  some  unhappy  wight  who  is  sure  to  be  persecuted
by  all  the  authorities  for  making  it.

Nevertheless,  we  cannot,  by  attaching  a  stigma  to  these
'  unrealities,'  deprive  them  of  psychological  reality  (in  the  first
sense)  ;  we  only  lump  them  together  with  such  '  subjective  ?
realities  as  '  dreams  '  and  '  hallucinations.'  By  coalescing
with  these  they  form  a  formidable  host,  capable  of  very
seriously  upsetting  the  conventional  beliefs  both  of  ordinary
life  and  of  the  sciences.  Ordinarily,  however,  little  attention
is  paid  them  ;  they  are  flung  out  on  the  rubbish  heaps,  and
officially  their  existence  is  denied.

Now  this  is  where  ive  come  in,  and  come  across  them.  Both
for  the  reason  that  they  are  '  subjective  '  and  because  they  are
suspected  of  error  and  illusion,  they  concern  us  nearly.  For
all  the  subjects  we  investigate  seem  to  have  a  reality  which
is  largely  of  the  sort  called  '  subjective  '  ;  indeed  there  is
usually  a  question  whether  they  have  any  other.  They  are
also  peculiarly  subject  to  error  and  illusion.  We  are  bound,
therefore,  to  become  expert  in  dealing  with  perplexing  material
of  this  sort,  and  to  fit  ourselves  to  work  over  the  rubbish  heaps
of  all  the  sciences  for  residual  products  of  value.

Now  when  we  do  this  we  cannot  but  note  two  facts.  (1)
Though  in  a  general  way  the  sort  of  reality  which  the  various
objects  of  our  interest  have  has  become  pretty  plain,  yet
there  is  always  a  fringe  of  disputed  cases.  No  sphere  of  interest
is  sharply  defined,  and  each  gets  shadowy  at  the  edges.  E.g.
we  feel  quite  confident  that  in  general  the  science  of  astronomy
does  not  deal  in  illusions,  and  yet  at  the  present  moment
we  must  say  that  the  '  canals  '  of  Mars  may  be  only  '  optical  '
phenomena.  Again,  while  the  N-rays  have  been  relegated
to  the  realm  of  illusion,  the  synthesis  of  elements  is  either
a  great  physical  discovery  or  an  error  of  experimentation.
The  subjects  whose  scientific  place  in  reality  is  thus  ambiguous
vary  of  course  from  time  to  time,  but  there  always  are  such


lxix.] Philosophy,  Science,  and  Psychical  Research.  215

puzzles,  and  in  any  decision  of  them  psychology  must  always
have  a  large  part  ;  the  case  therefore  runs  closely  parallel  to
our  own  problem  in  dealing  with  the  supernormal  :  in  both
cases  the  alternative  explanation  is  illusion,  and  psychology
is  relevant,  if  it  is  understood  as  the  psychology  of  actual
minds,  and  not  as  a  mere  juggle  with  abstractions.

(2)  We  note  that  though  our  ordinary  classification  of
realities  usually  stands,  yet  realities  which  do  not  normally
rank  high  in  the  scale  do  become  valuable  upon  occasion,
and  force  us  to  take  them  seriously  by  the  importance  they
acquire.  This  is  particularly  true  of  such  things  as  dreams,
trances  and  visions,  which  have  not  infrequently  turned  the
course  of  history.  The  visions  of  Jeanne  d'Arc,  for  example,
decisively  checked  the  English  conquest  of  France,  and  force
us  to  choose  between  a  recognition  of  their  supernormality
and  the  alternative  that  '  delusions  '  may  be  the  really
important  and  dynamic  forces  in  human  life — a  view  ill
calculated  to  enhance  the  rationality  of  human  history.

But  does  not  this  occurrence  of  valuable  realities  in  unlikely
quarters  cast  an  extensive  doubt  on  the  correctness  of  the
classifications  which  common-sense  accepts  as  final  because
they  usually  suffice  ?  When  we  combine  these  anomalies
with  the  general  presumption  of  the  fallibility  of  all  our  know-
ledge, are  we  not  driven  to  inquire  whether  the  distinction
between  the  '  real  '  and  the  '  unreal '  is  as  rigid  and  absolute
as  we  commonly  assume  ?  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  real  and
the  unreal  seem  to  interpenetrate  in  the  subtlest  fashion,  and
to  be  separable  only  in  the  roughest  way  for  the  most  coarsely
practical  purposes.  So  may  there  not  lurk  in  '  dreams  '  and
their  kin  far  more  valuable  revelations  than  we  have  yet  ex-
tracted from  them,  while  on  the  other  hand  the  multitudinous
abstractions,  theories  and  fictions,  of  which  the  sciences
proclaim  the  '  reality  '  so  loudly,  and  even  those  common-
sense  realities  which  so  irresistibly  obtrude  themselves  in
practice,  may  in  very  sooth  turn  out  to  be  but  fashionable
modes  of  '  dreaming  '  ?

These  suggestions  seem  to  me  worth  dwelling  on,  both
directly  and  for  their  own  sakes,  as  opening  out  what  may
prove  profitable  lines  of  investigation,  and  indirectly,  as
abating  our  excessive  trust  in  the  reigning '  truths,'  and


216


F.  G.  8.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


compelling  both  the  man  of  science  and  the  man  in  the  street
to  face  the  fact  that  the  foundations  of  their  ordinary  inter-
pretation of  experience  are  by  no  means  as  assured  and  stable
as  they  find  it  convenient  to  believe.  Let  us  marshal,  there-
fore, in  a  progressive  series  the  doubts  that  should  save  us
from  premature  dogmatizing  about  the  '  real  '  and  the
'  unreal.'

( 1 )  So  long  as  we  restrict  our  regards  to  the  ordinary  routine
of  everyday  life,  the  realities  we  encounter  seem  solid  and
assured  enough.  On  the  level  of  common-sense,  on  which
we  spend  our  days  (if  not  our  nights),  we  live  as  animate
bodies  amid  other  bodies  which  we  distinguish  as  animate  and
inanimate,  feeling,  moving,  changing,  acting  upon  them,  and
interacting  with  them,  finding  them  hard,  rough,  cold,  noisy,
malodorous,  unpalatable,  or  their  opposites,  in  various  ways
and  degrees.  This  common-sense  view  of  reality  imposes
itself  upon  all  in  their  actions,  whatever  the  over-beliefs  they
may  privately  add  to  it  in  their  philosophic  or  religious  cogita-
tions.

(2)  But  even  the  ordinary  man  does  not  live  wholly  by
routine,  and  most  men  are  extraordinary  when  you  can  really
probe  into  their  souls.  So  the  '  realities  '  of  common-sense
do  not  satisfy  them.  Indeed  they  are  not  entirely  satisfactory
objectively,  as  men  discover  after  a  time.  In  order  really
to  understand  this  world  of  sense  and  common-sense  we  have
to  devise  a  multitude  of  sciences,  which  enormously  enhance
our  power  over  the  real.  But  in  so  doing  they  abrogate  the
realities  of  common-sense  and  substitute  constructions  of
their  own  which  are  very  different.  For  none  of  the  sciences
is  the  sensible  world  really  '  real,'  and  more  than  a  starting-
point  for  conceptual  experiments.  It  is  as  vain  to  appeal
to  physics  as  to  geometry  to  substantiate  the  visible,  audible,
tangible  '  thing  '  our  matter-of-factness  loves  to  embrace  as  a
solid  fact.  Geometry  deals  only  in  immutable,  immaterial
shapes  in  an  ideal  space  in  which  no  thing  could  possibly
move  or  live.  Physics  deals  only  in  creatures  like  '  molecules,'
'  atoms  '  and  '  electrons  '  that  possess  neither  temperature,
colour,  nor  solidity,  but  move  with  incredible  velocities  in
a  space  and  a  time  that  are  wholly  relative  through  a  mysterious
'  ether  '  which  has  been  expressly  invented  as  a  vehicle  for  the


lxix.] Philosophy,  Science,  and  Psychical  Research.  217

paradoxical  qualities  which  the  science  of  the  time  finds  it
convenient  to  attribute  to  the  physically  '  real.'

(3)  Not  only  do  our  sciences  thus  disavow  our  senses,  but
they  are  mostly  not  on  speaking  terms  with  each  other.  In
the  name  of  scientific  specialization  they  claim  the  right  to
make  incompatible  assumptions,  which,  when  they  meet
(as  officially  they  never  need  do),  simply  cut  each  other.  But
what  is  a  concrete  human  being  to  think  when  e.g.  he  learns,
in  physics,  that  a  colour  is  a  definite  rate  of  vibration  in  the
ether,  and,  in  psychology,  that  it  is  a  '  simple  sensation  '  ?
Must  he  not  infer  from  the  difficulty  of  finding  anything  to
mediate  the  transition  from  the  one  to  the  other  of  these
modes  of  regarding  his  '  sensible  quality  '  that  both  are  prag-
matic conveniences  for  scientific  purposes,  and  that  in  the  end
it  is  his  experience  and  his  needs  that  both  are  catering  for  ?

(4)  The  '  realities  '  the  various  sciences  assume  do  not
merely  conflict  with  each  other  :  they  also  administer  a  severe
shock  to  what  might  otherwise  be  dangerously  plausible
pretenders  to  reality.  I  mean  the  accounts  of  ultimate  reality
given  by  the  various  philosophies  and  religions.  For,  in  the
name  of  scientific  method,  they  insist  that  these  accounts
shall  be  susceptible  of  verification,  and  to  this  pragmatic  test
neither  the  metaphysics  nor  the  theologies  seem  willing  to
submit.  Hence  the  modern  mind  seems  to  be  inclining  more
and  more  to  the  conclusion  that  the  philosophies  express
little  beyond  the  idiosyncrasies  of  their  authors,  while  the
religions  all  suffer  not  only  from  the  badness  of  the  historical
evidence  to  which  they  appeal,  but  also  from  incapacity  to
see  that  historical  evidence  never  suffices  to  establish  scientific
truth.1  When  in  addition  the  irreconcilable  varieties  and
incompatibilities  of  these  masses  of  speculation  are  noted,
it  is  no  wonder  that  they  are  growing  more  and  more  '  unreal '
and  tending  to  be  classed  with  '  dreams.'

(5)  Variability,  however,  is  no  reproach  to  address  to  the
results  of  uncritical  speculation  alone. It  occurs  also  in  the

1 1  do  myself  not  hold  that  this  condemnation  is  altogether  just  in  either
case.  But  I  cannot  help  noting  the  trend  of  thought,  and  the  responsibility
for  it  of  the  expounders  both  of  the  religions  and  of  the  philosophies.  Both
mostly  labour  to  estrange  their  beliefs  from  life,  and  the  living  retaliate
by  letting  them  alone  to  fossilize  to  their  heart's  content.


218


F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


finest  products  of  science.  Indeed  it  occurs  more  constantly.
For  while  in  the  former  case  it  is  more  or  less  accidental  and
restricted  by  the  influence  of  conventions  and  traditions,  in
the  latter  it  is  a  matter  of  principle,  inherent  in  scientific
method.  For  the  sciences  must  all  conceive  themselves  as
progressive.  Hence  they  cannot  regard  their  '  truths '  as
final,  but  must  continually  labour  to  improve  their  state-
ment and  to  extend  their  sway.  In  this  process  the  '  realities  '
the  '  truths  '  reveal  may  undergo  the  weirdest  transformations.
When  therefore  we  have  sufficiently  recovered  from  the  shock
of  its  novelty,  we  shall  realize  that  revolutions  which  the
electric  theory  of  matter  has  recently  occasioned  in  our  view
of  physical  '  reality  '  are  normal  incidents  in  scientific  progress,
even  though  their  occurrence  can  never  be  predicted.  It
should  be  noted,  however,  that  there  is  no  necessary  correlation
between  the  improvement  in  scientific  value  which  a  new  theory
effects  and  the  change  in  our  beliefs  about  '  reality '  which
it  demands.  Quite  a  slight  improvement  in  the  interpretation
of  scientific  facts  may  entail  a  complete  revolution  in  our
conception  of  reality,  as  was  exemplified  by  the  substitution
of  the  Copernican  for  the  Ptolemaic  explanation  of  the  suc-
cession of  day  and  night.

(6)  Similarly  what  are  theoretically  quite  easy  emendations
may  enormously  alter  the  bearing  of  scientific  truths  upon
our  life.  Quite  a  small  improvement  in  petrol  engines  removed
flying  from  its  proud  position  of  proverbial  impossibility.
The  perception  by  Darwin  of  biological  facts,  as  easy  as  the
egg  of  Columbus,  has  profoundly  modified  our  conception  of
our  place  in  nature.  And  whereas  but  a  few  years  ago  we
were  taught  to  look  forward  to  a  gradual  chilling  of  the  earth
as  the  sun's  furnaces  burnt  out,  we  have  now  a  choice  of  sudden
deaths,  according  as  we  prefer  to  believe  that  radio-activity,
heating  up  the  earth's  interior  to  the  explosion  point,  or  a
collision  of  the  solar  system  with  a  dark  nebula,  is  destined  to
terminate  our  earth's  career.

(7)  In  no  way  then  and  for  no  purpose  is  there  an  escape
from  the  uncomfortable  uncertainties  of  science.  Nowhere
can  even  stable  illusions  be  found  to  lull  our  doubts  to  rest.
And  seeing  that  we  cannot  in  any  proper  sense  be  said  to  live
only  in  one  '  real '  world,  what  attitude  is  it  reasonable  to


lxix.] Philosophy,  Science,  and  Psychical  Research.  219

take  up  towards  the  chaos  of  '  realities  '  that  surround  us  ?
It  is  clear  that  we  cannot  admit  the  claims  of  all  alike  ;  we
must  select,  to  get  anything  like  order  into  them.  But  does
not  this  mean  that  the  source  of  unity  and  order  in  our  scheme
of  realities  will  be  '  subjective,'  will  be  precisely  that  very
personal  subjectivity  which  at  first  we  strove  to  represent
merely  as  a  principle  of  insecurity  and  error  ?  The  individual
soul,  which  science  seemed  to  abstract  from  and  philosophy
despised,  is  after  all  the  principle  of  unity  and  order,  because
it  is  the  only  available  agency  of  selection.  It  stands  at  the
core  and  centre  of  the  cosmos  and  occupies  the  sole  point  at
which  aU  the  various  sorts  of  reality  intersect,  the  sole  position
from  which  they  can  be  controlled  and  unified.  How  that
may  be  it  is  still  premature  to  guess  ;  but  the  indications  do
not  at  present  favour  any  more  '  objective '  unification  of
all  that  claims  '  reality.'  It  does  not,  for  example,  seem  at
all  likely  that  all  the  '  dreams,'  errors  and  delusions  of  every
one  can  be  made  to  fit  together  into  a  real  cosmos  ;  but  how
many  worlds  we  may  thus,  actually  or  potentially,  inhabit
remains  to  be  explored.

The  central  position  of  the  individual  soul  does  however
fully  warrant,  I  think,  a  resolute  refusal  on  our  part  to  neglect
the  significance  of  the  '  realities  '  we  have  called  '  subjective.'
They  certainly  lie  very  near  the  centre  of  affairs,  and  no  limit
can  be  set  to  their  influence  :  they  pervade,  and,  if  you  will
have  it  so,  taint,  all  our  '  truths.'  Indeed,  no  truly  compre-
hensive view  of  reality  can  ever  allow  us  to  grow  oblivious
of  the  most  extensive  of  our  doubts,  which  I  have  saved  up  for
the  last,  because  in  the  end  it  may  prove  the  most  consoling.
We  have  no  means  of  proving  that  our  whole  life,  with  all  the
'  truths  '  it  supports  and  all  the  '  realities  '  it  attests,  is  not
itself  a  '  dream,'  and  consequently  death  itself,  when  we
come  to  it,  may  appear  like  awakening  from  a  nightmare.
This  suggestion  is  an  old  one  and  there  is  much  to  be  said  in
its  favour,  while  no  serious  reply  to  it  has  ever  been  forth-
coming. But  as  the  representatives  of  established  '  ortho-
doxies,' scientific,  religious  and  philosophic,  will  not  face  so
big  a  thought,  it  is  all  the  more  incumbent  on  adventurers
and  explorers  like  ourselves  to  bear  it  conscientiously  in
mind. For  even  practically  it  may  be  that  the  difficulties


220


F.  G.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


of  communicating  with  other  planes  of  being  is  essentially
that  of  transmitting  a  message  to  (or  from)  a  man  asleep.

To  conclude  then,  let  me  say  that  I  hope  I  have  shown  that
we  cannot  in  Psychical  Research  complain  that  we  have  a
subject  which  is  trivial,  hackneyed,  or  devoid  of  the  most
varied  connexions  with  life,  science  and  philosophy.  On  the
contrary  we  have  a  task  of  such  magnitude  and  complexity
that  only  an  age  which  has  had  such  abundant  experience
as  ours  of  the  triumphs  of  science,  and  of  the  progress  of  know-
ledge could  have  been  emboldened  to  attempt  it  and  to  dis-
credit the  old  prejudice  that  knowledge  is  evil  and  that  the
particular  sort  we  seek  is  forbidden  to  man  and  the  devil's  own
preserve.  Success  in  our  enterprise  is  not  of  course  assured  :
but  if  we  are  vigilant  and  worthy  of  our  opportunities,  and
can  obtain  social  support  at  all  commensurate  with  the  import-
ance of  our  quest,  I  can  see  no  reason  why  the  methods
of  science  should  not  vanquish  difficulties  which  do  not  differ
in  kind  from  those  of  all  knowing,  and  so  illumine  the  dark-
ness that  broods  over  the  destiny  of  man.


LXIX.]


Evidence  of  Personal  Survival.


221


IT.

SOME  RECENT  SCRIPTS  AFFORDING  EVIDENCE
OF  PERSONAL  SURVIVAL.1

By  the  Right  Hox.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.

The  evidence  I  propose  to  lay  before  you  in  this  paper  in
favour  of  personal  survival,  and  in  support  of  the  belief  that
communications  may  and  do  reach  us  from  those  who  have
passed  out  of  the  body,  is  based  upon  four  passages  from
Scripts  of  different  dates  produced  by  the  automatist  who  is
known  to  members  of  the  Society  under  the  pseudonym  of
Mrs.  Willett.

In  the  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXV.,  pp.  113-217,  will  be  found
a  careful  and  exhaustive  discussion  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  and
Mrs.  Verrall  of  certain  scripts  written  in  February,  1910,  by
Mrs.  Willett,  and  purporting  to  convey  the  answer  of  Myers
to  the  question  :  "  What  does  the  word  Lethe  suggest  to
you  ?  "  These  scripts,  now  generally  referred  to  as  "  the
Lethe  scripts,"  were  of  a  very  remarkable  character.

The  writers  of  the  papers  in  the  Proceedings  contended  :

(1)  That  there  were  interconnexions  between  the  Willett
scripts  and  the  scripts  of  other  automatic  writers  (with  some
of  which,  at  least,  Mrs.  Willett  was  wholly  unacquainted),
that  clearly  indicated  a  supernormal  origin  ;

(2)  That  the  classical  and  literary  knowledge  exhibited  in
the  scripts  was  beyond  what  Mrs.  Willett  normally  possessed,
and  again  pointed  to  a  supernormal  origin  ;

(3)  That  the  simplest  and  most  probable  hypothesis  to
account  for  all  the  facts  of  the  case  was  that  the  Lethe  scripts
had  really  been  inspired  by  the  surviving  personality  of  the
scholar  and  man  of  letters  from  whom  the  scripts  showing

1  This  paper  was  read  to  a  meeting  of  the  Society  on  March  27.  1914.


222  Bight  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.  [part

interconnexions  with  them  also  claimed  to  come,  namely,
P.  W.  H.  Myers.

I  believe  this  reasoning  to  have  been  in  the  main  sound,
even  if  not  conclusive.  Probably  its  weakest  point  lay  in
the  difficulty  of  proving  that  the  classical  and  literary  allusions
were  beyond  the  normally-acquired  knowledge  of  the  auto-
matist.

The  case  I  am  about  to  lay  before  you  differs  in  some  respects
from  the  Lethe  case.  On  the  one  hand  it  involves  no  cross-
correspondences  or  interconnexions  with  the  scripts  of  other
automatic  writers,  but  is  self-contained.  No  doubt  this  will
come  as  a  relief  to  many  members  of  the  Society  for  whom
cross-correspondences  have  grown  to  be  somewhat  of  a  weari-
ness of  the  flesh.  On  the  other  hand  the  subject-matter  in  the
present  case  seems  to  me  to  be  more  clearly  outside  the  range
of  the  automatist's  normal  knowledge  than  in  the  Lethe
scripts,  and,  in  this  respect,  to  be  more  evidentially  com-
pelling.

To  facilitate  the  task  of  exposition,  I  will  first  quote  from
the  four  scripts  by  Mrs.  Willett  such  extracts  as  are  relevant
to  the  case.  The  scripts  cannot  be  given  in  their  entirety  for
reasons  of  a  private  nature.  But  the  relevant  passages  are
in  every  case  easily  detachable  from  the  remainder  of  the
script  ;  and  I  am  able  to  assure  you  that  neither  their  inter-
pretation nor  their  evidential  value  is  in  any  way  affected
by  separation  from  their  contexts.  I  will  ask  you  to  note
particularly  the  elate  of  the  first  script,  as  this  is  important.


Extracts  from  Mrs.  Willett's  Scripts.
(A)  {Script  of  July  6,  1912.)

Does  she  remember  the  passage  in  which  there's  a  reference
to  a  river  ?  A  traveller  looks  across  it,  and  sees  the  inn  where
he  wishes  to  be  ;  and  he  sees  the  torrent  and  is  torn  both  ways,
half  disliking  to  battle  with  the  current,  and  yet  desiring  to  be
at  his  destination.

Should  it  be  possible  to  identify  this  passage,  the  matter  would
prove  interesting.


lxix.]  Evidence  of  Personal  Survival.  223

What  the  passage  does  not  say  I  draw  from  my  own  mind  to
make  the  connection  clear.

The  passage  is  not  from  Christina  Rossetti  ;  but  I  want  to  say
that  too  :

Yea,  beds  for  all  that  come —
You  cannot  miss  that  Inn.

After  an  interval  of  more  than  a  year,  three  Willett  scripts
in  succession  return  to  the  subject,  and  a  humorous  impatience
is  exhibited  at  the  delay  which  had  occurred  in  tracing  the
passage.

(B)  (Script  of  August  13,  1913.)

Some  one  indignant  at  the  delay  calls  out
HAS  THE  PASSAGE
been  identified  about  the  traveller  looking  across  a  stream  ;  dips
his  staff  in,  fears  to  wade,  takes  a  run,  heart  misgives  him  (Here
Mrs.  Willett  said  out  loud,  "  Some  one  is  laughing  so." — Note  by
Sitter),  longs  to  be  over  and  done  with

Eaith  and
Hair

in  a  Temple.

(Drawing  of  a  ivheel)  Wheel.
Pilgrim.

There  was  a  reason  for  the  CHOICE,  if  you  find  the  passage

alluded  to,  it  will  be  clear.

Have  this  seen  to,  for  he  swears  he  will  not  here  exercise  any
patience  whatsoever. Not  even  about

Lavender  or  Lub.

(C)  (Script  of  August  17,  1913.)

THE  PASSIONATE  PILGPvIM

But  it  is  of  another  one  I  want  to  write.  I  said  Pilgrim.  Now
write  this —

Not  a  one-horsed  dawn,  but  a  two-horsed  chariot,  though  one-
horsed  in  a  way  might  lit,  because  as  compared  to  another

p


224  Right  Ho7i.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.  [part

charioteer's  exploits  his  were  but  a  one-horsed  affair.  It  is  a
poem  I  am  alluding  to

A  man  who  drove  two  horses  in  a  less  ambitious  manner.  His
predecessor —

Does  God  exact  day  labour,  light  denied  ?

That  ought  to  make  it  clear.

Hair  in  a  temple  was  said.

(D)  (Script  of  September  8,  1913.)
(Written  in  the  presence  of  Mrs.  Verrall.)

He  of  the  little  patience  demands  now  this  3rd  time  whether
the  Pilgrim  has  been  understood.

Now  if  I  say  Passionate  Pilgrim,  I  know  all  sorts  of  connotations
will  be  dragged  in. But  think  of  the  passages  twice  inserted,

The  River  and  he  who  would  be  across.

Letting  I  would  not  wait  upon  I  would.

That  seems  jumbled  up  somehow,  never  mind.

A  passionate  Pilgrim  but

NOT  H.S.'s

one.

What  moves  the  stars  and  all  the  heavenly  bodies  ?  Dante  makes
it  clear.

Then  again  I  will  repeat  and  will  continue  to  repeat  until  you  are
all  sick  and  tired  of  the  subject

HAIR  IN  A  TEMPLE.

That  belongs.

You  will  observe  that  all  these  extracts  refer  to  a  "  passage  "
in  some  written  work.  What  this  passage  was  long  remained
a  mystery  to  the  little  group  of  researchers  who  were  studying
the  Willett  scripts.  It  had  indeed  from  the  first  been  supposed
to  be  connected  in  some  way  with  the  late  Dr.  Verrall.  The
script  of  July  6,  1912,  contains  two  lines  from  a  poem  by
Christina  Rossetti  called  "  Uphill,"  the  subject  of  which  is
Death.  Now  Dr.  Verrall  had  died  only  a  few  weeks  before
(on  June  18,  1912).  Though  Mrs.  Willett  knew  him  but
slightly,  she  was  a  friend  of  Mrs.  Verrall  ; and  this  being


LXIX.]


Evidence  of  Personal  Survival.


225


the  first  script  she  had  written  since  Dr.  Verrall's  death,  it
was  natural  to  expect  that  reference  to  him  would  be  made
in  it.  Moreover,  a  phrase  in  this  same  script  "  does  she  re-
member "  was  reminiscent  of  similar  phrases  in  which  "  she  "
clearly  alluded  to  Mrs.  Verrall.  To  this  extent,  then,  we
had  correctly  interpreted  the  script  of  July  6,  1912,  as  the
later  scripts  have  conclusively  proved.  But  the  "  passage  "
to  which  allusion  was  made  in  it  completely  baffled  us.  None
of  us,  Mrs.  Verrall  herself  as  little  as  the  rest,  could  remember
anything  in  literature,  whether  ancient  or  modern,  which
satisfactorily  corresponded  to  the  description  of  the  Timid
Traveller.

It  may  be  convenient  to  state  at  this  point  that  throughout
the  period  covered  by  the  printed  extracts  we  were  careful
to  keep  all  our  conjectures  and  conclusions  to  ourselves.  For
instance,  Mrs.  Willett  was  never  told  that  we  believed  her
script  of  July  6,  1912,  to  contain  allusions  to  Dr.  Verrall  ;
and  to  this  day  (March  27,  1914)  she  has  no  idea  of  the  inter-
pretations to  which  we  have  ultimately  been  led  and  which
I  shall  presently  have  to  submit  for  your  consideration.

The  subject  had  been  almost  forgotten,  when,  as  we  have
seen,  it  was  unexpectedly  revived  in  three  successive  scripts
of  August  and  September,  1913.  Of  these  three  scripts  the
two  first  confirmed  our  impression  that  the  mysterious  passage
was  in  some  way  connected  with  Dr.  Verrall,  but  did  not
otherwise  seem  to  advance  the  solution  of  the  problem.  The
September  script,  on  the  other  hand — the  only  one  written
with  Mrs.  Verrall  present — contained  the  important  state-
ment that  "  Dante  makes  it  clear."  1

This  was  evidently  a  clue  worth  following  up,  and  it  soon
led  to  fruitful  results.  What  is  the  link  between  Dr.  Verrall
and  Dante  ?

In  the  spring  of  1913  was  published  a  collection  of  Literary
Essays,  Classical  and  Modern,  contributed  by  Dr.  Verrall  at
various  dates  to  various  magazines  and  periodicals.  Among
the  Essays  are  three  Papers  dealing  with  the  interpretation

1  The  sentence  "  What  moves  the  stars  and  all  the  heavenly  bodies  ?  "
which  precedes  the  words  "  Dante  makes  it  clear,"  is  an  allusion  to  the  last
line  of  the  Divina  Commedia  :

"  L'Amor  che  muove  il  Sole  e  1'altre  stelle."


226


Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.


[part


of  passages  in  the  Divina  Commedia .  One  of  these,  on  "  The
Birth  of  Virgil,"  does  not  concern  us  here.  The  other  two
are  occupied  with  a  historical  problem  concerning  the  Latin
poet  Statius,  an  imitator  of  Virgil,  who  lived  and  wrote  in
the  second  half  of  the  first  century  a.d.,  and  whose  reputation
stood  a  good  deal  higher  in  Dante's  time  than  it  does  to-day.
His  principal  work  was  the  Thebaid,  which  described  the
legendary  War  of  the  Seven  against  Thebes.  Readers  of
Dante  will  remember  that  he  and  Virgil  on  their  pilgrimage
through  Purgatory  meet  the  soul  of  Statius,  which  happens
at  that  very  moment  to  have  completed  the  Purgatorial
expiation  assigned  to  it,  and  is  therefore  free  to  accompany
the  two  other  poets  on  the  remainder  of  their  journey  up
the  Mount.

Now  to  place  Statius  in  Purgatory  was  to  make  him  out
to  be  a  Christian,  which  there  is  no  ground  in  any  record  or
tradition  to  believe  that  he  was.  Dante,  however,  goes  yet
further.  Not  only  does  he  make  the  bold  historical  assump-
tion that  at  some  time  or  other  in  his  life  Statius  became  a
convert  to  Christianity  :  he  has  "  the  audacity  " — to  quote
Dr.  Verrall's  words — "  to  date  the  event,  the  baptism,  by  a
particular  passage,  a  definite  point  in  the  Thebaid,  which  no
one  familiar  Avith  the  poem  could  fail  to  recognize.  '  I  had
received  baptism,'  so  he  makes  Statius  say,  '  before,  as  a
poet.  I  had  brought  the  Greeks  to  the  rivers  of  Thebes.'  "
What  justification  could  Dante  have  had  for  taking  this
strange  liberty  with  accepted  history  ?

This  is  the  question  which  Dr.  Verrall  sets  himself  to  answer
in  the  two  essays  to  which  I  have  referred,  and  which  have
for  their  respective  titles  "  To  follow  the  Fisherman  "  and
"Dante  on  the  Baptism  of  Statius."

You  will  perhaps  think  I  am  wandering  from  the  subject
of  my  Paper,  and  wonder  where  I  am  coming  to.  But  wait
a  bit  and  see.  I  shall  be  very  much  disappointed  if  before
I  have  finished  I  have  not  succeeded  in  convincing  you  that
in  "  Dante  on  the  Baptism  of  Statius  "  is  to  be  found  the
elusive  passage  of  which  we  are  in  search.

In  order  to  make  this  fully  intelligible  I  shall  have  to  follow
rather  closely  part  of  the  argument  of  this  Essay,  and  even
to  quote  from  it  at  some  length. Indeed  I  would  strongly


LXIX.]


Evidence  of  Personal  Survival.


227


advise  those  of  you  who  may  be  interested  in  the  subject
of  my  Paper  to  read  for  yourselves  both  the  Essays.  Taken
together  they  form  one  of  the  most  brilliant  and  ingenious
pieces  of  literary  criticism  that  I  can  call  to  mind  ;  and  the
Essay  on  the  Baptism  of  Statius  in  particular  is  so  charac-
teristic of  its  author,  that  if  his  individuality  still  persists,
and,  being  wishful  to  communicate  with  those  yet  in  the
body,  he  had  elected  to  refer  to  this  essay  in  proof  of  his
personal  survival,  I  doubt  whether  a  more  appropriate  choice
could  have  been  made.

First  let  me  quote  the  passage  from  the  Ptirgatorio  round
which  the  whole  discussion  turns.  Statius  is  giving  an  account
of  his  conversion  to  his  two  fellow-poets.  His  first  impulse
towards  Christianity  arose,  he  explains,  from  his  study  of
the  famous  Messianic  Eclogue  of  Virgil.

Through  thee  (he  says,  addressing  the  latter)  I  was  a  poet,
through  thee  a  Christian,  but  that  thou  mayest  see  better  what
I  outline,  I  will  put  forth  my  hand  to  fill  in  colour.  Already  the
whole  world  was  big  with  the  true  belief,  sown  by  the  apostles
of  the  everlasting  kingdom  ;  and  thy  words,  touched  on  above,
harmonised  so  with  the  new  preachers,  that  the  habit  took  me
of  visiting  them.  They  then  became  so  holy  in  my  sight,  that
when  Domitian  persecuted  them,  their  wailings  were  not  without
tears  of  mine.  And  while  by  me  yon  world  was  trod,  I  succoured
them,  and  their  righteous  lives  made  me  despise  all  other  sects  ;
and  ere  in  my  poem  I  had  brought  the  Greeks  to  Thebes'  rivers,
I  received  baptism,  but  through  fear  I  was  a  secret  Christian,
long  time  pretending  paganism.1

The  translation  I  have  given  you  is  taken  from  what  Dr.
Verrall  calls  "  the  faithful  prose  of  the  Temple  Classics,"  and
may  be  accepted  as  a  correct  version  of  the  passage  as  gener-
ally understood.  But  Dr.  Verrall,  seizing  upon  two  linguistic
refinements,  has  managed  to  invest  Dante's  lines  with  a  com-
pletely new  significance.

In  the  first  place  he  contends  that  the  words  mentre  che
di  la  per  me  si  stette,  translated  in  the  version  I  have  just  read
to  you  "  while  by  me  yon  world  was  trod,"  cannot  properly
bear  this  meaning. A  literal  rendering  of  the  words  would

1  Purgatorio,  XXII.,  73-91.


228


Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.


[part


be  "  while  I  stayed  on  the  other  side  "  ;  but  the  peculiar
linguistic  form  used  implies  that  the  staying  was  in  some
sense  the  voluntary  act  of  the  stayer  ;  so  that  we  should
be  nearer  the  true  meaning  in  translating  them  "  while  I
lingered  on  the  other  side."  Moreover,  if  the  phrase  means
nothing  more  than  "  while  I  lived  "  or  "  before  I  died,"  the
effect  is  to  put  into  Statius'  mouth  the  strange  statement
that  he  had  become  favourably  disposed  towards  Christianity
before  he  died,  and  actually  a  Christian  before  he  wrote  a
certain  line  in  the  Thebaid,  i.e.  six  years  or  more  prior  to  his
death.  The  greater  includes  the  less  ;  and  if  Statius  became
a  Christian  six  years  prior  to  his  death,  it  is,  to  say  the  least
of  it,  unnecessary  to  tell  us  that  before  he  died  he  had  become
favourably  disposed  to  Christianity.  Mentre  che  di  Id  per  me
si  stette,  according  to  Dr.  Verrall,  can  have,  in  the  context
in  which  it  occurs,  one  meaning  and  one  meaning  only.  It
must  signify  "  while  I  abstained  from  joining  the  Church."

In  the  second  place  Dr.  Verrall  points  out  that  the  render-
ing "  ere  in  my  poem  I  had  brought  the  Greeks  to  Thebes'
rivers,  I  received  baptism,"  ignores  the  emphasis  which  the
order  of  the  Italian  words  lays  on  the  pronoun  "I."  "  Ebb'
io  battesmo  "  is  what  Dante  writes  ;  and  the  more  correct
translation  would  be  "  Ere  in  my  poem  I  had  brought  the
Greeks  to  Thebes'  rivers,  I  myself  received  baptism."

Starting  from  these  premises,  Dr.  Verrall  arrives  at  an
interpretation  of  the  passage  as  a  whole  which  I  must  give
in  his  own  words  :

The  question  arises,  by  what  thought  or  metaphor  Dante  is
led  to  describe  the  delay  or  hesitation  of  the  convert,  his  abstention
from  the  decisive  step  of  receiving  initiation,  as  a  staying  "  on
the  other  side."  On  the  other  side  of  what  ?  The  context  again
furnishes  the  answer,  about  which  indeed  we  could  hardly  doubt,
even  if  we  were  left  to  conjecture.  The  comparison  of  baptism
to  a  river  is,  for  obvious  reasons,  so  well  established  and  familiar,
that,  in  this  connexion,  it  would  be  almost  sufficiently  signified
by  "on  the  other  side  "  itself.  But  Dante  explicitly  gives  us
the  "  river  " —

"  e  pria  ch'  io  conducessi  i  Greci  ai  fiumi

di  Tebe,  poetando,  ebb'  io  battesmo  :  "


LXIX.]


Evidence  of  Personal  Survival.


229


"  And  before,  as  a  poet,  I  brought  the  Greeks  to  the  rivers  of  Thebes,
I  had  myself  received  baptism."  The  emphasis  on  of  Thebes,
given  by  the  position  of  the  words  in  the  verse,  and  on  myself,
given  by  the  inversion  "  ebb'  io,"'  imply  an  antithesis  or  com-
parison between  Statius  and  the  Greeks  of  the  poem,  between
the  "  rivers  "  to  which  they  came  and  that  to  which  he  came,
the  river,  according  to  the  familiar  figure,  of  baptism.  This  river
he  long  hesitated  to  pass  ;  he  "  halted  on  the  other  side,"  as  a  man,
who  was  no  hero,  might,  when  to  be  baptised  was  to  be  in  danger  of
death, — though,  as  he  tells  us,  the  delay  cost  him  centuries  of  expiation
upon  the  purgatorial  mountain.  But  before  he  brought  his  Argives
to  the  Asopus,  he  himself  had  made  his  passage.1

I  do  not  think  we  need  go  further  afield  in  quest  of  our
Timid  Traveller,  and  of  the  river  which  he  is  afraid  to  cross.
The  timid  traveller  is  Statius  himself,  and  the  river  is  the
metaphorical  river  of  baptism  into  the  Christian  faith.  Indeed
Dr.  Verrall  goes  so  far  as  to  maintain  that  Dante  plays  upon
the  name  of  Statius,  interpreting  it  to  mean  "  the  stationary
one,*'  the  "  Stayer  "'  or  "  Hesitater."  xAlready  in  his  own  day
Statius  appears  to  have  incurred  the  censure  of  the  critics
for  his  excessive  dilatoriness  in  getting  to  the  avowed  subject
of  his  poem.  The  Thebaid,  I  may  remind  you  again,  is  an
epic  poem  describing  the  expedition  against  Thebes  by  the
famous  Seven  Chieftains.  It  consists  of  twelve  books,  and
at  the  end  of  the  sixth  book  the  Argive  host  has  not  yet  entered
the  enemy's  country.  It  is  not  until  the  seventh  book  that
Statius  brings  the  invaders  to  the  bank  of  the  Theban  river,
in  the  line  which  Dante  quotes  as  marking  the  period  of  his
conversion  to  Christianity.  The  poet's  full  name  was  Publius
Papinius  Statius,  and  Dr.  Verrall  suggests  that  Dante  took
"  Statius  "  to  be  no  part  of  his  original  name,  but  a  literary
nickname  applied  to  denote  this  characteristic  of  dilatoriness
in  his  poetic  compositions,  and  no  less  applicable  to  his  delay
in  entering  the  Christian  Church.

Dr.  Verrall  may  be  right  or  he  may  be  wrong  in  this  as  in
his  other  conclusions.  That  really  does  not  concern  us  ;  nor
do  I  pretend  to  have  done  justice  to  the  whole  argument  of
the  Essay. The  point  for  us  is  that  the  passage  we  have

1  The  italics  in  the  last  two  sentences  are  my  own.


230


Bight  Hon.  Gerald  W .  Balfour.


[part


been  looking  for  is  to  be  found  in  an  essay  written  by  Dr.
Verrall  himself  ;  though,  as  we  shall  see,  not  one  readily
accessible  to  the  general  public  till  nine  or  ten  months  after
the  first  script  that  refers  to  it  was  produced.

I  am  afraid  you  may  think  I  have  been  almost  as  long,
in  proportion,  in  bringing  you  up  to  the  brink  of  my  river
as  the  poet  was  in  bringing  his  Greeks  to  the  banks  of  the
Asopus.  Perhaps  I  have  justly  laid  myself  open  to  this
reproach.  But  as  the  whole  superstructure  of  the  subsequent
argument  rests  on  the  identification  of  the  "  passage  "  which
the  script  bids  us  search  for  with  that  which  I  have  just  read
from  Dr.  Verralks  essay,  it  was  necessary  for  my  purpose  to
establish  the  foundation  as  firmly  as  possible.

The  fact  that  this  essay  brings  into  conjunction  Dr.  Verrall
himself,  Dante  and  a  traveller  or  pilgrim  who  hesitates  to
cross  a  river,  is  to  my  mind  almost  convincing  proof  that
it  contains  the  passage  we  are  looking  for.  But  any  doubt
that  may  still  remain  will  vanish,  I  think,  before  one  decisive
consideration.

When  Statius,  in  the  lines  of  which  I  have  already  read  a
translation,  says  to  Virgil  "  Through  thee  I  was  a  poet,  through
thee  a  Christian,"  he  adds  "  but  that  thou  may  est  the  better
see  what  I  outline  I  will  put  forth  my  hand  to  fill  in  colour.'"
Dr  Verrall  quotes  these  lines,  and  explains  them  to  mean
that  Dante  himself  felt  that  his  account  of  the  manner  and
date  of  Statius'  conversion  rested  on  an  imaginative  inter-
pretation of  the  passage  in  the  Thebaid  on  which  he  was  relying,
and  went  considerably  beyond  its  literal  meaning.  Now  turn
to  the  printed  extract  from  the  Willett  script  of  July  6,  1912  :
"  What  the  passage  does  not  say  I  draw  from  my  own  mind
to  make  the  connection  clear T

We  have  here  an  unmistakable  paraphrase  of  the  very
words  that  Dante  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Statius  !  And
what  I  will  again  ask  you  specially  to  note  is  that  this  crown-
ing proof  that  the  passage  has  been  correctly  identified  occurs
in  the  earliest  of  the  four  scripts  that  refer  to  the  subject.
The  importance  of  this  will  become  clearer  in  the  sequel.

Having  successfully  traced  our  mysterious  passage  to  its
source,  our  next  task  must  be  to  enquire  what  evidential


LXIX.]


Evidence  of  Personal  Survival.


231


value  the  references  to  it  in  Willett  Script  possess.  Are  we
entitled  to  conclude  from  them  to  the  continuous  existence
of  a  personality  that  has  survived  the  grave  ?

On  this  question  I  cannot  expect  unanimity  ;  but  I  will
endeavour  to  state  my  own  view.

Let  me  point  out  to  begin  with,  that  whatever  intelligence
may  be  responsible  for  the  scripts,  it  can  hardly  be  doubted
that  we  have  in  them  a  deliberate  attempt  to  produce  at  least
the  semblance  of  evidence  of  survival.  And  it  is  a  remark-
ably clever  attempt  too.  The  intelligence  must  certainly  have
possessed  something  more  than  a  mere  superficial  acquaint-
ance with  Dr.  Verrall's  essay.  The  boiling  down  of  the  whole
complicated  case  into  the  description  of  a  traveller  or  pilgrim
who  would  fain  cross  a  certain  river,  but  hesitates  through
fear  to  make  the  plunge,  and  still  more  perhaps  the  direct
paraphrase  of  the  two  relevant  lines  from  the  Purgatorio,  prove
this  incontestable .  Could  the  intelligence  have  been  that  of
the  automatist,  and  could  she  have  acquired  the  requisite
knowledge  normally  and  consciously  ?  If  so,  she  must  have
read  the  essay,  and  read  it  with  care  and  attention.  Towards
the  end  of  October,  1913,  I  sent  to  Mrs.  Willett  herself  the
following  questions,  without  however  telling  her  my  reason
for  putting  them  :

(1)  Have  you  read  an  essay  by  Dr.  Verrall  contained  in
his  Literary  Essays,  Classical  and  Modern,  and  entitled  "  Dante
on  the  Baptism  of  Statius  "  ?  If  so,  when  did  you  read
it  ?

(2)  Did  you  ever  hear  of  this  essay  before  the  lately  pub-
lished volume  came  out  ?

(3)  The  essay  originally  appeared  in  the  Albany  Revieio
in  1908. Have  you  ever  seen  or  heard  of  the  Albany  Review  ?

To  these  questions  I  have  received  answers  in  writing — -
the  answers  being  in  every  case  in  the  negative.  The  volume
was  sent  to  Mrs.  Willett  as  a  present  from  Mrs.  Verrall  in
May,  1913.  She  had  glanced  through  the  Memoir  at  the
beginning  of  the  book  ;  but  was  positive  that  neither  then
nor  since  had  she  read  any  of  the  essays  contained  in  it.  Of
this  particular  essay  Mrs.  Willett  was  certain  she  had  never
even  heard  until  she  received  my  set  of  questions.  Nor  had
she  ever  either  seen  or  heard  of  the  Albany  Review.


232


Eight  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.


[part


If  we  accept  Mrs.  Willett's  evidence  as  valid,  these  state-
ments are  conclusive  on  the  points  with  which  they  deal.
If  we  decline  to  accept  it  as  valid,  and  still  suppose  that  the
knowledge  shown  in  her  scripts  was  acquired  normally  and
consciously,  then  she  must  either  have  forgotten  the  fact
or  be  fraudulently  concealing  it.

No  one  who  knows  Mrs.  Willett  will  believe  her  to  be  cap-
able of  deliberate  deception.  The  matter  is  not  one  to  argue
about  with  those  who  do  not  know  her.  I  can  only  say  that
this  alternative  possibility  does  not  trouble  me  personally.
I  simply  reject  it,  and  with  absolute  conviction.

There  remains  the  possibility  of  forgetfulness.  Mrs.  Willett
may  have  read  the  essay  and  afterwards  lost  all  recollection
of  it  so  far  as  her  ordinary  consciousness  was  concerned.  I
am  not  prepared  to  deny  that  this  is  possible.  Hidden
memories  undoubtedly  do  sometimes  re-appear  in  scripts
without  being  recognized  as  memories  by  the  writers.  In
such  cases  we  must  suppose  that  they  still  lie  preserved  in
what  is  commonly  called  the  subliminal  self,  or  at  least  are
recoverable  by  it  ;  and  we  may,  if  we  like,  suppose  that  the
subliminal  can  use  them  on  its  own  account,  and  for  its  own
purposes,  if  it  has  any,  just  as  if  it  were  an  individual  con-
sciousness distinct  from  the  supraliminal.

But  consider  what  the  hypothesis  implies  in  the  present
instance.  It  requires  us  to  assume,  first,  that  at  some  time
Mrs.  Willett  must  have  read  this  essay  of  Dr.  Verrall's  and
read  it  with  care  and  understanding  ;  secondly,  that,  having
done  so,  she  forgot  all  about  it  ;  thirdly,  that  her  subliminal
self  waited  its  opportunity  and  in  due  course,  a  few  weeks
after  Dr.  Verrall's  death,  proceeded  to  manufacture  out  of
the  knowledge  so  acquired  an  elaborately  evidential  case  of
a  fraudulent  character  in  favour  of  survival.  If  we  are  willing
to  go  as  far  as  this,  we  shall  no  doubt  be  inclined  to  go  further,
and  suggest  that  it  was  the  subliminal  self  that  prompted
Mrs.  Willett  to  read  the  essay,  and  afterwards  inhibited  her
from  remembering  that  she  had  done  so.

I  repeat  .  such  a  hypothesis  is  possible.  It  is  one  of  the
alternative  explanations  we  have  to  bear  in  mind.  I  do  not
myself  think  it  probable  ;  and  the  improbability  in  this  case
is  greatly  added  to,  and  the  evidential  value  of  the  case  itself


LXIX.]


Evidence  of  Personal  Survival.


233


increased,  by  a  consideration  of  dates.  As  regards  the  three
latest  scripts  we  have  to  recognize  that  Mrs.  Willett  had  an
opportunity  of  reading  the  essay  before  they  were  written,  be-
cause the  volume  containing  it  was  in  her  hands  in  May,  1913,
and  these  scripts  were  written  in  the  following  August  and  Sep-
tember. The  first  script,  on  the  other  hand — that  of  July  6,
1912 — was  not  only  produced  many  months  before  she  re-
ceived the  volume,  but  many  months  before  it  was  published.
If,  therefore,  she  had  read  the  essay  before  this  script  was
produced,  she  must  have  read  it  in  the  Albany  Review,  in
which  it  originally  appeared.  That  takes  us  back  to  August,
1908,  before  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Willett  became  known  to
each  other.  I  do  not  know  if  many  persons  among  my  readers
are  acquainted  even  with  the  name  of  the  Albany  Review.
It  was  quite  new  to  me  until  I  began  to  study  this  case  last
autumn  ;  but  I  understand  it  was  a  magazine  conducted
largely  by  a  few  Cambridge  men,  which  had  an  ephemeral
existence,  and  came  to  an  end  two  or  three  years  ago.  I
think  it  extremely  unlikely  that  Mrs.  Willett  should  ever
have  seen  it,  and  equally  unlikely  that  she  should  have  got
to  know  about  the  essay  from  any  other  source.  Such  purely
literary  questions  have  no  sort  of  interest  for  her.  Both
Mrs.  Verrall  and  Miss  Verrall  are  confident  that  they  never
spoke  to  her  on  the  subject.

Looking,  then,  to  this  first  and  most  important  of  the  four
scripts — important  by  reason  of  its  date,  and  also  by  reason
of  its  containing  that  clinching  paraphrase  of  the  two  lines
from  Dante  already  referred  to — I  claim  that  our  verdict
on  any  explanation  which  requires  us  to  assume  that  at  some
time  prior  to  July  6,  1912,  the  essay  was  read  by  Mrs.  Willett,
must  be  "  Not  wholly  impossible,  but  in  a  very  high  degree
improbable."

What  then  ?  If  the  knowledge  shown  by  the  scripts  was
not  normally  obtained,  it  must  have  been  obtained  super-
normally — that  is,  it  must  have  been  telepathically  derived
from  some  consciousness  distinct  from  that  of  the  automatist.
What  kind  of  consciousness  ? Incarnate  or  discarnate  ?

Again,  design  is  manifest  in  the  scripts,  inasmuch  as  they
use  their  material,  whencesoever  derived,  to  serve  a  definite
purpose. Who  was  responsible  for  the  design  ? Was  it  the


234


Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.


[part


subconscious  self  of  the  automatist,  or  was  the  automatist
little  more  than  an  instrument  played  upon  by  the  same
independent  consciousness  which  supplied  the  material  of  the
scripts  ?

Here  are  tAvo  pairs  of  alternatives.  Taken  together  they
give  four  possible  combinations,  any  one  of  which  might  be
put  forward  as  the  true  account  of  what  actually  occurred.

Thus  the  really  active  and  planning  intelligence  may  have
been  :

(1)  Mrs.  Willett's  subconscious  self,  drawing  its  material
from  some  other  embodied  consciousness  ;

(2)  Mrs.  Willett's  subconscious  self,  drawing  its  material
from  the  spiritual  world  ;

(3)  The  mind  of  some  other  living  person  acting  on  the
mind  of  the  automatist  ;

(4)  Some  discarnate  spirit  using  the  automatist  as  a  medium
of  communication.

It  is  the  last  case  alone  that  points  unambiguously  to  the
doctrine  of  personal  survival  ;  for  the  second  case,  in  which
we  suppose  the  planning  intelligence  to  be  Mrs.  Willett's
subconscious  self  drawing  its  material  from  the  spiritual
world,  while  not  inconsistent  with  personal  survival,  would
be  equally  satisfied  if  the  source  of  the  supernormal  know-
ledge were  some  spiritual  reservoir  of  pooled  memories,  such
as  has  been  suggested  by  William  James.

I  am  not  prepared  to  affirm  a  priori  that  any  of  these  ex-
planations is  so  intrinsically  improbable  as  to  be  straight-
way ruled  out  of  court.  All  of  them,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,
involve  a  root-and-branch  reconstruction  of  many  present-
day  psychological  orthodoxies  :  and  yet  one  or  other  of  them,
it  would  seem,  must  be  admitted,  wherever  we  accept  evidence
of  design  in  the  scripts  combined  with  supernormally  acquired
knowledge.

Which  of  the  four  explanations  fits  the  present  case  best  ?

I  am  afraid  it  is  not  possible  within  the  limits  of  this  Paper
to  give  the  question  an  adequately  reasoned  answer.  A
special  case  cannot  be  properly  discussed  in  all  its  bearings
without  an  examination  of  many  other  more  or  less  similar
cases,  nor  without  some  attempt  to  estimate  the  value  and
significance  of  the  automatist's  script  generally.


LXIX.]


Evidence  of  Personal  Survival.


235


There  are,  however,  some  circumstances  in  connection  with
the  case  before  us  which  are  not  immaterial  and  may  help
towards  forming  an  opinion.

Mrs.  Willett  writes  her  scripts  sometimes  alone,  sometimes
with  a  sitter  present  .  There  was  a  sitter  present  on  July  6,
1912,  the  date  on  which  the  first  reference  to  the  subject
appeared.  When  an  automatist  is  supposed  to  have  derived
information  telepathically  from  the  mind  of  another  living
person  it  is  naturally  on  the  sitter  that  suspicion  first  falls.
But  the  sitter  on  July  6  Avas  myself  ;  and  I  can  positively
aver  not  only  that  I  had  no  idea  at  that  date,  or  indeed  for
a  Avhole  year  afterwards,  who  the  Timid  Traveller  might  be,
but  that  even  the  bare  fact  of  Dr.  Verrall's  having  •written
on  the  subject  of  Dante  and  Statius  Avas  completely  unknoAAm
to  me.

There  remain  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Miss  Verrall — for  I  cannot
think  of  any  other  liAang  person  A\rhose  mind  Mrs.  Willett
can  plausibly  be  supposed  to  have  tapped.

That  one  or  the  other  or  both  of  these  ladies  should  haA-e
been  the  source  AArhence  Mrs.  Willett  dreAAr  her  information,
is  a  possibility  Avhich  I  do  not  deny,  and  which  ought  not
to  be  ignored.  If,  however,  we  go  further  and  suppose  them
to  have  been  intelligent  agents  in  the  production  of  the  scripts.
the  difficulties  become  greater.  I  doubt  Avhether  any  actual
facts  can  be  brought  forward  tending  to  show  that  evidential
cases  have  been  "  engineered  :'  by  the  subliminal  self  of  some
living  person  other  than  the  automatist  without  the  normal
consciousness  of  that  person  being  in  any  Avay  aware  of  Avhat
was  going  on.  Yet  this  is  what  the  hypothesis  compels  us
to  assume.  Moreover,  the  particular  case  we  are  considering
offers  special  difficulties  of  its  OAvn.  Neither  Mrs.  Verrall  nor
Miss  Verrall  had  seen  Mrs.  Willett  for  nearly  two  months
before  July  6,  1912  ;  they  were  separated  from  her  by  more
than  a  hundred  miles  when  the  script  of  that  date  AA'as  written  ;
further,  Miss  VerraU's  acquaintance  Avith  Willett  Scripts  is
practically  confined  to  the  very  few  that  have  appeared  in  the
Proceedings  ;  and  Mrs.  Verrall  AAras  so  innocent  of  any  conscious
understanding  of  the  allusion  to  the  Traveller  and  the  River
AAhich  he  AATished  to  cross,  that  she  had  not  the  faintest  inkling
of  the  interpretation  iioav  placed  on  the  scripts  until  she  AA^as


230


Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.


[part


shown  the  first  sketch  of  this  Paper  in  November  of  last  year
(1913).

I  hope  these  observations  may  have  helped  somewhat  to
narrow  the  issue  ;  and  there  I  must  leave  it  so  far  as  argument
is  concerned.  If,  however,  you  care  to  hear  a  dogmatic  ex-
pression of  my  own  personal  opinion,  I  am  willing  to  tell
you  frankly  what  I  think.

The  scripts  which  we  owe  to  the  group  of  automatists  of
whom  Mrs.  Verrall,  Miss  Verrall,  and  Mrs.  Willett  are  the
chief,  go  back  for  many  years  now,  and  require  to  be  con-
sidered together  and  as  a  whole.  A  long  and  laborious  study
of  them  carried  on  from  this  point  of  view  has  brought  me
slowly  but  surely  to  a  conviction  that  there  is  much  in  them
that  cannot  be  satisfactorily  explained  except  upon  the
spiritistic  hypothesis.

Of  course  such  a  conclusion  must  in  its  turn  affect  one's
judgment  concerning  any  particular  episode  in  the  scripts.
And  my  own  sincere  belief  is  that  in  these  allusions  to  Dr.
Verrall's  essay  on  "  Dante  on  the  Baptism  of  Statius  "  we
have  at  least  the  echoes  of  the  voice  of  one  who  "  being  dead
yet  speaketh."

A  few  subsidiary  points  in  the  scripts  still  remain  to  be
considered.  Though  of  secondary  importance  they  are  by
no  means  without  interest  ;  and  their  collective  effect  is  to
confirm  and  reinforce  the  results  already  arrived  at.

At  the  end  of  Extract  (B),  from  the  script  of  August  13,
1913,  a  curious  phrase  occurs  :

Have  this  seen  to,  for  he  swears  that  he  will  not  here  exercise
any  patience  whatsoever  ;  not  even  about
Lavender  or  Lub.

"  Lavender  or  Lub"  came  in  a  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  written
on  Jan.  13,  1908.  That  script  had  been  seen  by  Mrs.  Willett,
which  no  doubt  accounts  in  part  for  its  appearance  here.
So  much  I  was  aware  of  ;  and  I  also  knew  that  its  original
source  was  some  comic  verses  in  Punch.  But  I  was  unable
to  form  any  conjecture  respecting  its  meaning  or  appropriate-
ness in  this  place  until  light  was  thrown  on  the  subject  by
Mrs.  Verrall  herself. She  was  shown  the  script  for  the  first


LXIX.]


Evidence  of  Personal  Survival.


237


time  on  November  10,  1913  ;  and  on  the  15th  of  that  month
she  writes  :

"  Lavender  or  Lub  "  is  a  quotation  from  a  poem  which  appeared
many  years  ago  in  Punch,  where  several  variations  were  made
on  the  alternative  name  for  the  fish,  Chavender  or  Chub.  The
fines  were  exceedingly  familiar  to  my  husband,  and  some  of  the
phrases  had  become  household  words  with  him,  displacing  the
proper  terms  :  during  many  years,  for  instance,  the  mention  of
bathing  invariably  produced  the  lines

"  And  when  I  take  my  Tavender,
My  Tavender  or  Tub."

"  Lavender  or  Lub  "  is  presumably  introduced  to  serve
as  an  identifying  symbol  connecting  Dr.  Verrall  with  the
script  by  a  link  the  significance  of  which  was  outside  the
normal  knowledge  of  the  automatist.  For  although  Mrs.
Willett  knew  that  "  Lavender  or  Lub  "  had  come  in  a
Verrall  script,  she  certainly  did  not  know  that  the  phrase
had  become  a  standing  jest  in  the  intimacy  of  the  family
circle.1

Another  cryptic  but  ingenious  reference  to  Dr.  Verrall  will
be  found  in  the  next  extract,  marked  (C),  from  the  script
of  August  17,  1913  :

Not  a  one-horsed  dawn,  but  a  two-horsed  chariot,  though  one-
horsed  in  a  way  might  fit,  because  as  compared  to  another
charioteer's  exploits  his  were  but  a  one-horsed  affair. It  is  a

1  There  is  nothing  in  Mrs.  Yen-all's  Script  of  Jan.  13,  1908,  to  suggest  any
connection  between  Dr.  Verrall  and  the  phrase  "  Lavender  or  Lub."  To
make  this  quite  clear,  I  give  the  Script  in  full  :

"  Everard  not  not  that  name.  Begin  again.  Lavender  is  a  word  that
will  fit  into  the  scheme  much  better.

Lavender  or  Lub.

Ask  Helen  when  she  thought  of  that  last —  write  and  ask  her  this  at
once — and  now  write  for  me.

Vagatur  extra  muros  in  praesenti  sed  mox  intra  circuitum  penetrabit.
Bene.

Ibi  invenimus  et  inventum  nobiscum  in  domum  invitabimus.  Bene,
immo  optime.

Nomen  rogamus,  quod  cum  declaravit,  en  aenigma  solvitur
Euge  eu  eu."


238


Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.


[part


poem  I  am  alluding  to — a  man  who  drove  two  horses  in  a  less
ambitious  manner. His  predecessor —

Does  God  exact  day  labour,  light  denied  ?
That  ought  to  make  it  clear.

"  A  one-horsed  dawn  "  will  doubtless  recall  to  many  here
an  experiment  in  telepathy  in  which  Dr.  Verrall  was  con-
cerned, and  which  was  described  at  length  by  Mrs.  Verrall
in  Vol.  XX.  of  the  Proceedings.  But  what  follows  is  a  riddle
not  so  easy  to  read  until  the  clue  is  supplied,  when  all  becomes
as  clear  as  daylight.

The  clue  is  to  be  found,  as  the  script  hints,  in  a  poem —
Gray's  Ode  on  the  Progress  of  Poesy.  I  will  quote  the  passage
and  you  will  at  once  perceive  the  application  :

Nor  second  He,  that  rode  sublime

Upon  the  seraph-wings  of  Extasy

The  secrets  of  the  abyss  to  spy.

He  passed  the  flaming  bounds  of  place  and  time  ;

The  living  Throne,  the  sapphire-blaze

Where  angels  tremble  while  they  gaze

He  saw  ; but  blasted  with  excess  of  light,

Closed  his  eyes  in  endless  night.

Behold  where  Dryden's  less  presumptuous  car

Wide  o'er  the  fields  of  glory  bear

Two  coursers  of  ethereal  race,

With  necks  in  thunder  clothed,  and  long-resounding  pace.

Gray  is  comparing  Dry  den  with  Milton. The  lines,

"  He  saw  ; but  blasted  with  excess  of  light
Closed  his  eyes  in  endless  night  "

refer  of  course  to  Milton's  loss  of  sight — a  reference  which  the
script  recalls  by  quoting  from  Milton's  Sonnet  on  his  Blindness

"Does  God  exact  day-labour,  light  denied  ?  "

Milton  is  Dryden's  "  predecessor  "  ;  and  the  "  man  who  drove
two  horses  in  a  less  ambitious  manner  "  is  Dryden  himself  :

"  Behold  where  Dryden's  less  presumptuous  car
Wide  o'er  the  fields  of  glory  bear
Two  coursers  of  ethereal  race."


LXIX.]


Evidence  of  Personal  Survival.


239


A  neater  or  more  convincing  example  of  the  deliberately
round-about  method  of  the  scripts  it  would  be  difficult  to
find.  The  last  work  on  which  Dr.  Verrall  was  engaged  before
his  death  was  a  set  of  lectures  on  Dryden,  in  the  course  of
which  this  very  passage  from  Gray's  Ode  was  quoted.  The
object  of  all  these  elaborate  literary  allusions  I  take  to  be
the  identification  of  Dr.  Verrall  as  the  "  communicator  "  in
a  way  that  would  be  apparent  to  an  interpreter  of  the  scripts,
while  unintelligible  to  the  normal  consciousness  of  the  writer
of  them.  It  is  possible  also,  though  not  certain,  that  the
allusions  show  supernormally-acquired  knowledge.  Mrs.  Wil-
lett  doubtless  knew  that  Dr.  Verrall  was  giving  lectures  on
English  Literature.  She  told  me,  in  answer  to  a  question,
that  she  was  not  aware  that  he  had  been  lecturing  on  Dryden  ;
and  she  certainly  did  not  know  that  the  passage  from  Gray's
Ode  had  been  quoted  in  the  lectures.  But  it  is  quite  possible
she  may  have  heard  or  read  that  he  had  been  lecturing  on
Dryden  without  consciously  remembering  it  ;  and  the  refer-
ence to  Gray  in  the  scripts  may  have  been  a  chance  coinci-
dence. The  lectures  themselves  were  only  published  in  the
present  year  (1914).

Another  point  :  What  is  the  meaning  of  "  Hair  in  a
Temple  "  ?  Some  importance  is  evidently  attached  to  the
allusion  contained  in  these  words,  for  they  are  found  in  every
one  of  the  three  later  scripts,  and  in  the  last  of  all  with  reiterated
emphasis  :

Then  again  I  will  repeat  and  will  continue  to  repeat  until  you
are  all  sick  and  tired  of  the  subject,  HAIR  IN  A  TEMPLE.  That
belongs.

It  is,  I  think,  a  fair  assumption  that  the  expression  "  Hair
in  a  Temple  "  relates  to  some  story  or  poem  belonging  to
classical  times.  There  happen  to  be  two,  and,  so  far  as  I
know,  only  two  classical  poems  to  which  it  can  refer.  One
of  these  is  a  well-known  poem  by  Catullus,  called  "  The  hair
of  Berenice."  The  other  is  a  poem  less  well-known,  and
less  deserving  to  be  well  known,  whose  author  is  none  other
than  our  friend  Statius.  That  Statius  should  have  written
a  poem  to  which  "  Hair  in  a  Temple  "  might  appropriately
serve  as  a  title  is  certainly  curious  :  and  it  may  be  that  here

Q


240


Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.


[part


we  have  the  explanation  of  which  we  are  in  search.  "  Hair
in  a  Temple  "  may  simply  be  intended  as  a  hint  that  Statius
is  in  some  way  connected  with  the  main  topic  of  the  script.

But  while  not  wholly  rejecting  this  explanation,  it  is  only
right  I  should  tell  you  that  I  do  not  believe  it  was  what  the
intelligence  responsible  for  the  scripts  had  primarily  and
principally  in  mind.  I  think  we  were  meant  to  interpret
the  scripts  as  alluding  to  the  Hair  of  Berenice,  which,  accord-
ing to  the  story,  she  cut  off  by  way  of  sacrifice  for  the  safe
return  home  of  her  husband,  and  dedicated  in  a  temple  ;
whence  it  was  transferred  to  the  heavens  and  became  the
Constellation  known  to  this  day  as  Coma  Berenices.

What,  then,  is  the  connection  between  Berenice  and  the
hesitating  Pilgrim  ?

Here  I  am  in  a  difficulty,  and  must  bespeak  your  kind
indulgence.  I  must  ask  you  to  accept  from  me  that  there
is  a  connection,  but  one  which  I  have  to  leave  unexplained,
because  it  involves  a  reference  to  private  matters  which  I
am  not  at  liberty  to  disclose.  Unfortunately  this  difficulty
is  one  that  frequently  occurs  in  dealing  with  Willett  Scripts,
and  diminishes  their  evidential  utility,  even  when  it  increases
their  intrinsic  evidential  value.

I  can  only  tell  you  that  "  Berenice  "  is,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
connected  by  very  definite  intermediate  links  with  Dr.  Verrall's
essays  on  Dante  and  Statius,  and  that  this  explanation  has
the  additional  merit  of  explaining  why  the  drawing  of  a  wheel
appears  in  the  script  of  August  13,  1913.  The  intermediate
links  have  nothing  to  do  with  Dr.  Verrall  himself,  and  could
only  be  understood  by  the  small  group  who  have  been  study-
ing the  scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Miss  Verrall,  as  well  as
those  of  Mrs.  Willett.  I  am  sorry  I  cannot  say  more  on  the
subject.

One  additional  puzzle  and  I  have  finished.  It  will  be
noticed  that  the  "  Traveller  "  of  the  script  of  July  6,  1912,
is  spoken  of  in  the  script  of  August  13,  1913,  first  as  the  "  Tra-
veller," and  then  as  the  "  Pilgrim."  In  the  two  latest  scripts
he  appears  either  as  the  "  Pilgrim  "  or  as  the  "  Passionate
Pilgrim."  What  is  the  significance  of  the  epithet  "  Passionate"
thus  applied  to  him  ?

It  is  true  that  it  is  only  applied  in  a  half-hearted  and  almost


lxix.]  Evidence  of  Personal  Survival.  241


apologetic  way  ;  and  care  is  taken  to  guard  against  the  associa-
tions, literary  or  otherwise — for  instance,  those  connected
with  Shakespeare's  poem — which  may  have  gathered  round
the  combination  of  "  Passionate  "  with  "  Pilgrim  "  :

The  Passionate  Pilgrim.  But  it  is  of  another  I  want  to  write.
I  said  Pilgrim.

and  again  :

if  I  say  Passionate  Pilgrim,  I  know  all  sorts  of  connotations
will  be  dragged  in  ...  a  Passionate  Pilgrim,  but  not  H.S.'s  one.

"  H.  S."  stands  for  Henry  Sidgwick  ;  and  "  H.  S.'s  one  "
must  be  taken  to  refer  to  an  early  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's
(Jan.  17,  1904)  1  in  which  "  the  Passionate  Pilgrim  "  occurs
in  a  passage  afterwards  connected  by  her  with  Professor
Sidgwick.  This  passage  was  published,  together  with  Mrs.
Verrall's  interpretation  of  it,  in  Volume  XX.  of  the  Proceed-
ings, and  had  been  seen  by  Mrs.  Willett.

But  what  does  "  Passionate  "  mean  here,  if  these  associa-
tions are  excluded  ?

It  may  perhaps  be  nothing  more  than  an  unauthorised
contribution  on  the  part  of  the  automatist,  the  "  Pilgrim  "  of
the  communicator  having  suggested  to  her  mind  the  "  Pas-
sionate Pilgrim."

Another  explanation,  however,  seems  to  me  possible,  and
even  probable.  It  is  that  the  passage  describing  the  hesi-
tation of  the  Pilgrim  to  cross  the  river  carries  with  it  a  personal
reference  to  the  communicator.  The  communicator  in  some
sense  identifies  himself  with  the  Pilgrim  ;  and  the  mock
indignation  and  impatience  which  he  professes  at  our  failure
to  discover  the  passage  for  which  he  bade  us  search,  is
humorously  carried  on  into  the  description  of  him  as  a  Pas-
sionate Pilgrim  :

Some  one  indignant  at  the  delaj^  calls  out  HAS  THE
PASSAGE  been  identified  ?

and  again  :

Have  this  seen  to,  for  he  swears  he  will  not  here  exercise  any
patience  whatsoever,  not  even  about  Lavender  or  Lub.

1  See  Proc.  Vol.  XX.,  p.  289.


242  Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour.  [part

Similarly  in  the  last  extract :  "  He  of  the  little  patience
demands  now  this  3rd  time,  etc."

Who  then  is  "he  of  the  little  patience"?  About  this
there  can,  I  think,  be  no  doubt.  It  is  clearly  Dr.  Verrall
himself  ;  and  if  my  interpretation  of  the  Passionate  Pilgrim
is  right,  there  must  be  some  sense  in  which  the  autobiographical
references  discovered  (according  to  the  view  of  the  essay)
by  Dante  in  the  lines  from  Statius'  Thebaid  about  the  crossing
of  the  river,  must  have  a  personal  application  to  Dr.  Verrall
as  well.  He  must  be  representing  himself  as  in  some  way
a  Statius,  or  Stayer  on  the  brink.

I  think,  too,  the  words  in  the  script  of  August  13,  1913,
which  I  have  just  quoted  confirm  this  idea  :  "  Have  this
seen  to,  for  he  swears  that  he  will  not  here  exercise  any  patience
whatsoever."  "  Not  here  "  seems  to  signify  that  during  life
in  the  body  patience  was  exercised  ;  and  the  word  "  Faith  "
occurring  in  the  same  script  may  be  intended  to  denote  the
subject  with  which  the  exercise  of  patience  was  concerned.

Could  the  River  which  the  Pilgrim  was  afraid  to  cross,
and  which  for  Statius  was  the  River  of  Baptism,  have  been
for  Dr.  Verrall  the  River  of  Faith  in  a  life  hereafter,  and  in
the  reality  of  communication  from  "  the  further  shore  "  ?

The  suggestion  here  made  receives  some  support  from  a
statement  which  Mrs.  Verrall  prepared  for  me,  and  which
I  am  permitted  to  reproduce  :

My  husband's  interest  in  Psychical  Research  was  mainly  due,
as  has  been  said  by  Mr.  Bayfield  in  the  recently  published  Memoir,
to  his  desire  to  "  encourage  every  investigation  which  gave  promise
of  tangible  fruit  "  ;  and  for  many  years  after  the  development
of  my  faculty  of  automatic  writing  he  dejorecated  as  premature
any  attempt  to  frame  even  a  "  working  hypothesis  "  to  account
for  what  seemed  difficult  to  attribute  to  telepathy  between  living
minds.  But  he  was  greatly  impressed  by  some  of  the  more  recently
recorded  phenomena  ; — in  particular  by  the  evidence  of  classical
knowledge  shown  by  Myersp  in  the  sittings  of  Mr.  Dorr  with  Mrs.
Piper  during  the  spring  of  1908,  as  suggestive  of  the  identity  of
the  supposed  communicator  and  so  pointing  to  what  may  be  briefly
called  the  "  spiritistic  hypothesis."  This  impression  was  deepened
on  his  receipt  of  a  "  message  "  claiming  to  come  from  a  personal


LXIX.]


Evidence  of  Personal  Survival.


243


friend,  recently  dead,  in  a  Willett  Script  of  Oct.  29,  1911,  which
was  sent  to  him  within  a  few  days  of  its  production,  and  was  further
confirmed  by  a  talk  which  he  had  with  Mr.  Gerald  Balfour  in
January,  1912,  of  which  he  spoke  to  me  at  the  time,  and  to  which
he  often  subsequently  referred.

His  interest  in  the  subject  was  further  shown  by  his  choice  for
reading  in  March,  1912,  first  of  William  James's  Varieties  of  Religious
Experience,  which  he  had  not  read  when  it  appeared  and  which
filled  him  with  admiration  for  what  he  called  James's  "  magnificent
candour,"  and  later  of  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  Paper  in  an  early  volume
of  the  Proceedings  (Vol.  III.)  on  the  Evidence  collected  by  the  Society
for  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.

The  question  of  his  personal  opinions  was  not  at  this  time  dis-
cussed between  us,  but  some  months  ago,  after  his  death,  an  inti-
mate friend  of  his  told  me  that  something  which  my  husband
said  made  the  hearer  think  that  he  believed  in  the  continuance
of  existence  after  death.

Let  me  say  in  conclusion  that,  in  suggesting  that  an  analogy
is  intended  between  Dr.  Verrall's  personal  attitude  and  that
of  the  pilgrim  who  shrinks  from  plunging  into  the  stream.
I  do  not  wish  to  insist  unduly  on  this  reading  of  the  script,
or  to  have  it  regarded  as  in  any  way  essential  to  the  main
contention  of  my  Paper.  It  may  be  that,  like  Dante's  Statius,
I  have  "  put  forth  my  hand  to  fill  in  colour,"  and  done  so
without  sufficient  warrant.  But  I  cannot  help  feeling  "  se
non  e  vero,  e  ben  trovato  "  ;  and  that  the  interpretation
is  one  which  puts  a  finishing  and  as  it  were  artistic  touch
to  a  message  which  must  in  any  case  take  high  rank  among
the  evidences  provided  by  automatic  writings  of  the  reality
of  communication  from  the  departed.


244


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


III.

NOTE  ON  THE  SAME  SCRIPTS.

By  the  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.

In  a  closely  reasoned  and  characteristically  lucid  argument  Mr.
Balfour  has  shown  good  grounds  for  his  belief  that  the  late
Dr.  Verrall  is  the  original  source  of  the  scripts  which  are  here
brought  to  our  notice.  For  this  conclusion  there  are  yet  other
reasons.  They  were  present  to  Mr.  Balfour's  mind,  but  as  he
said  at  the  meeting  at  which  he  read  his  paper,  he  did  not
enlarge  upon  them  because  he  thought  they  would  come  better
from  some  one  not  the  author  of  the  paper,  who  might  be
thought  to  be  unduly  influenced  by  a  desire  to  make  out  a
case.  The  imputation  is  one  to  which  no  one  could  be  less
liable  than  he,  but  personally  I  regret  his  abstention  the  less
since  it  has  given  me  an  opportunity  of  contributing  some-
thing to  the  discussion  of  a  communication  which  I,  too,
believe  to  have  come  from  my  oldest  and  dearest  friend.
Also,  having  at  various  times  for  some  years  past  expressed
in  these  pages  doubt  and  hesitation  as  to  the  proof  of  com-
munication with  the  spirit  world,  I  venture  to  seize  the
occasion  and  here  make  formal  recantation  of  those  doubts.
The  present  scripts,  following  on  Miss  Johnson's  recently
published  elucidation  of  the  cross-correspondence  entitled
"  Alexander's  Tomb,"  have  furnished  this  "  timid  traveller  "
with  a  bridge  by  which  to  cross  the  stream.

These  additional  reasons  for  assigning  to  Dr.  Verrall  the
scripts  which  we  are  examining  can,  I  fear,  be  fully  appre-
ciated only  by  those  who  knew  him  somewhat  intimately,  for
they  consist  in  the  exhibition  in  the  scripts  of  two  traits  of
his  personality  which,  highly  characteristic  though  they  are,
would  not  be  likely  to  come  under  the  notice  of  an  ordinary
acquaintance,  or  be  known  by  hearsay  to  a  stranger.  Since


XiXIX.]


Note  on  the  same  Scripts.


245


many  readers  of  the  foregoing  paper  can  only  have  known  Dr.
Verrall  by  repute,  this  note  is  appended,  at  Mr.  Balfour's
suggestion,  in  the  hope  of  further  assisting  such  readers  to
form  an  independent  judgement  on  the  whole  matter.

It  will  be  convenient  to  begin  by  repeating  Mr.  Balfour's
important  statement  that  Mrs.  Willett's  acquaintance  with
Dr.  Verrall  was  very  slight.  It  was,  in  fact,  limited  to  a  visit
of  three  days  in  the  late  summer  of  1910,  when  she  first  met
him,  another  of  two  days  in  1911,  and  an  interview  of  a  few
minutes  in  1912  ;  and  Mrs.  Verrall  is  sure  that  she  could  not
at  these  visits  have  discovered  either  of  the  first  two  points
discussed  below.  Mr.  Balfour,  who  was  very  intimate  with
Verrall  in  old  days  when  they  were  young  together,  and  who
is  also  personally  acquainted  with  Mrs.  Willett,  is  equally
certain  that  nothing  said  by  him  to  her  could  account  for  the
impersonation  presented  in  the  scripts.

For  the  last  fifteen  years  of  his  life  Dr.  Verrall  suffered
from  arthritis.  The  disease  gradually  increased  in  severity,
depriving  him  more  and  more  of  the  use  of  his  limbs,  and  after
the  spring  of  1910  he  was  unable  to  walk  ;  fresh  loss  of  power
in  the  hands  followed,  and  he  could  now  with  difficulty  turn
the  leaves  of  a  book.  These  painful  and  steadily  increasing
physical  disabilities  he  bore  with  an  uncomplaining  patience
which  excited  the  amazement  and  admiration  of  all  who  came
in  contact  with  him  ;  he  did  not  even  allow  them  to  inter-
fere with  the  continuance  of  his  literary  work.  Now,  it  was
just  when  this  exhibition  of  fortitude  was  most  remarkable
that  Mrs.  Willett  first  met  him,  and  it  cannot  be  doubted
that  his  extraordinary  patience  would  have  been  the  charac-
teristic by  which,  either  at  this  time  or  later,  a  visitor  would
be  most  impressed.  This,  my  own  independent  opinion,  is
confirmed  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  who  writes,  after  seeing  a  draft  of
this  note  :  "  Mrs.  Willett's  own  normal  impression  of  A.  was,
I  know  from  what  she  has  said,  mainly  the  patience  with  which
he  bore  his  disqualifications  and  sufferings,  and  of  the  way  in
which  he  was  '  Captain  of  his  soul.'  "  But  the  scripts  describe
him  as  showing  a  considerable  degree  of  impatience,  and  the
peculiar  kind  of  impatience  indicated  was,  in  fact,  in  the
earlier  days  of  health  and  high  spirits,  a  noticeable  feature  of
iis  character. It  signalises  a  Verrall  very  different  from  the


246


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


one  Mrs.  Willett  knew.  It  was  not  the  impatience  of  irrita-
tion, but  that  of  eagerness  and  keen  interest  ;  there  was
nothing  querimonious  about  it.  It  emerged  in  all  sorts  of
circumstances  and  in  all  sorts  of  ways,  and  especially  in  a
conversation  or  discussion  (with  intimates  only,  for  with  others
he  was  always  courtesy  itself)  when  your  thought  did  not  travel
so  quickly  as  his  own,  or  with  the  rapidity  which  he  expected
of  you.  Or  it  would  be  evoked  when,  as  in  the  scripts,  he
had  reason  to  fear  that  something  which  could  and  ought  to
have  been  done  at  once  had  not  been  done  ;  or  again,  when
he  was  anxious  to  have  some  preliminary  point  settled  and
cleared  out  of  the  way  in  order  that  the  talk  might  get  on  to
the  main  issue.  The  thing  I  mean  does  not  readily  lend  itself
to  definition,  but  it  was  eminently  characteristic,  and  no  one
who  had  engaged  with  him  in  intimate  talk  could  fail  to  be
struck  by  it.  A  number  of  examples  would  perhaps  make  it
clearer,  but  for  that  there  is  not  space  here,  and  it  must  suffice
to  say  that  all  the  specimens  in  the  scripts  are  typical  :

"  HAS  THE  PASSAGE

been  identified  about  the  traveller  looking  across  a  stream  ;  "
etc.,  in  (B)  ;  "  That  ought  to  make  it  clear,"  in  (C)  ;  "  Now

if  I  say  Passionate  Pilgrim  I  know  all  sorts  of  connotations
will  be  dragged  in  "  (a  peculiarly  Verrallian  remark)  ;  and
"  Then  again  I  will  repeat  and  will  continue  to  repeat  until
you  are  all  sick  and  tired  of  the  subject

HAIR  IN  A  TEMPLE  "

in  (D).  All  this  is  VerralFs  manner  to  the  life  in  animated
conversation.  On  the  other  hand,  the  terse  completeness  of
the  description  in  the  first  paragraph  of  (A)  is  equally  in  his
carefully  ordered  style  when  stating  a  case,  and  the  phrase
"  and  yet  desiring  to  be  at  his  destination  "  is  an  admirable
illustration  of  his  somewhat  stately  way  of  putting  a  simple
fact  in  a  considered  exposition.  When  I  first  read  the  words
quoted  above  I  received  a  series  of  little  shocks,  for  the  turns
of  speech  are  Verrall's,  the  high-pitched  emphasis  is  his,  and
I  could  hear  the  very  tones  in  which  he  would  have  spoken
each  sentence.  The  crescendo  at  the  end  of  (D)  was  perhaps
the  most  startling  instance  : I  can  see  the  amused  smile  on


LXIX.]


Note  on  the  same  Scripts.


247


his  face  and  the  merriment  flashing  from  his  eyes  as  he  shouts
out  with  all  the  gaminerie  of  a  mischievous  child,

"HAIR  IN  A  TEMPLE."

During  the  discussion  on  Mr.  Balfour's  paper  at  the  meeting
at  which  it  was  read,  both  he  and  Dr.  Leaf — also  an  intimate
friend  of  Verrall  from  undergraduate  days — concurred  with
me  as  to  this  impression  made  by  the  language  and  tone  of  the
scripts  ;  and  after  the  meeting  a  niece  of  Dr.  Verrall  told  me
she  had  had  a  similar  experience.  Mrs.  Verrall  has  since
written  that  she  is  altogether  in  accord  with  us,  and  doubtless
many  others  would  testify  to  the  same  effect.

Since  Mrs.  Willett,  before  writing  scripts  (B),  (C),  and  (D),
had  read  the  Memoir  prefixed  to  the  volume  of  essays  to  which
Mr.  Balfour  has  referred,  it  is  important  to  state  that  no
mention  is  there  made  of  this  salient  trait  of  intellectual
impatience,  though  it  was  vividly  present  to  my  mind  when
I  wrote,  "  Easily  roused  though  he  was  even  to  excitement
when  holding  forth  on  some  matter  which  greatly  interested
him,  his  usual  maimer  was  extremely  gentle."  Verrall's
natural  gaiety  and  love  of  fun  are  indeed  dwelt  upon  at  some
length,  but  nothing  is  said  of  the  particular  point  with  which
I  now  proceed  to  deal, — "  Lavender  or  Lub."

As  a  mark  of  identification,  the  reference  to  "  Lavender  or
Lub  "  is  as  convincing  as  the  impatience.  Verrall  had  a  rare
and  always  alert  sense  of  the  comic  (see  Script  B),  and  his
fine  appreciation  of  the  noblest  in  literature  did  not  prevent
his  deriving  the  keenest  delight  from  clever  nonsense,  and
especially  from  humorous  or  frankly  nonsensical  verse.  He  is
the  only  man  I  ever  met  who  enjoyed  it  quite  in  the  same  way
and  to  the  same  extent  as  myself, — that  is  to  say,  an  extent
which  seems  to  permit  of  no  increase  without  danger  of  dis-
integration. If  we  were  together  and  one  of  us  read  aloud
something  very  good  after  its  kind — something  in  which  the
combination  of  rhythm  and  assonance  and  rime  and  sense  (or
nonsense)  left  nothing  to  be  desired,  there  would  be  no  inter-
ruptions for  the  expression  of  our  enjoyment,  but  like  two
connoisseurs  sipping  a  wine  of  choice  vintage,  we  would  merely
exchange  a  series  of  rapturous  winks.  When  a  contributor  to
Punch,  having  found  the  full  designation  of  the  fish  commonly


248


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


known  as  the  chub  to  be  "  the  cha vender  or  chub,"  published
the  little  poem  in  which  he  properly  sought  to  extend  this
delicious  type  of  synonym — writing  of  "  lavender  or  lub,
gra vender  or  grub,  pavender  or  pub,"  etc.,  etc.,  the  idea  was
immediately  recognised  as  one  of  great  merit,  and  from  that
time  onward,  until  he  ceased  to  be  able  to  walk  (January,
1910),  Verrall  habitually  described  his  bath,  the  taking  of
Avhich  had  become  a  serious  effort,  as  his  "  ta vender  or  tub."
Now,  as  has  been  said,  Mrs.  Willett  did  not  make  Verrall's
acquaintance  until  the  late  summer  of  1910,  and  Mrs.  Verrall
is  quite  sure  that  all  allusions  to  "  lavender  or  lub  "  ceased
after  her  husband's  serious  illness  in  the  early  part  of  that
year  ;  jokes  had  become  very  rare,  and  she  doubts  whether
Mrs.  Willett  ever  heard  him  laugh.  It  appears  to  be  an  irresis-
tible conclusion  that  no  one  but  Verrall  himself,  who,  as  we
have  seen,  is  unmistakably  delineated  throughout  the  scripts,
could  have  furnished  this  peculiarly  ingenious  touch.

Both  the  points  which  we  have  been  considering  may  be
further  illustrated  by  the  narration  of  an  incident  which
occurred  about  the  year  1906.  Verrall,  who  was  on  a  visit
to  us,  was  sitting  by  himself  on  the  lawn,  looking  through  old
volumes  of  Punch,  when  he  caught  sight  of  me  coming  from
the  house.  "  Oh,  Bayfield,"  he  cried  (and  the  voice  was  so
urgent  that  I  began  to  quicken  my  pace),  "  come  here  !  Come
here  and  listen  to  this  !  "  He  had  found  "  The  Three  Judges.
A  song  of  the  Parnell  Commission.  Air — '  The  Three  Ravens,'  "
(vol.  97,  p.  194),  and  when  I  got  to  him,  chuckling  with  delight
so  that  he  could  hardly  go  on,  he  read  through  the  whole
poem,  of  which  the  following  is  the  opening  verse  :

There  were  three  Judges  sat  on  a  bench,
Down  a  down,  hey-down,  hey-down  ;

And  from  their  task  they  all  did  blench,
With  a  down.

And  one  of  them  said  to  the  others,

"  Oh,  here's  a  bore,  my  learned  Brothers  ;

With  a  down  derry,  derry,  derry  down  down."

The  point  which,  judging  by  myself,  I  think  tickled  him  most,
the  Derry  and  the  Down,  he  brought  out  with  ever  increasing
emphasis  until  at  last  it  became  a  shout  (see  end  of  Script  D).


LXIX.]


Note  on  the  same  Scripts.


249


It  remains  to  mention  one  more  point  which  also  impresses
me  strongly.  We  have  here  an  extraordinarily  faithful  repre-
sentation of  Verrall  in  respect  of  a  peculiar  kind  of  impatience
and  a  habit  of  emphasis  which  he  had  in  conversation,  and
of  his  playfulness  and  sense  of  humour.  In  what  way  are
these  life-like  touches  of  character  introduced  ?  How  are
they  worked  into  the  essential  matter  of  the  scripts  ?  Have
they  the  air  of  being  inserted  by  an  ingenious  forger  (the
unprincipled  subliminal  of  some  living  person)  with  a  purpose,
in  order  to  lend  convincing  vraisemblance  to  a  fictitious  im-
personation ;  or  do  they  give  us  the  impression  of  being
spontaneous  and  genuine  ?  Unless  I  am  inexcusably  mistaken,
no  one  accustomed  to  estimate  the  internal  evidence  afforded
by  a  document  of  doubtful  origin  could  hesitate  as  to  the
answer.  Note  how  simply  and  naturally  the  first  hint  of  the
impatience  which  we  have  been  discussing  emerges  at  the
beginning  of  Script  (B)  :  "  Some  one  indignant  at  the  delay
calls  out,"  etc.  Surely  this  is  the  language  of  sincerity, — of
one  who,  so  far  from  lying  "  with  malice  aforethought,"  is
honestly  describing  what  he  has  before  him,  what  he  actually
sees  and  hears.  Nor  can  I  find  in  all  that  is  said  by  the  "  some
one  indignant  "  throughout  the  scripts  any  touch  that  betrays
artificiality,  any  '  fault '  in  the  close  contexture  of  matter  and
manner.  Nowhere  is  there  any  slip  which  would  justify  the
suspicion  that  in  reality  we  have  to  do  with  a  cunningly
masquerading  '  sub.'  Neither  the  impatience,  nor  the  em-
phatic utterance,  nor  the  playfulness  has  anywhere  the  appear-
ance of  being  '  put  on,' — of  being  separable  from  the  matter
of  the  scripts.  "  Assume  a  virtue,  if  you  have  it  not,"  is  no
doubt  a  motto  which  an  enterprising  subliminal  would  not
forget,  but  to  me  at  least  it  is  incredible  that  even  the  cleverest
could  achieve  such  an  unexampled  triumph  in  deceptive
impersonation  as  this  would  be  if  the  actor  is  not  Verrall
himself.


250


Helen  cle  G.  V  err  all.


[part


IV.

A  FURTHER  STUDY  OF  THE  MAC  SCRIPTS.

By  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.

Mr.  and  Miss  "  Mac,"  it  will  be  remembered,  were  two  of  the
automatists  who  took  part  in  the  cross-correspondence  on
"  Sesame  and  Lilies  "  (see  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.
264  et  seq.).  The  present  paper  is  concerned  with  some  later
scripts  of  theirs  and  with  certain  connexions  between  these
scripts  and  some  written  by  Mrs.  Verrall  and  myself.  The
circumstances  under  which  the  earlier  cross-correspondence
on  "  Sesame  and  Lilies  "  occurred  are  worth  recalling  here,
because  they  add  to  the  interest  of  other  phenomena  con-
nected with  Mr.  and  Miss  Mac.

Mr.  and  Miss  Mac  are  not  members  of  the  S.P.R.  and  were
quite  unknown  to  my  mother  and  me  until  in  September,
1908,  Miss  Mac  sent  my  mother  the  records  of  some  plan-
chette  writing  obtained  by  herself  and  other  members  of  her
family,  chiefly  her  brother.  This  she  did  in  consequence  of
definite  and  repeated  injunctions  given  in  the  planchette
writing  to  "  send  the  messages  to  Mrs.  Verrall."  These
records  showed  a  definite  correspondence  of  topic  with  scripts
recently  produced  by  my  mother  and  me.  Since  that  time
my  mother  has  occasionally  corresponded  with  Miss  Mac,  but
we  have  never  met  either  Miss  Mac  or  her  brother.  The
additional  interest  which  the  earlier  phenomena  derive  from
the  fact  that  Mr.  and  Miss  Mac  were  complete  strangers  to  the
other  automatists  concerned,  extends,  therefore,  in  a  measure,
to  these  later  phenomena.

The  scripts  involved  are  (a)  four  scripts  of  my  own  written
between  January  and  March,  1911,  sent  to  the  Rooms  of  the
S.P.R.  and  not  seen  by  Mrs.  Verrall  till  August  20,  1911,  (6)


lxix.]  A  Further  Study  of  the  Mac  Scripts.  251

three  scripts  written  by  Mrs.  Verrall  in  June,  1911,  and  (c)
five  scripts  written  by  Mr.  and  Miss  Mac  in  July  and  Sep-
tember, 1911,  of  which  the  first  three  were  received  by  Mrs.
Verrall  on  July  12,  1911,  and  the  remaining  two  on  September
12,  1911.  I  did  not  see  either  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  of  June,
1911,  or  the  Mac  scripts  of  July  and  September,  1911,  till
October  6,  1912.  The  connexions  of  thought  constituting  the
cross-correspondence  are  to  be  found  chiefly  in  the  Mac  scripts
and  mine,  the  part  contributed  by  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  being
slighter  and  less  definite.  It  will  be  noticed  that  between
the  last  of  my  scripts  and  the  first  of  the  Mac  scripts  there
is  an  interval  of  more  than  three  months,  but  this  interval
may  be  to  a  great  extent  discounted,  because  July  7,  1911,
was  the  first  occasion  for  more  than  a  year,  upon  which  Mr.
and  Miss  Mac  obtained  any  script  purporting  to  come  from
Henry  Sidgwick,  the  only  one  of  their  supposed  controls
who  has  ever  been  associated  with  the  production  of  cross-
correspondences.  The  other  scripts  written  by  them  during
1911 — not  a  large  amount — are  of  a  totally  different  char-
acter, and  we  may  for  our  present  purpose  ignore  them,  and
regard  the  script  of  July  7,  1911,  as  the  first  script  produced
by  Mr.  and  Miss  Mac  after  my  scripts  of  January  and  March,
1911.  That  being  so,  no  great  importance  need  be  attached
to  the  interval  of  time.

I  will  first  quote  four  scripts  of  my  own,  written  on  January
25,  February  28,  March  10  and  March  14,  1911.

(H.  V.  script  of  January  25,  1911.)

Cloth  of  gold — the  king's  purple
'Twas  a  royal  train  put  forth  to  sea
But  the  tale  can  be  told  by  none  but  me.1

The  wild  waves  wist  2
And  apple — the  apple  of  discord, the  fruit  of  the  tree — fruit
A  barred  gate  nothing  more.

no  sound  was  heard
A  leaf  couch — in  the  depths  of  the  forest — and  in  green  under-
wood and  cover  blossom  by  blossom  the  spring  begins  3

1  Rossetti,  The  White  Ship.  2  Shakespeare,  The  Tempest,  I.  2.

3  Swinburne,  Atalanta  in  Calydon,  first  chorus.


252


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[fart


golden  grain  for  the  harvest, a  rich  harvest — gather  tip  the

sheaves.

What  went  ye  forth  for  to  see  ?  1

The  winding  of  the  thread  the  whirling  spindle.

9  times  9  and  again  9.

(H.  V.  script  of  February  28,  1911.)

Salvator  cupidine

[A  saviour — -with  desire.]

The  early  dawn — the  first  awakening

the  first  fruits  of  Time — airav&  6  /xaKpos  KavapiOjj.vTO'i  \p6vos*

[All  things  long  unnumbered  Time.2]

look  back  where  that  was  written  before  s

strength  to  resist  but  more  to  yield

The  garden  of  Eden.

master  of  the  murmuring  courts — 4

the  end  and  the  beginning

A  charm  a  philtre — nectar  and  dew  the  drink  of  the  gods

the  spinning  wheel

Enough.

(H.  V.  script  of  March  10,  1911.)

The  tune — the  old  tune — once  again
I  cannot  hear in  the  depths

then  when  the  end  comes
a  faded  flower  memories  live
the  best  and  the  worst  5

God  be  thanked  the  meanest  of  his  creatures  boasts  two  soul
sides  6

the  worst  and  the  best  5
I  cannot  get  it  elear.

1  Matt.  xi.  7-9  ;  Luke  vii.  24-26.  2  Sophocles,  Ajax.

3  This  quotation  occurs  in  the  H.  V.  script  of  December  16,  1909,  which
is  not  discussed  here.

1  Rossetti,  Love's  Nocturne.

5  Cf.  Swinburne,  Triumph  of  Time,  "  For  me  that  know  not  of  worst  or
best."

G  Browning,  Men  and  Women  :  Epilogue.


lxix.] A  Further  Study  of  the  Mac  Scripts.  253

{H.  V.  script  of  March  14,  1911.)

Quarto  decimo  die  [On  the  fourteenth  day].
Ask  not — ask  me  no  more  1 — no  that  is  wrong — the  pensive
lily — the  water  lily — the  rose  was  awake  all  night  for  thy  sake.2

The  triumph  of  Time
It  is  not  much  that  a  man  may  save
In  the  straights  [sic]  of  Life  on  the  shoals  of  Time
Who  swims  in  sight  of  the  great  third  wave
That  never  a  swimmer  may  cross  or  climb.3
We  have  tried  to  get  at  this  idea  before.

A  solemn  music — harmonies  of  ancient  days — a  broken  lute.

No  more  no  never  more.4

The  objection  is  sometimes  made  in  regard  to  the  evidence
for  cross-correspondences  that  the  scripts,  in  which  they
are  said  to  occur,  have  been  chosen  arbitrarily  out  of  a  large
mass  of  irrelevant  matter.  That  objection  cannot  be  raised
in  this  instance.  In  the  first  place  the  whole  amount  of
material  to  be  considered  is  small.  Between  November,  1910,
and  March,  1911,  I  wrote  only  seven  pieces  of  script,  which
are  divided  from  the  rest  of  my  script  by  an  interval  of  two
months  on  one  side  and  four  on  the  other,  so  that  they  may  be
regarded  as  constituting  a  group  by  themselves.  Moreover,
the  four  scripts  of  this  period,  which  I  quoted  just  now,  are
not  arbitrarily  selected.  Quite  apart  from  the  question  of
whether  they  give  evidence  of  supernormal  connexion  with
the  script  of  other  automatists,  they  can  be  shown  to  have  a
normal  connexion  with  one  another  through  the  recurrence
of  the  same  or  closely  similar  ideas  and  phrases.  These  ideas
and  phrases,  which  they  share  with  each  other,  they  do  not
share  with  the  other  scripts  of  this  period,  so  that  we  are

1  Tennyson,  Princess  :  Last  Song.

2  Tennyson,  Maud,  I.  xxii.

3  Cf.  Swinburne,  Triumph  of  Time  :

"It  is  not  much  that  a  man  can  save,
On  the  sands  of  Life,  on  the  shoals  of  Time,
Who  swims  in  sight  of  the  great  third  wave,
That  never  a  swimmer  shall  cross  or  climb."

4  Cf.  Shelley,  O  World,  O  Life,  O  Time,  of  which  the  last  line  is  "  No  more,,
oh  never  more."


254


Helen  tie  G.  Verrall.


[part


justified  on  internal  evidence  alone  in  regarding  these  four
scripts  as  a  distinct  sequence, — distinct,  that  is  to  say,  from  the
other  scripts  of  this  period.  In  order  to  make  my  meaning
clear,  I  must  analyse  the  four  scripts  which  I  have  quoted
above.

The  script  of  January  25,  1911,  the  first  in  the  series,  contains
the  phrases  :

the  apple  of  discord — the  fruit  of  the  tree  .  .  .
no  sound  was  heard

A  leaf  couch — in  the  depths  of  the  forest —
and  later,

The  winding  of  the  thread  the  whirling  spindle.

This  last  phrase  and  the  allusion  to  the  "  fruit  of  the  tree,"
link  it  with  the  second  script  on  February  28,  1911,  which
alludes  to  a  spinning  wheel  and  to  the  garden  of  Eden.

The  third  script,  on  March  10,  1911,  has  :

I  cannot  hear — in  the  depths,

which  recalls

no  sound  was  heard  ...  in  the  depths  of  the  forest.

The  first  script,  therefore,  has  points  of  connexion  both  with
the  second  and  with  the  third.

The  second  script,  moreover,  contains  the  words  :

the  first  fruits  of  Time,  a—a\>6'  6  /xaxpos  navapiO yu^-os  \p6vo<;.  [All
things  long  unnumbered  Time]

The  Greek  words  are  a  quotation  from  the  Ajax  of  Sophocles  ;
the  passage  runs  :  "  All  things  long  unnumbered  Time  brings
to  light  when  they  are  hidden,  and  hides  when  they  are  mani-
fest "  ;  and  might  be  briefly  paraphrased  as  describing  "  the
triumph  of  Time."  The.  second  script  is  therefore  closely
linked  to  the  fourth  script  on  March  14,  1911,  which  has  :

The  triumph  of  Time

It  is  not  much  that  a  man  may  save,  etc.

The  fourth  script  also  contains  the  phrases  :

A  solemn  music — harmonies  of  ancient  days — a  broken  lute.
No  more  no  never  more,


LXIX.]


A  Further  Study  of  the  Mac  Scripts.


255


which  we  may  compare  with  the  opening  words  of  the  third
script  :

The  tune — the  old  tune — once  again.

Moreover  the  phrase  "  No  more  no  never  more,"  being  an
almost  exact  quotation  from  Shelley's  poem  0  World,  0  Life,
O  Time,  contains  another  implicit  allusion  to  Time.

There  is  a  further  connexion  of  thought  between  these
scripts,  which  did  not  become  apparent  until  some  time  after-
wards.

The  first  script  on  January  25,  1911,  opens  with  the  words  :

Cloth  of  gold — the  king's  purple

'Twas  a  royal  train  put  forth  to  sea

But  the  tale  can  be  told  by  none  but  me.

These  lines  are  a  quotation  from  Rossetti's  ballad  The  White
Ship,  in  which  he  tells  the  story  of  the  drowning  of  Henry  I.'s
only  son  on  his  way  back  from  France.

This  quotation  appears  once  again  in  my  script  on  September
25,  1911,  which  begins  :

'Twas  a  royal  train  put  forth  to  sea
But  the  tail  [sic]  can  be  told  by  none  but  me
Youth  at  the  prow  and  pleasure  at  the  helm.1
atrox  incubat  cura [Fierce  care  oppresses.]
the  uncertainty  of  human  fate

that  is  one  idea  I  want  to  get — now  the  other — it  is  a  parallel
passage

a  sunless  sea — write  that it  will  help  ....

This  script  may  be  paraphrased  thus  :  the  quotation  from
The  White  Ship  and  the  idea  expressed  by  it, — which  is  re-
peated in  the  quotation  from  Gray  and  summed  up  in  the
words  "  the  uncertainty  of  human  fate," — are  to  be  com-
pared with  a  parallel  passage,  and  the  words  "  a  sunless  sea  "
will  in  some  way  help  to  identify  this  passage.

1  Cf.  Gray,  The  Bard  :

"  In  gallant  trim  the  gilded  vessel  goes  ;
Youth  on  the  prow,  and  Pleasure  at  the  helm  ;
Regardless  of  the  sweeping  whirlwind's  sway,
That,  hush'd  in  grim  repose,  expects  his  evening  prey."
R


256


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


The  Latin  words  in  this  script,  atrox  incubat  cura,  are  an
unmistakeable,  though  inaccurate,  allusion  to  the  famous
passage  in  the  Odes  of  Horace,  in  which  he  speaks  of  black
care  sitting  at  the  horseman's  back,1  atra  cura,  not  atrox.
The  quotation  is  familiar  to  me,  and  I  should  not  normally
misquote  it,  as  I  do  in  the  script.  Nevertheless  the  same
misquotation  appears  in  another  of  my  scripts  (and  only  in
that  one  other)  on  April  15,  1912. Thus  :

Atrox  cura  [Fierce  care.]
imminente  luna  2  [When  the  moon  hangs  overhead.]
non  ebur  neque  aureo  3  [Not  ivory  nor  with  gold]
nemesis — the  mills  of  God  grind  slowly
Swinburne — a  parallel
It  is  not  much  that  a  man  can  save —
Within  the  compass  of  a  hand.

The  three  Odes  of  Horace,  to  which  this  script  refers,  all
turn  upon  the  subject  of  Nemesis,  or,  as  it  was  expressed  in
the  earlier  script,  the  uncertainty  of  human  fate,  and  these
quotations  lead  up  to  the  words  :

Swinburne — a  parallel

It  is  not  much  that  a  man  can  save.

This  script  is  linked  to  the  script  of  September  25,  1911,
by  the  misquotation  atrox  cura,  and  therefore  there  is  no  doubt,
I  think,  that  in  its  quotation  from  Swinburne  ("  It  is  not
much  that  a  man  can  save  ")  we  have  the  "  parallel  passage  "
to  which  the  earlier  script  as  follows  refers  :

(H.  V.  script  of  September  25,  1911.)
the  uncertainty  of  human  fate

that  is  one  idea  I  want  to  get — now  the  other. — it  is  a  parallel
passage

a  sunless  sea — write  that  it  will  help.

It  may  fairly  be  said  that  the  words  "  a  sunless  sea  "  will
"  help  "  towards  identifying  the  passage  required,  because


Horace,  C.  III.  1. ■  2  Horace,  G.  I.  4.

3  Cf.  Horace,  G.  II.  18  ;  "  Non  ebur  neque  aureum."


LXIX.]


A  Further  Study  of  the  Mac  Scripts.


257


not  only  does  the  particular  verse  from  The  Triumph  of  Time,
which  is  afterwards  quoted,  refer  to  the  sea,  but  this  idea  is
prominent  throughout  the  whole  poem,  as  it  is  in  so  much  of
Swinburne's  work. In  the  first  verse  we  have  :

"  Time  swift  to  fasten  and  swift  to  sever
Hand  from  hand,  as  we  stand  by  the  sea,"

and  later  :

"  I  will  go  back  to  the  great  sweet  mother,
Mother  and  lover  of  men,  the  sea."

and  again  :

"  There  lived  a  singer  in  France  of  old
By  the  fadeless  dolorous  midland  sea."

The  two  poems,  The  White  Ship  and  The  Triumph  of
Time,  present  several  possible  points  of  comparison,  and  the
quotations  given  in  the  script  clearly  bring  out  one  of  these
points.

In  Swinburne  we  have  :

"  It  is  not  much  that  a  man  can  save
On  the  sands  of  life,  on  the  shoals  of  Time,
Who  swims  in  sight  of  the  great  third  wave,
That  never  a  swimmer  shall  cross  or  climb."

and  in  Rossetti  :

"  By  none  but  me  can  the  tale  be  told,
The  butcher  of  Rouen,  poor  Berold.
(Lands  are  swayed  by  a  king  on  a  throne.)
'Twas  a  royal  train  put  forth  to  sea,
Yet  the  tale  can  be  told  by  none  but  me.
(The  sea  hath  no  king  but  God  alone.)  "

Rossetti's  sea  is  the  real  sea  ;  Swinburne's  is  metaphorical,
the  sea  of  Time  ;  but  both  are  represented  as  forces  against
which  human  beings  strive  in  vain.

I  have  thought  it  worth  while  to  discuss  these  later  scripts
of  mine  for  two  reasons.  In  the  first  place,  they  show  that
there  is  a  closer  connexion  of  thought  between  the  earlier


258


Helen  cle  G.  Verrall.


[part


scripts  than  would  otherwise  appear.  The  first  script  of  the
series,  on  January  25,  1911,  begins  :

Cloth  of  gold — the  king's  purple
'Twas  a  royal  train  put  forth  to  sea
But  the  tale  can  be  told  by  none  but  me.

The  last  of  the  series,  on  March  14,  1911,  has  :

The  triumph  of  Time

It  is  not  much  that  a  man  may  save,  etc.

The  statements  found  in  the  subsequent  scripts  make  it
very  probable  that  the  idea  of  drawing  a  parallel  between
Rossetti's  poem  and  Swinburne's  was  already  latent  in  the
scripts  of  January  and  March,  1911.  Moreover,  the  date  at
which  my  script  returned  to  this  idea  is  worth  noting.  It  was
on  September  25,  1911,  that  my  script  opened  with  the  words  :

'Twas  a  royal  train,  etc.

and  it  was  on  September  25,  1911,  that  Mrs.  Verrall,  after
reading  the  various  scripts  discussed  here,  completed  the
notes  from  which  this  paper  has  been  written.  To  the  opening
words  of  my  script  of  January  25,  1911,

Cloth  of  gold — the  king's  purple
'Twas  a  royal  train  put  forth  to  sea

she  appended  a  note  :

Cf.  Swinburne,  Triumph  of  Time  :  "  Drowned  gold  and  purple
and  royal  rings."

At  that  time  and  for  many  months  afterwards  I  knew
nothing  of  the  Mac  scripts  of  July  and  September  beyond
the  fact  that  they  had  been  written  and  sent  to  my  mother.
I  did  not  see  the  scripts,  or  my  mother's  notes  on  them,  until
October  6,  1912,  i.e.,  some  months  later  than  any  of  the  scripts
discussed  here.

My  second  reason  for  discussing  these  later  scripts  of  mine
is  that  they  afford  a  good  illustration  of  one  of  the  characteristics
of  automatic  writing,  or  at  least  of  some  automatic  writing,
the  way  in  which  a  train  of  thought  may  be  persistently  evolved


LXIX.]


A Further  Study  of  the  Mac  Scripts.


259


in  the  script,  in  a  fragmentary  way,  perhaps,  and  at  consider-
able intervals  of  time,  but  so  that  it  can  be  traced  by  following
the  clues  afforded  by  the  script  itself.

So  far,  then,  I  have  tried  to  establish  on  internal  evidence
that  there  is  a  close  connexion  of  thought  linking  together  four
scripts  of  mine  written  between  January  and  March,  1911.  I
turn  now  to  the  scripts  contributed  by  Mr.  and  Miss  Mac.

On  July  5,  1911,  Miss  Mac  received  the  then  recently  issued
number  of  the  Proceedings  of  this  Society,  Part  LXIIL,  and
at  once  read  the  papers  on  Mrs.  Willett's  and  Mrs.  Holland's
scripts,  in  which  she  Was  specially  interested,  because  they
contained  some  references  to  her  own  earlier  scripts.  On
July  7,  1911,  for  the  first  time  for  more  than  a  year,  she  and
her  brother  obtained  script  purporting  to  be  from  Henry
Sidgwick.  They  had  made  several  attempts  to  obtain  script
earlier  in  the  year,  but  on  almost  all  these  occasions,  the  only
one  of  their  supposed  controls  who  purported  to  communicate
was  "  Bell,"  who  is  thus  described  by  Miss  Mac  :

....  Ellen  Bell  seemed  to  be  a  perfect  lunatic,  as  indeed  the
other  controls  said  she  was.  .  .  .  She  has  her  own  line  of  riddles,
epigrams,  Limericks,  etc.,  .  .  .  She  draws  clever  caricatures  of
our  acquaintances  .  .  .  she  appears  to  be  quite  subliminal  and
varies  in  character  with  the  various  writers.1

Once  or  twice  a  little  "  Italian  "  script  was  obtained  which
Miss  Mac  describes  as  "  rather  like  an  intermediate  stage
between  Bell  and  H.  S."

As  the  script  of  July  7,  1911,  was  obtained  immediately  after
reading  Part  LXIIL  of  the  Proceedings,  and  probably  to  some
extent  at  least  in  consequence  of  the  stimulus  thus  given,  it
becomes  a  matter  of  interest  to  consider  what  were  the  contents
of  the  articles  read  by  Miss  Mac  and  whether  they  had  any
perceptible  influence  on  the  scripts  produced.  But  it  will  be
more  convenient  to  discuss  this  question  after  I  have  dealt
in  detail  with  the  contents  of  the  scripts.

There  are  five  Mac  scripts  in  this  period,  a  group  of  three
on  July  7,  8,  and  9,  1911,  and  two  more  on  September  2  and  6,
1911. I  will  first  quote  the  three  July  scripts.


1  See  Proc.  S.P.B.,  Vol.  XXIV.  p.  265.


260


Helen  de  G.  V  err  all.


[part


(Mac  script  of  July  7,  1911.)
Sidgwick

I  am  that  I  am.1

(Drawing  of  hands  and  piano  keys.)

P saw  one  moon  flower  fair

fair  flower  of  foam  endures  when  the  rose  withers  whose  flowers
are  put  to  scorn  2  roses  and  lilies  too. — You  see,  scribe,  it  is  I.

I  return  for  a  little  with  a  gathered  flower  when  the  air  is  green
with  summer.

Thus  in  the  green  growth  of  hedge  and  coppice

(Drawing  of  horse-chestnut  leaf  on  long  stalk.)  Rest.

H.S.  finished  feast  and  the  light  vanishes  and  the  dancers  ar  \sic]
left  in  the  gloom.3

They  are  very  alike  those  two  with  the  moon-eyes  from  behind
a  cloud  I  think  and  the  Lethean  souls  perched  about  the  white
lilies  4  like  bees  in  summer.

All.
All.

(Mac  script  of  July  8,  1911.)
(H.  S.  control.)

agate

The  meaning  I  want  is  the  gate  which  I  have  hinted.

There  is  an  end  of  joy  and  there  shall  be  no  more  weeping.5
But  the  garden  is  gone  to  seed  and  forsaken  6  I  am  thinking  of
Swinburne.  As  the  heart  of  a  ded  [sic]  man  the  seed  plots  are
dry.6

1  Exodus,  hi.  14.

2  Cf.  Swinburne,  A  Forsaken  Garden,  "  For  the  foam  flowers  endure  when
the  rose-blossoms  wither."

3  Cf.  E.  Dowson,  "  When  the  feast  is  finished  and  the  lights  expire  .  .  -
dancing."

4  See  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXV.  p.  137. Cf.  Verg.  Aen.  VI.  707  ff.

5  Cf.  Swinburne,  Garden  of  Proserpine  (recognised  by  Mr.  Mac  and  Miss
Mae),  "  We  are  not  sure  of  sorrow,  And  joy  was  never  sure."

0  Swinburne,  A  Forsaken  Garden.


LXIX.]


A  Further  Study  of  the  Mac  Scripts.


261


No  more  joy  no  more  thrall 1

(Drawing  of  a  gate  as  above) I  have  important  words.

Think  of  Swinburne  and  it  all  comes  what  the  others  are  all
getting  at.  It  is  him.  About  dead  fancies  and  spoilt  rimes 2
and  lost  faces  and  sad  farewells

about  Time  about ruined  rimes  2

a  broken  song  spoilt  music a  ruined  rhyme  2

I  know  how  he  feels  now

(Drawing  of  hills)  hills and  crushed  fruit  moon
all

(Mac  script  of  July  9,  1911.)
(H.  S.  control.)

I  am  he  that  endureth  3
(Drawing  of  a  gate)  *

The  beginning  is  here  ;  the  end  is  not  yet.5
The  beginning  of  years  6
Whoso  knocketh

They  are  not  long  the  weeping  and  the  laughter

Love  and  desire  and  hate.

I  think  they  have  no  portion  in  us  after

We  pass  the  gate.7


May  voices

The  psean  of  spring  Atalanta  and  the  hounds  of  the  hunter  8
I  found  this  fair  to  see.

1  Cf.  Swinburne,  A  Match,  "  If  you  were  thrall  to  sorrow,  And  I  were
page  to  joy."

2  Cf.  Swinburne,  Triumph  of  Time,  "  A  broken  blossom,  a  ruined  rhyme."

3  Ps.  ix.  7  ;  cii.  12,  etc.

4  The  drawing  was  so  interpreted  by  the  automatists.  It  is  very  fragmentary
but  resembles  the  drawing  of  a  gate  on  July  8,  1911.

5  Matt.,  xxiv.  6  ;  Mark,  xiii.  7  ;  Luke,  xxi.  9.

6  Swinburne,  Atalanta  in  Calydon,  second  chorus  :  "  Before  the  beginning
of  years  there  came  .  .  .  Time."

'  E.  Dowson.

Cf.  Swinburne,  Atalanta  in  Calydon,  "  When  the  hounds  of  spring  are
on  winter's  traces."


262


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


This  is  wrong  but  it  connects  on  to  the  other.  I  think  they  will
piece  it  toge

Lord  if  it  L

I  have  spent  my  days  and  nights  in  love  who  tarrieth  but  a
little

(Reynold  control.)

Send  all  this  on  to  Mrs.  V.  at  once

Reynold.

The  first  thing  to  notice  in  these  scripts  is  that  they  are
full  of  allusions  to  Swinburne.  There  are  seven  certain  refer-
ences to  his  poems,  and  one  that  is  doubtful.  Of  these  allusions
the  most  important  is  in  the  script  of  July  8,  1911  :

Think  of  Swinburne  and  it  all  comes  what  the  others  are  all
getting  at.  It  is  him.  About  dead  fancies  and  spoilt  rimes  [sic]
and  lost  faces  and  sad  farewells

about  Time  about ruined  rimes

a  broken  song spoilt  music a  ruined  rhyme

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  script  is  here  alluding  to  the
same  verse  from  The  Triumph  of  Time  which  is  quoted  in  the
H.  V.  script  of  March  14,  1911. The  verse  runs  :

"It  is  not  much  that  a  man  can  save,
On  the  sands  of  life,  on  the  shoals  of  Time,
Who  swims  in  sight  of  the  great  third  wave,
That  never  a  swimmer  shall  cross  or  climb  ;
Some  waif  washed  up  with  the  strays  and  spars,
That  ebb-tide  shows  to  the  shore  and  stars.
Weed  from  the  water,  grass  from  a  grave,
A  broken  blossom,  a  ruined  rhyme."

The  two  scripts  are  complementary,  because,  whereas  the
H.  V.  script  emotes  the  first  four  lines  of  the  verse,  the  Mac
script  refers  to  the  last  line.

It  should  also  be  noted  that  this  passage  in  the  Mac  script
is  definitely  claimed  as  a  cross-correspondence  ;  thus :

Think  of  Swinburne  and  it  all  comes  what  the  others  are  all
getting  at.


LXIX.]


A  Further  Study  of  the  Mac  Scripts.


263


This  point  is  important,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  Mac
scripts  of  this  period  are  full  of  references  to  Swinburne.  If
the  claim  to  a  cross-correspondence  were  not  made  here — and
only  here — it  might  be  said  that  there  was  no  reason  for
singling  out  this  allusion  to  Swinburne  rather  than  any  of
the  others.

Here,  then,  we  have  the  closest  and  most  definite  point  of
connexion  between  the  Mac  script  and  mine,  but  there  are
several  other  connexions  still  to  be  considered,  which  afford
interesting  corroborative  evidence  of  design  in  the  choice  of
topics.

In  the  Mac  script  of  July  9,  1911,  there  are  two  allusions
to  Swinburne's  poem  Atalanta  in  Calydon.  There  is  first  a
quotation  from  the  second  chorus  :

The  beginning  of  years,

the  context  of  which  is  interesting. The  chorus  runs  :

"  Before  the  beginning  of  years
There  came  to  the  making  of  man
Time,  with  his  gift  of  tears,  etc."

The  script,  therefore,  is  still  harping  on  the  notion  of  time.
Then  later  in  the  same  script  we  have  :

The  psean  of  spring  Atalanta  and  the  hounds  of  the  hunter.

Taking  into  consideration  the  fact  that  we  have  here  an
undoubted  allusion  to  the  first  chorus  of  Atalanta  :

"  When  the  hounds  of  spring  are  on  winter's  traces,"

I  think  there  is  probably  an  attempt  to  quote  from  it  in  the
script  written  two  days  before,  on  July  7,  1911  :

I  return  for  a  little  with  a  gathered  flower  when  the  air  is  green
with  summer.

Thus  in  the  green  growth  of  hedge  and  coppice.

This  last  phrase  recalls  the  lines  from  the  first  chorus  of
Atalanta  :

' '  And  in  green  underwood  and  cover
Blossom  by  blossom  the  spring  begins."


264


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[paet


The  line  in  the  script  is  very  clumsy,  but  it  is  metrically
equivalent  to  Swinburne's  line,  having  four  principal  accents.
We  might  read  :

Thus  in  the  green  growth  of  hedge  and  coppice,1
Blossom  by  blossom  the  spring  begins.

and  "  the  green  growth  of  hedge  and  coppice  "  certainly  suggests
an  inaccurate  recollection  of

"green  underwood  and  cover."  2

The  point  is  interesting  when  we  remember  that  the  H.  V.
script  of  January  25,  1911,  the  first  of  the  four  scripts  which
I  have  quoted  above,  has  :

A  leaf  couch  in  the  depths  of  the  forest —

and  in  green  underwood  and  cover  blossom  by  blossom  the
spring  begins.

The  mere  fact  that  the  same  poem  is  quoted  in  two  scripts
is  hardly  enough  to  constitute  a  cross-correspondence  between
them,  but  the  H.  V.  script  of  January  25,  1911,  has  another
point  of  connexion  with  the  Mac  script  of  July  9,  1911,  the
script,  that  is  to  say,  in  which  there  is  an  explicit  allusion  to
the  first  chorus  of  Atalanta.

Just  before  the  quotation  from  this  chorus,  the  H.  V.  script
has  :

A  barred  gate nothing  more.

The  Mac  script  of  July  9,  1911,  begins  :

I  am  he  that  endureth
(Draiving  of  a  gate.)

Allusions  to  a  gate  run  all  through  the  Mac  scripts  of  this
period. The  drawing  of  a  gate,  reproduced  above,  p.  260,

1  Cf.  another  line  in  the  chorus  :

''Fills  the  shadows  and  windy  places."

2  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  phrase  ' '  the  green  growth  of  hedge  and
coppice  "  may  be  a  reminiscence  of  a  line  from  Swinburne's  poem  The  Garden
of  Proserpine,  ..  No  growth  of  m00r  or  COppice  -  .

or  perhaps  the  phrase  is  due  to  a  mental  fusion  of  this  line  and  the  line  from
Atalanta  in  Calydon,  quoted  above.


LXIX.]


A  Further  Study  of  the  Mac  Scripts.


265


appears  first  at  the  beginning  of  the  script  of  July  8,  191 1.1
The  script  goes  on  :

The  meaning  I  want  is  the  gate  which  I  have  hinted ....
{Drawing  of  a  gate)  I  have  important  words

Think  of  Swinburne  and  it  all  comes  what  the  others  are  all
getting  at.

Then  follows  the  allusion  to  The  Triumph  of  Time.
The  script  of  July  9,  1911,  begins  :

I  am  he  that  endureth
(Draiving  of  a  gate.)
.  .  .  Whoso  knocketh

They  are  not  long the  weeping  and  the  laughter

Love  and  desire  and  hate

I  think  they  have  no  portion  in  us  after

We  pass  the  gate.

"  The  gate  "  is  also  referred  to  in  the  Mac  script  of  Sep-
tember 6,  1911  :

Many  that  enter  by  my  gate  shall  proceed  further.

Mr.  and  Miss  Mac  produced  two  scripts  in  September,  1911,
and  both  present  points  of  interest  in  regard  to  the  subject
of  this  paper. I  will  therefore  quote  these  two  scripts.

(Mac  script  of  September  2,  1911.)
(H.  S.  control.)

Light  only  light  the  laughter  of  the  sage  where — house  of  shades
Ever  busy  (?)  sprite

Come  here  on  tripping  feet  that  scorn  the  grass
Welcome  !  s
from  the  sea.

And  the  sea  parted  and  the  way  was  made  clear  for  the  children
of  Israel.2

Month  by  month  loves  [or  lover]  of  men
my  mother

1  It  should  be  noted  that  the  drawing  is  here  labelled  "  gate,"  so  that  there
is  no  doubt  as  to  how  it  should  be  interpreted.

2  Exodus  xiv.


266


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


Good  (?)  Mark

A  match  (?)  of  the  house.

We  nailed  love  up  to  a  tree  1

hood

More  lest  you  remember  when  I  forget.
More — my

Two  things  perchance  he  has  left  us  yet
All  sad  and  ^|  [sic]

And  then  to  die  !  2
more

Universe  of  his  love  that  he  giveth  you

the  sea  green  mirrors  of  your  eyes  3  the  sea

wan  from  the  waves  I  the  mark  that  is  missed  4  lips  kissed

All H.  8.

(Mac  script  of  Seiptemher  6,  1911.)
(H.  S.  control.)

[The  script  opens  with  an  allusion  to  a  picture  by  Bramley,  called
The  Hopeless  Daiv?i.]

The  hope  I  have  cherished  through  long  years  of  oppression.

You  do  not  and  you  never  will  know.  The  writing  is  for  a  long
period.  It  continued  uninterrupted  by  the  presence  of  a  third
person.

In  the  night  where  your  moonlike  eyes  make  thy  garden  seem
like  a  sleepy  heaven  there.5

[Then  follows  a  statement  about  the  conditions,  under  which
the  script  was  written.]

Many  that  enter  by  my  gate  shall  proceed  further

(Drawings  of  ring,  E.  F.  (?)  and  of  hands,  left  hand  with  ring  on
third  finger.)

The  Ring  is  here  of  which  you  have  written  G  as  Swinburne  : —
Strange  raiment  clad  thee  like  a  bride
With  jewels  to  wear  on  hands  and  feet.
With  clasps  of  gold  on  either  side.
Wine  made  thee  glad  and  thou  didst  eat

1  Cf.  Swinburne,  Satia  Te  Sanguine,  "  Your  hands  nailed  love  to  the  tree."

2  Cf .  Swinburne,  Felise. 3  Swinburne,  Felise. 4  Swinburne,  Hertha.
s  Cf.  Mac  script  of  July  7,  1811,  "  the  moon-eyes."

6  There  had  been  no  previous  reference  to  a  ring  in  the  Mac  script.


LXIX.]


A  Further  Study  of  the  Mac  Scripts.


267


Honey  and  pleasant  choice  of  meat.1
H.  S.

A.  C.  S. Ring  (?) {Drawing  of  ring.)
Three  things  I  give  with  you
These  three  -Faith  [sic]
Hope

2  Charity  [sic]
{Drawing  of  a  harp  with  one  string  )

G.  F.  Watts.
You  remember  greeny  blue.
I  find  the  grey  seas  notes  of  green
The  green  seas  fervent  flakes  of  blue
More  fair  than  you.3

{Drawing  of  hand  apparently  holding  handle  of  whip.)
Then  winter  came
The  wind  was  his  whip
One  choppy  finger  was  on  his  lip  *
{Drawing  of  finger  on  lips.)
The  moving  finger  writes
And  having  writ— 5
La  fleche  {Draining  of  an  arrow.)
Rosy  fingered  dawn.6
It  is  clear  but  she  will  miss  it  may  be
The  first  is  not  clear  your  hand  is  imperfect.
Why  the  worlds  mine  oyster  which  I  with  sword  will  open.7
There's  straw  in  my  hair.
(Drawing  of  a  circle.)  I  sit  astride

o'  the  world
There's  straw  in  my  hair
Blaw  in  blaw  oot
Blaw  the  hale  hoose  about.

1  Cf.  Swinburne,  Aholibah  :

"  Strange  raiment  clad  thee  like  a  bride
With  silk  to  wear  on  hands  and  feet
With  plates  of  gold  on  either  side  ;
Wine  made  thee  glad  and  thou  did'st  eat
Honey  and  choice  of  pleasant  meat."

2  Cf.  1  Cor.,  xiii.  13.  3  Swinburne,  Felise.

4  Shelley,  The  Sensitive  Plant.  5  Fitzgerald,  Omar  Khayyam.

6  Cf.  Homer,  Od.,  passim.  7  Shakespeare,  Merry  Wives,  II.  ii.


268


Helen  cle  G.  Verrall.


[part


EUROPA

Paseppe

Such  as  I  have  do  I  give  unto  you  freely.1

Freely  I  have  given  unto  you  freely  take.2

Much  laughter  begets  weeping

Take  hands  and  part  with  laughter  3

T

Come  unto  these  yellow  sands
And  then  take  hands  4
All
H.  S.

The  latter  part  of  this  second  script  may  be  summarised
as  a  series  of  allusions  to  hands  and  to  Shakespeare,  culminating
in  a  quotation,  which  combines  these  two  ideas,  the  opening-
lines  of  Ariel's  song  :

"  Come  unto  these  yellow  sands
And  there  take  hands."

Having  reached  this  point,  the  script  ceases,  which  suggests
that  the  earlier  allusions  were  all  leading  up  to  this  by  a  series
of  associated  ideas.  The  various  stages  of  this  process  are
interesting.

The  idea  of  hands  first  emerged  in  several  drawings  of
hands  and  rings  and  a  quotation  from  Swinburne's  Aholibah
in  which  the  word  hands  is  underlined.  Then  after  a  digression
the  script  returns  to  the  idea  in  the  quotation  from  The  Sensitive
Plant :

' '  The  wind  was  his  whip
One  choppy  finger  was  on  his  lip."

The  same  idea  is  persistently  emphasised  in  the  quotation
from  Omar  Khayyam,  "  the  rosy-fingered  dawn,"  and  "  your
hand  is  imperfect."  Then  we  get  the  first  suggestion  of
Shakespeare  in  a  quotation  from  The  Merry  Wives.  The  next
phrase  "  there's  straw  in  my  hair  "  was  associated  by  the
automatists  with  Shakespeare,  as  they  believed  it  to  be  a
quotation  from  King  Lear. The  words  do  not  occur  in  the


1  Cf.  Acts,  iii.  6.

3  Swinburne,  Rococo.


2Cf.  Matt.,  x.  8.

4  Shakespeare,  The  Tempest,  I.  2.


LXIX.]


A  Further  Study  of  the  Mac  Scripts.


269


play,  but  they  might  naturally  be  associated  with  it,  straw
in  the  hair  being  a  conventional  sign  of  madness.1

I  sit  astride  o'  the  world

is  perhaps  a  reminiscence  of  the  phrase  from  Julius  Caesar,

"  bestride  this  narrow  world  "

suggested  by  the  previous  allusion  to  Watts'  picture  of  Hope,
who  is  represented  as  sitting  on  the  globe.  Then,  after  another
short  digression,  we  find  a  quotation  from  the  Acts,  leading
by  a  natural  association  of  ideas  to  an  inaccurate  reminiscence
of  a  passage  in  St.  Matthew.  The  context  of  these  two  passages
shows  an  even  closer  connexion  between  them  than  is  apparent
in  the  script  :

"  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none  ;  but  such  as  I  have,  give
I  thee." (Acts,  hi.  6.)

"  Freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give.  Provide  neither  gold
nor  silver  nor  brass  in  your  purses." (Matt.,  x.  8.)

The  reminiscence  from  St.  Matthew  introduces  for  the  first
time  the  word  take.  This,  followed  by  an  allusion  to  laughter,
leads  to  the  quotation  from  Swinburne  :

"  Take  hands  and  part  with  laughter,"

and  this  again  to  the  quotation  from  Shakespeare  :

' '  Come  unto  these  yellow  sands
And  then  take  hands."

We  find  in  the  script  three  separate  streams  of  thought,
"  hands,"  "  Shakespeare,"  "  take,"  successively  introduced
and  finally  combined.  It  is  worth  noting  that  in  the  quotation
from  St.  Matthew  the  word  take  has  been  substituted  for  the
word  give,  thereby  completely  altering  the  sense  of  the  passage
and  throwing  a  special  emphasis  on  to  this  word.  There  are
several  instances  in  automatic  writing  of  misquotation  used  for
emphasis,  e.g.  the  substitution  of  "  hope  "  for  "  passion  "
in  the  quotation  from  Aht  Vogler  (see  Proc.  S.P.E.,  Vol.  XXII.,
p.  63).

There  is  evidence,  therefore,  in  the  script  of  September  6,
1911,  that  the  emergence  of  the  quotation  from  Ariel's  Song

1  Cf.  Sheridan,  The  Critic,  in  which  the  mad  Tilburina  has  straw  in  her
hair.


270


Helen  cle  G.  Verrall.


[part


was  the  result  of  a  persistent  effort  to  give  this  quotation,  and
this  evidence  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  that  there  seems  to
be  an  attempt  to  refer  to  the  Song  in  the  previous  script  on
September  2,  1911.
This  script  begins  :

Light  only  light  the  laughter  of  the  sage  where — house  of  shades
Ever  busy  sprite

Come  here  on  tripping  feet  that  scorn  the  grass
Welcome  !  from  the  sea

In  her  original  copy  of  the  script  Miss  Mac  put  a  note  to
"  Ever  busy  sprite,"  saying  that  "  it  suggests  The  Tempest
and  Ariel."  The  actual  phrase  does  not  occur  in  the  play,  but
the  description  is  obviously  appropriate  to  Ariel,  and  several
times  Prospero  calls  tipon  Ariel  to  "  come,"  e.g.  :  "  Come
with  a  thought,"  "Come  away,  servant,"  "Ariel,  come,"
and  he  habitually  calls  him  "  spirit,"  "  my  tricksy  spirit,"
etc.  Moreover,  the  automatists'  interpretation  of  the  phrase
as  referring  to  Ariel  is  an  important  point,  whether  the  inter-
pretation be  thought  correct  or  not,  since  it  shows  that  the
association  was  in  their  mind.

Then  again,  at  the  end  of  the  same  script  we  find  :

wan  from  the  waves  I  the  mark  that  is  missed
lips  kissed

Ariel's  Song  runs  :

"  Come  unto  these  yellow  sands
And  there  take  hands  ;
Curtsied  when  you  have  and  kissed
The  wild  waves  whist."

The  introduction  of  the  words  "  waves  "  and  "  kissed,"
taken  in  conjunction  with  the  probable  allusion  to  Ariel  at
the  beginning  of  this  script,  may  be  due  to  a  confused  attempt
to  quote  from  the  Song,  which  definitely  emerges  at  the  end
of  the  next  script.

It  may  therefore  be  said,  I  think,  that  these  two  scripts
contain  more  than  a  casual  allusion  to  Ariel's  Song  ;  they
give  evidence  of  repeated  attempts  to  allude  to  it,  and  as  soon
as  the  attempt  has  been  successful,  the  script  ends.


lxix.]  A  Further  Study  of  the  Mac  Scripts.  271

This  point  is  interesting,  when  we  remember  that  a  quota-
tion from  Ariel's  Song  occurs  in  the  H.  V.  script  of  January
25,  1911,  the  first  in  the  series  of  four,  with  which  this  paper
deals. Thus  :

Cloth  of  gold  the  king's  purple
'Twas  a  royal  train  put  forth  to  sea
But  the  tale  can  be  told  by  none  but  me.
The  wild  waves  wist.

To  sum  up,  then  :

(a)  There  are  four  H.  V.  scripts  written  between  January
and  March,  1911,  connected  one  with  another  by  the  repetition
of  various  phrases  and  ideas  and  by  the  fact  that  the  first  of
these  scripts  contains  a  quotation  from  The  White  Ship,  and
the  last  a  quotation  from  The  Triumph  of  Time,  these  two
quotations  being  closely  associated  with  each  other  in  sub-
sequent H.  V.  scripts.

Of  these  four  scripts  the  first  on  January  25,  1911,  com-
bines with  the  quotation  from  The  White  Ship  a  quotation
from  Ariel's  Song  in  The  Tempest,  an  allusion  to  a  barred  gate,
and  a  quotation  from  the  first  chorus  in  Swinburne's  Atalanta  ;
the  second  on  February  28,  1911,  has  a  Greek  quotation,
which  might  be  paraphrased  as  "  the  triumph  of  time  "  ;
the  fourth  on  March  14,  1911,  has  a  four-line  quotation  from
Swinburne's  Triumph  of  Time,  combined  with  a  statement
that  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  give  this  idea  before.

(&)  There  are  five  (and  only  five)  scripts  written  by  Mr.  and
Miss  Mac  from  July  7  to  September  6,  1911,  inclusive.

In  the  first,  on  July  7,  1911,  there  is  probably  an  attempt
to  quote  one  of  the  two  lines  from  Swinburne's  Atalanta
in  Calydon  quoted  in  the  H.  V.  script  of  January  25,  1911  ;
in  the  second  script,  on  July  8,  1911,  there  are  two  allusions
to  a  gate,  which  is  described  as  important,  followed  by  a
quotation  from  the  same  verse  of  The  Triumph  of  Time,  which
is  quoted  in  the  H.  V.  script  of  March  14,  1911,  and  a  state-
ment that  a  cross-correspondence  is  aimed  at  ;  in  the  third
script,  on  July  9,  1911,  there  is  another  allusion  to  a  gate,
followed  by  a  quotation  from  the  second  chorus  of  Atalanta  in
Calydon  and  an  allusion  to  the  first  chorus  ;  the  automatists
are  also  enjoined  to  "  send  all  this  to  Mrs.  Verrall  "  ;  in  the

s


272


Helen  de  O.  Verrall.


[part


fourth  script,  on  September  2,  1911,  there  are  two  probable
allusions  to  Ariel  ;  and  in  the  fifth  script,  on  September  6,
1911,  there  is  an  allusion  to  a  gate,  followed  at  the  end  of  the
script  by  a  quotation  from  Ariel's  Song  :

"  Come  unto  these  yellow  sands,
And  there  take  hands."

Or,  to  put  it  in  another  way,  in  the  H.  V.  script  of  January
25,  1911,  we  find  a  quotation  from  The  White  Ship,  a  quotation
from  Ariel's  Song,  a  reference  to  a  gate,  and  a  quotation  from
the  first  chorus  of  Atalanta  in  Galydon  ;  in  the  Mac  script  of
July  8,  1911.  there  is  a  reference  to  a  gate  combined  with  a
quotation  from  The  Triumph  of  Time,  afterwards  associated
in  the  H.  V.  script  with  the  quotation  from  The  White  Ship  ;
in  the  Mac  script  of  July  9,  1911,  there  is  a  reference  to  a  gate
combined  with  an  allusion  to  the  first  chorus  from  Atalanta
in  Galydon  ;  in  the  Mac  script  of  September  6,  1911,  there  is
a  reference  to  a  gate  combined  with  a  quotation  from  Ariel's
Song.

1  turn  now  to  the  consideration  of  some  scripts  written  by
Mrs.  Verrall  during  the  same  period.  In  June,  1911,  she
produced  three  scripts  closely  related  to  one  another,  in  which
there  appear  to  be  attempts  to  indicate  Swinburne's  initials.
These  attempts  were  not  recognised  by  Mrs.  Verrall  (and  no
one  else  had  examined  her  scripts)  until,  on  July  12,  1911,  she
read  the  three  Mac  scripts  of  July,  the  statements  in  which
led  her  to  search  her  own  scripts  for  cross-correspondences
on  the  subject  of  Swinburne.

The  three  scripts  in  question  are  as  follows  :

{Mrs.  V.'s  script  of  June  27,  1911.)

2  "Eiy/xa  (ocrai'roj?  kou  TaAAa.  ypatjie  crv — et  jit]  p.eru.  ixt'i'ccreojs — (tvv
ra^ei. ra  p.kXXovro.  KapTepws  fievei' a  crvp.Trpdcro'op.ev  upurreva,'  Seyou

K0U  (TV.

Gnome  kou  Srj
nmeme

aAes  rrjSe' avpiov  aXXy  •yAoxnx//  ~\p~?i(r6at.
[Sigma  thus  also  the  other  things. Write,  if  not  with  under-


lxix.]  A  Further  Study  of  the  Mac  Scripts.


273


standing,  with  speed. What  is  to  come  stands  firm.  Combined
action  is  best. Receive  you  also.
Mind  and  also  memory.

Enough  to-day  ;  to-morrow  use  another  language  ]

(Mrs.  V.'s  script  of  June  28,  1911.)

In  a  garden  of  cucumbers — a  lodge.1  Write  both  letters  large
A.  L  odge. The  first  initial  is  now  right — never  mind  the  name.

A  c  c  i  dente  cespitosa  in  caespite  [By  accident  (?)  turfy  on  the
turf]  what  is  upon  the  turf  ? The  Turf.

(Mrs.  V.'s  script  of  June  29,  1911.)

The  white  swan — my  white  swan — and  Browning's  poems.
Would  it  were  I — not  you.2

It  really  is  important  to  get  the  clear  record  clear  to-day — but
she  does  not  understand.

Try  again — swan  wings  beating — the  swan's  nest  and  little
Ellie  3 Why  so  pale  and  wan  fond  lover 4

An  apple  showed  the  law  to  Newton's  mind

An  apple  was  the  aim  of  William's  bow

An  apple  caused  the  fall  of  human  kind

An  apple  made  the  maiden's  feet  run  slow.

A  was  once  an  apple  pie

Now  you  have  it part  was  said  last  night.

The  first  script,  on  June  27,  1911,  opens  with  the  Greek
letter  S.  The  rest  of  the  script  is  rather  obscure,  but  it  clearly
implies  that  there  is  more  to  come,  that  some  other  person
is  to  play  a  part,  and  that  Mrs.  Verrall  is  to  write  again  next
day.

In  the  second  script,  on  June  28,  1911,  we  find  the  words  :
A.  Lodge. The  first  initial  is  now  right — never  mind  the  name.

1  Cf.  Isaiah,  i.  8.

2  Cf.  Browning,  The  Worst  of  It  :

'"  Would  it  were  I  had  been  false
Not  you  !  .  .  .  my  swan  .  .  .
.  .  .  wonder  of  white."

3  Mrs.  Browning,  Ellie  and  the  Swan's  Nest.

4  Sir  John  Suckling.  Encouragements  to  a  Lover.


274


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


This  clearly  implies  that  the  first  initial  is  A,  and  that  the
name  is  not  Lodge.

In  the  words  that  follow  :

A  c  c  i  dente  cespitosa  in  caespite,

we  find  the  initial  A  repeated  and  followed  by  what  may  be-
an attempt  to  represent  Swinburne's  second  initial  C.  Puns
and  assonances  are  a  fairly  common  feature  of  Mrs.  Verrall 's
script.

The  script  of  June  29,  1911,  was  written,  Mrs.  Verrall  notes,
in  consequence  of  an  impulse  which  came  to  her,  whilst  she
was  copying  the  script  of  the  preceding  evening,  and  it  evidently
carries  on  the  same  train  of  thought,  concluding  as  it  does
with  the  words  :

A  was  once  an  apple  pie

Now  you  have  it — part  was  said  last  night.

The  way  in  which  the  letter  A  is  gradually  approached  is
interesting.  The  script  opens  with  a  reference  to  a  swan.
Then  after  a  short  digression  the  word  "  swan  "  recurs,  followed
by  a  quotation  containing  the  word  "  wan,"  followed  again
by  four  lines  of  verse  each  beginning  with  the  word  "  an,"
giving  the  sequence  swan,  wan,  an,  A.

Thus  we  find  in  these  three  scripts  definite  allusions  to  the
letters  A  and  S  and  a  possible  allusion  to  the  letter  C.  It
should  also  be  noted  that  in  the  script  of  June  28,  1911,  the
emphasis  laid  on  the  letter  L  in  the  Avords,  "  A.  Lodge,"  may
have  been  suggested  by  Swinburne's  first  name,  Algernon.

The  script  of  June  29,  1911,  presents  several  other  points
of  interest  in  connexion  with  the  H.  V.  scripts  of  the  preceding
February  and  March,  which  Mrs.  Verrall  had  not  seen  when
she  wrote  it.

The  script  opens  with  a  quotation  from  Browning's  The
Worst  of  It,  which  may  be  compared  with  Swinburne's  Triumph
of  Time.  In  both  poems  the  speaker  is  a  lover  whose  mistress
has  proved  unfaithful,  though  the  point  of  view  of  the  two  lovers
is  widely  different.  In  particular  we  may  contrast  the  con-
cluding lines  of  The  Worst  of  It :

' '  I  knew  you  once  ;  but  in  Paradise
If  we  meet,  I  will  pass  nor  turn  my  face."


LXix.]  A  Further  Study  of  the  Mac  Scripts.


275


with  the  concluding  lines  of  The  Triumph,  of  Time  :

"  Shall  I  lose  you  living  and  vex  you  dead  ?
I  never  shall  tell  you  on  earth  ;  and  in  heaven
If  I  cry  to  you  then,  will  you  hear  or  know  %  "

Possibly  the  H.  V.  script  is  groping  after  an  allusion  to
The  Worst  of  It  on  March  10,  1911,  in  the  words  :

the  best  and  the  worst

God  be  thanked  the  meanest  of  bis  creatures
boasts  two  soul  sides  1
the  worst  and  the  best
I  cannot  get  it  clear.

The  explicit  allusion  to  Browning  makes  this  interpretation
more  probable.

Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  June  29,  1911,  has  a  further  point  of
connexion  with  the  H.  V.  script  of  January  25,  1011,  which
has  :

And  apple — the  apple  of  discord —
the  fruit  of  the  tree

followed  almost  at  once  by  the  quotation  from  Atalanta  in
Calydon  :

And  in  green  underwood  and  cover
Blossom  by  blossom  the  spring  begins.

Compare  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  the  lines  :

An  apple  caused  the  fall  of  human  kind
An  apple  made  the  maiden's  feet  run  slow

The  first  of  these  latter  lines  refers  to  the  fruit  of  the  tree
of  knowledge  and  the  second  to  Atalanta,  who  was  beaten
in  the  race  because  she  stopped  to  pick  up  the  golden  apples
which  Milanion  let  fall.

It  only  remains  to  consider  how  far  the  contents  of  these
scripts  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  normal  thoughts  of  the
automatists  at  the  time  or  by  any  habitual  tendencies  observed
in  their  automatic  writing. To  consider  my  own  scripts

1  Browning's  Men  and  Women,  Epilogue.


276


Helen  cle  O.  Verrall.


[part


first,  there  had  been  very  few  allusions  to  Swinburne  in  my
script  before  January,  1911, — three  certain  allusions  (all  to
The  Garden  of  Proserpine),  and  one  doubtful  allusion  to  The
Triumph  of  Time,  not  to  the  verse  quoted  on  March  14,  1911.
I  am  fairly  well  acquainted  with  Swinburne's  poems,  having
at  one  time  or  another  read  the  greater  part  of  what  he  has
written.  With  a  few  poems,  including  The  Triumph  of  Time,
I  am  more  familiar,  but  Swinburne  is  not  a  poet  for  whom  I
have  a  special  admiration,  and  I  do  not  read  his  poems  very
often.  So  far  as  I  know,  there  had  been  nothing  to  turn  my
thoughts  towards  them  in  the  early  months  of  1911.

There  are  seven  allusions  to  Swinburne  in  the  Mac  script
before  July,  1911.  They  all  occur  between  May  and  July,
1909,  and  are  probably  due,  in  part  at  any  rate,  to  the  fact
that  Swinburne  died  in  April,  1909,  so  that  he  might  naturally
have  been  in  the  automatists'  minds  about  that  time.  Mr.
and  Miss  Mac  are  familiar  with  Swinburne's  work,  as  might
be  inferred  from  the  number  of  more  or  less  correct  quotations
occurring  in  the  script.  But  the  predominance  of  Swinburne
in  the  scripts  of  July  and  September,  1911,  is  very  marked,
and  quite  unlike  the  brief,  fragmentary  allusions  in  1909.
About  half  the  whole  amount  of  script  produced  in  1911
(and  attributed  to  Henry  Sidgwick)  consists  of  quotations
from  Swinburne.  I  have  already  referred  to  the  fact  that
immediately  before  the  July  scripts  were  written,  Miss  Mac
had  read  the  articles  on  Mrs.  Willett's  and  Mrs.  Holland's
script  in  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Part  LXIIL,  and  the  allusion  to  lilies
and  bees  in  the  script  of  July  7,  1911,  can  be  directly  traced
to  this  source.  The  question  will  naturally  be  asked  :  can
any  other  part  of  the  scripts  and  especially  the  allusions  to
Swinburne  be  explained  in  the  same  way  ?  Both  in  the
article  on  Mrs.  Willett's  script  and  in  the  article  on  Mrs.
Holland's  script,  passages  from  Swinburne  are  discussed  at
some  length.1  Passages  from  several  other  poets  are  discussed
even  more  fully  ;  but,  if  the  case  for  a  supernormal  connexion
between  the  Mac  scripts  and  mine  depended  solely,  or  even
mainly,  on  our  both  alluding  to  Swinburne,  it  would  be
seriously  weakened  by  Miss  Mac  having  read  Part  LXIIL
But  I  hope  that  I  have  already  made  it  clear  that  the  case

1  See  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXV.  pp.  206  ff.  and  234  ff.


lxix.]  A  Further  Study  of  the  Mac  Scripts.  277

rests  on  a  much  surer  foundation,  and  some  further  considera-
tions will  make  this  point  still  clearer.

The  poems  by  Swinburne  which  are  discussed  in  Part  LXIII.
are  The  Garden  of  Proserpine,  Itylus,  and  the  third  chorus
from  Atalanta  in  Galydon,  which  has  an  obvious  association
with  Itylus. It  contains  the  lines  :

' '  The  brown  bright  nightingale  amorous
Is  half  assuaged  for  Itylus,"

Avhich  are  the  lines  referred  to  in  Part  LXIII.

On  the  other  hand,  none  of  these  poems  is  mentioned  in
the  Mac  script  (the  allusions  to  Atalanta  are  to  the  first  and
second  choruses),  and  the  only  passage  which  is  claimed  in
the  script  as  a  cross-correspondence  is  one  from  The  Triumph
of  Time.  It  is  not  unlikely,  I  think,  that  from  reading  Part
LXIII.  Miss  Mac's  mind  received  an  initial  impulse,  which,
by  association  of  ideas,  greatly  facilitated  the  emergence  of
certain  latent  impressions  ;  but  this  initial  impulse  can  hardly
be  considered  sufficient  to  account  for  the  particular  course
followed  by  the  script.  Why  is  it  that,  whereas  the  poems
discussed  in  Part  LXIII.  are  The  Garden  of  Proserpine,  Itylus,
and  the  third  chorus  from  Atalanta  in  Galydon,  the  emphasis
in  the  script  is  thrown  on  to  The  Triumph  of  Time  %  More-
over, the  curious  way  in  which  the  Mac  scripts  are  linked
together  by  references  to  a  gate  cannot  be  explained  by  any-
thing in  Part  LXIII.,  whereas  the  probability  of  a  super-
normal connexion  with  my  script  of  January  25,  1911,  which
also  refers  to  a  gate,  is  thereby  increased.

Although  the  scripts  as  a  whole  show  remarkably  little
connexion  with  the  normal,  contemporary  thoughts  of  the
automatists,  yet  there  are  cases  in  which  it  is  clear  that  a
normal  train  of  thought  has  formed  the  starting-point  of  a
script.  It  is  almost  inevitable  that  this  should  be  so,  seeing
that  the  mind  of  an  automatist  during  the  production  of
script  is  not  divided  by  any  hard  and  fast  line  from  the  same
mind  at  other  times.  I  should  not  think  it  worth  while  to
dwell  on  this  point,  if  it  were  not  that  some  critics  seem  to
think  that  if  they  can  trace  the  influence  of  any  normal  associa-
tion of  ideas  either  in  the  connexion  of  the  scripts  Avith  the
normal  thoughts  of  the  automatist,  or  in  the  connexion  of  one


278


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


part  of  a  script  with  another,  they  have  thereby  removed
any  ground  we  might  have  for  supposing  that  the  scripts
have  been  influenced  by  some  force  external  to  the  mind  of
the  automatist.  That  is  a  confused  and  misleading  way  of
stating  the  problem.  The  relation  between  the  scripts  and
the  normal  thoughts  and  knowledge  of  the  automatists  is,  of
course,  an  important  question,  but  the  crucial  point  to  be
determined  is  this  :  how  definite  are  the  connexions  between
the  scripts  of  one  automatist  and  those  of  another,  and  how
probable  is  it  that  these  connexions  are  due  to  chance-coinci-
dence ?  That  may  be  a  very  difficult  question  to  determine,
and,  as  Mrs.  Sidgwick  has  pointed  out,  in  her  reply  to  Dr.
Maxwell,  it  is  one  upon  which  individual  judgments  will  differ.
Nevertheless,  in  the  answer  to  this  question  lies  the  solution
of  the  problem.

But  admitting,  as  most  students  of  psychical  research  do,
that  there  is  evidence  in  these  automatic  writings  for  the
influence  of  some  supernormal  agency,  it  becomes  a  matter  of
psychological  interest  to  trace  the  workings  of  an  automatist's
mind,  as  it  is  reflected  in  the  scripts.  It  is  especially  interesting,
I  think,  to  notice  the  part  played  by  the  ordinary  laws  of
association,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Mac  scripts  of  September  2
and  6,  1911,  where  a  certain  goal  is  reached  in  a  way  suggest-
ing that  it  has  been  deliberately  sought,  because,  assuming
that  some  telepathic  force  has  been  at  work  on  the  automatist's
mind — whether  it  is  telepathy  from  the  living  or  the  dead
matters  nothing  to  the  present  argument — it  seems  a  priori
probable  that  the  effect  of  this  telepathic  force  will  be  not  to
thrust  a  human  mind  entirely  out  of  its  natural  channels,
but  to  turn  the  stream  of  ideas  a  little  this  way  or  that,  and
thus  to  exercise  a  choice  as  to  which  amongst  a  hundred
possible  associations  shall  actually  emerge.


lxix.j Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


279


V.

EXPERIMENTS  IN  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

By  Clarissa  Miles  and  Hermione  Ramsden.

[Most  of  the  experiments  recorded  in  this  paper  have  already
been  reported  in  the  Journal,  see  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  243-262,
and  Vol.  XIV.,  pp.  392-399.  Their  publication  in  the  Pro-
ceedings was  postponed,  because  it  was  hoped  that  further
experiments  by  the  same  ladies  would  be  tried,  the  results
of  which  might  be  added  to  these.  Only  a  few  results,  however,,
have  been  obtained  since  and  those  hardly  successful  enough
to  be  worth  publishing  ;  and  as  there  seems  no  immediate
prospect  of  further  experimenting  by  them  in  this  direc-
tion, it  has  been  thought  desirable  to  publish  these  series
now.

All  the  original  records  have  been  put  into  our  hands  and
the  postmarks,  etc.  verified  by  us. — Ed.~\


I.

EXPERIMENTS  BY  MISS  MILES.

The  experiments  here  described  are  a  continuation  of  those
which  were  previously  brought  before  the  Society  and
published  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXL,  pp.  60-93.
As  before,  I  was  the  agent  and  my  friend  Miss  Ramsden  the
percipient.  Miss  Ramsden  on  each  day  sent  me  a  postcard
describing  what  her  impressions — which  were  generally  rather
numerous, — had  been,  and  I  noted  each  day  on  a  postcard
sent  to  her  what  the  idea  was  that  I  had  tried  to  transmit.


280


Clarissa  Miles.


[part


On  receiving  her  card  I  noted  what  facts  in  my  experience
had  corresponded  with  her  impressions.

As  in  the  previous  account  in  Proceedings,  (a)  indicates  my
postcard  written  at  the  time  of  the  experiment  ;  (b)  Miss
Ramsden's  postcard  recording  her  impressions  at  the  time  ;
(c)  my  comments,  made  after  receiving  her  postcard,  as  to
points  in  her  description  that  seemed  to  correspond  to  what
had  been  happening  to  me  ;  (d)  corroboration  of  the  latter  by
my  friends.

Some  of  the  experiments  failed  altogether,  and  in  most  of
them  Miss  Ramsden  had  other  impressions  besides  those  that
were  more  or  less  correct.  These  unsuccessful  cases  are
omitted  here  ;  but  as  all  the  experiments  are  numbered
consecutively,  the  proportion  of  complete  failures  is  shown.
In  the  record  of  the  more  or  less  successful  cases,  the
portions  omitted  are  indicated  by  asterisks.

During  these  experiments  I  was  on  a  tour  with  Lady
Guendolen  Ramsden  in  the  Ardennes,  where  Miss  Ramsden
had  never  been.  She  only  knew  my  address,  so  that  she
could  post  the  cards.  I  went  to  Namur  and  joined  Lady
Guendolen  there  on  the  13th  of  July,  1907,  and  did  not  begin
the  experiments  till  July  21st.

Experiment  I.

Miss  Ramsden  on  July  2Lst  sent  a  sketch  of  a  well  which
she  had  been  thinking  of  on  the  18th  and  19th  several
times  in  connection  with  me.  It  will  be  seen  that  this  has
some  resemblance  to  a  photograph  which  I  took  from  our
hotel  window,  and  part  of  which  is  reproduced  in  Plate  I.,  showing
a  tower,  which  was  the  most  conspicuous  object  from  the  hotel
garden :  when  there,  we  could  not  look  up  in  any  direction
without  seeing  the  tower  outlined  against  the  sky ;  but  the
weathercock  and  round  ball  beneath  shown  in  the  photograph
would  not  be  visible  to  us,  for  the  garden  being  situated
exactly  at  the  foot  of  the  tower,  we  were  too  much  under-
neath it.


LXIX.J


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


281


Experiment  II.

The  following  is  my  postcard,  written  on  the  first  day  that  I
attempted  to  transfer  an  idea  to  Miss  Ramsden  :

(a)  Hotel  d'Harscamp,  Namur,  July  20th  [really  21st.]

[Postmark,  Namur,  22.  vn.  07.  10.17.]

We  went  to  Huy  by  train  and  spent  the  afternoon  there,  I
wanted  you  to  see  the  fine  view  of  citadel.  The  hill  beyond
covered  with  trees,  boats  in  foreground  and  a  fine  bridge  spanning
the  Meuse.  ..  C.  M.

(b)  Miss  Ramsden's  next  postcard,  written  from  Ardverikie,
Kingussie,  has  the  postmark  "  Kingussie,  12.45  p.m.  Jy.  23.  07  "
and has nothing on  it except the sketch here  reproduced.


.MISS  ramsden's  sketch.


Miss  Ramsden  adds  later  :

This  was  seen  as  a  hypnagogic  illusion  just  before  going  to  sleep.
I  drew  this  on  Monday  after  the  post  had  gone  (8  a.m.).  That
is  why  it  was  not  posted  until  the  23rd.  I  saw  it  in  colour  ;  the
distance  was  a  lovely  blue.  H.  R.


282


Clarissa  Miles.


[part


(d)  Lady  Guendolen  Ramsden  writing  to  her  daughter  later
of  this  occasion,  sends  the  following  sketch  :


Lady  Guendolen  adds  :

[On]  the  day  we  went  to  Huy,  Clarisse  sat  under  a  tree  on  the
bank  of  a  garden  overlooking  the  Meuse.  She  said,  "  I'll  draw
the  bridge  ;  M.  may  get  an  impression  of  the  arches."  So  you
did, — only  yours  were  more  like  a  viaduct.  .  .  .  This  sketch  is
from  memory,  showing  where  Clarisse  sat  to  draw.  There  was  a
large  tree  on  whose  roots  she  sat  :  lots  of  boats  everywhere.  .  .  .

The  next  two  experiments  were  failures.

Experiment  V.

(a)  Bruges,  July  24th  [probably  should  be  28th,  as  postmark

is  "  Bruges,  29  Juillet,  07  "].

We  stopped  at  Ghent  on  July  23rd  [27th]  on  our  way  here.
Had  lunch.  Then  saw  the  Cathedral  of  St.  Bavon.  The  Van  Eyck
picture  "  Adoration  of  the  Immaculate  Lamb  "  interested  me
much,  details  so  wonderful. ...  CM.

{b)  Saturday,  July  27th,  1907. 10.45  p.m.

[Postmark  :  Kingussie  10.30  a.m.  Jy.  28.  07.]

An  Arab  or  Indian  wearing  a  turban  on  his  head.  .  .  .

H.  R.


LXIX.]


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


283


(c)  In  the  "  Adoration  of  the  Immaculate  Lamb,"  by  Van  Eyck,
one  of  the  principal  groups  in  the  foreground  is  composed  of
oriental  figures,  many  of  whom  have  turbans  on.  We  had  been
looking  specially  at  one  of  these.  We  were  given  glasses  to  inspect
closely  the  wonderful  finish  and  technique  of  the  painting.

C.  M.

Experiment  VI.

(a)  Sunday,  July  24th  [28th].

[Postmark  :  Bruxelles,  date  illegible.]1

We  went  to  Church  in  the  morning.  Then  I  walked  to  the
Grande  Place  and  saw  the  tournament  of  the  Toison  D'Or.
Ladies  on  horseback  with  quaint  head-dresses,  men  tilting  with
long  lances,  horses  caparisoned  and  shining  armour,  made  a  dazzling
picture  of  colour.  Clowns  juggled  and  tumbled  at  intervals.  The
giant  and  the  dwarf  gave  signals  of  when  the  jousts  were  to  begin.

C.  M.

(6)  Sunday,  July  28th.

[Postmark  :  Kingussie,  12.30  p.m.  Jy.  29,  07.]

A  spider  ;  but  the  chief  impression  is  Swalloivs  inflight.  Then  a
nest  full  of  eggs.  A  new  moon.  A  nurse  with  a  red  cross  on  her
arm.  Prancing  horses,  wooden  ones  ;  perhaps  it  is  a  merry-go-
round.  ...  It  seems  scarcely  fair  to  describe  Bruges,  as  I  have
heard  so  much  about  it  and  read  about  it — I  don't  know  how
much  is  telepathic.  I  see  a  stone  bridge  with  three  arches.
Poverty-stricken  houses  rising  straight  up  out  of  the  water,  clothes
and  rags  hanging  from  the  windows.  A  belfry  which  dominates
the  town. Did  you  go  to  see  the  bell  ?  H.  R.

(c)  The  Grande  Place  where  the  Tournament  is  held  is  just  at
the  foot  of  the  High  Belfry  Tower  which  dominates  the  town.  It
was  facing  me  all  the  afternoon.  Numbers  of  swallows  were  flying
about  everywhere.  A  few  of  the  people  in  the  Procession  had
crosses  on  their  costumes.  The  clowns  had  a  sham  joust  on
wooden  horses,  with  lances  made  of  thick  brown  paper  like  round
poles.  It  was  very  comic,  and  amused  me  much.  It  looked  so
absurd  to  watch  the  ridiculous  antics  of  these  clowns,  after  the

1  Some  Bruges  letters  go  via  Brussels  ;  there  is  the  hotel  mark  [Grand
Hotel  de  Commerce,  Bruges  |  on  the  postcards.


284


Clarissa  Miles.


[part


prancing  horses,  the  shining  armour  and  rich  accoutrements  of  the
real  tilters  with  their  lances.

Bruges  was  en  fete,  decorated  everywhere  ;  flags  and  banners  were
flying  from  every  window. Bruges  is  noted  for  its  bridges.

C.  M.

Experiment  VII.

(b)  Ardverikie,  Monday,  July  29th.
[Postmark  :  Kingussie,  12.30  p.m.  Jy.  30.  07.]

4.45  p.m.  I  was  not  thinking  of  you,  when  I  suddenly  began  to
see  Church  windows,  and  realised  that  you  were  inside  a  Church,
perhaps  sketching.  The  following  was  a  most  vivid  impression.
11.30  p.m.  You  both  sketched,  my  mother  sat  with  her  back  to
the  altar  and  drew  the  door  with  its  curious  old  carving.  There
was  a  priest  in  white  before  the  altar,  I  think  you  drew  that.
Outside  the  Church  were  many  steps,  and  people  selling  postcards,
and  penny  toys — windmills  with  paper  sails  for  children.  You
bought  a  postcard  in  case  I  should  see  this,  and  you  thought  of
me.  The  Church  is  much  higher  up  than  I  had  imagined.  It  is
several  hundred  feet  above  the  sea.  There  is  an  open  space  round
it  and,  standing  on  the  steps,  you  get  a  fine  view  of  the  town  with
its  tiled  roofs,  and  the  sea  beyond.  There  are  fishing  boats  to  be
seen,  and  the  sun  was  setting.  H.  R.

These  impressions  had  no  connection  with  what  was
attempted  to  be  transferred  on  this  occasion,  but  applied
appropriately  to  some  of  the  events  of  the  day. Thus  :

(c)  On  Monday,  July  29th,  we  were  in  a  Cathedral  just  about
the  time  Miss  Ramsden  saw  the  Church  windows.  We  had  no
time  for  sketching.  But  Lady  Guendolen  said  to  me  :  "  What  a
fine  head  that  priest  has,  how  much  I  should  like  to  draw  him."
There  was  also  a  Priest  in  white  standing  in  front  of  the  altar.
The  Church  is  on  a  level  with  the  town,  not  above  it.  We  bought
many  postcards.  A  variety  of  fishing  boats  were  to  be  seen.
They  looked  most  picturesque  against  the  setting  sun.  Children
were  swarming  everywhere,  bringing  penny  toys,  flying  paper
kites  and  round  air  balls,  blowing  trumpets,  thoroughly  enjoying
the  gay  and  festive  season  of  the  Tournament,  which  has  brought
people  to  Bruges  from  all  parts  of  the  World.  C.  M.


lxix.] Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


285


(d)  Lady  Guendolen  Ramsden  writes  :

We  were  in  church  at  the  time,  5.30,  but  not  drawing  I  did
say  to  Clarisse,  "  Look  at  that  priest  resting  (in  a  common  chair
like  a  visitor).  What  a  fine  grey  head  !  I  should  like  to  draw
him."

Experiment  VIII.

(a)  August  1st,  Hotel  de  L'Univers.

[Postmark  :  Bruxelles,  2  Aout,  07.]

We  took  a  drive  in  the  afternoon  near  the  pare  and  saw  the
large  Colomie  de  Congre  and  the  Cathedral.  Made  several  pur-
chases, cards  with  dogs  and  cart  amongst  the  number.  I  could
not  get  into  any  telepathic  state  to  send  you  impressions.  I  am
just  leaving  for  Montreuil.  C.  M.

(6)  Thursday  August  1st.

[Postmark  :  Kingussie,  12.45  p.m.  Au.  2.  07.]

A  statue — bust  of  a  man Nothing  at  all  vivid  except

the  statue.  H.  R.

(c)  The  Colonne  de  Congre  is  a  very  tall  column  with  a  bronze
statue  of  the  King  on  the  top.  a.d.  1831.  See  p.  96  of  Baedekers
Holland  and  Belgium.

Experiment  IX.

(b)  Ardverikie,  Friday,  August  2nd,  11.45  p.m.

[Postmark  :  Kingussie,  12.45  p.m.  Au.  3.  07.]

A  stone  bridge. Quai  Berthelot  or  some  name  like  that.

#  ♦  ♦  $  ♦

H.  R.

(c)  This  is  another  instance  of  what  happened  several  times
in  the  earlier  experiments  ;  a  name  obtained  more  or  less  correctly
by  Miss  Ramsden. In  this  case  the  name "  Quai  Berthelot
was  like  that  of  two  places  we  saw, — the  Tour  de  la  Reine  Berthe
and  the  Chapelle  Sainte-Austreberthe.

C.  M.

Experiment  X.

I  next  went  to  Montreuil-sur-Mer  in  the  North  of  France,
to  join  a  sketching  class  organised  by  Mr.  Townsley,  Director


286


Clarissa  Miles.


[part


of  the  London  School  of  Art,  tuition  to  be  given  by  Frank
Brangwyn,  A.R.A.

(a)  Hotel  de  France,  Montreuil-sur-Mer,  August  5th.

[Postmark  : Montreuil,  7.8.07.]

I  drew  all  the  morning  on  the  ramparts,  trees  and  cottages.
In  the  afternoon  we  all  went  to  the  Studio  and  painted  the  same
girl. Mr.  Brangwyn  gave  us  a  criticism.  C.  M.

(6)  Ardverikie,  Monday,  August  5th.

[Postmark  : Kingussie,  12.45  p.m.  Au.  6.  07.]

.  .  .  Trees  with  overhanging  branches,  very  low  so  that  you
would  have  to  stoop  to  pass  under  them,  and  fields  of  long,  wet
grass,  like  uncut  hay  ;  a  calf.  Is  it  raining  hard,  so  that  you
cannot  sketch  ? I  feel  nothing  happening, — so  dull.

H.  R.

(c)  The  place  where  the  model  poses  is  outside  the  ramparts
on  a  knoll.  The  trees  are  low,  with  overhanging  branches.  There
is  a  quantity  of  long,  wet  grass  about  half  cut.  It  is  let  to  a
woman  in  Montreuil  for  feeding  her  goat,  which  is  always  brows-
ing close  to  us  while  we  paint,  but  there  is  no  calf.

C.  M.

Experiment  XL

In  the  next  case  the  interesting  point  is  that  Miss  Ramsden
gets  names  associated,  not  with  the  place  where  I  was,  but
with  another  place  of  the  same  name.

(b)  Byram,  Tuesday,  August  6th,  1907.  10  p.m.  posted  7th.

[Postmark  :  Ferrybridge,  Au.  7.  07.]
A  fragment  of  sculptured  marble,  it  might  be  a  column  or  a
chimney  piece  that  you  are  sketching.  Then  a  distant  view  of  a
farmhouse  surrounded  by  an  orchard.  A  cart  horse.  The  follow-
ing names  :  Rue  de  Lafayette.  Malesherbes.  Buisson.  It  seems
like  an  attempt  at  some  name  with  a  rural  meaning. H.  R.

(c)  Mr.  Brangwyn  settles  on  a  certain  street  or  place  for  his
weekly  criticism,  and  we  all  go  and  choose  a  suitable  spot  for  our
work.  On  a  certain  day  Mr.  Brangwyn  gives  a  correction  to  each
student.  This  week  I  understood  the  place  chosen  was  the  village
La  Madeleine,  and  I  had  a  little  difficulty  in  finding  it.  The


lxix.] Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  287


village  is  seen  from  the  ramparts  and  is  quite  close  to  Montreuil  ;
but  I  had  to  ask  my  way  there,  as  there  are  two  or  three  gates
to  pass  outside  the  fortifications.  When  I  arrived  I  chose  a  row  of
cottages  with  a  farmhouse  in  the  distance,  surrounded  by  trees,
as  a  subject  for  my  sketch.  It  is  very  curious  that  two  of  the
names  Miss  Ramsden  thought  of,  namely,  Lafayette  and  Male-
sherbes,  are  connected,  not  with  this  village  La  Madeleine,  but
with  the  well-known  Church  of  La  Madeleine  in  Paris.  I  lived
for  two  winters  in  Paris  in  La  Rue  Caumartin  close  to  La  Madeleine,
so  I  am  well  acquainted  with  the  whole  neighbourhood,  and  the
names  of  these  streets  must  be  subliminally  associated  hi  my  mind
with  the  name  La  Madeleine.  CM.


Experiment  XII.

The  next  seems  to  be  an  instance  in  which  Miss  Ramsden
obtained  in  a  dream  an  impression  of  a  conversation  which  I
was  having  the  evening  before.

(6)  [Postmark  : Ferrybridge,  Au.  8.  07.]

An  aggressively  modern  house,  built  upon  the  ruins  of  an  old
fortress,  looking  small  and  insignificant  compared  to  the  forti-
fications by  which  it  is  surrounded.  The  Church  is  also  modern.
Seen  in  a  dream,  night  of  August  7th-8th,  1907.


MISS  ramsden's  sketch.


288


Clarissa  Miles.


[part


This  is  my  third  attempt  to  draw  it  ;  it  isn't  quite  right.  I
particularly  noticed  this  low  and  curiously-pointed  hill.  I  think
this  is  all  the  same  thing  as  the  other  postcard  [viz.  the  one  quoted
in  Experiment  XIII.].  This  may  be  a  hospital,  it  looked  more
like  a  chateau,  what  we  call  a  villa,  and  stands  surrounded  by  an
orchard  of  young  trees. Saint  Cloitre  or  Saint  Croix  ?

H.  R.

(c)  On  Wednesday,  August  7th,  Mr.  Baxter,  an  artist,  in  course
of  conversation  at  dinner,  described  to  me  the  interesting  objects
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Montreuil.  We  talked  especially  about
the  Chartreuse.  I  had  walked  round  the  ramparts  ;  which  com-
mand an  extensive  view  of  the  whole  neighbourhood,  but  the
Chartreuse  had  never  been  pointed  out  to  me  as  an  object  of  special
interest.

It  is  a  monastery  from  which  the  monks  were  expelled  about
five  years  ago.  It  has  remained  unoccupied  ever  since.  Quite
recently  it  has  been  bought  by  a  man  who  is  intending  to  turn
it  into  a  Sanatorium,  and  it  is  now  called  Sanatorium  on  picture
postcards.  Mr.  Baxter's  own  account  of  our  conversation  is  as
follows  :

(d)  December  18th,  1907.

La  Chartreuse,  near  Montreuil-sur-Mer,  is  not  a  very  interesting
building,  being  quite  modern  and  containing  little  more  than  the
bare  walls.  I  understood  an  attendant  to  say  that  it  had  been
built  on  the  site  of  a  more  ancient  building  ;  also  that  the  cele-
brated Chartreuse  liquor  had  not  been  made  there  for  a  great
number  of  years.  I  fancy  the  same  man  said  there  was  talk  of
turning  the  place  into  a  Sanatorium.  The  foregoing,  I  think,  is
all  I  mentioned  to  you  on  the  7th  August,  when  speaking  of  my
visit.

C.  H.  Baxtee.

Plate  II.  is  a  reproduction  of  an  illustration  of  La  Char-
treuse in  a  French  guide-book.


LXIX.]


Experiments  in  Thought -Transference.


289


Experiment  XIII.

(6)  Byram,  Wednesday,  August  7th,  1907,  11  p.m.

[Postmark  : Ferrybridge,  Au.  8.  07.]


Is  it  a  drawbridge  ?  It  may  be  stagnant  water,  but  I  do  not
think  that  it  is  a  river  ;  it  may  be  a  road.  The  roof  has  red  tiles,
there  was  a  chimney  and  windows.

You  have  met  an  interesting  man  to-day,  a  doctor,  from  a  place
called  Saint  Cloitre  or  Saint  Croix.

You  have  been  to  see  a  fortress  with  big  bare  rooms  not  used
now-a-days  ;  big  oak  chairs  and  large  fireplaces.  Perhaps  the  man
was  Governor  of  this  fortress.  There  was  a  Church  tower  with
these  windows.

^  #  %L  %

H.  R.

(c)  Mr.  Brangwyn,  A.R.A.,  informed  me  there  was  a  Doctor
who  lived  as  Governor  of  the  Tower  by  the  bridge  which  connects
one  part  of  the  fortifications  of  Montreuil  with  another.  This
doctor  with  his  family  used  to  dine  every  evening  at  our  Hotel.
I  remember  seeing  him  but  I  never  heard  anything  of  his  history
at  the  time.  A  copy  of  a  drawing  by  Mr.  Brangwyn  of  this  tower
and  bridge  is  reproduced  on  Plate  III.

I  imagine  that  the  "  fortress  "  mentioned  by  Miss  Ramsden  is
the  place  of  which  she  dreamt  that  night  (see  previous  Experi-
ment) and  which  I  identify  as  the  Chartreuse.

C.  M.


290


Clarissa  Miles.


[part


Experiment  XIV.

I  then  left  Montreuil-sur-Mer  and  went  to  stay  at  Laburnum
Villa,  Wickham  Heath,  near  Newbury,  to  have  painting
lessons  from  Mr.  Pittman.  I  should  say  that  he  lives  at
Hoe  Benham  with  his  friend,  Mr.  Waud.

(6)  Wednesday,  October  30th.

[Postmark:  Kingussie,  12.45  p.m.  Oct.  31.  07.]

Archways— entrance  to  a  building.  It  may  be  only  trellis  work
in  the  garden,  or  the  pattern  on  your  fender,  but  the  impression
was  very  persistent.

E.  N.  H.  Y.  A  name  :  Ellen  Hay  or  Henry.  A  very  high-
heeled  Shoe.  ...  H.  R.

(c)  The  drawing  of  arches  on  Miss  Ramsden's  postcard  has  some
slight  resemblance  to  the  windows  of  Mr  Waud's  studio,  the  whole
side  of  which  is  one  large  long  window. Mr.  Waud  writes  :

(d)  Hoe  Benham,  Newbury.
Miss  Miles  has  been  down  to  Hoe  Benham  several  times  for

painting,  and  had  never  seen  the  Studio  before,  as  it  had  only
just  been  erected  and  consequently  it  would  be  very  much
impressed  on  her  mind.  She  worked  in  it  every  day  and  found
it  so  extremely  convenient.

The  large  shoes  mentioned  very  much  resemble  mine.  I  always
wear  sabots  to  go  down  to  the  Studio,  which  is  at  the  bottom  of
the  garden.  I  wore  them  all  the  time  Miss  Miles  was  here.  They
have  caused  many  comments.

I  take  great  pride  in  my  garden  and  the  garden  is  full  of  green
posts  and  arches,  with  roses  growing  on  them.  At  the  present
time  there  are  some  still  in  flower.

Reginald  Waud.

Experiment  XV.

(6)  Thursday,  October  31st,  1907.

[Postmark  :  Kingussie,  12.30  p.m.  No.  1.  07.]

First  I  saw  dimly  a  house,  but  I  think  that  you  wish  me  to  see
a  little  girl  with  brown  hair  down  her  back  tied  with  a  ribbon  in
the  usual  way. She  is  sitting  at  a  table  with  her  back  turned  and


LXIX.]


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


291


seems  very  busy  indeed  ;  I  think  she  is  cutting  out  scraps  with  a
pair  of  scissors,  she  has  on  a  white  pinafore,  and  I  should  guess  her
age  to  be  between  eight  and  twelve.

H.  R.

(c)  This  is  the  description  which  my  landlady  Mrs.  Lovegrove
gives  of  her  child,  who  had  not  been  at  all  well.  I  was  much
interested  in  this  child  :

Laburnum  Villa,  Wickham  Heath.
I  have  a  little  girl  aged  eleven,  with  brown  hair,  tied  with  a
ribbon  in  the  usual  way  ;  she  wears  a  pinafore  and,  being  ill,  often
amuses  herself  cutting  out  scraps.  I  took  her  to  the  doctor's  on
the  30th  October,  and  had  a  long  talk  with  Miss  Miles  on  the  31st
October.  Laura  Lovegrove.

The  16th  Experiment  will  be  described  below  ;  the  17th  was
a  failure.


Experiment  XVIII.

My  sister  Lady  Tennant  was  going  to  marry  Mr.  Geoffrey
Lubbock,  and  her  wedding,  as  Miss  Ramsden  knew,  was  to
be  on  November  13th.

(a)  Friday,  November  8th.

I  lunched  with  Marguerite  Tennant.  .  .  ,  After  lunch  I  went  to
Mr.  Pavitt's  and  ordered  a  talismanic  bit  of  jewelry  for  my  sister
to  wear,  on  her  wedding  day.  Her  house  is  Taurus  ruled  by
Venus.1  C.  M.

(b)  Friday,  Nov.  8th,  1907.
[Postmark  :  Kingussie,  12.30  p.m.  No.  9.  07.]

[After  some  drawings  of  a  Church  Miss  Ramsden  draws  another
figure  which  she  describes  as  follows  :]

A  ring,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  ring  an  eye  emitting  rays  of  light
like  the  sun.

You  have  been  to  see  somebody  to  whom  you  have  just  received
an  introduction  :  it  was  very  interesting  and  weird  and  strange.

1  Consequently  the  design  of  the  pendant  was the  circle  with  horns
symbolising  Taurus,  and  enclosing  the  symbol  of  Venus,  a  circle  surmount
ing  a  cross. The  former  was  composed  of  a  single  turquoise  in  a  thin  gold
band,  turquoise  being  the  stone  of  Venus.


292


Clarissa  Miles.


[part


There  is  some  art  or  symbolism  connected  with  some  strange
religious  cult. It  may  he  somewhere  near  Regent's  Park.  .  .  .

H.  R.

(c)  The  strange  religious  cult  I  think  refers  to  the  astrological
symbols  in  the  pendant.  C.  M.

Experiment  XIX.

(a)  59  Egerton  Gardens,  Sunday,  Nov.  10th.

[Postmark  : Chelsea,  1.30.  p.m.  12  Nov.]

....  We  took  a  turn  in  Kensington  Gardens  and  looked  at

the  Ducks  on  the  Round  Pond Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hunter

were  going  shortly  on  a  visit  to  Taormina.  We  talked  a  great
deal  about  Sicily,  I  pictured  Mount  Etna  and  that  lovely  view
over  the  Straits  of  Messina.  I  know  it  well,  having  been  there
yachting  in  former  years.  C.  M.

(6)  [Postmark  : Kingussie,  Nov.  11,  07.]

A  row  of  houses  that  remind  me  of  Chalfont  St.  Peter,  because

there  is  a  duck-pond  in  front.

[Picture  of  a  mountain  with  two  peaks.]

the  Alps. Shipley H.  R.

Experiment  XX.

This  last  experiment  is  the  only  one  in  which  I  was
percipient.

(a)  59  Egerton  Gardens,  December  15th.

[Postmark  illegible.]
I  first  of  all  get  the  impression  of  a  red  glow,  bright  colours.  I
think  there  Avas  a  lovely  sunset,  or  brilliant  coloured  flowers.  The
most  lasting  impression  is  a  candlestick,  an  old-fashioned  one  with
a  flat  bottom  and  large  handle,  probably  made  of  brass.  .  .  .

C.  M.

(c)  After  the  first  impression  I  went  on  for  some  time  seeing
wherever  I  looked  a  sort  of  after-image  of  it,  which  was  shining
and  circular  in  shape,  with  a  great  variety  of  colours  in  it,  like
those  seen  at  first,  but  much  more  subdued  in  tone. The  whole


LXIX.]


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


293


effect  resembled  a  polished  brass  shining  disc  like  the  bottom  of  an
old-fashioned  flat-bottomed  brass  candlestick  with  a  bright  light
reflected  from  it.  CM.

(b) Sunday,  December  loth,  1907. Raith,  Kirkcaldy,  N.B.
[Postmark  :  Kirkcaldy,  12.45  p.m.  De.  16.  07.]

$  $  sH  ♦

Went  to  Church  this  morning,  the  sun  shone  very  brightly
through  a  stained  window  above  the  organ. It  was  this  shape  :
[Drawing  of  circle,  with  six  small  semi-circles  round  its  edge.]
I  wished  you  to  see  it.

%  ^  *  *  *

H.  R.

(e)  The  sun  was  shining  straight  into  my  eyes  during  the  whole
time  I  was  in  Church,  we  sat  in  the  gallery  and  the  round  window
was  on  a  level  with  our  eyes.  The  glare  of  light  was  almost  un-
pleasant. There  were  flowers  painted  on  the  window,  and  in  the
centre  a  lamb  with  a  halo  round  its  head.  The  colours  were  very
bright,  H.  R.

Experiment  XVI.

This  experiment  involves  a  complicated  story  of  supposed
hauntings  near  the  village  of  Hoe  Benham,  and  is  therefore
described  last.

Laburnum  Villa,  where  I  was  staying,  is  about  three
minutes'  walk  from  the  cottage  and  studio  where  Mr.  Pittman
and  Mr.  Wand  live.  They  had  been  here  for  about  four
years.  I  have  been  down  there  three  or  four  times  before
for  painting  lessons  and  have  always  stayed  at  Laburnum
Villa,  which  belongs  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Henry  Lovegrove.
This  autumn  for  the  first  time  here,  I  began  to  try  thought-
transference  with  Miss  Ramsden.

This  is  Mr.  Pittman's  description  of  what  happened  on
November  2nd,  1907  :

Hoe  Benham,  Newbury.
On  November  2nd,  1907,  I  was  painting  in  the  Studio  with  my
friend  Reginald  Waud  ;  the  model  was  our  servant  dressed  as  a
widow,  and  we  were  waiting  for  Miss  Miles  to  join  us. At  10
o'clock  I  knew  the  milkman  had  come  by  the  dogs  barking  in  the


294


Clarissa  Miles.


[part


cottage  at  the  top  of  the  garden.  So  I  said,  "  I  will  take  the  milk
in,"  and  went  up  to  the  cottage.  After  putting  the  jug  in  the
pantry  and  shutting  the  cottage  door,  I  looked  up  the  road  and
saw  Miss  Miles  coming  down  with  her  easel  and  paint-box.
Following  quite  close  behind  her  was  a  large  white  pig,  with  a
long  snout.  I  went  down  to  the  Studio  and  said  to  Waud,  "  What
do  you  think  Miss  Miles  is  bringing  down  with  her  this  morning,
instead  of  her  Chow  ?  A  large  pig  !  "  We  roared  with  laughter,
and  he  said,  "  Call  out  and  tell  her  not  to  bring  her  friend  in,  and
to  be  sure  to  shut  the  gate,  as  we  take  a  great  pride  in  our
garden."  The  moment  Miss  Miles  appeared  I  opened  the  window
and  shouted  out,  "  What  have  you  done  with  your  companion  ?  "
She  was  very  surprised  and  said,  "  My  companion,  what  do  you
mean  ?  "  Then  I  told  her  what  I  had  seen  following  her.  She
immediately  said,  "  If  a  pig  were  trotting  behind  me,  I  must  have
heard  it.  Besides,  there  is  a  very  easy  way  of  finding  out,  for  I
passed  the  milkman  in  the  lane  and  he  must  have  seen  it,  but
I  shall  go  and  look  for  myself."  When  she  came  back  she  said  :
"  There  is  no  trace  of  a  pig  anywhere."  We  made  enquiries  all
over  the  village  ;  no  one  had  seen  a  stray  pig.  There  is  only  one
white  one  in  the  place,  and  this  one,  its  owner  assured  us,  could
not  possibly  have  got  loose  without  his  knowing  it.  At  the  present
time  there  is  a  notice  out  forbidding  owners  to  allow  pigs  to  stray,
under  penalty  of  a  fine,  as  there  have  been  cases  of  swine  fever.
We  enquired  of  the  milkman  next  morning.  He  remembered
passing  Miss  Miles,  as  he  usually  met  her  about  the  same  time.
He  most  emphatically  said  there  was  no  pig  to  be  seen  anywhere
on  the  road.

(Signed) Osmund  Plttman.

Reginald  Waud.
Clarissa  Miles.
Louisa  Thorne.

I  chose  this  pig  for  the  subject  of  experiment  with  Miss
Ramsden,  and  wrote  on  my  postcard  :

(a)  Laburnum  Villa,  Saturday,  November  2nd.

[Postmark  :  Newbury,  G.30  p.m.  No.  3.  07.]

I  wished  you  to  see  a  stuffed  pheasant  or  you  may  have  seen
the  flying  phantom  pig.  C.  M.


LXIX.]


Experiments  in  Thought -Transference.  295


(b)  November  2nd,  1907.

[Postmark  :  Kingussie,  10.30  a.m.  No.  3.  07.]

£  a|c  $  #

You  were  out  of  doors  rather  late,  a  cold  raw  evening  near  a
railway  station  ;  there  was  a  pig  with  a  long  snout,  and  some
village  children  ;  it  was  getting  dark.  H.  R.

As  to  whether  there  could  have  been  a  real  pig  on  the  road,
this  is  the  evidence  of  the  milkman,  who  passed  me  that
morning  :

West  brook  Dairy,  Boxford.
I  have  been  asked  by  Mr.  Pittman  and  Miss  Miles  to  say  whether
I  saw  a  large  white  pig  following  Miss  Miles  on  November  2nd,
1907,  at  10  o'clock  in  the  morning,  as  I  met  her  walking  down
to  the  cottage  carrying  her  painting  things.  I  can  honestly  say
that  I  saw  no  such  thing,  there  was  no  trace  of  a  pig  to  be  seen
anywhere.  E.  Carrell.

Mrs.  Thorne  wrote  :

I  had  a  talk  with  the  children  playing  on  the  road.  They  had
seen  Miss  Miles  go  by  and  they  told  me  they  had  been  there  all
the  morning,  but  they  had  seen  no  pig  anywhere.

Louisa  Thorne.

On  February  4th.  1908,  I  returned  to  Laburnum  Villa  to
finish  one  or  two  paintings  I  began  last  autumn.  I  also
wished  to  get  further  evidence  of  the  strange  animal  forms
that  are  supposed  to  haunt  this  lane,  as  I  was  told  last
November,  after  the  episode  of  the  phantom  pig,  that  so
many  of  the  villagers  had  been  witnesses  of  these  remarkable
apparitions  under  different  forms,  such  as  a  cat,  a  dog,  or  a
rabbit,  or  other  animals.  Mr.  Pittman  and  Mr.  Waud  had
never  seen  anything  weird  or  out  of  the  ordinary  till  I  came
down  last  autumn  and  began  thought-transference  with  Miss
Ramsden  ;  they  had  only  heard  quite  casually  very  vague
accounts  of  something  strange  that  had  been  seen  years  ago,
to  which  they  had  paid  but  little  attention.  The  villagers
are  very  reticent  and  will  not  talk  much  for  fear  of  being
laughed  at,  but  the  history  of  the  phantom  pig  overcame  all
difficulties  on  that  score  as  regards  my  enquiries.


290


Clarissa  Miles.


[part


The  villagers  all  tell  the  same  story  to  account  for  these
apparitions.  They  put  them  all  down  to  "  Tommy  King."
He  was  a  farmer,  who  lived  over  a  hundred  years  ago.  He
hung  himself  in  an  outhouse,  and  his  spirit  is  supposed  to
haunt  the  spot,  appearing  in  these  strange  shapes  and  making
uncanny  noises.  The  farm  buildings  and  outhouses  were  all
demolished  on  the  occasion  of  the  sale  of  the  property  by
Mr.  Dreweatt  to  Sir  Richard  Sutton  in  1 892  ;  only  a  cottage
remains,  which  is  still  called  King's  cottage,  and  a  disused
well  close  to  the  lane,  which  is  called  Tommy  King's  chalk
well.  In  former  years  they  used  to  dig  out  chalk  from  the
side  of  the  hill.  I  have  looked  at  the  Register  of  the  Parish
Church  and  there  are  entries  of  the  deaths  of  two  Tommy
Kings,  one  in  1741,  the  other  in  1753,  so  it  must  be  one  of
these  two.

At  the  corner  of  the  lane  stands  an  old-fashioned  inn,
called  the  Halfway,  because  it  is  halfway  between  London
and  Bristol  and  sixty  miles  from  each.  It  is  on  the  main
road,  and  in  the  olden  days  all  the  coaches  stopped  here
to  change  horses.  The  lane  to  Hoe  Benham  branches  off
here,  going  up  a  hill  called  Pound  Hill.  King's  cottage  and
the  well  are  situated  to  the  left  of  the  lane.  The  well  is  close
to  the  road,  but  only  a  hole  in  the  bank  indicates  the  spot.
At  the  top  of  the  hill  about  ten  minutes'  walk  brings  you
to  the  Church,  then  there  is  a  short,  sharp  decline  and  the
straggling  village  of  Hoe  Benham  is  reached.  After  Benham
Hill  is  mounted  a  cluster  of  cottages  is  seen  nestling  on  the
side  of  the  hill,  one  of  them  belonging  to  Mr.  Pittman  and
Mr.  Waud.  Their  cottage  is  about  a  mile  from  the  Half-
way, and  it  is  all  along  this  lane  that  the  apparitions  have
been  seen.

The  following  are  accounts  which  I  obtained  from  some  of
the  villagers.  I  Avrote  down  what  they  told  me  as  nearly
as  possible  in  their  own  words,  and  afterwards  got  their
signatures  to  the  accounts.

Hoe  Benham.

In  the  beginning  of  January,  1905,  about  half-past  seven  in  the
evening,  I  was  walking  up  from  the  Halfway.  I  suddenly  saw  an
animal  that  seemed  to  be  like  a  large,  black  dog  appear  quite


LXIX.]


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


297


suddenly  out  of  the  hedge  and  run  across  the  road  quite  close  in
front  of  me  ;  I  thought  it  was  the  dog  belonging  to  the  curate.
I  was  just  going  to  call  it  to  send  it  home,  when  it  suddenly
changed  its  shape  and  turned  into  a  black  donkey  standing  on
its  hind  legs.  This  creature  had  two  glowing  eyes,  which  appeared
to  me  to  be  almost  as  big  as  saucers.  I  looked  at  it  in  astonish-
ment for  a  minute  or  so,  when  it  suddenly  vanished.  After  that
I  hurried  home,  for  the  sight  of  this  creature  with  the  large  shining
eyes  gave  me  a  shock.  The  evening  was  a  light  one  for  the  time
of  year.

(Signed) William  Thorne.

At  Michaelmas,  1897,  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening,  I  met  a
friend,  John  Barrett,  on  Benham  Hill,  and  we  stopped  to  have  a
chat.  At  this  spot  there  is  a  gate  on  either  side  of  the  road.
Whilst  we  were  talking  a  curious  looking  animal,  snowy  white,
crossed  the  road  quite  slowly  from  one  gate  to  the  other  close  to
us.  John  Barrett  said,  "  What  was  that  ?  "  The  animal  seemed
too  large  for  a  cat,  more  the  size  of  a  terrier  with  a  fluffy  coat.  I
went  and  stood  on  the  gate  and  watched  it  as  it  trotted  half  way
across  the  meadow,  Avhen  it  disappeared.  The  strange  whiteness
of  the  creature's  coat  struck  me  as  being  so  uncommon.

(Signed) William  Thorne,  Hoe  Benham.

John  Barrett,  Wickham  Heath,  Newbury.

About  three  or  four  years  ago  in  the  autumn  about  five  o'clock,
sort  of  between  the  lights,  but  I  could  see  everything,  I  was  walking
to  Stock  Cross  and  got  to  the  last  handing  post.  All  at  once,  I
heard  a  buzz,  like  the  whizz  of  leaves,  and  a  rattle  on  the  ground.
I  cast  my  eyes  down,  and  saw  summat  in  the  shape  of  a  calf
knuckled  down.  It  seemed  about  2  ft.  6  in.  high  and  5  feet  long
with  large  glowing  eyes.  It  regularly  startled  me.  My  hat  waved
over  my  head.  I  kept  my  eyes  on't,  but  I  never  saw  the  goings
on't.

(Signed) Albert  Thorne,  Hoe  Benham.

This  is  the  story  told  me  by  John  Barrett  and  his  wife
Polly.  He  is  63  years  of  age.  About  50  years  ago  when
he  was  a  lad,  he  was  returning  with  seven  or  eight  men  in
a  waggon  from  Halfway  after  a  day's  haymaking. The  team


298


Clarissa  Miles.


[part


of  horses  went  quite  quietly  until  they  reached  Pound  Hill,
when  suddenly  without  any  warning,

The  team  began  a-snortin'  and  a-blowin'  and  a  tramplin'  agen  one
side  of  the  road  to  another.  They  were  likes  to  turn  round.  Carter
jumped  down  to  their  heads  and  began  pattin'  them,  when  he
said,  "  Look  !  Them  horses  can  see  more  than  we.  Look  at  that
white  thing  a-bobbin'  up  and  down  over  their  heads."  We  all
looked  and  saw  what  he  was  pointing  at.  This  white  thing  kept
on  a-bobbin'  and  a-bobbin',  and  the  horses  continued  a-snortin,
and  a-snortin'  until  we  came  to  a  gate  just  before  the  Church,  when
the  white  thing  vanished  through  the  gate,  and  the  team  became
quite  quiet.

Later  on,  I  became  assistant  to  Mrs.  Flower.  She  kept  a  baker's
shop,  and  I  had  to  lay  the  leaven  for  the  bread  every  evening.
Sundays  Mrs.  Flower  always  had  supper  with  her  mother  at
Wickham  Heath.  For  this  she  had  to  go  up  Benham  Hill.  One
evening  she  returned  as  white  as  a  ghost  and  lay  on  the  sofa  as  if
she  were  going  to  die.  She  said,  "I  be  all  of  a  shake  and  a
tremble.  I  did  see  summat  white  on  the  gate  at  the  hill.  Never
shall  I  go  to  supper  agen  with  my  mother  of  an  evening."  And
she  never  did.  I  replied,  "  I  never  seen  nothing  there  on  that
hill  ;  I  have  been  up  and  down  all  hours  of  the  night."  I
remember  the  elate,  it  must  have  been  on  a  summer's  evening
about  35  years  ago.  [Polly  Barrett  chimed  in  and  said,  "  Quite
right,  you  were  a  courtin'  and  you  told  me."]  A  few  days  after,
between  nine  and  ten  in  the  evening,  I  was  a-comin'  down  Benham
Hill.  Between  the  two  gates,  I  heard  a  rattle  on  the  stones  as  of
an  animal  pawing  the  ground.  I  looked  to  see  what  it  was.  I
saw  summat  like  a  sheep.  I  went  to'poke  un  with  my  stick  when
it  vanished  away.

Another  time  me  and  my  brother  George  were  walking  late  near
Perris  Cottage.  We  heard  summat  that  made  such  a  rumpus  like
stones  tipped  down  from  a  cart.  We  groped  about  and  walked  to
and  agen  to  and  agen,  and  waited  to  hear  summat  more,  but  could
not  make  out  nothing,  so  we  just  walked  home.  My  father  always
told  me  these  apparitions  were  put  down  to  Tommy  King.

(Signed) John  Barrett,  Wickham  Heath.
Polly  Barrett.


lxix.] Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  299


The  following  were  my  own  experiences  at  Hoe  Benham  :
On  Sunday,  February  16th,  1908,  I  arranged  to  join  Mr.  Waud
and  go  to  the  Church  with  him  at  Hoe  Benham  to  3  o'clock
service.  All  the  morning  I  felt  in  a  weird,  trance-like  state,  the
condition  I  get  into  when  I  have  visions  of  coming  events,  changes
likely  to  affect  my  future.  I  described  these  sensations  both  to
Mr.  Pittman  and  to  Mr.  Waud.  After  Church  I  felt  compelled
to  walk  towards  Tommy  King's  chalk  well,  as  I  wished  to  see  the
road  along  which  the  team  of  horses  came,  which  were  so  terrified
at  the  white  thing  bobbing  ujd  and  down  over  their  heads.  We
thought  we  would  go  and  have  tea  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Le  Mesurier,
who  live  at  the  end  of  the  lane  just  opposite  Halfway  Inn.  To
reach  them  from  Hoe  Benham  we  always  take  a  short  cut  across
the  fields.  I  looked  over  the  old  inn,  and  the  proprietor  showed
me  where  the  old  stables  stood,  where  the  bell  was  always  rung  to
get  the  horses  ready  for  changing  teams.  I  take  a  great  interest
in  all  coaching  matters  and  horses,  for  I  have  hunted  all  my  life,
and  my  father  was  a  splendid  whip,  also  one  of  the  finest  heavy
weights  of  his  day  across  country.  After  tea,  Mr.  Waud  and  I
walked  back.  On  passing  Tommy  King's  well  an  overpowering
sense  of  suffocation  seized  me,  I  felt  the  presence  of  some  awful
being.  This  evil  spirit  seemed  to  follow  me  up  Pound  Hill.  I
felt  it  longing  to  do  me  some  bodily  injury,  there  was  such  deadly
malice  and  hate  in  the  air.  I  described  all  this  to  Mr.  Waud.
We  constantly  looked  around  but  could  see  nothing.  These
sensations  continued  all  the  way  back,  but  grew  worse  as  we
walked  up  Benham  Hill.  After  the  cottage  was  passed  a  shiver
went  down  my  back  and  spine,  the  same  kind  of  shock  I  ex-
perience when  dowsing  and  walking  over  water.  Suddenly  quite
close  to  us  on  the  road  the  stillness  of  the  evening  was  broken
by  an  unearthly  scream  which  seemed  to  end  in  a  moan.  As  the
sound  seemed  so  very  close  to  us,  we  both  looked  round  to  see
if  anything  was  near  which  would  have  produced  it,  but  nothing
whatever  was  visible.  We  both  were  speechless  for  a  minute, —
the  effect  was  so  awful.  We  hardly  spoke  till  we  reached
Laburnum  Villa,  the  time  being  about  six  o'clock.  It  was
only  the  next  day,  in  comparing  notes,  that  we  found  this  dread-
ful wailing  cry  was  heard  on  the  exact  spot  where  the  phantom
pig  was  seen  by  Mr.  Pittman  following  me  on  November  2nd,
1907.


300


Clarissa  Miles.


[part


Two  evenings  after,  on  February  18th,  I  walked  to  Tommy
King's  chalk  well  with  Mr.  Pittman  to  try  if  any  more  strange
phenomena  could  be  seen.  It  was  a  brilliant  moonlight  night.
No  evil  beings  were  there  to  disturb  the  stillness  of  this  evening,
all  was  calm  and  peaceful.  I  tried  automatic  writing,  and  two
sentences  were  written  twice  over  ;  they  came  with  such  lightning
speed,  no  human  hand  could  have  written  that  pace  alone.  The
words  were,  "  I  am  in  hell,  pray  for  me,  I  am  in  hell,  pray  for  me  "  ;
nothing  more.  On  walking  back  we  looked  around  and  across
the  lane  a  white  band  of  light  appeared  ; — the  same  sparkling-
effect  I  have  sometimes  seen  at  sea,  from  the  deck  of  a  yacht  on
a  dark  night,  shimmering  on  the  ocean.  It  was  of  a  quite  different
quality  from  the  moonlight.  This  luminous  effect  undulated
up  and  down,  backwards  and  forwards,  and  seemed  to  come  towards
us,  till  it  appeared  to  be  only  five  yards  away  ;  it  was  about  a  foot
from  the  ground  ;  it  then  receded  and  disappeared.  We  both
saw  it ;  most  strange  and  mysterious  it  appeared  in  the  brilliant
moonlight.  Another  evening  a  little  later  I  walked  down  with
Mr.  Pittman  but  nothing  of  special  interest  occurred.  But  the
pencil  wrote  automatically,  "  I  am  happier."

On  Benham  Hill  where  so  many  strange  apparitions  have  been
seen,  one  evening  when  it  was  half  daylight,  half  dark,  I  distinctly
saw  a  white  shadowy  form  which  appeared  like  drapery  standing
against  the  gate. No  one  else  saw  this.

On  Thursday,  February  27th,  my  last  evening  at  Hoe  Benham,
I  dined  at  the  cottage,  and  Mr.  Pittman  and  Mr  Waud  walked
back  with  me.  We  were  laughing  and  talking.  Suddenly  our
conversation  was  interrupted  by  this  unearthly  moaning  cr3r,
which  came  wailing  across  the  stillness  of  the  evening.  This
doleful  sound  seemed  to  come  over  our  heads  from  the  roof  of  the
Chapel  which  is  exactly  opposite  Laburnum  Villa.  We  all  heard  it  .
It  was  a  repetition  of  the  groan  Mr.  Waud  and  I  heard  the  other
evening  preceded  by  that  awful  scream.

(Signed)  Clarissa  Miles.

Reginald  Waud.
Osmund  Pittman.

Mr.  Waud  adds  :

On  Monday,  February  24th,  whilst  Pittman  and  I  were  taking
tea  in  the  cottage,  two  distinct  taps  were  heard  on  the  door  just


lxix.] Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  301


behind  us.  Both  dogs  started  barking.  I  got  up,  thinking  some
one  had  called.  I  went  to  both  doors  and  not  a  sign  of  any  one
or  anything  was  to  be  seen. It  was  about  6.15.

Reginald  Watjd.


I  tried  later  a  series  of  experiments  with  Miss  Tamara
Statkowski,  a  Russian  lady,  who  was  at  the  time  living  in
England.  From  Oct.  1,  1908,  to  Nov.  20,  1909,  twenty
experiments  were  tried,  the  three  most  successful  of  which
are  given  here.

Experiment  VI.

(a)  Postcard  from  Miss  Miles  to  Miss  Statkowski.

Tuesday,  January  28th.
[Postmark:  Chelsea,  S.W.  1.30  p.m.  29  Jan.  1909.]

I  went  to  an  Artists'  fancy  dress  ball  at  the  Grafton  Galleries.
Met  Mrs.  Brangwyn  there.  She  was  dressed  as  a  Roman  peasant,
black  velvet  skirt  and  bodice.  I  lent  her  the  costume  and  long
ear-rings.  I  was  in  a  fortune-telling  dress,  brilliant  red  scarf  and
head  dress,  the  rest  a  mixture  of  green  and  all  sorts  of  colours.
There  were  some  excellent  dresses.  At  the  end  every  one  walked
round  in  procession,  and  prizes  were  given.  I  attended  the  meet-
ing of  the  S.P.R.  at  five,  and  Mr.  Baggally  told  me  of  some  of  the
marvellous  phenomena  they  had  witnessed  with  Eusapia.

C.  M.

(6)  Postcard  from  Miss  Statkowski  to  Miss  Miles.

Thursday  eve. 28th  Jan.
[Postmark  :  London,  W.C.  4.15.  p.m.  Jan.  29,  09.]

A  triangle  very  clearly  cut.

An  arch.  The  Arc  de  Triomphe,  or  else  the  Arc  de  Titus  in
Rome.  An  Italian  pine  tree.  A  very  blue  bay — a  pointed  moun-
tain on  the  other  side.  Can't  make  out  whether  palm  tree  or
pine  tree — whether  Vesuvius  or  a  pyramid.

T.  S.

Here  the  percipient's  impression  of  Italy,  and  in  particular


302


Clarissa  Miles.


[part


of  Rome  and  Naples,  seems  to  correspond  to  what  was
attempted  to  be  conveyed.

(c)  Subsequent  Note  by  Miss  Miles.

I  only  spoke  to  Mr.  Baggally  for  a  very  few  minutes,  about  the
wonderful  experiences  he  had  had  in  Naples  with  Eusapia.1  They
made  a  very  great  impression  on  me  at  the  time.  I  suppose
my  thoughts  were  concentrated  all  the  evening  on  South  Italy
as  well.  For  I  went  afterwards  with  Mrs.  Brangwyn  to  the  Fancy
Ball  given  by  the  Artists  in  the  Grafton  Gallery.  She  was  dressed
as  a  Roman  Peasant.  I  had  bought  the  dress  long  ago  in  Rome
when  we  were  yachting  in  the  Mediterranean,  and  lent  it  to  her
for  the  occasion.

Note  by  31rs.  Brangwyn.

Temple  Lodge,  Queen  Street,  Hammersmith.

I  went  to  a  fancy  dress  ball  given  by  the  Artists  in  the  Grafton
Gallery  on  Jan.  28th,  1909.

I  was  dressed  in  the  costume  of  a  Roman  peasant.  Clarissa
Miles  joined  me  there.

L.  Brangwyn.

Note  by  Mr.  Baggally.

March  11th,  1910.
At  the  meeting  of  the  S.P.R.  on  the  28th  Jan.  1909,  I  spoke
to  Miss  Miles  and  related  to  her  some  of  the  experiences  I  had
had  recently  with  Eusapia  Palladino  in  Naples.

W.  W.  Baggally.

Experiment  XIV.

(a)  Postcard  from  Miss  Miles  to  Miss  Statkowski.

59  Egerton  Gardens,  Saturday,  June  19th.
[Postmark  :  Chelsea,  S.W.  12.15  a.m.  21  Jun.  1909.]

I  saw  Peggy  Tennant,  aged  ten,  in  bed  in  a  home.  She  had
undergone  treatment  for  her  tonsils.  I  took  her  toys.  In  the
afternoon  Nesta  and  I  went  to  the  White  City.  We  saw  Indians
juggling.  The  Dahomey  Village,  natives  cooking,  one  woman
with  a  baby  tied  on  to  her  back.  The  mountain  railway.  After-
wards I  went  to  the  evening  Church  Pageant. The  Coronation

1  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.,  pp.  309-569.


LXIX.]


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


303


of  King  Edward  VI.,  and  the  beheading  of  Archbishop  Laud  were
most  effective.  Also  the  last  scene  where  the  crowd  were  all  massed
together  with  flaring  torches.

C.  M.

(b)  Postcard  from  Miss  Statkowski  to  Miss  Miles.

20  June,  Sunday  morning.
[Postmark  :  London,  W.C.  4  a.m.  Ju.  21.  09.]

A  sort  of  fairy-tale  king  with  a  big  crown  on  his  head.  [Draw-
ing of  man's  head,  with  crown  on.]  A  drive  with  rows  of  trees,
the  boughs  meeting  overhead,  and  a  long  line  of  carriages  going
through  it  to  the  front  of  a  white  country  house.  Looks  like  a
wedding.

T.  S.

(c)  Subsequent  Note  by  Miss  Miles.

The  Coronation  of  King  Edward  VI.  made  an  immense
impression  on  me.  I  was  thus  able  to  have  a  glimpse  of  how
these  ceremonies  were  conducted  in  ancient  times  and  compare
it  with  the  Coronation  of  King  Edward  VII.,  whom  I  had  seen
crowned  in  Westminster  Abbey.

The  scene  is  described  in  the  programme  of  the  Pageant
as  follows  :

The  Coronation  Procession  of  King  Edivard  VI.  from  Westminster
Hall  to  the  Abbey,  20th  February,  1546-7.

The  Coronation  ceremonies  of  a  King  of  England  anciently
began  with  a  great  procession,  in  which  the  King,  accompanied
by  his  great  officers  of  State,  rode  bareheaded  from  the  Tower
of  London  through  the  City  to  his  palace  at  Westminster,  and
thus  offered  himself  to  be  seen  by  his  people.

The  next  day  the  King  came  down  into  Westminster  Hall,  where
he  was  met  by  the  prelates  and  nobles  of  the  realm,  and  lifted
up  by  them  into  a  marble  chair  set  upon  the  King's  bench.

The  King,  having  thus  been  elected  and  enthroned  by  his  peers,
was  conducted  from  his  palace  to  the  Abbey  Church.

It  is  this  procession  which  is  represented  by  the  scene.  The
order  of  it  is  taken  from  a  contemporary  manuscript  in  the  Library
of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries.

u


304


Clarissa  Miles.


[part


Experiment  XVIII.

(a)  Postcard  from  Miss  Miles  to  Miss  Stathowshi.

Sunday,  November  14th,  1909.
[Postmark:  Chelsea,  S.W.  5.15p.m.  15  Nov.  1909.]
I  was  at  Bulstrode  with  Lady  Guendolen  Ramsden.  In  the
morning  I  looked  out  at  the  wintry  scene,  snow  falling  and  the  bare
barren  look  of  the  trees,  and  all  the  ivy  cut  off  the  tower.  The
pigeons  looked  so  disconsolate.  The  scene  so  different  from  when
I  painted  it  in  the  summer.  I  psychometrised  for  Lady  G.  in  the
afternoon,  and  we  talked  much  of  Mr.  W.  We  also  looked  at
dolls  and  a  Teddy  bear.

C.  M.

(b)  Postcard  from  Miss  Stathowshi  to  Miss  Miles.

Monday,  Nov.  15th,  1909.
[Postmark:  London,  W.C.  1.15  p.m.  Nov.  15,  09.]
A  lot  of  yellow  trees.

Something  large  and  dark,  like  some  big  animal.  A  large  brown
bear.

The  iron  bars  of  a  cage.

T.  Statkowski.

(c)  Subsequent  Note  by  Miss  Miles.

I  painted  the  view  of  the  garden,  ivy  tower  Pots  of  Hydrangeas
in  the  foreground  and  the  trees  just  turning  yellow  in  the  month
of  September,  from  Lady  Guendolen's  sitting-room.  Arranging
the  Teddy  bear  for  the  picture  was  a  great  amusement.

Note  by  Lady  Guendolen  Ramsden.

Bulstrode,  Gerrard's  Cross,  Bucks.
Dec.  11,  1909

On  Sunday,  the  14th  November,  I  showed  some  dolls  and  a
Teddy  bear  to  Miss  Miles.  I  wanted  to  paint  a  picture,  and  the
Teddy  bear  was  to  be  in  the  middle.  Miss  Miles  helped  me  to  group
the  dolls  and  bear  for  the  picture  and  we  talked  a  good  deal  about
it,  particularly  about  the  Teddy  bear. Miss  Miles  left  next  day.

Guendolen  Ramsden.

A  photograph  of  the  picture  painted  by  Lady  Guendolen
Ramsden  shows  the  Teddy  Bear  seated  on  a  couch  as  the
principal  figure  in  the  centre.


lxix.] Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  305


II.

EXPERIMENTS  BY  MISS  RAMSDEN.

In  .  the  following  series,  Miss  Ramsden  was  the  agent  and
Miss  Tamara  Statkowski  the  percipient.  During  the  period
September  8  to  December  12,  1908,  twelve  experiments  were
tried.  As  a  rule,  both  agent  and  percipient  recorded  their
impressions  on  post-cards,  so  that  the  postmarks  might  attest
the  dates  on  which  they  sent  information  to  one  another,
and  all  the  original  records  from  which  this  account  is  com-
piled were  put  into  our  possession.  In  each  case  we  quote
first  :  (a)  the  agent's  statement  of  what  she  intended  to
transfer  ;  then  (6)  the  percipient's  statement  of  her  im-
pressions ;  and  finally  (c)  the  agent's  notes  or  comments
made  after  receiving  (b).

Before  the  first  experiment,  Miss  Ramsden,  writing  to  Miss
Statkowski  from  Bulstrode,  Gerrards  Cross,  Bucks.,  said
"I  go  on  Monday  [Sep.  7]  to  Morton's  House,  Corfe  Castle,
Dorset,  and  on  Friday  to  Rushmore,  Salisbury."  This
note  was  posted  on  Monday,  Sep.  7,  1908,  and  received  by
Miss  Statkowski,  who  was  then  staying  at  Westerham,  Kent,
on  the  following  day.

Experiment  I.

(a)  Postcard  from  Miss  Ramsden  to  Miss  Statkowski.

Morton's  House,  Corfe  Castle,  Dorset.,  Sep.  8.

[Postmark  :  Corfe  Castle,  Sp.  8.  08.  8.30  p.m.]
This  is  the  landscape  which  I  am  trying  to  make  you  see  to-day,
and  the  same  when  I  arrived  yesterday.

H.  R.

(b)  Letter  from  Miss  Statkowski  to  Miss  Ramsden.

Sept.  8th,  1908. Tuesday,  7  o'c.  p.m.
First — an  electric  light  hanging  from  the  ceiling,  in  a  plain  green
shade,  like  the  lights  in  offices. Then  the  electric  ball  inside  came


306


Hermione  Ramsdeh.


[part


forwards  and  slowly  changed  into  a  white  lily,  something  like  that
[rough  drawing  of  floiver]  on  a  stem  with  long  green  leaves.  Then
nothing  at  all  for  some  time.

Then  a  white  shapeless  thing  which  grew  square,  and  looked
like  Chinese  work  in  ivory  ;  it  changed  ;  two  towers,  between
them  the  high  curve  of  a  bridge  with  a  landscape  inside,  framed
in  between  the  two  towers  and  the  curve,  a  large  tree  and  water  ;
all  that  "  sculpte  en  bas  relief  "  in  ivory — not  Chinese  at  all  any
more — but  quite  European,  mediaeval  looking.  Then  the  tree
grew  very  green,  stood  out,  and  its  branches  spread  in  a  Gothic
vault,  like  a  church.  I  fear  it  is  altogether  rather  a  muddle.  I
wonder  if  it's  anything.  Green  and  white  seemed  the  principal
impressions  of  the  whole.  Then  a  lady,  with  a  white  front  on  the
bodice  of  her  dress,  sort  of  white  cloth  "  revers  "  and  white  silk
inside.  .  .  .

Were  you  sitting  in  a  deep  armchair  with  your  hat  on,  a
round,  broad  hat,  shady  ?  I  thought  of  you  like  that,  I  don't
know  why.

Tamara  Statkowski.

(c)  Subsequent  Note  by  Miss  Ramsden.

Morton's  House,  Corfe  Castle,  Dorset.
Tuesday,  Sept.  8th,  1908.

I  had  been  admiring  the  tall  white  lilies  in  the  garden  here.
At  6.30  p.m.  I  went  out  on  purpose  to  get  a  good  view  of  Corfe
Castle  to  impress  on  you.  I  walked  down  the  village  and  across
the  bridge  ;  then  discovered  that  I  was  too  much  below  the  castle
to  get  a  good  view  of  it,  so  I  returned  to  the  garden  here.  (There
are  three  bridges,  trees  and  water,  not  a  river,  to  the  right  on  en-
closed postcard.)  I  then  went  to  the  end  of  the  garden,  where
there  is  a  stone  seat,  roofed  over.1  There  I  sat  till  past  7  p.m. ;  my
hat  was  navy  blue,  round,  broad,  and  shady.  It  was  almost  dark
and  the  moon  was  rising.  The  castle  looked  very  dark  grey
against  the  sky.  It  was  once  a  square  tower,  which  has  been  rent
in  two  ;  from  where  I  sat  it  looked  like  two  towers.

My  cousin  was  wearing  a  white  silk  blouse  and  grey  coat  and
skirt.

1  It  was  from  this  point  of  view  that  the  picture  post-card  reproduced
on  Plate  IV.  was  taken.


Plate  IV.


CORFE  CASTLE.


Face  page  300.


Plate  V.


BRONZE  STATUE  OF  C/ESAR  AUGUSTUS  IX  THE  GROUNDS  AT  RUSHMORE.

Face  page  307.


lxix'.j Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  307


Experiment  II.
September  10. A  failure. Details  not  recorded.

Experiment  III.

(a)  Postcard  from  Miss  Ramsden  to  Miss  Statkoivski.

Rushrnore,  Salisbury. Sat.  Sept.  12th.
[Postmark  : Salisbury,  Sp.  12. 08.  10  p.m.]
I  am  sorry  I  sent  nothing  yesterday,  Friday,  but  mil  try  again
to-night.

Yesterday  I  was  busy  talking  at  7  p.m.  in  a  round  room  with
a  lot  of  windows. Drove  from  station  here  in  motor.  .  .  .

H.  R.

(b)  Two  Postcards  from  Miss  Statkoivski  to  Miss  Ramsden.

Westerham,  Kent. Sep.  11th,  1908.
[Postmarks: Westerham,  Kent,  Sp.  11.08.  8  p.m.]
An  arch  with  a  statue  in  it. The  arch  changed  into  an  arched
sort  of  cloister,  Italian,  viewed  in  perspective,  with  little  columns
to  the  right,  where  there  was  a  walled-in  square  garden  with  grass.

A  niche  with  a  statue  in  it,  statue  of  Roman  Emperor,
full  figure,  in  armour,  with  wreath  of  laurels  on  his  head,  right
arm  stretched  out  holding  a  spear.  Very  clear  and  persistent —
the  Emperor.

A  little  girl  in  an  apron  with  white  kerchief  on  her  head  and  a
broom  in  her  hand.  A  sweet  face,  rosy  and  white,  a  girl's,  with
plait  of  hair  put  all  round  her  head.

Somebody  on  a  bed,  turned  into  a  square  mediaeval  tomb,  with
lying  statue  on  it. Low  arch  above,  and  frescoes  above  the  arch.

A  very  low  stumpy  palm  tree — changed  into  a  bush,  in  the
same  square  walled-in  garden,  seen  at  first.

A  man's  head,  with  big,  white  curly  wig,  something  like  Louis
XIV.- — le  Grand  Roi — on  his  portraits.

A  woman's  neck  with  thin  black  velvet  round  it,  with  a  bow
of  it  at  the  back,  and  Watteau  costume.

Such  a  lot  of  things  !  T.  Statkowski

We  reproduce  on  Plate  V.  a  print  of  a  temple  in  the  grounds
of  Rushrnore  Park,  with  a  statue  of  Augustus  (a  copy  of  that


308


Hermione  Rnmsden.


[part


in  the  Vatican  Museum)  which  stands  in  front  of  it.  These
seem  to  correspond  with  Miss  Statkowski's  first  impressions.

(c)  Subsequent  Note  by  Miss  Ramsden.
Sept.  9th. No  attempt.
Sept.  10th.  Failure.

Sept.  11th.  No  message,  but  the  percipient  saw  a  great  deal.
I  arrived  at  Rushmore  6  p.m.  and  drove  close  to  this  temple,  when
the  thought  crossed  my  mind  :  "  That  would  be  a  good  subject
for  telepathy,  I  will  try  it  to-morrow  !  "  I  saw  the  statue  of  the
Roman  Emperor  in  the  distance,  from  behind,  but  did  not  notice
it,  and  did  not  discover  the  likeness  to  this  description  until  the
13th.  The  garden  here  is  square  with  a  hedge  round  it,  but  I
had  spent  the  whole  morning  in  "  a  walled-in  square  garden  with
grass,"  at  Morton's  House,  Corfe  Castle  ;  there  was  a  little  girl
aged  six,  but  she  had  no  white  kerchief  or  broom.  At  Rushmore
there  was  a  girl  as  described. The  rest  is  wrong.

Hermione  Ramsden.

Experiment  IV.
(a)  Postcard  from  Miss  Ramsden  to  Miss  Statkoivski.

Rushmore,  Salisbury.  Sat.  Sept.  12,  posted  13th.
[Postmark:  Salisbury,  Sp.13.08.  9.30  p.m.]
7  p.m.  After  tea  I  sat  for  a  long  time,  thinking  of  you  as  I
looked  at  this  temple.  There  was  a  statue  of  Japanese  storks
on  an  island  in  the  pond.  There  were  many  impressions  :  several
temples, — one  with  a  statue  of  Buddha  over  doorway, — but  this
was  the  prettiest  of  all  seen  through  a  vista  in  the  trees.

H.  R.

The  picture  referred  to  is  entitled  "  View  of  the  Temple,
Larmer  Grounds,  across  the  Dell."  It  shows  in  the  fore-
ground a  pond  with  a  little  island  on  which  the  two  Japanese
storks  are  standing,  and  beyond  a  flight  of  steps  leading  up
to  a  small  round  Temple,  in  the  midst  of  trees.

Miss  Ramsden  afterwards  added  an  enlarged  view  of  the
pond,  entitled  "  Japanese  Storks  in  Larmer  Grounds,"  show-
ing the  island  covered  with  plants  and  the  two  storks  standing
upright  on  it,  with  closed  wings.  On  this  picture  Miss  Rams-
den noted  ;  "  The  stones  of  which  this  island  is  built  are  now


LXIX.]


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


309


plainly  visible."  The  Larmer  Grounds  are  part  of  the  Rush-
more  estate.

(b)  Miss  Statkoivski  to  Miss  Ramsden.

Westerham,  Kent.  Saturday,  12th.
Nothing  at  all  for  a  long  time.  Then,  very  clearly,  a  big  bird,
with  outspread  wings,  sitting  on  a  stone,  like  an  eagle.  Big,  pink
clouds.  A  wild  landscape  of  high  mountains.  Fir-tree  in  front.
Rush  of  waters,  cascade,  or  the  fall  of  a  river,  rocks  and  the  eagle
again.

A  girl  in  white  muslin  frock  with  dark  hair  down  her  back.

Tamara  Statkowski.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  impression  of  a  big  bird  sitting
on  a  stone  has  some  resemblance  to  the  storks  on  the  stone
island.

Experiment  V.

(a)  Postcard  from  Miss  Ramsden  to  Miss  Statkoivski.

Rushmore,  Salisbury. Sunday,  Sept.  13th,  1908.
[Postmark:  Salisbury,  Sp.14.  08.  10  p.m.]
A  distant  view  from  a  high  common,  low  blue  hills  in  the  dis-
tance. Remains  of  an  old  Roman  village,  only  mounds  of  earth
to  be  seen,  and  deep  holes,  fenced  in.

Some  horses  in  a  field  came  up  to  be  patted  and  talked  to.
There  were  pink  clouds  at  sunset.  H.  R.

(Posted  14th.)

Just  got  your  card  of  12th. Glad  you  saw  the  birds.

(6)  Postcard  from  Miss  Statkowski  to  Miss  Ramsden.

Westerham,  Kent. Sunday,  13th.
[Postmark  :  Westerham,  Kent. Sp.14.  08.  10.15  a.m.]
Very  unsatisfactory.

Something  very  pale,  whitish  blue  like  a  streak  of  moonlight.
Changed  into  a  silvery  pale  blue  silk  dress.  Clouds,  or  rather
very  thick  smoke,  clustering  white  and  grey.  A  barn  with  trees
on  some  high  ground  behind. Nothing  more.

Forgot  carriage  and  pair,  coachman  and  groom  in  black,  horses
gray.  T.  Statkowski.


310


Hermione  Ramsden.


[part


(c)  Subsequent  Note  by  Miss  Ramsden.

On  Sunday.  Sept.  13th.  I  wore  a  pale  blue  silk  dress  with  silver
trimming  ;  it  was  hanging  over  a  chair  at  7  p.m.  when  I  sent  this
message.

There  was  a  barn  and  some  cottages  and  trees  on  the  common.
Carriage  wrong. Village  called  Woodcuts.


Experiment  VI.

(a)  Postcard  from  Miss  Ramsden  to  Miss  Statkowski.

Monday,  Sept.  14.  Rushmore.
[Postmark: Salisbury.  Sp.15.08.  10  p.m.]
I  spent  the  afternoon  at  the  Museum  looking  at  skeletons  and
the  skulls  of  ancient  Romans  dug  up  near  here.

Also  some  carved  figures  and  a  great  deal  of  pottery.  I  am
trying  to  make  you  see  a  skull.

I  return  home  to-morrow  15th. (Posted  Sept.  15th.)

H.  R,

(b)  Postcard  from  Miss  Statkowski  to  Miss  Ramsden.

Monday,  Sept.  14th. Westerham,  Kent.
[Postmark  :  Westerham,  Kent. Sp.14.08. 8  p.m.]
A  white  flower,  like  a  white  narcissus  or  an  anemone. A  glass
house — a  green  house  with  rows  of  flower  pots  without  flowers.
Beds  of  cyclamen  and  violets,  the  leaves  only. A  lot  of  empty
flower  pots.

The  sea  very  blue,  dark  blue.  A  desolate,  dry,  hilly  shore.
Negroes  or  some  sort  of  savages  moving  about  the  shore,  very
black,  half  dressed.  One  of  them  has  a  big  ring  in  his  ear,  and
he  is  eating  something  with  gusto. Tamara  Statkowski.

(c)  Subsequent  Note  by  Miss  Ramsden.

There  were  some  flower  beds  in  front  of  the  museum.  Room
8  has  glass  windows  the  whole  way  along  the  side,  which  give
it  the  appearance  of  a  green-house,  at  first  I  thought  it  was  one.
In  one  of  the  rooms  there  is  a  statue  of  an  Egyptian,  also  a  mummy.
There  are  relics  from  all  parts  of  the  world,  the  object  being  to
compare  the  primitive  races  of  all  countries  with  the  ancient
Britons  and  Romans.  Hermione  Ramsden.


LXIX.]


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


311


Experiments  VII.  and  VIII.
September  15  and  17. Failures. Details  not  recorded.


Experiment  IX.

(a)  Miss  Ramsden  to  Miss  Statkowski.

Friday,  Sept,  18th.

Boecklin's  picture  called  "  The  Isle  of  the  Dead."

P.S. — If  this  method  of  transferring  ideas  from  pictures  and
books  does  not  succeed,  we  had  better  stop  for  the  present,  as  I
am  not  seeing  any  new  places,  and  up  till  now,  it  is  only  when  I
have  been  vividly  impressed  myself  that  I  have  succeeded  in  send-
ing the  thought  of  it  to  you.

The  picture,  as  subsecpiently  described  by  Miss  Ramsden,
is  that  of  an  island  near  Corfu,  called  by  Boecklin  "  The
Isle  of  the  Dead."  His  picture  is  partly  fantastic  ;  he  has
imagined  dark  entrances  to  tombs  in  the  rock.  A  boat
bears  a  coffin  through  the  narrow  gateway,  accompanied  by  a
Greek  mourner  draped  in  white.

(b)  Miss  Statkowski  to  Miss  Ramsden.

Friday,  18th,  Westerham,  Kent.
A  railway  train  disappearing  in  a  tunnel.  At  the  mouth  of
the  tunnel  a  large  electric  light  just  blazing  up  in  the  dusk.  The
round  light  changes  into  the  white  face  of  a  clock  which  marks
10  past  10  o'clock.  Again  a  railway  line — "  seulement  les  railles  "
— on  a  hill  top,  some  white  houses  down  below.  The  mouth  of  a
grotto,  or  a  cavern  with  a  faint  light  inside.  Capri's  blue  grotto
came  into  my  mind,  but  not  the  image  of  it.  Again  railway  lines
— and  always  railway  lines.  A  white  vase  with  maiden  hair
ferns  planted  in  it.  A  woman  in  a  garden  or  park  in  a  grey  tweed
skirt  playing  diavolo  with  a  little  child,  a  boy,  I  think.  A  white
horse,  with  a  man  on  it,  looks  like  a  servant.  Woods,  woods,
and  again  railway  passing  through.

T.  S.


312


Hermione  Ramsden.


[part


Experiment  X.

(a)  Postcard  from  Miss  Ramsden  to  Miss  Statlcowshi.

Bulstrode,  Monday,  Sept.  21st. 11.30  a.m.
[Postmark  :  Gerrard's  Cross,  Sp.  21.08.  3.5  p.m.]

Picture  of  a  wild  buffalo  which  has  just  been  shot  with  an  arrow
by  a  red  Indian,  riding  a  white  horse.  The  Buffalo  is  the  chief
thing.

H  R.

P.S—  Tuesday  and  Wednesday  12.30  ;  on  Wed.  I  shall  be
seeing  something  interesting  at  that  time.

Plate  VI.  is  a  reproduction  of  the  picture  at  which  Miss
Ramsden  was  looking.  The  two  deer,  one  with  large
antlers,  seen  against  the  water,  are  more  conspicuous  in  the
original.

(b)  Postcard  from  Miss  Statlcowshi  to  Miss  Ramsden.

Queen's  Square,  London,  Monday.
[Postmark: London,  W.C.  Sep.  21.08.  10  p.m.]

A  bull  in  a  field, — a  frightful  one.  Horns — of  deer  and  other
animals.  Wall  covered  with  all  sorts  of  horns,  like  in  some  sport-
ing hunting  place.

T.  S.

Subsequent  Note  by  Miss  Statkowshi.

Queen  Square  Club,  9  Queen  Square,  London,  W.C.
Sept.  21,  1908.

I  forgot  to  post  my  p.c.  mentioning  the  bull  and  the  deer's  horns,
and  had  it  with  me  lying  on  the  table,  whilst  I  was  playing  cards.
My  three  partners  saw  it  before  I  got  Miss  Ramsden's  p.c.  about
the  buffalo,  and  kindly  give  testimony  to  it.

(Signed) L.  Matilda  Fagan.

H.  R.  Ratallack-Moloney.
P.  Ashford  Eve.


Lxix.j Experiments  in  Thought-Transfer  ewe.


313


Experiment  XI.


(a)  Postcard  from  Miss  Ramsden  to  Miss  Statkowski.

Bulstrode,  Gerrard's  Cross,  Bucks.  Wednesday,  Dec.  9th,  1908  ;
12  o'clock.

[Postmark  :  Gerrard's  Cross,  De.  9.  08.  7.30  p.m.]
"  June  in  Tyrol  "  by  MacWhirter. A  coloured  print  of  the

picture  in  the  Tate  Gallery.

Pointed  blue  mountains  with  patches  of  white  snow. A  white

church  with  a  spire.

The  entire  foreground  is  a  mass  of  blue  and  white  flowers  :

bluebells  and  daisies. A  woman  in  a  blue  apron  and  a  white

blouse  is  gathering  flowers.

(6)  Postcard  from  Miss  Statkowski  to  Miss  Ramsden.

Wednesday,  Dec.  9,  1908. 12  o'clock.
[Postmark  :  London,  W.C.  Dec.  9.  08.  2.15  p.m.]

First  a  black  umbrella  and  pair  of  goloshes.

Then  a  wooden  cross  like  this  near  a  road. A  white  building


at  the  back  like  a  chapel  with  a  white  bell  tower,  like  one  sees
in  Tyrol.  Changed  into  a  large  white  building  with  one  beauti-
fully carved  Gothic  window.


(c)  Subsequent  Note  by  Miss  Ramsden.

I  had  just  bought  a  large  coloured  print  of  this  picture  and  was
very  pleased  with  it.  I  did  not  know  that  Miss  Statkowski  had
ever  been  in  Tyrol  ;  but  the  wooden  cross,  or  wayside  shrine,  which
she  describes  is  closely  connected  with  the  Tyrol  in  my  mind,  as
there  are  many  of  them  at  Berchtesgaden  where  I  have  been.


T.  S.


H.  R.


314


Hermione  Ramsden.


[part


Experiment  XII.
Dec.  12,  1908. A  failure. Details  not  recorded.


In  July  and  August,  1911,  Miss  Ramsden  tried  a  number
of  experiments  with  two  other  ladies,  the  Misses  Tipping.
In  eleven  cases,  Miss  K.  Tipping  was  agent  and  Miss  Ramsden
(then  at  Ardverikie,  Kingussie,  N.B.),  percipient.  The  amount
of  success  in  most  of  these  seems  hardly  beyond  what  might
have  been  obtained  by  chance,  except  in  the  last  experiment,
the  record  of  which  is  as  follows  :

(a)  From  Miss  K.  Tipping  to  Miss  Ramsden.

29  Alexander  Road,  Lowestoft,  July  30,  1911.

[Postmark  : Lowestoft,  Jy.  30.  11.  7.45.  p.m.]
Yesterday,  29th, 12  mid-day. A  lighthouse,  which  had  an
arrow  for  a  weather-vane  ; upper  part  of  tower  painted  white,
lower  part  black. Very  brilliant  day. There  was  a  staircase
(outside)  leading  to  it  (the  tower).
4  o'clock. A  turquoise  ring.
7  o'clock. Myself  sewing  something  white.

I  really  intended  sending  gun-boats,  but  they  had  all  dis-
appeared.

K.  T.

(6)  From  Miss  Ramsden  to  Miss  Tip-ping.

Ardverikie,  Saturday,  July  29th,  1911.
[Postmark  :  Kingussie,  Jy.  31.  11. 12.45  p.m.]
Cannot  post  this  till  Monday  morning.

I  only  got  your  letter  at  5  p.m.  to-day.  I  did  not  feel  your
message  at  any  time  during  the  day  ;  but  now,  at  11.30  p.m.,  I
get  these  impressions  of  your  surroundings.

A  thing  like  the  Eiffel  Tower.  A  lift  from  the  town  to  the  beach
(I  have  never  been  to  Lowestoft).

An  immense  number  of  ships,  sailing  ships  without  sails.  One
has  a  red  flag.  There  are  also  smaller  boats.  It  looks  like
manoeuvering  and  yet  they  are  not  warships.  Shooting  or  fire-
works.


lxix.] Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  315

Large  numbers  of  men  (no  women)  on  the  sands,  which  are  very
extensive.  They  look  like  soldiers  or  sailors  practising.  There
are  tents  on  the  sands  ;  it  might  be  the  Boys'  Brigade  ?  But
they  look  grown-up.  I  am  puzzled  as  to  what  it  can  be.  Very
vivid  impression.

H.  R.

(c)  From  Miss  K.  Tipping  to  Miss  Ramsden.

[Postmark  : Lowestoft,  Au.  1.  11. 7.45  p.m.]

I  wanted  to  send  a  warship  and  submarines  which  I  saw  Friday
night  ;  on  going  to  the  spot  Saturday,  they  were  gone.  There
were  six  submarines,  just  the  conning  tower  showing,  one  cruiser
and  another  vessel  (I  don't  know  the  technical  name).  Several
men  were  looking  at  them  and  one  kept  talking  about  the  target  ;
probably  that  accounts  for  the  shooting.  They  were  not  on  the
sands,  which  are  very  extensive,  or  rather  reclaimed  sands.  There
are  tents  there,  which  I  believe  are  Boy  Scouts',  though  I  am  not
sure.  In  the  morning  I  saw  immense  numbers  of  sailing  ships
without  sails  and  smaller  boats.

K.  T.

Later  some  experiments  were  tried  with  Miss  Ramsden
as  agent  and  Miss  L.  Tipping  as  percipient.  The  most
successful  of  these  was  recorded  as  follows  :

(a)  Miss  Ramsden  to  Miss  L.  Tipping.

Tuesday,  August  22nd,  1911.
[Postmark  :  Kingussie,  Au.  23.  11.  12.45. p.m.]
We  motored  to  Fortwilliam  in  the  afternoon  to  the  Lochaber
Games,1  but  arrived  too  late,  we  only  saw  some  sailors  dancing
the  hornpipe,  pipers  playing  bag-pipes,  Irishmen  in  green  coats
and  scarlet  waistcoats  dancing  an  Irish  jig.  (This  I  particularly
wanted  you  to  see.)  Men  running  races  round  the  course  and  two
men  ran  in  sacks  afterwards.  Crowds  of  people  sitting  on  the
ground  and  on  reserved  seats.  A  tent  in  which  we  had  tea.  A
lovely  day,  very  hot  sun.

1  Miss  Ramsden  sends  us  an  extract  from  her  diary  of  the  same
date  (August  22),  in  which  she  writes  that  she  "  went  to  the  Lochaber  Games
at  Fortwilliam,  starting  at  20  min.  to  2,  but  got  there,  alas  !  too  late  to  see
the  Sword  Dance,  but  saw  an  Irish  jig  and  the  Hornpipes."


316


Hermione  Ramsden .


[part


(b)  Miss  L.  Tipping  to  Miss  Ramsden.

29  Alexander  Road,  Lowestoft. August  22nd,  1911.
[Postmarks  of  letter:  Lowestoft,  Au.  22.11.  8.15  p.m.  ;
Kingussie,  Au.  24.  11. 6  a.m.]

6  o'clock  till  7  o'clock.

I  see  you  very  plainly,  smiling  and  speaking  to  some  one.  I
get  a  large  number  of  pines  growing  on  rising  ground.  I
feel  chilly,  as  if  the  air  was  cold  and  damp  ;  it  may  be  raining,
I  rather  think  it  is.  A  large  space  of  grass  comes  now,  a  house,
—grey  stone — square  in  shape.  I  get  a  strong  feeling  of  people
moving  ;  some  are  in  kilts,  green  plaids,  and  you  are  looking  on
at  a  scene.  It  makes  me  think  of  a  stage  scene, — people  in  kilts
twirling  about,  as  if  at  play,  or  dancing  ;  great  rapidity  of  motion  ;
they  have  staves  or  swords, — the  latter,  I  believe, — and  I  feel
I  must  dance  !  I  see  swords  or  staves  on  the  ground,  as  if  they
were  hopping  over  them  ;  it  seems  only  men  in  kilts  going  in  for
this  rapid  motion.  I  can't  help  feeling  rain,  or  showers  are
spoiling  things.  Are  these  men  I  see  soldiers,  because  I  can't
see  them  without  swords  [rough  drawing  of  a  sword]  like  I  have
drawn  ?  I  think  it  must  be  some  kind  of  performance  out  of
doors,  and  you  are  looking  on. I  see  many  spectators.

Now  I'm  seeing  people  in  old-world  dress  performing  in  the  open  ;
is  it  a  pageant  you  are  looking  at  ?  I  get  people  in  varied  colours
forming  a  group  of  some  kind.

The  strongest  feeling  I  get  is  my  first,  viz.  :  the  men  in  kilts
with  swords,  or  staves.  The  last  impression  is  much  fainter,  but
I'm  putting  down  what  I  feel.

L.  Tipping.

(c)  Miss  Ramsden  to  Miss  Tipping.

Ardverikie,  Kingussie,  N.B. August  24th,  [1911].

It  was  a  great  success  !  But  the  funny  thing  is  that  what
happened  to  you  is  exactly  what  happened  to  your  sister  and  me
with  the  warships.  I  got  the  idea  of  warships  manoeuvering,
though  they  were  not  there.

I  arrived  late  at  the  Lochaber  Games  and  missed  all  the  High-
land dances,  and  was  very  disappointed,  because  I  wanted  the
children  to  see  the  Sivord  Dance,  which  I  had  been  talking
about.


lxix.] Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  317


But  some  of  the  details  are  curiously  wrong.  For  instance,
there  were  no  pines,1  but  crowds  of  people  sitting  on  rising  ground.
It  was  very  hot,  the  sun  scorched  my  back  till  I  was  afraid  that
my  new  mauve  cloth  dress  would  fade  !  Yet  it  was  too  scorch-
ing to  take  off  my  jacket.  It  did  not  rain  at  all,  but  motoring
home  between  6  and  7  it  was  decidedly  chilly.  We  live  high  up
in  a  different  climate  to  Fortwilliam,  which  is  by  the  sea  on  the
west  coast,  and  roasting  hot.

A  large  space  of  grass — right  ;  and  a  square  grey  stone  villa
overlooking  the  course  ;  I  said  :  "  What  a  good  view  those  people
have  !  "  There  was  a  square  platform  in  the  middle  of  the  field
on  which  two  pipers  stood,  all  Camerons  and  Macphersons,  kilts
and  plaids  red,  and  some  purple,  but  there  may  have  been  a  green
one  ;  I  forget.  But  the  kilts  did  not  dance,  that  part  we  missed.
No  soldiers,  but  sailors.

The  "  old-world  dress  "  is  very  good  for  the  Irishmen  who
danced  the  jig  ;  they  had  curious  old  pointed  coat  tails,  scarlet
waistcoats,  green  velvet  coats  and  knickers  ;  at  one  moment
there  was  a  group  of  them  and  the  pipers  in  kilts — Scotland  and
Ireland — and  every  one  remarked  on  how  picturesque  they
looked

The  men  dancing  the  jig  had  "  staves," — I  believe  they  call
them  "  shillelaghs," — I  never  saw  any  Irish  jigs  before.  The
staves  were  like  this  [rough  drawing]  about  2  feet  long,  and  they
kept  thumping  them  down  on  the  platform  and  crj'ing  :  "  Hooch  "  !

Hermione  Ramsden.

'■Note  by  Miss  Ramsden,  1914. — There  are  pines  above  where  the  people
were  sitting.  I  have  been  several  times  since  this  to  Fortwilliam,  and  have
taken  special  note.


318


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


VI.

TO  CLEAR  THE  AIR.


By  the  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayeield.

He  is  a  marvellous  good  neighbour,  faith,  and  a
very  good  bowler ;  but,  for  Alisander, — alas,  you  see
how  'tis, — a  little  o'erparted.

Loves  Labour's  Lost.


In  the  paper  entitled  Some  recent  Scripts  affording  evidence  of
Personal  Survival,  printed  above,  pp.  221  et  seq.,  Mr.  Gerald
Balfour  has  taken  occasion  to  tabulate  the  alternative  con-
clusions open  to  us  to  adopt  in  connexion  with  these  scripts.
He  states  them  as  follows  :

"  Thus  the  really  active  and  planning  intelligence  may
have  been  :

(1)  Mrs.  Willett's  subconscious  self,  drawing  its  material

from  some  other  embodied  consciousness  ;

(2)  Mrs.  Willett's  subconscious  self,  drawing  its  material

from  the  spiritual  world  ;

(3)  The  mind  of  some  other  living  person  acting  on  the

mind  of  the  automatist  ;

(4)  Some  discarnate  spirit  using  the  automatist  as  a

medium  of  communication."

The  last  is  the  conclusion  to  which  Mr.  Balfour  has  himself
been  led,  and  my  own  concurrence  has  already  been  expressed
in  the  Note  appended  to  his  paper.

Since  writing  that  note  it  has  occurred  to  me  that  it  may
be  not  out  of  place,  while  Mr.  Balfour's  paper  is  fresh  in  our
minds,  to  examine  the  claims  of  the  first  three  alternatives.
The  inquiry  may  help  us  to  clarify  our  ideas  and  to  estimate
with  some  precision  the  assumptions  which,  in  the  present


LXIX.]


To  Clear  the  Air.


319


state  of  our  knowledge,  it  would  be  necessary  to  make
before  any  one  of  the  three  could  be  accepted  as  a  probable
explanation  of  the  phenomena  which  the  scripts  present.1
This,  and  this  only,  is  the  purpose  of  the  present  paper,  which,
as  will  sufficiently  appear,  is  in  no  way  intended  to  be  a
general  review  of  the  whole  question  of  spirit  communica-
tion,— an  undertaking  that  would  require  an  essay,  if  not
a  volume.  My  sole  object  is  to  show  that,  while  it  is  easy
and  not  unnatural  to  imagine  the  phenomena  to  be  some-
how explicable  by  telepathy  between  embodied  minds,  it  is
by  no  means  so  easy  to  work  out  in  detail  a  coherent  theory
which  would  lend  reasonable  support  to  the  supposition.

I  take  first  the  second  alternative,  which  can  be  briefly
dismissed.  It  offers  two  choices  :  Mrs.  Willett's  subconscious
self,  as  the  active  and  planning  intelligence,  may  have  drawn
its  supernormally  acquired  knowledge  either  from  (a)  a  dis-
embodied spirit,  or  (b)  from  memories  stored  in  the  spirit
world  independently  of  any  surviving  personality.  The
former  supposition  (a),  which  postulates  the  survival  of
human  personality,  need  not  be  discussed  at  length.  It  pre-
sents practically  the  same  difficulties  as  we  shall  find  con-
fronting us  when  we  come  to  examine  alternative  (1).  If,
as  will  appear,  it  is  unlikely  that  one  incarnate  mind  can
extract  information  from  another  without  that  other's  con-
currence and  assistance, — can  in  fact  read  the  other  mind  as
one  reads  a  book, — there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  it  would
fare  better  in  an  endeavour  to  read  the  thoughts  of  a  dis-
carnate  spirit.  At  any  rate,  the  argument  from  analogy  is
all  we  have  to  go  upon  at  present,  and  the  point  can  well
be  deferred  until  the  fact  of  communication  between  the
living  and  the  dead  is  so  firmly  established  that  the  question,
which  of  the  two  is  the  active  factor,  is  the  only  one  at  issue.
With  regard  to  the  second  supposition  (b),  so  far  as  I  am
aware,  the  notion  of  a  "  spiritual  reservoir  of  pooled  memories,"
though  originated  by  one  of  the  most  brilliant  of  psychologists,
is  a  mere  imagination  unsupported  by  any  substantial  evidence.
Before  leaving  it,  however,  we  may  note  that  the  evolving  of
this  strange  and  really  fantastic  suggestion  shows  of  itself
how  little  satisfied  William  James  was  that  telepathy  between

1  The  scripts  will  be  found  on  pp.  222  ff .  supra.
X


320


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


the  living  would  explain  even  the  phenomena  which  had  come
to  light  in  his  day.

Let  us  consider  the  alternatives  numbered  (1)  and  (3).

What  are  the  assumptions  involved  in  (1) — that  "  the
really  active  and  planning  intelligence  may  have  been  Mrs.
Willett's  subconscious  self,  drawing  its  material  from  some
other  embodied  consciousness "  %  I  imagine  them  some-
what as  follows.  During  the  fortnight  or  so  immediately
preceding  the  production  of  the  first  script  Mrs.  Willett's
thoughts  had  been,  as  we  know,  specially  attracted  to  Dr.
Verrall  by  the  news  of  his  death,  which  occurred  on  June  18,
1912.  Stimulated  by  her  conscious  thoughts,  her  subliminal,
we  conjecture,  enters  upon  a  series  of  activities  which,  though
in  effect  productive  of  an  imposture,  may  not  have  been
fraudulent  in  intention.  Possibly  the  fraud  was  deliberate,
as  I  incline  to  think  it  was  in  the  case  of  M.  Til  quoted  in
Proceedings,  Vol.  XXV.,  p.  470  ;  but  in  Mrs.  Willett's  case,
being  free  to  assume  what  I  please,  I  prefer  another  sup-
position. We  will  suppose  that  her  subliminal  (hence-
forth for  convenience  referred  to  as  '  Z.')  dreams  that
Verrall's  spirit  wishes  to  make  a  communication  through
her,  and  as  happens  in  dreams,  comes  to  identify  itself,  the
dreamer,  with  him.  Thus  the  dreamed  wish  has  now  become
Z.'s  own  wish,  and  the  train  is  laid  for  a  pseudo-communica-
tion.

The  next  step  is  to  find  suitable  material.  Apparently
Mrs.  Willett  did  not  herself  possess  any,  for  we  have  her
own  word  for  it  that  she  had  no  conscious  knowledge  what-
ever of  that  which  was  actually  used — Verrall's  essay  entitled
The  Baptism  of  Statins.  The  subject-matter  of  the  purposed
communication  must  therefore  be  borrowed  from  the  mind
of  some  other  living  person,  probably  (according  to  our
present  knowledge)  that  of  one  of  the  small  number  of  "  sensi-
tives "  with  whom  she  was  in  touch.  Since,  however,  only
two  of  these,  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Miss  Verrall,  had  read  the
essay  in  question,  it  must  have  been  in  the  mind  of  one  of
these  two  ladies  that  Z.  found  the  thing  it  wanted.

But  Jioiv  did  Z.  find  it  ?  Shall  we  say,  by  rummaging,
without  invitation  given  or  leave  asked,  among  the  millions
and  millions  of  memories  stored  in  that  mind  (whose  sub-


LXIX.]


To  Clear  the  Air.


321


liminal  consciousness  we  will,  for  convenience  of  reference,
designate  '  V.'),  and  selecting  unaided  the  one  that  appeared
likely  to  suit  ?  And  if  we  say  this,  have  we  at  present  any
warrant  for  believing  that  a  subliminal  has  the  power  thus  to
ransack  another  mind  and  abstract  its  latent  thoughts,  that
other  lending  no  assistance,  but  remaining  passive  and  inert  ?

Our  published  records  of  experimental  telepathy  show  that
when  a  thought  has  passed  from  one  mind  to  another,  the
former  has  always  intended  to  effect  the  particular  transfer-
ence, or,  as  in  some  of  the  experiments  conducted  by  Miss
Ramsden  and  Miss  Miles,  has  had  the  imparted  thought
consciously  present  to  it  at  or  about  the  time  when  the  transfer
was  effected.  This  fact  has  not  unnaturally  led  us  to  assume
that  in  all  cases  of  telepathy  the  person  whose  thought  is
transferred  is  the  active  factor  in  the  actual  process  of  trans-
ference, and  for  reasons  given  below  I  believe  we  are  right.
On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  admitted  that  in  spontaneous
telepathy  there  is  no  conscious  intention  to  convey  the  par-
ticular impression  which  the  percipient  receives.  Spontaneous
cases,  therefore,  and  indeed  the  majority  of  experimental
cases,  if  they  are  regarded  alone  and  other  considerations
are  neglected,  might  seem  to  offer  no  obstacle  to  the  con-
trary supposition, — that  in  ordinary  telepathy,  certain  neces-
sary conditions  being  favourable,  the  actively  operating
intelligence  may  be  that  of  the  percipient.

The  question  is  further  complicated  by  the  fact  that  we  do
not  know  whether  in  telepathy  between  the  living  it  is  only
the  subliminal  consciousnesses  that  come  into  touch  with  each
other,  or  whether  the  essential  immaterial  intelligences  of  the
two  who  are  concerned  somehow  meet.  In  a  case  of  com-
munication from  the  spirit  world  I  incline  to  take  the  latter
view  ;  and  I  should  suppose  that  there  is  a  more  intimate
fusion  of  mind  with  mind  than  could  be  effected  by  anything
that  could  be  called  conversation  : —

And  all  at  once  it  seem'd  at  last
His  living  soul  was  flash 'd  on  mine.

And  mine  with  his  was  wound,  and  whirl'd
About  empyreal  heights  of  thought,
And  came  on  that  which  is.  .  .  .


322


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[PAET


Even  so,  there  must,  I  should  imagine,  be  a  willingness  on
both  sides  and  co-operation.  But  whatever  may  be  the
method  by  which  a  spirit  communicates  its  thoughts  to  an
embodied  mind,  the  existing  evidence,  in  my  judgement,
points  to  the  conclusion  that  telepathy  between  the  living
does  not  need  for  its  accomplishment  more  than  the  activity
of  the  subliminal  consciousness,  and  upon  that  basis  this
paper  is  written.

To  return  to  the  point  which  immediately  concerns  us —
which  of  the  two  persons  concerned  is  the  active  factor  in
ordinary  telepathy — notwithstanding  the  admission  made
above,  all  the  probabilities  seem  to  me  to  point  away  from
the  supposition  that  thoughts  could  be  literally  stolen.  I
base  this  conclusion  on  several  concurrent  considerations.
Firstly,  on  the  broad  ground  that,  thought  being  essentially
an  activity,  one  would  expect  it  to  pass  to  another  mind
by  its  own  energy  ;  it  seems  unnatural  to  suppose  that  it
could  be  read  like  an  inanimate  piece  of  print.  Secondly,
in  cases  of  spontaneous  telepathy  such  as  those  in  which
an  apparition  of  the  dying  is  seen,  and  especially  when  the
hallucination  is  experienced  by  more  than  one  person,  it
seems  perverse  to  seek  the  prime  cause  elsewhere  than  in
the  activity  of  the  dying  person's  mind.  And  if  this  is  so,
analogy  suggests  that  in  other  cases  also  of  spontaneous
telepathy, — as,  for  instance,  when  Mrs.  Holland's  script  made
reference  to  some  furs  recently  purchased  by  Miss  Verrall,
the  ostensible  agent  (here  Mrs.  Verrall  or  Miss  Verrall)  is
really  the  active  factor  in  the  transference.  Thirdly,  while
all  experimental  telepathy  obviously  suggests  this  view  of
its  own  modus  operandi,  I  do  not  see  how  we  can  resist  the
evidence  afforded  by  one  class  of  experiments  in  particular  ;
I  mean  those  in  which  pain  is  suppressed  or  prevented  by
suggestion  without  the  induction  of  trance.  (Whether  there
is  or  is  not  in  such  cases  some  slight  degree  of  hypnosis,  is
here  immaterial.)  In  a  valuable  paper  on  experiments  of
this  kind,  published  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XII.,  pp.  21  ff.,  Mr.
C.  M.  Barrows  writes  (p.  25),  "  Mine  is  a  silent  suggestion.
I  use  neither  voice  nor  other  means  to  convey  its  import  to
the  patient  through  sensory  adits.  I  find  it  possible  to  affect
with  these  unvoiced  suggestions  one  who  does  not  know  my


LXIX.]


To  Clear  the  Air.


323


language,  infants  who  have  learned  no  language,  and  brute
creatures.  .  .  .  More  than  this  :  I  am  not  conscious  of
forming  any  statement  of  the  message,  even  in  thought,  when
I  make  the  suggestion."  Surely  there  is  no  room  for  doubting
that  Mr.  Barrows'  mind  was  the  active  factor  in  the  numerous
successful  experiments  which  he  made, — that  there  was  no
reading  of  his  thoughts  by  the  patient.  If  doubt  were  possible
in  some  instances,  the  mention  of  infants,  at  any  rate,  is  con-
clusive. I  may  add  that  the  last  quoted  sentence  has  some
bearing  on  what  I  have  said  a  few  lines  above  about  the  prob-
able activity  of  the  subliminal  in  cases  of  spontaneous  tele-
pathy. In  any  case,  it  is  sufficient  for  my  present  argument
to  point  out  that  the  supposition  that  Z.  might  be  able  to
read  V.'s  thoughts  unassisted,  rests  at  present  upon  no
foundation,  while  the  contrary  view  has  much  to  be  said
for  it.

We  fare  no  better  with  the  alternative  supposition,  that
Z.  does  not  play  the  thief,  but  is  assisted  by  the  co-operation
of  V.,  who  obediently  selects  and  gives  over  the  thing  de-
manded. This  would  seem  to  entail  a  little  conversation
between  the  two.  If  the  commodity  which  is  to  change  hands
cannot  be  stolen,  it  must  be  asked  for.  But  if  Z.  can  '  speak  '
and  V.  can  '  hear,'  we  must  in  fairness  attribute  the  power
of  speech  to  V.  and  that  of  hearing  to  Z.  ;  and  that  in  that
case  V.  would  ask  some  questions,  we  cannot  doubt.

We  ask  ourselves  at  once,  can  subliminals  converse  ?  "It
mayn't  be  much  to  do,  your  Majesty,  but  can  they  do  it  ?  "
The  subliminal  is  certainly  "  a  very  good  bowler,"  and  may
be  counted  on  to  get  one  '  wood  '  in  even  at  long  bowls  ;
"  but  for  Alisander — alas,  you  see  how  'tis," — at  present  we
have  no  evidence  of  its  ability  to  take  part  in  dialogue.  Never-
theless, for  the  sake  of  argument,  let  us  assume  that  it  possesses
this  indispensable  faculty.  We  have  next  to  ask,  in  what
character  does  Z.  open  the  negotiations  ?  As  the  spirit  it
now  believes  itself  to  be,  and  expecting  to  be  accepted  as
such  by  V.  ?  Then,  I  suppose,  something  like  this  would
be  said  :  "I  want  to  bring  off  an  evidential  communication
through  Mrs.  Willett,  but  can  think  of  nothing  to  say.  Do
suggest  something."  The  incredible  confession  would,  I  fancy,
condemn  our  masquerading  Z.  out  of  its  own  mouth.  The


324


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[PART


first  thought  of  V.  would  be  (with  a  twist  of  Hamlet's  meaning),

Thou  comest  in  such  a  questionable  shape,

and  there  would  be,  alas,  no  answer  !

Shall  we  say,  then,  that,  by  a  shifting  of  the  dream-centre,
Z.  has  for  the  moment  recovered  its  identity  and  speaks  in
propria  persona,  and  that  the  colloquy  proceeds  thus  :  "I
want  a  little  material  to  make  up  into  a  pseudo-spirit-com-
munication. Could  you  let  me  have  something  that  would
do  ?  "— "  Certainly  ;  what  do  you  think  of  this  ?  "  Or
instead  of  a  ready  acquiescence,  did  the  tempted  subliminal
show  reluctance  and  need  persuasion,  and  when  persuaded
still  perhaps  express  a  natural  misgiving  as  to  success  ?

Macbeth.  But  if  we  fail  ?

Lady  Macbeth.  We  fail !

But  screw  your  courage  to  the  sticking  point,

And  we'll  not  fail.

However  the  interview  may  have  proceeded,  neither  is  self-
deceived  ;  the  two  are  engaged  in  planning  a  most  nefarious
conspiracy,  and  both  of  them  know  it.  I  will  not  deny  that
even  these  two  subliminals  might  be  morally  capable  of  such
an  imposture,  for  I  do  not  forget  the  shifts  and  evasions  of
Mrs.  Newnham's,  but  it  will  be  time  enough  to  go  into  that
when  we  have  proof  that  subliminals  are  able  to  exchange
their  thoughts  in  conversation  at  all.  Until  the  proof  is
forthcoming  the  assumption  of  collusion  seems  hardly  more
attractive  than  that  of  robbery,  and  we  may  hesitate  to
choose  between  them.  However,  let  us  not  be  daunted.
If  choice  is  difficult,  let  us  refuse  to  choose,  but  assume  that
somehow  or  other  Z.  could  get  from  V.  the  thing  it  requires.

We  have  now  to  ask,  what  it  is  that  Z.  gets.  Clearly  one
of  two  things  :  either  (a)  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  essay,
or  (6)  the  ready-made  confection  that  had  perhaps  only  been
waiting,  by  the  happiest  of  coincidences,  for  some  one  to
take  and  make  use  of  it — the  actual  riddle,  framed  upon
the  essay,  which  is  propounded  in  the  script.1

Our  bold  leap  has  brought  us  to  the  very  heart  of  the

1  See  p.  222  supra.


LXIX.]


To  Clear  the  Air.


325


matter  ;  let  us  consider  the  probabilities  severally  attaching
to  these  two  alternatives.

If  (a),  the  whole  essay,  was  the  treasure  trove,  how  did
Z.  apprehend  it  ?  As  a  complete  whole, — at  one  gulp,  as
it  were,  after  the  manner  of  a  serpent  swallowing  an  egg  ?
Before  attempting  to  answer  the  question  we  must  first  ask
whether  it  is  probable  that  the  essay  subsists  in  V.  as  an
agglomerated,  individualized  whole,  if  I  may  so  put  it.  Let
us  suppose  that  in  the  mind  itself,  the  centre  of  our  intelli-
gence, the  whole  essay  may  so  subsist  as  an  extremely  elaborate
complex  concept  ;  then  another  mind  might,  we  may  equally
suppose,  apprehend  such  a  whole  by  one  comprehensive  act.
I  do  not  know  how  far  the  first  of  these  suppositions  rests
on  any  psychological  probability,  but  the  two  taken  together
are  useless  for  our  present  purpose,  unless  we  identify  the
subliminal  consciousness  with  the  mind  itself.  But  as  I
understand  our  terminology  and  the  psychological  view  which
it  implies,  the  mind  is  one  thing  and  the  mind's  consciousness
(subliminal  or  supraliminal),  although  inseparable  from  it,
is  another  ;  and  upon  our  present  evidence  at  any  rate,  as
I  have  already  said,  we  are  not  warranted  in  believing  that
in  a  case  of  ordinary  telepathy  either  of  the  two  persons  con-
cerned brings  into  direct  and  immediate  operation  any  more
intimate  part  of  his  personality  than  the  subliminal  con-
sciousness. We  must  therefore  dismiss  these  suppositions,
and  seek  further  for  an  answer.

What  is  one's  experience  in  ordinary  acts  of  recollection  ?
It  is  true  that  when  I  myself  think  of  the  essay,  I  seem  in  a
way  to  recall  it  as  a  whole,  but  do  I  really  ?  Do  I  not  rather
recollect  first  one  of  the  ideas  of  which  it  is  composed,  and
then  successively,  though  with  great  rapidity,  a  certain  number
of  others,  one  idea  following  on  another  by  some  mysterious
association  1  Consciousness,  whether  supraliminal  or  sub-
liminal, appears  to  be  no  more  than  a  manifestation  of  the
mind's  activity ;  and  the  brain — the  instrument  both  of
conscious  and  subliminal  thought,  as  hypnotic  experiments
show — would  appear  to  be  so  constituted  that  it  can  only
allow  ideas  to  issue  in  a  series  of  flashes,  so  to  speak.  At
any  rate  one  thing  is  certain, — in  whatever  form  the  essay
subsists  in  my  mind  itself,  the  ideas  of  which  it  is  composed


326


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


are  never  all  present  to  my  external  consciousness  at  one
and  the  same  moment.  And  if  ever  I  recall  the  sum  and
substance  of  the  essay  as  a  whole  and  by  one  act,  am  I
not  in  reality  recalling  a  new  and  complex  concept  formed
in  my  mind  upon  reading  the  essay, — a  complex  peculiarly
my  own  and  differing  from  another  man's,  and  one  which,
so  far  from  being  identical  with  the  essay,  lacks  most  of  its
details  ?  I  conclude,  therefore,  since  the  essay  never  emerges
as  a  complete  whole,  nor  any  considerable  part  of  it  as  written,
that  it  is  not  present  as  a  whole  in  the  subliminal  conscious-
ness, and  that  accordingly  Z.  could  not  apprehend  it  from
V.  in  this  form.

Let  us  proceed  on  another  tack,  and  consider  in  what  form
we  can  with  greatest  probability  suppose  the  memories  of
the  essay  to  be  immanent  in  the  mind  itself  of  whose  activity
the  subliminal  consciousness  V.  is  merely  the  expression.
And  since  the  argument  will  not  be  affected  thereby,  we  will
for  the  moment  grant  Z.  liberty  of  access  even  to  this  very
centre  of  intelligence.

As  I  am  informed,  if  I  understand  my  informant  aright,
the  best  supported  view  among  psychologists  is  that  memories
are  retained  as  a  series  of  mutually  interpenetrating  concepts.
Thus  the  memories  of  an  essay  would  subsist  in  the  mind  as  a
ivhole  and  not  a.  whole.  The  whole  essay  is  there  (assuming
all  its  concepts  to  be  retained),  but  not  as  an  isolated  body
of  memories  ;  for  the  recovery  of  it  as  a  logical  whole  there
must  be  made  a  selective  combination  of  all  the  concepts
that  belong  to  it,  with  rejection  of  all  others.  If  this  is  so,
it  seems  natural  and  reasonable  to  suppose  that  it  is  as  a  series
of  concepts  that  Z.  apprehends  the  essay,  whether  by
"  reading  "  or  by  V.'s  recital.  What  exactly  is  the  manner
of  this  interpenetration  of  concepts,  no  one,  I  imagine,  could
say  ;  nor,  accordingly,  why  when  one  of  a  given  series  emerges
to  my  external  consciousness  others  of  the  series  have  a  tendency
to  emerge  also,  while  some  do  not.  Again  one  thing  is  cer-
tain,— I  cannot  evoke  them  all  at  will  ;  I  trace  the  associa-
tions successfully  up  to  a  point,  and  then  break  down.  Is
it,  then,  likely  that  Z.,  starting  from  one  concept  and
unassisted  by  V.,  could  trace  out  the  whole  series  of
which  the  essay  is  composed  ? (If  we  assume  conversa-


LXIX.]


To  Clear  the  Air.


327


tiort  between  the  two,  we  come  in  effect  to  Mr.  Balfour's
third  alternative,  which  is  examined  below.)  We  shall  be
little  helped  if  we  show  ourselves  yet  more  generous  to  Z.,
and  having  endowed  it  with  the  power  to  apprehend  at  will
some  of  the  concepts  in  another  mind,  assign  to  it  also  the
power  of  apprehending  the  mode  of  interpenetration  by  which
concepts  are  connected.  Our  mental  concepts  have  each  of
them  several,  and  most  of  them  countless  associations  ;  how
then  could  Z.,  ignorant  as  it  is  of  the  goal  to  be  reached,  know
which  line  of  association  to  take  ?  For  what  is  its  position  ?
We  may  for  our  present  purpose  compare  any  given  series
of  concepts  (the  essay)  to  a  water-way,  which  is  made  up  of
a  number  of  interpenetrating  particles  of  water  ;  and  the
mind  to  a  sort  of  water-maze,  of  practically  limitless  extent
and  containing  many  millions  of  such  water-ways,  which
continually  intersect  each  other.  Z.,  then,  is  in  the  position
of  a  man  who,  exploring  this  maze,  wishes  to  follow  the  route
previously  traversed  by  a  friend,  though  he  knows  neither
at  what  point  his  friend  started  nor  what  point  he  made  his
destination.  It  would  be  as  much  bewildered  as  our  little
friend  who  asked,  "  Which  way  am  I  to  go  now,  please  ?  "
"  Where  do  you  want  to  go  to  ?  "  replied  the  Caterpillar.
"  I  don't  know,"  said  Alice.  "  Then  it  doesn't  matter  which
way  you  go."  We  seem,  in  fact,  to  have  set  this  subliminal
a  task  "  imagination  boggles  at."

Freely  granting  that,  if  Z.  can  grasp  the  whole  essay,  such
a  clever  subliminal  will  have  no  difficulty  in  framing  a  little
enigma  in  connexion  with  it,  we  will  leave  it  to  its  task  and
go  back  to  our  second  alternative  (b)  : — Z.  finds  in  V.,  ready-
made  and  admirably  suited  to  its  purpose,  the  puzzle  pro-
pounded in  Script  (A).1  Still  we  are  baffled,  for  all  the  diffi-
culties which  we  have  been  examining  continue  to  confront
us,  though  on  a  smaller  scale, — that  is  to  say,  in  connexion
with  a  more  limited  subject-matter.  For  although  the  riddle
is  of  much  smaller  bulk  than  the  essay,  it  must  equally  be
apprehended  as  a  whole  or  by  some  process  of  rehabilitation.

We  have  already  discussed  the  difficulties  attaching  to
each  alternative  ;  but  the  form  in  which  the  puzzle  appears
in  the  script  presents  yet  another. If  Z.  could  obtain  from

1  See  p.  222  supra.


328


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


V.  a  knowledge  of  the  gist  of  the  essay  at  all,  it  might,  we
may  perhaps  say,  have  obtained  this  in  a  more  or  less  rough
form  ;  here,  however,  we  have  a  little  picture  in  words,  an
episode  in  a  story,  neatly  and  compactly  rounded  off,  and
complete  so  far  as  it  goes.  It  occupies  four  lines  of  print,
and  unites  in  logical  connexion  a  considerable  number  of
concepts.  I  cannot  recall  from  our  records  of  cross-corre-
spondences any  case  in  which  it  could  be  maintained  that
one  living  mind  has  received  from  another  a  similar  com-
position. The  transference  of  single  concepts,  simple  or
complex,  would  appear  to  be  the  limit  of  an  incarnate  mind's
telepathic  achievement.  Many  automatic  scripts,  it  is  true,
contain  connected  writings  of  considerable  extent,  but  we  do
not  find  them  reproduced  in  the  script  of  other  automatists.
Even  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper  (who  may  be  regarded  as  a
"  sensitive  "  of  at  least  equal  capacity  with  Mrs.  Willett,
whether  as  giver  or  receiver  of  impressions)  single  ideas —
words  or  phrases — are  the  utmost  that  we  find  appearing
both  in  her  script  and  in  the  script  of  others  in  identical  form.
Moreover,  if  one  incarnate  mind  has  this  power  of  reading  the
thoughts  of  another  as  connected  in  that  other  mind,  why,  we
may  fairly  ask,  did  not  Mrs.  Piper  read  and  reproduce  the
translation  of  the  Latin  Message,  which  was  vividly  present
to  the  minds  of  several  persons,  both  sitters  and  others,  during
a  considerable  period  of  time  ?  Her  desire  and  her  efforts  to
do  so  must  have  been  far  stronger  than  Z.'s  in  the  present  case.

It  has  been  suggested  to  me  that  a  performance  of  the
medium  Adele  Maginot  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  pp.  61  ff.)
should  in  fairness  be  mentioned  here,  as  possibly  an  instance
to  the  contrary  of  what  has  just  been  said.  The  sitter,  M.
du  Potet,  wished  her  to  '  call  up  '  M.  Dubois,  a  friend  of  his
who  had  died  some  fifteen  months  before.  She  proceeded
to  give  an  extraordinarily  detailed  and  (save  for  four  mistakes)
accurate  description  of  this  friend's  outward  appearance,  mode
of  carriage,  walk,  and  gestures.  If  we  regard  this  as  a  case
of  spontaneous  telepathy,  which  it  appears  to  be,  we  have
clearly  something  very  different  from  the  transference  of  the
logically  connected  composition  of  Script  (A).  I  see  no  diffi-
culty in  supposing  that  the  medium  received  successively
from  the  sitter's  mind,  as  he  sat  in  front  of  her,  a  number


LXIX.]


To  Clear  the  Air.


329


of  separate  concepts  (say,  twenty-one),  or  possibly  one  complex
concept  picturing  the  whole  man.  Two  points  which  would
not  properly  belong  to  such  a  pictorial  concept  in  M.  du  Potet's
mind  were  mentioned  by  the  medium,  but  they  were  wrong.
M.  Dubois'  action  in  the  vision  on  hearing  mention  of  the
Jesuits,  is  obviously  a  complex  concept  of  this  kind.

If  this  analysis  of  Mr.  Balfour's  first  alternative  is  sound,
that  alternative  seems  to  involve  for  Script  (A)  the  combi-
nation of  a  number  of  assumptions  which  are  unsupported
by  our  present  knowledge  and  also  in  themselves  improbable.
It  is  obvious  that  the  same  difficulties  attach  to  the  neatly
compacted  problem  contained  in  (C),1  if  we  suppose  that  Z.
was  the  active  party  in  effecting  its  transference,  in  what-
ever manner  or  form,  from  another  mind.  Neither  this
script,  therefore,  nor  either  of  the  other  two,  since  all  three
are  intimately  connected  with  one  another  and  with  (A),
calls  for  separate  discussion.

I  must,  however,  advert  briefly  to  one  further  difficulty
which  is  presented  by  all  the  scripts  when  they  are  considered
as  produced  by  the  method  of  this  first  alternative.  Z.  offers
for  our  inspection  four  bricks — if  a  metaphor  may  be  per-
mitted— composed  of  a  peculiar  kind  of  clay,  a  species  which
we  recognise  as  Verrallian.  We  find  it  difficult  to  understand
how  Z.  could  have  obtained  the  clay  ;  but  on  examination
of  the  bricks  our  perplexity  increases,  for  we  find  that  the
clay  is  bound  together  by  a  peculiar  kind  of  straw,  a  kind
which  grows  only  in  a  certain  district  which  we  are  sure  was
never  visited  by  Mrs.  Willett.  The  straw  is  the  life-like
characterisation  of  Verrall  discussed  in  my  Note.  The  diffi-
culties which,  as  we  have  seen,  would  attend  Z.'s  search  after
the  matter  of  the  scripts  must  no  less  effectually  defeat  any
efforts  it  might  make  to  discover  and  reproduce  these  examples
of  VerraU's  manner.

Let  us  turn  to  Mr.  Balfour's  third  and,  as  most  people
will  probably  think,  more  attractive  alternative  :  "  the  really
active  and  planning  intelligence  may  have  been  the  mind
of  some  other  living  person  acting  on  the  mind  of  the  auto-
matist."

For  the  sake  of  argument,  we  will  say  that  the  intelligence

1  See  p.  223  supra.


330


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


actively  operating  on  Mrs.  Willett's  mind  was  that  of  Mrs.
Verrall,  though  it  should  be  noted  in  passing  that,  as  a  matter
of  fact,  Mrs.  Verrall  was  no  more  able  than  any  one  else  to
guess  the  enigma  of  Script  (A)  until  the  clue,  "  Dante  makes
it  clear,"  was  given  fourteen  months  later  in  Script  (D).  If
her  subliminal  had  composed  the  problem,  one  would  have
thought  it  likely  that  the  key  to  it  would  emerge  at  some
time  during  this  long  interval.

Not  long  before  his  death  (June  18,  1912),  Dr.  Verrall
discussed  with  Mrs.  Verrall  and  two  friends  the  selection  of
certain  of  his  essays  for  republication,  and  came  to  a  decision
as  to  which  should  be  selected.  The  three  essays  on  Dante
were  from  the  first  included  in  the  list,  but  the  copy  for  the
two  volumes  was  not  sent  to  the  press  until  the  following
September.  Now,  while  it  is  improbable  that  Mrs.  Verrall
consciously  recalled  the  point  in  the  Baptism  of  Statins  which
reappears  in  the  script,  either  at  the  time  of  the  selection
of  the  essays  or  in  the  interval  which  elapsed  before  July
6,  1912,  no  doubt  her  subliminal  may  have  done  so.  Let  us
suppose  that  it  did  ;  and  let  us  further  suppose  that  during
the  fortnight  preceding  July  6,  and  in  some  such  way  as  that
suggested  above  for  Z.,  it  conceived  the  idea  of  a  pseudo-
spirit-communication,  and  proceeded  to  concoct  the  little
puzzle  propounded  in  Script  (A).  Then,  unless  V.  has  some
power  of  selecting  a  recipient,  Script  (A)  is  launched  into  the
void,  like  a  wireless  message,  to  be  taken  in  by  any  other
subliminal  that  happens  to  be  receptive  at  the  moment,  and
is  in  fact  received  and  recorded  by  Mrs.  Willett.  Indeed,
we  must  suppose  all  four  scripts  (including  the  curious  cir-
cumstance of  the  laughter,  which  perhaps  betrays  V.'s  delight
at  the  success  of  its  enterprise  !)  to  be  so  given  out  and  received
verbatim  et  literatim.

But  whether  the  subliminal  can  or  can  not  select  a  recipient,
our  telegraphic  simile  (and  some  such  seems  to  be  required)
has  carried  us  beyond  the  evidence.  As  an  explanation  of
impressions  received  of  persons  in  articulo  mortis  or  in  some
other  critical  situation,  it  seems  to  be  reasonable  to  suppose
that  such  persons  may  have  flashed  forth  an  image  of  them-
selves— or,  when  the  impression  is  auditory,  a  word  or  phrase
— -somewhat  wireless  message  is  given  out. In  such


LXIX.]


To  Clear  the  Air.


331


cases,  however,  the  pictorial  image  or  phrase  transferred  is
always,  I  believe,  a  single  though  perhaps  complex  concept,
— a  thing  very  different  from  any  one  of  Mrs.  Willett's  scripts,
each  of  which  presents  to  us  several  series  of  concepts  com-
bined, both  as  individual  concepts  and  as  series  or  groups,
in  logical  connexion.  And  the  simple  truth  is  that  up  to  the
present,  at  any  rate,  we  have  no  reasonable  ground  for  sup-
posing that  the  embodied  mind  can  either  give  out  or  receive,
after  the  manner  of  the  telegraphic  instrument,  long  and
logically  connected  messages  such  as  are  produced  in  the
scripts.  It  may  be  that  it  can  both  give  and  receive  messages
of  this  character,  and  we  may  some  day  get  proof  of  this
power,  but  as  I  have  already  said,  our  present  evidence  points
the  other  way.

If  M.  du  Potet's  case,  referred  to  above,  should  again  seem
to  suggest  a  different  conclusion,  I  would  repeat  that  the
thing  transferred  was  essentially  different  from  the  scripts  ;
the  vision  was  in  fact  one  of  the  kind  just  mentioned  as  some-
times flashed  from  the  dying.  And  though  M.  du  Potet  was
in  no  critical  situation  and  had  no  conscious  intention  to
transfer  his  own  mental  impression  of  M.  Dubois,  we  do  not
know  what  his  subliminal  was  doing  ;  his  earnest  desire  to
get  into  relations  with  his  friend  might  well  have  stimulated
it  into  becoming  (according  to  what  seems  to  me  the  more
probable  view  of  the  modus  operandi)  the  active  factor  in
the  transference.  I  find  it  very  difficult  to  believe  that  the
mental  picture  seen  in  the  vision  was  not  vividly  present
to  M.  du  Potet's  subliminal  consciousness.

But,  it  will  be  said,  it  is  precisely  this  power  of  conveying
and  receiving  a  connected  message  which  believers  in  the
establishment  of  communication  with  the  spirit  world  attri-
bute to  the  spirit  and  the  automatist  respectively.  Why
admit  its  exercise  in  the  one  case  and  deny  it  in  the  other  ?
The  point  is  a  strong  one,  and  perhaps  the  strongest  that
can  be  urged  in  favour  of  the  telepathic  and  against  the
spiritistic  view  of  the  phenomena.  The  answer  I  would  give
is,  firstly,  that  we  must  suppose  a  disembodied  spirit  to  be
free  from  many  limitations  which  beset  the  embodied  mind
when  endeavouring  to  effect  a  telepathic  communication  ;
and  secondly,  that  the  distinction  appears  to  be  warranted,


332


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


or  rather  demanded,  by  the  evidence  as  a  whole.  It  is  the
content  of  the  messages  which  weighs.  Some  scripts  embody,
in  the  form  of  a  connected  composition,  information  which
is  outside  the  knowledge  of  any  automatist  in  the  group  con-
cerned, and  at  the  same  time  profess  to  be  messages  from
the  spirit  world.  Clearly  the  internal  evidence  of  genuine-
ness in  such  cases  is  strong,  and  especially  so  if  the  content
of  the  message  is  also  characteristic  of  the  alleged  communi-
cator, as  in  some  of  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  On
the  other  hand,  some  scripts,  also  professing  to  be  spirit  com-
munications and  written  in  connected  language,  fail  to  exhibit
these  marks  of  genuineness.  There  is,  I  believe,  no  clear
evidence  or  plausible  ground  for  thinking  that  any  such
'  messages  '  emanate  from  some  other  incarnate  mind  ;  and
if  we  prefer  not  to  consider  them  genuine,  the  natural  account
of  them  would  seem  to  be  that  they  are  products  of  the  auto-
matist's  own  subliminal.  In  many  scripts  this  certainly  seems
to  be  the  case.  If  it  be  further  objected  that  such  connected
messages  or  communications  may  nevertheless  be  dictated  by
the  subliminal  of  some  person  outside  the  ring  of  automatists
and  sitters,  one  can  only  reply  that  it  may  indeed  be  so,  but
that  in  the  absence  of  evidence  in  its  support,  the  suggestion
cannot  carry  more  weight  than  any  other  mere  possibility.

The  result  of  our  examination  appears  to  be  that  there
is  a  lack  both  of  positive  evidence  and  of  reasonable  proba-
bility such  as  would  warrant  our  accepting  any  one  of  Mr.
Balfour's  first  three  alternatives  as  an  explanation  of  the
phenomena  presented  by  the  scripts  under  discussion.  In
other  words, — and  it  is  the  whole  of  the  contention  which
this  paper  set  out  to  maintain — though  we  leave  it  indifferent
which  of  two  mutually  exclusive  views  is  taken  as  to  certain
questions,  psychological  and  other,  which  have  emerged  in
the  course  of  the  discussion,  it  seems  impossible,  without
ignoring  the  trend  of  our  present  evidence  and  knowledge,
to  construct  any  coherent  and  plausible  theory  of  telepathy
between  the  living  which  would  account  for  the  production
of  these  astonishing  scripts.  If,  as  is  only  too  probable,
I  have  done  the  facts  or  the  argument  any  injustice,  due
correction  will  no  doubt  be  forthcoming.  I  shall  kiss  the
rod.


LXIX.]


The  History  of  Marthe  Bemud.


333


VII.

THE  HISTORY  OF  MARTHE  BERAUD  ("EVA  C").
By  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.
Bibliography.

De  quelques  Phenomenes  dits  de  Materialisation.  By  Professor
Charles  Richet.  (Annates  des  Sciences  Psychiques,  1905,
pp.  649  ff.)

Les  Polemiques  aw  sujet  de  la  Villa  Carmen. By  Professor  Charles

Richet. (Annates  des  Sciences  Psychiques,  1906,  pp.  129  ff.)
Mon  Temoignage  concemant  Bien-Boa. By  Monsieur  Marsault.

(Les  Nouveaux  Horizons,  November,  1906.)
Les  Mediums  de  la  Villa  Carmen. By  Dr.  Rouby. (Les  Nouveaux

Horizons,  February -June,  1907.)
Materialisationsplianomene. By Dr. von  Schrenck-Notzing.

(Ernst  Bernhardt. Munich. 1914. 14s.  net.)
Les  Phenomenes  dits  de  Materialisation. By  Madame  Juliette

Alexandre-Bisson. (Felix  Alcan. Paris. 1914. 10s.  6d.

net.)

Moderne  Mediumforschung . By Dr. Mathilde von  Kemnitz

and  Dr.  von  Gulat-Wellenburg. (J.  F.  Lehmann.  Munich.

1914. Is.  6d.  net.)
Der  Kampf  um  die  Materialisations phanomene : eine  Verteidi-

gungsschrift. By  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing. (Ernst  Rein-

hardt. Munich.  1914.)

Materialisation, — the  supposed  creation  of  matter  through
the  agency  of  some  kind  of  psychical  force, — has  always
occupied  a  conspicuous  position  amongst  the  physical  pheno-
mena with  which  psychical  research  is  concerned.  From
the  days  of  "  Katie  King  "  onwards  many  contributions  have
been  made  to  the  subject,  of  varying  interest  and  importance,


334


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


but  few  are  more  worthy  of  consideration,  either  on  account
of  the  care  with  which  the  researches  have  been  conducted,
or  the  conclusions  which  the  authors  have  reached,  than  the
volume  in  which  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  describes  his
experiences  during  the  last  few  years  with  the  French  medium,
Marthe  Beraud  ("  Eva  C").

Dr.  von  Schrenck's  personal  acquaintance  with  the  case
dates  from  the  earlier  half  of  1909,  but  Marthe  Beraud's
career  as  a  medium  began  in  1903,  and  before  we  turn  to  the
consideration  of  Dr.  von  Schrenck's  book,  some  account
must  be  given  of  the  medium's  earlier  history.

The  first  experiments  with  Marthe  Beraud  were  conducted
at  the  Villa  Carmen  in  Algiers,  the  house  of  General  and  Madame
Noel,  who  were  in  the  habit  of  holding  seances,  in  which
various  mediums,  professional  and  otherwise,  took  part.
Mademoiselle  Beraud,  at  that  time  a  very  young  girl  of  about
seventeen,  was  a  family  friend  and  not  a  professional  medium
Accounts  of  the  phenomena  observed  at  these  seances  were
published  in  various  spiritualistic  papers,  and  in  August,
1905,  Professor  Charles  Richet  went  over  to  Algiers  to  in-
vestigate the  case.  He  published  an  account  of  his  observa-
tions in  the  Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques,  1905,  pp.  649  ff.

The  phenomena  witnessed  by  Monsieur  Richet  consisted
in  the  alleged  materialisation  of  several  spirits,  in  particular
of  an  Arab  chieftain,  who  gave  himself  the  name  of  Bien-
Boa,  and  showed  in  various  ways  that  he  possessed  the  attri-
butes of  a  living  human  being.  The  problem  therefore  was
to  ascertain  whether  the  part  of  Bien-Boa  could  possibly
be  played  either  by  Marthe  or  by  an  accomplice.  The  con-
clusions to  which  Monsieur  Richet  came  were  that  :

(a)  at  the  sittings  at  which  he  was  present,  any  action
on  the  part  of  an  accomplice  was  excluded  and  therefore,
if  there  was  fraud,  it  was  practised  by  Marthe  Beraud  and,
moreover,  was  deliberate  ;

(b)  the  phenomena  were  almost  certainly  genuine,  although
Monsieur  Richet  did  not  commit  himself  to  any  definite  theory
to  explain  them.

I  do  not  propose  to  discuss  Monsieur  Richet's  article  in
detail,  but  one  point  is  worth  mentioning.  Several  photo-
graphs were  taken  at  the  sittings  with  a  view  to  obtaining,


lxix.]  The  History  of  Marthe  Bemud.  335

if  possible,  definite  evidence  to  prove  that  Marthe  and  Bien-
Boa  were  present  simultaneously.  These  photographs  show
the  bearded  figure  of  Bien-Boa  himself  wrapped  in  a  white
garment  of  a  nondescript  character  and  wearing  on  his  head
either  a  turban  or  a  sort  of  helmet.  What  appears  to  be  a
part  of  Marthe's  form  is  also  represented  in  these  photographs,
but  in  no  instance  are  her  hands  or  head  visible.  This
fact  suggests  prima  facie  that  what  we  see  in  the  photographs
is  Marthe's  blouse  and  skirt,  stuffed  perhaps  and  suitably
disposed  on  a  chair,  whilst  she  herself  is  occupied  in  represent-
ing the  Arab  chief.  Monsieur  Richet  himself  is  at  some
trouble  to  explain  these  photographs,  and  on  one  occasion
accounts  for  the  apparent  emptiness  of  Marthe's  sleeve  by
suggesting  that  "the  phenomenon,  so  mysterious  and  almost
miraculous,  which  we  call  '  materialisation,'  is  accompanied
by  a  sort  of  disintegration  of  the  pre-existing  matter,  so
that  .  .  .  the  medium  empties  herself,  so  to  speak,  to  constitute
the  new  being,  which  emanates  from  her,  and  which  one
cannot  touch  without  injuring  the  medium."

On  the  other  hand,  Dr.  von  Schrenck- Not  zing  explains  a
somewhat  similar  phenomenon,  which  was  observed  by
Monsieur  de  Fontenay  at  Paris,  during  Marthe  Beraud's  later
phase,  as  being  due  to  the  "  so-called  transfiguration  "  of  the
medium,  who  "in  a  spiritualistic  sense  takes  over  the  part
of  the  spirit,  and  clad  in  materialised  stuffs  tries  to  represent
dramatically  the  character  which  is  at  the  moment  in  ques-
tion." (See  Materialisationsphdnomene,  p.  157.)  According
to  Dr.  von  Schrenck,  therefore,  what  Monsieur  Richet  pro-
bably witnessed  at  the  Villa  Carmen  was  a  "  transfiguration  "
of  the  medium,  the  supernormality  of  the  phenomenon  con-
sisting in  the  "  materialised  "  clothes  worn  by  Bien-Boa.

Shortly  after  the  publication  of  Monsieur  Richet's  report,
several  people  came  forward  with  statements  to  the  effect
that  all  the  phenomena  witnessed  at  the  Villa  Carmen  were
produced  by  an  organised  conspiracy  of  fraud,  in  which  Marthe
Beraud  and  several  servants,  employed  by  General  and  Madame
Noel,  were  involved, — in  particular  the  coachman  Areski,  who
frequently  took  part  in  the  sittings,  although  he  had  not
been  present  on  the  particular  occasions  described  in  Mon-
sieur Richet's  report. It  was  alleged  that  not  only  Areski,

Y


336


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


but  also  Marthe  Beraud  and  her  father,  had  confessed  to
complicity  in  the  fraud.  These  allegations  were  all  set  forth
in  a  series  of  articles  by  Dr.  Rouby  and  Monsieur  Marsault,
and  published  in  Les  Nouveaux  Horizons,  1906  and  1907.
The  most  important  part  of  the  story  for  our  present  purpose
is  contained  in  a  statement  made  by  Monsieur  Marsault,  a
lawyer  living  in  Algiers,  of  which  the  following  is  a  translation,
considerably  abridged  (see  Les  Nouveaux  Horizons,  1906,
pp.  403  ff.)  :

It  was  towards  the  end  of  the  year  1900  that  1  made  acquaint-
ance with  Monsieur  and  Madame  Noel.  ...  I  was  invited  to
the  seances  at  the  Villa  Carmen  and  attended  them  regularly
for  several  months.  There  was  much  talk  at  the  time  of  an
old  medium  Ahmed,  a  servant  of  Monsieur  and  Madame  Noel,
and  of  the  strange  phenomena  obtained  through  his  presence :
the  apport  of  a  stone  of  seventy  kilograms,  the  changing  of  tea
into  coffee.  .  .  .  One  need  only  read,  for  example,  a  few  numbers
of  the  Revue  Scientifique  et  Morale  de  Spiritisme  of  that  date  to
realise  the  improbability  and  grotesque  nature  [of  these  pheno-
mena.] .  .  .  Bien-Boa  already  existed,  but  he  had  not  shown
himself  in  a  materialised  form.  At  that  time  he  was  only  giving
what  I  will  call  the  current  coin  of  spiritualism  :  movements  of
tables,  lights,  automatic  writing,  etc.,  and  already  promising  future
materialisations.

[Monsieur  Marsault  then  describes  how  on  two  occasions  he
detected  the  fraudulent  practices  of  a  medium,  who  was  perform-
ing at  the  Villa  Carmen.]  ...  A  few  days  after  this  seance  I
received  a  letter  from  Madame  Noel,  politely  requesting  me,  by
reason  of  my  inharmonious  fluiclic  force,  to  stay  at  home,  until
the  phenomena  should  have  returned  to  their  normal  course.  .  .  .

My  banishment  lasted  four  years.  During  that  time  I  had
maintained  strictly  courteous  relations  with  Monsieur  and  Madame
Noel,  whose  suspicions  of  me  increased  daily.  They  even  came  to
believe  that  my  advice  was  the  cause  of  certain  differences  of
opinion  which  had  arisen  between  them  and  their  son  Maurice,
who  had  become  my  intimate  friend.

Maurice  went  off  to  the  French  Congo  about  July,  1900,  as
commercial  agent  in  a  large  business  enterprise,  after  engaging
himself  to  Mademoiselle  Marthe  B whom  he  was  to  marry


LXIX-.]


The  History  of  Marihe  Beraud.


337


when  he  obtained  his  first  leave.  .  .  .  My  unhappy  friend  was  not
destined  to  return  from  the  Congo.  .  .  .  He  died  at  Libreville  in
October,  1904.  .  .  .  My  friend  Monsieur  Journau  and  I  paid  a  visit
of  condolence  to  the  Noel  family.  General  Noel  had  just  received  a
posthumous  letter  from  his  son,  praising  me  and  clearing  away  the
misunderstanding  which  had  existed  between  us  for  several  years.
Very  loyally — and  I  thank  him  for  it — General  Noel  recognised
this  misunderstanding,  and  our  reconciliation  was  sealed.  .  .  .  No
one  therefore  will  do  me  the  injustice  of  supposing  for  a  moment
that  the  attitude  which  I  have  adopted  in  regard  to  the  Bergolia
and  Bien-Boa  episodes  was  dictated  by  any  animosity.  .  .  .

My  visit  of  condolence  had  re-established  the  cordiality  of  our
relations.  My  friend  Monsieur  Journau  and  I  were  invited  to  a
family  supper  at  the  Villa  Carmen  and  to  the  seance  for  materiali-
sation which  was  to  follow

My  friend  and  I  received  letters  at  that  time  from  Madame  Noel,
informing  us  that  a  spirit,  Bergolia,  sister  to  Bien-Boa,  was  appearing
in  materialised  form,  "  drinking  tea  with  her,  talking  in  the  most
feminine  way  imaginable,  rummaging  about  in  a  box  of  sweets."
In  one  of  these  letters  Madame  Noel  even  said  that  their  son  Maurice
had  materialised,  that  he  had  kissed  her,  and  that  she  had  felt
on  her  forehead  the  cold  touch  of  his  eye-glasses.

I  paid  a  visit  to  Marthe  B.'s  family.  I  did  not  get  to  the  bottom
of  the  mystery,  but  Marthe  B.  spoke  to  me  of  a  certain  Ninon,
who  was  then  playing  the  part  of  medium  at  the  Villa  Carmen.
I  understood  that  it  was  Ninon  who  simulated  the  materialisation
of  Maurice  Noel.  Marthe  B.  added :  "  Ninon  had  better  not  simulate
my  fiance  before  me,  or  I'll  jump  at  her  face."

...  To  return  to  Madame  Noel's  invitation.

It  was  in  November,  1904,  about  a  month  after  the  death  of
our  friend  Maurice  Noel,  that  Monsieur  Journau  and  I  went  to  the
supper  and  the  seance,  to  which  we  had  been  bidden.  At  the  end
of  the  meal,  Monsieur  and  Madame  Noel  went  away  for  a  few
minutes,  leaving  my  friend  Monsieur  Journau  and  me  alone  with
Mademoiselle  Marthe  B.

She  at  once  said  to  us,  in  some  such  words  as  these  :  "  Do  you
want  to  have  some  fun  ?  You  know  Bergolia  is  all  humbug  ;
my  sisters  and  I  will  give  you  some  fun."  Monsieur  Journau  was
astounded.  For  my  part,  I  had  already  been  warned  by  Marthe
B.  that  all  these  materialisations  were  non-existent,  which  I  had


338


Helen  de  G.  V  err  all.


[part


long  suspected,  but  I  had  thought  that  for  once  Bergolia  would
miss  her  appointment.  At  this  juncture,  there  arrived  Marthe
B.'s  two  young  sisters.  Ninon,  who  was  expected  that  evening,
did  not  come.  .  .  .

We  entered  the  seance  room  and  sat  down  round  a  table  in  front
of  the  cabinet  reserved  for  the  medium.  A  red  lamp  gave  a  very
faint  light,  enough  however  to  see  outlines,  light  tones  especially.
We  had  hardly  taken  our  places,  when  Marthe  B.  kept  her  promise.
She  rose  from  the  table,  entered  the  mediumistic  cabinet  and
came  out  with  a  thin  white  shawl  over  her  head  and  shoulders.
She  walked  about  the  little  room,  carefully  avoiding  the  better
lighted  parts,  answering  first  in  French  to  the  questions  which
Madame  Noel  put  to  her  about  Bien-Boa  and  then  at  Madame
Noel's  request  inventing  a  sort  of  language,  which  she  said  was
Hindu.  .  .  .

This  little  comedy  lasted  about  twenty  minutes.  .  .  .  Monsieur
and  Madame  Noel,  whose  absolute  good  faith  I  have  never  doubted,
believed  blindly  that  the  sister  of  their  favourite  spirit  was  present.
To  seek  to  undeceive  them  was  utterly  futile.  All  who  have
experience  of  spiritualists  know  that  this  is  labour  lost.  .  .  .
Moreover,  Marthe  B.  was  not  a  professional  medium.  Bergolia,
I  think,  never  did  much  harm  to  any  one,  not  even  to  Monsieur
and  Madame  Noel,  who  did  not  wait  for  her  entry  into  our
world  to  believe  in  materialisations.  .  .  .

Such  events  would  have  left  no  room  for  doubt  even  in  the  mind
of  St.  Thomas.  Monsieur  Journau  and  I  had  no  doubt  whatever.
We  did  not  attend  any  further  seances  at  the  Villa  Carmen  in
spite  of  the  pressing  invitations  which  Ave  subsequently  received.
This  was,  I  think,  the  wisest  course.

I  come  now  to  the  critical  point,  namely,  Bien-Boa  as  sanctified
by  the  authority  of  Monsieur  Richet,  Bien-Boa,  turned  into  a  public
character,  known  to  all.  .  .  .

I  had  learnt  that  Monsieur  Richet  had  come  to  the  Villa  Carmen
to  study  for  the  second  time  the  phenomena  of  materialisation.
Knowing  what  I  have  related  above,  I  thought  that  no  one  could
have  the  audacity  or  the  simplicity  to  simulate  before  a  great
savant  like  Monsieur  Richet  the  materialisation  of  Bien-Boa.  I
was  convinced  that  should  this  occur,  Monsieur  Richet  would
discover  the  hoax.  .  .  .

I  leave  to  the  imagination  my  amazement  when  I  read  in  the


LXIX.]


The  History  of  Martlie  Beraud.  339


Annates  Psychiques  for  December,  1905,  Monsieur  Richet's  report
on  the  materialisations  at  the  Villa  Carmen.  .  .  .

In  the  fight  against  these  trickeries,  so  often  unmasked  .  .  .
no  honest  endeavour  is  to  be  despised.  That  is  what  I  thought,
when  I  determined  to  help  so  far  as  I  could  in  the  discovery  of
the  facts.  ...  I  at  once  considered  what  was  the  best  way  to  attain
the  proposed  end.  I  put  aside  all  idea  of  publicity.  ...  I  thought
it  best  to  act  discreetly.  This  was  the  only  method  which  could
reconcile  the  interests  of  unrecognised  truth  with  the  peace  of
mind  of  my  friends  at  the  Villa  Carmen,  the  reputation  of  a  young
girl  of  good  family,  and  above  all  the  susceptibility  of  a  man  of
learning.  .  .  .

When  I  reached  this  stage  of  my  reflexions,  I  had  learnt  from
Marthe  B.'s  father  .  .  .  that  the  observed  phenomena  were  fraudu-
lent and  that  Marthe  had  done  nothing  but  amuse  herself.  .  .  .  Mon-
sieur B.  was  very  much  surprised  and  troubled  at  the  unexpected
publicity  which  had  been  given  to  the  matter.  ...  I  expressed
the  opinion  that  he  ought  to  confess  the  truth  to  Monsieur  Richet
and  I  strongly  urged  him  to  do  this  in  the  interests  of  all.
On  my  part,  I  wrote  to  Monsieur  Richet,  as  follows  :
"...  For  the  last  five  years  or  so  I  have  taken  an  interest-
in  psychical  research  and  during  this  time  I  also  have  known  the
Villa  Carmen.

I  think  that  I  shall  be  serving  the  cause  of  truth  and  doing  a
wise  and  useful  deed  if  I  come  to  you  and  say  that  /  fear  greatly
that  you  have  been  deceived.

My  strong  conviction  is  based  upon  the  most  serious  grounds.
If  you  are  willing,  whilst  turning  to  your  own  use  the  statements
I  shall  make  to  you,  to  promise  me  complete  silence  as  regards
both  them  and  my  name,  I  will  tell  you  the  grounds  of  my  con-
viction. ..."

My  letter  was  well  received  by  Monsieur  Richet,  who  replied
as  follows  :

"  I  am  prepared  to  receive  in  absolute  confidence  any  dis-
closures you  may  wish  to  make  to  me  and  you  may  accept  my  word
of  honour  that  your  name  will  not  be  mentioned.  ..."

...  On  January  1,  [1906],  I  went  to  see  [Marthe  and  her  father]
at  their  house  and  met  the  whole  family,  Monsieur  and  Madame
B.  and  their  three  daughters.  During  the  three  hours  that  I  was
there  we  talked  only  of  Bien-Boa. With  much  volubility  and  a


340


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[paet


certain  humour  Marthe  related  all  the  ins  and  outs  of  the  story.
She  had  been  medium  against  her  will,  because  Madame  Noel
found  a  mediumistic  significance  in  her  least  gestures  and  saw
spirits  everywhere  .  .  .

When  Monsieur  Bichet  came,  she  had  long  been  established
as  a  "  great  materialising  medium."  How  was  she  to  escape
examination  by  this  man  of  learning  1  She  protected  herself  by
asserting  that  she  was  not  a  medium  at  all  and  did  not  believe
in  spirits.  But  they  pressed  her  with  such  insistence  that  at  last
she  gave  way  and  went  back  to  the  cabinet  in  the  seance-room.  .  .  .

Thus  it  was  that  little  by  little  against  her  will  she  had  been  led
to  play  her  part.  And  what  part  ?  A  secondary,  almost  a  negative,
part.  There  was  a  trap-door  set  between  the  bath  and  the  wall,
in  the  angle,  through  which,  when  the  room  had  been  darkened,
a  young  girl  was  introduced,  slim  and  dressed  in  black,  a  friend
of  Ninon's.  ...  As  to  Marthe  herself,  her  part  was  secondary  ;
she  remained  passive  and  pretended  to  sleep.  .  .  .  She  was  very
repentant  at  having  set  her  hand  to  trickery,  but  put  forward  as
her  constant  excuse,  the  compulsory  role  of  medium  which  she
had  been  obliged  to  play  and  the  existence  of  the  trap-door.  She
pleaded  extenuating  circumstances.

The  publicity  given  to  a  farce  which  they  thought  trivial  terri-
fied Marthe  and  her  family.  I  pointed  out  to  them  that  the  only
way  to  put  an  end  to  the  thing  was  to  tell  the  truth  quite  frankly
to  Monsieur  Richet.  .

The  next  day  I  wrote  to  Monsieur  Richet,  as  follows  :

"...  Monsieur  B.  and  Mademoiselle  Marthe  B.  herself  have
given  me  their  confidence.

They  have  told  me1  that  the  whole  affair  was  a  sham,  that  there
was  a  trap-door  and  accomplices.  Everything  was  explained  to
me  in  detail.

If  I  am  to  believe  1  Marthe  B.,  her  part  was  rather  slight,  and
almost  negative  ;  she  remained  passive.  .  .  .

I  have  strongly  urged  her  to  open  her  mind  to  you  frankly  in
conversation,  since  you  have  given  her  reason  to  hope  for  your
return  in  a  letter  which  she  has  shown  me.

1  Note  by  Monsieur  Marsault.  I  draw  attention  to  the  two  passages
"they  have  told  me,"  and  "if  I  am  to  believe  Marthe  B."  I  have  never
therefore  made  myself  responsible  for  the  hypothesis  of  the  trap-door,  which
people  have  foisted  on  to  me  as  a  means  of  attack.


LXIX.]


The  History  of  Marthe  Bemud.


341


If  you  come  I  will  explain  my  story  in  greater  detail  and,  if
necessary,  will  provide  you  with  evidence  from  some  of  my  friends,
who  will  make  it  their  duty  to  act  as  I  have  done.  ..."

Monsieur  Richet  replied  as  follows  :

':  I  have  received  your  letter.  It  is  quite  possible  that  there
was  trickery  that  I  was  unable  to  discover.  But  the  trickery  must
be  proved.

You  write  to  me  of  a  trap-door  and  accomplices.  Well !  nothing
is  easier  than  to  ascertain  the  existence  of  a  trap-door  in  the  summer-
house  at  the  Villa  Carmen.  ..."

It  was  my  intention  to  write  to  Monsieur  Richet  to  point  out  to
him  that  I  did  not  believe  in  the  hypothesis  of  the  trap-door, — a
convenient  method  by  which  Marthe  might  partly  exculpate  her
self, — although  I  was  convinced  of  the  trickery  .  .  .  when,  on
January  11,  I  met  Monsieur  B.  He  told  me  that  Marthe  had  had
a  letter  from  a  lady  in  Paris  telling  her  that  a  lawyer  in  Algiers
had  written  to  Monsieur  Richet  to  inform  him  of  the  deception.  .  .  .
Monsieur  B.  iirf erred  that  the  Algerian  lawyer  was  myself.  .  .  .

When  I  saw  that  my  discreet  intervention  with  Monsieur  Richet
was  becoming  everybody's  secret,  I  determined  to  write  to  Mon-
sieur Richet  no  more.  .  .  .

In  the  early  days  of  March,  Dr.  Rouby  of  Algiers  thought  he
had  discovered  the  key  to  the  trickery  in  the  person  of  Areski,
Monsieur  Noel's  former  coachman.  ...  To  destroy  this  hypothesis
General  Noel  put  forward  the  equivocal  nature  of  Areski's  state-
ments and  wished  to  prove  his  inconsistency  before  witnesses.
General  Noel  came  to  me  on  March  12  and  asked  me  to  be
one  of  the  witnesses.  I  agreed,  on  condition  that  Areski  should
be  cross-examined  in  Dr.  Rouby's  presence, — -which  I  thought  a
reasonable  suggestion.  General  Noel  would  not  agree  to  this
condition  and  in  return  I  refused  the  favour  he  asked  of
me.  .  .  .

Two  days  later  I  received  a  letter  from  Madame  Noel,  bitterly
reproaching  me  for  my  behaviour.  ...  I  quote  some  interesting
passages  from  this  letter  :

"  I  assumed  that  you  were  one  of  the  '  anonymous  young
men  '  of  whom  the  delightful  Rouby  spoke.

My  opinion  was  confirmed  by  what  you  said  to  the  General
about  Mademoiselle  Marthe  B.  ;  but  she  repudiates  your  statements
utterly.  ... I  think  that  an  impartial  person,  having  to  choose


342


Helen  cle  G.  V  err  all.


[part


between  your  two  assertions,  would  ask  first  :  '  What  interest
could  Mademoiselle  Marthe  B.  have  in  acting  thus,  in  running  the
risk  of  being  thrust  out  in  disgrace  by  a  family  who  received  her
with  open  arms  ?  '  "

.  .  .  Indignation,  reproaches,  or  attacks  trouble  me  little.  Bien-
Boa  does  not  exist  and  has  never  existed.

I  refuse  to  admit  that  the  existence  of  Bien-Boa  has  been
scientifically  proved .  .  .

Monsieur  Marsault's  statements  do  not  prove  Marthe
Beraud's  guilt,  any  more  than  her  repudiation  of  these  state-
ments proves  her  innocence.  But  considering  the  circumstances
of  the  case,  Monsieur  Marsault's  story  certainly  required  an
answer  and  a  refutation.  The  most  important  part  of  the
storjr,  however,  has  never  been  answered  at  all.  In  an  article
contributed  by  Monsieur  Richet  to  the  Annates  des  Sciences
Psychiques  (March,  190G),  in  which  he  is  mainly  concerned
with  disproving  Dr.  Rouby's  contentions,  the  following
passages  occur :

.  .  .  He  [Dr.  Rouby]  relates  that  in  the  presence  of  two  young
men,  who  would  not  refuse  to  give  their  evidence,  she  [Marthe
Beraud]  played,  for  a  joke,  the  part  of  Bergolia,  Bien-Boa's
sister.  .  .  .

As  to  the  so-called  confession  of  Mademoiselle  Marthe  B.  .  .
she  is  alleged  to  have  said  that  everything  was  done  by  means
of  a  trap-door,  whereas  in  the  first  place  she  has  not  said  so,  and
in  the  second  place  there  is  no  trap-door .  .  .

A  foot-note  is  put  to  this  last  statement,  as  follows  :

The  existence  of  this  notorious  trap-door,  about  which  a  lawyer
in  Algiers  wrote  me  an  excited  letter  which  some  day  I  will  publish,
is  disproved  by  the  following  affidavit :  [the  statement  of  the
architect  who  examined  the  seance-room].

This  is  the  only  direct  allusion  to  Monsieur  Marsault  which
Monsieur  Richet's  article  contains,  and  it  will  be  at  once
apparent  that .  it  leaves  Monsieur  Marsault's  main  contention
quite  untouched,  because  the  latter  is  careful  to  point  out  that
he  takes  no  responsibility  for  the  statement  about  the  trap-
door, and  that  the  existence  of  this  door  is  in  no  way  essential.


LXIX.]


The  History  of  Marihe  Beraud.


343


to  his  conclusions.  If  Monsieur  Richet  had  reasons  of  his
own  for  discrediting  Monsieur  Marsault's  statement,  why  were
they  not  given  ?  The  "  impartial  person,"  to  whom  Madame
Noel  appeals,  will,  I  think,  conclude  that  the  whole  episode  is
most  unsatisfactory,  and  of  a  nature  to  arouse  grave  suspicions.
So  much  then  for  Marthe  Beraud's  early  history.

In  190S  "Eva  C",  as  she  is  now  to  be  called,  came
to  Paris,  and  early  in  1909  she  began  to  give  sittings
for  a  small  private  circle  formed  under  the  auspices  of
Monsieur  and  Madame  Alexandre  Bisson.  Monsieur  Bisson
was  a  well-known  French  playwright :  he  died  in  January,
1912.  Madame  Bisson  is  a  sculptress  of  some  repute.  Dr.  von
Schrenck-Notzing  was  introduced  into  this  circle  in  May,  1909.
and  his  observation  of  the  phenomena  has  continued  from
then  up  to  the  present  time.

Before  turning  to  the  consideration  of  these  phenomena,
something  must  be  said  with  regard  to  the  concealment  of
the  medium's  identity.  In  Mater  ialisationsplianomene  Dr.
von  Schrenck-Notzing  describes  "  Eva  C."  as  "  a  young  girl
of  the  middle  classes  who  has  already  in  other  circles  produced
phenomena  of  materialisation."  He  is  not  permitted,  he
says,  to  give  precise  details  as  to  her  family  and  circumstances.
Her  identity  with  Marthe  Beraud  became  known  in  December,
1913  (one  of  the  earliest  statements  of  it  appeared  in  the
Matin  on  December  29,  1913),  and  no  attempt  was  made
to  deny  it.  In  Der  Kampf  um  die  Materialisationsphanomene.
a  pamphlet  recently  published  by  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing
in  reply  to  various  criticisms  of  his  book,  he  minimises  the
importance  of  Eva  C.'s  identity  by  making  light  of  the  dis-
closures in  regard  to  Marthe  Beraud.  "  It  is  a  long  recognised
fact  (he  says)  that  every  report  about  mediumistic  phenomena
is  speedily  followed  by  a  sensational  account  of  exposure.
Since  statements  in  the  newspapers  have  for  many  people
the  authority  of  a  gospel  ...  it  is  not  surprising  that  such
statements  are  more  readily  accepted  than  observations
which  are  inconsistent  with  public  opinion  and  scientific
orthodoxy."  He  then  dismisses  Dr.  Rouby's  contentions
as  "  gossip  of  the  lowest  sort  "  ;  with  Monsieur  Marsault's
story  he  does  not  deal  at  all.


344


Helen  tie  G.  V  err  all.


[part


But  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing's  defence  does  not  meet
the  objections  of  those  who  think  that  whether  the  accusa-
tions against  Marthe  Beraud  were  well-founded  or  not,
students  of  her  subsequent  phenomena  should  have  been
given  the  opportunity  of  judging  the  case  for  themselves.
The  refusal  of  her  family  to  allow  her  name  to  be  published
put  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  in  a  difficulty,  no  doubt  ;
but,  if  this  difficulty  was  insuperable,  it  would  at  least  have
been  possible  to  insert  a  statement  that  she  had  not  an  abso-
lutely clean  record.  The  omission  of  any  such  statement
would  naturally  be  interpreted  as  implying  that  she  had.

As  regards  the  phenomena  observed  in  the  case  of  Eva
C,  they  are  of  one  kind  only, — "materialisation."  The  problem
therefore  resolves  itself  into  two  questions  :  (a)  what  is  the
nature  of  this  "  materialised  "  substance  1  (b)  what  possibility
is  there  that  the  medium  smuggles  this  substance  into  the
sittings  by  some  normal  means  not  detected  by  the
observers  ?  In  order  to  answer  these  questions,  some
account  must  now  be  given  of  the  phenomena  observed  and
of  the  conditions  under  which  they  occur.

During  the  production  of  the  phenomena,  the  medium
sits  in  a  three-cornered  "  cabinet,"  consisting  of  black  cloth
stretched  over  a  wooden  frame-work.  The  cabinet,  which
fits  into  one  corner  of  the  room,  is  completely  closed  at  the
top  and  bottom  and  on  two  sides  ;  in  front  are  two  curtains
(of  black  cloth)  running  on  a  rod.  These  curtains  are  usualty
under  the  control  of  the  medium,  who  opens  or  closes  them
at  her  pleasure  ;  at  some  of  the  later  sittings,  however,  the
curtains  remained  open  or  partly  open  during  the  whole
time.  The  sittings  always  take  place  by  artificial  light,
usually  red  light,  but  in  some  cases  subdued  white  light  was
used.  The  light  varied  in  intensity,  and  on  this  point,  as  on
others,  better  conditions  were  gradually  imposed  ;  at  the
later  sittings  it  was  possible  to  read  good  print,  standing  at
a  distance  of  two  or  three  yards  from  the  light.  Within
the  cabinet  there  was  of  course  no  light  at  all,  except  such
as  shone  through  the  open  curtains.  One  advantage  of  using
red  light  was  that  the  shutters  of  the  various  photographic
apparatuses  could  then  be  left  open,  ready  for  use  by  flash
light  at  a  moment's  notice. On  many  occasions  several


LXIX.]


The  History  of  Marthe  Beraud.


345


cameras  were  used  simultaneously  and  the  phenomena  were
photographed  from  the  front,  from  the  side  and  from  above.
Interesting  evidence  was  thus  obtained  as  regards  the  dimen-
sions of  the  phenomena  ;  on  this  point  more  will  be  said
later.

During  the  sittings  the  medium  is,  ostensibly  at  least,  in  a
hypnotic  trance,  Madame  Bisson  being  usually  the  hypnotiser.
Doubts  have  been  cast  by  some  critics  on  the  genuineness  of
the  trance  (a  question  which  Dr.  von  Schrenck  does  not  dis-
cuss at  all),  but  compared  with  establishing  the  genuineness
of  the  phenomena,  the  point  is  of  secondary  interest.  It
has  also  been  suggested  that  the  medium  may  be  assisted
by  an  accomplice,  a  suggestion  arising  naturally  out  of  the
suspicions  cast  upon  her  earlier  performances.  But  there
is  no  evidence  in  support  of  this  hypothesis,  and  at  many
of  the  sittings  strong  evidence  against  it.

If  complicity  is  suspected,  suspicion  will  naturally  fall  on
Madame  Bisson,  both  on  account  of  her  close  personal
relations  with  the  medium,  who  has  for  some  years  lived
in  her  house  as  one  of  the  family,  and  because  she  is
the  only  person  who  has  been  present  at  all  the  sittings
(with  a  few  unimportant  exceptions).  I  must  apologise  to
Madame  Bisson  for  discussing  so  frankly  the  question  of  her
good  faith  ;  she  will  see  the  necessity  of  this  course  from  a
scientific  point  of  view.

It  should  at  once  be  said  that  Madame  Bisson  has  no  financial
interest  in  the  phenomena,  and  it  is  very  difficult  to  see  what
motive  could  induce  a  woman  of  her  standing  to  enter  into
a  conspiracy  for  their  production.  But  besides  the  absence
of  motive  for  fraud,  there  is,  on  some  occasions  at  least,  good
evidence  for  the  absence  of  opportunity.  During  the  earlier
sittings  Madame  Bisson  was  allowed  to  enter  the  cabinet
during  the  production  of  the  phenomena,  and  under  these
circumstances  she  might  conceivably  have  supplied  the
medium  with  materials  of  some  sort  ;  but  at  many  of  the
later  sittings  she  did  not  enter  the  cabinet  at  all,  no  contact
was  allowed  between  her  and  the  medium  except  during  the
process  of  hypnotisation,  when  she  held  the  medium's  hands
for  a  minute  or  two  under  strict  supervision,  and  on  several
occasions  Madame  Bisson  herself  was  very  thoroughly  searched


346


Helen  de  G.  V  err  all.


[part


before  the  sitting  and  dressed  in  clothes  which  had  been  care-
fully examined  by  the  investigators.  A  detailed  description
of  these  conditions  will  be  found,  e.g.,  on  p.  320  of  Materiali-
sations phanomene,  in  the  report  of  a  sitting  held  on  August  15?
1912,  and  in  Der  Kampf  um  die  Materialisationsphanomene
(pp.  30  ff.)  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  quotes  an  account  of
this  sitting  by  Dr.  von  Gulat-Wellenburg,  who  was  present
at  it.  The  two  statements  are  in  agreement,  and  although
Dr.  von  Gulat-Wellenburg  has  shown  himself  one  of  Dr.  von
Schrenck-Notzing's  keenest  critics,  he  seems  to  have  been
quite  satisfied  with  the  conditions  as  regards  Madame  Bisson.
It  may  therefore  be  taken  as  established,  I  think,  that  in
some  sittings  at  any  rate,  the  sole  agent  in  the  immediate
production  of  the  phenomena  was  the  medium  herself.

The  question  as  to  whether  she  had  any  assistance  in  pre-
paring the  materials  (assuming  them  to  be  prepared)  is  quite
distinct.  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  however,  states  that,  with-
out his  knowledge,  Madame  Bisson  and  Eva  C.  were  shadowed
for  eight  months  by  the  agents  of  a  well-known  Paris  detec-
tive bureau.  But  the  "  anonymous  employer "  of  these
detectives  did  not  succeed  in  obtaining  "  any  evidence  what-
ever of  fraud,  or  in  tracing  the  shop  from  which  the  materials
required  for  the  sittings  .  .  .  might  have  been  obtained."
(See  Materialisationsplidnomene,  Introd.  pp.  vii  and  viii.)

It  will  be  convenient  at  this  point  to  give  a  brief  account
of  the  nature  of  the  "  materialisations,"  some  of  which  I  shall
afterwards  describe  more  in  detail.  Roughly  speaking,  they
may  be  divided  into  two  classes  :

(a)  Vague  masses  of  no  definite  shape,  sometimes  more
or  less  globular,  sometimes  ribbon-like,  white  or  greyish
white  in  colour  and,  on  some  occasions  at  least,  semi-fluid.

(b)  Objects  having  a  definite  shape.  These  are  chiefly
of  two  kinds,  arms,  including  hands  and  fingers,  and  heads.
The  arms  and  hands  are  usually  flat  and  look  as  though  they
had  been  cut  out  of  some  white  material  of  a  flexible  nature.
But  there  are  two  or  three  instances  of  "plastic"  fingers,
well  modelled  and  showing  the  outline  of  the  nails.  The
heads  also  are  sometimes  flat,  and  sometimes  appear  to  be
modelled  in  bas-relief.  The  ground  colour  of  all  these  objects
is  white  or  grey. In  the  case  of  the  heads  the  features


LXIX.]


The  History  of  Marthe  Bemud.


347


frequently  present  the  appearance  of  being  drawn  in  black  on
a  white  ground.

If  these  "  materialisations  "  are  fraudulently  produced
without  the  help  of  a  confederate,  they  must  either  be  con-
cealed in  the  cabinet  before  the  sittings  begin,  or  they  must
be  brought  into  the  cabinet  by  the  medium  on  her  own  person.
The  cabinet  and  the  only  article  of  furniture  which  it  con-
tains, the  chair  on  which  the  medium  sits,  are  always  searched
carefully  before  each  sitting.  The  medium  is  not  in  the  room
during  the  search.  At  the  sittings  described  in  Materialisa-
tions phanomene  the  chair,  which  was  of  wicker,  was  covered
with  narrow  strips  of  black  cloth,  wound  round  the  various
parts  of  the  chair,  the  reason  given  being  that  the  reflexions
from  the  polished  surface  of  the  wicker  were  confusing  in  the
photographs.  It  has  been  suggested  that  small  objects,
e.g.  rolls  of  paper,  concealed  between  the  chair  and  the  cloth,
might  have  escaped  notice  in  the  search.  It  is  conceivable
that  fraud  of  this  nature  may  have  been  practised  on  one
or  two  occasions  without  detection,  but  the  hypothesis  appears
quite  inadequate  to  explain  the  phenomena  as  a  whole,
especially  in  vieAV  of  the  fact  that  in  December,  1913,  the
cloth  was  stripped  off,  and  the  phenomena  were  not  affected
by  the  change.  We  are  therefore  forced  back  upon  the  other
hypothesis,  that,  in  some  cases,  at  least,  the  medium  conceals
the  necessary  materials  on  her  own  person.

She  also  was  carefully  searched  before  each  sitting,  and
wore  clothes  specially  designed  for  the  occasion, — tights  of
black  stockinette  (hose  and  stockings  in  one  piece),  reaching
to  the  waist,  and  a  loose  black  tunic  fastening  behind.  The
whole  surface  of  her  body  was  carefully  examined  by  Dr.
von  Schrenck-Notzing  (and  occasionally  by  other  investigators),
her  hair,  nose,  mouth  and  ears  were  also  investigated  and
sometimes  (without  any  previous  warning  to  the  medium)  a
gynaecological  examination  took  place.  With  one  very
doubtful  exception,  into  which  I  need  not  enter  here,  nothing
suspicious  was  ever  observed.  After  the  medium  had  been
examined,  the  tunic  was  securely  sewn  to  the  tights  at  the
waist ;  it  was  also  sewn  closely  round  the  medium's  neck  and
wrists,  so  that  she  could  not  get  access  to  any  part  of  her  body,
except  her  head  and  hands,  without  breaking  the  threads.


34S


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


This  method  of  procedure  leaves  only  one  of  the  natural
orifices  of  the  body  free  and  accessible,  namely  the  mouth,
and  this  fact,  taken  in  conjunction  with  certain  characteristics
of  the  observed  phenomena,  has  led  some  critics  to  suggest,
as  an  explanation  of  the  whole  case,  that  the  medium  possesses
the  faculty  of  "  regurgitation."  For  this  theory  there  is,
prima  facie  at  least,  a  good  deal  of  evidence,  and  it  deserves
careful  consideration.

The  question  is  discussed  in  detail  in  Moderne  Medium-
forschung,  a  criticism  of  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing's  book  by
Dr.  Mathilde  von  Kemnitz  and  Dr.  von  Gulat-Wellenburg.  "  A
'  regurgitator,'  "  says  Dr.  von  Kemnitz  (op.  cit.  p.  12)  "is  dis-
tinguished from  other  men,  in  that  without  any  sensation
of  sickness,  without  retching  or  sound  or  trouble  of  any  kind,
he  can  at  any  time  at  will  bring  up  into  his  mouth  the  con-
tents of  his  stomach."  Dr.  von  Gulat-Wellenburg  (op.  cit.
pp.  63  ff.)  gives  an  account  of  a  remarkable  case  of  "  regurgi-
tation "  which  came  under  his  observation.

The  subject,  Hermann  W.,  was  a  man  who  in  1913  gave
public  exhibitions,  at  which  he  swallowed  as  many  as  twenty
living  frogs  and  fishes,  having  first  drunk  a  large  quantity  of
water,  held  them  in  his  stomach  as  long  as  he  chose,  and  brought
them  up  again  alive,  without  any  sound  or  visible  symptom
of  vomiting.  Hermann  W.  is  sixty-three  years  old  and  in
good  health.  He  has  had  the  power  of  regurgitation  from
babyhood  and  can  usually  inhibit  it,  although  sometimes
with  difficulty.  For  many  years  his  wife  remained  in  ignor-
ance of  his  peculiarity.  Dr.  von  Gulat-Wellenburg  tried
several  experiments  with  the  man,  making  him  swallow  a
long  roll  of  chiffon,  an  india-rubber  glove,  and  several  pieces
of  thin  paper,  folded  up.  All  these  objects  Hermann  W.
swallowed  and  brought  up  again  without  any  difficulty.
We  have  information  of  a  family,  several  members  of  which
have  the  same  power  and  could  probably  develop  it  with
practice  such  as  Hermann  W.  has  given  to  it.

There  are  several  points  in  the  evidence  upon  Eva  C.'s
phenomena  which  suggest  "  regurgitation,"  as  Dr.  von
Schrenck-Notzing  himself  admits.  (See  Materialisations-
phanomene,  p.  355.)  In  the  first  place  the  materialised
substance  has  frequently  been  observed  to  issue  from  the


LXIX.]


The  History  of  Marthe  Beraud.


349


medium's  mouth.  A  particularly  clear  instance  of  this  is
described  in  the  report  of  a  sitting  held  on  August  21,  1911
(see  MaterialisationspTianomene,  pp.  179  ff.).  The  medium's
hands  and  feet  were  controlled,  and  under  these  circumstances
"  a  long  shred  of  tissue,  which  appeared  to  be  in  direct  con-
nexion with  her  body,  and  to  be  guided  by  its  movements,
showed  itself  several  times  in  the  light."  Dr.  von  Schrenck-
Notzing  asked  that  this  material  should  lay  itself  in  his  hand,
and  after  several  attempts  his  wish  was  gratified,  and  a
photograph  taken  of  the  phenomenon.

The  tissue,  which  remained  motionless  for  about  six  seconds,
came  out  of  Eva's  mouth,  as  the  stereoscopic  print  clearly  shows,
and  ended  in  my  hand.  It  appeared  to  be  transparent  in  parts
and  flexible  like  india-rubber.  The  substance,  which  lay  in  my
hand,  struck  me  as  heavy  in  proportion  to  its  size  and  comparable
to  some  heavy  organic  substance  (Mesenterium  ?)  ;  it  was  damp,
cold  and  slimy,  and  gave  the  impression  of  a  long  fibrous,  irregu-
larly-shaped piece  of  membrane,  of  a  definite  consistencjr  and
formation.

Later  in  the  sitting  a  second  photograph  was  taken  :

We  see  .  .  .  the  medium's  two  hands  holding  the  curtains
and  her  head  thrust  out  through  the  opening.  .  .  .  The  front
part  of  her  face  and  the  substance,  issuing  from  her  mouth  and  held
by  it,  are  outside  the  curtains.

This  is  only  one  of  many  occasions  upon  which  the
materialised  substance  was  clearly  seen  to  come  from  the
medium's  mouth,  and  the  nature  of  this  substance,  as  described
by  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  (he  speaks  of  it  as  damp  and
slimy),  is  perfectly  consistent  with  the  hypothesis  that  it  has
been  swallowed  and  brought  up.  Other  evidence  can  also  be
adduced  to  support  this  contention.  At  a  sitting  held  on
September  8,  1912  (see  Mater  ialisationsphanomene,  pp.  333  ff.)  :

Strips  of  the  material  [were  seen]  on  the  bodice  of  the  [medium's]
dress.  .  .  .  We  ascertained  by  repeatedly  touching  her  dress,
that  the  parts  where  the  material  had  been  observed  were  wet,
as  though  moistened  by  a  slimy  substance.  .  .  .  An  investigation
of  the  dress  [after  the  sitting]  disclosed  on  the  breast  and  lap  a
group  of  irregular,  whitish-grey  spots  .  .  .  and  in  particular  a


350


Helen  cle  G.  V  err  all.


[part


long  streak  below  the  waist,  .  .  .  just  where  I  [Dr.  von  Schrenck-
Notzing]  had  seen  the  bright  streak  disappear  [as  described  in  the
report  of  the  sitting].

The  substance  of  wbich  these  spots  were  composed,  and
several  other  very  small  quantities  of  the  "  materialisations,"
obtained  at  other  sittings,  were  subjected  to  careful  analysis
(cf.  Materialisationsphanomene,  pp.  439  ff.).  The  general  con-
clusion to  be  drawn  from  this  analysis  appears  to  be  that
the  substance  is  of  an  organic  nature,  somewhat  resembling
saliva,  but  not  identical  with  it.  So  far  as  the  result  of  the
analysis  goes,  there  seems  to  be  no  trace  of  any  substance
which  might  not  be  produced  by  normal,  or  only  slightly
abnormal,  secretions  from  the  human  body.  But  one  of  the
unsatisfactory  features  of  the  case  is  that  it  has  never  been
possible  to  obtain  for  subsequent  analysis  any  fragment  of
what  may  be  called  the  solid  materialisations.  Several
attempts  have  been  made  (one  of  them  forcible),  but  all  that
has  been  obtained  is  a  few  drops  of  the  moisture  by  which
these  materialisations  are  frequently  accompanied.  It  may
be,  as  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  maintains,  that  owing  to
the  nature  of  the  "  ideoplastic  "  process  (see  below,  p.  363)  by
which  these  phenomena  are  produced,  it  is  impossible  to  seize
the  substance  without  the  risk  of  serious  injury  to  the  medium.
But  the  facts  obviously  lend  themselves  to  a  more  sceptical
interpretation.  However  that  may  be,  the  issuing  of  the
materialised  substance  from  the  medium's  mouth,  and  the
nature  of  that  substance  so  far  as  it  has  been  ascertained,  lend
colour  to  the  regurgitation  theory.

Another  point  in  favour  of  this  theory  for  those  who  are
not  disposed  to  believe  in  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena
is  that  the  medium  would  then  be  provided  with  an  excellent
hiding-place,  in  which  she  might  conceal  the  materials  required
for  her  performance  both  before  and  after  it.  This  is  im-
portant, because  the  fact  that  careful  searching  has  so  far
failed  to  reveal  anything  suspicious  has  been  put  forward  as
a  strong  point  in  her  favour.  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing
calls  attention  to  this  in  his  introduction  :

Since  the  special  gift  of  Eva  C.  is  confined  solely  to  the  sphere
of  materialisation,  the  only  objection  that  can  be  raised  is  that


lxix.]  The  History  of  Marthe  Beraud.  351


the  materialised  products  are  somehow  fraudulently  smuggled
into  the  sittings.  The  problem  of  control  is  proportionately  simple,
since  it  is  concerned  only  with  preventing  the  introduction,  piecing
together,  and  removal  of  any  substance.  None  of  all  the  observers
who  have  attended  sittings  during  these  four  years  has  been  able
to  show  that  previously  prepared  pictures  or  materials  have  been
brought  into  the  sittings  and  again  removed  after  use.  .  .  .  The
result  on  this  point  is  and  remains  negative,  that  is  to  say,  in  favour
of  the  medium.

The  methods  of  search  normally  employed  by  Dr.  von
Schrenck-Notzing  and  his  fellow-investigators  would,  however,
be  quite  useless  on  the  supposition  that  the  materials  had  been
swallowed.  But  attempts  were  made  on  several  occasions  to
detect  or  preclude  regurgitation.  At  three  sittings  in  May,
1913,  the  medium's  head  was  enveloped  in  a  net  veil,  which
was  firmly  sewn  to  the  neck  of  her  tunic.  At  the  first  of  these
sittings,  on  May  2,  1913,  a  head  was  seen,  which  in  its  general
character  resembles  phenomena  obtained  at  earlier  sittings,
that  is  to  say,  the  features  present  the  appearance  of  being
painted  or  drawn  on  some  flat  material,  which  is  creased  in
several  places  and  torn  at  the  edges.  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing
was  not  present  at  this  sitting,  which  is  only  cursorily  described
in  his  book,  so  that  one  cannot  draw  any  definite  conclusions
from  it.  At  the  next  sitting  on  May  9,  1913,  "  at  10.14  p.m.
a  white  strip,  about  half  a  yard  long,  came  through  the  veil
before  our  eyes  and  laid  itself  upon  the  upper  part  of  her
[the  medium's]  left  arm."  At  10.28  p.m.  the  phenomenon
disappeared,  but  unfortunately  no  record  was  made  as  to
the  exact  manner  of  its  disappearance.  A  photograph  taken
at  10.17  p.m.  shows  this  white  material  lying  across  the
medium's  left  arm  with  one  end  in  her  lap.  In  general  appear-
ance it  suggests  a  strip  of  very  fine  butter-muslin.

The  third  sitting,  on  May  16,  1913,  is  worth  describing  in
some  detail,  as  it  presents  one  very  curious  incident.  The
medium  was  dressed  on  this  occasion  in  a  close-fitting  knitted
costume,  made  all  in  one  piece  and  opening  only  at  the  wrists
and  from  the  back  of  the  neck  to  the  waist.  Her  head  was
covered  with  a  black  net  veil  sewn  to  the  neck  of  her  dress.
"  An  attempt  to  force  a  way  through  at  any  point  with  a

z


352


Helen  de  0.  Verrall.


[part


sharpened  pencil  without  breaking  the  stitches  was  unsuccess-
ful." The  mesh  of  the  net  was  about  TL  inch  square.  The
sitters  present  on  this  occasion  were  Dr.  Bourbon,  Monsieur
de  Vesme,  Madame  Bisson,  and  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing.
The  general  conditions  were  as  usual  (see  above,  p.  344).  The
sitting  began  at  9.5  p.m.  and  it  is  noted  that  the  medium's
hands  remained  visible  throughout,  holding  the  curtains.
At  9.9  p.m.  she  changed  the  position  of  her  hands,  crossing
the  forearms,  and  then  replaced  them  in  the  usual  position,
the  right  hand  holding  the  right  curtain,  the  left  hand  the
left  curtain.  At  9.25  "a  white  substance  appeared  hanging
out  of  her  mouth  like  a  great  tongue  and  seemed  to  be  making
its  way  through  the  veil."  Then  a  finger  was  seen  at  the  end
of  this  tongue  and  a  photograph  was  taken,  which  is  thus
described  by  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  :

Eva's  mouth  is  wide  open.  Part  of  the  veil  has  been  drawn  a
little  way  into  the  mouth-cavity.  One  sees  plainly  that  along
the  whole  width  of  the  lower  lip  a  broad  mass  ...  of  a  matted,
skein-like  nature,  is  hanging  out  of  the  mouth  ;  it  appears  to  be
issuing  from  between  the  tongue  and  the  lower  lip.  At  the  end
of  this  skein  of  threads  hangs  a  finger  of  natural  size,  completely
modelled  and  cut  clean  across  at  the  middle  of  the  first  phalanx  ;
a  thread  is  wound  round  the  second  joint  uniting  it  to  the  mass
[above],  with  which  it  is  not  otherwise  connected.

This  photograph  is  reproduced  in  Materialisations  phano-
mene  (p.  418)  and  corresponds  with  Dr.  von  Schrenck's  de-
scription, and  a  side  view  taken  simultaneously  is  also  shown.
For  several  minutes  after  the  photograph  was  taken,  Dr.
Bourbon  and  Monsieur  de  Vesme  were  able  to  observe  this
finger.  Dr.  Bourbon,  who  had  the  best  view  of  the  incident,
thus  describes  it  :

About  9.20  p.m.  Eva  leant  forward  towards  us  and  we  saw  the
"  substance  "  coming  out  of  her  mouth  and  certainly  on  the  inner
side  of  the  veil.

Very  shortly  afterwards  I  perceived  that  "  something "  was
hanging  out  of  her  mouth  and  moving  up  and  down  on  her  breast  ;
it  was  a  finger  tied  to  a  cord  of  the  substance  with  which  we  are
familiar.  The  finger  touched  me  and  in  answer  to  a  question
from  one  of  the  observers  I  said  that  the  finger  felt  dry.  Again


LXIX.]


The  History  of  Marthe  Beraud.


353


the  medium  took  my  hand  and  placed  it  under  the  object ;  I  felt
and  now  saw  clearly  and  definitely  a  finger,  which  was  damp  and
cold,  fall  into  the  hollow  of  my  hand,  where  it  rolled  to  and  fro
for  a  few  moments  ;  its  size  appeared  to  be  that  of  a  full-grown
finger.

The  phenomenon  vanished.

Eva  then  allowed  me  to  feel  the  veil,  which  was  quite  wet
through  in  the  region  of  the  mouth  as  though  with  saliva.  Soon
afterwards  with  practically  no  alteration  in  the  position  of  the
curtains  the  phenomenon  was  repeated,  the  hands  remaining  in
full  light  throughout.  I  could  now  perceive  the  finger  quite  clearly  ;
it  hung  from  a  grey  substance  having  two  or  three  strands  and
moved  up  and  down  on  the  medium's  breast.  Two  or  three  times
the  finger  made  distinct  bending  motions  and  then  disappeared
on  the  spot,  as  though  it  had  ceased  to  be  illuminated.  This
manner  of  disappearing  on  the  part  of  the  phenomena  can  often
be  observed.

Then  Eva  rested  with  her  hands  laid  on  her  lap,  holding  the
curtain  open  as  often  before.  Suddenly  I  saw  something  white
between  her  hands  which  were  about  ten  centimetres  apart.  I
pointed  this  out  to  my  fellow-observers  and  we  ascertained  that
we  again  had  to  do  with  a  small  finger,  which  lay  parallel  to  those
of  the  medium.  Soon  it  stretched  itself  slowly  and  we  perceived
now  that  it  lay  on  a  mass  of  the  above-mentioned  substance,  united
by  a  cord  with  the  medium's  body.  A  few  minutes  afterwards
the  whole  thing  disappeared  into  the  opening  of  the  curtains  and
thereupon  in  spite  of  our  wishes  nothing  more  showed  itself.

At  the  conclusion  of  the  sitting  Eva  was  searched  and  the
veil  examined.  There  were  no  holes  in  it  and  the  stitches
fastening  it  to  the  tunic  were  intact.  The  "  finger,"  as  the
photographs  clearly  show,  is  cylindrical  in  form  and  about
life-size ;  in  fact  it  does  in  shape  very  closely  resemble  a  human
finger,  showing  the  slight  indentation  at  the  joints  and  the
outline  of  the  nail.  It  appears  certain  therefore  that  the
"  regurgitation  "  theory  will  not  by  itself  suffice  to  account
for  this  phenomenon.  For  if  the  finger  came  from  the
medium's  mouth  and  therefore  from  inside  the  veil,  it  must
have  passed  through  the  veil  before  it  could  fall  into  Mon-
sieur Bourbon's  hand. Taking  into  account  the  respective


354


Helen  de  G.  V  err  all.


[part


dimensions  of  the  finger  and  the  apertures  in  the  veil,
it  seems  that  the  finger  could  not  have  passed  through  the
veil  by  any  normal  means.  We  may  assume,  if  we  please,
that  it  passed  through  by  some  supernormal  means  (and
supposing  the  finger  itself  to  be  of  supernormal  origin  there
is  no  knowing  what  it  might  do  in  that  way),  but  considering
that  it  was  never  seen  inside  the  veil,  it  is  simpler  to  suppose
that  it  never  was  inside.  We  must  then  dismiss  the  "  re-
gurgitation "  theory  as  an  explanation  of  this  phenomenon
and  consider  whether  there  is  any  other  way  in  which  it  might
have  been  fraudulently  produced.

We  have  two  hypotheses  to  choose  from  :  (a)  that  the  finger
and  the  accompanying  "  substance  "  were  concealed  by  the
medium  either  on  her  person  or  in  the  cabinet,  (6)  that  they
were  handed  to  her  by  some  confederate  at  or  after  the  begin-
ning of  the  sitting.  I  have  already  discussed  above  the
cmestion  of  whether  there  is  any  reason  to  suppose  that
Madame  Bisson  plays  the  part  of  a  confederate.  Here  I
need  only  add  that  as  Madame  Bisson  was  not  searched
on  this  occasion,  and  held  the  medium's  hands  for  a  few
moments  during  the  process  of  hypnotisation,  the  possibility
of  her  handing  something  to  the  medium  was  not  wholly
excluded.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  only  fair  to  repeat  that
neither  on  this  occasion  nor  on  any  other  is  there  a  shred  of
positive  evidence  against  Madame  Bisson,  and  there  is  no
doubt  that  some  phenomena  do  occur  without  any  complicity
on  her  part.  At  the  same  time  I  would  suggest  the  desir-
ability from  the  evidential  point  of  view  of  holding  some
sittings  in  which  Madame  Bisson  did  not  approach  the  cabinet
at  all,  or  at  least  in  which  there  was  no  contact  between  her
and  the  medium.  For  it  is  a  generally  recognised  principle
in  scientific  experiments  to  vary  all  the  known  conditions,
in  order  to  discover  which,  if  any,  are  essential  to  the  pro-
duction of  the  observed  effects.

With  regard  to  the  possibility  of  the  medium  having  con-
cealed materials  of  some  kind  in  the  cabinet  or  on  her  person,
it  should  be  noted  that  these  materials  would  have  to  be
easily  accessible  and  more  or  less  ready  for  use.  All  the
observers  agree  that  her  hands  were  continually  under  observa-
tion, holding  the  curtains. I  do  not  think  this  statement  can


lxix.]  The  History  of  Marthe  Bemud.  355

be  accepted  without  some  reservations  (for  reasons  which
I  shall  presently  explain)  ;  nevertheless  it  is  hardly  possible
under  the  circumstances  that  she  should  have  had  the
free  use  of  the  whole  of  either  hand  for  more  than  a  very
short  time,  too  short  to  admit  of  any  complicated  process
of  extracting  or  manipulating  the  materials.  That  being  so,
it  is  extremely  difficult  to  see  where  she  could  have  hidden
an  object  as  large  as  a  human  finger,  so  as  to  escape  detection
in  the  preliminary  search.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  dress
she  was  wearing  that  day  left  no  part  of  her  body  accessible
except  her  head  and  hands.  Supposing  the  phenomenon
to  be  fraudulent,  the  finger  was  probably  attached  to  the
white  mass  which  accompanied  it,  before  the  beginning  of
of  the  sitting.  This  can  be  inferred  from  the  argument  which
I  have  just  put  forward  in  regard  to  the  very  small  oppor-
tunity, if  any,  that  she  had  of  using  her  hands.

Monsieur  Bourbon  in  his  report  speaks  of  the  "  substance  "
coming  out  of  the  medium's  mouth  inside  the  veil.  But  since
the  veil  had  been  caught  up  into  her  mouth,  as  the  photograph
shows,  it  would  be  extremely  difficult  in  a  rather  poor  light
to  be  sure  whether  the  substance  was  inside  or  outside.  It
is  impossible  to  determine  this  point  with  any  certainty
from  the  photograph,  and  the  fact  of  the  veil  being  thrust
into  the  mouth  is  in  itself  rather  suspicious,  because  this
proceeding  would  be  necessary  on  the  supposition  that  the
medium,  having  extracted  the  material  from  some  place  of
concealment,  wished  to  make  it  appear  to  be  streaming  from
her  mouth,  whereas  one  does  not  see  why  the  veil  should
be  caught  up  in  this  way,  if  the  phenomenon  is  genuine.

It  is  interesting  on  this  point  to  compare  the  phenomena
obtained  at  the  previous  sitting.  "  A  white  strip,"  says
Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  "  about  half  a  yard  long  came
through  the  veil  before  our  eyes  and  laid  itself  upon  the  upper
part  of  her  left  arm."  Some  of  the  sitters  thought  they  saw
a  finger,  but  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  did  not  see  it  him-
self, nor  does  the  photograph  show  it.  At  the  conclusion  of
the  sitting,  about  sixteen  minutes  afterwards,  the  veil  was
found  to  be  dry.  The  photograph,  as  described  above,  shows
the  "  white  strip  "  lying  over  her  left  arm  with  the  end  in
her  lap. (See  Maierialisationsphdnomene,  p.  412.) The  veil


356


Helen  cle  0.  Verrall.


[part


is  hanging  clown  quite  clear  of  her  face.  No  one  touched
this  object,  and  therefore  there  is  only  the  evidence  of  the
photograph  to  show  the  nature  of  the  material  of  which  it  was
composed.  This  material,  as  I  have  said,  judging  from  the
photograph,  somewhat  resembles  white  butter-muslin.  The
substructure  is  rather  filmy  in  appearance,  with  coarser
threads  running  through  it.  At  one  point  there  is  apparently
a  rent  in  the  stuff.  Its  position,  as  it  hangs  from  the  medium's
arm  to  her  lap,  shows  that,  although  limp,  it  can  to  some
extent  support  its  own  weight  and  is  not  completely  fluid.

It  does  not  seem  that  any  material  presenting  the  char-
acteristics above  described  could  be  forced  through  a  veil,
having  a  mesh  inch  square,  by  normal  means  without  leaving
obvious  traces  of  its  passage.  If  therefore  we  accept  the
statement  that  "  the  white  strip  came  through  the  veil,"  it
is  difficult  to  resist  the  conclusion  that  we  have  to  do  here
with  some  abnormal  phenomenon.  This  statement  is  not
open  to  the  same  objection  that  can  be  raised  against  the
similar  statement  made  in  the  report  on  the  later  sitting
of  May  16,  1913,  because  on  this  first  occasion  the  veil  was
not  caught  into  the  medium's  mouth.  With  the  veil  hanging
loose,  as  in  the  photograph,  it  would  be  comparatively  easy
to  determine  whether  the  substance  was  coming  from  the
medium's  mouth  or  not.1

At  the  same  time,  considering  all  the  circumstances  of
the  case,  the  conditions  of  light,  etc.,  an  observer  might
be  mistaken  on  such  a  point,  which  brings  us  up  against
one  of  the  inherent  difficulties  of  judging  a  case  of  this
sort  on  written  evidence.  To  the  actual  observer  the  words
"  I  saw  it  coming  from  her  mouth  "  may  imply  many  con-
vincing details  which  they  do  not  actually  express.  To
some  extent  no  doubt  this  difficulty  is  insuperable  ;  but  I
think  it  might  have  been  partly  overcome  by  a  greater
precision  in  detail,  especially  upon  certain  crucial  points.  The

1  A  photograph  taken  by  Dr.  von  Schrenck  with  another  "  materialising  "
medium,  Stanislawa  P.  (see  op.  cit.  pp.  465  ff.)  shows  a  similar  white  sub-
stance issuing  from  her  mouth  through  a  veil.  This  substance  certainly
appears  to  be  inside  the  veil  as  well  as  outside.  In  my  opinion  this  is  one
of  the  strongest  pieces  of  evidence  for  the  abnormal  nature  of  the  substance
which  Dr.  von  Schrenck  has  yet  published.


LXIX.]


The  History  of  Marthe  Beraud.


357


report  of  the  particular  phenomenon  which  we  are  now
considering  may  be  taken  as  a  good  example  of  what  I  mean  :

10.14  p.m.  A  white  strip  about  half  a  yard  long  comes  through
the  veil  before  our  eyes  and  lays  itself  upon  the  upper  part  of  her
left  arm.  .  .  .

10.17  p.m. The  strip  is  lying  over  the  medium's  left  arm  and
the  upper  part  of  her  thigh.  .  .  .
10.25  p.m. The  strip  visible  again.

10.28  p.m.  Eva  feels  that  the  phenomenon  is  about  to  vanish.
10.30  p.m. Close  of  the  sitting.

It  will  be  seen  that  between  10.14  p.m.  and  10.17  p.m.
the  white  strip  changed  its  position  considerably.  Was  there
an  opportunity  for  continuous  observation  during  this  period
and  if  so,  why  are  not  the  movements  of  the  white  strip
more  precisely  described  ?  Or  were  the  curtains  closed
during  any  part  of  this  time  ?  At  10.25  p.m.  it  is  said  that
the  strip  was  "  visible  again,"  impljdng  that  there  had  been
an  interval  during  which  it  had  not  been  visible.  Was  this
due  to  the  closing  of  the  curtains  ?  In  many  of  the  reports
cpiestions  such  as  these  are  raised  and  left  unanswered,  which
produces  an  unsatisfactory  impression  of  vagueness  on  the
mind  of  the  reader.  In  a  case  where  the  whole  value  of  the
evidence  depends  upon  accuracy  of  observation  it  is  hardly
possible  to  be  too  precise.

I  have  thought  it  worth  while  to  discuss  this  particular
group  of  phenomena  in  some  detail,  because  they  are  fairly
representative  of  the  case,  and  the  conditions  under  which
they  were  observed  make  them  especially  interesting.  They
prove,  as  it  seems  to  me,  that  regurgitation  cannot  have
been  used  in  all  instances.  If  therefore  these  phenomena
were  fraudulently  produced,  the  medium  must  have  some
other  means  besides  regurgitation  of  obtaining  access  to
materials  not  known  to  be  in  her  possession,  and  whatever
means  were  employed  on  this  occasion  may  well  have  been
employed  on  other  occasions  also.  I  have  already  indicated
the  chief  difficulties  in  the  way  of  supposing  that  the  medium
gets  possession  of  the  recpiired  materials  by  any  normal  means,
and  I  shall  return  to  this  question  later. Meanwhile  it  will  be


358


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


convenient  to  consider  what  evidence  there  is  as  to  the  nature  of
the  substance  composing  what  I  have  called  the  solid  material-
isations. In  discussing  this  question  I  shall  take  into  account
only  those  phenomena  of  which  photographs  are  available.

These  materialisations  are  of  two  types,  flat  and  modelled,
the  latter  being  less  common.  The  finger  seen  at  the  sitting
of  May  16,  1913,  is  a  notable  instance  of  this  second  type
of  phenomenon.  A  somewhat  similar  finger,  similarly  bound
round  the  second  joint  with  a  cord-like  substance,  was
observed  on  April  1,  1913.  The  two  fingers,  however,  are  not
precisely  similar,  for  whereas  the  finger  seen  on  May  13,  1913,
was  almost  completely  extended,  the  finger  seen  on  April  1,
1913,  was  bent  at  the  second  joint.  In  this  connexion  it
should  be  noted  that  in  his  account  of  the  sitting  of  May  16,
1913,  Dr.  Bourbon  says  that  he  saw  the  finger  make  "  two  or
three  distinct  bending  movements."

It  is  difficult  to  form  any  definite  hypothesis  as  to  what  the
substance  could  be,  of  which  these  fingers  are  made.  They
suggest  white  plaster  casts,  but  evidently  the  substance  is
not  hard,  like  plaster,  because  in  the  photograph  taken  on
May  16,  1913,  it  can  be  seen  that  the  outline  of  the  finger
has  yielded  a  little  to  the  pressure  of  the  cord,  by  which  it
is  suspended.  Possibly  the  effect  could  be  produced  by  some
substance  of  the  nature  of  plasticine  in  the  hands  of  a  toler-
ably skilful  modeller.

A  more  frequent  type  of  phenomenon  consists  in  flat,  white
"  pseudo-hands,"  which  look  as  though  they  had  been  cut
out  of  some  material  having  the  consistency  of  white  leather.
These  "  pseudo-hands "  bear  only  a  rude  likeness  to  real
hands  and  are  often  incomplete,  having  only  two  or  three
fingers.  It  is  impossible  not  to  be  struck  by  the  fact  that
they  present  exactly  the  appearance  that  might  be  expected
of  fraudulent  materialisations,  and  there  is  evidence  to  show
that,  whatever  their  origin  may  be,  they  are  used  on  occasion
to  perform  a  questionable  function.  In  Dr.  von  Schrenck-
Notzing's  report  on  the  sitting  of  August  11,  1911,  the  following
passage  occurs  :

Out  of  an  agglomerate  of  the  elemental  substance,  which  kept
shifting  its  position,  there  was  formed  in  her  lap  a  third  clearly


LXIX.]


The  History  of  Marihe  Beraud.


359


visible  flat  hand  [i.e.  in  addition  to  the  medium's  two  hands  which
were  holding  the  curtains].  Then  I  also  observed  about  thirty
centimetres  above  her  head  a  more  completely  developed  hand.
When  the  phenomenon  repeated  itself  several  times  and  was  again
visible  above  her  head  I  took  a  photograph,  which  is  of  a  very
remarkable  character.  For  in  the  place  of  her  right  hand  is  the
flat  hand  which  I  had  repeatedly  seen,  three  fingers  and  the  greater
part  of  the  back  of  the  hand  being  visible.  ...  In  the  same  photo-
graph we  may  observe  over  Eva's  head  a  remarkable  four-cornered
object,  irregularly  shaped  below.  We  may  easily  suppose  that  the
substance  is  supported  by  the  medium's  right  hand  held  above
her  head.  .  .  .

After  the  second  photograph  [i.e.  the  photograph  described
above]  the  phenomena  continued.  A  strip  of  stuff  about  thirty
centimetres  wide  and  half  a  yard  long  Avas  waved  at  us  from  behind
the  curtain,  but  immediately  withdrawn.  Finally  there  appeared
coming  from  the  left  a  hand  fully  developed  in  all  respects  with
five  fingers  and  a  forearm  (the  medium's  hand1?)  whilst  Eva's
two  hands  (the  pseudo-hand1  ?)  lay  visible  on  her  lap.  This  appear-
ance made  a  threatening  motion,  remained  visible  for  four  or  five
seconds  and  was  then  withdrawn.  .  .  .  The  same  hand  touched
the  back  of  my  left  hand  and  pressed  the  tip  of  its  finger  against
my  skin  so  that  I  clearly  felt  the  nail  (obviously  Eva's  hand  1).  .  .  .

Then  the  sitting  ended.  Considering  the  result  of  the  photo-
graph, the  cpuestion  must  remain  open  whether  one  of  the  two
hands  which  lay  on  her  knees  was  not  in  these  [last]  phenomena
also  merely  the  appearance  of  a  hand,  so  that  on  this  assumption
the  frankly  material  character  of  the  final  phenomena  was  pro-
duced with  the  help  of  one  of  the  medium's  hands.

Two  things  are  clear  from  this  report.  In  the  first  place
there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  phenomena  on  this  occasion
were  at  least  partly  fraudulent.  The  photograph  shows
that  the  pseudo-hand  was  very  cunningly  placed  to  simulate
the  real  hand,  and  the  curtain  on  that  side  is  gripped  together

1  The  words  in  round  brackets  are  part  of  Dr.  von  Sehrenck-Notzing's
report;  they  were,  I  imagine,  added  in  consequence  of  the  disclosures  made
by  the  photograph,  the  passage  without  the  bracketed  words  representing
what  was  actually  observed  at  the  sitting.  I  draw  this  inference  from  Dr.
von  Sehrenck-Notzing's  words  :  "  Considering  the  result  of  the  photograph."
(See  above.)


360


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


(probably  between  the  medium's  knee  and  the  arm  of  her
chair)  in  such  a  way  that  in  a  rather  poor  light  it  would  appear
to  be  gripped  by  the  pseudo-hand.  Recourse  was  apparently
had  to  this  form  of  deception  on  at  least  two  other  occasions
(see  Materialisationsphanomene,  pp.  275  and  313).

In  the  second  place  it  is  clear  that  until  the  photograph  was
developed,  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  did  not  clearly  realise  the
deceptive  nature  of  the  phenomena.  He  was  under  the  im-
pression at  the  time  of  the  sitting  that  the  medium's  two  hands
were  "visible  on  her  lap,"'  when  a  third  fully-developed  hand  was
seen.  It  was  this  occasion  that  I  had  in  view  when  I  said  that  the
statement  as  to  her  two  hands  being  continually  under  observa-
tion could  only  be  accepted  with  some  reservations.  She
could  not  deceive  the  camera,  but  she  could  apparently  deceive
the  observers.  Taking  all  the  evidence  into  account,  and
especially  the  more  stringent  conditions  as  to  the  control
of  the  hands  which  were  enforced  at  the  later  sittings,  I  do
not  think  that  this  device  can  have  been  used  at  all  frequently.
But  the  fact  that  it  was  used  once  at  least  with  partial
success  is  damaging,  as  regards  both  the  honesty  of  the
medium  and  the  trustworthiness  of  the  evidence  concerning
her  phenomena.

These  pseudo-hands  are  frequently  accompanied  by  shape-
less masses  of  what  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  calls  "  the
elemental  substance."  I  have  compared  this  substance  to
butter- muslin,  but  it  is  of  a  curiously  variable  character  and
presents  one  of  the  most  perplexing  features  of  the  case.  The
most  important  advance  that  could  be  made  in  the  evidence
would  be  to  obtain  further  knowledge  as  to  the  nature  of
this  substance.  But  the  investigators  are  seriously  hampered
by  the  fact  that  the  medium  strongly  objects  to  any  attempt
to  seize  the  materialisations  or  to  handle  them  without  warn-
ing, alleging, — whether  truly  or  no, — that  such  attempts  have
a  damaging  effect  upon  her  health.  Nevertheless,  one  such
attempt  has  been  made,  at  a  sitting  held  on  August  30,  1912.
Dr.  Kafka  thus  describes  the  incident  (Materialisations-
phanomene, p.  345) :

.  .  .  Next  a  thin  brownish  strip  appeared  on  the  right  side  of  her
neck,  hanging  out  of  her  dress. It  was  about  three  inches  long


LXIX.]


The  History  of  Marihe  Bemud.


361


and  recalled  in  its  structure  a  coarse  porous  tissue.  This  strip
did  not  change  its  appearance  during  the  three  or  four  seconds
that  the  light  [an  electric  torch]  was  on  it.  At  Dr.  von  Schrenck's
request  I  snatched  at  the  substance  ;  the  medium  cried  out  in
protest  and  made  violent  movements  of  her  whole  body  and
especially  of  her  neck,  so  that  I  seized  nothing.  I  also  felt  no
moisture  under  my  hand.

This  incident  is  interesting  as  far  as  it  goes,  but  it  is  far
from  being  conclusive.  The  materialisation  seen  on  this
occasion  was  very  small,  and,  as  Dr.  Kafka  himself  suggests,
the  violent  movements  of  the  medium  might  easily  have
prevented  him  from  laying  his  hand  on  it.  The  failure  of  a
similar  attempt  to  seize  a  large  mass  of  substance  would  have
afforded  much  better  evidence  of  supernormality.  I  think
that  the  efforts  of  those  who  are  investigating  these  pheno-
mena should  now  be  mainly  directed  to  seizing  a  portion  of
this  substance,  or  at  least  to  demonstrating,  far  more  clearly
than  has  been  done  yet,  that  it  cannot  be  seized.  The  ex-
periment made  on  August  30,  1912,  did  not  apparently  do
the  medium  any  permanent  injury.  Could  not  this  experi-
ment be  repeated  at  intervals,  especially  at  moments  when
a  large  mass  of  substance  is  visible  ?

Of  all  the  phenomena  associated  with  Eva  C.  the  most
sensational  are  the  more  or  less  realistic  representations  of
human  heads,  which  appear  at  the  sittings,  some  being  flat,
others  modelled  in  relief.  In  some  cases  it  is  difficult  to  be
sure  whether  the  head  is  flat  or  modelled,  but  on  several
occasions  photographs  were  taken  simultaneously  from  differ-
ent positions,  and  the  proportions  of  the  materialised  object
thus  demonstrated.  (See  Materialisationsphanomene,  pp.  283 ff.
and  311  ff.1)  The  heads  are  never  completely  modelled  ;
they  are  masks  in  bas-relief,  and  the  modelling  shows  as  a
rule  very  little  technical  skill.  The  features  are  often  dis-
torted, especially  the  nose.  The  most  realistic  of  these  modelled
faces  is  the  one  which  appeared  at  the  sitting  of  November

1  By  the  courtesy  of  Dr.  von  Schrenek-Notzinu:  I  have  also  had  the  oppor-
tunity of  examining  some  stereoscopic  photographs,  in  which  the  dimensions
of  these  heads  can  be  more  clearly  seen.


362


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


22,  1911  (Materialisationsphdnomene,  p.  216).  Even  here
there  is  distortion,  but  rather  as  though  a  good  model  had
been  roughly  used  and  knocked  out  of  shape.

The  flat  heads,  on  the  other  hand,  display  considerable
skill  in  draughtsmanship  ;  as  Dr.  vow  Schrenck  points  out
himself,  they  present  the  appearance  of  "  artistic  "  productions,
drawn  or  painted  on  some  thin  pliant  material,  such  as  silk
or  linen.  In  at  least  one  instance  (the  Monna  Lisa  of  Material-
isations phxinomene,  p.  239  1)  the  lighting  of  the  medium's
face  is  inconsistent  with  the  lighting  of  the  materialised  head,
proving  that  the  photograph  shows  us  in  one  case  the  actual
shadows  caused  by  the  magnesium  flash  by  which  it  was  taken,
and  in  the  other  only  a  representation  of  shadows  already
existing  as  an  integral  part  of  the  "  materialisation."  Many
of  the  heads  show  clear  traces  of  having  been  creased  or
folded,  and  in  some  cases  the  edges  are  torn.

These  heads  are  chiefly  interesting  as  affording  evidence
of  a  surprising  and  most  suspicious  nature  as  to  the  source
from  which  some  of  them  were  derived.  A  photograph  taken
at  the  sitting  of  November  27,  1912  (Materialisationsphano-
mene,  p.  367)  shows  the  medium  with  a  mass  of  some  white
substance  fastened  to  one  side  of  her  face.  On  the  back  of
this  substance,  as  shown  by  a  simultaneous  photograph  taken
from  inside  the  cabinet,  there  appear  the  letters  M I  R  0  in
lar^e  capitals.  The  explanation  of  this  curious  phenomenon
given  by  the  medium  at  the  next  sitting  is  of  the  flimsiest.
On  the  other  hand,  in  a  series  of  articles  published  in  January
and  February,  1914,  in  the  Psychic  Magazine,2  it  is  pointed  out
that  these  capital  letters  bear  a  very  close  resemblance  to  the
lettering  on  the  cover  of  the  French  illustrated  paper  Le  Miroir,
and  that  some  of  the  heads  seen  at  Eva's  sittings  are  obviously
derived  from  illustrations  which  have  been  published  on  the
front  page  of  Le  Miroir.  Two  clear  instances  of  this  may
be  seen  on  pp.  386  and  402  of  Materialisationsphdnomene.
With  the  first  of  these  two  photographs,  taken  at  the  sitting
of  January  19,  1913,  may  be  compared  the  portrait  of  Presi-

1  An  enlarged  and  much  clearer  reproduction  of  this  photograph  appears
in  Madame  Bisson's  book  Les  Phenomenes  dits  de  Materialisation,  p.  101.

2  A  periodical  which,  in  spite  of  its  English  title,  is  French,  and  published
in  Paris.


LXIX.]


The  History  of  Marthe  Beraud.


363


dent  Wilson,  published  in  Le  Miroir  on  November  17,  1912,
and  with  the  second,  taken  at  the  sitting  of  March  6,  1913,
may  be  compared  the  portrait  of  President  Poincare,  published
in  Le  Miroir  on  April  21,  1912.  In  both  cases  the  features
have  been  to  some  extent  altered  or  blotted  out,  but  there
can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  (nor  indeed  is  it  denied  by
Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing1)  that  these  '"materialisations"
are  in  some  way  derived  from  the  Miroir  portraits.  On  the
other  hand  a  careful  comparison  of  details  makes  it  clear
that  at  least  in  some  cases  the  "  materialisations "  do  not
consist  of  the  actual  paper  sheets  torn  from  Le  Miroir,  because
there  are  slight  discrepancies  which  no  amount  of  "  touching-
up  "  will  explain.  (For  the  details  of  this  evidence,  which
it  is  impossible  to  give  here,  see  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing's
Der  Kampf  um  die  Materialisations phanomene.)  The  heads
at  the  sittings  present  the  appearance  of  a  rough  tracing  or
copy  of  the  Miroir  portraits,  deliberately  botched  in  various
ways.

Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  brings  forward  evidence  to  show
that  there  are  also  discrepancies  between  the  capital  letters
observed  on  November  27,  1912,  and  the  Miroir  title  ;  but
the  evidence  on  this  point  does  not  seem  to  me  conclusive,  if
allowances  are  made  for  the  possible  effect  of  perspective,  slight
crumpling  of  the  paper,  etc.  Considering  that  the  letters  are
on  the  back  of  the  "  materialisation,"  i.e.  they  were  not
visible  to  the  observers,  but  only  appeared  in  a  photograph
taken  from  inside  the  cabinet,  it  is  natural  to  suppose,  if  we
assume  fraud,  that  they  were  there  by  an  oversight  on  the
part  of  the  medium,  and  were  not,  so  to  speak,  intended  for
exhibition.

To  explain  these  phenomena  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing
puts  forward  the  theory  of  "  ideoplasma."  These  heads  are
"  materialised  dream-images,"  "  ephemeral,  externalised  and
in  some  cases  recognisable  precipitates  from  the  medium's
psychical  impressions  and  recollections." The  medium,  accord-

1  See  Der  Kampf  um  die  Materialisationsphanomene,  p.  114:  "It  may  be
objected  that  the  cumulative  force  of  these  pieces  of  evidence  [i.e.  the  various
points  of  resemblance  between  the  "  materialisations  "  and  the  Miroir
pictures],  corroborating  one  another,  is  too  great  to  be  explained  by  pure
chance-coincidence  ;  an  opinion  in  which  I  must  concur."


364


Helen  cle  G.  Verrall.


[part


ing  to  this  theory,  has  seen  the  Miroir  portraits  and  out  of
the  impression  which  they  have  left  upon  her  mind  she  is  able,
by  some  strange  creative  process,  to  make  material  repro-
ductions of  her  thoughts,  which,  when  the  creative  force
ceases  to  work,  are  reabsorbed  into  her  body.  It  is  useless
perhaps  to  speculate  as  to  how  this  obscure  ideoplastic  faculty
might  be  expected  to  act,  but  it  is  surely  remarkable  that
the  medium's  "  materialised  dream  image "  should  adorn
President  Wilson  with  a  black  eye  and  an  alien  moustache,
whilst  reproducing  almost  exactly  the  pattern  of  his
tie  !

The  burden  of  proof  in  regard  to  this  ideoplastic  theory,
as  in  regard  to  all  supernormal  theories,  is  upon  those
who  uphold  it,  and  obviously  a  very  broad  basis  of  evi-
dence will  be  required.  But  the  evidence  put  forward
by  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  is  almost  entirely  negative  :
the  medium  could  not  have  had  the  necessary  materials  in
her  possession ;  she  could  not  have  manipulated  them  in
the  necessary  way  (owing  to  the  close  watch  kept  upon  her
hands)  ;  the  observed  effects  could  not  be  produced  by  any
of  the  normal  processes,  which  the  medium  might  be  sup-
posed to  employ.  That  there  is  considerable  force  in  Dr.
von  Schrenck-Notzing's  contentions,  no  careful  reader  of  his
book  will  deny,  but  he  has  against  him  a  dead  weight  of
probability  which  is  hard  to  move.

The  case  is  very  complex,  and  discussion  of  its  various
features  might  be  indefinitely  prolonged.  But  since  the  object
of  this  review  is  to  set  before  the  reader,  so  far  as  is  possible,
an  estimate  of  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  I  think  that  I  shall  best
serve  that  object  if  I  now  briefly  summarise  what  seem  to
me  the  chief  points  for  and  against  the  genuineness  of  the
phenomena,  and  finally  state  the  general  conclusions  to  which
the  evidence  seems  to  point.

The  Case  against  the  Phenomena.

(1)  Some  of  the  heads  observed  during  the  sittings  have
been  traced  to  a  French  illustrated  paper,  Le  Miroir  ;  these
heads  present  the  appearance  of  being  drawn  in  black  upon
white  paper  or  linen  ;  upon  two  occasions  a  "  rustling  as  of
soft  paper  "  was  heard  just  before  and  just  after  the  appear-


i.x ix. ;


The  History  of  Marthe  Beraud.


365


ance  of  a  head  (see  Materialisationsphanomene,  pp.  366  and
372).  On  one  occasion  the  letters  MIRO  appeared,  in  a  type
closely  resembling  that  which  is  used  on  the  title  sheet  of
Le  Miroir.

(2)  Except  on  one  occasion  no  determined  effort  has  been
made  to  obtain  any  direct  positive  evidence  as  to  the  nature
of  the  substance  of  which  these  heads  and  similar  phenomena
consist.  This  is  explained  by  saying  that  attempts  to  obtain
such  evidence  are  injurious  to  the  medium,  but  the  chief
authority  for  this  statement  is  the  medium  herself,  who,  if
her  phenomena  are  fraudulent,  has  an  obvious  interest  in
making  it.

(3)  There  is  some  evidence  of  attempted  fraud  on  the  part
of  the  medium  by  the  substitution  of  a  faked  hand  for  her
own,  which  was  thereby  left  free  to  play  various  tricks  upon
the  observers.  This  fact,  taken  in  conjunction  with  the
medium's  previous  record,  must  awaken  grave  suspicions  of
her  honesty.

(4)  The  sittings  take  place  in  a  dimly-lighted  room.  The
medium  sits  in  a  cabinet  which  is  not  lighted  from  within  ;
the  cabinet  is  closed  in  front  by  two  curtains,  which  are  usually
under  the  medium's  control.  She  can  open  or  close  them  at
her  own  pleasure.  In  many  cases  the  curtains  were  opened
only  when  the  "  materialisation "  was  fully  "  developed,"
and  closed  again  immediately  afterwards.  These  conditions
obviously  lend  themselves  to  the  manipulation  of  fraudulently
prepared  materials.

(5)  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  medium  possesses  the
faculty  of  regurgitation  and  that  she  swallows  rolls  of  paper,
muslin,  etc.,  which  she  uses  to  produce  the  so-called  material-
isations. This  theory  is  supported  by  various  observations
which  have  been  made  as  to  the  nature  of  the  materialisa-
tions and  the  conditions  under  which  they  are  produced,
especially  by  the  fact  that  they  are  frequently  seen  issuing
from  the  medium's  mouth.

The  Case  for  the  Phenomena.

(1)  It  is  difficult  to  see  by  what  normal  process  the  medium
could  have  prepared  the  various  objects  which  have  been
seen  at  the  sittings,  especially  those  which  are  modelled  in


366


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


relief.  She  has  never  been  observed  to  make  any  suspicious
purchases,  nor  have  any  suspicious  materials  been  found  in
her  possession.

(2)  A  deliberate  attempt  was  made  on  one  occasion  to
secure  a  piece  of  the  materialised  substance,  but  the  attempt
failed.  It  is  suggested  that  the  failure,  was  due  to  the  abnormal
nature  of  the  substance,  which  had  been  reabsorbed  into  the
medium's  body.  Evidence  of  this  kind  might  be  of  great
value  if  it  could  be  strengthened  by  repetition,  but  one  cannot
attach  much  importance  to  a  single  incident.

(3)  At  the  later  sittings  the  medium  held  the  curtains  with
her  hands  all  the  time.  Even  when  the  curtains  were  closed
part  of  her  hands  was  visible.  The  observation  of  the  hands
was  thereby  made  easier  and  the  medium  had  proportion-
ately less  opportunity  of  using  them  for  the  production  of
phenomena.  There  seems  no  doubt  that  phenomena  are
frequently  produced  without  the  use  of  the  hands.

(4)  At  a  sitting  held  on  September  11,  1912,  the  curtains
remained  open  throughout  and  phenomena  of  an  interesting
and  remarkable  character  were  nevertheless  obtained.  This
is  an  important  sitting,  to  which  I  shall  refer  again.

(5)  The  regurgitation  theory  will  not  cover  the  whole  case,
because  on  three  occasions  (see  above,  pp.  351  ff.)  the  medium's
head  was  enveloped  in  a  veil  and  "  materialisations  "  were
nevertheless  obtained  outside  the  veil.  Moreover,  at  a  sitting
held  on  November  26,  1913,  with  the  express  purpose  of
testing  this  theory,  the  medium  was  given  an  emetic  immedi-
ately after  the  sitting  and  the  contents  of  the  stomach  were
analysed,  but  nothing  suspicious  was  found.  The  circum-
stances are  thus  described  by  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  (see
Der  Kampf  um  die  Materialisations phanomene,  pp.  9  ff.)  :

The  curtains  were  open  when  the  phenomena  began.

Between  9  and  9.10  p.m.  a  white  substance  issued  with  a  flowing
motion  from  the  medium's  mouth  without  any  assistance  from
her  hands  or  knees.  .  .  .  The  length  of  the  strip  was  about  fifty
centimetres,  its  width  about  twenty  centimetres.  It  laid  itself
upon  the  breast  of  her  dress,  broadened  out  and  formed  a  white
head-like  disc,  of  life  size  and  with  the  profile  to  the  right.  Even
after  the  magnesium  flash  (used  for  the  purpose  of  taking  a  photo-


LXIX.]


The  History  of  Marthe  Beraud.


367


graph)  the  curtain  remained  wide  open.  At  the  same  moment
I  turned  an  electric  torch  upon  the  image,  which  now  formed  a
folded  strip  and  went  slowly  back  into  the  medium's  mouth,  which
remained  visible  till  the  close  of  the  sitting,  9.20  p.m.

The  emetic  was  administered  at  once  and  took  effect  at
9.30  p.m.  The  contents  of  the  stomach,  which  were  analysed,
showed  no  trace  of  anything  but  fragments  of  partly  digested
food.  The  medium's  mouth  was  examined  both  before  and
after  the  sitting,  so  that  it  seems  clear  that  the  substance
seen  on  this  occasion  came  from  her  throat  or  stomach  and
was  of  a  nature  to  be  rapidly  assimilated.  None  of  the  artificial
products  which  it  has  been  suggested  that  she  may  use,  e.g.
paper,  silk,  linen,  etc.,  answer  to  this  description,  nor,  judging
by  the  appearance  of  the  phenomenon  on  this  occasion,  does
it  seem  to  me  necessary  to  suppose  that  any  material  of  that
kind  was  used.  There  is  no  question  here  of  a  clearly-
defined  "  portrait  head  "  but  only  of  a  "  head-like  disc."

I  hesitate  to  put  forward  a  theory  which  requires  medical
knowledge  for  its  support,  but  it  seems  to  me  worth  consider-
ing whether  the  case  might  not  be  explained  by  sup-
posing that  the  medium  is  possessed  of  some  abnormal  power
of  bodily  secretion  (mcluding  probably  the  power  of  re-
gurgitation), which  she  supplements  by  fraud.  On  this
hypothesis  I  should  say,  roughly  speaking,  that  whilst  the
more  definite  phenomena,  heads,  hands,  etc.,  are  fraudulent,
the  phenomenon  witnessed  at  the  sitting  just  described  and
the  many  similar  phenomena  witnessed  on  other  occasions
are  to  be  explained  by  this  supposed  power  of  secretion.

There  is,  in  fact,  a  good  deal  of  evidence  suggesting  that  the
medium  is  able  to  secrete  substances  of  various  kinds  from  her
body  in  an  abnormal  way.  In  particular,  I  would  refer  the
reader  to  the  sitting  of  September  11,  1912  (Materialisations-
phiinomene,  pp.  339  ff.).  Reports  of  the  phenomena  witnessed
at  this  sitting  (too  long  to  quote  here)  are  given  not  only
by  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  but  also  by  Dr.  Kafka  and
Count  Pappenheim.  Dr.  Kafka's  report  is  especially  inter-
resting,  and  suggests  that  the  secretion  issued  not  only  from
the  medium's  mouth,  but  also  from  her  breasts.  Reports  of
secretions  from  the  navel  and  other  parts  of  the  body  are

2a


368


Helen  cle  G.  Verrall.


[part


given  by  Madame  Bisson  (see  MaterialisationspTianomene,  pp.
192,  220  ff),  the  medium  being  on  these  occasions  completely
naked.  It  is  unfortunate  that,  as  regards  the  evidence  for
these  interesting  and  remarkable  phenomena,  we  should  be
dependent  on  the  report  of  a  single  observer.  For  obvious
reasons  the  unsupported  testimony  of  any  one  person  can
never  be  accepted  without  reservation,  and  moreover  Madame
Bisson,  being  a  personal  friend  of  the  medium,  and  convinced
of  the  genuineness  of  her  phenomena,  cannot  be  expected  to
regard  them  from  an  entirely  critical  and  detached  point  of
view.

In  many  cases  we  may  suppose  that  the  secretion  is  of  a
fluid  and  foam-like  character  ;  in  others  (as  e.g.  the  sitting  of
November  26,  1913,  see  above,  p.  366)  we  must  assume  that  it
may  become  partially  solidified.  I  am  aware  that  this  theory
is  open  to  serious  objections  and  I  put  it  forward  very  tenta-
tively. It  has  at  least  the  merit  that  it  would  explain  some
of  the  most  perplexing  features  of  the  case,  without  straining
our  credulity  to  the  extent  to  which  it  must  be  strained,  if  we
are  to  accept  the  supposed  "  ideoplastic  "  reproductions  from
the  illustrated  press.

There  is  very  little  positive  evidence  of  fraud  in  regard
to  Eva  C.'s  phenomena  (I  have  referred  above  to  the  occasional
substitution  of  pseudo-hands)  ;  nevertheless,  as  regards  the
Miroir  portraits  and  other  kindred  phenomena,  the  balance
of  probability  appears  to  be  on  the  side  of  fraud,  although
I  must  admit  that  I  am  quite  unable  to  put  forward
any  coherent  theory  as  to  the  particular  method  or  methods
employed.  But  on  the  other  hand,  if  we  suppose  that  the
whole  case  is  purely  fraudulent,  we  should  be  forced,  as  it
seems  to  me,  to  make  all  the  following  assumptions  :

(a)  that  the  phenomena  are  ill  observed  and  carelessly
reported  ;

(b)  that  the  medium  possesses  the  faculty  of  regurgitation  ;

(c)  that  she  was  able  on  several  occasions  to  elude  the
preliminary  search  and  conceal  materials  of  various  kinds,
either  in  the  cabinet  or  on  her  person  ;  and,  almost  certainly,

(d)  that  she  had  in  some  cases  a  confederate,  at  least  in  the
preparation  of  the  materials,  if  not  in  the  actual  production
of  the  phenomena.


LXIX.]


The  History  of  Martlie  Beraud.


369


I  have  tried  to  indicate  in  a  general  way  with  what  degree
of  probability  these  various  assumptions  may  be  made.  But
no  review  can  enable  any  reader  to  form  an  independent  judg-
ment of  the  case  ;  for  this  a  detailed  study  of  the  published
reports,  or  personal  observation  of  the  phenomena,  would  be
required.

Personally  I  incline  to  the  opinion  that  there  is  evidence  in
this  case  of  some  abnormal  faculty,  round  which  have  gathered
fraudulent  accretions  of  various  kinds.  I  am  aware  that  the
theory  of  physical  secretion  which  I  have  put  forward  above
needs  personal  observation  to  substantiate  it  and  may  be
wholly  inadequate  to  explain  the  facts.  I  put  it  forward,  as
I  have  said,  for  consideration,  because,  after  reading  Dr.  von
Schrenck's  report,  I  find  myself  in  great  perplexity, — unable
to  conclude  either  that  the  phenomena  are  wholly  fraudulent,
or  that  he  has  proved  his  case  for  the  ideoplastic  theory.

Before  a  solution  of  the  problem  can  be  reached,  further
investigation  will  be  necessary  under  the  most  stringent
conditions  which  the  medium  can  be  induced  to  accept.  In-
deed, unless  she  will  accept  more  stringent  conditions
than  have  hitherto  been  imposed,  I  doubt  whether  any
solution  is  possible.  Meanwhile,  a  debt  of  gratitude  is
owing  to  Madame  Bisson  and  to  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing
for  the  patience  and  industry  which  they  have  devoted  to
a  most  laborious  task.


370  Sidney  Wilkinson,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.  [part


SPECIAL  MEDICAL  SUPPLEMENT.

VIII.

RECENT  EXPERIENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  PRACTICE.
By  Sidney  Wilkinson,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.

(Hon.  Physician  to  the  Liverpool  Psycho-Therapeutic  Clinic,
Member  of  the  Psycho-Medical  Society).

During  23  years  in  which  I  have  employed  hypnosis  in  medical
practice,  I  have  had  experience  of  all  classes  of  cases,  and  it
seems  to  me  amazing  that  medical  men  have  such  a  power  at
their  disposal  which  they  never  employ,  and  withal  one  that
is  so  easy  to  use.

Take,  for  instance,  a  case  of  pneumonia  with  all  the  accom-
paniments of  parched  mouth,  dry  skin,  sleeplessness,  and  pain.
I  have  seen  patients  respond  almost  immediately  to  the
suggestion  of  sleep,  waking  at  regular  intervals  as  instructed,
to  take  their  supplies  of  nourishment  and  medicine  for  which
an  artificial  desire  has  been  induced.  They  have  looked  for-
ward to  the  nightly  visits  to  receive  suggestions,  with  a
confidence  unequalled  in  any  other  form  of  treatment.  By
the  same  means  pain  has  been  relieved  and  the  skin  moistened.

We  are  acquainted  also  with  the  benefits  bestowed  for  the
relief  of  drink  and  drug  habits,  neuralgia,  asthma,  obsessions,
stammering,  painful  self-consciousness,  hysteria,  and  a  hundred
other  maladies  in  which  suggestions  are  applicable.

As  a  conservation  of  work,  hypnosis  has  been  used  in  institu-
tions for  mental  cases,  where  attentive  rapport  has  been
established  between  patient  and  attendant,  so  that  on  the
smallest  movement  of  the  patient  during  sleep,  the  attendant
quicldy  awakes,  though  unaffected  by  noises  of  a  much  more
disturbing  nature.


lxix.] Rece?it  Experience  in  Hypnotic  Practice.  371

I  had  a  somewhat  amusing  experience  on  these  lines,  in  a
lady  patient  who  suffered  from  nervousness  and  insomnia.

I  suggested  ability  to  sleep  soundly,  but  in  order  that  a
young  and  somewhat  delicate  child  might  not  suffer  from
inattention,  I  included  a  protective  suggestion  of  rapport,  that
whilst  sleeping  soundly  through  aU  other  movements  and
noises,  she  would  be  alert  to  any  movement  that  the  child
might  make.  The  night  following  was  broken  by  the  boy
developing  an  attack  of  croup,  and  true  to  the  letter  of  my
instructions,  the  mother  awoke,  but  only  to  fulfil  the  duty
of  rousing  her  husband,  and  thereafter  being  content,  she
turned  over  and  slept  soundly  through  the  remainder  of  the
night.

In  spite  of  the  evidence  in  favour  of  the  employment  of
psycho-therapeutic  methods  in  selected  cases,  and  even  in
some  degree  for  many  organic  diseases,  it  still  seems  to  be
necessary  to  offer  some  sort  of  apology  for  its  employment.
It  does  not  occur  to  us  to  justify  the  use  of  radiography,
electricity,  and  other  forms  of  treatment  that  are  far  newer.
Is  it  because  psychic  treatment  is  produced  by  an  agency
that  cannot  be  seen,  and  felt,  and  measured  ?  Yet  its  results
are  not  infrequently  characterised  by  extreme  brilliancy.

There  is  no  doubt,  however,  that  the  old  conservatism  is
rapidly  dying  down,  and  that  medical  men,  though  they  may
be  slow  to  see  that  a  case  is  a  suitable  one,  and  try  every  other
means  first,  are  nevertheless  recommending  patients  in  in-
creasing numbers,  and  teachers  are  more  and  more  acknowledg-
ing the  merits  of  psychic  healing  in  their  clinics.  The  day  is
rapidly  dawning  when  hospitals  will  not  be  considered  com-
plete without  psycho-therapeutic  specialists  upon  their  staff.

I  invite  your  attention  to  some  interesting  points  occurring
in  three  or  four  of  my  patients  during  treatment,  but  I  would
like  it  to  be  clearly  realised  that  though  I  made  some  simple
tests  in  the  cases  recorded,  these  are  special  instances,  and  that
they  have  been  done  with  the  patients'  full  consent  and
knowledge.  They  are  a  few  patients  chosen  from  many,  and
it  must  not  be  inferred  that  a  custom  is  made  of  thus  experi-
menting. Patients  must  be  treated,  not  tested,  and  this  is  a
principle  that  I  invariably  adopt,  for  I  am  convinced  that
there  would  be  no  greater  deterrent  to  patients  accepting


372  Sidney  Wilkinson,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.  [part

treatment  than  the  thought  that  they  were  destined  to  play
a  part  in  some  entertainment.

The  first  case  I  shall  record,  I  will  refer  to  as  E.  P.,  a  man  of
47  years,  whose  employment  was  amongst  horses.

I  was  asked  to  see  him  as  a  hospital  patient.

As  might  be  expected  from  his  calling,  he  was  a  rugged  type
of  man,  and  scarcely  one  who  might  be  expected  to  develop
neurotic  symptoms,  and  less  so,  since  there  was  no  thought  of
compensation  to  accentuate  his  malady.

Two  years  prior  to  my  seeing  him  he  was  thrown  from  a
horse  whilst  jumping  a  hedge,  and  lay  for  some  time  untended
in  the  ditch.  He  had  some  indefinite  injury  to  the  head,  and
pains  in  the  hip  which  were  probably  of  a  rheumatic  character
from  damp  and  exposure.  Instead  of  improving,  his  symp-
toms increased,  and  perhaps  the  more  because,  as  a  well-known
servant,  he  was  frequently  visited  and  sympathised  with  by
his  master's  friends.

Finally  he  drifted  into  hospital,  where  he  had  been  an  inmate
for  two  months  before  I  was  asked  by  the  physician  in  attend-
ance to  see  him,  as  the  conclusion  had  been  arrived  at  that  his
pains  were  chiefly  of  a  functional  nature.  During  all  this
time  he  had  been  confined  to  bed.

My  interviews  with  him  were  in  the  X-ray  room,  to  which
he  was  carried  in  a  lifting  chair,  and  whilst  still  seated  in  the
chair  and  with  a  ruby,  cell-charging  lamp  for  illumination,  an
attempt  was  made  to  induce  hypnosis.  This  was  successful
to  a  deep  degree,  on  the  first  trial,  and  after  my  suggestions
were  concluded,  he  was  carried  back  still  asleep,  with  instruc-
tions not  to  awake  until  the  nurse  came  round  to  him  with
his  dinner.  He  was  much  tickled  on  awaking  to  find  himself
back  in  bed  with  no  memory  of  the  transition.

Next  day  the  process  was  repeated,  with  this  variation,  that
he  was  now  informed  that  he  could  walk  back  to  the  ward
with  light  assistance.  In  this  he  was  quite  successful,  negotia-
ting on  the  way  two  nights  of  steps.  This  was  the  first  time
in  two  years  that  he  had  been  upon  his  feet.  His  fellow
patients  exhibited  keen  interest  in  this  experiment.

Although  success  had  thus  far  met  our  efforts,  the  pain  had
not  greatly  abated,  and  I  wondered  if  I  could  expedite  recovery


lxix.] Recent  Experience  in  Hypnotic  Practice.


373


by  temporarily  blotting  out  from  consciousness  the  memory  of
the  accident  and  attendant  effects.

To  bring  about  this  end  I  created  a  dissociation  by  sugges-
tion, and  brought  about  a  change  of  personality  in  which  E.  P.,
the  man  who  had  sustained  injury  and  had  lived  in  the  hospital
as  a  patient,  had  no  part.  The  proposal  was  that  he  should
become  John  Jones,  who  was  engaged  as  a  hospital  attendant,
who  had  no  knowledge  of  E.  P.  and  his  accident.  He  con-
tinued to  occupy  the  same  bed,  and  understood  that  he  was
thus  situated  the  better  to  assist  in  the  ward  duties.  Mean-
while his  case  card  was  removed  and  letters  bearing  his  rightful
name  were  withheld.  It  was  understood  by  all  concerned
that  he  was  to  be  addressed  as  Jones,  and  work  was  to  be
found  for  him.

All  went  well  for  about  six  hours,  and  he  worked  quite  indus-
triously, but  at  five  o'clock  the  same  evening,  when  the  house
surgeon  addressed  him  as  Jones,  he  said  :  "  You  have  been
having  a  fine  game  with  me  ;  I  know  who  I  am  now."  At
the  same  time  he  continued  to  assist  in  the  ward  work,
though  it  was  apparent  that  he  limped,  and  he  still  complained
of  pain.

On  the  following  morning  I  repeated  my  suggestions  of
altered  personality,  and  again  he  responded.  Realising  that
he  returned  to  normal  at  5  p.m.  on  the  previous  day,  I
rang  up  the  hospital  at  that  hour  and  had  the  man  brought
to  the  telephone,  when  I  at  once  addressed  him  as  Jones.  The
ruse  was  quite  successful,  and  the  response  as  unexpected.
Asked  how  he  was  doing  in  his  new  place,  he  assured  me
that  he  was  all  right,  but  added,  "  What  are  you  going  to
give  me  for  this  job  ?  "  I  satisfied  him  on  the  point,  and  he
then  complained  of  pain  in  his  hip  as  though  he  was  then
experiencing  it  for  the  first  time,  and  offered  as  a  satisfac-
tory explanation  that  it  was  caused  by  looking  after  two
pneumonia  patients,  whom  he  described  as  "  them  two
lunatics,"  who  had  kept  him  awake  all  night.  This  was  a
self-imposed  task,  and  was  evidently  a  reason  invented  to
account  for  what  he  believed  to  be  a  new  pain.

As  is  well  known,  patients  frequently  invent  reasons  in  this
manner  to  account  for  phenomena  which  they  cannot  other-
wise explain.


374  Sidney  Wilkinson,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.  [part


He  was  at  this  time  wearing  an  old  dressing-gown,  and  fear-
ing that  it  might  prove  suggestive  of  invalidism  to  him,  I  told
him  that  I  wished  him  to  wear  a  white  coat,  whilst  on  duty,
like  those  worn  by  the  house  doctors.  For  this  he  demanded
extra  payment.  His  cupidity  was  growing  apace.  I  kept  him
in  this  state  for  three  days,  at  the  expiration  of  which  time  I
was  obliged  to  resynthetise  the  dissociation  for  the  peace  of
the  administration.  He  had  become  so  strict  in  his  zealous
attendance  upon  the  pneumonia  patients,  that  no  one  was
permitted  to  speak  above  a  whisper  for  fear  of  waking  them,
and  a  nurse  was  severely  reprimanded  for  sneezing.  So  for
the  smooth  working  of  the  ward  Jones  had  to  become  E.  P.
once  more,  and  was  allowed  to  receive  letters  and  friends,  but
forge tfulness  of  the  accident  was  still  suggested.

A  rapid  diminution  of  pain  ensued,  walking  became  more
certain  and  easy,  and  in  fourteen  days  he  was  discharged  from
hospital,  and  during  the  next  two  weeks,  prior  to  returning  to
work,  he  several  times  walked  two  miles  from  his  home  to
visit  me.  In  one  month  from  the  commencement  of  treat-
ment he  returned  to  a  former  employment,  which  consisted  in
breaking-in  horses.

On  the  last  occasion  upon  which  I  saw  him,  he  complained
of  a  blank  period  in  his  memory  that  had  been  produced  since
he  had  been  under  me.  This  was  the  state  that  I  had  pur-
posely left  when  I  restored  him  to  his  normal  personality,  so
that  his  recovery  might  not  be  retarded  by  disadvantageous
recollections.  Now  that  the  end  had  been  gained,  I  released
this  inhibition  and  placed  him  at  his  ease.

There  was  in  this  case  a  psychic  trauma  as  well  as  the  somatic
one,  the  symptoms  of  the  latter  continuing  to  be  reproduced  as
reverberations.  No  doubt  I  should  have  eventually  succeeded
in  arriving  at  a  satisfactory  termination  of  the  case  by  the
use  of  simple  suggestions,  but  I  am  satisfied  that  by  causing
a  displacement  of  memory  I  was  able  to  eliminate  the  pain
more  effectually,  so  that  exercise  might  be  encouraged  with
its  concomitant  improvements  in  circulation  and  muscular
development,  both  of  which  were  vital  for  recovery.

The  next  case  I  will  refer  to  as  Miss  A.,  a  dressmaker,
aged  28.


lxix.] Recent  Experience  in  Hypnotic  Practice.  375


It  was  one  of  conversion  hysteria,  the  chief  symptoms  of
which  were  spasmodic  wry  neck  and  spinal  curvature,  the
muscular  contractions  being  of  a  very  coarse  and  distressing
nature.  Here,  again,  the  duration  was  two  years,  with  abso-
lute confinement  to  bed  in  the  last  four  months.  Feeding  and
other  attentions  were  rendered  very  difficult  on  account  of
the  incessant  movements  of  the  head  and  shoulders,  and  a
good  deal  of  pain  was  experienced  from  the  same  cause.

Fig.  1,  Plate  A,  shows  how  severe  was  the  torticollis,  but
fails  to  show  it  at  its  worst,  for  with  each  movement  the  head
was  jerked  still  lower  on  to  the  shoulder.  Life  was  a  misery  in
spite  of  the  unremitting  endeavours  of  her  medical  attendant.

Treatment  was  commenced  on  April  16,  1912,  and  on  the
following  day  the  first  photograph  was  taken,  at  the  patient's
home.  She  was  barely  able  to  stand  for  the  few  moments
necessary  for  this  procedure,  and  the  photograph  was  practically
an  instantaneous  one.

On  a  first  attempt,  I  was  fortunately  able  to  induce  hypnosis
to  the  fourth  degree,  and  there  were  in  all  twenty-eight  treat-
ments, though  after  six  or  seven  sessions  the  patient  was  able
to  go  out  and  take  short  walks.

On  the  second  day  I  made  an  attempt  to  resurrect  the
causative  effect,  and  her  mother  being  present,  I  induced  a
deep  stage  of  hypnosis,  and  placed  a  pencil  in  her  hand  and  a
sheet  of  paper  before  her,  and  I  instructed  her  to  write  answers
to  my  questions,  and  for  a  facsimile  of  this  writing  the  reader
must  refer  to  Plate  A,  Fig.  3.

In  answer  to  my  first  enquiry,  viz.  what  circumstance  she
associated  with  her  first  symptoms,  she  wrote  "  Fright."

Next,  I  asked  who  frightened  her,  and  she  wrote  "  Man."
"  When  ?  " "  Night,  May,  1910." "  How  did  he  frighten
you  ?  " "  Tried  to  take my  life." "  In  what  way  ?  "
"  Poison."

I  showed  her  this  paper  on  awaking,  and  she  expressed  great
relief.  She  felt  freed  from  a  burden,  only  the  skeleton  of
which  she  remembered,  and  the  details  of  which  she  had  con-
fided to  no  one,  her  mother  not  excepted.  Free  conversation
was  invited  and  various  memories  recalled.

It  was,  of  course,  a  love  affair,  and  the  man  showing  mental
symptoms  the  engagement  was  abandoned,  and  he  tried  to


376


Sidney  Wilkinson,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.


[part


take  revenge  by  an  actual  attempt  upon  her  life,  and  by
other  forms  of  persecution,  all  of  which  had  been  zealously
kept  secret.

This  is  a  case  that  would  doubtless  have  benefited  by  Freud's
method  of  psycho-analysis,  but  fortunately  I  was  able  to  obtain
all  the  associations  I  needed  by  the  quicker  route,  because  she
proved  a  good  hypnotic  subject.

So  far  as  the  case  was  concerned,  my  work  was  practically
ended,  and  it  only  remained  for  me  to  continue  my  suggestions
for  a  time,  and  to  give  some  general  directions  for  exercises
designed  to  cure  the  scoliosis,  in  order  to  obtain  the  result  as
seen  in  Fig.  2,  Plate  A.

From  the  point  of  interest  to  this  Society,  however,  the  case
is  still  of  value.

Wishing  to  test  the  power  of  the  unfettered  sub-conscious
mind  to  recall  very  early  events,  I  hypnotised  Miss  A.  and
asked  her  to  tell  me  of  one  of  her  earliest  recollections.  She
recalled  a  circumstance  which  she  told  me  occurred  at  the  age
of  three  years.  She  remembered  a  scene  at  a  bridge  under
which  a  large  volume  of  water  flowed,  and  which  she  was
afraid  to  cross.  Her  mother  corroborated  this,  and  supplied
other  details,  such  as  the  child's  screams  and  the  people  who
were  attracted  thereby.

I  urged  her  to  try  further  back,  and  I  asked  her  what  she
could  recall  in  connection  with  her  second  birthday.  I  had
no  reason  for  asking  for  this  particular  day,  except  that
a  birth  date  is  a  prominent  day  in  a  child's  life,  one  that
could  be  more  easily  remembered  than  any  other  date.
After  naming  this  day,  I  realised  that  the  second  birthday
might  be  rather  ambiguous,  and  might  as  easily  refer  to  the  first
anniversary  as  the  second,  according  to  whether  the  actual  birth-
day was  included  in  the  count  or  not,  so  I  made  the  question
specific  by  adding,  the  birthday  when  you  were  two  years  old.

She  informed  me  at  once  that  she  was  ill.  Her  mother
subsequently  recalled  this  fact.  Giving  her  a  pencil  and
paper,  I  asked  her  to  draw  a  square  to  represent  the  sick
room,  and  to  place  initials  corresponding  to  fireplace,  window,
door  and  cot  (Fig.  4,  Plate  A).  The  result  is  not  a  work  of
art,  for  the  eyes  were  closed  and  the  finish  of  the  square  did
not  correspond  with  the  commencement.


lxix.] Recent  Experience  in  Hypnotic  Practice.  377

If  I  had  thought  at  that  time  that  I  was  likely  to  publish  the
case,  I  should  have  allowed  the  girl  to  open  the  eyes,  and  make
a  more  finished  sketch,  but  still  this  was  not  a  test  of  drawing
ability,  but  of  memory,  the  details  of  which  were  confirmed
again  by  the  mother.  In  the  waking  state  the  girl  had  no
memory  of  these  events,  and  had  even  no  knowledge  of  the
house  she  had  then  lived  in.

I  have  since  ascertained  from  Dr.  Francis  Scott  that  he  had  a
case  where  memory  was  pushed  back  to  the  third  month,  and
a  pattern  of  the  wall  paper  was  sketched  and  afterwards  veri-
fied to  be  correct.  I  have  also  met  a  girl  in  her  early  teens  who
can  remember  an  incident  in  her  first  year,  in  her  waking  state.
I  nevertheless  cite  this  for  what  it  is  worth,  with  the  comment
that  there  is  a  difference  between  the  early  memory  of  a  child
who  has  just  entered  her  teens,  and  that  of  a  young  woman  in
her  twenty-ninth  year.

I  next  experimented  Avith  her  for  the  post-hypnotic  fulfilment
of  a  suggestion  to  a  specified  number  of  minutes.

On  June  14  (1912),  at  11.45,  I  induced  hypnosis,  and  sug-
gested that  she  should  come  to  my  house  in  4455  minutes.

She  had  never  been  tried  with  a  time  test,  nor  had  she  been
to  my  house,  though  she  was  acquainted  with  the  ferry-boats
by  which  she  travelled,  and  she  knew  what  time  to  allow
between  the  ferry  and  the  Square  in  which  I  live.

The  journey  involved  the  following  modes  of  transit.  A  walk
to  a  tram-car  occupying  about  fifteen  minutes,  tram  ten  to
fifteen  minutes,  ferry-boat  to  Liverpool,  change  of  steamers,
and  ferry-boat  to  Birkenhead,  and  finally  a  walk  of  five
minutes'  duration.  The  journey  was  therefore  somewhat  com-
plicated, but  nevertheless  she  was  on  my  doorstep  as  the  clock
was  striking  two  on  June  17th,  i.e.,  exactly  in  4455  minutes.

I  presume  there  must  have  been  an  element  of  good  luck  in
arriving  exactly  to  the  minute,  since  it  would  be  impossible  to
judge  the  precise  time  that  it  would  take  to  complete  the
journey.  She  must  have  been  to  a  great  degree  dependent
upon  the  timing  of  the  steamers,  and  her  only  chance  of
lingering  or  making  up  time  would  be  in  the  last  five  minutes'
walk  to  my  house.  Her  sister  accompanied  her,  and  they
both  stated  that  there  was  no  special  effort  made  to  keep  a
scheduled  time. She  had  a  feeling  that  she  must  come  about


378


Sidney  Wilkinson,  M.R.C.8.,  L.R.C.P.  [part


that  time,  without  having  a  specified  hour  in  her  mind.  It
seemed  more  a  question  of  "  beating  time  "  than  judging  by
a  clock.

The  question  will  naturally  arise,  was  the  command  given  in
the  presence  of  any  one  who  would  instruct  and  prompt  her  ?

The  mother  was  present  at  the  time  of  the  suggestion,  but
I  had  the  assurance  of  both  that  no  assistance  was  given,  that
nothing  whatever  was  told  the  girl  on  waking.  The  mother
was  as  interested  in  the  experiment  as  I  was,  and,  moreover,
she  is  incapable  of  making  a  calculation  in  minutes  which  run
into  thousands,  as  is  also  the  girl  herself.  The  girl  only
knew  at  the  completion  of  the  test  that  she  had  come  to  me
in  response  to  a  suggestion.  No  test  had  been  given  pre-
viously to  guide  her.

In  this  experiment  I  had  purposely  given  a  number  of
minutes  which  I  had  previously  estimated  would  mature  at  a
time  when  I  would  be  at  home  to  receive  her,  but  in  the  next
experiment  I  named  the  minutes  at  random.

Having  hypnotised  her  in  my  Liverpool  consulting  room,
on  July  1st,  1912,  I  read  a  paragraph  from  a  book  which  lay
upon  my  table  : —

"  An  old  and  loyal  patient  consulted  me  one  morning.  She
complained  of  being  run  down  and  languid,  and  of  troublesome
indigestion.  I  prescribed  a  medicine  and  a  course  of  treatment
which  I  assured  her  would  put  her  right."

I  read  it  a  second  time,  and  told  her  that  in  4910  minutes,  no
matter  what  might  be  occupying  her  attention  at  the  time,  she
would  write  it  down  in  full  and  then  make  a  note  of  the  time.
To  enable  her  to  do  this,  I  instructed  her  to  carry  a  pencil
and  a  piece  of  paper  with  her.  I  awoke  her,  and  after  she
had  left  I  made  a  calculation  and  found  that  the  suggestion
would  fall  due  on  the  fourth  night  at  3.50.  The  sister  was
present  on  this  occasion,  but  assures  me  that  she  gave  no
assistance,  and,  moreover,  did  not  know  herself  when  the
calculation  would  work  out.

On  the  fifth  day  the  patient  duly  called  upon  me,  bringing
the  slip  of  paper  with  the  sentence  written  out  almost  word
for  word,  and  endorsed  2.20  a.m.  The  only  variation  in  the
wording  is  as  follows  :  for  "  She  complained  of  being  run
down  and  languid,  and  of  troublesome  indigestion,"  she  had


x,xix.] Recent  Experience  in  Hypnotic  Practice.  379

written,  "  She  complained  of  feeling  tired,  languid,  and  suffer-
ing from  indigestion."

I  will  undertake  to  say  that  not  one  reader  can  repeat  the
first  ten  words  of  this  sentence  at  this  juncture,  yet  after  four
and  a  half  days  the  paragraph  on  a  first  attempt  is  almost
correct  throughout.  It  will  be  observed  that  there  is  an
error  of  90  minutes  between  the  estimated  time  and  the  actual
completion  of  4910  minutes.  The  experiment  is  wonderful
enough  as  it  stands,  but  it  must  be  explained  that  the  girl
had  no  clock  in  her  bedroom,  and  the  question  arises  whether
the  sub-conscious  reckoning  was  at  fault,  or  the  guess  which
the  waking  mind  made  of  the  time  of  carrying  out  the
suggestion.

From  the  former  experience  I  lean  to  the  latter  theory.

I  questioned  Miss  A.  and  her  sister,  who  sleeps  with  her,  as
to  what  occurred  on  that  night.  It  appears  that  on  retiring
to  bed  that  evening  Miss  A.  took  to  bed  with  her  the  piece  of
paper  and  a  pencil,  it  being  the  first  time  she  had  taken  this
precaution  to  provide  a  pencil,  in  the  preceding  four  days,
though  she  did  not  know  why  she  did  this.  Both  were
soundly  asleep,  when  the  sister  was  awakened  by  Miss  A.
sitting  up,  and  exhibiting  a  strange  and  confused  demeanour.
She  complained  of  feeling  cold  and  faint,  but  rose  from  bed,
and  in  the  dark  fulfilled  her  task,  when  she  at  once  became  more
comfortable,  returned  to  bed  and  slept.

The  next  case  is  interesting  as  showing  that  when  I  started
a  train  of  thoughts,  the  movements  that  subsequently  followed
were  self -de vised  in  accordance  with  the  subject's  foreknow-
ledge of  what  is  usual  under  the  circumstances.

The  patient  was  a  boy  aged  1 1  years.  He  had  been  frightened
by  an  infuriated  bullock  charging  him,  and  for  many  months
he  had  been  afflicted  with  epileptiform  convulsions  of  daily
occurrence,  in  some  of  which  the  parents  feared  a  fatal  issue.
Two  or  three  sittings  completely  eradicated  them.

One  day,  as  he  lay  asleep,  I  put  the  suggestion  to  him  that
he  was  a  cat.  For  some  time  he  made  no  move,  and  did  not
seem  to  know  what  was  expected  of  him,  but  when  I  explained
that  cats  sat  by  the  fire  and  washed  themselves,  he  jumped
down  off  the  couch  and  proceeded  to  carry  these  occupations


380


Sidney  Wilkinson,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.  [part


into  effect,  and  thereafter  he  invented  new  pastimes  for  him-
self. He  purred  and  rubbed  himself  against  my  leg.  He
sought  for  mice  in  the  dark  corners  of  the  room,  played  with
cotton  reels  under  the  table,  growled  over  small  articles  thrown
to  him  as  mice,  pawing  them  in  quite  a  characteristic  manner.
If  told  that  a  dog  had  entered  the  room,  he  arched  his  back
and  stiffened  his  muscles.  At  the  call  of  "puss,"  he  followed
me  about  the  house,  and  descended  the  stairs  on  all  fours  in  a
perfectly  correct  style.  If  awakened  in  any  of  these  attitudes,
he  appeared  embarrassed,  but  had  no  memory  of  his  actions.

After  a  few  such  experiments  I  desisted,  as  I  am  of  the
opinion  that  such  tests  pushed  too  far  are  not  in  the  best
interests  of  the  patient.

Mr.  H.,  an  organ  builder,  age  about  48,  came  under  my  care
last  year  on  account  of  profound  neurasthenia.

Being  desirous  of  testing  the  depth  of  his  hypnosis,  I
suggested  a  post-hypnotic  inability  to  step  over  a  tape  which
I  had  placed  across  the  floor.  On  waking,  he  made  two
attempts  to  do  this  and  failed.  He  thereupon  sat  down  on
the  chair  against  which  one  end  of  the  tape  was  placed,  with
his  legs  bent  very  awkwardly  to  that  side  of  the  tape  on
which  he  had  been  standing.  Suddenly  he  gave  a  savage
side  kick  to  remove  the  obstruction,  saying  at  the  same  time,
"  This  thing  annoys  me."  Thereafter  he  was  able  to  walk
through  the  gap  he  had  effected.

Seeing  his  evident  annoyance,  I  did  not  repeat  this  test,  but
tried  a  simpler  one  on  his  next  visit.  Looking  around  my
room  for  a  suggestion  to  make,  and  having  in  mind  his  pro-
fession, I  was  struck  with  the  analogy  which  my  desk  bore  to
an  organ.  It  is  a  roll  top  desk  with  columns  of  drawers  down
the  sides,  and  on  top  of  the  desk  stands  a  three-tier  elastic
bookcase.  I  suggested  that  when  awake  he  would  be  im-
pressed by  the  analogy,  seeing  in  the  tall  lines  of  books  a
similarity  to  organ  pipes,  in  the  writing  surface  the  keyboard,
in  the  drawers  at  the  sides,  stops,  and  the  pedal  space
underneath.

After  awaking  he  approached  the  desk  and  examined  the
whole  thing  minutely,  then  said  how  irresistibly  it  reminded
him  of  his  work,  indicated,  with  an  upward  sweep  of  his  hand,


lxix.] Recent  Experience  in  Hypnotic  Practice.  381

the  likeness  of  the  books  to  pipes,  ran  his  fingers  over  the
table  top,  and  looked  below  for  the  pedals,  which,  however,
were  not  represented,  the  space  merely  indicating  them.
Finally  he  opened  the  drawers  down  the  side  as  though  he
was  on  the  point  of  making  a  comparison,  then  his  better
knowledge  coming  to  his  rescue,  he  shut  them  with  a  vicious
snap,  and  said,  "  You  have  got  the  stops  in  the  wrong  place  ;
they  should  be  here,"  and  opened  a  little  drawer  inside  the
roll  top.

I  had  made  a  false  suggestion.  His  professional  knowledge
was  too  deeply  ingrained  for  him  to  make  such  a  mistake.
And  this  has  always  been  my  experience.  When  it  is
attempted  to  alter  a  deeply  rooted,  or  instinctive  idea,  there
is  too  strong  a  counter  resistance  for  it  to  succeed.  In  the
same  way  I  find  it  a  most  difficult  task  to  accomplish  a  cure
in  traumatic  neurasthenia  when  compensation  is  being  paid
under  the  Act.  There  is  a  strong  auto-suggestion  of  uncon-
scious contentment  with  the  lot  of  the  insured,  acting  against
the  treatment.

The  case  of  Miss  S.  has  been,  and  continues  to  be,  my  best
case,  just  as  she  is  my  most  responsive  patient  to  suggestions
carried  out  post-hypnotically,  and  it  consequently  deserves
dealing  with  in  greater  detail.

She  was  a  patient  in  whom  I  feared  acute  tubercular  caries
of  the  spine,  but  when  I  received  the  assurance  of  no  less  an
authority  in  such  matters  than  Mr.  Robert  Jones  that  there
was  no  organic  lesion,  I  entered  on  a  course  of  treatment  by
hypnosis  which  has  resulted  in  great  improvement.  Sleep  was
not  induced  until  about  the  tenth  sitting.  So  responsive  has
this  patient  become  that  a  single  utterance  commands  imme-
diate sleep.  With  this  patient's  permission  I  have  carried
out  a  number  of  experiments,  a  few  of  which  may  be  worth
reporting  in  detail.

I  can  at  any  time  carry  out  the  experiment  of  selecting  an
envelope  from  a  new  packet,  which  being  secretly  marked
inside  the  flap,  is  afterwards  presented  to  her  with  the  sugges-
tion that  there  is  a  picture  upon  the  face  of  the  envelope.
This  is  found  and  easily  recognised  again  after  the  envelope
has  been  thoroughly  mixed  with  the  others  in  the  packet.


382


Sidney  Wilkinson,  M.B.C.8.,  L.R.C.P.  [part


A  propos  of  this,  I  lean  to  the  opinion  that  the  outline  of
the  photograph  is  sub-consciously  associated  with  fine  points  of
dissimilarity  on  the  surface  of  the  paper,  perceived  through  the
induced  hyperacuity  of  vision.  I  hold  this  view  from  the
fact  that  I  have  repeatedly  observed  in  this  patient  and
others,  that  if  the  envelope  is  turned  end  for  end,  after  it
has  been  shown,  and  returned  in  this  inverted  position  to  the
packet,  the  experiment  is  a  failure.  A  test  recently  made  to
see  if  the  envelope  could  be  distinguished  merely  by  the
sense  of  touch  met  with  no  success.

In  August,  1912, 1  was  treating  a  patient  who  did  not  resporjd
as  readily  as  I  wished  to  my  suggestions,  and  hoping  to  help
him  by  example,  I  showed  him  this  patient,  and  used  a  test
which  proved  more  interesting  since  than  at  the  time.

I  instructed  her  that  when  she  was  awakened  she  would
discover  that  we  were  alone,  and  that  the  gentleman  who  was
in  the  room  when  she  fell  asleep  had  left,  and  further,  that  she
would  find  her  hat  upon  the  stand  in  the  corner.

The  gentleman  meanwhile  stood  in  the  corner,  holding  the
hat  upon  his  left  hand,  as  though  upon  a  peg,  his  right  hand
being  similarly  extended.

She  awoke,  and  asked  if  the  gentleman  had  gone,  and
quite  unconcernedly  she  took  her  hat,  and  completing  her
toilet,  she  left,  fully  under  the  belief  that  he  was  no  longer
there.

So  far  there  is  nothing  unusual  in  such  a  negative  test.

When  at  home  she  remarked  upon  the  new  stand  which  I
was  supposed  to  have  bought,  and  when  next  she  came  I  asked
her,  when  hypnotised,  to  draw  it.  This  she  did,  and  the  result
is  seen  in  Plate  B,  Fig.  2.  It  is  significant  that  in  the  waking
state  she  is  unable  to  make  even  an  attempt  at  drawing  a
straight  line,  her  efforts  in  this  direction  being  represented
in  Plate  B,  Fig.  1.

Eleven  months  elapsed,  when  it  occurred  to  me  one  day  to
ask  her  to  draw  the  stand  again  from  memory.  In  the  mean-
time she  had  not  seen  the  drawing.  I  had  seen  it  myself
many  times,  yet  as  I  watched  her  draw  the  second  one  I  had
a  sudden  misgiving  that  she  was  going  to  make  an  error  when
I  watched  her  commence  the  fourth  row  of  pegs  (Plate  B,
Fig.  3). Yet  she  was  right  and  I  was  wrong. Even  the


x,xix.] Recent  Experience  in  Hypnotic  Practice.


383


unevenness  of  the  upper  slopes  correspond,  the  thick  line  at
the  base,  the  double  lines  in  the  mirror,  and  the  transverse
and  longitudinal  shadings  are  all  correct.

I  have  pointed  out  these  similarities  on  many  occasions  to
my  friends,  and  ought  to  be  very  familiar  with  every  line  of
the  drawing.

As  a  comparison,  therefore,  when  writing  this  article,  I  took
a  piece  of  paper  and  a  pencil  and  drew  Fig.  4,  Plate  B  to  see
how  I  could  do  it.  With  all  the  advantages  which  I  possessed, —
viz.  ability  to  copy  a  drawing  with  some  accuracy,  and  having
seen  both  drawings  at  least  a  score  of  times,  and  particularly
having  pointed  out  details  of  likeness, — I  could  not  remember
just  how  the  slopes  were  disposed,  Avhether  the  double  lines
surrounded  the  whole  of  the  mirror  or  lay  only  upon  the  left
of  it,  and  I  was  utterly  at  fault  when  I  tried  to  bring  to
mind  the  outlines  of  the  umbrella  rails  and,  as  the  results
" show,  I  was  quite  wrong.

These  details  were  of  great  interest  to  me,  and  speak  volumes
ior  sub-conscious  accuracy  of  recollection  after  so  long  a
period.  To  make  my  report  a  complete  one,  I  must  add  that
the  gentleman  who  stood  as  a  model  for  the  stand  was  not,
as  I  hoped  he  would  be,  made  susceptible  to  hypnosis  thereby,
a,nd  I  regard  his  case  as  one  of  my  failures.

I  have  several  times  given  this  patient  instructions  to  carry
out  complicated  directions  and  she  has  never  failed  me.  A
specific  instance  will  illustrate  the  kind  of  post-hypnotic  fulfil-
ment that  I  refer  to.

I  was  asked  to  speak  at  a  gathering  where  a  question  of
Psychical  Research  was  under  discussion — the  theme  of  the  dis-
cussion being  Sir  W.  F.  Barrett's  little  book  bearing  the  above
title.  Two  weeks  before  the  event  was  due  to  take  place,  I
gave  hypnotic  instructions  to  Miss  S.  to  present  herself  at  the
house  of  meeting  on  the  date  specified  at  8  p.m.  It  was  a
part  of  the  town  that  she  had  never  visited  before,  so  that  all
the  routes  and  names  were  new  to  her.  It  involved  a  journey
by  two  tram-cars,  and  a  walk  of  rather  more  than  half  a
mile.  Her  directions  were  supplied  twice,  verbally,  with
injunctions  to  ask  for  the  hostess  by  name,  and  when  ushered
into  the  room  she  was  to  fall  asleep  immediately  and  remain
in  that  condition  until  I  needed  her. No  one  was  informed

2b


384


Sidney  Wilkinson,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.  [part


of  my  intentions  except  the  girl's  mistress,  whose  permission
had  to  be  gained  to  permit  her  to  leave.

This  lady  takes  an  intelligent  interest  in  the  experiments
and  co-operates  with  me  heartily,  so  that  there  was  no  fear  of
prompting,  in  addition  to  which  the  lady  was  only  supplied
with  the  bare  information  that  I  wanted  Miss  S.  on  that  day..
It  is  probable  that  she  knew  the  lady's  name  to  whose  house
she  was  to  proceed,  but  she  did  not  know  the  locality  of  this
house,  the  name  of  it,  or  the  road.

As  events  transpired,  the  mistress  also  believed  the  appoint-
ment to  be  for  the  afternoon  of  that  day,  and  as  the  afternoon
wore  on  without  the  girl  making  a  move,  she  came  to  the  con-
clusion that  the  suggestions  had  miscarried.

All  occurred  punctually  as  described  to  the  subject,  and  it
was  interesting  to  trace,  step  by  step,  how  the  impulses  to  act
came  to  her,  and  how  the  names  slipped  into  consciousness  as
each  was  needed.  For  instance,  the  name  of  the  hostess  only
came  into  her  mind  as  the  maid  answered  her  ring.

During  the  afternoon  of  this  day  she  had  asked  permission
to  do  her  shopping  earlier  than  usual.  Consent  was  given,  and
as  the  afternoon  went  by  her  employer  became  uneasy  that
she  had  not  asked  to  be  released  for  what  she  thought  was  the
time  I  needed  her.  Nevertheless  she  did  not  prompt  her,  and
finally,  seeing  her  linger  over  her  work,  she  quite  made  up  her
mind  that  for  once  my  influence  had  failed,  and  she  afterwards
gave  up  all  idea  of  the  matter.

During  the  waiting  at  table  in  the  evening,  the  girl  seemed
absent-minded,  and  rather  perplexed,  but  this  was  not  then
connected  with  my  suggestions.  An  hour  or  so  before  the
time  for  leaving  the  house  the  restlessness  increased,  and
Miss  S.  stood  for  a  long  time  at  the  kitchen  door  looking
out  into  the  garden,  and  finally  asked  to  be  allowed  to
go  out.

This,  under  the  circumstances  of  the  household  arrangement,
was  considered  to  be  an  unreasonable  request,  but  was  neverthe-
less somewhat  reluctantly  granted,  and  it  was  not  until  the
matter  was  discussed,  after  she  had  left,  that  the  light  of
understanding  dawned  upon  the  employers.  They  realised  for
the  first  time  that  it  was  an  evening  assembly  and  not  an  after-
noon one,  as  believed  up  to  that  moment.


lxix.] Recent  Experience  in  Hypnotic  Practice.  385

This  explanation  precludes  the  thought  that  a  hint  of  assist-
ance might  have  been  given  to  my  patient.

I  have  tried  some  simple  tests  in  telepathy  with  this  subject,
under  hypnosis,  with  fair  success,  but  my  experiments  in  this
line  have  not  been  extensive,  nor  carried  out  with  that  care
which  would  be  considered  necessary  to  eliminate  all  possibility
of  correct  answers  being  given  by  other  means.  I  was  satisfied
that  she  did  not  see,  but  in  the  absence  of  stricter  methods
I  could  not  expect  others  to  share  that  satisfaction,  and  for
this  reason  the  experiments  are  omitted.

I  shall  have  one  other  experience  to  relate  about  the  same
subject  in  my  next  and  last  case.

Miss  C.j  age  24.  This  was  a  case  of  very  severe  conversion
hysteria,  having  its  commencement  about  eighteen  months
prior  to  my  introduction  to  the  case.  There  appeared  to  be
nothing  special  in  the  family  history,  other  members  of  the
family  being  normal  people.  The  death  of  the  father  six
months  previous  to  the  onset  was  supposed  to  have  had  some
connection  with  the  illness.

There  was  a  small  patch  of  dulness  at  the  apex  of  one  lung,
but  this  did  not  give  rise  to  any  complications,  and  the  definite
evidence  of  tubercle  was  not  established.

The  main  points  in  the  symptoms  were  extreme  wasting,  the
weight  being  but  4  st.  12  lbs.  This  was  due  to  the  persistent
refusal  of  all  food,  only  a  little  water  ever  being  taken  volun-
tarily. A  few  tablespoonfuls  of  milk  were  occasionally  forced
down,  during  twenty-four  hours,  under  very  great  resistance,
but  at  other  times  only  as  many  teaspoonfuls  were  able  to  be
given.  Rectal  feeding  was  equally  resisted,  and  in  spite  of
the  frailness  of  the  girl  she  was  able  to  resist  the  attempts  of
two  people  to  give  nourishment  by  either  route.

The  eyes  were  closed  except  momentarily  on  rare  occasions.
Speech  was  equally  obstinately  withheld,  and  I  believe  abso-
lutely so  prior  to  my  visits.  The  limbs  were  rigid  and  the
legs  were  flexed  and  crossed.  The  eyes  were  invariably  turned
up  out  of  sight  when  the  lids  were  raised.  That  she  was
conscious  was  evident,  as  talk  of  feeding,  or  the  preparations
made  for  the  purpose,  were  always  the  signal  for  crying  and
screaming.


386


Sidney  Wilkinson,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.  [part


After  seeing  the  patient  in  consultation  I  made  arrangements
for  her  to  be  brought  into  residence  as  a  private  patient  at
the  Liverpool  Psycho-Therapeutic  Clinic.  This  programme,
arranged  in  her  hearing,  provoked  the  first  words  that  she
had  uttered  for  months.  Although  she  made  no  sign  in  my
presence,  she  afterwards  protested  strongly  against  being
moved.  My  attempts  at  persuading  her  to  take  food  were
unsuccessful,  and  she  was  accordingly  fed  forcibly,  after  which
I  tried  to  induce  sleep.  The  sleep  that  supervened  I  thought
to  be  the  result  of  my  endeavours,  until  I  discovered  that  she
invariably  slept  from  exhaustion  after  each  struggle  to  feed.
Indeed  I  soon  discovered  that  hypnotism  was  impossible,  and
equally  so  was  the  question  of  psycho-analysis.

Suggestions  were  therefore  regularly  given,  though  there  was
never  a  quiver  of  an  eyelid  to  show  that  they  were  understood.
As  stated  above,  I  was  satisfied  on  this  point  by  the  patient's
consciousness  whenever  feeding  was  spoken  of,  and  preparations
were  in  progress.

Later  I  tried  suggestion  by  transference  after  the  method
described  by  the  late  Dr.  Forbes  Winslow  in  the  May  issue  of
the  Practitioner,  1913.

My  last-mentioned  patient  acted  as  the  medium,  and  when
hypnotised,  her  hands  were  joined  to  the  patient,  and  I  made
an  endeavour  to  tap  the  patient's  sub-conscious  mind  by
questions  addressed  to  the  medium.

For  some  strange  reason  Miss  S.  failed  me  for  the  first  time,
and  offered  stubborn  resistance  to  all  my  attempts.  Persever-
ance on  my  part,  coupled  with  the  plea  that  it  was  the  only
chance  of  saving  the  girl's  life,  resulted  in  an  outburst  of
crying  from  my  hypnotised  subject.  Further  questions  only
increased  the  distress.  I  therefore  took  her  into  an  adjoin-
ing room  and  left  her  with  pencil  and  paper,  and  gave  her
instructions  to  write.

After  an  interval  I  returned  and  discovered  her  with  her
head  on  her  hands,  still  sobbing,  and  with  an  incomplete
sentence  upon  the  paper,  viz.  :  "  I  didn't  want  to  do  it,  Don't
tell  Una  [intended  for  "  Una,"  the  girl's  name],  Come  to
what."  No  amount  of  coaxing  would  make  her  finish  the
sentence,  so  it  had  to  remain  incomplete  and  senseless.

To  my  question,  if  she  had  received  any  intimation  not  to


lxix.] Recent  Experience  in  Hypnotic  Practice.  387

reveal  what  she  had  learned,  she  answered  "  Yes."  It  was
evident  that  this  interrogation  was  causing  distress,  and  I
therefore  desisted,  and  suggested  an  amnesia  for  all  that  had
occurred,  and  not  to  allow  the  circumstance  to  worry  her.  On
the  command  to  awake,  she  was  immediately  bright  and
smiling,  with  no  memory  of  what  she  had  passed  through.

Before  separating  the  patient's  and  the  medium's  hands,  I
made  such  suggestions  as  I  thought  would  be  applicable  to
the  case,  from  the  scant  history  supplied  by  the  friends,  and
the  general  symptoms.  The  reason  given,  viz.  the  death
of  the  father,  I  did  not  consider  sufficient,  partly  for  the
reason  that  the  event  was  six  months  prior  to  the  first
symptoms.  I  thought  it  far  more  likely  that  there  had  been
a  love  affair  which  had  caused  a  more  than  usually  keen
disappointment,  and  I  made  some  suggestions  to  that  effect.
Whether  there  was  truth  in  this  shot  or  not,  it  was  the  only
chance  that  seemed  to  be  left  to  me.

In  any  event,  I  had  barely  left  the  house  before  the  patient
was  roused  to  indignation,  and  for  the  first  time  in  months
spoke  freely,  and  indignantly  denied  all  that  I  had  ventured
to  say,  and  forthwith  evinced  a  dislike  for  me,  and  on  each
subsequent  occasion  turned  over  in  bed  away  from  me  when-
ever she  heard  my  voice,  whilst  previously  I  might  have  been
absolutely  non-existent,  so  little  did  she  appear  to  notice  my
presence,  providing  I  was  not  preparing  to  feed  her.

This  increased  my  belief  in  the  accuracy  of  my  remarks,
and  it  was  further  made  evident  by  the  pains  with  which  she
endeavoured  to  supply  another  reason,  viz.  that  she  felt  that
she  was  not  regarded  at  home  with  the  same  esteem  as  the
other  members  of  the  family,  and  that  in  consequence  of  this
she  wished  to  die,  and  was  taking  this  means  of  accomplishing
her  end.  Apart  from  being  an  improbable  reason  for  so  grave
a  condition,  the  explanation  was  not  true,  since  great  devotion
was  shown  to  her  by  her  people.

From  this  point  in  the  history  I  ceased  to  attend  the  patient,
as  she  expressed  a  wish  to  go  back  to  the  house  where  I  first
saw  her,  and  to  be  spared  from  the  visits  of  doctors.

I  considered  it  best  to  agree  to  this,  and  I  did  not  see  her
again  for  two  weeks,  and  hoped  that  the  suggestions  would
meanwhile  wake  up  fresh  conflicts.


388


Sidney  Wilkinson,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.  [part


At  the  completion  of  this  period  I  called  to  enquire  about
her  progress,  from  her  sister,  and  I  was  informed  that  she  was
taking  a  little  more  food,  and  there  seemed  some  hope  that
improvement  had  commenced.

Whether  on  account  of  increased  acuity  of  hearing  she
heard  my  voice,  or  by  any  supernormal  means  received  a  sub-
conscious impression  of  my  presence  which  set  a  further  train
of  associations  in  action,  or  whether  my  visit  was  in  no  way
concerned  with  the  change,  yet  a  little  time  after  I  left  the
house  the  girl  suddenly  sat  up  in  bed,  asked  where  she  was,
embraced  her  sister,  enquired  after  various  members  of  the
family,  and  stated  that  she  was  hungry.

She  arose  and  dressed  and  ate  a  good  meal.  She  remem-
bered nothing  of  the  eighteen  months,  beyond  a  dim  recollec-
tion of  having  seen  the  room  she  was  in  before.  Of  the
visits  of  doctors,  change  of  abode,  and  other  circumstances,
she  had  no  recollection.  She  slept  well  that  night,  and  for
several  days  continued  to  improve,  and  we  believed  that  there
was  a  promise  of  a  complete  return  to  health.  The  dis-
sociated elements  had  been  re-synthetised  with  the  main
stream  of  consciousness.

I  wished  to  complete  my  investigations  into  this  case,  but
the  friends  were  reluctant  for  hypnosis  to  be  tried  in  order  to
probe  the  cause  and  to  try  and  eliminate  the  complexes.
They  were  afraid  of  a  recurrence  of  the  old  condition,  and
I  hesitated  to  press  the  point  until  a  later  and  more  robust
phase  should  supervene.

I  should  like  to  be  able  to  record  that  this  return  to  memory
marked  the  commencement  of  a  return  to  health,  but  the
subsequent  history  of  the  case  is  that  the  system,  worn  out  by
long  privation  and  emotional  distress,  was  too  far  disorganised
for  recovery,  and  she  subsequently  gradually  sank,  and,
as  the  physical  energy  gave  out,  the  psychic  dissociation
returned,  and  the  girl  died.  She  fulfilled  her  determination,
as  frequently  expressed  when  speech  returned.

It  will  be  fully  appreciated  that  there  were  no  means  of
influencing  the  sub-conscious  mind  except  by  persistently
repeated  suggestions.  Psycho-analysis  was  as  impossible  as
hypnosis,  except  that  it  might  have  been  employed  after  speech
and  memory  returned,  if  opportunity  had  been  granted  to  me.


lxix.] Recent  Experience  in  Hypnotic  Practice.  389

In  conclusion,  there  may  be  some  people  who  will  laugh  at
a  serious  attempt  being  made  to  affect  ttiis  patient  by  "  trans-
ference," but  this  method  has  the  support  of  men  who  are  well
known  in  the  profession  ;  the  late  Dr.  Forbes  Winslow  was
one  who  appeared  to  use  it  extensively  in  his  practice  ;  and
though  I  cannot  say  whether  any  of  the  subsequent  results
were  due  to  this  means  or  not,  still  two  things  stand  out
prominently  in  my  mind  :

(1)  Some  very  disturbing  element  must  have  entered  the  per-
ception of  my  medium  in  order  to  cause  such  obvious  distress
and  such  blank  refusal  to  divulge  her  thoughts,  and

(2)  After  the  first  sitting  the  medium  knew  the  patient's
name,  though  no  mention  of  it  had  been  made  in  her  presence,
and  when  awake  she  had  no  knowledge  of  it.

Since  the  death  of  the  patient,  I  have  made  other  attempts  to
obtain  something  from  Miss  S.,  telling  her  that  it  did  not  matter
now  that  the  girl  was  dead  and  could  not  object.  Beyond
telling  me  that  the  secret  is  one  that  she  cannot  divulge,
she  is  adamant,  and  every  effort  that  I  made  brought  about
the  same  state  of  sobbing  and  distress,  so  that  I  finally  had
to  abandon  the  task.  We  must  therefore  be  content  to  let  it
remain  a  mystery.


390


V.  J.  Woolley,  M.D.


[part


IX.

SOME  AUTO- SUGGESTED  VISIONS  AS  ILLUSTRATING
DREAM-FORMATION.

By  V.  J.  Woolley,  M.D.

During  the  last  few  years  the  study  of  dreams  and  their
causation  has  made  great  advances  through  the  work  of  Pro-
fessor Freud  of  Vienna.  His  theories  have  excited  the  fiercest
controversy  on  the  Continent,  particularly  among  the  members
of  the  medical  profession,  and  the  quarrel  has  extended  in  a
somewhat  milder  form  to  this  country,  where  it  has  even
reached  the  daily  press.  The  last  development  I  personally
rather  regret,  since  it  is  only  too  well  known  to  members
of  this  Society  what  gross  misrepresentations  and  garbled
narratives  are  inevitably  produced  by  such  an  extension.  It
is  in  the  hope  of  clearing  up  one  of  the  grosser  misunder-
standings of  Freud's  theory  that  I  venture  to  bring  forward
some  experiences  closely  resembling  dreams  and  illustrating
to  some  degree  what  Freud  believes  to  be  an  important  factor
in  the  causation  of  the  dream  state.

It  is  probably  known  to  most  people  that  Freud  believes
that  every  dream  originates  in  some  impulse  or  tendency
towards  action  present  in  the  unconscious  part  of  our  mind.
Every  dream,  moreover,  represents  in  some  way,  generally  a
symbolic  or  distorted  way,  the  carrying  out  into  action  of  some
such  impulse.  This  theory  is  usually  put  in  the  form  of  the
statement  ''every  dream  represents  the  fulfilment  of  a  wish,"
a  statement  which  I  think  is  very  misleading,  and  has  caused
an  immense  amount  of  misunderstanding  of  Freud's  con-
ception.

As  we  ordinarily  use  the  word,  when  we  say  "  I  wish  to
do  this  or  that,"  we  mean  that  we  have  considered  the  pros


lxix.]  Visions  Illustrating  Dream -Formation.


391


and  cons  and  are  actually  willing  and  anxious  to  adopt  this
or  that  line  of  conduct.  In  Freud's  sense,  however,  the  word
wish  implies  nothing  of  this  kind.  As  I  have  expressed  it
above,  it  implies  no  more  than  that  there  is  present  in  some
part  of  our  mind  a  tendency  towards  a  particular  line  of
action  ;  but  this  tendency  may  be  so  checked  and  resisted
by  other  existing  conditions,  such,  for  instance,  as  ideas  of
duty  or  of  worldly  wisdom,  that  it  in  no  way  corresponds
to  the  real  line  of  conduct  which  we  are  willing  to  follow.
In  fact,  it  often  happens  that  some  such  impulse  is  so  opposed
to  the  ideas  on  which  our  conscious  life  is  based  that  it  fails
altogether  to  penetrate  to  our  consciousness.  It  is  delibe-
rately kept  out  by  a  mental  mechanism  which  works  without
our  knowledge,  and  is  called  by  Freud  the  Zensur,  or  Censor.
When  we  sleep  this  Censor  is  weakened  in  its  working  ;  it
is  not  strong  enough  to  keep  out  these  impulses  completely,
but  it  succeeds  in  distorting  them,  so  that  they  are  no  longer
recognizable  by  our  conscious  mind  ;  or  we  may  put  it  that
they  manage  to  disguise  themselves  sufficiently  to  slip  past
the  sleepy  sentinel  and  take  advantage  of  their  chance  to
do  so.

It  is  in  this  sense  that  dreams  represent  the  distorted  ful-
filment of  an  unconscious  wish  or  impulse.  Yet  it  has  been
continually  urged  by  those  who  have  not  read  Freud's  writings
that  dreams  so  often  go  counter  to  our  wishes,  or  are  unpleasant,
or  that  we  dream  that  we  murder  some  one  against  whom  we
have  no  ill  will ,  that  they  cannot  be  said  to  be  the  fulfilment  of
our  wishes.  I  have  said  enough  to  show  that  such  an  objection
is  baseless,  but  the  dream-like  visions  I  am  going  to  discuss
give,  I  think,  a  clearer  illustration  of  the  dream  method  than
can  be  got  from  the  ordinary  dreams  of  sleep.

These  visions  consist  of  a  number  of  self-suggested  hallucina-
tions which  were  experienced  by  one  of  our  foreign  members.
He  has  placed  them  at  the  disposal  of  the  Society,  and  I  hope
that  at  some  future  date  they  may  be  described  in  detail  by
some  one  who  is  personally  acquainted  with  him.  (See  Miss
Johnson's  paper  below.)  I  have  only  selected  a  few  which
seem  to  illustrate  the  point  I  hope  to  make  clear.

This  gentleman,  whom  I  will  call  Mr.  Grunbaum,  suffered
in  1911  from  some  kind  of  nervous  breakdown  which  he  says


392


V.  J.  Woolley,  M.I).


[PART


he  determined  to  cure  by  means  of  self-hypnotism.  He
writes  :

My  intention  was  first  to  influence  the  different  senses  and  then
the  psychical  part  of  myself.  Therefore  one  day  in  the  end  of
September  [1911]  I  sat  down  in  a  chair  with  a  sheet  of  white  paper
in  front  of  me.  I  took  some  solution  (of  bromural  or  something
like  it)  in  order  to  get  a  little  sleepy,  and  then  I  told  myself  that
after  awaking  I  should  see  a  black  charcoal  line  on  the  white  paper
sheet.  I  really  got  sleepy,  and  after  a  while  I  saw  a  very  decora-
tive line  on  the  paper  in  front  of  me.  A  voice  in  my  head  told
me  "  This  is  on  account  of  the  experiment  you  are  making."
Thereupon  the  line  vanished.  Then  I  tried  again  to  get  the  line
straight,  but  that  would  never  succeed.  It  was  always  more  or
less  decorative.  The  one  that  came  nearest  to  the  straight  line
was  about  this  [here  he  gives  a  sketch  of  a  complex  figure  of  several
loops  and  curves  suggesting  nothing  in  particular].

So  [he  concludes]  I  gave  that  up,  and  one  of  the  following  days
I  tried  a  more  complicated  thing.  I  tried  a  young  lady.  She
did  come  and  even  without  any  drug.  It  was  as  follows  :  In
order  to  get  tired  I  had  been  making  a  long  walk  and  thereupon
I  sat  down  again  and  told  myself  that  after  awaking  I  should  see
a  young  lady.  After  some  20  minutes  I  got  aware  of  some  kind
of  whirlpool  where  there  seemed  to  be  flames  or  firework.  Then
the  thing  got  the  shape  of  a  lady  coming  in  a  great  speed  towards
me.  She  was  all  the  while  smiling  friendly  and  seemed  to  be  in
a  great  haste.  She  held  up  her  dresses  at  one  side  with  her  hand
in  order  to  be  able  to  go  quickly.  I  saw  them  flying  in  the  wind
and  I  saw  her  feet  go  very  quick.  When  she  was  about  the  size
of  1  foot  English  then  the  voice  said  again  that  it  was  on  account
of  my  experiment,  and  then  I  began  to  make  up  my  mind  that
it  might  come  out  to  be  interesting  when  she  came  nearer,  where-
upon she  vanished.

The  next  account  I  shall  quote  describes  as  follows  his
experience  while  undergoing  hypnotic  treatment  from  a
physician  whom  he  had  consulted  for  the  relief  of  his
symptoms  :

I  got  aware  of  something  moving  and  turning  in  f  ront  of  and  above
my  forehead. It  took  the  shape  of  a  disk  of  some  4  feet  diameter.


xxix.] Visions  Illustrating  Dream-Formation.  393

Inside  that  disk  there  was  sitting  a  young  lady.  It  was  a  beautiful
creature  with  a  very  friendly  charming  face.  She  nodded  her  head
very  nicely  towards  me.  I  said  "  Who  are  you  ?  "  She  answered,
"  I  am  your  Self-control. "  (I  had  read  in  Dr.  Bramwell's  book  that
the  chief  aim  of  every  hypnotic  treatment  should  be  to  develop
the  patient's  self-control,  but  I  had  never  thought  of  the  idea
"that  it  meant  to  develop  a  young  lady.)

"  Just  feel  how  real  I  am,"  she  said,  and  she  stretched  out
her  arm  and  hand  towards  me.  So  I  gave  her  a  pat  on  her
fingers.  I  heard  the  sound  it  made  and  felt  the  touch.  Then
I  noticed  on  that  occasion  something  extraordinary  :  I  felt  in
her  hand  just  as  well  as  my  own  hand.  That  is  to  say,  that  I
felt  just  the  same  as  when  one  is  touching  his  own  right  hand
with  his  left  hand.  My  own  hands  were,  however,  not  touching
■one  another,  but  were  lying  on  the  woollen  cover.

Thereupon  she  began  to  make  arrangements  to  step  out  of  the
disc.  She  put  her  foot  outside.  I  still  remember  the  beautifully
decorated  silk  stocking.  I  could  see  every  stitch  of  the  silk.  So
I  made  directly  up  my  mind  that  she  had  better  stay  in  there,
as  I  began  to  feel  uneasy  that  there  might  something  get  wrong  in
my  brains.  She  noticed  my  fear  directly  :  I  could  see  it  on  her
face.  So  I  returned  to  common  consciousness  and  she  dis-
appeared.

I  have  quoted  the  last  vision  chiefly  in  order  to  make  clear
some  others  that  follow,  but  I  may  here  draw  attention  to
what  is  disclosed  in  it  by  the  most  superficial  analysis.  We
•can  easily  discern  three  desires  which  form  the  motive  force
of  the  vision  :  the  wish  to  pass  into  a  hypnotic  trance,  to
•develop  his  self-control,  and  to  see  a  young  lady.  The  first
two  are  derived  from  Dr.  Bramwell's  book  which  he  had  just
been  reading  :  the  third  is  sufficiently  common  in  all  the
visions  to  make  one  certain  that  it  is  nearly  always  present
in  the  unconscious.  In  the  book  there  is  a  good  deal  said  of
the  method  of  producing  hypnosis  by  a  circular  mirror  or  disc
held  above  and  in  front  of  the  eyes,  and  it  will  be  seen  how
precisely  the  disc  containing  the  vision  is  located  at  this  spot.

After  this  vision  Mr.  Griinbaum  began  to  address  his  Self-
control  much  as  spiritualists  address  "controls"  at  a  seance.
I  quote  next  a  vision  of  February  1,  1912  :


394


V.  J.  Woolley,  31. D.


[part


(Young  lady's  hand.)

I  sit  down  after  dinner  and  after  a  while  I  speak  to  myself  as.
follows  :

"  My  dear  Self-control,  "  I  say,  "  where  have  you  gone  to  ?  Now
come  back,  there  is  a  chance  for  you  here  to  try  your  powers,
granted  that  you  behave  exactly  in  the  way  I  want  you  to.  Come,
come,  come,  show  me  your  little  hand."

Result. — After  some  20  minutes,  at  the  moment  of  getting  a
little  dreamy,  I  see  a  disk  in  front  of  my  closed  eyes — about  one
foot  in  diameter  and  at  about  one  foot  distance.  There  is  nothing
in  it  except  a  piece  of  staniol.  This  takes  the  shape  of  a  flower.
Then  there  comes  at  the  underpart  of  the  disk  a  red-brown  hand,
all  stiff  as  if  carved  from  wood.  It  is  connected  to  a  long  brown
arm  and  moves  upwards.  It  takes  hold  of  the  staniol-flower  and
shows  it  to  me.  It  turns  it  to  and  fro  and  disappears  at  the  under-
part of  the  disk,  taking  the  flower  with  it.

(February  2.) Young  lady's  hand.

I  say  :  "  Dear  Self-control,  you  seem  to  have  made  a  mistake
yesterday.  I  wanted  to  see  your  own  hand,  keep  that  well  in
mind  ;  go  on,  as  you  are  on  the  right  track."

Result :  a  lady's  hat. — It  is  beautifully  ornamented  with  silk  and
velvet  trimmings  all  of  a  dark  colour.  It  is  more  than  K  foot
broad  and  turned  slightly  upwards  so  as  to  show  to  me  the  hollow
crown.

I  say  :  "  My  dear  lady-friend,  you  must  be  mistaken,  as  this
is  not  a  hand  but  a  hat  ;  try  again."

Directly  hereon  the  hat  begins  to  turn  around  its  axes,  and
there  comes  something  glistening  around  the  corner  and  more  and
more  into  the  light.  It  is  then  brilliantly  illuminated  and  turns
out  to  be  a  brooch.  It  is  silver  plated  and  is  as  a  Christmas  card  :
two  hands  folded  together.  Then  the  hat  turns  to  and  fro  and
to  and  fro  as  if  it  were  to  show  to  me  how  nice  it  is.

It  fades  away  and  then  comes  a  small  nickel-plated  press-papier
with  a  nickel  hand  on  it.

(Note. — In  the  morning  of  that  day  I  had  seen  in  a  lunch-room
a  girl  with  a  rather  nice  hat  with  trimmings  of  silk  and  velvet.
There  was  no  brooch  on  it,  but  she  wore  a  band  around  her  waist
fastened  with  such  a  brooch.)


lxix.]  Visions  Illustrating  Dream- Formation.


395


(February  3.) Bouquet  of  flowers.

I  speak  as  follows  :  'L  Self-control,  here  is  something  you'll  like,
as  it  is  flowers  ;  just  the  thing  for  you.  After  you  have  shown
the  bouquet  to  me  you  must  let  me  smell  the  delicious  flavour  of
the  flowers  ;  don't  forget  that."

Result  :  A  pair  of  slippers. — They  are  pointing  with  their  em-
broidered toes  towards  me.  The  toes  are  embroidered  with  coloured
cotton  wool,  roses  and  buds.

Then  all  at  once  I  get  the  most  fearful  stink  in  my  nose,  as  I
had  never  before.  It  was,  in  fact,  worse  than  rotten  eggs.  I  pull
myself  out  of  it  with  a  start.

(February  8.)  Boy.

I  give  an  order  to  show  me  a  boy.  I  keep  this  idea  in  mind  and
picture  it  out  in  front  of  me.

Result  :  my  own  face  making  an  ugly  grimace  at  me.

(Note. — I  fail  altogether  to  see  any  connection  between  this  face
and  a  boy.  But  afterwards,  on  February  10,  talking  the  affair
over  with  Mr.  Feilding,  I  remember  that  on  February  7  I  had  been
looking  in  a  small  mirror  hanging  in  a  corridor  in  order  to  inspect
one  of  my  teeth.  On  that  occasion  I  had  made  the  remark  :
"  Well,  you  are  a  nice  boy  ;  would  you  make  yourself  younger
with  your  suggestion  ? You  are  decidedly  getting  older.'")

(February  10). Landscape  covered  with  pure  snow.

I  tell  my  Self-control,  as  I  am  rather  warm  near  the  hot  stove,
to  show  me  a  landscape,  covered  with  pure  snow.  (The  word
pure  is  in  the  Dutch  language  rein.)

Result. — I  see  Mr.  Feilding,  who  is  present  in  a  little  canoe  with
somebody  else.  The  canoe  tumbles  over  and  they  fall  down  into
the  water.

(Note. — During  the  morning  of  that  day,  I  had  a  conversation
with  Mr.  Feilding  concerning  a  canoe  accident  he  had  once.  In
the  course  of  that  conversation  Mr.  Feilding  told  me  that  it  had
been  on  the  river  Rhine.)

(February  14.)  Rose.

I  point  out  to  my  Self-control  that  she  seems  to  have  lost  the
right  track  last  time.  So  I'll  help  her  by  trying  to  picture  out  the
rose  in  front  of  me.


396


V.  J.  Woolley,  M.D.


[part


Result. — After  some  20  minutes  I  get  aware  of  something  waver-
ing to  and  fro  under  my  nose.  I  look  at  it  and  I  see  that  it  is  a.
rose  with  a  bud.  It  is  connected  with  a  long  stem  of  about  a  foot.
Very  low  down  it  is  held  by  a  lady's  hand — very  elegant — with  a
bracelet  around  the  wrist.

Just  when  I  try  to  get  a  good  view  of  this  bracelet,  I  smell  during
the  time  of  one  inhalation  a  very  intense  smell  of  beautiful  roses.
It  smelt  much  nicer  than  ever  a  real  rose  could  smell.

Then  I  say  :  "  Well  now,  this  is  right,  this  is  the  way  I  want  you
to  work  for  me."

(Note. — Still  a  while  afterwards  I  had  that  delicious  smell  in  my
nose.)

(February  15.)  Mignonette.

I  proceed  in  the  same  way  as  with  the  rose,  my  intention  being
to  work  along  in  this  way  all  the  different  flowers.

Result. — I  see  a  disk.  In  this  disk  there  comes  a  little  boy.  He
is  laughing.  Then  there  comes  a  big  woman  in  front  of  him.  She
is  pulling  his  ears  and  giving  him  blows  on  his  face.  I  hear  her
saying  :  "  There,  there,  there."  The  whole  scene  was  enveloped
in  a  very  thin  black  veil.

(Note. — That  day  I  had  been  taking  a  very  long  walk.  Coming
back  to  the  city,  I  came  across  a  brook,  wherein  there  was  still
lying  a  flake  of  ice.  There  was  a  boy  standing  on  it,  amusing  him-
self there.  Then  his  mother  came  out  of  house  scolding  at  him.
So  he  came  off  and  she  began  to  beat  him.

Next  day  I  went  clown  again  to  the  same  place  and  noticed
some  old  flower-pots  in  the  window-sill.  There  was,  however,
nothing  in  them  but  what  once  might  have  been  flowers.)

(February  16.)  Violets.

I  point  out  to  my  Self-control  that  she  seems  to  have  got  on
an  altogether  wrong  track  again.  So  I'll  try  to  help  and  picture
out  some  violets.  [On  February  17]  I  make  up  my  mind  to  try
that  again.

Result. — After  a  while  my  hair  is  pulled,  just  at  the  centre  of
my  head.  I  say  :  "  Come  now,  here  you  are  wrong,  it  has  nothing
to  do  with  it,  try  again."  There  again  my  hair  is  pulled,  but
stronger  and  more  decided.


LXIX.]


Visions  Illustrating  Dream-Formation.


397


(Note. — Then  I  make  up  my  mind,  that  there  stands  on  my
mantelpiece  a  small  bottle  with  some  oil  in  it,  to  be  put  on  the
hair. It  bears  a  label :  "  Violette  de  Parme.")

(February  21.)  Song-bird.

I  point  out  to  Self-control,  that  I  have  here  something  she'll
like  better,  as  it  concerns  the  singing  of  birds.  I  try  to  picture
out  all  kind  of  beautiful  birds  in  front  of  me.

Result. — I  hear  somebody  whistle  outside.  He  whistles  all  kind
of  airs  that  are  on  my  phonograph.  He  really  does  it  in  a  mar-
vellous way. He  whistles  some  five  or  six  different  airs.

(Note. — After  interrogating  my  mother  who  was  present  that
time,  I  asked  her,  if  she  had  heard  how  nicely  that  man  imitated
birds  in  the  street. She  said  she  heard  nothing  at  all.)

(March  1.) Heavenly  Love.

(This  is  the  best  one  as  far  as  now.)

Now  I  point  out  to  my  Self-control  that  we  shall  go  over  to
the  higher  sentiments  ;  I  propose  to  her  to  work  together  in  order
to  get  the  wanted  result.

Result. — I  see  a  medallion  of  some  2  feet  diameter.  All  around
the  circumference  there  are  little  flames  all  jumping  around.  They
dance  all  around  in  a  very  agitated  way.  In  the  medallion  I  see
(1)  Mephisto.  He  is  wonderfully  well  defined  with  his  shrewd  face.
I  feel  myself  very  much  attracted  towards  him,  as  he  has  such  a
cunning  face.  He  has  a  staff  in  one  hand  and  is  pointing  with  the
other  hand  to  Heaven. Then  it  disappears.

(2)  The  darkness  opens  itself  again  very  slowly,  and  I  see  a
disk.  Therein  is  a  brass  stand  with  a  brass  kettle  on  it.  It  is
wonderfully  ornamented  with  all  kind  of  curls.  It  is  transparent,
as  if  made  from  glass.  It  is  all  enveloped  in  a  very  thin  black  veil.
Even  the  way  in  which  the  veil  is  slung  around  the  brass  stand  is
highly  artistic. Then  it  disappears.

(3)  Thereafter  there  comes  a  work  girl  with  a  blue  skirt  with
the  sleeves  and  hands.  Next  to  her  is  a  hand  and  a  part  of  a
sleeve  apparently  belonging  to  a  policeman,  since  there  are
police  stripes  on  it.  The  man  himself  is  invisible,  but  the  hand
is  in  a  position  as  if  he  were  standing  up  to  dance  with  the  girl.
Then  I  make  up  my  mind  that,  when  she  connects  both  parts
together,  the  thing  will  be  ready  then.


V.  J.  Woolley,  M.D.


[PART


Thereupon  there  comes  out  of  the  darkness  a  Christmas  card
with  all  kinds  of  friendly-looking  faces  on  it.  The  card  is  of  an
extremely  fine  texture  like  muslin,  and  behind  this  muslin  there
are  again  all  kind  of  silvery  bouquets.  It  is  an  immensely  nice
little  thing  and  ornamented  all  over  with  flowers.  It  all  glitters
like  electricity.  It  fades  away  and  thereafter  I  get  a  sensation  of
really  going  up  to  Heaven.  This  must  have  been  what  is  called
ecstasy.

Notes. — (1)  That  day  I  had  been  reading  in  the  book  of  Faust.
There  is  a  print  in  it  in  which  Mephisto  points  with  his  hand  to
Heaven. It  is,  however,  nothing  like  what  I  saw.

(2)  Sitting  on  the  chair,  wherein  I  have  been  reading  Faust's
book,  the  brass  stand  with  kettle  stands  to  the  left.  It  is  heated
by  gas.

(3)  The  evening  before  I  had  been  visiting  a  variety  theatre.
One  of  the  numbers  was  a  love-song  between  a  work-girl  and  a
policeman.

{March  2.) Hoiv  much  is  65  x27  ?

I  tell  my  Self-control  that  after  we  have  been  right  up  to  Heaven
yesterday,  we  shall  have  some  arithmetic  to-day.  So  I  tell  her  to
calculate  out  how  much  is  27  x  65  and  write  it  down  in  front  of  me.
I  keep  asking  mentally  :  How  much  is  65  x  27  ?

Result. — I  see  two  arms  coming  out  of  my  shoulder.  They  are
intermingled  with  one  another  like  snakes.  They  are  in  the  act
of  writing  down  something  in  front  of  me  on  the  wall.  I  can,  how-
ever, not  make  out  what  is  written.  At  the  same  time  I  hear
somebody  say  :  "  Didn't  I  sharpen  your  pencil  for  you  yesterday  ?  "

(March  7.) Boy  playing  at  hoop.

I  keep  this  idea  in  mind  and  picture  out  a  boy  playing  at  hoop.

Result. — After  a  Avhile  I  see  a  disk.  There  come  figures  in  it.
I  see  three  little  girls  dressed  up  as  boys.  They  give  one  another
their  hands,  in  this  way  forming  a  closed  circle.  Then,  keeping
one  another's  hands,  they  begin  to  jump  around.  I  hear  them
singing  "  tralalah,  tralalah."  It  is  as  if  they  are  made  from  very
thin  coloured  glass  thread.  It  is  immensely  nice  to  see  them  jump
around,  at  the  same  time  looking  at  me  with  their  lovely  faces  and
long  curls.


lxix.]  Visions  Illustrating  Dream-Formation.


399


(Note. — So  I  find  that  herein  the  idea  of  children s  game  and  boy
and  circle  (hoop  ?)  are  represented,  but  I  did  not  see  a  boy  playing
at  hoop.)

There  are  many  more  of  these  visions,  and  the  ones  I  have
quoted  are  taken  to  some  extent  at  random.  They  all,  how-
ever, have  one  character  in  common.  With  the  rarest  excep-
tions, the  vision  which  Mr.  Griinbaum  actually  experienced
was  not  the  one  that  he  wished  for  and  expected.  Sometimes,
as  in  the  smell  of  the  carpet  slippers,  it  was  just  the  reverse,
but  in  most  it  was  more  or  less  clearly  connected  in  a  way
which  he  was  able  himself  to  detect.  In  some,  which  are  not
quoted,  no  connection  was  obvious  to  him,  but  I  have  no
doubt  that  a  connection  could  be  established  by  any  one
who  was  sufficiently  acquainted  with  his  thoughts,  and  his
association  tendencies.

The  object  of  this  paper  is  to  controvert  the  objection  to
Freud's  theory  of  dreams,  which  is  based  on  the  fact  that
dream  experiences  are  not  obviously  pleasant  or  satisfying  to
the  dreamer.  I  have  mentioned  earlier  that  the  motive  force
of  the  dream  is  to  be  sought  in  some  desire  or  impulse  which
cannot  obtain  gratification  in  waking  life,  on  account  either
of  outward  circumstances  or  of  inward  judgment.  It  is  this
incompatibility  with  the  waiving  life  that  causes  the  disguise
which  renders  the  desire  unrecognizable.

In  Mr.  Griinbaum 's  visions,  the  place  of  the  desire  is  taken
by  his  wish  to  experience  a  particular  vision.  As  that  wish
is  conscious,  it  does  not  need  to  be  rendered  unrecognizable;
but  it  does  succeed  in  associating  itself  with  some  elements
from  the  unconscious  which  bring  about  the  moderate  distortion
which  is  present.  To  know  what  those  elements  are,  it  would
be  necessary  to  know  what  ideas  could  be  associated  in  his
mind  with  the  various  items  of  the  visions, — a  knowledge
which  could  only  come  from  a  prolonged  and  detailed  study.
All  that  I  have  tried  to  shew  is  that  such  a  vision  may  be
demonstrably  based  upon  a  definite  wish,  while  it  fulfils  that
wish  in  a  distorted  or  disguised  manner.


400


Alice  Johnson.


[part


X.

PSEUDO-PHYSICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  THE  CASE  OF

MR.  GRUNBAUM.

By  Alice  Johnson.

Mr.  Grunbaum's  narrative,  some  parts  of  which  are  discussed
above  by  Dr.  Woolley,  includes  various  incidents  which  closely
resemble  certain  types  of  alleged  "  physical  phenomena,"  and
may  instructively  be  compared  with  them,  since  it  is  clear  that
in  Mr.  Grunbaum's  case  the  apparently  material  effects  were
really  hallucinatory,  while  the  actually  material  effects  were
found  to  be  produced  by  his  own  automatic  and  unconscious
action.  These  incidents  being  outside  the  scope  of  Dr.  Woolley's
paper  are  given  separately  here  ;  but  as  they  obviously
belong  to  the  same  train  of  psychical  events,  they  will  be
best  understood  if  seen  in  their  proper  setting.  I  there-
fore quote  some  cases  of  the  same  kind  as  those  already
given,  in  the  midst  of  which  what  I  may  call  the  "  pseudo-
physical  "  phenomena  occurred.

As  stated  by  Dr.  Woolley,  Mr.  Griinbaum  wished  to  cure
himself  by  self-suggestion,  and,  with  a  view  to  testing  his
susceptibility,  he  tried  first  to  influence  his  different  senses,
intending  afterwards  to  affect  his  general  mental  condition.
Shortly  after  the  first  vision  of  the  young  lady,  the  following
occurred  :

Next  day  I  tried  sound.  I  said  that  I  should  hear  my  name
called.  I  did  so.  After  about  fifteen  minutes  I  heard  myself  called
in  a  very  bright  way.

Then  I  said  that  I  should  feel  myself  touched.  This  it  did  in  a
rather  curious  way,  as  it  pulled  my  coat  a  couple  of  times.  Now
this  was  not  exactly  what  I  had  been  aiming  at. So  I  tried  again


LXIX.]


Pseudo-Physica I  Phenomena .


401


and  said  that  I  should  feel  a  hand.  It  did  so  and  I  felt  a  hand
being  laid  on  mine.  This  rather  startled  me,  notwithstanding  I
had  asked  for  it  myself.

So  I  made  up  my  mind,  that  whereas  I  had  been  so  fortunate
with  the  different  senses,  I  might  now  go  over  to  the  psychical
side  of  myself.  Here  I  found  myself,  however,  in  front  of  an
obstacle.  The  fact  is  that  when  you  are  getting  sleepy,  then  you
cannot  repeat  your  suggestion  any  more.  Therefore  I  prepared  a
wax -record  for  my  Edison  Phonograph,  saying  that  I  should  go  to
sleep  very  quietly  and  after  awakening  all  my  troubles  should  be
gone.

The  effect  of  listening  to  this  record  was  very  wonderful.  It
might  have  run  some  4  minutes  (I  had  altered  the  speed  of  my
phonograph  in  such  a  way  that  it  ran  8  minutes)  when  I  got  aware
of  a  most  extraordinary  sensation.  The  tonation  wherein  the  words
were  spoken  had  a  very  curious  influence  on  me  :  it  felt  like  an
intoxication  of  the  soul.  There  is,  however,  nothing  that  feels  like
it,  nor  can  it  be  compared  with  anything  else.  The  sound  of  my
own  words  nearly  made  me  dance.

It  was  decidedly  agreeable  and  felt  like  going  right  up  to  Heaven.
If  somebody  had  cut  off  one  of  my  hands  in  that  state,  then  I
think  that  I  should  have  perfectly  enjoyed  it.  Then  the  voice
said  that  it  was  on  account  of  my  experiment,  and  I  opened  my
eyes  and  there  I  saw  the  wax  record  rapidly  spinning  around  (it
had  advanced  about  up  to  the  middle  of  the  whole  length)  ;  during
some  words  I  still  felt  that  extraordinary  sensation,  and  thereupon
the  sensation  ended.

So  I  was  very  content  with  my  success,  and  then  I  began  to
consult  Mr.  Bramwell's  book  in  order  to  find  out  into  which  hyp-
notic state  I  had  worked  myself.  But  I  could  find  neither  head
nor  tail  in  it,  in  so  far  that  I  read  therein  that  the  senses  could  be
influenced  in  the  deep  stage,  and  I  had  never  been  aware  of  having
been  in  any  stage  at  all,  except  during  that  very  curious  sensation.

So  I  got  hold  of  a  very  old  book  concerning  Faust.  (I  should
not  have  done  this,  by  the  way.)  I  found  different  formulas  in  it,  as  :

' '  Tetragrammaton — Adonai — Agla — come — come — come . ' '

I  did  not  pay  any  special  attention  to  this  at  the  time  ;  but  at
night  time,  when  lying  in  my  bed  and  just  at  the  moment  of  going
to  sleep,  there  came  a  thought  flashing  through  my  head.  It  said  :
"  Tetraagrammaton — Adonai — Agla." Nor  did  I  pay  any  attention


402


Alice  Johnson.


[part


to  it,  as  I  had  no  notion  that  the  effect  of  it  would  be  so  fearful.
A  short  while  afterwards  I  saw  a  broad  spectre  standing  at  the
end  of  my  bedside.  It  was  about  five  feet  high  and  three  feet
broad.  It  consisted  of  a  body  and  a  head.  I  did  not  see  any  eyes
in  it,  nor  was  it  a  real  spectre  ;  it  was  only  the  flat  drawing  of  a
spectre.  It  was  drawn  in  blue  smoky  outlines,  all  vibrating  There
was  nothing  fearful  in  the  thing  itself,  but  I  cannot  say  how  it  was
that  the  thing  gave  me  such  a  tremendous  fright  (the  whole  thing
was  connected  with  a  feeling  of  wrong,  black  mischief).  I  was
lying  on  my  right  side,  so  that  there  could  be  no  question  about
nightmare  ;  besides  I  never  have  such  a  thing  as  nightmare,  unless
I  am  lying  flat  on  my  back.  My  heart  seemed  to  have  come  to  a
dead  stop.  Then  all  at  once  it  started  with  a  fearful  speed.  So
I  jumped  out  of  my  bed  and  drank  a  glass  of  water.  By  means  of
counter-suggestions  and  very  heavy  slow  breathing,  I  mastered  the
palpitation  of  my  heart,  but  it  took  as  long  as  half  an  hour  before
it  began  to  beat  at  moderate  speed  again.  I  slept  very  little  that
night.

Next  day  I  listen  again  to  my  phonograph-record,  but  it  gives
no  result  whatever.  I  feel  very  sorry  about  this,  as  all  the  other
experiments  gave  me  such  a  peaceful  agreeable  feeling.  That  night
I  do  not  try  anything  else  any  more,  but  all  at  once,  contrary  to
my  expectation,  the  same  spectre  is  there,  but  that  time  standing
at  my  bed  side,  decidedly  looking  at  me. So  it  had  come  nearer.

I  jump  directly  out  of  my  bed  and  my  heart  starts  beating
again,  although  not  half  as  bad  as  the  other  day.  Thereupon  I
think  that  I  slept  a  little.

Next  day  I  prepare  a  special  record  with  the  suggestion  that  I
shall  feel  happy,  etc.  ;  but  I  get  no  result  whatever.  I  feel  very
depressed  about  this  and  write  the  whole  affair  (without  the  spectre)
to  Mr.  Bramwell,  who  answers  me  that  I  had  better  consult  a  com-
petent physician.

As  a  result  of  this  advice,  Mr.  Griinbaum  went  (as  stated
above  by  Dr.  Woolley)  to  a  physician  for  hypnotic  treat-
ment on  October  17,  1911.  He  received  about  thirteen
treatments,  at  the  rate  first  of  twice  a  week,  then  once  a
week,  and  afterwards  once  a  fortnight.  The  effect  was  excel-
lent, and  he  recovered  completely  from  the  abnormal  mental
condition.


LXIX.]


Pseudo-Physical  Phenomena.


403


Meanwhile,  however,  various  hallucinations  occurred  to  him
spontaneously.  One  form  of  these  seems  to  have  been  the
distorted  result  of  an  external  suggestion,  just  as  some  others
were  the  distorted  result  of  self-suggestions.  He  describes  this
as  follows  :

In  the  beginning  of  November,  when  I  was  going  to  have  one  of
my  teeth  drilled,  the  doctor  gave  me  a  suggestion  concerning  this
in  the  waking  state.  The  effect  of  it,  after  a  while  lying  on  the
sofa,  was  a  feeling  as  if  I  received  a  blow  on  my  head  with  a  club,
and  as  if  all  my  brains  were  pulled  together  by  means  of  a  string.
At  the  same  time  I  felt  a  tingling  in  that  special  tooth.

Next  day,  on  the  way  to  the  dentist,  that  sensation  was  repeated,
and  the  tooth  was  drilled  without  any  special  discomfort  from  my
side.  I  will  call  this  sensation  the  "  club-blow, , "  as  we  shall  see  that
it  is  to  be  repeated  many  a  time  afterwards  masked  for.

Then  came  the  day  when  I  received  the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.,
wherein  is  described  the  case  of  "  Anna  Burton."  1  This  thing
seems  to  have  evoked  quite  a  stir  in  my  subliminal  being.

It  was  as  follows  :  I  think  it  must  have  been  on  November  11th
that  I  received  that  special  Journal.  Not  having  had  a  chance  to
read  it  in  the  day-time,  I  took  it  along  with  me  to  bed  and,  after
lighting  the  candle,  I  began  to  read  the  case  all  through.  So  I
made  up  my  mind  that  it  was  no  way  of  experimenting  at  all,  if
one  is  asking  in  total  darkness  to  be  touched,  whereas  I  had  been
doing  that  [with  success]  in  plain  daylight,  being  all  alone  and  as
a  result  of  my  own  suggestions.  Also  I  made  up  my  mind  that
if  the  doctor  who  made  that  experiment  had  smeared  some  lamp-
black on  his  fingers,  he  might  then  have  been  able  to  make  out
if  he  had  really  been  touching  his  own  right  hand  with  his  left  hand,
or  if  somebody  else  did  it,  or  if  it  was  a  hallucination.  But  it  is
always  very  easy  to  make  up  your  mind  what  other  people  should
have  done. So  I  blew  out  my  candle  and  lay  down  to  sleep.

I  was,  however,  to  get  aware  of  something  else,  before  sleep
should  come.  Just  at  the  verge  of  falling  asleep,  there  shot  a
thought  through  my  head  saying  :  "  Shall  I  touch  you  a  little  ?  "
Directly  afterwards  I  received  a  "  club -blow  "  on  my  brain  ;  it
was  accompanied  by  a  white  silhouette  of  a  hand  on  a  black  back-
ground. I  saw  this  hand  at  the  back  of  my  head. I  recognised

1  Journal  S.P.R.,  November,  1.911.


404


Alice  Johnson.


[part


directly  in  it  the  exact  reproduction  of  a  black  hand  on  a  white
background  that  had  once  been  printed  in  the  Annals  [of  Psychical
Science] 1  in  an  article  by  Prof.  Richet  on  "  The  Spirit  of  Pres-
bourg."  Then,  not  expecting  anything  particular,  I  fell  asleep,
when  all  at  once  I  was  taken  hold  of  by  two  big  hands.  They  took
hold  of  me  in  my  sides  and  gave  me  eight  strong  squeezes.

It  was  not  at  all  disagreeable.  After  the  first  four  squeezes  I
said  :  "  Don't  get  higher,"  as  I  was  afraid  that  it  would  come  in
my  face.  It  responded  directly  to  what  I  said  and  gave  me  four
more  squeezes  lower  down.  Thereupon  I  cried  :  "  Don't  get  lower  !  "
and  then  it  finished.

It  was  done  with  very  great  force.  It  lifted  me  right  up  (this,
at  least,  is  what  it  felt  like)  ;  but  it  may  have  been  my  own  muscles
doing  that.  The  first  series  made  me  bump  with  my  head  against
the  wall  and  the  second  series  nearly  threw  me  out  of  bed.

I  was  not  at  all  frightened.  These  hands  felt  as  if  they  had
gloves  on  and  were  at  the  inside  lined  with  cotton  wool.

On  the  night  of  November  14th  (I  am  not  altogether  sure  of  the
date)  I  received  such  a  sudden  blow  on  my  head,  that  I  was  alto-
gether startled  by  it.  I  thought  that  this  was  to  be  the  end  of  my
life,  such  a  tremendous  bump  I  received  on  my  brains.  I  all  at
once  resisted  and  said  :  "  Get  away,  whatever  you  may  be,  as  I
did  not  call  for  you  !  "  Then  I  got  a  sensation,  as  if  there  were
champagne  all  foaming  through  my  body  from  the  tips  of  my  toes
to  the  top  of  my  head,  all  up  and  down,  my  brains  at  the  same
time  being  handled  in  the  above-named  way.  I  would  not  let  go
for  anything.  Then  I  felt  as  if  my  spine  was  pushed  upwards
and  as  if  there  was  being  made  a  trial  to  lift  me  up.  The  perspira-
tion came  all  over  my  body  and  the  bed  began  to  dance  up  and
down  at  least  a  foot,  and  all  other  kind  of  nervous  phenomena.

Then  I  compared  the  top  of  the  bedside  with  the  figures  on  the
wall-paper,  and  I  felt  that  they  were  going  up  and  down  together.
Then  I  said  to  myself  :  "  Well,  my  dear,  so  you  see  that  the  bed
does  not  move."  After  a  while  I  mastered  the  position  and  I  was
glad  that  I  kept  master  in  my  own  house.

Then  there  happened  something  very  curioiis.  In  this  very  quiet,
totally  exhausted  state,  it  was  all  at  once  as  if  there  opened  itself
something  before  me  and  there  came  a  very  big  hand  some  foot
long,  with  fingers  of  some  2  inches,  all  vibrating  towards  me.  It
1  Vol.  I.  pp.  210-212,  April,  1905


:lxix.]  Pseudo-Physical  Phenomena.  405


did  so  extremely  carefully.  I  tried  to  get  hold  of  it,  but  it  with-
drew. So  it  did  a  couple  of  times  when  at  last  I  got  hold  of  the
thing  and  I  felt  that  it  had  some  resistance.  After  a  Avhile  there
came  something  more — shoulders  and  a  head.  It  was  as  if  it  were
made  from  cigar-smoke,  all  vibrating  and  changing  its  position.
Then  I  said  :  "  Who  are  you  ?  "

He  said  :  "I  am  Urlus  "  (this  is,  by  the  way,  the  name  of  a
German  opera-singer).  Then  I  said  :  "  Well,  this  may  be  or  it  may
not  be,  but  what  do  you  want  ?  "  Then  Urlus  said  (I  was  dreaming
with  my  eyes  half  open)  :  "I  am  going  to  materialise  for  you."
Whereupon  he  began  to  manipulate  and  after  a  while  there  stood
a  complete  man  in  front  of  me  with  very  broad  shoulders.  Then,
taking  hold  of  my  left  pulse,  he  squeezed  me  rather  painfully.
Then  he  said  :  "  Just  feel  my  shoulders,  how  strong  they  are."
Then  I  slapped  him  on  his  shoulders  and  remarked  to  him  that
it  sounded  rather  like  cardboard.  Whereupon  Urlus  said  :  "  You
are  right,  in  so  far  that  it  really  sounds  like  cardboard,  but  you
should  not  forget  that  it  is  artificial."

Thereafter  I  went  through  a  common  dream,  giving  him  lemonade
to  drink  (a  remembrance  of  "  Bien-Boa  "  ?  1).  I  felt  very  proud
of  having  such  a  big  man  for  my  companion.  Then  all  at  once  I
found  myself  lying  with  my  eyes  open  and  my  candle  still  burning.
I  wondered  about  the  curious  experience  and  soon  after  I  went
to  sleep.

On  November  loth  and  16th  the  thing  repeated  itself  in  so  far
that  there  began  all  kinds  of  objects  to  fall  around  me.  I  heard
the  loud  blows  ;  I  also  heard  the  sound  as  if  people  were  hammering
with  a  chisel  on  big  stones.  I  remember  one  object  coming  so  near
that  it  flew  right  through  my  nose.  Mr.  Urlus  did  not  come  that
time.  Then  during  the  day  I  made  up  my  mind  that  at  night
time  I  seemed  to  be  in  a  somewhat  abnormal  state  of  mind  and
I  prepared  a  glass  plate  all  covered  with  lamp-black.  As  I  had
read  that  other  people  claimed  to  have  got  impressions  in  that  way
on  such  glasses,  so  I  thought  that  I  might  just  as  well  try  for
myself.

1  "  Bien-Boa  "  was  the  name  given  to  the  "materialised"  form  that
appeared  at  the  seances  held  by  Professor  Richet  at  Algiers  in  1905  with
the  medium  Marthe  B.  (see  Miss  Verrall's  article  above,  pp.  333  et  seq.)
as  reported  in  the  Annals  of  Psychical  Science  for  October  and  November,
1905.  The  photographs  of  "Bien-Boa"  there  reproduced  are  probably  the
origin  of  Mr.  Grunbaum's  "Urlus."


406


Alice  Johnson.


[part


So  I  did. I  fastened  the  plate  to  the  wall  along  my  bedside.

Then,  when  I  felt  that  my  brains  began  to  work,  I  said  as  follows  r
"  Well,  Mr.  Urlus  ;  in  case  you  might  come  back  to-night,  I  pro-
pose that,  instead  of  handling  my  body  with  your  big  hands,  you
might  try  to  press  one  of  your  hands  on  the  glass  plate.  I  have
arranged  it  specially  for  you,  so  I  suppose  that  you  will  make  use
of  it.  It  has  the  great  advantage  that  it  does  not  keep  me  out  of
my  sleep,  and  you  only  need  to  use  one  hand  instead  of  your  whole
body.  Besides  this,  it  may  leave  a  mark  of  your  presence."  So
I  went  to  sleep.

In  the  morning  I  am  perplexed,  as  I  find  that  the  black  plate
has  been  really  tampered  with.

There  was  no  impression  of  a  hand  on  it,  but  the  lamp-black
over  about  a  third  of  the  surface  was  rubbed  clean  off.  I  began  to
search.  My  head-pillow  on  the  place  where  I  am  lying  with  my
head  is  all  smeared  with  lamp-black.  There  is  also  lamp-black  on
the  wall.  Then  I  search  my  hands.  They  are  all  clean  ;  my  nails
the  same,  but  looking  in  my  mirror,  I  find  that  the  inside  of  my
left  ear  is  black,  also  behind  my  ear  it  is  smeared.

Then  I  begin  to  search  the  bed-clothes.  I  find  that  the  right
corner  at  the  foot  end  of  the  upper  sheet  leaves  a  black  trace  on  the
white  pillow  when  I  rub  that  corner  with  force  on  it.  The  other
corners  do  not  do  that.  So  the  operation  must  have  been  done
with  that  special  corner.  As  my  door  was  locked,  there  cannot
have  been  anybody  else  in  the  room  except  myself.  So  I  must
have  been  doing  that  myself  and  I  must  have  been  taking  scrupulous
care  not  to  leave  any  trace  of  the  modus  operandi.

I  am,  however,  not  aware  of  ever  having  done  such  a  thing,  so
that  I  cannot  make  this  very  clear.

The  vision  of  the  young  lady  quoted  above  in  Dr.  Woolley's
account,  p.  393,  followed  shortly  afterwards.
Mr.  Griinbaum  goes  on  :

One  or  two  days  after  that  had  happened,  I  think  on  November
17th,  I  tried  "  direct  writing."

I  prepared  a  black  plate,  put  it  inside  a  box,  but  left  a  round
hole  in  the  box  cover.  I  put  also  some  scraps  of  pencil  inside  the
box.  I  put  that  box  under  my  head-pillow  and  as  I  liked  that
young  lady  much  better  than  the  big  hands  of  Mr.  Urlus,  I  began
to  address  her  and  I  said  :


LXIX.]


Pseudo-Physical  Phenomena.


4(17


"  My  dear  Self-control,  can  you  write  on  the  plate  under  my
head-pillow  without  opening  the  cover  of  the  box  ?  "

I  received  directly  an  answer  to  that  question  in  the  shape  of
a  sound.  First  I  heard  something  fumbling  in  the  pillow  and  then
I  heard  that  there  was  something  written  on  the  plate.  Then
there  was  drawn  a  line  and  after  that  there  was  put  a  big  point  at
the  end.  Then  I  thought :  "  Now  we  shall  have  what  we  want."
I  got  out  of  bed,  took  a  glass  of  water,  and  then  I  said  to  myself  :
"  Well,  now  you  look  at  it."  So  I  opened  the  box  and  there  was
nothing  written  on  it.

After  describing  one  or  two  other  experiences,  Mr.  Grunbaum
continues  :

I  made  up  my  mind  to  have  absolutely  nothing  to  do  with  that
kind  of  thing,  as  it  was  all  at  work  by  itself  and  not  at  all  to  be
handled  by  me.  So  at  night-time  I  gave  myself  strong  suggestions
to  do  nothing  else  but  sleep  quietly.

It  came  back  a  couple  of  times  in  another  shape.

One  night  (I  think  I  had  been  reading  the  Proceedings)  when
I  had  gone  upstairs  to  my  bedroom,  I  was  just  in  the  act  of  taking
my  coat  off,  when  it  was  puUed  a  couple  of  times.  So  I  took  it
off  altogether.  But  when  I  was  opening  my  vest,  after  I  had
loosened  the  buttons,  and  just  when  I  was  moving  one  tip  of  it
sidewards,  I  felt  some  resistance.  I  thought  that  it  might  be  a
motor  automatism  of  my  left  arm,  but  when  I  felt  with  my  right
hand  in  front  of  me,  I  felt  that  there  was  some  fluidic  kind  of  thing
standing  in  front  of  me.  This  thing  gave  me  a  fearful  fright.  I  rushed
towards  the  curtains,  and  pulled  them  high  up.  I  think  that  it  is  a
touch  that  makes  one  feel  afraid,  especially  when  it  is  not  expected.

After  I  had  gone  to  bed  that  night  I  did,  of  course,  not  feel
quite  certain  about  what  was  going  to  happen,  when  all  at  once
I  felt  as  if  somebody  gave  me  a  stroke  with  a  fan  towards  my
face.  All  my  mouth,  hps,  etc.,  felt  as  cold  as  ice  ;  it  felt  just  as  if
some  icy  cold  air  were  blown  towards  my  face.  A  short  while  after
that  I  heard  somebody  whistle.  It  was  done  rather  nicely.  I  con-
cluded that  it  was  a  hallucination.  But  then  I  noticed  that  when
I  closed  my  ears,  I  did  not  hear  it  so  well,  and  when  I  opened  them
I  heard  it.  This  puzzled  me  again  and,  feeling  with  my  hands
towards  my  hps,  I  felt  that  my  own  lips  did  it.  Then  I  got  out  of
bed  and  took  a  glass  of  water.


408


Alice  Johnson.


[part


So  I  had  a  long  conversation  with  my  own  "  Self-control,"  and
I  pointed  out  to  her  that  the  only  way  to  give  her  a  chance  to
show  her  powers  was,  in  my  case,  that  she  should  behave  exactly
according  to  my  directions.  She  never  said  a  word,  but  at  the
end  of  my  conversation  I  got  a  squeeze  in  my  brains,  accompanied
by  a  young  lady's  bust  and  face  looking  very  disdainfully  at  me.
She  then  started  and  flew  far  away  and  away,  all  the  time  looking
at  me,  until  she  was  no  more  than  a  point.  I  specially  noticed  her
very  high  white  collar.

Mr.  Griinbaum,  having  found  that  his  experiments  led  to
results  which  he  did  not  desire,  now  determined  to  give  them
up.  Some  weeks  later,  however,  when  it  seemed  that  the
hypnotic  treatment  had  completely  restored  his  mental
balance,  he  began  again  to  feel  attracted  by  the  idea  of  trying
the  effects  of  self-suggestion  and  started  his  experiments  once
more.  He  now  found  that  he  could  no  longer  induce  the
mental  state  in  which  he  could,  as  he  expresses  it,  "  create  "
things, — the  state,  that  is,  in  which  all  his  senses  were  affected
at  once  by  the  hallucination,  which  therefore  assumed  the
most  realistic  form  possible.  He  could  only  induce  visual
hallucinations.  It  is  these  visions  of  which  Dr.  Woolley  has
quoted  some  typical  instances.  Later,  the  complicated  type
recurred,  and  in  the  following  case  the  realism  was  carried  so
far  that  the  whole  room  appeared  to  him  to  be  affected,  the
floor  seeming  to  vibrate  :

{July  5,  1912,  at  night.)

Without  any  intention  on  my  part,  I  awake  at  about  3  o'clock
at  night.  Then  I  am  looking  out  for  a  vision.  There  comes  nothing
at  all.

All  at  once  I  hear  mentally  behind  myself  the  loud  noise  of  the
rattling  of  an  iron  chain  (at  about  3.15).

My  attention  is  drawn  by  this  and  then  I  hear  behind  myself
four  very  heavy  footsteps.  They  are  given  in  a  very  decided  way
at  intervals  of  about  two  seconds.  (It  sounds  exactly  as  if  a  heavy
iron  statue  had  taken  a  fancy  to  walking  about  a  wooden  floor.)

At  the  same  time  I  see  a  dark  column  coming  down  at  me  at
my  back.  The  thing  was  about  5\  or  6  feet  high,  and  I  saw  a  trans-
parent black  veil  over  the  top  part,  something  like  this  drawing.


LXIX.]


Pseudo-Physical  Phenomena.


409


[Drawing  of  a  completely  draped  figure.]

It  was  a  visual  mental  image.  At  every  footstep  I  hear  the  floor
behind  myself  vibrating  (all  mentally).  I  get  afraid  of  the  thing
and  lack  the  courage  to  let  it  come  nearer,  and  draw  myself  out  of
the  trance.

I  make  up  my  mind  that  this  curious  phenomenon  must  be  the
same  as  in  those  cases  in  which  people  claim  to  have  heard  footsteps.

Mr.  Grunbaum,  whom  I  had  known  for  some  years  by
correspondence,  described  a  good  many  of  these  experiences  to
me  in  a  long  talk  which  I  had  with  him  at  the  rooms  of  the
S.P.R.  when  he  was  once  for  a  few  days  in  London,  and
this  talk  strongly  confirmed  the  impression  I  had  already
formed  of  him  as  an  intelligent  and  accurate  reporter.

It  may,  nevertheless,  not  be  out  of  place  to  conclude  this
paper  with  a  warning  of  the  risk  of  trying  experiments  such
as  are  described  in  it.  There  is  clearly  a  possibility  that
hallucinations,  if  once  deliberately  started,  may  develop
and  tend  to  recur  spontaneously  and  more  and  more  fre-
quently till  the  whole  mind  may  conceivably  be  thrown  out
of  gear.  Mr.  Griinbaum  himself  was  not  unaware  of  this
possibility,  and  especially  desired  that,  if  his  experiences
were  published,  readers  should  be  warned  of  it.  He  thus
describes  what  he  regards  as  the  greatest  danger  of  all  :
"  I  found  it  as  a  rule  very  easy  to  manoeuvre  myself  into
some  mental  state  from  which  I  could  not  get  myself  out
again."  Another  danger,  he  adds,  is  "  Voices  talking  in
the  head.  On  many  occasions  I  heard  a  whole  conversa-
tion concerning  the  suggestion.  I  think  there  is  nothing
abnormal  in  this.  But  sometimes  these  conversations  were
all  of  a  sudden  interrupted  by  a  sentence,  or  a  part  of  a
sentence,  not  at  all  belonging  to  the  conversation.  These
curious  voices  would  induce  either  direct  visions  or  post-
hypnotic hallucinations."  Hallucinatory  voices  are  well  known
to  be  a  frequent  accompaniment  of  mental  disease,  occurring
much  more  frequently  than  visual  hallucinations.

But  it  is  to  be  noted  that  throughout  all  this  series  of  some-
what disturbing  experiences,  Mr.  Grunbaum  never  allowed
himself  to  be  deceived  into  imagining"  that  his  hallucinations
had  any  objective  reality  ;  he  never  seriously  supposed  that


410


Alice  Johnson.


[part


anything  beyond  his  own  mind  was  at  work.  It  was  this
completely  sane  view  that  no  doubt  prevented  the  ill  effects
that  might  otherwise  have  followed.  If  he  had  believed,  as
many  persons  under  the  same  circumstances  would  have  been
tempted  to  believe,  that  "  spirits  " — evil,  or  merely  mischievous
— were  at  work,  the  consequences  might  have  been  serious.  It
seems  to  me,  indeed,  that  modern  attempts  to  revive  the
mischievous  doctrine  of  demon-possession  have  much  to  answer
for  through  the  encouragement  thereby  given  to  the  de-
velopment of  latent  or  incipient  delusions  in  ignorant  and
unbalanced  minds.  Against  these  tendencies  Mr.  Griin-
baum  was  fortunately  forearmed  by  his  acquaintance  with
the  work  of  the  S.P.R.,  aided  by  the  not  inconsiderable  sense
of  humour  which  enables  him  to  take  an  impersonal  view
of  his  own  mental  processes.


XXIX.]


Review.


41  I


REVIEW.

Psychopaihology  of  Everyday  Life.  By  Professor  Sigmund  Freud,
LL.D.  Authorised  English  Edition,  with  an  Introduction  by
A.  A.  Brill,  Ph.B  ,  M.D.  (T.  Fisher  Unwin,  1  Adelphi  Terrace,
London,  W.C. 1914. Price  12s.  Gd.  net.)

This  long  looked-for  translation  has  fulfilled  the  promises  of  interest
awakened  in  us  by  the  brief  presentations  of  writers  upon  psycho-
analysis. The  present  volume  grew  out  of  an  essay  published  in
1898  on  "  The  Psychic  Mechanism  of  Forgetting,"  in  which  failure
of  memory  is  explained  upon  principles  of  determinism.  The
underlying  idea  is  that  just  as  dreams  are  an  expression  of  the
"unconscious,"  so  also  does  it  strive  for  expression  in  absent-
minded  acts,  slips  of  the  tongue  or  pen,  and  in  things  erroneously
recalled,  or  resolutions  carried  out  in  a  manner  contrary  to  con-
scious intention.

It  is  generally  conceded  that  names  tend  to  be  forgotten  more
easily  than  any  other  content  of  memory  ;  but  Freud  examined
this  phenomenon  of  temporary  forgetfulness  in  the  course  of  his
analytical  researches.  He  concluded  that,  whether  a  name  is
merely  forgotten,  or  is  replaced  by  a  substitute,  the  displacement
follows  definite  natural  laws,  and  is  associated  with  repression.
Sometimes  it  is  due  to  direct  associations,  but  not  infrequently
to  disturbances  of  the  present  theme  by  the  ps}^chic  relations
of  the  theme  which  preceded  it,  "  for  the  disinclination  to  recall
may  apply  to  one  content  of  the  theme,  and  yet  the  inability  to
remember  may  appear  in  another."

Forgetting  is  sometimes  brought  about  by  a  deviation  of  atten-
tion, due  to  inner  conflict,  in  which  outer  association  is  formed
between  an  idea  and  a  repressed  wish.


412


Constance  E.  Long,  M.D.


[part


Our  social  sense  regards  the  forgetting  of  a  name  as  a  slight,
for  we  are  supposed  never  to  forget  the  name  of  a  person  who
makes  a  pleasing  impression  upon  us.

We  are  sometimes  induced  to  undertake  an  engagement  against
which  we  have  resistances,  and  we  are  apt  to  accept  it  with  a  safe-
guard, such  as  :  "  I  will  do  this,  but  I  have  a  bad  memory  and
you  must  excuse  me  if  I  forget  to  turn  up."  No  psychologist
is  surprised  to  find  that  engagements  undertaken  in  this  fashion
frequentty  come  to  grief.  An  example  of  an  omission  which  be-
trayed an  unconscious  intention  is  given  in  a  letter  from  a  pro-
spective patient  of  Brill's.  After  some  preliminary  correspondence
about  treatment  he  obtained  an  appointment.  Instead  of  keeping
it,  (says  Brill)  he  sent  the  following  letter  :

"  '  Owing  to  foreseen  circumstances  I  am  unable  to  keep  my
appointment.'  He  naturally  meant  to  write  unforeseen.  He
finally  came  to  me  months  later,  and  in  the  course  of  the  analysis
I  discovered  that  my  suspicions  at  the  time  were  justified  ;  there
were  no  unforeseen  circumstances  to  prevent  his  coming  at  that
time  ;  he  was  advised  not  to  come  to  me.  The  unconscious  does,
not  lie."

Printers'  errors  are  often  explicable  in  the  same  way,  but  in
Freud's  examples  the  Editorial  Department  comes  in  for  a  large
share  of  responsibility. He  tells  the  following  story  :

"  An  almost  unbelievable  example  of  miswriting  and  misreading
occurred  in  the  editing  of  a  widely  circulated  weekly.  It  con-
cerned an  article  of  defence  and  vindication  which  was  written
with  nmch  warmth  and  great  pathos.  The  editor-in-chief  of  the
paper  read  the  article,  while  the  author  himself  naturally  read
it  from  the  manuscript  and  proof-sheets  more  than  once.  Every-
body was  satisfied,  when  the  printer's  reader  suddenly  noticed
a  slight  error  which  had  escaped  the  attention  of  all.  There  it
was,  plainly  enough  :  '  Our  readers  will  bear  witness  to  the  fact
that  we  have  always  acted  in  a  selfish  manner  for  the  good  of  the
community.'  It  is  quite  evident  that  it  was  meant  to  read  un-
selfish. The  real  thoughts,  however,  broke  through  the  pathetic
speech  with  elemental  force."

Freud,  with  his  charming  disregard  of  personal  feelings  in  favour
of  analytical  truth,  tells  of  himself  that  he  has  occasionally  attacks
of  migraine  which  are  heralded  by  inability  to  recall  proper  names.
For  this  he  does  not  allow  himself  the  excuse  of  circulatory  or  func-


LXIX.]


Review.


413


tional  disturbance  of  the  brain,  but  attributes  such  forgetting  to
the  same  psychic  forces  that  trip  him  up  in  health.  He  finds,
on  analysing  such  phenomena,  that  the  name  withheld  usually
touches  some  painful  personal  complex  in  himself.

He  quotes  an  example  of  Jung's,  showing  the  effect  of  a  personal
complex  :  "  Mr.  Y.  falls  in  love  with  a  lady  who  soon  thereafter
marries  Mr.-  X.  In  spite  of  the  fact  that  Mr.  Y.  was  an  old  acquain-
tance of  Mr.  X.,  and  had  business  relations  with  him,  he  repeatedly
forgot  the  name,  and  on  a  number  of  occasions,  when  wishing  to
correspond  with  X..  he  was  obliged  to  ask  other  people  for  his
name."  Here  the  motivation  for  forgetting  is  obvious,  aiid  it
is  a  direct  result  of  Y.'s  dislike  for  his  successful  rival, — he  wishes
to  blot  him  out.

Our  chance  actions  betray  the  state  of  our  unconscious  to  such
an  extent  that  Freud  prefers  to  call  them  "  symptomatic  actions."
They  give  expression  to  something  which  the  actor  does  not  suspect
in  them,  and  which  he  has  no  intention  of  imparting  to  others.
For  instance,  a  newly  married  lady  after  six  weeks'  honeymoon
was  out  shopping  with  her  sister,  when  !1  suddenly  she  noticed
a  man  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street  ;  nudging  her  sister
she  said  :  '  Why,  that  is  surely  Mr.  L.',  forgetting  that  for  some
weeks  this  man  had  been  her  husband."  Freud  says  :  "  I  was
chilled  by  this  tale,  but  I  did  not  dare  to  draw  any  inference.
This  little  story  came  back  to  me  several  years  later,  after  this
marriage  had  ended  most  unhappily."

These  unintentional  occurrences  tend  to  complicate  human
relations,  and  they  explain  some  of  the  difficulties  neurotic
persons  experience  in  living  together.  Such  persons  are  exceed-
ingly sensitive  to  the  "  symptomatic  "  conduct  of  others,  which
they  understand  to  express  change  of  feeling,  or  veiled  hostility,
and  they  are  apt  to  be  blind  to  similar  lapses  in  themselves.

In  the  chapter  on  "  Determinism  ",  in  which  Freud  states  that
if  one  is  asked  to  select  a  number  at  random  it  is  impossible  to
do  so  "  by  chance  ",  he  gives  several  analyses  to  prove  his  state-
ment, the  deductions  from  which  will  appear  arbitrary  to  many
readers.  Some  phenomena  of  superstition  also  furnish  examples
of  unconscious  motivation.  Superstitious  persons  find  omens,  not
only  in  external  chance  events,  but  also  in  occurrences  brought
about  by  their  own  unintentional  mental  activity.  Freud  says  :
"  There  are  two  differences  between  me  and  the  superstitious


414


Constance  E.  Long,  M.D. [part  lxix.]


person :  first,  he  projects  the  motive  to  outside,  while  I  look
for  it  in  myself  ;  second,  he  explains  the  accident  by  an  event,
which  I  trace  to  a  thought.  What  he  considers  hidden  corre-
sponds to  the  unconscious  in  me,  and  the  compulsion  not  to  let
chance  pass  as  chance,  but  to  explain  it,  is  common  to  both  of
us.  Thus  I  admit  that  this  conscious  ignorance  and  unconscious
knowledge  of  the  motivation  of  psychic  accidentalness  is  one  of
the  psychic  roots  of  superstition.  Because  the  superstitious  person
knows  nothing  of  the  motivation  of  his  own  accidental  actions,
and  because  the  fact  of  this  motivation  strives  for  a  place  in  his
recognition,  he  is  compelled  to  dispose  of  them  by  displacing  them
into  the  outer  world.  If  such  a  connection  exists,  it  can  hardly
be  limited  to  this  single  case.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  I  believe  that
a  large  portion  of  the  mythological  conception  of  the  world,  which
reaches  far  into  the  most  modern  religions,  is  nothing  but  psychology
projected  into  the  outer  world.  The  dim  perception  (the  endo-
psychic  perception,  as  it  were)  of  psychic  factors  and  relations
of  the  unconscious  was  taken  as  a  model  in  the  construction  of
a  transcendental  reality,  which  is  destined  to  be  changed  again
by  science  into  psychology  of  the  unconscious."

The  book  is  full  of  pertinent  examples,  and  should  be  read  care-
fully if  justice  is  to  be  done  to  it.  The  subject  is  one  which
awaits  further  investigation,  and  it  is  open  to  Freud's  critics
to  put  his  theories  to  the  test,  for  absent-minded  acts,  omis-
sions and  forgetfulness  are  daily  occurrences.  It  is,  indeed,  easier
to  apply  psycho-analysis  to  our  neighbours  than  to  ourselves,
but  what  we  discover  in  the  psychology  of  another  is  rarely  far
from  what  is  present  in  our  own  personality,  though  we
live  so  near  to  ourselves  as  to  be  very  partial  in  our  self-obser-
vations.

Constance  E.  Long,  M.D.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LXX.
May,  1915.


I.

SOME  RECENT  EXPERIMENTS  IN  THOUGHT-
TRANSEERENCE.

By  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.
Introduction.

The  experiments  in  thought-transference  described  in
this  report  have  been  conducted  during  the  last  two  years
under  strict  conditions  determined  by  the  officers  of  the
Society  for  Psychical  Research,  and  under  their  personal
observation  and  supervision.  The  percipient  throughout
was  Miss  Louisa  Tipping  ;  the  agent  in  the  first  series
of  experiments  was  her  sister,  Miss  Kathleen  Tipping ;
in  the  second  series  I  myself  was  the  agent,  and  on  two
occasions  there  were  two  agents,  Miss  Kathleen  Tipping
and  Mr.  G.  N.  Tyrrell.

An  account  of  some  experiments  in  thought-transference
between  the  Misses  Tipping  and  Miss  Hermione  Ramsden

2d


416


Helen  de  O.  Verrall.


[part


was  included  in  an  article  published  in  the  Proceedings
(see  Vol.  XXVII.,  p.  314),  but  the  amount  of  success
obtained  in  this  series  was  not  very  large.  Miss  Louisa
Tipping  and  her  sister  had  also  tried  some  earlier  ex-
periments together  with  interesting  results.  But  these
earlier  experiments  were  conducted  under  less  strict  con-
ditions than  those  with  which  I  shall  deal  here,  and
therefore  do  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  this  report.
For  the  same  reason,  in  considering  the  question  of
the  success  or  failure  of  an  experiment,  I  shall  concern
myself  here  only  with  immediate  success,  that  is  to  say,
success  obtained  during  the  actual  course  of  the  experi-
ment, under  conditions  which  I  shall  presently  describe.
In  a  good  many  instances  after  the  percipient  had  gone
home,  she  got  a  deferred  impression  approximating  more
or  less  closely  to  the  subject  chosen  for  transmission.
But  since  she  had  in  the  mean  time  met  the  agent  (her
sister),  the  possibility  of  unconscious  suggestion  has  to  be
taken  into  account,  and  it  is  almost  impossible  to  deter-
mine how  much  allowance  must  be  made  for  this  factor.

General  Conditions.

In  all  the  experiments  dealt  with  in  this  paper,
the  agent  and  percipient  were  in  different  rooms,  so
that  there  was  no  possibility  in  any  case  of  indications
being  unconsciously  given  or  unconsciously  received  as  to
the  subjects  chosen  for  transmission.  If,  therefore,  we
conclude  that  the  results  cannot  be  explained  by  chance-
coincidence,  we  can  hardly,  I  think,  avoid  the  further
conclusion  that  some  telepathic  faculty  is  involved.  As
to  how  far  chance-coincidence  will  explain  the  results,
opinions  will  probably  differ.  The  problem  is  very
similar  to  that  which  has  to  be  faced  in  considering  the
question  of  cross-correspondences  in  automatic  script.
At  the  conclusion  of  this  report  I  shall  put  forward
certain  considerations  which  seem  to  indicate  that,  after
all  due  allowance  has  been  made  for  chance,  there  still
remains  a  margin  of  evidence  suggesting  that  some  other
agency  has  been  at  work.

In  each  case  the  subject  for  transmission  was  chosen


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  417

either  by  Miss  Newton  or  by  myself,  with  the  exception
of  the  two  experiments  in  which  Mr.  Tyrrell  was  an  agent,


w


2.


Miss  Johnson's


Room.


•  W  ■


■W


Miss  Verrall's


Room


W


w


Stairs.


|Passage.


Lift.


\


w


Miss  Newton's


Room.


Store-room.


/


w


W'  w


Library  and  Office.


W


w


Plan  of  S.P.R.  Rooms  at  20  Hanover  Square,  W.


when  he  chose  his  own  subjects.  Throughout  all  the
experiments  the  agent  was  in  one  of  the  Rooms  of  the
Society, at 20 Hanover Square, London, W.  During


418


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


the  first  four  experiments  the  percipient  was  in  some
other  part  of  London,  and  posted  the  record  of  her
impressions  immediately  after  the  experiment,  before
she  had  seen  the  agent  again.  This  arrangement  was
made  because  we  were  anxious  at  first  not  to  impose
completely  new  conditions  on  the  percipient.

All  experiments  after  the  first  four  were  conducted
entirely  at  the  Rooms  of  the  Society,  the  agent  being  in
one  room  and  the  percipient  in  another.  These  two  rooms
(marked  1  and  2  on  the  plan  on  p.  417,  which  is  drawn
to  scale),  are  on  opposite  sides  of  the  building  and  are
separated  by  a  passage  about  ten  yards  long.  The  doors
of  both  rooms  were  always  closed  during  the  experiments,
and  care  was  taken  to  avoid  the  possibility  of  the  per-
cipient obtaining  by  normal  means  any  indication  of  the
subject  which  had  been  chosen.  If  we  suppose  that  she
received  her  impressions  through  any  of  the  channels
of  sense,  we  must  therefore  assume  her  to  be  hyper-
aesthetic  in  a  remarkable  degree.  We  have  no  a  priori
grounds  for  assuming  this,  and  there  seems  to  be  nothing
in  the  result  of  the  experiments  to  suggest  hyperaesthesia
as  a  probable  explanation.

When  Miss  Kathleen  Tipping  was  the  agent,  she  was
never  told  what  had  been  chosen  as  the  subject  of  the
experiment  until  after  she  and  her  sister  had  parted.  She
sat  in  Miss  Newton's  room,  and  Miss  Newton  was  always
present  during  the  experiments.  Miss  Louisa  Tipping,  the
percipient,  sat  in  Miss  Johnson's  room,  and  Miss  Johnson
was  usually  present.

When  I  was  the  agent,  I  myself  chose  the  subject  for
transmission,  except  in  the  first  two  experiments,  when
it  was  chosen  by  Miss  Newton.  I  sat  in  Miss  Newton's
room  (usually  alone),  and  the  percipient  sat  as  before  in
Miss  Johnson's  room.  When  these  experiments  began
Miss  Louisa  Tipping  and  I  were  not  acquainted.  After
some  weeks,  at  Miss  Tipping's  suggestion,  we  met  once
in  Miss  Newton's  room  at  the  conclusion  of  an  experi-
ment, and  had  about  five  minutes'  talk.  With  this
exception  we  never  even  saw  each  other  during  the
period  covered  by  these  experiments.


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  419

I  will  now  give  the  detailed  record  of  the  experiments,
as  follows  :

(A.)  Twenty- two  experiments.

Agent, Miss K. Tipping. Percipient, Miss  L.
Tipping.
(B.)  Ten  experiments.

Agent, Miss  H. de G. Verrall. Percipient,  Miss
L.  Tipping.
(C.)  Two  experiments.

Agents,  Miss  K.  Tipping,  Mr.  G.  N.  Tyrrell.  Per-
cipient, Miss  L.  Tipping.

In  my  analysis  at  the  end  of  this  paper  I  have  reckoned
nine  experiments  out  of  the  thirty-four  as  successes,
viz.  Nos.  II.,  VII.,  XL,  XIV.,  XV.,  XIX.,  XXVI.,
XXVII.,  and  XXX.  The  records  of  these  experiments
are  printed  at  full  length.  As  regards  the  other  twenty-
five  experiments  I  have  included  such  parts  of  the  records
as  present  points  of  interest,  and  I  have  printed  at  length
one  completely  unsuccessful  experiment  to  serve  as  a
specimen.  As  regards  the  question  of  type  and  arrange-
ment, I  have  followed  the  same  method  as  is  used  in
the  reports  on  the  exj^eriments  in  thought-transference
between  Miss  Miles  and  Miss  Ramsden :  (a)  indicates
the  contemporary  record  of  the  subject  chosen  for  experi-
ment, with  notes  made  either  by  the  agent  or  by  some
other  person  who  was  present  during  the  experiment,
before  they  had  seen  the  percipient's  record  ;  (b)  the
percipient's  record,  made  before  she  knew  the  subject
of  the  experiment ;  (c),  (d),  etc.,  notes  made  immediately
after  the  experiment  by  the  agent  or  percipient,  or  by
some  other  person  concerned  in  the  experiment.  These
notes  are  printed  throughout  in  small  type  ;  my  own
comments  are  in  large  type.  I  have  marked  with  an
asterisk  those  experiments  which  have  been  counted  as
successful  in  my  final  analysis.


420


Helen  de  G.  V  err  all.


[part


A.

Experiment  I.

A  Failure.

March  6,  1913. 2.45-3.15  p.m.

20  Hanover  Square,  W.
Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.
Note  by  Miss  Newton. The  subject  of  the  experiment  was
Botticelli's  picture  "  The  Birth  of  Venus."

*  Experiment  II.

(«)  March  7,  1913. 2.38-3  p.m.

20  Hanover  Square,  W.
Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.
Note  by  Miss  Newton. The  subject  of  the  experiment  was  a
gold  watch  bracelet. Miss  Tipping  sat  at  the  table  holding  the
bracelet  up  and  turning  it  round  and  round  in  her  hands.

(6)  March  7,  1913. 2.30-3.15  p.m.

24  Gordon  St.,  W.C.

You  are  sitting  at  a  table  in  a  well-lit  room — the  fire  seems
burning  brightly — great  sense  of  comfort — and  you  are  holding
a  small  round  smooth  object,  bright  in  colour.  You  have
picked  it  up  and  keep  turning  it  round,  your  hands  seem
moving  much.  It  is  glowing  colour — orange  is  the  colour  I
get — and  its  colour  is  its  attraction.  The  object  seems  very
cold  and  smooth,  and  a  great  feeling  of  roundness  comes  to
me.  I  sense  a  warm  country  and  dark  people  moving  about
— picking  up  fruit — long  groves  of  trees — blue  sky — and  very
sunny.  Is  it  fruit  you  are  holding  ?  I  get  many  objects  of
the  same  shape.  I  can't  make  out  if  it  is  an  orange,  or
some  kind  of  fruit  with  plenty  of  juice.  I  seem  to  be
tasting  fruit  of  some  kind.  L.  Tipping.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  first  part  of  the  percipient's
statement,  down  to  "a  great  feeling  of  roundness  comes
to me  " is quite appropriate, especially as regards  the


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  421

movements  of  the  agent's  hands.  The  latter  part  of  the
statement  is  wrong.  This  result  suggests  that  the  per-
cipient, having  got  a  correct,  but  slightly  blurred  and
incomplete  impression  of  what  the  agent  was  doing,  mis-
interpreted it.

This  is  a  typical  instance  of  the  results  which  have
been  obtained  in  these  experiments.  Sometimes  the  per-
cipient's impression  approximates  more  closely  to  the
subject  chosen  for  transmission — sometimes  less.  Biit  in
almost  all  cases  in  which  any  degree  of  success  has  been
obtained,  what  the  percipient  seems  to  get  is  an  impression
of  movement  and  of  simple  sensations,  shape,  colour,  size,
weight,  position,  texture  and  so  forth.  These  impressions
she  apparently  combines  by  means  of  associated  ideas
into  a  complex  whole  which  may  be  very  far  from  the
truth.

Experiment  III.

(a)  March  8,  1913. 11.15-11.35  a.m.

20  Hanover  Square,  W.
Agent.  Miss  K.  Tipping.
Note  by  Miss  Newton.  The  subject  of  the  experiment  was  a
long  chain  of  beads  of  autumn  colourings.  The  agent  sat  in  the
window  with  the  chain,  which  she  put  on  and  off,  holding
it  out,  examining  the  beads  and  slipping  them  up  and
down  the  string.  The  beads  were  brown,  yellow,  green,  red
and  bronze,  yellow  predominating.

(6)  March  8,  1913. 11.15  a.m.-12  noon.

British  Museum.

You  are  holding  the  object.  I  get  the  same  feeling  again
to-day  that  the  object  is  round,  smooth,  hard,  and  has  a
shiny  surface,  and  the  colour  is  leaning  towards  yellow,  or
yellow  objects  seem  in  it  or  near  it,  and  they  are  very
alike.  They  seem  to  be  living.  Is  it  flowers  in  a  vase  ?
You,  I  think,  are  holding  an  ornament,  and  it  is  deep
enough  to  hold  things,  pretty  in  shape  and  colour.  I  get
bright,  stimulating  colour.  You  also  turn  the  object  about,
your  hands  do not  remain  in the  same  position for  long.


422


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


If  you  let  go  what  you  are  holding,  it  would  break.  There
is  a  frail  feeling  about  it.  I  can't  get  the  object  you  hold
very  clearly  and  I'm  getting  tired.  L.  Tipping.

(c)  The  agent  afterwards  added  a  note  that  she  had  thought
of  tl  autumn  leaves,  yellows,  (but  no  flowers)  and  sunlight."

Here  again  we  have  a  result  suggesting  a  partially
correct impression wrongly  interpreted.


Experiment  IV.

March  10, 1913. 11.35-11.50  a.m.

20  Hanover  Square,  W.
Note  by  Miss  Newton. The  agent  sat  at  the  table,  and
I  took  the  atlas  from  the  cabinet  and  gave  it  to  her.  She
looked  at  the  map  of  Bulgaria. The  subject  to  be  transmitted
was  war.  .  .  .

We  were  five  minutes  late  in  beginning.

(6)  March  10,  1913. 11.30  a.m.-12  noon.

British  Museum.

I  can  only  get  a  vague  impression  this  morning,  nothing
sharp.  I  am  wondering  if  you  are  sending  anything  ?  I  think
you  are  close  to  the  table,  and  I  feel  that  an  object  has
been  handed  to  you  from  some  shelf,  that  is  not  very  large,
rather  square  and  dark.  ...  I  get  books  lying  near  you  and
white  papers.  ...  L.  Tipping.

The  percipient's  impression  is  vague,  but  fairly  correct
as  far  as  it  goes,  especially  as  regards  the  position  of  the
agent  "  close  to  the  table,"  and  the  handing  of  a  square
object  to  her  from  a  shelf.

From  this  time  onwards  the  experiments  were  conducted
entirely  at  the  Offices  of  the  Society,  the  agent  and
percipient  being  in  different  rooms.  In  future,  therefore,
only  the  room  in  which  each  sat  will  be  noted  in  the
record.


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  423


Experiment  V.

On  this  occasion,  contrary  to  the  usual  practice,  the
agent  sat  in  Miss  Johnson's  room  and  the  percipient  in
Miss  Newton's  room.

(a)  March  18,  1913. 11.35  a.m.-12.15  p.m.

Miss  Johnson's  room.
Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.
Note  by  Miss  Johnson. The  agent  sat  at  the  table  arranging
a  bunch  of  violets  in  a  narrow  green  glass  vase.

.  .  .  The  violets  bad  very  long  stalks,  as  had  also  their
leaves — there  were  a  good  many  leaves  with  them — and  Miss
Tipping  cut  the  stalks  of  some.  .  .  .

(6)  March  18,  1913.1

Miss  Newton's  room.
The  object  is  standing  on  the  table  in  front  of  you,  you
touch  it,  but  do  not  hold  it.  I  get  a  fairly  tall  object,
slim  in  shape,  and  colour  rather  light  in  tone.  I  see  carving
of  some  kind  on  it,  sometimes  it  seems  in  the  shape  of
leaves,  and  they  stand  off  well  from  the  flat  surface  of  the
object.  Is  the  object  stone  ?  I  feel  it  is  hard,  smooth,
polished.

I  also  get  the  form  of  a  running  figure,  swift  movement ;
it  is  a  man's  figure.  This  only  comes  faintly ;  the  object
seems  rather  heavy  for  one  to  hold,  so  it  stands  in  front
of  you.  L.  Tipping.

The  first  part  of  the  percipient's  impression  as  far  as
"  colour  rather  light  in  tone  "  is  correct,  and  it  is  note-
worthy that  again  she  is  right  as  to  the  position  and
movements  of  the  agent  in  relation  to  the  subject  of  the
experiment.  The  impression  of  carving  is  wrong,  but  it
is  interesting  that  this  carving  should  appear  to  the
percipient  to  be  "  in  the  shape  of  leaves,  and  they  stand
off well from the flat surface of the object."  This

1  The  percipient  did  not  always  note  the  time  of  day  as  well  as  the
date  in  her  record,  but  in  all  cases  she  and  the  agent  "sat"  simul-
taneously, although  sometimes  the  percipient  continued  the  experiment
for  a  longer  period.


424


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


impression  might  easily  be  derived  from  a  group  of  leaves
in  a  vase,  and  Miss  Johnson  notes  that  "  there  were  a
good  many  leaves  with  [the  violets]."

The  idea  of  carving  apparently  suggests  to  the  percipient
something  of  stone,  which  becomes  defined  as  a  statue
or  bas-relief  of  a  running  figure.  This  part  of  her
impression  is  wrong.

Experiment  VI.

A  Failure.

March  19,  1913. 11.35  a.m.-12  noon.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.
Subject. A  pack  of  cards  and  some  black  envelopes  with
red hearts pasted on them. The agent sat building  card
houses.

*  Experiment  VII.

{a)  March  26,  1913. 11.25-11.50  a.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.

Note  by  Miss  Newton.  The  agent  and  I  discussed  what  to  do.
I  suggested  that  she  should  lie  on  the  sofa.  I  fetched  a  cushion
from  the  office  and  placed  it  under  her  head.  I  gave  her  a
blotting  pad,  a  pencil  and  a  piece  of  paper,  and  placed  a
little  table  at  her  side.  She  tried  to  transmit  at  home.
Miss  Jones  brought  in  tea,  a  teapot,  milk-jug,  cup  and  saucer
on  a  tray,  put  it  on  the  folding  table  and  left  the  room.  I
carried  the  tray  and  placed  it  on  the  table  by  Miss  Tipping
and  poured  out  a  cup  of  tea,  telling  her  it  was  china.  I
left  the  room  and  brought  in  another  cup  and  saucer  and
poured  out  some  tea  for  myself.

{b)  March  26,  1913.

Miss  Johnson's  room.
You  are  holding  the  object  and  appear  to  move  it  about.  I
see  a  smooth  bright-looking  thing,  and  I  get  reflections  from


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  425

things  near  this  object.  I  think  it  is  hard,  also  a  roundness,
and  I  see  black  colour  near  to  it.  I  feel  a  metal  like  silver,
it  is  so  bright  and  quite  light  in  weight.  L.  Tipping.

(c)  Note  by  Miss  Neivton.  The  percipient  told  me  when  I
went  to  her  after  the  experiment  that  she  had  had  a  persistent
impression  of  a  silver  spoon  and  reflections  of  a  face  in  it.
When  she  told  me  this  she  did  not  of  course  know  what
the  experiment  had  been.  She  thought  the  impression  was
due  to  her  having  seen,  just  before  she  left  the  boarding-
house  where  she  is  staying,  a  new  bright  half-crown.

The  agent  told  me  after  she  knew  that  her  sister  had  thought
of  a  spoon  and  of  reflections,  that  she  had  taken  up  the  tea-spoon
and  looked  at  it,  and  also  had  noticed  the  reflections  in  the  polished
brown  tea-pot,  but  had  dismissed  the  thought  of  the  reflections
from  her  mind.  This  and  the  attention  given  to  the  spoon  were
but  momentary  impressions.

The  percipient  on  this  occasion  had  one  persistent,  im-
pression, derived  apparently  from  a  passing  incident  in  the
experiment,  which  the  agent  had  not  consciously  tried  to
transmit.  There  have  been  several  instances  in  earlier
experiments,  in  which  the  percipient's  mind  has  apparently
reflected  the  subconscious  rather  than  the  conscious
thoughts  of  the  agent  (see  e.g.  Proc.  8.P.R.,  Vol.  XXVII. ,
pp.  309,  310).

It  is,  of  course,  a  defect  in  the  record  that  no  mention
of  the  tea-spoon  occurs  in  the  contemporary  note  on  the
subject  of  the  experiment,  but  Miss  Newton's  supple-
mentary note  was  made  immediately  afterwards,  when  the
agent's  memory  was  still  fresh  in  regard  to  her  action  with
the  spoon.

Perhaps  the  reason  why  the  percipient's  mind  seized  upon
this  particular  impression  is  that  it  was  linked  by  association
with  an  idea  already  present  in  her  mind,  that  of  the  silver
half-crown  which  she  had  recently  seen.  Students  of
automatic  script  will  remember  instances  in  which  an
idea  normally  engendered  in  the  mind  of  the  automatist
has  formed  the  starting-point  for  a  train  of  thought,  sug-
gesting some  abnormal  connexion  with  other  scripts.


426


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


Experiment  VIII.

A  Failure.

March  27,  1913. 11.35-11.53  a.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.
Subject. Winding  a  skein  of  red  wool.

Experiment  IX.
A  Failure.

March  29,  1913. 11.30  a.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.
Subject. A  picture  in  a  book,  representing  a  child  in  red.

Experiment  X.
A  Failure.

(a)  April  1,  1913. 11.35  a.m.-] 2  noon.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.
Subject. Printed  letters,  D,  0,  G,  S.

*  Experiment  XL

(a)  April  2,  1913. 11.30-11.55  a.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent.  Miss  K.  Tipping.
Note  by  Miss  Newton.  I  first  asked  the  agent  whether  she  knew
any  part  of  Switzerland  well  enough  to  visualise  it  (I  having
brought  with  me  a  book  of  views  of  Switzerland).  She  replied
no.  I  then  told  her  Mrs.  Sidgwick  had  suggested  she  should  open
an  umbrella. She  agreed  and  said  she  had  tried  it  once  before,


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


427


but  all  that  her  sister  got  was  an  impression  of  her  opening  and
closing  a  fan.  I  suggested  that  she  should  dance  round  with
an  open  umbrella.  She  laughed.  I  cleared  away  the  table  and
bookcase.  Miss  Tipping  opened  and  closed  the  umbrella  for  some
minutes,  and  then  I  again  suggested  that  she  should  dance.  She
did  so,  twirling  the  umbrella,  and  opening  and  closing  it  as  she
danced.

(b)  April  2,  1913.

Miss  Johnson's  room.
Your  hand  seems  moving  up  and  down.  The  object  stands
in  front  of  you,  and  I  can  hear  a  bell  with  a  measured  strike,  very
faintly  but  often.  I  get  reflection  on  the  object  you  have  near
to  you,  and  I  feel,  if  I  could  hold  it,  it  would  be  a  cold  weight  in
my  hand.  It  seems  very  hard,  and  it  has  a  useful  feeling.  Your
hand  rises  and  falls  frequently. I  might  add  the  object  seems

round  in  shape,  something  like  this  ^ with  a  little  top


to  it.  I  think  I  could  see  myself  in  it  if  I  wished  to  do  so.  I  get
a  green  colour  close  to  you,  and  once  I  have  faintly  seen  good-
sized  letters  ;  one  letter  seems  an  O,  C,  or  E.  I  can't  make  out
any  word.  It  is  either  G  or  E,  I  can't  say  which.  And  I  also
see  objects  near  very  like  in  shape  and  colour,  round.  They  seem
to  have  a  life  of  their  own.  Is  it  flowers  ?  I  am  not  as  sleepy
as  yesterday,  but  I  see  more  objects.

You  lift  up  your  hand  and  let  it  fall.  Several  times  you  do
this.  The  shape  seems  like  a  doll's  umbrella,  with  a  little  slender
stem.  L.  Tipping.

(c)  Note  by  Miss  Newton.  The  last  paragraph  of  the  percipient's
statement  was  written  in  my  room,  but  before  the  percipient  had
any  opportunity  of  guessing  what  the  experiment  had  been.1
When  she  came  into  my  room,  she  said  the  impression  she  had
got  was  of  her  sister  moving  her  hand  up  and  down  rhythmically.
(The  illustration  she  gave  was  like  the  agent's  movement  with
her  hands,  when  opening  and  shutting  the  umbrella.)  She  saw
an  object  like  a  mushroom,  and,  wondering  what  it  was,  had  kept


1  The  umbrella  had  been  removed  from  the  room  before  Miss  Louisa
Tipping  entered. — H.  de  G.  V.


428


Helen  de  G.  V  err  all.


[part


on  thinking  of  a  wee  doll's  umbrella  which  she  had  had  when  a
child.  She  tried  to  banish  the  impression  as  irrelevant.  When
she  told  me  this,  neither  the  agent  nor  I  had  suggested  anything,
or  helped  her  to  remember  the  impression.

We  have  apparently  another  instance  here  of  a  correct
impression  wrongly  interpreted.  The  percipient  sees  "  an
object  like  a  mushroom  "  and  the  agent's  arm,  moving
up  and  down.  She  actually  interprets  the  mushroom-
shaped  object  as  an  umbrella,  but  dismisses  this  inter-
pretation as  due  to  the  recollection  of  one  of  her  own
toys.  Then,  casting  about  for  some  other  interpretation,
she  thinks  of  a  small  table-bell,  the  kind  that  is  struck
by  hand,  and  her  impression  develops  further  on  these
lines  into  an  object  with  reflections  on  it,  which  would
be  a  cold  weight  in  the  hand,  is  hard,  and  has  a  useful
feeling.

Experiment  XII.

(a)  April  3,  1913. 11.45  a.m.-12.10  p.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.

Subject.  Dusting  the  bookcase.  At  the  conclusion  of  the
experiment  the  agent  washed  her  hands.

Note  by  Miss  Newton.  After  the  percipient  had  left  the  room,
I  brought  in  a  pair  of  step-ladders,  and  a  duster,  large  holland
apron,  etc.,  which  the  agent  put  on.  She  climbed  to  the  top  of
the  ladder  and  dusted  the  top  of  the  bookcase.  She  came  down
and  shook  the  dust  over  the  fire,  and  I  said  the  dust  was
like  soot.  She  went  on  dusting  the  bookcase  thoroughly,
coming  down  to  shake  the  dust  into  the  fire.  She  laughed
and  said  it  was  a  spring  cleaning,  and  I  regretted  I  had  not
brought  gloves  for  her,  but  she  said,  "  Oh,  no,  I  can  wash
my  hands."

(6)  April  3,  1913.

Miss  Johnson's  room.
[The  percipient  first  has  an  impression  of "  round  objects
like  flowers  .  .  .  yellow  in  colour."]


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  429

...  I  also  sense  water,  a  wet  feeling  comes  to  my  fingers,
I  feel  I  must  wipe  mine.  You  may  be  wiping  yours.  I  get
a  handkerchief.  ...  L.  Tipping.

(c)  Note  made  by  Miss  Newton  after  seeing  the  percipient'' 's
record.  When  the  percipient  was  asked  at  what  time  she  got
the  impression  of  wet  hands,  she  said  it  was  between  12  and
12.5  p.m.  She  heard  the  clock  strike  twelve  before  she
received  the  impresson,  and  when  she  looked  at  her  watch
after  the  impression  it  was  12.5  p.m.  From  what  she  told
me  I  gathered  the  impression  was  received  about  12.3  p.m.
I  was  careful  to  ascertain  the  time  as  near  as  possible,  and
it  was  not  until  after  I  had  ascertained  it  that  I  remembered
my  watch  was  fast,  and  comparing  it  with  hers,  found  that
mine  was  seven  minutes  in  advance  of  hers.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  percipient's  impression  of  wet
hands  corresponded  in  time  almost  exactly  with  the  moment
when  the  agent  was  washing  her  hands,  since  this  occurred
at  12.10  by  Miss  Newton's  watch,  that  is  to  say,  at  12.3  by
the  percipient's  watch.  This  was  the  only  time  in  this  series
of  experiments  that  the  percipient  had  an  impression  of  wet
hands.  The  agent  washed  her  hands  during  an  experiment
on  one  other  occasion.


Experiment  XIII.

(a)  April  9,  1913. 11.40  a.m.-12.2  p.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.
Stibject. The  agent  wrote  several  sentences  on  a  typewriter.

(6)  April  9,  1913.

Miss  Johnson's  room.
I  can't  see  the  objects. I  feel  there  are  several  and  very
alike. They  are  on  the  table  in  front  of  you,  and  you  touch
but  do  not  hold  them  all  the  time. I  get  squares  still,  but
more  faintly  than  yesterday.1 I  get  colour,  red  and  black,  design

1  It  appears  from  this  statement  that  some  experiment  must  have
been  tried  on  April  8,  1913,  but  no  record  of  it  has  been  found.


430


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


of  some  kind.  Also  I  want  to  look  into  some  object  very  near
you,  and  it  seems  fairly  tall,  smooth,  hard,  and  has  a  shiny
surface.  What  it  is  I  can't  say,  but  I  think  I  could  pick
things  out  of  it,  and  drop  them  into  it  again,  but  this
feeling  is  only  dim.  L.  Tipping.

The  percipient,  when  asked  at  the  close  of  the  experi-
ment, whether  she  could  draw  the  objects  she  had  seen,
produced  the  following  sketch  :


58


these  slender  things
are  hard.


The  objects  represented  in  the  percipient's  sketch  are
not unlike the keys of a typewriter, seen from  the


operator's point of view,  thus


It  is  true  in


reference  to  these  keys  that  "  there  are  several  and  they
are  very  alike.  They  are  on  the  table  in  front  of  you,
and  you  touch  but  do  not  hold  them  all  the  time."
It  is  also  correct  to  say  "  I  get  colour,  red  and  black,
design  of  some  kind."  The  keys  of  the  typewriter  used
in  this  experiment  (a  Smith  Premier)  are  black  and  white
(symmetrically  arranged),  with  five  red  stops.  The  type-
writer itself  is  black,  it  is  "  fairly  tall,  smooth,  hard,  and
has  a  shiny  surface."  In  the  centre,  immediately  behind
the  keys,  there  is  a  large  cup-like  depression  out  of  which
things  could  be  picked.


*  Experiment  XIV.

(a)  April  10,  1913. 11.45  a.m.-12.7  p.m.

Miss  Newton's  room
Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.
Subject. Picture  of  a  Madonna  and  Child  by  Murillo.
Note  by  Miss  Newton. The  agent  sat  in  the  basket-chair  with
the  picture  in  her  hands. We  were  very  quiet  and  did  not  speak


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference .  431


after  the  experiment  began,  until  12.5  p.m.,  when  I  mentioned
the  time,  and  the  agent  said  she  would  go  on  a  little  longer,  as
she  "  had  been  rather  naughty  this  morning,  thoughts  would
flit  in."  The  only  disturbing  sound  was  the  typewriter  which
was  occasionally  used  in  the  office.  I  asked  Miss  Tipping  if  the
typewriter  disturbed  her.  She  replied  no,  but  that  the  opening
and  shutting  of  a  door  had.

(b)  April  10,  1913.

Miss  Johnson's  room.

Sometimes  the  object  seems  placed  in  front  of  you,  then  again
you  lower  it  as  though  you  rested  your  hands  with  the  object  on
your  lap.  I  have  seen  a  round,  hard,  smooth  thing,  and  also
figures,  Roman  figures,  II,  III,  IV,  V,  VI,  rather  large,  and  also
letters  small  and  large,  as  if  a  book  lies  near  you.  You  appear
most  interested.  Whatever  the  object  is  you  seem  to  hold  it
in  two  positions,  on  a  shelf  in  front  of  you,  and  then  much  lower
down.  It  is  not  heavy.  I  get  one  object  only.  I  thought  it
was  golden,  but  am  not  sure  ;  this  feeling  was  fleeting  only.
It  has  also  a  very  useful  feeling.  I  get  a  yellow  colour,  and
I  think  the  object  must  be  fairly  bright.  I  could  pass  my
fingers  over  it  very  smoothly,  and  it  is  cold.  Is  it  a  coin  ?
Or  some  metal  ?  I  can  now  see  a  head  like  you  see  on
coins.  I  get  a  round  hard  something  like  this  [Drawing  of  a
circle  ivith  a  head  in  it]  with  a  form  or  pattern  stamped  on
it,  an  imprint  of  some  one,  perhaps.

I  don't  think  what  I  have  written  down  is  any  good.  I  have
been  disturbed  by  a  man  outside  with  a  hammer  and  thoughts
were  hard  to  hold  in  my  mind.  But  I  feel  the  object  has  weight,
smoothness,  hardness.  It  is  cold,  and  I  think  of  letters  or  figures
on  it,  or  in  connexion  with  it.

I  felt  once  I  could  fold  it  up  into  different  shapes,  this
only  very  faintly. I  felt  this  was  not  true.

[Drawing  of  four  circles.]

L.  Tipping.

The  picture  which  formed  the  subject  of  this  experiment
was  a  coloured  reproduction,  mounted  on  stiff  cardboard.
The  background  is  buff,  and  round  the  picture  there  is  the
representation  of  a  gold  frame,  which  perhaps  accounts
for  the  percipient's  impression  that  the  object is  golden.

2E


432


Helen  de  G.  V  err  all.


[part


From  the  reproduction  on  the  opposite  page  (Plate  I.)
it  will  be  seen  that  the  Madonna  and  the  two  angels
on  either  side  of  her  have  large  and  conspicuous  haloes,
producing  an  effect  not  unlike  a  head  on  a  coin.


*  Experiment  XV.

(a)  April  12,  1913. 11.50  a.m.-12.10  p.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.

Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.

Note  by  Miss  Newton.  The  subject  of  the  experiment  was  a
figure  of  a  black  cat,  cut  out  of  velvet,  on  a  card  bearing
the  words  A  BLACK  CAT  (see  illustration,  Plate  II.).  It
stands  on  the  revolving  bookcase.  Behind  it,  as  a  background
to  throw  up  the  black  shape,  stands  perpendicularly  the
large,  brown-paper-covered  atlas.  Miss  Tipping  sat  in  the
basket-chair  in  front  of  the  cat  and  looked  at  it,  sometimes
leaning  back,  sometimes  sitting  up.  Generally  one  hand  was
on  her  chin.  I  also  tried  to  transmit  the  idea  of  a  black
cat,  running  along  the  passage  to  Miss  Johnson's  room,  arching
its  back  to  be  stroked,  sprawling  on  the  rug  to  be  played
with,  etc.

Miss  Tipping  said  she  thought  the  object  was  more  like  a  dog,
and  that  she  could  not  get  away  from  that  idea.

{b)  April  12,  1913.

Miss  Johnson's  room.

I  have  seen  the  face  of  a  man,  very  handsome,  with  a  heavy
moustache,  hair  on  head  inclined  to  be  curly.  This  has  come
to  me  as  a  photo  set  in  a  small  frame.  It  looks  framed  up  with
slight  black  or  brown  border  of  wood  around  it.  My  mind  has
been  a  perfect  blank  but  for  this  one  idea,  and  I  have  been  very
sleepy.  I  believe  you  held  the  object  you  send,  and  perhaps
have  sat  and  gazed  at  it  in  front  of  you,  but  have  not  held
it. I  am  divided  between  these  two  ideas.

I  am  wondering  whether  my  mind  has  been  too  sleepy  to  jrick
up  the  object.  I  don't  feel  at  all  sure  that  this  is  right,  rather
the  opposite  feeling  comes  to  me.


Plate  I.


f*|l  name  shall  enouvr  for  poer:  J|te  name  shall  be
fTonlinueb  as  long  as  (he  sun:  ano  men  shall  he
IMesseo  mMfin-  all  nations  shall  ralljKmt  hlesseb.


P$,  ixxrt.  ry.-


Face  page  43:2


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  433

I  felt  a  square  feeling,  and  as  though  you  touched  wood,  and
that  printing  and  paper  were  mixed  up  with  what  you  send.  I
could  break  it  up.

This  portrait  has  a  look  about  it  as  if  the  man  inside  thought
deeply,  and  it  gives  me  a  feeling  of  great  repose  and  strength.
The  face  is  most  striking. I  have  seen  it  so  clearly.

I  don't  feel  this  object  is  cold.  I  think  paper  is  in  it,  and  I
feel  as  if  I  could  break  it  up.  I  could  bend  it  up,  and  I  do  not
get  much  weight  with  the  object.

L.  Tipping.

When  the  percipient  returned  to  the  Secretary's  room
at  the  conclusion  of  the  experiment,  after  the  cat  had
been  put  away,  she  described  to  Miss  Newton,  who
was  careful  to  say  nothing  to  her  about  whether  her
impression  was  correct  or  not,  the  portrait  which  she
had  seen,  and  drew  the  sketches  reproduced  opposite
to  illustrate  her  meaning.  The  frame  of  the  picture
was  black,  she  said,  with  a  cream  mount.  The  waving
lines  she  explained  as  representing  the  man's  hair.  It
will  be  seen  that  these  lines  are  not  unlike  the  cat's
ears.  Moreover  in  the  percipient's  sketch  of  the  "  por-
trait "  there  appear  some  scrawls  at  the  bottom  repre-
senting the  supposed  title.  The  only  legible  letters
amongst  these  scrawls  are  G  at  the  beginning,  and  t  at
the  end,  whereas  the  word  Cat  was  written  under  the
cat. The  description  of  the  object  photo  set  in

a  small  frame.  It  looks  framed  up  with  a  slight  black
or  brown  border,"  is  also  appropriate.  It  is  again  as
though  various  disjointed  impressions  were  correctly
received,  and  then  woven  by  the  percipient's  mind  into
a  coherent  whole  which  is  ludicrously  wrong.

The following experiment, which was completely  un-
successful, is  printed  at  full  length  as  a  specimen :


434


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


Experiment  XVI.

(a)  April  14,  1913. 11.45  a.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.
Subject. Two  red  apples  on  a  black  velvet  cloth.

Note  by  Miss  Newton.  Miss  Tipping  sat  in  the  basket-chair  ;
she  stroked  the  velvet  and  then  leant  forward,  her  right  elbow
supported  in  her  left  hand,  her  face  resting  on  the  other  hand.
After  about  six  minutes  I  went  to  the  store-room  and  brought
in  two  saucers,  putting  one  on  the  table  in  front  of  the
agent,  and  placing  one  of  the  apples  on  it.  I  took  a  knife
out  of  one  of  the  drawers  of  my  desk.

Miss  Tipping  lifted  the  apple  up  by  the  stalk  and  turned  it
round,  and  held  it  up,  let  it  hang,  and  so  on.  She  then
peeled  the  apple,  and  was  careful  to  keep  the  peel  unbroken  ;
it  hung  from  the  apple  like  a  ribbon.  She  dangled  it  on  her
fingers  and  said  she  would  try  to  make  her  sister  think  of
an  old  custom.  She  threw  it  over  her  shoulder,  cut  up  the
apple  and  handed  it  to  me,  and  we  ate  it.

(6)  April  14,  1913.

Miss  Johnson's  room.

I  get  very  slow  ideas  this  morning,  have  been  waiting  twenty
minutes  and  can't  feel  a  thing.  I  get  a  strong  violet  light  around
me.

I  now  see  the  colours  red  and  blue.  I  think  you  hold  the
object  on  the  table  in  front  of  you.  You  both  appear
interested  in  it,  very  much  so.  I  think  it  is  something
slender,  flat,  and  has  a  soft  feeling  about  it,  paper  of  some
sort,  and  I  get  a  figure  of  a  woman.  She  is  not  English,  dark
and  southern  looking.  I  feel  a  squareness  and  about  half  an
inch  in  thickness,  figures  one  after  another  like  this,

13  17  21

14  18  22

15  19  23  and  so  on,
16J20

many  figures,  and  round  these  figures  a  border  to  fasten  them


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  435


in,  little  square  {Drawing  of  figures  in  squares)  dates.  The  object
is  just  one  simple  thing,  and  I  feel  paper  is  connected.

I  can  see  a  figure  like  a  little  Cupid  with  wings  and  a
straight  little  body.  I  feel  he  is  moving  in  the  air,  he  seems
to  fly.

I  see  also  small  letters  c  d  e  g  h  i  following  one  another  in
very  long  lines.  It  makes  me  think  of  verse,  they  seem  in
couplets  nicely  arranged.

Second  impression.  A  round  object,  smooth,  that  you  can
look  down  into  ;  also  it  would  and  can  hold  small  objects.  I
get  a  laced  feeling,  as  if  the  texture  of  the  object  were  like  this
{Drawing  of  trellis-work),  a  kind  of  pattern.  This  seems  to  me
to  be  very  hght  in  weight.

I  must  say  ideas  come  very  badly,  and  I  feel  this  is  not  correct,
either  of  the  things  I  have  written  clown.  I  feel  very  still  and
thoughtful,  but  everything  is  so  faint.  L.  Tipping.

The  percipient's  first  impression  seems  to  be  a  calendar
and  her  second  a  basket.


Experiment  XVII.

A  Failure.

April  19,  1913. 11.50  a.m.-12.10  p.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.
Subject. Weighing-scales  and  six  small  brown  paper  parcels.

Experiment  XVIII.

(a)  April  24,  1913. 11.45  a.m.

20  Hanover  Square,  W.

Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.

Note  by  Miss  Newton.  The  agent  and  I  went  into  the  garden
in  Hanover  Square.  I  got  the  key  from  the  Office  in  the
Hall.  We  walked  about  on  the  grass  and  talked  all  the  time.
I went  to  the  summer-house and  brought out  two  chairs,


i:ir>


Helen  de  G.  V  err  all.


[part


and  we  sat  down.  The  wallflowers,  red  and  yellow,  were
out.  We  touched  the  yellow  ones.  We  left  the  garden  at
12  noon,  returned  to  my  room,  and  the  agent  climbed  out
of  my  window  on  to  the  balcony  and  looked  down  on  the
Square.  When  we  went  into  the  garden,  there  were  four  or
five  persons  there,  a  nurse  and  children ;  they  came  towards
us,  we  noticed  them  as  they  came,  and  they  left  the  garden.
We  were  then  the  only  people  in  the  garden.

(6)  April  24,  1913.

Miss  Johnson's  room.

1  have  felt  once  that  you  are  holding  something  slender,
smooth,  and  fairly  tall,  and  that  you  move  your  fingers  up
and  down  on  it,  also  that  the  object  is  soft,  and  very
pleasing  to  look  on.  A  feeling  of  moisture  comes,  as  if  the
object  you  touch  might  be  slightly  moist,  wet.  All  these
feelings  are  so  very  faint.  I  don't  think  they  are  correct  in
the  least. I  wondered  once  if  the  object  had  life.

Second  impression.

I  now  get  an  object  shining  and  smooth,  pretty  in  design,
a  pattern  running  through  it,  yellow  in  colour,  it  catches
reflections,  and  I  can  see  a  ring,  like  a  gold  one,  or  I  might
say  a  golden  circle,  and  one  part  a  distinct  round  in  it,  and
the  face  of  a  small  watch  conies  like  this  (Drawing  of  a
watch)  and  an  e  d.  in  small  letters,  very  small  letters.

The  object  is  cold  to  my  hand,  not  heavy,  hardness,  and  frail
too.  I  think  I  could  injure  it  if  I  tried,  and  you  would  not
improve  it  if  you  let  it  fall.

I  have  also  seen  a  scene  with  immense  distance  in  it.  I  thought
you  were  looking  at  some  scene  or  other.  I  feel  quite  lonely  as
I  look  into  it,  very  lonely,  but  a  great  sense  of  beauty.  I  can
now  see  a  few  figures  moving  about,  very  few.  and  foreign-looking
beings.

Have  you  held  a  silken  material  soft  green  in  colour  ?  I  want
to  fold  it  up.

Ideas  are  poor  this  morning.  I  can't  hold  them  much  to  be
able  to  decide  which  I  feel  is  near  what  you  are  doing.

The  object  seems  to  have  life,  and  my  fingers  feel  as  if
you  had  touched  something  cold  and  moist,  yellow  in  colour,
smooth.


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  437


The  scene  I  have  seen  was  very  expansive,  not  many  trees,
but  a  very  peaceful  feeling.  I  saw  five  men,  came  one  after
another,  such  a  strange  feeling  of  leisure,  no  one  had  need
of  hurry.  If  you  had  hurried  it  would  have  been  quite  out
of  character.  Wherever  I  have  been,  I  have  seen  strangers.
It  has  given  me  much  rest,  poised  my  mind.  The  quiet  of
this  place  was  intense.  These  men  came  near  to  me,  then
faded.  L.  Tipping.

(c)  Note  made  by  Miss  Newton  after  seeing  the  percipient's
record.  The  yellow  wallflowers  were  planted  in  five  beds  in
the  centre  of  the  garden. They  were  planted  in  rings.

There  are  two  points  of  interest  in  this  experiment :

(i)  The  percipient  first  has  an  impression  of  touching
an  object  which  is  "  soft  and  very  pleasing  to  look
on  .  .  .  slightly  moist."

Then  she  has  an  impression  of  an  object  which  is  almost
certainly  a  watch-bracelet  (the  subject  of  an  earlier
experiment,  see  p.  420),  and  is  described  as  "  shining
and  smooth  .  .  .  yellow  in  colour  ...  a  golden  circle,
etc."

.  Afterwards  these  two  impressions  coalesce  apparently
into  an  impression  of  an  object  which  "  seems  to  have
life."  "  My  fingers  feel  as  if  you  had  touched  something
cold  and  moist,  yellow  in  colour,  smooth."

This  impression  was  perhaps  suggested  by  the  yellow
wallflowers  which  the  agent  touched,  and  which,  as  Miss
Newton  noted  after  the  experiment,  were  planted  in
circles.

(ii)  The  percipient  had  an  impression  of  an  outdoor
scene,  a  country-scene  evidently,  since  she  speaks  of  it
as  expansive  with  "  not  many  trees  "  and  "  a  very
peaceful  feeling."  This  impression  was  appropriate,  seeing
that  the  agent  had  been  sitting  in  a  garden.  She  and
Miss  Newton  were  careful  when  they  went  out  to  walk
quietly  and  not  to  speak  in  the  passage,  so  that  the
percipient  should  have  no  normal  knowledge  of  their
having  left  Miss  Newton's  room.  This  was  the  only
time  that  the  agent  left  20  Hanover  Square  during  the
experiment, although on one later occasion she  went


438


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


up  on  to  the  roof  (May  3,  1913).  On  one  other  occasion
(April  26,  1913),  the  percipient  had  an  impression  of  an
outdoor  scene.


(a)


*  Experiment  XIX.

April  25,  1913. 11.45  a.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.


Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.

The  subject  of  this  experiment  was  a  stereoscopic  con-
trivance invented  by  Mr.  W.  W.  Baggally,  of  which  a  sketch
in  profile  is  given  below.  Slides  are  inserted  at  the  point
marked  s,  and  by  an  arrangement  of  mirrors,  if  a  spectator
looks  through  the  lens,  he  sees  a  stereoscopic  view  against
the  background.


Lens.  {


Candle.
 I


Backgrou  n  (I.


Note  by  Miss  Newton.  The  stereoscope  had  a  black  velvet
background  which  I  built  up  of  letter-filing  boxes,  and  covered
with  a  piece  of  black  velvet.  The  agent  sat  in  the  basket-chair
at  the  seance  table,  with  the  large  dark  screen  behind  her.  I
lit  the  small  piece  of  candle  in  the  stereoscope,  then  blew  it
out  and  substituted  a  longer  piece  which,  after  lighting,  I
thought  was  unsatisfactory,  and  so  I  replaced  the  original  piece
and  lighted  it  again.  On  the  table  was  a  small  dark  green
box  and  a  piece  of  string.  The  box  contained  the  slides,
which  Miss  Tipping  took  out  one  by  one  and  inserted  in  the
stereoscope,  and  looked  at  through  the  peep-hole.  The  candle
was  short  and  flamed  and  smoked  occasionally.  Miss  Tipping
said  it  made  her  think  of  photography,  as  the  candle  in  her
little  lamp  acted  in  the  same  way.

Miss  Tipping  seemed  specially  interested  in  the  slide  of  Ellen
Terry,  and  commented  on  the  vivid  colouring  of  her  hair,  and  in
one  of  a  statue  of  a  boy  ;  also  one  of  the  Royal  Exchange.


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  439


(b)  April  25,  1913.

Miss  Johnson's  room.

Impressions  are  very  faint  this  morning.  I  wonder  if  you  are
sending  anything  to  me. I  can't  see  things  yet.

You  appear  to  me  to  hold  the  object,  sometimes  quite  close
to  you,  then  put  it  at  a  distance.  It  is  hard,  smooth,  round.  I
have  not  any  strong  sensing  that  it  has  ever  lived,  unless  in
the  mineral  world.  I  have  only  a  very  faint  feeling  of  this,
yet  it  seems  to  me  to  have  an  interesting  feeling,  a  certain
aura,  as  though  many  hands  have  held  it.  I  get  the  colour
blue,  from  faint  blue  to  an  intense  green  blue.  The  colour
draws  me.  I  like  it.  It  makes  me  think  of  a  jar,  and  that
I  could  place  things  in  it,  and  yet  I  can't  see  what  it  is.  I
see  figures  again  to-day,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  and  a  few  others,
but  these  come  so  very  faintly,  I  don't  think  you  are  looking  at
anything  like  figures. A  great  feeling  of  doubt  comes  over  these.

I  have  seen  two  faces  in  a  looking-glass.  I  don't  know
them.  I  feel  as  if  I'm  looking  into  a  glass  and  can  see
myself.  You  have  talked  to  each  other  this  morning,  but
have  also  been  fairly  quiet. I  get  very  little  movement.


I  get  a  shape  now  like  this I  [ . I  can  see  the  flame


of  a  candle,  light  of  some  kind.  I  also  get  rounds.  (Drawing
of  several  circles.)

I  shall  say  you  hold  a  round,  smooth,  hard  object,  nice  colour,
and  I  feel  I  can  place  things  if  I  wish  in  it.

I  have  seen  a  strong  violet  light  this  morning,  very  violet.  I
have  found  it  difficult  to  keep  my  mind  quite  free  of  other
thoughts.  L.  Tipping.

The  percipient's  note  records  one  quite  correct  impression,
that  of  the  lighted  candle,  which  is  shown  by  Miss  Newton's
note  to  have  figured  prominently  in  the  experiment  ;  it
was  lit,  re-lit,  observed  to  smoke,  etc.  This  is  the  only
occasion  upon  which  artificial  light  in  any  shape  formed
part  either  of  the  experiment  or  of  the  percipient's  im-
pression.


440


Helen  de  O.  Verrall.


[part


The  statement  "  I  have  seen  two  faces  in  a  looking-
glass,"  is  interesting.  This  impression  might  easily  be
derived  from  the  thoughts  of  the  agent,  as  she  looked
through  the  glass  lens  and  saw  e.g.  a  portrait  of  Ellen
Terry,  against  the  background.

Experiment  XX.
(a)  April  26,  1913. 11.35  a.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.
Subject. A  Badminton  racket  and  shuttlecock.
Note  by Miss  Newton. Miss Tipping  played,  removed  her
coat,  while  I  played,  and  then  continued  playing.

The  shuttlecock  was  formed  of  white  feathers  and  a  green
and  white  base.

(6)  April  26,  1913.

Miss  Johnson's  room.

I  can  see  beautiful  yellow  sand,  and  blue  sea^ — many  people
walking  along  sands  ;  the  sunlight  is  lovely.  I  see  very  white-
sailed  ships,  moving  very  swiftly — these  are  yachts  I  think —
people  dressed  very  smartly,  feeling  of  great  comfort  and  plenty
of  time  to  stand  and  look  at  things.

The  object  seems  very  close.  I  think  you  must  hold  it.  I
get  gold  in  some  form  or  another.  I  see  bright  colour  and
white.  You  both  talk  over  the  object,  you  seem  very
interested.  I  feel  it  is  long  and  fairly  wide.  I  think  I
know  what  you  are  looking  at.  It  seems  familiar  to  me.
I  want  to  look  at  what  you  are  looking  at  much.  I  get  a
feeling  of  design,  and  again  I  look  through  a  substance  like
glass.  The  first  part  or  top  of  the  thing  you  hold  makes  me
think  of  glass  ;  it  is  so  smooth  a  surface.  I  also  sense  it  is
cold  and  thin  and  breakable,  glass  I  think  ; it  catches  high

lights. I  get  shapes  like  this  v — iiy  . Several  of  the  same


kind,  but  of  different  colours.


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  441

It  does  not  live  ;  I  feel  it  is  very  pleasing.  You  both  like
it  ;  the  colour  is  good.  I  think  it  must  be  a  bright  coloured
thing.  It  cheers  rne.  A  certain  amount  of  weight  in  this
object.  I  get  faint  letters  in  (Scrawl)  and  a  long  letter  like
the  last  mark,  but  these  letters  are  so  faint,  as  if  they  did
not  wish  to  be  seen,  a  very  minor  detail.

I  also  get  the  colour  green,  a  dark-green.  I  think  you  must
be  looking  at  flowers,  but  I  can't  feel  they  live,  and  I  don't
feel  a  scrap  certain  if  they  are  flowers,  but  I  do  appear  to
see  many  shapes  alike.  I  feel  also  an  ornamental  design.
Sometimes  I  think  the  object  must  rest  on  your  knee,  it
comes  so  very  close.

Have  you  eaten  anything  ? — because  you  seem  to  hand  some-
thing to  each  other.  I  feel  Miss  Newton  holding  something  to
you. Heads  move  very  much  up  and  down.  L.  Tipping.

(c)  When  the  percipient  was  asked  by  Miss  Newton  at  the
conclusion  of  the  experiment,  before  being  told  what  the
subject  was,  whether  she  could  draw  something  to  represent
her  impression,  she  produced  the  following  sketches  :


The  three  drawings  marked  (a)  were  perhaps  suggested
by  the  shuttlecock,  especially  taken  in  conjunction  with
the  percipient's  statements  :

I  also  get  the  colour  green,  a  dark-green.  I  think  you  must
be  looking  at  flowers,  but  I  can't  feel  they  live.

The  shuttlecock  used  in  this  experiment  "  was  formed
of  white  feathers  and  a  green  and  white  base,"  and  might
well  be  described  as  "a  flower  which  doesn't  live."


442


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


In  an  earlier  part  of  her  record  the  percipient  notes
that  she  sees  "  bright  colour  and  white,"  and  at  the
beginning  of  all  she  has  an  impression  of  "  white-sailed
ships  moving  very  swiftly."

Another  interesting  point  in  the  percipient's  statement
again  concerns  movement.  Speaking  of  the  agent  and
Miss  Newton,  she  says  :

Have  you  eaten  anything  1 — because  you  seem  to  hand
something  to  each  other.  I  feel  Miss  Newton  holding  some-
thing to  you. Heads  move  very  much,  up  and  down.1

This  should  be  compared  with  Miss  Newton's  state-
ment that  she  and  the  agent  played  alternately.  There
would  almost  certainly  be  an  up-and-down  movement
of  the  players'  heads,  following  the  movements  of  the
shuttlecock.

Experiment  XXI.
A  Failure.

April  30,  1913. 11.35  a.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.

Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.

Subject.  A  picture  of  a  red  Punch,  with  a  blue  stick  and  a
blue  Toby,  on  a  white,  background.

Experiment  XXII.
A  Failure.

(a)  May  3,  1913. 11.45  a.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.

Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.

Note  by  Miss  Newton.  At  11.45  a.m.  Mss  Tipping  and  I
went  on  to  the  roof  at  20  Hanover  Square,  and  looked
down  on  to  the  roofs  below  towards  Bond  Street.

1  The  italics  are  the  percipient's.


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


443


B.

In  the  following  series  of  ten  experiments  Miss  Louisa
Tipping  was  again  the  percipient  and  I  was  the  agent.
Miss  Tipping  sat,  as  before,  in  Miss  Johnson's  room  and
I  sat  in  Miss  Newton's  room.  On  the  first  two  occasions
Miss  Newton  chose  the  subject  of  the  experiment,  on  all
other  occasions  I  chose  it  myself  and  no  one  else  knew
of  it  until  after  the  conclusion  of  the  experiment.


Experiment  XXIII.
A  Failure.

(«)  April  16,  1913. 11.28  a.m.-11.50  a.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  Verrall.
Subject. A  little  white  velvet  spotted  dog  against  a  black
velvet  background.

Experiment  XXIV.
A  Failure.

(a)  April  17,  1913. 11.30  a.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  Verrall.
Subject. A  bunch  of  daffodils.


Experiment  XXV.
(a)  May  7,  1913. 11.25  a.m.-11.50  a.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  Verrall.
I  strung  some  bright  blue  beads  on  a  piece  of  string.  I
counted  the  beads,  22,  played  with  them,  unstrung  and  re-
strung  them.  H.  de  G.  Verrall.


444


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


(b)  May  7,  1913.

Miss  Johnson's  room.
I  think  you  hold  the  object,  or  else  you  are  very  close  to
it,  and  touch  it  when  you  wish  to.  Sometimes  I  fancy  you
draw  away  from  it,  and  return  to  it,  and  then  hold  it.  I
have  a  sensing  that  it  is  cold  to  hold,  smooth  and  round.
There  are  reflexions  in  it,  but  it  is  not  a  very  clear  surface.
I  want  to  look  into  it  sometimes,  but  very  faintly.  I  feel
there  are  many  objects  near  you,  and  alike  in  shape,  but  this
I  do  not  feel  one  bit  sure  of,  only  I  want  to  pick  up  more
than  one  thing  in  connexion  with  what  you  are  trying  to  send
me.  Then  again  a  smooth,  round,  fairly  large  thing  comes,
but  what  it  is  I  can't  sense.  You  appear  to  be  looking  most
intently  at  what  you  are  doing.  I  get  colours,  yellow  and
pink.  There  is  not  any  life  in  the  object  or  objects  you  are
holding.  Have  you  turned  over  things  like  the  leaves  of  a
book  ?  I  see  small  letters,  but  rather  funny  shaped  letters,
and  three  faces  of  women  but  very  very  faintly.  You  have
moved  your  hands  about  in  connexion  Avith  what  you  have
been  sending,  but  you  have  not  walked  about.  I  don't  get
much  weight  in  the  object.  I  could  hold  it  very  comfortably.
You  have  not  left  the  room  you  have  entered  once  during
the  experiment,  neither  have  you  talked.  L.  Tipping.

(c)  Note  by  the  agent  after  seeing  the  percipient's  statement.
The  beads  are  of  serpentine  rock,  cold,  round,  smooth  and

polished.  It  is  true  that  there  are  reflexions  in  them  and  that
they  are  not  clear.  It  is  true  that  I  did  not  walk  about
during  the  experiment,  or  talk.  I  did,  of  course,  move  my
hands  a  good  deal,  stringing  the  beads,  and  then  holding  them
up  in  front  of  me  on  the  string  and  swinging  them  about.

H.  de  G.  Verrall.

(d)  Note  made  by  the  percipient  after  she  had  gone  home,  but
before  she  had  seen  the  agent  or  knew  anything  of  the  subject
of  the  experiment.

I  think  she  sat  down  to  a  table.  I  can't  say  whether  there
are  more  objects  than  one,  smooth,  hard  and  cold.  She  seems
to  me  to  pick  things  up  and  put  them  back  in  front  of  her.
I  can't  say  what  they  are,  not  very  heavy  in  weight. I  get


lxx.] Some  Recent,  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  445

lines  on  something,  and  feel  like  the  leaves  of  a  book.  I  get
little  writing.  Is  there  a  transparency  with  this  ?  A  thinness
that  I  could  look  through  ?  And  yet  I  get  a  solid  feeling.
The  objects  seem  close  together,  as  though  they  were  in  a
basket. I  want  to  pick  these  things  out  of  something.

L.  Tipping.

The  percipient's  impression  of  my  action  was  fairly
correct  this  time,  especially  her  remark  that  she  wants
"  to  pick  up  more  than  one  thing  in  connexion  with  what
you  are  sending  me,"  and  again  later,  "  I  think  she  sat
down  to  a  table  .  .  .  She  seems  to  me  to  pick  things
up  and  put  them  back  in  front  of  her."

The  impression  of  an  object  which  is  cold,  smooth  and
round,  although  correct,  must  be  to  some  extent  dis-
counted, because  it  is  an  impression  which  the  percipient
has  not  infrequently.

*  Experiment  XXVI.

(a)  June  4,  1913. 11.25-11.45  a.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.

Agent. Miss  Verrall.

I  sat  throughout  the  time  of  the  experiment  making  white
crochet  lace.  H.  de  G.  Verrall.

(b)  June  4,  1913.

Miss  Johnson's  room.

Impressions  come  very  faintly.  I  can't  hold  ideas.  First
came  white  flowers,  with  petals  lying  around  as  if  you  had
pulled  them  off,  lots  of  little  bits  of  white,  very  soft  in
texture.  I  want  to  pick  up  these  little  white  things  and  place
them  in  order.  You  seem  to  move  these  fallen  white  things
about,  at  least  your  fingers  seem  very  busy.

Then  I  see  red  colours  and  small  rounds  this  time,  like
this.  (Drawing  of  six  cherries  with,  stalks.)  I  want  to  eat
cherries.  I  keep  wishing  to  taste  fruit.  These  small  rounds
appear  to  me  to  have  stalks.  I  get  a  large  number  of  the
same kind, it would be very  hard to have to say  how


446


Helen  de  O.  V  err  all.


[part


many  of  them,  I  mean  of  these  rounds.  I  get  a  very  high
polish,  very  very  smooth  and  hard.

Your  hands  seem  to  move  about  much.

It's  so  queer,  but  I  do  want  to  count  the  things  you  are
touching. I  get  also  a  white  or  light  colour  with  these  rounds.

I  feel  very  strongly  that  you  have  had  more  than  one
object  and  that  there  were  many  shapes  alike,  round,  hard,
and  smooth  in  texture,  and  white  and  red  in  colour.  I
thought  I  looked  through  these  rounds,  but  that  feeling  soon
went.

All  I  have  seen  has  come  very  slowly  and  faintly.
I  have  also  seen  very  small  letters,  writing,  and  in  lines
that  are  very  close  together.  L.  Tipping.

Note  by  Miss  Newton.  The  percipient  came  straight  to  my
room  when  she  left  Miss  Johnson's  room  soon  after  12  noon,
and  she  spoke  of  her  impression.  I  append  the  note  I  hastily
made  while  she  talked.  I  did  not  know  what  Miss  Verrall
had  chosen  for  the  experiment  until  after  Miss  Tipping  had
left.  Miss  Verrall  and  Miss  Tipping  did  not  see  each  other,
Miss  Verrall  having  left  the  room  before  Miss  Tipping  came  in.

Statement  made  by  the  percipient  to  Miss  Newton.

I  tasted  fruit,  and  I  wanted  to  count.  I  felt  all  the  time
I  wanted  to  count.  I  felt  I  must  ask  :  how  many  are  there
in  front  of  you  ?  I  don't  know  how  to  express  it.  There
were  so  many,  too  many  to  count,  and  yet  they  were  countable.
I  think  Miss  Verrall  moved  them.  I  got  thirsty  and  tasted
fruit.  Then  there  were  a  lot  of  small,  highly-polished  objects,
with  stalks  ;  I  could  bite  them  ;  they  were  hard  and  smooth,
like  cherries.

(c)  Note  made  by  the  agent  after  seeing  the  percipient's  state-
ment.

June  4,  1913.

The  lace  I  was  crocheting  has  a  pattern  which  makes  it
necessary  to  count  the  stitches  as  I  work.  It  has  been  in
my  mind  this  morning  (I  thought  of  it  just  before  the  experi-
ment) that  I  must  not  forget  to  buy  some  cherries  for  dessert
this  evening,  as  I  have  a  friend  dining  with  me.

H.  de  G.  Verrall.


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  447

The  percipient  had  two  impressions  this  time,  (if  we
ignore  the  impression  of  "  small  letters,"  which  is  of  very
frequent  occurrence  and  upon  which  no  emphasis  is  laid
here),  one  of  "  little  white  things,"  the  other  of  small
round  objects,  red  in  colour,  identified  as  cherries.  After
a  time,  as  often  happens,  there  is  contamination  between
these  two  impressions,  but  at  first  they  are  quite  distinct.

The  impression  of  cherries  may  be  due  to  the  fact  that
cherries  had  been  prominently  in  my  thoughts  that  morn-
ing, as  stated  above.  But  upon  that  point  one  cannot
lay  much  stress,  as  cherries  had  not  been  the  subject  of
the  experiment. The  other  impression  is  more  interesting.

It  is  an  impression  "  of  little  bits  of  white,  very  soft  in
texture,"  which  the  percipient  wishes  to  pick  up  and
place  in  order  ;  I  seem  to  her  to  move  these  white  things
about,  my  fingers  seem  very  busy.  She  has  a  persistent
desire  to  count  the  things  I  am  touching.

This  impression  seems  to  me  very  much  what  we  might
expect  to  find,  if  we  suppose  that  my  actions  and  sensa-
tions, as  I  sat  crocheting,  were  conveyed  to  the  percipient
piecemeal,  bereft  of  all  meaning  and  coherence.  The
colour  is  there,  the  texture  of  the  material,  the  idea  of
making  a  pattern,  placing  things  in  order,  the  constant
movement  of  my  hands,  and  the  persistent  counting,
which  is  not  the  counting  of  a  definite  sum  total  of
things. She  says  :

I  felt  all  the  time  I  wanted  to  count.  I  felt  I  must  ask  :
how  many  are  there  in  front  of  you  ?  I  don't  know  how  to
express  it.  There  were  so  many,  too  many  to  count,  and  yet
they  were  countable. I  think  Miss  Verrall  moved  them.


*  Experiment  XXVII.

(a)  June  11,  1913. 11.20-11.50  a.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.

Agent. Miss  Verrall.

I  played  patience.  I  sat  at  the  table  and  laid  the  cards  in
front  of  me.

2f


44S


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


The  cards  had  backs  with  a  pattern  in  light  and  dark
green.  H.  de  G.  Verrall.

(6)  June  11,  1913. 11.20  a.m.

Miss  Johnson's  room.

Are  you  thinking  of  a  puzzle  ?  Because  I  have  seen  little
things  of  many  shapes,  some  like  this,  (Drawing  of  shapes)
queer  shapes  and  yet  you  could  put  them  in  order,  and  they
would  mean  something.  I  got  different  colours.  I  want  to
pick  these  things  up,  and  place  them  again.  It  would  require
thought,  and  a  good  eye  for  measurement.  I  get  a  feeling
of  wanting  to  space  things  out.  You  look  down  at  what  you
are  trymg  to  send  me,  and  your  hand  goes  ovit  and  picks
up  these  queer  little  shapes.  They  appear  to  me  to  lie  quite
close  to  you,  all  mixed  up,  and  you  sift  them  for  a  certain
shape.  Whatever  you  are  doing  takes  up  your  attention  much.
I  feel  most  serious  and  attentive,  quite  puzzled.

The  objects  appear  to  be  of  a  hard  texture  ;  it  is  the
different  shapes  which  attract  me.  I  think  you  have  thrown
them  out  of  a  box  or  some  kind  of  square  thing  which  has
held  them.  These  objects  are  different  on  the  upper  and
lower  surface  ;  the  shape  is  the  same,  but  there  is  something
on  the  one  side  which  makes  an  alteration.

Then  once  I  felt  you  were  cutting  things  out  in  paper  with
a  pair  of  scissors,  shapes  like  these  (Drawing  of  shapes)
because  I  wanted  to  out  up  things  with  you.  I  feel  much
design  about  what  you  are  trying  to  send  through.  Also  I
wondered  once  if  it  was  a  message  to  me,  because  these  words
came  very  clearly  :  "  It  will  come."  Letters  of  some  kind.
Have  you  spoken  out  loud  to  yourself  about  what  you  are
sending,  because  I  thought  once  I  heard  words  and  wanted
to  listen.  This  feeling  went  very  quickly,  it  seemed  to  me
just  like  the  end  of  a  whisper.

But  the  chief  thought  is  about  the  queer  little  shapes,  a
feeling  as  if  they  were  connected  with  some  sort  of  puzzle.

L.  Tipping.

Note  by  Miss  Johnson.  Miss  Tipping  gave  this  writing  to
me  about  12.15  p.m.,  then  stood  and  thought  further,  and  at
intervals  made  various  remarks  which  I  wrote  down,  not  quite
verbatim,  as  follows  :


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  449

"  It  seems  like  different  things  that  could  be  put  together
to  make  a  pattern,  things  of  different  shapes.  I  don't  want
to  count  them  as  the  other  day.  They  were  lying  in  a  heap
together  and  she  took  them  out  and  placed  them.

I  distinctly  saw  a  message,  letters,  '  it  will  come.'

The  strongest  impression  was  the  puzzle.  Things  different
on  the  two  sides,  like  playing  cards,  all  cardboard,  they  express
on  their  surfaces  different  things.

She  seemed  to  be  very  intent  on  what  she  was  doing.  Just
a  flutter  of  words,  you  could  hardly  catch  it,  the  faintest
whisper,  such  a  flutter. She's  spoken  something  out."

(c)  Note  added  by  the  agent  after  seeing  the  percipient's
statement.  The  cards  were  in  a  cardboard  case.  It  is  there-
fore correct  to  say  that  I  threw  them  "  out  of  a  box  or  some
kind  of  square  thing  which  has  held  them."

H.  de  G.  Verrall.

The  first  part  of  the  percipient's  statement  is  obviously
a  description  of  a  jigsaw  puzzle.  The  allusion  to  the
queer  shapes  of  different  colours  and  different  on  the  two
sides,  which  are  to  be  sifted  out  and  put  in  order,  makes
this  clear.

But  many  of  the  percipient's  remarks  are  equally
appropriate  to  my  action  during  the  experiment  :

Are  you  thinking  of  a  puzzle  ?  .  .  .  I  want  to  pick  these
things  up  and  place  them  again.  It  would  require  thought
.  .  .  I  think  you  have  thrown  them  out  of  a  box,  or  some
kind  of  square  thing  which  has  held  them.  These  objects
are  different  on  the  upper  and  lower  surface  .  .  .  there  is
something  on  the  one  side  which  makes  an  alteration.

After  a  fleeting  impression  of  cutting  out  paper,  ob-
viously derived  from  the  earlier  impression  of  the  "  queer
shapes,"  the  percipient  returns  to  the  idea  of  the  puzzle,
which  she  finally  sums  up  in  the  words  recorded  by  Miss
Johnson,  who  did  not  at  the  time  know  the  subject  of
the  experiment  :

Things  different  on  the  two  sides  like  playing  cards,  all
cardboard,  they  express  on  their  surfaces  different  things.


450


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


Even  here  the  objects  seen  are  not  identified  with
playing-cards,  they  are  only  said  to  be  like  them  ;  but
it  should  be  noted  that  the  words  "all  cardboard,"  which
are  applicable  to  cards,  are  not  applicable  to  a  jigsaw
puzzle,  which  is  always  made  of  wood.

The  percipient  was  evidently  strongly  impressed  with
the  idea  that  the  things  she  saw  were  different  on  the  two
sides  ;  she  returns  to  this  idea  more  than  once.  My  own
record  shows  that  I  was  consciously  aware  of  this  pecu-
liarity in  playing-cards,  for  I  noted  that  "  the  cards  had
backs  with  a  pattern  in  light  and  dark  green."

It  is  again  as  though  the  percipient  received  a  series
of  correct  but  disjointed  impressions,  which  at  first  she
misinterprets.  Afterwards  this  misinterpretation  is  partly
corrected.

Experiment  XXVIII.

A  Failure.

June  12,  1913. 11.25  a.m.-11.55  a.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  Verrall.
Subject. Design  of  twenty-four  squares,  red,  blue  and  yellow.

Experiment  XXIX.
A  Failure.

June  18,  1913. 11.15  a.m.-11.45  a.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  Verrall.
Subject. A  long  gold  chain  with  two  latch-keys  on  it.

*  Experiment  XXX.

(a)  June  19,  1913. 11.30  a.m.-12  noon.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  Verrall.
I  sat  and  looked  at  a  small  china  bowl. It  was  bright  blue
outside  with  a  gold  pattern  on  it,  and  white  inside  with  a


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  451


border  of  blue  and  red.  I  held  it  in  one  hand  for  some  time
and  passed  a  finger  of  the  other  hand  round  and  round  the
rim.  I  also  laid  the  bowl  on  its  side  on  the  table  and  rolled
it  round  and  round.  In  the  middle  of  the  experiment  I  con-
sidered the  question  of  filling  the  bowl  with  water,  but  decided
not  to  do  this.  H.  be  G.  Veerall.

(6)  June  19,  1913.

Miss  Johnson's  room.

I  see  very  plainly  a  Japanese  doll,  its  hair  and  slanting
eyes  I  see  very  clearly.  I  first  saw  it  as  though  you  held  a
small  form  in  your  hand,  and  then  it  seemed  lying  in  your
lap,  first  in  one  position  and  then  in  another.  The  slanting
eyes  were  the  first  thing  I  felt  in  this  figure,  then  came  the
dark  hair,  and  afterwards  the  colour  and  form  of  a  face.  I
felt  whatever  you  held  in  your  hand  was  light  in  weight,  and
that  it  was  clothed.  I  get  light  bits  of  colour  splashed  on  a
dark  ground-work,  easy  and  flowing  in  design,  but  this  does
not  attract  me  much,  just  a  detail  in  the  object  you  hold.
The  face  is  the  strongest  thing  and  that  I  see  most  clearly.
I  sense  an  unusual  feeling  in  what  you  are  doing.  I  don't  feel
anything  spread  in  front  of  you,  but  that  it  is  one  object.
You  pick  up,  hold,  turn  it  round,  and  then  place  it  on  your
lap. I  get  red  colour.

Second  impression  :

I  can  see  gold-fish  in  a  bowl,  or  a  something  that  holds
water.  I  want  to  wet  my  fingers.  Not  many  gold-fish  but
little  objects  moving  round.  This  is  as  clear  as  the  face  of
the  doll,  or  whatever  I'm  seeing  ;  has  life.  I  think  they  must
be  gold-fish.  I  can  see  them  moving  so  swiftly,  round  and
round. I  want  to  keep  making  circles.

Whatever  you  have  tried  to  send  through  this  morning  has
to  me  the  feehng  of  the  unusual.  L.  Tipping.

Note  made  by  Miss  Johnson  at  the  conclusion  of  the  experi-
ment. I  gathered  from  what  Miss  Tipping  said  that  the
impressions  were  unusually  clear,  the  doll  with  the  black  hair
and  slanting  eyes  as  clear  as  my  inkstand, — the  fish,  or  what-
ever they  were,  going  round  and  round,  always  in  the  same
direction.


452


Helen  de  G.  V  err  all.


[part


(c)  Note  made  by  the  agent  after  seeing  the  percipient's  state-
ment. The  bowl  used  in  this  experiment  was  a  small  bowl  of
oriental  china,  about  three  inches  in  diameter  at  the  rim.
Inside  at  the  top  was  a  narrow  border  of  blue  and  red  flowers,
and  a  circle  of  similar  flowers  at  the  bottom.  Between  the
two,  on  the  sides  of  the  bowl,  were  three  red  and  blue  butter-
flies. H.  de  G.  Verrall.

With  regard  to  the  percipient's  first  impression,  the
Japanese  doll,  I  have  no  explanation  to  offer.  Her
second  impression  appears  in  several  particulars  to  reflect
the  ideas  that  I  was  trying  to  convey.

(i)  The  percipient  says  that  she  sees  gold-fish  in  a  bowl,
or  something  that  holds  water,  and  she  wants  to  wet  her
fingers.  The  subject  of  the  experiment  on  this  occasion
was  a  bowl,  and  during  the  experiment,  as  I  have  noted
in  my  contemporary  statement,  "  I  considered  the  question
of  filling  the  bowl  with  water,  but  decided  not  to  do  this."

(ii)  In  speaking  of  the  gold-fish  the  percipient  says  :

Not  many  gold-fish  but  little  objects  moving  round  .  .  .
I  think  they  must  be  gold-fish.  I  can  see  them  moving
so  swiftly  round  and  round. I  want  to  keep  making  circles.

And  immediately  afterwards,  in  conversation  with  Miss
Johnson,  she  speaks  of  "  the  fish,  or  whatever  they  were,
going  round  and  round."

With  these  impressions  should  be  compared  my  note  :

I  held  it  [the  bowl]  in  one  hand  for  some  time  and  passed  a
finger  of  the  other  hand  round  and  round  the  rim.  I  also
laid  the  bowl  on  its  side  on  the  table  and  rolled  it  round  and
round.

Perhaps  "  the  little  objects  moving  round "  which  the
percipient  identifies,  rather  doubtfully,  with  gold-fish,  were
suggested  by  the  three  butterflies  painted  on  the  inside
of  the  bowl.


LXX.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  453


Experiment  XXXI.

A  Failure.

June  20,  1913. 11.35  a.m.-12.5  p.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  Verrall.
Subject. Cutting  and  folding  white  paper  into  patterns.

Experiment  XXXII

A  Failure.

June  25,  1913. 11.15-11.45  a.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  Verrall.
Subject. Washing  a  lace  collar.

C.

Twice  the  experiment  was  tried  of  having  two  agents
simultaneously.  The  percipient  was  not  told  that  a  second
agent  was  to  take  part  on  these  occasions,  as  it  was
thought  that  it  would  be  interesting  to  note  whether  she
showed  any  consciousness  of  this  unusual  circumstance.
Mr.  G.  N.  Tyrrell,  the  second  agent,  is  an  associate  of  the
Society  for  Psychical  Research,  and  was  not  at  the  time
acquainted  with  the  Misses  Tipping.  He  has  since  tried
some  further  experiments  in  thought-transference  with  Miss
Louisa  Tipping,  and  they  have  met  with  some  success.

Experiment  XXXIII.

(a)  (i)  April  30,  1914. 3.5  p.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.
Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.
Subject. A  yellow  crescent  on  a  white  card.


454  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

(ii)  April  30,  1914.

Miss  Verrall's  room.

Agent. Mr.  Tyrrell.
Subject. Queen  of  Clubs.

(6)  April  30,  1914.

Miss  Johnson's  room.

I  see  three  objects,  square  in  shape,  thin  and  light  in  weight,
colour,  red,  faint  black,  and  also  white.  I  think  there  are
small  letters  on  these  squares,  or  printing  of  some  kind  ;  the
surface  of  the  objects  very  smooth.  I  get  numbers,  1,  2,  3.
There  is  drawing  on  these  squares.  L.  Tipping.

The  percipient's  impression  is,  perhaps,  a  faint  reflexion
of  the  second  subject,  the  Queen  of  Clubs,  but  the  re-
semblance is  too  vague  to  be  evidential.  Of  the  first
subject  there  is  no  trace.

Experiment  XXXIV.

(a)  (i)  May  11,  1914. 11.57  a.m.

Miss  Newton's  room.

Agent. Miss  K.  Tipping.

Note  by  Miss  Neivton.  The  agent  polished  the  silver  handle
(a  crook)  of  her  umbrella.

(ii)  May  11,  1914. 11.57  a.m.

Miss  Verrall's  room.

Agent. Mr.  Tyrrell.
Note by Miss Verrall. The agent chose two subjects  for
this  experiment. From 11.57  a.m.  to 12.7  p.m. he  sat  and
looked  at  a  diagram,  drawn  in  black  ink  on  a  white  ground,
as  below  :


He  also  copied  this  diagram.


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  455


From  12.7  to  12.17  p.m.  the  subject  of  the  experiment  was
"CLARENCE,  in  gold  letters  on  a  red  brick  house  outside."

(b)  May  11,  1914. 11.57  a.m.

Miss  Johnson's  room.

First  impression.  Silver,  metal.  [Drawing  of  a  circle.]
Money.  Silver.

I  think  you  have  written  something  on  paper  for  me,  or
you  have  done  drawing  of  some  kind.  I  wish  to  draw,  or
make  figures.  I  have  felt  numbers,  or  rather  a  number,  12,
colour  black  and  white.  L.  Tipping.

The  percipient's  impressions  are  interesting  on  this
occasion,  because  they  seem  to  some  extent  to  reflect  the
thoughts  of  both  agents,  the  idea  of  silver  being  perhaps
derived  from  the  polishing  of  Miss  K.  Tipping's  umbrella-
handle,  and  the  idea  of  drawing  in  black  and  white
from  Mr.  Tyrrell's  diagram.  The  percipient's  impression
of  the  number  12  was  perhaps  suggested  to  her  by  the
fact  that  the  time  was  then  just  about  12  noon  ;  very
probably  she  had  heard  a  clock  strike.

Neither  here  nor  in  the  previous  experiment  does  the
percipient's  record  show  any  consciousness  of  there  being
two  agents,  and  although  on  the  second  occasion  the
result  was  not  unpromising,  it  was  thought  better  for
the  moment  at  any  rate  to  follow  a  simpler  line  of  experi-
ment and  therefore  on  subsequent  occasions  there  was  only
one  agent.


As  to  the  question  of  how  far  these  results  may  be
attributed  to  chance-coincidence  it  is  not  possible  to  come
to  any  exact  conclusion,  because  the  experiments  do  not
admit  of  statistical  analysis.  As  regards  certain  types
of  impression  a  good  deal  of  allowance  would  undoubtedly
have  to  be  made  for  chance,  because  the  percipient
exhibits  in  these  experiments  several  mental  habits.  For
instance,  she  has  an  impression  of  letters  or  printing  no
fewer  than  sixteen  times  out  of  thirty-four,  and  on  six
occasions  she  has  an  impression  of  flowers. But  it  will


456


Helen  de  G.  Vcrrall.


[part


be  noticed  that  in  none  of  the  more  successful  experi-
ments do  these  recurring  ideas  play  an  important  part.
If  we  left  them  out  of  account  entirely,  our  estimate
of  the  success  would  hardly  be  affected.

Critics  may  be  inclined,  again,  to  suggest  that  where
the  resemblance  between  the  percipient's  impression  and
the  subject  chosen  for  transmission  is  only  of  a  general
character, — a  question  of  the  attitude  and  gestures  of
the  agent,  or  of  the  shape  and  colour  of  the  subject, —
chance-coincidence  might  account  for  most  of  the  resem-
blances.

With  a  view,  however,  to  testing,  as  far  as  possible,
the  quantity  and  quality  of  the  coincidences  that  might
have  been  produced  by  chance  in  this  series,  I  con-
structed out  of  it  an  artificial  series  by  comparing  each
of  the  percipient's  impressions  with  the  subject  (a)  of
the  succeeding  experiment,  (b)  of  the  next  experiment
but  one,  (c)  of  the  next  but  two,  obtaining  thus  a  series
of  ninety-six  imaginary  "  experiments."  Since  the  date
of  the  percipient's  impression  in  each  case  preceded
the  date  of  the  subject  chosen  for  comparison,  it  might
be  assumed  that  any  coincidence  which  occurred  in  this
artificial  series  was  due  to  chance.  If  the  dates  had
been  reversed,  it  might  be  supposed  that  the  coincidences
were  due  to  deferred  telepathy.

In  judging  the  amount  of  coincidence  in  this  artificial
series,  I  tried  to  maintain  approximately  the  same  standard
as  I  have  applied  to  the  genuine  experiments  discussed
above,  and  I  therefore  began  by  discounting  slight,  vague
coincidences  which  seemed  mainly  due  to  what  I  have
called  the  percipient's  mental  habits.  Amongst  these
ninety-six  results  I  found  five  partial  coincidences,1  i.e.  a
proportion  of  one  in  nineteen,  as  compared  with  nine
out  of  thirty-four,  i.e.  one  in  four  in  the  real  experiments.

1  Compare,  e.g.,  III.  (a)  with  II.  (b)  and  XVII.  (a)  with  XIV.  (b).
In  Experiment  XXVI.  I  made  crochet  lace  in  white  cotton  and  in
Experiment  XXIV.  the  percipient  had  an  impression  that  I  was  knitting
with  white  or  grey  wool.  This  is  the  only  one  of  these  five  coincidences
which  is  at  all  striking.  I  will  ask  the  reader  to  take  the  other  two
"  on  trust,"  since  they  occur  in  experiments  of  which  the  detailed  record
is  not  included  in  this  paper.


lxx.] Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  457

So  far,  therefore,  as  any  conclusions  can  be  drawn  from
this  test,  there  seems  to  be  a  considerable  margin  of
evidence  for  supposing  that  some  other  agency  than  chance
has  contributed  to  the  result  of  these  experiments,  and
as  I  have  said'  hi  my  introduction,  it  is  difficult  to  see
what  this  other  agency  can  be  but  thought-transference.

After  the  conclusion  of  the  experiments  which  I  have
discussed  here,  Miss  Louisa  and  Miss  Kathleen  Tipping
carried  out  another  short  series  of  experiments,  in  May  and
June  1914,  in  which  the  subject  was  usually  a  playing-
card  or  diagram  upon  which  the  agent  fixed  her  attention.
In  this  series  of  experiments  there  was  only  a  very  small
amount  of  success.  The  Misses  Tipping  are  both  under
the  impression  that  more  success  is  likely  to  be  attained
when  action  of  some  kind  is  involved  in  the  subject  of
the  experiment,  and  the  results  hitherto  observed  in  this
case  bear  out  this  impression.  It  may  be,  of  course,  that
the  higher  degree  of  success  attained  in  a  particular
type  of  experiment  is  due  to  expectation  and  auto-sugges-
tion, but  two  other  explanations  may  be  suggested  :

(a)  Any  one  who  has  ever  played  the  part  of  agent  in
experiments  of  this  kind  will  recognise  what  a  great  help
action  of  almost  any  kind  is  towards  continuous  mental
concentration.  Indeed,  for  most  people  it  is  almost
impossible  to  keep  the  attention  fixed  upon  a  single  mental
concept  for  more  than  a  very  short  period  of  time.

(b)  In  carrying  out  action  of  any  kind  many  sub-
conscious nerve-centres,  both  motor  and  sensory,  are
stimulated.  If,  as  we  have  some  reason  to  think,  the
subconscious  mind  plays  an  important  part  in  thought-
transference,  it  may  be  that  the  stimulation  of  these
nerve-centres  helps  in  the  transmission  of  ideas.

It  is  not  possible  to  draw  any  certain  conclusions  from
such  a  small  number  of  experiments  as  are  here  discussed,
but  we  hope  before  long  to  carry  out  further  experiments
with  Miss  Louisa  Tipping,  and  perhaps  with  other  per-
cipients. As  the  amount  of  material  increases,  it  may
gradually  become  possible  to  form  some  theory  as  to  what
conditions  are  most  favourable  to  thought-transference.


458


Hereward  Carrington .


[part


II.

A  DISCUSSION  OF  THE  WILLETT  SCRIPTS.1

I.

By  Hereward  Carrington.

In  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Gerald  W.  Balfour — and  evidently
other  members  of  the  S.P.R. — the  late  Willett  scripts
have  afforded  evidence  for  survival  of  a  very  striking
character,  and  at  least  two  of  our  prominent  members
have  had  no  hesitation  in  coming  forward  and  asserting
that  they  prove  the  persistence  and  identity  of  Dr.  A.  W.
Verrall — instigating  and  dictating  these  scripts.  To  others
of  us,  on  the  contrary,  these  scripts  have  proved  anything
but  conclusive,  and  I  beg  to  offer,  in  the  following  brief
discussion,  an  alternate  theory,  which  tends  to  dispose,  not
only  of  their  spiritistic  character  and  origin,  but  of  their
supernormal  character  altogether  !  Let  me  first  of  all  quote
the  scripts  verbatim,  so  that  there  may  be  no  misunder-
standing with  regard  to  the  actual  "  evidence  "  discussed.

(A)  (Script  of  July  6,  1912).

Does  she  remember  the  passage  in  which  there's  a  reference
to  a  river  ?  A  traveller  looks  across  it,  and  sees  the  inn
where  he  wishes  to  be  ;  and  he  sees  the  torrent  and  is  torn
both  ways,  half  disliking  to  battle  with  the  current,  and  yet
desiring  to  be  at  his  destination.

Should  it  be  possible  to  identify  this  passage,  the  matter
would  prove  interesting.

1  See  the  papers  by  Mr.  G.  W.  Balfour  and  Mr.  Bayfield  on  "  Some
Recent  Scripts  affording  Evidence  of  Personal  Survival." — Proceedings,
Part  LXIX.,  pp.  221-249.


lxx.]  A  Discussion  of  the  Willett  Scripts.  459


What  the  passage  does  not  say  I  draw  from  my  own  mind
to  make  the  connection  clear.

The  passage  is  not  from  Christina  Rossetti  ;  but  I  want  to
say  that  too  :

Yea,  beds  for  all  that  come —
You  cannot  miss  that  inn.

(B)  {Script  of  August  13,  1913).
Some  one  indignant  at  the  delay calls  out

HAS  THE  PASSAGE

been  identified  about  the  traveller  looking  across  a  stream  ;
dips  his  staff  in,  fears  to  wade,  takes  a  run,  heart  misgives
him  (here  Mrs.  Willett  said  out  loud  :  "  Some  one  is  laughing
so." — Note  by  Sitter),  longs  to  be  over  and  done  with

Faith  and

Hair
in  a  Temple
(Drawing  of  a  wheel)  Wheel
Pilgrim.

There  was  a  reason  for  the  CHOICE,  if  you  find  the
passage  alluded  to,  it  will  be  clear.

Have  this  seen  to,  for  he  swears  that  he  will  not  here
exercise  any  patience  whatsoever. Not  even  about

Lavender  or  Lub.

(C)  (Script  of  August  17,  1913).
THE  PASSIONATE  PILGRIM

But  it  is  of  another  one  I  want  to  write.  I  said  Pilgrim.
Now  write  this —

Not  a  one-horsed  dawn,  but  a  two-horsed  chariot,  though  a
one-horsed  dawn  in  a  way  might  fit,  because  as  compared  to
another  charioteer's  exploits  his  were  but  a  one-horsed  affair.
It  is  a  poem  I  am  alluding  to

A  man  who  drove  two  horses  in  a  less  ambitious  manner.
His  predecessor —

Does  God  exact  day-labour,  light  denied  ?

That  ought  to  make  it  clear.

Hair  in  a  Temple  was  said,


460


Hereward  Carrington.


[part


(D)  (Script  of  September  8,  1913).

(Written  in  the  presence  of  Mrs.  Verrall.)

He  of  the  little  patience  demands  now  this  3rd  time  whether
the  Pilgrim  has  been  understood.

Now  if  I  say  Passionate  Pilgrim,  I  know  all  sorts  of  con-
notations will  be  dragged  in.  But  think  of  the  passage  twice
inserted,

The  River  and  He  who  would  be  across.
Letting  I  would  not  wait  upon  I  would.
That  seems  jumbled  up  somehow,  never  mind.
A  passionate  Pilgrim  but

NOT  H.S'S

one.

What  moves  the  stars  and  all  the  heavenly  bodies  ?  Dante
makes  it  clear.

Then  again  I  will  repeat  and  will  continue  to  repeat  until
you  are  all  sick  and  tired  of  the  subject

HAIR  IN  A  TEMPLE
That  belongs.

Now,  in  considering  this  curious  series  of  writings,  let  us
start  our  discussion  without  any  prepossessions  whatsoever.
Let  us  not  assume  that  they  refer  to  any  particular  thing,
or  to  any  particular  person.  If  we  begin  by  assuming  this,
we  are  apt  to  make  all  the  evidence  fit  into  our  theory.
Let  us,  rather,  judge  the  scripts  purely  impartially,  without
assuming  that  they  emanate  from  Dr.  Verrall  or  from  any
other  disembodied  "  spirit."  It  seems  to  me  that  those
who  have  studied  these  scripts  have  not  done  this  ;  they
seem  to  have  been  almost  determined  from  the  start  to
place  the  authorship  with  Dr.  Verrall  ;  for  we  read  (p.  224)  :
"  it  had  indeed  from  the  first  been  supposed  to  be  connected
in  some  way  with  the  late  Dr.  Verrall."  Why  ?  Because
the  script  of  July  6  contains  two  lines  from  a  poem  of
Christina  Rossetti's,  whose  subject  is  death,  and  Dr.  Verrall
had  died  "  only  a  few  weeks  before  !  "  Surely  the  S.P.R.
will  invite  very  adverse  criticism  as  to  its  methods  if  it
advances  evidence  of  this  sort,  and  then  proceeds  to  build
up  elaborate  theories  and  an  immense  superstructure  upon


lxx.]  A  Discussion  of  the  Willett  Scripts.  461


so  flimsy  a  foundation  as  this  !  Let  us  see  if  there  is  not
another  interpretation  of  the  script — one  quite  in  confor-
mity with  the  facts,  and  perfectly  obvious,  when  once
pointed  out.

Before  discussing  this  alternate  interpretation,  however,
one  fact  must  not  be  lost  sight  of  ;  and  that  is  the  fact  that
the  enigmatic,  studied,  veiled  and  obscure  form  of  the
writing  affords  no  evidence,  per  se,  of  its  genuinely  spiritistic
character.  We  know  full  well  that  planchette  and  auto-
matic writing  will  often  assume  this  form,  when  there  is  no
evidence  whatever  that  any  external  intelligence  is  active- —
other  than  the  subliminal  of  the  medium.  This  "  dramatic
play  "  is  effective,  but  it  affords  a  strong  argument  against
the  spiritistic  theory  just  as  much  as  it  does  for  it.  The
beautiful  cases  brought  forward  by  Flournoy,  in  his  work
Spiritism  and  Psychology,  fully  demonstrate  this,  and  indi-
cate the  lying  character  of  many  of  these  communica-
tions. Here,  as  we  have  seen,  messages  of  a  precisely
similar  character  were  received  from  supposedly  "  dead  "
people  who  afterwards  turned  up  alive  and  in  good
health  !  Facts  of  this  character  should  give  us  pause,
and  make  us  decide  to  discard  absolutely  all  evidence  for
survival  based  upon  this  "  dramatic  play."  Evidence
must  be  forthcoming  that  the  knowledge  shown  over-
reaches the  possibilities  of  the  subconscious  mind.  The
supernormal  is  the  criterion.  This  fact  was  very  clearly
seen  and  insisted  upon  by  Prof.  Hyslop,  when  he  said
{Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XVI.,  p.  292)  :

The  crucial  test  of  Spiritism,  in  this  and  all  other  cases,
must  turn  upon  the  question  of  telepathy  to  furnish  the  data
upon  which  any  secondary  consciousness  has  to  work.  Until
it  is  more  fully  studied,  we  shall  have  to  assume  that  second-
ary personality  is  equal  to  the  task  of  explaining  the  dramatic
play  of  person  ality,  and  all  non-evidential  data,  and  base  our
conclusion  upon  the  insufficiency  of  telepathy  to  supply  the
objective  facts  in  evidence  of  personal  identity.

This  has  been  more  and  more  borne  out  by  the  publi-
cation of  late  facts.  We  must  make  up  our  minds,
therefore,  to  discard  all  "  dramatic  play  "  as  non-evidential,


462


Hereivard  Carrington.


[part


in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  and  judge  the  scripts
solely  upon  the  basis  of  the  supernormal  information  they
contain.

Judged  in  this  light,  and  from  an  entirely  unbiassed  view-
point, what  do  we  find  ?

It  seems  perfectly  obvious  to  me  that  the  symbolic  re-
ferences to  crossing  a  river,  the  pilgrim  hesitating  upon  its
brink,  etc.,  refer  not  to  Dr.  Verrall  at  all,  nor  to  any  classical
writer  ;  but  to  a  book  which  practically  everyone  has  read,
and  which  may  be  calculated  to  leave  an  indelible  and  life-
long impression  upon  the  subliminal  of  every  reader — to
wit,  Pilgrim's  Progress.  The  word  "  Pilgrim  "  is  distinctly
referred  to  on  several  occasions — the  actual  word  being
used.  We  are  also  specially  warned  not  to  confuse  this
Pilgrim  with  the  Passionate  Pilgrim  (which  would  steer  us
off,  into  Shakespeare)  nor  to  "  H.  S.'s."  In  other  words,
the  script  refers  in  a  veiled  way  to  a  certain  passage  in
which  a  Pilgrim  comes  to  a  river  which  he  hesitates  to
cross,  and  which  may  be  assumed  to  refer  symbolically  to
Death.  Now,  in  Pilgrim's  Progress,  Death  is  aptly  repre-
sented by  a  deep  river  without  a  bridge,  separating  the
believer  from  his  heavenly  inheritance — as  Jordan  flowed
between  Israel  and  the  promised  land.  Let  me  quote  the
passage  to  make  this  perfectly  clear :

Now  I  further  saw  that  betwixt  them  and  the  gate  was  a
river ;  but  there  was  no  bridge  to  go  over ;  the  river  was
very  deep.  At  the  sight  therefore  of  this  river,  the  pilgrims
were  much  stunned  ;  but  the  men  who  went  with  them  said,
"  You  must  go  through  or  you  cannot  come  to  the  gate."

The  pilgrims  then  began  to  inquire  if  there  was  no  other
way  to  the  gate  ?  to  which  they  answered,  "  Yes  ;  but  there
hath  not  any,  save  two,  to  wit,  Enoch  and  Elijah,  been
permitted  to  tread  that  path  since  the  foundation  of  the
world  ;  nor  shall  until  the  last  trumpet  shall  sound."  The
pilgrims  then  (especially  Christian)  began  to  despond  in  their
minds,  and  looked  this  way  and  that,  but  no  way  could  be
found  by  them,  by  which  they  might  escape  the  river.  Then
they  asked  the  men  if  the  waters  were  all  of  a  depth  ?  They
said, "  No  ;  " yet  they  could  not  help  them  in  that  case ;


lxx.]  A  Discussion  of  the  Willett  Scripts.  463

"  for,"  said  they,  "  you  will  find  it  deeper  or  shallower,  as
you  believe  in  the  King  of  the  place."

They  then  addressed  themselves  to  the  water,  and,  entering,
Christian  began  to  sink,  and  crying  out  to  hi&  good  friend
Hopeful,  he  said,  "  I  sink  in  deep  waters  ;  the  billows  go  over
my  head,  all  his  waves  go  over  me.  Selah."

The  passage  then  goes  on  to  describe  Christian's  further
agonies  of  soul  in  crossing,  and  his  final  triumphant  emer-
gence upon  the  further  shore.

I  think  we  need  surely  go  no  further  in  our  search
for  the  origin  of  this  script.  We  have  all  the  necessary
conditions  fulfilled.  Assuming  Mrs.  Willett  to  have  read
Pilgrim's  Progress,  or  to  know  the  story,  we  have  here,
it  seems  to  me,  a  complete  explanation  of  the  origin  of  this
part  of  the  writing.

We  have  a  Pilgrim  (not  the  Passionate  Pilgrim  of
Shakespeare  nor  H.  S.'s) — crossing  a  river — the  river  of
death.  It  is  beautifully  symbolized.  He  hesitates  and
doubts  before  crossing.  He  sees  the  stream  and  is  afraid.
He  dislikes  to  battle  with  the  current  and  the  water's
probable  depth.  It  would  "  prove  interesting  "  upon
identification,  because  it  refers  to  Death,  symbolically.  It
is  not  Rossetti's.  Truly,  "  you  cannot  miss  that  Inn,"
because  all  men  must  die  !  The  passage  is  as  clear  as
possible  throughout.  The  writing  is  a  mere  subliminal
re-construction  of  this  story  of  Christian  crossing  the
river  of  Death — portrayed  in  the  usual  veiled  manner.
Neither  Statius  nor  any  classical  author  whatever  is  referred
to  ;  nor  is  reference  to  them  necessary  to  explain  the
script  fully  and  satisfactorily.

To  pass  to  other  portions  of  the  script.  In  that  of
August  13,  we  have  "Faith  and  .  .  .  Hair  ...  in  a
Temple."  Now,  I  should  imagine  that  the  automatic
hand,  wandering  on  in  its  usual  dreamlike  way,  started
to  write  "Faith  and  Hope,"  but  after  writing  the  H  of
the  word  Hope,  it  suddenly  took  a  "new  turn"  and
wrote  "  Hair  in  a  Temple."  I  have  seen  many  similar
instances  of  this,  in  which  the  meaning  of  the  phrase
has  been  suddenly  turned  in  this  manner,  after  the  first

2  G


464


Hereward  Carrington.


[part


letter  of  a  word  has  been  given.  It  is  a  common  trick
of  the  subliminal.  Just  why  "  Hair  in  a  Temple  "  should
then  have  been  written,  I  am,  of  course,  unable  to  say.
It  seems  mere  dream-like  rambling.  Mr.  Balfour  says  it
has  a  hidden  and  very  intimate  and  subtle  connection
with  Dr.  Verrall — too  intimate  and  subtle,  unfortunately,
for  publication  !  Not  knowing  the  facts,  I  cannot  dispute
this.  As,  however,  I  think  I  have  shown  that  neither
Dr.  Verrall  nor  Statius  were  in  any  way  referred  to  in
the  foregoing  script,  I  think  we  need  not  concern  our-
selves very  greatly  with  this  connection,  which  thus
assumes  a  very  far-fetched  aspect.

"  Lavender  and  Lub  "  would  be  a  good  hit,  were  it
not  for  the  fact  that  this  phrase  had  already  appeared  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  and  had  been  seen  by  Mrs.  Willett
(]).  236).  If,  therefore,  Mrs.  Willett  had  any  intimation
that  her  script  was  thought  to  emanate  from  Dr.  Verrall
— which  she  might  well  have  subconsciously  surmised
from  the  actions  of  her  sitters — her  subliminal  might  well
have  inserted  this  phrase,  amidst  her  writings,  as  it  was
known  to  be  intimately  connected  with  Mrs.  Verrall
(it  appeared  in  her  writing)  and  hence  indirectly  with  her
husband.  The  phrase  does  not  appear  remarkable  to  me
at  all.

As  to  the  drawing  of  a  wheel,  amid  many  drawings
and  diagrams  which  have  occurred  in  the  automatic  writing
in  the  past — many  of  them  unrecognizable — this  should
not  occasion  us  much  concern  !  It  might  represent  the
Wheel  of  Fortune  ;  the  wheel  of  a  Chariot  (spoken  of  at
the  next  sitting)  ;  the  Wheel  of  Time  ;  the  Wheel  upon
which  Mercury  is  sometimes  represented  as  standing,  etc.
If  the  latter,  it  would  follow  very  naturally  from  the
sentence  before  it — speaking  of  a  Temple.  (I  myself  have
seen  a  dome-like  building,  resembling  a  temple,  surmounted
by  a  winged  Mercury,  standing  upon  a  wheel.)  This
would  seem,  therefore,  to  represent  a  pure  piece  of  symbolic
imagery.

Finally,  as  to  the  passages  relating  to  the  "one-horsed
dawn  "  and  "  Dante," — inasmuch  as  these  had  already
been  the  subject  of  lengthy  discussions  in  the  Proceedings,


LXX.]


A  Discussion  of  the  Willett  Scripts.


465


I  am  inclined  to  attach  no  weight  whatever  to  them,  but
to  regard  these  references  merely  as  stray  shots — referring
to  incidents  which  could  not  fail  to  hit  the  mark  in  one
capacity  or  another.  Any  reference  whatever  to  Dante
would  be  held  to  have  significance — after  all  that  has
been  written  upon  him  in  the  past  !  It  has  no  real
connection  with  the  script,  but  is  merely  a  stray  shot,
a  line  thrown  out,  to  see  whether  or  not  it  would  find
soil.  The  fact  that  it  did  so  is  evident  from  the  paper  of
Mr.  Balfour,  and  the  tremendous  superstructure  of  theory
which  the  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield  has  reared  upon  this  slender
number  of  facts  !

Reviewing  the  evidence,  therefore,  from  a  purely  im-
personal and  impartial  point  of  view,  we  see  that  it  by  no
means  points  to  Dr.  Verrall  as  the  author  of  the  scripts  ;
and  that  no  vast  amount  of  classical  scholarship  is  involved
or  necessary  to  understand  or  interpret  them  fully.  They
represent,  rather,  the  piecing  together  of  disjointed  fragments
of  subconscious  knowledge  and  subconscious  memories  ;
they  have  no  systematic  connection,  and  point  to  no
"  spirit  "  as  their  author.  They  are  all  fully  explained
upon  purely  psychological  and  naturalistic  lines.  And
this  criticism  applies,  it  seems  to  me,  not  only  to  the
Willett  scripts  in  particular,  but  to  almost  the  whole
of  the  cross-correspondences.  Studied  in  this  manner,
and  without  prepossession,  they  almost  invariably  resolve
themselves  into  simple  subconscious  memories  and  associa-
tions, between  which  no  real  connection  whatever  exists.
I  believe,  with  Dr.  Maxwell,  that  the  evidence  afforded  by
these  cross-correspondences  has  been  vastly  over-rated  ;
that  chance  has  played  a  far  greater  part  than  is  usually
assumed  ;  and  that  the  evidence  for  survival  which  they
furnish  is  distinctly  inferior  in  all  respects  to  the  straight-
forward communications  supplied  in  the  Hodgson  and
Hyslop  reports,  from  which  method  many  of  us  are  sorry
the  Society  has  ever  departed.  I  also  agree  fully  with
Mrs.  Anna  Hude  {The  Evidence  for  Communication)  in
thinking  that,  while  there  is  strong  evidence  for  supernormal
knowledge  of  a  vague  kind  shown  by  these  cross-references,
there  is  practically  no  evidence  of "spirit  return,"  and


466


Hereward  Carrington.


[part


that  the  Latin  message  incident,  far  from  being  a  success,
was  a  miserable  failure.  It  is  with  regret  that  I  record
these  impressions,  which  are  doubtless  opposed  to  those  of
many  other  members  of  the  Society  ;  but  they  have  been
reached  only  after  a  thorough  and  painstaking  examination
of  the  evidence.  I  cannot  help  feeling  that  these  com-
munications lack  nearly  all  the  essentials  necessary  to
insure  conviction  ;  and  that  the  spiritistic  hypothesis  still
rests  for  its  most  solid  support  upon  the  G.  P.  sittings,
and  other  "  direct  "  communications  coming  through  Mrs.
Piper. The  whole  crux  of  the  question  lies  there.

II.

By  Ivor  Lloyd  Tuckett,  M.D.

[The  following  remarks  by  Dr.  Tuckett,  who  is  not  a
member  of  the  S.P.R.,  are  taken  from  a  letter  he  wrote  in
October,  1914,  to  a  member  who  had  asked  his  opinion  about
the  Willett  scripts,  and  who  suggested  that  his  answer  should
be  published.  This  is  now  done  with  Dr.  Tuckett's  permission.
—Ed.]

The  Willett  script  published  in  Part  LXIX.  of  the
Proceedings  is  a  less  oppressive  case  for  discussion  than
most  cases  of  automatic  writing,  especially  those  that
are  supposed  to  form  a  cross-correspondence,  such  as  the
"Alexander's  Tomb  "  C.  C.  analysed  by  Miss  Johnson,  which
does  not  impress  me  with  the  necessity  for  a  supernormal
explanation  but  which  it  is  difficult  to  grasp  and  criticise
concisely.  So  this  Willett  script,  in  as  far  as  it  is  not
supposed  to  be  part  of  a  cross-correspondence,  deserves,
to  my  mind,  more  serious  attention  and  is  more  impressive.

But  it  is  only  impressive  if  you  agree  with  Mr.  Balfour
that  the  Willett  script  of  July  6,  1912  (written  in  Mr.
Balfour's  presence  eighteen  days  after  Dr.  Verrall's  death
on  June  18,  1912)  finds  its  solution  in  a  passage  from
Dr.  Verrall's  essay,  entitled  "  Dante  on  the  Baptism  of
Statius,"  published  in  the  Albany  Review  in  August,  1908,


lxx.]  A  Discussion  of  the  Willett  Scripts.  467

but  probably  quite  unknown  to  Mrs.  Willett.  Mr.  Balfour,
who  has  written  the  article  in  the  Proceedings  of  the
S.P.R.  with  considerable  skill,  is  too  ready,  I  think,  to
assume  that  it  does  find  its  only  solution  in  Dr.  Ve null's
essay.  Therefore,  as  Mr.  Balfour's  argument  depends
almost  entirely  on  identifying  the  passage  asked  for  in
Mrs.  Willett's  script  with  a  passage  in  Dr.  Verrall's  essay,
I  must  discuss  this  matter  at  some  length.

The  script  of  July  6,  1912  (see  above,  p.  458)  ends
with  a  quotation  from  a  poem  called  Uphill,  the  subject  of
which  is  Death.

Now  in  this  script  there  is  obviously  quite  as  much
stress  laid  on  the  idea  of  an  Inn  as  there  is  on  that
of  River ;  and  there  is  also  some  mention  of  battling
with  the  current.  Then  the  quotation  of  Christina
Rossetti's  poem  rather  implies  that  the  passage  referred
to  occurs  in  a  poem.  Consequently  I  do  not  think  the
passage  in  Dr.  Verrall's  essay  more  appropriate  than
many  other  passages  either  in  classical  literature  about
crossing  the  Styx,  or  in  hymns  about  trembling  on  the
brink  of  the  river  of  death  ;  while  in  modern  poetry
there  must  be  many  passages  which  would  fit  well  enough.
Why  should  it  not  even  be  some  passage  from  Dante
(for  the  script  of  September  8,  1913,  contains  the  words,
"  What  moves  the  stars  and  all  the  heavenly  bodies  ?
Dante  makes  it  clear.")  rather  than  the  passage  in  Dr.
Verrall's  essay,  which  runs  as  follows  :

This  river  [i.e.  of  baptism]  he  long  hesitated  to  pass  ;
he  "  halted  on  the  other  side,"  as  a  man,  who  was  no  hero,
might,  when  to  be  baptised  was  to  be  in  danger  of  death, —
though,  as  he  tells  us,  the  delay  cost  him  centuries  of  expiation
upon  the  purgatorial  mountain.  But  before  he  brought  his
Argives  to  the  Asopus  [i.e.  in  his  poem  of  "  The  Seven
against  Thebes  "]  he  himself  had  made  his  passage.

Here  there  is  no  reference,  explicit  or  implicit,  to  an  Inn,
and  nothing  about  battling  with  a  torrent.  In  Dr.  Verrall's
remarks  on  Statius,  the  stress  is  on  the  danger  he  ran  after
crossing  the  river  of  baptism  rather  than  on  any  danger  in
crossing,  the  point  accentuated  in  the  script.


468


Ivor  Lloyd  Tuckett,  M.D.


[part


In  the  next  place,  Mr.  Balfour  tries  to  clinch  the  matter
and  convince  the  reader  that  this  is  the  passage  referred
to  in  the  script  by  writing  (p.  220)  :

The  fact  that  this  essay  brings  into  conjunction  Dr.  Verrall
himself,  Dante  and  a  traveller  or  pilgrim  who  hesitates  to  cross
a  river,  is  to  my  mind  almost  convincing  proof  that  it  contains
the  passage  we  are  looking  for.  But  any  doubt  that  may  still
remain  will  vanish,  I  think,  before  one  decisive  consideration

When  Statius,  in  the  lines  of  which  I  have  already  read
a  translation — [i.e.  Purgatorio  xxii.,  73-91] — says  to  Virgil,
"  Through  thee  I  was  a  poet,  through  thee  a  Christian,"  he
adds,  "  but  that  thou  mayest  the  better  see  what  I  outline,  I  will
put  forth  my  hand  to  fill  in  colour."  Dr.  Verrall  quotes  these
lines  and  explains  them  to  mean  that  Dante  himself  felt  that
his  account  of  the  manner  and  date  of  Statius'  conversion
rested  on  an  imaginative  interpretation  of  the  passage  in  the
Thebaid  on  which  he  was  relying,  and  went  considerably  beyond
its  literal  meaning.  Now  turn  to  the  printed  extract  from  the
Willett  script  of  July  6,  1912  :  "  What  the  passage  does  not
say  I  draw  from  my  own  mind  to  make  the  connection  clear."

We  have  here  an  unmistakable  paraphrase  of  the  very  words
that  Dante  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Statius.  And  what  I  will
again  ask  you  specially  to  note  is  that  this  crowning  proof
that  the  passage  has  been  correctly  identified  occurs  in  the
earliest  of  the  four  scripts  that  refer  to  the  subject.

Here  you  see  Mr.  Balfour  talks  about  a  crowning  proof.
But  to  my  mind  the  occurrence  in  Mrs.  Willett's  script
of  words  which  are  more  or  less  a  paraphrase  of  some
lines  in  the  Purgatorio  do  not  prove  anything  at  all.  If
the  inspirer  of  the  script,  supposed  by  Mr.  Balfour  to  be
Dr.  Verrall,  had  wanted  to  make  the  script  refer  to  a
passage  in  Dr.  Verrall's  essay  and  at  the  same  time  to
bring  in  a  reference  to  Dante's  mention  of  Statius  in  the
Purgatorio,  he  would  have  attained  his  end  with  certainty,
not  by  using  words  which  are  only  a  vague  paraphrase  of
Dante's  words,  but  by  quoting  Dante's  words  themselves
in  the  Italian  or  at  any  rate  the  English  translation,  viz.
"  but  that  thou  mayest  the  better  see  what  I  outline,
I  will  put  forth  my  hand  to  fill  in  colour."


lxx.  I  A  Discussion  of  the  Willett  Scripts.  469

The  expression  "  I  will  put  forth  my  hand  to  fill  in
colour  "  would  have  been  a  millionfold  more  convincing
than  saying,  "  What  the  passage  does  not  say  I  draw
from  my  own  mind  to  make  the  connection  clear."  These
latter  words  might  be  applied  to  so  many  contexts,  and
are  not  uncharacteristic  of  the  vague,  non-committal
utterances  of  automatic  script.

Then  again  Mr.  Balfour's  words,  "  The  fact  that  this
essay  brings  into  conjunction  Dr.  Verrall  himself,  Dante
and  a  traveller  or  pilgrim  who  hesitates  to  cross  a  river,
is  to  my  mind  almost  convincing  proof  that  it  contains
the  passage  we  are  looking  for,"  are  to  my  mind  point-
less. For  if  we  do  not  assume  that  Dr.  Verrall  is  the
inspirer  of  the  script,  then  the  fact  that  any  passage
brings  into  conjunction  Dr.  Verrall,  Dante  and  a  Traveller,
does  not  make  that  passage  any  more  probably  the  one
referred  to  in  the  script.  Mr.  Balfour  here  is  obviously
arguing  in  a  circle.  He  assumes  the  identity  of  the
passage  to  prove  that  Dr.  Verrall  inspired  it,  and  he
then  makes  a  point  of  Dr.  Verrall  being  the  inspirer  to
prove  the  identity  of  the  passage.

Altogether  I  am  absolutely  unconvinced  that  the  script
about  the  Timid  Traveller  refers  to  the  passage  in  Dr.
Verrall's  essay  ;  and  if  it  does  not,  then  there  is  nothing
impressive  about  the  script.  In  all  cases  of  automatic
writing  I  see  no  reason  yet  for  doubting  that  what  is
written  could  be  given  a  normal  explanation,  if  we  knew
all  about  the  conscious  thoughts  and  subconscious  material
present  to  the  automatic  writer's  mind  in  the  hours  or
days  preceding  the  production  of  the  script.  Nevertheless,
I  admit  the  possibility  that  some  day  convincing  evidence
of  communications  from  discarnate  minds  may  be  forth-
coming ;  although  in  this  particular  case  I  regard  the
evidence  for  Dr.  Verrall's  interference  as  very  weak.

Next  a  few  remarks  about  two  subsidiary  points.

(1).  "Lavender  or  Lub,"  which  came  at  the  end  of
script  B  (August  13,  1913),  and  which  Mr.  Balfour
supposes  were  words  "  introduced  to  serve  as  an  identify-
ing symbol  connecting  Dr.  Verrall  with  the  script  by  a
link the significance of which was outside the  normal


470


Ivor  Lloyd  Tuckett,  M.D.


[part


knowledge  of  the  automatist,"  had  occurred  in  a  script
of  Mrs.  Verrall  written  on  January  13,  1908.  Mrs.  Willett
had  seen  this  script  ;  so  the  occurrence  of  the  expression
in  her  own  script  requires  no  supernormal  explanation.

(2).  In  scripts  B,  C,  and  especially  in  D,  quite  as  much
or  more  stress  is  laid  on  "HAIR  IN  A  TEMPLE "  than  on
the  passage  referring  to  a  Timid  Traveller.  If  the  expres-
sion involves  private  matters,  it  is  unfortunate  for  the
supernormal  explanation ;  but  Mr.  Balfour's  words  are  of  no
scientific  value  when  he  says  he  thinks  it  refers  to  Catullus'
poem  on  "  The  Hair  of  Berenice,"  and  adds,  "  I  must  ask
you  to  accept  from  me  that  there  is  a  connection,  but
one  which  I  have  to  leave  unexplained,  because  it  involves
a  reference  to  private  matters  which  I  am  not  at  liberty
to  disclose.  ...  I  can  only  tell  you  that  '  Berenice  '
is,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  connected  by  very  definite  inter-
mediate links  with  Dr.  Verrall's  essays  on  Dante  and
Statius,  and  that  this  explanation  has  the  additional  merit
of  explaining  why  the  drawing  of  a  wheel  appears  in  the
script  of  August  13,  1913."

I  regard  it  as  almost  scientifically  illegitimate  to  use
the  words  as  a  matter  of  fact ;  and  it  is  certainly  scientifi-
cally pointless  to  mention  Berenice's  Hair  at  all,  if  the
evidence  cannot  be  given.  So  for  the  ordinary  reader
of  the  Proceedings  there  is  nothing  to  show  from  the
occurrence  of  the  words  "  Hair  in  a  Temple  "  in  three
scripts  out  of  four  that  the  passage  referred  to  in  the  first
script  has  anything  to  do  with  Dr.  Verrall's  essay  entitled
"  Dante  on  the  Baptism  of  Statius."

Finally,  I  feel  I  ought  to  make  some  general  remarks
about  the  whole  incident.

(I.)  It  is  noteworthy  how  prejudiced  Messrs.  Balfour
and  Bayfield  are  in  favour  of  the  Verrall  origin  of  the
script.  They  do  their  best  to  make  the  passage  in  Dr.
Verrall's  essay,  entitled  "  Dante  on  the  Baptism  of
Statius,"  fit  the  words  of  Mrs.  Willett's  script  without
considering  and  discussing  the  claims  of  any  other  passages
in  modern  and  ancient  literature  about  a  river  which
some  one  hesitated  to  cross,  such  as  Caesar  and  the
Rubicon, or Christian crossing the river to Paradise  in


lxx.J  A  Discussion  of  the  Willett  Scripts.  471

The  Pilgrim's  Progress  ;  and  then  they  triumphantly  argue
that  the  inspirer  of  the  script  was  much  more  probably
Dr.  Verrall's  discarnate  mind  than  the  automatist's  own
mind,  or  some  other  incarnate  mind  acting  telepathically
on  the  automatist.

N.B. — It  is  amusing  to  note  how  seriously  the  Rev.
M.  A.  Bayfield  discusses  whether  Dr.  Verrall  or  some
form  of  telepathy  is  the  more  probable  explanation  of  the
script  ;  and  talks  as  if  he  knew  a  great  deal  about
Telepathy,  although — as  I  continue  to  maintain — Telepathy
itself  has  never  yet  been  scientifically  established.  In
this  discussion,  too,  I  note  that  he  refers,  as  evidence  for
telepathy,  to  the  scientifically  worthless  experiments  of
Miss  Miles  and  Miss  Ramsden  which  gave  such  feeble
results.

(II.)  Even  if  I  admitted  that  there  was  no  doubt  of
the  connection  between  the  script  and  Dr.  Verrall's  essay
and  that  apparently  Dr.  Verrall  was  the  inspirer  of  the
script  and  that  there  was  here  some  evidence  for  the
supernormal,  yet  then  I  should  try  not  to  forget  that
this  was  a  single  experiment  ;  and  that,  in  the  light  of  all
the  twaddly,  worthless  automatic  writings  and  utterances
which  have  been  given  forth  during  the  last  2000  years,
great  caution  must  be  exercised.  For  in  studying  pheno-
mena taking  place  under  vague,  unknown  conditions,  with
the  possibility  of  all  sorts  of  unforeseen  fallacies,  the  only
way  to  approach  truth  is  by  establishing  a  percentage  of
striking  results  out  of  a  large  mass  of  phenomena,  of  very
low  scientific  value  individually.  And  the  percentage  is
remarkably  low  !  Yet  the  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield  in  his
Note  on  the  Same  Scripts  says  that  this  incident  has  quite
convinced  him  of  the  reality  of  "  communication  with  the
spirit  world."

(III.)  The  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield's  note  on  the  incident
is  remarkably  characteristic  of  the  sort  of  effect  which
emotional  bias  has  on  a  person.  What  has  convinced  him
much  more  than  any  sound  scientific  evidence  is  obviously
the  form  of  the  script  in  which  he  thinks  he  can  recognise
personal  peculiarities  of  Dr.  Verrall.  This  reminds  me
strikingly  of  the  trial of  the  French  spirit-photographer,


472


Ivor  Lloyd  Tuckett,  M.D.


[part


Buguet  (see  Podmore's  Modern  Spiritualism,  Vol.  II.,
p.  120),  at  which  witness  after  witness  came  forward  to
testify  on  behalf  of  the  accused,  having  obtained  unmis-
takeable  photographs  of  those  dear  to  them  ;  and  they
would  not  relinquish  their  faith,  even  when  they  heard
Buguet  explain  how  he  had  taken  all  the  photographs  with
"  a  headless  doll  or  lay  figure,  which,  variously  draped,
served  for  the  body  of  the  ghost.  The  head  was  commonly
chosen  to  suit  expectations.  .  .  .  The  lay  figure  and  a
large  stock  of  heads  were  seized  by  the  police  at  the
studio."

In  short  there  is  no  evidence  apt  to  be  more  deceptive
than  the  recognition  of  traits  and  peculiarities  which  we
think  characteristic  of  those  we  have  known  well  and
loved.  The  emotional  bias  subconsciously  making  one
wish  to  be  convinced  is  so  strong.  Even  the  recognition
of  Russians  whom  we  have  never  loved  can  be  fallacious,  if
the  bias  is  strong  enough  !

In  this  case  the  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield  lays  stress  on  the
characteristically  impatient  tone  of  the  Willett  script.  But
from  his  remarks  it  is  clear  that,  if  the  script  had  been
remarkable  for  the  patience  shown,  it  would  have  been
equally  easy  to  say  this  was  characteristic  of  the  patient
fortitude  with  which  Dr.  Verrall  bore  his  long  illness.

(IV.)  There  is  nothing  in  Mrs.  Willett's  script  which
is  not  characteristic  of  automatic  writing.  Now  as  we
knoiv  that  automatic  processes  in  some  cases  have  been
inspired  by  forgotten  memories  or  by  a  subconscious
train  of  thought — I  could  give  four  or  five  examples  from
Miss  Johnson's  first  paper  on  Mrs.  Holland's  script, — the
natural  attitude,  apart  from  special  reasons,  is  to  find
the  explanation  of  every  script  in  the  automatist's  own
mind.  (In  this  case  identification  of  the  references  to
a  Timid  Traveller  with  Dr.  Verrall's  essay  would  con-
stitute a  special  reason  ;  but,  as  I  have  shown,  this
identification  is  not  convincing.)  Moreover,  the  year's
interval  between  scripts  A  and  B  is  quite  characteristic  of
the  way  subconscious  processes,  masquerading  as  a  per-
sonality, go  on.  We  must  always  remember  that  Mrs.
Willett  was  at  the  time  an  intimate  friend  of  Mrs.  Verrall


lxx.]  A  Discussion  of  the  Willett  Scripts.  473

and  her  daughter,  and  knew  all  about  their  hopes  of  what
automatic  writing  would  prove,  besides  having  read  many
papers  published  by  the  S.P.R.  Consequently,  Mrs.  Willett
probably  knew  quite  well,  subconsciously,  the  sort  of
evidence  which  would  impress  members  of  the  S.P.R. ,
and  how  this  sort  of  puzzle  of  referring  vaguely  to  some
passage  and  then  returning  to  the  subject  a  year  later
would  excite  interest.

(V.)  All  that  we  know  about  the  mind  and  its  relation
to  the  brain  from  the  researches  of  physiologists  and
experimental  psychologists  goes  to  show  that  you  cannot
get  out  of  the  mind  anything  the  elements  of  which
have  not  been  put  into  the  mind  at  some  previous  time.
The  mind  can  evolve  wonderful  combinations  out  of
subconscious  material,  but  there  is  no  evidence  that  it
can  produce  thoughts  quite  outside  the  range  of  the
thinker's  experience.  For  instance,  there  is  no  evidence
that  an  automatist  can  speak  or  write  a  language  which
can  be  shown  with  certainty  never  to  have  come  within
the  horizon  of  the  automatist's  experience.  Consequently,
the  hypothesis  that  Dr.  Verrall  inspired  Mrs.  Willett 's
script  can  only  mean  that  Dr.  Verrall's  discarnate  mind
was  able  to  select  and  utilise  elements  which  were  present
in  Mrs.  Willett's  subconscious  mind  ;  but  the  Rev.  M.  A.
Bayfield,  in  discussing  the  telepathic  hypothesis,  himself
denies  that  there  is  any  evidence  that  one  mind  can  rout
about  in  another  person's  mind.  On  the  other  hand,  if
the  discarnate  Dr.  Verrall  was  more  than  a  mere  selector
of  the  script,  his  mind  must  have  got  possession  of  the
working  of  the  automatist's  brain,  a  hypothesis  which
raises  endless  difficulties.

(VI.)  Mrs.  Willett  only  knew  Dr.  Verrall  slightly.  So
if  Dr.  Verrall  wanted  to  send  a  communication  to  show
the  S.P.R.  that  his  mind  still  survived,  he  could  have
done  it  so  much  more  easily — one  would  think,  knowing
nothing  about  the  supernormal  conditions  under  which
automatic  writing  might  occur — through  his  wife  or
daughter.  Or,  if  he  wanted  to  make  his  communication
as  convincing  and  striking  as  possible,  one  would  expect
him  to  have  chosen  some  complete  stranger. Mrs.  Willett


474


Ivor  Lloyd  Tuckett,  M.D.


[part


strikes  me  as  being  neither  intimate  enough  nor  enough
of  a  stranger  for  it  to  be  probable  that  Dr.  Verrall
would  have  chosen  her  for  his  medium  of  communication.
However,  I  really  consider  ib  is  futile  to  discuss  what  is
probable  in  a  hypothesis  for  which  there  is  no  evidence  ;
and  I  attach  no  weight  to  this  argument.  So  I  have
put  these  remarks  last  in  case  they  may  appeal  to  any
spiritistically  inclined  readers.


III.

By  the  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.

I  have  been  asked  to  make  a  reply  to  the  two  papers
which  immediately  precede  this,  and  will  endeavour  to  do
so,  dealing  in  such  detail  as  seems  to  be  required  with
the  criticisms  which  they  offer.  We  will  take  Mr.  Carring-
ton's  paper  first.

He  writes  on  p.  460,  "  they  seem  to  have  been  almost
determined  from  the  start  to  place  the  authorship  with
Dr.  Verrall  ;  for  we  read  (p.  224)  '  it  has  indeed  from
the  first  been  supposed  to  be  connected  in  some  way
with  the  late  Dr.  Verrall.'  Why  ?  Because  the  script
of  July  6  contains  two  lines  from  a  poem  of  Christina
Rossetti's,  whose  subject  is  death,  and  Dr.  Verrall  had
died  'only  a  few  weeks  before'!"  But  Mr.  Balfour's
words,  "  it  [the  script]  had  indeed  from  the  first  been
supposed  to  be  in  some  way  connected  with "  afford  no
warrant  for  Mr.  Carrington  writing,  "  they  seem  to  have
been  almost  determined  from  the  start  to  place  the  author-
ship with."  Further,  in  order  to  show  that  the  supposed
connexion  was  not  altogether  arbitrary  (as  Mr.  Carrington
suggests  that  it  is),  Mr.  Balfour  goes  on  to  say,  "  This
being  the  first  script  she  had  written  since  Dr.  Verrall' s
death,  it  was  natural  to  expect  that  reference  to  him
would  be  made  in  it."  Any  one  familiar  with  the  subject
knows  that  this  is  the  way  of  automatists,  and  also  that
the  fact  imports  nothing  as  to  the  ultimate  origin  of  the


lxx.]  A  Discussion  of  the  Willett  Scripts.  475

script.  To  maintain  that  Dr.  Verrall  is  referred  to  in  the
script  is  totally  different  from  maintaining  that  he  is  the
author  of  it  ;  the  critic,  however,  appears  not  to  have
grasped  the  distinction,  and  he  omits  Mr.  Balfour's  im-
portant sentence.  Mr.  Balfour  immediately  adds  a  stronger
reason  for  the  connexion  :  "  Moreover,  a  phrase  in  this
same  script  '  does  she  remember '  was  reminiscent  of  a
similar  phrase  in  which  '  she '  clearly  alluded  to  Mrs.
Verrall.''  This  point  also  Mr.  Carrington  ignores  and
omits  ;  but  clearly  Mr.  Balfour's  two  reasons,  given  in  full
and  taken  together,  explain  satisfactorily  enough  why  it  had
been  supposed  that  Script  (A)  was  "  connected  in  some  way
with  the  late  Dr.  Verrall."  Even  if  Mr.  Carrington  does
not  find  these  reasons  satisfactory,  he  might  note  that
though  the  supposition  was  seriously  entertained,  this  was
in  spite  of  the  fact  that  it  left  any  connexion  of  the
"  passage  "  with  Dr.  Verrall  still  a  complete  mystery.

Mr.  Carrington  comments  on  his  own  version  of  Mr.
Balfour's  arguments  as  follows  : — "  Surely  the  S.P.R.
will  invite  very  adverse  criticism  as  to  its  methods  if  it
advances  evidence  of  this  sort,".  .  .  Fortunately  the
Society  is  in  no  way  responsible  for  offering  '  evidence  of
this  sort '  in  support  of  spirit  intervention,  nor  is  even
Mr.  Balfour  ;  it  is  a  hors  d'ceuvre  of  Mr.  Carrington' s  own
preparation.  The  evidence  Mr.  Balfour  advanced  on  this
point  is  merely  evidence  that  the  scripts  referred  to  Dr.
Verrall,  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  question  of  the
latter's  authorship  or  agency.

Next  we  are  warned  to  attach  no  importance  to  the
'  dramatic  play '  in  the  scripts,  since  it  is  by  no  means
beyond  the  capacity  of  the  unaided  subliminal  conscious-
ness. That  is  a  truth  familiar  to  babes  in  psychical
research,  and  since  Mr.  Balfour  showed  no  forgetf illness
of  it,  one  wonders  why  it  was  thought  necessary  to
emphasise  the  axiom  in  the  present  connexion.  The
topic  is  quite  irrelevant.  May  I  be  pardoned  for  wonder-
ing— merely  wondering — whether,  by  some  confusion  of
thought,  the  writer  had  in  his  mind  my  Note  on  the
extraordinary  characterisation  of  Dr.  Verrall  (with  its
dramatic features) which the scripts present  ? If  this


476


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


is  so,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  two  things  are  not
the  same.  The  characterisation  of  an  individual  is
quite  distinct  from  the  ordinary  dramatic  play  which
occurs  so  commonly  in  scripts,  and  which  is  referred
to  in  Mr.  Carrington's  quotation  from  Dr.  Hyslop's
article.

Mr.  Carrington  identifies  the  passage  referred  to  in
the  scripts  as  being  Bunyan's  description  of  the  pilgrims
crossing  the  River  of  Death  ;  he  says  the  identification
is  "  perfectly  obvious."  The  passage  in  The  Pilgrim's
Progress  is  so  familiar,  and  the  superficial  similarity
between  the  passages  so  obvious,  that  the  idea  is  probably
the  first  that  would  occur  to  anyone  on  a  first  glance
at  the  scripts  ;  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  it  was  the  first
that  occurred  to  those  who  first  saw  the  scripts.  They
rejected  it  because  a  second  glance  showed  the  proposed
solution  to  be  untenable  for  the  following  reasons.

First,  all  the  scripts  emphasise  the  single  traveller,
and  never  mention  more  than  one  ;  in  Bunyan's  allegory
there  is  a  crowd  of  people  on  the  river  bank,  who  are
described  as  all  being  concerned  to  make  the  crossing  and
as  proceeding  to  attempt  it,  and  two  pilgrims,  Christian
and  Hopeful,  pass  over  together.

Again,  Script  (A)  describes  the  river  in  question  as  a
"torrent,"  and  speaks  of  the  traveller  as  "  disliking  to  battle
with  the  current."  Now,  this  is  in  precise  and  remarkable
agreement  with  the  condition  of  the  river  Asopus  as
described  in  the  essay.  Dr.  Verrall's  words,  which  follow
the  description  of  Statius,  are,  "  The  unfriendly  stream,  we
are  told,  then  chanced  to  be  swollen  by  a  formidable
flood,  and  the  Argive  horsemen  hesitated  to  pass."  1  It
was  the  strength  and  speed  of  the  river,  now  become  a
torrent,  which  dismayed  them,  and  it  is  natural  and  reason-
able to  suppose  that  if  Dr.  Verrall  assigned  in  his  thoughts
any  particular  characteristics  to  the  metaphorical  river  of
Statius'  baptism  (the  river  of  the  script,  as  we  think),  it  would
be  those  of  the  Asopus  in  flood,  since  it  is  the  Asopus
in that condition which furnishes the image.  Bunyan's

1  See  Literary  Essays  Classical  and  Modern,  p.  195,  and  Statius,  Theb.
vii.  425  ff.


lxx.]  A  Dismission  of  the  Willett  Scripts.  477


river,  on  the  other  hand,  appears  to  have  had  no  appreciable
current.  In  fact  its  pace  was  no  part  of  his  thought  ;  the
only  feature  and  the  only  difficulty  he  is  concerned  to
present  is  the  depth  of  the  water.  At  its  first  mention  the
river  is  said  to  have  been  "  very  deep,"  and  a  little  later
the  pilgrims  are  told  that  they  "  will  find  it  deeper  or
shallower  "  according  to  their  faith  ;  and  that  is  all  that
is  said  of  the  character  of  the  stream.

A  still  more  decisive  objection  than  these  is  that  this
solution  boldly  ignores  the  various  hints  given  in  the
later  scripts  as  a  help  towards  identification  of  the  passage
in  the  first.  Mr.  Carrington  arbitrarily  and  impatiently
tosses  these  aside,  and  says  with  the  finality  of  a  Judicial
Committee  of  the  House  of  Lords,  "  It  [any  reference
to  Dante]  has  no  real  connection  with  the  script."  Now
assertion  is  not  argument,  as  Mr.  Carrington  is  well  aware,
and  since  he  is  engaged  in  a  serious  discussion  to  which
he  must  desire  to  do  strict  justice,  he  cannot  be  '  bluffing '
his  readers  ;  no  honest  seeker  after  truth  would  do  that.
We  are  bound,  therefore,  to  suppose  that  he  has  some
sound  reasons  for  this  wholesale  elimination  of  the  refer-
ences to  Dante,  though  he  keeps  them  to  himself, — that
he  possesses  some  touchstone  by  which  he  can  infallibly
distinguish  the  material  from  the  immaterial.  But  why
this  sudden  and  unexpected  reticence  ?  To  raise  our
expectations  of  a  reasoned  treatment  of  this  cardinal
point  and  then  leave  us  unsatisfied  is,  to  say  the  least,
unkind.  Also  I  am  afraid  he  cannot  have  realised  how
important  these  allusions  to  Dante  are  for  Mr.  Balfour's
view ;  else,  with  his  desire  to  be  studiously  fair  to  the
discussion  and  to  guide  us  aright,  he  would  have  told
us  plainly  why,  like  "  the  flowers  that  bloom  in  the
spring,  tra  la,"  they  "  have  nothing  to  do  with  the
case."  As  it  is,  deserted  by  our  guide,  we  shall  go  on  in
our  own  stupid  way,  believing  that  these  allusions  are
intentionally  inserted  as  helps  towards  identification  of
the  propounded  passage.

Moreover,  as  against  Mr.  Carrington's  view,  if  the
passage  in  Bunyan's  Pilgrim's  Progress  is  the  true  answer
to  the  riddle,  what  plausible  explanation  can  be  given  of


478


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


the  words  of  Script  (A),  "  Should  it  be  possible  to  identify
this  passage,  the  matter  would  prove  interesting  "  1
"  Should  it  be  possible  "  is  a  phrase  which  suggests  some
difficulty  in  making  the  identification,  but  the  incident  in
Bunyan's  story  leaps  to  any  literary  person's  recollection
at  once.  And  if  the  passage  of  Bunyan  had  had  any
"  interesting  "  association  with  Dr.  Verrall,  Mrs.  Verrall
would  almost  certainly  have  been  aware  of  the  fact,  and
would  have  told  us.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  "  passage  "
of  Script  (A)  is  the  passage  in  the  essay  on  Statins,
"  the  matter "  does  "  prove  interesting,"  for  it  furnishes
strong  evidence  of  personal  identity  and  survival.

Let  us,  having  no  reason  to  the  contrary,  take  into
account  the  allusions  to  Dante,  and  let  us  for  the  moment
assume  that  Mrs.  Willett's  subliminal  alone,  and  in  pure
mischief,  concocted  the  scripts.  She  begins  by  pro-
pounding the  problem  in  Script  (A)  ;  but  the  little  jest
falls  flat,  for  nobody  makes  any  guess  at  the  answer,
though  she  waits  for  a  whole  year.  The  words  "  What
the  passage  does  not  say,"  etc.,  were  not  at  that  time
recognised  as  a  paraphrase  of  two  lines  of  Dante.  She
is  naturally  piqued,  and  propounds  her  riddle  again  in
(B), this  time  adding  hint  the  word '  wheel '  and

the  drawing  of  a  wheel.  This  hint  also  is  too  obscure ;
for  though  there  is  a  famous  wheel  in  the  Divina  Corn-
media,  there  are  also  others,  as  Mr.  Carrington  observes.
Accordingly  there  are  still  no  bids.  So  in  (D)  she  returns
to  the  subject  once  more,  and  this  time  with  the  pointed
hint  "  Dante  makes  it  clear."  After  that,  those  few  who
had  seen  the  writings  offered  their  answer  to  the  puzzle,
and  the  subject  disappeared  from  Mrs.  Willett's  scripts.
Apparently  her  subliminal  was  satisfied.  On  the  assump-
tion with  which  this  paragraph  begins,  this  view  of
the  scripts  seems  to  be  natural  and  indeed  inevitable.
On  any  view  of  the  origin  of  the  scripts  it  is  merely
perverse  to  separate  the  references  to  Dante  from  the
propounded  passage ;  and  this  will,  I  think,  be  the
general  opinion  until  Mr.  Carrington  sees  fit  to  impart
the  secret  of  his  patent  separator.  One  wonders  what
he  himself would have said of such a dislocation  if


LXX.]


A  Discussion  of  the  Willett  Scripts.


479


anyone  had  ventured  upon  it  in  order  to  support  a  case
for  spirit  intervention.

How  dangerous  it  is  to  form  a  judgement  about  the
allusions  in  script  without  taking  every  detail  into  account
is  well  shown  in  the  case  of  the  following  scripts  written
by  Miss  Verrall.  Though  they  extend  over  a  period  of
six  years  they  are  apparently  all  connected.  I  have
italicised  the  words  which  alone  belong  to  the  poem  that
was  finally  identified  as  being  the  one  intended  :

(1)  Dec.  16,  1907. — .  .  .  A  fairy  boat  in  the  moonlight
(drawing  of  a  boat)  and  a  star  at  the  prow  (drawing  of
a  boat  and  a  star)  and  a  mast  of  silver  but  the  sails  are
furled  .  .  .

(2)  Dec.  15,  1908. — .  .  .  A  knife  a  carving  knife  three  blind
mice  a  single  thread.

(3)  Feb.  1,  1909. — .  .  .  A  ship  a  ship  comes  sailing  but
never  a  ship  for  me  .  .  .

(4)  Jan.  21,  1914. — .  .  .  Apollo's  golden  bow — a  shower  of
gold — aurea  a  golden  boat  (drawing  of  a  crescent  moon)  there
is  a  poem — something  about  the  moon  and  a  golden  boat  .  .  .

(5)  Jan.  28,  1914.- — .  .  .  the  golden  boat — something  about
the  masts  being  of  silver — it  is  an  English  poem — we  have
tried  to  quote  it  twice  before — to  sail  on  the  sea — last  night
the  moon  had  a  silver  ring — three  blind  mice — yes  write  it
down — I  wish  you  could  find  that  poem  .  .  .

(6)  Feb.  4,  1914. — .  .  .  the  masts  were  all  of  silver — the  crew
were  mice  .  .  .

Before  the  next  script  appeared  Mr.  Piddington  told
Miss  Verrall  that  he  had  discovered  the  poem,  and  told
her  what  it  was.

(7)  Feb.  9,  1914. — .  .  .  It  was  right  about  the  boat.

(8)  Feb.  25,  1914. — .  .  .  Did  you  understand  about  the  silver
masts  ?  that  was  important — the  mice  too  were  to  identify —
I  mean  for  identification  of  the  ship  .  .  .  the  ship  is  what
matters  .  .  .

After  much  hunting,  Mr.  Piddington  had  identified  the

2h


480


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[PAET


poem  as  being  The  Fairy  Ship,  a  child's  poem  which
begins  : —

"  A  ship,  a  ship  a-sailing,  a-sailing  on  the  sea,
And  it  was  deeply  laden  with  pretty  things  for  me  ;
There  were  raisins  in  the  cabin  and  almonds  in  the  hold,
The  sails  were  made  of  satin,  and  the  mast  it  was  of  gold.
The  four  and  twenty  sailors  that  stood  between  the  decks
Were  four  and  twenty  white  mice,  with  rings  round  their
necks  ..."

There  are  other  versions,  and  in  one  the  sails  are,  it  is
said,  of  silver.

Probably  few  people  would  dispute  the  correctness  of
this  identification,  which,  it  should  be  added,  was  arrived
at  by  Mr.  Piddington  entirely  without  prejudice,  for  he
has  no  idea  why  the  poem  in  question  was  referred  to
by  the  scripts.  But  if  no  notice  had  been  taken  of  the
mice,  which  in  (2)  and  (5)  appear  to  be  altogether  irrele-
vant, the  true  solution  would  certainly  have  been  missed.
Thus  Miss  Verrall  herself  thought  that  Hood's  poem
beginning,  "  A  lake  and  a  fairy  boat,  To  sail  in  the
moonlight  clear,"  might  possibly  be  intended.  Only
when  it  was  plainly  said  in  (6)  that  "  the  crew  were
mice "  was  it  seen  that  all  previous  guesses  had  been
erroneous.  None  the  less,  should  this  identification  ever
be  used  to  support  a  case  of  spirit  intervention,  we  must
not  be  surprised  if  some  one  gifted  with  mysterious
powers  of  penetration  comes  forward  and  boldly  declares
that  the  mice  have  "  no  real  connexion  with  the  script,"
that  each  one  of  them  "  is  merely  a  stray  shot,  a  line
thrown  out,  to  see  whether  or  not  it  would  find  soil  "• —
and  bear  no  doubt  those  fantastic  fruits  that  we  so  often
see  when  shots  and  lines  strike  root.  Any  one  who  can
ignore  Dante  would  make  short  work  of  three  blind  mice,
or  even  a  crew  of  them.

These  scripts  of  Miss  Verrall  furnish  a  further  lesson,
which  may  be  useful  to  those  who  have  only  made  a
superficial  study  of  automatic  writing.  They  illustrate  the
difficulty  which  the  subliminal  not  infrequently  seems  to
find  in  expressing  simply  and  directly  the  idea  which  it


lxx.]  A  Discussion  of  the  Willett  Scripts.  481

apparently  wishes  to  convey.  It  will  lead  up  to  it  by
indirect  approaches,  or  wrap  it  round  with  confusing
superfluities,  or  even — betrayed  by  some  literary  or  other
association — introduce  a  fresh  thought  similar  yet  distinct,
so  that  the  reader  is  puzzled  to  decide  which  idea  is
the  important  one.  For  instance,  in  (2)  above,  we  get
at  the  mice  of  the  fairy  crew  only  through  "  three  blind
mice,"  and  these  themselves  are  led  up  to  by  the  carv-
ing knife.

Again,  such  irrelevances  may  be  introduced  by  the
automatist's  conscious  self  :  realising  what  she  is  writing,
she  may  start  a  train  of  associated  thought  which  some-
how finds  its  way  into  the  script,  either  at  the  time  or
later.  Thus  the  description  of  the  fairy  boat  in  (1)
introduces  moonlight  and  a  star,  neither  of  which  occurs
in  the  poem.  The  moonlight  is  borrowed  from  Hood's
poem,  and  the  star  comes  from  an  illustration  of  it
which  Miss  Verrall  had  seen,  and  which  shows  a  star
at  the  boat's  prow.  I  may  add  in  passing  that  the
foregoing  remarks  have  a  bearing  on  the  mention  of
the  Inn  in  Mrs.  Willett's  Script  (A),  which  will  be  dealt
with  below.

The  references  to  "  Hah  in  a  Temple  "  Mr.  Carrington
explains  in  a  manner  apparently  satisfactory  to  himself,
but  which  is  mere  imagination.  He  is,  of  course,  not
in  a  position  to  offer,  or  even  form,  any  opinion  on  this
point,  and  he  would  have  impressed  us  more  as  a  dispu-
tant if  he  had  contented  himself  with  saying  that  the
court  could  take  no  notice  of  statements  unsupported
by  evidence.  Mr.  Balfour's  opinion  on  the  matter  (pp.  239  f.)
has  weight  with  many  of  us,  but  one  would  not  expect
importance  to  be  attached  to  it  by  anyone  who  did  not
know  his  impartiality  in  judging  of  such  questions.  The
reader  may  be  reminded  that  his  mention  of  the  point
was  independent  of  his  main  argument,  and  that  he  did
not  offer  it  as  any  part  of  the  evidence  in  support  of  that
argument.

The  remarkably  strong  point  "  Lavender  or  Lub  "  is
similarly  dismissed  with  a  mere  wave  of  the  hand — and  a
false  statement. For  the  phrase  was  not,  as  Mr.  Carrington


482


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


asserts,  "  known  to  be  intimately  [the  italics  are  mine]
connected  with  Mrs.  Verrall  "  (p.  464).  It  had  appeared
once  in  a  script  written  by  Mrs.  Verrall  on  January  13,
1908,  which,  among  a  large  number  of  others,  had  after-
wards been  seen  by  Mrs.  Willett,  and  that  fact  is  all  Mrs.
Willett  could  have  known  about  it.  As  will  be  seen  by
reference  to  Mr.  Balfour's  footnote  on  p.  237,  "  Lub  "  (the
essential  word  in  the  Willett  script)  is  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
script  solely  due  to  the  accidental  emergence  of  a  sub-
liminal memory,  through  association  with  "  Lavender " —
one  of  thousands  of  such  emergences,  and  there  is  nothing
in  the  script  to  suggest  any  connexion  of  this  phrase  with
Dr.  Verrall.  Yet  a  critic  who  comes  before  us  as  one  not
to  be  convinced  on  important  matters  without  compelling
evidence,  can  on  these  facts  satisfy  himself  that  Mrs.
Willett  having  "  subconsciously  surmised  from  the  action  of
her  sitters  "  [my  own  italics]  that  "  her  script  was  thought
to  emanate  from  Dr.  Verrall,"  "  her  subliminal  might
well  have  inserted  this  phrase  amidst  her  writings,  as
it  was  known  to  be  intimately  connected  with  Mrs.  Verrall
.  .  .  and  hence  indirectly  with  her  husband."  That  is
to  say,  he  is  ready  to  believe  that,  though  Mrs.  Willett
had  seen  enough  of  Dr.  Verrall  to  remember  many  things
connected  with  him,  she  reproduces  a  casual  and  meaning-
less expression  that  had  once  emerged  from  Mrs.  Verrall's
subliminal  when  writing  automatically,  in  order  to  give
colour  to  the  suggestion  that  Dr.  Verrall  is  the  author  of
her  own  script.  It  is  a  curious  example  of  believing  against
all  probability  what  one  wishes  to  believe.

Mr.  Carrington's  mention  of  sitters,  it  may  be  added,
is  a  mere  assumption,  for  he  could  not  know  that  there
were  more  than  the  one  mentioned  by  Mr.  Balfour.  In
any  case,  it  was  made  clear  in  Mr.  Balfour's  paper
(pp.  236-7)  that  Mrs.  Verrall  was  not  present.  As  a
matter  of  fact  there  was  one  sitter  only,  Mr.  Balfour ;
but  he,  as  he  states,  "  was  unable  [with  regard  to  the
phrase  Lavender  and  Lub]  to  form  any  conjecture
respecting  its  meaning  or  appropriateness  "  in  connexion
with  Dr.  Verrall.


LXX.]


A  Discussion  of  the  Willett  Scripts.


483


Dr.  Tuckett,  unlike  Mr.  Carrington,  has  not  made  up  his
mind  to  any  particular  identification  of  the  passage  pro-
pounded in  Script  (A).  Apparently  almost  any  passage
that  refers  to  the  crossing  of  a  river  would  satisfy  him,
if  only  that  passage  were  not  in  the  essay  on  Statius,
or  did  not  for  other  reasons  lead  to  a  spiritistic  explana-
tion.

He  begins  by  stating  that  in  the  script  "  there  is
obviously  quite  as  much  stress  laid  on  the  idea  of  an  Inn
as  there  is  on  that  of  River."  Any  one  acquainted  with
the  idiosyncrasies  of  automatic  writings — and  it  is  dangerous
to  offer  judgements  on  them  without  such  acquaintance —
would  have  written  not  "  obviously  "  but  "  apparently,*'
remembering  that  appearances  are  deceptive.  As  we  saw
in  the  case  of  Miss  Verrall's  scripts  quoted  above,  it  is
quite  possible  for  a  topic  to  be  introduced  which  is
foreign  to  the  main  theme  of  the  script,  and  neglect  of
this  possibility  may  result  in  a  complete  misunderstanding
of  the  script's  point.  As  therefore  we  found  no  difficulty
in  eliminating  the  "  moonlight  "  and  the  "  star  at  the
prow "  from  Miss  Verrall's  script  after  the  poem  referred
to  had  been  securely  identified,  so  here,  if  we  believe  we
have  good  grounds  for  identifying  the  river  with  one  on
whose  banks  there  is  no  inn,  we  need  not  hesitate  to
suppose  the  inn  to  be  an  irrelevance  which  has  crept
in  through  some  mental  association.  The  association  of
travellers  and  inns  is  both  familiar  and  natural.  The  fact
is,  supposing  spirits  do  communicate,  few  communications,
it  would  seem,  are  reproduced  in  script  without  '  con-
tamination.' 1  The  imparted  thought  is  liable  to  be  im-
perfectly grasped  or  to  receive  additions  as  it  passes
through  the  medium's  brain  ;  it  may  be  coloured,  decorated,
or  otherwise  modified  in  various  ways,  and  foreign  ideas
may  be  interpolated  between  two  or  more  connected
pieces  in  the  same  script.  This  view  of  the  matter
seems  to  be  warranted  by  the  facts,  and  since  the  point
has  been  discussed  from  time  to  time  in  our  publications,

1  For  an  instructive  instance  of  this  contamination  in  the  case  of
telepathy  from  the  living,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  ixovuttwXov  es  aw
incident  reported  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.,  pp.  156-167.


484


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


one  would  have  thought  it  would  not  be  ignored  by  any
one  who  ventures  to  write  on  the  main  question.

This  "  Inn,"  irrelevantly  intruded  (as  I  believe)  in  the
hrst  paragraph  of  the  script,  has  perhaps  been  responsible
for  the  introduction  of  the  quotation  from  Christina
Rossetti's  poem  and  the  idea  of  death.  However  this
may  be,  what  is  certain  is  that  both  the  Inn  and  the
poem,  with  the  latter's  associations  of  death,  are  dropped
entirely  from  the  later  scripts,  while  the  other  itemsj|of
the  description  are  persisted  in  and  amplified.

It  is  somewhat  startling  to  find  that  Dr.  Tuckett,
notwithstanding  the  importance  he  would  attach  to  the
presence  of  the  Inn,  is  prepared  to  identify  the  river
with  the  Styx  or  the  Rubicon,  or  the  river  in  The  Pilgrim's
Progress  (!),  or  a  river  hi  some  hymn  or  in  "  some  passage
from  Dante."  My  acquaintance  with  Dante  is  not  suffi-
ciently precise  to  enable  me  to  affirm  on  the  point,  but  I
should  be  much  surprised  to  find  in  his  works  mention
of  a  river  with  an  inn  on  its  bank.  Without  referring  to
my  copy,  I  hazard  the  assertion  that  Bunyan  does  not
place  an  inn  on  the  heavenly  bank  of  the  River  of  Death,
or  indeed  on  either.  I  am  sure  there  is  no  mention  of
an  inn  in  any  hymn,  and  I  do  not  think  Greek  or  Latin
literature  mentions  one  on  the  banks  of  the  Styx  or
Rubicon.  It  may  be  added  that  the  passage  of  the  Styx,
so  far  from  inspiring  alarm,  was  made  with  ease  and
comparative  comfort.  The  stream  was  sluggish,  and  the
passengers  were  ferried  over  in  a  punt  by  an  old  man,
whom  they  sometimes  mobbed  in  their  eagerness  to  get  a
place.  Also,  always  supposing  there  had  been  no  oversight
or  other  mishap,  each  of  them  had  in  his  (or  her)  mouth
three  halfpence  with  which  to  pay  the  fare.

It  may  be  freely  admitted  that  possibly  there  is  "  some
passage  from  Dante  "  which  would  fit  the  case  as  aptly  as
does  the  passage  from  Dr.  Verrall's  essay,  but  it  has  not
been  found.  Perhaps  the  critic  will  suggest  one.  If
he  can  bring  himself  to  accept  the  concession,  mention  of
an  inn  shall  not  be  a  sine  qua  non.

As  his  final  words  on  this  topic,  Dr.  Tuckett  writes,
"  In  Dr.  Verralls  remarks  on  Statius  the  stress  is  on  the


lxx.]  A  Discussion  of  the  Willett  Scripts.  485

danger  he  ran  after  crossing  the  river  of  baptism  rather
than  on  any  danger  in  crossing,  the  point  accentuated
in  the  script."  One  wonders  what  he  himself  would
have  said  if  an  opponent  had  descended  to  this  quibble.

The  paper  next  deals  with  the  argument  which  Mr.
Balfour  bases  on  the  words,  "  What  the  passage  does
not  say  I  draw  from  my  own  mind,"  etc.  Or  rather,
though  some  observations  are  made  on  the  words,  there
can  hardly  be  said  to  be  any  attempt  to  deal  with  the
argument.  Dr.  Tuckett  admits  that  the  words  are  "  more
or  less  a  paraphrase "  of  Dante's  lines,  but  complains
that  the  poet's  actual  words  (in  Italian  or  English)  were
not  given  in  the  script.  A  wise  inspirer  of  scripts  would
have  given  them,  and  they  "  would  have  been  a  million-
fold  more  convincing."  But  the  objection  quietly  evades
the  point  at  issue.  If  the  words  are  really  a  paraphrase
of  the  lines  in  Dante,  they  are  altogether  as  effective
as  the  original,  for  they  guide  us  to  the  passage  in  which
the  original  occurs — and  that  is  all  that  quotation  of
the  poet's  actual  words  in  the  Italian  would  have  been
intended  to  do.  One  wonders  what  it  is  that  has  blinded
the  critic  to  this  obvious  fact  ?  And  how  far  are  truth
and  serious  discussion  served  by  dismissing  the  matter
with  this  weak  and  pointless  observation  : — "  These  latter
words  [those  of  the  paraphrase]  might  be  applied
to  so  many  contexts,  and  are  not  uncharacteristic
of  the  vague,  non-committal  utterances  of  automatic
script  "  ?

That  the  sentence  in  the  script  is  a  paraphrase  of
Dante's  lines  I  am  personally  unable  to  doubt.  I  did
not  see  the  scripts  until  a  few  minutes  before  the  meeting
at  which  Mr.  Balfour's  paper  was  read,  when  one  of
the  slips  on  which  they  had  been  separately  printed  for
the  convenience  of  the  audience  was  put  into  my  hands.
I  at  once  began  to  read  Script  (A).  The  moment  my  eye
fell  on  the  words  now  in  question  they  recalled  the  two
lines  of  Dante.  For  reasons  here  immaterial  I  happened
to  have  a  peculiarly  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  essay
on  Statius,  but  had  last  seen  it  twelve  months  earlier
and  some  ten  months  before  I  heard  of  the  existence  of


486


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


the  scripts.  Moreover,  I  knew  nothing  of  Mr.  Balfour's
paper  beyond  the  broad  fact  that  it  would  endeavour
to  establish  some  connexion  between  the  scripts  and  the
essay ;  it  was  the  paraphrase  alone  which  evoked  the
memory  of  the  lines.

On  the  whole  question  Dr.  Tuckett  accuses  Mr.  Balfour
of  arguing  in  a  circle  (see  p.  469),  but  the  accusation
falls  flat.  The  argument  may  be  summarized  thus.  A
certain  script,  which  probably  (or  more  probably  than
not)  has  reference  to  Dr.  Verrall,  propounds  a  passage  in
literature  for  identification.  Later  scripts  written  by  the
same  automatist  present  features  which,  apart  from  any
fancied  identification  of  the  proposed  passage,  leave  little
room  for  doubt  that  the  writer  at  any  rate  has  Dr.
Verrall  in  mind  throughout  (Conclusion  (a)  ).  On  the
other  hand,  independently  of  any  presumption  that  Dr.
Verrall  is  referred  to  in  the  scripts,  various  hints  in  the
scripts  lead  to  identification  of  the  propounded  passage
as  being  a  passage  in  a  certain  essay  (Conclusion  (b) ).
This  essay  happens  to  have  been  written  by  Dr.  Verrall.
If  there  had  been  reason  to  think  that  Dr.  Verrall  had
not  even  heard  of  the  essay,  then  conclusion  (b)  would
receive  no  support  from  (a),  and  vice  versa ;  considering
the  subject  matter  with  which  wc  are  dealing,  each
might  even  be  thought  to  weaken  the  other.  But  since
Dr.  Verrall  is  actualty  the  author  of  the  essay,  each  of
the  two  independent  conclusions  is  sensibly  strengthened
by  the  other ;  there  is  mutual  confirmation.  To  combine
the  two  conclusions  is  not  the  fallacious  process  known
as  "arguing  in  a  circle,"  but  a  legitimate  completion  of
the  circle  of  the  argument.

In  his  remarks  on  subsidiary  points  Dr.  Tuckett  dis-
misses "  Lavender  or  Lub  "  in  two  sentences  which  betray
somewhat .  misty  thinking.  The  phrase  had  a  peculiar
and  special  connexion  with  Dr.  Verrall,  and  Mr.  Balfour
noted  that  the  significance  of  this  link  with  him  was
outside  the  normal  knowledge  of  the  automatist.  If  Dr.
Tuckett  had  shown  us  that  the  scripts  one  and  all  had
no  reference  to  Dr.  Verrall,  or  that  "  Lavender  or  Lub "
had  no  meaning  in  connexion  with  him — whereas  he  has


Lxx.]  A  Discussion  of  the  Willett  Scripts.  487

attempted  neither — it  would  have  been  to  the  point  to
say  that,  since  Mrs.  Willett  had  seen  the  script  of  Mrs.
Verrall  in  which  the  words  occur,  "the  occurrence  of
the  expression  in  her  own  script  requires  no  supernormal
explanation."  Of  course  the  mere  occurrence  of  the  words
requires  no  supernormal  explanation,  and  Mr.  Balfour
said  so  ;  but  if  it  is  clear  that  the  automatist  (whether
'  inspired '  or  not)  had  Dr.  Verrall  in  her  mind  through-
out, and  if  the  words  are  remarkably  significant  in  con-
nexion with  him  (a  fact  in  no  way  indicated  in  the  scripts
which  she  had  seen),  then  some  further  explanation  of
then  insertion  in  then  context  is  obviously  required.
It  is  strange  that  anyone  who  adventures  on  the  field
of  *  scientific  '  criticism  should  fail  to  grasp  an  issue  so
simple.

As  to  "  Hair  in  a  Temple,"  Dr.  Tuckett  regards  it
as  "  almost  scientifically  illegitimate "  for  Mr.  Balfour  to
use  the  words  "as  a  matter  of  fact"  in  his  statement
that  Berenice  "is  connected  by  very  definite  links  with
Dr.  Verrall's  essays  on  Dante  and  Statius  ".  .  .  Now,
either  these  "  very  definite "  links  exist  or  they  do  not.
If  they  do — and  most  people  will  readily  take  Mr.  Balfour's
word  on  the  matter — the  connexion  in  question  is  removed
from  the  region  of  opinion  and  becomes  a  matter  of  fact  ;
and  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  it  was  "  illegitimate  "  for  him
to  say  so.  It  would  indeed  have  been  illegitimate  to
foist  in  the  statement  as  any  part  of  the  evidence  for  the
contention  that  Dr.  Verrall  was  concerned  in  the  author-
ship of  the  scripts,  but  this  Mr.  Balfour  did  not  do  ;
on  the  contrary,  he  states  that  his  inability  to  give  the
facts  "  diminishes  [the]  evidential  utility  "  of  the  scripts.
Why  the  aUeged  illegitimacy  is  described  as  almost  scien-
tific ("  almost  scientifically  illegitimate  ")  we  shall  probably
never  know.  Or  is  "  scientifically  almost  illegitimate  "  what
is  meant  ?

Dr.  Tuckett's  paper  concludes  with  some  general
remarks,  which  are  distributed  under  six  heads.  On  the
whole  they  are  not  very  helpful.  I  adopt  the  numbering
of  his  paragraphs.

(I.)  With  a  rashness  not  entirely  new  to  us  in  the  writings


488


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


of  '  scientific  1  men  on  psychical  subjects,  he  accuses
Mr.  Balfour  and  myself  of  having  come  to  our  conclusion
"  without  considering  and  discussing  the  claims  of  any
other  passages  in  modern  and  ancient  literature.".  .  .
How  can  he  know  that  no  other  passage  has  been  con-
sidered ?  And  what  would  be  the  profit  of  discussing
in  a  paper  (if  that  is  what  is  meant)  passages  which
appeared  not  to  fit  the  case  ?  Was  every  river  that  anyone
ever  crossed  to  be  passed  in  review  ?  Would  he  have  the
absurd  unsuitability  of  the  Styx  and  Rubicon  solemnly
demonstrated  ?  Was  even  the  inappropriateness  of  Bunyans
river  to  be  made  clear  until  someone  should  have  main-
tained the  contrary  ?  Surely  it  is  for  the  critic  himself
to  find  the  River  which  will  offer  a  more  plausible
solution  of  the  problem  than  the  one  with  which  he
quarrels.

While  on  this  topic  Dr.  Tuckett  takes  occasion  to
observe : — "  It  is  amusing  to  note  how  seriously  the
Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield  discusses  whether  Dr.  Verrall  or
some  form  of  telepathy  is  the  more  probable  explanation
of  the  script  :  and  he  talks  as  if  he  knew  a  great  deal
about  Telepathy,  although — as  I  continue  to  maintain
— Telepathy  itself  has  never  yet  been  scientifically
established."  1  Dr.  Tuckett,  as  we  have  seen,  is  not
a  severely  logical  thinker,  and  the  implications  which
underlie  this  modest  sentence  may  have  escaped  him.
What  he  writes  seems  to  come  to  this  : — I,  Dr.  Tuckett,
am  of  opinion  that  Telepathy  is  a  fond  thing  vainly
imagined.  Some  people  write  as  though  they  knew  a
good  deal  about  it,  but  there  is  nothing  known  in  its
favour  that  is  worth  knowing.  This  is  indeed  only  my
opinion  ;  nevertheless,  so  long  as  I,  Dr.  Tuckett,  continue
to  maintain  (that  is  to  say,  hold  or  assert)  this  mere
opinion,  it  is  ridiculous  for  any  one  to  write  as  though
Telepathy  were  an  established  fact.

I  like  a  modest  man,  but  Dr.  Tuckett  pleases  me  too
much. As  to  Telepathy,  if  it  has  not  yet  come  to  his

1  For  Professor  Bergson's  views  on  the  question  which  Dr.  Tuckett
implicitly  raises  here  by  his  use  of  the  word  "  scientifically,"  see  the
references  given  in  the  footnote  on  p.  490,  infra.


lxx.]  A  Discussion  of  the  Willett  Scripts.


489


ears  that  it  is  a  well-established  fact,  it  would  be  well  for
him  to  study  the  evidence  which  has  been  accumulated,1
or,  better  still,  to  make  some  experiments.  It  is,  how-
ever, only  fair  to  warn  him  that  he  must  be  prepared
for  the  worst,  that  is  to  say  for  conviction,  and  that
conviction  on  this  point  might  lead  him  to  the  very
abyss  of  superstition.

(II.)  The  critic's  description  of  the  present  case  as
a  single  experiment  "  appears  to  show  that  he  is  in
almost  total  ignorance  of  what  the  S.P.R.  has  been  doing
for  now  many  years  past.  One  is  reminded  of  the  man  in
Punch  who,  when  asked  if  he  had  read  a  certain  book,
replied,  "  We  don't  read — we  tonte."  Still  it  was  not  too
much  to  expect  Dr.  Tuckett  to  read  with  attention  the
paper  which  he  undertakes  to  criticise.  On  p.  236  (Proceed-
ings, Part  LXIX.)  Mr.  Balfour  had  written  : — "  The  scripts
which  we  owe  to  the  group  of  automatists  of  whom  Mrs.
Verrall,  Miss  Verrall,  and  Mrs.  Willett  are  the  chief,  go
back  for  many  years  now,  and  require  to  be  considered
together  and  as  a  whole.  A  long  and  laborious  study  of
them  carried  on  from  this  point  of  view  has  brought  me
slowly  but  surely  to  a  conviction  that  there  is  much  in
them  which  cannot  be  satisfactorily  explained  except  upon
the  spiritistic  hypothesis."

Dr.  Tuckett's  remarks  on  my  own  final  conviction
betray  an  inability  to  understand  this  cumulative  effect
of  a  large  body  of  evidence  pointing  in  the  same  direction,
and  how  one  strong  piece  of  evidence  following  on  many
others  may  transform  doubt  into  conviction.  Indeed  by
his  constant  use  of  the  word  '  scientific,'  which  is  as
much  out  of  place  hi  our  present  inquiry  as  it  would  be
in  a  court  of  law  at  a  trial  for  murder,  he  seems  to  be
unaware  that  there  are  numerous  ways  by  which  the
mind  may  arrive  at  reasonable  conviction  besides  those  of

1  In  The  Evidence  for  the  Supernatural  :  a  critical  study  made  with
"uncommon  sense,"  published  in  1911,  Dr.  Tuckett  confessed  that  he
had  "  not  made  any  detailed  study  of  the  subject  "  of  cross-corre-
spondences. He  seems  not  to  have  repaired  the  omission  since,  and
indeed  to  have  little  first-hand  acquaintance  with  the  work  of  the  S.P.R.
A  notice  of  the  book  appeared  in  the  Journal  for  May,  1912.


490


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[fart


the  laboratory  and  dissecting-room  or  of  mathematical
demonstration.1

(III.)  "  The  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield's  note  on  the  incident
is  remarkably  characteristic  of  the  sort  of  effect  which
emotional  bias  has  on  a  person.  What  has  convinced
him  much  more  than  any  sound  scientific  evidence  is
obviously  the  form  of  the  script  in  which  he  thinks  he
can  recognise  personal  peculiarities."  There  are,  as  we
know,  many  who  hold  it  for  an  axiom  that  those  who
are  convinced  of  the  reality  of  communication  from  the
spirit  world  must  ipso  facto  have  been  led  to  their  con-
viction mainly  by  "  emotional  bias."  How  far  Dr.
Tuckett  may  be  the  victim  of  this  curious  '  scientific  '
prejudice  we  need  not  inquire,  for  it  is  clear  that  in  my
own  unfortunate  case  he  believes  the  scientific  laws  of
scientific  logic  force  him  to  the  conclusion.  It  is  not  worth
while  to  examine  this  logic  beyond  pointing  out  its  major
premiss  :  all  men  who  recognise  personal  peculiarities  in
scripts  are  influenced  by  emotional  bias  !  If  he  had  been
less  anxious  to  make  this  insinuation,  he  might  perhaps
have  remembered  the  opening  words  of  my  Note  on  the
case  {Proceedings,  Part  LXIX.,  p.  244),  which  I  beg  leave
to  quote  : — "  In  a  closely  reasoned  and  characteristically
lucid  argument  Mr.  Balfour  has  shown  good  grounds  for
his  belief  that  the  late  Dr.  Verrall  is  the  original  source
of  the  scripts  which  are  here  brought  to  our  notice.  For
this  conclusion  there  are  yet  other  reasons.  ..."

(IV.)  This  paragraph,  which  is  specially  prepared  for
infantile  digestion,  calls  for  no  remark.

(V.)  So far as one can disentangle the materials  of

1  See  the  admirable  discussion  of  this  point  in  Professor  Bergson's
Presidential  Address,  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXVI.,  pp.  464-466  (or  in  the
English  translation,  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXVII.,  pp.  159-161).  With
regard  to  Telepathy  he  says  in  this  passage  [after  reviewing  the  work
of  the  S.P.R.  and  noting  the  care  with  which  the  evidence  has  been
tested],  "  I  am  led  to  believe  in  Telepathy,  just  as  I  believe  in  the
defeat  of  the  Invincible  Armada.  My  belief  is  not  the  mathematical
certainty  that  the  demonstration  of  Pythagoras'  theorem  gives  me,
it  is  not  the  physical  certainty  that  I  have  of  the  law  of  the  fall  of
bodies,  but  it  is  at  least  all  the  certainty  that  we  obtain  in  a  historical
or  judicial  matter."


lxx.]  A  Discussion  of  the  Willett  Scripts.


491


this  illuminating  paragraph,  the  syllogism  appears  to  be
as  follows: — Major  Premiss:  "You  cannot  get  out  of  the
mind  anything  the  elements  of  which  have  not  been  put
into  the  mind  at  some  previous  time." — Minor  Premiss  :
If  you  agree  with  Mr.  Bayfield,  there  is  no  evidence
that  one  mind  can  rout  about  in  another  person's  mind
[selecting  and  abstracting  thoughts  suitable  for  some
purpose  of  its  own]. — Conclusion  :  Therefore  the  thoughts
[combinations  of  elementary  concepts]  contained  in  Mrs.
Willett's  scripts  could  not  have  been  conveyed  to  her
mind  by  another  mind.

Thus  we  see  that  one  mind  cannot  communicate  new
ideas  to  another.  It  must  be  admitted  that  there  are
cases  in  which  this  is  lamentably  true.

(VI.)  The  Oversubjectivity  (if  a  German  word  may  be
pardoned)  of  Dr.  Tuckett's  concluding  paragraph  is  mildly
interesting,  but  needs  no  discussion.  Its  general  intent
is  to  convey  a  friendly  warning  to  the  correspondent  to
whom  the  paper  is  addressed,  and  the  warning  is  based
on  the  suppressed  major  premiss  :  To  be  "  spiritistically
inclined "  is  evil.


492


F.  0.  8.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


REVIEW.

The  Unconscious,  The  Fundamentals  of  Human  Personality,  Nor-
mal and  Abnormal.  By  Morton  Prince,  M.D.,  LL.D.,
Emeritus  Professor  of  Diseases  of  the  Nervous  System,  Tufts
College  Medical  School  ;  Consisting  Physician  to  the  Boston
City  Hospital.  (New  York  :  The  Macmillan  Co.,  1914.
Pp.  xiii,  549.)

A  new  book  by  Dr.  Morton  Prince  is  something  of  an  event  for
the  many  readers  of  his  fascinating  Dissociation  of  a  Personality,
and  for  all  who  are  interested  in  the  problem  of  human  person-
ality in  a  practical  way.  For  he  is  a  leader  among  the  all  too
scanty  band  of  those  who  have  gone  out  into  the  untamed  jungle
of  concrete  facts,  and  tested  their  psychological  theories  by  their
working,  i.e.  by  the  therapeutic  success  of  their  applications,  and
this  puts  his  theorizing,  like  that  of  Freud  (with  whom  he  is  in
partial  agreement),  into  a  different  category  from  that  of  merely
academic  psychologists.  Moreover,  the  discoveries  he  has  to
report,  though  they  seem  at  first  sight  as  complicated  as  they
are  strange,  and  fit  ill  into  the  accepted  framework  of  traditional
ideas,  constrain  one  to  feel  that  it  is  not  armchair  introspec-
tion by  professional  psychologists  of  the  normal  mind  (which
they  always  identify  with  their  own),  nor  even  laboratory  experi-
ments (usually  conducted  under  conditions  too  artificial  to  dis-
play the  mind's  normal  working),  and  least  of  all  philosophic  re-
flection on  the  metaphysical  implications  of  the  notions  of  '  mind.'
'  self,'  '  soul,'  etc.,  but  only  the  successful  handling  of  patients
who  are  abnormal  only  in  exaggerating  universal  tendencies,
that  can  make  any  real  advance  towards  a  scientific  solution  of
the  riddle  of  human  personality.


LXX.]


Review.


493


The  claim  which  Dr.  Prince  has  upon  the  attention  of  those
interested  in  this  problem  rests  essentially  on  his  method  :  for
this  involves  the  principle  that  our  preconceptions  are  to  be  con-
trolled by  the  facts  which  observation  and  experiment  reveal,
and  to  be  tested  by  their  success  in  handling  them.  This  also
means  that  the  notions  we  employ  to  interpret  the  facts  must
be  conceived  as  plastic,  and  modified  whenever  the  facts  demand
it.  As  Dr.  Prince  well  says  (p.  422),  "  until  we  have  wider  and
more  exact  knowledge,  it  is  well  not  to  theorize,  and  still  more
not  to  dogmatize,"  and  all  the  terms  employed  must  be  treated
as  provisional  and  open  to  correction.  For  Avhile  some  existing
terms  must  be  used  to  describe  the  observed  facts,  their
traditional  meaning  has  no  authority  as  against  facts  and
experiments.

Dr.  Prince's  present  volume  is  the  first  instalment  of  a
theoretic  discussion  of  the  stores  of  evidence  he  has  collected,
which  he  promised  in  the  preface  of  his  Dissociation  of  a
Personality.  Actually  it  is  part  of  his  lecture  courses  on  abnormal
psychology  in  the  Tufts  Medical  School,  and  bears  traces  of
its  origin  in  a  certain  diffuseness,  lack  of  arrangement  and
repetitions.  It  is  also  more  technical  than  the  Dissociation,
and  though  Dr.  Prince  often  draws  apt  illustrations  from  the
wealth  of  his  clinical  experience,  these  references  are  usually
of  a  tantalizing  briefness.  But,  as  a  whole,  the  book  is  very
stimulating.

Critical  comment  should  first  be  directed  upon  the  tools
with  which  Dr.  Prince  operates,  viz.  the  extant  notions  relative
to  psychological  phenomena.  For  such  comment  may  be
helpful  by  stimulating  him  to  remodel  the  extant  terminology
in  the  light  of  his  unrivalled  experience.  I  will  attempt,
therefore,  to  express  my  sense  of  the  grievous  inadequacy
of  our  old  notions,  in  the  hope  that  he  may  be  enabled  to
improve  on  them,  and  without  fear  of  giving  offence  to  one
who  has,  I  am  sure,  only  used  them  faute  de  mieux.

We  may  begin  our  critical  reflections  with  the  notion  of
the  '  unconscious ,'  which,  after  being  rendered  fashionable  by
E.  von  Hartmann's  metaphysical  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious,
has  since  been  used  by  psychology  in  a  great  variety  of  senses.
Von  Hartmann  himself  had  late  in  life  to  recognize  no  less  than
nineteen  distinct  senses  of  '  unconscious,'  though  he  continued


494


F.  C.  8.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


to  maintain  that  these  ambiguities  had  not  vitiated  his  original
doctrine.  Dr.  Morton  Prince  is  concerned  with  several  of  these.
The  term  '  unconscious  '  appears  to  denote  (1)  a  "  storehouse
of  neurographic  dispositions,"  inferred  from  the  phenomena  of
memory  (p.  229),  (2)  whatever  is  devoid  of  the  attributes  of  con-
sciousness (p.  249),  (3)  co-conscious  or  sub-conscious  ideas  (ibid.),
and  (4),  most  strictly  and  properly,  a  kind  of  the  subconscious,
opposed  to  the  co-conscious,  and  occurring  in  the  two  forms  of
neural  dispositions  and  of  neural  processes  (p.  253).  So  under-
stood, it  "  rather  than  the  conscious  is  the  important  factor  in
personality  and  intelligence  "  (p.  262).

The  subconscious,  therefore,  in  Dr.  Prince's  most  formal  ter-
minology (though  not  in  bis  title),  becomes  the  generic  notion
contrasted  with  consciousness.  The  '  sub-  '  in  it  is  taken  to  mean
'  beneath,'  and  it  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  applied  to  '  dimly  conscious  '
or  '  marginal  '  processes  in  the  '  fringe  '  of  consciousness,  but
only  to  the  '  ultra-marginal  '  (pp.  343-52).  That  subconscious
processes  go  on  is  attested  (inter  alia)  by  their  subsequent  re-
covery in  memory  under  hypnosis  or  in  dreams.  Their  existence
leads,  however,  to  such  verbally  contradictory  statements  as  that
"  the  whole  content  or  field  of  consciousness  at  any  given  moment
includes  not  only  considerably  more  than  that  which  is  within  the
field  of  attention  but  more  than  is  within  the  field  of  awareness  "  1
(?=  consciousness),  viz.  "conscious  states  of  which  the  personal
consciousness  is  not  even  dimly  aware  "  (p.  351).  These,  how-
ever, are  more  properly  '  co-conscious  '  processes.  Further,  it  is
admitted  that  "  there  is  a  constant  shifting  or  interchange  of
elements  going  on  between  the  field  of  attention  and  the  marginal
and  the  ultra-marginal  zone  "  (p.  344),  and  that  "  the  distinction
between  the  conscious  and  the  subconscious  "  is  not  always  "  sharp
and  precise  "  (p.  420,  cf.  pp.  243,  347).

In  view  of  the  modification  of  subsequent  action  by  unconscious
and  subconscious  processes,  and  the  proofs  of  their  registration,
conservation  and  possible  reproduction,  Dr.  Prince  feels  entitled
to  regard  "  conscious  memory  as  only  one  type  of  memory "
(p.  3).  It  follows  that  "  the  inability  to  recall  an  experience
is  no  evidence  whatever  that  it  is  not  conserved,"  even  when
our  actual methods fail  to  recover  it, though  it  would  be

1  The  author's  italics.


LXX.]


Review.


495


exaggeration  to  say,  on  the  present  evidence,  that  everything
is  conserved  (p.  84).

It  follows,  however,  that  "  ideas  which  have  passed  out  of  mind
must  be  conserved  through  some  sort  of  residuum  "  (p.  109),  which
the  author  prefers  to  conceive  as  neurograms  or  '  traces  '  left  in
the  brain  forming  a  "  functioning  system  corresponding  to  the
system  of  ideas  of  the  original  mental  process  and  capable  of  re-
producing it  "  (p.  121).  This  is  necessary  because  "  there  is  no
evidence  that  co-conscious  ideas  have  a  continuous  existence,"
and  they  are,  therefore,  "  inadequate  to  account  for  the  whole
of  the  conservation  of  life's  experiences "  (p.  112).  Frederic
Myers's  theory  of  a  subliminal  mind  is  rejected  as  an  unnecessary
"  metaphysical  hypothesis,"  and  the  theory  that  the  seat  of  the
'  conservation  '  is  psychical  is  rejected  as  "  transcending  experi-
ence "  (pp.  114-7).  Dr.  Prince,  however,  candidly  admits  that
his  materialistic  "  neurograms  are  pure  theoretical  conceptions
and  have  never  been  demonstrated  by  objective  methods  of
physical  research  "  (p.  132).

By  '  co-conscious  ideas  '  Dr.  Prince  means  "  a  coexisting  dis-
sociated consciousness  of  which  the  personal  consciousness  is  not
aware  "  (p.  249).  He  seems  to  have  fully  established  its  exist-
ence by  an  abundance  of  ingenious  experiments  and  observations
which  he  relates.  He  denies,  however,  that  normally  these  co-
conscious  processes  form  a  self  (pp.  256-7,  348,  cf .  p.  169).  Largely,
it  would  seem,  on  the  authority  of  the  hypnotic  self  of  "  Miss  B.,"
who  denied  that  the  pronoun  I  could  be  applied  to  the  co-
conscious  processes  accompanying  her  ordinary  life,  and  declared
that  they  were  better  described  as  unconnected,  discrete  sensa-
tions, impressions  and  emotions,  not  synthesized  into  a  personality,
though  the  hypnotic  I  could  subsequently  acquire  and  remember
them  (p.  348).

It  will  have  been  noted  that  Dr.  Prince  makes  much  use  of  the
term  '  idea  '  in  his  psychological  descriptions,  but,  I  cannot  help
thinking,  without  due  appreciation  of  its  essential  trickiness,  and
without  explaining  its  relation  to  '  process.'  Thus  (p.  312)  a
'  perception  '  and  an  '  idea  '  of  an  object  are  equated,  and  said
to  be  usually  complex  (cf.  p.  315).  '  Perceptions  '  are  memory
images  synthesized  with  sensations  (p.  316).  But  when  percep-
tion is  regarded  as  a  process  (p.  321),  associations  with  previous
experiences  "  give  the  ideas  meaning." This  '  context '  is  itself


496


F.  G.  8.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


a  process,  and  may  also  be  regarded  as  an  '  attitude  of  mind  '
(p.  321),  and  is  part  of  the  idea's  conscious  content  (p.  323).  It
is  (quite  truly)  pointed  out  that  the  psychology  of  meaning  has
not  been  properly  worked  out,  and  that  to  conceive  '  ideas  '  as
compounded  of  '  perception  '  and  '  meaning  '  is  too  static,  because
they  shade  into  one  another  and  should  be  regarded  as  one  dyna-
mic process  (p.  327).  This  is  profoundly  true,  but  does  not  suffice
to  eradicate  a  feeling  that  Dr.  Prince  has  not  adequately  brought
out  the  vital  differences  between  the  psychological  and  the  logical
sense  of  '  idea,'  and  between  the  verbal  or  '  dictionary  '  meaning
of  an  idea,  which  is  static  and  supposed  to  be  fixed,  but  is  not
a  psychic  fact,  and  the  actual  or  personal  meaning,  which  is  a
dynamic  process  and  a  psychic  event.1

But  the  gravest  objection  to  the  term  '  idea  '  is  that  it  is  funda-
mentally incompatible  with  the  functional  or  '  process  '  view  of
consciousness  and  life,  Avhich  is  what  Dr.  Prince  really  believes
in.  It  irresistibly  suggests  that  '  ideas  '  are  thing-like  entities,
which  can  wander  about  on  their  own  in  a  mind  of  which  they
are  not  integral  parts,  and  possess  a  permanent  existence  and
identity,  so  that  they  can  pass  into  and  out  of  '  consciousness,'
officially  retaining  the  title  of  '  our  thoughts  '  even  when  we  no
longer  think  them  or  know  anything  about  them  (cf.  p.  Ill),
'  associating  '  themselves  with  others,  capable  of  '  recall  '  (cf .
p.  6),  becoming  '  dormant  '  and  being  '  stored  up  '  in  memory,
like  so  many  bulbs,  or  '  conserved,'  like  pots  of  jam.  All  this
is  the  old  '  Associationist  '  mythology,  which  has  often  been  re-
pudiated by  the  more  philosophic  psychologists,  and  seems  singu-
larly unsuited  to  interpret  the  complicated  facts  Dr.  Prince  has
observed.  He  himself  at  times  recognizes  this,  as  when  he  argues
for  the  existence  of  physiological  conservation  on  the  ground
that  the  conservation  can  hardly  be  psychical  (p.  113  f.).  More-
over, the  intellectualistic  colouring  of  '  idea '  renders  the  term
very  inappropriate  to  processes  which  admittedly  are,  always
more  or  less,  and  often  intensely,  pervaded  by  emotion.  But
the  climax  of  awkwardness  is  reached  by  this  phraseology  when
it  is  driven  to  declare  that  "  neurograms  are  concepts  "  though
unconscious  (p.  148).  Surely  '  concepts  '  must  be  psychical,  and
the  confusion  of  the  psychical  and  the  physical  could  hardly  go
further.

1  Cf.  my  Formal  Logic,  Ch.  II.,  §  3,  Ch.  VII.,  §  9.


LXX.]


Review.


497


It  follows  from  these  objections  to  the  notion  of  '  ideas  '  that
it  cannot  be  lightly  conceded  that  they  can  form  '  complexes,'
which  are  syntheses  of  '  elemental  '  ideas  (p.  265),  even  though
Dr.  Prince  agrees  with  the  Freudians  that  this  notion  has  great
clinical  value  in  psychotherapeutics  (p.  288).  It  need  not  be
disputed  that  patients  may  often  behave  as  if  '  complexes  '  existed,
but  the  fact  that  they  may  be  subconscious  as  well  as  conscious
is  surely  an  additional  problem,  and  is  not  easy  to  reconcile  with
the  argument  that  '  neurograms  '  must  be  assumed  because  there
is  no  sufficient  evidence  that  subconscious  ideas  have  a  continuous
existence  (p.  112).

On  the  whole,  our  terminological  survey  does  not  lead  to  the
conclusion  that  Dr.  Prince's  tools,  the  notions  by  which  he  tries
to  interpret  the  facts,  are  particularly  well  adapted  to  his  pur-
pose. And  as  he  gives  such  abundant  proofs  of  candour  and
openmindedness,  I  am  emboldened  to  make  him  a  present  of  a
series  of  suggestions  of  alternative  interpretations  which  might,
perhaps,  do  better  service.

(1)  In  the  first  place  is  it  not  rather  hazardous  to  assume,  as
Dr.  Prince  does  at  the  outset  (p.  1),  that  the  conception  of
mechanism  must  provide  an  adequate  clue  to  the  nature  of  mind  ?
If  the  term  is  used  at  all  strictly,  it  seems  to  leave  no  room  for
the  specifically  biological  nature  of  mental  functioning,  to  which
all  the  '  mechanisms  '  found  in  the  body  must  be  subordinate.
For  they  must  all  conduce  to  the  maintenance  of  life,  and  be  under-
stood as  so  conducive.  It  is  a  far  cry,  therefore,  from  mechanism
to  psychology,  and  the  value  of  mechanical  analogies  in  psychic
life  is  far  from  self-evident.

(2)  It  may  be  suggested  that  seriously  misleading  implications
lurk  in  the  notion  of  '  dissociation.'  The  word  seems  to  imply
a  mind  which  is  constructed  by  the  '  association  '  of  simpler  '  ele-
ments,' into  which  it  may  again  be  broken  up  ;  or  else,  a  unitary
mind,  which  can  somehow  fall  to  pieces.  In  either  case  it  is  in-
sinuated that  the  '  association  '  is  normal,  and  the  '  dissociation  '
abnormal  and  morbid.

But  are  not  the  so-called  '  elements  '  of  mind  manifest  fictions,
sheer  conveniences  of  description,  to  which  no  biological  signifi-
cance can  possibly  attach  ?  No  mind  can  possibly  maintain  its
existence  on  earth  unless  it  contrives  effectively  to  control  and


498


F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


guide  the  behaviour  of  its  body,  and  the  speculations  which
compound  the  mind  out  of  '  elements  '  like  '  cognition,'
'  conation,'  and  '  feeling,'  analyse  the  mind  into  abstractions
which  are  incapable  of  independent  existence,  and,  what  is
even  worse,  contain  no  hint  of  the  sort  of  unity  every  mental
process  must  have,  viz.  relevance  to  some  more  or  less  important
vital  process  or  purpose.  The  simplest  and  most  primitive
mental  processes,  therefore,  must  have  a  functional  unity
which  is  not  decomposable  into  the  abstractions  of  psycho-
logical analysis.

This  need  for  vital  adaptation,  however,  does  not  demand  or
guarantee  any  complete  or  metaphysical  unity  of  mind,  such  as
many  philosophers  have  postulated.  Its  requirements  would  be
met  by  a  mental  life  that  consisted  of  a  series  of  impulses  and
responses  to  stimulation  each  of  which  acted  itself  out  indepen-
dently, discontinuously,  and  separately,  and  yet  so  appropriately
as  to  conserve  the  life  of  the  organism.  Now,  curiously  enough,
such  is  in  actual  fact  the  dominant  aspect  of  mental  life.  Most
minds  live  by  their  instincts  and  impulses,  and  not  by  their  reason,
and  in  the  lower  (or  immature)  minds,  whether  of  adults,  chil-
dren, or  animals,  there  is  a  strongly  marked  growth  of  discon-
tinuousness  and  inconsequence  the  lower  we  go.  And  even  the
most  highly  systematized  human  minds  are  by  no  means  com-
pletely unified  ;  even  the  most  consistent  characters  fall  far  short
of  exhibiting  complete  mental  harmony  and  congruity  in  all  their
acts.  Consequently  the  unification  of  their  '  personality '  or
'  self  '  cannot  truly  be  said  to  have  been  achieved.

It  follows  that  when  they  suffer  '  dissociation  '  they  are  not
doing  anything  out  of  the  Avay.  They  are  simply  reverting  to,
or  exhibiting,  a  lower  and  more  primitive  organization  of  men-
tality. '  Dissociation  '  in  this  sense  is  normal  ;  it  exists  every-
where more  or  less,  and  is  not  a  morbid  disruption  of  a  normal
unity.  We  need  not,  then,  be  surprised  to  find  vast  amounts
of  it  in  every  one.  Wherever  there  are  mental  processes  imper-
fectly coordinated  with  others,  mental  conflicts,  incongruities,
and  inconsistencies  of  any  kind,  impulses,  moods,  dreams,  etc.,
there  is  '  dissociation.'  The  morbid  dissociations  which  Dr.
Prince  has  studied  so  brilliantly  are  throughout  continuous  with
common  and  normal  phenomena,  and  differ  from  them  chiefly
in  intensity. What  the  psychologist  has  to  explain,  therefore,


LXX.]


Review.


499


is  not  dissociation  so  much  as  unification,  and  the  formation
of  a  (relatively)  stable  and  well-balanced  '  personality.'

(3)  It  would  seem  to  follow  that,  strictly,  every  soul  is  not  one
but  many,  and  a  battle-ground  for  hosts  of  inveterate  habits  and
ancestral  impulses,  and  that  its  '  unity  '  is  really  an  illusion.  And
no  doubt  the  absolute  sort  of  unity  which  metaphysicians  used
to  assume  can  no  longer  be  regarded  as  scientifically  admissible.
Still  the  belief  in  a  unitary  soul  is  not  necessarily  disposed  of.
It  has,  no  doubt,  to  be  considerably  modified  in  view  of  the  new
facts,  and  must  not  be  deduced  a  -priori,  but  verified  empirically  ;
but  I  would  put  it  to  Dr.  Prince  that  it  retains  some  truth,  or,
at  any  rate,  appreciable  utility.  In  particular,  his  own  facts
do  not  seem  to  warrant  either  (a)  his  acceptance  of  physiological
pseudo-solutions  of  psychological  problems,  or  (b)  his  scorn  of
the  '  soul  '  and  the  '  subliminal  self.'  For  whereas  the  former
cannot  be  made  to  explain '  anything,  the  latter  when  properly
formulated  may  explain  many  things  which  at  present  puzzle
him.

(a)  So  long  as  no  satisfactory  and  really  intelligible  theory  of
the  relation  of  body  and  mind  is  extant,  hypothetical  '  neuro-
grams  '  seem  quite  ineffectual  in  accounting  for  the  psychological
facts  of  memory.

For  what  after  all  is  a  '  neurogram  '  supposed  to  be  ?  Nothing
but  a  physical  alteration  in  bodily  tissue.  But  how  can  any  such
alteration  in  any  way  help  to  generate  the  judgment  '  I  remem-
ber experiencing  something  very  like  my  present  perception  '  ?
Have  we  the  least  notion  of  what  the  '  I  '  may  be  as  a  '  ne myo-
gram '  ?  Are  we  in  the  least  able  to  trace  any  specific  parallelism
between  variations  in  the  flow  of  blood  in  the  brain  and  the  com-
ings and  goings  of  '  ideas  '  in  the  mind  ?  Only  negatively.  We
can  after  a  fashion  understand  that  if  the  bodily  mechanisms
are  instruments  for  the  expression  of  'psychical  energies  normally
transmitted  through  them,  any  damage  done  to  a  physical  mechan-
ism may,  by  blocking  the  physical  channels,  arrest  and  shut  off
the  psychical  phenomena  mediated  by  it,  at  all  events  temporarily
and  until  either  the  mischief  is  repaired  or  alternative  modes  of
expression  have  grown  up  (how  ?)  in  the  form  of  new  mechanisms
or  of  old  ones  put  to  new  uses.  This  would  explain  the  observed
fact  that  psychic  functions  which  are  lost  in  consequence  of  in-
juries to  the  brain  reappear  if  life  continues  long  enough  for  the


500


F.  C.  8.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


damage  to  be  repaired.  As  Dr.  Prince  himself  points  out  (pp.
232-3),  "  the  decerebrate  unconscious  (?)  animal  performs  about
all  the  movements  performed  by  the  normal  animal.  .  .  .  Even
spontaneity  which  at  one  time  was  supposed  to  be  lost  it  is  now
agreed  returns,  if  the  animal  is  kept  alive  long  enough."  These
facts  seem  to  render  it  imperative  that  the  '  transmission  '  theory,
as  James  has  called  it,  of  the  relation  of  the  psychical  to  the
physical  should  be  seriously  considered  as  an  alternative  to  the
materialistic  '  production  '  theory.  It  has  the  logical  advantages
of  being  incapable  of  refutation  by  any  conceivable  physiological
evidence,  of  accounting  for  a  number  of  admitted  facts  which
do  not  fit  at  all  well  into  the  materialistic  scheme,  and  of  leaving
room  for  the  evidence  of  discarnate  psychic  action  which,  though
not  yet  admitted  by  official  science,  is  far  from  contemptible  as
evidence.

At  present,  however,  it  is  better  to  rely  chiefly  on  the  second
of  these  grounds  in  order  to  contest  the  exclusive  claims  of
the  '  neurogram  '  theory.  It  fails  to  account  for  a  large
number  of  undisputed  facts.  Taking  for  example  the  familiar
fact  of  recollection,  Dr.  Prince  is  compelled  to  regard  it  as
"  only  a  more  perfect  kind  of  conscious  memory  "  (p.  144).
It  is  difficult  to  understand  this,  as  recollection  appears  to
have  all  the  defects  of  memory  ;  it  may  be  '  dim  '  as  well  as
'  clear,'  and  false  as  well  as  correct.  Moreover  '  recollection,'
as  defined,  does  not  seem  to  be  the  real  thing  ;  Dr.  Prince
means  by  it  merely  the  '  localization  '  or  placing  of  memories
in  space  and  time.  But  this  entirely  omits  the  active  recol-
lection, the  conscious  striving  to  remember.  When  I  say  '  I
tried  to  recollect  the  plot  of  my  dream,  but  only  got  dis-
jointed memories,'  this  is  (like  the  other  facts  of  self-conscious-
ness and  the  experiences  of  activity)  prima  facie  evidence  of
the  activity  of  a  '  self,'  which  has  to  be  explained,  and  is
not  to  be  interpreted  by  '  neurograms.'

Lastly  and  most  fundamentally,  it  may  be  contended  that
the  explanation  of  memories  by  '  neurograms  '  is  essentially
illusory,  because  memory,  the  very  fact  to  be  explained,  is
implied  in  the  very  notion  of  a  neurogram.  For  what  is  this
remarkable  capacity  of  a  physical  body  to  retain  an  impress  of
its  past  experiences  and  to  have  its  subsequent  behaviour
modified  thereby,  but  a  close  analogue  of  memory  ? We  may


LXX.]


Review.


501


assume  that  it  differs  from  what  is  ordinarily  termed  memory
in  being  unconscious  ;  but  Dr.  Prince  himself  has  taught  us
how  risky  it  is  to  assume  that  a  process  is  unconscious  merely
because  the  dominant  personality  does  not  now  remember  it,
and  we  should  remember  that  it  may  only  seem  unconscious
to  us  because  we  are  unable  (as  yet)  to  get  at  it  from  the
inside,  and  to  get  at  the  mind  behind  the  physical  changes,
as  we  get  at  the  minds  behind  the  actions  of  our  fellow  men.
The  essential  mystery  of  memory  is  that  the  past  should
not  be  dead,  but  should  continue  to  modify  present  action  :
that  in  fact  it  does  this  is  familiar  to  us  from  our  personal
experience,  though  we  do  not  yet  understand  how  it  is  done.
It  is  '  memory  '  therefore  which  gives  a  clue  to  the  registration
of  '  neurograms,'  and  not  vice  versa.

(b)  I  now  feel  in  a  position  to  break  a  lance  on  behalf
of  the  theories  about  human  personality  which  we  owe  to  the
genius  of  Frederic  Myers.  And  to  begin  with  I  would  enter  a
protest  against  dismissing  his  subliminal  self  as  an  unnecessary
metaphysical  hypothesis.  If  ever  a  psychologist  formed  his
ideas  empirically  and  in  close  contact  with  the  facts  accessible,
it  was  Myers,  and  his  ideas  seem  to  me  to  be  thoroughly
legitimate  and  susceptible  of  empirical  verification.  Similarly
I  am  unable  to  understand  why  Dr.  Prince  should  regard  the
notion  of  a  '  soul  '  as  involving  any  '  transcendence  of  experi-
ence.' Metaphysicians  no  doubt  used  to  conceive  the  soul  as
something  beyond  its  activities,  and  as  somehow  '  underlying  '
and  '  having  '  them,  and  inaccessible  to  empirical  observation.
But  that  was  only  because  their  metaphysics  were  bad,  and
everywhere  assumed  a  relation  of  '  substances  '  to  '  attributes  '
which  was  essentially  unverifiable,  and  rendered  all  '  substances  '
unknowable  as  such.  Apart  from  this  mistake  there  is,  as
Mr.  M'Dougall  has  so  strongly  urged,  no  intrinsic  reason  why
the  '  soul '  should  not  be  conceived  as  a  principle  of  scientific
investigation  and  be  used  to  interpret  empirical  facts.  Only
of  course,  before  we  do  so,  we  must  radically  disabuse  our
minds  of  any  belief  that  we  can  know  a  priori  all  about  the
constitution  of  a  soul  and  the  limits  of  its  powers.  We  must
say  rather  that  a  soul  '  is  '  what  it  does,  and  that  what  it
does  has  to  be  learnt  from  experience.

It  must  not  therefore  be  assumed (as  the  metaphysicians


502


F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


were  led  to  do  by  very  superficial  evidence)  that  the  soul  is
necessarily  coextensive  with  the  passing  consciousness  of  the
moment,  or  one,  or  immutable,  or  even  personal,  or  again
that  the  traditional  distinctions  recognized  in  it  adequately
represent  the  real  facts.  On  the  contrary  its  organization  and
behaviour  have  to  be  studied  empirically  with  conceptions
which  are  modified  and  grow  as  knowledge  accrues.

Now  there  is  in  the  facts  which  Dr.  Prince  and  his  col-
laborators have  adduced  much  that  conducts  straight  to  the
notion  of  a  soul  organized  as  Myers  suggested.  Myers  tried
to  conceive  the  manifest  and  supraliminal  psychic  processes  as
selections  from  a  larger  totality.  He  gave  a  reason  also  for
thinking  that  such  selection  was  needed.  The  functions  of
the  soul  might  not  all  be  required  for  the  purposes  of  terres-
trial existence,  and  therefore  might  be  economically  cut  down
to  those  that  had  survival-value,  so  that  normally  these  alone
would  be  operative.  This  is  a  good  biological  argument,  and
there  is  nothing  metaphysical  or  transcendent  about  it.  He
also  pointed  out  that  whereas  in  face  of  the  facts  of  multiple
personality,  etc.,  any  absolute  unity  of  consciousness  had
become  untenable,  it  need  only  be  inferred  that  the  unity
must  be  subliminal.  Hence  there  may  yet  be  a  real  soul  for
science  to  discover  ;  nay,  it  may  be  a  bigger  thing  than  the
useless  creature  of  metaphysics  we  have  had  to  abandon.
Only  it  is  probably  far  more  complicated  than  the  surface
indications  showed.

Now  has  Dr.  Prince  advanced  any  evidence  to  discredit
this  hypothesis  ?  On  the  contrary,  he  has  adduced  much  that
favours  it.  For  example,  what  about  his  signal  successes  in
re-constituting  '  dissociated  '  personalities  ?  Can  they  mean
that  he  created  a  unity  that  never  existed  before  out  of  a
discordant  chaos  of  soul-dust  ?  Are  not  these  dissociated
processes  best  conceived  as  capable  of  fusing  because  they  were
already  connected  in  a  larger  whole  ?  Now  this  whole  cannot
have  been  the  body,  of  which  the  disorders  are  apparently
the  physical  stimuli  to  the  dissociations.  Besides,  it  contains
no  reason  even  for  the  imperfect  psychic  unity  we  find.  For
if  the  body  is  a  self -regulating  system  of  mechanisms,  why
should  the  bodily  functions  ever  have  become  psychical  at  all  ?
If,  on  the  other  hand,  '  soul  '  is  the  name  for  what  regulates


LXX.]


Review.


503


the  mechanism  and  is  partially  revealed  in  our  conscious
experiences,  both  the  dissociations  and  the  syntheses  of  '  person-
ality '  seem  to  become  more  intelligible.

Again,  how  interpret  the  fluidity  of  the  whole  psychic  material,
the  continual  interchanges  between  conscious  and  subconscious,
central  and  marginal,  processes  ?  Do  they  not  incite  us  to
regard  the  real  soul  as  embracing  them  all  and  our  distinctions
as  artifices  ?

Even  the  extraordinary  phenomena  to  which  Dr.  Prince  refers
as  disproving  the  view  that  the  secondary  consciousness  is  a
personality  (pp.  348,  169)  really  tell  against  his  inference.
Granting  that  "  there  is,  normally,  no  distinct  subconscious
self,  or  subliminal  self,  or  secondary  self,  or  hidden  self "
(p.  256),  but  rather  a  flux  of  '  unowned  '  uncontrolled
'  thoughts  '  and  impulses,  figures  that  come  into  the  subject's
mind  out  of  the  unknown  and  proceed  to  add  themselves  in
order  to  comply  with  a  posthypnotic  suggestion,  and  obsessions
that  the  dominant  personality  is  unable  either  to  expel  or  to
assimilate,  it  by  no  means  follows  that  all  this  '  mind-stuff '
is  as  autonomous  and  impersonal  as  it  seems.  Even  our
normal  thoughts  have  a  good  deal  of  apparent  autonomy,  and
only  gradually  and  imperfectly  yield  to  the  behests  of  the
personality.  But  what  is  still  more  to  the  point,  does  not  the
very  fact  that  these  impersonal  processes  could  subsequently
be  taken  up  into  the  self,1  and  remembered  as  having  occurred,
conclusively  show  that  in  a  way  they  belonged  to  it  also
before  ?  The  '  quasi-pathological  '  state  Dr.  Prince  calls
'  depersonalization  '  (p.  459),  in  which  "  the  '  conscious  intelli-
gence '  present  is  able  to  think  and  reason  logically  and  sanely,
is  capable  of  good  judgments,  and  has  an  unusually  large  field
of  memory,  and  is  in  short  a  very  intelligent  consciousness,"
but  nevertheless  "  has  lost  all  consciousness  of  self,  and  has
no  sense  of  personality,  of  anything  to  which  the  term  '  I  '
can  be  ajDplied,"  because  "  this  sentiment  seems  to  be  abso-
lutely dissociated  in  this  state,"  points  to  the  same  conclusion.
For  surely,  as  Lotze  long  ago  explained,  to  be  a  '  self  '  it
is  not  necessary  to  feel  self-conscious  ;  it  is  enough  that  such
states  should  be  continuous  with  the  whole  personality  and
be  subsequently  claimed.  Otherwise  it  would  have  to  be  held
1  In  this  case  a  1  hypnotic  '  self.


504


F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part


that  many  of  our  highest  and  most  characteristic  activities,
e.g.  absorbed  attention  in  a  scientific  research,  were  '  dis-
sociated '  from  our  personality.  Of  course,  Dr.  Prince's  evi-
dence shows  that  in  cases  where  the  '  mind-stuff '  was  sub-
conscious, the  '  self,'  which  included  the  mind-stuff,  could  not
have  been  the  normal  waking  self,  nor  even  the  '  secondary '
consciousness  (p.  170)  ;  but  is  there  anything  to  prevent
our  supposing  that  the  '  personality  '  which  includes  everything
psychic  that  occurs  in  what  we  call  '  our '  experience  may
habitually  reside  at  still  greater  depths  %  Myers's  terminology
seems  to  fit  such  facts  most  aptly.

It  can  hardly  be  too  strongly  emphasized  that  these  pheno-
mena are  in  important  senses  normal.  They  happen  to  us  all
more  or  less,  and  even  the  psychic  processes  '  abnormally  '
revealed  are  akin  to  and  continuous  with  those  we  call
1  normal.'  Dr.  Prince  has  to  confess  as  much  himself.  E.g.
after  interpreting  the  descriptions  of  one  of  his  subjects  as
meaning  that  "  the  thoughts  of  the  secondary  consciousness
do  not  form  a  logical  chain.  They  do  not  have  volition  "
(p.  348),  he  proceeds  on  p.  349  to  remark  that  "  the  subcon-
scious thoughts  may  involve  a  certain  amount  of  volition  and
judgment."  Clearly  no  definite  line  between  the  normal  and
the  subnormal  can  be  drawn.

The  same  point  may  be  illustrated  from  so  familiar  an  experi-
ence as  dreaming,  which  may  be  shown  to  involve  at  least
three  strata  of  '  personality.'  In  the  first  place,  to  be  aware
of  the  '  dream  '  and  its  unreality  there  must  be  a  standpoint
of  waking  life  more  or  less  disconnected  from  the  '  dream,'
and  able  to  condemn  it.  Secondly  there  is  the  dreamer,  who
is  not  identifiable  with  the  normal  ivaking  self.  For  not  only
do  his  thoughts,  feelings  and  acts  often  markedly  differ  from
the  latter's,  but  the  dissociation  between  the  two  is  attested
by  the  extensive  amnesia  which  the  waking  has  for  the  dream
life.  Dreams  are  usually  forgotten  with  an  uncanny  and
abnormal  rapidity.

Nor  is  this  all.  The  dreamer  is  not  himself  the  maker
of  the  dream.  He  is  more  commonly  its  victim,  always  hallu-
cinated, and  sometimes  (as  in  a  nightmare)  most  unpleasantly
so.  Who  or  what  then  is  this  hidden  third  party,  the  maker
of  the  dream  ? The  times  are  past  when  it  seemed  enough


LXX.]


Review.


505


to  ascribe  dreams  to  such  agencies  as  unconscious  cerebration,
automatic  recrudescence  of  impressions,  or  indigestion.  Practical
psychologists  like  Dr.  Prince  and  Prof.  Freud  are  by  no
means  disposed  to  underrate  the  constructive  ability  which
goes  to  the  making  of  dreams,  and  the  value  of  the  clues
they  give  to  the  dreamer's  character  and  history.  If  any-
thing, they  seem  to  common-sense  rather  to  overrate  the
significance  of  dreams.  But  there  can  be  no  doubt  that
the  making  of  dreams  is  often  a  highly  intelligent  and
artistic  process.  Dr.  Prince  fully  endorses  the  Freudian
doctrine  that  "  underlying  a  dream  is  a  subconscious  process
which  fabricates  the  conscious  dream  "  (p.  196),  though  he  does
not  think  its  meaning  is  always  sexual  nor  restrict  its  aim
to  the  fulfilment  of  wishes,  but  thinks  it  may  express  also
antecedent  doubts,  scruples  and  anxieties.  He  relates  an
elaborate  symbolic  dream  constructed  by  one  of  his  patients
out  of  a  hint  given  her  in  hypnosis,  and  remarks  that  "  it
is  difficult  to  conceive  of  a  dream  allegory  being  constructed
by  the  dream  consciousness  (i.e.  dreamer)  itself,"  because
"  the  imagery  develops  as  if  done  by  something  else  "  (pp.
202-3),  and  infers  that  "  a  subconscious  intelligence  "  is  required
(p.  203).  If  then  "  the  subconscious  process  which  determines
the  dream  may  be  what  is  actually  an  intelligence,"  and  its
"  fabrication  has  all  the  earmarks  of  purpose,  forethought  and
constructive  imagination  "  (p.  211),  it  may  reasonably  be
identified  with  the  intelligence  that  animates  automatic  writing,
in  which  also  "  all  happened  as  if  there  was  a  deeper  under-
lying process  which  did  the  composing  "  (p.  208).  I  cordially
agree,  and  would  only  add  that  if  ordinary  dreaming  implies
such  complexity  in  the  personality,  we  may  well  expect  such
further  complications  in  abnormal  cases  as  are  attested  in  the
famous  '  Beauchamp  '  case.  Here  '  Sally,'  who  claimed  that
she  never  slept,  was  aware  of  what  'Miss  B.'  dreamt,  and
was  able  to  describe  her  dreams  as  the  experience  of  another
and  yet  also  from  within,  while  conversely  Miss  B.  sometimes
dreamt  about  what  '  Sally  '  was  thinking  (p.  212).

It  does  not  appear,  however,  that  Dr.  Prince's  attention  was
ever  drawn  to  a  possibility  which  has  long  seemed  to  me  the
most  plausible  explanation  of  the  '  Beauchamp  '  case,  viz.  that
'  Sally  '  was  precisely  the  '  maker  of  dreams,'  enabled  by  the


506


F.  G.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.


[part  lxx.


abnormal  conditions  to  manifest  herself  and  to  control  the  body,
but  supjDressed  again  whenever  normal  conditions  were  restored.
The  Dissociation  of  a  Personality  does  not  contain  any  decisive
evidence  for  or  against  this  theory,  perhaps  only  because
the  crucial  experiments  were  not  made.  If,  however,  '  Sally  '
was  not  the  '  maker  of  dreams,'  it  simply  follows  that  this
personage  must  be  located  deeper  down  still.  In  any  case  it
remains  a  constituent  of  our  total  personality,  which  it  should
'  theoretically  '  be  possible  to  elicit  by  experiment.

In  short,  what  is  called  abnormal  psychology,  but  is  simply
the  method  of  clinical  experiment  in  psychology,  seems  to
open  endless  vistas  of  exploration  into  the  abysses  of  our
'  personality.'  For  the  first  time  in  history  there  is  before
us  a  definite  prospect  of  learning  what  is  the  real  scientific
meaning  of  terms  like  '  self,'  '  soul  '  and  '  personality,'  which
we  have  long  been  accustomed  to  use  so  vaguely  and  blindly.
All,  therefore,  who  are  anxious  to  learn  cannot  do  better
than  wish  Dr.  Prince  more  power  to  his  elbow,  and  will  look
forward  to  his  next  book.

F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


FORMER  PRESIDENTS  OF  TEE  SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


Professor  Henry  Sidqwick,  -  1882-84.
Professor  Balfour  Stewart,

F.R.S. , 1885-87.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  -  1888-92.
The  Eight  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,

M.P.,  F.R.S., ... -  1893.
Professor  William  James,  - -  1894-95.
Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S., -  1896-99.
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  - - -  1900.
sm  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S., -  1901-03.


Sm  William  Barrett,  F.R.S., -  1904.
Professor  Charles  Richet,  - -  1905.
The  Bight  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,-  1906-07.
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  - - -  1908-09.
H.  Arthur  Smith,  -  1910.

Andrew  Lang.  1911.

Rt.  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Car-
penter, D.D., ....  1912.
Professor  Henri  Bergson,  - -  1913.
F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc, - -  1914.  •


OFFICERS  AND  COUNCIL  FOR  1915.

PRESIDENT.
Professor  Gilbert  Murray,  LL.D.,  Litt.D.
VICE-PRESIDENTS.


Rt.  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.
Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.
Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
Rt. Rev.  Bishop  W. Boyd  Car-
penter, D.D.
Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  F.R.S.


George  B.  Dorr.
Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  Ph.D.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  D.Sc.
Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  D.Sc.
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  D.Litt.,  LL.D.


COUNCIL.


J.  G.  Piddington.
St.  George  Lane  Fox  Pitt.
Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.
F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.
Sydney  C.  Scott.
A.  F.  Shand.

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  Litt.D.
H.  Arthur  Smith.
Sir  Joseph  J.  Thomson,  O.M.,  F.R.S.
Charles  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.
Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.
V.  J.  Woolley,  M.D.
M.  B.  Wright,  M.D.


W.  W.  Baggally.
The  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.
Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.
Ernest  N.  Bennett.
J.  Milne  Bp>amwell,  M.B.
G.  Lowes  Dickinson.
The  Hon.  Everard  Feilding.
Professor  L.  P.  Jacks,  D.D.
Sir  Lawrence  J.  Jones,  Bart.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.
W.  M'Dougall,  F.R.S.,  M.Sc,  M.B.
T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.

HON.  TREASURER.
H.  Arthur  Smith,  7  Queen's  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,  W.

HON.  SECRETARIES.
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  27  Grange  Ro;k1,  Cambridge.
The  Hon.  Everard  Feilding,  5  John  Street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.
RESEARCH  OFFICER  AND  EDITOR.
Miss  Alice  Johnson,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
SECRETARY  AND  SUB-EDITOR.
Miss  I.  Newton,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
ASSISTANT  RESEARCH  OFFICER.
Miss  H.  de  G.  Verrall,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
HON.  SECRETARY  OF  THE  MEDICAL  SECTION.
T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.,  Hoath  Cottage,  Hadlow,  nr.  Tollbridge.

HON.  SECRETARY  FOR  RUSSIA.
Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  55  Serguievskaia,  Petrograd.
AGENT  FOR  AMERICA.
The  W.  B.  Clarke  Co.,  26-28  Tremont  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.


508


Members  and  Associates.


[part


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.

May,  1915.

President— Professor  Gilbert  Murray,  LL.D.,  Litt.D.

Vice-Presidents.

The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  4  Carlton  Gardens,
London,  S.W.

The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.
Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  6  De  Vesci  Terrace,  Kingstown,
Co.  Dublin.

Rt.  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Carpenter,  D.D.,  6  The  Little  Cloisters,

Westminster,  London,  S.W.
Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  7  Kensington  Park  Gardens,

London,  W.

George  B.  Dorr,  18  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  519  West  149th  Street,  New  York  City.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  The  University,  Birmingham.
Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  D.Litt.,  LL.D.,  27  Grange  Road,  Cam-
bridge.

Honorary  Members.

Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  6  De  Vesci  Terrace,  Kingstown,
Co.  Dublin.

Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  7  Kensington  Park  Gardens,
London,  W.

Madame  Curie,  Faculte  des  Sciences  de  Paris,  Laboratoire  de

Physique  Generale,  12  rue  Cuvier,  Paris.
Sir  Joseph  J.  Thomson,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  Holm  Leigh,  West  Road,

Cambridge.


LXX.]


Members  and  Associates.


509


Corresponding  Members.

Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa  906,  Rio  Janeiro.
Professor  H.  Beaunis,  Villa  Printemps,  Le  Cannet  (Alpes  Mari-
times),  France.

Professor  Henri  Bergson, Villa  Montmorency, 18  Avenue  des

Tilleuls,  Paris.
Professor  Bernheim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy,  France.
President  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  University,  New  York,

U.S.A.

Dr.  Dariex,  6  Rue  du  Bellay,  Paris.

Dr.  Max  Dessoir,  Speyererstrasse  9,  Berlin,  W.

Professor  Th.  Flournoy,  The  University,  Geneva.

Professor  Dr.  Freud,  ix.,  Berggasse  19,  Vienna.

President  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Mrs.  William  James,  95  Irving  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Professor  Pierre  Janet,  54  Rue  de  Varenne,  VIP,  Paris.

M.  Maurice  Maeterlinck,  32  rue  Perronet,  Neuilly-s.-S.,  France.

Professor  Wm.  Romaine  Newbold,  Ph.D.,  Univ.  of  Pennsylvania,

Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Professor  E.  C.  Pickering,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,  Mass.,

U.S.A.

Dr.  Morton  Prince,  458  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Professor  Th.  Ribot,  Office  of  the  Revue  Fhilosojjhique,  Paris.
Professor  Charles  Richet,  15  Rue  de  1'Universite,  Paris.
Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  2  Max  Joseph  Strasse,  Munich.

Honorary  Associates.
Alrutz,  Dr.  Sydney,  Upsala,  Sweden.

Bayfield,  Rev.  M.  A.,  The  Rectory,  Hertingfordbury,  Hertford.
Edmunds,  Miss  L.,  P.O.  Box  111,  Alton,  R.I.,  U.S.A.
Falcomer,  Professor  M.  T.,  Regio  Instituto  Tecnico  e  Nautico,
Venice.

Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T..  St.  James's  Vicarage.  Walthamstow,  London,  E.
Grubb,  Edward,  26  Avondale  Road,  Croydon,  Surrey.
Muirhead,  Professor  J.  H.,  The  Rowans,  Balsall  Common,  nr.
Coventry.

Ochorowicz,  Dr.  J.,  Faubourg  de  Cracovie  No.  16/18,  Warsaw.
Reed,  Miss  E.  M.,  2  Gledhow  Gardens,  S.  Kensington,  London,
S.W.

Sage,  M.,  33  Rue  de  Coulmiers,  XIVe  Arrt.,  Paris.

van  Eeden,  Frederik,  M.D.,  Walden,  Bussum,  Holland.


510


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Members  and  Associates.

An  asterisk  is  prefixed  to  the  names  of  Members.
Abbott,  Mrs.,  Broadview,  Hill  Brow,  Bromley,  Kent.
Abbott,  E.  J.  W.

Abernethy,  Mrs.,  10  St.  Colme  Street,  Edinburgh.
Acland-Hood,  Lady  Helena,  46  Burton  Court,  London,  S.W.
Adair,  Desmond.

Adamowska,  Madame  S.,  11  Cbanning  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Adams,  Mrs.,  4  Brookside,  Cambridge.

Adamson,  Rev.  H.,  P.O.  Box  241,  Christcliurch,  New  Zealand.
Agelasto,  Michael  A.,  Box  485,  Norfolk,  Va.,  U.S.A.
Albree,  John,  Swampscott,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Alexander,  Professor  S.,  Victoria  University,  Manchester.
Allan,  Percy,  M.D.,  Crogdene,  Croham  Road,  South  Croydon,
Surrey.

Allen,  B.  M.,  14  Gainsborough  Gardens,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.

Allen,  George  B.,  Free  Chase,  Warninglid,  Sussex.

Allen,  Professor  H.  J.,  c/'o  The  National  Bank  of  India,  26
Bishopsgate,  London,  E.C.

Allen,  William,  M.B.,  4  Newton  Terrace,  Charing  Cross,  Glasgow.

Alston,  Mrs.  Rowland,  Turvey  Abbey,  Turvey,  Beds.

Anderson,  Mrs.,  Brackenboro',  Bramhall,  Cheshire.

Anderson,  Lt. -Colonel  A.  T.,  R.F.A.,  115  Knight's  Hill,  West
Norwood,  London,  S.E.

Anderson,  F.,  Medical  Director,  1628  19th  Street,  N.W.,  Wash-
ington, D.C.,  U.S.A.

Anderson,  Rev.  Francis  M.,  115  Knight's  Hill,  West  Norwood,
London,  S.E.

Anderson,  Miss  Ruth,  Heath  Cottage,  Westleton,  Saxmundham.
Anstey,  Captain  E.  C,  R.F.A.,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co.,  16  Charing

Cross,  London,  S.W.
Armstrong,  Charles  W.,  Caixa  196,  S.  Paulo,  Brazil.
Armstrong,  Miss  M.  M.,  57  Redington  Road,  Hampstead,  London,

N.W.

Askew,  Claude,  Botches,  Wivelsfield  Green,  Sussex.

Askew,  Mrs.  Claude,  Botches,  Wivelsfield  Green,  Sussex.
*Assheton-Smith,  Lady,  Vaynol,  Bangor,  N.  Wales.

Astley,  Miss,  Cowrie  Haven,  Poundstock,  nr.  Bude,  N.  Cornwall.
*Astor,  William  Waldorf,  Cliveden,  near  Maidenhead.

Atkinson,  Henry,  Rokeby,  Green  Lane,  Northwood,  Middlesex.


LXX.J


Members  and  Associates.


511


Atwater,  Horace  G.,  Norfolk,  St.  Lawrence  Co.,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
*Auden,  Harold  A.,  13  Broughton  Drive,  Grassendale,  Liverpool.
*Austen,  Harold  W.  C,  M.D.,  2  Freeland  Road,  Ealing,  London,  W.

Austin,  C.  G.,  I.C.S.,  Hosur,  South  India.
*Ayrton,  Captain  F.  F.  J.,  Royal  Cornwall  Yacht  Club,  Falmouth,
Cornwall.

Bacon,  Mrs.  Sewell,  Highground,  Waterford  Rd.,  Oxton,  Cheshire.
*Baggally,  Wortley  W.,  7  Sillwood  Place,  Brighton.

Baggally,  Mrs.  W.  W.,  7  Sillwood  Place,  Brighton.

Baikie,  W.  S.,  Southend,  Stromness,  Orkney  Islands.
*Bailey,  Cyril,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.

Bailey,  Hon.  Mabel,  Hay  Castle,  Hay,  by  Hereford.

Baker,  Alfred  L.,  Lake  Forest,  Illinois,  U.S.A.

Baker,  Mrs.  Charles,  14  Inverness  Terrace,  London,  W.

Baker,  Miss  Mabel,  St.  John's  Schools,  Eton,  Windsor.
*Balfour,  Miss,  4  Carlton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Balfour,  Right  Hon.  A.  J.,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  4  Carlton  Gardens,
London,  S.W.

Balfour,  F.  C.  C,  32  Addison  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Balfour,  Right  Hon.  G.  W.,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.
Bandon,  The  Countess  of,  Castle  Bernard,  Bandon,  Co.  Cork,  Ire-
land.

Bannester,  Miss  E.  S.,  Alexandra  College,  Westcliff-on-Sea,  Essex.
*Barclay,  Edwyn,  39  Hurlingham  Court,  London,  S.W.
*Barker,  Mrs.  C.  F.,  3942  Ellis  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.

Barkley,  Dr.  M.,  Box  162,  Carlyle,  111.,  U.S.A.

Barkworth,  Mrs.,  Thornford  House,  Sherborne,  Dorset.

Barlow,  Miss  Jane,  D.Litt.,  Killarney  Hill,  Bray,  Co.  Wicklow,
Ireland.

Barnes,  Rev.  Walter  W.,  Meadowside,  Cliddesden  Road,  Basing-
stoke.

Barritt,  E.  H.,  J. P.,  Warrior  House,  26  Beaconsfield  Avenue,
Colchester.

*Barrow,  J.  R.,  Ramna  P.O.,  Bengal,  India.
Barrows,  Miss,  Hampton  School,  Malvern  P.O.,  Jamaica,  B.W.I.
Barrows,  C.  M.,  522  West  149th  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Barrs, Mrs., Marshlands, Laurel Road, Cottenham  Park,

Wimbledon,  London,  S.W.
Baruch,  Edgar,  Rooms  805-6,  Wright  &  Callender  Building,  Los

Angeles,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Basden,  Miss  Isabel  K.,  21  The  Drive,  Hove,  Sussex.

2k


512


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Batchelor,  E.,  I.C.S.,  Wardha,  Central  Provinces,  India.
*Battersea,  The  Lady,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring,  Herts.
*Bayley,  Weston  D.,  M.D.,  1524  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  U.S.A.

Baynes,  W.  E.  C,  Assiut,  Upper  Egypt.

Bean,  Rev.  Edwin.
*Beattie,  Ivor  Hamilton,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.
*Beaumont,  Miss  Annette.

Beaumont-Klein,  Leopold  de,  D.Sc,  Clermont  House,  Methwold,
Norfolk.

Beaumont-Klein,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  de,  Clermont  House,  Methwold,
Norfolk.

*Bedford,  Adeline  Duchess  of,  Chenies,  Rickmansworth.

Beeching,  Miss  Nelly,  York  House,  Ton  bridge.
*Behrens,  Captain  Clive,  Swinton  Grange,  Malton,  Yorks.

Behrens,  Noel  Edward.
*Beilby,  Dr.  G.  T.,  F.R.S.,  11  University  Gardens,  Glasgow.

Belaribi,  Mrs.,  Bartlands,  Holt  Heath,  Worcestershire.

Bell,  Miss  A.  E.,  Sesame  Club,  29  Dover  Street,  London,  W.

Bell,  Miss  Alison  H.,  Exmoor,  Quickley  Lane,  Chorley  Wood,
Herts.

Bennett,  Colin  N.,  Escot,  Penzance,  Cornwall.
Bennett,  Ernest  N.,  The  Bath  Club,  34  Dover  Street,  London,  W.
Benson,  Miss  A.  M.,  M.D.,  Pedcler  Road,  Cumballa  Hill,  Bombay,
India.

*Benson,  Mrs.,  Tremans,  Horsted  Keynes,  Sussex.
Benson,  Arthur  C,  C.V.O.,  The  Old  Lodge,  Magdalene  College,
Cambridge.

Benton,  Dr.  J.  R.,  Gainesville,  Florida,  U.S.A.
*Berens,  Rev.  Randolph,  14  Prince's  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Bergen,  Axel  von,  Abbey  Road,  Darlington,  Durham.

Berrington,  Rev.  Leslie  G.,  29  Beauchamp  Avenue,  Leamington
Spa,  Warwickshire.
*Berry,  Mrs.  F.  M.  Dickinson,  M.D.,  21  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.

Best,  Robert,  146  Hamstead  Road,  Handsworth,  Birmingham.

Bethell,  Mrs.,  23  Shooters  Hill  Road,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.

Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131  Gloucester  Road,  London,  S.W.

Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9  Rutland  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Bevan,  Rev.  W.  O.,  Kalutara,  Ceylon.
*Beveridge,  Erskine,  LL.D.,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B.

Beverley,  Mrs.,  Nascot  Lodge,  Watford,  Herts.


LXX.]


Members  and  Associates.


513


Biach,  Dr.  Rudolf,  Mayerhofgasse  20,  Vienna  IV.,  Austria.

Bibesco,  H.H.  Prince  Antoine,  114  Grosvenor  Road,  London,  S.W.

Bicknell,  Clarence,  Villa  Rose,  Bordighera,  Italy.

Bidder,  George  P.,  Cavendish  Corner,  Hills  Road,  Cambridge.
*Bigg,  Miss  Louisa,  2  York  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
*Binney,  Rev.  Maximilian  F.  B.,  The  Vicarage,  Richmond,  Surrey.

Birley,  Miss  Florence  H.,  Goldsmiths'  College,  New  Cross,  London,
S.E.

Black,  Mrs.,  37  Rectory  Place,  Woolwich,  London,  S.E.

Blackburn,  A.  J.,  Aruba  House,  The  Leazes,  Burnopfield,  Durham.

Blackburn,  E.  M.,  Little  Thakeham,  Pulborough,  Sussex.

Blacklock,  Miss  C,  101  Beaufort  Mansions,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Blane,  Miss  Edith  H.,  18  Ashley  Mansions,  London,  S.W.

Blathwayt,  W.,  Eagle  House,  Batheaston,  Bath.
*Bligh,  Stanley  M.,  28  Grosvenor  Road,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.

Bloemfontein,  The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of,  Bishop's  Lodge,
Bloemfontein,  O.R.C.,  S.  Africa.

Bodley,  Mrs.,  41  Gloucester  Place,  Portman  Square,  London,  W.

Bois,  H.  G.,  c/o  Messrs.  J.  M.  Robertson  &  Co.,  Colombo,  Ceylon.
■■Bolton,  Lyndon,  The  Patent  Office,  25  Southampton  Buildings,
London,  W.C.

Boothroyd,  A.  E.,  Warley,  Meadway,  Hampstead  Garden  Suburb,
London,  N.W.

Bosanquet,  Miss  Theodora,  10  Lawrence  Street,  Cheyne  Walk,
London,  S.W.

Bonlding,  R.  S.  H.,  Woodthorpe,  Barston  Road,  W.  Norwood,
London,  S.E.

Bouwens,  B.  G.,  The  Grange,  Idmiston,  nr.  Salisbury,  Wilts.
Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  rue  Maze,  St.  Martin's,  Guernsey.
Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  Careys,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.
*Bowditch,  C.  P.,  Ill  Devonshire  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Bowen,  Miss  Anna  C,  210  E.  Main  Street,  Batavia,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Bower,  James  Garton,  Junr.,  Earlham  House,  Norwich.
Box,  Alfred  Marshall,  Woodlands,  14  Magrath  Avenue,  Cam-
bridge.

Bozzano,  E.,  Salita  Emanuele  Cavallo,  N.  92,  Genoa.
Brabrook,  Sir  Edward  W.,  C.B.,  Langham  House,  Wallington,
Surrey.

*Bradley,  Miss  A.  A.,  Hingham,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Bradley, Professor A. C, 54 Scarsdale Villas,  Kensington,
London,  W.


514


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Bradley,  F.  Ii.,  Merton  College,  Oxford.

Brain,  Ernest,  7  St  .  George's  Square,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.

Bramly,  Mrs.  Jennings,  Asolo,  Treviso,  Italy.
*Bramwell,  J.  Milne,  M.B.,  17  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.
*Brandt,  Rudolph  E.,  4  Fenchurch  Avenue,  London,  E.C.

Bray,  F.  E.,  17  The  Boltons,  London,  S.W.

Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

Brewster-,  Bertram,  59  Madeley  Road,  Ealing,  London,  W.
Briantchaninoff,  Alexandre  N.,  11  Grand  Mouetuaia,  Petrograd,
Russia.

Bristowe,  The  Hon.  Mr.  Justice,  Supreme  Court,  Pretoria,  South
Africa.

Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama,  U.S.A.
Brooke,  Colonel  C.  K.,  Army  and  Navy  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.

Brooke,  Miss  Emma  F.

Brooke,  E.  G.  de  C,  Brushford,  Dulverton,  Devonshire.
*Brooke,  Lady,  Colebrooke,  Brookeborough,Co.  Fermanagh,  Ireland.
*Brown,  B.  G.,  46  Regent's  Park  Road,  London,  N.W.

Brown,  Mrs.  F.  C,  Women's  Franchise  Club,  9  Grafton  Street,
London,  W.

Brown,  Haydn,  L.R.C.P.,  Manor  Lodge,  Chislehurst,  Kent.
Brown,  Mrs.  H.  F.,  18  Curzon  Park,  Chester.
Brown,  Miss  May,  62  Carlisle  Mansions,  Westminster,  London, S.W.
Browne,  Professor  Edward  G.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cam-
bridge.

Browne,  J.  Stark,  87  York  Mansions,  Battersea  Park,  London,
S.W.

Brownrigg,  Lady,  White  Waltham,  Maidenhead,  Berks.
Bruce,  James,  Craik,  Sask.,  Canada.

Brush,  W.  Franklin,  500  5th  Avenue,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Bryan,  C. A.  Douglas,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P., Portland  House,
1  Saxe  Coburg  Street,  Leicester.

Bryce,  Miss  Kathleen,  15  Campden  Hill  Square,  London,  W.

Bryson,  Archibald,  Nenthorne,  Ayr,  N.B.
*Bubb,  Henry,  J. P.,  Ullenwood,  near  Cheltenham.

Buchanan,  A.  G.,  F.R.C.S.,  75  Warwick  Square,  London,  S.W.

Bullard,  Dr.  W.  N.,  89  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Buller,  Professor  A.  H.  Reginald,  University  of  Manitoba,  Winni-
peg, Canada.
*Bulley,  Mrs.  Arthur,  Ness,  Neston,  Cheshire.


LXX.]


Members  and  Associates.


515


*Bullough,  Edward,  6  Huntingdon  Road,  Cambridge.

Bullough,  Mrs.  Edward,  6  Huntingdon  Road,  Cambridge.

Burghard,  Mrs.,  86  Harley  Street,  London,  W.

Burnham,  Mrs.,  Staindrop  Lodge,  CkajDeltown,  Sheffield.

Burns,  Nesbitt,  M.B.,  The  Lodge,  Highbridge,  Somerset.

Burrard,  Mrs.  Charles,  c/o  Lloyds  Bank,  Knightsbridge  Branch,
Brompton  Road,  London,  S.W.

Burton,  Miss  L.  M.,  26  Deans  Walk,  Gloucester.

Bury,  Henry,  Mayfield  House,  Farnham,  Surrey.

Bury,  Mrs.  Henry,  Mayfield  House,  Farnham,  Surrey.
*Bushell,  Rev.  W.  D.,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.

Butler,  Mrs.  Charles,  Syon  House,  East  Budleigh,  Devon.

Butt,  Lady,  9  Albert  Hall  Mansions,  Kensington  Gore,  London,
S.W.

Buttemer,  Robert  Wm.,  St.  Mary's,  Godalming,  Surrey.
Butterworth,  Miss  A.  M.,  The  Bungalow,  West  Kirby,  Cheshire.
Cadell,  Mrs.  Lewis,  Brae  Lodge,  Murrayfield,  Edinburgh.
Caird,  Mrs.  Henryson,  34  Woronzow  Road,  St.  John's  Wood,
London,  N.W.

Cairns,  Rev.  David  S.,  D.D.,  62  Hamilton  Place,  Aberdeen.
^Campbell,  Lady Archibald, Coombe  Hill  Farm,  Kingston-on-
Thames,  Surrey.

Campbell,  Mrs.  Burnley,  Ormidale,  Colintraive,  Argyllshire.

Campbell,  Mrs.,  Arduaine,  Lochgilphead,  N.B.

Campbell,  Colin  E.,  34  Lower  Belgrave  Street,  London,  S.W.

Campbell,  Major  N.  D.  H.,  7th  Dragoon  Guards,  Trimulgherry,
Deccan,  India.

Campbell,  Rev.  R.  J.,  The  City  Temple,  London,  E.C.

Campbell-Lang,  Miss,  c/o  Professor  Brunton,  LL.B.,  180  Hope
Street,  Glasgow.

Candler,  H.  A.  W.,  37  Commercial  Road,  London,  E.

Capron,  Mrs.  Cynthia  J.,  316  Lincoln  Avenue,  Freeport,  111.,
U.S.A.

Carnahan,  C.  T.,  951  Logan  Avenue,  Denver,  Colo.,  U.S.A.
^'Carnarvon,  The  Earl  of,  13  Berkeley  Square,  London,  W.
Carpenter,  Mrs. ,  51  Teignmouth  Road,  Cricklewood,  London,  N.W.
Carr,  H.  Wildon,  D.  Litt.,  10  More's  Garden,  Cheyne  Walk,
London,  S.W.

Carr,  Lucien,  163  Brattle  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Carrington,  Hereward,  504  West  111th  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.


516


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Carter,  Lady,  Greycliffe,  Torquay,  S.  Devon.

Case,  Miss  A.  J.,  35  Elm  Bank  Mansions,  Barnes,  London,  S.W.
Cassatt,  Miss  Mary,  10  Rue  de  Marignan,  Paris.
Cathels,  Rev.  David,  The  Manse,  Hawick,  Scotland.
*Cave,  Charles,  J. P.,  Ditcham  Park,  Petersfield,  Hants.
Cayley,  Hugh  S.,  Room  221,  Loo  Building,  Vancouver,  B.C.,
Canada.

Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Alford  House,  Alford,  Somerset.
*Chambers, John, Mokopeka, Hastings, Hawkes Bay,  New
Zealand.

Chance,  Clinton  F.,  12  Arthur  Road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
Chapman,  E.  G.,  Belsize,  Friern  Watch  Avenue,  N.  Finchley,
London,  N.

Chaidton,  Miss  Frances  M.,  23  Kensington  Square,  London,  W.
*Charrington,  Miss  E.  Beatrice,  60  Eaton  Terrace,  London,  S.W.
Chatterjee,  A.  K.,  Deputy  Magistrate  and  Collector,  P.O.  Comilla,

District  Tippura,  India.
Chattock,  Arthur  P.,  D.Sc,  Heathfield  Cottage,  Crowcombe,  nr.

Taunton,  Somerset.
Cheney,  Dr.  Frederick  E.,  126  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,

Mass.,  U.S.A.

Chichkine,  Mademoiselle  A.  de,  Lyceum  Club,  128  Piccadilly,
London,  W.

Ckilde-Pemberton,  Miss  A. H., 12  Portman  Street,  Portman

Square,  London,  W.
Childers,  Miss  F.  I.,  Cranbourne  Grange,  Sutton  Scotney,  Hants.
Chitty,  Hubert,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.,  etc.,  46  Pembroke  Road,  Clifton,

Bristol.

Chubb,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Longforgan,  The  Ridgway,  Wimbledon,  Lon-
don, S.W.

Clapham,  Mrs.  H.  H.,  50  South  6th  Street,  San  Jose,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Clapham,  J.  H.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
*Clark,  Rev.  F.  H.  H.,  12a  Market  Hill,  Cambridge.
Clarke,  Ronald  Stanley,  Trobridge  House,  Crediton,  Devon.
Clarkson,  Mrs.  St.  John, 18  Milner  Street,  Cadogan  Square,
London,  S.W.

Clive,  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.
Closson,  Miss  Olivia  T.,  1359  Columbia  Road,  Washington,  D.C.,
U.S.A.

Clover,  Martin,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Bay  House,  Veryan,  Gram-
pound  Road,  Cornwall.


LXX.]


Members  and  Associates.


517


Coates,  C.  J.,  The  Thornton  Woollen  Mill  Co.,  Petrograd.
Coates,  Mrs.,  4  Duke's  Avenue,  Muswell  Hill,  London,  N.W.
Cochrane,  Miss  Jessie,  148  Charles  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Cockle,  Rev. Francis  T.,  The  Rectory, Swinford, Co.  Mayo,
Ireland.

Coe,  Miss  M.  A.,  c/oM.  T.  Pritchard,  125  School  Street,  Roxbury,
Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Coggin,  Rev.  F.  E.,  White  Lodge,  Meads,  Eastbourne.
Coghill,  Colonel  Kendal,  C.B.,  Castle  Townshend,  nr.  Skibbereen,
Co.  Cork,  Ireland.
*Cole-Hamilton,  Mrs.  L.  A.,  c/o  Messrs.  H.  S.  King  &  Co.,  9  Pall
Mall,  London,  S.W.
Coleridge,  Miss  Christabel  R.,  Cheyne,  Torquay.
Colquhoun,  Daniel,  M.D.,  44  High  Street,  Dunedin,  New  Zealand.
*Constable,  F.  C,  Wick  Court,  near  Bristol.
Conway,  Lady,  Allington  Castle,  Maidstone,  Kent.
Cooke,  Miss  Mabel,  Dana  Hall  School,  Wellesley,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Cooper,  Rev.  F.  W.,  Prestwich  Rectory,  Manchester.
Cooper,  Miss  Louisa  E.,  Ripponhurst,  Epping,  Essex.
Cooper,  Mrs.  P.  H.,  283  South  Street,  Morristown,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
Cornelson,  Rev.  G.  H.,  1912  State  Street,  New  Orleans,  La.,
U.S.A.

Corry,  Miss  Lucy,  13  Argyll  Road,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Cort  van  der  Linden,  P.  W.  A.,  Councillor  of  State,  Groenhove,
The  Hague.

Cotesworth,  Miss  Lilias  E.,  45  Westminster  Mansions,  Great  Smith
Street,  London,  S.W.
*Cotterell,  Mrs.,  Claremont,  Walsall,  Staffs.
Cotterell,  Miss  Alice,  Ig  Montagu  Mansions,  Portman  Square,
London,  W.

Courtauld,  George,  Junr.,  The  Waver,  Wethersfielcl,  Braintree,
Essex.

Courtauld,  R.  M.,  M.B.,  6  Denmark  Villas,  Hove,  Sussex.
*Cowan,  W.  H.,  The  Crow's  Nest,  Fairwarp,  Uckfield,  Sussex.
Cowell,  Miss  Marion  A.,  3  Brudenell  Terrace,  Aldeburgh,  Suffolk
Cox,  Mrs.  Rowland,  310  West  7th  Street,  Plainfield,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
Coxe,  The  Hon.  Mr.  Justice  Henry  R.  H.,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay

&  Co.,  54  Parliament  Street,  London,  S.W.
Coxon,  Mrs.  George  S.,  Craigleith,  Cheltenham.
Cozens,  J.  C,  Brigus,  Conception  Bay,  Newfoundland.
Craggs,  Lady,  30  Bramham  Gardens,  London,  S.W.


518


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Craige,  Wm.  C,  409  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Craufurd,  Commander  Queutin  C.  A.,  R.N.,  H.M.S.  St.  George,
Home  Fleet.

Crawford,  W.  C,  1  Lockharton  Gardens,  Colinton  Road,  Edin-
burgh.

Croft,  Mrs.  Henry  Page,  Knole,  Bournemouth.
Crook,  A.  H.,  Queen's  College,  Hong  Kong.
*Crookes,  Lady,  7  Kensington  Park  Gardens,  London,  W.
Crouch,  H.  N.,  AdditionalJudicial  Commissioner  of  Sind,  Karachi,
Sind,  India.

Currie,  Mrs.,  7  Sunderland  Terrace,  Bayswater,  London,  W.
""Curtis, Atherton, 17 rue Notre Dame des Champs,  Paris,
France.

*Curtois,  Miss  Margaret  A.,  10  Barton  Street,  Westminster,  Lon-
don, S.W.

Curzon  of  Kedleston,  The  Earl,  Hackwood,  Basingstoke,  Hants.
Dale,  Alan,  Wright  Avenue,  Bayside,  Long  Island,  New  York,
U.S.A.

Dale,  Mrs.  Hylton,  28  Elm  Park  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Dale,  J.  Gilbert,  68  Holland  Park,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Dallas,  Miss  H.  A.,  Innisfail,  Crawley,  Sussex.
*Dalton,  J.  H.  C,  M.D.,  The  Plot,  Adams  Road,  Cambridge.
Damant,  Mrs.  H.  C,  Lammas,  Cowes,  Isle  of  Wight.
Daniell,  Mrs.  Averell.

Danzas,  Mile.  Julia,  26  Moika,  Petrograd.
D'Arcy,  Rev.  G.  J.  A.,  The  Vicarage,  Worksop,  Notts.
Davies,  Benjamin,  Wilford,  Chase  Green  Avenue,  Enfield,  Middle-
sex.

Davies,  Mrs.  G.  R.,  Glenlaggan,  Parton,  N.B.
Davies,  Miss  M. H. Lloyd, Lynton, Curzon Road,  Hoylake,
Cheshire.

);'Davies,  Valentine  Clements,  59a  Grove  Road,  Eastbourne.
Davis,  A.  E.,  F.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  56  Rodney  Street,  Liverpool.
Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  Trelinda,  St.  Merryn,  Padstow.
Davison,  Miss  Annie,  Albemarle  Club,  37  Dover  Street,  London,  W.
Dawson,  Lt. -Colonel  Henry  P.,  Hartlington  Hall,  Skipton.
Day,  Rev.  Dr.  E.  H.,  Newton  House,  Belmont,  Hereford.
Day,  Miss  Mabel  K.,  Gershom,  Reigate,  Surrey.
Dearmer,  Rev.  Percy,  St.  Mary's  Vicarage,  Primrose  Hill,  London,
N.W.

Deichmann,  Baroness,  Abbey  Lodge,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.


LXX.]


Members  and  Associates.


519


De  Jong,  Dr.  K.  H.  E..,  Obrechtstraat  343,  The  Hague.
Delap,  Alfred  D.,  Rosslare  Harbour,  Kilrane,  Wexford.
Deverell,  Mrs.  F.,  7  Glen-dower  Place,  South  Kensington,  London,
S.W.

Devitt,  Mrs.  J.  A.,  Oskaloosa,  Iowa,  U.S.A.
*Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  Rothesay,  Scotland.
De  Wyckoff,  Joseph,  The  Croft,  Greville  Place,  London,  N.W.
Dickie,  H.  Elford,  British  Consulate,  Pernambuco,  Brazil.
Dickinson,  Miss,  Trebrea  Lodge,  Tintagel,  Cornwall.
Dickinson,  Miss  A.  J.,  3a  Clareville  Grove,  London,  S.W.,  and

Poultry  Court,  Painswick,  Gloucestershire.
Dickinson,  G.  Lowes,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Dicksee,  Frank,  R.A.,  3  Greville  Place,  St.  John's  Wood,  London,

N.W.

Dill,  J.  F.  Gordon,  M.B.,  6  Brunswick  Place,  Brighton.
*Dixon,  Edward  T.

Dixon,  Hugh  N.,  17  St.  Matthew's  Parade,  Northampton.

Dixon, Professor  W.  Macneile,  LL.B.,  Litt.D.,  2  South  Park
Terrace,  Hillhead,  Glasgow,  W.

Doane,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Dobie,  D.  Jamieson,  46  Hulne  Avenue,  Tynemouth.

Dodds,  E.  R.,  University  College,  Oxford.
*Dodge,  Miss  Mary  H.,  Warwick  House, St.  James's,  London,
S.W.

Donne,  Mrs.,  c/o  Messrs.  Holt  &  Co.,  3  Whitehall  Place,  London,
S.W.

Dorr, George  B., 18 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

*Dougall,  Miss  Lily,  Cutts  End,  Cumnor,  nr.  Oxford.
Douglas,  Mrs.,  4  Campden  House  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Douglas,  Mrs.  Charles,  Auchlochan,  Lesmahagow,  Lanarkshire.
Douglas,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  W.,  Tuxedo  Park,  Orange  County,  New
York,  U.S.A.

Douglas,  Rev.  Job  A.,  11  Commercial  Road,  Peckham,  London,
S.E.

*Douglas-Pennant,  Hon.  Violet,  9  Cromwell  Place,  London,  S.W.

Dowson,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Felixstowe,  The  Park,  Nottingham.
*Doyle,  Sir  A.  Conan,  M.D.,  Windlesham,  Crowborough,  Sussex.

Drake,  Mrs.  A.  J.,  24  Bennington  Street,  Newton,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Drew,  Ringrose  C,  Kluang,  Johore,  via  Singapore,  Federated
Malay  States.


520


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Drewry,  Mrs.  George,  c/o  S.  Hicks,  J. P.,  Rostherne,  Upper
Colwyn  Bay,  N.  Wales.

Driesch,  Professor  Hans,  Ph.D.,  L.L.D.,  52  Uferstrasse,  Heidel-
berg.

Duggin,  Mrs.  Clias.,  25  East  38th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Dulley,  Rev.  P>.,  St.  Peter's  Clergy  House,  London  Docks,  E.
*Duncan,  Harold,  43  Fetter  Lane,  London,  E.C.
*Duncan,  Mrs.,  Earlston,  Epsom  Road,  Guildford,  Surrey.

Dunne,  D.  P.,  Yetholme,  Liverpool  Road,  Birkdale,  Southport.
*Dutton,  Miss  A.,  Somerdon,  Sidmouth,  Devon.

Dyce,  Capt.  Cecil,  69  Linden  Gardens,  Bayswater,  London,  W.

Dyson,  Rev.  W.  H.,  Edgerton,  1a  Weld  Road,  Birkdale,  Southport.

Edelsten,  Colonel  John  A.,  8  Beach  Lawn,  Waterloo,  nr.  Liverpool.

Edie,  H.  S.  Ker,  c/o  Messrs.  Thos.  Cook  &  Son,  Ludgate  Circus,
London,  E.C.

*Edwardes,  Mrs.  Dyer,  5  Hyde  Park  Gate,  Kensington,  London,  W.
-Elder,  Frederick,  The  Times  Library  Club,  380  Oxford  Street,
London,  W.

Eldred,  Fleet-Paymaster  E.  H.,  R.N.,  c/o  Capital  and  Counties

Bank,  Ltd.,  Southsea,  Hants.
Elliot,  Miss  A.  I.  M.,  Women's  University  Settlement,  44  Nelson

Square,  Blackfriars  Road,  London,  S.E.
Elliot,  Gilbert  C,  Hull  Place,  Deal,  Kent.
Elliot,  Mrs.  Gilbert,  Kasr  el  Nuzha,  Cairo,  Egypt.
Elliott,  Captain  B.  H.,  R.A.,  6  Ahlon  Road,  Rangoon,  Burma.
Ellis,  Herbert,  The  Gynsills,  Groby  Road,  Leicester.
Emmerson,  Robert,  M.D.,  Calle  Llave  423,  Chihuahua,  Chih.,

Mexico.

Emmet,  Rev.  C.  W.,  West  Hendred  Vicarage,  Steventon,  Berks.

Engall,  John  S.,  62  Goldsmith  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.

Eno,  H.  L.,  Princeton,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.

Entee,  Professor  B.  A.,  Samaldas  College,  Bhaunagar,  India.

Erskine,  Mrs.,  The  Buries,  Bishopstrow,  Warminster,  Wilts.

Evans,  Frank  Gwynne,  The  Tower  House,  Woodchester,  Stroud.

Evans,  W.  A.,  The  Brackley,  Stoneygate  Avenue,  Leicester.
*Fabbri,  Alessandro,  11  East  62nd  Str.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Farrer,  The  Dowager  Lady,  Idlerocks,  Stone,  Staffordshire.

Faulkner,  W.  B.,  52  South  Molton  Street,  London,  W.
*Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  5  John  Street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.

Ferenczi,  Dr.  Sandor,  VII,  Erzsebet-Korut  54,  Budapest,  Hungary.

Field,  Allan  B.,  Kingslea,  Strines  Road,  Marple,  Cheshire.


LXX.]


Members  and  Associates.


521


Fillmer,  Hoi'atio  R.,  52  Ship  Street,  Brighton.
*Firth,  Colonel  R.  H.
Fisk,  Rev.  George,  Tsingchowfu,  Shantung,  China.
Fliigel,  J.  C,  Cravenhurst,  Reigate,  Surrey.

Foote,  Mrs.  H.  R.,  Harewood  House,  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
Ford,  Miss  Emily  S.,  23  Glebe  Place,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
*Forman,  Josef,  28  Lowndes  Square,  London,  S.W.
Forman,  Colonel  R.  H.,  A.M.S.,  65  Ashley  Gardens,  London,
S.W.

Fortescue,  Miss  Frances,  Woodlands,  Warwick  Gardens,  Worthing.
*Foster,  Rev.  J.  Edgar,  Lindsey  Vicarage,  Ipswich.

Fotheringham,  W.  B.,  24  Teville  Road,  Worthing.
*Fox,  Mrs.,  Fawe  Park,  Keswick,  Cumberland.

Fraenkel,  Dr. Joseph, 21  East  82nd  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Francis, Arthur,  P.O.  Mazwood, Victoria, Vancouver  Island,
Canada.
'•Francis,  Mrs.  Francis.
Frankiand,  F.  W.

Franks,  Mrs.,  51  Dacre  Hill,  Rock  Ferry,  Birkenhead.
Freeman,  Miss  Adelaide  C,  Queen  Anne's  Mansions,  London,
S.W.

Freeman,  Rev.  H.  B.,  The  Vicarage,  Burton-on-Trent,  Staffs.
*Frith,  Mrs.,  Swynnerton  Rectory,  Stone,  Staffordshire.
*Frost,  Miss  Annie,  Carnelloe  Cottage,  Zenuor,  nr.  St.  Ives,  Corn-
wall.

Frostick,  J.  A.,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.
*Fry,  Miss  Agnes,  Failand  House,  Failand,  near  Bristol.
*Fry,  Lewis  George,  Stonycroft,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.
*Fullerton,  Colonel  J. D.,  Artillery  Mansions,  Victoria  Street,
Westminster,  London,  S.W.

Gabb,  F.  B.,  The  Willows,  Abergavenny,  Wales.

Gaff,  T.  T.,  1520  20th  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Gage,  Lyman  J.,  Point  Loma,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Gantz,  Mrs.,  Wallington  Rectory,  Baldock,  Herts.

Gardiner,  Professor  H.  N.,  23  Crafts  Avenue,  Northampton,
Mass.,  U.S.A.

Gardner,  Harold  E.,  9  Cook  Street,  Liverpool.
*Gaskell,  Mrs.  J.  B.,  Roseleigh,  Woolton,  Liverpool.

Gellert,  J.  W.,  c/o  Box  396,  G.P.O.,  Adelaide,  S.  Australia.
*George,  Mrs.,  Cottage-on-the-Links,  Hindhead,  Haslemere,  Surrey.


522


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*George,  H.  Trevelyan,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  33  Ampthill  Square,
London,  N.W.
Gibbes,  C.  S.,  Mojaiskaia  oolitsa,  No.  1,  Petrograd.
Gibson,  Professor  W. R.  Boyce,  D.Sc,  Lichfield,  18  Wallace

Avenue,  Toorak,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Girod,  Madame,  4  Avenue  Hoche,  Paris.
Glenconner,  Lady,  34  Queen  Anne's  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Gobel,  J.  S.,  Fraii9ois  Valentignstraat  199,  The  Hague.
Goedhart,  P.,  Laan  van  Meerdervoort  135,  The  Hague.
*Goldschmidt,  Mrs.  Beni  de,  16  Wilton  Street,  Grosvenor  Place,
London,  S.W.

Goldstein,  Dr.  phil.  J.,  Rossdorferstrasse  81,  Darmstadt,  Germany.
Golejewski,  Lieut. -Colonel  N.,  The  Russian  Embassy,  Washing-
ton, U.S.A.

Golejewski,  Madame,  The  Russian  Embassy,  Washington,  U.S.A.
Gomme,  J.  F.,  196  Oxford  Street,  London,  W.
Gooch,  G.  P.,  South  Villa,  Campden  Hill  Road,  London,  W.
Goodall,  Charles  Henry,  Lucknow  Avenue,  Nottingham.
Goodhart, Rev. Charles A., Lambourne Rectory,  Romford,
Essex.

Gordon,  Mrs.  J.  L.  R.,  Roden  House,  Cheltenham.
Gough,  A.  B.,  Ph.D.,  Sandcroft,  Upper  Bridge  Road,  Redhill,
Surrey.

Gover,  J.  M.,  LL.D.,  5  New  Square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,
W.C.

Gower, John H., Mus.  Doc. (Oxon.), 1600 Clarkson  Street,
Denver,  Colo.,  U.S.A.
*Grafflin,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Filston  Manor,  Glencoe,  Baltimore  County,
Md.,  U.S.A.

Graham,  J.  W.,  Dalton  Hall,  Victoria  Park,  Manchester.
*Grant-Suttie,  Captain  H.  F.,  "  H  "  Battery,  Royal  Horse  Artillery,
Expeditionary  Force.
Graveson,  Miss  C, Goldsmiths'  College, New Cross,  London,
S.E.

Green,  Mrs.  Alan  B.,  Hogarth  House,  Bushey,  Herts.
Greene,  Mrs.  Bertram,  382  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

*Greene,  J.  G.,  34  Stiles  Street,  Elizabeth,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.

Greeves,  Rev.  F.  B.,  Cudworth  Vicarage,  Barnsley,  Yorkshire.

Greg,  Mrs.,  56  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.
*Grenfell,  Mrs.,  5  New  College  Street,  Oxford.


LXX.]


Members  and  Associates.


523


*Grenfell,  Field-Marshal  Lord,  G.C.B.,  G.C.M.G.,  Overstone  Park,
Northants.

Grew,  Mrs.  Joseph  Clark,  Rauchstr.  27,  Berlin,  Germany.
*Grey,  R.  C,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  &  Co.,  54  Parliament  Street,
London,  S.W.

Gribble,  Miss  F.  M.,  32  Chester  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  London,
N.W.

""Grignon,  Miss  A.  E.,  4  Melrose  Avenue,  Cricklewood,  London,
N.W.

*Grigsby,  Miss  E.  B.,  80  Brook  Street,  London,  W.
Grosvenor, Hon. Mrs. R. C, Morrisburne House,  Woking,
Surrey.

Grottendieck,  W.  G.,  Schenk  Straat  150,  The  Hague.
*Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  Southwold,  SulTolk.

*Gurbaxani,  Professor  H.  M.,  D.J.  Sind  College,  Karachi,  Sind,
India.

*Guttwoch,  Charles,  7  Kingswood  Avenue,  Queen's  Park,  London,
N.W.

*Gwyn,  W.  J.,  8  Netherhall  Gardens,  South  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.

Hackett, James  T.,  Widows'  Fund  Building, Grenfell  Street,
Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Haemmerle,  Madame,  Merdo,  Arendal,  Norway.

Haldar,  Professor  Hiralal,  37  Sibnarayan  Das  Lane,  Calcutta.

Halkett,  Miss  Katherine  E.
*Hall,  Mrs.  Basil,  29  Dover  Street,  London,  S.W.

Hall,  Miss  E.  M.,  Swedish  Gymnasium,  Prince's  Drive,  Colwyn
Bay,  N.  Wales.
*Hall,  J.  P.,  Gorse  Bank,  Werneth,  Oldham.

Hall,  R.  D.,  c/o  W.  H.  Hart,  Sutton-on-Hull,  Yorks.

Hall,  Miss  S.  Elizabeth,  33  Canfield  Gardens,  London,  N.W.

Hall,  Wilfred,  9  Priors  Terrace,  Tynemouth,  Northumberland.

Hallett,  Henry  Hiram,  Bridge  House,  Taunton.
*Halsey,  Mrs.,  18  Mount  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,  London,  W.
*Hambro,  Mrs.  Eric,  70  Prince's  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Hamilton, James, Heversham School, Milnthorpe,  Westmore-
land.

Hamilton,  J.  J.,  80  Woodland  Rise,  Muswell  Hill,  London,  N.
Hamilton,  Mrs.  Vera,  22  Hornsey  Lane,  Highgate,  London,  N.
Hamilton,  W.  Bernard.

Hammond,  Miss  Winifred  B.,  Cocpiille,  Oregon,  U.S.A.


524


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Handcock,  Dr.  Charles  L.,  J. P.,  Muswellbrook,  New  South  Wales,
Australia.

Hannes,  Mrs.,- Woolley  Firs,  Maidenhead  Thicket,  Berks.
Hansard,  Mrs.,  1236  Oxford  Street,  Victoria,  Vancouver  Island,

British  Columbia.
Hanson,  H.  P.,  Box  39,  R.F.D.  Route  No.  5,  Harlan,  Iowa,  U.S.A.
Hanson,  Mrs.,  Pleasaunce  Cottage,  Dormans  Park,  Surrey.
Hardeman,  Miss  Frances  E.,  1  Prince's  Park  Terrace,  Liverpool.
Hardie,  Miss  Mabel,  M.B.,  Candello,  577  Finchley  Road,  London,

N.W.

Harding,  Miss  A.  K.,  c/o  Nevett  &  Co.,  21  Park  Road,  Crouch
End,  London,  N.
*Harding,  Wyndham,  19  Bishopsgate,  London,  E.G.
Hargreaves,  Miss,  115  Clarence  Gate  Gardens,  Regent's  Park,
London,  N.W.

Harris,  Alan  C.,  c/o  Messrs.  Morgan,  Harjes  &  Co.,  31  Boulevard
Haussmann,  Paris,  France.
*Harris,  Mrs.  H.  Percy,  98  Gloucester  Terrace,  London,  W.
*Harris,  Hon.  J.,  East  India  United  Service  Club,  16  St.  James's
Square,  London,  S.W.

Harris,  Mrs.  Leverton,  70  Grosvenor  Street,  London,  W.

Harris,  Mrs.  W.  F.,  The  Willows,  Westbourne  Avenue,  Hull.

Harrison,  Rev.  Arthur  S.,  28  Eastgate,  Stafford.

Harrison,  Miss  Jane  E.,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.

Harrison,  William,  47  Chatsworth  Road,  Croydon,  Surrey.

*Hart, Colonel  H.  H.,  R.E.,  c/o  Messrs.  King,  King  &  Co.,
Bombay,  India.

Hart,  Lieut.-General  Sir  Reginald  Clare,  V.C.,  K.C.B.,  K.C.V.O.,
United  Service  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.
*Hartness,  James,  Springfield,  Vermont,  U.S.A.

Hartshorn,  Miss  Cornelia,  Milton  P.O.,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Hartshorne, Charles  H., 35 Warren  Place, Montclair,  N.J.,
U.S.A.

Hastie,  Miss,  c/o  Messrs.  Street,  30  Cornhill,  London,  E.C.
Hastings,  Rev.  J.  H.,  The  Manor  House,  Halton,  Lancaster.
Hatton,  G.  C,  3  Vernon  Chambers,  Southampton  Row,  London,
W.C.

Hauxhnrst,  Mrs.  W.,  35  West  81st  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.,
U.S.A.

Hawarden,  The  Viscountess,  18  Chelsea  Court,  London,  S.W.
Hawker,  Mrs.  George,  55  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.


LXX.]


Members  and  Associates.


525


Hawker,  Miss  Elizabeth,  55  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Hawkins,  E.  F.,  9bis  Allee  du  Jardin  Anglais,  Le  Raincy  (S.  et
O.),  France.

Hayes,  Rev.  Joseph  W.,  West  Thurrock  Vicarage,  Grays,  Essex.
Head,  Miss  Alice  L.,  26  Leinster  Square,  London,  W.
Heard,  G.  H.,  90  Goldhurst  Terrace,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
Heath,  George  H.,  277  Brockley  Road,  London,  S.E.
Heaton,  Guy,  51  West  CliS  Road,  Bournemouth.
Henderson,  J.  J.,  322  Avenue  U,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Henderson, Miss  Lilian,  The  Sesame  Club, 29  Dover  Street,
London,  W.

Henly,  Mrs.  Albert  W.,  Gwydyr  House,  Bromley,  Kent.
Henning,  Mrs.,  4  Upper  Bedford  Place,  Russell  Square,  London,
W.C.

Henrici,  Jacob,  6126  Penn.  Avenue,  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1  Argyll  Villas,  Cheltenham.
Herbert-Smith,  Miss  Evelyn  E.,  Raymead,  Park  Road,  Watford,
Herts.

Herriot,  Miss  E.  F.,  2  Sunningdale  Gardens,  Kensington,  Lon-
don, W.

Hersckel,  Colonel  John,  F.R.S.,  Royal  Engineers,  Slough,  Bucks.

Heseltine,  Mrs.,  19  Launceston  Place,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Heymans,  Prof.  G.,  Ubbo-Emmiussingel  2,  Groningen,  Holland.
*Hicks,  Miss  Lucy,  50  Cambridge  Terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Higbee,  Colonel  George  H.,  Burlington,  Iowa,  U.S.A.

Hildyard,  F.  W.,  77a  Lexham  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Hill,  J.  Arthur,  Claremont,  Thornton,  Bradford.
*Hillard,  Miss  Mary  R.,  Westover  School,  Middlebury,  Conn.,
U.S.A.

Hillman,  E.  Haviland,  4  Somers  Place,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Himes,  Prof.  Charles  F.,  170  W.  Louther  Street,  Carlisle,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Hoare,  Fred  H.,  37  Fleet  Street,  London,  E.G.
Hoare,  Mrs.  Henry,  20  Montagu  Street,  Portman  Square,  Lon-
don, W.

Hockliffe,  Mrs.  Ernest,  Littlebrook,  Uppingham.

Hodding,  Miss,  2  The  Avenue,  Bedford  Park,  London,  W.

Hoernle,  Professor  R.  F.  Alfred,  Emerson  Hall,  Harvard  Uni-
versity, Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Hogenraad,  Mrs.  Clio,  Cornelis  Jolstraat  93a,  Scheveningen,
Holland.


52G


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Hogg,  Sir  Frederick  Russell,  Oriental  Club, Hanover  Square,
London,  W.

*Hogg,  Henry  R.,  23  Hornton  Street,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Hoggan,  Mrs.  Frances,  M.D.,  Hillview,  Squire's  Lane,  Finchley,

London,  N.
Holding,  Sam,  Columbia,  Tenn.,  U.S.A.
Holland,  Miss,  1a  Holland  Park,  London,  W.
Hollander,  Bernard,  M.D.,  57  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.
Hollins,  Mrs.,  24  Sussex  Place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
Hollins,  Mrs.  A.  E.,  3  Maid's  Causeway,  Cambridge.
Hollway,  C.  R.,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.

Holme,  Strachan,  Bridgewater  Offices,  Walkden,  Manchester.
*Holt,  Henry,  34  West  33rd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Holt,  Miss  Winifred,  New  York  Association  for  the  Blind,  111  East

59th  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Homan,  C.  H.,  24  Oscarsgade,  Christiania,  Norway.
*Home,  Mrs.  Robert,  b/78  Portsdown  Road,  Maida  Vale,  Lon-
don, W.

Hoppin,  J.  C,  310  Sears  Building,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Horridge,  Miss  J.  G.,  43  Alexandra  Road,  Southport.
*Hoskins,  Edmond  J.,  M.D.,  Hammam  Chambers,  76  Jermyn
Street,  London,  S.W.
Houston,  James,  9  Viale  Giuseppe  Mazzini,  Piazza  d'Armi,  Rome.
Howard,  Miss  Marian,  Dobroyd,  Westgate  Avenue,  Bolton,  Lanes.
Howden,  Mrs.,  11  Eton  Terrace,  Edinburgh.

Howe,  Mrs.  M.  A.  De  Wolfe,  26  Brimmer  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Hude,  Mrs.  Anna,  Ph.D.,  35  Vestre  Boulevard,  Copenhagen,  B.
Hudson,  Morris,  St.  Cuthbert's,  Bathampton,  Somerset.
Hughes,  Major  H.  M.,  St.  Elmo,  Victoria  Road,  Worthing,  Sussex.
*Hull,  Mrs.  Carrie  G.,  20  Garfield  Place,  Poughkeepsie,  N.Y.,
U.S.A.

Hume-Rothery,  J.  H.,  The  Pines,  Tivoli  Road,  Cheltenham.
Humphreys, T. H. A., Survey Department, Giza  (Mudiria),
Egypt.

*Hunt,  Mrs.  Warwick,  12  Lansdowne  Road,  Holland  Park,  London,
W.

Huntingford,  Miss,  Beverley  Hall,  South  Cliff,  Bournemouth.
Hurwitz,  W.  A.,  Ph.D.,  Cornell  University,  Ithaca,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Hussain,  Dr.  C.  Muhammad,  c/o  C.  Jaffer  Hussain,  Madrax-
Arzam,  Mount  Road,  Madras,  India.


LXX.]


Members  and  Associates.


527


Hutchinson,  F.  W.  H.,  Grove  Lawns,  St.  Albans,  Herts.
Hutchison,  Mrs.,  c/o  Messrs.  Woodhead  &  Co.,  44  Charing  Cross,
London,  S.W.

*Hutchison,  Mrs.,  8  The  Manor,  Davies  Street,  London,  W.
Hutton,  Mrs.,  St.  Mary's  Vicarage,  Brighton.

*Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  519  West  149th  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Imamura,  Pi*of.  Shinkichi,  Clinic  for  Psychiatry,  Imperial  Uni-
versity, Kioto,  Japan.

Ingham,  Charles  B.,  Moira  House,  Eastbourne.

Ingham,  Percy  B.,  120  Bedford  Court  Mansions,  London,  W.C.

Ingram,  Miss  M.  I.,  The  Priory,  Wimbledon  Common,  London,
S.W.

Innes,  Miss  H.  K.,  4  Greycoat  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Ionides,  A.  C,  Junr.,  34  Porchester  Terrace,  London,  W.
Ireland,  Gordon,  32  Nassau  Str.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Jacks,  L.  P.,  28  Holywell,  Oxford.
Jackson,  Mrs.,  44  Park  Street,  Calcutta,  India.
Jackson,  Miss  Emily  G.  A.,  28  Melville  Road,  Barnes,  London,
S.W.

*James,  Miss  S.  Boucher,  Hallsannery,  Bideford,  N.  Devon.
'■Jameson,  David,  New  Castle,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

*Janson,  E.  W., 11 Eaton  Mansions,  Eaton  Square,  London,
S.W.

Jaye,  William  R.,  Springwood  Lodge,  Oakfield  Road,  Clapton,

London,  N.E.
Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
Johnson,  Charles  R.,  340  Main  Street,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Johnston,  R.  F.,  Weihaiwei,  China.

*  Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.

Jones,  D.  Marinus,  M.D.,  Ardmay,  Woburn  Place,  London,  W.C.

*  Jones, Sir Lawrence J., Bart., Cranmer Hall,  Fakenham,

Norfolk.

Jones,  Miss  Lilian  I.,  120  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.
Jordan,  H.  W.,  Ashcroft,  The  Green,  Southgate,  London,  N.
*Judah,  Noble  B.,  2701  Prairie  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Judd,  Mrs.  Sylvestre  Dwight,  477  Highland  Avenue,  Maiden,
Mass.,  U.S.A.

Jutsum,  J.  A.,  6  Cowley  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.
Karrer,  Enoch,  6527  Jefferson  Street,  Germantown,  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  U.S.A.


528


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Keene,  The  Most  Rev.  J.  B.,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Meath,  Navan,
Co.  Meath.

Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  The  Hut,  Holmwood,  Dorking.
*Kelso,  Captain,  R.N.,  Horkesley  Park,  Colchester,  Essex.

Kenneth,  H.,  Lindley,  Bycullah  Park,  Enfield,  Middlesex.

Kennion,  T.  A.,  Apartado  810,  Mexico,  D.F.

Kenway,  Mrs.,  Mendip  View,  Winscombe,  Somerset.

Ker,  Miss,  78  Ann  Street,  Glasgow,  W.
*Kerr,  George,  M.B.,  6  St.  Colme  Street,  Edinburgh.

Kerr-Clark,  Lady,  Moore  Abbey,  Monasterevan,  Ireland.

Ketkar,  N.  G.,  Amraoti,  Berar,  India.
-Kevill-Davies,  Captain  G.,  Edgeley  House,  Whitchurch,  Salop.
*King,  H.  F.  Locke,  J. P.,  Brooklands,  Weybridge,  Surrey.

King,  W.  A.  H.,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.
*Kingscote,  Mrs.,  4  Southwick  Crescent,  London,  W.
*Kingsford,  Miss  S.  M.,  5  Doneraile  Street,  Fulham,  London,  S.W.

Kirkwood,  J.  H.  M.,  81  Cadogan  Square,  London,  S.W.
*Kittel,  T.  B.,  Vane  House,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.

Klinckowstroem, Count Carl, Elisabethstrasse 40,  Munich,
Germany.

Knight,  Mrs.  Baillie,  Thornhnrst,  Silverdale  Road,  Burgess  Hill,

Sussex.

Knight,  Charles  N.,  36  Kensington  Park  Road,  London,  W.
Knoller,  Richard,  1  Riemerstrasse  8,  Vienna.
Kothen,  Baron  Axel  von,  27  Mikealsgaten,  Helsingfors,  Finland.
Krebs,  Rev.  Stanley  L.,  1411  N.  18th  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Lach-Szyrma,  Rev.  W.  S.,  Barkingside  Vicarage,  Ilford,  Essex.
Lafone,  A.  W.,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  Walton-on-Thames.
La  Grange,  H.  R.,  43  Winder  Street,  Detroit,  Mich.,  U.S.A.
Laing,  R.  M.,  Boys'  High  School,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.
Lamb,  Charles  George,  77  Glisson  Road,  Cambridge.
Lambert,  Miss  Ada  R.,  4  Overstrand  Mansions,  Prince  of  Wales

Road,  Battersea  Park,  London,  S.W.
Lambert,  G.  W.,  War  Office,  Whitehall,  London,  S.W.
Lane-Poole, Professor Stanley, Litt.D., Donganstown  Castle,

Wicklow,  Ireland.
Langworthy,  Major  G.,  Santa  Clara,  Torremolinos,  Malaga,  Spain.
Larken,  E.  P.,  98  Warwick  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Latham,  Miss  Edith,  3  Avenue  Bugeaud,  Paris.
Latshaw,  Allen,  3414  Sansom  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.


LXX.]


Members  and  Associates.


529


"-Latymer,  Lord,  88  St.  James's  Street,  London,  S.W.

Lauritzen,  Severin,  Holte,  Denmark.

Law,  A.  H.,  16  Manor  House  Road,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.
*Lawry,  J.  Littleton,  M.D.,  Calstock,  Cornwall.

Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  Woodcroft,  Oxted,  Surrey.

Leaf,  Miss  Ellen,  6  Airlie  Gardens,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.

Leaf,  Miss  E.  M.,  4  Barton  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.

Leaf,  Mrs.,  The  Green,  Marlborough,  Wilts.
*Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.D.,  6  Sussex  Place,  Regent's  Park,  London, N.W.

Leaf,  Mrs.  Walter,  6  Sussex  Place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.

Ledyard,  Mrs.  R.  F.  H.,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Lee,  Blewett,  135  Park  Row,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.

Lees,  Miss  G.  Hyde,  16  Montpelier  Square,  London,  S.W.
*Legg,  W.  A.,  18  The  Avenue,  Brondesbury,  London,  N.W.

Leggatt,  E.  O.  E.,  Y  Bryn,  Deanery  Road,  Godalming,  Surrey.
*Leigh,  Lord,  Stoneleigh  Abbey,  Kenilworth,  Warwickshire.

Leigh,  W.  Austen,  Hartfield,  Roehampton,  London,  S.W.

Lenon,  J.  W.,  c/o  P.O.  Kyambu,  British  East  Africa.

Leon,  Mrs.  Philip,  4m  Montagu  Mansions,  Portman  Square,
London,  W.

Leonard,  Thomas,  223  W.  School  Lane,  Germantown,  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  U.S.A.

Leslie,  James,  1029  Corydon  Avenue,  Winnipeg,  Canada.

Lewin,  Rev.  C.  H.,  The  Hill,  Lower  Bourne,  Farnham,  Surrey.

Lewis,  David  J.,  House  of  Representatives  U.S.,  Washington,
D.C.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Public  Library  of  Adelaide,  Australia.

Librarian,  Adelbert  College  of  Western  Reserve  University,  Cleve-
land, Ohio,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Birmingham  Public  Libraries,  Reference  Department,
Ratcliff  Place,  Birmingham.

Librarian,  Bowdoin  College  Library,  Brunswick,  Maine,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Public  Library,  etc.,  Church  Street,  Brighton.

Librarian,  Cambridge  Public  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Public  Library,  Colorado  Springs,  Colo.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Public  Library  of  the  District  of  Columbia,  Washing-
ton, D.C.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Library  of  Congress,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Librarian  (Hon.)  of  the  Constitutional  Club,  Northumberland
Avenue,  London,  W.C.

Librarian,  The  John  Crerar  Library,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.


530


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Librarian,  Enoch  Pratt  Free  Library  of  Baltimore  City,  Baltimore,
Md.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Grosvenor  Public  Library,  c/o  Messrs.  Stevens  &  Brown,

4  Trafalgar  Square,  London,  W.C.
Librarian,  Guildhall  Library,  London,  E.C.
Librarian,  Hackley  Public  Library,  Muskegon,  Mich.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Harvard  College  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Jamsetjee  Nesserwanjee  Petit  Institute,  Hornby  Road,

Bombay.

Librarian,  Leeds  Library,  Commercial  Street,  Leeds.
Librarian,  Leland  Stanford  Junior  University,  Calif.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Library  Association,  Portland,  Oregon,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Meadville  Theological  School,  Meadville,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Mercantile  Library,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Minneapolis  Athenaeum,  Minneapolis,  Minn.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Newberry  Library,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society,  Newcastle-upon-
Tyne.

Librarian,  Public  Library,  New  Bridge  Street,  Newcastle-upon-
Tyne.

Librarian,  New  Hampshire  State  Library,  Concord,  N.H.,  U.S.A.
Librarian, Public  Library  of  New  South  Wales, c/o  Messrs.

Truslove  &  Hanson,  153  Oxford  Street,  London,  W.
Librarian,  New  York  Public  Library,  c/o  Messrs.  Stevens  &  Brown,

4  Trafalgar  Square,  London,  W.C.
Librarian,  Ohio  State  Library,  Columbus,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
""Librarian,  Omaha  Public  Library  and  Museum,  19  and  Harvey

Streets,  Omaha,  Nebraska,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Pennsylvania  State  Library,  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Peoria  Public  Library,  Peoria,  111.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Public  Library,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Seattle  Public  Library,  Seattle,  Washington,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Theological  Seminary,  Rochester,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Theosophical  Society,  19  Tavistock  Square,  London,

W.C.

Librarian,  The  University,  Aberdeen.

Librarian,  Bibliotheque  Victor  Cousin,  L'Universite  de  Paris.
Librarian,  University  of  Minnesota  Library,  Minneapolis,  Minne-
sota, U.S.A.

Librarian,  University  of  Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  University  of  Sydney,  New  South  Wales,  Australia.


LXX.]


Members  and  Associates.


531


Librarian,  Victoria  Public  Library,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Librarian,  Wellesley  College,  Wellesley,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian, Dr. Williams's  Library, Gordon Square,  London,
W.C.

Librarian,  Yale  University  Library,  New  Haven,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
*Llewellin,  Mrs.  W.,  Upton  House,  nr.  Poole,  Dorset.

Lloyd,  Major-General  Sir  Francis,  K.C.B.,  C.V.O.,  D.S.O.,  Aston
Hall,  Oswestry,  Salop.

Lloyd,  Judge  Frank  T.,  Camden,  N.J.,  U.S.A.

Lloyd,  Rev.  John,  530  Warren  Street,  Wausau,  Wisconsin,  U.S.A.

Lloyd,  Miss  Julia,  Farm,  Sparkbrook,  Birmingham.

Lodge,  Miss  E.  C,  Lady  Margaret  Hall,  Oxford.
*Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  F.R.S.,  Mariemont,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.

Lodge,  Robert,  Compton  Wood,  28  Carlisle  Road,  Eastbourne.

Loewenstein,  Amtsrichter  Dr.,  Heimhuderstrasse  32,  Hamburg,
Germany.

Lomax,  Arthur,  Heilbron,  O.R.C.,  S.  Africa.

Lombardi,  C,  2231  Le  Conte  Avenue,  Berkeley,  CaL,  U.S.A.,  and
c/o  The  Dallas  News,  Dallas,  Texas,  U.S.A.

Long,  Miss  Constance,  M.D.,  2  Harley  Place,  London,  W.

Long,  T.  K.,  4823  Kimbark  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.

Low,  Miss  Ursula,  22  Roland  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Lowrey,  Grosvenor,  M.D.,  34  Albert  Road,  Regent's  Park,  Lon-
don, N.W.

Lubbock,  Mrs.  Geoffrey,  Greenhill,  Sutton-Veny,  Wiltshire.

Lyall,  Sir  Charles  James,  82  Cornwall  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Lyall,  Edward,  Barton,  R.S.O.,  Darlington.

Lyell,  D.,  74  Campden  Hill  Court,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Lyon,  Miss  C.  C,  Ashcroft,  Prestwood,  Great  Missenden.

Lyttelton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Alfred,  16  Great  College  Street,  Westminster,
London,  S.W.

Macdonald,  Prof.  Duncan  Black,  Hartford  Theological  Seminary,

Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
Macdonald,  Lieut. -Colonel  F.,  Neemuch,  Central  India.
Macdonald,  Miss  Isabelle  M.,  M.B.,  47  Seymour  Street,  Portman

Square,  London,  W.
Macdonald,  Mrs.,  Dun  Erin,  Chalfont  St.  Peter,  Bucks.
MacGregor,  Arthur  C,  8  Longford  Terrace,  Monkstown,  Co.

Dublin.

Mackay,  N.  Douglas,  M.D.,  Dall-Avon,  Aberfeldy,  Perth.
Mackenzie,  H.  Gordon,  M.D.,  74  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.


532


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Mackenzie, Lady  Muir, 22  Draycott  Place,  Cadogan  Gardens,
London,  S.W.

Mackintosh,  R.  D.,  M.B.,  The  Bungalow,  Mortlake,  Surrey.

Macklin,  Miss  Helen  E.,  141  Inverness  Terrace,  London,  W.

Macnauglitan,  Miss,  1  Norfolk  Street,  Park  Lane,  London,  W.

MacVeagh,  Lincoln,  11  Prescott  Hall,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Madocks,  Major  H.  J.,  94  Piccadilly,  London,  W.

Mahler,  Mrs.  John,  Bronygarth,  Oswestry,  Salop.

Mainwaring,  Mrs.,  11  Wilton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.

Maitland,  A.  Heriot,  Calle  Andes  22,  Buenos  Aires.

Mallet,  Sir  Louis,  K.C.M.G.,  C.B.
*Malone,  Squadron-Commander  C.  L'Estrange,  R.N.,  30  Eccleston
Street,  London,  S.W.

Mander,  Charles  A.,  The  Mount,  Wolverhampton,  Staffs.
*Mander,  Geoffrey  Le  Mesurier,  Wightwick  Manor,  Wolverhampton.

Mangin,  Marcel,  102  Rue  Erlanger,  Paris.

Mann,  Rev.  Frederic,  Temple  Ewell  Vicarage,  Dover.

Mansell,  Andrew  Evans,  Hammerstene,  Bagdad,  Tasmania.
*Mansfield,  Mrs.  Richard,  The  Grange,  New  London,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Man  tell,  Colonel  A.  M.,  Arolla,  Warren  Road,  Guildford,  Surrey.

Marks,  Mrs.  Claude.

Marsh,  Edward  H.,  3  Gray's  Inn  Place,  London,  W.C.
Marshall, William Cecil, Tweenways, Hindhead,  Haslemere,
Surrey.

Marston,  Charles,  J. P.,  Afcot,  Compton,  nr.  Wolverhampton.
*Marston,  Commander  G.  M.,  R.N.,  Park  Lodge,  Albert  Gate,
Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.
Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78  Vanbrugh  Park,  Blackheath,  London,
S.E.

Marten,  Rev.  G.  H.,  St.  Mark's,  Purley,  Surrey.
Martin,  Mrs.  J.  Biddulph,  Norton  Park,  Bredon's  Norton,  near
Tewkesbury.

Martin,  Thomas  Beecham,  Wanstead  College,  South  Woodford,
London,  N.E.

Martineau,  Alfred  Edward,  Gnrdaspur,  Punjab,  India.
Matsumura,  Rev.  Kaisiki,  Omori,  Tokio,  Japan.
'-Mason,  Frank,  7  Stanley  Crescent,  London,  W.
Mason,  Miss  M.  H.,  5  Vincent  Square  Mansions,  Westminster,
London,  S.W.

Massey,  Hon.  Mary,  80  Royal  Hospital  Road,  Chelsea,  London,
S.W.


LXX.]


Members  and  Associates.


533


*Mather,  Rev.  Herbert,  13  Grosvenor  Road,  East  Grinstead,  Sussex.
*Matthews,  Mrs.,  15  Stanley  Gardens,  Notting  Hill  Gate,  London,
W.

Mattiesen,  Emil,  Ph.D.,  Witzleben  Str.  3,  Charlottenburg,  Berlin,
Germany.

Mavrogordato,  John  N.,  52  Queen's  Gate  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Maxim, Sir Hiram S., Sandhurst Lodge, 382 High  Road,

Streatham,  London,  S.W.
Maxwell,  Dr.  Joseph,  6  Rue  Villaret-de-Joyeuse,  Paris.
^Maxwell,  Sir  John  Stirling,  Bart.,  21  Portland  Place,  London,  W.
Mayor,  R.  G.,  11  Campden  Hill  Square,  Kensington,  London,  W.
M' Alpine,  Robert,  The  Croft,  Totteridge,  Herts.
M'Clellan,  Mrs.  Clara  D.,  Briarcliff  Manor,  New  York  City,  U.S.  A.
M'Clure, Henry, M.D., 30  Portland Court, Portland  Place,
London,  W.

M'Connel,  H.  W.,  M.B.,  M.R.C.S.,  Matlaske  Hall,  Norwich;

and  11  Eton  Avenue,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
M'Connel,  Mrs.,  Matlaske  Hall,  Norwich;  and  11  Eton  Avenue,

Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
M'Dougall,  William,  F.R.S.,  M.Sc,  M.B.,  Woodsend,  Foxcombe

Hill,  nr.  Oxford.
M'Kay,  Mrs.  Alex.,  Mangonui  N.,  Auckland,  New  Zealand.
M'Keever,  Buell,  3900  Lake  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
M'Lauchlan,  G.  M.,  c/o  B.  A.  Hignett,  St.  Brannocks,  Mount

Grove,  Birkenhead.
Mead,  G.  R.  S.,  16  Selwood  Place,  Onslow  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Meek,  Maximilian  de,  5  Rue  Leo  Delibes,  Paris.
Meebold,  Alfred,  Heidenheim,  Wurtemberg,  Germany.
Megson,  Albert,  Fern  Villa,  Headlands,  Ossett,  Yorks.
Mehrji,  Munchershaw  Hormusji,  M.D.,  3  Batlivala  Villa,  Sleater

Road,  Bombay,  India.
Meissner,  Mrs.  de,  1524  31st  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Mellone,  Rev.  Sydney  Herbert,  D.Sc,  Dunedin,  Victoria  Park,

Manchester.

Menendez-Mena,  Rodolfo,  LL.D.,  D.Sc,  Apartado  24,  Merida,

Yucatan,  Mexico.
Merwin,  Miss  Mary  F.,  668  Hancock  Street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,

U.S.A.

Metcalfe,  Mrs.  G.  R.,  The  Aberdeen,  St.  Paul,  Minnesota,  U.S.A.
Meyer,  Rev.  F.  B.,  Regent's  Park  Chapel,  Park  Square  East,
London,  N.W.


534


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Micklethwait,  Richard  K.

*Mildmay,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  St.  John,  121  Mount  Street,  London,  W.

*Miles,  Miss,  59  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

*Millard,  Mrs.  Almira  B.,  2505  Farnam  Str.,  Omaha,  Neb.,  U.S.A.

Millard,  Charles  Killick,  M.D.,  D.Sc.,  Gilroes,  Leicester.
"""Miller,  Prof.  Dickinson  S.

*Miller,  Miss  Elizabeth  L.,  Greenriver,  Bonchester  Bridge,  Hawick,
N.B.

*Milward,  Graham,  77  Colmore  Row,  Birmingham.
*Mirlees,  W.  J.,  11  Cranmer  Road,  Cambridge.
Mitchell,  Sidney  J.,  c/o  D.  Mitchell  &  Co.,  Box  77,  G.P.O.,  New-
castle, N.S.W.,  Australia.
*Mitchell,  T.  W.,  M.D.,  Hoath  Cottage,  Hadlow,  nr.  Tonbridge.
Monteagle, The  Lord, K.P., Mount  Trenchard, Foynes,  Co.
Limerick.

Montgomery,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Byways,  Exmouth,  Devon.

Moore,  Major  H.  G. A.,  East  Yorkshire  Regiment,  Victoria

Barracks,  Beverley,  Yorks.
*Moore,  Admiral  W.  Usborne,  8  Western  Parade,  Southsea.
Morison,  Mrs.  Miller,  4  Randolph  Cliff,  Edinburgh;  and  Morison

House,  Hetland,  Ruthwell,  N.B.
Morley,  Edwin  W.,  Andover,  Ashtobula  County,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
Morrill,  Dr.  Frank  G.,  Havana,  111.,  U.S.A.
Morris,  Mrs.,  Horsley  Hall,  Eccleshall,  Staffs.
Morton,  Mrs.  F.  N.,  73  West  La  Crosse  Avenue,  Lansdowne,  Pa.,

U.S.A.

Moses,  E.  J.,  c/o  Messrs.  E.  D.  Sassoon  &  Co.,  2  Rampart  Row,
Bombay.

Moss-Blundell,  F.  B.,  28  George  Street,  Richmond,  Surrey.
Mosscockle,  Mrs.,  26  Hertford  Street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.
Moulton,  Mrs.,  7  rue  de  Chaillot,  Paris.

Moultrie,  Miss  A.  J.  C,  6  Oakhill  Road,  Putney,  London,  S.W.

Miiller,  Fraulein  A.,  78  Vanbrugh  Park,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.

Munro,  Hector,  M.B.,  27  Lower  Seymour  Street,  London,  W.

Murgoci,  Prof.  George,  Str.  Transylvania  13,  Bucharest,  Roumania.
*Murray,  Donald,  12  Wharf  Road,  City  Road,  London,  N.
*Murray,  Professor  Gilbert,  LL.D.,  Litt.D.,  82  Woodstock  Road,
Oxford.

Murray,  Miss  Jessie,  M.B.,  14  Endsleigh  Street,  Tavistock  Square,

London,  W.C.
Murton,  Miss  Josephine,  The  Firs,  Charing,  Kent.


LXX.]


Members  and  Associates.


535


Musson,  Miss  A.  J.,  Fair  View  West,  Rainhill,  Lanes.
Myers,  Professor  Charles  S.,  M.D.,  Galewood  Tower,  Great  Shel-
ford,  Cambs.

*Myers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
*Myers,  L.  H.,  34  Kensington  Square,  London,  W.
Myers,  W.  Wykeham,  M.B.,  H.B.M.'s  Consular  Agency,  Pagoda

Anchorage,  China.
*Neale,  Edward,  c/o  Mr.  Herbert  Bishop,  29  Ludgate  Hill,  London,

E.C.

Neild,  Miss  Maria,  27  Brompton  Square,  London,  S.W.
Neustadter,  Louis  W.,  461  Mission  Street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.,
U.S.A.

*Newcastle,  The  Duke  of,  Clumber,  Worksop,  Notts.
*Newmann,  Oscar  P.,  84  Newman  Street,  London,  W.

Newton,  Miss  I.,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.

Newton,  Heber,  Oamaru,  New  Zealand.
*Nicoll,  Mrs.  DeLancey,  23  East  39th  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Nicolls,  Brig. -General  E.  G.,  United  Service  Club,  Pall  Mall,
London,  S.W.

Nicolson,  Right  Hon.  Sir  Arthur,  Bart.,  G.C.B.,  etc.,  Foreign
Office,  Downing  Street,  London,  S.W.

*Nisbet,  E.  T.,  13  Beverley  Terrace,  Cullercoats,  Northumberland.

*Niven,  Mrs.  Graham,  The  Golden  Farm,  Cirencester,  Gloucester-
shire.

Noel,  Miss  Frances,  40  Beaufort  Mansions,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Noel,  J.  B.  L.,  West  Hill  House,  Portishead.

Noel-Cox,  H.  L.,  M.D.,  F.R.A.S.,  11  Clifton  Hill,  Clifton,  Bristol.
Norman, Hubert, M.B., Camberwell House, Peckham  Road,
London,  S.E.

*Norris,  Professor  Richard, M.D.,  F.R.S.E., The  Laboratory,

Yardley  Fields,  Yardley,  Birmingham.
Northcote,  Rev.  H.,  17  Rue  Simoneau,  Boulogne-sur-Mer,  France.
Nott,  William  F.,  Sunnyside,  Wales  Avenue,  Carshalton,  Surrey.
Nutter,  Miss  H.  G.,  6  Acacia  Road,  Norbury,  London,  S.W.
Oates,  R.  Crosbie,  The  Chalet,  Park  West,  Heswall,  Cheshire.
Odell,  S.  W.,  202  Boston  Building,  Pasadena,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Ogilvie,  Mrs.  Robert,  c/o  R.  G.  Ross,  10  Hill  Street,  Edinburgh.
Ogle,  Captain  N.,  67th  Punjabis,  Quetta,  Baluchistan,  India.
Oldham,  G.  F.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Rostrevor,  Langton  Green,

Tunbridge  Wells.


536


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*01ivier, Sir Sydney, K.C.M.G., Board of Agriculture  and
Fisheries,  4  Whitehall  Place,  London,  S.W.
Oman,  Professor  Charles  W.  C,  Frewin  Hall,  Oxford.
Onslow,  Lady,  Chevin  Bank,  Duffield,  Derbyshire.
*Onslow,  Hon.  H.,  Clandon  Park,  Guildford.
Osborne,  Miss  H.,  2  Northcote  Mansions,  Heath  Street,  Hamp-

stead,  London,  N.W.
Overton,  Mrs.  Winfield  S.,  4  Upper  Bedford  Place,  London,  W.C.
*Owen,  A.  S.,  Keble  College,  Oxford.
Pack  Beresford,  Denis  R.,  Fenagh  House, Bagenalstown,  Co.
Carlow.

Pagan,  Miss  C,  Marston  Lodge,  Harrow.

Paget,  Sir  Arthur,  9  King's  Bench  Walk,  Temple,  London,  E.C.
Paley,  Mrs.,  Ampton  Hall,  Bury  St.  Edmunds.
*Parkin,  John,  Blaithwaite,  Carlisle.
Parkin,  Mrs.,  Broomhill  House,  Watson  Road,  Sheffield.
Parsons,  N.  M.,  22  Barkston  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Patel,  F.  J.,  L.R.C.P.,  3  Church  Gate  Street,  Bombay.
Paterson,  Miss  Mary  N.,  3  Devonshire  Terrace,  Ventnor,  Isle  of
Wight.

Paul,  J.  Rodman,  505  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Payne, Ernest, 10  Wellington  Court,  Knightsbridge,  London,
S.W.

Pease,  Mrs.  J.  R.,  Hesslewood,  Hessle,  Yorks.

'Peck,  Miss  Charlotte  L.,  Maidencombe  House,  St.  Mary  Church,
S.  Devon.

Peckham, Orville, 953 N. Pennsylvania Street,  Indianapolis,
Indiana,  U.S.A.

Pennington,  Mrs.  Henry,  Chalet  Belleone,  Gstaad,  Bernese  Ober-

land,  Switzerland.
Penny,  W.  R.,  Railway  Stores  Department,  Uitenhage,  nr.  Port

Elizabeth,  S.  Africa.
Percival,  Mrs.,  1  Chesham  Street,  Belgrave  Square,  London,  S.W.
Perdicaris,  Ion,  The  Manor  House,  Chislehurst,  Kent.
Perez,  Dr.  Jorge,  Puerto  de  Orotava,  Teneriffe,  Canary  Isles.
Perkins,  Miss  S.  R.,  c/o  Dr.  Perkins,  57  Harley  Street,  London,  W.
Permain,  W.  J.,  146  East  Dulwich  Grove,  London,  S.E.
Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  The  Count,  55  Serguievskaia,  Petro-

grad.

Perowne,  Miss  Edith,  12  Albert  Road,  Regent's  Park,  London,
N.W.


lxx.]  Members  and  Associates.  537

Perry, Sir  E. Cooper, M.D., Superintendent's  House,  Guy's

Hospital,  London,  S.E.
Perry,  Horace  H.,  Court  Royal,  144  King  s  Cliff,  Brighton.
Perry,  T.  S.,  312  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Perry,  Mrs.  T.  S.,  312  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Pessers,  Henry  J.  G.,  265  Folkestone  Road,  Dover.
*Pkillimore,  Mrs.,  Battler's  Green,  Letchmore  Heath,  Watford,
Herts.

Pickering,  J.  W.,  D.Sc,  Sundridge,  Russell  Hill,  Purley,  Surrey.
*Piddington,  J.  G.,  Holy  Well,  Hook  Heath,  Woking,  Surrey.
*Piercy,  Major  B.  H.,  94  Piccadilly,  London,  W.

Pigou,  Professor  Arthur  Cecil,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
*Pilcher,  Giles  T.,  Treen,  Frith  Hill,  Godalming,  Surrey.
Pinchot,  Gifford,  1615  R.I.  Avenue,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Piper, Jobn  E.,  LL.B., 10  Herondale Avenue,  Wandsworth

Common,  London,  S.W.
Pithapuram,  The  Rajah  of,  Pithapuram,  Godavari  Dist.,  Madras
Presidency,  India.
*Pitt,  St.  George  Lane  Fox,  Travellers'  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.

Pitt,  Mrs.  Fox,  Robin  Hood  Farm,  Kingston  Vale,  Putney,
London,  S.W.

Plowden,  Mrs.,  Strachur  Park,  Loch  Fyne  Side,  Argyllshire.
Plumer-Willson,  Mrs.  W.,  20  Laurence  Road,  Hove,  Brighton.
Pogson  Smith,  Mrs.  E.,  Bourkes,  Blackball  Rd.,  Oxford.
Pond,  George  F.,  816  Commonwealth  Building,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Ponsonby,  Hon.  Mrs.  C.  B.,  14  West  Halkin  Street,  London,  S.W.
Pontifex,  Dudley,  73  Alleyn  Park,  West  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.
Pooley,  H.  F.,  Scotter,  Well  Walk,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
*Pope,  Miss  Theodate,  Hillstead,  Farmington,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
Popoff,  General  James,  Sosnitza,  Gov.  Tchernigov,  Russia.
Porter,  Miss  Agatha,  M.D.,  18  Kensington  Park  Road,  Notting

Hill,  London,  W.
Portsmouth,  The  Countess  of,  Hurstbourne  Park,  Whitchurch,

Hants.

Post,  Mrs.  Wm.,  St.  Lucie,  Fla.  ;  and  Buckhannon,  W.  Va.,  U.S.A.
*Potter,  John  Wilson,  219  Ashley  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Pou,  Hon.  E.  W.,  House  of  Representatives,  Washington,  D.C.,
U.S.A.

Powell,  C.  Berkeley,  J. P.,  283  Metcalfe  Street,  Ottawa,  Canada.


538


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Powles,  Lewis  Charles,  The  Highlands,  Rye,  Sussex.

Prausnitz,  Dr.  Paul  H.,  Buchschlag,  bei  Frankfurt-a-M.,  Germauy.
*Proctor,  G.  Norman,  83rd  Wallajahbad  Light  Infantry,  Secundera-

bad,  Deccan,  India.
*Pulver,  S.  H.,  Dunedin  House,  Basinghall  Avenue,  London,  E.G.

Pumphrey,  Mrs.,  Hindley  Hall,  Stocksfield-on-Tyne.

Putnam,  Miss  Irene,  328  Walnut  Avenue,  San  Diego,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Pye,  W.  A.,  Priest  Hill,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.
"Tyke,  Mrs.  Aubone,  The  Hermitage,  Netley  Abbey,  Hants.

Pym,  Mrs.  Guy,  35  Cranley  Gardens,  South  Kensington,  London,
S.W.

Quackenbos,  John  D.,  M.D.,  331  West  28th  Street,  New  York
City,  U.S.A.

*Quinby,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Bridgewater,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Radcliffe-Whitehead,  Ralph,  Woodstock,  Ulster  Co.,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Raggett,  Mrs.,  70  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.

Raikes,  E.  B.,  Drayton  Old  Lodge,  Norwich.

Raikes,  Mrs.,  Beomonds,  Chertsey,  Surrey.
*Raines,  Lady,  46  Sussex  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Raj,  Des,  Kasur,  Dist.  Lahore,  Punjab,  India.
*Rampling-Rose,  W.,  10  Dee  Hills  Park,  Chester.

Ramsden,  Miss,  16  Incognito  Gade,  Christiania.
*Randell,  Rev.  J.  Mickley,  The  Church  House,  26  Crowndale  Road,
London,  N.W.

Ransom,  Francis,  Chilterns,  Hitchin,  Herts.

Raper,  R.  W.,  Trinity  College,  Oxford.
*Rashdall,  Rev.  Hastings,  New  College,  Oxford.
*Rashleigh,  John  C.  S.,  M.D.,  Throwleigh,  Okehampton.

Reade,  Herbert  V.,  C.B.,  32  Palace  Gardens  Terrace,  Kensington,
London,  W.

*Reckett,  Miss  Juliet  E.,  20  Dulwich  Wood  Park,  Upper  Norwood,
London,  S.E.

Redgrove,  H.  Stanley,  191  Camden  Road,  London,  N.W.
Regina  Madre,  S.  M.  La,  Palazzo  Margherita,  Rome.
*Reinhardt,  C.  E.,  M.D.,  29  Onslow  Square,  London,  S.W.
Remacle,  Georges,  c/o  Mrs.  Laurie,  22a  Buccleuch  Place,  Edinburgh.
Rendall,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  H.,  Dedham  House,  Dedham,  Essex.
Richardson,  Frederick  W.,  County  Analyst's  Office,  Hustlergate,
Bradford.

*Ridley,  Henry  N.,  F.R.S.,  C.M.G.,  7  Cumberland  Road,  Kew,
Surrey.


LXX.]


Members  and  Associates.


539


*Ridley,  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Daleham  Gardens,  London,  N.W.
Ridley,  The  Viscountess, 10  Carlton  House  Terrace,  London,

s.w.

Ritchie,  A.  J.,  20  Kensington  Mansions,  Earl's  Court,  London,
S.W.

Ritchie,  Thomas,  J. P.,  Conservative  Club,  St.  James's  Street,

London,  S.W.
Ritter,  Miss,  7  Park  Place,  St.  James's,  London,  S.W.
Riviere,  Mrs.  Evelyn,  10  Nottingham  Terrace,  York  Gate,  London,

N.W.

Rix,  Rev.  A.  H.,  St.  Mary's  Vicarage,  Keighley.
*Robbins,  Miss  A.  M.,  79  Newbury  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Robbins,  Rufus  M.,  Titusville,  Brevard  County,  Florida,  U.S.A.

Roberts,  Mrs.  Hugh,  Fernwood,  St.  Lawrence,  Jersey.
*Roberts,  Lady,  Bryngwenallt,  Abergele,  N.  Wales.

Roberts,  W.  M.,  Bar  Harbor,  Maine,  U.S.A.

Robertson,  Mrs.  J.  G.,  90  Regent's  Park  Road,  London,  N.W.

Robinson,  George  R.,  31  James  Street,  Liverpool.

Robinson,  Nelson  L., 120  East  61st  Street, New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Rogers,  Edmund  J.  A.,  M.D.,  CM.,  222  West  Colfax  Avenue,

Denver,  Colo.,  U.S.A.
"-Rogers,  George  F.,  M.D.,  19  Raymond  Street,  Chester.
Rogers, T. Percival, Henleaze Park,  Westbury-on-Trym,

Gloucestershire.
Rolleston,  Mrs.,  31  Moscow  Court,  Bayswater,  London,  W.
Rolleston,  T.  W.,  Ifield,  16  Prince  Arthur  Road,  Hampstead,

London,  N.W.

"-Romanes,  N.  H.,  The  Cavendish  Club,  119  Piccadilly,  London,  W.

Rosenberger,  James,  Sellersville,  Bucks  Co.,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Ross,  Samuel,  67  Willis  Street,  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Rothschild,  Mrs.  Leopold  de,  5  Hamilton  Place,  London,  W.

Ryves, Miss  Evangeline,  Damory Cottage,  Walton-on-the-Hill,
Surrey.

St.  Hill,  Mrs.,  Thimble,  Littlewick  Green,  Berks.
*Salm  and  Dyck,  H.S.H.  Christine,  Princess.
Samaldas,  Hon.  Lalubhai,  99  Apollo  Street,  Fort,  Bombay,  India.
Sampson,  Colonel  Dudley,  Buxshalls,  Lindfield,  Hayward's  Heath.
Sanderson,  W.  R.,  Via  Nomentana  58,  Rome.
Saunders,  Miss  E.  R.,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.
Saunders,  W.  E.,  Riovista,  Torresdale,  Pa.,  U.S.A.


540


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Savage,  Rev.  M.  J.,  D.D.,  1867  Crawford  Road,  Cleveland,  Ohio,
U.S.A.

Savill,  Mrs.,  M.D.,  66  Harley  Street,  London,  W.
*Scaramanga-Ralli, Mrs., 2 Lygon Place, Grosvenor  Gardens,
London,  S.W.

*Scatcherd,  Miss  F.  R.,  Ringmore  House,  Quarry  Road,  Hastings.
Schaaf,  Albert  E.,  55  North  Clinton  Street,  Poughkeepsie,  N.Y.,
U.S.A.

*Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  D.Sc,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.
Schilling,  Baroness,  Lowenwolde,  Stat  Rakke,  Estland,  Russia.
Schofield,  Mrs.,  1  Phillimore  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Schuster,  Miss,  Cottenham  House,  Wimbledon,  London,  S.W.
Scott,  Rev.  D.  D.,  The  Manse,  Onehunga,  Auckland,  New  Zealand.
Scott,  F.  Gilbert,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Rocquaine,  New  Maiden,
Surrey.

*Scott,  Captain  G.  B.,  N.W.  Militia,  Miranshah,  N.W.  Frontier
Province,  India.

*Scott,  Sydney  C,  92  Westbourne  Terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Scott,  W.  Sibbald,  M.B.,  The  Lymes,  Ellesmere,  Salop.
*Scott-Gatty,  Sir  Alfred  S.,  K.C.V.O.,  F.S.A.,  Garter  King  of
Arms,  Wendover  Lodge,  Welwyn,  Herts.

Scowcroft,  Heber,  Ogden,  Utah,  U.S.A.

Seabra,  Alberto,  M.D.,  rua  15  de  Novembre  No.  9,  Sao  Paulo,
Brazil.

Sedgwick,  Mrs.  H.  P.,  120  E. 22nd  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Selenka,  Frau  Prof.,  Leopoldstrasse  7,  Munich,  Germany.
Sellers,  Miss  R.  A.,  Wellesley  Girls'  High  School,  Naini  Tal,  India.
Senathi  Raja,  E.  S.  W.,  LL.B.,  The  Grange,  Trivandrum,  India.
Seton-Karr,  Captain  H.  W.,  8  St.  Paul's  Mansions,  Hammersmith,
London.  W.

Seymour,  Admiral  of  the  Fleet  Sir  E.  H.,  O.M.,  G.C.B.,  G.C.V.O.,

Queen  Anne's  Mansions,  St.  James's  Park,  London,  S.W.
Shackleford,  Hon.  Thomas  M.,  Tallahassee,  Florida,  U.S.A.
Shakespear,  Mrs.,  12  Brunswick  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Shand,  Alexander  F.,  1  Edwardes  Place,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Shaw,  Arnold  E.,  Grove  House,  Aspley  Guise,  Beds.
*Shaw,  Mrs.  Bernard,  10  Adelphi  Terrace,  Strand,  London,  W.C.
*Shaw,  Rev.  Sir  Charles  J.  Monson,  Bart.,  The  Rectory,  Wrotham,
Kent.

Shaw,  Mrs.  W.  N.,  10  Moreton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.


LXX.]


Members  and  Associates.


541


Sheets,  J.  C,  7  Glenwood  Apartments,  College  Hill  Station,
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
*Shewan,  R.  G.,  c/o  Shewan,  Tomes  &  Co.,  Hong  Kong,  China.
*Shove,  Miss  E.,  M.B., 30  York  Street  Chambers,  Bryanston
Square,  London,  W.
Sbuttleworth,  Miss  C.  J.,  10  Cottesmore  Gardens,  Kensington,
London,  W.

*Sidgwick,  Arthur,  LL.D.,  64  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Edward,  25  Collingham  Road,  London,  S.W.
*Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  27  Grange  Road,  Cambridge.

Sidgwick,  Miss  Rose,  64  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.

Siegel,  Mrs.  Henry,,  Hotel  Saint  Regis,  5th  Avenue,  New  York,
U.S.A.

Silver,  Mrs.,  24  Victoria  Square,  London,  S.W.

Simmonds,  Miss  C.  E.,  33  Clarence  Gate  Gardens,  Baker  Street,

London,  N.W.
Simons,  L.,  230  Overtoom,  Amsterdam.

Simpson,  Commander  H.  V.,  R.N.,  United  Service  Club,  Pall

Mall,  London,  S.W.
Simpson,  Miss  Price,  Beech  Barns,  Alton,  Hants.
Sinclair,  Miss  May,  1  Blenheim  Road,  St.  John's  Wood,  London,

N.W.

Singh,  Amar,  Hoshiarpur,  Punjab,  India.

Skipwith,  Mrs.,  13  Montagu  Square,  London,  W.

Sloggett,  Director-General  Sir  A.  T.,  C.M.G.,  K.C.B.,  6s  Bicken-

hall  Mansions,  London,  W.
Smith,  Adolphe,  12  Crookham  Road,  Fulham,  London,  S.W.
Smith,  Miss  Beatrice  E.,  Lea,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.
"Smith,  Rev.  Ernest  F.
Smith,  Ernest  T.,  178  Park  Road,  Crouch  End,  London,  N.
Smith,  G.  Albert,  Sunville,  Cromwell  Road,  Hove,  Brighton.
Smith,  G.  Main,  Southville  Lawn,  Brunswick  Square,  Gloucester.
*Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  7  Queen's  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,

W.

Smith,  Sir  H.  Babington,  C.B.,  121  St.  James's  Court,  Bucking-
ham Gate,  London,  S.W.
Smith,  J.  Hoyle,  Spring  Bank,  Eccles,  Lancashire.
Smith,  R.  F.  Ruthven,  81  Cadogan  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Smith,  Rev.  Sidney  M.,  Hebden  Bridge  Vicarage,  Yorkshire.
*Smith,  Mrs.  W.  Easton,  132  Grove  Street,  Waterbury,  Conn.,
U.S.A.


542


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Smith,  William  Hawley,  2039  Knoxville  Avenue,  Peoria,  111.,
U.S.A.

Smith,  William  P.,  Crestline,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
-Smithson,  Mrs.,  42  Tilehouse  Street,  Hitchin,  Herts.

Songhurst,  Bernard,  Departamento  Almacenes,  Ferro  Carril  Anto-
fagasta  a  Bolivia,  Antofagasta,  Chili.

Sparrow,  G.  W.  S.,  Albrighton  Hall,  near  Shrewsbury.
*Speer,  Charlton  T.,  Glenhurst,  The  Common,  Sutton,  Surrey.

Spens,  William,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Stanton,  Rev.  Horace  C,  Ph.D.,  D.D.,  148  North  18th  Street,

Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Stapleton,  Mrs.,  11  Sloane  Terrace  Mansions,  London,  S.W.
*Stapley,  Sir  Richard,  33  Bloomsbury  Square,  London,  W.C.
Stawell,  Miss  F.  M.,  33  Ladbroke  Square,  Notting  Hill  Gate,

London,  W.

Steedman,  J.  G.  W.,  M.D.,  5394  Waterman  Avenue,  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  U.S.A.

'-Steel,  Mrs.,  Court  o'  Hill,  Tenbury,  Worcestershire.
Stephen, Mrs. Adrian, 3f  Morpeth  Terrace, Victoria  Street,

London,  S.W.
Stephens,  Mrs.,  41  Harrington  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Stevenson,  Mrs.,  Wingrove,  Moorend  Park  Road,  Cheltenham.
Stewart,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Larghan,  Coupar  Angus,  N.B.
Stewart,  Miss  M.  A.,  Artillery  Mansions, 75  Victoria  Street,

London,  S.W.

Stoehr,  Miss,  109  Iverna  Court,  Kensington  High  Street,  London,
W.

Stout,  Professor  George  F.,  Craigard,  St.  Andrews,  N.B.
Strachan,  W.  M.,  Strood  Park,  Horsham,  Sussex.
Strachey,  Charles,  Colonial  Office,  Downing  Street,  London,  S.W.
*Strachey,  John  St.  Loe,  Spectator  Office,  1  Wellington  Street,

Strand,  London,  W.C.
Stratton,  F.  J.  M.,  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cambridge.
Strauss,  E.  A.,  M.P.,  49  Grosvenor  Square,  London,  W.
Strode,  Miss  E.  L.  C,  7  Stafford  Terrace,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Strong,  Rev.  Charles,  D.D.,  67  Avoca  Street,  S.Y.,  Melbourne,

Australia.

*Strutt,  Hon.  Richard,  Rayleigh  House,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Stuart,  Mrs.

-Sturdy,  Edward T., Norburton, Burton Bradstock,  Bridport,
Dorset.


lxx.]  Members  and  Associates.  543

Sturge,  Miss  M.  Carta,  Cranbourne  Grange,  Wonston,  Micheldever,
Hants.

Swainson,  Miss  F.  J.,  Stonecross,  Kendal.

Swainson,  Miss  M.,  7e  Oxford  &  Cambridge  Mansions,  London,  W.
*Swayne,  Mrs.  Noah  Haynes,  Junr.,  153  Mill  Creek  Rd.,  Ardmore,
Pa.,  U.S.A.
Sweetland,  Mrs.  Gifford.
Szentirmay  de  Darvasto,  13.  M.  J.  de.

Tait,  Mrs.,  10  Ellerdale  Road,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
Tait,  Mrs.  W.  J.,  Lismullen,  Arthur  Road,  Wimbledon  Park,
Surrey.

Taplin,  A.  Betts,  L.R.C.P.,  Norwood,  Ivanhoe  Road,  Sefton  Park,
Liverpool.

Taylor,  Mrs.  C.  C,  Wood  Cottage,  Cronk's  Hill,  Reigate,  Surrey.
*Taylor,  Mrs.  Charles  H.,  31  Blenheim  Park  Road,  South  Croydon,
Surrey.

Taylor,  Miss  E.  Waring,  7e  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,
London,  W.

*Taylor,  H.  Dennis,  Stancliffe,  Mount  Villas,  York.
Tebb,  Mrs.,  Rede  Hall,  nr.  Burstow,  by  Horley,  Surrey.
Temple,  Reginald  W.

Tennent,  Mrs.,  16  Park  Avenue,  Willesden  Green,  London,  N.W.
*Thaw,  A.  Blair,  Hotel  Leonon,  701  Madison  Avenue,  New  York,
N.Y.,  U.S.A.

*Thomas,  Rev.  C.  D.,  South  Hill  Lodge,  Bromley,  Kent.

Thomas,  Miss  Edith  J.,  Mynydd  Ednyfed,  Criccieth,  N.  Wales.

Thomas,  Ernest  Seymour,  Turf  Club,  Cairo,  Egypt.
*Thomas,  J.  W.,  Overdale,  Shortlands,  Kent.

"-Thomas,  Seymour  P.,  41  Gower  Avenue,  Germantown,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Thompson,  Edwin,  25  Sefton  Drive,  Liverpool.
Thompson,  Matthew  William,  Salters  Hall,  Sudbury,  Suffolk.
Thompson,  Mrs.  Rosalie,  90  Newman  Street,  London,  W.
Thompson,  W.  R.,  Zoological  Laboratory,  Cambridge.
^Thomson,  Edward  J.,  Western  Club,  Glasgow.
Thorburn,  Rev.  T.  J.,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  The  Bungalow,  St.  Helen's

Down,  Hastings.
Thornhill,  Miss  H.,  Sesame  Club,  29  Dover  Street,  London,  W.
Thornley,  Rev.  Alfred,  Hughenden,  Coppice  Road,  Nottingham.
Thorp,  Richard,  Colenso  Hill,  Napier,  New  Zealand.
Thurn  and  Taxis,  H.I.H.  The  Princess  Alexander  of,  Lautschin,

Nimburg,  Bohemia,  Austria.


544


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Trafford,  Mrs.  Galfrid  de,  Queensberry  House,  Richmond.
*Trotter,  Mrs.,  Standerwick  Court,  Frome,  Somerset.

Truell,  Robert  Holt  Stuart,  West  Mount,  Dover  College,  Dover.
*Tuckey,  C  Lloyd,  M.D.,  45  Upper  Brook  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,
London,  W.

Tudor,  Owen  S.,  Friday's  Hill,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
*Tugwell,  Mrs.  Arthur,  Bracken  Hill,  Tower  Road,  Branksome
Park,  Bournemouth.
Tyler,  Professor  C.  M.,  1601  Washington  Avenue,  Scranton,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

*Tyrone,  The  O'Neill  de,  59  rua  das  Flores,  Lisbon,  Portugal.
Tyrrell,  G.  N.,  The  Lodge,  Alderminster,  Stratford-on-Avon.
Tyrwhitt,  Rev.  H.  M.,  19  The  Glebe,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.
Ulman,  Mrs.  Jacob  A.,  Brooklandville,  Baltimore  County,  Md.,
U.S.A.

Urquiola,  Manuel  de,  Calle  de  Alfredo  Calderon  8,  Valencia,  Spain.

Van  Deren,  H.  S.,  Nashville,  Tenn.,  U.S.A.

Van  Hamel,  Professor  J.  A.,  612  Keizersgracht,  Amsterdam.

Van  Renterghem,  A.  W.,  M.D.,  1  Van  Breestraat,  Amsterdam.
*Verney-Cave,  Hon.  Mrs.,  Stanford-on-Avon,  Rugby.
*Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  5  Selwyn  Gardens,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Miss  H.  de  G.,  5  Selwyn  Gardens,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Miss  M.  E.,  The  Lydd,  West  Hoathly,  Sussex.

Vyvyan,  Mrs.  T.  C,  Poldhu,  Richmond,  Natal,  South  Africa.

Wade,  Miss  Florence,  52  Alexandra  House,  Judd  Street,  London,
W.C.

Walker,  Rev.  David,  The  Vicarage,  Darlington,  Durham.

Walker,  Miss  Madeline  J.,  107  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Walker,  Miss  May  C,  Halcyon  Club,  14  Cork  Street,  London,  W.
*Walker,  Captain  P.  L.  E.,  7th  Hussars,  Bangalore,  South  India.
*Walker-Munro,  L.,  R.N.,  Rhinefield,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.

Walker-Munro,  Mrs.,  Rhinefield,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.
*Wallace,  Abraham,  M.D.,  39  Harley  Street,  London,  W.

Walsh,  A.  Digby,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Club,  Pall  Mall,  Lon-
don, S.W.  "

Walsh,  Correa  M.,  Belleport,  Long  Island,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Wanderley,  F.  M.,  Corumba,  Matto  Grosso,  Brazil.
Ward,  David  S.,  Sedan  House,  Harrogate,  Yorkshire.
Ward,  Hon.  Kathleen,  Beechwood,  Killiney,  Co.  Dublin,  Ireland.
Warndorfer,  A.,  Gunselsdorf,  Port  Schonau  a.d.  Triesting,  Lower
Austria.


LXX.]


Members  and  Associates.


545


Warner,  Miss  E.,  42  Albany  Villas,  Hove,  Sussex.
Warren, Mrs. Fiske,  8  Mount  Vernon  Place,  Boston,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Warrender,  Miss  Margaret,  50  Wilton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.

Wastell,  Mrs.,  The  Rowans,  Crowborough,  Sussex.

Waterhouse,  Miss,  Glenalna  House,  Killiney,  Co.  Dublin,  Ireland.

Watson,  H.  B.  Marriott,  Shere,  Guildford,  Surrey.

Watson,  Mrs.  Milne,  39  Eccleston  Square,  London,  S.W.

Waymouth,  Miss  Esther,  3  Church  Road,  Parkhill  Road,  Hamp-
stead,  London,  N.W.

Webber,  Mrs.  Felix,  The  Croft,  Shillingstone,  Dorset.
*Weinberg,  Harry  J.,  North  Road,  The  Park,  Nottingham.

Weingaertner,  F.  C,  187  Grove  Street,  Liverpool.

Wemyss,  Countess  of,  23  St.  James's  Place,  London,  S.W.

Western,  F.  J.,  Cambridge  Mission,  Delhi,  India.
*Westlake,  Ernest,  Fordingbridge,  Salisbury.

"'Westmorland,  Brig. -General  C.  H. ,  C.B. ,  c/o  H.  S.  King  &  Co.,
9  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.
Westropp,  A.  S.  A.,  East  India  United  Service  Club,  16  St.

James's  Square,  London,  S.W.
Wheeler,  C.  Bickersteth,  80  Hamilton  Terrace,  London,  N.W.
*Whetham,  W.  C.  D.,  F.R.S.,  Upwater  Lodge,  Cambridge.
Whishaw,  R.  W.,  North  West  House,  Duntrune  Terrace,  Broughty
Ferry,  N.B.

Whitaker,  Joseph  J.  S.,  Villa  Malfitano,  Palermo,  Sicily.
*Whitehead,  Miss  Mercia  D.,  St.  Mary's,  Trumpington,  Cambridge.
Whiting, J. Markby, Ashford House, Wimbledon  Common,
London,  S.W.

Whitmore,  Mrs.,  28  Milner  St.,  Cadogan  Square,  London,  S.W.
Whiton,  Rev.  J.  M.,  Ph.D.,  65  West  127th  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

*Whittemore,  Mrs.  Julia  S.,  Naugatuck,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
*Whittingham,  F.  S.,  Rodborough  Rectory,  nr.  Stroud,  Gloucester-
shire.

Wigan,  W.  L.,  Clare  Cottage,  East  Mailing,  Maidstone,  Kent.
Wight,  Edward,  M.R.C.S.,  9  Regency  Square,  Brighton.
Wilding,  Mrs.,  Penbryn,  Montgomery,  Wales.
Wilkins,  Mrs.,  19  Ormond  Road,  Rathmines,  nr.  Dublin.
*Wilkins,  C.  F.,  Allahabad,  U.P.,  India.

^Wilkinson,  Miss  Milisent,  c/o  The  Royal  Bank  of  Queensland,  Ltd.,
31  Budge  Row,  London,  E.G.


546


Members  and  Associates,


[pakt


Wilkinson, Sidney, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.,  4  Hamilton  Square,
Birkenhead.

Willett,  Mrs.,  Fir  Tree  End,  Haywards  Heath,  Sussex.
Williams,  A.  C.  Redshawe,  4  Church  Road,  West  Drayton,  Yiew-
sley,  Middlesex.

Williams,  Mrs.  Glynne,  7  Berkeley  House,  Hay  Hill,  London,  W.
Williams,  Harry  L.,  541  Wood  Street,  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Williams,  J.  E.,  200  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Williams,  Mrs.  S.  R.,  12  Lome  Rd.,  Oxton,  Cheshire.
Williamson,  Mrs.,  The  Copse,  Brook,  Godalming,  Surrey.
Willis,  Grant  B.,  1103  West  Aultoman  Avenue,  Canton,  Ohio,
U.S.A.

Wilson,  Rev.  Alexander,  The  Manse,  Ythanwells,  Insch,  Aberdeen-
shire.

Wilson,  Mrs.  Arthur,  The  Nook,  Peppard  Common,  Henley-on-
Thames.

Wilson,  Charles  J.,  Derlamogue,  Ailesbury  Park,  Dublin.
Wilson,  Mrs.  C.  Stuart,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co.,  16  Charing  Cross,
London,  S.W.

Wilson,  Miss  E.  M.,  c/o  H.  E.  Wilson,  Gainesville,  Texas,  U.S.A.
Wilson,  Mrs.  George,  12  Osborne  Drive,  Bangor,  Co.  Down,  Ireland.
Wilson,  Mrs.  F.  E.,  c/o  Hon.  W.  Warren- Vernon,  105  Cadogan

Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Wilson,  Mrs.  H.  J.,  12  Cheyne  Court,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Wilson,  Miss  M.  A.,  c/o  H.  A.  Higgins,  Ythan,  Woodland  Grove,

Weybridge,  Surrey.
Wingate,  D.  C.

Wingham,  T. A., 174  Aberdeen  Avenue,  Hamilton,  Ontario,
Canada.

Wise,  Miss  A.  Stewart,  16  West  Kensington  Gardens,  London,  W.
Witherby,  Arthur  George,  Newtown  Grange,  Newbury,  Berks.
*Wolf,  Francisco  Eugene  de,  P.O.  Box  269,  Bristol,  Rhode  Island,
U.S.A.

*Wood,  R.  H.,  c/o  Messrs.  Smith,  Wood  &  Co.,  3  and  4  Lime  Street

Square,  London,  E.C.
Woodhull,  Miss  Zula  M.,  Norton  Park,  Bredon's  Norton,  near

Tewkesbury,  Gloucestershire.
Woods,  Miss  Alice,  St.  Ives,  Radlett,  Herts.
Woods,  Mrs.,  The  Master's  House,  Temple,  London,  E.C.
Woollett,  Lieut. -Colonel  W.  Charles,  F.S.A.,  4  The  Ridges,  Farn-

boro',  Hants.


lxx.]  Members  and  Associates.  547

Woolley,  V.  J.,  M.D.,  15  Lower  Camden,  Chislehurst,  Kent.
*Worsfold,  Mrs.  Basil,  Romden  Place,  Smarden,  Kent.
Wrangliam,  W.  H.,  78  Barmouth  Road,  Wandsworth,  London,
S.W.

Wriford,  Mrs.,  21  Bullingham  Mansions,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Wright,  Maurice  B.,  M.D.,  17  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.
Wyllys,  Miss  R.,  18  Louisburg  Square,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Wyndham,  Mrs.,  200  West  58th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Wyndham-Quin,  The  Lady  Emily,  12  William  Street,  Lowndes

Square,  London,  S.W.
Yaroschenko,  Madame,  La  Cava,  Bordighera,  Italy.
Yeats,  W.  B.,  18  Woburn  Buildings,  Tavistock  Square,  London,

W.C.
Yih,  Z.  L.

Younghusband,  Sir  Francis,  3  Buckingham  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Yssel  de  Schepper,  Mr.  Justice,  Eendrachtstraat  27b,  Rotterdam.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

INDEX  to  VOL.  XXVII
(PARTS  LXVIII-LXX)

1915.

A.

Abnormal  Psychology,  Problems  in -  492-506
A  hi  I  'lujltr. Si  1  ( Y(  >ss-(.'(  >rrcs| « )i  it  Irnrrs  :  Script  tvtVrences  to  drowning.
Aeneid. See  Cross-Correspondences  :  Script  references.
Aeschylus,  Prometheus  Vinctus. See  Cross-correspondences :  Script
references.

Aksakoff,  Alexander  N.,  Animisme  et  Spiritisme,  quoted  -  -  184-185
Alexander's  Tomb. See  Cross-correspondence.

All  Men  are  Ghosts,  by  Professor  L.  P.  Jacks,  -  201-202
American  Society  for  Psychical  Research.  Experiments  in  Thought-
transference,  reference  to  -  -  186
Amherst  (Nova  Scotia)  Poltergeist,  reference  to  -  -  -  -  178
Anagrams  in  the  Scripts  -  -  -  -  35-36,  40-42
Arnold,  Matthew.  See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.
Associates,  and  Members,  List  of  -  -  -  -  -  508
Auditory  Hallucinations  -  393,  396,  397,  398,  400-401,  405,  407,  408-409
Automatic  Scripts. See  Cross-correspondences.

"  Automatisms,  Concordant"  A  Reconstruction  of  some,  by  Miss  Alice

Johnson ...  .  -  -  1-156

Auto-Suggested  Visions  illustrating  Dream-Formation  -  390

Auto-Suggestion. See  Self- Suggestion.


[parts  lxviii.-lxx.] Index  to  Vol.  XXVII.  549

ou'tos  ovpavbs  aKVfjLwv  Incident,  The  -  -  3,  24,  67,  77-127,  135

„  Report,  Detailed -  80

„  Summary -  - - -  77,  125-127

See  also  Cross- correspondences  : Ave  Roma
Immortalis  and  The  Clavigers.
Ave  Roma  Immortalis. See  Cross-correspondence.


B.

Balfour,  The  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W. —

,,  ,,  The  Horace  Ode  Question,  Some  Observations,

reference  to - - - - - -  81

,,  ,,  Survival,  Some  Recent  Scripts  affording  Evidence

of  221

Bangs  Sisters,  The ... -  -  178

Bateson,  Mary,  Script  reference  to  47
Bayfield,  Rev.  M.  A.—

Survival,  Note  on  some  recent  scripts  affording  evidence  of  -  244
Clear  the  Air,  To - -  -  -  318

Reply  to  H.  Carrmgton  -  474-482
Dr.  Ivor  Tuckett -  -  483-491

Verrall,  Dr.  A.  W.  -  244-249

"  Beauchamp,  The  Misses,"  reference  to -  -  505-506

"  Bell,  Ellen." See  Controls.

Beraud,  Marthe,  The  History  of  -  -  333

Bibliography - -  ...  333

Fraud,  Alleged - -  -  335-336,  337-343

„ Confession  -  - -  339-340

„ Indications -  - 358-360,  362-363,  364-365,  368

Phenomena,  Nature  of  -  - 346-347,  349,  358-359,  362

Conditions  -  344-346,  347

„ Evidence  for  and  against,  summary - -  364-369
Theories,  Regurgitation  -  - 348-354,  357,  365,  366-367,  368

„ Secretion,  Physical  -  367-368,369

Bergson,  Professor  Henri - 192,  194,  208,  488  (foot-note),  490  (foot-note)
Presidential  Address  (1913),  Translation -  - -  157

""  Bien-Boa." See  Controls.

Bisson,  Madame  Alexandre  -  333,  343,  345-346,  352,  354,  367-368,  369
Blake. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.

Body  and  Mind,  by  W.  M'Dougall,  reference  - -  209

Bourbon,  Dr.,  On  Marthe  Beraud  352-353,  355,  358

Bramley. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.
Bramwell,  Dr.  J.  Milne,  Hypnotism  :  its  History,  Practice  and  Theory,

references  to  -  - - 393,  401

Browning. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.


550  Index  to  Vol.  XXVI I.  [parts

Browning,  Mrs. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.
Browning-Tennyson  Quotation  in  "  Mrs.  Holland's  "  Script  - - -  9,  112

C.

"  C,  Eva." See  Beraud,  Marthe.

Carr,  H.  Wildon,  D.Litt.,  Translation  of  Professor  Bergson's  Presiden-
tial Address  (1913) -  ....  157

Carrington,  Hereward,  Personal  Experiences  in  Spiritualism,  review  of  176
„  „ Willett  Scripts,  A  Discussion  of  the  - - -  458

„  „  „  Reply  by  the  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield  474

Clavigers,  The. See  Cross-correspondence.

Clear  the  Air,  To,  by  the  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield -  -  318

Clough. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.
Coleridge,  Hartley. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references
Communicators —

Hodgson,  Dr.  R.  -  -  27,  74


Myers,  F.  W.  H.  See  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.
Piper,  and  the  automatic  scripts  of  Mrs.  "  Holland,"
the  "Macs,"  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall,  and  Mrs.
"  Willett,"

Sidgwick,  Henry  - - - 251,  259,  260-262,  265-268,  276
Verrall,  Dr.  A.  W. See  Survival,  Some  Recent  Scripts
affording  evidence  of.


Controls —

„ "  Bell,  Ellen "  - -  259

"  Bien  Boa "  - 334,  335,  336,  337,  338,  339-342

„ "Reynold" -  - -  , -  262


See  also  Communicators.
Coover,  John  E.,  Ph.D.,  Thought-Transference — Experiments -  186-190
Cross-correspondence  :  Alexander's  Tomb 2-3,  4,  25,  50-76,  107,

150,  151-154,  156

,,  ,, Summary  ------  75-76

Ave  Roma  Immortalis 2,  3,  11-24,  119,  127,

134,  144,  145-147,  156
See  also  avrbs  ovpavbs  aKVjxiDV  and  The  Clavigers.
Clavigers,  The 3,  22,  24,  78,  112,  114,  127-143,  156

„ Summary  142-143

See  also  Ave  Roma  Immortalis  and  avrbs  ovpavbs

Hope,  Star  and  Browning - 2,  25,  27,  28-49,  104
,,  ,, Summary  ------  49

„  Sesame  and  Lilies -  -  6, 250

Sevens - -  ...  147-148

Swinburne's  Poems  - -  - -  250-278

Thanatos  37  (foot-note)


LXVIIL-LXX.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXVII.


551


Cross- correspondences,  General  references - -  - 1-156,  250-278

Nature  of - - -  -  -1,3,4-11

,,  Experiments  to  elicit  evidence  of  an  inde-

pendent intelligence. See  arros  ovpavvs
aKVfjwov,  "  Horace  Ode  "  Question,  and  the
Latin  Message  Experiment.
Cross-correspondences,  The  Automatic  Scripts —

,,  Association,  Normal,  of  ideas - -  277-278

„  "  Author,"  On  the  use  of  the  word - -  9-10

Influence  of 1,  3-4,  10-11,  62,

143-144,  145-147,  148-155
„  Automatist. See  below,  "  Writer."

,,  Intelligence  behind.  See  above,  "  Author  ;  "

and  Cross-correspondences :  Experi-
ments.

,,  '  Interpretation,  Methods  of  -  1,  5-9

,,  Obscurities,  The  Sources  of  - 1,  10

Selection,  The  Principle  of 3-4,  146-147,

148-149,  150-151

Telepathic  influence 144-145,  146,  147-148,  278
"  Writer,"  On  the  use  of  the  word - -  9-10
,,  ,, On  the  Part  played  by  the  3,  9,

21-22,  26,  31, 43  (foot-note),
45,  46,  47,  48,  71,  72,  73,
77-78,  81,  84,  96,  113,  123,
124,  134-135,  143-144,  148-

149,  152-153,  221-222,  276-278
Cross-correspondences,  Script  References  and  Reminiscences —

Aeneid -  - 12,  129  (foot-note)

,,  Aeschylus,  Prometheus  Vinctus  - 128  (foot-note)

,,  Arnold,  The  Forsaken  Merman  57

Blake,  Song -  -  36

„  „ Songs  of  Innocence  72

„  Bramley,  The  Hopeless  Dawn - - -  266

Browning,  Alt  Vogler 27,  32,  35,  36,  37,
38  (foot-note),  40,  41,  43,

44,  45,  269

„  Aristoplxane£  Apology  -  140,  143
„ Asolando :  Epilogue

78,  92,  95,  125,  126
Home  Thoughts,  from  Abroad -  43,  46
,, Home  Thoughts,  from  the  Sea -  46
James  Lee's  Wife 30,  112,  127,  143
Last  Ride- Together - 9,  114,  127,  143
„ Men  and  Women  :  Epilogue 252,  275
,, Pied  Piper  of  Hamelin - 39,  41,  42


552


Index  to  Vol  XXVII.


[parts


Cross-correspondences,  Script  References  and  Reminiscences —

Browning,  Prospice  - - - - 95,  126
,, Ring  and  the  Book

34,  35,  36  (foot-note),  37

Sordello  32,  34

Worst  of  it  -  -  273,  274,  275
Browning,  Mrs.,  Ellie  and  the  Swan's  Nest  -  273
Clough,  Say  not  the  Struggle  nought  availeth  69
Coleridge,  Hartley,  Prayer  30
Dante  -  -  -  80,  110,  111,  118,  119,  148
Dowson,  E.  -  -  -  -  -  260,  261
Dryden,  Song  for  St.  Cecilia's  Day  -  -  31
Eurijjides,  Hercules  Furens 14  (foot-note),

128,  130,  140,  142,  143


479-480
267,  268
255
57

-  59,  122,  123

-  77,  90,  141
43,  255,  256,  267

-  14,  21


88
61

-  72,  73

-  72,  73

47


124


Fairy  Ship,  The
Fitzgerald,  Omar  Khayyam
Gray,  The  Bard
Herbert,  George,  A  Wreath
Homer,  Iliad

„  Odyssey
Horace,  Odes

Juvenal  -----
Keats,  Ode  to  a  Nightingale
Marlowe,  Doctor  Fa  ust  us  -
Milton,  V Allegro

,, II  Penseroso  -
Moore,  T.,  While  History's  Muse
Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  Essays — Classical

31,  36,  37,
,,  Renewal  of  Youth  and

Other  Poems  67-68,  78,
79,  91,  99-100,  103,
106, 107,  108-109,

125,  126

„  Stanzas  on  Mr.  Watts'

Collected  Works  79,

99-100,  126
To  Tennyson  87,  91,  94,

125,  126

Venice -  45,  92,  123  (foot-note)
Poe,  E.  A.,  To  One  in  Paradise  -  29

Rossetti,  Blessed  Damozel -  9,  45-46

„ Love's  Nocturne  - - - -  252
Rose  Mary  -  - 67-68,  107

White  Ship 251,  255,  257,  258,

271,  272


LXVIII.-LXX.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXVII.


553


Cross-correspondences,  Script  References  and  Reminiscences —

,,  Ruskin,  Sesame  and  Lilies - - -  76

Scott,  The  Violet -  67,  106

Scriptures  :  Old  Testament 59,  109,  260,

261,  265,  273
New  Testament 61,  83,  119,

129,  252,  267,  268,  269
,,  Shakespeare,  Antony  and  Cleopatra - -  42

;,  „ Julius  Caesar - - 267,  269

King  Lear - - 267,  268-269
,,  ,, Merchant  of  Venice - -  28,  92

Merry  Wives  of  Windsor 267,  268
„  ,, Midsummer  Night's  Dream -  56

Othello  - - - - -  70,  71
Tempest -  251,  268,  269-271,  272
Shelley,  O  World,  0  Life,  0  Time - 253,  255
,,  ,, Prometheus  Unbound - - -  151

Sensitive  Plant  -  -  -  267,  268
To  Night -  - -  67-68

„  Sophocles,  Ajax .... 252,  254

,,  Suckling,  Encouragements  to  a  Lover  - -  273

Swinburne,  Aholibah - - 266-267,  268
Atalanta  in  Calydon 251,  261,

263,  264,  271,  272,  275,  277
Erechtheus - -  -  99

Fe'lise -  266,  267

Forsaken  Garden  -  -  -  260
Garden  of  Proserpine  260,  276,  277
Hertha -  -  266

Itylus  277

Match,  A  -  -  -  -  261
Rococo -  - -  268

Satia  Te  Sanguine  - - -  266
Triumph  of  Time  252,  253,  257,
258,  261,  262,  271,  272,  274,

275,  276,  277
Tennyson,  Crossing  the  Bar,  78,  79,  94,  98,

99,  104,  107-108,  116,  126,  127
„ In  Memoriam  77,  78,  79,  87,  89,
96,  97,  99,  100,  101,  110,  112,

115,  124,  125,  126,  127,  143
Lotos  Eaters  -  -  -  93,  126
Lucretius  77,  90,  93,  124,  126,  141
Maud  -  -  69,75,111,126,253
Merlin  and  the  Gleam  -  ^  77,  89
Morte  d'  Arthur  89


554


Index  to  Vol.  XXVII.


[parts


Cross-correspondences,  Script  References  and  Reminiscences —


Tennyson,  Passing  of  Arthur - -  77,89,141

,, Princess  -

-  253

,, Progress  of  Spring

43

Silent  Voices

94

„ Ulysses  -

-  87-88

,, Voyage  of  Maeldune  -

77,  88,  92

Watts,  Hope

267,  269

Wordsworth,  Descriptive  Sketches

-  101

,, I  wandered  lonely  as  a  cloi

d  -  118

„ Peele  Castle  in  a  Storm  -

91

,, Slumber  did  my  spirit  seal

58

Song  at  the  Feast  of  Brougham

Castle ... -  101


D.

Dante,  Conception  of  Leah  and  Rachel -  -  -  135-137

in  the  Willett  Scripts - 224,  225-230,  231,  233,  235,  236,  240,  242
See  also  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.
-  Dawn,  The  One-Horse,"  references  to  - 3,  144-145,  237,  238

Diamond  Island  Incident,  Reference  to  71,  153

Dissertationes  of  Maximus  of  Tyre,  and  the  avros  ov/>avbs  aKV/Mov

Incident -  - -  77-78,  90-91,  141

Dissociation,  Normal  -  -  .....  493

Dorr,  G.  B.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  reference  to - 82  (foot-note),  242
Dowson,  E. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.
Dream-Formation,  Some  Auto-suggested  Visions  as  illustrating  - -  390
Dreams,  Freud's  theory  of  -  -  390-391,  399,  411,  505

„ Subconscious  process  of  ...  .  504-505

Dryden. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.


E.

Elijah. See  the  aiVbs  oiyjaros  aKv/xmv  Incident.
Euripides. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.

F.

Fairy  Ship,  The. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.
Feeling  of  being  stared  at — Experimental -  -  188-189

Forgetfulness,  Temporary,  Prof.  Freud  on  -  411-413
Freud,  Professor  S.,  Psychopathology  of  Everyday  Life,  Review  of -  411
„ Theories  -  206  (foot-note),  492,  497

„ Dreams 390-391,  399,  411,  505

Frith,  Mrs.,  The  Automatic  Scripts  of - -  ...  148


LXVIIL-LXX.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXVII.


555


G.

Gray. See  Cross-Correspondences  :  Script  references.

"  Griinbaum,  Mr.,"  Auto -suggested  Visions  - - 391-399,  400-402,  403-409

Gulat-Wellenburg,  Dr.  von,  on  Marthe  Beraud  - - - 333.  346,  348


H.

Hallucinations —

Auditory -  -393,396,397,398,400-401,405,407,408-409


Self-Suggested  -  -  - 392-399,  400-402,  403-409

Dangers  of  - -  409-410

Smell -  395,  396

Tactile 393,  396,  400-401,  403-405,  407

Visual  -  -  -  392,  393,  394-399,  402,  403-405,  408,  409
Hartmann,  Philosophy  of  the  Uncoyiscious,  reference  to  -  -  493-494
Hauntings -  293-301


Herbert,  George. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.
Hercules. See  Cross-correspondences : The  Clavigers  and  Ave  Roma
Immortalis.

Hercules  Furens. See  Cross-correspondences : Script  references  to
Euripides.

Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  Attempts  to  obtain  Evidence  of  the  Identity

of  "  communicators  "  -  ....  81-82

Hodgson-Control. See  Communicators.

Hoe  Benham,  Alleged  Haunting  - -  293-301

"  Holland,  Mrs.,"  The  Automatic  Script  of  2,  3,  4,  9,  11,  12,  14,  22-23,

24,  25,  26,  27,  28-30,  32-35,  37,  39,  42-49,  54,
56-59,  65,  66-68,  69-71,  72,  74,  75-76,  78-82,
87,  90,  96,  106-115,  116,  119,  123,  126-127,
132  (foot-note),  133,  135-142,  143,  147,  148-

149,  150,  151-154,  259,  276
,,  Cross-correspondences. See  Alexander's  Tomb  ;

Ave  Roma  Immortalis ;  The  Clavigers  ;
Hope,  Star,  and  Browning ;  Sesame  and
Lilies  ;  Sevens  ;  Tlianatos.

Homer. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.

Hope,  Star  and  Browning. See  Cross-correspondence.

11  Horace  Ode "  Question -  - 80,  81,  82,  92

Horace's  Odes. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.

Hough,  de  Witt,  Fraudulent  Medium,  reference  to -  -  178

Hypnosis,  Self 392-399,  400-402,  403-409

Hypnotic  Practice,  Recent  Experience  in - ....  370
Hypnotism,  Experiments  in,  reference  to - - - - 328-329,  331
Memory,  Revival  of 376-377


556


Index  to  Vol.  XXVII.


[parts


Hypnotism,  Post-Hypnotic  Suggestions - - 377-379,  380-381,  382-384
,,  „  Calculations  involved  in - - -  377-379

J.

Jacks,  Professor  L.  P.,  All  Men  are  Ghosts ... -  201-202

James,  Professor  William 192,  196,  213,  234,  319-320

Johnson,  Miss  Alice —


,, Pseudo- Physical  Phenomena  in  the  Case  of  Mr.  Grimbaum

400

„ Reconstr  uction,  A,  of  some  "  Concordan  t  Automatisms  " —

Synopsis

1

Introduction  ---------

4

"  Ave  Roma  Immortalis  "  ------

11

Theory  of  Cross-correspondences  and  the  Latin  Message

24

Hope,  Star  and  Browning  ------

28

Alexander's  Tomb  --------

50

The  outos  ovpavbs  d.KVjxij>v  Incident

77

The  Clavigers  --------

127

Some  General  Conclusions ...  -

143

List  of  Illustrations  -------

156

., Reports  on  "  Mrs.  Holland's  "  Scripts,  reference  to

33,  43  (foot-note),  46  (foot-note),  71,  72,  132  (foot-note),

148-149,  151,  153


Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  -  -  -  74,116-118,122,124-125
Thought-Transference,  Experiments  in  -  418,  423,  448-449,  451,  452

Jonson,  Joseph,  Fraudulent  Medium,  reference  to -  - -  176

Juvenal. See  Cross- correspondences  :  Script  references.

K.

Kafka,  Dr.,  On  Marthe  Beraud -  -  367

Keats. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.

Keeler,  Pierre,  Fraudulent  Slate-writing,  reference  to  -  -  177

Kemnitz,  Dr.  Mathilde  von,  On  "  regurgitation " -  -  348

L.

Latin  Message  Experiment,  The 2,  24-27,  30,  37,  39,  80,  81,  92

(foot-note),  103,  104,  151,  152,  328

„  Summary - 26-27

Laurel  Wreath. See  Cross-correspondence  :  Alexander's  Tomb.
Lavender  or  Lub  -  -  223,  236-237,  247-248,  469-470,  481-482,  486-487

Leland  Stanford  University,  Psychical  Research  at  -  -  186  (foot-note)
Me  Scripts,  The  ....  .  221-222

Levitations. See  Telekinesis.

Library. See  Cross-correspondence  :  Alexander's  Tomb.


lxviii.-lxx.]  Index  to  Vol.  XXVII.


557


Light  in  West. See  Cross-correspondence:  Alexanders  Tomb.

Lily  Dale  Camp  Experiments,  reference  to  - - - - - -  176

Lodge,  Sir  Oliver —

„ In  Memory  of  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  reference  to  -  105

Scripts  of  "  Mrs.  Willett  " -  221

Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper -  - -  -  73-75

Long,  Constance  E.,  M.D.,  Review  of  Professor  Freud's  Psychopathology

of  Everyday  Life  - - - - - - - - - -  411


M.

"Mac"  Script,  The  - 3,  6,  71,  72,  76,  250-251,  258,  259-272,  276-277,  278
,,  Cross- correspondences.  See  Alexander's  Tomb  ;  Sesame

and  Lilies  ;  Swinburne? 's  Poems.
Maitland,  Professor  F.  W.,  Script  Allusions  to  Illness  and  Death  of  33,  46-48
Maginot,  Adele,  Reference  to  Hypnotic  Experiments  with  - 328-329,  331
Marie,  Professor  Pierre,  Reference  to  the  works  of -  -  167

Marlowe. See  Cross- correspondences  :  Script  references.

Marsault,  M.,  On  the  Mediumship  of  Marthe  Beraud -  333,  336-343

Materialisation. See  The  History  of  Marthe  Beraud  ("  Eva  C").
MaterialisationsphanomeJie,  by  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing. See  Beraud,
Marthe.

Maxwell,  J.,  M.D.,  Criticism  of  Cross-correspondences,  reference  to

15,  144  (foot-note)

M'Coy,  Mrs.,  Fraudulent  Medium,  reference  to -  -  -  176

M'Dougall,  W.,  Body  and  Mind,  reference  to  -  209

Medical  Supplement -  - -  -  371

Medici,  The,  History  of,  as  bearing  upon  the  cross- correspondence  :

Alexaiider's  Tomb -  -  2,  50-56

Members  and  Associates,  List  of  - -  - -  -  508

Miles,  Miss  Clarissa,  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference  279-295,

301-304,  321,  419

Hoe  Benham,  Alleged  Haunting  -  293-301
Milton. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.
Moore,  T. See  Cross-correspionclences  :  Script  references.
Moses. See  The  olvtus  ovpavus  aKv^tav  Incident  and  The  Clavigers.
Moss,  Mrs.,  Fraudulent  Medium,  reference  to  176
Music,  Item  in  Cross-correspondence. See  Hope,  Star  and  Browning.
Myers-Control. See  The  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper,  and  the
Automatic  Scripts  of  "  Mrs.  Holland,''  the  "  Macs,"  Mrs.  and  Miss
Verrall,  and  "  Mrs.  Willett."
Myers,  F.  W.  H.—

„ Theory  of  the  Subliminal  -  495,  501-502,  504

„ Works  by,  references  to  (as  bearing  on  Cross-correspondences)

*  11-12,  18,  23-24,  77,  79,  81.  84,  85,  89,  91,  102,  119,  123,  124
See  also  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.


558


Index  to  Vol.  XXVII.


[PAETS


N.

Newton,  Miss  I.,  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference -  417,  418,

420-442,  443,  446,  454

Nichols,  C,  Fraudulent  Medium,  reference  to  176
Noel,  General  and  Madame  -  -  -  334,  335,  336-338,  340,  341-342,  343
Norm  n,  A.,  Fraudulent  Spirit-Photography  and  Slate- Writing  of,

ference  to  -  ...  176

Nun'  iers  used  as  Letters  in  the  Scripts  - - -  46

0.

Officers  and  Council,  for  1915 - 507

Omar  Khayyam. See  Cross- correspondences : Script  references  to
Fitzgerald.

"  i  ne-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment,  references  to  - - 3,  144-145,  237,  238


I'.


P.,  Stanislawa -  - 356  (foot-note)

Palladino,  Eusapia -  -  178-184

Pappenheim,  Count,  On  Marthe  Beraud - -  - -  367

Pemberton,  Mrs.,  Fraudulent  Medium,  reference  to  176
Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  Count,  Review  of  Personal  Experiences  in

Spiritualism.,  by  Hereward  Carrington  -  176
Personality,  Human,  The  Problem  of  -  -  492-506

Philosophy,  Science,  and  Psychical  Research,  a  Presidential  Address  by

Dr.  F.  C.  S.  Schiller ---------  191

Physical  Phenomena. See  Beraud,  Marthe.

Physical  (Pseudo)  Phenomena -  -  -  400


Piddington,  J.  G.,  References  to  11,  24-27,  29  (foot-note),  30,  31  (foot-
note), 32,  37,  38,  39,  40,  41  (foot-note),  45  (foot-
note), 50,  60-61,  63-66,  70  (foot-note),  71,  76.
77-78,  80  (foot-note),  81,  82,  85,  86,  90,  91-92,
96,  98,  102-105,  106,  115  (foot-note),  123  (foot-
note), 130,  132,  139,  140  (foot-note),  141,  142,

148,  479-480

Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  26-27,  60-61,  63-66,  71,  82,
85,  86,  92  (foot-note),  98,  102-105,  106,  115

(foot-note)

Piper,  Mrs.,  Trance  Phenomena  of,  3,  4,  9,  24-27,  28,  29,  30,  37,  38
(foot-note),  40,  42,  43,  49,  54,  59-61,  62,  63-66,  71.
73-75,  76,  77-88,  92  (foot-note),  94,  97-99,  102-106.
108,  111,  115-119,  122-123,  124-127,  138,  139-140,

143,  151-153,  242,  328


LXVIII.-LXX.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXVII.


559


Piper,  Mrs.,  Cross-correspondences. See  Alexander's Tomb ;  The
Clavkjers  ;  Hope,  Star  and  Browning. Also  The
avrus  ovpavos  dicvfuov  Incident;  and  the  Latin
Message  Experiment.
Pittman,  Osmund,  Evidence  contributed  by -  293-294,  300

Plotinus. See  the  avros  ovpavijs  aKVfiwv  Incident  and  Cross-corre-
spondence :  The  Clavigers.
Poe,  E.  A. See  Cross- correspondences  :  Script  references.

Poltergeist  Cases  - -  - 176,  178

Presidential  Address  (1913). By  Henri  Bergson  (Translation) - -  157
(1914). By  Dr.  F.  C.  S.  Schiller  -  191

Preyer,  W.,  Die  Erhldrung  des  Gedankenlesens,  reference  to  186,  187  (foot-note)
Prince,  Morton,  M.D.,  The  Unconscious,  The  Fundamentals  of  Human

Personality,  Normal  and  Abnormal,  Review  of -  -  492

Pseudo-Physical  Phenomena -----  -  400

Psychical  Research,  at  the  Leland  Stanford  Junior  University,  reference

to ------ 186  (foot-note)

„  Professor  Bergson  on  the  Method  followed  in

159-161,  490  (foot-note)

Psychical  Research,  Philosophy,  Science  and,  by  Dr.  F.  C.  S.  Schiller  -  191
Psychology,  Experimental,  Feeling  of  being  stared  at  -  188-189
Psychopathology  of  Everyday  Life,  by  Professor  S.  Freud,  Review  of  -  411
Psycho- Therapy. See  Hypnotism  ;  and  Suggestion.

Puns  and  Assonances  in  the  Script - -  -  274

R,

Ramsden,  Miss  Hermione,  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference

279-295,  305-317,  321,  415-416,  419,  471

Rector,  Trance  Personality  of  Mrs.  Piper -  -  -  59-61,66

Regurgitation -  -  -  348

Reviews  :  Hereward  Carrington's  Personal  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  176
,,  Professor  Freud's  Psychopathology  of  Everyday  Life  -  -  411
,, Dr.  Morton  Prince's  The  Unconscious  -  -  492

"  Reynold." See  Controls.

Richet,  Professor  Charles —

„  Beraud,  Marthe  ("  Eva  C")  -  -  333,  334-335,  338-341,  342-343
„ Thought-Transference,  Experiments  in - -  186-187

Rossetti. See  Cross- correspondences  :  Script  references.

Rossetti,  Christina,  Uphill,  Script  reference  to -  -  223

Rouby,  Dr.,  On  the  Mediumship  of  Marthe  Beraud  -  333,  336,  341,  342,  343
Ruskin. See  Cross- correspondences  :  Script  references.

S.

St.  Paul. See  Cross-correspondence  :  Ave  Roma  Immortalis.
St.  Peter. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Ave  Roma  Immortalis  and  The
Clavigers.


560  Index  to  Vol.  XXVII.  [parts

Sambor,  Alleged  Mediumship  of,  reference  to  -  180

Schiller,  F.  C.  S.—

,, Philosophy,  Science  and  Psychical  Research -  -  191

„ Review  of  Dr.  Morton  Prince's  The  Unconscious -  -  492

Schrenck-Notzing,  Dr.  von.  Experiences  with  Marthe  Beraud  ("  Eva  C")

333-334,  335,  343-364,  366,  369
Science,  Philosophy  and  Psychical  Research,  by  Dr.  F.  C.  S.  Schiller -  191
Scott. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.
Scripts,  Automatic. See  Cross- correspondences  ; and  The  Scripts  of
"  Mrs.  Holland,"  the  "  Macs,"  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall,  and  "  Mrs.
Willett."

Scriptures,  The. See  Cross- correspondences  :  Script  references.

Secretion,  Physical  - -  367-368,  369

Self-Suggested  Hallucinations - -  - 392-399, 400-402,  403-409

Dangers  of -  409-410
Self-Suggestion  and  Self-Hypnosis  -  392-399,400-402,403-409

Sesame  and  Lilies. See  Cross-correspondence.
Sevens. See  Cross-correspondence.

Shakespeare. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.
Shelley. See  Cross- correspondences  :  Script  references.
Sidgwick,  Henry. See  Communicators.
Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry —

Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper - - - - 26,  115,  124-125,  138
„ Thought- Transference,  Experiments  in,  reference  to - -  186
Smell.  Hallucination  of  ...  .  395,  396

Sophocles. /See  Cross-correspondences. Script  references.
Spirit  Identity,  Characteristic  Traits  of  Personality -  244-249
Spiritualism,  Personal  Experiences  in,  by  Hereward  Carrington,  review

of 176

Statius. See  Dante  in  the  Willett  Scripts.

Statkowski,  Miss  Tamara,  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference

301-304,  305-314

Subconscious,  The -  -  494-495

See  also  Subliminal.
Subliminal,  The,  Difficulty  to  express  Ideas  simply -  -  480-481

F.  W.  H.  Myers's  theory  of -  495,  501,  502,  504

Suckling,  Sir  John. See  Cross- correspondences  :  Script  references.
Suggestion,  Hypnotic  -  - -  370

By  Transference  386-387,  389

Non-Hypnotic  -  322-323,  386-388

Self 392-399,  400-409

Survival,  Professor  Bergson  on - -  - - -  171

Survival,  Some  Recent  Scripts  affording  Evidence  of  - 221,  244,  318,

458,  466,  474-482,  483-491
Discussion  of  the  Evidence  -  230-236,  318

,,  „ Design.  Indications  of  -  233-234


LXVEK.-LXX.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXVII.


561


Survival,  Recent  Scripts  affording  Evidence  of —

., Discussion  of  Evidence  for  Identity  - -  244-249,  329

„ Knowledge  shown -  231-236,  244,  318
Swinburne. See  Cross-correspondences  :  Script  references.
Sivinbume's  Poems. See  Cross-correspondence.

T.

Tactile  Hallucinations  - 393,  396,  400-401,  403-405,  407


Telekinesis —

Movements  of  Tables  -  -  336

„ Lights 336

„ Levitations  - - - - - -  180


Telepathic  Influence  on  the  Scripts -  - 144-145,  146,  147-148,  278

Telepathy,  The  Active  Factor  in  321-323,  325

Experimental  145,  186-190,  279-295,  301-304,  305-317,  321,

415-457

General  Methods - 187-188,  279-280,  416-419
Tennyson. See  Cross- correspondences  :  Script  references.
TJumatos. See  Cross-correspondence.
Thought-Transference. See  Telepathy.

Tipping,  Miss  K.,  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference 314-315,  415,

416,  418,  419,  420-442,  453-455,  457
Tipping,  Miss  L.,  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference  315-317,  415-457
Tuckett,  Ivor  L.,  M.D.,  A  Discussion  of  the  Willett  Scripts  - - -  466

Reply  by  the  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield - -  483
Tyrrell,  G.  N.,  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference 415,  417,  419,  453-455


U.

Unconscious,  The,  by  Dr.  Morton  Prince,  Review  of - - - -  492


V.

Verrall,  Dr.  A.  W. —

Ave  Roma  Immortalis - - - 13,  14,  17,  21-22,  144,  145-147
„ Communications  purporting  to  come  from. See  Survival,

Scripts  affording  Evidence  of.
,, "  Dante  and  Statius." See  below,  Literary  Essays.

„ Hercules  Furens  128,  130

,, Latin  Message  Experiment - -  -  - -  26

„ Literary  Essays,  Classical  and  Modem 225-230,  231,  320,  330,

476  (foot-note)

"  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment  -  - 3,  144-145,  237,  238

See  also  Bayfield,  Rev.  M.  A.


562


Index  to  Vol.  XXVII. [parts  lxviii.-lxx.]


Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.—

Automatic  Scripts  of 4,  12-24,  26-27,  28,  29,  30-32,  35-39,  40,
41,  44-45,  49,  53,  59,  61-63,  65  (foot-note),  76,  77-81,
83-84,  87,  88-106,  108,  109-115,  116,  119,  123-124,
125-127,  128-135,  138-143,  144-149,  151,  236-237,  240,

241,  250,  251,  272-275
„  Cross-correspondences. See  Cross-correspondence :  Alex-

ander's Tomb,  etc.
Lethe  Scripts,  On  the - - - - - - - -  221

,, New  Group  of  Experimenters,  reference  to - - - -  71,  72

„ Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  - - 60,  76,  77,  82,  85,  86,  116-118,  122
,, Verrall,  Dr.  A.  W.,  On  the  Communications  purporting  to  come

from  -  - 225,  233,  235-237,  242-243

See  also  The  uurus  ovpavus  aKVfUtiV  Incident  and  the  Lathi
Message  Experiment.
Verrall,  Miss  H.  de  G. —

„ Automatic  Scripts  of  2,  3,  26,  28,  29,  33  (foot-note),  35,  39-42,
49,  50,  54,  68-69,  71,  72,  76,  78,  92,  93-94,  95,  125,  148,
150,  151-154,  236,  250-259,  262,  263,  264,  271,  272,

274,  275-278,  479-481,  483
„  Cross-correspondences. See  Alexander's  Tomb ;  Hope,

Star  and  Browning  ; Sesame  and  Lilies  ; Sevens  ;
Swinburne's  Poems.
Experiments  in  Thought-Transference -  415,  417,  418,  419,  443-453
Further  Study  of  the  Mac  Scripts,  A  ...  250

„ History  of  Marthe  Beraud  ("  Eva  C") -  - - -  333

„  Report  on  Some  Recent  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference  415
Visions,  Auto-Suggested -  -  390,  400-402,  403-409

Visual  Hallucinations - - 392,  393,  394-399,  402,  403-405,  408,  409


W.

Watts. See  Cross- correspondences. Script  references.

Waud,  Reginald,  Case  confirmed  by - -  294,  300-301

Wilkinson,  Sidney,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Recent  Experience  in  Hypnotic

Practice  370

"  Willett,  Mrs.,"  The  Automatic  Scripts  of 3,  72-73,  76,  154,  221-225,

230-243,  244-249,  259,  276,  318-332,  458-491
,,  Cross-correspondence. See  Alexander's  Tomb.

Woolley,  V.  J.,  M.D.,  Some  Auto-Suggested  Visions  as  Illustrating
