Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XXVIII (1915)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1915 Glasgow: Robert MacLehose and Co. edition (Part LXXI) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc28soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research


VOLUME  XXVIII

(CONTAINING  PART  LXXI)
1915


The  responsibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  in  papers
published  in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  with  their  authors


PRINTED  FOR  THE  SOCIETY  BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  COMPANY  LIMITED
UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  GLASGOW
1915

Agents  for  the  sale  of  publications :

LONDON  :  FRANCIS  EDWARDS,  83  High  Street,  Marylebone,  W.
GLASGOW  :  JAMES  MACLEHOSE  &  SONS,  61  St.  Vincent  Street
AMERICA:  THE  W.  B.  CLARKE  CO.,  26-28  Tremont  Street,  Boston,  Mass.


All  rights  reserved


*  * *  > i  *


PART  LXXI.

December,  1915.
A  Contribution  to  the  Study  of  the  Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's


Trance  Phenomena. By  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.

PAGE

Preface, -----------  i

List  of  Papers  concerning  Mrs. Piper  previously  published

in  the  Proceedings, --------  ii

Synopsis  of  Contents, --------  v

Explanations  concerning  Treatment  of  the  Records, - -  xvii
Dates  of  some  Events  bearing  on  the  History  of  Mrs.  Piper's

Trance, ----------  xix

Chapter  I.  Introductory,  --------  1

„ II.  Theories  of  Controls  as  to  their  Relation  to  the

Body  and  Spirit  of  the  Medium,  29
,, III.  Individual  Controls, ------  75

,, IV.  Indications  (1)  of  Artificiality  in  the  Language  of
the  Controls,  and  (2)  of  Common  Memories  and
Associations  of  Ideas  in  different  Controls,  -  130

,, V.  Communicators, - - - - - - -  159

„ VI.  The  Waking-Stage,  and  the  Corresponding  Stage

in  going  into  Trance, ------  205

,,  VII.  Relation  to  each  other  of  Mrs. Piper's  different

States  of  Consciousness, -----  258

,,  VIII.  Effect  of  Sitters  and  of  so-called "  Influences  "

on  the  Trance  Phenomena, ... -  294
,, IX.  Conclusion, --------  315

Appendix  to  Chapter  I.  :  Some  Prophecies, - - - -  332

„  ,,  ,,  II.  :  Theories  of  Controls  as  to  their  re-
lation to  the  Body  and  Spirit  of
the  Medium, - - - -  335


1  V


Contents


Appendix  to  Chapter  III
.  TV


PAGE

Specimens  of  Individual  Controls,  -  437
Some;  'Passage?  :  about  -Speaking  by
.V.  : /  '-.Tkought',-'  :'  -: '  '-"  . .  sis

,, V.: Communicators,,, ,  - -  520

„ ,, \ VI:,:  ..The-  Waking-.Stage'^  and,  the  Corre-

"  '  sponding  Stage  in  going  into  Trance,  549
,, „ ,,  VII.  :  Relation  to  each  other  of  Mrs.  Piper's

different  States  of  Consciousness,  -  614
,,  VIII.  :  Effect  of Sitters  and  of  so-called
"  Influences  "  on  the  Trance  Phe-
nomena, - -  - -  619
Chronological  List  of  Page  References  to  Sittings,  -  -  646
Index  to  Vol.  XXVIII. , • - -  -  653


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LXXI.

Djecember,  1915.


A CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUDY OF  THE
PSYCHOLOGY  OF  MRS.  PIPER'S  TRANCE
PHENOMENA.

By  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


PREFACE.

The  main  interest  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  phenomena  lies
undoubtedly  in  the  evidence  they  afford  of  knowledge  acquired
otherwise  than  through  the  senses — whether  from  the  living
or  from  the  dead.  This  evidence  has  been  set  forth  and
discussed  in  numerous  papers  in  the  Proceedings,  of  ivhich
a  list  is  given  below.  To  these  papers  I  must  refer  those
who  are  interested  only  in  such  evidential  matter.  For  in
the  present  paper  they  will  not  find  what  they  want.  There
is  no  attempt  in  it  to  give  any  of  the  evidence  for  super-
normal powers,  with  which  it  is  concerned  only  incidentally.

Its  object  is  to  throw light  on  the  working of  the  trance

a


ii  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

consciousnesses  from  a  psychological  point  of  view,  and,  among
other  things,  on  the  question  whether  the  intelligence  that  spealcs
or  writes  in  the  trance,  and  is  sometimes  in  telepathic  com-
munication with  other  minds  (whether  of  the  living  or  of
the  dead),  is  other  than  a  phase,  or  centre  of  consciousness,
of  Mrs.  Piper  herself.


A  LIST  OF  PAPERS  CONCERNING  MRS.  PIPER
PREVIOUSLY  PUBLISHED  IN  THE  PROCEEDINGS

Vol.  VI.  (1890),  pp.  136-659.  "A  Record  of  Observations
of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance,"  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers,
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  Dr.  Walter  Leaf  and  Professor  William
James.

This  deals  with  the  sittings  in  England  in  1889-1890.

Vol.  VIII.  (1892),  pp.  1-168.  "A  Record  of  Observations  of
Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance,"  by  Dr  Richard  Hodgson.

This  deals  with  sittings  in  America  from  1886  to  1891.

Vol.  XIII.  (1898),  pp.  284-582.  "A  Further  Record  of  Ob-
servations of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance,"  by  Dr.
R.  Hodgson.

This  deals  with  sittings  in  America  from  1892  io  1895.

Vol.  XIV.  (1898),  pp.  6-49.  "A  Further  Record  of  Ob-
servations of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance,"  by  Pro-
fessor Romaine  Newbold.

This deals with sittings with which Professor  Newbold
was  concerned  from  1891  to  1895.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Papers.  in


Vol.  XVI.  (1901),  pp.  1-649.  "A  Further  Record  of  Ob-
servations of  Certain  Trance  Phenomena,"  by  Professor
J.  H.  Hyslop.

This  deals  with  Professor  Hyslop's  sittings  in  1898-1899,
and  contains  also  accounts  of  certain  experiments  by  him,
and  discussions.  Professor  Hyslop  has  published  accounts
of  his  later  sittings  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  [new]  American
Society  for  Psychical  Research.

Vol. XXII. (1908), pp. 19-440. "A Series of  Concordant
Automatisms,"  by  Mr.  J.  G.  Piddington.
This deals with concordant automatisms between  Mrs.
Piper and  other  automatists,  and  some experiments  during
her  visit  to  England  in  1906-7.

Vol. XXIII. (1909), pp. 2-121. "Report on Mrs.  Piper's
Hodgson-Control,"  by  Professor  William  James.
This  records  and  discusses the  HodgsonP  communications
whether  as  control  or  communicator  during  the  year  following
his  death,  namely  1906.

Vol.  XXIII.  (1909),  pp.  127-280.  "Report  on  some  Trance
Communications  received  chiefly  through  Mrs.  Piper,"
by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.

Most  of  this  paper  is  concerned  with  sittings  with  Mrs.
Piper  arranged  for  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  and  at  which
he  was  generally  present,  in  England,  in  1889,  1890,  1906,
1907. Two  sittings  in  1905  in  America  are  included.

Vol. XXIV. (1910),  pp.  31-200. "Further  Experiments  with
Mrs.  Piper  in  1908,"  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick,  Mrs.  A.  W.
Verrall  and  Mr.  J.  G.  Piddington.
This  deals  with  Mr.  G.  B.  Dorr's  sittings  in  America  in  1908.

Vol. XXIV. (1910), pp. 351-664. "Report on the  Junot
Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,"  by  Miss  H.  de  G.  Verrall.
This  gives  the  record  of  all  "  Bennie  Junot's  "  communica-
tions from  1899-1905.

a  2


iv  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


All  the  above  papers  are  primarily  concerned  with  the
exhibition  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trances  of  knowledge  supernormally
acquired,  though  incidentally  some  other  points  are  discussed.

There  have  also  appeared  in  the  Proceedings  four  papers
discussing  the  published  evidence,  viz.  :

Vol. XIV. (1898), pp. 50-78. "Discussion of the  Trance
Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper,"  by  F.  Podmore.
This paper takes the view that there is  undoubtedly
telepathy  with  the  living,  but  insufficient  evidence  to  prove
anything  further. The  Piper  phenomena  are  compared  with
those  of  Adele  Maginot  and  others.

Vol. XV. (1900), pp. 16-38. "Discussion of the  Trance
Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper,"  by  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.
This  papei  takes  the  view  that,  assuming  there  is  com-
munication with  the  dead  through  Mrs.  Piper,  the  evidence
points  to  its  being  telepathic  in  character.

Vol.  XV.  (1900),  pp.  39-52.  "Discussion  of  the  Trance
Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper,"  by  Andrew  Lang.

This  paper  is  described  by  its  author  as  "  Reflections  on  Mrs.
Piper  and  Telepathy/'

Vol.  XXVI.  (1912),  pp.  147-173.  "The  Latin  Message  Experi-
ment," by  Mrs.  Anna  Hude  (with  Note  on  same  by
Mr.  J.  G.  Piddington).

This  discusses  one  of  the  experiments  in  1906-7  as  published
in  Vol.  XXII.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Contents.  v


SYNOPSIS  OF  CONTENTS.


Chapter  I. Introductory.  PiQE

Hodgson  intended  to  discuss  the  theory  maintained
by  controls  and  communicators  concerning  the
writings  and  their  production,  but  failed  to  carry
it  out 1

Materia]  available  for  study,  its  nature,  and  how  it
can  be  used --------  4

Knowledge  obtained  by  supernormal  means  is  often
exhibited  in  the  trance 6

Definition  of  "  Controls  "  and  "  Communicators  " -  7

History  of  Piper  trance  phenomena - - - -  9

General  description  of  trance  and  waking-stage  - -  15
,,  ,, of  waking-stage - - - -  21

Brief  characterisation  of  different  states  of  conscious-
ness --  27

Chapter  II. Theories  of  Controls  as  to  their  rela-
tion to  the  Body  and  Spirit  of  the  Medium.

Special  series  of  sittings  for  questioning  controls  in

1888,  1895,  and  1896-7 -  - - - -  29

The  control  in  voice  sittings  claims  to  occupy  the

whole  organism  --------29

The  idea  of  systematic  occupation  of  only  part  of  the

organism  begins  with  writing  sittings - - -  31
Development  of  the  writing  ------  32

Divided  control --------  33

This  power  lost - -- -- --  -35

Divided  control  with  two  controls  aware  of  each  o  ther  38
Want of distinction between the voices of G-  P.

and  of  Phinuit  39


vi  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


Control asserted to be unaware of writing, and  PAQB

statements  contradictory  to  this  44

Other  indications  that  it  is  not  true  48
Genesis  of  the  notion  probably  in  the  theory  of  the

occupation  of  the  arm  by  a  spirit  in  bodily  form -  52

Theory  that  hearing  is  in  the  hand - -  54

Fingers  as  supposed  organs  of  sight - -  56

Occupation  of  arm  by  control  not  always  affirmed -  57

Relation  of  control  to  brain  - - -  58

"Light"  -  59

Statements  as  to  distance  of  control  from  medium

and  sitter ---------  65

Relation  of  control  to  medium's  spirit  -  67
Cord  said  to  connect  Mrs.  Piper's  body  and  spirit,

and  its  functions - - - - - - -  71


Chapter  III. Individual  Controls.

Private  controls --------  75

Public  or  official  controls ------  76

The  two  functions  of  public  controls,  as  advisers  and
as  intermediaries - -  - - - -  76

These  are  the  regular  functions  of  the  controls  of
professional  mediums  -------  76

The  advantage  of  the  arrangement  from  the  control's

point  of  view -  77
It  is  compatible  either  with  the  hypothesis  that  the
control  is  an  independent  spirit  or  that  it  is  Mrs.
Piper's  subliminal  self ------  77

Of  the  public  controls  selected  for  special  consideration
here,  only G. P. and Hodgson give evidence  of
identity. This  they  do as  being  private  controls
as  well  as  public -------  78

Failure  of  the  others  to  produce  credentials  -  -  78
But  all  guarantee  each  other,  and  it  is  on  the  trust-
worthiness of  G.  P.'s  statement  that  there  is
control  by  independent  spirits  that  evidence  for  this
depends.  If  the  consistency  of  personation  of  any
control  guaranteed  by  him  fails,  his  evidence
breaks  down -  80


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.- — Contents.  vii

This  would  not  tend  to  show  that  there  was  no  real  PAGE

G.  P.  in  the  background - - - - - -  81

Discussion  of  objections  to  the  telepathic  hypothesis -  81
Among  the  selected  controls,  specimens,  as  such,  of
the  utterances  of  Phinuit,  G.  P.,  and  Hodgson  are
not  required,  as  they  have  been  sufficiently  given

in  Proceedings --------  84

Sir  Walter  Scott ----- -  85

Proctor  --  ---87

W.  Stainton  Moses  and  his  spirit  guides  88

The  Imperator  Band -------  98

They  take  over  the  management  of  the  sittings -  98

Imperator --------  98

Imperator  on  Bible  history - - - - -  102

Changes  in  the  Imperator  Band -  105

Rector ----- -  105

Mentor,  Doctor - - -  105

Prudens  ---------  106

Rector  as  amanuensis,  and  his  difficulties -  107

His  inconsistencies  about  his  name  and  language  -  109

Improved  conditions  under  Imperator  Band  - -  110

Kind  of  tests  objected  to - - - - -  111

Julius  Caesar  - - - - - - - -  -112

George  Eliot  ------- -  115

"Moses  of  Old  " - -  119

Madame  Guyon --------  123

Development  of  automatic  script  without  trance -  127


Chapter  IV.  Indications  (1)  of  Artificiality  in  the
Language  of  the  Controls,  and  (2)  of  Common
Memories  and  Associations  of  Ideas  in  diffe-
rent Controls.

Our knowledge of the controls is derived  almost


entirely  from  their  language  -  -  -  -  -  130
There  are  some  differences  of  movement  which  may

be  habits  or  may  be  signals  to  announce  particular

controls ---------  130

Similarly,  the mode  of speech of different  controls

differs  130


viii  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


PAGE

If  these  differences  are  due  to  habit — whose  habit  ?  -  131
Use of second person singular by Imperator  and

Rector 132

Grammatical  errors  of  two  kinds  occur  - - - -  138

viz.  Mistakes  in  using  archaic  language - -  138

Mrs.  Piper's  habitual  mistakes - - -  139

The  Quaker  "  thee  " -  140

Time  names -------- -  143

One  control  falling  into  the  mode  of  expression  of

another ---------  147

Common  stock  of  memories  and  associations  : - -  148

"  Two,  too,  to  " - - - - - -  149

Solidarity  among  controls - - - - -  150

Rector associates with the name of a  sitter

Phinuit's  nickname  for  him - - - -  154

Forrest  case --------  155

Chapter  V.  Communicators.

The  subject  is  approached  from  the  point  of  view
of  the  theories  advanced  by  controls  and  com-
municators --------  159

Alleged  difficulties  of  communication  arising  from  :

(1)  Bewilderment or suffocation in going  into

"light" --------  159

Fatigue  ;  arrangements  for  resting - - -  162

(2)  Control's  difficulty  in  hearing  communicator -  163
Distance  of  communicator -  168

(3)  Communicator's  difficulty  in  hearing  sitter -  172
Control's ,, ,, ,, -  175

(4)  Sitter's  difficulty  in  reading  the  script - -  175
False  communicators - - - - - -  -176

Questions to be considered concerning relations  of

control  and  communicator  ------  178

Dramatic distinction between control and  com-
municator  ---------  179

Independent memories attributed to control  and

communicator --------  179

Question  whether  this  is  more  than  play-acting  -  -  179
Real  communications  from  spirits  are  not  incompatible


LXXI.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance.— Contents.  ix

with purely  dramatic  representations  of  the com-  PAQE
municator -------- -  180

Externalised  seeing  and  hearing  of  communicator  by
control ---------  180

Affirmation by communicator of his position  in
space  -------  --  186

Symbolic  descriptions - -  186

Communicator  sometimes  influences  medium's  organism
as  shown  by  cramped  or  other  movements  'of

her  hand  and  by  changes  in  her  handwriting  -  187
by use of her hand for other purposes  than

writing  191

by  perturbation  of  her  hand  by  communicator's
emotions - -- -- -- -  192

This seeming influence on the organism by  the

communicator  may  be  a  form  of  joint  control -  193
or may be a  part played by  the control  to

symbohse  the  communicator -  194
or  may  be  an  artifice  to  make  the  drama  clear

to  the  sitter  194

Cases  of  control  suffering  communicator's  pain - -  194

Assisted  control  -194

Through degrees of assisted control,  communicator

and  control  merge  into  each  other  -  200
Communicators  hear  through  the  medium's  ears  -  -  201
Summary  of  points  established  203

Chapter VI. The Waking-Stage, and the  Corre-
sponding Stage  in  going  into  Trance.

Changes  in  processes  of  going  into and  coming  out
of trance,  and  in  Mrs.  Piper's  state  of  mind

when  doing  so 205

Quiet and seemingly pleasant process  under

Imperator  regime -  205

The  process  under  the  Phinuit  regime -  -  206

Mrs.  Piper's  visions  of  spirits  in  waking-stage
began  under  the  Phinuit  regime,  but  became
commoner  under  the  G.  P.  regime,  when  also
talking  during  waking-stage  began -  212


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

PAGE

Waking-stages  during  recovery  from  anaesthetics -  217

Waking-stages  of  1894-5 218

Stages  of  consciousness  during  waking-stage  - -  223
Consciousness  of  presence  of  the  sitter  - - -  224
Subject-matter of waking-stage dreams  can
generally be traced in the preceding  trance
proper  ---------  224

"  Snap  "  in  head  during  waking-stage -  225
Coincidence of rise of regular waking-stage  with
disappearance  of  Phinuit and  ceasing of  habitual
voice-sittings - -- -- -- -  226

Mrs. Piper  in  the "  spirit world  " of  the  waking-
stage  does  not  meet  living  people -  227
But  her  visionary  spirits  get  mixed  with her  real
surroundings  as  she  wakes .....  228

Breaks of memory and absence of judgment  in

waking-stage  - -  228

Imagery  of  waking-stages ------  229

Concerning  the nature of the  intelligence  operating

in  the  waking-stage ------  230

Hodgson's  view  of  "  the  subliminal  "  discussed -  230
The  waking-stage  personality  conceives  itself  as
Mrs.  Piper --------  231

Sometimes  she  gives  her  side  only  of  the  conversa-
tion addressed  sometimes  to  spirits,  sometimes
to  sitter  as  well  as  spirits  - - - -  231

Sometimes  she  gives  the  spirit's  side  only  of  the
conversation -------  232

Sometimes  she  gives  both  sides - - - -  233

Echolalia- --------  234

Exceptional  cases  where  it  does  not  seem  to  be
Mrs. Piper herself who is the "  I  " of  the
waking-stage  utterance - - - - -  235

The  waking-stage  sometimes definitely  continues

the  drama  of  the  preceding  trance  proper  - -  240
The  drama  of  trance  proper  is  sometimes  begun  in
the  going-into -trance  stage  -----  242

Connexion  of  some  kind  is  almost  always  to  be
found  between  the  trance  proper  and  the
waking-stage -------  244


Lxxi.j Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance. — Contents.  xi

Cases where such connexion is affirmed are  PAGE
reserved  for  Chapter  VII. - - - - -  244

There  is  more  or  less  identity  of  the  personages
who  appear  in  trance  and  waking-stage — and
once  the  absence  of  a  personage  in  both  is
noted ------  . .  244

There  are  no  records  of  personages  making  their
first  appearance  in  the  waking-stage,  but
ideas  sometimes  do ----- -  244

Various  cases  of  correspondence  of  ideas  in  trance
proper  and  in  waking-stage  (including  "  sphere-
spear  ")  -  - -  245

Mrs.  Piper's  visions  in  waking-stages  of  Phinuit,

Rector,  Imperator ------  248

Her  visions  of  communicators  sometimes  veridical  219

Locket  case  250

Memory  from  one  waking-stage  to  another - -  255

Chapter VII. Relation to each other of  Mrs.
Piper's  different  states  of  Consciousness.

The  normal  Mrs.  Piper  appears  to  have  no  conscious

knowledge  of  what  happens  in  the  trance  proper  -  258
Possibility that subliminal memory of the  trance

may  sometimes  emerge  in  the  normal  state  -  -  258
Normal state  less cut off from waking-stage  than

from  trance  proper -------  259

Different views as to knowledge in trance of  the

normal  state 259

Mrs.  Piper's  memorised  knowledge  is  certainly  common

to  both  states 259

And  to  the  waking-stage  also  -----  260
But  is  aU  her  normal  knowledge  available  for  trance

and  waking-stage  consciousnesses  ? - - - -  261

Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  view  -------  261

Dr.  Leaf's  view ------  261

Hodgson's  view  -------  262

Other possibilities besides complete knowledge  and

complete  ignorance -------  263

Ignorance  professed  in  trance  of  Mrs.  Piper's  state  of

health  or  state  of  mind ------  264


xii  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [f  ART

PAGE

But  not  very  consistently - - - - - -  264

The last thought before trance often recurs  on

emerging  from  trance -  266
Memory  in  one  trance  of  preceding  trances  is  good -  267
Uncontrolled  association  of  ideas  -----  267

Memory  in  waking-stage  of  preceding  waking-stages -  268
Memory  between  trance  proper  and  waking-stage -  268
Examples  before  the  full  development  of  the  waking-
stage  ----------  268

Examples  after  the  full  development  of  the  waking-
stage 270

Joseph  Marble  case  (recognition  of  photograph) - -  273
Further evidence of memory in one state of  the
other  state  under  influence  of  cross-correspondence

experiments  in  1907 - 273

and  in  1908 277

Some  statements  by  MyersP  about  the  connexion -  277
Suggestion  from  trance  to  waking-stage -  279
Communicator  said  to  confer  with  control  at  moment  of
leaving ; perhaps this  indicates  moment  of  special

lucidity - 282

Dramatic  consistency -------  286

The  suggestion  that  questions  should  be  given  to
the  communicator  to  think  over  is  perhaps  also  an
indication  that  in  coming  out of  trance  there  is

a  moment  of  lucidity  287

An  incident  indicating  lucidity  at  the  moment  of  transi-
tion in  a  break  in  the  trance -----  289
Cases definitely indicating that it is Mrs.  Piper's
consciousness  operating  throughout -  290

Chapter  VIII. Effect  of  Sitters  and  of  so-called
"  Influences  "  on  the  Trance  Phenomena.

Sitters  influence  the  communications  by  being  person-
ages in  the  drama  ......  294

Also  by  being  the  audience  ------  294

Controls  adapt  their  remarks  to  supposed  needs
of  the  sitter - -- -- -- -  295

Differences  in  the  qualities  of  the  sitters  affect  the
amount  of  veridical  communication -  295


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.- — Contents.  xiii

Sitters possibly a telepathic channel between com-  PAGE

municator  and  medium ------  290

Evidence  of  telepathy  from  the  sitter  - - - -  297

Controls are concerned to deny telepathy  from

sitters -  298

But  are  not  consistent  -------  298

Sometimes  they  admit  borrowing  language  from  sitter  -  299

Some  telepathy  is  admitted  by  HodgsonP  in  1906 -  299
GurneyP, MyersP and HodgsonP as  communicators

apparently  affected  by  sitters - - -  300
Myersp ....  .-.-300

HodgsonP --------  301

Gurneyp  ---------  301

"  Influences,"  what  they  are  and  how  used  - - -  305

Hodgson's  suggestions  about  them  in  his  first  report  -  306
Not  much  has  been  added  to  our  knowledge  about

them  since  then  - 307

Doctor's  account  of  influences  307

G.  P.'s  account --------  307

G.  P.  and  Doctor  do  not  believe  in  psychometry -  308
Other  statements  about  influences  are well  adapted

for  use  as  excuses  for  failure - ...  308

"  Spirit  "  of  influences  taken  to  the  other  world  - -  308

Influences  of  living  people — various  views - - -  309
Further remarks on telepathy from sitters as  an

explanation  of  effect  of  influences - - - -  310

But  "  the  healer's  influence  "  and  Hodgson's  influences
do not fall under any of the above  mentioned

explanations 310

The  use  of  influences  is  perhaps  a  form  of  ritual  - -  3 1 1
But  the  use  of  "  the  healer's  influence  "  suggests  that
grasping  it  may  have  had  a  steadying  effect  on  the

trance  consciousness 311

Or  a  pause  may  have  been  desired  and  obtained  by

grasping  an  influence 311

False  influences  can  be  efficacious  -----  312
The  same  advantages  as  are  supposed  to  be  conferred
by influences  were  sometimes  obtained  by  resting

the  hand  on  the  sitter's  head - - - -  312

Also  from  verses  being  read  to  the  control  - - -  313


xiv


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


Comm. anicators often  require a rest and obtain  it  PAGE

by  pauses - - - - - - - -  -  313

Influences may be used, among other means,  to

secure  pauses  for  them - - - - -  -  314

Chapter  IX.  Conclusion.

The  controls  are  not  spirits  other  than  Mrs.  Piper  -  315
Nor  are  the  dramatic  communicators  -  -  -  -  317
The greater powers,  as compared  with the  normal

Mrs.  Piper,  shown  in  some  respects  by  controls  -  317
And their supernormal access to information  from

living  minds  and  probably  from  the  dead-  -  -  318
Are  both  compatible  with  the  controls  being  phases  or

fragments  of  Mrs.  Piper ------  320

The  fragmentary  character  of  supernormal  impressions

resembles  thought-transference  experiments  -  -  320
As  does  the  mental  groping  after  impressions  -  -  321
Are controls secondary personalities, and if so,  in

what  sense  ? - -- -- -- -  323

They  probably  are  Mis.  Piper's  hypnotic  self  in  self-
induced  hypnosis  personating  different  characters  -  324
Sometimes  perhaps  deliberately,  sometimes  self-deceived  325
The  best  analogy  to  the  controls  is  probably  the  suggested

personations  of  hypnosis ------  326

Mrs.  Piper's  trance  is  in  other  respects  like  hypnosis  -  327
All the elements required to suggest the  trance

drama  were  present  in  Mrs.  Piper's  case  -  327
Differences in consciousnesses of trance and  of

waking-stage --------  328

Telepathy  in  the  various  states -  - -  329

What  psychical  processes  are  involved  in  changes  and

divisions  of  consciousness  either  in  hypnosis  or  in  Mrs.

Piper's  trance  we  do  not  know  -----  329
Brief  summary  of  conclusion  - - -  330

Appendix  to  Chapter  I. - - - - - - -  332

Appendix  to  Chapter  II.  :  Theories  of  Controls  - -  335

(A.)  Stenographic  reports  of  Phinuit  in  1888  -  -  335
(B.)  „  „ of  G.  P.  in  1892  - - -  352


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Contents.  xv

PAGE

(C.)  Sittings  for  enquiry  into  theories  in  1895 - -  363

(D.)  A  dream  of  Mrs.  Piper's  in  1896  - -  377

(E.)  Sittings,  October,  1896,  to  June,  1897  - -  381

(F.)  Sittings  after  1897 - -  417

Appendix  to  Chapter  III.  : Specimens  of  Individual

Controls.  - - - -  437

(.4.)  Sir  Walter  Scott - -  437

(B.)  Proctor  the  Astronomer  - ....  443

(C.)  Stainton  Moses - - -  453

(D.)  The  Imperator  Band  -  -  -  -  468
(E.)  George  Eliot  :

Failure  of  Cross-Correspondence  Experiments  -  491

(F.)  Mrs.  Piper's  last  trance  ------  514

Appendix to Chapter IV.  : Some Passages  4B.out

SPEAKING  BY  THOUGHT - - - - -  518

Appendix  to  Chapter  V.  :  Communicators - -  520
Examples  of  :

Intermediaries  between  Communicator  and  Rector -  520

Control's  difficulty  in  hearing  the  Communicator -  524

Communicator  "  hearing "  the  sitter - - -  528

False  Communicators ----- .  533

Externalised  visions  in  writing  sittings  - - -  544

Position  in  space  affirmed  by  Communicator -  546

Control  feeling  pain  of  Communicator  -  548

Appendix  to  Chapter  VI.

Examples  of  waking-stages, and  stage  of  going  into

trance ---------  549

Appendix  to  Chapter  VII.

Supposed  relation  of  trance  personality  to  normal  -  614
G. P. on  messages  through  returning  spirit  of  the

medium  616
Phinuit  on  messages  through  returning  spirit  of  the

medium ---------  617

Case  of  False  Communicator  remembering  in  trance

the  previous  waking-stage  ------  617


xvi


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PART


Appendix  to  Chapter  VIII.

Extracts  concerning  :  PAGE

(A.)  Control's  views  on  influence  of  minds  of  sitters -  619

(B.)  "Influences"  -----  622

(C.)  Examples  of  medium  seeking  strength  by  resting

her  hand  on  the  sitter's  head 644

(D.)  Example  of  medium  seeking  strength  by  hearing

verses  recited --------  645


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Records.  xvii


Explanations  concerning  my  Treatment  of  the

Records.

(i)  I  have  not  thought  it  necessary  even  when  we  have
the  original  script,  which  to  a  large  extent  we  have,  to
compare  with  it  the  extracts  from  sittings  given  in  my
text  or  appendices.  To  do  so  would  be  a  very  laborious
and  troublesome  piece  of  work,  and  for  the  purposes  of
this  paper  I  have  thought  that  the  typed  copies  made
immediately  after  the  sittings  and  carefully  compared  with
the  original  script  at  the  time  by  the  recorder,  may  fairly
be  taken  as  sufficiently  accurate.

(ii)  I  have  in  transcribing  from  the  typed  copies  gener-
ally omitted,  without  indicating  the  fact,  repetitions  due
to  difficulty  of  reading.  These  repetitions  interrupt  the
straightforward  apprehension  of  what  the  controls  wish  to
sa.y,  and  do  not  in  any  way  affect  the  sense.  All  omissions
of  a  different  kind  in  any  passage  quoted  are  indicated  by
asterisks  or  otherwise.  I  have  also  inserted  what  seemed
needful  in  the  way  of  punctuation,  but  have  been  very
careful  in  this,  as  well  as  in  omissions,  not  to  alter  the
sense  of  what  is  quoted.

(iii)  It  has  often  been  necessary  for  my  purposes  to  keep
before  the  reader  who  the  control  or  communicator  is
supposed  to  be,  or  to  distinguish  clearly  between  them.
I  have  accordingly  inserted  the  name,  or  some  designation,
before  each  remark.  But  these  names  are  not  part  of  the
original  records  nor  of  the  typed  copies.  Generally
speaking,  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  who  the  speaker  or
writer  is  supposed  to  be,  but  occasionally  it  is  a  matter
of  conjecture,  and  whenever  I  have  had  any  doubt  myself
I  have  given  as  alternatives  the  two  names  between  which


xviii


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


the  doubt  lies.  When  the  control  is  writing  for  a  com-
municator I  have  generally  prefixed  to  the  remark  the
name  of  the  communicator  or  the  abbreviation  "  Comm."

In  designating  Myers  or  Hodgson  or  Gurney  as  com-
municators or  controls,  I  have  generally  used  the  symbol
Myersp,  HodgsonP,  etc.,  introduced  in  Proceedings,  Vol.
XXII.,  for  two  purposes,  viz.  to  distinguish  between,  e.g.
the  Myers  of  different  automatists,  and  to  avoid  any
begging  of  the  question  whether  the  control  or  communi-
cator was  the  real  Frederic  Myers,  etc.,  or  not.

(iv)  Remarks  enclosed  in  square  brackets  are  notes
by  the  recorder.  Those  inserted  by  myself  in  the  course
of  j  a  record  are  indicated  by  {  }  .

(v)  The  symbol  "  U.D."  is  an  abbreviation  for  Under-
stand, understood,  do  you  understand  ?,  etc.


Definitions.

Definitions  of  the  following  words  and  phrases  as  used
in  this  paper  will  be  found  at  the  pages  indicated  :
Control,  p.  7.
Communicator,  p.  7.

Telepathy  (see  p.  82)  is  used  of  all  communication  other-
wise than  through  the  senses  ;  whether  between  living
persons,  or  between  disembodied  spirits  and  living  persons,
or  between  spirits.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Dates.  xix


Dates  of  some  Events  bearing  on  the  History  op  Mrs.
Piper's  Trance  Communications  as  dealt  with  in
this  Paper.

1884.  Mrs.  Piper's  trances  began.

1887  (May). R.  Hodgson  went  to  the  United  States  as  secre-

tary of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,
and  continued  investigations  with  Mrs.  Piper  already
begun  by  that  Society.

1888  (June  22). Edmund  Gurney  died.
1889-90. Mrs.  Piper's  first  visit  to  England.
1892  (February). "  George  Pelham  "  died.

(March). First  appearance  of  G.  P.  control.
1897  (January  26). The Imperator Band assume position  of
chief  controls.

1900  (August  28). Henry  Sidgwick  died.

1901  (January  17). F.  W.  H.  Myers  died.
1905  (December  20). R.  Hodgson  died.
1906-7. Mrs.  Piper's  second  visit  to  England.
1909-11. Mrs.  Piper's  third  \isit  to  England.

1910  (August  26). William  James  died.

1911  (June  4). Mrs. Piper's first automatic writing  without

trance.

1911  (July  31). Mrs.  Piper's  last  trance.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  1


CHAPTER  I.
Introductory.

When  in  1898  Dr.  Hodgson  published  his  second  paper  on
Mrs.  Piper,1  it  was  his  intention 2  to  write  a  "Part  II."  in
which  he  would  deal  with  objections  that  might  be  raised
to  his  views,  and  would  refer  to  statements  made  by  the
"  communicators "  concerning  the  writings  and  then  pro-
duction. He  also  intended  to  add  records  of  further  inci-
dents strengthening  the  general  evidence.  Unfortunately
these  intentions  were  never  carried  out.  All  that  appeared
of  the  intended  Part  II.  was  a  valuable  contribution  by
Professor  W.  Romaine  Newbold,3  discussing  sittings  with
which  he  was  concerned  in  1894-5.  Of  these  sittings —
33  in  number — 15  "  were  devoted  for  the  most  part  to
getting  evidence  to  prove  the  identity  of  the  alleged  com-
municators ;  the  remainder  to  getting  from  them  their  own
theory  of  the  phenomena  and  their  description  of  the  con-
ditions under  which  they  were  working  and  of  the  life  they
live."  "  While  it  is  impossible  at  present,"  Professor  New-
bold  continues,  "  to  accept  these  statements  as  true,  it  is  of
the  greatest  importance  to  put  them  on  record  as  afford-
ing clues  for  the  guidance  of  experiments  with  other
automatists."  The  material  provided  by  this  latter  series
was,  however,  left  to  Hodgson  to  deal  with  in  the  paper

*"A  further  Record  of  Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance."
By  Richard  Hodgson,  LL.D. S.P.R.  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  284-582.
2  Op.  cit.,  p.  406.

3"A  further  Record  of  Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance."
Part  II.,  A.  By  Professor  William  Romaine  Newbold.  Proc,  Vol.  XIV  ,
pp.  6-49.

A


2


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


which  never  saw  the  light,  Professor  Newbold  concerning
himself,  in  his  paper,  with  the  evidence  for  identity  only.

Nor  did  Hodgson  ever  reply  to  an  article  by  myself,1
in  which  I  discussed  his  theory  of  the  nature  of  the
communicating  intelligence  and  its  relation  to  Mrs.  Piper  ;
and  pointed  out  what  seemed  to  me  good  grounds  for  my
view.  I  regret  this  the  more  because  he  is  known  to  have
disagreed  with  me  and  to  have  intended  to  write  an
answer,  and  it  is  only  by  free  discussion  that  we  can  hope
to  arrive  at  sound  conclusions.

Hodgson  not  only  did  not  carry  out  these  various
intentions,  but,  so  far  as  I  know,  he  left  no  notes  of  what
he  intended  to  say  in  any  form  available  for  use  by
others.  It  is  unfortunate,  because  his  experience  of  the
trance  manifestations  in  Mrs.  Piper's  case  was  greater  than
that  of  any  other  student  of  the  subject  ;  and  because  the
records  of  his  own  sittings  with  her  probably  include
experiments  and  attempts  to  elucidate  points  to  which  we
have  not  the  clue,  and  the  significance  of  which  is  therefore
lost  to  us.  Moreover,  even  apart  from  this,  we  who  read
his  records  of  sittings  have,  as  it  were,  only  the  dry  bones,
and  doubtless  lose  much  that  made  the  communications  life-
like and  impressive,  and  which  he  might  to  some  extent
have  made  us  realise  had  he  himself  written  about  them.
As  Professor  William  James  says  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.,
p.  32)  :

One  who  takes  part  in  a  good  sitting  has  usually  a  far
livelier  sense,  both  of  the  reality  and  of  the  importance  of  the
communications,  than  one  who  merely  reads  the  record.  Active
relations  with  a  thing  are  required  to  bring  the  reality  of  it
home  to  us,  and  in  a  trance-talk  the  sitter  actively  co-
operates. *  *  *  But  a  sitting  that  thus  seemed  important
at  the  time  may  greatly  shrink  in  value  on  a  cold  re-
reading ;  and  if  read  by  a  non-participant,  it  may  seem
thin  and  almost  insignificant.

This  advantage  of  personal  participation  in  a  sitting  is,
however,  not  entirely  unmixed,  for  the  dry  light  of  criticism

1  "  Discussion  of  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper."  Proc,  Vol.
XV.,  pp.  16-3S.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance  Phenomena.  3

is  perhaps  more  easily  brought  to  bear  when  uninfluenced
and  unimpeded  by  dramatic  or  emotional  elements.  In
much  the  same  way,  when  we  wish  to  get  at  facts  it  may  be
better  to  read  a  statement  of  them  to  ourselves  rather  than
to  hear  even  the  same  statement  eloquently  set  forth  by  an
orator  with  a  parti  pris.  It  must  be  remembered,  of  course,
that  a  conversation  of  any  vividness,  whether  carried  on
on  the  medium's  side  by  voice  or  by  writing,  is  hardly
possible  unless  the  sitter  can  act  his  part  and  behave  as
though  his  interlocutor  were  what  he  professes  to  be,  even
when  he  suspects  him  of  play-acting.  Thus  Mrs.  Piper's
sitters  cannot  escape  sharing  in  the  performance,  whatever
view  they  take  of  its  genuineness.

It  would  be  interesting  to  know  why  Hodgson  failed  so
completely  to  carry  out  his  intentions.  One  reason  was
doubtless  that  he  was  busy.  The  constant  superintendence
of  Mrs.  Piper's  sittings — in  1896  and  1897  generally  six  a
week,  and  latterly  usually  three  a  week  during  some  three-
fourths  of  the  year — and  the  keeping  of  records  of  them,
must  have  been  a  time-consuming  and  rather  fatiguing
business,  and  there  was  as  well  the  business  of  the  American
Branch  of  the  S.P.R.,  of  which  he  was  secretary.  And  of
course  the  material  with  which  he  had  to  deal  was  con-
stantly growing  on  his  hands.  I  think,  however,  that  he
did  not  expect  this  growth  to  continue  indefinitely.  The
records  show  that  the  trance  personages  frequently  spoke
of  Mrs.  Piper's  power  coming  to  an  end  in  a  year  or  two,
as  well  as  of  the  probable  withdrawal  of  the  Imperator
Band — i.e.  the  particular  group  of  soi-disant  communicating
spirits  in  whose  communications  Hodgson  was  specially
interested  from  1897  onwards.  The  records  also  show
that  a  continued  and  prosperous  life  was  prophesied  for
Hodgson  himself.1  The  first  prophecy  might  well  have
made  him  feel  that  it  would  be  more  profitable  to  delay
writing  till  he  had  the  whole  of  the  evidence  before  him  ;
and  the  second  prophecy,  if  he  attached  any  importance
to  it,  would  tend  to  support  the  impression,  natural  in  a
healthy  man  of  his  age,  that  there  was  no  need  for  haste
— that  he  had  time  before  him.

1  For  instances  of  these  prophecies  see  Appendix,  pp.  332-333.


4


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Whatever  the  cause,  however,  of  Hodgson's  not  giving  us
a  further  instalment  of  his  study  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance
phenomena,  we  can  merely  note  and  regret  the  fact  and
endeavour  to  make  what  use  we  can  of  his  material  with-
out his  assistance.  Some  of  this  material  regarded  as
bearing  on  the  evidence  for  the  identity  of  the  alleged
communicators  has  already  been  published.  Professor
Hyslop's  sittings,  on  which  he  reported  in  Hodgson's  life-
time in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XVI.,  and  some  of  those  on
which  he  reported  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  American
Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Vol.  IV.,  belong  to  the
period  between  Hodgson's  last  report  and  his  death ;
and  so  do  the  Junot  sittings,  edited  by  Miss  Verrall  and
published  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  351-664.  Hodg-
son once  told  me,  as  I  well  remember,  that  he  attached
great  value  to  the  latter  series  as  evidence  of  identity,
especially  as  being  one  which  could  be  published  quite
complete.  It  is  also  a  series  in  which — owing  to  the  Junot
family  living  at  a  great  distance  from  Boston  (where  most
of  the  sittings  were  held),  and  to  their  being  unconnected
with  other  sitters — there  need  be  hardly  any  fear  of  leakage,
of  information  having  accidentally  reached  Mrs.  Piper
through  other  sitters.  Unfortunately,  though  the  conviction
of  personal  identity  produced  was  strong,  the  amount  of
actually  veridical  statement  beyond  any  probability  of  guess-
work is  less  in  amount  than  one  could  have  wished.
There  have  also  been  published  certain  cross-correspondences
between  Mrs.  Piper  and  Mrs.  Verrall  which  occurred  in  1902
during  Hodgson's  life-time  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.,
pp.  212-218).

There  is  other  material  in  the  records,  which  there  is
little  doubt  added  to  the  evidence  for  supernormal  com-
munication ;  but  some  of  it  is  too  private  to  publish,  and
in  hardly  any  of  it  is  it  now  possible  to  judge  of  the  value
of  the  evidence,  because  we  cannot  tell  how  much  Mrs.
Piper's  supraliminal  or  subliminal  self  may  have  known
normally.  The  record  of  what  passed  at  sittings  is  not
complete.  Hodgson  was  often  asked  to  leave  the  room
during  parts  of  sittings,  and  on  other  occasions  he  was  not
present  at  all. The  sitters  were  sometimes  known  to  Mrs.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  5

Piper  in  her  normal  state,  and  sometimes  known  to  each
other,  so  that  there  were  possibilities  of  leakage  which
cannot  now  be  estimated.  Tor  these  reasons  the  records
can  add  little  to  the  evidence  for  the  identity  of  com-
municators already  published.  Moreover,  they  do  not
on  the  whole  afford  evidence  different  in  kind  from  that
which  we  already  have.  Mr.  Gerald  Balfour  and  I,  who
have  between  us  read  through  all  the  available  records
left  by  Hodgson,  have  therefore  come  to  the  conclusion
that  so  far  as  they  are  concerned  it  is  not  worth  while  to
attempt  to  present  more  evidence,  as  such,  of  knowledge
reaching  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  personality  in  a  supernormal
manner — and  in  this  conclusion  Mr.  Piddmgton  concurs.

We  think,  however,  that  some  attempt  should  be  made
by  examining  all  the  available  records,  both  published  and
unpublished,  to  analyse  further  the  phenomena  of  the
various  trance  states  ;  to  discover  in  what  respects  the
communicating  intelligences  concerned,  and  alleging  them-
selves to  be  independent  of  one  another,  are  differentiated  ;
whether  their  account  of  themselves  is  consistent ;  and  to
what  extent,  if  at  all,  their  claim  to  be  other  than  a
phase,  or  particular  centre  of  consciousness,  of  Mrs.  Piper
herself  is  justified.  Opinions  on  these  questions  have  been
much  divided.  For  instance,  as  Professor  William  James
says  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.,  p.  3)  :  "  Dr.  Hodgson  was
disposed  to  admit  the  claim  to  reality  of  Rector  and  of
the  whole  Imperator-Band  of  which  he  is  a  member,
while  I  have  rather  favoured  the  idea  of  their  all  being
dream  creations  of  Mrs.  Piper,  probably  having  no  existence
except  when  she  is  in  trance,  but  consolidated  by  repetition
into  personalities  consistent  enough  to  play  their  several
roles."  My  own  opinion  in  1899  was  that,  however  true  it
may  be  that  there  is  really  communication  between  the
living  and  the  dead,  the  intelligence  communicating  directly
with  the  sitter  through  Mrs.  Piper's  organism  is  Mrs.
Piper.  This  opinion  was  expressed  in  the  article  already
referred  to  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XV.,  pp.  18,  19),  and  I  may
as  well  say  at  once  that  it  has  remained  substantially
unchanged.

Incidentally,  it  will  be  desirable  in  the  course  of  the


6


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


discussion  to  bring  into  more  prominence  than  has  yet
been  done  the  weakest  side  of  the  Piper  trances — cases  of
obviously  false  personations  and  false  claims,  of  ignorance
and  misapprehensions  shown  by  the  trance  personages,
and  so  forth.  Not  that  the  existence  of  these  things  has
been  ignored  by  any  of  the  investigators,  or  that  specimens
have  not  been  given  ;  but  in  joapers  mainly  concerned  with
evidence  for  the  exhibition  of  knowledge  not  normally  within
Mrs.  Piper's  reach,  their  importance  is  naturally  subordi-
nate, and  we  think  that  the  place  which  they  occupy  in  the
trance  communications  as  a  whole  and  the  important  bearing
they  must  have  on  such  questions  as  we  are  now  proposing
to  discuss,  has  perhaps  hardly  been  appreciated  by  those
who  have  only  had  the  hitherto  published  evidence  before
them.  I  propose,  therefore,  besides  referring  to  such  cases
where  the  discussion  requires  it,  to  give,  among  other
things,  specimens  in  the  Appendices  of  what  may  be  called
Mrs.  Piper's  trance  communications  at  their  worst.

Much  of  the  material  on  which  this  paper  is  based  has,
as  I  have  already  said,  been  studied  by  Mr.  Gerald  Balfour
as  well  as  by  myself,  and  I  have  had  the  advantage  of
his  notes  on  it  as  well  as  of  his  criticism  of  what  I  have
written,  though  the  responsibility  is  entirely  my  own.

To  PREVENT  MISAPPREHENSION,  I  AM  ANXIOUS  TO  SAY
EMPHATICALLY  AT  THE  VERY  BEGINNING  OF  MY  DISCUSSION
THAT  I  HAVE  NO  DOUBT  WHATEVER  THAT  KNOWLEDGE  IS
OFTEN  EXHIBITED  IN  THE  COURSE  OF  MRS.  PlPER'S  TRANCE
UTTERANCES  WHICH  CAN  ONLY  HAVE  REACHED  HER  BY  SOME
SUPERNORMAL  MEANS — BY  WHICH  I  MEAN  OTHERWISE  THAN
THROUGH  THE ORDINARY  CHANNELS  OF  SENSE.

For  evidence  of  this  I  must  refer  my  readers  to  the
papers  already  published  in  the  Proceedings  about  Mrs.
Piper,1  for  I  do  not  propose  to  go  into  it  in  the  present
paper.  Nor  do  I  propose  to  discuss  the  question  whether
the  evidence,  if  accepted,  does  or  does  not  carry  us  beyond
telepathy  from  the  living.  I  will  only  say  that  since  I
wrote  my  previous  paper  in  1899  two  very  important
things  have  happened.  First,  evidence  tending,  in  my
opinion,  decidedly  to  support  the  hypothesis  of  communica-

1  For  a  list  of  these  see  Preface.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  7

tion  from  the  dead  has  been  obtained  through  automatists
other  than  Mrs.  Piper  ;  and  secondly,  the  development  of
cross-correspondences  has  introduced  a  new  line  of  evidence
to  which  Mrs.  Piper  has  contributed  her  share.  The  weak-
ness I  pointed  out  in  1899 — that  we  depended  for  evidence
of  communication  from  the  dead  on  one  medium  alone —
has  therefore  disappeared.  Nevertheless,  partly  because  I
am  not  going  to  deal  in  this  paper,  except  incidentally,
with  evidence  for  telepathy  either  with  the  living  or  the
dead,  partly  because  I  am  unable  to  agree  with  Hodgson
as  to  the  extent  to  which  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  utterances  are
independent  of  her,  and  partly  because  I  must  dwell  on
absurd  elements  hi  those  utterances,  what  I  have  to  say
may  seem  to  some  readers  to  belittle  the  value  of  the
evidence  obtained  through  her  for  communication  otherwise
than  through  the  senses.  I  am,  therefore,  the  more  con-
cerned to  make  it  clear  that  hi  my  opinion  Mrs.  Piper's
supernormal  powers  are  very  important.  It  is  indeed
chiefly  because  of  their  importance  that  I  think  it  worth
while  to  make  a  careful  study  of  her  trance  phenomena.

Before  going  further,  I  wish  to  define  the  way  in  which
in  what  follows  I  propose  to  use  the  two  words  "control"'
and  "communicator,"  both  familiar  to  the  readers  of  reports
on  Mrs.  Piper.  In  previous  discussions  these  words  have
sometimes  been  used  as  synonymous,  and  it  will,  I  think,
conduce  to  clearness  to  assign  to  each  a  special  meaning.
By  "  control,"  then,  I  mean  the  intelligence  which  is
and  professes  to  be  hi  direct  communication  with  the
sitter  by  voice  or  writing — the  intelligence  which  Hodgson,
when  he  wants  to  distinguish,  calls  the  "  direct  com-
municator." 1  By  "  communicator  "  I  mean  an  intelli-
gence for  which  the  control  professes  to  act  as  amanuensis
or  interpreter,  or  whose  remarks  the  control  repeats  to  the
sitter.

1  For  the  benefit  of  those  not  familiar  with  spiritualistic  literature  I  may
remark  that  the  word  "  control  "  is  in  regular  use  in  this  sense  in  mediumistic
parlance.  Nearly  all  trance  mediums,  professional  or  otherwise,  have  their
"  controls,*'  and  speak  ''  under  control,"  and  indeed  the  general  dramatic
framework  of  Mrs.  Piper's  sittings  is  common  to  most  trance  mediums.


8


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[PAET


I  am  not  at  present  making  any  assumptions  as  to  whether
controls  or  communicators  are  or  are  not  what  they  pro-
fess to  be,  namely,  spirits  of  dead  persons  ;  or  whether
they  are  or  are  not  phases  of  Mrs.  Piper's  consciousness,
and  if  so  whether  the  dissociation  between  them  and  the
normal  consciousness  is  so  complete  that  they  merit  the
name  of  secondary  personalities.  In  the  discussion  that
follows  the  aim  is  to  obtain  light  on  these  questions.
But  whatever  theory  we  adopt  it  will,  I  think,  be  con-
venient in  describing  the  phenomena  to  use  the  words
"  control  "  and  "  communicator "  in  the  senses  above
defined.

All  readers  of  our  Proceedings  will  readily  recall  as  instances
of  "controls"  in  the  trance  state,  Phinuit,  "George  Pelham"
(whom  I  shall  throughout  call  G.  P.),  Rector.  In  the
waking-stage  the  "  control,"  according  to  the  definition
above  given,  almost  invariably  purports  to  be  Mrs.  Piper
herself.  The  friends  of  sitters  generally  appear  in  the  role
of  "communicators."  But  the  roles  of  control  and  com-
municator are  interchangeable :  a  communicator  may
become  a  control  and  may  oscillate  between  the  two  func-
tions ;  and,  of  course,  a  control  can  and  does  communicate
on  his  own  account.  Sometimes,  as  we  shall  see,  it  is
difficult  for  the  sitter  to  know  whether  the  communicator  is
supposed  to  be  communicating  through  a  separate  control
or  whether  he  is  the  control  himself.  But  on  the  whole  it
is  generally,  I  think,  fairly  clear  what  is  happening  or
supposed  to  be  happening.  Doubt,  when  it  occurs,  is  often
the  result  of  a  further  dramatic  complication  which  we  may
call  "assisted  control,"  when  the  communicator  is  repre-
sented as  writing  or  talking  himself,  but  with  Phinuit  or
Rector  or  G.  P.  supporting  him,  as  it  were.

The  dramatic  form  above  indicated  is  consistently  main-
tained throughout  the  trance  proper :  all  the  characters
appearing  in  the  drama  being  represented,  and  representing
themselves,  as  permanent  independent  entities — spirits  of  the
dead — quite  distinct  from  Mrs.  Piper  herself.  Mrs.  Piper's
own  spirit  is  represented  as  temporarily  removed  and  having
no  concern  in  the  business  at  all.  Her  body  is  said  to  be
in  the  meanwhile  occupied  by  the  control  who  works  the


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  9

writing  or  speaking  mechanism  ;  and  the  reason  that  a  con-
trol must  intervene  between  communicator  and  sitter  is
said  to  be  that  successful  working  with  the  medium's  organism
needs  special  capacity  and  practice.  Whatever  our  theory
of  the  underlying  reality,  it  would  be  very  inconvenient
not  to  accept  this  dramatic  form  and  speak  of  the  char-
acters in  the  drama  as  they  speak  of  themselves.  When,
therefore,  in  what  follows,  I  refer  to  the  control  as  he  or
she  as  the  case  may  be,  or  say  that  Rector  is  writing,  and
so  forth — this  mode  of  describing  what  occurs  must  not  be
taken  as  implying  any  theory  whatever  as  to  the  true
nature  of  any  of  the  personages  in  the  drama.

It  may  be  convenient  to  my  readers  to  be  reminded  briefly
of  the  history  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  phenomena.  She  first
went  into  trance  in  June,  1884,  when  consulting  a  profes-
sional medium,  Mr.  Cocke,  about  her  own  health  (see  Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  46-47).  Phinuit,  who  called  him-
self a  French  physician,  was  among  her  earliest  controls,  but
at  first  only  for  medical  diagnosis.  She  had  a  number  of
other  controls,  "  Chlorine,"  Mrs.  Siddons,  John  Sebastian
Bach,  Longfellow,  Commodore  Vanderbilt,  and  Loretta
Ponchini — the  last  purporting  to  be  an  Italian  girl.1
According  to  Mrs.  Piper's  father-in-law,  Chlorine  was  at
first  the  principal  control  for  outside  sitters,  and  Loretta
Ponchini  and  Mrs.  Siddons  for  sittings  in  the  Piper  family.
After  a  time  Bach,  who  represented  himself  as  leader  of
the  band,  said  they  were  going  to  concentrate  all  their
powers  on  Phinuit,  and  he  became  ultimately  the  chief
control.  There  is  a  certain  interest  in  comparing  this
account  of  the  development  of  the  early  trance  controls
with  the  later  development  of  the  control  of  the  Imperator
Band,  which  in  some  ways  resembles  it.  We  have,  in  the
latter  case,  Stainton  Moses  professing  to  bring  his  former
controls — Imperator,  Rector,  etc.  These  at  first  aU  take
turns  in  controlling,  till  finally  Rector  is  established  as  the
regular  control.  There  is  this  difference  between  the  two
cases,  however,  that  Rector  always  had  Imperator  in  the

1  Bach  and  a  soi-disctnt  French  doctor  called  Finny  were  controls  of  Mr.
Cocke.


10


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


background  keeping  a  general  supervision  over  things,  while
Phinuit  appeared  to  act  on  his  own  responsibility  alone.

Professor  William  James  first  came  across  Mrs.  Piper  in
1885,1  and  introduced  her  to  Hodgson  in  1887  when  the
latter  went  to  America  as  secretary  of  the  American  Society
for  Psychical  Research.  From  that  time  she  has  been  in
almost  constant  relation  with  the  Society  in  America  or  in
England.  The  time  during  which  systematic  records  have
been  kept  divides  itself  naturally  into  four  periods.  During
the  first  the  principal  control  called  himself  Phinuit,  and  the
sittings  were  all  voice  sittings,  that  is,  Phinuit  talked  to
the  sitters.  This  period  lasted  till  1892.  Three  reports  were
published  dealing  with  it  :  one  by  Professor  William
James  in  1886  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  for
Psychical  Research  ;  one  in  1890  in  our  Proceedings,  Vol.
VI.,  by  an  English  committee  on  sittings  held  in  England  in
1889-90,  but  including  a  further  report  by  William  James  ;
and  one  by  Hodgson  published  in  1892  in  the  Proceedings,
Vol.  VIII.

The  second  period  extends  from  1892  to  January  1897.
During  this  period  Phinuit  still  continued  to  control  and
to  communicate  by  voice,  but  a  leading  part  was  played
by  a  new  control,  "  G.  P." — a  gentleman  recently  deceased
— and  he  and  other  controls  gradually  adopted  the  plan  of
communicating  in  writing,  conversations  with  the  sitter
being  carried  on  by  the  sitter  speaking  and  the  control
writing.  This  period,  which  we  may  call  the  G.  P.  regime,
was  reported  on  by  Hodgson  in  1897  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  XIII.,  and  Professor  Newbold's  paper  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  XIV.  (see  above,  p.  1)  was  also  concerned  with  it.
The  earlier  part  of  this  second  period  afforded  interesting
instances  of  double  control — Phinuit  talking  and  G.  P.
or  some  other  control  writing  on  different  subjects  at  the
same  time.  This  and  the  extraordinary  vividness  and
truth  to  life — to  judge  from  his  friends'  accounts — of  the
"  G.  P."  control  make  me  think  that  in  1892  occurred
probably  the  culmination  of  Mrs.  Piper's  automatic  powers.
There  are  other  considerations  to  which  I  shall  call  atten-
tion later,  which  seem  to  point  in  the  same  direction  ;  and

'■Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  651.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  11

I  think  it  is  true,  whether  G.  P.  was  an  intelligence
independent  of  Mrs.  Piper  or  not.

During  the  third  period,  which  extended  from  the  begin-
ning of  1897  till  Hodgson's  death  in  December,  1905,  the
principal  controls  were  the  Imperator  Band  (professing
to  be  the  spirits  who  formerly  communicated  through  Mr.
Stainton  Moses),  and  from  March  or  April,  1897,  onwards,
chiefly  Rector.  George  Eliot  and  another  literary  lady,
K.  F.,  also  took  prominent  parts  as  controls  in  1897,  while
the  transition  to  Rector's  becoming  the  important  control
was  going  on.

Phinuit  made  his  final  appearance  on  January  26,  1897,
and  G.  P.  since  that  time  has  taken  a  comparatively  sub-
ordinate part.  At  the  beginning  of  this  Imperator  regime,
communication  by  voice,  which  is  stated  to  be  much  more
fatiguing  to  the  medium  than  communication  by  writing,
was  discontinued ;  and  when  a  few  months  later  it  was
resumed,  it  was  rarely  used  except  with  two  or  three
favoured  sitters,  most  of  whom,  though  not  all,  had,  I  think,
been  previously  hi  the  habit  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper.  It
was  perhaps  partly  in  order  to  reduce  communication  by
voice  that  Phinuit  was  got  rid  of — removed  to  a  higher
sphere  and  relieved  from  his  earthbound  condition,  it  was
explained.  A  very  pleasing  change  introduced  by  the  new
controls  was  a  quiet  and  placid  jDrocess  of  going  into  trance
instead  of  the  convulsive  movements,  often  unpleasant  to
witness,  with  which  it  used  generally  to  be  accompanied
previously.  As  stated  above,  the  Hyslop  sittings  {Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  XVI.,  and  some  in  the  Proceedings  Am.  S.P.R.,
Vol.  IV.)  and  the  Junot  sittings  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.)
belong  to  this  third  period.

The  immediate  difference  introduced  by  Hodgson's  death
in  December,  1905,  which  I  have  called  the  beginning  of  the
fourth  period,  was,  apart  from  the  loss  of  his  management
of  the  sittings,  chiefly  the  appearance  of  a  communicator
claiming  to  be  Hodgson.  Hodgson  has  also  frequently
appeared  as  control,  though  Rector  retained  his  position  as
chief  control.  Imperator  was  in  a  sense  the  chief  control
both  in  the  third  and  fourth  periods,  as  Rector  always
represented  himself  as  acting  under  Imperator's  direction,


12


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PAET


but  Imperator  very  seldom  himself  controlled,  i.e.  he  very
seldom,  after  the  spring  of  1897,  professed  to  write  or  speak
himself.  The  early  appearances  of  Hodgson,  whether  as
control  or  communicator,  were  reported  on  by  Professor
William  James  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.,  and  by  Pro-
fessor Hyslop  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  8.P.R.,
Vol.  IV.

There  has  been  considerable  variation  in  the  sittings  of
this  period,  for  the  English  sittings  in  1906-7 — which  Mr.
Piddington  reported  on  in  our  Proceedings,  Vols.  XXII.
and  XXIII. ,  and  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  in  Vol.  XXIII.— pre-
sent a  somewhat  new  type  ;  and  those  of  Mr.  Dorr  in
1908-9 — reported  on  in  our  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV. — a
different  type  again.  It  was  during  this  period,  in  the
spring  of  1909,  that  Dr.  Stanley  Hall  had  a  series  of  six
sittings  on  which  he  and  his  assistant,  Miss  Amy  Tanner,
Ph.D.,  reported  in  a  book  entitled  Studies  in  Spiritualism,
published  at  New  York  in  1910,  and  reviewed  in  our
Proceedings,  Vol.  XXV.

When  Mrs.  Piper  came  to  England  for  her  third  visit  at
the  end  of  1909,  her  power  of  going  into  trance  seemed  to
have  left  her.  She  was  not  at  all  in  good  health,  which
may  have  had  something  to  do  with  it.  But  whatever  the
cause,  repeated  attempts  to  go  into  trance  produced  no
results  till  May,  1910,  when  Miss  Margaret  Bancroft — an
American  friend  of  Hodgson's  whom  Mrs.  Piper  was  well
acquainted  with,  and  who  had  been  a  frequent  sitter —
happened  to  visit  England,  and,  by  encouragement  and
suggestion  apparently,  succeeded  in  getting  the  trance  to
come  on  for  a  short  time,  and  some  fragmentary  writing  to
be  produced.  Mrs.  Piper  when  normal  again  was  much
gratified  by  this  result,  for  she  had  feared  that  her  power
had  gone.

After  this,  sittings  of  the  usual  type  began  to  occur
again  at  intervals.  There  were  one  in  May  and  two  in
July,  1910,  under  the  management  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  and
a  certain  number  also  under  his  management  in  the  autumn
and  winter  of  1910-11.  But  they  were  irregular  ;  the  trance
did  not  always  come  on,  and  what  was  worse,  recovery
from  the  trance  was  sometimes  difficult — long  intervals  of


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  13

seeming  complete  unconsciousness  occurring  after  the  alert
trance  state  was  over  before  any  sign  of  returning  to  normal
consciousness  began.  This  was,  of  course,  alarming.  By-
direction  of  the  controls  periods  of  weeks  were  left  without
sittings,  but  apparently  with  no  good  effect  The  Imperator
Band  said  at  different  times  that  the  sittings  were  bad  for
the  medium  and  must  stop — that  they,  the  Imperator
Band,  must  go.  They  took  what  purported  to  be  a  final
leave  on  May  24,  1911 — the  first  sitting  since  the  middle
of  February.  Another  sitting  was  held  on  July  3,  at  which
Mrs.  Isaac  Thompson,  well  known  to  Mrs.  Piper  (see  Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  XXIII.,  pp.  162-196),  and  who  had  been
asked  for  by  the  controls,  was  present  ;  but  the  Imperator
Band  did  not  appear  ;  "  Madame  Guyon,"  who  had  in  the
previous  winter  been  referred  to  once  or  twice  by  the  con-
trols, and  had  once  sent  a  message,  took  their  place.  On
July  31,  1911,  a  sitting  promised  by  the  controls  to  Lady
Lodge  took  place,  at  which  her  friends  communicated ;
"  Madame  Guyon "  opened  it,  but  Imperator  came  at  the
end  to  close  the  light  for  good.  This  was  Mrs.  Piper's  last
sitting.  But  it  is  interesting  that  a  power  of  automatic
writing  in  an  apparently  normal  state  developed  to  some
extent.  More  will  be  found  about  this  in  Chapter  III.,
pp.  127-129.

Whether  the  cessation  of  Mrs.  Piper's  power  of  going  into
trance  is  due  to  some  permanent  change  in  her,  or  whether
the  power  will  return  after  really  prolonged  resting,  it  is,
of  course,  impossible  to  say.  Mrs.  Piper  herself  and  also
the  controls  are  disposed  to  regard  the  change  as  a  con-
sequence of  Dr.  Stanley  Hall's  experiments.  On  one  occa-
sion, in  testing  for  ansesthesia,  he  produced  a  blister  and
other  effects  from  which  some  discomfort  was  experienced
after  the  trance  was  over  ;  and,  what  was  more  resented  by
the  controls,  he  deceived  the  Hodgson  control — "  told  awful
whoppers,"  as  the  control  expressed  it — and  induced  him
by  verbal  suggestion  to  accept  a  false  claim  of  acquaintance,
to  introduce  imaginary  communicators,  and  so  forth.  No
doubt  these  things  were  disturbing,  and  may  have  inter-
fered with  a  calm  confidence  in  the  sitter,  which  had  perhaps
become  a  necessary  predisposition  for  going  into  trance  ;


14  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.  [part

and  what  would  probably  be  worse,  if  the  controls  are
phases  of  Mrs.  Piper,  may  have  undermined  their  confidence
in  themselves.1  At  the  same  time  no  immediate  ill  effect
seems  to  have  been  produced.  After  the  Stanley  Hall
sittings  Mrs.  Piper  took  her  usual  summer  holiday,  and  in
the  autumn  gave  sittings  to  known  friends  as  before.  The
week  before  she  was  to  have  sailed  for  England  she  gave
so  many  consecutive  sittings  that  she  exhausted  herself,
and  was  subsequently  laid  up  with  a  very  severe  cold.  She
had  to  defer  her  sailing,  and  was  still  much  out  of  health
when  she  reached  this  country.  As  before  remarked,  this
illness,  which  continued  for  some  time,  may  have  interfered
with  the  faculty  of  going  into  trance.

But  it  seems  equally  probable  that  the  prolonged  failure
to  go  into  trance — occasional  failures  occurred  from  time
to  time  at  all  periods — was  merely  the  last  step  in  a  gradual
decline  of  power,  for  there  are  indications  that  the  sittings
had  been  becoming  more  of  an  effort  and  more  exhausting
as  time  went  on.  It  was  for  this  reason  that  sittings,
which  up  to  about  1898  were  frequently  held  on  six  days  a
week,  and  before  1887  sometimes  more  than  once  a  day,
were  reduced  to  three  per  week.  It  was  for  this  reason  also
— so  it  was  stated — that  writing  sittings  were  preferred  to
voice  sittings,  as  less  tiring.  It  was  probably  for  this
reason,  at  least  in  part,  that  the  Imperator  Band  preferred
what  may  be  called  medical  sittings,  or  preaching  sittings
in  which  general  advice  was  given,  or  sittings  in  which
consolation  to  the  bereaved  was  proffered,  to  attempts  at
purely  evidential  communications.2  And,  moreover,  all
through  the  Imperator  regime  occasional  prophecies  were
made  that  "  the  light  "  would  fail.

1  I  think  Dr.  Stanley  Hall — though  a  psychologist,  and  though  predisposed
to  the  belief  that  the  trance  personalities  were  forms  of  Mrs.  Piper — over-
looked the  fact  that  he  might  in  this  way  be  permanently  injuring  her
psychologically  as  a  subject  of  experiment.

"E.g.  on  March  19,  1897,  the  Control  (Rector)  says  :
R. It  is  now  time  to  give  some  comfort  and  not  so  much  questioning
because  the  light  is  not  equal  to  it,  my  friend.  *  *  * We  see
that  the  light  would  be  withdrawn  if  such  things  were  to  be
continued.

R.  H. You  mean  indiscriminate  tests  ?  R. Yes  we  do.


lxxi.] Psychology  .of  Mrs .  Piper's :  ■Prdnde:  Phenomena.  15

Before  proceeding-,  to ,  any ,  more  detailed  analysis  and  dis-
cussion, I  had'  better''  give .-.  in-  ffeijifej  introductory  chapter  a
general  description  of  the  trance  "and  the  process  of  going
into  and  coming  out  of  it,  and  of  the  physical  conditions
accompanying  it  ;  and  in  doing  so  I  shall  chiefly  have
in  mind  the  later  periods  of  Mrs.  Piper's  mediumship
— especially  the  sittings  in  1907,  at  which  I  was  myself
present.  In  the  Phinuit  and  G.  P.  periods  going  into
trance  was  usually  a  disagreeable  process  for  all  concerned,
accompanied  by  convulsive  movements  and  grinding  of
teeth,  but  under  the  Imperator  regime  it  became,  as  already
remarked,  quiet  and  peaceful.

When  during  these  later  periods  she  desired  to  go
into  trance,  Mrs.  Piper  sat  down  at  a  table  with  a  pile
of  cushions  hi  front  of  her  and  wiUed  to  go  off,  apparently
as  one  wills  to  go  to  sleep.  As  in  the  case  of  sleep  success
was  usual  but  not  invariable.  She  liked  to  have  some  one
present  who  knew  about  the  trance  and  on  whom  she
could  rely,  but  no  one  touched  her  or  took  any  part
in  inducing  the  trance.  The  person  in  charge  merely
sat  quietly  beside  her.  After  a  varying  interval  her
consciousness  of  her  surroundings  seemed  to  become
somewhat  confused,  and  then  to  disappear,  visions  of  spirits
and  imaginary  scenes  being  substituted.  It  can  hardly  be
said  that  a  definite  line  could  be  observed  between  different
stages  of  consciousness  as  she  went  off.  Moreover,  the
onlooker  is,  of  course,  only  aware  of  them  by  occasional
remarks  or  gestures,  and  often  nothing  was  said  at  all
during  any  part  of  the  process  of  going  into  trance.  What
was  occasionally  said,  however,  showed  that  it  resembled
the  waking  process,  though  naturally  in  reverse  order,  and
the  waking  process  afforded  much  more  opportunity  for
observation.1  Usually  very  soon  after  the  first  wavering
of  consciousness,  Mrs.  Piper's  head  dropped  on  to  the
pillows,  with  the  face  turned  to  the  left,  and  away  from
the  sitter  who  sat  on  her  right  in  order  to  read  the
script  ;  and  then  for  a  few  minutes  she  appeared  to  be  in  a

1  In  the  chapter  on  the  waking-stage  (Chapter  VI.),  I  shall  have  occasion
to  refer  to  some  important  manifestations  in  going  into  trance,  notwith-
standing their  comparative  rarity.


16  MjrssJlenr'y\lliag\i$cl$.-.  [paet

profound  sleep. A  During  this  period .  the  sitter  could  move
about  as  he  pleased,  withoux  fear  ;.cf  ,  disracbing  her,  but
could  not,  of  course," 'assume  that  her  consciousness  was
altogether  as  impervious  to  impressions  as  appeared.  After
a  few  minutes  the  right  hand  woke  from  this  sleep  and  took
the  pencil  the  sitter  gave  it,  and  the  trance  consciousness
had  begun.  The  rest  of  the  body  remained  inert  and
quiescent.

This  was  what  happened  in  a  purely  writing  sitting.  In
the  old  voice  sittings  Mrs.  Piper's  whole  body  appeared  to
be  muscularly  alert,  and  the  whole  upper  part  of  it  in  use,
except  the  eyes  which  were  usually  closed.  Hodgson  tells
us  in  his  first  report  that  he  also  found  the  eyeballs  rolled
up  whenever  he  examined  them.  On  one  occasion  he  held
the  eyelids  open  and  urged  Phinuit  to  move  down  the  eye-
balls into  their  ordinary  waking  position.  This  was  accom-
plished with  apparently  considerable  effort  and  strain,  and
after  about  half  a  minute  they  rolled  up  again  suddenly
(see  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  5).  When  Dr.  Stanley  Hall
and  Dr.  Amy  Tanner  raised  the  eyelid  during  a  writing
sitting  in  1909,  i.e.  some  twenty  years  later, .  the  eyeball
seemed  to  be  in  a  normal  position — not  rolled  up — so  this
cannot  be  taken  as  an  invariable  symptom  of  the  trance.
Hodgson  found  that  the  pupils  reacted  to  light.  The  sense
of  hearing  and  the  active  sense  of  touch  were  in  normal
operation  in  the  Phinuit  clays,  and  he  could  localise  pinches,
but  there  seems  to  have  been  a  very  considerable  degree
of  insensitiveness  to  pain  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  447,

1  The  attitude  assumed  was,  of  course,  the  result  of  training.  That  the
brief  sleep  is  really  profound  so  far  as  the  body  is  concerned  seems  to  be
confirmed  by  an  observation  of  Hodgson's  on  April  22,  1897,  when  Mrs.
Piper  happened  to  be  troubled  with  a  cough.  She  coughed  while  going
into  trance — "  Mrs.  P.'s  spirit  not  yet  departed,"  as  Hodgson  expresses
it.  The  cough  ceased  during  the  sleep,  but  began  again  "  with  incoming
of  other  spirit."  The  interval  of  sleep  was  sometimes  very  brief.  Thus
Mr.  Dorr,  recording  a  voice  sitting  on  March  20,  1905,  says  about  her  going
off  :  "  Passes  into  sleep,  head  drooping,  and  almost  immediately  rising
again."  When  the  communication  is  by  voice,  it  should  be  observed,  the
head  is  erect,  not  lying  on  the  pillows.  On  the  other  hand,  on  one
occasion  (September  13,  1898)  it  is  recorded  that  "  owing  to  some  difficulty
in  arranging  the  cushions  Mrs.  Piper  slept  quietly  for  ten  minutes  before
writing  "


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  17

and  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  5),  and  smell  and  taste  seem  to  have  been
at  least  weakened  in  the  trance  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,
pp.  4  and  5).  Dr.  Stanley  Hall  and  Miss  Tanner  in  1909
tried  some  tests  of  a  similar  kind  to  Hodgson's,  in  a  writ-
ing sitting,  but  seem  to  have  been  left  in  doubt  as  to
whether  the  sensibility  was  or  was  not  in  any  respect
below  the  normal  {Studies  in  Spiritualism,  pp.  17-21  and
235-245).

In  the  purely  writing  sittings  the  whole  body,  as  already
remarked,  seems  inert,1  except  the  right  hand,  which  is
very  active  and  expressive — gesticulating  as  well  as  writing,
and  exercising  an  apparently  delicate  sense  of  touch  with  the
finger  tips.  The  sense  of  hearing  is  also  in  operation,  and
is,  I  have  myself  no  doubt,  exercised  through  the  ears  in  the
ordinary  way,  though  some  have  thought  that  the  organ
of  hearing  is  for  the  time  being  in  the  hand.2  The  writing
hand  is  sensitive  to  being  touched  by  the  sitter,  who  can,
however,  take  hold  of  the  head  or  left  hand  and  move  them
into  a  more  comfortable  position  on  the  pillows  without
any  apparent  consciousness  on  the  part  of  the  patient.  But
it  must  be  observed  that  it  was  often  because  his  attention
was  drawn  by  the  script  to  some  unnamed  form  of  dis-
comfort that  the  sitter  w%s  led  to  give  such  assistance.

It  may  be  worth  while  to  give  a  few  specimens  of  help
given  in  this  way  by  the  sitter  at  different  periods.  We
must  first  observe  that  until  Phinuit's  final  withdrawal  in
January,  1897,  there  was  generally  an  assumption  while
writing  was  going  on  that  he  was  in  possession  of  the  head
and  the  rest  of  the  body  other  than  the  writing  hand,  even
when  it  was  lying  inert  on  the  pillows.  The  following  is  a
specimen  of  help  given  to  the  medium  under  these  circum-
stances on  June  27,  1895.  Professor  W.  Romaine  Newbold
was  the  sitter,  and  the  writing  control  purported  to  be  Sir
Walter  Scott.  (For  a  more  complete  extract  from  the  record,
see  Appendix  to  Chapter  III.,  p.  437.)

1  When  writing  sittings  first  began  in  1892  and  a  writing  and  speaking-
control  sometimes  purported  to  be  present  at  the  same  time,  it  was  only,
I  think,  when  the  speaking  control  lapsed  into  the  background,  and  was,  in
fact,  in  abeyance,  that  the  body  sagged  down  and  had  to  be  supported.

2  This  question  is  further  discussed  below,  pp.  54-55.


1 8


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


[Medium's  head  falls  from  the  cushion.]
W.  R.  N. Wait  a  moment  Sir  Walter  while  I  fix  the  head  of

the  medium  in  place.
W.  S. Yes sir. [Hand stops  writing until the head  is

again  firmly  set  in  place. Phinuit  thanks  me  in

stifled  tones. I ask  whether  the  light  is  going

out. Hand  replies]
W.  S. The  light  so  called  ? No  sir.

After  Phinuit's  final  departure  the  function  of  occupying
the  head,  etc.,  while  another  control  is  writing  is  sometimes
said  to  be  performed  by  Rector. Thus  on  March  5,  1897  :

[Disturbance  with  the  head  of  Mrs.  P.]

{George  Eliot  writes.}  Rector  holds  the  other  side  and
begs  me  to  ask  you  to  assist  the  material  while  he  holds
the  spiritual.  Then  I  will  go  on  with  you.  Pardon  any
interruptions  that  may  occur.  [I  rearrange  Mrs.  P.'s  head
with  cushions,  etc.] Better  so. Thanks  to  you.

The  idea  of  this  kind  of  divided  control  was  gradually
dropped,  and  I  think  there  was  no  such  assumption  in  Mrs.
Piper's  later  sittings.  The  writing  hand  then  simply  asks
for  assistance  to  be  given  to  the  light — "  light  "  in  this  con-
nexion meaning  medium.  Thus  on  March  2,  1904 — Hodgson
recording  and  two  other  sitters  present— Rector  interrupts
his  work  as  amanuensis  to  say  :

Help  the  light  friend. [R.  H.  moves  round  tables  to
left  of  Mrs.  P.  and  finds  the  left  arm  has  slipped  and  is
hanging  down. He  replaces  it  on  cushions  with  hand  under
forehead,  and  returns.]
R.  H. All  right.

Rector  (writing)  I  began  to  be  a  little  blind,  R.
R.  H. Yes  ?  1

There  have  not,  I  think,  been  many  observations  recorded
on  Mrs.  Piper's  pulse  and  temperature  and  other  such  symp-
toms during  the  trance.  As  regards  the  earlier  accounts  in
our  Proceedings,  reliance  had  been  placed  on  obtaining  the

1  The  question  mark  after  the  "  yes  "  I  suppose  indicates  that  Hodgson
did  not  understand  Rector's  last  remark.  No  explanation  is,  however,
vouchsafed,  and  Rector  continues  to  write  for  the  sitters'  friends.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena..  19

report  of  a  physician,  who  in  the  end  refused  to  make  any
report  whatever  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  5).  Sir
Oliver  Lodge  tells  us  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  447)  that
"  her  pulse  is  affected  beyond  what  [he]  can  imagine  to  be
the  control  of  volition,"  but  he  does  not  tell  us  either  the
degree  or  the  direction  of  the  change.  Hodgson  quotes  in
Vol.  XIII.,  p.  479,  the  following  report  by  Dr.  Lena  V.
Ingraham,  who  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  March  12,
1893,  preliminary  to  a  very  serious  operation  which  she  was
to  perform  on  her  two  days  later.  Dr.  Ingraham  gave
Hodgson  the  following  statement  as  regards  this  sitting  :

Mrs.  Piper's  pulse  before  the  trance  was  rapid,  from
the  fact  that  she  became  rather  excited  over  dread  of
examination,  operation,  etc.,  but  just  before  the  trance  it
was  about  72  per  minute,  and  was  not  accelerated  during
the  trance.

Her  temperature  was  99  degrees  before,  during  and  after
the  trance.

Miss  Tanner,  Ph.D.,  in  the  book  already  quoted,  Studies
in  Spiritualism,  p.  14,  writes  as  follows  about  pulse  and
breathing — her  observations  relating  to  the  six  sittings  she
and  Dr.  Stanley  Hall  had  in  1909  :

Her  entrance  to  the  trance  state  is  voluntary,  though
she  is  unable  to  describe  in  detail  her  mental  attitude
She  usually  carries  on  a  casual  conversation  with  the  sitters
while  sitting  in  an  arm-chair  in  front  of  a  table  on  which
three  pillows  are  placed.  She  tries  not  to  think  intently
of  anything,  and  more  or  less  consciously  she  makes  her
breathing  much  slower.  She  begins  to  look  sleepy,  the  eyes
become  slightly  fixed  and  staring,  within  a  minute  the
mouth  drops  open,  and  the  eyes  become  rigid,  the  breath-
ing is  still  slower,  and  in  five  or  six  minutes  from  the
first  look  of  sleepiness  the  head  is  dropped  on  the  pillow,
the  breathing  is  slower  by  one  half  than  normal,  and  very
stertorous,  and  the  hand  is  ready  to  write.  Usually  as
the  trance  comes  on  the  face  twitches  slightly,  and
sometimes  the  fingers  do  also.  Sometimes  there  is  some
incoherent  talking.  The  pulse  varies  from  about  84,  which
seems  to  be  the  normal rate before the onset of  the


20


M?:s.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[PABT


trance,  to  between  70  and  76  at  the  close.  The  breathing
varies  from  20  to  22  for  the  normal,  to  between  7  and
10  during  the  trance,  up  to  the  time  the  hand  ceases  to
write.  It  then  becomes  gradually  more  rapid,  rising  to
normal  in  the  course  of  fifteen  minutes.

On  page  18,  Miss  Tanner  says  :

The  breathing  varies  from  approximately  22  in  the
normal  to,  at  lowest,  7,  and,  as  a  rule,  10  in  the  trance.1

This  profound  variation  in  the  breathing,  with  the  lessened
oxygenation  of  the  blood,  must  result  in  a  partial  suffoca-
tion, a  temporary  toxemia,  and  is  probably  the  agency  by
means  of  which  the  normal  consciousness  is  put  out  of
commission  and  the  control  put  into  possession.

However  this  may  be,  it  seems  highly  probable  that  the
slow  breathing  accounts  for  the  great  desire  for  fresh  air —
wide  open  windows  being  frequently  insisted  on  even  in  the
coldest  weather.

Stertorous  breathing  in  going  into  trance  is  sometimes
recorded  by  various  observers,  but  I  do  not  think  it
occurred,  at  least  in  my  own  experience,  after  the  trance
was  fully  established.  The  breathing  while  the  writing  was
going  on  was,  in  the  sittings  of  1906-7,  exceedingly  quiet.
A  remark  made  by  Miss  Tanner,  lower  down  on  the  page
(18)  from  which  I  last  quoted,  that  "both  ears  are  un-
covered,'' suggests  that  the  face  was  buried  in  the  pillows,
which  would  thus  make  an  obstruction  to  breathing  which
might  lead  to  its  remaining  stertorous  during  the  trance
proper.  In  our  sittings  the  head  was  turned  to  the  left
and  the  right  ear  was  buried  in  the  pillow,  and  pains
were  taken  by  the  sitter  to  see  that  the  pillow  did  not
obstruct  mouth  and  nose.  This  was  also  Hodgson's
practice  ;  e.g.  he  records  on  December  18,  1905,  "  R.  H.
slightly  rearranges  Mrs.  P.'s  head,  as  she  begins  to  breatbe
rather  heavily.  The  nose  was  pressing  somewhat  on  the
cushion."

1  Compare  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  observation  on  Mrs.  Piper's  coming  out
from  her  last  trance  (Appendix  to  Chapter  III.,  p.  510),  when  her  breathing
seems  almost  to  have  stopped.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper  s  Trance  Phenomena.  21

Readers  of  Proceedings  are  already  familiar  with  the
procedure  in  what  I  may  call  the  trance  proper,1  which  has
been  more  than  once  described  in  our  Proceedings.  I  may
refer  the  reader  especially  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  account  of  it
in  Vol.  XXIII.,  pp.  131-135,  and  spare  myself  further
description.  Much  less,  however,  has  been  said  about  the
waking-stage,  of  which  Hodgson  seems  to  have  taken  com-
paratively little  account, — and  which,  indeed,  had  not  in
the  sittings  up  to  the  end  of  the  period  with  which  his  last
report  deals,  taken  the  important  place  which  it  has  since
occupied.  I  will  therefore  now  give  a  pretty  full  general
account  of  the  waking-stage,  based  on  notes  of  the  sittings
held  in  England  in  1906-7.

When  the  writing  came  to  an  end — finishing  rather  faintly
and  feebly,  and  usually  with  words  of  leave-taking — the
right  hand  became  relaxed  and  as  inert  as  the  rest  of  the
body  ;  the  pencil  was  dropped,  and  Mrs.  Piper  had  again,
as  in  going  into  trance,  the  appearance  of  being  in  a  pro-
found sleep.  After  an  hiterval  of  from  two  to  five  minutes
from  the  dropping  of  the  pencil,  but  sometimes  longer,2  she
began  to  raise  her  head  and  body  into  an  upright  sitting
posture.  This  sometimes  began  with  stretching  out  the
left  arm.  The  raising  of  the  head  was  accomplished  slowly
and  with  effort.  Sometimes  it  fell  again  on  to  the  cushions
after  being  raised  or  partially  raised  ;  the  sitter  could
prevent  this  and  sometimes  hasten  the  proceedings  by  slightly
supporting  the  head.  Then  the  eyes  gradually  opened,  but
without  seeming  to  see  what  was  actually  before  them.  They
tended  to  look  upwards  at  what,  from  pointing  and  smiles
and  other  gestures,  and  from  words  spoken  later  on,  appeared
to  be  visions  of  people  and  scenes  of  great  brilliancy  and
beauty.  Sometimes  these  imaginary  persons  gave  her
imaginary  flowers,  which  she  would  hold  between  her  finger

1  In  calling  the  main  part  of  the  sitting  the  trance  proper,  to  dis-
tinguish it  from  the  more  unstable  condition  passed  through  at  the  begin-
ning and  end,  I  do  not  mean  to  imply  that  a  strict  definition  of  trance  would
not  include  part  at  least  of  the  waking-stage.

2  In  the  last  sitting  recorded,  July  31,  1911,  it  was  a  quarter  of  an  hour
after  the  writing  ceased  before  the  waking-stage  began  (see  Appendix  to
Chapter  III.,  p.  516).


22


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PABT


and  thumb  and  smell  with  great  apparent  enjoyment.1  The
right  hand — the  one  that  had  been  writing — was  drawn
up  on  to  the  cushion  stiffly  and  with  apparent  difficulty
after  she  had  attained  the  erect  sitting  posture,  and  some-
times not  till  after  the  speaking  had  begun.  She  often,
in  course  of  waking,  complained  of  "  aches,"  and  rubbed
the  back  of  her  hand.

She  usually  began  to  speak  two  or  three  minutes  after
beginning  to  sit  up,  but  speech  was  sometimes  delayed
longer,  and  the  gestures  above  mentioned,  in  which
head  and  hands  came  into  play,  often  preceded  it.  The
vocal  organs,  and  especially  the  muscles  used  in  articu-
lation, seemed  generally  not  to  be  completely  available  at
first,  and  whispered  and  murmured  words  were  pronounced
in  an  inarticulate  manner,  which  made  them  difficult  and
often  impossible  to  catch.  The  thickness  of  speech  was
like  that  of  a  person  half  awake  and  unwilling  to  rouse  him-
self, but  apparently  the  failure  to  control  the  muscles  of
speech  was  not  in  Mrs.  Piper's  waking-stage  voluntary,  for
sometimes  at  request,  or  spontaneously,  she  would  try  to
repeat  distinctly,  but  try  vainly.  She  was  certainly  often
aware  of  the  indistinctness  and  was  liable  to  be  irritated  by
it.  On  one  occasion — December  19,  1906 — she  remarked,
"  My  speech  isn't  good — they  haven't  taken  the  bonnet
off  me  yet  " — the  bonnet  being  something  often  mentioned
which  she  says  her  visionary  people  put  on  her  when  they
send  her  back  to  her  body,  and  which  perhaps  is  her  dream
explanation  of  actual  difficulty  in  speaking  and  seeing,  though
it  may  be  merely  a  way  of  accounting  for  the  disappearance
of  the  heavenly  visions.  Generally  some  minutes  elapsed
after  the  waking  stage  speaking  began  before  what  she  said
became  at  all  distinctly  audible  and  coherent  sentences
could  be  made  out.

The  speech  was  addressed  sometimes  to  the  visionary
personages  in  whose  company  she  seemed  to  herself  to  be,
and  sometimes  to  the  sitter  whose  questions  and  suggestions
she  would  generally  respond  to,  though,  as  a  rule,  apparently
regarding him quite  impersonally and remaining  almost

1  The  particular  imagery  tending  to  prevail  in  the  waking-stage  varied
at  different  periods  (see  Chapter  VI.).


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  23

unaware  of  his  existence  till  she  was  nearly  normal.  Some-
times what  she  said  seemed  to  be  a  repetition  addressed  to
no  one  in  particular  of  remarks  she  was  hearing.

Consciousness  of  her  actual  surroundings  seemed  to  come
gradually  and  by  steps,  there  being  a  brief  period  when  the
visionary  surroundings  and  the  real  ones  were  apparently
perceived  more  or  less  together,  and  during  this  period  she
could  sometimes  be  put  back  a  step  by  judicious  questions
and  remarks  calculated  to  fix  her  attention  on  the  visions.
Shortly  before  normal  consciousness  returned  an  experience
constantly  occurred  which  she  described  as  her  head  snap-
ping, and  which,  as  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  remarks  {Proceedings,
Vol.  XXIII.,  p.  186),  she  half  seems  to  expect  the  sitter
to  hear.  "  Sounds  like  wheels  clicking  together  and  then
snaps,"  she  said,  describing  it  on  one  occasion  (Nov.  11,  1906,
Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.,  p.  187),  and  on  another  (February
20,  1907),  "  Heard  my  head  snap  ?  It  goes  suzz — suzz — er
— suzz  and  then  it  cracks."  This  snap  of  late  years
generally  occurred  twice  with  a  short  interval  between,
before  she  completely  recovered  her  normal  consciousness.
I  think  it  was  a  less  invariable  phenomenon  hi  earlier  days.
"  I  hear  something  snap  in  my  head  sometimes,"  she  said
on  February  27,  1897.

The  sensation  is  not  always  described  in  terms  of
sound.  Thus  on  March  6,  1897,  she  said,  "When  some-
thing seems  to  snap  in  my  head  I  can't  remember  any  more.
It  seems  as  if  there  were  some  threads  at  the  back  of  my
head,  and  then  they  got  pulled  to  the  front,  like  three
threads  it  seems,  and  when  that  gets  puUed  to  the
front  all  that  I  see  is  stopped."  And  on  December  13,
1897,  "  I  felt  that  separation  hi  my  head."  On  November
13,  1905,  this  feeling  of  separation  is  combined  with  sound,
"  Did  you  hear  my  head  snap  ?  I  feel  as  if  there  was  some
division  in  my  brain."  On  January  1,  1907,  she  said,
"  Head  snapped  twice  in  two  places."  I  should  imagine
that  the  sensation  is  due  to  some  change  hi  flow  of  blood
to  the  brain.  Mrs.  Piper  takes  this  view  herself,  perhaps
as  the  result  of  a  suggestion  from  some  sitter.  Thus  at  the
end  of  the  waking-stage  on  January  13,  1909,  when  Miss
Pope  was  the  sitter  in  charge,  Mrs.  Piper  said,  "  What  did


24


Mrs.  Henry  Siclgwick.


[part


Mr.  Myers  mean  by  Bombino  ?  He  said  it  just  as  my  head
snapped.  My  head^  goes  s — s — s  click.  I  think  the  blood
settles  back  in  my  brain  and  then  I  am  conscious."

Change  of  circulation  is  also  suggested  by  prickling  sensa-
tions, of  which  she  sometimes  speaks  both  in  going  into
and  coming  out  of  trance.  Thus  on  February  1,  1897  :
"  I  prickle  from  my  head  to  my  feet."  January  22,  1901  :
"  Well,  I  think  I'll  prickle  all  to  pieces.  Is  it  night  ?  You
hear  my  head  snap."  March  6,  1901  (going  into  trance)  :
"  My  face  prickles  terribly  sometimes  [rubbing  her  cheeks]."
November  20,  1905  (waking-stage)  :  "  [Rubbing  her  cheek]
"  My  face  is  asleep.  Hear  it  snap  ?  *  *  *  My  face  felt
just  like  your  foot  when  it  goes  to  sleep.  *  *  *  It
prickles."

When  she  first  perceived  her  actual  surroundings  her
vision  appeared  to  be  blurred  from  want  of  proper  focussing
of  the  eyes  or  some  other  cause.  Everything  looked  dark
and  horrid — not  it  would  seem  merely  from  contrast  with
the  previous  heavenly  vision.  In  the  London  sittings  the
window  was  generally  the  first  thing  she  made  out  clearly.
She  frequently  complained  of  spiders  crawling  on  the  wall
and  of  cobwebs  over  her  face.  And  she  misinterpreted
objects,  apparently  from  indistinctness  of  vision,  taking  on
one  occasion  (March  5,  1907)  her  own  muff  and  bonnet  on
a  chair  for  a  man,  and  on  another  (January  30,  1907)  a  fur
coat,  similarly  on  a  chair,  for  a  cow,  the  sight  of  which  at
first  amused  her  and  then  distressed  her  so  much  that  she
actually  shed  tears.  On  one  occasion  (March  20,  1905),
after  a  voice  sitting  with  Mr.  Dorr,  the  blurred  vision  con-
tinued to  some  extent  after  she  was  practically  normal,  and
she  recognised  the  fact  and  described  it  :  "  Let  me  take
your  glasses. I  want  to  see  if  I  can  see  any  better  with

them. I  have  a  blurred  feeling  across  my  eyes  The

heaviness  in  my  head  has  gone  but  my  eyes  are  still  a  little
blurred.  I  feel  that  if  I  would  get  my  reading  glasses  and
put  them  on  it  would  help  that,  that  feeling."  Ten  or
fifteen  minutes  later  she  said  :  "  My  eyes  are  quite  clear
now,  that  blurred  condition  has  all  passed  off."  The  follow-
ing remark  on  April  12,  1905,  also  indicates  a  consciousness
of  previously  imperfect  vision:  "Yes  I  can  see  perfectly.  I


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper  s  Trance  Phenomena.  25

heard  my  head  snap.  When  my  head  snaps  you  see  I  see
clearly."

One  thing  concerning  vision  which  she  frequently  men-
tioned as  having  occurred  just  before  she  had  completely
recovered  normal  consciousness,  is  different  from  indistinct-
ness of  vision.  She  would  say,  namely,  that  the  sitter,  when
she  first  saw  him,  had  looked  to  her  very  small  and  a  long
way  off,  as  if,  as  she  sometimes  described  it,  she  had  been
looking  at  him  through  the  wrong  end  of  an  opera  glass.
This  illusion  may  have  been  either  an  actual  hallucination
of  vision  or  a  pseudo-memory,  arising  from  the  theory  that
she  returned  rapidly  to  her  body  from  a  distance.1  Thus  on
February  20,  1907  :  "  I  saw  you,  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  but  you
were  very  small."  This  was  at  my  first  sitting  with  her
in  the  series,  and  when  normal  or  nearly  normal,  she  pro-
ceeded to  explain  how  when  she  is  coming  out  of  trance
people  appear  to  her  as  through  the  wrong  end  of  an  opera
glass.  November  13,  1905  :  "  I  saw  Mr.  Hodgson,  but  he
was  a  long  way  off  at  first ;  he  was  very  smaU,  then  he  got
larger. Did  you  hear  my  head  snap  ?  "

The  reverse  of  this  was  said  to  happen  to  her  vision  of
Imperator  as  she  returned  to  earth  on  April  8,  1897:  "I
saw  that  gentleman  with  the  cross  again,  and  he  gets  so
small."  At  one  time  she  speaks  of  something  expanding
either  in  the  sitter  or  herself.  Thus  on  April  17,  1905  :  "  Oh,
Mr.  Dorr — I  thought  you  were  a  small  man,  but  you  kept
on  expanding  !  [Becomes  quite  normal  again.]  "  And  on
the  following  day  :  "  Did  you  hear  my  head  snap  ?  You
seemed  so  small  and  something  in  my  eyes  seemed  to  exjDand
and  expand  till  you  became  big."  On  May  24,  1905,  a
different  comparison  is  made  :  "  When  I  came  out  of  this
just  now  you  looked  very  small,  then  you  kept  expanding,
like  a  rubber  ball."  Once  at  least  (December  26,  1899),
she  remarked  in  going  off  into  trance  :  "  Everything  grows
so  small."

The  exact  moment  of  return  to  normal  consciousness  can

1  As  against  this  theory,  it  must  be  observed  that  some  people  have,  I
understand,  had  experience  of  seeing  things  small  and  as  though  far  off
when  in  a  semi-conscious  state,  as  in  trying  to  keep  awake  in  church,  or
in  recovering  from  an  anaesthetic.


26


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[PART


hardly  be  defined  ; — indeed  Mrs.  Piper  often  remained  in  a
slightly  dazed  condition  for  some  little  time  after  she  had
begun  to  move  about  the  room  and  talk  in  an  ordinary  way.
But  the  moment,  so  far  as  it  could  be  determined,  when  she
fully  realised  the  situation  and  talked  entirely  rationaUy,
occurred,  during  the  sittings  of  1906-7,  from  14  to  26  or  even
30  minutes  after  the  ceasing  of  the  writing  and  dropping  of
the  writing  hand.  The  time  tended  to  lengthen,  for  in  the
first  ten  sittings  of  that  series  in  which  it  is  recorded,  the
average  duration  was  18  minutes,  and  in  the  last  ten,  23
minutes.  The  reason  probably  was  that  those  who
managed  the  sittings — chiefly  Mr.  Piddington  and  myself —
coming  to  perceive  that  the  waking  stage  was  of  considerable
interest  and  likely  to  produce  evidential  matter,  our  own
remarks  and  questions  retarded  the  return  to  normality.

I  am  disposed  to  think  that  in  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings  of  1908
(see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.),  the  duration  of  the  waking-
stage  was  longer  still,  but  this  impression  is  only  based  on
the  records  of  the  remarks  made  in  the  waking-stage  ;  the
actual  time  is  not  recorded.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  I
think,  that  the  waking-stage  was  at  least  sometimes
shortened  by  the  request  of  the  sitter,  addressed  either  to
the  trance  personalities  before  the  waking-stage  began  or
to  the  waking-stage  intelligence.  The  trance  also  could
be  similarly  shortened  by  suggestion.1  It  was  sometimes
possible,  as  I  have  said,  to  prolong  a  dream-like  state  when
Mrs.  Piper  had  almost  recovered,  by  keeping  her  mind  on
ideas  that  had  prevailed  during  the  waking-stage.2  After
one  of  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings  with  a  long  waking-stage  in  1908,
Mrs.  Piper's  daughter  reported  that  her  mother  had  had,  an
hour  or  so  afterwards,  a  slight  momentary  tendency  towards
an  apparent  relapse  into  a  dream-like  state,  and  it  appears
this  had  also  happened  on  a  previous  occasion.  Whether

1  Hodgson  sometimes  helped  to  bring  the  trance  to  an  end  by  physical
signs  ;  e.g.  on  November  30,  1892,  a  spirit  controlled  who  had  died  of  cancer
in  the  stomach,  and  the  medium  apparently  suffered  so  much,  and  gave
such  signs  of  physical  anguish,  that  the  sitters  were  afraid  of  exhausting
her  and  helped  to  bring  the  trance  to  an  end  by  pressing  on  the  back  of
her  neck.  Phinuit  commented  at  the  next  sitting  on  the  discourtesy  of
preventing  his  returning  to  bid  good-bye.

2  See  a  case  quoted  below,  p.  250.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  27

this  tendency  to  relapse  had  any  causal  relation  to  the
prolonged  waking-stage  is  not  known.

The  consciousnesses  of  the  trance  and  of  the  waking-stage
occupy  a  large  part  of  the  discussion  to  follow.  Here,  how-
ever, I  may  say,  speaking  briefly  and  quite  generally,  that
the  consciousness  of  the  waking-stage  seems  to  resemble  that
of  many  dreams  in  instability,  incoherence,  and  varying
relations  to  the  actual  surroundings.  The  scenery  of  the
waking-stage,  the  imagined  surroundings,  are  generally  dif-
ferent from  Mrs.  Piper's  actual  surroundings,  of  which,  till
towards  the  end,  she  is  to  a  large  extent  unaware.  The
shifting  and  uncertain  nature  of  the  imaginary  surroundings
and  incidents  is  again  like  dreams,  and  the  gradual  com-
bination of  dream  images  with  actual  surroundings  is  like
what  sometimes  happens  to  an  ordinary  sleeper  when  he
wakes  slowly.  The  muscles,  however,  are  not  relaxed  nor  the
senses  in  abeyance  as  much  as  in  ordinary  sleep.  In  this
the  waking-stage  is  more  like  sleep  walking  ;  though,  of
course,  the  muscles  come  into  use  in  some  ordinary  dreams
— as  when  a  dog  dreams  of  hunting  and  moves  his  legs  and
yaps  in  sleep  accordingly.  In  the  waking-stage  Mrs.  Piper
is  usually  herself  the  principal  character  of  the  piece — the
"  I  "  who  sees  and  hears  and  feels  and  talks  with  the  sitter.
The  other  characters  are  as  a  rule  conceived  as  outside
herself  ;  and  even  when  then  remarks  are  given  in  the  first
person  she  usually,  though  I  think  not  quite  invariably,
regards  herself  as  repeating  what  they  say.

In  almost  all  these  particulars  the  waking-stage  conscious-
ness differs  from  the  trance  consciousness.  The  latter  is
stable  and  coherent — that  is,  consistent  with  itself  or  nearly
so — while  it  lasts.  It  has  a  definite  idea  of  its  relation,
spatial  and  other,  to  the  actual  surroundings,  and  there
are  apparently  no  imagined  surroundings  except  spirits,  who
are  usually  conceived  as  present  in  the  room.  The  writing
or  speaking  "  I  " — the  control — never  appears  to  regard
itself  as  Mrs.  Piper,  and  always  speaks  of  her  conscious-
ness as  outside  itself,  out  of  the  body,  and  not  at  the
moment  present  at  all.  The  control  resembles,  externally
at  least,  the  personation  by  a  hypnotised  subject  of
characters suggested to him by the  hypnotiser — as,  for


28


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


instance,  when  told  he  is  Napoleon,  he  acts  the  part.1  This
is,  of  course,  more  apparent  in  the  voice  sittings  when  the
whole  body  is  more  or  less  available  for  acting,  than  in
the  writing  sittings.

We  have,  then,  three  states  of  dissociation  to  study.  (1)
The  full  trance  state,  in  which  the  controlling  intelligence
apparently  believes  itself  to  be  other  than  Mrs.  Piper,  and
not  to  be  in  conscious  relation  with  any  part  of  her  mind,
though  conscious  of  the  position  of  her  body  and  conscious
of  her  surroundings — that  is,  of  the  room  and  the  persons  in
it.2  (2)  The  waking-stage,  in  which  the  controlling  intelli-
gence is  consciously  Mrs.  Piper  herself,  but  is  not  conscious
of  her  surroundings.  (3)  The  state  accompanying  automatic
script  while  Mrs.  Piper  is  apparently  normal,  in  which  we
have  two  consciousnesses,  or  a  divided  consciousness,  at
work  ;  Mrs.  Piper  fuUy  aware  of  herself  and  her  surroundings
— able  to  hear  and  to  make  remarks  to  other  people,  and
to  read  the  script  and  address  questions  to  the  scribe,  and
the  script  at  the  same  time  (or  at  any  rate  in  rapid  alterna-
tion) carrying  on  its  own  train  of  thought,  or  replying
appropriately  to  remarks  made.  An  account  of  this  de-
velopment will  be  found  in  Chapter  III.,  pp.  127-9.  Concern-
ing a  fourth  state — Mrs.  Piper  in  semi-hypnosis — I  quote
in  an  Appendix  to  this  chapter  (see  p.  333)  a  brief  report  on
observations  and  experiments  by  William  James,  published  in
the  Proceedings  of  the  American  S.P.R.  in  1886.  Mrs.  Piper
was  not  a  very  good  hypnotic  subject,  but  she  could — at
that  time  at  least — be  put  into  a  semi-hypnotic  state,  and
comparison  between  this  and  the  trance  proper  and  the
waking-stage  is  interesting.

1  Compare  Professor  C.  Richet  on  Mrs.  Piper  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,
p.  620)  :  "  Pour  tout  observateur  habitue  a  voir  ]es  somnambules,  l'etat
cle  Madame  Piper  est  tout-a-fait  le  meme  que  l'etat  de  somnambules  en.
sommeil  magnetique,  avee  transformations  de  personnalite."

2  This,  I  think,  extends  to  persons  introduced  after  the  trance  has  begun,
and  who  are  not  sitting  near  Mrs.  Piper  or  taking  part  as  sitters.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  29


CHAPTER  II.

Theories  of  "Controls"  as  to  their  Relation  to  the
Body  and  Spirit  of  the  Medium.

What  I  have  so  far  said  is  intended  as  an  introduction  to
an  examination  of  the  records  in  detail  for  evidence  as  to  the
nature  of  the  consciousnesses  with  which  we  have  to  deal,
and  their  relation  to  Mrs.  Piper's  normal  consciousness.  It
will  be  convenient  to  begin  this  examination  with  the
accounts  given  by  the  "  controls  "  themselves  as  to  the
nature  of  control,  and  it  is  with  this  that  the  present  chapter
will  be  occupied.  Special  series  of  sittings  have  been  held
at  different  times  with  the  object  of  questioning  the  £:  con-
trols "  and  ascertaining  the  views  they  put  forward  on  this
and  other  points.  Hodgson  had  one  such  series  with  Phinuit
as  control  in  May  and  June,  1888.  Professor  Newbold  and
Hodgson  had  one  largely  with  the  object  of  questioning
G.  P.  in  1895,  and  Hodgson  had  a  number  of  sittings  in
the  winter  and  spring  of  1896-7  for  the  purpose  of  question-
ing the  Imperator  Band.  These  various  series  afford,  on  the
whole,  the  most  important  sources  of  our  information,  and
I  quote  largely  from  them  in  the  Appendix  to  this
chapter,  but  we  have  to  compare  them  with  statements
made  at  other  times.  \

The  trance  controls,  as  already  said,  always  claim  to  be
entirely  distinct  from  and  other  than  Mrs.  Piper's  spirit,
which  they  say  has  left,  or  been  removed  from,  her  body
while  the  control  occupies  it  in  her  place.  In  the  days
when  Phinuit  was  the  principal  control  and  the  sittings  all
voice  sittings,  and  also  in  certain  later  voice  sittings,  the
control  was  supposed  to  occupy  the  whole  organism.  "  I
use  the  medium's  organism  as  my  instrument,  exactly  as


30


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


she  uses  it,"  says  Phinuit  on  June  2,  1888  (see  Appendix,
p.  339).  Thus  Phinuit  having  been  asked  by  Hodgson  to
stand  up  :

Mrs.  Piper  stood  up  without  changing  the  position  of
her  feet,  at  the  same  time  throwing  her  head  slightly
back  and  her  chest  forward,  and  thrusting  the  thumbs
jauntily  into  what  would  have  been  the  armholes  of  her
waistcoat  had  she  worn  one.  (Proceedings.  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  5,
footnote.)

Again,  Miss  A.  M.  R.  writes  on  December  17,  1888  :

My  friend  took  control  first.  He  used  to  be  lame  *  *  *
This  evening  he  sat  about  five  or  six  feet  from  my
folding  bed,  on  which  were  some  ornaments.  I  asked
him  if  he  thought  he  could  walk  over  there  *  *  *  Instead
of  walking  as  Dr.  P[hinuit]  would  do,  he  leaned  heavily
on  me,  and  seemed  to  hop  or  hitch  along  on  one  foot,
exactly  as  a  person  would  do  who  could  only  use  one
foot  in  walking.  After  he  came  back,  he  dropped  into
the  chair  exhausted,  and  said  that  was  the  hardest  work
he  had  done  since  coming  back,  and  that  it  was  too
much  of  the  real  life  for  him  ;  *  *  he  was  ver}7  glad  to
have  had  the  opportunity  to  handle  the  articles  with
the  hands  of  the  medium.  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.
111-112.)

Again,  Mr.  Rogers  Rich  says  of  a  sitting  on  November  8,
1888  :

I  remarked  an  odd  movement  of  the  medium  while  under
this  influence  ;  she  apparently  was  twirling  a  moustache,  a
trick  which  my  friend  {i.e.  the  control}  formerly  practised
much. (Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  129.)

Compare  with  this  G.  P.  apparently  pulling  his  moustache
on  May  29,  1892  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  579).

More  explicitly  Stainton  Moses,  controlling  on  June  24,
1895  (in  a  writing  sitting,  however),  says  :

I  am  so  very  delighted  to  find  this  bright  path  to
Earth  *  *  *  I  am  here  in  every  organ  of  a  human  body.
(Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  39.)


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  31

Again,  Hodgson  records  that,  the  astronomer  Proctor  con-
trolling on  July  3,  1895  :

The  hands  and  arms  made  movements  as  if  holding  a
telescope,  looking  through  it,  directing  it  upwards,  turning
it  in  a  sweep,  drawing  it  out,  adjusting  it,  turning  round
the  eyepiece,  working  a  side  screw  etc.1

There  is  an  instance  of  not  quite  complete  control  of  the
limbs  recorded,  which  shows  that  it  was  usually  conceived
as  complete. Hodgson  writes  :

At  a  sitting  which  I  attended  on  February  20,  1888,
Phinuit  declared  that  one  of  his  thumbs  "  belonged  to  the
medium  "  and  added  "  I  cannot  move  that."  {Proceedings,
Vol.  VIII.,  p.  31,  footnote.)

There  are  variations,  however,  in  degree  to  the  command
of  the  organism  claimed.  "  Sometimes  I  do  not  get  so
much  control,"  says  Phinuit  on  June  2,  1888  (Appendix,
p.  339,  and  see  also  May  26,  1888,  Appendix,  p.  337).
Possibly  the  control  growing  weak — which  is  often  said  to
occur  towards  the  end  of  a  sitting 2 — is  another  way  of
expressing  this,  though  this  weakness  is  sometimes  spoken
of  as  due  to  want  of  "light"  ;  communicators,  however,  are
also  spoken  of  as  getting  weak  (see  Chapter  V.,  p.  162).
There  are,  moreover,  besides  variations  in  the  degree  of
control,  some  definite  and  constant  limitations  apparently,
for  Phinuit  tells  us  that  he  cannot  taste,  and,  as  stated
above  (Chapter  I.,  p.  17),  experiments  seem  to  confirm
this  to  a  considerable  extent.  Another  limitation  is  in  the
use  of  the  eyes,  which  are  closed  during  the  sitting.  Phinuit,
however,  in  the  conversation  on  June  2,  1888,  already
referred  to,  asserts  that  he  does  use  the  medium's  eyes,
and  when  reminded  that  they  are  closed,  says  he  means
that  he  uses  the  medium's  brain.  The  passage  (Appendix,
p.  339)  should  be  read.

With  writing  sittings,  the  idea  of  deliberate  occupation
by  the  control  of  part  only  of  the  medium's  bodily  frame
came  in — probably  because  expression  by  writing  in  Mrs.

1  For  a  fuller  report  of  this  sitting  see  Appendix  to  Chapter  III.,  p.  448.

2  See,  e.g.  below,  pp.  33,  43,  46,  338.


32  Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.  [part

Piper's  trance  began  by  being  associated  with  divided  con-
trol— one  control  expressing  himself  by  speech  and  the  other
by  writing.

Writing  during  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  was  not  a  new  pheno-
menon in  itself  when  the  writing  sittings  began.  Her  first
mediumistic  manifestation  seems  to  have  been  the  writing  of
a  message  "  under  control "  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.
46-47),  and  during  later  sittings  scraps  of  writing  were  occa-
sionally produced.  Thus  on  December  24,  1889,  in  a
sitting  at  which  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Isaac  Thompson  were  present
and  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  was  taking  notes,  towards  the  end  of
the  sitting  :

Here  he  {Phinuit  apparently}  asked  for  pencil  and
scrawled  a  few  words,  getting  very  weak.  Writing  just
legible  afterwards  in  mirror  as  "  Ted  " — "  Isaac  "—
"  Horse  " — "  Dear  Brother  " — {all  topics  which  had  been
previously  mentioned  during  the  sitting}.  (Proceedings,
Vol.  VI.,  p.  511.)

Again,  on  the  following  day,  Phinuit  says  :

Give  me  a  pencil.  [Wrote  on  back  of  letter  while
holding  it  to  forehead,  the  word  "  Nellie  "  distinctly.]
There,  that's  her  name  and  that's  your  Aunt  Anne's
writing  ; she  wrote  it.1 (Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  513.)

For  another  instance  see  Vol.  VI.,  p.  519,  and  for  a  per-
haps more  instructive  case  see  February  1,  1890  (Vol.  VI.,
p.  538),  as  follows  :  Phinuit  was  controlling  and  speaking  for
a  communicator  unknown  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  who  was
conducting  the  sitting  and  taking  notes  :

O.  J.  L. Will  you  send  him  your  name,  sir  ?

W, i, 1. I  will  write  it  for  you. Show  him  the
chain  again. Hold  it  up. (Medium  writes.)  There,

1  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  notes  {op.  cit.  p.  515)  :  "  This  writing  was  not  '  mirror
writing.'  Usually  when  Phinuit  wrote  on  card  held  in  front  of  him  the
writing  was  perverted  so  as  to  be  legible  in  a  mirror  ;  sometimes  each  letter
was  right  but  the  order  perverted.  Single  letters  like  capitals  were  made
properly.  But  when  the  writing  was  done  on  paper  held  to  Mrs.  Piper's
forehead,  i.e.  with  the  hand  turned  round — pencil  towards  face — as  in  the
present  instance,  the  writing  was  ordinary."


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  33

that's my  full  name. [Wrote  James  Wilson  back-
wards, illegible  till  afterwards  in  mirror.]
O.  J.  L. Is  this  his  name  ?

Yes,  that's  right.1  *  *  *  He's  a  dear  old  man,  but
1  can't  hold  him,  he's  gone.  He  was  quite  weak
while  writing. I  can't  do  everything.

I  think  there  is  no  doubt  that  Phinuit  is  throughout  the
speaker  here — speaking  sometimes  for  himself  and  some-
times for  the  communicator,  but  it  appears  to  be  claimed
that  both  "  Mr.  Wilson  "  here  and  "  Aunt  Anne  "  (see  above)
themselves  write.  If  so,  it  would  seem  to  be  as  joint-control
with  Phinuit  and  assisted  by  him,  for  there  is  no  suggestion,
as  later,  that  his  hand  is  taken  away  from  him  and  used
independently.  A  somewhat  similar  incident  is  reported  on
March  10,  1892.  Phinuit  said  the  communicator  would  try
to  write,  whereupon  some  not  very  legible  attempts  to  write
a  sentence  were  made.  When  the  sitter  (not  Hodgson,  by
the  way)  asked  "  Why  can't  he  talk  that  ?  "  Phinuit  replied,
"  He's  too  weak."  There  seem  to  have  been  one  or  two
such  cases  about  this  time,  leading  on  to  divided  control
and  the  full  development  of  writing  under  the  G.  P.  regime.

A  case  of  divided  control  was,  however,  apparently  wit-
nessed by  Miss  A.  M.  R.  on  May  23,  1891.  Her  friend  H.,
who  sometimes  controlled — as  in  the  case  quoted  above,
p.  30 — more  or  less  independently,2  wrote  several  sheets
to  which  Miss  R.  appended  the  note  "  Written  when  Phinuit
had  control,  but  H.  said  he  seized  and  controlled  the  hand
and  wrote  it  "  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  292).  But  the
first  important  case  of  divided  control  that  came  under
Hodgson's  own  observation  occurred  on  March  12,  1892.
about  ten  days  before  G.  P.'s  first  manifestation.  It  was
apparently  an  entirely  spontaneous  development.  Hodgson
describes  it  as  follows  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII. ,  p.  291  :

The  sitter,  a  lady,  had  taken  several  articles  as  test
objects,  among  them  a  ring  which  had  belonged  to  Annie
D  . Phinuit  made  references  to  this  lady,  giving  the

1  N.B. — The  Christian  name  was  wrong.

2  Though  apparently  with  Phinuit's  assistance,  see  Proceedings,  Vol.
VIII.,  p.  113.

c


34


31  r $.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


name  Annie,  and  just  before  the  close  of  the  sitting  Mrs.
Piper's  right  hand  moved  slowly  up  until  it  was  over  the
top  of  her  head.  The  arm  seemed  to  become  rigidly  fixed
in  its  position,,  as  though  spasmodically  contracted,  but  the
hand  trembled  very  rapidly.  Phinuit  exclaimed  several
times  :  "  She's  taken  my  hand  away,"  and  added  :  "  she
wants  to  write."  I  put  a  pencil  between  the  fingers,  and
placed  a  block  book  on  the  head  under  the  pencil.  Xo
writing  came  until,  obeying  Phinuit's  order  to  "  hold  the
hand."  I  grasped  the  hand  very  firmly  at  its  junction  with
the  wrist  and  so  stopped  its  trembling  or  vibrating.  It

then wrote  : "I am Annie D [surname  correctly

given]  ...  I  am  not  dead  ...  I  am  not  dead  but  living
...  I am not dead  .  .  .  world  .  .  .  goodbye  ...  I  am

Annie  D  ." The  hold  of  the  pencil  then  relaxed,  and

Phinuit  began  to  murmur  "  Give  me  my  hand  back,  give
me  my  hand  back."  The  arm,  however,  remained  in  its
contracted  position  for  a  short  time,  but  finally,  as  though
with  much  difficulty,  and  slowly,  it  moved  down  to  the
side,  and  Phinuit  appeared  to  regain  control  over  it.1

There  was  no  proof  in  this  case  that  the  intelligence  using
the  voice  and  that  using  the  hand  were  really  independent,
but  sometimes  there  seem  to  have  been  two  distinct  and
simultaneous  streams  of  consciousness,  for  Hodgson  tells  us
that  it  was  not  necessary  for  Phinuit  to  stop  talking  while
the  hand  was  writing.  He  gives  several  instances  of  this
in  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  292-295  (see  also  p.  398),  though  without
much  detail.  He  seems  even  to  have  succeeded  in  getting
writing  with  both  hands  while  Phinuit  was  speaking.  Thus
he  says  :

On  March  18,  1895,  another  attempt  much  more  suc-
cessful was  made,  when  I  was  accompanied  for  the
purpose  by  Miss  Edmunds.  Her  "  deceased  sister  "  wrote
with  one  hand  and  G.  P.  with  the  other,  while  Phinuit

1  After  a  few  sittings  at  which  the  writing  was  done  in  the  above-described
attitude  Hodgson,  partly  by  peraua3ion  and  partly  by  force,  induced  the
arm  to  come  down  and  write  in  a  more  ordinary  manner  on  a  table  (Vol.
XIII.,  p.  292).  But  convulsive  movements  and  muscular  contractions
continued  to  occur  during  the  writing  at  times  till  the  Imperator  regime
began,  and  even  occasionally  afterwards.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance  Phenomena.


was  talking,  all  simultaneously  on  different  subjects.  (Yol.
xm„  p.  294. J

Hodgson  further  says  :

When  the  sitter  turns  to  pay  attention  to  the  hand.
Phinuit  frequently  makes  some  such  enigmatical  remark
as  "  1*11  help  him."  or  "  111  help  to  hold  him  up."  At
other  times  Phinuit  will  request  that  an  article  should
be  given  to  himself  {i.e.  placed  in  the  left  hand},  so
that  he  might  have  something  to  engage  his  attention.
*  *  *  At  any  time.,  apparently  under  these  circumstances.
Phinuit  can  be  evoked  from  his  silence  by  talking  into
the  ear,  and  will  at  once  resume  the  communication  while
the  writing  continues  without  a  break.

This  phenomenon  seems  in  some  respects  to  resemble  the
experience  of  some  automatic  writers  (without  trance),  who
find  it  helpful  to  read  a  book  while  the  writing  proceeds.
But  perhaps  Gurney's  experiments  in  post-hypnotic  sugges-
tion, in  which  his  subjects  would  work  out  problems  with
plane hette  while  reading  aloud,  are  more  strictly  analogous.
They  are  described  in  his  paper  on  "  Peculiarities  of
Certain  Post-hypnotic  States/'"  Proceedings,  Vol.  IV.  For
particular  examples,  see  pp.  317  to  321.  but  the  whole  paper
may  be  read  with  advantage  in  connexion  with  our  present
subject.

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  we  have  not  any  fuller  descrip-
tion of  the  simultaneous  working  of  two  independent  streams
of  consciousness  in  Mrs.  Piper's  case,  for  it  might  have  thrown
some  light  on  the  nature  of  the  "  control.'"''  The  power
seems  to  have  lasted  only  for  two  or  three  years  (the  years
in  which  Mrs.  Piper's  powers  perhaps  culminated);  for  I  can
find  no  such  clear  and  complete  instances  of  it  among  later
records.  Indeed  there  is  some  evidence  that  the  power  of
separate  and  simultaneous,  as  distinct  from  alternate,  action
was  lost.  Phinuit  seems  to  imply  that  he  has  not  got  it
in  a  sitting  of  Professor  Xewbold's  on  June  19.  1895  (see
Appendix,  p.  370). Phinuit  says  :

I'll  tell you  another  thing. While  George  talks  to  you
{i.e. by  writing},  if  it was  not  for  interruption  I  could


36


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


talk  at  the  same  time.  George's  thoughts  have  no  more
to  do  with  mine  than  yours  have.

There  appear,  however,  to  have  been  one  or  two  instances
of  brief  sentences  being  written  simultaneously  with  some
talking  in  Professor  Newbold's  sittings  in  1895.

On  another  occasion  (December  21,  1896),  Hodgson  and
a  lady  being  the  sitters,  Phinuit  is  talking  when  G.  P.  begins
to  write  :

G.  P. I  have  just  returned  from  Mexico. Who  is  speaking  ?
R.  H. Phinuit's  talking  to  the  lady.

G.  P.  I  am  interrupted,  H.  I  wish  the  doctor  to  keep  quiet.
R.  H. Never  mind  him. Go  on  with  me.

G.  P.  I  have  seen  D.  and  there  is  no  reason  why  they  cannot
put  their  .  .  .  [the  conversation  between  Phinuit
and  {the  lady  sitter}  apparently  disturbs  G.  P.  some-
what so  I  suggest  that  G.  P.  should  listen  to  me  and

give  me  the  message  about  D later.  |

{G.  P.  assents  and  R.  H.  talks  at  some  length  in  a  very
low  voice  into  the  hand  close  to  his  lips,  G.  P.  writing
brief  but  appropriate  replies  such  as  "  good,"  "  I  am
very  glad,"  "leave  it  to  me,"  etc.}

The  difficulty  of  interruption  is  given  as  a  reason  for  not
attempting  simultaneous  communication  at  a  sitting  on
January  5,  1897,  recorded  by  Hodgson.  Phinuit  was  using
the  voice  when  G.  P.  interposed  in  writing  :

G.  P. H. I have several messages  for  you before I  go — if
possible  before  the  Doctor  {i.e  Phinuit}  gets  through
R.  H. Can  you  give  these  while  Dr.  is  talking  to  these  ladies  ?
G.  P. No  he  interrupts  me.

There  was  a  curious  incident  on  April  5,  1897,  suggesting
that  in  the  case  of  divided  control  one  control  may  disturb
the  other  merely  by  its  presence.  The  control  writing  is
"George  Eliot."

[Hand  prods  the  head  and  cushions  slightly  with  the
pencil.]

R.  H. I'll  fix  that  in  a  moment.
G.  E. Take  Rector  over


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  37


R.  H.  I  will  in  a  moment  [I  shift  the  head  further  over].

G.  E. I  wish  his  thoughts  not  to  interfere  with  my  own.1

But,  of  course,  here,  as  in  other  similar  cases,  we  have  no
evidence  apart  from  the  control's  statement  that  there
really  was  a  second  consciousness  in  operation.

The  latest  attempt  at  simultaneous  expression  by  hand
and  voice  that  I  know  of  was  made  on  February  8,  1905,  and
was  a  failure.  Hodgson  was  in  charge  of  the  sitting
and  no  other  sitter  present.  Mrs.  Piper's  head,  turned  as
usual  to  the  left,  rested  on  a  pile  of  cushions  in  front  of  her.
Rector  was  controlling,  and  writing  as  amanuensis  for  Mrs.

H.  Hodgson  reports  :

Mrs.  H.  through  Rector.  All  is  well  with  me.  I  hope  to  give
much  light  on  the  point  of  Phinuit
[While  the  preceding  sentence  was  being  written,  Mrs.
Piper's  head  is  moving  as  if  antecedent  to  use  of
the  voice,  and  I  hear  some  sounds  indistinctly.  I
go  round  and  apparently  some  one  is  trying  to  use
the  voice,  but  I  can't  catch  the  words.  The  hand
meanwhile  has  written  /  and  stopped,  as  I  find  on
returning.]

R.  H. What  is  it,  Rector  ?

Writing. Ask  Mrs.  C  to  wait  until  Mrs.  H.  finishes.

[I  return  to  left  of  Mrs.  Piper  and  speak  towards  left
ear.]

R.  H. Kindly wait a moment till Mrs. H. says what  she

wants. I  shall  be  glad  to  hear  from  you.
Voice. I  want  to  speak  with  you.
R.  H. Yes  I  shall  be  delighted. [I  return  to  hand.]
Writing. I  will  take  her  away  if  thou  dost  wish  R.
R.  H. Yes,  Rector,  kindly  say  I  shall  be  so  pleased  to  hear

from her as soon as Mrs. H. fulfils her  promise

which  she  made  to  come  to  me  now.
[Pause. Hand  in  air,  talk  to  spirit. Pause  for  about  a

minute.]

1  Compare  November  17,  1896  ;  Hodgson  recording,  Hart  controlling
(writing).  [Hand  moves  over  to  Mrs.  Piper's  head,  and  pokes  it  several
times  quite  vigorously.]  R.  H.  What's  the  matter  ?  Hart.  Tell  Doctor
{i.e.  Phinuit}  to  keep  all  quiet  -j  R.  H.  does  so}


38


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


Writing.  Gone.  She  thought  she  could  speak  at  the  same
time,  but  we  have  explained  it  to  her.

Simultaneous  and  independent  expression  by  two  streams
of  consciousness  was  apparently  a  development  of  divided
control,  in  which  the  writing  and  the  speaking  control
acted  in  concert,  each  with  knowledge  of  what  the  other

was  saying. The  manifestation  of  Annie  D  ,  already

quoted  (p.  33),  seems  to  have  been  of  this  kind,  and
a  very  clear  case  of  it  is  given  by  Hodgson  in  Proceed-
ings, Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  313-315.  It  occurred  on  May  16,  1892,
at  one  of  the  earlier  sittings  at  which  G.  P.  controlled.
Hodgson  and  Mrs.  Howard  were  present.  The  following
are  extracts  from  the  record,  the  description  verbally  re-
arranged a  little  to  bring  out  the  point  :

{G. P. had been  speaking  to  Mrs. Howard, and  on

Hodgson  entering  the  room  began  to  write. I  omit

the  first  sentence.}
G.  P.  [writing]. I  saw  him  take  some  notepaper  and  write  an

explanatory  letter  to  Prank  *  *
Phinuit  [speaking]. Do  you  understand  ?  Sitter.  Yes.

G.  P.  [writing]. [Some indecipherable words.] The  flowers

which  I  saw  mother  put  before  my  photo,  she  and

father  will  understand  .  .  .
[The  next  sentence  not  written,  but  spelt  out  by  Phinuit].  I

saw  them do [patting] I saw mother put  them

under my picture on the afternoon  of  which  he

spoke  to  me  to  watch  him.
G.  P.  [writing]. In  connection  with  this  I  saw  them  open  my

book  *  *  *  I saw you [Mrs. Howard] and  saw

father  give  you  the  roses.
Phinuit  [speaking]. He  saw  you  take  a  picture  *  *  *
Sitter. Of  whom  ?

[Phinuit  stumbled  over  a  word  sounding  something  like

"  himself."]

G.  P.  [writing].  Himself  my  myself  [Mrs*  Howard  asks  which
picture,  showing  portraits,  at  one  of  which  Phinuit
says  "  That's  it  "]  I  mean  the  one  you  got  from
the  photographer.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.


:;<i


Phintjit  [speaking  on  behalf  of  G.  P.j. Ask  Hodgson  whether

this  is  important  to  him  or  not, I  am  determined  to
G.  P.  [writing], transfer  to  you  my  thoughts  although  it  will

have  to  be  done  in  this  uncanny  way.  *  *  *  I  will

move  heaven  and  earth  to  explain  these  matters  to

you  Hodgson.
Phintjit  [speaking]. You  see  I  am  not  asleep.
G.  P.  [writing]. I  am  wide  awake,  and  I  assure  you  I  am

ever  ready  to help you and give you things  of

importance  in  this  work.
Phintjit  [speaking]. It  was  like  Greek  to  him  before  he  came

here. I  could  not  believe  this  existence.
G.  P.  [writing]. I  am  delighted  to  have  this  opportunity  of

coming  here  to  this  life,  so  as  to  be  able  to  prove

my  experiences  and  existence  here.

*  *  *  *

R.  H.  Now  George  we  mustn't  keep  the  medium  in  trance  too
long.

G.  P.  [writing].  Do  not  worry  about  her,  she  is  having  a
good  time,  and  I  will  do  no  harm.  You  know
that  too  well.

Phintjit  [speaking]. He  says  he's  not  an  idiot.

R.  H. Oh  I  know  he's  not  an  idiot  etc.

G.  P.  [writing]. I  understand. You  see  I  hear  you.

*  *  *  *

I  assume  that  the  recorder  here  had  sufficient  grounds  for
attributing  all  the  spoken  remarks  to  Phinuit.  From  the
record  alone  it  would  seem  possible  that  there  was  con-
fusion, and  that  G.  P.,  intending  to  write,  sometimes
spoke  by  mistake  ;  in  other  words,  that  the  supposed  divi-
sion of  instruments  (voice  and  hand)  between  the  supposed
division  of  consciousnesses  (Phinuit  and  G.  P.)  was  not  con-
sistently maintained.  No  doubt  there  was  generally  some
difference  between  G.  P.'s  way  of  speaking  and  Phinuit's,
though  we  are  told  very  little  about  it,1  but  this  difference

1  On  April  11,  1892,  Mrs.  Howard  records:  "We  told  him  {G.  P.}  not
to  bother  about  it  now,  but  to  tell  us  at  next  sitting,  a  proposal  which
Phinuit  recommended,  but  he  himself  in  his  gruff  voice  suggested  '  Theo-
sophic'  I  told  him  no  "  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  302).  Compare  also
account  of  G.  P.  speaking  on  May  29,  1892  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  579).


40


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


cannot  always  have  been  very  marked,  for  at  a  sitting  on
May  22,  1892,  Mr.  Howard  did  not  at  once  perceive  that
the  speaker  who  opened  the  communication  was  G.  P.  and
not  Phinuit,  and  the  same  mistake  was  made  by  both  Hodgson
and  Mrs.  Howard  at  a  sitting  on  December  5,  1892,  when
there  was  a  change  of  control.  Again,  at  a  sitting  on  April
13,  1892 — that  is  earlier  than  the  mixed  communication  just
quoted — Mrs.  Howard  attributes  to  G.  P.  a  sentence  uttered
while  writing,  which  Hodgson  (who  was  not  present)  thinks
should  have  been  attributed  to  Phinuit  speaking  for  G.  P.
The  case  is  instructive  and  I  will  quote  it,  prefacing  with
preceding  portions  of  the  record  which  illustrate  both  the
method  of  G.  P.'s  entry  at  that  time  and  the  kind  of  difference
of  speech.  It  was  the  third  "  G.  P."  sitting.1  The  recorder
was  Mrs.  Howard.

Phintjit  [speaking].  It  is  my  work  to  bring  people  together,
you  know.  I  go  get  him.  [Puts  his  right  hand
out  towards  the  door  beckoning  violently  for  a
minute.  I  put  my  photograph  {which  had  belonged
to  G.  P.}  to  medium's  head.  Then  suddenly,  with
a  fresh,  joyous  tone,  and  much  less  French  accent,
comes  George]

G.  P.  Mary  dear,  I'm  here  again. {A  good  deal  of  conversation
follows,  in  which  G.  P.  is  understood  to  be  speaking
directly  himself. The  record  continues  : — }
[Phinuit reappears 11.45 saying  "  He  wants to  leave.

Give  me  something  belonging  to  him. He  hates  to

leave,  but  is  exhausted  "]
{Then  Phinuit  speaks  reporting  what  G.  P.  says  and

thinks,  and  continues  : — }
Ph. He  wants  to  write. I  think  he  will  come  and  take  my

hand soon. — Ah he has my hand  ! He has  my

hand  ! You  can  talk  to  me  while  he  writes  with

my  hand  if  you  wish  *  *  *
{A  short  letter  follows  which  was  I  think  G.  P.'s  first

writing except a still shorter similar letter  on

April  11th. The  record  then  continues — }

1  For  further  information  about  this  sitting  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,
p.  302.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena .  41


[This  letter  was  written  with  the  fist  grasping  the
pencil  and  the  pad  held  upon  the  top  of  the  head
in  such  a  position  that  I  could  not  read  it  at  the
time.1  Once  he  said  while  writing  with  feverish
haste  "  I  don't  have  time  to  dot  all  the  i's  you
won't  mind."  Apparently  Phinuit  who  was  quiet  at
this  time  had  given  him  the  body  as  well  as  hand,
for  he  said  this  in  the  first  person.]

{Hodgson,  who  was  not  present  at  the  sitting  annotates
on  the  margin,  referring  to  this  spoken  sentence,
"  Phinuit  doubtless  repeating  G.'s  exact  words."  2}

The  question  of  recognition  of  G.  P.'s  voice  as  distinct
from  Phinuit's  is  something  of  a  digression.  It  is  immaterial
to  the  present  argument  whether  the  sitters  were  always
correct  in  their  diagnosis  of  who  was  speaking.  My  point
at  this  moment  is  only  that  in  the  early  days  of  the  writing
control  the  speaking  intelligence  and  the  writing  intelligence
were  mutually  aware  of  each  other,  and  sometimes  at  least
of  each  other's  communications.  Of  course,  in  such  cases
we  have  no  proof  that  two  distinct  streams  of  conscious-
ness were  at  work.  Both  parts  might  be  acted  by  one  intelli-
gence. And  this  is  also  true  when  two  controls  quarrel,
or  talk  to  each  other.3  I  do  not  think,  however,  that  there
is,  or  at  any  rate  need  be,  conscious  play-acting  on  the  part
of  the  trance  personality,  even  when  this  possibility  is  not
excluded  by  actual  simultaneous  writing  and  speaking  on
different  subjects.

During  the  first  year  of  G.  P.'s  manifestation — March,
1892,  to  March,  1893 — he  was  gradually  developing  into  an

1  It  was  about  a  fortnight  after  this — April  29,  1892  (see  Proceedings,
Vol.  XIII.,  p.  292)— that  Hodgson  succeeded  in  getting  the  writing  done
with  the  writing  pad  on  a  table,  but  for  a  considerable  time  it  continued
to  be  at  least  sometimes  necessary  for  the  sitter  to  keep  the  hand  steady
by  holding  the  arm.

2  The  date  of  this  annotation  is  not  known  to  us.  The  records  of  these
early  G.  P.  sittings  with  Hodgson's  original  notes  were  lost,  and  he  seems
to  have  used  the  Howards'  copy  in  writing  his  paper.  But  this  copy  he
could  not  obtain  till  the  end  of  1897  (see  footnote  to  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,
p.  304).

3  For  examples  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  429  (in  1892),  p.  575  (in
1892),  p.  500  (in  1894),  etc.


42


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


almost  purely  writing  control.  He  would  sometimes  control
the  body  and  speak  to  the  sitters,  and  sometimes  borrow
Phinuit's  hand  to  write,  notwithstanding  the  decided  pre-
ference for  speech  expressed  by  the  sitters  ;  and  the  amount
of  writing  increased  at  the  expense  of  the  speaking.  A
brief  account  of  the  sittings  from  this  point  of  view  will  make
the  development  clear.

It  was,  I  think,  on  April  29,  1892, 1  the  occasion  on  which
Hodgson  managed  to  get  the  arm  to  write  with  the  writing
pad  on  a  table,  that  occurred  the  first  conversation  carried
on  on  G.  P.'s  side  by  writing,  and  it  seems  quite  possible
that  Hodgson's  action  in  facilitating  the  writing  really  sug-
gested this  mode  of  conversing.  If  so,  we  owe  him  a
debt  of  gratitude  for  promoting  a  method  which  has  the
merit  of  furnishing  automatically  a  record  of  the  medium's
words,  and  thus  is  valuable  for  evidential  purposes  ;
and  in  many  ways  for  our  present  purposes,  though  it  limits
us  in  some  respects.  At  this  sitting  there  is  also,  I  think,
the  first  hint  that  the  head  control  and  the  hand  control
may  not  always  be  aware  of  each  other's  communications.
The  record  says,  in  the  middle  of  G.  P.'s  writing  :

[Phinuit  wanted  us  to  ask  George  if  he,  Phinuit,  was
helping  him.]

G.  P. Yes  [we  told  Phinuit  that  George  wrote  yes.]

Earlier  in  the  sitting,  while  Hodgson  was  sharpening  the
pencil,  Phinuit  intervened  to  "  spell  out  "  a  sentence  for
G.  P.,  the  latter  resuming  the  sentence  he  had  been  writing
when  the  pencil  was  returned  to  him.

On  May  14  there  is  speaking  by  Phinuit  as  well  as  writing
by  G.  P.,  and  once  or  twice,  while  conversation  with  the
writing  is  going  on,  appropriate  remarks  are  interpolated
by  the  voice  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  312-313),  as
in  the  passage  I  have  already  quoted  above  (pp.  38-39)
from  the  sitting  on  May  16,  though  to  a  much  less  marked
extent.2 On  May  17  we  find  G.  P.  acting  as  amanuensis

1  For  an  account  of  this  sitting  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  308-9
and  311.

2  Compare  also  another  sitting  of  about  this  time — May  22,  1892 — when
the  writing  control  did  not  purport  to  be  G.  P. — Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,
p.  575.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  43

for  another  communicator- — the  first  time,  I  believe,  in  which
writing  is  used  in  this  way.

After  Mrs.  Piper's  summer  holidays  in  1892  a  series  of
thirteen  stenographically  reported  sittings  were  held  for  the
purpose  of  communicating  with  G.  P.  These  sittings  are
described  and  quoted  from  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.
315-322  and  413-441,  but  we  have  the  full  stenographic
reports  and  I  use  them  here.  At  the  first  of  this
series  on  November  22,  G.  P.  first  writes  and  later
speaks.  The  writing  seems  to  come  with  difficulty,
Phinuit  talks  about  G.  P.,  repeating  the  latter's  remarks
in  connexion  with  the  writing,  making  it  evident  that
he  knows  what  is  going  on,  though  less  evident  that
he  knows  what  is  actually  written.  A  considerable  por-
tion of  the  record  of  this  sitting  will  be  found  in  the
Appendix  (p.  352).  In  this  and  the  following  two  sittings
of  the  series  (November  22,  28,  30,  1892)  G.  P.  chiefly
used  the  voice.  On  December  2  he  wrote  and  then
spoke,  but  changed  to  writing  again  when  Mr.  Marte,  present
for  the  first  time,  came  in  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,
p.  420,  and  Vol.  XV.,  p.  26),  because,  as  he  explained,  he
was  getting  weak.  On  December  5  he  chiefly  wrote  ;
Hodgson  was  trying  to  get  an  answer  to  a  test  question
sent  by  R.  T.,  whom  he  described  by  his  initials,  and  at
the  same  time  to  get  G.  P.  to  give  R.  T.'s  full  name.
There  was  much  shuffling  and  no  success.  It  was  only
when  this  was  over  that  there  was  a  little  speaking.
Portions  of  this  sitting  also  are  given  in  the  Appendix
(p.  355).  On  the  7th  G.  P.  wrote  only,  and  on  the
9th,  when  Mr.  Marte  was  again  present,  wrote  only  till
just  the  end.  On  the  16th  and  19th  he  spoke  and  wrote,
and  at  the  remaining  four  sittings  of  the  series,  December
21,  22,  and  January  24  and  30,  wrote  only.  On  the
first  of  these  four  days  a  friend  of  G.  P.'s,  Miss  Vance,
was  for  the  first  time  present  and  would  have  liked  to  have
voice  communication,  but  G.  P.  could  not  be  persuaded  to
speak.  Preference  for  writing  when  the  sitters  were  new
and  tests  were  desired  may  have  been  due  to  the  fact
that  the  slower  mode  of  communication  gave  more  time  to
catch  elusive  ideas. But  it  undoubtedly  also  gave  oppor-


If


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


trinities  of  concealing  ignorance  by  writing  crucial  words
illegibly.1

The  fact  that  writing  as  G.  P.'s  habitual  method  of  com-
municating was  developing  in  1892  makes  the  records  of  this
period  important,  because  we  may  expect  to  find  in  them
evidence  about  the  early  form  of  the  theory  of  writing
offered  by  the  controls  and  may  compare  it  with  that  pro-
mulgated some  years  later.  In  1895  G.  P.  asserted  to  Pro-
fessor Newbold  that  he  was  not  conscious  of  writing.  For
example,  on  June  18,  1895  (see  Appendix,  p.  367),  he  says  :

G.  P. It  is  like  speaking  through  a  *  *  telephone  *
W.  R.  N. Then  how  do  you  make  a  difference  between  writing
and  talking  ?

G.  P.  There  seems  ...  is  no  difference  to  me.  I  only
know  that  I  am  writing  by  having  been  told  so  by
Hodgson  2

This  view  was  subsequently  endorsed  by  the  Imperator
Band  and  fully  accepted  by  Hodgson,  who  says  (Proceedings,
Vol.  XIII..  p.  293)  :

It  would  seem,  moreover,  that  until  instructed  in  some
way,  the  quasi-personality  that  guides  the  writing  is
unaware  that  he  is  writing.  The  process  from  the  point
of  view  of  the  "communicator"  {control}  rather  resembles
the  definite  thinking  of  his  thoughts,  with  the  object  of
conveying  them  to  the  sitter, — and  I  feel  very  sure  that
this  is  true  whatever  theory  may  be  held  as  to  the
identity  of  the  '"communicator"  {control},  whether  this  is
what  it  purports  to  be,  or  merely  another  stratum  of  Mrs.
Piper's  mind  believing  itself  to  be  an  extraneous  intelli-
gence.

And  again  at  p.  405  :

After  having  endeavoured  as  best  I  could  to  follow  the
writing  of  thousands  of  pages,  with  scores  of  different
writers,  after  having  put  many  incpiiries  to  the  communi-

1  For  instances  very  suggestive  ot  this,  see  the  above-mentioned
sitting  of  Dee.  5,  1892  (Appendix,  pp.  356-358).

2  We  do  not  possess  a  record  of  any  conversation  before  181)5  in  which
Hodgson  told  G.  P.,  or  had  occasion  to  tell  G.  P.  this.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  45

cators  {controls}  themselves,  and  after  having  analysed
numerous  spontaneously  occurring  incidents  of  all  kinds,  I
have  no  sort  of  doubt  whatever  but  that  the  consciousness
producing  the  writing — whatever  that  consciousness  be,
whether  Mrs.  Piper's  secondary  personality  or  the  real
communicator  as  alleged, — is  not  conscious  of  writing,  and
that  the  thoughts  that  pass  through  "  his  "  mind  tend  to
be  reproduced  in  writing  by  some  part  of  the  writing
mechanism  of  Mrs.  Piper's  organism.

It  is  with  hesitation  that  one  can  venture  to  differ  from
an  observer  so  careful  and  so  experienced  as  Hodgson,
especially  as  the  material  on  which  he  based  his  conclusion
was,  up  to  the  date  of  his  report,  more  ample  than  that  at
my  disposal.  Nevertheless  I  am  driven  to  a  different  con-
clusion. For  I  cannot  see  what  grounds  he  can  have  had
for  deciding  as  he  did,  except  the  persistent,  but  not  very
consistent  statements  of  the  controls  themselves  from  1895
onwards,  and  possibly  earlier ;  and  against  this  must  be
set  the  clear  indications  that  they  held  a  different  view  in
1892,  and  also  specific  occurrences — published  and  unpub-
lished— at  the  sittings  which  distinctly  point  the  other  way.
To  begin  with,  take  the  first  occurrence  of  trance  writing
under  Hodgson's  observation  (see  above,  p.  34).  Phinuit
explained  about  the  "  hand  control :  "  "  She  has  taken  my
hand  away,  she  wants  to  write."  This  surely  indicates
that  both  Phinuit  and  the  writing  control 1  knew  that  writing-
was  aimed  at.  Frequent  remarks  scattered  through  the
stenographically  reported  series  of  sittings  in  1892-3  referred
to  above,  show  that  Phinuit  knew  what  G.  P.  did  with  the
hand  when  he  had  "  taken  "  it  ;  that  he  knew  when  it
wrote  and,  sometimes  at  least,  knew  what  it  wrote.  For
example,  on  November  28,  1892  :

PHnsruiT. George  is  writing  that  for  a  lady  that  speaks  Italian.

I  can't  speak  it.
R.  H. Well,  we  can't  make  it  out.

On  December  16,  1892  :

G.  P.  (writes). First  you  asked  me  to  pump  Phinuit.

1  Unless  Phinuit  merely  inferred  the  intention  to  write  from  the  action.


46


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Phinuit.  You  better  shut  up  about  me.

3[E  3]C  3}C  3^

G.  P.  {writes  something  illegible}

Phinuit.  George  was  weak  that  time.  Wait  a  minute  *  *  he
will  write  it  for  you  and  then  he  will  explain  it  to  you.

And  again  on  December  22,  1892  :

Ph.  That  fellow  {i.e.  G.  P.}  wants  to  shake  hands  with  that
little  girl  {Mrs.  Howard's  daughter}.  |He  has  got
my  hand  and  he  has  carried  it  away  somewhere  *  *
That  is  very  funny  ;  he  is  going  all  round  the  lot.
{Medium  is  shaking  hands  with  all  present  in  turn}
I  don't  care  what  he  does  with  it ;  I  give  that  to
him.

{and  later  in  the  same  sitting}

Ph. *  *  he  writes  because  he  is  more  used  to  it.

*  #  *  *

Ph. And  he  does  not  like  it  {apparently  meaning  that  G.  P.

does  not  like  manipulating  the  whole  body}  it  is
kind  of  distasteful  to  him,  so  I  just  assist  him  and
hold  the  body  while  he  takes  my  hand,  and  he
knows  how  to  use  my  brain  through  the  hand  just
as  well  ;  he  takes  the  whole  hand  away  from  me
absolutely.

G.  P.  also  was  clearly  aware  of  writing.  The  passage
quoted  above  (p.  41),  where,  on  April  13,  1892,  he  said  he
had  not  time  to  dot  his  i's,  shows  this.  Again,  on
November  30,  1892  :

G.  P.  (using  voice).  Then  I  was  happy  to  know  that  I  could
express  my  thought  or  could  use  the  organism  of
the  medium  to  express  my  thoughts.  Can  you  hear
me  ?

Mrs.  Howard. Yes  every  word.

G.  P.  Then  I  found  that  I  could  write,  I  could  handle  the
organism  of  the  medium  to  write.

Dec.  2,  1892.  G.  P.  who  has  been  speaking  says  [reaching  for
pencil]  :  "  Give  it  to  me,  I  will  write  it,"  and  proceeds  with
his  communication  in  writing. (Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII. ,  p.  420.)


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  47


Dec.  5,  1892  :

Mrs.  Howard  {to  G.  P.  who  is  writing}.  Are  you  writing  for
Elisa  ?

G.  P.  (writing). Si.  Yes.

#  *  *  *

G.  P.  (writing).  I  don't  quite  hear  all  you  say,  cannot  you
talk  slower  please,  and  it  is  easier  for  me  to  write.

Dec.  9,  1892[:

G.  P.  (writing).  I  am  more  used  to  writing  and  I  am  clearer
just  now.

sfc  %  ^  %

Please  let  this  block  or  sheet  alone  when  I  am  writing
and  wait  until  I  finish.

Dec.  16,  1892  : (see  Appendix,  p.  361).

Mrs.  Howard. Couldn't  you  do  it  easier  by  writing  ?

G.  P.  (using  voice). Much  easier. I  came  this  way  first  and

I  got  to  know  the  real  by  writing. I  am  a  little

more  accustomed  to  it  ;  it  is  easier.
R.  H.  Will  it  always  be  easy  for  you  to  write  ?
G.  P. I  shall  be  able  to  write  clearly  by  and  by.

Dec.  21,  1892  :

G.  P. Oh  help  me  to  write  it.
Miss  Vance. Tell  me  how  to  help  you.
Mrs.  Howard. Doctor  can  we  do  anything  to  help  him  ?
Ph. You  help  him  if  you  will  by  steadying  his  hand  ;  that
is  all  he  needs.

*  *  *  *

Mrs.  Howard.  If  Helen  {Miss  Vance}  were  to  come  and  take
the  medium's  hands  would  you  talk  to  her  with
your  own  mouth  ?

G.  P.  (writing). No  I  want  to  write  to  her.

Later  than  this,  in  1894,  we  still  find  G.  P.  apparently
conscious  of  writing. Thus  on  January  9,  1894,  he  says  :

G.  P.  I  want  to  have  a  good  talk  with  "Marte"  and  then  I
am  done  *  *  *  But  Hodgson,  it  won't  do  to  stay


is


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


here  always.  I  should  have  gone  on  long  ago,
with  Gurney,  Walt  Whitman,  Darwin  and  others,  if
it  had  not  been  for  seeing  my  old  friend  Marte
*  *  *  But  I  shall  have  to  write  it  to  him.

R.  H. You  mean  you  can't  talk  ?

G.  P. No,  not  clearly.

R.  H. You  can  do  better  in  the  writing  ?

G.  P. Yes,  I  guess  I  can.

Other  controls  similarly  show  consciousness  of  writing  in
1894.  On  March  3,  1894,  the  following  conversation  is
recorded  with  D.  P.  B.  (wife  of  the  sitter  C.  H.),  communi-
cating for  the  first  time  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  507)  :

C  H. Can  you  write  your  name  ?

D.  P.  B.  writing.  *  *  *  I  wrote  it,  I  wrote  it.  Do  read.  It  is
over  here,  turn,  [hand  fumbles  among  the  loose
sheets  lying  on  the  table  covered  with  writing]

C.  H. Will  you  give  it  me  later  ?

D.  P.  B. Yes,  before  I  go  I  will  write  it  in  full {which  she

did}

Again,  on  April  30,  1894  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  520).
Sitter,  J.  M.  {second  sitting}  :

PmisruiT. The  lady's  going  to  borrow  my  hand.  *  *  *
[Hand  writes]. I  am  Margaret  M. {Name  of  sitter's  wife}

%  *  H4

J.  M. Did  you  ever  speak  to  me  before  ?

M.  M. Yes  once  J.  M.  How  ?

M.  M. Writing  ?  .  .  .  This  very  way  by  writing  —

A  strong  reason  for  doubting  the  assertions  made  later
by  the  controls,  that  they  seem  to  themselves  to  be  speaking
into  an  instrument — as  it  were,  a  telephone — which  auto-
matically produces  writing  at  the  other  end,  is  that  correc-
tions and  other  things  occur  in  the  writing  which  require
the  writing  process  itself  to  be  intelligently  directed  and
not  to  be  merely  mechanical  ;  and  the  intelligence  directing
it  must  be  either  the  control  or  another  intelligence  inter-
vening between  the  control  and  the  material  process  of


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  49

writing  Professor  Newbold  brings  this  point  out  well  in  his
questioning  of  G.  P.  in  1895  (see  especially  Appendix,  p.  374).

Taking  specific  instances  from  1895  onwards — how  is  it  pos-
sible to  suppose  that  the  particular  method  used  on  June
18,  1895,  to  indicate  the  pronunciation  of  "lead"  (see
Appendix,  p.  369) — putting  an  e  after  the  d  to  make  the
sitter  who  is  reading  the  script  understand  that  it  is  the  verb
meaning  to  conduct  and  not  the  lead  of  a  pencil  that  is
intended — was  carried  out  by  an  intelligence  unaware  of
writing  ? Again,  on  January  19,  1897  :

{G.  P.  writes  '  annihilated  '  and  Hodgson  cannot  read  the
word  and  makes  various  shots  at  it ;  then  : — }
G.  P.  anni.

R.  H.  Annie  something — Animated

G.  P.  How  absurd,  H, — Promulgated,  put  that  in  and  see  how
you  like  it.  .  .  .  Annihilated  .  .  .  Annihilated  .  .  .
Anni.

R.  H.  Anni.

G.  P. nighilated.  R.  H.  Can't  read  it.

G.  P.  Annihilated  .  .  .  Banished  .  .  .  what  are  you  thinking
about  H. Anighilated.  *  *

It  cannot  be  a  machine  that  tries  to  indicate  the  pronun-
ciation of  the  long  i  by  spelling  the  syllable  nigh  ;  unless
it  is  a  machine  like  a  typewriter  that  writes  letter  by  letter.
And  that  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  theory  that  the
controls  believe  themselves  to  be  speaking  when  writing,
or  with  their  finding,  as  MyersP  said  he  did  on  April  6,  1908,
that  "  the  machine  registers  according  to  sound  with  no
attempt  to  spell  properly."

Similarly,  how  can  the  control  correct  the  writing  by
erasures  or  interpolated  letters,  or  how  can  it  point  to  words
that  have  been  written  instead  of  repeating  them,  if  it  is
unaware  of  writing  ?  For  instance,  on  March  30,  1897
(see  App.  to  Chap.  III.,  p.  499),  Hodgson  records  that
George  Eliot  wrote  :

"  distinguished gentlemen  " then "  looking  " was  written

and  hand  gestured  to  the  words  above  for  me  to  read  it

in  its  right  place. I  read  "distinguished  looking  gentlemen."

p


50


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Corrections  are  quite  common.  Here  are  two  taken  at
random  from  the  sitting  of  February  14,  1905.  First,
"should"  is  corrected  to  "could"  by  a  c  being  superposed,
and  later  in  the  sitting  the  record  runs  (control  Rector,
writing  for  Mrs.  H.  as  communicator)  :

It  took  just  the  amount  of  light  possessed  [a  slight
hesitation]  which  he  was  [then  hand  turns  back  and
writes  of  in  front  of  possessed  and  points  to  possessed]  of.

And  again  on  July  6,  1905,  "  except  "  is  written  without
a  p,  the  p  being  added  over  the  t.  Similar  cases  are
recorded  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  dealing  with  writing
sittings  of  1907  ;  e.g.  an  erasure  will  be  found  at  p.  101,
and  examples  of  the  hand  pointing  to  already  written  words
to  make  the  meaning  clear  at  pages  87,  148,  335,  345.

Drawings  made  in  the  course  of  writing  also  seem  to
show  that  the  communicating  intelligence  is  conscious  of
using  a  pencil  or  pen.  Instances  in  1907  will  be  found
in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  153,  156,  345.  And
consciousness  of  drawing  is  clearly  shown  ;  e.g.  in  Proceed-
ings, Vol.  XXII.,  p.  71,  Rector  having  made  attempts  to
draw  a  triangle,  says  :  "I  tried  to  draw  it  as  he  {MyersP}
made  it."  But  drawings  were  made  both  earlier  and  later
than  this.  For  example,  on  November  18,  1896,  a  control
professing  to  be  a  little  nephew  of  Hodgson's,  wrote  more
or  less  baby  language  in  capital  (print)  letters,  and  drew
what  purported  to  represent  a  horse  and  a  pig.  Conscious-
ness of  writing  seems  also  involved  when,  as  Hodgson  records
on  March  5,  1897  (see  Appendix  to  Chapter  III.,  p.  496),

hand  makes  movements  as  if  trying  to  turn  over  the  leaf
with  the  end  of  the  pencil.

What  is  difficult  to  reconcile  with  these  facts  and  state-
ments is  the  theory  that  the  writing  control  is  a  separate
and  independent  spirit,  taking  the  place  of  Mrs.  Piper's
spirit,  which  has  been  temporarily  ousted  altogether.  If
the  control  was  a  phase — a  centre  of  consciousness — of
Mrs.  Piper,  it  is,  of  course,  quite  possible  that  it  may  have
been  aware  of  writing  in  1892,  but  through  some  different
splitting  of  consciousness,  due  to  suggestion  by  Hodgson  or


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  51


to  some  other  cause,  have  become  unaware  of  it  in  1895,
while  yet  some  part  of  Mrs.  Piper's  consciousness  was
conducting  the  writing  in  an  intelligent  manner.  This
would  be  the  kind  of  thing  that  often  happens  in  the  case
of  negative  hallucinations.  A  hypnotised  person  may  have
a  negative  hallucination  imposed  upon  him — a  hallucination
that  some  object  is  invisible  to  him — and,  while  really  believ-
ing that  he  does  not  see  the  object,  may  yet  by  his
behaviour  show  clearly  that  some  part  of  him  does  see  it,
as  otherwise  he  could  not  select  it  for  invisibility.1

It  would  be  very  interesting  to  know  when  and  how  the
idea  that  the  control  was  unaware  of  the  process  of  writing
began,  but  beyond  the  facts  already  given  we  have  no  means
of  tracing  this.  It  is  clear,  I  think,  that  G.  P.  knew  he  was
writing  in  1892  ;  that  he  and  some  other  controls  knew  it
in  1894  ;  but  that  G.  P.  was  not  maintaining  ignorance  of
the  process  for  the  first  time  when  Professor  Newbold
questioned  him  in  June,  1895.  We  know  this  last  because
G.  P.  refers  to  having  been  told  by  Hodgson  that  he  was
writing — a  matter  about  which  his  memory  is  likely  to  have
been  correct.  Such  explanations  by  Hodgson  occur  fre-
quently in  subsequent  unpublished  sittings  (1896  onwards),
and  apparently  have  sometimes  to  be  given  over  and  over
again  at  different  sittings  to  the  same  control.  This  may
have  helped  to  crystallise  the  idea  of  the  supposed  ignorance
in  the  trance  personality's  mind,  and  may  also  have  helped
to  put  the  theory  into  a  shape  acceptable  to  Hodgson,  who
often — in  my  view  too  often — corrects  statements  of  the
control's,  or  gives  them  back  in  words  of  his  own.2  Take

1  For  a  specific  instance  see  Myers's  Human  Personality  and  its  Survival
of  Bodily  Death,  Appendix  to  Chapter  V.,  paragraph  546a  (p.  499).  The
hypnotised  person  in  this  case  is  told  that  cards  with  odd  numbers  on  them
will  be  invisible.  The  result  is  that  he  sees  such  a  card  when  its  blank  side
is  presented  to  him,  but  does  not  see  it  when  the  side  with  the  number
on  it  is  towards  him,  to  his  great  mystification.

2  This  procedure  would,  of  course,  be  legitimate  were  we  certain  that
the  control  knew  what  he  was  talking  about  and  only  suffered  from  a  diffi-
culty in  expressing  it.  In  such  a  case,  help  in  expressing  it  may  shorten
the  investigation  while  doing  no  harm.  But  if  we  have  to  answer  the
question  :  "  Does  the  control  know  what  he  is  talking  about,  or  is  he  merely
trying  to  conceal  fundamental  ignorance  as  well  as  he  can  ?  " — which  auto-


52


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[pabt


an  example  from  the  sitting  of  January  1,  1897  (see  Appendix,
p.  397)  :

Rector  writes —

I  am  inside  of  an  empty  shell  filled  with  spirit
air  *  *  and  whisper  to  or  through  the  holes  in  the
shell,  and  the  air  from  your  world  receives  the
sound  of  my  voice  and  registers  it  for  your  vision.

R.  H. Not  the  air  *  *  the  medium's  arm.

I  think  it  is  probable  that  if  we  had  all  the  records,  we
should  find  the  notion  that  the  control  was  unaware  of  writing
developing  as  a  corollary  to  the  notion  that  the  spirit  in
bodily  form  occupied  the  hand  and  arm,  which  by  June  18,
1895,  was  so  definite  that  G.  P.  explains  that  his  head  is
in  the  hand,  his  feet  at  the  elbow,  and  so  forth  (see  Appendix
367).  The  controls  made  no  suggestion  of  anything  of  this
kind  in  1892-3,  so  far  as  we  can  tell  from  the  stenographic
reports  already  referred  to.  They  do,  however,  say  quite
distinctly  that  the  writing  control  is  not  in  the  head,  though
the  speaking  control  is,  and  they  say  this  in  spite  of  the
statement  that  G.  P.  uses  the  "  brain  through  the  hand "
(see  above,  p.  4G).  One  of  the  clearest  instances  is  in  the
record  of  December  5,  1892,  as  follows  :

{G.  P.  is  writing}
R.  H. I  want  to  ask  you  a  question  George.
G.  P. Go  on  please  R.  H.  You  hear  what  I  say  ?

G.  P. Yes. [R.  H.  speaks  into  the  ear  of  the  medium]
G.  P. All  right,  that  is  the  doctor  in  the  medium's  head  and

not  I. Yes  ask  your

{After a good deal of conversation with G.  P.

(writing)  and  much  shuffling  on  his  part,  and  some

irritation  on  Hodgson's,  Phinuit  intervenes  (see  App.,

p.  357)}

Ph. Why  don't  you  speak  to  him  ?
R.  H Well  where  is  he  ?

matic  personalities  are  known  often  to  do — then  clearly,  in  the  interests
of  truth,  no  assistance  in  concealing  the  ignorance  should  be  given.  If
I  may  say  so,  Professor  Newbold  was  in  this  respect  a  better  examiner
than  Hodgson.


Lxxi.]  Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  53
Ph. Over  there.

jfc  sfc  Jfi  «fc

G.  P.  I  don't  know  what  you  say  *  *

Ph.  You  speak  to  him,  don't  speak  to  me.

R.  H.  Well,  where  can  he  hear  that  ?

Ph.  He  is  over  there  by  you.1

Again,  on  January  24,  1893,  Phinuit  suddenly  interjects  :

Talk  to  him  there  ;  don't  talk  to  me.

And  G.  P.  himself  uses  the  same  expression  {e.g.  on  Decem-
ber 7,  1892,  see  below).

But  on  no  occasion  does  "  there  "  seem  to  mean  in  the
hand  as  it  would  have  done  in  1896.  In  1892  the  hand
is  apparently  conceived  throughout  as  a  hand.  For  instance,
on  December  21 — G.  P.  writing,  Phinuit  intervenes  :

Ph. He  wants  to  know  why  you  don't  hold  that  {the  hand}
for  him  then.

Mrs.  Howard. We  did  but  he  slipped  his  hand  down  so  slowly

{and  later  in  the  sitting}
G.  P. Help  me.  Sitter.  Yes,  how  shall  I  help  you  ?

G.  P. Hold  my  hand.

The  idea  of  divided  control  and  the  speaking  of  G.  P.  as
"  there  "  soon  led,  however,  at  least  in  some  sitters  if  not
in  the  controls,  to  a  sort  of  personification  of  the  hand,  as,
for  instance,  when  on  December  7,  G.  P.  having  written,
"  talk  to  me  there,"  Mrs.  Howard  says,  "  Oh  yes,  the  hand."
The  fact  that  the  hand  not  only  writes  but  gesticulates  in
a  very  expressive  maimer  2  would  further  help  to  concentrate
attention  on  it,  and  one  can  imagine  how  under  questioning
by  sitters  the  theory,  admitted  by  the  controls  themselves
to  be  grotesque,  of  the  hand  and  arm  being  occupied  by
the  spirit  in  the  form  of  a  small  human  body,  might  grow
up.  Other  controls  besides  G.  P.  maintained  it  later,  though
with  some  variations  (see  e.g.  Appendix,  pp.  382,  398,  427),
and  Hodgson  certainly  encouraged  it,  though  probably  not

1  It  may  be  observed  that  both  head  and  hand  hear  the  remarks  made
sometimes — e.g.  May  16,  1892  (see  above,  p.  38).

2  For  description  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  322.


54


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


till  after  it  was  well  established,  by  constantly  explaining
to  new  controls  the  supposed  modus  operandi.

It  does  not  seem  very  consistent  that  the  control  occupy-
ing the  hand  and  arm  with  his  head  in  the  hand,  should  at
the  same  time  be  aware  that  the  hand  plays  the  part  of  a
hand  in  the  ordinary  way  ;  as,  for  instance,  in  handling  a
pencil,  shaking  hands,  or — as  in  the  following  case  on
December  5,  1898 — in  putting  on  a  ring  :

Communicator  (through  Rector  as  amanuensis).  What  have  you
done  with  my  (illegible)  give  me  something,  some-
thing for  James :  my  cap,  my  gloves,  anything.
Yes  give  me  something.

Sitter.  I  have  only  this  ring  which  you  gave  me,  you  re-
member, [taking  the  ring  from  her  finger  she  gives
it  *  *  *  the  right  hand  of  Mrs.  Piper  seizes  it
eagerly  and  puts  it  on  one  of  its  own  fingers.]

Communicator.  Yes  I  do,  I  do  well  and  if  you  could  only
know  how  I  have  changed  since  I  met  you  here
you  would  be  pleased  I  know.

This  difficulty  is,  however,  boldly  faced  on  more  than
one  occasion,  the  control  stating  that  the  communicator
uses  his  (the  control's)  head  to  feel  something,  or  the  com-
municator (as  on  April  8,  1903,  see  Chapter  V.,  p.  191)
indicating  a  spot  by  getting  Rector  to  put  his  head  there.

The  location  of  the  organ  of  hearing  for  writing  controls
in  the  hand  is  part  of  the  theory  of  the  spirit  being  actually
in  the  arm  and  hand.  That  the  ear  was  in  the  hand  was
steadily  maintained  from  1895  onwards  by  different  con-
trols communicating  by  writing  whenever  asked  about  it —
including  the  Hodgson  control  in  Dr.  Stanley  Hall's  sittings
in  1909  (see  Studies  in  Spiritualism,  pp.  229,  243,  251) —
and  in  accordance  with  this  view  they  often  held  up  the
palm  of  the  hand  to  the  mouth  of  the  sitter  in  order,  as
they  say,  to  hear  better.  Whether  the  living  Hodgson
believed  that  the  sense  of  hearing  was  in  the  hand,  I
do  not  know.  He  says  in  his  report  {Proceedings,  Vol.
XIII.,  p.  293)  :

In  all  cases  when  the  "  hand  ' '  is  writing  independently


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  55

of  Phinuit,  the  sense  of  hearing  for  the  "  hand  control "
appears  to  be  in  the  hand,  whereas  Phinuit  apparently
always  hears  through  the  ordinary  channel.  This  apparent
heteraesthesia  will  be  considered  in  Part  II.  of  my  Report.

And  again,  on  p.  398  :

The  sense  of  hearing  for  this  consciousness  appears  to  be
in  the  hand,  and  the  sitter  must  talk  to  the  hand  to  be
understood.

The  italicising  of  "  appears  "  looks  as  if  he  did  not
believe  it.1  And  it  is  of  course  almost  impossible  to
suppose  it  true,  even  if  the  controls  really  believe  it.
It  is  quite  possible  that,  without  conscious  acting,  such  a
belief  might  by  suggestion  produce  a  simulation  of  the
results.  Something  like  crucial  evidence  on  the  subject
might  possibly  be  obtained  by  closing  the  ears  in  such  a
way  as  to  make  hearing  with  them  practically  impossible.
This  is  no  doubt  a  thing  very  difficult  to  do  effectively.2
I  had  hoped  that  Dr.  Stanley  Hall,  with  the  resources  of  a
psychological  laboratory  at  his  disposal,  might  have  accom-
plished it,  but  he  does  not  seem  to  have  succeeded  {Studies
in  Spiritism,  p.  243).

I  have  little  doubt  myself  that  successful  elimination  of
the  ordinary  channels  of  hearing  would  have  stopped  hearing
altogether.  I  have  never  had  any  feeling  at  a  writing
sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  that  the  control  was  hearing  other-
wise than  through  the  ears.  Nor  was  loud  speaking  neces-
sary, as  some  sitters  in  America  seem  to  have  found.  All
that  was  required  was  that  the  sitter,  especially  if  unfamiliar
to  the  controls,  should  speak  distinctly  and  not  too  fast.3
This  was  important,  as  Mrs.  Piper's  position  was  not  favour-
able for  hearing — her  head  being  turned  away  from  the
sitter  and  one  ear  buried  in  pillows.

1  Professor  Newbold,  however,  is  inclined  to  think  he  did  believe  it.

2  See  on  this  subject  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  remarks  in  Proceedings,  Vol.
XXIII.,  p.  244.

3  On  December  17,  1906,  Rector  said  to  Mr.  Piddington,  "  You  may-
speak  softly  but  slowly  if  you  will  for  our  understanding.  J.  6.  P.  I'm
sorry  if  I  have  been  speaking  too  loud  :  I  wanted  to  be  clear.  Rector.
We  do  not  catch  your  words  if  they  are  spoken  too  rapidly  or  loudly."


56  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


It  appears  to  be  sometimes  further  claimed  that  the
fingers  act  as  organs  of  sight,  or  that  they  read  by  sense
of  touch.  One  such  case  occurred  on  January  18,  1899.
Hodgson  was  the  sitter  and  Rector  the  control.

{Hodgson  tried  to  read  aloud  to  the  control  a  prayer
sent  as  a  message  by  a  lady- — a  frequent  sitter — who
was  at  the  time  ill.}

R.  H.  {reading}.  "Please  help  me  oh  ye  powers  of  Love  and"
— can't  read  that  next  word — "  make  me  well  soul
and  body."  [I  spent  a  little  time  trying  to  make  out
the  word  (which  seems  to  me  now  quite  clear),
when  the  hand  passed  over  the  paper  and  lingered
with  tips  of  fingers  close  to  the  word  in  question]

Rector,  {writes}. Mercy  R.  H.  Oh  yes,  Mercy.

Rector. He  says  it.

This  cannot,  of  course,  be  taken  as  evidence  of  the  exist-
ence of  the  supernormal  form  of  perception  apparently
claimed,  because  it  is  quite  likely  that  the  words  of  the
prayer  had  been  given  either  by  the  invalid  lady,  or  by  the
controls  at  a  previous  sitting,  and  that  consequently  the
word  Hodgson  failed  to  read  was  known  to  Rector.  A
somewhat  similar  claim  seems  to  be  made  by  another  con-
trol, K.  F.,  on  June  22,  1899.  The  sitter  had  taken  with
her  a  book  of  her  own  poems,  and  describes  how  the  hand
turned  "  over  the  leaves- — would  go  on  and  then  backwards
looking  for  something  ;  finally  rested  on  p.  102,"  which  had
a  special  appropriateness.

A  claim  to  see  with  the  hand  is  implied  again  in  sucb
an  incident  as  the  following  on  March  25,  1903.  The  sitter
was  Miss  Bancroft,  and  Hodgson  was  also  present  to  assist
and  record.

G.  P.  enters  apparently  controlling  and  is  introduced
to  Miss  Bancroft.

*  *  *  *

G.  P.  (writing).  Gracie.

Miss  B.  Is  that  the  last  name  ?  {i.e.  the  name  the  previous
communicator  had  been  trying  to  give  through
Rector}  [assent] Yes,  I  remember.

G.  P. She  told  it  to  me  just  as  I  came  in.


Lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper*s  Trance  Phenomena.  57

[Hand  moves  about  in  front  of  Sitter's  face  and  chest.
I  did  not  see  this  clearly  as  my  eyes  were  on  my
writing. R.  H.]
Miss  B. What  is  it  ? Something  you  want  now  ?

G.  P. No  I  am  only  looking  at  you  just  to  get  acquainted

that  is  all. don't  mind  me.

Notwithstanding  the  elaboration  of  the  theory  it  must
not  be  assumed  that  writing  controls  are  always  supposed
to  occupy  the  hand  and  arm  when  they  write.  The  con-
trary seems  to  be  implied,  for  instance,  in  the  following
conversation  on  April  26,  1897,  between  Hodgson  and  a
communicator  whom  he  calls  H.  C,  apparently  communi-
cating through  Rector.  H.  C.  is  taking  part  in  certain
cross-correspondence  experiments  about  which  more  will  be
said  in  the  next  chapter  (see  pp.  115-118  and  Appendix,
pp.  505-513),  between  Mrs.  Piper  and  a  medium  Myers  was
sitting  with  in  England,  and  has  just  described  what  she
affirms  she  has  written  through  the  English  medium.

H.  C. {through  Rector}. I  wrote  distinctly  this.
R.  H.  You  wrote  it  yourself  ?

H.  C. Yes,  I  used  the  light

R.  H. Did  you  use  her  hand  to  write  ?

H.  C. Yes,  I  placed  my  own  hand  upon  hers.

R.  H.  Were  you  conscious  of  writing  %

H.  C. No,  but  I  expressed  the  thought  clearly,  and  the  hand

received  it.
R.  H. Just  as  Rector  is  doing  now  ?

H.  C  Yes,  only  his  head  is  bowed  down  upon  his  hand  and
his  hand  seized  or  seizes  the  hand  of  the  earthly
body. This  is  as  it  appears  to  me.

R.  H.  Thank  you  very  much.  When  you  thus  write  through
the  other  light,  you  do  so  I  suppose  unaided,  1
mean  unaided  by  any  other  spirit  directly.

H.  C.  Yes,  if  I  understand  you  correctly.  I  did  not  deliver
my  sentences  to  any  other  spirit.  .  .  .  no.

Compare  with  this  a  description  by  Mrs.  Piper  in  the
waking-stage  of  May  5,  1903,  recorded  by  Mr.  Dorr  :

Rector's  there  ! Take  him  quickly ! He  will  let  me  in


58


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


when  he  goes  out. I  can  see  my  arm  all  numb  ! I  can
see  his  head  on  my  hand. He  has  his  head  on  my  hand
now. He  takes  the  ether  out  of  it. I  can  see  him  go
into  the  air. I  can  see  the  cord  on  which  I  came  in.
He  looks  like  a  priest !

Further,  it  would  appear  from  the  description  given  by
Mrs.  H.  as  communicator  on  December  14,  1904  (see
Appendix,  pp.  431,  432),  that  Rector,  while  acting  as
amanuensis,  occupies  the  whole  organism  of  the  medium,
taking  the  place  of  her  absent  spirit.  And  one  would  have
naturally  supposed  that  the  same  idea  is  intended  to  be
expressed  by  Rector  himself  when  he  writes  of  being  in  an
empty  shell  and  speaking  through  the  holes  (e.g.  see  above,
p.  52,  and  Appendix,  p.  397,  January  1,  1897),  though
Hodgson  interprets  it  differently.

Before  leaving  the  subject  of  the  supposed  relation  of
the  control  to  the  medium's  body,  it  should  be  noticed  that
the  brain  is  not  ignored  altogether,  though  it  would  be
difficult  to  say  how  its  function  in  the  matter  is  combined
with  the  occupation  of  the  arm  as  such  by  the  control.  In
1888  Phinuit  spoke — rather  oddly  it  must  be  admitted —
of  the  part  played  by  the  brain.  It  was  on  June  2  (see
Appendix,  p.  337)  :

R.  H.  You  see  the  difference  of  mediumistic  power  as  a  differ-
ence in  luminosity  *  *  Can't  you  explain  how  it
would  appear  to  me,  supposing  I  investigated  a
medium's  body  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the
difference  in  structure  ?

Ph.  You  would  see  a  very  sensitive  organism,  you  would
see  a  very  large,  peculiar,  undeveloped  brain  ;  what  I
mean  to  say,  the  brain  is  too  large  to  be  used  by
the  natural  mortal  mind  of  the  medium.

R.  H.  Do  you  mean  there  is  a  certain  part  of  the  brain  which
is  used  by  the  etherial  organism  and  can  be  filled
by  the  etherial  organism  of  the  spirit  ?

Ph.  Certainly.

I  have  already  quoted  a  remark  by  Phinuit  on  Decem-
ber 22,  1892,  about  G.  P.  using  the  "  brain  through  the  hand  "
(see  above,  p.  46) On  November  30,  1892,  G.  P.  himself


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  59

talks  of  the  difficulty  of  expressing  "  the  thought  through
the  medium,  through  the  brain  of  the  medium,  because  it
is  so  very  material  "  (see  below,  p.  69).  Again,  on
December  19,  1892,  G.  P.  writing,  points  out  that  there
must  "  be  more  or  less  confliction  between  one's  spiritual
Ego  or  mind,  and  the  material  mind  or  Ego  of  the  one
you  are  obliged  to  use "  {i.e.  the  medium},  and  Hodgson
presently  asks  :

R.  H.  What  becomes  of  the  medium  during  trance  ?
G.  P. She  passes out  as  your  etherial goes  out when  you
sleep.

R,  H.  Well,  do  you  see  that  there  is  a  conflict,  because  the
brain  substance  is,  so  to  speak,  saturated  with  her
tendencies  of  thought  ?

G.  P.  No,  not  that,  but  the  solid  substance  called  brain,  it  is
difficult  to  control  it,  simply  because  it  is  material
.  .  .  her  mind  leaves  the  brain  empty,  as  it  were,  and
I  myself  or  other  spiritual  mind  or  thought  takes  the
empty  brain,  and  there  is  where  and  when  the  con-
flict arises.1 (See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  434.)

These  statements  were  made  before  the  theory  of  occupa-
tion of  hand  and  arm  by  the  control  was  formulated,  but  the
brain  is  also  referred  to  later.  Thus  on  December  11,  1896
(see  Appendix,  p.  391),  Doctor  writes  :

[Drawing  of  circle.]  See  that,  that  is  an  empty  brain.
I  will  fill  it  with  light.  I  have  done  so.  I  wish  to  use  it.
Others  wish  to  use  it.  We  divide  it.  I  use  one  part  or
one  side.  Doctor  somebody  uses  another.  George  somebody
uses  another. There  are  four  sides  to  an  ordinary  light.

From  the  supposed  relation  of  the  controls  to  Mrs.  Piper's
organism  we  may  proceed  to  the  theory  of  their  relation
to  her  spirit  and  with  this  to  the  theory  of  mediumship
generally.  In  this  connexion  the  word  "  light  "  is  in  con-
stant use  and,  as  in  the  passage  just  quoted,  is  used  in  more
than  one  sense.  It  denotes  the  medium  ;  and  it  denotes
what  Hodgson  calls  the  "  peculiar  energy  "  through  which
the  spirits  act  on  the  material  plane  ; it denotes  some-

1  Compare  with  this  statement  one  on  June  18,  1895,  Appendix,  p  367.


60


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


thing  which  the  spirits  provide  from  their  world  to  make
communication  possible  ;  and^it  also  denotes  some  quality
inherent  in  all  persons  or  objects  which  enables  the  spirits
to  discern  the  past  history  of  objects.  The  use  of  the  word
to  denote  the  medium  perhaps  originated  in  a  metaphor
introduced  to  explain  how  the  spirits  distinguish  mediums
from  other  men.  Thus  at  a  sitting  on  December  25,  1889,
recorded  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  the  Gurney  control  says  :

One  can  tell  a  medium.  She's  like  a  ball  of  light.  You
look  as  dark  and  material  as  possible,  but  we  find  two  or
three  lights  shining.  It's  like  a  series  of  rooms  with
candles  at  one  end.  Must  use  analogy  to  express  it.
When  you  need  a  light  you  use  it,  when  you  have  finished
you  put  it  out.  They  are  like  transparent  windows  to  see
through.  Lodge  it's  a  puzzle.  It's  a  puzzle  to  us  here  in
a  way  though  we  understand  it  better  than  you.  I  work
at  it  hard.  I  do.  I'd  give  anything  I  possess  to  find  out.
I  don't  care  for  material  things  now,  our  interest  is  much
greater.  I  am  studying  hard  how  to  communicate ;  it's
not  easy.  But  it's  only  a  matter  of  a  short  time  before  I
shall  be  able  to  tell  the  world  all  sorts  of  things  through
one  medium  or  another.  (See  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  516,
and  Vol.  XXIII.,  p.  151.)1

The  expression  was  in  use  before  1889  and  very  likely
from  the  beginning  of  Mrs.  Piper's  mediumship,  though  we
have  no  record  of  it.  When  Hodgson  was  questioning
Phinuit  about  theory  in  1888  a  good  deal  was  said  about
light, Thus  on  May  26,  1888,  Phinuit  said  :

There  are  spirits  wandering  round  here  trying  to  find
their  friends  and  the  medium  is  given  them  for  light.
They  see  this  fight  as  I  see  the  light  of  the  medium.

And  on  June  2,  1888  :

Ph. They  {bad  spirits}  are  attracted  by  certain  lights,  can

see  dim  lights  in  the  body  just  as  I  can.

*  *  *  *

1  I  have  quoted  more  of  this  passage  than  is  required  for  my  present
purpose,  because  it  is  interesting  as  coming  from  the  Gurney  control,  of  whose
history  I  shall  have  something  to  say  later  (see  Chapter  VIII.,  pp.  301-305).


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  61

R.  H.  What  is  the  explanation  of  mediumistic  power  ?
Ph. Effervescing  light.

Compare  also  Appendix,  pp.  341,  347,  348,  for  instances
of  the  use  of  the  word  in  1888.

In  1892  we  find  G.  P.  talking  of  light.  Thus,  when  asked
on  November  30  (see  Appendix)  how  he  found  the  medium
out,  he  says  :

G.  P. It was by  light, light alone  ; to me  her  body  was
light.1

On  December  5  G.  P.  proposes  to  answer  questions  on
another  occasion  "  before  Old  Phinuit  uses  up  all  the  light."
On  December  9  Phinuit  complains  that  "  the  light  "  was
"  not  so  good  as  it  is  sometimes,"  and  G.  P.  also  says
"  this  light  is  weak  "  ;  the  difficulty  on  this  occasion
being  apparently  due  to  Mrs.  Piper's  ill  health  (Proceedings,
Vol.  XIII.,  p.  428).

It  is  in  a  somewhat  different  way  that  Phinuit  speaks  of
light  on  January  24,  1893,  when  he  says  :

After  leaving  the  material  body  the  body  is  like  vapor,
as  it  were,  and  then  it  is  like  light,  composed  of  etherial
substances,  just  as  light  (heat)  inhabits  your  body  now,
or  your  body  inhabits  {interruption  here}

In  this  passage  it  seems  to  be  not  mediumistic  "  light  "  that
Phinuit  alludes  to,  but  the  "etherial  body"  which  spirits
are  supposed  to  have,  and  which  is  regarded  as  like  light
through  a  confusion  between  light  and  luminiferous  ether.

There  are  in  the  records  of  sittings  published  by  Hodgson
one  or  two  scattered  references  to  '"light,"  and  the  diffi-
culty of  going  into  trance  or  giving  a  proper  sitting  because
there  is  "  no  light,"  but  it  was  on  the  unpublished  records,
especially  doubtless  those  of  Professor  Newbold's  sittings
in  1895  and  of  his  own  with  the  Imperator  Band  in  1896-7,
that  Hodgson  relied  when  he  wrote  the  following  precis
of  the  theories  of  the  trance  personalities  (Proceedings,
Vol.  XIII.,  p.  400)  :

The  statements  of  the  "communicators"  {i.e.  controls}  as
to  what  occurs  on  the  physical  side  may  be  put  in  brief

1  But  compare  context,  Appendix,  p.  355.


62


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


general  terms  as  follows.  We  all  have  bodies  composed  of
"  luminiferous  ether  "  enclosed  in  our  flesh  and  blood
bodies.  The  relation  of  Mrs.  Piper's  etherial  body  to  the
etherial  world,  in  which  the  "  communicators "  claim  to
dwell,  is  such  that  a  special  store  of  peculiar  energy  is
accumulated  in  connection  with  her  organism,  and  this
appears  to  them  as  "a  light."  Mrs.  Piper's  etherial  body
is  removed  by  them,  and  her  ordinary  body  appears  as  a
shell  filled  with  this  "  light."  Several  "communicators  "
may  be  in  contact  with  this  light  at  the  same  time.  *  *  *
If  the  "  communicator "  gets  into  contact  with  the
"  light  "  and  thinks  his  thoughts,  they  tend  to  be  repro-
duced by  movements  in  Mrs.  Piper's  organism.  *  *  *  Upon
the  amount  and  brightness  of  this  "light,"  cceteris  paribus,
the  communications  depend.  When  Mrs.  Piper  is  in  ill
health  this  "light"  is  feebler,  and  the  communications  tend
to  be  less  coherent.  It  also  gets  used  up  during  a  sitting,
and  when  it  gets  dim  there  is  a  tendency  to  incoherence
even  in  otherwise  clear  communicators.  In  all  cases,  com-
ing in  contact  with  this  "  light  "  tends  to  produce  be-
wilderment, and  if  the  contact  is  continued  too  long,  or
the  "light"  becomes  very  dim,  the  consciousness  of  the
communicator  tends  to  lapse  completely.

This  precis  as  far  as  it  goes  corresponds  I  think  broadly
with  the  statements  most  frequently  made  by  the  controls.
But  it  is  a  simplification,  and  in  simplifying  contradic-
tions, incoherences,  and  impossible  pseudo-scientific  state-
ments are  omitted,  which  when  taken  together  seem  to  me
to  show  that  no  authority  whatever  can  be  attached  to
the  theories  put  forward.  I  think  that  most  people  will
agree  with  this  view,  if  they  will  take  the  trouble  to  read
the  copious  extracts  given  hi  the  Appendix  to  this  chapter
from  the  records  of  Professor  Newbold's  sittings  in  1895,
and  from  those  held  for  the  purpose  of  questioning  the  Im-
perator  band  in  1896-7,  as  well  as  sundry  remarks  extracted
from  later  sittings.  It  is  not  worth  while  attempting  any
full  analysis  of  the  various  statements  made,  but  some  of
them  may  be  mentioned.

We  are  told  that  the  etherial  body  is  "  light,  luminiferous


lxxi.] Psychologij  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  63

ether "  (Appendix,  p.  366)  ;  that  light  consists  of  etherial
and  spiritual  substance  (p.  388)  ;  that  it  is  spirit  force  drawn
up  by  the  spirit  of  the  medium  from  the  spirit  world  where
the  whole  atmosphere  is  light  or  spirit  (p.  394).  We  are
told  that  the  medium's  body  is  like  a  fountain  or  large  reser-
voir which  becomes  filled  with  light,  i.e.  the  etherial  atmos-
phere of  the  spirit  world  (pp.  398,  417,  418,  422)  ;  that  when
the  control  first  enters  the  medium  the  light  burns  brightly,
but  after  a  short  time  begins  to  expire  (p.  413)  ;  fresh
currents  may,  however,  apparently  be  received  during  a  sitting
(p.  403,  428)  ;  and  controls  draw  constantly  the  etherial
strength  from  the  spirit-world  while  "  in  the  light  "  (p.  422)  ;
experienced  controls  may  advantageously  intervene  "  to  give
a  clear  light  "  (p.  383).  There  may  at  some  moments  be  too
much  light  (p.  411)  ;  and  an  unduly  short  sitting  may  have
drawbacks  because  of  the  difficulty  of  removing  from  the
body  of  the  medium  etherial  light  which  had  not  been  used
up  (p.  436) 1 ;  the  light  used  up  at  sittings  is,  however,
replenished  by  the  medium  drawing  fresh  supplies  from  the
spirit  world  in  the  intervals  between  the  sittings  (pp.  392,
394,  395).  Mrs.  Piper's  mediumship  is  due,  we  are  told
in  1896,  to  her  body  being  inhabited  by  two  distinct  lights
— her  normal  spirit  and  the  light  of  Phinuit — the  result  being
a  kind  of  storage  battery  (p.  389).  The  light  within  the
control  uses  the  light  within  the  hand  as  a  telephone  (p.  370).
The  control  follows  the  light  and  uses  it  as  one  would  a  type-
writer, only  thoughts  act  instead  of  fingers  (p.  367).  A
control  loses  its  grasp  of  the  light  as  the  sitting  comes
to  an  end  (Appendix  to  Chapter  III.,  p.  443).  The
light  is  improved  by  keeping  away  all  evil  or  outside
influences  (Appendix,  p.  400),  and  "  the  moie  disturbing
elements  "  {in  the  form  of  unfamiliar  sitters},  "  the  lower
burns  the  light "  so  Imperator  tells  us  on  January  25,
1897.

Perhaps  some  readers  will  be  inclined  to  say  here  that,  as
the  processes  which  it  is  attempted  to  describe  do  not  belong
to  the  physical  world,  the  description  of  what  occurs  is  neces-

1  With  adequate  warning,  however,  this  difficulty  can  be  avoided  appa-
rently. "  Give  us  a  few  moments  warning  {before  stopping}  so  that  we
may  change  the  light  so  as  to  do  no  harm  as  we  remove  it." Feb.  25,  1907


64  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


sarily  metaphorical,  and  that  we  cannot  expect  complete
coherence  and  consistency  in  metaphor.  I  think  it  is  true
that  the  idea  of  light  was  at  first  used  metaphorically,  but
as  it  was  elaborated  under  questioning  the  metaphorical
character  soon  disappeared,  and  the  warmest  defenders  of
the  Imperator  Band  will  hardly  maintain  that  they  intend
to  speak  metaphorically  when  they  commit  themselves  to
statements  about  the  chemical  composition  of  the  etherial 1
or  spiritual  body.  It  is  composed,  says  Imperator,  on
February  5,  1897  (see  Appendix,  p.  406),  of  air,  light,  and
a  large  amount  of  hydrogen,  which  is  the  lightest  of  any-
thing known  to  them.  When  Hodgson  demurs  to  lumini-
ferous  ether  consisting  of  air  or  hydrogen,  Imperator  says
it  is  not  the  air  or  hydrogen  of  our  planet  and  of  our  crude
sciences,  but  their  air  and  hydrogen,  and  he  ultimately
substitutes  vacium — one  feels  inclined  to  ask  if  there  is  any
connexion  between  vacium  and  vacuum — for  hydrogen.
Vacium  is  a  body  thoroughly  spiritualised  and  pure,  a  part
of  God.  It  is  still  more  surprising  to  learn  on  February  6,
1897  (p.  408),  that  the  spiritual  body  is  composed  of  love  and
wisdom  ;  that  love  is  a  substance  purer,  lighter,  higher  and
more  real  and  exquisite  than  anything  else  known  to  mortal
man  ;  that  it  is  truth,  purity  and  sincerity — and  that  the
chief  substance  is  vacium,  known  as  love.  The  spirit  of
love  is  real  spiritual  ether.  Hodgson  at  this  point  sees  a
way  out  of  the  maze,  and  suggests  to  Imperator  that  what
he  means  is  that  from  the  idealistic  point  of  view  "  ether
is  the  shadow,  the  representation  on  the  material  plain,  the
physical  analogue,  of  love, — which  is  the  real  thing."  But
I  do  not  think  that  most  people  reading  the  record  will  believe
that  Imperator  meant  anything  of  the  kind.  To  me  it
seems  obvious  that  he  was  talking  nonsense  about  what  he
did  not  understand,  exhibiting  crass  ignorance  of  elementary
facts  of  chemistry  and  physics,  and  a  complete  absence  of
grasp  of  any  distinction  between  qualities  of  mind  and
matter  (see  Appendix,  February  1,  February  5,  February  6,
1897).2

1  Hodgson  tells  us  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  56)  that  it  was  from  him
that  the^controls^first  acquired  the  terms  etherial  and  etherial  body.

2  Hodgson,  of  course,  saw  the  absurdity  of  much  that  is  said  by  the  various


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  65

In  connexion  with  the  various  descriptions  of  the  con-
trol actually  occupying  the  medium's  body,  or  grasping  the
"  light,"  must  be  considered  statements  of  a  somewhat
bewildering  kind  which  occur  from  time  to  time  relating  to
its  varying  distance  while  controlling.  I  do  not  refer  to
such  statements  as  that  attributed  to  G.  P.  by  Hodgson
at  the  end  of  1893  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  323),  "  that
he  was  going  '  farther  away  '  and  would  not  be  so  available
for  tests,  but  that  he  would  continue  to  assist  as  far  as  pos-
sible, and  help  any  '  stragglers '  to  communicate "  ;  for
this  might  only  mean  that  he  was  less  in  touch  with  this
world  than  he  had  been  1  and  that  his  memories  were  less
vivid.  But  it  does  not  seem  possible  thus  to  interpret  the
following  assertion  of  increasing  distance  on  January  16,
1897.  Hodgson  had  proposed  to  G.  P.  that  he  should  at
once  communicate  through  a  medium  Myers  was  sitting  with
in  England,  through  whom  George  Eliot  purported  to  com-
municate,2 and  that  he  should  enquire  of  George  Eliot  about
the  matter. Accordingly  he  proposes  to  depart  :

G.  P. Do  you  not  see  that  I  am  getting  farther  and  farther
away [the writing has been fainter and  more
automatic  3  during  the  last  few  sentences]  and  I  will
do  this  errand  for  you  at  once.
R.  H. Is  the  light  burning  low  ? [Hand  speiring.]
G.  P. Pardon.  R.  H. Is  the  light  burning  low  just  now  ?

controls  as  well  as  we  do,  but  he  explained  it  to  his  own  satisfaction  by
attributing  it  to  defects  in  Mrs.  Piper  as  the  machine  they  have  to  use  in
communicating  by  voice  or  writing.  If,  however,  the  machine  introduces
such  hopeless  confusion  into  what  they  say,  their  communications  seem
to  lose  all  value.

1  Compare  Chapter  III.,  p.  81,  for  a  statement  by  Rector  on  April  23,
1897,  about  G.  P.  having  gone  further  from  earth  and  being  therefore  less
reliable  for  tests.

2  See  Chapter  III.  below,  p.  115.

3  By  "  automatic  "  in  this  connexion  Hodgson  means,  I  think,  less
energetically  controlled.  When  a  sitting  was  drawing  to  a  close  the  writing
frequently  became  very  feeble  and  straggly  during  the  last  sentences,  owing,
as  was  explained,  to  the  weakness  of  the  control  or  the  failure  of  the  supply
of  light,  and  Hodgson  describes  this  as  becoming  dreamy  and  automatic.
He  also  uses  this  expression  about  a  feeble  voice  in  speaking  (see  below,
Chapter  VI.,  p.  213).

E


66


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


G.  P. ...  low. Eliot  R.  H. George  Eliot  ?

G.  P. there  H.  [Hand  points]  taking  my  light.
R.  H. Has  she  a  message  for  me  ?

{George  Eliot  gives  a  message,  apparently  through  G.  P.}

Again,  with  good  will  we  can  interpret  metaphorically
— as  not  really  referring  to  space — Rector's  statement  on
March  3,  1897,  that

We  are  very  much  nearer  now  than  you  think,  yet  we
will  always  be  some  distance  from  you.

Or,  on  March  11,  1897,  that

We  are  not  near  to  your  planet.

And

I  have  one  {i.e.  Imperator}  who  will  stand  by  me  and
render  me  assistance  when  necessary.  I  know  of  no  one
more  competent  to  do  so  than  he.  Yet  when  he  actually
returns  here  he  is  not  so  near  as  I.

But  actual  space  must  surely  be  referred  to  in  the  follow-
ing dialogue  on  December  12.  1896  :

R.  H.  {speaking  to  Imperator}. Are  you  present,  close,  or  far
off,  guiding  ?

Imperator  (writing). I  am  present  in  space  near  thee.

R.  H. Like  George  or  Moses  when  they  are  here  talking  to  me  ?

Imperator. Yes,  yet  not  quite  so  near.

And  again,  Imperator's  explanation  on  February  5,  1897,
(see  Appendix,  p.  407),  of  why  his  writing  is  always  very
faint — "  It  cannot  be  otherwise.  I  am  not  so  near
your  planet  as  are  some  others  " — can  hardly  be  intended
metaphorically  ;  unless  indeed  the  faintness  of  the  writing
is  itself  a  mere  symbol — a  very  inconvenient  symbol  for
the  sitter.

In  the  following  case  actual  space,  namely  the  distance
between  Boston  and  Mexico,  seems  to  be  taken  account  of
by  Phinuit.  On  November  24,  1896,  he  was  by  way  of
having  started  for  Mexico  when  Hodgson  called  him  back.
He  calls  him  "  several  times  before  he  answers. He  says


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  67

he  was  nearly  there,  i.e.  Mexico."  1  And  presumably  it  is
also  actual  distance  in  space  that  he  refers  to  on  December
5,  1896,  when  he  explains  unusual  delay  in  answering  to
Hodgson's  call  at  the  beginning  of  a  sitting  by  saying,  "  When
you  first  speak  to  me  I'm  very  far  away.  Your  voice
seems  a  very  long  way  off."

We  shall  have  to  consider  the  question  of  the  supposed
position  of  communicating  spirits  in  space  again  in  con-
nexion with  communicators  in  Chapter  V.  (pp.  168-172)  ;
I  will  therefore  only  add  here  that  sometimes  a  subjective
view  of  distance — differing  for  spirits  and  for  mortals — is
suggested.  Thus  Phinuit  on  June  22,  1895,  says  of  the  place
where  he  found  Stainton  Moses,  "  It  would  be  a  long  way
to  you  Billie,  but  not  so  far  to  me "  (Proceedings,  Vol.
XD7.,  p.  37),  and  again,  Imperator,  when  speaking  of  the
canopy  of  heaven,  the  etherial  veil  or  canopy  which
separates  the  spirit  world  from  ours,  says  on  February  11,
1897,  in  reply  to  Hodgson,  that  it  would  seem  to  us
millions  of  miles  away  from  the  earth,  but  to  spirits
it  seems  near  (see  Appendix,  p.  411).  On  the  other
hand,  Doctor  affirms  on  February  2,  1897,  that  the  spirit
body  is  of  the  same  size  and  shape  as  the  mortal  body
(see  Appendix,  pp.  403-5),  though,  in  maintaining  this  he
has,  in  answer  to  Hodgson's  questioning,  to  modify  the  theory
about  the  writing  control  occupying  the  arm  as  described
by  G.  P.  (see  Appendix,  p.  371).

So  far  we  have  been  considering  the  alleged  processes  of
controlling  as  they  affect  the  controls.  They  have  also
to  be  considered  in  relation  to  the  spirit  of  the  medium*
All  controls  agree  that  she  goes  out  of  the  body  and  they
come  in,  but  beyond  this  there  are  considerable  variations
of  statement  at  different  times.  The  earliest  account  we
have,  I  think,  is  in  Hodgson's  stenographically  reported
examination  of  Phinuit  on  June  2,  1888  (see  Appendix,
p.  337)  :

1  At  this  time  Phinuit,  G.  P.,  W.  Stainton  Moses,  the  Imperator  Band,
Julius  Csesar,  and  others  are  engaged  in  trying  to  find  a  young  man  lost
in  Mexico  (see  below,  p.  112).  There  were  many  affirmations  of  seeing  him,
but  no  ultimate  success.


68


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


Phintjit  says  : —

When  I  come  here,  the  medium  passes  into  the  spirit
as  it  were.  The  medium's  etherial  organism  goes
through  the  spirit  world;  or  various  parts  of  the
spirit  world  ;  she  wanders  about  like  a  spirit  *  *  *
She  takes  my  place  as  it  were  in  the  spirit  world.

When  I  begin  to  leave  the  medium  *  *  *  she  begins  to
return  and  she  gets  nearer  to  me. I  can  actually
sometimes,  when  I  am  here,  see  the  medium.  *  *  *
Sitter. How  does  she  know  {you  are  leaving  the  organism  ? }
Phinuit.  Because  she  lingers  in  a  certain  sense  near  me.

Phinuit's  perception  of  the  medium's  spirit  at  what  was
probably  an  earlier  sitting  than  the  above  is  incidentally
mentioned  in  Hodgson's  first  report.  He  was  experimenting
on  Phinuit's  success  in  describing  the  writers  of  letters  placed
in  his  hand,  and  says  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  24,  footnote)  :

I  asked  Phinuit  whether  the  writer  of  this  second  letter
{viz.  Mrs.  Piper  herself  whom  Phinuit  had  given  a  fair
description  of,  but  not  named}  was  "in  the  body"  or
"  in  spirit."  He  replied  at  once,  "  In  the  body "  but
added  :  "  Why  no  ;  that's  curious.  There  she  is  in  the
spirit,  talking  to  an  old  lady."  This  appeared  to  bewilder
Phinuit,  who,  after  some  soliloquising  and  mumbling,  went
on  to  another  subject.  Several  times  at  the  close  of  later
sittings  he  referred  to  the  "  medium  "  as  "  coming  back,"
"  laughing,"  "  asking  questions,"  "  trying  to  touch  the
sitter,"  etc.

A  similar  incidental  reference  occurs  in  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's
report  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  516).  At  the  beginning
of  a  sitting  on  Christmas  day,  1889,  Phinuit  said  :

Captain {his  nickname  for  Sir  Oliver  Lodge}  do  you
know  that  as  I  came  I  met  the  medium  going  out,
and  she's  crying. Why  is  that  ?
O.  J.  L. Well  the  fact  is  she's  separated  from  her  children  for
a  few  days,  and  she  is  feeling  rather  low  about  it.

In  1892  very  similar  statements  were  made.  Thus  on
November  30  :


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance  Phenomena.  69


R.  H.  Do  you  get  right  into  the  body  of  the  medium  George  ?
G.  P.  (speaking). The  medium's  spirit,  her  etherial,  leaves  the

body  with  the  exception  of  a  thread,  and  I  take

the  body  as  she  leaves  it.
R.  H.  Your  etherial  goes  in  ?

G.  P.  Just  the  same.  Now  I  cannot  talk  to  you,  I  could  not
talk  to  you  independent  of  a  medium  as  I  talk  to
you  now,  but  it  is  very  trying,  it  is  wearying  to  me
and  it  is  most  difficult  to  express  the  thought
through  the  medium,  through  the  brain  of  the
medium  because  it  is  so  very  material.

On  December  16,  1892,  Hodgson  says  to  Phinuit  :

R.  H.  Don't  tire  the  medium  out.  You  must  not  stay  too
long.

Ph. I  am  going  out  when  I  get  ready.
R.  H.  The  medium  don't  like  to  be  too  long  in  trance.
Ph. I  don't  care. Well,  let  her  show  up  if  she  wants  to
come  out.

{Presently,  after  saying  au  revoir,  Phinuit  exclaims  : }
Ph. Oh,  that  is  the  medium. {Trance  ends.}

On  December  19,  1892,  at  the  end  of  the  sitting,  Phinuit
said  :

Ph.  Here  comes  the  medium.  She  has  got  an  ugly  scowl  on
her.

R.  H. What  for  ? Because  you  kept  her  body  too  long  ?
[Medium  comes  out  of  trance.]

On  January  24,  1893,  there  is  a  still  more  dramatic  account
of  the  return  of  the  medium  :

Ph. Who  is  that  lady  there  ? Oh,  here  comes  the  medium.

That  is  the  medium.
Mes.  Howard. Are  you  and  the  medium  good  friends,  or  do

you  quarrel  ?

Ph. To  tell  you  the  truth,  I  don't  care  much  about  her.

{at  this  point  the  hand  makes  characters  of  the  deaf
and  dumb  alphabet 1  which  no  one  is  able  to  read —

1  "  Laura  Bridgman  "  rather  often  intervened  at  this  period  and  attempted
communication  in  what  seemed  to  resemble  the  deaf  and  dumb  alphabet.
For  further  particulars,  see  p.  113.


70


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


then  tries  to  write,  spelling  words  backwards,  after

which  Mrs.  Howard  asks}
Mrs.  Howard. Doctor,  are  you  trying  to  get  your  hand  back  ?
Ph. I  am  going  out  ; give  it  here. Look  at  the  medium,

been  sitting  there  waiting  for  me  half  an  hour.

In  all  these  cases,  notwithstanding  the  thread  mentioned
above  (p.  69),  the  medium's  spirit  seems  to  be  conceived
as  moving  about  freely  among  other  spirits,  approaching
the  control  when  she  wished  to,  as  other  spirits  did,  and
then  visible  to  him  ;  also  as  exercising  more  or  less  free
will  about  leaving  and  returning  to  the  body.  Later,  more
compulsion  is  suggested.  For  instance,  on  June  15,  1895,
Professor  Newbold  reports  Phinuit  as  saying  that  when  he
turns  the  medium  out  he  goes  into  her  body  on  a  string.
Or,  again,  on  December  8,  1896,  Doctor  talks  of  controls
seizing  the  spirit  of  the  medium  and  pulling  her  out  of  the
body,  and  then  walking  in  (see  Appendix,  p.  388),  and  on
December  11,  of  her  spirit  "being  removed"  (see  Appendix,
p.  392,  and  compare  also  Appendix,  p.  410,  February
6,  1897).  Persuasion  rather  than  compulsion,  however,  is
spoken  of  on  March  31,  1897  (see  Appendix,  p.  414),  and
probably  it  is  intended  to  represent  this  as  what  normally
occurs.  The  free  wandering  while  away  from  her  body
spoken  of  above  seems  to  be  denied  in  later  accounts.  It  is
difficult,  e.g.  to  reconcile  it  with  MyersP's  account  on  March
20,  1901,  of  the  medium's  spirit  blocking  up  the  doorway
because  it  cannot  be  removed  beyond  it  without  breaking
the  cord  (see  Appendix,  p.  419),  or  with  the  clergymen
of  Mrs.  H.'s  account  on  June  3,  1903  (see  Appendix,
p.  427),  who  hold  the  medium's  spirit  in  one  place  all  the
time  that  communications  are  going  on.  Notwithstanding
this,  however,  the  old  freedom  seems  to  be  indicated  by
many  of  Mrs.  Piper's  waking-stage  remarks,  as  we  shall
see  in  Chapter  VI.  For  instance,  on  December  24,  1906,
she  said  in  the  waking  stage  :

I  met  Dr.  Hodgson  walking  in  the  garden  and  I  was
taking  a  message  for  him  ;  and  then  Myers  came  and
interrupted  him  ;  and  then  I  came  down  and  down  on  a
cord,  and  then  I  felt  a  pain  here  (rubbing  solar  plexus).


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  71

The  cord  or  string  mentioned  several  times  above  is  an
important  element  in  the  descriptions  of  the  process  of  con-
trolling, performing  apparently  three  functions.  It  main-
tains the  connexion  between  the  wandering  spirit  of  the
medium  and  her  body  ;  it  serves  as  a  sort  of  Jacob's  ladder
up  and  down  which  spirits  pass  between  earth  and  heaven  ;
and  it  serves  as  a  kind  of  telephone  wire  by  means  of  which
communicators  convey  what  they  have  to  say  to  the  con-
trol. The  first  function  is  the  one  we  hear  of  earliest.  I
do  not  know  when  the  idea  first  emerged,  but  I  think  the
earliest  mention  of  which  we  have  any  record  was  on  June
9,  1888  (see  Appendix,  pp.  342-6),  when  Hodgson  and  Phinuit
were  discussing  the  possibility  of  another  spirit  taking  pos-
session of  the  medium's  body  while  she  is  asleep  and  her
own  spirit  wandering.  Phinuit  talks  of  the  latter  "  holding
on  to  the  brain,"  "  clinging  to  the  brain,"  and  Hodgson
interprets  this  as  done  through  a  "  chain  of  communica-
tion," "  a  chain  that  binds  the  etherial  organism  with  the
mortal  body  "  (p.  343),  "  a  thread "  (p.  344),  "  a  thread
of  connexion  between  A.  and  A.'s  body  "  (p.  345).  Phinuit
makes  no  objection  to  Hodgson's  description,  but  whether
it  represents  his  own  idea  we  have  no  means  of  knowing.
There  is,  however,  no  doubt  that  in  1892  G.  P.  affirms
the  existence  of  the  connecting  thread  or  cord  (see  above,
p.  69),  and  also  in  1895  (June  18,  1895,  Appendix,
p.  366) ;  and,  prompted  by  Hodgson,  Imperator  speaks  of
the  cord  in  this  sense,  February  6,  1897  (see  Appendix,
p.  410).  It  is,  however,  difficult  to  reconcile  the  existence
of  this  thread  with  the  difficulty  of  findhig  her  body,  which
Mrs.  Piper  complains  of  in  the  waking-stage  of  April  3,
1897  (see  Appendix  to  Chapter  VI.,  p.  561).

The  use  of  the  cord  as  a  path  for  spirits  is  apparently
not  realised  by  G.  P.  when  he  says  on  June  14,  1895,
that  he  comes  to  earth  without  any  inconvenience,  "  seems
like  flying "  (see  Appendix,  p.  365).  Phinuit,  however,  on
June  15,  1895  (as  we  saw,  p.  70),  speaks  of  going  into
the  medium's  body  on  a  string  ;  and  the  idea  is  a  good
deal  elaborated  afterwards.  Curiously  enough  the  first
description  in  detail  we  have  of  the  cord  from  this  point
of  view  is  in  a  dream  of  Mrs.  Piper's  when  hi  on  February


72


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


22,  1896  (see  Appendix,  p.  380).  This  is  the  only  dream
of  Mrs.  Piper's  of  which  I  have  seen  any  record,1  and  it
is  interesting  as  bringing  in  controls  and  communicators
who  were  at  that  time  figuring  in  her  trance,  and  also  as  fore-
shadowing to  some  extent  future  trance  communications
about  going  out  and  in  on  the  cord,  and  the  cord  being  like
a  ray  of  light,  "  similar  to  a  ray  of  light  from  the  sun
through  a  knot  hole,"  described  again  by  Mrs.  H.  (as  com-
municator) on  December  14,  1904  (see  Appendix,  p.  432).
Similar  descriptions  may,  however,  have  been  given  pre-
viously at  sittings  of  which  I  have  seen  no  record.  The
same  sort  of  idea  is  probably  behind  Mrs.  Piper's  descrip-
tion in  the  waking-stage  of  November  13,  1896  :  "  They
took  me  out  and  brought  me  back,  and  when  I  came  back
I  slid  down  a  rope  and  I  thought  I  would  be  caught  before
I  got  here."  Mrs.  Piper  very  frequently  speaks  in  waking-
stages  of  coming  down  on  a  rope  or  cord — at  any  rate  in
the  later  years  of  her  mediumship.2  Doctor,  however,
when  he  gives  descriptions  of  the  process  of  controlling  on
December  5  and  8,  1896  (see  Appendix,  pp.  383-388),  seems
independent  of  any  cord,  and  Imperator  refers  to  none  in
describing,  on  December  15,  1896,  how  spirits  approach  the
medium;  nor  does  Rector  on  January  1,  1897  (Appendix,
p.  397),  though  in  all  these  cases  the  amount  of  detail
given  renders  it  strange  that  the  cord  as  a  path  of  egress
and  ingress  should  be  omitted.  Imperator,  however,  on
February  11,  1897,  speaks  of  the  spirit  of  the  medium
entering  the  spirit  world,  through  the  canopy  dividing
earth  from  heaven,  by  a  thread  (Appendix,  p.  410).

The  fullest  accounts  of  the  cord  in  this  Jacob's  ladder
aspect  are  those  referred  to  above,  given  by  Mrs.  H.  (as
communicator)  on  June  3,  1903,  and  December  14,  1904.
According  to  these  accounts  the  cord  which  comes  from

1  Unless,  of  course,  we  regard  the  trance,  or  waking-stage  experiences
of  Mrs.  Piper  as  in  some  sense  dreams.  The  dream  of  February  22,  1896,
occurred  during  ordinary  sleep,  and  differed  from  the  waking-stage  or  trance
experiences  in  being  remembered.

2 1  think  it  does  not  occur  in  the  records  of  waking-stages  (which  are
not  very  numerous)  before  November  13,  1896,  nor  again  after  this  till  the
end  of  1898.  On  January  13,  1899,  she  said  in  the  waking-stage,  "Do  you
know  what  I  was  doing  ? I  came  down  a  long  way  on  a  string.'"


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  73

the  other  world  is  made  for  the  purpose  each  time 1  and
is  specially  attached  by  Rector  to  the  medium's  body.
Compare  also  the  account  given  by  a  spirit  friend  of
Miss  A.  M.  R.'s  on  May  24,  1904  (Appendix,  p.  429).
Sometimes  we  are  told  there  is  a  difficulty  in  attaching  the
cord;  e.g.  on  February  24,  1904  (Appendix, -p.  428).  It  also
is  stated  on  various  occasions,  e.g.  May  25,  1904  (see  Appen-
dix, p.  430),  that  it  is  one  of  Rector's  functions  to  hold  the
cord  at  the  medium's  end  while  the  trance  lasts.  To  com-
bine this  with  repeating  to  the  sitters  what  communicators
say  is  stated  to  be  one  of  the  great  difficulties  he  experiences
as  a  control.  Compare  also  the  extract  from  the  record  of
December  20,  1904,  in  the  Appendix,  p.  435.

It  does  not  appear  that  the  arrangements  for  the  ladder
are  always  as  elaborate  as  those  described  by  Mrs.  H.,  for
it  is  recorded  by  Miss  A.  M.  R.,  who  was  the  sitter  and
recorder  on  June  21,  1905 — a  voice  sitting — that  Rector
said  that  the  spirits  of  deceased  friends

return  to  earth  under  various  conditions — possibly
through  lights,  independently  of  lights,  in  their  own
spheres,  and  they  pass  over  certain  what  we  call  spiritual
cords  to  the  earthly  life,  and  reach  thy  spirit,  and  they
guard  that,  and  when  thou  dost  feel  impressed — etc.

I  am  not  sure  that  the  conception  of  the  spirit  of  the
medium  using  the  cord  as  a  kind  of  ladder  is  consistently
held,  for  some  of  her  waking-stage  remarks  seem  rather  to
suggest  that  she  is  let  down  by  the  cord.  For  example,  on
March  18,  1907,  she  says  :  "  I  thought  I  was  on  a  rope  on
the  end  of  it  coming  down  very  fast."  But,  on  the  other
hand,  the  two  ideas  seem  to  be  mixed  on  March  13,
1907  :  "  I  thought  I  was  up  on  a  rope  and  I  was  sliding
down  and  I  tried  to  get  on  the  end  of  the  rope  and  I
couldn't."

The  third  use  of  the  cord;  as  a  kind  of  telephone
or  telegraph  wire,  is  also  described  on  June  3,  1903
(Appendix.,  p.  427),  as  follows  :

1  But  compare  the  view  of  Hodgson,,  on  July  31,  1911  (Appendix  to
Chapter  III.,  p.  514)  about  the  permanent  injury  done  to  the  cord  by  Dr.
Stanley  Hall's  experiments.


74


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Mrs.  H.  {communicating  through  Rector}. I  hear  over  the  cord

at  which  he  {Rector}  is  at  its  end.
R.  H.  And  my  voice  travels  to  you  on  the  cord  ?
Mrs.  H. Yes  if  it  were  not  for  this  I  could  not  U.D.  you.
R.  H.  And  how  does  your  thought  reach  Rector  ?
Mrs.  H. It  reaches  him  over  the  cord  also  it  vibrates  to  him,

and  he  speaks  it  to  you.

It  is  doubtless  this  use  of  the  cord  that  Sidgwickp,  com-
municating through  Rector,  speaks  of  in  some  detail  on
February  19,  1902  (see  Appendix,  p.  420).  And  the
speaking  of  communicators  over  the  cord  is  frequently  men-
tioned, at  any  rate  after  this  date  (cf.  also  February  23,
1904,  quoted  in  Chapter  V.,  p.  164,  and  May  24,  1904,
Appendix,  p.  429).  It  is  perhaps  the  idea  of  a  telephone
or  telegraph  wire  that  leads  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  waking-stage
of  November  20,  1905,  to  talk  of  the  cord  as  a  wire  :

Well  I  thought  I  was  on  the  string.  I  thought  I  was
on  a — on  a  wire — on  a  wire  cord — what  would  you  call  it  ?
a  wire  cord — not  a  wire  cord  but  a  wire.  (See  Appendix  to
Chapter  VI.,  p.  597.)

Or  a  tube,  as  on  February  4,  1903  :

I  was  drawn  in  .  .  .  like  being  drawn  in  on  a  tube  .  .  .
on  a  cord. (See  Appendix  to  Chapter  VI.,  p.  590.)

Whether  or  not  the  cord  stands  for  any  real  element  in  the
process  of  controlling  and  communicating,  it  is  certain,  I
think,  that  the  idea  develops  in  various  ways,  and  that
it  does  not  represent  anything  of  which  controls  and  com-
municators were  necessarily  and  always  aware.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  75


CHAPTER  III.
Individual  Controls.

From  the  consideration  of  control  in  general  and  the
theories  as  to  its  nature  offered  by  the  trance  personalities,
we  now  proceed  to  discuss  particular  controls,  and  to
consider  how  far  their  claim  to  be  personalities  inde-
pendent of  Mrs.  Piper  is  made  out.

The  supposed  controls  may  be  divided  into  two  groups —
private  controls  who  control  for  their  own  friends  whom
they  knew  on  earth,  and  those  which  we  may  call  for
convenience  public  or  official  controls.

As  regards  private  controls,  we  have  a  good  deal  of
evidence  about  Miss  E.  G.  W.'s  friend  T.  (see  Proceedings,
Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  28  et  seq.),  and  some  about  Miss  A.  M.  R.'s
friend  H.  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII. ,  pp.  Ill  et  seq.),  kindly
furnished  by  those  ladies.  We  know  that  Hodgson's
friend  "  Q."  acted  as  control,  and  I  believe  that  this  was
a  very  important  factor  in  the  experience  that  convinced
him  of  the  reality  of  communication  from  the  dead.  He,
however,  published  very  little  about  her  as  control  ;  it
was  as  a  communicator  through  Phinuit  that  she  gave
the  important  evidence  of  identity  of  which  Hodgson  tells
us  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  66-67.  Under  the  head
of  private  controls  I  may  also  mention  the  Gurney  con-
trol, to  which  I  shall  have  occasion  to  refer  in  Chapter
VIII.  Some  of  the  most  successful  communicators  occa-
sionally manifested  as  controls  for  a  short  time,  e.g.  the
baby  Ruthie  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  385)  and  Bennie
Junot  [Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  425).

Two  observations  may  be  made  about  private  controls.
The  first  is  that  the  evidence  of  identity  may  be  con-


76


Mrs.  Henry  Sictgwich.


[part


vincing  to  the  friends  to  whom  they  manifest  themselves,
but  of  a  kind  which  is  incommunicable  to  readers  of  the
records.  These  may  have  to  be  content  with  the  sitter's
statement  that  the  resemblance  to  his  or  her  friend  was
striking.  The  other  observation  is  that  it  is  not  always
clear  that  the  friend  when  professing  to  control  is  doing
so  entirely  independently  of,  e.g.  Phinuit  or  Rector.  Miss
A.  M.  R.'s  friend  H.  definitely  admitted  Phinuit's  assist-
ance (see  Proceedings,  Vol  VIIL,  p.  113).  It  must  be
remembered,  moreover,  that  the  line  is  by  no  means  always
clearly  marked  between  controlling  (direct  communication)
and  communicating  through  a  control  acting  as  inter-
mediary.1

Partly  because  public  or  official  controls  are  more  free
from  these  complications  and  partly  because  taken  all
together  there  is  more  available  material  for  consideration
in  their  case,  I  propose  in  the  main  to  deal  with  them  in
the  following  pages.

The  public  or  official  controls  perform  two  functions.
First,  they  communicate  on  their  own  account,  giving
advice  or  information  or  offering  tests  of  supernormal
powers.  As  regards  advice,  Phinuit  and  his  successor
Rector  were  both  of  them  very  ready  to  give  medical
and  hygienic  advice  or  moral  and  spiritual  advice  and
guidance,  and  did  so  with  considerable  effect.  As  regards
tests,  the  official  controls  lend  themselves  to  various
experiments  and  researches  (for  examples '  see  below  under
Julius  Caesar  and  George  Eliot),  and  they  are  somewhat
addicted  to  prophesying  rather  in  the  fortune-telling
manner,  though  not  very  successfully.2  The  second  function
of  an  official  control  is  that  of  intermediary  between  the
sitter  and  his  spirit  friends.  There  is,  moreover,  always
I  think  some  public  control  professing  to  manage  the
business  of  communicating  through  Mrs.  Piper,  and  to
direct  and  regulate  the  proceedings,  even  when  not  actually
controlling.

Official controls with these functions are usual  with

1  Compare,  e.g.  the  case  of  Dr.  Thaw's  friend  quoted  below,  p.  82.

2  Though  I  have  not  gone  into  the  matter  statistically,  I  think  I  may
safely  venture  to  say  that  their  prophecies  usually  proved  wrong.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  77

professional  mediums,  and  Mrs.  Piper,  who,  as  it  were,
caught  her  mediumship  from  one  of  these,  Mr.  Cocke
(see  above,  p.  9),  would  naturally  find  her  automatic
faculty  tending  to  develop  on  these  lines  whether  spiritual
entities,  apart  from  herself,  were  concerned  in  the  matter
or  not.  But  it  is  a  fact  that  must  not  be  overlooked
that  to  a  subliminal  self  aiming  at  producing  the  effects
she  did  produce,  the  advantages  of  the  particular  dramatic
form  adopted  would  be  obvious.  For,  in  the  first  place,
advice  is  more  impressive  appearing  to  come  from  some
one  other  than  the  medium,  and,  in  the  second,  less  is
demanded  from  a  spirit  friend  limited  to  communicating
through  another  spirit,  who  may  misunderstand  what  he
is  supposed  to  repeat,  than  from  one  purporting  to  talk
with  the  sitter  directly.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the
difficulty  of  this  indirect  communication  is  constantly
adduced  as  an  excuse  for  failure  or  confusion  in  the
records  before  us.1  A  dramatic  form  is,  as  is  well  known,
readily  assumed  in  automatic  writing  and  speaking,  even
when  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  an  external  intelligence
at  work,  and,  as  is  also  known,  means  of  facilitating  its
task  are  apt  to  be  eagerly  seized  by  the  subliminal  self.
There  is  therefore  no  difficulty  in  supposing  that  if  Mrs.
Piper's  trance  personality  be  some  subliminal  centre  of  con-
sciousness of  Mrs.  Piper,  it  either  pretends  to  be,  or
imagines  itself  to  be,  a  Phinuit  or  a  Rector  or  a  George
Eliot.

To  decide  between  this  and  the  spirit  hypothesis  we
must  examine  the  sayings  and  doings  of  the  controls,
find  out  whether  the  characters  are  consistently  main-
tained, whether  there  are  manifestations  of  knowledge,
including  memories,  which  cannot  be  attributed  to  Mrs.
Piper,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  defects  in  knowledge  which
cannot  be  attributed  to  the  supposed  spirit.

Among  the  public  controls  I  will  select  for  discussion
and  illustration,  (1)  as  regular  controls,  Phinuit,  G.  P.,  the
Imperator  Band,  Hodgson,  and  Madame  Guyon,  and  (2)

1  See  also  a  case  below,  p.  109,  where  after  a  failure  Imperator  throws
the  blame  on  Rector  and  threatens  to  dismiss  him  as  an  incompetent
intermediary.


78  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


as  occasional  controls,  Sir  Walter  Scott,  Proctor  the
astronomer,  Stainton  Moses,  Julius  Caesar,  George  Eliot,
"Moses  of  old"  {i.e.  Moses  of  the  Exodus).

Among  them  the  only  ones  who  give  independent
evidence  of  identity  are  G.  P.  and  Hodgson.  One  reason
for  this  is  that  these  were  private  controls  as  well  as
public  ;  they  met  those  who  had  been  their  intimate
friends  in  life,  recognised  them  appropriately,  remembered
things  unknown  to  Mrs.  Piper,  and  generally  by  their
whole  maniere  d'etre  impressed  intimate  friends  with  their
identity.  All  this  has  to  be  discounted  to  some  extent  in
the  case  of  Hodgson,  on  account  of  his  being  so  well
known  to  the  medium.1  But  G.  P.  was  scarcely  known  to
her  at  all,  and  the  evidence  set  forth  by  Hodgson  in
Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  leaves  little  doubt  that  in  con-
nexion with  this  control  there  was  sometimes 2  some
supernormal  power  at  work,  and  further,  that  there  is
good  ground  for  supposing  that  the  supernormal  element
was  more  than  telepathy  from  the  living — for  supposing,
in  fact,  that  G.  P.  as  a  surviving  entity  was  in  some
way  concerned.  But  he  may  well  have  been  concerned
without  our  being  obliged  to  believe  that  he  "  controlled  "
in  the  sense  of  finding  Mrs.  Piper's  spirit  removed  from
her  body  and  taking  its  place.

None  of  the  other  public  controls  have  any  credentials
at  all.  Of  those  I  have  named,  both  Stainton  Moses,
who  had  not  been  dead  three  years  when  the  control
claiming  his  name  first  manifested,  and  George  Eliot,  who
died  in  1880,  had  living  friends  in  England,  and  might,
one  would  think,  have  referred  to  things  which  would
have  tended  to  convince  these  friends  of  their  identity.

1  See  Professor  William  James's  "  Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson
control  "  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.

2  I  say  "  sometimes  "  because  there  are  other  times  when  the  evidence
is  in  my  opinion  not  only  neutral  but  against  any  real  G.  P.  being
concerned  at  the  moment  at  all.  I  may  instance  the  effort  of  the
control  G.  P.  (December  9,  1892)  to  converse  intelligently  with  Mr.
Marte  on  the  philosophical  views  held  by  G.  P.  on  earth  (see  Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  XV.,  p.  26),  and  the  shuffling  attempts  to  answer,  or
rather  to  evade  answering,  a  test  question  on  December  6,  1892  (see
Appendix  to  Chapter  II.,  p.  355).


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  79

Stainton  Moses  had  even  had  some  personal  acquaintance
with  Hodgson,  and  he  was  also  confronted  with  another
acquaintance  who  knew  several  of  his  friends,  and  with  a
man  who  had  been  his  pupil  as  a  boy,  but  he  failed  on
any  of  these  occasions  to  be  convincing.  His  English
friends,  too,  sent  questions  to  serve  as  tests  which  he  would
when  in  this  world — as  far  as  can  be  judged — have  answered
without  difficulty,  but  nothing  worth  mentioning  did  he
remember  correctly.  George  Eliot  was  equally  uncon-
vincing.

The  Imperator  Band — Imperator,  Rector,  Doctor,  Mentor,
Prudens — were  introduced  by  the  so-called  Stainton  Moses
as  the  same  spirits  who  had  inspired  his  automatic  writing
when  he  was  alive,  the  writing  published  in  his  book,  Spirit
Teachings.  The  above  names  were  pseudonyms,  and  the
real  names  claimed  by  these  soi-disant  spirits  of  the  dead
were  unknown  to  Hodgson  and,  at  least  as  regards  Impera-
tor's,  had  never  been  published.  It  would  have  been  excel-
lent evidence  of  supernormal  knowledge  if  these  names  had
been  given,  and  it  is  almost  inconceivable  that  they
should  have  been  persistently  forgotten  either  by  their
owners  or  by  Stainton  Moses.  But  not  only  were  these
names  not  given,  which  might  have  been  attributed  to
reticence,  but  a  variety  of  other  names  were  given  with
solemn  asseverations  that  they  were  the  ones  asked  for,  and
others  equally  wrong  were  apparently  tentatively  suggested.

Hodgson  would,  I  think,  have  said  that  the  quality  of,
e.g.  Rector's  communications — the  advice  he  gave,  and  so
forth — is  so  far  beyond  Mrs.  Piper's  normal  powers  that  in
itself  it  constitutes  strong  evidence  of  his  independent
existence.  Professor  William  James  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.
XXIII. ,  p.  3),  though  he  "  favoured  the  idea  of  their  {i.e.
Rector  &  Co.}  all  being  dream-creations  of  Mrs.  Piper,
probably  having  no  existence  except  when  she  is  in  trance,"
admitted  that  "with  all  due  respect  to  Mrs.  Piper"  he
felt  "  very  sure  that  her  own  waking  capacity  for  being  a
spiritual  adviser,  if  it  were  compared  with  Rector's,  would
fall  greatly  behind."  But  hejj  saw  "  no  contradiction
between  Rector's  being  on  the^  one  hand  an  improvised
creature  *  *  *  and his being on the other hand  the


so


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


extraordinarily  impressive  personality  which  he  unquestion-
ably is."  And  this  is  surely  borne  out  by  the  surprising
powers  exhibited  by  certain  subjects  in  hypnotic  trance.
I  cannot,  therefore,  count  this  as  furnishing  what  I  have
called  credentials.

Phinuit,  of  whose  gift  for  preaching  Professor  James
speaks,  it  may  be  observed,  much  as  he  does  of  Rector's,1
notoriously  failed  to  produce  credentials — so  much  so  that
before  the  advent  of  G.  P.,  Hodgson  for  a  long  time  felt
the  most  satisfactory  hypothesis  to  be  "  that  of  an  auto-
hypnotic  trance  in  which  a  secondary  personality  of  Mrs.
Piper  either  erroneously  believes  itself  to  be,  or  consciously
and  falsely  pretends  to  be,  the  '  spirit '  of  a  deceased
human  being,  Phinuit "  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  57 ;
Vol.  XIII.,  p.  286).  "  Sir  Walter  Scott,"  "  Moses  of  old,"
and  "  Julius  Caesar  "  could  hardly  be  expected  to  produce
evidence  of  identity,  though  somewhat  more  verisimilitude
in  their  make-up  might,  I  think,  have  been  looked  for.

But  though  these  public  controls  fail  to  produce  cre-
dentials, they  and  all  controls  guarantee  each  other,  as
indeed  might  be  expected  on  almost  any  hypothesis.  They
guarantee,  that  is,  the  reality  of  each  other's  independent
existence — independent  of  each  other  and  independent  of
Mrs.  Piper.  They  do  not  always  guarantee  each  other's
veracity  or  reliability.  Thus,  for  instance,  G.  P.  says  of
Phinuit  on  January  14,  1894  :

He  is  inclined  to  try  too  much  at  times,  H.,  and  thinks
he  hears  things  when  they  are  not  close  enough  to  him.
He  is  a  mighty  good  fellow,  but  exaggerates  a  little
occasionally  when  he  is  dull.  Better  rot  tell  him  I  say
this. (Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  369  footnote.)

1  He  says  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  pp.  654-5 :  "  I  must  admit,  how-
ever, that  Phinuit  has  other  moods.  He  has  several  times,  when  my
wife  and  myself  were  sitting  together  with  him,  suddenly  started  off  on
long  lectures  to  us  about  our  inward  defects  and  outward  shortcomings,
which  were  very  earnest,  as  well  as  subtile  morally  and  psychologically,
and  impressive  in  a  high  degree.  These  discourses,  though  given  in
Phinuit's  own  person,  were  very  different  in  style  from  his  more  usual
talk,  and  probably  superior  to  anything  that  the  medium  could  produce
in  the  same  line  in  her  natural  state.  Phinuit  himself,  however,  bears
every  appearance  of  being  a  fictitious  being."


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  81


And  Rector  says  of  G.  P.  on  April  23,  1897  :

We  would  warn  thee  not  to  rely  too  much  upon  the
statements  made  as  tests  so-called  by  your  friend  George.
He  is  too  far  away  from  your  earth  now  to  be  clear  in
regard  to  tests,  test-conditions,  etc.  *  *  *  his  work  in  your
field  is  done  *  *  *  the  conditions  are  such  as  to  render  it
impossible  for  him  to  reach  you  as  he  would  like.  He  has
passed  beyond  *  *  *  not  intentionally  would  he  do  or  say
anything,  in  the  slightest,  wrong,  yet  if  called  upon  he
might  err  unintentionally.

But  if  G.  P.'s  statements  were  no  longer  to  be  relied  upon
in  April,  1897,  it  is  at  any  rate  assumed  that  they  were
accurate  earlier.  And  if  the  earlier  G.  P.,  who  professed  to
"  control  " — to  take  the  place  of  Mrs.  Piper's  spirit  in  her
body — -was  all  that  he  represented  himself  as  being  and  was
doing  all  that  he  represented  himself  as  doing,  it  seems
impossible  that  he  can  have  been  mistaken  when  he  spoke  of
Phinuit,  Rector,  and  the  rest  as  being  also  entities  inde-
pendent of  Mrs.  Piper.  The  whole  thing,  therefore,  seems
to  stand  and  fall  together.  G.  P.  is  our  real  authority  for
there  being  any  control  by  independent  spirits.  If  the  con-
sistency either  of  his  own  personation,  or  of  the  per-
sonation of  the  "  spirits  "  he  guarantees,  breaks  down,  we
are  left  practically  without  support  for  the  hypothesis  that
controls  are  anything  more  than  divided  off  centres  of
consciousness  of  Mrs.  Piper,  personating  and  perhaps
believing  themselves  to  be  independent  spirits.1

But  first,  to  prevent  any  danger  of  misapprehension,  let
me  here  repeat  that  proof  that  controls  are  not  independent
spirits  would  not  in  my  opinion  even  tend  to  show  that
there  was  no  real  G.  P.  in  the  background,  helping  at
times  to  inspire  the  personation  of  him.  G.  P.  may  thus
communicate,  and  there  may  be  sufficient  evidence  to  prove
it,  without  his  being  properly  speaking  a  "  control."  And
if  it  be  urged  that  so  good  a  personation  of  G.  P.  would  be
impossible  based  merely  on  the  knowledge  acquired  from
the  sitters,  and  telepathically  from  himself — that  telepathy

1  G.  P.  himself  recognises  that  his  credit  is  affected  by  false  statements
of  guaranteed  spirits  (see  Appendix,  p.  454).

F


82


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


could  not  do  as  much  as  that — I  should  reply  three  things.
First,  that,  as  I  argued  in  my  previous  paper  (Vol.  XV.,
p.  21),  it  is  easy  to  overestimate  the  completeness  of
resemblance  required  for  a  personation  under  the  limiting
conditions  of  the  manifestation  even  when  the  voice  is
used,  and  still  more  when  the  personation  is  expressed
only  in  the  words  written  (which  are  not  in  the  supposed
control's  handwriting),1  and  in  the  dramatic  representation
of  manner  through  movements  of  the  hand  alone.
Secondly,  avowed  communicators  are  often  dramatically
represented  when  there  is  no  pretence  of  their  controlling.
I  quoted  a  striking  instance  of  this  in  the  same  paper
(Proceedings,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  21),  taking  it  from  Hodgson's
report  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  567),  and  repeat  it  now
for  convenience.  It  happened  on  May  10,  1892.  It  will  be
observed  that  the  occurrence  of  personation  in  this  case  is
not  conjectural,  but  is  asserted  by  the  control.  A  friend  of
the  sitter's,  Dr.  Thaw,  spoke  in  so  life-like  a  manner  through
Phinuit  that  Dr.  Thaw,  wishins;  to  know  whether  it  was
his  friend  or  Phinuit  who  was  speaking,  said  :  "  Can  you
tell  me  anything  about  Dr.  Phinuit  ?  "  The  answer  came
from  Phinuit — "  I'm  talking  to  you  myself,  you  rascal  ;
I'm  talking  for  him."  "Well,"  said  Dr.  Thaw,  "you're
trying  to  make  us  think  he's  talking,"  to  which  Phinuit
replied,  "  I'm  simply  telling  you  what  he  says.  I'm  trying
to  imitate  him."

Thirdly,  in  reply  to  the  argument  that  telepathy  cannot
account  for  so  much,  I  should  say  that  we  know  very
little  about  the  possibilities  of  telepathic  communication,
but  that  whether  the  controls  are  other  than  phases  of
Mrs.  Piper  or  not,  we  have  to  admit  for  it  a  very  wide
scope.  I  am  using  the  word  telepathy,  of  course,  in  the
comprehensive  sense  in  which  I  used  it  in  my  previous
paper  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  18,  and  in  which  it  is,
I  think,  now  very  generally  used — in  a  sense  wide  enough
to  include  any  communication  between  mind  and  mind
otherwise  than  through  the  recognised  channels  of  sense,

1  Mr.  Piddington  thought  an  approximation  to  Myers's  handwriting
(which  was  known  to  Mrs.  Piper)  could  be  observed  in  some  of  the  script
of  1906-7.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  83


whether  the  minds  communicating  be  in  the  body  or  not.
How,  except  by  telepathy,  are  we  to  account  for  Mrs.
Piper's  recognition  of  a  photograph  of  a  deceased  person
known  to  her  only  through  a  vision  in  the  waking-stage —
such  as  the  case  of  Mr.  Marble,  described  by  Sir  Oliver
Lodge  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.,  p.  275,  and  which,
with  other  cases,  we  shall  have  to  discuss  in  Chapter  VI.
below.1  It  is  Mrs.  Piper  herself,  or  at  least  some  part
of  Mrs.  Piper,  who  has  the  waking-stage  vision  and
recognises  the  photograph — not  a  different  controlling
intelligence.  A  correct  visual  impression  of  the  deceased
person  cannot  have  reached  her  through  her  bodily  eyes.
If  she  had  one,  therefore,  it  must  have  been  the  result
of  telepathy  from  the  living  or  the  dead.

It  might,  perhaps,  be  said  that  though  Mrs.  Piper
undoubtedly  does  have  vivid  visual  impressions  in  the
waking-stage,  we  must  not  assume  that  they  are  veridical
or  that  the  recognition  of  the  photograph  is  due  to  one.
The  right  photograph  might  have  been  picked  out  owing
to  indications  given  unconsciously  by  the  living  persons
present — or  telepathically  prompted  either  by  the  experi-
menters or  by  spirits  without  any  previous  visual  impres-
sion corresponding  to  it.  Of  course  precautions  were  taken
on  each  occasion  with  a  view  to  excluding  these  possi-
bilities so  far  as  living  agents  are  concerned,  but  even
if  we  grant  their  existence  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper's
selection  of  photographs,  we  cannot  so  explain  the  ex-
periences of,  e.g.  Cahagnet's  subject,  Adele  Maginot.2  Here,
again,  there  is  no  question  of  the  perceiving  intelligence
being other than the medium — that is Adele  herself,

1  In  some  of  these  recognition-of-photograph  cases  we  seem  to  require  tho
further  extension  of  the  idea  of  telepathy  to  include  communication
between  different  streams  of  consciousness  in  the  percipient,  which  Mr.
G.  W.  Balfour  pointed  out  as  a  probable  hypothesis  in  his  Presidential
Address  in  1906  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIX.,  p.  392).  For  Mrs.  Piper
has  her  vision  in  the  waking-stage,  and  recognises  the  photograph  in
another  state  of  consciousness  when  all  memory  of  the  vision  seems  to
have  vanished.

2  Alphonse  Cahagnet,  Arcanes  de  la  vie  f  uture  devoilis,  Vol.  II.
Podmore  gave  some  account  of  the  man  and  the  book  in  his  discussion
of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  pp.  58-71.


84


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


though  Adele  in  hypnotic  trance.  Consider,  for  example,
the  case  No.  117  quoted  by  Podmore  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  XIV.,  p.  61.  M.  du  Potet  asked  for  his  friend
M.  Dubois,  who  accordingly  appeared  to  Adele,  and  was
minutely  described  as  to  appearance,  dress,  manner  of
speaking,  gestures,  etc. — "  si  bien  que  je  croyais  le  voir
moi-meme,  tant  le  tableau  en  etait  saisissant."  The
apparition  also  answered  questions  correctly  and  with
appropriate  appreciation  and  behaviour.  It  is  clear  that,
if  the  account  given  is  to  be  relied  on,  Adele,  if  she
was  a  good  mimic,  might  very  plausibly  have  personated
M.  Dubois  after  seeing  that  apparition.  But  she  did  not
see  the  apparition  with  her  bodily  eyes.  It  must  have
been  telepathic  ;  and  Du  Potet  was  inclined  to  attribute
it  to  telepathy  from  himself  on  the  ground  that,  as  he
discovered  later,  there  were  some  points  in  the  description
which  corresponded  with  his  idea,  but  were  not  in  fact-
correct.

We  may  now  proceed  to  more  detailed  examination  of
records  concerning  the  public  controls  selected  as  types.
The  history  and  development  of  the  Phinuit  and  G.  P.
controls  have  been  so  fully  related  by  Hodgson  in  Pro-
ceedings, Vols.  VIII.  and  XIII.,  that  it  is  needless  to
give  an  account  of  them  here.  I  will  only  remind  the
reader  that  Phinuit,  without  any  formal  farewell,  made  his
last  appearance  on  January  26,  1897,  ousted  by  the  Im-
perator  Band  ;  1  and  that  G.  P.,  though  he  continued  to
appear  from  time  to  time  almost  to  the  end,  occupied  a
subordinate  place  after  Imperator  and  Co.  undertook  the
management  of  affairs.  Of  the  Hodgson  control  it  is
hardly  necessary  to  give  any  long  history.  There  will  be
occasions  for  incidental  mention  later  on.  Hodgson's  early
manifestations,  whether  as  control  or  communicator,  are
discussed  in  a  very  interesting  paper  by  William  James

1  It  was  suggested  by  the  Imperator  Band  on  July  3,  1897,  that  they
might  bring  him  back  when  he  had  made  sufficient  progress,  but  I  do
not  think  he  ever  did  reappear.  His  return  was  also  offered  to  Sir
Oliver  Lodge  in  1906,  but  the  latter  did  not  press  for  it  (Proceedings,
Vol.  XXIII.,  pp.  280-281).


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper  s  Trance  Phenomena.  85

in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.  He  controlled  rather  fre-
quently, writing  either  for  himself  or  as  amanuensis  for
others  till  the  end.1

Sir  Walter  Scott.

The  earliest  in  chronological  order  of  the  other  controls
named  above  on  pp.  77,  78  was  Sir  Walter  Scott.  He  had  first
communicated  with  Hodgson  some  time  about  1894  through
Phinuit,  but  we  have  not  got  the  record  of  the  occasion.
An  interesting  point  about  it,  as  we  learn  from  a  note  by
Professor  Newbold  to  the  record  of  June  25,  1895,  is  that
the  manifestation  occurred  the  day  after  Hodgson  had  been
reading  Scott's  Life  and  Letters,  which  had  greatly  interested
him.  After  laying  down  the  book  he  had  spent  an
hour  or  so  smoking  and  thmking,  with  a  strong  personal
interest,  of  Scott.  This  looks  as  if  the  preoccupation  of
Hodgson's  mind  with  Scott  led  to  his  appearance.  A
similar  apparent  connexion  with  Hodgson's  thoughts
occurred  on  October  19,  1896,  when  the  day  after  he
had  been  re-reading  some  of  Stainton  Moses'  Spirit  Teach-
ings, and,  inter  alia,  Section  VI.,  at  the  heading  of  which
the  author  refers  to  his  meeting  D.  D.  Home  the  medium,
a  soi-disant  Home  controlled  and  wrote  :  "I  was  with
a  gentleman  named  Moses  in  the  body  also."  2  He  wrote
at  some  length,  but  there  was  little  verisimilitude  about
the  control.  Similarly,  Madame  Guyon's  first  appearance
(see  below,  p.  123)  may  have  been  due  to  the  fact  that
the  sitter  on  the  occasion  had  been  recently  reading  about
her.

Sir  Walter  Scott's  appearance  as  a  control  about  a  year
later  than  his  first  communication  to  Hodgson  occurred
apparently  spontaneously  on  June  25,  1895,  at  one  of
Professor  Newbold's  sittings.  He  came  to  offer  informa-
tion about  the  planet  Mars,  which  had,  I  gather  (though  of
this  I  am  not  sure),  been  a  topic  in  his  communication  the
year  before,  and  which  had  been  talked  of  earlier  in  the

1  Compare  below,  Chapter  V.,  pp.  197-200.

2  This  was  in  the  middle  of  sittings  at  whicii  Stainton  Moses  was
manifesting.


86


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


sitting  of  June  25  with  Phinuit,  who  professed  to  have
found  Stainton  Moses  in  Mars.  For  this  part  of  the
sitting,  see  Appendix  to  Chapter  II.  (p.  375).  Sir  Walter
Scott's  entrance  on  the  scene  is  recorded  as  follows  ;
Hodgson  and  Professor  Newbold  were  both  present.

[Hand  changes. Becomes  small  and  writes  slowly]
Scott,  Scott,  Scott,  I  am  extremely  happy  to  be  with
you  sir  ...  I  just  strayed  in  here.
R.  H. This  is  Sir  Walter  Scott  ?

Scott.  Yes  Sir  I  strayed  .  .  .  for  a  moment  lend  me  your
attention  when  you  wish  to  hear  anything  concern-
ing Mars — do  not  forget  to  call  for  me.  I  am  .  .  .
I  have  met  Mr.  Pelham  {  =  G.  P.}  and  I  am
enchanted  with  him  intellectually.

After  a  little  further  conversation  he  is  asked  to  return
the  following  day.  This  he  does,  and  also  at  six  other
sittings  between  June  25  and  July  8  inclusive.  He  ex-
presses himself  in  a  precise  and  somewhat  ceremonious
way,  and  writes  in  a  small,  faint  handwriting,  signing  his
name  at  the  end  of  his  communication.  The  gestures  of
the  hand  were  gentle  compared  with  those  of  other  writing
controls.  The  communications  were  concerned  with  ima-
ginary voyages  among  the  planets  on  which  he  takes  the
sitter,  Professor  Newbold  or  Hodgson  ;  and  with  life  in  the
spirit  world.  He  manages,  among  other  things,  to  betray
a  portentous  ignorance  of  astronomy.

The  portions  of  the  sittings  of  June  27  and  28,  1895,
occupied  by  the  Scott  control  are  quoted  in  full  in  the
Appendix  to  this  chapter,  pp.  437-448.  In  the  course  of  them
will  be  found  another  incident  tending  to  show  telepathic
information  about  what  had  passed  or  was  passing  in  the
sitter's  mind  (see  Dr.  Newbold's  paper  in  Proceedings,  Vol.
XIV.,  pp.  48-49).  Briefly,  the  control  stated  on  June  27
that  there  were  monkeys  in  the  sun.  This  naturally  excited
laughter  in  Dr.  Newbold  and  Hodgson  when  they  were
going  over  the  record  of  the  sitting  that  evening,  and
the  next  day  the  control  spontaneously  retracted  the
monkeys  and  asked  who  had  been  laughing  loudly  with
Dr.  Newbold  over  the  imaginary  journeys.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  87

One  rather  curious  incident  concerning  this  control's
ignorance  and  knowledge  may  be  described  here.  On
July  2,  1895,  Sir  Walter  Scott  asked  Hodgson  where  he
would  like  him  to  take  him.

R.  H.  Have  you  ever  been  further  away  than  the  planet  we
call  Saturn  ?

Scott.  Further  away  .  .  .  there  is  not  a  place  or  planet  known

to  the  human  mind  that  we  have  not  visited.
R.  H. I  should  like  to  take  a  trip  further  from  the  sun.
Scott.  I  do  not  understand.
R.  H. You  took  my  friend  to  Saturn.
Scott.  Yes  Sir.

R.  H.  I  should  like  to  go  beyond  Saturn.

Scott.  I  cannot  catch  your  meaning  sir. I  cannot  take  you  to

planets  that  do  not  exist.
R.  H.  Haven't  you  seen  a  planet  further  away  than  Saturn  ?
Scott.  Mercury.

R.  H.  I'm afraid the light's nearly exhausted Sir  Walter.
Perhaps  you  had  better  continue  next  time.

In  the  interval  between  this  sitting  and  the  next.  Scott
has  apparently  made  enquiries,  or  consulted  Mrs.  Piper's
half-lost  memories  ;  and  Hodgson  having  asked  the  next
day  (on  questions  being  invited  to  "  disentangle  every
muddle  should  there  be  any "),  "  Can  you  tell  me  about
the  planets  beyond  Saturn  ?  "  Scott  replies,  "  Oh  yes,
sir,  all  of  them.  You  know  they  were  distinguished  one
from  another  by  names  .  .  .  [illegible]  in  Latin."  Later  in
the  sitting  an  expedition  to  Uranus  is  spontaneously
offered,  and  on  July  5  to  Neptune.  The  previous  ignor-
ance or  forgetfulness  is  the  more  curious  as  Neptune  and
its  inhabitants  turn  out  to  be  specially  interesting,  and
are  described  at  great  length  !

Proctor.

On  July  1,  1895,  Hodgson  asked  "whether  G.  P.  could
hunt  up  Proctor  the  astronomer  and  get  him  to  com-
municate about  the  planets."  G.  P.  is  at  first  doubtful
both  about  the  possibility  and  the  utility  of  this  pro-
ceeding, but  gives  way  to  Hodgson's  view  that  Proctor


88


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


could  speak  of  modern  astronomical  problems  of  which  Scott

might  be  ignorant,  and  consents  to  try  to  find  him.  The
result  is  that  a  soi-disant  Proctor  turns  up  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  sitting  of  July  3,  1895,  with  a  great  deal  of
gesticulation  representing  the  handling  of  an  imaginary
telescope.  I  give  the  record  in  full  in  the  Appendix
(pp.  448-452).  There  is  no  astronomy  in  it,  though  there  is
pseudo-science,  but  it  has  an  interest  for  the  investigator
because  there  are  some  special  features  both  about  the
going  into  trance  and  the  beginning  of  the  trance  itself.
It  was,  so  far  as  I  know,  Proctor's  only  appearance.

W .  Stainton  Moses  and  his  spirit  guides.1

W.  Stainton  Moses,  like  Proctor,  appeared  first  in  con-
sequence of  a  request  to  G.  P.  to  bring  him.  This  is
described,  and  the  communications  at  this  time  of  the
so-called  Stainton  Moses  are  given  at  length  in  Professor
Newbold's  paper  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  pp.  36-41.  Pro-
fessor Newbold's  summing  up  (p.  41)  gives  the  results  from
our  point  of  view  clearly,  and  I  cannot  do  better  than  quote
it  here  for  the  convenience  of  the  reader.

In  this  case  we  have  the  difficulties  which  attach  to  the
spiritistic  theory  brought  out  in  the  highest  relief.  The
general  tenor  of  the  communications,  the  allusion  to  Mr.
Speer,  the  reception  of  the  names  of  Myers  and  Hodgson
have  an  air  of  verisimilitude.  The  communicator  then
gives  us,  with  the  most  solemn  asseveration  of  their
accuracy  and  with  apparent  consciousness  of  the  import-
ance of  his  statements  to  a  cause  which  he  had  in  life
much  at  heart,  three  names  which  the  real  Mr.  Moses  must
have  known  and  which  of  all  possible  things  would  seem
to  be  the  hardest  for  the  spirit  to  forget — the  names  of
the  spirit  friends  who,  as  he  claims,  opened  his  eyes  while
still  on  earth  to  the  realities  of  the  eternal  life.  And  not
one  of  those  names  is  true  or  has  the  least  semblance  of
truth  !  Furthermore,  of  all  points  touched  upon  during  the
sitting  this  was  the  only  one  that  was  unknown  to  both

1 W.  S.  Moses  was  very  well  known  in  spiritualistic  circles. He  wrote
under  the  nom  de  plume  of  M.A.  Oxon.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  89


the  sitters — another  item  in  favour  of  the  telepathic
theory.1  To  my  mind  this  failure  on  the  part  of  the
alleged  Moses  is  an  obstacle  to  the  acceptance  of  the
spiritistic  theory  which  has  not  as  yet  been  set  aside
and  which  must  be  satisfactorily  explained  before  that
theory  can  be  regarded  as  meeting  the  requirements  of  the
case.

Stainton  Moses  was  called  for  again  by  Hodgson  on
October  1,  1896,  the  first  sitting  after  a  seven  or  eight
months'  interval,  during  which  Mrs.  Piper  had  been  re-
covering from  an  illness  which  had  necessitated  an  opera-
tion. Hodgson  said  to  G.  P.,  "  Especially  I  want  you  to
get  from  Stainton  Moses  the  real  name  of  Imperator."
The  importance  of  this  was  emphasised,  and  G.  P.  pro-
mised to  get  at  Stainton  Moses.  On  October  12,  G.  P.
says  :

I  wish  to  tell  you,  H.  I  have  seen  Moses,  and  his
thoughts  are  not  as  {clear  as?}  I  would  wish,  yet  I  am
helping  him  and  in  a  very  short  time  after  I  have  brought
him  here  several  times  he  will  speak  and  interpret  his  own
messages.

Moses  proceeds  to  communicate  through  G.  P.,  com-
plaining of  a  veil  between  him  and  Hodgson,  and  showing
some  confusion.  "  What  is  the  meaning  of  all  the  con-
fusion and  lack  of  concentration  of  thought,  I  wonder,"
writes  G.  P.  for  Moses,  and  continues  as  from  himself  to
Moses.  "  Oh,  you  will  be  clearer  soon,  sir.  Have  no
misgivings.  I  will  stand  by  you.  Oh  yes,  yes."  2
Attempts  are  apparently  made  to  give  Imperator's  name —
two  or  three  suggestions  being,  it  would  seem,  tentatively
put  forward,  but  with  the  usual  want  of  success.

On  October  14  he  again  communicates  for  a  time,  and
continues  what  looks  like  fishing  for  the  name  of  Im-
perator. G.  P.  says  of  him,  "  he  is  beyond  me,  H.,  and

1  Dr.  Newbold  means  here,  of  course,  the  theory  of  telepathy  from  the
living.

z  This  kind  of  by-play  is  not  uncommon,  and  is  sometimes  explained
by  the  controls  as  registered  accidentally.  Its  advantage  in  making
clear  the  dramatic  situation  is  obvious. For  a  conspicuous  case  see  p.  39(J.


90  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

to  draw  him  back  is  not  so  easy  as  one  would  think."
Still  G.  P.  promises  remarkable  tests  through  Stainton
Moses  soon,  and  says  for  him  that  Imperator  is  St.  Joseph,
"  the  father  of  Christ  " — which  with  other  names  suggested
is  again  entirely  wrong.  The  next  step  is  that  on  October  16
a  communicator  calling  himself  Imperator  writes  through
G.  P.  as  amanuensis.  He  says  :  "I  am  Imperator.  I  am
the  intimate  friend  and  adviser  of  the  lamented  S.  Moses,"
and  he  uses  Imperator's  sign — a  cross.  On  October  17  he
prophesied  about  the  millennium  (which  was  to  come  with
the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  century)  and  about  a  great
war  which  was  to  precede  it,  involving  all  the  great  powers,
of  whose  relations  with  each  other  and  relative  importance
he  shows  very  inadequate  knowledge.  Hodgson,  having
learnt  from  Myers  that  Imperator  was  not  Joseph,  speaks
very  strongly  to  G.  P.  (on  October  27,  28,  and  29,  1896,  see
Appendix)  about  the  deception  involved  on  the  part  of
both  Stainton  Moses  and  Imperator.1  G.  P.  makes  excuses.
Joseph,  he  says,  is  a  spirit  who  "  is  called  High  Com-
mander by  thousands  of  intelligences  "  in  the  other  world,
and  thought  he  was  meant  when  Imperator  was  asked
for.  It  is  curious,  on  this  hypothesis,  that  besides  saying
that  he  was  the  intimate  friend  and  adviser  of  Stainton
Moses,  he  had  spoken  of  England  as  the  country  "  in  which
I  used  to  return  so  often";  and  that  when  Hodgson  said
he  understood  that  Moses  "  held  somewhat  narrow  theo-
logical views  and  that  you  {the  communicator}  led  him
out  of  them,"  he  had  replied,  "  Oh  yes  I  was  deter-
mined to  do  so."  No  explanation  of  these  statements  is
offered.  Moreover,  it  appears  from  the  following  curious
conversation  between  Hodgson  and  G.  P.,  after  the
false  Imperator  has  gone  on  October  17,  1896,  that  the
latter  had  talked  to  G.  P.  about  his  communications  to
Moses.

R.  H. Have  you  seen  much  of  Imperator  ?

G.  P. Very  little. There  is  one  very  strange  thing  about  him,
i.e.  he  is  quite  clear-headed, and  yet  I  find  him

1  Hodgson  was  always  very  frank  with  the  controls  about  their  failures
and  false  claims,  their  deceptions  and  absurdities,  and  his  view  of  them.
Some  other  instances  will  be  found  in  the  Appendices.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  91

very  .  .  .  [hand moves slowly about as  though
exploring  in  every  direction.]  .  .  .
R.  H.  What's  the  matter  ?

G.  P.  I  did  not  wish  him  to  hear  me,  and  I  was  simply
listening  to  see  if  he  [was]  present  anywhere.1  He  is
very  anxious  to  make  this  light  his,  and  I  am  not
quite  satisfied.

R.  H.  He's  inclined  to  talk  about  teaching  and  religions,  etc.,
isn't  he  ?

G.  P. You  mean  through  Moses'  light  he  was  religious,  etc.

R.  H. Yes, a  great  deal. I  think  his  communications  were

chiefly  of  that  type.
G.  P. Yes,  he  told  me  this,  and  I  do  not  approve  of  a  long

Rabble of Religions. Not by any means, I  like

test-work  enough  sight  better.

*  #  *  *

R.  H. Well  we  know  our  views  and  what  we  want.

G.  P.  Yes,  of  course,  only  I  wished  you  to  fully  understand
my  position  in  the  matter.  This  is  my  light  and  I
am  going  to  hold  on  to  my  own  string.

R.  H. I'll  back  you  up.

G.  P. I  promised  this,  and  I  will  keep  my  promise.

In  the  end  (see  Appendix,  October  29,  p.  457)  it  appears
that  neither  the  real  Imperator  nor  the  real  Stainton  Moses
had  been  communicating  so  far.  The  real  Stainton  Moses
was  present,  but  being  confused  employed  his  father  to
communicate  for  him.  Hence  mistakes.  The  real  Moses
is  actually  present  with  Dr.  Arthur  Myers,  continues  G.  P.,
and  will  now  communicate  through  him.

Accordingly,  we  get  a  very  unplausible  Arthur  Myers
control,  who,  e.g.  calls  Hodgson,  whom  he  knew  well  in
life,  "  Sir."  He  gives  messages  on  behalf  of  Stainton
Moses,  and  then  the  latter  "  controls  "  himself.  The
record  of  part  of  his  somewhat  incoherent  writing  is
given  in  the  Appendix  (p.  460).  The  incoherence  is  new ;
he  was  quite  coherent  in  1895  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.
XIV.).  Stainton  Moses  controls  again  on  October  30  and
31  ; both  times  making  confused  statements  and  receiving

1  Compare  below,  p.  108,  March  9,  1897.


92  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [pabt


a  good  deal  of  information  from  Hodgson  by  way  of
encouragement  in  the  form  of  leading  questions.  On  the
31st  he  says  in  answer  to  Hodgson  that  he  has  seen
Doctor,  Rector,  and  Imperator  in  spirit  life,  "  and  if  you
will  ask  me  to  come  and  bring  them  with  me  I  will  do
so.  You  may  put  them  to  any  tests  possible.  They  are
equal  to  any."

The  assistance  of  Imperator  and  Co.  is  not,  however,
obtained  at  once.  Stainton  Moses  controls  on  November  9,
1896,  without  their  appearing,  though  he  again  offers  to
bring  them.  On  November  10  he  writes :  "I  have  seen
my  friends  and  they  all  agree  with  me  as  to  the
desirability  of  proving  to  you  just  who  we  all  are,"  and
a  little  later  in  the  sitting  :

I  have  seen  Dr.,  I.  S.  D.  {  =  Imperator},  and  Rector.

One  would  not  assist. One,  Rector,  would  not  say

anything. Doctor  says  he  would  be  glad  to  help.

I.  S.  D.  says  he  also  will  be  glad,  and  if  you  wish

they  will  give  in  their  own  handwriting  a  message

giving  their  names  in  full.
R.  H. I  shall  be  delighted  if  they  will. Can  they  do  that

now  ?

W.  S.  M.  [Conversation  with  invisibles]  Yes  .  .  .  yes  .  .  .  well
I  was  trying  to  see.  I.  S.  D.  is  a  very  remarkable
spirit  as  you  see  ...  at  once.  [Conversation  with
invisibles]  No  I  have  not  .  .  .  yes  .  .  .  not  now  .  .  .
all  right  ...  if  you  wish  ...  as  you  wish  .  .  .  with  me
.  .  .  yes  .  .  .  yes.  The  light  is  not  quite  as  clear  as  I
wish  it  for  Rector  when  he  wishes  to  speak,  I  will
speak  to  him  in  person  once  more,  and  what  I
wish  of  all  things  is  for  my  good  friends  who  taught
me  the  many  truths  of  spirit  life,  to  speak  indi-
vidually, give  their  names,  signs  etc.  unmistakeably
for  you.  Speak  to  Mr.  Pelham  {G.  P.}  a  moment
and  ask  him  to  go  to  Albion  House  and  call  for
Rector.

R.  H. Albion  House  ?  W.  S.  M. Yes. Cypress  Road.

R.  H. Cypress  Road  ?  W.  S.  M.  Yes.

R.  H. In  our  world  ?  W.  S.  M.  No.

R.  H. In  your  world  ? [Thump  for  yes.]


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  93

W.  S.  M. He  will  understand.1

Rector  is  accordingly  fetched,  but  does  not  apparently
take  any  part  in  the  proceedings  that  day.  Imperator,
however,  says  through  Stainton  Moses  :

Imp.  Well,  I  will  give  you  my  faithful  promise  to  return  here
and  speak  my  name  to  you  if  you  will  help  me  to
reach  you,  sir.

R.  H. What  can  /  do  ?

Imp.  Let  me  come  first  with  this  gentleman  who  is  present
now.

R.  H. Mr.  Pelham  ?  Imp.  Yes,  Sir,  &  I  will.

R.  H. The  very  next  time  ?  Imp.  I  will  Sir.

{To  which  Stainton  Moses  adds}
W.  S.  M. Yes he will. I  would tell  you  Mr. Hodgson,  but

since they  would so enjoy  meeting  you I  would

prefer  they  should  do  so.
R.  H. I  leave  it  to  your  discretion. You  know  best.
W.  S.  M. Yes. You  see  for  years  they  would  not  tell  me  who

they  were. Then  after  they  did  tell  me,  they  would

not  allow  me  to  mention  it  to  any  one.
*  *  *  *

The  next  time  I  see  this  light  burning  I  will  mention  all
of  these  names.  He  says  this  *  *  *  And  he  never
broke  his  word  with  me,  and  he  will  not  with  you.

{A  lot  of  explanation  follows  about  the  false  Moses  and
the  false  Imperator  said  to  have  previottsly  com-
municated. }

Accordingly,  at  the  next  sitting,  November  11,  1896,
Imperator  controlled  (see  Appendix,  p.  468).  He  prayed
in  the  manner  that  subsequently  became  characteristic  of
him,  and  gave  a  name,  if  not  two  names,  but  not  the
right  one. His  writing  is  very  faint,  and  the  pencil  moved

1  Albion  House  is  again  referred  to  at  the  next  sitting.  G.  P.  says  :
"  I  went  up  to  Albion  House  for  him  {Imperator}  myself  and  told  him
just  what  you  wished."  And  later  again  on  November  17,  1896,  G.  P.
says  that  Imperator  "  lives  here  in  a  fine  old  chateau  "■ — of  which
Albion  House  is  presumably  the  name  !  This  kind  of  grotesqueness  is
not  common  in  the  records,  and  it  is  of  some  interest  that  the  surprise
Hodgson  doubtless  expressed  in  his  voice  did  not  prevent  Albion  House
being  referred  to  again.


94


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


very  slowly.  In  the  course  of  the  sitting  he  promised  to
bring  scent 1  in  time.

On  November  13,  Mentor,  another  of  Moses's  controls,
professed  to  control,  but  rather  unsuccessfully — he  chiefly
produced  wild  movements  of  the  arm,  but  managed  to
write  "  I  am  Mentor." Later  in  the  sitting  G.  P.  wrote  :

Say,  one  word,  H,  you  have  raised  a  rumpus  over  here,
with  Moses  and  his  many  controls.  They  all  want  to  be
present  at  once,  and  he  also.  Now  that  they  have  only
found  out  this  light  and  there  is  no  stopping  them.

Stainton  Moses  at  this  sitting  talked  of  bringing  scent
"  from  our  flowers  here,"  but  with  less  assurance  than
Imperator  had  shown.  "  I  will  try  and  see  if  I  can  bring
it  to  you."  After  some  talk  about  the  "  Spiritualist
Alliance "  and  about  Moses's  Spirit  Teachings — subjects
introduced  by  Hodgson — Moses  suddenly  says  :

W.  S.  M. Do  you  remember  Ulysses  ?

R.  H. Ulysses !  W.  S.  M.  Yes.

R.  H. The  famous  Ulysses  ?  W.  S.  M.  Yes.

R.  H. Of  Homer  ?  W.  S.  M.  Yes.

R.  H. Of  the  Odyssey  ?  W.  S.  M.  Yes.

R.  H. The  father  of  Telemachus  ?

W.  S.  M. Yes. I  know  him  well.

R.  H. Do  you  remember  Tennyson's  poem  about  Ulysses, —

"  the  weary  oar  " — and  ending  "  Beyond  the  utmost

bound  of  human  thought  "  ?
W.  S.  M. Yes,  exactly, I  do  very  well  indeed,  and  he  also

remembers  of  having  heard  this  read,  but  he  did

not  realize  *  *  *  that  it  was  to  him.
R.  H. Is  he  there  now  ?

W.  S.  M. Yes,  by  you. Who  was  it  that  was  said  to  have
laid  the  egg  for  Martin  Luther.2

1  The  scattering  of  scent  was  a  frequent  phenomenon  at  Stainton
Moses's  own  sittings,  but  not  through  the  agency  of  Imperator.  Not-
withstanding promises  made  more  than  once,  it  never  occurred  at  Mrs.
Piper's  sittings.

2  The  person  said  to  be  standing  by  Hodgson  was  doubtless  Mentor,
who  definitely  claimed  to  be  Ulysses  at  this  period — e.g.  on  December  7,
1896  :  "  Yes.  I  am  Mentor.  Ulysses.  I  am  he  "  (see  for  further  details
Proceedings,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  24). Martin  Luther  had  been  referred  to  at  the


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  95


R.  H. I  forget  that  expression.  W.  S.  M.  Do  you  ?

R.  H. Who  said  it  ?

W.  S.  M. Ulysses. He  was  said  to  have  laid  the

R.  H. What  Ulysses  ?  W.  S.  M.  Erasmus

{Difficulties  in  reading  intervene  here}
R.  H. Erasmus  ?  W.  S.  M.  Yes.

R.  H. The  Reformer  ?  W.  S.  M.  Yes.

R.  H. Not  Ulysses  ?  W.  S.  M.  No.

R.  H. You'd  done  with  Ulysses  ? W.  S.  M.  Yes  I  finished.
R.  H. I  understand  exactly. Erasmus  laid  the  egg.
W.  S.  M. Yes. He  is  with  me  now.

I  think  it  will  be  agreed  that  it  requires  great  good-
will not  to  attribute  real  fundamental  confusion  between
Erasmus  and  Ulysses  to  the  control  here — not  merely
confusion  induced  by  difficulties  in  controlling.

After  some  more  talk  and  brief  controlling  by  Moses's
old  friend  Dr.  Speer,  by  Imperator,  and  by  Doctor — the
latter  holding  the  pencil  awkwardly  and  the  arm  stiffly,
and  requiring  instruction  from  Hodgson,  but  writing  a
large  and  heavy  script — Moses  reappeared  and  the  following
conversation  occurred  :
R.  H. Doctor's  very  powerful.

W.  S.  M.  Always  was.  Rector  more  so  if  anything.  Imperator
is  my  idol.

R.  H.  His  writing  is  very  faint.  I  suppose  it's  because  he's
farther  away  from  earth  than  they  are.

W.  S.  M. Yes. It  is  more  difficult  for  him  now  than  when  he

used  to  come  to  me.1

previous  sitting  (November  11,  1896,  see  Appendix,  p.  470).  This  and
some  of  the  other  names  mentioned  by  Mrs.  Piper's  controls  at  this  period
had  occurred  in  Myers's  papers  on  the  expei'iences  of  Stainton  Moses  in
Proceedings,  Vols.  IX.  and  XI. — e.g.  Erasmus,  Grocyn,  Lydgate,  Louis
Napoleon.  In  the  script,  however,  we  have  not  Louis  Napoleon  but  Alex-
andria Napoleon.  Is  this  perhaps  a  combination  of  Louis  Napoleon  and
Alexander  Theliffsen,  a  name  mentioned  on  the  next  page  of  Myers's  article  ?
The  Piper  Stainton  Moses  asserts  in  reply  to  Hodgson's  query,  that  Alex-
andria Napoleon  is  correct  and  will  be  found  in  his  note-books.  There
had  also  been  a  good  deal  in  the  journal  Light  recently  about  W.  S.  Moses'
controls,  but  I  do  not  know  if  Mrs.  Piper  ever  saw  this  paper.

1  This  is  irrelevant  if  it  means  it  is  more  difficult  for  Imperator  to
write,  for  he  did  not  profess  to  write  himself  through  Stainton  Moses.
He  employed  Rector  as  amanuensis.


96


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


R.  H.  I  suppose  it's  like  going  into  a  suffocating  region
like  going  down  a  pit  full  of  poisonous  gases.

W.  S.  M.  Yes,  as  it  was  for  me  at  first.  I  heard  the  voices
of  other  spirits  call  and  I  gave  their  names  to  you
instead  of  my  own,  I  suppose,  from  what  I  have
heard  you  say.  Too  bad,  but  I  was  not  aware  of
so  doing.

These  last  statements  were  meant,  of  course,  to  explain
his  failure  in  the  sittings  with  Dr.  Newbold  in  1895,  but
any  one  referring  to  the  account  of  these  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  XIV.,  will  find  the  explanation  rather  difficult  to  fit
with  the  facts.

On  the  next  day,  November  14,  1896,  W.  S.  Moses
again  appears  and  asks  :

W.  S  M.  What  would  you  have  me  do  for  you  now,  Mr.
Hodgson  ?

R.  H. Rector  has  not  written  at  all  yet.

W.  S.  M. No. Shall  I  call  him  here  ?  1 I  will  speak  to  him.

Yes.  Give  my  love,  to  Sidgwick,  both  Mr.  and
Mrs.,  also  to  Myers,  Watts,  Massey,  Wedgewood,
Bennett  3  and  any  other  friends  who  may  enquire
for  me.

R.  H. But  Wedgwood  is  with  you  now,  isn't  he  ?
W.  S.  M. I  intended  this. He  just  mentioned  to  send  his  love
also.

This  is  an  explanation  clearly  suggestive  of  shuffling.

For  some  months  W.  S.  Moses  continued  to  control
from  time  to  time.  It  would  be  tedious  to  refer  to  every
occasion.  The  quotations  already  given  will  serve  as
specimens,  and  I  have  quoted  as  further  examples  in  the
Appendix  the  parts  of  the  sittings  of  December  4  and  5,
1896,  in  which  Moses  controlled.  On  January  16,  1897,
Hodgson  told  G.  P.  that  "  even  Moses  and  his  friends
haven't  proved  their  identities.  Doctor  and  Rector  and
Imperator  haven't  given  me  their  real  names  yet  "  (see  below,

1  Rector  writes  later  in  the  sitting  (see  Appendix,  p.  470).

2  The  mere  mention  of  these  names  is  of  no  significance,  as  they
might  all  have  been  easily  known  to  Mrs.  Piper  through  the  Proceedings
of  the  S.P.R.  or  otherwise.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  97

p.  116).  Questions  from  C.  C.  Massey  intended,  as  mentioned
above,  to  draw  out  what  should  have  been  vivid  recollections
on  the  part  of  Moses,  were  read  to  the  control  on  January  21,
but  the  answers  given  were  all  wrong.  Failure,  however,
did  not  discourage  the  soi-disant  Moses,  who  continued  to
assure  Hodgson  that  in  time  he  would  give  proofs  of  his
identity ;  and  excuses  were  made  for  him,  as  e.g.  by
Doctor  on  February  4,  "  When  one  cannot  extricate  him-
self from  the  crowd  which  surrounds  him,  as  has  been  the
case  here,  one  cannot  express  one's  own  thoughts  clearly,.
Hence  confusion.  U.D.  Such  has  been  the  case  with  poor
old  Moses.  Yet  he  when  not  in  the  act  of  communicating
is  clear  and  coherent."

Vain  attempts  at  identifying  statements  continue  to  be
made  occasionally,  as  e.g.  on  March  2,  1897,  when  Moses
wrote  :

When  you  see  my  friend  Sidgwick  kindly  ask  him  if  he
remembers  the  evening  we  spent  together  at  his  own  home
when  we  discussed  this  very  subject  viz  :  the  one  of  which
we  were  speaking  spiritualism.  Also  ask  him  if  he  re-
members saying  he  was  willing  to  receive  any  thing  that
was  true,  yet  he  must  or  preferred  to  judge  of  its  truth
from  his  own  experience.  I  think  if  I  remember  rightly
this  was  the  only  evening  I  ever  spent  with  him.

Unfortunately,  like  the  other  attempts,  this  was  a  bad
shot,  for  he  never  was  in  Sidgwick's  house.  On  the  whole,
after  November,  1896,  W.  S.  Moses  takes  a  subordinate
place,  retiring  into  the  background  as  the  Imperator  Band
begin  to  take  the  leading  place,  and  gradually  ceasing  alto-
gether to  control.  He  admits  on  April  2,  1897,  that  "  I
never  could  do  what  your  friend  Pelham  has  done,  because
I  am  not  as  clear  and  strong  as  he  is.  I  do  not  get  the
same  control  which  he  does."  Hodgson,  discussing  him
as  a  control  (in  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  408),  after  observing  that
he  gave  entirely  wrong  names  for  Imperator,  Doctor,  and
Rector,  "  and  failed  later  in  attempting  to  answer  test
questions  propounded  by  some  of  his  friends,"  adds  that
"  later  still,  however,  he  did  furnish  some  private  informa-
tion, unknown  to  the  sitters,  and  afterwards  verified  in

G


98


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PAET


England,  and  well  adapted  so  far  as  it  went  as  an  indica-
tion of  identity."  I  do  not  know  what  this  private  infor-
mation was,  nor  whether  it  was  beyond  probable  guesswork,
nor  whether  it  was  drawn  out  by  leading  questions.  (It
was  not,  I  think,  to  Hodgson  that  it  was  given.)  But  I
gather  from  the  way  Hodgson  speaks  of  it  that  it  does  not
go  far  to  outweigh  the  many  irrelevant,  implausible,  and
false  statements  which  have  to  be  explained  away,  and  that
consequently  we  must  regard  W.  Stainton  Moses  as  having
failed  to  establish  his  identity.  And,  similarly,  Imperator
and  his  band,  whatever  they  were,  must  be  regarded  as
having  falsely  claimed  identity  with  Stainton  Moses's  spirit
guides.

The  Imperator  Band.

It  was  on  January  26,  1897,  that  Imperator  at  the
request  of  Hodgson  undertook  the  part  of  chief  control.
At  the  end  of  a  communication  by  G.  P.,  the  latter
writes  :

G.  P.  Here  comes  +  {  =  Imperator}.  We  must  soon  all
leave,  H.  He  is  going  to  take  charge  of  every-
thing next  time  and  keep  us  all  out,  so  he  sent  me
here  with  others  to  free  my  mind  and  get  through
with  everything.1

Then  after  a  few  more  remarks  G.  P.  leaves  and
Imperator  writes  :

Imp.  +  Hail.
R.  H.  Hail.

Imp. All is going  well. The way  is being  opened  slowly.

Patience  is  not  without  reward.  Father  sustain  him
and  give  him  strength,  courage,  hope  and  light.  I
will  command  the  light  and  it  will  obey.  Your
messages 2  will  be  given  by  all.  Time  is  all  [?]
Hold  thou  no  cross  above  thy  head,  but  bear  it.

1  It  will  be  observed  that  G.  P.  here  appears  no  longer  to  feel  the
objection  he  did  three  months  previously  (see  above,  p.  91)  to  being
deprived  of  his  position.

2  To  the  medium  Myers  was  sitting  with  in  England.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  99


Should  thou  feel  weak,  call  for  help  and  it  will  be
given  thee.

The  light  is  only  fair  there.1 It  will  improve.  What
wouldst  thou  have  me  do  ?
R.  H.  I  want  you  to  take  charge  of  the  light  and  do  what

you  think  best  for  humanity.
Imp. Ah  yes  I  will,  but  at  this  meeting.

R.  H.  [I  ask  whether  my  exterior  or  interior  consciousness
affects  the  communications,  etc.,  my  opinions,  pre-
judices, etc.]

Imp. At  times  you  do.

R.  H. How  can  I  lessen  that  ?

Imp. By  attending  to  one  thing  first.

R.  H. Keeping  to  one  thought.

Imp. Yes  and  not  introduce  so  many  outside  intelligences.
R.  H. So  that  the  stream  of  your  thought  shall  go  on  without
interruption.

Imp.  Yes,  unbroken.  But  I  have  seen  nothing  but  confusion
here.

R.  H.  [I  think  I  referred  here  to  the  several  matters  un-
finished.]

Imp.  Yes,  but  you  have  had  about  all  the  tests  that  time
can  give  through  this  light.  Now  there  should  be
higher  development.  And  it  must  be  done.  It  is
like  a  child  studying  music.  It  must  overcome  the
drudgery,  when  in  time  it  produces  clear  and
beautiful  strains  of  music.  The  comjjarison  is
similar.  I  was  free  with  my  medium  Moses.  I
must  be  free  here  to  do  good  work.  I  must  give
you  light  and  then  the  door  will  close  here  forever.

R.  H. In  this  medium  ?

Imp. Yes. After  my  work  has  been  completed  I  shall  depart

forever  from  this  door  and  close  it  behind  me.
R.  H. So  that  no  harm  can  come  ?

Imp. Yes,  and  leave  the  natural  soul  in  its  own  environment.

Until  then  I  will  be  constantly  with  you.  I  must
depart  for  the  present  and  give  you  time  in  which
to  think  it  over.  May  God  in  his  mercy  be  and
abide  with  thee  meanwhile.  Amen.  Imperator  lover
1  Presumably  with  Myers's  medium  in  England.


100


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


of  Proteus  [?]  Dante  Homer1  [undecipherable  words]
I.  S.  D.

Hodgson  on  the  next  day  told  Mrs.  Piper  of  the  pro-
posal that  Imperator  should  take  charge,  "  reading  her
such  portion  of  his  {Imperator's }  remarks  as  did  not  refer
to  the  '  other  light.'  "  He  explained  Imperator's  relation
to  W.  S.  Moses,  and  left  her  a  copy  of  his  Spirit  Teach-
ings to  consider.2  She  made  no  objection,  and  the  re-
volution was  accomplished.  It  was  more  than  a  sub-
stitution of  the  Imperator  Band  for  Phinuit,  for  Hodgson
himself,  for  a  time  at  least,  abdicated  the  direction  of
affairs,  so  that  the  controls  had  a  completely  free  hand
as  to  conditions.  In  Hodgson's  brief  account  of  the
change,  at  the  end  of  Ins  second  Report  (Proceedings,
Vol.  XIII.,  p.  408),  he  speaks  of  it  as  having  been  deter-
mined by  the  controls  to  a  greater  extent  than  the  written
records  we  have  fully  indicate.  He  says  that  Imperator
"  demanded  that  the  control  of  Mrs.  Piper's  '  light '  should
be  placed  in  their  hands,"  and  that  he  (Hodgson)  "  was
repeatedly  and  emphatically  urged  "  thereto  by  G.  P.

I  have  already,  in  discussing  the  Stainton  Moses  con-
trol, quoted  passages  from  the  records  showing  how
Imperator  (who  first  controlled  on  November  11,  1896),
and  Doctor  and  Mentor  (who  first  controlled  on  Novem-
ber 13),  came  on  the  scene.  Rector's  first  appearance  as
control  was  on  November  14,  1896,  and  the  account  of  this,
as  well  as  of  Imperator's  first  appearance,  will  be  found  in
the  Appendix  to  this  chapter,  pp.  468-470.  In  Chapter
II.  above,  and  its  Appendices,  are  quoted  numerous  pas-
sages giving  accounts  by  Imperator,  Doctor,  and  Rector
of  the  process  of  controlling,  and  their  pseudo-scientific
explanations  of  it.  These  accounts  were  for  the  most  part
given  in  the  early  months  of  their  controlling,  when,  as  we

1  Some  of  the  names  previously  given  in  connexion  with  the  Imperator
Band.  I.S.D.  stands  for  Imperator  Servus  Dei  and  was  used  as  a  signa-
ture by  Imperator  as  the  -f-  was.  Both  symbols  were  used  by  the
Imperator  of  Spirit  Teachings.

2  It  has  been  suggested  that  from  an  evidential  point  of  view  it  was
unwise  to  put  Spirit  Teachings  into  Mrs.  Piper's  hands,  but  ignorance
of  a  published  and  easily  accessible  book  could  hardly  have  been  assumed
in  any  case.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance  Phenomena.  101


have  seen,  Hodgson  questioned  them  closely  on  the  subject.
There  still,  however,  remain  some  things  to  say  about  the
characters  and  functions  of  the  members  of  the  Imperator
Band.

Imperator  is  represented  as  a  very  "  high  spirit."  "  I've
never  seen  any  spirit  higher  than  he  is,"  says  Phinuit  on
December  14,  1896.  G.  P.  calls  him  his  holy  majesty.
Rector  says  on  June  21,  1905  (as  reported  by  Miss
A.  M.  R.),  "  No  greater  spirit  ever  appeared  to  earth  than
Imperator.  His  power  is  divine,  it  is  high,  it  is  noble
*  *  *  He  is  in  communion  with  the  Great  and  Holy
Spirit."  Myersp  says  on  May  20,  1903,  that  Imperator
"  is  all  powerful."  He  himself  appears  to  rank  himself
with  the  prophets,  and  at  times  speaks  as  having  received
divine  authority.  On  one  occasion  he  says  to  Hodgson,
who  was  in  difficulty  about  getting  money  to  pay  for
sittings,  "  Cast  thy  burdens  upon  myself  and  God.  We
will  bear  them  all."  And,  speaking  of  the  work  of  the
band,  Rector  says  for  him  on  July  3,  1897,  "  More
satisfactory,  higher,  clearer,  better  work  than  has  ever
been  done  since  the  days  of  Christ  will  be  done  there-
after. This  will  be  nearly  at  the  closing  of  this  epoch.1
Then  thou  must  look  for  other  lights."

Imperator's  communications  read  in  the  light  of  claims
such  as  these  produce  on  me  an  unpleasant  effect  of
pretentious  inadequacy.2  But,  though  this  is  my  own
feeling,  it  must  be  remembered  that  it  does  not  appear
to  have  been  Hodgson's,  nor  that  of  some  other  sitters  in
America.  Hodgson  would,  of  course,  have  agreed  that  it
is  impossible  to  accept  all  the  statements  made,  but  he  con-
cluded that  the  undeniable  errors  and  inconsistencies  must

1  "  This  epoch  "  is,  I  think,  the  period  of  Mrs.  Piper's  mediumship.  It
may,  however,  be  the  end  of  the  epoch  preceding  the  millennium  (see  above,
p.  90,  and  below,  p.  122).

2  The  same  is  true  of  Stainton  Moses's  Imperator,  who  also  made  lofty
claims  ;  but  it  is  much  worse  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Imperator,
whose  communications  are  not  only  incoherent  and  contradictory  but
altogether  on  a  lower  level  of  culture  than  what  we  find  in  Spirit
Teachings.  This,  of  course,  is  what  one  would  expect  if  the  communi-
cations either  originate  in,  or  are  importantly  affected  by,  the  mind  of
the  medium  concerned.


102


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


be  attributed  to  the  difficulty  of  working  with  the  medium's
organism.  When  and  how  he  arrived  at  this  conclusion  I  do
not  know,  nor  whether  he  was  first  impressed  with  Impera-
tor's  teaching  and  inferred  from  it  his  wisdom  and  genuine-
ness, or,  on  the  other  hand,  first  accepted  Imperator  as  a
very  high  spirit  on  the  authority  of  G.  P.,  and  felt  his  teach-
ing to  be  impressive  and  authoritative  on  this  account.1
Personally,  I  can  more  easily  understand  the  impressiveness
of  Rector  as  manifested  in  later  years — when  Imperator
took  little  part  except  in  opening  and  closing  sittings  with
greetings  and  prayer — for  Rector  is  less  pretentious.2

Imperator's  ignorance  of  science  combined  with  assump-
tion of  knowledge,  as  shown  in  his  discussion  of  the
process  of  controlling,  has  been  illustrated  in  Chapter  II.
and  its  Appendix.  When  his  exposition  of  this  subject
was  finished,  Hodgson  started  him  on  the  history  of
revelation,  and  thus  gave  him  the  opportunity  of  dis-
playing similar  ignorance,  combined  with  similar  claims  to
knowledge,  of  history  and  theology.  It  was  on  February
12,  1897,  that  Hodgson  introduced  the  subject.  He
suggested  to  Imperator  that  there  were  several  interesting
subjects  that  he  might  discourse  on,  and  continued  :

R.  H.  One  of  the  most  important  subjects  appears  to  me  to  be
a  general  or  detailed  account  of  the  revelation  of
God  to  man  on  this  planet.  About  this  you  gave
some  instruction  to  Moses  which  has  been  published
in  his  Sjnrit  Teachings.  I  refer  to  the  references
to  the  chief  line  of  descent  from  Melchisedek  to
Christ  in  successive  human  beings  who  were  guided
by  higher  spirits  from  your  world.  And  it  seems  to
me  that  the  world  now  might  be  ready  to  receive  a
fuller  account  of  the  lines  of  spirit  influence  in
different  nations  of  the  world.  What  do  you  think
of  the  desirability  of  this  ?

1  Professor  Newbold,  who  had  much  opportunity  of  knowing  Hodgson's
thoughts  and  feelings  as  the  investigation  proceeded,  is  inclined  to  think
that  he  accepted  Imperator  finally  on  account  of  his  being  an  inseparable
part  of  the  spiritistic  interpretation  as  a  whole,  having  seen  many  cases
which  he  regarded  as  practically  conclusive.

2  For  William  James  on  Rector's  impressiveness,  see  above,  pp.  79-80.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  103

Imperator  agreed,  and  on  the  following  day,  February
13,  1897,  began  his  discourses  on  the  subject  with  state-
ments about  the  openness  to  spirit  influence  of  early  man,
mankind  being  then  purer  and  more  spiritually  developed.
The  discussion  between  him  and  Hodgson  on  that  day,
and  how  Hodgson  brought  him  to  agree  to  a  statement
in  accordance  with  the  theory  of  evolution,  will  be  found
in  the  Appendix,  pp.  471-8.  Imperator  next  returned  to  the
subject  on  February  20,  1897,  with  the  words  :

Imp.  Hail  friend  of  earth  I  am  with  thee  again.  Would  go
back  to  the  early  christian  church  the  first  revela-
tion of  God  *  *  *  There  was  the  kingdom  known  in
those  ancient  days  as  the  kingdom  of  Melchisedek.

During  this  sitting,  and  some  ten  more  in  the  course  of
February  and  March,  the  subject  is  continued — I  cannot
say  developed,  for  there  is  much  repetition  and  very
little  information.  The  general  line  will  be  seen 1  from
the  record  of  March  10,  1897,  given  in  the  Appendix,
p.  478.  Notwithstanding  a  good  deal  of  assistance  from
Hodgson,  who  both  gave  elementary  information  by  way
of  criticism  or  in  answer  to  questions,  and  also  interpreted
Imperator's  statements  for  him — the  latter  managed  to
produce  a  medley  of  nonsense  and  contradiction.  He  said,
for  instance,  on  February  23  :

From  the  days  of  M[elchisedek]  to  the  life  of  Abraham,
there  were  many  whose  perceptions  were  such  as  to  enable
them  to  gain  knowledge  of  God,  yet  there  were  none  of
his  people  who  were  in  a  condition  for  God  to  reveal
himself  as  he  did  to  Abraham,  i.e.  between  the  days  of
M[elchisedek]  and  A[braham].

But  when  the  next  day,  February  24,  Hodgson  demurred
to  the  interval  of  time  between  Melchisedek  and  Abraham,
he  withdrew  it  and  said,  "  that  is  wrongly  registered,  there
was  no  time  between."  He  said  also  that  Abraham  "  did
more  to  develop  and  raise  the  Jews  "  than  any  other  in
his  day.

1  Together  with  a  conversation  with  G.  P.  showing  some  dissatisfaction
on  Hodgson's  part,  p.  484.


104


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


He  said  at  the  same  sitting,  February  24  :

Imp.  From  the  time  of  M[oses]  to  C[hrist]  men  were  en-
lightened. Then  after  this  period  so  changed  did
men  become,  that  they  grew  to  be  more  of  the
earth,  earthy,  being  misled  by  the  teaching  of  the
Bible,  their  Book.

Hodgson  suggests  that  he  is  perhaps  referring  to  the
"  dark  ages,"  and  Imperator  admits  this  and  says  pre-
sently :

Imp.  To  us  the  dark  ages  are  known  as  existing  only  in  the
days  of  the  Papacy  when  in  the  reign  of  the  Popes
they  crucified  and  slaughtered  God's  people  in  large
numbers.

On  March  10  Imperator  says  that  Melchisedek  after  his
death  :

Imp.  did  live  and  so  act  upon  the  earth,  manifesting  himself
in  different  form,  that  he  actually  reigned  all
through  the  days  of  Abraham  M[oses]  E[lijah]  and
E[lisha]  down  to  the  days  of  King  David.

*  *  *  *

The  wondrous  workings  of  M[elchisedek]  will  never  be
blotted  out  of  the  history  of  the  early  church.

He  talks  on  March  16  of  Abraham  preaching  to  the
Jews,  and  adds  :

Imp He  made  kings  of  the  Jews,  built  temples  of  worship,

rescued  Lot  dost  thou  not  U.D.  me  ?
R.  H.  You  mean  kings  metaphorically.

Imp.  Yes.  They  became  followers  of  Mjelchisedek]  down  to
Moses,  Elijah,  Elisha,  etc.  when  according  to  thy
book,  which  is  wrong,  came  the  Levitical  period.

And  on  March  24  :

Imp.  We  follow  the  teachings  of  Mjelchisedek]  through  all  the
ages  down  to  David,  Daniel,  Samuel.  We  do  not
follow  him  after  this  period.

R.  H Which  period  ?

Imp. After the levitical priesthood. After this there  came


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance  Phenomena.  105

Christ.  I  wish  thee  to  understand  all.  Is  it  at  all
clear  ?

R.  H.  I  think  I  understand  what  you  mean.  It  is  expressed
in  a  way  different  from  ours.

It  would,  I  think,  be  of  little  profit  to  examine  these
discourses  of  Imperator  in  further  detail,  though  they  bulk
so  largely  among  his  utterances.

One  thing  to  be  remarked  about  the  Imperator  Band  is
the  change  it,  by  degrees,  undergoes.  When  Mrs.  Piper
was  in  England  in  1907,  for  instance,  we  had  Imperator
in  the  background  supposed  to  be  organising  the  whole
business,  and  communicating  briefly  at  the  beginning  and
end  of  the  sittings  with  a  greeting  and  a  prayer  and
blessing.  He  was  there  to  be  referred  to  by  his  assistants,
as  it  were,  but  communicated  very  little  himself.  Rector
had  become  the  member  of  the  band  with  whom  sitters
mostly  came  in  contact — the  serious,  earnest,  patient
individual  anxious  to  help  everyone  on  both  sides,  whom
all  who  have  sat  with  Mrs.  Piper  of  recent  years — indeed,
I  think,  since  1898 — know.  Communicators,  while  availing
themselves  of  his  services,  speak  of  him  sometimes  in  such
patronising  terms  as  e.g.  "  good  old  Rector,"  and  seem  to
regard  him  as  rather  ignorant  and  a  little  stupid.  "  It
was  very  stupid  of  Rector  I  must  say  {to  write  "evangelical''
instead  of  "Evelyn  Hope"}  as  Hodgson  and  Myers  both  kept
repeating  it  over  and  over  again,  to  him,"  says  G.  P.
on  March  6,  1907  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  61).

Mentor  retired  early,  and  Doctor — at  least  so  far  as  the
Doctor  professing  to  have  been  Stainton  Moses's  control
is  concerned — appears  very  little  after  1897.  The  Im-
perator Band  secured  the  services  of  another  doctor  for
purposes  of  medical  diagnosis  and  advice,  namely,  a
deceased  Boston  physician,  Dr.  Oliver.  They  speak  of
him  in  1904  as  "  the  doctor,"  as  "  our  doctor,"  and  say
he  "  came  to  us  recently."  But  I  do  not  think  there  is
confusion,  at  this  stage  at  least,  between  him  and  Stainton
Moses's  Doctor ;  perhaps  there  is  later  when  he  becomes
"  Doctor "  without  the  "  the."  I  believe,  however,  that
the  original  Doctor  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Imperator  Band  (not,
of course, of Stainton Moses's) regarded himself as  a


106


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


doctor  of  medicine,  at  any  rate  after  he  had  given  up
being  Homer  (see  November  14,  1896,  Appendix,  p.  471).
Thus  on  December  3,  1896,  there  is  an  air  of  anatomical
knowledge,  and  he  spontaneously  diagnosed  and  prescribed
for  Hodgson  who  had  a  sore  throat.  There  is  an  amusing
piece  of  sensitiveness  about  his  language  on  January  29,
1897,  when  he  says  :

Yes,  but  I  wish  you  to  understand  me  because  I  am  a
gentleman  and  I  know  my  letters  thoroughly.  I  wish
therefore  to  get  my  sentences  correct  for  your  under-
standing.

Prudens,  another  of  Stainton  Moses's  controls,  is  not
mentioned  at  first,  I  think,  and  at  no  time  communicates
much.  His  chief  function  is  that  of  a  messenger  who  can
be  sent  to  look  for  spirits,  or  to  convey  a  message  to
another  medium.  He  seems  to  be  a  vaguely  conceived
personage,  for  though  in  1899  he  was  described  by  Mrs.
Piper  in  the  waking-stage  as  a  little  old  man,  and  though
he  is  generally  spoken  of  as  "  he  " — as,  e.g.  on  March  13,
1901,  when  Rector  says  :

Prudens  who  went  and  looked  up  this  case  *  *  *  and
was  explaining  to  me  for  thy  U.D.  the  condition  exactly
as  he  found  it  to  be  ;

or  in  1907  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  88)  when
HodgsonP  says  :

Prudens  has  been  to  Mrs.  Verrall  but  he  has  not  been
able  to  get  the  message  through  to  her  ;

-yet  on  May  26,  1906  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIIL,  p.  81),
he  turns  up  as  a  lady.  William  James  was  on  this
occasion  the  sitter  and  recorder,  and  Hodgson,  who  at
this  time  had  been  dead  five  months,  the  communicator.

Hodgsonp.  You  understand  that  we  have  to  have  a  medium  on
this  side  while  you  have  a  medium  on  your  side,
and  through  the  two  we  communicate  with  you.

W.  J. And  your  medium  is  who  ?

HodgsoNj,.  We  have  a  medium  on  this  side.  It  is  a  lady.  I
don't  think  she  is  known  to  you.


lxxi.]  Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  107
W.  J. You  don't  mean  Rector  ?

Hodgsonp.  No,  not  at  all. It  is — do  you  remember  a  medium

whom  we  called  Prizdens  ?
W.  J.  Yes.

Hodgsonp.  Prudens is a great help. Through Prudens  we
accomplish  a  great  deal.

This,  it  may  be  observed,  seems  to  involve  a  new  view
of  the  modus  operandi.1  The  same  function  is  assigned  to
Hodgsonp,  on  January  1,  1907,  see  Appendix  to  Chapter  V.
p.  524.  G.  P.  is  sometimes  described  as  taking  notes  on
the  other  side  as  Hodgson  did  on  this  ;  but  that  is
different.

To  return  to  Rector,  who  is  from  our  point  of  view
much  the  most  interesting  and  important  member  of  the
band,  he  at  first,  as  we  have  seen,  controlled  and  com-
municated only  on  his  own  account,  just  as  Doctor  and
Imperator  did.  It  was  not  till  March,  1897,  that  he  took
office  as  intermediary  between  other  communicators  and
the  sitter.  Imperator  speaks  of  him  on  March  4,  1897,
as  his  chief  assistant,  and  on  March  11  he  writes  for
Imperator,  and  does  so  several  times  later  in  the  month,
though  they  each  also  communicate  directly  on  their  own
account.  On  the  18th  Rector  says  :  "  I  am  between  your-
self and  Imperator,  and  must  listen  to  you  both  which  is
not  easy  for  a  partially  developed  spirit  to  do."  Towards
the  end  of  the  month  other  sitters  besides  Hodgson  are  ad-
mitted for  the  first  time  since  the  Imperator  Band  took
charge,  and  Rector  wrote  for  their  friends  ;  so  his  position
as  intermediary  and  amanuensis  may  now  be  regarded  as
established.  Moreover,  he  also  about  the  same  period  is
represented  as  performing  Phinuit's  former  part  in  occupy-
ing the  head  and  body,  but  without  speaking,  while  George
Eliot  writes  with  the  hand.  I  quoted  an  instance  from  the
sitting  of  March  5,  1897,  in  Chapter  I.  (p.  18),  and  another
from  that  of  April  5,  1897,  in  Chapter  II.  (p.  36).  One  on
March  30,  1897,  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix  to  the  present

1  Mrs.  Verrall  tells  me  that  the  view  that  a  medium  is  wanted  on  both
sides  was  strongly  held  in  the  automatic  writing  of  Mrs.  Forbes,  and  that
the  question  was  discussed  by  the  latter  with  Hodgson  on  one  of  his  visits
to  England  about  1900.


108


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


chapter  (p.  499)  ;  and  one  on  March  31,  1897,  in  the
Appendix  to  Chapter  II.  (p.  415). An  instance  on  March  9,

1897,  is  perhaps  worth  quoting  here  because  it  led  to  a
remark  about  spirits  hearing,  which  may  be  compared  with
G.  P.'s  on  October  17,  1896  (see  above,  p.  91).  George
Eliot  writes  :  "  Rector  said  I  will  remain  with  you  here
and  arrange  all  these  material  things  for  you  "• — i.e.
Mrs.  Piper's  position,  etc.  ;  and  a  little  later,  when  asking
for  a  message  to  take  to  Myers,  she  writes  :  "  I  do  not  wish
you  to  speak  it  loudly,  but  slowly,  softly,  so  that  I  alone
may  hear  it,  or  no  one  but  myself  and  Rector  *  *  *  Do
not  let  the  rest  of  the  spirits  hear  it. Rector  says  ready."

Rector  may  then  about  this  date  be  described  as  having
taken  Phinuit's  place,  especially  as  he  also  undertook
Phinuit's  function  of  medical  adviser.  One  difference,
however,  was  that  Phinuit  spoke  and  Rector  wrote.
Rector  never  spoke  during  his  first  months  of  office,  and
later  only  for  a  few  favoured  sitters.  The  post  of  inter-
mediary is  represented  as  a  somewhat  arduous  one,  for,
in  addition  to  the  difficult  task  of  both  listening  to
the  communicator  and  writing  down  ("  registering  ")  what
he  says,1  he  has  to  "  hold  the  light,"  or  his  "  position
in  the  light,"  or  "  hold  the  end  of  the  cord."  2  When
things  go  wrong  Rector  has  to  bear  the  blame,  and
he  only  holds  his  post  during  Imperator's  good  pleasure.
For  instance,  there  was  serious  trouble  on  December  19,

1898,  when  there  had  been  a  very  confused  sitting.  It  was
a  first  sitting,  that  is  the  sitter  had  not  been  present  before,
and  she  did  not  recognise  the  professing  communicators  at
all. She  writes  about  it  as  follows  :

More  than  thirty  names  were  given  but  no  names  of
any  of  my  deceased  or  living  friends  were  among  them.
Eight  different  forms  of  relationship  were  given  and  the

1  "  When  I  am  not  listening  I  can  register  well  enough,"  says  Rector
on  January  25,  1905,  and  again  on  March  27,  1905:  "I  find  it  im-
possible for  me  to  listen  and  register  carefully  at  the  same  moment."
On  both  of  these  occasions  Hodgson  had  complained  of  his  writing  one
word  on  the  top  of  another.

2Cf.  Appendix  to  Chapter  II.,  p.  430  (May  25,  1904),  and  also  Appendix
to  this  Chapter,  p.  490  (May  24,  1904).


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  109


relationship  of  myself  to  my  departed  friend  was  among
them,  but  nothing  whatever  was  given  to  show  the  per-
sonality of  this  friend.

The  writing  had  been  rapid  and  often  illegible.  At  the
next  sitting — December  24,  1898 — Hodgson  being  alone,
Imperator  (apparently  through  Rector)  remarks,  referring
to  the  failure  :

We  cannot  burden  Rector  with  the  responsibility  of
taking  care  of  new  communicators,  and  we  will  search  and
find  another  control  whom  we  will  have  serve  in  his
place  +.  We  find  that  unless  all  the  forces  are  in  activity
from  our  side  he  is  incapable  of  assuming  the  responsi-
bility and  *  *  *  we  are  not  at  all  times  present  *  *  *
We  have  been  contemplating  a  trial  with  either  Prudens
or  Doctor.  We  will  during  the  next  meeting  for  test
purposes  send  either  one  or  the  other  *  *  *.  We  cannot
ask  thy  friend  George  to  take  that  position,  as  he  is  going
on  to  a  higher  and  better  condition.1

Rector  is  apparently  forgiven  however,  as  there  is  no
sign  of  this  contemplated  change  having  been  carried  out.

There  is  another  thing  to  notice  about  Rector,  namely,
that  the  inconsistency  of  his  statements  as  to  the  name
he  bore  on  earth  extends  also  to  the  language  he  spoke.
On  May  26,  1898,  the  sitter,  Mrs.  "  Howard,"  reports
as  follows — Rector  was  using  the  voice  :

Rector  talks  about  my  health  and  all  my  affairs  and  is
very  sweet  and  consoling.  Then  he  says  a  prayer  in  a
strange  tongue  no  word  of  which  I  can  understand.  He
says  that  I  must  say  that  prayer.  I  say  I  don't  under-
stand it.  He  says  it  is  Hebrew  and  that  he  lived  long
ago  and  was  Hebrew  and  wishes  me  to  learn  to  speak
some  Hebrew  words.  He  is  sure  I  can  do  so.  He  then
says  as  nearly  as  I  could  tell  :  "  sick  nim  kim  kray  "  and
says  that  is  one,  two,  three,  four.  Then  he  says  "  ain,
nim,  kain,  kr-g  " — this  last  a  guttural  like  German  with  no
vowel  sound. He  is  much  pleased  with  my  pronouncing

1  More  than  a  year  and  a  half  before  this  (April  23,  1897)  it  had
been  said  that  "His  work  in  your  field  is  done"  (see  above,  p.  81).


110


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


this  correctly.  He  says  he  wishes  much  to  teach  me  some
Hebrew — that  this  will  please  Hodgson  !  1

A  few  days  later  the  same  sitter,  this  time  accompanied
by  her  daughter,  records  :

Rector  speaks  in  a  clear  deep  voice,  *  *  *  He  then
prays  in  Hebrew.  He  says  Hebrew  is  his  native  tongue,
easier  to  him  than  English  ;  then  translates.

It  is  curious  after  this  to  find  Rector  on  January  16,
1907,  in  England,  writing  as  amanuensis  for  Imperator
what  he  said  he  thought  were  Hebrew  letters  (they
scarcely  bore  even  a  superficial  resemblance),  but  unable
to  understand  them  himself.

Rector's  statement  on  January  21,  1907  (see  Proceedings,
Vol.  XXII.,  p.  35)  that  his  name  was  Francis,  could
hardly  be  consistent  with  Hebrew  being  his  native  tongue.
Nor,  again,  combined  with  the  ecclesiastical  character  given
him  in  the  trance  communications,2  is  it  easily  reconciled
with  his  being  spoken  of  by  MyersP  as  "  good  old  Rector
who  does  not  understand  a  word  of  Latin  "  (see  Proceedings,
Vol.  XXII.,  p.  337).

One  reason  given  in  January,  1897,  for  the  taking  over
by  the  Imperator  Band  of  the  management  of  medium
and  sittings  was  that  the  medium  had  been  worn  out  by
sittings  for  tests  of  identity  or  of  supernormal  power.  If
the  "  light "  is  to  last,  they  say,  sittings  for  instruction
and  consolation  must  be  substituted  for  test  sittings,  the
implication  apparently  being  that  the  former  are  less  of  a
strain  to  the  medium,  who  is  spoken  of  as  a  "  battered
and  worn "  machine  (February  6,  1897)  which  must  be
repaired.  Imperator  writes  (January  26,  1897,  see  above,
p.  99),  "  You  have  had  about  all  the  tests  that  time
can  give  through  this  light.  Now  there  should  be  higher
development."  3  Accordingly,  under  the  new  regime,  the
sittings  not  only  become  free  from  the  convulsive  move-

1  Hodgson  was  in  England  at  this  time.  The  above  syllables  have  no
resemblance  to  the  Hebrew  numerals.

2  See,  e.g.  June  3,  1903,  p.  424,  and  December  14,  1904,  p.  431,  Appendix
to  Chapter  II.

3  See  also  similar  statements  in  1903. Appendix,  p.  490.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  Ill

ments  that  previously  preceded  them,  but  become  other-
wise quieter,  and  they  are  largely  devoted  to  instruction
and  exhortation.  Hodgson  describes  the  change  in  Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  XIII.,  p.  409,  and  the  change  is  also  appar-
ent from  the  following  account  by  a  lady  who  had
had  experience  of  both  the  Phinuit  and  Imperator  regimes.
She  writes  in  December,  1897  :

The  April  and  May  {1897}  sittings  were  clearer — as  far
as  mistakes  went — than  any  I  had  ever  had,  and  there
seemed  a  stillness  and  peace,  a  freedom  from  the  old
hurry  and  confusion  *  *  *  There  is  a  greater  desire  to
help  one  to  live  a  higher  life  shown  *  *  *  but  as  far  as
knowledge  of  the  future  goes,  I  cannot  say  that  the  new
controls  have  been  more  correct  than  Phinuit  was,  but
they  are  not  so  ready  to  talk  of  the  future  or  of  material
affairs.

It  is  noticeable,  however,  that  the  lofty  ideal  of  the
function  of  the  Imperator  Band  as  spiritual  teachers  and
guides  is  scarcely  consistently  maintained.  We  find,  for
instance,  in  June,  1899,  that  the  Imperator  group  are
giving  advice  about  investments,  or  if  they  do  not  give
it  themselves,  introducing  Flower,  "the  great  financier,"  to
do  so.  Imperator  apparently  personally  invited  him.  The
advice  does  not  turn  out  very  well,  and  perhaps  this  is
why  six  months  later  we  find  the  controls  saying  that
they  wish  to  give  advice  on  financial  matters  only  when
they  choose.  It  is  not  to  be  asked  for  except  perhaps
by  a  certain  named  sitter.

It  is  probable  that  in  1897  the  objection  to  tests
referred  chiefly  to  sittings  held  with  a  view  to  obtaining
proofs  of  the  identity  of  communicators.  At  any  rate
the  objection  did  not  apparently  extend  to  looking  for  a
missing  boy,  or  to  experiments  in  what  we  should  now
call  simple  cross-correspondences.1  The  distinction  is
not  difficult  to  understand,  because  immediate  success  is
demanded  by  a  sitter  seeking  for  evidence  of  the  communi-
cator's identity.  If  the  supernormal  information  comes
easily  all  would  be  well  and  probably  no  fatigue  ensue,  but

1  For  these  see  below  under  George  Eliot,  pp.  115-118


112


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


if  it  is  struggled  for  and  perhaps  not  obtained — the  reader
has  only  to  refer  to  the  sitting  of  December  5,  1892,  in
Appendix  to  Chapter  II.  (p.  355),  or  that  of  March  18,
1907,  in  Appendix  to  Chapter  V.  (p.  536),  to  see  how
fatiguing  it  would  be.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  search
for  the  lost  boy,  or  in  carrying  messages  to  or  from  a  dis-
tant medium,  the  sitter  is  as  well  satisfied  at  the  time  by
one  decently  plausible  statement  as  another.  He  knows  as
little  of  the  truth  as  the  medium  does.

Search  for  the  missing  boy  D  , who  was  officially

reported  to  have  died  in  Mexico,  but  who  was  believed
by  his  relatives  to  be  alive  all  the  time,  engaged  the
attention  of  the  Imperator  Band,  of  G.  P.,  of  Phinuit,  of
Julius  Caesar,  and  of  others,  in  the  autumn  and  winter  of
1896-7,  chiefly  before  the  Imperator  Band  took  charge.
Elaborate  though  vague  accounts  of  places  and  buildings
where  he  was  asserted  to  be  were  given  by  the  controls,
who  go  backwards  and  forwards  between  Mexico  and
Boston  reporting  what  they  see  and  saying  that  they  are
constantly  watching  over  him.  Nothing  came  of  it  all,
and  there  is,  I  believe,  no  reason  for  thinking  that  there
was  anything  veridical  in  any  of  the  statements  made.  A
few  references  to  the  matter  have  already  been  inciden-
tally made,  and  it  will  suffice  if  in  addition  I  give  the
particulars  of  Julius  Caesar's  intervention.

Julius  Caesar.

The  first  time  Imperator  controlled — November  11,  1896
(see  Appendix,  p.  470),  he  said :  "  Julius  Caesar  is  my
friend.  He  will  not  falter  by  the  wayside.  Not  he."  1  The
name,  like  other  names  mentioned  at  this  time,  was  prob-
ably a  feeler  put  out  in  the  desire  to  find  the  names  of
Stainton  Moses's  spirit  guides.  But  having  been  so  men-
tioned, it  seems  likely  that  the  idea  acted  suggestively  in

1 A  previous  mention  of  the  name  Julius  Caesar  had  occurred  on
October  30,  1896,  when  the  Stainton  Moses  control  made  an  enigmatic
remark  about  him  as  follows  :  "  R.  H.  were  you  interested  in  the
Bacon  Shakspeare  controversy  ?  W.  S.  M.  Yes  very,  yes  very.  I  have
many  fields  to  open  up  from  Julius  Caesar.  I  have  many  spirit  teach-
ings to  recall  and  discuss."


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  113

producing  the  control  a  few  days  later.  We  have  an  instance
in  1892  of  a  person  mentioned  by  one  control  appearing  as
a  control  herself  afterwards  for  no  reason  apparently  except
that  the  name  had  been  mentioned.  On  November  30,
1892,  G.  P.  controlling  illustrated  a  point  by  referring  to
Laura  Bridgman,  the  blind  and  deaf  girl  who  was  success-
fully taught  to  read  and  write.  Six  days  afterwards,  and
on  several  later  occasions,  a  Laura  Bridgman  control
turned  up,  but  said  nothing  of  interest.  At  her  first
appearances  there  were  movements  of  the  hand  suggesting
the  deaf  and  dumb  alphabet  which  no  one  present  knew,
but  no  name  was  given.  Phinuit  professed  not  to  know
who  it  was,  though  he  said  she  had  had  a  great  struggle
to  get  there. Subsequently  the  name  was  written.

But  to  return  to  Julius  Caesar.  On  November  16,  1896,
Doctor  writes  :  "Charles  Adams.  Julius  Caesar.  *  *  *  I  hear
a  word  from  each  for  you."  On  the  following  day,  Novem-
ber 17,  talking  with  the  control  J.  Hart  1  about  Mexico

and  the  search  for  D  ,  Hodgson  asked: "Who  went

with  you  on  this  last  trip  ?  "  Hart  proceeded  to  name
various  people — Erasmus,  Ulysses,  D.  D.  Home,  Alexander
the  Great,  Proteus,  Julius  Caesar.  Hodgson  misreads  at
first,  then  says  :

R.  H. Oh,  Julius  Caesar.
Hart.  Yes,  did  you  know  him  ?

R.  H. I  didn't  know  him  personally,  George,  of  course,  but  I

know  about  him.
Hart.  I  am  not  George.

R.  H. Hart  I  mean. The  writing  is  so  good  and  quick  that  it
reminded  me  of  George's  manner  I  suppose.

sfe  $  s£  $

Hart.  He  is  a  brick.

R.  H.  Julius  Caesar  %  [Assent.]

Hart.  And  he  went  to  Mexico  with  us. Helmet,  armour,  with
sword.

%  %  sis  Hs

R.  H.  Any  others  with  you  ?
Hart.  Yes.

1  Concerning  J.  Hart,  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  296-9  and  353-7.

H


114


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[paet


R.  H. Tell  me  the  others.

Haet.  Yes. Can  you  believe  it  ? Can  you  imagine  my  being
able  to  fly  hand  in  hand  with  Julius  Caesar  1

On  the  following  day,  November  18,  1896,  Hart  affirms
that  "  Caesar  has  got  a  powerful  hold  on  this  matter,  and
I  assure  you,  H,  old  boy,  that  not  a  stone  will  be  left
unturned  by  us  on  this  side."  Then  presently  there  is  a
scribble  of  the  pencil  and  Julius  Caesar  takes  control.
Hodgson  reports  :

[After  the scrabble, a wild fling of the  arm,  several
jerks,  and  bangs  on  the  table,  and  then  a  plunge  forward
on  the  table  at  full  length,  palm  of  hand  upwards,  turned
a  little  to  the  left,  as  if  to  shake  hands. I  touch  the
fingers  as  if  to  shake  hands,  but  there  is  no  response.  I
put  the  pencil  between  the  fingers,  and  it  seems  to  under-
stand and  the  arm  draws  back  and  I  help  it  into  position
for  writing. The  writing  is  not  very  large,  but  cramped
and  heavy,  the  pencil  being  pressed  very  heavily  down.
Two  pencils  are  broken  during  the  writing  of  two  pages.1]
J.  C. I  am  Julius  Caezar  (sic). I  will  move  heaven  and  earth
to  find  your  boy  and  return  him  to  his  home  and
friends  once  more.
R.  H. We  are  very  grateful  for  your  kind  help.
J.  C. I  am  Julius  Caezar. I  am  Julius  Caezar.
R.  H.  You'll  try  to  influence  him,  the  boy's  friend.
J.  C. Talk  to  his  soul,  oh  yes,  to  his  soul. My  prayers  are

sincere,  my  interest  great. Good  day,  sir.
R.  H. Good  day.
J.  Caesar.

[Arm  extends  again  as  before  the  scrabble.]

[Then  G.  P.  writes]
G.  P. Well  H. How  are  you  was  ?
R.  H.  George.

G.  P. D is  on  the  right  track  now  if  he  only  carries  it

out.  By  the  great  Julius  Caezar  [Hand  points  to
invisible]  he  will  bring  him  home.

R,  H. Splendid  !

1  As  very  little  is  usually  written  on  a  page,  this  probably  means
during  part  only  of  Julius  Caesar's  writing.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper  s  Trance  Phenomena.  115

G.  P. Caezar  is  as  great  as  ever  he  was. Adieu. G.  P.  I
am  off  for  Mexico.

This  is,  I  think,  Julius  Caesar's  only  attempt  to  control,
but  he  is  mentioned  again  on  January  21.  1897,  by
Phinuit,  who  says,  by  voice,  not  writing  :

I  just  came  back  a  little  while  ago  {from  Mexico}.

❖  ^  ifc  ifc

Imperator  has  been  down  there.  And  so  has  Moses.
And  Julius  Caesar.  It  is  Julius  Caesar.  They  say  the
only  Julius  Caesar.  He  walks  around  that  place  like  a
man  on  guard. He'll  liberate  that  boy.

George  Eliot.

Another  and  more  frequent  control — George  Eliot — was
introduced  in  connexion  with  the  attempts  at  cross-
correspondence  mentioned  above  (p.  111).  They  were
carried  on  for  many  days  and  with  great  elaboration
through  the  Imperator  Band,  G.  P.,  and  others  in  January.
February,  March,  and  April,  1897,  but  were  entirely
unsuccessful,  notwithstanding  constant  affirmation  of  success
by  the  controls  concerned.  The  medium  at  the  other  end
was  a  non-professional  medium,  Miss  C.,  with  whom  Myers
was  having  sittings  in  England.  These  sittings  took  place
partly  in  London,  and  during  about  a  fortnight  in  April,
in  a  house  reputed  to  be  haunted  in  Scotland.  Special  effort
was  concentrated  over  this  fortnight,  during  which  the
sittings  with  Miss  C.  were  no  doubt  more  frequent  than
they  had  been  in  London.

The  first  we  hear  of  these  experiments  in  the  Piper
records  is  on  January  16,  1897,  when  Hodgson  says  to
G.  P.  :

Fred  Myers  has  got  hold  of  a  light  *  *  *  why  can't
you  give  your  pass-sentence.

G.  P.  says  he  will  if  Myers  calls  for  him,  and  Hodgson
continues  :


The  medium  is  a  Miss  C [name  given]  and  a  spirit

friend of  hers, a  Miss  T.  is the  chief  communicator,  I


116


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


understand.  George  Eliot  told  Myers  through  that  light
that  she  had  communicated  here.  She  did  once  when
"  Q  "  was  writing.1  You  can  get  hold  of  George  Eliot
through  "  Q  "  and  make  enquiries  at  once.

After  a  brief  interval,  during  which  another  matter  is
discussed,  G.  P.  says  :

G.  P.  Oh  I  shall  be  so  thankful  if  I  can  only  use  the  light
there  and  give  my  pass-word.

R.  H.  Take  Doctor  and  Rector  and  the  whole  crowd  of  com-
municators that  come  here  and  make  them  give
their  names  to  the  other  light.

G.  P.  But  I  thought  I  had  given  you  the  names  of  nearly
every  spirit  in  heaven  already.  The  Egos  of  every
one  of  them  have  been  seen  by  yours  truly.

R.  H.  Yes,  but  that's  totally  different.  There's  nothing
through  any  other  light.  Even  Moses  and  his
friends  haven't  proved  their  identities.  Doctor  and
Rector  and  Imperator  haven't  given  me  their  real
names  yet.  And  the  evidence  would  be  on  a  dif-
ferent basis  if  you  could  send  corroborative  messages
through  another  light.

After  some  more  discussion,  G.  P.  agrees,  and  then
fetches  George  Eliot 2— who  communicates  through  him,
and  gives  a  message  alleged  to  come  from  Myers  and  takes
one  for  him.  Messages  are  sent  and  news  of  the  other
medium  given  at  each  intervening  sitting,  and  George
Eliot  is  spoken  of  as  taking  part,  but  she  controls  for  the
first  time  herself  on  January  20  ;  Phinuit  says :  "  There's
a  gentleman  there  wants  to  speak  to  "  Hodgson.3  Report
continues  as  follows  :

1  This  was  on  December  16,  1893.  "  Q."  wrote  :  "  George  Eliot  is
here  with  me  now  *  *  *  Yes,  at  this  moment.  Who  is  Fred — of  whom
she  speaks  so  often  and  asked  me  to  say  to  him  that  she  has  the  warmest
admiration  for  him  here  and  he  must  know  of  this  life  and  light."

=  The  passage  about  getting  further  away  quoted  at  p.  65  comes  in
here.

3  Later  in  the  sitting  Phinuit  "  remarks  that  the  lady  who  was  there
before  resented  his  calling  her  a  gentleman,  but  that  he  couldn't  always
tell  who  was  there,  and  couldn't  see  very  clearly  when  lie  was  just
coming  into  the  body,  etc."


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  117


[The  hand  moves  to  the  table  and  forearm  is  lifted,
with  hand  up  and  palm  bent  forward.  Hand  re-
mains poised  a  short  time,  with  slight  gentle  move-
ment several  times  as  though  listening  to  spirit  and
forefinger  points  two  or  three  times.]

G.  E. [To  Spirit]. Yes  thanks. Who  said  I  was  a  gentleman  ?

I  am  not  as  yet.  I  may  be  some  day,  but  I
doubt  it. I  am  George  Eliot.

R.  H. Delighted  to  meet  you.

G.  E. I came here at the request of your friend  George
Pelham. I  have  taken  your  message  to  the  light

beyond  the  water,  materially  speaking. Miss  F  1

here  is  with  me,  a  delightful  woman.  On  my  own
responsibility  I  took  the  following  message  to  F.  W.
Myers  a  friend  of  mine  when  I  was  in  my  body.  I
think  he  understood  me  as  few  men  did,  and  in
consequence  of  this  I  would  do  anything  within  my
power  for  him.
The  life  of  the  immortal  is  sweet.  George  Eliot.  Ask
him  if  he  received  it  as  I  have  quoted  it  here.

A  good  deal  more  of  the  same  kind  is  said  at  this
sitting,  and  George  Eliot  frequent!}'  controlled 2  afterwards
during  the  first  half  of  1897.  Her  topics  were  chiefly
these  cross-correspondence  experiments  with  Myers's
medium  and  elaborate  descriptions  of  heaven  (where,  it
may  be  observed,  she  met,  among  other  people,  Adam
Bede).  I  give  specimens  of  communications  by  her  on  each  of
these  topics  in  the  Appendix,  pp.  491-513. In  connexion  with

1  K.  F.,  a  friend  of  a  frequent  sitter,  and  herself  a  frequent  control
at  this  period.

2  There  is  a  little  ambiguity  sometimes  as  to  whether  George  Eliot
controls  or  communicates.  In  several  cases  expressions  are  used  which
seem  nonsense  unless  she  is  controlling.  But  on  March  15,  1897,  in  the
middle  of  a  communication  in  which  Hodgson  describes  her  as  herself
writing,  she  says  :

"  We  speak  by  thought  unless  we  act  upon  some  machine  so-called
medium  when  our  thoughts  are  expressed  to  the  controlling  spirit
who  registers  them  for  us  ;  "
which  looks  as  if  she  regarded  herself  as communicating  through  an
amanuensis. She  more  than once  herself  acts  as  amanuensis  for  Im-
perator.


118


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


the  first,  I  also  give  Myers's  statement  of  the  failure  of  the
experiments  and  Hodgson's  discussion  with  George  Eliot  about
it,  and  also  (p.  513)  a  record  of  a  similar  and  equally  futile
attempt at cross-correspondence between  Mrs. Piper  and

the  same  medium,  Miss  C  ,  when  Hodgson  is  erroneously

supposed  to  be  sitting  with  her  in  November,  1897,  though
on  this  occasion  it  is  "  Q."  and  the  Imperator  Band  who
are  the  messengers — not  George  Eliot.  The  curious  thing
about  these  experiments  is  the  definite  and  uncompromising
assertions  of  the  controls,  not  only  that  they  have  taken
the  messages  proposed,  but  that  they  have  seen  the  other
medium  and  sitters  and  their  surroundings,  which  they
describe,  and  have  brought  back  messages  from  them
which  they  give — all  this  that  they  describe  being
erroneous  and  having  no  relation  to  the  facts.  False
statements  of  the  same  kind  were  made,  it  will  be  remem-
bered, in  1908  when  some  cross-correspondences  reaUy  did
take  place  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII. ).  The  controls
seemed  unable  to  distinguish  the  unsuccessful  from  the
successful  attempts,  and  gave  similar  circumstantial  and
unveridical  accounts  of  supposed  visits  to  Mrs.  Verrall
and  others.

To  return,  however,  to  George  Eliot  : — on  April  1,  1897,
Rector  informs  Hodgson  that  she  has  been  promoted  to
apparently  a  high  position  in  the  band  of  controls  and
communicators. He  says  :

R. We  are  having  many  changes  made  for  us. We  will
give  you  a  short  explanation  of  what  is  going  on.
I,  Imperator  Servus  Dei,  in  consideration  [not  deciphered]
listen  .  .  .

I  Imperator,  do  hereby  in  consideration  of  the  many
kindnesses  bestowed  upon  us  through  the  con-
geniality and  influence  of  our  friend  and  co-worker
(George  Eliot)  henceforth  and  forever  .  .  .

Read  to  him  {i.e.  to  Imperator}  that  he  may  know
that  I  am  doing  his  bidding.

[R.  H.  reads  over.]
R. pronounce  her  worthy  and  capable  to  manage  through
her  clearness  of thought, this light, and I  now
place  her  at  the  head  of  our  circle. She  is  to  be


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  119

counted  as  the  leader  of  the  band  of  lady  com-
municators.
R.  H. Very  good.

R.  She  will  in  any  and  all  cases  take  and  deliver  any
messages  given  from  either  our  side  or  yours.
I  am  not  sure  that  I  have  got  down  my  words  as  he
has  repeated  them  to  me,  but  I  think  I  have  them
right.  It  is  difficult  to  repeat  for  others.  Do  you
hear  ?

R.  H. Yes,  quite  clearly.

R. Answer  him  if  you  please,

R.  H.  I  am  pleased  with  any  arrangement  that  you  make.  I
will  follow  any  instructions  that  George  Eliot  may
give.

R.  Thanks.  We  see  that  she  is  qualified  to  use  the  light
without  doing  any  injury.  Yet  we  do  not  intend
to  leave  her  alone,  or  unprotected.

George  Eliot's  part  does  not,  however,  seem  to  have
become  materially  more  important  after  this  announcement.
She  controlled  a  good  many  times  in  April,  1897,  and
a  few  times  in  May  and  June,  but  I  think  little  or
nothing  is  heard  of  her  later.  As  I  stated  before,  she
gave  no  evidence  of  identity,  and,  apart  from  G.  P.'s
guarantee,  there  is  clearly  no  reason  for  regarding  her  as
anything  but  a  rather  poor  personation.

"  Moses  of  Old."

It  seems  possible  to  suggest  some  reason  for  the  appear-
ance of  each  of  the  controls  so  far  dealt  with.  Phinuit
probably  originated  in  Mr.  Cocke's  control,  Dr.  Finney.
G.  P.  first  manifested  to  a  friend  who  had  brought  to  the
sitting  objects  that  had  belonged  to  him,  so  that  he  must
be  regarded  as  invited  verbally  or  telepathically.  Proctor,
Stainton  Moses,  the  Imperator  band,  George  Eliot  were
asked  for.  Julius  Caesar  had  been  mentioned  by  a  control
a  few  days  before.  There  is  appearance  of  telepathic
suggestion  in  the  case  of  Sir  Walter  Scott,  and  also  in  that
of  Madame  Guy  on  whom  we  shall  come  to  presently.  But
for  the  selection  of  Moses  of  the  Exodus  to  make  the


120


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


prophecy  desired  by  Hodgson  (a  desire  not,  so  far  as  we
know,  mentioned  to  Mrs.  Piper  or  her  controls),  no  reason
is  indicated.  It  may  well  be,  however,  that  the  New
Testament  phrase,  "Moses  and  the  prophets,"  or  some
recollection  of  the  pre-eminence  among  prophets  attributed
to  him  in  the  Old  Testament  (see  Deuteronomy  xxxiv.  10),
suggested  Moses  as  a  leading  prophet  when  prophecy  was
wanted.  It  was  on  December  18,  1899,  that  he  made
his  solitary  appearance,  and  Hodgson  notes  at  the  end  of
that  sitting  :

[In  connection  with  the  above  statement  made  by
"  Moses,"  I  note  that  the  war  between  the  British  and
the  Boers  has  been  much  on  my  mind  lately,  and  that  I
have  several  times  recently  since  my  previous  sitting  on
Nov.  15, 1  meditated  on  the  desirability  of  asking  Im-
perator  if  he  knew  of  any  one  specially  competent  to
make  prophecies  on  questions  of  war  on  this  planet.
Prophecies  were  made  at  the  end  of  1896, 2  and  also
I  think  in  1897  and  1898  further  prophetic  references  to
wars  were  made  at  the  sittings,  but  owing  to  my  own
ignorance  and  that  of  other  sitters  of  the  trance  con-
ditions, these  prophecies  were  somewhat  confused,  and  I
hoped  that  perhaps  more  definite  statements  could  now  be
given.  I  cannot  recall  having  thought  of  "  Moses  "  in  any
way  in  connection  with  such  proimecies. P.  H.]

At  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  of  December  18,  1899,
Hodgson  being  the  only  sitter,  Rector  writes  (I  as  usual
omit  repetitions  due  to  Hodgson's  misreadings)  :

The  prophet  of old  will soon  appear  and  with  thee

1  He  had  not  been  present  at  any  sitting  in  the  interval.

2  The  prophecy  at  the  end  of  1896  to  which  Hodgson  refers  here
was  that  made  by  the  afterwards-said-to-be-false  Imperator,  who  called
himself  "Joseph,  the  father  of  Christ"  (see  above,  p.  90).  It  was  given
through  G.  P.  as  control  on  October  17,  1896,  and,  though  hardly  con-
sistent with  the  prophecy  made  by  "  Moses  of  Old,"  in  certain  respects
resembled  it.  Both  speak  of  the  near  approach  of  the  millennium
(which  both  call  the  millennial),  and  of  the  lion  and  the  lamb  lying  in
peace  together.  Both  speak  of  sanguinary  wars.  Both  say  that  in  the
war  England  backs  the  United  States,  Russia  is  against  them,  Germany
not  concerned  in  any  important  way.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  121


speak.  [I  supposed  at  the  time  that  this  referred
to  Imperator,  though  it  seemed  odd,  but  it  evidently
referred  to  Moses.  See  below.]
{A  good  deal  of  discussion  about  arrangements  for
future  sittings  and  other  matters  follows,  after  which
the  record  proceeds.}

Rector. Now  friend  hast  thou  ceased  for  a  moment  ?

R.  H. Yes,  I  have  all  I  think,  thank  you.

R.  We must  release  this  spirit  then. We  will  return.

wait  for  us. +  .  R.  P.  [Imperator,  Rector,  Prudens.]
[Pencil  drops. Disturbance  in  hand. I  supply  fresh
pencil. Hand  half  turns  over,  takes  pencil  in  novel
way,  between  lower  joints  of  thumb  and  forefinger,
with  tip  of  forefinger  touching  it. Rector  takes  the
pencil by  separating  fore and middle fingers  and
receiving  it  between  their  lowest  joints.]
[Moses  of  old  writes.]
[Writing  rapid,  large  and  scrawly.]

M.  I  am  Moses  of  old. I  speak  to  say  a  great  uprising

is  to  take  place  upon  thy  earth  and  there  shall  be
blood  shed  and  bodies  swept  away  like  chaff  before
the  wind.  Such  is  the  will  of  God,  so  be  it  .  .  .
And  thy  world  shall  become  purified  and  a  Christian
world  prevail  instead  .  .  .  prevail  instead  and  God's
laws  obeyed  as  thy  world  hath  sinned  and  become
corrupt.  R.  H.  Yes

M.  Speak  thou  to  Moses.

R.  H.  I  thank  you.  Can  you  tell  me  any  more  detail  \
Will  the  British  have  much  more  bloodshed  ?

M.  Not  so,  but  there  will  be  greater  battles  through  thy

land  and  there  will  be  forever  peace  with  England
and  thy  country  and  love  and  sympathy  prevail
for  all  time,  but  battle  ships  will  be  set  out  for
battle  and  Russia  be  defeated  and  wiped  out.  Doth
thou  hear  me. Oh  mortal  tongue  speak.

R.  H.  I  think  I  understand  most.  Do  you  say  that  England
will  be  victorious  in  her  war  now  %

M.  We  Do.

R.  H.  And  that  Russia  will  fight  against  England  and
America  ?


122


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


M.  later  .  .  .  yes  .  .  .  and  in  all  ways.

R.  H. Shall  .  .  .

M.  France  will  interfere  and  great  will  be  the  loss  on

their  side.

R.  H. Shall  this  be  in  iny  days  on  earth  ?

M.  The  dawn  of  the  millenial  is  at  hand  and  thou  shalt

live  in  flesh  to  know  all.
R.  H. Is  America  to  be  joined  with  England  ?
M.  It  is  for  all  time,  and  ever.

R.  H. Amen. And  both  .  .  .

M.  The  lion  and  the  lamb  shall  lie  down  together  and

peace  love  Christianity  and  sympathy  reign  forever
hand  in  hand.

R.  H. Will  this  present  war  with  the  Boers  in  Africa  bring

about  much  more  loss  ?
M.  Not  to  England, but  it  will  soon cease  and  peace

reign  therein

R,  H. Amen. And  it  will  be  all  under  British  rule  ?
M.  It  will. In  spite  of  any  mortal  thought  to  the  con-

trary.

R.  H. Amen. Will  Germany  take  part  in  the  coming  great
war  %

M.  Not  seriously,  but  in  a  way  yes.

R.  H. But  the  chief  fight  will  be  between  Russia  and  France
on  one  side,  and  England  and  America  on  the  other.
M.  It  will,  I  say  it,  and  so  be  it.  R.  H.  Amen.

M.  Better  will  thy  world  and  its  people  be.

R.  H. It  is  a  purification  time.

M.  Yes  and  God's  voice  is  being  heard  unto  his  people

R.  H.  Yes.

M.  I  go.  R.  H.  Thank  you  very  much.

M.  Speak  cautiously and quietly. Fail  not. Fare  thee

well. Moses.  R.  H.  Farewell.

M.  Prophet  of  God  R.  H.  Amen.

+  [Disturbance  in  hand,  Pencil  drops,  etc.]
Rector  writes. Friend  we  return  and  all  is  well.
R.  H.  Amen.

Rector. We  gave  way  to  God's  voice,  and  decided  to  return
to  thee  and  finish  our  work


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  123


Madame  Ouyon,  and  development  of  automatic  script  without

trance.

The  development  in  1911,  as  Mrs.  Piper's  trances  came
to  an  end,  of  a  control  calling  itself  "  Madame  Guy  on "
has  several  features  of  interest.  Her  name  occurs  first  on
October  23,  1910.  Sir  Oliver  Ledge  was  in  charge,  and  a
friend  of  his  who  was  to  be  the  principal  sitter  was
waiting  to  come  in  after  the  trance  had  begun.  The  same
sitter  had  been  present  on  the  immediately  preceding
occasion,  October  13,  and  Gurney  had  then  controlled.
The  sitting  of  October  23  begins  thus,  Imperator  appar-
ently controlling  :

Imp.  +  Hail

-f-  Friend  what  asketh  thou  of  me  ? +  I.  S.  D.
O.  J.  L.  Imperator  I  want  you  to  help  us. There  is  a  friend

in  the  next  room  wishing  to  speak  with  one  on

your  side.

Imp. Friend  it  may  be  difficult  for  you  to  realise  that  our

work  is  nearly  at  an  end,  but  it  is  really  so.
O.  J.  L.  Don't  go  in  a  hurry.

Imp.  We  have  remained  a  good  long  time  with  you  and
now  I  must  soon  call  my  messengers  away,  -f-
I.  S.  D.

O.  J.  L.  We  are  grateful  for  all  they  have  done  for  us.  Do

you  know  our  friend  Gurney  ?
Imp. Yes  well,  all  he  is  trying  to  do. We  see  his  light

and  U.D.  his  desires  well. He  controls  fairly  well.

Guyon  also
O.  J.  L.  Do  you  mean  Madame  Guyon  ?
Imp.  helps.

The  occurrence  of  the  name  was  striking,  because  the
attention  of  the  sitter,  who  came  in  a  few  minutes  later,
had  recently  been  drawn  to  the  subject  of  Quietism  (of
which  Madame  Guyon  was  a  prominent  exponent)  owing
to  a  reference  to  it  hi  a  message  received  through  the
writing  of  another  automatist,  which  message  claimed  to
come  from^  Gurney.  This  fact  was  known  to  Sir  Oliver
Lodge,  but  nothing,  so  far  as  is  known,  had  been  said  on


124


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[pakt


the  subject  to  Mrs.  Piper,  and  there  appears  to  be  no
reason  why  the  name  should  come  into  her  mind  normally
at  this  time.1  It  is  mentioned  again,  still  with  no  apparent
relevance,  later  in  the  sitting.  Gurney  is  communicating
and  says  to  the  sitter  :

E.  G. Is  {M  }  clearer  ?

Sitter.  Yes

E.  G.  I  have  explained  everything  to  her  all  about  how  to
communicate  and  everything  and  all  about  Guyon.
Yes  and  her  help.

No  more  happened  in  connexion  with  Madame  Guyon
till  February  8,  1911.  In  the  interval  there  had  been
three  sittings  and  three  other  attempts  to  go  into  trance
which  had  failed.  On  this  day  the  following  brief  isolated
communication  occurred  in  the  middle  of  the  sitting  a  propos
to  nothing  apparently  :

Guyon  says  it

I  hunted  all  through  life  for  Christ  and  found  him  in
myself. I  am  happier  now.

There  is  undeniably  a  certain  appropriateness  to  Madame
Guyon  hi  this  remark.

We  next  hear  of  her  on  July  3,  1911,  when  without  notice
she  comes  as  the  control  in  charge  of  the  sitting — in  Im-
perator's  place,  in  fact.  The  sittings  that  winter  and  spring
were  few  and  far  between,  because,  as  mentioned  above
(Chapter  I.,  p.  13),  Mrs.  Piper  had  often  great  difficulty
in  going  into  trance  and  sometimes  in  coming  out,  and  long
rests  between  trances  were  prescribed  by  the  controls.  Even
so,  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  attempts  to  go  into
trance  failed  altogether.  On  May  24  a  difficult  trance
occurred. Rector  said  :

R.  If  we  could  accomplish  anything  by  coming  we  might

try  otherwise  it  would  be  wiser  to  discontinue.  We
are  sorry  to  leave  you.  We  have  been  your  friends
and  done  our  best  to  prove  our  life.

O.  J.  L.  Yes  indeed,  and  we  are  grateful.

1  Madame  Guyon  in  life  appears  herself  to  have  been  an  automatist,  but
whether  this  was  known  to  Mrs.  Piper  at  any  time  I  do  not  know.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  125

R. We  did  hope  to  restore  the  light  but  it  seems  fruitless.
{At  the  end  of  the  sitting,  however,  Rector  said  : }
After  many  Sabbaths  try  again.

Apparently  the  next  incident  was  a  little  impromptu
sitting  of  Mrs.  Piper  with  her  daughters  on  June  10  at
which  the  controls  urged  that  there  should  be  a  sitting
with  Mrs.  Isaac  Thompson,  well  known  to  Mrs.  Piper  both
as  a  friend  and  as  a  sitter.  Accordingly  a  sitting  on
July  3,  1911,  was  arranged  for  her  and  her  son.  Sir
Oliver  Lodge  was  taking  charge,  and  records  the  beginning
of  the  sitting  as  follows  :

Cross  in  air  {this  was  a  common  Avay  for  Imperator

and  Rector  to  begin}
Mme.  G.  I  greet  you  friends. I  am  Mme.  Guyon  I  come  to

supervise and render such assistance as  seems

within  my  power.  Guyon.
O.  J.  L.  Oh,  that's  very  interesting.

Mme.  G.  I will  now  stand aside and  give  way  to my  new
found  friend.

The  writing  was  small  and  good.  After  it  had  been
read,  the  hand  was  seized  with  excitement,  scored  the
paper,  broke  the  pencil,  and  presently  wrote  as  Hodgson,
who  apparently  continued  to  write  through  the  sitting,
acting  as  amanuensis  for  Isaac  Thompson.  At  the  end
he  wrote  in  his  own  name  again,  and  when  he  had  taken
leave  and  O.  J.  L.  had  said  "  Good-bye,  Hodgson,"  a
cross  was  made  in  the  air  again,  and  in  a  changed  hand-
writing came :  "  Goodbye  friends  and  may  you  rest  in
peace.  +  Mme  G."  In  the  waking-stage  that  followed,
Mrs.  Piper  said  :  "  That  lady  who  prays  all  the  time  said
run  away  now  "  ;  and  after  the  "  snaps  "  hi  her  head —
that  is,  when  nearly  normal — "  I  saw  a  lady  with  a  cross
in  her  hand  and  a  lot  of  pretty  people."

Mrs.  Piper  only  once  more — so  far  as  we  know — went
into  trance.  It  was  on  July  31,  1911.  The  trance  was
long  incoming  on,  but  the  writing  at  last  began  :

Mme.  G. +  I  am  glad  to  meet  you  friend. I  am  Guyon.

O.  J.  L.  Hail  Madame  Guyon,  glad  to  see  you

Mme.  G.  God  be  with  you  one  and  all. A  friend  is  waiting  to


126


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivich.


[part


speak.  I'll  step  aside.  God's  blessing  on  you.
Mme  G.

The  main  part  of  the  sitting  was  occupied  with  com-
munications from  Lady  Lodge's  relations  and  friends,
HodgsonP  apparently  acting  as  amanuensis.  Imperator
closed  the  sitting  and  Madame  Guyon  did  not  appear
again  that  day,  but  in  the  course  of  his  final  remarks
HodgsonP  spoke — at  least  so  I  interpret  him — of  the  possi-
bility of  automatic  writing  without  trance  being  developed,
and  then  said  :  "  Mme  will  get  through  in  any  case,  this
we  are  sure  of."  This  final  part  of  Mrs.  Piper's  latest  trance
sitting,  and  the  subsequent  waking-stage,  are  quoted  in  the
Appendix  (p.  514).

There  are  two  things  worth  noting  about  the  latest
developments  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance.  The  first  is  that  all
the  difficulty  attending  the  going  into  trance — the  evidently
failing  power  to  do  so  with  safety — did  not  apparently
prevent  communications  of  evidential  value  occurring  when
the  trance  did  come  on.  By  evidential  value  I  mean,  of
course,  of  value  as  affording  evidence  in  the  trance  utter-
ances of  knowledge  which  cannot  have  reached  Mrs.  Piper
through  her  senses.  Unfortunately  this  evidential  matter
was  too  private  for  publication,  but  I  gather  that  some  of
it  bears  comparison  with  some  of  the  best  that  has  been
published.  I  do  not  here  raise  the  question  of  how  far
the  sitter  was  an  important  factor  in  the  result,  as  this
is  of  general  application  throughout  the  evidence,  and  does
not,  therefore,  specially  affect  the  present  point.

The  second  point  is  that  the  introduction  of  Madame
Guyon  as  a  control  was  apparently  intended  to  be  a  step
in  the  direction  of  peacefulrtess  in  the  manifestations
beyond  that  already  attained  under  the  Imperator  regime.
This  is  perhaps  made  clearer  in  the  automatic  writing
without  trance  to  be  described  presently.  But  it  can
hardly  have  been  meant  that  this  gain  in  peacefulness
would  be  secured  by  a  method  of  going  into  trance
quieter  than  the  very  quiet  one  which  had  already  become
customary.  Presumably,  therefore,  it  meant  either  a  dis-
position to  some  lighter  form  of  trance,  or  more  probably
to the automatic script without trance which  actually


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena,.  127

occurred.  It  would  be  very  interesting  to  know  how  far
the  development  of  automatic  script  was  the  result  of  a
deliberate  plan  made  by  some  intelligence,  possibly  a
subliminal  self,  with  the  object  of  making  up  for  the  loss
of  power  to  go  into  trance  ;  to  know  whether  Sir  Oliver
Lodge's  suggestion  in  May  (see  below)  to  try  for  automatic
script  set  this  plan  going  ;  and  whether  the  substitution
of  Madame  Guyon  for  Imperator  at  the  last  two  trance
sittings  was  part  of  the  plan.  But  these  things  must,  I
fear,  remain  matter  for  conjecture.

The  automatic  writing  under  Mine.  Guyon's  direction,
apparently  foreshadowed  in  the  last  trance  by  the  Hodgson
control,  showed  no  signs  of  beginning  till  September  20,
1911,  but  it  is  interesting  that  one  brief  piece  of  script
without  trance  had  already  occurred  in  June.  About  the
end  of  May,  seeing  that  the  trances  seemed  likely  to  come
to  an  end,  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  suggested  to  Mrs.  Piper's
daughters  to  try  if  she  could  do  automatic  writing  in  a
normal  state.  The  idea  was  not  new  to  her  ;  she  had
seen  something  of  the  kind  produced  by  others,  and  had
in  previous  years  occasionally  tried  for  it  herself,  though
without  success.  To  give  a  concrete  instance,  she  had
tried  vainly  on  June  20,  1895,  in  Dr.  Newbold's  presence
immediately  after  a  sitting  during  which  the  control —
G.  P. — had  been  asked  :  "  Could  you  use  Mrs.  Piper's  hand
while  she  is  conscious?"  and  had  replied:  "I'll  try.  I
do  not  know."  1

Soon  after  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  suggestion,  namely,  on
June  4,  1911,  when  Miss  Violet  Lodge  happened  to  be
present  with  the  Piper  family  party,  Mrs.  Piper  complained
that  her  hand  felt  numb,  and  it  occurred  to  one  of  her
daughters  to  give  her  a  pencil.  At  first  nothing  happened.
Then  the  position  of  the  pencil  was  changed,  and  it  was
placed  between  her  first  and  second  fingers.  A  little  scrap
of  script  was  then  obtained  consisting  first  of  a  drawing  of  a
seven-legged  insect,  then  the  words  "  A  Rachne,"  and  then
a  drawing  of  a  spinning-wheel — all  three  in  one  line.  The

1  A  sentence,  veridical  apparently,  had  however  been  written  automati-
cally on  April  25,  1894.  while  Hodgson  "  was  managing  to  keep  her
out  of  trance  successfully"  (see  Chapter  VI.,  p.  211).


128


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


letters  were  written  detached,  quite  plain,  and  with  a  back-
ward slope,  totaUy  different  in  character  from  the  trance
writing.  The  word  Arachne — Greek  for  spider — and  the
spinning-wheel  make  it  practically  certain  that  the  badly
drawn  creature  was  meant  for  a  spider  ;  but  Sir  Oliver
Lodge  satisfied  himself  that  neither  his  daughter  nor  Mrs.
Piper  or  her  daughters  attached  any  meaning  to  "  Arachne,"
and  they  called  the  creature  a  beetle.

It  is  rather  curious  that,  notwithstanding  this  successful
attempt,  nothing  came  but  scribbles  when  Mrs.  Piper  next
tried  on  September  20 — just  as  might  happen  to  any  one
trying  to  obtain  automatic  writing  for  the  first  time.  The
following  attempt  was  little  better,  consisting  mainly  of
repetitions  first  of  "  Mme."  and  then  of  "  G."  The  next,
on  October  8,  again  consisted  of  repetitions  of  "  Mme."  and
"  Mme.  G.,"  but  these  were  interspersed  with  drawings  of
ecclesiastical  objects.  The  fourth  attempt  on  October  11
began  to  be  more  coherent.  It  was  made  fairly  clear  that
a  rosary  and  a  particular  kind  of  cross  were  to  be  sym-
bolic of  Mme.  G.  just  as  a  -f-  was  of  Imperator.  The  name
Guy  on  was  not  given,  but  Gun  was  repeated  several  times.
Then  a  soi-disant  Hodgson  wrote  and  brought  about  an  un-
mistakable coincidence,  which  it  is  very  difficult  to  suppose
either  accidental  or  due  to  any  normal  knowledge  of  Mrs.
Piper's,  between  the  script  and  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  preoccupa-
tions on  that  day. The  script  also  said  :

Trust  Mme  G  and  things  will  soon  be  clearer  *  *  *  A
most  holy  influence  is  being  brought  to  you  *  *  *

Several  other  scripts  followed,  getting  more  and  more
coherent.  Mme.  Guyon  always  purported  to  be  present,
though  the  full  name  was  not  written  except  backwards.

The  longest  and  in  some  respects  most  interesting  of  the
scripts  was  produced  on  October  28,  1911,  in  the  presence
of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  The  writing  continued  for  about  an
hour  conversing  with  him  in  the  manner  of  Mrs.  Piper's
trance  script,  and  accompanied  by  some  of  the  trance
mannerisms.  For  instance,  the  hand  was  sometimes  held
towards  Sir  Oliver's  mouth  as  though  to  listen  to  what
he  said. Mrs.  Piper  too  spoke  of  a  tingling  in  hand  and  arm


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  129

at  the  beginning  and  end,  a  sensation  sometimes  experienced
in  connexion  with  the  trance  (see  Chapter  I.,  p.  24).
Mme.  Guyon  purported  to  open  and  close  the  script
just  as  she  would  have  done  had  it  been  a  trance  com-
munication. In  short,  it  resembled  a  trance  communication
in  almost  all  respects,  except  that  Mrs.  Piper  was  in  full
possession  of  her  normal  consciousness  all  the  time,  though
she  did  not  attempt  apparently  to  follow  what  the  script
said.  Sir  Oliver  asked  for  Hodgson,  who  then  purported  to
write,  Mrs.  Piper  saying  she  felt  the  influence  in  her  arm
changing.  After  conversing  with  this  Hodgson  control  for
some  time,  Sir  Oliver  sent  a  message  to  Myers,  who  there-
upon took  control,  the  writing  again  changing  somewhat.  He
said,  among  other  things,  that  Mme.  G.

has  taken  up  the  light  and  is  the  chief  control  now.  We
shall  all  greet  you  often  and  give  you  much  help.  We
are  only  in  the  primary  stage

A  drawing  of  Madame  G.'s  cross  presently  led  Sir  Oliver
to  say  "  Madame  G.  is  coming  again,"  and  Mrs.  Piper  re-
marked :  "I  like  her,  she  is  most  quiet  and  restful  "  ;  and
again  when  the  writing  was  over  :  "  That  is  the  quietest
peacefulest  influence.  I  feel  rather  rested  when  she  has
been."

It  is  clear,  then,  that  some  intelligence  behind  the
trance  communications,  and  behind  the  subsequent  auto-
matic script,  looked  forward  to  further  communications  of
an  interesting  kind  under  the  Guyon  management.  But
these  anticipations  have  not  so  far  been  fulfilled.  Mrs.
Piper  sailed  for  America  on  October  31,  1911,  and  since
then  has  sent  a  few  scripts  to  Sir  Oliver,  namely,  one
in  1911,  three  in  1912,  some  in  1914,  and  again  several  in
1915.  Madame  Guyon  has  continued  to  take  the  lead,  and
messages  from  different  communicators  have  been  written,
but  the  output  is  somewhat  meagre  in  amount  and  its
content  for  [the  most  part  of  little  interest,  though
one  ov\  two  of  the  scripts  of  1915  give  more  promise  of
evidential  communications.  It  is  possible  that  Mrs.  Piper
has  not  herself  been  interested  in  obtaining  script,  and
that  more  might  come  if  she  were.

i

i


130


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


CHAPTER  IV.

Indications  (1)  of  Artificiality  in  the  Language  of
the  Controls,  and  (2)  of  Common  Memories  and
Associations  of  Ideas  in  Different  Controls.

The  two  lines  of  investigation  included  in  the  heading  of
this  chapter  are  distinct,  but  it  is  convenient  to  group
them  together  because  certain  cases  may  belong  to
either.  Moreover,  both  may  conveniently  be  considered  at
this  point  of  the  whole  discussion  when  the  reader  has
just  been  introduced  to  some  of  the  individual  controls.

Apart  from  what  they  say  about  themselves  and  each
other,  our  knowledge  of  controls  depends  almost  entirely
on  their  language — that  is,  on  the  way  they  speak  and
write.  They  are  not  like  men  living  among  us,  whom  we
might  know  well  even  if  they  never  spoke  or  wrote  at
all.  The  examination  of  their  manner  of  speaking  or
writing  may  therefore  be  very  important.  Some  controls
have,  it  is  true,  certain  characteristic  gestures.  For  in-
stance, Phinuit,  we  learn  from  Hodgson's  records  in  1896-7,
had  a  habit  of  rubbing  Mrs.  Piper's  right  cheekbone  with
her  left  hand  when  he  first  appeared.  Different  writing
controls  hold  the  pencil  differently,  press  on  it  with  dif-
ferent degrees  of  force,  and  tend  to  exhibit  different
movements  or  contractions  in  the  hand  as  a  prelude  to
writing.  But  these  movements  are  not  very  revealing  ;
and  whether  they  were  at  first  accidental  and  then  become
habits  of  Mrs.  Piper's  organism  associated  with  particular
controls,  or  whether  they  were  merely  signals,  like  Im-
perator's  cross  and  Madame  Guyon's  rosary,  intended  to
announce  the  writer,  we  have  no  means  of  knowing.

The language used by each control in speaking  or


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  131

writing  is  similarly  more  or  less  characteristic.  Phinuit's
way  of  speaking  with  a  semblance  of  French  accent  and
a  few  French  words  was  peculiar  to  himself  and  markedly
different  from  that  of  others.  The  G.  P.  and  Hodgson  con-
trols both  evidently  spoke  with  a  sufficient  resemblance  to
the  language  of  those  gentlemen  in  life  to  be  impressive —
sometimes  very  impressive — to  their  friends  ;  and  their
written  communications  resembled  their  speech.  The  differ-
ence of  style  exhibited  by  other  controls  can  be  studied
by  the  reader  in  the  preceding  chapter  and  its  appendix.
He  can  there  observe  the  elaborateness  of  George  Eliot ;
the  pomposity,  with  a  tendency  to  use  biblical  phraseology,
of  Imperator  ;  the  brusquerie  and  colloquialness  of  G.  P.  ;
the  stilted  style  of  Julius  Caesar  and  "  Moses  of  Old,"
and  so  forth.

The  question  is — are  these  differences  due  to  habit  ?
If  they  are,  whose  habit  is  it  ?  Or  are  they,  on  the
other  hand, — again  like  the  cross  and  the  rosary — merely
symbols  ?  In  the  case  of  Phinuit,  of  George  Eliot,  of
G.  P.,  of  Hodgson,  and  of  others  stated  to  have  lived
comparatively  recently,  the  habit  is  no  doubt  supposed  to
be  their  own  ;  and  the  fact  that  it  is  tempered  by  Mrs.
Piper's  habit  would,  perhaps,  not  be  very  surprising  even
on  the  theory  of  almost  complete  control  by  spirits.  But
whose  habit  is  revealed  in  the  language  of  Imperator  and
Rector  ?  We  do  not  know  what  then  original  language  was
supposed  to  be.  Their  own  view  about  this  presumably
varied  with  their  views  about  the  names  they  bore,  and,
as  we  have  seen,  Rector  in  particular  made  inconsistent
statements  about  his  native  language  (see  above,  pp.  109,  110).
But  at  all  events  they  did  not  profess  to  be  modern
Englishmen  or  Americans.  Nor  did  they  derive  their
style  solely  from  Mrs.  Piper's  habitual  mode  of  speaking,
or  from  that  of  the  sitters.1  Nor  is  their  style  the  same
as  that  of  Stainton  Moses's  Imperator.  Whence,  then,  did
their  language  habits  come  ?

If  pressed  they  might,  perhaps,  themselves  have  an-
swered this  question  by  saying  that  they  used  the  same

1  They  sometimes  however  professed  that  they  borrowed  words  or  modes
of  expression  from  the  sitter  (see  Chapter  VIII.,  p.  299).


132


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


language  in  communicating  that  they  used  among  them-
selves in  the  other  world,  only  modifying  it  a  little  to
suit  our  habits.  It  is  true  that  they  and  other  controls
tell  us  that  communication  between  spirits  is  by  thought,
or  by  ideas— not  by  speech.1  But  other  statements
suggest  that  in  practice  English,  with  some  deviation  from
ordinary  usage,  is  the  language  of  the  other  world.  For
instance,  on  March  3,  1897,  Rector  speaks  about  "  emana-
tions." Hodgson  asks  him  what  he  exactly  means  by
emanations,  and  Rector  replies,  "  Spirits.  We  speak  in
this  way  among  ourselves.  It  is  difficult  to  bear  in  mind
that  I  am  speaking  to  an  earthly  friend."  2

General  questions  of  style  are  rather  elusive  and  difficult
to  discuss,  but  one  peculiarity  of  the  language  of  Im-
perator and  of  Rector — the  use  of  the  second  person
singular  during  parts  of  their  careers  as  controls,  but  not
invariably- — gives  us  the  opportunity  of  studying  a  definite
point  of  style  statistically,  as  it  were.  The  investigation
reveals  clearly,  I  think,  that  a  habit  of  using  the  second
person  singular  was  deliberately  adopted,  was  cultivated
with  some  difficulty,  and  finally,  so  far  as  Rector  was
concerned,  was  deliberately  dropped.  This,  of  which  I
shall,  I  think,  be  able  to  convince  the  reader,  affords  as
far  as  it  goes  distinct  evidence  of  an  artificial  attempt  to
speak  in  a  particular  manner.  It  shows  that  some  intelli-
gence was  planning  the  make  up  of  Imperator  and  Rector,
or  that  they  themselves  were  playing  a  part.

To  judge  from  Stainton  Moses's  Spirit  Teachings,  his
Imperator,  who  however  did  not  "  control "  himself  but
communicated  through  Rector,  only  used  the  second
person  singular  in  addressing  the  deity.  His  style  is  a
pulpit  style,  and  the  form  "  ye "  occasionally  occurs  in
addressing  people  collectively,  but  to  Moses  himself  he
says  "  you."  The  false  Imperator,  who  communicated
through  G.  P.  in  October,  1906,  and  claimed  to  be  Joseph
(see  above,  p.  90)  apparently  also  used  "  you  "  in  addres-
sing Hodgson,  unless  G.  P.  translated  into  that  form  for

1  See  Appendix  to  this  chapter  for  instances  of  this  assertion.  The  question
whether  they  think  in  words  has  probably  not  been  faced.

2  Cf.  below,  p.  135,  for  the  language  of  the  other  life.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  133

him.  When  Mrs.  Piper's  Imperator  first  controlled  (on
November  11,  1896,  see  Appendix  to  Chapter  III.,  p.  468)
his  communication  consisted  largely  of  prayers  in  which
naturally  the  word  "  thou  "  was  used.  Hodgson  was,  how-
ever, addressed  as  "  you  "  more  than  once,  though  "  thee  "
was  used  in  the  farewell  phrases.  At  Imperator's  second
appearance,  which  was  very  brief,  he  used  "  thou "  in
greeting  Hodgson.  At  his  third  time  of  controlling,
November  17,  1896,  the  second  person  plural  is  chiefly
used,  though  he  says  once  "  I  will  be  thy  spiritual  ad-
viser," following  it  with  "  I  will  show  you  the  way."

Examination  of  subsequent  sittings  show  a  similar  mixed
use,  and  I  do  not  think  it  is  clear  that  Imperator  intends
to  use  the  second  person  singular  regularly  and  habitually
till  about  the  middle  of  February,  1897.  It  may  have
been  that  Hodgson's  invitation  to  him  on  February  12  to
give  an  account  of  the  revelation  of  God  to  man  suggested
that  scripture  language  was  appropriate — whereas  before
that  "  thou  "  and  "  thee  "  may  have  been  introduced  as  part
of  a  more  general  attempt  at  archaic  or  poetic  language.1
As,  for  instance,  on  December  8,  1896,  when  the  sentence
"  Look  thou  yonder  and  see  your  faithful  friend  George  "
illustrates  both  the  use  by  Imperator  of  the  word  "yonder,"
unusual  in  ordinary  modern  English  prose,  and  the  lapse
into  "  you "  of  a  sentence  begun  with  "  thou "  as  the
mode  of  address.  At  any  rate  it  can  hardly  be  doubted,
after  February  12,  whatever  we  think  before,  that  though
the  use  of  "thou"  and  "you"  are  still  mixed,  "thou"
is  the  form  intended  and  "  you  "  comes  in  by  mistake.
It  is  after  this  date,  too,  that  these  lapses  begin  appar-
ently to  be  sometimes  noticed  by  the  control,  and  what
seem  rather  flimsy  excuses  for  them  to  be  made.  The
following  example  of  this  occurred  on  February  22,  1897.
Imperator  writes  :

In  the  days  when  Christ  appeared  this  evil  was  subdued.
You  will  U.D. —  Thou  speakest  not  to  me.  I  am  not
you. Rector  says  you. I  command  all  quiet. Go  on.

1  There  is  a  good  deal  of  this  kind  of  mixture  of  "  thou  "  and  "  you  "  in
e.g.  Scott's  novels.


134


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


I  do  not  profess  to  understand  fully  the  by-play  be-
tween spirits  here,  but  it  seems  clear  that  the  sentences
following  "  you  will  U.D."  are  intended  to  explain  the
occurrence  of  "  you."  A  little  further  on  the  enquiry
about  understanding  is  put  in  the  form  "  Dost  thou
U.D.  ?  "

In  the  above  passage  it  is  fairly  clear  that  Imperator
was  "  controlling  "  himself — not  employing  Rector  as
amanuensis,  as  he  began  to  do  in  March,  1897  (see  above,
p.  107).  Rector's  mode  of  addressing  Hodgson  in  1897
was,  however,  in  the  second  person  plural,  though  he  was
apt  to  get  a  little  confused  between  "you"  and  "thou"
when  his  subject  was  one  on  which  Imperator  had  pre-
viously communicated,  or  when  he  was  acting  as  amanu-
ensis for  Imperator.1  He  seems  to  realise  this  himself
sometimes,  for  on  March  11,  1897,  when  there  had  been
some  mixture  of  "  thee "  and  "  you,"  he  interpolated  at
one  point  :

I  use  my  own  expression  when  speaking  for  him  [i.e.  Im-
perator] at  times,  because  I  am  more  accustomed  to  so  doing.

After  which  Hodgson  is  consistently  addressed  as  "  you  "
to  the  end  of  the  sitting.

By  the  summer  of  1898,  however,  the  use  of  the  second
person  singular  had  apparently  become  easy  to  Rector,
and  he  had  taken  to  using  it  on  his  own  account.
Exactly  when  this  change  took  place  it  is  difficult  to  say,
because  Rector  generally  wrote  for  Imperator  or  for  the
Imperator  Band,  or  for  the  friends  of  sitters,  and  the
passages  where  it  is  certain  that  he  speaks  for  himself
alone  are  comparatively  few.  But  we  can  trace  the
transition  to  some  extent.  Thus,  on  January  28,  1898,  he
is  undoubtedly  saying  "  you  "  to  Mrs.  L.  (see  Appendix  to
Chapter  III.,  p.  514).  Again,  on  May  14,  1898,  a  sitting
hi  which  "  thou  "  and  "  you "  are  much  mixed,  Rector
seems  clearly  to  speak  for  himself  in  the  following  passage  :

1  A  case  occurred  on  March  19,  1897,  of  what  seems  to  be  confusion  under
these  circumstances  ingeniously  explained  by  getting  temporarily  rid  of
Imperator,  who  is  represented  as  returning  a  little  later  in  the  sitting.  It
is  quoted  on  p.  151  below  in  another  connexion.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  135


Sitter.  Is  this  my  father  ?

Rector.  Yes  he  is  dictating  to  me. I  tell  you  to  follow  this

friend  and  all  will  be  well.  Rector —
Sitter.  Is  Rector  a  physician  ?

R.  I  am  not  a  physician,  but  I  do  know  all.  Read  not
for  many  weeks,  rest  your  mind,  take  things  easy.
Amen,  and  rest  thy  body  a  great  deal.

And  in  the  following  passages  in  sittings  of  June  8
and  9,  1898,  it  is  again  clearly  Rector  who  is  communi-
cating on  his  own  behalf,  and  this  time  using  the  second
person  singular  without  mistake  :

{June  8,  1898.)

{Rector  writing  after  a  long  communication  from  a  friend
of  the  sitter.}

Rector.  Rector.  I  am  with  thee  friend  of  earth  and  what  has
taken  place  no  mortal  mind  must  know.  Speak  not
of  thy  friends  anxieties.

(June  9,  1898.)

I  am  Rector  and  I  am  speaking  for  thy  brother,  thy

husband  and  thy  son,  they  are  present  but  I  am

speaking  for  them
{and  later  to  Miss  Edmunds  who  was  recording}
I  have  told  thee  this  time  and  over  and  again

With  the  evidence  before  us  of  the  development  of
Rector's  use  of  the  second  person  singular,  the  following
remarks  made  by  him  and  Imperator  to  Mrs.  L.  on
April  9,  1900,  read  rather  strangely.  They  came  to  close
the  sitting  after  a  friend  of  Mrs.  L.'s  had  been  con-
trolling :

R.  Friend  we  return  to  thee  once  more  and  strange  to  say
we  have  discovered  that  our  language  is  not  like
thine  of  earth.  For  instance  we  see  that  thou  dost
say  you,  and  why  not  thou  ?

Mrs.  L.  Sometimes  we  say  thee  and  thou  to  friends,  but  in
our  language  usually  only  in  speaking  to  God.

R.  All  yes,  we  U.D.  but  such  is  the  language  of  our
own  life


136


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


The  use  by  Rector  of  the  second  person  singular  con-
tinued with  occasional  momentary  lapses  till  the  summer
of  1905.  But  when  on  October  30,  1905,  sittings  are
resumed  after  the  summer  holidays,  the  habit  is  changed
for  some  unexplained  reason.  Hodgson  was  alone  present
on  October  30.  "  Thee  "  is  used  in  the  opening  greetings
to  him — and  the  use  of  thou  and  you  is  mixed  on  the
following  pages  when  the  controls  are  explaining  that
Mrs.  Piper's  mediumship  is  not  likely  to  be  continued
long  :

We  are  desirous  of  finding  one  or  more  good  lights  through
which  communication  can  be  established  for  thy
work,  as  we  shall  not  long  continue  here  as  we
have  previously  and  many  times  stated.  We  do
not  intend  to  return  so  often  as  formerly  friend.
We  may  continue  to  return  on  first 1  and  second 1
but  it  is  doubtful  if  we  return  continuously  on
third 1  as  formerly.  Therefore  it  will  be  well  for
[hand  turns  to  spirit]  you  to  look  well  to  other
lights.

After  this  the  second  person  plural  is  used  during  the
remainder  of  this  sitting  with  one  possible  lapse  ;  and  it
is  also  used  in  those  that  follow,  whether  Rector  is  speak-
ing for  himself  alone  or  for  the  Imperator  Band,  except
that  "  thee  "  is  apt  to  occur  in  the  initial  greeting.  That
the  change  was  deliberate  seems  to  be  shown  by  the
following  passage  in  the  sitting  of  November  22,  1905,  in
which  a  lapse  occurs.  Hodgson  was  the  recorder  and  only
sitter.  Rector  was  writing  and  had  addressed  Hodgson
in  the  second  person  plural.  Then  in  arranging  for  a
sitting  for  a  new  sitter  described  as  "  Mrs.  R.'s  sister,"
the  following  occurs  :

R.  Wilt  thou  [Hand  turns  to  spirit]
Will  you  [Hand  assents  to  spirit]
George  is  teaching  me  these  words. Will.  U.D

R.  H.  Yes.

R. Will  you  kindly  be  near  so  we  can  call  upon  you  if

1  Days  of  the  week,  viz.  Monday,  Tuesday  and  Wednesday  respectively,
see  pp.  145,  146  below.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  137


necessary  when  we  meet  Mrs.  R's  sister  as  she  is
unfamiliar  with  us.1

But  much  earlier  than  this  G.  P.  apparently  intervenes
on  one  occasion  to  get  "  you "  said  instead  of  "  thee "
— possibly  to  cover  up  a  tendency  to  slip  into  "  you  "  on
Rector's  part.  It  happened  on  October  13,  1902.  Rector
was  writing,  and  Hodgson  was  the  sitter  and  recorder.

R.  He  tried  to  speak  to  thee  and  ask  thee  to  call  on
Mrs.  D.  to  see  if  he  could  not  [send]  a  message
to  .  .  .  say  you  Rector  .  .  .  send  a  message  to
you  .  .  .  George  said  you  .  .  .  say  [written  above
you]  you

R.  H. (reading)  George  said  say  you.

{Hodgson  comments  on  this  :}  [Apparently  G.  P.  is
communicator  and  wished  Rector  to  say  you  and
not  thee.]

On  May  24,  1904,  there  is  a  criticism  by  the  com-
municator, the  so-called  Dr.  Oliver,  of  Rector's  language
as  old-fashioned  and  a  statement  that  they  were  "  teaching
him  how  to  use  different  language "  (see  Appendix  to
Chapter  III.,  p.  490).  Possibly  it  is  intended  to  represent
the  change  to  "  you  "  in  October,  1905,  nearly  a  year  and
a  half  later,  as  the  result  of  this  instruction.

Hodgson  died  quite  suddenly  on  December  20,  1905,  and
the  last  record  of  his  which  we  have  is  that  of  a  sitting
on  the  day  before — December  19,  1905.  The  next  sittings
of  which  we  have  the  complete  records  were  those  in
England  in  1906-7.  The  use  of  the  second  person  plural
by  Rector  was  quite  established  throughout  these  sittings,
except  that  in  the  one  voice  sitting  during  the  series  (on
November  16,  1906,  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.,  p.  234)
he  began  by  using  "  thee."  In  subsequent  sittings  of
which we have records — viz. Mr. Dorr's in 1908,  Miss

1  There  is  another  instance  of  consciousness  about  language  on  the  same
day,  though  in  the  form  of  Rector's  remarks  about  the  language  of  com-
municators. He  says  of  a  communicator  :  "  R.  This  lady  is  a  most
interesting  spirit  and  when  she  speaks  herself  I  find  she  does  not  say
awfully,  but  George  does  repeatedly  .  .  .  say  .  .  .  awfully  .  .  .  U.D.
R.  H.  Yes.  R.  He  supplies  words  often  to  help  out  a  new  com-
municator."


138


Mrs.  Henry  Sid g wick.


[part


Pope's  in  1909,  and  the  English  sittings  of  1910-11 —
Rector  continued  to  address  the  sitter  as  "  you."

Definite  changes  of  language,  such  as  those  we  have
been  considering,  can  only  be  explained,  so  far  as  I  can
see,  by  supposing  the  control  to  be,  in  some  degree  at
least,  personating  a  character  to  which  he  thinks  a  special
way  of  speaking  appropriate,  and  accordingly  adopts  it  as
we  might  do  in  acting  a  charade.  The  apparently
accidental  slips  which  occur  in  the  use  of  this  language
point  in  the  same  direction,  but  less  distinctly  perhaps,
because  it  might  be  argued  on  Hodgson's  theory  that
these,  like  grammatical  mistakes,  were  due  to  "  the
machine  "  ;  that  is,  to  the  control's  manner  of  speech
being  interfered  with  by  the  tendency  of  Mrs.  Piper's
organism  to  work  in  the  way  habitual  to  it.1

It  must  be  observed,  however,  that  the  grammatical
mistakes  made  in  the  Piper  script  are  of  two  distinct
classes.  There  are  those  consisting  in  the  misuse,  but  not
uniform  misuse,  of  old  grammatical  forms  which  are  not
habitual  to  Mrs.  Piper's  normal  waking  self — as,  for
example,  where  the  form  "  dost  "  is  used  for  "  doth "  or
vice  versa,  or  "  ye "  is  used  in  addressing  a  single  indi-
vidual. The  following  are  instances  :  "  Dost  not  thy  book
drop  him  {Melchisedek}  about  the  time  of  Israel,"  said
by  Imperator  in  1897,  and  again,  "  When  dost  thy  book
speak  of  Salem?";  "Thou  mistaketh  God's  power,"  said
by  Imperator  or  Rector  on  June  3,  1898  ;  "  Friend  be  ye
not  discouraged  time  will  be  given  thee  for  all  things
well,"  said  by  Rector  for  himself  and  Imperator  on
November  20,  1899  ;  "If  thy  brother  faileth  in  his  work
fail  ye  not  but  turn  to  him  and  lend  him  thy  helping
hand,"  said  by  Imperator  on  November  3,  1902 ;  "  If
thou  hath  increased,"  said  by  Rector  on  December  20,
1904.  See  also,  for  other  mistakes  of  the  same  kind,  an
extract  from  the  sitting  of  December  20,  1904,  in  the
Appendix  to  Chapter  II.,  p.  434. This  class  of  mistake  is

1  A  slip  occurred  on  December  12,  1906,  which  goes  against  this  tendency-
of- the- organism  theory.  Iloctor,  who  by  this  time  had  given  up  the  use  of
archaic  language,  except  occasionally  in  the  initial  greeting,  wrote  "  The
lady  present  hath  light  a  little."


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena .  139

not  instinctive,  it  is  not  due  to  bad  habit,  but  to  absence
of  habit,  or,  at  least,  imperfectly  formed  habit.  They  are
like  the  mistakes  we  make  in  speaking  a  foreign  language
which  we  have  acquired  imperfectly,  and  they  point  to  a
form  of  language  being  used  artificially.

The  other  class  of  grammatical  mistake  is  doubtless  due
to  bad  habit  in  Mrs.  Piper,  whose  grammar,  I  am  bound
to  say  however,  is  usually  excellent.  I  think  the  com-
monest error  of  this  class  is  the  use  of  "  as  "  for  "  that  "
in  certain  connexions,  which  is  liable  to  occur  with  all
sorts  of  controls.  Thus — taking  examples  from  G.  P.  and
George  Eliot,  both  educated  writers  in  this  life — we  have
G.  P.  remarking  on  October  29,  1896,  "Well,  I  cannot  say
now  as  he  is  the  Moses  you  wish  "  ;  and  again  on  January
26,  1897,  "  I  laughed  and  said  I  am  plain  George  Pel-
ham  and  no  special  Angel  as  I  know  of."  George  Eliot
writes  on  March  30,  1897  :  "I  hardly  know  as  there  is
enough  light  remaining  for  me  to  continue  "  ;  and  on
April  5,  1897,  "  Do  not  know  as  I  have  ever  seen  a
'  Haunted  House.'  "  We  may  compare  also  GurneyP  on
January  25,  1897  :  "I  do  not  know  as  I  mean  in  a  day
or  two,  but  it  may  in  a  week  or  two."

There  is  a  record  of  a  conversation  about  grammatical
mistakes  of  this  sort  which  took  place  between  Hodgson
and  Myersp  communicating  through  Rector  on  February  4,
1902.  It  is  worth  quoting,  as  it  contains  views  expressed
by  Hodgson  and  by  the  trance  personalities  on  the  subject,
and  as  it  is,  moreover,  the  conversation  about  "  Nigger
talk  "  to  which  William  James  refers  in  Proceedings,  Vol.
XXIII.,  pp.  18-19.

R.  H.  Do  you  remember  about  your  laughing  with  me  once
and  your  saying  that  doubtless  you  would  some
time  be  coming  back  and  talking  nigger-talk  ?

Myersp. Yes indeed, Well, very well do I remember  this.

Is  this  what  you  would  call  my  talks  with  you
now  %  R.  H.  No —

Myersp.  I  should  really  like  to  know  if  it  sounds  anything
like  it.

R.  H.  No,  but  of  course  it  is  different  from  speaking  to
you when you were using your own body.  For


140


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


Myees
R.  H.


Myers,


R.  H.


Rector
Myers„


example,  you  would  never  say  such  a  thing  as  "I
remember  of  doing  something."
p. No  not  of  certainly.

Things  like  that  appear  occasionally  in  the  writing
which  I  attribute  to  writing  mechanism  or  the
speech  centres  of  the  organism.
I  find  it  sometimes  and  not  infrequently  due  to  lack
of  U.D.  on  the  part  of  amanuensis — Rector  as
amanuensis

{Note  by  Hodgson}  [He  probably  refers  to  difficulty
in  transmitting  special  words  or  phrases  to  Rector,
such  e.g.  as  Myers  would  use  in  discussing  techni-
cal psychical  questions  with  me.] 1

Yes,  but  ...  I  don't  exactly  see  how  you  mean, —
except  that  Rector  finds  difficulty  in  making,  as  it
were,  the  machine  run  in  unfamiliar  channels.
[Rector  to  spirit  ?]  clearer

Yes,  and  then  again  when  listening  to  the  com-
municator he  not  infrequently  drops  the  machine
too  quickly  therefore  registers  a  word  which  has
not  been  given  or  perhaps  leaves  out  a  word  and
so  on.

R.  H. Yes.  Myersp.  More  later. Nigger-talk  yes  yes.

The  next  time  MyersP  communicates,  viz.  on  February  17,
1902,  he  returns  to  the  subject  thus  :

Myersp.  First  let  me  tell  you  not  to  lay  so  much  stress  on
words  not  clearly  registered  or  superfluous  .  .  .  the
using  of  superfluous  words  ...  it  is  not  worth  the
while  as  I  find  it  is  due  to  the  machine  absolutely

In  connexion  with  the  use  of  the  second  person  singular
it  is  worth  examining  two  instances  in  which  Rector  deals
with  the  Quaker  "  thee "  when  acting  as  amanuensis  for
Quaker  communicators.2 The  first  of  these  cases  occurred

1 1  see  no  warrant  for  this  interpretation  of  Hodgson's.  The  plain,
straightforward  meaning  is  that  mistakes  like  the  insertion  of  the  redundant
"  of,"  are  often  due  to  Rector's  not  understanding  what  the  communicator
says.

2  The  old-fashioned  Quaker  use  of  "thee"  is,  of  course,  different  from
that  of  the  ordinary  second  person  singular,  which  may  have  been  Rector's
reason  for  not  attempting  it  at  first.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  141

in  November,  1902,  when  he  was  habitually  using  for
himself  the  ordinary  second  person  singular  as  his  mode  of
address.  The  second  case  was  in  July,  1907,  after  he  had
given  this  up.  Mrs.  Piper  had  previously  known  both  the
sitter  and  the  communicator  of  November  24  and  25,
1902.  The  control  was  Rector,  writing,  and  Hodgson  was
present  as  recorder  throughout  the  first  of  the  two  sittings
and  through  the  greater  part  of  the  second.  The  sitter
wrote  afterwards  :

The  sittings  as  a  whole  were  highly  satisfactory  to  me  ;
were  very  characteristic  of  Mr.  W.  Although  so  personal
and  private  they  might  not  be  of  much  evidential  value
to  others — to  me,  it  was  positive  assurance  that  Mr.  W.
{the  communicator}  was  really  there.

During  the  first  sitting  the  sitter  used  the  Quaker
"  thee  "  throughout,  but  the  communicator  addressed  her
through  Rector  as  "  you."  As  regards  the  second  sitting,
Hodgson  notes  :

After  Mrs.  P.  had  lost  consciousness  and  with  eyes  closed
was  sinking  into  trance,  {the  sitter}  asked  me  why
Mr.  W.  didn't  use  thee  in  communicating  as  he  was
in  the  habit  of  doing  during  life.  I  explained  to  her
briefly  that  G.  P.  was  probably  helping,  and  that  in
any  case  the  verbal  forms  were  liable  to  be  affected
by  the  intermediary  or  intermediaries.  Nov.  25,  1902.
— R.  H.

In  Mr.  W.'s  communications  at  this  sitting  "  you  "  is
used  at  first,  but  afterwards  "  thee."  Shortly  before  the
change  is  made  the  following  remarks  occur  :

Sitter.  I  want  to  know  all  that  is  on  thy  mind,  dear.  Speak
freely.

Mr.  W. I  heard  better  then  dear.

[Between  spirits]  thee  yes  thee
Mr.  W. I  hope  you  U.D.  that  Mr.  {Pelham  =  G.  P.}  is  helping

me,  dear.
Sitter.  I  am  most  grateful  to  him.

Mr.  W. He  is  kindness  personified. I  can  come  more  easily
to-day.


142


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


It  is  worth  remarking  that  though  the  communicator
may  have  thus  repeated  the  two  points  of  the  conversation
which  took  place  while  Mrs.  Piper  was  seemingly  uncon-
scious— the  appropriateness  of  Mr.  W.  using  "  thee  "  and
the  assistance  of  G.  P.  as  a  probable  explanation  of  his
not  doing  so — though  he  may  have  repeated  these  without
having  heard  the  conversation,  it  certainly  looks  as  if  the
conversation  suggested  his  remarks  and  the  subsequent
adoption  of  the  form  "  thee."  If  we  could  be  sure  that
this  was  so,  it  would  be  important  in  its  bearing  on  the
interpretation  of  the  Piper  phenomena.  Experienced  in-
vestigators would  of  course  always  assume,  as  Hodgson
evidently  did  in  this  case,  that  anything  said  in  the
presence  of  the  medium  during  the  period  of  deep  sleep
preceding  the  trance  might  reach  the  trance  con-
sciousness.

The  second  instance  occurred  at  one  of  the  Isaac
Thompson  sittings  recorded  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  (Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  XXIII.).  The  Thompson  family  being
Friends,  the  older  members  of  it  appear,  sometimes  at
least,  to  have  used  the  second  person  singular  in  talking
to  each  other.  The  records  printed  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge
in  Vol.  XXIII. ,  pp.  162-198,  show,  however,  that  it  was
scarcely  used  at  the  sittings  either  by  sitters  or  com-
municators. The  exception  occurred  on  July  3,  1907  (op.
cit.  pp.  192-193).  Rector  was  controlling.  When  Mr.  E.
Thompson  said  to  a  recently  deceased  uncle  communi-
cating :  "  Can  you  tell  us  from  whom  you  ordered  it  ?  ",
the  uncle  replied  through  Rector  as  amanuensis :  "  That
would  be  difficult  to  get  through  to  thee."  And  later  in
the  same  sitting,  when  Isaac  Thompson  was  communi-
cating, his  widow,  who  had  been  addressing  him  as  you,
says  :

Mrs.  T.  And  Isaac,  we  want to  send  our love  to thee  and

Charlie. Theodora  is  here.  *  *  *
Communicator.  Theodora dear are you better (Theodora  had

just  come  into  the  room.)
Rector.  I  say  you  R.  Because  I  understand  it  better.  Rector.

He says  Thee, but I say you. I understand  it

better.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  143

Whether  this  is  genuine — that  is  to  say,  whether  Rector
was  translating  the  communicator's  "  thee  "  into  "  you  "
all  through  (except  in  the  one  case  of  the  uncle  quoted
above) — or  whether  it  was  a  piece  of  hedging  due  to  Mrs.
Thompson's  "  thee  "  suddenly  suggesting  to  Rector  that
this  was  the  form  he  ought  to  have  been  using,  it  is,  of
course,  impossible  to  say.  The  difference  between  the
excuse  given  here  and  that  given  in  the  previous  instance
is  noteworthy.

There  is  another  line  of  language  development  analogous
to  the  change  in  Rector's  usage  of  "  thou "  and  "  you,"
but  mixed  up,  I  think,  with  some  confusion  of  thought.
It  is  in  the  use  of  the  names  for  periods  of  time — hour,
day,  week,  etc. — and  for  the  days  of  the  week.  The
controls  maintain  that  there  is  no  time  in  the  other  world,
apparently  meaning  thereby  no  divisions  of  time.  I  am
not  sure  when  this  idea  was  first  mentioned,  but  for  our
present  purpose  the  following  bit  of  conversation  between
G.  P.  (writing)  and  Hodgson  on  October  16,  1896,  is  early
enough.  Hodgson  had  been  talking  about  mistakes  in
prophecies  made  by  controls,  and  referring  to  correct
prophecies  also.

G.  P.  Oh  I  do  see,  yet  H.  it  is  like  this.  The  facts  are
visible  perfectly,  and  there  is  a  perfect  panorama
of  things  going  on  continuously  before  us.  Now
then  when  I  see  a  picture  or  which  is  to  me  a
stern  reality,  I  mention  the  fact.  Yet  whether  it
prove  itself  a  fact  within  one  week,  one  year,  I
am  unable  to  say.  I  am  willing  to  admit  this,  H.
I  have  only  learned  this  by  experience.  That  there
is  no  time  here  is  an  established  fact.

ft.  H. There  are  changes  and  there  must  be  time.

G.  P.  I  mean  to  say  not  as  there  is  time  in  the  material
world,  no  division  of  time.

R.  H. Not  the  same  kind  of  division  ?

G.  P. No  but  totally  different.

This  idea  is  carried  right  through  the  Imperator  regime
and  to  the  end  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trances,  and  after  a  while  a
result  of  it  is  asserted  to  be  that  the  controls  cannot


144


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


understand  the  meaning  of  time  names.  Thus  William
James  says  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.,  p.  115)  :  "  The
weak  talk  of  the  Imperator-band  about  time  is  reproduced,
as  where  R.  H.  pretends  that  he  no  longer  knows  what
'  seven  minutes  '  mean  (May  14,  1906)."  And,  as  another
example,  in  the  record  of  Dr.  Stanley  Hall's  sittings  in
1909  (Studies  in  Spiritism,  p.  231),  occurs  the  following  :

Sitter.  Can  we  meet  two  weeks  from  to-day  ?
Hodgsonp. Oh,  don't  talk  like  that. Oh,  don't  talk,  I  can't
UD.

Sitter.  Can  we  come  second  after  second  coming  ? Will  that
be  right  ?

HodgsoNj, I'll  enquire. [The  hand  rises,  beckons,  questions,  and
writes,] Yes. Very  good. I'll  be  here.

Or  again  on  November  26,  1906  :

Sitter (O.  J.  L.) The  sitting  will  be  in  the  afternoon.
Rector.  Afternoon  ?

Sitter.  Yes,  your  medium  does  not  mind,  and  it  suits  the
lady  better.

Rector.  I  do  not  think  we  fully  understand  the  time :  can

you  explain  more  explicitly  ?  R.
Sitter.  I  only  mean  it  will  be  later  in  the  day  :  after  the

second  meal,  instead  of  after  the  first.
Rector.  It  will  not  matter  to  us,  friend,  we  think  +  R.

And  on  April  9,  1907,  at  one  of  the  sittings  in  London  :

Sitter  (E.  M.  S.). Not to-day at all. Perhaps next  week

[Hand  seems  not  to  understand]
Sitter.  Perhaps  after  next  Sabbath.
Rector.  Oh  yes  I  U.D.  thank  you.

This  want  of  understanding  does  not  occur  at  first.  G,  P.
in  the  passage  quoted  above  writes  of  "  week  "  and  "  year  "  ;
and,  what  is  more  to  the  point,  the  Imperator  Band  make
no  pretence  of  not  understanding  such  words  in  1897.  For
example,  on  June  28,  1897  (Hodgson  recording,  Rector
writing)  :

R.  H. Shall  I  come  to-morrow,  or  shall  I  wait  a  week,  or  a
month,  or  three  months  or  six  months  ?


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  145


Rector.  We  will  mention  a  time  for  thee  and  when  the  time
approaches  fail  us  not.  One  more  week  and  we
shall  know.

R.  H.  The  nest  time  that  I  come  is  to  be  a  week  from
to-day  ?

R.  We  would  prefer  to  see  thee  the  day  before  the
Sabbath

R.  H. To-day  is  Monday,  and  I  will  come  again  on  Saturday.
R. It  will  be  well. We  have  many  preparations  for  the
Sabbath  always  in  our  world.

Days  of  the  week  have  to  be  constantly  referred  to  in  mak-
ing appointments  with  controls  for  future  sittings,  and  the
ideas  of  day  and  week  and  of  particular  days  of  the  week
are  never  lost — it  would  have  been  very  difficult  to  make
appointments  with  the  trance  personality  if  they  bad  been
— but  the  Imperator  Band  adopt  a  peculiar  nomenclature
for  them.  The  working  days  of  the  week  are  numbered
consecutively  from  Sunday,  and  described  as  following  one
or  other  of  the  Sundays  in  a  series  numbered  from  the  actual
time  of  speaking.  Monday  of  next  week  would  be  described
as  the  first  after  the  coming  Sabbath — or  simply  as  first  after
coming,  with  Sabbath  understood.  In  this  way,  though
the  word  "  day  "  is  used,  the  word  "  week  "  and  the  names
of  the  days  of  the  week  are  avoided.  This  practice,  for  which
I  find  no  reason  given  in  the  records,  seems  to  have  begun
some  time  in  1898  or  1899.  Certainly  in  the  following
passage  on  November  4,  1897,  it  is  Mrs.  L.,  the  sitter  and
recorder,  rather  than  Rector,  who  approximates  to  it.

Mrs.  L.  Can  you  give  me  now  a  time  or  times  when  I  can
have  my  sittings  so  I  can  send  word  to  Hodgson.1
R.  Yes.  Monday

Mrs.  L.  The  day  after  next  Sabbath  1
R. And  the  day  following  etc.

HfL  $  $  a|c

Mrs.  L.  Am  I  to  understand  that  you  will  meet  me  personally

on  Monday  ?
R. At  4.30. It  is  so.

1  With  a  view  to  the  cross-correspondence  experiments,  of  which  the
failure  is  described  in  the  Appendix  to  Chapter  III.,  pp.  513-514,  Hodgson
was  in  England  at  this  time.


146


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


And  other  instances  of  the  use  of  time  names  at  this
period  could  be  added.

By  the  autumn  of  1898  the  Imperator  Band's  new  way
of  describing  the  days  referred  to  had  become  more  or  less
established,  and  it  was  readily  adopted  by  the  sitters,  but
the  word  "  week  "  was  still  sometimes  used  by  Rector  him-
self and  by  sitters  talking  to  him  to  the  end  of  1898
and  through  1899  ;  and  Hodgson  could  still  in  1898  talk  to
Rector  of  Monday,  Tuesday,  to-morrow,  etc.  It  is  hardly
worth  continuing  the  examination  of  the  records  for  the
exact  gradations  in  the  use  by  the  controls  of  time  names
or  for  the  moment  when  they  began  to  protest  that  they
did  not  understand  them.  It  would  be  difficult  to  deter-
mine either  with  any  exactness  ;  partly  because  Hodgson
and  others  concerned  with  making  appointments,  which  is
the  connexion  in  which  dates  and  therefore  time  names  most
frequently  occur,  got  to  use  the  peculiar  nomenclature  of  the
Imperator  Band  with  great  consistency,  and  therefore  gave
no  occasion  for  protest ;  and  partly  because  there  are  slips
and  inconsistencies  in  the  controls'  own  use  of  the  words.  As
Miss  Verrall  says  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  454,  footnote)  :

The  controls  often  protest  against  the  use  of  words  denot-
ing periods  of  time,  e.g.  morning,  week,  etc.,  and
sometimes  appear  unable  to  apprehend  their  meaning.  At
other  times,  however,  they  use  these  very  words  themselves
and  their  attitude  does  not  seem  to  be  based  on  any
consistent  principle.

It  would  be  easy  to  multiply  examples,  but  I  think  I  have
said  enough  to  prove  the  point  I  wished  to  bring  out,  viz.
that  the  Imperator  Band  (with  HodgsonP  in  their  wake)
professed  in  e.g.  1906  a  difficulty  in  understanding  words
of  a  certain  class  which  they  knew  and  used  correctly
and  apparently  naturally  in  1897.  Either,  therefore,  their
knowledge  of  the  English  language  had  deteriorated  or
their  ignorance  was  assumed — assumed,  it  would  seem,  with
a  confused  idea  that  it  supported  a  theory  about  time  in
the  other  world  expressed  by  G.  P.  in  1896  in  the  passage
quoted  above,  and  by  the  Doctor  of  the  Imperator  group
on  April  18,  1904,  as  follows  :


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  147

We  have  many  times  (perhaps  not  I  personally)  stated
that  which  is  true  that  we  have  no  stipulated  time
in  our  world.  Therefore  we  more  or  less  lose  the
conditions  of  time  in  your  world  after  entering  this.1

Another  point  we  may  notice  is  that  there  are  occasional
lapses  from  the  mode  of  expression  proper  to  a  particular
control  which  are  suggestive  of  artificial  use.  For  instance,
on  April  7,  1897,  George  Eliot,  writing,  says  in  the  course
of  a  description  given  in  the  first  person  singular  of  her
experiences  in  heaven  :

You  might  ask  the  question  "  Are  there  bees  in  heaven."
You  might  also  ask  as  to  whether  there  were  birds
in  heaven.  We  would  answer  both  by  saying  there
are  both.  We  answer  from  experience.  We  have
seen  them.

I  was  visited  for  a  moment  by  an  acquaintance  viz.
Rector. This  is  why  I  said  we.

Qui  s'excuse  s'accuse,  and  it  is  the  not  very  plausible  excuse
here  offered,  that  makes  the  case  suspicious.  No  excuse
was  needed,  for  the  "  we  "  might  quite  well  stand  for  "  we
in  heaven."  But  Rector  when  speaking  for  Imperator
always  said  "  we,"  and  George  Eliot's  excuse  looks  like  a
consciousness  of  having  accidentally  fallen  into  this
"  we  "  habit  ;  a  thing  which  might  easily  happen  if  there
is  an  underlying  unity  in  the  trance  personalities.

That  there  was  a  slip  in  the  next  case  is  certain.  On
March  23,  1897,  the  following  passage  occurred  in  the  course
of  a  conversation  between  Rector  and  Hodgson  :

R.  H. Where  am  I  going  for  the  experiments  to  which  you
referred  %

R. We  do  not  know  your  country  well.

R.  H. It  is  near  where  I  am  now  ?  R. Yes,  sir.

R.  H. Yes,  sir  ?  R. Yes,  friend.

Now  Rector  does  not  address  any  one  as  "  Sir,"  so  it  would
seem  that  this  slip  must  have  been  due  either  to  a  momentary
confusion  as  to  his  own  identity,  or  as  to  the  part  he  was

1  The  occasion  of  this  remark,  as  of  Gt.  P.'s,  is  that  no  reliable  date  can
be  given  for  the  fulfilment  of  a  prophecy.


148


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


playing.  Some  difficulty  in  deciding  who  is  communicating
in  the  script,  suggesting  possible  temporary  confusion  in
the  control  as  to  his  identity,  is  liable  to  occur,  but  it  is
seldom  so  definite  as  in  this  case.

Another  incident  may  be  quoted  resembling  the  last,  only
it  is  not  the  form  of  address,  but  the  form  of  a  written
capital  letter  appropriate  to  another  control  that  is  used
and  corrected  by  the  control.  It  was  on  April  20,  1897.
G.  P.,  who,  I  think,  had  not  controlled  since  March  24,
opened  the  sitting.  The  following  is  Hodgson's  record
with  his  remarks  as  usual  in  square  brackets  :

[G.  P.  writes] [Shakes  hands]
R,  H. Halloo  George.

G.  P. How  are  you  H.  ? [The  H  as  Rector  usually  makes
it,  type

R.  H. First  rate,  George,  old  chap. What's  the  news  ?

G.  P. Just left Newbold. Saw him in chair  reading,  not
feeling  any  too  well  physically  either.
Go  [?]  shake  hands  with  him  H.  [Hesitation  in  deciph-
ering. H  first  made  as  Rector  makes  it,  then  as
if  with slight  effort, as G. P. used to make  it,


An  underlying  unity  in  the  trance  personages  might,  as
I  have  already  suggested,  explain  mistakes  like  those  just
described,  and  thus  bring  them  under  the  second  heading
of  the  present  chapter — common  associations  of  ideas  and
common  memories  among  controls.  That  there  is  a  common
stock  of  memories  and  associations,  besides,  of  course,  in-
grained ones  such  as  are  implied  in  the  common  use  of  the
English  language,  cannot,  I  think,  be  doubted,  but  what
has  further  to  be  determined  is  whether  it  amounts  to  more
than  can  naturally  be  accounted  for  by  supposing  the  con-
trols to  talk  things  over  among  themselves.  Do  the  cases
I  am  about  to  refer  to  indicate,  on  the  other  hand,  that
the  individuality  of  the  controls  is  less  distinct  than  they
assert  ? What  they  say  is  (June  5,  1900,  Rector  writing)  :

Our  intelligence  doth  not  live  within  the  boundary  line
of the brain of this light or any other U.D.  but


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance  Phenomena.  149


whether  our  sentences  seem  broken  or  unintelligent  or
what  not  we  know  we  are  independent  and  individual
intelligences  acting  through  and  upon  it  as  mortals  would
register  sentences  with  a  machine  and  mortals  hath  no  right
to  gainsay  it  and  ere  we  cease  our  work  they  will  surely
know. Remember  this  friend.1

Does  their  common  stock  of  associations  show  this  to
be  untrue  ?  I  do  not  think  the  examples  I  have  to  bring
forward  can  be  regarded  as  conclusive  on  the  subject,
but  they  are  suggestive  and  worth  considering.

I  will  begin  with  an  instance  of  the  occurrence  to  G.  P.
and  to  George  Eliot  of  the  same  language  difficulty  on
consecutive  days  which  may  possibly  be  a  mere  coinci-
dence, but  which  at  any  rate  can  hardly  be  due  to  the
controls  concerned  talking  to  each  other  behind  the
scenes.  On  January  19,  1897,  G.  P.  controlling  wrote
at  the  end  of  the  sitting  :

G.  P. Yes,  I  intend  to  do  this,  H  .  .  .  Yes  yes,  they  {i.e.

the Imperator Band} two too. The verb  too

bothers  me  at  times

1  The  sitting  at  which  this  was  said  was  a  kind  of  farewell  to  Hodgson
before  the  summer  holidays,  though  it  was  not  quite  the  last  of  the  season.
Nothing  in  the  record  of  the  sitting  accounts  for  the  emphatic  assertion  ;
but  I  think  it  may  have  been  in  part  at  least  due  to  my  own  and  Mr.  Andrew
Lang's  papers  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XV.  On  April  3,  1900,  the  following
conversation  took  place  between  Hodgson  and  G.  P.  about  this,  and  there
is  no  record  of  Hodgson  being  present  at  any  sitting  between  April  3  and
June  5  : — G.  P.  What  have  you  been  discussing  now,  H.  ?  R.  H.  Oh
I  don't  know  exactly,  George.  I  expect  soon  to  reply  to  some  criticisms
on  my  report  of  these  things.  They — for  example — allege  that  there  must
be  an  admixture  of  the — what  is  called  the  subliminal  consciousness  of
Mrs.  Piper,  because  when  Doctor  came  and  talked  about  Homer,  said  I
am  Homer  and  so  on,  and  in  answer  to  my  question  if  he  was  Homer  the
reply  came  yes  and  so  on,  a  lot  of  statements  made  when  their  group  first
began  using  the  light.  O.  P.  Well,  don't  they  know  yet  that  they  were
in  no  wise  developed  and  were  more  or  less  confused  themselves  or  will  they
never  U.D.  anything  ?  R.H.I  think  probably  it  will  be  pretty  hard  to
drive  some  things  into  the  heads  of  those  who  have  not  been  through  a  long
practical  experience.  G.  P.  Well,  don't  bother  yourself  too  much,  H
there  is  ...  a  long  road  that  has  no  turn.  Keep  to  the  right  and  when
they  think  they  know  the  most  they  know  the  least,  so  what  does  it  matter
any  way  *  *  *  *  Well,  stick  to  it  and  in  spite  of  all  things  you  will  surely
win.  R.  H.  I  know.  G.  P.  I  tell  you  you  will  sure.  R.  H.  I  have
no  doubt.


150


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwiclc.  [part


R.  H. The  word  too.  G.  P.  Verb

R.  H. Verb  ?  G.  P.  Yes To  two  too. G.  P.

On  January  20,  George  Eliot  wrote  :

G.  E. I  am  waiting  for  your  message.
R  H. Do  you  remember  the  words  of  Shakespeare  :
"  Spirits  are  not  finely  touched
But  to  fine  issues  "  ?
G.  E. Is  this  quotation  from  the  Tempest  or
R.  H. I  think  Measure'  for  Measure.

G.  E.  Oh  yes.  [R.  H.  repeats  the  passage  several  times
during  the  writing]

G.  E.  Spirits  are  not  finely  touched  but  to  two  too  two  [?]
fine  issues.  I  hear  you  better  this  way  {i.e.  holding
palm  of  hand  towards  Hodgson's  mouth}

R.  H. I  understand.

G.  E.  Spirits  are  not  finely  touched  but  to  fine  issues.  Very
good  indeed.

We  should  think  it  an  odd  coincidence  if  two  acquaint-
ances independently  spoke  of  this  difficulty  on  consecutive
days.  At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  observed  that  the
difficulty  may  have  been  differently  caused  on  the  two
days.  G.  P.  evidently  made  a  mistake  and  wrote  "  two "
when  he  meant  "too."  George  Eliot,  on  the  other  hand,
perhaps  failing  to  understand  the  quotation  at  first,  did
not  know  which  of  the  three  words  was  meant.

There  are  various  instances  in  which  a  solidarity  among
controls  seems  to  be  assumed — in  which,  that  is,  a  control
talks  about  what  "  we  "  have  done  or  experienced,  though
he  is  not  by  way  of  having  been  concerned  in  the  matter
personally  at  all.  Sometimes  the  want  of  complete  appro-
priateness of  this  mode  of  speech  is  noticed,  as,  for
example,  in  the  remarks  of  the  Doctor  quoted  on  p.  147
above.  The  Doctor  at  this  time  (April,  1904)  was  said  to
be  a  Dr.  Oliver  who  had  died  in  September,  1903,  and
had  apparently  joined  the  Imperator  Band,  "  Our  doctor  "
who  "  came  to  us  recently,"  Rector  says  on  December  13,
1904. When Dr. Oliver says "  we have many  times

1  Note  G.  P.'s  persistence  in  a  quasi-grammatical  error,  which  G.  P.
in  life  would  never  have  made,  and  which  could  not  be  due  to  a  machine.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  151


stated"  "that  we  have  no  stipulated  time  in  our  world,"
he  is  therefore  wise  in  adding  the  parenthesis  "  perhaps
not  I  personally,"  for  any  knowledge  he  had  of  its  being
many  times  stated  must  have  been  at  second  hand.

Something  similar  occurred  on  March  19,  1897.  Rector
was  controlling,  acting  as  amanuensis  for  Imperator.
Hodgson  was  the  sitter  and  recorder,  and  his  notes  are
as  usual  in  square  brackets.  They  were  discussing  the
admission  of  other  sitters  and  communicators  for  the  sake
of  the  fees.

Rector.  We  have  through  this  channel  given  as  many  proofs
of  spirit  identity  as  we  can.  [It  here  came  to  my
mind  to  say  that  they  had  given  none  at  all.]  i.e.
not  ourselves,  but  a  great  many  others,  and  we  think
it  time  before  the  light  expires  altogether  to  keep
the  way  open  and  produce  the  very  best  there  is.
[I  wasn't  sure  about  the  word  produce]  Bring  forth.

R.  H.  I  understand.  It's  all  right.  I  wasn't  sure  what  you
wrote.

R. Yes. We did not U.D. you. At least I did  not.

Do  you  wish  us  to  name  the  communicators  ?
R.  H. Yes. Of  course.

R.  We  may  not  recall  thy  earthly  friends,  but  we  do
know  those  in  spirit.  We  will  name  some  of  them
later  before  we  depart.
But  in  the  meantime  we  would  say  this  for  thy  U.D  ,
that  unless  you  have  any — he  leaves  me  now —
unless — yes  I  will  do  the  rest  [To  Imperator]
Unless  you  have  any  objection  to  make  in  regard
to  past  experiences  we  would  say  to  you  now
once  and  for  all  time.  We  have  opened  the  way
for  better  and  nobler  spirits.  We  intend  to  guard
and  guide  this  light  now  and  forever  more.  The
friends  and  communicators  in  the  past  have  given
you  all  that  was  possible  and  if  you  had  continued
in  the  same  way,  you  never  would  have  received
anything  better.  There  have  however  been  many
proofs  given  and  many  good  .  .  .

R  H. "  Good  ones."

R  Yes. Yet  there  has  unavoidably  been  much  confusion.


152


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Now  we  would  send  only  those  who  are  clear  and
coherent  and  it  is  now  time  to  give  some  comfort
and  not  so  much  questioning  because  the  light  is
not  equal  to  it,  my  friend.

The  sentence  in  this  passage  relevant  to  our  present  topic
is,  of  course,  the  first,  in  which  Rector  claims  on  behalf  of
the  Imperator  Band  the  evidence  for  spirit  identity  given
before  they  came  on  the  scene  at  all,  and  then  corrects  him-
self. I  have  quoted  more  of  the  passage  than  this,  because
the  end  of  it  throws  further  light  on  the  beginning,  and  be-
cause in  the  middle  occurs  an  example  of  change  from  the
second  person  singular  to  which  I  have  referred  in  a  foot-
note on  p.  134  above,  and  it  seemed  better  to  give  this  here
rather  than  to  break  the  passage  up.

The  next  instance  I  have  to  give  is  somewhat  different.
On  November  12,  1898,  when  Hodgson  and  Rector  were
making  arrangements  for  future  sittings,  the  following  con-
versation took  place  :

R.  There  is  nothing  of  great  importance  at  this  meeting
to  be  settled  further,  but  thou  hast  a  friend,  viz.
Newbold  who  would  desire  to  come  to  us  later,
and  he  must  not  be  overlooked.

R.  H. Very  good.

R. No  matter  when  he  asks,  it  must  be  arranged  for.

R.  H. I  shall  be  very  glad.

R. And  we  must  have  it  so  understood,

R.  H.  Yes.

R.  That  is  at  any  moment  would  he  desire  to  should  he
desire  to  meet  us,  he  will  do  so  without  further
question.

R.  H. Yes,  I  understand.

R. No  matter  who  is  to  be  present.

R.  H. Very  good. He will come at once no matter  who

else  has  arranged  to  see  you.
R.  +  It  was  he  who  once  gave  us  light.

R.  H. Yes. Yes  indeed.  Yes.

R. And  to  him  we  will  give  great  help. We  are  working

for  him  now.
R.  H. I  am  delighted.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  153

R.  For  the  first  time  since  our  last  meeting  with  him
we  are  working  with  and  for  him  directly  *  *  *
and  -f  attention  has  been  called  to  him  in  par-
ticular of  late  and  infinitely  better  arrangements  are
being  made  for  him.

I  know  of  no  reason  for  this  outburst  about  Professor
Newbold  at  this  time.  The  records  throw  no  light  on  it.
The  interesting  point  in  it  hi  connexion  with  our  present
subject  is  Rector's  reference  to  him  as  if  the  Imperator
Band  knew  him,  for  they  had  never  nie„t  him  through  Mrs.
Piper.  Any  knowledge  they  had  of  him  as  giving  light
must,  it  would  appear,  have  been  obtained  from  Stainton
Moses  or  other  spirits,  and  "  our  last  meeting  with  him  "
can  only  be  interpreted  on  the  hypothesis  of  a  solidarity
among  controls — what  Stainton  Moses  had  done  counting
as  if  the  Imperator  Band 1  had  done  it.  Dr.  Newbold
tells  me  that  the  only  sitting  he  had  between  those  of
June,  1895  (to  which  much  reference  has  been  made  in
previous  chapters),  and  1906,  was  one  towards  the  end
of  January,  1896,  before  the  Imperator  Band  had
been  introduced.  The  only  other  sittings  he  has  had
were  the  two  in  1906,  from  which  William  James  quotes
largely  in  his  paper  on  the  Hodgson  control  in  Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  XXIII. ,  and  it  was  not  till  then  that  he
had  any  converse  with  Rector.  Dr.  Newbold  suggests  that
the  allusion  on  November  12,  1898,  may  perhaps  be  to  the
fact  that  he  was  the  first  to  enquire  for  Stainton  Moses
and  to  invoke  the  Stainton  Moses  control,  through  whom
he  asked  for  the  names  of  Imperator,  etc.  But  "  giving
light  "  in  script  parlance  could  not,  I  think,  mean  this.  A
person  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  during  the  trance  "  gives
light  "  when  he  or  she  is  what  I  should  call  a  good  sitter —
one  with  whom  the  process  of  communication  goes  easily
and  well,  and  who  gets  good  results.2 That  Dr.  Newbold

1  It  is  true  that  Stainton  Moses  is  on  one  occasion  at  least  mentioned  as
having  joined  this  band,  which  is  perhaps  to  be  regarded  as  a  very  loosely
constructed  one.  It  is  possible  that  "  we  "  should  sometimes  be  taken  as
meaning  all  the  controls  and  communicators  whom  Imperator  undertakes  to
direct.

2  Compare  Chapter  VIII.,  pp.  295-297.


154  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.  [part

was  a  good  sitter  in  this  sense  will  not  be  doubted  by  any
one  who  has  read  his  own  paper  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,
or  William  James's  account  of  his  sittings  hi  1906  in  Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  XXIII.  Rector  was  quite  right  as  to  the
fact  that  he  had  "  given  light,"  in  the  sense  that  he  was  a
desirable  sitter  to  have,  but  how  did  Rector  know,  and  why
does  he  claim  that  the  light  was  given  to  "  us  "  %

The  next  case  to  be  considered  is  one  where  association
of  ideas  clearly  plays  a  part.  It  happened  on  November
22,  1905.  The  following  conversation  took  place  between
Hodgson  and  Rector  :

R.  H.  I  have  various  matters  to  mention,  first  especially  a
special  request  to  Imperator.  [Hand  {gestures  as
to  a  spirit.} Cross  in  air.]

Rector.  He  will  U.D.

R.  H.  I  have  an  earnest  request  from  Lodge,  the  friend  of
Myers  and  myself.

R.  One  moment  friend. We  were  told  to  give  a  message

to  you  from  Mrs.  H.  so  called  on  our  side,  from  a
former  reigning  spirit  known  to  us  as  Phinuit.1
The  message  was,  whenever  permitted  to  speak
kindly  say  to  the  gentleman  present  that  I  send
great  love  to  my  old  friend  the  Captain  and
assure  him  that  even  in  my  advanced  state  I
do  not  forget  him  and  in  many  ways  I  am  trying
to  help  him.  She  gave  me  the  message  several
so  called  days  ago  will  you  kindly  deliver  it  ?  R.

R.  H. With  much  pleasure  *  *  *  Shall  I  now  continue.

R. He  will  listen  attentively.

R.  H.  Lodge  earnestly  desires  that  a  friend  known  to  him
should  have  some  meetings  with  you  here.  Phinuit
gave  some  good  communications  from  this  person's
relative  or  relatives  many  years  ago,  and  he  would
welcome  the  opportunity  of  coming  here  {etc. —
discussing  arrangements,  without  giving  his  name,  for
a  sitting  for  Mr. E.  Thompson  who  was  coming

1  Mrs.  H.,  an  old  friend  of  Hodgson's,  had  not  long  before  this  given  long
communications  about  Phinuit,  what  he  was,  his  removal  to  a  higher  sphere,
and  so  on.  Communications  alleged  to  come  from  her  on  the  method  of
control  are  given  in  the  Appendix  to  Chapter  II.,  pp.  422,  431.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper' 's  Trance  Phenomena.  155

over  from  England.  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.,
p.  163. The  sitting  took  place  on  December  11.}

It  is  clear  here  that  the  mention  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  either
reminded  Rector  of  a  message  he  had  been  asked  to  send
to  "  the  Captain,"  or  (on  the  more  sceptical  view)  suggested
to  him  that  such  a  message  would  be  dramatically  appro-
priate. Why  did  it  do  so  ?  Why  did  Rector  (quite  cor-
rectly of  course)  associate  the  name  Lodge  with  Phinuit's
old  nickname  for  Sir  Oliver  ?  The  association  was  not
always  represented  as  operative,  for  when  Mrs.  Piper  was
in  England  in  1906-7  Sir  Oliver  had  been  present  at  a  good
many  sittings  before,  on  his  enquiring  about  Phinuit  and
saying  he  was  a  friend  of  his,  Rector  asked,  "  Could  you
by  any  possibility  be  the  friend  on  earth  whom  he  called
Captain  ?  "  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIIL,  p.  280).

The  next  case  I  have  to  discuss  is  one  in  which  the  associa-
tion of  ideas  cannot  be  doubted,  though  it  led  to  inappro-
priate reminiscences.  In  England  in  November,  1906,  Sir
Oliver  Lodge  arranged  and  superintended  three  sittings  at
which  a  friend  of  his  whom  I  will  call  Mr.  Richard  Forrest 1
was  present  as  sitter.  He  was  introduced  to  the  trance  per-
sonages anonymously,  and  Mrs.  Piper  was  not  supposed
to  have  heard  her  sitter's  name.  At  the  second  sitting  the
name  Helen  was  given  in  connexion  with  a  lame  little  boy,
who  had  been  mentioned  at  the  first  sitting  and  said  to  be
eight  or  ten  years  old.  At  the  same  sitting  Burlington  is
said  to  be  Helen's  father.  These  names  and  statements  had
no  meaning  for  Mr.  Forrest.  At  the  third  sitting  the  names
Richard  and  Helen,  and  Robert  and  Helen,  were  connected
together.

A  few  days  later,  December  3,  1906,  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,
sitting  alone,  addressed  the  soi-disant  mother  of  Mr.  Forrest
as  Mrs.  Forrest,  so  from  this  point  the  name  was
certainly  known  to  the  trance  personalities,  whatever  may
have  been  the  case  before.  Later  in  the  sitting  the
following  conversation  occurred  :

Rector. There  are  four  children. She  speaks  of  a  daughter.
O.  J.  L. Well  that  I  do  not  understand.

1  Other  names  are  substituted  for  the  real  ones  throughout  this  case.


156


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


R.  And  she  calls  her  Helen. She  must  be  the  wife  of  a

son,  we  think,  and  he  has  a  boy  whom  she  thinks
got  injured.  Now  then,  if  this  is  so,  and  Richard
does  not  know  of  it,  it  cannot  get  out  of  his  mind,
can  it  \  R.

O.  J.  L.  Well  will  she  tell  me  which  son  Helen  is  the  wife  of  ?
R.  Robert.

O.  J.  L. Very  well,  Helen  is  the  wife  of  Robert.

R.  Yes, and this spirit who calls  himself Burling  [or

Buling]  is  near  him
O.  J.  L. That  is  the  one  you  got,  Burlington.
R.  Yes,  they  called  him  Cajjtain.

O.  J.  L. Very  well,  that  may  be  good.
R.  Yes,  it  is  a  fact. I  hear  it  most  distinctly

Later  still  in  the  sitting  the  name  Joseph  Hird  was  written
as  part  of  a  message  to  Mr.  Richard  Forrest,  but  without
any  obvious  connexion  with  the  rest  of  the  message.

Mr.  Richard  Forrest  had  a  cousin  Robert  Forrest  in  the
United  States  of  America,  whose  wife's  name  was  Helen,  and
the  combination  of  the  names  Robert  Forrest  and  Helen
suggested  enquiries  there.  In  response,  the  following  facts
were  elicited.  Mrs.  Helen  Forrest's  mother's  name — not  her
father's — was  Burlington,  and  she,  Helen,  had  an  uncle  called
Captain  Burlington.  She  had  no  lame  child,  but  a  cousin
about  her  own  age  named  Joseph  (surname  not  Hird)  was
lame,  and  Captain  Burlington  had  been  rather  interested
in  him.  Mrs.  Robert  Forrest's  father,  Mr.  Vance,  had  been
a  member  of  the  American  branch  of  the  S.P.R.  and  inter-
ested in  its  work,  and  was  on  friendly  terms  with  Hodgson,
who  often  saw  him  and  his  family  and  told  them  about  the
most  recent  Piper  manifestations.  Mrs.  Robert  Forrest
before  her  marriage  had  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  when
G.  P.,  whom  she  had  known  in  life,  controlled,  and  also
Phinuit.  It  is  further  almost  certain  that  some  trance  per-
sonages were  aware  that  she  had  become  a  Mrs.  Forrest,
because  on  one  occasion  at  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  an
enquiry  had  been  made  of  the  controls,  who  would  at
this  timej  probably  be  Rector  and  Co.,  about  Mr.
Forrest's  health,  on  behalf,  as  I  understand  it,  of  Mrs.
Forrest.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  157

Examination  of  Hodgson's  records  brings  out  the  further
facts  that  Mrs.  Forrest's  father,  Mr.  Vance,  had  a  sitting
with  Mrs.  Piper  in  1892  and  another  in  June,  1895.  At  the
latter  G.  P.  and  Phinuit  successively  acted  as  intermediaries
for  Captain  Burlington,  for  whom  the  sitter  had  asked  by
name,  giving  also  his  title.  It  was  a  very  confused  sitting,
but  various  things  were  said  for  Captain  Burlington,  and
said  more  clearly  at  a  subsequent  sitting  of  Dr.  Newbold's.
They  were,  however,  completely  wrong.  Mr.  Vance  wrote
to  Hodgson  :

Dear  Mr.  Hodgson.  As  to  the  enclosed  interview  with
Mrs.  Piper,  I  can  only  say  that  it  amounted  to  just
nothing  at  all.  Also,  that  the  subsequent  sayings  when  I
was  not  present,  have  no  significance.  It  seemed  to  be
all  guessing.  Nothing  said  by  the  supposed  Captain
[Burlington]  about  his  death,  his  book,  his  friends,  etc.,
was  even  approximately  correct.  One  wonders  why  so
much  that  is  fraudulent  gets  mixed  up  with  the  sayings
of  a  medium  of  Mrs.  Piper's  undoubted  honesty.  It  would
be  so  much  easier  to  say  that  Captain  [B.]  could  not  be
found  or  was  unable  to  communicate  !  Why  is  it  neces-
sary to  falsify  about  him  ?  *  *  *  I  was  intimate  with
him  [Capt.  B.],  and  know  that  he  could  (and  would  if
he  could)  give  me  evidence  of  his  continued  existence.
The  last  sentence  is  something  of  an  Irishism — but  you
see  what  I  mean.  So  this  interview  must  take  its  place
among  the  complete  failures  which,  as  well  as  the  mysterious
successes,  challenge  further  enquiry.

At  the  sitting  this  letter  refers  to,  the  soi-disant  Captain
Burlington  enquired  about  "  your  girl  Helen,"  which  is  of
no  evidential  importance,  but  shows  that  Captain  Burlington
and  Miss  Helen  Vance  were  associated  for  the  intermediary,
who  was  at  that  moment  Phinuit.

G.  P.  continued  to  take  an  interest  in  "  Helen  "  and  her
affairs,  for  on  January  7,  1897,  after  abruptly  referring  to
Mr.  Vance,  he  said  :

G.  P. Helen  is  married.  R.  H.  Yes,  I  know.

G.  P. Got  a  boy.  R.  H.  I  didn't  know  that.

G.  P. Yes,  she  has,  I  see  it.  Positive.


158


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


A  similar  interpolation,  irrelevant  to  what  was  being
talked  about,  occurred  on  March  17,  1897  :

G.  P. Did  you  find  out  about  Helen's  boy  ?

R.  H. What  Helen's  boy  ? [Difficulty  {was}  in  deciphering

partly,  but  partly  because  I  thought  of my  sister

Ellen's  boy.]
G.  P.  Vance.
R.  H. No,  not  yet.
G.  P. Aren't  you  slow  ?

In  this  case,  then,  we  have  a  misleading  track  starting
from  the  name  Forrest 1  leading  through  Helen  to  Captain
Burlington.  Rector  may,  through  his  own  experience  as
intermediary,  have  been  acquainted  with  this  track  as  far
as  "  Helen."  G.  P.  had  all  the  associations.  But  how  did
Rector  get  to  the  name  of  that  false  and  futile  communicator
Captain  Burlington  1  That  name  relatively  to  Mr.  Richard
Forrest  was  irrelevant ;  as  indeed  were  several  other  names
mentioned  at  his  sittings,  but  these  may  have  been  mere
guesses,  which  "  Captain  Burlington  "  clearly  was  not.

1  How  the  name  Forrest  was  arrived  at  we  do  not  know.  It  may,  of
course,  have  been  telepathic  ;  but  as  Mrs.  Piper  was  staying  in  Sir  Oliver
Lodge's  house  at  the  time,  and  the  sittings  were  held  there,  it  is  almost
impossible  to  be  sure  that  the  name  had  not  leaked  out  through  some  channel
or  other  and  become  normally  known  to  her.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  159


CHAPTER  V.

Communicators  .

In  this  chapter  we  have  to  consider  the  soi-disant  personalities
called  by  Hodgson  indirect  communicators  ;  personages
whose  appearance  or  statements  are  described  by  the  con-
trol— by  Phinuit,  G.  P.,  Rector,  Hodgson,  etc. ;  or  for  whom
the  control  acts  as  intermediary  or  amanuensis,  professing
to  repeat  as  exactly  as  he  can  what  they  say.  It  is  in  this
way,  for  the  most  part,  that  the  friends  of  sitters  communi-
cate with  them,1  and  communicators  (like  controls  in  the
trance  proper)  always  profess  to  be  spirits  of  persons  who
have  lived  on  earth  and  died — unless  indeed  we  stretch  the
meaning  to  include  pet  animals  whose  spirits  are  in  one  or
two  cases  described.

It  will  be  well  to  approach  the  study  of  communicators
as  we  did  that  of  controls,  from  the  point  of  view  of  their
own  theories,  and  to  examine  what  they  and  the  controls
tell  us  about  the  process  of  communicating.  They  agree
that  it  is  by  no  means  simple  and  easy.  There  are  many
difficulties  to  be  overcome,  and  these  difficulties  are  repre-
sented as  accounting  for  much  of  the  failure  in  getting
clear  and  satisfactory  communications.

(1)  A  first  difficulty  is  that,  though  the  communicator
is  not  in  control,  he  is  liable — to  use  Hodgson's  words
(Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  401) — to  suffer  from  "  bewilder-

1  This  is  true,  speaking  generally,  and  especially  true  of  the  Phinuit
regime.  It  is  less  true  apparently  of  the  early  years  of  writing  sittings.
Hodgson  says  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  293)  :  "  If  writing  occurs  at  any
sitting  it  usually  purports  to  come  directly  from  some  deceased  friend  of  the
sitter,"  and  (p.  331),  "  Since  the  development  of  the  automatic  writing,
most  communicators  have  made  some  attempt  to  express  their  thoughts
directly  through  this  channel."


160


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


ment  "  produced  "  by  his  relation  to  the  '  light.'  "  Some-
times this  is  described  as  a  difficulty  in  breathing.  For
instance,  on  March  30,  1904,  Hodgson  and  a  sitter  being
present,  and  Hodgson  recording  :

Sitter.  How  far  away  do  I  seem  from  you  ?

Communicator.  As  I  would  express  it  were  I  in  the  body  you
seem  about  ten  feet.  If  I  could  only  come  a  little
closer  I  should  U.D.  better  what  your  expressions
are.  But  they  won't  allow  me  to  come  any  nearer
just  now.  They  say  I  could  not  do  so  well  because
I  could  not  breathe.

A  year  later — March  27,  1905 — -the  same  communicator,
whom  I  will  call  John,  observed  :

I  am  talking  as  it  were  through  a  thick  fog  and  it
often  suffocates  me.

The  difficulty  is  sometimes  expressed  in  terms  of  mental
bewilderment — as  by  Bennie  Junot  on  June  20,  1899  (see
Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  377)  :

I  have  no  bother  unless  I  try  to  speak,  then  it  all
goes  away  from  me  before  I  have  a  chance  to  say
it.

Or  again,  on  May  2,  1905,  by  the  communicator  John
quoted  above,  whose  friends  questioned  him  a  good  deal
about  the  process  of  communication  :

John.  I  find  my  thoughts  become  clouded  at  times
especially  when  I  am  trying  to  recall  experiences
and  narrate  them  at  the  same  time.  I  often  feel
confused  and  long  to  leave  here  for  a  few
moments  in  order  to  refresh  myself.  You  have  no
idea  how  pleased  I  am  to  see  you  in  this  way.
However  it  is  rather  confusing  and  I  find  my
thoughts  often  wandering  when  I  am  trying  to
speak.

♦  ♦  $  $

Sitter.  Why  is  it  that  you  can  talk  away  so  glibly  and  clearly
as  you  are  doing  now  about  the  conditions,  but  the
moment  I  want  you  to  give  a  correct  and  detailed


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  161


account  of  some  incident  in  your  life  you  become
confused  ?

John.  That  is  easy  enough  to  U.D.  and  if  you  will  take  the
trouble  to  put  your  question  to  Mr.  Pelham  he  will
soon  explain  it  to  your  satisfaction.  I  will  explain
briefly,  as  I  U.D.  it.
I  come  here  delighted  with  the  thought  of  seeing  you.
The  moment  I  enter  this  atmosphere  I  find  the
incident  I  have  on  my  mind  suddenly  leaves  me.
I  have  to  get  some  one  here  to  take  my  place  for  a
few  moments  until  I  collect  my  thoughts  again  so
to  speak.

Another  thing  which  confuses  me  greatly  is  your  lack
of  U.D.  the  incidents  to  which  I  refer  which  have
been  1  so  completely  registered  on  my  mind.  Besides
I  always  feel  the  presence  of  some  one  else  with
you  which  prevents  me  from  expressing  my  thought
clearly.

Sitter.  And  .  .  .  you  see,  J  ,  you  are  talking  finely  and

like  a  book  now,  but  the  moment  you  turn  to  give
your  memories  your  talk  becomes  seemingly  crazy.

John.  It  is  the  most  exasperating  thing  on  our  side
to  give  clearly  our  earthly  recollections.  It  is  like
a  wild  panorama  before  us  when  speaking  in  this
way  especially  when  giving  detailed  accounts  of  our
earthly  experiences.

To  this  category  of  difficulties  belong  expressions  like  "  It
is  hard  to  come  into  the  light  sometimes  "  (see  Proceedings,
Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  462),  or  "  wait  until  I  pass  through  the
light  "  (same  volume,  p.  380),  or  "  the  Good  Priest  is
helping  me  to  keep  my  thoughts  clear "  (same  volume,
p.  390).

The  mind-wandering  theory  is  recognised  by  Hodgson
when  speaking  to  communicators,  and  on  one  occasion
(October  13,  1902) — when  H.  Sidgwick  is  communicating
through  Rector  and  offering  specific  alleged  but  erroneous
recollections,  after  having  been  told  that  previous  statements
were  wrong — he  says  :

1  The  word  "  been  "  omitted  at  first  and  added  above.

L


162


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


R.  H.  Do  not  hurry.  Would  it  not  be  better  for  you  to
think  of  some  special  private  incidents  between
yourself  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  go  over  in  memory
one  of  these  again  and  again  so  that  you  could
automatically  reproduce  it  here,  even  should  your
mind  wander  while  communicating  ?

H.  S. Possibly. I  will  try  this  especially.

Rector.  Gone. This  spirit  seems  weak,  when  trying  to  speak.

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  Hodgson  did  not  try  to  test  the
theory  in  this  case  by  seeing  whether  the  specific  things
stated  when  under  the  influence  of  mind  wandering  were
or  were  not  subsequently  remembered  and  reaffirmed.

The  effort  of  communicating  is  said  to  exhaust  the  com-
municator as  well  as  the  control  (see  e.g.  Proceedings,  Vol.
XXIII.,  p.  180,  at  the  end  of  a  sitting,  "  He  is  here,  but
he  is  getting  weak").  On  account  of  this  exhaustion,  the
communicator  during  a  long  communication  sometimes
goes  out  to  "  get  his  breath,"  to  "  refresh  himself."  This
happened  twice,  for  instance,  during  a  long  conversation
between  Miss  A.  M.  R.  and  a  communicating  friend  on
May  24,  1904. He  says  :

I  have  got  to  go  out  a  moment — you  will  excuse  me
— I  must  go  out  for  a  little  change.  My  thoughts  begin
to  wander,  and  if  I  stayed  you  would  be  displeased
with  my  wandering  thoughts,  so  I  will  just  go  out  and
get  refreshed  and  return  instantly.

{After  silence  for  perhaps  a  minute  he  returns}

The  second  time  he  thus  went  out  another  communi-
cator took  his  place  for  a  short  time,1  which  is  a  way  the
situation  was  often  dealt  with.2

1  On  returning,  the  first  communicator  here  says  about  the  second  : "  1

met  Mr.-  and  he  told  me  he  just  wanted  to  speak  to  you  a  moment  while

I  was  refreshing  myself,  so  I  said  '  go  ahead  and  ask  Rector  if  you  can
get  in.'  "

2  For  other  instances  of  fatigue  and  resting,  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,
p.  338  :  "I  am  too  [weak]  to  tell  it  to-day.  My  thoughts  wander  .  .  .
good-bye  "  ;  p.  339  :  "  Wait  until  he  rests  and  I  will  get  it  clearer  "  {G.  P.
then  communicates  and  afterwards  MyersP  returns}  ;  p.  360  :  "  Oh  yes
do  while  I  can  hear  you  clearly  "  ;  and  Vol.  XXIII.,  pp.  7,  8,  11,  89,  95,
etc.,  also  below,  pp.  198,  545.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  163

(2)  A  second  hindrance  to  communication  arises  from  the
difficulty  the  control  as  amanuensis  has  in  hearing  or
understanding  the  communicator.  I  say  "  hearing  "
because  the  process  is  generally  so  spoken  of,  and  the
details  of  such  descriptions  as  are  given  are  generally  in
terms  of  sound.  We  cannot,  however,  suppose  that  com-
munication either  between  two  discarnate  spirits  or  centres
of  consciousness,  or  between  a  discarnate  spirit  and  one
occupying  the  organism  of  the  medium  is  by  air  waves
impinging  on  physical  organs  of  hearing.  Such  communi-
cation must  be  telepathic,  since  the  ideas  must  be  trans-
mitted otherwise  than  through  organs  of  sense,1  and  if  the
control  thinks  he  hears  the  communicator,  his  perception
must  be  hallucinatory.  Nevertheless,  it  will  be  convenient
to  discuss  the  alleged  difficulties  of  communication  in  the
terms  in  which  the  controls  present  them  to  us,  and  this
is  for  the  most  part  in  terms  of  hearing.

It  may  be  remarked,  however,  that  there  are  some  things
which  suggest  seeing  rather  than  hearing  ;  e.g.  on  March
19,  1900  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  416),  Bennie  Junot
says  through  Rector  or  G.  P.  :

You  should  see  the  kindly  men  who  are  teaching  me
how  to  find  the  way  to  speak  clearly.  *  *  *  here  my
words  form  in  the  Gloria  and  they  speak  them  out  for
me.  {'  Gloria  '  is  a  new  word,  and  Rector  on  being  asked
says  Bennie  means  by  it  'the  light.'}

Again,  an  error  on  June  2,  1907,  does  not  appear  like
one  due  to  mishearing  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.,  p.  254).
Myersp  communicating  through  Rector  ends  a  sentence  :

in  order  to  make  it  still  more  de  finite

{Myersp  apparently  in  some  way  becomes  aware  that
"  de  finite  "  has  been  written  thus  in  two  words,  and
remonstrates,  at  any  rate  Rector  says  : }

All  right,  I  will.  I  am  sorry.  Rector,  {and  continues
for  Myersp  : }

Yes  definite  I  registered  a  star,  etc.

1  As  remarked  in  Chapter  IV.,  the  controls  themselves  on  various  occa-
sions tell  us  that  spirits  converse  by  thought  (see  p.  132  and  Appendix  to
Chapter  IV.,  p.  518).


164


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


When  Rector,  on  March  6,  1907,  says  about  an  attempt
of  his  to  draw  a  triangle,  "  I  tried  to  draw  it  as  he,"  i.e.
Myersp,  "made  it"  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  71),  he
means,  I  imagine,  that  MyersP  was  drawing  a  triangle  for
him  to  copy.  Sometimes,  moreover,  the  control  is  repre-
sented as  imitating  the  communicator's  gestures  as  well  as
his  words.  For  instance,  on  May  24,  1904,  Miss  A.  M.  R.
reports  the  communicator  as  saying  through  Rector  in  the
voice  sitting  already  quoted  from  :

If  the  eye  was  opened  to  the  spiritual  and  you  could
see  me  as  I  stand  here  talking  with  you,  you  could  see
every  gesture  I  make,  which  is  copied  by  Rector.  He
imitates  me  as  I  speak  with  you.1

Whatever  the  significance  of  these  passages  may  be,  how-
ever, there  is  no  doubt  that  the  usual  view  of  the  process
expressed  by  both  communicators  and  controls  is  that  one
speaks  and  the  other  hears.  But  it  appears  that  the  hear-
ing is  liable  to  be  imperfect  and  the  speaking  indistinct.
"  You  see  she  has  a  peculiar  voice  and  it  is  difficult  to  hear
all  she  says,"  says  G.  P.  of  a  communicator  on  June  26,  1894
(see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  27).  It  appears  also  that
from  some  unexplained  causes  the  sounds  undergo  some
change  in  travelling  from  communicator  to  control.  Thus,
on  February  23,  1904,  Bennie  Junot  says  through  the  control
(Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  587)  :

I  have  to  speak  over  the  line  to  you  and  I  cannot
always  make  the  sounds  audible  to  those  to  whom  I
speak  {i.e.  the  controls.}

On  March  4,  1903,  the  following  is  recorded  by  Hodgson

1  In  connection  with  this  obtaining  information  from  the  communicator
by  sight,  compare  the  cases  quoted  below  of  the  control  having  visual
hallucinations,  and  of  communicators  writing  for  the  control  to  see
(pp.  181-186).

Compare  also  an  incident  on  December  7,  1892,  when  Hodgson  was
enquiring  of  Phinuit  about  the  whereabouts  of  a  lost  young  man.
Phinuit  says,  he  is  in  Dakota.  "  R.  H.  How  can  you  find  out  that  ?
Ph.  These  letters  are  written  right  before  me  ;  I  can  see  them  just  as  plain
as  this.  And  another  thing,  he  has  got  letters  in  a  little  desk  before  him
with  that  initial  on  top."


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  165


(a  communicator  has  been  struggling  to  give  a  pet  name
through  Rector)  :

Rector.  If  thou  couldst  only  realize  the  difficulties  in  registering
sounds  thou  wouldst  U.D.  my  position.  R.

R.  H. Yes. I  understand  of  course  only  in  part. But  .  .  .

R.  E  invariably  when  spoken  by  a  spirit  to  me  through

the  light  sounds  like  i  and  vice  versa.

The  difficulty  of  hearing  a  name  is  referred  to  again  on
February  25,  1903  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  555).
Vain  attempts  had  been  made  to  get  a  certain  name,  and
Hodgson,  who  was  in  charge  of  the  sitting,  interposed  :

R.  H.  The  name  is  not  right,  Rector.  Better  get  George  to
get  it  and  not  make  the  attempts  on  the  machine
in  this  way  to  get  the  sounds  registered  when  it  is
so  difficult.

Rectoe.  We  thank  thee.  We  do  not  clearly  see  the  registering
as  thou  dost.  We  repeat  by  sound  and  it  tries  us
sometimes  to  U.D.

The  expedient  here  advocated  by  Hodgson  of  bringing
an  experienced  communicator  like  G.  P.  to  help  an  inex-
perienced one  in  making  Rector  understand  was  one  often
adopted,  but  it,  of  course,  adds  another  wheel  to  the
complicated  machine.  For  examples,  see  the  Appendix,
pp.  520-524,  also  Chapter  VII.,  p.  289.

The  control's  difficulty  in  hearing  is  somewhat  differently
stated  in  the  following  extract  from  a  voice  sitting  of  June
30,  1902  (sitter  and  recorder,  G.  B.  D.)  :

[Rector  has  difficulty  in  getting  the  word  '  broader,'
and  afterwards  explains  to  me  :]

Sometimes  friend,  when  I  hear  a  word  I  hear  two  words
which  convey  the  same  meaning

*  *  *  *

Some  mortals  in  the  body,  friend,  wonder  why  these
communications  are  not  continuous — I  say  this,  Rector —
they  would  not  think  so  if  they  had  to  deliver  them,
let  me  assure  you,  friend.  They  come  intermittently  and
brokenly — Owing  to  the  registering  of  the  thoughts  it  is  !
I  get  their  replies  and  sayings  through  the  vibrations.


166  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.  [part


With  this  again  we  may  compare  the  following  message
from  Myersp  on  June  2,  1907,  quoted  in  Proceedings,  Vol.
XXIII.,  p.  253  :

Rectob.  Myers  will  open  first  this  day.  He  says  when  messages
come  from  him  he  understands  that  the  language
is  not  always  as  he  would  speak  it,  but  it  gathers
so  much  on  the  way  when  it  is  being  transmitted
it  sometimes  loses  its  natural  tone. Understand  ?

And  also  the  following  extract  from  the  sitting  of  July  11,
1904  (sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson).  The  communicator
"  John  "  says  through  Rector  writing  :

I  heard Miss talking  with George but  whether

he  used  his  own  expression  or  hers  I  cannot  say.  *  *
You  forget  *  *  that  oftentimes  our  words  travel  a  long
distance  before  they  are  registered  at  all  and  when  they  do
they  lose  much  of  their  significance.  You  seem  to  think  we
are  just  close  to  you  when  we  are  speaking  but  this  is
not  so  really.

Confusion  caused  by  spirits  talking  to  each  other,  and
the  control  not  distinguishing  the  words  intended  for  him,
is  mentioned  on  July  6.  1904  (see  Appendix,  p.  526-7).  And
Bennie  Junot  complains  on  February  19,  1901  (see  Proceed-
ings, Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  463)  of  interruptions  by  other  spirits.
He  says  to  his  mother  :

My  mistakes  are  not  due  to  lack  of  memory  on  my
part  or  lack  of  love  for  you,  but  due  to  a  misunder-
standing on  the  part  of  the  good  man  {i.e.  Rector}  who
is  good  enough  to  repeat  my  words  to  you  and  other
spirits  who  sometimes  interrupt  me  when  I  am  speaking.

Instances  of  remarks  of  spirits  to  each  other  or  of  the
controls'  own  remarks  to  spirits  being  written  down,  acci-
dentally as  it  is  sometimes  alleged,  are  not  infrequent,
and  instances  have  been  quoted  in  preceding  chapters.1

Poor  Rector,  it  seems,  suffered  from  yet  another  diffi-
culty in  following  the  communicator's  remarks,  for  he  told


1  E.g.  pp.  89,  92,  133,  137. See  also  pp.  184,  399.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  167


Hodgson  on  May  25,  1904,  that  he  had  partly  lost  his
understanding  of  earthly  language. He  said  :

I  have  not  after  so  many  so  called  years  in  spirit  life
— not  a  complete  U.D.  of  the  earthly  words  therefore  I
may  not  comprehend  readily  their  meaning.1

Other  descriptions  of  the  control's  difficulties  in  getting
hold  of  the  communicator's  messages  will  be  found  in  the
Appendix,  pp.  524-528.

An  added  difficulty  for  the  control  in  reporting  the  com-
municator correctly  occurs,  one  must  suppose,  when  the
former,  absorbed  in  "  registering,"  does  not  attend  to  the
meaning  of  what  the  communicator  says  or  to  the  remarks
of  the  sitter  to  which  the  communicator  replies.  Rector
represents  this  as  occurring  on  April  12,  1897,  when  he
was  acting  as  amanuensis  for  G.  P.  (sitter  and  recorder,
Hodgson).  Hodgson  had  been  speaking  to  G.  P.  about  an
incident  concerning  which  Myers  had  written  to  him,
namely,  the  apparition  of  Hodgson's  double  to  the  medium
with  whom  Myers  was  experimenting  in  England.  G.  P.
suggested  an  explanation  which  did  not  commend  itself  to
Hodgson. Hodgson  continued  :

R.  H. Well,  now,  let  me  ask  Rector  himself  if  he  knows  any-
thing about  the  incident  of  which  Myers  wrote.
G.  P. Yes,  certainly.
R.  H. Well  what  do  you  know  ?
Rectoe.  You  wish  to  speak  with  me  ?

R.  H.  Yes.  I  wish  to  ask  you  the  question  which  I  have
been  asking  George,  and  I  want  him  to  listen  also
to  your  reply.

Rector.  Repeat  kindly. When  I  am  speaking  for  some  other

spirit,  I  do  not
R.  H. follow  the  sense  particularly.  [Hand  assents]

{When  the  incident  is  explained  to  Rector  he  says  he

knows  nothing  about  it.}

In  Hodgson's  sittings  during  the  Imperator  regime  failure
to  make  communications  clear  to  the  control  is  generally,

1  For  further  passages  from  this  sitting  describing  Rector's  difficulties
see  Appendix  to  Chapter  II.,  p.  429.


168


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


I  think,  attributed  to  want  of  skill  or  experience  in  the
communicator ;  but  in  England  in  1907  denseness  on  the
part  of  Rector,  arising  it  would  seem  from  stupidity  or
ignorance,  seems  to  be  assumed  as  a  cause  of  failure  in
getting  communications  through  to  the  sitter.

Thus  MyerSp  says,  on  June  2,  1907  (Proceedings,  Vol.
XXIII.,  p.  255) :

Do  you  realise  how  difficult  it  is  to  receive  your  words
{presumably  certain  Greek  words}  and  translate  them
clearly  to  Rector,  who  understands  nothing  of  what  I  am
trying  to  tell  him  ?

On  May  7,  1907  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII. ,  p.  391)  :

You  understand  the  difficulties  in  quoting  to  Rector
who  must  repeat  for  me.

And  on  May  6,  1907  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  383)  :

It  is  very  clear  to  me  my  only  difficulty  is  in  making
it  quite  clear  to  R{ector}

In  speaking  thus  plainly  about  "  good  old  Rector,"
through  Rector  himself,  MyersP  was,  perhaps,  counting  on
his  "  not  following  the  sense  particularly."  Compare  also
a  remark  of  G.  P.'s  on  March  6,  1907,  quoted  above,  p.  105.

It  will  have  been  noticed  that  the  distance  the  sounds
have  to  travel  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  one  cause  of  the
difficulty  the  control  has  in  hearing  the  communicator
correctly,  and  under  the  next  head  it  will  appear  as  also
affecting  the  hearing  of  the  sitter  by  the  communicator.
What  exact  meaning  is  to  be  attached  to  the  idea  of
distance  is  as  difficult  to  determine  in  the  case  of  com-
municators as  in  that  of  controls  (see  above,  Chapter  IL,
pp.  65-67),  and  all  the  more  because  the  statements  made
about  it  are  not  very  consistent.  The  distance  of  the
communicator  is  sometimes  represented  as  varying,  and
communication  as  being  clear  only  when  he  is  near.
Thus  on  April  20,  1897,  Rector,  apparently  addressing  the
communicator,  writes  :

Come  a  little  closer  to  this [Hand  beckons  to  spirit.]


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper 's  Trance  Phenomena.  169


On  July  1,  1898,  the  communicator  says  :

I  am  coming  to  help  my  child  if  she  will  only  hear
me.  I  am  very  far  off.  I  want  to  reach  her  more
closely

On  November  21,  1898,  another  communicator  :

I  am  coming  nearer  and  nearer  and  in  a  few  minutes
I  will  be  able  to  hear  all  you  say  to  me.

At  Bennie  Junot's  first  appearance — June  19,  1899  (see
Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  356) — he  is  represented  as
approaching  :

Rector.  We  see  among  our  friends  here  a  young  man  who  seems
dazed  and  puzzled.  He  is  not  near  enough  to  us
for  us  to  give  him  much  help  at  the  moment  but
will  be  presently  *  *  *  George  is  here  with  him  and
trying  to  urge  him  to  come  closer  as  .  .  .  that  he
may  see  into  thy  world  more  clearly.

Bennie  (through  Rector).  I  hear  ...  I  hear  something.  Where
is  my  mother  I  want  very  much  to  see  her.  I
can  breathe  easier  now.1  I  want  to  go  home  now  .  .  .
and  take  up  my  studies  and  go  on.  I  see  some  one
who  looks  like  my  father  *  *  *  Father  I  hear
something  strange  .  .  .  can  it  be  your  voice.

Communicators  are  represented  as  receding  as  well  as
approaching.  Thus  on  February  18,  1901  (Proceedings,  Vol.
XXIV.,  p.  451),  Bennie  says  :

I  am  getting  .  .  .  far  away  now.

*  *  *  *

Rectok.  Friend  it  will  be  better  to  ask  him  again  when  he  is
nearer  the  light

And  on  March  2,  1903,  Rector  says  about  an  exhausted
and  unsuccessful  communicator  :

He  is  getting  far  away  friend  hope  he  will  return  refreshed.

1  This  may  refer  to  the  suffocating  effect  of  the  "  light,"  or  to  Bennie's
mis-recollection  of  his  last  illness  as  affecting  his  breathing  (see  Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  414).  As  a  matter  of  fact,  he  died  of  con-
gestion of  the  brain.


170


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


In  these  cases  distance  and  weakness  seem  to  be
equivalent.

Sometimes,  however,  nearness  does  not  seem  to  help  much.
Thus  on  April  9,  1902,  Rector,  in  a  voice  sitting,  said  to  Mr.
Dorr  :

This  spirit, friend, is very, very close to me yet  I
may  not  be  able  to  catch  all  the  sounds  of  the  voice.

And  sometimes  distance  seems  to  be  no  hindrance.  For
an  instance,  see  in  Appendix  to  Chapter  II.,  p.  427,
Mrs.  H.'s  account  on  June  3,  1903,  of  speaking  over  the
end  of  a  cord,  which,  she  thinks,  is  about  a  quarter  of
a  mile  long.1  When  Hodgson  asks  whether  she  is  a  quarter
of  a  mile  away,  she  replies,  "  about  this  distance,  I  should
say,"  and  as  she  represents  Rector  as  being  in  the  medium's
body,  this  means  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  control  as
well  as  from  the  sitter.  Nevertheless,  her  communication
was  very  clear.  Her  views  on  her  position  varied,
however,  for  on  February  18,  1903,  she  had  said  through
Rector  :

Mrs.  H.  Do  you  understand  that  I  am  looking  into  your  face
now.

R.  H. I  wish  I  could  see  you.
Mrs.  H. Can't  you  .  .

It  is  worth  observing  that  Rector  seems  to  know  nothing
about  this  quarter  of  a  mile,  for  on  June  8,  1903,  only  five
days  after  the  statement  about  it  was  made,  the  following
conversation  occurred  about  another  communicator,  K.  F.,
who  had  made  a  sudden  brief  incursion  during  a  sitting  :

Rector.  She  has  gone.

R.  H.  {with  the  statement  of  June  3rd  in  mind}  Rector,  was
she  a  quarter  of  a  mile  off  ?  [Hand  listens  as
though  not  understanding.]  Was  she  a  quarter  of  a
mile off  ?

Rector.  No she  came  down close  to me. Here  comes

again  {after  going  "out  a  moment"  to  "think  up
some  of  the  things  "  he  had  seen},  rubbing  his
hands  over  his  forehead.


1  The  full  account  is  worth  reading  for  the  theory  of  communication.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  171

The  communicator  is  undoubtedly  constantly  located  in
the  seance  room  and  in  a  definite  spot  there,  as  on  April  13,
1892,  when  Phinuit  says  about  G.  P.  :

He  is  close  by  (pointing  with  hand)  He  has  just  passed
behind  you.  He  is  looking  over  Jim's  shoulder  *  *  *
He  wants  to  write.  I  think  he  will  come  and  take  my
hand  soon.

And  the  hand  in  a  writing  sitting  constantly  turns  to
listen  to  the  communicator  as  though  standing  close  by,
just  as  it  turns  to  listen  to  the  sitter  (compare  Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  XIII..  p.  399).  Some  communicators,  how-
ever, never  seem  to  get  near.  Thus  on  January  21,  1902,
H.  Sidgwick  is  said  to  be  "  some  distance  from  the  light
which  accounts  for  the  apparently  weak  speech."

Some  of  the  statements  quoted  suggest  that  the  ideas  of
the  trance  personalities  about  the  position  and  distance  of
the  communicator  depended  partly,  at  least,  on  whether
he  was  conceived  at  the  moment  as  speaking  in  the  usual
way  or  as  speaking  as  by  a  telephone,  which  is,  I
suppose,  the  idea  implied  in  "  speaking  over  a  cord."
And  a  further  complication  is  introduced  by  the  meta-
phorical use  of  distance,  to  which  I  called  attention  in
Chapter  II.,  pp.  65-66,  and  which  should  possibly  be  assumed
in  some  of  the  statements  about  the  position  of  communi-
cators quoted  above.  In  the  following  instance  on  March
26,  1902,  the  ideas  of  distance  and  of  bewilderment  from
entering  the  sphere  of  the  light  seem  to  be  combined  :

Communicator.  If  I  seem  far  off  or  at  times  bewildered  it  is
not  because  I  am  really  so  but  owing  to  the  con-
ditions into  which  I  enter  while  impressing  [speak-
ing ?  ]

The  word  "  seems "  again  in  the  following  passage
(Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  25)  suggests  distance  ha  a
metaphorical  sense.  The  sitting  took  place  on  June  25,
1894,  and  G.  P.,  asked  if  he  could  give  the  communicator's
name,  replied  :

I'll  ...  I  don't  believe  it  because  I  can  scarcely  hear
her,  she  seems  so  far  away.


172


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


The  alleged  relation  of  communicators  to  the  bodily
organism  of  the  medium  (discussed  below,  pp.  187-192)  makes
the  meaning  to  be  attached  to  distance  still  more  difficult
to  disentangle.

The  presence  or  absence  of  spirits  from  the  immediate
neighbourhood  is  sometimes  spoken  of  apart  from  the
question  of  hearing  them  speak.  Thus  on  January  2,  1907,
the  following  conversation  between  himself  and  Rector
(writing)  is  reported  by  Mr.  Piddington  :

J.  G.  P.  Could  I  speak  to  Myers  now  ?
R.  I'll  see  if  I  can  see  him  about

I'll  send  for  him  wait  (Pause — hand  moves  about
enquiringly.)  he  will  be  here  presently.  I  believe
he  has  gone  to  see  if  he  can  see  Miss  Johnson  at
the  other  ["  Light  "  is  the  obvious  completion  of
the  unfinished  sentence.]
(Agitated  movement  of  hand.)
Here  he  is.  Speak.

Spirits  are,  I  think,  never  conceived  by  the  trance
personalities  as  otherwise  than  in  space,  and  on  April  5,
1897,  we  find  it  expressly  stated  (by  George  Eliot)  that
"it  is  impossible  for  individual  spirits  to  be  in  more  than
one  place  at  a  time."  An  approximation  to  this  is,  how-
ever, suggested  on  one  occasion  by  the  communicator
whom  I  have  called  Mrs.  H.,  who  on  July  2,  1904,
claimed  a  "  sixth  sense  of  double  consciousness,"  as
follows  :

R.  H. What  new  senses  have  you  ?

Mrs.  H.  I  have  in  every  way  the  same  that  I  had  when  in
the  body  with  the  additional  sixth  sense  of  double
consciousness.  For  instance  when  I  am  speaking
with  you,  I  am  speaking  with  some  one  else  at  the
same  time  with  another  consciousness

(3)  Returning  to  the  difficulties  of  communication,  a  third
impediment  is  due  to  the  communicator's  difficulty  in  hear-
ing the  sitter.  About  this  the  information  given  us  varies.
On  April  7,  1897,  George  Eliot  controlling  says  to  Hodgson
about  the  communicator  :


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  173


Friend,  this  lady  hears  you,  as  is  not  usually  the  case.

And  the  following  remark  by  G.  P.  on  June  24,  1894  (see
Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  34),  suggests  indirect  hearing  :

G.  P. Do  you  see  these  people.
R.  H. No,  George,  not  we.

G.  P.  Why  is  it  possible  when  they  are  so  near,  yet  I  know
you  do  not,  yet  it  seems  as  though  you  must  .  .  .
Yes  .  .  she  says  this  distinctly  and  is  still  coming
nearer  and  now  requests  you  to  speak.

W.  R.  N.  Can  she  hear  me  ?

G.  P. I  can  and  I  am  the  telephone.

Nevertheless,  it  is  generally  assumed  that  the  communi-
cator does  hear  the  sitter  directly  as  the  control  does,
though  perhaps  with  more  difficulty.  And  the  statement
that  the  communicator  is  expected  to  hear  is  often
explicitly  made.  Thus  on  June  22,  1895,  Professor
Newbold  reports  G.  P.  as  saying  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,
p.  37)  :

Here  is  Stainton  Moses,  do  you  wish  to  see  him  %  Well,
now  let  me  give  you  a  bit  of  advice.  Speak  slowly  and
distinctly,  making  sure  that  you  articulate  properly,  or  in
other  words  well  *  *  *  then  he  will  answer  to  me  all
questions  distinctly. You  see  he  is  talking  to  me  now.

A  conversation  followed  in  which  G.  P.  apparently  acted
as  amanuensis,  though  shortly  afterwards  Stainton  Moses
seems  to  have  "  controlled "  himself.  On  March  3,  1903,
in  a  conversation  quoted  in  the  Appendix,  p.  530,  the  com-
municator says  to  the  sitter,  "  I  heard  you  splendidly,  that
time  my  dear."

The  Bennie  Junot  sittings  offer  several  clear  examples  of
the  communicator  hearing  the  sitter,  and  of  the  difficulties
that  occur.  Thus  on  March  28,  1900  {Proceedings,  Vol.
XXIV.,  p.  426),  Bennie  says  to  Hodgson  :

Bennie.  Do  you  hear  me  or  do  you  see  me  or  how  do  you  do  ?
R.  H. {Explains  how  a  writing  sitting  is  conducted.}
Bennie. Well  that  is  queer  too  because  I  hear  you  and  I  see
you  very  clearly.


174


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


On  June  28,  1904  (Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  608),  Bennie  says  to
his  brother  :

I  hear  every  word  you say R but Helen  got  her

words  so  mixed  I  could  not  U.D.  very  well

On  November  20,  1905  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  655),
Bennie  says  to  his  father  :

I  U.D.  every  word  you  say  dad  you  speak  so  clearly.  I
wish  I  could  speak  to  you  that  way.1

The  communicator  "  John  "  said  on  January  16,  1905,
through  Rector  as  amanuensis  :

Let  me  first  explain  to  you  that  I  am  not  a  long  way
off 2  and  that  although  I  speak  to  another  spirit  who
takes  my  words  to  you  I  do  see  you  dear  and  I  hear
your  voice.

Again  on  March  12,  1907,  when  Hodgsonp  was  communi-
cating through  Rector,  E.  M.  S.,  replying  to  a  remark  of
his,  said  :

E.  M.  S. I  am  very  glad,  Mr.  Hodgson. Will  you  tell  him  so,
Rector  ?

Rector. Yes  he  U.D.  what  you  say.

Rector makes what seems a very explicit  statement

1  There  is  a  curious  conversation  on  November  21,  1905,  between
Bennie  and  his  mother  concerning  communication  between  them  when
no  medium  is  present  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  659).  Mrs.  Junot  says  :
"  When  I  think  of  you,  does  it  bring  you  to  me  ?  Bennie  :  Almost  invari-
ably and  is  a  great  help.  *  *  *  Every  thought  is  registered  upon  what
you  call  air  it  is  ether  really,  and  your  thought  waves  reach  me  just
as  mine  do  you.  U.D.  Mrs.  J.  :  Yes  Bennie  I  understand.  But  are  both
good  and  evil  thoughts  registered  ?  Bennie  :  Evil  thoughts  become  puri-
fied by  the  ether  before  they  reach  us.''  For  registering  of  thoughts,
compare  Rector  on  June  30,  1902  (see  above,  p.  165).  Selection
among  thoughts  by  the  ether,  as  spoken  of  by  Bennie,  based  on  the
significance  of  what  is  said  as  well  as  on  its  sound,  seems  to  open
the  way  to  much  possible  misrepresentation  and  confusion  !

2  It  will  be  remembered  that  John  said  six  months  earlier  :  "  You  seem
to  think  we  are  just  close  to  you  when  we  are  speaking,  but  this  is  not  so
really "  (see  above,  p.  166).


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  175

about  all  the  sitter's  words  being  heard  by  the  com-
municator on  February  26,  1902,  when  he  says  to  the
sitter,  who  has  been  explaining  her  want  of  certainty
as  to  the  communicator  being  really  what  he  claims
to  be  :

Remember  friend  if  statements  appear  which  seem  inco-
herent and  unsatisfactory  it  is  in  part  due  to  the  over-
anxious state  of  his  {the  communicator's}  own  mind  also.
And  remember  doubting  on  thy  part  doth  not  improve
matters.  Not  one  word  from  thy  mortal  lips  escapeth
him  or  his  hearing  especially  when  he  is  not  speaking
himself.

Some  further  instances  of  the  hearing,  but  imperfect
hearing,  of  the  sitter  by  the  communicator  will  be  found
in  the  Appendix,  pp.  528-533,  and  it  is  perhaps  unnecessary
to  multiply  examples  further.

It  may  be  well  to  call  attention  here  to  the  fact  that  the
control's  difficulty  in  hearing  the  sitter  is  represented  as
similar  in  kind  to  that  of  the  communicator.  Thus  on
April  1,  1897  (when  no  communicator  is  concerned),
Rector  says  to  Hodgson,  who  is  recording  and  has  been
complaining  of  indistinct  writing  :

We  hear  ofttimes  your  voice  in  the  same  way,  indis-
tinctly. At  times  the  words  sound  very  distant,  and  we
do  not  grasp  what  you  are  saying.

(4)  In  writing  sittings  a  fourth  source  of  confusion  in
communicating  arises  from  the  difficulty  the  sitter  is  liable
to  have  in  reading  the  writing,  which  is  never  good  and  is
worse  at  some  times  than  at  others,  and  which  is  apt  to
be  worst  of  all  in  giving  names  or  statements  that  might
be  evidential.  Rector  on  March  27,  1905,  asserts  that  he
writes  one  word  over  another  and  so  forth,  because  he
finds  it  impossible  "  to  listen  and  register  carefully  at
the  same  moment  although  "  he  tries  "to  do  so  at  all
times."  Also  he  says  on  April  29,  1907,  "  perhaps  you
will  read  better  next  time  *  *  *  I  can't  register  unless
you  U.D.  well  "  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  164).


176


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


With  the  process  of  communicating  bristling  in  this  way
with  difficulties  real  or  alleged,  it  is,  of  course,  easy  to  find
excuses  for  the  frequent  failures  of  communicators.  The
question  is,  Are  these  excuses  valid  ?  We  know  that  there
are  genuine  communications — this  paper  is,  as  already
stated,  based  on  this  assumption — and  their  imperfection  is
doubtless  due  to  difficulties  of  some  sort  in  communi-
cation, whether  the  controls'  account  of  the  nature  of  the
difficulties  is  correct  or  not.  But  there  are  other  cases
where  it  is  quite  certain  that  the  communicator  is  not
what  he  professes  to  be,  and  where  the  communications
are  false  or  worthless.  I  think  hardly  any  one  well
acquainted  with  the  facts  would  deny  this  ;  but  it  is
never  admitted  by  the  controls,  who  try  to  explain  away
even  the  worst  failures.  We  are,  therefore,  obliged  to
assume  that  all  their  elaborate  statements  about  the
difficulties  may  either  be  consciously  fabricated  to  cover
up  failure,  or  be  a  form  of  self-deception  to  account  for  it
to  themselves.

At  this  point  it  will  be  desirable  to  give  instances  of  false
communicators.  I  referred  at  the  end  of  Chapter  IV.  to
one  bad  failure — that  of  the  supposed  Captain  Burlington
— which  may  serve  as  a  specimen,  and  in  the  Appendix
(p.  533)  will  be  found  another  case,  from  Hodgson's  records
(in  1902),  of  dissatisfaction  with  the  communicator
strongly  expressed  by  a  sitter,  Mrs.  E.,  and  commented
on  by  Rector.  The  full  record  of  the  sittings  on  which
Mrs.  E.  comments  certainly  seems  to  bear  out  what  she
says.  I  may  add  that  she  expresses  well  the  impression
produced  on  me  by  a  good  many  sittings.  As  a  specimen
I  give,  in  the  Appendix,  p.  536,  the  record  of  one  at  which
I  was  myself  present  as  recorder  in  1907.  HodgsonP  was
the  communicator,  and  he  apparently  failed  to  recognise
the  sitter,  an  intimate  friend  of  Hodgson's  in  life,  or  to
understand  any  clues  she  gave  him,  so  that  it  is  very  diffi-
cult to  suppose  that  his  claim  to  be  Hodgson  was  justified.
Yet — and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  I  have  chosen  this  par-
ticular example — in  the  midst  of  all  the  confusion  and  the
feeling  about  for  facts  and  indications,  occurs  a  flash  of
supernormal  perception,  or  so  it  appears,  in  the  form  of


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs,  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  177


part  of  a  cross-correspondence.1  Another  variety  of  failure
(on  December  19,  1898)  is  referred  to  in  Chapter  III.,
p.  108,  a  propos  of  the  blame  being  thrown  on  Rector.  In
this  case  it  is  difficult  to  make  out  whether  the  control
regards  any  one  communicator  as  having  tried  to  express
himself,  or  whether  crowds  of  relations  and  friends  are
represented  as  having  been  clamouring  incoherently.

We  are  not,  however,  limited  to  inference  from  the  failure
of  communicators  for  evidence  that  they  are  sometimes  not
what  they  profess  to  be,  for  Dr.  Stanley  Hall  in  1909  took
a  short  cut  to  positive  evidence  by  deceiving  the  control
Hodgsonp,2  and  asking  for  a  niece,  Bessie  Beals,  who  had
never  existed,  but  who  was  nevertheless  produced  at  several
sittings.  She  said  little  at  first,  but  communicated  more
fully  by  the  third  sitting,  and  connected  specific  memories
with  the  sitter — mainly,  though  not  entirely,  such  as  might
be  suggested  by  his  statements  and  questions.  When  in
the  end  Dr.  Hall  told  HodgsonP  that  he  (Hall)  had  been
deceiving  him,  and  that  there  was  no  such  person  as
Bessie  Beals,  Hodgsonp  maintained  her  reality.  The
following  is  the  report  of  the  conversation  (Studies  in
Spiritism,  p.  254)  :

Dr.  Hall.  Well,  what  do  you  say  to  this,  Hodgson.  I  asked
you  to  call  Bessie  Beals,  and  there  is  no  such
person. How  do  you  explain  that  ?

Hodgsonp.  Bessie  Beals  is  here,  and  not  the  —
{Note  by  Miss  Tanner.}

[At  this  point  we  laughed  and  I  made  some  remark
to  the  effect  that  that  was  just  what  we  had
said  Hodgson  would  do,  and  the  hand  continued
thus,]

1  The  cross-correspondence  on  "  Cup  "  described  by  Mr.  Piddington  in
Proceedings,  Vols.  XXII.,  p.  179  ;  XXV.,  p.  304.  There  is  also  some  reason
to  think  that  the  communicator  showed  knowledge  of  the  name  of  the  sitter's
husband  (see  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  186,  188).  For  other  almost  certainly  false
communicators,  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  37-42  and  57.

2  Studies  in  Spiritism,  p.  171,  etc.  Dr.  Hall's  investigation,  intended
to  be  limited  in  duration  and  scope,  did  not  impose  on  him  any  need  of
retaining  the  confidence  of  the  trance  personalities  (see  above,  Chapter  I.,
pp.  13-14).

M


178


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PART


HodgsoNj,.  I  know  a  Bessie  Beals.  Her  mother  asked  about  her
before. Mother  asked  about  her  before.

Dr.  Hall.  I  don't  know  about  that,  Hodgson.  Bessie  Beals  is
a  pure  fiction.

Hodgsonp.  I refer to a lady  who  asked  me  the  same  thing

and  the  same  name.
Dr.  Hall.  Guess  you  are  wrong  about  that,  Hodgson.
Hodgsonp.  Yes,  I  am  mistaken  in  her. I  am  mistaken.  Her

name  was  not  Bessie,  but  Jessie  Beals.1

We  can  only  say  about  this  explanation  that  it  is  not
plausible.  Like  G.  P.'s  explanation  of  the  appearance  of
the  false  Imperator  (see  above,  p.  90) — also  a  communi-
cator, by  the  way — it  breaks  down  over  the  details  of  the
communication.  Dr.  Hall  might  accidentally  have  hit  on
the  name  of  a  previous  communicator,  but  it  is  very
unlikely  that  this  communicator  would  have  had  memories
appropriate  to  Dr.  Hall's  fictions  and  have  admitted  him
as  her  uncle.

It  must,  then,  be  admitted  that  some  communicators  are
not  genuine,  while  other  communicators  offer  evidence  of
identity  which,  if  it  does  not  necessarily  come  from  the
spirits  they  claim  to  be,  at  least  shows  knowledge  of  those
spirits  which  cannot  have  reached  Mrs.  Piper's  mind  by
normal  means.  This  being  so,  is  it  possible  to  find  a
formula  which  will  express  the  relation  to  the  control  of
all  communicators — both  successful  and  unsuccessful  ?  Are
they  or  are  they  not  essentially  different  ?  Is  the  unsuc-
cessful communicator  a  figment  of  the  control's  imagina-
tion, while  the  successful  communicator  is  an  independent
entity  ?  If  so,  can  we  draw  a  definite  line  between  them  ?
Are  we  to  judge  a  communicator,  rej)resenting  himself  as
the  same,  to  be  on  some  days  a  figment  and  on  others
an  independent  centre  of  consciousness,  according  as  he
is  unsuccessful  or  successful  in  producing  a  plausible
semblance  of  the  person  he  professes  to  be  ?  And  if  the
communicator  is  a  figment,  is  the  control  conscious  of  it,  or

1  It  is  noticeable  that  notwithstanding  this  explanation  Mrs.  Piper  seems
to  have  seen  Bessie  Beals  in  the  waking-stage  of  this  sitting.  "  Hello —
there's  Bessie,"  she  said  (op.  cit.,  p.  257).


»


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  170

is  he  himself  deceived  ?  In  other  words,  what  is  the
degree  of  independence  of  control  and  communicator  ?
Are  two  more  or  less  independent  centres  of  consciousness
involved  ;  whether  consciousnesses  of  separate  individuals
or  different  centres  of  consciousness  of  Mrs.  Piper  ?  Or
is  the  communicator  a  dream  or  hallucination  of  the
controls  1  Or  is  the  dramatic  presentation  of  him  pure
play-acting  by  the  control  ?

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  dramatic  distinction  between
control  and  communicator  was  in  general  maintained  with
much  consistency,  though  there  were  cases — as  is  natural,
perhaps,  on  any  hypothesis — in  which  it  was  difficult  for
the  sitter  to  distinguish  between  them.  In  general,  control
and  communicator  each  plays  his  appropriate  part  at
sittings  where  both  are  stated  to  be  present,  and  some-
times incidents  occur  which  show  that  to  each  is  at  least
attributed  an  independent  memory.  For  instance,  on
March  26,  1902,  Hodgson  tells  Rector  at  the  beginning
of  the  sitting  that  it  is  intended  to  ask  the  expected
communicator,  whom  I  will  call  Phil,  to  find  in  the  other
world  a  Mr.  Hackley,  and  explanations  are  given  as  to
who  Mr.  Hackley  is  and  why  it  is  desired  to  get  into
touch  with  him.  This  was  before  Phil  was  supposed  to
be  present.  When  later  in  the  sitting  Phil  himself,  who
is  communicating  through  Rector,  is  spoken  to  about  it
he  appears  not  to  know  who  Mr.  Hackley  is,  and  the
explanation  has  to  be  given  over  again.

But  it  is  difficult  to  find  anything  in  all  this  beyond  the
scope  of  acting.  The  dramatic  form  might  be  assumed,  and
what  we  want  to  know  is  whether  it  is  ever  anything  more
than  the  way  in  which  the  control  chooses  to  present  what
he  has  to  say.  We  want  to  know  whether  the  control  ever
really  feels  the  communicator  to  be  a  being  with  a  con-
sciousness and  a  will  independent  of  his  own,  and  whether,
when  he  attributes  to  him  a  bodily  form  and  a  definite
position  in  space,  he  really  seems  to  himself  to  see  him  ;
and,  similarly,  whether  when  the  communicator  is  repre-
sented as  speaking,  the  control  ever  really  seems  to  himself
to  hear  him.  If  the  externality  from  the  control's  point  of
view  is  established,  we  must  further  ask  to  what  extent


180


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgioich.


[pabt


if  at  all,  it  is  reciprocal.  Is  there  ever  a  separate  con-
sciousness which  in  any  degree  feels  itself  to  be  actually
taking  the  part  in  the  drama  which  the  control  attributes
to  the  communicator  ?  Or  are  the  control's  perceptions
merely  hallucinations — representations  of  its  own  ideas
veridical  or  otherwise  ?  For  if  the  communicator  does  seem
to  the  control  external  to  itself,  as  our  dream  personages
often  do,  this  would,  of  course,  not  solve  for  us  the
question  whether  it  is  anything  really  external.  A  Bessie
Beals  might  appear  as  real  as  a  G.  P.  to  the  control.  And,
on  the  other  hand,  if  the  whole  dramatic  form  were  play-
acting, it  might  still  be  the  framework  in  which  veridical
communications  come  to  us.  In  fact,  the  question  of  what
is  the  nature  of  the  communicator  as  dramatically  pre-
sented to  us,  is  distinct  from  the  question  whether  there
is  any  real  communicator  in  the  background.  A  real  com-
municator— say  G.  P. — might  be  the  source  of  information
displayed,  and  even  the  model  for  its  dramatic  presenta-
tion, without  being  either  an  actor  in  the  drama  presented
to  us  or  in  any  way  responsible  for  it.

It  will  simplify  matters  if  we  concern  ourselves  for  the
present  only  with  what  I  may  call  the  dramatic  communi-
cator and  his  true  relation  to  the  control.  We  may  put  the
question  as  to  what  the  control's  impressions  are  in  the
form  :  Does  the  trance  control  see  and  hear  the  communi-
cator with  the  same  degree  of  externalisation  that  Mrs.
Piper  evidently  does  in  the  waking-stage  ?  The  externalised
quality  of  the  waking-stage  visions  is,  as  will  be  seen  in  the
next  chapter,  so  manifest  that  it  gives  us  a  useful  standard
of  comparison.  I  think  it  hardly  possible  that  any  one
should  read  records  of  waking-stage  visions  without
realising  that  to  the  seer  they  are  entirely  objective — that
she  really  believes  herself  to  be  seeing  and  hearing,  as
outside  herself,  what  she  describes.  I  am  quite  sure  that
no  one  could  be  present  during  a  waking-stage  of  any
importance  without  realising  it.  There  is  no  acting
about  it  any  more  than  there  is  in  the  hallucinations
of  delirium,  or,  for  that  matter,  than  there  is  in  our
ordinary  dreams.

The trance controls are more sophisticated than  the


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  181

waking-stage  Mrs.  Piper.  On  any  hypothesis  as  to  what
they  are,  we  can  hardly,  after  what  we  have  seen  in
previous  chapters,  exonerate  them  from  a  tendency  to  act
a  part  (even  if  they  believe  it  to  be  their  own  pa  rt),  and
to  make  what  they  affirm  about  their  experiences  conform
to  a  theory.  It  is  therefore  much  more  difficult  to  feel
sure  that  when  they  speak  of  a  communicator  as  external
to  and  independent  of  themselves,  as  occupying  a  definite
position  in  space,  and  so  forth,  they  are  expressing  the
simple  truth  as  it  appears  to  them  at  the  moment.
Nevertheless,  I  think  there  is  sometimes  evidence,  apart
from  their  assertion,  pointing  to  its  being  true,  even
allowing  for  good  acting.  Such  evidence  is  naturally
more  easy  to  find  in  voice  sittings,  when — the  whole
upper  part  of  the  body  coming  into  play — a  greater  range
of  expression  is  possible  than  in  writing  sittings.

Perhaps  the  most  striking  case  is  one  given  in  Hodgson's
first  report  on  Mrs.  Piper  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.
104-5).  The  sitting  took  place  on  December  28,  1888,
and  the  sitter  and  recorder  was  the  Rev.  W.  H.  Savage,
brother  of  the  Rev.  Minot  J.  Savage.  Phinuit  was,  as
usual  in  those  days,  controlling,  but  in  his  notes,  contrary
to  the  custom  that  has  been  usually  adopted,  Mr.  Savage
speaks  of  Phinuit  as  Mrs.  Piper,  and  uses  the  feminine
pronoun. He  reports  as  follows  :

After  several  remarkable  sayings  she  {i.e.  Mrs.  Piper
as  Phinuit}  suddenly  said  "  Ah  !  Here  is  somebody
from  outside — he  says  his  name  is  Robert  West.1  He
wants  to  send  a  mesage  to  your  brother."  Then,  after
a  moment,  "  I  wrote  an — he  is  writing  it  and  I  am
reading  for  you — an  AR-TI-  article  A-G-A  against  his
W-  work  in  the  AD-V-  Advance.  What  the  dickens  is
the  Advance  V  I  said  "It  is  a  paper."  *  *  *  I  said  to  her
"  Can  you  see  him  ?  "  "  Yes  "  she  replied.  "  How  does
he  look  ?  "  I  asked.  "  He  has  greyish  blue  eyes,  a  beard,
a  rather  prominent  nose,  a  firm  mouth,  a  large  forehead,
and  he  brushed  his  hair  up,  so,"  brushing  my  hair  with

1  Robert  West,  as  we  learn  from  Hodgson's  report,  had  previously
communicated  directly  and  indirectly  for  another  sitter,  Miss  E.  G.  W.


182


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


her  hand,  to  show  the  fashion  of  his.  "  He  is  of  medium
build,  rather  tall."  *  *  *

{So  far  is  quoted  from  the  account  of  the  sitting  written
on  the  same  day.  The  following  was  added  by  the  sitter
on  July  5,  1890.}

When  Mrs.  Piper  began  speaking  of  Mr.  West,  she  turned
with  a  surprised  look,  as  at  an  unlooked  for  interruption,
with  the  remark  "  Ah  !  here  is,  etc."  When  I  asked  for
a  description  she  turned  in  the  same  direction  and  said,
"  Hold  up  your  head  and  let  me  look  at  you."  Then  she
went  on  to  describe  as  given  in  the  statement.

It  is  a  pity  that  these  last  touches,  so  important  from
our  present  point  of  view,  were  not  included  in  the
original  record,  but  if  we  can  trust  the  accuracy  of  Mr.
Savage's  observation  and  memory,  Mr.  West  must  have
appeared  to  Phinuit  as  a  realistic  human  figure  capable
of  movement  and  standing  in  the  room.  The  appearance
must  have  been  what  we  should  have  called,  if  Mrs.  Piper
had  had  her  eyes  open  (which  she  doubtless  had  not),
a  waking  visual  hallucination.  Whether  it  also  affected
the  sense  of  hearing  is  not  clear,  but  the  somewhat
unusual  feature  of  writing  by  the  communicator  for  the
control  to  see  1  suggests  that  it  was  not  auditory.

Another  instance  of  what  appears  to  be  a  vision  by
Phinuit  of  the  communicator  as  standing  in  the  room
occurred  on  March  18,  1892  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,
p.  558).  Phinuit,  who  is  talking  for  Ruthie,  the  baby
daughter  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Thaw,  says  :  "  There  she  is
standing  by  Aleck.  See!"  and  a  little  later  remarks:
"  Here's  this  little  girl  talks  just  as  if  she  were  alive."

Compare  also  Phinuit's  description  of  G.  P.'s  position
on  April  13,  1892,  quoted  above  (p.  171),  and  the  following
on  April  22.  1892,  as  noted  by  Mrs.  Howard  :

[When  George  went  out  and  stood  beside  Phinuit  and
"rested"  for  a  while  {after  controlling},  while  Phinuit
was  talking  he  (Phinuit)  took  up  the  little  screen  for
the lamp that G. had given me and turned it  round

1  For  an  instance  of  this  in  a  writing  sitting,  see  extract  from  sitting
of  April  20,  1897,  Appendix,  p.  544.


LXXI.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  183

so  that  the  flowers  on  it  should  be  seen  by  anyone
standing  behind  him.  He,  Phinuit,  then  said  "  he  is
much  pleased  that  you  brought  this,  he  wants  me  to
hold  it  up  so  that  he  can  see  it,  he  is  smiling  "  *  *  *  ] 1

The  localisation  in  the  actual  surroundings  is  less  clear
in  the  following  two  cases,  but  the  detailed  description  in
other  respects  makes  up  for  this.  The  first  is  from  Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  66-67.  Hodgson, '  after  reporting
a  strikingly  accurate  description  given  by  Phinuit  on
January  20,  1888,  of  a  peculiar  mark  in  the  colouring  of
one  of  the  eyes  of  his  friend  "  Q,"  continues  :

I  asked  Phinuit  how  he  obtained  the  information
about  the  eyes.  He  said  that  "  Q "  was  standing  close
to  him  and  showing  him  her  right  eye  so  that  he  could
see  it  clearly,  and  saying  that  that  was  what  I  wanted.
This  peculiarity  in  the  eye  was  what  I  had  in  mind
when  I  asked  Phinuit  for  a  detailed  description  of
"Q's"  face.

The  second  is  from  Professor  Newbold's  paper  (Proceed-
ings, Vol.  XIV.,  p.  37),  and  is  a  description  by  Phinuit  of
seeing  W.  Stainton  Moses  on  June  22,  1895  :

Ph.  Do  you  know  Billie,  George  is  talking  to  such  a
funny  looking  man  ;  he  has  a  long  double  coat  with
a  large  collar  and  cape, — a  long  beard,  large  eyes
with  drooping  lids,  [fairly  shouts  with  laughter.]
George  is  shaking  his  fingers  at  me.2

Instances  of  Phinuit  apparently  seeing  the  medium's
spirit  while  he  is  controlling  are  given  in  Chapter  II.,
e.g.  "  talking  to  an  old  lady  "  (p.  68),  "  got  an  ugly
scowl  on  her  "  (p.  69).  Though  this  is  not  a  halluci-
natory vision  of  a  communicator,  it  is  in  some  ways
analogous.

1  In  this  case,  however,  though  Phinuit  certainly  describes  G.  P.  as  though
he  saw  him,  he  appears  to  locate  him  behind  himself.  For  examples  of
this  kind  of  vision,  see  Proceedings.  Vol.  III.,  p.  114,  and  Vol.  X.,  p.  90.

2  Professor  Newbold  tells  us  that  this  description  of  Stainton  Moses
answers  to  the  notion  he  had  of  him  at  the  time,  derived  from  portraits.


184  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwiclc.  [part

There  is  similar  evidence  for  Rector  as  control  in  voice
sittings  seeing  the  communicator  as  external  to  himself.
Thus  on  April  9,  1902,  sitter  and  recorder  G.  B.  D.  :

[Hand  stretched  out  and  moves  circling  round.]
Rectoe. She  passes  round  on  that  side.
Communicator. "  I  think  I'll  have  to —  "
G.  B.  D. What  ?

Rector.  I  did  not  catch  that  friend.  Oh,  she  comes  back  to
repeat  it  ;  she  says  "I  do  not  want  you  to  lose
anything  !  I  was  coming  a  little  closer,  going  round
on  the  other  side."

Earlier  in  the  same  sitting,  Rector's  language  and
actions  seem  to  show  that  he  is  really  seeing  a  figure  of
a  lady,  though  whether  she  is  a  communicator  or  a
casual  intruder  is  not  clear  from  the  extracts  from  the
record  which  are  all  we  have.  Rector  had  been  speaking
for  a  male  communicator,  and  the  record  proceeds  thus  :

[Rector  to  G.  B.  D.] His  voice  seems  faint  somehow.

[Rector,  not  to  G.  B.  D.]  Why  of  course  I  know  you  !  [Smiles
and  then  explains  to  G.  B.  D.]  I  just  recognized
this  lady.  [As  before  to  other  personality]  Why,  I
was  so  absolutely  [word  lost]  in  what  I  was  saying
that  I  did  not  really  notice  you.  [To  G.  B.  D.
again]  There  are  two  things  of  the  utmost  import-
ance, friend  ;  and  those  I  will  clear  up,  or  endeavour
to  do  so,  at  our  next  meeting.

Again  on  June  17,  1902,  sitter  and  recorder  G.  B.  D  ,  we
have  :

R.  This  spirit  is  very  near  to  me,  friend.

G.  B.  D. What  spirit  ?

R.  Thy  brother.  G.  B.  D. My  brother  ?

R  Yes, there are three — thy father, thy mother,  thy

brother,  and  just  near,  right  behind  thy  mother,
is  another  lady.  Would  to  God,  friend,  that  thou
could  see  them  as  I  can  this  minute  !

There  are  no  gestures  of  Rector  reported  in  this  last  case,
and  for  this  reason  it  resembles  the  kind  of  evidence  fur-


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  185


nished  in  writing  sittings,  which,  as  already  said,  is  usually
less  strong  for  the  reality  of  the  externalised  vision  of  the
communicator  which  the  control  professes  to  have.  Still
there  are  instances  in  writing  sittings  where  the  circum-
stantial details  given,  or  gestures  of  the  hand  alone,  add
something  to  the  mere  statement  that  the  communicator  is
seen,  and  give  an  air  of  reality  to  the  vision.  We  may  take
as  an  example  an  incident  on  December  28,  1905  (see
Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.,  p.  7),  during  Hodgson's  first
appearance  after  his  death. Rector  writing  says  of  him  :

He  holds  in  his  hand  a  ring  .  .  .  He  is  showing  it  to
you. Cannot  you  see  it,  friend  ?  1

Two  incidents  on  April  26,  1898,  give  a  dramatically  vivid
impression  of  externalised  visions  by  the  control — the  second
being  of  a  deceased  pet  dog.  The  control  was  a  private
control,  the  young  son  of  the  sitters,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  B.,  and
Miss  Edmunds  was  taking  notes.  The  control's  grand-
mother had  been  communicating,  and  the  sitters  had  just
changed  places  and  rearranged  themselves.  The  record
continues  :

Control, don't  walk  over  Grandma,  don't  walk  over  Grandma

dear do  not  walk  all  over  Grandma.
Sit  tees. We  are  so  sorry
Control. Yes  dear  all  right  now.

Sitters. We  did  that  so  that  Papa  could  sit  dowD  more.

Control. I  am  so  glad. Yes  Bonnie  Bonnie

Sitters. What  Bonnie  is  that. What  is  that  once  more  ?
[Hand  pointed  to  Mr.  B.]

Control. Paw  on  Papa. Paw  on  Papa.

Sitters. Have  you  something  more  to  say  to  Papa  ?

Control.  Come  here  sir  sit  down  and  wait  hold  him  Ruth
{control's  dead  sister}  until  I  get  through  Mamma
Mamma  come  and  see  him  as  he  looks  now.
["  Bonnie  "  {the  sitters  note}  was  {control's}  St.
Bernard  dog.  He  had  a  habit,  when  sitting  on  his
haunches  near  one  of  us,  of  putting  his  paw  up


1  Compare  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  71,  where  Rector  writes  of  MyersF  :
'  He  holds  up  a  circle."


186  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

against  us  for  recognition.  The  "  Come  here  sir  '
is  very  characteristic  of  {control},  and  also  Mrs.
Piper's  hand  as  she  beckoned  the  dog  at  the  same
time.  Bonnie  died  *  *  *  a  year  after  {control}
passed  out,  and  since  his  death  had  not  before  been
mentioned  at  any  sitting.]

Other  examples  of  seeming  externalisation  in  writing
sittings  are  given  in  the  Appendix,  pp.  544-546.

From  the  communicator  also  we  get  similar  statements
defining  the  place  in  the  room  which  he  occupies.  Thus
on  April  15,  1898,  the  sitter  having  changed  her  place,  the
communicator  says  through  Rector  writing  :

Yes  now  you  walked  right  over  me  Auntie  .  .  .  did
you  not  see  me  holding  up  my  hand  to  you.

And  again  on  January  28,  1907,  when  HodgsonP  was
communicating  through  Rector  writing,  Mr.  Piddington
got  up  suddenly  to  move  something,  whereupon  HodgsonP
said  :

Hodgsonp. You  must  not  step  so  near.
J.  G.  P. I'm  so  sorry  ; I  forgot.

Hodgsonp. I  am  where  you  went  then  while  I  am  speaking.

The  following  is  also,  perhaps,  an  instance — on  February
26,  1902  :

Dearest  do  you  know  what  I am  doing  here. I  am

standing  beside  Rector  telling  him  what  to  say  for  me.

Another  example  is  given  in  the  Appendix,  p.  546.  In
the  present  connexion,  however,  the  value  of  what  com-
municators say  is  difficult  to  estimate,  for  as  we  can
only  know  their  sentiments  through  the  controls,  we  can
hardly  take  what  they  say  as  evidence  of  separate  and
independent  consciousness  of  localisation.

Moreover,  we  must  in  any  case  be  cautious  in  our  inter-
pretation of  mere  description  without  action,  even  when
details  are  given,  for  they  may  be  intended  to  be  sym-
bolic and  not  to  represent  anything  actually  seen  ;  as,  for


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  187

instance,  when  the  communicator,  Isaac  Thompson,  says  on
December  13,  1905  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.,  p.  165)  :

I  hold  this  bottle  in  my  hand  for  identification  *  *  *  I
had  much  to  do  with  them  when  in  your  world.

The  control  in  this  case  says  nothing  about  seeing  the
bottle.

In  cases  like  those  I  have  quoted,  the  control  in  the
trance  proper,  like  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  waking-stage,  seems
clearly  to  conceive  a  communicator  outside  itself  with  an
independent  consciousness  of  its  own  and  a  definite  position
in  space.  The  control  conceives  itself  as  in  occupation  of
Mrs.  Piper's  body,  and  the  communicator  as  outside  that
body  and  with  a  body  or  semblance  of  a  body  of  its  own.
It  sometimes  sees  the  communicator  and  sometimes  hears
him,  and  sometimes  both.

But  things  occur  at  other  times  which  are  very  diffi-
cult to  reconcile  with  this  conception  of  a  communicator
in  no  way  concerned  with  Mrs.  Piper's  organism — things
which,  in  fact,  suggest  either  some  confusion  or  fusion
between  itself  and  the  communicator  in  the  mind  of  the
control,  or  some  sort  of  joint  control.  One  of  these
things  is  that  communicators  are  apt  to  affect  the
handwriting.  An  example  of  this  on  December  2,  1898,
will  be  found  in  the  Appendix,  p.  528,  and  the  follow-
ing on  November  15,  1899,  is  a  case  in  point.  The  sitter
and  recorder  was  Hodgson,  and  Rector  was  the  control
who  acted  as  amanuensis.  The  trance-personages  had
been  prescribing  for  an  absent  lady  who  had  asked  for
medical  advice,  and,  this  being  finished,  the  conversation
proceeds  as  follows  :

.Rector.  Unless  thou  hast  further  inquiries  to  make  this  day
we  will  release  this  directing  spirit  {presumably  the
doctor}  and  pass  on  to  other  things

R.  H. Yes,  very  good.

Rector.  Gone.

Communicator.  Could  I  speak  a  word.  [This  and  the  following
few  sentences  written  slowly  and  crampedly  as  if
the  hand  was being  restrained.] I  think I  know


188


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


you  and  I  long  to  speak.  {The  communicator  goes
on  to  explain  that  he  is  a  recently  deceased  friend,
the  father,  in  fact,  of  the  lady  for  whom  Imperator
and  Co.  have  just  been  prescribing}  *  *  *

R.  H. 1 am  so  glad  my  dear  Mr.  D to  receive  your

greetings  from  your  new  world.  All  your  dear
children  have  been  hoping  to  hear  from  you  through
this  light.

Comme.  I  promised  I  would  return  to  them,  [excitement .  in
hand  becomes  more  marked]

R.  H. Yes,  Mr  D  . Mr  D kindly keep very  calm.

*  *  *  Take  your  time  and  do  not  hurry.  Think
quietly  what  you  would  like  to  tell  me,  what  you
would  like  me  to  tell  your  children,  and  then
quietly,  as  you  used  to  do,  you  remember,  you
were  quiet  and  calm  in  your  thoughts  and  speech,
usually,  just  sweetly  tell  Rector  and  he  will  tell
me.  [Writing  begins  again  calm  and  regular,  but
later  shows  restraint  again.]

*  *  *  *

Communicatoe  {after  further  conversation}  I  want  you  to  know
how  I  have  been  helped  by  your  good  friends
Rector  Imperator  and  Prudens.  When  I  told  them
to  let  me  speak  they  said  thou  shalt  do  so  and
we  will  arrange  for  thee.

*  *  *  *
Goodbye  for  the  present

*  *  *  *

[Slight  disturbance  in  hand.]
Rector.  Friend  we  have  been  preparing  this  friend  for  a  meet-
ing with  thee  for  some  days,  and  as  he  will  soon
be  freer  he  will  be  clearer  also.  Listen,  here  is  thy
mother  and  friend.  [Pause.]
{Q.  then  communicates,  and  after  she  and  Hodgson
have  conversed  for  some  time  and  she  has  taken
leave  }

Rector.  Friend  the  light  is  going. May  God  lead  and  protect
thee  always. Farewell  -f  I.S.D.  [R]
{Hodgson  annotates  as  follows}  :  [The  influence  of  the


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  189


communicators  on  the  writing  was  very  noticeable

in  the  case  of  Mr. and  Q. The  writing  was

much  restrained  and  in  different  ways.  Thus  when
Rector  was  writing  for  Q.  the  writing  tended  to
approximate  to  that  produced  in  previous  years
when  Q  was  producing  the  writing  directly  herself.
But  to-day  apparently  Rector  was  really  the  im-
mediate amanuensis.]

I  take  it  on  Hodgson's  authority  that  Rector  was
acting  as  amanuensis,  for  as  he  was  present  his  means  of
judging  were  better  than  ours  are.  But  I  confess  that  from
the  record  alone,  omitting  Hodgson's  comment,  I  should

not  have  felt  at  all  sure  that  Mr.  D and  "  Q."  were

not  regarded  by  the  trance  consciousness  as  controlling
and  writing  for  themselves.  Either  way  they  seem  to  be
conceived  as  in  some  way  influencing  the  organism,  for  it
is  difficult  to  suppose  that  cramped  handwriting  was
intended  merely  as  an  imitation  of  their  manner.  In
certain  cases  it  is  perhaps  possible  to  suppose  something
of  the  kind.  When  HodgsonP  communicates,  the  hand-
writing is  sometimes  larger  than  when  Myersp  does  (in
neither  case  is  it  like  the  handwriting  of  the  supposed
communicator  1),  and  it  might  be  said  that  this  is  because
the  control  is  trying  with  the  hand  to  indicate  Hodgson's
more  boisterous  manner.2  But  a  cramped  handwriting
hardly  seems  a  good  way  of  imitating  the  manner  of
Mr.  D — —  or  of  "  Q."  If  deliberately  adopted  by  the
control  it  can  only  be  symbolic,  not  imitative  ;  and  if
due  to  direct  influence  of  the  communicator  on  the  writing,
then — if  control  and  communicator  are  distinct  conscious-
nesses— there  is  some  sort  of  combined  control.

An  incident  related  in  Miss  Verrall's  "  Report  on  the
Junot  sittings  of  Mrs.  Piper" {Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,

1  Some  have  thought  that  there  was  sometimes  a  faint  approximation
to  Myers's  handwriting,  which  was  known  to  the  medium  and  had
some  marked  features.

2  On  June  2,  1907  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.,  p.  253)  the  small
handwriting  appears  to  have  been  only  adopted  for  Myersp  when  Rector
was  writing  for  him  in  the  first  person,  not  when  he  was  reporting
in  the  third  person  what  he  said.


190


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PAET


p.  530)  illustrates  the  point  still  more  clearly.  It  occurred
on  February  23,  1903. Miss  Verrall  notes  :

At  this  point  with  the  appearance  of  Hugh  Irving  {Mr.
Junot's  deceased  black  coachman},  the  writing  changes
and  "  there  is  a  tendency  to  make  extra  curling  loops
to  the  strokes."  When  the  sitters  complain  of  illegibility
{"owing  to  the  curious  looping"}  Rector  apologizes  on
the  ground  that  "  he  (that  is  H.  I.)  speaks  queerly."  It
appears  that  peculiarity  of  speech  on  the  part  of  a
communicator  is  here  represented  by  peculiarity  of  writing
on  the  part  of  the  control.

This  curly  writing  was  used,  it  should  be  observed,  only
during  Hugh's  first  two  remarks.  When  its  illegibility  is
remarked  on,  it  is  given  up.  Hodgson  notes  on  his  original
transcript  that  presumably  Hugh  gave  these  two  sentences
direct  to  Rector,  and  that  afterwards  apparently  G.  P.
acted  as  intermediary — intermediary  between  Hugh  and
Rector,  I  suppose  he  means.  When  Hugh  had  once
previously  communicated  (on  February  11,  1902),  no  such
peculiarity  in  the  handwriting  seems  to  have  appeared.

Sometimes  the  effect  of  excitement  in  the  communicator
is  represented  as  producing  illegible  writing  on  the  part
of  the  control.  The  following  extracts  illustrate  this  and
also  Hodgson's  acceptance  of  the  theory  :

(Feb.  26,  1900.)

Hodgson  recording  for  several  sitters,  friends  of  the  com-
municator called  above  Phil. Rector  writing.

[Writing  very  scrawly  and  not  read  at  the  time  through-
out.]

R.  H.  Rector,  please  explain  to  Phil  that  he  must  be  abso-
lutely calm.  Otherwise  the  writing  cannot  be  read.
We  cannot  possibly  continue  unless  the  writing  is
better,  and  the  machine  will  not  produce  this  clearly
unless  all  is  peaceful.

R. We  .  .  .  we  .  .  .  will call our leader. Wait for  us.

[Slight  pause.  Writing  resumes  more  slowly  and
clearly.]

{Two  days  later.  February  28, 1900,  same sitters  and
communicator.}


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  191

R.  H. Rector,  please,  the  writing  seems  to  be  deteriorating.

R.  Well  I  am  absorbed  in  his  sayings  which  accounts
for  it.  I  am  anxious  to  keep  him  quite  calm  and
clear  as  I  am  giving  all  my  attention  to  him.  But
speak  kind  friend  if  I  am  not  clear  in  my  own
duty.

A  similar  fusion  of  control  and  communicator  seems  to
be  implied  when  the  communicator  uses  the  hand  for
purposes  other  than  writing.  An  instance  of  its  being
used  to  represent  the  communicator  looking  round  the
room  is  given  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  in  Proceedings,  Vol.
XXIII.,  p.  188.  It  occurred  on  November  12,  1906,  at
one  of  the  Isaac  Thompson  sittings  in  England,  Mr.  E.
Thompson  being  the  recorder  :

Mrs.  Thompson. Can  you  remember  this  room  ?

Commune.  Give  me  time  and  I'll  see. [Hand  waves  about  and

seems  to look round everywhere] Can it be  the

nursery,  Sue  dear.
Mrs.  T. Yes  it's  the  old^nursery,  where^we have  been  so  often

together.

It  might  be  asked  in  this  case  whether  Isaac  Thompson
was  not  himself  controlling,  but  I  think  it  is  clear  that
it  is  not  so  conceived  by  the  trance  personality.  The  full
record  shows  that  Isaac  Thompson  said  at  the  beginning  :
"  Remember  if  you  cannot  see  me,  I  am  standing  here
beside  you,  impressing  my  thoughts  upon  this  sensitive
plate";  and  that  a  little  later  he  complained  of  not  being
able  to  make  Rector  write  the  pet  name  by  which  he
used  to  call  one  of  his  daughters.  The  sitters  apparently
assumed  throughout  that  Rector  was  controlling.

An  instance  of  a  more  ambiguous  kind  is  recorded  by
Hodgson  on  April  8,  1903,  as  follows  :

Commr.  I  had  a  red  mole  on  my  shoulder  *  *  *  I'll  show
you  .  .  .

[Hand  touches  over  my  left  shoulder,  and  presses  a
point  at  back.]
R.  H. Back  of  left  shoulder  ?
Commr. Yes  where  Rector  put  his  head.


192


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwiclc.


[part


R.  H. "  His  hand."

Comme. head. Wait  I'll  watch  him.

R.  H. Yes. [Hand feels again in same place on my  left

shoulder.]
Commr. Yes  there.

This  looks  to  me  suspiciously  like  a  change  in  the  point
of  view  in  the  middle — the  communicator  beginning
by  conceiving  himself  as  touching  the  spot  and  then
remembering  that  it  is  not  he  but  Rector  who  should
control  the  hand.  There  is  perhaps  a  similar  ambiguity
on  March  26,  1902,  when,  as  recorded  by  Hodgson,  a
gesture  of  affection  (this  interpretation  is  mine)  seems  to  be
made  with  the  hand  by  the  communicator.  It  is  stated
that  the  "  hand  draws  block  book  back  and  rests  a  moment
on  wrist  of  sitter  " — the  sitter  being  the  communicator's
father.

Another  way  in  which  the  hand  is  affected  by  the  com-
municator is  seen  when  the  latter's  excitement  is  expressed
by  movements  of  the  hand.  Perturbation  of  the  hand  is
often  mentioned  in  the  records,  and  often  concerns,  or  may
concern,  the  control  only — as,  for  instance,  when  it  occurs
with  a  change  of  control  or  a  change  of  communicator,  or
when  the  control  at  length  succeeds  in  grasping  what  the
communicator  is  trying  to  say,  or  perceives  that  the  com-
municator has  grasped  some  idea,1  or  when  the  sitter  fur-
nishes a  piece  of  information.  But  there  are  other  times
when  it  is  obviously  the  communicator's  excitement  which
is  represented  by  the  perturbation  of  the  hand.  For
instance,  on  December  13,  1905,  at  a  sitting  recorded
by  Hodgson  when  Rector  was  the  control  and  Isaac
Thompson  the  communicator  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.,
p.  166):

R.  H. I  am  an  old  friend  of  Professor  Lodge
Commr.  LODGE.
R.  H.  Yes.

1  For  examples,  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  373,  where  Rector  grasps
the  name  Abt  Vogler,  and  Appendix,  p.  533.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  193

Commr. What  my  old  neighbour  in  L  I  V  .  .  .

[Excitement  in  hand  which  cramps  and  twists  about
somewhat.]
Rector.  Calm  friend. [Between  spirits.]
Commr. L  I

[Excitement  stops  the  writing  again.]
Commr. Drugs  ...  Do  not  go. Wait  for  me.  LIVERSTOOL.

etc.

And  further  on  in  the  same  sitting  :

R.  H. I am interested in Psychical work and sent  Mrs.

Piper many years ago to  England,- — don't  you

remember  seeing  Mrs.  Piper  ?
Commr. Piper  ?

R.  H. Yes  and  the  [Perturbation  in  hand.]
Commr. Oh  yes  I  remember  Piper. Was  Mrs.  Piper  a  medium,
an  American  lady  ?

In  cases  of  the  communicator  affecting  the  movements  of
the  hand,  whether  in  writing  or  otherwise,  it  seems  probable
that  the  control  is  aware  of  the  fact  ;  indeed,  he  sometimes
clearly  is.  But  the  question  remains,  Does  he  consciously
exercise  volition  in  the  matter  ?  If  not — if,  for  instance,  he
is  surprised  when  the  hand  goes  through  motions  of  looking
round  the  room,  or  when  queer  speaking  results  in  queer
writing — there  must  either  be  a  telepathic  influence  from
the  communicator  expressing  itself  through  the  control  as
a  "  motor  automatism,"  or  there  must  be  something  of
the  nature  of  joint  control  by  two  or  more  distinct  centres
of  consciousness.  In  either  case  something  must  happen
like  what  happens  in  automatic  writing  without  trance,
when  the  normal  consciousness  of  the  writer  is  aware  that
writing  is  going  on,  but  not  aware  of  directing  it.  It  will
be  observed  that  this  joint  control,  if  there  be  joint  control,
is  different  from  the  divided  control  described  in  Chapter
II.  There  there  was  a  division  of  the  organism  between
two  controls  ;  Phinuit  was  said  to  occupy  the  head  and
some  other  control  the  hand.  In  joint  control,  control
and  communicator  affect  the  same  motor  centres  concerned
with  the  same  hand  and  affect  them  simultaneously,  so  that
the  action  of  the  communicator  modifies  that  of  the  control.


194


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


On  the  other  hand,  if  the  control  is  solely  responsible  for
the  movements  of  the  hand,  he  is  playing  a  part.  He  is
apparently  "  trying  to  imitate "  the  communicator,  as
Phinuit  said  to  Dr.  Thaw  (see  above,  Chapter  III.,  p.  82)  ;
and  as  in  a  writing  sitting  action  is  limited  to  the  hand,  the
imitation  becomes  partly  symbolic.  But  there  is  of  course
yet  another  possible  alternative.  The  appearance  of  in-
fluence by  the  communicator  on  the  movements  of  the  hand
may  be  an  artifice  more  or  less  consciously  employed  by
the  control  to  make  the  drama  clearer  to  the  sitter.

There  is  a  passive  form  of  apparent  fusion  of  control  and
communicator  in  connexion  with  Mrs.  Piper's  organism — a
form  not  concerned  with  motor  centres — of  which  the  con-
trol is  undoubtedly  aware.  This  is  the  experiencing  by  the
control — so  it  is  alleged — of  the  pain  suffered  by  the  com-
municator in  his  or  her  fatal  illness.  It  is  liable  to  happen
in  voice  sittings  and  at  a  communicator's  first  appearance —
not,  I  think,  at  subsequent  appearances.  Controls  also
sometimes  suffer  from  a  recurrence  of  their  own  pain  (e.g.
the  case  referred  to  in  the  footnote  to  Chapter  I.,  p.  26),  and
this  is  sometimes  represented  as  the  result  of  association  on
returning  to  earthly  conditions.  But  it  is  not  at  all  clear
why  it  should  happen  to  the  control  when  the  person  who
suffered  was  the  communicator.  Symptoms  accurately  re-
presented serve,  of  course,  as  evidence  of  identity,  but  for
evidential  purposes  description  would  generally  serve  as
well  as  acting — as  in  the  case  of  "  Kakie  "  Sutton  (Decem-
ber 8,  1893,  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  485) — and  in  the
cases  I  now  refer  to  the  control  represents  himself  as  not
merely  acting  the  part  of  a  sufferer,  but  as  suffering.  A
good  example  of  this  is  recorded  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,
p.  537,  as  having  occurred  on  February  14,  1892,  at  Dr.  and
Mrs.  Thaw's  first  sitting,  when  their  little  girl  Ruthie  com-
municated through  Phinuit.  I  give  the  relevant  part  of  the
record  in  the  Appendix,  p.  548.

There  is  another  variety  in  the  relation  between  control
and  communicator  which  further  complicates  matters,  which
we  may  call  assisted  control.  The  communicator  is  some-
times represented  as  controlling  to  the  extent  of  doing  the
writing  or  talking himself  with assistance, or  sometimes


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  195

apparently  without  assistance  but  while  Rector  "  holds  the
light."  This  appears  to  be  different  from  either  joint
control  or  divided  control.  One  type  of  assisted  control  is
reported  by  Miss  A.  M.  R.  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,
p.  113,  as  follows  :

When  my  friend  H.  takes  control  of  the  medium  it
seems  to  be  quite  a  different  personality  {from  Phinuit},
although  there  is  something  in  the  voice  and  manner  of
speaking  that  is  like  Dr.  P.  The  voice,  however,  is  not
nearly  so  loud.  When  I  asked  him  why  this  was,  he
told  me  that  Dr.  P.  was  right  by  him  and  that  he
could  not  stay  a  moment  without  his  help.  In  a  great
many  little  ways  he  is  quite  like  what  my  friend  used
to  be  when  living.  *  *  *

Another  interesting  case  of  assisted  control — an  important
case  in  its  bearing  on  the  whole  theory  of  the  process  of
controlling — occurred  on  March  3,  1894,  and  is  quoted  by
Hodgson  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  505-510. 1  On
p.  504  the  sitter,  Mr.  Charles  Hey  wood,  gives  his  description
of  what  occurred  as  follows  :

{The  sitting}  was  devoted  wholly  to  automatic  writing.
Phinuit  was  very  quiet,  and  "  George  Pelham  "  seemed
to  be  the  controlling  and  directing  intelligence.  Of  course,
nearly  all  the  writing  was  done  by  the  "  D.  P.  B.  "
intelligence,  but  Pelham  seemed  to  supervise,  and  at  times
took  the  pencil  himself  and  assured  me  that  he  was
looking  after  things.  D.  P.  B.  spoke  of  Pelham  as
standing  within  "  ear-shot,"  if  such  a  term  may  be  used.

It  must  be  noted  about  this  case  that  Hodgson,  who  was
present  during  part  of  the  sitting,  expresses  the  opinion  (Vol.
XIII.,  p.  505)  that  "  Probably  G.  P.  was  acting  as  amanuensis
throughout,"  which  illustrates  the  difficulty  of  interpreting
the  relations  of  control  and  communicator  in  certain  cases,
and  shows  that  different  sitters  may  take  different  views  of
the  dramatic  situation. It  is  possible  that  Hodgson's  view

1  I  have  already  quoted  from  it  in  discussing  the  control's  conscious-
ness of  writing  in  Chapter  II.,  p.  48.


196


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


of  this  case  was  influenced  by  the  conclusions  he  had  come
to  as  to  the  modus  operandi  in  general,  for  the  report  of
the  sitting,  so  far  as  it  is  given,  certainly  seems  to  me  to
fit  best  with  Mr.  Heywood's  view  of  what  was  supposed  to
be  occurring.  And  this  view  seems  to  be  definitely  sup-
ported by  other  cases.  For  example,  on  February  17,  1903,
when  Hodgson  was  himself  sitter  and  recorder,  a  com-
municator, who  had  communicated  on  a  previous  occasion,
rather  unexpectedly  turned  up  and  wrote  a  message  to  his
mother. Hodgson  asked  :

R.  H. Rector,  did  he  write  himself  ?

Rector.  He  did  while  Prudens held him. He  U.D.  wonder-
fully well.

For  a  similar  case  on  November  22,  1905,  see  Appendix,
p.  523.

The  amount  of  assistance  given  in  assisted  control  seems
to  vary,  and  sometimes  consists  apparently  in  little  more
than  Rector  being  needed  to  open  and  close  the  sitting.
Different  degrees  of  it  are  represented  in  a  sitting  on
May  24,  1904,  at  which  Miss  A.  M.  R.,  whose  description
of  the  nature  of  her  friend  H.'s  control  is  quoted  above,
was  sitter  and  recorder.  It  was  a  voice  sitting,
and  she  took  down  what  was  said  stenographically.  At
one  point  Dr.  Oliver  communicating  says  :  "  Rector  is
repeating  for  me  my  sentences  as  best  he  can."  Yet
when  Dr.  Oliver  takes  leave  and  Rector  returns,  he  asks
the  sitter :  "  Friend  hath  the  doctor  finished,"  as  if  he
did  not  exactly  know  what  was  going  on.  (For  fuller
extracts  from  this  part  of  the  sitting,  see  Appendix  to
Chapter  III.,  pp.  490-491.)  Then  a  recently  deceased  friend
of  the  sitter's  communicates — Rector  introducing  him
and  then  stepping  aside— and  in  answer  to  some  question  1
says  :

Oh  Rector  is  holding  the  light  :  I  could  not,  they
would  not  let  me  do  that,  dear.  Not  quite  now,  but  I
may  be  able  to  later.  But  they  have  to  support  the
light,  some  friend  has  to  look  after  it.

1  The  question  is  not  recorded,  but  the  sitter  thinks  she  asked  whether
the  communicator  was  talking  through  Rector.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  197

The  exact  significance  of  this,  however,  is  doubtful,  for
after  a  long  conversation  "  Rector  returns  "  saying :  "I
came  to  close  the  light."  Some  conversation  between
him  and  the  sitter  follows,  in  the  course  of  which  Rector
says  :

I  have  been  talking  for  thy  friend  and  I  may  use
some  of  his  expressions.  He  teaches  me  much  in
language.

So  perhaps  it  was  Rector  talking  all  the  time,  in  spite
of  his  having  "  stepped  aside  "  when  the  friend  came.  A
deceased  relative  of  the  sitter's  communicates  after  this,
and  in  his  case  Rector  changes  from  reporting  what  he
says  in  the  third  person  to  speaking  for  him  in  the  first
without  any  transition — with  no  "  stepping  aside  "  or  return-
ing. I  think  that  in  a  sitting  such  as  this  it  is  difficult  not
to  suppose  that  there  is  some  shifting  in  the  point  of  view  of
the  trance  consciousness.

Light  is  thrown  on  the  possibilities  of  assisted  control
and  the  views  of  Rector  regarding  it  in  extracts  from  another
sitting  of  Miss  A.  M.  R.  (December  20,  1904)  given  in  the
Appendix  to  Chapter  II.,  p.  434.

In  later  years  this  arrangement  of  Rector  appearing  at
the  beginning  and  end  of  the  sitting,  and  presumably  man-
aging the  light,  while  some  communicator  writes  himself  in
the  middle,  became  more  marked — or  rather  it  is  recognised
more  definitely  as  a  change  of  control.  This  development
happened  especially  as  regards  the  Hodgson  communicator.
In  the  early  days  after  Hodgson's  death  Hodgsonp  did  not
apparently  contemplate  acting  as  control  at  all.  Thus  in
a  sitting  recorded  by  Mr.  Dorr  in  1906  1  (see  Proceedings,
Vol.  XXIII.,  p.  160),  the  following  conversation  occurs  :

G.  B.  D.  I  wanted  to  ask  whether  you  ever  controlled  the
organism  of  the  light  yourself,  or  whether  it  is
wholly  done  by  Rector.

1 1  do  not  know  the  exact  date  of  this  sitting,  but  it  must  have  been  in
the  first  half  of  1906,  I  think.  Mrs.  Piper  came  over  to  England  at  the
beginning  of  November,  1906,  and  it  was  her  usual  practice  to  take  three
or  four  months'  holiday  in  the  summer  and  autumn.  Hodgson  died
December  20,  1905.


198


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgiviclc.


[part


Hodgsonp. It  is  wholly  clone  by  Rector  and  it  will  continue

to  be. I  shall  take  no  part  in  that.
G.  B.  D. Then  it  is  he  who  is  speaking  ?

HodgsoNj,. It  is  Rector  who  is  speaking  and  he  speaks  for  me.

I  have  no  desire  to  take  Rector's  place.  I  trust
him  implicitly  and  absolutely.

G.  B.  D. And  he  constantly  reports  for  everyone  ?

Hodgsonp.  Everyone.  There  is  no  question  about  that.  In
the  first  place  he  is  more  competent  to  do  it,  he
understands  the  conditions  better  than  any  indi-
vidual spirit  ;  he  is  fully  capable  and  is  under  the
constant  direction  of  Imperator.  When  I  finished
with  the  conditions  in  the  earthly  life  I  finished
with  my  control  over  the  light.

Nevertheless,  at  Hodgsonp's  very  first  appearance,  Decem-
ber 28,  1905,  eight  days  after  his  death,  he  had  either
controlled  or  in  a  very  marked  way  affected  the  hand  (see  Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  XXIII.,  p.  7). Sitter  and  recorder,  Miss  Pope  :

Rector  had  been  writing,  when  the  hand  dropped  the
pencil  and  worked  convulsively  several  seconds  in  a
very  excited  manner.

Miss  P. What  is  the  matter  ?

[The  hand,  shaking  with  apparently  great  excitement,
wrote  the  letter  H.,  .  .  .  bearing  down  so  hard  on
the  paper  that  the  point  of  the  pencil  was  broken.
It  then  wrote  "  Hodgson."]

Miss  P. God  bless  you  !

[The  hand  writes  "I  am" — followed  by  rapid  scrawls,
as  if  regulator  of  machine  were  out  of  order.]

Miss  P. Is  this  my  friend  ?

[Hand  assents  by  knocking  five  times  on  paper  pad.]

Rector.  Peace,  friends,  he  is  here,  it  was  he,  but  he  could
not  remain,  he  was  so  choked.  He  is  doing  all  in
his  power  to  return  .  .  .  Better  wait  for  a  few
moments  until  he  breathes  freer  again.  *  *  *
Presently  he  will  be  able  to  conduct  all  here.
{Rector  then  describes  him  as  showing  the  sitter  a
ring. See  above,  p.  185.}

Again, on  July 3, 1906, HodgsonP  says things  which


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  199

leave  the  question  whether  he  is  controlling  himself  or  not
rather  confused.  The  sitter  and  recorder  was  Professor
W.  R.  Newbold.  I  quote  from  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.
p.  73  :

HodgsoNj,.  *  *  *  I  am  not  wholly  conscious  of  my  own
utterances  because  they  come  out  automatically,
impressed  upon  the  machine.

W.  R.  N.  Perfectly  clear.

Hodgsonp. Yes,  I  am  standing  beside  you. {This  looks  as  if

he  was  not  controlling.}
W.  R.  N.  Can  you  see  me  Dick  ?

HodgsoNj,.  Yes,  but  I  feel  your  presence  better.  I  impress
my  thoughts  on  the  machine  {This  suggests  con-
trolling} which  registers  them  at  random,  and  which
are  at  times  doubtless  difficult  to  understand.  I
understand  so  much  better  the  modus  operandi  than
I  did  when  I  was  in  your  world.

That  HodgsonP  sometimes  took  Rector's  place  seems
clearly  indicated  on  November  23,  1906,  in  a  sitting
recorded  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII. ,
p.  243),  when  Hodgsonp  says  :

I  am  Hodgson,  but  I  cannot  take  Rector's  place  to-day.
However  I  will  make  a  poor  attempt  to  speak  through
him.

In  1908,  at  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings,  Rector  seems  regularly  to
open  and  close  the  sittings,  but  MyersP  or  HodgsonP  appar-
ently often,  if  not  always,  control  in  the  middle.  HodgsonP
says  explicitly  on  April  21,  1908  :  "I  am  writing  for
Myers."  On  March  17,  1908,  an  indication  that  Rector  is
really  supposed  to  be  away  and  to  come  back  to  close
the  sitting  is  rather  curiously  given.  Myersp,  who  is  com-
municating and  apparently  controlling,  says  :

Myeesp. I  am  getting  a  little  weak.

G.  B.  D. Had  you  not  best  stop  now  ?

Myersp. Soon. I  think  I  saw  Rector  a  moment  ago,

G  B.  D. You  had  best  go  now  I  think.

MYERSp. I  do  not  think  we  ought  to  go  on. Let  us  end. I  am
too  weak  to  go  on. Good  bye. More  anon.


200


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick


[part


Rector. We  cease  now  and  may  the  blessings  of  God  rest  on
you +  R Farewell  (R)

On  July  16,  1910,  there  can  hardly  be  any  doubt  that
Rector's  stepping  aside  and  afterwards  returning  means  that
he  leaves  the  communicator  to  write  himself.  Sir  Oliver
Lodge  and  Miss  A.  Johnson  were  present.  Rector  opened
the  sitting  with  his  usual  greeting  and  then  wrote  :

Rector.  A  friend  is  here  who  wishes  to  greet  you. I  will  step
aside  and  let  him  speak.

A.  J. Who  is  it  ?  Rector.  One  you  desire A.  J.  Yes.

Rector.  Goodbye  -f  (R.)

{Strong  excitement  in  hand  follows,  knocking  pencil
and  pads  off  the  table.  Then  enter  HodgsonP,  who
continues  to  write  till  the  very  end  of  the  sitting,
when  he  says  "  Adieu — R.  H."  and  goes  ;  then
re-enters  Rector  : }

+ I return to close the light. Peace patience  and
trust  -f  Farewell  (R.)1

It  appears,  then,  that  neither  is  the  line  between  assisted
control  and  full  control  a  very  clear  one,  nor  the  line  between
assisted  control  and  communication  through  a  control.
Through  different  degrees  of  assisted  control,  communicator
and  control,  or,  as  Hodgson  would  have  expressed  it,  in-
direct and  direct  control,  seem  almost  to  merge  into  each
other.

In  all  the  above  examples  of  partial  control  by  the  com-
municator, or  of  ways  in  which  the  communicator  affects
the  organism  of  Mrs.  Piper,  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  the
control  unaware  of  interference,  and  in  some  cases  he
admittedly  is  aware  of  it.  But  there  is  a  joint  use  of  the
organism,  inseparable,  I  think,  from  so-called  indirect  com-

1  In  Vol.  IV.  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  Prof.  Hyslop  records  several  sittings  in  which  Hodgson  is
represented  as  taking  actual  control  during  part  of  the  sitting,  and  on  his
saying  '  Good-bye,'  Rector  describes  himself  as  returning  (see  op.  cit.,
pp.  G17,  627.  700,  720).  Compare  also  Dr.  Stanley  Hall  in  May,  1909.
He  asked  Hodgson  to  lift  Mrs.  Piper's  left  arm.  Hodgson  said  he
could  not.  "  You  do  anything  you  want  to  with  this  right  arm  and
hand,"  said  Dr.  Hall.  "  That  is  my  head,  you  stupid,  head,"  replied
Hodgson  (Studies  in  Spiritism,  p.  239).


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  201

munication  of  which  the  control  may  be  unaware.  I  mean
the  use  of  the  medium's  organs  of  hearing.  In  a  voice
sitting  the  control  admittedly  hears  the  sitter  in  the
ordinary  way  through  the  ear,  and  in  a  writing  sitting,
even  if  the  existence  of  an  organ  of  hearing  in  the  hand
be  credited,  the  control  still  hears  through  the  organism.
Communication  between  control  and  communicator,  if  and
so  far  as  these  are  separate  centres  of  consciousness,  is,  as
already  said  (p.  163  above),  presumably  telepathic.  But  how
does  the  communicator  "  hear "  the  sitter  ?  Does  he
become  aware  of  the  sitter's  remarks  by  direct  telepathy
with  him,  or  by  telepathy  with  the  control  who  has  heard
the  remarks  through  Mrs.  Piper's  organism,  or  does  the
communicator  also  hear  through  the  ears  ?  The  third  of
these  hypotheses  is  the  only  one  universally  applicable.  The
first  is  at  least  sometimes  inadmissible,  because  mistakes
are  made  which  are  obviously  mistakes  of  hearing  not  mis-
understanding of  ideas,  and  the  second  also  because  the
mistake  of  hearing  is  at  least  sometimes  not  the  control's.
An  auditory  mistake  can  only  occur  where  there  is  actual
transmission  of  sound  ;  if  the  mistake  is  not  made  by  the
control,  it  must  be  made  by  the  communicator  to  whom,
therefore,  the  sound  must  be  transmitted  directly  ;  and  to
receive  it  directly  he  must  use  the  medium's  organs  of
hearing.

Examples  of  auditory  mistakes  which  are  clearly  not  the
control's  are  naturally  rare,  but  we  find  one,  I  think,
recorded  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIL,  p.  88,  when  on
March  11,  1907,  MyersP  communicating  mishears  "Dwarf"
as  "  Wharf."  The  words  Giant  and  Dwarf  had  been
chosen  by  Mr.  Piddington  on  February  19,  1907,  as  a
cross-correspondence  message  to  be  taken  to  Mrs.  Verrall,
and  had  been  given  by  him  to  Rector  when  MyersP  was
not  supposed  to  be  present.  On  March  11,  when  MyersP
was  communicating  through  Rector  writing,  Mr.  Piddington
recurred  to  the  subject.  MyersP  did  not  understand,  and
the  following  conversation  took  place  :

Myersp. Could  you  explain  a  little  about  first  word. I  do

not  feel  sure  of  it.
J.  G.  P. "  Giant  "  Myeesp.  Oh  Giant  yes  yes.


202


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


J.  G.  P. Yes  ;  and  "  Dwarf."

Myersp.  Thank  you.  I  U.D.  Wharf  (hand  {i.e.  presumably
Rector}  makes  negative  gesture.  J.  G.  P.  remains
silent. )

Myersp {or  Rector}  no  Dwarf
J.  G.  P. Yes  ;  quite  right.

Rector. Yes. I  U  D.  Giant  and  Dwarf.  R.

If  we  accept  the  drama  here  as  genuine,  Rector  through-
out understands  "  Giant  and  Dwarf,"  but  in  spite  of  this,
and  in  spite  of  the  probability  that  through  association  of
ideas  "  giant  "  would  suggest  "  dwarf  "  rather  than  "  wharf,"
Myersp  judges  from  the  sound  that  "wharf"  is  meant,  and
Rector  writes  it  for  him.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  here  that
if  the  mistake  of  MyersP  was  genuine  he  was  led  to  it
neither  by  the  ideas  of  the  sitter  nor  by  those  of  the  con-
trol, but  solely  by  the  imperfectly  apprehended  sound  of
the  sitter's  words.

We  find  another  instance  of  mishearing  by  MyersP  on
April  29,  1907  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  158),  when
he  failed  to  catch  the  word  "  author "  in  a  remark  of
Mrs.  Verrall's,  and  asked  first  if  it  was  "  water  "  and  then
if  it  was  "  Arthur,"  showing  that  he  had  partially  grasped
the  sound;  but  not  the  meaning.1

Instances  in  which  the  communicator  congratulates  him-
self and  the  sitter  on  the  correctness  with  which  the  latter
reads  aloud  the  communicator's  remarks  strongly  suggest
direct  hearing  by  the  communicator  of  the  sitter's  reading,
though  it  is  conceivable  that  this  was  apprehended  tele-
pathically  through  the  control.  A  case  occurred  on  February
19,  1901  [Proceedings.  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  463)  :

(R.  H.  reads  the  whole  sentence  {Bennie  Junot's  com-
munication through  Rector}  over  in  a  natural
manner  as  if  speaking  it  himself  and  not  merely
slowly  deciphering  it.)
Bennie.  Yes,  this  is  exactly  right,  how  did  you  do  it  1  How
did  you  happen  to  hear  me  so  distinctly,  I  am
delighted .

1  The  argument  depends,  of  course,  on  the  mishearing  being  genuine,
which  it  may  be  rash  to  assume.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  203

R.  H.  Well,  Rector  made  the  machine  work,  and  although
I  could  not  read  it  at  first,  it  was  all  well  done
by  him.

And  similarly  on  May  23,  1906  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.,
p.  172),  on  the  script  representing  a  remark  of  Isaac
Thompson's  being  read  out,  he  says  :  "  Correct.  Oh  my,
I  hardly  realized  I  could  speak  so  well."

Indisputable  instances,  showing  that  hearing  by  the  com-
municator is  meant  literally,  are  not  easy  to  find.  But  I
think  any  one  studying  the  records,  or  even  the  extracts  I  have
given  (above  pp.  173-175  and  Appendix,  pp.  528-533)  illus-
trating the  difficulties  of  the  communicator  in  "  hearing  "  the
sitter,  will  agree  that  a  considerable  amount  of  straining  would
often  be  required  to  enable  us  to  attribute  a  metaphorical  sense
to  the  word.  I  think  it  is  almost  certain,  therefore,  that
the  communicator  as  dramatically  represented — i.e.  the
intelligence  responsible  for  the  communicator's  side  of  the
conversation — really  hears  the  sitter's  remarks,  and,  if  so,
he  must,  like  the  control,  use  the  medium's  organs  of  hear-
ing. This,  if  control  and  communicator  represent  inde-
pendent centres  of  consciousness,  implies  of  course  joint
control,  though  neither  centre  of  consciousness  need  be
aware  of  it.

I  am  afraid  it  will  be  felt  that  in  this  chapter,  even  more
than  in  others,  questions  have  been  raised  without  being
definitely  answered  ;  and,  in  fact,  the  evidence  does  not
enable  us  to  answer  all  definitely.  It  may,  however,  be
useful  to  sum  up  here  a  few  of  the  points  which  I  think
have  been  made  clear  by  the  evidence  presented  in  this
chapter.  First,  although  there  have  been  veridical  com-
munications, communicators  cannot  be  taken  at  their  face
value,  as  they  are  sometimes  manifestly  false,  though  even
when  false,  the  dramatic  distinctness  of  communicator  and
control  is  maintained.  Secondly,  suspicion  is  thrown  on  the
alleged  machinery  of  communication  both  by  its  manifest
adaptation  to  concealing  of  ignorance,  to  hedging,  and  to
covering  up  false  tracks  ;  and  by  the  inconsistencies  and
absurdities  in  the  accounts  given  of  it.  Thirdly,  there  is,
however,  evidence  that  the  dramatic  communicator  is,  on
some  occasions,  something  more  than  a  conscious  dramatisa-


204


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


tion  by  the  control,  since  the  latter  sees  him  apparently  as
an  externalised  vision.  Fourthly,  on  the  other  hand,  there
is  also  evidence  for  more  merging  of  control  and  communi-
cator, especially  in  the  matter  of  joint  control  of  Mrs.  Piper's
organism,  than  the  trance  personalities  admit.

All  these  points  being  taken  into  account,  grave  doubts
are  thrown  on  the  genuineness  at  any  time  of  the  dramatic
presentation  of  the  communicator.  Veridical  communica-
tions are  received,  some  of  which,  there  is  good  reason  to
believe,  come  from  the  dead  and  therefore  imply  a  genuine
communicator  hi  the  background.  But  the  dramatisation
of  even  genuine  communicators,  with  the  whole  dramatic
machinery  employed,  is  probably  merely  dream-like.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper  s  Trance  Phenomena.  205


CHAPTER  VI.

The  Waking-Stage  and  the  Corresponding  Stage  in

going  into  Trance.

The  waking-stage,  as  we  have  called  the  stage  passed
through  in  coming  out  of  the  trance,  and  the  corresponding
stage  preceding  the  trance  proper,  deserve  rather  full  treat-
ment here  because  they  are  but  little  discussed  in  Hodgson's
papers  about  Mrs.  Piper.  Indeed,  it  was  only  in  the
latter  part  of  the  period  covered  by  his  second  Report
that  they  began  to  assume  importance.  These  stages,  more-
over, which  are  obviously  similar  in  kind,  are  of  great  in-
terest in  the  study  of  the  trance  consciousness,  especially
as  in  them  the  relation  of  the  intelligence  in  possession
of  the  organism — which  usually,  if  not  always,  regards
itself  as  Mrs.  Piper  herself — to  the  other  personages  in
the  drama  is  simpler  and  less  sophisticated  than  in  the
trance  proper.  There  is  no  indication  of  artificiality  about
it,  no  suggestion  of  acting,  and  it  has  no  theory  to  conform
to.  Its  behaviour  is  more  spontaneous — in  this  resembling
our  ordinary  dreams.  It  does  not  perform  for  an  audience,
whereas  the  consciousness  of  the  trance-proper  necessarily
has  the  sitter  in  view  in  all  it  says.

I  have  already  described  in  the  introductory  chapter  (pp.
15-27)  the  process  of  going  into  and  coming  out  of  trance
as  it  has  appeared  of  late  years.  In  the  present  chapter,
besides  examining  as  far  as  we  can  the  states  of  conscious-
ness involved,  we  have  to  consider  the  changes  and  develop-
ments that  have  occurred  in  the  process  in  the  course  of
Mrs.  Piper's  mediumistic  history.

Since  the  beginning  of  the  Imperator  regime  in  1897,  going
into  trance  appears  to  have  been  pleasant  to  Mrs.  Piper  until


206


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


the  latest  sittings  (1910-11),  when  it  had  become  difficult
and  uncertain  and  was  approached  with  some  anxiety.  And
coming  out  of  trance  was  also  accompanied  by  pleasant  sen-
sations, though  just  before  normal  consciousness  returned
she  was  distressed  by  the  contrast  between  the  bright  world
she  seemed  to  herself  to  be  leaving  and  the  grimy  one  she
returned  to.  She  also  appeared  to  suffer  some  discomfort
from  a  dazed  feeling  which  lasted  a  little  while  after  she  was
otherwise  normal.1  On  March  23,  1897,  when  just  back
into  her  normal  state  she  expressed  to  Hodgson  her  feelings
about  it.  "  Oh  how  dreadful  this  is.  I  used  to  think  it
was  horrible  to  go  to  sleep,  but  now  its  the  awakening."
Hodgson's  record  continues  :  "  Mrs.  P.  enlarges  on  this,
saying  that  it  is  now  a  pleasure  to  her  to  go  into  trance,2
whereas  she  once  used  to  dread  it.  But  she  doesn't  like
coming  back."  At  any  rate,  since  early  in  1897  the
process  both  of  going  into  trance  and  coming  out  of  it  has
been  a  quiet  one,  and  has  evidently  been  accompanied  by
the  sensation  of  pleasant  sights  and  sounds.

In  these  respects  the  Imperator  regime  introduced  a
marked  improvement  on  what  used  to  occur  before.  In
the  Phinuit  days  both  the  going  into  and  the  coming  out
of  trance  were  generally  accompanied  by  convulsive  move-
ments and  grinding  of  teeth  very  unpleasant  to  witness,
and  probably  unpleasant  to  go  through,  and  one  cannot
wonder  that  Mrs.  Piper  dreaded  it.  The  following  is  a
description  given  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  of  a  typical  case  on
November  30,  1889,  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  444)  : 3

I  sat  facing  Mrs. Piper  in  a  partially  darkened  room.

1  This  is,  I  suppose,  equivalent  to  saying  that  the  state  of  dissociation
involved  in  trance  is  not  completely  removed.  By  a  dazed  feeling  we  mean
a  want  of  complete  confidence  in  our  prompt  apprehension  of  our  surround-
ings, of  the  milieu  in  which  we  find  ourselves,  as  manifested  to  us  through
our  senses  in  the  normal  way.

2  On  May  1,  1899,  Mr.  Dorr  records  similarly:  "In  going  into  trance
Mrs.  Piper  said  that  the  feeling  which  came  to  her  was  like  the  shutting
down  of  day,  the  descending  of  twilight.  She  used  to  have,  she  said,  a
sensation  of  falling,  but  now  '  I  never  feel  more  calm  in  my  life  than
when  I  am  going  to  sleep  ' — passing  into  trance.  '  It  is  very  pleasant
to  me — just  for  a  moment  while  I  am  able  to  realise  it.'

3  Cf.  also  Prof.  Richet's  account,  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  618.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  207

*  *  *  Mrs.  Piper  sat  still,  leaning  forward  in  her  chair,
and  holding  my  hands.  For  some  time  she  could  not  go
off,  but  at  last  she  said,  "Oh,  I  am  going,"  the  clock
happened  to  strike  one  (for  a  half  hour),  and  she  twitched
convulsively,  ejaculated  "  don't,"  and  went  into  apparent
epilepsy.  [I  had  seen  epilepsy  several  times  before  and
recognised  many  of  the  ordinary  and  obvious  symptoms ;
not,  of  course,  pretending  to  speak  medically.]  Gradually
she  became  quiet,  and  still  holding  my  right  hand,  cleared
her  throat  in  a  male  voice,  and  with  distinctly  altered
and  hardened  features,  eyes  closed  and  unused  the  whole
time.

Phinuit  once — at  the  beginning  of  a  sitting  on  June  22,
1895,  in  which  the  trance  had  come  on  unusually  suddenly
and  while  Mrs.  Piper  was  actually  carrying  on  a  normal
conversation  with  the  sitter- — said  :

I  took  the  medium  quickly,  I  saw  the  light  long  ago
and  was  hurrying  to  it.  Sometimes  I'm  there  long  before
she  goes.  When  she  goes  out  I  see  her  spirit  and  I  go
in  on  a  string  while  she  goes  out.  Sometimes  she  sees
me  as  we  pass  and  she  tries  to  go  back  and  fight  with  me,
unwilling  to  move  out.

It  is  possible  that  this  account  represented  a  real  struggle
on  the  part  of  Mrs.  Piper's  subconscious  self  against
entrancement,  notwithstanding  the  deliberate  decision  of
her  normal  self  to  go  into  trance,  and  that  this  struggle
caused  the  convulsions  ;  while  in  the  Imperator  days
the  subconscious  self  may  have  become  more  amenable.
Against  this,  however,  it  must  be  noted  that  before  1897,
coming  out  of  trance  was  also  often  accompanied  by
convulsions,  and  indeed  that  violent  convulsions  would  at
times  seize  the  writing  arm  while  the  communications
were  proceeding  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  7).

We  have  not,  however,  much  description  of  the  coming
out  of  trance  in  the  early  days.  The  details  of  the  process
do  not  seem  to  have  been  thought  interesting,  and  in  the
English  sittings  of  1889-90  I  find  no  ordinary  case  described
in  detail.  Here  is  a  brief  record  of  that  on  November  30,
1889,  by  Myers  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  469). Phinuit  says  :


208  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


I  begin  to  feel  weak.  I  must  go.  Myers  !  Myers  !
(and  gradually  Mrs.  Piper  came  to  herself.)

The  following  account  by  Dr.  Walter  Leaf  evidently  refers
to  an  exceptionally  bad  waking-stage  on  January  1,  1890,
after  a  sitting  he  had  superintended  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,
p.  599)  :

After  this  Dr  P[hinuit]  became  incoherent,  and  kept
calling  out,  "  Walter,  help  me,  help  me ;  I  can't  turn
round."  1  The  trance  passed  off  very  slowly  and  with
unusual  symptoms.  The  medium,  on  coming  to,  appeared
to  be  very  prostrate  and  distressed.

Nor  is  there  very  much  about  the  coming  out  of  trance
in  Hodgson's  first  Report  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.).  The
earliest  case  mentioned  occurred  in  May,  1886,  when
Mr.  Barrett  Wendell  reports  that  "  Mrs.  Piper's  recovery
from  the  trance  state  was,  perhaps,  the  most  shocking  sight
I  ever  witnessed "  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  97).
Mr.  J.  F.  Brown,  who  had  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 2  in
June  and  October,  1888,  reports  (op.  cit.  p.  87)  that
Phinuit  having  taken  leave  (on  June  11),

the  medium  twisted,  groaned  and  grated  her  teeth  just
as  she  did  when  going  into  the  trance,  then  stared  about
wildly  and  appeared  to  be  coming  to  herself.  She  seemed
surprised  to  see  me,  and  said,  "  Are  you  here  ?  I  didn't
know  you  were  here."  She  acted  bewildered  for  a  moment
and  in  answer  to  my  question  said  she  felt  dizzy.

Mr.  Brown  also  tells  us  (p.  92)  that  after  his  final  sitting
on  October  20,  1888  :

When  the  medium  was  coming  to,  she  saw  snakes  on
my  hands and  kindly  pulled  them off. She  complained

1  "  Turning  round  "  in  trance  parlance  means  getting  out,  or  perhaps
something  preliminary  to  getting  out,  of  the  medium's  body,  i.e.  ceasing
to  control.  Compare,  for  example,  Rector  on  Hodgson  in  1906,  as  quoted
by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  in  Vol.  XXIII.,  p.  236.

2  It  should  be  mentioned  that  Mr.  Brown  wrote  in  1891  that  he  was  fully
convinced  that  Mrs.  Piper's  dealings  with  him  had  been  false  and  fraudu-
lent throughout,  and  Hodgson  understood  that  he  thought  the  trance
simulated  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  85).


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  209


of  being  pricked  on  the  hand,  said,  "  Don't  prick  me  so,"  or

something like that, and after she was entirely  herself

asked  me  two  or  three  times  if  I  had  pricked  her.  I
assured  her  that  I  had  not.

Miss  Gertrude  Savage  also  describes  both  the  going  into
trance  and  the  coming  out  of  it  at  a  sitting  she  had  on
October  23,  1888  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  101,  103).
After  a  moment  or  two  of  conversation  Mrs.  Piper,  who
had  complained  of  a  headache,  said  :

"  I  only  hope  I  can  give  you  something  satisfactory,  for
when  my  head  aches  so,  it  is  rather  apt  not  to  be  so
successful."  We  then  went  into  the  darkened  room  adjoin-
ing, and  she  took  my  hand  in  hers.  Immediately  her
fingers  began  to  twitch  and  then  her  whole  body,  and  she
groaned  and  ground  her  teeth,  and  constantly  muttered,
"  Oh,  what's  the  matter  ? What  is  the  matter  ?  "

#  ♦  ♦  $

On  going  into  the  trance  state  Mrs.  Piper's  voice  became
guttural,  harsh,  and  she  spoke  with  a  decided  accent.1
Keeping  my  hand  in  hers,  and  pressed  against  her  fore-
head, she  began  instantly  to  speak.  *  *

At  the  end  of  the  sitting,  Miss  Savage  says  :

Mrs.  Piper  then  came  out  of  the  trance,  with  a  face
drawn  and  haggard,  and  with  a  dazed  look  in  her  eyes.
"  Who  are  you  ?  "  she  said.  "I  do  not  know  who  you
are,  do  I  ?  " I  said,  "  No,  but  I  will  tell  you  now."

Mr.  Rogers  Rich  writes  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  127)  :

My  first  sitting  with  her  was  on  September  6th,  1888.
With  little  trouble  she  went  into  the  trance — a  state  which
was  entirely  new  to  my  experience — and  after  a  moment's
silence,  which  followed  her  rather  violent  movements,  I
was  startled  by  the  remarkable  change  in  her  voice — an
exclamation,  a  sort  of  grunt  of  satisfaction,  as  if  the  person
had  reached  his  destination  and  gave  vent  to  his  pleasure
thereat  by  this  sound,  uttered  in  an  unmistakeably  male
voice,  but  rather  husky.

1  That  is,  Phinuit's  French  accent,  or  imitation  of  French  accent.

o


210


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


"  A  moment's  silence  "  after  the  convulsions,  here
mentioned,  presumably  corresponds  to  the  few  minutes
of  seemingly  deep  sleep  which  sitters  became  familiar
with  later.

The  process  of  going  into  trance  continued,  as  already
said,  to  be  disagreeable  till  1897.  The  following  is  a
description  given  by  Mrs.  M.  E.  P.  {Proceedings,  Vol.
XIII.,  p.  499)  of  March  2,  1894  :

The  passing  into  the  trance  state  was  disagreeable  to
witness.  It  seemed  to  me  like  a  person  inhaling  ether 1
very  unwillingly,  and  with  more  or  less  struggle.

There  are  few  records  of  the  duration  of  the  convulsive
movements  in  going  into  trance.  I  only  know  of  one.  Dr.
Thaw  records  about  the  first  sitting  at  which  he  was  present,
viz.  February  14,  1892  :  "  Convulsions  strong  ;  continue  ten
minutes  "  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  537).  The  duration
as  well  as  the  violence  of  the  struggle  varied,  and  a  struggle
does  not  seem  to  have  been  a  necessary  or  invariable  accom-
paniment of  going  into  the  trance.  The  following  two  cases
apparently  show  a  gradual  loss  of  consciousness  without
struggle,  or  an  approach  to  the  trance  condition  not  obvious
to  the  sitter.  The  first  was  on  November  19,  1888  {Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  VIII.,  p.  106),  when  the  sitter,  Miss  Z.,  before
the  sitting  began,  showed  Mrs.  Piper  a  stone  which  she
had  brought  as  a  test  object  concerning  which  the  trance-
personality  might  give  information. Miss  Z.  reports  :

She  took  it  in  her  hand,  put  it  between  her  teeth,  and
then  said,  "  It  was  given  you  by  a  gentleman,  a  great
smoker  *  *  *  A  man  I  have  the  impression  has  been  to
me,  and  whom  I  call  very  fascinating."  Upon  my  deny-
ing that  the  man  had  seen  her,  as  I  thought  then  was
true,  she  said,  "  I  cannot  have  made  a  mistake ;  but
come  quickly  into  the  other  room,  and  sit  down  as  soon

1  Compare  January  23,  1907,  when  the  comparison  of  going  into  the
trance  to  the  inhaling  of  ether  seems  to  have  occurred  to  the  medium,  as
here  to  the  onlooker.  Mrs.  Piper  going  into  trance  says,  "  I'm  going  round,
d  you  see  ?  Can't  you  smell  it  ?  "  J.  G.  P.,  "  Smell  what  ?  "  Mrs.
Piper,  "  Ether."  (Heavy  breathing  follows.)  There  are  other  references
to  ether  in  this  sense  in  waking-stages.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  211


as  you  can,  for  I  can't  wait  long."  She  afterwards  told
me  she  was  then  partially  in  the  trance  condition.

The  second  case  occurred  on  December  21.  1893,  and  is
reported  by  Mrs.  Sutton  from  notes  taken  by  Mrs.  Howard
during  the  sitting.  The  report  says  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,
p.  489)  :

Mrs.  Piper  was  sitting  talking  with  us,  not  ready  to  be
entranced,  when  she  suddenly  put  her  hand  to  her  head,
rose,  and  moved  toward  the  window.  Before  reaching  it
she  staggered  and  would  have  fallen  but  that  we  supported
her  to  a  chair.  For  an  instant  only  she  seemed  lifeless,
then  as  suddenly  rose  full  of  animation  under  the  control
of  G.  P.

With  this  we  may  compare  a  case  reported  by  Hodgson
in  which  an  undesired  trance  was  averted  on  April  25,  1894
{Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  344).

This  morning,  one  of  our  members,  Mrs.  R.,  was  trying
experiments  in  crystal  gazing  and  automatic  writing.
Mrs.  Piper  had  her  hand  resting  occasionally  on  Mrs.  R's.
Mrs.  P.  felt  some  pushing,  etc.,  in  her  hand.  I  put  pencil
in  and  we  went  on  talking.  Turning  to  talk  to  another
lady  present,  a  Mrs.  G — ,  my  attention  was  attracted
suddenly  by  Mrs.  P.'s  breathing.  She  was  on  the  point
of  being  entranced,  and  while  I  was  managing  to  keep
her  out  of  trance  successfully,  her  right  hand  with  pencil
was  dashing  off  *  *  *  "  Add  lo  instead  of  and."  1

The  seeing  of  "  spirits  "  in  the  waking  stage,  definite
externalised  visions  or  hallucinations,2  which  was  so
characteristic  of  later  waking-stages,  evidently  sometimes
occurred  in  the  earlier  period,  for  we  have  the  following
description  by  Miss  A.  M.  R.  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,
p.  112).  It  relates  to  the  end  of  the  sitting  of
December  17,  1888,  from  which  I  have  already  quoted  an

1  It  was  afterwards  made  clear  that  this  referred  to  a  name  given  in  trance
the  day  before,  and  meant  that  Rollo  was  to  be  substituted  for  Roland.

2  The  snakes  described  by  Mr.  Brown  (see  above,  p.  208)  were  apparently
an  instance  of  hallucinatory  vision,  though  not  of  spirits.


212


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


extract  in  Chapter  II.,  p.  30.  A  friend  of  Miss  R.'s  was
controlling  :

I  asked  my  friend  if  he  would  not  get  my  sister,  who
seemed  to  be  there,  and  Dr.  P.  and  all  to  stand  back
of  me  when  the  medium  returned,  to  see  if  she  could
not  see  them.  So  when  half  out  of  her  trance  she
exclaimed  at  something  which  she  saw.  She  described
afterwards  three  persons  whom  she  saw — two  gentlemen
and  one  lady — and  also  some  beautiful  flowers.  I  have
had  a  similar  experience  with  her  twice  before.  On  one
of  these  occasions  she  described  my  friend  (referred  to
above)  in  general  terms,  and  added  :  "  His  nose  was  just
a  little  bit  crooked."  This  amused  me,  as  my  friend  and
I,  before  his  death,  frequently  disputed  as  to  the  straight-
ness  of  his  nose,  and  I  always  maintained  that  it  was
slightly  crooked.  I  am  satisfied  that  Mrs.  Piper  could
have  known  nothing  whatever  of  this.

It  was,  however,  under  the  G.  P.  regime  (1892  onwards)
that  waking-stages  with  visions  by  the  medium  began  to
be  at  all  common,  and  that  speech  by  the  medium  during
them  was  gradually  developed.  It  was  on  April  28,  1892,
that  occurred  the  incident  of  the  name  Peirce,  which
G.  P.  had  failed  to  give  in  the  trance,  being  called  out
in  what  we  should  now  call  the  waking-stage  ;  and  it  is
noteworthy  that  from  Hodgson's  remarks  about  this  it
seems  to  have  been  the  first  waking-stage  in  which  he
heard  Mrs.  Piper  speak.  At  any  rate  it  led  to  his  first
description  of  this.  The  contemporary  record  says  (Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  XIII.,  p.  305)  :

Finally  Phinuit  said  he  had  to  go,  and  Mrs.  Piper  began
to  come  out  of  trance.  Convulsive  movements  worse  than
usual,  and  then  whispered  voice  muttering  some  words
indistinguishable  *  *  *  Further  unintelligible  sounds,  among
which  the  name  Peirce  was  alone  distinct.  This  name  was
spoken  twice,  and  was  not  in  either  Phinuit's  or  Mrs.  Piper's
ordinary  voice.  Shortly  after  this  Mrs.  Piper  came  to
herself.

On  this  Hodgson,  whose  paper  was  published  in  1898,
remarks  (Proceedings.  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  306)  :


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  213


Since  this  sitting  I  have  frequently  heard  Mrs.  Piper
speak  during  the  interval  between  trance  and  waking,  on
the  borderline  of  waking.  On  rarer  occasions  I  have
heard  her  speak  just  as  she  is  losing  consciousness  before
the  trance.  At  both  these  times  her  voice,  though  slightly
different  from  the  ordinary  voice  in  conversation,  is  not
different  to  the  extent  that  the  remark  in  my  contempor-
ary note  above  seems  to  suggest.  Sometimes  it  is  a  whisper,
more  commonly  not  ;  but  it  always  sounds  dreamy  or
automatic,  i.e.  it  sounds  just  as  I  should  imagine  Mrs.
Piper's  voice  would  sound  if  she  were  talking  in  her
sleep,  either  aloud  or  in  a  whisper.

I  do  not,  however,  find  records  in  1892  or  1893  of
Mrs.  Piper  in  the  waking-stage  speaking  to  spirits  or
repeating  the  observations  of  spirits  (unless  it  occurred  on
November  28,  1892,  as  suggested  below,  p.  220),  though
several  cases  of  visions  are  mentioned,  chiefly — as  was  also
the  case  under  the  Imperator  regime — visions  of  controls  or
communicators  who  had  played  a  part  in  the  trance.

At  the  sitting  on  November  28,  1892,  such  a  vision  of
G.  P.  is  mentioned,  and  a  subsequent  selection  of  G.  P.'s
photograph  as  that  of  the  man  she  had  seen.1  This
sitting  is  also  notable  because,  after  this  vision,  Mrs.  Piper
went  into  trance  again  and  later  in  the  sitting  there  were
apparently  two  abortive  beginnings  of  waking.  The  sitting
is  described  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.  (pp.  416-417).  I
quote  from  a  somewhat  longer  stenographic  report  the
account  of  the  waking-stage  that  occurred  in  the  middle
of  it.  The  sitting  took  place  at  the  house  of  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Howard,  who  with  their  daughter  Katherine  were
present  as  well  as  Hodgson  and  the  stenographer.  G.  P.
had  been  controlling  when  :

[At  9.16  the  medium  comes  out  of  trance  but  before
wholly  out  exclaims — ■"  There  is  the  man  with  the  beard."]
R.  H.  What  is  he  saying  %

1  On  December  22,  1892,  we  learn  from  the  stenographic  report  that  "  When
partially  out  [of  trance]  she  seems  to  see  something  and  when  asked  what
it  was,  she  says  she  saw  the  same  gentleman  she  saw  once  before  ;  just
saw  him  smile  ;  did  not  see  him  do  anything."  This  was  doubtless  again
a  vision  of  G.  P.


214


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[pabt


Mrs.  Piper.  Did  you  see  him  ?  I  dreamed  that  I  saw  a
gentleman  with  a  book  and  a  pencil  in  his  hand
and  he  was  writing.

R.  H. Would  you  know  him  if  you  saw  him  again  ?

Mrs.  Piper. Do  you  know  where  Mr.  Howard  is  ?

Mr.  Howard.  Yes.

R.  H.  Was  it  Mr.  Howard  you  saw,,  or  did  you  see  me  ?

Mrs.  Piper.  Oh  no,  I  did  not  see  either  of  you.  Oh  no,  I
was  dreaming,  I  think.  I  saw  a  bright  light  and
a  face  in  it,  a  gentleman  with  a  beard  on  his  face
and  he  had  a  very  high  forehead  and  he  was  writ-
ing. I  saw  it  just  as  distinctly  as  it  could  be.

R.  H. Would  you  know  it  again  if  you  saw  it  do  you  think  ?

Mrs.  Piper. Oh  yes,  I  would  know  it,  I  think.

R.  H. Well,  try  and  recall  it.

[Medium  says  she  feels  queer  and  as  if  she  could  turn
right  round  and  go  into  the  trance  again.  Does
not  know  what  is  the  matter  with  her.  After
saying  this  she  becomes  entranced  again  very
quickly at 9.22 and Phinuit appears shouting  : — ]

Ph.  You  know  you  don't  play  that  on  me.  George
Pelham  is  a  very  clever  fellow  but  I  am  going  to
tell  you  he  passed  by  me,  and  do  you  know  what
he  did,  he  let  her  go  without  signalling  to  me  at
all ;  he  did  it  by  mistake ;  he  told  me  afterwards
and  so  I  come  back  to  tell  you. Now  he  wants

me  to  tell  you {A  message  from G. P.  follows}

*  *  *

R.  H. George  went  out  without  telling  you  to  get  ready  to
come  in,  is  that  it  %
{Phinuit  does  not  reply  at  once  but  talks  about  other
things  .  .  . Presently  he  says}

Ph.  Hodgson,  now  I  want  to  tell  you  what  this  is.  He
passed  the  medium,  you  know,  when  the  medium
came  in  he  went  out,  then  he  passed  me  and  he
apologized  to  me  and  I  come  in  here  for  a
minute.

{After  further  talk,  in  the  course  of  which  Phinuit
gave  a  message  from  G.  P.,  Mrs.  Howard  said  :
"  Tell him we had a lovely talk with him  this


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  215

evening." This  message  to  G.  P.  apparently  led  to

his  return. Phinuit  replied}
Ph. You  take  that  Hodgson,  give  it  to  him.
R.  H.  Is  he  going  to  write  ?

Ph. He  is  going  to  do  something,  he  has  got  hold  of  my
hand  taking  it  right  away  from  me.
{Writing  begins,  but  is  illegible}  *  *  *
R.  H.  Is  this  George's  writing,  Doctor  ?

Ph.  George  is  writing  that  for  a  lady  that  speaks  Italian.
I  can't  speak  it.

$  $  $  4

Ph.  Au  revoir.  A  bientot.  Here  she  comes  [Mrs.  Piper
is  apparently  about  to  come  out  of  the  trance  when
another  control  takes  possession  for  a  few  minutes,
who  is  thought  by  Mrs.  Howard  to  be  Madame  Elisa,
and  who  whispers  something  in  Italian  to  Mrs.
Howard.1  Again  Mrs.  Piper  apparently  is  about  to
come  out  of  the  trance  when  Phinuit  returns  for  a
moment  to  say  au  revoir.  *  *  *  After  Mrs.  Piper
comes  out  of  trance  she  is  shown  a  collection  of  thirty-
two  photographs,  nine  of  them  being  of  men,  from
which  she  selects  a  picture  of  the  person  whom  she
saw  when  coming  out  of  trance  {the  first  time}.  The
likeness  that  she  first  picked  out  was  an  excellent
likeness  of  {G.  P.}  She  afterwards  picked  out  another
photograph  of  him.  She  stated  that  she  never
knew  the  gentleman  when  living.2]  3

1  Apparently  only  a  few  disjointed  words.

1 G.  P.  had,  however,  in  life  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  under  an
assumed  name.

3  Breaks  such  as  here  occurred  in  the  trance  are  not  common.  For  one
deliberately  arranged  by  the  control  Phinuit  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,
pp.  43-44.  And  for  a  relapse  into  trance  with  convulsions  after  Mrs.  Piper
had  begun  to  come  out  (on  November  18,  1893),  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,
p.  483.  (This  case  is  quoted  below  in  Chapter  VII.,  p.  290).  For  a  brief
interval  of  apparent  sleep  during  a  sitting  between  two  controls  (Gurney
and  Phinuit),  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  553.  I  think  that  in  later  years
intervals  longer  than  a  few  seconds — such,  for  instance,  as  would  be  involved
in  holding  "the  healer's  influence"  (see  below,  p.  310) — were  avoided.
Perhaps  it  was  as  a  means  of  avoiding  them  that,  when  a  control  or  com-
municator temporarily  withdrew  the  interval  was  filled  with  general  talk
by  Rector,  or  by  a  brief  episode  concerning  some  other  communicator.  It


216


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


On  December  7,  1892,  a  vision  again  occurred  in  the
waking- stage.  G.  P.  had  been  writing,  after  which
Phinuit  talked,  and  then  Madame  Elisa  controlled  and
talked  in  a  whisper  for  a  short  time  to  Mrs.  Howard.
From  this  point  I  quote  the  stenographic  report,  which
is  rather  fuller  than  that  given  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,
pp.  426,  427  :

[At  10.17  the  medium  comes  out  of  trance.  When
partially  out  she  appears  to  see  something  and  reaches
out  her  hand  as  if  to  take  something.]

R.  H. See  anything  ? What  is  it  you  see  ?

Mrs.  Piper. It  is  a  lady.

Mrs.  Howard. What  did  the  lady  look  like  ?

Mrs.  Piper. I  dreamed

Mrs.  Howard. What  did  you  dream  ?

Mrs.  Piper. I  saw  a  lady  with  a  lot  of  flowers  in  her  hand.

Where  am  I  ?
Mrs.  Howard. With  Mrs.  Howard  in  the  library
Mrs.  Piper. Do  you  know  Walter  Leaf  ?  1
Mrs.  Howard.  Yes.
R.  H. What  about  Walter  Leaf  %
Mrs.  Piper. Oh  nothing.

R.  H. You  asked  Mrs.  Howard  if  she  knew  him  ?
Mrs.  Piper. I  could  not  think  where  I  was.

R.  H. Don't you remember asking Mrs. Howard if  she

knew  Walter  Leaf  ?
Mrs.  Piper. Yes I remember saying  something. What  did  I

say  about  him  ? I  could  not  think  where  I  was.

Isn't  it  funny.

R.  H. Did  you see  Walter Leaf in a dream or  anything
of  that  sort  ?

Mrs.  Piper. No,  I  did  not,  I  don't  know  why  I  asked  her  that.

I  tell  you  what  I  do  remember,  of  seeing  a  lady

is  possible  that  any  long  pause  might  in  these  later  years  have  brought  the
trance  to  an  end.  There  was  a  case  after  a  voice-sitting  with  Mr.  Dorr
on  April  17,  1905,  of  Mrs.  Piper  coming  out  of  trance  with  the  usual  kind
of  waking-stage,  and  going  back  into  the  trance  to  write  a  message  to
Hodgson. (See  Appendix,  pp.  595-596).

1  Mr.  Leaf,  it  will  be  remembered,  had  taken  charge  of  some  of  the
sittings  in  England  in  1890.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance  Phenomena.


217


with  something  in  her  hand,  I  don't  know  what
it  was.

R.  H. Would  you  recognize  the  lady  if  you  saw  her  picture  ?

Mrs.  Piper.  I  don't  know,  I  think  I  could.  She  had  dark
curly  hair,  not  very  much  curly,  crinkled  a  little
up  here  (forehead)  brushed  back  like  that.  She  had
a  very  pronounced  looking  face,  very  fine  looking
face,  quite  large  eyes,  quite  a  large  mouth.

R.  H. What  sort  of  flowers  ?

Mrs.  Piper. I  can't  tell  you,  it  is  going  from  me  now.

The  consciousness — or  perhaps  I  should  say  memory — of
the  waking-stage  impressions  here  seems  less  broken  up
than  was  usually  the  case  in  more  recent  sittings,  but  it
is  possible  that  we  have  here  only  part  of  the  waking-
stage  recorded.  Whether  the  description  of  the  halluci-
natory lady  resembled  Madame  Elisa  or  any  other  person
known  to  the  sitters  we  are  not  told.

Another  definite  waking-stage  vision  is  reported  by  Miss
Edmunds  on  November  22,  1893,  as  I  find  from  unpublished
notes. She  writes  :

As  she  came  out  of  trance  Mrs.  Piper  described  a
man  standing,  placing  the  fingers  of  one  hand  on  the
other  and  stroking  his  whiskers  etc. — characteristic  of  {one
of  those  who  had  controlled  during  the  sitting}.

On  March  14,  1893,  i.e.  between  the  two  waking-stages  last
described,  Mrs.  Pij)er  underwent  a  serious  operation,  already
referred  to  above,  p.  19,  and  it  is  interesting  to  note  that
in  coming  to  herself  from  the  influence  of  the  anaesthetic
she  seems  to  have  gone  through  a  waking-stage  resembling
those  in  coming  out  of  trance.  Hodgson  had  gone  to  the
sanatorium  and  remained  in  the  building  while  the
operation  was  performed,  so  that  he  might  be  of  assistance
in  case  of  any  unusual  occurrence.  He  writes  (Proceedings,
Vol.  XIII.,  p.  479)  :

After  the  operation,  and  while  Mrs.  Piper,  who  had  been
taken  to  her  room,  was  still  under  the  influence  of  the
ether,  and  apparently  unconscious  of  any  person  present,
Dr.  Ingraham  requested  me  to  enter  the  room,  as  Mrs.  Piper


218


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


was  calling  for  me.  I  went  in  and  spoke  to  her,  but
she  seemed  to  be  quite  unaware  of  my  presence,  although
she  moaned  occasionally,  and  several  times  called  out
spasmodically  "  Mr.  Hodgson."  During  this  interval  of
unconsciousness  her  attention  became  fixed  as  upon  an
object  of  interest,  and  she  exclaimed :  "  Who  is  that
old  man  ?  Take  him  away."  Then  came  a  pause  as  if
she  was  listening,  and  she  then  added,  "  Oh,  no.  He's
a  nice  old  man.  He  can  stay."  This  naturally  caused  me
to  think  of  Phinuit.

Another  instance  of  a  "  waking-stage "  after  an  anaes-
thetic will  be  found  in  the  Appendix  to  this  chapter,
p.  579.  It  occurred  on  April  24,  1901,  nearly  eight  years
later  than  the  one  just  described,  and  it  will  be  observed
that  here  it  is  Imperator,  the  chief  control  of  this  later  date,
who  appears.

The  waking-stages  of  the  sittings  of  June  25  and  26,  1894,
are  described  by  Dr.  Newbold  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,
pp.  25  and  27.  In  the  second  of  these  occurs  hearing  of
spirits  by  Mrs.  Piper  and  repetition  of  what  spirits  say,
both  common  features  of  later  waking-stages,  but  here
perhaps  developing  ;  though,  on  the  other  hand,  there
may  have  been  more  of  it  before  this  than  the  records
clearly  reveal  (see  next  page).  It  is  curious  that  the
talking  for  spirits  on  June  26  was  followed  by  a  relapse
into  unconsciousness  from  which  there  was  considerable
difficulty  in  getting  Mrs.  Piper  to  wake.

In  a  waking-stage  of  November  9,  1894,  of  which  Miss
Edmunds  gives  a  brief  account,  Mrs.  Piper  has  again  auditory
as  well  as  visual  hallucinations  :

On  coming  out  of  trance  Mrs.  Piper  said  :  "  Oh  I  hear
some  one  calling  '  Water ! '  He  says  '  Oh  I  want  water ! '  "
She  also  gave  a  very  good  description  of  Mr.  C.  excepting
the  nose.  Said  she  saw  a  gentleman  with  very  clear  eyes,
etc.

Phinuit  had  during  the  sitting  commented  on  the  com-
municator's "  eyes  as  clear  as  a  bell,"  and  the  latter  had
himself  referred  to  his  calling  for  water  in  his  last  illness.
In  1895  we  have  in  the  records  of  Dr.  Newbold's  sittings


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.


219


several  notable  waking-stages.  I  quote  first  those  of  April
24  and  May  8,  both  recorded  by  Hodgson

{April  24,  1895.)

[After  Phinuit  goes,  there  is  whispering,  Pttee  p'see
repeated  frequently,  then  Euthee  and  papa  repeated —
other  sounds  possibly,  but  these  were  all  I  could  hear.

Mrs.  Piper  in  coming  out  bent  forward  as  though  seeing
something  and  murmured  in  her  own  voice  :  "  Mrs.  Dow
and  the  baby."  On  questioning  her  immediately  after-
ward she  said  she  had  seen  Mrs.  Dow  with  "  two  little
ones."]  1

(May  8,  1895.)

Present  W.  R.  N.  and  R.  H.

At  end  of  trance,  after  Phinuit  left  there  were  signs
of  another  "control."  There  was  a  murmuring  which  N.
thought  sounded  like  Walter,  but  which  R.  H.  thought
was  Water.

Mrs.  Piper  appeared  to  have  a  vision  as  she  was  coming
out  of  trance,  and  on  being  questioned  said  she  saw  a
gentleman  arm  in  arm  with  Mr.  Pelham.  They  were
laughing  and  rocking  from  side  to  side. — She  didn't  re-
member having  seen  the  gentleman  before. — He  was  not
very  much  larger  than  Newbold,  had  a  pointed  beard  very
dark  brown,  dark  eyes, — glasses.  "  His  moustache  was
put  out  this  way  "  [indicating  that  it  was  pushed  up  and
out  from  the  upper  lip].  His  glasses  were  spectacles  and
the  wire  went  over  and  behind  the  ears.

Both  these  accounts  begin  with  partially  heard  whispering
or  murmuring  regarded  by  Hodgson  at  the  time  as  signs
of  another  "  control "  taking  possession  when  Phinuit
left,  and  therefore  as  occurring  during  the  trance  proper.
Judging  from  later  experience,  however,  it  seems  very
possible that  these  words  are  part  of  the  waking-stage

1  These  names  and  phrases  belong  to  communicators  in  the  sittings  of
Dr.  and  Mrs.  Thaw  in  1892  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  384,  385,  and
536-582).  The  names  recurred  in  several  waking-stages  (see  below,  p.
256,  and  Appendix,  p.  550).


220


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


and  spoken  by  Mrs.  Piper  in  propria  persona — perhaps
repeating  after  spirits.  The  waking-stage  of  later  years
usually  began  in  this  way  ;  1  and  there  was  no  doubt
about  its  being  the  waking-stage,  because  it  followed  the
period  of  apparently  profound  sleep  which  succeeded  the
closing  of  s  the  sitting  by  Imperator  and  Rector,  and  it
only  began  after  Mrs.  Piper  had  raised  her  head  from  the
pillow  and  opened  her  eyes.

But  if  these  whispered  words  in  April  and  May,  1895,
are  really  part  of  the  waking-stage,  it  would  seem  not
improbable  that  the  whispered  Italian  words  on  November
28,  1892  (see  above,  p.  215)  were  also  part  of  a  waking-
stage,  notwithstanding  Phinuit's  brief  apparent  return  to
say  au  revoir.  At  any  rate,  so  far  as  one  can  judge  from
the  almost  necessarily  imperfect  description,  there  is  a  good
deal  of  likeness  between  the  two  cases  ;  and  it  seems
to  follow  that  the  distinction  in  the  state  of  consciousness
between  the  trance  proper  and  the  early  part  of  the
waking-stage  is  not  in  essence  so  marked  as  is  suggested
by  what  we  now  regard  as  typical  cases,  or  perhaps  the
one  may  intrude  into  the  other.  We  shall  presently  see
that  there  are  some  other  things  pointing  in  the  same
direction.  In  the  Phinuit  and  G.  P.  days  there  certainly
seems  to  have  been  a  less  obvious  division  between  trance
and  waking-stage  than  under  the  Imperator  regime,  but
one  would  like  to  know  exactly  what  symptoms  led  the
recorder  on  November  28,  1892,  to  say  "  Mrs.  Piper  is  appa-
rently about  to  come  out  of  trance."

In  a  sitting  of  Dr.  Newbold's  on  June  14,  1895,
the  whispering  is  definitely  placed  by  him  in  the  waking-
stage.  The  description  is  interesting  also  because  I  think
it  is  the  first  we  have  of  the  gradually  waking  Mrs.  Piper
seeing  the  sitter  as  a  black  and  horrible  object — which
she  commonly  did  later.  Dr.  Newbold's  record  is  as
follows  :

[Coming  out  Mrs.  Piper  whispers,  nearly  all  unintelligible]
Better  give  me  my  own  body  ...  I  want  my  husband.
Elliott [?] I want  .  .  .  Sallie  .  .  .  my father was  with

1  See  description  in  Chapter  I.,  p.  22.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  221

me  ...  I  want — everybody  to  go  away — [to  N.]  you
look  blacker  than  the  ace  of  spades — horrible  .  .  .  [Draws
away  from  him  with  expression  of  loathing.]

Oh  dear  [relapses  several  times]  Oh  yes,  Dr.  Newbold,
Oh  I  am  so  sleepy  and  stupid.  I  heard  all  sorts  of
voices  calling  to  me.  There  was  a  lady  who  kept  pulling
and  picking  at  me  and  txy'mg  to  say  something  but  I
couldn't  understand  her.  It  seemed  as  if  my  mind  and
hers  were  trying  to  get  together  but  could  not.  I  was
deaf  to  her  and  I  felt  I  had  to  go  somewhere,  where  I
did  not  know.  She  had  beautiful  dark  hair,  a  little
silvered,  black  eyes,  very  small  hands.  I  saw  the  same
lovely  lady  I  saw  yesterday.  She  had  light  hair,  dark
eyes.  The  other  one  seemed  more  earnest  or  serious,  and
kept  all  the  time  talking  to  me,  or  trying  to.

When  Mrs.  Piper  talks,  as  represented  in  the  latter  part
of  this  record,  of  what  she  has  seen  or  experienced — describes
it  as  one  might  a  dream  from  which  one  has  waked  up — she
is,  of  course,  in  a  nearly  normal  condition.  When  quite
herself,  the  memory  of  the  dream  has  generally  disappeared
(see,  e.g.  a  remark  by  her,  p.  217).  The  reference  to  seeing
the  same  lovely  lady  as  yesterday  seems  to  show  that  while  in
the  waking-stage  she  has  memory  of  previous  waking-stages.
It  is  to  be  noted  that  sitters'  friends  when  described  by
Mrs.  Piper,  whether  in  the  trance  proper  or  in  the  waking-
stage,  are  apt  to  be  described  in  flattering  terms,  said
to  be  lovely  or  the  most  beautiful  spirit  she  ever  saw,
etc.  This  can  hardly  be  a  strictly  accurate  description
of  her  visions,  because  these,  when  we  can  test  them,
resemble  the  originals  as  known  on  earth.  But  I  think
that,  at  least  since  1896,  the  "  spirits  "  seen  in  the  waking-
stage  do  share  the  beauty  of  the  waking-stage  visions.
In  the  trance  proper  the  flattering  descriptions  may  be  due
to  a  desire  to  please  sitters,  though  there  is  something  of  a
more  general  character  in  a  remark  such  as  Phinuit  made
about  K.  F.  on  December  12,  1896 :  "  She's  a  beautiful
creature.  You  don't  know  how  beautiful  a  beautiful  soul
is  till  you  come  over  here."

We  may  observe  one  distinction  between  waking-stages
of  this  period  and  later,  that  there  is  a  distinct  tendency


222


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


in  1895  for  the  waking-stage  impressions  to  be  in  part  at
least  disagreeable — to  be  bad  dreams.

(June  25,  1895.)

Hodgson  and  Dr.  Newbold  present.

[Mrs.  Piper  coming  out,  whispers  hoarsely  gasping
between  every  two  or  three  words.  N.  takes  all  down
nearly  verbatim.1]  Christ  (H.  Who  was  he  ?)  Our  Saviour
.  .  .  Oh-h-h-h  ...  be  merciful  to  me  ...  to  all  .  .  .  my
soul  .  .  .  goes  out  .  .  .  goes  to  sleep  .  .  .  my  mind  .  .  .
my  thoughts  ...  go  to  sleep  ...  I  go  out  .  .  .  and
see  all  the  world  ...  I  see  the  trees  ...  I  see  flowers
.  .  .  the  birds  .  .  .  the  cattle  .  .  .  the  beasts  .  .  .  but
oh  .  .  .  not  any  longer  beasts  .  .  .  they  live  .  .  .  they
live  .  .  .  they  live  .  .  .  they  hear,  they  know,  they
speak  .  .  .  my  soul  takes  a  flight  .  .  .  my  body  is
used  by  that  old  man  .  .  .  look  at  that  old  man  .  .  .
oh  let  me  go  .  .  .  the  line  that  connects  the  soul  with
the  body  (What  is  it  like  ?)  [She  shivers  and  her
teeth  chatter.]  Oh  I  am  cold  (What  was  the  colour  of
the  line  ?)  A  line  of  light  .  .  .  (What  is  it  made  of  ?)
Oh  I  have  two  distinct  brains  .  .  .  Oh  I'm  so  cold  .  .  .
(What  do  the  brains  look  like  ?)  One  looks  like  sulphur
burning  and  the  other  looks  like  flesh  .  .  .  Oh  I've  had
such  a  horrible  dream  (What  was  it  about  ?)  Don't  I
feel  dreadfully  .  .  .  Oh  but  it  is  a  dreadful  thing.  (What
was  the  dream  about  1)  I  was  dead,  my  body  was  dead
and  then  after  I  died  I  saw  an  old  hump  backed  man
pick  it  up.2  (Pick  what  up  ?  How  did  he  pick  it  up  ?)
With  his  hands  ?)  Picked  my  body  up,  not  with  his  hands,
he  picked  up  the  upper  part  of  it  and  shut  himself  in  and
went  walking  all  about  with  my  body  and  I  couldn't
help  it.  (And  what  did  you  do  ?)  I  went  with  a  lot  of
other people. (Did you know them?) No, but I  saw

1  It  must  be  remembered  that  what  is  said  in  the  waking-stage,  being
spoken,  not  written,  has  to  be  taken  down  by  the  sitter  ;  and  as  it  is  generally
almost  impossible  to  get  down  every  word  the  records  of  waking-stages  are
seldom  quite  complete.

2  Presumably  Phinuit,  though  I  do  not  remember  any  other  statement
about  his  being  hunchbacked.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  223


very  many  and  we  -went  everywhere.  (Did  they  show
you  the  animals?)  Oh  my  body  feels  bad  .  .  .  yes  I
saw  animals  .  .  .  they  looked  like  .  .  .  they  were  very
real  but  they  had  bodies  all  outlined  .  .  .  They  were
transparent  and  you  could  see  through  them.  (Did  they
try  to  attack  you  or  were  they  peaceful  1)  Oh  no,  they
were  peaceful  .  .  .  they  had  once  been  animals  .  .  .  the}7
were  the  shadowy  forms  of  animals  that  had  once  lived.
I  saw  these.  (Did  you  see  anything  else  that  was  strange  ?
[She  suddenly  sits  upright  and  looks  at  H.  with  an  air
of  recognition.  Speaks  aloud,  but  not  in  her  normal
tones.]  Did  you  hear  something  snap  in  my  head,  Mr.
Hodgson  ?  [She  is  quite  herself  again  in  a  few  minutes
and  later  remembers  from  this  point,  but  has  forgotten
all  that  preceded.]  I  want  to  tell  you  the  strangest  thing.
I  had  two  distinct  pairs  of  eyes.  I  used  one  pair  behind
the  other  and  looked  through  these  eyes  [touching  her
own]  as  if  they  were  spectacles.  They  looked  like  marbles,
but  I  knew  they  were  my  own  eyes  all  the  time  though
I  don't  know  how  I  knew  it.  Sometimes  I  would  see
very  clearly  with  the  other  eyes,  sometimes  I  couldn't
tell  what  I  saw,  then  I  heard  something  crack.  I  forgot
I  was  in  the  room  but  it  is  all  clear  now,  I  was  giving
you  a  sitting  wasn't  I  ?  And  Mr.  Hodgson  when  I  saw
you  first  it  was  through  the  other  pair  of  eyes  and  you
didn't  look  as  you  do  now.  You  looked  as  I  have  some-
times seen  myself  look  in  the  glass  [she  refers  to  double
reflections]  it  seemed  to  me  you  were  double,  there  was  a
sort  of  shadow  outside  your  real  self.  Then  something
snapped  in  my  head  and  I  got  my  own  eyes  again.
Bad  dreams  like  this  seem  to  have  disappeared  with
the  convulsions  under  the  Irnperator  regime,  as  did  also
unpleasant  impressions  in  going  into  trance — for  instance,
the  one  on  June  20,  1895,  when  Mrs.  Piper  going  into
trance  says :  "in  a  tone  of  horror  '  Take  him  away  '  "  ;
immediately  after  which  Phinuit  controls.

There  are  several  things  to  note  about  the  waking-stage
just  described,  as  illustrating  waking-stages  generally.
First,  in  the  earlier  part  the  dream  seems  to  be  going  on.
Then  a  different  stage  of  consciousness  comes  on  and  she


224  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


begins  to  describe  the  dream  of  which  she  has  given  frag-
mentary indications  while  it  was  proceeding.1  Hodgson's
questions  probably  prolonged  this  stage  by  keeping  her
mind  on  the  dream.  I  should  surmise,  however,  that  the
questions  were  answered  without  any  distinct  consciousness
of  who  was  asking  them,  and  that  full  consciousness  of
this  only  came  on  at  the  point  when  she  sits  upright  and
looks  at  Hodgson  with  an  air  of  recognition,  and  it  is
probably  to  this  moment,  before  the  snap,  that  belongs  the
further  impression  of  seeing  with  spirit  eyes,  through  her
bodily  eyes,  the  spirit  body  as  well  as  the  mortal  body  of
Hodgson.

Waking-stages,  or  rather  the  earlier  parts  of  waking-
stages,  seem  to  vary  in  the  degree  of  consciousness  ex-
hibited of  the  presence  of  the  sitter.  In  some  cases  the
presence  of  the  sitter  does  not  seem  to  be  recognised.  An
example  of  this  will  be  found  on  p.  559.  On  the  other
hand,  in  a  case  such  as  is  recorded  on  June  17,  1895  :

Sallie  said  give  my  love  to  the  boys.  Oh  how  many
Uncle  Williams.  Who  do  you  suppose  that  old  lady  can
be  ?  She  is  persistent.  She  is  always  here ;  was  standing
with  her  hand  on  your  shoulder.

the  spirits  and  sitter  seem  to  be  brought  into  definite
spacial  relation  with  each  other.

The  subject-matter  of  the  waking-stage  dreams  or  impres-
sions can  often,  perhaps  generally,  be  traced  in  recent
trances.2  Thus  the  occupation  of  the  medium's  body  by
Phinuit,  and  seeing  with  spirit  eyes,  etc.,  had  been  spoken
of  in  the  trance  from  which  Mrs.  Piper  was  waking  on

1  Compare  a  note  concerning  waking-stages  made  by  Hodgson  on
December  26,  1896:  "There  appear  to  be  two  somewhat  separated  stages
of  Mrs.  Piper's  subliminal  {subliminal  =  waking-stage}.  (1)  Where  she
bears  the  same  relation  to  the  '  invisibles  '  and  the  sitter  as  the  ordinary
speaking  'communicator'  {=  control}  does,  e.g.  Phinuit.  (2)  Where  she  no
longer  is  seeing  and  hearing  the  '  invisibles  '  but  only  remembering  what  she
has  just  passed  through.  Both  of  these  stages  are  frequently  observable,
but  often  only  one.  There  is  nearly  always  a  trace  of  (2)  in  the  beginning
of  her  normal-consciousness  return,  a  dreamy  rapidly-fading  recollection."

In  neither  stage,  it  may  be  remarked,  do  we  get  the  whole  of  what  waa
dreamt.

2  For  some  exceptions,  see  below,  p.  245.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  225

June  25,  1895,  and  the  survival  of  animals  and  their  real
existence  and  development  in  the  spirit  world  had  been
discussed  in  the  trance  of  June  20.

Another  noteworthy  point  about  the  waking-stage  of  June
25,  1895,  is  the  snap  in  the  head.  It  is  the  first  record,  so
far  as  I  know,  of  Mrs.  Piper  remarking  on  this  sensation  at
the  time  of  its  occurrence,  and  expecting  the  sitter  to  hear
it.  The  snap  was,  however,  spoken  of  on  June  21,  1895
(see  Appendix,  p.  549) — after  a  waking-stage  which,  by  the
way,  again  seems  to  have  been  a  bad  dream  experience —
and  spoken  of  in  a  way  that  shows  it  was  not  an  experience
new  to  her.

For  comparison  with  the  waking-stage  of  June  25,  1895,
I  may  give  that  of  February  19,  1907,  where  all  seems
bright  and  pleasant  except  the  returning  to  this  dark
world.  I  select  this  one  from  among  others  because  it
illustrates  well  the  breaks  of  consciousness  in  the  waking-
stage.  The  Bennie  Junot  incident  is  apparently  quite
disconnected  from  the  rest,  and  Bennie  had  not  been
mentioned  during  the  trance.

(February  19,  1907.  Waking-stage.)
Sitter  and  Recorder,  J.  G.  Piddington.

[Pencil  dropped  at  12.37  p.m. Head  lifts  12.43. The  left
hand  is  stretched  out,  and  appears  to  take  hold  of  some-
thing between  the  first  finger  and  the  thumb. The  hand,
still  with  the  thumb  and  first  finger  pressed  together,  is
brought  close  to  the  nose,  and  Mrs.  Piper  sniffs  several
times  and  then  (12.45|)  says  :]
Mrs.  Piper. Beautiful  ! I  do. I see him  .  .  .  Ah  ! Ah  !  all
right. I'm  glad. Annie (?) — know  you. Ab  !  it's
all  right. Ah  !  (smiling) Where  did  you  find  them  ?
Yes. She  does. (Smiles  and  breathes  quickly.)  .  .  .
exactly, (smiling) Beautiful. I like to go  with
you. (Points.) George  P'lham. Ha ! A  long  time
since  I  saw  you. I don't understand it.  They're
[or,  'like'] Dutch  .  .  .  Millie  (?) Millie  (?)  well  .  .  .
Maple  (?)
J.  G.  P. '  Maple  '  ?
Mrs.  Piper,  tut — Mabel  loyal

p


226


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


J.  G.  P. '  Mabel  loyal '  ?

Mas.  Piper.  That's  right.  That's  an  awful  noise.  Oh  !  look
here.  A  little  white  mist  gathered  all  over  them,
and  they're  gone.  Oh  !  that's  too  bad.  What  ?
They  told  me  to  say  that  if  he  didn't  write,  it's
his  own  fault.  George  Pelham  is  in  there,  shaking
both  hands  at  me  and  muttering  a  kind  of  a
language,  and  they  say  that  they  tell  you  things  in
your  dreams  some  day  some  time.  Here  they  are
giving  me  flowers  to  take.
They  get  so  dark  I  can't  see  them.

J.  G.  P.  What  ?

Mrs.  Piper. They  get  so  dark  I  can't  see  them.
And  I  wish  they  wouldn't  go.

Why  I  don't  like  this  room. It  has  bugs  on  it —

spiders.
(Looking  at  wall.)
I  had  such  a  good  time.  (Sighs.)
J.  G.  P.  Head  snapped  ?

Mrs.  Piper. Ha  ! I  thought — I didn't know where I  was.

Yes. I  heard  something. Do  you  know  who  Bennie
Junot  is  ? Oh  ! I  did  want  to  send  my  love  to
Dad. Just  over  the  end  of  the  cord.
I  heard  this  when  my  head  snapped. Mr.  Piddington  !

Oh  ! I  forgot  where  I  was.
I  wanted  to  tell  you  something  very  much  before  and
I  forgot  it.
J.  G.  P.  Was  it  about  Bennie  Junot  ?

Mrs.  Piper. I don't know  what you mean. What are  you

trying  to  tell  me  ?
J.  G.  P.  You  don't  know  about  Bennie  Junot  ?
Mrs.  PiPtfR.  I  never  heard  of  it. Are  you  making  that  up  to

fool  me  ? You  mustn't  joke  with  me  now  because

I'm  silly.

(Trance  ends,  12.55  p.m.)
Judging  from  the  frequent  absence  in  the  records,  before
the  Imperator  regime  began,  of  any  mention  of  a  waking-
stage,  talking  during  it  was  not  before  that  a  habitual
phenomenon.  And  it  did  not  become  an  invariable,  or
very  nearly  invariable,  occurrence till about the  middle


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  227

of  February,  1897,  which  suggests  that  its  development,
at  least  partly,  depended  on  the  cessation  of  the  habitual
use  of  the  voice  in  the  trance  proper.  This,  as  we  have
seen,  was  one  result  of  the  departure  of  Phinuit  and  taking
over  of  the  direction  of  trance  utterances  by  the  Imperator
band.  Talking  while  going  into  the  trance  remained  only
occasional  to  the  end.  Nothing  would  be  gained  by
quoting  every  case  of  talking  either  in  going  into  or
coming  out  of  trance.  I  give  in  the  Appendix  to  this
chapter  a  selection  from  among  the  more  interesting  or
typical  cases,  chosen  to  illustrate  various  points,  and
chosen  from  different  years  so  that  the  reader  may  have
the  opportunity  of  following  the  further  development.

But  it  may  be  well  to  give  here  some  further  general
description  of  the  waking-stage  during  most  of  the
Imperator  regime.  I  pointed  out  in  the  introductory
chapter — -and  it  is  illustrated  by  various  waking-stages
referred  to  in  the  present  chapter — that  in  the  earlier  part
of  the  waking-stage  Mrs.  Piper  conceives  herself  to  be  in
a  world  of  spirits  brighter  and  better  than  this,  and  is
unaware  apparently  of  her  actual  surroundings.  In  that
other  world  her  own  spirit  walks  about  among  other
spirits,  as,  for  instance,  on  April  3,  1900,  when  she  says
(see  Appendix,  p.  571)  :

Say,  Rector  took  me  into  the  other  world  and  I've  been
all  round  through  the  garden  with  Mrs.  Hodgson  and  that
little  boy.

Or  on  December  24,  1906,  when  she  says  (in  the  passage
quoted  in  Chapter  II.,  p.  70,  in  another  connexion)  :

I  met  Dr.  Hodgson  walking  in  the  garden  and  I  was
taking  a  message  for  him  ;  and  then  Myers  came  and
interrupted  him ;  and  then  I  came  down  and  down  on  a
cord.

The  spirits  she  thus  meets  may  be  false  communi-
cators ;  e.g.  she  appeared  to  see  "  Bessie  Beals "  in  the
waking-stage  (see  above,  p.  178,  footnote).  But  though
her  own  spirit  is  there,  I  do  not  think  that  she  ever
meets  there  the  spirit  of  any  other living  person.  On


228


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


the  other  hand,  her  visions  of  spirits  sometimes  persist
into  that  part  of  the  waking-stage  when  she  begins  to
return  to  this  world  and  to  be  aware  of  her  real  surround-
ings, and  thus  get  mixed  up  with  these.  For  instance,
on  November  17,  1902,  Hodgson  reports  that  Mrs.  Piper

remarked to the effect that the silk  robe swirled  over

her,  and  on  my  asking  her  what  it  was,  she  said  that

when  he  (apparently  Imperator)  turned,  the  silk  robe  went
over  her  pillow.

Or  again  on  December  8,  1902,  Mr.  Dorr  reports  :

[Staring  at  G.  B.  D.]  Well,  who  is  that  lady  with  her
hand  on  your  shoulder — something  misty  shut  down  right
over  it — That's  no  dream,  Mr.  Hodgson  !

Or  on  February  20,  1901,  after  one  of  the  Bennie  Junot
sittings  :

See  that  cord  I  came  in  on  ?

There  was  a  young  man  almost  in  my  way. I  did  not
step  on  him,  did  I  ?

Or  on  April  16,  1901,  R.  H.  and  G.  B.  D.  present:

I  felt  so  numb

[To  R.  H.]  If  you'd  put  your  head  over  a  moment  ago
you'd  have  hit  Rector  right  in  the  mouth  !

Compare  also  the  waking-stage  of  March  5,  1897
(Appendix  to  Chapter  III.,  p.  499).  This  intrusion  of
spirits  into  the  semi-normal  consciousness  of  the  later  part
of  the  waking-stage  is  not  necessarily  accompanied  by  any
complete  recollection  of  the  part  these  spirits  have  played
in  the  previous  dream  or  even  of  their  having  played  any
part  at  all.  There  is  generally  a  distinct  break  in  memory
when  the  consciousness  of  actual  surroundings  begins,  and
very  often  such  breaks  will  also  appear  in  the  middle  of
the  part  before  this  point,  or  of  that  after  it,  or  both.
In  fact,  Mrs.  Piper  seems  to  come  to  herself  through  a
varying  number  of  strata  of  consciousness  as  it  were.

The  tendency  to  absurd  misinterpretation  of  what  she
sees  is  another  dreamlike  characteristic  apt  to  exhibit  itself


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  229

in  the  second  part  of  the  waking-stage.  I  gave  some
instances  in  Chapter  I.  as  illustrations  of  probably
blurred  vision.  But  it  requires  absence  of  normal  power  of
judgment  as  well  as  blurred  vision  to  suppose  that  a  fur
coat  on  a  chair  is  a  cow  in  the  room  (see  above,  p.  24),
or  that  Mr.  Hodgson's  arm  is  an  elephant's  trunk,  as
Mrs.  Piper  did  on  January  22,  1901  :

You  hear  my  head  snap  ?

I  thought  you  were  an  elephant.  I  thought  that  was
an  elephant's  trunk  [pointing  to  R.  H.'s  left  arm  lying
across  the  table] Oh  is  that  you,  Mr.  Hodgson  ?  1

There  is  generally,  I  think,  throughout  a  waking-stage  a
sort  of  framework  of  the  dream  common  to  most  of  the
waking-stages  of  about  the  same  period,  though  varying
without  marked  transition  from  period  to  period.  Thus
the  general  religious  atmosphere  and  the  idea  of  edifying
instruction  being  given  by  Imperator  to  the  medium  con-
stantly occurs  in  1897.  And  the  same  phrases  are  often
used.  I  think  the  kind  of  similarity  I  mean  can  be
observed  in  those  waking-stages  of  March,  1897,  quoted
in  the  Appendix.  In  1907,  when  Mrs.  Piper  was  in
England,  a  vision  of  a  kind  of  temple  with  archways  in
which  apparently  the  spirits  were  grouped  was  frequent.
In  the  later  part  of  the  waking-stages  after  1898  the
coming  in  on  a  cord  is  very  frequently  spoken  of — and  so
forth.  Flowers  constantly  played  an  important  part
in  waking-stages  of  all  periods,  and  were  often  perceived
through  three  senses — sight,  smell,  and  touch.  Some
imagery  or  remarks  indicating  that  Mrs.  Piper  regarded
herself  as  visiting  a  heavenly  region,  conceived  in  various
ways,  occur  in  almost  all  waking-stages  under  the
Imperator  regime.  But  nothing  about  these  waking-stage
dreams  is  invariable,  and  there  are  cases  where  the  ideas
are  apparently  entirely  derived  from  the  immediately
preceding  or  recent  trances  proper,  and  the  scene  of
the  drama  is  in  this  world,  though  not  in  the  actual
surroundings — visits  to  Mexico  and  to  Myers's  medium  in

1  A  tendency  to  illusion  in  a  minor  degree  was  exhibited  in  occurrences
on  December  12  and  17,  1906  (see  Appendix,  p.  601).


230


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


England  are  instances  (see  below,  p.  247,  and  Appendix,
pp.  551-553).

It  remains  to  try  to  make  out  something  about  the  intelli-
gence concerned  in  the  waking-stage  talk  or  in  that  going
into  trance,  and  what  its  relation  is  to  the  personalities  of
the  trance  proper  and  to  the  normal  Mrs.  Piper.

In  the  detailed  description  of  the  going  into  trance,  which
Hodgson  gives  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  397-399,  he
seems  to  conceive  of  two  distinct  consciousnesses  in  Mrs.
Piper,  one  aware  of  this  world  and  the  other  of  another
world.  His  theory  put  shortly  seems  to  be  that  in  going  into
trance  the  subliminal  consciousness  first  mixes  itself  with
and  then  ousts  the  supraliminal  consciousness,  and  finally
itself  disappears,  taking  the  supraliminal  consciousness
with  it  and  leaving  the  "  spirits  "  free  to  act  in  its
absence.  This  process  he  conceives  as  occurring  in  reverse
order  in  coming  out  of  trance.  In  his  typewritten  records
of  sittings  he  always  heads  his  account  of  the  waking-
stage  with  the  words :  "  Mrs.  Piper's  subliminal  speaks,"
or  some  similar  phrase  ;  and  the  waking-stage  came  to  be
called  by  him  and  other  sitters  "  the  subliminal."

I  think  it  is  possible  that  Hodgson  would  himself  have
admitted  that  he  used  the  term  "  subliminal,"  both  in  the
passage  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  just  referred  to,  and
in  his  records,  a  little  loosely.1  For  though  the  dream
consciousness  of  all  of  us,  and  Mrs.  Piper's  waking-stage
consciousness — which,  as  I  remarked  in  the  introductory
chapter  (p.  27)  have  obviously  many  points  of  resemblance
— may,  as  compared  with  the  normal  waking  consciousness,
be  more  open  to  influence  from  the  subconscious,  and
have  more  access  to  subliminal  memories,  the  differences

1  He  says,  in  introducing  his  description (Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.

397)  :  "I  shall  use  terms  as  far  as  possible  which  are  familiar  to  the
readers  of  our  Proceedings,  even  although  they  may  not  be  strictly
accurate  in  their  application."  A  friend  who  frequently  discussed  the
phenomena  with  Hodgson  tells  me  that  he  doubts  whether  by  '  sub-
liminal '  he  meant  to  imply  more  than  '  not  included  in  the  memory  of
the  normal  consciousness  '  but  I  think  the  description  I  have  tried  to
summarize  above  is  difficult  to  reconcile  with  this  as  the  whole  meaning
of  the  word.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  231

more  constantly  in  evidence  are  of  the  nature  of  limita-
tion rather  than  extension.  The  confusion,  incoherence,
and  frequent  absurdity  arise  largely  from  the  absence  of
perception  of  the  actual  surroundings,  from  unstable  and
rapidly  shifting  memory,  and  from  partial  abeyance  of
the  critical  faculty — the  faculty  of  judgment.  These  are
hardly  the  results  one  would  expect  from  the  combined
operation  of  consciousnesses  aware  between  them  of  two
worlds.

When  two  more  or  less  independent  consciousnesses  are
at  work,  as  in  automatic  writing,  one  must  be  subliminal
to  the  other  if  both  belong  to  the  same  individual.  But
in  dreams  it  is  difficult  to  say  what  is  subliminal  and  what
is  not.  At  any  rate,  I  prefer  to  avoid  difficult  questions
about  the  subliminal  consciousness  and  to  put  the  question
to  be  determined  in  the  form  :  "  Does  the  intelligence  which
speaks  in  the  waking-stage  conceive  itself  as  being  Mrs.
Piper  ?  "  This  question,  I  take  it  from  Hodgson's  use  of
the  word  subliminal,  he  would  have  answered  in  the  affirma-
tive.1 In  the  later  part  of  the  process  of  waking — when  the
experiences  of  the  earlier  part  are  being  described — there
is,  of  course,  no  doubt.  It  is  Mrs.  Piper  herself  who  de-
scribes them.  And  whenever  these  experiences  take  the
form  of  vision,  it  is  Mrs.  Piper  herself  who  sees.  Again,
the  spoken  remarks  in  the  earlier  part  are  often  obviously
addressed  by  Mrs.  Piper  to  a  spirit  or  to  an  impersonal
auditor,  or  occasionally  to  the  sitter.2  Thus  we  sometimes
get  Mrs.  Piper's  side  only  of  a  conversation  with  spirits.
For  example,  on  February  12,  1897,  the  record  of  the
waking-stage  begins  :

I  will  be  good. I  will  be  good. I'll  do  the  best  I  can.

I  do  try. Yes,  I  do. Yes  I  do. Oh  yes  I  do. Yes  I

will. Yes,  and  in  this  world  too.

1 1  think,  in  fact,  that  what  he  means  when  in  his  records  he  describes
the  waking-stage  as  "  Mrs.  Piper's  subliminal  speaking  "  is  simply  that  the
speaking  intelligence  does  not  conceive  itself  as  an  independent  spirit,  as
it  does  in  the  trance  proper,  but  that  at  the  same  time  it  is  not  the  normal
waking  Mrs.  Piper.

2  Sometimes  the  sitter,  though  realised  as  an  individual,  is  not  recog-
nised. See  e.g.  p.  247  (April  16,  1897),  and  Appendix,  March  29,  1897,
p.  559  ;  May  22,  1900,  p.  572  ;  March  26,  1902,  p.  585  ;  March  1,  1905,  p.  594.


232


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Which  sentences  are  followed  by  a  remark  showing  that  she
has  conceived  herself  as  conversing  with  Imperator.  (For  full
record  see  Appendix,  p.  553.)  Or,  again,  on  March  23,  1897,
the  record  begins  with  one  side  of  a  conversation  which
Mrs.  Piper  appears  to  be  holding  with  Mrs.  Dow  during
a  sort  of  morning  call  in  the  other  world — Mrs.  Dow 1
having  been  one  of  the  communicators  during  the  trance  :

Who  told  you  that  ?  .  .  .  Yes,  she  has.  She  has  grown.
She's  quite  a  large  girl.1  Whose  boy  is  it  %  He  came  here
first,  did  he  ?  ...  Oh  I  see.  He's  a  very  good  man,
don't  you  think.  That's  Rector.  Well,  I  think  I  could
stay  with  you,  Mrs.  Dow,  but  I'm  going  back.2

Other  instances  in  which  Mrs.  Piper's  side  only  of  a
conversation  is  uttered  aloud  will  be  found  in  the
Appendix.3

As  an  example  of  Mrs.  Piper  herself  being  the  sole
speaker,  but  describing  what  she  sees  or  hears  to  an
earthly  auditor  apparently  without  consciousness  of  whom
she  is  describing  it  to,  the  waking-stages  of  February  23,
1897,  and  May  22,  1900,  may  be  referred  to  (see  Appendix,
pp.  553,  572).  Sometimes  in  the  first  part  of  the  waking-
stage  Mrs.  Piper  is  obviously  the  sole  speaker  whose  remarks
are  given,  but  she  addresses  some  of  her  remarks  to  the
spirits  and  some  to  the  earthly  auditor.  For  instance,  on
March  27,  1897  (see  Appendix,  p.  559),  she  begins  by  de-
scribing what  she  sees,  and  when  she  comes  to  the  words
"  Would  you  please  let  me  go  sir  "  is  apparently  addressing
Imperator.

In  most  waking-stages — even  the  early  parts  of  them —
at  least  some  of  the  remarks  are  obviously  the  remarks  of
Mrs.  Piper  in  propria  persona.  But  there  are  a  certain
number  of  cases  where  the  remarks  of  spirits  to  Mrs.
Piper  are  given  in  the  first  person,  unaccompanied  by  any
remarks  of  Mrs.  Piper's  own — where  we  have,  in  fact,  the

1  See  above,  p.  219. The  girl  who  has  grown  is  doubtless  Ruthie  Thaw.

s  The  passage  quoted  on  p.  206  above  about  Mrs.  Piper's  dislike  of  coming
back,  etc.,  follows  immediately  here  in  the  record.

3  See  March  24,  1897; April  15,  1897; May  11,  1897.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  233

spirit's  side  of  the  conversation  but  not  Mrs.  Piper's.  For
instance,  on  April  8,  1897,  the  record  begins  :

Come  here  spirit  and  answer  me  [?]

I  am  the  messenger  of  God,  the  Life,  the  Light.  I  will
guard  thee  well.

Go  spirit,  take  up  thy  body.

Say  to  him  these  are  the  paths  of  light  and  truth,  and
may  God  be  merciful  to  you.
[Almost  normal.]

Mr.  Hodgson,  I  saw  that  gentleman  with  the  cross
again  {Imperator}  and  he  gets  so  small,1  and  when  I  get
into  this  room  again,  oh  I  feel  so  horrible  ...***
They're  pouring  .  .  .

(R.  H. Heard  the  snap  yet  ?)

Oh  I  just  heard  it.  I  felt  as  though  they  were  pouring
something  over  me.2

Are  we  in  cases  like  this  also  to  suppose  Mrs.  Piper  to
regard  herself  as  speaking,  repeating  the  remarks  of
spirits  ?  Hodgson  apparently  did  so,  and  I  believe  that
in  most  cases  this  interpretation  is  right.  The  reasons  for
thinking  so  are  that  the  voice,  when  more  than  a  whisper,
is  like  Mrs.  Piper's  when  she  is  undoubtedly  speaking  for
herself  or  clearly  acting  as  intermediary  for  a  spirit,3  and
that  in  other  cases,  in  which  both  spirits  and  Mrs.  Piper
herself  speak,  the  fact  that  she  is  repeating  for  spirits  is
sometimes  made  clear,  the  manner  being  much  the  same
as  when  it  is  not  made  clear.4  There  are  many  instances
in  which  we  have  the  remarks  of  both  Mrs.  Piper  and  of
spirits,  where  the  question  whether  she  regards  herself  as
repeating  the  spirit's  remarks,  arises  just  as  it  does  in
cases  where  the remarks  are  all  those  of  spirits.5  And

1  Compare  Chapter  I.,  p.  25.

2  For  other  examples  see  Appendix,  March  8  and  12,  1897.

3  For  a  definite  example  of  this  see  Appendix,  May  26,  1898.

4  See,  for  example,  Appendix,  April  26,  1897.

5  See,  for  examples,  Appendix,  March  4,  13,  17,  22,  26,  29  and  April  1,
1897  ;  March  20,  1907  ;  also  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  302,  May  7,  1907  ;  Appendix,
May  13,  1908.  On  April  26,  1897,  and  March  31,  1897,  there  are  indica-
tions that  she  knows  she  is  repeating  for  spirits.


234


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


there  is  at  least  one  case  (June  10,  1897,  see  Appendix)
where  the  question  is  raised  by  a  conversation  that  occurs
between  Mrs.  Piper  and  a  spirit  hi  going  into  trance.

There  is  one  phenomenon  which  occasionally  occurs
which  may  possibly  throw  some  light  on  this  question  of
repetition  for  spirits  in  the  first  person — namely,  the
repetition  by  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  waking-stage  of  the
sitter's  remarks — what  Haidenhain  and  Charcot,  when  they
observed  it  in  hypnotised  subjects,  called  echolalia.  Accord-
ing to  that  school  of  hypnotism,  the  repetition  was  due
to  a  mechanical  reflex — to  action  of  the  nerves  without
volition.  The  more  modern  view  is,  I  believe,  that  it  is
the  result  of  volition  and  due  to  mental  suggestion  of  some
sort  ;  the  hypnotised  person  repeats  parrot-like  because
for  some  reason  or  other  he  thinks  that  is  what  he  is  intended
to  do.1  This  kind  of  mimicry  is  recorded  at  least  twice  by
Hodgson,  on  June  20,  1899,  and  March  10,  1902,  and
once  by  Dr.  Stanley  Hall  in  the  spring  of  1909.  The
following  are  Hodgson's  records  :

(June  20,  1899.)

Present,  R.  B.  J.  and  R.  H.

[inarticulate]. God  is  spirit  [?]

There's that same one. There's the same one  .  .  .
before

Oh  I  don't  know. I  won't  ache.

Who's  *  *  *  [inarticulate] There  he  is. I want  to  go
out. That's  that  other  one.
(R.  H. Hallo)  Hallo
(R.  H. Mrs.  Piper) Mrs.  Piper
(R.  H. Are  you  all  right  ?) Are  you  all  right.

(March  10,  1902.)

Present,  Mrs.  B.  and  R.  H.

"  That's  Katie  .  .  .  That's  Katie  .  .  .  That's  Katie."  (R.  H.
What  Katie  ?)  I  don't  know  [R.  H.  says  :  "  Hello  !  "  "  Good
morning." "  All  right." "  It's  a  fine  day." "  Alta  quite

1  Mrs.  Piper  similarly  automatically  imitated  speech  and  gesture  when
put  into  semi-hypnosis  by  William  James  (see  Appendix  to  Chapter  I.,  p.  334).


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance  Phenomena.  235


well  ?  "  and  several  other  analogous  phrases  to  stimulate
the  return  of  Mrs.  P.'s  ordinary  consciousness  ;  she  repeats
automatically  after  me  the  words  I  say.  Finally  she
becomes  normal,  and  to  my  query  "  all  right  ?  "  replies
"Yes,  thank  you."]

Dr.  Hall's  record  I  give  in  Appendix,  p.  612.  It  will
be  seen  that  some  of  the  remarks  repeated  after  him  were
rather  longer  than  Hodgson's,  also  that  the  mimicry
occurs  in  a  longer  waking-stage,  which  continues  after  it
for  some  little  time  before  complete  normal  consciousness
is  recovered.

As  Mrs.  Piper  clearly  has  in  the  waking-stage  vivid
auditory  hallucinations,  as  well  as  those  of  sight  and  smell,
it  seems  just  possible  that  she  may  sometimes  mimic  her
own  hallucinations,  as  in  the  instances  just  quoted  she
mimicked  Hodgson.  Against  this,  however,  it  must  be
observed  that  the  instances  we  have  of  repetition  after
the  sitter  occur  in  a  later  part  of  the  waking-stage — a
part  more  near  to  normal  awakeness  than  the  instances  of
repetition  of  the  remarks  of  spirits.  And,  moreover,
repetition  for  spirits  is  certainly  in  many  cases  intelligent
and  deliberate,  as,  e.g.  on  March  16,  1908  (see  Proceedings,
Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  67),  where,  in  the  midst  of  allusions  to
the  Mneid,  she  says  to  the  sitter :  "  Don't  you  hear  me  ?
Mr.  Myers  is  whispering  in  one  ear  and  I  am  trying  to
get  it  out  at  the  other."

On  the  whole,  as  I  have  said,  I  have  little  doubt  that  the
speaking  intelligence  of  the  waking-stage  not  only  generally
but  practically  always  regards  itself  as  Mrs.  Piper —
sometimes  speaking  for  herself  and  sometimes  repeating
what  she  hears  spirits  say.  There  are,  it  is  true,  certain
extreme  and  comparatively  rare  cases  difficult  to  reconcile
with  this  view.  These,  or  some  of  them,  may  perhaps,
however,  represent  lapses  into  something  resembling  the
trance  proper  after  the  marked  break  between  trance
and  waking-stage.  One  of  these  peculiar  cases  occurred
on  January  16,  1907  ;  it  is  quoted  in  full  in  the  Appendix.
On  this  occasion  the  waking-stage  began  with  the  clear
utterance  in  the  first  person,  and  in  a  deep  voice  like  a
man's,  of  a  communication  substantially  and  unmistakeably


236


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


the  same  as  one  which  Rector  had  given  in  the  third
person  during  the  trance  proper  as  a  message  from  Mr.
Joseph  Marble.  It  is  very  difficult  to  distinguish  this  from
a  brief  voice  communication  with  Mr.  Marble  as  control.

The  case  just  referred  to  is,  I  think,  the  only  one  the
record  of  which  mentions  a  change  of  voice  in  the  waking-
stage,1  but  there  are  others  where  a  spirit  seems  to  con-
verse with  the  sitter  in  the  waking-stage  without  any
acknowledged  intervention  of  Mrs.  Piper.  Something  of
this  kind  seems  to  have  happened  on  April  8,  and  on
October  21,  1901  (see  Appendix,  pp.  577,  582),  when
there  was  a  short  conversation  between  MyersP  and
Hodgson.  Again,  on  April  2,  1902  (see  Appendix,  p.
585)  Bennie  Junot  seems  to  speak  himself  to  Hodgson  in
the  waking-stage,  and  gives  veridical  information — or,  at
any  rate,  information  which  leads  to  the  recovery  of  the
lost  dog  Rounder.2  It  happened  on  April  27,  1908,
when  Myers  is  represented  as  speaking,  and  as  answering
directly  when  Mr.  Dorr  asks  a  question.  The  following
is  an  extract  from  Mr.  Dorr's  record  of  this  waking-stage  :

Have  no  doubts, no  fears  ;  I  am  Frederic  Myers  that
once lived among you, among men  *  *  *  I said  the
Doctor  would  recover  from  his  rheumatism.
(G.  B.  D.  Who  is  that  ?)

Dr.  Verrall. Do  you  know  him  \ He  is  a  friend  of  mine.

It  apparently  happened  again  on  May  12  and  13,  1908
(see  Appendix,  pp.  609,  610,  for  the  full  account).  On  the
latter  date  Mr.  Dorr,  who  was  again  the  sitter  and  recorder,
writes  about  the  waking-stage  :

R.  H.  appears,  talking  in  the  first  person  to  G.  B.  D.

1  We  have  possibly  another  example  in  the  waking-stage  of  February
26,  1907  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  95).  Immediately  after  vain
attempts  by  Mrs.  Piper  to  say  the  word  "  laurel  "  distinctly,  the  words

aphasia,  aphasia  "  were  uttered.  Mr.  Piddington,  who  was  the  sitter
and  recorder,  recalls  these  words  as  having  been  said  in  a  hurried  whisper
coming  out  in  a  way  very  different  from  that  in  which  Mrs.  Piper's  utter-
ances in  the  waking-stage  usually  do.  It  gave  him  the  feeling  of  having
caught  a  remark  by  MyersP  or  G.  P...  which  the  speaker  had  not  meant
him  to  overhear.

2  For  the  details  of  this  case  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  515-518.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  237


in  a  direct  way  unusual  in  the  subliminal  of  these  sittings.
What  he  talks  about,  however,  is  merely  the  Latin  verses
which  he  is  endeavouring  to  translate,  attempts  at  transla-
tion and  questions  about  the  words  he  has  misunderstood.

In  the  following  two  waking-stages,  reported  by  Miss
Theodate  Pope,  we  again  have  Hodgson  seeming  to  con-
verse directly  with  the  sitter  and  in  the  first  person,
but  nevertheless  Mrs.  Piper's  remarks  in  propria  persona
seem  to  show  that  she  regarded  herself  as  present
throughout.

{Dec.  21,  1908.  Waking-stage.)

{HodgsonP,  Myersp,  and  others  had  communicated  during  the
sitting.  There  had  been  a  good  deal  said  about  the
desirability  of  writing  in  Greek,  Latin  and  Italian  for
test  purposes.  Shortly  before  the  end  of  the  trance
proper,  Miss  Pope  had  asked  HodgsonP  to  give  her  some
"  Greek  words  in  the  subliminal  "  and  he  had  promised  to
try.  The  remarks  in  square  brackets  are  Miss  Pope's
notes. }

Italian  Italian

Signa tak et  Waterman  oramen  Alphus  U.T.A.  dek

Groda,
in  God  we  trust.
Laudig.

Hello  George,  I  meant  to  put  Boodle  on  the  end  of
those  nonsense 1 — I  am  Richard  Hodgson,  speak  to
me.

(T.  P. You  said  Boodle.)

I  want  one  more  word,  Poodle.

How  are  you  first  rate  ?  You  look  charming.  I  want
to  see  you  again.

Scipio  palenten  viren
(T.  P.  Translate)

T  herist  (?)  go  now.
(T.  P.  Translate)

1  "  Those  nonsense  "  refers  no  doubt  to  a  string  of  nonsense  words,
"  Spoodle,  goodie,  eoodle,  doodle,"  given  by  HodgsonP  during  the  sitting
as  a  cross-correspondence  message.


238


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


That  is  it  I  say  I  must  go,  I  say  to  you  good  morn-
ing arsano  logano  you  see  I  know.

Oh  [looking  up  delightedly]  it's  the  minister.  Good-
bye, we're  up  the  mountain  climbing,  climbing.

I  don't  like  it  here.

Oh  dear,  oh  dear,  what  is  it,  what  is  it  ?  Oh  [almost
crying]

Oh  [seeing  T.  P.]  you,  you,  you  [distressed]
Begone  [R.  H.  to  light.] [Insane  look  in  eyes]
Miss  Pope

Where  did  Mr.  Myers  go  ?  N.  D.'s  father  with  a  book
all  in  the  light  and  in  a  row.  Mr.  Hodgson  pushed
N.  D.  almost  into  my  face  and  said  go  up  and
have  a  look  at  her  and  Mr.  Hodgson  wanted  Mr.
D.  to  read  something  out  of  the  book  and  Mr.
Myers  was  saying  such  queer  talk.

[Notices  T.  P.  writing]  Oh  I  forgot  I  must  not  talk.

The  changes  here  are  decidedly  confusing.  Judging  from
what  Mrs.  Piper  says  in  the  last  paragraph,  some  of  the
absurd  attempts  at  a  foreign  language  are  to  be  attributed
to  a  Myers  personality.  Then  with  the  words  "  Hello
George,"  a  Hodgson  personality  comes  in.  "  George "
is  probably  Mr.  Dorr,  and,  if  so,  there  is  an  illusion  as  to
who  the  sitter  is,  such  as  not  infrequently  occurs  in  the
waking-stages  ;  only  it  is  generally  Mrs.  Piper  in  propria
persona  who  addresses  Mr.  Dorr  as  Hodgson  e.g.  on  Dec.  8,
1902  (see  above,  p.  228),  or  as  Mr.  Piddington  in  1908.1
The  remarks  about  Boodle,  etc.,  show  a  knowledge  of  what
has  occurred  during  the  sitting.  Yet,  after  Miss  Pope  has
spoken  and  the  Hodgson  personality  apparently  recognises
her  identity,  he  greets  her  as  though  they  had  not  met  for
some  time,  although  just  before  the  trance  proper  ended
they  had  been  talking  like  old  friends.  Mrs.  Piper  clearly
comes  in  herself  with  the  first  "  Oh."  The  minister  is  Im-
perator  or  Rector.  Who  it  is  that  says  "  We're  up  the
mountain,  etc.,"  is  not  clear. The  same  line  is  quoted  by

1  In  all  cases,  probably  owing  to  habit  acquired  in  recent  sittings  or  to
association  of  ideas.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  239


the  Hodgson  control  in  the  course  of  the  sitting  on  the
following  day  as  a  message  given  to  Mrs.  Holland.

(Dec.  22,  1908.  Waking-stage.)

The  'cusative  went  into  ablative,  plural
He  means  to
Sailing,  sailing
Thanatopsis

I [I  could  not  catch  some  words  that  seemed  to  be  in
Greek]

Musarum  ?

They  said  the  soldiers  of  the  Trojan  war —

You  don't  collect  my  passages,  you  only  get  the  frag-
ments M  (?)

I  must  do  better  so  they  will  make  sense

Give  me  time
(T.  P. Send  her  back  quickly)

I  will,  I  will,  thank  you.

Begone.  Scampe,  scampo.

Oh  you  are  Mr.  Hodgson,  aren't  you  funny.

[She  stretched  her  hand  out  and  shook  it  as  if  in  some
one's  face]

Begone

Yes  I  am  going
Good  bye

[She  has  the  insane  look.]
On  the  cord

I  forgot  you  were  here  I almost  had  a  fall  I  came
sliding  in  on  a  cord. My  head  snapped.

Here,  again,  there  are  changes  in  the  personage  apparently
speaking.  The  "  I  will,  etc.,"  seems  to  be  a  reply  by
Hodgson  to  Miss  Pope,  and  the  next  words  to  be  addressed
by  him  to  Mrs.  Piper,  and  then  comes  a  conversation
between  her  and  him.

Direct  speaking  by  Hodgsonp  seems  to  have  occurred  again
in  the  waking-stage  of  Mrs.  Piper'sTlast  sitting — July  31,
1911 — recorded  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,rand  which  is  quoted
in  the  Appendix  to  Chapter  III.  \  (p.  516).  And  here
also  Mrs. Piper  would  ajDpear  to  have  regarded  herself


240


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


as  present  if  we  attribute  the  words  "  There's  Mabel "
and  "  I  got  that  through  "  to  her,  as  I  think  we  should.
The  waking-stage  record  begins  :

[She  waved  her  hand  and  said  : — ]
There's  Mabel.

I  wanted  to  speak  but  I  couldn't.  God  bless  you
you  dear  old  thing.  I  love  you  always  always.  We
shall  meet  again. By  bye.

I  brought  her  Lodge  I  want  you  to  know  who  she
is. I'm  Dick

[O.  J.  L.  whispered  into  Mrs.  Piper's  ear,  "  Yes,  J  know,  Dick
Hodgson,  and  you  brought  Mabel."  *  *  *]
[Satisfied  sigh.] I  got  that  through.  Good-bye.

It  is  clear  in  all  these  instances  that  the  sitter  had
the  impression  of  conversation  with  a  control  or  com-
municator other  than  Mrs.  Piper,  like  that  in  a  voice
sitting,  and  it  seems  probable  that  a  tendency  to  some
sort  of  assimilation  between  the  method  in  trance  proper
and  in  waking-stage  was  being  developed  in  the  later
years  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance.  Perhaps  the  remark  in  the
waking-stage  of  May  12,  1908,  "  I'm  half  myself  and  half
somebody  else  "  (see  Appendix,  p.  609),  points  the  same  way.

In  connexion  with  these  cases,  where  spirits  seem  to  be
conceived  as  conversing  directly  with  the  sitters,  we  may
notice  some,  where  the  beginning  of  the  waking-stage  carries
on,  without  apparent  recognition  of  any  interruption,  the
last  part  of  the  trance — notwithstanding  the  interval  of  deep
sleep  that  has  intervened.  This  happened,  for  instance,  on
June  3,  1898  (see  Appendix,  p.  565),  when  the  trance  having
ended  before  Imperator  could  write  his  accustomed  prayer,
it  came  early  in  the  waking-stage.

Probably  a  similar  making  up  in  the  waking-stage  for  an
omission  in  the  trance  proper  is  illustrated  at  the  sitting  of
July  2,  1902  (see  Appendix,  p.  587),  when,  as  it  was  the  last
sitting  before  prolonged  summer  holidays,  various  frequent
communicators  send  farewell  messages  of  affection  to  their
friends.  One  would  have  expected  this  to  be  done  in  the
trance  proper,  as  happened  e.g.  at  the  corresponding  sitting
in  1903. But  most  of  the  trance  communication  was  taken


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  241


up  by  discussion  and  what  one  may  call  reconciliation  between
Hodgson  and  Rector,  who  had  had  one  of  their  not  very
infrequent  misunderstandings  about  the  management  of  the
sittings,  and  there  was  apparently  little  time  for  anything
else.  Imperator  and  Rector  take  their  leave,  and  then,
when  the  waking-stage  begins,  come  the  omitted  greetings
from  communicators  to  their  friends.

Clear  continuity  occurs  on  March  13,  1901,  when  Hodgson's
record  describes  the  end  of  the  trance  and  beginning  of  the
waking-stage  as  follows  :

(March  13,  1901.)

{Rector  and  Imperator  take  leave.  Hodgson  writes  :}  [I  was
about  to  take  the  pencil  out  of  fingers  when  the  hand
bent  somewhat  spasmodically  holding  pencil  tight,  and
wrote  in  strong  characters,  contrasting  with  the  immediately
previous  faint  writing]  Remember  *  *  *  [Pass-sentence]
Hyslop  1

{The  waking-stage  begins  : — }
That's  my  test  to  him. I  am  not  I  unless  I  give  it.
[1  make  a  sound  of  interrogation,  not  being  quite  sure
of  all  the  words.]

I  am  not  I  unless  I  give  it.

[The  foregoing  apparently  from  Professor  Hyslop's
father.]

I  will.  Tell  Hodgson  there's  more  truth  than  poetry  in  it.
There's  Fred  and  Doctor  Myers.  All  transparent.  That's
pretty,

Etc.

On  March  20,  1901,  again,  at  the  end  of  the  sitting
Hodgson  was  reading  to  Rector  a  letter  from  a  previous
sitter  to  a  communicator,  but  had  to  stop  half-way
through  because  it  was  time  for  the  sitting  to  end.  The
waking-stage  begins  :

That  so  !  All  I  could  do  to  stay  and  hear  it.  Better  so.
Farewell.

1  Presumably  Professor  Hyslop's  father.  Professor  Hyslop,  in  con-
nection with  a  medium  he  was  experimenting  with,  had  been  spoken  of
during  the  sitting.

a


242


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


This  kind  of  continuity  is  occasionally  strikingly  shown
in  going  into  trance.  One  instance  of  it  is  given  in  the
Appendix  to  Chapter  III.,  p.  448,  the  case  where  Proctor,
who  on  July  3,  1895,  made  his  first  and  only  appearance
in  the  trance  proper,  is  also  introduced  as  making  remarks
in  the  preceding  going-into-trance-stage.

On  March  15,  1897  (see  Appendix,  p.  556),  the  exact  words
said  by  Mrs.  Piper  going  into  trance,  perhaps  repeating  after
Imperator,  are  said  by  Imperator  to  Hodgson  as  soon  as
the  usual  greetings  have  been  exchanged.

In  the  following  case,  recorded  by  Hodgson,  Imperator
seems  to  play  successive  parts  of  the  same  drama  in  the
stage  of  going  into  trance,  in  a  somewhat  ambiguous  early
part  of  the  trance  before  the  writing  begins,  and  in  some
of  the  first  written  sentences :

(March  29,  1897.)

[After  a  short  time  she  breathes  heavily,  and  this  is
followed  by  repetition  in  low  voice  of  what  seems  to  be
a  prayer  which  she  is  repeating  after  some  one.  Following
this  is  heavy  breathing  again.  Entranced  completely.
Attempt  to  speak.  I  finally  caught  what  sounded  like
"  Imperator  Servus  Dei,"  but  couldn't  hear  anything  else.
The  hand  made  sign  of  a  cross  and  touched  the  (Mrs.  P.'s)
forehead  and  apparently  assented  when  I  repeated  "  Imper-
ator Servus  Dei."  Soon  the  attempts  at  speech  ceased,
and  the  hand  gave  indications  of  being  "  more  seized."]

[Imperator  writes]
Imp. -|-  Hail  R.  H.  Hail,  Imperator.

Imp.  Friend,  we  greet  thee  Should  we  not  inspire  the  spirit
of  this  body  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  we  should  at  times
be  subjected  to  other  spirits  not  preferable  [?]  .  .  .
from  other  spheres.  We  know  of  higher  and  better
spirits  whom  we  prefer  to  bring.  We  have  faith  that
we  shall  be  all  powerful.

A  few  weeks  earlier,  on  March  5,  1897,  something  of  the
same  kind  happened  with  George  Eliot  as  control  (see
Appendix  to  Chapter  III.,  p.  491).  Mrs.  Piper  going  into
trance  said,  "  I'll  never  be  able  to  remember  that,"  and


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  243

appeared  to  attempt  to  recite  some  poetry.  Then  George
Eliot  begins  the  trance  by  announcing  herself  and  writing
fragments  of  verse  in  an  almost  illegible  hand,  after
which  she  greets  Hodgson  and  explains  that  she  was
reciting  poetry  to  a  lady  whom  she  saw  passing  over  the
boundary  line.  In  both  these  last- mentioned  cases,  the
going-into-trance  drama  is  continued  into  or  repeated  in
the  beginning  of  the  trance  proper,  which  beginning  is
also  more  inchoate  than  is  usual.

But  the  most  curious  case  of  the  trance  following  up
the  indications  of  the  going-into-trance-stage  occurred  on
April  20,  1897  (see  Appendix,  p.  562).  Mrs.  Piper  going
into  trance  had  a  vision  apparently  of  Dr.  Newbold.
She  said,  "  I  think  that  must  be  Dr.  Newbold,  and  he's  a
bad  cold  too."  The  first  control  in  the  trance  is  G.  P.,  who,
immediately  after  greetings  to  Hodgson,  says,  "  Just  left
Newbold,  saw  him  in  chair  reading,  not  feeling  any  too
well  physically  either."  What  are  we  to  suppose  happened
in  this  case  ?  Did  G.  P.  show  Mrs.  Piper  a  vision  of  Pro-
fessor Newbold,  or  did  he  take  her  there  with  him  ?  Or
did  she  have  a  telepathic  impression  from  G.  P.  ?  Or
were  the  two  intelligences,  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  going-into-
trance-stage  and  the  G.  P.  control,  in  effect  the  same,  only
in  a  state  of,  so  to  speak,  broken  up  consciousness  with
discontinuity  of  memory  ?  Mrs.  Piper  not  infrequently
appeared  to  see  spirits  as  she  was  going  into  trance,  and
the  spirits  she  saw  were  often  those  who  controlled  or
communicated  in  the  ensuing  trance,  especially  those  who
did  so  immediately  the  trance  began.  But  the  vision  of
April  20,  1897,  just  described  was  different.  What  she
saw  was  not  a  spirit,  but  a  living  person,  and  the  same  living
person  that  the  spirit  who  immediately  afterwards  con-
trolled said  he  had  been  seeing.1

Study  of  the  connexions  between  the  ideas  of  the  trance
proper  and  of  the  waking-stage  is  of  the  greatest  importance
as  bearing  on  the  nature  and  relations  of  the  consciousnesses
involved.  In  the  cases  just  described,  the  connexion  con-
sists in  a  continuation  in  one  state  of  what  has  been  begun

1  There  is  no  indication  that  she  placed  this  living  person  in  the  spirit
world  (see  above,  p.  227).


244


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


in  another,  or  of  the  making  good  in  the  waking-stage  of  an
omission  in  the  preceding  trance  communication.  But  there
is  much  other  evidence  of  connexion — indeed,  there  is  some
in  almost  every  waking-stage.  As  a  rule,  there  is  no
evidence  that  any  connexion  is  recognised  by  the  intelli-
gences concerned,  no  avowal  of  knowledge  in  the  waking-
stage  of  what  has  occurred  in  the  trance  or  vice  versa.
The  cases  where  such  recognition  is  affirmed  are,  of
course,  very  important,  but  it  will  be  convenient  to
reserve  them  for  discussion  in  connexion  with  a  fuller
discussion  of  the  memory  relations  between  Mrs.  Piper's
various  states  in  Chapter  VII.

Where  the  connexion  between  the  ideas  of  the  two  states
is  not  explicitly  recognised  in  either,  the  commonest  case
is  simply  the  appearance  of  the  same  personages  in  both.
It  happens  in  most  waking-stages  that  at  least  some  of
the  personages  Mrs.  Piper  speaks  of  seeing  or  hearing
have  figured  as  controls  or  communicators  in  the  preceding
trance  proper,  and  that  this  presence  in  both  states  is
not  accidental  is  confirmed — if  confirmation  be  needed — by
finding  that  on  one  occasion  at  least  the  absence  of
Imperator  is  noted  in  both.  On  February  27,  1897,  he
did  not  appear  at  all  in  the  trance  proper,  and  Stainton
Moses  who  controlled  during  the  last  part  of  this  said  he
was  sent  in  his  place,  and  that  he  (Imperator)  had  £:  been
called  in  another  direction."  Accordingly  Mrs.  Piper
very  properly  sees  nothing  of  him  during  the  waking-
stage,  and  remarks  towards  the  end  of  it,  "I  didn't  see
the  man  with  the  gown  on,"  i.e.  Imperator.

The  identity  of  personages  in  trance  and  waking-stage  is
by  no  means  complete.  All  the  trance  personages  do  not
necessarily  appear  in  the  waking-stage,  and,  on  the  other
hand,  characters  sometimes  appear  in  the  waking-stage  who
have  no  connexion  with  the  trance  proper  that  immediately
preceded  it.  I  think,  when  this  is  so,  they  have  always
appeared  in  some  earlier  trance,  at  least  I  do  not  know  of
any  clear  case  of  a  communicator  appearing  for  the  first
time  in  a  waking-stage.  This  may,  however,  be  an
accident,  for  ideas  other  than  the  recognition  of  a  person
as  present,  do  sometimes  appear  for  the  first  time  in  a


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs,  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  245


waking- stage.  The  reference  to  Ajax  in  the  waking-stage
of  October  28,  1896  (see  Appendix,  p.  456),  is  perhaps  an
instance,  as  I  know  of  no  previous  reference  to  Ajax.  The
statement  by  Bennie  Junot  in  the  waking-stage  on  April  2,  1902,
that  "  John  Welsh  has  Rounder  "  (see  p.  236,  and  Appendix,
p.  585)  is  certainly  a  case  in  point,  and  instances  that
occurred  in  the  English  sittings  of  1906-7  and  Mr.  Dorr's
sittings  of  1908  have  been  published  in  Proceedings,  Vols.
XXII.  and  XXIV.  The  Rufus  Miller  case  (December,  1905)
presents  the  same  feature — the  Christian  name  coming  out
first  in  the  waking-stage.  It  is  an  interesting  case,  because
the  erroneous  idea  that  Rufus  Miller  was  still  alive  is  com-
mon to  two  trance  communications  and  an  intervening
waking-stage — not  the  waking-stage  of  either  trance  ;  but
there  is  no  knowledge  explicitly  shown  of  the  waking-stage
in  the  trances  or  vice  versa,  though  the  second  trance  com-
munication refers  to  the  first  across  the  ignored  waking-
stage.  A  note  on  the  case,  with  quotation  of  the  records,
will  be  found  in  the  Appendix,  pp.  598-601.

A  marked  and  almost  verbally  exact  correspondence  of
ideas  without  acknowledgment  is  shown  in  the  trance  and
waking-stage  of  January  16,  1907  (Joseph  Marble),  already
referred  to  above  in  another  connexion  (pp.  235-236,  and
quoted  in  the  Appendix,  p.  602).  Another  good  instance
occurred  on  December  12,  1896.  Doctor,  who  at  this  time
suggested  that  his  name  was  Lydgate,1  controlling,  said  at
the  close  of  the  trance  proper  :  "  Well  we  draw  our  forces
from  our  own  world."  In  the  waking-stage  Mrs.  Piper
said :  "  Doctor  Lindrum  (?)  [stumbling  over  name]  says
draw  forces  from  our  world."  A  case  occurred  again  on
January  28,  1902,  in  connexion  with  the  sphere-spear  cross-
correspondence  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.,  pp.  213-216).
The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  trance  proper — sitter
and  recorder  Hodgson.  MyersP  is  communicating  through
Rector  :

R.  H. Can you try and make Helen see you holding  a

1  See  December  8,  1896,  Appendix,  p.  552.  Rector,  however,  aJso
claimed  the  name  Lydgate  apparently  (see  November  14,  1896,  Appendix
to  Chapter  III.,  p.  471).  On  that  day  Doctor  represented  himself  to  be
Homer.


246


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


spear  in  your  hand  ? Would  that  be  the  kind  of
experiment  you  think  would  be  suitable  ?
Yes  and  no why  a  sphere  I  prefer  some  symbolism

of  this  life  for  instance  a  cross  or  a  star.
Yes,  I  said  spear.
All  spear.  R.  H.  Yes.

Yes  significant  of  death  so-called  [I  was  not  thinking
of it in this way, was thinking of  Shake-speare]
All  right,  since  there  is  no  death  I'll  try  it.  My
interpreter  is  calling  me  to  go.
Yes,  all  right. Keep  trying  Helen  with  the  spear  for

a  week.
A  week,  all  right.

#  #  *  #

{This  extract  is  at  the  end  of  a  longish  conversation
with  Myersp  communicating  through  Rector,  which
formed  the  bulk  of  this  sitting.  The  waking-stage
record  is  as  follows  :}

Waking-Stage.
I  have  [had  ?]  it  sphere  [spear  ?]
I'm  Fred  Myers  *  *  *  [not  caught]
(R.  H. He  what  «)

I  saw  you  both  *  *  *  [not  caught]  over  there.  All
right.

Mr.  Myers  was  making  all  manner  of  fun  of  you.
Dr.  Myers  was  with  him.  Why  does  he  hold  him
by  the  shoulders  when  he  talks  ?  Why  does  Im-
perator  all  the  time  pray  ?

[Pause]

Oh  Mr.  Hodgson  I  forgot  you  were  here  .  .  .  nice
day  isn't  it  ?  1

An  interesting  case  of  another  kind,  exhibiting  general
correspondence  between  the  ideas  of  trance  and  waking-
stage occurred on April 16, 1897. During the  trance

1  For  other  examples  of  correspondence  of  ideas,  without  acknowledgment,
between  trance  proper  and  waking-stage,  see  below,  and  App.,  June  22,
1895,  March  26,  1897,  March  1,  1905  ;  App.  to  Ch.  V.,  Jan.  1,  1907,  p.  524,
and  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  27  (June  26,  1894),  and  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.
126,  150  (March  6,  1907),  p.  279  (April  29,  1907),  pp.  379,  382  (May  1,
1907),  p.  392  (May  7,  1907).


MyebSj,.

R.  H.

Myersp.

MyerSj,.

R.  H.
Myersp.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  247

proper  spirits  professed  to  be  flitting  to  and  fro  between
America  and  the  haunted  house  in  England  where  Myers
was  having  sittings  with  a  medium,  and  bringing  to
Hodgson  descriptions  of  what  was  going  on.  Hodgson
suggested  that  they  should  take  Mrs.  Piper's  spirit  there,
and  accordingly  they  professed  to  do  so,  and  described
her  being  seen  by  the  English  medium.  Of  this  visit  to
England  Mrs.  Piper  was  apparently  aware  in  the  waking-
stage,  which  is  recorded  by  Hodgson  as  follows  :

I  saw  every  one  of  them
(R.  H. Every  one  of  whom  ?)

I  saw  every  single  one  of  them.

I  saw  Myers  as  plain  as  day.
(R.  H. Did  he  see  you  ?)

Who's  that  speaking  to  me  ? Is  it  you  ?  .  .  .

A  lady  did.1 But  isn't  she  nervous,  terribly  nervous.

You  just  let  me  alone  now. I  can  remember  just
as  well  as  you  can.

I  don't  see  why  they  have  the  flowers  all  on  the
table  .  .  .

Oh — is  that  you  Mr.  Hodgson  ?
(R.  H.  Yes.)

I  don't  think  much  of  that  pot  of  flowers. It  doesn't
belong to that  world [?] I've  seen  much  more
beautiful  flowers  than  those.
(R.  H. Were  they  earthly  flowers  ?)

Yes. I  think  they  were.
(R.  H. Was  Myers  near  them  ?)

I  don't  remember. Yes. Myers  was  there. [?  Doubtful.
Low  murmur,  hard  to  catch]  2

We  should  here  have  very  interesting  evidence  tending
to  support  the  assertion  that  Mrs.  Piper's  spirit  is  removed
by  spirits  during  the  trance,  if  there  had  been  any  truth  in
her  account  of  what  she  saw.  As  it  is,  this  account  must
share  with  the  statements  in  the  trance  proper  Myers's

1  It  had  been  stated  in  the  trance  that  Myers's  medium  had  seen  Mrs.
Piper's  spirit.

2  A  vase  of  flowers  in  Myers's  own  room  had  been  casually  mentioned
in  the  trance,  but  not  in  connexion  with  Mrs.  Piper's  spirit.


248


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


condemnation  of  the  whole  series  of  descriptions  of  what
went  on  at  the  English  sittings  as  absolutely  without
truth.1  This  being  so,  who  was  the  dreamer  or  inventor
who  manufactured  these  stories  ?  If  it  was  not  some  ele-
ment of  Mrs.  Piper  herself  that  was  originally  responsible,
did  she  share  the  dream  telepathically  ?  Or  did  a  deceiving
spirit  persuade  her  that  she  had  been  at  the  English  sitting  ?
It  seems  easier  to  suppose  that  Mrs.  Piper  dreamt  through-
out— in  one  form  appropriate  to  the  occasion  in  the  trance,
and  in  another,  corresponding  to  some  extent  with  the  first
but  not  identical  with  it,  in  the  waking-stage.

Something  of  the  same  kind  happened  before  the
Imperator  regime  began,  in  connexion  with  the  search  for  the
lost  boy  in  Mexico  (see  waking-stages  of  November  16  2  and
18,  and  December  8,  1896,  in  the  Appendix,  pp.  551,  552).
There  had  been  no  profession  in  the  trance  proper  of  taking
Mrs.  Piper's  spirit  to  Mexico,  but  her  waking-stage  per-
sonality seems  to  have  conceived  itself  as  sharing  the
search  and  seeing  the  persons  and  buildings  which  had
been  mentioned  in  the  trance.  It  is  noticeable  that  on
December  8,  1896,  she  acts  in  the  waking-stage  as  though
being  shown  a  building — apparently  one  described  in  the
trance  proper  at  a  previous  sitting — then  and  there.  As
before  said  (p.  112),  there  is  no  reason  to  regard  any  of
this  Mexican  business  as  veridical.

Another  variety  of  connexion  was  shown  on  February  18,
1903  (see  Appendix,  p.  591),  when  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  waking-
stage  had  a  vision — the  first  for  many  years — of  Phinuit,
who  had  been  spoken  of  during  the  trance.  This  instance
differs  from  the  others  in  that  the  vision  of  Phinuit  seems
to  have  been  the  result  not  of  any  experience  of  the  control
or  communicator  during  the  sitting,  but  merely  of  its  being
mentioned  that  the  communicator  had  seen  him.

The  waking-stage  visions  of  personages  who  control  or
communicate  in  the  trance  are  often  very  vivid  and  definite.
For  instance,  visions  of  Phinuit,  Rector,  and  Imperator  are
described  in  a  way  that  shows  that  their  appearance  is

1  See  Appendix  to  Chapter  III.,  p.  507.

2  The  waking-stage  of  November  16  presents  the  curious  feature  of  Mrs.
Piper  being  very  much  out  of  breath  owing  to  imaginary  running.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance  Phenomena.  249

vividly  conceived.  A  description  of  Phinuit  on  October  12,
1896  (p.  551),  of  Imperator  and  Rector  on  June  29,  1898,
and  of  Rector  on  June  20,  1905  (p.  566),  will  be  found
in  the  Appendix.  As  regards  Rector  it  must  be  admitted
that  he  appears  to  have  shaved  hi  the  interval  between  the
two  descriptions  if  they  both  refer  to  him.

But  one  of  the  most  important  and  interesting  points
about  Mrs.  Piper's  waking-stage  is  that  the  visions  of
people  that  occurred  in  them  were  apparently  sometimes
veridical.  She  appeared  to  see  friends  of  sitters  as  the
latter  knew  them,  when  she  cannot  possibly  have  seen
them  in  life  herself.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  evidence
pointing  to  this.  Not  only  were  her  descriptions  of  their
friends — often  given  with  great  detail.1  and  sometimes
including  peculiarities  of  movement  and  gesture — generally
admitted  by  sitters  to  be  wholly  or  in  the  main  correct,2
but  she  has  on  several  occasions  picked  out  from  among
other  photographic  portraits  that  of  the  person  thus  seen.
I  have  quoted  above  her  recognition  of  the  photograph  of
G.  P.  (pp.  213-215).

We  have  another  case  among  Hodgson's  unpublished
records,  which  occurred  in  1900.  A  new  sitter  had  three
sittings  in  succession— June  11,  12,  and  13,  1900.  Her
deceased  husband  wrote  a  little  himself,  and  then  com-
municated through  G.  P.  and  Rector.  The  communications
were  confused  and  their  evidential  value  difficult  to
estimate,3  but  some  description  of  the  communicator  was
given  in  all  three  waking-stages,  and  Mrs.  Piper  picked
out  his  portrait  in  a  photographic  group  of  thirty-one  men
in  the  waking-stage  on  the  11th  and  in  another  group  of
seventeen  on  the  12th.  The  records  of  the  waking-stages
of  the  11th  and  12th  are  given  in  full  in  the  Appendix,

1  There  was  sometimes,  I  think,  a  little  feeling  about  for  details.  See
e.g.  the  remarks  about  moustache  and  blue  eyes  on  June  11,  1900,
Appendix,  p.  573.

2  In  this  power  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  waking-stage  resembled  Adele  Maginot
(see  above,  Chapter  III.,  p.  83).

3  The  communicator  could  not  remember  his  own  profession  or  the  name
by  which  he  called  his  wife,  and — what  is  worse — made  bad  shots  at  both  ;
and  yet  there  were  some  good  things  evidentially  in  the  course  of  these
and  later  sittings,  besides  the  recognition  of  the  portrait.


250


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


pp.  573-576.  The  mention  on  the  12th  that  the  com-
municator "  laughs  one-sided "  is  an  instance  of  correct
description  of  peculiarity  of  movement.  It  is  to  be
noticed  that  the  photographs  were  on  both  days  sub-
mitted to  Mrs.  Piper  before  she  had  completely  recovered
her  normal  consciousness,  and  that  on  the  second  day,
after  fixing  on  the  likeness,  she  seems  to  have  gone  back
again  into  a  somewhat  deeper  phase  of  the  waking-stage.
The  G.  P.  photograph  was  selected  by  Mrs.  Piper  after  the
waking-stage,  when  apparently  quite  normal  again.  And
so  it  was  in  the  Joseph  Marble  cases  (December,  1906,  and
May,  1907)  described  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  XXIII.,  pp.  275-278.  G.  P.  had,  however,  been  seen
in  the  waking-stage  and  the  fact  was  remembered,  and  in
the  second  Joseph  Marble  case  the  same  is  true.  The  first
Joseph  Marble  case  is  somewhat  different,  because  he  had
undertaken  in  the  trance  to  show  himself,  and  because,
notwithstanding  this,  there  is  no  indication  of  his  having
been  seen  that  day  in  the  waking-stage.  I  shall  return  to
this  case  in  Chapter  VII.  pp.  273-276.

During  Mrs.  Piper's  last  series  of  sittings  a  very  interesting
experiment  is  reported  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  which  throws
light  on  the  waking-stage  consciousness  and  memory,  or,
at  least,  suggests  possible  answers  to  questions.  At  a  sitting
on  December  2,  1910,  a  locket  which  had  belonged  to  one
of  the  communicators  had  been  brought  out  by  the  sitter
and  remarked  on  by  the  communicator.  At  the  end  of  the
waking-stage,  when  Mrs.  Piper  was  almost  normal  again,
though  not  quite — she  had  apparently  felt  a  snap,  and  she
had  just  talked  about  the  darkness  of  the  room  and  about
feeling  numb — Sir  Oliver  handed  her  the  locket  in  its  case.
The  sight  of  it  seemingly  put  her  back  into  the  waking-stage
dream.  Sir  Oliver  reports  as  follows  :
(Mrs.  Piper  pounced  on  it  with  interest  saying,)

That  was  the  little  girl's. That  was  what  I  saw.  The

lady  was  trying  to tell  me about it. She  said

something  about  putting  hairs  in  it.
The  little  girl  held  it  up  before  her  eye  (Imitating

the  action  of  an  eye-glass,) like as  if  she  wanted

her  eye-lash  in  it.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  251

There  is  a  lady  there  looks  like  aunt,  but  very  young

when  she  went  over.
(Referring  again  to  the  locket,) It's a  pretty  thing,

isn't  it  ? Is  that  glass  or  iron  on  it  %
(O.  J.  L.  I  don't  know.)

They  were  trying  to  figure  it  out  what  it  was,  and

they  thought  it  was  flowers.
Oh  dear  I'm  afraid  I'm  not  very  intelligent. I  wish

I  could  remember  what  they  said  but  my  thoughts

are  going.

They  were  all  there,  I  never  saw  anything  so  pretty,
such  a  happy  group.  And  all  of  a  sudden  they  leave
me. Why  do  they  ?

I  feel  my  head  going  round  and  round  and  then
there's  a  snappy  sound.

I  got  it  in  my  head  that  you  were  going  to  leave  me
and  I  hadn't  strength  to  speak  and  tell  you  not
to  go.  My  thoughts  had  begun  to  go.  I  wanted
to  say  Don't  leave  me,  but  I  couldn't.  I  felt  that
if  you  left  me  to-day  I  didn't  know  what  was  to  become
of  me.

{This  about  her  fear  of  being  left,  refers  to  an  incident
that  occurred  at  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  when  Mrs.  Piper
was  going  into  trance  but  was  only  partly  off.  After  a  little
conversation  about  this  Mrs.  Piper  said,  referring  to  the  locket
again  : }

Do  you  know  I  saw  all  that,  or  I  saw  a  representa-
tion of  that. It's  a  funny  thing  but  there's  a  little
girl  up  there  and  she  was  going  to  put  something
inside  it. She  wants  her  mother  to  put  her  hair
in  it. Where's  her  mother  ? I don't know  what
it means at all. I saw a perfect  representation
of  it  just  like  that. It's  queer,  I  don't  see  how
you  got  it  down  here  so  quickly. Isn't  that  queer  %
It's  transfiguration.
Well  now  that's  quite  clear.
(Mrs.  Piper  here  looked  round  over  her  shoulder. There  was
no  one  else  now  in  the  room,  and  she  said — )

I  thought  Briscoe  was  there.  {Mr.  Briscoe  had  been
there  just  before  she  began  to  go  into  the  trance.}


252


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


Do you know who that gentleman is that  stands
just  in  front  of  me  here  i He  has  a  dark  moustache,
a  very  striking  face,  a  tall  gentleman with  square
shoulders. He  constantly  stands  here  just  in  front
of  me. I  don't  see  him  now  you  know.
I  think  I'll  get  up  and  sit  in  the  armchair  by  the
fire. My  feet  are  cold.
(This  being  done  and  her  back  turned,  0.  J.  L.  looked  through
first  some  volumes  of  Proceedings  and  then  in  "  Fragments  of
Prose  and  Poetry  "  for  a  portrait of Gurney  {who  had  also
been one of  the  communicators  during  the  sitting  and  had
been  mentioned  by  name  earlier  in  the  waking-stage.}  Hiding
the  name,  he  brought  it  and  put  it  in  front  of  Mrs.  Piper
to  see  whether  she  would  remark  on  it. She  pounced  on  it
instantly.)

That  is  the  very  same  man,  the  very  man. Oh  I'm  so

glad  you  showed  me  that. It's  the  same  man  *  *  *
He  is  a  tall  man  with  square  shoulders. He's  very
earnest. He  spoke  to  me. I  wish  I  could  remember
that  a  little  while  longer. He  had  rather  a  stoutish
lady  with  him,  a  motherly  looking  lady. His  face
is  clear  and  younger  than  that,  and  he  seemed  to
be  working  hard,  so  busy.
You  knew  who  I  meant. You  guessed  it  from  the
description. How  did  you  know  ?
(O.  J.  L.  Well  I  guessed.)

It  isn't  your  brother,  is  it  ?  Excuse  me  asking,  but
he  seemed  very  near  to  you  when  I  was  over
there.  That  little  girl  had  a  little  round  thing  in
her  fingers  and  she  kept  telling  me  to  tell  somebod}^
to  put  something  in  it.
(0.  J.  L.  here  went  to  the  table  for  the  locket  and  said
"  Was  it  this  %  ")

Yes,  only  it  had  something  to  it  ;  it  was  hanging.
(Holding  up  her  hand  as  if  dangling  something.)
I  saw  them  all  and  a  beautiful  form  [or  %  face]  of
a  little  girl.

{She  described  the  little  girl  more  or  less,  and  then  described
a  lady.  0.  J.  L.  showed  her  a  likeness  of  his  mother,  and
she  said  : — }


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  253

That's  the  one,  yes.
(But  this  identification  did  not  carry  conviction. It  was  not
at  all  secure  and  certain  like  the  other  one. All  it  could  mean
was  that the lady  spoken  of  in  the  waking-stage  had  been
something  like  that.)

After  some  time  spent  in  ordinary  conversation  with
Mrs.  Piper  and  her  daughter,  who  had  been  called  in,
Sir  Oliver  Lodge  asked  her  :

O.  J.  L Did  you  ever  know  Mr.  Gurney  ?
Mrs.  Piper.  No  I  never  knew  him.

O.  J.  L.  No,  I  suppose  he  was  dead  before  you  came  over  to
England.1

Mrs.  Piper.  I  don't  know.  I  never  saw  him.  I  don't  know
what  he  looked  like.  I  should  not  know  him  if  I
saw  him.  Perhaps  Miss  Johnson  has  a  picture  of
him  in  her  room  ?

O.  J.  L.  Yes.

Mrs.  Piper.  Oh  well  I  suppose  I  have  seen  it,  but  I  never
identified  it  or  knew  which  it  was.  I  don't  feel  to
know  his  appearance  properly.

It  is  the  locket  experiment  I  chiefly  wish  to  call  atten-
tion to  here.  In  the  trance  proper  the  little  girl  as
communicator  had  spoken  about  the  locket  and  about
something  inside  it,  but  in  the  record  of  the  waking-
stage,  before  it  was  shown,  though  the  little  girl  is
mentioned  the  locket  is  not.  We  cannot,  however,  be
sure  from  this  that  it  did  not  form  any  part  of  the
waking-stage  dream,  for  Mrs.  Piper  probably  does  not
mention  all  she  sees,  and,  moreover,  some  of  the  waking-
stage  utterances  are  almost  always  too  inarticulate  to
be  caught.  Mrs.  Piper  cannot  have  seen  the  locket  itself
until  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  showed  it  to  her  as  described  above.
Her  right  hand  doubtless  handled  it  during  the  trance  when
it  was  produced,  but  she  could  not  have  seen  it  then,  as
her  face  was  turned  away  on  the  pillows.  Nor,  again,
was there, so  far  as  we can  judge, any  knowledge  in

1  Gumey  died  in  1888,  and  Mrs.  Piper's  first  visit  to  England  was  in
1889.


254  Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.  [part


Mrs.  Piper's  normal  mind  of  the  little  girl,  who  was  to
her  at  the  moment  of  the  experiment  therefore  probably  a
forgotten  dream,  recalled  by  the  sight  of  the  locket.  Why
and  how  did  the  locket  recall  it  ?  How  did  a  never-before-
seen  locket  get  appropriately  associated  with  an  un-
remembered  dream-child  ?

In  trying  to  answer  this  we  have  first  to  observe  that  the
recognition  of  the  locket,  and  the  recognition  of  likenesses
of  sitters'  friends,  are  phenomena  resembling  each  other
so  much  as  to  make  it  probable  that  they  are  both  to
be  explained  in  the  same  way.  If  this  be  so,  then  the
recognition  of  the  locket  cannot  have  depended  on  its
having  been  actually  present  and  handled  during  the
trance  proper,  for  this  possibility  is  absent  in  the  case
of  sitters'  friends.  We  need  not,  therefore,  consider  either
whether  vision  without  eyes  (clairvoyance)  of  a  material
object  ever  occurs,  or  whether  a  sense  of  touch  may  be
so  delicate  as  to  make  construction  from  it  of  an  exact
visual  image  possible.

There  remain  explanations  by  telepathy  either  from  a
sitter  or  a  spirit.  What  exactly  would  have  to  be  telepathi-
cally  conveyed  ?  If  there  really  was  a  visual  hallucination
fully  representing  the  locket  before  the  actual  locket  was
seen,  the  telepathy  must  have  come  in  there  ;  the  vision
must  have  been  telepathically  produced.  We  have  no  evi-
dence of  this  in  the  case  of  the  locket  except  Mrs.  Piper's
statements  after  seeing  it,  and  this  might  have  been  a
pseudo-memory,  produced  by  the  association  of  it  with
the  little  girl  telepathically  derived  in  a  sudden  and  con-
vincing way  from  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  at  the  moment  of  his
showing  the  locket.  A  hypothesis  of  this  kind  was
suggested  by  Hodgson  as  an  explanation  of  the  utility  of
"  influences  "  (which  are  to  be  discussed  in  Chapter  VIII.),
and  it  was  as  an  "  influence  "  that  the  locket  was  intro-
duced at  the  sitting.  The  hypothesis  might,  perhaps,  be
stretched  to  include  the  cases  of  selection  of  photographs
of  friends,  although  the  sitter  does  turn  away  while  the
selection  is  made.  But  in  these  cases  there  generally  has
been  some  description  of  a  vision  given  before  the  photo-
graph afterwards  declared  to resemble it has  been  pro-


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  255

duced.  And  that  Mrs.  Piper  does  have  vivid  visions  in
the  waking-stage  will  not,  I  think,  be  doubted  by  any
one  who  has  followed  this  chapter  so  far.

On  the  whole,  I  think,  the  hypothesis  that  these  visions
are  sometimes  telepathically  produced  and  veridical,  repre-
senting a  person  or  thing  so  well  as  to  be  recognisable,  is
the  one  that  fits  the  facts  best.  Who  the  telepathic  agent
is,  or  whether  there  is  a  single  agent  or  more  than  one,  are
questions  about  which  it  is  more  difficult  to  come  to  a  decision.
It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  had  no
further  opportunity  of  trying  these  important  experiments,
and  that  so  few  are  recorded  by  Hodgson.

Questions  of  conscious  memory  in  the  waking-stage  of
the  trance,  and  vice  versa,  I  propose,  as  already  said,  to
defer  to  the  next  chapter.  But  it  will  be  well  to  say  a
few  words  here  about  memory  from  one  waking-stage  to
another.  There  is  some  evidence  of  this,  though  not,  I
think,  a  great  deal.

Of  course  the  recurrence  of  similar  ideas  and  images  in
different  waking-stages  about  the  same  period,  which  I
mentioned  above  (p.  229),  cannot  be  accidental.  There
must  be  a  causal  connexion  of  some  kind,  either  memory
or  similar  external  facts.  But  it  need  not  be  the
conscious  memory  of  the  waking-stage  intelligence.  This
may  not  be  aware  that  it  had  had  the  same  ideas,  the
same  dream  experiences,  before.  To  be  sure  that  there  is
such  a  memory  we  want  it  stated  plainly,  or  at  least
apparently  implied  in  what  is  said.  There  are  very  few
clear  statements  of  this  kind,  and  the  stratified  memory
during  the  waking-stage  tends,  by  making  the  communi-
cation fragmentary,  to  reduce  the  occasions  for  them.
There  are,  however,  sometimes  indications  that  the  experi-
ences of  the  waking-stage  which  Mrs.  Piper  is  going  through
are  not  new  to  her.  A  very  definite  one  occurred  on
November  13,  1900  (see  Appendix,  p.  577),  when  she
said :

I  wish  I  could  remember  where  I  go.  Sometimes  I  go
farther  away  than  others,  but  I  can't  be  dead,  can  I  ?

There  are  also  references  to  having  seen  waking-stage


256


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


personages  before,  as  on  December  22,  1892  (see  above,
p.  213,  footnote)  :

she  saw  the  same  gentleman  she  saw  once  before  ;  just
saw  him  smile  ;  did  not  see  him  do  anything

and  on  June  14,  1895  (see  above,  p.  221)  ;

I  saw  the  same  lovely  lady  I  saw  yesterday,
or  on  April  8,  1897  (see  above,  p.  233)  :

I  saw  that  gentleman  {i.e.  Imperator}  with  the  cross  again.

And  there  are  comparisons,  as  on  October  12,  1896  (see
Appendix,  p.  551),  when  she  says  she  has  seen

that  man  again.  That  must  be  Phinuit.  I  never  saw
him  so  clearly  before.

The  statement  "Margaret  and  Ruth  grown  much  larger
than  when  I  saw  {them}  before"  made  in  the  waking-
stage  of  June  15,  1895,  and  in  substance  again  on  June  24,
1895  (see  Appendix,  p.  550),  must  refer  back  to  some
previous  experience  either  in  a  former  waking-stage  or
otherwise,  and  if  we  had  more  complete  information  it
might  throw  interesting  light  on  the  relations  between
Mrs.  Piper's  different  states  of  consciousness.  Ruthie  and
Margaret  were  twin  children  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Thaw  (see
Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  384-385  and  536-582).  Ruthie
died  at  the  age  of  fifteen  months  near  the  end  of  1891
and  Margaret  earlier.  Mrs.  Piper  had  never  seen  them  or
known  anything  about  them  in  life.  In  the  first  half  of
1892,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Thaw  had  sittings  with  her,  and  the
records  of  Ruthie's  communications  through  Phinuit  are
among  the  most  interesting  evidential  matter  concerning
Mrs.  Piper  that  we  have.  This  was  before  the  days  of
regular  waking-stages,  and  we  have  no  records  of  any  in
connexion  with  these  sittings.  How  then  did  the  waking-
stage  Mrs.  Piper  know  about  these  children  ?  Of  course,
if  she  did  know  about  them  in  1892.  it  would  be  natural
that  she  should  think  of  them  as  grown  much  larger  in
1895,  but  we  can  hardly  suppose  that  this  experience
referred to the difference between  them as  seen in  the


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  257

waking-stage  of  April  24,  1895  (see  above,  p.  219),  and
in  those  of  June,  1895,  and  I  do  not  think  we  have
records  of  any  waking-stage  mention  of  them  earlier.
There  easily  may,  however,  have  been  waking-stage
visions  unmentioned  by  Mrs.  Piper,  or  unrecorded,  and
perhaps  the  easiest  hypothesis  to  make  is  that  she  remem-
bered such  a  vision.

Another  possibility  is  that  the  recollection  was  derived
from  the  normal  Mrs.  Piper's  knowledge  or  dreams,  for
though  no  account  of  Dr.  Thaw's  sittings  had  been  published
in  1895,  it  is  practically  certain,  I  think,  that  Mrs.  Piper
had  been  told  about  them  in  her  normal  state,  since  she  had
stayed  with  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Thaw  as  their  guest,  and  there
would  have  been  no  advantage — rather  the  reverse — in  con-
cealing from  her,  at  any  rate  after  the  first  few  sittings,  that
communications  were  believed  to  have  come  from  the
children.  Then,  again,  we  may  ask  whether  the  recollection
could  have  been  derived  from  Phinuit;  filtered  through
from  his  consciousness — whether  he  is  a  phase  of  Mrs.  Piper
or  a  separate  entity — to  the  waking-stage  consciousness,
so  as  to  appear  to  the  latter  a  memory  of  its  own.  Or,
again,  we  may  ask  whether  Mrs.  Piper's  spirit,  or  that  part
of  her  which  constitutes  the  waking-stage  consciousness,  is
present  with  communicators  and  controls  during  the  trance
proper.  But  as  regards  this  it  must  be  remembered
that  there  is  no  indication  that  the  controls  conceive  it  as
present  when  they  are  acting  as  intermediaries  between
communicators  and  sitters — in  fact  the  contrary  is,  on  the
whole,  suggested  (see  Chapter  II.,  pp.  67-70).  Altogether
the  case  under  discussion  does  not  by  itself  furnish
sufficient  data  for  arriving  at  a  conclusion  as  to  its
interpretation


258


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


CHAPTER  VII.

Relation  to  each  other  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Different
States  of  Consciousness.

The  relation  to  each  other,  especially  as  regards  memory,
of  Mrs.  Piper's  normal  consciousness,  her  trance  state
proper,  and  the  waking-stage  that  precedes  and  follows
it,  is  of  great  importance,  and  has  not  in  the  preceding
chapters  been  dealt  with  at  all  fully.

Investigators  are  generally  agreed  that  the  normal  Mrs.
Piper  has  no  conscious  knowledge  of  what  passes  during  the
trance.  Statements  on  this  point  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  and
by  Hodgson  will  be  found  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  445,
and  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  54.  The  absence  of  conscious  knowledge
would  not  of  course  imply  that  there  was  no  subliminal
memory  of  what  had  passed,  or  that  portions  of  this
might  not  be  brought  into  the  supraliminal  consciousness
by  suitable  stimuli  and  thus  affect  actions  or  thoughts.  I
do  not  think  we  have  positive  evidence  that  this  happens,
but  it  would  be  rash  to  assume  that  it  does  not.  I  can
imagine,  for  instance,  that  association  of  ideas  might
induce  the  emergence  of  some  memory  of  a  trance
incident  into  the  normal  consciousness  in  the  same  way
that — as  most  of  us  probably  have  occasionally  had  to
surmise — a  forgotten  dream  is  responsible  for  a  pseudo-
memory,  an  erroneous  impression,  obtruding  itself  into  our
waking  life.  And  I  can  imagine  that  if  in  her  normal  con-
dition Mrs.  Piper  came  across,  e.g.  a  name  or  a  poem  that
had  been  referred  to  in  the  trance,  her  attention  might  be
attracted  to  it,  and  information  or  ideas  about  it  might
be  then  intentionally  or  unintentionally  acquired  by  her
in  a  way  that  would  not  have  happened  but  for  a  sub-


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  259

conscious  interest  in  the  subject  due  to  the  trance  happen-
ings. At  any  rate,  it  would  be  unsafe  to  assume  either  that
no  subconscious  knowledge  of  the  trance  exists,  or  that
no  interpenetration  from  the  subconscious  can  occur  while
Mrs.  Piper's  conscious  knowledge  of  the  trance  happenings
is  limited  to  what  she  has  learnt  through  the  talk  of
sitters  or  through  published  statements.

The  normal  state  is  less  cut  off  from  the  waking-stage,
of  parts  of  which  there  is  often,  as  we  have  seen  in  the
last  chapter,  an  evanescent  memory  as  the  normal  con-
sciousness returns.  The  waking-stage  happenings  apparently
vanish  in  the  same  sort  of  way  that  our  dreams  often  do,
and  by  special  effort  or  attention  can  sometimes  be  made
to  persist  longer,  and  even  perhaps  permanently.  Some
measure  of  the  duration  of  these  evanescent  impressions
is  afforded  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  experiments  on  the
recognition  of  the  photograph  of  Joseph  Marble  (see  below,
pp.  274-276).

The  converse  question,  whether  the  controls — that  is,
the  consciousness  of  the  trance  proper — share  the  know-
ledge possessed  by  Mrs.  Piper  of  what  she  thinks  and
does,  or  of  what  happens  to  her  in  her  normal  condition,
is  more  difficult  to  answer,  and  different  views  on  the
subject  have  been  expressed.  It  is  discussed  by  Sir
Oliver  Lodge  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  448,  and  Vol.
XXIII.,  pp.  177-181  ;  by  Dr.  Walter  Leaf,  Proceedings,
Vol.  VI.,  p.  560  ;  and  by  Hodgson,  Proceedings,  Vol.
VIII.,  p.  55.  Up  to  a  certain  point  there  is  agreement.
I  do  not  think  that  any  one  doubts  that  Mrs.  Piper's
habitual  or  memorised  knowledge — her  general  stock  of
acquirements,  or  what  we  may  call  memory  transformed
into  habit 1 — is  to  a  very  large  extent  if  not  completely  shared
by  the  controls.  They  share,  for  instance,  her  knowledge
of  language  and  of  writing,  and  apparently  her  general
information  ; and that these acquirements as used  by

1  Readers  of  M.  Bergson's  works,  especially  Matiere  et  Memoire,  will
recognise  the  distinction  here  assumed  between  two  kinds  of  memory  :

(a)  the  recalling  of  facts  and  experiences  as  events  in  time  and  space,  and

(b)  what  I  have  called  memorised  knowledge,  or  memory  transformed  into
habit.


260


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


the  controls  are  Mrs.  Piper's  acquirements  is  shown  by
their  limitations.  The  controls  cannot  apparently  use
languages  with  which  Mrs.  Piper  is  unfamiliar,  although
some  of  the  persons  they  profess  to  be  spoke  such
languages  on  earth  ;  and  the  general  statements  about
science  or  historj^  or  philosophy  or  contemporary  politics
show,  broadly  speaking,  as  we  saw  in  Chapters  II.  and  III.,
limitations  of  knowledge  natural  in  Mrs.  Piper,  but  not
natural  in  the  professed  controls.  I  think  that  few  investi-
gators who  have  thought  about  the  subject  would  greatly
disagree  with  this  ;  and  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  controls
are  spirits  distinct  from  Mrs.  Piper,  it  would  be  explained  by
the  necessity  of  using  an  organism  trained  in  a  particular
way.  Thus  Hodgson,  describing  a  discussion  with  Phinuit
on  the  latter's  inability  to  speak  French,  though  claiming
to  be  a  French  doctor,  says  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII..
p.  50)  :

I  replied  that  this  explanation  {i.e.  the  one  offered  by
Phinuit}  was  very  surprising,  and  that  a  much  more
plausible  one  would  be  that  he  was  obliged  to  use  the
brain  of  the  medium,  and  could  therefore  manifest  no
more  familiarity  with  French  than  she  possessed.  This
— trite  enough- — suggestion  appeared  to  Phinuit  also  more
plausible,  since  a  few  days  later  he  offered  it  himself  to
another  sitter  as  an  explanation  of  his  inability  to  sustain
a  conversation  in  French  !

But  the  possession  of  Mrs.  Piper's  memorised  knowledge
is  also,  of  course,  shared  by  the  waking-stage  conscious-
ness, while  yet  there  are  undoubtedly  breaks  of  some
sort  in  memory  between  the  trance  and  the  waking-
stage,  within  the  waking-stage  itself,  and  also  between
the  waking-stage  and  the  normal  state  that  follows  it.
None  of  these  breaks  go  so  deep  as  to  cut  off  Mrs.
Piper's  memorised  knowledge,  which  evidently  persists
through  all  the  changes.  The  question  which  it  is  difficult
to  answer  is  whether  the  break  which  there  clearly  is
between  the  trance  and  the  preceding  normal  state — if
it  is  true  that  the  working  of  the  trance-consciousness
is  unknown  to  the  normal  consciousness — cuts  off  anything


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  261

from  the  trance-consciousness.  Does  the  trance-conscious-
ness, potentially  at  leasts  know  all  that  is  known  to  the
normal  consciousness — not  only  memorised  knowledge,  but
recent  facts  and  experiences  ?  And,  if  not.  can  we  in
any  way  distinguish  what  will  and  what  will  not  be
carried  on  into  the  trance-consciousness  ?

It  is  on  these  questions  that  the  evidence  is  uncertain.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge  says  in  1S90  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,
p.  448) :

So  far  as  my  present  experience  has  gone,  I  do  not  feel
sure  how  far  Mrs.  Piper's  knowledge  or  ignorance  of
specific  facts  has  an  appreciable  influence  on  the  communi-
cation of  her  trance  personality.

In  1909  he  goes  rather  further  and  says  (Proceedings,
Vol.  XXIII.,  p.  177)  :

It  seems  to  me  that  *  *  *  her  normal  knowledge  has  in
reality  very  little  if  any  influence  on  the  information
that  is  obtained  during  her  trance.  The  trance  personalities
appear  to  be  ignorant  of,  or  to  be  groping  after  a
number  of  things  that  Mrs.  Piper  knows  quite  well.

And  again,  p.  181  :

I  myself  am  unable  to  trace  much,  if  any,  connexion
between  the  trance  knowledge  and  her  normal  knowledge.
For  instance,  a  sitter  introduced  by  name  is  no  more
likelv  to  have  his  name  mentioned  during  a  sitting  than
one  who  is  introduced  as  an  anonymous  stranger.  I  make
a  general  statement  of  this  kind  believing  that  careful
analysis  will  bear  it  out,  and  as  a  challenge  to  any  one
who  will  bestow  time  and  labour  upon  the  work  of
analysing  the  records  from  this  point  of  view.1

Dr.  Walter  Leaf  in  1890  took  a  view  somewhat  different
from  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  He  says  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,
p.  559)  :

1  Notwithstanding  this  challenge,  I  have  not  undertaken  the  proposed
analysis  for  the  same  reason  that  leads  me  to  the  conclusion  that  Hodgsonrs
unpublished  records  cannot  be  made  much  use  of  for  evidential  purposes
— namely,  that  our  knowledge  of  what  Mrs.  Piper's  probable  normal
knowledge  was,  is  too  incomplete.


262


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


The  question  of  the  amount  of  communication  existing
between  the  two  states  is  in  the  nature  of  the  case
obscure,  and  the  evidence,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able
to  see,  is  mainly  negative.  Dr.  Phinuit  makes  many  state-
ments which  may  easily  have  been  learnt  by  Mrs.  Piper  ;
*  *  *  on  the  other  hand  knowledge  about  {the  sitters}
and  their  surroundings  which  Mrs.  Piper  certainly  possessed,
was  not  as  a  rule  given  by  Phinuit.  *  *  *  One  observation
bearing  on  this  point  was  made  by  Mrs.  Verrall.  In  her
three  sittings,  her  eldest  girl  was  frequently  mentioned,  but
her  name,  which  she  had  never  mentioned  to  Mrs.  Piper,
was  not  given.  After  her  last  sitting,  No.  63,  she  purposely
took  an  opportunity  of  calling  the  child  Helen  in  Mrs.
Piper's  presence.  At  the  very  next  sitting  where  Mrs.
Verrall  was  mentioned,  that  of  Mrs.  B.,  No.  66,  Helen  was
named  by  Dr.  Phinuit.  There  is  therefore  ground  for
supposing  that  *  *  *  the  abnormal  state  is  conscious  of
what  goes  on  in  the  normal,  but  not  vice  versa ;  but  that
this  connexion  is  purposely  obscured.

An  observation  made  on  one  occasion  (February  27,
1907),  perhaps  points  in  the  same  direction.  Before  the
trance  began  a  half  joking  conversation  was  started  by  Mrs.
Piper  about  the  pencils  used,  and  Mr.  Piddington  remarked
that  very  few  had  been  broken  during  the  trance  writing
lately,  and  added,  "  Of  course,  you'll  break  a  lot  to-day  on
purpose."  Whether  by  pure  coincidence,  or  as  the  result
of  this  remark,  four  or  five  pencils  were  broken  by  Rector
during  the  sitting  that  followed.  Mrs.  Piper  had  never
referred  to  the  pencils  before.

Hodgson  writing  in  1892  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  55)
did  not  agree  with  Dr.  Leaf,  and  was  inclined  to  the
view  that  "  the  change  to  the  trance  personality  involves
a  partial  obliteration  of  the  facts  known  to  the  normal
waking  self." He  says  (p.  54)  :

I  have  not  been  able  to  trace  any  continuity  of
memory  between  Phinuit  and  Mrs.  Piper.  I  have  already
stated  my  belief  that  Mrs.  Piper  is  entirely  ignorant  of
what  occurs  during  the  trance,  and  Phinuit  is,  or  pretends
to be,  equally  unaware of the knowledge  possessed  by


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  263

Mrs.  Piper,  and  of  the  incidents  which  happen  to  her  in
her  ordinary  life.  On  one  occasion,  not  long  before  a
sitting  (June  30th,  1888),  Mrs.  Piper  was  startled  by  a
very  near  sudden  clap  of  thunder,  and  Phinuit,  on  being
afterwards  questioned,  appeared  to  have  no  knowledge  of
the  circumstance,  and  apparently  tried  to  guess  at  what
had  occurred.  Similarly  on  questioning  Phinuit  at  one  of
my  early  sittings  concerning  the  life  of  Mrs.  Piper,  he
professed  ignorance  on  the  subject,  but  said  that  he
would  "find  out  things"  about  her.

*  *  *  *

I  have  also  met  with  several  cases  where  Mrs.  Piper
knew  not  a  little  of  the  sitter's  ordinary  environment,
names  of  friends,  etc.,  and  yet  this  information  was  not
given  by  Phinuit.  Further,  indeed,  I  have  known  Phinuit
under  such  circumstances  to  be  confused  and  to  make
mistakes  upon  points  well  known  to  Mrs.  Piper.  Still,  all
this  "  ignorance  "  may  be  "  the  perfection  of  acting  "  on
the  part  of  Phinuit,  *  *  *

It  is  the  sophistication  of  the  control,  the  impossibility
of  feeling  sure  that  he  is  not  acting,  the  certainty  that
he  sometimes  is,  and  also  that  he  is  apt  to  say,  regardless
of  consistency,  whatever  he  thinks  will  support  any
theory  he  has  advanced,  or  will  impress  or  please  the
sitter,  that  makes  it  impossible  to  arrive  at  a  definite
conclusion  on  the  question  under  discussion — without,  at
any  rate,  an  opportunity  of  comparing  a  great  many  more
cases  bearing  on  it  than  we  have.  Hodgson  believed
that  in  these  respects  G.  P.  and  Rector  &  Co.  were
more  trustworthy  than  Phinuit,  but  as  the  reader  already
knows, I am unable  myself  to see much  improvement.

The  difficulty  of  coming  to  any  conclusion  is  increased
when  we  take  account  of  other  possibilities,  besides  a
clean  cut  between  what  is  known  on  one  side  and  on
the  other,  of  the  division  between  the  normal  state  and
the  trance.  There  may  be  ordered  selection,  either  of
things  that  are  remembered  out  of  a  general  forgetfulness,
or  of  things  that  are  forgotten  among  a  general  recol-
lection. It  is  possible  for  instance  that,  as  I  suggested


264


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


above,  subliminal  interest  in  the  topics  of  previous  trances
may  cause  isolated  facts  like  the  name  of  Mrs.  VerralTs
daughter  to  be  carried  on  into  the  trance-consciousness
without  general  memory.  It  is  possible,  similarly,  that
suggestions  connected  with  trance  procedure,  as  in  the
pencil  case  above,  may  select  themselves  for  persistence.
And,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  perhaps  possible  that  a
general  memory  may  be  accompanied  by  forgetfulness  of
things  immediately  connected  with  the  train  of  thought
broken  off  by  the  trance,  so  that  the  impression  made
by  a  clap  of  thunder  just  before  the  trance  began  might
vanish  with  the  normal  consciousness.1  All  this  is  con-
jecture. Some  study  of  hypnotic  memory  has  doubtless
been  made  which  might  indicate  whether  the  conjectures
are  plausible  or  not.  But  I  do  not  know  where  to  find
such  a  study,  and  as  experience  would,  I  imagine,  vary
with  different  hypnotic  subjects  and  with  different  hypno-
tists, as  it  certainly  does  with  different  mediums,  we
should  still  in  the  end  have  to  judge  each  case  on  its
merits.

The  controls  constantly  profess  ignorance  of  Mrs.  Piper's
state  of  health  or  state  of  mind,  of  the  effect  on  her  of
prolonged  sittings,  and  so  forth.  But  there  appears  to
be  some  inconsistency  in  the  things  they  say.  For
instance,  on  April  28,  1902  (see  Appendix,  p.  614),  while
professing  to  depend  on  the  sitter  for  information  about
her  health,  they  also  say  that  they  have  themselves
discovered  that  she  has  eaten  injurious  food.  At  other
times  they  profess  to  know  about  her  when  not  con-
trolling, though  not  when  they  are.  Thus  Mr.  Dorr
reports  on  March  20,  1905  :

I  asked  some  questions  which  I  had  in  mind  regarding
the  extent  to  which  they  were  able  to  perceive  the
physical  condition  of  the  medium  during  the  trance,  in
answer  to  which  Rector  said  that  they  only  became
conscious of it after leaving the  light — which was  the

1  This  would  be  analogous,  except  that  it  lasted  through  the  trance  only,
to  the  loss  of  memory  of  immediately  preceding  events  liable  to  occur  in
cases  of  concussion  of  the  brain.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  265

reason  why  it was necessary  for  them  to  depend  upon
us on this side for observation  of  the  passage  of  our
earthly time. {This means that the controls did  not
always  know  when  the  sitting  was  going  on  so  long  as
to  exhaust  Mrs.  Piper.}
On the other hand, with the help of some  object
belonging  to  Mrs.  Piper — an  "influence''  (see  next  chapter)
— the controls, or perhaps I should say the  medical
member of their band, diagnose her case when she  is
unwell,  and  prescribe  for  her  as  they  would  for  another
person. This  is done, of  course, while the  sitting  goes
on,  but  it  is  not  explained  why  her  own  body  will  not
serve as an "  influence." After thus prescribing  on
January 14, 1907, "Dr.  Oliver"  adds: "I  quite  under-
stand her  case  and  will  look  after  her " — agreeing  with
Rector's  remark  above  that  he  becomes  conscious  of  her
condition  after  leaving  the  light.

As  to  knowledge  of  Mrs.  Piper's  thoughts  and  feelings,
the  view  maintained  by  the  controls  is  curiously  exemplified
in  the  sittings  of  April  28  and  29,  1902  (see  Appendix,  pp.
614.  616),  where  Hodgson  acts  as  go-between  between  them
and  the  normal  Mrs.  Piper.  Whether  the  professed
ignorance  is  altogether  genuine,  it  is,  of  course,  impossible
to  say.  Perhaps  a  possible  view  is  that  the  trance
personalities  really  are  largely  ignorant  of  the  normal
personality's  thoughts  and  feelings,  but  are  capable  of
realising  them  in  part  by,  e.g.  directing  special  attention
to  them.  An  instance  was  quoted  above  (Chapter  II.,
p.  68)  in  which  on  December  25,  1889,  Phinuit  did  show
knowledge  of  Mrs.  Piper's  feelings,  though  not  of  the
cause  for  them,  but  as  he  professed  to  have  learnt  what
he  knew  by  meeting  her  spirit  going  out  crying  as  he
came  in,  it  should  perhaps  count  among  instances  of
lucidity  in  moments  of  transition,  to  which  I  refer  below.

In  considering  the  value  of  the  controls'  assertions  of
ignorance  concerning  Mrs.  Piper,  it  must  be  kept  in  mind
that  their  theory  that  they  are  external  spirits  tem-
porarily occupying  Mrs.  Piper's  organism,  but  otherwise
quite  independent  both  of  her  and  of  other  living  people,
makes them anxious to show that they neither  share


266


Mrs.  Henry  Sidy  wick.


[part


Mrs.  Piper's  normal  knowledge  nor  acquire  knowledge
telepathically  from  the  sitter,  and  emphatic  declarations
are  made  on  both  points — declarations  so  sweeping  as  to
overshoot  the  mark.  The  following  is  such  a  declaration
about  Mrs.  Piper's  knowledge  made  by  G.  P.  on  January  4,
1894  (sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson)  :

G.  P.  But  sometimes  there  is  bound  to  be  confusion,  which
often  I  cannot  prevent  *  *  *  Sometimes,  when
I  am  here,  throwing  my  thoughts,  or  in  other  words,
trying  to  express  them  through  this  medium,  I  not
only  express  my  own  words,  but  I  sometimes  hear
others  speaking,  and  now  and  then  put  in  a  word
wrongly.

It  is  the  times  that  you  don't  hear  distinctly —
understand,  there  is  a  conglomeration  of  words  all
mixed  up  together,  but  believe  me,  it  is  no  fault
of  ours.  Yet,  if  there  was  the  least  remembrance,
or  trace  even,  of  the  medium's  own  brain,  or
thoughts  left  to  be  mixed  up  with  ours,  she  would
not  write  as  badly  as  we  do  sometimes.  Yet  I  do
know — Do  you  understand  this  1  Consequently  it  is
no  fault  of  hers,  and  if  she  was  the  most  intelligent
person  on  earth  .  .  .

R.  H. It  would  make  no  difference.

G.  P. No  not  the  slightest.

It  is  worth  noting  as  evidence  that  the  trance,  including
the  waking-stage,  fills  a  gap  of  which  the  normal  con-
sciousness is  unaware  except  from  external  signs,  that
the  idea  in  Mrs.  Piper's  mind  just  before  she  begins  to
sink  into  trance  is  apt  to  recur  as  soon  as  she  is  normal
again.  As  she  put  it  to  Mr.  Piddington  on  January  28,
1907,  immediately  after  the  sitting  and  quite  spontaneously,
"  What  I  think  about  last  when  I  go  to  sleep  1  comes
back  to  me  first  of  all  when  I  wake."  Mr.  Piddington
asked  her  what  she  was  thinking  about  then,  and  she
replied,  "  Oh,  about  your  writing  to  Professor  Hyslop."
She  had  just  before  settling  down  to  go  into  trance
expressed strong annoyance at an article by  Professor

1  That  is,  go  into  trance.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper  s  Trance  Phenomena.  2ti7

Hyslop  which  had  appeared  in  an  American  journal.
Other  instances  of  this  were  noted  by  Mr.  Piddington
both  before  and  after  this  conversation.  For  instance,
before  settling  down  to  the  trance  on  February  20,  1907,
she  told  a  story  about  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  and  after  the
trance  spontaneously  referred  again  to  this  story.

Leaving  the  normal  consciousness,  we  have  to  study
the  memory  connexions  between  trance  proper  and  waking-
stage.  But  first  we  may  observe  that  the  memory  in
one  trance  of  what  has  happened  in  preceding  trances
is  very  good — much  better  than  that  of  most  sitters.
The  controls  are  very  seldom  mistaken  in  assertions  as
to  what  has  occurred,  and  when  they  have  once  connected
the  appropriate  communicators  with  a  sitter,  very  seldom,
if  ever,  fail  to  do  so  again.  Also,  there  is  very  little
tendency  to  mix  up  one  sitter's  affairs  with  those  of
another,  except  perhaps  in  putting  out  feelers  with  a
new  sitter.  In  one  respect  the  memory  works  too  well
and  seems  sometimes  to  inhibit,  as  it  were,  corrections
which  the  communicator,  if  really  communicating,  should
be  able  to  make.  For  instance,  in  the  case  of  one  sitter
who  had  a  good  many  sittings  and  got  a  good  deal  that
was  evidential,  Rector  after  various  attempts  fixed  on
a  name  as  the  one  by  which  the  sitter's  husband  called
her.  It  was  not  right,  but  Rector,  having  once  decided
on  it,  stuck  to  it.  To  the  end,  I  think,  he  failed  to
learn  what  the  name  really  was.  Another  instance  is  the
repeated  calling  of  a  family  friend  of  the  Junots  "Judge"
instead  of  "Major,"  by  Rector  writing  for  Bennie  Junot
(see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  443-470).  Miss  Verrall
attributes  this  to  uncontrolled  association  of  ideas,  also
noted  by  Hodgson  in  his  second  report.  She  says  (Vol.
XXIV.,  p.  352)  :

One  clearly  marked  characteristic  is  the  large  part  played
in  the  trance  utterances  by  the  association  of  ideas.  Dr.
Hodgson  has  referred  to  this  characteristic  in  his  Report
on Mrs. Piper (Proceedings, Vol. XIII., p. 333), 1  and

1  When  Hodgson  wrote,  his  opinion  was  that  it  was  when  the  com-
municator became  exhausted and  stupefied  that  irrelevant  associations


268


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PAET


frequent  traces  of  it  are  to  be  found  in  the  sittings  now
under  consideration  {i.e.  the  Junot  sittings}.  If  a  group
of  names  has  been  once  associated  together,  an  allusion
to  any  one  of  them  is  very  likely  to  produce  allusions  to
the  others.  The  human  mind  in  its  normal  condition  is
largely  influenced  by  such  associations,  but  their  force  is
controlled  by  conscious  and  deliberate  choice.  In  the  case
of  Mrs.  Piper's  mind,  during  trance,  this  control  is  appar-
ently lacking,  so  that  associations  once  formed  will  often
recur  without  regard  to  their  immediate  relevance.  This
characteristic  will  also  explain  the  tendency  to  repeat  a
mistake  once  made.  For  instance,  the  confusion  between
"Judge"  and  "Major"  persists  through  the  sittings,  in
spite  of  the  fact  that  some  part  of  the  medium's  mind
is  apparently  aware  of  it.

That  there  is  some  continuity  of  memory  between
waking-stage  and  waking-stage  is  sufficiently  shown  by
the  evidence  adduced  in  Chapter  VI.,  pp.  255-257,  though
the  instability  and  incoherence  of  the  waking-stage  make
the  continuity  less  obvious  than  it  is  between  trance  and
trance,  and^also  probably  make  it  less  complete.

We  now  come  to  the  more  important  question  of
memory  between  trance  and  waking-stage.  I  gave  in
Chapter  VI.  evidence  of  continuity  of  some  kind  between
the  two — the  same  persons,  the  same  topics,  and  some-
times almost  verbally  the  same  sentences  appearing  in
both.  But  I  have  deferred  till  now  the  consideration
of  cases  where  the  trance-consciousness  shows  awareness
of  what  has  passed  in  a  previous  waking-stage,  or  where
things  come  .  out  in  the  waking-stage  in  accordance  with
what  has  been  promised  in  the  trance.

The  first  cases  of  the  kind  occurred  before  the  waking-
stage  was  fully  developed,  and  the  first  I  know  of  con-
sisted in  a  name  that  had  been  asked  for  in  the  trance
being  called  out  just  as  the  trance  came  to  an  end.
Dr.  C.  W.  F.  reports  on  May  17,  1889  (Proceedings,
Vol.  VIII.,  p.  99)  :

of  ideas  took  effect.  But  this  is  certainly  not  the  case  with  the  two
persistent  mistakes  as  to  names  referred  to  in  the  text.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  269


At  my  first  seance  {January,  1889}  Dr.  P{hinuit}  said  :
"  Your  friend  William  is  here,  and  *  *  *  is  determined
to  give  you  his  whole  name  before  I  go  out."  As  Mrs.  P.
began  to  come  out  of  the  trance,  "  Pabodie  "  was  spoken
with  great  force,  and  Mrs.  P.  gave  a  start,  saying,
"  Somebody  spoke  right  in  my  ear."  I  thought  she
seemed  to  think  I  had  done  so.  At  my  third  seance
Dr.  P.  said  spontaneously,  "  William  Pabodie  sends  his
love  to  you  *  *  *  "

A  similar  incident  reported  by  Hodgson  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  305-8,  occurred  on  April  28,  1892,  and
has  already  been  partly  quoted  in  Chapter  VI.,  p.  212,
in  connexion  with  the  development  of  waking-stages.
The  sitter,  Mr.  Peirce,  whose  name  is  believed  to  have
been  unknown  to  Mrs.  Piper,  was  apparently  recognised
by  G.  P.  during  the  sitting,  but  a  difficulty  was  made
about  giving  his  name.  When  Mrs.  Piper  was  coming
out  of  trance,  among  unintelligible  sounds  "  the  name
Peirce  was  alone  distinct.  This  name  was  spoken  twice,
and  was  not  in  either  Phinuit's  or  Mrs.  Piper's  ordinary
voice."

At  the  next  sitting  on  the  following  day,  G.  P.  (writing)
explained  :

G.  P.  I  could  not  speak  to  Dr.  [Phinuit]  to  make  him  under-
stand what  I  wanted  him  to  say,  so  I  tried  to  tell
the  medium  just  as  she  was  coming  into  her  body
again,  and  I  hope  she  told  you  the  test  you  asked
for. Please  answer  me,  did  she  tell  you  ?

R.  H.  Yes,  she  gave  us  the  name.

G.  P. That  is all  you asked me for. I will  now  explain.

I  had  so  many  things  in  my  mind  about  .  .  .
and  other  things  which  you  had  asked  me  to  do
for  you.  The  fact  is  I  really  had  no  time  or
strength  to  tell  you  anything  about  anybody  else.

And  again  later  in  the  same  sitting  apparently  :

G.  P. Do  tell  Peirce  how  I  tried  to  tell  the  medium,  but  I

don't  know  you  got,  whether  you  got  it  or  no.
R.  H. Yes,  we  got  it.


270


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


G.  P.  Good.  You  see  I  saw  her  spirit  just  as  she  was  going
in  and  as  I  could  not  tell  Dr.  I  took  the
chance.

The  claim  of  the  controls  in  these  cases  that  they
are  responsible  for  the  message  given  through  the  returning
spirit  of  the  medium  is  clear.  An  exposition  of  this  plan
of  communing  with  her  soul,  as  G.  P.  calls  it,  given  by
him  on  November  30,  1892,  will  be  found  in  the
Appendix,  p.  616.  Also  Phinuit's  views  on  the  subject
expressed  on  December  7,  1896,  will  be  found  in  the
Appendix,  p.  617.

A  similar  case,  where  not  only  a  name  but  a  message
was  given,  as  Mrs.  Piper  came  out  of  trance,  is  described
by  Hodgson  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  372.  He
"  understood,  as  it  was  described  later,  that  *  *  *  G.  P.
gave  it  to  the  '  returning  consciousness  '  of  Mrs.  Piper."

These  cases  before  the  full  development  of  the  waking-
stage  are  clearly  of  the  same  nature  as  the  later  ones
when  the  dividing  line  between  trance  proper  and  waking-
stage  had  become  more  marked,  and  the  waking-stage
longer  and  more  important.  The  utterance  of  the  name
Peirce,  and  G.  P.'s  subsequent  claim  that  he  had  given
it  to  the  medium  as  she  was  returning  to  her  body  is,
for  instance,  very  like  a  case  described  in  Proceedings,  Vol.
XXIV.,  pp.  556-557,  when  a  name  which  had  been  asked
for— Miriam — was  uttered  in  the  waking-stage  of  February
25,  1903,  and  Bennie  Junot  claimed  at  the  next  sitting  at
which  he  communicated  to  have  given  it  "to  a  spirit
returning  to  its  body."

A  rather  interesting  case  of  the  same  kind  occurred  in
1900,  the  sitter  being  Professor  Hyslop,  and  Hodgson
recorder.  It  was  interesting  because  the  success  was
incomplete  though  sufficient,  I  think,  to  make  it  certain
that  an  attempt  was  made.  On  February  5,  1900,1  a
name  had  been  asked  for  but  not  given.  The  name
wanted  was  Carruthers.  The  record  of  the  waking-stage
begins :

1  The  record  of  this  sitting  has  been  published  by  Prof.  Hyslop  in
the  Proceeding*  oj  the  American  S.P.B.,  Vol.  IV.,  pp.  391-402.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance  Phenomena.  271


Clarrakther
Sitter  (to  R.  H.)  Clarkthur

Clarkther. Say Clarkther. Say Clarkthurs  .  .  .
Clarrakthurs.

Robert  Hyslop. I  don't  know  .  .  .  Robert  Hyslop  said  it.
At  the  next  day's  sitting  G.  P.  said  :

He  sent  me  in  for  a  moment  to  say  I  told  it  to  the
spirit  of  the  light  as  she  went  out.

In  the  following  case,  January  5,  1899  (sitter  and
recorder,  Hodgson),  it  is  claimed  that  a  vision  seen  was
the  work  of  the  controls.  Rector  writes  spontaneously
immediately  after  the  usual  greeting  :

Our  dove  as  shown  to  the  removed  spirit  meaneth  Peace.
[On two recent occasions {notes Hodgson} Mrs.  P's.

subliminal  at  end  of  trance  spoke  of  a  dove  circling

round  her.]

On  one  of  these  occasions,  December  29,  1898,  the
following  occurs  in  the  waking-stage  record  :

There's the same white dove. Go. [as if repeating  a
command].

Did  you  see  that  white  dove  flying  round  my  head  ?

There  are  cases  of  promised  communications  through
Mrs.  Piper's  returning  spirit,  and  of  asserted  attempts
which  came  to  nothing,  which  have  some  interest  in
showing  the  ideas  of  the  trance  personalities  on  this
matter.  On  May  24,  1904,  at  the  end  of  the  voice
sitting  recorded  by  Miss  A.  M.  R.  from  which  I  have
already  several  times  quoted,  her  brother-in-law  com-
municated 1  through  Rector,  giving  his  relationship,  but
when  asked  for  his  name  saying  :

1  It  is  worth  noting  that  Miss  A.  M.  R.  reports  that  this  brother-in  ■
law,  recently  dead,  who  had  never  seen  Mrs.  Piper,  but  to  whom  Miss
A.  M.  R.  had  spoken  of  her  own  sittings  with  her,  had  said  on  his  death
bed  that  "  if  he  did  find  himself  on  the  other  side  he  was  going  to
try  and  find  some  of  my  {Miss  A.  M.  R's.}  friends  and  was  going  to  try
and  find  Mrs.  Piper."


272


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


I  will  tell  you  before  I  go,  I  will  whisper  it  to  the  light
as  I  see  it  return.

In  the  waking-stage  which  followed  shortly,  Mrs.  Piper
immediately  after  the  first  snap  of  her  head  said  :

Oh  did  you  hear  my  head  snap  ?  Don't  you  hear  it
at  all  ?  Who  was  that  gentleman  speaking  to  me  ?
Miss  A.  M.  R.  I  don't  know,  how  did  he  look  ?

He  looked  as  though  his  beard  had  grown  and  his
face —

Miss  A.  M.  R.  Young  or  old  ?

Young,  and  he  had  a  little  moustache,  and  he  had
— rather  light,  his  eyes  were  blue  and  he  had  and
rather  a  high  forehead  and  a  full  here  [pointing
to  cheekbones]  and  thin  here  [pointing  to  lower
part  of  face]  and  long  face  down  here  on  his  chin,
and  he  seemed  so  anxious  to  tell  me  something  and
he  said  it  over  and  over  again  and  a  funny  name
he  gave  me.

Miss  A.  M.  R.  Can't  you  remember  that  name  ?

He  kept  saying  it  over  and  over  to  me  [evi-
dently listening  again]  I  wish  I  could  think  what
that  was  he  said,  and  he  repeated  it — I  think  it
was — no,  I  don't  know  what  it  was.  What  was
Robert  ?  It  was  Bert,  or  Elbert — I  can't  hear  it  any
more — yes  it  is  Bert.  Oh  how  anxious  he  was  to
tell  me.  I  can't  tell  you  how  anxious  he  was  to
tell  me  that.  Did  you  hear  my  head  snap  ?  I
was  talking  to  you  a  moment  ago —  It  has  gone
now.

{Miss  A.  M.  R.  notes  :}

[My  brother-in-law  had  an  odd  name,  but  he  has  a
brother  living  *  *  *  called  Bert. *  *  *

The  description  of  the  thin  face,  light  hair,  blue  eyes,
full  cheeks  or  high  cheek  bones,  and  thin  pointed  lower
part  of  face,  beard  and  moustache,  was  a  good  description
of  my  brother-in-law,  whom  Mrs.  Piper  never  saw  or  knew.
He  was  decidedly  light  and  pale  and  thin.]

The  following  is  a  case  recorded  by  Hodgson  of  an


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  273

asserted  attempt  by  a  communicator  to  appear  in  the
waking-stage,  and  of  ignorance  whether  it  had  succeeded.

(January  19,  1904.)

R.  H.  Have  you  any  news  to  give  of  Dr.  Blodgett  in  your
world  ?

Rector.  We  shall  refer  to  him  later  as  he  hath  tried  many
times  to  appear  to  the  spirit  of  the  light  while
returning  to  the  earthly  body.  *  *  *  dost  thou
know  whether  he  hath  succeeded  in  showing  him-
self.

(January  20,  1904.)

R.  H.  I  looked  through  all  my  notes  of  the  words  of  the
light  while  returning  during  this  season,  but  can
find  nothing  to  indicate  that  she  saw  Dr.  Blodgett.

Rector.  We  are  glad  to  know  friend  as  it  helps  us  to  U.D.
how  near  the  spirit  must  be  to  be  seen.

These  extracts  about  Dr.  Blodgett  are  worth  studying
in  connexion  with  the  very  important  case  reported  by
Sir  Oliver  Lodge  of  the  recognition  of  the  photograph
of  Joseph  Marble.  His  account  of  this  case  will  be  found
in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.,  pp.  276-277,  but  he  does
not  mention  the  detail — unimportant  from  the  point  of
view  of  his  paper,  but  important  in  the  present  con-
nexion— that  the  experiment  was  proposed  by  Joseph
Marble  communicating  and  Rector  controlling  in  the
trance  proper  of  the  day  on  which  the  recognition  was
first  made.  The  relevant  extract  from  the  record  is  as
follows  .

(Dec.  3,  1906.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  Rector  writing,
Joseph  Marble  communicating  through  him.
J.  M.  As  a  proof  of  my  identity  I  will  show  my  face  to
the  spirit  of  the  light  when  it  returns,  so  that  it
can  be  recognised  by  the  same  spirit  before  it  quite
re-inhabits  its  body,  from  twenty  photographs  of
men  resembling  myself.  U.D.

s


274


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgvrick.


[part


O.  J.  L.  Yes,  I  understand ;  he  will  show  himself  to  the
medium  before  she  has  completely  recovered  con-
sciousness, in  the  expectation  that  she  will  after-
wards have  sufficient  recollection  of  his  appearance
to  pick  out  a  photograph  of  him  from  among
others.

Rector.  Yes,  we  did  this  for  our  friend  Hodgson  occasionally
when  he  was  in  the  body

In  regard  to  this  statement  of  Rector's  T  know  of  no
instance  of  selection  of  photographs  before  this  date
except  those  discussed  in  Chapter  VI.,  namely,  the  G.  P.
case  (p.  213),  and  the  case  of  June  11  and  12,  1900,  which
is  quoted  in  the  Appendix  to  that  chapter  (pp.  573-575).
There  may,  of  course,  have  been  other  cases  of  which
we  have  not  got  the  records.  In  the  G.  P.  case,  which,
by  the  way,  occurred  some  years  before  the  Imperator
band  came  on  tha  scene,  Mrs.  Piper  was  apparently  normal
when  she  recognised  the  photograph.  In  the  1900  case  the
recognition  occurred  during  the  waking-stage,  and  I  think
that  this  is  what  Joseph  Marble  really  proposed  in  the
present  case,  though  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  apparently  understood
it  otherwise.  Joseph  Marble's  proposal  to  appear  was
made  in  the  earlier  half  of  the  sitting,  and  a  considerable
variety  of  communicators  and  communications  followed  ;
Myers  being  the  last  person  spoken  of  in  the  trance.  In
the  waking-stage,  which  is  given  in  full  by  Sir  Oliver  in
Proceedings.  Vol.  XXIII. ,  p.  276,  no  mention  of  Joseph
Marble  nor  reference  to  the  proposed  experiment  is  recorded,
and  it  was  perhaps  for  this  reason  that  Sir  Oliver  did  not
immediately  pursue  the  experiment.  It  was  about  an  hour
and  a  half  after  the  sitting,  lunch  having  intervened,  that
he  showed  Mrs.  Piper  eleven  photographs  of  men,  and  asked
her  if  she  had  ever  seen  any  of  them.

She  looked  over  them,  hesitating  on  the  one  representing
Mr.  Joseph  Marble  for  some  time,  and  then  picked  that
out  and  said  she  had  seen  that  man  somewhere,  but  she
could  not  remember  where.

This  must  be  regarded  as  only  a  partial  success.  A
much  more  definite  one  was  obtained  at  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs,  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  275


next  sitting  five  months  later,  May  19,  1907,  when  a
number  of  photographs  were  placed  before  her  just  as
she  came  out  of  the  waking-stage  {Proceedings,  Vol.
XXIII.,  p.  278),  and  she  immediately  pounced  on  one
without  the  slightest  hesitation  saying  :

That  is  the  man  I  saw.  I  saw  him.  That  is  the  man  I
saw.  I  saw  him  up  there  :  such  a  nice  face.  I  could  see
him. I  could  see  Mr.  Hodgson  pushing  him  up  to  the  front.

She  had  said  in  the  waking-stage  :

Fine  looking  man,  his  name  is  Joe.  Mr.  Hodgson  keeps
pushing  him  in  the  front  row.  Foreground.

When  an  hour  or  so  later  the  photographs  were  again
put  before  her,  she  looked  at  them  as  if  for  the  first
time  and  said,  "I  do  not  know  the  photographs."  She
then  hesitated  long  over  the  right  one,  saying  she  had
"  seen  him  somewhere,"  but  finished  up  by  saying,  "  No,
I  do  not  know."

The  degree  of  recollection  here  seems  closely  to  resemble
that  after  about  the  same  interval  of  time  on  December  3,
and  I  think  it  probable  that  if  Sir  Oliver  had  shown
her  the  photographs  on  the  first  occasion  as  immediately
after  her  normal  consciousness  returned  as  he  did  on  the
second,  the  recognition  would  have  been  equally  vivid.
Would  this  imply  that  she  had  the  promised  vision  in
the  waking-stage  of  December  3,  although  she  did  not
mention  it  ?  We  cannot  tell.  There  is  no  reason  to
assume  that  she  describes  out  loud  all  she  sees  in  the
waking-stage,  and,  in  fact,  indications  of  the  contrary
may  be  found  in  the  waking-stage  records.  See,  for
instance,  the  locket  case  above,  comparing  pp.  250  and  253.

The  question  is  not  unimportant,  because  if  she  really
had  no  impression  of  Joseph  Marble  in  the  waking-stage,
the  degree  of  recognition  of  his  photograph  which  she
exhibited  must  have  been  j:due  to  some  recollection  by
the  normal  consciousness  of  the  trance  7proper,  though  only
an^  evanescent  recollection,  as  by  the  evening  of  the  next
dayJfit  had  entirely  disappeared.  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  says
(Vol.  XXIIL,  p.  277)  :


276


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Next  day,  in  the  evening,  I  tested  Mrs.  Piper  again
with  another  set  of  photographs  of  men,  partly  the  same
and  partly  different,  but  containing  among  them  the  critical
one.  This  time,  however,  it  was  looked  at  without  com-
ment and  without  interest,  and  no  remembrance  of  the
appearance  seemed  to  persist.  She  remembered  the  fact
of  having  recognised  one  before  ; 1  but  when  asked  to  do
it  again,  she  picked  out,  after  much  hesitation,  a  different
one  as  a  possibility,  and  said  that  she  thought  it  had
been  found  in  America,  that  the  memory  evaporated  in
time,  and  that  it  was  strongest  within  an  hour  of  the
sitting.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  experiment  with  the  locket,  and  its
context,  described  in  Chapter  VI.,  pp.  250-255,  should  be
studied  in  connexion  with  this  question  of  vanishing
memory,  and,  indeed,  from  one  point  of  view,  the  whole
of  the  latter  part  of  Chapter  VI.,  pp.  240  to  the  end,  belongs
to  our  present  subject.

Under  the  influence  of  the  cross-correspondence  experi-
ments in  the  English  sittings  of  1906-7  and  Mr.  Dorr's
sittings  of  1908,  both  the  expression  in  the  trance  of
intention  to  communicate  through  the  waking-stage,  and
the  recognition  in  the  trance  that  such  communications
had  been  attempted  in  a  preceding  waking-stage,  became
more  frequent  than  they  had  been  before.  This  was,
doubtless,  at  least  pai'tly  due  to  the  recognition  of  the
importance  of  the  waking-stage  by  those  in  charge  of  the
sittings,  and  to  their  consequently  encouraging  it  more
than  Hodgson  ever  did.

Two  instances  in  1907  will  be  found  in  Proceedings,  Vol.
XXII.  On  February  26,  in  the  waking-stage  which  is
quoted  in  full  (Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  94-96),  Mrs.  Piper  spoke
about  laurel  wreaths,  and  indicated  apparently  that  G.  P.
had  said  he  would  tell  "  her "  (presumably  Mrs.  Verrall)
about  laurel  wreaths.  On  the  next  day,  during  the  trance
(Vol.  XXII.,  p.  96),  MyerSp  communicating,  said  :

Myebsp. I  gave  Mrs.  Verrall  Laurel  wreath.

1  This  recollection  adds  to  the  certainty  that  she  was  in  possession  of
her  normal  consciousness  when  making  the  recognition.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  277

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  quite  right  ;  she  got  it.

*  *  *  *

Myebsp.  Yes  I  gave  her  that  and  as  the  spirit  of  the  light
returned  to  its  body  I  tried  to  grasp  it  *  *  *
grasp  the  spirit,  so  as  to  give  it  you  last  time.

J.  G.  P.  Yes  I  heard  it  quite  well ;  laurel  wreath.

On  March  6 — in  the  waking-stage — also  given  in  full
in  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  150-152,  Mrs.  Piper  quoted  "  moaning
at  the  bar  when  I  put  out  to  sea,"  and  also  spoke  of
Arthur  Hallam.  On  March  13,  the  next  sitting  at  which
Mr.  Piddington  was  alone,  MyersP  said  a  propos  of  the
quotation  from  Crossing  the  Bar  having  appeared  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  script  :

Myeesp.  I  did  quote  those  lines  to  her.  I  also  quoted  them
to  this  light  *  *  *  while  Hodgson  held  it  for  me.

And  later  in  the  sitting  he  said  about  the  name  Arthur
Hallam,  "  I  gave  it  to  the  spirit  of  this  light  while  it  was
returning."

In  the  sittings  of  1908  the  waking-stage  was  still  further
developed  under  the  influence  of  Mr.  Dorr,  who,  having
been  told  about  the  evidential  value  of  some  waking-stage
communications  in  the  English  sittings  of  1907,  laid  great
stress  on  waking-stages.  He  began  to  do  this  on  March  23
1908,  when  he  urged  HodgsonP,  who  was  communicating,
to  give  him  all  they  could  "  through  the  subliminal."  The
hand  bowed  assent  and  wrote,  "  We  gave  Laurel  Wreath
through  the  subliminal  when  we  could  not  do  so  through  the
hand,"  referring,  no  doubt,  to  the  incident  of  February  26,

1907,  just  described. At  this  same  sitting  of  March  23,

1908,  Mr.  Dorr  asked  MyersP  what  the  word  Lethe  sug
gested  to  him,  and  obtained  important  elements  of  the
answer  in  the  waking-stage  as  well  as  some  in  the  trance
proper.  Full  particulars  and  copious  extracts  are  given
in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  86-95,  but  what  concerns
our  present  subject  is  that  MyersP  made  statements  on
March  24  in  the  trance  proper  as  to  what  had  occurred
in  the  waking-stage  of  March  23.  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  waking-
stage  had  seen  a  vision  of  a  lady  with  a  bow  and  arrows.


278


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


which  she  described  with  some  detail  (see  Proceedings.  Vol.
XXIV.,  p.  89).  To  this  HodgsonP  refers  without  any
prompting  on  March  24,  saying,  "  he  {i.e.  Myers}  drew
the  form — a  picture  1  of  Iris  with  an  arrow  ' '  ;  and  later
in  the  sitting  it  is  again  mentioned,  apparently  by  MyersP  :

Myebsp. Did  the  light  quote  Picture 1  I  made  for  her  spirit  as

it  returned  ?
G.  B.  D.  The  picture  of  Iris  ?
Myebsp.  Yes.

G.  B.  D.  Yes,  she  did.  But  I  thought  it  was  Diana.  She
told  me  about  it  very  clearly.

*  *  *  *

Myersp  or  Hodgsonp.  *  *  *  I  was  given  the  lines  by  Pidding-
ton  which  I  gave  to  the  light's  spirit  to  make  you
understand  my  meaning  of  Iris.

The  lines  which  had  been  repeated  in  the  waking-stage
were  an  incorrect  version  of  the  first  two  lines  of  Long-
fellow's weU-known  song  beginning  "  I  shot  an  arrow  into
the  air."  Mr.  Piddington  had  quoted  the  first  line  of  this
to  HodgsonP  on  February  25,  1907. 2  That  the  trance
personalities  on  March  24th  knew  something  about  the  waking-
stage  on  the  23rd  is  here  clear.  And  it  is  also  clear  as
regards  "  Sybil "  in  the  same  waking-stage.  MyersP  says
on  March  24  :

I  told  the  Light  to  say  sybil  last  time.
G.  B.  D.  Yes,  the  Light  did  say  Sybil  in  the  subhminal.

Important  and  interesting  references  in  the  trance  writing
to  preceding  waking-stages  occur  in  many  of  these  sittings
of  Mr.  Dorr's,  but  it  was  not  his  object  to  trace  the  relations
between  trance  and  waking-stage  consciousnesses,  and  his

1  What  Mrs.  Piper  described  was  not  a  picture  but  an  apparently  solid
figure  in  the  air  pointing  an  arrow  at  her.  Probably  "  picture  "  should
not,  however,  be  taken  too  literally.

2  This  was  the  day  before  the  mention  of  laurel  wreath  in  the  waking-
stage — an  approximation  of  dates  which  suggests  that  association  of
ideas  may  have  led  to  the  quotation  of  this  line  in  the  waking-stage
of  the  sitting  at  which  the  laurel  wreath  incident  had  been  again
referred  to.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance  Phenomena.  279


habit  after  March  24  of  reading  to  the  trance  personalities
the  record  of  previous  waking-stages — unobjectionable  from
his  point  of  view  and  in  some  respects  enlightening — is  apt
to  invalidate  the  evidence  for  the  independent  memory  of
the  facts  by  the  trance  personalities.1  This  is  all  the  more
the  case,  because  while  claiming  knowledge  of  what  was
attempted  in  the  waking-stage,  they  generally  profess  not
to  know  how  far  the  attempts  succeeded.

Of  memory  the  other  way — memory  in  the  waking-stage
of  the  trance,  or,  at  least,  of  promises  made  in  the  trance
being  carried  out  in  the  waking- stage — there  are  several
instances.  Thus  on  March  31,  1908,  Mr.  Dorr, — after  reading
some  lines  from  the  invocation  to  Zeus  in  the  Agamemnon
translated,  as  he  told  MyersP,  by  his  brother,  Mr.  Ernest
Myers, — said  ■

Now  I  want  you  to  try  whether  you  cannot  give  me
later,  in  the  subliminal  perhaps,  the  name  of  the  old
Greek  play  from  which  these  lines  are  translated  *  *  *
[Hand  bows  assent.]

The  waking-stage  shortly  followed,  and  the  first  audible
word  was  "  Agamemnon."

On  April  13,  in  the  waking-stage,  which  is  quoted  in
full  in  the  Appendix  to  Chapter  VI.  (p.  605),  four
questions  which  had  been  asked  in  the  preceding  trance
proper  are  more  or  less  answered,  and  in  the  case  of
three  of  them  MyersP  had  undertaken  to  try  to  give  the
answers  in  the  waking-stage.  These  three  questions  are
given  on  pp.  607-608.

There  is  an  interesting  case  on  April  6  and  7,  1908,  where
the  promise  is  made  to  attempt  a  communication  in  the
waking-stage.  The  attempt  partly  succeeded  and  was  com-
pleted in  the  trance  next  day.  Mr.  Dorr  had  on  March  23
asked  the  communicators  for  a  translation  of  a  certain
Greek  line.  It  is  quoted  (and  translated)  in  Fragments  of
Prose  and  Poetry,  p.  48.  The  English  is  "  striving  to  save
my  own  soul,  and  my  comrades'  homeward  way."  The

1  An  earlier  case,  on  January  14,  1897,  in  which  the  evidence  for
independent  memory  was  invalidated  in  the  same  way,  will  be  found
in  the  Appendix,  p.  618


280


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PART


first  half  had  been  more  or  less  successfully  given,  and
on  April  6  Mr.  Dorr  asked  MyersP  if  he  could  not  give
the  rest.

G  B.  D.  Now  try  whether  you  cannot  get  the  rest  of  that
liue  through  to  me. kcu  vottov  eTu'ipwv

Myebsp,  I  am  not  sure  that  I  can  get  it  through  to  you
clearly  but  perhaps  a  few  words  will  do.  I'll  try
to  give  it  through  the  sub.  will  try  it  as  the  spirit
leaves.

Accordingly  in  the  waking-stage  is  said  :

On  the  homeward  way  — striving  to  save  my  soul  and  on
the  homeward  way.

On  April  7,  immediately  after  the  first  greetings,  comes  :

Myeesp. Comrades'  homeward  way.

{after  some  discussion  by  G.  B.  D.  "  of  how  much

is  lost  in  the  subhminal  "  and  the  reasons  for  it}
Myebsp. We are trying our best to make her  understand

to-day,  and  we  feel  if  we  do  not  remain  too  long

in  the  hand  we  may  be  able  to  do  better  in  the

head. Let  us  try.
G.  B.  D.  I  am  greatly  pleased  at  getting  what  you  have  just

written,  1  Comrades'  homeward  way.' This  gives  me

now  the  rendering  of  that  whole  fine.
MYEBSp. I  gave  it  in  the  subhminal  again  and  again  last  time.

That  is  why  it  comes  out  now.

These  two  statements  by  MyersP  are,  I  think,  of  consider-
able importance  in  the  light  they  throw  on  his  conception
of  the  relation  of  the  consciousness  of  the  trance  proper
with  that  of  the  waking-stage.  The  first  statement  almost
identifies  them,  for  the  expressions  "  in  the  head "  and
"  in  the  hand  "  are  habitually  used  of  the  method  of  control
hi  voice  sittings  and  writing  sittings  respectively  ;  so  that
the  implication  is  that  MyersP  is  thinking  of  himself  as
using  the  medium's  vocal  organs  in  the  waking-stage  in  the
same  direct  way  that  it  is  asserted  the  control  does  in  a
voice  sitting.  Of  course,  the  statement  may  have  been  an
accidental  slip ;  but  a  slip  of  this  kind  would  indicate  a


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  281

want  of  stability  in  MyersP's  view  as  to  the  process  of
communication.

The  second  statement,  implying  that  efforts  to  get  a
thing  said  in  the  waking-stage  lead  to  its  coming  out
in  the  trance,  is  again  an  unexpected  admission  in  view
of  the  theories  put  forward  by  the  trance  personalities.
It  is  more  easy  to  reconcile  with  the  view  that  in  both
states  the  mind  directly  expressing  itself  in  speech  or
writing  is  Mrs.  Piper's,  in  more  or  less  successful  telepathic
relation  with  other  spirits,  than  that  it  is  in  one  case
Mrs.  Piper's  and  in  the  other  an  alien  spirit  using  her
organism  directly.

That  these  reflexions  are  not  irrelevant  to  our  present
subject  we  see  at  once  when,  granting  that  there,  is
evidence  of  some  memory  connexion  between  what  is
said  in  trance  and  in  waking-stage,  we  ask  whose  memory
it  is.  There  is  nothing  in  most  of  the  instances  given
to  show  whether  it  is  Mrs.  Piper's  or  that  of  another
spirit — say,  Myers  or  Hodgson.  On  the  theory  that  the
controls  in  the  trance  are  independent  of  Mrs.  Piper's
spirit,  and  say  what  they  have  to  say  without  its  inter-
vention, the  memory  exhibited  is  that  of  the  controls  or
communicators.  They  remember  what  they  said  or  wrote
in  the  trance  and  what  they  tried  to  say  to  Mrs.  Piper's
spirit  in  the  waking-stage.  On  the  theory  that  the
controls  are  always  Mrs.  Piper  playing  a  part,  though  at
times  inspired  by  real  communicators,  it  may  still  be
the  communicators  who  remember  what  they  said  through
Mrs.  Piper  in  each  state  ;  but  it  is  equally  tenable  that
it  is  some  part  of  Mrs.  Piper  which  remembers.  When
there  is  evidence  of  supernormal  knowledge,  she  may
remember  in  one  state  knowledge  telepathically  received
in  another,  just  as  she  may  remember  from  one  state
to  the  other  knowledge  otherwise  acquired.  This  would
give  us  a  natural  interpretation  of  the  sentence,  "  I  gave
it  in  the  subliminal  again  and  again  last  time,  that  is
why  it  comes  out  now."

The  same  ambiguity  as  to  whether  it  is  Mrs.  Piper's
mind  operating  throughout  or  that  of  the  controls  doing
so,  manifests  itself  in  another  kind  of  case — the  case  of


282


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivich.


[part


suggestion  in  the  trance  proper  affecting  the  waking-
stage.  Hodgson,  and  other  sitters  also,  when  desirous  of
shortening  the  waking-stage,  not  infrequently  asked  the
controls,  before  the  trance  ended,  to  send  back  the  spirit
of  the  light  quickly  ;  and  the  suggestion  certainly  some-
times took  effect.  In  Hodgson's  view  this  was  because  the
control  was  an  independent  spirit  concerned  with  managing
the  return  of  Mrs.  Piper's  spirit  and  willing  to  oblige
Hodgson.  But  it  may  equally  well  have  been  suggestion
of  the  ordinary  kind  affecting  Mrs.  Piper  herself  directly.

Before  trying  to  decide  between  these  rival  hypotheses,
there  are  other  things  to  be  considered  in  connexion
with  the  waking-stage  intelligence.  In  all  the  cases  so
far  discussed  of  professed  communication  outside  the
trance  proper,  it  is  the  returning  spirit  of  the  medium
which  is  said  to  be  the  channel  of  communication.  But
there  is  another  plan,  namely,  that  the  communicator
should  catch  the  control  as  the  latter  leaves  the  medium
and  make  clear  to  him  what  the  desired  word  or  name,
which  he  has  failed  to  give,  are,  so  that  he  may  be
better  able  to  write  it  next  time.  This  was  a  plan  which
Myergp  professed  to  use  several  times  in  April  and  May,
1907.

But  before  describing  these  cases  we  may  observe  that
this  plan,  like  that  of  communicating  through  the  returning
spirit  of  the  medium;  seems  to  be  foreshadowed  in  two
instances,  mentioned  by  Hodgson,  before  the  full  develop-
ment of  waking-stages.  In  both  a  final  effort,  as  the
sitting  ended,  to  give  a  name  that  had  been  asked  for
was  made  through  the  control  and  not  through  the
spirit  of  the  medium."  The  first  was  the  Mannors  case,
May  17,  1892,  of  which  particulars  are  given  in
Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  471-2,  and  also  p.  310.
Hodgson  says  :

The  writing  ended  *  *  *  Suddenly  Phinuit  called  out
"Who's  M-AN-N-O-R-S.  I  got  that  for  H-O-D-G-S-O-N.
Tell  Hodgson  I  gave  this  to  you  as  I  could  not  stay  there
longer  on  account  of  Elisa."  This  was  G.  P.'s  message
apparently  through  Phinuit.  "  Mannors  "  was  the  surname
of  Madame  Elisa.


Lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  283

The  second  case  was  M.  Paul  Bourget's  on  December  11,
1893  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  310). Hodgson  writes:

After  the  writing  apparently  was  finished  and  the  hand
dropped,  it  was  seized  again  suddenly  and  violently,  and
wrote  a  name  beginning  with  A,  but  the  other  letters
were  indecipherable.  This  was  followed  by  the  name
Venice.

These,  Hodgson  understood,  were,  as  far  as  they  went,
answers  to  test  questions  put  by  M.  Bourget  to  the
chief  communicator  at  his  sitting.

Hodgson  says  {op.  cit.,  p.  311)  about  such  final  efforts  :

The  explanation  offered  is  that  the  communicator's  mind,
when  the  act  of  communicating  is  broken,  regains  the
balance  which  it  lost  while  communicating,  realises  more
fully  the  questions  that  were  put,  and  recalls  more  clearly
the  answers.  The  swift  resumption  of  communication  while
the  answers  are  "  on  the  mind,"  and  before  other  thoughts
can  intervene,  is  likely  to  result  favourably.

This  explanation  will  not  as  it  stands  apply  to  the
more  or  less  analogous  cases  of  1907,  but  so  far  as  it
implies  a  moment  of  special  lucidity  as  the  trance  proper
comes  to  an  end,  I  think  there  is  something  in  it.

The  case  in  1907  of  speaking  to  Rector  as  he  left
the  light,  about  which  most  was  said,  occurred  on  April  17
and  it  was  also,  I  think,  the  first  case  of  the  kind.  The
relevant  passages  from  the  records  will  be  found  in
Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  369-373  and  305.

The  investigators  were  at  that  time  trying  to  get
Myersp,  who  seemed  to  have  referred  to  Browning's
Abt  Vogler,  to  give  the  name  of  the  poem  from  which
his  words  came  ;  and  I,  being  in  charge  of  the  sitting
on  that  day,  asked  him  whether  he  professed  to  have
given  it.  He  replied  through  Rector  as  amanuensis,  "  No,
I  have  not  been  able  to  get  it  through,  but  I  hope  to
do  so."  At  the  very  end  of  the  trance  he  made  another
reference  to  the  subject  as  follows  :

Myersp. Mrs.  S.  I  shall  see  you  again  and  as  soon  as  Rector
leaves  the  fight  I  will  catch  him  and  spell  out  letter


284


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


by  letter  the  poem  to  him.  and  give  it  to  you  at
once  when  I  see  you  again.  I'll  wait  for  him  to-day
M.

E.  M.  S. I shall see you on the third after coming  {i.e.

translated  from  trance  language,  April  24}  alone.
MYEBSp. I'll  surely  give  it  then  if  not  before.

In  the  waking-stage  of  the  same  day,  which  quickly
followed,  Mrs.  Piper  said  :  "  Mr.  Myers  has  got  Rector
by  the  ear,  whispers  into  it."  Note  this  apparent  know-
ledge by  the  waking-stage  consciousness  of  what  is  going
on.  At  the  next  sitting  (April  22)  I  was  not  present,
and  nothing  concerning  the  matter  occurred  except  that
in  the  waking-stage  Mrs.  Piper  gave  as  a  message  from
Myers  :  "  Mr.  Myers  says  I  must  keep  my  promise "  ;
with  words  indicating  that  the  promise  referred  to  was
the  promise  to  give  the  name  of  the  poem.  On  April  24,
some  time  after  the  beginning  of  the  sitting,  a  clear
and  nearly  successful  attempt  to  keep  the  promise  was
made  through  Rector.  After  getting  as  near  as  "A  B
Volugevar,"  Rector  remarks  :

I  can't  quite  repeat  the  last  two  letters,  but  he  caught
me  after  I  left  the  light  and  told  me  what  it  was.  R.

After  some  further  talk  in  the  course  of  which  MyersP
says,  "  I  gave  Rector  one  more  letter.  How  do  you
pronounce  ABt  "  ;  and  after  Rector  has  got  "  Abt  "  and
I  have  finished  "  Vogler  "  for  him,  he  says  :

Rector. He pronounced it  for  me  again  and  again  just  as
you  did,  and  he  said  Rector  get  her  to  pronounce
it  for  you  and  you  will  U.D.
He  whispered  it  in  my  ear.

E.  M.  S. Just  as  you  were  coming  out  1

Rector. Just  as  I  left  the  light

It  is  clear  here  that  MyersP  stated  his  intention  of
impressing  the  name  of  the  poem  on  Rector  as  the  latter
"  left  the  light  "  on  April  17  with  a  view  to  his  repeating
it  to  me  on  April  24  ;  that  the  waking-stage  consciousness
affirmed  that  it  saw  on  the  17th  that  something  was
being  said  to  Rector ; that  on  the  22nd  MyersP  sent  a


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  285

message  concerning  the  matter  through  ';  the  spirit  of  the
light "  ;  and  that  on  the  24th  in  the  trance  script  an
unmistakeable  attempt  at  the  name  was  made,  Rector
stating  that  Myers  had  given  it  to  him  at  the  time
specified.

Later  in  the  sitting  of  April  24  MyersP  said  about
another  point,  "  I  will  catch  Rector  again  and  whisper
all  to  him."  But  nothing  seems  to  have  come  of  this.
On  the  same  day,  however,  an  answer  had  also  been
asked  from  MyersP  about  his  associations  with  certain
Greek  words,  and  he  had  said  he  would  reply  to  this
next  time,  and  accordingly  a  reply  is  given  on  April  30
(which  was  not  the  next  time,  but  the  next  but  one x)
to  Miss  Johnson  at  the  beginning  of  the  sitting,  and  this
reply  was  prefaced  by  the  words  :

I  promised  to  give  my  reply  to  the  Greek  words  and  as
soon  as  I  saw  the  light  departing  I  caught  Rector  and
gave  it  to  him  and  he  will  now  give  it  to  you.

Later  in  the  sitting  Rector  corroborates,  saying  :

I  have  seen  Mr.  Myers  and  he  gave  me  his  reply  to  your
Greek  words,  and  I  gave  them  to  the  other  lady  {Miss
Johnson}  before  you  appeared

On  May  1  the  subject  of  the  Greek  words  was  again
referred  to,  and  MyersP  promised  that  he  would  yet
make  it  clear,  but  said  nothing  about  speaking  to  Rector
about  it.  However,  in  the  waking-stage  Mrs.  Piper  said,
"  What  do  they  say  to  me.  Got  Rector  by  the  ear  " —
the  same  expression  she  used  on  April  17.  At  the  next
sitting,  May  6  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  170),
MyerSp  gives  as  his  answer  "  Plotinus,"  and  says,  "  I
caught  Rector  at  our  last  meeting  and  spelled  it  out  to
him  clearly."

Very  shortly  after  this  at  the  same  sitting,  May  6,
1907, MyerSp was asked for a particular line in  Abt

1  Mr.  Piddington  gives  reasons  for  thinking  that  there  was  an  attempt
to  answer  the  question  about  the  Greek  words  on  the  real  next  time,
April  29,  but  that  owing  to  confusion  Myers,,  was  headed  off  from  it
(see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  161).  For  further  extracts  from  the
Bitting  on  April  30,  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp. 165,  168.


286


Mrs.  Henry  SidgivicJc.


[part


Vogler  which  specially  answered  the  "  Latin  message,"  to
which  he  replied  :

I  shall  have  to  give  it  to  Rector  as  I  did  the  Greek
*  *  *  then  I  can  get  it  through  clearly.  *  *  *  It  is  very
clear  to  me  my  only  difficulty  is  in  making  it  quite  clear
to  R.  *  *  *  You  may  be  quite  sure  I  will  go  over  this
carefully  and  tell  R.

A  good  deal  later  in  the  sitting,  after  talking  about
Abt  Vogler,  he  says  :

I  shall  make  it  clearer  after  talking  it  over  with  Rector.

The  talk  with  Rector  was  apparently  not  completely
successful,  for  it  was  only  after  prolonged  effort  at  the
sitting  next  day  that  the  word  "  scale  "  in  a  line  from
Abt  Vogler  which  MyersP  tried  to  quote  through  Rector
was  got  through,  though  he  said,  "  T  gave  it  to  Rector
when  1  left."  1

No  instances  of  talking  to  Rector  as  he  came  out
occurred,  I  think,  in  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings  in  1908.  Perhaps
this  is  because  MyersP  and  HodgsonP  seem  in  those
sittings  to  have  written  themselves,  without  the  inter-
vention of  Rector  as  amanuensis,  so  that  if  the  greater
facility  of  getting  through  what  was  wanted,  which
apparently  exists  at  the  moment  of  transition  from  trance,
was  to  be  made  dramatic  use  of  at  all,  it  could  only  be
through  the  waking-stage  communication.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  whether  this  telling  things
to  Rector  as  he  comes  out  is  or  is  not,  in  fact,  the  same
process  as  telling  them  to  the  waking-stage  consciousness,
at  any  rate  the  dramatic  distinction  is  consistent^  main-
tained. The  things  professedly  said  to  Rector  do  not
come  out  till  Rector  controls  again,  and  the  things  pro-
fessedly said  to  the  "  spirit  of  the  light  "  generally  come
out  at  once  in  the  waking-stage.  The  two  things  seem,
however,  to  be  bound  together  by  MyersP's  remark  on
April  7,  1908  (see  above,  p.  280).  And  further  it  must
be  admitted  that,  considering  how  many  words — let  alone

1  For  further  extracts  from  the  sittings  in  question,  see  Proceedings,
Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  382-92.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  287


letters — Rector  apparently  successfully  grasps  and  trans-
mits while  writing,  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  why  a  process
of  literally  spelling  a  name  to  Rector  "  letter  by  letter "
should  be  easier  behind  the  scenes  than  during  the  trance
script  ;  and  this  difficulty  necessarily  inspires  some  doubt
whether  the  process  is  accurately  described.  But  if  it  is  not
accurately  described,  what  becomes  of  Mrs.  Piper's  seeing
Myers  taking  Rector  by  the  ear  and  whispering  to  him  ?  Is
this  a  recollection  in  the  waking-stage  of  what  has  been
promised  in  the  trance  ?

I  think  the  giving  questions  to  the  communicator  at
one  sitting  to  think  over  for  communication  at  the  next —
a  course  recommended  by  the  trance  personalities — is  very
likely  also  connected  with  special  lucidity  at  the  moment
of  transition.  It  is,  perhaps,  significant  that  G.  P.  recom-
mends it  (April  29,  1892)  in  the  midst  of  explaining  the
utterance  of  the  word  Peirce. He  says  :

The  better  way  for  you  ...  to  get  things  from  me  is
to  ask  me  to  look  up  things  for  you  and  then  let  me
tell  them  to  you  quite  clearly  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,
p.  308)

The  following  instance  is  of  some  interest,  though
nothing  came  of  it,  because  it  is  Rector  who  undertakes
to  see  that  the  communicator  gives  a  name  (through  him,
of  course)  instead  of  the  communicator  trying  to  teach
Rector  to  do  so,  as  in  the  cases  we  have  been  considering.
It  was  on  March  2,  1903  ;  those  present  were  two  sitters,
with  Hodgson  recording.  Rector  says  towards  the  end
of  the  sitting  :

R.  Better  give  him {the  communicator}  some  things  to

think  over

R.  H. Will  he  tell  us  something  about  this  knife,  for  one
thing.

R.  Yes. {And  a  little  later}

R.  H. She  asks  if  he  can  tell  her  first  name.

R.  I'll  see  that  he  calls  it  on  his  return.  Rector.

Neither  the  name  nor  facts  about  the  knife  seem  to
have been produced at the sitting next day — and,  of


288


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


course,  the  professed  advantage  of  thinking  over  things
may  have  been,  on  this  and  other  occasions,  a  mere
device  for  postponing  admission  of  complete  ignorance.
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  quite  possible  that  a  genuine
communicator  might  find  it  advantageous  to  have  an
interval  for  thinking  over  answers  to  questions  and  for
reviving  memories — and  even  to  a  false  communicator,
a  mere  personation  by  a  phase  of  Mrs.  Piper,  an  oppor-
tunity for  reflexion  and  putting  two  and  two  together
might  be  useful.  I  am  inclined  to  think,  however,  that
when  the  plan  succeeds  it  is  probably  generally  due  to
a  moment  of  special  lucidity  at  the  transition  out  of  or
into  the  trance  state — a  moment  in  which  the  trance
intelligence  succeeds  in  grasping  ideas  transmitted  tele-
pathically,  either  from  the  sitter  or  the  communicator,
to  which  it  has  previously  been  impervious.  It  is  possible
that  greater  lucidity  at  the  transition  moment  may  be
due  to  the  trance  personality  being  then  relieved  from
the  effort  of  acting  parts.  What  portion  of  the  waking-
stage  should  be  regarded  as  included  in  such  a  transition
moment  it  is,  of  course,  difficult  to  say.

Activity  between  sittings  is  sometimes  alleged  to  take
the  form  of  the  control  conversing  with  the  communicator
to  get  information  from  him.  The  following  is  a  successful
example  of  this  plan  in  which  some  of  the  things  said
suggest  that  the  transmission  really  occurs  at  the  time
of  ending  the  trance.  On  January  17,  1905,  at  a  sitting
at  which  Hodgson  was  recorder  and  a  lady  sitter  present,
the  sitter  asked  the  communicator  "John"  for  a  certain
name,  and  on  its  being  only  partially  given — Edgerley
for  Edgerton — Hodgson  said  to  Rector  :

R.  H.  It  would  probably  be  better  for  him  to  give  that
as  well  as  names  of  his  other  friends,  to  George
between  this  meeting  and  next,  and  let  George
come  in  at  the  beginning  of  next  meeting  and  give
all.

R.  Very good. Poor George has his hands full so  to

speak in keeping his {presumably the  communi-
cator's} thoughts  clear  over  this  cord.
{G. P. was apparently helping the  communicator.


LXXI.]


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  289


A  little  later — just  at  the  end  of  the  sitting — when
the  communicator  takes  leave  there  is  a  disturbance
in  the  hand,  and  G.  P.  writes}
G.  P. Adieu  H. I'll  go  with  him  and  have  a  chat.

The  next  day,  January  18,  the  same  sitters  being
present,  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  going-into-trance  stage  says
"  George,"  and,  after  the  usual  preliminary  greetings  by
Imperator  and  Rector,  Rector  says,  "  We  bring  George
this  day  for  a  few  moments."  G.  P.  begins  with  greetings
and  breaks  off  a  sentence  to  write  :

G.  P.  EdgERton

Sitter. Good  enough,  John,  that  is  splendid,  that's  right.
G.  P. I  got  him  to  tell  it  me  after  we  left.

{Later  in  the  sitting  he  said}
G.  P. I  can  do  so  much  better  with  him  in  this  way  and
he  U.D.  so  much  better  when  he  is  not  speaking.

{and  later  still}

Sitter John, it  is splendid  that  you  got Edgerton's  name

through  correctly.
John. I owe this all  to our good friend who helps  me

to-day and  the gentleman  present  with you  who

made  the  suggestion  to  George.
Sitter Can  you  give  Edgerton's  first  name  ?
John. Yes  I'll  give  him  in  the  same  way  and  he  will  take

it  to  the  light  as  I  go  out.
{I  gather,  however,  that  he  failed  to  do  so.}

Two  cases  from  Hodgson's  published  reports  of  what  was
possible  lucidity  at  the  moment  of  going  into  trance  have
been  already  quoted  in  Chapter  VI.,  pp.  210,  243.

An  incident  in  a  sitting  on  November  18,  1893,  is  an
instance  of  lucidity  at  the  moment  of  Phinuit  going  out,
though  in  this  case  the  effort  to  communicate  produced
re-entrancement.  It  is  described  in  Hodgson's  Report,
Vol.  XIII.,  p.  483.  The  sitter  was  Mr.  A.  A.  C,  who
expected  communication  from  his  brother  Harry,  owing
to  a  message  having  been  sent  to  him  by  the  latter  through
G.  P.  some  months  before.  Hodgson  was  recording.  Amid
some confusion communications came successively  which

T


290


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


were  appropriate  to  previous  sitters,  but  not  to  Mr.  A.  A.  C.
Then  Phinuit  talked  further,  but  the  only  relevant  matter
was  "  young  man  named  Harry — I  want  to  see  my
brother,"  and  Phinuit  complained  of  confusion.  Hodgson
continues  :

Mrs.  Piper  had  begun  to  come  out  of  trance,  but  was
strongly  convulsed  again,  and  the  hand  moved  to  write.  I
put  a  pencil  in  it,  and  a  very  direct  personal  communi-
cation was  written  to  the  sitter,  who  was  addressed  by  his
first  name.  The  full  name — first,  middle,  and  surname —
of  his  brother  Harry,  from  whom  the  communication
purported  to  come,  was  written  several  times,  with  great
violence  tearing  the  paper  of  the  block  book.  The  wild
anxiety  of  the  communicator,  as  shown  in  the  writing  and
in  the  movements  of  Mrs.  Piper's  hand  and  arm,  was  very
striking.  *  *  *  Phinuit  stated  on  November  23  that  when
he  "  went  out  "  he  found  this  young  man,  who  begged  most
earnestly  for  the  opportunity  of  speaking  to  his  brother,
and  that  he,  Phinuit,  had  "  helped  him  in,"  etc.

The  existence  of  a  greater  capacity  or  of  more  favour-
able conditions  for  receiving  impressions  supernormally  at
the  moment  of  transition  into  or  out  of  the  trance  state
would  not  in  itself  throw  light  on  the  question  of  whose
memory  connects  the  trance  proper  with  the  waking-stage.
And,  in  fact,  I  am  disposed  to  think  that  the  cases  of
conscious  memory  in  one  state  or  the  other,  of  the  kind
which  have  been  discussed  in  this  chapter,  can  be  explained
equally  well  as  due  to  the  memory  of  some  part  of
Mrs.  Piper,  or  of  the  controls  or  communicators  ;  and
the  claim  of  the  trance  personages,  of  course,  is  that
it  is  their  memory  which  is  concerned.

There  are,  however,  a  few  cases  which  seem  definitely
to  point  to  the  memory  being  that  of  some  element  of
Mrs.  Piper.  They  may  be  divided  into  two  classes  :
(a)  cases  where  there  is  specific  reason  for  thinking  that
the  control  professing  to  remember  is  not  genuine  ;  (b)
cases  where  the  knowledge  in  the  waking-stage  which  shows
connexion  with  the  trance  is  claimed  by  the  waking-
stage  consciousness  as  acquired  by  direct  experience.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  291

Of  the  first  kind  the  case  of  January  13  and  14,  1897.
given  in  the  Appendix  (pp.  617-618)  is  a  specimen,  and  I
am  not  sure  that  there  are  any  others.  In  this  case
"  Hannah  Wild "  controlling  on  January  14  repeats  a
line  of  a  hymn  which  had  been  uttered  in  the  waking-
stage  the  day  before,  and  on  being  asked  by  Hodgson
whether  she  had  sung  it  "to  the  medium  when  she  was
coming  into  her  body  last  time,"  replied  that  she  had.
The  evidence  for  conscious  memory  here  is  vitiated  by
Hodgson's  leading  question,  but  it  is  quite  possible  that
the  conscious  memory  existed,  and  in  any  case  the  repeti-
tion of  the  same  line  is  conclusive  evidence  of  some
kind  of  continuity.  Now  "  Hannah  Wild  "  was,  it  will  be
remembered,  an  old  communicator,  and  the  attempts
made  to  obtain  evidence  of  her  identity,  as  described
by  Hodgson  in  his  first  Report,1  were  extremely  interesting
and  afforded  important  evidence  of  the  supernormal  acquisi-
tion of  knowledge.  But,  as  Hodgson  says,2  the  evidence
"  seems  to  be  very  far  from  proving  the  presence  of  Hannah
Wild  "  ;  and  I  should  go  further  and  apply  to  the  whole
series  of  sittings  what  he  says  at  an  early  stage  of  it,  viz.
that  the  result  "  suggested  that  however  Phinuit  succeeded
in  obtaining  the  names  and  other  impressions  which  proved
to  be  more  or  less  correct,  he  at  least  did  not  g;et  them
from  the  '  spirit  '  of  Hannah  Wild."  Later  appearances  of
"  Hannah  Wild  " — the  one  we  are  dealing  with  among  them
— did  not  make  it  more  probable  that  the  real  Hannah
Wild  was  concerned.

But  if  it  was  not  Hannah  Wild  herself  who  claimed  on
January  14  to  remember  singing  that  hymn  to  the  returning
spirit  of  Mrs.  Piper  the  day  before,  who  was  it  ?  It  must
have  been  either  some  phase  or  element  of  Mrs.  Piper
herself,  who  somehow  in  both  states  associated  the  hymn
with  Hannah  Wild,  or  it  must  have  been  a  personating
spirit.

The  argument  hi  a  case  of  this  sort  is  briefly  that
the fictitiousness of the trance  personage implies  that

1  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  10-16  and  69-84;  see  also  Professor
W.  James  on  the  subject,  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  657.

2  Op.  cit.,  p.  15.


292


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


communication  by  it  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  waking-
stage  is  fictitious  also.  In  the  second  class  of  case  the
argument  is  in  a  sense  reversed.  It  is  that  as  Mrs.  Piper
in  the  waking-stage  claims  immediate  knowledge  of  facts
or  ideas  common  to  the  two  states,  it  is  probably  some
phase  or  element  of  her  mind  that  has  the  knowledge  in
both  states.  Examples  of  this  class  have  been  given  in
Chapter  VI.  The  claim  of  Mrs.  Piper's  waking-stage
consciousness  to  have  visited  England  and  Mexico  in
spirit  are  cases  in  point  (see  Chapter  VI.,  pp.  247-248,
and  Appendix,  pp.  551,  552).  The  case  of  her  seeing
Professor  Newbold  while  going  into  trance,  and  G.  P.
professing  to  have  done  so  as  soon  as  the  trance  began
(p.  243),  again  seems  to  be  of  the  same  kind.  And
the  case  described  on  p.  248,  and  Appendix  (p.  591),
of  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  waking-stage  seeing  Phinuit,  for  the
first  time  for  years,  on  the  day  when  the  trance  com-
municator had  spoken  of  meeting  him  in  the  other  world,
is,  I  think,  analogous — the  idea  of  Phinuit  in  the  trance
having  probably  suggested  the  vision  to  the  waking-stage
Mrs.  Piper.

These  cases  are  not  numerous,  but  they  are,  I  think,
sufficient  to  show  that  the  interdependence  of  trance
and  waking-stage  ideas  is  sometimes  at  least  due  to
Mrs.  Piper's  mind  operating  in  both  states  and  carrying
ideas  from  one  to  the  other.  This  implies  some  under-
lying memory  connexion,  though  not  necessarily  a  conscious
memory  in  either  state  of  the  other.  That  it  is  not
always  a  conscious  memory  is  shown  by  such  indications
as,  e.g.  Mrs.  Piper's  surprise  at  seeing  Phinuit  "  away
up  there  "  in  the  case  just  mentioned,  and  by  the  frag-
mentariness  and  dreamy  futility  which  sometimes  char-
acterises the  waking-stage  expression  of  the  idea  carried
over.  Myersp — to  take  him  as  an  example  of  communi-
cators— when  claiming  that  it  is  he  who  is  responsible
for  the  connexion  of  ideas  between  the  two  states,  gets
over  the  difficulty  of  the  fragmentariness  by  professing
ignorance  of  what  exactly  he  has  got  Mrs.  Piper  to
understand  or  to  utter  in  the  waking-stage  (see  e.g.  p.  278).
This is quite possibly  true ; —indeed,  if a  real  Myers  is


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  293

communicating,  he  may  well  be  attempting  to  do  so
through  Mrs.  Piper  in  both  states  and  not  know  how  far
he  is  succeeding  in  either.  But  I  think  it  is  clear  that
in  some  cases  there  is  connexion  of  ideas  between  the
two  states  without  a  MyersP  to  carry  them  over.


294


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


CHAPTER  VIII.

Effect  of  Sitters  and  of  so-called  "  Influences  "  on
the  Trance  Phenomena.

It  is  impossible  to  study  the  voluminous  records  of  Mrs.
Piper's  trances  without  perceiving  that  the  nature  and
quality  of  the  communications  vary  very  much.  The
extracts  already  given  in  this  paper  show  this,  and  it
becomes  still  more  manifest  if  those  given  in  previous
reports  are  taken  into  account.  They  vary,  of  course,  with
the  controls,  as  we  saw  in  Chapter  III.  ;  but  they  vary
also  with  the  sitters  ;  and  they  vary  in  style  and  manner
as  well  as  in  evidential  and  other  qualities.

That  the  sitters  must  influence  the  trance  communica-
tions to  some  extent  is,  of  course,  obvious.  For  one  thing,
they  are  themselves  personages  in  the  drama,  and  the  part
they  play  in  it  and  the  way  they  play  it  must  affect
the  way  the  trance  personalities  play  theirs.  This  happens
in  ordinary  conversation.  We  all  of  us  inevitably  talk  to
different  acquaintances  differently  and  on  more  or  less
different  topics,  and  the  complaisance  of  the  controls,
their  desire  to  please,  would  tend  to  develop  this  tendency
strongly.  And  in  the  trance  drama  the  sitters  not  only
largely  determine  the  subjects  of  conversation,  but  the
personages  who  shall  take  part  in  it.  They  explicitly  or
tacitly  demand  that  their  own  friends  shall  manifest
themselves  and  produce  evidence  of  identity,  or  give
information  on  particular  points.  Then  again,  besides
playing  a  part  in  the  drama  and  influencing  the  selection
of  the  other  characters,  the  sitters  are  the  audience.  It
is  all  played  for  them,  and  their  presence  and  participation
very  likely help to prevent  dreamlike  wanderings,  such


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  295

as  occur  in  the  waking-stage  when,  generally  speaking,  no
audience  is  assumed  to  be  present ;  or  incoherences,  such
as  are  liable  to  occur  in  automatic  writing  done  in  solitude,
when  the  automatist  exercises  no  deliberate  influence  on
what  is  written.

It  is  clear  also  that  the  controls  at  times  deliberately
adapted  their  remarks  to  sitters  with  more  regard  to
expediency  than  truth.  I  give  an  extract  in  the  Appendix
(p.  619)  from  the  record  of  a  sitting  on  November  23,
1899  from  which  it  appears  that  assurances  of  an  opposite
nat  re  had  been  given  to  two  sitters.  I  suspect  that  in
{ !  is  particular  case  Rector  was  advising  somewhat  morbid
people,  and  that  in  trying  to  smooth  over  difficulties  in  a
complicated  situation  consistency  was  sacrificed.  This  is
conjecture,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  Rector  did  sometimes
act  with  a  good  deal  of  success  as  adviser  and  helper  in
cases  of  mental  trouble  and  difficulty.

In  cases  such  as  that  just  referred  to,  what  the  control
says  is  influenced  by  what  he  learns  about  the  sitter  by
means  of  normal  tact  and  observation.  But  there  are  other
differences  in  the  sitters  which  have  to  be  considered.
The  controls  speak  of  some  sitters  as  giving  them  light —
meaning  that  with  them  communication  goes  easily.1  But
what  qualities  in  the  sitter  produce  this  result  is  not  clear.
Probably  anything  that  puts  the  controls  at  their  ease  does
so,  and  they  have  very  likely  not  analysed  further.  It  is
sometimes  alleged  that  mediumistic  power  in  the  sitter  works
this  way  ;  e.g.  on  February  22,  1900,  Rector  says  :  "  Mrs.
X  is  a  light  and  gives  us  light  always,  therefore  she  cannot
but  help  the  light  under  such  conditions  as  she  brings."
And  again  on  January  1,  1907,  "  B.  has  some  light  herself,
which  is  a  help  to  us."  But  the  opposite  is  also  asserted,
for  we  learn  from  Miss  A.  M.  R.  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,
p.  113)  that  Phinuit  stated  that  a  certain  sitter  "was  very
mediumistic  herself,  and  weakened  him  when  talking  with
her."  However  this  may  be,  it  seems  certain  that  some-
thing in  the  sitters  affects  the  evidential  value  of  the  com-
munications. As  I  said  in  my  previous  paper  on  Mrs.  Piper
(Proceedings,  Vol.  XV.,  pp.  35,  36)  :

1  See  above,  Chapter  IV.,  pp  152-154.


296


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgtvick.


[part


Differences  in  the  veridicality  of  the  communications  are
evidently  at  least  partly  due  [to]  the  sitter.  The  success
of  sitters  in  obtaining  interesting  communications  varies,  as
we  know,  enormously,  and  there  are  persons  who  sit
with  Mrs.  Piper — have  even  sat  often  with  Mrs.  Piper —
who  though  they  receive  plenty  of  communications,  receive
none  which  there  is  the  slightest  reason  to  suppose
supernormal  at  all.  It  is,  I  think,  the  case  that  the
sitters  who  obtain  most  evidence  of  supernormal  communica-
tion of  some  kind  are  those  whose  sittings  afford  evidence
of  supernormal  communication  of  all  kinds,  both  of  thought-
transference  from  the  sitter  and  of  communication  with  the
dead  or  with  distant  living  minds.  If  it  were  only  a  question
of  information  derived  by  Mrs.  Piper  telepathically  from
the  sitter,  it  would  be  easy  to  attribute  the  failure  of  an
unsuccessful  sitter  to  his  being  a  bad  agent  ;  but  a  good
sitter  seems  in  some  way  to  make  the  process  of  trans-
mission easier,  even  when  he  does  not  seem  to  be  the
source  of  the  information.

Hodgson  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  371)  recognised
this  difference,  but  was  inclined  to  attribute  it  merely  to
want  of  tact  and  sympathy  in  the  sitter,  or  to  what  we  may
perhaps  call  want  of  will  to  be  communicated  with.  But
though  defects  of  this  kind  in  a  sitter  doubtless  have  some
effect,  they  will  not,  I  am  sure,  account  adequately  for
much  of  the  failure,  any  more  than  such  differences  of
mental  attitude  will  account  in  thought-transference  experi-
ments for  the  complete  failure  of  some  agents  in  com-
municating ideas  to  percipients  with  whom  other  agents
succeed.  There  must  be  a  quality  of  mind  or  brain,  not  a
mere  mental  or  emotional  attitude,  which  makes  a  person
a  good  telepathic  agent,  and  it  is  highly  probable,  I  think,
that  the  quality  making  for  good  agency  also  makes  for
good  percipiency  and  vice  versa,  some  kind  of  attunement
between  the  two  incarnate  minds  concerned  being  also  per-
haps needed.  I  suggested  in  my  previous  paper  that  this
psychical  quality,  whatever  it  may  consist  in,  may  cause
the  sitter  possessing  it  to  serve,  not  only  as  a  telepathic
source  of  information  to  the  controls,  but  as  a  possible
telepathic channel of communication between his  com-


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.  Phenomena.  297

municating  friends  in  the  other  world  and  the  controls.
If  this  last  point  could  be  established  it  would  certainly  help
to  remove  some  of  the  difficulties  connected  with  supposed
veridical  communications  through  Mrs.  Piper — at  any  rate
the  difficulty  of  accounting  for  the  selection  of  communi-
cators. But  it  does  not  specially  concern  our  present
subject  and  I  do  not  propose  to  say  more  about  it  now.
I  discussed  it  somewhat  more  fully  in  the  paper  referred
to.  The  other  point,  the  sitter  as  a  telepathic  source  of
information,  requires  further  consideration  here,  because  on
this  the  controls  at  various  times  expressed  views,  though
not  always  quite  consistent  ones.

First  we  may  remark  that  the  evidence  for  thought  trans-
ference from  the  sitter  does  not  solely  consist  of  cases  where
the  sitter  as  a  source  of  information  is  an  alternative  to  the
spiritistic  hypothesis.  There  are  a  certain  number  of  in-
stances of  thoughts  at  the  moment  in  the  sitter's  mind,  or
which  have  been  in  his  mind  recently,  being  reproduced
in  or  affecting  the  trance  communications  in  a  way  that
can  hardly  be  attributed  to  chance.  As  examples  may  be
mentioned  the  cases  I  called  attention  to  in  Chapter  III.,
p.  85,  of  the  first  appearance  as  controls  of  Sir  Walter
Scott  and  of  D.  D.  Home  following  promptly  after
Hodgson  had  been  reading  about  them,  and  of  Madame
Guyon's  first  appearance  occurring  similarly  in  connexion
with  a  sitter  who  had  been  reading  about  her.1  A  case
of  knowledge  of  what  Hodgson  and  Professor  Newbold
had  been  thinking  is  mentioned  on  p.  86.  A  case  of  a
reply  being  given  at  a  sitting  on  December  8,  1893,  to  pre-
vious thoughts  of  the  sitter,  which  had  not  been  mentioned
in  Mrs.  Piper's  presence,  will  be  found  in  Proceedings,  Vol.
XIII. ,  p.  489,  as  follows  :

The  day  before  the  sitting  Mr.  Sutton  had  questioned
whether  it  was  right  or  desirable  for  them  to  bring  them
back  for  our  gratification.  It  did  not  occur  to  him  during
the  sitting,  but  Alonzo  said,  "  Do  not  think  it  wrong  to  bring
us  back — we  love  to  come."

1  In  this  last  case  there  may,  however,  have  been  a  cross-correspondence
(see  Chapter  III.,  p.  123).


298


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


In  the  same  way  Hodgson  records  on  December  2,  1902,
that  a  subject  he  and  a  previous  sitter  had  discussed  two
days  before — a  fourth  dimension  of  space— turned  up  at
the  sitting.

Hodgson  several  times  notes  the  uttering  by  the  controls
of  a  thought  at  the  moment  in  his  mind,  but  in  some  cases,
e.g.  in  one  on  March  19,  1897,  quoted  in  Chapter  IV.
(p.  151),  and  perhaps  in  one  on  July  1,  1895  (Appendix,  p.  627),
the  coincidence  might  result  merely  from  the  same  idea  being
suggested  to  both  by  what  had  been  said.  Professor  Hyslop's
case  quoted  below,  however,  p.  299  (October  10,  1906),  seems
free  from  this  objection.  And  a  somewhat  similar  case
(January  24,  1893)  is  described  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,
p.  438,  when  G.  P.  divined  what  Hodgson  was  going  to
ask  him  to  do,  and  said  he  heard  him  say  it.  Hodgson  had
not  done  so — at  least  at  the  sitting — and  replied  that  G.  P.
must  have  heard  his  thought.

Thought-transference  of  this  limited  kind  the  controls
sometimes  admit,  but  they  are  chary  of  admitting  even  this
much,  and  go  so  far  on  other  occasions  as  to  deny  that  they
get  ideas  from  the  sitter's  mind  at  all.  Their  dislike  of  the
telepathic  hypothesis  is  probably  due  to  the  fear  that  it
would  militate  against  a  spiritistic  hypothesis.  This  comes
out,  for  instance,  in  passages  from  the  sittings  of  May  23
and  24,  1905,  which  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix,  p.  620.
And  these  passages  also  bring  out  inconsistencies  in  which
the  unqualified  denial  of  telepathy  from  the  sitter  involves
the  controls.  On  May  23,  G.  P.  is  very  emphatic  in  his
assertion  that  the  sitter's  "  mind  has  nothing  to  do  with
it."  The  next  day  Rector  expresses  amusement  at  the
sitter's  idea  "  that  we  were  able  to  pick  out  of  thy
mind  *  *  *  words  or  names  of  friends,  etc."  The  sitter
says  she  is  not  alone  in  this  opinion,  which  leads  Rector
to  say  rather  inconsistently  :

No  mortal  could  possibly  be  more  conscious  of  this
attitude  toward  [us  ?]  than  we  ourselves  are.  Remember
friend  we  are  in  no  wise  dead  or  asleep  to  the  realisation
of  the  thoughts  of  mortals  concerning  us.  We  not  only
understand  fully  what  they  think  but  we  often  hear
conversations  which  actually  take  place  between  mortals.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  299


The  fuller  extracts  from  these  two  sittings  in  the
Appendix  will  be  found  interesting,  and  with  them  should
be  compared  Rector's  remarks  on  April  15,  1897  (Appendix,
p.  621).

One  way  in  which  the  controls  seek  to  limit  the  admis-
sion of  telepathic  help  from  the  sitter  is  by  granting  that
they  borrow  words  from  the  sitter  but  not  ideas.  See
e.g.  February  13,  1897  (Appendix  to  Chapter  III.,  p.  477):

R.  H. These  words  suggested  to me a misappreciation  of

what  you  really  meant.
Impekatok  (writing). I  am  not  responsible  for  my  words.  I

am  obliged  to  borrow  more  or  less  of  your  own.
R.  H. That  is  to  say,  you  have  a  thought,  and  the  words

depend  in  part  at  least  on  your  interlocutor.
Imp.  Yes

This  same  idea  was  expressed  by  Rector  (as  reported
by  Mr.  Dorr)  somewhat  more  fully  on  March  20,  1905
(see  Appendix,  p.  622).  Mr.  Dorr  had  suggested  that
communications  were  influenced  by  the  mind  of  the  sitter,
and  Rector  replied  that  the  language  in  which  the  thought
was  expressed  was  often  largely  borrowed  from  the  sitter's
mind,  but  that  the  thought  itself  was  not.

In  1906,  on  the  other  hand,  HodgsonP,  controlling  or
communicating,  franldy  admitted  mind-reading  on  more
than  one  occasion.  Thus  on  March  21,  1906,  the  following
remarks  are  recorded  by  Professor  Hyslop  (see  Proceedings
American  S.P.B.,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  682)  :

Prof.  Hyslop.  I  have  seen  evidences  every  now  and  then  that
you  get  my  thoughts  which  I  do  not  utter.

Hodgsonp.  Indeed  I  do.  I  am  as  clear  in  reading  your
thoughts  as  you  are  in  thinking  them.

And  again  on  October  10,  1906  (op.  cit.,  p.  719)  :

Hodgsonp. Hyslop  I  am  going  to  tell  you  something  private.

I do not  want  you  to  remarry  that  woman  with

the  children.
Prof.  Hyslop. To  whom  do  you  refer  ?
HoDGsoNp. I  mean  the  one  in  your  life  now.


300  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

Prof.  Hyslop.  Good,  I  did  not  want  to  open  that  matter
first.

Hor>GsoNp.  Good.  I  hear  you  think  almost.  I  almost  hear
you  think.

Possibly,  however,  HodgsonP  retained  some  anxiety  lest
the  idea  of  telepathy  from  the  sitter  should  be  carried  too
far — at  least,  this  may  be  the  implication  in  the  following
conversation  on  April  25,  190G  (o}).  cit.,  p.  696)  :

{Reference  had  been  made  to  a  correct  statement  by
Hodgsonp about something said  in a  conversation
Hodgson  had  had  with  Professor  Newbold. }
Prof.  Hyslop. Yes  Hodgson,  and  you  told  me  the  same  thing
twice.

Hodgsonp. What  thing  before  I  came  over  do  you — ■
Prof.  Hyslop. Yes  Hodgson.
HoDGsoNp. Oh  yes  I  remember  it  well.
Prof.  Hyslop.  Good.

HoDGsoNp. There  is  no  telepathy  in  this  except  as  it  comes

from  my  mind  to  yours.
Prof.  Hyslop. Good. Then  telepathy  is  at  least  a  part  of  the

process  by  which  you  communicate  with  me  ?
HoDGsoNp. Most  assuredly  it  is  and  I  had  a  vague  idea  before

I  came  over.
Prof.  Hyslop. Yes,  you  did.

Hodgsonp.  You  remember  our  talks  about  the  telepathic
theory  of  our  friends'  thoughts  reaching  us  from
this  side  telepathically — [correct]  communicating  tele-
pathically  from  our  side  to  yours.

To  the  influence  of  sitters — not  necessarily  telepathic —
we  may  attribute,  I  think,  a  remarkable  difference  in
quality,  varying  apparently  with  the  country  in  which
they  occur,  in  the  communications  of  GurneyP,  MyersP,
and  HodgsonP,  whether  as  communicators  or  controls.
GurneyP  was  a  much  more  interesting  communicator  in
England  than  in  America,  while  with  HodgsonP  the  reverse
was  the  case,  and  the  importance  of  MyersP  as  a  communi-
cator was  greatly  enhanced  when  Mrs.  Piper  came  to
England  in  1906. The  effect  of  place  was,  I  imagine,  acci-


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  301

dental,  except  so  far  as  Mrs.  Piper's  associations  may  have
made  Myers  seem  to  her  a  more  appropriate  communicator
than  Hodgson  in  England,  and  thus  have  helped  sub-
liminally  to  bring  him  into  comparative  prominence.
But  it  is  probable,  indeed  practically  certain,  that  the  sitters
— different  in  the  two  countries — had  hi  various  ways  an
important  influence  on  the  communications,  and  this  might
well  account  for  the  greater  interest  of  what  MyersP  had
to  say  in  England.

The  case  of  HodgsonP  is  more  difficult  to  understand.
During  the  first  few  months  after  Hodgson's  death  he
appeared  to  be  a  most  vivid  and  impressive  communicator
to  marry  of  his  friends  in  the  United  States,  as  readers  of
William  James's  Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson  Control
[Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.)  are  aware.  Why  in  England,
only  a  few  months  later,  HodgsonP  should  have  almost
entirely  failed  to  recognise  intimate  friends  of  Hodgson's,
or  to  be  put  on  the  track  of  memories  which  one  would
suppose  Hodgson  must  have  retained,  one  does  not  see.
The  fact  that  it  was  three  or  four  years  since  Hodgson
and  his  English  friends  had  met  in  the  flesh  hardly  seems
a  sufficient  explanation.

The  Gurney  case  is  still  more  curious.  Gurney  died  in
the  summer  of  1888,  and  a  Gurney  control  made  its
appearance  through  Mrs.  Piper  in  America  on  several
occasions  in  March,  1889,  when  Professor  William  James
was  present.  He  gives  some  account  of  it  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  VI.,  pp.  655-6,  which  was  published  in  1890,  calling
the  control  "  E.",  and  says  "  neither  then,1  nor  at  any
other  time,  was  there  to  my  mind  the  slightest  inner
verisimilitude  in  the  personation."  Hodgson,  who  was
present  at  at  least  one  of  these  sittings,  also  describes
this  control  in  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  44-45,  agreeing  that  it  was
not  like  Gurney. He  adds  :

If  we  assume  that  this  control  was  the  "  make-up  "  of
Mrs.  Piper's  secondary  personality,  it  apparently  involved
some  very  subtle  use  of  information  drawn  telepathically

1  That  is  at  the  first  appearance,  when  Gurney P  purported  to  communicate
through  Phinuit. On  other  occasions  he  "'  controlled  "  himself.


302


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


from  at  least  the  minds  of  the  sitters,  and  at  the  same
time  the  most  extravagant  ignorance  and  confusion  con-
cerning other  facts,  some  of  which  were  known  to  the
sitters,  and  which  we  should  expect  to  be  vivid  in  the
remembrance  of  "  E."

Mrs.  Piper  visited  England  in  the  winter  of  1889-90,  and
there  the  personation  was  good.  Some  very  private
things,  too  private  for  publication,  which  could  not
possibly  be  known  to  Mrs.  Piper,  were  referred  to — first
in  the  presence  of  sitters  who  were  aware  of  them ;  and
the  control  as  witnessed  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  was  vivid
and  plausible,  and  to  some  extent  evidential.  Extracts
from  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  sittings  at  which  Gurney  appeared
are  given  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  and  more  fully  in
Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.,  pp.  140-1 02.  I  have  quoted
one  passage  in  Chapter  II.,  p.  60.  The  pseudonym  "  E."  was
adopted  in  reporting  in  1890,  partly  because  of  the
extremely  private  nature  of  the  more  evidential  matter,
and  partly  because  of  the  badness  of  the  American  mani-
festations. For  the  two  reasons  together  it  seemed  better
to  wait  for  further  developments  before  bringing  any
Gurney  communications  as  such  before  the  Society.  That
these  further  developments  were  to  be  expected  was
clearly  indicated  in  the  passage  referred  to  above,  and
again  in  such  passages  as  the  following  (evening  of
February  3,  1890,  op.  tit.,  p.  158)  :

Well  Lodge  I  must  be  going.  Good-bye.  Stick  to  a  good
thing  and  don't  give  it  up.  Go  on  with  the  investigation.
I  will  help  you.  This  will  be  the  thing  of  the  future,
and  will  increase  people's  happiness.  More  mediums  will
arise,  and  communication  will  be  easier.  Good-bye.

Phinuit  professed  to  think  highly  of  Gurney's  capa-
cities as  a  control,  as  is  shown  by  a  remark  he  made
(morning  of  February  3,  1890,  op.  cit.,  p.  160)  to  Sir  Oliver
Lodge  who  had  asked  that  a  certain  communicator  should
control  instead  of  only  sending  messages,  and  was  told  it
was  too  difficult.  He  pleaded  that  Mr.  Gurney  did  it,
to  which  Phinuit  replied  :


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  303


Yes,  Mr.  Gurney  does,  but  Mr.  Gurney  is  a  scientific
man,  who  has  gone  into  these  things  He  comes  and  turns
me  out  sometimes.  It  would  be  a  very  narrow  place  into
which  Mr.  Gurney  couldn't  get.

After  Mrs.  Piper's  return  to  America,  however,  nothing
further  of  interest  seems  to  have  occurred.  Gurney  com-
municated and  controlled  occasionally,  but  in  a  brief  and
ineffective  manner,  and  other  controls  seemed  to  assume  that
this  must  necessarily  be  so.  G.  P.  said  on  November  30,
1892  :

G.  P.  He  has  not  been  allowed  and  not  had  the  power  to
come  back  as  I  do.

i|e  3|e  3fe  a|c

He  would  like  to  have  been  a  help  to  you  but  he
has  not  been  allowed  through  this  medium  or  any
other.

R.  H. Well,  Phinuit  told  us  that  Gurney  told  him  that  he

would  give  us  a  long  article.
G.  P. I  think  he  will  be  able  to  do  a  few  things  like  that,

but  never  do  what  I  do.

And  again  on  June  15,  1895,  G.  P.  said  of  him  to
Professor  Newbold  :

G.  P.  A  brighter  man  never  existed,  yet  when  he  tries  to
speak  he  is  all  balled  up.

'  Balled  up  '  is,  I  understand,  American  slang  for  confused.
G.  P.'s  view  must  therefore  be  held  to  be  in  contradiction
to  the  facts  if  it  was  Gurney  who  controlled  in  the  English
sittings  of  1889-90.  But  Gurney P  in  America  himself  sup-
ported G.  P.'s  view,  for  he  said  to  Hodgson  on  January  25,
1897  :

Gurney p  (writing).  I  have  been  very  much  interested  in  your
friend  George.  He  has  just  taken  my  place  and
done  what  I  should  have  liked  to  have  done.

R.  H. He's  been  a  jewel.

GuBNEYp.  Yet  I  fear  my  [undecipherable]  was  too  shaky  to  do
so.  My  head  was  not  clear,  and  is  not  yet,  when
I  speak  to  you.


304  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

And  again,  in  the  course  of  a  brief  communication
through  Rector  on  October  31,  1900,  he  said  :

I  am  out  of  my  general  haziness  into  light  at  last.

This  he  repeated  on  January  29,  1902,  saying  :

I  have  passed  out  of  my  haziness  since  Myers  and
the  rest  of  the  comrades  joined  me.

Between  these  two  last-mentioned  sittings,  on  April  8,
1901,  Mrs.  Piper,  in  the  waking-stage,  made  the  curious
remarks  recorded  as  follows  (see  Appendix  to  Chapter  VI.,
p.  578)  :

[To  R.  H.]  That's  a  queer  tiling.  I'll  tell  you  some-
thing. R.  H.  What  ?

There's  Mr.  Sidgwick,  and  they've  taken  Mr.  Gurney
out  of  a  hole.  They  found  him  and  took  him  out.
You  never  saw  a  man  so  pleased  as  he  was.  He's
nearer  than  he  was.  He's  getting  {next  words
apparently  lost. }

What  change  had  occurred  to  put  Gurney P  into  a  haze,
or  a  hole,  or  to  cause  him  to  be  "  balled  up  "  after  he
had  been  so  clear  in  1889-90,  does  not  appear.  Nor  does
his  coming  out  of  the  haze  appear  to  have  led  to  improved
communications.

In  England  in  1906-7  he  did  not,  I  think,  put  in  an
appearance,  and  I  believe  that  after  1903  his  next  mani-
festation was  in  England  in  1910-11.  He  was  then
expected  by  one  of  the  sitters  introduced  by  Sir  Oliver
Lodge,  and,  after  being  asked  for,  communicated  clearly
and  with  a  good  deal  of  appropriateness  to  the  occasion.  It
will  be  remembered  that  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  waking-stage  of
December  2,  1910,  after  a  sitting  in  which  Gurney  P  had
communicated,  described  a  visionary  man  she  saw  in  a
way  that  fitted  Gurney,  and  when  shown  a  photograph
of  him  recognised  it  with  a  decision  that  impressed  Sir
Oliver  Lodge  as  genuine.  The  incident  is  described  fully
above,  Chapter  VI.,  pp.  252-253.  What  was  also  apparently
a  vision  of  him  had  occurred  two  months  earlier  on  October
10. There  had  been  a  similar  one  on  October  31,  1900,


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  305

after  the  sitting  quoted  from  above.  Mrs.  Piper  said  in
the  waking-stage  :

There's a great tall man with a large  moustache.
{Hodgson  appends  the  note}  [E.  G.?]1

It  is  certainly  difficult  to  put  all  these  communications
from  and  concerning  GurneyP  together  so  as  to  make  a
consistent  personality,  and  the  easiest  explanation  of  the
discrepancies  seems  on  the  whole  to  lie  in  the  different
expectations  of  Hodgson  in  America  and  Sir  Oliver  Lodge
and  other  sitters  in  England.

From  the  influence  of  sitters  we  may  pass  to  the
supposed  influence  at  sittings  of  objects  connected  with
particular  persons,  whether  dead  or  living.  Such  articles
or  objects  are  often  in  the  conversations  between  sitters
and  trance  personalities  simply  called  "  influences,"  and  I
shall  use  this  term  in  what  follows.  Influences  are  supposed
to  bring  the  control  into  touch  with  then  owners  or  former
owners,  and  are  sometimes  spoken  of  as  a  source  of  infor-
mation which  may  be  used  to  prove  that  the  presence  of  a
sitter  is  not  necessary.  Thus,  on  April  27,  1904,  Hodgson
records  the  following  remarks,  elicited  through  an  "  in-
fluence "  of  Mrs.  B.  being  presented  to  Rector  who  had
expressed  a  wish  to  hear  from  her  :

R.  +  {i.e.  Imperator}  before  the  light  permanently  closes
on  the  earthly  side  of  life  would  like  to  use  it  for
fifteen  or  sixteen  Sabbaths  {i.e.  weeks}  for  the  purpose
of  obtaining  messages  etc.  from  our  world  from  influences
alone,  for  the  express  purpose  of  proving  to  mortals  the
fact  that  it  is  not  necessary  for  them  to  be  present  at
the  light  to  obtain  such.2

Sitters  wishing  for  some  particular  communicator,  or
desiring  information  about  some  distant  living  person,  are
generally  advised  to  bring  to  the  sitting  some  article
connected  with  him, one  that  has  been  much  worn  or

1  It  is  not  of  course  unlikely  that  Mrs.  Piper  in  her  normal  state
had  seen  a  likeness  of  Gurney  in  England  in  1889-90.

2  Influences  were  much  in  use  about  this  time  for  medical  diagnosis.

u


306


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


handled  by  him  being  preferred.  This  "  influence "  is
put  into  the  hands  of  the  medium  or  placed  close  to  the
writing  block.  In  a  voice  sitting  it  can  be  held  by  the
medium  all  the  time,  and  in  a  writing  sitting  it  can  be
felt  and  grasped  at  intervals.  During  the  G.  P.  regime,
when  divided  control  was  the  usual  condition — or  at  least
was  supposed  to  be — an  "  influence  "  would  often  be  given
to  the  left  hand  to  occupy  Phinuit's  attention  and  enable
G.  P.  to  write  with  the  right  hand  uninterrupted  by
Phinuit.  Influences  are  not  represented  as  always  necessary,
nor  are  they  always  asked  for,  but  their  absence  is  some-
times an  excuse  for  failure.

One's  first  impression  naturally  is  that  all  this  must  be
nonsense,  but  the  evidence  on  the  whole  seems  to  show
that  some  effect  is  produced  by  influences,  though  probably
not  in  the  way  the  controls  say  and  perhaps  think.
Hodgson  says  in  his  first  Report  (Proc,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  21)
that  he  thinks  Phinuit

is  much  more  likely  to  succeed  with  the  help  of  such
objects  than  without  them.  It  is  quite  conceivable,  of
course,  that  Phinuit's  belief  that  such  articles  act  as  clues
may  itself  influence  his  success,  even  though  that  belief  be
merely  subjective.

Again  {Proc,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  56-57)  :

Possibly  Phinuit  may  be  assisted  in  some  way  by  in-
animate objects  which  have  been  much  worn  or  handled  by
specific  persons,  and,  as  I  have  said,  they  seem  to  add  to
the  chances  of  his  success.  *  *  *  Phinuit  apparently  claims
that  such  objects  bring  him  into  relation  with  the  persons
who  have  handled  them,  whether  such  persons  be  living  or
dead.  Now  where  the  sitter  knows  the  circumstances  con-
nected with  the  object,  the  associations  will  probably  form
a  specially  vivid  cluster  of  experiences  in  his  mind,  con-
scious or  subconscious,  owing  to  the  very  presence  of  the
object  within  the  field  of  his  perception,  and  this  may  help
Phinuit  to  discover  and  disentangle  these  associations  by
direct  thought-transference.  Where,  on  the  other  hand,
the  sitter  is  ignorant  of  the  circumstances  connected  with


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  307

the  object,  it  may,  at  any  rate,  form  a  sort  of  point  de
repere  enabling  Pbinuit  to  get  telepathic  ally,  through  the
mind  of  the  sitter,  at  the  mind  of  the  distant  living
person  from  whom  the  object  was  obtained,  and  who
knows  of  its  associations.
I  do  not  think  further  experience  has  thrown  much
more  light  on  the  subject,  and  perhaps  that  is  why
Hodgson  does  not  discuss  it  again  in  his  second  report.
A  good  deal  has,  however,  been  said  about  it  by  the
trance  personalities  since  his  first  report  was  written,  and
it  may  be  well  to  give  some  account  of  their  statements.
Accordingly,  I  quote  in  the  Appendix  various  general
accounts  given  by  them,  and  also  particular  cases  of  the
use  of  influences  connected  with  dead  or  living  people,
which  illustrate  or  throw  doubt  on  their  theories.  These
are  arranged  in  chronological  order.  The  fullest  account
in  some  respects  is  that  given  by  Doctor  on  February  8,
1897  (see  p.  628),  but  he  confines  himself  almost  entirely
to  the  use  of  influences  from  the  point  of  view  of  communi-
cators. From  this  point  of  view  he,  with  the  assistance
of  Hodgson,  attributes  five  uses  to  an  influence.  It  attracts
its  former  owner,  stimulates  his  associations,  makes  him  feel
at  home,  and,  owing  to  "  its  own  light,"  in  some  way  gives
him  strength  to  communicate.  It  also  helps  "  him  to  avoid
being  telepathically  acted  upon  by  spirits,"  whether  in  or
out  of  the  body  apparently.  This  last  is  presumably  what
Rector  means  when  he  talks  of  the  influence  holding  "  the
desired  spirit  apart  from  others  avIio  might  otherwise  un-
consciously interrupt  "  (Dec.  2,  1902,  see  Appendix,  p.  637),
and  keeping  "  the  communicators  clear  "  (May  6,  1903,  see
Appendix,  p.  638).

G.  P.,  in  his  account  given  to  Professor  Newbold  on
June  20,  1895,  and  to  Hodgson  on  July  1,  1895  (see
Appendix,  pp.  624,  626),  looks  at  the  matter  from  the  point
of  view  of  the  control  who,  it  is  said,  gets  from  the  influence
an  impression  of  the  owner,  living  or  dead,  which  enables
the  control  to  recognize  him  in  the  spirit  world ;  or,
in  the  case  of  a  distant  living  owner,  to  diagnose,
medically  or  otherwise,  his  case.  G.  P.,  as  control  on
Dec. 26, 1896  (see  Appendix,  p.  628),  confirms  this  idea


308


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


that  recognition  by  the  control  of  the  spirit  owner  of  an
influence  is  an  important  object  to  be  attained  by  pre-
senting it,  for  he  says  the  absence  of  the  influence  after
the  first  sitting  will  make  no  difference,  "  I  would  know
him  anywhere  after  this."

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  G.  P.  and  Doctor  both
deny,  or  at  least  are  very  sceptical  about,  the  possibility
of  what  is  called  psychometry — the  learning  from  an
object  its  own  history  without  the  intervention  of  a  spirit
connected  with  it  (see  Appendix,  pp.  625,  634).

We  are  told  various  other  things  about  influences,  such
as  that  their  effect  diminishes  with  use  (see  Appendix,
February  8,  1897,  p.  632),  and  with  lapse  of  time  (Appen-
dix, June  20,  1895,  p.  624,  and  April  11,  1905,  p.  642)  ;
that  they  deteriorate  from  being  carried  across  the  water
— i.e.  the  Atlantic  Ocean  (Appendix,  November  22,  1905,
p.  643),  and,  again,  from  having  been  handled  by  many
people  (Appendix,  June  20,  1895,  p.  624),  or  being  much  in
contact  with  other  influences.  These  difficulties,  whether
genume  or  not,  obviously  afford  excuses  for  failure.

It  will  be  observed  that  the  effective  part  of  an  in-
fluence is  sometimes  described  as  its  "  light,"  or  as
"  etherial."  This  part  is  sometimes  said  to  be  taken  to
the  other  world  for  use  apart  from  the  sittings  apparently.
Thus,  on  March  7,  1900  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,
p.  409),  Bennie  Junot  says  :

You  see  I  took  all  my  influences  with  me.  [At  end  of
previous  sitting  the  hand  fingered  some  of  the  articles
{that  had  belonged  to  Bennie}  and  acted  as  if  "  drawing
some  influence"  from  them,  after  the  writing  ceased. — R.  H.]
And  I  am  better  now  and  perhaps  I  can  tell  you  more.

And  again,  on  March  27,  1900,  Bennie  says  (Proceedings,
Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  425)  :

He  who  is  helping  me  is  calling  me  to  take  my  influences
and  give  it  up  for  now.

Compare  also  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  492,  where
Phinuit  is  said,  on  December  21,  1893,  to  make  a  motion
of  drawing  something  from  a  living  child's  lock  of  hair  and


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper  s  Trance  Phenomena.  309

giving  it  to  the  child  spirit,  Kakie,  saying,  "  Now  she  has
it. She  can  get  nearer  her  little  sister  with  it."

It  is  rather  bewildering  to  find  on  Jnly  5,  1904
(Appendix,  p.  639),  that  the  spirit  of  the  influence  cannot
thus  be  taken  to  the  spirit  world  unless  the  influence
is  held  by  the  medium  before  the  control  begins  to  depart
— notwithstanding  that  the  presence  of  an  influence  during
the  waking-stage  tends  apparently  to  keep  its  spirit
owner  hanging  about  against  his  will  (see  April  14,  1908,
Appendix,  p.  643).  Rector,  having  failed  to  take  the  spirit
of  Mr.  D.'s  influence  away  with  him  on  July  4,  1904,
has  to  show  the  influence  itself  to  Imperator  during  the
sitting  on  the  5th,  as  well  as  to  take  away  its  spirit  at  the
end  of  the  sitting.

Various  views  as  to  the  influences  of  living  people  will
be  found  expressed  in  the  cases  quoted  in  the  Appendix.
Phinuit's  theory  on  January  24,  1893  (p.  623),  apparently
was  that  the  perspiration  of  the  body  on  the  influence  is
carried  on  the  air  and  that  he  follows  it  to  the  person's
spiritual  body  ; — an  explanation  which,  as  one  of  the
sitters,  Mr.  Howard,  remarks,  "  is  very  obscure."  Rector,
on  October  28,  1902,  takes  a  more  spiritual  view  apparently.
The  influence  brings  the  spirit  of  its  living  owner  almost
as  close  to  him  as  the  sitter,  he  can  see  it  so  perfectly
(p.  636).  It  is,  however,  the  body  of  Mr.  X.  that  he  sees
so  plainly  on  December  8,  1902  (p.  638),  and  on  December
19,  1904  (p.  640),  it  was  "  the  astral  light  which  the
article  carried  with  it  which  brought  "  him  "  in  immediate
touch  with "  the  owner's  organism.  On  February  7,  1905,
several  erroneous  guesses  having  been  made  about  the
owner  of  the  influence  which  had  been  in  Hodgson's  pos-
session for  some  weeks,  Rector  opines  (p.  641)  that

We  see  his  condition  from  the  objects  presented  at  the
time  when  they  were  connected  with  him.  This  is  a
trifle  confusing  as  the  case  stands  now.

And  on  April  24,  1905  (p.  643),  the  control,  owing  to  a
special  sympathy  between  a  father  and  daughter,  is  able
"  to  reach  her  aura  through  his  objects."

Altogether,  what  the  controls  say  is  not  very  explanatory.


310


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


nor  I  think  does  it  add  much  to  the  data  Hodgson
had  before  him  when  he  framed  the  telepathic  hypothesis
quoted  above.  That  hypothesis  still  seems  to  me  plausible,
though  I  learn  from  Professor  Newbold  that  Hodgson  had
definitely  abandoned  it.1  It  involves,  of  course,  the  active
part  in  the  telepathic  process  being  taken  by  the  controls,
who  must  get  out  of  the  sitter's  mind  certain  ideas,  con-
scious or  subconscious,  which  are  grouped  together  there
and  marked  off  by  the  presence  of  the  influence.  The  in-
fluence in  its  effect  on  the  sitter's  mind  may  even  form  a
kind  of  frame  into  which  ideas  derived  by  the  controls  from
elsewhere  may  or  may  not  be  found  to  fit — a  sort  of  touch-
stone by  which  the  appropriateness  of  ideas  can  be  tele-
pathically  tested  before  they  are  selected  for  utterance.  It
is  not  at  all  incompatible  with  this  hypothesis  about  in-
fluences that  they  are  by  no  means  used  with  uniform
success,  and  that  communicators  may  sometimes  claim  as
theirs  articles  presented  by  sitters,  and  yet  fail  altogether
to  give  the  slightest  evidence  of  identity,  or  to  offer  any
plausible  communications.

But  influences  were  resorted  to  and  apparently  found
useful  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trances  in  cases  where  the  useful-
ness cannot  have  consisted  either  in  the  things  G.  P.  and
Doctor  claim  for  them,  or  in  their  being  aids  to  tele-
pathic selection.  For  instance,  when  Mrs.  Piper  was  in
England  in  1906-7,  and  also  later,  the  trance  controls
professed  to  get  strength  and  help  when  the  hand  grasped
a  handkerchief,  known  as  "  the  healer's  influence,"  which
had  belonged,  I  believe,  to  a  lady  in  America — a  mental
healer  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  308).  It  would
be  grasped  at  moments  of  seeming  weakness,  not  because
any  communication  with  its  former  owner  or  her  friends
was  sought  for  or  obtained,  but  for  the  strength  to  be
derived  from  it.  We  can  hardly,  however,  suppose  that
the  handkerchief  was  an  important  and  persisting  store-
house of  strength,  especially  as,  according  to  the  control's
views,  it  must  have  lost  some  of  its  effect  in  crossing  the

1 1  do  not  know  what  hypothesis  he  put  in  its  place,  given,  what  I  think
was  the  case,  that  he  believed  in  the  efficacy  of  articles  in  attracting  "  spirits
and  in  tapping  a  stream  of  veridical  communications.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  311

ocean.  Influences,  again,  connected  with  a  constant  com-
municator like  Hodgson  can  hardly  have  been  required  for
any  effect  in  facilitating  selection  from  the  mind  of  the
sitter,  though  their  presentation  by  a  sitter  may  sometimes
have  indicated  in  a  normal  manner  that  communication
with  Hodgson  was  desired.  Nor,  though  it  is  asserted
that  Hodgson's  influences  did  attract  and  hold  him,
apparently  by  a  process  he  found  it  difficult  to  resist
(see  April  14  and  21,  1908,  Appendix,  pp.  643,  644),  would  one
suppose  them  necessary  either  to  attract  him,  or  to  make
him  feel  at  home,  or  to  stimulate  associations.

It  is  possible  that  the  use  of  influences  was  sometimes
a  piece  of  ritual.  Of  ritual — forms  and  ceremonies  to  be
observed — there  is  a  good  deal  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance
procedure,  as  will  be  obvious  to  readers  who  have  followed
my  examination  of  it  so  far,  and  ritual  may  have  an  im-
portant subjective  effect  both  on  medium  and  sitters.

But  there  is  another  possibility  to  be  considered.  The
use  of  the  healer's  influence,  if  not  of  Hodgson's,  suggests
that  holding  an  object  for  a  few  seconds  with  the  hand
may  have  had  a  kind  of  steadying  effect  on  the  trance
condition — helping  perhaps  to  fix  the  attention  and  avert
some  tendency  to  dream-like  instability.  It  may  have
helped  in  some  such  way  as  holding  a  friend's  hand  helps
some  people  to  maintain  self-control  when  in  pain.  Or  the
mere  pause  involved  in  grasping  an  influence,  slight  as  it
was,  may  have  been  helpful  in  some  way,  as  is  suggested,
for  example,  by  the  following  passage  in  Mr.  Dorr's  record
of  March  17,  1908  (Mr.  Dorr  it  will  be  remembered  was
trying  to  draw  out  reminiscences  of  classical  literature  from
Myers  P)  :

MYEBSp.  VENUS

[Written haltingly and pausing between letters  to
grasp  influence  of  healer  and  hold  it  for  a  moment.
This  was  repeatedly  done  during  the  sitting  in  get-
ting difficult  words  through.]
G.  B.  D. Good. Write  it  again.

Myebsp. Wait  until  I  get  fight  VENUS.

[Takes influence again and holds it for  another
moment.]


312


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Myeksp. Beauty. Apple  angered  Juno.

An  incident  is  recorded  on  May  8,  1908,  at  another  of  Mr.
Dorr's  sittings,  of  a  longer  pause  partly  filled  by  grasping
influences,  which,  if  it  was  not  mere  acting,  perhaps  illus-
trates the  point  further.  After  HodgsonP  has  translated  the
Tavern  Club  motto  with  considerable  energy  :

[The  hand  now  rests,  limp  and  cold,  without  move-
ment for  some  time,  then  writes  very  faintly :]
HoDGsoNp.  Exhausted  .  .  .  wait.

[A  long  pause  now  follows,  G.  B.  D.  placing  in  the
hand the Healer's and R. H.'s influences,  which
it  holds  tightly  for  a  while,  then  writes  :]
HoDGsoNp.  That  took  so  much  light,  George.

It  somewhat  confirms  the  idea  that  one  object  of
influences  was  to  have  something  to  grasp — whether  with
the  desire  to  secure  a  pause  or  for  some  other  reason —
that  when  Dr.  Stanley  Hall  substituted  on  one  occasion
for  Hodgson's  influences  some  similar  articles  of  his  own,
the  change  was  not  seemingly  noticed  by  the  Hodgson
control,  who  held  Dr.  Hall's  influences  with  apparent
satisfaction  (Studies  in  Spiritism,  pp.  236-253).  This  is
what  one  would  expect  if  all  that  was  really  wanted  was
something  to  grasp  at  intervals.  That  it  was  the  accus-
tomed form  of  the  article  associated  with  Hodgson  that
counted  rather  than  any  real  connexion  of  it  with  him,  is
indicated  by  an  incident  on  December  31,  1906,  reported  by
Mr.  Piddington. Rector  writes :

R.  We  want  the  influence  friend.

(J.  G.  P.  gives  skull  cap,  and  hand  rejects  it.)

J.  G.  P.  Both  are  Hodgson  influences  ;  but  the  one  you  had  last

time  and  the  time  before  is  not  here.

R. Too  bad  why  do  you  change  them. We  wish  him  to

become  accustomed  to  the  same  it  will  help  much

to  avoid  confusion.

At  some  periods  of  the  Piper  history  the  same  advantage,
whatever  it  was,  seems  to  have  been  obtained  by  resting
the  hand  on  the  head  of  the  sitter.  This  happened  very
frequently  in 1896 and 1897 with various controls  and


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  313

sitters.  It  is  asked  for  as  giving  strength.  I  give  two
examples  from  these  years  in  the  Appendix  (November  17,

1896,  and  November  10,  1897,  p.  644),  and  also  a  later  one,
March  17,  1908.  See  also  March  5,  1897  (Appendix  to
Chapter  III.,  p.  498). On  at  least  one  occasion,  March  3,

1897,  a  pause  is  secured  by  another  plan — Rector  asks  to
have  something  read  to  him.  He  says,  "  Read  for  me  a
moment  *  *  *  not  my  statements.  Anything  to  give  me
strength."  Hodgson  recited  some  lines  of  poetry,  after
which  Rector  proceeded  with  his  discourse1  (see  Appendix,
p.  645).  Perhaps  the  object  here  and  in  other  cases  may
have  been  to  gain  time  to  think  what  to  say  next.

In  the  cases  so  far  referred  to  it  was  the  control  who
apparently  desired  a  pause  ;  but  the  need  for  one,  or  for
rest  of  some  sort,  is  constantly  said  to  be  felt  by  com-
municators. This  is  sometimes  attributed  to  the  difficulty
of  remaining  in  the  suffocating  air  of  this  world  (see  Chapter
V.,  p.  160),  sometimes  merely  to  fatigue  and  weakness.
Whatever  the  cause  of  the  exhaustion — whether,  as  the
controls  say,  it  is  due  to  the  quasi-physical  difficulties  of
communicating  or  to  the  strain  of  making  the  control  under-
stand ;  or  whether,  as  we  must  suppose  if  we  think  the
communicator's  part  as  represented  to  us  is  an  acted  part,
it  is  due  to  the  mental  effort  required  in  the  case  of  a  new
communicator  or  one  trying  to  give  evidential  matter —
whatever  the  cause,  the  result  is  that  the  communicator
"  goes  out  "  for  a  shorter  or  longer  time.  An  example  will
be  found  in  Chapter  V.,  p.  162  (May  24,  1904).  In  this
instance  the  intervals  during  the  communicator's  absence
were  filled  in  one  case  by  a  silence,  in  the  other  by  a  more
stereotyped  communicator  who  said  nothing  of  special  in-
terest. My  impression  is  that  such  intervals  are  usually
filled  up  with  talk  of  a  kind  involving  little  effort,  either  by
the  control  or  a  familiar  communicator,  but  it  would  b
rash  without  further  investigation  than  I  have  made  to
affirm  this  as  a  fact.2

1 1  understand  from  Professor  Newbold  that  at  one  period  Hodgson
thus  recited  poetry  to  the  control  not  infrequently.

2  For  a  note  about  breaks  in  the  trance  of  a  more  marked  kind — definite
interruptions  in  the  trance  state — see  p.  215,  footnote.


314  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

I  think  it  is  clear  from  the  cases  considered  that  plans  of
various  kinds  were  adopted  by  the  trance  personalities  which
had  the  effect,  and  very  likely  were  intended  to  have  it,  of
producing  a  pause,  short  or  long  ;  and  that  it  is  at  any  rate
plausible  to  suppose  that  the  grasping  of  an  "  influence  "
may  sometimes  have  had  the  same  object.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  315


CHAPTER  IX.
Conclusion.

In  the  preceding  chapters  I  have  tried  to  put  before  the
reader  a  fair  and  adequately  full  account  of  the  material
available  for  judging  of  the  Piper  phenomena  from  a
purely  psychological  point  of  view — omitting  that  part
of  the  case  which  had  been  the  main  topic  of  previous
papers,  namely,  the  evidence  for  a  supernormal  element  in
the  communications  received.  This  supernormal  element
I  take  for  granted,  and  its  existence  must  therefore,  of
course,  be  taken  into  account  in  briefly  summing  up  the
conclusions  to  which  the  examination  of  the  material  may
lead  us.

The  principal  questions  to  which  we  want  answers
are  :

(1)  Is  there  reason  to  think,  as  was  maintained  by
Hodgson  in  his  second  report,  that  any  spirit  independent
of  Mrs.  Piper  exercises  at  any  time  direct  control  over  any
part  of  Mrs.  Piper's  organism  ?

(2)  If  not,  or  indeed  in  any  case,  what  kind  of  divided
consciousness  is  manifested  in  Mrs.  Piper  ?  Are  the  con-
trols secondary  personalities  and  in  what  sense  ?

To  the  first  question  my  answer  is  probably  already
plain  to  the  reader,  even  if  it  has  not  been  explicitly
stated.  The  intelligence  in  direct  communication  with  the
sitter,  whom  we  have  called  the  control,  is  not,  as  it
professes  to  be,  an  independent  spirit  using  Mrs.  Piper's
organism,  but  some  phase  or  element  of  Mrs.  Piper's  own
consciousness.  This  conclusion  rests  chiefly  on  the  evidence
set  forth  in  Chapters  II.  and  III.  and  the  Appendices  thereto.
I do  not  see how  on  any  other  hypothesis  we are  to


316


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


account  for  absurd  personations  like,  e.g.  Julius  Caesar,
which,  it  will  be  observed,  is  in  no  way  distinguished  by
other  controls  as  different  in  nature  from  themselves.
Nor  on  any  other  hypothesis  can  we  easily  account  for
the  absurd  statements  made  and  the  ignorance  exhibited
by  these  other  controls.  We  cannot,  for  instance,  reason-
ably suppose  that  the  limitations  of  Mrs.  Piper's  organism
not  only  inhibit  the  getting  through  of  scientific  informa-
tion, but  alter  what  does  come  through  into  nonsensical
statements  dressed  up  in  pseudo-scientific  jargon.  Even
if  we  ought  not  to  expect  Rector  and  Imperator,  who
profess  to  have  lived  on  earth  in  more  or  less  remote
times,  to  be  acquainted  with  modern  science — any  more
than  we  can  expect  it  of  Mrs.  Piper1 — we  should  still  less
expect  these  exalted  spirits  to  use  scientific  nomenclature
in  a  way  that  shows  total  want  of  understanding  of  what
they  are  talking  about.

And  the  ignorance  is  not  confined  to  science.  Mrs.  Piper
might  easily  have  given  little  attention  to  Old  Testament
history  or  the  history  of  Christianity,  but  that  Imperator,
if  the  great  spirit  he  professes  to  be,  should  undertake  to
instruct  Hodgson  in  the  true  inwardness  of  these  things,
and  contrive  even  while  confining  himself  to  vague  gener-
alities to  talk  so  much  nonsense  about  them,  is  difficult
to  conceive.  Again,  Mrs.  Piper  might  well  have  erroneous
notions  concerning  Adam  Bede  and  imagine  him  to  be
a  real  person  whom  she  might  meet  in  the  other  world,
but  it  is  hardly  possible  that  George  Eliot  should  make  a
similar  mistake  and  report  having  met  him  without
expressing  any  surprise.  G.  P.'s  philosophical  talk  (see
Proceedings,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  26)  is  another  case  in  point.
But  I  need  not  multiply  instances  in  which  the  trance

1  It  must  be  allowed,  however,  that  some  of  the  nonsense  talked
(e.g.  monkeys  in  the  sun,  p.  86)  is  not  what  we  should  expect  the  normal
Mrs.  Piper  to  utter,  and  must,  if  a  centre  of  consciousness  of  Mrs.
Piper  is  responsible,  be  attributed  to  a  dream-like  abeyance  of  the  inhibi-
tory faculty.  We  all  in  our  normal  state  refrain  from  saying  some  things
of  which  we  feel  doubtful,  for  fear  of  making  fools  of  ourselves  ;  in  doing
so  we  often  conceal  ignorance,  but  also,  no  doubt,  fail  to  give  ourselves
credit  for  knowledge  which  we  more  or  less  possess,  or  could  make  a  good
guess  at.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  317

utterances  are  natural  enough  as  coming  from  Mrs.  Piper
but  not  as  coming  from  the  supposed  control,  even
if  allowance  be  made  for  confusion  and  difficulty.

Communicators  are  not  supposed,  like  controls,  to
influence  Mrs.  Piper's  organism  directly,  but  I  may  as
well  say  here  that,  in  the  case  of  what  I  have  called
the  dramatic  communicators — communicators  as  manifested
at  the  sittings — (see  p.  180),  there  are  much  the  same
arguments  for  refusing  to  regard  them  as  entities  inde-
pendent of  Mrs.  Piper  as  there  are  in  the  case  of  the
controls.  Dramatic  communicators,  like  controls,  are
sometimes  clearly  false,  and  no  criterion  is  offered  in  the
representation  itself,  or  in  its  relation  to  the  control,  by  which
a  false  communicator  may  be  distinguished  from  a  true  one.
The  existence  of  false  communicators  is  not  admitted  at  all.

There  are,  however,  two  respects  in  which  the  com-
munications both  of  controls  and  communicators  appear
at  times  to  transcend  what  the  normal  Mrs.  Piper  could
produce.  First,  they  sometimes  show  greater  capacity  in
certain  directions  than  she  probably  possesses  in  the  normal
state — as,  e.g.  when  advice  is  given,  impressive  to  the
recipient  of  it  both  in  form  and  matter.  And,  secondly,
they  sometimes  give  evidence  of  possessing  information,
connected  with  special  persons  dead  or  alive,  which  is
not  accessible  to  the  normal  Mrs.  Piper,  and  which  may
even  be,  as  in  the  G.  P.  case,  sufficient  to  enable  so
successful  a  personation  to  be  produced  that  some  of  his
friends  found  it  easier  to  suppose  it  not  a  personation
at  all,  but  G.  P.  himself.  It  is  these  powers  which
have  led  investigators  like  Hodgson  to  accept  the  trance
personages'  own  account  of  themselves  at  its  face  value —
at  least,  to  a  large  extent.  But,  though  these  powers  are
of  great  interest  and  importance  in  the  study  of  the  case,
they  are,  it  seems  to  me,  quite  as  compatible  with  the  hypo-
thesis that  the  trance  personalities  are  phases  or  elements
of  Mrs.  Piper  as  with  any  other.  The  increased  capacity  is
a  phenomenon  frequently  observed  in  the  case  of  hypno-
tised persons,  and  presumably  is  not  due  to  a  real  or  funda-
mental increase  of  mental  power,  but  to  the  removal  of
something— as,  e.g.  want  of  confidence  or  of  power  of  atten-


318


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.  [part


tion — which  inhibits  a  power  always  there,  though  generally
latent.  About  this  there  is,  of  course,  nothing  supernormal
in  the  psychical  research  sense.

As  to  the  supernormal  knowledge,  its  source  is  an
important  question.  If  it  all  came  telepathically  from
living  persons  near  or  distant,  no  one  would  be  likely  to
regard  the  interposition  of  an  alien  spirit  controlling  Mrs.
Piper's  organism  as  a  necessary  hypothesis.  Up  to  the
date  of  his  first  report — dealing  with  the  evidence  to  the
end  of  1891 — Hodgson  was  of  opinion  that  the  evidence
was  not  sufficient  to  prove  more  than  this.  He  wrote
(Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  57)  :

Putting  aside  all  the  facts  which  can  be  explained  by
direct  thought-transference  from  the  sitter,  and  considering
simply  the  information  given  which  was  not  known  to  the
sitter  and  which  purports  to  come  from  "  deceased  "
persons,  but  which  was  known  to,  and  afterwards  verified
by,  distant  living  persons, — is  there  sufficient  ground  for
concluding  that  Phinuit  is  in  direct  communication  with
"  deceased "  persons,  and  that  he  is  a  deceased  person
himself  as  he  alleges  ?  I  think  that  the  evidence  here
presented,  together  with  that  previously  published,  is
very  far  from  sufficient  to  establish  any  such  con-
clusion.

Later,  the  evidence  that  some  of  the  knowledge  super-
normally  acquired  comes  from  the  dead  became  stronger,
chiefly  owing  to  the  G.  P.  case,  and  it  has  been  further
strengthened  by  more  recently  published  evidence.  Does
this  alter  the  argument  ?  Surely  not,  if  communication
with  the  dead  is  also  telepathic.  And  unless  telepathy
between  the  living  is  a  physical  process,  a  hypothesis
which  becomes  more  and  more  improbable  as  our  know-
ledge increases,  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  telepathic
communication  between  spirits  in  the  body  is  similar  in
kind  to  communication  between  spirits  out  of  the  body,
and  between  spirits  in  the  body  and  spirits  out  of  it  ;
the  main  difference  being  that  the  body  is  a  great
hindrance  to  any  awareness,  or  full  manifestation,  of  such
communication.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  319

I  do  not  forget  that  to  some  people  the  remarkably
successful  personation  of  dead  persons  which  sometimes
occurs  seems  difficult  to  explain  by  telepathy,  but  I  have
already  given  reasons  in  Chapter  III.,  pp.  81-84,  and  in  my
previous  article,  Proceedings,  Vol.  XV.,  pp.  21,  22,  for
believing  the  material  necessary  to  successful  personation
to  be  within  the  range  of  what  telepathy  can  produce.
I  may  add  here  that  I  think  the  difficulty  sometimes  felt  in
admitting  this  arises  partly  from  a  tendency  to  limit  the
scope  of  telepathy  which  has  been  fostered  by  the  use  of
the  terms  "  agent  "  and  "  percipient  "  to  denote  respectively
the  mind  which  is  the  source  of  the  information  transferred
and  the  mind  which  receives  it.  These  technical  terms,
introduced  in  the  early  days  of  the  S.P.R.,  had  their  origin  in
thought-transference  experiments  in  which  the  person  from
whom  the  idea  is  to  be  transferred  tries  to  concentrate  his
mind  on  it  with  a  view  to  transferring  it.  But  the  term
agent  is  not  very  happily  chosen,  since  it  assumes  that  this
effort  of  concentration  is  an  effective  part  of  the  process  of
transference,  whereas  for  anything  we  know  it  may  have
no  effect  except  that  of  ear-marking  the  idea  it  is  desired  to
transfer.  It  is  possible  that  the  so-called  agent's  part  is
purely  passive,  while  the  percipient  has  to  play  the  active
part  and  extract  the  idea  or  combination  of  ideas  from  the
"  agent's  "  mind.  It  is  more  probable,  perhaps,  that  the
active  part  may  be  played  by  either  of  the  two  minds  con-
cerned in  the  transmission,  or  sometimes  by  both  together.
At  any  rate  we  must  be  careful  to  remember  that  we  know
very  little  about  the  process  of  telepathy,  and  not  to  assume
that  the  conditions  and  limitations  of  telepathic  com-
munication can  be  inferred  from  those  under  which
the  communication  through  the  senses,  with  which  we  are
familiar,  occurs.

To  the  a  priori  reasons  for  thinking  that  evidence
pointing  to  communication  with  the  dead  does  not  in
itself  support  the  hypothesis  of  a  control  which  is  not
a  phase  or  element  of  Mrs.  Piper,  we  may  add  the  obser-
vation that  evidence  for  such  communication  has  also
been  obtained  through  other  automatists  whose  automatic
script  is  produced  without  eclipse  of  the  normal  conscious-


320


Mrs.  Henry  SidgivicJc.


[part


ness,  and  therefore  clearly  without  its  temporary  removal
to  another  sphere  while  the  control  takes  its  place.1

Of  course,  communication  with  the  dead,  when  it  occurs,
must  imply  a  real  communicator  in  the  background,  but
the  point  is  that  this  does  not  necessitate  either  the
dramatic  communicator  or  the  control  being  other  than
phases  or  elements  of  Mrs.  Piper.  Nor  does  it  exclude
the  possibility  that  the  dramatic  communicator  is  a
fiction,  or  a  dream,  or  a  hallucination,  of  the  control,
each  of  which  things  it  sometimes  appears  to  be.  That
it  is  with  phases  or  elements — centres  of  conscious-
ness— of  Mrs.  Piper,  and  not  with  entities  independent  of
her,  that  the  sitter  is  in  direct  communication  seems  to  me
for  the  reasons  given  to  be  the  hypothesis  which  best
fits  the  facts  so  far  as  we  know  them  :  that  under  which
they  most  readily  fall  into  an  intelligible  order  and  are
most  easily  interpreted.  And  it  is  also  a  hypothesis
against  which  no  valid  arguments  have,  so  far  as  I  have
seen,  been  adduced.

There  is  a  point  about  the  veridical  information  offered
which  tends  to  confirm  this  hypothesis  and  is  worth
considering  in  the  light  of  statements  by  the  controls
themselves.  It  is  the  usually  scrappy  and  imperfect  nature
of  the  information.  Neither  this  nor  the  excuses  made  for
it  fit  well  with  the  idea  of  a  well-informed  control  in
communication  with  other  spirits,  but  hampered  in  expres-
sion by  an  imperfect  machine.  The  excuses  made,  as
described  in  Chapter  V.,  seem  to  interpolate  the  machine
difficulty  between  communicator  and  control  as  well  as
between  control  and  sitter,  though,  if  the  machine  be
Mrs.  Piper's  brain,  it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  it  comes
in  there.  What  the  attempts  to  give  evidential  communi-
cations  constantly suggest is a striving of the  control

1 1  do  not  wish  to  be  taken  as  affirming  dogmatically  that  no  influ-
ence of  a  telergic  kind  can  ever  be  exercised  by  an  external  mind,
i.e.  that  an  external  mind  can  never  affect  our  nervous  system  in
'the  same  way  that  our  own  mind  does.  I  think  there  is  practically  no
evidence  for  it  at  present.  But  we  know  so  little  about  the  whole
subject,  including  the  way  our  own  minds  affect  our  bodies,  that  dog-
matic assertion  is  best  avoided.  It  is  even  possible  that  telepathy  and
telergy  may  merge  into  each  other.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  321

after  information  from  all  sources,  guessing  sometimes,
fishing  for  information  from  the  sitters  sometimes,  piecing
slight  hints  together,  and  eagerly  seizing  on  any  impression
or  information  obtained,  whether  normally  or  telepathically,
without  always  knowing  how  it  is  arrived  at  or  whence
it  comes.  Mental  groping  of  this  kind,  omitting  what
depends  on  conversation  with  the  sitter,  is  what  the
percipient  appears  often  to  feel  he  is  doing  in  thought-
transference  experiments.  Among  crowding  impressions  he
has  to  pick  out  the  right  one.  It  certainly  seems,  therefore,
more  appropriate  to  attribute  such  feeling  about  for
information,  which  in  the  end  comes  in  an  uncertain  and
fragmentary  fashion  if  it  comes  at  all,  to  some  part  of
Mrs.  Piper's  mind  than  to  an  alien  spirit.

Of  course,  that  there  is  this  groping  is  an  inference  from
what  comes  out,  but  it  is  based  on  a  general  impression
derived  from  a  good  many  records  of  sittings,  and  occasion-
ally the  controls  make  remarks  which  suggest  that  it  is  a
fact  and  even  that  they  are  aware  of  it.  Phinuit  once,  so
Hodgson  reports  (it  was  at  the  end  of  the  sitting  of  April
29,  1892  ; see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  309),

made  a  few  remarks  about  the  difficulty  of  seeing  things
clearly,  etc.  "It  is  like  looking  through  a  keyhole  into  a
room  and  trying  to  find  out  about  the  people  passing
backwards  and  forwards."

The  illustration  so  aptly  describes  what,  as  I  have  said,
the  communications  constantly  suggest  that  I  think  this
was  probably  a  candid  account  of  Phinuit's  experience.

Rector  on  one  occasion  asked  whether  a  name  he  had
got  right— the  family  name  of  a  sitter — had  been  given  by
the  sitters,  as  it  in  fact  had,  or  by  the  communicator.
Here,  again,  it  seems  quite  possible  that  the  question  was
as  innocently  asked  as  it  appeared  to  be,  and  that  he
really  did  not  know  how  he  had  learnt  the  name.  The
incident  occurred  on  April  24,  1907,  at  a  sitting  at  which
I  alone  was  present.  Rector's  opening  remark  after  the
usual  greeting  was  :

R.  Friend  we  wished  to  correct  an  error  if  error  it  be.

i.e. regarding  the spirit  who spoke last {at  the

x


322  Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.  [part

previous  sitting}. Was  it  he  gave  us  the  name  or

was  it  given  on  your  side  first  ?
E.  M.  S.  Which  name,  Rector  ?
R.  I'll  ask  him.  Forbes1

E.  M.  S.  I  told  you  some  time  ago  that  Mrs.  Forbes  was
coming  again  to  a  sitting,  but  I  only  told  you  after  I
believed  you  knew  her  quite  well.  [Her  name  had
not,  however,  been  previously  given  and  mentioning
it  was  a  slip  on  my  part. E.  M.  S.]

R.  I  knew  her  from  the  moment  I  saw  her  light  friend

and  when  her  companion  spoke  first

♦  ♦  ♦  ♦

E.  M.  S.  It  was  because  I  thought  you  knew  her  that  I  spoke
to  you  of  her  as  a  friend.

R.  Yes  quite I  U.D.  it  so  far  as  I  could  U.D.  anything,

but  I  can't  always  be  quite  certain,  just  how  much
I  am  registering  of  what  is  said  in  the  body,

E.  M.  S.  I  see.

R.  or  on  our  side,  therefore  I  may  register  things  which

you  say  as  well  as  those  spoken  by  friends  on  our
side.

E.  M.  S.  Yes,  I  think  you  do  sometimes,  but  very  seldom.
R.  I  do  try  not  to  do  so.

This  explanation  of  Rector's  is  interesting,  but  not
relevant  to  the  point  in  question,  for  it  was  on  April  17
that  I  had  given  away  the  name,  and  it  was  not  referred
to  in  the  script  till  the  next  sitting,  April  23.  When  I
first  mentioned  it,  HodgsonP,  who  was  communicating
through  Rector,  responded  intelligently  and  appropriately,
as  understanding  whom  I  was  speaking  of,  and  without
surprise  at  the  mention  of  the  name.  He  conversed,  in
fact,  as  if  he  had  known  it  all  the  time,  but  he  did  not
repeat  it.

The  same  idea  of  the  difficulty  of  selecting  among  many
confused  impressions  is  suggested  by  the  rather  frequent
reference  to  a  crowd  of  unmannerly 2  spirits  trying  to  get
to  the  "  light  "  and  having  to  be  kept  back. The  following

1  This  is  substituted  for  the  name  actually  given.

2  The  adjective  is  mine.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  323

is  an  instance  of  this  on  March  11,  1897.  Rector  is
speaking  of  Iraperator  and  says  :

I  am  his  assistant  and  follower  always.  He  is  capable  of
keeping  the  others  back  and  preventing  much  unnecessary
interference.

The  struggle  to  find  out  things  is  referred  to  by  Mrs.
Piper  in  rather  a  curious  way  towards  the  end  of  the
long  waking-stage  of  April  10,  1907.  I  was  again  myself
the  recorder.  She  had  been  talking  disjointedly  about  the
communicators  of  the  trance  proper  when  she  turned  to
speak  to  me,  though  whether  to  me  as  other  than  an  im-
personal auditor  I  do  not  know. The  record  goes  on  :

(Confidentially  to  E.  M.  S.)  People  in  the  body  never
tell  me  anything  [I  think  this  was  in  contrast  to  the
spirit  people.  E.  M.  S.]  They  seem  to  expect  me  to
find  out  things  and  I  don't  [know  how  they  expect  me
to  do  it.]1

It  is  to  be  noted  here  that  in  the  waking-stage  Mrs.  Piper
seems  to  identify  herself  with  the  personages  of  the
trance  proper — for  it  is  they  who  are  expected  by  people
in  the  body  to  find  out  things.  This  should  be  kept  in
mind  hi  seeking  the  answer  to  the  second  question  to
which  we  now  turn.

The  question  is,  granted  that  the  controls  are  not  alien
spirits  but  some  phase  or  fragment  of  Mrs.  Piper,  what
kind  of  divided  consciousness  is  manifested  ;  are  the
controls  secondary  personalities,  and  if  so,  in  what  sense  ?
This  question  is  a  good  deal  more  complicated  and  there-
fore more  difficult  to  answer  than  the  one  just  discussed.
It  cannot  be  answered  by  a  simple  yes  or  no.

Hodgson,  in  a  passage  from  which  I  quoted  in  Chapter
in.,  p.  80,  says  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  57,  and  com-
pare Vol.  XIII.,  p.  286)  :

The  hypothesis  which  for  a  long  time  seemed  to  me  the
most  satisfactory  is  that  of  an  auto-hypnotic  trance  in

1  These  last  words  are  doubtless  in  square  brackets  in  the  record,
because  I  failed  to  put  her  exact  words  down  at  the  moment  of  speak-
ing, and  therefore  was  only  certain  of  the  meaning.


324


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


which  a  secondary  personality  of  Mrs.  Piper  either
erroneously  believes  itself  to  be,  or  consciously  and
falsely  pretends  to  be,  the  "  spirit"  of  a  deceased  human
being,  and  further  fictitiously  represents  various  other
personalities  according  to  the  latent  ideas  of  some  of  the
sitters.

He  had  apparently  already  abandoned  this  hypothesis
when  he  published  his  first  report.  Nevertheless,  I  believe
it  to  be  at  any  rate  an  important  approximation  to  the
truth.  I  am  disposed,  however,  to  demur  to  Hodgson's
use  of  the  word  "  secondary  personality,"  or  at  least  to
say  that  it  is  not  very  clear  how  he  applies  it.  Does  he
mean  that  Mrs.  Piper's  hypnotic  self  is  a  secondary  per-
sonality which  imagines  itself  to  be,  or  pretends  to  be,
Phinuit  ?  Or  does  he  conceive  the  hypnotic  consciousness
split  up,  and  if  so,  how  ?  I  think  he  really  means  that
it  is  the  hypnotic  self  as  the  dominant  centre  of  con-
sciousness for  the  moment  that  takes  itself  to  be,  or
pretends  to  be,  Phinuit.  And  this  is  what  appears  to  me
to  agree  best  with  the  facts.  The  hypnotic  self,  or  some
element  of  it,  successively  personates  a  number  of  different
characters — Phinuit,  G.  P.,  Stainton  Moses,  Rector,  George
Eliot,  etc.,  but  I  think  that  there  is  no  divided  off  part
of  Mrs.  Piper  which  has  assumed  and  permanently  retains
the  character  of,  say,  Rector,  and  is  in  that  sense  a
secondary  personality.  Rector  has  no  more  persistent
existence  than  Hamlet  has.  When  the  part  of  Rector  is
not  being  played  he  has  no  existence,  just  as  Hamlet,
however  well  the  part  is  acted,  ceases  to  exist  as  soon
as  the  actor  leaves  the  stage.  That  part  of  Mrs.  Piper's
mind  which  is  used  in  acting  as  Rector  may  act  as  a
different  control  when  Rector's  part  ends,  and  is  doing
something  else when  the  trance is  over.1

1  I  do  not  say  that  by  suggestion  and  education  a  Rector  or  a  Phinuit
might  not  have  been  developed,  who  could  manifest  as  a  secondary  per-
sonality in  Mrs.  Piper's  ordinary  life,  doing  things  her  normal  self  was  un-
aware of  and  might  have  objected  to,  as  Leonie.2  did  in  the  well-known
case  of  Madame  B.  (see  Myers,  Human  Personality,  230a).  But  there
is  no  sign  of  this  in  Mrs.  Piper's  case,  unless  we  regard  as  such  her  impres-
sion of  the  presence  of  Phinuit  or  Imperator  when  recovering  from  the


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  325

The  comparison  to  a  part  played  on  the  stage  must
not,  however,  be  carried  too  far,  for  whether  or  no  Mrs.
Piper's  trance  self  sometimes  deliberately  plays  a  part,  there
are  at  other  times  elements  in  the  trance  drama  which  seem
to  preclude  conscious  acting.  I  refer  especially  to  what
happens  in  the  cases  described  by  Hodgson  (see  Chapter
II.,  p.  35)  in  which  two  controls  carry  on  simultaneous
but  independent  conversations  by  voice  and  writing  respec-
tively, and  in  the  cases  where  the  control  sees  the  com-
municator as  external  to  himself  (see  Chapter  V.,  pp.  181-186).
Both  these  phenomena  require  us  to  suppose  the  trance
self  split  for  the  time  into  two  centres  of  consciousness
acting  more  or  less  independently,  just  as  we  have  to
suppose  this  when  a  negative  hallucination  is  experienced
by  a  hypnotised  person  (see  Chapter  II.,  p.  51),  and  such
splitting  up  cannot,  so  far  as  we  know,  be  brought  about
by  the  conscious  act  of  any  centre  of  consciousness
dominant  for  the  moment.

While,  however,  these  things  show  that  sometimes  at
least  there  is  division  of  personality  of  various  degrees
of  completeness  and  complication  during  the  trance,  there
are  other  considerations  supporting  the  view  stated  above
that  this  particular  division  exists  during  the  period  of
trance  only.  For  one  thing,  any  splitting  up  that  involved
a  relatively  permanent  separation  of  as  many  centres  of
consciousness  as  there  are  controls,  with  new  ones  con-
stantly emerging,  and  each  continuing  along  with  the
normal  Mrs.  Piper  to  believe  itself  a  separate  personality
and  each  liable  to  take  in  alternation  the  dominant  position,
would  be  a  form  of  divided  consciousness  not  hitherto
classified.  Moreover,  such  a  hypothesis  would  be  attended
by  some  of  the  same  difficulties  as  that  of  alien  spirits
controlling  Mrs.  Piper's  organism.  It  would  be  almost  as
difficult  to  reconcile  one  as  the  other  with  the  evidence  set
forth  in  Chapter  IV.  for  artificiality  in  particular  controls,
especially  artificial  peculiarities  of  language  not  consistently
maintained,  and  common  memories  and  associations  of
ideas  in  controls  who  ought  to  be  entirely  distinct  ;  or

influence  of  an  anaesthetic — i.e.  when  in  an  artificially  produced  state  of
dissociation.


326


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


again  with  the  evidence,  such  as  is  given  in  Chapter  III.,
of  inconsistencies  in  the  make  up  of  controls,  and  con-
tradictions in  what  is  said  of  them  by  themselves  and
others  at  different  times.  And  it  must  be  noted  further,
that  the  view  that  some  centre  of  consciousness  is  present
throughout,  which  at  least  during  the  waking-stage  realises
itself  as  Mrs.  Piper,  and  which  during  the  trance  proper
acts  or  dreams  the  trance  personages,  is  supported  by
the  indications  of  a  tendency  for  the  waking-stage,  in
which  the  dominant  personality  conceives  itself  as  Mrs.  Piper,
to  develoj)  in  the  direction  of  resemblance  to  the  trance
proper  (see  Chapter  VI.),  and  the  consequent  difficulty  of
drawing  theoretically  a  definite  and  permanent  line  between
the  two  ;  and  also  by  the  indications,  such  as  they  are,  that
the  Mrs.  Piper  of  the  waking-stage  sometimes  identifies
herself  with  the  consciousness  of  the  trance  proper.

The  best  analogy  to  the  controls  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance
is  probably  to  be  found  in  the  personations  that  can  be
obtained  through  suggestion  with  some  hypnotised  persons.
I  called  attention  in  Chapter  I.  (p.  27)  to  the  superficial
resemblance  between  the  two.  It  is  not  unlikely  that
with  some  hypnotic  subjects  it  would  be  possible  to
imitate  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  phenomena  further  by  making
them  see  a  hallucinatory  communicator  while  they  them-
selves were  personating  some  one  else  ;  or  even  by  getting
them  to  personate  two  characters  at  once,  one  speaking
and  the  other  writing.  There  does  not  seem  to  be  any
obvious  reason  why  this  should  be  more  difficult  than  the
simultaneous  working  of  arithmetical  problems  and  reading
aloud,  which  Mr.  Gurney  obtained  by  post-hypnotic  suggestion
(see  Chapter  II.,  p.  35).

Whether  a  hypnotised  person  adopting  a  suggested
character  really  believes  himself  to  be  that  character  is
difficult  to  determine.  It  probably  varies  with  different
hypnotic  subjects  and  at  different  times.  And,  similarly,
Mrs.  Piper  in  a  state  of  self -induced  hypnosis  may  some-
times deliberately  and  consciously  personate  the  control,
and  at  others  believe  herself  to  be  Rector  or  Phinuit,  while
at  still  other  times  something  between  the  two  may  occur
and  she  may  have  a  more  or  less hazy  consciousness  of


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  327

being  Rector  but  also  of  being  Mrs.  Piper.  That  such
mixed  states  of  consciousness  are  possible  we  all  know  from
dreams  ;  and  we  may  also  observe  them  in  children  in  a
normal  waking  state.  Children  may,  e.g.  be  genuinely
frightened  by  a  wolf,  knowing  all  the  time  that  it  is  not  a
wolf,  but  their  own  father  assuming  the  character  at  their
own  request.  It  seems  not  unlikely,  though  difficult  to
prove,  that  a  child's  normal  state  may  resemble  that  of  an
adult  in  hypnosis  in  the  fact  of  the  subliminal  self  being
freer  to  act — less  kept  under  by  the  supraliminal — than  is
the  case  with  normal  grown  up  people.  Such  mixed  or  dual
consciousness  was  perhaps  what  led  to  Phinuit's  description
(see  Chapter  II.,  p.  31)  of  his  inability  sometimes  to  get
complete  possession  of  Mrs.  Piper.  He  may  have  been
referring  to  the  occasions  when  the  trance-personality  felt
itself  to  be  simultaneously  Phinuit  and  Mrs.  Piper.  An
interesting  case  will  be  found  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XL,
pp.  309-316  (see  especially  p.  314),  where  Mr.  C.  H.  Tout
describes  his  experiences  in  falling  into  semi-trance  and
in  this  state  involuntarily  personating  some  one  else  while
partly  retaining  his  normal  consciousness,  so  that  he
seemed  to  himself  to  be  two  persons  at  once.

It  is  not  only  in  the  likeness  of  the  controls  to  hypnotic
personations  that  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  resembles  hypnotic
trances.  The  dream-like  incoherence  of  the  waking-stage
with  its  sudden  breaks  of  memory,  and  the  tendency  both
in  waking-stage  and  trance  proper  to  hallucination,  are
features  which  may  readily  be  observed  in  hypnotic  trances
in  which  different  stages  of  consciousness  occur  ;  and  the
realisation  by  the  hypnotised  person  of  his  own  identity,  as
with  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  waking-stage,  is  what  ordinarily
occurs  when  no  personation  is  suggested.  Also  the  trance
dream,  if  I  may  call  it  so,  recurrent  in  its  general  outline,
and  the  order  of  succession  of  consciousnesses  manifested
in  the  course  of  it,  could  doubtless  be  produced  in  a
suitable  hypnotic  subject  by  appropriate  suggestion  and  a
little  education.

It  is  certain  that  such  suggestion  was  present  in  Mrs.
Piper's  case  and  may  therefore  have  operated.  Mrs.
Piper  wills  to  go  into  trance  with  a  definite  idea, — originally


328


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[paet


derived  from  her  sittings  with  Mr.  Cocke  (see  p.  9), — that
her  own  personality  is  to  disappear  and  its  place  to  be  taken
by  various  other  spirits  whose  function  is  to  converse  with
the  sitter,  advise  him,  and  put  him  into  communication
with  the  spirit  world.  Accordingly,  in  a  typical  sitting  of,
say,  1907,  she  conceives  herself  during  the  going-into-trance-
stage  as  gradually  withdrawing  and  consequently  losing
her  awareness  of  the  actual  surroundings.  When  she  con-
ceives herself  as  quite  gone,  a  brief  interval  of  deep  sleep
occurs  during  which  no  consciousness  at  all  seems  to  be
present  so  far  as  external  manifestation  goes,  but  during
which  nevertheless  there  is  reason  to  think  that  ideas  may
be  received  through  the  senses  by  some  element  of  con-
sciousness, and  may  act  suggestively  in  the  subsequent
trance  proper  (see  e.g.  Chapter  IV.,  p.  142).  From  the
deep  sleep  awakes  a  consciousness  apparently  conceiving
Mrs.  Piper's  spirit  as  absent  and  itself  as  another  spirit
who  is  there  for  the  purpose  of  conversing  with  the
sitter.  Who  this  other  spirit  is  to  be  and  also  what
he  is  to  begin  by  saying  is  sometimes  foreshadowed  in
the  utterances  and  gestures  of  the  going-into-trance-stage,
as  though  it  had  been  suggested  beforehand,- — and  it  is,  of
course,  quite  likely  that  the  normal  Mrs.  Piper  does  some-
times suggest  it  to  herself  consciously  or  subliminally  as
she  goes  off.  There  is  a  similar  relation  between  the  ideas
of  the  trance  proper  and  of  the  waking-stage  which  succeeds
the  deep  sleep  that  follows  the  withdrawal  of  the  controls.
During  this  waking-stage  the  consciousness  present  again
realises  itself  as  Mrs.  Piper,  who  conceives  herself  as  coming
back  to  this  world  from  the  spirit  world.  In  the  latter  she
meets  personages  of  the  trance  proper,  whose  company  she
sometimes  enjoys  up  to  the  moment  when  she  feels  her
retiirn  as  complete,  and  fully  realises  herself  as  back  in
the  actual  surroundings.

This  succession  of  events  corresponds  with  the  ideas
with  which  the  trance  was  entered  upon,  and  there  is  an
underlying  unity  of  plot  in  the  story  notwithstanding  the
dream-like  incoherence  of  the  waking-stage.  Details  suit-
able to  the  occasion  would  naturally  be  suggested  on  any
particular  day,  and  we  can  sometimes  see  in  the  records


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena.  329

how  from  time  to  time  changes  in  the  controls  and  other
modifications  of  the  trance  dream  were  apparently  suggested
by  the  sitters  or  by  the  desires  of  the  trance  consciousness
itself.

The  states  of  consciousness  in  trance  and  waking-stage
are,  as  we  have  seen,  very  different.  In  the  waking-stage
we  have  consciousness  of  her  own  identity  together  with
unawareness  of  the  actual  surroundings  ;  in  the  trance
proper  no  apparent  consciousness  of  herself  and  complete
and  keen  awareness  of  the  sitter  and  surroundings  ;  during
the  waking-stage  incoherence  and  instabnity  with  discon-
tinuity of  memory  ;  during  the  continuance  of  the  trance
proper  complete  coherence  and,  notwithstanding  changes
of  assumed  personality,  apparent  stability.  It  is  probable
that  the  direction  of  attention  to  the  sitter  and  the  need
of  carrying  on  a  conversation  satisfactory  to  him  has  a
steadying  effect ;  but  there  is  also  some  reason  to  think  that
(as  suggested  in  Chapter  VIII.,  p.  311)  the  maintenance
of  stability  and  coherence  sometimes  involves  an  effort.

The  evidence  published  by  our  Society  seems  to  show
that  dissociated  states — hypnosis,  trance,  automatic  writing,
ordinary  sleep — are  favourable  to  the  emergence  of  tele-
pathic impressions,  and  such  emergence  may  occur  in  any
of  the  stages  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  other,  of  course,  than
the  deep  sleep.  But  as  we  saw  in  Chapter  VII.,  the  transi-
tion stage  at  the  end  of  the  trance  proper,  "  when  Rector
goes  out,"  which  may  perhaps  be  the  deep  sleep  itself,  seems
more  favourable  to  the  effective  receipt  of  telepathic
impressions  than  the  trance  proper.  It  may  be  that  the
effort  just  spoken  of,  to  remain  coherent  and  to  satisfy
the  sitter,  acts  as  a  hindrance  to  telepathy.  On  the  other
hand,  the  Avaking-stage,  if  favourable  to  telepathy  in  one
way,  appears  in  another  to  hinder  its  manifestation,  for
words  and  names  telepathically  learnt  may  be  uttered  in
that  stage  while  the  ideas  to  which  they  should  be
attached  are  through  the  dream-like  incoherence  turned  into
nonsense.

I  have  been  endeavouring  to  show  the  resemblances  be-
tween Mrs.  Piper's  trance  and  hypnosis  as  regards  changes
and  divisions  of  consciousness. But  what  psychical  pro-


330


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[PAET


cesses  are  involved  in  these  changes  and  divisions,  either
in  hypnosis,  or  in  the  Piper  trance  if  it  differs  from  hypnosis,
we  do  not  know.  We  may  perhaps  usefully  represent
it  to  ourselves  as  some  sort  of  shuffling  and  rearrange-
ment of  centres  of  consciousness,  interconnected,  but  to
some  extent  independent,  with  one  of  them  sometimes  suffi-
ciently dominant  to  keejD  order,  as  it  were,  and  secure  the
kind  of  stability  exhibited  in  the  trance  proper.  But  how
far,  if  at  all,  such  a  representation  has  any  true  resemblance
to  the  facts,  our  present  state  of  knowledge  does  not  enable
us  to  say.

To  sum  up  very  briefly  my  own  conclusion  about  Mrs.
Piper's  trance,  I  think  it  is  probably  a  state  of  self-
induced  hypnosis  in  which  her  hypnotic  self  personates
different  characters  either  consciously  and  deliberately,  or
unconsciously  and  believing  herself  to  be  the  person  she
represents,  and  sometimes  probably  in  a  state  of  conscious-
ness intermediate  between  the  two.  In  the  trance  state
her  normal  powers  transcend  in  some  directions  those  of
her  ordinary  waking  self,  as  is  often  the  case  in  hypnosis.
And  further — what  makes  her  case  of  great  importance —
she  can  obtain,  imperfectly  and  for  the  most  part  frag-
mentarily,  telepathic  impressions.  Or  rather,  as  it  would
perhaps  be  more  correct  to  say,  such  impressions  are  not
only  received  by  her  as  the  result  of  her  own  telejmthic
activity  or  that  of  other  spirits — spirits  of  the  living  or
may  be  of  the  dead — but  rise  partially  or  completely  into
the  consciousness  operating  in  the  trance  communications,
and  so  are  recognised.

I  have  in  attempting  to  expound  and  justify  this  theory
and  in  discussing  the  facts  on  which  it  is  based,  used  very
frequently  such  words  as  "  probably,"  "  perhaps,"  "  some-
times." That  is  because  it  seems  to  me  impossible  at
present  to  prove  any  theory  on  the  subject.  Provisionally
the  one  I  have  put  forward  is  what  seems  to  me  to  fit  the
complicated  facts  of  Mrs.  Piper's  case  best.  But  it  would
be  rash  in  so  elusive  and  difficult  a  subject  to  try  to  come
to  any  final  conclusion  on  this  case  alone.  Much  more  study
is  required  of  hypnotic  and  other  dissociated  states  in
different  people, including of course cases of  automatic


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance  Phenomena.  331

writing  produced  while  the  normal  consciousness  is  appa-
rently in  full  operation,  especially  those  in  which  there  is
the  same  kind  of  evidence  for  supernormal  powers  as  in
Mrs.  Piper's.  Such  investigation  might  lead  to  an  entire
revision  of  my  interpretation  of  the  relations  of  Mrs.  Piper's
states  of  consciousness.

If  my  attempt  to  study  the  psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's
trance  phenomena  suggests  any  lines  of  observation  or  ex-
periment to  be  pursued  in  other  cases,  it  will  have  served
a  useful  purpose.  And  in  any  case,  the  length  and  detail
of  the  essay  I  am  laying  before  the  Society  is,  I  hope,  justi-
fied by  the  great  importance  for  our  investigations  of  gaining
all  the  light  we  can  on  the  way  the  consciousness  works —
in  all  of  us,  but  in  automatists  in  particular.


332


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PAET


APPENDIX  TO  CHAPTER  I.

Instances  of  Prophecies  concerning  Hodgson's  living
on  after  Mrs.  Piper  ceased  to  give  Sittings.

(April  27,  1897. Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.)
(George  Eliot  writing.)

*  *  The  light  will  burn  {i.e.  Mrs.  Piper's  sittings  will  go

on}  only  for  few  years  here  *  *  *  you  {i.e.  Hodgson}
will  be  called  upon  to  take  charge  of  it  to  the  end.

(April  28,  1897. Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.)
(Rector  writing.)

*  *  present  light {i.e.  Mrs.  Piper}  *  *  will  be  over  here

{i.e.  in  the  spirit  world.}
R.  H. Before  I  get  there  ?  [Assent.]

(Nov.  30,  1898. Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.)
(Rector  writing.)

R.  H.  Do  you  think  [it]  probable  that  you  will  be  able  to
return  for  three  or  four  years  of  our  time  %

R  We  do,  from  the  time  when  we  first  gave  thee  know-
ledge of  this

*  *  *  H<

R.  H. And  you  expect  afterwards  to  meet  me  through  other

lights.
R. We  do.

(Dec.  2,  1898. Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.)
(Rector  writing.)

R.  And  thy  life  for  the  benefit  of  man  will  be  greater  than
any  others  to  whom  our  attention  hath  been  drawn

*  *  *  *

Thy  life  is  only  in  its  beginning.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  333


{Dec.  15,  1898. Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.)
(Rector  writing. )

R.  We  have  thou  wilt  remember  given  our  promise  to  find
a  light  for  thee  through  whom  we  will  act  after
we  have  finished  here,  and  as  we  do  not  promise  any-
thing without  certainty,  we  will  ask  thee  to  accept
this.

{Oct.  31,  1899. Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.)

{First  sitting  after  holidays. At  this  time  Mrs.  Piper  was

rather  ill  and  fearing  an  operation  might  be  necessary.}

R.  And  after  we  have  developed  another  light  sufficiently
for  our  work  and  continuance  of  it,  we  will  cease
here  forever  *  *  i.e.  thou  shouldst  make  known  to  all
mortals  that  as  soon  as  our  work  has  ceased  with
thee  we  cease  with  all.

R.  H. Yes  I  mil.

R. And  this  should  be  done  at  once.

{June  29,  1905. Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.)
(Mrs.  H.  communicating.)

In  your  light  I  see  you  marrying,  and  some  one  whom
you  love  I  see  two  children  for  you.  Now  no
matter  what  happens  you  will  find  out  that  I  see
clearly  on  this  point  too.

{Oct.  31,  1905. Rector  writing.)

Understand  friend  that  the  light  is  now  nearing  the
close  of  our  reign  and  in  order  to  prolong  its  use
we  must  exercise  the  utmost  care.

Professor  William  James  on  Mrs.  Piper  in  Semi-Hypnosis,
and  Comparison  of  this  with  Her  Trance  State.
{Extracted  from  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  Society
for  Psychical  Research,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  104-5.)

At  the  time  this  was  written — 1885 — the  writing  sittings
and  the  "  waking-stage  "  had  not  developed.  It  will  be
observed  that  some  of  the  symptoms  in  the  semi-hypnosis
occur  in  the  waking-stage — indistinct  speech  constantly,  and


334


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


automatic  imitation  of  speech  and  gesture  occasionally  (see
Chapter  VI.,  p.  234,  and  Appendix  to  Chapter  VI.,  p.  612).

Curious  to  ascertain  whether  there  were  continuity  between
the  medium-trance  and  the  ordinary  hypnotic  trance,  I  made
some  observations  ad  hoc  upon  Mrs.  P[iper].  My  first  two
attempts  to  hypnotize  her  were  unsuccessful.  Between  the
second  time  and  the  third,  I  suggested  to  her  "  control  "  in
the  medium-trance  that  he  should  make  her  a  mesmeric
subject  for  me.  He  agreed.  (A  suggestion  of  this  sort  made
by  the  operator  in  one  hypnotic  trance  would  probably  have
some  effect  on  the  next.)  She  became  partially  hypnotized  on
the  third  trial  ;  but  the  effect  was  so  slight  that  I  ascribe  it
rather  to  the  effect  of  repetition  than  to  the  suggestion  made.
By  the  fifth  trial  she  had  become  a  pretty  good  hypnotic
subject,  as  far  as  muscular  phenomena  and  automatic  imitations
of  speech  and  gesture  go  ;  but  I  could  not  affect  her  con-
sciousness, or  otherwise  get  her  beyond  this  point.  Her
condition  in  this  semi-hypnosis  is  very  different  from  her
medium-trance.  The  latter  is  characterized  by  great  muscular
unrest,  even  her  ears  moving  vigorously  in  a  way  impossible
to  her  in  her  waking  state.  But  in  hypnosis  her  muscular
relaxation  and  weakness  are  extreme.  She  often  makes  several
efforts  to  speak  ere  her  voice  becomes  audible  ;  and  to  get  a
strong  contraction  of  the  hand,  for  example,  express  mani-
pulation and  suggestion  must  be  practised.  The  automatic
imitations  I  spoke  of  are  in  the  first  instance  very  weak,
and  only  become  strong  after  repetition.  Her  pupils  contract
in  the  medium-trance.  Suggestions  to  the  "  control  "  that  he
should  make  her  recollect  after  the  trance  what  she  had  been
saying  were  accepted,  but  had  no  result.  In  the  hypnotic-
trance  such  a  suggestion  will  often  make  the  patient  remember
all  that  has  happened.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  335


APPENDIX  TO  CHAPTER  II.

Theoeies  of  Controls  as  to  their  Relation  to  the
Body  and  Spirit  of  the  Medium.

The  extracts  from  records  of  sittings  of  which  this  Appendix
consists  are  supplementary  to  those  given  in  the  text,  and
form  an  important  part  of  the  evidence  on  which  statements
in  the  text  are  based.  In  some  cases  they  give  the  con-
text of  quotations  in  the  text.  The  arrangement  is  strictly
chronological  all  through,  and  the  six  sections  into  which  the
Appendix  is  divided  are  marked  by  important  divisions  of
time.  The  chronological  order  has  the  disadvantage  of
mixing  up  the  different  topics  dealt  with  in  the  chapter,
so  that  in  reading  the  Appendix  through  the  reader  would
have  the  feeling  of  continually  jumping  from  one  subject
to  another.  On  the  other  hand,  topics  could  not  be  kept
apart  without  cutting  up  many  of  the  extracts  given.  More-
over, the  chronological  development  is  in  itself  of  some
importance.

Remarks  in  large  print  and  those  enclosed  in  { }  are
notes  or  comments  of  my  own.

A.

Extracts  from  Stenographic  Reports  of  Five  Sittings,
May  26— June  30,  1888.

These  are  the  sittings  referred  to  by  Hodgson  (Proceed-
ings, Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  2-3),  as  given  gratuitously  by  Mrs.
Piper,  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  him  to  find  out  what  he
could  from  Phinuit  in  any  way  he  chose,  concerning  his  own
personality,  his  knowledge,  his  relations  to  Mrs.  Piper,  etc.
Hodgson  used  the  results  in  his  Report,  and  seems  at  one
time  to  have  intended  to  publish  rather  full  extracts,  though,
as  he  says,  "  the  results  were  decidedly  unsatisfactory  so


336


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


far  as  regards  the  receipt  of  any  exact  explanation."  I
agree  with  him,  however,  "  that  in  the  task  of  estimating
the  general  character  of  the  trance  personality,"  "  certain
portions  of  these  accounts  are  worth  reproducing."  The
portions  bearing  on  Phinuit's  theory  of  "  control  "  are  what
are  here  quoted.  In  what  follows,  Ph.  stands  for  Phinuit
and  S.  for  Hodgson  or  the  stenographic  reporter.  The
latter  was  herself  interested  and  had  had  a  good  many
sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  The  record  does  not  distinguish
between  the  two  questioners,  but  no  doubt  in  the  great
majority  of  cases  S.  here  stands  for  Hodgson.

(May  26,  1888.)

*  *  *  *

S.  You  make  me  so  tired  ;  is  it  etherial  energy  you  draw
from  me  ?  Do  you  use  my  ^etherial  body  as  a
sort  of  reservoir  ?

Ph.  Oh  oui  ;  I  will  take  you  over  here  with  me  one  of  these
days.

S. What  do  you  do  with  it  when  you  have  got  it  ?

Ph.  I  absorb  it  through  the  medium.  You  cannot  see  me  but
I  can  see  you.  Sometimes  I  cannot  see  you  and
sometimes  I  can.

S.  How  do  spirits  there  regard  mortal  beings  here  ?  Are  we
as  invisible  to  them  as  they  are  to  us  ?

Ph. Certainly.  *  *  *

Sometimes  when  they  come  to  the  medium — the  medium
is  my  instrument — when  a  friend  comes  to  me  and
speaks  to  me  and  gathers  round  me  they  see  me
because  I  look  just  the  same  when  I  control  the
medium  as  the  medium  looks  before  I  get  here.  I
have  to  use  the  ears,  the  eyes  of  the  medium,  to
control  her  tongue  to  speak  to  you.  Those  friends
gather  round  and  when  I  say  to  them  "  There  is
your  friend  here  " — I  say  this  quietly  ;  you  do  not
hear  me  say  this  ;  I  say  this  to  the  friends  that
gather  round  me,  and  make  motions  to  them.

♦  ♦  ♦  ♦

Sometimes  when  I  come  here,  do  you  know,  actually  it
is  hard  work  for  me  to  get  control  of  the  medium.


lxxt.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  337


Sometimes  I  think  I  am  almost  like  the  medium,
and  sometimes  not  at  all.  Then  I  am  weak  and
confused.1  Then  they  won't  recognize  their  friends,
and  that  is  the  way  they  go  on.

*  *  *  *

(June  2,  1888.)

*  *  *  *

S. What  is  the  explanation  of  mediumistic  power  ?

Ph. It  is  effervescing  light.

*  *  *  *

S. From your point of view, you see the difference  in

mediumistic  power  as  a  difference  in  luminosity  ?
Ph.  Certainly.

S.  Can't  you  explain  how  it  would  appear  to  me,  supposing
I  investigated  a  medium's  body  for  the  purpose
of  ascertaining  the  difference  in  structure  ?

Ph.  You  would  see  a  very  sensitive  organism,  you  would  see
a  very  large,  peculiar,  undeveloped  brain ;  what  I
mean  to  say,  the  brain  is  too  large  to  be  used  by
the  natural  mortal  mind  of  the  medium.

S.  Do  you  mean  there  is  a  certain  part  of  the  brain  which  is
used  by  the  etherial  organism  and  can  be  filled  by
the  etherial  organism  of  the  spirit  ?

Ph.  Certainly.

S.  The  reason  why  all  people  are  not  mediumistic  is  because
they  crowd  out  others  and  fill  it  all  up  ?

Ph.  Yes.

S.  You  are  not  likely  to  expect  of  a  person  that  uses  up
every  bit  of  himself,  to  be  mediumistic  ?

Ph. That  was  never  found  in  your  country.

Now  you  see  when  I  come  here,  the  medium  passes  into
the  spirit,  as  it  were.  The  medium's  etherial  organ-
ism goes  through  the  spirit  world,  or  various  parts
of  the  spirit  world  ;  she  wanders  about  like  a  spirit  ;
she  gropes  about  that  way  (putting  out  hands).
Just  when  I  get  ready  to  come  here,  she  goes  out
I  drive  her  out.  She  takes  my  place,  as  it  were,  in
the  spirit  world.

1  This  passage  is  quoted  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  9.

Y


338


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


S. How  does  she  appear  to  the  spirits  ?

Ph. Well,  she  looks strange  to  the  different  spirits  and  they

look  strange  to  her  probably.
S. What  characteristic  does  she  exhibit  that  marks  her  off

as  still  inhabiting  a  material  organism  ?
Ph. She  looks  darker.  S.  Like  an  evil  spirit  ?

Ph. Oh,  not  like  an  evil  spirit,  but  not  so  shining,  gleaming.
S. Is  it  a  matter  of  common  knowledge  that  persons  who

look  like  that  have  to  go  back  to  the  body  ?
Ph. Some of them  do  not  understand  it ; they  think  it  is

curious.

S.  The  same  as  white  people  who  inhabit  a  certain  country,
suddenly  see  a  black  man  ?

Ph.  Yes.

S.  Is  she  conscious  all  the  time  that  she  must  return  ?  Is
she  like  a  lost  bird  ?

Ph.  She  goes  round  ;  when  I  get  ready  to  go  out  I  leave  the
medium's  organism  weak,  in  a  certain  sense ;  then
while  her  spirit  is  roaming  about  it  has  gathered
strength  enough  to  put  back  into  that  what  I  have
exhausted.  She  gathers  up  a  certain  amount  of
energy.  She  is  helped  on  by  various  spirits  and
good  spirits  too.  Then  when  I  begin  to  leave  the
medium,  I  get  weak,  have  exhausted  all  the  material
energy  I  could  get  from  her,  she  begins  to  return
and  she  gets  nearer  to  me.  I  can  actually  some-
times, when  I  am  here,  see  the  medium.

S.  How  do  you  communicate  with  her  ?  How  does  she
know  ?

Ph. Don't  you  see,  I  am  leaving  the  organism.
S. How  does  she  know  it  ?

Ph.  Because  she  lingers,  in  a  certain  sense,  near  me.  At  the
same  time,  your  spirit  mother  comes  here  and  tells
me  she  is  here,  only  I  can  tell  her  from  the  other
spirit  because  she  is  a  little  darker.

S. She  comes  and  tells  you  you  must  go  ?

Ph.  Oh  no.  Her  spirit  would  stay  in  the  spirit  forever  and
live  there  if  I  should  stay  here  too  long,  but  I  have
only  a  certain  amount  of  strength  given  me  and
when  I  have  exhausted  that I  have  to  go  whether


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  339


I  like  it  or  not,  and  she  comes  back,  and  she
actually  stands  by  me  pulling  on  me  to  get  me  out,
and  then  she  gradually  gets  back  again.

S. Didn't  she  have  great  difficulty  at  first  to  get  back  ?

Ph. She  was  afraid  of  me  I  guess  at  first.

S. I  mean  to  get  back  again  ?

Ph.  Sometimes  people  have  asked  me  what  made  me  make
the  medium  suffer  so.  You  know,  sometimes  she
realises  the  fact  that  I  am  getting  here  and  is  kind
of  afraid  to  let  me  come,  for  she  is  afraid  she  won't
get  back  again,  but  I  talk  to  her  and  tell  her  she
will  get  back  all  right,  so  she  comes  right  back  and
takes  my  place.  Then  when  I  have  the  medium's
organism,  I  can  feel  sometimes.  In  the  first  place,
the  medium's  body,  the  hands,  arms,  head,  feet, — I
itch  tremendously — they  feel  heavy  to  me,  hard
work  to  get  them  round,  and  then  I  try  to  force
energy  ;  still  they  are  heavy.  Then  I  exert  a  great
deal  of  will  power  and  I  can  do  anything.  (Stretches
out  hand.)  Then  again,  I  can  see  you  ;  I  can  see
your  etherial  ;  I  can  see  a  fac-simile  of  yourself,
but  I  cannot  see  the  material  only  as  I  touch  you.
I  have  a  sense  of  feeling  and  can  feel.  I  use  the
medium's  organism  as  my  instrument,  exactly  as
she  uses  it.  Then  I  hear  with  the  medium's  ears.
Sometimes  I  do  not  get  so  much  control.

S.  To  all  intents  and  purposes  you  use  the  medium's  organ-
ism precisely  as  you  would  if  you  were  a  human
being  ?

Ph.  Exactly.

S. How  is  it  that  you  do  not  use  the  medium's  eyes  ?
Ph. I  do  use  the  medium's  eyes.

S. You  told  me  the  last time that  you  used  them  about

there  (pointing  to  spot  over  the  eyes).
Ph. Oh,  I  mean  to  say  that  I  use  the  medium's  brain  ;  I  do

not  need  eyes.

S.  Could  you  use  the  eyes  if  you  tried  ?  Have  you  ever
tried  ?

Ph.  One  time  a  gentleman  in  the  body  wanted  me  to  open  the
medium's  eyes. They  are  closed  now,  are  they  ?


340


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwiclc.


[part


Yes.  Open  them  and  look  at  me.  Can't  you  open  them  ?
You  have  not  any  control  over  the  muscles  of  the
eyelids  ?

(Feels  of  the  eyes.) No,  I think  if  I  should  practise  I

think  I  could  do  it.
Well  now,  try  that  and  practise  it,  won't  you  ?
I  will  try  very  soon.

Is  it  because  you  have  not  got  quite  perfect  control  of
the  organ  ?

(Trying  to  open  them.) I  do not  see  how you  do  it.

You  open  my  eyes.
The eye-ball, the  iris,  appears to be turned right  up
toward  the  nose,  as  though  you  were  asleep,  just  as
though  you  were  in  an abnormal state. Do  you
understand  ?

Now  I  tell  you  that  is  the  hardest  work  for  me.  Half

of  the  time  I  do  not  comprehend  what  you  say.

#  *  #  *

Now  I  have  got  no  smell ;  I  cannot  taste.  I  have  tried
to  taste  but  I  cannot.

*  *  *  *

{June  9,  1888)

S. Why  doesn't  the  medium  remember,  when  she  comes  back

to  her  body,  what  she  has  been  doing  ?
Ph. How  could  she  remember  when  I am here  ? She  goes

away  when  I  come.
S. You  told  us last  time  that  she  wandered  about  in  the

spirit  world  ;  why  doesn't  she  remember  ?
Ph. Because  I  take  all  the  strength  out  of  the  medium's  body,

out  of  the  brain.
S. Doesn't  she  bring  back  strength  with  her  ?
Ph. She  does,  but  you  know  she  comes  right  back  where  she

left  off  when  I  get  here.
S. I  don't  understand why  she  does  not  remember  all  the

same.

Ph. Remember  what  ? Remember  me  ?

S.  You  talk  with  a  sitter's  friends,  and  you  come  into  the
medium's  body,  and  you  tell  us  what  they  have  told
you. Now,  why  can't  I  say  to  the  medium,  "  You


s.

Ph.
s.

Ph.
S.

Ph.

s.

Ph.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  341


go  and  talk  with,  my  spirit  friends  and  when  you

come  back  tell  me  what  they  have  said  ?  "
Ph. Because  I  have  exhausted  the  medium  physically. I  have

taken  away  all  the  light.
S. When  will  she  remember the experiences  in the  spirit

world  ?

Ph.  When  I  get  her  all  used  up,  I  guess.  I  have  tried  so
many  times  to  make  the  medium  remember.  For
instance,  when  I  go  out  I  say  to  her,  "  Do  you
think  what  you  have  seen ;  enjoy  it  ?  "  Don't
she  remember  ?

S. No,  she  never  remembers  anything. Why  can't  you  make

her  remember  ?
Ph. Because  I  paralyse  the  brain,  I  guess.
S. Supposing  the  medium  went  out  of  her  body.  .  .  .
Ph. Well,  you  go  and  take  a  dose  of  ether  and  see  how  much

you  remember  when  you  get  out  of  it.
S. What  happens  when  I  take  a  dose  of  ether  ?
Ph. Your  brain  gets  numb.

s.  I  can't  remember  what  has  been  going  on  in  that  time
because  nothing  does  go  on  ?

Ph. Even  so,  but  the  power  in  the  brain  has  been  exhausted.

At  the  same  time,  your  etherial  goes  out  of  yourself.
When  you  go  to  sleep  you  dream.

S. My  etherial  does  not  go  out  then  ?

Ph. I  tell  you  it  does.  S.  Always  ?

Ph.  Yes.  When  you  wake  up  you  remember,  because  your
etherial  was  acting  on  your  brain  all  the  time.
For  instance,  when  you  go  to  sleep  your  etherial
wanders  about,  but  at  the  same  time, — your  etherial
sees  your  mother  in  another  part  of  Australia,  and
that  is,  your  mind  exercises  that  in  your  brain,  puts
that  single  incident.  That  is  a  dream  in  your  mind.
Well,  when  you  awake,  your  normal  self  again,  and
your  brain  is  no  more  being  used  as  in  a  dream,
then  you  remember  that  you  dreamed  a  certain
thing.  Well,  sometimes  it  is  true  and  sometimes  it
is  not.

S. What  makes  it  not  true,  if  dreams  are  always  realities  ?

You  say  that  in  dream  life  the  etherial  body  always


342


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwiclc.


[part


passes  out  of  the  organism,  and  then  the  dreams
represent  real  experiences  ; is  that  what  you  mean  ?

Then  follows  a  long  discussion,  very  confused  on  Phinuit's
part,  about  sleep.  Hodgson  wants  to  know  the  explana-
tion of  dreams,  and  what  is  the  difference  between  a  veridi-
cal and  a  purely  imaginary  dream.  Phinuit  says  the
"  etherial  "  always  goes  out  of  the  organism  in  sleep  and
apparently  maintains  that  it  sees  the  thoughts  that  the
sleeper  has  had  while  awake,  mixes  them  up  and  impresses
them  upon  the  brain,  but  that  it  also  sometimes  really  com-
municates with  distant  people  and  impresses  what  it  learns
on  the  brain.  Hodgson  also  wants  to  know  whether  another
spirit  could  take  possession  of  the  sleeping  organism  and
permanently  keep  out  its  own  spirit,  and  if  not  why  not.
Phinuit  seems  to  reply  that  no  spirit  would  wish  to  do  so,
and  that  it  could  not  if  it  would,  because  the  etherial  is  still
holding  on  to  the  brain.  Also  that  the  sleeping  body  is
as  useless  for  purposes  of  communication  as  a  dead  body.
Moreover,  if  a  spirit  did  get  possession  during  sleep  or  other-
wise it  could  not  remain  long  because  the  light  and  strength
get  exhausted.

It  is  perhaps  noteworthy  that  Hodgson  in  this  conversa-
tion introduces  the  idea  of  a  chain  or  cord,  binding  the
etherial  body,  when  it  goes  out  in  sleep,  to  the  physical,
— an  idea  which  plays  so  large  a  part  later  on,  especially
in  waking-stage  utterances.  Phinuit  does  not  use  the
metaphor  himself  here,  though  he  does  not  exactly  reject
it. The  following  are  the  relevant  passages  :

Ph.  I  cannot  come  and  control  the  medium  when  the  medium
is  asleep.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  still  there  ;  I
cannot  use  it  to  articulate,  to  speak  to  you.  Then
again,  you  see  the  light  is  not  sufficient ;  it  is  not
strong  enough,  powerful  enough,  bright  enough  for
me  to  follow  it.  Well,  invariably,  people  that  have
not  the  mediumistic  light,  of  course  there  is  nothing
there  for  the  spirit  to  use.  Your  etherial  is  still
holding  on  to  the  brain.

S.  How  do  I  hold  on  to  the  brain  ?  How  does  my  etherial
organism  hold  on  to  my  brain  ?


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  343


Ph. What  makes  you  move  ?  S.  I  desire  to.

Ph.  That  is  what  I  do  when  I  leave  the  body ;  I  desire  to
keep  the  soul  (?)  in  my  own  possession.  The  brain
and  the  etherial,  which  controls  the  physical,  are
linked  together  and  there  is  no  use  for  a  spirit  to
come  in  there  between.

S. He  cannot  separate  that  from  it  ?

Ph.  No  sir,  he  cannot  ;  when  you  are  in  the  sleep  state  your
brain  is  in  a  very  different  way  ;  it  is  in  anything
but  a  natural  state  when  you  are  asleep.  For
instance,  your  brain  is  acting  when  you  are  awake  ;
you  are  learning,  studying,  reading  something ;  well,
when  your  eyes  are  closed  and  that  is  gone  from
your  view,  your  brain  is  at  rest.

S.  Now  supposing  here  is  a  very  strong  etherial  organism,
which  is  spirit,  and  he  watches  the  organism  of  a
person  in  the  body,  and  he  sees  that  person  going
to  sleep.  Gradually  the  organism  of  that  person
becomes  still,  and  he  sees  the  etherial  organism  of
that  person  come  out  of  the  body  and  begin  to
walk  round,  and  he  sees  the  chain  of  communication
between  that  person  and  his  own  body.  Very  well,
that  strong  spirit  thinks,  "  I  will  have  a  good  time  ;
I  will  murder  that  man,"  and  he  goes  and  breaks
the  chain  and  { ?  that }  binds  the  etherial  organism
with  the  mortal  body,  and  he  takes  possession  of
that  body. Why  can't  that  happen  ?

Ph.  Because  the  etherial  and  the  brain  are  connected  when
you  are  asleep.  If  your  etherial  should  let  go  the
brain  and  the  body  would  be  dead.

s.  You  mean  to  say  that  if  this  strong  spirit  broke  that
chain  of  communication,  it  would  not  do  him  any
good  ?

Ph.  I  mean  to  say  that  you  would  pass  out  of  the  body
for  ever.

S. Do  you  mean  that  the  body  would  be  dead  ?

Ph.  I  mean  to  say  that  when  you  sleep  the  nerves  of  the
system,  the  entire  system  is  dead,  as  it  were ;  the
etherial  is  there  just  the  same  ;  it  wanders  about ;
for instance, it is like a thought. Your  etherial


344


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


certainly  controls  the  physical.  When  your  brain  is
at  rest  the  etherial  dances  about,  wanders  about ;
at  the  same  time  clings,  as  it  were,  to  the  brain,
never  leaves  the  brain,  and  no  spirit  power  is
strong  enough  to  break  it.
S. It  requires  too  much  energy  ?

Ph.  No  spirit  is  mean  enough  to  want  to  kill  anybody  when
they  are  asleep.  Common  sense  ought  to  teach  you
that  any  of  your  spirit  friends  would  not  want  to
come  and  use  your  organism  when  you  are  in  the
unconscious  state ;  to  begin  with,  he  has  got  no
use  for  it.

S.  But  this  is  the  idea  ;  suppose  this  is  Mr.  A.,  and  we  will
say  A.  has  a  strong,  healthy  body,  and  we  will  say
that  A.  has  killed  B.  in  the  mortal  body.  Very
well,  we  will  say  B.  is  an  elderly  man  and  A.  is  a
young  man.  A.  kills  B.  and  takes  possession  of
B.'s  property.  B.  is  a  spirit  then,  isn't  he  ?  Suppose
that  B.  is  an  evil  spirit.  B.  Avatches  A.  going  to
sleep,  and  he  sees  A.'s  etherial  body  beginning  to
dance  round,  as  you  described  it  just  now,  but  still
keeping  hold  of  his  own  brain.  Then  B.  says  "A.
has  murdered  me  ;  he  has  driven  my  etherial
organism  out  of  my  body  and  I  cannot  enjoy  the
mortal  life,  but  all  the  same  I  shall  have  my
revenge  now,  and  I  will  simply  cut  that  thread  off
from  A.,  and  I  will  go  into  his  body  instead  of  A.,
and  I  will  enjoy  myself  in  A.'s  body."  Do  you
understand  ?

Ph.  Yes.

S.  Do  you  mean  to  say  that  that  is  an  impossible  thing,
that  for  some  reason  or  other  B.  cannot  do  that  ?
Why  can't  he  ?

Ph.  Certainly  he  cannot.  Although  you  are  asleep,  your  body
is  at  rest,  but  it  is  rest  from  sleep,  from  a  natural
sleep  which  is  ordained.  You  are  in  a  very  different
condition  from  what  you  are  when  you  are  awake ;
your  etherial  has  ceased  to  act ;  it  is  exhausted ;
jowv  etherial  has  not  the  power  to  grasp  a  thought,
an  impression,  that  is  on  your  mind  during  the  day.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  345


Your  spirit  simply  watched  your  physical  while  you
are  resting ;  then  it  can  in  a  certain  way  com-
municate with  the  etherial,  and  when  you  are  awake
you  can  remember  it.  But  the  spirit  has  no  reason
and  no  power  to  lift  up  the  physical  when  it  is
asleep,  and  make  use  of  it.

S.  Why  can't  B.,  who  is  a  spirit,  drag  the  etherial  organism
out  of  A.'s  body,  or  if  A.'s  gets  out,  why  can't  B.
keep  it  out  ?  Is  it  a  thing  that  you  cannot  under-
stand yourself  ; is  it  beyond  you  ?

Ph.  Oh  no,  I  know  all  about  it ;  I  know  I  cannot  control
the  medium's  organism  when  she  is  asleep.  The
etherial  is  on  the  outside  instead  of  in  the  inside.

S.  Now  supposing  you  come  to  the  medium,  and  you  say
"  Come  out  of  that,  come  out  of  that,"  and  she  says
no  and  you  say  "  Come  out  of  that ;  I  will  make
you  come  out,"  and  then  you  make  her  come  out
and  you  say  "  I  am  not  going  back  here  any  more  ;
I  will  stop  here  in  the  body."

Ph.  I  cannot  stop  here  in  the  medium's  body  ;  when  the  light
and  the  strength  are  exhausted,  I  have  to  go.

S.  So  that  if  a  man  broke  the  thread  of  connection  between
A.  and  A.'s  body,  and  if  he  could  get  into  A.'s  body
for  a  short  time,  then  he  would  be  there  only  just
as  long  as  this  reservoir  lasted,  and  then  he  would
be  dead  a  second  time  ?

Ph. That  is  all.

S. Is  it  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  the  universe  that  a

spirit  cannot  break  the  chain  that  binds  the  living

organism  with  the  etherial  body  ?
Ph. Certainly.  S.  But  you  do  not  know  why  ?

Ph. Certainly,  I  do  ;  when  you  are  asleep  it  is  just  the  same

as  if  it  was  dead. Now  if  it  is  dead  how  is  the

spirit  going  to  take  hold  of  it  ?
S. Because  in  the  case  I  am  supposing,  I  am  supposing  that

the  spirit  uses  it  just  as  the  etherial  is  about  to

return  to  the  body.
Ph. Your  etherial  still  clings  to  the  brain,  but  it  leaves  the

other  portion  of  the  body. Then  there  is  nothing,  no

spirit  power  can  sever  that  from  the  brain.


346


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[pabt


S. But  why  can't  they  ?
Ph. Why,  because  there  is  life  there.
S. I  can  sever  an  etherial  body  from  the  body.
Ph. Certainly, because you  can  take  his  life, but  a  spirit
cannot  do  that.

S.  Why  can't  he  ?  I  believe  I  have  got  an  idea  of  the
reason  now  myself.  My  idea  is  this,  that  the  spirit
can  act  upon  the  etherial  part  of  the  bond  con-
necting the  etherial  organism  with  the  ordinary  body,
but  that  part  of  that  bond  consists  of  more  gross
matter  which  can  only  be  acted  upon  by  a  person
who  is  on  the  material  plane,  and  that  therefore  a
person  who  is  still  in  the  body  can  break  that  link,
but  a  spirit  cannot.

Ph. But  why  can't  he  ?

S.  Because  he  cannot  act  upon  that  matter  unless  that
matter  happens  to  be  connected  with  a  mediumistic
person. Is  that  right  ?

Ph. Where  does  the  life  come  in,  the  life  of  the  brain  ?

At  this  point  Hodgson  changes  the  subject,  or  at  least
tries  to  approach  it  from  a  different  side,  by  asking  if  there
is  such  a  thing  as  murder  in  the  spirit  world.

Later  in  the  sitting  the  following  occurs  :

S.  Now  tell  us  how  it  was  that  the  medium  first  came  to
go  into  this  state,  and  who  first  controlled  her  ?
What  made  her  mediumistic  ?  Was  there  any
event  which  made  her  body  mediumistic  ?

Ph. Any  event  ?  No.

S. Has  she  always  been  mediumistic  from  childhood  ?

Ph.  It  is  born  with  you  when  you  are  put  into  the  body,  and
children  sometimes  are  controlled  by  spirits  if  their
brains  are  strong  when  they  are  very  young,  but  if
they  are  not  strong  physically  and  mentally  there  is
not  enough  there  for  the  spirit  to  control  it,  and
never  will  until  it  can  handle  it  and  handle  it
right.

S. Now  tell  us  the  history  of  your  own control  and  the

other  spirits  that  controlled  her,  etc.
Ph. Oh, there are  several different spirits  that I  am  not


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  347


particularly  acquainted  with.  They  call  them  a
band  of  spirits,  but  they  are  called  that  in  the  body
more  so  than  in  the  spirit.  For  instance,  when  I
or  any  spirit  finds  that  there  is  a  medium,  that  is,  a
light,  every  spirit  that  can  will  follow  that  fight  to
see  if  they  cannot  handle  it,  use  it.  For  instance,
you  try  to  lift  a  stone  and  you  are  not  strong
enough  to  do  it  ;  your  brother  tries  and  some  one
else  tries,  and  finally  there  is  some  one  strong
enough  to  do  it.  That  is  the  way  I  got  here.
S. Other  spirits  had  tried  before  you  ?

Ph. Only  one  or  two.  S.  What  others  really  succeeded  ?

Ph. There  was  Loretta  Ponchena,  an  Italian  girl : then  there

was, — I  don't  know, — Henry  Longfellow,  I  believe.
S. Who  else  ?

Ph. I  don't  remember ; it  was  the  spirit  of  Mr.  Longfellow,
just  the  same.

S. Was  it  the  real  spirit  of the  poet  ? (Think  the  answer
was  yes.)

Ph. Then  there  used  to  be  a  Mrs.  Sarah  Siddons.
S. What  did  she  do  ?  Ph.  Oh,  nothing.

S. What  sort  of  a  person  is  she  ?

Ph. I  don't  know  ;  I  guess  she  used  to  be  an  actress  ;  I  do

not  know  her  very  well.
S. Who  else  ? — Beethoven  ?
Ph. Musical  ?  S.  Yes.

Ph. No.  S.  Did  Admiral  Blake  come  ?

Ph. No,  never  heard  the  name  before. S.  Commodore  Wiley  ?

Ph. No,  never  heard  the  name.  S.  Who  came  ?

Ph. Chief  Justice  Marshall  ; that  is  all.

S. Did  you  ever  know  any  naval  officer  that  came  ?

Ph. Commodore Vanderbilt  ; he was not a naval officer ;

Commodore  is  his  name. He  is  a  decent sort  of

fellow ; nice  old  fellow,  but  he  is  profane  ;  used  to

swear  like  a  Turk.
S. None  of  those  could  manage  the  medium's  body  as  well

as  you  %

Ph. No.  S.  Who  is  the  leader  of  this  band  of  spirits  ?

Ph. There  is  no  leader  at  all.

S. That  is  what  the  mortals  call  it.


348


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Ph.  Certainly  ;  it  is  a  various  number  of  people  that  try  to
use  the  medium's  organism.

{June  16,  1888.)

4  %  %  $

S. Have  I  got  any  light  about  my  brain  ?

Ph. Certainly,  a  great  deal.  S.  Luminosity  ?

Ph. Yes.  S.  What  impressions  am  I  subject  to  ?

Ph.  I  do  not  know  as  I  can  illustrate  that  to  you  clearly
but  I  will  try.  If  you  had  a  friend  that  was  ill
you  would  know  it,  you  would  feel  impressed,  but
it  would  be  done  through  the  spiritual  influence.
Do  you  call  that  one  mind  acting  on  another  ?

S. Yes,  we  call  that  telepathy.

Ph.  Well,  I  tell  you  it  is  not  at  all.  You  get  an  impression
through  some  disembodied  spirit,  or  it  may  be  a
very  powerful  action  of  your  own  etherial.

S.  That  is  what  I  think  it  is  likely  ;  tell  me  how  I  can  act
in  that  case.  You  mean  it  is  the  action  of  me  on
the  other  person,  that  my  etherial  really  takes
cognizance  of  what  is  going  on  ?

Ph.  Oui,  that  is  the  idea.  I  can  tell  those  that  are  in
sympathy  with  me  when  I  first  see  them.  I  can
look  right  through  them.  They  do  not  believe  I
am  here.  And  another  thing  I  go  on  talking  to
them ;  they  sit  perfectly  indifferent ;  if  they  would
put  some  feeling  and  some  sympathy  and  give  them-
selves up  in  earnestness,  and  were  desirous  of  getting
something  from  the  spiritual  world,  it  is  an  un-
mistakable fact  that  they  will  get  it  every  time,
and  I  will  guarantee  it.  But  even  that  lady  that  is
dreadfully  sad  ;  now  she  has  got  feeling,  she  is  sad
and  sorrowful  in  the  material,  but  she  has  got  no
sincerity  in  really  calling  up  her  friends,  because
she  thinks  it  is  impossible,  and  it  is  just  as  hard  to
break  through  that  ice  as  it  is  for  you  to  break
an  iron.  I  will  guarantee  that  if  you  will  bring  a
sympathetic  lady,  a  lady  that  is  anxious  to  get
something  and  will  put  her  soul  and  heart  into  it,
her  soul  particularly,  I  will guarantee  you  that  if


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  349


she  has  got  friends  in  the  spirit  I  can  talk  with
them.  Now  for  instance,  Ella  Brown;  you  take  that
name ;  that  name  will  come  to  me  and  that
person  will  say  she  is  Ella  Brown,  but  that  friend
does  not  start  up  and  be  glad  to  see  her,  but
simply  sits  cool  and  quiet  and  does  not  say  whether

she  knows  Ella  Brown  or  not.

*  ❖  *  *

Sometimes,  don't  you  see,  they  won't  listen  to  me.  They
put  themselves  so  hard  and  stern  and  so  within
themselves,  no  feeling,  no  sympathy,  no  belief,  no
nothing,  and  it  is  just  as  impossible  for  their  friends
to  reach  them,  because  I  am  so  sensitive.  For
instance,  I  can  talk,  criticise,  lecture  from  one
year's  end  to  the  other,  generally  speaking ;  at  the
same  time  you  can  say  a  thing  to  me  which  makes
me  deucedly  weak,  in  a  cold,  hard,  stern,  unsympa-
thetic, unkind  tone.  But  I  will  guarantee  that  if
a  lady  or  gentleman  comes  to  me  with  sincerity,
and  anxious  for  me  to  tell  them  something,  I  will
guarantee  to  tell  them  what  they  want  to  know.
And  I  do  not  care  if  I  get  here  forty  times.  You
may  do  whatever  you  have  a  mind  to.  Do  as
another  gentleman  did  ;  he  got  me  to  come  here
and  he  went  and  got  a  cloth  bandage  and  tied  it
all  over  my  head.  Well,  you  can  do  the  same  if
you  like.

S. To  see  if  you  can  see  anything  ?

Ph.  No,  no  ;  then  bring  in  your  friend,  your  American  friend,
and  if  they  are  sympathetic  I  will  guarantee  to  tell
them  their  friends. You  can  do  all  you  like  to  me  ;

I  do  not  care.

*  *  *  *

{Here  were  made  the  experiments  in  localising  pinches,
and  in  smelling  and  taste,  referred  to  in  Proceedings,  Vol.
VIII., p.  5.}

*  *  *  *

S.  That  sense  of  effort,  that  feeling  of  struggle,  does  that  lie
in  the  connection  between  the  etherial  organism  and
the  ordinary  organism  1


350


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


Ph. You  see  I  control  the  medium.

S.  But  supposing  another  spirit  was  looking  on  at  your
feeling  of  effort,  what  would  they  see  ?  What  does
the  effort  consist  of  ?

Ph.  I  make  an  effort  because  I  have  the  use  of  the  medium's
hands.

S. Is  that  effort  in  order  to  make  your  etherial  catch  hold

of  the  medium's  physical  ?
Ph. Oui,  you  know  I  have  got  hold  of  it  all  the  time.
S. If  that  connection  were  more  perfect  the  effort  would  not

be  so  great  ?

Ph.  No.

S.  The  more  imperfect  the  connection  is,  the  greater  the
effort  is  ?

Ph. Certainly. The  medium  is  matter  and  I  am  etherial.
S. What  sort  of  shape  has  the  etherial  organism  ?
Ph. Fac-simile  of  the  one  in  the  body,  mouth,  nose  and  eyes.
S. What  is  the  etherial  mouth  for  ?

Ph.  Supposing  that  I  should  come  to  you  without  the  medium,
how  do  you  suppose  I  could  talk  to  you  ?  If  I  had
not  any  mouth  I  could  not  whisper,  I  could  not  talk
to  you.

S. But  there  are  a  great  many  people  who  do  not  come  to  us

with  their  mouths  ?
Ph. That  is  very  true.

S. Then  you  can  hear  us  without  any  ears,  can't  you  ?
Ph. Certainly  ;  oh,  I  have  got  etherial  ears.
S. You  can  hear  without  etherial  ears  ?
Ph.  Certainly.

S.  What  is  your  nose  for  ?  You  do  not  go  snuffing  about
in  your  etherial  body  ?

Ph. Oh  no.  S.  Then  what  is  the  good  of  it  ?

Ph.  The  etherial  retains  that  shape  because  it  has  had  that
shape  in  the  body.  You  must  remember  I  am  like
a  little  boy,  like  learning  my  lessons  over  again.  Do
you  know,  I  do  not  believe  there  is  a  spirit  comes
back  to  earth  through  any  medium  that  is  stronger
or  more  learned  about  different  things  than  I  am.
I  do  not  believe  you  will  even  find  a  spirit  that  is
stronger  to  bring  back  friends  than  I  am. I  say


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  351


that  because  I  have  seen  so  many  spirits  that  really
have  been  back  to  earth,  and  I  have  never  found
one  that  said  that  they  could  use  the  medium,  and
I  do  not  say  this  because  I  am  conceited  ;  I  tell
you  because  it  is  the  actual  truth.  I  have  talked
with  a  good  many  of  them  and  they  say  they
cannot  use  the  medium  to  hear.  But  I  am  not  a
very  good  hand  to  lecture,  I  am  not  a  very  good
hand  to  explain,  unless  you  put  the  question  very
quietly,  slowly,  and  very  simply  to  me.  But  when
you  get  on  to  your  fandangoes,  a  little  bit  of  French,
a  little  bit  of  Italian,  a  little  bit  of  German,  all
mixed  up  together,  I  cannot  understand  what  you
mean.

*  *  *  *

(June  30,  1888.)

*H  *t*  ^fi

Ph. Did  you  know  everything  has  a  mind,  every  single  object,

a  tree,  a  stone,  a  hill,  a  field, —
S. And  a  fence  and  a  man's  nose  ?

Ph. You  throw  a  stone  into  the  air  and  it  falls. What  makes

it  fall  ?
S.  Gravitation.

Ph.  Well,  that  is  the  idea.  The  centre  comes  down  and
strikes.  What  is  that  thing  you  have  got  there  ?
That  body  ?

S. It  is  matter  ?

Ph. Well,  that  is  all.

S. Do  you  mean  to say  that the  stone  has  a  mind,  an

etherial  body  ?
Ph.  Certainly.

S. Every  portion  of  matter  has  an  etherial  ?
Ph.  Certainly.

8. You  say  every  portion  of  matter  has  a  mind,  and  some-
times the  mind  leaves  it  ?
Ph.  Certainly.

S.  Well,  then  you  have  a  portion  of  matter  that  has  not  an
etherial  ?

Ph. There  is  a  powerful  action  of  the  etherial,  of  the  life  over


352  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwiclc.  [part


the  matter ;  that  is,  the  matter  that  is  flesh  and
bone  and  sinew  and  blood,  all  that  sort  of  thing ;
it  is  more  powerful  to  act  and  handle  and  con-
trol the  objects  of  matter  in  the  stone  than  the
stone's  mind  is  to  control  you.  It  is  a  sense,  it  is
an  etherial  power,  a  natural,  normal,  intellectual,
human  mind,  whereas  the  stone  has  a  mind  that  is
dull  ; there  is  no  sense  in  it.

S. Is  it  of  the  same  nature  as  the  human  mind  ?

Ph. No,  it  is  different  entirely.

S. Don't  you  mean  that  it  is  different  in  degree  ?
Ph. Certainly,  in  degree,  and  in  degree  only.

*  #  *  *

B.

Extracts  from  Stenographic  Reports  of  Sittings,
November  22,  1892,  to  January  30,  1893.

These  extracts  are  chiefly  illustrative  of  theories  as  to
writing,  and  are  supplementary  to  those  quoted  in  the
text.  Extensive  extracts  giving  evidential  matter  from
these  sittings  will  be  found  in  Hodgson's  paper,  Proceedings,
Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  315-322  and  413-441.

(Nov.  22,  1892.)  Extract  from  record  of  sitting  at  the
Howard's  house.  Present  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howard,  Hodgson  and
stenographer.  {This  was  the  first  sitting  after  May  29,  1892,
at  which  G.  P.  communicated. }

*  *  *  *

Phinuit. Here  comes  a  friend  of  yours.  R.  H.  Yes.

Ph. I  am  going  to  step  out.

R.  H.  You  are  going  to  step  out,  you  say,  Doctor  ?
Ph. He  is  going  to  take  that.

R.  H.  Take  what,  the  pencil  ?  Oh,  he  is  going  to  take  the
hand,  gently,  gently,  gently.  Here  you  are  [medium
taking  pencil  in  hand].

R.  H.  Steady,  steady.  Tell  him  to  be  steady,  Doctor ;  tell
him  not  to  be  in  such  a  fuss.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  353


Ph. He  is  doing  first-rate.

R.  H.  He  is  doing  first-rate,  is  he. Oh,  he  is  doing  it  for

strength  ?  1
Ph. Ha  ! He  says  he  can't  get  it.
Mrs.  Howard. Gently  :  now  don't  be  in  a  hurry.
Ph. Ha  ! He  says  he  is  much  obliged  to  you. Hodgson  !
R.  H.  Yes.

Ph. You  can  help  him  if  you  will.

R.  H.  Yes,  I  am  trying  to  {Presumably  by  holding  the  arm
to  steady  it.}

Ph.  Ha !  He  is  fussing.  I  will  give  it  to  him.  [Medium
begins  to  write,  H.  tearing  off  sheets  of  pad  and
reading  for  reporter  what  is  written.]

G.  P.  (writing.) Haloo  Hodgson,  you  know  me,

R.  H.  Who  are  you  ?

G.  P. George  Pelham.  R.  H.  Yes,  I  thought  so.

Ph.  (speaking.) Where  is  Jim,  he  says.

Mrs.  Howard.  He  is  here.  [Mr.  Howard  coming  over  near  the
medium.]

Ph.  Speak  to  Jim,  he  says,  speak  to  Jim.  Speak  to  him
Jim.

Mr.  Howard. Well,  George,  go  ahead.

R.  H. We  are  very  glad  to  see  you  again.

G.  P.  Haloo,  Jim,  old  fellow,  I  am  not  dead  yet.  I  still  live
to  see  you.  Do  you  remember  how  we  used  to
ask  .  .  .

Mrs.  Howard. Gently  George.

Ph. He  says  he  is  doing  the  best  he  can.

Mrs.  Howard. You tell him, Doctor,  not to hurry  himself.

There  is  plenty  of  time.
R.  H.  We  can't  get  the  word  after  "  ask."

G.  P. Each other  for  books  of  certain  kinds,  about  certain

books,  where  they  were,  and  you  always  .  .  .
R.  H.  Gently,  take  time,  George,  take  time.
G.  P. Knew  just  where  to  find  them.

*  *  *  #

1  Compare  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  292-3.  All  this  reads  as  if  the
violent  motions  were  going  on  which  automatic  writers  often  experienced  in
early  attempts  ;  but  several  writing  sittings  had  occurred  before  this,  and
G.  P.  had  acted  as  amanuensis  for  other  communicators.

z


354


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


Hulloa,  I  know  now  where  I  am. Jim,  you  dear
old  soul,  how  are  you  %
R.  H.  Gently,  gently  George,  take  time.

G.  P. Whom  is  this,  Louis  ...  he  wants  me  to  tell  you  for

him  .  .  .  Louis  he  wants  to  see  Billie.
Ph. Ha  ! He  wants  to  know  something.

Mbs.  Howard. Can't  he  come  and  ask  us  himself  ? He  does

not  seem  to  write  very  well.
R.  H.  Who  is  Louis  ?

Ph. He  is  . . Who  is  that  gentleman,  that  German  fellow

talking  to  you  George,  can't  you  tell  them  ?
R.  H.  He  wants  to  see  Billie,  does  he  ?
Ph. Who  is  he  talking  about  ? I  am  all  jumbled  up.
R.  H.  George,  can  you  spell  the  name  ?
Ph. He  will  answer  you.

R.  H.  Tell  George  to  give  us  his  other  name  besides  Louis.
G.  P.  (writing)  Well,  wait  just  one  minute.

Ph. George  is  talking  to  that  gentleman  and  he  is  writing
to  you.

R.  H. Well,  Doctor,  why  can't  you  talk  to  us  and  get  George

to  talk  to  us  instead  of  writing.
Mrs.  Howard.  We  can  get  so  much  more  in  the  time.
G.  P. Hodgson,  it  is  I,  go  out  and  tell  him  to  come.  Good

day,  you  know  me  ;  George  Pelham.
R.  H.  Yes,  we  know  you  George,  very  well. Are  you  coming

to  talk  to  us  ?
G.  P. Yes,  yes.

{Some  further  conversation  with  Phinuit  follows,  then  : — }
R.  H.  Are  you  getting  your  hand  back,  Doctor  ?
Ph. I  will  have  it  in  a  minute.

{Phinuit talks for G.  P., writes a name in  mirror
writing. Further  conversation  with  Phinuit,  then  : — }
Ph. Can't  you  help  me  turn  round.
Mrs.  Howard. Yes,  how  do  you  want  to  turn  ?

[Medium  breathing  hard  and  clinging  to  Mrs.  H.]
Ph. Hodgson  ?  R.  H.  Yes

Ph. You  help  me  get  out.

R.  H.  All  right  [placing  hands  on  medium's  head]
Ph. Change  that,  that  is  right

[At  this  point  there  is  a  change  of  control. The  new


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  355

control  is  recognised  as  George  who  has  taken  control
at  previous  sittings. The  voice  is  so  low  that  only-
snatches  of  sentence  can  be  caught  by  the  reporter.]
{Conversation  with  G.  P.  talking  follows.}

{Nov.  30,  1892.)

*  *  *  *

G.  P.  (using  voice). The medium  was given to us  to  use.

I  find  that  the  spirit  comes  back  and  uses  its
natural  expression.  If  a  man  is  a  born  liar  he
'will  come  back  and  lie  through  the  medium.

Mrs.  Howard.  Then  he  yields  to  the  temptation  of  lying  just
as  much  there  as  here  ?

G.  P.  Only  when  expressing  himself  through  the  medium  ;
that  brings  back  the  same  earthly  conditions.

Mrs.  Howard.  It  is  the  body  that  brings  back  the  same
character  that  he  had  here  ?

G.  P.  Exactly.

R.  H.  What  first  drew  you  toward  the  medium  ?  How  did  you
find  the  medium  out  ?

G.  P. It  was  by  light,  light  alone  :  to  me  her  body  was  light.

R.  H.  Why  did  you  come  to  her  instead  of  some  other  medium  ?

G.  P.  Because  the  light  was  stronger  and,  to  tell  you  the
absolute  truth  of  the  thing  the  body  of  the  medium
is  moral,  and  unless  the  material  body  with  the
spiritual  in  it  is  willing  to  give  up  to  it  and  is  moral,
then  we  can  use  it  in  no  possible  sensible  degree.

*  *  *  *

R.  H.  I  thought  that  perhaps  when  Hart  came  to  the  medium1
perhaps  some  of  the  articles  that  he  brought  acted
as  a  sort  of  magnet  to  you  to  bring  you  there.

G.  P.  That  is  true  ,  I  have  explained  it,  that  the  more  objects
that  you  give  me  acts  as  the  needle  did.

{Dec.  5,  1892.)

{Other names and initials are substituted  for the  real

ones in this sitting. The extracts are given  not only  as

the context to passages referred to in the  text, but  as

1  Referring  to  the  first  sitting  at  which  G.  P.  communicated,  see  Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  296-299.


356


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


affording  a  good  example  of  the  possibilities  of  shuffling  in
communications  by  writing.}

R.  H.  (reading  question  suggested  by  R.  T.).  Can  you  tell
what  R.  T.  wrote  you  about  and  what  verbal
correction  you  made  in  your  reply  ?

*  *  *  *

G.  P.  (writing).  Yes,  I  wrote  R.  T.  that  I  would  correct  it
for  him  and  explain  by  my  next  letter  .  .  .  and  I
in  the  first  wrote  more  or  less  in  the  negative  *  *  *
Then  I  replied  and  said  I  would  see  and  I  told  him
I  had  seen  it  philosophically. And  then  I  ended.

Ph.  (speaking).  He  wants  you  to  read  that  question  over
again.

R.  H.  {reads  question}. Ask him if he knows who R.  T.

is  ? George,  do  you  know  R.  T.  ? Write  it  in  full  if

you  can.

{G. P. after attempting an answer again, writes  of
other  matters}.

sjc  )fc  j^c  s}c

R.  H.  Now  George  can  you  tell  me  the  full  name  of  R.  T.  ?
G.  P. I  can't  quite  hear  all  you

Ph.  (speaking). He does not hear all you say. Will  you

speak  slowly,  not  so  fast.
R.  H.  Yes. George  will  you

G.  P. Whom  is  K D is  she  better  now  and  where.

[Another  word  written]
R.  H.  Tadworth  is  that  ?
G.  P. No  Thornton

*  *  *  *

R.  H.  George  can  you  listen  to  me  ? Can  you  hear  ?

Ph. You  help  him  Hodgson.

G.  P. [An  entirely  illegible  scrawl]

R.  H.  Yes, will you write the full name of R. T.  who

asked  that  question  ?
G.  P. No.  R.  H.  Does  he  hear  that,  Doctor  ?

G.  P. Yes.  R.  H.  Won't  you  do  it  ?

G.  P. Oh  yes  to  be  sure.

R.  H.  Well,  why  won't  you  write  it,  George,  because  it  is  a
good  test  ?


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  357


G.  P.  For  obvious  reasons  which  I  will  explain  to  you  and
Marte.

{This  sort  of  fencing  with  the  question  goes  on  for
some  time.  G.  P.  writes  Reuben  with  an  illegible
word  after  it.}

R.  H.  Well  George  that  is  not  the  R.  T.  that  I  am  talking
about.  *  *  *  Perhaps  you  have  got  on  to  a  wrong
question  altogether

G.  P. Oh  no,  I  ans.  you. [Scrawl  like  Reuben]

Fi.  H.  Reuben  is  all  wrong,  George.

G.  P. Oh  no,  it  is  not  that.

R.  H.  Oh  it  is  something  else  you  want  to  write  about  ?
G.  P. That  is  absurd — why  can't  you  read  this — I  know  now.

*  *  *  *

R.  H.  I  can't  read  that — steady,  be  patient,  no  use  in
writing  too  fast,  can't  read.  Can't  you  write  in
capitals  ?  Do  you  want  Mrs.  Howard  to  come  in  ?
Will  that  help  ?

G.  P. No  ; you are all  right Hodgson. But  I  don't  quite

hear  all  you  say,  cannot  you  talk  slower  please,  and

it  is  easier  for  me  to  write.
R.  H. *  *  *  I  want  you  to  give  {that  name}  to  me  before

Mrs.  Howard  and  Jim  come  here,  or  else  it  loses

its  value.

G.  P. Yes  I  see. What  name  ?  R.  H.  The  name  of  R.  T.

G.  P. I  don't  understand  what  you  mean.

R.  H.  The  R.  T.  who  wrote  to  you  and  for  whom  you  made

a  verbal  correction. He  wrote  to  you  something  and

used  bad  grammar  of  some  sort  and  you  made  a

correction  in  your  reply,
G.  P. I  told  him  it  was  to  be  corrected  in  this  way,  /  am  not,

instead  I  is  not  (?) Now  you  know.
Ph. Why  don't  you  speak  to  him  ?
R.  H.  Well,  where  is  he  ?  Ph.  Over  there.

{Some  more  conversation  about  the  supposed  correction

and  some  more  illegible  writing.}
R.  H. (to  Phinuit.) Tell  him  that  I  think  it  is  desirable  that

he  should  give  me  the  full  name  of  this  person  for

whom  he  made  this  correction.
[More  writing.]


358


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[PAET


R.  H.  We  can't  read  this,  Doctor.

i|C  jfc  i|C  s|c

Ph. Now  you  have  got  it

R.  H.  No,  I  have  not,  cannot  read  anything  there.
Ph. Oh  dear,  why  not  1

R.  H.  Can't  read  anything. Tell  him  to  spell  it  out  in  capitals.

That looks like Tout  but  that  is wrong  that  is

not  the  person.
Ph. You  have  not  got  that  right.

R.  H.  Well,  it  is  nothing  like  the  name  George.  *  *  *  I  think
you  are  thinking  of  some  other  person  altogether.  *  *  *

3p  *I*  •'fc

G.  P I  did  not  write  Tout.

R.  H.  Well  what  is  it  then  *  *  *  Can  you  write  distinctly  the
name  of  the  person  in  full.  *  *  *  Can't  read  that,
George,  is  that  intended  for  Robinson  ?

%  sje  %  $

G.  P. No  it  is  not  Robinson.

R.  H.  Well  what  is  it  ? Now  George  if  you  don't  remember

this  name

G.  P. I  don't  know  what  you  say  I  don't  think  at  all.
Ph. You  speak  to  him,  don't  speak  to  me.
R.  H.  Well,  where  can  he  hear  that  ?
Ph. He  is  over  there  by  you.

R.  H.  Well  George  I  have  asked  you  a  question  about  a
certain  correction  in  grammar  or  something  of  that
sort — ■ —

Ph. He  says  he  has  answered  that  for  you.

R.  H.  Well,  very  well  then.  It  is  about  a  certain  person  and
I  want  you  to  write  me  in  full  the  name  of  that
person  with  whom  the  incident  occurred,  whose  initials
are  R.  T.

Ph. Oh  that —  G.  P.  Robert —

R.  H.  I  want  you  to  write  it  out. Robert  is  not  right.

Ph. Who  are  you  talking  about,  his  friend  ?

R.  H.  I  am  talking  about  R.  T. I  want  him  to  write  the  full

name  of  R.  T.
Ph. You  hear  George  what  he  says — you  help  him.
G  P. I  don't  know  R.  T.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  359

R.  H.  Why  but,  George, that  is the  question  I  have  been

asking  you  all  the  time.
G.  P. Nor  never  did.

R.  H.  Well,  but  you  just  now  explained,  George,  that
G.  P. I  truly  don't  know  but  one  person  in  your  world  and
that  is  Tucker

R.  H.  Do  you  mean  that  is  the  only  person  beginning  with  a

T,  is  that  it  ?
G.  P. Tucker  and  he  is  the  one  to  whom  I  wrote.

*  *  *  *

R.  H.  Well,  that  is  not  the  person  that  I  have  been  asking
the  cpiestion  about.  *  *  *  Can't  you  think  of  any
other  person  beginning  with  a  T.  ?  I  did  not  say  he
was  a  special  friend  of  yours,  George.

G.  P.  Well,  who  was  it,  *  *  *  I  don't  remember  any  T.  but
Tucker  that  is  I  cannot  recall  to  mind  any  but  he.

k.  H.  Well  now,  I  will  tell  you,  George  the  person  that  I  am
asking  you  about  is  Rowell  Tracy.  Did  you  ever  hear
of  Rowell  Tracy  ?  Now  I  will  read  the  question
again.  Can  you  tell  what  R.  T.  wrote  you  about  and
what  verbal  correction  you  made  in  your  reply  ?

G.  P.  I  do  and  he  was  not  a  friend  of  mine  at  all  and  the
whole  thing  to  me  is  vague.  I  think  you  had  better
get  something  more  closely  comiected  with  me.

R.  H.  Well,  George,  I  asked  that  question  because  it  was
given  to  me  by  Rowell  Tracey  as  a  specially  good
test.

G.  P.  But  I  answered  it  correctly,  I  remembered  the  circum-
stance and  to  whom  I  was  sure  of  Tucker  sure
was  Tucker

R.  H.  You  mean  you  told  Tucker  about  it  ?

G.  P. Yes,  and  he  remembers  it  well. I  cannot  stay.

{Dec.  7,  1892.)

At  this  sitting  G.  P.  explained  that  he  had  while  alive
been  justly  annoyed  by  something  R.  T.  had  said,  and
therefore  would  not  give  his  name.  Hodgson  in  his  paper
(Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  424)  appears  to  accept  this
explanation  of  the  failure  to  give  the  name  as  satisfactory


360


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


but  what  he  said  to  G.  P.  at  the  time  is,  I  think,  more
to  the  point. It  was  as  follows  :

R.  H.  Well,  George  instead  of  running  round  and  writing
various  names  like  Reuben  and  Tucker,  last  time,
why  didn't  you  write  out  "  I  decline  to  have  any-
thing to  do  with  R.  T.  or  any  questions  coming
from  him  ?  "

G.  P.  But  it  is  of  special  importance  to  me  that  I  should
not  I  do  wish  you  could  understand  my  reason  for
acting  thus.

R.  H.  No,  I  can't  George  ;  I  can  understand  your  declining
to  answer  the  question  or  to  have  anything  to  do
with  R.  T.  but  I  can't  understand  your  giving  a  long
elaborate  description  of  a  mistake.

{Dec.  16,  1892.)

{Phinuit  has  been  talking.}
R.  H.  He  is  taking  your  hand  isn't  he  ?

Ph. My  hand — it  is  gone  out — I  have  got  to  let  go  of  my
hand. I  will  give  it  to  him.  *  *  * You  take  it  George
You  take  it  if  you  want  it. I  will  help  you  in  a
minute  if  you  want  me  to.

❖  ^  *  ❖

Will  you  help  George,  some  of  you,  to  give  him  a
little  bit  of  strength  ? He  has  got  all  of  mine.
{After  another  sentence  spoken  by  Phinuit,  G.  P.  begins
to  write.}

R.  H.  George,  do  you  prefer  writing  to  talking  ?

G.  P.  (writing). Yes  I do  now  for  obvious  reasons  which  I

will  explain  to  you.
R.  H. Good.  G.  P.  Is  that  you  Hodgson  ?

R.  H. Yes  it  is. I  am  following  your  hand  George.
G.  P. All  right  I  could  not  distinguish  the  voices  exactly.

G.  P. Now  I  want  to  tell  you  what  I  have  for  you.

Mps.  Howard. What  is  it  ?

G.  P. First  you  asked  me  to  pump  Phinuit.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  361


Ph. You  better  shut  up  about  me.

{Mrs.  Howard  then  exchanges  a  few  remarks  with
Phinuit  who  is  speaking  while  Hodgson  does  so  with
G.  P.  who  is  writing,  but  there  is  no  evidence  that
the  voice  and  the  hand  were  used  actually  simul-
taneously and  the  remarks  of  the  controls  are  few.}

Ph.  {handling  articles}. Oh,  somebody  is  ill.

Mb.  Howard. I  am  sorry  to  hear  that. Do  you  get  anything

more  definite  than  that,  doctor  ?
Ph. Oui,  what  do  you  want  ? [Phinuit  seems  to  be  having

a  struggle  with  the  hand. George  in  the  mean  time

is  trying  to  go  on  with  the  writing.]
G.  P. This  is  a  tabula  rasa.
Mrs.  Howard. Who  has  got  the  hand,  doctor  ?
G.  P. George,  I  am  going  into  the  head.

{He  continues  to  write  for  some  time  however,  before

he  takes  control  of  the  head  and  says  : }
G.  P.  (speaking)  Ha  ha  ! Here  I  am  myself. How  are  you  *  *  *

Well  how  goes  it  ? I  have  been  writing.

♦  ♦  Jfc  3fc

G.  P.  This  is  the  most  difficult  thing  to  do,  to  express  one's
thoughts  through  the * *  *

Mrs.  Howard. George  couldn't  you  do  it  easier  by  writing  ?

G.  P.  Much  easier.  I  came  this  way  first  and  I  got  to  know
the  real 1  by  writing.  I  am  a  little  more  accus-
tomed to  it ;  it  is  easier.

R.  H.  Will  it  always  be  easy  for  you  to  write  ?

G.  P.  I  shall  be  able  to  write  clearly  by  and  by.  Still,  I  am
getting  farther  away  from  you  each  time :  I  am
going  on ; * *  *

*  *  *  *

{After  some  more  talk  he  says  in  reply  to  a  question:}
G.  P. *  *  *  Let  me  think — let  me  write  it  for  you  will  you.

*  *  * I  -will  go  out  a  minute  ; just  let  me  relieve
myself  a  minute  and  I  will  come  back  and  tell  you
what  it  was  if  I  possibly  can  recall  it  ;  I  think  I
can. {Illegible  writing}.
R.  H.  What  is  that  you  have  just  written  George  ? Wait  a

1  The  "  real  "  means  life  in  this  world.


362  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


minute — I  am  afraid  we  cannot  read  any  of  that  ;
you  will  have  to  write  that  all  over  again.
*  *  *  *

[George  trying  to  write.]
Ph.  (speaks) George  was  weak  that  time. Wait a  minute;

you  help  him,  will  you,  and  he  will  write  it  for  you
and  then  he  will  explain  it  to  you.

if!  i|C  jJj

G.  P.  (writes.) All  I  ever  knew I  will  tell  you.
Ph. He  is  talking  to  me. Wait  a  minute  till  he — oh,  he
says  if  he  ever  knew  he  will  tell  you.

{Dec.  22,  1892.)

{Present  R.  H.,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howard,  stenographic  reporter,
and  at  first  Evelyn  Howard. Phinuit  has  been  talking  for
some  time  to  Evelyn  Howard  especially.}
Ph. That  fellow  wants  to  shake  hands  with  that  little  girl.

He  has  got  my  hand  and  he  has  carried  it  away
somewhere.

9(!  5JC  S|C  »JC

That  is  very  funny  ;  he  is  going  all  round  the  lot.  I
don't  care  what  he  does  with  it ;  I  give  that  to
him.

Me. Howard. Hello, George, good evening [medium  has
shaken  hands  with  all  in  turn.]

Ph.  Now  you  wait  on  him  and  let  me  alone  and  I  will  give
him  all  the  strength  I  can,  do  you  see  ?
{G.  P.  then  for  a  hour  or  more  carries  on  a  conversation
in  writing,  in  the  course  of  which  occurs  what
Hodgson  describes  as  "  perhaps  the  most  dramatic
incident  of  the  whole  series,"  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,
p.  321.  When  G.  P.  has  taken  leave  Ph.  takes
control  again.}

Ph. *  *  *  You  help  him  give  me my  hand  back  will  you  ?

{This  means,  I  think,  that  Hodgson  is  to  rub  it.}  He
has  got  a  tight  hold  on  it,  very  tight.  Oh  you
want  to  go  back  do  you  ?  {To  G.  P.}  He  is  the
greediest  fellow  ever  I  see * *  *

R.  H.  Have  you  been  in  the  head  all  the  time  ?


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  363

Ph.  I  have  been  in  the  head  all  the  time.1  I  have  been
just  hanging  on  to  her  all  the  time  and  giving
him  all  the  strength  I  can,  but  I  try  not  to  say-
any  thing  to  him  to  bother  him,  and  I  tell  you  one
thing  {advice  about  how  to  talk  with  George — not
interrupting  him  and  so  forth — follows}.

*  *  *  *

Ph.  You  see  if  he  should  happen  to  recognize  things — I
have  got  it  {i.e.  the  hand}  all  right ;  that  is  mine  ;
it  feels  good  to  get  it  back  again — Well,  if  he  should
recognize  that  for  instance,  let  him  go  on  and  tell
all  about  it  without  interruption  :  don't  stop  him  in
the  middle  of  it.  I  listen  to  you  fellows  sometimes
and  you  make  me  kind  of  disgusted  with  you
because  you  don't  give  him  a  chance,  and  he  writes
because  he  is  more  used  to  it.  *  *  *
{Phinuit  compares  his  own  powers  and  G.  P.'s.}

Ph.  I  am  only  illustrating.  And  he  does  not  like  it  {i.e.,
apparently,  controlling  the  whole  organism}  it  is  kind
of  distasteful  to  him,  so  I  just  assist  him  and  hold
the  body  while  he  takes  my  hand,  and  he  knows
how  to  use  my  brain  through  the  hand  just  as  well  ;
he  takes  the  whole  hand  away  from  me  absolutely  ;
what  do  you  think  of  that  ?

*  *  *  *

c.

Extracts  from  Professor  W.  R.  Newbold's  Sittings  in

1895.

The  extracts  here  given  illustrate  theories  of  controls  about
writing  and  about  the  process  of  controlling.  Other  extracts
from  this  series  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix  to  Chapter
III.  (Sir  Walter  Scott  and  Proctor),  and  in  that  to  Chapter

1  The  body  had  been  sagging  down,  "  as  it  were  limp  and  lifeless,"  supported
by  Mrs.  Howard  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  322).  The  plan  of  cushions
had  not  been  invented  yet.


364


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


VIII.  about  influences.  Professor  Newbold's  article  in
Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  is  largely  concerned  with  this  series
of  sittings.

(June  14,  1895.)

Sitter  and  Reporter,  Professor  W.  Romaine  Newbold.
W.  R.  N. Are  you  ready  to  tell  me  of  your  life  over  yonder  ?
G.  P.  (writing.) Yes I am. .  .  .  the life  .  .  .  yes, yes,  cer-
tainly .  .  .  yes  sir  what  about  my  life  .  .  .  quite.
W.  R.  N. What  is  the  state  of  mind  after  death  ?
G.  P. What  is  the  state  of  your  mind  ? Confused  for  a
time

W.  R.  N. How  long  ?

G.  P.  It  depends  upon  the  condition  of  leaving  the  body.
Next

W.  R.  N. Does  sudden  death  confuse  one  more  ?
G.  P.  Certainly.

W.  R.  N. Does  expectation  of  death  and  willingness  tend  to

make  confusion  less  ?
G.  P. Very  much.

W.  R.  N. In  case  of  insanity,  does  confusion  last  long  %
G.  P. Not  very  long.

W.  R.  N.  Does  attempt  to  communicate  through  a  medium
confuse  you  ?

G.  P. Terrible  .  .  .  very  bad  sometimes  .  .  .  yes  sir.
W.  R.  N. Does  it  tire  you  ?  G.  P.  Oh  no  indeed.

W.  R.  N. Why  does  it  confuse  you  ?

G.  P.  Because  we  cannot  grasp  the  light  sufficiently  to
express  clearly  all  of  our  thoughts.

W.  R.  N.  Does  this  confusion  begin  when  you  get  into  the  earth
region  before  taking  hold  of  the  medium's  light  ?

G.  P.  No.

W.  R.  N. Can  you  see  the  earth  ?  G.  P.  Oh  yes.

W.  R.  N. What  do  you  see  ?

G.  P.  Our  friends  as  viz.  I  saw  my  father  distinctly
and  saw  him  go  to  the  photographer's.  {See
Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  304.}

W.  R.  N.  I  know  of  that,  Mr.  P{elham}.  Can  you  see  objects
too  ?

G.  P. Our  friends  of  course  interest  us  more  than  objects  .  .  .


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  365


our  memory  fails  somewhat  i.e.  in  recalling  all  our
past  (and  I  am  sure  I  am  quite  pleased  to  lose  .  .
forget  mine).

W.  R.  N. Do  you  see  material  things  ?

G.  P. Indistinctly,  vaguely.

W.  R.  N. For  example  what  does  this  paper  look  like  ?

G.  P.  Paper  looks  like  a  large  light  surface  .  .  .  looks  as
above  described.

W.  R.  N.  Then  you  see  much  as  we  do,  but  not  so  clearly.
Can  you  see  me,  i.e.  my  body  ?

G.  P.  Certainly  if  I  desire  yet  it  does  not  seem  to  me  that
it  is  a  body  I  discern  ...  a  very  dark  surface
or  shape  as  it  were  ...  as  it  is  seen  by  me  I
realize  a  distinct  shape  .  .  .  hear  you  me  ?

W.  R.  N. Then  you  come  to  earth  without  any  inconvenience  ?

G.  P. Certainly. Why  ?

W.  R.  N.  I  thought  otherwise.  Can  you  go  through  the  solid
earth  itself  ?

G.  P.  Certainly  or  [it]  seems  the  nearest  and  easiest  way
by  which  I  can  make  you  understand  would  be
to  use  your  own  words  .  .  .  expressions  and  say
it  seems  like  flying.

W.  R.  N.  What  a  comfort  it  must  be  to  get  rid  of  this
heavy  carcase.

G.  P. Comfort  ? Well  I  should  think  so.

W,  R.  N. How  does  a  medium  seem  to  you  ?

G.  P. Very  light.

W.  R.  N. All  over,  or  through  the  bodyi?
G.  P.  Depends.

{June  15,  1895.)

Present  W.  R.  N.  and  A.  W.  G.
W.  R.  N.  What  makes  one  communicator  more  confused  than
another  ?

G.  P.  (writing.)  It  is  due  to  different  causes  1st  perhaps  the
light  may  be  poor,  perhaps  the  person  took  his
own  life,  perhaps  it  is  due  to  the  number  of
friends  present,  but  there  is  always  more  or  less
confusion  in  the  mind  of  the  spirit  present  owing
to  the  state  in  which  he  is  when  communicating.


366


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Then  again  there  are  a  volley  of  test  questions
thrown  slap  into  the  present  communicator's  face
before  he  has  really  had  time  to  free  his  thoughts.
2nd.  When  the  spirit  is  attracted  by  and  drawn
into  the  light  so  termed — for  convenience  sake  I
use  the  expression

W.  R.  N.  (interrupting). Then  it  is  not  like  light  ?

G.  P.  It  is,  but  into  it  I  [mean] — there  are  a  various  number
of  persons  following  up  the  communicator  with  a
multitude  of  questions  and  all  wishing  to  see  some
friend.  It  is  a  thousand  times  more  difficult  to
express  one's  thoughts  then.  Consequently  there
is  bound  to  be  a  confusion.


(June  18,  1895.)

W.  R.  N.  and  H.  W.  0.  present.
W.  R.  N.  I  want  to  ask  you  about  the  two  elements,  light  and
the  ego.

G.  P.  (writing) Certainly. Light and ego. A part of  the

etherial  ;  question  ?
W.  R.  N.  When  the  ego  separates,  does  the  light  stay  behind  ?
G.  P. Behind  or  before,  as  you  may  choose  to  term  it  .  .  .

certainly.

W.  R.  N.  Does  the  light  hold  the  ego  in  the  body  ?
G.  P. Light  hold  ego  in  the  body  ?  No.
W.  R,  N. What  does  ?

G.  P. Only  a  material  cord. W.  R.  N.  What  is  this  cord  ?

G.  P.  The  last  thread  existing  .  .  .  which  exists  .  .  .  that
so  called  by  you.

W.  R.  N.  Perhaps  you  cannot  make  me  understand.

G.  P.  I  only  use  words  such  as  you  would  use  to  express  it,
i.e.  for  your  understanding.  In  other  words,  the
etherial  body  is  used  by  us  as  a  medium.

W.  R.  N.  What  is  this  etherial  body  which  you  use  as  a
medium  ?

G.  P. Light,  luminiferous  ether.

W.  R.  N.  Is  this  light  conscious  ?

G.  P. No  .  .  .  yes  .  .  .  that, — but  your  first  question  .  .  .


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  367


consciousness  ...  no  has  no  consciousness  ...  is
dead,  for  the  time  being  it  dies.1
%  ^  *  *

W.  R.  N.  In  the  act  of  communicating,  can  the  medium's
machinery  contribute  to  what  you  say  ?

G.  P.  Oh  not  in  the  least.  When  I  am  present  and  in  the
act  of  communicating  nothing  concerning  the  material
body,  or  as  you  term  it,  machinery,  can  arrest —
interfere  with  my  thoughts  or  actions  in  any  degree
whatever.  Should  there  be  any  interference  of  any
kind  it  would  be  due  to  interruptions  from
other  voices.2

$  $  $  $

W.  R.  N.  When  you  are  communicating  do  you  talk  to  the  light

or  put  your  hand  into  the  light  ?
G.  P. Follow  it  and  use  it  as  you  would  a  typewriter,  only

my  thoughts  must  act  instead  of  fingers.
W.  R.  N.  Can  you  explain  this  ?

G.  P.  Explain  ?  Well,  it  is  like  speaking  through  a  ...  let
me  think  .  .  .  what  was  it  we  used  to  speak.

W.  R.  N.  Telephone  ?  G.  P.  Telephone,  yes.

W.  R.  N.  Then  how  do  j^ou  make  a  difference  between  writing
and  talking  %  3

G.  P.  I  do  not  understand.  [Question  repeated.]  There
seems  ...  is  no  difference  to  me.  I  only  know
that  I  am  writing  by  having  been  told  so  by  Hodgson.

W.  R.  N.  So  that  is  purely  accidental  ?

G.  P.  Certainly.  Did  you  not  see  me  bow  my  head  to  H.  ?
W.  R.  N.  When  H.  went  out  ?  G.  P.  Certainly.

W.  R.  N.  But  George  you  didn't  bow,  you  waved  your  hand.
G.  P. Don't  you  understand  the  difference  between  a  fellow's

head  and  feet  for  instance  ?
W.  R.  N. Did  you  try  to  bow  ?

G.  P.  Did.  Certainly,  bowed  my  head  of  course,  so  [Hand
rises  and  bends  towards  imaginary  Hodgson]

1  Apparently  G.  P.  here  goes  off  to  the  use  of  the  word  "  light  "  to  mean
Mrs.  Piper  herself  as  the  medium.

'  But  compare  Chapter  II.  above,  p.  33.

3  Note  Phinuit's  answer  to  this  same  question  next  day  (p.  369).


368


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PART


W.  R.  N.  Well  it  did  not  look  like  a  bow  here.
G.  P. What  then  ? That's  my  head,  you  goose  [we  both
laugh]

W.  R.  N.  Well,  in  fact,  the  medium's  hand  rose  up  and  bowed
or  waved.

G.  P. Well,  I'll  be  hanged,  if  that  doesn't  get  me  .  .  .  Well,
I'll  have  to  give  this  up  as  beaten  ...  I  am  beaten.
W.  R.  N.  Never  mind,  we  understood.

G.  P. Well, you are clever if it looked that way  .  .  .

Well  I  am  glad  to  know  you  any  way. Question  ?

W.  R.  N.  What  is  Phinuit  about  while  you  talk  to  the  light  ?

G.  P.  Phinuit  ?  He's  talking  to  John  H.  and  a  little
million  others  at  the  same  time  helping  me  hold
them  back  and  keep  them  from  interrupting  me.
Yet,  he  helps  me  hold  the  light.

W.  R.  N.  Is  it  hard  to  keep  hold  of  the  light  ?

G.  P.  Yes,  just  as  it  would  be  for  you  to  hold  a  box  contain-
ing a  telephone  while  your  friend  here  talked
through  one  end  of  it  and  your  other  friend  the
other. — it  is  like  a  double  telephone.  Got  it  ?
What  is  it  ?

W.  R.  N.  I  think  so.  When  I  touch  you,  do  you  feel  a  touch  ?
G.  P. No,  but  I  see  it.  W.  R.  N.  See  it  ?

G.  P. Certainly.  W.  R.  N.  Do  you  see  my  hand  ?

G.  P. Think  I  am  blind  ?

W.  R.  N.  When  we  shake  hands,  how  does  it  seem  to  you  ?
G.  P. I  see  you  assent  and  touch  my  head  .  .  .  Certainly.
W.  R.  N.  When  I  touch  you,  you  don't  feel  it  ?
G.  P. No,  I  see  it.

W.  R.  N.  What  tremendous  problems  this  would  open  to  specu-
lation !

G.  P.  Certainly,  I  understand  it  and  wish  you  did  as  well,
yet  there  are  a  million  things  which  I  under-
stand perfectly,  but  cannot  explain  to  you,  so
that  you  could  understand  them  as  I  do.

W.  R.  N.  Have  you  any  sense  of  touch  at  all  ?  G.  P.  No.

W.  R.  N.  What  senses  have  you  ?  G.  P.  See,  hear.

W.  R.  N.  Your  consciousness  is  exclusively  visual  and  auditory  ?

G.  P.  Certainly.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  369


[Takes  another  pencil  from  N.  after  rejecting  three
or  four  from  0.]
G.  P.  Thanks.

W.  R.  N.  Why  did  you  throw  away  those  pencils  ?
G.  P. Leads. [This  is  misunderstood  and  N.  asks]
W.  R.  N.  How  did  you  know  that  the  leads  were  bad  ?

[Hand then writes three times] leades me,  leades
LEADES [evidently  putting  on  the  e  to  mark
intended  pronunciation]  me  to  see  other  things.
W.  R.  N. What  things  ?

G.  P.  Your  friends  or  some  ones  friends  other  than  those
of  whom  I  am  speaking,  in  other  words  it  has
its  own  light,  etc.,  like  any  other  object  that
has  been  worn  or  handled  by  others,  or  some-
times it  abstracts  thought.

#  ♦  ♦  #

I  cannot  do  more  as  the  light  is  going  out.  Adieu
until  I  ...  we  meet  again. G.  P.

{June  19,  1895.)
Present  W.  R.  N. Control  Phinuit.

*  sj»  *  *

W.  R.  N.  You  know,  Doctor,  most  scientific  men  don't  believe

in  you  spirits  at  all.
Ph.  I know that. But what do they think I am  ?

Don't  they  believe  in  me  ?
W.  R.  N.  They  think  you  are  just  one  of  the  medium's  dreams.

She  goes  to  sleep  and  dreams  she  is  a  French

Doctor.

Ph.  Oh  my ! [with  infinite  disgust] people had  better

say  it  again.  I'm  individually,  distinctly,  abso-
lutely my  own  self,  I  have  nothing  to  do  with
that  woman  :  the  body  is  light  to  me,  it  is
illuminated.

W.  R.  N. Are  you  talking  to  the  light  ?

Ph.  I'm  right  inside  the  body.

W.  R.  N.  But  George  says  he  isn't.

Ph.  You  see  my  hand,  [holding  it  up]  that's  my  hand.

When  George  comes  I'll  go  out  to  keep  the
people away and hold the machine. When  I


370


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


take  the  hand  [?]  you  can  divide  the  light.  He
takes  that  part  of  the  light  and  uses  it.  I'll
tell  you  another  tiring.  While  George  talks  to
you,  if  it  was  not  for  interruption  I  could  talk
at  the  same  time.  George's  thoughts  have  no
more  to  do  with  mine  than  yours  have.

*  *  *  *

Ph.  Here's  George  whistling  around,  he  wants  to  write.

[Hand  has  been  twitching  for  some  time. I  ask

Phinuit  if  George  is  coming  in]
Ph.  No, he's only walking around the light and  just

whistling  and  singing  and  talking  to  himself.
W.  R.  N.  How  does  he  make  the  difference  between  writing

and  talking  ?

Ph.  He  can  talk  closer  than  I  can,  he  has  no  ties  and

no  weight  to  hold  him  down,  like  this  (indicating
body  of  medium)

*  *  *  *

{Presently  G.  P.  writes.}

W.  R.  N. (to  G.  P.). Do  you  see  the  hand  %

G.  P.  (writing).  I  see  the  hand  ?  No  not  quite.  Yes  I
know  that  there  is  a  hand  present,  yet  it  looks
to  be  yours [touches  mine]

W.  R.  N. It  is  mine.  G.  P.  Your  own

W.  R.  N. [I  touch  medium's  hand]  Is  this  your  head  ?

G.  P. Yes,  this  is  my  head,  or  where  my  head  is.

W.  R.  N.  Did  I  actually  touch  you  ?

G.  P. Certainly,  you  put  your  hand  on  my  face.

W.  R.  N.  How  is  your  thought  transformed  into  writing  ?

G.  P.  Well,  this  is  all  my  own  doings — I  think  my  thoughts
and  speak  them  and  the  light  within  me  uses  the
light  within  the  material  object,  if  it  be  a  hand,
as  a  telephone,  yet  it  really  has  no  meaning  to  me.

W.  R.  N.  Do  you  will  to  turn  the  pages  ?

G.  P.  No,  I  see  that  you  have  not  heard  all  that  I  have  said,
I  consequently  repeat,  and  if  I  move  pages  it
is  because  I  take  this  method  of  explaining  but
the  mere  fact  of  my  moving  the  pages  is  not  intel-
ligible to  me.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  371


W.  R.  N.  Does  not  this  seem  as  if  the "  light "  understood

and  suitably  interpreted  your  thought  ?
G.  P. The  light. I  do  not  see  it  so.

W.  R.  N.  The  hand  moves  as  if  it  were  acting  intentionally.
G.  P. Yes,  but,  you  goose,  I  have  two  spirit  hands  myself,

and  they  act  through  my  own  will  as  I  wish.
W.  R.  N.  Do  you  use  them  to  turn  pages  ?
G.  P. Certainly  I  do.

W.  R.  N.  But  you  said  you  didn't  know  there  were  any
pages.

G.  P.  Yes,  but  you  have  just  explained  to  me  what  I
really  did  not  realise  before,  that  the  actual
paper  was  present.  I  find  it  extremely  difficult
to  realize  that  I  express  my  thoughts  on  paper,
yet  I  am  here  altogether,  head,  ears,  heart  and
hand.  I  use  the  hand,  if  you  so  term  it,  as  my
head,  hand,  feet  and  everything.

W.  R.  N.  Let's  experiment  on  this.

G.  P.  Good.  Capital.  [Hand  rises  and  bends  slowly  forward
twice.]  Bowed  my  head.  [I  explain.]  Well,,  that
is  strange. Oh,  yes.

W.  R.  N. Well  ?

G.  P. I  said  Oh  yes. Didn't  you  hear  me  ?
W.  R.  N.  You  wrote  "  Oh  yes."

G.  P.  What !  Wrote  "Oh  yes  "  ?  [I  read  all  written
from  the  first  "  oh  yes."]  [I  touch  inner  side  of
hand  and  outer  side  with  my  fingers  in  lifting  it
to  turn  pages. Hand  instantly  writes.]

G.  P. You  took  my  ear  and  my  nose.

W.  R.  N.  Is  this  your  nose  [touching  inner  side  of  hand]  ?

G.  P.  Yes.

W.  R.  N.  And  this  your  ear  [outer  side]  %

G.  P. Yes  .  .  .  certainly — what  are  you  doing  now  ?

W.  R.  N.  Kick  your  feet.

G.  P.  Good.  [Arm  rises  and  elbow  strikes  table.]  [I  tell
him.]  No  thunder,  well  that's  strange.  Well  you
will  say  that  I  have  grown  small.

W.  R.  N.  It  reminds  me  of  Alice.  Do  you  remember  how  she
ate  the  comfits — wasn't  it — and  shrank  ?

G.  P. Yes,  and  Walrus  and  Oyster. Now  I  am  going  to


372


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwiclc.


[part


shake  hands. [Does  it.] Hands  that  was.  Now

I  will  bow  my  head  again. [Does  it,  as  above

described.] See  you  me  ? Well  you  see  I  can  do

anything  I  wish.
W.  R.  N.  Now note what I do and describe it. [I  grasp

hand,  lift  it  about  a  foot  in  the  air,  turn  a  page

and  put  it  in  place  again.]
G.  P. It  seems  as  though  you  covered  up  my  head.
W.  R.  N.  We  do  that  all  the  time  don't  we  ? Do  you  know

why  we  do  it  ?
G.  P. Yes,  certainly,  because  you  do  not  hear  me.
W.  R.  N. Not  at  all.  G.  P.  What  then  ?

W.  R.  N. It  means  that  I  picked  up  the  medium's  hand  and

turned  a  page.

G.  P. Oh  go  on  ! That  is  not  the  medium  at  all,  what  in

thunder  are  you  talking  about  ?
W.  R.  N.  It's  a  fact. You  see  I  am  teaching  you  a  thing  or

two  for  once.
G.  P. O.K. I  can  stand  it.

W.  R.  N.  You  see  the  hand  runs  off  the  paper  if  it  is  not
watched.

G.  P. Well I  don't  see.  .  .  . Well,  I  told  you  I  wasn't

conscious  of  paper.
W.  R.  N.  And  when  it  gets  to  the  end  of  the  sheet  I  take

it  up  and  turn  the  sheet. That's  what  you  see

as  covering  your  head.
G.  P. Well. Well,  that's  a  sticker,  isn't  it  ?— Well  do  you

now  ?  1

W.  R.  N. Don't  let  the  light  go  out  altogether.
G.  P. Well,  I  think  not  by  Jove,  I  wish  to  speak  to  you
again  old  man.

♦  ♦  ♦  ♦

W.  R.  N.  Sometimes when we don't understand, the  hand
thumps  the  table. What  do  you  do  ?

1  In  the  sittings  in  England  in  1906-7  it  was  not  necessary  to  lift  the
hand.  If  the  control  did  not  of  himself  facilitate  the  tearing  off  of  the
sheet  from  the  block,  it  was  only  necessary  for  the  sitter  to  say  "  Wait  a
moment  while  I  tear  off  the  sheet."  Note  also  that  in  earlier  G.  P.
sittings  the  control  himself  tore  off  the  sheets  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,
p.  322).


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  373


G.  P. I  nod  my  head  of  course.  ...  No  ...  So.  (thumps)
[I  tell  him.]

G.  P. Well,  well,  I  am  beginning  to  think  that  I  don't

know  much  after  all.
W.  R.  N. How's  the  light  ?  G.  P.  Getting  a  little  poor.


{June  20,  1895.)

W.  R.  N.  alone.

i|e  '  $  $  ♦

[Hand spends a minute or  more  carefully  feeling
paper, — edges, surfaces, turning leaves,  etc.]
G.  P.  (writing). Well,  well, I begin  to understand  it.  Now
I  see  the  white  surface. Now  I  am  ready  for
emergencies.

{Here  follows  the  discussion  on  "  influences  "  quoted
in  the  Appendix  to  Chapter  VIII.,  p.  624.}

#  ♦  ♦  $

W.  R.  N.  How  do  you  underline  your  words  if  you  are  not

conscious  of  writing  1
G.  P. I  really  do  not  have  the  material  sense  of  writing,

but  sight  more  particularly.
W.  R.  N. How  is  the  light  ?  G.  P.  Fair.

W.  R.  N. Well  do  you  will  to  underline  ?

G.  P. Oh no, I express one or some words  more

emphatically.
W.  R.  N. Do  it.  G.  P. I  do  it  ?

W.  R.  N.  Yes,  say  something  emphatically.

G.  P.  Certainly.  [I  tell  him  what  is  done.]  Ah  well,  I  see
and  hear,  but  it  is  mighty  difficult  to  recognize
.  .  .  yes  .  .  .  get  .  .  .  your  [I  read  this  George]
No  George  there  .  .  .  There's  no  such  word  as
George  there  ...  [I  had  grasped  medium's  arm
about  4  inches  in  front  of  elbow]

W.  R.  N. What  did  I  do  ?

G.  P. You have your hand on my knee  .  .  .  yes  .  .  .

[I tell him.] Thunder. Well I'll give it  up.

Perhaps  I  have  turned  into  an  arm.
W.  R.  N. Hardly.  G.  P. Oh  that's  a  joke  simply.


374


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


W.  R.  N.  Now  spell  slowly  aloud.
G.  P. Well,  you  hear  it  ?  joke. Speak  it.
W.  R.  N.  It  was  just  written  like  other  words. What  makes
the  hand  print  1

G.  P. Because  I  hear  the  word  from  Hodgson. Print  it  George.

W.  R.  N.  You  will  to.  G.  P.  Certainly.

W.  R.  N. How  ?  G.  P. Because  I  say  print  and  it  is.

W.  R.  N. I  think  the  hght  must  be  intelligent.1

G.  P. Well  of  course  I  have  intelligence. Do  you  think

otherwise  ? [I  explain  what  I  mean.] Well  enough.

May  be,  but  I  do  not  understand  it.

W.  R,  N.  The  light  is  going  out  ?  G.  P.  Yes.

{June  21,  1895.)

W.  R.  N.  and  H.  W.  0  present.  G.  P.  writing.
[Hand  gesticulates  and  twists  so  as  to  get  O.'s
mouth  close  to  outer  side  of  hand  just  below
the  root  of  little  finger.]  My  ear.  [W.  R.  N.
explains  he  means  that  his  spirit  ear  is  located
there.]  Certainly,  my  ear.  (See  Proceedings,
Vol.  XIV.,  p.  46.)

{June  25,  1895.)

Present,  Hodgson  and  Prof.  W.  R.  Newbold.  {The  record
leaves  it  uncertain  whether  the  first  four  questions  attributed
here  to  W.  R.  N.  were  asked  by  him  or  R.  H. }

[Phinuit  speaks  .  .  .  after  a  few  ordinary  remarks.]
VV.  R.  N. Tell  us  how  you  found  Stainton  Moses.
Ph.  George  Pelham  gave  me  his  description  and  told  me

he  used  to  have  a  hght.  I  saw  him  talking  to
an  elderly  gentleman,  a  very  important  looking
gentleman,  looks  something  like  Hodgson's  material
body.  People  here  who  had  light  in  the  body
look  lighter here. There's a greater degree  of

1  "  Light  "  here,  and  throughout  passages  here  quoted,  is  used  by
Professor  Newbold  of  the  etherial  light,  said  to  fill  the  body  of  the
medium  when  her  spirit  is  removed.  The  control  evidently  uses  it
of  this  and  also  of  the  medium  herself.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  375


attraction,  and  they  can  come  back  to  the  earth
again.

W.  R.  N. Where  did  George  send  you  to  look  for  him  ?

Ph.  Another  place,  far  away  from  here. The  people  who

live  in  it  call  it  Mars.
W.  R.  N. But  there  must  be  millions  and  millions  of  people

there.

Ph.  It's  like  a  hall  filled  with  people. You  start  in  the

entrance  and  go  clear  away  round  until  you  come
to  the  limit.  Then  you  take  another  start  and
go  round  and  through  again  and  find  him  with
difficulty.

W.  R.  N. What  did  you  say  to  him  when  you  found  him  ?

Ph.  I  said,  "  You  come  here  I  want  to  tell  you  some-

thing," and  then  I  brought  him  here  to  the  light
and  then  George  took  him  and  told  him  what  he
wanted  of  him.

W.  R.  N.  Do  you  live  right  in  the  planet  Mars  ?  [N.  asking
questions,  R.  H.  taking  notes.]

Ph.  No. I'm ahve  you  know. I see, hear  and  feel.

I'm  conscious  all  the  time  when  I'm  not  on  the
earth.  I  live  in  another  sphere  called  Mars,  not
a  substance,  more  like  being  in  your  air,  more
like  a  bird  in  the  atmosphere,  not  on  this  solid
plane. I  see  very  funny  people  there  sometimes.

W.  R.  N. Can  you  go  to  the  stars  ?

Ph.  Oh  yes Some  of  these  places  are  intensely  hot,  but

that  doesn't  make  any  difference  to  me.

W.  R.  N. Did  you  ever  go  up  to  the  sun  ?

Ph.  I could  go  if  I  wished  to. I  can't  say  I've  ever

been  there.

W.  R.  N. Isn't  it  very  bright  there  ?

Ph.  Everything  that's  material  looks  dark.

W.  R.  N.  What  do  you  see  when  you're  in  Mars  looking  at  the
earth  ?

Ph.  Lots  of  dark  objects.

W.  R.  N. Does  it  look  round  ?

Ph.  I  don't  know. I  see  objects  moving,  people.

W.  R.  N. Do  you  see  the  trees  and  houses  on  the  earth  ?
Ph.  I  don't  notice  those  things  much.


376


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


W.  R.  N. When  you  try  to,  can  you  distinguish  them  ?

Ph.  I  can  discern  one  object  from  another. They  don't

look  so  large  and  massive  as  they  did  when  in

the  body.

W.  R.  N. What  does  the  medium  look  like  ?
Ph.  One  big  light.

W.  R.  N. Do  you  see  her  head  and  hands  and  feet  ?
Ph.  Not  specially.

W.  R.  N. Can  you  feel  now  her  head  and  hands  and  feet  ?

Ph.  It's  difficult  to  support  the  surface  .  .  .  heavy.

W.  R.  N. What  do  you  see  when  you're  in  the  medium's  body  ?

Ph.  See  lots  of  people.

W.  R.  N. Do  you  see  me  clearly  ?

Ph.  I  can  touch  you.

W.  R.  N. When you touch me what do you see  ?  [Hand

touches  all  over  N's.  head.]
Ph.  I  see  spirit  eyes  and  spirit  head  and  spirit  thought

and  spirit  nose  and  spirit  mouth.
W.  R.  N. Don't  you  see  my  body  ?

Ph.  I  can  get  your  body  and  see  the  difference  between

your  material  body  and  spirit.  I  can  see  your
material  body  better  [than  when  not  in  the
medium's  body]  [Feeling  over  head]  I  see  your
whole  spirit  now.

W.  R.  N. How  do  you  feel  the  medium's  body  ?

Ph.  The  frame  is  very  solid,  very  heavy  sometimes.  It's

hard  for  me  to  reahze  that  I  possess  her,  that  I
get  her  frame.  Yet  I  know  that  I'm  not  so  free,
so  active.

W.  R.  N. How's  the  light  ?  Ph.  That's  all  right.

[N.  asks  Phinuit  to  show  himself  in  other  lights,  i.e.
through  other  mediumistic  persons  if  possible.]
Ph.  I  see  a  good  many  but  they're  undeveloped. I  can't

get  over  their  material  obstinacy.  Their  material
is  stronger  than  the  hght.  You  don't  know  how
real  and  beautiful  it  is  to  see  the  light  in  any
one.  .It  makes  them  look  more  like  ourselves,
you  know.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  377


D.

A  Dream  of  Mrs.  Piper's  on  February  22,  1896.

This  dream  occurred  when  Mrs.  Piper  was  in  hospital  for
an  operation  for  hernia,  and  presumably  after  the  operation,
but  I  do  not  know  how  long  after.  The  account  of  it
was  taken  down  from  Mrs.  Piper's  lips  by  Miss  Lucy
Edmunds,  Dr.  Hodgson's  assistant,  on  February  24,  1896,
and  signed  by  Mrs.  Piper.  It  is  of  interest,  as  showing  a
resemblance  between  the  dream  ideas  and  those  of  the
trance  imagery  (compare,  e.g.  below,  June  3,  1903,  p.
422  ;  December  14,  1904,  p.  431  ;  March  5,  1897,  p.  494  ;
March  30,  1897,  p.  499).

On  two  occasions,  when  recovering  from  an  anaes-
thetic, Mrs.  Piper  had  experiences  suggestive  of  her  trance
life.  The  first  occasion  was  on  March  14,  1893,  and
Hodgson's  description  of  it  is  quoted  on  p.  217.  The
second  occasion  was  in  1901,  and  the  description  will  be
found  in  the  Appendix  to  Chapter  VI.,  p.  579.  It
resembled  in  many  respects  a  waking-stage.

Massachusetts  General  Hospital,  February  24,  1896.

Mrs.  Piper  gives  an  account  (with  frequent  pauses  and  rests)
of  a  vision  which  she  had  on  the  night  of  Saturday,  February  22
[L.  E.  taking  notes].

[Mrs.  Piper  explained  that  her  recollection  of  the  vision  was
becoming  dim ;  that  she  could  have  given  a  better  account
had  she  told  it  to  Dr.  Hodgson  on  the  day  after  it  happened.
To-day  it  was  an  effort  to  remember,  and  she  could  only  give
a  somewhat  fragmentary  account.]

On  Saturday  night  I  went  to  sleep  and  at  about  one  o'clock
- — I  think  it  was  one  because  I  awoke  soon  after — I  had  a
dream  or  vision.  The  first  experience  I  had  was  as  though  I
was  being  raised  from  my  bed  while  still  in  my  body,  that  is
to  all  intents  and  purposes  I  was  in  my  body.  Then  I  felt
a  strong  hand  clasping  my  arm  on  the  left ;  it  seemed  like
the  hand  of  a  man.  On  my  right  I  was  being  lifted  apparently
without  any  contact.


378


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


I  saw  a  man  with  long  wavy  hair  and  stoop-over  shoulders.
I  think  it  was  Phinuit.  I  saw  George  {i.e.  G.  P.}  1  also.  It
was  he  who  seemed  to  be  holding  me  up.

Then  I  heard  voices  saying,  "  Come,  we  wish  to  take  you
with  us  ;  we  wish  to  give  you  a  rest  from  your  tired  body,"
and  without  further  sound  I  was  raised.  There  was  a  break
between  my  hearing  the  voices  and  my  being  lifted  or  raised
above  my  bed.  I  was  conscious  of  not  being  on  my  bed.
Then  I  was  carried  in  space  until  we  came  to  a  delicate  blue
drapery  hanging  in  folds  as  though  blowing  in  the  breeze.
It  seemed  to  be  immovable  until  we  passed  through  when  it
parted,  and  I  was  not  conscious  of  there  being  any  sides  to  it ;
I  then  heard  a  rustling  sound  as  of  people  approaching,  but  I
didn't  hear  the  footsteps.  It  was  like  the  rustling  of  garments,
and  then  I  saw  a  light  as  though  all  space — the  whole  earth
was  aglow — such  a  light  ! — I  never  saw  anything  like  it  before.

Then  I  heard  children's  voices  as  though  singing,  and  a
chorus  like  young  ladies'  voices  ;  I  was  surrounded  by  them  ;
they  were  everywhere  and  they  then  seemed  to  form  a  ring
around  me.  They  were  all  very  beautiful,  and  passing  around
from  one  to  the  other  was  what  seemed  to  be  a  silken  banner
or  sash  which  they  seemed  to  be  holding.  It  was  soft  and
silky  and  entwined  about  with  flowers,  and  it  was  held  from
one  to  the  other  so  that  the  silken  band  helped  to  form  a
ring.  They  had  beautifully  sandalled  feet.  I  heard  the  rustling
of  their  garments  (something  like  the  rustling  of  tissue  paper)
■ — loose,  Greek,  flowing  garments.  They  danced  about  as  they
formed  the  ring  ;  then  the  ring  seemed  to  separate  and  they
dispersed.  I  felt  it  was  a  sort  of  greeting  to  me  as  it  were,
that  is,  the  ring  and  their  dancing  and  singing.

We  passed  on  along  a  smooth  walk  hedged  on  either  side
with  flowers.  We  came  to  pillars — they  looked  like  real
pillars,  but  were  not  solid-looking,  almost  transparent.  The
pillars  seemed  to  be  an  entrance  to  what  seemed  to  be  a

1  How  much  Mrs.  Piper  in  her  normal  state  knew  about  G.  P.  at
this  date  I  do  not  know,  but  she  had  been  told  in  1892  that  sittings  at  the
Howards'  house  were  held  there  because  communications  were  expected
from  "  George  "  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  316).  She  had  in
1892  had  visions  of  him  in  the  waking-stage  and  afterwards,  when
normal  or  nearly  so,  had  recognised  photographs  of  him.  And  she  had
had  later  waking-stage  visions  of  him.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  379

large  building.  It  seemed  as  though  one  whole  side  of  the
building  was  open,  the  pillars  forming  the  entrance.  Inside
the  building  as  we  passed,  I  saw  a  long  bench  or  table  around
which  many  men  were  writing ;  they  were  each  one  sitting
back  one  to  the  other  and  did  not  seem  to  pay  any  attention
to  me.  It  seemed  as  though  some  sort  of  educational  work
was  being  carried  on.  I  looked  into  their  faces  as  we  passed
the  building ;  their  faces  were  smooth  and  devoid  of  all
wrinkles, — they  had  very  clear  complexions.

I  suddenly  saw  an  elderly  gentleman.  He  was  gray-haired
and  had  bluish-gray  eyes,  heavy  moustache — no  beard — dis-
tinguished looking, — face  rather  small.  He  said  he  was  not
lame  now  ;  he  took  hold  of  his  robe  and  began  to  dance,
saying,  "  See,  I  am  not  lame  now."  1  A  young  lady  was  with
him  ;  she  was  very  lovely.  She  had  dark  hair  combed  back
away  from  her  forehead,  pompadour  fashion — large  eyes  and
intelligent,  sweet  face.

Then  I  saw  an  elderly  gentleman  with  hair  white  and  a  full
white  beard- — clear  eyes — intelligent — large  distinguished  nose.
He  resembled  Mr.  Hodgson,  but  Mr.  Hodgson  has  more  dreamy
and  spiritual  expression  about  the  eyes.  I  said  to  Mr.  Hodg-
son :  "I  could  take  that  gentleman  to  be  your  father."

I  also  saw  a  dark-complexioned  gentleman  with  pointed
beard — very  intelligent  looking — but  rather  small.  He  ap-
proached George.  I  saw  them  shake  hands  and  heard  them
say,  "  Hulloa,  old  fellow,"  or  something  of  the  kind.  They
discussed,  but  I  could  not  hear  what  they  were  discussing.  All
seemed  so  happy :  I  also  saw  an  aunt  of  mine  who  died  of
cancer  and  also  a  cousin  who  died  of  consumption.  I  got
along  so  easily  and  did  not  seem  to  walk,  but  made  progress
without  stepping — I  stood  erect.

I  saw  two  of  Mrs.  Thaw's  children.  I  was  conscious  that
they  were  hers  but  did  not  see  Mrs.  Thaw's  mother.

A  thin-faced  young  man  came  to  me  who  was  anxious  about
a  friend  of  his ;  he  wanted  information  which  I  could  not
give  him.  He  was  about  30  or  35.  He  may  have  been  Dr.
Thaw's  brother.  He  was  perhaps  looking  for  his  wife — This
was  my  impression.

1  Most  of,  if  not  all,  these  specifically  described  persons  were,  I  think,
friends  of  sitters  and  had  previously  figured  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trances


380


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


I  think  I  saw  Mr.  D.  (L.  E.  "  Did  you  know  Mr.  D.  ?  ")
Yes,  I  saw  him  once  or  twice  at  Mrs.  D.'s  house.

I  saw  Mrs.  S.'s  husband  and  her  son  and  her  aunt,  and
she  seemed  to  be  doing  something  with  her  hands  as  though
she  were  picking  something  to  pieces.  I  seemed  to  see  every-
one I  had  ever  known  who  has  died.

I  saw  a  very  tall  gentleman  ;  he  was  extremely  tall.  They
called  him  Charles.

As  I  was  beginning  to  see  a  great  number  of  people  ap-
proaching, I  felt  as  though  some  one  had  stabbed  me  in  the
back.  When  I  was  first  being  taken  up,  I  seemed  to  follow
a  streak  of  light ;  it  seemed  to  be  a  ray  of  light,  similar  to
a  ray  of  light  from  the  sun  through  a  knot  hole,  and  we
followed  that  light.  When  I  felt  the  stab,  I  felt  that  the
same  light  was  behind  me,  and  it  seemed  to  be  a  cord  or
string  but  nothing  tangible,  and  it  seemed  to  be  the  same  ray
of  light  which  led  me  off  away  from  this  sphere.  As  these
people  approached  me,  some  one  seemed  to  be  pulling  on  the
cord,  though  I  could  not  say  it  was  a  cord — it  looked  like  a
light  and  felt  like  cord.  Some  one  kept  pulling  and  I  was
being  lowered  and  taken  from  my  feet — (I  had  been  standing
erect) — to  a  position  of  lying  down,  and  then  I  awoke  and  I
had  a  feeling  that  I  had  not  been  asleep  but  had  been  awake
and  had  had  this  experience  while  awake — and  yet  my  body
was  so  heavy  I  could  not  move — my  body  seemed  so  dark
and  heavy  as  though  it  did  not  belong  to  me  ;  I  had  to
struggle  for  breath.  I  felt  depressed  to  think  that  I  had  got
back. I  could  not  move  a  limb  at  first.

L.  E.  Piper.

As  regards  the  stab  mentioned  in  this  record,  compare
the  waking-stage  of  November  29,  1905,  when  Mrs.  Piper  said  :

Mrs.  P. Isn't  that  awful. Coming  down  on  the  cord  ? I  got

stabbed,  and  a  pain  in  my  heart.
Sitter. Who  stabbed  you  ?

Mrs.  P. Cord  stabbed  me. {Hodgson  notes  : Detachment  of

etherial  cord  ? }
Sitter. Well  tell  us  about  it.

Mrs.  P. Well  I  don't  know  ...  I  slid  down  ...  I  slid  on  it.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  381


On  May  24,  1905,  the  back  is  spoken  of  in  the  waking-
stage  as  the  point  of  attachment  of  the  cord.

Sitter. What  did  you  dream  ?
Mrs.  P. I  was  in  the  air.
Sitter. Go  on.

Mrs.  P. I  slid  in  mischievously  on  a  cord.

[Stumbling  and  smiling,  chuckling  as  it  were,  over  the
word  mischievously.]
Sitter. Go  on.

Mrs.  P.  Well  there  were  .  .  .  they  pulled  it  out  of  my  back
.  .  .  they  pulled  it  out  of  a  hole  in  my  back.  I
slid  down  on  it  before  I  [they  ?]  went  out.

On  other  occasions  the  heart  or  the  stomach  are  spoken
of  as  the  points  of  attachment  of  the  cord.  Thus,  in  the
waking-stage  of  July  4,  1904,  Mrs.  Piper  says,  "  Rector
took  a  cord  out  of  my  stomach,"  (Appendix  to  Chapter
VI.,  p.  593  ),  and  in  the  sitting  of  June  3,  1903,  the  com-
municator says  (p.  424),  "the  spirit  of  the  medium  passes
out  on  a  cord  which  is  attached  to  the  heart  or  solar
plexus  I  should  say "  (see  Chapter  II.,  pp.  71-74,  for  a
discussion  of  the  cord).

E.

Extracts  from  Sittings,  October,  1896,  to  June,  1897.

This  period  includes  a  number  of  sittings  chiefly  occupied
with  questioning  the  Imperator  Band  as  to  the  process  of
controlling,  etc.,  as  seen  from  their  side.  Most  of  the  follow-
ing extracts  are  from  these  sittings,  but  some  others  are
added.  Hodgson  was  the  sole  sitter,  except  where  it  is  other-
wise stated,  and  the  recorder  in  all  the  sittings  quoted  from.
He  had  all  the  sittings  to  the  end  of  this  section  before  him
when  he  wrote  his  second  report,  published  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  XIII.,  though  he  did  not  include  in  the  report  more  than
a  brief  reference  to  those  in  the  period  covered  by  this
section  E.


382


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


{October  14,  1896.)

Control,  J.  Hart.  {J.  Hart  (pseudonym)  was  the  friend  of
G.  P.  who  first  obtained  communication  from  the  latter
(see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  296).  He  had  died  in  the
interval  and  had  communicated  and  controlled  on  various
occasions  before  October,  1896.}

9|e  a|e  a|e  a|e

J.  H.  (writing). Do  you  see  my  head  ?

R.  H. No  I  don't  see  you  at  all. All  the  movements  you

make  are  with  the  medium's  hand.
J.  H. Well  I  cannot  believe  it.

R.  H. I don't  hear  you. The pencil in  the  hand  writer.

Now  you  are  putting  the  hand  up  near  my
lips.

J.  H. Well  I  hear  this  way. Face  me  H. Well,  H.  is  your
face  all  over  your  body  ?
[R.  H.  touches  the  ends  of  fingers  of  medium's  hand.]
J.  H. This  is  my  head.

R.  H. Where  is  your  foot  ?  J.  H.  Below.

R.  H. Move  it. [The  elbow  rises  and  knocks  on  the  table.]

That's  the  medium's  elbow.
J.  H. You  are  going  crazy  H.

[R.  H.  moves  his  hand  along  the  medium's  arm  from

wrist  towards  the  elbow.]
J.  H. Legs  and  feet. Cannot  you  see,  H.  ?
R.  H. This  is  hand, wrist,  forearm,  elbow. [R.  H.  touches

these  parts  of  the  medium's  arm  as  he  speaks.]
J.  H. Not  much. I  need  my  .  .  .

R.  H.  [lifting  the  arm  from  the  table]  You  are  all  crowded
into  the  medium's  arm,  and  I  lift  you  up  so.

J.  H.  No,  but  you  do  not  understand  that  my  body  is  here,
and  I  am  speaking  through  the  telephone  and  this
is  my  mouth  and  head  at  its  mouthpiece.

R.  H. You  seem  to  be  talking  ?  J.  H.  Yes.  Exactly.

R.  H.  Well,  all  the  manifestations  that  you  make  with  any
part  of  you  are  represented  to  me  by  the  move-
ments of  this  hand  and  arm  of  the  medium.

J.  H. Oh  I  see  .  .  .  well  my  thoughts  .  .  .

R.  H. Come  out  in  writing  with  the  pencil  in  the  hand.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  383


J.  H. Oh  I  see  .  .  .  strange  to  you  I  should  say,  yet  it  is

all  quite  natural  to  rne  H.
R.  H. It's  natural  to  us  now.  J.  H.  Oh  I  see.

(Nov.  13,  1896.)

{Mentor, one  of  the  Imperator  band,  makes  a  first
and  somewhat  futile  attempt  at  controlling. G.  P.
intervenes  and  writes}
G.  P. Give  him  another  chance  H. I  had  to  come  in  to
give  a  clear  light. Better  now  H.
{After  a  succession  of  controls  have  written  ending
with  G.  P.}

[Hand  and  arm  gives  a  jerk  and  drop  on  table  as
usual. Phinuit  talks.]
R.  H. Got  your  hand  back  ?

Ph.  Not  yet. When  they  leave  it  there's  no  life  in  it,

and  it  flops  away.  They  haven't  got  it  and  I
haven't  got  it. Then  I  get  it.

{Nov.  14,  1896.)

Doctor  {one  of  the  Imperator  band,  controlling  for  the  second
time  and  claiming  to  be  Homer,  writes}  Strong
light,  light,  strong  light,  too  much  light,  I  am  dizzy.

(Dec.  5,  1896.)

{Stainton Moses is  trying to explain things,  when

there  is  a  wild  scrabble  of  hand,  and  thrash  of  arm

and  Doctor  intervenes}
Doctor (writing). I will answer this for you. I take  his

place  for  a moment, let  him  get  free,  because  I

{?am}  monarch  of  all  I  survey.
R.  H. "  Monarch  of  all  I  survey  "  ?  [Assent]
D.  I was peeping in and  felt that my presence  was

necessary.

♦  Ht  $  4

R.  H.  I  would  like  very  much  for  you  to  give  a  description
of  how  this  communication  appears  to  you  from
your  side.

D.  I  will,  sir.


384  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

R.  H. Just  as  I  would  describe  a  new  scene  to  a  friend  who
hadn't  been  there. First  let  me  explain  in  detail
how  it  appears  to  me.
(R. H. proceeds to describe what happens at  a
sitting  }

D.  Rather  uncanny  is  it  not  ?

R.  H. Not  to  me  now. It  is  to  strangers.

D.  Well  fl]  think  I  understand  your  side. Now  I  give

you  a  synopsis  of  my  side.
The  first  recollection  I  have  of  communicating  with
you  was  when  I  was  induced  to  appear  through  the
influence  of  my  friend  Moses.  He  was  influenced
by  a  young  gentleman  named  George.
Now  as  it  would  seem  to  your  vision  we  are  in  space,
and  in  form  and  feature  like  our  former  selves,  yet
there  is  nothing  tangible  about  us  i.e.  to  .  .  .  Are
you  tired  ?

R.  H. Oh  no,  indeed  I'm  listening  "with  the  greatest  interest.
D.  Thank  you  .  .  .  the  human  being.

R.  H. I  can't  touch  you.

D.  Not  at  all. Now  then  when  we  are  first  conscious

of  speaking  or  in  any  way  making  ourselves  .  .  .

making  [hesitancy]  .  .  .  not  visible,  but.  .  .
R.  H. "  Making  ourselves  "  ?
D.  Understood.  R.  H.  Manifesting.

D.  Manifesting  ;  exactly  .  .  . We  first  of  all  are  attracted

by  a  soft  bright  light.
R.  H. You  in  your  world  see  a  light  jxist  as  I  might  see  a

star  and  you  go  to  see  what  it  is.
D.  This  is  exactly — exactly. This  is  precisely  what  we

do  see  and  absolutely  true  to  the  letter. We  say

to  one  another  see  that  light  over  yonder.  Come

lets  look  [hesitancy]
R.  H. Let  us  look  [assent]

D.  And  see  what  it  is. Suddenly  we  find  ourselves  as  it

were  nearing  the  earth.  Well  the  earth  so  to  speak
is  stifling  in  its  atmosphere.  We  however  venture
on  and  on,  which  takes  us  but  a  few  of  your
earthy  (sic)  moments,  when  suddenly  we  find  ourselves
right  in  front  of  an  open  window  or  as  it  would


LXXI.]


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  — Appendix.  385


look  to  you  a  door.  One  gentleman  having  spied
this  eons  (sic)  ago,  he  rushes  forward  and  stands  in
the  centre  of  the  doorway.  We  feeling  interested  to
know  what  is  going  on  inside  so  to  speak,  we  all
rush  in  beside  him,  or  when  the  doorway  is  not
sufficiently  lighted,  we  stand  back  a  short  distance
and  wait  until  we  are  signalled.  While  we  are  thus
waiting,  the  gentleman  of  the  Committee  [not  read
at  first]  .  .  .  jury  if  you  prefer  the  expression
.  .  .  over.  [R.  H.  reads  committee  on  the  previous
page  of  the  writing]
R.  H. The  centre-of-the-doorway  man.

D.  Yes you have it  .  .  .  beckons us to  step  forward.

We  rush  all  at  once,  longing  to  peep  behind  or
inside.  Immediately  we  find  ourselves  standing  in
the  doorway  speaking  to  some  one  or  more  of  our
friends  in  the  body,  this  light  being  clear  enough  for
several  of  our  party  to  speak  and  get  replies.  Is
this  clear  to  you  ?

R.  H.  What  makes  the  light  ?  If  this  world  is  dark,  why
is  the  window  light  ?

D.  Exactly. Yet we instantly see other lights  which

are  those  of  our  friends  like  yourself,  for  instance.
Hence  the  law  of  attraction.  I  will  tell  you  exactly.
We  are  not  exactly  conscious  of  its  being  a  medium
in  mortal  body  until  we  have  appeared  or  used
the  light  a  great  many  times.  At  first  the  atmo-
sphere is  so  bad  we  can  scarcely  speak.  Now  this
is  due,  as  I  see  it,  from  natural  conditions,  i.e.
to  say  the  light  is  due  .  .  .  which  seems  the  easiest
way  for  you  to  understand.  It  seems  [?]  like  an
etherial  or  electrical  light.

R.  H. If  I  could  see  it,  it  would  seem  to  me  like  an  electric  glow.

D.  Exactly,  and  we  not  only  see  it  here,  but  we  see

others  also.  Imagine  yourself  standing  on  the  earth
surrounded  by  a  million  other  persons  at  midnight,
You  for  the  first  time  glance  upwards  and  suddenly
discover  a  star — in  fact  several.  One  seems  brighter
to  your  vision  than  the  rest.  Now  supposing  you
could  go  to  that  one  star  at  will,  and  the  remaining


386


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


persons  were  also  anxious.  You  give  a  signal  and
then  fly,  as  it  would  seem  to  you,  on  .  .  .  on  .  .  .
upwards  .  .  .  onward,  which  would  take  but  a  few
moments  of  your  time  there.  Now  then  you  have
reached  the  star.  You  find  it  vacated, — in  other
words  hollow.

R.  H. That  is  to  say  the  medium  has  gone  away  ?

D.  Quite,  consequently  shell,  only  very  bright.

R.  H. A  bright  shell.  D.  Very,  inside.

R.  H. It's  bright  because  she's  gone  away.

D.  Yes,  yes.  R.  H.  Not  so  bright  at  other  times.

D.  No. Now  if  you  could  only  get  my  idea  and  question

me  it  would  save  light.
R.  H. You  get  into  this  hollow  bright  shell.
D.  Yes. I  find  the  shell  is  transparent.

R.  H. You  can  look  through  it.

D.  Quite, yet  there  is  still  a  slight  smoky  appearance

before  us,  in  other  words  it  is  a  kind  of  film  or
veil. Understand  ?

R.  H  Yes.

D.  This  is  why I am  not  always  as  near as  I  may

seem.  Have  you  a  clear  conception  of  what  this
light  seems  to  me.

R.  H.  Yes  I  think  so,  but  what  I  specially  wanted  to  know
if  possible  was  about  the  details  of  the  actual
process  of  communicating.  Why,  when  you  talk,
does  the  hand  write  ?  If  you  were  in  the  head
of  the  medium's  body  and  trying  to  speak,  it  seems
intelligible  that  you  should  talk  with  her  muscles
by  using  her  brain,  but  how  do  you  affect  the  hand
and  arm  ?

D.  Yes,  but  this  is  only  a  branch  of  the  tree  or  a  point

of  the  star.
R.  H. It's  a  very  bright  point  ?

D.  Yes,  more  so  than  the  body  of  the  tree  :  for  instance,

you  walk  through  your  fields  or  woodland  paths.
You  spy  a  large  tree,  the  body  is  apparently  sound,
healthy  etc.,  yet  you  find  on  close  examination
that  it  is  not  altogether  as  healthy  as  one  or  more
of  its  branches  may  seem.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  387


R.  H.  Here  is  a  shrub.  The  main  stem  has  many  flowers,
but  one  of  the  side  branches  is  more  thickly  covered,
laden  down  with  flowers.

D.  Yes  exactly. You  have  it. Any  more  you  wish  of

me  ?

R.  H. Can  you tell me exactly what you do when  you

communicate  here  ?
D.  Yes we sit on the limb.  .  .  quite. We hold  our

heads  [?] We  lay  .  .  .
R.  H. When  you  speak  and  the  hand  writes  ?  the  details  ?
D.  Yes,  I  am  going  .  .  .

R.  H. I  see,  you  sit  on  the  limb  ?

D.  Or  lay our  heads on the  limb, while  we  hold  it

quite  tightly  with  our  hands,  and  shake  it  about
signifying  words.

R.  H. You  shake  it  about.

D.  Yes, exactly. Our thoughts are expressed by  the

movements  of  the  branch  of  the  tree  at  our  will.
I  will  say  YOU.
{Hand  seizes  R.  H.'s  left  hand  close  to  wrist,  and
makes  three  movements.  The  control  dissatisfied
with  R.  H.'s  description  of  them  repeats  them.
R.  H.  notes  "  once  down,  once  to  the  right  and  once
to  the  left  "  to  which  the  hand  assents.1}

D.  I  hear  you  speak  through  my  spiritual  ears.

R.  H.  I  am  speaking  into  the  palm  of  the  hand  of  the
medium.

D.  Well  the  facts  are  I do  not  believe  that  you  will

ever  understand  how  we  see  you  nor  how  you  see
us.

R.  H. Possibly  not.

D.  It will never  be  fully  understood  by  me, that  is,

your  side  not  your  explanation.


{Dec.  8,  1896.)

#  $  *  *

Doctor  (writing). {Explains that spirits look for means  of


1 1  suppose  the  movements  represented  the  letter  Y. — E.  M.  S.


388


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


returning  to  earth  and}  find  a  light  viz.  a  medium
*  *  *  they  now  follow  it  *  *  *  Well  after  a  time  they
begin  to  make  themselves  understood  by  seizing
the  spirit  of  the  medium  and  pulling  him  or  her
out  and
Out  of  the  body  ?

Of  the  body  of  course.  Then  they  walk  in.  Well
here  they  are  between  the  spiritual  and  material
worlds.

*  *  *  *

(Dec.  9,  1896.)
Sitter,  R.  H. Doctor  writing.

j|S  S(I  ijC  if!

R.  H. What  does  light  consist  of  ?
D.  Etherial  or  spiritual  substance.

R.  H. How  is  it  developed  ?

D.  By  being  used  by  disembodied  spirits — by  the  mode

of  living  [?]

R.  H.  But  how  exactly  is  it  developed  ?  For  instance,  I
make  a  fire  by  taking  a  magnifying  glass,  a  lens,
and  I  concentrate  the  rays  of  the  sun  on  a  piece
of  paper  and  so  light  it.

D.  Yes, but the spiritual light in this instance  pre-

dominates and  when  called  upon  concentrates  its
thoughts  on  the  or  near  the  body  of  the  medium,
understand  ?

R.  H.  No.  I  don't  think  you  have  got  my  question.  *  *  *
I  want  to  know  *  *  *  how  this  light  in  the
medium  starts.  {Further  illustration  by  Hodgson
to  bring  home  to  Doctor  the  meaning  of  his  question.
Then  Doctor  writes}

D.  Exactly so. I begin to understand your  question.

Well,  according  to  my  knowledge  of  this  light,  I  see
the  body  is  inhabited  by  two  distinct  lights,  one
the  normal  or  natural  spirit  which  keeps  the  body
or  machine,  in  normal  working  order,  the  other  is
the  light  of  the  spirit  which  once  lived  in  another
body  on  the  earth,  viz.  Phinuit.  He  picked  up  this
body  at  its  birth. Now  for  instance  you  may  for  a


R.  H.
D.


lxxi.]


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  389


better  understanding  .  .  .  join  two  lights,  the  positive
and  negative. What  would  be  the  result  ?

R.  H. Do  you  mean  if  I  make  a  circuit  %

D.  Yes  precisely.  R.  H.  I  would  get  a  current.

D.  Here  we  have  it.

R.  H. Phinuit's  etherial  organism.

D.  Also  understand  with  the  medium's  spiritual  organism.

R.  H.  Her  etherial  organism  has  such  a  relation  to  his  that
it's  analogous  as  it  were  to  that  between  two  poles
used  for  the  production  of  an  electric  current  ?

D.  Quite.

R.  H.  And  between  them  they  made  a  kind  of  storage
battery.

D.  Precisely.  R.  H.  It  glows  and  wastes  as  it  glows.

D.  Yes, becomes exhausted by being used by  other

etherials.

R.  H.  Does  it  literally  consist  of  so-called  electrical  energy  ?
D.  No,  I  only  use  this  expression  for  your  understanding.

R.  H. Some  etherial  energy  ?

D.  Yes it is etherial power surely not electrical.  I

only  supply  this  expression  for  your  understanding,
as  you  would  not  realize  or  understand  it  by  any
other.

R.  H.  In  this  case  Phinuit  got  a  foothold  early,  but  in
others  it  is  not  so  ?

D.  Oh no, they are frequently taken up by  etherial

intelligences  later  in  life  according  to  the  develop-
ment of  the  etherial.

R.  H.  But  they  cannot  take  them  up  unless  the  material
organism  has  already  developed  some  "  light."

D.  No. This  is  just  what  I  have  been  trying  to  convey

to  you.

R.  H. But  what  is  the  origin  of  the  light  that  enables  the

spirit  to  seize  the  organism  ?
D.  She  or  he  attracts  ...  he  or  she  .  .  .us.

R.  H. How  ? the  material organism is dark. When  one

has  a  light,  then  the  spirit  can  seize  it.
D.  Because of the light being developed or  brought

forward from its latent sphere — before the  spirit

goes.


390


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


R.  H. But  how does  the  light  originate  before  any  spirit

seizes  the  organism  at  all  ?
D.  I do not grasp this. Illustrate by  yourself.  What

do  .  .  .

R.  H.  All  right.  Suppose  I  have  "  light "  and  have  not
been  controlled  by  a  spirit.  How  come  I  to  have
any  "  light  "  at  all  ?

D.  Because  the  .  .  .  Ah  ! Ah  ! this  is  where  the  sub-

liminal comes  to  the  front  .  .  .  latent,  or  has  been.

R.  H. The  subliminal  has  "  light  "  of  its  own,  etherial.

D.  Yes, always in all cases  is a powerful etherial  in

itself.

R.  H. What is the relation then between the  subliminal

and  what  we  call  the  supraliminal  ?
D.  Yes. I  explained  this  to  you  before.

R.  H. Yes,  but  on  a  different  aspect,  not  on  this.  There

are different aspects. You may see them all  at

once,  but  I  don't.
D.  Yes,  it  is  true. My  own  thoughts  travel  very  rapidly.

R.  H. Is  there  something  in  the  nature  of  some  subliminals  to

make  light  at  the  beginning  ?
D.  Yes,  but  this  is  generally  due  to  the  conditions  under

which  the  child  is  born.
R.  H. Combinations  of  small  conditions.
D.  Combinations  of  various  elements.

iji  sj(  sfs

Hodgson  had  prepared  a  short  series  of  questions  to  put
to  Doctor  about  the  nature,  origin  and  development  of
"  light,"  and  its  growth  and  decay.  The  above  is  the  first
part  of  the  interrogatory,  which  is  continued  on  December
10  and  11,  1896.  Little  progress  is  made  on  the  10th,  and
on  the  11th  Doctor's  replies  are  very  confused,  but  the  follow-
ing statements  seem  to  be  affirmed  :

(Dec.  11,  1896.)


Doctor.  Supposing  you  were  a  little  child  and  were  controlled
by  spirits  from  our  sphere,  and  so  you  grow  con-
tinually until  you  are  fully  grown. Well  then  your


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — -Appendix.  391


spirit  grows  also,  your  own  and  that  of  your  con-
trol becomes  established  i.e.  to  join  hands  as  it
were  with  your  own  spirit  controlling  completely
both  your  own  spirit  and  body.  *  *  *  The  spirit  con-
trols the  body  enough  so  as  to  be  able  to  take  away
completely  the  living  or  normal  spirit  of  the  body.
*  *  *  I  see  here  two  spirits,  one  whom  I  have
met  in  my  own  sphere,  one  whom  I  recognise  as
the  medium  or  light.  I  see  her  pass  out  completely,
while  the  interior  light  is  being  acted  on  by  one
of  our  spirits.  *  *  *  Without  the  physical  body  in
this  case  we  could  not  appear  *  *  *

[Drawing  of  circle]  see  that,  that  is  an  empty  brain.
I  mil  fill  it  with  light.  I  have  done  so.  I  wish
to  use  it.  Others  wish  to  use  it.  We  divide  it.
I  use  one  part  or  one  side.  Doctor  somebody  uses
another.  George  somebody  uses  another.  There  are
four  sides  to  an  ordinary  light

Like  the  sides  of  a  square.

Yes.  You  come  and  sit  on  one  side,  your  brother
on  another,  your  sister  on  another,  your  friend  on
another.  You  wish  to  read  or  study  something  by
it,  your  friends  also.  You  can  do  so  very  easily,
all  using  the  same  light  at  one  time  *  *  *  you
finally  see  the  light  growing  dimmer  *  *  *  the
material  has  become  exhausted,  nothing  remains.

{Hodgson  explains  that  he  w  ants  to  know  the  whole
history  of  the  light  during  the  medium's  life  time
and  presently  asks  : }

Does  the  light  reach  its  maximum  with  the  body's
maturity  1

Yes.  Then,  it  is  due  to  the  natural  growth  of  the
interior.

But  the  interior  does  not  diminish  with  the  decay
of  the  body  ?

Exactly.  But  it  grows  higher  in  itself,  consequently
does  not  require  the  use  of  the  disembodied.  I  am
trying  to  explain  {how}  your  own  spirit  grows.

But  if  the  spirit  grows  why  does  the  light  fade  ?
Why,  if  the  spirit  grows  ?


392


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


D.  I  do  not  know.

R.  H. Do  you  think  because  its energy  is dependent  on

the  bodily  organism  ?
D.  Yes,  somewhat.

*  *  *  *

R.  H.  On  each  particular  visit  the  light  gets  used  up  *  *  *
in  twenty  four  hours  there  is  fresh  light.  How  is  it
manufactured  ?

D.  From  our  own  sphere.

R.  H. What  causes  its  manufacture  ?

D.  What  causes  its manufacture  ? This  I will  explain

another  time,  when  I  am  a  little  clearer

R.  H. The  light  is  not  so  good  to-day  ?  D.  No.

R.  H. Is  the  medium  exhausted  physically  ?

D.  I  think  her  spirit  is  weak. I  saw  it  as  it  was  being

removed.

She,  unlike  most  persons  draws  from our  world  an

abundance  of  light  to  her,  and  when  .  .  .  she  has

drawn sufficiently it takes another form of  light

than  ours,  different.
R.  H She  lays  up  a  store  of  energy  by  the  fact  that  her

interior  draws  from  your  world  ?
D.  Yes, exactly, why this is the only thing I  have

conveyed  to  your  understanding  clearly.
R.  H. When  she  is  weak,  owing  to  the  relation  between  her

interior and her  material organism,  she  does  not

draw  so  much  ?
D  Yes.  yes. Have  you  it  now  ?

R.  H. I  think  I've  got  that  clearly

3  *  *  *

{Later  at  the  same  sitting,  when  Doctor  leaves,  G.  P.
writes,  and  asks}
G.  P. H.  what  is  up  with  him  ?
R.  H. He's  not  up  to  scratch  to-day.
G.  P. Too  dark  for  him  ?

R.  H. The  light's  a  little  dark  for  him,  I  suppose.
G.  P. He  is  not  so  used  to  it  as  I  am,  and  he  would  get
confused  when  I  would  not. *  *  *  What  can  you


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance. — Appendix.  393


make  out  of  my  answers  H.  ?  Were  they  at  all
coherent  ?

R.  H. When  ?  G.  P.  Always.

R.  H. Very  good  for  the  most  part.
G.  P. Well,  his  will  be.

R.  H. He  went  to  pieces  awfully  to-day. He  went  to  pieces

somewhat  yesterday. The  light's  dim  ?
G.  P. Yes,  there  is  not  as  much  as  usual

sji  j{c  igS  SjS


(Dec.  14,  1896.)
Imperator  writing.

9|C  ^  ¥  *M

{Hodgson  says  "  the  writing  is  so  faint  and  scrawty,
with  words  omitted  and  then  inserted,  etc.,"  that
he  wrote  them  himself  on  the  edge  of  the  paper  to
save  difficulties  in  deciphering  afterwards.}

R.  H. I  don't  hear  you  speak.

Imp. Because  we  speak  by  thought.

R.  H. You  hear  me  speak.  Imp.  Yes.

R.  H. But  I  do  not  hear  you  speak.

Imp.  Because  I  am  invisible  to  you.  Your  spiritual  eyes
are  closed  while  in  your  present  environment.

R.  H. I  might  possibly  hear  you  speak  without  seeing  you.

Imp.  Yes,  indeed,  and  under  possible  conditions  your
spiritual  eyes  might  be  opened  and  you  might  see
me. [Hand  bows  as  in  prayer.] Pardon  me.

R.  H. But  how  is  your  speech  transformed  into  writing  ?

Dr.  Phinuit  acts  upon  the  muscles  of  speech  I
suppose  in  the  ordinary  way,  and  he  speaks  with  the
medium's  mouth  and  I  hear  him.

Imp.  Yes,  yet  he  does  not  prevent  others  from  entering
one  of  the  branches.

R.  H.  But  when  you  enter  the  branch,  how  exactly,  by
what  exact  process  does  your  speech  come  out  in
written  words  ?

Imp. I  do  not  know.

R.  H.  *  *  *  I  think  of  moving  my  fingers,  and  I  move
them. We  can  say  in  general  terms  that  a  change


394


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


in  the  brain  is  followed  by  other  changes  in  nerves
and  muscles,  and  the  result  is  movement  of  the
fingers.  *  *  *  I  suppose  there  is  something  analo-
gous here  ?

Imp. Yes,  quite. I  follow. I  think  independently  when  my

thoughts  are  registered  *  *  *
R.  H. Your  independent  thought  acts  upon  the  branch,  and

the branch functions as it is in the habit  of

functioning.
Imp. Yes,  exactly,  like  your  own.

R.  H.  Well  I  should  like  to  ask  another  question.  How  is
the  light  renewed  day  by  day  ?

*  *  *  *

Imp.  Light  is  spirit  force  drawn  up  by  the  interior  or
normal  [?]  spirit  of  the  medium  from  our  own  world.
The  whole  atmosphere  of  our  world  is  light  or
spirit.  There  is  a  crevice  through  which  the  forces
escape,  drawn  from  the  battery  of  the  medium.

R.  H. A  crevice  into  your  world  ?

Imp. No,  into  your  own. Let  me  speak.

Supposing  your  room  or  mortal  dwelling  was  filled
with  smoke.  It  was  power.  Supposing  it  were
inhabited  by  spirits.  Now  then  in  an  adjoining
compartment  there  lived  mortals  *  *  *  desiring  to  gain
some  knowledge  *  *  *  concerning  the  inhabitants
of  the  adjoining  dwellings  *  *  *  supposing  there
was  a  crevice  *  *  *  through  which  more  or  less
of  the  smoke  could  pass.  *  *  *  Supposing  there  was
one  (or  two,  for  instance,  persons)  within  this
mortal  dwelling  who  was  more  sensitive  to  the
smoke  than  the  others,  by  or  due  to  the  laws  of
attraction.  Well,  supposing  the  one  or  more  sensi-
tives received  into  their  organisms  superabundance
of  smoke.  Now  then,  by  so  becoming  impregnated
with  this  amount  of  smoke,  their  organisms  become
attractive  to  the  spirits  living  in  their  own  sphere.
*  *  *  Now  then  there  is  such  a  quantity  taking
[entering  ?]  the  organisms  of  those  sensitives  that  by
natural  law  *  *  *  they  attract  the  spirits.  Now  then,
the  spirits  say  to  themselves,  there beyond  ...  or


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.


395


behind  this  crevice  or  opening  there  is  or  has  escaped
some  of  our  own  atmosphere  or  light.  This  being
intermingled  with  their  own  natural  light  or  lights,
changes  its  colour  and  condition  so  completely  that
it  gives  a  brighter  glow  to  the  spirits.  Understand  ?
R.  H.  Yes.  I  think  so.  Those  organisms  that  have  absorbed
some  of  your  atmosphere,  *  *  *  become  more  brightly
luminous  and  draw  the  attention  of  spirits  in  the
other  world.

Imp.  Yes.  Now  then,  they  wish  to  use  their  own  power
of  speech,  and  in  order  to  do  this  they  gather
from  their  own  sphere,  light,  strength  etc.  and
with  this  they  enter  the  adjoining  room,  seize  the
person  who  has  become  filled  with  their  spiritual
atmosphere,  power.  Then  they  suddenly  find  that
they  have  power  to  use  the  entire  system.  Now
they  begin  to  seek  light  for  your  world.  *  *  *
They  live  on  it  until  it  becomes  exhausted.


{Dec.  15,  1896.)
Imperator  writing.

R.  H.  Has  your  atmosphere  any  direct  relation  with  what
we  call  luminiferous  ether  ?

Imp.  Oh  yes  indeed  it  is  and  all  spiritual  beings  are
luminiferous  ether,  also  the  atmosphere  of  our
world.  *  *  *  The  spiritual  part  of  mortals  is
composed  of  luminiferous  ether,  and  when  the
spiritual  eyes  open,  they  are  able  to  discern  spirits.
For  instance  the  spirit  presents  itself  to  the  spirit
vision — can  be  easily  seen.  The  impression  is  re-
ceived through  the  retina.  Have  you  my  idea  ?  I
do  not  think  you  have.

R.  H.  I  think  I  have  it  now.  The  spirit  sees  another  spirit
owing  to  etherial  action  on  the  etherial  retina,  just
as  I  see  a  material  body  owing  to  etherial  vibra-
tions on  my  protoplasmic  retina.

Imp. Yes  .  .  .  yes,  yes,  exactly.

Now,  then,  should  (under  favourable  conditions),
the  spiritual  ear  open,  one  could  easily  hear  the
voice  of  the  spirit.


396  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

R.  H. But  there  is  a  difference  there,  isn't  there  ?

Imp. Yes. I  will  explain. The  eye  is  better  able  to  see

than  ear  is  to  hear,  because  the  words  are  given  by

thought  impression.
R.  H. Not  by  actual  waves.  Imp.  No  sounds.

R.  H. But  in  case  of  seeing  there  are  etherial  vibrations.
Imp. Yes. I am waiting. You must question me,  my

friend,  for  my  understanding  as  to  what  you  most

wish  to  know.

■Is  *i*  H*

R.  H.  The  interior  consciousness  of  a  mortal  writes  auto-
matically as  we  call  it.

Imp.  Yes,  and  when  it  is  unaccompanied  by  a  trance  or
other  coma  it  is  bound  to  be  more  or  less  un-
reliable. UD.

{Imperator  has  just  explained  that  for  the  word
"  understand "  he  will  in  future  use  UD.  and  will
teach  others  to  do  so.}

R.  H.  If  the  medium's  etherial  is  still  there,  some  of  his
own  thoughts  may  be  confused  with  the  message.

Imp.  Quite.

R.  H. Sometimes  it  may  be  a  dissociated  fragment  of  the

writer's  ordinary  mind  that  writes  ?
Imp.  Quite.

R.  H. When  the  interior  consciousness  writes  it  is  sensitive

telepathically.  Imp.  Yes.

R.  H.  Now  (1)  It  may  be  influenced  by  a  spirit  or  spirits
Imp. Yes  indeed

R.  H. (2)  It  may  be  influenced  by  the  exterior  conscious-
ness of  an  incarned  person  present.
Imp.  Yes.

R.  H. (3)  It  may  be  influenced  by  the  exterior  conscious-
ness of  an  incarnated  person  not  present.
Imp.  Yes.

R  H. (4)  May  it  be  influenced  by  the  interior  consciousness

of  an  incarned  person  present  or  absent  ?
Imp. Not  so.

R.  H. Why  no,  when  a  spirit  can  influence  it  ?
Imp. Because  we  are  free  to  act.

R.  H. And  the  interior  of  the  incarned  person  is  shut  up


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  397


Imp.  Exactly.

{Hodgson  elicits,  however,  that  the  interior  conscious-
ness may  in  certain  cases  leave  the  body,  and  is
then  practically  a  spirit,  capable  of  acting  on  the
interior  consciousness  of  the  medium.  Also  the
medium's  own  interior  consciousness  may  sometimes
go  out  and  get  a  "  peep "  into  the  spirit  world,
and  come  back  and  write  as  a  higher  self}

R.  H.  It's  analogous  to  the  medium's  speech  on  her  return
{i.e.  in  the  waking-stage}.  If  she  had  been  differ-
ently constituted  she  might  have  written  it.

Imp.  Yes.

*  *  *  *


(January  1,  1897.)
Rector  writes.

{This  is  the  account  of  Rector's  first  important
appearance.  He  had  previously  controlled  on  Nov.
14,  1896,  confusedly  (see  Appendix  to  Chapter  III.
p.  470),  and  again  on  Dec.  17,  1896,  two  days  after
Hodgson  had  referred  to  him,  in  the  course  of  a
sitting,  as  having  acted  as  Imperator's  amanuensis
for  W.  Stainton  Moses.  He  is  introduced  by  Doctor
and  described  as  a  very  serious  fellow.}
R.  Who  are  you. I  am  Rector.

R.  H. How  does  it  seem  to  come  into  this  light  ? Tell  me

how  you  got  here.
R.  I  will. I  saw  a  Jack  o'  Lantern. I  am  its  light.

R.  H. What  do  you  do  ?

R.  I  am  inside  of  an  empty  shell  filled  with  spirit  air.

I  breathe,  see,  live,  exist.
R.  H. In  the  shell  ?

R.  Of  course. Yes  and  whisper  to  or  through  the  holes

in  the  shell,  and  the  air  from  your  world  receives
the  sound  of  my  voice  and  registers  it  for  your
vision.

R.  H. Not  the  air,  Doctor,  the  medium's  arm.

R.  I  am  not  doctor.  R.  H.  Rector  I  should  say,

R.  It  does. It  is  crude  indeed,  yet  it  is  the  clearest  way.


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


[Hodgson  explains  about  movements  of  medium's
hand  and  arm,  etc.,  touching  the  elbow,  forearm,
tips  of  fingers]

Hsad  [forefinger]  that's  my  ear.

afE  $  $  ♦

[Elbow  bumps  a  little]
What  are  you  doing  ?

Well  I  was  simply  changing  my  position  in  the  shell.

Now  when  you  speak  you  don't  affect  the  air  in  our
world.  You  may  affect  the  ether  in  connection
with  the  protoplasm  of  the  medium's  arm  and  so
cause  it  to  move.

Yes,  precisely.

*K  *fc  *i*  i|s

I  speak  as  you  would  hear  the  wind  blow

And that acts upon the nervous system of  the

medium's  arm  and  it  writes  ?
Yes  because  it  has  passed  under  the  control  of  my

voice  spiritually

*  *  *  *

I  see  the  mortal  body  of  a  woman — I  see  her  spirit
rising  way  above  the  body,  I  see  ...  it  seems  to  be
coming  closer  to  our  world  *  *  *  After  it  has  come
into  contact  with  the  outer  edge  of  our  world,  we
rush

Can't  read

Step  forward,  since  all  is  transparent  to  us,  we
raise  the  veil  namely  ether  *  *  *  and  allow  her
to  enter  while  we  pass  out  beside  her.

She  passes  into  the  spirit  world  and  you  pass  into
the  material  world  ?

Exactly.  Her  body  is  like  a  fountain  or  large  reser-
voir which  becomes  filled  with  the  etherial  atmo-
sphere of  our  world.  This  looks  like  our  own  light
{Passing  into  the  atmosphere  of  the  medium}  we  by
the  two  forces  are  able  to  speak.

Two  forces,  your  own  and  the  medium's.

Yes,  the  material  and  etherial.  We  then  speak  as
we  should  to  one  another  before  we  have  passed


LXXI.]


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  399


through  this  change  [?]  well  [?]  we  find  the  fountain
which  at  the  time  of  communication  is  filled  with
our  own  ether.  We  find  our  thoughts  are  being
registered  by  the  machine.  Although  we  do  not
see  our  thoughts  written,  we  are  conscious  of  using
the  machine.

i{C  ijl  SjC  Jjc

This  is  how  it  seems. Is  it  clear  to  you  ? Do  you
know  any  more  than  you  did  before  you  asked  ?
R.  H. No, I don't think I do. Doctor gave me  pretty
nearly  the  same  account.

{January  12,  1897.)

Present,  Hodgson  and  Mrs.  Blodgett.

{Hannah  Wild  1  has  been  controlling,  and  then  G.  P.,
to  whom  Hodgson  explains  about  her.  G.  P.  then
talks  to  her,  his  side  of  the  conversation  getting
recorded. }

[Between  G.  P.  and  invisible.  Hand  listening,  etc.]
Will  take  care  of  that  .  .  .  yes  you  keep  that  in
your  mind  until  next  time  .  .  .  yes  and  give  it
yourself  .  .  .  yes,  very  good  ...  of  course  I  will
.  .  .  certainly  .  .  .  most  assuredly.

[G.  P.  apparently  explaining  to  Hannah  Wild  about
the  writing,  the  block-book,  the  leaves,  etc.  The
finger  moves  along  paper  as  though  tracing  lines,
and  writes  near  the  bottom  of  the  page]  all.

[Next  page.]  Commence  on  the  top  like  this  and
write  down  .  .  .  see  .  .  .

[Hand  and  arm  jerks  back  suddenly]  but,  well  now
you  came  near  putting  me  out  {and  so  forth.}

(January  29,  1897.)

Doctor  controlling  for  the  first  time  since  December  11th, —
except  when  he  came  to  introduce  Rector  on  January  1
and  very  briefly  on  another  occasion.

*  *  *  *

1  Hannah  Wild,  see  p.  291.


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PABT


D.  (writing). I  wish  to  take  up  where  I  left  off.

R.  H. I  forget  at  this  moment  just  where  it  was.

D.  We  were  discussing  the  peculiar  condition  of  man's

interior exterior etc.  *  *  * I weakened and  left

suddenly  *  *  *

R.  H. I  remember  now, it  was  about  the  growth  of  the

light. What  causes  improvement  of  the  light  and

what  causes  its  decay  ?
D.  The  growth  age  and  declining  years  of  the  medium

.  .  .  growth,  the  advancement.  .  .  .
R.  H. Not  specific  enough. What  causes  its  growth  ?
D.  Ah the  light which we  use  comes from our  own

sphere  and  is  improved  by  keeping  away  all  evil

or  outside  influences.
R.  H. What  do  you  mean  by  evil  influences  ?
D.  I mean disturbing elements such as idle  curiosity

seekers.

*  #  *  *

(January  30,  1897.)
Imperator  writing.

i|S  9fS  S|S  3f!

R.  H.  When  the  medium's  spirit  leaves  her  body,  does  she
carry  with  her  her  exterior  consciousness  %

Imp.  Thoroughly.  The  spirit,1  as  I  term  it  for  your
understanding  removes  the  exterior  sense.

R.  H.  What  becomes  of  the  intermediate  or  animal  or
sense  mind  ?  2

Imp. Lies  dormant,  unused.

R.  H. As  though  it  were  sealed  up  ?

1  Probably  the  spirit  of  the  medium.

2  Imperator  had  explained  on  December  15,  1896,  that  : — There  is  an
intermediate  self.  Exterior  acting  mind,  interior  or  only  occasionally  acting
mind.  (R.  H.  That  corresponds  to  the  ego  ?)  Imp  Yes  exactly.  .  .  .
The  material  mind  or  (R.  H.  That's  the  intermediate  ?  *  *  *  There  are
three  minds,  the  exterior,  the  interior,  and  the  material  or  intermediate.)
Imp.  Yes,  yes.  Call  it  sense  (R.  H.  The  intermediate  mind  sense  ?)  Imp.
Yes  {He  goes  on  to  say  that  the  intermediate  mind  always  acts  for  evil,
and  that  it  is  this  which  is  the  perishable  part  of  mortal  man,  though  its
effects  on  the  interior  may  remain  for  long  afterwards. }


LXXI.]


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  401


Imp.  As  though  it  were,  to  use  one  of  your  own  terms,
dead.

R.  H.  Is  there  no  chance  of  that  affecting  any  controlling
spirit  ?

Imp. Absolutely  none  in  this  case.
R.  H. In  some  mediums  it  might  ?

Imp.  Yes,  especially  where  *  *  *  the  spirit  has  not  al-
together removed  the  normal  or  exterior  sense
*  *  *  Consequently  the  threads  of  normal  thought
remain  unbroken  by  the  spirit  which  in  such  cases
causes  an  entanglement.

R.  H. In  this  case  they're  all  removed  ?

Imp. Every  vestige.

R.  H.  The  interior  or  spirit  of  this  medium  leaves  the
body  ?

Imp. Yes  and  with  it  takes  the exterior  altogether,  while

in  some  cases.
R.  H. There  are  fragments  of  the  exterior  left.
Imp. Thes0  are  not  wholly  removed.
R.  H. The  controlling  spirit  clears  these  away.
Imp. Yes,  quite.  R.  H. Or  he  should  do  so.

Imp. Yes, and  when he does his complete  and  faithful

work  he  has  done  this.
R.  H. Do  they  go  with  the  medium's  interior  consciousness

and  the  rest  of  her  exterior  ?
Imp. Yes,  making  the  spirit  and  exterior  completely  *  *  *

excluded,  and  as  it  were  combined.
*  *  *  *

{R.  H.  asks  concerning  origin  of  the  interior  and
exterior  and  the  animal  or  sense  mind  in  the
course  of  evolution}

Imp.  Of  course  you  will  understand  that  evolution  is  the
working  of  spirit.

R.  H.  I  regard  all  the  successive  material  changes  in  Evolu-
tion as  the  manifestations  of  spirit.

Imp.  Yes,  this  theory  is  the  only  correct  one.  Now  with
the  horse  the  material  matter  is  of  a  coarser  origin
than  that  of  man,  consequently  cannot  by  spirit
be  developed  into  anything  higher,  while  in  the
act  of  inhabiting  matter  be  anything  but  a  horse,
•2  c


402


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


*  *  *  and purposely made so for the use  and

convenience  of  man.  *  *  *
R.  H. But  birds  and  monkeys  have  an  interior  consciousness.
Imp. Yes,  and  evolute  according  to  the  laws  of  God  after

the disposition of the material form. They  are

specimens  to  denote  the  higher  part  of  man.
R.  H. Typical  ?

Imp.  Yes,  for  instance,  the  spiritual  part  of  man  is  repre-
sented by  the  bird,  while  the  lower  nature  of  man
is  represented  by  the  lower  animals  for  instance
the  lion  tiger  etc.


(February  1,  1897.)
Rector  controlling.

*  *  *  *

[Hodgson  tries  different  positions  of  the  hand  for
hearing]

R.  As  you  are  .  .  .  Better  so. [He  prefers  the  position

with  back  of  hand  upward]
R.  H. What  position  is  your  body  in  ?

R.  My  ear  is  at  your  mouth. I  have  my  head  placed

upon  the  light  and  I  say  move  [?]  speak

*  *  *  *

{Rector  states  that  the  spirit  body,  e.g.  Rector's  own,  is
composed  of  luminiferous  ether.  Foolish  talk  follows
about  gas — made  from  coal — and  Hodgson  explains
the  meaning  of  molecules  and  the  formula  H20.
Rector  continues  : }

I  think  I  will  take  gas  {not  water}  for  your  under-
standing. Supposing  your  spirit  was  composed  of
gas.  Its  action  on  the  body  would  not  be  the  same
as  it  is  to-day.  It  would  produce  as  you  would  term
it  suffocation.  Well  then  the  body  would  be  dormant,
or  in  your  own  words  dead.  Very  well,  so  would  the
gas  be  also  *  *  *  Now  we  will  take  the  ether,  as
there  is  no  similarity  to  gas,  in  the  spiritual  sense.  The
spiritual  ether  is  composed  as  we  understand  it  of
both  [?]  hydrogen  and  oxygen.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  403


R.  H. Can't  read  that.  R.  Oxygen  and  hydrogen

R.  H. Composed  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen  !

R.  The  spiritual  ether  is  not  composed  of  oxygen  and

hydrogen.
R.  H. I  know  it  isn't.

R.  It  is  composed  of  the  finer tissues  termed  lumini-

ferous  ether  because  it  is  or  can  be  seen  by  the
spiritual  eyes  of  mortals.  UD.

R.  H. No  you've  got  off  the  track.  *  *  *

R.  What  do  you  mean  by  that  ?

R.  H.  [reads  some  sentences  proceeding]

R.  Oh  I  see  you  do  not  get  only  half  of  my  thoughts.

{R. H. changes the  subject. Later in the  sitting
he  asks}
R.  H. Is  the  light  ebbing  ?

R.  Yes I think it is, yet I wish to go on if  my

light  remains.

*  *  *  *

R.  {later}  I  now  at  this  moment  have  a  fresh  current  of  light.

#  Hs  *  Ns

(February  2,  1897.)
Doctor  writing.

R.  H.  [trying  experiments  as  to  best  position  of  hand  for
hearing.]  Do  you  hear  with  your  (right  or  left
ear  ?

D.  Left  of  course.

R.  H.  [turning  the  hand  over  to  other  position]  and  now  with

your  right.
D.  Yes.

R.  H. Is  your  spirit  body  as  big  as  mine. I  mean  is  it

about  the  size  of  an  ordinary  human  form  ?
D.  Yes.

R.  H. Does  it  occupy  space  ?  D.  Yes.

R.  H. And  remains  the  same  size  ?  D.  Yes.

R.  H. Where  is  your  head  ?  D.  Near  your  own.

R.  H. Where  are  your  heels  ?

D.  Strange  question *  *  * on  the  lower  extremities  of

my  body.


404


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Here  are  your  ears  ? [touches  the  inside  of  palm  and

the  finger  ends.]
Yes.

What  part  of  your  body  am  I  touching  now  ?  [squeezes

wrist  a  little]
I  do  not  understand  you.
Now  ?  [squeezes  elbow]

You  are  not  touching  my  body  at  all,  Sir.

*  *  *  *

R.  H.  [swings  the  arm  up  and  down  several  times  with  the
elbow-joint  as  hinge] What  did  I  do  ?

D.  You have simply tossed my head about in  the

suffocating  air  of  earth.

*  *  *  *

R.  H. Can  you  shake  hands  with  me  ?

D.  Yes,  but  you  will  not  realize  it

R.  H. Well  try. [R.  H.  holds  out  his  hand.  Pause.]

D.  Do  you  feel  me  ?

R.  H.  No.  You  could  change  your  position  and  shake
hands  with  me  as  some  of  my  friends  do.

D.  Ah. I  will  turn  around  if  you  wish. [Curving  move-

ments of  hand  and  arm.  Then  shakes  hands]
Speak.

R.  H. Were  you  conscious  of  shaking  hands  ?

D.  I  used  the  instrument  of  the  material

R.  H. You  have  to  change  your  position  to  do  that  ?

D.  Yes.  *  *  *  I  will  turn back. [Slight movements  of

hand  and  arm  again]
R.  H. Are  you  now  in  your  original  position  ?
D.  Yes.

R.  H. The  spirit body  is  not  compressed  or  diminished  in

size  in  the  act  of  communicating  ?
D.  Not  at  all. I  simply  bow  my  head,  and  at  the  same

time  hold  the  hand  and  arm  of  the  medium  while

I  speak  to  you,  with  you.
R.  H. You  seize  the  arm  and hand  of the medium  with

your  hand  ?

D.  Yes,  one  hand,  and  when  I  wish  to  hear  your  voice

I  place  my  head  upon  that  hand  also.


R.  H.
D.

R.  H.
D.

R.  H.
D.


LXXI.]


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper  s  Trance. — Appendix.  405


R.  H. Do  you  seize one  hand  of  the  medium with  both
of  yours  ?

D.  No  one  hand  *  *  *  I  have  one  free  which  I  move

in  assent  to  other  minds. [Hand  speirs.]
R.  H. Head  going  forward  ?

D.  Yes,  quite. For  example,  [Hand  speirs  and  gestures

a  little]  speaking  and  listening  to  Rector.
R.  H. Is  the  spirit  body  always  the  same  size  ?
D.  Yes,  indeed.

R.  H. Always  looks  like  a  human  being  ?

D.  Yes,  or  more  like  a  shadowy  form  of  a  human  being.

R.  H. Does  it  look  to  you  like  a  shadowy  form  ?
D.  No,  but  to  mortals.

R.  H. But  I  want  to  know  how  it  looks  to  you  1
D.  Ah  yes,  like  a  mortal  very  much  improved.

R.  H. Is  it  luminous  ?
D.  Yes  indeed.

R.  H. Are  some  more  luminous  than  others  ?
D.  Yes. Depends  chiefly  upon their advancement  from

earth.

#  ♦  ♦  ♦

R.  H. You  have  a  spirit  body,  but  I  have  also  one  just
like  it.

D.  Yes  indeed,  only  you  have  still  a  mortal  covering  as

it  were.

R.  H. What  is  the  origin  of  that  spirit  or  etherial  body  ?
D.  I  have  already  explained  it.

R.  H.  Not  to  me.
D.  Not  to  you

R.  H.  No.

D.  Moses [The writing here begins to show signs  of


dreaminess]  You  are  the  image  of  God  and  he
alone  understands  the  development  of  the  etherial
body.  No  spirit  understands  this.
{After  a  little  more  talk  Doctor  is  "  called  away  "
and  Imperator  intervenes}
Imp.  What  means  this  confusion  of  thought  ?  The
light  is  not  so  good  *  *  *  I  am  looking  the  situa-
tion over.  No,  it  is  due  to  the  undevelopment  of
my  advisers,  undevelopment  of  the  controllers.


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

Want  of  development. That  will  pass  away  ?
Yes,  most,  surely. I  am  advised  by  God. The  spirit
of man is or begins with the beginning of  the
covering  or  body,  begins  as  a  spark  of  light.  It
contains  heat,  light,  is  like  in  beginning  to  a  little
spark  of  light
The  beginning  of  the  etherial  body  ?
Yes,  or  the  spirit

{He  goes  on  to  say  that  it  develops  and  grows  as
does  the  protoplasmic  body.}

On  February  4,  1897,  in  the  course  of  conversation,  Hodg-
son reminds  Doctor  that  he  was  dazed  when,  in  replying
to  his  question  concerning  the  growth  of  the  spirit  body  or
etherial  body,  he  said  that  no  spirits  knew  how  they
developed,  etc.,  and  that  Imperator  had  to  come  and  put
matters  right.  Doctor  thereupon  writes  :  "  I  have  here-
tofore told  you  distinctly  that  I  was  not  as  yet  familiar  with
the  workings  of  this  light,  have  I  not  ?  "  Hodgson  explains
again  that  he  has  at  present  no  means  of  determining  what
statements  can  be  relied  upon  and  suggests  :  "I  think  your
confusion  the  other  day  may  have  been  my  fault,  and  may
have  been  caused  by  my  shaking  your  head  about  in  the
suffocating  air  of  earth  "  (see  above,  p.  404).  Doctor  accepts
this  explanation  at  once,  and  says  :  "it  disturbed  my  line
of  thought  so  completely  I  could  not  finally  hold  on  to  the
light."  We  must  observe,  however,  that  there  was  no  sign
of  disturbance  or  annoyance  at  the  time,  that  Doctor  and
Hodgson  conversed  for  some  time  afterwards,  and  that  the
explanation  was  not  suggested  by  Doctor.

{February  5,  1897.)
Imperator  writing.

H*  •(*  H*

Imp.  The  etherial  or  spiritual  body  is  composed  of  air,
light  and  a  large  amount  of  hydrogen  which  is  the
lightest  of  anything  known  to  us.  It  has  sense  of
hearing,  feeling,  seeing  and  speaking.  It  is  composed
of  heat,  light,  air,  hydrogen,  is  light  and  exquisitely
fine,  the  finest  of  anything  possible. Etherial  .  .  .


406

R.  H.
Imp.


R.  H.
Imp.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance. — Appendix.  407


fibre,  and  the  most  delicately  constructed  parts  of
light. UD.  ? Do  you  hear  me  ?
R.  H. I can't harmonize that with anything which  we
know.

Imp.  Very  good.  Very  well.  It  is  as  it  is  and  will  be
made  known  to  you  in  later  years.  You  have
materially  speaking  a  knowledge  of  luminiferous
ether,  have  you  not  ?

R.  H. We  know  something  about  it.

Imp. It  is  obscure.

R.  H. We  know  something  that  it  isn't,  we  know  that  it's

not  air  nor  hydrogen
Imp. Not  air  of  your  planet. There  are  different  kinds  of

air;  light.

■jl  sfc  *(•

Imp. I  do  not  feel  sure  that  you  hear  all  I  am  saying.  It

perhaps  does  not  register  well.
R.  H. It  is  difficult  to  read  chiefly  because  the  marks  are

nearly  always  extremely  faint  when  you  speak.
Imp. It cannot be otherwise. I am not so near  your

planet  as  are  some  others.

SjS  !(S  SfS

R.  H.  Luminiferous  ether  is  vastly  more  subtle  than  air  or
hydrogen.

Imp.  Yes,  so  it  is,  but  it  is  beyond  your  comprehension
.  .  .  hydrogen  I  mention  the  word  *  *  *  so  that
you  may  know  how  delicate  and  exquisitely  fine
it  must  necessarily  be.  Hydrogen  according  to
your  crude  science  is  at  least  14  or  15  degrees
fighter,  finer  than  your  air,  *  *  *  while  ours  is
many  times  more  fine  than  this  which  is  known  to
you  as  hydrogen.

R.  H. Your  hydrogen.

Imp.  Yes.1

SjS  SfS  ifc  5|i

Imp. Vacium. I  must  dwell  on  vacium.

R.  H. Something  known  to  you  and  not  known  to  us  ?

1  On  February  1 1  Lmperator  wrote  :  Thou  hast  misunderstood  my  com-
parison of  Hydrogen.  R.  H.  Your  thoaght  was  not  expressed.  Confusion
owing  to  bad  machine. Imp.  Yes  I  am  not  yet  in  rapport  with  it.


408


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PAET


Imp. Yes,  termed  by  you  hydrogen.

R.  H. Is  vacium  the  name for  what  we call hydrogen  or

what  you  call  hydrogen  ?
Imp. We call hydrogen. Our constitution has no  such

thing  as  your  hydrogen.
R.  H. And  what  you  call  vacium  is  a  constituent  of  your

etherial  body  ?

Imp. Yes,  you  can  only  ... I  do  not  at  present  know
how  or  what I  can  compare  it  with  *  *  *  in  fact
the  only  expression  for  it  is  spiritual.1
*  *  *  *

{R.  H.  puts  his  difficulty  again  re  the  statement  that
the  etherial  body  was  composed  of  air  and  hydrogen,
dwelling  especially  on  hydrogen. }
Imp. Ah yes. Thou hast made it clear to me. I  wish

vacium  used  instead.
R.  H. Vacium  is  the  chief  constituent  of  the  etherial  body  ?
Imp.  Yes,  this  will  explain  it.

*  *  *  *

R.  H. You  mean  that  the  ether  consists  partly  of  vacium

and  partly  of  something  else  ?
Imp.  I  do. Light  is  true. Light  is  real.

R.  H. Vacium  is  a  kind  of  subtle  matter  ?
Imp. With  which  our  bodies  are  composed.


{Feb.  6,  1897.)

Imperator  writing.

Imp. *  *  * O  friend  the  machine  is  imperfect. I  find  it
battered  and  worn. There  is  a  barrier  in  my  path.

^ %  ^

The  spiritual  body  is  composed  of  love  and  wisdom,
and  the  relations  which  it  bears  to  the  material
are  as  cause  is  to  effect.

[About  here  {R.  H.  reports}  I  asked  if  he  meant  that
they were the real things of which the  material


1  Further  on  he  says  Vacium  "  is  a  body  thoroughly  spiritualised  and
pure,  a  part  of  God.  .  .  ."


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  409

represented  our  objective  perceptions.  Hand  assented
strongly.]

Imp. Love  is  a  substance  *  *  * It  is  purer  lighter  higher

and more real and exquisite than anything  else

known to mortal man. It is truth purity  and

sincerity  *  *  *
Remember  that  the  chief  substance  is  vacium  known

as  love. It  is  the  part  of  man  which  prompts  him

to  rise  or  fall.  *  *  *
When  the  spirit  of  love  is  wakened  it is the  first

real  sense  which {man}  perceives  of  God. This  is

real  spiritual  ether.
R.  H. Ah yes. From  the  idealistic point of view.  Ether

is  the  shadow,  or  the  representation  on  the  material

plane,  the  physical  analogue,  of  love, — which  is  the

real  thing. [Strong  assent.]
Imp. Yes  .  .  .  yes. There  can  be  and  is  none  other.  This

is  the  substance  of  the  spiritual  and  is  the  true

and  real  thing.

*  *  *  *

{Imperator  explains  further  that  in  time  the  spirit,
"  which  is  composed  of  love,  wisdom,  truth,"  and
"  is  light  and  life,"  "  will  sever  its  connection  with
the  body  and  will  return  to  God  who  gave  it.  It
will  then  become  a  distinct  part  of  God  *  *  *
It  will  still  continue  to  live,  as  it  is  the  life  in
itself.  Yet  it  will  continue  to  resemble  the  body
which  it  now  controls."  Then  follows  a  long  and
somewhat  obscure  discussion  concerning  the  etherial
covering  of  spirit  and  mortal  body.  So  far  as  can
be  made  out,  it  is  apparently  asserted  that  while  in
the  mortal  body  the  etherial  network  or  spirit  has
(1)  a  protoplasmic  covering  or  earthly  body,  (2)  an
etherial  covering,  similar  to  the  membrane  within
the  shell  of  an  egg.  This  etherial  covering  is  re-
tained by  the  spirit  after  severance  from  the  mortal
body.  When  the  etherial  spirit  temporarily  leaves
its  mortal  habitation,  as  in  Mrs.  Piper's  case,  the
etherial  covering  is  left  behind,  otherwise  the  mortal
body  would  die.}


410


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


R.  H. She  goes  out.
Imp.  No.

R.  H. You  take  her  out.
Imp. Yes,  through  the  heart.

R.  H. Is  there  some  connecting  link  between  her  and  the

covering  ?
Imp.  Yes.

R.  H. Composed  of  etherial,  I  suppose. Is  that  the  cord  ?

Imp. Yes,  known  to  us  as  a  cord  also,  etherial.

R.  H. If  the  cord  were  destroyed,  the  medium  would  pass

away  altogether.
Imp. Yes  we  could  no  longer  operate.

{February  11,  1897.)
Imperator  writing.

*  *  *  *

Imp. Didst  thou  ask  where  Heaven  is  ?
R.  H Yes  *  *  *

Imp.  It  is  an  etherial  canopy.  It  surrounds  and  is  close
to  earth,  a  little  above  it,  separated  only  by  an
etherial  veil  or  canopy,  through  which  we  are
permitted  to  see  the  earthly  plane  below.

*  *  *  *

{The  veil  is}  analogous  to  the  covering  of  an  egg
*  *  *  There  are  openings  through  which  we  some-
times pass  *  *  *

R.  H. What  is  it  that  makes  the  openings  in  that  ?

Imp.  The  pressure  is  very  great,  due  to  the  power  of  the
spirit  of  the  medium  which  presses  as  it  were
against  the  covering,  and  presses  with  such  force
that  it  is  allowed  to  enter  by  a  thread.  When  this
is  being  done  the  thread  is  taken  up  by  some
spirit  and  used.

*  *  *  *

R.  H.  A  spirit  acting  from  your  side  of  the  veil  draws  out  the
spirit  of  the  medium  and  draws  it  to  the  veil.  The
pressure  then  upon  the  veil  carries  the  spirit  through.
Through  that  aperture  the  spirit  from  your  world
passes.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  411


Imp. Yes,  yes,  yes,  passes  through  to  you.

R.  H. Can  you  not  yourselves,  I  refer  to  ordinary  spirits

developed  or  otherwise,  pass  through  that  veil  to

earth  without  help  of  a  medium  ?
Imp. Yes,  attracted  by love, which  is part of our  own

being,  only  love  of  some  one.
R.  H. Do  you  mean  that  no  one  can  pass  back  through

the  veil  unless  drawn  by  love  ?
Imp.  I  do.

S|S  S|S  ■(!  Sfl

R.  H. This  veil  between  you  and  us,  is  it  many  miles  above
the  earth  ?

Imp. Would  seem  many  to  you,  millions  as  it  were,  yet
to  us  it  is  near.

*  *  *  *

(February  15,  1897.)

Rector  controlling  [very  wild  at  first].
R.  Rector, I  am Rector, sent  here  by  Imperator  .  .  .

excuse  me  ...  to  see  a  man  named  Hogman.
R.  H. Do  you  think  that's  my  name  ?
R.  Yes.

R.  H. It  isn't. My  name  is  HODGSON
R.  Hodgson,  excuse  me

R.  H. Quiet,  quiet,  keep  quiet. Restrain  yourself

R.  Too  much

R.  H. Too  much  light  ?  [assent]

♦  ♦  ♦  '  #

R.  {Concerning |j]  physical  phenomena  of spiritualism.}  In

some  cases  {i.e.  as  appears  later  when  the  light  is
very  bright}  we  are  able  to  remove  the  spirit  of
the  medium  entirely  and  use  our  own  etherial
instead.  In  cases  where  we  make  ourselves  manifest
by  rappings  etc.  we  act  on  the  strength  which  we
gather  from  the  medium's  own  spirit  *  *  *  The
fountain  is  filled  with  light,  too  much  so.

R.  H. This  one  is  now  ?

R.  Yes

R.  H. You  mean  that  when  you  produce  what  we  speak  of


412


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


as physical phenomena, you do it by being  or
remaining  without  the  medium's  body  and  by  using
drawing  ...  I  beg  your  pardon

by drawing the etherial energy 1 from the  etherial

body  of  the  medium.
I  do,  and  this  is  precisely  what  we  do.  *  *  *

(February  16,  1897.)
Doctor  writing.


Sjc  ij£  ijc  *f£

R.  H. Could  you  tell  me  how  much  you  see  when  you  are
in  this  room  but  not  in  connexion  with  the  body  ?
D.  Material  things,  such  as  objects  etc.  ?

R.  H.  Yes.

D.  Yes,  indeed,  I  see  the  articles  which  in  appearance


are  like  dark  shadows.  For  instance,  I  see  what
appears  to  me  as  a  table.  I  see  also  chairs.  I
could  not  at  this  moment  tell  you  how  many.  I
should  be  obliged  to  try  the  experiment  of  standing
apart  from  the  medium  and  look  about  specifically
and  then  return  to  the  light  which  I  put  into  action
by  my  own  thought

*  *  *  *

R.  H. You  see  objects  very  dimly  as  though  looking  through

a  murky  glass  ?
D.  Yes.

R.  H. When  you  are  communicating {controlling},  as  now,

do  you  see  more  or  less  ?
D.  Less.2

*  *  *  *

R.  H. Do  you  see  this  book  on  which  you  write  ?
D.  No  not  at  this  moment.

R.  H. Do you see the pencil which is in the  medium's
hand  ?

D.  I  do  not  distinctly.

R.  H. Do  you  feel  it  ?

1  Described  by  Rector  as  chemical  energy  on  February  18.

2  But  compare  Stain  ton  Moses'  statement  on  March  2,  1897  (see  below
p.  414).


R.

R.  H.
R.


lxxi.]  Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  413
D.  No.

R.  H. When  I  give  you  the  pencil  what  do  you  feel  ?

D.  I  feel  the  slight  pressure  of  your  own  etherial.

R.  H. When you come  first and show your  readiness  to

begin  to  express  your  thoughts  to  me,  what  do  you

do  ?

D.  Owing  to  the  extension  of  the  etherial  which  surrounds

the  medium  I  am  enabled  thereby  to  express  my
thoughts,  using  the  surplus  etherial.

R.  H.  When  you  first  come  you  usually  act  so  that  the
medium's  hand  sticks  out  in  front,  and  the  fingers
spread  a  little  so  as  to  suggest  that  they  are
waiting  for  me  to  place  a  pencil  between  them.
What  in  your  mind  corresponds  to  that  specific
motion  ?

D.  Speaking  as  it  were  to  another  spirit  *  *  *  I  have

no  way  by  which  I  can  speak  to  you  other  than
picking  up  this  material  hand,  and  when  I  speak
to  it,  it  replies  for  me.

R.  H. What  are  you  conscious  of  in  that  first  motion  ?

D.  Asking  for  a  pencil.

R.  H. But  you  do  not  say  that  in  words  do  you  ?
D.  Yes  certainly  ; I  express  this  as  ...  I  ask  Rector

a  question,  or  any  other  spirit.

{At  this  sitting  Hodgson  suggests  that  when  "the  other
light  " — i.e.  the  one  Myers  is  sitting  with  in  England — be-
comes more  developed  so  that  her  spirit  is  entirely  removed,
the  spirits  of  the  two  mediums  might  interchange  bodies
and  each  communicate  through  the  other.  Doctor  declares
this  quite  possible  and  safe,  and  is  strongly  in  favour  of
having  the  experiment  tried.}

{February  19,  1897.)

Rector,  {excusing  himself  for  interrupting  Hodgson  earlier  in
the  sitting}  when  I  enter  here  the  light  burns
brightly  and  after  I  have  been  here  a  short  time
it  begins  to  expire.  Consequently  I  try  to  take
advantage  of  it  and  I  do  my  very  best  to  hear


414  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


you  also  register  my  thoughts  and  your  UD.  before
the  light  burns  out.

(March  2,  1897.)

W.  Stainton  Moses  writing.

W.  S.  M.  There  is  a  great  difference  in  lights.  Through  some

we  may  be  able  to  speak  directly  while  through

others  we  must  send  our  messages  to  our  friends

through  the  controlling  spirit,  and  in  this  case  it  is

never  so  clear.  Neither  can  we  see  our  friends  as
clearly.1

{March  31,  1897.)

George  Eliot  writing.
G.  E. Did  you  see  the  fountain  filling  ?
R.  H. No,  I  don't  think  so.
Q.  E. I  did  plainly
R.  H. Can  you  describe  the  operation  ?

G.  E.  Yes  I  think  so.  I  saw  several  of  the  higher  order
of  spirits  rushing  forward  towards  the  opening  in
the  veil  of  etherial  light  which  separates  our  world
from  yours.  I  saw  the  incarned  spirit  of  this  body
brighten  with  the  etherial  light  from  our  own  world.
I  saw  them  whisper  to  the  incarned  spirit.  I  heard
them  whispering  Come  with  us  and  let  us  send
friends  from  our  world  to  take  up  thy  body ;  and
speak  to  those  below.  I  saw  the  incarned  spirit
passing  out  and  saw  it  enter  through  the  opening
through  which  I  have  just  passed.  The  instant  this
change  took  place  the  whole  body  became  filled
with  etherial  light  ;  and  I  heard  one  voice,  of  our
commander  in  chief,  say  "  All  is  ready  for  thee  to
go  forth  and  take  up  thy  work.  Kindly  now  pass."
I  did  so,  using  the  etherial  light  through  which  to
act.  *  *  *  You  will  understand  that  if  we  had
nothing  etherial  with  which  to  act,  we  could  not
do  so.


1  But  compare  Doctor's  remark  on  February  16,  1897,  about  difficulty
of  seeing  while  controlling  (see  above,  p.  412).


lxxi.]  Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  415
R.  H. I  understand.

G.  E.  When  we  are  in  the  act  of  communicating  with  you
or  in  fact  anyone  we  draw  ether  from  our  world
continually  *  *  *  We  act  as  long  as  we  can  keep
the  incarned  spirit  out.  We  are  intelligent  enough
to  know  and  understand  just  how  much  we  can
do,  and  when  we  have  finished  we  simply  withdraw,
and  as  we  return  to  our  own  world,  the  incarned  spirit
which  has  been  temporarily  removed  by  us,  returns
again  to  its  body  without  being  injured  in  any  way.
And  I  would  further  say  by  way  [of]  explanation
that  when  the  spirit  has  taken  up  its  body  again,
it  is  no  longer  fight  to  us  i.e.  for 1  some  time.
Of  course  in  this  case  there  is  nothing  to  which
we  are  attracted  *  *  *  There  should  be  nothing
whatever  mysterious  about  it.  The  same  conditions
have  existed  from  the  beginning  of  your  world.
{That  is,  as  explained  later,  since  the  evolution  of
man.}

{Later in the sitting we get apparent  localisation
of  spirits,  as  follows:}
G.  E. I  am  specially  requested  to  ask  you  to  assist  Rector
in  placing  the  body

sfc  ♦

Go  over  there  please  Rector,  and  I  will  remain  here.
The  machine  is  not  registering  so  well  for  me  I
think.

&  *  ❖  *

I  repeat  for  one  who  is  standing  near  {i.e.  Imperator}.
May  the  grace  of  God  be  and  abide  with  thee  for
ever  and  ever. Amen. Imperator.  G.E.

{April  1,  1897.)

{Rector  controlling,  and  writing  as  amanuensis  for  Imperator.}

igC  !|S  Sj!  S$S

[Hand  twists block  book  round,  and  speirs out  to
listen  nearly  in  direction  of  my  organism  instead  of,


1  The  i.e.  was  first  written  after  and  above  the  for,  but  it  was  explained
that  it  was  to  be  read  before  it. It  was  a  case  of  a  word  inserted.


416


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


as  previously,  almost  directly  in  front  of  Mrs.
Piper's.]

R.  H. Is  that  position  more  convenient  for  you  ?
R-  I  was  following  him  {presumably  Imperator}.

♦  ♦  ♦  ♦

R.  H.  {Complains  of  the  difficulty  of  reading  because}  the
whole  word  is  more  or  less  slurred  over  by  the
organism  and  presents  a  hazy  outline.

R.  What  do  you  mean  by  the  organism

R.  H. The  medium's  hand  and  arm.

R.  We do not understand what you mean.  Kindly

explain  will  you  ?

R.  H.  You  talk  i.e.  speak  articulately,  or  perhaps  I  should
say,  you  think  in  the  form  of  words  which  you
wish  to  convey  to  me. Do  you  not  ?  [assent]

R.  Certainly

R.  H.  The  structure  of  the  medium's  arm  and  hand,  in  the
fingers  of  which  there  is  a  pencil, — the  structure,
I  say,  in  some  way  unknown  to  us  on  this  side,
and  unknown  apparently  to  you  on  your  side,  takes
up  the  words  which  you  impress  upon  it  as  thought,
and  reproduces  them  in  the  form  of  written  words
on  the  paper  which  I  provide.  These  written  words,
if  you  think  your  words  too  rapidly,  are  written  too
rapidly,  and  are  therefore  more  or  less  abridged
and  blurred.  Some  strokes  or  letters  are  omitted.
Sometimes  a  whole  word  is  omitted.

R.  We  understand  what  you  mean  now,  we  think.

(May  7,  1897.)
Rector  writing.

{Sitting  coming  to  an  end.}

We  must  now  depart.  We  cannot  remain  longer.  It
is  impossible. We  will  break  the  spiritual  covering.

(May  11,  1897.)

Rector  writing  for  communicator,  Mrs.  Dow.
R.  H. ...  you  dictate  and  he  {Rector}  writes.
Mrs.  Dow. Yes. I  am  standing  beside  him  while  I  am  speak-


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  417


ing  and  the  Holy  Father  {Imperator}  is  covering
him  with  spiritual  light,  the  same  Heavenly  light
as  that  which  we  are  now  living  in.

{May  26,  1897.)
Rector  writing.

R.  We draw from thy material strength  unavoidably,

not  intentionally,  yet  such  is  the  case.  In  entering
into  thy  world  we  must  have  help

{June  9,  1897.)

Rector  writing  for  Imperator.

Imp.  We  give  thee  this  allotted  time  for  the  express  purpose
of  clothing  the  medium  with  more  light,  putting
the  broken  threads  into  repair.  Thou  wilt  under-
stand that  the  whole  spiritual  covering  consisteth
of  a  network  of  fine  threads.  Unless  they  are
each  and  every  one  of  them  in  perfect  repair,  our
thoughts  must  necessarily  be  registered  imperfectly.


F.

Extracts  from  Sittings  after  June,  1897.

{June  29,  1898.)

Sitter  and  Recorder  Mrs.  C — .  {Control,  probably  Rector,
writing.}

Mrs.  C. What  is  mediumship  and  the  "  light  "  ?

R.  The  body  is  a  reservoir  which  becomes  through  our

desires  filled  with  ether  through  which  we  pass  and

give  expression  to  thought.

{January  3,  1900.)

Sitter  and  Recorder  Mrs.  L.  {Her  friend,  whom  I  will  call
the  communicator,  is  apparently  communicating  through
Rector,  the  latter  acting  as  amanuensis.}

#  if  ♦  4!

•2d


418


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


[Some  disturbance  in  the  hand]
Com. I  am  coming  near  to  you  dear,  so  I  can  hear  you

better are  you  very  near  the  medium  dear.
Mrs.  L. I'm  sitting  close  beside  her  while  you  write  and  when

I  speak  to  you I  hold her  hand near my  lips.

Where  is  that  head  of  yours  ?
Com. It's  in  front  of  you  dear. Do  you  not  see  me  staring

at  you  ?

Mrs.  L. No,  I  can't  see  or  even  feel  you.

Com.  I  am  right  here  and  Rector  is  helping  me  to  speak
to  you  and  when  I  speak  to  him  he  whispers  it
over  the  head  of  Imperator  and  it  is  repeated  to
you.

Mrs.  L.  Yes,  dear,  where  does  the  medium  come  in  ?  How
do  you  use  her  ?

Com.  Rector  is  holding  his  hand  over  the  medium's  whole
body,  and  he  has  covered  it  with  the  light  from
our  world,  and  Imperator  has  called  the  spirit  to
our  world  and  sent  Rector  in  its  place  *  *  *  The
whole  body  of  the  medium  becomes  a  reservoir
which,  through  the  efforts  of  I.  S.  D.  {  =  Imperator}
becomes  filled  with  ether  and  is  covered  with  ether
and  remains  so  while  we  operate  with  it.  Do  you
U.D.  this  dear  ?

Mrs.  L.  Yes  I  understand  your  description  but  it  can't  be
thoroughly  understood  from  my  side,  I  suppose.


{March  20,  1901.)

Sitter and  Recorder  Hodgson. Control  Rector {acting  as
amanuensis  for  Myersp.1}
Myersp Now  I  wish  to  say  that  I  have  waited  patiently  to
speak  and  tell  you  I  have  much  matter  collected
which  will  be  of  help  to  you  in  your  search  for
truth  concerning  our  life  here.  Myers.
R.  H. Good. I  am  listening.

Mybrsp. There  are I  find great  difficulties  in  sending  com-
munications through this light known to us  as


1  Frederic  Myers  had  died  on  January  17,  1901.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper  s  Trance. — Appendix.  419


R.  H.

MYERSp.

R.  H.

MYERSp.


R.  H.


Myers


p'


R.  H.


Myersc


Piper and the one chief obstacle is pressure  of

material  against  the  etherial.
The  body  of  the  light  is  precisely  a  machine  and  it

is  not  easy  for  the  spirit  to  handle  it  sufficiently

well  to  prevent  pressure,  do  you  U.D.
I  understand  in  part,  but  not  .  .  .
What  is  it  that  you  do  not  U.D.
Where  is  the  pressure  ?

It  is  in  the  spirit  inhabiting  the  body,  and  as  it  is
removed  by  the  Messengers  it  is  lingering  near  the
communicator  and  cannot  be  removed  entirely,  i.e.
for  any  distance  without  breaking  the  cord.  Is  that
clear  to  you,  this  would  mean  what  we  used  to
call  death.

Yes.  That  is  clear.  How  does  the  near  presence  of
Mrs.  Piper's  spirit  interfere  ?

The  spirit  does  not  interfere  consciously  but  it  pro-
duces a  pressure  against  the  clamouring  mass  of
spirits  who  are  trying  to  reach  your  side,  it  stands
in  the  open  doorway  and  cannot  be  removed  beyond
it  without  severing  it  from  the  body,  therefore  all
who  wish  to  speak  must  necessarily  pass  it.  This
causes  partial  suffocation  and  is  a  decided  obstacle
so  far  as  our  entering  completely  through  to  your
world  is  concerned.  Does  this  clear  up  anything
in  your  mind.

Not  anything  special.  Let  me  repeat.  You  say
that  one  cause  of  the  confusion  or  tendency
to  confusion  is  that  the  communicator  must
crowd  past  Mrs.  Piper's  spiritual  or  etherial  body
which  is  close  to  her  fleshly  body.  Is  that
correct  ?

No,  not  at  all  correct.  It  entirely  leaves  the  fleshly
body  and  remains  dormant  whilst  we  are  present, —
but  it  passes  over  the  threshold  and  we  must  pass
it  to  enter  here.

As  I  become  accustomed  to  the  necessary  course
to  pursue  to  enable  me  to  speak  I  will  be  able
to  impart  much  information  to  you  which  will
enable you to better U.D. the conditions  which


420  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

were  so  perplexing  to  us  both  when  I  was  with
you.

*  *  *  *

Rector.  Friend  I  am  responsible  for  this  communication.
Rector. I  took  it  precisely  as  he  gave  it.

{February  19,  1902.)

Sitter  and Recorder  Hodgson. Control Rector {acting  as

amanuensis  for  MyersP  and  then  Sidgwickp.}

*  *  *  *

MYEESp.  Sidgwick  is  with  me  to-day  can  you  possibly  help
him.

[Hodgson  gives  hat  lining  out  of  parcel  from  bag.
Hand  holds  it  a  moment  or  two.]
Myersp  {?}. All  right

[Hand places hat lining on block  book  in  front.]
SiDGwicKp.  Well  well  I  think  I  never  saw  you more  clearly.

Our  thoughts  are  registered  through  vibration.
Hear  .  .  .

R.  H. Yes,  but  vibration  does  not  explain  much.

SiDGwicKp.  Well  I  hope  to  be  able  to  explain.  There  are  numer-
ous .  .  .  [Pause]

Imperator.  Hurry  while  the  light  burneth  clearly.  +

SiDGwicKp.  Numerous  fine  network  like  wires  or  threads  reaching
out  from  the  object  known  and  spoken  of  as  light,
hear  [Hodgson  tries  to  decipher.]  Anything  left  out
speak  quickly

R.  H. "  Wires  or  threads  "  something.

SiDGwicKp.  Sounds  reaching  out.

R.  H. "  Reaching  out  "

SiDGwicKp.  Yes  extending  out.  These  appear  to  be  illuminated
.  .  .  and  as  we  are  directed  to  them  and  approach
them  we  find  by  speaking  directly  over  them  the
sound  is  being  registered  on  your  side

R.  H.  Yes.

SiDGwicKp.  and  not  infrequently  do  the  sounds appear  some-
what jumbled.
R.  H. "  Somewhat  "  ?
SiDGwicKp.  Confused.  R.  H.  Yes.

Sidgwick  .  We  find  that  as  time  goes on  we  will be  better


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  421


able  to  U.D. the  exact  conditions  sufficiently  well
to give you a more clear precise and  scientific
explanation  of  it.
R.  H.  Yes.

SiDGwicKp.  The  desire  is  so  great  on  our  part  to  reach  you
U.D.ly  that  at  times  it  [is]  seems  next  to  impossible
for  us  to  prolong  it  and  we  feel  like  smashing  the
threads  almost.  Yet  we  philosophise  and  think
better  of  it  and  wait  on  patiently  studying  closely
*  *  *  into  the  conditions.

Rector. Is  it  clear  friend. R.  R.  H.  Yes,  quite  clear.

SiDowicKp.  The  sounds  as  repeated  by  the  amanuensis  known
as  Rector  are  sometimes  very  wide  of  the  mark
and  might  I  have  no  doubt  give  rise  to  much
questioning  on  the  part  of  scientific  minds  as  to
the  reality  of  our  being  present  at  all.  U.D.

R.  H.  Yes.

StDGwicKp.  Yet  as  a  matter  of  fact  we  are  present  and  studying
into  the  conditions  while  our  expressions  are  being
repeated.

R.  H.  Yes.

SiDGwicKp.  It  is  a  long  and  difficult  process,  and  I  trust  will
be  made  so  .  .  .  [wavering  of  hand]  lost  it  .  .  .
[Hand  moves  as  if  for  article.  I  put  hat  lining
in  contact  with  it.  Hand  takes  it  for  a  moment,
then  lays  it  down  in  front  of  sheet]  perfect  in  .  .  .
lost  it  wait  a  moment.

{Myers  then  takes  Sidgwick's  place  and  talks  of  some-
thing else.}

May  27,  1902.)

Sitter  and  Recorder  G.  B.  D. Control  Rector  speaking  with
the  voice  for  Imperator.

The  Vibrations  are  such  that,  where  the  light  in  the
material  world  is  clear  and  burneth  as  clearly  as
this  light  doth,  the  thoughts  of  the  beloved  ones  in
the  unseen  can  be  so  clearly  registered  on  the
mechanism  as  to  produce  an  absolutely  clear  com-
munication and  perfect  understanding  between  the
two  minds,  the  mind  of  the  mortal  and  the  thought


422


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


of  the  spirit  speaking.  In  other  words,  the  vibra-
tions are  constantly  in  motion  although  perhaps
the  mortal  at  a  distance  from  the  light  may  not
perceive  that  the  thoughts  of  his  friends  in  the
spiritual  world  are  being  registered  upon  his  own
*  *  *  #

These  communications  all  come  in  consequence  of
the  etherial  vibrations  ;  the  thought  becomes  regis-
tered upon  my  mind  and  I  give  it  out  to  thee  just
as  it  comes.  I  borrow  from  the  earthly  side  the
language  which  I  use,  to  a  certain  extent.  If  I
were  to  speak  to  thee  as  we  speak  to  each  other
thou  wouldst  not  hear  it.


(Oct.  28,  1902.)

Sitter  and  Recorder  G.  B.  D.  Rector  controlling  using  the
voice.

*  *  *  *

R.  Understand, friend, that the light is a  reservoir

which  is  filled  with  etherial  light  from  our  world
and  as  long  as  I  remain  in  the  light  I  am  drawing
constantly  the  etherial  strength  from  our  world  ;
thereby  I  am  helped  by  the  communications.

(June  3,  1903.)

Sitter  and  Recorder  Hodgson.  {Communicator  Mrs.  H.,  a
friend  of  Hodgson's,  who  had  recently  died.  She  had  sat
with  Mrs.  Pij>er  and  was  interested  in  the  phenomena.
Rector  was  acting  as  amanuensis  for  her.}

^S*  ***  *H

Communicatoe.  I  want  to  tell  you  that  coming  over  is  not  so
hard. It  is  delightful  to  leave  the  body  behind.

R.  H.  I  wish  you  would  give  me  as  clear  an  account  as
possible  of  your  actual  transition,  your  last  moments
in  the  body,  and  the  whole  detail.

Com.  I'll  try.  At  the  very  last  I  did  not  realize
anything  at  all.  I  was  unconscious  for  a  short
time.  When  I  recovered  consciousness  I  was  taking
leave of my body. I saw my Mother and  my


LXXI.]


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.- — Appendix.  423


little  boy  who  had  grown  to  manhood,  he  spoke
to  me  first  and  lifted  my  hand  ...  he  said  come
with  me  and  I  will  show  you  where  I  live.  I  felt
his  touch  perfectly  his  voice  was  like  some  melody
I  saw  all  round  me  illumination  I  felt  cool  and
indescribably  free.  I  felt  light  in  weight.  I  seemed
to  move  without  difficulty.  I  came  up  into  the
cool  refreshing  etherial  atmosphere  until  my  head
touched  something  quite  movable  like  a  [not  com-
pleted. Then  a  pause.]  ...  to  your  U.D.  a  thin
curtain,  it  parted.  We  entered.  And  I  was  fully
awakened,  to  the  reality  of  this  life.  While  passing
up  and  over  my  body  it  was  like  being  in  a  swing
.  .  .  and  being  raised  into  the  air  above.
R.  H. Yes  ?

Com. it  was  exactly  in  sensation  like  this.

[Hand  points  to  previous  sentence.]
R.  H.  Yes.

Com.  I  had  no  thought  of  my  body  at  the  time  I  was
being  led  through  the  etherial  height,  it  only
dawned  upon  me  that  my  body  was  left  behind
as  I  entered  behind  the  etherial  veil.  Is  this
understandable .

R.  H.  Yes.  Now  tell  me  just  when  and  how  you  came
here  so  soon  after  you  left  the  body.

Com.  I  while  passing  into  the  etherial  height  suddenly
thought  of  my  body  and  when  I  looked  back  to
see  it  I  thought  why  that  is  the  world  below  where
my  body  is  I  wonder  if  I  can  find  some  friend
whom  I  knew  while  on  my  way.  I  looked  for  you
especially  as  the  thought  passed  over  me  that  I
would  acquaint  you  with  my  leaving.  I  saw  the
spirit  of  a  mortal  which  had  been  taken  out  of  its
body  on  an  etherial  cord.  I  said  I'll  follow  that
and  see  if  I  can  find  him.  I  followed  it  and  said
tell  him  I  am  here  I  am  leaving  the  mortal  world
behind.

R.  H. Yes  ?

Com.  I  saw  your  etherial  body  shut  up  in  darkness  I
tried  to  speak  with  you  but  I  could  not  make  you


424


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


respond. I  did  catch  the  spirit  of  the  mortal  while
it  was  returning  and  I  made  it  see  me.
R.  H. Yes  ?

Com.  I  saw  the  spirit  enter  the  dark  receptacle  and  I
turned  and  went  on  with  Mother  and  Pete  until  I
entered  this  world,  the  passing  was  only  for  an
hour  or  so.  I  am  now  speaking  to  you  through
the  opening  in  the  open  veil.

R.  H. Yes  ?

Com. others  are  near, whilst  I  am  speaking
R.  H. Yes  ?

Com. What  more  can  I  tell  you  of  my  departure.

R.  H. Did  you come  here before  your  head touched  the

etherial  curtain  and  it  parted  for  you  to  enter  ?
Com. Yes  on  my  way  through  the  veil  I  caught  the  spirit

leaving  from  the  other  side  of  the  veil.
R.  H. Did  you  recognize  it  ?
Com. the  spirit  .  .  .
R.  H.  Yes.

Com.  Yes  at  the  moment.  I  saw  the  most  interesting
performance  I  ever  witnessed  I  saw  two  clergymen  1
releasing  it.

R.  H. Yes  ?

Com.  they  stood  one  on  each  side,  and  held  it  until  they
were  ready  to  release  it  then  one  of  them  repeated
a  prayer  to  it  and  said  I  release  thee  go  take  up
thy  life  in  the  body.

R.  H. Yes  %

Com.  I  caught  sight  of  it  and  followed  it  until  it  reached
the  darkest  enclosure  I  ever  saw  excepting  when  I
looked  back  and  saw  my  body  I  then  for  the  first
time  recognized  who  the  spirit  was  and  I  vaguely
saw  you.

R.  H.  Yes.

Com.  The  spirit  of  the  Medium  passes  out  on  a  cord  which
is  attached  to  the  heart  or  solar  plexus  I  should
say.

R.  H. Yes  ?

1  Presumably  Imperator  and  Rector  or  Prudens.  On  December  4,  1904,
a  communicator  speaks  of  "  Rector  and  the  other  priest."


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  425


Com. it  enters  precisely  the  centre  of  the  body.
R.  H. Yes  ?

Com. the  cord  is  detachable, and  is  only  placed  there  by

these  clergymen.
R.  H. That's  very  interesting. Go  on.

Com. It  moves  slowly  outward, held  by  them, until  the

spirit  follows  out  on  it  .  .  .
R.  H. Yes  ?

Com. it  follows  it  until  it  reaches  the Veil  I  speak  of.

then  the  veil  parts,  and  we  are  able  to  com-
municate through  it  along  this  cord  to  which  I
refer.

R.  H, Yes  ?

Com.  After  a  period  of  time  the  cord  is  extended  a  little
and  the  spirit  is  sent  back  and  we  are  not  allowed
to  follow  it  after  it  once  enters  the  body,  the  veil
closes  and  the  spirit  is  back  again  to  earth.

R.  H. Yes  ?

Com. What  more  can  I  tell  you.

R.  H.  What  happens  when  she  feels  as  if  a  cap  was  put
over  her,  or  her  head  cracks  or  snaps  ?  1

Com.  the  cord  is  being  detached,  or  attached  in  the
beginning  it  is  attached  when  the  sensation  of  the
cap  is  being  donned  or  put  on  .  .  .

R.  H.  No,  the  .  .  .  [Hand  assents  twice  rapidly  as  if  to
say  that  the  obscurity  would  be  cleared.]

Com.  Wait  a  moment,  then  when  the  spirit  returns  and
the  cord  is  being  detached  the  Snap  is  heard.

R.  H.  Yes,  that  last  part  is  all  related,  but  she  also  some-
times at  the  end  speaks  as  though  a  cap  or
bonnet  had  been  put  over  her,  suggesting  a  sort  of
extinguisher.

Com.  Oh  I  U.D.  it  is  when  the  mind  is  returning  and
becomes  possessed  of  its  full  material  faculties,  it
is  only  the  sensation  of  recovering  consciousness.
I  know.

R.  H.  Well,  it  is  the  other  aspect  probably.  That  is,  it  is
not  so  much  the  sensation  of  recovering  her  material


1  For  these  sensations  in  the  waking-stage  see  Chapter  VI.  below.


426


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PAKT


consciousness  as  the  feeling  of  losing  her  spiritual
consciousness.

Com.  Well  this  may  be  of  course  I  do  not  actually  experi-
ence with  her  but  I  do  know  what  takes  place.

R.  H.  Yes.  First,  after  she  returns,  she  is  for  a  short  time
conscious  of  you  and  the  other  friends  in  spirit,
she  sees  and  hears  you  to  some  extent  and  repeats
things  said  to  her.

Com.  That  is  when  the  clergymen  are  nearest  the  body
waiting  to  detach  the  cord  and  the  veil  is  open.

R.  H.  Yes.  Then,  she  .  .  .  the  vision  fades,  the  light  she
sees  disappears,  or  she  says  the  window  shuts,  and
sometimes  she  says  they  put  a  bonnet  over  me.

Com.  this  is  at  the  time  when  the  clergymen  are  passing
through  the  veil  and  when  they  close  it.  She  feels
the  light  is  being  extinguished  *  *  *  this  is  the
last  process  of  removing  the  light  or  power  for  the
time  being.

R.  H. Yes  I  understand.

Com. anything  more.

R.  H. There  is  lots  more,  but  .  .  .

Com. what  did  you  say.

R.  H.  I  say  there  is  lots  more,  but  I  like  to  get  as  much
description  as  possible  of  how  the  whole  thing
appears  to  you,  what  you  do  when  you  start  to
come  here,  why  you  start,  how  you  get  here,
whom  you  speak  to,  how  you  speak,  what  the
process  of  communication  looks  like  to  you,  and  so
on.  For  example,  I  describe  in  detail  how  it  seems
from  my  side,  the  beginning,  how  I  leave  my  rooms,
go  to  the  station,  take  train,  then  carriage,  arrange-
ment of  rooms,  books  to  write  in,  pencil,  Mrs.
Piper's  going  into  trance,  and  so  on  in  detail,  and
some  time  I  should  be  pleased  to  have  any  further
description  from  you  of  what  it  looks  like  to  you,
because  you  know  something  of  how  it  appears
from  this  side,  and  you  are  only  recently  on  that
side,  and  your  perception  would  probably  be  nearly
what  most  of  us  would  see  it  as. Understand  ?

Com. I  think  I  do  quite.


LXXI.]


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  427


R.  H. All  that  you  have  told  me  is  very  interesting.

Com.  Well  I  have  told  you  exactly  what  happened  to  rue
my  experience  and  what  takes  place  with  the  light.

R.  H.  Yes.  The  clergymen  ...  do  they  hold  the  spirit
in  one  place  all  the  time  that  I  am  getting  com-
munications ?

Com.  Yes  in  one  place  they  hardly  move  at  all.  and  one
enters  at  the  end  on  which  the  cord  is  attached
to  the  light  :  .  .

R.  H.  Yes.

Com. this  is  the  third.

R.  H.  Yes.

Com.  clergyman.

R.  H. I  understand.

Com.  he  remains  stationary  also,  he  takes  the  place  of  the
spirit  which  has  been  removed,  and  a  supply  of
ether  is  furnished  him  over  the  cord  during  his  stay
at  the  material  end.

R.  H. Yes. How  long  is  the  cord  %

Com. I  do  not  know  exactly  but  I  should  think  it  was

about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  long.
R.  H. Well,  are  you  a  quarter  of  a  mile  away  from  me

now  ?

Com. Yes  about  this  distance. I  should  say.
R.  H. And  where  is  Rector  ? How  near  ?
Com. he  is  as  near  you  as  the  body  of  the  absent  spirit
appears.

R.  H. Yes. [Hand  turns  suddenly  to  Sp.]

Com. I  hear  over  the  cord  at  which  he  is  at  its  end.

R.  H. And  my  voice  travels  to  you  on  the  cord  1

Com. Yes  if  it  were  not  for  this  I  could  not  U.D.  you.

R.  H. And  how  does  your  thought  reach  Rector  ?

Com. it  reaches  him  over  the  cord  also, it  vibrates,  to

him. and  he  speaks  it  to  you  .  .  .
R.  H. Can  you  see  what  ...  or  rather  how  he  speaks,  to

me  ?

Com. Yes. quite  clearly. [Hand  turns  to  R.  H.]
R.  H. Yes. I  mean  for  you  to  describe  it.
Com. Oh  I  see  he  is  in  full  control  at  your  end  or  his  end
of  the  cord  and  he  holds the  hand of  the  body


428


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


using  it  as  his  .  .  .  head  and  makes  it  vibrate
thereby  registering  my  thoughts  by  writing.  [Hodg-
son reads  the  sentence  over  slowly  and  distinctly  a
second  time.]

Com. I  am  a  little  weary  .  .  .

R.  H. Yes,  better  stop,  the  light  is  dimming.

Com. now  and  I  will  take  this  up  some  other  time.

R.  H. Yes. Time's  up.

Com. The  clergymen  are  beginning  to  get  the  spirit  ready
to  return. Good  bye  for  the  present.  .  .

(October  26,  1903.)
Sitter  and  Recorder  R.  H. Rector  writing. {This  is  the  first
sitting  after  the  vacation,  and  Mrs.  Piper,  who has  had
family  trouble,  is  apparently  not  in  good  form  for  a  sitting.
After  a  few  remarks  have  been  exchanged  : — }
R.  The  power  is  weak  and  we  are  far  off. We  regret  to

find  it  thus  we  may  be  able  to  come  nearer  presently
we  know  not  friend  until  we  try.
{A  good  deal  later  in  the  sitting  Rector  says}
R.  We  are  supplying  light  now  every  moment.  [Hodgson

interpreted  this  as  meaning  that  special  effort  was
being  made  from  moment  to  moment  to  make  up
for  the  deficiency  of  '  light  '  of  Mrs.  Piper.]

(February  24,  1904.)

Sitter  and  Recorder  Hodgson.  Rector  writing,  says  immedi-
ately after  greetings  :  "  We  had  a  little  difficulty  in
attaching  the  cord  this  day."  {This  perhaps  refers  to  the
fact  that  Mrs.  Piper  was  rather  slower  than  usual,  after
the  trance  began  to  come  on,  in  becoming  completely
entranced. }

(May  24,  1904.)

Sitter  and  Recorder  Miss  A.  M.  R.  This  is  a  voice  sitting.
{Miss  A.  M.  R.,  it  will  be  remembered,  had  been  a
frecpaent  sitter  in  the  Phinuit  days  (see  Hodgson's  first
Report,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  111).  Rector  is  controlling  and
speaking  for  the  communicator,  a  friend  of  Miss  A.  M.  R's.}
A.  M.  R. How  long  does  it  take  for  you  to  come  to  me  ?


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  429


Com.  I  would  seem  some  distance  from  you  if  you  could
see  me  as  I  am.  When  you  have  a  desire  to  speak
with  me, — there  are  spirits  here  who  know  every
mortal  on  the  face  of  the  earth  ;  that  is,  the  same
one  does  not  know,  but  the  different  ones  know
every  mortal,  and  they  say,  here  is  a  friend,  I
think  she  is  a  friend  of  yours  .  .  .  there  the  light  is
beginning  to  burn,  it  is  open,  we  have  attached  the
etherial  cord  and  we  will  remove  the  spirit  from  the
light,  take  it  to  our  world  or  out  on  the  cord,
attach  the  cord  to  the  shell,  as  it  were,  fill  it  with
our  etherial  light,  and  you  can  enter  into  it  and
see  if  it  is  your  friend  and  if  so  you  follow  Rector,
follow  those  that  are  used  to  the  cord,  and  go  to
the  end  of  it  and  speak  over  it  to  Rector,  who  is
actually  within  the  shell  himself,  and  he  will  trans-
mit your  message  to  you,  to  your  friend.  It  takes
in  all  I  suppose  of  your  time  five  or  ten  minutes
perhaps  for  me  to  reach  you.

{May  25,  1904.)
Sitter  and  Recorder  Hodgson. Rector  writing.

^  %  ifc  5fc

Rector.  I  have  at  times  great  difficulty  in  holding  my  position
in  the  light  and  taking  messages  at  the  same  time,
therefore  if  mortals  can  appreciate  and  U.D.  the
difficulties  I  shall  be  grateful  indeed.

R.  H.  We  can  understand  only  in  part.  I  supposed  that
when  a  communicator  is  giving  names  say  to  George
or  yourself,  and  you  or  George  may  be  thinking
these  over  again  through  the  light  and  the  writing
mechanism  is  reproducing  what  the  sounds  are
like,  there  is  often  much  mistake  somewhere  in
one  or  other  of  the  links,  even  where  the
communicator  is  quite  clear  and  is  giving  the  name
correctly,  and  I  thought  that  it  might  be  a  better
plan  instead  of  doing  this, — to  go  out,  yourself
or  George  as  the  case  might  be,  and  take  the
communicator  also  away  and  find  the  name  from
him  and  return  and  give  it  yourself  from  memory.


430


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


R.  I U.D.  Apart from my registering, as I  often  do

unconsciously  what  is  said  on  our  side.  I  am  sent
here  for  the  purpose  of  holding  the  end  of  the  cord
which  is  attached  to  the  light  while  we  are  operating
and  it  would  never  do  for  me  to  release  it  until
the  light  began  to  grow  dim.  This  with  the  many
many  interrupted  messages  often  keeps  me  in  a
state  of  almost  despair  at  the  time  when  I  am
supposed  to  give  clear  messages  from  really  clear
talking  spirits.

R.  H. Yes  ?

R.  Realise  what  such  a  position  means  to  me  and  thou

wilt  U.D.  me  better.

R.  H.  Yes  Rector  I  was  suggesting  a  plan  that  might
perhaps  cost  more  light  and  involve  pauses,  and
perhaps  other  costs  or  wastes  that  I  do  not  know
about,  but  the  results  of  which  would  be  better
on  this  side,  even  if  much  less  were  obtained  and
the  communicator  could  talk  only  half  as  much.

R.  [makes  gesture of  assent] Yes  we  often  think  our-

selves if  they  could  say  less  in  general  and  give
clear  and  good  test  messages  the  proofs  would  be
far  more  clear  and  .  .  .  They  would  be  proofs  really
whereas  general  communications  means  little  to  those
who  do  not  U.D.  the  conditions.

R.  H.  Yes.

R.  We  have  talked  all  this  over  between  ourselves  and

tried  many  times  to  get  the  communicators  to  talk
less  about  trivial  matters,  and  get  down  to  facts
so  to  speak.  We  hope  to  accomplish  something  in
this  line  later  on  in  time.

R.  H. Yes. For  .  .  .

R.  George  says  if  only  one  name  or  incident  is  given

even  understandingly  [?]  well  it  is  infinitely  better
for  those  on  thy  side  than  all  the  general  messages
we  can  give.  U.D.

R.  H.  Yes  for  example,  what  I  mean.  Suppose  Mary  asks
for  the  names  of  John's  brothers.  You  say  at  once
"  I  will  go."  You  go  out,  and  suppose  George
takes your  place, and talks to the  ...  to  Mary


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  431


about  general  matters.  He  says  John  has  gone
away  with  Rector  and  Rector  will  ask  him  about
the  names  of  your  brothers  and  return.  In  the
meantime  can  I  ask  .  .  .  answer  any  general  enquiry
about  this  life  and  so  on.  Then  you  finish  with
John ;  you  find  out  that  his  brothers  names  are
so-and-so  and  so-and-so,  and  you  return  and  you
once  more  take  the  place  of  George,  and  say  I
have  talked  with  John  and  he  tells  me  that  his
brother's  names  are  Arthur  and  whatever  it  is.
Then  .  .  .

R.  This  is  what  George  always  tries  to  do.  and  since  we

are  learning  all  the  time  we  hope  to  do  better
from  time  to  time  instead  of  worse  indeed  we  do.


{December  14,  1904.)

Sitter  and  Recorder  Hodgson. Mrs.  H.  communicating  through
Rector  as  on  June  3rd,  1903,  above.

♦  ♦  ♦  #

R.  H.  You  said  you  could  be  talking  with  me  here,  and
at  the  same  time  looking  over  and  instructing  some
one  in  your  world.

Com.  Yes.  did  I  explain  about  the  two  clergymen  who
helped  me  ?

R.  H.  You  said  a  very  little  about  that,  but  it  was  very
interesting.  You  said  one  of  them  was  managing
the  body  of  the  light.

Com. Yes  &  he  is  at  the  moment.

R.  H. Is  he  inside  the  body  ?

Com. Yes  .  .  .

R.  H. Just  like  the  incarnate  spirit  ?

Com.  Yes  .  .  .  only  he  exists  in  the  ether  which  he  pro-
duces, let  me  explain  in  my  own  way.
there  is  a  cord  attached  to  the  body  of  the  light
about  the  centre  of  the  so  called  stomach,  the
cord  is  attached  to  the  body  by  Rector.  +{Imper-
ator}  stands  on  one  side  at  this  end  of  the  cord
&  sends  waves  of  ether  over  the  cord  into  the  body
of  the  light  which  after  the  cord  is  attached  to  the
body becomes for a moment an empty,  shell.


432


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


immediately  the  waves  of  ether  are  sent  over  the
cord  into  the  shell  until  it  is  completely  filled  with
ether  directly  this  is  filled  Rector  enters  over  the
cord  enters  into  the  receptacle  or  shell.
&  begins  operations.  While  he  is  operating  with  the
organism  we  stand  at  this  end  of  the  cord  trans-
mitting messages  over  the  cord  to  him.  while  he
registers  our  messages  to  you U.  D.

R.  H. Yes  ? When  does  Mrs.  Piper  leave  her  body  ?

Com. the  moment  the  cord  is  attached  to  it.

R.  H. Where  does  the  cord  come  from  ?

Com. our  side.

R.  H. Is  it  a  loose  cord  so  to  speak  ?

Com.  No  it  is  a  long  etherial  cord  similar  or  analogous  to  a
stream  of  light,  sun  fight  .  .  .  streaming  into  a
small  round  hole  in  a  shade  which  has  been  drawn
down  over  a  window  U.  D.

R.  H.  Yes,  exactly.  What  I  want  to  know  is  who  makes
this  cord  ? Is  it  a  fresh  cord  every  time  ?

Com.  certainly.  Just  as  the  sun  rises  each  day  &  produces
a  new  fresh  light  as  it  were.

R.  H.  Yes.  Rector  comes  into  our  world  and  so  to  say
weaves  .  .  .

Com. does  what  ?

R.  H.  weaves.

Com. Weaves  .  .  .  yes.

R.  H.  a  cord  .  .  .  does  he  begin  at  your  end  or  at  the
body  ?

Com.  our  end.  U.D.  he  steps  up  to  the  etherial  veil  which
separates  our  world  from  yours,  he  touches  it  with
+  {Imperator's}  help,  it  separates.  &  the  ether
flows  in  a  cord  like  form  until  it  reaches  the  body
of  the  light,  the  body  opens  in  the  center  &  draws
in  the  ether,  until  it  becomes  filled.  Then  Rector
enters  op  .  .  .

R.  H. No  !  you  forget  about  the  medium.

Com. Oh  yes. there, is  a  cord  similar  to  .

R.  H.  Yes.

*  *  *  *

Com. Rector  stands  at  one  end  .  .  .  listen.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper  s  Trance. — Appendix.  433


and  the  moment  the  cord  touches  the  body  of  the
light,  her  spirit  passes  out  over  the  cord,  and
is  cared  for  by  +  {Imperator}  Prudens.  etc.  after
she  is  removed  from  her  body.  Rector  enters  &
begins  operations  is  it  clear.
R.  H. Yes. Then,  at  the  end.

Com.  at  the  end  or  close  +  {Imperator}  bids  her  return
Rector  passes,  over  the  cord  until  he  enters  our
side  after  which  she  passes  over  the  same  cord 1
into  the  body  again.

R.  H. Yes  ?

Com.  the  passage  closes,  or.  I  will  use  a  very  ordinary
term  for  your  U.  D.  our.  veil  is  drawn  together,
the  hole,  or  opening  in  the  body  of  the  light
closes  the  instant  the  cord  is  detached.

R.  H.  You  haven't  said  yet  when  or  where  the  cord  is
detached. After  .  .  .

Com. I  do  not  U.  D.  you.

R.  H.  Listen.  After  Rector  returns,  Mrs.  Piper  goes  back
along  the  cord  to  her  body.  Then  what  takes
place  precisely  next  ?

Com.  the  remaining  ether  is  removed  with  the  detachment
of  the  cord  by  +  {Imperator}  Rector.

R.  H. Not  clear.  Listen.

Com.  I  do  not  U.  D.  you  clearly.  Put  your  question  as
clearly  as  the  rest.  Do  I  U.D.  you  to  ask  how
the  cord  is  removed  ?

R.  H.  Yes.

Com. the  cord  is  detached  by  +  {Imperator}  R.  &  Doctor,
they  simply  draw  the  cord  with  their  hands.
[Hand  makes  motion  of  drawing  away  a  cord.]
R.  H. from  their  side  ?

Com. from  our  side, when  the  light  enters  the  body,  her

spirit, enters  the  .  .  .
R.  H. Yes  I  understand.

1  But  cf.  an  assertion  in  the  waking-stage  of  January  22,  1900,  when
Mrs.  Piper  says  "  I  will  tell  you  how  it  is — there  is  a  space  that  opens  into
that  other  world,  and  then  my  spirit  goes  out  on  a  cord  into  that  world,  and
then  Rector  comes  in  on  another  cord.  Only  they  can't  keep  the  ether.
It  goes  away."

2e


434


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


the  cord  is  instantly  detached  by  +  {Imperator}  R.

etc.
I  understand,
is  this  clearer.
Yes  that's  what  I  wanted.

Oh  yes  I  am  glad  to  U.D.  you. I  wish  to  explain
precisely  what  happens, without  saying  it  is  like
this  that  or  the  other.
Yes  ?

I  wish  you  to  U.D.  exactly  what  does  take  place.
Yes  that's  right.
&  I  have  told  you.
It's  very  interesting.

Well  it  is  a  fact, the  body  of  the  light  is  a  magnet,
as  it  were.1

Ah  ! now  you're  saying  what  it's  like  and  not  what
it  is  !

Yes. I  U.D. this but I  have  previously  explained

what  it  is. &  I  am  now  making  comparisons.
Yes  ?

I  simply  was  obliged  to. describe  the  ray  of  sun-
light, for  your  U.D  g.

(December  20,  1904.)

Sitter  Miss  A.  M.  R. Voice  sitting  recorded  stenographically
by  sitter.

Rector. I  shall  be  here  to  close  the  light  at  the  end  *  *  *

A.  M.R.  Rector,  wait  a  moment.  Through  whom  is  my  friend
going  to  talk  now  ?

R.  He  will  try  and  speak  direct  to  thee,  if  this  be  possible  ;

if  not  I  shall  remain,  as  it  were,  a  non-entity,  giving
his  messages.

A. M.R. You  have  allowed  him  to  do  that  ?

R.  Yes,  I  have,  through  the  advice  and  command  of  our

leader,  and  before  his  departure  this  day  he  saith  to
me,  "  Ere  I  return  through  [to]  the  light,  goest  thou
forth,  give  light  and  help  ;  I  leave  thee  in  the  hands

1  That  the  medium  is  to  a  spirit  as  a  magnet  to  a  needle  is  a  very  frequent
comparison.


Com.

R.  H.

Com.
R.  H.
Com.

R.  H.
Com.
R.  H.
Com.
R.  H.
Com.

R.  H.

Com.

R.  H.
Com.


LXXI.]


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  435


of  Prudens  ;  bring  the  messages  from  the  friends  to
the  mortal  in  the  body  whom  we  hath  summoned
before  the  light  this  day.  If  according  to  thy  wisdom
the  spirit  be  fully  prepared  to  take  up  the  light,
standest  thou  beside  him  and  aid  him  in  transmitting
his  messages.  If  he  be  not  clear  or  be  not  of  suffi-
cient power  to  hold  the  light  independently,  remainest
thou  near  repeating  the  messages  for  him."

A.M.R.  That  is  splendid.  Now,  Rector,  my  friend  is  really
and  truly  here  almost  exactly  the  same  as  if  he  were
in  his  own  body,  is  he  not  ?

R.  Almost  the  same,  and  if  thy  spiritual  eyes  could  open

thou  wouldst  see  him  standing  here  beside  the  etherial
cord,  waiting  his  turn  to  enter  into  the  light  upon
the  cord.

{After  the  sitter's  friend  has  talked  for  nearly  H  hours

— and  taken  leave  the  record  continues.}
[Rector  takes  control  11.50  a.m.]

R.  Hail!  A.M.R. Hail,  Rector

R.  Thy  friend  hath  passed  along  the  line  while  I  enter

here  again.  *  *  *  I  have  been  waiting,  attending  thy
friend  during  his  long  speech  with  thee.  *  *  *  It  is
my  privilege  to  return  and  close  the  light.  I  enter
and  close  it,  and  the  light  is  sinking,  and  I  shall  soon
have  to  depart.  {He  however  continues  to  talk  till
12.7  p.m.}

(February  22,  1905.)
Sitter  and  Recorder  Hodgson. Rector  writing.

*  *  *  *

R.  H.  Rector  the  light,  so  far  as  I  can  tell,  is  very  poor
this  time,  and  it  was  also  very  poor  on  the  last
occasion  after  two  days  with  the  voice.  The  writing
is  not  clear,  and  most  of  what  comes  is  of  little  or
no  importance,  just  talk.  Can  you  kindly  look  into
this  matter  later  ?

R.  We  shall  be  very  glad  to  do  so. We  wish  to  U.D.

how  the  light  appears  to  thee  always.  For  some
time  we  have  wondered  if  the  voice  did  not  use  up
much  of  the  light.


436


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


R.  H.  I  think  probably  the  time  is  greatly  exceeded  with
Mr.  D.  The  light  was  confused  after  his  meeting.
She  feels  always  much  better  after  Mrs.  X.  than
after  any.

R.  We  shall  try  and  U.D. Mrs.  X.  is  a  light  and  gives

us  light  always.  Therefore  she  cannot  but  help
the  light  under  such  conditions  as  she  brings.  *  *  *
Neither  are  we  capable  of  using  up  the  light  when
she  is  present.

(April  17,  1905.)
Sitter  and  Recorder  G.  B.  D.  Voice  sitting.  Control  and
Communicator  Rector.  G.  B.  D.  reports  :  "  I  asked  him
{Rector}  if  they  were  now  satisfied  with  the  working  of
the  shorter  sitting  {agreed  on  on  March  1}  and  its  effect
upon  the  condition  of  the  light.  *  *  *  Rector  replied  that
they  had  encountered  one  difficulty  in  the  matter  in  the
removal  of  the  etherial  light  from  the  body  of  the
medium  after  a  short  sitting  which  had  not  used  it  up.1
This  seemed  to  me  very  interesting  in  connection  with
what  Dr.  Hodgson  wrote  me  as  to  the  lengthened  period
during  which  Mrs.  Piper's  subliminal  utterances  lasted  as
she  was  coming  out  of  trance  since  the  sittings  have  been
shortened."

1  Compare  waking-stage  of  March  1,  1905,  Appendix  to  Chapter  V.,  p.
594,  where  it  is  said  that  "  It  would  not  be  well  to  prevent  the  light  burning
out  [?]  it  would  bring  sorrow  to  all  who  look  to  us  for  light."


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  437


APPENDIX  TO  CHAPTER  III.
Specimens  of  Individual  Controls.
A.

Sir  Walter  Scott  Control.

Two  specimen  sittings,  June  27  and  28,  1895.
Sitter  and  Recorder,  Professor  W.  Romaine  Newbold.

{June  27,  1895.)

[Writing  changes  to  characteristic  Scott  hand.]
W.  S.  Good  morrow  my  friend  I  am  now  prepared  to
finish  my  discourse  or  description  of  spiritual  beings,
existences  etc.  Do  you  remember  where  I  left  off  ?
It  was,  that  is  to  say  we  were,  in  the  planet  Mars.
The  lines  by  the  way  sir,- — come  with  me  again,  are
you  ready —  Well  the  lines  or  spots,  so  to  speak,
are  not  satellites.  They  are  reflections  from  the
sun.

W.  R.  N.  Reflections  of  what  ?  [hand  ignores  the  question  and
pursues  the  calm  and  even  tenor  of  its  way]

W.  S.  Well  now  we  wish  to  see  something  of  the  habitations
of  the  gentlemen  who  inhabit  this  planet.  Their
houses  are  similar  to  those  on  earth  yet  more  modern
and  much  less  complicated  in  structure.  Do  you
wish  to  speak  to  me  sir  as  we  pass  ?

W.  R.  N.  Yes, of  what  are  they  made  and  how  ?

W.  S.  They  are  made  from  various  kinds  of  material  such  as
brick,  stone,  etc.


438


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


W.  R.  N.  These  are  the  houses  on  the  planet  Mars  of  which  you
are  speaking  ?

W.  S. I  am,  yet  we  do  not  compare  them  exactly  with  those


on  earth  They  are  made  according  to  natural  causes
and  such  atmospheric  conditions  as  it  is  necessary
from  such  materials.


W.  R.  N.  Tell  me  more  about  the  atmospheric  conditions.

W.  S.  I  think  that  I  have  done  so  upon  other  occasions  sir,
and  were  you  the  gentleman  to  whom  I  gave  them  ?

W.  R.  N.  Not  to  me,  Sir  Walter,  but  to  a  friend  of  mine.  I  have
read  what  you  said,  and  I  think  you  did  not  say  any-
thing of  the  atmosphere.

W.  S. Well,  pardon  me  sir,  I  will  then. The  planet,  as  we


see  it  materially  is  rather  cold.  For  instance,  there
are  icebergs  and  many  of  them  on  this  planet  i.e.  on
some  parts  of  it  ;  in  others  it  is  warmer  and  enough
so  to  produce  vegetation.  There  are  some  very  beauti-
ful trees,  flowers,  etc.


W.  R.  N.  You  mean  it  is  fair  in  the  torrid  zone  of  Mars  ?


W.  R.  N.  Are  there  inhabitants  in  other  planets  ?

W.  S. Such  as  Jupiter  ? Well  let  me  ask  what  you  are  dream-


ing about  sir  [I  misunderstand  and  think  writer  is
reproving  me  for  asking  such  a  question  of  Jupiter,
since  I  knew  well  that  it  was  not  in  a  condition  to
support  life,  so  I  say]


W.  R.  N.  I  said  nothing  of  Jupiter,  Sir  Walter  ;  I  merely  asked
whether  there  is  life  in  any  other  planets.

W.  S.  There  was  a  little  misunderstanding  I  think,  as  we  are
now  riding  through  the  air.

W.  R.  N.  I  beg  your  pardon  ; go  on.

W.  S. we  now  leave  the  planet  Mars  and  we  wish  to  visit  others.


First  we  think  of  Jupiter. Well  as  we  ride  we  begin

to  discern — [for  pencil] — Thanks  something  which

to  us  looks  like  a  dark  jagged  ball  or  rock.  Well  as
we  draw  nearer  we  seem  to  discover  smoke  as  it  seems,
then  still  more  of  the  darkness.  Now  we  are  nearing
the  planet. As  we  draw  nearer  we  begin  to  see  sparks


W.  R.  N.
W.  S.


Is  the  climate  fair  or  cloudy  ?
Very  fair,  it  is  in  the  torrid  zone.


W.  S.


Yes,  this  only.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  439


which  remind  us  of  fire. Now  we  pass  through  a
tremendously  stifling  atmosphere
W.  R.  N.  Not  stifling  to  you  ?

W.  S.  Oh  no  sir,  I  am  the  spirit  or  life,  you  are  the  material
man  whom  I  am  taking  with  me  as  my  guest.  You
seem  choked,  and  yet  you  ask  me  to  go  on.  Well,
now  we  wish  to  pass  through  this  fog  of  seemingly
smoke,  fire,  electricity,  as  Mr.  Pelham  terms  it.  I
borrowed  the  phrase  sir,  and  now  we  begin  to  reach
the  planet  Jupiter.  We  pass  around  the  surface  peep-
ing into  it  .  .  .  onto  it  .  .  .  and  we  see  nothing  of
any  importance  except  the  continual  sparks,  so  called,
which  conglomerate  together  and  as  yet  are  in  a  very
unsettled  state

W.  R.  N.  Take  me  further.

W.  S.  This  all  seems  to  us  strange  and  interesting.  We  see
all  in  one  mass  a  conglomeration  of  atmospheres  which
when  settled  in  one  body  looks  like  a  planet.

W.  R.  N,  Then  Jupiter  is  not  solid  ?

W.  S. Not  at  all  solid.

W.  R.  N.  Take  me  elsewhere,  especially  where  there  is  life.

W.  S. What  is  the  general  idea  of  Jupiter  on  your  planet  sir  1

W.  R.  N.  I  know  little  astronomy,  Sir  Walter,  but  I  think  Jupiter

is  believed  to  be  a  red  hot  solid  surrounded  by  dense

clouds

W.  S. But  it  is  not  at  all  solid  as  we  can  pass  through  it.

W.  R.  N.  Take  me  where  there  is  life.

W.  S. Venus —  W.  R.  N.  Good.

W.  S.  so  termed  is  inhabited  [Medium's  head  falls  from  the
cushion. I  say]

W.  R.  N.  Wait  a  moment  Sir  Walter  while  I  fix  the  head  of  the

medium  in  place.
W.  S. Yes  sir. [Hand  stops  writing  until  the  head  is  again

firmly  set  in  place. Phinuit  thanks  me  in  stifled

tones. I  ask  whether  the  light  is  going  out.  Hand

replies]

W.  S.  The  fight  so  called  ?  No  sir.  Now  sir,  we  will  leave
Jupiter  and  visit  Saturn.  Well  as  we  have  nothing
much  to  see  there  we  will  first  visit  Venus.  Venus
you  will  remember  on  earth  looks  like  a  very  beautiful


440


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[paet


and  bright  star.  Well  now  we  wish  to  learn  all  we
can  concerning  this  planet  so  now  we  start.  We
pass  through  a  long  ...  of  light,  so  called  sky  and
we  pass  on  very  rapidly  until  we  begin — are  you  tired
sir  ?

W.  R.  N.  No,  indeed. Go  on.

W.  S.  ■ — to  feel  very  much  pleased  with  the  atmospheric  con-
ditions through  which  we  are  passing.  We  smell  the
most  delightful  odors  possible  for  the  human  mind
to  understand  or  sense.  Now  all  is  life,  light,  the
air  is  as  balmy  and  soft  as  a  spring  morning  on
earth.  Now  we  realise  that  we  are  approaching  Venus.
We  pass  on  still  in  this  delightful  atmosphere.  Now
our  eyes  are  open  and  we  see  insects  of  all  kinds  and
descriptions,  birds  of  every  known  [hand  hesitates
for  some  time  and  then  writes]  description

W.  R.  N. You  had  species  in  mind,  had  you  not  ?

W.  S.  species,  yes  sir,  this  was  exactly  the  expression  which
I  wish  to  express  or  use — their  plumage  is  to  you
something  magnificent  and  indescribable.  We  see  them
flitting  about  from  one  place  to  another,  apparently
in  space,  yet  as  we  move  on  we  begin  to  realize  that
we  are  approaching  something  more  tangible.  Now
we  see  the  heavens  aglow  with  light,  the  perfume
heavenly.  The  atmosphere  warm,  balmy,  beautiful,
too  much  so  to  put  in  words  and  express.  Now  we
feel  a  slight  breeze  and  we  are  wafted  through  the
outer  rim  as  it  were  into  a  perfect  little  heaven  by
itself.  Nothing  ever  realized  on  earth  could  com-
pare with  this.  Now  we  see  no  one,  i.  e.  no  living
being  so  to  speak,  only  these  beautiful  creatures  the
trees  like  wax,  the  flowers  like  the  true  soul  as  it  were,
they  are  so  really  beautiful,  the  fields  are  one  mass
of  green,  the  flowers  of  various  hues,  yet  we  see  not  a
man  anywhere.  We  wonder  where  they  all  are,  we
travel  for  miles  and  miles,  yet  we  see  nothing  but
insects  and  birds  i.e.  living.  We  wish  to  ascertain
why  this  is  thus  .  .  .  yes  sir  .  .  .  we  breathe  the
delightful  odor  while  we  remain,  yet  we  still  see  no
living  being  .  .  .  why  .  .  .  why  .  .  .  because  of  the


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  441


marvellous  atmosphere.  They  are  sensitive  to  this
and  cannot  survive  it.

W.  R.  N.  Did  they  ever  exist  ?  W.  S.  Oh  no,  sir.

W.  R.  N.  You  mean  then  that  Venus  is  passing  through  a  stage
analogous  to  the  carboniferous  era  on  the  earth  ?

W.  S. I  do,  only  it  is  more  perfect  and  real  at  this  stage.

Birds,  insects  and  flowers  grow  in  this  atmosphere
only  when  the  time  comes  for  the  flowers  to  decay
they  simply  droop,  wither  and  fall,  then  immediately
others  spring  up  and  fill  their  places.  Now  we  stop
for  a  moment  and  wish  that  we  could  remain  here  for
always,  yet  we  are  not  satisfied,  we  long  to  see  more.
Now  we  must  go  .  .  .  pass  ...  on  and  leave  this
beautiful  godlike  heaven  or  planet  as  it  were  [my
hand  is  resting  on  the  paper.  The  writing  hand  col-
lides with  it,  stops,  feels  it,  finger  by  finger,  writes  :]
What  is  that  please,  sir  ?

W.  R.  N.  My  hand.

W.  S.  Best  not  disturb  me  [I,  misunderstanding,  explain  that
I  lift  the  writing  hand  while  I  turn  the  pages  of  the
block  book]  Oh  thanks  not  that  sir  ;  it  was  here
[tapping  the  spot  where  my  hand  had  rested]  it's
all  right  sir,  pardon  me  if  you  please.
Now  we  wish  to  visit  other  places  yet  we  long  to  remain
here,  however  we  must  not,  we  must  go  on  or  in  other
words  pass  on.  Now  we  wish  to  find  the  sun.  We
move  out  of  Venus,  slowly,  unwillingly,  yet  on  we
pass  until  we  have  reached  the  outer  sphere  again.
Now  we  move  on  towards  the  sun,  but  at  first  we
feel  extremely  uncomfortable  after  having  left  Venus,
yet  we  begin  to  become  accustomed  to  the  atmos-
phere and  now  on  we  go  .  .  .  on  we  move  ...  in
our  air  vessel  towards  the  sun.  We  draw  nearer  and
nearer  until  we  begin  to  feel  as  though  we  were  suffo-
cating again  and  as  we  move  on  we  still  continue  to
feel  uncomfortable  until  we  reach  this  planet,  when
the  atmosphere  begins  to  clear  a  little.  Now  we —
excuse  the  mixture  of  nouns  and  pronouns,  sir,  we
then  reach  the  sun,  and  we  feel  cold

W.  R.  N.  Cold  %


442


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


W.  S.  Yes  sir  we  have  passed  beyond  the  limit  of  the  former
planets  and  we  feel  the  various  changes  as  we  move.
Now  the  extreme  change  takes  place,  &  we  feel  in-
tensely hot,  as  we  approach  it.  Now  all  is  fire,  the
fire  is  intense  we  do  not  wish  to  move  on,  so  now  we
find  this  one  centre  of  heat

W.  R.  N.  Can  you,  a  spirit,  feel  the  heat  ?  [Finger  points  de-
liberately at  me,  then  hand  writes,]

W.  S.  You,  yet  I  [I  express  comprehension]  pardon,  yes  sir,
yet  I  wish  you  to  imagine  yourself  a  spirit  well
now.  .  .  .

W.  R.  N.  Sir  Walter,  is  the  sun  all  fire,  or  has  it  a  solid  core  ?

W.  S.  The  word  is  not  familiar  to  me,  sir.  [I  explain]  Oh
There  is  a  solid  body,  sir,  which  I  am  now  going  to
take  you  to  see.  We  feel  destined  to  reach  this  foun-
dation i.e.  you  desire  to  do  so.  Well  now  we  move
on  towards  this  fire,  now  reach  its  borders  and  not-
withstanding the  extreme  heat  we  pass  through  it  and
we  find  ourselves  upon  a  solid  bed  of  hot  clay  or  sand.
This  is  caused  by  gravity  understand  where  we  are
we  have  now  reached  the  limit,  we  find  it  very  warm
and  deserted  like  a  deserted  island.  We  wish  to  find
its  inhabitants  if  there  are  any  i.e.  if  it  has  any.  Now
we  see  what  we  term  monkeys,  dreadful  looking  crea-
tures, black  extremely  black,  very  wild.  We  find
they  live  in  caves  which  are  made  in  the  sand  or  mud,
clay  etc.  Now,  sir  for  that  I  will  be  obliged  to  dis-
continue our  journey  until  some  future  time.

W.  R.  N.  Will  you  come  again  ?

W.  S.  Yes,  I  will  look  down  upon  your  planet  and  find  you
out.  Good  morrow,  my  friend.  Leave  the  sun  or
in  other  words  we  will  remain  in  it.  Adieu

W.  Scott.

{June  28,  1895.)

W.  S.  [Writing]  I  am  here  to  take  you  to  .  .  .  for  the
purpose  of  continuing  our  journey  together.

W.  R.  N.  Before  we  start,  Sir  Walter,  I  would  like  to  ask  some
questions.

W.  S. Ah. I  see  that  you  remember  me.


LXXI.]


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  443


W.  R.  N.  You  told  nie  the  canals  or  lines  which  we  see  on  Mars
are  reflections. Of  what  1

W.  S.  Yes,  sir,  but  let  me  say  sir  that  before  I  left  you  I  found
out  afterward  that  I  had  taken  you  through  the
planet,  viz.  sun  and  that  we  had  followed  it  all  the
way  to  the  earth.  Well  sir  we  were  beginning  to  see
monkeys,  don't  you  recall  ?

W.  R.  N.  Yes,  and  this  I  could  not  understand  and  meant  to  ask
you.

W.  S.  No  you  do  not  understand  my  idea  [The  left  hand
begins  to  gesticulate  rapidly, — I  think  it  was  trying
to  use  the  deaf-mute  language]  We  went  to  the  sun
and  experienced  heat.  Well  then  we  found  it  un-
bearably hot.

W.  R.  N.  Won't  you  tell  that  other  spirit  to  go  ?

W.  S.  He  is  going  sir.  Then  sir.  Well  then  we  began  to
follow  its  light  as  far  as  the  tropic  of  Capricorn,  when
we  reached  the  earth  of  course,  here  we  saw  the
monkeys  flying  in  and  out  of  sand  caves.  There  I
began  to  lose  my  grasp  on  the  light.

W.  R,  N.  May  I  ask  a  question  ?  W.  S.  Yes  sir.

W  R.  N.  Is  the  sun  a  mass  of  incandescent  vapor  or  does  it  con-
tain a  solid  centre  ?

W.  S. It  is  simply  as  a  planet  a  mass  of  heat  and  lava.

W.  R.  N.  What  are  the  sun  spots  ?

W-  S. This  is  the  shadow  of  the  earth  sir.

W.  R.  N.  You  are  thinking  of  eclipses.  I  understand  this,  but
I  mean  the  black  spots  sometimes  seen  on  the  sun  ?

W.  S.  Oh  I  beg  pardon  sir,  I  did  not  understand  your
question,  thoughts,

W.  R.  N.  I  beg  your  pardon.

W.  S. No  sir,  I  understand  now  the  spots  on  the  sun  are  .  .  .

yes  sir  .  .  .  are  the  so  called  satellites  which  sur-
round it,  this  produces  a  dark  mass  of  spots.  [I  ask
again  about  the  canals  of  Mars]  First  sir  let  me  ask
what  is  your  meaning. Why  do  you  use  the  term  ?

W.  R.  N.  Some  astronomers  have  supposed  these  marks  to  be
canals.

W.  S. What  definition  do  they  give  to  the  word,  sir  ?

W.  R.  N.  A  canal  is  a  large  trench  or  ditch,  cut  that  water  may


444


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


flow  through  it.  These  marks  are  supposed  to  be
something  of  the  kind.
W.  S.  On  Mars  and  discernible  from  earth  ?  Well  they  are
not  openings  at  [all]  sir,  but  are  reflections  caused
by  certain  lights  from  the  sun  sir  which  brings  to
the  eye  a  dim  aspect  which  looks  like  straight  lines
yet  they  are  the  peaks  and  shadows  of  the  moun-
tainous region  in  the  planet  Mars  and  can  only  be
seen  under  certain  conditions  of  light  from  the
sun.

W.  R.  N.  Let  us  go  on  to  Saturn  and  then  tell  me  of  the  destiny
of  the  human  spirit.

W.  S.  Yes  sir,  delighted,  this  is  as  much  a  pleasure  to  me  as
to  yourself  sir,  as  to  you.  Remember  we  were
following  the  sun  and  we  finally  came  to  earth  because
more  particularly  of  exhaustion.  Well  do  you  under-
stand now  that  we  do  not  find  animal  or  vegetable
life  in  the  sun.

W.  R.  N.  I  am  glad  to  hear  that,  for  it  troubled  us.

W.  S.  Oh  you  could  not  have  thought  that  I  wished  to  con-
vey the  idea  that  there  were  actually  monkeys  living
in  the  sun,  sir.

W.  R.  N.  Take  me  on  further.

W.  S.  Yes  sir,  I  will  now  take  you  to  the  moon  which
is  opaque.  We  find  here  mountains  and  valleys  only,
consequently  we  do  not  wish  to  remain.  Excuse  me,
sir,  a  moment.  Who  was  the  gentleman  with  whom
I  saw  you  seemingly  laughing  over  my  journeys  with
you  !  Actually  laughing  .  .  .  yes  sir  .  .  .  and  roar-
ing enough  to  split  the  canopy  of  heaven

W.  R.  N.  That  was  Dr.  Hodgson  who  is  doing  more  to  establish
the  truth  of  spirit  communication  than  almost  any
one  living.  We  were  laughing  chiefly  at  the  state-
ment that  there  were  monkeys  in  the  sun.  I  beg
your  pardon.1

1  Dr.  Newbold  says  about  this  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  pp.  48-49)  :
"  That  night  {i.e.  June  27}  while  writing  up  the  sitting  at  Dr.  Hodgson's
rooms,  ten  miles  from  Mrs.  Piper,  Dr.  Hodgson  and  I  fell  to  laughing
over  this  preposterous  statement  {about  monkeys  in  the  sun}  ;  so  loudly
indeed  did  we  laugh  that  I  finally  cautioned  Dr.  H.  that  we  should  be
wakening the whole block.  *  *  *  I confess I  was  much  taken  aback


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  445


W.  S.  Not  at  all  sir.  Thank  you  sir,  .  .  .  exceedingly  kind,
sir,  No  intelligent  spirit  would  convey  for  a  moment
this  impression.  It  was  due  to  my  following  this
planet  to  earth

W.  R.  N.  I  beg  your  pardon,  won't  you  go  on  ?

W.  S.  Yes,  sir,  certainly  disabuse  your  mind  of  this  theory
altogether.  Now  we  will  leave  the  moon  because  of
its  lack  of  interest  and  we  now  sail  along  in  our  air
ship  towards  the  planet  Mercury. Here  we  find —

W.  R.  N.  Dr.  Hodgson  was  asking  me  whether  you  spoke  of
Mercury.

W.  S.  I  heard  it  ...  a  beautiful  blue  light  and  we  follow
it  until  we  enter  .  .  .  [at  this  point  I  lifted  my  hand
to  rub  my  face]  attention,  my  friend  .  .  .  until  we
enter  a  large  round  ball  like  we  pass  through  the  rim
or  surface  so  to  speak  and  now  we  find  ourselves  in
another  planet  without  habitation  and  apparently  con-
ditions of  temperature  etc.  excepting  those  which
from  its  shape  substance  which  help  to  make  it  a  so-
called  planet  yet  to  us  it  is  rather  a  pleasing  atmos-
phere for  one  to  exist  in  to  us  .  .  .  yes  sir  .  .  .  being
i.e.  with  exception  of  this  one  feature,  we  find  it  un-
interesting

W.  R.  N.  Is  it  solid  or  gaseous  ?

W.  S. Gaseous.  W.  R.  N.  Altogether  so  ?

W.  S.  Yes,  sir.  I  have  been  through  and  around  it  very
many  times

W.  R.  N.  Can  I  do  this  when  I  come  to  your  world  ?

W.  S. Why  certainly.

W.  R.  N.  Just  to  dream  of  such  a  thing  !

W.  S. You  can  begin  to  realise  what  our  real  spirit  existence

means  to  us.
W.  R.  N.  Do  you  see  them  well  ?

W.  S.  Certainly,  very  well.  Well  I  will  now  take  you  to
Saturn,  another  planet  extremely  red.  This,  strange
to  say  has  begun  to  take  form  and  shape,  apart  from
its  gaseous  condition.  We  see  various  lights,  first
dark,  then  light,  now  very  dark  and  red,  i.e.  in  regard

by  having  my  sins  thus  unexpectedly  brought  to  light "  {at  the  sitting
on  the  28th}.


446


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


to  color.  Here  we  are  after  a  long  journey  [I  mis-
understand] after  a  long  [hand  puts  parentheses
round  the  immediately  preceding  words]  at  the  sur-
face of  the  planet  Saturn  we  wish  to  visit  its  interior.
Now  follow  me  and  I  will  take  you  through  it.  Now
are  you  with  me  ?  Well  look  now  and  see  those
species  of  mineral  trying  to  form  from  the  conditions
of  atmosphere  etc.  It  will  from  its  present  condition
take  about  one  million  years  to  become  solid,  then
in  time  it  will  take  pattern  as  it  were  from  other  solid
or  material  planets.  We  feel  damp,  warm  and  cold
all  at  once,  you  realize  what  it  is  like  .  .  .  imagine
being  very  many  feet  underground  in  a  large  mine.
Well,  yoii  will  begin  to  realize  what  the  atmosphere
is  like,  i.e.  Go  into  the  mine  and  then  come  out  on
top  of  earth  in  some  very  hot  country.  Well,  this
is  the  present  condition  of  Saturn.
W.  R.  N.  What  are  the  rings  ?

W.  S.  Rings — do  not  understand.  [I  explain  the  appearance
of  the  rings,  without  suggesting  any  theory  as  to
their  constitution]  Yes,  sir,  this  is  so  sir  .  .  .  it
is  caused  by  the  large  amount  of  varying  atmos-
pheric condition  It  becomes  first  warm  and  then
extremely  warm  and  then  cool  and  smoky.  This
throws  out  rings  or  circles  of  heat  and  smoke,  not
exactly  smoke  but  alike [Hand  tries  to  write]  sim

W.  R  N.  [I  suggest]  "  similar."

W  S.  Yes,  sir.  Now  you  begin  to  feel  very  heavy  dull,
choking  and  you  wish  to  return  to  our  own  sphere.
So  on  we  go.

W.  R.  N.  In  passing  over  these  immense  distances  are  you
conscious  of  the  lapse  of  time  and  of  the  distance
you  go  ?

W.  S. Oh  no,  sir. yet  I  must  necessarily  term  it  so  to  you

or  for  your  understanding.
W.  R  N.  I  have  heard  that  thought  carries  spirit  whither  it

wishes  to  go.

W.  S.  This  is  true,  quite  sir.  Now  sir,  I  may  not  be  able
to  take  you  much  further  and  complete  it,  so  what
would  you  have  me  do,  sir  ?


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  4:4:7


W.  R.  N.  I  am  much  interested,  but  I  wish  to  have  a  few  words

with  Mr.  Pelham  before  the  light  goes  out.
W.  S. I  would  say  sir,  that  if  you  wish  me  to  take  you  as  far

as  possible  I  would  be  pleased  to  do  so  sir  .  .  .
W.  R.  N.  I  merely  wish  to  say  Goodbye  to  Mr.  Pelham.
W.  S. Yes,  sir.  .  .  . You  see  I  am  conscious  of  this  fact

and  I  do  not  wish  to  be  selfish  or  intrude
W.  R.  N.  Oh  not  at  all,  not  at  all,  I  am  your  debtor.
W.  S. but  for  want  of  time  and  which  according  to  your

own  statement,  sir.
W.  R.  N.  I  only  want  to  say  a  few  words  to  Mr.  Pelham  before

the  light  goes.

W.  s.  Oh  I  see  .  .  .  very  well  I  will  go  on  for  a  while,  yet
I  wish  to  know  before  it  is  too  late  sir.  Would  you
kindly  let  me  know  sir.

W.  R.  N.  Can't  you  tell  ?

W.  S.  Not  very  well.  Well  now  we  have  had  a  nice  long
trip,  and  we  wish  now  to  visit  ...  no  [hand  strikes
out  "  visit  "  ]  leave  the  actual  planets  and  visit  our
own  planet,  i.e.  Heaven.  Well,  sir,  come  with  me
and  I  will  take  you  through  it  with  me.  Imagine
yourself  without  the  material  body  grasping  me  by
the  hand  i.e.  as  real  to  us  as  though  it  was  really  the
material  hand,  we  now  ascend.  We  are  leaving
earth,  our  bodies  and  we  realize  that  we  are.  Now
we  are  still  leaving,  struggling  somewhat.  Now  we
shut  our  eyes  for  an  instant  no  matter  how  sudden
the  so-called  death.  We  shut  our  eyes  for  an  instant.
Now  we  open  them.  We  see  light.  Our  spirit  is
being  led  along  by  some  kind  and  tender  hand.  We
are  ascending  all  the  while.  [Hand  rises  slowly  as
if  to  indicate  the  ascent]  Now  quick  as  a  flash  we
have  passed  behind  the  curtain.  It  closes  behind  us
from  natural  causes.  We  now  see  persons  moving
about.  We  see  them  as  to  us  shadows  .  .  .  they
ascent  [assent]  our  coming  .  .  yes  they  ascent  our
coming — they  greet  sanction  our  coming,  they  recog-
nize us  and  we  them.  They  come  nearer  to  us,  caress
and  whisper  to  us.  They  are  saying  we  are  in
heaven,  we  will  be  happy  and  we  realize  that  we


448


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


are.  We  hear  music,  we  see  our  families  if  we  have
any  here.  We  think  no  more  of  troubles,  pain,
care.  We  are  free,  conscious,  immediately  we  are
happy,  we  know  that  we  are  in  Heaven.  We  can
walk  as  real  as  on  earth  we  can  fly  if  we  wish,  we  can
speak  to  one  another,  we  can  see  fountains,  trees,
flowers,  birds,  streams,  lakes,  walks,  etc.  The  air  is
like  a  beautiful  dream,  the  mellowness  of  the  light
is  indescribable,  absolutely.  The  perfume  fills  the
celestial  city.

W.  R.  N.  Go  on,  only  leave  time  for  Mr.  Pelham.

W.  S. Yes,  sir. Now  realize  all  this  above  your  earth.

W.  R.  N.  "  Eye  hath  not  seen  nor  ear  heard  neither  hath  it  entered
into  the  heart  of  man  the  things  that  God  hath  pre-
pared for  them  that  love  him."

W.  S.  Quite  so  and  never  can.  Never  will  man  materially
realize  just  what  heaven  is  like.

W.  R.  N.  Will  you  continue  this  subject  when  my  friend  comes  ?

W.  S.  Yes  I  will,  I  will  indeed,  ...  *  *  *  I  must  now
return  to  heaven,  wishing  you  all  the  happiness  that
it  is  possible  to  fall  to  the  lot  of  man.  With  love
and  best  wishes  for  ...  I  am  yours  in  spirit,  Walter
Scott.


B.

Proctor  Control.

(July  3,  1895.)

Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson.

[As  Mrs.  Piper  began  to  lose  consciousness,  her  head
peered  forward  as  it  were,  her  eyes  seemed  fixed,
and  she  murmured  "  Proctor — Proctor — I  see  Proctor
— listen,  listen — In  the  front  of  your  eye  forms  a  lens
which  collects  the  rays  of  light  which  project  from
an  object  and  it  registers  itself  upon  the  retina.  That's
how  you  see  me."  There  may  have  been  some  addi-
tional words.  Mrs.  Piper  then  went  into  trance
under  what  was  obviously  a  "  new  control,"  i.e.  other


LXXI.]


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  449


than  Phinuit.  The  attempts  to  speak  failed  ;  then
the  hands  and  arms  made  movements  as  if  holding
a  telescope,  looking  through  it,  directing  it  upwards,
turning  it  in  a  sweep,  drawing  it  out,  adjusting  it,
turning  round  the  eye-piece,  working  a  side  screw,
etc.  I  suggest  writing.  Hand  feels  my  head  and
fingers]  [Proctor  writes]  [scrawls]  Proctor  [scrawls]
Phinuit  takes  control.  Hand  becomes  more  per-
turbed. Ph.  says  :  "  there's  a  gentleman  there.  I
saw  him  talking  to  the  light  of  the  medium."  [I
give  Phinuit  a  hat  lining  of  deceased  person  to  find
details  about  while  I  am  talking  to  Proctor.]  What's
the  .  .  .  help.  [I  hold  the  hand  by  the  wrist  gently
but  firmly  and  keep  it  near  the  table.]  Oh  thank
you  sir,  Oh  thanks.  I  used  to  study  and  teach
astronomy.

R.  H. Are  you  Mr.  Proctor  ?  Proctob.  Yes,  sir,  Proctor.

R.  H.  I  heard  you  lecture  once  in  England  [Much  excite-
ment in  hand. Wild  scrawls]

Proctob.  England — well — I  know  England  very  well  .  .  .  England.

Oh  England  how  sweet  to  hear  the  sound  of  England
and  be  able  to  discriminate  the  difference  between
the  immortal  and  the  mortal.  I  wished  to  have  had
some  one  see  me

R.  H. here  ?

Proctor.  Yes  when  I  came  with  my  magnet.  I  produced  some
of  our  .  .  .  [illegible,  a  word  apparently  beginning
pra  and  looking  like  Pranasie,  several  more  attempts
below  to  give  this  word.]  lights

R  H. Can't  read  the  word  before  '  lights  '  .  .  .  [illegible]

Proctor.  Rainbow

R.  H. I  understand,  a  special  color.

Proctor.  .  .  .  [illegible]

R.  H. Some  spectrum  color,  I  suppose.

Proctor.  Yes,  sir,  scientifically  speaking  [two  more  attempts  at
the  word]  come  nearer — somewhat  nearer  [I  bend
my  head  close  to  the  block  book]  Praynasic

R.  H. Praynasic  ?  Proctor.  Yes  ...  I  am  .  «  1

R.  H. Name  of  a  color  ?

Proctor.  Yes,  in  heaven  .  .  .  heavenly  color.

2f


450


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


R.  H. Appearances  in  heaven  ?
Proctor.  Yes,  sir,  we  live  in  it.

R.  H.  It's  the  kind  of  light  in  which  you  live  ?  [much  per-
turbation of  hand]

Proctor.  Yes  sir  [?]  I  brought  a  ray  with  me,  sir,  in  hope  that
some  mortal  intelligence  would  see  me,  sir

R.  H.  You  hoped  that  you  would  be  thus  able  to  make  your-
self visible  ?

Proctor.  Exactly. My  magnetic  current  is  too  strong.

R.  H. What's  the  word  after  "  magnetic  "  ?

Proctor,  current  is  too  powerful,  sir.  [Throughout  the  Proctor
writing  the  hand  is  unusually  perturbed  and  irregular
in  its  movements. At  this  point  it  runs  wild.]

R.  H. It'll  be  all  right  directly

Proctor.  I  think  so  .  .  .  you  see  [?]  that  I  but  have  discovered
.  .  .  that  have  .  .  .  that  I  have  just  discovered  that
this  is  a  decided  magnet  which  is  constantly  throwing
off  its  current  without  being  seen  or  otherwise  dis-
coverable. I  picked  up  the  light  as  the  magnet  picks
up  the  loadstone. Have  my  ideas  come  out^yet.

R.  H. Yes  I  think  I  understand.

Proctor.  This,  sir,  is  like  speaking  through  a  phonograph.  One
realizes  that  they  are  speaking  and  what  they  are
saying  is  being  registered,  yet  one  can  not  actually
see  the  process,

R.  H.  As  though  you  talked  into  a  machine  where  a  carbon
point  traced  your  words  on  a  revolving  bobbin.

Proctor.  Yes,  sir,  yet  the  sound  is  being  registered  continually,
also  the  sound  of  the  communicator  as  well  as  the
operator.  For  instance,  I  hear  your  voice,  you  know
that  I  am  speaking  also,  yet  you  do  not  see  but
hear

R.  H. I  don't  hear  you.

Proctor,  no  not  hear.  ,1  would  say  read  the  contese  [?  intended
for  contents]

R.  H.  Can't  read  that  word  [Another  similar  attempt  ;  then
attempt  at]

Proctor,  communication  on  the  cylinder, sir. Well,  now  by

natural  and  spiritual  laws  combined  [?]
R,  H. Can't  read  that. [Perturbation]. Go  back  to  '  by  '.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  451

Proctor.  By  spiritual  and  natural  laws  you  should  be  able  to
see  me.

R.  H. I  am  unable  to  see  you.
Proctor.  Haven't  you  eyes  sir

R.  H.  Yes,  but  my  retina  is  not  adapted  to  the  vibrations
which  emanate  from  your  etherial  organism.

Proctor.  Oh  indeed.  So.  Extremely  sorry  because  of  the
actual  loss  which  this  must  necessarily  be  to  you.

R.  H.  Some  persons  apparently  can  see  sometimes  their  friends
who  have  passed  out  of  the  body.

Proctor,  indeed  do  they  see  into  planets  also  ?

R.  H. Do  you  mean;  do  they  see  through  planets  ?

Proctor.  Yes,  sir,  into  them,  for  instance.

R.  H.  There's  evidence  that  some  persons  on  rare  occasions
have  seen  through  opaque  substances  as  it  were.

Proctor.  Yes,  well  [?]  I — Matter  such  as  this,  [apparently  indi-
cating blockbook  and  table  by  touch]  scientifically
known  to  the  senses.

R.  H. Yes,  such  as  a  brick  wall.

Proctor.  Ah,  I  understand  you,  sir,  thank  you. What  a  most

wonderful  and  interesting  case  this  must  be
R.  H this  light  ?

Proctor.  Yes,  sir  I  mean  my  [?]  magnet  i.e.  which  I  have  just
picked  up,  sir.

R.  H.  Do  you  remember  about  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  and  do  you  remember  the  magazine  Know-
ledge which  you  started  ?

Proctor.  I  .  .  .  my  why  yes,  certainly  I  do,  sir.  I  am  not
asleep.

R.  H*  Do  you  remember  that  some  stories  of  apparitions  and
accounts  of  other  psychical  experiences  were  published
in  Knowledge.

Proctor.  Oh  yes_.  sure  enough,  but  they  had  entirely  slipped  my

memory.  ... It  is  a  decided  magnet,  sir,  the
R.  H. What  kind  of  a  magnet  ?

Proctor.  Not  an  artificial  magnet  exactly,  but  a  natural  magnet.

R.  H. The  medium's  body  does  not  attract  needles.

Proctor.  Oh  no,  sir,  but  the  light  of  the  magnet  does  attract  us,

myself  for  instance.
R.  H. Then  you  use  the  word  magnet  metaphorically  ?


452


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Proctor.  Yes,  only  metaphorically.

R.  H. Do  you  wish  to  free  your  mind  of  anything,  or  will

you  answer  some  questions  ?
Proctor.  Well,  sir,  I  first  shall  have  to  become  accustomed  to

the  working  of  this  magnet  before  I  can  express  my

thoughts  scientifically
R.  H. You  think  perhaps  you'd  better  not  try  to  answer

technical  questions  at  present.  [Perturbation.]
Proctor.  I  feel  like  a  person  in  mortal  body  having  an  attack

of  nightmare,  sir. I  am  all  in  a  whirl
R.  H. Perhaps|you'd  better  not  stay  too  long.
Proctor.  No,  sir. I  wish  to  have  you  .  .  .  [illegible]  understand
R.  H. I  wish  to  have  you  ..."  something  "  understand.
Proctor,  fully

R.  H.  I  know  it  must  be  difficult  for  you  to  keep  clear  and
concentrated.

Proctor.  Yes  I  wish  to  have  you  recognize  me  as  being  what
I  .  .  .  [illegible]  am,  a  scientific  man

R.  H. "  as  being  what  I  "  ?

Proctor,  really  am,  a  scientific  R.  H.  man.

Proctor,  yes  sir.  My  thoughts  are  somewhat  clouded.  Con-
sequently I  am  not  in  the  best  possible  condition  to
 [illegible]  to  you  much  valuable  information

R.  H.  Can't  read  that,  but  I  understand  your  meaning.  Not
in  a  condition  to  impart

Proctor.  Yes,  sir,  impart  to  you

R.  H. much  valuable  information.

Proctor.  Yes,  sir.  Consequently  I  prefer  to  wait  until  I  can
express  myself  naturally,  sir.  I'll  bid  you  good  day,
sir.

R.  H. I  hope  you'll  come  again,  Mr.  Proctor.
Proctor.  Most  assuredly  I  will,  sir,  thanks.

R.  H.  I  am  specially  anxious  to  get  some  information  from
you  about  the  canals  of  Mars,  and  should  be  grateful
if  you  can  tell  me  when  you  come  again.

Proctor.  Yes,  ex — certainly  [?] Yes,  sir.

{This  was  I  believe  Proctor's  only  appearance.}


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  453


C.

Stainton  Moses  Control.

{Oct.  27,  1896.)

Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson.
G.  P. I  am  here. The  message  by  Joseph  they  say  is  not  right,

and  I  have  seen  Moses  and  he  says  it  is  one  of  his

helpers  in  this  world,  Imperator.
R.  H. I heard from Myers yesterday. Joseph is  absolutely

wrong,  has  no  relation  to  the  matter.

$  $  $  4

[R.  H.  talks  of  the  importance  of  Imperator,  and  how
absurd  it  is  for  Imperator  to  pretend  to  be  a  great
spirit  and  not  to  know  his  own  name,  etc.]
G.  P. And  ...  he  is  ...  he  does  know  his  own  name  .  .  .  and
I  will  take  care  of  the  whole  thing.


{Oct.  28,  1896.)
Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson.

R.  H. Now  for  Imperator  and  Moses  G.  P.  Now

R.  H.  Wait  a  minute.  I  want  to  speak  first.  Moses  and  his
Imperator  have  made  an  awful  mess.

G.  P.  Rot

[R.  H.  talks  at  some  length  about  the  necessity  for  getting
the  real  Imperator,  if  there  is  any  such  person.  He
condemns  the  apparent  wickedness  of  Moses  in  claim-
ing different  persons  for  Imperator,  and  he  condemns
the  alleged  Imperator  who  claims  to  be  Imperator
and  Joseph,  etc.,  etc.]
G.  P.  Listen,  H.  I  was  sure  from  his  incoherency  that  he  did
not  remember  anything  about  his  experience  in  the
body.

R.  H.  But  you  yourself  thought  that  he  had  given  you  the  right
name  at  last.  Who  is  this  spirit  that  calls  himself
Imperator  ?  What  sort  of  a  rascal  or  rapscallion  is  he  ?


454


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgtvick.


[part


G.  P.  Now  listen.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  H,  he  is  really  Joseph
and  is  a  friend  of  Moses,  and  he  is  really  a  gentleman
and  not  a  rascal  and  is  and  will  be  a  help  to  you  in
many  ways  as  in  regard  to  his  prophecies  etc  etc,
etc.  and  is.

R.  H.  Well,  his  prophecies  are  exceedingly  improbable.  At  first
it  looked  as  if  he  meant  that  there  would  be  a  great
European  war,  but  it  appeared  that  he  meant  only
that  America  would  go  to  war  with  Spain  and  Turkey.
Spain  and  Turkey  are  small  powers  any  way.  And
while  this  looks  improbable,  the  only  thing  that  we
can  judge  him  by  is  the  positive  statement  that  he
made  that  he  was  Imperator,  and  with  the  cross-
mark  attached.  This  being  wrong,  what  value  can
be  attributed  to  his  prophecy  ?

G.  P.  Yes,  but  I  would  not  question  so  difficult  a  problem.  Let
it  come  as  it  will,  H.  Do  not  question  his  state-
ment, as  he  is  a  truth  and  authority  on  certain  things.
[I  comment  further  on  the  difficulty  of  reconciling  the
existence  of  these  errors  with  the  alleged  fact  of  com-
munication from  the  other  world.]

G.  P.  Well,  H.  Yes.  I  see  it  all  and  after  all  my  efforts  to
prove  my  identity  and  keep  my  promises  to  you,  H.
Of  course  this  would  be  counted  against  me,  for
instance,

R.  H  Exactly.  The  evidence  for  identity  and  spirit-com-
munication all  comes  on  your  shoulders.  Apart  from
what  you  have  done,  the  evidence  seems  to  me  to  be
entirely  inadequate.  Communication  from  the  other
world  was  the  subject  that  was  dearest  to  Moses  in
life,  and  he  is  helping  to  spoil  his  life's  work  by  his
actions  now.  If  he  had  refused  to  give  the  name  of
Imperator  it  would  have  been  intelligible,  though
I  daresay  that  I  personally  would  not  have  been  satis-
fied. But  to  declare  that  he  is  giving  us  the  name
and  then  to  give  us  a  false  one,  is  another  matter
altogether.  I  hoped  to  get  the  names  of  Doctor
Rector  and  Imperator  from  him,  but  Imperator  is
the  most  important,  because  only  Myers  knows  it.

G.  P. Well  then  why  is  [he]  not  willing  to  tell  me. Why  is  he


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.— Appendix.  455

...  and  why  does  he  try  to  deceive  me  as  well  as
you.  He  says  that  was  a  secret  which  he  would  never
make  known  to  any  one  on  earth,  and  always  said
that  the  world  should  never  know  his  secret,  yet  when
I  beg  of  him  to  tell  me  and  explain  the  importance
of  his  telling  me,  he  then  takes  this  course,  and
I  do  not  know  who  his  friends  were,  in  earth  or
out.

R  H. Well,  then  Moses  must  be  a  liar  ?
G.  P. I  must  rely  upon  his  sincerity.

R.  H. How  can  he  be  sincere,  can't  he  and  all  his  exalted  guides

manage  to  get  a  thing  like  this  straight  %
G.  P. and  yet  I  do  know  that  he  tries  to  reach  the  earth,  yet
when  he  does,  his  intelligent  thoughts  all  leave  him,
so  to  speak. In  other  words,  every  person  whom  he
has  ever  known  dashes  through  his  mind,  and  then
there  is  no  use  in  trying  to  hold  him  here.
R.  H. And  we  get  nothing  but  lies  and  swindles.
G.  P. Yet  I  feel  sorry  for  him  because  he  is  willing  to  do  the
best  he  can  remember,  and  he  is  no  liar,  H.,  and  he
calls  .  .  .  you  had  best  .  .  .
R.  H. Why  in  thunder  does  Joseph  claim  to  be  Imperator  ?
G.  P. because  as  a  matter  of  fact  he  is  called  High  Commander

by  thousands  of  intelligences  here. Now  does
R.  H. Well,  the  most  important  thing  of  all  is  to  find  out

Imperator,  if  possible.
G.  P. How  about  D.  {the  lost  boy  in  Mexico.}  ?

That's  important,  very  ;  but  it  might  still  be  said  that
it  involved  only  clairvoyant  vision  in  this  world.
Your  world  comes  in  only  to  the  extent  of  knowing
that  D.  isn't  with  you.  Success  wouldn't  prove  spirits,
and  failure  might  be  interpreted  to  mean  only  that
spirits  were  not  so  familiar  with  this  world  of  matter.
But  in  the  case  of  Moses  and  Imperator  the  person3
concerned  are  supposed  to  be  in  the  spirit-world,  and
moreover,  some  of  them  to  have  very  high  powers
there.  The  knowledge  of  what  we  seek  is  with  them
if  the  spirit-claims  are  true,  and  it  seems  to  be  a  thing
that  ought  surely  to  be  obtained.  Failure  therefore
is  a  condemnation  of  the  spirit  hypothesis.


R.  H.


456  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

G.  P.  Yes,  I  understand  it  all,  H.,  and  no  spirit  (I  acknow-
ledge I  am  one)  ever  worked  more  faithfully  than
I  have  to  keep  Moses'  mind  clear  and  get  him  to  recall
all  of  his  earthly  experiences  for  the  sole  benefit  of
your  researches.

R.  H.  I  know  it.  I'm  talking  to  you  in  this  plain  way,  but  I
don't  mean  to  talk  at  you.  But  I  want  you  to  know
exactly  how  I  feel,  so  that  you  can  go  to  Moses  and
let  him  have  it.

G.  P.  Well  you  need  not  have  any  fears  but  what  I  shall  do
that  all  right.

R.  H.  It  is  important  that  this  should  be  cleared  up  as  quickly
as  possible.

G  P. For  your  special  report  or  some  other,  H.

R.  H.  Well,  I  suppose  I  shall  mention  it  in  my  present  report,
but  I  wasn't  thinking  of  that  at  the  moment.  I
want  to  get  rid  of  some  of  these  points  that  have
been  troubling  us,  and  have  a  chance  at  some  con-
versations about  your  world  and  philosophy  etc.,  if
you  would  like  that.

G.  P.  Yes  of  course  I  do  of  all  things  ...  yes  exactly.  Well
you  know  how  long  old  was  in  trying  to  obtain
the  name  of  Q  for  instance,  and  even  now  [she]  will
not  give  it  him.  Well,  here  is  another.  And  I  wish
to  find  the  spirit  myself  of  .  .  and  the  only
imperator

R-  H. The  spirit,  whoever  he  was,  that  was  Moses'  chief  guide,

that  Moses  always  called  Imperator.
G.  P. Yes. He  never  signed himself this way H. It  was

Moses  who  did  that,  and  not  the  spirit.
R.  H. If  you  can't  rely  on  Moses,  how  do  you  know  that  ?
G.  P. I  know  from  of  him  because  there  is  not  one  person  whom

I  have  met  with  Moses  who  would  answer  to  this

name.

R.  H. But  Joseph  answered  to  Imperator.

G.  P. Yes,  who  as  matter  of  fact  was  and  is  called

R.  H. Imperator  ?

G.  P. [yes]  here,  and  has  been  for  years  and  years.
Well,  I  am  sure,  H.,  I  am  more  sorry  than  you
*  *  *  *


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  457


[I  refer  again  to  the  mess  ]
G.  P. Of  course  I  know  it  all,  my  friend,  words  will  be
R.  H.  Wasted.

G.  P. [yes] I  pity  Moses  when I  reach  him  after  I  leave

here  now.
R.  H. Let  him  have  it.

G.  P.  You  bet  I  will.  I  will  make  him  sorry  that  he  ever  met
me  and  kept  his  secrets. Auf  Wiedersehen.

{End  of  writing.  Waking  stage  follows.}
[As  Mrs.  Piper  is  recovering,  she  murmurs  "  Ajax,  Ajax,  I
think  Ajax  (Who's  Ajax  ?)  George  says  that's  an
imaginary  god."  Mrs.  Piper  becomes  nearly  normal,
enough  so  to  recognize  me  as  Hodgson,  and  asks
"  what  is  helmet  and  armour  ?  "  "  Tin  clothing,
like  divers  wear."  I  surmise  that  G.  P.  was  making
some  joke  in  connection  with  Ajax  and  his  famous
defiance.]

(Oct.  29,  1896.)
Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson. G.  P.  writes.

G.  P.  H.,  I  feel  as  though  I  had  committed  a  grievous  sin,  and
I  feel  that  I  could  go  and  .  .  .  wait  sir  .  .  .  hide
myself  in  some  remote  corner  of  this  world  of  space,
to  think  that  after  all  my  efforts  to  keep  all  things
straight,  I  should  take  the  word  of  a  comparative
stranger  and  accept  it  as  true  without  pulling  him
over,  so  to  speak  and  making  him  realize  more  fully
what  was  expected  of  him.  Now  I  stand  here  and
acknowledge  my  fault  and  wish  you  to  give  me  a  good
slap  so  to  speak  for  my  stupidity.

R.  H.  Well,  George,  I'm  not  going  to  blame  you,  because  1
know  you  did  the  best  you  could.

G.  P.  I  did  not  know  this  man.  I  never  saw  him  in  life,  and
I  knew  little  if  anything  about  him.  [Hand  gestures
towards  invisible.]  He  is  not  the  Moses  we  have
been  looking  for  at  all,  but  he  is  Moses  sure  enough,
but  not  the  one  whom  Myers  knows.  Imperator
was  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  name  given  to  Joseph
aeons  ago.  He  was  always  called  High  Commander
here,  and  is  now.


458  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

R.  H.  Well,  if  that's  not  the  Moses  we  want,  the  hash  is  ten
times  worse  than  ever.

G.  P.  Yes,  but  there  are  two  distinct  Moses  here  H.  There
are  two  Moses  here  and  they  are  both  intelligent  men
and  one  is  at  this  moment  with  Dr.  Myers,  and  the
other  is  here  also  and  they  are  together.  The  elder
of  the  two

R.  H. Can't  read.  Wait.

G.  P.  Listen.  Here  is  doctor  Myers  and  he  will  answer  all  of
your  questions.  Now  Stanton  Moses  is  Stanton  Moses
always  and  he  is  in  the  presence  of  Myers  now.

R.  H. I  want  to  say  something. Don't  write  while  I'm  talking.

G.  P.  Now  make  your  statement,  H.  I  am  interrupted,  H  very
often  when  you  speak,  and  I  have  to  act  between
the  two.

[I  had  misunderstood  the  first  statements  at  this  sitting
about  Moses,  and  supposed  that  I  was  being  informed
by  G.  P.  that  the  Moses  he  had  got  hold  of  before
was  not  the  Moses  I  intended  to  interrogate.  I  here,
and  shortly  after  also,  explained  very  emphatically
that  the  Moses  we  had  been  dealing  with  had  shown
by  his  knowledge  of  the  words  Doctor,  Rector  and
Imperator,  by  his  asking  about  Speer,  by  his  know-
ledge of  our  Society,  Myers,  etc.,  that  he  was  the
Moses  we  wanted  or  else  was  a  fraudulent  person,
and  that  this  pseudo-explanation  made  the  confusion
ten  times  worse  confounded.]

G.  P.  Well,  who  is  this  gentleman  ?  Listen.  I  personally  do
not  know  ...  I  do  not  know  Moses  personally,  yet
I  do  know  that  this  gentleman  claims  to  be  Moses
and  I  personally  do  not  know  him,  and  I  feel  very
much  to  blame  for  not  being  able  to  tell  you  .  .  .
[I  repeat  my  difficulty.]

G.  P.  No  it  is  .  .  .  Oh  well  why  do  you  not  say  so,  H.  No,
but  you  do  not  understand  me  at  all,  H.  Now  listen.
This  gentleman,  so  far  as  I  know,  is  your  friend,  but
I  do  not  claim  to  know,  and  I  never  knew  him  alive,
I  mean  when  in  the  earth.  I  could  not  recognize
him.  Well,  I  cannot  say  now  as  he  is  the  Moses  you
wish. You  must  treat  him  as  you  have  treated  me


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.- — Appendix.  459


and  give  the  poor  devil  a  chance  to  say  who  he  is.
I  am  only  interpreter  for  any  straggler  who  wishes  to
speak  here.  [In  the  meantime  I  am  turning  up  the
early  sheets  of  the  writing  to  repeat  to  G.  P.  the  words
he  wrote  in  referring  apparently  to  some  new  Moses.]

G.  P. Read [I  read  the  last  sentence  written.]

R.  H. Now  wait,  George. Wait  till  I  see  what  you  said.

G.  P.  I  will  wait.  H.  [I  find  that  I  had  misconceived  the  mean-
ing of  G.  P.'s  words  in  early  part  of  the  sitting.]

R.  H.  I  understand  now.  I  take  it  all  back,  George  [Hand
seizes  R.  H.'s  in  energetic  clasp,  then  goes  on  writing.]

G.  P. I  am  talking  of  doctor  Myers'  friend  Stanton  Moses.

R.  H. Is  there  another  Moses  there  now,  a  new  one  ?

G.  P.  I  do  say  it,  and  it  is  true.  I  am  sure  that  doctor  Myers
has  your  own  man  here.  I  am  so  ...  I  say,  doctor,
— help  the  doctor,  H.  .  .  .  doctor  Phin.  [I  speak  to
Phinuit,  re-arranging  Mrs.  Piper's  head  on  the  cushion,
and  Ph.  says  that  he  nearly  slipped  out  of  the  body.]

G.  P.  Now  I  find  doctor  Myers  here  with  Moses,  and  he  is
Stanton  Moses,  an  English  gentleman,  whom  we  call
a  gentleman  of  the  clergy. Is  that  he  ?

R.  H.  Yes.

G.  P. Well,  now,  here  is  his  father  also  .  .  .  and  William  .  .  .

the  whole  family  as  a  matter  of  fact.
R.  H.  Good.

G.  P. Now  listen  to  these  Moseses.

R.  H. To  the  Moseses  ?

G.  P. Yes,  by  way  of  a  joke,  H.

R.  H. Yes,  the  Moseses.  Good.

{Then  Dr.  Arthur  Myers  intervenes — writing  seemingly
first  through  G.  P.  and  afterwards  himself.}

A.  T.  M.  I  am  doctor  A.  T.  Myers,  and  I  will  answer  to  any  of
these  charges  against  my  friend  Mr.  Moses.  No  one
is  more  intelligent  than  he  is,  and  no  one  is  more
anxious  to  prove  his  identity  than  he,  yet  he  has  not
been  able  to  reach  here  clearly  as  he  could  and  does
wish.  So  he  asked  his  father  to  take  some  messages
for  him,  and  in  so  doing  my  friend  has  been  a  little
disturbed  by  it.  But  it  need  not  trouble  any  one.
He  will  prove  his  identity  with  me,  and  give  to  my


460


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


brother  Fred  all  the  information  he  needs  without
any  mistake  if  you  will  only  give  him  half  a  chance.

*  *  *  *

{Later  in  the  sitting}  [W.  Stainton  Moses  writes.]

[The  hand  does  not  begin  to  write  at  once,  but  "  speirs  "
about  somewhat.  I  begin  to  explain  that  the  hand
will  write  his  thoughts  as  his  hand  when  he  was  in
the  body  wrote  the  thoughts  of  the  spirits  that  used
to  control  him,  etc.  But  I  do  not  use  the  words
paper  or  pencil.  Probably  A.  T.  M.  or  G.  P.  was
explaining  to  him  also  and  used  these  words.]

W.  S.  M.  Well  I  have  been  trying  to  think  out  some  .  .  .  what
are  you  talking  about  ?  I  am  .  .  .  what  are  you
talking  .  .  .  Paper  .  .  .  pencils  .  .  .  well  is  it  pos-
sible .  .  .  real  pencils  with  which  .  .  I  am  Stai
where  .  .  .  Stainton  .  .  .  where  .  .  .  Stainton  W  Moses,
author  of  Spirit  teachings  etc.  in  book,  form.  Where
.  .  .  I  .  .  .  where  ...  in  book  form.

R.  H.  I  have  a  copy  of  your  Spirit  Teachings  in  my  room
now.

W.  S.  M.  Oh  your  .  .  .  well  I  am  all  that  is  immortal  of  Stainton
Moses  the  medium.  They  wish  .  .  .  [undec]  of  my
identity.  Well  I  sent  them  through  ...  I  wish  to
collect  my  MSS.  and  put  them  into  book  form.  Where
am  I  ?

R.  H.  Your  friends  are  doing  that  for  you,  C.  C.  Massey  and
Mr.  Speer  and  Myers.  Myers  has  had  articles  em-
bodying a  lot  of  your  Mss.  in  the  Proceedings  of  our
Society,  and  Mr.  Speer  has  been  publishing  a  lot  more
of  your  Spirit  Teachings  in  the  magazine  Light,  which
you  used  to  edit. Do  you  remember  it  ?

W.  S.  M.  Oh  yes,  oh  what  a  help,  oh  what  a  help.  I  will  be
glad  to  do  anything  that  I  can  for  you  to  prove  that
I  am  really  Moses.  What  does  it  all  mean,  anyway  ?
I  have  no  pain,  no  sorrow,  but  still  I  cannot  remember
as  I  wish  I  could.

R.  H. You  will  later  on.

W.  S.  M.  Those  friends  of  yours  hear  me  ?  I  do  not  think  I
made  my  messages  clear.  I  see,  I  begin  to  see,  I  do,
oh  how  glad  I  will  be  if  I  can  bring  into  this  open


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  461


door  ray  friends  .  .  .  father  will  .  .  .  [Pencil  is
dropped.  Three  in  succession  are  rejected,  the  fourth
is  taken.  Probably  A.  T.  M.  or  G.  P.  says  "  No
pencil "]  No  pencil  .  .  .  No  pencil  .  .  .  Yes.  I
see,  so  familiar  to  me.  My  father,  the  dear  old
fellow,  could  not  do  anything  for  me.  I  wrote  spirit
teaching.  I  used  to  call  one  friend  1.  Rector  2.
Doctor  .  .  .  [wild  scrawls]  I  am  thinking  .  .  .  spirit-
teaching  .  .  .  spirit  teaching  ...  I  will  teach  them.
Now  Rector  come  here  and  tell  my  friends  in  this
body  who  you  are.  I  say, — Moses,  wish  it.
1.  Rector  2  Doctor.  [Scrawl]  Imperator.  All  come
to  me  at  once.  [Scrawl]

%  %  %  %

W.  S.  M.  Well  if  you  only  knew  how  glad  I  am  to  see  this  light.

I  am  so  happy.  I  will  in  a  few  visits  know  where  I
am  and  say  anything  I  wish.  I  Stainton  W.  Moses
still  live.  Well,  you  will  know  me  in  time.  Wait,
for  me You  will  know  me  in  a  few  visits — S.  W.  M.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  great  confusion  exhibited
here  is  new.  The  Stainton  Moses  control  was  coherent  in
1895  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  pp.  36-41.).

(December  4,  1896.)

Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson. W.  S.  Moses  writes.

He  sfc  sfc  sN

W.  S.  M.  I  wish  very  much  to  see  you  and  hear  more,  also  give

you  more  light.
E.  H. Moses  ?  W.  S.  M.  I  am  he.

R.  H. Shall  I  go  on  reading  Mr.  Speer's  biography  of  you  ?
W.  S.  M.  Not  just  at  present,  but  I  would  like  to  answer  some

of  the  questions  put  to  my  friend  Doctor. He  has

been  telling  me  something  about  them.
R.  H. Shall  I  put  them  to  you,  the  ones  that  Fred  Myers

sent  ?

W.  S.  M. Very  good. Would  you  wish  me  to  answer.
R.  H. Of  course  I  shall  be  very  glad. Doctor  has  already
answered  the  first  and  second. I'll  read  them  to  you.


462


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


"  Have  you  any  recollection  of  any  existence  before
the  terrene  ?  "
W.  S.  M. None  whatever.

R.  H. No  recollection  of  an  existence  which  didn't  exist,  eh  ?

W.  S.  M.  Not  at  all. You  may  assure  of  this.

R.  H.  How  about  the  "  existence  of  a  governing  subliminal
self  during  life  "  on  this  earth  ?

W.  S.  M.  This  is  the  spiritual  germ,  the  higher  and  nobler  quali-
ties of  man.

R.  H. In  a  large  number  of  persons  this  is  undeveloped  ?
W.  S.  M. Quite  right,  and  never  becomes  developed  while  within
its  environment.

R.  H. In  other  persons  it  does  grow  and  develope  while  still

in  the  body  ?
W.  S.  M.  Yes  wonderfully.

R.  H. How  far  can  the  subliminal  be  a  guide  and  controller

of  the  ordinary,  supraliminal  ?
W.  S.  M.  Just  how  to  answer  this  question,  to  make  it  clear  to

you  I  am  at  the  moment  meditating
R.  H. Do  you  wish  me  to  wait  ?  W.  S.  M.  Yes

[Pause  of  two  or  three  seconds.]
W.  S.  M. I  can  explain  it  to  you  in  this  way.

Read  the  question  once  more. [I  repeat  as  above.]

Excuse  .  .  .  well  this  depends  upon  its  development.

In  some  cases  it  has  the  advanced  control,  in  others

primary

R.  H. You  mean  elementary  ?  W.  S.  M. Yes  elementary

R.  H. You're  thinking  of  primary  etymologically
W.  S.  M.  Yes  in  the  beginning  R.  H.  not  dominating.

W.  S.  M.  in  embryo. I  have  a  very  good  knowledge  of  the

power  of  the  subliminal.
R.  H. You  must  have.

W.  S.  M.  It  is  what  interests  and  attracts  me  particularly.

R.  H.  How  about  the  increased  control  of  the  lower  func-
tions of  the  body,  the  vaso-motor  system — the  thera-
peutic aspects. Is  this  by  the  subliminal  ?

W.  S.  M.  Yes,  quite.  In  the  more  spiritual  and  high  minded
man  it  is  seen  by  the  wonderful  control  which  such
a  man  has  so  to  speak  over,  for  instance  a  large  con-
gregation. Do  you  understand  ?


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  463


B.  H.  That  is  one  of  the  effects  of  the  subliminal  ?  But
that  is  not  the  particular  question  I  meant  to  ask.

W.  S.  M.  I  do  not  think  I  fully  understand  the  question.  Speak
more  slowly  if  you  please. [I  begin  to  repeat.]

W.  S.  M.  Yes  and  over  his  physical  organism  as  well.

R.  H.  It's  really  part  of  his  higher  self  that  controls  his  lower
physical  organism  ?

W  S.  M.  Yes,  quite.  It  is  exactly,  making  such  a  person  the
ideal  man  so  to  speak.

R.  H.  Then  Myers's  illustration  of  the  spectrum,  beyond  the
violet  end  the  higher  powers,  clairvoyance,  spirit-
communication  and  so  on,  and  below  the  red  end,
control  of  the  lower  functions  of  the  body,  etc.,  etc.,
is  quite  justified  ?

W.  S.  M.  It  for  a  mortal  man  to  solve  could  not  be  more  so,
i.e.  to  say  he  has  solved  the  problem  to  a  wonderful
extent  in  this  one  particular.  He  has  been  helped
and  impressed  by  higher  spiritual  intelligences  for
many  years  ;  Myers  in  particular.  This  is  of  the
most  intense  interest  to  me,  in  fact  all  my  guides
also.

R.  H.  Now  "  organic  and  other  subliminal  memories,  how
far recovered  in post-terrene  life  ?  " First  organic

W.  S.  M.  I  understand  fully.  I  understand.  They  are  disposed
of  entirely,  only  used  while  inhabiting  the  mortal
body

R.  H. How  about  the  other  subliminal  memories  ?
W.  S.  M.  Exist  always.

R.  H.  Things  which  have  lapsed  out  of  my  ordinary  con-
sciousness ?

W.  S.  M.  have  been  grasped  by  your  higher  spiritual  conscious-
ness, yet  may  never  be  discernible,  and  may  never
be  recalled  by  the  human  exterior  mind.  Have  you
this  ?

R.  H.  Yes.

W.  S.  M.  Some  of  my  words  are  entirely  inadequate  or  left  out.

[I  repeat  what  he  has  written.]  Exactly.  After
leaving  his  body  they  will  all  come  back  to  him,  at
least  be  uppermost  in  his  mind.


464


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


R.  H. They  will  be  recallable.

W.  S.  M.  Yes,  indeed.  He  will  find  his  mind  full  of  earlier
recollections,  and  after  having  finally  severed  his
connection  with  the  body,  he  the  real  man  has  com-
plete control  of  the  whole  entire  senses.

R.  H. I  don't  understand  senses  quite.

W.  S.  M.  not  senses  but  former  latent  or  hidden  consciousness.
I  have  forgotten  none  of  Myers's  theories.

R.  H.  Myers  says  that  he  rather  gathers  "  that  memories  are  lost
and  not  regained.'"

W.  S.  M.  Not  necessarily  so,  and  are  not  frequently  lost.

R.  H. Not  frequently  lost  ? W.  S.  M.  No,  on  the  contrary.

R.  H.  His  reason  for  thinking  so  is  that  it  seems  very  hard
to  get  old  memories  reproduced  from  spirits.

W.  S.  M.  But  this  one  difficulty  I  will  attempt  to  explain.  I
know  the  special  reason  of  this.  For  instance,  you
may  wish  to  communicate  with  some  special  friend.
Your  mind  may  be  impressed  with  various  incidents.
You  may  attract  this  one  special  friend  to  you.  He
or  she  will  appear.  While  in  the  act  of  communi-
cating with  you,  he  or  she  may  have  their  minds
impressed  with  various  other  names  not  the  same  as
those  within  your  own  mind.  Now  then  they  are
conscious  all  the  time  of  what  they  most  wish  to
express.  They  are  also  conscious  of  your  presence.
They  are  ready  to  give  you  some  possible  description
of  their  former  recollections.  You  are  at  that  moment
thinking  of  something  totally  different,  you  being
still  in  your  environment  and  more  liable  to  have
forgotten  other  circumstances  of  which  they,  he  or
she  for  instance,  are  trying  to  [slight  pause]  narrate.
.  .  .  You  have  not  always  followed  them  through
life.  You  are  not  and  never  have  been  thoroughly
acquainted  with  their  sayings  and  doings.  Some  you
have  forgotten,  while  everything  that  they  ever  did
or  ever  thought  of  doing  has  been  recalled  by  them.
They  now  are  trying  to  express  one  or  more  of  their
remembrances,  while  you  are  thinking  of  something
else.  This  is  given.  You  have  forgotten.  They  be-
come bewildered. You  are  sure  you  are  right.  They


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.


465


are  disappointed.  You  are  also  disappointed.  You
at  once  feel  sure  that  they  must  have  forgotten  all
their  earthly  remembrances,  while  they  have  not
forgotten  anything,  but  are  remembering  .  .  .  [undec.
more  ?]  no,  all,  every  thing.

R.  H. But  I  can't  read  that  other  word

W.  S.  M. it  is  obvious.

R.  H. Oh  yes. I  understand  your  meaning  perfectly  but  I

wanted  to  know  the  word  that  I  couldn't  read.
W.  S.  M. Yes,  but  it  does  not  read  as  I  wish  it.
R.  H. Oh,  all  right.

W.  S.  M.  Well,  while,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  a  delicate  and
difficult  matter  to  be  able  to  use  the  mortal  organism
and  light  of  mediums,  it  produces  not  infrequently
confusion.  [Hand  rests  on  my  head  and  hands  a
few  seconds.] Have  I  answered  all  ?

R.  H. I  would  like  to  put  a  specific  case.

W  S.  M.  Very  well.  We  at  the  time  however  feel  that  possibly
we  may  ourselves  have  forgotten.

R.  H.  Well  now  suppose  that  I  asked  you  to  tell  me  some-
thing about  Dawson  Rogers,  and  you  told  me  a  lot
of  things  that  would  be  true  about  John  Page  Hopps,
but  kept  using  the  name  of  Dawson  Rogers,  saying
that  he  was  a  clergyman  and  preached  and  one  thing
and  another  that  would  apply  to  Hopps  but  not  to
Rogers  at  all.

W.  S.  M.  Well,  you  see  this  may  be  due  to  several  causes  :  1st
the  poor  light  of  the  medium.  2nd  the  communi-
cator having  been  gone  from  earth  a  very  long  time.
3rd  the  communicator  having  (when  being  present)
when  communicating  .  .  .  having  in  mind  one  person
while  the  friend  in  the  body  has  another  entirely
different  person.  4th  the  long  absence  of  a  friend
.  .  .  the  longer  the  absence  of  a  friend  the  more  diffi-
cult it  is  for  them  to  convey  to  you  their  meaning.
5th  the  communicator  may  have  some  special  person
or  circumstance  in  his  or  her  mind  which  may  have
had  or  played  an  important  part  in  their  lives.  This
may  be  the  one  thought  which  at  the  moment  may

impress  their  mind,  and  which  has  or  may  have  been

2g


466


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


a  great  source  of  distress  to  them.  Should  such  be
the  case  it  would  almost  invariably  [Four  attempts
at  invariably  before  I  deciphered  it.  Then  a  pause.]
Read  [I  read  the  sentence  from  the  beginning.]  remain
the  one  thing  uppermost  in  the  mind  until  there  had
been  some  explanation  given  by  the  friend  or  friends
in  the  body  to  give  them  assurances  and  comfort.
I  have  found  it  so  upon  several  occasions.
R.  H.  Suppose  that  Hopps  had  done  you  a  wrong,  and  it  was
on  your  mind  when  you  passed  out  of  the  body,  and
I  asked  you  about  Dawson  Rogers,  you  might  describe
the  things  about  Hopps,  and  yet  use  the  name  of
Rogers  ?

W.  S.  M.  Injury,  exactly.  Exactly.  Quite,  because  of  my  in-
ability to  express  other  things,

R.  H.  Where  there  is  a  strong  disturbing  influence  before
leaving  the  body,  there  is  sure  to  be  confusion  unless
the  spirit  has  an  opportunity  of  freeing  his  mind.

W  S.  M. and  almost  invariably  due  to  no  fault  of  the  spirits.

R.  H. Part  of  the  laws  of  nature  ?

W.  S.  M.  Exactly,  in  one  way,  yet  it  is  due  mostly  to  the  pure
and  devoted  friends  here  while  communicating  to
some  one  or  more  friends  in  the  body.  I  am  inter-
rupted [?]  and  weak.  I  must  go  out.  I  can  no  longer
speak  coherently.  S.  M.  I  will  take  up  this  subject
later  R.  H  Good.

(December  5,  1896.)

Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson. W.  S.  Moses  writes.
W.  S.  M. I  am  Moses,  Hodgson. I  am  a  little  discouraged  in

trying  to  express  my  thoughts.
R.  H. You mustn't be discouraged. You feel better  and

clearer  every  time,  don't  you  ?
W.  S.  M. Yes  I  do  certainly,  but  I  cannot  always  keep  my

thoughts  clear  and  uninterrupted.
R.  H. When  you  are  no  longer  clear  I  can  generally  tell,  and

you  can  generally  tell,  and  then  you  can  have  a  rest.
W.  S.  M. Yes. I  am  so  anxious,  so  very  anxious,  you  see,  to

be  able  to  enlighten  you.
R.  H. It  will  all  come  in  time.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  467


W.  S.  M.  Now  before  you  hear  from  Imperator  please  go  on  with
our  former  subject. It  is  clear  to  you  ?

R.  H.  Clear  as  far  as  it  went.  It  was  only  your  last  sentence
that  was  not  clear.  We  were  talking  about  a  dis-
turbing influence  before  death,  and  how  it  produced
confusion.

W.  S.  M.  Yes,  quite,  I  fully  realize  this.  .  .  .  Read  my  answer.
R.  H. I  haven't  got  it  here.

W.  S.  M.  Never  mind,  then. I  will  endeavor  to  proceed.

Once  in  the  act  of  communicating  with  one's  friends
one  is  liable  to  make  many  mistakes  because  of  the
lingering  thoughts  of  some  former  suffering  or  dis-
appointment. This  will  explain  a  vast  amount  in
itself.  The  soul  so  to  speak  is  fully  conscious  of  its
earthly  troubles.  Yet  after  once  having  disposed  of
the  mortal  body  it  no  longer  retains  this  suffering,  yet
when  commimicating,  the  first  thoughts  are  of  the
past.  This  is  not  so  in  all  cases  however,  yet  it  is
so  with  many.  Well  now  if  suffering  is  discarded
with  the  body,  you  would  ask  why  one's  spirit  should
refer  to  this,  would  you  not  ?
I  will  answer  this.

Because  with  the  spirit  exists  love  ever,  it  is  the  soul
or  goes  to  make  up  the  soul  so  to  speak.  The  last  is
my  idea.

R.  H. Goes  to  make  up  the  soul  ?

W.  S.  M.  helps  ...  I  have  left  out  a  few  words  yet  .  .  .
R.  H. You  mean  that  Love  is  the  essential  element  of  the
soul  ?

W.  S.  M.  quite,  and  without  love  we  should  be  all  at  sea.  Con-
sequently the  spirit  feels,  realizes  feeling,  and  this
accounts  for  so  many  affectionate  messages  being
given.

R.  H.  Its  emotional  nature  is  not  so  barriered  in  as  it  is  in
this  world  ?

W.  S.  M.  Not  so.  No  indeed,  it  is  freer  much,  and  the  whole
spiritual  world  so  to  speak  is  embalmed  with  diviner
love. [Difficulty  in  deciphering  embalmed.]

W.  S.  M.  I  think  you  have  the  idea  which  I  am  trying  to
give.


468


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


The  whole  of  your  atmosphere  is  full  of  tender  love

and  solicitous  care  and  affection.
Absolutely. The  coarser  nature  has  been  laid  aside.

Hence  the  subliminal  .  .  .  understand.
I  don't  quite. Not  if  that's  a  complete  sentence.  Per-
haps it's  only  the  beginning  of  a  sentence. "  Hence
the  subliminal  "  and  then,  what  follows  ?
Oh  excuse  me,  I  thought  you  were  not  understanding
me  .  .  .  the

Subliminal  ?  W.  S.  M.  is  the  true  spirit  or  soul.

I  dont  see  that  that  follows  as  a  conclusion.
I  have  left  out  one  whole  sentence. Go  back.  [Hand
gestures  as  if  to  know  what  I  am  doing  with  my
right  hand. I  explain  that  I  am  writing  down  what
I  myself  say  that  there  can  be  a  complete  record.]
Understand  ?

Oh  I  do  now. [I  begin  to  state  what  Moses  has  been
saying.] I  wish  my  statement  to  you  to  be  as  simple
and  brief  as  possible.
[Wild  scrabble  of  hand,  and  thrash  of  arm.]
{And  here  comes  in  Doctor,  see  Appendix  to  Chapter
II.,  p.  383.}

D.

The  Imperator  Band.

(Nov.  11,  1896.)  Imperator' 's  first  appearance.
Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson.

After  the  usual  greeting  Phinuit  says  :

Ph.  There's  a  man  there  wants  to  speak  to  you.  He's  a
peculiar  man.  He  has  3  or  4  or  5  other  gentlemen
with  him  and  two  ladies.  There's  a  whole  basketful
of  flowers  for  you.  George  went  to  get  him  with
another  man  with  a  long  beard.  {Stainton  Moses.}
He's  a  great  writer.  He's  got  a  poetical  turn  of  mind.
He's  got  ...  do  you^know  what  a  priest  wears  when
he  is  in  the  body  .  .  .  well,  he's  got  that.

R.  H. Do  you  know  who  he  is  ?


R.  H.
W.  S.  M.
R.  H.

W.  S.  M.

R.  H.
R.  H.

W.  S.  M.


R.  H.
W.  S.  M.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  469


Ph.  Well,  you  speak  to  him  and  he'll  tell  you  who  he  is
himself.  *  *  *  You  speak  to  that  man.
[I  move  right  hand  {i.e.  the  medium's}  slowly  on  to
the  table,  and  explain  :  "  You  are  in  contact  with
the  light  in  the  hand  and  arm.  I'm  touching  you
with  my  hand.  This  is  my  head  (placing  hand  on
my  head).  Your  thoughts  will  come  out  in  writing.
I  put  a  pencil,  so,  between  the  fingers  of  the  medium's
hand.  This  hand  is  now  on  the  book  with  sheets  of
paper  to  receive  the  writing,"  etc.]
[Imperator  writes.]

Imp. 4  Imperator.

R.  H. I'm  very  glad  to  have  your  presence  here.

[The  writing  is  faint,  not  heavy.  The  pencil  moves  very
slowly.  I  continually  have  my  hand,  sometimes  my
left,  sometimes  my  right,  in  contact  with  the  medium's
hand.  The  usual  tendency  to  omit  letters  or  strokes
is  here  specially  marked.  There  are  frequent  short
pauses  as  though  from  exhaustion.  Nothing  suggests
incoherence  of  thought,  but  there  seemed  to  be  much
difficulty  in  producing  clear  writing,  or  indeed  in  pro-
ducing any  writing  at  all.  The  daylight  in  the  room,
the  shutters  being  closed,  was  not  very  good,  even
when  I  pulled  up  the  window  blinds.  In  copying  the
automatic  writings  of  Mrs.  Piper  I  do  not  as  a  rule
reproduce  any  misspellings,  omissions  of  letters  or
strokes,  repetitions  owing  to  difficulty  of  deciphering,
etc.  But  this  first  communication  of  Imperator  I
reproduce  in  more  detail  than  usual.]

Imp.  Oh  holy  father,  teacher  of  divine  goodness  and  wisdom,
we  beseech  that  thou  wilt  guide  us  in  our  desires  to
enlighten  this  people. Help  us  0  father.

R.  H.  Amen.

Imp. Amen. Guide  us. Give  us  light  .  .  .  more  strength  .  .  .
more  strength.
Thou  knowest  our  longing
R.  H. I  can't  read  that.
Imp. thou  knowest  our  lo
R.  H. I  can't  read  it [Much  pausing  here  ]
Imp.  thou


470  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

R.  H. show [Pause. I  repeat  show.]

Imp.  us  the  way  and  keep  us  ever  in  the  right  path.  Help
oh  all  wise  [It  looks  like  onalwise.  I  interpret  "  help
on. What  comes  next  ?  "]

Imp. Al  wise  R.  H.  Help  on  all  wise  ?

Imp.  Help  oh  allwise  [Still  written  alwise]  and  mighty  God
our  heavenly  father  to  speak  thrths

R.  H. truths  ?

Imp.  thy  heavenly  truths.  [Note  the  "  portmanteau  "  word
thrths  in  relation  to  the  problem  of  connection  be-
tween thinking  (i.e.  their  speaking)  the  words  and
the  reproduction  of  them  by  the  writing  mechanism.
Similarly,  strokes  are  omitted  from  each  of  the  words
thy  heavenly  truths.]

R.  H. help  us.

Imp. We  are  now  ailed  upon  R.  H.  Can't  read.

Imp. called  upon  to  give  light  to  our  fellow  men. Wilt  thou
give  us  strength  I  beseech  thee  Oh  our  father,  in  the
name  of  all  that  is  good  and  holy.  Amen.
I  will  now  sign  my  name  as  thou  art  my  witness  in  thy

omnipotent  presence. I.  S.  D.
{A good deal of confused and fragmentary  writing
followed, including several attempts at names —
among  others  Dante. The  following  sentences  also
were  written  : }

lair. Do  you  remember  our  old  preach  L.  Martin  Ma  Luther.

*  *  *  *

I  wish  to  be  understood.  Oh  God  lead  me.  Julius
Caesar  is  my  friend.  He  will  not  falter  by  the  way-
side. Not  he.

S}l  «|t  3|E  Jj4

I  will  return  to  thee  again  my  friend.

(Nov.  14,  1896.) Rector's  first  appearance.

Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson. Rector  writing.

[Forearm  moves  up  and  down  and  about,  from  elbow
joint,  feels  about  on  block  book,  clutches  it  and  appa-
rently wishes  to  lift  it  to  the  head  of  medium.  I  take
it  away  and  replace  it  on  table,  also  slightly  pressing
on  the  arm,  saying  :  "  You  will  do  better  in  this  posi-


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  471


tion,  etc." Finally  the  arm  takes  up  a  position  with
elbow  well  back  against  medium's  side. The  writing
is  strong  and  heavy  but  not  large  specially,  and  shows
a  tendency  to  the  back  slope.]
R. Who  are  you  ?  R.  H.  My  name  is  Hodgson

R.  My  name  is  Lidgates  [?]  and  I  am  a  graduate  of  Oxford
College  in  England,  sir,  and  I  am  glad  to  meet  you
here.  What  is  all  this  about  ?  I  am  myself,  sir.
I  am  Rector,  sir,  Rector.  I  am  Rector,  sir,  Rector
Rector  I  am  Rector.  I  am  here  on  a  mission  for
some  friend  of  mine.  I  am  a  good  friend  +  help  me
Oh  God  to  clear  my  mind.  I  was  so  happy  to  be  sent
on  this,  am  so  happy  to  be  sent  on  this  errand  of
love  light  and  recognition.  I  was  for  years  the  only
surviving  *  *  *  member  of  a  large  family  when  on
earth  and  I  went  to  Oxford  for  a  long  term  of  years,
and  I  am  glad  to  wake  up  I  know  [?]  here.  I  am
Sir  Thomas  [?]  L  and  John  Lidygate  [?]  a  brother
[?]***  I  am  Sir  Thomas  [?]  Liggate  [?]  yes,  sir
all  right  ...  of  Christ  College  .  .  .  yes  Rector  *  *  *
brother  to  John  [?]...  What  is  it  ?
R.  H. Can't  read

R.  I  am  Sir  .  .  .  [undec]  Ludgate  [?]  I  am  Sir  .  .  .  [un-

dec] I  am  he. I  am  he. I  am  here. I  am  he.
{End  of  Rector's  communication.}

It  is  noteworthy  that  on  December  8.  1896,  Doctor  claims
the  name  of  Lydgate,  apparently  John  (see  Appendix  to
Chapter  VI.,  pp.  552,  553).  On  November  14  Doctor  com-
municated as  well  as  Rector,  and  asserted  that  he  was
Homer,  and  that  he  sang  of  Troy.

[February  13,  1897.) Imperator  on  Evolution.
Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson.
+  H  AIL
R.  H. Hail,  Imperator.

Imp. God  in  his  mercy  hath  been  good  to  thee.

Well,  friend,  I  am  in  readiness  to  speak  with  thee  on
the  subject  of  the  first  revelation  of  God  to  men  on
earth. Thou  hast  read  in  the  history  of  old  of  the


472


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


appearance  of  God  in  the  form  of  man  to  Moses.
Hast  thou  not  ?
R.  H. Yes,  in  the  Bible.

Imp. Yes,  well,  now  go  back  with  me  to  the  more  ancient
stages,  in  the  beginning  of  the  world,  so  to  speak.
He  made  himself  known  to  man  by  giving  signs  and
carrying  out  or  fulfilling  promises  which  he  instilled
into the  soul of  man. In  those days  of  ancient
history  the  world  was  more  perceptive  of  God  and  his
presence,  due  to  the  fact  of  their  being  purer  and
more  spiritually  developed.
They  were  much  more  so  than  they  have  ever  been
since. They  were  so  perfected  as  to  be  able  to  see
into  heaven,  so  divinely  spiritual  were  they  in  those
stages  [?]. [I  read  it  days  at  time.]
After  this  period  God  divided  the  mind  of  man  into  two
distinct  parts  viz.  the  will  and  U  D. After  this  the
world  became  thoroughly  changed  and  then  for  the
first  time  began  to  corrupt. Before,  however,  I  wish
thee  to  U  D  that  man  was  so  thoroughly  a  part  of
God  that  he  could  see  and  hear  him  speak  to  his
followers. Heaven  was  so  well  known  to  them  that
they  had  no  doubt  of  any  thing.
R.  H. The spirit-world and a future life were matters  of

common  knowledge.
Imp. Yes,  in  fact  they  were  so  pure  in  themselves  that  they
were  godlike.
I  weary. Thou  shalt  speak.
R.  H. Was  this  spiritual  state  the  natural  development  from

the  lower  state  of  savagery  ?
Imp.  It  is  known  to  us  to  have  been  one  of  the  first  condi-
tions according  to  the  natural  laws  of  the  divine  being
God  from  his  first  creation  of  man.
R.  H.  I  am  thinking  of  the  evolution  of  man's  body  and  do
not  understand  a  special  creation  independently  of
some  evolution.

Imp.  Yes  I  U  D.  There  is  a  point  on  which  I  wish  thy
thoughts  to  centre.  When  God  first  created  the
natural  body  he  was  so  distinct  a  part  of  it  that
speaking  of  man  as  the  first  spark  of  matter  was  so


LXXI.]


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  473


distinct  a  part  of  him  as  to  enable  him  to  be  able  to
discern  his  presence. So  pure  and  holy  did  he  first
evolute  man. Is  this  clear  to  your  U  D.
R.  H. I  think  I  understand  your  words.

Imp.  I  am  teaching  thee  what  actually  was.  I  am  not  teach-
ing theology,  neither  am  I  teaching  mythology.  I
am  teaching  thee  true  facts  as  they  are  known  to  me
from  the  first  stages  of  evolution.  Should  your  mind
not  be  in  readiness  to  U  D  this,  speak.

R.  H,  I  think  it  will  help  me  to  understand  better  if  I  express
briefly  what  is  the  common  view  now.  You  can
then  point  out  precisely  where  that  is  erroneous
and  where  the  new  teaching  is  markedly  different.
At  present  the  common  view  among  educated
persons

Imp.  theologians

R.  H. No  not  theologians,  scientific  men.

Imp. spiritually  developed  or  from  more  subtle  minds,  i.e.

those  who  have  had  simply  a  natural  scientific
training  ?

R.  H. I  think  that  it  is  a  view  generally  held  by  the  highest

minds  of  all  types  to-day.
Imp. thinking  minds  .  .  .

R.  H.  There  are  many  theologians  of  narrow  school  who  do
not  accept  this  view,  but  the  broadest  and  highest
spiritual  minds  that  I  know  of  do  accept  it.  That
is  process  of  evolution.  This  is  the  way  in  which
I  myself  would  put  it.  Some  scientific  men  would
omit  the  appreciation  of  the  divine  purpose.  Now
in  accordance  with  God's  workings  there  arose,  just
how  we  do  not  know,  but  we  suppose  by  gradual
steps

Imp. Yes,  exactly

R.  H.  a  simple  form  of  what  we  call  living  matter,  that  in  the
course  of  millions  of  years  that  was  succeeded  by
higher  and  more  complex  forms  of  organism,  that
correlated  .  .  .

Imp. Thou  art  putting  my  own  knowledge  into  expression.

Hast  thou  not  U  D  ?  Read  to  me  all  if  thou  wilt.
[Hand  indicates  previous  sheets. I  read  from  the


474  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

beginning  down  to  "so  divinely  spiritual  were  they
in  those  stages  "]

Imp.  Yes,  quite  right.  This  is  true.  Thou  needst  not  read
if  thou  wilt  give  thy  idea  of  what  I  thought  to  have
explained  to  thee.

R.  H.  The  difficulty  that  I  had  was,  what  you  said  seemed  to
suggest  that  man  in  some  way,  without  preceding
gradual  steps,  was  in  a  much  higher  state  than  now,
and  I  was  anxious  for  you  to  make  quite  clear  to  me
how  that  superior  state  arose,  when  we  have  been
thinking  that  there  has  been  a  gradual  development
throughout.  In  other  words  what  you  said  seemed
to  be  very  like  the  old  theological  dogma  of  a  perfect
state  of  man  in  some  paradise  ignoring  the  general
process  of  evolution.

Imp. Then  my  friend  thou  hast  not  followed  me  throughout.

In  one  of  my  previous  conversations  with  thee,  my
friend,  I  spoke  to  thee  of  evolution  caused  by  the
spirit.

R.  H. Yes,  spirit  behind  everything.

Imp.  Yes.  Well,  I  had  taken  up  my  present  conversation
from  where  I  left  off.

R.  H.  What  I  wished  was  that  you  should  emphasize  how  it
came  about  if  possible  that  in  those  ancient  days
man  was  higher  spiritually  than  now.

Imp.  because  in  the  beginning  of  the  ancient  stages  at  the
time  of  Melchizedek,  he  was  one  of  the  first  to  whom
God  revealed  himself  ...  I  have  taught  this  again
and  again  .  .  .
according  to  the  .  .  .  divine  laws  of  God,  he,  after  the
creation  of  man,  desired  to  make  himself  known  to
him  that  he  should  know  of  a  superior  being,
in  .  .  .  [undec]  he  had  made  him  a  part  of  himself.
Dost  thou  not  hear  me  ?

R.  H. I  can't  read  it.

Imp.  I  give  thee  a  clear  idea  of  the  evolution  of  man  due
to  the  divine  laws  of  God,  viz.  spirit.  Man  has
ignorantly  supposed  that  he  evoluted  from  the  lower
savages  according  to  the  laws  of  nature,  has  he
not  ?


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  475


R.  H.  A  great  many  persons  would  put  it  in  that  way  only.
But  I  .  .  .

Imp.  Thou  doest  not  maintain  that  theory.  Dost  thou  not
accept  the  higher  idea  of  spirit,  man's  evolution
according  to  spiritual  .  .  .

R.  H. No  other  is  thinkable  [Assent.]

R,  H.  I  have  held  that  just  as  my  present  body  has  been  evolved
from  a  simple  cell  in  a  few  months,  and  years,  so  the
bodies  as  it  were  of  the  human  race  as  a  whole  have
evolved  from  simple  cells  during  some  perhaps  millions
of  years.

Imp.  Yes.  Well,  my  friend,  what  I  am  most  anxious  to  have
thee  know  is  that  there  was  a  time  when  man  had
according  to  evolution  a  better  idea  and  knowledge
of  God  in  past  ages  than  he  has  in  the  present.  This
is  the  truthful  idea  which  I  wish  to  convey  to  thee,
to  thy  mind.

R.  H.  What  I  wished  you  to  do  was  to  explain  where  and  how
that  higher  knowledge  arose.  I  do  not  mean  in  every
detail,  but  in  general.

Imp.  It  arose  according  to  the  construction  of  men  in  those
days  and  through  higher  development  of  spirit  and
prayer.  The  whole  atmosphere  was  at  one  time  per-
meated with  spirit,  and  it  is  now  evoluting  to  the
same  standard. Is  that  clear  to  you  ?

R.  H. It  is  clear  as  a  statement.

Imp.  Yes,  but  it  cannot  be  explained  otherwise  unless  thou
canst  put  thyself  into  the  position  of  being  with  [?]
God  and  feeling  God  is  speaking  to  thy  spirit,  is  guard-
ing thee  in  every  word,  thought,  and  action,  as  did
his  followers  of  old. After  the  period  of  evolution

R.  H. can't  read

Imp. I  have  so  much  difficulty  in  making  thee  U  D  me.

Oh  God  help  me.  Speak.
R.  H. Do  you  mean  this, namely, that  as  man  began  to

develope  as  man
Imp. give  me  strength. [Hand  rests  lightly  against  my  head]
Imp. Yes,  I  will  try  once  more,  using  analogy.

+  Take  the  child  from  its  earliest  state,  when  it  is

simply  the  struggling  etherial  spark  in  its  covering.


476


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Its  mother  weaves  around  it  a  covering.  It  is  born
into  the  world.  It  is  then  called  an  infant.  Its  first
knowledge  of  life  is  when  it  first  begins  to  perceive
fight.  Then  for  the  first  time  it  appears  conscious.
It  is  from  day  to  day  nursed  and  tended  by  its  mother.
Then  comes  the  rational
R.  H. Can't  read.

Imp. It  becomes  rational  as  it  grows  to  man  or  womanhood.

Then  appears  the  intellectual.  Trained,  educated
according  to  natural  laws.  There  it  stops.  It  has
its  own  scientific  training  but  no  knowledge  of  God.
It  is  filled  with  knowledge  of  earthly  education,  but
has  no  knowledge  of  spiritual  things  or  God.  It  has
its  own  dogmatic  theories,  etc.  Not  so  in  past  ages.
After  this  period  of  development  God  made  him-
self known  to  man  as  he  is  doing  to-day.  The  soul
of  man  has  clearer  and  higher  perceptions  than  ever
since  the  days  of  Abraham  and  Moses.  Do  you  fully
[?]  U  D  my  meaning  ?

R.  H.  I  would  like  to  put  it  in  my  own  way  to  see  if
I  do.

Imp. You  remind  me  of  Moses. I  had  much  difficulty  in

making  him  U  D  me. You  must  and  will.
R.  H. I'm  sure  I  will.

Imp.  It  will  enlighten  thy  soul.  Thou  knowest  little  of  God
yet.

R.  H. Very  little  indeed.

Imp.  After  I  have  made  this  teaching  clear  to  thee  I  wish  to
speak  further  of  the  supremely  selfish  beings.  How-
ever, not  as  yet  Now  let  me  hear  thee,  pray.  I
am  desirous  to  know  of  thy  U  D  of  me.

R.  H.  Do  you  mean  this,  or  more  than  this,  namely  that — or
I  should  perhaps  say  less  than  this — that  in  the  pro-
cess of  evolution,  which  is  of  course  under  the
guidance  of  God's  Holy  Spirit

Impc  Amen

R.  H.  in  the  course  of  that  evolution,  as  man  began  to  exist
as  man  rather  than  merely  an  anthropoid  ape,  that
in  that  stage,  before  his  intelligence  became  so  to
speak,  self-conscious,  he  was  more  as  a  child,  and


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  477


that  in  certain  sections  of  the  human  race  they  were
open  to  the  influences  from  the  spirit  world,  to  in-
fluences from  possibly  messengers  who  had  come
from  other  planets  or  other  regions  under  God's
special  arrangement

Imp. direction,  yes  friend,  I  mean  nothing  more.

R.  H.  and  thereafter,  as  their  self  consciousness  grew,  and  the
exterior  consciousness  became  more  active  they
neglected  these  spirit  influences

Imp. and  teachings  .  .  .

R.  H.  And  followed  the  desires  of  their  bodies  and  so  their
mediumship  was  dimmed,  they  had  fewer  and  less
burning  lights,  and  so  their  own  darkness  brought
a  greater  darkness,  until  later  in  the  process  of
evolution,  there  has  been  a  possibility,  owing  to  growth
of  spirit  in  the  body,  for  fuller  communication  from
your  world.

Imp. Yes,  it  is  well,

R.  H.  At  the  first  I  somewhat  misunderstood  you  because  the
words  which  you  used  savoured  somewhat  of  the
words  which  have  been  used  so  long  in  the  world  to
express  a  view  of  God's  working  which  has  been  con-
demned as  erroneous  by  the  best  minds.  I  mean  the
references  to  creation  of  man,  and  in  the  beginning,
and  the  perfection.  These  words  suggested  to  me
a  misappreciation  of  what  you  really  meant.

Imp.  I  am  not  responsible  for  my  words.  I  am  obliged  to
borrow  more  or  less  of  your  own.

R.  H.  That  is  to  say,  you  have  a  thought,  and  the  words
depend  in  part  at  least  on  your  interlocutor.

Imp.  Yes.

R.  H.  There  will  doubtless  as  time  goes  on  be  less  misunder-
standing on  my  part.

Imp.  It  has  been  known  to  me  that  my  thoughts  were  not
clear  to  you,  which  is  more  or  less  of  a  sorrow  to  me,
as  I  am  one  of  God's  messengers  sent  here  to  give  thee
light,  and  when  thou  misunderstandest  me  it  grieves
me.

R.  H. In  time  .  .  .

Imp. Your  world  is  coming  into  contact  with  ours  according


478


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgiviclc.


[part


to  the  desires  of  God. I  am  pleased  to  know  that
thou  hast  finally  U  D  me.
R.  H. The  time  is  nearly  up.

♦  ♦  ♦  #


{February  26,  1897.) George  Eliot  on  Imperator.

Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson.  Control,  George  Eliot.
G.  E.  He  knows  and  understands  fully  every  desire  of  your
heart.  He  is  of  God,  and  is  ever  ready  and  patient
to  follow  him.  When  his  messengers  are  confused
and  imperfect  he  feels  every  pang  of  yours,  every
feeling  of  regret  or  disappointment,  yet  as  he  is  of
God  he  accepts  it  and  bears  the  sorrow  patiently,
enduringly,  and  goes  through  it  all  with  your  own
soul.  Yet  he  teaches  them  to  be  patient,  not  hurry,
make  every  sound  audible,  every  expression  as  per-
fect as  possible,  assuring  them  that  they  will  in  time
be  able  to  deliver  his  messages  clearly.  Should  you
know  what  his  work  is,  you  would  not  feel  your  own.
Every  word  thought  and  deed  of  your  own  is  under-
stood by  him.  He  sees  your  patience,  he  sees  the
struggle  you  are  having  with  his  messengers,  your
disappointments,  the  little  despites,  and  all.  When
he  appears  himself  he  is  in  constant  communication
[connection  ?]  with  the  Most  High  and  as  he  labours
with  the  machine  he  only  asks  for  help  and  goes  on
in  loving  trust  in  him  who  governs  all  things  wisely.
He  feels  the  injuries  which  you  feel  thoroughly,  yet
he  is  a  Saint  and  was  a  martyr  of  God  when  on
the  earth.


{March  10,  1897.) Imperator  on  Old  Testament  history  {specimen).

Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson.
+  HAIL
R.  H, Hail,  Imperator.

Imp.  Oh  God  our  father,  divine  and  Holy  Worker  [?]  on  high,
watch  over  us  and  lead  us  into  thy  divine  truth.
Give  us  light  and  knowledge,  oh  father  as  we  are  thy
children. Keep  us  ever  in  thy  loving  and  tender


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  479

care.  We  are  thy  servants  and  would  do  thy  holy
will.  Trusting  ourselves  in  thy  hands,  we  will  pro-
ceed with  our  teachings  of  thy  truth  4  •
Friends  of  earth,  we  are  pleased  to  meet  thee  and  what
thou  desirest  to  know  of  God  and  his  revealing  him-
self to  his  creatures  on  earth  we  will  make  known  to
thee.

Dost  thou  not  recall  the  Levitical  kingdom.
R.  H.  Yes

Imp. After  the  reign  of  M { Melchisedek }  what  dost  thy

book  teach  of  this  ?

R.  H.  First  Abraham,  then  Isaac,  then  Jacob,  whose  name
became  Israel,  then  the  sons,  then  Moses,  then  Moses
led  the  Israelites  out  of  Egypt  and  gave  them  the
commandments  which  he  received  on  Mt.  Sinai.

Imp. Left  them  where  ?

R.  H. Received,  the  commandments.

Imp. Whence  did  he  lead  them  ?

R.  H. From  Egypt.

Imp. According  to  thy  book

R.  H. According  to  the  Biblical  account  Moses  led  the  Israelites

out  of  Egypt.
Imp. Whence  .  .  . Whither  did  they  go  ?
R.  H. To  Canaan
Imp. Dost  thy  book  teach  this  ?
R.  H. I  think  so.

Imp.  Is  this  supposed  to  have  been  during  the  Levitical  so
termed  ?

R.  H.  I  do  not  remember  surely  whether  that  was  called  the
Levitical  or  not.

Imp.  This  should  be  known  by  thyself.  Thou  shouldst
question  on  points  not  understood  as  did  Moses  that
I  may  set  thee  right.

I  will  continue  on  all  important  points  not  yet  under-
stood b; thee.  [?]

M{elchisedek}  taught  the  people  to  know  of  God  .  .  .
that  he  was  a  direct  descendant  of  God  ...  a  direct
messenger  of  God's.  He  therefore  set  the  people  right
and  they  understanding  and  believing  in  him  and
his  teachings  became,  as  a  multitude,  followers  of  God.


480  Mrs.  Henry  SidgtvicJc.  [part

Before  he  ascended  he  told  them  that  there  should
be  another  kingdom  called  the  Levitical.  This  was
all  through  his  teaching  and  he  also  warned  them
against  any  thing  evil.  He  gave  them  laws  and  rules
which  they  were  under  all  circumstances  to  follow.
He  sent  forth  prayers  which  were  answered  in  the
eyes  of  the  people,  which  so  inspired  their  confidence
that  ever  after  his  teachings  were  handed  down  from
one  kingdom  to  another  until  the  ages  when  Christ
appeared.

M{elchisedek}  having  realized  the  higher  spiritual  per-
ception in  Abraham,  he  blessed  him  and  gave  him
much  power  to  .  .  .

[Hand  moves  slowly  backwards  and  forwards  several
times,  as  if  suggesting  that  the  block-book  should
be  put  in  a  different  position. I  alter  it  about.]

I  am  distressed.

[I  re-arrange  Mrs.  P.'s  head  slightly,  and  move  the  table
slightly.]

R.  H. Is  that  better  ?

Imp. I  am  pleased  .  .  .

...  to  act  among  the  people.  He  was  not  disreputable
as  thy  book  teaches.1  Such  theorizing  is  an  abomina-
tion. Neither  did  he  forsake  or  cast  out  his  wife.
This  teaching  is  a  mere  theorizing  or  conjecturing  of
the  people,  and  according  to  my  knowledge  of  Abraham,
I  consider  him  to  have  been  a  great  and  good  man
and  an  honest  upright  follower  of  God.  Such  is  our
knowledge  of  him  and  we  know  this  well.  He  was
inspired  in  his  work  and  followed  out  in  every  par-
ticular the  laws  of  God,  guided  by  the  spirit  of  M —
even  after  his  ascension.

R.  H. Yes. I  understand.

Imp.  We  explain  this  in  the  following  way.  He  was  inspired
or  controlled  by  his  spirit  all  through  his  life.  Then
Moses  received  the  direct  inspiration  whereby  he  was
enabled  to  write  on  the  tablets  of  stone  the  command-
ments of  God  which  were  given  clearly  to  him. U  D

1  This  refers  to  Abraham's  denial  that  Sarah  was  his  wife,  which  Hodgson
had  mentioned.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  481


R.  H. Yes,  quite  well.

Imp.  So  far  the  teachings  are  correct  and  reliable.  After
this  thou  wilt  recall  the  reign  of  David.

R.  H. Yes,  much  later  [Assent.]

Imp. After  the  Levitical.  R.  H.  Yes.

Imp.  Between  these  periods  there  is  little  to  say  of  the  direct
inspirational  teachings  of  the  messengers  of  the  Most
High.

Wouldst  thou  wish  to  speak  of  any  of  the  people  of  these
ancient  periods  between  the  days  of  M — ■  A —  or
Moses.  I  would  command  thee  to  ask  me  now.  We
know  not  just  how  much  truth  thou  hast  obtained
from  thy  book,  and  what  we  most  desire  is  to  set
thee  right.

R.  H. I  do  not  know  what  to  accept  as  true  from  the  Bible  ;

I  have  long  ago  ceased  to  regard  it  as  trustworthy.
Imp. Yes  I  U  D  this,  my  friend,  but  the  points  between  the

dep.  of  M.  and  the  reign  of  David  is  where  I  wish  to

give  thee  light.

R.  H.  I  simply  do  not  know.  e.g.  I  should  be  glad  if  you
could  give  me  an  account  of  the  line  of  spirit-teaching
during  these  periods  ;  e.g.  you  have  referred  briefly
in  your  teaching  to  Stainton  Moses  and  have  said
that  Melchizedek  inspired  Abraham,  also  Moses,  that
Moses  inspired  Elijah,  and  Elijah  inspired  Elisha.
You  have  not  gone  into  any  detail  so  far  as  I  know.

Imp.  Thou  dost  not  U  D  that  it  would  take  ages  upon  ages
to  do  so.  We  must  give  thee  light  in  brief.  There
is  so  much  to  relate  to  thee  my  friend  that  the  light
would  never  last  long  enough  for  us  to  give  thee  a  full
detailed  account  of  the  lives  and  workings  of  the
mediums  of  God,  never  friend.  Could  we  have  taken
up  this  light  in  its  earliest  stages,  we  could  have  given
thee  this  information,  but  it  is  too  far  gone  for  this.
So  I  would  ask  thee  to  hasten  and  get  all  the  infor-
mation concerning  them  viz.  the  messengers  of  God.
There  is  not  time  enough  for  details  in  full.  So  we
must  give  thee  all  we  can.

R.  H. I  shall  be  glad  if  you  will  give  me  the  outline  in  as  brief

a  form  as  you  think  desirable. I  did  not  quite  under-
2h


482


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


stand  what  you  wished  me  to  do. You  asked  me  if

I  wished  to  know  anything  about  the  persons  between

Abraham  and  David.
Imp. Yes  I  meant  by  this  the  specific  antecedents  of  any

special  one.
R.  H. No. I  .  .  .

Imp.  Let  me  repeat  once  more  that  the  very  first  +  appear-
ance or  revelation  of  God  was  when  M —  appeared.
I  have  given  thee  knowledge  of  his  goodness  and
power.  Yet  he  ceased  not  to  live,  but  did  five  and
so  act  upon  the  earth,  manifesting  himself  in  different
form,  that  he  actually  reigned  all  through  the  days
of  Abraham  M.  [Moses]  E.  [Elijah]  And  E.  [Elisha]
down  to  the  days  of  King  David.
First  he  inspired  A.  then  after  his  ascension  he  inspired
Abraham  .  .  .  Moses.  He  was  the  Most  High  and
powerful  spirit  and  assisted  the  spirit  of  A.  .  .  .  To
return  to  M. —  he  was  the  controlling  spirit  all
through  the  Levitical  kingdom  as  well  as  during  his
own  Priesthood. U  D.

R.  H.  Melchizedek  was  the  spiritual  leader  after  his  ascension
all  through  the  time  of  the  Priesthood  as  rulers  among
the  Jews.

Imp.  [Assents]  Yes  and  he  was  the  direct  messenger  who
inspired  A.  even  after  his  departure  from  the  earth.
The  wondrous  workings  of  M. —  will  never  be  blotted
out  of  the  history  of  the  early  Church.  He  inspired
the  spirit  of  A.  the  spirit  of  M.  .  .  .  The  spirit  of
E.  E.  and  also  David,  Samuel,  dost  thou  know  of
Samuel  and  his  wonderful  prophecies  ?

R.  H.  Yes.

Imp. All  this  is  known  to  us  to  have  come  through  M. —

R.  H. Do  you  mean  that  M. —  personally  inspired  all  these

persons  ?  [Dissent]
Imp. He  inspired  their  spirits.

R.  H.  Yes,  that  is  what  I  meant  by  my  question.  I  did  not
mean  to  ask  if  he  incarnated  in  them,  but  if  he  per-
sonally acted  on  Elijah  as  he  did  on  Abraham.

Imp. He  did. Do  not  mistake.

R.  H, For  example. Melchizedek  saw  Abraham  in  life.  After-


X  XI.]


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  483


wards  he  directly  inspired  Abraham.  Later  he
inspired Moses, but Abraham did not so  inspire

Moses  ?

Imp. He  inspired  Moses  through  the  spirit  of  A.
R.  H. After  Abraham  left  his  body  ? [Assent] but  not  per-
sonally ?  [Dissent]
Imp. Thou  art  just  beginning  to  U  D.

R.  H.  Then  the  figure  or  apparition  seen  by  Moses,  was  this
really  the  etherial  of  Abraham  ?  [Assent]  Acting
under  instructions  from  Melchizedek.

Imp. This  is  our  knowledge.

R.  H. Then,  later,  the  etherial  of  Moses  was  visible  to  Elijah,

and  Moses  acted  under  orders  of  Melchizedek.
Imp. M.  and  A.

R.  H. That  is,  Abraham  was  above  Moses  so  to  speak.  [Assent]
Imp. He  had  passed  to  the  higher  and  more  godlike  con-
dition.

R.  H.  When  was  the  last  appearance  of  Melchisedek  per-
sonally ?

Imp. When  Christ  appeared,  Melchizedek  departed  altogether.
R.  H. I  still  do  not  quite  understand. I  mean  by  personally,
not  as  the  .  .  .

Imp.  He  ceased  to  inspire  any  one  after  God  sent  Christ.  He
then  left  his  work  to  him.

R.  H.  But  what  I  meant  rather  was,  when  was  the  last  time,
I  mean  roughly,  when  his  .  .  .

Imp.  I  will  give  thee  a  brief  account  of  the  last  inspirations
of  M.  when  we  meet  again.  We  will  take  this  from
the  days  of  Elijah.  We  will  give  thee  the  last  and
final  account  of  his  direct  inspiration  on  any  one.
Before  the  appearance  of  Christ.  We  will  take  this
up  from  Elijah.  I  will  give  thee  more  knowledge
of  King  David.  I  do  not  think  that  thy  book  has
given  a  truthful  account  of  him  We  have  met  many
here  who  have  preached  wrongly  about  David.  I
will  return  to  thee  and  give  thee  an  account  of  M —
and  his  last  reign.
Be  patient,  believing  in  the  power  of  the  Supreme.  Let
him  be  thy  guiding  star.  More  when  we  meet  here
again.


484  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


God  be  with  thee.  + . I.  S.  D.

{Here  enters  G.  P.  and  writes  about  Imperator.}

R.  H. Halloo  George,  glad  to  see  you.

G.  P. Glad  to  see  you,  old  chap,  how  are  you  ?

R.  H. First  rate.

G.  P.  I  am  still  your  friend  H,  and  .  .  .  light  is  not  good
just  now.

[I tell him briefly about the sympathetic  messages
of  some  of  his  friends,  etc.]
G.  P. Very  nice. I  am  delighted.

How  is  his  Holiness  getting  on,  H  ?  He  is  very  high,
farther  from  the  earth  than  anyone  who  comes
here.

R.  H.  He  does  not  seem  ever  to  get  confused,  but  some-
times it  seems  as  if  he  did  not  give  his  information
in  the  way,  for  example,  you  would.  As  if  his
mind  was  different  in  some  way  from  ours.

G.  P.  Well  if  you  could  see  him  as  I  do  you  would  say  it
was.  In  what  way  does  it  seem  different,  H  ?  He
is  nearer  the  sight  of  God.

R.  H.  Perhaps  it  is,  I  suppose  it  is,  due  to  the  difficulties
in  communicating.

G.  P. Answer  my  question,  old  man. R.  H.  Can't  read  that.

G.  P.  Answer  my  question.  I  have  been  so  near  to  you  and
told  you  so  much  about  our  life.

R.  H. For  example  I  have  asked  about  the  course  of  Spirit
teaching  from  the  beginning,  on  Jewish  lines.

G.  P. Well  he  knows  if  any  one  does.

R.  H.  Exactly.  He  seems  to  know,  but  he  does  not  convey
it  to  me  in  the  straight  way  in  which  I  would
convey  it  to  you  in  a  brief  outline  history.

G.  P.  Yes  he  will  in  all  probability  if  he  returns  a  few  times
in  succession.

R.  H. It  is  very  general  as  he  gives  it.

G.  P.  He  is  a  great  deal  with  your  friend  Moses  and  talks
with  him  in  the  very  same  way.

R.  H.  Well,  George,  Moses  is  a  very  dear  fellow,  but  his
mind  is  very  different  from  mine.  It  may  be  a
superior  mind  in  many  ways,  but  Moses  had  not  a


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  485

scientifically  trained  mind,  and  he  placed  much
more  credence  in  the  biblical  history  than  I  do.

G.  P.  Yes.  I  know,  H,  unlike  ourselves,  and  is  very  narrow
I  call  him  in  many  things.

R.  H.  George  Eliot's  type  of  mind  is  more  like  the  kind  of
mind  we  wish  to  influence,  and  the  kind  of  informa-
ation,  or  perhaps  I  should  say  the  form  in  which
the  information  is  given,  she  would  be  a  good  judge
of,  if  she,  as  I  suppose  she  does,  still  retains  the
kind  of  mind  she  had  when  incarnate.

G.  P. Can  you  not  judge  from  what  she  says. R.  H.  Yes.

G.  P.  Very  well.  Imperator  knows  this  as  well  as  any  one,
and  he  has  sent  her  here  because  he  knows  this,
and  I  assure  you,  H,  that  beyond  His  giving  you
the  history  of  the  .  .  .  what  is  it  ?

R.  H. The  early  course  of  spirit-teachings.

G.  P. Revelation  eh  ?  R.  H.  Yes.

G.  P.  He  cannot,  neither  can  Moses,  nor  any  the  rest  of
them  give  you  the  scientific  knowledge  which  you
wish,  H.

R.  H. They  can't  do  it  ?

G.  P.  No.  I  know  they  are  much  higher  and  far  beyond
G.  E.  and  G.  P.,  but  they  cannot  handle  this
machine  as  we  can.

R.  H. I  supposed  it  was  due  in  some  way  to  that.

G.  P.  Yes,  H.  They  are  very  high  and  religious  and  this
is  my  path.

R.  H. I  hope  mine  too.

G.  P. I  know  you  will  get  better  things  of  the kind  you

wish  in  time
R.  H.  Good.

G.  P.  Yes.  But  do  not  forget  me.  R.  H.  Not  much,  I  won't.
G.  P. Yours  ever. G.  P.

G. E. is in England, working like  ...  on  another
light. G.  P.

[Mrs.  Piper  murmured  something  too  low  for  me  to
catch, and as she  recovered normal  consciousnes
said  that  she  saw  George  Pelham  grinning  at  her.
"  I  haven't  seen  him  for  a  long  time."]


486


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


(March  29, 1897. Imperator  on  Old  Testament  history  (further
specimen).

Sitter  and  Recorder  Hodgson.

[Imperator  writes]

+  HAIL

R.  H. Hail,  Imperator.

Imp. Friend,  we  greet  thee.

Should  we  not  inspire  the  spirit  of  this  body  with
the  Holy  Spirit,  we  should  at  times  be  subjected
to  other  spirits  not  preferable  [?]  .  .  .  from  other
spheres.  We  know  of  higher  and  better  spirits
whom  we  prefer  to  bring.  We  have  faith  that  we
shall  be  all  powerful.  We  are  working  in  faith.
And  without  faith  we  would  indeed  be  lost
We  move  in  many  different  ways.  We  act  upon  the
minds  of  mortal  men  in  many  ways,  unlike  to  those
of  the  earth-bound  spirits.  We  do  not  and  will
not  allow  those  to  subject  themselves  to  anything
evil  or  carnal.  We  not  only  purify  the  souls  of
men  upon  thy  earth,  but  we  purify  the  air  which
they  breathe.  The  air  being  the  breath  of  life  and
a  symbol  of  God,  we  must  begin  purifying  and
cleansing  this.  Then  we  act  directly  on  the  soul
of  man.  We  have  so  carried  on  our  work  ever
since  we  departed  from  the  life  known  as  earth
life.  So  we  continue  evoluting  the  minds  of  men.
We  will  speak  of  evolution  in  due  time.

R.  H. I  follow.

Imp.  We  intend  before  very  long  to  bring  such  spirits  into
thine  own  surroundings  as  may  be  seen  by  thee.
We  know  our  power  well.  We  worked  out  our
own  salvation  upon  the  earth.  We  obeyed  the
direct  laws  of  God  as  given  to  Moses  upon  the
Mount.  We  changed  not  the  laws  of  God,  as  has
so  been  stated.  But  we  have  known  from  the
beginning  of  our  lives  that  God  so  sent  his  Holy
Messengers  to  teach  his  word  to  men,  that  they
should  keep  his  laws.  From  the  beginning  unto
the  end  he  has  and  ever  will  reveal  himself  to  his
people. We  are  now  obeying  his  laws,  and  should


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.- — Appendix.  487


we  at  any  future  time  not  be  heard,  we  should  not
cease  to  live  and  act.  We  should  be  elsewhere
.  .  .  acting  according  to  his  desires.  We  have  not
always  been  understood,  neither  were  any  of  the
prophets.

M.  —  [?]  has  from  the  beginning  inspired  the  whole
number  Viz.  twelve  Jacob  Abraham  Moses  [?]  .  .  .
[undec]  .  .  .  [undec]  Levi  .  .  .  the  twelve  i.e.
through  Melchisedec.  And  in  consequence  of  his
being  in  direct  communication  with  them,  the
whole  world  was  .  .  .  [undec]  ...  in  a  state  of
exhilaration,  especially  among  our  people,  viz.  Jews.

When  we  choose  to  reveal  ourselves  to  thee,  friend,
thou  wilt  have  no  further  doubt  of  our  identity
or  teachings.  We  know  of  all  the  sayings  and
doings  of  our  High  Priests.  We  know  that  it  was
through  the  constant  communion  with  God  and
ever  abiding  faith  which  they  had  in  the  Most
High  that  enabled  them  to  carry  on  their  work
and  obey  His  divine  laws.

Friend,  we  would  ask  thee  not  to  accept  other  teach-
ings than  ours,  as  we  are  of  the  Most  High  ;  and
have  obeyed  his  holy  word  from  our  earliest  history.
R.  H.  I  am  not  following  any  other  teachings.
Imp.  We  wish  to  so  help  thee  in  thy  work  as  to  purify
thy  whole  spirit  throughout  thy  existence  like  as
we  did  with  Moses.

The  body  of  man  is  a  good  servant  but  a  very  bad
master.  The  spirit  is  ofttimes  poisoned  through
the  flesh. It  is  a  pity  that  such  sin  should  exist.

We  so  possessed  our  bodies  as  to  become  masters  of
them. We  have  become  exalted  in  consequence.

We  find  it  difficult  to  make  thee  hear  clearly,  friend.
We  have  faith  that  this  will  not  last  for  all  time.

Dost  thou  recall  the  mention  of  the  promised  land  ?
R.  H. Yes,  indeed. Canaan  ?

Imp. Dost thou remember where [?] the Jews  walked

through  the  Red  Sea  ?
R.  H.  Yes.

Imp. and  the  Egyptians  were  lost.


488


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


Yes. I  remember  well.

We  know  this  better  than  any  one.  We  know  the
truths  of  many  such  sayings.  We  had  but  to  obey
his  laws  and  through  our  faith  in  him  we  were
followed  by  his  people  and  we  worked  with  the
children  of  Israel  and  indeed  we  were  followed  by
them.  Dost  thou  not  see  the  drift  of  our  meaning  ?
Are  you  speaking  now  of  your  own  personal  embodi-
ment ?
It  is  well.

No  man  loveth  God  more. No  man  ever  descended

to  earth  that  could  give  thee  more  light.
We  find  at  times  a  poor  quality  of  light,  at  which
times  our  sayings  are  incoherent  and  vague,  yet
we  are  nevertheless  present,  and  we  see  and  feel
thy  feelings  of  j>ossible  doubt.  We  would  ask  thee
to  put  thyself  in  our  place.
I  will  try.

By  so  doing  thou  wilt  be  able  to  understand  us  better.
We  follow  out  the  instructions  given  us  before  we
enter  here,  as  did  the  prophets  of  God.

*  *  #  *

(May  31,  1897.) G.  P.  on  Imperator.
Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson. G.  P.  writing.

G.  P. How  is  everything  going  on  since  I  left  you  so  to  speak.

R.  H.  First  rate,  George.  A  good  deal  different  in  some
respects,  as  you  know,  much  less  disturbance  and
everything  quieter  and  calmer  and  clearer  under
the  arrangement  of  Imperator  here.

#  $  . $  $

G.  P.  He  had  been  watching  us  for  some  time,  I  have  since
learned,  but  could  not  and  would  not  take  charge
unless  he  could  be  trusted  implicitly  to  do  so.  He
is  all  that  he  professes  to  be  as  you  will  know  in
time.

(April  2,  1900.) Rector  as  preacher  (specimen).

Rector  {using  voice} —  —  —  this  we state from  absolute


R,  H.
Jmp.


R.  H.
Imp.


R.  H.
Imp.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper  s  Trance. — Appendix.  489


knowledge,  as  in  communion  with  the  Allwise  God  ;
He  has  sent  us  as  His  prophets  to  teach  His  people
that  if  they  will  live  in  Him  and  follow  Him  He
has  done  all  everything  for  them.  This  is  no  longer
hidden  from  thee,  is  it,  friend  ?
Sitter.  Says  that,  to  be  frank,  it's  not  as  clear  as  he  could
wish.

Rector.  Our  teaching  is  —  our  aim  beneath  all  this  is  to  teach
thee  how  thou  mayest  find  God,  to  teach  thee  to
live  in  Him  and  obey  His  laws,  to  teach  thee  that
thy  life  has  been  mapped  out  for  thee  and  that  we,
as  prophets,  are  enabled  to  see  it  and  foresee  it.
We  are  sent  to  enlighten  thee  and  teach  thee  how
to  live  so  as  to  best  meet  what  lies  before  thee.


(Dec.  8,  1902.) Claims  of  Rector.

Sitter  and  Recorder,  G.  B.  D.
Rector  {using  voice}  What  we  claim,  if  we  be  understood,
is  as  simple  as  the  reading  of  a  book.  Our  desire
is  that  all  mortals  should  understand  that  we  are
possessed  of  a  power  that  is  far-reaching  and  is
the  power  of  the  Most  High,  and  if  any  mortal
hath  put  himself  under  our  guidance  and  care  and
is  willing  to  follow  our  teaching  he  will  not  look
for  error  and  error  will  not  overtake  him.  That
is  so,  friend,  and  thou  wilt  see  it  if  thou  dost  see
us  as  we  are.

#  ♦  ♦  ♦

Ask  thyself  one  question,  friend,  why  we  should  return
here  and  inspire  thee  with  a  thought  which  hath
not  been  a  thought  from  the  Most  High  ?  He  is
thy  Creator,  He  hath  created  thee,  friend.

(March  17,  1903.)

Sitter  and Recorder,  G.  B.  D.
Rector  {using  voice}. Under  our  care  and  guidance  it  {the  light}
may  continue  for  a  long  time  to  come  ; but  its  con-
tinuing will  depend  absolutely  upon  the  use  that  is
made  of  it — if  it  be  used  for  spiritual  purposes  only,


490  Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.  [part

to  give  spiritual  help  and  guidance  and  knowledge  of
the  laws  of  God  to  those  whom  we  may  call  before
us  for  this  purpose,  the  light  will  continue  and
we  do  not  see  the  end  of  it  ;  but  if  it  be  used  for
the  purpose  of  material  tests  it  will  not  last,  no,
not  at  all.  Friend,  we  will  destroy  the  light  our-
selves if  there  is  any  further  so-called  testing  and
probing  for  proof  of  immortality  ;  there  has  been
sufficient  proof  given,  both  along  the  spiritual  line
and  the  material.  Now  if  we  cannot  sustain  the
light  and  use  it  for  giving  spiritual  teaching  and
advice  and  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  destruc-
tion of  unpleasant  earthly  conditions,  then  we  cease
to  act.

(May  24,  1904.) Dr.  Oliver  on  Rector.
Sitter  and  Recorder,  Miss  A.  M.  R.

A  voice  sitting.  Control,  Rector.  Communicator,  "  Dr.
Oliver,"  who  has  been  prescribing  medically  for  the  sitter.
The  following  is  part  of  their  subsequent  conversation  :

Dr.  O.  Yes,  Rector  is  repeating  for  me  my  sentences  as  best
he  can.  Rector  is  an  important  personality,  for
the  reason  that  he  knows  how  to  care  for  the  light,
how  to  support  it  and  how  to  keep  it.  He  is
appointed  by  Imperator  to  look  after  it.  He  knows
every  organ  of  the  body  and  knows  how  to  use
all  the  organs  that  are  necessary  for  him  to  use,
and  he  knows  how  to  keep  the  light  replenished
and  how  to  keep  others  from  using  it  to  the
detriment  of  it.  Therefore  he  is  exceedingly  im-
portant to  us,  although  he  is  a  little  old  fashioned
in  his  language,  but  he  is  learning — as  we  come
over  here  and  find  out  the  light  and  return  to  it
we  are  teaching  him  how  to  use  different  language.1

Sitter.  Well  is  it  because  he  lived  so  long  ago  ?

Dr.  O.  Yes,  he  is  very  quaint,  lived  many  years  ago  as  you
would  term  it.


1  This  may  portend  a  change  from  "  thou  "  to  "  you,"  but  the  change
did  not  take  place  till  October,  1905  (see  Chapter  IV.,  p.  137).


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  491


Sitter. Well  I  am  very  grateful  to  you —

Dr.  O.  I  will  be  off,  I  have  other  duties  to  perform  and  I
must  keep  to  my  duties,  but  I  am  very  glad  to
have  met  you  and  hope  you  will  profit  by  the
advice  which  I  give  you  *  *  *  They  tell  me,
Rector  and  the  other  priest,  that  they  are  going
to  close  the  light  very  soon —

Sitter. You  mean  for  the  season.

Dr.  0.  •  in  consequence  of  that  I  would  like  to  hear  from

you  before  if  it  is  convenient.  Meanwhile  may  all  the
good  in  that  world  be  yours,  health,  wealth,  pros-
perity, especially  health  and  all  that  goes  to  make
a  perfect  life. Goodbye, God be with  you.

Sitter.  Good-bye.

Dr.  O. If  I  can  be  of  service  to  you  at  any  time  please  call

upon  me
Sitter.  Thank  you.

[Hector  returns.]

R.  Friend,  hath  the  doctor  finished  ?  Sitter.  Yes.

R. Very  well,  then  here  is  a  friend  for  you.
Sitter.  He  is  a  friend  ?

R. Here  is  a  friend. I  will  step  aside.


E.

George  Eliot  Control.
Also  Failure  of  Cross-Correspondence  Experiments.

(March  5,  1897.)  1

Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson.

[Mrs.  P's  subliminal  murmured  some  words  to  the
effect  "  I'll  never  be  able  to  remember  that,"
followed  by  words  that  sounded  like  two  or  three
lines  of  poetry,  but  I  was  unable  to  catch  what
was  said.]


1 1  give  the  whole  record  of  this  sitting  and  of  the  next  quoted
(March  30,  1897),  including  the  going-into-trance  and  waking-stages,
to  serve  as  specimens  of  complete  records.


492


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


[George  Eliot  writes]
G.  E. I  am  yours  most  truly,  George  Eliot.

When  the  pains  of  life  are  over  .  .  .  [?]

and  from  the  earth  you  .  .  .  [?]

when  you  bereft  of  earthly  cares  [?]
R.  H. Can't  read  any  of  that  except  "  George  Eliot  ".
G.  E. from  earthy  care  bereft  .  .  .

and  from  thy  body  .  .  .  [?]

[The  hand  quivers  a  good  deal,  and  the  writing  is
hurried  and  bad.  I  take  the  hand  and  hold  it
gently  and  explain  that  the  writing  is  not  legible,
etc.  From  what  follows  it  appears  that  G.  E.  was
not  talking  to  me,  but  to  Mrs.  P.,  and  that  the
words  were  written  by  her  unintentionally.]
G.  E.  Pleased  to  see  you.  I  am  yours  most  truly  George
Eliot.  I  was  speaking  to  a  lady  whom  I  saw
passing  over  the  boundary  line.  I  was  reciting
poetry  to  her.

We  are  going  at  the  suggestion  of  His  Holiness  to
take  the  spirit of  the  medium  through  space  to
another  channel. He  is  preparing  for  this  journey.
Do  you  remember  me  well.
R.  H. I  remember  your  works  very  well.

G.  E. I  had  a  sad  life  in  many  ways,  yet  in  others  I  was
happy. Yet  I  have  never  known  what  real  happi-
ness was  until  I  came  here.
What  errand  can  I  do  for  you  %

R.  H. Do  you  think  you  can  take  a  message  yet  to  the
other  light  ?

G.  E. I  have  just  returned  from  there  and  find  the  arrange-
ment and  conditions  are  not  completed  yet.
R.  H. Have  you  any  further  news  about  the  other  light  ?
G.  E. I  have.

R.  H. I shall be glad to hear anything you have  to
tell  me.

G.  E. Did  you  know  that  I  had  had  several  conversations

with  my  old  friend  Myers  ?
R.  H. Do  you  mean  since  .  .  .

G.  E. No. I  have  seen  you  here  before  a  long  time  ago,
and  after  that  I  went  there


LXXI.]


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance,. — Appendix.  493


R.  H.  Yes,  he  told  me  that  he  had  received  a  message
through  that  light  informing  him  of  the  message
which  you  gave  here  so  long  before.

G.  E. About  his  work  ?  R.  H.  Yes.

G.  E. Yes  I  gave  it.

R.  H. I  have the  precise words as  written by my  friend

Miss  ...  [Q  ...  ]  for  you
G.  E. Yes  I  have  this  one  pass-word  which  I  will  give  there

viz.  Adam  Bede. My  reason  for  this  is  because  it

is  original  and  would  not  be  liable  to  be  taken  up

by  any  other  spirit  from  our  world.
R.  H. But  you  gave  me  your  pass-word  before. Do  you  not

remember  it  ?
G.  E. Yes,  indeed,  and  this  is  my  introduction.
R.  H. You  do  not  mean  that  you  will  put  aside  the  longer

one. [Strong  dissent.]
G.  E. Not  at  all. Oh  no  indeed,  but  this  is  for  recognition.
R.  H. Yes. I  understand.

G.  E. and  to  so  attract  his  attention  that  he  will  pay  strict

attention  to  my  longer  *  *  *
R.  H. Yes. I  see.

G.  E.  You  must  understand  that  it  is  not  always  easy  to
attract  one's  friends  through  a  medium  i.e.  in  cases
like  hers,  where  we  only  gain  partial  control.

R.  H.  Under  ordinary  circumstances  I  suppose  that  you  have
no  means  of  determining  in  her  case  whether  you
can  give  your  messages  or  not.

G.  E.  No,  indeed,  it  is  a  thing  which  remains  for  experiment
.  .  .  which  remains  to  be  seen  .  .  .  leave  out  thing
please  it  was  dropped  by  accident.

R.  H. It  remains  to  be  shown  by  experiment,  you  mean.

G.  E.  Yes.  So  faint  was  the  light  at  first  that  it  was
scarcely  discernible,  yet  with  keeping  our  eyes  open
and  feeling  so  strongly  the  desire  to  send  some
message  of  comfort  and  proof  of  our  existence,  we
finally  succeeded  in  discovering  the  etherial  glowing
around  the  body  of  the  young  woman.
All  friends  have  more  or  less  etherial  light,  especially
when  they  are  earnestly  seeking  to  find  some  friend
here


494  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.  [part

R.  H. Can't  read.  G.  E.  from  here,  i.e.  spirit

R.  H. What  do  you  mean  when  you  say  "  All  friends  have

more  or  less  etherial  light  ?  "
G.  E.  I  mean  to  say  when  the  soul  has  been  inspired  with
the  desire  to  reach  some  friend  here,  there  is  then
the  first  spark  of  light  which  beams  forth  from  the
soul  of  the  friend  and  by  its  own  law  attracts  some
friend  here.

I  was  an  unbeliever,  in  fact  almost  an  agnostic,  when
I  left  my  body.  But  when  I  awoke  and  found
myself  alive  in  another  form  superior  in  quality,
that  is,  my  body  less  gross  and  heavy,  with  no
pangs  of  remorse,  no  struggling  to  hold  on  to  the
material  body,  I  found  it  had  all  been  a  dream.
R.  H. That  was  your  first  experience.

G.  E.  Yes,  so  free  did  my  thoughts  flow,  so  light  and  free
was  my  etherial  being,  that  I  almost  immediately
understood  the  change  and  what  it  really  meant.

R.  H. This  was  your  very  first  feeling  ?

G.  E.  It  was.  I  had  the  most  beautiful  and  indescribable
feeling  of  freedom.  I  found  that  the  longings  which
I  had  had  previously  were  absolutely  a  material
thing.  The  moment  I  had  been  removed  from  my
body,  which  had  always  been  a  great  puzzle  to  me,
I  found  I  was  at  once  .  .  .
Read  ...  I  think  I  have  left  out  two  words.  I  am
not  sure.  Read  please.  I  wish  you  to  understand
me  well  ...  [I  read  above]  ["  I  found  "]  I  had
been  thoroughly  mistaken  in  my  conjectures.  I
looked  back  upon  my  whole  life  in  one  instant.
Every  thought  word  or  action  which  I  had  ever
experienced  passed  through  my  mind  like  a  wonder-
ful panorama  as  it  were  before  my  vision.  You
cannot  begin  to  imagine  anything  so  real  and
extraordinary  as  this  first  awaking.  The  balmy
air  of  spirit  life  which  we  immediately  enter  into
is  indescribable  and  beyond  your  power  of  com-
prehension. No  mortal  man  can  ever  know  or
realize  what  it  really  is.  It  is  simply  impossible
to convey this extraordinary life to the  under-


lxxi.J Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  495


standing  of  mortal  man.  He  must  have  the  experi-
ence before  he  can  even  picture  it  clearly  in  his
mind.  I  had  at  times  sat  in  my  own  room  absorbed
in  the  reverie  of  thought  and  fancied  that  there
must  be  an  indisputable  something,  but  just  what
I  could  not  conceive.  So  my  life  in  the  material
went  on.  I  never  knowing  or  realizing  more  than
the  mere  fancying,  until  (as  I  have  said  before)  I
passed  out  of  the  material  life,  which  was  so  puzz-
ling and  mysterious  to  me.
You  must  not  think  my  friend  from  anything  you  may
have  heard  or  known  of  my  life,  that  I  was  not  a
thinker.  Should  you  think  this  you  would  be
mistaking  me  altogether.
R.  H.  George  Eliot,  I  have  always  had  the  most  profound
admiration  not  merely  for  your  psychological  work
in  fiction,  but  for  your  clear  philosophical  insight
and  originality.

G.  E. Thanks  to  you,  my  friend,  for  such  pleasing  thoughts
of  me.

R.  H.  I  had  thought  with  regret  that  it  did  not  so  happen
that  you  met  with  convincing  proofs  that  another
life  was  waiting.  I  had  my  own  doubts  and
struggles,  and  probably  from  the  same  standpoint
as  yourself,  having  become  familiar  with  the  general
principles  of  modern  scientific  work,  especially
perhaps  being  affected  by  biological  studies ;  and
the  natural  effect  was  for  the  mind  to  be  impressed
with  the  negative  side,  and  the  apparent  absence
of  any  evidence  of  a  positive  sort  from  our  friends
who  had  departed.  It  .  .  .
[Disturbance  with  the  head  of  Mrs.  P.]

G.  E.  Rector  holds  the  other  side  and  begs  me  to  ask  you
to  assist  the  material  while  he  holds  the  spiritual.
Then  I  will  go  on  with  you.  Pardon  any  inter-
ruptions that  may  occur.  [I  re-arrange  Mrs.  P.'s
head  with  cushions,  etc.]
Better  so.  Thanks  to  you.  His  Holiness  watches  over
all  and  will  not  allow  any  thing  but  the  very  best
conditions  here.


496


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


R.  H.  I  only  wished  to  add  that  I  understand  your  former
point  of  view,  the  origin  of  the  quasi -agnosticism,
having  been  there  myself,  but  having  been  blest
in  receiving  evidence  which  brought  the  heaven
as  a  reality  to  my  mind.

G.  E.  You  cannot  realize  what  a  consolation  it  is  to  us
here  to  wake  and  find  all  so  clear  and  beautiful.

R.  H. Your  first  feeling  was  of  lightness  and  freedom.

G.  E.  Yes,  indescribably  free.  There  are  no  words  in  the
Anglo  Saxon  dictionary,  .  .  .  vocabulary,  with  which
we  can  describe  our  experiences. It  is  impossible.

R.  H. Better  take  another  pencil.

G.  E. Are  you  speaking  ?

R.  H. Change  this  please  [pencil].

G.  E. You  may  ajjproach  it,  but  that  is  all.

R.  H. Can  you  kindly  go  on.

G.  E. Yes  certainly,  nothing  could  give  me  more  pleasure.

I  wish  you  to  know  the  best  there  is  to  know,
so  far  as  the  human  mind  can  understand  com-
prehend [substituted  for  understand]
After  having  left  my  body  (which  seems  but  yesterday
in  one  sense,  yet  in  reality  must  have  been  a
much  longer  time)  [Hand  makes  movements  as  if
trying  to  turn  over  the  leaf  with  the  end  of  the
pencil,  the  page  being  nearly  finished.  Occasionally
a  writer  has  turned  over  the  page  himself]  I
passed  as  it  were  in  an  instant  behind  a  cloud
beyond  the  sight  of  mortal  eye,  realizing  fully
what  had  taken  place.

R.  H.  This  was  after  you  recovered  your  coherent  con-
sciousness.

G.  E. Yes  .  .  .

which  was  far  sweeter  than  waking  from  a  refresh-
ing sleep.  [I  interpreted  tvaking  at  first  as  recover-
ing] waking.  I  like  this  word  better.  You  must
not  make  my  words  out  wrongly.

R.  H.  When  I  decipher  incorrectly,  kindly  draw  my  attention
as  now.

G.  E. I  will  try.

I,  as  I  said  before,  saw  everything  and  realized  every


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  497


thought  I  ever  had.  Then  from  this  moment  up
to  the  period  of  .  .  .  How  can  I  express  it  to
you  ?  ...  A  few  days  I  had  a  feeling  of  remorse,
but  it  did  not  last  long.  When  this  passed  away,
I  began  to  feel  happier  than  I  had  ever  been  through
the  whole  course  of  my  earthly  existence.  Nothing
remained  to  trouble  my  soul.  I  was  free  and
content.  I  immediately  sang  songs  of  love,  realizing
I  was  a  part  of  love  itself.
I  cannot  tarry  much  longer  with  you,  my  friend,  but
if  you  would  have  me  say  more  of  my  life  here,
call  for  me  in  spirit,  i.e.  in  thought.

R.  H.  I  should  be  very  pleased  for  you  to  go  on  some  time
and  give  me  so  to  speak  a  complete  detailed
history  of  your  experiences  since  your  first  reaching
the  world  where  you  now  are,  whom  you  first  and
afterwards  met,  who  told  you  of  the  new  life,  etc.

G.  E.  Ah  but  my  spirits  were  not  so  depressed  but  what  I
knew  and  realized  fully  what  had  taken  place.  I
knew  almost  immediately,  as  I  have  previously
stated.  My  life  while  in  my  body  was  filled  with
love.

R.  H. I  know  it.

G.  E. No  woman  on  your  planet  to-day  ever  expressed  more.

Love  is  spirit,  love  is  everything.  Where  there  is
not  love  .  .  .  Where  love  is  not,  there  is  nothing
«  .  .  there  nothing  is.

R.  H. "  Where  love  is  not,  there  nothing  is."  [Assent]

G.  E. Man's  soul  is  love.

R.  H. Yes,  in  its  nature.  [Assent]

G.  E.  woman's  also.  Yes,  it  is  the  one  thing  universal.  We
pour  forth  light  over  our  own  mediums,  and  act
thereupon  until  we  reach  you.  I  think  my  thoughts
must  pour  to  higher  realms  than  this.

R.  H. Feel  yourself  getting  dim  ?

G.  E. I  feel  like  .  . Soar. My  thoughts  must  soar. I  feel

like  one  blinded.

R.  H. Perhaps  you  had  better  not  stay  longer  now.

G.  E. I  will  meet  you  here  again.

R.  H. I  shall  be  very  pleased.

2  i


498  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

G.  E.  I  have  been  happy  in  speaking  with  you,  because
it  may  be  the  means  of  reaching  some  other  friend
who  perhaps  has  known  me  not  since  I  left  the
earth.

R.  H. Yes,  indeed.

G.  E. Could  you  not  give  me  strength  to  remain  ?

R.  H.  Perhaps  you  can  take  some  from  me  [I  rest  the  hand
against  my  head]  You  have  literally  joined  "  the
choir  invisible,"  but  invisible  only  to  ordinary
mortal  eye,  not  invisible  because  non-existent.

G.  E. Thanks  for  the  strength  received.

I  may  not  be  visible  i.e.  in  body,  but  I  am  determined
to  blow  the  bugle  so  long  as  I  can  reach  a  friend.
George  Eliot  is  not  one  to  be  embarrassed  by  the
loss  of  a  word.  She  will  cling  to  her  friends  for-
ever and  anon.  Many  were  the  walks  she  had  in
life  and  many  are  those  she  is  taking  now,  and
one  she  must  take  is  at  this  present  moment.
Adieu  until  we  meet  again.  Yours  ever,  George
Eliot.

R.  H.  Adieu.

[Rector  writes]

Rector.  May  the  blessings  of  Heaven  rest  on  you  .  .  .  [Hand
moves  out  to  Spirit] thy  head. +  I.  S.  D.  (Rector)
[Leaves  hand — returns  again] No  more.
R.  H. Doctor  ? [Finger  traces] Rector  ?  [Assent]

[Mrs.  Piper's  subliminal  speaks]  {i.e.  Waking-stage}
The  Bishop  .  .  .

I  the  Bishop  tell  you  to  go  forth  to  thy  body  and
inhabit  it  and  take  this  message  for  me.  May  the
Supreme  Being  watch  over  guide  and  protect  thy
footsteps  all  through  thy  life  and  forever  .  .  .

.  .  .  listen  to  the  teachings  of  thy  friend  I.  S.  D.  and
be  patient.  I  must  leave  thee  now  .  .  .  Go  forth
and  take  up  the  duties  which  are  set  before  thee,
in  patience.

Scent  of  lilies

[My  head  is  bent  over  the  table  writing,  and  Mrs
P.'s  attention  apparently  is  drawn  to  it]


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  499


Your  hair  isn't  as  fine  as  the  rest,  is  it  ?
R.  H. As  fine  as  what  ?

It  isn't so fine as the other  people's here  in  this
room  .  .  .
R.  H. People  in  this  room  ?

[Normal] Oh  what  am  I  talking  about  ?

{March  30,  1897.)

Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson.
[Mrs  Piper's  subliminal.] {i.e.  Mrs.  Piper  going  into  trance}

Those  are  the  loveliest  flowers  I've  ever  seen.  I  want
a  few.

[George  Eliot  writes]
G.  E. George  Eliot.  R.  H. Pleased  to  see  you.

G.  E.  Very  happy  to  return.  [Arm  moves  a  little  about
table]

G.  E.  I  wish  plenty  of  room.  I  have  it  where  I  am.  [I
touch  cushions  and  push  them  a  little  further  away
from  writing-table]

R.  H. All  right  ?

G.  E. Yes,  all  is  very  satisfactory,  thanks.

Now  returning  to  our  former  subject  I  would  say  it
would  be  just  as  well  to  go  on  from  where  I
left  off  .  .  .  Beginning  from  where  I  left  off
.  .  .  Do  you  know  a  gentleman  by  the  name  of
Rector.

R.  H.  Yes.

G.  E. He  will  take  charge  of  the  body  here.  R.  H.  Good.

G.  E.  I  was  speaking  about  the  palace,  into  which  I  had
been  escorted  by  a  gentleman.
We  passed  on  through  the  long  corridor  up  a  flight
of  stairs  as  it  were  to  the  first  reception  room.
In  passing  through  we  passed  several  very  dis-
tinguished-looking gentlemen,  with  the  most  perfect
forms  and  faces  I  had  ever  seen.
[R.  H.  notes  :  Occasionally  in  the  writing  a  word  will
be  added  afterwards,  and  some  indication  of  its  place
given,  e.g.  in  the  above  :  "  distinguished  gentle-
men." Then  "  looking  "  was  written,  and  hand
gestured  to  the  words  above,  for  me  to  read  it  in


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


its  right  place.  I  read  "  distinguished -looking  gentle-
men."] [Assent]

Among  those  whom  I  recall  were  Shelley,  of  whom  I
used  to  be  very  fond.

Now  listen  because  I  am  trying  to  give  you  an
absolutely  true  and  accurate  account  of  my  experi-
ences and naming the gentlemen whom I  met.

Chaucer  .  .  .  Shelley  and  Chaucer  the  original  .  .  .  and
only  writer  of  Canterbury  tales.

Then  Burns.

Robert  Burns  ?  G.  E.  Yes

I  can't  read  the  word  before  Burns.
Also  .  .  .  then. Is  it  important  for  you  to  interrupt
me,  friend  ?

Let  me  explain  [Hand  moves  as  if  to  write]  Let  me
explain.  If  I  cannot  read  the  words,  it  is  obviously
impossible  to  go  on  until  I  know  what  you  are  saying.
I  must  therefore  interrupt  and  ask  you  to  repeat  until
I  understand.  If  you  will  be  a  shade  slower,  I  hope
that  there  will  be  no  need  of  interruption.

Thanks,  very  much.  But  it  is  difficult  indeed  for  spirits
to  control  and  be  patient  because  we  know  we  can-
not have  light  long  at  a  time.  We  desire  to  make
the  best  of  it  also  take  advantage  of  it  while  it  lasts.

The  more  haste  the  worst  speed.

Very  good.  We  will  do  the  best  we  can.  You  will
kindly  return  to  Burns.

I  saw  him  in  the  same  building  with  the  before
mentioned  spirits.  I  also  saw  the  original  Adam
Bede.  You  perhaps  can  imagine  my  delight  in
meeting  spirits  of  whom  I  had  thought  so  much
when  in  my  body.  I  also  met  Homer  our  dear
old  Greek  poet,  and  I  stopped  and  spoke  with  each
of  them.  This  was  to  me  the  most  delightful
experience  I  had  had  at  all.

They  instantly  arose  from  their  seats  as  we  approached
them,  and  extending  their  hands  to  us,  gave  us
their  most  cordial  greetings,  expressed  much  delight
in  seeing  us  and  began  speaking  of  things  which
interested  them  the  most. They  showed  us  about


LXXI.]


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  501


the  palace  and  gave  us  full  instructions,  illustra-
tions, of  their  lives  since  entering  spirit.

We  passed  on  from  one  to  the  other,  until  my  mind
was  satisfied  with  its  longings,  and  then  we  bade
each  good  bye  and  left  the  palace  of  the  writers
and  poets,  returning  to  our  own  home  and  friends.
Such  a  perfect  life  of  harmony  and  peace  no  mortal
mind  can  comprehend.  There  they  were,  each  at
his  own  work  in  a  palace  of  beauty  indescribable
to  mortal  minds.  However  no  one  could  give  you  a
clearer  description  of  this  life,  its  laws,  its  sur-
roundings, its  beauties,  than  George  Eliot.  I  do
not  speak  in  egotism,  but  I  have  had  a  beautiful
experience  since  I  came  here.  I  know  and  under-
stand your  desires  too,  as  well  as  any  one  can.

I  will  give  you  another  description  of  one  of  my
experiences.

One  does,  as  perhaps  you  can  imagine,  long  to  see
those  of  whom  they  have  heard  and  read  a  great
deal.

R.  H. Yes,  indeed.

G.  E. This  you  will  find  will  be  one  of  the  things  you  will
desire  first.

R.  H. That  seems  to  me  highly  probable  for  most  people.

G.  E. Yes,  it  was  in  my  own  case  most  certainly.

Now  I  wished  to  see  and  realize  that  some  of  the
mortal  world's  great  musicians  really  existed,  and
asked  to  be  visited  by  some  one  or  more  of  them.
When  this  wish  was  expressed,  instantly  several
appeared  before  me  and  Rubinstein  stood  before
me  playing  upon  an  instrument  like  a  harp  at  first.
Then  the  instrument  was  changed,  and  a  piano
appeared  and  he  played  upon  it  with  the  most
delightful  ease  and  grace  of  manner.
While  he  was  playing,  the  whole  atmosphere  and  his
strains  of  music  were  .  .  .  the  whole  atmosphere
was  filled  .  .  .  [Hand  gestures  for  me  to  read  the
words  into  a  sentence]

R.  H. The  whole  atmosphere  was  filled  with his  strains  of
music  ?


502  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

G.  E.  Yes.  And  they  were  accompanied  by  the  most  delight-
fid  songs  from  heavenly  spirit  birds  ...  As  the
strains  of  music  ascended,  they  seemed  to  awaken
these  beautiful  songsters,  and  if  you  can  place
yourself  in  imagination  with  me  you  perhaps  will
be  able  to  realize  in  part  what  these  beautiful
sounds  so  melodiously  poured  forth  meant  to  myself
as  a  listener.

R.  H. Very  wondrous.

G.  E.  The  whole  spirit  world  as  it  seemed  to  me  was  filled
with  music.  No  mortal  mind,  as  I  have  many
times  said  before,  can  ever  realize  it  until  they  have
become  spiritual  beings.

Just  his  playing  brought  forth  all  this  beautiful  chorus.

There  never  was  anything  like  it,  as  I  thought.  I
stood  like  one  spell  bound.  When  he  had  finished
playing,  he  arose  from  his  seat,  placed  a  little  white
flower  upon  my  hand  and  bowed  most  graciously
to  me,  smiled  and  disappeared  to  his  own  retreat.
You  see  I  have  not  forgotten  some  of  my  earthly
expressions.

R.  H. No,  indeed. Very  interesting  description.

G.  E. First,  my  friend,  these  are  absolute facts. There  is

not  one  iota  of  fiction  written  here.
R.  H.  Good.

G.  E. You  will  one  day  verify  this  to  your  satisfaction,  and

when  we  meet  I  will  remind  you  of  these  facts.
R.  H. I  shall  be  delighted.

G.  E. Now  then  since  you  are  tranquil  I  will  go  on  and

tell  you  of  other  experiences.
R.  H. Yes. I  shall  be  very  glad.

G.  E.  I  had  no  thought  of  being  fatigued,  not  in  the  least.
In  fact  I  have  never,  since  I  first  came  here.
I  then  thought  I  would  like  to  know  more  of  the
different  kinds  of  music,  which  they  understood
so  much  about.  I  thought  I  would  like  to  hear
something  like  a  choir  of  voices  from  the  beautiful
singers  of  whom  I  had  heard  and  read  when  in
the  body.  Well,  friend,  I  expressed  this  thought
silently, as  I  had  done  previously. When  a  lady


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  503

stepped  forward  Martino  by  name.  She  bowed  she
addressed  me  with  a  smile  and  whispered  "  listen."
Well,  first  I  will  describe  in  part  her  appearance.
She  was  the  most  saintlike  looking  creature  I  had
ever  seen,  the  most  beautiful  woman,  as  I  thought.
Her  eyes  were  aglow  with  light.  Her  voice  like  the
soft  and  mellow  sound  of  a  silvery  lute.  This  was
when  she  addressed  me.  She  was  slight  of  stature,
large  eyes,  oval  face,  more  of  the  Greek,  of  which
I  had  fancied  in  my  mortal  mind  .  .  .  Yes,  but
my  fancies  were  like  a  hideous  nightmare  in  com-
parison with  the  real  beauty  of  the  face.
She  then  smiled  and  began  to  sing.  Oh  such  a
heavenly  sound  I  had  never  even  had  the  faintest
idea  of.  It  is  simply  impossible  for  me  to  describe
it.  I  could  never  do  it.  Analogy  there  is  none.
But  she  sang  ...  to  me,  and  the  song  was  of  spirit-
life  in  a  state  of  perfection.  I  will  ere  long  give
you  some  idea  of  the  nature  of  the  song.
R.  H. You  mean  the  words.

G.  E. Yes. I  hope  I  will  be  able  to  make  you  understand  it.

When  she  had  nearly  finished  her  song,  as  in  the
case  of  Rubinstein's  playing,  she  was  accompanied

by  a  chorus  of  voices,  but  unlike  R  ,  they  were

young  ladies  instead  of  birds.  Oh  friend,  how  will
you  be  able  to  realize  this  chorus  of  young  maids'
voices  ?  They  were  like  so  many  .  .  give  it
up  .  .  . Cannot  illustrate  it.  Impossible.

Yet  I  did  "  listen."  I  assure  you.  I  had  been
entertained  royally,  as  I  thought,  before,  but  I
fancied  I  had  been  only  half  entertained  when  I
heard  them  singing.  The  whole  etherial  atmosphere
was  one  echo  of  song.  I  said  as  soon  as  I  col-
lected myself  and  my  thoughts  sufficiently  to
realize  who  and  what  I  was  ;  well,  this  is  Heaven
in  reality.  I  then  wondered  why  I  had  not  gone
before.  I  passed  along  a  few  feet  in  front  of  them,
and  the  whole  pathway  was  literally  strewn  with
flowers,  sending  their  scents  up  before  me  and  the
charming singers. There were six in all,  young


504


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


ladies, besides their leader Martino. They  were
standing  just  beyond  the  path  of  flowers,  and  were
in  rotation, the  lady  herself  being  in  the  centre,
and  three on  the  .  .  .
R.  H. Three  on  one  side  and  three  on  the  other.
[Assent]

G.  E.  ranging  in  size  from  a  full  grown  lady  down  to  a  child
of  about  twelve  years  old.
The  younger  of  the  two  smallest  ones  to  my  right
stooped,  picked  six  little  blossoms,  after  they  had
finished  their  song,  and  stepped  in  front  of  the  rest
and  decorated  the  brows  of  the  others,  placing  the
largest  flower  upon  the  brow  of  their  leader,  and
then  stepping  back  to  her  former  position  they  were
signalled  by  their  leader,  the  lady  herself.  And
raising  their  sweet  faces  towards  my  own,  they
smiled,  then  placed  their  finger  tips  to  their  hps
and  throwing  me  a  kiss,  vanished  before  my  very
eyes.

I  was  left  in  meditation  and  my  soul  was  filled  to
its  utmost  capacity  with  delight.
R.  H. Yes. I  can  understand.

G.  E.  I  hardly  know  as  there  is  enough  light  remaining  for
me  to  continue.

R.  H.  The  time  will  soon  be  gone,  and  perhaps  it  is  wiser
not  to  force  the  end  of  the  light  as  it  were.

G.  E.  Yes.  We  agree,  as  we  cannot  do  as  well,  when  we
return  again.

R.  H.  You  mean  that  if  you  get  confused  now,  it  will  tend
to  make  you  incoherent  the  next  time  you  come.
[Assent]

G.  E.  Yes,  yet  I  have  many  interesting  experiences  to  narrate
to  you.

R.  H. I  hope  there'll  be  plenty  of  time  for  all.
G.  E. When  it  will  be  convenient.

Imperator wishes me to say that he bestows  his
blessings  on  you,  and  will  ever  be  a  faithful  servant
of  God. I  will  bid  you  adieu.
R.  H. Adieu.  G.  E.  I  am  yours  in  spirit. G.  E.

[Mrs.  Piper's  subliminal  speaks]  {i.e.  waking-stage}


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  505

Go,  take  up  thy  spirit  [body  ?]  believing  in  God.  No

harm  can  befall  thee. We  are  thy  friends  always.
Are  you  Saint  Paul  ?  .  .  .
That's  Imperator,  sure  .  .  .
I  don't  know  who  the  lady  is.

{April  17, 1897.) Failure  of  alleged  cross-correspondences  with
Myers  and  a  Medium  in  England.

Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson. George  Eliot  writing.

G.  E. You  do  not  mind  my  speaking,  I  trust.

R.  H. I  shall  be  very  pleased. This  George  Eliot  ?  [Assent]

G.  E.  I  have  been  to  see  Myers  several  times.  He  at  first
was  not  inclined  to  take  much  stock  in  the  mani-
festations because  there  were  so  few  clear  and
distinct  ones  given.  He  got  a  little  impatient  and
said  he  thought  he  would  not  try  again  to-day,
but  as  the  conditions  were  better,  he  changed  his
mind  and  decided  to  remain  and  go  on.  But
Imperator  visited  them  and  things  have  been  going
better. Mentor and Doctor accompanied me  and

on  my  way  I  met  Miss  F  . I  heard  Myers  reciting

or  quoting  some  verses  in  his  own  room  during  the
interval  between  the  lights  .  .  .  burning  of  the  lights.
Do  you  hear  me  distinctly  ?

R.  H. Yes,  quite.

G.  E.  They  placed  some  material  flowers  upon  a  small  table
and  we  saw  them  distinctly  while  we  were  there.
The  name  of  your  friend  George  Pelham  was
mentioned  also.
They  cannot  seem  to  account  for  the  rumbling  sounds
which  are  heard  so  distinctly  over  their  heads.
Now  here  is  one  thing  which  happens  [written  with
one  p.  Hand  after  finishing  word  returns  and  adds
a  second  p  just  after  the  first]  always.  The  candle
goes  out  and  leaves  them  in  darkness.  This  was  a
trick  of  the  old  gentleman  when  in  his  body,  and  he
continues  to  keep  it  up.1

1  In  this  paragraph  G.  E.  is  professing  to  describe  the  doings  of  the
ghosts  in  the  haunted  house  in  which  Myers  was  having  sittings.


506


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Apart  from  that  I  have  already  mentioned  I  heard
Myers  reciting  poetry  .  .  .  [undec]
R.  H. What's  that  ?
G.  E. I  repeated  it  for  you  simply.

Your  two  lines  were  given  to  the  medium  and  noted.
R.  H. Which  two  lines  ?

G.  E. Two  which  you  gave  to  Mr.  Pelham  some  time  ago.

They  are  not  correctly  spelled,  but  they  were
received  there  by  her.  This  is  the  best  opportunity
we  have  had  in  any  way  whereby  we  were  able
to  give  the  messages.
We  have  had  no  better  opportunity  to  give  our
messages  than  the  present  one.  The  conditions  have
never  been  more  favorable,  and  we  will  be  able  to
do  much  good  in  consequence.  We  will  be  able
to  remove  all  unpleasant  spirits  from  their  earth-
bound  spheres.
Have  you  any  questions  you  would  ask,  please.  I
must  be  going  soon,  as  there  is  very  little  light
left  for  me.

[Hand  bows  to  sp.  and  seems  particularly  respectful.

I  infer  that  Imperator  has  arrived.]
He  has  returned,  and  we  will  repeat  what  we  have

previously stated that there was some  difference

in  time.

We  have  done  the  best  we  could.
R.  H. Yes,  thank  you  very  much. The  light  is  getting  very
dim  now.
[Assent]

G.  E. and  as  Miss  F and  others  are  there  and  will  be  for

some  time,  we  will  bid  you  good  bye  for  the  present
and  keep  watch  over  all.


(May  14,  1897.)

Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson. George  Eliot  writing.

G.  E. Friend,  did  you  wish  to  see  me  ?

R.  H. Yes,  I  shall  be  glad  to  talk  to  you.

G.  E. I  wished  to  say  something  more  about  my  life  here.

R.  H. Yes. I  shall  be  very  glad.

*  *  *  *


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper1 s  Trance. — Appendix.  507


G.  E.  There  has  not  been  much  going  on  with  the  second
light  of  late.

R.  H. I  have  something  to  say  about  the  second  light.
G.  E. Yes,  we  wish  to  know  what  the  state  of  her  spirit  is
now.

R.  H. I cannot give you much light directly upon  that.

But  you  will  recall  that  you  personally  are  one  of
those  most  responsible  for  all  our  relations  with
the  second  light.

G.  E. Yes,  quite. I  admit  I  am.

R.  H.  Well,  I  yesterday  afternoon,  since  I  was  here  last,
received  a  postal  card  from  Myers  concerning  the
greater  part  of  the  series  of  sittings  when  they  were
in  the  so-called  haunted  house.  He  writes  these
words.

G.  E. Read  to  me,  as  I  know  him  well.

R.  H.  He  says  "  Yours  up  to  April  23  inclusive  "■ — -that
means  the  records  which  I  sent  him — "  received.
Very  disappointing.  Not  a  vestige  of  truth.  No
messages  received  :  none  could  be  sent  :  whole
description  erroneous  :  nothing  recognizable."
[Hand  starts  to  write]

R.  H.  Let  me  finish  ?  [Hand  comes  back  and  listens]  "  The
only  one  of  the  controls  mentioned  who  even  pro-
fessed to  control  at  B  " — that's  the  name  of

the  place — "  was  E.  G.  and  he  said  nothing — only
whispered  his  name."  [Hand  starts  to  write]  Let
me  finish  ?  [Hand  comes  back  and  listens]  "  No
good  spending  more  time  on  attempted  rapproche-
ment at  present.  On  our  side  we  must  go  on  as
we  can  trying  to  work  up  the  mediumship  :  on
yours  there  is  grave  doubt  (it  seems  to  me)  on
reality  of  some  controls  by  "  .  .  .he  means  grave
doubt  thrown — "  by  their  assertions  of  success  or
misdescription."  Now  you  are  all  in  a  pretty
pickle.

G.  E.  No  one  could  be  more  certain  of  their  conditions
and  statements  than  G.  E.  I  know  for  a  certainty
(although  I  assure  you  I  do  not  in  the  least  desire
to  contradict  or  in  any  way  deny  one  word  uttered


508


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


by  my  friend  Myers)  that  our  messages  were
most  sincerely  and  honestly  taken  to  the  light  there.
Nothing  could  be  more  earnestly  and  sincerely  done
than  our  work  has  been.  We  felt  sure  at  the  time
that  our  thoughts  were  being  registered  there,
because  in  many  cases  there  was  assent  by  the
medium's  spirit.  It  is  a  true  light,  as  I  have
been  there  and  in  part  used  it,  yet  it  is  not  well
developed,  and  if  our  messages  were  not  received,
we  have  been  deceived  ourselves.  No  band  of
workers  ever  worked  more  faithfully  than  we  did.
I  truthfully  say  this,  my  friend.  The  material
surroundings  are  always  difficult  to  see  clearly,  but
the  spiritual  is  not.

R.  H.  Myers  also  informed  (sic)  that  the  description  [that]
was  given  here  of  the  house  and  the  phenomena
was  also  erroneous.

O.  E.  We  saw  the  workers  there,  and  I  as  sincerely  as  ever
spirit  could  possibly  be,  visited  there  and  saw  the
spirits  described.  Now  [you  ?]  one  day,  and  while
you  still  remain  in  the  body,  will  have  cause  to
realize  in  part  about  the  truth  we  have  told  you.
We  have  been  sincere  and  faithful  always.  Myers
will  see  in  time.  We  not  only  gave  the  messages
which  you  gave  us,  but  gave  our  own  also.
Whether  they  were  received  or  not.

R  H.  And  how  also  about  the  numerous  messages  that  you
brought  back  from  Myers  ?

G.  E.  Yes,  we  would  ask  you  to  ask  him  to  consider  care-
fully what  his  thoughts  were,  i.e.  those  not  put
into  actual  speech.

R.  H.  But  that  is  no  good,  since  he  did  not  receive  any
message,  and  did  not  send  any  ;  he  may  of  course
and  doubtless  did  have  thousands,  millions  of  thoughts
through  his  mind  in  one  way  or  another,  which  he
would  never  be  able  now  specially  to  recall.

G.  E.  We  feel  sorry  for  that,  but  we  feel  if  he  were  able
to  recall  any  thing  in  this  way,  he  could  determine
where  we  erred.

R.  H. I  understand  from  what  you  say  that  you  offer  as


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  509


an  explanation  of  what  really  happened,  one  which
naturally  occurred  to  myself  also.  That  is  to  say
you,  and  the  other  messengers, — I  of  course  refer
to  you  all — you  delivered  your  messages  to  the
interior,  or  as  we  commonly  speak  of  it — not
exactly  identical  however  with  interior — we  say
subh'rninal — you  were  delivering  messages  to  the
subliminals  and  possibly  getting  replies  from  those
subhminals  and  were  entirely  unable  to  distinguish
between  what  was  going  on  in  the  subliminal  world
and  the  ordinary  material  world.

G.  E, Yes,  as  Miss  F communicates  with  her  friend,

*  #  #  #

And  in  this  other  case  we  just  as  sincerely  gave  your
messages  as  you  exist.  We  of  course  could  not
and  would  not  say  this  unless  we  were  sure  of  our
work.

R.  H.  Well  now,  what  is  there  to  say  about  your  descrip-
tions of  the  phenomena  manifested  by  the  earth-
bound  spirits  there  ?

G.  E.  We  as  sincerely  saw  them  there  and  saw  their  move-
ments as  described  to  you,  by  ourselves,  and  if
there  had  been  a  specially  fine  and  sensitive  spirit
incarnate  there,  they  would  surely  have  heard  and
seen  what  we  described.
My  friend,  let  me  say  once  and  forever  that  I  am  all
that  I  profess  to  be  and  nothing  on  the  material
earth  could  allow  me  to  profess  to  be  anything
only  what  I  am,  George  Eliot.  Besides,  if  I  cannot
be  trusted  in  what  I  am  most  sincere  in  saying
and  doing,  I  would  prefer  to  remain  away  altogether.
I  feel  sorry  for  my  friend  Myers  and  am  surprised
that  he  should  feel  we  were  not  present.

R.  H.  Now,  George  Eliot,  he  would  surely  be  extremely
foolish,  quite  irrational,  if  he  were  to  conclude  that
you  were  present.  Listen  for  one  moment.  How
does  he  know  where  and  what  you,  any  of  the
messengers,  may  be  ? He  .  .  .

G.  E. I  am  sure  I  have  seen  him  there.

R.  H. Listen. I  have  made  as  you  know  verbatim  reports


510


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgtvick.


[part


of  your  descriptions,  my  messages,  all  our  doings
through  this  light  during  those  two  weeks.  These
do  not  correspond  at  all  with  what  they  were
actually  doing.  The  description  of  the  house  is
wrong,  the  description  of  the  phenomena  which  they
witnessed  is  wrong.  They  received  no  message,
although  you  said  that  they  had  received  various
messages.  They  sent  .  .  .
G.  E.  We  felt  sure  of  this,  my  friend,  otherwise  we  should
have  said  so.

R.  H.  Exactly  ;  and  therefore  the  surer  you  were,  the  more
you  were  actually  in  error.  But  I  am  not  now
driving  this  upon  you,  and  merely  seeking  to  show
you  how  absurd  it  would  be  for  Myers  or  any  other
intelligent  person  to  suppose  for  a  moment  that
you  and  the  others  were  there  — I  refer  of  course
on  the  ground  of  the  evidence  of  that  period.  You
have  made  a  series  of  statements  of  one  kind  or
another  which  were  to  be,  so  to  say,  proofs  of
your  presence.  They  are  all  incorrect.  You,  if
there  was  a  meeting  of  friends  in  the  body  in  a
certain  room,  you  if  you  asked  an  invisible  voice
through  a  tube  about  the  room, — if  the  voice  replied
to  you  "  I  am  your  friend  Herbert  Spencer,  and  I
have  been  in  that  room  and  I  have  seen  so-and-so
and  such  and  such,  and  these  things  are  occurring,"
and  if  you  went  then  to  that  room  and  found
that  such  things  were  not  occurring  and  had  not
occurred,  and  if  you  then  saw  things  and  heard
things  yourself,  and  got  further  statements  through
the  tube  which  Myers  sent  you  and  said  to  you,
this  voice  says  it  is  Herbert  Spencer  and  says  that
such  things  are  and  have  been  going  on,  and  you
on  receipt  of  the  message,  found  nothing  whatever
true,  absolutely  i.e.  practically  every  item  without
verification,  do  you  not  think  that  you  would  be
irrational  to  suppose  that  Herbert  Spencer  had
been  in  the  room  or  was  Herbert  Spencer  at
all  ?

G.  E. I  might  say,  knowing  as  I  do,  more  or  less  of  ou


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  511


conditions,  that  perhaps  Herbert  Spencer  was
actually  there  in  spirit,  and  did  actually  do  what
he  said  he  did  or  professed  to  do,  so  far  as  the
spiritual  side  was  concerned,  yet  so  far  as  the
material  side  was  concerned  he  had  unmistakably
deceived  himself.
R.  H.  Yes,  I  mean  what  would  you  say  were  you  still  in
the  body  ?

G.  E. Oh  I  see,  you  wish  me  to  picture  myself

R.  H. in  the  position  of  Myers  or  myself.

G.  E. in  the  body  for  instance.  R.  H.  Exactly.

G.  E. Why  yes, my  friend, I  should  say  Herbert  Spencer

was  not  there  at  all.
R.  H. Well,  you  cannot  expect  Myers  to  say  any  differently

about  you.

G  E.  No,  he  is  justified  in  feeling  as  he  does.  Yet  I  know
that  he  does  not  understand  just  what  did  take
place  with  us.  It  also  helps  me  to  feel  that  when
we  see  the  light  there  and  are  speaking  to  it,  it
does not  hear.

R.  H. Yes,  well,  the  most  important  .  .  .

G.  E. I [Hand  listens]

R.  H. Go  on  please.

G.  E.  I  will  try  no  more  because  I  know  who  and  what  I
am,  and  if  I  cannot  be  understood  it  would  be
useless  for  me  to  try  there.

R.  H.  I  do  not  think  you  should  say  that.  You  remember
that  you  did  succeed  in  giving  some  very  clear
statements  some  time  ago.  And  the  important
[lesson]  to  be  derived  from  these  recent  circum-
stances seems  to  me  to  be  this.  I  frequently
urged  this  upon  the  old  control  here  Phinuit,  and
also  upon  my  friend  Pelham.  And  there  seems  to  be
a  curious  inability  among  all  of  you,  to  discriminate
between  what  possibly  goes  on  in  the  subliminal,
and  what  goes  on  in  the  normal  consciousness  which
we  know,  or  our  full  material  world.  Statements
have  frequently  been  made  in  the  past  which  seem
explicable  only  on  the  supposition  you  cannot
distinguish,  or  at  least,  cannot  with  any  certainty


512


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


distinguish,  between  the  subliminal  and  the  ordinary.
Do  you  understand  clearly  ?
G.  E.  Yes.  I  think  I  do  perfectly,  but  I  found  when  I  was
speaking  there,  there  was  a  constant  interrupting
stream  of  thought,  for  which  I  could  not  account.
Now,  friend,  no  one  understands  this  better  than  I
do,  and  in  replying  I  would  ask  to  have  him
accept  the  possibility  of  my  being  present,  only
this, — and  you  will  both  one  day  know  for  a
certainty  that  what  I  have  said  and  done  was  not
false.

R.  H. George  Eliot.

G.  E. Yes,  my  friend,  I  hear  you.

R.  H.  Of  course  the  question  from  the  evidential  point  of
view  is— What  proof  is  there  that  any  supernormal
beings  of  any  kind  are  communicating  through
this  so-called  light.  Among  the  answers  that  might
be  given  is  that  there  are  some  intelligences  which
are  deceivers,  pretending  to  be  George  Eliot,  Rector,
etc.,  and  of  course  if  I  were  convinced  that  you
and  the  others  were  consciously  trying  to  mislead
me,  I  naturally  would  not  place  any  reliance  upon
you.  But  taking  your  statements  exactly  for
what you offer them, regarding you as  George

Eliot  and  K P as  K F  ,  and  so

on  :  it  is  of  course  clear  that  however  pure  and  lofty
and  sincere  in  every  way  in  your  desires  to  help
humanity  and  Myers  and  myself  as  among  the
means  and  so  on, — it  is,  I  say,  clear  that  there
are  some  regions  where  it  is  very  difficult  for  you
to  see  clearly  yourselves  just  what  transpires,  and  it
therefore  follows  that  I  cannot  be  certain  of  the
statements  that  you  make,  although  recognizing
your  profound  sincerity  and  goodness  and  earnest-
ness and  sacrifice. Is  this  clear  ?

G.  E.  Yes,  perfectly.  [An  arrival  apparently  here,  probably
Imperator]

R.  H.  I  am  not  in  your  world,  that  is,  to  see  and  be  con-
scious of  it  in  any  way  analogous  to  my  knowledge
of  the  material  world.


i


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  513

G.  E. We  feel  that  we  are  the  ones  who  have  been  deceived
in  a  way.

Oh  friend,  we  feel  it  much,  and  it  only  helps  us  to
know  and  confirm  what  we  once  experienced,  that
we  cannot  trust  ourselves  when  coming  in  contact
with  the  material  world.  We  thank  you  for  your
kindly  attention  and  sincerity  and  will  repeat  that
we  feel  more  sinned  against  than  sinning.  We  are
not  evil  in  the  slightest  possible  thing,
ft.  H. I  do  not  suppose  that  you  are.

G.  E. Friend,  if  there  ever  was  a  band  of  sincere  and  faithful
workers,  we  are  that  band.

*  *  *  *

Friend,  we  thank  you  for  every  vestige  of  attention.
We  only  feel  that  we  have  deceived  ourselves.  We
will  be  the  better  for  it  in  the  end.  We  ought  to
understand  more  of  the  material.


(January  28,  1898.) Another  failure  in  cross-correspondences.

Sitter  and  Recorder,  Mrs.  L. {Hodgson  was  at  this  time  in
England}

Mrs.  L.  My  friend  Hodgson  and  I  have  confidence  that  you
are  what  you  say  you  are  but  it  becomes  more
and  more  evident  that  you  do  not  see  our  world
as  you  think  you  do.  You  are  all  at  sea  in  regard
to  the  details  of  my  home  life  during  the  past
months.  You  recall  the  experiment  we  made  here  in
sending  violets  to  Hodgson  by  "  Q  "  ?

Rector.  Yes  in  no  time  after  we  had  ceased  to  speak  we  saw
our  mistake  in  his  meeting  the  light  there.

Mrs.  L.  But  my  friend  you  described  a  scene  which  did  not
take  place.  Now  tell  me  as  near  as  you  can  why
you  thought  you  saw  Hodgson  with  the  light  and
gave  me  a  detailed  description  of  his  sitting.

R.  Different  locality  entirely  and  different  surroundings
through  which  we  passed  and  our  messengers  were
wrongly  located  in  the  surroundings  of  our  earthly
friend.

*  *  *  *

2  K


4


514


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PART


Mrs.  L.  Hodgson  sat  in  his  own  room  in  London  during  all
the  time  I  was  sitting  here.  *  *  *  and  what  was
told  me,  viz.  Q.  seeing  Mr.  Myers,  Hodgson,  the
light  and  so  forth,  never  took  place  at  all.  There
was  no  sitting  as  we  call  it,  no  light — no  Mr.
Myers — no  other  lady.  Hodgson  was  absolutely
alone  in  his  own  room.  You  thought  you  saw  what
never  took  -place  at  all.  It  is  as  bad  a  failure  as
there  could  be,  do  you  not  think  so  ?

R.  We  answer  not  Mrs.  L.  Why  ?

R.  We  do  not  care  to  answer  to  such  misunderstanding

of  our  work  and  we  have  again  and  again  explained
the  difficulties  in  reaching  the  other  light  and  we
may  not  locate  distinctly  all  earthly  surroundings
but  we  do  see  what  we  describe  yet  we  say  this
yet  we  may  ofttimes  mistake  persons  or  places.

Mrs.  L.  *  *  *  explain  to  me  what  you  saw.  Let  me  see  if  I
cannot  understand  the  cause  of  the  failure.

R.  We  can  only  reply  to  this  by  saying  in  future  we  shall

decline  to  take  messages  to  other  lights  for  anyone.

We  did  see  what  we  described  and  we  did  see  it  in

another  part  of  your  world  most  certainly  we  did.

If  there  has  been  a  mistake  it  is  a  case  of  mistaken

identity  because  we  do  not  return  for  such  mistakes

as  you  have  described

*  *  *  *

F.

Mrs.  Piper's  Last  Trance  Communication.

(July  31,  1911. End  of  sitting.)

Sitters,  Sir  Oliver  and  Lady  Lodge. Hodgson  control  writing.

$  ♦  ♦  ♦

Hodgsonp.  The  great  difficulty  is  in  getting  in  and  out  over
that  cord.  When  Hall  rapped  her  on  the  head
with  that  instrument  he  snapped  it  That  was  just
what  happened.1

O.  J.  L. Well  then  I  expect  it  is  rather  dangerous.

Hodosonp.  Yes  and  +  thinks  I  ought  to  give  it  up  +  thinks
I  ought

1  See  note  at  end  of  sitting.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  515


O.  J.  L. Is  that  Rector  that  thinks  so  ?

HODGSONp.  -j-

O.  J.  L. Oh  you  mean  Iniperator.

HodgsoNj,.  I  am  shockingly  disappointed  as  I  had  hoped  to
repair  the  damage  but  I  am  really  afraid  to  take
the  responsibility  after  all  I  implored  God  to  guide
me  and  He  has  done  so.

O.  J.  L. Well,  you  will  take  care  of  the  machine,  won't  you  ?

HoDGsoNp.  I  will.  He  made  special  help  for  me  to-day  so  I
could  keep  my  promise  to  Mary  {Lady  Lodge.}

O.  J.  L.  Don't  you  think  you  could  develop  automatic  writing
in  her  if  this  method  ceases  ?

HoDGsoNp.  -{-  told  me  if  I  would  make  constant  attempts  it
would  come  out  in  other  phases.  He  has  long  since
promised  this  but  he  feels  as  I  do  the  body  ought
to  be  left  normal  so  it  can  take  care  of  itself  so  it
will  not  be  left  to  the  mercy  of  any  one  in  the
body.

O.  J.  L. We  should  be  careful  anyway.

HoDGsoNp.  You  would  I  am  sure.  But  the  danger  lies  in  the
snap  [?]  [?  rap]  I  got  by  that  instrument  on  the
head This  was  where  the  trouble  began.

O.  J.  L. Hodgson,  I  am  afraid  it  is  time  to  stop.

HoDGsoNp.  I  am  going  because  it  is  time  quite  I  have  done  my
very  best  to  build  it  up  and  go  on  but  it's  no  use
taking  chances  taking  chances  when  +  forbids.

O.  J.  L. No,  I  am  sure  you  are  right.

HoDGsoNp.  Mme.  {i.e.  Mme  Guyon}  will  get  through  in  any  case,
this  we  are  sure  of.  We  are  sure  of.  Send  my  love
and  farewell  messages  to  all  my  friends  and  tell  them
I  am  grateful  to  them  all.  Good-bye  Lodge  May
Heaven  bless  you

O.  J.  L. Good-bye  Hodgson.

HoDGsoNp.  May  Heaven  bless  you  one  and  all

M.  L. Tell  them  I  thank  them  for  all  their  help.

Hodgsonp.  You  are  welcome Good-bye  again. R.  Hodgson.

Imp.  I  am  come  to  close  the  light  for  good  and  all  May
the  Grace  of  God  be  with  you  Farewell I.  S.  D.


516


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[pakt


Waking-stage.

[Mrs.  Piper  was  a  long  time  coming  to,  and  there  was
some  anxiety  about  her  breathing.  We  had  Alta
{Miss  Piper}  in  out  of  the  garden,  and  fully  a
quarter  of  an  hour  elapsed  before  the  waking-stage
began.  Mrs.  Piper  had  had  an  idea  of  bringing  a
bottle  of  eau  de  Cologne  with  her,  and  this  was
now  brought  into  use  on  a  handkerchief ;  it  cer-
tainly seemed  to  revive  her,  causing  her  to  take
deep  breaths,  whereas  there  had  been  long  intervals
without  any  breathing  at  all.

Presently  the  waking-stage  began,  and  she  waved  her
hand  and  said  :]

There's  Mabel.

I  wanted  to  speak  but  I  couldn't. God  bless  you,
you dear old thing. I love you always — always
We  shall  meet  again. By  bye.
I  brought  her  Lodge  I  want  you  to  know  who  she
is. I'm  Dick.

[O.  J.  L.  whispered  into  Mrs.  Piper's  ear  :  "  Yes,  I  know,  Dick
Hodgson,  and  you  brought  Mabel."  This  message  is
about  a  recently  deceased  friend,  known  to  Mrs.  Piper
also. It  is  quite  appropriate.]

(Satisfied  sigh.) I  got  that  through.  Good-bye.

Run  along  [evidently  addressed  to  the  medium
herself.] Go  back.

Oh  dear — oh  dear — Jack  and  the  beanstalk — I  climbed
up. Oh  what  does  it  all  mean I  feel  so  choked.

[putting  up  her  hands  to  her  head  and  rocking
violently.]

Oh  I  had  such  a  bad  snap.

Oh  there's  another.

[both  appearing  to  be  painful — an  unusual  feature.
Then  she  looked  at  her  daughter  who  said,  "  It's
all  right,  Mama,  you  are  back  now."]

Oh  Alta  I  thought  I  was  dead.  I  had  such  a  dread-
ful fall.

Miss  Pipeb  :  "  Yes,  but  it's  all  right  now,  and  you  are  back  with
us."


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  517

[Presently  Mrs.  Piper  came  to,  but  for  the  next  twenty-
four  hours  had  rather  a  bad  head-ache.]

Note  about  "  rapped  on  the  head  "  with  "  that  instrument."

There  is  no  doubt  some  imagination  about  this.  Dr.
Hall  used  no  instruments  except  the  esthesiometer  and
algometer  (to  test  sensitiveness),  and  these  were  used  on
the  hand.  By  head,  however,  the  Hodgson  control  prob-
ably meant  hand,  as  he  was  pleased  to  call  the  hand  his
head.  The  experiments  in  sensitiveness  were  not  objected
to  by  the  control  at  the  time,  nor  apparently  by  the  normal
Mrs.  Piper  later,  after  they  were  explained  to  her.  But
they  produced  temporarily  unpleasant  after-effects  about
which,  before  they  were  explained,  her  daughter  wrote  in
some  distress.  Dr.  Tanner  writes,  summarising  Miss
Piper's  complaints  (Studies  in  Spiritism,  p.  246) :  "  It
appears  that  some  time  after  the  sitting  red  spots  appeared
on  Mrs.  Piper's  palm,  and  her  index  finger  was  numb  for
two  or  three  days,  the  red  spots  being  the  after-effects  of
the  esthesiometer  pressure,  and  the  numbness  probably
due  to  the  pain-pressure  experiments.  Her  lower  lip  was
also  blistered  from  the  camphor  used."  It  seems  absurd
to  suppose  that  temporary  physical  effects  such  as  these
should  permanently  affect  Mrs.  Piper's  mediumistic  powers.
It  is  much  more  likely  that,  if  Dr.  Hall  is  responsible  at
all  for  the  failure  of  her  powers,  it  was  the  psychological
effect  of  his  deceiving  the  trance  personality  that  did  the
harm  (see  above,  Chapter  I.,  p.  13).  But  I  think  the
failure  had  been  gradually  coming  on,  and  would  have
occurred  in  any  case.


518


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


APPENDIX  TO  CHAPTER  IV.


Some  Passages  about  Speaking  by  Thought. See  p.  132.

{Dec.  8,  1893. Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  487.)

Sitter. Can  he  hear  and  speak  in  that  life  ? [He  was  a  mute.]

Phinuit.  He  can  hear. We  talk  by  thought  here.

{April  30,  1894. Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  520.)

{Communicator having "  borrowed Phinuit's hand  "  writes
herself  :}

I  cannot  tell  myself  just  how  you  hear  me,  and  it  bothers
me  a  little  .  .  .  how  do  you  hear  me  speak,  dear,
when  we  speak  by  thought  only  ?

{April  1,  1897.)

Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson. Rector  writing.
R.  H. You  need  not  trouble  about  the  exact  words  of  course.
Just  the  idea.

R.  Yes,  this  is  all  we  can  ever  give.  We  do  not
warrant  doing  anything  more  ever  .  .  Identical
words  are  always  difficult  to  carry.  Our  own  work
is  carried  on  in  this  way  in  our  world,  in  ideas.

R.  H. You  mean  not  in  words.

R.  No.  Not  in  words,  as  we  did  of  old  when  in  mortal
body.

{April  5,  1897.)

Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson. George  Eliot  writing.

I  would  first  impress  upon  your  mind  that  we  speak  by
thought  alone ;  as  when  we  impress  our  thoughts
upon  the  mind  of  another  spirit. We  are  not  sure


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  519


always  that  the  exact  sounds  have  been  received.
We  feel  however  that  if  we  impress  our  thoughts
sufficiently  upon  the  communicating  spirit  and  it
receives  in  part  the  thought,  we  are  quite  satisfied.
In  this  case,  i.e.  our  having  been  present  there
{with  Myers's  medium  in  England}  and  communicat-
ing,— we  may  not,  and  in  fact  we  do  not,  feel  that
we  impress  our  thoughts  sufficiently  enough  for  her
to  get  every  word.

{April  28,  1897.)

Sitter  and  Recorder,  Hodgson. G.  P.  writing.
R.  H. I  suppose  that  you  did  not  communicate  among  one

another  by  precise  words.
G.  P. No,  never.

See  also  extracts  from  records  of  December  14,  1896,
(Appendix  to  Chapter  II.,  p.  393)  ;  and  of  March  15,
1897  (Chapter  III.,  p. 117  footnote).


520  Mrs.  Heyxry  Sidgwick.  [part


APPENDIX  TO  CHAPTER  V.

Communicators.

The  order  in  which  extracts  from  records  are  placed  in  this
Appendix  is  in  the  main  that  in  which  they  are  referred  to
in  the  text.


The  chronological  order  is  as  follows  :


February  14,  1892,

P-

548

March  3,  1903,

p.

529

April  20,  1897,

P-

544

March  4,  1903,

P-

531

January  20,  1898,

P-

536

December  21,  1903,

P-

545

June  20,  1898,

p.

545

July  6,  1904,

P-

526

December  2,  1898,

P-

528

January  24,  1905,

P-

521

January  3,  1900,

P-

546

May  2,  1905,

p.

527

February  6,  1900,

P-

524

November  22,  1905,

P-

523

February  13,  1901,

p.

525

November  29,  1905,

p.

523

February  20,  1901,

P-

545

December  18,  1905,

p.

532

February  26,  1902,

P-

520

January  1,  1907,

P-

523

October  28,  1902,

P-

525

March  6,  1907,

p.

546

December  3-17,  1902,  p.

533

March  18,  1907,

P-

536

March  16,  1908,  p.  546.


Examples  of  G.  P.  or?Hodgsonp  acting  as  Intermediary
between  Communicator  and  Rector. (See  p.  165.)

(Feb.  26,  1902.)

Hodgson  was  recording  for  the  sitter  at  first,  but  was  out  of

the  room  when  the  following  occurred  :
Rector  writing.

{Various  attempts  at  a  name  communicator  is  trying
to  give — Duncan,  Duno  [?]  .  .  .  Dono  Donw  [?]
son}

Sitter.  Domson.
Commr. Not  quite  dear


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  521


[Sitter  asks  him  to  go  and  get  George  to  spell  it  for
him Hand  turns  over  and  lapses  on  the  table  for
a  moment  or  two.]
G.  P. Good  morning  my  friend  I  am  here  to  help  you
Sitter. Thank  you.

G.  P. I  will  spell  it  for  him.  Sitter Thank  you.

G.  P. It  is  D  A  N  ...  yes  ...  I  E  L.

Sitter. Right,  quite  right,  thank  you  very  much.

G.  P. Welcome.  Sitter.  Thank  you.

G.  P. DANIEL  ...  Dr.  Sitter.  Quite  right.

G.  P. I  wish  I  could  remain  but  you  see  I  have  my  own

work  here,  but  call  me  when  you  need  me.
Sitter. Many  thanks.

G.  P. Not  so Aufwiedersehen  *  *  * [Perturbation  in  hand.]
Commr. I  am  here  again  darling. I  feel  so  grateful to  you
for  asking  him  to  help  me.


The  intervention  of  G.  P.  here  to  help  to  convey  a  name
to  Rector  is  unusual  in  form.  It  would  seem  that  Rector
is  controlling  throughout,  whether  the  sitter's  friend  com-
municates or  G.  P.  communicates  for  him.  It  is  curious
that  the  communicator  fetching  G.  P.  leaves  the  hand
unoccupied  as  it  were.  Perhaps  it  is  intended  to  indicate
that  the  control  fetched  G.  P.  After  the  latter's
departure,  however,  the  communicator  represents  himself
as  returning,  and  his  doing  so  produces  perturbation  in
the  hand.  For  another  request  by  a  communicator  for
G.  P.  to  be  asked  to  come  in  and  help,  see  Proceedings,
Vol.  XIV.,  p.  15  ;  in  this  case  Phinuit  goes  to  fetch  him.


{January  24,  1905.)

Two  sitters  present  with  Hodgson  recording.
Commr.  I  got  a  long  list  of  things  I  want  to  remind  you  of

before  I  finish.
Sitter2  (to  R.  H.  in  low  voice). Who's  this  writing  ?

[R. H. shakes head  negatively,  not  understanding  at
the  moment. It  was  Rector  acting  as  amanuensis
and  G.  P.  assisting  the  communicator.]
*  *  *  *


522


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


S.o No I don't remember that Charles. I wish  he'd

give  his  last  name.
{R.  or  G.  P.}  It  is  Edwards  .  .  .


R.  H, Rector,  that  is  Edwards,  but  .  .  .

R.  It  is  not  quite  right  friend.  I  hear  it  so  clearly  yet
I  am  unable  to  reproduce  it  clearly.

{G.  P.}  I get many facts from him. Don't you  recall

Edwards  or  similar  .  .  .
S.2 No  I  do  not.

{G.  P. }  Strange.  Well  I  cannot  help  it.  I  will  follow  him
up  and  have  a  talk  with  him  and  if  I  see  you
later  I  try  [?]  and  tell  you  more  about  him  and  the
rest  of  the  messages  reminders  etc.  later

*  *  *  *

Anything  you  give  me  to  do  I  shall  be  glad.
R.  H.  Why  George  we  shall  be  glad  for  that  person  to  make
himself  known,  and  apparently  there  is  something
wrong  about  his  name.  And  the  only  way,  as  I
have  explained  fully  before,  is  not  to  attempt  any
name  at  all  in  this  way,  but  to  take  the  person
away,  talk  with  him,  get  the  name,  both  first  and
last  if  possible,  come  back  and  give  it.  One  thing
done  in  that  way  without  any  previous  mistakes
is  worth  ten  times  all  the  trials  and  general  talk
about  things  which  cannot  be  such  tests  as  the
straight  name.

{R.}  Yet  you  say  names  indicate  nothing,  and  facts
incidents  indicate  more.  It  is  difficult  indeed  for
me  to  listen  and  repeat  at  the  same  time  getting
all  clear  I  have  explained  many  times  however  I
will  do  my  best  not  to  make  mistakes  in  names
etc.  when  I  hear  them

These  extracts  illustrate  (1)  G.  P.  assisting  communicator
(to  communicate,  not  control)  while  Rector  acts  as  amanu-
ensis. (2)  A  new  form  of  Rector's  difficulties — he  can  hear
communicator  clearly  yet  not  be  able  to  reproduce  the  name.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  523


(3)  Hodgson's  very  reasonable  desire  that  the  spirits  should
get  things  clear  behind  the  scenes.

(Nov.  29,  1905.)

A  sitter,  with  R.  H.  recording,  Rector  writing  for  com-
municator, Miss  P  .

[Miss  P  's  gloves  given,  felt,  held  up,  placed  near  the

hand.]

Miss  P. Good morning  again. I  am  glad  to  see  you.  Let

me locate myself. When you hear me  speak.

Can  you  tell  me  how  the  wor[?]  .  .  .
Rector. Sounds like School is progressing. Repeat as  I

hear  both  George  and  the  lady  speaking,  he  repeats

for  her  to-day.

R.  H. "  Can  you  tell  me  how  the  School  is  progressing  "
Rector. Yes  sounds  like  school
Sitter. That's  right.

Miss P is  the communicator  who a week  earlier,

November  22,  1905,  furnished  a  good  example  of  assisted
control  (see  p.  196).  She  gave  in  writing  a  message  about
which  Rector  wrote  :

R.  She  said  it  herself  with  the  help  of  George  {G.  P.}

and  John  {a  frequent  communicator  at  this  time}

#  ♦  ♦  ♦

this  lady  is  a  most  interesting  spirit  and  when  she
speaks  herself  I  find  she  does  not  say  awfully,
but  George  doe^  repeatedly  *  *  *  He  supplies  words
often  to  help  out  a  new  communicator.

(January  1,  1907.)
Sitter  and  recorder,  J.  G.  P. Rector  writing.
{In  this  example  Hodgson  seems  to  be  represented  as  a  sort
of  general  intermediary  between  communicators  and  Rector,
not  as  acting  for  some  particular  communicator.  Compare
a  statement  about  Prudens,  Chapter  III.,  pp.  106-107.}
J.  G.  P.  Rector,  I  want  to  ask  that  great  care  should  be  taken
to  distinguish  one  spirit's  messages  from  another's.
Several  things  said  at  the  last  meeting  and  at  the


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

meeting  before  that  would  have  been  true  if  attri-
buted to  another  spirit.  For  instance,  things  were
said  by  Hodgson  in  the  first  person  which  were  not
true  coming  from  him,  but  if  they  had  been  given  by
or  in  the  name  of  other  spirits  they  would  have  been
correct.

Remember  friend  that  Hodgson  himself  acts  almost  as
a  Medium  on  our  side  and  receives  many  messages
from  friends  of  the  sitter  so  called,  which  he  repeats
to  me  as  I  register  them  therefore  I  cannot  take  time
or  light  to  explain  (Pause.)
The  source  of  them  ?  (Hand  assents.)
Therefore  I  leave  this  to  the  honesty  of  the  mortal

present  to  explain  to  you
Yes,  I  follow  that. But  tell  Hodgson  that  confusion

of  this  kind  weakens  the  evidence.
It  is  not  confusion  friend  but  is  really  facts  which  he
collects  from  them.

Note  that  in  the  waking-stage  of  that  day  Mrs.  Piper

says  :

Dr.  Hodgson  says  he  is  not  guilty. Is  that  the  word  ?
not  guilty  of  conclusions — confusions.

This  is  an  instance  of  correspondence  between  ideas  of  trance
proper  and  waking-stage  (see  Chapter  VI.,  pp.  243-255).

Five  Examples  of  the  Control's  Difficulty  in  Hearing

the  Communicator.

The  following  case  not  only  illustrates  the  apparent  diffi-
culty of  the  control  in  hearing  the  communicator,  but  also
what  looks  like  an  attempt  by  the  control  to  bring  round
his  original  hearing  or  mishearing  to  a  word  suggested  by
the  sitter.

{February  6,  1900.)

Sitter,  Prof.  Hyslop. Hodgson  recording.
Communicator. I  had  her  go  with me  to  have  a  Silhouette.
Sitter [in a  whisper  to R.  H.] I'll tell  you  in  a  moment
.  .  .  daguerreotype.


524


R.


J.  G.  P.
R.


J.  G.  P.
R.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  525


[Hand  listens  towards  R.  H.]
R.  H. I'm  listening.

Rector.  Not  that  I  cannot  U.  D.  the  word  friend.  Wait  and
I  will  see  if  I  can  get  it  .  .  .  Silotype  .  .  .  Slogotype  .  .  .
Degeotype  taken  and  we  had  it  .  .  .  any  way  it  is
near  enough.

{The  incident  is  stated  by  Prof.  Hyslop  to  be  mv
verifiable.}

(Feb.  13,  1901.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson. Rector  writing.

R.  In receiving communications from friends here  we

are  not  infallible  as  thou  canst  [?]  *  *  *  and  if
errors  occur  it  will  not  be  through  lack  of  care  or
intelligence  on  our  part.  We  do  in  all  cases  do
our  very  best  to  keep  all  as  quiet  and  peaceful  as
is  possible  for  spirits  to  do.  It  is  not  possible  at
times  for  us  to  hear  distinctly  all  that  is  being
said,  and  were  we  to  allow  the  friends  to  use  the
light  it  {would}  ultimately  destroy  it  entirely.  This
is  the  reason  why  we  are  appointed  or  have  been
to  look  after  it  and  take  messages  from  them  U.  D.

R.  H.  Yes,  you  mean  using  the  organism  of  the  light
directly  as  intermediary.  R We  do.

It  appears  sometimes  to  be  Imperator's  function  to  keep
all  "  quiet  and  peaceful."  Thus  on  February  26,  1902 —
when  Rector  wishes  Hodgson  to  leave  the  room  so  that  the
sitter  may  receive  communications  by  herself — he  says  :

Imperator  is  present  this  day  and  will  remain  through-
out consequently  all  will  be  given  slowly  peacefully
and  U.  Dy.

[October  28,  1902.)

Voice  sitting  recorded  by  G.  B.  D. Rector  speaks  :
Rectob. Thy  mother  spoke  to  me  and  said,  '  Tell — all  thou
canst ' (pause)  I  am  catching  it  '  which  will  help
him '  *  *  *  What a beautiful influence this  is.
'  I am  very  happy — you  will be glad to know '


526


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


*  *  *  '  All  is  better,  infinitely  better  than  I  dared
to  hope  [almost  whispering]  I  always  thought  that
they  knew  a  great  deal  more  than  they  could  tell
us — I  used  to  tell  you  so — I  find  it  is  so  '.  [voice
very  low]'

Going  !  How  near  this  spirit  comes  to  me  !  How
strong  and  vigorous,  to  use  an  earthly  expression,
this  spirit  is  !  How  clear  in  thought  ! — it  is  quite
beautiful

'  Our  messages  will  always  come  in  fragments, — the
conditions  are  such  it  cannot  be  otherwise.  Accept
the  little  .  .  .  with  great  .  .  .  great  love.'  [Spoken
with  apparent  difficulty]

It  is  not  easy,  friend,  to  repeat  from  the  voice  of
the  spirit  as  it  comes  near  to  me — though  I  love
to  do  it ;  as  while  I  hold  the  material  organism
filled  with  the  etherial  light  it  is  more  difficult
to  hear  the  voice  than  when  I  am  apart  from  the
light. The  voice  ceases —

(July  6,  1904.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson. Rector  writing.

R.  We  wish  now  to  point  out  one  more  thing  which  is

of  great  importance  to  all  on  our  side.  We  have
noticed  for  a  long  time  thy  anxiety  for  tests  when
a  communicator  is  present  and  speaking.  We  also
notice  that  when  tests  are  not  given  thou  art
restless  in  spirit  and  mind,  this  will  not  do  friend,
as  the  condition  reacts  and  often  causes  a  mistake
or  false  communication.  The  spirit  or  spirits  com-
municating are  in  a  very  sensitive  state  and  oft-
times  confused  themselves  with  the  thoughts  of
others  who  are  trying  to  render  them  assistance
For  instance  when  George  is  present  and  trying
to  hold  a  communicator  he  often  speaks  to  them
when  we  who  are  registering  repeat  his  words  as
given  to  them  instead  of  their  words  to  us.  is  it
clear  ?

This  often  appears  in  lengthy  and  seemingly  unneces-
sary words  or  sentences  as  registered  by  us.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  527


We  shall  endeavour  from  time  to  time  (trust  us  for
this)  [to]  do  our  very  best  to  avoid  registering  con-
versation between  spirits  when  we  are  seeking  tests.
It  is  a  most  difficult  thing  for  us  to  do  friend,  as
we  often  hear  not  only  what  is  said  by  those
communicating  but  we  hear  the  conversation  of
others  at  a  distance.  *  *  *  It  requires  the  com-
bined efforts  of  all  our  helpers  to  prevent  this  con-
versation between  spirits  when  we  are  registering
the  thoughts  of  others  U.  D

It  is  a  thousand  pities  that  such  should  be  the  case
yet  is  truth  nevertheless.  But  when  such  is  the
case  do  not  seem  restless  friend.  Be  patient  and
good  things  will  come  and  remember  we  are  doing
all  in  our  power  to  make  the  conditions  what  they
should  be  even  though  we  may  at  times  fail.

(May  2,  1905.)

Present  a  sitter,  with  Hodgson  recording. Immediately  after
the  initial  greetings  Rector  writes  :
R.  We  have  a  word  to  the  lady  ere  we  continue  with

the  messages. +  Pv.

Remember  friend  whereas  it  is  our  privilege  to  return
to  earth  for  the  purpose  of  giving  proof  of  the
immortal  life.  We  do  not  guarantee  anything  at
any  meeting  with  us.  but  at  all  times  we  are  ready
and  willing  to  do  the  very  best  we  can  and  answer
any  and  all  inquiries  so  far  as  we  are  able.

Remember  also  that  during  these  communications  there
must  be  necessarily  the  human  element  in  them 1
besides  when  the  expressions  seem  unlike  the  friend
or  friends  on  our  side  we  do  not  hold  ourselves
responsible  for  such.  We  are  obliged  to  borrow
from your side  many  expressions  for  your  U.  D.

1  Cf.  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII.,  p.  12  (January  23,  1906),  HodgsonP  says  :
'  Remember  every  communication  must  have  the  human  element  "  ;  Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  XXII.,  p.  384  (May  6,  1907),  MyersP  says  :  "  In  all  our
messages  through  both  lights  there  is  always  more  or  less  of  the  human
element  in  them,  which  cannot  be  avoided,  for  your  U.D.,  but  you  must
discriminate  and  dissect  the  spiritual  from  the  material."


528


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


otherwise  you  would  be  at  a  loss  to  U.  D.  much
that  is  said.

If  the  communications  seem  fragmentary  or  discon-
nected we  cannot  hold  ourselves  responsible  for
them,  as  we  often  fail  to  U  D.  the  utterances
both  of  yourselves  and  the  spirits  communicating
U.  D.  ?

For  examples  of  control's  difficulty  in  hearing  communi-
cator, see  also  January  24,  1905  (above,  p.  521),  and  March
3,  1903  (below,  p.  529).

Examples  of  Communicator  "  Hearing  "  Sitter.

{Dec.  2,  1898.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson. Rector  writing.
Rector. Wouldst  thou  speak  whilst  thy  mother  cometh  here.

[Pause. Hand apparently labours under  suppressed
excitement. Writing  much  perturbed  and  irregular,
hand  much  cramped  in  its  movements.]
Mrs.  Hodgson. Where  oh  where  is  my  son.
R.  H. Dear  mother

Mrs.  Hodgson.  I  see  the  light  I  see  the  way  I  see  the  way.
R.  H. Quiet, — quite  quiet  please.

Mrs.  Hodgson. My  boy  [?]  far  [?]  away I  am  your  mother.

I  am  receiving  help.  R.  H.  Yes  dear  mother

Mrs.  Hodgson. Richard  is  it  you I  am  far  off.

*  *  *  *

R.  H. Take  time  dear  mother  and  feel  quite  calm  and  tell

me  all  you  wish  to  say  to  me
Mrs.  Hodgson. Do  you  hear  me. Can  you  know  my  thoughts.

*  *  *  *

but  I  am  living  and  father  came  to  meet  me  *  *  *
R.  H. And  you  recognised  him  ?

Mrs.  Hodgson.  Yes  at  once.  I  heard  you  so  plainly  then,
and  I  knew  it  was  your  voice  as  I  knew  father's
when  I  came  here.

2$€  ifC

Do  you  hear  ?  who  is  helping  me  to  speak  with
you.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  529


R.  H. Rector, a kind friend, is acting as  intermediary

between  you  and  me.
Mrs.  Hodgson. Yes,  and  he  hears  me  well  now  only  I  am  a

little  confused  dear  .  .  .

The  above  extracts  are  from  the  first  communication  from
Hodgson's  mother,  who  died  in  1898.  They  illustrate  not
only  the  hearing  of  the  sitter's  voice  by  the  communicator,
but  influence  of  communicator  on  movements  of  the  hand.

{March  3,  1903.)

Hodgson  recording  for  Sx  and  S2.
Rector. Hail  friends. I  find  it  difficult  to  hear  the  voice  of

the spirit also of the mortal couldst thou  not

arrange  it  differently  and  allow  the  lady  to  change.
R.  H.  to  S. Suppose  you  change  places. [Sx  and  S2  change

places. Hand  turns  to Sp. I. Cross  in  air.]
Rector. I  think  we  can  U.  D.  better,  and  he  can  see  better.

[Sitters  have  put  knife  and  watch  on  edge  of  table

some  time  before]
Communicator  (?). I  hope  you  will  say  good  night  and  good

morning as you usually do. [Hand seeks as  for

articles. R.  H.  puts  knife  in  front  of  sheets  ]
Commr. I  am  coming  never  fear

S2.  We  have  both  come  this  morning  hoping  to  speak

with  you.
Commr. I  hear  you  well  *  *  *

[Hodgson  sent  out  of  room]

*  *  *  *

Commr. Tell  me  dear  do  you  remember  MA.

Sr  I  do  not  know  just  what  you  mean  by  MA.

Commr. MO.  it  should  be  MO.  Sr  That  is  right.

Commr. i.  Sr  can  you  finish  that  ?

Rector, if I register too quickly speak to me and I  will

stop  .  .  .  Rector  *  *  *
■  Commr. MO.  Sr  Yes.

Commr.  [undeciphered  suggests  a  mixture  of  L  and  R.]  MOO
Sr  Yes  that  is  right,  go  on  and  write  the  whole

Rector. Speak  it  as  I  register  it. R.  S2.  Yes  we  will.

Rector, he  is  spelling  it  out  to  me. MOR  ey  [?  or  J  ?]

2l


530


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


S2.  If  it  is  too  hard  do  not  try.

Rector. Sounds  like  S. Speak  as  I  speak. S.  MOR

S.  No.  No.

Sr  M O That  is  right,  now  what  is the  rest  ?  [very

slowly] M O is right so far. Can you go  on

with  your  name.
Commr. I  heard  you  splendidly, that  time  my  dear.  W[?]

let  me  tell  you  something  else  first  then  he  will

U.  D.  it. My  name  is  M  0  .  .  .

*  *  *  *

{Presently  Sx  as  well  as  R.  H.  leave  the  room,  S2
remaining  alone.  Some  talk  not  relating  to  name
follows.}

*  *  *  *

Commr,  Do  you  remember  ...  M  0  ...  N  [W?]  [Dots  made
and  much  hesitation  on  third  letter.]  F  .  .  .
[There  is  also  what  looks  like  a  not  quite  finished
capital  N,  probably  written  after  the  N  or  W.
R.  H.]

Commr.  Do  you  hear  me  say  it.  Please  speak,  as  I  want  to
tell  you  a  great  deal  about  myself.

*  *  *  *

Commr.  Speak  N.  I  did  not  intend  to  say  MUSIC.  {This
refers  to  an  inappropriate  memory  of  a  music  desk
earlier  in  the  sitting,  or  to  another  irrelevant  intro-
duction of  the  word  later.}  I  meant  to  say  MO
[tapping  with  pencil]

Rector.  I  can't  U.  D-  that  other  letter.

S2.  If  I  tell  you  the  next  letter  perhaps  you  will  think

of  the  rest,  but  if  you  do  not  it  is  of  no  con-
sequence. It  is  another  0.

Rector, he  speaks  it  to  me R. [=  Rector. R.  H.]

Commr. I  put  it  M  0  and  then  0  long  ago.

S2.  True,  you  did,  I  remember.

Commr.  or  Rector, then  R  .  .  .  it  is  I  .  .  .  who  is  saying  R.  .  .  .

E.  [{Note  by  sitter} Moore  is  not  correct.  S.]
{On  the  latter  part  of  this  conversation  Hodgson  comments}: —
[I  surmise  that  when  Rector  got  Music  earlier  in  this

sitting  it was a mistaken reproduction of  Moody


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  531


{the  name  wanted 1 } ;  also  that  the  letters  deciphered
by  S2  above  as  M  0  N  are  really  MOW,  and  that
the  W  may  have  been  Rector's  misapprehension  of
double  0.  There  is  a  misapprehension  by  S2  just
below  in  connection  with  Rector's  initial  R.  She
apparently  interpreted  this  as  the  next  letter  of  the
name,  and  perhaps  said  "  then  R."  Rector  repeats
"  then  R "  and  understands  the  mistake  she  is
making  and  tries  to  explain  it  to  her,  "it  is  I
who  is  saying  R."  But  she  fails  to  understand,
and  thinks  that  the  name  MOORE  is  given. —
R.  H.,  March  8,  1903.]

Regarding  Hodgson's  note,  it  seems  to  me  more  natural
to  suppose  that  it  was  the  communicator  (through  Rector)
who  said,  "  then  R  ...  it  is  I  who  is  saying  R,"  and  that
the  point  of  the  remark  was  that  he  did  not  wish  the  R  to
be  taken  for  Rector's  signature.

It  is  interesting  that  in  the  going  into  trance  stage
the  next  day,  March  4,  when  the  sitters  of  March  3  were  not
present,  Mrs.  Piper  said  the  name  Moody  in  an  uncaught
context  as  follows  :

Mrs.  Piper. *  *  *  [Not caught] * Mr. Moody * and  *  *  *

R.  H. Mr.  who  ?  Mrs.  Piper.  Mr.  Moody  *

R.  H. Mr.  Moody  what  ?  Mrs.  Piper. *  *  *  [Not  caught.]

Moody  put  in  an  appearance  as  communicator  later  in  the
sitting,  Rector  introducing  him  by  "  Moody  wishes  to  speak
to  you,"  but  what  he  said  was  incorrect.  I  have  quoted
these  extracts  as  illustrating  several  points  :  (1)  the  "  hear-
ing "  of  the  sitter  by  the  communicator  ;  (2)  Hodgson's
acceptance  of  the  view  that  the  control  actually  (not  meta-
phorically) "  hears  "  the  communicator,  and  is  therefore
liable  to  auditory  mistakes — W  for  double  0  ;  (3)  the  mode
of  fishing  for  a  name  in  a  writing  sitting.  Observe  the  re-
peated request  to  the  sitter  to  speak  the  letters  after  Rector,
which  would,  of  course,  help  him  to  know  if  they  were  right
or  wrong  and  give  him  chances  of^correcting  them  ; (4)  the

1  Moody  would  not  have  been  appropriate  in  either  place  where  Music
came.


532


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


emergence  of  the  correct  name  first  in  the  going  into  trance
stage,  which  is  unusual.  We  cannot  regard  the  correct
giving  of  the  name  the  next  day  as  necessarily  more  than
a  guess,  considering  the  limited  number  of  names  beginning
with  MOO,  and  that  Moore  had  been  tried  and  rejected.
But  whether  arrived  at  by  telepathy  or  guessing,  it  is  im-
portant and  probably  significant,  from  the  psychological
point  of  view,  that  what  the  control  failed  to  get  at  on
March  3  should  on  March  4  have  reached  both  the  waking-
stage  consciousness  of  Mrs.  Piper  and  the  control.

Sitter :  on  March  3  and  4,  1903,  was  the  same  as  on
December  19,  1898,  when  Rector  nearly  got  dismissed  for
his  bad  management  of  a  new  communicator  (see  Chapter
III.,  pp.  108-109),  and  also  the  same  as  on  November  15,  and
December  18  and  19,  1905,  when  a  correct  name  came  out
first  in  the  waking-stage  (see  Appendix  to  Chapter  VI.).
She  and  a  friend  had  a  good  many  other  sittings.  Extracts
from  that  of  December  18  follow.

(Dec.  18,  1905.)

Hodgson  recording  for  the  same  two  lady  sitters.  Rector
writing.

*  ♦  ♦  *

[Hand  perturbed  slightly,  and  cramps  a  little,  and  seeks  a

moment  as  for  articles.]
{Change  of  communicator  here  takes  place.}

sfc  *!■  *fc  H*

Sitter.  She  {i.e.  communicator's  wife,  not  present}  would
like  to  have  me  ask  you  if  you  can  tell  her  where
the  other  certificate  is. She  has  found  one  of  them.

R.  He  does  not  quite  get  that  neither  did  I R.  one

word  I  failed  to  catch.  R.

R.  H.  She  says  his  wife  asks  him  if  he  can  tell  her  where
the  other  certificate  .  .  .  certificate  ...  is.

R.  Spell  it  kindly.

R.  H. Certificate...  certificate. [To Sitter.]  What

sort  of  certificate  ?
Sitter  [to  R.  H.] I  do  not  know,  but  she  thought  I  would

be  told  here.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  533

R.  Can  you  repeat  the  word  once  more  that  I  may  be

quite  sure  of  it.  [Sudden  perturbation.]  he  has  it.
*  *  *  *  he  U.D.s.

Communicator, (through  Rector) She  will  find  it  in  a  long  .  .  .

Rector, {for  himself} See  if  you  can  U.D.  this  word  friend.

Communicator. ENVELOPE, in  the  drawer  of  the  safe.

{Further descriptions  and  directions  for  finding  the
certificate  followed,  but  led  to  nothing.}

I  quote  this  passage  as  illustrating  three  points  discussed
in  Chapter  III.  :  (1)  the  joint  hearing  of  sitter  by  control
and  communicator,  but  by  communicator  perhaps  less  well  ;
(2)  Rector's  anxiety  lest  the  word  Envelope  should  not  be
caught.  Was  this  an  instance  of  his  own  alleged  difficulty
in  catching  words  because  of  his  long  absence  from  earth  ?
(see  p.  167)  ;  (3)  the  cramping  or  perturbation  of  the
hand  when  the  communicator  changes  and  when  a  point
is  grasped  (see  p.  192).

Examples  of  Communicators  almost  certainly  False.

General  Comment  by  Mrs.  E.  on  sittings  of  December  3,  10,  and
17,  1902. Dated  December  20,  1902.

Only  one  who  knows  the  facts  can  appreciate  how  thoroughly
these  alleged  communications  ring  false.  I  freely  made  suggestions
which  in  every  case  were  adopted  by  the  communicator  with
a  claim  of  full  recollection  and  understanding ;  yet  the  re-
sponses, while  appropriate  to  the  general  situation,  lacked
every  shred  of  individuality,  and  miscarried  whenever  the
least  additional  statement  was  ventured  in  the  response.
Most  of  my  suggestions  were  reintroduced,  at  one  time  or
another,  by  the  communicator,  as  original  matter, — in  some
cases  as  evidence  of  identity.  But  in  every  case  there  was  a
lack  of  knowledge  of  the  context  that  defeated  the  attempted
allusion.  On  the  third  sitting  I  asked  leading  questions  which
were  calculated  to  mislead  ;  and  in  every  case  the  communi-
cator fell  into  the  trap,  with  a  result  that  would  have  been
ludicrous  had  it  not  been  so  disgusting.

While  I  gave  a  good  many  suggestions  purposely,  I  gave
some  by  accident  and  without  realizing  that  I  had  done  so
until  long  afterward. For  instance,  the  word  Pet, page  51,


534,


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


original  document,  of  December  3rd  Sitting,  I  must  have  read
as  Pern,  at  the  time,  as  it  was  with  difficulty  that  Mr.
Hodgson  persuaded  me,  in  going  over  the  original  writing,
that  the  T  was  not  an  M.  But  by  commenting  on  it  as  M.,
as  I  think  I  must  have  done,  I  gave  away  a  private  name
which  at  the  time  greatly  startled  me.  At  the  time  I  believed
that  this  name  proved  thought-transference,  if  nothing  more.
But  I  now  see  that  it  simply  means  that  the  communicator
was  quick  to  catch  up  my  suggestion  and  adopt  it  as  if
original.

If  the  communicators  had  been  fragmentary  and  incoherent
in  his  (or  her)  utterances,  I  should  have  considered  the  evi-
dence inconclusive,  and  should  have  assumed  it  to  be  possible
that  people  were  speaking  across  ^the  grave  who  could  not
make  themselves  articulate.  As  it  is,  I  am  convinced  that
some  intelligence  was  impersonating,  deliberately  and  with
considerable  ingenuity,  and  yet  on  the  whole  doing  it  so  ill
that  the  deception  is  proved  beyond  a  peradventure.

G.  P.,  by  the  way,  was  as  signal  a  failure  as  the  other
alleged  speakers  in  saying  a  single  word  that  smacked  of  in-
dividuality, or  met  the  situation.  He  undertakes  to  be  a
trained  communicator,  yet  he  was  as  helpless  as  the  novices
in  saying  anything  to  show  any  one's  identity.

To  attribute  the  inappropriateness  of  the  communications
to  a  lack  of  full  consciousness  in  the  communicators  seems  to
me  to  simply  torture  the  evidence.  It  is  incredible  to  me  that
any  one  could  make  this  claim  who  has  any  knowledge  of
the  persons  who  it  was  alleged  were  speaking.

E.  G.  E.

Mrs.  E.  had  told  the  controls  at  the  end  of  her  last  sitting
what  she  thought  of  the  communications,  and  accordingly
at  Hodgson's  next  sitting  (December  24,  1902)  Rector
introduced  the  subject,  and  the  following  conversation
gives  the  views  put  forward  by  him  :

R.  We  feel  sad  because  Mr.  E.  could  not  realize  how  to
express  himself  better,  but  it  may  be  the  case
occasionally  unavoidably  .  .  .  unavoidably  ...  as  we
cannot  do  for  every  mortal  alike.

*  *  *  *


txxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  535


She  will  not  be  comforted  friend  ?
R.  H.  She  feels I think quite sure that  what  came  isj  the
manifestation of some false deceiving  intelligence
pretending  to  be  her  husband  and  showing,  as  she
believes,  to  her  conclusively  that  it  is  not,  using
her suggestions and  trying  to trick her  into  the
belief  that  it  is  her  husband.
R, Sad the thought for any mortal to maintain.  We
know  that  Mr.  E.  and  none  other  was  present  but
he  could  not  be  made  to  U.D.  the  conditions  of
speech,  and  what  we  required  of  him. He  in  other
words  is  dreaming  and  only  half  conscious  of  her
presence. But  so  far  as  deceiving  spirits  are  con-
cerned we  can  truly  say  there  are  none  such  repre-
sented here. No  matter  how  vague  and  incoherent
the  messages  may  appear  *  *  *  Some  time  when  thou
art  to  meet  us  alone  we  would  ask  thee  to  give  us  some
article  of  his  that  we  may  see  what  help  we  may
be  able  to  give  him  *  *  *  He  can  be  awakened  to
realize what is desired of him without  relapsing
into  a  state  of  coma  whilst  attempting  to  speak.
Therefore we  wait  his  coming with patience  and
faith  in  his  being  able  to  speak  clearly.  +.
Have  we  ever  deceived  thee  friend  ?
R.  H.  No. I  understand,  I  think,  the  situation clearly,  but
of  course  I  know  little  about  the  states  of  mind
of  communicators. What  little  I  know  it  took  me
years  to  learn. Scarcely  any  one  on  this  side  has
even  such  little appreciation  of  the  conditions  as
I  have  acquired,  and  the  conclusion  of  Mrs.  E.  is
probably that which nearly every person  would
reach  if  dealing  with  her  own  experiences  here  alone.
R. Where  we  may  meet  with one failure  we meet  with
more  that  are  not. Of  course  communications  will
always  be  given  in  a  fragmentary  way. It  cannot
be  otherwise  through  any  light.
I  am  myself  unable  to  see  how  a  state  of  confusion  or
dreaming  or  coma  can  account  for  the  kind  of  communi-
cation complained  of  by  Mrs.  E.,  which  seems  to  require
a  consciousness  sufficiently  alert  and  acute  to  seize  any


536


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


indications  which  may  enable  it  to  personate  with  plausi-
bility a  character  about  whom  it  starts  in  almost  complete
ignorance.

The  following  comment  by  the  sitter — a  Mr.  D. — on  the
communications  of  January  20  and  21,  1898,  are  worth
comparing  with  Mrs.  E.'s,  though  the  cases  differ  in  that
in  Mr.  D.'s  case  his  friend  seems  to  be  represented  as  writing
himself — not  through  Rector — though  the  latter  was  assist-
ing him  or  at  least  superintending  the  process  :

In  sentences  of  from  six  to  twelve  words,  he  ought  to
have  been  able  to  have  given  one  clear  cut  and  un-
mistakable experience,  name,  or  thing  well  known  to  us
all,  or  known  only  to  himself,  to  be  verified  afterwards.
Perhaps  we  expect  too  much.  The  cautious  and  ambigu-
ous manner  of  introducing  names,  and  the  use  made  of
the  unconscious  cues  we  furnished,  all  shew  the  acuteness
of  Mrs.  Piper's  supernormal  mind,  if  nothing  more.

Sitting  of  March  18,  1907,  in  London.

The  sitter,  a  lady  introduced  without  name  after  the
trance  had  begun,  was  an  intimate  friend  of  Hodgson's.
It  was  her  first  sitting,  but  her  husband  had- — also
anonymously — had  four  sittings  during  the  preceding  fort-
night with  little  or  no  success.  E.  M.  S.  was  present  as
recorder  and  in  charge  of  the  sitting.  HodgsonP  was  the
communicator,  with  Rector  as  amanuensis.  Rector  inter-
polated remarks  of  his  own,  and  sometimes  it  is  not
quite  clear  whether  some  particular  thing  is  said  for
himself  or  for  HodgsonP.  I  have  assigned  the  remarks  as
seems  most  plausible.  The  frequent  repetition  of  "  yes "
by  the  control  is  in  acknowledgment  of  the  reading  out
by  the  sitter  or  E.  M.  S.  of  the  preceding  written  sentence.
Before  the  sitter  came  in  HodgsonP  had  been  talking  of
cross-correspondence  experiments  with  Mrs.  Verrall  and
other  matters.

[Sitter  enters.]
E.  M.  S.  The  friend  is  here.

Hodgsonp. Very  glad  where  is  he. Where  is  he  ?

Hello  old  chap  are  you  first  rate  ? I  am  very  glad


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  537


to  see  you  old  ch  [?]  tell  your  Old  chap  U.D.
me  I  do  not  think  he  did  absolutely,  but  if  you
U.D.  better  than  he  did  we  shall  get  on  finely
first  rate  together.  Sitter.  "  Understand  "  ?

Hodgsonp.  Yes  you  remember  how  I  used  to  walk  up  and
down  your  dining  room  explaining  my  ideas  to  you
and  him  ?  Sitter.  Generally.

Hodgsonp. (illegible  word)

E.  M.  S.  What  is  the  last  word  ? The  friend  says  you  did

walk  up  and  down.
Hodgsonp. I  said  explaining  my  ideas  to  you  and  him.
Sitter.  Yes.

Hodgsonp.  You  used  to  think  I  was  a  little  over  sanguine
but  1  think  I  was  mostly  right,  nearly  right
after  all. Do  you  remember.  Sitter.  Yes.

HoDGsoNp. how  you  laughed  at  my  illustration  of  a

E.  M  S. "  my  "  what  "  of  a  "  ?

Hodgsonp. illustration  of  Medium  Sitter.  Yes,  I  do.

Hodgsonp. whom  you  thought  pretty  good, whom  you  thought
pretty  fine  [or  fair]  had  some  light
I  am  delighted  to  see  you  again.
Sitter  (to  E.  M.  S.) I  wish  he'd  know  me.

HoDGsoNp.  I  shall  give  me  time, and  so  soon  as  I  place  you

you  will  see  I  am  your  old  friend.
Sitter. That's  better.

HoDGsoNp.  I  am  certain  that  I  know  you  but  want  to  make

sure  before  I  make  a  botch  of  it.
Sitter. That  is  like  you.

HoDGsoNp. I  want  to  recall  a  few  incidents  and  then  I  shall  be

sure  of  being  (?)  understood.
E.  M.  S.  We  can't  read.

HoDGsoNp.  You  are  a  stupid  lot  if  you  cant  U.D.  when  I  am
shouting  at  the  top  of  my  voice,  to  make  you  U.D.
Don't  you  remember  how  I  used  to  Shout  when  I
got  excited  and  interested.

Sitter.  Yes.

HoDGsoNp. Cup  used.
CC1

1  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  179,  and  XXV.,  p.  304,  for  the  cross-
correspondence  of  which  this  forms  a  part.


538  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.  [part


Sitter. Is  it  somebody  else  now  ?
HoDGsoNp. No  not  at  all. M  e  .
Sitter. "  C  "  ?

HodgsoNj,.  No  I  never  used  bad  grammer. it  is  I  it  is  I  instead
of  Me. speaking, speaking  to  you  Mrs.  [?]  Mc  [?]
I  remember

[Probably  the  sitter  made  some  remark.]
Hodgsonp. Don't bother me so. listen, do you  remember
Buddhist.

Rector. He  is  very  impatient  with  me.  R.
HoDGsoNp. Wilson  E.  M.  S.  Wilson,  did  you  say  ?

Rector. Yes. he  said  Wilson.
Hodgsonp. Do  you  remember  Buddhist.
E.  M.  S.  &  Sitter. "  Buddhist  "  ?
HoDGsoNp. and  how  we  used  to  laugh  about  it.
Sitter, (referring  to "  laugh about  it  "). I  don't  remember
specially.

HoDGsoNp. Don't  you  UD. Don't  you  remember.
Sitter. So  sorry.

HoDGsoNp. (hand thumps.) you must U  D. or loose  lose
much. B  Sitter. "  B." There  it  is  again.

HoDGsoNp.  uddhist.
Sitter. I  understand  the  words.

HoDGsoNp. but  not  what  I  am  driving  at  %  Sitter.  No.

HoDGsoNp. Do you remember what I said about being  in

trick  ?  Sitter.  You  showed  me  lots  of  tricks.

HoDGsoNp. I  do  not  mean  that  at  all.

(E.  M.  S.  explains  what  she  thinks  he  means,  viz.

that  if  the  evidence  was  not  genuine  he  must  be  in

the  trick.)

HoDGsoNp. (Hand thumps assent.) Yes exactly, and  you
laughed  but  you  would  U  D.  my  ideas, yes.  Now
follow  me  and  we  shall  get  on  famously.
Do  you  remember  Jackson  Sitter.  No.

HoDGsoNp. Yes Jack  E.  M.  S. "  Jack  "  ?

Sitter. Jack,  of  course. Is  it  Jack  ?

HoDGsoNp. Well  of  course  it  is.  Jack.

Sitter. Of  course  I  remember  Jack.

Rector. Son  was  inadvertently  spoken, he  says  inadvertently
spoken  in  a.  the  son. I  mean  son


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  539


Sitter. I  don't  know  Jackson.
Rector. Yes  it  should  be  Jack  only.
Sitter. Yes,  I  know  Jack.
Rector. Yes. now  I  say  that  was  a  mistake,
(read  over.)

Hodgsonp.  yes  it  should  have  been  Jack  only,  got  it  ?
Sitter. Yes.  Hodgsonp.  All  right  now  Mrs.  L

Rector, give  me  his  influence.  R.

[Hodgson's  hat  was  doubtless  here  given  to  the  hand,

but  it  is  not  recorded.]
HoDGsoNp. I  repeatedly  said  Jack, now  do  you  remember  ?

also  my  idea  of  you. as  reasoning  (?)  S  let  (illegible

word)  and  his  law. got  it  ?  Sitter.  No

HoDosoNp. impressions  (?)  officially  (?)  and  his  law. Scott  (?)

don't  you  U  D.  Sitter.  No.

HoDGsoNp. he says dont you remember about (?) your  (?)

(illegible  word)  impressions  and  his  law.
Rector, too  bad  he  seems  so  clear.
HoDGsoNp. yes. do  you  remember  Lan  ban.
E.  M.  S.  Could  you  print  it,  Rector  ?
Rector. BAN .  N  E  R.
E.  M.  S.  Whose  Banner  Rector  ?

HoDGsoNp. Willy's  (?)  Banner  E.  M.  S.  Willy's  banner?

HoDGsoNp, Oh  dear. What  shall  I  do. do  you  remember  how

I  used  to  shake  my  fist  and  explain  about  the  Ban
E.  M.  S.  Banner  ? (Hand  thumps.)
Sitter. I  can't  remember  any  banner.

HoDGsoNp. Do  you  remember,  the  last  time  I  saw  you  I  told

you  about  the  skeleton. (E.  M.  S.  reads  over.)  yes.
Sitter. I  am  so  sorry  I  don't  remember.

HoDGsoNp. Do  you  remember  about  the  Rings  linking  together

and  how  we  tried  to  catch  him.
E.  M.  S.  "  Linking  together  "  is  it  ?
HoDGsoNp. Yes Don't  you  remember.
Sitter. I  remember  a  puzzle.

HoDGsoNp.  Don't  you  remember,  how  we  tried  to  get  him
open  it,  and  one  with  long  sticks  with  two  rings,
and  how  hard  we  tried  catch  (?)  him.  Anna.
Oh  dear  oh  dear

E.  M.  S.  (correcting  reading  of  sitter) It  is  "  Oh  dear."


540


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Rector, listen. I  dont  think  you  U  D.

R.

Hodgson  says  he  talked  about  the  medium  who  tried
to  cheat  him  about  a  banner  and  the  key  rings,  he
said  he  could  have  broken  him  into

Hodgsonp. Do  you  remember  Mr  [or  Mrs]  Mc

E.  M.  S.  "  Mr  Mac  "  ?  [I  think  I  said  '  Mac  '  not  M.C.,  but
am  not  sure. E.  M.  S.]

Hodgsonp. Yes.  Sitter.  No.

HoDGsoNp. Who  was  the  Medium  we  had  such  a  disgusting

experience  with.
Sitter. I  have  never  been  near  a  medium.
HoDGsoNp. I  told  you  about  it  one  evening  in  your  house.
Sitter. You  told  me  so  many  stories.

HoDGsoNp.  and  you  were  very  much  amused  over  my  explana-
tions of  the  banner.

Sitter. No,  I  don't  remember  anything  about  a  banner.

HoDGsoNp.  Dont  you  remember  my  expression  he  ought  to
have  a  Prize  Banner  for  his

Sitter. I'm  sorry  I  can't  remember.

Hodgsonp.  I  remember  how  amused  you  were  over  it.

Sitter. It  may  have  been  so,  I  can't  remember.

HoDGsoNp. Let  me  remind  you  of  something  else.

Sitter. Yes  do.

HoDGsoNp. Do  you  remember  HOME
Sitter. I  know  Home's  name.

HoDGsoNp. and my explanation of the experience, do  you

remember  Cadoodled.  Caddoodled.
E.  M.  S.  Cadoodled  ?  Hodgsonp.  Yes. Do  you  ?

Sitter. It  sounds  like  one  of  your  words.

HoDGsoNp. Why  dont  you  wake  up  and  listen  to  me,  if  you
will  I  can  prove  that  I  am  Hodgson.
(Last  sentence  read  over.)
Rector, that  is  what  he  said.  R.
Sitter. Tell  me  my  pet  name  for  you.

Rector. I  wish  you  would  not  stick  to  any  one  special  word
or  its  meaning.  R.
Just  let  him  ramble  on  about  what  comes  into  his
mind and after he recovers from (illegible)  he
will  be  clear  and  you  will  U  D. (read  over)  yes.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  541


recovers  his  U.D.  he  will  tell  you  all.  Surely  he
will.

Hodgsonp. Do  you  remember  (illegible)

Rector.  Remind  him  of  something  something  that  will  do  no
harm  to  tell  him.  I  wish  you  would  U  D.  remind
him  of

do not ask him any questions  but  remind  him  of
something.
Sitter.  Cripplegate.1

HoDGsoNp. Oh  you  mean  where  we  were  ?  Sitter.  Yes.

HoDGsoNp. Oh  you  mean  where where  we  were. I  remember

walking  with  (several  illegible  words)  and  playing

yes  there,  Do  you  remember.  Father
E.  M.  S.  "  Father  "  is  that  ?
Hodgsonp. Pa Confessor.  Sitter.  No.

HoDGsoNp.  and  there  I  used  to  sit  and  smoke  and  tell  stories
until  it  was  long  past  bed  time.

(Sitter  reads  "midnight," E.  M.  S.  says  "bedtime.")
HoDGsoNp. Oh  I  should  say  I  remembered

(Pencil  which  had  worn  down  is  changed.)
Rector. It  is  not  going  well  ? Yes  better

he  says  he used  to sit  there and smoke and  tell
stories  until midnight, when  he  used  to  talk  (?)
about  (?)  garden  and  return  to  his  room  he  liked
it  so  much  there, he  liked  it.
HoDGsoNp. Do  you  remember  Dock.  Sitter.  Yes,  Yes  !  2

HoDGsoNp. Wake up then. and I hear you say it  now

(E.  M.  S.  reads  over.) now  clearly, in  my  mind.

love  to  D —
Sitter. Love  to  whom  ? Is  it  P  or  D  ?
Rector, all  right. I  heard  him  so

DOCK

yes. got  it.
Sitter. I  can't  give  love  to  Dock.

HoDGsoNp. I  did  not  say  it. love  to  you. the  D  came  in  as

1  The  name  of  a  former  home  and  house  of  the  sitter  and  her  husband,
and,  she  believes,  the  place  where  she  last  saw  Hodgson.

2  Docky  was  the  nick-name  used  by  the  sitter  and  her  husband  for  a  com-
mon friend  (deceased)  of  theirs  and  Hodgson's,  but  on  reflexion  she  does
not  think  Hodgson  ever  used  the  name.


542


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PAKT


being  registered  at  Mrs  W  s.  at  Mrs  V  s  again
today  E.  M.  S.  I  understand.

Rector,  he  got  G.  P.  to  give  it.  in  his  place.  Dock  is
correct  for  the  lady, as  he  reminds  her  of  it.

Sitter. Yes,  I  remember  Dock.

Hodgsonp. I  wish  you  to  remember  also.  C

E.  M.  S.  Is  that  a  C  ?  Hodgsonp.  yes  Cat

Rector, not  quite  R. C  is  right  C  a  r  1 1.  C

HoDGsoNp. you  remember, the  lane. E.  M.  S.  "  Is  it  lane  "  ?

Rector. Sounds  like  it

HoDosoNp. where  we  got  the  C  a  1 1 Colt E.  M.  S.  "  Colt  "  ?

HoDGsoNp. (illegible  word)  Cold.  E.  M.  S.  "  Cold  "  ?

HoDGsoNp. yes  speak  and  S Swim. E.  M.  S.  '  Swim  '  is  that  ?

Rector, yes and  it  right,  time  excuse  me. R.  yes

E.  M.  S.  "  cold  "  what  "  and  swim  "  ?

HoDosoNp. Cold  swim. Oh  I  did  enjoy  it. so  much

Rector, ask  him  if  you  like  now  R.

E.  M.  S.  "  Ask  him  if  you  like  more  "  ?  Rector,  now

HoDosoNp.  do you  remember  how  I  used  to  recite  poems  to

you.  Sitter.  Rather.

HoDosoNp. Remember  one  that  went  like  this

How  knowest  thou  aught  of  God

How  knowest  thou  aught  of  God

of  His  favor  or  His  wrath

Of  His  favor  or  His  wrath

can  the  little  fish.
E.  M.  S.  "  Fish  "  is  it  ? (Hand  thumps  assent.)
HoDGsoNp. fish,  etc.  etc. Do  you  remember  it  ?
Sitter I  don't  remember  that  poem.

HoDGsoNp. and  the  flowers.  E.  M.  S.  "  Flowers  "  ?

HoDGsoNp.  yes

Map  out  an  Eagles  Path.

I  used  to  recite  it  again  and  again.
Sitter. I'll  try  and  remember  it. I  remember  your  reading

poetry  most  of  all.
HoDosoNp. Yes  I  said  reading  or  reciting. DON  Skeptic.
E.  M.  S.  "  Don  Skeptic  "  ?
HoDGsoNp. Yes. It  was  part  of  the  Poem.

I  think  till  I'm  weary
Sitter. "  Weary  "  ?


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  543


Hodgsonp. Weary  yes  U  D  it.  Sitter.  You  are  tired  ?

HoDGsoNp. the  Poem.

How  knowest  thou  aught  of  God.

(E.  M.  S.  here  says  to  Rector  that  they  ought  to  be
going.)

Yes  I  shall  have  to  come  again  Mrs  L. and  talk

with  you. I  shall  be  clearer  I  think.
E.  M.  S.  Then  if  the  friend comes  to-morrow, he  will  meet

her.  Rector,  he  says  he  will

HoDGsoNp. I (illegible  word)  speak  so I  can  U  D.  you  and

speak  a  little  slower  if  you  can  Sitter.  Yes.

HoDGsoNp. you  U.D. I  am  no  longer  in  the  body  so  I  can

shout  out  at  you. as  I  used  to  Shout
Sitter. I  wish  I  could  hear  you.
HoDGsoNp. if  you  U  D. Eliza  that  old  lady  says  it.
Sitter. I  know  nothing  about  Eliza.
Rector. I  do  not  either.  R.

HoDGsoNp. I  remember  where  we  spent many  days  together
and  the  good  time  we  had  there.
I  remember  the  poems  well Also  Dock  and  Jack.
Sitter. That  is  quite  plain.
HoDGsoNp. I  UD.  much  more  besides.
Sitter. Let  me  ask  you  a  question.

HoDGsoNp. yes give me something to think over, give  me

something  to  think  over.
Sitter. I  want  to  know  where  Dock  is.
EoDGsoNp. he  is  here.  Sitter,  yes.

HoDGsoNp.  and  speaking  to  you.  hear  him  shout  (?)  Hone(?)
E.  M.  S.  near  his  home  ?  Hodgsonp.  He  is  here

Sitter. Dock,  speak  to  me

Dock.  I  am  speaking  I  was  caught  by  a  friend  of  ours  and
he  brought  me  here.  I  was  caught  up  by  Hodgson,
and  he  brought  me  here  and  told  me  to  say  Dock,
and  she  would  U  D.

HoDGsoNp.  He  sends  (?)  love  (?)  Now  we  must  close  but  I  will
speak  to  you  again.

E.  M.  S.  Tomorrow.

HoDGsoNp.  (?)  Yes.  Next  time.  Don't  you  get  discouraged
with  me.

Sitter. Tell  me  what  to  do  to  understand  better.


544


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Hodgsonp. You  spoke  splendidly  just  then, and  I  heard  you

best  of  all best  of  all  H.
Rector. We are going now. and will ask you to speak  a
little  slower  and  a  little  more  distinctly it  will  help
us  so  much, will  you  try  ?
Sttter. Yes,  I  will  do  anything  to  help.

Rector. Amen, that  is  all  we  ask. It  will  prevent  confusion
and  we  can  U  D.  better.
{The  trance  proper  then  ends  with  farewells.}

Six  Examples  op  Apparently  Externalised  Visions  in

Writing  Sittings.

(April  20,  1897.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.  Rector  writing.  G.  P.  com-
municating through  Rector  what  purports  to  be  a
message  sent  by  Myers  sitting  with  a  medium  in
England.

G.  P. "  Out  of  the  d— g  [?]  past
R.  H. Can't  read.  Slow.

R. He  writes  it  for  me. let  me  have  a  look.

OUT  OF  THE  DEVESTING  PAST.
R.  H. Write  the  preceding  word  again,  the  word  before  past.
R.  DEVESTING.

R.  H. Something  wrong. There's  no  such  word  as  dimning.

R. Yes  but  you  have  not  got  it  all. Wait  till  I  say  it

is  right.  OUT.
R.  H. Don't  mind  the  first  part. I've  got  that.
R. Oh. DREAMING  PAST.
R.  H. Dreaming  ?

R. Yes. Wait. Let  me  have  one  more  look. He  is  now
spelling  it  for  me. It  is  not  easy  to  see  when  one  is
in  the  light. — ■
DREAMING. Yes.  Right.

The  weak  point  of  this  case  is  that  a  suspicion  suggests
itself  that  "  dimning  "  really  was  what  Rector  wished  to
write,  and  that  he  changed  it  because  Hodgson  would  not
admit  the  word.  "  Dimning,"  if  one  may  coin  a  word,
would  make  more  sense  than  dreaming.


liXXi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  545


(June  20,  1898.)

Sitter, Mrs. Howard. Recorder, Miss Edmunds. G.  P.
controlling,  writing.

G.  P.  Yes  and  all  the  little  groups.  I  see  the  [Hand  points
to  corner  of  the  room  as  if  he  could  not  realize
that  I  did  not  see  them  as  he  did.]  See  those
little  groups  all  here.  One  and  the  many  are  here
"  one and the many  "...  are  here

Mrs.  H.  Was  not  "  one  and  the  many  "  the  title  of  the  book
you  meant  to  publish  ?  Do  you  apply  it  to  those
who  have  passed  away  ?

G.  P. Yes  but  to  them  in  particular

This,  perhaps,  also  illustrates  the  Piper  G.  P.'s  failure  to
understand  the  meaning  of  the  title  proposed  for  the  book
(compare  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  428,  and  Vol.  XV.,
p.  26).

(February  20,  1901.)

Sitter,  Mrs.  Junot. Recorder,  Hodgson  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.

XXIV.,  p.  465). Control,  Rector,  writing  for  communicator,

Bennie  Junot.
Bhstnie. Do  you  see  cousin  Frank.

Mrs.  J. No,  Bennie,  is  he  here  ? [Hand  points  to  right  front. J

Standing  over  there.
Beistnie. Right  by  my  side. I  do  not  believe  I  can  keep  him

long.

Here  the  hand  pointing  is  presumably  Rector  indicating
the  position  of  Cousin  Frank.1

(December  21,  1903)  Hodgson  recording.  The  communi-
cator, a  friend  of  the  sitter's,  is  represented  as  leaving  for  a
moment  to  rest. In  his  absence  Rector  writes  :

He  takes  up  a  lot  of  room  .  .  .  Look  at  what  he  has  got
in  his  hand ;  he  has  a  large  square — piece  of  glass — or
something  like  it  with  pictures  all  over  it  showing  it  to
me  Rector  2

1  Cousin  Frank  presently  communicated  himself,  but  his  messages  to  his
mother  were  not  understood  by  her  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  467).

'  This  is  not  explained. It  is  perhaps  meant  to  indicate  a  stained-glass

•2  M


546


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


(March  6,  1907.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  J.  G.  P. Myers  communicating  through
Rector.
Myebsp. Yes  I  go  farewell.

J.  G.  P.  Goodbye. [I was a little late with my goodbye ;

which  may  explain  what  followed. J.  G.  P.]
Myersp. and  may  all  good  be  yours.  Myers.
Rector. We  cease  now  and  may  the  divine  and  holy  blessings

of  the  Most  High  rest  on  you.

+  Farewell.  R.
J.  G.  P.  '  The  divine  and  '  what  '  blessings  '  ?
R.  holy

(Hand  points  towards  place  where  the  communicating
spirit  is  supposed  to  be.)
J.  G.  P.  There  is  no  one  there.
R.  Speak  to  him.

J.  G.  P.  Yes. To  whom  ?
R.  Myers.

J.  G.  P.  Goodbye, goodbye, Myers. I shall see you  again.
(Hand  drops.)

(March  16,  1908.) Mr.  Dorr  recording  :

[Sidgwick's name is mentioned and the hand points  as
though  to  an  unseen  figure  in  the  room.]
G.  B.  D. Is  he  with  you  ?

Myersp. He  is  attracted  and  comes  to  understand  and  help  me
in  helping  you.

[On  Gurney's  name  being  read,  the  hand  again  points  as
though  to  a  person  in  the  room.]

A  Case  of  Position  in  Space  affirmed  by  a
Communicator.

(January  3,  1900.)

The sitter's husband communicating through Rector  as
amanuensis.

window.  The  removal  of  a  stained-glass  window  from  the  sitter's  dining-
room  was  discussed  at  later  sittings.  The  idea  of  such  a  window  might,
moreover,  have  been  (erroneously)  suggested  by  a  statement  made  by  the
sitter,  just  before  the  communicator  "  went  out  "  and  Rector  wrote  as
above.  The  sitter  had  told  the  communicator  that  her  business  in  Boston
related  to  something  to  be  done  in  memory  of  him.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  547

[Some  disturbance  in  the  hand.]
Commb. I  am coming  near  to  you  dear,  so  I  can  hear  you

better are  you  very  near  the  medium  dear.
Sitter. I'm sitting close beside her while you write 1  and

when  I  speak  to  you  I  hold  her  hand  near  my

lips. Where  is  that  head  of  yours  ?
Commr. It's  in  front  of  you  dear. Do  you  not  see  me  staring

at  you  ?

Sitter. No,  I  can't  see  or  even  feel  you.

Commr.  I  am  right  here  and  Rector  is  helping  me  speak  to
you  and  when  I  speak  to  him  he  whispers  it  over
the  head  of  Imperator  and  it  is  repeated  to  you.

Sitter.  Yes,  dear,  where  does  the  medium  come  in  ?  How
do  you  use  her  ?

Commr.  Rector  is  holding  his  hand  over  the  medium's  whole
body,  and  he  has  covered  it  with  the  light  from
our  world,  and  Imperator  has  called  the  spirit  to
our  world  and  sent  Rector  in  its  place.  Do  you
U.D.  me  dear  ?  Sitter. Yes  in  a  way.

Commr.  The  whole  body  of  the  medium  becomes  a  reservoir
which,  through  the  efforts  of  I.  S.  D.  becomes  filled
with  ether  and  is  covered  with  ether  and  remains
so  while  we  operate  with  it.  Do  you  U.D.  this
dear.

Sitter.  Yes,  I  understand  your  description,  but  it  can't  be
thoroughly  understood  from  my  side  I  suppose.

Commr.  Well  dear  listen.  Often  times  the  spirit  will  be
removed  from  the  body  and  the  body  become
apparently  lifeless  for  a  long  time  and  when  the
spirit  returns  it  is  often  conscious  of  where  it  has
been  and  who  and  what  it  has  seen,  but  in  such
cases  the  body  is  not  being  used  by  other  invisibles
U.D.2  Sitter.  Yes.


1  The  sitter  appears  to  be  under  the  impression  that  the  communicator
is  controlling,  but  he  presently  makes  it  quite  clear  that  this  is  not  his  view
of  what  is  going  on.

2  But  compare  Mrs.  P.'s  apparent  knowledge  in  the  waking-stage  of
April  16,  1897  (see  Chapter  VI.,  p.  247)  that  she  has  been  to  see
Myers's  medium  in  England,  which  is  what  the  controls,  alleged  to  be
using  her  body  in  America,  say  in  the  trance  is  the  case.


548


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwiclc.


[PART


Commb.  while  in  this  and  similar  cases  it  is  used  while  the
body  remains  quiet.

Instance  of  Control  apparently  feeling  Pain  of  Com-
municator's Last  Illness  (from  Proceedings,  Vol.
XIII.,  pp.  537-8).

{Feb.  14,  1892.)

Present  Dr.  and  Mrs.  A.  D.  Thaw  and  Mrs.  Holmes.
Dr.  Thaw  taking  notes. Phinuit  controlling.

Ph.  [in  a  child's  voice,  for  Ruthie].  Tell  Mamma  not  to
trouble  so  [Here,  and  at  times  later,  there  seemed
to  be  great  physical  distress  and  pain  in  abdomen,
throat  and  head.]  It  pains  me  so  here  [Hands  on
abdomen.]  [Correct.  Child  had  dysentery,  with  sore
throat.]  My  throat  hurts.  The  powder !  Take  it
away.  I  don't  like  it.  Take  it  away.  [Bismuth
was  given  through  entire  illness  of  two  weeks,  and
was  always  given  with  trouble.]  {N.B.  the  child
was  only  15  months  old  when  she  died  and  could
say  only  two  or  three  words,  so  the  language
attributed  to  her  here  is  not  that  which  she  used
during  her  illness.  So  far  Phinuit  may  be  conceived
as  imitating  Ruthie  1  but  after  more  talk  he  appears
distinctly  to  suffer  himself.}

Ph.  This  is  dreadful.  This  little  girl  will  take  me  out
with  her.  She's  tearing  me  to  pieces.  [Great  pain
apparently.]

1  Conscious  acting  on  Phinuit's  part,  in  imitation  of  Ruthie,  does
occur,  e.g.  on  May  19,  1892,  when  he  pats  Dr.  Thaw  and  remarks,
"  She  says  I  don't  do  it  right  I'm  not  gentle  enough.  I  don't  do  it
the  way  she  used  to  do  "  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  570).  See  also
Vol.  XIII.,  p.  '489,  for  cuddling*up  doll  in  neck  and  singing  in  imitation
of  Kakie  Sutton  on  December  8,  1893


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  549


APPENDIX  TO  CHAPTER  VI.

The  Waking-Stage  and  the  Corresponding  Stage  in

going  into  Trance.

The  arrangement  of  the  records  in  this  Appendix,  whether
of  waking-stages  or  of  going  into  trance,  is  almost  purely
chronological.  Most  of  them  have  been  referred  to  in
the  text,  but  I  have  also  added  a  few  notes  partly  to
call  attention  to  particular  points,  partly  explanatory,  and
partly  to  show  the  connexion  with  the  preceding  trance.

Remarks  inserted  in  the  records  by  the  recorder  are
enclosed  in  square  brackets.  Remarks  by  myself  in  {}.
Asterisks  in  almost  all  cases  represent  words  the  recorder
could  not  catch.

(June  21,  1895.)  Waking-Stage.

Professor W. Romaine Newbold sitter and recorder,  and
H.  W.  O.  present.

[Mrs.  Piper  coming  out]  There's  a  deep  hole,  go  in
to  it.  [Describes  it  in  response  to  questions.]  Very
large,  big  enough  to  go  into,  very  dark  like  a  cave
.  .  .  they  put  me  into  it.  [Is  much  confused  and
very  cross  ;  talks  thickly.]  I  tell  you  the  least
any  one  could  do  when  I  fall  is  to  pick  me  up
[Gets  clearer,  says  she  feels  better  as  soon  as  she
has  felt  something  snap  in  her  head.]

[June  22,  1895.) End  of  Trance  and  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and recorder, Professor  Newbold.
[Phinuit  returns,  speaks  with  difficulty.]
Ph. George has been teaching that man {Stainton  Moses}
a  lesson  showing  him  how  to  use  the  light.  Help
him out of that arm Billie like Hodgson  does.
He's stuck there. [Arm is feebly twisting  and


550


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PAET


moving  in  aimless  fashion.  I  rub  it.]  There  he's
out.  It's  mine  now,  I'll  take  it  with  me.
[Coming  out  Mrs.  Piper  holds  out  her  left  hand,
palm  upwards  hollowed.]  I've  brought  you  all
these  flowers  from  the  other  gentleman.  George
says  they  are  for  you  with  his  compliments.  [Gets
a  little  clearer,  but  is  still  unnatural.]  Oh  I  had  the
queerest  dream.  I  thought  I  saw  the  gentleman
with  the  hat  and  cape  and  he  said  '  I  shake  him
up,'  pointing  to  you.  He  had  a  basketful  of  flowers,
he  was  picking  them  out  and  giving  them  to  me.

Part  of  this  sitting  is  quoted  by  Professor  Newbold  in
Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  pp.  37-39.  "  Billie "  =  Professor
Newbold  ;  "  that  man  "  and  "  the  gentleman  with  the  hat
and  cape "  =  W.  Stainton  Moses.  The  cape  had  been
referred  to  by  Phinuit  with  amusement  during  the  trance
proper  (see  above,  p.  183).

(June  24,  1895.)  Waking-Stage.

Present,  Hodgson  and  Professor  Newbold.
Mrs.  Piper  [coming out] I think you have grown to  be

quite  a  girl.
R.  H. Whom  do  you  see  ?

Mrs.  P.  Ruth  and  Margaret  grown  to  be  quite  a  big  body,
aren't  you.  And  Mrs.  Dow  and  Mr  S —  and  Caroline
is  with  her  too.  Very  glad  to  see  you  Mr  P —  .  .  .
John  Hart  and  George  Pelham  are  talking  to  me.
I  wouldn't  take  the  rest  of  those  books  if  I  were
you. John  Hart  has  not  finished  everything.

R.  H. Tell  him  I'll  talk  to  him  later  on.

Mrs.  P.  Don't  go.  Oh  my  God,  my  God,  my  God.  [Takes
some  imaginary  object  from  her  mouth  with  ex-
pressions of  great  disgust  ;  spews  it  out.] Cigars  !

R.  H.  Who  put  the  cigar  in  your  mouth  ?  Who's  been
smoking  cigars  ? Was  it  a  spirit  cigar  ?

Mrs.  P.  That  gentleman  with  the  beard  put  a  cigar  in  my
mouth.

R.  H. Was  it  Hart  ?

[She makes no reply. Upon regaining  consciousness


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance,.- — Appendix.  551


a  moment  later  she  has  no  memory  of  this,  and
when  questioned  says  :]  Nobody  put  any  cigar  in  my
mouth,  unless  you  did,  Mr.  Hodgson. Did  you  1

Part  of  the  trance  proper  of  June  24  and  the  going
into  trance  is  quoted  by  Professor  Newbold  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  XIV.,  pp.  39-41.  There  was  not,  I  think,  any  mention
in  the  trance  of  Ruthie  and  Margaret,  nor  of  Hart,  but
the  latter  wrote  on  June  15  and  17.  For  Hart  (pseudonym)
see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  296-9,  353-7.

{Oct.  12,  1896.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

[After  a  few  words  with  Phinuit  at  the  end  of  the  writing,
Mrs.  Piper  begins  to  come  out  of  the  trance,  and
her  eyes  open,  but  stare  vacantly,  while  her  right
hand  seizes  the  pencil  and  writes  OUT  from  right
to  left  in  capital  letters,  mirror-writing  (out).  Re-
peated (out).  Again  repeated.  "  Who  is  out  ?  ",
I  say.  Then  "  Dr.  Ph "  is  written  in  mirror-
writing  similarly.  "  You've  got  out  all  right,
Good,"  I  say.  The  pencil  drops,  and  the  hand
loses  its  stiffness,  and  Mrs.  Piper  very  quietly
regains  her  consciousness  and  then  says  she  has
seen  "  that  man  again.  That  must  be  Phinuit.  I
never  saw  him  so  clearly  before."  She  described
him  as  having  long  hair,  a  broad  face,  heavy  eye-
brows, full  eyes  that  seemed  to  be  grayish-brown,
with  a  very  large  nose.]

Writing  during  the  waking-stage  is  a  very  unusual
feature.  This  writing  is  in  Phinuit's  mirror-writing
manner  (see  p.  32,  footnote),  which  suggests  that  it  may
perhaps  have  been  done  automatically,  without  the  know-
ledge of  the  waking-stage  consciousness.

(Nov.  16,  1896.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

[Mrs. Piper  on  recovering  pants  very  heavily  as  though
from  violent  exercise,  and  says :]  Oh  I  ran  as  fast


552


Mrs.  Henry  Sid  g  wick.


[part


as  I  could  or  they  would  have  caught  me.  I  saw
D —  {the  boy  lost  in  Mexico}.  They  took  me.
There  was  a  round  mirror  on  the  wall,  and  the  door
had  big  hinges.

[By  questioning  her  I  gathered  fragments  suggesting  that
John  Hart  had  been  chasing  her  to  make  her  tell
me  something.  When  she  completely  recovered  con-
sciousness she  complained  for  a  short  time  of  a  pain
in  her  lung.]

There  was  no  mention  during  the  trance  proper  of  this
sitting,  nor,  I  think,  at  any  other  time  of  Mrs.  Piper's
spirit  being  taken  to  Mexico.  But  Mexico  and  the  lost
boy  had  been  spoken  of  during  the  trance,  and  a  prison
or  other  building  in  which  he  was  said  to  be.

(Xor.  18,  1896.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

[Mrs.  Piper's  subliminal  speaks  with  a  tone  of  some  fear  :]
They  took  me  into  an  awful  place
R.  H. What  sort  of  a  place  ?

Mrs.  P. A  gaol. He  was  sitting  on  a  seat. He's  very  young.

I  can't  bear  to  look  at  him.  Chloral  they  gave  him.
Tell  him  to  release  him,  that  dark  complexioned
man  with  glasses,  Seeans,  Seeints.

The  propriety  of  looking  for  the  lost  boy  in  a  prison
had  been  spoken  of  in  the  course  of  the  sitting,  and  the
name  Cintz  mentioned  by  Hart  (writing)  as  that  of  an
official  concerned.  This  was  the  sitting  during  which
Julius  Caesar  controlled  (see  p.  114).

(Dec.  8,  1896.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.
Mrs.  P. John, [stumbling  then  over  a  name  very  like  Lydgate.

I  repeated  several  similar  names  as  close  to  the
sounds  made  as  I  could  imitate,  such  as  Luggate,
Ludgate.  but  she  still  made  fresh  efforts,  but  accepted
the  name  at  once  when  I  said  Lydgate,  and  she
added]  Poet.  Writer.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  553

[She  then  drew  her  body  back  slowly,  staring  in  front  of  her,
and  said  that  gentleman  with  the  pointed  beard  (Hart)  had
been  taking  her  to  see  some  pillars.  (Probably  reference  to
pillars  described  by  Phinuit  in  a  previous  sitting  as  in  front
of  building  where  D —  is  said  to  be).]

The  Mexican  search,  but  no  pillars,  had  been  mentioned
during  the  trance  proper  of  December  8.  Doctor,  giving
his  name  as  "  J.  D.  L.  I  am  John,"  had  controlled  in
the  latter  part  of  the  trance.

(Feb.  12,  1897.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

I will be  good. I will be  good. I'll  do the  best  I
can. I  do  try. Yes,  I  do. Yes,  I  do. Oh  yes  I
do. Yes  I  will. Yes,  and  in  this  world  too.
Imperator's voice sounds like a silver note in  the

music  of  that  place  in  heaven.
My  body's  so  dead. Where  are  you  going  %  .  .  .
That's  a  funny  way  to  talk  to  any  one.
You  look  as  black  as  anything. Are  you  Mr.  Hodgson  ?
R.  H.  Yes. Who  was  talking  to  you  ?

That  gentleman  with  the large eyes, — that wears  the
cross. Oh  you  never  heard  such  a  voice  as  that.
R.  H.  What  sort  of  a  voice  ?

Like  when  you  pull  on  the  thin  thread  of  an  instru-
ment .  .  .  goes  through  me  .  .  .
Do you know I feel sometimes  .  .  .  just like  water
bubbling  in  my  brain.

Imperator  had  controlled  throughout  the  sitting.

(February  23,  1897.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

[Very  indistinct. I  keep  asking  what  she  sees.]
There's  a  wreath  ... A  wreath  of  Ascension  lilies  .  .  .
Imperator  put  on  his  head, — on  George  Pelham's  head
.  .  . Oh  is  that  you,  Mr.  Hodgson,  talking  to  me  ?
R.  H.  Yes.

Oh  you've  got  the  worst  voice  .  .  .


554


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


(March  4,  1897.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.
Oh  yes. Oh  I  will  .  .  .

Take  him  into  thy  confidence,  and  trust  him.
Trust  in  me  and  I  will  lead  thee  .  .  .

0  my  soul  .  .  .

Beautiful  .  .  .  Beautiful  .  .  .  What  are  those  ? Are  those

praises  ? Praises  they're  singing  ?
Please  give  them  to  me  [Hand  moves  forward  as  if  to

ask  for  something.]
That's  the  finest  thing  I  ever  saw.

A  circle  of  light,  three  different  faces  in  it,  they've  all  got
loose  sort  of  gowns  on.  .  .  .  One  on  each  side  a
little  behind  the  one  in  the  middle.  He  waves  his
hands back. They're vanishing  .  .  .

1  don't  think  my  brain  can  remember  that.

Imperator,  the  central  figure,  had  controlled  throughout.
One  of  the  others  was  doubtless  Rector.

(March  8,  1897.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

I,  W.  Stainton  Moses  .  .  .  [unintelligible]
(R.  H.  What's  after  Moses  ?)

Go,  spirit,  and  repeat  this  for  me.

1,  W.  Stainton  Moses,  standing  in  the  light  of  God,
assisted  by  the  higher  power,  will  use  these  forces
to  prove  to  my  friends  there  is  no  death.  Frater-
nally yours,  W.  Stainton  Moses  for  I.  S.  D.

I'll  blow  the  breath  of  heaven  on  you.

Oh  my  God  .  .  .

Oh  what's  the  difference  between  my  soul  .  .  .
Oh  I  don't  know.

Stainton  Moses  had  been  the  principal  control  during
the  trance,  followed  by  Imperator.

Note  that  though  Hodgson's  question  near  the  beginning
is  ignored,  it  apparently  suggests  the  repetition  that
follows.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  555


(March  12,  1897.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

[Can't  catch  the  first  words.]
I'm  very  happy  in  this  world.
(R.  H.  Who  says  that  ?)

Go  tell  him  George  Eliot  is  working  through  all  the
different spirits to reach him in reality, and  I
present him with these little flowers to let  him
know  they  are  reality.
Go  right  along  about  your  business  into  that  body  and

don't  forget  this  message  on  the  way.
That  looked  like  Mrs.  L.  senior.

George  Eliot  had  been  the  control  during  the  last  part
of  the  trance.

[March  13,  1897.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.
Doctor  A.  T.  Myers  .  .  .
I  didn't  want  you  to  send  me  back,
and I didn't want to go. I  didn't  want  to  go  in

there.
Tell  him  what  ?

go and tell the man in the body what  ? I  can't

hear  you  .  .  .  what
All  rewards  ...  all  is  in  my  hands. I  am  conducting

it  accordingly. Rewards  will  be  yours  for  ever  [?]
God  bless  you.

I  don't  want  to  go  down  there  .  .  .  [crying  voice.]
I  don't  want  to  go  down  there.
Be  home  in  May  .  .  .
Is  that  you  George  %
Oh  I'm  blind  .  .  .

Mr.  Hodgson,  that's  George  Pelham  sure  enough.  He's
the  brightest  looking  man  you  ever  saw.  He  must
be  very  fond  of  double  white  violets.  He  moves
them about  this  way  .,  .  .  [Hand  indicates.]

[Normal] There,  did  you  hear  that  ?
R.  H. What  ? Snap  in  your  head  ?

Yes. Mr.  Hodgson  I  forgot  that  you  were  here.


556


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Rector,  George  Eliot,  and  G.  P.  had  controlled  during
the  trance,  but  there  had  been  no  mention  of  A.  T.
Myers  I  think,  though  Frederic  Myers  had  been  spoken  of.

(March  15,  1897.) Going  into  Trance  and  Beginning  of  Trance.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.
Mrs.  Piper  (going  into  trance). (What  .  .  .  What's  that  ?

Let  not  thy  spirit  be  troubled. God  watches  over  all.
[Imperator  writes.]
Imp. +  Hail  R.  H.  Hail  Imperator

Imp.  Friend  of  earth,  we  greet  thee  R.  H.  I'm  very  pleased.
Imp. Let  not  thy  spirit  be  troubled.  R.  H.  No.

Imp. God  watches  over  all.  R.  H.  Amen.

Imp. It  is  with  pleasure  we  greet  thee. Art  thou  troubled  ?

We  feel  we  see  and  know  thy  earthly  conditions.

Hodgson  then  explains  to  Imperator  that  he  had  just
learnt  from  the  medium  that  a  long  account  had  appeared
in  the  papers  about  what  had  been  said  in  the  trance
about  the  boy  in  the  Mexican  prison,  and  that  he  and
the  medium  were  both  grieved  about  it.

Observe  (a)  the  connexion  of  pre-trance  thoughts  and
communications,  and  (b)  words  in  going-into-trance  stage
exactly  the  same  as  words  in  trance.  This  might,  if  this
case  stood  alone,  be  represented  as  Imperator  comforting
Mrs.  Piper  as  he  met  her  going  out,  and  Hodgson  directly
he  (Imperator)  came  in,  but  should  probably  be  interpreted
in  the  light  of  other  cases. See  above,  Chapter  VI.,  p.  242.

(March  17,  1897.) End  of  Trance  and  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  Recorder  Hodgson.
{The  trance  ends  with  : — }

[Rector  writes].

(Rector)

Let not thy  soul be  troubled. Ask  for  faith  and  it
shall  be  given  thee, -f-  I.  S.  D.  (Rector)
[Mrs.  Piper's  subliminal  speaks.]

I  didn't  know  it  ...  I  didn't  know  it  [crying  tone].
I,  Imperator,  servant  of  God,  watch  over  you  always.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  557

The  Lord  is  thy  shepherd  and  thou  shalt  not
want.

Go,  spirit, take up thy  duties  and  worry  not.  God

is  with  thee
Oh  my  head  .  .  .

I saw the man with the cross distinctly. He  was

making  passes  over  my  head.
Oh  it's  hard  to  wake  up,  I  tell  you  .  .  .
[Practically normal] Did you ever have the  mumps,

Mr.  Hodgson  ?
(R.  H.  I  did  when  I  was  a  little  boy.)

Minerva's1  got  them,  and  I  think  Alta's 1  getting  them.

(March  22,  1897.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter,  Mrs.  D.,  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

Mr.  D — That's  Mr. D — ■. He does look so  beautiful.

I'm  glad  to  see  you.
The  clergyman's  with  you.
I  don't  want  to  go  back.
Go,  spirit,  take  up  your  duties.
I  don't  want  to  take  them  up.
Don't  go.

I saw a  light. And I saw  that gentleman  that  wears
a  long  gown. And  I  saw  your  husband.

There  is  definitely  conversation  between  Mrs.  Piper  and
a  spirit  here.

(March  24,  1897.) Waking -Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

I  don't  think  I  could  possibly  have  got  down  here  if  you
hadn't  helped  me. I'm  very  grateful  to  you  George.
I  can't  take  every  one  of  them. I  can't  take  them  all.
God  is  good  .  .  .
Where  didlyou  find  him  %

G.  P.  was  the  last  control  at  the  sitting,  and  had
talked  of  flowers  at  the  end.


1  Mrs.  Piper's  children.


558  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

(March  25,  1897.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

[I  heard  the  words  said  which  formed  a  connected  message,

but  could  not  get  them  all  written.]
I, Imperator servus Dei say we have received  ...  go

tell  him  we  have  received  his  prayer,  have  taken

it to God  .  .  .  presented in due time.  Worry

not  .  .  .

May  God  .  .  .  watch  over  you  .  .  .
Repeat  it  slowly  and  distinctly  .  .  .

I  am  a  Priest  of  the  Holy  Church  most  High  ...  I
once  lived  in  a  body  like  you.

Is  this  my  room  ?  (R.  H.  What's  the  matter  ?)

I  was  wondering  what  the  spell  was  over  me
[Spoken  with  some  difficulty.]

[Unusually  long  passing  from  {this  second  state}  to  normal,
after  which  she  says  she  was  trying  to  recollect
something,  but  couldn't,  refers  to  Imperator  and
wonders  why  he  is  so  far  away.]

Imperator  had  closed  the  trance  proper.
It  appears  that  the  effort  to  remember  prolonged  the
waking-stage.

(March  26,  1897.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

Come  nearer  to  me  father,  and  I'll  tell  you  [?]
I  command  thee  to  go,  spirit,  take  up  thy  body.
I  am  a  Holy  Father  of  God  most  High.

I  lived  [?]  in  the  Priesthood  after  the  order  of  Mel-
chisedek  [?]

See  that  there  shall  be  more  light  .  .  .  more  light  whereby

we  reveal  the  truth  [?]
Go,  spirit,  and  may  the  blessings  of  God  rest  on  you.
Take  that  down  to  earth.

Do  you  put  the  cross  on  my  spirit  ...  as  an  emblem
of  truth.

Yes,  I  hear  all  you  say.  Yes,  I  will  be  good.  I  will  be
good.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix,  559


Rector  and  Imperator  had  closed  the  trance  proper,  and
Rector  had  been  controlling  and  talking  about  Melchisedek,
etc.,  and  saying  that  Melchisedek  had  "  inspired "  all  the
"  priests  of  the  Most  High."  Among  the  priests  are  Moses,
Aaron,  Elisha,  Elijah,  David,  Daniel.

(March  27,  1897.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

There's  .*.*.*.*  and  Moses  and  George  Eliot.
There's Rector, and Moses and Dr. Speer and  George

Eliot  and  [H.  C.]. There's  a  whole  crowd  of  them,

as beautiful  people as  ever  you  saw.  *  *  *  *
Well  I  declare  there's  Doctor  Myers  and  his  mother  and

there's  Brandon  [?] [sound  like  Brandon. Who  is

it  ?]

Would  you  please  let  me  go,  sir  ?
Would  lyou  please  let  me  go,  sir  ?
Could  you  make  me  much  lighter  1

That  was  Imperator  because  he  took  my  hand.  He  said
take  my  hand  and  put  it  up  there.  He  would
make  me  hold  my  head  up.

Imperator,  Rector,  and  George  Eliot  have  controlled,  the
latter  closing  the  trance  proper.

{March  29,  1897.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.
(R.  H.  Halloo,  Mrs.  Piper,  Halloo.)

Halloo. Who's  that  talking  to  me  ?

There's the lame man,  the  man  that  was  lame,  but

he  isn't  lame  now.
There's  two  ladies  with  him  this  time.
Well,  we're  all  very  much  better  off,  and  much  happier.

This  is  the  life  *  *  *
I'm  M — B — if you please, but my  name is  not

known  to  everybody. There's Elisa on that  side.

*****  j)r  Myers  ...***
Hold  up  your  head  .  .  .
(R.  H.  See  anything  ?)

There's  a  veil  over  my  face.


560


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


[Just  normal] Did  you hear  that  snap  ?  [to  R.  H.].
I  saw  something. Give  me  a  pencil  while  I  remember
it.

[Mrs.  Piper  then  printed  off

HAVE  .  FAITH  .  IN  .  GOD  .

She  saw  these  "on  a  board  or  something."]

In  this  case  it  is  clear  that  Mrs.  Piper  hears  and
responds  to  Hodgson's  call  without  recognising  him.

(March  31,  1897.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

4*  J(J  l{C  lj!

Better  be  very  good.

What's  that  .  .  .  listen  to  me  .  .  .

Have  faith  in  God.  He  governs  all  things  well  [then  with
a  snap,  as  though  she  had  not  heard  clearly  and
was  being  corrected]  wisely,  wisely.

May  the  blessings  of  God  be  with  you  forever.

Tell  him  that  .  .  .

Will  you  come  with  me  .  .  .

How  do  you  do,  George  % I  didn't  know  you. *  *  *
changed  .  .  .
(R.  H.  Is  he  changed  ?)

[Just  normal]  Why,  Mr.  Hodgson.  Why  didn't  you
speak  to  me  ?

(April  1,  1897.) End  of  Trance  and  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

{Record  of  the  trance  proper  ends  thus  : — }

[W.  S.  Moses  writes.]
I  have  thought  it  all  out  and  will  give  it  to  you  the

next  time  we  meet.
Ever  your  friend,  W.  S.  M. No  more  light.

[Mrs.  Piper's  subliminal  speaks.]
I  am  William  Stainton  Moses,  but  I've  passed  through
so  many  stages  since  I  came  here  that  *  *  *  [hard
to  get  back  again], but  with  the  help^of  God  and
my  guardian  angels  *  *  *  *  will  be  given.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  561


(R.  H.  What  will  be  given  ?)
I  will  repeat.

You go back to  your  body  and say  that  all  proofs

of  identity  will  be  given.
I am not of the earth,  earthy,  but I'm beyond  it

with  God  .  .  .
Please  let  me  go. I  dislike  to  be  between.

(April  3,  1897.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter,  Mrs.  D.,  with  Hodgson  recording.

{During  the  trance  proper  Mrs.  D.'s  friends  had  partly
used  the  voice  and  partly  communicated  through  George
Eliot  (writing),  who  explained,  "  because  there  was  neces-
sity for  a  little  more  light  I  came.  The  dear  elderly  gentle-
man who  has  just  been  here  *  *  *  had  not  enough  strength

to  remain."}

# * *  *

Where  will  they  find  my  body.

I  can't  ...  I  don't  know  where  it  is. Why  do  you  talk
to  me  about  my  body  ? If you all  stand  in  my
way  I  can't  get  in.
(R.  H. What  do  you  see  ?)

I  didn't  want  them  to  close  the  place  up  !

(April  15,  1897.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

Do  you  call  those  ascension  lilies  ?

What  you  say  to  me  is  so  clear,  but  I  can't  hear  it,
you  know.

But I don't want to go  ...  to go down  there  [in

tearful  voice].
That's  a  good  way  to  get  out  of  it.

The  funniest  thing  happened. Did  you  see  what  that

gentleman  did  ?
(R.  H.  No,  what  did  he  do  ?)

He kept reaching out some flowers to me and  I

couldn't  reach  them. And  he  put  a  lily up  and

he  was  behind  it,  and  the  lily  disappeared  and  he

wasn't  there  at  all.

2n


562


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[pakt


The  trance  had  been  occupied  with  imaginary  accounts
of  the  English  sittings  with  no  mention  of  lilies  or  any
flowers.

{April  20,  1897.) Going  into  Trance  and  Beginning  of  Trance.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

[Mrs.  Piper's  subliminal  speaks.]
I  think that  must be Dr.  Newbold,  and  he's  a  bad
cold  too. [I  had  a  cold. W.  R.  N.]
[G.  P.  writes.]

[Shakes  hands.]
R.  H. Halloo  George

G.  P. How  are  you  H.  ? [The  H  as  Rector  usually  makes
it,  type  W\

R.  H. First  rate,  George,  old  chap. What's  the  news  ?

G.  P.  Just  left  Newbold.  Saw  him  in  chair  reading,  not
feeling  any  too  well  physically,  either.  [About  this
time  I  was  sitting  in  my  chair  in  my  room  at  the  Uni-
versity. I  do  not  know  what  I  was  doing.  W.  R.  N.]
Go  [?]  shake  hands  with  him,  H.  [Hesitation  in  deciph.]
[H  first  made  as  Rector  makes  it,  ffl,  then  as  if  with
slight  effort,  as  G.  P.  used  to  make  it,  H  or  j6^-
type.]

R.  H.  I  don't  understand  what  you  mean.
G.  P. Are  you  well  ?

R.  H.  Yes  I  see. I  have  a  cold  but  it's  getting  better.

Etc.

As  regards  the  letter  H,  see  Chap.  IV.,  p.  148.  It  is  to
be  observed  that  G.  P.  had  not  controlled  since  March  24,
I  think,  whereas  Rector  was  a  frequent  control,  and  had  been
the  principal  control  for  some  days  before  this.  The  notes
in  square  brackets  signed  W.  R.  N.  are  taken  from  Pro-
fessor |Newbold's  [copy  of  the^fsitting  and  are  approximately
contemporary,  made  a  few  days  after  the  sitting  took  place.

(April,  26,  1897.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

$  $  $  $


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance, — Appendix.  563


Go  forth  spirit  into  thy  body  and  give  these  messages  to
the  stranger.

Tis  I,  Imperator,  instructs  thee.  Have  better  sense,  not
to  worry,  spirit.  Why  worry,  it  is  thy  mission.
Go,  have  courage.  I  am  astonished.  It  is  thy
mission.  God  requests  it  of  thee.  These  teachings
to  be  sent  broadcast  all  over  the  material  world,
and  help  God's  children.

Did  I  say  it  all  for  you  ? You're  a  good  man.

Oh,  don't  go  now. Don't  go  now.

*  *  *  all  the  messages  for  you  ?

They're  as  busy  as  bees.

She  had  beautiful  hair.

Closing  over  my  very  face.

Oh  dear  me  !  .  .  . Well  really.

Is  that  you  Mr.  Hodgson  ?

I  didn't  know  was  resurrected  .  .  .

This  room's  all  so  black.

There  is  no  obvious  connexion  with  the  pi-eceding
trance  proper  in  this  waking-stage.

(May  11,  1897.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

Oh  that's  George  Pelham. How  you've  changed.

*  *  *  Excuse  me,  I  mean  Mr.

What  are  you  going  to  do  with  those  ?

Won't  you  please  tell  me  1

Is  that  you  .  .  .  Moses.  *  *  *

if  *  *  *  came  so  near.  *  *  *

They  smell  lovely,  don't  they  ?

Would  it  be  a  boy,  would  it  be  a  girl.

I  didn't  know  that. It's  something  new.

Goodbye  .  .  .  goodbye  .  .  .

Oh  Mr.  Hodgson  there's  feathers  all  over  my  face.
(R.  H.  There's  what  ?)

Little  light  fluffy  things  all  over  my  face  .  .  .

Did  you hear my  head snap  ? Did you hear  that
shut  down  ? I  know  what  they  do.
(R.  H.  What  ?)

They  put  a  bonnet  on  me.


564  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

1  think  this  is  the  first  appearance  of  the  bonnet,
which  was  frequently  mentioned  in  later  waking-stages.

(June  10,  1897.) Going  into  Trance.

Sitter  Mrs.  D — Recorder,  Hodgson.

#  *  #  *

I  don't  think  I  know  you.

My  name's  D — . Don't  consider  yourself  above  me.
No  I  don't,  [apologetically]
Coming,  coming,  coming.

Mr.  D —  communicates  almost  at  once  when  the
trance  proper  begins.  Some  such  remark  as  "  Coming,
coming,  coming  "  was  frequent  in  going  into  trance  about
this  period.

(May  26,  1898.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Mrs.  Howard.

[Mrs. P. coming out of trance says  :] I see  your

father  [describes  him  and  then  says  :]
I  see  that  beautiful  young  lady.
Mrs.  H. What  is  her  name  ?

Mrs.  P. Edith  D —  ;  she  wants  to  give  you  the  lilies  she  holds.

She  says  '  Take  these  lilies  as  an  emblem  of  my
love.'

Mrs.  H.  You  dear  Edith,  I  wish  I  could  take  them  ;  I  will
gladly  take  them  though  I  can't  see  them.  When-
ever anything  happens  to  me  that  is  good  I  want
to  tell  it  to  you.

Mrs.  P.  She  laughs  at  that,  she  is  so  pleased  to  hear  you  say
that.

Mrs.  H.  I  often  think  of  Wordsworth's  sonnet  when  I  think
of  you  :

"  Surprised  by  joy  impatient  as  the  wind
I  turned  to  share  my  transport  all  with  whom
But  thee  deep  buried  in  the  silent  tomb."

Mrs.  P.  'No  no,'  she  says,  'no,  no'  to  that  last,  she  does  not
like  you  to  say  that.

Mrs.  H.  No,  dear  Edith,  I  know  you  are  not  in  any  tomb
but  here  with  me.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  565


Mrs.  P.  She  is  smiling  now,  she  likes  that.  She  says  again,
'  Take  these  lilies,  etc.'  Why  there  is  George  !  I
see  George.

Mrs.  H. What  flowers  has  he  ?

[Mrs.  Piper  suddenly  starts,  comes  to  herself  a  little,
recognises  me  and  says,  "  Oh  why  didn't  I  get
that  big  bunch  of  violets  he  wanted  to  give  you  !  "
Then  she  begins  to  cry  as  a  grieved  child  at
having  to  come  back  "  to  this  dark  place " — "  I
don't  want  to  come  back,  oh  I  don't  want  to
come  back  !  "]

The  record  of  the  trance  proper,  which  is  not,  however,
complete,  does  not  mention  Edith  D — .

{June  3,  1898.) End  of  Trance  and  Waking-Stage.

Sitter, Mrs. Howard and her daughter. Recorder,  Miss
Edmunds.

G.  P.,  who  has  been  controlling,  takes  leave.
Mrs.  H. Good-bye  everybody. Give  my  love  to  Edith.

[After  a  pause  the  hand  makes  feeble  signs  of  writing,

but  is  unable  to  make  any  mark.]
Mrs.  H. Imperator  is  trying  to  write  a  prayer.
[Trance  ends  12.12  and  Mrs.  Piper  tries  to  speak.]

Waking-Stage.
Mrs.  H. What  do  you  see  ?
Mrs.  P. All  there

God  guard  and  keep  them  through  our  Lord.
Mrs.  H. It  is  the  blessing  that  he  could  not  write. Now  he  has

given  it. Tell  us  whom  you  see  ?
Mrs.  P. Very  pretty.  Mrs.  H.  What  is  it  ?

Mrs.  P. That's you Imperator makes  all the  flowers  in

a  minute.
Mrs.  H. Whom  do  you  see  ?
Mrs.  P. Edith. .  Mrs.  H.  Who  else  ?

Mrs.  P. George another  man here's  Mr.  L —
Mrs.  H- You  see  his  whiskers  and  moustache  ?
Mrs.  P. Mrs. D — and her daughter. Jim's cousin  Mrs.

Coriston [?] [Not recognized] Mr.  Z- —
Mrs.  H. What  !  my  grandfather  ! Perhaps  it  is  my  cousin  with

my  grandfather.


566


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgiuick.


[part


Mrs.  P. makes  all the  flowers  in  a  minute on  top  of  that

lady's head  in  the  body.
Mrs.  H. Who  else  is  there  ? What  was  Mrs.  Z. — 's  first  name  ?
Mrs.  P. Hodgson's  mother  is  in the  front — she  says  she  is

with him all  the time ; the  efforts  of  prayer  will

bring  peace  to  the  soul.
Go thou take up thy body and blessings rest  on

thee. This  is  really  Heaven. I  am  so  blind  [Cries.]
Mrs.  H. Don't cry, you'll  go there again  very  soon.  Don't

cry.

Mrs.  P. All  gone  away.  [Cries.]

Mrs.  H. It  must  be  hard  to  go  to  Heaven  for  an  hour  every
day  and  not  be  able  to  remember  anything  about  it.
Mrs.  P. [Lifts  up  cushions,  looks  at  hands  and  under  cushions.]
Mrs.  H. What  are  you  looking  for  ?

Mrs.  P. I want the basket with the handle made of  gold

things  with  pearls  in  the  end. I  can't  find  it.
Mrs.  H. What  is  in  it  ?

Mrs.  P. Two  songs  written  with  forget-me-nots.

Mrs.  H. Who  wrote  them  ?

Mrs.  P. Big  man  with  side  whiskers.

Mrs.  H.  What  were  the  songs  called  ?  That  was  Mr.  L —
Mrs.  P.  Is  that  you  Miss  Edmunds  ?  Your  voice  is  not
musical.  Your  voice  [to  Mrs.  Howard]  sounded  like
a  trumpet.  There  was  a  wreath  of  something  wound
round  my  hand  and  arm.  They  wound  it  round
and  they  took  it  off.  It  is  something  white.  They
put  it  on  and  take  it  off.

Descriptions  of  Rector  and  Imperator  given  in  Waking-Stages
of  June  29,  1898,  and  June  20,  1905.

(June  29,  1898.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Mrs.  C.

[She  said:  "Oh,  must  you  go  now?"  (to  them),  and  said
she  saw  a  man  sitting  and  writing  in  a  large  book.
He  had  a  very  high  forehead,  a  dark  beard,  a
rather  large  nose  inclined  to  be  hooked,  and  a  very
pleasant  expression.  He  was  dressed  in  light  colored
clothes of some material like linen. This  was


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  567


evidently  Rector,  though  I  think  she  did  not
mention  his  name.
Then  she  said  to  me,  "  You  have  never  seen  Imperator.
have  you  1  "  and  described  him  as  tall,  looking
like  a  priest,  with  no  hair  on  his  face.  He  was
dressed  in  long  flowing  garments  looking  like  soft
white  silk,  and  had  a  silver  cross  on  his  breast,
hung  by  a  cord.  He  was  being  carried  through  the
air  and  had  a  halo  about  his  head.]

(June  20,  1905.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Mrs.  X.

[The  following  is  Mrs.  X.'s  record  of  Mrs.  P.'s  description
{in  the  waking-stage}  of  Rector  :]

Arched  eyebrows — large  dark  blue  eyes — nose  large- — rather
raised — a  round  firm  face — a  little  spot  over  right
eyebrow — long  dark  hair — Greek  nose — hair  brushed
back — grayish  hair  going  through  it — high  forehead
— no  beard — full  chin — little  curve  in  his  chin — Oh
I  can  see  him  so  plainly — he  has  such  a  nice  face
— hair  falls  over  right  ear  a  little.

(September  13,  1898.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitters,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Thaw. Recorder,  Miss  Edmunds.

They  took  him — he  was all bloated up — they  took

them  all  away.
I  wonder  where  my  head  is  ?
I  don't  want  to  see  you  at  all [to  Dr.  Thaw]
Do  you  know  who  that  tall  man  was  ? A  tall  man
kept shaking hands with you. He  did  not  have
his  glasses  on. He  took  them  off. Did  you  know
where  he  put  them  ? He  was  trying  to  tell  them
when  he  wanted  to  go. Man  who  has  taken  them.
Little  girl  with  them. She  was  not  the  same  one.
Sitter. Did  the  tall  man  say  anything  1

He  shook  hands  all  the  time  with  you. He  told  me
to  tell  you  what  he  said. It  will  come  to  me  in  a
minute.
Sitter. Tell  me.

I  wish  I  could  think. I  don't  know.


568


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Sitter. What  did  he  look  like  ?

A  nice looking  man. He  had  the brightest  eyes —
darker  than  yours.
Sitter. What  was  his  name  %

He  told  me. I  kept  hearing  it  all  the  time.  Did
you  see  his  hands  kept  going  ? I  was  too  far  away
when  I  tried  to  reach  him. I  could  hear  him.
Sitter. Wanted  to  speak  to  any  one  else  ?

I  want  to  know  who  that  little  girl  was  too.  She
was  in  front  of  him.

The  man  with  the  cross  came  and  now  all  the  whole
place  is  closed  over.

Is  that  you  Dr.  Thaw  ?
Dr.  Th. Who  did  you  think  I  was  ?

You  looked  so  black  to  me.  Did  you  hear  my  head
snap  ?  Did  you  see  the  light  ?  Something  goes
down  and  shuts  over  my  head.  So  glad  to  see
you.  I  didn't  know  where  I  was.  I  have  four
eyes  and  then  I  can  see  you  with  two.1  There  are
eyes  at  the  back  of  my  eyes.  Why  didn't  you
speak  to  me  ?  I  see  you  and  yet  I  can't  see  you.
I  feel  so  funny, etc.  etc.

There  is  no  obvious  connexion  between  this  waking-
stage  and  its  trance  proper.  I  do  not  know  whether  it
had  any  for  the  sitters.  We  have  here  a  case  of  bringing
the  spirits  into  special  relation  with  the  sitters.

{Oct.  13,  1898.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitters,  Mrs.  Dorr  and  Hodgson,  the  latter  recording.
{This  was  the  first  sitting  Hodgson  attended  after  his  return
from  England,  where  he  had  been  for  about  a  year.}

*  *  *  Imperator  *  *  *  take  care  of  thee  .  .  .

*  *  *  take  it  away  if  you  wish.

oh,  oh,  oh,  beautiful.  Oh  take  me  with  you — I  want
to  go.  Oh  take  me  with  you — See  the  wreath.  Is
that  a  wreath  ?  Put  it  on  her  head.  Good-bye,
good-bye,  good-bye,  good-bye.  Oh  I  want  to  go.
Will  it  be  all  right  ?

1  Compare  Chapter  VI.,  p.  223.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  569

There's  Imperator,  he's  in  a  chair,  made  in  a  minute,
and  Rector  and  Doctor,  and  a  lovely  lady  taking
through  the  air,  and  they're  going  to  take  away  in
the  chair.
R.  H. Take  whom  away  ?

take  Imperator  away  in  the  chair.

Oh  I  don't  want  to  stay  here.  *  *  *

They  say  I  mustn't  feel  badly  because  they  go.

D'you  hear  that  ?  silvery  voice  ?  mustn't  worry  because
they  go.

I  wondered  why  I  didn't  stay  where  I  could  see  the
light.  I  heard  the  little  whistle,  and  I  heard  the
voice  say  that  I  must  go,  and  uncomplaining.
[The  "  little  whistle  "  was  probably  a  whistle  which
I  heard  also  and  which  apparently  was  a  call  to
workmen  engaged  in  building  behind  Mrs.  D.'s
house.]

There,  did  you  hear  that,  did  you  hear  my  head
snap  %

Is  that  you,  Mr.  Hodgson  ? Oh,  is  this  Mrs.  Dorr's  ?
[Mrs.  P.  now  normal.]

(Oct.  31,  1899.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.
[Inarticulate.]
My  love  to  my  son.
R.  H.  Yes,  dear  mother.

All  ...  all  ...  all  ..  .  all's  well.
[With  beaming  smile.]

Yes. Waited  for  the  prayer,  didn't  he  ?  .  .  .
I  feel  queer.

There  are  two  priests. One  was  a  teacher. He  wrote
many  books,  and  taught  in  the  old  school.
R.  H. Which  one  is  that  ?

That's  Rector  .  .  .  Rector. The  other's  .  .  .

I'll  tell  you  again  .  .  . I'll  tell  you  by  and  by.

Well  ...  I  heard  my  head  snap. Didn't  you  hear  it  ?

There  had  been  no  mention  of  Mrs.  Hodgson  during
the  trance  proper.


570


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


{Dec.  4,  1899.)  Waking-Stage.

Voice  sitting. Sitter  and  recorder,  G.  B.  D.

[After  this  Mrs.  Piper  gradually  comes  to  herself,  describ-
ing certain  things  she  sees  and  repeating  certain
words  she  hears  while  in  the  half-way  state,  which
were  of  a  character  intensely  personal  to  myself.
At  last  she  tries  to  tell  me  something  which  she
suddenly  loses,  then  says  :]
You  look  like  a  shadow — you  looked  very  dark  to  me  a
moment  ago.  Some  one  with  a  very  earnest  face
was  reaching  out  something  for  me  to  give  you —
I  can't  remember  what  it  was.

This  illustrates  breaks  of  memory.

{January  15,  1900.)  Waking-Stage.

Voice  sitting. Sitter  and  recorder,  G.  B.  D.
Yes,  I  see  them,  they're  roses.
I  will,  I  will  certainly.

From  whom  ? Mr.  W—  ? Are  you  Mr.  W—  ?
Thank  you  ! — I  see  the  star.

There's  Mr.  — ,  and  his  sister,  and  Mr.  W — ,  all  standing
in  a  row,  and  there  is  —  with  roses,  and  Imperator.
— And  Mr.  —  has  grown  younger —
If  that  cord  is  long  enough,  I'll  be  there —
[She  snuffs  the  air  ]  I  smelt  those  flowers  plainly.  —
When  the  light  goes,  Imperator  puts  up  his  hands
that  way  and  holds  up  the  cross,  and  the  light
all  goes  out.  But  the  flowers  remain,  but  they're  all
going  to  pieces  !  —  Oh,  Mr.  D —  I  saw  you
standing  outside  that  black  form  a  moment  ago.

{Jan.  22,  1900.)  Waking-Stage.

Voice  sitting. Sitter  and  recorder,  G.  B.  D.

I  will  tell  you  how  it  is — there  is  a  space  that  opens
into  that  other  world,  and  then  my  spirit  goes  out
on  a  cord  into  that  world,  and  then  Rector  comes
in  on  another  cord.

Only  they  can't  keep  the  ether. It  goes  away.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper  s  Trance. — Appendix.  571


[To  me.] I  want  you  to  think  you  are  a  very  black

looking  creature  ! It  is  all  closed  over  !
[To  me.] Are  you  somebody  ?
G.  B.  D.  No  ! I  am  nobody  !

Nobody  ! Nobody  ! That's  queer  !

Note  here  the  two  cords.

(April  2,  1900.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  G.  B.  D.
Yes,  I  hear  !

There  are  two  Mr.  D.s  in  Rector's  arms  and  there's  a
ring  over  the  young  man's  head  !  Oh  I  can  see  so
plainly  !

[Repeats  what  some  one  says.]  "  Oh  I  am  just  as  happy
as  I  can  be  !  "

 I  can  see  those  little  flowers  all  made  in  a  minute  !

 I  don't  want  to  be  made  to  go  ! —

I  see  there  is  a  light  all  open,  and  there  is  a  cord  attached
to  my  heart  [puts  hand  on  heart].  I  go  out  on
that  cord  and  I  go  in  on  that  cord.  But  when  I
am  there  I  am  so  happy  !  And  I  see  such  beautiful
things  !

Do  you  hear  the  bell  !

[Coming  back  to  herself  and  seeing  me.]  You  seem  too
black  to  live  !  That  one  here,  this  one,  is  black,  but
the  young  man  over  there  —  He  went  into  that
light  when  Imperator  pulled  the  curtain  —  —  —

What  am  I  talking  about, any  way  ? Oh,  how  queer  !

{April  3,  1900.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

I'll  produce  Mrs.  Hodgson  with  Eric.
R.  H. produce  Mrs.  Hodgson  with  what  ?

I'll  produce  Mrs.  Hodgson  with  Eric.

There's  old  Mr.  Hyslop  and  *  with  him.
R.  H. Who  with  him  ?

Uncle  Clarkthers  with  *  *  *  will  be  here  soon.

Say,  Rector  took  me  into  the other world and  I've
been  all  round  through  the  garden  with  Mrs.  Hodgson


572


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


and that little boy.  *  *  * And I smelt  incense
burning  *  *  *  and  when  I  came  out  that  old  gentle-
man followed  me  in  all  the  way.
That's  funny  isn't  it  ?

That's  no  dream. Where  have  they  all  gone  to  \

You look as black and as ugly as anything  [to


(May  22,  1900.)  Waking-Stage.

Voice  sitting. Sitter  and  recorder,  G.  B.  D.

Oh  let  me  see  your  face  again  !  [Hand  raised,  eyes  open.]
Ah,  ah  .  .  .  I  don't  know  you.  Oh,  I  am  glad
to  see  you.

I  want  to  see  that  other  lady  that  is  walking  on  the
side  of  her  who  was  trying  to  reach  me ;  that  is
her  sister  ! She  told  me  so.

[Smiles.]  There's  that  lady  with  those  lovely  eyes,  right
up  in  the  air.

Oh,  there  is  Imperator  !  he  is  going  to  take  them  all
away  !

There  is  that  same  little  crescent  again,  with  two  stars
on  it ! That  is  no  dream.

I  want  to  tell  you  something  whoever  you  are.  That
light  goes  right  into  the  other  world,  and  when  my
spirit  goes  out  it  goes  out  on  that  cord.  [Describes
Imperator  and  his  coming  in,  but  too  rapidly  for  me
to  get  it  down.]  I  am  going  to  tell  you  something  :
that  is  no  dream,  no  dream.  But  that  is  what
makes  me  numb,  and  that  is  all  just  as  I  see  it.
There's  that  little  white  dove  again  ;  that  dove  is
Mr.  —  and  it's  the  prettiest  little  thing  you  ever
saw  !

I  am  just  so  happy !

[She  then  describes  a  face  she  sees  and  ends  by  saying

with  emphasis] I  think  I  know. Sh  ! Sh  !
[Then  after  a  pause,  during  which  her  face  changed  from


R.  H.]

Did  you  hear  my  head  snap  ?
Don't  you  smell  something  ?
Hear  my  head  crack  ?
Do  you  feel  sleepy  ?


R.  H.  No.
R.  H.  No.


R.  H.  No.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  573

the expression of absolute ecstasy which it  had
just  had to one of  horror :] This  place  is  Hell !
This  place  down  here  is  Hell !
[Then  to  me,  a  little  later  :]  You  look  whiter  to-day  don't

you  ?

What's  that  bell  ringing  for  ?  I  did  not  want  to  come
back  here.

I  see  that  man  over  there.  [She  says  this  looking  at  me.
I  ask  her  what  the  man  looks  like.]  He  looks  all
right,  only  he's  heavy  looking.

(June  11,  1900.)  Waking-Stage.

A  new  sitter  S.,  with  R.  H.  recording.

{During  the  trance  the  sitter's  husband  wrote  a  little
and  then  communicated  through  Rector  with  the  assistance
of  G.  P. The  communication  was  confused.}

*  *  *  [unintelligible]

Eyes  bright  enough  [?] There's  George  Pelham.
All  right. All  right  sir. Oh  .  .  .
R.  H. See  anything  ?

Who's that gentleman with the dark moustache  ?
Do  you  know  that  gentleman  with  the  blue  eyes  ?
S.  Tell  me  about  the  gentleman  with  the  blue  eyes.

He's  got a light blonde  moustache and blue  eyes,
and  a  very  handsome  face.
S.  Tell  me  some  more.

Hair  up  that  way  [motion  of  hand  which  I  did  not
fully  see.] He's  gone  with  George.
S.  Would  you  know  his  photograph  ?  if  I  were  to  show

you  his  photograph  ?
I  didn't  see  his  photograph. I  saw  him  know  him
anywhere. I  know  him  in  that  light  coat,  and  that
little  cravat  with  a  little  light  stripe  in  it.
[S.  asks  about  possibility  of  her  recognizing  him  again.]
Well  I  don't  know.
R.  H. Well,  do  you  remember  that  gentleman  you  saw  ?

Who  was  that  that  had  the  broad  shoulders  ?
S.  Would  you  know  him  if  you  saw  his  photo  ?

Oh  it  wasn't  Mr.  Hodgson  at  all.


574


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


[Mrs.  P.  seemed  to  be  forgetting  the  appearance  of  the  figure
as  she  was  recovering  full  consciousness,  and  I  couldn't  make
full  record  of  question  and  answer.  She  seemed  here  to  lapse
back  partly  into  her  subliminal  again,  and  when  I  asked  her
what  sort  of  moustache  the  gentleman  with  the  blue  eyes  had,
she  referred  to  G.  P.'s  having  moustache  and  beard,  and
implied  apparently  that  the  blue-eyed  gentleman  with  the
broad  shoulders  did  not  have  moustache.  During  this  time
S.  was  behind  Mrs.  P.  and  shaking  her  head,  indicating  to
me  that  there  was  no  moustache.  S.  gave  her  a  photograph
with  a  large  number  of  faces  in  to  pick  out  the  one  she  saw,
and  I  requested  S.  to  turn  away  so  as  not  to  influence  Mrs.
P.'s  selection  by  any  ordinary  means.  Mrs.  P.  very  quickly
picked  out  one,  and  S.  on  being  shown  it,  said  it  was  right.
The  photo  was  a  military  group  taken  at  Netley,  England,
and  contained  31  figures,  of  which  five  were  clean  shaven
and  two  others  Hindus.  The  only  bearded  figure  is  one  of
the  Hindus.  Shortly  after  this,  Mrs.  P.  apparently  became
normal,  and  had  no  recollection  of  the  figure  or  the  photo-
graph. R.  H.]

{On  the  above,  the  sitter  comments  :}  [I  did  not  understand
Mrs.  P.  to  say  at  any  time  that  the  gentleman  with  the
blue  eyes  had  a  moustache,  and  by  shaking  my  head  I
intended  to  convey  to  Dr.  Hodgson  that  I  personally  did
not  think  she  said  he  had.  Up  to  1891,  my  husband  was
clean  shaven.  In  1892,  he  grew  a  moustache  which  he  shaved
off  at  my  desire,  immediately  before  our  marriage.]

{June  12,  1900.)  Waking-Stage.

{Same  sitter  as  on  previous  day  and  Hodgson  recording.}
[Unintelligible mostly. Some words with sounds  of

K  and  R  in  it  repeated  again  and  again.]
George  says  tell  Hodgson  *  *  *  [K  ...  R]
[Repetition,  probably  an  attempt  to  repeat  the  name

Karachi  mentioned  by  S.  {during  the  sitting}]
There  he  is.

There's  Imperator  and  Rector.  There's  the  gentleman
with  the  beard.  And  there's  a  little  boy  with
short  light  hair.  There's  the  gentleman  with  the
blue  eyes,  high  forehead,  presses  mouth  up  like  that


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  575

[puffing  lips  somewhat]  [{Note  by  sitter}  unintelli-
gible]

laughs  one  sided  [{Note  by  sitter}  characteristic]

Tell  Hodgson  that's  all  right. I'll  meet  him  next  day.
S.  Know  that  man  again  ?

Know  him  anywhere.  Rector's  taking  the  bonnet
off.  Pins  and  needles  all  in  it.
[R.  H.  gives  Mrs.  P.  another  photo  group,  and  requests
her  to  pick  out  the  gentleman  with  the  blue  eyes.  S.  turns
away,  and  R.  H.  can  see  only  back  of  photo  which  he  has
not  previously  inspected.  Mrs.  P.  picks  out  almost  immediately
one  that  proves  to  be  correct.  The  group  is  of  football  players
17,  taken  at  Netley,  England  ;  four,  perhaps  five,  of  whom  are
clean  shaven,  the  rest  with  moustaches,  none  with  beard.]

Do  you  know  that  man  said  something  to  me  for  you.
R.  H. What  was  it  ?

It  sounded  like  a  funny  word.  R.  H.  What  was  it  ?

Something  like  sherry. *  *  * Soft  sound  of  C.  Sh
*  *  *  Don't  you  think  I  could  go  back  and  find
it  ? Well  why  does  he  keep  saying  that  over  and
over  again.  Its  Cashia  Cashie  .  .  .  something  like  that.
S.  What sort of sound did it end up with  ?

i  .  .  .  e  .  .  .

S.  What  sort  of  sound  would  that  make, — a  k  and  an

s  and  i  e  ?
It  wasn't  Katie

{Perhaps  it  was  Cashmere,  a  name  the  sitter  had  mentioned
in  an  important  connexion  during  the  trance.}

(November  12,  1900.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

John  .  .  .  Hyslop.  R.  H.  John  Hyslop  ?

says  ...  he  says  ...  I  say  it.  R.  H.  John  Hyslop  ?
Three  Hyslops.  R.  H.  Three  Hyslops  ?

Robert  Hyslop. I'm  as  stubborn  as  a  mule  and  you

can't  change  me.
Survival after death is as sure as God.  You'll

understand  it  better  soon.
I'm  all  right. Tell  them  I'm  going  on. My  work  is
only  just  begun.  Hyslop.


576


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Beautiful  .  .  .

0  don't  do  that.  Will  you  please  take  me  1  .  .  .  O — o.
Well  there's  Philip  S sure  enough.

1  want  to  go  with  them,  with  the  Doctor.
That's  not  a  dream. Oh  dear.

Was  that  you  talking  to  me  ?  R.  H.  No.

Did  you  say  it's  all  right  now  ?

Did  you  say  you'll  feel  better  soon  ?  R.  H.  No.

What's  Mr.  Newbold  got  to  do  with  it  ?
Oh  do  you  hear  that  ?

Mr.  Hodgson,  I  thought  you'd  grown  very  old.

(November  13,  1900.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

Yes  I  will.  I  remember.  This  is  my  son  George.
Tell James I won't forget him. Imperator  prays

all  the  time. Well  there's  Mrs.  C  . [Mrs.  P.'s

face  smiling] I  don't  know  Rebecca,  who  Rebecca
is. Will you all take me  ? Who's Miss Dunn  ?
*  *  *  [not  caught]  too.
R.  H. Who  ?

O  Lord  have  mercy  on  .  .  .  you.

Yes  I  will.  You  take  two  flowers.  One's  an  orchid,
a  pink  orchid,  one's  a  forget-me-not,  put  them  in
some  water,  and  they  cannot  die.

See  the  candles.  There's  one,  two,  three,  four,  five,
six,  seven.

I'm  all  numb.

Who's  the  Bishop  ?  Who's  the  Bishop  ?
[Mrs.  P.  looks  towards  me,  and  moves  her  forefinger  up  to
my  forehead  and  touches  it  lightly,  as  if  to  see  what  it  is.
Then  she  looks  up,  then  looks  at  her  hands,  then  looks  in
front  of  her, — then  begins  to  weep,  but  soon  stops  weeping  and
begins  to  smile.]

[To  R. H.] I  want  you  to  see  the  light  when  it
went  out. Did  you  see  all  the  pretty  things  I  saw  ?
Why  didn't  they  stay  here  % Why  did  it  all  get
dark  so  suddenly  ?
Did  you  hear  that  ? [Snapping  in  head.] It's  not  so
dark  now.


LXXI.]


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  577


*  *  *  [Here  came  several  apparently  normal  remarks,

followed  by  a  lapse  again  into  subliminal.]
I  wish  I  could  remember  where  I  go. Sometimes  I

go  farther  away  than  others,  but  I  can't  be  dead,

can  I  ?  R.  H.  No.

What's  transition  ? do  you  know  ?  R.  H.  Yes.

What  is  transition  ? It  goes again. [The  snap  in

her  head.]

(March  12,  1901.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

[Opens  her  eyes  and  nods  her  head]

This  is  my  mother. Tell  him  Myers  says  this  is  my

mother.
Are  you  happy,  Mr.  Myers  ?

[Gazing  in  front  of  her,  then  turning  her  eyes  towards

my  right,  then  lifting  them  upward.]
Mr.  Myers  has  just  gone  out  of  the  passage  with  a

lady. He's grown younger. He's transparent  and

goes  quickly.

Mr.  Hodgson  do  you  see  a  cross  ?  R.  H.  No.

It's  gone. Do  you  hear  that  crack  ?  R.  H.  No.

What  was  that  cross  doing  in  the  air  ?
[Then  some  remark  about  its  being  heavy  and  she
wondered  how  they  could  lift  it.]

(March  13  and  March  12,  1901.) Going  into  Trance.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

[Mrs.  P.  going  into  trance]  "  I  feel  that  same  thing
now  shutting  down  all  over  me."  {She  had  said  in  going
into  trance  on  March  12,  <:  I  feel  something  shutting
down  all  over  me."  And  then  after  a  pause,  "  Good
morning,  Bennie  .  .  .  good  morning,  Bennie."}

(April  8,  1901.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.
{During  the  trance  proper  Imperator  had  come  in  to  promise,
in  reply  to  Hodgson,  to  regulate  the  length  of  sittings  better.}
Well  ? Yes. Yes. Yes. All  right. All  right.

2o


578  Mrs.  Henry  Sidqivick.


[part


I'm Imperator Servus Dei, very remote from  the

earthly  sphere.
I  understand  fully,  will  [?]  guard  watch  pray  for  you,

and  [?]  for  all  God's  children.
Hallo  Mr.  Myers.

Tell  him  I  understand  the  [?]  modus  operandi  [a
little  stumbling  over  these  words]  very  well.

How  are  you,  Hodgson  ?  R.  H.  First-rate.

It's  a  slow  process,  but  it's  as  sure  as  my  taking
off. We're  going  to  have  infinitely  better  conditions.
Stick  to  it. I'm  weak  yet.  Good-bye.
R.  H.  Good-bye.

[To  R.  H.]  That's  a  queer  thing.  I'll  tell  you
something.  R.  H. What  ?

There's  Mr.  Sidgwick,  and  they've  taken  Mr.  Gurney
out  of  a  hole.  They  found  him  and  took  him  out.1
You  never  saw  a  man  so  pleased  as  he  was.  He's
nearer  than  he  was. He's  getting  *  [?]

Go,  take  up  thy  body  and  fear  no  evil.  I  am  thy
rod  and  thy  staff  and  thou  shalt  be  comforted.

Farewell.

Did  you  hear  my  head  crack  ?  R.  H.  No.

This  waking-stage  is  noticeable  for  the  conversation
of  Hodgson  apparently  direct  with*Myersp.

(April  10,  1901.) Going  into  Trance.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

Funny,  wasn't  it,  I  saw  Mr.  Myers  in  my  dream.  I
think  they  must  be  making  a  desperate  effort  to
get  here  ...  to  get  in

{April  16,  1901.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitters,  G.  B.  D.  and  Hodgson.

That's  .  .  .  that's  .  .  .  [Smiling]  There's  .  .  .  I'll
put  .  .  .  I'll  put  this  cross  here  for  an  emblem
of  peace  and  love.  Imperator.  See  that  little
white dove. It's to denote purity. No cross  no

1  See  Chapter  VIII.,  p.  304.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  579


crown.  Come  unto  me  all  ye  that  are  heavy
laden  and  I  will  give  you  rest.  May  the  Grace  of
God  rest  on  thee  evermore.  Farewell.  We  meet
again. Good-bye,  George.

That's  Mr.  Sidgwick.  Tell  Mr.  Hodgson  I'll  see  him
by-and-by  .  .  .  by-and-by.  R.  H.  Yes.

All  is  well  here.  I  wish  to  God  it  was  as  well  with
you. Don't  forget  us.  R.  H.  No.

I  have  much  to  do.

[Turning  to  R.  H.] Mr.  Hodgson,  everybody's  after

you. [With  a  slight  laugh  "Ha  [Ha"]  Imperator's

put  out  the  light.
[Looking  at  her  hands,  then  turning  to  R.  H.]
They  were  too  black  for  anything.
[To  G.  B.  D.] I  saw  you  double.
G.  B.  D.  You  saw  me  double,  did  you  ? What  did  the  other

one  look  like  ?
I  never  saw  you  before. I  felt  so  numb.
[To  R.  H.] If  you'd  put  your  head  over  a  moment

ago  you'd  just  hit  Rector  right  in  the  mouth.
[To  R.  H.  in  a  whisper.] Is  that  Mr.  Dorr  ?
R.  H. Yes.  [Pause.]

Oh  Mr.  Dorr  I  didn't  know  you.  .  .  .

[To  R.  H.] Did  you  hear  my  head  crack  ?

Record  by  Hodgson  of  Mrs.  Piper's  utterances  when  recovering
consciousness  after  being  under  ether  for  an  operation.

{April  24,  1901.)

Morning  of  operation  for  hernia  by  Dr.  Maurice  Richardson
at  Massachusetts  General  Hospital.

[Operation  about  8.30  a.m.  I  was  with  Mrs.  Piper  till  she
became  unconscious  under  ether.  She  was  taken  about  9.45
a.m.,  after  the  operation,  to  her  room  in  the  hospital  where  I
awaited  her.  The  following  is  the  record  made  at  the  time
by  me  of  our  conversation  until  she  became  normal  about
11.45  a.m.  I  was  able  to  record  practically  everything  said
by  Mrs.  Piper,  but  did  not  record  every  question  put  by  the
nurse, Miss Rogers, or myself. Nothing  of significance  was


580


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


omittecL  from  my  record,  only  the  reiterated  questions  by  the
nurse  or  myself  to  some  such  effect  as  :  "  Mrs.  Piper,  do  you
feel  all  right  now  ?  "  R.  H.]  {The  remarks  in  round  brackets
are  those  of  Hodgson  or  the  nurse  so  far  as  recorded.}

[Questions  to  Mrs.  P.  by  nurse  and  Pv.  H.  {between  round
brackets}  ]

Don't  disturb  me.  .  .  I  don't  want  to  leave  those  people
.  .  .  Oh  dear  me  ...  I  want  to  go  back  to  those
people  .  .  .

(Who  are  those  people  ?) He  pronounces  a  benediction.
(Can  you  remember  what  he  said  ?)  Yes.
(Tell  me  what  he  said.) Peace  and  plenty.
(What  else  did  he  say  ?) I'll  care  for  you.
(What  else  did  he  say  ?)

Peace  and  plenty  ...  If  you'll  let  me  stay  a  minute
.  .  .  There  they  go  .  .  .  There  they  go  .  .  .
[Pause.]

(Feel  all  right  now  ?)

Imperator'll  take  care  of  me. He  said  a  benediction  .  .  .

a  benediction. Farewell. — I'll  be  with  you.
(What  was  it  he  said  ?) I'll  be  with  you. —
(What  else  ?) Peace  and  plenty.
(What  else  ?) I  am  .  .  .
(I  am  what  1)

I  am  the  servant  of  the  Most  High. All  is  well  that

ends  well  and  this  is  well.
[Pause.]

Farewell.  Oh  dear  ...  I  [or  we]  will  leave  thee  now.
[Pause.]

All  is  well  .  .  . [Pause.] Good-bye  .  .  .

(All  right  now  ?)  [repeated]

Don't  worry  about  me,  I'm  all  right.

[Pause.]  Well.  Well  there's  no  doubt  about  it  after  all
that.  I  wouldn't  care  to  live  a  minute  .  .  .  All
gone.  Oh  dear,  where  am  I  ?  It's  all  over.  We'll
take  care  of  you.  Now  we'll  go.  .  .  .  Good-bye.
How  black  it  is  .  .  .  Oh  how  black  it  is.  I'd
give  anything  to  go  back  there.  If  they  could
just  take  me  back  a  minute  I'd  be  all  right.

(Why,  you'll  be  all  right  now.)


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  581


All  right  now. [automatically  as  if  repeating  my  words.]
I've  been  taking  care  of  *  *  *  all  right.
You  needn't  worry  about  that.

[Pause.]  Well  I'm  sorry  to  have  you  go  .  .  .  Thank
you  very  much.  I'll  be  able  to  *  *  *  in  a  moment.
[10.48  a.m.]

(Mrs.  Piper — ) Good-bye  .  .  .  Farewell.

(Do  you  feel  all  right,  etc.,  Mrs.  Piper  ?)  [Repeated
several  times.]

Yes. They've  gone. Where am I  ? [11.11  a.m.]

(Why  don't  you  wake  up  ?) [11.21  a.m.]

They  told  me  to  rest. [?] Oh  dear  .  .  .

(Feel  all  right  ?) Yes,  thank  you. [11.25  a.m.]

(How  are  you  ?)

1  $  $  $

(Feel  all  right  ?) Yes,  thanks.

(Hallo  !) What,  hallo  .  .  .
(Well  ?) I'm  all  right  now.
[Mrs.  P.  looks  towards  the  nurse.]
(Do  you  know  this  lady  ?)

You see some persons are brighter [lighter  ?]  than
others.

(Remember  me  1) Yes. You're  Doctor  Hodgson.
(How  are  you  ?) Well,  I  don't  know. I'm  exhausted.
(Feel  pretty  tired  ?)  Very.

(Know  this  lady  ?) You're  head  nurse  in  Ward  B.
(Feel  all  right  ?)

Why  do  you  talk  so  much  always  ?  Why  won't  you  let
me  rest  ?  Would  you  mind  ?  Now  please  would
you  ?  Your  name's  Rogers  and  your  name's  Dr.
Hodgson  and  my  name  ...  I  wish  I  hadn't  any
... Oh  I  am  so  cold. [11.35  a.m.]

(Feel  all  right  ?) [Nods  assent.] Very  tired.

(Do  you  remember  anything  ?)

No,  nothing  .  .  . Remember  anything  ?

(Yes.) Not  much  of  anything,  don't  want  to.

(How  are  you  now  ?)  Sleepy.

(Know  this  lady  ?) Miss  Rogers  .  .  .


582  Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.  [part

I  wish  I  could  have  an  extra  pillow  under  my  head.
[Nurse  arranges  pillows,  etc.]

[R.  H.  leaves  about  12  noon.]

{October  21,  1901.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

{First  sitting  after  operation  in  April,  1901 — also  after  a
statement  made  by  Mrs.  Piper  that  she  wished  to  leave
off  her  trances  and  free  herself  from  the  Society  and  from
Imperator. }

*  *  *  operation  [?]

*  *  *  Myers  *  *  *  Myers  and  Doctor  Myers.
Hallo  Doctor  Myers.

You  ought  to  be  ashamed  of  yourself.
R.  H. Who  says  that  ?

That's  Myers.
R.  H. Whom  does  he  say  that  to  ?

I'm  talking  to  the  light.

Go  and  clear  ...  go  and  clear  ...  go  and  clear
the  cobwebs  out  of  your  brain.  Begone  with  your
folly.

[These  remarks  apparently  made  by  F.  W.  H.  M.  to
Mrs.  P.]

Imperator  servus  Dei. If  *  *  *  on  earth  the  sins  of
mortals  are  greater  than  *  *  *  mercy  *  *  * I  tell
thee  to  beware  *  *  *  warnings  to  thee  *  *  *  warn
ings  to  thee  *  *  *

going  .  .  .  going  .  .  .  four  rows  of  .  .  .
R.  H. Four  rows  of  what  ?
people.

[To  R.  H.]  I  was  wondering  where  we  were.  You
didn't  see  the  black  thing  they  drew  over  me.  I
never  saw  that  before.  Mr.  Hodgson,  I  went  to
sleep,  didn't  I  ?  I  didn't  think  I  was  going  to
sleep  this  morning,  did  you  2
R.  H. Oh,  I  don't  know.


This  is  another  case  of  apparently  direct  conversation
between  Hodgson  and  Myersp.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  583


(January  22,  1902.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Miss  A.  M.  R.
Yes,  I  see  them.
A.  M.  R.  Who  do  you  see  ?

Imperator,  Rector,  all,  in  prayer,  all  praying,  Inipera-
tor  is  leading.  Looks  like  a  church.  Oh,  how-
beautiful.  Oh  such  a  light.  See  how  beautiful  that
is.  Imperator's  prayers,  the  voice  is  like  a  bell,
oh  so  soft.  He  is  praying  for  somebody  that  is  in
the  dark  w  orld.
A.  M.  R.  Yes.

See  his  robes  ? See  his  cross  ? Oh, he stands  up.

He pronounces a benediction. Fear no evil,  we

will be with thee. Farewell. Hear the choir  all

singing  amen. Going.  Good-bye.
[Looking  at  her  hands  and^  at  me,  but  no  recognition

yet.]

Did  you  know  all  those  people  that  I  saw  a  moment
ago  were  doing  something  to  protect  you  ?
A.  M.  R.  Yes.

They  lifted  a  very  dark  veil  all  up  and  after  they
took  that  away  everything  looked  so  light.
A.  M.  R.  I  see.

And  I  thought  that  perhaps  that  dark  came  off,  of
you.

A.  M.  R. I  guess  so.

Well, it  is  a  long  robe  like  black  thing j  and  they
pulled it all away and made it light. It  was
transparent, as it were. They prayed and  then
they  went  away.
A.  M.  R.  Yes. Lovely,  isn't  it  %

More beautiful than anything I could describe  to

you. I  faintly  remember  it.
[Did  not  seem  to  be  fully  herself  or  have  the  light  of
recognition  in  her  eyes  until  this  point.]

Well,  Miss  R  , I  did  not know you. Did  you

hear  my  head  %
A.  M.  R.  No,  I  did  not.

Why,  it  went  just  like  that  apart  [separating  hands]
and  then  seemed  to  join  together  again. You  must


584


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


laugh  at  my  crude  descriptions,  but  if  you  could
feel  it  and  were  powerless  to  express  it  as  I  am,
perhaps  you  would  express  it  in  as  crude  a  way.

(March  24,  1902.)  Waking-Stage.

Present,  a  sitter,  with  Hodgson  recording.
[Smiling

young  lady  .  .  .  Fine  eyes  .  .  .  Oh-h  .  .  .  It's  all  going
away.

going  away. *  *  *  [not  caught]
My  love  to  mother.
That's  the  young  lady.

[looking  at  her  hands]  strange  .  .  .  hands  .  .  .

[looking  at  R.  H.]  oh  yes  I  see. Well  that's  Mr.  Hodgson.

I  was  trying  to  make  you  out. I  couldn't  see  you

at  first.
My  hand  ached  all  the  time.

Oh  well  Mr.  S.  {to  sitter}  I  forgot  that  you  were  here.
Did  you  hear  my  head  snap  ?  You  see  I  was
asleep  and  when  I  woke  up  my  head  snapped.
Did  you  hear  my  head  snap  ?

I  quote  this  for  the  comparison  of  return  to  normal
consciousness  to  waking  from  sleep.

[March  26,  1902.)  Waking-Stage.

A  sitter,  with  Hodgson  as  recorder.
All  right  I  will.

Phil says tell  .  .  .  mother  .  .  .  Florence sends  her

love.
It's  all  right.
Oh  I  don't  mind.
Well  I  see  them.

Well  they  all  went  out  so  quickly.
Well  that's  a  .  .  .  that's  a  .  .  .

[Sniffing  up  strongly  several  times  as  though  smelling
at  flowers.]
R.  H . What  are  they  ?

Lilies  of  the  valley.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  585


R.  H. Who's  .  .  . [R. H. was going  to say "  Who's  got
them  ?  "]

Who  said  what  are  they  ? a  funny  sound  .  .  .
Well  I  couldn't  think.

Well  I  thought  I  saw  a  young  man  with  a  young
lady  walking  close  to  me  when  I  forgot  what  they  were.
I  keep  thinking.

Well — oh  Mr.  Hodgson  I  couldn't  see  you  at  all  for
a  moment.

I  thought  there  was  something  over  my  face.
My  hands  and  arms  are  as  numb  as  anything.
[Then recognizes sitter and speaks of her  head
snapping.]

The  names  are  those  of  communicators  during  the  trance
proper.

{April  2,  1902.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

John  Welsh  has  Rounder.
R.  H. John  Welsh  was  round  her.

John Welsh has Rounder. Tell this  .  .  .  tell  .  .  .
tell  .  .  . John  Welsh  has  Rounder.
R.  H. John  Welsh  is  round  her  ?

Has  .  .  .  has  .  .  .  It's  I,  Benny,  don't  you  see  me  ?
I,  Benny.

R.  H. John  Welsh  has  Rounder. Yes  I  understand.

[I  here  recalled  Mr.  Junot's  enquiry  about  the  dog
Rounder  in  sitting  of {February  11,  1902}]

Tell  Dad.
R.  H. Yes. I'll  tell  him.

[Pause]

Imperator  took  that  tall  j'oung  man  with  the  light
hair  and  put  him  out,  put  his  hand  round  him,  and
pulled  the  shade  right  down  ...  I  always  see  .  .  .
the  cross  .  .  .

I  didn't  know  you  Mr.  Hodgson.  Do  you  hear  my
head  snap  ?

This  is  included  as  part  of  the  Junot  series  in  Pro-
ceedings, Vol. XXIV., p. 516. The sitting was  not


586  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.  [part

however,  held  with  any  view  to  the  Junots,  and  the  only
mention  of  them  during  the  trance  proper  was  by  Rector
in  the  course  of  remarks  on  the  differences  among  sitters
in  their  effect  on  the  success  of  the  controls. He  said  :

R  Others  bring  before  us  great  light  and  peace.  Friend

we  must  not  fail  to  refer  especially  to  Benny  and
his  dear  ones  especially  his  father  and  mother.
They  bring  infinite  light  and  peace.  Their  spiritual
lives  are  beautiful  considering  they  are  still  mortals.

This  waking-stage  is  of  special  interest,  on  account  of
the  resemblance  of  Benny  Junot's  communication  to  the
manner  of  the  trance  proper,  and  because  the  name  of
John  Welsh,  which  served  as  a  clue  to  the  recovery
of  the  dog  Rounder,  was  here  given  for  the  first  time.

{May  28,  1902.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.
Don't  hurry  me  so.

*  *  *  [a  few  words  in  low  voice  indistinguishable.]

Don't  hurry  me  so.

I  didn't  know  you  were  there.

What  ?

Yes  I'll  take  it.

I  am  F.  W.  H.  Myers.  Tell  Hodgson  I  left  a  sealed
envelope  with  a  Greek  word  written  inside  of  it  as
a  test  for  me  to  give  from  this  side.

Good.  Go.

Mrs.  Myers,  Mrs.  Myers,  Mr.  Myers,  H.  C,  Doctor  Myers,

his  father,  and  brother,  all  in  a  row.
Imperator  said  .  .  .

They  took  me  out,  showed  me  several  different  spirits.
Then  Imperator  came  up  with  a  long  stick,  like,
— made  of  light.  Then  they  all  went  out,  every
one  of  them.

This  is  the  blackest  place  I  ever  was  in.

You  know  I  just  hate  this  place.

Mr.  Hodgson  I  thought  you'd  grown  very  old, but  you

haven't,  have  you.
Well  my  head  went  with  a  bang  that  time,  didn't  it !


LXXI.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  587


(July  2,  1902.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.
Hurry  up  !

Love  to  mother,  Dad,  Bennie.
Love  to  father,  mother.  Phil.
Love  to  *  *  *
(R.  H. Who  ?)

Mary  .  .  .  Hugh  .  .  .  Bonnie,  Mollie  .  .  .  Hugh.
Love  to  Richard. Jessie,  Mother,  Fred,  Rebecca.
Good-bye.  (R.  H.  Good-bye.)

J.  G.  D.  [?]  Ad  infinitum  .  .  .  Ad  infinitum.
Imperator. There's George. All right  ...  I  do.
[Smiling] Yes  its  .  .  . John  Hart  ... I  know  you.

Laura  H .  .  .  good-bye — dear, my  love  always.

Going.

Where  .  .  .  stay  ...  I  thought  you  almost  was  going
to  fall  .  .  .  you  would  if  you  hadn't  hurried  away.

I  saw  Mrs.  C and  the  baby  *  *  *  [not  caught]

I  came  in  on  a  string.

[to  R.  H.]  well  I  didn't  know  you. I  thought  you
were  Mr.  Myers.

This  is  the  last  sitting  of  the  season.  The  trance
proper  ended  with  farewells  from  Imperator  and  Rector,
but  had  been  so  much  taken  up  by  discussion  of
Hodgson's  relations  with  the  controls  that  there  was
little  in  the  way  of  messages  from  any  communicators
except  Myers.  The  omission  appears  to  be  made  up  in
the  waking-stage.

The  confusing  of  Hodgson  with  a  spirit  (Myers)  is  worth
noting.

[October  14,  1902.)  Waking-Stage.

Voice  sitting. Sitter  and  recorder,  G.  B.  D.
[Hand  raised.]

[Whispers]  Puss  !  [more  clearly]  That  is  all  right,  George  !
We  are  not  so  far  removed  from  the  earthly  life
after all. — ■ How is puss  ? — {almost  whispering]

It's  all  well  with  me  ! —


588


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Those  are  roses,  aren't  they  1  I  don't  see  how  they  make
them  !  "  It's  this  way  !  "  but  that  doesn't  teach
me  anything.  Are  they  all  fresh  ? — It's  going  to
fall.  Mr.  Hodgson ! 1  It's  going  to  fall !  You  catch
that,  please  ! Look  at  that  pretty  white  rose. —

Oh  !  [staring  at  G.  B.  D.]  Well,  I  thought  that  you'd
grown  very  thick  ! —  It's  too  horrible  for  anything  !
to  come  down  into  this  black  place.- —

I  saw  Mr.  Dorr  and  Mrs.  Dorr —  and  a  dear  little  lady
with  a  whole  room  full  of  roses  !  There  was  a
little  white  rose  came  down  from  all  the  rest.  I
reached  for  it  and  then  it  all  went !

This  waking-stage  brings  out  clearly  what  seem  to  be
successive  strata  of  consciousness,  but  yet  with  a  recol-
lection of  the  whole  immediately  after  waking.

{November  10,  1902.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  G.  B.  D.

Yes,  I  do  ! Can't  you  come  with  me  % Oh,  oh,  oh  look

—  oh,  look  at  that.  Oh,  what  a  pretty  light  !
There's  Mrs.  Dorr  and  Mr.  Dorr,  and  a  tall  man,
and  another  lady  ;  all  in  a  row ;  and  there's  Im-
perator !  Oh,  how  I  wish  I  could  stay  there  for
ever. Look  at  that  little  dove  —  —  little  white

—  —  and  there's  a  beautiful  lily  all  made  in  a
minute  !  —  • —  —  - —

Well,  [looking  at  G.  B.  D.] — Oh,  there's  two  ladies —
one  lady  told  me  something  to  tell  you  when  I
came  away  but  I  can't  remember  what  it  was.
[Looking  hard  at  G.  B.  D.]  that's  a  black  kind
of  a  looking  man  —

Well  did  you  hear  my  head  snap  ?  I  thought  I  was
coming  a  long  way  on  a  string  and  if  I  left  that
string  I  was  going  to  fall.  When  I  left  that  place
I  was  so  happy — but  it  doe3  not  look  very  happy
here,  does  it  ?  That's  queer  ;  when  I  first  saw  you
just now  I  thought  you was [sic] two persons —


Note  that  Hodgson  was  not  present.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.— Appendix.  589


you  looked  very  much  lighter  in  the  one  body  than
in  the  other !

(February  4,  1903.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.
[Several  words  not  caught.  Then  many  repeated  attempts  at
a  name  which  her  words  "  It's  George  saying  "  indicated  that
G.  P.  was  trying  to  get  her  to  give.  The  name  approximated  to
Martha  {Barton.}  Martha  was  quite  distinctly  given  at  least
once,  but  the  Barton  was  not  quite  reached.  This  name  as
she  gave  it  sounded — not  clearly — more  like  Barralen  or  Parralen,
and  on  my  saying  "  spell  it,"  the  letters  she  gave  sounded  more
like  P.a.r.  than  B.a.r.  She  did  not  get  any  further  in  the
spelling  than  the  r.  I  suggested  {Barron}  and  {Barran}  and
{Parson},  but  none  of  these  was  accepted,  she  continued  trying
to  repeat  the  name.  No  assent  was  made  either  to  Martha
or  Mother  which  I  suggested  for  the  other  sound.  When
I  said  Martha  {Barton},  she  stopped  repeating  the  sound,  a
smile  broke  over  her  face  (which  previously  had  a  strained
look  forward  while  she  was  automatically  repeating  the  name)
and  she  said  "  that's  it,  sure.  George  says  sure."  This
note  is  made  practically  from  memory  on  the  afternoon  of
the  day  of  the  sitting,  Feb.  4,  1903.  What  follows  is  from
my  shorthand  record.]

Hear  it  ! That's  his  sister.
R.  H. Whose  ?

[Pause.] James's  sister  ? George  says  Hannah's  sister.

Here's  George,  and  Mr.  Myers,  and  oh  a  lovely  lady.
She  has  beautiful  hair.

They're  all  going  into  the  light.

There's  a  man  with  a  kind  of  a  beard.  There's  a
man  went  into  this  world  shot  himself.  He  didn't
mean  to  do  it.  There's  a  little  old  lady  with  gray
hair  kind  of  wavy  parted  in  centre  and  put  around
like  that  off  her  forehead.

[Mrs.  P.  makes  motion  with  her  right  hand  suggesting
curvature  in  front  part  of  hair.  I  asked  her  to
repeat  the  description,  which  she  did  in  nearly  the
same  words,  but  I  did  not  get  every  single  word
down  in  the  above.]


590


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


I  guess  I  know. I  can  see  her.
R.  H. Do  you  know  her  ?

No,  she's  with  a  man.

I  tell  you,  Mr.  Hodgson,  there's  a  light  up  there,
but  when  the  light  goes  out  it's  awfully  dark  here
in  this  world.

I  want  to  go  up  in  the  other  room  ...  in  my  room.

[Pause.] I  thought  that  was  Mrs.  C  .

Oh  ! All gone. I wonder how many  ... I  was

drawn  in  .  .  .  like  being  drawn  in  on  a  tube  .  .  .

on  a  cord. It's  an  awful  day,  isn't  it  %
R.  H. Yes. [The  day  is  dark  and  rainy.]

Don't  you  know  that  the  light  in  this  room  seems

very  dark  sometimes.

The  name  Barton  is  a  pseudonym  I  have  substituted
for  the  real  one,  and  I  have  altered  Hodgson's  attempts
at  the  name  accordingly,  while  trying  to  keep  equivalent
approximations  to  the  sound.

At  the  end  of  the  trance  proper,  friends  of  a  previous
sitter  named  {Barton}  had  communicated,  and  among
others,  a  cousin  had  appeared,  but  not  spoken,  whose
name  G.  P.  had  promised  to  find  out  and  let  Hodgson
know  "  after  I  go."  Presumably  "  Martha  Barton "  is
the  result.  Mr.  Barton,  the  previous  sitter,  however,  who
thought  some  things  in  the  trance  communications  good,
said,  "We  know  of  no  Martha  {Barton}.  We  have  a
cousin  Martha  ■ — — ,  nee  {Barton},  but  she  is  alive  and
well."

I  have  quoted  this  waking-stage  for  the  sake  of  the
Martha  Barton  incident,  which  seems  of  interest  in  con-
nexion with  the  waking-stage  consciousness.  The  con-
fidence of  the  waking-stage  intelligence  in  accepting  the
name,  though  a  name  of  no  significance,  which  is  suggested
to  it  is  interesting,  but  might  be  due  to  Hodgson's  own
conviction  conveyed  in  his  tone.

The  case  is  also  interesting  as  an  example  of  failure
to  carry  out  successfully  a  promised  attempt  to  get  a
name  or  other  word  in  the  waking-stage.  Successful  use
of  this  method  is  discussed  in  Chapter  VII.,  p.  268,  etc.


Lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  591


(Feb.  18,  1903.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

That's  Mrs.  H  .  .  .  and  Edmund  Gurney.
There's  Mr.  Sidgwick  with  him  .  .  .  Sidgwick  .  .  .
Mrs. H  .  .  .  Mrs. H  .  .  .  and [in sudden  surprise]
who is  .  .  .  Oh-h  .  .  .  there's  .  .  .  there's  Doctor
Phinuit [stumbling several times  over  the  name,
sounding  at  first  somewhat  like  Finley.~\
R.  H. Who  ?

Doctor  Phinuit.
He's  away  up  there  !

[Then,  with  a  slight  change  of  direction  of  gaze,  and

a  reverence  in  voice  and  manner.]
There's  Imperator.
Good-bye  .  .  .  good-bye.
[Feeling  her  hands.]

Came  pretty  near  taking  me  along  with  them.

There's  a  little  lady  up  there  got  an  awfully  thick

head  of  hair  .  .  .  long  brown  hair  awfully  thick.
[After  staring  at  R.  H]  Hallo  !  Mr.  Hodgson.
I  was  waiting  to  see  what  that  sound  was  in  my

head. It's  cold  in  this  room,  isn't  it.
R.  H. Not  specially. [It  was  rather  cold,  but  not  so  cold

as  it  had  been  on  several  recent  occasions.]
Don't  you  know  I  can't  remember,  when  I  go  out,

hardly  what  this  place  is  when  I  wake  up.

During  the  sitting  Gurney  had  communicated,  also
Mrs.  H.  who  had  communicated  at  the  end  of  the  sitting
just  before  Imperator's  and  Rector's  farewells.  She  had
said  :

Mrs.  H.  I  have  seen  Phinuit.

R.  H. Well,  well ! What  about  him  ?

Mrs.  H.  he  is  no  more  like  what  he  was  than  you  are  like
me.

R.  H. Really  % [Assent] Improved  ?
Mrs.  H. Of  course  he  has  improved  he  is  just  splendid.
R.  H. Well,  I  shall  be  delighted  if  you  will  come  again  and
tell me all about Phinuit's past and present.  I


92


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


remember  he  was  always  somewhat  of  a  favourite
of  yours.

Mrs.  H.  I  thought  if  I  could  really  find  him  I  would  be
really  happy  he's  a  long  way  from  your  world
now.

There  had  been  no  news  of  Phinuit  for  a  long  time
before  this,  I  think.  Mrs.  H.  was  an  old  friend  of
Hodgson's,  and  had  been  present  at  sittings  with  Mrs.
Piper  while  in  life.

(May  5,  1903.)  Waking-Stage.

Voice  sitting. Sitter  and  recorder,  G.  B.  D.

Rector's  there  !  Take  him  quickly  !  He  will  let  me  in
when  he  goes  out.  I  can  see  my  arm  all  numb  !
I  can  see  his  head  on  my  hand.  He  has  his  head
on  my  hand  now.  He  takes  the  ether  out  of  it.
I  can  see.  him  go  into  the  air.  I  can  see  the  cord
on  which  I  came  in.
He  looks  like  a  priest  !  I  can  see  the  light  so  well — too  ;
three,  four,  five,  six,  seven,  they  are  all  going  in  the
light  !  Isn't  it  dark  here  ?  Well  I  was  out  !  I
was  having  a  happy  time  of  it  before  it  got  so
dark.  They  were  telling  me  some  pretty  things.
I  felt,  I  saw,  a  male  {?  veil}  going  up,  going  up,
lifting.

That  is  Mr.  Dorr !  But  you  looked  so  queerly  to  me
before  I  saw  you  clearly.  You  looked  so  heavy,
you  looked  so  thick.

Rector  had  been  the  sole  communicator  as  well  as
control  during  the  sitting.  In  this  case  we  find  described
as  going  on  a  part  of  the  waking-stage  dream  which  is
usually  only  described  as  a  recollection  and  with  less
detail.

(July  4,  1904.)  Waking-Stage.

Present  a  sitter,  with  Hodgson  recording.

McVickar  [repeated  several  times  before  I  caught  it
clearly]  Mr.  Hodgson


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  593


(R.  H. Mc  Vickar.)

$  He  $  $

That's  what  I  want  .  .  .
(Ft.  H. I  remember  you.)

I  want  to  tell  you  something  ...  (R.  H.  All  right.)

You  pretty  well  ?  (R.  H.  Yes.)

I'm  much  happier  than  I  was  and I want  you  to
know  it  and  to  do  something  for  you.
(R.  H. I'm  glad  to  know  it  and  shall  be  glad  of  your  help.)
*  *  *  beautiful  place.

#  s|c  $  ♦

Why  can't  we  reach  you  better,  more  clearly.
[Pause]

There's  a  lady  over  there  trying  to  tell  me  something
.  .  .  rather large  .  .  .  blue eyes  ... I  couldn't

hear it at all. She says he's [?]  .  .  .  C  .  I

send  my  love  to  .  .  Sarah.

[Pause.]

Rector  took  a  cord  out  of  my  stomach.
Hands  are  numb.
(R.  H. All  right.)

I  forgot  who  you  were,  Mr.  Hodgson.

McVickar  had  not  communicated  during  the  trance
proper,  but  I  do  not  know  whether  he  had  any  connexion
with  sitter  or  communicator,  nor  indeed  anything  about
him.  Note  the  apparently  direct  conversation  between
him  and  Hodgson.

(March  1,  1905.) End  of  Trance  and  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

Most  of  the  trance  had,  through  Hodgson's  initiative,
been  occupied  with  conversation  between  him  and  Rector
about  the  advisability  of  lessening  the  duration  of  the
trances  with  a  view  to  lessening  the  strain  on  the  medium.
Rector  had  listened  sympathetically  and  had  promised
that  "  After  we  make  this  a  study  with  your  help  and
are  fully  competent  to  judge  we  will  give  you  full  know-
ledge of  the  conditions  as  we  understand  them."  Towards

2r


594


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


the  end  of  the  trance  other  things  are  referred  to,  and
Rector  ends  :

R.  We  give  our  message  as  we  leave  ...  as  we  leave.

We  cease  now. +  Farewell  (R).
R.  H. Amen.  Farewell.

[Mrs.  P's.  Sublim.]

[Mrs.  P.  repeats  the  following  injunction  monotonously
— much  as  I  myself  say  my  own  words  while  writing
them  down  at  the  sitting, — but  more  rapidly,  and
some  of  them  too  low  for  me  to  catch.]

Be  ye  wise  in  thy  judgment.

It  would  not  be  well  to  prevent  the  light  burning
out.  [?]  it  would  bring  sorrow  to  all  those  who  look
to  us  for  light.

*  *  *  I  will  *  *  *  from  his  interests  in  those  whom
he loves  in  the  earthly  life.

Hearest  thou  me  %  .  .  .  I  say  it. Hearest  thou  me  ?
(R.  H.  Yes.)

God  in  His  Wisdom  and  *  *  *  sends  us  to  the  earthly
world  to  prevent  sorrow,  suffering,  and  we  obey
His  laws.

May  His  spirit  go  with  you  this  day  and  His  blessings
rest  on  you.  (R.  H.  Amen.)

*  *  *  gQ  *  *  *  [Pause.]  Oh!  light!  Stars  in  heaven?
sometimes  .  .  .  sometimes.

There's  Benny.

[Looking  at  R.  H.]  A  man  ?  A  man  ?  are  you  a
man  ?  (R.  H.  Yes.)

I  had  a  beautiful  dream.  I  want  to  say  to  you  man
they  told  me  that  there  was  great  affection  from
son  Benny  to  his  father  and  mother  that  the
affection  would  never  cease,  they  must  be  cheerful
and  *  to  it.

I  lose  the  words  I  think.

God  knows  best. Those  were  the  words. I  was  too

far  away  to  .  .  .
Mr.  Hodgson  !  (R.  H.  Yes.)

Small  *  *  *

You  hear  my  head  snap  then  ?  (R.  H.  No.)


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  595


This  is  clearly,  I  think,  a  case  of  the  trance  com-
munication carried  on  into  the  waking-stage.  Note  also
the  impersonal  recognition  of  Hodgson.

Compare  this  waking-stage  with  that  of  April  17,
1905,  which  is  quoted  next.

(April  17,  1905.)  Waking-Stage.

Voice  sitting.  Sitter  and  recorder,  G.  B.  D.
In  the  course  of  the  sitting  Rector  had  expressed  a
wish  that  G.  B.  D.  instead  of  R.  H.  should  accompany
Mrs.  A.  to  the  sitting  arranged  for  her  on  the  following
day,  and  had  said  that  at  the  close  of  the  sitting  they
wished  to  go  into  the  hand  and  send  a  message  to  the
earthly  friend  (=R.  H.)  regarding  this.

Influenced  by  none !  I  want  to  tell  you  —  —
beautiful !  —  — •  ■ — ■  — ■  Will  you  take  a  message
to  Hodgson  %  [All  this  said  quite  slowly  and
brokenly ;  not  with  the  directness  of  the  voice  in
trance.]  I  wish  to  work  in  my  own  field  !  Will
you  without  prejudice  take  a  message  to  my  friend  ?
G.  B.  D.  Who  is  speaking  ?

I  am  Rector  servant  of  God.  The  power  should  be
individually  free  and  active,  according  to  the  divine
laws  of  the  most  High.  Say  that  to  him.  No
feeling  of  prejudice  or  dissatisfaction  should  enter
into  these  communications.  But  they  should  be
approached  with  a  feeling  of  sincerity  and  freedom
of  thought  and  feeling.  And  the  more  charitable  the
attitude  the  finer  and  clearer  and  higher  the  result
of  the  communications.  That  which  ye  give  shall
ye  also  receive  !  If  thou  dost  not  trust  thy  friends
thy  friends  will  not  trust  thee. Practice  what  thou

dost  preach  and  the  —  Don't  go  !  and

better  conditions  will  grow  out  of  it.  That  is  the
high commander  —  —  the  high commander  !  —

—  —  They  hold  me  in  this  state  !  Thus  may  his
blessing  and mine  go  with thee ; PAX  vobiscum  !

—  —  go  spirit  take  up  thy  body,  and  our  blessings
on  thee  —  — £  [Mrs.  Piper  coming  into  consciousness
of  her  surroundings.] Pillows !  —  hands  !  —  table  !


596


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


—  Mr.  Dorr !  —  if  I  live  —  —  that  is  Mr.  Dorr

—  —  'tis  he !  It  is  a  day  —  —  daylight  !  —
Darkest  clouds  before  daylight  —  Oh  !  Oh,  Mr.
Dorr  —  I  thought  you  were  a  small  man  but  you
kept  expanding  !  [Becomes  quite  normal  again.
Influence  then  passed  into  hand  and  wrote  message
for  Dr.  Hodgson.]

{The  written  message  was  two  or  three  sentences,  by
direction  of  Imperator,  expressing  the  wish  that  G.  B.  D.

should  accompany  Mrs.  A as  they  desired  to  use

the  voice. }

Note  that  Rector  appears  to  reply  directly  to  G.  B.  D.

(May  23,  1905.)  Waking-Stage.

A  sitter,  with  Hodgson  recording.

*  *  *  She  lost  you  all  right. Tell  my  mother  *  *  *

cease.  [Pause.]
Say  Willis  ...  I  will  stay  with him. Are  you  all

going  ? *  *  *  awfully  pretty  light.
What'd  you  get  the  funny  lot [?] I want  to  say

Willis  *  *  *  for  me.
There's Imperator  over  there. *  *  to take  up  the

body  .  .  .  good  work.
[Pointing  with  her  left  forefinger  in  left  front.]
[Looks  up  to  right.] There's  Mrs.  H.
Tell Willis to *  * like a friend. There's  dark

*  *  in  a  door.  [Pause.]
Funny. There's  George  and  John  will  be  with  the  *
[Pointing  at  R.  H.] That  is  the  same  type  of  man

as  Mr.  Hodgson  .  .  .  same  kind  of  beard.
Sitter. What  did  you  dream  ?

They came  on  a  line  down  to  me  and  took  me  out.

Then  Rector  slid  in  on  the  line. Then  Mrs.  H

and  Mrs.  F [?]  and  John  were  all  saying  some-
thing about  records.
I don't know  ...  I see  .  .  .  then they came  to

pull  me  out  .  .  .  that  was  a  dream  .  .  .  that  was

a  dream.

S.  What  else  did  you  dream  ?


LXXI.]


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  597


Well  ...  I dreamed that they were  ...  I  didn't

dream  at  all.  S.  Yes  you  did.

I  saw  it.  S.  What  did  you  see  ?

I  saw  Mr. Pelham  up  there  holding on  to  a  lady
and  trying  to make  her  talk, but I don't  know
who  the  lady  was.
S.  Didn't  George  say  her  name  ?

Well  I  thought  so  but  my  head  is  mixed  up.
S.  What  else  did  you  dream  ?

I  didn't  dream  anything. Dream  ?

My  hand  is  numb  .  .  .  did  .  .  .  that's  my  hand
surely  but  it's  numb  [feeling  her  hands].  [Pause.]

Hallo,  Mr.  Hodgson.  R.  H.  Hallo  !

You  see  I  knew  you  instantly.  And  the  lady  too.
Did  you  hear  my  head  snap  ?  S.  No.

Well  I  feel  a  nausea  sometimes  when  my  head  snaps.

[Then  an  ordinary  remark  about  the  weather.]

(Nov.  20,  1905.)  Waking-Stage.

Present,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Junot,  and  Hodgson  recording.

*  %  sf:  ^  ifr

I  knew  it  all  the  ...  all  the  while.

Say  .  .  .  say  *  *  *

I  want  to  ...  I  don't  want  to  go  ...  I  don't
want  to  .  .  .

Head  .  .  .  [feeling  her  head  with  her  left  hand.]

[Looking  up  and  smiling]  I  think  you'll  know  me
.  .  .  next  time.

[feeling  her  right  hand  with  her  left  and  then  looking
about  her].  It's  a  world.  What's  the  .  .  .  what's
the  .  .  .  what's  that  gentleman  talking  about  that
didn't  want  to  go.  What  was  it  ?  I  guess  it's  all
right.

Mr.  Hodgson  !
R.  H. Hm  !

What  were  you  doing  over  there  ?

[Rubbing  her  cheek.] My  face  is  asleep.

See  [hear  ?]  it  snap.

Well  I  thought  I  was  on  the  string.  I  thought  I
was  on  a  ...  on  a  wire  ...  on  a  wire  cord  .  .


598


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


what would you call it  ? a wire  cord  .  .  .  not  a

wire  cord  but  a  wire  .  .  .  Oh  yes.
I  want  to  ...  I  want  to  change  this  table  and  put

it  round  the  other  side.
[Looking  at  R.  H. Then  at  J.]

That's  all  right.  I  just  remember  ...  I  just  re-
member about  it.  Is  the  lady  gone  ?  [Mrs.  J.  is
on  the  left  side  of  Mrs.  P.  who  has  been  looking
to  her  right,  where  Mrs.  J.  was  at  the  beginning
of  the  sitting.]

Were  you  cold  here,  Mr.  Hodgson  ?
R.  H.  No.

My  face  felt  just  like  your  foot  when  it  goes  to  sleep-
Do  you  know  what  I  mean  ?
R.  H.  Yes.

It  prickles.

Case  of  Rufus  Miller.

(Dec.  18,  1905.) Beginning  of  Waking-Stage.
Present,  Sx  and  S2  with  Hodgson  recording.

*  *  *  Rufus  *  *  *  love  to  him.
Tell  Rufus  I'm  all  right  *  *  *.

*  *  *  Rufus  *  *  *  I  want  to  see  him.
He's  *  *  *

Tell  Rufus  I'm  all  right. I  want  to  see  him. I  want  to
send  him  my  love.

*  *  *  He's  a  good  man. Oh  I  can't  hear  you.

*  *  *  Miller  [heard  by  Sx  and  S2  but  not  clearly  by  R.  H.

who  only  noted  the  sound  as  like  an  approximation
to  Merlin.]
what  [?]  I  will  feel  for  him. That's  all.

(December  19,  1905.) Extract  from  record  of  trance  proper.

Same  sitter  as  on  December  18. Rector  writing.

[Glove of Mr. {Taylor,  who  had communicated  on
Dec. 18} given. Hand feels it after turning  it
inside  out,  lays  it  close  at  top  of  sheet.]
Taylor (through  Rector). I have  been  trying  to  find an  old
friend  of  mine. Is  he  all  right  think  ?


Lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance. — Appendix.  599


Yes.
can  help


Sj.  Can  you  .  .  .

[Hand  has  been  writing,  and  stops  as  Sx  speaks.]
Taylor. I  wish  [?]

Sr  Can  you  tell  his  name  or  describe  him  in  any  way.

Rector, friend  you  will  please  note  if I  get  this  right  and

help  me  as  I  register  it. R  .  .  .
{Rector  proceeds  to  write  the  letters  of  the  surname

letter by letter in  capitals,  Hodgson  reading  each

out  as  written. After  E  has  been  read  :}
[Hand reaches forward  as if  to get glove. R.  H.

moves  block-book  nearer  hand,  which  just  touches

glove  lightly.]
R.  R.  .  .  R.  H.  R.

Rector. Is  that  L.  R.  H.  Yes.

R.  sounds  like  MILLER  .  .

8V  Yes.  Miller.

R.  Is  it  MIR  or  L.

R.  H. Miller  is  all  right.
T.  I  wish  to  find  him  as  he

comes  over.
Sr  Do  you  mean  Henry  Miller  or  .  .  .

R.  No  ... I  am  not  sure  of  this  friend.

What  is  this  ? I  mean  ... R  .  .
R.  H.  R.

T.  I  mean  R  Miller  RU  .  .  .  R.  H.  R.U.

R.  F  .  .  .  R.  H.  F.

R.  U  S.  R.  H.  U.S.  Rufus.

Sr  Rufus  Miller  is  not  living.

T.  I  know  I  want  to  find  him  now  as  he  can  tell  me.

help  me  I  mean. Don't  you  U.D.
Sr  Rufus  Miller  senior  is  not  living,  but  he  has  a  nephew

by  the  name  of  Rufus  Miller  who  is  living.
T.  I  want  to  find  my  friend  over  here  U.D. I  want  him

to  help  me  ...  he  is  far  off  they  say  .  .  .
R.  H. How  can  Mrs.  C — —  help  you  to  find  Rufus  Miller

in  your  world  ?

T.  Can't  she  help  me  by  asking -)-  find  him  ? I  want

very  much  to  bring  him  here  ...  I  want  to  help
him  to  know  how  to  speak  .  .  .

S,.  Yes  his  friends  would  much  like  to  hear  from  him.


me  before  he


listen  R.


600


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[pabt


T.  I  shall  find  him  soon  I  hope. I  heard  you  talking

about  him  not  long  ago.
S2.  Perhaps  we  did.

T.  do  you  remember  how  I  tried  to  tell  you  about  him

when  I  first  tried  to  speak  ?
S2.  Yes. You spoke the name and we read  it  Mellor

instead  of  Miller,  so  we  did  not  understand.
T.  Well  I  will  find  him  and  help  him  all  I  can.  God

bless  you  all.  T.
[Hand  scrabbles  slightly  on  table-covering.]
R.  friend  you  would  better  if  possible  obtain  some  object

belonging  to  him  and  we  will  teach  him  how  to

speak.  R.

Taylor  had  first  communicated  —  writing  himself  —  on
November  15,  1905,  and  at  the  end  of  his  short  com-
munication said  :

T.  Is  [?]  Mil  .  .  .  All  right

R.  H. "  Is  Mel  all  right."
T.  Mel

[Pencil  dropped.  Hand  scrabbles  somewhat  on  paper.
Taylor's  writing  large  and  scrawly.  Pencil  given.
Rector  writes.]

Rector  (for  T.). Tell  Mellor  I  live  I  live  I  live  I  hope  I  live.

I  live  I  am  glad.  Who  is  it  speaking  to  me.  Is  it
Mrs.  C.

I  had  to  return.  R.
Sr  Yes  it  is  Mrs.  C.

I  have  substituted  pseudonyms  for  the  surnames  in
the  above  records.

Rufus  Miller,  the  sitters  note,  and  Mr.  Taylor  were
formerly  clerks  in  an  office  together.  Mr.  Miller's  death
occurred  a  great  many  years  before  the  death  of  Mr.
Taylor.

The  above  are,  so  far  as  I  know,  the  only  references
to  Rufus  Miller.  The  case  presents  several  features  of
interest  :

(1)  The  name  so  imperfectly  given  on  November  15,
1905,  that  it  was  not  understood  by  the  sitters,  was  given
much  more  clearly  in  the  waking-stage  of  December  18,


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  601

more  than  a  month  later,  and  the  message  then  given
was  further  dwelt  on  in  the  trance  the  next  day — December
19.  Taylor  had  communicated  on  the  18th  in  the  trance,
but  had  not  mentioned  Rufus  Miller,  so  that  the  first
clear  mention  of  him  and  the  first  mention  of  his  Christian
name  was  in  the  waking-stage.

(2)  Rufus  Miller,  though  he  had  really  been  a  friend
of  the  communicator's,  is  erroneously  supposed  to  be
alive  both  by  the  waking-stage  intelligence  on  the  18th
and  by  the  trance  intelligence  on  the  19th — until  the
latter  has  been  clearly  told  by  the  sitter  that  he  is  dead.
Taylor  living  could  have  been  under  no  misapprehension
about  this,  and  Taylor  as  communicator  repudiates  the
mistake — shuffles  out  of  it  not  very  plausibly.  If  there
was  really,  as  he  claims,  no  n)istake  in  idea,  the  same
confusion  in  expression  must  have  occurred  in  waking-
stage  and  in  trance.

(December  12,  1906.)  Ooing-into-irance.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Mr.  Piddington.

(While  but  half  entranced  and  with  eyes  open  {Mrs.  Piper}
says,  pointing  in  the  direction  of  the  mantelpiece  :  "  That
vase  worries  me.  It  looks  hke  a  head."  J.  G.  P.  removes
two  vases.)

(December  17,  1906.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Mr.  Piddington.

[Before  sitting  down  Mrs.  Piper  took  a  round  vase  off  the  mantel-
piece because,  she  said,  it  had  worried  her  the  last  time,  as
it  looked  like  a  face.  J.  G.  P.  then  told  her  that  just  before
going  into  trance  on  December  12,  she  had  spoken  of  her
dislike  of  the  vase.  Mrs.  Piper  replied  that  she  did  not  know
she  had  done  so  ;  but  that  on  December  12,  directly  after
sitting  down  preparatory  to  going  into  trance,  and  while
fully  conscious,  she  had  thought  of  asking  me  to  remove  the
vase,  but  did  not  do  so  because  she  thought  such  a  request
woiild  seem  foolish.]

I  quote  these  incidents  as  exemplifying  the  gradual
loss  of  normal  consciousness,  the  partial  development  of


602


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


an  illusion  (compare  Chapter  VI.,  p.  229),  and  the  con-
tinuance into  the  beginning  of  the  trance  of  the  ideas  of
the  normal  or  almost  normal  state,  but  failure  to  remember
a  week  later  what  had  occurred  in  what  was  evidently  a
very  light  stage  of  trance.


(January  16,  1907.) Extract  from  Trance  and  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  Mr.  Piddington.

{During  the  trauce,  about  a  third  through  the  sitting,
there  was  an  interlude  while  waiting  the  return  of  spirits
who  had  gone,  so  it  was  alleged,  to  try  and  give  a
message  through  Mrs.  Thompson.  The  interval  was
occupied  by  Rector  in  giving  a  message  from  Joseph
Marble  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIII. ,  pp.  255-279)  entirely
unconnected  with  anything  else  in  the  trance  proper.
The  following  is  the  conversation  : }

Rector.  The  friend  and  spirit  Joseph  M says  he  is  ex-
tremely anxious  to  reach  an  old  helper  of  his  named
Rodney  Smith.  He  was  in  his  employ  for  a  long
time  and  is  now  unable  to  help  himself  much.

J.  G.  P.  Please  ask  the  spirit  Joseph  M to  tell  me  every-
thing he  can  about  Rodney  :  where  he  lives,  for
instance,  and  so  forth.

R.  He  lives  at  or  near  Durham.

J.  G.  P.  Durham  ?  (Hand  assents)

R.  A  place  called  that  and  he  is  in  poor  health.  He

wishes  to  reach  and  help  him.

{The  following  is  the  record  of  the  waking-stage,  which  did
not  occur  till  much  else  had  been  said  about  other
matters  :}

Pencil  placed  deliberately  on  table  12.50  p.m.
Hand  feels  the  Healer's  influence.
Hand  and  head  drop  12.50J  p.m.

Head  begins  to  rise  12.53  ;  entirely  raised  12.53J ;
relapses  on  to  pillow  12.54 ;  then  raised  again
almost  at  once.  J.  G.  P.  slightly  supports  head  for
a  little  while.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  603


Speaking  begins.

I  want  that  man  who  was  in  my  {employment}  for
he  helped  me  I  must  now  help  him.  You  will
find  him  if  you  look.  I  am  not  free  until  you  do.
(repeated)  I  know  what  I  am  saying.  It's  up  to
you  to  help  me  through.  (Up  to  this  point  the
voice  spoke  in  unusually  deep  tones,  like  a  man's  ;
about  as  deep  as  the  tone  of  voice  of  Rector.)

I  rest  in  peace. I  know  all  is  well.

There's  Mr.  Myers,  (smiles,  points,  and  breathes
heavily)  Joseph  M — —  old  lady  Mary — Dr.  Hodgson
— {a  statement  about  an  individual  omitted  here}.
Oh !  God  is  good  to  all.  (smiles)  Little  old  man
Charles  ;  he's  so  persistent.
J.  G.  P.  Well,  what  does  he  say  ?

I  should  like  to  know  what  you  all  think  I'm  doing
here.  I  want  to  reach  my  people.  I  know  what  I
know  and  I  want  to  say  I'm  glad  to  see  the
children.  I  go — you  better  listen  to  me.  Aches
(Pats  hands ;  looks  at  ceiling ;  then  at  J.  G.  P.)
Oh  !  Lord.  That's  awful.  (Groans  and  rubs  fore-
head.) tut — tut — tut — tut — tut- — (looks  sideways  at
J.  G.  P.)  Why  ?  Oh !  Why  here  ?  Why  do  you
look  so — ump.  Oh !  (looks  at  her  hands)  Hands
black — must  be  hands — can't  make  it  out — can't
seem  to  help  it.  Ha  !  Ho  !  Ha  !  Mr.  Piddington.
J.  G.  P.  Yes  ?

Ha  !  something  went  round  and  round  in  my  head
and  then  it  snapped.  I  saw  such  a  beautiful  light
and  I  saw  a  long  walk — like  a  garden  walk — paths
— and  I  saw  blossoms  along  each  side  and  I  saw  a
gentleman  something  like  Mr.  Myers,  and  he  tossed
me  out  like  that ;  and  there's  a  little  old  gentleman
who  followed  up  in  front  of  him  who  began  talking
like  anything  ; and  when —

Another  snap  !  This  is  your  room,  isn't  it  ?  I  had
something  on  my  mind  I  wanted  to  tell  you.  Why
didn't  you  ask  me  %  It  went  away  all  in  a
minute.

Trance  ends  1.5  p.m.


604


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Of  the  persons  mentioned  in  the  waking-stage,  Joseph

M  ■  (as  we  have  seen)  and  Myers  had  communicated  in

the  trance ;  Hodgson  had  been  mentioned ;  and  the  old
lady,  Mary,  and  the  little  old  man,  Charles,  were  previous
communicators.

The  deep,  man-like  voice  is  very  unusual  in  the  waking-
stage. I  know  of  no  record  of  any  other  case.

{March  20,  1907.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  E.  M.  S.
[I  called  Miss  Newton  in  when  the  trance  proper  ended,  and
most  of  the  words  that  follow  were  heard  by  her. I  could
not  distinguish  the  words  till  the  voice  got  stronger  towards
the  end.— E.  M.  S.]

Donald. Pipin. Harriet, lonely,  wonder.

(?)  London. Wandered — heavenly  shore.

Patience. Faith. (Points  up.)

Pipin  (Miss  Newton  says  that  is  the  third  time  she

has  said  that.)
Heavenly

Annie — mother — Arthur — Oh  ! I didn't know you —

Roses — Glad  I  am.
I  know — well

She's — too  ha-rd.  Tell  Arthur  to  send  her  away.  She
spoke  too  hard. She  talked  too  hard.

[The  words  heard  as  "spoke"  and  "talked"  were
perhaps  "  worked;"  I  think,  if  we  consider  what
follows.— E.  M.  S.]

Overwork. I  am  afraid  of  her.

You  say  you  are  afraid  for  her.

Tell  Arthur  to  give  her  a  rest.  Henry.

Nearer  and  nearer — give  her  a  rest.

Arthur — I  must  go.

Give  her  a  rest  she's  tired.  She  talked  too  hard.  She
talked  too  hard.  She's  overwork — talked.  She's  a
bright  girl.

Ring — leaves —

withered  leaves  and  then  Springtime  then  Springtime
such  is  life  with  us.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  605


I  don't  know  what  else  you  want  me  to  do. I  can't

hear  you.
Gone.

Where  is  he  gone  ?  (pointing.)

Lily  % Rome — Dark —

What  is  that  man  with  a  long  beard.

Arthur  must  give  Eleanor  a  rest — she  talked  too  hard,

I  was  afraid  that  she  would  suffer.
I  saw  Mr. Myers  and  Dr. Myers and  Mr.  Myers's
mother and I saw Mr. Hodgson and his  cousin
Fred  and  Fred  Hyde,  and  I  saw  Rebecca  and  a  lady
with  a  spot  in  her  eye. All  in  the  light  I  saw  them.
But  I  saw  Dr.  Hodgson  writing  on  the  board — words.
What's  that  noise  I  hear.
E.  M.  S. Nothing  [the  blinds  were  rattling  noisily.]

But  I  hear  it.  E.  M.  S.  Only  the  wind.

[Here  the  notes  cease.  She  awoke  completely  imme-
diately afterwards.]
[{Contemporary  Note}  It  may  be  worth  noting  apropos  to  the
name  "  Arthur  "  that  I  had  heard  on  the  evening  before  this
sitting  that  Arthur  Sidgwick  could  come  to  sittings  on  Monday
and  Tuesday,  25th  and  26th,  and  had  definitely  written  to
arrange  it. It  was  in  my  mind  at  the  sitting. E.  M.  S.]

For  comments  on  this  waking-stage,  Proceedings,  Vol.
XXII.,  pp.  430,  431,  may  be  referred  to.

(April  13,  1908.)  Waking-Stage.
Sitter  and  recorder,  G.  B.  D.
Ernest  wrote  it.
[See  question  asked  towards  end  of  sitting.]

Oh  Zeus  ! Ernest  wrote  it,  translated  it — my  brother.
The  wings  of Pegasus  ! He opened them and  flew,
and  he  closed  them  and  was  an  ordinary  horse.  He
kicked — hoof —
Perseus  cut  Medusa's  head  off  ! Do  you  think  that  I
have  forgotten  !

[This  is  the  first  time  that  the  name  has  come  clearly  through,
though  tried  for  in  the  subliminal  by  Mrs.  Piper  on  several
occasions.]


606


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.  [part


God  of  thunder —
Roses —

He's  got  a  rock  in  his  hand — -and  he  sat  ages  on
top  of  it.1  He  wrote  it  on  a  card  and  the  rock
had  a  crack  in  it  and  he  put  the  paper  in  it.

Tell  George  if  she  doesn't  understand  I'll  hit  her  on
the  head  with  the  rock  and  that  will  beat  sense
into  her  head  ! Peace  of  all  ages

They  say  he  is  sitting  in  a  chair  representing  a
throne.

[This is an answer to G. B. D.'s question, asked  during
the  sitting, as  to  whether  the  figure  of  Jupiter  in  Phidias'
statue  was  erect  or  seated. Care  was  taken  in  asking  the
question  to  give  no  indication  which  it  was.]
Twelve  foot  high  pedestal.

I  want  to  tell  you  all  I  can ! And  I  want  you  to
understand  that  I  know  the  difference  between  the
Odyssey  and  Homer's  Iliad.
[Here  a  fresh  attempt  was  made  by  Mrs.  P.  to  get
the  name  of  Aeschylus,  but  without  better  success
than  previously,] — wrote.
[Some  words  are  now  lost  through  indistinct  utter-
ance and  the  first  that  are  caught  again  are  :]
Anchises  funeral.
Discus  hit  him — killed  him.
[This  goes  back  to  the  "Discus  hit  me"  of  a  former  subliminal

which  G.  B.  D.  had  asked  to  be  told  more  about]

Quoits  !

Hodgsonp. Begone  with  you  ! Skeedaddle  !

I  don't  like  you  to  talk  like  that,  Mr.  Hodgson —
Hodgsonp. Makes  little  difference  whether  you  like  it  or  not  !

Go  down  to  your  dim  world,  begone  with  you.
[G.  B.  D.  had  asked  {HodgsonP}  at  the  beginning  of  the  sitting
to watch  that  the  light  did  not  stay  too  long  in  the  sub-
liminal, as  he  could  not  control  it  from  his  side.]

Mr.  Myers  is  as  handsome  as  a  picture !

Mr.  Hodgson  thinks  he  knows  everything —
HoDosoNp. No  matter  whether  you  like  it  or  lump  it,  begone

1  Reference  to  the  Rock  of  Ages,  which  had  been  spoken  of  during  the
trance  proper.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  607

with  you  into  your  black  world  !  We're  not  ready
for  you.

He  had  an  ox's  head  and  a  man's  body — centaurs.
[Apparently  there  is  a  confusion  here  between  the  Minotaur,
spoken  of  by  G.  B.  D.  in  a  former  sitting,  and  the  centaurs.]
Sphinxes — woman's head and a lion's body — it's

getting  dark  ! Oh  beautiful ! I  saw  a  star  and  I

saw  a  big  bowl  of  valley  lilies  in  the  star  and  the

star  was  beautiful.

The  ideas  referred  to  in  this  dream-like  way  in  this
waking- stage  had  almost  all  been  mentioned  or  led  up
to  in  the  trance  proper  of  the  same  sitting.

Note  in  relation  to  Chapter  VII.,  p.  279,  that  three
questions  asked  by  Mr.  Dorr  in  the  trance  proper  of
this  day,  April  13,  1908,  and  which  MyersP  undertook  to
try  to  answer  in  the  waking-stage,  are  answered  directly
or  indirectly.  The  relevant  passages  in  the  record  of  the
trance  are  as  follows  :

I. — G.  B.  D.  {just  at  the  end  of  the  trance}  Now  I  want  to
read  you  something  and  see  if  you  can  tell  me  who
wrote  it  [{Note  by  Mr.  Dorr.}  G.  B.  D.  then  reads
again  the  invocation  to  Zeus  {from  the  Agamemnon}
translated  by  Ernest  Myers.  When  it  was  read
by  him  two  weeks  before  G.  B.  D.  had  stated  in
introducing  it  that  it  was  written  by  Ernest  Myers,
and  asked  that  the  name  of  the  play  from  which
it  had  been  translated  be  given  him  in  the  sub-
liminal if  possible,  and  the  first  word  uttered  in  the
subliminal  that  followed  was  :  Agamemnon.1  The
attempt  to-day  is  to  see  whether  the  recollection
of  the  lines  themselves,  whether  as  read  previously
or  from  former  memory,  was  clear  enough  to
identify  them  as  their  author's.]

Myeesp. I'll  tell  her.

The  answer  is  in  the  opening  words  of  the  waking-stage
record.


1  See  Chapter  VII.,  p.  279.


608


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.  [part


II.  — G.  B.  D.  {reading  record  of  waking-stage  of  April  7 }

"  Pefeus  took him  through the air and the  blood
dropped  to  earth." You  see  it  is  rather  confused,
name  and  all. Try  presently  and  see  if  you  cannot
get  it  through  to  me  right.
Myebsp. I'll  clear  it  later.

G.  B.  D.  Get  the  name  through  clearly  if  you  can.
Myersp. Perhaps  I  can  spell  it  to  her. I'll  try.

For  answer,  see  "  The  wings  of  Pegasus  "  to  "  forgotten."

III.  — G.  B.  D.  {still  reading  the  record  of  the  waking-stage  of

April  7}  Next  she  said  that  "a  lily  came  up
out  of  the  blood.  Don't  you  remember  the  flower
that  grew  out  of  the  drop  of  blood  %  "  I  want  you
to  tell  me  some  other  time  what  flower  this  was
and  whose  was  the  blood.

sfc  Jfc  ^  ^

MYERSp. I'll  tell  her  as  she  returns.

For  the  answer,  see  "  Anchises'  funeral  .  .  .  Quoits,"
which,  though  it  does  not  give  the  name,  refers  unmistakeably
to  Hyacinthus.

(May  12,  1908.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  G.  B.  D.
[The  subliminal  took  on  to-day  at  its  beginning  a  more  con-
versational character  than  usual,  as  though  R.  H.  were  trying
to  use  it  for  further  talk,  not  simply  for  sending  things  through.
But  Mrs.  P.  whispered  so  low  and  so  disjointedly  that  it  was
impossible  to  catch  more  than  scattered  words,  which  showed
recurrence to  the  Latin  verses {i.e  Tavern  Club  motto}  and
questions  as  to  words  not  understood. After  that  came  this  :]
I  said  take  the  bitter  with  the  sweet  and  she  wrote
it. Deepest  thinking — -I  am  in  a  state  of  deepest
thinking,  trying  to  think [More  was  said  but  was
not  clear]

Don't  you  remember  in  mythology  where  the  golden

Bough  comes  in  ?
G.  B.  D.  But  that  is  what  I  want  you  to  tell  me.

I  am  thinking  it  over. I  shall  not  forget  anything.

Golden  Bough  is  a  good  word  for  me  to  get  through.


I


lxxi  ] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  609


G,  What  is  the  difference  between  Snakes'  Head —
Medusa's  head — -and the Golden Bough  ?  [Appar-
ently correcting  this]  I  say  I  know  the  difference.
You  must  not  hasten  me.
G.  B.  D.  There's  no  haste  at  all,  take  as  long  as  you  want.

I  want  to  assure  you  that  I  am  not  forgetting  my
days  of  fun.  [This  evidently  refers  to  the  Tavern
Club  toast.]  {and  comes  from  Hodgsonp}

Do  you  know  my  friend  Tennyson  ?  {This  is  from  Myersp}

[Mrs.  P.  referring  to  herself.]  I  am  stupid  to  day.  I
can't  hear  what  they  say  at  all.  Mr.  Myers  [drew]
trees,  and  rocks  and  angels,  dance  of  Cupids,  and
round  balls.  And  he  wrote  bullets.  And  they  told
me  to  take  Winged  Victory,  and  Spire,  conformation,
Altar — ALTAR — and  chancel.  {These  ideas  had  all
or  almost  all  appeared  in  previous  trances.}

I  have  travelled  many  miles  to  get  these  to  you,
George  ! Goblet,  and  Euthanasia.

[This  last  word  was  given  with  considerable  difficulty
by  Mrs.  P.,  who  repeated  it  a  number  of  times,
but  it  was  still  perfectly  clear  to  G.  B.  D.  from  the
first  what  word  was  meant.]

[Mrs.  P.  beginning  to  return  to  consciousness.]

It's  a  blessed  place  and  when  I  think  I  cannot  stay
in  it,  it  makes  me  sad. More  later  Addio.

Rock  bound  coast  is  all  right  ; that^has1 'got "through.

You  don't  mind  aphorisms  do  you  ?

[Points  across  the  room] There's1  Mr.  j  Myers  and  he's
found  Mary  James.
G.  B.  D.  Who  is  Mary  James  ?

I  don't  know. It  was  said.1

Mrs.  V.  said  Tablet  and  Fame  Circe.

I'm  half  myself  and  half  somebody  else  !  I  had  a
very  good  time. I'm  sorry  it's  over.

1  On  the  next  day,  May  13,  1908,  in  the  trance,  Mr.  Dorr  going  through
this  waking-stage  with  the  control,  asked  about  Mary  James  :  G.  B.  D.
Then  she  said  "He  has  found  Mary  James."  Mybrsp  or  Hodgsonp.  Very
good  indeed.  We  brought  her  before  his  vision  purposely,  to  see  if  she
could  recognize  her.  That  is  good.  G.  B.  D.  Who  is  Mary  James  ?
Communicator.  William's  mother.

2o.


610


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


[To  G.  B.  D.] You  will  come  with  me next  time,
^  won't  you  ?
G.  B.  D.  Yes,  we'll  take  the  train  together.

You  don't  take  a  train ;  you  just  take  a  cord  and

hold  on  to  the  end  of  it.
What  does  Hodgson  mean  by  Marcus  Aurelius  ?
Marcus  wide  of  the  mark  !

[Rather  crossly]  I  can't  tell  when  he  is  fooling  and
when  he  isn't.  And  if  I  don't  hear  what  he  says
he  does  not  like  it.  And  then  he  suddenly  breaks
forth  and  talks  all  sorts  of  nonsense.  Mr.  Myers
is  easier.  And  when  Mr.  Hodgson  thinks  I  don't
hear  him  he  keeps  writing  a  lot  of  things  on  bits
of  paper  and  sticks  them  up  in  my  face.

You  know  everything  seems  to  be  so  well  regulated
there,  and  it's  chaos  here — all  mixed  up.  Do  you
know  what  Rector  meant  when  he  put  up  a  cross
and  a  3,  a  figure  3  ?

I  have  a  feeling  of  ecstasy  go  all  through  me  at  the
light  !  If  I  had  more  of  this  in  real  life  it  would
be  better  for  me.

(May  13,  1908.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  G.  B.  D.
[R.  H.  appears,  talking  in  the  first  person  to  G.  B.  D.  in  a
direct  way  unusual  in  the  subliminal  of  these  sittings.  What
he  talks  about  however  is  merely  the  Latin  verses 1  which
he  is  endeavouring  to  translate,  attempts  at  translation  and
questions  about  the  words  he  has  misunderstood.  This  was
difficult  to  take  down  and  did  not  seem  important,  G.  B.  D.
saying  nothing  further  than  recorded  previously.  He  or  F.  M.
then  speaks  of  the  Golden  Fleece,  which  had  come  up  spon-
taneously at  the  sitting — brought  in  by  association  with  the
Golden  Bough.  Whether  this  was  R.  H.  or  F.  M.  was  not
made  clear,  but  whichever  it  was  spoke  of  "  writing  about  it  "
when  here.  Then  something  is  whispered  about  "  celestial
fields,"  and  then  this  came  :]

1  I.e.  the  Tavern  Club  motto.  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  78,
footnote.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  611

Helen,  Sappho — harp  I  drew.  I  said  "  chain  him
down  and  let  them  feed  on  his  liver."

I  said  "fire."  I  said  "music."  I  said  "say  Princess
Sappho. At  her  feet  a  wreath  of  laurel."

[Somewhat  more  was  said  here  but  so  brokenly  and
low  as  to  be  impossible  to  catch  clearly.]

If  I  can  get  my  utterances  through;  you  will  find
a  conglomeration  of  ideas  which  will  astound
you  when  they  are  through  all  Lights.  There-
fore it  is  important  that  you  understand  every
word  I  say.  And  when  I  say  Sappho,  Princess,
feet,  laurel  wreaths,  music  [rest  could  not  be
caught.]

And  I  said  "  Maidens  fair,  twining  their  golden  locks."

And Mrs. Sidgwick  said "  You go back and  tell

that  to  Mrs.  Piper  and  then  see  what  comes  of  it."

That  is  as  I  understand  it,  and  I  think  she  is  very

clear  in  her  enunciation.1 Oh,  if  I  only  had  my

body  again  I'd  show  [rest  lost]
Took  me  seventeen  weeks  to  get  that  other  message

through, how  do you suppose [rest  said  too  low

to  catch.]

Those  were  blessed  days,  those  old  days  in  Cumber-
land.

Romulus — I  will  give  it  in  both  ways.  We're  getting
on  very  nicely  and  when  you  see  the  results  you
will  be  very  pleased.  Only  we  have  so  much  to
do  we  do  not  know  what  to  do  first.  Well,  we
are  pleased.  Good-bye.

May  the  blessings  of  the  All-wise  rest  on  you  and
give  you  peace.  And  if  you  trust  in  Him  a  ter-
mination of  all  good  will  come  to  you — An  all-
wise,  almighty  and  all-powerful  God.

Farewell,  my  friend,  and  may  the  hand  of  good
fellowship  go  out  to  you.

I  don't  like  this  place,  you  know.  It's  like  going
from  summer  into  winter.  And  the  hills  seem  far
away,  don't  they  ?

1  Reference  to  what  had  been  said  in  trance  about  Comus.  See  Pro-
ceeding*, Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  196-199.


612


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[paut


[Mrs. P. returning to herself and looking for  her

handkerchief.]
We  have  pockets  in  this  life,  don't  we  !
G.  B.  D.  What  do  they  do  there  without  them  ?

You  see  they  don't  have  to  have  them  ;  they  have

everything  they  want  without  them. You  see  there

is  a  cool  atmosphere  and  it  is  ether,  and  ether  is

life — electrical  life.

During  the  trance  proper  of  this  sitting,  HodgsonP  and
MyerSp  had  both  communicated,  and  the  Tavern  Club  motto,
the  Golden  Fleece,  Helen,  and  Comus  had  been  referred  to,
and  as  regards  the  Golden  Fleece  the  communicator  said  :
"  I  am  trying  to  recall  what  came  out  of  the  Golden  Fleece.
I  ought  to  have  told  you  before.  I'll  tell  it  to  her."  I.e.
doubtless  to  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  waking-stage.


A  Case  of  Echolalia.

Spring  of  1909.  Extract  from  Waking-Stage.  Dr.  Stanley
Hall's  fourth  sitting. Recorder,  Dr.  Amy  Tanner.

(The  record  is  quoted  from  Dr.  Amy  Tanner's  Studies  in
Spiritism,  p.  232.)

After  a  record  of  some  not  very  intelligible  talk  without
apparent  consciousness  of  her  surroundings,  the  record  pro-
ceeds :

[She  catches  sight  of  Dr.  Hall,  who  is  standing  directly
in  front  of  her,  and  exclaims  with  the  utmost
disgust  :]

A-a-a-ah  !
S.  H. Pretty  bad,  isn't  it  ?

A-a-h  !

S.  H. You  know  me,  don't  you,  Mrs.  Piper.

What's  the  noise  ?
S.  H. You  recognise  me,  don't  you  ?

You  recognise  me  don't  you  ?
S.  H.  Yes.

Yes.

S.  H. I'm  afraid  you're  going  to  be  tired.

I'm  afraid  you're  going  to  be  tired


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  613


S.  H. I  should  be  sorry  to  have  you  go  into  a  sleep  now.
I  should  be  sorry  to  have  you  go  into  a  sleep  now.
[This mimicry was given with Mrs. Piper  looking
at  Dr.  Hall  and  varying  his  inflections  just  enough
for it to be very ludicrous. At this point  Dr.
Tanner  who  was  sitting  close  to  Mrs.  Piper  and  to
one  side, began  to  laugh, and  Mrs. Piper  turned
toward  her  and  scrutinised  her  intently,  as  she  had
Dr.  Hall  just  a  few  minutes  before.]
A.  T. How  do  you  do,  Mrs.  Piper  ?

You  look  like  an  owl.
S.  H. Yes,  and  she  makes  faces  like  that,  too. [And  Dr.

Hall  twisted  his  own  face  into  a  thousand  wrinkles.]
Oh,  no,  she  doesn't  !  [said  Mrs.  Piper  in  a  shocked
way,  and  the  two  of  them  had  quite  an  argument
over  it.]

You're  getting  nearer  to  me  now — I  don't  care.  I
saw  that  lovely  light  with  the  rainbow  in  it.  Did
you  hear  my  head  snap  ? O-o-oh,  you're  Dr.  Hall
aren't  you  ? You  looked  so  small  a  minute  ago,
so  very  far  away. Did  you  hear  that  ?  [Referring
to another  snap  of  the head.] Why  I  recognised
you  quite  soon  didn't  I  ? That  shows  I'm  getting
better  acquainted  with  you.
This  should  be  compared  with  the  other  cases  of  echolalia
mentioned  above,  pp.  234,  235. It  will  be  noticed  that  it
occurs  here  after  she  has  become  partially  conscious  of  her
actual  surroundings,  but  before  her  consciousness  is  normal
and  before  the  first  head  snap. The  waking- stage  continues
for  some  time  after  it. In  Hodgson's  cases  it  occurred  in
response  to  an  attempt  on  his  part  to  rouse  Mrs.  Piper  to
normal  consciousness,  and,  at  least  on  the  second  occasion,
this  result  apparently  immediately  followed.


614


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


APPENDIX  TO  CHAPTER  VII.


Relation  to  bach  other  of  Mrs.  Piper's  different


Case  illustrating  the  supposed  relation  of  the  trance  personality
to  the  normal  Mrs.  Piper  (see  pp.  259-266).

In  April,  1902,  Mrs.  Piper  had  been  ill  from  what  her
doctor  called  nervous  indigestion  and  in  bed  for  several
days,  and  when  attempts  at  sittings  were  resumed  she
failed  twice  to  go  into  trance.  On  April  28  (Hodgson
being  alone  present)  Rector  wrote  immediately  after  the
usual  greeting  :

R.  Speak friend and give answer to the question  we


put  to  thee  this  day.  There  hath  been  great
cloudiness  over  the  light  which  hath  debarred  us
from  entering  it.  We  found  it  impossible  to  return.
Hast  thou  any  knowledge  of  its  condition  ?
{The  physical  symptoms,  dizziness,  etc.,  are  then
described  by  Hodgson,  and  Rector  intervenes  :}


After  our  last  meeting  with  thee  we  discovered  that
the  light  hath  partaken  of  either  meat  or  fish  of  a
very  poisonous  nature  and  we  had  forbidden  either.
This  we  found  had  caused  great  disturbance  and
done  great  harm.

{The  controls  proceed  to  prescribe  a  suitable  diet,  and
discussion  follows  about  the  discontent  which  Hodgson
describes  Mrs.  Piper  as  feeling  and  for  which,;  he
suggests  reasons  of  which  Rector  disapproves.  The
following conversation then takes place :}


R.  H. Shall  I  talk  specially  with  the  light  and  ask  her  to


tell  me  briefly  and  plainly  what  her  mind  is  towards
you  and  towards  the  whole  situation  and  bring
this  to  you  ? Perhaps  you  could  ask  her  just  what


States  of


Consciousness.


R.


Let  us  speak  here  -)-.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  615


you  wish  and  I  will  place  it  before  her  for  her  to
make  a  clear  confession  to  you  herself.
Rector.  Amen.  We  wish  to  know  precisely  what  her  state  of
mind  is  towards  us.  What  her  real  belief  is  concerning
us  and  our  work.  What  her  wishes  and  ideas  are
concerning  material  gain  or  on  the  question  of  so
called  money.  We  wish  to  know  how  she  feels
concerning  our  use  of  the  organism.  Absolutely.
We  wish  to  know  what  we  can  do  to  help  her  to
feel  that  we  are  truth  love  and  wisdom,  that  our
work  is  God's  work  and  His  only.
Chiefly  the  question  of  our  uses  of  the  organism  her
belief  and  the  question  of  future  gain  from  a
worldly  point  of  view. This  is  all.

♦  ♦  $  $

Doth  she  desire  us  not  to  return  at  all  doth  she
fear  us  do  we  exhaust  her  is  she  dissatisfied
because  of  money.

We  want  the  truth.  +■

Friend  we  are  sad.  We  must  and  will  lead  kindly  the
light  into  light  or  destroy  it.  It  would  be  well  for
thee  to  talk  with  it  at  once  and  return  to  us  that  we
may  U.D.  once  and  for  all  the  true  facts  that  never
again  (whilst  we  are  sent  here)  there  can  be  any
misunderstanding  or  dissatisfaction.  We  desire  her
to  be  happy,  most  happy  with  us  if  it  be
possible.

#  *  #  *

Ask  her  any  and  every  conceivable  question  which
may  occur  to  thee  whilst  speaking  and  note  down
on  material  paper  the  answers  received  from  her  and
bring  them  before  us.  It  will  we  think  be  the  direct
means  of  unearthing  all  the  difficulties  which
obstruct  our  way.
R,  H.  Amen.

R.  We  have  long  felt  that  there  must  be  some  cause

for  the  darkness  which  at  times  surrounds  us  in
our  work.  Although  there  are  many  difficulties
on  our  side  yet  we  would  like  to  understand  those
on  the  earthly  side.


616


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgioick.


[part


Hodgson  accordingly  had  a  talk  with  the  normal  Mrs.
Piper,  and  reported  to  Rector  on  April  29,  1902.  The
following  is  an  extract  from  the  conversation  :

R.  H.  Until  lately  she  thought  that  you  were  severe  with
her  and  requested  her  {through  Hodgson  of  course}
to  do  things  without  realizing  what  her  environment
was,  that  you  did  not  understand  the  cares  she  had,
the  trouble  with  her  family,  and  her  trials  generally
as  a  wife  and  mother

R.  Perhaps  there  may  be  a  little  truth  in  this  but  we

doubt  if  we  have  not  seen  much  and  it  is  not  of
us  to  be  severe.

In  these  two  sittings  together,  we  have  a  clear  assump-
tion of  ignorance  on  the  part  of  the  trance  consciousness
of  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  the  normal  Mrs.  Piper,
and  also  of  her  surroundings  and  physical  symptoms,
except  so  far  as  the  controls  had  learnt  these  by  external
observation.

0.  P.'s  explanation  of  information  being  given  as  the
medium's  spirit  returns  (see  p.  270).

(Nov.  30,  1892.)

Present,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howard  and  Hodgson.

G.  P.  (using  voice)  I  want  to  tell  you  another  thing,  it
is  not  always  that  I  can  come  here,  the  medium
is  not  always  in  condition.  I  can't  always  get
through  the  medium's  or  into  the  medium's  body
and  there  are  some  times  when  I  am  wandering
and  bewildered  but  it  depends  upon  the  medium's
condition.  Then  I  am  liable  to  make  a  great
many  mistakes.  I  cannot  always  recognize  my
friends  ;  when  I  can't  then  the  better  way  is  to
commune  with  the  soul  ...  I  like  that  better  .  .  .
of  the  medium,  when  I  am  leaving  the  body  and
find  I  can't  recognize  my  friends  I  commune  with
her  and  have  her  repeat  it  as  she  comes  back.

As  a  note  to  this  Hodgson  says,  "  see  report  of  sitting
with  Prof.  Pierce,"  which,  perhaps,  implies  that  that  is  the
only  case  he  remembered  at  this  time.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  617


Phinuit's  view  about  messages  given  to  the  returning  spirit
of  the  medium  (see  p.  270).

(Dec.  7,  1896.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

At  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  apparently  Phinuit  says  :
Phinuit.  It's  no  good  giving  the  medium  a  message  when  she's

going  out.
R.  H. Who's  doing  that  ?

Ph.  That lady, Kate. [Phinuit laughs a little.]  Why

didn't  she  give  them  to  me. I'll  give  her  a  talking  to.

R.  H.  Of  course  she  ought  to  give  them  to  the  medium
when  the  medium's  coming  back.

Ph.  Yes,  that's  no  good  giving  them  to  her  when  she's

going  along  with  them.

R.  H. In  the  spirit- world  ?

Ph.  Yes.

R.  H.  You  tell  her  to  give  the  messages  when  the  medium
comes  back  to  her  body,  and  to  give  them  to  you
when  you  are  coming  in.

What  the  messages  were,  or  whether  there  were  any,
in  this  case,  we  do  not  know.  The  possibility  of  their
being  remembered  by  the  outgoing  spirit  of  the  medium
and  uttered  later  does  not  seem  to  be  contemplated,
nor  does  Phinuit  apparently  recognise  the  advantage  of
messages  being  given  to  him  as  he  goes  out,  as
Myersp  gives  them  to  Rector  (see  pp.  282-288).  Messages
must  apparently  in  Phinuit's  view  be  given  for  immediate
delivery.

Case  of  false  communicator  ("  Hannah  Wild  ")  remembering
in  the  trance  the  waking-stage  of  the  previous  day  (see
pp.  290-291).

{For  Hannah  Wild  and  sittings  concerning  her,  see  Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  10-16  and  69-84;  also  Vol.  XV.,
pp.  30-31.}

(January  13,  1897.)  Waking-Stage.

Sitter, Mrs. Blodgett {H. Wild's sister}, and  Hodgson
recording.


618


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


[Mrs.  P.  sings  a  few  notes  and  then  talks.]
I  want  to  be  a  missionary.  [First  line  of  a  hymn  that
Hannah  used  to  sing  a  great  deal  *  *  *]  I  am  prepared
to  go  and  meet  my  God.  I  feel  my  work  is  done.  I
will  help  if  I  live  my  life  work  shall  go  on.  I  write
this.  I  am  too  weak.  I  am  prepared  to  meet  my  God.
My  life  work  shall  go  on.  I  have  done  the  best  I  could.
[The  last  sentence  probably  Mrs.  Piper's  own]

Most  of  the  words  of  this  waking-stage  are  probably
an  attempt  to  reproduce  a  sealed  letter,  futile  attempts
to  reproduce  which  formed  an  important  part  of  Hannah
Wild's  communications.  Attempts  to  do  this  were  made
in  the  trances  of  both  January  13  and  14,  1897.

{January  14,  1897.)

Sitters  the  same. Hannah  Wild  writing  :

H.  W. Bessie  my  sister  I  am  here  to  repeat  the  few  lines
as  nearly  as  possible  which  I  wrote  down  on  paper
during my  illness. I spoke of  my  work, also  of
my  future  hfe,
{More  said  here  about  the  contents  of  the  letter : }

H.  W. I  want  to  be  a  missionary.

R.  H. Did you sing that to the medium when she  was

coming  into  her  body  last  time  ?
H.  W. I  did  two  [altered  into  twice]
R.  H. She  got  it. We  heard  her.

The  leading  question,  of  course,  prevents  there  being
evidence  here  of  independent  conscious  memory  of  the
waking-stage.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  619


APPENDIX  TO  CHAPTER  VIII.

Effect  of  Sitters  and  of  so-called  "  Influences  "
on  the  Trance  Phenomena.

(A)  Extracts  Concerning  the  Influence  of  the  Minds

of  Sitters.

{November  23,  1899.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Z. Rector  writing.

Z.  Why  did  you  tell  my  C and  me  different  things

at  the  same  time  ?
R  Ah — we  explained  this  to  thee  before.

♦  ♦  ♦  ♦

Z.  Is  it  not  that  our  desires  are  reflected  greatly  when
we come  to  you  strongly  desiring  something  ?

R.  No — and  that  is  wherein  we  are  often  misunderstood.
We  cannot  be  affected  by  any  material  desire.

Z.  And  it  has  seemed  to  me  that  some  few  of  us  have
invariably  come  away  from  the  light  satisfied,
having  got  the  assurance  of  what  we  desired.  My
C and  mj^self  received  at  the  same  time  assur-
ance of  an  opposite  nature.

R. Speak  out  plainly  friend.

[Z.  repeats]

R.  We  do  not  return  to  assist  from  thy  side  friend,  but
from  our  own,  and  we  teach  from  the  spirit  only,
but  if  we  see  that  thy  desires  on  the  material
side  are  wrong,  we  at  once  place  a  barrier  before
thee  and  thy  desire.  But  if  we  see  that  they  are
light  {?  right}  we  act  at  once  through  prayer  to
assist  thee  to  accomplish. U.D.  fully  !

Z.  Shall  I  help  my  friend  who  lives  in  ■ —  by  going  ?

R.  We  will  direct  thee  through  thine  own  spirit,  and  what
doth  seem  wisest  to  thee,  feel  that  it  is  from  us,
and  it  will  be  well.


620  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


(May  23,  1905.)

Sitter,  with  Hodgson  recording. G.  P.  writing.

Sitter.  Mr.  Pelham  *  *  *  if  you  want  to  be  kind  to  me,
you  will  get  the  name  of  the  lady's  husband,  that
is,  the  name  of  the  owner  of  this  influence  who  is
in  the  body.

G.  P.  I  will  certainly  try.  Remember  these  friends  are
talking  to  an  influence  only.  Suppose  you  talk  to  a
chair  your  grandmother  sat  in  and  see  how  far
you  get.

Sitter.  Mr.  Pelham,  but  if  his  name  is  in  my  mind,  can't
you  or  she,  pull  it  out  ?

G.  P.  Why  no  your  [sic]  a  lunatic.  What  good  do  you
suppose  that  can  do  me  ?  Your  mind  has  nothing
to  do  with  it.  You'll  find  it  out  in  time.  The
more  you  think  about  it  the  less  likely  I  am  to
give  it  to  you.1  What  queer  ideas  you  do  get  about
us  over  here.

This  subject  is  referred  to  again  by  Rector  on  the
following  day  when  the  same  persons  were  present  as
follows :

{May  24,  1905.)

R.  We  were  somewhat  amused  at  thy  remarks  to  one  of

our  co-workers  at  our  last  meeting  regarding  the
impressions  (wholly  erroneous)  that  we  were  able
to  pick  out  of  thy  mind,  as  thou  dost  express  it
words  or  names  of  friends  etc.  etc.  We  can  only
say  thou  hast  much  to  learn  meanwhile  we  are
greatly  amused.

S.  I  am  glad  you  speak  of  this  because  I  would  like

to  say  I  am  not  alone  in  this  opinion.
#  *  #  #

R.  No  mortal  could  possibly  be  more  conscious  of  this

attitude  toward  [us  1]  than  we  ourselves  are
remember friend we are in no wise dead  or

1  Compare  with  this  statement  Mrs.  Verrall's  experience  with  Mrs.
Thompson,  who  seemed  able  to  get  things  from  the  sitter's  mind,
provided  the  latter  did  not  fix  her  attention  on  them.  (Proc.  Vol.  XVII.,
p.  174.)


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper  s  Trance. — Appendix.  621


asleep  to  the  realization  of  the  thoughts  of  mortals
concerning  us.  We  not  only  understand  fully  what
they  think  but  we  often  hear  conversations  which
actually  take  place  between  mortals  who  have  never
even  conversed  with  us  through  the  light.

*  *  *  *

If  thoughts  reach  us  and  are  transmitted  through  the
subconsciousness  of  the  light  as  you  express  it  what
power  have  you  to  say  that  we  do  not  also  receive
thoughts  from  those  who  are  in  the  discarnate  form.

*  ♦  ♦  #

S.  One  more  question. Please  tell  me  why  Mr.  Pelham

said  that  he  could  get  a  name  through  better  for
me  if  I  did  not  think  of  it  myself,  because  in  that
case  my  mind  does  seem  to  affect  the  phenomena
in  some  way.  It  would  seem  as  if  I  must  keep
my  mind  as  free  from  any  special  thought.  Is
that  so  ?

R.  Certainly  the  less  you  think  about  those  matters  the

better  tests  you  will  receive  as  when  you  are  not
troubled  in  mind  we  receive  spiritual  help  and  light
from  you.  And  we  get  power  from  your  organism
as  we  draw  from  the  organism  of  the  friend  present.

*  *  *  *

When  they  go  so  far  as  to  say  we  read  your  mind
ask  them  to  explain  whose  minds  we  are  reading
when  we  have  but  a  simple  object  present.

(April  15,  1897.)

Hodgson  recording. Rector  writing.

Rector.  Friend  we  would  ask  if  you  think  we  say  what  you
think  ? We  were  told  to  ask  you  this.  Speak.

R.  H.  That  is  one  form  of  the  theory  which  has  been  applied
to  such  manifestations  as  these,  viz.  that  in  some
way  the  utterance  of  the  trance  personalities  may
depend  primarily  on  the  minds  of  persons  still  em-
bodied in  flesh  and  blood.  I  do  not  now  think  that
this  hypothesis  is  a  plausible  one.

R. We  would  say  in  reply,  or  in  other  words  by  way  of


622


Mrs.  Henry  S  id  g  wick.


[part


explanation,  that  when  the  conditions  are  the  very
best,  we  are  scarcely  able  to  reach  your  own  mind  at
all.  We  are  an  independently  thinking  and  acting
band  of  disembodied  spirits,  and  we  do  not,  except
in  very  exceptional  cases,  reach  the  minds  of  mortal.
We  do  however  reach  them  in  some  cases,  and  occa-
sionally reproduce  their  thoughts,  but  they  are  never
connected  ones  and  not  registered  by  us  unless  the
thought  disagrees  with  our  own.  Then  we  do  at
times  register  some  one  or  more  of  your  own  thoughts.
But  it  must  and  does  in  all  cases  when  we  do  so,
disagree  with  ours.

{March  20,  1905.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  G.  B.  D.

[I  also  asked  some  questions  with  regard  to  the  apparent
inconsistency  of  attitude  and  comment  on  their  part  between
what  came  to  different  sitters,  which  would  seem  to  indi-
cate thought  not  wholly  independent  on  their  side  but
more  or  less  influenced  by  the  mind  of  the  immediate
sitter.  Rector  in  reply  to  this  answered  that  the  language
in  which  their  thought  was  expressed  was  necessarily  often
largely  borrowed  from  the  sitter's  mind  but  that  the
thought  itself  was  not,  though  the  language  used  might
sometimes  seem  to  imply  it.  Rector  spoke  on  the  train  of
thought  so  started  at  considerable  length  and  with  much
earnestness  but  it  was  impossible  to  take  down  what  he
said.]

(B)  Concerning  "  Influences."

Extracts  from  Sixteen  Sittings  in  Chronological  Order.

{Jan.  24,  1893.)

Present,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howard. Stenographic  report.

{Hodgson  has  gone  out  and  G.  P.  is  supposed  to  be
following  him to report what he does.  Phinuit
talks  meanwhile.}
Ph.  Don't  give  me  anything  belonging  to  George  because

if  you  do  it  will  call  him  back  and  I  don't  want
to  disturb  him.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  623


{An  object  belonging  to  a  living  lady  is  given  to  him}

Ph.  Oh,  she  is  lovely  and  really  a  very  true  friend

*  *  *  *

She  is  kind  of  stout.
Mb.  Howabd. Oh  no.

Ph. Well  you  don't  know  the  word  that  I  apply  to  that  ;

what  is  the  word  ? Strong  ? No  firm.
Mbs.  Howabd. Yes, she is firm  ; she has got a very  firm

character.

Ph.  Well  that  is  what  I  mean  ;  her  principles  are  very

firm,  stout.  Oftentimes  they  misunderstand  me
because  I  can't  find  words  to  put  my  meaning ;
it  bothers  me  a  little  ;  oh,  very  stout  friend,  one
of  the  stoutest  friends  you  have  got,  and  oh,  just
as  lovely  and  sweet  as  she  can  be,  and  I  like  that
influence very much  ; there is no  twishy-twashy

about  her.

*  *  *  *

Mbs.  Howabd.  She  is  very  delicate  but  she  has  got  lots  of
spirit.

Ph. Oh,  she  is  very  stout  and  strong.
Mbs.  Howabd.  Courage.

Ph.  Courage,  that  is  it,  stout-hearted  ;  awfully  nice  influ-

ence ;  I  don't  know  when  I  have  seen  an  influence
that  I  like  so  much,  and  sometimes  they  are  horrid
to  me. I  don't  like  to  take  them  at  all.

V  *i*  ¥

Mb.  Howabd.  ,  Now  you  say  you  get  an  influence ;  does  it
seem  to  be  as  though  it  was  a  moral  good,  or
an  agreeable  light  ?

Ph.  It is an agreeable light and a thoroughly  moral

light  ;  it  takes  me  to  the  individual  spiritual  in  the
body ;  you  see  I  sense  this,  and  by  their  having
handled  it,  and  the  perspiration  of  the  body  is
carried  in  this  particularly  on  the  air,  and  I  follow
this  to  the  person  themselves  inwardly  ;  I  com-
municate, in  other  words,  with  their  spiritual  body  ;
you  see  what  I  mean.

Mb.  Howabd.  Of  course  I  don't  see  how  you  do  it  ;  it  is
very  obscure.


624  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.  [part


Ph.  But  I  can't  explain  it  any  other  way.

Mas.  Howard. It  is  like  going  on  a  telegraph  wire.
Ph.  Yes,  what  do  yon  call  your  telegraph  wires  ? It  is

like  the  wires  in  your  country.

*  *  *  *

See  also,  for  this  period,  November  30,  1892,  quoted  in
Appendix  to  Chapter  II.,  p.  355.

(June  20,  1895.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Professor  W.  Romaine  Newbold. G.  P,
writing.

G.  P.  Objects  carry  with  them  a  light  as  distinct  to  us  as
the  sunlight  is  to  you.  The  instant  you  hand  us
an  object,  that  instant  we  get  an  impression  of  its
owner,  whether  the  present  or  the  past  owner  and
often  both.  In  some  cases  the  impression  is  as
clear  as  possible,  in  others  it  is  vague,  and  I  find
upon  examination  that  almost  invariably  the  object
presented  to  us  for  information  has  been  of  long
standing,  or  otherwise  unhandled — untouched  by  its
owner  for  a  period  of  long  duration,  or  sometimes
it  may  have  been  handled  often  and  by  a  great
number  of  persons.  This  often  causes  confusion. —
End.
Any  questions  ?

W.  R.  N.  Does  influence  resemble  light  ?

G.  P. No,  not  exactly,  but  similar.

W.  R.  N.  Can  influence  be  conferred  by  one  who  has  no  light  ?
G.  P. Certainly. Oftentimes  it  will  attract  its  former  owner,

i.e.  if  he  has  passed  out  of  the  material  body.
W.  R.  N.  Why  does  it  attract  him  more  in  the  presence  of  the

medium  ?
G.  P. It  does  not  .  .  .  it  .  .  .

W.  R.  N.  You mean it is then only that we know he  is

attracted  ?
G.  P. Certainly — only  this.

W.  R.  N.  What does Phinuit do when he carries away  in-
fluence ?

G.  P. Describes  the  object  to  one  or  more  persons  present


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  625


and  makes  various  inquiries  as  to  the  article  or
object.

W.  R.  N.  In  how  many  ways  is  the  article  useful  ?
G.  P. No,  I  do  not  understand  your  meaning.

[I  explain.]
G.  P. Oh,  I  catch  your  idea.

W.  R.  N.  [I  read  from  paper  of  questions  "  It  attracts  its
owner."  ]

G.  P. Yes,  the  article  at  times  attracts  its  owner  etc.  i.e.

if  he  has  passed  out,  etc.
W.  R.  N.  I understand. 2nd.  "  Does  it  contain  influence  that

can  be  used  ?  "
G.  P. Such  as  what  ?

W.  R.  N.  To  hold  the  spirit  in  communication  ?
G.  P. Well,  this  explains  it.

W.  R.  N.  Then  its  only  function  is  to  attract  and  hold,  much

as  a  magnet  does  ?
G.  P. Certainly. The  article  ...  an  article  belonging  to  a

person  when  still  in  the  body  also  has  its  own  law

of  attraction  which  I  for  instance  can  discriminate,

because  it  carries  its  light.
W.  R.  N.  Is  this  light  or  influence  used  up  when  the  spirit  is

communicating  ?

G.  P.  Yes,  somewhat,  or  at  least  we  so  term  it,  but  really
it  is  ourselves  losing  hold  of  our  light.

W.  R.  N.  When  Phinuit  describes  the  article  to  the  spirit,  does
he  describe  the  material  object  or  the  influence
that  is  on  it  ?

G.  P.  The  article,  also  its  influence  or  light  as  it  appears
to  him.

W.  R.  N.  Can  you  make  me  understand  the  differences  that  you
discern  between  influences  %

G.  P.  I  do  not  know,  I  will  do  the  best  I  can.  The  object
carries  with  it  its  owner's  light  or  influence  as  the
Dr.  particularly  terms  it.  Well  it  has  an  influence —
we  will  use  this  for  convenience — The  object  to  us
appears  like  the  person  or  its  light  conveys  to  us
the  impression  of  its  owner.

W.  R.  N.  Can  such  an  influence  be  derived  from  places  ?

G.  P. I  cannot  answer — I  do  not  know.


626


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


W.  R.  N.  I  mean  does  an  article  carry  with  it  elements  so  to
speak  of  its  former  surroundings  which  you  can
perceive,  or  must  such  influences  be  drawn  from  its
owner  exclusively  ?

G.  P.  Oh  yes  I  do,  it  does  bring  with  it  a  decided  picture
of  a  place.

W.  R.  N.  Can  this  be  got  from  a  place  or  must  it  be  through
a  person  ?

G.  P. Oh  without  the  intervention  of  a  person  because  it
has  light  enough  to  give  us  the  impression  of  its
former  surroundings.
W.  R.  N.  E.g. when I showed you the letter  yesterday  you

'"  got  an  inkling  of  the  writer's  feelings.
G.  P. Certainly,  almost  immediately.

(July  1,  1895.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson. G.  P.  writing.
R.  H. Now  I  wish  to  ask  you  something  else.
G.  P. Are  you  in  a  hurry  ?
R.  H. Not  specially.
G.  P. O.K. Go  on.

R.  H.  How  do  you  distinguish  between  the  "  lights  "  of
two  objects,  one  of  winch  belongs  to  a  living  person,
and  the  other  to  a  person  who  has  passed  out  ?

G.  P.  They  convey  their  thoughts  to  the  object  which
enables  [R.  H.  interprets  "  makes  "  during  the  sitting,
and  reading  it  over  says  it  isn't  clear,  hence  change
of  construction  after  the  word  medium  below]  the
spirit-intelligence  communicating  through  the  medium
[to]  grasp  their  idea  by  producing  the  object's  light.

R.  H.  That's  not  clear.  I'll  explain  at  great  length  what
I  mean.  Wait.

G.  P. No,  not  necessary.

R.  H. I  bring

G.  P. I get it  ...  I get it  .  .  .  some [object]  belonging

to  a  person  who  has  passed  out.
R.  H. Yes. I  also  bring  an  article  belonging  to  a  person

who haf not passed out. Explain the  difference

between  their  "  lights."
G.  P. Well,  the  article  belonging  to  the spirit  when  being


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance. — Appendix.  627

handled  by  the  spirit  in  communication,  attracts
its  owner  while  the  object  or  article  belonging  to  a
person  still  on  earth  attracts  no  one  in  particular.

R.  H. How  does  an  object  suggest  its  previous  surroundings  1

G.  P. It  would  be  by  thought.

R.  H. If  a  human  being  were  present  instead  of  the  object

it  would  be  easy  to  understand.
G.  P. Yes,  you  think.
R.  H. But  an  object  doesn't  think.

G.  P.  No.  Yet  the  object  has  been  found  and  handled  by
some  person  still  in  the  body.  Well,  first  the  spirit
sees  the  object,  secondly,  its  owner.

R.  H.  Or  some  one  who  has  handled  it  ?  [In  noting  this
question,  "  handler "  came  into  my  mind,  and  I
wrote  on  back  of  the  previous  sheet,  "  or  some
handler,"  bixt  did  not  say  the  word]

G.  P.  Yes,  exactly.  Well,  if  an  object  has  been  handled
at  all  it  receives  what  we  term  influence  for  con-
venience, yet  apart  from  seeing  the  handler  [see  note
above]  of  it  we  see  a  light  also  which  portrays
to  us  a  picture.

R.  H. But  the  object  itself  hasn't  a  picture.

G.  P. No,  not  at  all.

R.  H. The  picture  comes  from  its  connection  with  the  owner  ?
G.  P.  Yes.

R.  H. The  owner  has  the  mental  picture  ?

G.  P. Yes. Yet  we  see  distinctly  the  light  which  to  us  is

connected  with  the  object.
R.  H. Are  the  pictures  in  that  light  ?
G.  P. No,  but  it  connects  us  with  it.
R.  H. It  comes  from  persons  who  have  handled  it  ?
G.  P. Yes. For  instance,  we  get  a  clear  or  otherwise  picture

from  the  person  to  whom  it  belongs.
R.  H.  Good.

G.  P. Well,  what  does  this  explain  ?

R.  H.  Well,  some  persons  maintain  that  objects  themselves
have  a  kind  of  memory,  they  seem  to  suppose  that
inanimate  objects  carry  with  them  mental  pictures
like  those  of  developed  human  beings.

G.  P. Scientifically  not. No,  not  at  all.


628  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [pabt

(December  26,  1896.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson. G.  P.  controlling.

[Signet-ring  given. Hand  moves  slowly  about  holding
ring,  as  though  showing  it  in  different  directions.]
G.  P. I  am  attracting  him. There  are  so  many  stragglers.

5fc  H<  %  ifc

This  gentleman  comes  forward  and  whispers.
Commr. I  am  trying  to  see  the  light. I  am  not  far  from  you

now  *  *  *  my  ring  my  ring.
G.  P. I  am  going.  H.

[Hand  scrabbles  etc.] [New  writer]

[Hand  closes  on  ring  and  swirls  round  and  round
on  table  with  wist  as  hinge.  I  finally  restrain  it
and  talk  into  hand,  explaining  that  the  speech  is
registered  in  writing  *  *  *]

{Conversation  with  the  new  control  writing  follows,  but
what  was  written  was  of  no  significance.  After
a  time,  confusion  being  apparent,  Hodgson  inter-
feres }

R.  H. You  had  better  go  out  and  come  back.

[Hand  scrabbles]
G.  P. What  is  the  trouble. Can  he  not  keep  clear  ?
R.  H. He  seemed  to  be  dreamy  then  and  kept  repeating

the  same  thing. I  thought  it  was  better  for  him

to  take  a  rest.

G.  P. Quite  right,  H. A  bright  man  and  yet  he  *  *  *  *  *

He  is  bound  to  be  all  right  in  a  little  while.
R.  H. I'll  have  to  return  the  article.

G.  P.  It  won't  make  any  difference,  I  would  know  him
anywhere  after  this,  so  if  he  is  not  quite  O.K.  he
will  be.

I  do  not  think  anything  more  was  heard  of  this  com-
municator, who,  it  may  be  observed,  himself  controlled
most  of  the  time  he  was  in  evidence.

(February  8,  1897.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson. Doctor  writing.

[I  enquire  about  the  purposes  subserved  by  articles
worn  or  handled,  etc.,  when  brought  to  a  sitting]


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  629


Doctor.  I  may  not  be  able  to  answer  this  question  in  detail,
and  yet  I  will  give  you  my  answer  according  to  my
experience.  Articles  worn  by  a  person  when  in  the
body  contain  a  certain  form  of  magnetic  power.
[I  object  to  the  word  magnetic,1  referring  to  the
technical  uses  of  scientific  terms  and  the  lax  popular
uses,  etc.]

Doctor.  Ah  but  it  is  and  is  known  to  us  as  magnetic.  We
are  attracted  to  the  hght  which  the  article  carries
with  it,  and  which  it  has  received  by  having  been
used  or  worn  by  a  spirit  when  in  the  body.  It
attracts  in  nearly  the  same  way  as  a  magnet
attracts  a  needle.  It  carries  with  it  its  own  sphere.
It  has  hght  of  its  own.  It  has  an  etherial  cover-
ing which  is  to  us  attractive  or  magnetic.  It  has
a  slight  etherial  covering  as  it  were.

R.  H.  Firstly,  then,  such  an  article  has  some  portion  of
etherial  attached  to  it.  Has  that  etherial  been
left  there  by  the  owner  ?  Is  it  a  fragment  so  to
speak  of  his  etherial  ?

Doctor.  Yes,  it  is.  For  instance,  had  it  not  been  worn  by
him  when  in  the  body  it  would  not  have  any
attraction  for  him.

R.  H.  Is  that  etherial  on  the  article,  has  that  been  shed,
so  to  speak,  by  the  etherial  covering  of  the  spirit
when  in  the  body  %

Doctor. Yes  it  has.

R.  H. And  not  by  the  spirit  etherial  inside  the  covering  ?
Doctor.  No.

R.  H.  Just  as  there  is  perspiration  from  the  skin  of  the
ordinary  body,  so  there  is  etherial  emanation  from
the  etherial  covering  ?

Doctor.  Yes,  which  can  only  be  discerned  by  your  spirit
when  out  of  your  body.

R.  H. Under  ordinary  circumstances.

Doctor. Under  all  circumstances.

R.  H. Perhaps  I  had  better  say,  in  ordinary  cases.


1  This  is  a  little  hard  on  Doctor,  as  the  word  magnet  had  been  used
in  connexion  with  influences  by  Hodgson  himself  on  November  30,  1892
(see  p.  355),  and  by  Professor  Newbold  on  June  20,  1895  (see  p.  625).


630


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Doctor. Yes  better.

R.  H.  I  was  thinking  of  the  case  of  a  seeing  spirit  still  in
the  body.

Doctor. Yes,  depends  however  upon  the  development  or  .  .  .

[undec.]  of  the  spirit  when  in  its  body.
R.  H. Of  what  service  is  it  to  the  spirit  coming  back  and

communicating  ?

Doctor.  It  so  attracts  him  that  he  is  enabled  thereby  to  recall
and  relate  some  incident  which  was  well  known  to
him  when  in  his  body,  .  .  .

R.  H.  Does  it  act  in  any  other  way,  on  this  particular
point,  than  as  a  stimulus  to  his  associations  ?

Doctor. Not  to  my  knowledge.

R.  H.  I  bring  an  article  of  A,  unknown  to  me.  The  con-
trolling spirit  gets  the  person  ? How  ?

Doctor.  [According]  to  my  understanding  it  is  by  joining  the
two  lights.

R.  H. Can't  read.

Doctor. Bringing  together  the  two  lights.
\I  misinterpret.]

Doctor.  No.  joining  the  two,  the  controlling  spirit  being  one
light,  while  the  article  carries  its  own  light,  and
when  being  held  by  the  controlling  spirit  he  is
able  to  words  [?]  vague  [?]  vague  [?]  attract  the
owner  by  it  precisely  as  you  for  instance  attract
your  friends  by  being  present  when  the  reservoir
is  filled  with  ether,  only  this  is  chiefly  done  by  the
controlling  spirit  instead  of  the  article  alone.  I
will  illustrate.  I  am  the  controlling  spirit.  I  have
my  own  light.  You  hand  me  an  article  worn  by
A.  I  hold  it  with  my  own  light.  The  two  are
dissimilar.  I  am  surrounded  byd  spirits.  I  attract
them  by  the  light  of  the  article  which  I  hold.  I
do  not  see  any  one  who  seems  to  recognize  the
article.  I  may  then  see  some  friend  of  my  own
to  whom  I  may  speak  and  ask  him  to  make  a
search  for  the  owner.  When  he  does  this  he
describes  the  light,  i.e.  as  it  appears  to  him  when
this  is  visible  to  him.  He  searches  for  the  owner,
and by the power of the spirit that you  eouid


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.- — Appendix.  631


not  U  D,  he  finds  its  owner  among  many,  and  brings
him  forth.  Instantly  he  recognizes  his  article.  I
have  seen  your  friend  Pelham  do  this  again  and
again.

R.  H.  Just  as  a  dog  might  find  its  master  in  a  crowded
building,  so  the  spirit  can  find  the  owner  of  the
article,  but  in  a  much  more,  to  us,  marvellous
fashion.

Doctor. Repeat. This  all  sounds  strange  to  me.

[I  repeat] Yes, more  complex. You may use  this
analogy  for  your  understanding
R.  H. Having  got  him  here,  then  ?

Doctor.  I  have  seen  it  done  repeatedly.  Personally  I  have
done  very  little  if  any  of  this  attracting  spirits  by
articles  worn  by  them  when  in  the  bodies,  yet  I
have  been  an  onlooker  many  times.

R.  H.  Having  got  him  here,  then  the  article  serves  as  a
stimulus  to  his  associations  ?

Doctor. Yes,  independently  of  his  friend.

R.  H.  But  suppose  I  bring  the  article.  I  don't  know
anything  about  the  person  to  whom  it  belongs,
but  we  have  got  him  here.

Doctor.  Ah  yes.  He  sees  his  article  or  better  the  fight  of
his  article  with  etherial

R.  H. Clinging  to  it.

Doctor.  Clinging  to  it,  taken  from  his  body,  etherial  covering
of  his  body.

R.  H.  It  has  served  the  purpose  of  attracting  the  spirit
and  stimulating  his  associations.  Has  it  any  other
effect  ?

Doctor. I  do  not  U  D. Put  your  question  differently.

R.  H.  I  bathe  in  the  sea.  It  cleanses  my  organism  but
it  also  invigorates  otherwise.  I  might  cleanse  my
organism  in  my  room  with  soap  and  water,  but  I
wouldn't  get  the  same  invigoration.  The  bathing
in  the  sea  has  more  than  one  effect.

Doctor.  Do  you  mean  does  it  affect  him  in  any  other  way
than  by  simply  attracting  him  ?

R.  H.  Yes,  any  other  than  by  attracting  him  and  stimulat-
ing his  associations.


632

Doctor.
R.  H.
Doctor.
R.  H.
Doctor.


R.  H.

Doctor.
R.  H.
Doctor.

R.  H.
Doctor.
R.  H.

Doctor.
R.  H.

Doctor.


R.  H.
Doctor.


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


R.  H.


Doctor.

R.  H.]

Doctor.


Not  known  to  me.
Does  it  help  to  keep  A's  thoughts  .  .  .
clear

.  .  .  clear  ?

Yes,  because  he  feels  sure  that  he  is  being  welcomed
and  is  anxious  to  speak  of  his  remembrances.  It
makes  him  feel  at  home  in  other  words.

Does  it  supply  actual  temporary  nutriment  which
aids  him  while  he  is  in  the  act  of  communicating  ?

Yes  I  thought  I  had  told  you  this.

"No.

If  it  is  a  stimulant — which  it  is — does  it  not  tem-
porarily nurture  him  %
Not  necessarily.

Why  % [To  Spirit  ?] Yes. I  do.

You  may  be  interested  in  giving  information  but  if

there's  no  light  you  can't  give  it.
I  see  very  little  sense  in  your  remark.
You  want  to  say  something  here,  suppose,  but  the

light  is  all  used  up,  you  can't  say  it.
I do not think it is applicable. [I enlarge]  Yes,

quite. Yet  in the case of the article  it  has  its

own  light  that  is  strength-giving  to  its  owner.
Exactly,  that's  what  I  meant.

Yet  you  had  a  different  way  of  expressing  it  which
I  did  not  U  D.  Yet  when  he  has  expressed  one
or  more  thoughts  he  has  exhausted  the  hght  and
must  return.  In  consequence  he  could  so  use  up
the  etherial  hght  of  his  article  so  it  would  in  the
course  of  time  be  useless.  In  fact  he  has  removed
the  etherial  covering,  providing  I  am  able  to  attract
its  owner.

Well  then  the  etherial  on  the  article  serves  to  find
its  owner,  it  acts  as  a  stimulus  to  his  associations,
and  it  provides  a  certain  amount  of  nutriment  for
him  while  communicating. Any  other  use  ?

No,  only  that  he  is,  at  times,  as  the  case  may  be,
overwhelmed  with  joy

can't  read

delight  joy  at  the  thought  of  being  able  to  express


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  633


R.  H.

Doctor.
R.  H.


Doctor.
R.  H.


Doctor.

R.  H.
Doctor.
R.  H.

Doctor.
R.  H.
Doctor.


R.  H.

Doctor.
R.  H.

Doctor.
Doctor.
R.  H.


himself  to  some  intelligent  friend  or  otherwise
relative  [?].  At  times  he  may  be  so  overjoyed
he  gets  muddled  or  confused,  so  anxious  is  he  to
express  himself.  When  he  has  fully  recovered
consciousness  the  light  may  have  become  exhausted
without  his  being  able  to  clear  his  mind  at  all.

Well,  never  mind  about  that.  That's  another  thing.
That's  a  side-issue.

Pardon.  Repeat.  Perhaps  I  did  not  hear  you  dis-
tinctly.

Well,  we've  got  to  this,  that  the  etherial  on  the
article,  besides  attracting  and  stimulating,  also  sup-
plies food

energy  so  to  speak

Yes  energy.  Does  it  prevent  his  mind  from  being
directly]  affected  by  the  thoughts  of  other
persons  ?

Yes,  it  is  more  liable  to  prevent  confusion  than  as

though  some  one  of  his  friends  were  present.
The  etherial  energy  helps  him  to  keep  his  grip  .  .  .
hold.

...  on his own mind to the exclusion of  other

minds  in  the  body.
Yes,  indeed.
Also  in  the  spirit  ?

Yes.  It  attracts  himself  alone,  whereas  his  were  one
or  more  of  his  friends  present  would  attract  more
[hand  speirs  two  or  three  times  a  little]  i.e.  a  larger
number  of  friends  in  spirit  providing  there  were
more  than  he  here.  I  was  disturbed  a  little.
Excuse  me.

What  I  meant  was  did  it  help  him  to  avoid  being

telepathically  acted  upon  by  spirits  ?
I  answered  yes.

It  helps  him to remain unaffected by the  current

of  my  thought  ?
Yes.

Moses  was  speaking  to  me. All  right  now.
Can  you  think  of  any  other  use  which  that  etherial
remnant  might  have  ?


634


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


Doctor. There are none others known to me. No.  Have

you  other  theories  ?
R.  H. I  don't  recall  at  this  moment.

Doctor.  If  you  have  I  wish  you  would  explain  what  they
are  because  I  do  not  wish  you  to  get  a  wrong
idea. There  are  none  others  known  to  me.

R.  H.  If  I  think  of  any  other  use  that  occurs  to  me  as
possible,  I  will  ask  you  another  time.

Doctor.  Very  good,  my  friend,  I  am  sure  there  are  none,
because  I  watched  very  earnestly  and  carefully
this  proceeding  with  articles,  with  your  friend
Pelham.

R.  H.  We've  been  talking  of  the  use  of  the  etherial  on
articles  to  the  communicator  who  owned  them.
Does  there  cling  to  such  articles  anything  like  a
record  of  the  articles'  history  independent  of  the
person  who  owned  them  ?

Doctor. I do not UD [I repeat] Any spirit you mean  ?

You  say  person.  Do  you  mean  in  the  body  or
spirit  ?

R.  H.  Take  a  glove  that  was  owned  by  a  person  in  body
or  in  spirit.  Certain  persons  are  said  to  be  able
to  describe  the  owner  and  some  of  his  experiences
by  the  help  of  the  glove  alone.

Doctor. Do  they  do  it  ? or  do  they  pretend  to  do  it  ?

R.  H. I  have  never  seen  it  done  to  my  satisfaction.

Doctor.  Ah  my  friend,  we  warn  you  to  be  careful,  I  do  not
think  it.  We  know  of  no  such  cases,  unless  by
chance  or  some  falsifying  remark.

R.  H.  Some  persons  are  said  e.g.  to  take  a  piece  of  ore, —
ore,  from  which  a  metal may  be produced  .  .  .

Doctor,  ore

R.  H. and  describe  the  mine  or  locality,  other  lodes,  where

the  veins  run
Doctor, from  which  it  came.
R.  H.  Yes.

Doctor. It  is  not  safe  to  trust  such  persons.

R.  H. The  crux  of  the  enquiry  comes  to  this. Do  objects

as such carry with  them scenes  independently  of

persons  ?


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance. — Appendix.  635


Doctor.  Not  to  my  knowledge.  More  advanced  spirits  might
be  better  able  to  enlighten  you  on  this  point.  I  do
not  think  it  however.  I  believe  in  such  cases  the
interior  consciousness  of  the  person  holding  such
articles  as  named  by  yourself  viz.  ore,  is  more  or
less  impressed  by  some  spirit  intelligence  who  was
formerly  connected  with  the  locality  from  which
the  ore  was  produced.
Would  it  be  possible  for  the  interior  consciousness
of  the  person  holding  the  ore,  let  us  call  this
person  the  percipient,
very  well

to  see  the  locality  herself  ?

As  it  were  clairvoyantly  as  you  would  term  it  ?
Yes.

Yes,  impressed  however  by  some  spirit.
Not  by  her  own  power  ?

No. This  is  where  persons  on  earth  are  ignorant.
A  distant  percipient  is  given  an  article  by  a  person,
belonging to B, and the percipient describes  the
character  of B, and  perhaps  special  incidents.  Is
that  possible  ?
Yes,  providing  the  person  possesses  light.  Otherwise

not,  and  would  be  untrustworthy.
It  is  a  possible  thing  ?

Yes,  indeed. The person possessing light can  be
impressed  by  a  spirit  to  describe  such  scenes  and
surroundings
and  give  a  description  of  character  ?
yes  also.

But  she  can't  give  it  herself  ?
No.

Here  is  a  woman  in  a  distant  city.  Call  her  X.  A
person  known  to  me  gives  to  X  a  letter  by  me
and  asks  X  for  an  account  of  the  writer.  She
offers  an  account  of  my  character,  habits,  etc.
Would  it  be  possible  for  her  to  do  that  correctly
without  the  assistance  of  a  spirit  from  your  world  ?
Doctor.  Possibly  the  person  by  whom  you  sent  the  letter  may
be present and if so such might be his or  her


R.  H.


Doctor.
R.  H.
Doctor.
R.  H.
Doctor.
R.  H.
Doctor.
R.  H.


Doctor.

R.  H.

Doctor.


R.  H.

Doctor.
R.  H.
Doctor.
R.  H.


636


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


R.  H.


Doctor.
R.  H.


Doctor.
R.  H.
Doctor.
R.  H.
Doctor.


R.  H.


Doctor.

R.  H.
Doctor.
R.  H.
Doctor.


condition  to  enable  the  person  named  X  to  read
alone  [?]  the  interior  thought  of  the  person  .  .  .
Let  me  fully  U  D  you.

X  is  the  percipient,  Y  the  person  who  gave  my
letter.  Under  what  circumstances  can  X,  suppose
honest  and  not  knowing  me,  give  a  true  and  detailed
description  of  my  character  1

By  possessing  light  only.

I  understand  that  if  a  spirit  tells  X,  X  can  get
it  that  way.  But  I  refer  now  to  possibilities  of
obtaining  information  without  the  aid  of  any  other
spirit  but  her  own.

Yes,  this  would  .  .  . [undec]  of  telepathy

can't  read

of  thought

You've  written  those  words  over  one  another

pardon  .  .  .  the  interior consciousness might  be  able

to perceive  the  impression of  your  own  light,  i.e.

X's,  her  spirit  might.
That is to say, X's interior consciousness  might

through  the  light of the  article  get  into  rapport

with  mine.

Yes,  but  it  must  necessarily  be  very  light  to  enable

her  to  do  so.
She  must  be  quite  advanced  ?
Yes,  quite  developed.
The  time's  nearly  up.
Yes. I  feel  weak  already.


{Oct.  28,  1902.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  G.  B.  D. Rector  using  voice.  {Letter
from  a  living  woman  given  to  Rector.}
Rector. This is the best influence which thou hast  ever

given  us  !

*  *  *  *

There  is  something  so  remarkable  in  the  influence
thou  hast  given  us  that  it  brings  the  spirit  almost
as  close  to  us  as  thou  thyself  art.  We  can  see  it
so  perfectly ; it  makes  me  quite  happy.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  637


G.  B.  D.  Who?

R.  I,  Rector,  to  see  it  so  clearly. I  don't  think  I  ever

mistake  influences.  I  think  I  can  see  them  almost
perfectly.  This  influence  is  inspired  by  the  higher
and  wiser  spirit  and  therefore  it  is  beautiful  and
it  is  true — I  wish,  friend,  thou  wouldst  take  my
love  to  her.

G.  B.  D.  Who  is  speaking  ?

R.  I,  Rector,  I  love  to  see  this  spirit.

{Rector proceeds to give messages from  various
communicators  to  the  owner  of  the  influence.}

(December  2,  1902.)
Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson. Rector  writing.

R.  Also  friend  let  us  advise  thee  that  it  is  infinitely

wiser  to  have  present  some  object  once  worn  in  the
material  world  [by]  the  spirit  or  spirits  who  repre-
sent themselves  as  being  present.  It  is  not  necessary
to  produce  the  articles  until  it  hath  first  been
announced  as  to  the  type  of  spirit  present  i.e.
whether  gentleman  or  lady.

R.  H. Yes,  yes. I  understand.

R.  as  it  might  be  more  satisfactory  to  the  friend  on  the

earthly  side.

But  when  it  hath  been  once  announced  as  to  the
type  of  spirit  present  if  it  be  rightly  U.D.  by  the
mortal  present  then  articles  should  be  produced,
this  will  assist  us  greatly  in  our  efforts  to  hold  the
desired  spirit  apart  from  others  who  might  other-
wise unconsciously  interrupt.

R.  H. Yes. That  is  the  special  use  of  articles  ?

R.  with  us  yes. Besides  it  gives  additional  help  to  the

spirit  in  recognizing  his  own  objects.

R.  H. Yes. [Cross  in  air.]

R.  Besides there is an unmistakable light  surrounding

each  object  which  hath  been  used  by  spirits  when
dressed  in  mortal  covering.  We  observe  almost
immediately  the  object  as  it  sends  forth  a  perfect
reflection  of  its  size  shape  etc.  which  is  seldom
mistaken  by  the  former  owner.


638  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

R.  H. Yes,  I  follow.

R.  Remember one thing of vast importance is  the

producing  of  objects.
R.  H.  Yes.

R.  and we may add that all such should be  those

handled  as  little  as  possible  by  other  hands  than
those  to  whom  the  object  belonged.

R.  H.  Yes.

R.  This  will  help  thee  greatly  in  thy  future  research.

(Dec.  8,  1902.)

Sitter and recorder, G. B. D. Voice sitting.  Rector
speaking.

[Mrs.  X.'s  influence.]
Rector. I  think  this  is  the  companion's 1  influence,  friend,  and
not  hers.

[Note  :  I  gave  the  influence,  a  handkerchief,  as  Mrs.
X.'s  own,  which  I  supposed  it  to  be  myself.]
Rector. I  know  it  is.  —  —

{An account of Mr. X.'s symptoms and  character
follow. Whether  these  were  correct  and  if  so  what
previous  opportunity  of  knowing  about  them  Rector
may  have  had,  I  do  not  know. E.  M.  S.}
^  *  *  *

Rector,  the  condition  can  never  be  wholly  removed.  It  hath
taken  such  a  vital  hold  !  There  is  acid  all  through
the  blood.  Why,  friend,  I  can  see  this  as  plainly
as  I  can  see  thee.  How  much  better  it  is  for  thee
to  always  bring  an  object  like  this  !  Each  object
hath  its  own  astral  light  which  is  so  clear  and
distinct  to  us  as  to  enable  us  to  see  the  mortal
himself.

(May  6,  1903.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson. Rector  writing.

R.  H. S. —  writes  that  so  far  as  he  can  see  all  the  statements

from Mr. H  y are incorrect. He is  anxious

for  a  meeting  to  be  devoted  again  to  clearing  up
the  mystery  if  possible.

1  "  Companion  "  =  husband  or  wife.


LXXI.]


Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  639


Rector.  We  must  have  influences  another  time  friend,  in
order  to  keep  the  communicators  clear.  It  is  as
important  as  life.

R.  H. Yes  ?

Rector,  and  unless  we  can  have  them  and  have  them  good
we  can  guarantee  little.  We  have  made  this  clear
so  many  times  it  doth  not  seem  necessary  for  us
to  reiterate.

R.  H.  Yes.

Rector. The  minds of  communicators cannot be kept  clear

without  some  law  of  attraction.
R.  H. Yes  ?

Rector.  Now  then  bring  us  some  fresh  or  at  least  good
articles  and  we  can  make  as  clear  a  communicator
of  him  as  we  did  of  Bennie.

R.  H.  Yes?

Rector.  We  cannot  keep  his  thoughts  clear  and  undisturbed
otherwise.

{The  communication  from  the  professed  Mr.  H  y

had  taken  place  on  April  8,  1903,  and  had  been
very  clear  and  detailed,  though  wrong.}


(July  5,  1904.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson. Rector  writing.

Rector.  Imperator  was  surprised  that  I  failed  to  take  up
Mr.  D.  at  the  close  of  our  last  meeting  therefore
I  shall  be  obliged  to  look  at  him  first  and  at  the
end  also.

R.  H. But  I  did  give  you  his  influence  as  usual  at  the  end,

and  you  held  it.
Rector. Yes  but  I  was  so  far  out. He  did  not  receive  it  fully.

Therefore  I  must  let  Him  see  it  one  moment  now.
R.  H. Yes. Here  it  is. It  is  the  same. [Assent] I  have

not  received  fresh  one  to-day.  [Assent.]
[Mr.  D.'s  article,  handkerchief,  given. Hand  feels  it,

holds  it  up,  then  bows  to  table,  holding  it  a  short

time, 10  or  15  seconds,  then  makes  cross  in  air.]
Rector. We  are  thankful.  +R

{Mr. D. was a hving man for whom the  controls

were  giving  medical  advice}


640


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


In  Hodgson's  record  of  the  previous  sitting  (July  4,
1904)  we  find  just  after  the  leave-taking  of  Imperator  and
Rector.

[Hand  seeks  as  for  article. I  give  Mr.  D.'s  influence,  a
handkerchief. Hand  feels  it,  lays  it  down,  lapses.]

(Dec.  19,  1904.)

Sitter,  with  Hodgson  recording.

{Dr. — presumably Dr. Oliver — apparently  communi-
cating through  Rector. Hodgson  certainly  regards
Rector  as  writing  throughout}
[Disturbance  in  hand,  which  thumps  on  table.]
Dr.  I  wish  to  speak  a  moment  to  my  patient  while  the

gentleman  {previous  communicator}  takes  a  rest.
[Hand  speirs  about  just  in  front  of  S.'s  chest]
Dr.  I see  infinitely better  blood, less indigestion  better

circulation.
S.  Yes  that  is  true.

*  *  *  *

S.  How  did  you  make  that  diagnosis  from  my  glove?

Dr.  Why  my  dear  lady  that  is  the  least  of  my  difficulties.

I  saw  your  condition  from  the  astral  light  which
the  article  carried  with  it,  which  brought  me  in
immediate  touch  with  your  organism.

S.  Then  the  soul  impresses itself upon everything  we

touch  ?

Db.  Yes and we are extremely sensitive to the  touch

when  operating  through  the  light.

*  *  *  *

[hand  touches  lightly  about  left  temple  of  S.]
Dr.  had  any  pain  over  temples  with  this  cold  ?

S.  Not much. Very  little.

Dr.  I  see  a  slight  inflammation  in  left  side  etc.

(February  7,  1905.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.
Rector (writing). +  feels  the  importance  of  looking  into  the

case  of  Mrs.  [R.]  for  a  few  moments.
R.  H. Shall  I  give  the  influence  of  her  Uncle  Rob  ?


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance. — Appendix.  641


Rector. Kindly  do  so

[I  give  glove  and  flannel  from  two  separate  parcels.]

R.  We  are  glad  to  be  able  to  throw  some  light  here

friend.  Of  course  when  we  say  that  restoration  is
not  possible  it  doth  not  mean  that  we  cannot
give  help  because  we  can  do  so.  He  is  weak
and  in  a  state  which  is  incurable.  When  was  this
given  thee  friend.

R.  H. I  received  it  I  think  before  Christmas.

R.  We  think  her  special  desire  is  for  us  to  give  some

light  concerning  the  future  connected  with  him.  Is
this  not  so  ?

R.  H.  No.

R.  She  referred  to  this. Or  are  we  to  find  him.

R.  H. She did not specify what she wanted when  she
originally  sent  it.
[Hand  feels  articles  again,  turns  to  spirit.]

Rectoe.  No  certainly  not  unless  thou  dost  wish.  [Between
spirits.]  Reference  was  made  to  our  giving  him
assistance  before  he  passed  over  to  his  changing  [?]
his  affairs.  [Hand  feels  articles  again.]  It  [sic]
impossible  for  us  to  get  this  clearly  now  we  will  be
obliged  to  take  it  up  again  presently.  [Hand  moves
articles  to  right  of  block-book  and  rests  on  them
in  a  covering  manner  for  several  seconds,  suggesting
that  they  were  not  to  be  disturbed.]  We  see  his
condition  from  the  objects  presented  at  the  time
when  they  were  connected  with  him.  This  is  a
trifle  confusing  as  the  case  stands  now.  Therefore
we  leave  it  until  a  little  later  when  we  will  return
to  it. Kindly  leave  the  objects.

I  do  not  think  anything  further  was  said  about  these
influences.  On  February  14  Hodgson  makes  the  following
note  :

[Note.  Mrs.  Piper  told  me  *  *  *  that  she  had  received
a  letter  from  Mrs.  [R.]  this  morning  in  which  Mrs.  [R.]
told  her  that  her — Mrs.  [R.'s] — Uncle  had  recently  died.
I  inferred  from  what  Mrs.  Piper  said  that  Mrs.  [R.]  in
her  letter  had  commented  adversely  on  the  fact  that  no


642


Mrs.  Henry  Sid  g  wick.


[part


reference  to  this  death  had  been  made  at  the  sittings. —
R.  H,  Feb.  14,  1905.]

From  this  note  and  Hodgson's  remarks  quoted  above  I
infer  that  the  influences,  though  clearly  taken  by  Rector
for  those  of  a  living  man,  belonged  to  one  who  was  dead
at  the  time  of  the  sitting.

(April  11,  1905.)

Two  sitters,  Sx  and  S2,  with  R.  H.  as  recorder. Rector  writing
as  amanuensis  for  communicator.
Commb. I  heard  you  say  I  wish  he  could  tell  me  about  those
letters  etc.  etc.

S„.  Yes  we  did  say  that,  but  it  is  not  very  important,

other  things  will  do  as  well.

Commr.  Remember,  influences  have  their  light  as  mortals
theirs.  But  after  a  long  period  of  time  some
objects  lose  their  light  or  it  diminishes  to  such  an
extent  that  I  am  unable  to  see  through  it  clearly
enough  at  the  moment  what  it  is  or  to  whom  it
belonged. This  is  no  excuse  but  a  fact.


(April  24,  1905.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

{Gloves  belonging  to  S.,  an  old  sitter,  are  given  to
Doctor  who  prescribes  for  him. Then : }
Doctor. Do you see anything which  indicates a new  child

connected  with  his  family  ?
R.  H.  No.

Doctor. Will  you  keep  this  private  for  a  few  months,  and
then  ask  him


R.  H.


I  think  {S.'s  daughter  H. }  is  going  to  have  a  child,
*  *  *  I  see  and  would  like  you  to  obtain  an  object
from  her  and  present  to  me.  *  *  *  I  wish  this
before  telling  him.

[I  turn  to  S.'s  list  of  questions  to  see  if  there  was
anything  about  H.]

He  says  : "  Does know  or  wish  to  say  anything


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance. — Appendix.  643


about  H.  and  her  present  condition  ?  "  That  is  one
of  his  questions.
Doctor.  Well  I  have  just  told  you.  *  *  *  Will  now  let  me
straighten  things  out  a  little.  I  see  through  his
influence  {her  condition}  *  *  *  there  is  special
sympathy  between  those  two,  i.e.  father,  daughter,
son-in-law  etc.  which  enables  me  to  reach  her
aura  through  his  objects

(November  22,  1905.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson. Rector  writing,

{By  request  of  the  controls  an  article  belonging  to
Mrs.  J.  had  been  brought.}
R.  H. That  is  all  I  have  at  present. What  will  you  take

up  first  %
Rector. Mrs.  J.

{He  begins  to  prescribe  for  her. Then  : }
[Hand turns for article. Glove given. Hand  turns
it  inside  out  and  feels  it,  lays  it  under  wrist.]
Rector. We find objects which have crossed the water  no
matter how  carefully they  may  be protected  lose
their  light  and  influence.
R.  H. Hm.  Yes.

Rector.  So  that  when  they  reach  us  they  are  dark  in  com-
parison and  have  lost  the  chief  influence  upon  which
we  work.

(April  14,  1908.)  Waking-stage.

Sitter  and  recorder,  Mr.  Dorr. The  last  thing  recorded  :
Hodgson  wants  something  holding  him  here  taken  away.
[G.  B.  D.  removes  R.  H.'s  influences  from  hand.]
Good,  you  begin  to  understand  ! Did  you  hear  me  say

begin  ?

HodgsonP  had  been  the  communicator  and  apparently
the  control  throughout  the  sitting  on  April  14.  This  is
the  only  case  I  know  of  "  influences "  being  referred  to
in  the  waking-stage,  and  it  may  be  regarded  as  a  further
instance  (see  p.  240)  of  the  approximation  of  the  waking-
stage  procedure  to  that  of  the  trance  proper.


644


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


(April  21,  1908.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Mr.  Dorr.  {He  goes  over  the  record  of
the  waking-stage  of  April  14  with  the  trance  personages,
who  on  this  day  represented  themselves  as  Hodgson  writing
for  Myers,  but  himself  intervening  when  appealed  to.  Mr.
Dorr  records  :}

[R. H.'s  request  at  the  end of the subliminal  to
have  his  influences  removed  from  the  Light's  hand
is  spoken  of]
HoDasoNp.  Yes,  they  often  attract  and  hold  me

(C)  Strength  sought  by  resting  the  Hand  on  the  Sitter's
head. Three  Examples.

(Nov.  17,  1896.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson.

#  *  *  #

Hart  (writing).  Wait  a  moment,  H.,  until  I  get  a  little  more
strength.  Help  me  now.  [I  put  the  hand  on  my
head] Yes,  thanks.

jji  $t  sfs  s|s

Hart. Listen. Strength a little. Give it so I can  finish
about  my  list,  H.
[I take the hand and hold it  on my  head  for  a
short  time]

Hart.  Yes,  thanks.  How  do  you  do  it,  H.?
R.  H. I  don't  know. You  take  it  from  me.

(November  10,  1897.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Mrs.  L. Rector  writing.

*  *  *  *

[Hand holds  mine  in a  curious beseeching way,  and

faintly writes  :] Strength —
[I  place  the  hand  on  my  head,  where  it  remains  a  moment

or  two,  gives  me  a  little  pat  and  takes  up  the

pencil.]

(March  17,  1908.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Mr.  Dorr. HodgsonP  writing.  Proposed
cross-correspondences  are  being  rehearsed.


lxxi.] Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.— Appendix.  645


[Pause. Hand  twice  reaches  out  and  rests  for  a  moment
on  G.  B.  D.'s  head.]

(D)  Strength  sought  by  hearing  Verses  recited.

(March  3,  1897.)

Sitter  and  recorder,  Hodgson. Rector  writing.

Rector. This  explains  to  you  in  part  the  condition  of  sleep.

You  will  understand  that  the  spirit  always  is
conscious,  no  matter  what  the  state  of  its  environ-
ment or  body  may  be.  When  the  body  has  be-
come fatigued,  the  spirit  departs,  yet  hovers  over
it  until  it  has  rested.  This  is  not  as  I  wished  it
exactly. Read  for  me  a  moment.

R.  H. Yes  I  will.

Rector. Wait  .  .  .

Yes  read  if  you  will,  but  not  my  statements,  anything
to  give  me  strength.

R.  H. Do  you  mean  for  me  to  ask  questions  ?

Rector.  No.

R.  H. But  to  read  or  recite  something  to  you.
Rector.  Yes.

{Hodgson  then  recites  a  couple  of  verses  (8  lines)}
Rector. Very beautiful and appropriate. No. [to Spirit  ?]
Now  expressing  thanks  I  will  go  on.

In  1908  the  controls  encouraged  a  good  deal  of  reading
aloud  by  Mr.  Dorr.


646  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


CHRONOLOGICAL  INDEX  OF  PAGE  REFERENCES  TO

SITTINGS.


1888.

January 20 :  183.

February  20  :  31.

May  26  :  31,  60,  336.

June 2  :  30,  31,  58,  60,  67,  337.

„ 9  : 71,  340.

„ 11  :  208.

„ 16  :  348.

„  30:  263,  351.
September 6 :  209.


October


20  :  208.
23  :  209.


November  8
19

December  17
28


30.
210.

30,  211.
181.


1889.

May  17  :  268.
November  30  :  206,  207.
December  24  :  32.

„  25  (two  sittings)  :  32,

60,  68,  265.

1890.

January 1  :  208.
February  1  :  32.

3  (two  sittings)  :  302.


1891.


May  23  :  33.


1892.

February  14  : 194,  210.
March  10  :  33.
„ 12:  33.
18:  182.
April 11  :  39  footnote.

13  : 40,  46,  171,  182.
„ 22:  182.

„ 28:  212,  269.

29  : 41  footnote,  42,  269,
287,  321.
May 10  :  82.

14  :  42.

16  :  38,  42,  53  footnote.

17  :  42,  282.
19  :  548  footnote.
22  :  40,  42  footnote.
29  :  30,  39  footnote.

November  22  :  43,  352.

28  :  43,  45,  213,  220.
30: 26  footnote,  43,

46,  58,  61,  68,  113,
270,  303,  355,  616,
624,  629  footnote.

December 2  :  43,  46.

„  5  :  40,43,  44  footnote,

47,  52,  61, 78  foot-
note, 112,  355.

7  : 43,  53,  164  foot-
note, 216.
9  :  43,  47/61,  78  foot-
note.
16  ;  43,  45,  47,  69. 1


lxxi.]  Chronological  Index  of  Page  References  to  Sittings.  647


December  19  :  43,  59,  69.

21  :  43,  47,  53.
22: 43, 46, 58,  213
footnote,  256,  362.

1893.

January 24  :  43,  53,  61,  69,  298,
309,  622.
30:  43.
March  12:  19.

14: 217,  377.
November  18  :  215  footnote,  289.
22:  217.
23:  290.
December 8  :  194,  297,  518,  548
footnote.
11  :  283.

16  :  116  footnote.
21  : 211,  308.

1894.
January 4  :  266.

9:  47.
14:  80.
March  2  :  210.

„ 3: 48,  195.
April  25  : 127  footnote,  211.

„ 30: 48,  518.
June  24  :  173.
„ 25: 171,  218.
„ 26  : 164,  218,  246  footnote.
November  9  :  218.


1895.

March

18  :

34.

April

24  :

219,  257.

May

8  :

219.

June

14  :

71,  220,  256,  364.

??

15  :

70,  71,  256,  303,  365,

551.

99

17  :

224,  551.

99

18  :

44,  49,  52,  59  foot-

note, 71,  366.

97

19  :

35,  369.

99

20  :

127,  223,  225,  307,

308,  373, 624,  629

footnote.

June

Z 1  :

99?; **74  549

93

LL  :

fi7 173 183.  207,

9dfi  -f nrvfvnofcft  549.

79

24  :

30,  256,  550.

99

OK.

zo  :

«5  Sfi  922  225  374.

99

1 7 86  437

99

86 437  442.

July

1  :

87,  298,  307,  626.

93

•1  :

87.

9  9

6  -

qi qq  949  448.

99

5  :

87.

99

8:

86.

1896.

February  22
October  1
12
14
16
17

19
27
28
29
30
31

November  9
10
11

13
14


L6
17


18
24

December  3
4

5
7


72,  377.
89.

89,  249,  256,  551.

89,  382.

90,  143.

:  90,  108,  120  foot-
note.
:  85.

: 90,  453.

: 90,  245,  453.

:  90,  91,  139,  457.

: 91,  112  footnote.

: 91,  92.

:  92.

: 92,  93.

:  93,  95  footnote,
100,  112,  133,  468.

:  72,  94,  100,  383.

:  96,  100,  106,
245  footnote,  383,
470.

:  113,  248,  551.
: 37 footnote,  93
footnote,  113,  133,
313,  644.
: 50,  114,  248,  552.
:  66.
:  106.
: 96,  461.

:  67,72,96,383,466.
: 94  footnote,  270,
617.


648


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


1 896 — continued.
December 8 : 70,  72,  133,  245
footnote,  248,  387,
471,  552.


February  22  :  133.

23  :  103,  232,  553.

24:  103,  104.

26  :  478.


9

:  388.

27  :  23,  244.

10:  390.

March

2

97,  412  footnote,  414.

11

:  59,  70,  390.

3

66,  132,  313,  645.

? )

12

: 66,  221,  245.

4

107, 233  footnote,  554.

>  j

14

: 101,  393,  519.

5

18,  50,  107,  228,  242,

15  :  72,  395,  400  foot-

313,  377,  491.

note.

6

23.

21

:  36.

8

233  footnote,  554.

26

:  224  footnote,  307,

9

91  footnote,  108.

628.

10

103,  104,  478.

11

66,  107,  134,  323.

1897.

12

233  footnote,  555.

J  anuary

1

52,  58,  72,  397.

13

233  footnote,  555.

5

36.

15

117 footnote,  242,

7

157.

519  556

12

399.

16

104.

13

291,  617.

17

1 58, 233  footnote,  556.

14

279  footnote,  291.

18

107.

618.

19

14  footnote,  134  foot-

16

65,  96,  115.

note,  151,  298.

19

49,  149.

22

233  footnote,  557.

20

116,  150.

23

147,  206,  232.

21

97,  115.

24

104, 232  footnote,

25

63 139  303

557  562

26

11  84  98  110  139

25

558.

29

106 399  1

26

233 footnote,  246

30

400.

footnote  558

February

1

24,  64,  402.

27

232  559

2

67,  403.

29

231 footnote  233

4

97,  406.

footnote 242  486.

5

64,  66,  406.

559.

6

64,  70,  71,  110,  408.

30

49,  107,  139,  377,  499.

8

307,  308,  628.

31

70,  108,  233  footnote,

11

67, 72, 407  foot-

414, 560.

note,  410.

April

1

118,  175,  233  foot-

12

102,  133,  231,  553.

note,  415,  518,  560.

13

103,  299,  471.

2

97.

15

411.

3

•  71,  561.

16

: 412,  414  footnote.

5

:  36,  107,  139,  172,  518.

18

412  footnote.

7

• 147,  172.

19

413.

8

: 25,  233,  256.

20

103.

12

167.

lxxi.]  Chronological  Index  of  Page  References  to  Sittings.  649


April  15 :
16:

17  :

20:

22:
23:

26:

27  :

28  :

May 7  :

11  :

14:
26:
31  :

June  9  :
10:
28  :

July 3 :

November
>»

December


232  footnote,  299,
561,  621.

231 footnote,  246,
547  footnote.
505.

148,  168,  182  foot-
note, 243,  544,  562.

16  footnote.

65  footnote,  81,  109
footnote.

57,  233  footnote,  562.
332.

332,  519.
416.

232  footnote,  416, 563.

506.

417.

488.

417.

234,  564.
144.

84  footnote,  101.

4  :  145.
10  : 313,  644.
13:  23.


1898.

536.
536.

134,  513.


January  20
21
28

April 15  :  186.

26  :  185.
May 14  :  134.

26  : 109,  233  footnote,  564.
June 3  :  138,  240,  565.
8:  135.
9  :  135.
20  :  545.

29  : 249,  417,  566.
July 1  :  169.

September  13  : 16  footnote,  567.
October 13  :  568.
November  12 : 152,  153.

21  :  169.

30:  332.
December 2  :  187,  332,  528.


December 5  :  [54.

15  :  ^333.

19  : 108,  177,  532.
24  :  109.
29  :  271.


May


1899.
January 5  :  271.

:  72  footnote.
56.

206  footnote.
169.

160,  234.
56.

333,  569.
15:  187.
20:  138.
23  : 295,  619.

4  :  570.
18  :  120.
26:  25.


13
18
1  :

June 19  :
„  20:
„  22:
October  31
November


December


1900.

417,  546.
570.

22  :  433  footnote,  570.
February 5 :  270.

: 271,  524.
:  295.
:  190.
:  190.
308.
163.
308.
173.

488,  571.

149  footnote,  227,  571.
135.

22  :  231  footnote,  232,  572.
5  :  148.

249,  274,  573.
249,  250,  274,  574.
249.

304.
575.

255,  576.


J  anuary  3
15


6
22
26
28

March  7
„  19
„  27
„  28
2
3
9


April


May
June

11

„  12

„  13
October  31
November  12
13


650


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


January
February


March  6
„  12
„  13
„  20

April  8
„  10
„  16
„  24

October  2


1901.

24,  229.
525.
169.

166,  202.
228,  545.


22
13
18
19
20

24.

577.

106,  241,  577.
70,  241,  418.
236,  304,  577.
578.

228,  578.
218,  579.
1  : 236,  582.


1902.

January

21  :

171.

99

22

583.

99

28

245.

J9

29  :

304.

February

4  :

139.

99

11  :

190.

99

17  :

140.

19  :  74,  420.

26  : 175,  186,  520,  525.


March

10  :

234.

9  9

24  :

584.

99

26  :

171, 179, 192,  i

footnote,  584.

April

2  :

236,  245,  585.

99

9  :

170,  184.

99

28  :

264,  265,  614.

99

29  :

265,  616.

May

27  :

421.

»>

28  :

586.

June

17  :

184.

J  9

30  :

165,  174  footnote.

July

2  :

240,  587.  -

October  13
14
28

November  3
10
17  :


137,  161.
587.

309,  422,  525,  636.

138.

588.

228.


November  24  :  141.

25:  141.
December 2  :  298,  307,  637.

'I

10  :  V176,  533.
17  sj

8  :  228,  309,  489,  638.
24:  534.

1903.

February 4  :  74,  589.


99

17  :  196.

99

18  : 170,  248,  591.

99

23  :  190.

99

25  : 165,  270.

March

2

169,  287.

99

3

173,  528,  529,  532.

39

4

164,  531,  532.

99

17

489.

99

25

56.

April

8

54,  191.

May

5

57,  592.

99

6

307,  638.

9  i

20

101.

June

3

70,72,73,110footnote,

170,  377,  381,  422.

99

8

170.

October  26  :  428.
December  21  :  545.

1904.

January 19  :  273.

20:  273.
February  23  :  74,  164.

24: 73,  428.
March 2 :  18.

„ 30:  160.
April 18  : 146,  150.

27  :  305.
May 24  : 73,  74,  108  footnote,
137, 162, 164,  196,
271,  313,  428,  490.
25  :  73,  108  footnote,  167,
429.

June 28  :  174.


lxxi.]  Chronological  Index  of  Page  References  to  Sittings.  651


July


2  :
4:
5:
6:

„ 11  =

December


172.

309,  381,  592,  640.
309,  639.
166,  526.
166.


4
13
14

19
20


424  footnote.
150.

58,  72,  110  foot-
note, 377,  431.
309,  640.
73,  138,  197,  434.


January  1 6
17
18

24
25

February  7
8
14
22

March  1


1905.
174.

288.
289.

521,  528.
108  footnote.
309,  640.
37.
50.
435.

231  footnote,  246  foot-
note, 593.


99

20  :

16  footnote,  24,  264,

99

299,  622.

99

27  :

108  footnote,  160,  175.

99

April

11  :

308,  642.

12  :

24.

99

99

17  :

25,  216  footnote,  436,

99

595.

9  9

99

24  :

309,  642.

May

2  :

160,  527.

99

23  :

298,  596,  620.

99

24  :

25,  298,  381,  620.

January

June

20  :

249,  567.

99

21  :

73,  101.

1  9

29  :

333.

July

6  :

50.

October

30  :  136.

>)

31  :  333.

November

13  : 23,  25.

>>

15  : 532,  600.

20  :  24,  74,  174,  597.

21  : 174  footnote.


November  22


29

December  1 3
18

19;
28


January  23


136,  137  footnote,
154,  196,  308,  523,
643.

380,  523.
187,  192.
20,  532,  598,  600.

137,  532,  598,  601.
185,  198.

1906.

527  footnote.


March

21

299.

April

25

300.

May

14

144.

J i

23

203.

99

26

106.

July

3

198.

October  10
November  11
12
16
23
26

December


298,  299.
23.
191.
137.
199.
144.

3  :  155,  273,  275.
12  : 138  footnote,  229

footnote,  601.
17  : 55  footnote,  229

footnote,  601.
19  :  22.
24  : 70,  227.
31  :  312.


1


2
14
16
21

23
28
30

February  19
20


1907.

23,  107,  246  foot-
note, 295,  523.
172.
265.

110,  235,  245,  602.
110.

210  footnote.
186,  266.
24.

201,  225.
23,  25,  267.


652


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part  lxxi.


1 907 '—continued.
February  25  :  63  footnote,  278.


99

26  :  236  footnote,  276,

277.

99

27  :  262,  276.

March

5  :  24.

99

b  :

l/^K lftj ICQ  O/ift

1U5, 104, JLoo,  z4d

tootnote,  Ail,  o4o.

99

11  :

OA  1

99

1  o  .

T  H  A

174.

99

13  :

73,  Z77.

99

18  :

7o, 11Z,  ODD.

J  9

OA

ZO  :

Zoo  iootnote,  oU4.

April

y  :

1  A  A

144.

99

i  a  .
1U  :

ozo.

99

17  :

OOO OQ  A  OOO

Zso,  ^84,  oZ4.

9  9

alt  .

OQ4

Z84.

99

oo  .

OOO

99

24  :

284,  285,  321.

99

29  :

175,  202,  246  footnote,

285  footnote.

99

30  :

285.

May

1  :

246  footnote,  285.

9  J

6  :

168,  285,  527  footnote.

>>

7  :

168,  233  footnote,  246

footnote,  286.

19  :

275.

June

2  :

163,  166,  168,  189  foot-

note.

July

3  :

142.

1908.

March

16

235,  546.

99

17

199,  311,  313,  644.

99

23

277,  278,  279.

99

24

277,  278.

99

31

279.

April

6

49,  279,  280.

1  J

7

279,  280,  286.

A  nri  1

J.  o  .

°7Q fiAF>  fi07

99

1  4.  •

at:  .

OUS7, Oil,  U*±0.

99

91  •

1  QQ 9.1  1  (\<td.

±VO, Oil,  Uit.

99

27  :

236.

May

8  :

312.

99

12  :

236,  240,  608.

9  9

13  :

233  footnote,  236,  609

footnote,  610.

December  21  :  237.

22  :  239.

1909.

January  13  :  23.

Spring,  Dr.  Stanley  Hall's  Sittings:
12,  13,  14,  16,  17,  19,  20,
54,  55,  144,  177,  178,  200
footnote,  227,  235,  312,
517,  612.

1910.

July  16  :  200.
October 10  :  304.

23  : 123,  124.
December 2 : 250,  304.

1911.

February  8 :  124.

May 24: 13,  124.

*June 4  :  127.
„ 10  :  125.

July 3: 13,  124,  125.

31  :  13,  20  footnote,  21
footnote,  73  foot-
note, 125,  239,  514.

*September  20  : 127,  128.

♦October 8  :  128.

*  11  :  128.

*  28  : 128,  129.


Note. — Those  marked  *  were  cases  of  automatic  script  without
trance.


PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

INDEX  to  VOL.  XXVIII
(PART  LXXI)

1915.


Astronomy ,  Statements  about,  by  Controls - - 85-88,  437-448

Biblical  history,  Statements  about,  by  Imperator

102-105,  316,  478-488,  559

Cahagnet,  Alphonse,  Experiments  with  Adele  Maginot - -  83
Cocke,  Mr.  (medium),  consulted  by  Mrs.  Piper  - - 9,  77,  119,  327
"  Communicators,"  Definition  of .....  7
„  Theories  of,  about  themselves  - - - 159  et  seq.

„  Their  relation  to  Mrs.  Piper - - 317-331,  passim

,,  Individual  Communicators —

C,  H.  57

Dow,  Mrs. .... . 232,  416

Gurney,  E. .... ^124,  300-305

H.,  Mrs.,  50,  58,  72,  74,  170,  172,  422-428,  431-434,
591.

Hodgson,  R.,  11,  12,  106,  186,  197-200,  277,  300,  301


Junot,  Bennie, 160,  163,  164,  169,  173-174,  202,

226,  236,  270,  308,  545.
Myers,  F.  W.  H., 70, 139, 140, 163,  168,  199,

201-202,  245-246,  277-281,  283-286,  300,  418-

421,  546.


654


Index  to  Vol.  XXVIII.


[PAKT


"  Communicators,"  Individual  Communicators —

Oliver,  Dr.  ...  196,  265,  490,  640
Sidgwick,  H. - - - 74,  161-162,  171,  420

Taylor,  Mr. 598-601

Thompson,  Isaac - -  142,  191,  192-193,  203

West,  Robert  -  181

"  Controls,"  Definition  of .......  7

„  Theories  of,  about  themselves  -  -  -  29-74,  passim
„ Their  relation  to  Mrs.  Piper - - -  315-331,  passim

See  also  Memory.
,, Individual  Controls —

Bach,  J.  S.  9

Bridgman,  Laura  - - - - - - -  113

"  Chlorine  "  9

D.,  Annie  - -  34,  38

Doctor,  59,  67,  70,  72,  79,  100,  105,  245,  307,  308,  310,

383-392,  399,  403-405,  412,  553,  628-636.
Eliot,  George,  11,  18,  36,  49,  65,  76,  78-79,  107,  108,  115-
119,  131,  139,  147,  149,  150,  172,  242-243,  316,  332,
414,  478,  491-513,  518,  555,  561.

F.,  K.  11,  56,  117

Gurney,  Edmund  -  60,  75,  123,  139,  301,  302,  303
Guyon,  Madame  -  13,  77,  85,  119,  123-129,  130,297,  515

Hart,  J. 113,  382,  552,  553

Hodgson,  R.,  11,  12,  13,  54,  77,  78,  84,  125,  126,  129,  198,

200,  236-237,  239,  299-300,  301,  312,  514,  606.
Home,  D.  D. - - - - - - 85,  297

Imperator,  9,  11,  13,  14,  15,  29,  64,  66,  67  (foot-note),  72,
77,  79,  84,  89-112,  131,  242,  393-397,  400-402,  406-
411,  468-488,  554,  556.

Imperator  Band,  the 77,  79,  98

See  also  Doctor,  Imperator,  Mentor,  Prudens,  Rector.
Julius  Caesar,  67  (foot-note),  76,  78,  80,  112-115,  119,  131,
316,  552.

Longfellow,  H.  W. - - - - - -  9,  347

Mentor 79,  100,  105,  383

Moses,  W.  Stainton, 9,  30,  67  (foot-note),  78-79,  88-98,

119,  153,  414,  453-468,  554,  560.
"  Moses  of  Old  "  - - - -  78,80,119-122,131

Myers,  A.  T.  91,  459

Myers,  F.  W.  H.  - - -  49,199,236,311,607-608

Oliver,  Dr. 105,  137,  150

"Pelham,  George  "  (G.  P.), 8,  10,  15,  29,  35,  36,  38-48,

51,  52,  53,  56,  61,  77,  78,  84,  passim.
Phinuit,  8,  9,  10,  15,  17,  18,  29,  30,  31,  32-48,  53,  60,  61,

77,  80,  82,  84,  passim.


LXXI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXVIII.


655


Controls,  Individual  Controls—

Ponchini,  Loretta - - - - - -  9,  347

Proctor,  R.  A. - - -  30,78,87-88,119,448-452
Prudens - - - - - -  79,  106,  107,  196

Rector,  8,  9,  11,  14,  18,  36,  50,  52,  54,  56,  57,  79,  100,  105,

107-110,  397-399,  402,  411,  413,  415-436,  470,  488-

491,  passim.

Scott,  Sir  Walter, 17-18,  78,  80,  85-87,  119,  297,  437-448

Siddons,  Mrs.  9,  347

Vanderbilt,  Commodore - - - - -  9,  347

Wild,  Hannah  291,  617

Cross -correspondence  Experiments,  Failures  in

57,  65,  98  (foot-note),  115-118,  247,  505-513

Echolalia,  Instances  of 234-235,  612

False  Communicators 176-178,  533-544

Gurney,  E.,  Experiments  in  Post-hypnotic  Suggestion - -  35
See  also  Communicators,  Controls.

Hodgson,  R.,  Investigation  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena

1,  passim

See  also  Communicators,  Controls,  Sitters  with  Mrs.  Piper.
Hypnotic  Phenomena  compared  with  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Pheno-
mena 35,  51,  323-330

"  Influences,"  Effect  of,  on  the  Trance  Phenomena, 305-314,  622-644

Language  of  Controls,  Artificialities  of  -  -  -  -  130-147
Locket  Case 250-254,  276

Maginot,  Adele,  compared  with  Mrs.  Piper  -  83
Marble,  Joseph,  Case  -  -  83,  236,  250,  259,  273-276,  602,  604
Memory  Relations  of  different  States  of  Consciousness

148-158,  179,  258-293,  passim
Mexico,  Case  of  Boy  lost  in - 67  (foot-note),  112-115,  552,  553,  556

"  Miller,  Rufus,"  Case  of 598-601

Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  Sittings  for  Cross-correspondence  with  Mrs.

Piper  ... 57,  65,  98  (foot-note),  115-118,  247,  505-513
See  also  Communicators,  Controls.


Operation,  Mrs.  Piper's,  Incidents  connected  with

217,  377-381,  579-582


(


656  Index  to  Vol.  XXVIII.  [part

Photographs  of  Persons  seen  in  Trance  recognised  by  Mrs.

Piper 215,  249,  250,  273-276,  573-575

Piper,  Mrs.,  the  Trance  Phenomena  of,  by  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick  -  1-645
Podmore,  F.,  on  Cahagnet's  Experiments  -  -  -  83  (foot-note),  84
Prophecies  given  in  trance  -  -  -  -  3,  90,  120-122,  332
Psychometry  doubted  by  G.  P.  and  Doctor ....  308

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry,  A  Contribution  to  the  Study  of  the

Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena - - -  1-645
See  also  Sitters  with  Mrs.  Piper.
Sitters,  Effect  of,  on  the  Trance  Phenomena - - -  294-305
,, with  Mrs.  Piper —

Individual  Sitters —

Bancroft,  Miss  Margaret  - - - - -  12,  56

Blodgett,  Mrs.  617,  618

Brown,  J.  F.  208

Dorr,  G.  B.,  12,  16  (foot-note),  24,  25,  26,  184,  197-198,
199,  236,  264,  277-280,  436,  489-490,  546,  570,  571,
572,  578,  587,  588,  592,  595,  605-612,  622,  636,  638,
643,  644.

Dorr,  Mrs.  568

Edmunds,  Miss  L.  34

"  Forrest,  Richard "  ....  155-158
Hall,  Dr.  Stanley, 12,  13,  14,  16,  17,  19,  54,  55,  177-

178,  200  (foot-note),  312,  514,  517.
Heywood,  Charles -----  195-196
Hodgson,  R., 1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  7,  10,  16,  18,  20,  26  (foot-
notes), 29,  34, 36-39,  45,  51-53,  69,  137,  139,
335  ff .,  passim.
Howard,  Mrs.,  38,  40,  46-47,  53,  69,  109,  110,  213-217,

352-355,  360-363,  545,  564-566,  616,  622.
Hyslop,  Prof.  J.  H.,  4,  11,  12,  200  (foot-note),  270-271,
299-300.

Ingraham,  Dr.  Lena  V.  -  -  -  -  -  19
James,  William,  2,  5,  10,  12,  28,  78  (foot-note),  79,  106
Junot,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  4,  11,  189-190,  267,  545,  585,  597

Leaf,  Walter 208,  259,  261

Lodge,  Sir  Oliver, 12,  19,  20  (foot-note),  21,  23,  32,

60,  68,  123-129,  206,  261,  514-517.

Marte,  Robert  43

Newbold,  Prof.  W.  R., 1,  10,  17-18,  29,  35,  44,  51,

70,  153,  199,  219,  221,  222,  364-376,  437-448,  549-

551,  624-626.

Peirce,  Prof.  J.  M.  212,  269

Piddington,  J.  G.,  12,  225-226,  262,  266,  312,  546,
601,  602.


LXXI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXVIII.


657


Sitters,  with  Mrs.  Piper —

Individual  Sitters —

Pope,  Miss  Theodate  -  -  23,  138,  198,  237-239
R.,  Miss  A.  M., 30,  33,  73,  75-76,  162,  195,  196,  197,

212,  271-272,  428,  434,  583.

Rich,  Rogers 30,  209

Savage,  Miss  Gertrude .....  209

Savage,  Rev.  W.  H.  181

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry,  25,  283-286,  321-322,  323,  536-

544,  604.

Sutton,  Mrs.  211

Tanner,  Miss  Amy - -  12,  16,  17,  19,  20,  612

Thaw,  Dr.  and  Mrs.,  82,  182,  194,  210,  219  (foot-note),

256,  257,  548,  567.
Thompson,  Isaac ......  32

Thompson,  Mrs.  Isaac - - 13,  32,  125,  142,  191

Vance,  Miss  43,  47

Wendell,  Barrett  208


Telepathy  from  the  Dead,  Question  of 5,  7,  81,  82,  83,  317-321,  329
,,  from  the  Living,  Question  of

6,  7,  81,  83,  296-300,  310,  318,  329
Tout,  C.  H.,  Automatic  Personations  of  327
Trance,  Mrs.  Piper's,  General  Account  of - - - - -  15-21

,, History  of -------- -  9-14

„ Bibliography  of ------- -  ii


Visions  seen  by  Mrs.  Piper  after  Anaesthetics - -  217-218,  377-380
„  ,,  ,, during  Sittings - - -  544-546

in  the  Waking-stage,  212-217,  218-229,  248-
257,  551,  566,  567.


Waking-stage,  General  Description  ------  21-28

,,  Development  of  205-258,  549  et  seq.

Visions  seen  by  Mrs.  Piper  in, 212-217,  218-229,  248-
257,  551,  566,  567.


GLASGOW  : PRINTED AT  THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY ROBERT MACLEHOSE AND CO.  LTD.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

-

Part  LXXt* Vol.  XXVIII. December,  1915.  Price  12s.  net.


CONTENTS.

PAGE


A  Contribution  to  the  Study  of  the  Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance
Phenomena. By  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick  :

Preface, . . . . . .  i

List  of  Papers  concerning  Mrs.  Piper,  previously  published, .  ii

Synopsis  of  Contents, ......  v

Chapter I. Introductory,  ......  1

,, II. Theories  of  Controls  as  to  their  Relation  to  the

Medium,  ......  29

,, III. Individual  Controls,  .  .  .  .  .75

,, IV. Language  of  Controls,  and  their  Common  Memories

and  Associations  of  Ideas, . . .  130
,, V. Communicators, . . .  .159

VI. The  Waking-Stage, .  .  .  .  .205

,, VII. Relation  of  the  States  of  Consciousness  to  each  other,  258

,,  VIII. Effect  of  Sitters  and  of  so-called  "Influences," .  294

,, IX. Conclusion,  -  315

Appendix  to  Chapter I. Some  Prophecies, . . .  332

,, ,, II. Theories  of  Controls, . .  335

,, ,, III. Specimens  of  Individual  Controls,  437

,, " ,, IV. Speaking  by  Thought, . .  518

,, „ V. Communicators, . . .  520

,,  ,,  VI.  Examples  of  Waking-Stages,  .  549
,, ,, VII. Relations  between  the  States  of

Consciousness,  . . .  614
