Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XXX (1919-1920)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1919 Glasgow: Robert MacLehose and Co. edition (Parts LXXV-LXXVIII and Appendix) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc30soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research


VOLUME  XXX

(CONTAINING  PARTS  LXXV,  LXXVI,  LXXVII,  LXXVIII  APPENDIX)

192O


The  responsibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  in  papers
published  in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  with  their  authors


PRINTED  FOR  THE  SOCIETY  BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  COMPANY  LIMITED
UNIVERSITY  PRESS:  GLASGOW
1920

Agents  for  the  sale  of  publications  :

LONDON  :  FRANCIS  EDWARDS,  S3  High  Street,  Marylebone,  W.
GLASGOW  :  MACLEHOSE,  JACKSON  &  CO.,  61  St.  Vincent  Street
AMERICA:  THE  F.  W.  FAXON  CO.,  83  Francis  Street,  Boston,  Mass.


All  rights  reserved


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2015


https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc30soci


CONTENTS.

PART  LXXV.
(Special  Medical  Part).
July,  1918.

I.  The  Psychoanalytical Use of Subliminal Material.  By


Constance  E.  Long,  M.D., 1

II.  Dream-Analysis. By  Miss  Alice  Johnson, ...  33

III.  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis.  By

T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.,  134

PART  LXXVI.
November,  1918.

I.  Fresh  Light  on  the  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.  By

J.  G.  PlDDINGTON,  175


II.  Evidence  of  Super-normal  Communications  through  Motor
Automatism. By  Sir  William  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  -

? III.  Note  on  Telepathy  and  Telergy. By  Sir  William  Barrett,
F.R.S.,

Review  :

Mr.  John  E.  Coover's  Experiments  in  Psychical  Research,
being  the  "  Leland  Stanford  Junior  University's
Psychical  Research  Monograph,  No.  1." By  F.  C.  S.


Schiller,  D.Sc, - - - - - - -  261

PART  LXXVII.
July,  1919.

I.  Presidential  Address. By  The  Right  Hon.  Lord  Ray-

leigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  275

II.  Note  on  Mr.  Piddington's  Paper  called  "  Fresh  Light  on
the  1  One-Horse  Dawn  '  Experiment."  By  Sir
Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  -  291

III.  A  Reply  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  Note. By  J.  G.  Piddington,  296

IV.  "  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena." By  W.  Whately

Smith,  .  -  306

V.  Report  on  Dr.  Crawford's  Medium. By  Sir  William

Barrett,  F.R.S.,  334

193918


230
251


iv  ...  Contents.

.'. ".  •  J  *  1  ■>  t  »  » **  •*  ?e»  J  »

PART  LXXVIII.

•Bepembery. 1919'.
On  a  Series  of  Sittiiigg  with  'Mrs.  Osborne  Leonard.
By  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  (Una)  Lady  Trotjbbjdge.


I  HAT.  PAGE

Introduction, --------  339

I.  Description  by  Feda  of  Communicator's  Personal  Appear-
ance as  Evidence  of  Identity,  348

II.  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  the  Communicator  :

§  I.  Memory  of  Riding  and  M.  R.  H.'s  Horse, - -  361

§  II.  Memory  of  Characteristics  of  M.  R.  H., -  365
§  III.  Memory  of  Places  where  the  Communicator  and
M.R.H.  have  been  together  :

(a)  Malvern  Wells, 366

(b)  Teneriffe, - 39 1

§  IV.  Memory  of  a  Motor  Accident  and  of  certain

Uncomfortable  Physical  Symptoms, - -  4 17

§  V.  Memory  of  U.  V.  T.'s  Photographs, -  436

§  VI.  Memory  of  A.  V.  B.'s  Guitar, ... -  438

§  VII.  Memory  of  Words  Peculiar  to  A.  V.  B., -  444

§  VIII.  Memory  of  M.  R.  H.'s  Method  of  Composing,  449

§  IX.  Memory  of  Swimming  and  Bathing,  - - -  451

III.  Apparent  Knowledge  of  Contemporary  Events  :

§  I.  Actions  and  Conversations,  -----  454

§  II.  A  Flash  of  Colour, 457

§  III.  A  Diagram, 457

§  IV.  U.  V.  T.'s  House  and  Circumstances  connected

with  it,  - -  458

§  V.  U.  V.  T.'s  Dining-room  and  the  Work  done  there,  463

§  VI.  Daisy's  Plans  and  Movements,  -  -  -  -  471
§  VII.  Knowledge  of  Small  Incidents  connected  with

M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T., 473

IV.  Personal  Touches  and  the  A.  V.  B.  Control, - - -  477

V.  Knowledge  shown  of  Matters  entirely  unknown  to  the
Sitters  :

§  I.  Concerning  the  Dog  Billy, -----  487

§  II.  Concerning  "  Burnham," -----  506

§  III.  Concerning  Daisy's  Second  Father, - - -  521

Appendices, ----------  547

APPENDIX  TO  PART  LXXVIII.

Officers  and  Council  for  1920,  - - -  555

List  of  Members  and  Associates, - ...  557

Index  to  Vol.  XXX., - 60L


SPECIAL  MEDICAL  PART

OF  THE

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LXXV.

1918.


I.

THE  PSYCHOANALYTIC  USE  OF  SUBLIMINAL

MATERIAL.1

By  Constance  E.  Long,  MJD.

I  have  chosen  for  the  subject  of  my  paper  the  psycho-
analytic use  of  subliminal  material,  believing  this  to  be
something  of  interest  to  all  of  us.  The  S.P.R.  has  made
intimate  studies  of  various  subconscious  phenomena,  which
I  have  not  as  yet  foiuid  time  to  follow.  I,  on  the  other
hand,  have  been  acquiring  a  practical  knowledge  of  the
working  of  the  unconscious  part  of  the  mind  in  particular
ways  which  are  probably  unfamiliar  to  many  of  my
.  readers.  There  should  be  here  a  j)romising  field  for  dis-
cussion and  I  welcome  the  opportunity  now  given  me  of
opening  it.

I  am  using  the  word  "  unconscious  "  in  the  sense  intro-
duced by  Freud.  In  a  paper  published  by  this  Society  he
said, "Let  us call 'conscious'  the  conception  which  is

JThis  paper  was  read  at  a  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  on  January  31,  1917.

VOL.  XXX.  A


2


Constance  E.  Long,  M.D.


[pabt


present  to  our  consciousness  and  of  which  we  are  aware,
and  let  this  be  the  only  meaning  of  the  word  '  conscious  '  ;
as  for  latent  conceptions,  if  we  have  any  reason  to  believe
they  exist  in  the  mind — as  we  have  in  the  case  of  memory
- — let  them  be  denoted  by  the  term  '  unconscious  '."
Freud's  "unconscious"  corresponds  to  the  "subliminal"
of  Myers,  viz.  "  those  thoughts  and  feelings  lying  beneath
the  ordinary  threshold  of  consciousness,  as  opposed  to  the
'  supraliminal,'  lying  above  the  threshold."  Freud  dis-
tinguishes between  the  preconscious  and  the  completely
unconscious  layers  of  the  unconscious  mind.  The  contents
of  the  preconscious  have  once  been  conscious  and  they
can  fairly  easily  become  conscious  again,  if  suitable
stimuli  occur.  The  completely  unconscious  part  of  the  mind
has  contents  which  have  never  yet  reached  consciousness
at  all.  According  to  Freud,  this  material  remains  uncon-
scious because  of  a  powerful  unconscious  resistance  against
its  admission  into  consciousness.  It  is  connected  with
infantile  wish-tendencies  which  are  incompatible  with  the
adult  thinking  or  feeling.  It  is  kept  unconscious  by  a
mechanism  which  he  calls  "  repression."  The  barrier  pro-
duced by  repression  can  only  be  surmounted  with  great
difficulty.  It  may  be  psychologically  "  rushed,"  so  to
speak,  as  in  an  attack  of  mania,  where  the  unconscious
material  breaks  through  into  consciousness  and  holds  the
field  in  a  disastrous  manner  ;  or  it  may  be  systematically
brought  up,  as  in  psychoanalysis,  by  the  help  of  the
consciousness,  with  an  end  in  view,  chiefly  that  one  may
gain  control  over  something  which,  if  neglected,  tends  to
get  the  upper  hand.

While  touching  upon  the  different  views  of  the  uncon-
scious mind,  I  had  better  just  mention  Jung's  conception
of  the  personal  and  impersonal  unconscious.1  He  recog-
nises in  the  unconscious  mind  material  which  in  its  origin
is  independent  of  any  land  of  personal  experience,  but
which  is  inherited  and  latent,  derived  from  our  remotest
ancestors  and  common  to  the  human  mind  and  soul,  just
as  certain  histological  elements  are  common  to  the  human
body. This  he  calls  the  impersonal  or  collective  uncon-

Collected  Papers  on  Analytical  Psychology,  2nd  ed.


lxxv.] Psychoanalytic  Use  of  Subliminal  Material  3

scions.  It  is  this  impersonal  content  which  makes  men  so
much  more  alike  in  the  unconscious  than  in  the  conscious.
It  is  akin  to  the  undifferentiated,  mind  of  the  primitive  or
of  the  little  child,  neither  of  whom  separates  subject  and
object  in  thought.  From  one  point  of  view,  the  process
of  developing  individuality  consists  in  finding  the  poise
between  what  belongs  to  the  personal  and  what  to  the
impersonal  or  collective  thinking  and  feeling.  One  has  to
develop  one's  own  individual  capacities  and  qualities  by
a  process  of  differentiation  from  those  which  are  a  race
inheritance.

The  adaptation  of  the  individual  to  society  is  a  task
for  the  whole  of  life,  and  one  which  presents  special
difficulties  to  people  who  deviate  from  the  normal,  as  do
neurotics.  To  lead  a  satisfactory  life  one  must  develop
as  an  individual  and  also  as  a  member  of  a  group,  and
growth  in  either  direction  should  be  complementary,  not
antagonistic,  to  growth  in  the  other  direction.  In  analysis
of  the  unconscious  mmd  we  soon  find  how  great  is  the
unconscious  conflict  between  these  two  sets  of  claims.
These  two  lines  of  cleavage,  viz.  that  between  the  personal
and  impersonal  or  collective  of  Jung,  and  that  between
the  individual  qua  individual  and  qua  member  of  a  group,
have  a  parallel  in  the  cleavage  between  the  conscious  self
and  the  subconscious  infantile  or  primitive  tendencies.
But  the  unconscious  mind  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  merely
infantile  and  primitive,  except  in  the  sense  that  the
infantile  contains  all  the  possibilities  of  future  develop-
ment. Moral  instincts 1  are  as  much  an  essential  content
of  the  unconscious  mind  as  are  the  sexual  instincts  upon
which  Freud  has  unfortunately  laid  such  undue  stress.
Primitive  man,  whom  we  all  own  in  our  ancestry,  made
taboos  and  imposed  barriers  upon  what  he  unconsciously
felt  to  be  his  more  dangerous  instincts.  This  fact  is  of
great  significance  and  justifies  belief  in  the  fundamental
goodness  of  man  in  his  main  development.

To  turn  from  the  origin  of  subconscious  phenomena  to
their  actual  characteristics. It  is  clear  that  the  unconscious

1  Trotter  calls  these  "  gregarious  instincts."  See  Herd  Instinct  in  Peace
and  War.


4


Constance  E.  Long,  M.D.


[part


mind  expresses  itself  in  curiously  veiled  symbols.  Freud
attributes  this  veiling  mainly  to  the  activity  of  a
hypothetical  "  censor,"  who  cannot  allow  a  more  direct
expression  of  unconscious  infantile  wishes,  because  they
are  distasteful  and  unwelcome  to  the  conscious  personality.
Jung  gives  little  credit  to  the  censor  and  sees  in  the
veiled  symbolism  the  primitive  human  mode  of  thinking,
of  which  the  dream  is  a  survival,  and  which  is  shown  also
in  the  construction  of  myths  and  in  folk-lore.  This
difference  in  emphasis  between  Jung  and  Freud  leads  to
widely  different  results.  The  Freudian  interpretation  of
symbols  becomes  monotonous  and  stultifying.  The  other
interpretation  reveals  a  richness  in  the  content  of  dreams
which  is  fully  in  accordance  with  the  creative  and  evolu-
tional character  of  the  human  mind.

Let  me  now  turn  to  psychoanalysis.  Psychoanalysis  is
a  technique  for  discovering  and  analysing  the  contents  of
the  unconscious  mind.  It  is  a  therapy,  specially  beneficial
in  illnesses  caused  by  disturbances  in  the  unconscious
region  of  the  mind,  functional  diseases,  such  as  hysteria,
and  other  psychoneuroses.  It  may  be  regarded  histori-
cally as  an  offspring  of  hypnotism,  as  chemistry  is  an
offspring  of  alchemy.  In  each  case  the  offspring  differs
widely  from  the  parent.  In  hypnotism  unconscious  mental
processes  are  covered  up  from  the  patient  ;  in  analysis
they  are  laid  bare.  The  history  of  hypnotism  is  too  well
known  to  need  comment  here,  save  to  say  that  most
psychoanalysts  of  repute  have  hitherto  come  to  the  newer
therapy  via  the  old.  Psychoanalysis  owes  a  debt  to
hypnotism  and  to  those  pioneers  who  initiated  the  use  of
a  psychic  remedy  for  psychic  diseases.

Hysteria  and  hypnotism  show  us  the  mind  in  dissection
or  dissociation.  Analysis  deliberately  seeks  to  analyse  the
mind,  even  the  morbid  and  distraught  mind,  into  its
elements.  It  makes  the  subconscious  contents  conscious
with  an  aim  in  view.  This  naturally  has  a  somewhat
disturbing  effect  on  the  individual,  for  it  involves  a  kind
of  operation  on  the  mind.  But  as  with  surgical  operations,
its  aim  is  not  only  to  disturb  and  dissect,  but  to  resect
and  heal,  leaving  the  condition  healthy,  with  the  function


lxxv.] Psychoanalytic  Use  of  Subliminal  Material  5

restored.  The  physical  healing  and  renewal  correspond  to
the  synthetic  or  reconstructive  side  of  analysis.

In  hypnosis  an  apparent  synthesis  is  obtained.  This
acts  effectively  for  a  time,  and  may  suffice  for  life.  There
is,  however,  considerable  risk  that  under  a  severe  accidental
emotional  strain  fresh  dissociation  will  occur.  The  process
of  synthesis  in  hypnotism  is  not  a  conscious  one.  It  is
inexplicable  to  the  patient,  who  accepts  it  gratefully  as
something  akin  to  the  miraculous.  In  psychoanalysis  the
cause  of  the  dissociation  and  the  means  of  the  synthesis
are  made  apparent  to  the  patient.  The  resulting  cure
should  theoretically  withstand  all  the  events  of  life.  Of
course  this  is  not  so  in  fact.  We  have  to  acknowledge  our
share  of  failures.  It  must  be  remembered  that  much  of
our  work  is  done  on  very  nervous  people,  and  that  these
very  sufferers  are  asked  to  contribute  a  great  amount  of
effort.  They  must  be  people  of  good  will,  capable  of
co-operation.  At  first  sight  this  demand  on  the  neurotic,
though  wholesome,  seems  very  hard.  He  is  extra  sensitive
and  painfully  self-conscious.  He  unconsciously  protects
himself  from  the  mental  sufferings  to  Avhich  his  peculiar
make  of  mind  renders  him  susceptible,  in  one  of  two  ways  :
either  he  shuts  himself  up  within  himself  and  develops
symptoms  such  as  phobias,  or  fears,  which  tend  to  deliver
him  from  his  environment  ;  or  else  he  develops  hysterical
symptoms,  such  as  blindness,  or  paralysis,  which  tend  to
throw  him  on  to  the  sympathy  of  people  around  him.  In
the  first  case  he  turns  his  j)sychic  energy  inwards  by  a
process  of  introversion  ;  in  the  second  he  turns  it  outwards
by  a  process  of  extra  version.  In  each  case  the  same
purpose  is  served- — a  modification  of  the  individual's  actual
relation  to  the  world  and  to  the  demands  made  upon  him
by  "daily  life.  Each  is  the  outcome  of  an  unconscious
childish  attitude  of  mind.  Psychoanalysis  aims  at  helping
the  patient  to  find  the  unknown  causes  of  this  attitude,
and  his  understanding  must  accompany  the  analytical  pro-
cess at  every  step.  "  Neurosis  is  a  failure  in  adaptation
to  life."  The  origin  of  the  first  mental  dissociation  was
in  the  unconscious,  and  it  is  there  we  must  ultimately
find the means for  the desired synthesis. Whatever  in


G


Constance  E.  Long,  31. D.


[part


the  morbid  symptoms  is  not  understood— not  merely
intellectually  but  emotionally  too — contains  a  possibility
of  present  failure  and  future  breakdown.  Jung  says.  "In
psychoanalysis  the  infantile  personality  must  be  set  free
from  the  unconscious  hindrances  to  its  development  in  a
rational  manner.  The  energy  which  is  thus  freed  serves
for  the  building  up  of  a  personality  matured  and  adajited
to  reality,  who  does  willingly  and  without  compulsion
everything  required  of  him  by  reality."  1  The  Scotch  have
a  way  of  describing  a  man  by  saying  "  there's  not  much
to  him."  In  analysis  we  find  there  is  much  more  to  a
man  than  he  was  aware  of,  and  this  applies  generally  to
the  healthy  and  to  the  morbid.  It  is  not  merely  a  ques-
tion of  resources — it  is  one  of  energy.  It  is  useless  for  a
country  at  war  to  contain  rich  coal  fields  if  there  is  no
one  to  work  them.  The  nervous  invalid  is  in  a  similar
position.  He  has  large  resources  which  he  cannot  develop
and  which  are  an  actual  encumbrance  to  him,  because
they  offer  a  temptation  to  the  enemy,  and  use  up  his  own
energy  in  an  unproductive  way  in  guarding  them.

This  brings  me  to  an  important  psychoanalytic  concept,
called  the  libido  theory.  It  was  first  introduced  by  Freud,
but  greatly  extended  by  Jung  and  I  shall  explain  it
entirely  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Swiss  school.  The
term  libido  is  used  by  Jung  not  in  the  ordinary  Latin
sense  of  the  word,  but  as  equivalent  to  psychic  energy.
This  libido  or  psychic  energy  is  the  central  impulsive  or
propulsive  force  in  human  nature  and  human  actions.  It
may  also  be  described  as  interest,  desire,  inclination,
capacity  for  action.  It  may  be  applied  to  one  object
or  another,  from  which  follows  the  shifting  of  interest
from  one  thing  to  another.  Like  physical  energy  it  may
be  kinetic  or  potential,  i.e.  active  or  latent.  It  may  also
be  transmuted  from  one  form  to  another  ;  this  may  happen
suddenly,  as  in  a  moment  of  danger  when  the  energy
directed  to  the  occupation  of  the  moment  is  converted
into  paralysing  fear,  or  into  the  effort  to  escape  ;  or  the
transmutation  may  be  gradual,  as  in  the  process  of  sub-
limation, when  the  energy  passes  through  a  variety  of
1  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious.


lxxv.] Psychoanalytic  Use  of  Subliminal  Material  7

forms,  and  is  applied  successively  to  different  and  higher
functions.  Thus  the  combative  instinct  which  makes  war
between  nations  may  be  directed  to  the  promotion  of
international  peace.  One  has  only  to  think  of  a  life's
progress  to  realize  that  the  energy  which  was  once  applied
to  activities  infantile  in  character,  and  appropriate  during
infancy,  has  to  take  other  forms  at  later  stages  of  growth.
What  was  once  automatically  given  to  sucking  is  later
devoted  to  eating,  which  is  a  conscious  process.  The  love
which  was  originally  given  solely  to  the  mother,  that  is
to  an  undifferentiated  object  within  a  group  recognised
as  "  mother,"  is  gradually  applied  to  the  differentiated
mother,  to  the  nurse,  father,  other  members  of  the  family,
and  later  to  companions,  teachers,  lovers,  and  causes.  It
is  clear  that  the  psychic  energy,  where  development  is
normal,  is  differently  applied  at  6,  16  and  60,  and,  to
judge  by  external  behaviour,  this  is  generally  the  case.
But  the  psychic  energy  must  be  looked  for  on  both  sides
of  the  threshold  of  consciousness  ;  not  the  whole  of  it  is
in  the  conscious  life.  Some  is  with  our  subliminal
memories  and  imaginations.  There  is  a  tendencv  for  too
much  of  it  to  be  applied  below  the  threshold  of  con-
sciousness. This  is  particularly  the  case  with  neurotic
people,  for  the  reason  that  those  who  cannot  live  agreeably
to  themselves  in  the  real  world  are  led  to  create  a  world
of  phantasy  to  live  in.  This  produces  a  thinning  of  the
forceful  currents  of  life,  and  in  some  hysterical  subjects
the  thinning  is  so  extreme  as  to  result  in  complete  dis-
sociation of  the  personality — a  fact  illustrated  by  the
classical  cases  frequently  referred  to  in  the  literature  of
our  Society.  Absent-minded  acts  show  a  temporary  and
partial  dissociation  ;  we  are  not  "  on  the  spot,"  as  we
say ;  that  is,  the  psychic  energy  has  momentarily  retired
from  consciousness  and  dipped  into  the  subconscious.

In  our  work  as  analysts  we  strive  to  find  where  this
missing  energy  is  located.  We  actually  find  that  much  of
it  is  applied  to  phantasy  building.  We  all  know  what  it
is  to  day-dream  ;  but  what  we  do  not  know  so  well  is
that  day-dreams  occur  without  our  being  even  aware  of
them — they may be entirely subliminal. A person  is


8


Constance  E.  Long,  M.D.


[part


apjDroximately  normal  when  the  psychic  energy  is  well
applied,  and  flows  easily  from  point  to  point,  as  required
by  life,  in  his  thoughts,  feelings  and  actions.  A  person
is  neurotic  when  the  stream  tends  to  stagnate,  to  remain
in  lacunae,  or  to  run  in  too  many  directions  at  once.  He
is  then  like  the  owner  of  treasure  who  has  no  means  of
realizing  it.  There  are  people  of  many  talents  whose
energy  is  lacking,  and  people  of  small  talents  whose
energy  is  all  available,  and  it  is  adapted  energy,  after
all,  that  tends  to  make  one  individual  more  effective  than
another.  There  are  some  who  have  ample  energy,  but
who  are  so  desirous  that  they  expend  it  extravagantly
in  overwork,  so  that  their  resources  are  always  at  a  low
ebb.  Samuel  Butler  says  : 1  "  The  life  of  a  creature  is
the  memory  of  a  creature.  We  are  all  the  same  stuff  to
start  with,  but  we  remember  different  things,  and  if  we
did  not  remember  different  things,  we  should  be  absolutely
like  each  other.  As  for  the  stuff  of  which  we  are  made,
we  know  nothing,  save  that  it  is  '  such  as  dreams  are
made  of.'  "  We  should  add  to  this,  however,  that  unless
the  psychic  energy  is  free  to  move  among  these  memories,
selecting  one  or  another  and  inserting  them  into  con-
sciousness at  the  right  moment,  they  might  just  as  well
not  exist.  In  a  sense  our  well-being  may  be  said  to
depend  upon  a  good  rapport  with  the  unconscious  mind.

A  neurotic  person  is  deficient  in  control  of  his  psychic
energy.  In  a  severe  case  he  either  cannot  direct  it  to
the  useful  end  he  desires,  or  else  he  uses  it  in  an  exag-
gerated manner.  He  is  a  victim  to  the  phantasies  formed
in  his  own  unconscious  mind.  In  order  to  cure  him,  the
analyst  has  recourse  to  dream  or  phantasy  material,
which  arises  from  the  same  source  as  the  hysterical
symptoms  and  is  of  a  similar  nature.  The  symptoms
are  phantasy  formations  created  by  a  displacement  of
energy  from  the  psychical  to  the  physical  realm,  con-
sequent on  the  fact  that  to  some  natures  physical  suffering
is  easier  to  bear  than  mental  suffering,  and  offers  an
escape  from  it.  The  neurotic  is  not  for  one  moment  to
be  regarded  as  inferior  to  other  people  ;  he  is  very  often

1  Life  and  Habit.


lxxv.] Psychoanalytic  Use  of  Subliminal  Material  9

superior,  but  more  sensitive,  and  far  too  thin-skinned.
But  lest  I  should  seem  to  accuse  him  alone  of  making
phantasies,  let  us  remind  ourselves  that  phantasy  formation
is  a  perfectly  normal  mechanism — one  may  call  it  a
function  even — which  few  of  us  would  wish  to  live  without.
Every  inventor  makes  phantasies  before  he  makes  his
invention  ;  the  philosopher  does  the  same  in  the  process
of  arriving  at  his  new  concepts.  The  business  man  and
the  lover  equally  pave  the  way  for  their  ventures  with
day-dreams  ;  the  mother  plans  for  the  Christmas  holidays
in  her  phantasies.  With  the  poet  and  artist  their  poems
and  paintings  are  more  or  less  direct  expressions  of  their
unconscious  mind.  They  may  in  a  very  special  sense  be
called  mediums  of  the  subconscious.  Let  us  see  what
Shakespeare  says  about  phantasies  :

Lovers  and  madmen  have  such  seething  brains,

Such  shaping  fantasies  that  apprehend

More  than  cool  reason  ever  comprehends.

The  lunatic,  the  lover,  and  the  poet,

Are  of  imagination  all  compact  :

One  sees  more  devils  than  vast  hell  can  hold  ;

That  is  the  madman  :  the  lover  all  as  frantic,

Sees  Helen's  beauty  in  a  brow  of  Egypt  :

The  poet's  eye,  in  a  fine  frenzy  rolling,

Doth  glance  from  heaven  to  earth,  from  earth  to  heaven  ;

And,  as  imagination  bodies  forth

The  forms  of  things  unknown,  the  poet's  pen

Turns  them  to  shapes,  and  gives  to  airy  nothing

A  local  habitation  and  a  name.

Such  tricks  hath  strong  imagination,

.That,  if  it  would  but  apprehend  some  joy,

It  comprehends  some  bringer  of  that  joy  :

Or  in  the  night,  imagining  some  fear,

How  easy  is  a  bush  supposed  a  bear  !  1

It  must  be  recognised  that  "  the  unconscious  holds  the
germs  of  future  conscious  contents,"  2  and  that  dreams
and  phantasies,  when  made conscious,  help  us  to  come

1  Midsummer-Night's  Dream,  Act  v.  Sc.  i.

2  Jung's  Conception  of  the  Unconscious. Collected  Papers,  ch.  xv.


10


Constance  E.  Long,  M.D.


[part


to  our  true  thinking  and  feeling.  In  normal  persons
the  unconscious  has  the  effect  of  softening  and  toning
down  extreme  conscious  tendencies  "  through  an  effective
opposite  impulse  in  the  unconscious."  A  life  that  is
devoid  of  phantasy  is  apt  to  be  sterile.  When  we  say  a
man  has  no  imagination,  we  recognise  a  defect  in  him.

A  case  which  illustrates  the  effects  of  subconscious
phantasy  is  that  of  a  Miss  A.,  a  young  woman  of  30.
She  was  brought  to  me  because  she  had  violent  attacks
of  hiccoughs  lasting  from  one  hour  to  a  whole  day.  She
had  an  innocent  mindless  expression  and  a  high  childish
voice.  She  had  at  one  time  been  clever  and  capable,  for
at  17  she  was  forewoman  of  a  room  in  a  blouse  factory,
where  she  showed  originality  in  designing  and  cutting  out.
She  exhibited  the  usual  belle  indifference  to  her  symptom
so  characteristic  of  the  hysteric,  for  though  the  hiccoughs
were  of  such  violence  as  almost  to  jerk  her  off  the  couch
on  which  she  was  lying  for  my  examination,  she  yet  wore
the  placid  expression  of  an  infant  suffering  from  painless
eructations  of  wind.  Her  guileless  baby-talk  was  equally
remarkable.  I  was  obliged  to  send  this  patient  into  a
nursing  home,  much  against  her  will  ;  and  without  giving
her  any  other  treatment  I  began  an  analysis,  which  was
at  first  carried  on  every  day  for  one  hour.  One  of  her
early  dreams  was  the  following  :

Something  was  wrong  with  me,  what,  I  did  not  know.  I
was  having  advice  from  a  gentleman  who  seemed  to  be  a  surgeon.
He  did  a  lot  of  talking  with  mother.  He  then  lifted  a  little
girl  on  to  a  wooden  horse  and  pushed  the  horse  and  child  into
a  pond.  The  child  was  wearing  one  of  my  dresses.  We  all
stood  and  watched  her  sail  away.  After  that  the  doctor  went
into  a  shop,  still  talking.  My  sister  Maggie  said,  "  That's  the
worst  of  Dr.  Long."

Here  the  dream  amusingly  hits  off  the  exact  situation.
Without  giving  details  I  will  just  say  that  my  patient
identified  herself  with  the  little  girl  on  the  horse  by  the
dress  she  was  wearing  ;  the  surgeon  was  identified  with
myself  as  the  "  doctor  who  talked  so  much."  The  "  pond"
brought  up  as  a  free  association  a  previous  dream.  In


lxxv.] Psychoanalytic  Use  of  Subliminal  Material  11

this  dream  she  was  reluctantly  coming  to  my  consulting
room  for  the  first  time,  and  as  she  crossed  the  street  to
my  house  a  great  pond  spread  out  before  her  into  which
she  fell  :  this  she  had  called  the  Slough  of  Despond,  for
the  thought  of  being  treated  medically  filled  her  with
despair.  She  did  not  want  to  go  to  a  doctor — that  is,
unconsciously  she  did  not  want  to  get  well.  My  talka-
tiveness was  a  witty  and  revengeful  criticism  by  her
unconscious  of  my  persuasiveness  in  making  her  come
against  her  wish,  for  a  second  visit,  and  finally  talking
her  into  a  nursing  home.  The  pond,  then,  was  a  symbol
for  this  terrible  adventure  of  treatment.  She  is  accom-
panied in  the  dream  by  her  mother,  and  indeed  by  her
whole  family,  for  this  grown-up  baby  is  never  far,  psycho-
logically at  least,  from  her  mother's  apron  strings  and  her
childhood's  companions.

The  dream  gives  a  picture  of  the  childishness  of  her
attitude.  The  little  wooden  horse  was  understood  to  be
her  psychic  energy,  which  was  a  feeble  affair — as  unsuit-
able to  her  present  age  of  thirty  as  a  child's  toy  would
be  as  a  steed.  The  argument  between  the  mother  and
the  surgeon  represented  the  tempest  of  emotions  roused
by  making  her  conflict  conscious.  The  conflict  was  between
her  childish  adaptation  to  her  mother,  and  the  new
demands  made  upon  her  that  she  should  sacrifice  the
shelter  which  her  symptoms  had  hitherto  procured  for
her,  and  take  up  a  new  attitude  to  life.

You  will  see  that  the  make-up  of  this  dream  seems  very
simple.  It  is  like  the  story  you  tell  children  when  you
want  to  point  a  moral.  The  unconscious  is  not  a  moralist,
however,  not  at  least  by  intention,  but  it  is  a  picture
maker,  a  maker  of  parables.  The  meaning  of  the  dream
is  arrived  at,  not  from  the  manifest  content  (that  is,  the
part  of  the  dream  which  is  remembered,  and  which  pro-
bably is  only  a  fragment  of  the  whole),  but  from  the
latent  content.  This  latent  content  is  to  be  gathered  from
the  free  associations,  which  it  is  the  analyst's  business  to
stimulate  and  discuss  in  the  time  devoted  to  the  analysis
of  the  dream.  The  meaning  of  the  dream  lies  on  this
side  and  on  that  of  the  threshold  of  consciousness. It  is


12


Constance  E.  Long,  M.D.


[part


the  analyst's  art  to  bring  the  two  into  juxtaposition,  so
that  understanding  may  come  to  the  patient.

Earlier  in  Miss  A.'s  case  there  had  been  an  attack  of
blindness  of  hysterical  nature.  It  had  occurred  at  the  age
of  17  in  this  wise.  She  travelled  backwards  and  forwards
daily  to  the  blouse  factory  in  the  city.  One  evening,  on
her  way  home,  she  was  alone  in  the  carriage.  As  the
train  left  the  station  a  working  man  swung  himself  into
the  carriage,  sat  opposite  to  her  and  suddenly  exhibited
himself  in  an  alarming  and  indecent  way.  She  was  rooted
to  her  seat,  unable  to  move  or  speak.  A  minute  or  two
later  he  swung  himself  out  as  the  train  slowed  up  to
enter  the  next  station,  which  was  Miss  A.'s  destination.
She  ran  the  three-quarters  of  a  mile  between  the  station
and  her  home,  arriving  breathless  and  almost  beside
herself  with  terror  and  excitement.  The  only  account  she
gave  to  her  parents  was  "  that  a  man  had  followed  her
from  whom  she  ran."  Three  weeks  later,  as  she  was
examining  the  work  one  of  her  girls  brought  for  inspection,
darkness  fell  upon  her.  She  asked,  "  What  has  happened
to  the  light  ?  "  Nothing  had  happened,  but  she  had
suddenly  become  blind,  and  had  to  be  led  home.  This
blindness  passed  away  in  the  course  of  a  few  weeks,
although  her  sight  remained  inadequate,  and  rendered  her
comparatively  helpless  for  some  years.  She  was  no  longer
able  to  go  out  to  work,  and  lost  all  her  initiative,  and  though
she  became  helpful  in  her  mother's  house,  could  take  no

J.

responsibility.  She  constantly  had  hallucinations  of  being
pursued  ;  and  once,  like  Luther,  who  threw  an  ink-stand
at  the  devil,  she  threw  everything  she  had  in  her  hands
at  an  equally  visionary  figure  which  came  in  at  her  docr.
Her  second  severe  psychical  illness  was  that  accompanied
by  the  violent  hiccoughs  described.  She  was  permanently
cured  of  these  within  a  week,  and  her  cure  has  been
lasting.

Several  months  ago  she  came  to  me  again,  looking
anxious,  and  told  me  that  no  less  than  five  times  in  the
previous  few  weeks  the  kettle  and  saucepans  had  fallen
out  of  her  hands,  the  contents  being  spilled.  The  last
incident of  this  kind  was  that  she  had  washed  up  the


lxxv.] Psychoanalytic  Use  of  Subliminal  Material  13

tea-cups  and  absent-mindedly  put  them  into  a  large
enamel  jug  to  carry  to  the  dresser — "  a  stupid  thing,"
she  said,  which  she  "had  never  done  before."  Five
minutes  later  she  emptied  the  jug  into  the  sink,  smashing
all  the  crockery  thereby  !  She  also  said  that  for  several
nights  she  had  been  wakened  from  sleep  hearing  her  name
called,  and  had  gone  to  her  friend  who  was  ill  at  the
time  and  who  was  to  her  an  adopted  mother,  saying,
"What  did  you  call  me  for?"  But,  like  the  infant
Samuel,  she  found  the  voice  was  a  subjective  one.  These
acts  are  what  is  called  "  symptomatic  "■ — the  result  of  a
splitting  of  consciousness.  They  shew  the  tricky  behaviour
of  the  unconscious,  and  have  counterparts  at  seances.
My  patient  had  been  neglecting  to  pay  proper  attention
to  the  workings  of  her  unconscious  mind,  and  her  phan-
tasies had  once  more  got  her  partially  in  their  grip.
They  were  a  signal  from  her  unconscious  that  she  was
in  some  danger  of  a  fresh  breakdown.  Analysis  of  a  few
dreams  soon  brought  to  light  the  new  problems  which
were  disturbing  her,  and  helped  her  to  get  her  energy  on
the  right  track  again.  Miss  A.  has  acquired  insight  enough
into  the  analytic  method  to  realize  that  she  must  be  on
her  guard  and  take  preventive  measures  to  avoid  a
breakdown,  whenever  she  is  disturbed  by  symptomatic  acts
of  the  kind  described.  In  such  symptoms  one  is  able  to
recognise  the  beginnings  of  a  psychic  disease — a  type  of
illness  upon  which  the  use  of  a  thermometer  and  the
counting  of  a  pulse  can  throw  no  light.

I  now  propose  to  give  the  analysis  of  a  dream  in  some
detail.  A  dream  may  be  interpreted  on  its  objective
or  on  its  subjective  aspect,  or  from  both  points  of  view,
which  supplement  each  other.  The  line  to  be  followed  is
indicated  by  the  remarks  of  the  dreamer.  On  the  sub-
jective side,  all  the  personages  that  occur  in  the  dream
are  dramatizations  of  the  dreamer  himself  under  various
aspects,  more  or  less  disguised,  and  all  the  things  they
do  and  say  represent  different  conflicting  feelings  or  ideas
of  his.  The  dream  characters  are  of  the  same  nature  as
the  different  characters  that  appear  in  cases  of  multiple
personality,  or  the  personifications  of  automatic  phenomena.


L4


Constance  E.  Long,  31. D.


[part


To  demonstrate  this  in  the  interpretation  of  dreams  is
generally  enlightening  to  the  person  under  analysis,  because
few  people  realize  the  simultaneous  existence  of  opposite
feelings  in  themselves.  In  making  the  following  analysis
I  asked  my  patient  to  give  her  free  associations,  taking
the  various  dream-parts  as  texts.  In  order  to  arrive  at
these,  the  dreamer  should  be  as  passive  as  possible  in
regard  to  the  ideas  which  come  into  the  mind,  should
repeat  them  without  self-criticism,  and  should  reject
nothing,  no  matter  how  far-fetched  or  irrelevant  it  may
seem. This  is  exceedingly  difficult,  though  it  sounds  easy.

Miss  B.,  the  dreamer,  is  of  the  intellectual  type.  She
is  aged  45  and  has  been  engaged  in  teaching  and  literary
work.  She  is  suffering  from  inability  to  walk  any  distance
and  has  vague  abdominal  pains.  She  can  walk  about  in
the  house  and  in  her  own  room  with  a  firm  elastic  step,
but  out  of  doors  she  is  assailed  by  fears,  and  has  to  lean
against  supports.  A  distance  of  fifty  yards  seems  well-
nigh  impossible  to  her.  She  has  to  come  to  my  house  in
a  cab,  a  walk  of  some  four  minutes.  She  once  took  this
walk  at  my  suggestion  and  as  a  consequence  had  a
collapse.  She  has  been  ill  for  seven  years.  Up  to  that
time  she  earned  her  living,  and  led  a  most  praiseworthy
life.  She  was  the  youngest  child  of  an  unhappy  marriage.
Her  father  was  a  heedless  spendthrift,  her  mother  a
patient  Griselda,  of  almost  saintly  forbearance.  The  pair
were  incompatible,  and  this  youngest  daughter,  clever  and
sensitive,  gradually  sided  with  the  mother,  though  un-
doubtedly most  of  her  love  was  given  to  her  father.  As
she  grew  up  she  soon  put  her  talents  to  use,  and  earned
an  income,  which  later  on  she  devoted  largely  to  her
parents'  support  and  succour.  Her  holidays  were  almost
exclusively  spent  in  the  family  home,  from  a  sense  of
duty.  Here  she  underwent  constant  anxieties,  and  to  a
certain  extent  stood  between  the  parents.  It  seemed  to
her  in  reviewing  her  life  that  it  was  one  of  perpetual
sacrifice  and  self-less  devotion.

In  ajjpearance  the  lady  is  cpiiet  and  self-respecting.
She  has  a  clear  skin  and  well  cut  features.  She  looks
healthy,  though  at  times  she  is  very  pale  and  worn,  and


lxxv.] Psychoanalytic  Use  of  Subliminal  Material  15

she  very  soon  tires.  Her.  ^animation  .springs  up  quickly
in  response  to  intellectual  or  iaee.'i  subjects:.,  tier  expression
is  lively.  If  anything  offends  her,  she  compresses  her  lips,
and  very  angry  looks  sometimes  dart  •  from  her  eyes.  This
change  of  expression  indicates-  rmcbi^cious  feelings  and
gives  one  the  impression  of  slumbering  fires.
She  brought  the  following  dream  for  analysis  :
Dream. — I  see  myself  in  a  strange  room,  there  are  people  in
it,  but  I  do  not  know  any  of  them.  A  gentleman  of  the
company,  who  seemed  to  know  me  and  to  have  some  interest
in  me,  asked  me  to  come  with  him,  as  he  wanted  to  shew  me
a  school  building.  I  took  my  house  shoes  off  and  put  them
somewhere  behind  the  leg  of  a  piano,  and  put  a  blanket  round
my  shoulders  to  go,  as  it  appeared  to  be  raining.

When  we  reached  the  road  outside,  I  saw  on  the  left  a
cluster  of  beautiful  blue-bells  ;  farther  down  the  road,  on  the
same  side,  hung  a  great  clump  of  wild  broom  in  full  flower.
The  road  and  the  flowers  were  bathed  in  a  beautiful  clear
light.  The  school  building  was  some  distance  beyond  the
flowers,  but  we  did  not  get  to  it,  nor  did  I  see  it.  I  knew
it  was  there.

While  we  stood  for  a  moment  on  the  road,  I  saw  an  animal
glide  out  suddenly  from  among  the  blue-bells  ;  in  shape  and
size  and  in  its  sinuous  movement,  though  not  in  colour,  it
looked  at  first  like  a  weasel.  A  beautiful  phosphorescent  light
shone  right  down  its  back.  It  glided  swiftly  across  the  road,
and  as  it  went  it  became  much  larger,  and  now  the  fight  on
its  back  was  no  longer  to  be  seen.  It  settled  itself  down  on
a  low  bank  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  road  with  its  back  to
us,  and  I  now  saw  its  coat  was  spotted  greyish  black  and
white  and  that  it  was  quite  a  large  animal.  I  asked  what
animal  it  was,  as  I  did  not  recognise  it,  and  was  told  it  was
a  wolf,  and  I  wondered  if  we  had  not  better  move  away  from
its  neighbourhood  when  I  heard  that.

There  was  something  very  sinister  in  the  appearance  of  the
creature,  as  it  very  quietly  stretched  itself  out,  apparently
quite  oblivious  of  our  presence,  but  one  felt  in  it  a  certain
indefinable  something  that  rather  expressed  or  betokened  extreme
watchfulness,  power  and  knowledge.  Then  it  rose  up  slowly,
crossed  the  road  back  to  the  blue-bell  clump  and  stood  among


Hi


Constance  E.  Long,  M.D.


[part


the  flowers ;  but  now  it  was  .fi(j5  i-onger  &  wolf,  but  a  low  type
woman  vath  :<.n'm8*  -hard  features,  a  hooked  nose  and  unplea-
sant aspect'.  Her  clothes  were  not  ragged,  but  plain  and  tidy
and  she  wore  a  bonnet..  She;  was  talking  to  some  one  who
stood  near'  her.- The  dream  ended  there.

The  following  are  some  of  the  dreamer's  free  associations  :

PART  I.

School. — I  have  been  associated  with  schools  practically  all
my  life  and  am  interested  in  them.  In  Sweden  I  visited
several  and  taught  in  some  there.  The  schools  in  Sweden  for
the  people  are  infinitely  better  equipped  than  ours.  I  have
visited  schools  in  Switzerland  and  in  Paris,  and  have  been
present  at  language  lessons  given  in  schools  in  France  and
Switzerland. I  have  taught  in  schools  in  Wales  and  England.

Blanket.- — Suggests  bed  and  warmth  ;  one  would  not  use  a
blanket  as  covering  for  the  body  except  in  a  case  of  great
urgency,  and  where  it  was  the  only  covering  available,  such  as
in  shipwreck  or  fire,  etc.

House  Shoes  suggest  my  present  pair,  which  are  of  velvet
and  very  comfortable,  but  nearly  worn  out.  I  always  like  to
wear  house  shoes  in  the  house.

Piano. — Calls  up  the  pleasure  I  have  in  being  able  to  play
a  little  ;  but  I  like  a  good  piano  and  sweet  and  rather  muffled
tone.  Playing  gives  my  fingers  something  to  do  and  in  this
way  is  a  satisfaction  and  pleasure,  apart  from  the  much
deeper  enjoyment  of  the  music.

PART  II.

Blue-bells. — A  stretch  of  blue-bells  in  spring  gives  me  infinite
pleasure.  I  don't  like  spring  to  pass  without  having  this
pleasure  ;  I  have  missed  something  very  helpful  and  beautiful
if  it  does.  I  know  of  many  blue-bell  woods,  all  very  beautiful,
in  Wales  and  also  in  Somersetshire.

Broom. — Grows  more  gracefully  than  gorse,  without  prickles,
is  less  common,  is  very  beautiful  in  a  mass,  although  you
seldom  see  it  so. White  broom  is  more  beautiful  than  yellow.


lxxv.] Psychoanalytic  Use  of  Subliminal  Material.


17


I  can  think  of  three  gardens  where  there  is  some  very  lovely
white  broom.

Phosphorescent  light. — Recalls  glow-worms  and  fire-flies.  I  have
seen  the  former  in  Ireland.  This  particular  light  strikes  you
as  different  from  any  other  light  you  have  ever  seen.  I  have
noticed  it  on  old  tree  stumps.  "I  have  translated  a  fairy  story
from  the  Swedish  in  which  hobgoblins  used  rotten  tree  stumps
for  lights.

Wolf. — Hungry,  fierce,  cruel.  I  have  seen  wolves  only  in
Zoos  ;  have  translated  stories  from  the  Swedish  in  which  wolves
figure  largely  ;  belong  to  cold  northern  climates  now.

Browning  has  written  a  striking  poem,  Ivan  Ivanovitch,  in
which  a  mother  throws  her  children  one  by  one  out  of  a
sledge  to  the  wolves,  so  that  she  might  escape  herself.

Greyish  black  and  white  coloured  coat. — Does  not  suggest  a
wolf  ;  colours  out  of  place  ;  I  like  a  decided  black  and  white.

Woman  low  type. — I  saw  a  woman  of  this  type  at  a  railway
station  in  London  some  months  ago  ;  such  a  face  repels  and
saddens  me.

The  telling  of  this  dream  with  its  free  associations
occupied  the  first  part  of  the  analytical  hour,  which  I
am  briefly  describing.  The  latter  part  of  the  time  was
taken  up  in  weaving  the  dream  parts  and  their  associations
into  one  fabric  in  order  to  obtain  the  interpretation.

As  this  proceeding  goes  along,  fresh-springing  associations
are  added  by  the  dreamer,  and  some  analogies  may  be
introduced  by  the  analyst  (the  hermeneutical  method) 1
from  history,  mythology  or  experience.

The  dream  related  gives,  through  its  analysis,  the  patient's
subconscious  view  of  the  present  situation,  and  of  her
immediate  problems  and  her  own  psychological  attitude.
It  exhibited  her  orientation,  for  hitherto  we  only  knew
she  was  ill  and  in  need  of  treatment,  other  treatments
having  failed  to  cure  her.  We  knew  that  her  illness  was
more  psychical  than  physical  ;  we  could  see  she  was  a
conscientious  person,  with  a  somewhat  saint-like  character  ;
but  without  such  a  dream  one  would  hardly  know  where
to  begin  to  work.

1  See  Jung's  Collected  Papers  on  Analytical  Psychology,  2nd  edition.

B


is


Constance  E.  Long,  M.D.


[part


She  is  in  a  strange  room,1  as  indeed  she  is  here  in  London  ;
there  are  other  people  in  it ;  she  knows  none,  that  is,  she
does  not  personally  know  anyone  who  has  been  analysed ;
she  would  "  like  to  know  what  effect  it  has  on  others."

A  gentleman  who  seemed  to  have  some  interest  in  her
shows  her  the  school  building.  The  analyst  is  interested
to  shew  her  something  she  has  never  seen  before,  that  is,
her  unconscious  ;  analysis  is  a  "  new  school."

She  makes  her  preparations  ;  she  takes  off  her  soft  house
shoes ;  they  are  indeed  nearly  worn  out.  This  tendency
of  hers  to  keep  indoors  is  hard  on  her  slippers,  which  are
so  comfortable.  She  finds  she  ought  to  put  off  these
comfortable  outworn  habits  to  go  outside  to  the  road„
This  brings  an  association  with  the  command  to
Moses,  "  Put  off  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  for  the
place  whereon  thou  standest  is  holy  ground."  This  gives
a  solemn  and  religious  aspect  to  the  visit  to  the  school
building,  that  is,  to  her  new  effort  at  analytical  under-
standing. She  puts  the  shoes  behind  a  leg  of  the  piano.
The  piano  is  an  apt  symbol  of  expression  ;  she  prefers
her  sweet  sounds  "  muffled."

She  "  plays  a  little."  The  piano  at  her  lodging  is  poor
and  jangling  and  out  of  tune,  so  that  the  music  she  can
produce  just  now  is  not  satisfying.  The  "  finger  exercise  "
represents  extraversion  ;  the  "  deeper  enjoyment  "  intro-
version. All  the  harmonies  of  her  life  are  muffled.  The
putting  of  the  shoes  behind  the  piano  is  a  make-shift
affair.  Things  are  not  in  their  right  proportion  ;  how  could
a  piano  leg  hide  a  pair  of  shoes  ?  It  is  easier  to  live  a
half -invalided  life  than  to  take  up  a  drastic  new  attitude.
Like  her  slippers,  she  feels  "  worn  out  "  ;  but  this  is
equivalent  to  "  shipwreck,"  and  that  she  thinks  it  so
(subconsciously)  is  shown  by  her  use  of  a  blanket  as
covering  ;  it  is  an  occasion  of  "  great  urgency."  This  adds
to  the  notion  of  a  religious  call,  a  sense  of  desperate
personal  need.  The  blanket  has  the  significance  of  some-
thing comfortable  taken  from  her  bed  ;  she  "loves  warmth  "  ;
her  ill-health  has  made  her  spend  much  time  in  bed,  and

1  The  italics  here  refer  to  items  in  the  dream,  the  inverted  commas  to
items  of  the  associations.


x,xxv.] Psychoanalytic  Use  of  Subliminal  Material.  19

value  her  comforts.  She  feels  now  like  one  who  has  lost
her  all  in  storm  or  fire.  She  is  indeed  an  invalid  and
might  expect  shelter,  and  yet  she  has  to  go  out  in  the  rain
'to  see  a  new  school  building.  The  demand  of  analysis  is
that  she  should  take  up  life  again.  She  consciously
acquiesces  up  to  a  point,  but  the  dream  shows  her  to  be
wearing  the  blanket,  a  symbol  of  her  invalid  life,  which
she  carries  with  her  on  her  new  venture.

The  school  building  xvas  at  some  distance  beyond  the
flowers.  Much  had  to  be  seen,  experienced  and  under-
stood before  it  was  reached.  The  flowers  were  inter-
preted as  phantasies  ;  the  school  is  "  beyond."  Will  the
goal  be  reached  ?  That  is  always  the  problem  ;  has  one
enough  patience  and  perseverance  to  get  beyond  the
phantasies  to  the  real  working  place  ?  The  dream  puts
the  question  but  does  not  answer  it.  The  school  building
had  come  up  in  former  dreams  as  a  place  where  she  had
done  educational  work,  which  had  been  rebuilt,  and  which
she  was  re-visiting.  It  is  something  new  on  an  old  founda-
tion. Perhaps  what  analysis  requires  of  her  is  not  alto-
gether new,  only  a  reconstruction  and  a  fresh  attitude  to
life.  The  new  building  is  an  improvement  on  the  old  ;
that  much  is  clear.  She  knows  that  we  must  assimilate
the  new  by  means  of  the  old,  for  until  we  can  do  this,
we  cannot  accept  the  new,  although  the  old  no  longer
serves  us.  Until  we  can  accept  the  new  emotionally,  our
thoughts  carry  no  conviction  and  supply  no  power.  Thus
she  must  bring  over  into  the  new  life  the  blanket  that  is
so  ill  adapted  to  her  new  purposes.  She  will  throw  it
away  only  when  she  is  able  to  face  the  new  requirements.

The  road  outside  goes  through  beautiful  bluebells  and  is
bathed  in  beautiful  clear  light.  These  are  the  pretty
phantasies  she  loves  so  much  about  herself  and  life.
They  are  "  beautiful,"  but  danger  lurks  in  them  too.
These  spring  flowers  suggest  new  springing  hope.

Broom  was  there,  too,  and  the  rarest  kind,  white  broom.
She  "  prefers  it  to  gorse."  It  is  typical  that  what  is
beautiful  in  her  eyes  is  "  rarer,  more  graceful  and  without
prickles."  This  sensitive  soul  would  like  her  roses  without
spines. Be it noted that broom suggests gorse  in  the


20


Constance  E.  Long,  M.D.


[part


associations.  That  is  a  contrast  of  smooth  and  prickly.
There  is  the  idea  of  opposites  in  the  associations  with  the
colour  of  the  wolf's  coat,  which  was  spotted  greyish  black
and  white.  The  dreamer  likes  "  a  decided  black  and
white."  Black  and  white  represent  evil  and  good.  She
has  always  wanted  to  separate  the  one  from  the  other.
Indeed  has  she  not  done  this  in  following  the  path  of
sacrifice  ?  What  else  could  she  have  done  ?  This  clear-
cut  attitude  has  repeatedly  made  her  turn  away  from
anything  that  is  dubious  and  dangerous  in  life  and  revert
to  the  known  and  approved.  It  has  led  her  to  adopt  the
path  of  sacrifice  as  "  white,"  and  reject  all  that  is  unknown,
all  her  natural  desires  for  herself,  as  "  black."  This  atti-
tude has  always  led  her  back  to  the  parental  home,  no
matter  how  unhappy  that  return  made  her.  She  had
never  risked  spending  on  herself,  or  living  her  own  life,
because  who  could  tell  where  it  might  lead  ?  Suppose
there  was  "  a  hungry  wolf  "  inside  one,  how  dangerous
that  might  be  !  We  may  call  to  mind  here  the  legend
of  St  .  Francis  and  the  wolf  of  Agobio.  This  hungry  wolf
was  causing  grief  in  the  little  town,  robbing  and  killing.
The  saint  went  out  to  it,  struck  a  bargain  with  it,  tamed
it,  converted  and  led  it  home,  turned  it  into  a  friend  of
the  poor,  and  it  became  a  guardian  of  the  town.  There
is  a  kind  of  goodness  that  tames  the  animal  nature  by
accepting  it,  and  dealing  with  it  ;  by  uniting  with  it  in
friendship. This  surely  is  the  meaning  of  this  legend.

But  for  our  dreamer  "  white  "  is  the  safe  colour.  It
is  the  colour  of  etherialized  saints,  of  brides,  and  little
children.  She  can  keep  herself  pure  and  uninitiated  and
infantile  by  an  invariable  choice  of  white.  But  it  does
not  really  succeed.  To  remain  spotless  means  to  cut
oneself  off  from  real  life  and  live  in  phantasies.  Phantasies,
however,  have  a  way  of  running  off  with  one,  of  suddenly
becoming  dangerous,  that  is,  if  one  begins  to  live  in  them,
and  the  real  pains,  incidental  to  life  in  the  real  world,
which  one  avoids,  may  push  surrogates  of  themselves  into
consciousness  in  the  form  of  neurotic  symptoms,  such  as
disability  to  walk,  or  vague  abdominal  aches  and  pains,
which  are  alarming  and  penalising.


Lxxv.] Psychoanalytic  Use  of  Subliminal  Material.  21

Miss  B.,  whenever  a  choice  is  presented,  decides  to  live
for  her  parents.  She  identifies  herself  with  her  suffering
mother,  and  bears  the  burden  of  her  father's  vices  as
though  she  were  herself  his  wife.  In  thinking  thus  of
others,  she  avoids  thinking  of  herself,  and  evades  that
greatest  of  all  problems  in  life — the  acceptance  of  personal
freedom  and  the  necessity  of  learning  to  use  it.  This,  in
other  words,  is  the  task  of  developing  her  individuality.

Timid  natures,  such  as  hers,  unconsciously  refuse  indivi-
dual thinking  and  feeling,  and  shirk  the  problems  of  love,
which  naturally  arise  and  require  enterprise  and  responsi-
bility for  their  full  acceptance.  Miss  B.  thinks  she  is
freely  selecting  a  path  of  self-sacrifice.  Her  unconscious
motive  is  that  she  prefers  to  remain  a  child  ;  she  cannot
accept  the  temptations  of  freedom.  She  would  ever
remain  with  the  "  white,"  which  she  believes  to  be  the
good.

But  the  dream  tells  us  the  reason  for  this.  Unknown
there  is  an  animal  lurking.  Out  of  the  bed  of  the  shelter
of  blue-bells  darts  a  stealthy  creature  in  the  form  of  a
weasel  with  a  beautiful  phosphorescent  light  down  its  back.
It  crosses  from  one  side  of  the  road  to  the  other.  It
turns  its  back  to  her,  as  though  disregarding  the  con-
ventions, or  so  that  it  may  be  seen  in  all  aspects.  It
increases  in  size  as  it  moves  and  becomes  a  wolf,  and
finally  returns  to  the  blue-bell  clump  ;  and  behold  it  has
now  turned  into  a  woman  of  low  type.  It  is  a  land  of
werewolf.

In  looking  at  the  woman  the  dreamer  knows  she  is
looking  at  a  representation  of  herself.  Her  clothes  are
plain  and  tidy,  she  wore  a  bonne*.  She  herself  is  neat  and
plainly  dressed.  The  bonnet  is  a  sign  of  middle  age.
The  unpleasant  aspect  explains  these  darting  expressions  of
ill-feeling  and  malice  that  rise  up  so  unexpectedly  from
her  unconscious  from  time  to  time.

The  beautiful  phosphorescent  light  has  the  effect  of  a
magic  illumination.  It  reminds  her  of  the  torches  used
by  fairies  which  are  symbolic  of  the  light  of  the  phantasies  ;
it  reminds  her  of  the  inexplicable  baffling  insect  light
shown  by  the  glowworm  and  fire-fly — these  humble  things


22


Constance  E.  Long,  M.D.


[part


which  are  so  wonderful  and  illuminating.  This  is  the  light
that  belongs  to  the  subconscious  view  of  things.  It  is
"  different  from  any  other  light."  It  is  not  the  light  of
the  intellect,  but  non-rational  rather  than  rational  in
character.

This  analysis  by  no  means  exhausts  the  dream  and  its
associations,  but  it  must  serve  as  an  example  of  the  way
the  work  proceeds.  It  is  carried  on  by  means  of  a
backward  and  forward  conversation,  which  follows  the
patient's  lead  as  closely  as  possible.

What  is  most  remarkable  in  the  dream  and  analogous
material  is  its  character  as  compensatory  to  the  conscious
thinking.1  This  of  necessity  throws  light  on  the  daily
problems.  One  is  working  in  what  Gilbert  Murray  calls
"  the  uncharted  region  of  the  mind,"  2  which  contains  all
the  germinal  material  that  may  ultimately  become  con-
scious, and  from  which  art  and  religion  emanate.

The  dream  itself  may  in  a  sense  be  regarded  as  a
primitive  form  of  art,  sometimes  crude,  sometimes  mature.
The  instance  just  given  is  clear  and  bold  allegory,  pro-
vocative of  deep  emotion  in  the  dreamer  and,  when  under-
stood, capable  of  giving  rise  to  a  new  set  of  values  and
providing  the  motive  force  for  a  reconstruction  of  life.
But  though  the  dream  is  valuable  as  a  stimulus,  this  is
not  all  that  is  wanted.  It  supplies  only  part  of  the
motive  for  conduct,  the  other  part  must  come  from  the
conscious  reason  and  the  will.  The  patient  in  this  case
had  been  overthrown  by  her  unconscious  and  had  taken
her  phantastic  view  of  life  for  reality.  Now  in  analysis
we  go  to  the  very  source  of  her  overthrow  and  learn
wisdom  from  it ;  we  now  use  the  phantasies  that  formerly
made  use  of  her.

The  patient  whose  dream  I  have  given  is  not  unique
in  her  breakdown.  She  represents  complexes  and  con-
flicts to  which  all  are  subject.  How  to  effect  a  compromise
with  life  in  its  two  aspects  is  a  common  human  difficulty,
but  we  do  not  all  break  down  over  it.  Perhaps  a  tem-
porary experience  of  neuroses  would  have  a  beneficial  effect

1  Nicoll,  Dream  Psychology,  chapter  vi.

2  Gilbert  Murray,  Four  Stages  of  Greek  Religion.


xxxv.] Psychoanalytic  Use  of  Subliminal  Material.  23

on  many  of  us.  It  would  teach  us  to  sympathise  with
others  and  help  us  to  realize  there  is  no  precisely  normal
reaction,  no  exactly  right  path.

Our  dreamer's  "  high  has  proved  too  high,  her  heroic
for  earth  too  hard."  For  her  the  lowering  of  her  standard
would  increase  the  possibilities  of  life.  In  order  to  main-
tain her  one-sided  attitude,  she  has  pushed  all  she  takes
to  be  evil  into  the  unconscious  and  disguised  it  with
phantasies  ;  and  in  doing  this  she  has  sacrified  her  own
development.  Her  ideal  of  perfection  has  kept  her  childish.
The  animal  has  magic  in  it  ;  that  is  the  strange  light  it
carries.  This  power  for  good  or  ill  is  at  present  only  in
the  unconscious  ;  and  her  emotional  life  is  limited  because
of  its  repression.  Her  symptoms  represent  her  repressed
feelings.

Primitive  man  embodies  the  idea  which  I  wish  to  con-
vey in  his  attitude  to  his  totem  animal.  He  eats  it  to
obtain  its  "  mana  "  or  virtue,  its  life-force  or  magic,  and
thereby  enchances  his  own  personality.  The  dream  is  on
the  level  of  "  totemistic  thinking  "  and  expresses  the  notion
of  vital  force  under  the  symbol  of  the  wolf,  which  later
becomes  incorporated  in  the  woman.  So  Miss  B.'s  next
step  must  be  to  obtain  the  "  mana  "  from  her  animal
nature.  She  must  recognise  that  side  of  herself,  pay
attention  to  it,  and  consciously  abstract  from  it  what
is  useful  to  herself  and  to  humanity.  She  will  thus
accpiire  forcefulness  and  an  extension  of  her  personality
and  bring  about  that  co-operation  between  good  and  evil,
spiritual  and  animal,  white  and  black,  without  which  no
life  can  be  lived  satisfactorily.

To  act  "  nobly,"  according  to  a  standard  of  virtue
which  she  has  not  independently  thought  out  and  adopted
for  herself,  is  useless  for  one  who  has  already  broken
down  under  such  an  attempt  ;  it  does  not  work.  What
we  want  is  to  be  as  effective  as  possible  on  a  level
suitable  to  our  capacity,  and  to  live  as  free  from  neurosis
or  any  other  hampering  manifestation  as  may  be.  The
difficulty  for  each  is  to  cut  his  coat  according  to  his
cloth,  to  find  out  what  suits  his  special  nature,  to  make  a
harmonious  compromise. It  does  not  do  to  be  a  saint  or


24


Constance  E.  Long,  M.D.


[part


martyr  in  the  conscious,  and  a  werewolf  in  the  unconscious.
Such  an  attitude  is  bound  sooner  or  later  to  be  no  longer
supportable.  The  more  sensitive  and  valuable  the  character,
the  graver  the  conflict.

Dreams  have  been  denied  a  moral  meaning  ;  I  cannot
but  think  this  is  an  error.  In  no  department  of  human
activity  can  an  ethical  bearing  be  excluded.  The  moral
meaning  is  not,  however,  to  be  found  in  the  dream  alone.
It  would  be  dangerous  to  take  a  dream  too  literally  or
concretely  ;  but  it  supplies  the  view  missing  to  conscious-
ness— missing  because  painful  to  consciousness.  The
meaning  is  to  be  found  only  through  the  work  of  the
conscious  upon  the  unconscious.

The  dream  just  analysed  is  chosen  on  account  of  its
general  character.  A  trained  analyst  will  find  other
meanings  than  those  given  ;  the  patient  herself  as  time
went  on  found  other  important  meanings  and  associations.
It  has  been  said  that  the  whole  of  a  life  might  be  revealed
from  one  dream,  if  the  associations  were  followed  suffi-
ciently freely  and  far  ;  but  no  dream  can  be  exhaustively
analysed,  especially  in  public.

Before  I  myself  had  analysed  dreams  and  become
familiar  with  some  aspects  of  the  subconscious  mind,  I
found  examples  of  dream  analysis  very  unconvincing,  and
I  cannot  hope  that  my  own  attempt  will  prove  less  so.
One  cannot  recapture  all  the  delicate  threads  of  the  con-
versation, and  portray  the  subtle  reactions  that  made  it
possible  to  bring  the  material  above  the  threshold  of
consciousness  ;  and  when  once  the  material  is  in  con-
sciousness and  is  so  obvious,  it  seems  as  if  it  must  have
been  there  all  the  time.  The  dream  gives  a  concrete
picture  of  an  incident  that  at  first  sight  may  not  be
interesting  even  to  the  dreamer.  It  seems  meaningless
till  the  free  associations  shew  it  to  have  a  symbolical
meaning.  The  emotions  attached  to  it  belong  to  the
psychological  problems  which  also  occupy  the  dreamer  in
the  day,  and  the  symbols  selected  are  singularly  apt,
and  often  witty.  An  example  of  a  witty  dream  is  the
following,  which  was  reported  to  me.  I  do  not  know  the
dreamer. It  ran  :  "  Some  people  travel  by  boat,  some  by


lxxv.] Psychoanalytic  Use  of  Subliminal  Material.  25

rail,  but  I  always  travel  by  Virginia  creeper."  We  can
all  make  a  guess  at  the  latent  content  of  this  dream,  and
in  so  doing  we  shall  all  interpret  it  differently.  What  it
actually  meant  to  the  dreamer  can  only  be  known  when
her  free  associations  are  forthcoming.

I  will  now  give  an  instance  of  phantasy  production  in
which  I  think  some  credulous  people  would  be  inclined
to  see  the  appearance  of  a  spirit,  but  which  to  the
analytical  student,  and  most  members  of  the  S.P.R.
would  have  quite  another  interpretation.  A  certain  Mrs.  C.
had  a  hypnagogic  vision.  It  was  the  head  of  a  young
woman  with  a  peculiar  and  striking  face.  The  key-note
of  the  expression  was  sad.  The  face  appeared  on  a  grey
misty  background.  Mrs.  C.  woke  from  this  vision  with  a
feeling  of  sorrow.  On  going  to  sleep  again  she  saw  the
same  head  in  a  dream.  This  time  it  was  a  dead  face.
As  the  dreamer  gazed  at  it  the  eyes  opened  and  looked
levelly  forward.  Mrs.C.  woke  up  weeping,  and  the  memory
of  the  hypnagogic  vision  and  the  dream  caused  her  acute
distress  when  she  recalled  it  during  the  folio  whig  day.
Unknown  to  Mrs.  C,  then  or  since,  the  woman  whom  she
recognised  in  the  dream  had  died  a  few  days  previously
in  tragic  circumstances,  and  her  body  was  still  unburiecl.
Mrs.  C.  had  seen  her  but  three  times,  then  not  to  speak
to  and  only  for  a  moment.  She  had  consciously  thought
her  ill  and  sad-looking,  and  her  striking  appearance  had
roused  a  passing  curiosity.  One  association  with  the  dead
face  in  the  dream  was  of  a  thorn-crowned  head  of  Christ
painted  or  printed  on  linen,  in  which  the  eyes  appear
to  open  as  the  gazer  approaches  the  picture.  Another
association  was  of  a  so-called  mystical  painting,  in  which
a  cross  appeared,  which  it  was  claimed  had  never  been
put  there  by  the  painter.  Thus  the  head  in  the  dream
represented  sorrow,  despair  and  death,  and  also  sacrifice
and  crucifixion.

All  these  emotions  belonged  to  the  immediate  life  prob-
lem of  the  dreamer,  and  her  unconscious  mind  with
remarkable  sureness  had  selected,  out  of  hundreds  of
indifferent  faces  seen  in  the  previous  few  days,  just  the
very  one  that  poignantly  symbolized  her  own  particular


26


Constance  E.  Long,  M.D.


[part


sufferings.  This  appearance  of  the  dead  in  the  dream  is
a  coincidence  that  we  must  necessarily  come  across  when
we  observe  unconscious  phenomena,  just  as  we  find  it  in
any  group  of  conscious  imenomena.  It  is  obvious  that
the  dream  must  be  attributed  to  a  reminiscence  of  the
dreamer's,  rather  than  to  any  supposed  action  of  the
dead  person.  What  analysis  adds  to  the  view  of  its
subjective  origin  is  that  it  has  a  meaning  discoverable
by  the  dreamer,  as  representative  of  certain  unconscious
thoughts  or  wishes.

Those  who  have  read  reports  of  seances  are  often  struck
with  the  occasional  banalities  of  the  so-called  controls.
They  serve  to  strengthen  the  supposition  that  the  pheno-
mena in  question  are  emanations  from  the  unconscious
mind  of  the  medium,  and  possibly  of  the  sitters  through
the  medium.  The  material  of  dreams  is  often  quite  as
trivial,  but  we  recognize  that  it  has  no  concrete  value
— only  a  symbolical  one.  In  analysis  the  conscious  mind
is  brought  to  bear  upon  it  critically  in  order  to  wrest
values  from  it,  as  one  washes  away  mud  to  find  the  gold
ore.  This  critical  attitude  gradually  brings  about  a  change
in  the  character  of  the  material  produced.

During  analysis  the  work  done  on  the  unconscious  by
the  conscious  mind  continues  to  force  fresh  material  above
the  threshold.  Examples  may  be  given  which  treat  of
the  relation  between  the  analyst  and  the  analysed  person.
Incidentally  they  show  how  humorous  the  unconscious  is.
E.g.,  a  lady  expressed  feelings  of  parsimony  in  the  following
way  :  She  dreamed  that  she  was  being  fitted  by  a  Bond
Street  tailor  for  a  coat  and  skirt  ;  she  regretted  she  had
not  bought  it  before  the  tailor  had  removed  to  this
expensive  address,  as  he  had  made  them  just  as  well
at  half  the  cost  when  he  lived  at  Surbiton.  This  actually
refers  to  the  recent  removal  of  the  physician  from  a
suburb  into  the  area  of  consulting  practice.  She  could
have  paid  smaller  fees  if  she  had  consulted  him  before
his  removal.

Another  patient  ended  a  spell  of  analysis  with  a  wish
to  establish  friendly  relations  with  the  doctor.  This  did
not seem possible. She dreamed that she was on  an


lxxv.] Psychoanalytic  Use  of  Subliminal  Material.  27

island.  A  beautiful  dolphin  visited  her  on  government
business.  As  he  swims  away  she  feels  very  sad,  and
notices  that  his  tail  is  studded  with  yellow  discs.  They
are  of  shining  metal,  and  strengthen  the  tail  as  a  band  of
metal  strengthens  the  blade  of  an  oar.  The  analysis
shewed  the  metal  discs  to  represent  golden  guineas,  sym-
bolic of  the  cash  nexus  which  she  now  feels  to  be  the
sole  bond  between  her  and  the  doctor,  and  which  she
tries  to  rejoice  over,  on  the  ground  of  cash  being  necessary
to  his  well-being.

The  analyst  often  turns  up  in  his  patient's  dream  under
any  guise  that  fits  the  situation  of  the  moment.  In  a
single  day  the  dreams  of  various  patients  might  depict
him  as  :  (1)  a  j^oliceman,  representing  a  guardian  of  law
or  a  helper  ;  (2)  a  siren,  one  who  draws  into  danger  ;
(3)  a  ship's  stoker,  one  who  attends  to  the  invisible
sources  of  energy  ;  (4)  a  gardener,  one  who  cultivates
growing  thoughts  and  feelings,  or  who  prunes  bushes,  and
nurtures  seeds  ;  (5)  a  piece  of  jewelry,  which  may  be  either
precious  or  a  sham  ;  (6)  the  Kaiser,  one  who  makes  bom-
bastic assertions.  Every  symbol  would  have  its  special
meaning  for  the  moment,  and  would  be  changed  in  the
course  of  analysis  as  rapidly  as  the  mental  attitude
■changes.  Though  in  each  case  the  analyst  is  meant
objectively  by  these  characters,  they  have  a  subjective
meaning  as  well,  standing  for  something  in  the  dreamer's
psyche.

The  analysed  person  appears  to  himself  under  innumer-
able guises.  His  ambition  may  be  symbolized  by  Alex-
ander, his  power  by  Jove,  his  patience  by  Job,  his  piety
or  sexuality  by  monk  or  nun,  his  self-depreciation  by  a
cringing  dog,  his  temper  by  Xantippe,  his  greed  by  a
ravening  wolf,  his  childishness  by  a  sucking  pig,  and  so
forth.  The  problems  with  which  the  dream  is  concerned
are  curiously  veiled,  not  for  purposes  of  concealment
merely,  but  because  the  subconscious  naturally  thinks  in
terms  different  from  the  conscious,  and  is  trying  to  solve
problems  by  seeking  analogies.  The  dream  is  a  means  of
expression.  It  is,  according  to  Jung,  "  the  subliminal
picture of  the psychological condition of the  individual


28


Constance  E.  Long,  M.D.


[part


in  his  waking  state."  It  is  also  a  fact  that  the  subcon-
scious view  of  a  problem  is  often  different  from  the
conscious  one.  Just  as  the  day-dream  offers  a  relief  from
the  hard  facts  of  reality,  so  the  night-dream  refreshes  us
with  the  opposite  point  of  view,  or  points  out  our  error
in  a  picture.  The  dream  is  a  source  of  wisdom,  as  we
all  unconsciously  admit  when  we  leave  some  knotty
problem  over  night  with  the  words,  "  let  us  sleep  upon
it."

Sometimes  we  find  that  the  psychological  problems  are
brought  up  under  a  recurring  dream  character.  This
personification  persists  until  the  problems  connected  with
it  disappear — till  "  the  ghost  is  laid  "  in  fact,  not  by
magic  but  by  development,  by  assimilating  into  conscious-
ness the  repressed  elements  which  the  dream-character  in
question  represents.  Let  me  illustrate.  Miss  X.,  a  kind-
hearted  woman  of  forty,  with  the  benevolent  feelings  of
a  social  worker,  was  generous-minded  and  affectionate,  but
she  was  also  slangy  and  aggressive,  and  unconsciously
inconsiderate  of  the  feelings  of  others  with  a  different
outlook  on  life.  In  some  respects  she  had  the  psychology
of  an  open-hearted  public  schoolboy  of  sixteen,  who  is
well-intentioned,  but  does  not  think.  In  her  dreams  the
following  character  appears  again  and  again  under  slightly
different  guises  ;  each  guise  embodying  some  special  point
a  propos  to  the  occasion  of  the  dream.  The  character  is
a  youth — like  a  Greek  youth,  and  rather  like  the  Faun
of  Praxiteles.  He  is  more  like  a  natural  and  kindly
animal  than  a  man.  He  might  be  mentally  or  morally
defective,  but  is  quite  amiable  and  gay.  He  has  a
romantic  appreciation  of  feminine  charm.  He  appears
under  the  following  circumstances  :

(1)  A  policeman  comes  to  arrest  him  good-temperedly  and
put  him  where  he  can  do  no  harm.

(2)  He  was  sent  up  to  Cambridge,  but  only  wasted  his  time.
Now  he  is  going  to  have  another  try.

(3)  Miss  X.'s  father  helps  her  to  capture  him  when  he  "  runs
amok  "  in  the  house  and  is  a  danger.  Once  caught,  he  can  be
"  put  on  his  honour."


jLXXV.] Psychoanalytic  Use  of  Subliminal  Material.  29

(4)  He  comes  home  as  a  semi-prodigal  and  joins  family
prayers,  but  is  allowed  to  look  at  a  picture  book.

(5)  Returned  from  the  hunt,  he  sticks  his  legs  up  on  an  Inn
table,  whereupon  the  company,  shocked  at  his  manners,  proceed
to  hunt  him.

(6)  He  wakes  up  and  is  terribly  frightened  to  find  himself
alone.

(7)  As  "  Sir  Pompey  Briseas  " — Breezy  Ass — he  is  required
to  enter  into  an  estate  and  manage  a  property.  He  hates
laving  to  do  it.

This  character  reappeared  until  the  unconscious  trends
symbolized  were  fully  acknowledged,  and  the  attitude
abandoned— at  least  in  intention,  for  it  takes  time  to
work  the  change.  Such  an  unconscious  attitude  creates
many  difficulties  in  life,  puzzling  the  patient,  who  is  apt
to  think  these  difficulties  are  owing  to  faults  of  others.
Her  conduct  is  influenced,  none  the  less  that  the  irrespon-
sible side  is  under  repression,  and  in  this  case  concealed
by  enthusiastic  interests  in  life.  Here  I  may  add  that
the  sex  of  a  dream  personification  matters  little — male
may  stand  for  female  and  vice  versa.  The  symbol  most
appropriate  will  be  selected,  regardless  of  sex,  or  because
of  it,  as  the  case  may  be.  This  should  not  surprise
us,  because  every  normal  human  being  contains  elements
of  both  sexes,  not  only  biologically,  but  also  psycho-
logically.

I  will  next  give  an  example  of  a  cryptic  word  which
occurred  in  a  dream,  in  the  making  of  which  a  great
condensation  of  dream  ideas  has  taken  place.  Here  I
must  again  remind  you  that  the  remembered  dream  is
the  manifest  content  only.  As  Freud  says,  "  The  first
thing  that  becomes  clear  to  the  investigator  in  the  com-
parison of  the  dream  content  with  the  dream  thoughts
is  that  a  tremendous  work  of  condensation  has  taken
place.  The  dream  is  reserved,  paltry,  and  laconic,  when
compared  with  the  range  and  copiousness  of  the  dream
thoughts."  I  do  not  propose  to  relate  the  dream,  but
will  merely  give  the  word  and  the  associations  attached
to  it,  supplied  by  the  dreamer. I  may  say  the  dreamer


30


Constance  E.  Long,  M.D.


[part


was  Welsh  and  a  speaker  of  Welsh.  She  saw  on  a  door-
plate  the  word  :

Anwlwimdwy.

Anwl — was  a  Welsh  word  meaning  "  dear."

Dwy — meant  "  two,"  or  feminine.

Wy — (1)  a  common  ending  for  names  of  places  :

(2)  the  last  syllable  in  her  mother's  name  :

(3)  the  first  syllable  in  her  sister's  name  :

(4)  a  word  meaning  "  egg."

Lwm="lum,"  part  of  the  names  of  two  people  of  whom
she  thought,  giving  associations.
Wlwin  =cwlwin — meant  "  a  knot."
Nwl=niwl — meant  "a  frog."
Mdwy==nodrwy — meant  "a  ring."

English  words  gave  the  following  associations  :
Anwl  =  annul,  null  and  void.

Wmdwy — Humpty  Dumpty,  the  Liberal  Party,  Anti -suffrage,
Lum  =Lump.

Following  these  items  back  to  early  reminiscences,  she
recollects  that  at  the  age  of  nine  she  associated  with  three
children  whose  names  all  began  with  W.,  and  now  noticed
that  in  Anwl,  Wm,  Dwy,  there  are  three  W.'s,  and  Wy
suggests  the  name  of  two  of  them,  but  the  third  has  no
letter  beyond  the  W.  Every  one  of  the  foregoing  associ-
ations led  to  important  dream  thoughts.  The  word
Anwlwimdwy,  then,  is  merely  the  form  that  conceals  the
latent  content.  It  is  a  symbolic  picture,  embodying
psychological  problems,  a  language  of  signs  which  has  the
significance  of  shorthand.  Analysis  finds  the  associations,
shewing  subtle  symbolic  connections  between  the  form  and
its  contents  ;  these  connections  represent  the  dream  thoughts.

Another  short  dream  shewing  similar  mechanisms  occurred
to  a  middle-aged  man,  who  was  thinking  of  proposing  to
a  lady  who  lived  in  Highgate.  He  was  feeling  dashed  by
recent  experiences  and  was  inclined  to  give  up  his  quest.
As  he  woke  one  morning  he  caught  this  fleeting  dream  :
"Archie  Hemel  H.em\Me&."  The  associations  with  Archie
were  : an  ingenuous  youth  ; the  railway  arch  ;  Archway


lxxv.] Psychoanalytic  Use  of  Subliminal  Material.  31

Tavern ;  Highgate  Archway  ;  the  way  to  Highgate — this
was  the  way  to  the  lady  of  course  !  Hemel — Himmel  =
Heaven.  "  What  is  the  German  for  saddle  (he  continued
in  associating),  and  for  a  camel's  hump,  which  is  not  a
defect,  but  is  useful  to  ride  on  ?  "  Hempsted  was  a
combination  of  Hampstead  and  Hemel  Hempsted — two
places  associated  in  the  dreamer's  mind  with  successfully
wedded  couples  who  are  free  and  natural  people.  His
mixed  attitude  to  this  problem  of  marriage,  needing  such
courage  on  the  part  of  our  timid  dreamer,  is  well  shewn
in  the  camel's  hump — "  having  the  hump."  The  question
about  the  German  for  saddle  means  :  won't  he  be  saddled  ?
but  will  it  not  be  Himmel  ?  etc.,  etc.  I  need  not  elaborate
further.

When  dreams  and  phantasies  fail,  as  they  occasionally
do  in  analysis,  there  is  either  conscious  material  to  work
upon,  or  other  subconscious  products,  such  as  verses,
drawings,  paintings,  or  models.  All  is  grist  that  comes
to  the  analytical  mill.  A  certain  patient  brings  me  a
kind  of  shorthand  drawings,  which  analyse  out  very  use-
fully. They  are  extremely  abstract  forms,  sometimes  mere
lines  or  curves,  representing  germinal  thoughts  or  feelings  ;
they  are  not  unlike  some  scribblings  I  have  seen  in  Miss
Johnson's  accounts  of  Mrs.  Holland's  scripts.  One  comes
to  believe  that  nearly  every  one  is  capable  of  some  form
of  primitive  art,  and  that  it,  like  the  facade  of  the  dream,
is  a  fruit  of  the  symbolic  function  of  the  unconscious
mind.  I  have  also  a  number  of  little  statuettes  done  in
plasticine,  produced  by  a  woman  during  analysis.  She  had
never  done  anything  of  this  kind  before  ;  but  these  things
are  not  to  be  appraised  for  their  artistic  merit,  though
we  do  occasionally  find  evidences  of  real  art  in  a  latent
or  nascent  state.

I  may  say  that  any  effort  to  force  an  interpretation  of
subliminal  material  falls  flat.  The  intelligent  patient  will
have  none  of  it.  When  the  material  is  rightly  handled,
the  more  obvious  and  simple  truths  go  home  at  once,  for
the  reason,  as  Jung1  says,  that  the  analyst  "has  a  con-
federate  in the patient's unconscious." Analytical  work

1  The  Conception  of  the  Unconscious.


32


Constance  E.  Long,  M.D.


[part


follows  laws  and  demands  a  technique.  The  training  which
analysis  gives  in  the  observation  of  unconscious  phenomena
greatly  deepens  the  individual's  rapport  with  his  own
unconscious  and  so  brings  his  other  side  into  closer  union
with  his  consciousness.  The  Swiss  school  advises  that  after
an  analysis,  the  patient  should  remain  in  touch  with  his
unconscious,  that  is,  by  paying  attention  to  it  and  carrying
on  his  own  analysis  to  the  best  of  his  ability.  "  The
real  end  of  analysis  is  reached  when  the  patient  has
attained  adequate  knowledge  of  the  methods  by  which
he  can  remain  in  such  contact,  and  apply  its  results  to
his  life."  The  problem  is  to  adapt  oneself  continually,
with  an  increasing  degree  of  success,  to  the  external
world.  It  is  natural  to  make  efforts  to  overcome  the
obstacles  in  life  to  a  certain  degree.  When  the  obstacles
are  too  great,  and  the  man  gives  up  trying  to  overcome
them,  the  energy  that  should  have  been  thus  used  turns
instead  to  j)roducing  emotional  disturbances,  physical  and
mental.  It  is  imperative  that  a  rational  solution  of  the
patient's  conflicts  should  be  found,  and  they  should  be
found  by  the  patient  himself.  For  the  aim  of  analysis
is  to  leave  the  jmtient  morally  responsible.  It  helps  him
to  discover  where  his  energy  flows  most  easily,  and  to
find  the  path  in  life  where  he  can  be  most  truly  at  one
with  himself.  When  he  has  learnt  to  find  the  latent  values
in  himself,  he  is  generally  more  tolerant  and  harmonious
in  his  relations  with  other  people  and  with  the  external
world  in  general.  It  is  with  this  important  aim  of  unifying
the  personality  that  we  make  analytical  use  of  subliminal
material.


LXXV.]


Dream -Analysis.


33


II.

DREAM- ANALYSIS.
By  Alice  Johnson.
Introduction.

I  have  long  been  convinced  that  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research  could  not  afford  to  neglect  the  study  of  psycho-
analysis. It  may  be  remembered  that  Dr.  Freud's  early
work  was  referred  to  more  than  once  in  Mr.  Myers's
articles  on  the  subliminal  consciousness,1  while  a  lengthy
notice  of  Drs.  Breuer  and  Freud's  Studien  iiber  Hysterie
was  included  in  Human  Personality  (Vol.  I.  pp.  50-56)
Mr.  Myers  had  a  remarkable  faculty  for  recognising  what
was  important  and  significant  in  any  fresh  field  of  research,
and  if  he  had  lived,  would,  I  have  no  doubt,  have  made
himself  fully  acquainted  with  the  subject  and  considered
its  bearings  on  psychical  research.

From  1910  onwards,  some  valuable  discussions  of  psycho-
analysis have  been  contributed  to  the  Proceedings  by
Dr. Mitchell and Dr. Woolley,2 besides an  important

1  Proceedings  S.P.R.  Vol.  IX.  p.  12  (1893);  Journal  S.P.R,  Vol.  VIII.
p.  55  (1897).

2  "  Some  Recent  Developments  in  Psychotherapy,"  by  T.  W.  Mitchell,
M.D.,  Proc.  Vol.  XXIV.  p.  665.

Review  of  Dr.  Bleuler's  "  Die  Psychanalyse  Freuds,"  by  V.  J.  Woolley,
M.D.,  Vol.  XXVI.  p.  367.

"  Some  Auto-suggested  Visions  as  illustrating  Dream-Formation,"  by
V.  J.  Woolley,  Vol.  XXVII.  p.  390.

Review  of  Dr.  Freud's  "  Psychopathology  of  Everyday  Life,"  by
Constance  E.  Long,  M.D.,  Vol.  XXVII.  p.  411.

Review  of  Prof.  Jung's  "Collected  Papers  on  Analytical  Psychology,"
by  T.  W.  Mitchell,  Vol.  XXIX.  p.  191.
c  33


34


Alice  Johnson.


[part


paper  by  Dr.  Freud  himself  on  "  The  Unconscious  in
Psychoanalysis  "  (Proc.  Vol.  XXVI.  p.  312).

The  present  paper  attempts  to  deal  with  certain  limited
aspects  only  of  the  subject  through  the  detailed  analysis
of  a  few  of  the  writer's  own  dreams  by  the  psycho-
analytic  "  method  of  association."

It  is  a  tenet  of  psychoanalysis  that  all  the  incidents
of  a  dream  stand  for  events  significant  for  the  dreamer,
and  that  all  the  dream-characters  are  dramatisations  of
different  aspects  of  himself,  his  varying  feelings,  conflicting
impulses,  and  so  on  ;  so  that  if  any  one  dream  could  be
completely  analysed  and  interpreted,  it  would  give  a
picture  of  the  man's  whole  inner  self.  The  primary  aim
of  psychoanalysis  is  to  gain  an  insight  into  the  personality
of  the  dreamer  through  studying  his  dreams  from  their
personal  and  especially  from  their  emotional  side,  as
described  in  Dr.  Long's  paper  above  ;  and  the  knowledge
thus  acquired  is  often  used  with  great  success  for  thera-
peutical purposes.  But  it  is  also  possible  to  analyse
dreams  on  the  lines  rather  of  pure  psychology,  and  to
treat  the  results,  as  is  done  here,  in  a  less  personal  and
more  objective  manner,  which  has  perhaps  a  more  direct
bearing  on  psychical  research.

The  analysis  seems  to  show  that  many  more  thoughts
and  ideas  are  involved  in  the  dream  than  appear  in
that  part  of  it  which  is  consciously  remembered  (its
"  manifest  "  content)  ;  and  an  attempt  is  made  to  discover
how  these  underlying  ideas  (its  "  latent "  content)  are
concealed,  and  to  what  cause  or  principle  of  mental
action  they  owe  their  concealment.

In  some  automatic  scripts  also  obscurities  occur,  which,
though  sometimes  accidental,  at  other  times  appear  to  be
deliberate.  This  is  manifest  in  some  scripts  that  have
been  discussed  in  the  Proceedings.  If  therefore  we  can
obtain  any  light  on  the  causes  of  obscurities  in  dreams,  it
may  help  us  to  understand  the  psychology  of  automatic  script.

From  a  psychological  point  of  view,  dreams  resemble
artistic  or  literary  compositions,  with  the  peculiarity  that
they  are  composed  by  the  dreamer's  subliminal  for  him-
self, and are addressed exclusively to himself.  Thus,


LXXV.]


Dream- Analysis


35


they  are  more  like  poetry  than  prose  ;  for,  roughly
speaking,  poetry  is  a  mode  of  self-expression,  whereas
prose  is  better  adapted  for  conveying  facts  to  other
people.  Since  the  poet  wishes  to  express  his  own  ideas
rather  than  to  make  himself  plain  to  others,  it  is
enough  for  him  to  use  a  descriptive  epithet  instead  of
a  name,  or  an  allusion  or  image  instead  of  a  simple
statement  of  fact.  Yet  even  in  the  most  subjective  poetry
he  does  not  completely  ignore  his  readers  ;  at  the  back
of  his  mind  he  must  to  some  extent  be  addressing  him-
self to  them.  In  a  dream,  on  the  other  hand,  the  dreamer
is,  as  it  were,  talking  to  himself  and  cannot  possibly
be  overheard.  He  is  therefore  entirely  absolved  from
the  necessity  of  making  himself  clear  to  anybody  else.
So,  if  we  wish  to  understand  either  imaginative  literature
(including  poetry  and  myths),  or  dreams,  we  must  take
the  trouble  to  note  the  metaphors  or  allusions  used  by
the  poet  or  dreamer,  and  try  to  find  out  the  underlying
thoughts  or  feelings  which  he  attaches  to  them,  and
which  presumably  have  determined  his selection  of  them.

The  general  analogies  between  myths  and  dreams
have  been  pointed  out  by  many  writers, — mythologists
and  philosophers,1  as  well  as  psychologists.  The  myth
starts,  we  may  suppose,  as  a  simple  story  of  a  single
interesting  event.  The  story,  as  it  passes  from  mouth
to  mouth,  gradually  picks  up  the  features  of  other  similar
events  and  becomes  a  collective  or  composite  story  of
many  incidents  telescoped  into  one.  Then,  as  men's
minds  become  more  and  more  capable  of  apprehending
abstract  ideas,  the  composite  story  may  be  interpreted
in  a  metaphorical  or  allegorical  way.  So  some  primitive
and  barbaric  myth,  by  the  gradual  accretion  of  associa-
tions and  emotions  that  have  gathered  round  it  in  the
course  of  many  generations, — who  found  in  it,  some  one
thing,  and  some  another,  answering  to  their  own  feelings, —
comes  to  have  an  immense  and  growing  appeal  to  all
classes  of  mankind  and  plays  a  great  part  in  the  mental
evolution  of  the  race.

1  See,  e.g.,  an  interesting  discussion  in  Prof.  J.  A.  Stewart's  Myths  oj
Plato,  pp.  4-8.


36


Alice  Johnson.


[part


In  much  the  same  way  that  the  history — both  physical
and  mental — of  the  race  repeats  or  telescopes  itself  in
the  history  of  the  individual,  the  mental  history  of  the
individual  may  in  some  cases  apparently  repeat  or  tele-
scope itself  in  a  single  dream,  which  seems  to  run  through
the  whole  gamut  of  the  dreamer's  experience,  representing
at  the  same  time  the  most  infantile  and  the  most  advanced
stages  of  his  personality.  On  the  infantile  element,
which  comes  out  clearly  in  most  of  the  dreams  analysed
below,  much  stress  has  been  laid  by  psychoanalysts,
who  maintain  that  the  dream-state  represents  a  return
to  the  primeval.

There  can,  I  think,  be  little  doubt  that  at  least  some
dreams  are,  like  myths,  allegorical.  Others  are  probably
nothing  more  than  a  literal  reproduction — a  mere  repetition
in  memory — of  past  experiences,  real  or  imaginary,  or  are
simply  rambling  and  incoherent.  But  the  present  dis-
cussion deals  only  with  dreams  of  the  allegorical  type, —
with  those,  that  is,  in  which  a  meaning  other  than  what
appears  on  the  surface  has  been  detected.  In  comparing
such  dreams  with  myths,  we  observe  that  while  the
narrator  of  a  myth  presumably  intends  to  indicate  or
suggest  the  ideas  underlying  it,  the  dream  is  sometimes
more  like  a  riddle  ;  on  the  face  of  it,  it  looks  as  if  the
person  who  propounded  the  riddle  did  not  wish  it  to  be
guessed,  or  at  least  wished  to  make  it  difficult  to  guess.

Freud,  as  is  well  known,  believes  the  concealment  of
meaning  to  be  intentional  ;  he  puts  it  down  to  the  action
of  his  hypothetical  "  Censor,"  who,  on  his  theory,  distorts
the  ideas  of  the  dream-self  because  they  are  such  as
would  annoy  or  disgust  the  waking  self  if  they  were
openly  expressed.

Before  accepting  this  theory,  it  seems  to  me  we  should
consider  how  far  the  imperfect  recollection  of  dreams
may  not  account  for  their  obscurity.  All  we  know  about
the  dream  must  be  founded  on  the  conscious  recollection
of  it  after  waking, — after,  that  is,  a  definite  break  in
consciousness  which  has  probably  caused  much  of  it  to
be  forgotten.  We  are  often  aware  that  we  have  forgotten
many  dreams, and  many  portions of  dreams, for  there


LXXV.]


Dream- Analysis.


37


are  often  dissociations  of  consciousness  within  the  course
of  the  dream  itself.  We  may  compare  it  to  a  cinemato-
graph film  with  large  pieces  torn  out,  which  makes  it
difficult  to  understand  what  subjects  are  represented.
But  the  one  and  only  spectator  of  the  show  (i.e.  the
dreamer  of  the  dream)  is  the  designer  of  the  film,  and
he- — if  he  can  recover  the  recollection  of  it — will  under-
stand its  meaning.  Other  people  can  only  make  guesses
at  it,  from  his  description  of  the  fragments.

The  dreamer  must  retain  in  his  subliminal  consciousness
the  recollection  of  the  whole  dream  and  of  his  thoughts
about  it  at  the  time,  and  any  view  of  the  dream  that
conflicts  with  this  will  probably  be  confronted  with
feelings  of  dissatisfaction  arising  from  the  subliminal.
On  the  other  hand,  when  the  dreamer  feels  convinced
that  the  solution  he  has  found  is  the  right  one — at
least  as  far  as  it  goes — it  seems  probable  that  the  sub-
liminal is  satisfied  too,  or  else  it  would  make  some  protest.

Freudians  would  not,  I  imagine,  accept  this  view,
because  they  would  hold  that  it  ignores  the  action  of
the  "  Censor."  I  can  only  say  that,  having  studied
my  dreams  carefully,  and,  I  believe,  with  an  open  mind,
by  the  association  method  for  the  last  two  years,  I  am
unable  to  find  in  them  any  evidence  of  the  working  of
the  Censor.  The  dreams  given  below  may,  no  doubt,
be  interpreted  on  Freudian  lines,  (as  it  is  obvious  that
any  dream  can  be),  by  any  one  who  chooses  to  follow
the  all-embracing  lines  of  Freudian  symbolism,  instead
of  taking  my  own  personal  associations  with  the  topics.
As  the  result  of  following  my  own  associations,  which
seems  to  me  the  only  reliable  method,  I  have  come  to
the  provisional  conclusion  that  there  is  no  deliberate
concealment,  but  rather — where  any  definite  intention
exists — that  the  intention  is  to  clear  up  some  train  of
thought, — to  express  some  idea  in  a  form  which,  when
grasped,  will  give  it  a  fresh  significance,  and  that  the
metaphors  are  chosen,  as  they  are  chosen  in  poetry,
for  this  purpose.

The  views  here  advanced  are  based  partly  on  a  study
of  some of the  work  of  Freud and Jung, but  chiefly


38


Alice  Johnson.


[part


on  analysis  of  my  own  dreams,  aided  by  discussions  with  the
analyst  (who,  of  course,  is  not  responsible  for  anything  in
the  paper).  This  is  obviously  a  slender  basis  for  generalisation,
and  I  should  not  have  ventured  to  express  any  opinion  on
the  work  of  psychoanalysts  but  that  I  found  myself
driven  to  do  so  in  the  course  of  analysing  certain  dreams,
such  as  the  "  Queen  Victoria  "  and  "  Kaiser  "  cases
below.  Whatever  point  there  may  be  in  these  analyses
would  have  been  lost  by  the  suppression  of  my  personal
views.  This  must  be  my  excuse  for  writing,  as  a  novice,  in
a  manner  that  must,  to  an  expert,  appear  presumptuous  and
dogmatic.  My  ojMnions  are  not  put  forward  as  important  in
themselves,  but  the  interaction  between  the  dream-thoughts
and  the  opinions  may  possibly  be  instructive.

To  the  psychoanalyst  who  may  find  the  analyses
barren  in  other  respects,  I  may  add  that,  as  remarked
above,  the  personal  application  of  the  dream  interpretations
is,  for  obvious  reasons,  deliberately  omitted.

General  Description  of  the  Process  of  Analysis.

The  first  stage  in  the  analysis  shows  the  material
out  of  which  the  dream  is  concocted.  We  can  often
remember  incidents,  exjjerienced  or  read  of,  which  are
like  the  incidents  of  the  dream.  We  do  not  remember
that  we  concocted  the  dream  out  of  them,  but  we  are
ready  to  believe  it,  because  it  accounts  for  the  dream
in  a  simple  and  reasonable  way.  We  can  often  also
remember  some  quite  recent  circumstance  which  has
reminded  us  of  the  incidents  and  has  apparently  led  us
to  work  them  up  into  the  dream.  This  affords  a  reason
for  the  choice  of  the  hicidents.

But  considering  the  mass  of  past  experiences  from
which  we  might  choose,  it  would  seem  that  we  could
find  a  similar  reason  for  many  other  choices.  And  we
often  notice  that  both  the  past  experience  and  the  recent
incident  are  trivial  and  unimportant  ;  it  is  clearly  not
because  they  are  especially  interesting  to  us  that  we
have  dreamt  of  them.  We  have  still  then  to  account
for  the  jiarticular  selection  made.


LXXV.]


Dream- Analysis.


39


It  is  the  peculiar  merit  of  Freud  that  he  grasped
the  importance  of  this  question  and  devised  an  empirical
method  for  finding  an  answer  to  it.

Thus,  I  dream  that  I  am  walking  along  a  narrow,
uneven  path,  cut  in  the  face  of  a  steep  hillside,  with
three  members  of  my  family,  A.,  B.,  and  C.  After
waking  I  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  dream  was
compounded  out  of  memories  of  two  somewhat  similar
walks ,• — one  with  A.  and  B.  in  North  Wales,  the  other
with  C.  in  the  Lakes.  I  also  remember  that  a  day  or
two  before  the  dream,  I  happened  to  mention  the  North
Wales  walk  to  D.,  another  member  of  the  family  party
there,  but  who  did  not  himself  appear  in  the  dream.
No  particular  incident  occurred  on  either  of  the  walks,
nor  was  my  talk  with  D.  on  any  but  trivial  topics.

The  analytic  method  takes  up  the  problem  at  this
point,  with  a  view  to  finding  some  ground  for  the  choice
of  the  dream-material.  I  look  for  my  associations  with
the  items  of  the  dream  :  what  do  I  first  think  of, —
i.e.  what  is  of  interest  to  me, — in  connection  with  the
different  points  ?  E.g.,  the  Lakes  :  I  think  at  once  of
Mr.  Myers,  who  spent  his  early  life  there  and  had  so
strong  an  affection  for  the  country  (see  his  Fragments
of  Prose  and  Poetry,  and  his  Wordsworth).  The  thought
of  him  naturally  carries  with  it  thoughts  of  his  work
in  psychical  research  ;  it  carries  me  at  once  to  one  of
the  strongest  interests  of  my  life.

I  give  this  dream  in  outline  only,  including  the  first
step  only  of  the  analysis,  merely  as  a  preliminary  illustra-
tion of  the  analytic  method.  The  first  step  shows  that
there  is  more  point  than  appears  at  first  sight  in  the
choice  of  a  walk  in  the  Lakes  as  one  of  the  factors  in
the  make-up  of  the  dream  ;  the  subject  is  more  interesting
to  the  dreamer  than  was  at  first  apparent.

Freud  holds  that  by  following  up  the  dreamer's  associa-
tions with  all  the  items  of  the  dream,  something  of
great  interest  to  him  may  be  found  connected  with
every  one  of  them,  and  that  this  is  why  he  chose  them
to  dream  of.  He  maintains  that  the  ideas  which  come
out in the analysis through the dreamer's  associations,


40


Alice  Johnson.


[part


and  which  he  calls  "  the  dream-thoughts,"  have  entered
into — have  indeed  taken  a  preponderant  part  hi — the  for-
mation of  the  dream,  although  the  dreamer  cannot  remember
that  they  have  had  anything  to  do  with  it.  The  links  which
are  lost  to  recollection  are  supplied  by  the  associations.

Now  it  is  comparatively  easy  to  believe  that  in  the
case  just  given  the  dreamer  mentally  transformed  and
compounded  two  concrete  images  of  a  walk  into  one
similar  concrete  image  ;  even  though  no  recollection  of
the  mental  process  could  be  recovered.  We  can  believe
it  on  what  may  be  called  circumstantial  evidence.  It
is  much  more  difficult  to  believe  that  the  complex  and
more  or  less  abstract  idea  of  Mr.  Myers  and  his  con-
nection with  the  S.P.R.  was  transformed  by  some  obscure
process  1  into  the  simple  concrete  image  of  a  walk  along
a  hillside.  It  must  appear  on  the  face  of  it  much  more
probable  that  the  idea  of  Mr.  Myers  first  occurred  to
the  dreamer's  mind  in  the  course  of  the  analysis,  and
that  the  meaning  attached  to  that  idea  was  read  into
the  dream  afterwards.  If,  as  most  analysts  say,  a  man
will  persevere  in  analysing  his  own  dreams  as  thoroughly
as  possible  for  some  considerable  time,  he  will  probably
convince  himself  that  such  apparently  remote  ideas  as
this  have  actually  entered  into  the  formation  of  his
dreams, — i.e.  have  not  only  been  read  into  them  after-
wards ;  but — they  generally  say — his  analysis  will  fail
to  carry  conviction  to  any  one  else  who  has  not  gone
through  the  same  experience.  One  cannot,  however,
remain  satisfied  with  a  conviction  which  is  only  j)ersonal  ;
and  the  cases  which  I  give  below — a  few  typical  ones
out  of  a  large  number  recorded  and  studied — are  analysed
in  considerable  detail,  in  order  to  give  readers  material
for  forming  their  own  judgment  on  them.

A  Literary  Parallel.

I  referred  above  to  the  analogy  between  dreams  and
literary compositions, — a feature which has  especially

1  For  Freud's  conception  of  the  process,  which  in  this  brief  and  bald  state-
ment I  am  not  attempting  to  expound,  see  his  Interpretation  of  Dreams.


LXXV.]


Dream- Analysis .


4.1


struck  me  because  it  happens  that  the  material  for  my
own  dreams  is  largely  drawn  from  literary  sources.  If
we  analyse  a  poetical  metaphor  on  the  same  lines  as
those  on  which  a  dream  is  analysed,  we  find  that  meanings
are  brought  out  in  a  similar  way.  The  analogy  is  so
essential  for  my  general  argument  that  I  venture  to
give  an  instance  in  illustration,  from  Dante's  Inferno,
XIV.  103-1 19,1  as  follows  :

Within  the  mountain  [Mount  Ida,  in  Crete]  stands  erect  a
great  elder,  who  holds  his  shoulders  turned  towards  Damietta,
and  gazes  at  Rome  as  his  mirror.  His  head  is  fashioned  of
fine  gold  ;  and  pure  silver  are  his  arms  and  breast  ;  then  is
he  of  brass  even  to  the  fork  ;  from  thence  downwards  is  he
all  choice  iron,  save  that  his  right  foot  is  baked  earth,  and
upon  the  first  more  than  upon  the  other  he  stands  upright.
Every  part  beside  the  gold  is  burst  with  a  cleft  which  drips
tears,  the  which,  collected,  pierce  this  cavern.  Their  course
into  this  vale  is  from  rock  to  rock  ;  they  make  Acheron,
Styx  and  Phlegethon  ;  afterwards  .  .  .  they  make  Cocytns.

The  image  of  this  great  Old  Man  is — like  so  many
dream-images — compounded  primarily  of  two  factors  : —
(1)  The  "great  image"  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  forgotten
dream,  which  Daniel  recalled  and  interpreted  to  him
(Daniel  II.  31  ff.)  :  "  This  image's  head  was  of  fine  gold,
his  breast  and  his  arms  of  silver,  his  belly  and  his  thighs
of  brass,  his  legs  of  iron,  his  feet  part  of  iron  and  part
of  clay."  ;  (2)  the  four  ages  of  man,  represented  by  the
four  metals, — an  idea  common  to  the  ancients,  but  perhaps
derived  by  Dante  from  Ovid,  Met.  I.  89-150,  in  particular.

The  Old  Man  of  Crete,  then,  represents  the  whole
human  race  from  the  earliest  age  onwards.  He  is  placed
in  Crete  because,  from  Aen.  III.  105,  Crete  is  regarded
as  "  the  cradle  of  our  race,"  that  is,  the  Trojan  race,
the  ancestors — according  to  Virgil — of  the  Romans.  The
tears  that  issue  from  every  part  of  him,  except  his  golden
head,  are  shed  for  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  the  human
race.  In  the  golden  age  alone,  under  the  reign  of  Saturn,
king of Crete, [Inf. XIV. 96) mankind was  innocent

1  A.  J.  Butler's  translation.


42


Alice  Johnson.


[part


and  happy,  for  sin  and  war  had  not  yet  come  into  the
world.  In  the  silver,  brass,  and  iron  ages  men  became
progressively  more  and  more  wicked  and  impious.

Dante,  starting  from  these  two  sources,  which  for
brevity  may  be  called  Daniel  and  Ovid,  diverges  at
once  from  his  originals.  Daniel's  interpretation  of  his
image  was  that  the  golden  head  represented  King  Nebu-
chadnezzar, and  the  silver,  brass,  and  iron  the  kings
that  were  to  succeed  him.  The  symbolism  of  the  four
metals  here  is  essentially  different  from  that  of  the  four
metals  corresponding  to  the  four  ages  of  man  ;  but  there
is  a  superficial  resemblance  between  the  two  cases,  and
just  such  a  superficial  resemblance  as  we  often  find
between  two  factors  of  a  dream-image.

Further,  Dante  transforms  Daniel's  image  in  two  re-
spects :  (1)  he  makes  the  brass  end  with  the  trunk,
whereas  Daniel's  brazen  part  includes  the  thighs  ;  (2)  he
makes  the  right  foot  of  clay  and  the  left  of  iron,  whereas
Daniel  makes  both  feet  partly  iron  and  partly  clay.

Such  deviations  in  the  case  of  dreams  rule,
significant  ;  they  are  generally  indicative  of  the  idiosyn-
crasies of  the  dreamer.  In  the  case  of  this  metaphor
they  introduce  a  dominant  idea  of  Dante's, — that  the
human  race  rests  essentially  on  the  double  organisation
of  Church  and  Empire,  each  the  supreme  human  authority
in  its  own  sphere,  both  deriving  their  authority  direct
from  God.  That  the  Old  Man  rests  more  upon  his  right
foot  of  clay  than  upon  his  left  foot  of  iron  indicates
that  the  ecclesiastical  power  had  actually  become  stronger
than  the  secular  power, — a  usurpation  of  authority  against
which  Dante  in  his  works  was  constantly  protesting.

The  0  vidian  factor  in  the  Old  Man  of  Crete  is  aug-
mented and  largely  coloured  by  what  may  be  described
generally  as  Virgilian  influences,  for  it  must  have  been
chiefly  from  Virgil  that  Dante  drew  his  enthusiastic
idealisation  of  Rome.  The  Old  Man  stands  in  the  moun-
tain with  his  back  turned  always  to  Damietta  (in  Egypt),
— the  type  of  the  old  barbarous  and  luxurious  monarchies
after  which  the  degenerate  Roman  hankered  ;  from  which,
in  Virgil's  age,  Rome  was  saved  by  the  Battle  of  Actium


LXXV.]


Dream- Analysis .


and  the  final  victory  of  Augustus  over  Antony,1  "  nigh
the  time  when  all  heaven  willed  to  bring  the  world  to
its  own  serene  mood  "  {Par.  VI.  55-56).  Later  Constantine,
by  removing  the  capital  of  the  Empire  to  Constantinople,
"  wheeled  back  the  eagle,  counter  to  the  course  of  heaven
which  it  had  followed  in  train  of  "  Aeneas  {Par.  VI.  1-3),  which
was  the  origin — in  Dante's  view — of  the  disastrous  usurpation
of  temporal  power  by  the  Papacy.  The  reversion  to  the
East  symbolises  for  him  a  return  to  the  Dark  Ages.  So
the  Old  Man  of  Crete  keeps  his  face  turned  always  to
Rome,  the  ideal  city,  destined  ultimately  to  become  "  that
Rome  whereof  Christ  is  a  Roman  "  {Purg.  XXXII.  102).

The  ancient  poets  looked  back  to  the  past  and  longed
for  the  return  of  the  primeval  Golden  Age.  For  Dante
the  human  race  turns  its  face  to  the  future  and  looks
forward  to  the  realisation  of  its  ideals  there.  Meanwhile
the  miseries  and  evils  of  the  past  and  the  present — the
tears  of  the  Old  Man — are  flowing  continually  away
from  the  earth,  down  into  hell.

While  scholars  would  perhaps  not  endorse  every  detail  of
the  above,  they  would  probably  all  agree  that  these  meanings,
or  something  like  them,  were  in  Dante's  mind  as  he  was
writing  the  passage  and  have  not  merely  been  read  into
it  later  by  commentators.  By  a  somewhat  similar  process  of
analysis,  one  may  be  convinced  that  complicated  meanings
are  inherent  or  latent  in  comparatively  simple  dreams.

The  first  dream  to  be  considered  illustrates  the  use
of  the  association  method  in  disclosing  a  connection
between  the  factors  that  could  hardly  have  been  discovered
by  any  other  means.

Dream. "The  Golden  Stairs."

A  photograph  of  Burne- Jones's  "  Golden  Stairs  "  was  given
to  me,  and  I  hung  it  up  in  a  certain  place  on  the  wall  of
my  room.

1  The  culminating  scene  of  the  future  history  of  Rome  represented  on
the  shield  of  Aeneas,  see  Aen.  VIII.  675  ff.  See  also  the  prayer  of
Juno  that  the  Romans  may  never  return  to  Troy,  Aen.  XII.  819-828.


44


Alice  Johnson.


[part


When  I  woke  up,  I  remembered  that  the  place  where
I  dreamt  I  had  hung  it  was  really  occupied  by  two
pictures,  Rethel's  Der  Tod  als  Freund  (Death  tolling  a
bell  while  an  old  man  is  dying  peacefully  in  his  chair),
and  a  Nativity  by  Diirer.  So  it  seemed  that  in  my
dream  I  had  substituted  the  "  Golden  Stairs  "  for  these
two  pictures.

I  have  never  seen  the  original  of  the  "  Golden  Stairs,"
or  taken  any  interest  in  it  ;  but  reproductions  of  it
(which  do  not  attract  me)  are,  of  course,  very  common.
It  happens  that,  through  a  casual  remark  once  made
by  a  friend  of  mine,  I  associate  it  with  Jacob's  Ladder,
though  there  is  no  connection  between  the  subjects  of
the  picture  and  of  Jacob's  dream.  In  the  picture  a
number  of  girls  are  walking  down  a  winding  staircase  ;
in  the  dream  the  Ladder  connects  earth  and  heaven,
and  the  angels  descend  and  ascend  on  it.  There  is,
however,  a  connection  between  Jacob's  Ladder  and  the
two  pictures  for  which  the  "  Golden  Stairs  "  was  sub-
stituted ;  for  in  "  Der  Tod  als  Freund  "  the  soul  of  the
dying  man  is,  we  may  suppose,  about  to  ascend  into
heaven,  and  the  Nativity  is  a  "  descent  into  generation."
The  Ladder  represents  both  these  in  a  composite  form  ;
for  it  is  associated  with  the  promise  of  posterity  to
Jacob  :  "  The  Lord  stood  above  it  and  said  .  .  .  thy  seed
shall  be  as  the  dust  of  the  earth  .  .  .  and  in  thee  and
in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed  "
{Genesis  XXVIII.  13,  14).

The  church  at  Rottingdean  where  Burne- Jones  is  buried
contains  seven  windows  designed  by  him.  Of  these,  the
two  in  the  tower  represent  Jacob's  Ladder  and  a  "  Jesse
tree  "  with  the  Virgin  and  Child  at  the  top.  I  had
visited  the  church  and  paid  special  attention  to  these
windows  about  two  years  earlier,  so  that  there  was  in
my  mind  a  definite  link  between  Burne-Jones  and  the
Ladder  and  the  Nativity.

Another  of  my  associations  with  Jacob's  Ladder  comes
from  the  Paradiso  (XXII.  111-120).  Dante  rises  by  the
Ladder  from  the  Seventh  Heaven  into  the  Heaven  of
the Fixed Stars, and finds himself, to his joy, in  the


LXXV.]


Dream- A  na  lysis .


4.-,


region  of  his  own  natal  stars,  the  Gemini.  Heaven  has
many  mansions,  and  he  returns  to  the  one  from  which
he  first  descended  to  earth,  the  mansion  of  his  "  genius,"
"  the  Soul  that  rises  with  us,  our  life's  Star."  He  brought
with  him  into  the  world  a  certain  individuality,  and  the
same  individuality  he  carries  back  with  him  into  Paradise  ;
it  is  on  this  very  account  that  he  finds  himself  at  home  there.

The  general  idea  is  probably  derived  from  Plato's
Timaeus,  (known  to  Dante  only  in  the  Latin  paraphrase
of  Chalcidius)  ;  cf.  Par.  IV.  49-53  :  "  That  which  Timaeus
argueth  of  the  souls.  .  .  .  He  saith  the  soul  returneth  to
its  star,  believing  it  cleft  thence  when  nature  gave  it
a  form."

The  passage  alluded  to  in  the  Timaeus  Myth 1  is  as
follows  :

When  [God]  had  made  of  [the  elements  of  the  Soul  of  the
All]  one  mixture,  he  took  and  divided  Souls  therefrom,  as
many  as  there  are  stars,  and  to  each  star  he  assigned  a  Soul,
and  caused  each  Soul  to  go  up  into  her  star  as  into  a  chariot,
and  showed  unto  her  the  nature  of  the  All.  [The  souls  are
then  born  into  human  bodies,  with  all  the  human  passions]  ;
and  if  any  man  should  hold  these  passions  in  subjection,  his
life  would  be  righteous  ;  but  unrighteous  if  he  should  be  over-
come of  them  ;  and  whosoever  lived  virtuously  all  the  time
appointed  unto  him  should  journey  back  to  his  kindred  star
and  dwell  there,  and  there  should  have  a  life  blessed  and
conform  unto  his  nature  ;  but  whosoever  fell  short  of  this
[must  go  through  various  lower  incarnations,  until]  he  should,
by  the  might  of  reason,  overcome  all  that  unreasonable,
tumultuous  crowd  which  was  afterwards  gathered  about  him
from  the  elements  of  fire  and  water  and  air  and  earth,  and
should  come  again  unto  his  first  and  best  estate.

This  abstract  notion  of  the  history  and  fate  of  the
human  sold  Dante  characteristically  renders  into  concrete
individual  terms  by  imagining  himself  in  the  act  of  going
through  the  process.  His  ingenious  device  of  using  Jacob's
Ladder  for  the  return  journey  to  the  star  is,  I  think,
original .

1  Translation  in  Prof.  J.  A.  Stewart's  The  Myths  of  Plato,  pp.  275-277.


46


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  dream  associations  show  that  the  idea  behind  the
"  Golden  Stairs  "  in  my  dream  was  Jacob's  Ladder,  and
that  Jacob's  Ladder  stands  in  the  dream  for  a  symbol
of  continuity  between  the  present  and  a  future  life,  and
of  individual  survival.

There  is  another  peculiar  feature  in  the  dream  which
I  did  not  notice  till  more  than  a  year  after  its  occurrence,
viz.  the  substitution  of  an  English  picture,  the  "  Golden
Stairs,"  for  the  two  German  pictures,  by  Rethel  and
Durer.  German  is  par  excellence  the  language  of  psycho-
analysis (and  something  German  has  occurred  several
times  in  my  dreams  as  a  symbol  or  indication  of  this
subject,  as  will  be  seen  in  some  cases  given  below,  p.  63)  ;
whereas  English  may  be  called  par  excellence  the  language
of  psychical  research.  The  substitution  of  the  English
picture  in  the  dream  is  therefore,  I  think,  to  be  regarded
as  indicating  the  dreamer's  predilection  for  psychical
research.

Dream. "  The  Bacchae."

I  came  into  Botolph  Lane,  Cambridge,  (a  narrow  lane  with
houses  on  one  side  and  the  churchyard  of  St.  Botolph's  Church
on  the  other),  and  saw  a  cow  running  wild  among  a  crowd  of
children.  With  some  difficulty  I  got  through  the  crowd  and
was  running  away  into  the  street  beyond  when  I  heard  it
said  that  some  of  the  children  were  being  attacked  by  the
cow.  So  I  turned  back,  intending  to  go  to  their  rescue.  I
saw  several  small  children  being  tossed  up  in  the  air  and
falling  in  the  churchyard.  The  most  horrible  part  was  that
the  other  children  in  the  crowd  were  rejoicing  in  the  sight,
laughing  and  shouting  exultantly.  Before  I  could  get  to  the
scene  of  action,  an  elderly  man,  with  two  or  three  women,
came  out  of  one  of  the  houses.  He  had  a  long  grey  beard,
and  a  plain,  unattractive  face,  and  carried  in  his  hand  some
sort  of  antique  weapon,  like  a  pike.  He  went  up  to  the  cow,
who  was  now  in  the  churchyard,  sitting  up  and  leaning  back,
in  the  attitude  in  which  one  sits  in  a  dentist's  chair.  He
said  to  her,  "  Madam,  you  knew  it  would  end  in  this,"  and
then  cut  her  throat. Then  he  told  the  parents  of  the  injured


LXXV.]


Dream- Analysis.


47


children,  who  gathered  round  him  with  the  children  in  their
arms,  that  if  the  point  of  his  pike  was  cleaned  and  placed
lengthwise  against  their  throats,  it  would  heal  them.

On  waking  up  from  this  dream,  I  said  to  myself,
"  Why,  that's  a  parody  of  the  Bacchae," — meaning  the
Bacchae  of  Euripides,  familiar  to  me  in  Prof.  Gilbert
Murray's  version.  I  recognised  the  Cow  as  a  disguised
form  of  Dionysus,  the  Bull-God, — a  disguise  which  was
skilfully  emphasised  in  the  dream  by  the  Cow  being
addressed  as  "  Madam,"  but  which  I  saw  through  at
once  on  awaking.  I  went  over  the  details  of  the  dream
in  my  mind,  so  that  I  might  remember  it  in  the  morning  ;
then  I  soon  went  to  sleep  again  and  dreamt  again.  The
scene  of  the  first  dream  (Botolph  Lane)  was  on  the  way
from  my  home  to  Newnham  College  and  was  a  place
which  I  must  have  passed  through  at  least  a  thousand
times.  The  second  dream  was  located  at  Newnham  itself,
and  was  as  follows  : —

I  was  walking  through  a  long  passage.  One  side  of  the
passage,  where  there  are  in  reality  a  number  of  small  rooms,
was  transformed  into  a  wall  some  ten  to  twelve  feet  thick,
pierced  by  three  narrow  archways.  These  led  out  into  an  open
space,  surrounded  by  a  high  brick  wall.  The  wall  was  mellow
in  colour,  very  old,  but  in  perfect  repair,  and  looked  very
solid.  It  was  almost  entirely  covered  by  a  creeper,  which
also  covered  the  whole  ground.  An  extraordinarily  soft  and
brilliant  light,  like  glorified  sunlight,  was  shining  down  on  to
it,  and  I  noticed  particularly  the  delicate,  half-transparent
green  of  the  young  shoots  and  leaves.  I  recognised  the  creeper
as  a  very  common  one,  perfectly  familiar  to  me,  but  I  could
not  remember  its  name.  The  whole  scene  suggested  peace,
quiet,  and  solitude.

When  I  woke  up,  it  seemed  important  that  I  should
get  the  name  of  the  creeper.  With  a  considerable  effort
I  recalled  its  appearance  to  my  mind,  and  then  saw  that
it  was  Ivy.  I  was  vaguely  aware  that  Ivy  had  some
significance  in  Greek  mythology  ;  but  it  took  a  little
while  longer  to  remember — what  was  perfectly  well  known
to me — that it is one of the commonest emblems  of


48


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Bacchus.  Thus  the  second  dream  was  obviously  a  con-
tinuation of  the  first.

Considering  that  no  incident  of  the  first  dream  is  like
any  incident  in  the  play,  it  seems  to  me  noteworthy
that  I  recognised  it  at  once  as  a  parody  of  the  play.
The  recognition  was  not  a  matter  of  inference  from  any
of  the  details  ;  it  seemed  rather  of  the  nature  of  an
immediate  sensory  perception  ;  it  was  like  being  in  the
same  room  with  a  person  intimately  known  to  one,
whose  identity  it  would  be  imjjossible  to  doubt,  in  spite
of  his  being  dressed  in  strange  and  unfamiliar  clothing.
So  I  was  convinced,  and  nothing  could  have  shaken  my
conviction,  of  what  the  dream  Avas.

This,  I  think,  amounts  to  a  practical  proof  that  a
good  deal  of  subliminal  mental  activity  had  gone  to  the
concoction  of  the  dream,  and  that  the  recollection  of
that  activity  was  retained  in  my  subliminal  conscious-
ness, while  the  knowledge  of  the  result  of  it,  and  this
only,  had  risen  above  the  threshold  of  consciousness.
In  other  words,  my  subliminal  self  had  composed  the
jjarody  ;  it  knew  that  it  had  done  so,  and  knew,  of
course,  what  it  had  parodied  ;  but  the  only  part  of  its
knowledge  that  emerged  into  the  supraliminal  was  the
bare  fact  :  Here  is  a  parody  of  the  Bacchae.

The  material  for  the  dream  is  borrowed  in  the  first
instance  from  Professor  Murray's  translation  of  the  Bacchae
and  his  Euripides  and  his  Age,  and  to  a  less  extent  from
Miss  J.  E.  Harrison's  Prolegomena  to  the  Study  of  Greek
Religion  and  Dr.  Verrall's  The  Bacchants  of  Euripides  ;
but  other  elements,  as  will  be  seen,  also  enter  into  it.
Dr.  Verrall's  view 1  that  the  Bacchae  is  a  veiled  attack
on  the  Dionysiac  cult,  that  the  Dionysus  of  the  play
is  an  impostor  masquerading  as  the  God,  and  so  on,
may  partly  account  for  the  semi-farcical,  or  superficially
farcical,  character  of  the  dream.

In  order  to  make  it  comprehensible,  it  may  perhaps
be  best,  for  the  benefit  of  readers  who  are  not  familiar
with  the  play,  to  begin  with  a  brief  account  of  it,  which

1  This  view  is  expressly  put  forward  as  only  one  out  of  several  inter-
pretations, all  more  or  less  valid  ;  see  op.  cit.  p.  18.


XXXV.]


Dream- A  nalysis.


49


I  abridge  from  Professor  Murray's  Introductory  Note  to
his  translation  :

The  myth  on  which  the  Bacchae  is  founded  is  briefly  as
follows  :

Semele,  daughter  of  Cadmus,  King  of  Thebes,  being  loved
by  Zeus,  asked  him  to  appear  to  her  once  in  his  full  glory  ;
he  came,  a  blaze  of  miraculous  lightning,  in  the  ecstasy  of
which  Semele  died,  giving  premature  birth  to  a  son.  Zeus,
to  save  this  child's  life,  and  make  him  truly  God  as  well  as
Man,  tore  open  his  own  flesh  and  therein  fostered  him,  till
in  due  time,  by  a  miraculous  and  mysterious  Second  Birth,
the  child  of  Semele  came  to  full  life  as  God.

He  is  a  God  of  Intoxication,  of  Inspiration,  a  giver  of
superhuman  or  immortal  life.  He  becomes  especially  the  God
of  the  vine.  He  has  many  names, — Dionysus,  Bacchios,
Zagreus,  etc.,  etc.,  and  also  many  shapes,  especially  appearing
as  a  Bull  and  as  a  Serpent.  His  worshippers  carry  the  thyrsus,
a  wand  wreathed  with  ivy.

This  originally  primitive  and  barbarous  religion  was  in  the
sixth  century  B.C.  seized  upon  and  transfigured  by  the  great
wave  of  religious  reform,  known  under  the  name  of  Orphism.
Orphism  was  grafted  straight  upon  the  Dionysus-worship,
and,  without  rationalising,  spiritualised  and  reformed  it.  Ascetic,
mystical,  ritualistic  and  emotional,  Orphism  easily  excited  both
enthusiasm  and  ridicule.  It  lent  itself  both  to  inspired  saint-
liness  and  to  imposture.  In  doctrine  it  laid  especial  stress
upon  sin,  and  the  sacerdotal  purification  of  sin  ;  on  the  eternal
reward  due  beyond  the  grave  to  the  pure  and  the  impure,
the  pure  living  in  an  eternal  ecstasy,  the  impure  toiling  through
long  ages  to  wash  out  their  stains.  It  recast  in  various  ways
the  myth  of  Dionysus,  and  especially  the  story  of  his  Second
Birth.  All  true  worshippers  become  in  a  mystical  sense  one
with  the  God  ;  they  are  born  again  and  are  "  Bacchoi."
Dionysus  being  the  God  within,  the  perfectly  pure  soul  is
possessed  by  the  God  wholly  and  becomes  nothing  but  the
God.

A  curious  relic  of  primitive  superstition  and  cruelty  remained
firmly  embedded  in  Orphism — a  doctrine  irrational  and  un-
intelligible, and  for  that  very  reason  wrapped  in  the  deepest

D


50


Alice  Johnson.


[part


and  most  sacred  mystery  :  a  belief  in  the  sacrifice  of  Dionysus
himself,  and  the  purification  of  man  by  his  blood.  There  was
a  constant  tradition  of  inspired  Bacchanals  in  their  rites
tearing  to  pieces  wild  animals,  even  bulls.  The  wild  beast
that  tore  was,  of  course,  the  savage  God  himself.  And  by
one  of  those  curious  confusions  of  thought,  which  seem  so
inconceivable  to  us,  but  so  absolutely  natural  and  obvious
to  primitive  man,  the  beast  torn  was  also  the  God.  The
Orphic  congregations  of  later  times,  in  their  most  holy  gather-
ings, solemnly  partook  of  the  blood  of  a  bull,  which  was,  by
a  mystery,  the  blood  of  Dionysus-Zagreus  himself,  the  "  Bull
of  God,"  slain  in  sacrifice  for  the  purification  of  man.

In  the  play  Pentheus,  now  king  of  Thebes,  son  of
Agave,  sister  of  Semele,  denies  the  divinity  of  Dionysus
and  suspects  that  the  secret  rites  of  his  women  worshippers
are  a  mere  cloak  for  licentiousness.  The  suspicion  is
throughout  maintained  to  be  groundless  ;  and  Dionysus,
to  revenge  himself  on  Pentheus,  lures  him  out  into  the
forest  glades  to  witness  the  women's  rites,  on  which  no
man  may  look,  and  then  leaves  him  to  the  vengeance  of
the  women.  Inspired  by  the  God  with  madness,  they
take  Pentheus  for  a  wild  beast,  and  a  band  of  them,
headed  by  his  own  mother,  Agave,  tear  him  to  pieces.

Throughout  the  Bacchae  there  is  (in  Professor  Murray's
words)  "  a  sharp  antagonism  between  the  two  spirits  of
the  Chorus,  first,  as  furious  Bacchanals,  and  secondly
as  exponents  of  the  idealised  Bacchic  religion  of  Euri-
pides." These  two  antagonistic  aspects  of  the  play  are
represented  in  the  two  dreams.  In  the  first  the  crowd
of  children  represent  the  chorus  of  furious  Bacchanals,  for
the  Bacchic  possession  gives  to  all,  young  and  old,  the
spirit  of  exultant,  irresponsible  youth.  It  is  the  extreme
youth  of  the  children  which  prevents  their  realisation
of  what  is  going  on,  so  that  they  rejoice  in  the  excitement
of  seeing  the  Cow  attack  their  companions  ;  as  Agave
and  her  sisters,  in  their  madness  and  delusion,  murdered  her
son  Pentheus  and  exulted  in  the  deed.  The  second  dream
seems  to  symbolise  the  freedom  and  peace  of  the  initiate,,
one  "  who  hath  fled  the  tempest  and  won  the  haven."


LXXV.]


Dream- Analysis.


51


I  propose  to  examine  the  first  dream  in  detail,  and
will  begin  with  its  first  associations  : —

The  children.  Their  extreme  youth,  like  the  madness
of  the  Bacchants,  made  an  obstacle  to  their  perception
of,  their  communion  with  the  external  world.  The
obstacle  between  us  and  the  babe  is  like  that  between
us  and  the  disembodied  : — "  Like  a  child  from  the  womb,
like  a  ghost  from  the  tomb." Birth  and  re-birth.

The  man  reminded  me  of  a  typical  Dissenting  deacon.
The  worshippers  of  Dionysus  were  heretics  or  dissenters  ;
the  "  inspiration "  of  some  of  the  early  Quakers  and
Anabaptists  was  not  unlike  the  Bacchic  or  Orphic  pos-
session in  a  modern  form.  Dissenters  claim  freedom  of
thought,  and  free  development  of  individuality.  The  man
seems  to  represent  a  Puritan.

His  Pike  :  an  antique  weapon,  suggesting  the  Civil
Wars  ;  Cromwell  ;  Dunbar  ;  "  Peace  hath  her  victories  no
less  renowned  than  War."  The  French  word  pique,
meaning  both  "  pike  "  and  "  spade  "  (hi  cards)  ;  thus
suggestive  both  of  war  and  peace.

The  Cow,  who  attacks  the  children  and  is  then  herself  slain,
is  primarily  Dionysus  in  his  double  capacity  of  the  God  and
the  Victim,  "the  slayer  and  the  slain  "  ;  although  in  the  play
not  Dionysus,  but  Pentheus,  is  the  victim,  and  he  is  slain,
not  by  Dionysus  himself,  but  by  his  tools,  the  Bacchants.

We  may  find  the  first  explanation  of  the  change  of
sex  in  the  dream  in  the  fact  that  a  certain  confusion  of
sexes  is  inherent  in  the  myth  :  (1)  Zeus  fosters  the  infant
Dionysus  in  his  own  body  and  brings  him  to  a  miraculous
second  birth  ;  (2)  Dionysus  himself  is  represented  as
beardless  and  like  a  woman,  with  effeminate  long  curls  ;
(3)  Pentheus  disguises  himself  as  a  woman,  to  spy  on
the  women's  secret  rites.

But  more  profound  reasons  are  to  be  found  in  the
highly  complex  character  of  the  Cow,  as  revealed  by  the
analysis. The  first  associations  with  it  were  asj  follows  : —

Nursery  rhymes,  e.g.

"  Thank  you,  pretty  cow,  that  made
Pleasant  milk  to  soak  my  bread."


52


Alice  Johnson.


[part


"  The  friendly  cow,  all  red  and  white,

I  love  with  all  my  heart  ;
She  gives  me  cream  with  all  her  might,

To  eat  with  apple-tart."
"  Where  are  you  going  to,  my  pretty  maid  ?

I'm  going  a-milking,  Sir,  she  said."

Milk  for  babes.

"  This  is  the  cow  with  the  crumpled  horn,

That  tossed  the  dog.  ..."
"  There  was  an  old  man  who  said,  '  How

Shall  I  flee  from  this  terrible  cow  ?  '  "
"  The  cow  jumped  over  the  moon."

Mythological connection of the crescent moon  with
cow's  horns  :  Io,  the  cow-maiden.
Europa's  bull.

The  Minotaur  :  Watts 's  picture.

Io,  the  Argive  maiden,  was,  like  Semele,  beloved  of
Zeus.  She  was  transformed  into  a  cow,  and  driven  in
a  state  of  frenzy  over  the  world  by  a  gad-fly,  till  she
found  a  resting  place  in  the  Nile  Delta.  There  her
reason  was  restored  and  a  son  was  born  to  her — the
founder  of  a  new  race.  "  To  the  mythologist  Io  is  pro-
bably one  of  the  many  shapes  of  the  horned  Moon,  the
wanderer  of  the  sky.  She  was  identified  by  the  Greeks
with  the  Egyptian  Isis,  and  her  son — conceived  miracu-
lously by  the  touch  of  the  hand  of  Zeus — with  Apis,  the
sacred  Egyptian  bull."  1

Io,  the  Cow-maiden,  rushing  to  and  fro  in  her  frenzy,
seems  to  be  one  of  the  factors  of  the  Dream  Cow.

The  slaying  of  the  Cow  :  its  throat  is  cut.  Cf.  the
chorus  in  which  the  Bacchants  invoke  vengeance  on  the
blasphemer  Pentheus  : —

Hither  for  doom  and  deed  !
Hither  with  lifted  sword,
Justice,  Wrath  of  the  Lord,
Come  in  our  visible  need  !

1  Prof.  G.  Murray,  Rise  of  the  Greek  Epic,  pp.  247-248.


LXXV.]


Dream- A  nalysis .


53


Smite  till  the  throat  shall  bleed,
Smite  till  the  heart  shall  bleed,
Him  the  tyrannous,  lawless,  godless,
Echion's  earth-born  seed  !
(The  Chorus-Leader  continues  :)
Appear,  appear,  whatso  thy  shape  or  name,
O  Mountain  Bull,  Snake  of  the  Hundred  Heads,
Lion  of  Burning  Flame  !
O  God,  Beast,  Mystery,  come  !

Allusion  has  already  been  made  to  the  Bacchic  or
Orphic  identification  of  the  Victim  with  the  God,  whose
multiformity  is  here  indicated.

Another  famous  bull-slaying  is  alluded  to  in  the  associa-
tions :  the  Minotaur,  or  Man-Bull,  of  the  Cretan  labyrinth,
slain  by  Theseus,  who  cut  its  throat  with  the  sword
furnished  to  him  by  Ariadne.

A  further,  and  perhaps  more  essential,  factor  in  the
dream-sacrifice  is  to  be  found  in  the  representations  of
Mithras,  the  Persian  Sun-god,1  killing  the  Bull,  the  evil
principle.  The  God  is  generally  represented  as  a  youth,
kneeling  on  a  bull,  whose  throat  he  is  cutting.  In  another
aspect  the  Mithraic  Bull  is  the  first  living  creature,  and
its  death  gives  rise  to  the  whole  animate  creation.  So
various  creatures,  such  as  a  snake,  a  dog,  and  a  lion  or
scorpion,  generally  appear  in  the  groups,  feeding  on  its
vital  juices.  Thus,  either  Mithras,  by  sacrificing  the  Bull,
or  the  Bull,  by  being  sacrificed,  is  the  Creator  of  the
universe;  or  rather,  both  of  them  fulfil  this  function.
Here,  again,  is  the  same  identification  of  the  God  with
the  Victim  as  in  the  Dionysiac  doctrines,  and  the  same
cycle  of  birth,  death,  and  re-birth.

In  the  Mithraic,  as  in  the  Orphic,  doctrines,  all  men
were  equal  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  2  there  was  "  neither
Jew  nor  Greek,  neither  bond  nor  free,  neither  male  nor
female." All  might  become  initiates, — might,  by  the  due

1  For  the  Mithraic  religion,  see,  e.g.,  Cumont's  Mysteries  of  Mithras.

2  The  religion  of  Mithras,  introduced  from  Asia  into  the  Roman
Empire,  became  especially  (though  not  exclusively)  the  religion  of  the
Roman  army,  and  an  instrument  for  knitting  together  the  men  of  the
many  different  tribes  and  races  of  which  the  army  was  composed.


54


Alice  Johnson.


[part


rites,  be  purified  from  their  sins,  and  so  obtain  im-
mortality.

The  seating  of  the  Cow,  as  if  in  a  dentist's  chair.  The
seating  is  perhaps  derived  from  an  illustration  in  Miss
Harrison's  Prolegomena  to  the  Study  of  Greek  Religion,
p.  483,  of  a  seal-impression,  found  in  Crete,  of  a  supposed
bnll-god  seated  on  a  throne  of  camp-stool  shape.  It  is
not  certain  that  the  creature  is  a  bull,  but  the  text
refers  to  similar  sealings  of  a  seated  Minotaur, — the
Minotaur  being,  says  Miss  Harrison,  "  own  cousin  "  to
the  Bull-Dionysus  of  Thrace.  Pentheus,  according  to
the  genealogy  of  the  play,  was  literally  first  cousin  to
Dionysus.

The  dentist's  chair.  The  scene  of  the  dream  was  close
to  the  house  of  a  dentist  to  whom  I  used  to  go  in  Cam-
bridge ;  and  seven  days  before  it  occurred  I  had  had
several  teeth  out  in  London.  But,  as  remarked  above,
the  recent  incidents  that  are  introduced  into  a  dream
are  generally  uninteresting  in  themselves,  and  selected  only
because  they  can  be  woven  into  the  fabric  of  some
interesting  thing.  The  inclusion  in  the  Cow  associations
(see  above)  of  Europa's  Bull  carries  us  back  to  the
legendary  foundation  of  Thebes.  Europa,  daughter  of
the  Phoenician  king  Agenor,  was  carried  off  by  Zeus  in
the  form  of  a  Bull  to  Crete,  where  she  became  the  mother
of  Minos.  Her  brother  Cadmus  was  sent  to  look  for  her
and  enjoined  not  to  return  without  her.  Unable  to  find
her,  he  went  at  last  into  Boeotia,  where  he  encountered
a  monstrous  dragon,  the  son  of  Ares  (Mars),  which  he
killed.  He  was  commanded  by  Athena  to  sow  the  dragon's
teeth  in  the  ground  ;  out  of  these  armed  men  sprang  up,
who  all  killed  each  other  except  five.  The  five  survivors
helped  Cadmus  to  build  the  city  of  Thebes,  and  became
the  ancestors  of  the  Thebans.  One  of  them,  named
Echion,  married  Agave,  daughter  of  Cadmus,  and  became
the  father  of  Pentheus.  So  the  struggle  in  the  play  is
between  Pentheus,  the  son  of  an  earth-born  warrior,  and
Dionysus,  the  son  of  a  divine  father.  (See,  in  the
Chorus  from  the  Bacchae  quoted  above,  "  the  tyranno^^s,
lawless,  godless,  Echion's  earth-born  seed.")


XiXXV.]


Dream- A  wily  sis .


55


Cadmus,  the  grandfather  of  both,  who  acted  as  a  dentist
to  the  Dragon,  is  an  important  character  in  the  play.

The  Churchyard,  in  which  the  Cow  was  slain.  The
scenery  of  the  Bacchae  is  thus  described  by  Professor
Murray  :  "  The  background  represents  the  front  of  the
Castle  of  Pentheus,  King  of  Thebes.  At  one  side  is  visible
the  sacred  Tomb  of  Semele."  The  presence  of  this  sacred
Tomb  is  felt  throughout  the  play.  Semele,  says  Dionysus,
has  been  slandered  by  her  sisters  :• —

"  My  mother  sinned,  said  they  ;  and  in  her  need
With  Cadmus  plotting,  cloaked  her  human  shame
With  the  dread  name  of  Zeus  ;  for  that  the  flame
From  heaven  consumed  her,  seeing  she  lied  to  God."

So  he  comes  to  Thebes

"  To  save  my  mother's  fame,  and  crown  me  here
As  true  God,  born  by  Semele  to  Zeus."

And  for  this  purpose  he  does  not  shrink  from  means
that  have  been  used  by  many  other  religions,  down  to
the  historic  age  of  the  Inquisition,  or  even  later.

In  his  Euripides  and  his  Age  (pp.  181-197)  Professor
Murray  gives  his  view  of  the  relationship  of  the  dramatist
to  this  play  in  words  which  might  be  taken  almost  un-
altered to  describe  the  psychological  relationship  of  a
dreamer  to  his  dream.  The  passage  is  too  long  to  quote,
and  I  will  not  spoil  it  by  attempting  to  summarise  it.
But  there  is  one  point  in  it  which  probably  influenced
my  dream, — Prof.  Murray's  comparison  of  the  Bacchae  to
a  hypothetical  play  written  by  some  "  great,  free-minded,
modern  poet  ...  in  the  style  of  the  old  Mysteries,  on
some  legend  of  a  mediaeval  saint," — a  tradition  which
should  fix  the  incidents  to  be  introduced,  while  itself
forming  a  vehicle  through  which  the  poet  can  express
himself  all  the  more  freely  because  the  incidents  are  not
of  his  choice  or  of  his  invention.  The  churchyard  scenery
of  my  dream-drama  suggests  Miracle-plays,  which,  being —
like  the  Greek  tragedies- — a  kind  of  religious  ceremonial,
were  often  performed  in  churches  or  churchyards.  They
were, as we know, always crude, often more or  less


56


Alice  Johnson.


[part


farcical,  and  not  infrequently  degenerated  into  a  coarsely
grotesque  treatment  of  the  most  sacred  subjects  ;  for  they
were  intended  to  appeal  to  the  common  people,  and
perhaps — like  the  modern  theatre — aimed  at  a  lower
point  than  was  necessary  for  that  purpose.  The  dream
has  a  farcical  and  rather  childish  element  in  it, — an
atmosphere  comparable  to  that  of  a  Miracle-play.

There  is  also  a  specific  childish  association  of  mine
with  this  particular  churchyard,  perhaps  worth  mentioning
here.  In  the  street  beyond  the  church  and  adjoining  it,
the  inner  side  of  the  pavement  (by  Corpus  College)  is
raised  some  two  feet  above  the  rest.  This  structure  was
known  to  us  in  my  nursery  days  as  "  The  High  Place,"
and  I  vaguely  supposed  it  to  be  somehow  connected
with  the  "  high  places  "  in  the  Bible  where  sacrifices
were  offered  to  idols  ;  e.g.,  to  the  golden  calves  set
up  by  Jeroboam  (I.  Kings  XII.  28-33).  The  slaying
of  the  Cow  in  the  dream  is  obviously  sacrificial,  and
in  spite  of  the  superficial  farce,  the  underlying  purpose
of  the  sacrifice  is  certainly  serious.  We  have  seen  that
it  has  elements  derived  both  from  Dionysiac  and  Mithraic
sources,  and  that  it  should  take  place  in  the  churchyard
points  to  those  numerous  analogies  between  the  Dionysiac
or  Orphic  mysteries  and  rites  and  the  Christian  sacraments
which  are  indicated  in  the  quotations  from  Prof.  Murray's
Introduction  to  the  Bacchae  given  above.  The  similar
analogies  between  Mithraic  and  Christian  rites  are  well
known.

There  is,  moreover,  a  special  appropriateness  in  the
location  of  the  dream  considered  as  a  Miracle-play  or
Mystery.  For  miracle-plays  were  especially  connected
with  the  festival  of  Corpus  Christi,  and  the  guild  of
Corpus  Christi  in  Cambridge,  which  founded  Corpus
Christi  College  in  1352,  is  known  to  have  been  concerned
in  such  plays  at  about  that  time.  Now  St.  Botolph's
Church  and  churchyard  adjoins  the  College,  and  in  early
days  a  close  connection  existed  between  the  College  and
the  church.

So  far  as  I  am  consciously  aware,  I  did  not  at  the
time  of  the  dream  know  of  this  early  connection  between


LXXV.]


Dream- Analysis.


57


the  College  and  the  church  ;  nor  that  miracle-plays  were
associated  with  the  Roman  Catholic  festival  of  Corpus
Christi.  I  had  in  my  analysis  of  the  dream  made  the
comparison  with  miracle-plays  some  time  before  I  came
across  these  facts,  which  confirm  the  comparison.  But  of
course  they  may  have  been  within  my  subliminal  knowledge.

There  is  another  important  element  in  the  dream
hitherto  not  mentioned.  The  Dionysian  Bull  has,  it  seems,
been  transformed  into  a  Cow,  and  I  mentioned  above
that  a  certain  confusion  of  sexes  was  inherent  in  the
myth  ;  also  that  Io,  the  Cow-maiden,  seemed  to  be  one
of  the  factors  of  the  Cow.  But  the  Cow  is  slain  on,  or
close  to,  the  equivalent  of  the  Tomb  of  Semele  (i.e.  in
the  churchyard)  ;  she  must  then  be  also  Semele.  Semele
had  asked  Zeus  to  appear  to  her  in  his  full  glory,  in
order  to  prove  that  he  was  a  divine  and  not  a  mortal
lover  ;  he  came  as  a  blaze  of  miraculous  lightning,  in  the
ecstasy  of  which  she  died.  So  we  have  in  the  dream-
churchyard  the  "  Tomb  of  the  Lightning's  Bride."  And
the  weapon  that  kills  her  is  the  Thunderbolt  of  Zeus.

It  follows  that  the  man  who  wields  it  is,  in  one  aspect,
Zeus.  If  this  seems  at  first  sight  surprising,  I  would
refer  once  more  to  the  analogy  of  miracle-plays,  in  which
an  ordinary  citizen  might  represent  the  Deity.  I  would  also
suggest  that  the  drama  of  a  dream  is  like  private  theatricals
played  by  a  limited  family  party,  where  "  one  man  in  his
time  plays  many  parts,  His  acts  being  seven  ages."  Only
in  a  dream  the  parts  are  played  simultaneously  instead  of
successively,  which  makes  them  difficult  to  follow.

Those  characters  of  the  Man  which  belong  to  his  early
ages  are  revealed  by  his  relationship  to  the  different
characters  of  the  Cow  :

To  Semele  and  to  Io  he  is  Zeus.

To  Dionysus  and  to  Pentheus  he  is  a  Bacchos,  an
Initiate,  a  sacrificial  priest  of  the  Orphic  Mysteries.

To  the  Minotaur — the  most  degraded  form  of  the  Bull,
the  utterly  and  irretrievably  animal  form  1 — he  is  Theseus.

To  the  Mithraic  Bull,  he  is  Mithras  ;  the  initiate  who
is  one  with  the  God  becomes  here  the  God  himself.

1  As  represented  by  Watts  ;  see  associations,  above,  p.  52.


58


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  Man  takes  part  in  a  primitive,  even  revolting,
ceremonial  of  sacrifice  ;  but  he  is  also  the  healer  of  the
children.  He  heals  them  by  a  sort  of  magic,  of  the
nature  of  a  rite  of  purification, — and  rites  of  purification
were  a  specially  important  part  of  the  Orphic  cult  ;  but
the  actual  blood  of  the  slain  victim,  "  the  blood  of  bulls,"
is  not  used  in  the  rite  ;  the  pike  has  to  be  cleansed
from  the  blood  before  it  can  become  an  instrument  of
healing.  The  symbolism  of  purification  by  blood  in  the
New,  even  more  than  in  the  Old,  Testament  and  in
hymns  always  appeared  to  my  childish  mind  particularly
revolting,  while  at  the  same  time  I  imagined  it  wrong
to  have  such  feelings.  This  may  have  been  one  cause
of  the  cleansing  required  hi  the  dream,  which,  however,
has  probably  a  wider  significance.

The  Man  in  his  modern  aspect  (see  associations,  above,
p.  51)  appears  as  a  Puritan, — presumably  an  Ironside.
But,  unattractive  as  he  looks,  he  retains  something  of
his  old  character  of  the  Orphic 1  :  for  the  greatest  poet
of  the  Puritan  age  was  himself  a  Puritan.

The  dream  as  a  whole  may  be  described  as  a  rather
crude  essay  in  comparative  religion.  The  main  doctrine
which  connects  together  the  various  religions  alluded  to- —
the  Dionysiac  or  Orphic,  the  Mithraic,  and  the  Christian —
is  a  belief  in  immortality.  This,  being  the  chief  interest
of  the  dreamer,  is,  I  think,  the  predominant  underlying
idea  of  the  dream.

The  Problem  of  Personation.

The  jDsychoanalytic  doctrines,  both  of  Freud  and  of
Jung,  assume  that  the  dream  is  a  symbolical  summary
of  the  psychological  state  of  the  dreamer  at  the  moment,
and  that  all  the  dream  characters  are  dramatisations  of
his  characteristics,  impulses,  moods,  or  feelings.  It  is  of
course  to  be  understood  that  the  dream-personality  does

1  Orpheus,  the  sober  ascetic,  "the  scrupulous  moralist  and  reformer,"
the  "  poet,  seer,  musician,  theologist,"  (as  described  in  Miss  Harrison's
Prolegomena,  p.  472),  reminds  one  curiously  in  some  respects  of  Milton.


IXXV.]


Dream- Analysis


59


not  as  a  rule  represent  the  dreamer  in  any  complete  way,
but  only  one  aspect  of  him,  or  one  of  his  feelings  or
wishes.

The  same  view  might  be  taken  of  literary  compositions  ;
it  might  be  maintained  that  all  the  characters  of  a  drama
represent  the  dramatist  himself,  or  some  aspect  of  him  ;
and  there  is,  no  doubt,  a  certain  degree  of  truth  in  this
view.  But  there  is  in  most  cases  room  for  much  difference
of  opinion  as  to  how  far  it  is  true  ;  and  while  dreams
are  probably  as  a  rule  more  intimately  concerned  with
the  dreamer  than  literature  is  with  the  author,  the
difference  appears  to  me  one  of  degree  rather  than  of
kind.

Freud  says  :  "  Every  dream  is  absolutely  egotistical  ;
in  every  dream  the  beloved  ego  appears,  even  though  it
may  be  in  a  disguised  form.  The  wishes  that  are  realised
in  dreams  are  regularly  the  wishes  of  this  ego  ;  it  is  only
a  deceptive  appearance  if  interest  in  another  person  is
thought  to  have  caused  the  dream."  1

Dreams  may  no  doubt  be  interpreted  on  this  basis,  just
as  we  could  interpret  every  waking  thought  and  action
as  actuated  by  purely  egotistic  motives.  But  I  cannot
discover  any  ground,  either  in  Freud's  dreams,  as  analysed
in  his  book,  or  in  my  own,  for  saying  that  the  interest
in  other  people  displayed  in  the  dream  is  merely  a  decep-
tive appearance.  Whatever  interest  we — whether  waking
or  sleeping — take  in  other  people  must  have  an  egotistic
element  in  it,  and  we  may,  if  we  choose  (as  Freud  does
in  the  case  of  his  own  dreams),  pick  out  this  element  and
treat  it  as  the  predominant  one.  But  if  we  do,  I  think
we  run  the  risk  of  ignoring  other  and  equally  true  and
important  elements  ;  just  as  to  ignore  everything  but  the
egotistic  element  in  literature  would  give  a  very  one-sided
view  of  it.

I  believe,  however,  that  personation  plays  an  important
part  in  dreams,  and  I  give  next  two  illustrative  cases,
in  both  of  which  two  real  individuals,  myself  and  the
analyst,  stand  behind  the  dream-personalities.  It  is
natural  that  the  analyst  should  often be  represented  in

1  The  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  p.  227.


GO


Alice  Johnson.


[part


dreams,  and  such  dreams  show  in  a  dramatic  form  the
relationship  at  the  moment  of  the  dreamer  to  the  analyst,
or  rather,  perhaps,  to  the  process  of  analysis.  I  need
hardly  add  that  the  representation  of  the  analyst  in  such
a  dream  is  not  to  be  taken  any  more  literally  than  th&
representation  of  the  dreamer.

Dream. "  Queen  Victoria."

My  nephew  R.  was  to  have  some  very  slight  operation,,
something  not  much  more  serious  than  having  a  tooth  out.
Just  then  Queen  Victoria  came  in  and  hearing  that  the  opera-
tion was  to  be  performed,  asked  me  to  let  her  know  how  it
went  off,  which  I  promised  to  do.  After  it  was  over,  I
discussed  with  my  family  how  to  write  to  the  Queen.  My
idea  was  to  begin,  "  Madam,"  and  go  on  as  one  would  to
anybody  else.  They  said  that,  if  I  did  so,  I  must  write  a
covering  letter,  beginning,  "  May  it  please  your  Majesty,"  and
altogether  formal  and  ceremonious.  R.  objected  to  my  sending
any  letter  to  the  Queen  ;  he  cried  and  clung  to  me,  imploring
me  not  to  write,  as  he  said  it  was  such  a  silly  fuss  to  make
about  nothing.  I  said  I  must  write,  because  I  had  promised
to  do  so.

The  trivial  operation  of  this  dream  is  no  doubt  the
process  of  psychoanalysis,  which  was  then  being  practised
on  me  ;  Queen  Victoria,  the  superior  and  benevolent
person  who  is  interested  in  the  result  of  it,  is  the  analyst
(a  medical  woman)  ;  the  other  characters  represent  my
different  feelings  about  the  process.  The  subject  was
then  new  to  me  ;  I  found  it  an  effort  to  give  my  attention
to  it,  and  in  some  moods  probably  wished  to  have  nothing
to  do  with  it.  This  unreasonable  side  is  dramatised  as
the  boy  (who  appeared  in  the  dream  to  be  much  younger
than  he  really  was  at  the  time)  ;  he  objects  to  having
anything  to  do  with  the  analyst.  The  "family"  do  not
go  so  far  as  this,  but  they  are  still  dubious  ;  they  will
only  deal  with  the  analyst  in  a  formal  and  ceremonious
manner,  preferring  not  to  come  to  close  quarters  with
her.  The  "  I  "  of  the  dream  plays  the  most  sensible
part, determining not to shirk the difficulties of  the


XXXV.]


Dream- Analysis.


61


situation,  (for  I  was  really  much  interested  in  psycho-
analysis). One  object  of  the  representation  of  Queen
Victoria  is  probably  to  make  it  appear  difficult  ;  it  is,
for  one  unaccustomed  to  royal  society,  an  excuse  for
finding  it  difficult.  Yet  the  idea  that  Queen  Victoria  is
only  a  sort  of  joke  is,  I  fancy,  floating  about  somewhere
in  the  background  of  the  dream  ;  for  my  first  association
with  the  phrase,  "  May  it  please  your  Majesty,"  was
Alice's  Adventures  in  Wonderland.  I  found  on  looking
up  the  book  about  two  years  later  that  it  represented
my  sentiments  much  more  closely  than  I  had  consciously
recollected  ;  the  context  of  the  phrase  being  as  follows  :

[The  Queen  of  Hearts  asks  Alice  :]
"What's  your  name,  child  ?  "

"  My  name  is  Alice,  so  please  your  Majesty,"  said  Alice
very  politely  ;  but  she  added  to  herself,  "  Why,  they're  only
a  pack  of  cards,  after  all. I  needn't  be  afraid  of  them."

"Alice's  Adventures"  are  dream-adventures,  and  Alice
is  my  name.

The  address  "  Madam  "  was  associated  in  my  mind
with  Tennyson,  because  letters  from  him  to  the  Queen,
beginning  "  Madam,"  are  published  in  his  Life,  which  I
have  read  more  than  once.

This  dream,  then,  is  associated  with  two  typically
Victorian  writers,  Lewis  Carroll  and  Tennyson  ;  its  atmos-
phere is  •  exclusively  domestic  ;  and — to  stamp  the  whole —
we  have  the  entry  on  the  scene  of  the  Queen  herself.

About  six  weeks  afterwards  came  another  dream,  which
was  only  considerably  later  perceived  to  be  supplementary
to  the  one  just  given,  as  follows  : —

Dream. "  The  Kaiser."

I  was  in  a  room  with  a  number  of  people,  among  whom
were  the  Kaiser  and  Mrs.  Salter.  Seeing  that  no  one  was
going  to  introduce  me  to  the  Kaiser,  I  bowed  to  him,  and  he
shook  hands  with  me.  His  manner  was  polite,  but  not  gracious  ;
he  did  not  smile.  He  offered  to  let  me  look  over  a  book
the  Bible)  with  him.  We  were  standing  on  a  raised  dais.
On  the  floor  below  a  man  (?  King  Ferdinand  of  Bulgaria)  was


62


Alice  Johnson.


[part


standing,  facing  us,  and  reading  aloud  out  of  another  copy
of  the  same  book,  like  a  man  reading  a  Lesson  in  church.
The  Kaiser  was  supervising  and  prompting  him,  and  frowned
and  gesticulated  at  him.  Ferdinand  was  confused,  had  difficulty
in  finding  his  place  to  begin  with,  and  lost  it  hopelessly
towards  the  end.

Meanwhile  I  was  trying  to  think  of  a  topic  of  conversation
with  the  Kaiser,  and  thought  of  asking  him  whether  he  had
seen  the  papers  that  morning.  (The  chief  topic  in  the  papers
had  been  the  refusal  of  the  English  fishermen  of  the  King
Stephen  to  save  the  German  airmen  of  the  wrecked  Zeppelin.)
I  forgot  at  the  moment  that  his  sympathies  would  be  on  a
different  side  from  mine.

Afterwards  I  saw  Mr.  Piddington,  and  remarked  to  him
that  it  would  have  been  rather  funny  if  I  had  asked  the
Kaiser  that  question.  I  also  told  him  that  I  was  disappointed
not  to  see  the  Kaiser  looking  more  ill  (as  there  had  lately
been  rumours  that  he  was  seriously  ill)  ;  he  had  been  very
pale,  but  seemed  fairly  strong.

In  this  dream  the  Kaiser  represents  the  analyst,  while
the  analysed  person  is  represented  by  two  characters,
"  I  "  and  King  Ferdinand  of  Bulgaria.  (If  this  does  not
seem  altogether  complimentary  to  the  analyst,  at  least
it  is  hardly  more  so  to  the  dreamer ; — the  honours  are
even.)  The  book  which  the  Kaiser  and  "  I  "  were  looking
over  together  and  which  Ferdinand  was  reading  aloud  is
evidently  the  theory  of  psychoanalysis.  Most  books  on
this  subject  are  written  in  German  ;  hence,  probably,  the
introduction  of  the  Kaiser.  The  subject  has  two  main
aspects,  the  therapeutic  and  the  psychological,  the
latter  being  the  aspect  which  connects  it  with  psychical
research,  and  which  is  therefore  the  more  interesting  one
to  me.  On  the  therapeutic  or  purely  psychoanalytic  side,
I  am  in  the  position  of  a  pupil  of  the  analyst's,  and
this  seems  to  be  symbolised  by  the  relation  of  Ferdinand
to  the  Kaiser.

One  of  my  first  associations  with  Ferdinand  was  that
his  action  reminded  me  of  the  behaviour  of  Bill  the
Lizard  at  the  trial  of  the  Knave  of  Hearts  in  Alice's


LXXV.]


Dream- A  nalysis .


63


Adventures  in  Wonderland.  Following  this  line,  I  thought
next  of  the  picture  of  Bill  the  Lizard,  coming  out  of  the
chimney,  which  he  had  tried  to  enter  from  the  top, —
the  wrong  way  for  a  chimney  sweep.  This  suggests  the
epithet  "  chimney-sweeping  "  used  by  Fraulein  O.  for  the
process  of  psychoanalysis,  in  a  case  in  Breuer  and  Freud's
Studien  vher  Hysterie,  summarised  by  Myers  in  Human
Personality,  Vol.  I.  p.  55  :  "  '  The  talking  cure  '  or  '  chimney-
sweeping,'  as  Fraulein  0.  called  it,  was  practically  equi-
valent to  confession  under  hypnosis."  A  reminiscence  of
the  same  phrase  appears  in  a  Holland  script  as  follows  :
"  Is  she  asleep  ?  No,  she's  talking.  That  chimney
smokes."  Having  traced  this  script  phrase  to  the  sentence
in  Human  Personality,  I  have  ever  since  associated  the
two  together,  so  that  a  smoking  chimney,  or  smoking,
stands  in  my  mind  as  a  symbol  of  psychoanalysis.1

In  regard  to  the  bearing  of  psychoanalysis  on  psychical
research,  my  relation  to  the  analyst  is  different,  since
psychical  research  is  my  special  province.  Hence  the
"  I "  of  the  dream,  regarded  as  a  psychical  researcher,
stands  on  a  level  with  the  Kaiser.  In  this  subject  we
are  opponents,  in  the  sense  that  our  opinions  do  not
coincide,  and  the  disagreement  is  represented  in  the  dream
by  the  different  sentiments  about  the  wrecked  Zeppelin.
The  presence  in  the  dream  of  my  colleagues,  Mrs.  Salter
and  Mr.  Piddington,  shows  that  psychical  research  is  an
important"  element  in  it.  They  and  "  I  "  are  in  the  same
way  opposed  to  the  Kaiser, — that  is,  to  the  psycho-
analyst's view  of  psychical  research, — though  we  keep  up
polite  relations  with  him.

The  German  element  in  this  dream  has  a  special  signifi-
cance. A  transmutation  of  a  German  into  an  English
subject  has  been  described  above  in  the  Burne- Jones's
"  Golden  Stairs  "  dream  (p.  46).  Somewhat  later  in  the  same
series,  I  dreamt  that  I  was  back  at  College,  wandering
about  with  nothing  particular  to  do,  but  planning  to  study
German.  The  dream  was  rambling  and  incoherent,  but
gave  me  the  impression  of  dealing  in  a  confused  way
with  psychoanalysis, among other  things. On  the  other

1  The  symbol  recurs  in  the  dream  of  "  The  Bus,"  given  below,  p.  92.


64


Alice  Johnson.


[pabt


hand,  on  two  occasions,  French  and  Italian — the  languages
of  our  allies — have  appeared  in  dreams  relating  to  the
special  subjects  of  the  automatic  scripts,  that  is,  to
psychical  research.

Further  Analysis.

On  referring  nearly  two  years  later  to  Alice's  Adventures,
which,  as  a  child,  I  knew  almost  by  heart  (and  which,
it  may  be  remembered,  has  played  a  great  part  in  political
caricatures),  I  found  it  accounted  for  more  of  the  setting
of  the  dream  than  I  had  realised.  This  exemplifies  the
general  view — frequently  confirmed  in  my  experience —
that  the  dream-memory  is  more  extensive  and  more
accurate  than  the  waking  memory.  In  the  picture  of
Bill  the  Lizard  alluded  to  in  the  associations,  I  found
that  there  are  two  chimneys  in  one  stack  ;  Bill  the
Lizard  is  in  the  air  above  one,  while  clouds  of  smoke
are  coming  out  of  the  other.  So  it  fitted  more  closely
than  I  was  consciously  aware  of  to  the  Holland  script
johrase,  "  That  chimney  smokes."

I  had  noted  that  Ferdinand  reminded  me  of  Bill  the
Lizard  at  the  trial  of  the  Knave  of  Hearts  (at  which
Alice  was  an  interested  spectator  and  was  called  upon  to
give  evidence).  Bill  was  one  of  the  jury,  who  took  notes
on  slates.  He  lost  his  slate-pencil  and  "  was  obliged  to
write  with  one  finger  for  the  rest  of  the  day  ;  and  this
was  of  very  little  use,  as  it  left  no  mark  on  the  slate."
Later  the  Queen  of  Hearts,  who  sat  by  the  King  as  Judge,
and  was  constantly  ordering  off  persons  in  the  court  to
execution,  threw  an  inkstand  at  the  Lizard  :  "  The  un-
fortunate little  Bill  had  left  off  writing  on  his  slate  with
one  finger,  as  he  found  it  made  no  mark  ;  but  he  now
hastily  began  again,  using  the  ink  that  was  trickling
down  his  face,  as  long  as  it  lasted."

Now  if  King  Ferdinand  is  Bill  the  Lizard,  it  is  evident
that  the  Kaiser  is  the  Queen  of  Hearts.  The  picture  of
the  trial  shows  the  Queen  of  Hearts  sitting  on  the  dais
(with  the  King),  and  the  jury-box,  in  which  Bill  sat,  on
the floor below, looking not unlike a reading-desk  in


LXXV.]


Drea  m-A  nalysis.


65


church.  So  in  the  drearn  the  Kaiser  stands  on  a  dais,
and  Ferdinand  on  the  floor  below  is  compared  to  "a  man
reading  a  Lesson  in  church."

Thus  it  appears  that  the  whole  dream  is  a  parody  of
the  Trial  scene  in  Alice's  Adventures,  as  the  dream  of  the
Cow,  above,  was  seen  to  be  a  parody  of  the  Bacchae  ;
though  in  the  latter  case  the  parody  was  perceived  by
the  dreamer  immediately  after  waking,  while  in  the  former
it  was  not  observed  till  about  two  years  after  the  dream.

The  dream  Queen  Victoria,  however,  had  been,  as  we
saw,  associated  in  the  first  analysis  with  the  Queen  of
Hearts.  This  makes  it  still  more  certain  that  Queen
Victoria  and  the  Kaiser  are  essentially  the  same  person,
or  different  aspects  of  the  same  person,  viz.,  the  analyst.
The  Queen  of  Hearts'  favourite  remark  is  "  Off  with  his
head  I"  Cf.  the  insistence  of  the  psychoanalyst  that  the
emotional  factor  is  the  only  one  that  counts  in  dreams.

But  as  in  the  Cow  dream  there  are  other  elements
besides  those  derived  from  the  Bacchae,  so  in  these  dreams
there  are  other  elements  besides  those  derived  from  Alice's
Adventures,  and  in  particular  the  "  German  "  element.
The  dreamer,  it  seems,  objects  in  some  respects  to  psycho-
analysis, and  the  objection  to  it  is  represented  in  both
dreams  under  the  guise  of  hostility  to  Germany.  In  the
second  dream  the  hostility  is  open  ;  in  the  first  it  is  veiled
by  the  apparently  "All-British"  atmosphere,  and  by  the
fact  that  the  word  "  Victorian  "  stands  for  something
typically  English,  although  Queen  Victoria  actually  was
of  predominantly  German  descent,  and  the  majority  of  all
her  family  connections  were  and  are  German.  In  the  dreams
there  is  much  less  hostility  to  her  than  to  the  Kaiser,
but  the  hostility  is  clearly  there,  although  the  partially
German  dream-person  is  felt  to  be  less  objectionable  than
the  wholly  German  dream-person.  This  distinction  points
clearly  to  the  two  schools  of  psychoanalysis, — the  purely
German  or  Vienna  school  of  Freud,  and  the  semi-German
or  Zurich  school  of  Jung.  The  objection  is  no  doubt  to
the  sexual  basis  of  the  theories  of  both  schools.

The  Freudian  position  in  regard  to  sex  reminds  one  of
those  extreme  spiritualists  who  used  to  put  down  anything

E


66


Alice  Johnson.


[part


they  could,  not  understand,  such  as  Maskelyne's  con-
juring tricks,  to  the  agency  of  spirits.  The  general
attitude  of  this  school  is  indicated  in  the  dream  by  the
Kaiser  being  represented  with  a  Bible,- — a  book,  that  is,
for  which  infallibility  is  claimed.  For  the  Freudian,
like  the  theologian,  is  apt  to  regard  any  disagreement
with  his  views  as  due  to  "  resistance,"- — by  which  I
understand  him  to  mean  resistance  to  the  Truth.

The  Zurich  school,1  as  is  well  known,  lay  much  less
exclusive  stress  than  do  the  Viennese  on  the  sexual
elements  in  the  unconscious,  as  supposed  to  be  revealed
by  psychoanalysis.  While  holding  that  the  sexual  element
is  always  to  be  found,  they  consider  that  in  many  cases
symbols  which  are  primarily  sexual  are  not  to  be  inter-
preted exclusively  as  such,  but,  according  to  the  free
associations  of  the  dreamer,  as  standing  for  many  quite
different  ideas  and  feelings.

To  me  it  ajmears  that  even  this  school  considerably
exaggerate  the  supposed  sexual  symbolism.  As,  some
half-a-century  ago,  it  used  to  be  maintained  by  some
mythologists  that  religious  symbols  of  all  kinds  repre-
sented the  sun  and  pointed  to  a  world-wide  primitive
sun-worship,  so  it  is  now  held  by  analysts  that  any  and
every  object  or  action,  thought  of  or  dreamt  of,  has,
primarily,  at  least,  a  sexual  significance.  In  support  of
this  theory,  they  point  to  the  prevalence  of  the  sexual
element  in  myths,  from  which  they  argue  that  all  natural
phenomena  were  conceived  of  by  primitive  man  as  sexual.
On  the  other  side  it  may  be  argued  that  since,  from  the
narrowness  of  his  experience,  primitive  man  has  very
few  metaphors  at  his  command,  it  is  natural  that  the
sexual  one  should  very  often  occur.  But,  as  a  matter
of  fact,  the  eating  and  the  fighting  motifs,  the  life-and-

1  Readers  who  wish  to  understand  the  theories  of  the  Zurich  school
may  be  referred  to  Dr.  Jung's  Collected  Papers  on  Analytical  Psychology
(Authorised  translation,  edited  by  Dr.  Constance  E.  Long,  second  edition,
1917).  It  is  impossible  to  summarise  so  complicated  a  subject,  and
quoted  extracts  are  liable  to  mislead  in  the  absence  of  their  context.
What  follows  is  therefore  not  put  forward  as  an  authoritative  state-
ment of  Dr.  Jung's  views,  but  merely  indicates  my  own  provisional
attitude  towards  them.


LXXV.]


Dream-  Analysis .


67


death  motif,  and  the  parent  and  offspring  motif  are  also
very  frequent.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  all  these  are
ideas  at  least  as  primary  as  the  sex  idea  ;  from  the  point
of  view  of  biological  evolution,  they  are  indeed  more
primary,  for  the  asexual  mode  of  generation,  both  in
plants  and  animals,  long  preceded  the  sexual  mode,  which
only  developed  slowly,  sporadically,  and  gradually.  Why
then  should  all  primitive  symbols  be  referred  back  to  sex  ?

Jung  is  of  course  aware  that  the  theory  cannot  be
justified  on  grounds  of  biological  evolution,  and  has
indeed  laid  stress  on  this  fact  in  some  of  his  criticisms
of  Freud.  But  he  maintains  that  innumerable  fantasies
are  the  desexualised  manifestations  of  originally  sexual
interests  (see  his  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious,  p.  461),
and  that  while  the  position  cannot  be  justified  biologi-
cally, it  remains  true  psychologically  {op.  cit.  p.  459).

Now  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  our  knowledge  of
psychological  evolution  is  both  more  meagre  and  far
more  speculative  than  our  knowledge  of  biological  evolu-
tion. It  appears  to  me,  therefore,  very  doubtful  whether
any  conclusions  should  be  founded  on  supposed  facts
of  mental  evolution  which  are,  at  least  apparently,  con-
tradicted by  much  better  established  facts  of  physical
evolution.

Confining  himself,  however,  to  the  mental  standpoint,
Jung  maintains  that  sex  has  more  importance  mentally
than  physically,  or  more  in  imagination  than  in  reality.
Consequently  it  plays  a  larger  part  in  myths  and  in
fantasies  than  in  real  life.  Consequently  every  item  in
any  myth  that  has  ever  been  explicitly  used  as  a  sexual
symbol  must  be  held  to  have  that  meaning  implicitly
in  all  cases  where  it  is  not  explicit.  And  in  particular,
any  explicit  repudiation  of  the  sexual  interpretation  is
to  be  regarded  as  a  "  repression  "  and  therefore  as  strong
evidence  of  an  implicit  acceptance  of  it, — on  the  principle,
apparently,  of  "  Heads,  I  win  ;  tails,  you  lose."  Practi-
cally everything  in  myths  and  fantasies  having  thus  been
shown  to  be  of  sexual  import,  it  follows  that  these  prove
conclusively  the  ubiquitous  and  overwhelming  importance
of  sex, — which,  by  the  way,  was  assumed  to  begin  with,


68


Alice  Johnson.


[part


as  a  basis  for  the  whole  theory.  The  argument,  in  fact,
is  in  a  circle  ;  the  question  is  begged  to  begin  with.

As  an  instance  of  the  application  of  this  method  of
reasoning,  I  may  refer  to  Jung's  discussion  of  the  sym-
bolism of  the  arrow  {Psychology  of  the  Unconscious,  pp.
321-329).  He  puts  together  such  cases  as  the  sensations
felt  by  the  stigmatised  nun,  Katherine  Emmerich  ;  the
comparison  of  children  to  arrows  in  Psalm  CXXVII.  4 ;
the  lance  or  arrow-head  as  the  symbol  of  men  ;  the  arrows
of  Cupid  ;  the  arrows  of  the  sun  ;  the  martyrdom  of
St.  Sebastian,  etc.  Of  all  the  instances  given,  the  arrows
of  Cupid  alone  are  explicitly  sexual  symbols  ;  that  is,
they  are  the  only  ones  which  refer  to  the  relation  between
the  sexes  ;  for  it  is  obvious  that  the  arrow  or  lance  as
a  symbol  of  men  is  a  weapon  borne  by  men  qua  fighters,
not  qua  males.  To  the  plain  man  it  would  also  seem
obvious  that  arrows  are  attributed  to  Cupid  simply  because
he  is  thought  of,  and  indeed  often  spoken  of,  as  a
victorious  warrior.  In  other  words,  the  symbolism  is
primarily  derived  from  fighting,  and  secondarily  sexual, —
not  the  other  way  about.  Yet  on  the  basis  of  all  these
cases  in  which  Jung  (following  Freud)  chooses  to  treat  the
iveapon  as  a  sexual  symbol,  he  maintains  that  the  prevalence
of  the  arrow  in  myths  and  stories  is  one  among  many
proofs — all  based  on  the  same  circular  method  of  reasoning
— that  their  symbolism  is  always  either  sexual,  or  derived
from  sexual  bases,  modified  into  something  else.

The  question  is  not  whether  this  interpretation  is
morally  shocking,  but  simply  whether  it  is  intellectually
justifiable.  It  appears  to  me  that  it  cannot  be  upheld
on  grounds  either  of  science  or  of  logic.  On  the  moral
side,  Jung — and  this  is  where  he  parts  company  with
Freud — regards  his  theory  as  providing  a  basis  for  the
continued  progress  of  the  human  race  through  the  proper
development  and  due  direction — the  "sublimation" — of
the  sexual  instinct.  What  strikes  one  in  his  conception
is  not  that  he  overvalues  sex — it  would  be,  perhaps,
impossible  to  do  so — but  that  through  deriving  so  much
from  it,  he  practically  undervalues  all  other  elements  in
life,  so  that  his  whole  view  seems  out  of  proportion.


LXXV.l


Dream- Analysis .


69


It  is  this,  apparently,  which  suggested  the  dream-
parallel  between  him  and  Queen  Victoria.  The  ordinary
Victorian  literature  deals  with  little  else  but  love  interests,
and  implies  that — especially  for  women — nothing  else  in
life  really  matters.  Much  other  literature,  of  course,  did
and  does  the  same  ;  but,  in  England  at  least,  we  have
gradually  become  conscious  of  the  distortion  in  the
point  of  view  of  the  typical  Victorian,  as  other  elements
have  been  gradually  growing  in  interest, — especially  for
women.  "  There  is  one  glory  of  the  sun,  and  another
glory  of  the  moon,  and  another  glory  of  the  stars  :  for
one  star  differeth  from  another  star  in  glory."  It  is
well  for  the  human  race  to  include  in  its  sky  the  sun,
the  moon,  and  all  the  stars.


Though  some  dreams  show,  on  analysis,  an  extra-
ordinary complexity  of  meaning,  indicating  that  much
thought  has  gone  to  their  make-up,  there  appear  to  be
many  other  comparatively  simple  dreams,  of  which  the
following  is  an  instance  :

Dream. "The  Tableau  Vivant."

A  friend  of  mine,  Miss  S.,  and  I  were  acting  a  sort  of
tableau  vivant.  She  was  dressed  in  a  bright-coloured  semi-
evening  dress,  and  was  supposed  to  represent  a  happy  wife.
I  was  in  a  sad-coloured  dress,  with  a  white  counterpane
draped  over  my  shoulders,  and  was  supposed  to  represent
an  unhappy  wife.  We  stood  together  in  the  doorway  of  my
old  home  at  Cambridge  for  the  people  in  the  street  to  see  us.
There  were  a  good  man}-  people  walking  about,  but  no  one
seemed  to  take  any  particular  notice  of  us.  I  said  to  my
friend,  rather  sadly,  "  No  one  will  ever  be  able  to  guess
what  we  are  supposed  to  be."  She  replied  cheerfully,  "  Oh
yes,  I  think  they  will."  In  order  to  make  it  somewhat  more
apparent,  we  went  and  stood  in  the  next  doorway  (belonging
to  the  same  house).  Then,  to  make  it  plainer  still,  we  walked
a  little  way  up  the  street.  As  I  walked,  the  counterpane
fell  off  my  shoulders  on  to  the  pavement.  A  man  picked  it
up,  shook  it,  to  shake  off  the  dust,  and  handed  it  back  to  me.


70


Alice  Johnson.


[part


I  concluded  on  waking  that  the  dream  was  intended
as  a  skit  on  psychoanalysis  and  dream-interpretation  ;
for  the  supposition  that  my  friend  and  I  rejjresented  a
happy  and  an  unhappy  wife  seemed  purely  arbitrary.
There  was  nothing  to  show  for  it  ;  we  might  just  as  well
have  stood  for  any  other  two  women  in  fiction  or  in  real
life.  The  whole  thing  was  painfully  unconvincing  ;  and
this,  I  thought,  will  probably  be  the  impression  pro-
duced on  the  reader  by  my  own  cases  of  dream-analysis.

In  trying  to  analyse  this  dream,  the  only  association
I  could  think  of  was  that  my  counterpane  falling  off
me  on  to  the  pavement  reminded  me  of  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  throwing  down  his  cloak  so  that  Queen  Elizabeth
might  pass  dry-shod  over  a  muddy  path  on  her  way  to
her  barge  in  the  Thames.  According  to  the  version  of
this  story  in  Kenilworth,  Raleigh  declared  afterwards
"  This  cloak  shall  never  be  brushed  while  in  my  posses-
sion."

For  a  long  time  I  tried  in  vain  to  think  of  any  other
associations.  At  last  it  occurred  to  me  that  my  white
counterpane  had  probably  been  suggested  by  the  white
satin  dress  of  Tilburina  and  the  white  linen  of  her  Con-
fidant in  Sheridan's  play,  The  Critic;  or,  a  Tragedy
Rehearsed.  The  "  tragedy,"  in  which  Tilburina  and  her
Confidant  are  characters,  is  called  The  Spanish  Armada,
and  I  found,  on  looking  it  up,  what  I  had  forgotten —
that  among  the  other  characters  are  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
and  the  Thames.  The  special  point  which  led  to  the
utilisation  of  this  play  in  a  skit  on  psychoanalysis  is
probably  the  famous  description  of  Lord  Burleigh's  shake
of  the  head,  by  which,  "  if  [it  is  explained]  he  shook
his  head  as  I  taught  him,  he  gave  you  to  understand
that  even  though  they  had  more  justice  in  their  cause,
and  wisdom  in  their  measures — yet,  if  there  was  not  a
greater  spirit  shown  on  the  part  of  the  people,  the
country  would  at  last  fall  a  sacrifice  to  the  hostile
ambition  of  the  Spanish  monarchy."

It  seems,  then,  that  there  is  nothing  very  subtle  or
complicated  in  this  dream.  Also,  so  far  as  can  be  judged
from  it, when  a  dream  is  simple, the  associations  with


LXXV.]


Dream- A  nalysis.


71


it  are  few  and  simple.  They  do,  nevertheless,  help  to
reveal  whatever  meaning  it  may  possess, — as,  in  this
instance,  by  pointing  to  Sheridan's  Critic  as  the  source
of  the  scene.

Dream. "The  Two  Dolls."

I  saw  two  little  dolls,  with  round  flat  bodies  and  round
flat  faces,  face  to  face  with  each  other.  The  faces  had  no
proper  features,  but  little  rows  of  letters  across  them,  which,
as  I  could  not  distinguish  the  letters,  looked  like  shading,
intended  to  represent  features.  There  was  very  little  expression
in  the  faces,  but  as  far  as  it  went,  it  was  rather  unpleasant,
having  a  faint  suggestion  of  coarse  sneering  about  it.

On  the  morning  before  the  dream,  I  had  paid  a  visit
to  my  oculist,  and  had  had  my  eyesight  tested  in  the
usual  way  by  looking  at  rows  of  letters  of  different
sizes.  The  letters  on  the  dolls'  faces  were  like  the  rows
of  smallest  letters,  which  were  indistinguishable  to  me,
even  with  the  strongest  glasses.

At  Chicago,  several  years  earlier,  I  had  been  given  a
large  rag  doll  to  take  home  to  a  little  girl  in  England,
named  Rachel.  A  friend  whom  I  met  that  morning  at
the  oculist's  had  spoken  to  me  of  this  girl.  The  Chicago
doll  was  similar  in  its  general  shape  to  my  dream-dolls,
but  a  good  deal  larger.  With  it  was  given  a  sort  of
replica  of  itself,  consisting  of  a  rag  cover  just  like  the
cover  of  the  first,  but  without  any  stuffing  and  con-
sequently quite  flat.  This  struck  me  as  an  interesting
variant  on  the  dolls  of  my  own  childhood.

The  dream-dolls  also  reminded  me  of  the  speech  of
Aristophanes,  in  the  Symposium,  which  purports  to  de-
scribe the  origin  of  the human  race, as  follows  :  1

The  original  human  nature  was  not  like  the  present,  but
different.  The  sexes  were  not  two,  as  they  are  now,  but
originally  three  in  number  ;  there  was  man,  woman,  and  the
union  of  the  two. The  primeval  man  was  round,  his  back

1  Abridged  from  Jowett's  translation  of  The  Dialogues  of  Plato,  Vol.  I,
pp.  559  et  seq.


72


Alice  Johnson.


[part


and  sides  forming  a  circle  ;  and  he  had  four  hands  and  four
feet,  one  head  with  two  faces,  looking  opposite  ways,  set  on
a  round  neck  and  precisely  alike.  He  could  walk  upright  as
men  now  do,  backwards  or  forwards  as  he  pleased,  and  he
could  also  roll  over  and  over  at  a  great  pace,  turning  on  his
four  hands  and  four  feet,  eight  in  all,  like  tumblers  going
over  and  over  with  their  legs  in  the  air  ;  this  was  when  he
wanted  to  run  fast.

Now  the  sexes  were  three,  and  such  as  I  have  described
them ;  because  the  sun,  moon,  and  earth  are  three ;  and  the
man  was  originally  the  child  of  the  sun,  the  woman  of  the
earth,  and  the  man-woman  of  the  moon,  Avhich  is  made  up
of  sun  and  earth,  and  they  were  all  round,  and  moved  round
and  round  like  their  parents.  Terrible  was  their  might  and
strength,  and  the  thoughts  of  their  hearts  were  great,  and
they  made  an  attack  upon  the  gods.

At  last  Zeus  discovered  a  way  to  humble  their  pride  and
improve  their  manners.  He  determined  to  cut  them  in  two,,
so  that  they  should  walk  upright  on  two  legs,  and  then
caused  Apollo  to  turn  the  face  and  half  the  neck  round,  and
mould  the  halves  into  bodies  of  the  present  human  form.  So
it  came  to  pass  that  each  of  us,  when  separated,  having  one
side  only,  like  a  flat  fish,  is  but  the  indenture  of  a  man,
and  he  is  always  looking  for  his  other  half.  And  when  one
of  them  meets  with  his  other  half,  the  actual  half  of  himself,
the  pair  are  lost  in  an  amazement  of  love  and  friendship
and  intimac3r,  and  one  will  not  be  out  of  the  other's  sight
even  for  a  moment  :  these  are  the  people  who  pass  their
whole  lives  together,  yet  they  could  not  explain  what  they
desire  of  one  another.  For  the  intense  yearning  which  each
of  them  has  towards  the  other  does  not  appear  to  be  the
desire  of  lover's  intercourse,  but  of  something  else  which  the
soul  of  each  evidently  desires  and  cannot  tell,  and  of  which
she  has  only  a  dark  and  doubtful  presentiment.

Suppose  Hephaestus,  with  his  instruments,  to  come  to  the
pair  and  to  ask  them  whether  their  desire  was  not  to  be
melted  into  one,  so  that  they  might  be  always  together  and,
after  their  death,  in  the  world  below  still  be  one  departed
soul  instead  of  two,  there  is  not  a  man  of  them  who  would
not acknowledge that this meeting and melting into  one


LXXV.]


Dream  -Analysis .


73


another,  this  becoming  one  instead  of  two,  was  the  very
expression  of  his  ancient  need.  And  the  reason  is  that  human
nature  Mas  originally  one,  and  we  were  a  whole,  and  the
desire  and  pursuit  of  the  whole  is  called  love.

My  words  include  men  and  women  everywhere  ;  and  I
believe  that  if  our  loves  were  perfectly  accomplished  and  each
one  returning  to  his  primeval  nature  had  Ins  original  true  love,
then  our  race  would  be  happy.  Wherefore  we  must  praise
the  god  Love,  who  is  our  greatest  benefactor,  both  leading
us  in  this  life  back  to  our  mm  nature,  and  giving  us  high
hopes  for  the  future,  for  he  promises  that  if  we  are  pious,
he  will  restore  us  to  our  original  state,  and  heal  us  and  make
us  happy  and  blessed.

My  dream-dolls  had  letters  on  their  faces  for  features,,
and  "  letters  "  suggest  literature,  and  hence  that  a
literary  origin  is  to  be  looked  for.  But  they  did  not
correspond  closely  in  shape  with  the  halves  of  Aristo-
phanes' primeval  man  ;  nor  did  they  correspond  exactly
to  the  two  dissimilar  Chicago  dolls.  They  rep  resent  a
sort  of  compromise  between  the  two  pairs  ;  that  is,  they
are  compounded  'of  the  elements  of  both.

With  the  Chicago  dolls  my  first  associations  were  :
The  name  of  the  dolls'  owner,  Rachel,  suggested  to  me
a  passage  in  the  Purgatorio  (XXVII.  100-109)  about
Leah  and  Rachel.  Dante  in  a  dream  sees  a  lady  gather-
ing flowers,  who  tells  him  :  "I  am  Leah,  and  go  moving
my  fair  hands  around  to  make  me  a  garland  ....  but
Rachel  my  sister  ne'er  stirs  from  her  mirror,  and  sitteth
all  day.  She  is  fain  to  behold  her  fair  eyes,  as  I  to
deck  me  with  my  hands  ;  her,  contemplation  ;  me,
action,  doth  satisfy."

This  passage  is  closely  associated  in  my  mind  with  a
Holland  script  (quoted  in  Proc.  Vol.  XXVII.  p.  110),
in  which  it  is  alluded  to  as  follows  :  "  Do  you  remember
that  exquisite  sky  when  the  afterglow  made  the  East
as  beautiful  and  as  richly  coloured  as  the  West  ?  Martha
became  as  Mary  and  Leah  as  Rachel."  Martha  and
Mary  are  the  traditional  Xew  Testament  types  of  the
active and the contemplative life — "  the good and  the


74


Alice  Johnson.


[part


best,"  as  Dante  calls  them — as  Leah  and  Rachel  are  the
Old  Testament  types.  In  the  Convivio  (IV.  17  :  85-111)  he
uses  Martha  and  Mary  for  these  types,  as  in  the  Commedia
he  uses  Leah  and  Rachel.  The  Holland  script,  in  combining
them,  suggests  the  Convivio 1  as  well  as  the  Commedia.

The  Convivio  (Banquet)  of  Dante,  in  which  he  cele-
brates the  praises  of  his  mystical  lady,  Philosophy,  has
a  link,  at  least  through  its  title,  with  the  Symposium, — ■
the  speeches  in  praise  of  love  delivered  at  the  Banquet
of  Agathon  (although  Dante  was  certainly  not  acquainted
with  the  Symposmm), — and  this  link  seems  to  be  im-
plicit in  the  dream.

Rachel,  face  to  face  with  her  image  in  the  mirror,
is  like  the  dream  dolls,  face  to  face  with  each  other.
But  since  the  image  is  not  of  the  same  nature  as  the
object  reflected,  Rachel  and  her  image  are  like  the  two
dissimilar  Chicago  dolls,  not  like  Aristophanes'  pair  of
similar  beings.

The  script  just  quoted  alludes  also  to  the  East  and
West  facing  each  other,  and  the  colours  of  the  Western
sunset  reflected  in  the  East.  A  similar  opposition  of
East  and  West  is  described  in  a  slightly  earlier  Holland
script  (see  Proc.  Vol.  XXVII.  p.  107)  and  forms  a  cross-
correspondence  with  a  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's,  also  alluding
to  a  reflection  of  sunset  colours  which  makes  the  East
like  the  West  (op.  cit.  pp.  109-112).

This  second  instance  of  what  Mr.  Piddington  in  an
earlier  discussion  of  the  same  scripts  (Proc.  Vol.  XXII.
p.  280)  called  the  union  or  identification  of  opposites  is
again,  I  think,  symbolised  by  the  two  Chicago  dolls, — •
partly  because  of  their  dissimilarity,  partly  because  they
were  brought  from  the  West  as  a  present  to  the  East.
The  child  to  whom  they  were  brought  also  represents
a  union  of  East  and  West,  since  one  of  her  parents  is
English  and  the  other  American.

Among  the  first  of  the  dream  associations  with  Aristo-
phanes which  I  noted  was  Browning's  Aristophanes'1  Apology.

1  Reflection  in  a  mirror  is  a  favourite  image  of  Dante's,  and  the
allegory  of  Rachel  (Contemplation)  gazing  at  her  fair  eyes  in  the  mirror
is  explained  in  Conv.  IV,  2:  143-162.


LXXV.]


Dream- A  nalysis.


75


This  is  closely  associated  by  me  with  another  Holland
script  of  the  same  period,  containing  an  allusion  to  it
(see  Proc.  Vol.  XXVII.  pp.  139-142).  The  poem  includes
a  translation  of  Euripides'  Hercules  Fur  ens,  and  the  Hol-
land script  forms  a  Cross-correspondence  with  two  scripts
of  Mrs.  Verrall's  alluding  to  the  Hercules  Furens  {cp.  ext.
pp.  128-129).  The  whole  of  these  latter  scripts  seem  to
be  included  in  the  implicit  thoughts  of  the  dream,  but
I  will  here  emote  the  salient  points  only  :

{Extracts  from  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  of  March  4  and  25,  1907.)

Hercules  Furens  .  .  .  ask  elsewhere  for  the  Bound  Hercules
HjOa/cA;/?  \vojuei>o$  [the  Unbound  Hercules]  is  the  sequel.
Binding  and  loosing  .  .  .

Claviger  the  bearer  of  the  Key  and  Club  [i.e.  the  symbols
of  moral  and  material  force]  .  .  .  The  Club  and  Key — East
and  West  .  .  .  The  Hercules  story  comes  in  there  .  .  .

Remember  the  Virgilian  line  indignantis  sub  umbras.  To
you  they  are  shadows,  like  the  shadows  in  Plato's  cave,  but
they  are  shadows  of  the  real.  [Here  follows  a  Latin  sentence,
part  of  which  is  translated  as  follows  :]  In  dreams  sometimes
you  see  the  flitting  bodies  of  Shades  rather  for  bodies  it  were
better  to  say  souls.  The  immortal  things  that  touch  your
mind  in  sleep,  seize  them  .  .  .

There  and  thus  does  this  mortal  put  on  immortality,  by
keeping  hold  of  the  things,  the  true  things,  seen  in  sleep.

Heracles  is  supposed  to  have  been  an  oriental  deity,
imported  into  Greece  from  Babylonia  ;  his  club,  at  least,
is  an  oriental  element.  He  is  therefore  a  type  of  the
union  of  East  and  West.  Analysis  of  the  script  shows
further  that  it  contains  references  to  :  (1)  Odyssey,  XI.
601-3,  where  a  distinction  is  drawn  between  the  shade
(e'tSooXov) of Heracles 1 in Hades, and Heracles  himself

1  It  is  perhaps  worth  noting  that  there  is  an  association  (familiar  to
me)  of  Heracles  with  dolls  or  puppets  in  Ovid's  story  (Fasti  V.  631)
that  he  was  the  first  to  throw  dummy  figures,  made  of  rushes,  instead
of  live  human  beings,  from  the  Sublician  Bridge  into  the  Tiber,  as
sacrifices  to  the  gods.  Note  also  the  assonance  between  doll  and  idol
(derived  from  the  Greek  eidolon),  though  there  is  no  etymological  con-
nection between  the  two  words.


76


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(qJto?)  in  Heaven  ;  (2)  the  mystical  interpretation  of
these  lines  in  a  passage  of  Plotinus  :  "  The  shade  of
Heracles,  indeed,  may  talk  of  his  own  valour  to  the
shades  ;  but  the  true  Heracles  in  the  true  world  will
deem  all  that  of  little  worth  ;  being  transported  into
a  more  sacred  place,  and  strenuously  engaging,  even
above  his  strength,  in  those  battles  in  which  the  wise
engage  "  ;  (3)  Plato's  allegory  of  the  prisoners  in  the
cave,  who  are  fixed  so  that  they  can  see  the  shadows
only  of  real  objects  outside  it  ;  when  released,  they
"  will  first  see  the  shadows  best,  next  the  reflections
(e'iSwXa)  of  men  and  other  objects  in  the  water,  and
then  the  objects  themselves  (avrd)."

The  phrase,  "  To  you  they  are  shadows,  but  they  are
shadows  of  the  real,"  is  not  only  Platonic,  but  also
expresses  the  .  view  of  the  veridical  hallucination  held
by  most  8.P.R.  investigators, — viz.  that  the  appearance,
aJthough  hallucinatory,  is  not  subjectively  originated,  but
is  the  result  of  telepathy  from  another  mind,  whether
embodied  or  disembodied.  This  conception  appears  to  be
one  of  the  ideas  behind  the  crude  imagery  of  the  dream.

The  idea  of  the  contrast  between  the  autos  and  the
eidolon  is  rooted  in  my  mind  (and  therefore  likely  to
appear  in  my  dreams)  on  account  of  certain  references
to  the  eidolon  in  some  early  Holland  script,  discussed  in
my  first  report  on  it  {Proc.  Vol.  XXI.  pp.  215-218).
One  passage  in  this  script  refers  to  a  supposed  occasion
when  the  surviving  spirit  saw  his  still  living  friends
as  "flat  cardboard  figures,"- — a  curiously  literal  version
of  the  imaginary  reversal  of  the  point  of  view  of  the
living.

The  concej^tion  towards  which  all  these  ideas — implicit
in  the  dream — are  converging  is,  I  think,  the  speech  in
the  Symposium  which  stands  in  the  sharpest  contrast
to  that  of  Aristophanes — the  speech  in  which  Socrates
himself  sets  forth  what  he  has  learnt  of  Love  from  the
prophetess  Diotima.  "  You  hear  people  say,"  says  Dio-
tima  {Symp.  205)  referring  to  Aristophanes'  myth,  "  that
lovers  are  seeking  for  their  other  half  "  ;  but  she  dis-
claims this  doctrine.


LXXV.j


Dream- Analysis.


77


Through  the  mouth  of  Diotima,1  Plato  insists  that  it  is
an  unfailing  sign  of  true  love  that  its  desires  are  for  ever  ;
nay,  that  love  may  be  even  defined  as  the  desire  of  the
everlasting  possession  of  the  good.  And  in  all  love's  acts  he
finds  the  impress  of  man's  craving  for  immortality, — for  im-
mortality whose  only  visible  image  for  us  on  earth  is  the
birth  of  children  to  us  as  we  ourselves  decay.  "  And  then,"
says  Plato,  rising,  as  ever,  from  visible  to  invisible  things,
"  if  active  bodies  have  so  strong  a  yearning  that  an  endless
series  of  lovely  images  of  themselves  may  constitute,  as  it
were,  an  earthly  immortality  for  them  when  they  have  worn
away,  how  greatly  must  creative  souls  desire  that  partnership
and  close  communion  with  other  souls  as  fair  as  they  may
bring  to  birth  a  brood  of  lofty  thoughts,  poems,  statutes,
institutions,  laws, — the  fitting  progeny  of  the  soul  ?  .  .  .

He,  then,  who  to  this  end  would  strive  aright,  must  begin
in  youth  to  seek  fair  forms,  and  should  learn  first  to  love  one
fair  form  only  and  therein  to  engender  noble  thoughts.  [He
must  then  go  on  to  love  the  beauty  of  the  soul,  and  the
beauty  of  actions,  and  of  laws  and  of  sciences,  till]  setting
sail  into  the  ocean  of  beauty  and  creating  and  beholding
many  fair  and  glorious  thoughts  and  images  ...  he  may
perceive  that  there  is  one  science  only,  the  science  of  infinite
beauty.  For  he  who  hath  thus  far  had  intelligence  of  love,
and  hath  beheld  all  fair  things  in  order  and  aright, — he  draw-
ing near  to  the  end  of  things  lovable  shall  behold  a  Being
marvellously  fair,  for  whose  sake  in  truth  it  is  that  all  the
previous  labours  have  been  undergone  .  .  .  And  whoso  being
led  on  and  upward  by  human  loves  begins  to  see  that  Beauty,
he  is  not  far,  I  say,  from  reaching  the  end  of  all  .  .  .  What
would  it  be  were  it  granted  to  any  man  to  see  Very  Beauty
clear  ; — incorruptible  and  undefiled,  not  mingled  with  colour
or  flesh  of  man,  or  with  aught  that  can  consume  away,  but
single  and  divine  ?  Could  man's  life,  in  that  vision  and
beatitude,  be  poor  or  low  ?  Or  deemest  thou  not  (said  she)
that  then  alone  it  will  be  possible  for  this  man,  discerning
spiritual  beauty  with  those  eyes  by  which  it  is  spiritually
discerned,  to  beget  no  shadows  of  virtue,  since  that  is  no
shadow  to  which  he  clings,  but  virtue  in  very  truth,  since
1  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Human  Personality,  Vol.  I.  pp.  113-115.


7s


Alice  Johnson.


[part


he  hath  the  very  Truth  in  his  embrace  1  And  begetting  and
rearing  Virtue  as  his  child,  he  must  needs  become  the  friend
of  God  ;  and  if  there  be  any  man  who  is  immortal,  that  man
is  he."

So  in  the  Platonic  philosophy,  this  Divine  Beauty  or
Wisdom  is  the  reality  of  which  all  beautiful  objects  are
shadows  or  reflections.

In  Human  Personality,  the  passage  just  quoted  follows
an  extract  from  Prof.  Pierre  Janet's  UAutomatisme
Psychologique,  setting  forth  "  the  physiological  or  materialist
conception  of  the  passion  of  love, — where  love's  subliminal
element  is  held  to  be  of  the  organic  type," — which  Myers
calls  the  "  planetary  "  conception  of  love,  as  contrasted
with  Plato's  "  cosmical  "  conception.

Summary  of  Analysis.
To  sum  up  the  analysis  of  this  dream,  we  have  :

(1)  The  following  pairs  of  opposites,  in  which  the
members  of  the  pair  may  be  said  to  be  of  the  same
value  or  the  same  nature  ;  or  to  be  supplementary  to
one  another,  so  that,  combined,  they  form  a  complete
or  perfect  whole  :

Leah  and  Rachel  ;
Martha  and  Mary  ;
Action  and  Contemplation  ;
West  and  East  ;
Key  and  Club.

These  ideas  or  images  in  combination  are  foreshortened
into  the  more  superficial  stratum  of  the  dream-thoughts,
and  there  symbolised  by  Aristophanes'  two  halves  of  the
£>rirneval  man,  who  between  them  constitute  the  complete
human  being.

(2)  The  following  pairs  in  which  one  member  of  the
pair  is  only  a  temporary  and  evanescent  reflection,
shadow,  or  image  of  the  other  ;  and  has  value  only  as
representing  it  :

The  Reality  and  the  Shadow  of  Diotima's  discourse,
Plato's  Cave,  etc.


LXXV.]


Dream- Atmly  sis.


70


The  Autos  and  the  Eidolon  of  Heracles,  etc.
The  Western  sunset  reflected  in  the  Eastern  sky.
Rachel  and  her  Image  in  the  Mirror.

These  pairs  are  represented  or  summed  up  in  the
superficial  stratum  of  the  dream-thoughts  by  the  Chicago
doll  and  its  flat  replica.

There  are  points  of  connection  between  the  two  lands
of  pairs,  corresponding  to  the  fusion  of  the  two  types
into  the  one  pair  of  dream-dolls.  Thus  Rachel  comes
into  both  ;  as  do  East  and  West  ;  also  Heracles,  as
Club-bearer  in  the  first  set,  and  as  autos  and  eidolon  in
the  second.

In  other  words,  there  is  not  in  the  dream  a  perfectly
clear-cut  conception  of  the  two  types  ;  no  absolute  line
is  drawn  between  them.  The  dream  leans,  it  would
seem,  to  Myers's  conception  of  the  "  planetary  "  and
"  cosmical  "  aspects  rather  than  to  the  extreme  mystical
standpoint.

The  analysis  just  given  represents  the  view  arrived  at
after  several  attempts,  made  at  intervals,  to  interpret
the  dream  on  the  basis  of  my  associations.  On  so
complicated  a  dream  (as  it  turned  out  to  be)  fresh  lights
are  often  thrown  by  repeated  analyses,  each  of  which
generally  reveals  points  that  had  not  been  noticed  before.
It  is  instructive  for  the  dreamer  to  keep  records  of  all
his  analyses,  but  it  would  generally  be  tedious  for  the
reader  to  have  them  all  reproduced.  Sometimes,  how-
ever, the  final  interpretation  can  hardly  be  appreciated
without  a  knowledge  of  the  stages  through  which  it  has
been  reached,  and  this  seems  to  me  the  case  with  the
next  dream,  which  was  as  follows  :

Dream. "  The  Fabulous  Horse."

I  was  going  on  an  excursion  with  two  or  three  other  people.
We  were  only  going  up  and  down  a  broad  path,  some  fifty
yards  or  less  in  length.  I  had  to  ride  on  a  horse,  which  I
was  rather  afraid  of,  having  never  been  on  horseback  before  ;
but  I  found  it  quite  easy  to  manage.  I  had  to  make  a
backward  and  forward  movement  with my  leg or arm,  and


80


Alice  Johnson.


[part


then  the  horse  went  on,  as  if  it  were  a  mechanical  thing.
It  only  required  a  little  steering  besides,  as  it  had  a  tendency
to  run  into  the  right  side  of  the  path.  Its  legs  were  like
straight  wooden  sticks.

First  Analysis.

The  first  association  of  this  dream  was  with  an  Austrian
friend  of  mine  (now  dead),  Miss  Freund,  who  had  spent
her  early  life  in  Vienna  (this,  of  course,  points  to  Dr.
Freud,  of  Vienna).  As  she  became  lame  in  later  life,
she  used  to  ride  a  hand-propelled  tricycle,  worked  by  a
backward  and  forward  movement  of  the  handles,  like  my
backward  and  forward  movement  on  the  horse.  A
tricycle  naturally  requires  steering  also.  I  once  tried  to
ride  one  after  being  accustomed  to  a  bicycle,  and  found
it  very  difficult  to  prevent  its  running  into  the  side  of
the  road.

I  associated  the  straight  wooden-like  legs  of  the  dream-
horse  with  a  child's  story-book,  called  Beechnut,  in  which
the  hero,  Beechnut,  makes  a  rocking-horse  out  of  a  log
of  wood,  into  which  three  pairs  of  long  straight  poles
(cf.  the  three  wheels  of  the  tricycle)  are  fixed,  to  serve
as  legs.  The  horse  had  no  rockers,  but  the  middle  pair
of  legs  was  longer  than  the  front  and  back  pairs,  so
that  it  could  be  rocked  backwards  and  forwards.  It
was  a  remarkably  imnatural  kind  of  horse  :  not  a  real
horse,  but  a  rocking-horse  ;  and  not  even  a  real  rocking-
horse,  for  it  had  no  rockers,  and  its  legs  were  straight,
and  six  in  number  instead  of  four.

To  have  six  legs  is  a  characteristic  of  insects  (a  fact
that  could  not  fail  to  occur  to  the  mind  of  any  person
with  a  knowledge,  however  slight,  of  Zoology).  Insects
are  a  much  lower  class  of  animals  than  horses.  To
my  mind  many  insects  are  repulsive  ;  they  are  associ-
ated with  dirt  and  the  production  of  diseases.  On  the
other  hand,  metaphors  of  an  imaginative  or  mystical
kind  have  been  associated  with  them  :  they  are  treated
as  symbols  of  development,  or  of  the  soul.  E.g.,  the
development  of  the  caterpillar  into  the  butterfly  (i.e.  the


IjXXV.]


Dream- A  nalysis.


81


asexual  into  the  sexual  form)  is  regarded  as  symbolic
of  death  and  resurrection,  or  the  death  of  the  body  and
the  immortality  of  the  soul.  Or  the  bee — the  honey-
maker — is  a  symbol  of  the  soul  (see  Virgil,  Georg.  IV.
220  ff.).  Honey  the  food  of  the  infant  god.
The  bee  commonwealth  :

"  Obedience — for  so  work  the  honey  bees.  .  .  .  The
singing  masons,  building  roofs  of  gold."  1

Samson  ;  the  swarm  of  bees  and  honey  found  in  the
carcase  of  the  lion  he  had  killed, — the  occasion  for  his
riddle  (Judges  XIV.  8,  14).

John  the  Baptist,  who  fed  on  locusts  and  wild  honey
(Matthew  III.  4), — another  insect  association.

Drones  :  "  Was  I  a  drone  ?  At  least  there  was  honey
within  my  reach,  even  if  I  brought  none  to  the  hive."
This  is  a  quotation  from  a  Holland  script  (see  Proc,
Vol.  XXI.  p.  322).  The  word  "  drone  "  had  been
observed  later  to  be  an  anagram  for  "  Roden,"  viz.
Roden  Noel,  to  whom  this  and  several  other  scripts
referred.  In  later  scripts  R.  Noel's  name  is  associated
with  Christmas  and  Christmas  carols.

My  first  attempt  to  interpret  the  dream  on  the  basis
of  these  associations  gave  the  following  results  :

The  dream-horse,  which  is  a  composite  of  a  tricycle
and  a  very  unrealistic  artificial  horse  with  a  definite
bias  in  a  certain  direction,  represents  Freud's  theory
of  psychoanalysis,  which  I  was  endeavouring  to  master.
The  theory  appears  to  me  in  many  respects  highly
artificial,  and  strongly  biassed  by  the  idiosyncrasies  of
its  author.

The  connection  of  the  horse  with  the  insect  type  brings
in  a  sex  association  which  seems  to  include  both  ex-
tremes of  the  possible  functioning  of  sex, — as  an  instru-
ment either  of  the  lowest  degradation  or  of  the  greatest
elevation  of  mankind.

It  appeared  to  me,  however,  that  the  dream-imagery
covered  a  good  deal  more  than  this  interpretation,  and
that  there  was  some  clue  in  it  which  I  had  not  yet
found. I  therefore  put  it  aside  for  a  time,  on  the  chance

1  Henry  V.,  Act  I.,  Scene  2  :  speech  of  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.

F


82


Alice  Johnson.


[part


that  a  fresh  light  might  be  thrown  on  it  from  some
other  quarter.

Meanwhile  I  looked,  up  the  story-book,  Beechnut,  and
found  that  my  recollection  of  the  rocking-horse  was
inaccurate.  There  was  a  doubt  as  to  whether  it  should
have  six  or  eight  legs  ;  the  scholar  of  the  family  was
asked  to  suggest  a  name  for  the  animal,  and  he  said
that  it  should  be  called  Hexapod  if  it  had  six  legs,  or
Poly  pod  if  it  had  more  than  six.  Ultimately  the  horse
was  christened  Polypod,  from  which  one  may  infer
(though  this  is  nowhere  stated)  that  it  had  eight  legs.
It  must  be  supposed  that  my  subliminal  memory  in-
cluded this  point,  in  which  case  the  conception  of  the
dream-horse  was  a  composite,  including  a  six-legged
creature  {i.e.  the  Insect  type)  and  an  eight-legged  creature,
to  which  the  nearest  parallel  in  nature  would  perhaps
be  the  Arachnida  (spiders  and  scorpions,  etc.).

Second  Analysis.

The  dream  took  place  three  nights  later  than  the
dream  of  the  "  Two  Dolls."  On  the  day  after  that
dream,  I  had  made  a  preliminary  analysis  of  it,  recog-
nising the  Chicago  dolls  and  Aristophanes'  pair  of  beings
as  the  factors  of  the  comjjosite  dream-dolls.  But  I  was
not  very  familiar  with  the  Symposium,  and  my  conscious
recollection  of  Aristophanes'  speech  was  so  vague  that  I
noted  it  merely  as  "  myth  of  creation  of  sexes  by
?  Aristophanes  in  Symposium."  On  this  topic,  again,  it
seems  certain  that  my  subliminal  memory  was  far  more
extensive  and  accurate  ;  for  when,  about  four  months
later,  I  got  the  book  again  and  read  it  carefully  with  a
view  to  working  out  the  analysis  of  the  "  Two  Dolls  "
dream,  I  found,  to  my  surprise,  that  Aristophanes'
primeval  man  was  behind  the  Dream-horse  also.  For  the
primeval  man  (see  p.  71),  like  Beechnut's  rocking-horse,
had  eight  limbs,  and  the  way  the  horse  rocked  back-
wards and  forwards  on  its  eight  legs  was  like  the  way
the  man  rolled  over  and  over,  backwards  or  forwards,
on  his  eight  limbs.


LXXV.]


Dream- Analysis .


83


We  have  seen  that  the  rocking-horse  was  in  the  first
analysis  closely  associated  with  the  idea  of  insects.
Another  childish  association  following  (in  the  second
analysis)  from  the  zoological  train  of  thought  was  the
picture  of  the  "  Rocking-horse-fly  "  in  Through  the
Looking-glass}

The  Rocking-horse-fly  has  four  legs  and  two  large
gauzy  wings  ;  it  is  introduced  by  the  following  con-
versation :

"  What  sort  of  insects  do  you  rejoice  in,  where  you  come
from  ?  "  the  Gnat  inquired.

"  I  don't  rejoice  in  insects  at  all,"  Alice  explained,  "  because
I'm  rather  afraid  of  them — at  least  the  large  kinds.  But  I
can  tell  you  the  names  of  some  of  them  .  .  .  [For  instance,]
there's  the  Horse-fly."

"  All  right,"  said  the  Gnat  :  "  half  way  up  that  bush  you'll
see  a  Rocking-horse-fly,  if  you  look.  It's  made  entirely  of
wood,  and  gets  about  by  swinging  itself  from  branch  to
branch."

Here,  then,  are  combined  the  ideas  of  the  Horse,  Fly,
and  Rocking-horse  (certainly  not  a  usual  combination)
which  we  find  combined  in  the  dream  ;  while  the
Looking-glass  is,  as  we  have  seen,  an  essential  consti-
tuent of  the  dream  of  the  "  Two  Dolls,"  which  is  so
closely  connected  with  this  one.

In  the  first  analysis,  the  associations  with  Bees  are
especially  numerous  and  prominent.  One  of  the  most
familiar  facts  about  bees  is  their  three  different  forms, —
the  Queen-bee  (the  female),  the  workers  (imperfectly
developed  sterile  females),  and  the  drones  (males).  These
three  forms  are  all  alluded  to  in  the  dream-associations
(see  above)  through  the  quotations  from  the  Holland
script  and  from  Henry  V.,  for  the  "  obedience  "  preached
by  the  Archbishop  is  compared  to  the  supposed  obedience
of  the  bees  to  their  "  king  "  or  "  emperor."

In  the  Fourth  Georgia  (an  important  factor  in  the
dream-associations),  Virgil  gives a picturesque  description

1  Cf.  allusions  to  Alice  s  Adventures  in  Wonderland  in  the  "  Queen
Victoria"  and  "Kaiser"  dreams  above,  pp.  61,  62,  64-65.


84


Alice  Johnson.


[part


of  the  labours  of  the  different  kinds  of  bees  and  their
devotion  to  their  "  king "  and  to  "  the  tiny  citizens  of
their  Rome  "  (Georg.  IV.  201)  ;  but  naturally  he  has
no  idea  that  the  varieties  of  form  have  any  relation  to
sexual  structure.1  Shakespeare  is  at  just  the  same  stand-
point.

It  seems  to  me  that  the  idea  of  a  certain  analogy
between  the  three  forms  of  bees  and  Aristophanes'  three
sexes  had  occurred  to  my  subliminal  mind.  The
analogy  is,  of  course,  superficial,  since  Aristophanes'
third  sex  was  hermaphrodite  (a  characteristic  which  is
normal  in  many  classes  of  the  Invertebrata,  but  not,
I  think,  in  any  class  of  Insects),  while  the  third  bee  form
is  actually  female.  There  is  nevertheless  a  superficial
resemblance  between  the  two  cases,  and  just  such  a
resemblance  as  seems  calculated  to  strike  the  dreaming
mind.

Further,  I  feel  little  doubt  that  Aristophanes'  three
sexual  forms,  which  "  were  all  round,  and  moved  round
and  round  like  their  parents,"  (see  above),  provided  a
factor  for  the  three  wheels  of  my  dream-tricycle.

But  another  factor  of  the  Tricycle-Rocking-horse-Insect
idea  is,  I  believe,  derived  from  the  famous  allegory  in
the  Phaedrus,  in  which  the  Soul  (whether  of  a  man  or
a  god)  is  described  "in  a  figure  "  as  a  composite
nature,  made  up  of  a  charioteer  and  a  pair  of  winged
horses.  Here  the  Soul  is  driving  a  wheeled  vehicle,  which
is  probably  one  of  the  elements  going  to  make  up  my
Tricycle.  The  chariot  of  the  Soul  is  presumably,  like
the  ordinary  form  of  the  Greek  chariot,  two- wheeled  ;
but  the  Soul  itself  has  three  constituents, — another
trinity  contributing  to  the  make-up  of  my  Tricycle,  which,
like  the  Soul,  requires  to  be  steered  (see  Dream).

The  Soul's  pair  of  horses  have,  between  them,  eight
legs,- — another  parallel  to  the  eight  legs  of  my  Rocking-
horse  ;  and  these  horses  are  winged,  like  the  "  Rocking-
horse-fly."  It  is  perhaps  worth  noting  that  the  wings
of  fabulous  animals  of  this  kind,  if  they  can  be  compared

1  The  facte  about  this  were  first  shown  by  the  discoveries  of  Francois
Huber,  about  1787-1790.


LXXV.]


Dream- A  na  lysis .


8f>


with  anything  in  nature,  are  like  the  wings  of  insects, —
not  like  the  wings  of  birds,  which  are  a  modification  of
the  Vertebrate  fore-limbs.

The  following  circumstances  add  to  the  probability
that  the  Symposium  and  the  Phaedrus  were  important
factors  in  the  formation  of  this  dream  :

(1)  The  Dream  that  occurred  three  nights  earlier  had
already  been  interpreted  as  derived  from  the  Symposium.

(2)  Either  just  before  or  just  after  this  first  dream,
I  had  been  discussing  with  a  friend  certain  points  in
the  Symposium  and  the  Dialogue  most  closely  associated
with  it, — the  Phaedrus  (with  which  I  had  long  been
familiar),  so  that  these  two  Dialogues  had  been  much
in  my  mind.

(3)  I  had  also  been  considering  the  facts  of  the  evolu-
tion of  sex  in  the  lower  animals,  with  a  view  to  their
possible  bearing  on  the  theories  of  Freud  and  Jung.
This  probably  accounts  for  the  zoological  atmosphere  of
one  aspect  of  the  dream.

The  significance  of  the  Phaedrus  elements  in  the  dream
must  be  further  considered.

In  the  Phaedrus  allegory,1  the  horses  of  the  gods  are  both
noble  and  of  noble  descent,  but  those  of  the  man  are  one
noble  and  of  noble  breed,  and  the  other  ignoble  and  of  ignoble
breed,  and  the  driving  6f  them  of  necessity  gives  a  great
deal  of  trouble  to  him.  The  ignoble,  ugly,  left-hand  horse
is  always  struggling,  against  the  will  of  the  charioteer,  to
drag  the  chariot  down  to  earth  ;  while  the  noble  and  beautiful
right-hand  horse  strives  always  to  keep  it  in  the  upper  world, —
the  plain  of  truth,  where  pasturage  is  found  which  is  suited
to  the  highest  part  of  the  soul.  There  abides  the  very  being
with  which  true  knowledge  is  concerned,  and  there  the  intelli-
gence of  every  soul  which  is  capable  of  receiving  the  food
proper  to  it  rejoices  at  beholding  reality.  [The  myth  is
connected  with  the  doctrine  of  the  transmigration  of  souls,
the  incarnations  being  separated  by  periods  of  a  thousand
years  each,  after  which  the  souls  draw  lots  and  choose  their
next  lives.] The  soul  of  a  man  may  pass  into  the  life  of  a

1 1  give  here  parts  of  Jowett's  translation,  in  an  abridged  form.


86


Alice  Johnson.


[part


beast,  or  from  the  beast  return  again  into  the  man.  But  the
soul  which  has  never  seen  the  truth  will  not  pass  into  the
human  form.  For  a  man  must  have  intelligence  of  universals,
and  be  able  to  proceed  from  the  many  particulars  of  sense
to  one  conception  of  reason  ; — this  is  the  recollection  of  those
things  which  our  soul  once  saw  while  following  God — when,
regardless  of  that  which  we  now  call  being,  she  raised  her
head  up  towards  the  true  being.  And  therefore  the  mind  of
the  philosopher  alone  has  wings  ;  and  this  is  just,  for  he  is
always,  according  to  the  measure  of  his  abilities,  clinging  in
recollection  to  those  things  in  which  God  abides,  and  in
beholding  which  He  is  what  He  is.  And  he  who  employs
aright  these  memories  is  ever  being  initiated  into  perfect
mysteries,  and  alone  becomes  truly  perfect.

In  these  two  closely  associated  Dialogues  may  be
found  Plato's  concejDtion  of  immortality,- — the  subject
with  which,  I  take  it,  the  dream  is  fundamentally  con-
cerned.

The  Phaedrus  contains  the  Platonic  doctrine  of  reminis-
cence,-— that  whatever  vision  of  the  real  we  may  have
in  this  life  is  "  the  recollection  of  those  things  which
our  soul  once  saw  while  following  God," — and  the  doctrine
of  successive  re-incarnations,  each  of  which  is  a  state
of  probation,  finally  ending  in  a  permanent  release  from
"  that  living  tomb  which  we  carry  about,  now  that  we
are  imprisoned  in  the  body."

But  (says  Jowett  1  )  while  the  Phaedrus  looks  backwards
and  forwards  to  past  and  future  states  of  existence,  in  the
Symposium  there  is  no  break  between  this  world  and  another  ;
and  we  rise  from  one  to  the  other  by  a  regular  series  of
steps  or  stages  ...  At  first  immortality  means  only  the  suc-
cession of  existences  [i.e.,  of  generations  ;  see  quotation  from
the  discourse  of  Diotima  given  in  the  analysis  of  the  "  Two
Dolls  "  dream,  p.  77]  ;  even  knowledge  comes  and  goes.
Then  follows,  in  the  language  of  the  mysteries,  a  higher  and
a  higher  degree  of  initiation  ;  at  last  we  arrive  at  the  perfect
vision  of  beauty  .  .  .  eternal  and  absolute  ;  not  bounded  by
this  world,  or  in  or  out  of  this  world,  but  an  aspect  of  the

1  Introduction  to  the  Symposium.


LXXV.]


Dream- Analysis.


87


divine,  extending  over  all  things  and  having  no  limit  of  space
or  time  .  .  .  Plato  does  not  go  on  to  ask  whether  the  individual
is  absorbed  in  the  sea  of  light  and  beauty  or  retains  his
personality.  Enough  for  him  to  have  attained  the  true  beauty
or  good,  without  enquiring  precisely  into  the  relation  in  which
human  beings  stood  to  it.

It  is  this  conception  of  immortality,  or  the  gradual
evolution  of  the  conception  of  immortality,  that  links
the  Platonic  elements  of  the  dream  with  the  element
derived  from  the  Fourth  Georgic, — the  Bee  as  a  symbol  of
the  Soul  (see  first  analysis,  above,  p.  81).  The  story  of
Samson  finding  the  swarm  of  bees  in  the  lion's  carcase
closely  resembles  the  story  of  Aristaeus,  who,  after  all
his  bees  had  been  killed  by  disease,  found  fresh  swarms
in  the  bodies  of  the  sacrificed  oxen  (Georg.  IV.  550  ff.).

The  bee  1  is  a  creature  of  special  sanctity  among  the  ancients
and  has  special  associations  with  birth,  death,  and  re-incarna-
tion .  .  .  Re-incarnation  could  hardly  be  more  clearly  suggested
than  by  the  story  in  the  Fourth  Georgic  of  the  miraculous
birth  of  bee-life  from  the  dead  body  of  a  bull,  after  due
propitiation  by  Lethean  poppies  has  been  made  to  Orpheus.
Earlier  in  the  same  poem  (206-208)  we  are  reminded  that,
though  the  individual  bees  perish,  the  race  remains  immortal.
Most  significant  of  all  is  .the  suggested  explanation  of  the
special  virtue  of  the  bee  in  the  view  of  '  certain  persons  '
(219-227)  that  the  bees  partake  of  ethereal  draughts,  this
same  ethereal  element  being  described  in  the  great  speech  of
Anchises  as  the  only  part  left  to  the  soul  after  its  complete
purgation  {Am.  VI.  747).  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  bee
in  Virgil's  mind  was  closely  associated  with  the  idea  of  the
re-incarnation  of  the  purified  soul,  and  the  comparison  of  the
souls  gathering  round  Lethe  to  hovering  bees  gains  suggestive-
ness  from  this  fact.

To  continue  the  dream-associations  revealed  in  the
first  analysis  :

For  "  honey  the  food  of  the  infant  god,"  see  Georg.  IV.

149. The  infant  god is Zeus, who  was hidden  by  his

1  See  "  Two  instances  of  Symbolism  in  the  Sixth  Aeneid,"  by  M.  de  G.
Verrall  ;  The  Classical  Review,  Vol.  XXIV.  p.  43  ;  March,  1910.


88


Alice  Johnson.


[part


mother  Rhea, — to  save  him  from  being  devoured  by  his
father,  Saturn,  or  Chronos, — in  a  cave  on  Mount  Ida
in  Crete,  and  was  there  tended  by  nymphs,  who  fed
him  on  goats'  milk  and  honey.  So  the  god,  rescued
from  all-devouring  Time,  became  an  Immortal.

The  dream-associations  show  also  an  allusion  to  Christ-
mas and  the  Child  associated  with  the  prophecy  of
Isaiah  (VII.  15),  "  Butter  and  honey  shall  he  eat."

As  to  Mount  Ida,  the  Christian  name  of  Miss  Freund,
the  lady  who  rode  the  tricycle,  was  Ida.  As  mentioned
above,  I  had  in  the  first  analysis  of  the  dream  noticed
the  similarity  of  the  names  "  Freund "  and  "  Freud."
But,  though  I  was  perfectly  familiar  with  the  story  of
the  infant  Zeus  being  fed  with  honey  on  Mount  Ida,
and  with  the  fact  that  Miss  Freund's  name  was  Ida,  it
was  several  months  before  I  consciously  put  these  two
things  together,  and  observed  that  they  must  have  been
connected  in  my  subliminal.  I  think  it  is  a  fair  conclu-
sion that  the  other  famous  Mount  Ida  (in  Asia  Minor,
near  Troy,  referred  to  in  Georg.  IV.  41,  as  the  Phrygiati
Ida),  celebrated  as  the  scene  of  the  rape  of  Ganymede,
must  also  have  been  in  the  dream-thoughts.

In  the  later  Roman  tombs  and  monuments  1  Ganymede
borne  up  to  heaven  by  the  eagle  is  supposed  to  be  a
symbol  of  the  soul  liberated  from  earth.  The  analogy
with  the  Phaedrus  Soul  carried  up  to  heaven  by  its
winged  horses  is  obvious.  There  is  also  at  this  point
a  link  with  the  "  Golden  Stairs  "  dream  and  the  picture
Der  Tod  als  Freund  associated  with  it  (see  above,  p.  44).
I  had  not  noticed  this  link  till  the  analyst,  reading  my
account,  observed  the  coincidence  of  the  name  Freund
being  implicit  in  both  dreams,  the  interval  between  which
was  about  nineteen  months.

In  Purg.  IX.  19-30,  Dante  dreams  that  he  is  on  Mount
Ida  and  is  carried  up  to  heaven,  like  Ganymede,  by  an
eagle.  On  waking,  he  finds  that  he  has,  in  his  sleep,
been  carried  up  the  lowest  part  of  the  Mount  and  placed
just  below  the  Gate  of  Purgatory.  The  Eagle,  says
A.  J.  Butler  in  a  note  on  this  passage,  is  "  the  emblem

1  Mrs.  Arthur  Strong,  Apotheosis  and  After-Life,  p.  229.


LXXV.]


Dream  -A  nalysis .


89


from  the  earliest  Christian  times  of  the  soul  which  most
aspires  to  meditate  on  divine  things,  and  as  such  [was]
adopted  as  the  special  '  cognisance  '  of  St.  John  the  Divine."

This  is  the  first  of  the  three  dreams  in  the  Purgatorio  ;
the  last  of  them  is  Dante's  dream  about  Leah  (XXVII.
97-108),  which  was  an  important  element  in  the  associa-
tions of  the  "  Two  Dolls  "  dream  (see  p.  73).  These
Dante  associations,  then,  form  another  link  between
that  dream  and  the  present  one,  affording  further  evidence
of  the  continuity  of  thought  between  them.

Further,  the  Platonic  and  Virgilian  doctrines  of  immor-
tality bound  up  with  a  Purgatorial  scheme,  which  we
found  included  in  the  dream-thoughts,  can  hardly  have
failed  to  suggest  Dante's  treatment  of  the  same  topic.
The  chief  feature  which  distinguishes  Dante's  scheme
from  earlier  ones  is  the  emphasis  laid  on  the  individual
element, — on  the  persistence  of  individuality,  of  person-
ality. It  has  been  remarked  (by,  I  think,  Dean  Church)
that  all  the  characters  in  the  Commedia  (apart  from
mythological  monsters  and  heroes  of  antiquity  in  whose
actual  historical  existence  Dante  may  have  believed)
are  real  persons,  either  historical  or  his  own  contem-
poraries ; — they  are  not  types,  although  they  may  be
taken  incidentally  to  typify  virtues  or  vices.  Dante,
"  who  loved  well  because  he  hated,"  had  a  vivid  realisa-
tion of  individuals,  and  an  intense  interest  in  their
individual  fates.

In  accordance  with  this  modern  sense  of  the  value
of  the  human  being,  as  such,  is  the  disappearance  of  the
doctrine  of  the  transmigration  of  souls  ;  for  it  is  difficult,
though  not,  of  course,  theoretically  impossible,  to  reconcile
a  number  of  successive  incarnations,  involving  a  number
of  successive  forgettings,  with  the  persistence  of  the
individual,  whose  characteristics  must  be  so  intimately
bound  up  with  his  memories.  No  doubt  the  doctrine
is  absent  from  Dante  because  it  is  not  a  Christian
doctrine  1  ;  but  its  absence  is  in  complete  harmony  with
his  whole  tone  of  mind.

1  See,  however,  the  legend  of  Trajan,  whose  soul,  by  a  special  miracle,
was  delivered  from  Hell  and  re-incarnated  (Par.  XX.  43-117).


90


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Summary.

To  sum  up  the  factors  of  this  dream  :
The  Dream-horse  is  composed  of  (a)  The  Rocking -horse,
and  (b)  The  Tricycle.

(a)  The  Rocking-horse  comprises  :

(1)  Hexapod  =  Insect  ; — Butterfly,  Bee.

The  Bee  has  three  forms  ;  cf.  Aristophanes'  three  sexes.
The  Bee  symbolises  the  Soul.

(2)  Polypod  =  Aristophanes'  eight-limbed  man,  and  the
Phaedrus  Soul's  two  four-legged  horses.

Hexapod  and  Polypod  combined  =  The  "  Rocking-horse-
fly,''  and  the  Phaedrus  Soul's  winged  horses.

(b)  The  Tricycle  comprises  :
Several  trinities,  viz.  :

(1)  Three  pairs  of  Hexapod  legs  ;  and

(2)  Three  forms  of  Bees  ;  and

(3)  Aristophanes'  three  sexes,  who  moved  round  and
round  ;  and

(4)  The  three  elements  of  the  Phaedrus  Soul,  viz.  the
Charioteer  and  two  horses.

(5)  The  Chariot  of  the  Soul,  as  a  wheeled  vehicle.

(6)  Ida,  the  name  of  the  owner  of  the  Tricycle,
suggesting  Mount  Ida,  with  which  are  associated  :

(7)  The  Infant  God  fed  by  the  Bees  ;  and

(8)  Ganymede  carried  up  to  heaven  by  the  Eagle,  as  the
Phaedrus  Soul  is  carried  up  by  its  winged  horses  ;  and

(9)  Dante  carried  up  to  the  Gate  of  Purgatory  by  his
Dream-Eagle.

Aristophanes'  myth  refers  to  the  constitution  of  the
bod}^,  the  Phaedrus  myth  to  that  of  the  soul.  So  the
intimate  association  of  elements  derived  from  both  in  the
Dream-Horse  must  symbolise  the  connection  between  the
body  and  the  soul.

On  the  other  hand  the  antithesis  between  Body  and
Soul  is  no  doubt  conceived  of  in  the  dream  as  analogous
to  the  antithesis  in  the  "  Two  Dolls  "  dream  between
the  Shadow  and  the  Reality,  or  the  Eidolon  and  the
Autos,  or  the  Planetary  and  the  Cosmical  (see  pp.  78-79).


LXXV.]


Drea  ra-A  nalys  is .


01


Supplement  to  the  Analysis  of  the  "  Two  Dolls  "  dream.

It  happens  not  infrequently  that  the  analysis  of  one  dream
throws  light  on  a  preceding  one.  Thus,  after  discovering
in  the  "  Fabulous  Horse  "  the  Rocking-horse-fly  element,
derived  from  Through  the  Looking-glass,  I  noticed  that
this  fitted  in  with  the  Mirror  or  Looking-glass  element
in  the  "  Two  Dolls."  It  then  became  apparent  that
another  element  in  the  same  book  must  have  contributed
to  the  "  Two  Dolls,"  viz.  Tweedledum  and  Tweedledee.

They,  it  may  be  remembered,  show  Alice  the  Red
King  lying  asleep  in  the  forest,  and  tell  her  that  he  is
dreaming  of  her  ;  and  they  add,  to  her  great  indigna-
tion, that  she  is  only  "  a  thing  in  his  dream,"  and  that
if  he  were  to  wake,  she  would  "  go  out  like  a  candle  "  ;
the  "  real  "  situation  of  course  being  that  Alice  is  the
dreamer,  and  the  Red  King  a  "  thing  "  in  her  dream.
The  idea  is  one  calculated  to  appeal  equally  to  the
Philosopher  in  the  Child  and  the  Child  in  the  Philosopher.

Tweedledum  and  Tweedledee  are  also  interesting,
because  one  can  never  feel  sure  whether  they  are  the
same  person  or  not.  Are  they  one  or  two  ?  Or  are  they,
perhaps,  alternating  personalities  ?  In  that  case,  which
of  them  is  the  "  real  "  person  ?  Or  are  they  of  what
is  called  the  "  co-conscious  "  type  ?

All  these  problems-  connected  with  Tweedledum  and
Tweedledee,  as  well  as  the  metaphysical  theory  they
propound  to  Alice,  fit  in  closely  with  the  whole  of  the
dream  conception, — the  question,  What  is  "  the  real  "  ?


While  the  two  dreams  just  given  are  examples  of
complicated  abstract  ideas  combined  and  compressed  into
simple  images  or  metaphors,  the  next  one  returns  to
what  was  called  above  "  the  j^oblem  of  personation."
It  contains  a  dream-character  who  turns  out  on  analysis
to  be  a  composite  of  several  persons.  It  also  illustrates
the  occurrence  in  dreams  of  puns  and  other  plays  on
words,  which  Freud  considers  an  important  factor  in
dream  formation.  These,  however,  belong  not  to  the
"  manifest,"  but  to  the "  latent  "  content  of  the  dream


92


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(as  in  other  cases  in  my  exjDerience,  e.g.,  "Mount  Ida"
above),  and  so  are  revealed  only  through  the  analysis.

Dream. "The  Bus."

I  was  in  a  bus.  There  was  a  young  woman  there  ;  also,
I  think,  a  woman  conductor.  I  turned  to  one  side  and  saw
that  a  man,  whom  I  had  not  noticed  before,  was  sitting  by
me,  smoking  a  pipe.  A  few  of  the  ashes  fell  on  my  dress.
I  shook  them  off,  and  said  to  the  man,  "  Excuse  me,  but
smoking  is  not  allowed  inside  the  bus."  He  glared  at  me,
but  said  nothing.  I  felt  a  little  nervous,  but  determined  to
call  to  the  driver  if  he  did  not  leave  off  smoking.  I  intended
to  do  this  by  pulling  a  string,  as  one  might  in  a  train  to  call
the  guard.  The  man  was  wearing  a  soft  slouch  hat  with  a
wide  brim  that  partly  hid  the  upper  part  of  his  face.  He
looked  like  a  sailor,  or  some  one  who  had  wandered  about  the
world  a  good  deal.  The  strangest  part  of  him  was  his  eyes,  which
were  extraordinarily  bright  and  glittering.  He  half  closed  them
when  he  glared  at  me,  which  emphasised  the  effect  of  glittering.

My  first  associations  with  this  dream  were  :  Gaboriau's
Monsieur  Lecoq,  which  I  was  then  in  the  middle  of
reading.  As  I  am  interested  in  detective  stories,  and
familiar  with  the  Sherlock  Holmes  series,  it  had  natur-
ally occurred  to  me  to  compare  the  French  detective,
Lecoq,  with  the  English,  Sherlock  Holmes,  who  smokes
to  excess.  The  glittering  eyes  of  the  man  in  the  bus
also  suggested  to  me  almost  at  once  the  "  Ancient
Mariner."  I  therefore  regarded  him  primarily  as  a  com-
posite of  Sherlock  Holmes  and  the  Ancient  Mariner.

The  Ancient  Mariner  was  intended  by  Coleridge  as  a
story  of  the  supernatural,  not  as  a  study  in  psychology.
But, as he himself pointed out.1 the emotional  state

1  It  was  planned  as  one  of  a  series  of  poems,  in  which  "  the  incidents
and  agents  were  to  be,  in  part  at  least,  supernatural  ;  and  the  excellence
aimed  at  was  to  consist  in  the  interesting  of  the  affections  by  the
dramatic  truth  of  such  emotions,  as  would  naturally  accompany  such
situations,  supposing  them  real.  And  real  in  this  sense  they  have  been
to  every  human  being  who,  from  whatever  source  of  delusion,  has  at
any  time  believed  himself  under  supernatural  agency  "  (Biographia
Literaria.  chap.  XIV.).


LXXV.]


Dream- A  na  lysis.


93


of  the  hero  is  obviously  like  that  of  a  person  suffering
from  delusions  or  obsessions.  The  poem  then  may  be
treated  as  a  case  of  self -analysis, — for  the  analyst  is
also  the  analysed  person,  who  attempts  to  relieve  his
mind  by  the  process.  He  succeeds  for  a  time  ;  but
the  confession,  or  analysis,  has  to  be  constantly  repeated
and,  it  appears,  will  have  to  be  repeated  at  intervals
throughout  the  rest  of  his  life.  The  Ancient  Mariner
of  the  dream  is  doubtless  conceived  of  from  this  point
of  view  ;  and,  like  most  dream-characters,  he  stands  for
more  than  one  person.

He  stands  first  for  Freud,  whose  book  on  The  Inter-
pretation of  Dreams  (which  I  was  then  studying)  is
largely  concerned  with  an  analysis  of  his  own  dreams.
The  story  of  the  Ancient  Mariner,  moreover,  has  a
general  resemblance  to  the  legend  of  the  Wandering
Jew,  and  Freud's  analysis  shows  how  strongly  his  own
emotional  attitude  in  life  is  coloured  by  the  fact  of  his
being  a  Jew,  in  a  country  where  the  Anti-Semitic  senti-
ment is  still  strong.

The  other  dream-character,  Sherlock  Holmes,  the  de-
tective, represents  the  analyst  only,  not  the  analysed
person.  Primarily  he  too  stands  for  Freud,  for  he  not
only  smokes,1  but  is  also  addicted  to  the  use  of  cocaine.
Cocaine  is  associated  by  me  with  Freud,  because,  as  I
had  read  two  or  three  days  before  the  dream  (see  The
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  pp.  143-144),  he  had  written
"  an  essay  on  the  coca  plant,  which  drew  the  attention
of  K.  Koller  to  the  anaesthetic  properties  of  cocaine.  .  .  .
Shortly  after  Roller's  discovery,  my  father  had  ....
become  ill  with  glaucoma  ;  he  was  operated  upon  by  my
friend,  the  eye-specialist,  Dr.  Konigstein.  Dr.  Koller
attended  to  the  cocaine  anaesthetisation,  and  thereupon
made  the  remark  that  all  three  of  the  persons  who  had
shared  in  the  introduction  of  cocaine  had  been  brought
together  on  one  case."  This  statement  occurs  in  the
course  of  an  analysis  by  Freud  of  one  of  his  own
dreams  ; he  also  says  that  he  had  been  thinking  that,

1  For  the  association  of  "smoking"  with  psychoanalysis  and  Freud,
see  "  The  Kaiser  "  dream,  above,  p.  63  ;  see  also  below,  p.  95.


94


Alice  Johnson.


[part


if  he  ever  had  glaucoma,  he  would  go  to  Berlin  to  be
operated  on.

Further  analysis  of  my  dream  reveals  a  number  of  links
between  it  and  this  case  of  Freud's,  and  it  is  noteworthy
that  the  links  consist  chiefly  of  plays  on  words,  (of  which
he  gives  many  examples  in  his  cases).  Thus,  a  berlin
is  defined  in  my  dictionary  as  "a  four-wheeled  vehicle
[like  a  bus]  of  the  chariot  kind,  first  made  at  Berlin  "  ;
glaucoma  is  a  disease  of  the  eye  caused  by  "an  opacity
of  the  vitreous  humour,  giving  the  eye  a  bluish-green
tint,"  the  word  being  derived  from  the  Greek  glaukos,
bluish-green  or  sea-green.  The  Greek  word  (see  Liddell
ana  Scott's  Lexicon)  is  used  especially  of  the  sea  and
of  eyes.  In  the  latter  case,  it  originally  meant  glaring
or  gleaming,  with  the  collateral  notion  of  fierce.  Glaucus
was  a  fisherman,  who  became  a  sea-god  (Ovid,  Met.  XIII.
898).  Cf.  my  Ancient  Mariner,  with  the  glittering  eyes,
in  the  four-wheeled  vehicle.

Freud's  dream  (op.  cit.  p.  142)  was  that  he  had
written  a  monograph  on  a  plant  ;  the  slang  meaning
of  the  word  "  plant  "  in  English  is  a  hoax.  In  my
dream,  the  man  smokes  ;  "  to  smoke  a  person,"  in  slang
language,  means  to  hoax  him.

Freud,  if  he  went  to  Berlin  as  he  was  imagining,  would
go  by  train.  In  my  dream  I  think  of  calling  the  driver's
attention  by  pulling  a  cord,  and  think  of  this  as  the
means  of  communication  (with  the  guard)  used  in  trains.

Another  series  of  associations  starts  from  some  phrases
in  a  Holland  script  (quoted  in  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.  p.  215),
which  apjmrently  suggested  several  factors  in  the  dream  :

Is  she  asleep  ?  No,  she's  talking.  That  chimney  smokes  .  .  .
I  want  you  to  understand  me  but  I  have  so  few  chances  to
speak. — it's  like  waiting  to  take  a  ticket  and  I  am  always
pushed  away  from  the  pigeon-hole  before  I  can  influence  her
mind  ...  A  peck  of  pickled  pepper  .  .  .

A  faint  far  glimmer

a  flickering  light
Five  different  influences

have  tried  to  write


LXXV.]


Dream- Analysis .


95


In  the  Holland  script,  "  she  "  generally  means  the
automatist,  and  "  I  "  the  "  control,"  i.e.,  the  influence
purjjorting  to  inspire  the  script.  Transferring  this
conception  to  the  dream,  it  would  seem  that  "  she  "
is  the  dreamer,  who,  in  the  dream,  is  "  talking  "  ;  while
the  "control" — the  "five  different  influences"  of  the
script — is  the  other  chief  dream-personage,  the  man,
who  is  a  composite  of  several  different  characters,  and
whose  glittering  eyes  are  perhaps  partly  suggested  by  the
"  flickering  light  "  of  the  script  .  Also  there  were  five
persons  in  all  in  the  bus  (including  the  driver).

"  Waiting  to  take  a  ticket  "  may  happen  in  a  bus,
but  the  script  phrases  seem  to  apply  rather  to  taking
a  ticket  for  a  train  at  a  railway  station.

"  Is  she  asleep  ?  No,  she's  talking.  That  chimney
smokes  "  is,  as  mentioned  above,  (see  the  analysis  of
"  The  Kaiser  "  dream,  p.  63)  a  reminiscence  of  a  sentence  in
Human  Personality,  Vol.  I.  p.  55,  relating  to  a  case
in  Breuer  and  Freud's  Studien  iiber  Hysterie  ;  "  '  The
talking  cure,'  or  '  chimney-sweeping,'  as  Fraulein  0.
called  it,  was  practically  equivalent  to  confession  under
hypnosis."  The  chimney  that  emokes,  then,  is  one  that
wants  sweeping,  or  that  has  not  yet  been  swept  ;  — that
is,  there  is  something  wrong,  something  incomplete  or
unsatisfactory,  in  the  analysis.

In  the  dream,  objection  is  made  to  smoking  "  inside
the  bus."  Now  "  bus  "  is  an  anagram  for  "  sub,"  which
both  Mrs.  Holland  and  I  constantly  used,  in  corre-
sponding with  each  other,  as  an  abbreviation  for  "  sub-
liminal." The  idea  seems  to  be  that  the  subliminal
thoughts  should  be  clear,  not  smoky  ;  smokiness,  or
obscurity,  should  occur  only  on  the  roof  of  the  bus, —
the  supraliminal.

"  Bus,"  again,  is  the  abbreviated  form  of  "  omnibus,"
— a  word  suggesting  Jung's  view  that  there  is  a  stratum
of  the  subliminal  which  is  common  to  everybody.

Another  association  between  the  smoking  man  of  the
dream  and  Mrs.  Holland  occurred  to  my  mind  later.
It  consisted  in  a  phrase  in  a  script  of  Miss  Verrall's
(Mrs.  Salter),  as follows  : "  An  old  Dutch  pipe  with  a


!><;


Alice  Johnson.


[part


curved  stem — Dutch  windmills."  A  note  by  Mr.  Pidding-
ton  on  this  phrase  suggests  that  it  is  a  veiled  reference
to  Mrs.  Holland.  There  are  in  Miss  Verrall's  scripts,
so  far  as  known  to  me,  only  three  other  references  to
the  country  or  people  of  Holland,  one  of  which  is  as
follows  :  "  Round  the  world  for  ever  and  aye 1 — der
fliegender  Hollander."  The  Flying  Dutchman  is  of  course
a  variant  of  the  Wandering  Jew,  who  is  associated  above
with  the  Ancient  Mariner.  It  is  to  be  understood  that  Miss
Verrall's,  like  Mrs.  Holland's,  scripts,  together  with  a  great
quantity  of  unpublished  notes  on  them,  are  extremely
familiar  to  me,  so  that  when  I  think  of  any  one  of  them,
it  cannot  fail  to  remind  me  of  many  other  connected  ones.

The  smoking  man  was  first  associated  by  me  with
Gaboriau's  Monsieur  Lecoq,  and  his  twofold  character  as
the  analyst  and  the  analysed  person  corresponds  with  the
two  chief  characters  in  the  book,- — the  detective,  Lecoq,
and  the  accused  person  (le  prevenu),  Anne-Marie-Martial,
Marquis  de  Sairmeuse,  who  calls  himself  "  Mai,"  and
whose  real  name  and  history  Lecoq  is  trying  to  discover.

The  comparison  of  the  analyst  to  a  detective  and  of
the  analysed  person  to  a  supposed  criminal  may  be
thought  odd,  even  if,  as  in  the  case  of  this  story,  the
person  accused  of  the  crime  is  acquitted  in  the  end.
The  situation  arises,  of  course,  from  the  procedure  of  the
Trench  criminal  law,  as  distinguished  from  the  English  :
in  the  former,  the  accused  person  is  assumed  to  be
guilty  and  has  to  prove  himself  innocent  ;  whereas  in
the  latter  he  is  assumed  to  be  innocent  until  the  crime
is  proved  against  him.  I  think  that  the  dream-self
selected  a  French  rather  than  an  English  detective  story
on  this  very  account,  as  representing  the  Freudian  atti-
tude. For  Freud's  method  of  procedure,  in  his  Inter-
pretation of  Dreams,  certainly  lends  itself  to  the  view
that  he  is  searching  for  what  he  calls  primitive — or
what  others  might  call  degenerative — tendencies,  and  that
he  takes  up  the  position  of  assuming  always  that  they
exist  and  that  the  burden  of  proof  rests  throughout  on
his  opponents.

1  Matthew  Arnold,  The  Forsaken  Merman.


LXXV.]


Dream- A  na  lysis .


97


Both  Lecoq  and  "  Mai "  have  glittering  eyes,  like  the
Ancient  Mariner  ;  and  on  one  occasion  they  travel
together  in  a  police  van,  in  which  there  are  three  other
persons,  making  five  altogether,  as  in  my  bus.

In  view  of  the  plays  on  words  already  noted,  in-
cluding the  anagram  "  bus  "  for  "  sub,"  the  following
may  also  be  pointed  out  :

(1)  The  name  "  Ancient  Mariner "  resembles  the  name
"  Anne-Marie-Martial."

(2)  This  latter,  again,  resembles  "  Anna,"  the  Christian
name  of  Fraulein  O.,  the  inventor  of  the  epithet
"  chimney-sweeping  "  (see  above),  who  suffered  from  an
affection  of  the  eyes,  among  other  symptoms.

(3)  The  initials  of  "  Ancient  Mariner  "  reversed  give
the  first  two  letters  of  the  prisoner's  pseudonym  "  Mai."

(4)  An  anagram  for  "Mai"  is  "I  am," — that  is,  the
dreamer  is  one  of  the  persons  concealed  in  the  composite.

(5)  The  first  three  letters  of  Lecoq's  name,  reversed,
give  the  initials  of  Dr.  Long,  the  analyst  whose  paper
precedes  mine,  and  who  follows  the  school  of  Jung.

(6)  Lecoq  is  very  often  described  as  the  "  jeune  agent."
The  initials  of  these  words,  reversed,  give  my  own  initials.

(7)  The  French  word  "  jeune  "  corresponds  to  the
German  "  jung,"  suggesting  the  analyst  Jung,  who  writes
both  in  French  and  German.

I  need  hardly  remark  that  the  above  resemblances  or
coincidences  are  'purely  accidental  ;  an  unlimited  number
of  such  could  be  found  in  many  other  directions,  and
no  significance  of  any  kind  is  to  be  attached  to  them
in  themselves.  But  I  believe  that  my  subliminal  selected
Gaboriau's  book  to  assist  in  the  make-up  of  the  dream
partly  because — in  addition  to  the  fact  that  the  story,
with  its  two  principal  characters,  lent  itself  to  the  general
dream-scheme  of  the  analyst  and  the  analysed  person —
there  happened  to  be  these  coincidences  between  the
names  of  the  characters  and  the  names  of  those  analysts
and  analysed  persons  who  would  naturally  occur  to  my
mind.  Thus,  by  the  side-wind  of  these  purely  accidental
coincidences,  several  instances  of  the  analyst  and  analysed
types  are  introduced  into  the  composite.

G


98


Alice  Johnson.


[part


It  seems  that  the  dreamer  appears  in  this  group  of
persons  as  being  more  in  sympathy  with  the  Swiss  than
with  the  Vienna  school  of  psychoanalysis.  What  is  found
objectionable  in  the  dream-man  is  his  smoking — the
characteristic  that  especially  connects  him  with  Freud.
This  is  represented  in  the  dream  as  causing  confusion
and  obscurity  in  a  region  that  should  be  clear.  80
Freud's  constant  and,  as  I  think,  greatly  exaggerated
emphasis  on  the  sexual  side  of  life  seems  to  me  to
obscure  the  very  issues  which  he  is  attempting  to  clear  up.

Summary.

The  analysis  shows  that  this  dream  is  concocted
primarily  from  four  sources  :  (1)  Coleridge's  Ancient
Mariner  ;  (2)  Gaboriau's  Lecoq,  involving  Sherlock
Holmes  ;  (3)  Freud's  Interpretation  of  Dreams  ;  (4)  the
Holland  script  quoted  on  p.  94.

By  combining  ideas  derived  from  all  these  sources,
we  arrive  at  the  notion  of  two  generic  or  typical  persons,
the  analyst  and  the  analysed  person  ;  and  these  two  are
fused,  by  a  process  which  we  may  compare  to  a  chemical
synthesis,  into  the  single  composite  dream-character,  the
Smoking  Man.

Reversing  the  process,  we  find  that  the  Man  may  be
decomposed  into  two  main  characters  :  (a)  Sherlock
Holmes,  who  represents  the  Analyst  only  ;  (b)  the
Ancient  Mariner,  who  still  combines  the  two  types  of
Analyst  and  Analysed  person.

The  two  characters- — themselves  composite — may  in  turn
be  decomposed  further  into  their  factors  or  elements,
and  we  find  that  in  both  cases  the  factors  are  held
together  by  invisible  threads  of  connection,  which  we
may  compare  to  the  forces  of  chemical  affinity  or  attrac-
tion. The  connecting  threads  consist  in  plays  on  words, —
only  revealed  through  the  analysis.  The  notion  of  plays
on  words  has  been  borrowed  by  the  dreamer  from  Freud's
Interpretation  of  Dreams  and  from  the  Holland  script,  which
abounds  in  them  ;  it  is  partly,  perhaps,  on  account  of  this
common  characteristic  that  the  book  and  the  script  have
been  utilised  jointly  in  the  production  of  the  dream.


LXXV.]


Dream- A  nalysis.


yy


Continuing  the  decomposition  of  the  dream-characters,
we  find  that  :  (a)  Behind  Sherlock  Holmes  (the  detective)
stands  Freud  (the  analyst).  They  are  connected  by  the
Cocaine  association,  and  by  the  puns  on  the  slang  use
of  the  words  "  plant  "  and  "  smoking."

(b)  Behind  the  Ancient  Mariner  stand  :  (1)  Freud,
both  as  analyst  and  analysed  person,  associated  with
the  Ancient  Mariner  through  :  his  imagined  journey  to
Berlin  (berlin  =  bus)  ;  his  feared  glaucoma  (glaukos  =  blue-
green,  sea-green  ;  glittering  eyes.  Glaucus,  the  fisherman,
or  mariner)  ;  his  Jewish  blood  (the  Ancient  Mariner
like  the  Wandering  Jew).

(2)  "  Der  fliegende  Hollander,"  that  is,  Mrs.  Holland,
considered  as  an  analysed  person.

(3)  Anne-Marie-Martial,  the  accused  person  of  Gaboriau's
story  ;  behind  whom  stands  Fraulein  Anna  0.,  the
analysed  person  referred  to  in  the  Holland  script.

(4)  "  Mai,"  the  pseudonym  of  the  accused  person  ;
behind  whom  stands  the  dreamer,  as  an  analysed  person,
through  the  anagram  "  I  am."

(5)  Lecoq,  "  le  jeune  agent,"  i.e.  the  detective  ;  behind
whom  stand  three  persons  in  the  capacity  of  analyst,
viz.  Dr.  C.  E.  Long,  Dr.  Jung,  and  the  dreamer.

Post-script.

The  above  dream  had  been  studied  with  great  care,
and  several  accounts  of  it  had  been  written  out  in  the
endeavour  to  make  it  clear,  first  to  myself  and  after-
wards to  my  readers.  I  had  long  seen  that  its  scheme
included  the  two  types  of  analyst  and  analysed  person,
that  the  latter  category  included  automatic  writers  as
well  as  dreamers,  and  that  one  automatist,  Mrs  Holland,
was  included  in  the  composite.

In  view  of  all  this,  it  seems  odd  that  I  should  have
overlooked  the  connection  between  the  name  "  Mai  "
and  Mrs.  Verrall,  whose  name  was  Margaret,  but  who
was  always  called  "  May "  by  her  friends,  including
myself.  Also  her  second  name  (de  Gaudrion)  was  French,
which  might  have  afforded  another  clue.  Nevertheless,
it  was  not  until  some time after  the  final  draft  of  the


100


Alice  Johnson.


PART


analysis  was  written  out — and  nearly  seven  months  after
the  occurrence  of  the  dream — that  it  suddenly  flashed
on  me  that  "  Mai  "  was  Mrs.  Verrall.

Mrs.  Verrall,  then,  is  one  of  the  conglomerate  company
in  the  Bus.

About  three  weeks  after  the  discovery  of  Mrs.  Verrall
in  the  "  Bus,"  another  equally  obvious  discovery  was
made  with  the  same  suddenness,  viz.  that  the  Smoking
Man  included  also  Mrs.  Piper.

Mrs.  Piper's  is  a  name  that  lends  itself  to  puns,  and  has
in  fact  been  frequently  punned  on  in  the  scripts  ;  e.g.,
in  a  Holland  script  given  in  Proc.  Vol.  XXV.  p.  273  :

"  Piper,  sit  thee  down  and  write
In  a  book  that  all  may  read  "

■ — a  quotation  from  Blake's  Introduction  to  "  Songs  of
Innocence.'''  See  also  allusions  to  the  Pied  PijDer  of
Hamelin  in  Miss  Verrall's  scripts  quoted  in  Proc.  Vol.
XXII.  pp.  67-68.  These  scripts  and  others  by  Mrs.
Verrall  and  Mrs.  Piper,  quoted  in  the  same  section  as
forming  a  cross-corres}Dondence  with  them,  are  full  of
plays  on  words.

The  first  play  on  Mrs.  Piper's  name  that  has  been
detected  in  the  scripts  occurs  in  an  early  Holland  script,
as  follows  :

"  The  next  pick  of  pickled  pepper  will  be  rather  a
surprising  one. Mrs.  Piper  .  .  .  ."

This  of  course  alludes  to  the  nursery  rhyme,  "  Peter
Piper  picked  a  peck  of  pickled  pepper."  Cf.  "a  peck  of
pickled  pepper "  in  the  Holland  script  quoted  above
(p.  94)  as  the  source  of  several  elements  in  the  dream.
I  at  first  omitted  this  phrase  from  the  extracts  quoted
from  the  script,  not  seeing  its  significance  in  regard  to
the  dream.  It  affords,  I  think,  a  clear  proof  that  Mrs.
Piper  was  included  in  the  "  dream  thoughts  "  as  an
analysed  person.

I  take  it  that  the  general  idea  at  the  back  of  this
dream  is  that,  in  spite  of  more  or  less  serious  differences
of  opinion  and  of  outlook  between  the  different  real
persons represented in it, there is much in  common


LXXV.]


Dream- Analysis.


101


between  them.  They  are  all  in  the  same  "  Bus  "  ;  i.e.,
they  are  all  concerned  with  and  deeply  interested  in  the
study  of  the  subliminal,  and  their  views  in  regard  to  it
would  harmonise  in  many  respects.


The  dreams  analysed  in  this  paper  are  all  given  in  the
chronological  order  of  their  occurrence,  with  the  exception
of  the  one  next  to  be  quoted.  This  occurred  at  a  date
about  half  way  between  the  "  Golden  Stairs "  and
"  Bacchae  "  dreams,  but  for  the  purposes  of  my  general
argument  is  placed  here.

Dream. "  The  Astronomer's  Bath."

I  was  in  my  lodgings,  talking  to  a  former  fellow-lodger,
Mrs.  L.  She  remarked  that  she  wanted  to  take  a  bath,  and
would  take  one  at  the  astronomer's.  I  got  the  impression
that  this  would  be  something  of  an  elaborate  kind,  perhaps
like  a  Turkish  bath.  So,  knowing  that  her  means  were  very
limited,  I  asked  "  Wouldn't  that  be  rather  expensive  1  "  She
said,  "  Yes."  I  said,  "  Then  why  not  take  a  bath  in  this
house  1  "  She  replied  that,  as  she  was  no  longer  living  in
the  house,  she  did  not  like  to  do  so.  I  urged  her  to  ask  the
landlady's  leave  for  it.

At  the  end  of  our  talk,  we  seemed  to  be  standing  together
at  the  top  of  the  backstairs  in  my  old  home,  outside  the  door
of  my  old  night  nursery.

The  following  are  the  chief  associations  with  the  items
of  this  dream  which  occurred  to  my  mind  and  were
noted  the  next  morning  :

Mrs.  L.  had  to  work  hard,  often  beyond  her  strength,
to  keep  herself  and  her  children.  She  could  have  got
help  from  her  relatives,  but  preferred  to  be  independent.
I  thought  her  over-scrupulous  in  making  claims  for  her-
self ;  thus,  it  was  characteristic  that  she  should  have
refused  to  ask  for  a  bath  that  would  cost  nothing  in
her  old  lodgings,  and  preferred  to  pay  for  one  elsewhere.

A  bath  :  a  simple  thing  ;  talcing  a  bath  is  the  most
pleasant  part  of  one's  toilet  ;  it  would  be  very  dis-
agreeable  to be so  poor  as  to  be  unable  to  have  one.


102


Alice  Johnson.


[part


But  as  a  child  I  disliked  my  bath,  because  it  was  always
cold.  A  bath  is  a  frequent  religious  symbol.  I  was
brought  up  as  a  Baptist,  but  was  never  baptised.

At  the  Astronomer's  :  the  only  one  of  my  acquaintances
that  I  could  think  of  who  had  any  concern  with  astronomy
was  a  relative,  then  absent  at  the  front,  though  not  near
the  fighting  line.  I  was  therefore  occasionally,  but  not
acutely,  anxious  about  him.  A  marked  characteristic  of
his  is  an  unusual  degree  of  truthfulness  and  accuracy  ;
he  is  unusually  careful  not  to  make  a  statement  unless
he  knows  it  to  be  correct.

Stars  :  my  own  interest  in  stars  is  chiefly  literary  rather
than  scientific  ;  legendary  stars  :  the  Ejnphany  star,
"  Heaven's  youngest-teemed  Star,"  1  the  herald  of  a  new
epoch.  Frequent  mythological  connection  of  stars  with
birth,  e.g.,  in  Virgil's  "  Messianic  "  Eclogue  (Eel.  IV.  6)  :
"Now  the  Virgin  2  returns  to  earth,  and  the  Saturnian
reign  [the  age  of  gold]  begins  again." 3

The  backstairs  :  associated  with  childish  terrors  and
imaginings  ;  a  dark  and  gloomy  place,  haunted  by  the
unseen  presences  of  giants,  robbers,  and  wild  beasts.
Half  way  up  the  stairs  led  into  a  dark  cupboard,  which,
I  believed,  opened  into  a  "  secret  room."  I  often  visited
this  imaginary  room  in  dreams,  but  it  remained  shadowy
even  then.  The  only  real  danger  of  the  backstairs  was
that  one  sometimes  met  black  beetles  there,- — the  most
terrible  objects  that  could  be  met  anywhere.  The  front
stairs,  on  the  other  hand,  was  a  safe,  well-lighted,  and
cheerful  place  ;  but  by  going  up  the  backstairs  one  saved
the  front  stairs  carpet,  and  so  acquired  merit.  And  at  the
top  one  reached  the  safe  and  j)leasant  haven  of  the  nursery.

These  earliest  associations  with  the  dream  obviously
fail  to  explain  its  central  problem,  the  "  Astronomer's
Bath."  I  went  on  turning  this  over  in  my  mind  at
intervals,  and  thinking  of  various  literary  and  legendary
ideas — ancient and modern — about stars  ; e.g., the  con-

1  Milton,  Hymn  on  the  Morning  of  Chrises  Nativity.

2  The  constellation  Virgo  is  identified  with  Altcri,  Astraea,  or  Justice.
For  Justice  taking  leave  of  earth,  cf.  Georg.  II.  474.

3  Cf.  Milton's  Hymn  on  the  Nativity,  stanzas  XIV.,  XV.


LXXV.]


Dream- A  nalysis .


103


ception  of  the  system  of  stars  as  exemplifying  perfect
obedience  to  divine  laws  ; — "  His  will  is  our  peace  "  ; 1
and  other  of  the  numerous  allusions,  literal  or  symbolic,
to  astronomy  in  Dante.  I  had  once  begun  to  make  a
list  of  all  his  references  to  the  constellations,  and
shortly  before  the  dream  had  read  a  book,  by  M.  A.
Orr,  called  Dante  and  the  Early  Astronomers,  which  shows
his  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  science  of  Astronomy,
so  far  as  it  was  known  at  his  time,  and  the  almost
invariable  accuracy  of  all  his  allusions  to  such  specific
facts  as  the  relative  positions  of  stars,  sun,  and  moon,
in  the  heavens  at  different  times  of  the  day  and  night
and  at  different  seasons  of  the  year,  the  precession  of
the  equinoxes,  etc.  (Cf.  above,  my  associations  with  the
"  Astronomer.")  All  this  had  interested  me  for  the  light
it  threw  on  Dante's  many-sided  character.

It  was  not,  however,  until  several  months  after  the
dream  that  it  suddenly  flashed  on  me  that  my  "  Astro-
nomer "  was  Dante  himself,  and — at  the  same  time —
that  his  "  Bath  :'  was  the  river  of  Lethe,  "  which  takes
away  from  men  the  memory  of  sin  "  (Purg.  XXVTII.  128),
with  its  twin  stream  Eunoe,  which  restores  the  recollection
of  good.  The  impression  came  to  me  with  the  same  feelings
of  sudden  recognition  and  absolute  certainty  of  the  correct-
ness of  the  recognition  as  in  the  case  of  the  "  Bacchae  "
dream,  described  above,  p.  47  ;  the  only  difference  being
that  the  "  Bacchae  "  was  recognised  immediately  after
waking,  and  Dante  not  until  several  months  later.  Con-
sidering that  my  subliminal  self  must  have  known
perfectly  well  all  the  time  who  the  "  Astronomer "  was,
it  strikes  me  as  noteworthy  that  the  knowledge  was
withheld  so  long  from  the  supraliminal.

As  to  Lethe,  it  will  be  remembered  that  after  Dante
has  climbed  all  the  terraces  of  the  Purgatorial  Mount,
he  enters  the  Earthly  Paradise  or  Garden  of  Eden  at
the  top,  and  advancing  into  it  finds  his  way  barred  by
the  stream  of  Lethe,  on  the  other  side  of  which  he
sees  in  turn  Matilda,  the  mystic  procession  of  the  Divine
Car,  and  Beatrice  with  her  attendant  nymphs.

1  Par.  III.  85.


104


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  next  step  in  the  analysis  of  the  dream  was  taken
some  months  later  in  the  recognition  of  the  Backstairs  as
an  "  infantile  "  symbol  of  the  Purgatorial  Mount  which
has  to  be  climbed  before  Lethe  can  be  reached.  With
its  imaginary  monsters  and  other  perils  the  Backstairs
represents  the  horrors  of  Hell  and  the  pains  of  Purga-
tory ;  and  it  leads  to  the  nursery  at  the  top,  which  by
comparison  was  an  Earthly  Paradise,  and  which  contained
the  bath.  As  observed  in  the  dream,  the  "  bath  "
(whether  the  nursery  one  or  Lethe)  was  "  rather  ex-
pensive "  ;  much  had  to  be  gone  through  before  one
could  arrive  at  it.

The  apparently  childish  character  of  this  analogy  is  on
a  par  with  many  metaphors  in  the  dreams  treated  of  in
the  present  paper.  Its  appropriateness  in  this  case  will
be  seen  if  we  consider  that  the  necessity  for  some  sym-
bolic new  birth  is  a  conception  inherent  in  many
religions,  including  the  Christian  :  "  Except  a  man  be
born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God  "  (John
III.  3).

The  Earthly  Paradise  represents  a  return  to  the  state
of  primeval  innocence  ;  it  was  the  "  place  chosen  for
nest  of  the  human  race  "  (Purg.  XXVIII.  77),  the  place
of  "  the  golden  age  and  its  happy  state "  (ibid.  140).
It  is  a  Paradise  of  the  archaic — one  maj  perhaps  say,
the  infantile — type,  the  return  to  a  supposed  ideal  past.
But,  in  the  Divina  Commedia,  it  is  not  the  goal,  but  only
a  temporary  resting-place  where  the  soul  is  prepared  for
the  real  Paradise  beyond.  "  Thou  shalt  be  (says  Beatrice
to  Dante)  for  a  short  time  a  dweller  in  this  forest,  and
with  me  for  ever  thou  shalt  be  a  citizen  of  that  Rome
whereof  Christ  is  a  Roman  "  (Purg.  XXXII.  100-102).

The  Bath.

It  is  odd  that  Dante  should  in  the  dream  be  desig-
nated "  the  Astronomer,"- — almost  as  odd  as  if  one  were
to  allude  to  Milton  as  "  the  Astronomer."  It  is  equally
odd  that  Lethe  should  be  described  as  "a  bath,"  for  the
root-idea  of  Lethe  is  a  water  which  men  drink,  in  order
to  forget  their  woes,  not  a  water  in  which  they  bathe.


LXXV.]


Dream- A  nalysis.


105


Dante,  however,  lays  stress  on  the  cleansing  property
of  the  water.  He  is  drawn  by  Matilda  into  the  stream
up  to  his  neck  (a  gola,  Purg.  XXXI.  94)  ;  when  he  is
nearly  over,  he  hears  the  words  Asperges  me 1  being  sung
(1.  98)  ;  then  Matilda  dips  his  head  and  makes  him
swallow  some  of  the  water ;  finally  she  draws  him  out
and  leads  him  bathed  (bagnato,  1.  103)  into  the  circle
of  the  four  nymphs,  handmaids  of  Beatrice.  Further,
when  Dante  first  enquires  about  Lethe  in  Hell,  Virgil
tells  him  (Inf.  XIV.  136-138)  :  "  Lethe  thou  shalt  see,
but  out  of  this  abyss,  there  where  the  spirits  go  to  wash
themselves  (a  lavarsi)  when  their  guilt  has  been  removed
by  penitence."

This,  I  rejDeat,  is  not  the  usual  conception  of  Lethe.
In  the  sixth  Aeneid  (as  in  Plato's  "Vision  of  Er")  it
is  only  after  the  spirits  have  been  purified  by  purgatorial
pains  that  they  are  allowed  to  come  and  drink  of  the
waters  of  Lethe  (Aen.  VI.  735-751).  Similarly  in  the
Purgatorio,  Dante  goes  through  all  the  stages  of  purifi-
cation from  sin  ;  the  marks  of  the  seven  deadly  sins  on
his  forehead  (Purg.  IX.  112)  have  been  erased  one  by  one
at  the  top  of  each  of  the  Seven  Terraces  (Purg.  XII.
98,  121-134,  etc.),  making  his  ascent  of  the  Mount  con-
stantly easier,  and  he  has  gone  through  the  purging
fire  at  the  top,  before  he  enters  the  Earthly  Paradise
and  comes  to  Lethe.  The  function  of  his  Lethe  is  not
to  purify  from  sin,  but  to  take  away  the  memory  of  sin.
Washing  does  not  seem  a  natural  way  of  doing  this,
and  the  fact  that  Dante,  unlike  earlier  writers,  speaks
of  being  washed  in  Lethe  is  one  that  I  had  never  con-
sciously noticed  till  the  dream  drew  my  attention  to  it  ;
nor  is  the  point  alluded  to  in  any  of  the  commentaries
that  I  have  read,  before  or  since  the  dream.

One  reason  for  the  dream  epithet  of  "  Bath  "  is,  I
think,  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  Dante  had  a  com-
panion in  this  "  bath,"  viz.  the  poet  Statius,  who  had
joined  him  and  Virgil  on  the  Fifth  Terrace  and  accom-
panied him  through  the  rest  of Purgatory. Readers  of

1  Psalm  LI.  7,  "  Purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean  :  wash
me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow."


106


Alice  Johnson.


[part


the  Proceedings  will  remember  that  the  Statius  episode
was  referred  to  in  certain  Willett  scripts  expounded  by
Mr.  G.  W.  Balfour  in  Vol.  XXVII.  pp.  221-243.  In
his  opening  statement  Mr.  Balfour  refers  to  some  earlier
Willett  scripts  which  purported  to  give  the  answer  of
Myers  to  the  question  :  "  What  does  the  word  Lethe
suggest  to  you  ?  "  The  scripts  treated  of  in  Mr.  Bal-
four's paper  had  nothing  to  do  with  Lethe,  but  were
interpreted  as  referring  to  Purg.  XXII.  73-91,  in  which
Dante  speaks  of  the  baptism  of  Statius,  and  to  two
articles  by  Dr.  Verrall,  entitled  "  To  follow  the  Fisher-
man "  and  "  Dante  on  the  Baptism  of  Statius,"  repub-
lished posthumously  in  his  Collected  Literary  Essays  :
Classical  and  Modem.  These  scripts  purported  to  be
inspired  by  Dr.  Verrall.

It  happens  that  my  personal  interest  in  Dante  was
first  excited  by  a  conversation  with  Dr.  Verrall,  who
remarked  in  the  course  of  it  that  he  thought  Dante's
the  only  conception  of  Paradise  that  could  satisfy  both
the  feelings  and  the  intellect  of  an  educated  modern
man  (I  am  not,  of  course,  professing  to  give  his  exact
words,  but  only  the  gist  of  what  he  said).  It  would
seem,  therefore,  that  my  dream  contains  an  implicit  refer-
ence to  Dr.  Verrall,  and  to  this  paper  of  Mr.  Balfour's.
Cf.  my  "  Astronomer  "  and  the  Willett  script  of  Sept.  8,
1913  {Proc.  Vol.  XXVII.  p.  224)  :  "  What  moves  the
stars  and  all  the  heavenly  bodies  ?  Dante  makes  it  clear  "  ;
the  allusion  being  to  the  last  line  of  the  Paradiso  :
"  The  Love  that  moves  the  sun  and  the  other  stars."
Cf.  also  my  "  Bath  "  and  the  quotation  from  the  Punch
poem  associated  with  Dr.  Verrall  (op.  cit.  p.  237)  :

"  And  when  I  take  my  Ta vender,
My  Tavender  or  Tub."

The  connection  between  my  dream  and  the  Statius
subject  is  further  confirmed  by  the  occurrence  among
my  first  associations  with  "  stars  "  (see  above,  p.  102)
of  the  line  from  Virgil's  Messianic  Eclogue  :  "  Now  the
Virgin  returns  to  earth,  and  the  Saturnian  reign  begins
again  "  ; for it was to this very passage that  Statius


LXXV.]


Dream- A  nalysis.


107


(Purg.  XXII.  70-72)  ascribed  his  (supposed)  conversion  to
Christianity.

Dr.  Verrall  in  his  two  papers  above  mentioned  analyses
the  grounds  for  Dante's  belief  that  Statius  had  been  con-
verted and,  at  a  certain  specified  date,  secretly  baptised  :
"  Before,  as  a  poet,  I  brought  the  Greeks  to  the  rivers  of
Thebes,  I  had  myself  received  baptism  "  {Purg.  XXII.  88-89),
in,  says  Dr.  Verrall,  continuing  to  expound  Dante,  "  the
river,  according  to  the  familiar  figure,  of  baptism.  This  river
he  long  hesitated  to  pass  ;  he  '  halted  on  the  other  side,'
as  a  man  who  was  no  hero  might,  when  to  be  baptised
was  to  be  in  danger  of  death, — though,  as  he  tells  us,  the
delay  cost  him  centuries  of  expiation  upon  the  purgatorial
mountain." (Collected  Literary  Essays,  p.  194.)

Here,  then,  is  another  "  expensive  bath,"  like  that  of
the  dream,  where  "  baptism  "  is  mentioned  among  the
first  associations  (see  above,  p.  102)  with  the  word  "  bath."
But,  Dr.  Verrall  points  out,  it  is  almost  certain  that
Dante  was  mistaken  in  thinking  that  Statius  had  ever
been  converted  ;  in  that  case  Statius  (like  the  dreamer)
was  never  baptised.  Note  that  Baptists,  founding  them-
selves on  the  custom  of  the  New  Testament  and  of  the
first  Christians,  practise  only  adult  baptism  and  retain
the  primitive  procedure  of  immersion.  In  both  these
respects  Statius  and  the  dreamer,  if  they  had  been
baptised,  would  have  been  treated  in  the  same  way.

There  are,  thus,  two  "  baths  "  which  may  legitimately
be  connected  with  the  "  Astronomer,"  Dante,  both  asso-
ciated with  leading  incidents  in  the  Commedia  (in  which
there  is,  so  far  as  I  can  remember,  no  other  "  bath  "
of  any  importance)  ;  both  are  baths  in  rivers  ;  in  both
Statius  takes  part,  but  Dante  only  in  one.  The  dream
no  doubt  refers  to  both  baths,  and  the  further  analysis
of  it  was  directed  towards  discovering  the  significance
attached  to  each.

The  Lethe  "  Bath."

This  was  associated  by  me  with  the  references  to  Lethe
in  the  automatic  scripts  published  in  the  Proceedings,
especially  to  :


108


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(1)  The  Lethe  of  Ovid  {Met.  Book  XI.  Fable  VII.),
which  rises  in  the  Cave  of  Sleep,  "  through  which  the
rivulet,  trickling  with  a  murmuring  noise  amid  the
sounding  pebbles,  invites  sleep  "  (11.  603  seq.).  From  this
Cave  dreams  issue  forth  (11.  615-648)  to  impose  themselves
on  men  (see  Proc.  Vol.  XXIV.  pp.  86-144).

(2)  The  Lethe  of  Virgil  (see  Proc.  Vol.  XXIV.  pp.  86-
144;  and  Vol.  XXV.  pp.  113-193).

(3)  The  Lethe  of  Dante  (see  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  237,
264,  268,  269,  foot-note  ; and  Vol.  XXV.  pp.  214-216).

The  articles  on  the  scripts  containing  these  allusions
were  naturally  familiar  to  me,  as  was  the  ordinary
mytholog3T  of  Lethe.  But  the  Lethe  of  Dante  was  the
one  in  which  I  had  long  been  most  interested,  as  it
apjDearecl  to  me  that  it  had  special  meanings  which  were
not  explained  satisfactorily  by  any  of  the  commentaries
that  I  had  read  ;  and  the  dream  seems  to  be  an  attempt
to  carry  on  further  and  clear  up  my  somewhat  vague,
rambling,  and  intermittent  waking  reflections  on  the
matter.

It  aj^pears  that  the  original  function  of  Lethe  was
merely  to  act  as  a  drug  or  narcotic  to  deaden  the
senses  and  make  men  forget  trouble  and  pain.  In  the
Orphic  and  later  mythology,1  it  develops  into  a  rite  of
initiation  ;  the  man  dies,  symbolically  or  actually,  to
live  again  or  to  be  re-incarnated.  Between  the  two
stages  or  two  lives,  he  passes  through  a  purgatorial
period  and  then  drinks  of  Lethe,  so  that  in  the  second
life  he  has  no  recollection  of  anything  that  preceded  it.

Thus  in  the  Sixth  Aeneid,  (11.  713-715)  :  "  Souls  to  whom
Fate  owes  a  second  body  drink  at  the  wave  of  the  river
of  Lethe  draughts  that  free  from  care  and  long  oblivion."
"  All  these,  when  they  have  turned  the  wheel  through  a
thousand  years,  God  summons  in  a  great  multitude  to  the
river  of  Lethe,  so  that  without  memory  they  may  see
the  vaulted  sky  again,  and  may  begin  to  wish  to  return
into  bodies  "  (11.  748-751).

1  See  Plato's  Myth  of  Er,  Republic,  613e-621d.  For  an  account  of  the
"  Orphic  Tablets,"  see  Miss  J.  E.  Harrison's  Prolegomena  to  the  Study  of
Greek  Religion,  pp.  573  et  seq.


LXXV.]


Dream- A  nalysis .


109


This  passage  is  probably  the  immediate  source  of  Dante's
Lethe,  but  he  diverges  at  once  from  his  model.  To  begin
with,  he  imports  into  Lethe  for  the  first  time,  or  at  least
strongly  emphasises,  the  idea  that  it  causes  oblivion  of
sin,  the  original  notion  being  that  it  caused  forgetfulness  in
general.  Then,  with  his  passion  for  exact  topography,  he
does  not  confine  himself  (as  Virgil  does,  Aen.  VI.  704  ff.)  to
the  bank  where  the  souls  about  to  be  re-incarnated  gather
to  drink  of  the  water,  but  works  out  the  relationship
of  the  stream  as  a  whole  to  his  scheme  of  the  universe,
material,  as  well  as  spiritual.  Virgil  places  his  infernal
rivers,  Acheron,  Styx,  and  Cocytus,  near  the  entrance  to
Hades,  and  Lethe  in  its  purgatorial  region.  Dante,  whose
Purgatory  is  sharply  marked  off  from  his  Hell,  meets
Lethe  first  in  the  lowest  depth  of  Hell,  i.e.  the  centre
of  the  earth.  Here  Lucifer  is  fixed,  embedded  up  to  his
middle  in  the  frozen  swamp  of  Cocytus.

This  "  Creature  who  was  once  so  fair "  has  now  a
head  with  three  faces,  yellow,  red  and  black,  under  each
of  which  is  a  pair  of  gigantic  flapping  bats'  wings,  and
the  winds  raised  by  these  keep  the  swamp  always  frozen,
while  his  three  mouths  are  perpetually  gnawing  the  three
arch-traitors,  Judas  Iscariot,  Brutus,  and  Cassius.  In
contrast  with  the  crude,  barbaric,  and  almost  grotesquely
hideous  appearance  of  this  monster  is  the  environment,
which  shows  his  esoteric  character.  The  three  infernal
rivers,  Acheron,  Styx  and  Phlegethon,  are  formed  from
the  tears  of  the  whole  human  race  from  its  early  ages
onwards,1  and  they  all  run  down  into  Cocytus  {Inf.  XIV.
113-119),  into  which  also  the  tears  of  Lucifer  himself  flow
perpetually  (Inf.  XXXIV.  52-54).

On  another  side  the  swamp  receives  also  the  waters
of Lethe, flowing down into it from Purgatory,2  and

1  See  the  ;i  Literary  Parallel  "  above,  p.  40.

2  The  ruscelletto  of  Inf.  XXXIV.  130,  which  flows  from  Purgatory  into
Hell,  is  nowhere  named,  but  is  said  to  be  Lethe  in  a  foot-note  in  the
Temple  Edition,  which  I  have  been  accustomed  to  use.  At  the  time  of
my  dream,  I  did  not  know  that  the  point  had  ever  been  disputed,  so
that  for  the  dream-self  the  rivulet  in  question  was  Lethe.  Many  of  the
commentators  say  nothing  about  it.  Mr.  Edmund  Gardner,  in  the
Temple  Primer  of  Dante,  following  Dr. Carlyle,  says  that  the  rivulet


110


Alice  Johnson.


[part


carrying  thence  the  memories  of  sins  from  which  the
purified,  souls  have  been  set  free.  Thus  Lucifer  suffers
perpetually  his  own  pain  and  the  pains  of  the  whole
human  race,  and  lives  in  the  eternal  memory  and  con-
sciousness of  evil.

So.  in  accordance  with  the  general  plan  that  Purgatory
should  be  a  counterpart  to  Hell,  there  is  a  place  and  a
function  for  Lethe  in  Hell.  It  is  at  the  top  of  Purgatory,
and  at  the  bottom  of  Hell.  Its  function  in  Purgatory
is  to  obliterate  the  memory  or  consciousness  of  evil  ;  its
function  in  Hell  is  the  contrary,- — to  emphasise  and
conserve  the  memory  of  evil.  For  the  effect  on  Dante
himself  only,  it  might  be  sufficient  for  him  to  drink  the
water  ;  but  how,  in  that  case,  could  the  water  be  so
affected  as  to  produce  any  result  in  Hell  ?  So  he  not
only  drinks  the  water,  but  also  bathes  in  it,  with  the  idea,
as  I  conceive,  that  the  evil  memories  will  both  be  de-
stroyed in  himself  and  washed  off  him,  so  that  they  may
be  carried  down  to  Hell.

The  scheme  has  the  incidental  advantage  that  the  water
running  down  into  the  centre  of  the  earth  wears  a  narrow
winding  channel  in  the  rock, — a  sort  of  short  cut  out  of  Hell,
passage  through  which  is  in  general  not  permitted  (see
Purg.  I.  40-48),  and  it  is  through  this  channel  that  Virgil


brings  "  the  remains  of  sin  that  has  been  purged  in  Purgatory  back  to
Lucifer."  Prof.  J.  A.  Stewart  describes  the  whole  course  of  Lethe  as
being  on  the  surface  of  the  earth.  Mr.  H.  F.  Tozer,  in  his  English
Commentary  on  Dante's  Divina  Commedia,  says  that  the  rivulet  is
generally  regarded  as  Lethe,  but  expresses  doubt  of  the  correctness  of
this  interpretation.

Longfellow,  in  a  note  to  his  translation,  calls  it  Lethe.  A.  J.  Butler
in  a  note  says,  "  The  brook  is  generally  held  to  be  the  outflow  of  Lethe,
which  rises  at  the  summit  of  the  Mountain  of  Purification,"  and  he
apparently  accepts  the  view.  Mr.  Paget  Toynbee,  in  his  Dante  Dictionary,
under  "  Lete  "  refers  to  the  "  ruscelletto  "  of  Inf.  XXXIV.  130,  and  to
the  "  cieco  flume  "  of  Purg.  I.  40,  which  are  undoubtedly  the  same.
Dr.  G-.  A.  Scartazzini,  in  his  Enciclopedia  Dantesca  (Milano,  1896),  says
that  Lethe  rises  at  the  top  of  the  Mount  of  Purgatory,  flows  through
the  Earthly  Paradise,  falls  to  the  foot  of  the  mountain  and  from  thence
passes  through  the  hollow  of  a  rock  down  to  the  centre  of  the  earth.

I  think  therefore  that  the  balance  of  evidence  is  on  the  side  of  the
identification  of  the  stream  as  Lethe.


LXXV.  |


Dream- A  na  lysis .


Ill


and  Dante  climb  up  to  the  surface  of  the  earth,  at  the
antipodes  of  the  spot  whence  they  descended  into  Hell,
and  find  themselves  at  the  foot  of  the  Mount  of  Purga-
tory.

They  do  not  meet  with  Lethe  again  till  they  come  to
the  Earthly  Paradise,  where  again  it  differs  in  a  marked
way  from  its  mythological  prototype.  Virgil  (like  Plato)
describes  the  function  of  Lethe  from  a  general  and
abstract  point  of  view,  as  a  process  in  the  development
of  the  soul.  Dante  conceives  of  the  process  as  applied
to  himself,  and  tries  to  imagine  exactly  what  effect  it
will  have.  This  not  merely,  I  think,  for  dramatic  purposes,
but  because  he  thinks  naturally  in  personal  terms.  The
twofold  stream  is  thus  described  to  him  by  Matilda  (Purg.
XXVIII.  127-133)  :

On  this  side  it  descends  with  a  virtue  which  takes  from
men  the  memory  of  sin  ;  on  the  other  it  restores  the  memory
of  every  good  deed.  On  this  side  Lethe,  as  on  the  other
Eunoe  'tis  called,  and  works  not  except  first  it  is  tasted  on
this  side  and  on  that. This  exceedeth  all  other  savours.

From  a  psychological  point  of  view  the  passage  appears
to  me  of  great  interest,  since  the  question  of  Memory  is
the  central  problem  of  psychology,  if  not  (as  Plato  hints)
of  ethics.  What  we  are  conscious  of  and  what  we  re-
member is  only  a  small  selection  out  of  the  whole
possible  field  of  consciousness  and  memory.  But

"  We  forget  because  we  must,
And  not  because  we  will."  1

To  be  able  to  control  the  selection,  to  get  rid  of
memories  of  evil  and  horror  that  no  longer  serve — perhaps
have  never  served — any  useful  purpose,,  and  to  recover  and
retain  the  desirable  ones,  would  be  a  great  gain  both  for
happiness  and  for  efficiency.

Dante,  having  reached  the  summit  of  Purgatory,  has
already  repented  of  his  sins  and  been  purified  from  them  ;
to  keep  the  recollection  of  them  any  longer  will  therefore
be useless and merely  hampering. The water of  Lethe

1  Freud's  view  is  of  course  the  opposite  of  Matthew  Arnold's.


112


Alice  Johnson.


[part


delivers  him  from  this  useless  burden.  The  memories
from  which  he  was  delivered  are  described  in  the  following
words  which  he  addresses  to  Beatrice  (Purg.  XXXIII.  91-
93)  :  "  I  do  not  remember  that  I  ever  estranged  myself
from  you,  nor  have  I  conscience  thereof  that  gnaws  me."

This  is  the  only  sin  which  is  anywhere  explicitly
mentioned  as  having  been  forgotten  through  drinking
of  Lethe.  I  think  we  may  infer  that  Dante  himself
regarded  his  sins  against  Beatrice  and  all  that  she  stood
for  in  his  life,  if  not  as  the  sum,  at  least  as  "  the  head
and  front  of  his  offending."

To  my  mind  the  passage  has  not  been  fully  appreciated
because,  in  spite  of  the  trend  of  modern,  and  especially
of  English,  scholarship  towards  the  literal  interpretation
of  the  Commedia  as  oj)posed  to  the  earlier  symbolic
interpretation  of  it,  there  is  still  too  much  tendency  to
regard  Beatrice  in  the  first  place  not  as  herself  but  as
the  representative  of  Religion,  while  Virgil  is  thought  of
not  as  himself  but  as  representing  Philosophy.  Yet
to  an  impartial  person  who  reads  the  whole  narrative
with  no  such  preconception  it  must.  I  think,  appear
that  what  Dante  has  forgotten  through  drinking  of  Lethe
is  the  actual  events  of  his  life,- — that  is,  the  course  of
dissipation  into  which  he  fell  after  the  death  of  Beatrice.
Let  us  then  next  consider  his  personal  relationship  to
Beatrice  as  compared  with  his  relationship  to  the  other
chief  character  of  the  poem,  Virgil.

For  Virgil  he  has  a  great  devotion  and  reverence  ;
but  there  is  nothing  reciprocal  in  the  relationship.  Virgil
is  the  man  "  who  goes  by  night  and  carries  the  light
behind  him  "  (Purg.  XXII.  67)  ;  he  is  not  deliberately
showing  it  to  any  one,  and  he  does  not  know  on  whom
it  shines,  or  who  is  blind  to  it.  Just  such  a  relationship
may  subsist  between  Dante  himself  and  any  one  of  his
modern  readers.  Dante  does  not  suppose  that  Virgil
actually  came  out  of  Limbo  to  enlighten  him.

On  the  other  hand, — this  it  seems  to  me  impossible
to  doubt, — it  was  an  essential  part  of  his  faith  that
Beatrice  did  actually  and  literally  make  a  personal  effort
on  his  behalf. For  its  efficacy,  his  own  co-operation  was


LXXV.]


Dream- Analysis .


113


of  course  necessary  ;  but  the  effect  produced  on  him  was,
he  believed,  due  to  something  more  than  his  own  un-
assisted efforts  and  aspirations.  In  the  language  of
psychical  research,  Beatrice  is  a  "  communicator "  ;
Virgil  is  only  a  "  control."  Throughout  the  Inferno,
and  the  greater  part  of  the  Purgatorio,  Virgil  "  controls  "
for  Beatrice  ;  afterwards  she  "  controls  "  for  herself.

Now.  after  drinking  the  water  of  Lethe,  Dante  forgot
that  he  had  ever  sinned  against  her  ;  he  could  not
therefore  realise  in  any  adequate  way  her  efforts  for  his
salvation.  The  water  of  Eunoe  was  necessary  to  restore
to  him  the  realisation  of  this.  The  idea  of  Eunoe  as
the  indispensable  counterpart  of  Lethe  is  the  most  essential
and  original  1  pait  of  his  whole  conception.

It  is  strange  that  two  such  scholars  as  Mr.  Paget
Toynbee  and  Prof.  J.  A.  Stewart 2  should  have  taken
Purg.  XXVIII.  129  ("  dall'  altra,  d'ogni  ben  fatto  la
rende  ")  to  mean  that  what  is  restored  to  the  penitent
by  the  water  of  Eunoe'  is  the  memory  of  his  own  good
deeds,  the  advantage  of  which  (according  to  Prof.  Stewart)
is  that  it  enables  him  to  preserve  the  continuity  of  his
conscious  life  when  he  passes  into  Paradise.  The  final  touch
that  is  to  fit  Dante  for  Paradise  is  not,  surely,  the  contem-
plation of  his  own  virtues,  but  the  virtues  of  Beatrice.

The  functions  of  Lethe  and  Eunoe  had  already  been
explained  to  him  by  Matilda  (Purg.  XXVIII.  121-132,  see
above)  ;  but  he  had  forgotten  her  explanation,  and  when
he  saw  the  streams  again,  "  parting  like  friends  that
linger,"  he  had  to  ask  what  they  were.  It  is  explicitly
stated  that  this  forgetfulness  was  not  due  to  the  action
of  Lethe, — it  was  a  case  of  what  might  be  called  normal
forgetfulness.  Then,  by  the  direction  of  Beatrice,  Matilda,
to "  requicken his fainting virtue," leads Dante  and

1  It  has  some  resemblance  to  the  Platonic  notion  of  anamnesis  or
reminiscence, — "  the  recollection  of  those  things  which  in  time  past
[i.e.,  in  some  previous  existence]  our  soul  beheld  when  it  travelled
with  God," — and  to  the  Orphic  Fountain  of  Memory,  but  was  probably
invented  by  Dante  independently  of  any  mythological  tradition.

2  Paget  Toynbee,  A  Dante  Dictionary,  under  "  Lete."
Prof.  J.  A.  Stewart,  The  Myths  of  Plato,  pp.  157-8.

ii


114


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Statius  to  Eunoe  and  makes  them  drink  of  "  the  sweet
draught  which  never  would  have  sated  me.  ...  I  came
back  from  the  most  holy  waves,  born  again,  even  as  new
trees  renewed  with  new  foliage,  pure  and  ready  to  mount
to  the  stars  "  (Purg.  XXXIII.  138-145).

We  find  as  a  fact  that  in  the  Paradiso  the  souls  have
still  some  recollection  of  the  faults  of  their  lives  on  earth  ;
e.g.,  Piccarda  remembers  that  her  vows  were  slighted
(Par.  III.  56)  ;  Justinian  remembers  that  he  once  held
heretical  opinions  (Par.  VI.  14)  ;  and  the  effect  of  their
past  lives  is  symbolised  by  their  presence  in  the  lower
heavens,  though  it  is  explained  that  this  is  only  an
allegorical  appearance  (Par.  IV.  34-43).

It  is  in  the  Third  Heaven,  the  Heaven  of  Venus,  that
the  effects  of  the  drinking  of  Lethe  and  Eunoe'  are  most
clearly  hinted  at,  though  never  specifically  alluded  to.
Cunizza  of  Romano  says 1 (Par.  IX. 32-35)  :

Here  I  shine,  because  the  light  of  this  star  had  the  mastery
of  me.  But  gladly  I  allow  to  myself  the  occasion  of  my
lot,  and  it  gives  me  no  annoy.

Folco  of  Marseilles,  the  Troubadour,  says  (Par.  IX.
95-108)  :

This  heaven  is  stamped  with  me,  as  was  I  with  it  .  .  .  Here,
however,  one  repents  not,  but  smiles,  not  for  the  fault,  which
returns  not  to  the  mind,  but  for  the  goodness  which  ordered
and  foresaw.  Here  one  gazes  into  the  art  which  makes  beauti-
ful with  so  great  affection,  and  the  good  is  discerned  whereby
the  world  on  high  turns  that  below.

In  a  note,  Butler  explains  this  speech  to  mean  :

We  feel  no  repentance  for  our  fault,  which  indeed  we  have
forgotten  ;  but  we  contemplate  with  joy  the  wonderful  order
of  God's  providence,  which  makes  that  love  wherein  we  for-
merly erred  an  honour  to  us  ;  and  we  discern  this  same  love
in  its  highest  manifestation,  namely,  as  the  power  by  means
of  which  the  whole  course  of  the  world  is  governed.

Cf.  the  "  Astronomer,"  who  ends  his  poem  with  the  words  :

"  L'Amor  che  move  il  sole  e  l'altre  stelle."

1  Of  this  and  the  next  quoted  passage  I  give  Butler's  translation.


3LXXV.]


Dream- Analysis .


115


I  may  quote  also  a  comment  by  Mr.  Edmund  Gardner 1
on  the  speeches  of  Cunizza  and  Folco  :

Grief  for  past  sin  is  absorbed  in  happiness  in  the  divine
mercy  and  in  gratitude  for  forgiveness.  For,  in  Dante's
allegory,  both  Lethe  and  Eunoe  have  been  drunken  of.  In-
tellectual remembrance  of  these  past  evils  remains  to  the
soul,  but,  as  far  as  regards  sensible  experience,  they  are
wholly  forgotten  :  La  col/pa  a  mente  non  torna.  "  In  the  City
of  God,"  says  St.  Augustine,  "  the  soul  will  be  oblivious  of
sin,  oblivious  of  sufferings,  and  yet  not  so  oblivious  of  its
deliverance  as  to  be  ungrateful  to  its  deliverer."

The  personal  application  of  this  conception  to  Dante
himself  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  a  thread  of  his
own  history  is  interwoven  into  the  scenes  of  the  Heaven
of  Venus  through  the  allusion  to  his  Ode,  "  Ye  who  by
understanding  move  the  Third  Heaven,"  (Par.  VIII.  37)  ;
for  this  Ode  is  in  one  of  his  sonnets  associated  with
"  that  Lady  in  whom  I  went  astray,"  who  is  almost
certainly  the  "  Lady  of  the  Window  "  of  the  Vita  Nuovav
§§  36-39.2

But  the  passage  which  perhaps  above  all  others  shows
the  inspiration  of  Eunoe'  is  Dante's  last  address  to  Beatrice
in  the  Tenth  or  Highest  Heaven  (Par.  XXXI.  79-93)  :

"  0  Lady,  in  whom  my  hope  is  strong,  and  who  didst
endure  for  my  salvation  to  leave  thy  footprints  in  Hell,  for
all  the  things  that  I  have  seen  I  own  the  grace  and  the
virtue  by  thy  power  and  by  thy  goodness.  Thou  hast  from
a  slave  drawn  me  to  liberty  through  all  those  ways,  through
all  the  modes  which  had  the  power  to  do  that.  Preserve
the  great  work  that  thou  hast  wrought  in  me,  so  that  1113^
soul  which  thou  hast  healed  may  be  unloosed  from  the  body
well-pleasing  to  thee."  Thus  I  prayed  ;  and  she,  so  far  away
as  it  seemed,  smiled  and  looked  upon  me  ;  then  she  turned
back  to  the  eternal  fountain.

1  Dante's  Ten  Heavens,  p.  87.

2  For  a  full  exposition  of  this  point,  and  of  the  relation  of  the  Ode  in
question  to  G'onv.  II.,  see  Appendix  II.  of  Mr.  P.  H.  Wicksteed's  trans-
lation of  the  Convivio  (Temple  Edition,  pp.  428-435),  and  his  translation
of  Witte's  Essays  on  Dante,  pp.  423-432.


116


Alice  Johnson.


[part


To  sum  up  :  The  idea  behind  "  the  Lethe  Bath  "  is,
I  take  it,  that  the  perfect  life — the  goal  of  human
endeavour — involves  the  oblivion  of  evil  and  the  perpetual
and  vital  consciousness  of  good, — the  good  to  which
Dante  was  led  by  Beatrice.

The  "  Bath,"  or  Baptism,  of  Statms.

This — the  other  factor  of  the  Dream  Bath — is  in  Dante's
scheme  anterior  to  the  Lethe  Bath.  As  the  latter  is
intimately  bound  up  with  his  relationship  to  Beatrice,
so  the  former  is  bound  up  with  his  relationship,  and  the
relationship  of  Statius,  to  Virgil.

One  of  the  problems  which  most  exercised  Dante's
mind  was  the  fate  of  the  "  virtuous  heathen,"  many  of
whom  he  saw  in  Limbo,  the  first  circle  of  Hell,  where,
Virgil  tells  him,  they  are  "  only  in  so  far  afflicted  that
without  hope  we  live  in  desire  "  (Inf.  IV.  42).  These
were  "  men  of  much  worth  "  and  "  great  sadness  took
[him]  at  the  heart  on  hearing  "  of  their  condition  and  their
permanent  exclusion  from  heaven.  In  the  same  Canto
(52-63)  Virgil  describes  Christ's  descent  into  Hell,  from
which  he  liberated  certain  souls,  so  that  a  large  number
of  Old  Testament  saints  rose  to  Heaven.  This  of  course
is  in  accordance  with  the  traditions  of  the  Christian
Church  ;  what  is  interesting  is  Dante's  own  choice  of
heathen  that  were  saved.  Apart  from  the  Emperor
Trajan,  whose  legend  formed  part  of  the  Church  tradition,
all  the  others  are  vouched  for,  or  closely  associated  with,
Virgil. They  are  :

(1)  Statius  ;

(2)  Cato,  the  warder  of  Purgatory  (Purg.  I.  31)  ;  i.e.
Cato  of  Utica,  described  by  Virgil  in  Aen.  VIII.  670,
as  dispensing  laws  to  the  departed  spirits  of  virtuous
men  ;

(3)  The  obscure  Kipheus  (Par.  XX.  68,  100-148)  whom
Virgil  in  Aen.  II.  426,  calls  of  all  the  Trojans  the  man
most  just  and  most  observant  of  the  right.

Ripheus  appears  in  the  Sixth  Heaven,  that  of  Jupiter,
the distinguishing Virtue of which is Justice, and  here


LXXV.]


Dream- A  nalysis .


117


Dante  tries  to  find  an  explanation  of  the  apparent  arbi-
trariness of  the  Divine  selection  of  the  virtuous  heathen
for  salvation  or  the  reverse.  He  appeals  to  the  souls
there,  who,  if  any,  should  understand  the  nature  of
Justice,  to  "  solve  the  great  fast  which  long  hath  held
me  hungering,  because  on  earth  I  found  no  food  for  it  "
(Par.  XIX.  25-27).  They  understand  his  question  intui-
tively :  1  "  Thou  didst  say  :  '  A  man  is  born  upon  the
bank  of  Indus,  and  there  is  none  to  tell  of  Christ,  nor
none  to  read,  nor  none  to  write  ;  and  all  his  volitions
and  his  deeds  are  good  so  far  as  human  reason  seeth,
sinless  in  life  or  in  discourse.  He  dieth  unbaptised  and
without  faith  ;  where  is  that  justice  which  condemneth
him  ? where  is  his  fault,  in  that  he  not  believes  ?  '  "

The  question  may  not  present  itself  in  the  same  terms
to  a  modern  reader,  but  the  problem  is  the  same, — a
problem  especially  acute  at  the  present  day, — how  can
the  sufferings  of  innocent  persons,  brought  on  them  not
by  their  own  fault,  be  reconciled  with  a  just  governance
of  the  universe  ?

It  was  perhaps  the  very  intensity  of  his  feeling  on
this  subject,- — the  feeling  that  an  answer  to  the  question
must  be  found,  must  somewhere  exist, — that  led  Dante
to  inscribe  over  the  gate  of  his  Hell  the  strange  words
(Inf.  III.  4-6)  :  "  Justice  moved  my  High  Maker  ;  Divine
Power  made  me,  Wisdom  Supreme,  and  Primal  Love."
But  he  cannot  permit  himself  to  formulate  anything
beyond  the  declaration  with  which  the  spirits  in  the
Heaven  of  Jupiter  end  their  discourse  (Par.  XX.  133-135)  :
"  Ye  mortals,  hold  yourselves  straitly  back  from  judging  ;
for  we,  who  see  God,  know  not  as  yet  all  the  elect."

Now,  of  course,  the  one  of  all  others  for  whom  Dante
desired  salvation  was  Virgil  ;  but  a  man  of  his  intellectual
honesty  could  not,  in  the  circumstances  of  his  time,
reconcile  it  with  his  conscience  to  believe  that  Virgil
was  saved.  So  he  endeavours  to  satisfy  his  love  for
Virgil  by  everything  possible  short  of  this.  He  takes
him  as his Master and Leader up to  the top of  the

1  Here,  as  frequently  throughout  the  Cow/media,  telepathy  as  a  normal
mode  of  communication  between  spirits  is  assumed.


118


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Mount,  and  sheds  bitter  tears  at  their  parting  there.
And  in  particular  he  chooses,  as  an  instance  of  the
soul  rising  to  Paradise  on  its  release  from  Purgator}^
"  Statins,  the  most  successful  of  the  imitators  of  Virgil,"
who  (says  Dr.  Verrall1)  "for  Dante  and  his  contem-
poraries was  perhaps,  after  Virgil,  the  most  interesting
figure  in  literature."  Dr.  Verrall,  as  mentioned  above,
has  analysed  the  evidence  on  which  Dante  based  his
belief  that  Statius  was  a  Christian  and  shown  its  inade-
quacy.  I  venture  to  add  the  conjecture  that  there  was
a  special  motive  which  led  Dante  to  seize  eagerly  on
whatever  evidence  he  could  find, — viz.  the  desire  to  do
honour  to  Virgil  by  ascribing  to  him  not  only  the  poetical
inspiration,  but  also  the  conversion  of  Statius.

"  The  sparks  (says  Statius,  Purg.  XXI.  94-98  :)  which
warmed  me,  from  the  divine  flame  whence  more  than  a
thousand  have  been  kindled,  were  the  seeds  of  my  poetic
fire  :  of  the  Aeneid  I  speak,  which  was  a  mother  to  me
and  was  to  me  a  nurse  in  poesy."  So  much  is  matter
of  common  knowledge  ;  but,  he  adds,  (Purg.  XXII.  64-
73)  :  "  Thou  first  didst  send  me  towards  Parnassus  to
drink  in  its  caves,  and  then  didst  light  me  on  to  God.
Thoii  didst  like  one  who  goes  by  night  and  carries  the
light  behind  him,  and  profits  not  himself,  but  maketh
persons  wise  that  follow  him,  when  thou  saidst  :  '  The
Avorld  is  renewed,  justice  returns  and  the  first  age  of  man,
and  a  new  progeny  descends  from  heaven.'  Through
thee  I  was  a  poet,  through  thee  a  Christian."

Virgil  himself  is  shut  out  from  Paradise  ;  but  as  through
the  help  of  Beatrice  Dante  gained  entrance  there,  so
through  the  help  of  Virgil  this  spiritual  son  of  his,  Statius,
has  been  admitted.  Admittance  is  gained  through  the  two-
fold "  Bath,"  the  first  stage  of  which  is  (in  this  case)
Baptism.  Then  follows  the  long  sojourn  in  Purgatory,  till
the  moment  comes  when  the  purgation  is  completed.  At
this  moment  the  man's  will,2  hitherto  torn  between  two
conflicting  desires,- — the  desire  to  pay  the  penalty  of  his
sins  and  the  desire  to  pass  on  to  the  next  stage, — turns,
unimpeded,  to  the  single  purpose  of  rising  to  the  life  of

1  Collected  Literary  Essays,  p.  154.  2  Purg.  XXI,  40-69.


LXXV.]


Drea  m-A  nalys  is .


119


Paradise,  on  the  threshold  of  which  he  goes  through  the
second  and  last  stage  of  the  "Bath,"  viz.  Lethe  and
Eunoe.

Other  Dante  Dreams.

My  contemporary  notes  of  dreams  for  a  period  of
37  days  show  that  during  that  time  eight  dreams  (in-
cluding the  "Astronomer's  Bath")  occurred,  relating,
either  directly  or  through  their  first  associations,  to  Dante
topics. I  give  these  briefly  in  chronological  order  :

(1)  A  phrase  which,  so  far  as  I  could  remember,  ran
thus  :  "  If  only  one  could  get  crowned,  one  could  go
ahead."  It  was  clear  in  the  dream  that  to  be  "  crowned  "
did  not  mean  to  have  authority  over,  or  to  be  superior
to,  other  people  ;  it  meant  a  position  of  freedom  and
independence  for  oneself.  Many  months  later  I  traced
it  to  Purg.  XXVII.  142  :  "I  crown  and  mitre  thee  over
thyself  "  (the  crown  and  mitre  being  the  symbols  of
temporal  and  spiritual  authority), — Virgil's  last  words  to
Dante,  after  he  had  brought  him  to  the  top  of  the  Mount
of  Purgatory.

(2)  Dream  of  the  "  Golden  Stairs,"  one  association  with
which  was  the  Jacob's  Ladder  of  the  Paradiso,  see
above,  p.  44.

(3)  Dream  of  the  Pool  of  Bethesda,  associated  with
Jacob's  Ladder  (because  of  the  angel  that  came  down
and  troubled  the  water,  see  John  V.  4),  and  hence  with
the  Paradiso.

(4)  Some  vague  phrases,  including  the  words  :  "  Con-
quering combatants — Leah  and  Rachel  "  ;  associated  with
Dante's  dream  of  Leah,  see  Purg.  XXVII.  100  ff.  The
same  topic  re-ajypears  much  later  in  the  "  Two  Dolls  "
dream,  see  above,  p.  73.

(5)  Dream  of  "  The  Astronomer's  Bath."

(6)  An  apparently  vague  and  incoherent  dream  which
I  could  remember  only  in  a  very  fragmentary  way  as  :

Something  to  do  with  Bergson  ;  forgetting  something  makes
a  confusion  and  catastrophe,  as  when  in  a  novel  a  misunder-
standing makes  things  go  wrong.  A  phrase  :  "I  will  keep
to  myself  the  gates,  while  thou,  the  ancient  thou  "  The


120


Alice  Johnson.


[part


phrase  seemed  to  break  off  here.  "  Thou  "  was  somehow
connected  with  a  desolate  wintry  landscape.

The  combination  of  Bergson  and  "  forgetting  "  suggested
to  me  at  once  his  work  on  Memory.  This  fits  in  closely
with  the  Lethe  and  Eunoe  associated  with  the  "  Astro-
nomer's Bath,"  although  I  did  not  identify  the  "  Bath  "
until  several  months  later.

The  first  associations  with  "  gates  "  were  Blake's  lines  :
"  Entering  through  the  gates  of  birth,  And  passing
through  the  gates  of  death  "  ;  and  the  description  in
Purg.  X.  41-42,  of  a  sculpture  representing  the  Annunci-
ation :  "  There  she  was  fashioned  who  turned  the  key
to  open  the  supreme  love."

Later  associations  were  with  the  Gates  of  Hell  (Inf.
III.  1-12)  and  of  Purgatory  (Purg.  IX.  76).  "  The  ancient
Thou  "  is  probably  a  reminiscence  of  the  last  lines  of
the  inscription  over  the  Gate  of  Hell  :  "  Before  me  were
no  things  created  but  eternal,  and  eternal  I  endure  ;
leave  all  hope,  ye  that  enter."

(7)  A  dream,  one  of  the  chief  associations  with  which
was  Rossetti's  picture,  Beata  Beatrix.

(8)  Dream  of  the  seven-branched  candlestick  ;  associ-
ated with  the  seven  candlesticks  borne  at  the  head  of
the  Procession  of  the  Divine  Car  in  Purg.  XXIX.  43.

During  the  period  in  which  these  dreams  occurred,
I  was  aware  that  allusions  to  Dante  were  occasionally
cropping  up  ;  but  having  failed  to  decipher  the  first
and  fifth  dreams  of  the  series  I  had  no  idea  of  the
extent  and  significance  of  the  allusions.  When  they  are
put  together,  it  becomes  clear  that  much  subliminal  or
dream  thinking  on  these  topics  had,  unknown  to  my
waking  self,  been  going  on,  which  tends  to  confirm  in
a  general  way  the  significance  I  attach  to  the  "  Astro-
nomer's Bath," — it  tends,  that  is,  to  show  that  the  meanings
existed  in  the  dream,  and  were  not  only  read  into  it
afterwards.

General  Conclusions.

In  the  Introduction  to  this  paper  I  said  that  I  had
been  unable  to  find  in  my  dreams  any  evidence  of  the


LXXV.]


Dream- Analysis.


121


working  of  Freud's  "  Censor."  It  may  be  well  here  to
explain  further  what  was  meant  by  this  statement.

Cases  are  quoted  above  in  which  the  analysis  shows
that  sexual  topics,  not  in  the  "  manifest  "  content  of
the  dream,  exist  in  its  "  latent  "  content.  Considering
how  much  human  affairs  in  general  are  bound  up  with
the  subject  ;  considering  also  how  strongly  it  is  pressed
on  one's  attention  in  the  process  of  being  analysed,  it
would  be  extraordinary  if  this  were  not  so.  And  one
may  be  sure  that  if  the  element  could  not  be  found,
Freudians  would  point  to  its  absence  as  the  strongest
possible  evidence  of  the  influence  of  sex  on  the  mind  of
the  dreamer,  as  shown  by  the  repression.

But  the  sexual  topics  revealed  in  the  analysis  of  these
dreams  contain  nothing  calculated  to  shock  the  waking
self.  Why,  then,  should  they  be  "  censored  "  ?  Further,
a  great  variety  of  other,  non-sexual,  topics  are  veiled
in  the  same  way,  and  only  revealed  through  analysis.
The  veiling,  it  is  to  be  noted,  does  not  occur  only  in
the  dream  itself  ;  it  may,  or  may  not,  be  continued  long-
after  waking  ;  one  may  remain  for  months  blind  to  some
obvious  interpretation.  Examples  of  this  are  given  above.
E.g.,  in  the  "  Fabulous  Horse  "  dream,  I  recognised  at
the  outset  of  the  analysis  that  Miss  Freund's  surname
stood  for  Freud  (and  consequently  for  his  theories),  but
did  not  see  that  her  Christian  name  stood  for  Mount
Ida.  In  the  "  Bus  "  dream,  I  noticed  Mrs.  Holland  as
a  factor  of  the  smoking  man,  but  not  Mrs.  Verrall  or
Mrs.  Piper.  I  recognised  the  "  Bacchae  "  immediately  on
waking,  but  took  some  months  to  discover  the
"  Astronomer's  Bath."

These  examples  are  typical  of  a  very  large  number  of
similar  ones  in  my  records,  and  they  seem  to  me  to
negative  any  theory  of  "  censorship."  They  can  only
be  explained  on  this  theory  by  the  argument  :  Sexual
matters  are  concealed  in  dreams  ;  therefore  what  is
concealed  in  dreams  is  sexual.  This  is  the  logical  fallacy
that  appears  to  me  to  permeate  the  Freudian  doctrine.

I  would  suggest  as  a  substitute  for  the  Censor  theory
a hypothesis based on two generally accepted facts  :


122


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(1)  that  it  is  of  the  essence  of  the  dream-self  to  clothe
its  ideas  in  pictures,  images,  or  metaphors,  rather  than
in  language  ;  it  does  not  follow  connected  logical  lines
of  thought  ;  and  (2)  that  many  parts  of  a  dream  (as
observed  in  the  Introduction)  are  forgotten  on  waking.

The  first  characteristic  does  not  necessarily  involve
any  lack  of  clearness  in  the  presentation  ;  on  the  con-
trary, metaphors  are  often  the  best  vehicle  for  conveying
vivid  impressions  to  the  mind.

Secondly,  the  remembered  fragments  of  a  dream  are
comparable  to  peaks  of  a  mountain  range,  emerging  from
a  mist  that  covers  all  but  their  summits  ;  we  cannot
see  how  to  pass  from  one  peak  to  another.  So,  in  the
waking  memory  of  a  dream,  many  of  the  connecting
links  are  lost,  and  what  remains  is  naturally  incoherent.
There  is,  then,  ground  for  thinking  that,  if  we  could
remember  all  the  parts,  the  meaning  of  the  metaphors
would  be  clear.

Freud,  if  I  understand  him  aright,  holds  that  the
forgetf ulness  is,  in  effect,  deliberate, — that  it  is  due  to
the  action  of  the  Censor.  My  hypothesis  is  that  the
recollection  is  deliberate, — that  it  is  due  to  the  desire
of  the  Self  to  understand  itself.

I  believe  the  recollection  to  be  deliberate  partly
because,  in  the  course  of  a  dream,  one  is  often  conscious
of  an  effort  not  to  lose  the  thread  of  what  is  happening.
This  can  hardly  be  a  mere  mechanical  effort  to  remember  ;
it  must  be  also,  I  think,  an  attempt  to  understand.  It
is  an  effort  of  what  may  be  called  the  half -waking  self.
In  my  belief,  the  dream-self  co-operates  with  this  half-
waking  self,  sharing  in  its  desires  and  aims.  In  accord-
ance with  their  common  aim,  a  dream-image  is  con-
structed, into  which,  by  virtue  of  its  symbolic  character,
manifold  meanings  can  be  compressed.  The  image,  on
account  of  its  simplicity,  will  be  comparatively  easy  to
remember  ;  — all  the  more  if  something  slightly  bizarre,
incongruous,  or  grotesque,  is  tacked  on  to  it,  likely  to
attract  the  attention  and  curiosity  of  the  half-waking  or
waking  self,  and  so  to  fix  it  in  the  memory.  The  jest,
silly or childish in itself, conceals a serious  purpose.


LXXV.]


Drea  m- Analysis .


123


But  if  the  dreamer  were  not  amused  by  the  jest,  he
would  not  take  the  trouble  to  look  behind  it  for  its
serious  meaning.  This  may  perhaps  partly  account  for
what  psychoanalysts  call  the  "  infantile "  element  in
dreams.  The  childish  ideas  are  often  peculiarly  suited
for  the  purpose  of  metaphor.

The  following  is  a  recent  dream  which  I  cpiote  in
illustration  of  my  hypothesis  :

Dream. "  The  Lock  of  Hair."

I  was  at  a  meeting  at  which  one  of  the  Classical  Lecturers
on  the  Staff  of  Newnham  College  had  to  give  a  discourse  on
Virgil.  It  appeared  that  there  was  some  particular  Virgilian
subject  on  which  she  had  to  speak.  This  was  represented
by  a  diagram  on  a  black-board,  vaguely  resembling  a  geo-
metrical diagram,  on  the  right  side  of  which  was  a  wavy
figure,  drawn  in  bold  and  clear-  outline.  This  was  said  to
be  a  lock  of  hah.  It  seemed  the  most  important  part  of
the  subject.

After  waking,  I  remembered  some  recent  correspond-
ence on  literary  subjects,  classical  and  other,  with  a
relative  who  was  serving  with  the  Red  Cross  in  France.
A  letter  received  from  him  four  days  before  the  dream
referred  to  Virgil's  conception  of  the  character  of  Dido.
It  then  became  clear  that  the  dream  alluded  to  her  death.
Dido  was  mortally  wounded,  but  (Aen.  IV.  698  :)  "  Pro-
serpine had  not  yet  reft  the  yellow  lock  from  her  head."
At  last  Iris,  sent  by  Juno  to  release  the  spirit  from  the
body,  severs  the  lock,  as  an  offering  to  Dis,  and  the
release  is  accomplished.

The  same  symbolism  occurs  in  a  passage  in  Horace,
familiar  to  me,  and  appropriate  to  the  general  circum-
stances of  the  correspondence  above  mentioned,  as  follows
(C.  I.  28,  15-20  T)  :

But  one  and  the  same  night  awaits  us  all,  and  the  path  of
death  must  once  be  trodden.  Some  the  Furies  give  to  make
shows  for  grim  Mars. The  greedy  sea  is  the  destruction  of

1  E.  C.  Wickham's  translation.


124


Alice  Johnson.


[part


those  who  go  in  ships.  Of  young  and  old  without  difference
the  funerals  crowd  along.  There  is  no  head  that  imperious
Proserpine  ever  feared  to  touch.

Wickham  notes  on  this  :

None  could  die  (acc.  to  Virg.  Aen.  4,  698)  till  Proserpine
had  cut  a  lock  of  hair  from  his  head  ;  the  idea  being  that
the  dying  man  was  a  victim  offered  to  the  powers  below,,
as  it  was  usual  to  begin  a  sacrifice  by  cutting  some  hairs
from  the  forehead  of  the  victim  and  burning  them,  Virg..
Aen.  6,  245.

The  last  reference  is  to  the  sacrifice  made  by  the
Sibyl  on  behalf  of  Aeneas  before  his  journey  into  Hades.

The  death  of  Dido  is  of  course  one  of  the  most  striking
and  dramatic  scenes  in  the  Aeneid.  The  waking  self
would  probably  picture  it  amid  the  main  accessory  cir-
cumstances :  the  great  funeral-pyre  built  up  by  Dido's
command  in  the  inner  court-yard  of  her  palace,  ostensibly
for  the  purpose  of  working  love-charms,  but  really  for
her  own  death  ;  the  piling  up  on  it  of  the  relics  asso-
ciated with  Aeneas,  including  his  sword  ;  Dido  falling
on  the  sword,  and  the  pyre  bursting  out  in  flames,  as
the  Trojan  fleet  escapes  into  the  distant  seas.

It  is  certainly  not  beyond  the  powers  of  the  dream-
self  to  produce  such  a  picture.  But  the  dream  leaves
all  this  on  one  side,  and  selects  the  far  less  striking
incident  of  the  severed  lock.  This  incident,  being  symbolic,
comprises  within  itself  more  meaning  than  almost  any
of  the  other  events.  By  means  of  the  figure  of  the
lock  of  hair  and  the  single  word  "  Virgilian,"  the  dream
gives  the  whole  story  in  a  nutshell, — and  within  the
compass  of  a  very  small  nut.  So  simple  an  image  was
probably  easy  to  remember,  and  at  the  same  time  it
excited  the  curiosity  of  my  waking  self  ;  I  at  once
began  to  ask  myself  :  What  is  there  in  Virgil  about
a  lock  of  hair  ?  and  soon  hit  on  the  answer  to  the
question.

In  the  course  of  this  dream,  I  went  through  the  experi-
ence described  above  of  being  aware,  in  a  half- waking,,
half -sleeping state, that I was forgetting parts of  it


LXXV.]


Dream- Analysis.


125


I  was  also  aware  of  the  effort  to  remember  ;  and  I  am
strongly  inclined  to  think  that  my  dream-self  tried  to
make  me  remember.

Analysis  of  the  dreams  makes  it  continually  clearer
that  they  are  occupied  with  the  same  subjects , — the
same  interests,  questions,  and  problems, — as  occupy  my
waking  thoughts.1  Of  these,  unfamiliar  aspects  are  con-
stantly presented,  so  that  I  do  not  in  the  dream
recognise  the  subject.  When  it  is  recognised,  I  generally
find  that  the  dream  has  shed  a  fresh  light  on  it  of  a
kind  which  is  often — to  me- — extremely  interesting.  Since
the  dream-metaphors  fulfil  the  function  of  giving  me
new  ideas,  it  seems  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  dream-
self  has  selected  them  for  this  purpose, — that  they  are
intended  to  reveal,  and  not  to  conceal.

In  the  cases  treated  of  in  this  paper,  two  facts  come
out  through  analysis  by  the  association-method  which
seem  to  me  to  afford  strong  evidence  for  the  validity
of  the  method  :

(1)  The  associations  with  the  items  of  a  dream  often
point  to  some  literary  source  which  is  not  apparent  in
its  "  manifest  "  content.  When  this  source  is  referred
to,  it  is  generally,  if  not  always,  found  that  some  other
items  of  the  dream  (or  other  associations  with  them),
besides  those  first  discovered,  have  also  been  derived
from  it.  Frequently  the  dreamer  finds  that  literary  details
which  he  has  forgotten  and  which  are  only  recalled  to
his  memory  by  referring  to  the  book,  account  for  these
other  dream-items  or  associations  Not  infrequently  he
may  find  them  accounted  for  by  details  which  he  cannot
remember  ever  having  read  before.

This,  of  course,  is  to  be  expected,  since  we  all  know
that  the  subconscious  memory  is  far  superior  to  the
conscious.

But  the  facts  furnish  evidence  confirmatory  of  the
associations, since, the more independent items we  can

1  E.g.,  the  story  of  Dido  is  of  special  interest  to  me  partly  because
of  references  to  it  in  the  scripts  ;  see  Mr.  Piddington's  paper  on  "  Cross-
correspondences  of  a  Gallic  Type,"  in  Proc.  Vol.  XXIX.  pp.  30-38.


126


Alice  Johnson.


[part


find  corresponding  to  details  in  a  book,  the  more  probable
it  becomes  that  the  dream  has  drawn  on  that  book
for  its  imagery  or  dream-thoughts.  And  if  this  can  be
considered  proved,  other  inferences  about  the  dream  may
often  be  legitimately  drawn.

Incidentally  we  may  observe  that  dreams  derived  from
literary  sources  lend  themselves  in  a  peculiar  degree  to
a  scientific  and  precise  psychological  treatment,  since  it
is  easier  to  test  one's  memory  of  a  book  than  of  many
other  things.

(2)  The  associations  often  reveal  connections  between
dreams  which  their  "  manifest  "  contents  fail  to  show.
Thus  we  have  above  the  close  relationship  between  the
"  Queen  Victoria  "  and  "  Kaiser  "  dreams,  and  the  carry-
ing on  of  the  "  smoking  "  symbolism  (more  than  a  year
later)  into  the  "  Bus  "  dream  ;  which  also  contained,
as  shown  by  the  analysis,  characters  corresponding  to
the  dream-Queen-Victoria  and  Kaiser.  We  have  also  the
intricate  relationship  between  the  "  Two  Dolls  "  and  the
"Fabulous  Horse";  and  we  have  a  long  series  of  Dante
associations.  The  Dante  topic  occurred  (though  for  long
undetected)  on  the  first  night  on  which  I  attempted  to
analyse  my  dreams  and  continued  at  intervals  up  to
the  present  day.

These  are  only  a  few  examples  out  of  a  very  large
number  of  such  connections  between  dreams  in  my
records.  In  fact  I  suspect  that  the  dreams,  if  fully
analysed,  would  be  seen  to  form  a  single  continuous
scheme  of  interconnected  subliminal  mental  activity.

When  the  dreamer  has  made  out  the  meaning  (for  him)
of  some  image  or  symbol  which  interests  him, — that  is,
when  his  normal  waking  consciousness  has  apj)rehended
it,- — it  seems  not  unnatural  that  it  should  re-appear  in
his  future  dreams.  Thus  the  "  smoking  "  symbolism  of
the  "  Kaiser "  dream  had  been  made  out  by  me  long
before  it  re-appeared  in  the  "  Bus,"  and  it  has  occurred
more  than  once  since.  Symbols  of  this  kind,  when
repeated,  often  appear  with  some  additional  feature,
derived  apparently  from  the  normal  waking  thoughts
about  them. Thus,  the  "smoking"  appeared  in  a  recent


lxxv.]  Dream- Analysis.  127

dream  as  a  smoking  chimney, — after  I  had  observed,
while  awake,  that  the  origin  of  the  symbol  was  a  smoking
chimney,  not  (as  in  the  "  Bus  "  dream)  a  smoking  man.
Such  an  interweaving  or  interaction  of  sleeping  and
waking  thoughts  might  be  expected  to  occur.  The  con-
tinuity between  the  dream-thoughts  in  such  cases  seems
to  be  assisted  by,  or  may  be  entirely  due  to,  their  re-
inforcement by  the  waking  thoughts.

But  what  is  more  interesting  is  the  continuity  found
between  dreams  in  cases  where  the  dream-thoughts  have
remained  almost  unnoticed,  or  at  all  events  have  not
been  consciously  interpreted,  by  the  waking  self.  Thus,
my  "  Queen  Victoria  "  was  consciously  associated  in  a
slight  and  vague  way  with  the  Queen  in  Alice's  Adven-
tures in  Wonderland.  I  knew  quite  well,  but  did  not
consciously  think,  that  this  Queen  was  the  Queen  of
Hearts.  I  thought  very  little  about  her  and  much  more
about  Queen  Victoria.  The  sequel  seems  to  show  that
my  subliminal,  or  my  dream-self,  had  gone  on  thinking
about  the  Queen  of  Hearts  ;  it  had  thought  of  the
absurdity  of  the  Queen  of  Hearts  saying,  "  Off  with  his
head," — an  antithesis  which,  obvious  as  it  is,  had  not,
I  feel  sure,  ever  occurred  to  my  conscious  mind  ;  1  it
saw  how  other  details  in  the  story  could  be  turned  to
account,  and  constructed  a  second  dream-scene  out  of  it.

Again,  long  before  the  analyses  of  the  "  Queen  Victoria  "
and  "  Kaiser  "  dreams  had  shown  how  many  details  in
the  story  had  been  used,  its  sequel,  Through  the  Looking-
glass,  had  already  been  utilised  in  the  "  Two  Dolls  "  and
"  Fabulous  Horse,"  though  this  fact,  again,  was  only
discovered  at  a  late  stage  of  the  analysis  of  these  dreams.

The  complicated  web  of  allusions  to  Dante  and  Plato
in  the  same  dreams  affords  further  evidence  of  the  sub-
liminal carrying  on  of  thoughts  from  one  dream  to
another,  with  apparently  very  little  assistance  from  the
supraliminal.  E.g.,  the  idea  of  using  Aristophanes'  myth
again  in  a  quite  different  form,  and  the  idea  of  combining

1  I  mentioned  this  to  a  friend,  who  said  that  the  idea  was  new  to
him  also.  He  added  that  this  was  probably  because  we  both  knew  the
book  by  heart,  not  by  head.


128


Alice  Johnson.


[part


it  with  the  PJmedrus  myth,  must  have  been  completely
.subliminal.

The  "  Fabulous  Horse,"  again,  through  the  association
with  "  Ida  Freund  "  implies  Mount  Ida  and  Ganymede
as  a  symbol  of  the  soul  liberated  from  earth.  This
connects  with  "  Der  Tod  als  Freund,"  associated  with
the  much  earlier  dream  of  "  The  Golden  Stairs,"  a  link
which,  as  stated  above,  p.  88,  was  not  detected  till  the
analyst  read  the  paper  and  drew  my  attention  to  it.

Reference  was  made  in  the  Introduction  to  the  question
whether  the  ideas  that  emerge  in  the  analysis  were  really
in  the  dream-thoughts,  or  whether — -as  a  critic  might
suppose — they  had  merely  been  read  into  the  dream
afterwards.  Freud  says  (The  Interpretation  of  Dreams,
p.  157):  "All  criticisms  upon  the  dream  and  remarks
about  it,  although  they  have  secured  a  place  in  waking
thought,  regularly  belong  to  the  latent  dream  content."
This  statement,  which  at  first  sight  may  appear  dogmatic,
is  expanded  and  discussed  in  his  very  interesting  and
instructive  chapter  on  "  The  Dream-Work,"  from  which
I quote the  following (pp. 262-263)  :

It  is  true,  of  course,  that  particular  thought  connections
first  arise  only  during  analysis  ;  but  one  may  always  be  sure
that  such  new  connections  have  been  established  only  between
thoughts  which  have  already  been  connected  in  the  dream
thoughts  by  other  means  ;  the  new  connections  are,  so  to
speak,  corollaries,  short  circuits,  which  are  made  possible  by
the  existence  of  other  more  fundamental  means  of  connection.
It  must  be  admitted  that  the  huge  number  of  trains  of  thought
revealed  by  analysis  have  already  been  active  in  the  forma-
tion of  the  dream,  for  if  a  chain  of  thoughts  has  been  worked
out,  which  seems  to  be  without  connection  with  the  formation
of  the  dream,  a  thought  is  suddenly  encountered  which,
being  represented  in  the  dream,  is  indispensable  to  its  inter-
pretation— which  nevertheless  is  inaccessible  except  through
that  chain  of  thoughts.

I  understand  this  to  mean  that,  though  we  can  have
no  positive  proof  that  the  whole  of  the  chain  of  thoughts


LXXV.]


Dream- Analysis.


129


suggested  by  a  given  association  has  taken  part  in  the
formation  of  the  dream,  the  existence  in  the  chain  of
a  single  link  which  seems  clearly  to  have  entered  into
the  dream  affords  presumptive  evidence  that  the  whole
chain  has  so  entered.

While  there  is,  I  think,  much  to  be  said  for  this  view,
the  argument  seems  to  dismiss  too  lightly  the  possibility
that  the  coincidence  between  a  single  item  in  the  chain
of  associations  and  a  single  dream  item  may  be  merely
accidental.

In  any  case  it  must  be  difficult  to  discover  exactly
what  was  in  the  dream  thoughts  and  what  was
not, — to  discover,  that  is,  whether  a  given  idea  was
thought  of  before  the  dream  or  after  it.  The  difficulty  is
increased  by  the  continuity  of  thought  (as  shown  in  my
cases)  between  dreams.  Whenever  a  dream-thought  can
be  clearly  traced  to  an  earlier  dream,  we  can  at  least  feel
sure  that  we  have  not  read  it  into  the  later  dream.  We
cannot  say  when  it  first  arose  ;  but  we  can  point  to  a
definite  date  on  which  it  was  already  in  existence.

The  dream  has  in  it  something  intangible,  Protean,
elusive.  No  charm  yet  devised  can  actually  seize  and
hold  it  fast  till  it  delivers  up  its  secret.  Theoretically
we  might  expect  that  by  some  such  means  as  hypnotic
suggestion  the  dreamer  could  be  put  back  into  the
dream  condition  and  could  then  give  a  full  account  of
the  dream  and  of  what  it  meant  to  him  ;  or  that  it
might  be  fully  re-constructed  through  automatic  script
or  crystal-gazing.  For  we  know  that  lapsed  memories
are  often  recovered  by  such  methods  and  one  can  hardly
doubt  that  the  lapsed  memories  would  supply  many
clues.  But  if,  as  the  psychoanalyst  conceives,  the
memories  and  the  ideas  attaching  to  them  are  deejDly
rooted  in  the  subsoil  of  the  whole  personality,  it  will
not  be  enough  to  remove  the  surface  soil  from  the  roots.
It  is  not  enough  to  consider  the  dream  apart  from  the
dreamer.  The  value  of  the  association  method  lies  in
the  light  it  throws  on  the  intimate  relationship)  of  the
dreamer  to  the  dream.

The  analysis  does  not  profess  to  re-construct  the  dream


130


Alice  Johnson.


[part


as  it  was  dreamt ;  it  may  be  that  the  task  is  inherently
impossible.  What  the  analysis  does  is  to  reveal  many
ideas  and  combinations  of  ideas  which,  it  may  fairly  be
presumed,  have  entered  into  the  formation  of  the  dream.
There  is  no  positive  proof — from  the  nature  of  the  case
there  can  be  no  positive  proof- — that  they  have  so  entered.
Though  his  associations  are  facts  known  to  the  dreamer,
their  application  to  the  dream,  and  its  consequent  inter-
pretation, may  often  to  the  dreamer  himself  seem  obscure
and  conjectural  ;  many  of  the  associations  appear  at
first  sight  to  have  no  bearing  on  the  dream.  Gradually
light  emerges  on  one  after  another  and  the  dreamer
begins  to  see  a  real  and  vital  connection  between  these
ideas  which  he  knows  to  have  existed  in  his  mind  and
the  dream  which  appeared  so  remote  from  them.  The
process  which  begins  in  doubt  and  ends  in  conviction
is  liable  to  be  reflected  in  his  exposition  of  his  analysis  ;
he  begins  by  suggesting  as  a  possible  interpretation  what
at  a  later  stage  he  assumes  as  a  certain  one  ;  and  to
a  critical  reader  the  proceeding  must  appear  suspicious
or  arbitrary.  What  convinces  the  dreamer  is  the  cumu-
lative effect  of  seeing  one  point  after  another — not  in
one  case  only,  but  in  case  after  case- — fall  into  place
as  part  of  what  looks  like  an  elaborate  and  coherent
scheme.  It  is  difficult  to  convey  such  a  cumulative
effect  to  the  mind  of  an  outsider  ;  hence  the  analyst's
despair  of  convincing  the  man  who  has  not  experienced
it.  I  have  tried  to  overcome  the  difficulty  by  describing-
many  instances  at  what  T  am  afraid  may  appear  an
inordinate  length.

There  remains  the  more  fundamental  difficulty  of
explaining  the  stress  laid  on  certain  apparently  trivial
details  and  not  others.  The  reader  may  say  : — You
choose  certain  items  from  the  dream  and  from  the
associations  and  make  a  sort  of  story  out  of  them  ;
obviously  you  could,  if  you  liked,  select  other  items
and  make  quite  a  different  story  out  of  them.  The
only  answer  I  can  make  is  :  I  admit  that  I  select  to
some  extent  both  from  the  dream  and  from  the  associa-
tions,— the  selection  being,  I  may  remark,  largely  involun-


LXXV.]


Dream- A  nalys  is .


131


tary.  I  select  the  tilings  that  appeal  to  me — that  are
interesting  to  me.  I  cannot  explain  why  certain  things
are  so  much  more  interesting  and  important  to  me  than
others  ;  I  only  know  that  it  is  so.

I  follow  this  semi-automatic  process  of  selection  and
I  find,  to  my  surprise,  that  it  leads  me  to  a  story  which,
to  me,  is  interesting  and  to  me  seems  the  story  predestined
to  be  made  out  of  those  materials.  Later  I  select  again
from  the  same  stock  in  the  same  semi-automatic  manner,
and  am  led  on  again  to  a  further  story.  But  I  never  go
back  on  my  first  story  ;  this  always  turns  out  to  be  the
preliminary  stage  of,  or  one  episode  of,  the  second.
Other  people,  I  dare  say,  could  make  a  different  story
out  of  it,  but  I  cannot.  This,  and  no  other,  is  my  story, —
"  a  poor  tiling,  but  mine  own."  This,  then,  I  believe
to  be  the  real  meaning  of  my  dream.

The  hypothesis  of  the  latent-  content  revealed  by  the
associations  remains  and  must  remain  a  hypothesis  only.
Its  justification  is  that,  as  I  have  endeavoured  to  show,
it  offers  a  plausible,  a  reasonable  and  a  self-consistent
view  of  the  facts.  It  seems  to  me  then  that  the  method
may  be  usefully  added  to  other  methods  for  investigating
the  subliminal  with  which  we  have  long  been  familiar, —
the  various  hypnotic  methods,  the  study  of  different  kinds
of  dissociations  of  consciousness,  of  automatic  writing  and
other  forms  of  automatism.  I  regard  it  not  as  a  substitute
for,  but  as  a  supplement  to,  whatever  lines  of  research
we  may  believe  to  be  sound  and  reasonable  and  which  in
practice  we  have  found  fruitful.

I  have  also  endeavoured  to  show  that  we  may  accept
the  method  as  an  admirable  tool  for  working  purposes
without  accepting  the  results  obtained  by  any  particular  in-
dividual through  his  use  of  the  tool  (an  argument  which
of  course  cuts  both  ways).  In  my  brief  and  admittedly
inadequate  discussion  of  some  of  the  results  obtained  by
psychoanalysts,  I  have  referred  to  what  appear  to  me
to  be  serious  flaws,  due- — as  it  seems  to  me- — to  premature
attempts  at  the  simplification  of  extraordinarily  complex
facts, — the  attempt  to  refer  to  one  cause  phenomena  that
may  be  due  to  a  mixture  of  several  causes.


132


Alice  Johnson.


[part


But  in  a  discussion  it  is  generally  easier  to  express
disagreement  than  agreement.  Every  one  admits  the
great  importance  of  sex  in  human  life,  whether  in  normal
or  abnormal  conditions,  though  it  must  be  a  matter  of
opinion  whether  some  have  exaggerated,  or  whether  others
have  minimised  its  range.  Meanwhile  the  controversy
that  has  raged  round  this  particular  point,  and  the
violence  with  which  both  sides  have  carried  it  on,  have
tended  to  obscure  the  wider  issues  of  the  subject.  It
has  to  be  remembered  that  psychoanalytic  theories  are
based  on  the  study  of  pathological  cases,  whereas
psychical  research  deals  primarily  with  persons  in  a
normal  condition.  But,  as  Mr.  Myers  long  ago  pointed
out,  it  is  useful  to  study  abnormal  and  normal  psychology
side  by  side,  for  the  sake  of  the  light  they  may  throw
on  one  another.  While  in  many  respects  psychoanalysis
confirms  what  was  already  familiar  to  those  who  have
followed  the  work  of  the  S.P.R.  from  the  beginning,  and
on  the  other  hand  psychical  research  confirms  much
psychoanalytic  work,  the  two  groups  of  workers  under-
take different  groups  of  phenomena  and  start  from
different  points  of  view.  Collaboration  between  them
should  therefore  be  mutually  profitable.  For  we  are  all —
they  and  we- — as  one  of  my  dreams  indicated,  in  the  same
"  Bus."  We  are  all  engaged  in  the  investigation  of  the
sub-conscious  ;  we  are  all  bound  on  the  same  quest  ;
and  there  is  much  in  common  between  us.


A  few  words  must  be  said  in  conclusion  as  to  the
bearing  of  this  paper  on  the  automatic  scripts, — a
question  touched  on  in  the  Introduction,  but  which  I
propose  to  defer  to  a  future  article.

The  general  upshot  of  my  argument  is  in  accordance
with  the  view  long  held  by  most  S.P.R.  investigators
that  the  subliminal  mental  activity  manifested  in  scripts
is  of  the  same  nature  as  that  manifested  in  dreams.
It  leaves  untouched  the  question  of  who  directs  the
activity.  In  the  absence  of  positive  evidence  to  the
contrary,  we  must  of  course  assume  that  the  automatist


LXXV.]


Dream- A  nalysis .


133


(or  dreamer)  directs  his  own  mental  activity.  Evidence
to  the  contrary  depends  not  on  the  form,  but  on  the
content,  of  the  automatic  product  ;  it  turns  on  the
question  whether  any  knowledge  of  verifiable  facts,
provably  unknown  by  normal  means  to  the  automatist,
is  manifested.  In  the  dreams  here  given,  there  is  no
evidence  of  this  ;  whereas  in  the  scripts  discussed  in
our  Proceedi?igs  such  evidence  often  exists,  especially  that
furnished  by  the  cross-correspondences.

If,  as  I  believe,  these  scripts  are  the  joint  production
of  the  automatists  and  an  intelligence  external  to  all  of
them,  it  is  of  great  interest  and  importance  to  under-
stand the  part  played  by  the  automatists,  without  which
no  understanding  is  possible  of  the  part  played  by  the
external  intelligence.

The  present  paper,  like  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  article  on
"  The  Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena "
(in  Proc.  Vol.  XXVIII.),  relates  only  to  the  psychology
of  the  automatist.


134


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[PAKT


III.

PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  UNCONSCIOUS  AND
PSYCHOANALYSIS.

By  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.

Psychology  of  the  Unconscious.  A  Study  of  the  Trans-
formations and  Symbolisms  of  the  Libido,  by  Dr.
C.  G.  Jung,  1916.

Collected  Papers  on  Analytical  Psychology,  by  C.  G.  Jung,
M.D.,  LL.D.,  (Second  Edition),  1917.

The  title  given  to  the  English  translation  of  Jung's
"  Wandlungen  nnd  Symbole  der  Libido  "  may  mislead
some  of  those  who  intend  to  read  it.  Psychology  of  the
Unconscious  may  suggest  to  them  topics  and  interests
of  which  they  will  find  here  no  trace.  Nor  will  the
subsidiary  title,  "  A  Study  of  the  Transformations  and
Symbolisms  of  the  Libido,"  convey  very  much  to  their
minds  as  to  the  probable  subject-matter  of  the  work,
unless  they  already  have  some  knowledge  of  psycho-
analytic investigations.  They  may  know  that  the  term
libido  is  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  writings  of  psycho-
analysts, and  they  may  know  the  sense  in  which  it  is
most  generally  used  by  them,  but  they  may  be  unpre-
pared for  the  possibility  that  a  study  of  its  transformations
and  symbolisms  can  be  described  as  Psychology  of  the
Unconscious.

These  two  conceptions, — the  conception  of  the  uncon-
scious and  the  conception  of  the  libido — have  each  a
history,  and  it  may  help  us  to  approach  Jung's  work
at  the  proper  angle  and  to  view  it  in  right  perspective


lxxv.]  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis.  135

if  we  follow  briefly  the  course  of  the  speculations  and
investigations  that  have  led  up  to  the  points  of  view
from  which  these  two  conceptions  may  be  regarded  at
the  present  time.

In  the  most  superficial  and  uncritical  attempts  to
examine  or  explain  mental  process  we  are  led  to  assume
the  existence  of  something  more  than  is  revealed  to  us
by  introspection.  We  recognise  that  there  is  more  in  the
mind  than  is  at  any  moment  present  in  consciousness.
We  can  draw  on  our  memories  of  past  experience,  and  the
question  arises :  How  are  we  to  conceive  those  traces  of
past  experience  ?  What  is  the  medium  in  which  they  inhere  ?
It  is  around  the  facts  of  mental  retention  that  the  problem
of  the  unconscious  first  arises  in  psychological  inquiry.

If  we  feel  compelled  on  methodological  grounds  to  try
to  explain  mental  retention  in  psychological  terms,  we
may  assume  that  past  conscious  process  is  conserved  as
mental  traces  or  psychical  dispositions  which  are  in  the
mind  but  out  of  consciousness.  And  this  we  may  do
without  reference  to  any  knowledge  we  may  already  have,
or  may  hi  the  future  acquire,  of  the  relations  that  exist
between  the  mind  and  the  nervous  system.  But  the
difficulty  of  conceiving  any  form  of  psychical  existence
outside  consciousness  has  led  many  psychologists  to  adopt
some  other  explanation  of  the  conservation  of  past  ex-
perience. There  are  at  least  two  mam  forms  of  explana-
tion which  have  been  put  forward  as  alternatives.

One  form  is  that  which  would  explain  mental  retention
by  the  persistence  of  neural  modifications  which  are
assumed  to  be  the  concomitants  of  all  mental  process.
It  may  be  described  as  the  hypothesis  of  physical  or
physiological  dispositions.  This  is  the  view  which  is  most
favoured  by  physiologists,  but  its  adoption  implies  a
denial  of  the  possibility  of  giving  a  direct  explanation
of  experience  in  psychological  terms.  It  is  inconsistent
with  the  view  that  the  mind  itself  has  a  structure,  and
it  reduces  all  mental  life  to  a  series  of  disjointed  mani-
festations whose  only  connecting  links  are  the  structural
and  functional  interrelations  of  the  material  systems
whose  activity  is  accompanied  by  consciousness.


136


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


Many  psychologists,  moreover,  refuse  to  admit  accounts
of  material  modifications  into  psychological  explanation.
But  if  unconscious  psychical  dispositions  are  denied,  and
if  physical  dispositions  are  held  to  be  irrelevant,  it
becomes  necessary  to  postulate  dispositions  that  are  not
unconscious  and  are  not  merely  physical.  We  must
assume  that  past  experience  is  conserved  as  a  system
of  persisting  modifications  of  consciousness  which  are  of
such  low  intensity  that  they  have  no  power  to  influence
the  direction  of  attention.

It  is  to  modifications  of  consciousness  of  this  kind
that  Professor  James  Ward  alludes  in  his  hypothesis  of
subconscious  presentations.  "It  is  a  fact  easily  verified,"
he  says,  "  that  we  do  not  distinguish  or  attend  separately
to  presentations  of  less  than  a  certain  assignable  in-
tensity. On  attaining  this  intensity  presentations  are
said  to  pass  over  the  threshold  of  consciousness,  to  use
Herbart's  now  classic  phrase.  What  are  we  to  say  of
them  before  they  have  attained  it  ?  After  they  have
attained  it,  any  further  increase  in  their  intensity  is
certainly  gradual  ;  are  we  then  to  suppose  that  before
this  their  intensity  changed  instantly  from  zero  to  a
finite  quantity,  and  not  rather  that  there  was  also  a
subliminal  stage  where  too  it  only  changed  continuously  ?
The  latter  alternative  constitutes  the  hypothesis  of  sub-
consciousness." 1

The  facts  that  give  support  to  the  hypothesis  of  sub-
conscious presentations  are  well  recognised  by  psycho-
logists. Some  of  them  have  to  be  taken  into  account
in  any  description  of  mental  process.  When,  for  example,
we  are  engaged  in  a  train  of  thought  or  a  course  of
observation,  there  is  much  in  consciousness  that  is  not
referred  to  the  object  presented.  There  is  a  felt  back-
ground of  presentations  which  are  not  discriminated
because  they  are  not  attended  to.  There  is  always  the
mass  of  organic  sensations  and  many  impressions  received
through  the  special  organs  of  sense,  which  have  no
significance  for  the  thought  of  the  moment,  except  in
so  far  as  they  form  a  setting  and  give  a  colour  to  the

1  Encyclop.  Brit.  10th  edit.  Vol.  XX.  p.  47.


lxxv.]  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis.  137

total  mental  state.  Such  undiscriminated  experiences  are
sometimes  referred  to  as  subconscious.

It  may  be  maintained,  however,  that  all  such  mental
states,  in  so  far  as  they  are  conscious  at  all,  must  be
regarded  as  being  above  the  threshold  ;  that  the  vague-
ness or  indistinctness  of  the  contents  of  the  margin  or  fringe
of  consciousness  is  due  to  a  want  of  distinctness  of
representation  of  the  objects  they  stand  for,  not  a  lower
degree  of  consciousness  as  such  ;  that  the  threshold  is  a
knife-edge  which  sharply  delimits  consciousness,  and  that  con-
sciousness per  se  is  something  that  does  not  admit  of  degrees.

A  contrary  opinion  is  expressed  by  some  writers,  as
for  example,  by  Professor  Lloyd  Morgan,  who,  since  he
believes  that  mental  process  and  cerebral  process  are
but  one  process  viewed  from  different  aspects,  feels  bound
to  suppose  that  below  the  threshold  of  consciousness
there  is  something  of  the  same  order  of  existence  as
that  which  lies  above  the  threshold.  To  this  part  of
the  total  field  he  gives  the  name  of  Infra-conscious.  This
infra-consciousness  is  in  his  view  "  not  merely  negative,
but  something  positive  and  existent, — what,  for  want  of
better  terms  we  may  call  the  not-yet  or  the  not-quite
conscious."  1

As  has  been  already  said,  many  writers  refer  to  that
part  of  the  supraliminal  field  of  consciousness  which  is
marginal  as  subconscious,  but  in  Dr.  Ward's  hypo-
thesis of  subconscious  presentations  he  must  be  held  to
refer  more  particularly,  as  does  Dr.  Lloyd  Morgan  when
he  speaks  of  the  infra-conscious,  to  hypothetical  mental
modifications,  partaking  of  the  nature  of  consciousness,
yet  occurring  beneath  the  threshold.  The  evidence  in
favour  of  a  subconsciousness  of  this  kind  is  mainly  in-
direct, and  its  cogency  is  perhaps  due  to  the  satisfaction
it  gives  to  the  demand  for  continuity  in  the  psychical
series,  rather  than  to  the  strength  of  the  arguments  that
can  be  brought  forward  in  support  of  this  interpretation
of  the  facts.

But  this  hypothesis  of  modifications  of  consciousness
occurring below the threshold has an interest and  an

1  Introduction  to  Comparative  Psychology,  p.  34.


13S


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


application  outside  the  problem  of  mental  retention.  It
prompts  us  to  inquire  if  there  is  available  any  empirical
evidence  of  the  occurrence  of  conscious  process  of  any
kind  that  is  not  discernible  on  introspection.  So  far  as
the  psychology  of  the  normal  is  concerned  there  are
practically  no  facts  which  can  be  brought  forward  in
support  of  such  a  view,  that  cannot  be  explained  more
or  less  satisfactorily  in  some  other  way.  But  the  question
is  pressed  upon  us  with  great  insistence  when  we  enter
the  domain  of  abnormal  psychology.  We  find  that  many
of  the  conceptions  arrived  at  in  the  study  of  the  normal
mind  do  not  seem  to  fit  the  facts  of  observation  and
experiment  in  this  strange  territory.  Our  notion  of  the
mind  as  one  and  indivisible,  of  consciousness  as  a  unity
subject  to  subdivision  only  in  so  far  as  different  parts
of  its  content  may  be  more  or  less  attended  to  and
discriminated,  of  the  threshold  as  a  line  sharply  dividing
the  conscious  from  the  unconscious, — all  seem  to  fail  us
when  we  come  to  examine  the  mental  peculiarities  of
abnormal  persons  or  of  normal  persons  under  certain
unusual  conditions.

The  data  of  abnormal  psychology  which  are  supposed
to  afford  some  answer  to  the  question  of  what  goes  on
beneath  the  threshold — the  problem  of  the  subliminal
as  we  may  call  it — are  of  a  varied  and  conflicting
character  ;  and  certain  conceptions  which  are  not  felt
to  be  necessary  in  the  description  of  the  structure  and
process  of  the  normal  mind  have  been  widely  employed
in  their  elucidation.  The  most  important  of  these  con-
ceptions is  the  hypothesis  of  "  dissociation  of  conscious-
ness "  elaborated  by  Pierre  Janet  in  explanation  of  the
subconscious  phenomena  exhibited  in  hysteria.

The  presence  of  consciousness  existing  below  the
ordinary  threshold  may  be  discovered  on  examining  the
nature  of  the  anaesthesia  that  is  such  a  common  feature
of  hysterical  disorders.  But  instead  of  being  of  the  low
intensity  ascribed  by  writers  on  normal  psychology  to
all  modifications  of  consciousness  that  may  take  place
below  the  threshold,  these  subconscious  mental  activities
may  be  found  to  be  more  intense  than  those  that  occur


lxxv.]  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis.  139

above  the  threshold.  For  example,  the  limb  thit  is
anaesthetic  for  the  supraliminal  consciousness  is  found  to
be hyperaesthetic when  the  subliminal  is  interrogated.

According  to  Janet  hysterical  anaesthesia  of  a  limb
is  due  to  a  dissociation  from  the  personal  consciousness
of  the  system  of  sensations  connected  with  the  limb.
And  in  the  same  way  in  other  hysterical  affections,
larger  or  smaller  systems  of  ideas  fail  to  get  incorporated
with  the  mass  of  ideas  synthesised  in  the  personal  con-
sciousness, and  seem  to  take  on  independent  functioning
on  their  own  account.  In  Janet's  opinion  all  subconscious
phenomena  are  due  to  the  presence  of  such  dissociated
states,  and  all  manifestations  of  subconscious  mental
activity  are  evidence  of  hysterical  dissociation.

Some  of  the  most  convincing  evidence  of  the  occurrence
of  conscious  process  below  the  ordinary  threshold  is
afforded  by  certain  hypnotic  phenomena  and  in  one  form
of  the  condition  known  as  double  or  multiple  personality.
And  the  most  striking  characteristic  of  the  consciousness
so  disclosed  is  that  it  is  a  "  clear "  consciousness  which
exists  concomitantly  with  the  clear  consciousness  of
waking  life.  It  is,  like  the  subconsciousness  of  hysteria,
a  form  of  psychical  existence  so  manifestly  different  from
the  hypothetical  modifications  of  consciousness  of  low
intensity  to  which  the  term  subconscious  has  been
applied  by  writers  on  normal  psychology,  that  it  is
necessary  to  call  it  by  some  other  name  in  order  clearly
to  mark  the  difference  between  the  two  kinds  of  sub-
consciousness. Dr.  Morton  Prince  has  proposed  that  it
should  be  called  a  co-consciousness.  This  term  does  away
with  the  implication  of  diminished  intensity  conveyed  by
the  prefix  of  the  word  subconscious,  and  at  the  same
time  it  emphasises  the  concomitance  of  the  subliminal
conscious  process  with  that  which  goes  on  above  the
ordinary  threshold.

Many  experiments  and  observations  have  been  recorded
by  different  investigators  which  all  point  to  the  same
conclusion.  They  point  to  the  possibility  of  conscious-
ness becoming  split  up  so  as  to  give  rise  to  two  or  more
mutually independent systems of thought, instead  of


140


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


going  along  in  one  unitary  stream.  And  since  the  personal
consciousness  existing  above  the  ordinary  threshold  has
no  awareness  of  the  thoughts  of  the  secondary  system,
the  latter  system  is  spoken  of  as  being  dissociated,  just
as  the  subconscious  sensations  or  ideas  of  hysteria  are
said  to  be  dissociated.

But  this  notion  of  dissociation  as  applied  to  isolated
groups  of  sensations  or  ideas  is  very  hard  to  grasp.
Janet's  view  of  a  dissociated  idea  growing  and  develop-
ing on  its  own  account  seems  ojyposed  to  the  very  first
datum  of  psychological  investigation, — the  fact  that  the
only  sensations,  or  ideas,  or  thoughts  of  which  we  have
any  knowledge  are  the  sensations  or  ideas  or  thoughts
of  some  personal  self.  If,  as  Janet  says,  the  ensemble
of  sensations  coming  from  an  arm  or  leg  may  become
dissociated  from  the  totality  of  consciousness,  and  yet
give  evidence  of  still  possessing  consciousness  on  their
own  account  we  feel  bound  to  ask,  If  these  sensations
are  felt,  who  feels  them  ?  Janet  would  seem  content
to  leave  them  floating  about  in  the  void  without  being
claimed  or  owned  by  any  thinker.  But  other  writers
who  are  convinced  of  the  fact  of  co-consciousness  arc
less  easily  satisfied.  Consequently  we  find  that  some
psychologists  get  over  the  difficulty  by  postulating  the
existence,  below  the  ordinary  threshold,  of  a  self  to  whom
those  feelings  and  thoughts  belong.  And  as  a  logical
correlate  of  such  a  supposition  in  the  case  of  abnormal
co-consciousness  the  possession  of  a  secondary  self  must
be  postulated  for  every  one.  Writers  who  take  up  this
position  enunciate  views  on  the  nature  of  the  sub-
conscious which  are  based  on  the  supposition  that  the
phenomena  observed  in  abnormal  states  may  be  regarded
as  revealing  the  existence  of  modes  of  consciousness  that
are  common  to  every  human  mind.

It  was  on  a  supposition  of  this  kind,  supported,  it
is  true,  by  evidence  drawn  from  other  fields  of  investi-
gation, that  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers  based  his  hypo-
thesis of  the  subliminal  self.  Although  Myers  expressly
denied  that  by  this  term  he  meant  to  imply  that  there
are two correlative and parallel selves existing  always


lxxv.] Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis.  141

within  each  one  of  us,  yet  his  work  has  been  held  by
many  of  his  critics  and  adherents  to  teach  this  doctrine,
and  the  weight  of  his  authority  has  been  made  use  of
by  popular  writers  in  support  of  opinions  of  the  crudest
character  regarding  the  existence  and  the  nature  of  a
subconscious  self.

When  Myers  introduced  the  term  subliminal  self  the
word  subliminal  was  already  in  use  in  psychology  to
define  those  sensations  which  are  too  feeble  to  be  indi-
vidually recognised.  He  proposed  to  extend  the  meaning
of  the  term  so  as  to  make  it  cover  all  that  takes  place
beneath  the  ordinary  threshold  ;■ — not  only  those  faint
stimulations  whose  very  faintness  keeps  them  submerged,
but  also  "  sensations,  thoughts,  emotions,  which  may  be
strong,  definite,  and  independent,  but  which,  by  the
original  constitution  of  our  being,  seldom  emerge  into  that
supraliminal  current  of  consciousness  which  we  habitually
identify  with  ourselves."  By  the  subliminal  self  he  meant
that  part  of  the  self  which  is  commonly  subliminal,  and
he  believed  that  no  self  of  which  we  can  here  have
cognisance  is  in  reality  more  than  a  fragment  of  a  larger
self, — "  revealed  in  a  fashion  at  once  shifting  and  limited
through  an  organism  not  so  framed  as  to  afford  it  full
manifestation."  1

A  conception  of  a  subliminal  self  in  some  way  similar
to  that  of  Myers  has  been  advocated  by  Dr.  Boris  Sidis
as  a  result  of  his  investigations  on  the  Psychology  of
Suggestion.  He  maintains  that  in  everyone  there  is  a
subconscious  or  subwaking  self  below  the  threshold  of
the  waking  self -consciousness.  In  the  subconscious,  he
like  Myers,  includes  both  co-consciousness  and  those
faint  stimulations  whose  very  faintness  keeps  them  sub-
merged. He  says,  "  In  many  cases  it  is  not  easy  to
determine  what  the  exact  character  of  the  subconscious
manifestation  is,  how  far  it  is  conscious,  dimly  conscious,
how  far  it  has  gone  toward  the  development  of  an
independent  personality,  and  how  far  it  shades  in  the
direction of the purely physiological."  2 He is  mainly

1  Human  Personality,  Vol.  I.  pp.  14-15.
9-Proc.  S.P.R.  Vol.  XXVI.  p.  339.


142


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


concerned  to  show  that  the  subconscious  is  not  an  "  un-
conscious,"-— it  is  not  a  physiological  automatism.  "  The
subconscious  is  a  consciousness,  a  secondary  consciousness,
a  sort  of  secondary  self,  the  self  being  understood  by  me
as  a  diffused  consciousness."  1

What  Sidis  means  by  a  diffused  consciousness  is  not
easy  to  grasp,  nor  is  it  easy  to  understand  what  sort
of  self  can  be  formed  out  of  such  material.  Especially
does  he  fail  to  make  clear  the  status  of  those  ideas  and
feelings  which  are  "  clear  "  in  co-consciousness.  He  would
ascribe  their  occurrence  under  certain  conditions  to  a
cleavage  between  the  two  selves,  and  the  consequent
attainment  of  self-consciousness  by  the  originally  diffused
consciousness  of  the  subconscious.  But  how  the  trans-
formation of  a  diffused  consciousness  into  self-consciousness
is  brought  about  he  does  not  tell  us.

A  new  avenue  of  approach  to  the  problem  of  the
subliminal  was  opened  up  by  Sigmund  Freud  in  the
course  of  the  elaboration  of  his  psychoanalytic  technique  ;
and  his  theoretical  formulation  of  his  views  on  what
he  has  termed  "  The  Unconscious  "  is  having  an  in-
creasingly marked  effect  on  contemporary  psychology.
Freud  does  not  make  use  of  the  metaphor  of  a  threshold
in  his  descriptions,  but  he  confines  the  use  of  the  word
"  conscious  "  to  those  mental  processes  of  which  we  are
aware at  a  given  moment.

Consciousness  in  Freixd's  writings  means  and  means  only
what  is,  as  we  should  say,  supraliminal  at  the  moment.
On  the  other  hand,  everything  that  is  subliminal  at  the
moment  he  calls  unconscious — in  the  wider  of  two  senses
in  which  he  uses  this  word.  Ordinarily,  he  says,  ideas
are  latent  in  the  unconscious  because  their  activity  is
slight,  because  they  are  weak  ideas,  aiid  when  they  become
active  and  strong,  they  become  conscious.  But  psycho-
analysis has  shown  that  some  ideas  may  be  active  and
strong  and  yet  never  emerge  into  consckmsness.  Thus
latent  ideas  of  two  kinds  exist  beneath  the  threshold,
and  since  they  behave  so  differently  when  they  become
strong, Freud proposes to call foreconscious or  pre-

1  Ibid.  p.  326.


lxxv.]  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis .  143

conscious  those  which  on  becoming  strong  become  conscious,
while  he  reserves  the  term  unconscious  (proper)  for  those
which  do  not  emerge  into  consciousness  no  matter  how
strong  and  active  they  may  be.

This  distinction  between  preconscious  and  unconscious
ideas  is  not  a  primary  one.  Both  kinds  of  ideas  are
unconscious  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  conscious
personality.  But  it  is  claimed  that  psychoanalysis  clearly
shows  that  it  is  only  when  an  idea  is  unacceptable  to  the
conscious  personality  that  it  is  doomed  to  remain  un-
conscious. Its  repulsion  from  consciousness,  its  imprison-
ment in  the  unconscious,  is  due  to  living  forces — to
repression,  and  the  psychoanalyst's  attempt  to  drag  it
into  consciousness  is  met  with  what  is  known  technically
as  resistance.

Freud's  views  on  the  unconscious  and  its  relation  to
repression  were  derived  in  the  first  place  from  the  analysis
of  hysterical  patients,  but  his  investigations  on  dreams
and  other  peculiarities  of  mental  process  in  healthy  people
convinced  him  that  unconscious  ideas  in  this  restricted
sense  exist  in  every  human  mind, — not  merely  as  isolated
and  occasional  occurrences,  but  as  a  vast  and  ever  present
interconnected  system.  It  is  to  this  system  that  he
applies  the  term  The  Unconscious.

This  is  not  merely  another  name  for  the  subconscious
considered  as  faint  states  of  consciousness  or  for  co-
consciousness,  nor  can  it  be  regarded  as  synonymous  with
psychical  dispositions  or  still  less  with  physical  disposi-
tions. Freud  claims  the  right  of  psychology  to  describe
mental  process  in  psychological  terms  and  repudiates  the
notion  that  it  is  necessary  or  permissible  to  fall  back  on
material  systems  to  fill  up  the  gaps  in  the  conscious
series.  The  unconscious  is  psychical  but  it  has  a  dynamic
character  which  distinguishes  it  from  the  relatively  static
systems  of  psychical  dispositions.

Hitherto  upholders  of  the  doctrine  of  subliminal  activity
have  not  claimed  that  there  are  any  distinctive  peculiar-
ities in  the  contents  of  that  part  of  the  mind  which  is
ordinarily  subliminal.  To  Myers  it  appeared  to  be  both
a lumber room and a treasure house. But on  this


144


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


question  Freud  expresses  himself  with  conviction,  in  one
of  those  sweeping  generalisations  which  have  so  often
been  a  stumbling  block  to  his  readers.  The  unconscious,
he  says,  contains  nothing  but  wishes  and  such  psychic
formations  as  may  have  grown  around  them.  These
wishes  are  instinctive  impulses,  or  original  components
of  the  instincts,  that  have  been  repressed.  Originally
the  gratification  of  these  impulses  afforded  pleasure,  but
in  the  course  of  the  upbringing  of  the  child  they  have
been  discarded  or  supjDressed  in  deference  to  the  require-
ments of  the  social  environment,  the  moral  and  cultural
tradition  into  which  he  was  born.  Their  further  appear-
ance in  consciousness  would  be  accompanied  by  pain
rather  than  by  pleasure,  so  a  censorship  is  set  up  by  the
preconscious  which  ensures  that  these  unacceptable  wishes
shall  not  penetrate  into  consciousness.  Yet  they  continue
to  exist  in  the  unconscious  and,  according  to  Freud,
form  the  very  foundation  of  our  being.  "  These  uncon-
scious wishes  establish  for  all  subsequent  psychic  efforts  a
compulsion  to  which  they  have  to  submit  and  which
they  must  strive  if  possible  to  divert  from  its  course
and  direct  to  higher  aims."  1

Any  hypothesis  put  forward  in  explanation  of  subliminal
mental  activity  ought  to  take  account  of  the  evidence
which  supports  the  conception  of  co-conscipusness.  Some
writers  believe  the  fact  of  consciousness  to  be  so  well
attested  in  those  activities  which  have  been  called  co-
conscious,  that  no  hypothesis  of  unconsciousness  can  ever
entirely  cover  them.  The  occurrence  of  co-consciousness
may  not  be  really  incompatible  with  any  of  the  funda-
mental conclusions  at  which  Freud  has  arrived  as  to  the
structure  and  functioning  of  the  mind.  But  as  a  matter
of  fact  Freud  categorically  denies  that  co-consciousness
ever  occurs.  In  reference  to  the  hypothesis  of  dissociation
and  co-consciousness  he  says  :  "I  venture  to  urge  against
this  theory  that  it  is  a  gratuitous  assumption,  based  on
the  abuse  of  the  word  '  conscious.'  We  have  no  right
to  extend  the  meaning  of  this  word  so  far  as  to  make
it include a consciousness of which its owner  himself

1  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  p.  479


lxxv.]  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanaly sis.  145

is  not  aware.  .  .  .  The  cases  described,  as  splitting  of
consciousness,  like  Dr.  Azam's,  might  better  be  denoted
as  shifting  of  consckrasness, — that  function — or  whatever  it
be- — oscillating  between  two  different  psychical  complexes
which  become  conscious  and  unconscious  in  alternation."  1

Thus  we  see  that  Freud  feels  compelled  to  deny  the
occurrence  of  co-consciousness,  not  only  in  hysteria  and
in  post-hypnotic  phenomena,  but  even  in  those  cases
of  double  or  multiple  personality  in  which  its  occurrence
seems  to  be  most  clearly  attested.  For  the  explanation
he  proposes  in  Azam's  case  is  only  applicable  to  the
simply  alternating  type  of  multiple  personality  and  does
not  help  us  at  all  to  understand  those  of  the  co-conscious
type  in  which  two  different  psychical  complexes  give
evidence  of  being  simultaneously  conscious.

It  is  when  we  examine  Freud's  view  of  the  uncon-
scious as  containing  nothing  but  wishes  that  we  meet
with  a  notion  which  begins  to  render  intelligible  Jung's
description  of  "  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  "  as  "A
Study  of  the  Transformations  and  Symbolisms  of  the
Libido."

At  the  beginning  of  his  psychoanalytic  work  Jung
accepted,  or  appeared  to  accept,  all  the  main  formu-
lations of  Freud  in  regard  to  the  content  and  mechanism
of  unconscious  functions.  The  unconscious  wishes  which
formed  the  core  of  all  unconscious  psychic  formations
were  maintained  by  Freud  to  be  of  the  nature  of  sexual
desires  and  longings.  To  indicate  these  desires  and
longings  he  proposed  to  use  the  term  Libido.  Jung  in
his  later  work  has  used  this  term  in  a  much  wider  sense,
the  understanding  of  which  will  be  best  attained  by
examining  the  history  of  the  use  of  the  term  libido  in
psychoanalytic  writings.

Unlike  "the  unconscious"  the  word  "libido"  was
practically  unknown  as  a  technical  term  in  psychology
until  Freud  introduced  it.  It  was,  of  course,  frequently
used  in  medical  and  medico-legal  works  where  it  had
the  ordinarily  accepted  meaning  of libido  sexualis, — with,

1  Proceedings  S.P.R.  Vol.  XXVI.  p.  315.


146


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


however,  the  implication  of  its  English  derivative,  libidi-
nous— inordinate  desire  or  lust.  In  the  opening  words
of  his  Three  Contributions  to  the  Theory  of  Sex
Freud  defines  his  use  of  the  term.  He  says  :  "  The
fact  of  sexual  need  in  man  and  animal  is  expressed  in
biology  by  the  assumption  of  a  '  sexual  impulse.' "
This  impulse  is  made  analogous  to  the  impulse  of
taking  nourishment  and  to  hunger.  The  sexual  expres-
sion corresponding  to  hunger  not  being  found  colloquially
science  uses  the  expression  "  libido."  The  use  of  the
term  was  thus  clearly  assigned  and  restricted  to  "  the
sexual,"  and  the  chief  ground  of  the  criticism  which
arose  on  every  side  respecting  Freud's  views  is  to  be
found  in  the  extended  connotation  which  he  appeared  to
give  to  the  word  sexual.  For  it  seemed  plain,  and  indeed
he  himself  admitted,  that  he  was  using  this  word  in  a
sense  different  in  some  ways  from  that  in  which  it  is
ordinarily  used.  The  fact  that  "  infantile  sexuality "
and  the  disturbance  of  its  development  are  all  important
in  his  theory  of  the  neuroses,  is  in  itself  sufficient  to
show  that  he  has  departed  from  ordinary  usage.  For
in  the  popular  conception  sexuality  is  never  ascribed  to
infancy.

The  extent  to  which  he  departs  from  ordinary  usage
is  perhaps  best  illustrated  by  reference  to  bis  inclusion
of  "  thumb-sucking  "  among  the  manifestations  of  infantile
sexuality.  And  reference  is  here  made  to  this,  not  for
the  purpose  of  affirming  or  denying  its  legitimacy,  but  with
a  view  to  understanding  what  is  implied  when  the  term
libido  is  used  in  Freudian  writings,  and  thereby  getting
a  clearer  notion  of  the  innovations  introduced  by  Jung.

In  calling  sexual  such  pleasure -giving  activities  as
thumb-sucking  it  would  at  first  sight  seem  as  if  Freud
implied  that  all  pleasure  is  at  root  sexual  in  character.
This  implication  is  accepted  by  Dr.  Beatrice  Hinkle  in
her  excellent  introduction  to  Jung's  Psychology  of  the
Unconscious,  where  she  says  Freud  "  apparently  identifies
the  pleasure  principle  and  the  sexual  instinct  and  con-
siders that  the  former  is  primarily  rooted  in  the  latter."  l

i  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious,  p.  xxii.


lxxv.]  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis.  147

Freud  asserts,  however,  that  pleasure  to  be  called
sexual  must  be  pleasure  of  a  definite  and  perhaps  peculiar
quality.  Pleasure  of  this  peculiar  quality  may  be  obtained
from  various  regions  of  the  body,  and  these  regions  he
calls  erogenous  zones.  The  erogenous  quality  adheres
chiefly  to  definite  regions  of  the  skin  or  mucous  mem-
brane, but  any  region  may  assume  the  function  of  an
erogenous  zone.  He  is  indeed  inclined  to  attribute  the
"  quality  of  erogenity "  to  all  parts  of  the  body  and
inner  organs.  It  is  because  he  believes  this  peculiar
quality  of  pleasure  is  obtained  by  the  child  in  thumb-
sucking  that  he  sees  in  this  habit  an  instance  of  infantile
sexuality.

The  term  libido  as  used  by  Freud  would  thus  express
at  least  the  craving  for  this  peculiar  quality  of  pleasure,
a  craving  which  exists  and  is  capable  of  satisfaction  from
infancy  to  old  age.  This  craving  would  appear,  in  the
ultimate  analysis,  to  be  the  driving  force  behind  all
manifestations  of  sexual  activity  whether  infantile  or
adult,  and  therefore  of  all  those  activities  of  our  moral
nature  whose  rise  and  development  may  be  traced  to
a  sexual  source.  This  is  the  real  Freudian  libido,  and
when  we  find,  as  he  himself  has  explicitly  declared,  that
Freud's  use  of  the  word  sexual  includes  every  mani-
festation of  altruistic  love  and  endeavour,  it  is  well  to
remember  the  egoistic  and  hedonistic  source  from  which,
in  his  view,  all  such  strivings  spring.

In  the  child  the  sexual  impulse,  according  to  Freud,
is  complex.  It  is  made  up  of  many  components  which
have  different  sources,  and  it  has  no  connection  with  the
function  of  reproduction.  In  the  course  of  normal
development  its  subservience  to  this  later  function  is
attained,  and  in  the  process  many  of  the  original  infantile
components  undergo  energetic  repression  under  the  influ-
ence of  mental  forces  like  shame  and  disgust  which
arise  in  the  course  of  moral  and  cultural  education.  The
overstrong  excitation  of  any  of  these  components  in  child-
hood leads  to  a  fixation  which  forms  a  weak  spot  in  the
psycho-sexual  make-up  of  the  adult,  and  if  the  libido
is  denied  its  normal  outlet  it  turns  and  flows  backwards,


148


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


and  in  its  "  regression  "  reawakens  the  repressed  impulse
components  still  existing  in  the  unconscious.  These,
owing  to  the  repression,  cannot  appear  in  consciousness,
but  they  find  surrogate  satisfactions  in  the  production
of  neurotic  symptoms.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  Freud
maintains  that  neurotic  symptoms  derive  their  energy
from  the  sexual  life.  They  are  substitute  manifestations
of  the  infantile  sexual  activities  of  the  patient.

The  regressive  flow  of  the  libido  entails  a  withdrawal
of  libido  from  application  in  the  "  real  "  world  and  its
utilisation  in  a  world  of  phantasy.  The  function  of
"  adaptation  to  reality "  is  thereby  narrowed  and  the
waiit  of  adaptation  evinced  by  psychoneurotic  patients
corresponds  exactly  to  the  amount  of  libido  withdrawn
from  application  in  the  real  world.  That  part  of  the
adaptation  to  reality  which  is  lacking  in  the  psycho-
neurotic is  a  part  that  is  normally  maintained  by  affluxes
of  libido,  and  the  libido  withdrawn  from  reality  in  these
patients  is  libido  sexualis  as  defined  by  Freud.

Jung  admits  the  correctness  of  this  view  in  so  far  as
it  is  applied  to  the  psychoneuroses  of  which  hysteria
may  be  taken  as  the  type  ;  but  he  thinks  Freud's  theory
of  the  libido  is  not  applicable  to  the  true  psychoses  such
as  dementia  precox  or  paranoia.  For  in  these  mental
disorders  the  failure  of  adaptation  to  reality  goes  far
beyond  what  can  be  accounted  for  by  the  withdrawal  of
"  libidinous  affluxes  "  alone.  If  we  are  to  apply  the
libido  theory  in  explanation  of  the  psychology  of  dementia
precox,  we  must  either  understand  adaptation  to  reality
as  a  whole  to  be  a  function  of  sexuality,  or  we  must
extend  the  meaning  of  the  term  libido  so  as  to  include
under  it  not  only  libido  sexualis  but  also  "  objective
interest  in  general."'

The  latter  course  is  that  which  Jung  has  followed.
Instead  of  starting  from  the  empirical  standpoint  of
Freud,  who  "  accepts  the  multiplicity  of  instincts  among
which  is  the  sexual  instinct  as  a  special  phenomenon,"
Jung  approaches  the  question  from  the  genetic  stand-
point, and  regards  the  multiplicity  of  instincts  as  issuing
from  a relative  unity  which  he  terms  the  primal  libido.


lxxv.]  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis.  149

He  postulates  "  a  continuous  life  impulse,  a  will  to  live,
which  will  attain  the  creation  of  the  whole  species  through
the  preservation  of  the  individual."

In  the  stage  of  childhood,  Jung  says,  the  libido  is
almost  wholly  occupied  in  the  instinct  of  nutrition.  With
the  development  of  the  body  new  spheres  of  application
for  the  libido  are  successively  opened  up.  The  last  and
most  important  sphere  of  application  is  sexuality.  In
phylogeny  this  transformation  of  the  primal  libido  presents
itself  as  an  energy  of  growth  which  forces  the  individual
towards  division,  budding,  etc. — as  an  impulse  of  pro-
creation. Further  transformations  of  the  primal  sexual
libido  so  arising  occur  when,  with  the  growing  complexity
of  life  conditions,  part  of  the  energy  originally  devoted
to  the  production  of  the  reproductive  elements  become
deflected  into  other  channels  so  as  to  subserve  "  the
secondary  functions  of  allurement  and  protection  of  the
young."  By  such  transformations  Jung  claims  that  the  libido
so  deflected  becomes  desexualised,  and  he  thus  hopes
to  escape  the  unwelcome  conclusion  that  the  "  function  of
reality "  is  phylogenetically  preponderatingly  of  sexual
origin.  Yet  he  says,  "  It  can  be  a  surprise  only  to  those
to  whom  the  history  of  evolution  is  unknown  to  find
how  few  things  there  really  are  in  human  life  which
cannot  be  reduced  in  the  last  analysis  to  the  instinct
of  procreation.  It  includes  very  nearly  everything,  I
think,  which  is  beloved  and  dear  to  us."  1

It  is  at  first  sight  difficult  to  see  what  Jung  gains
by  desexualising  libido  which  in  the  last  analysis  is  shown
to  be  of  sexual  origin.  Of  more  significance  would  have
been  his  extension  of  the  term  libido  to  that  part  of  the
life  impulse  which  does  not  follow  the  path  of  sexual
libido  but  remains  at  the  nutritional  plane,  if  such
extension  of  the  application  of  the  term  proved  to  be
useful  in  the  elucidation  of  the  pathogenesis  of  the
psychoses.  But  this  he  does  not  appear  to  claim.  What
he  does  claim  is  that  his  conception  of  the  part  played
in  the  function  of  reality  by  the  primal  sexual  libido
that  has  become  desexualised  in  the  course  of  phylogeny

1  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious,  p.  145.


150


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


"  will  prove  of  especial  advantage  in  the  important  field
of  the  introversion  psychoses."  In  these  he  maintains
that  "  reality  is  deprived,  not  merely  of  an  immediate
(individual)  amount  of  libido,  but  also  of  an  already
differentiated  or  desexualised  quantity  of  libido,  which,
among  normal  people,  has  belonged  to  the  function  of
reality  ever  since  prehistoric  times."  1

Thus  although  Jung  wishes  to  restrict  the  use  of  the
word  sexual  to  the  "  immediate  sexual,"  and  declines  to
call  sexual  those  functions  and  activities  of  sexual  origin
which  have  become  desexualised,  it  is  impressive  to  find,
on  his  own  showing,  that  in  its  ultimate  analysis  the
libido  which  is  misapplied  both  in  the  neuroses  and  in
the  psychoses  is  derived  from  that  primal  sexual  libido
which  phylogenetically  arises  as  an  "  impulse  of  pro-
creation."

If  Jung's  purpose  in  formulating  his  theory  of  the
libido  was,  as  Freudians  declare,  to  escape  the  oppro-
brium of  their  sexual  theories,  it  may  perhaps  be  asserted
that  he  has  increased  the  difficulties  of  his  own  exposi-
tion and  prejudiced  the  acceptance  of  his  views  by
committing  what  many  will  consider  an  error  of  the  same
kind  as  was  ascribed  to  Freud  when  he  departed  from
ordinary  custom  in  his  use  of  words.  The  originally
"  sexual  "  character  of  the  "  impulse  of  procreation  "
may  be  too  readily  conceded  because  of  the  connection
between  sex  and  reproduction  in  the  later  stages  of
phylogeny.  Such  a  concession  is  the  more  easily  made
because  it  falls  into  line  with  the  usage  of  ordinary
speech.  Yet  it  may  legitimately  be  objected  to  on  the
ground  that  reproduction  by  simple  cell  division  or  budding
is  phylogenetically  prior  to  sex.  Moreover,  a  somewhat
similar  concession  was  widely  denied  to  Freud  when  he
extended  the  use  of  the  word  sexual  to  activities  that  had
no  apparent  connection  with  reproduction.  In  the  one
case  we  are  willing  to  call  sexual,  processes  that  have  in
their  beginnings  nothing  to  do  with  sex.  In  the  other
we  are  unwilling  to  call  sexual,  impulses  that  in  their
beginnings  have  nothing  to  do  with  reproduction.

1  Psychology  of the  Uncomciovs,  p.  153.


lxxv.]  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis.  151

Had  Jung  been  as  enamoured  of  a  sexual  terminology
as  the  Freudians  appear  to  be,  he  might  have  applied
the  libido  theory  to  the  psychoses  by  still  further  ex-
tending the  application  of  the  word  sexual,  instead  of
by  extending  the  meaning  of  the  word  libido  so  as  to
make  it  synonymous  with  the  primitive  life  impulse.
Here  as  elsewhere  in  his  recent  work  Jung  appears  to
shirk  the  consecmences  of  his  own  analyses.

The  transformations  of  the  libido  which  Jung  holds  to
be  the  true  subject-matter  of  the  psychology  of  the
unconscious  are  those  deflections  of  the  sexual  libido  from
the  sexual  territory  into  associated  functions  or  analogous
activities  which  have  occurred  in  the  past  history  of  the
race.  He  gives  many  instances  in  which  such  a  deflec-
tion has  taken  place  and  he  traces  the  history  of  the
symbolism  resulting  therefrom  in  the  cults  and  super-
stitions of  ancient  peoples  and  in  the  myths  and  religions
of  more  modem  times.  He  is  obviously,  however,  some-
what at  a  loss  to  account  for  the  origin  of  these  deflec-
tions of  the  libido.  Why  should  primitive  man  allow  his
sexual  libido  to  be  turned  away  from  its  natural  destina-
tion, and  employ  itself  so  strenuously  in  substitution
actions  such  as,  for  example,  fire  production  or  the
cultivation  of  the  earth  ?

In  his  work  on  the  Transformations  of  the  Libido  Jung
expresses  his  belief  that  primitive  man  was  compelled
to  such  sublimations  of  his  libido  by  an  internal  resistance
against  sexuality.  He  does  not  consider  that  it  was  due
to  any  outer  opposition  or  to  any  real  obstacle,  but  that
it  was  due  to  an  internal  resistance  based  on  an  original
division  of  the  will.

In  his  later  studies  he  makes  more  explicit  the  im-
plications of  this  doctrine.  He  holds,  with  the  best
anthropological  authorities,  that  man  was  from  the  be-
ginning a  social  animal  and  that  altruism  is  necessarily,
therefore,  as  innate  and  as  primordial  as  egoism  in  the
soul.  The  beginnings  of  sexual  morality  shown  in  the
prehistoric  deflections  of  the  libido  to  other  aims,  were
imposed upon man by his own nature. "  It  should,


152


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[PART


indeed,"  he  says,  "  never  be  forgotten — and  the  Freudian
School  needs  this  reminder- — that  morality  was  not
brought  down  upon  tables  of  stone  from  Sinai  and  forced
upon  the  people,  but  that  morality  is  a  function  of  the
human  soul,  which  is  as  old  as  humanity  itself.  Morality
is  not  inculcated  from  without.  Man  has  it  primarily
within  himself — not  the  law  indeed,  but  the  essence  of
morals."  1  In  this  quotation  we  find  some  indication  of
what  appears  to  be  a  profound  opposition  between  Jung
and  Freud  in  their  outlook  upon  human  nature.  It  may
be  compared  with  the  opposition  which  once  existed
between  two  of  the  great  heresies  of  the  Church — the
Pelagians  declaring  that  man  is  innately  good,  the  Mani-
chaeans  insisting  that  he  is  innately  evil.

In  his  work  on  the  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious
Jung  approaches  the  subject  of  the  symbolisms  of  the
libido  in  a  somewhat  novel  way.  He  thinks  that  at  the
present  time  there  is  need  for  the  psychoanalyst  to
broaden  the  analysis  of  individual  psychologic  problems
by  a  comparative  study  of  historical  material  relating  to
them.  Much  work  has  been  already  done  by  the  applica-
tion of  psychoanalytic  knowledge  to  historical  problems,
and  he  now  desires  to  apply  the  insight  so  obtained  to
the  interpretation  of  individual  phantasies  of  purely  un-
conscious origin.  He  finds  the  material  for  his  investi-
gation in  an  article  entitled  "  Q.uelques  faits  d'imagination
creatrice  subconsciente,"  contributed  to  Archives  de  Psy-
chologie  (1906,  Vol.  V.)  by  an  American  lady,  Miss  Frank
Miller.

It  is  impossible  here  to  indicate  even  in  the  barest
outline  the  course  which  his  investigations  take.  All  that
is  possible  is  to  give  to  the  reader  just  a  hint  of  the
topics  discussed,  and,  by  means  of  a  few  quotations,  of
the  kind  of  conclusions  he  is  invited  to  accept.

Miss  Miller  when  on  a  sea-voyage  was  one  night
greatly  impressed  by  the  singing  of  one  of  the  Italian
officers.  She  afterwards  had  a  dream  at  the  end  of  which
she  had  a  vision  of  a  poem  which  she  wrote  down  as
soon  as  she  awoke. The  poem  was  a  Hymn  of  Creation

1  Analytical  Psychology,  2nd  edit.  p.  379.


lxxv.]  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis.  153

Miss  Miller,  in  her  commentary  on  the  poem  gives  some
of  the  associations  necessary  for  the  analysis  which  Jung
undertakes.  Among  these  may  be  found — The  Singer —
the  Morning  Stars- — the  God  of  Tone — The  Creator — The
God  of  Light  and  of  Love — a  much  honoured  ecclesiastic
who  had  puzzled  her  in  her  youth  by  his  references  to
the  Gift  of  Love  (don  d'amour).

A  quotation  from  Jung  may  indicate  the  line  of  investi-
gation he  follows  and  the  kind  of  interpretation  he  gives.
"  Miss  Miller's  problem  at  this  age  was  the  common  human
problem  :  How  am  I  to  be  creative  ?  Nature  knows  but
one  answer  to  that  :  Through  the  child  (don  d'amour !).
But  how  is  the  child  attained  ?  Here  the  terrifying
problem  emerges,  which,  as  our  analytic  experience  shows,
is  connected  with  the  father,  where  it  cannot  be  solved  ;
because  the  original  sin  of  incest  weighs  heavily  for  all
time  upon  the  human  race.  The  strong  and  natural  love
which  binds  the  child  to  the  father,  turns  away  in  those
years  during  which  the  humanity  of  the  father  woidd  be
all  too  plainly  recognised,  to  the  higher  forms  of  the
father,  the  '  Fathers  '  of  the  Church,  and  to  the  Father  God,
visibly  represented  by  them,  and  in  that  there  lies  still
less  possibility  of  solving  the  problem.  However,  mythology
is  not  lacking  in  consolations."  1

At  a  later  date  Miss  Miller  composed  another  poem
called  "The  Moth  to  the  Sun."  At  the  end  of  his
examination  of  the  material  supplied  by  this  poem  Jung
says  :  "  Under  the  symbol  of  '  moth  and  sun '  we  have
dug  down  into  the  historic  depths  of  the  soul,  and  in
doing  this  we  have  uncovered  an  old  buried  idol,  the
youthful,  beautiful,  fire-encircled  and  halo-crowned  sun-
hero,  who,  forever  unattainable  to  the  mortal,  wanders
upon  the  earth,  causing  night  to  follow  day ;  winter,
summer ;  death,  life  ;  and  who  returns  again  in  rejuve-
nated splendour  and  gives  light  to  new  generations.  The
longing  of  the  dreamer  concealed  behind  the  moth  stands
for  him."  2

In  the  third  and  last  creation  of  Miss  MiUer  we  meet  with
the  personification  of  the  libido  in  the  form  of  the  hero.

1  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious,  pp.  62-63.  2  Ibid.  pp.  115,  116.


154  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.  [part

And  the  myth  of  the  hero  as  it  appears  to  Jung  is
"  the  myth  of  our  own  suffering  unconscious,  which  has
an  unquenchable  longing  for  all  the  deepest  sources  of
our  being  ;  for  the  body  of  the  mother,  and  through  it
for  communion  with  infinite  life  in  the  countless  forms
of  existence.  .  .  .  The  course  of  the  invincible  sun  has
supplied  the  mystery  of  human  life  with  beautiful  and
imperishable  symbols  ;  it  became  a  comforting  fulfilment
of  all  the  yearning  for  immortality,  of  all  desire  of  mortals
for  eternal  life.  Man  leaves  the  mother,  the  source  of
libido,  and  is  driven  by  the  eternal  thirst  to  find  her
again,  and  to  drink  renewal  from  her  ;  thus  he  completes
his  cycle,  and  returns  again  into  the  mother's  womb."  1
It  is  by  thus  laying  bare  the  mythological  foundation  of
the  infantile  incest  phantasy  that  Jung  seeks  to  break
away  from  the  Freudian  interpretation  and  to  regard
this  phantasy  not  as  a  true  sexual  inclination  towards
the  parents  but  as  "a  regressive  product  of  the  revival
of  the  archaic  modes  of  function,  outweighing  actuality."  2
The  symbolisms  of  "  the  hero,"  of  the  "  mother  and  of
rebirth,"  of  "the  dual  mother  role"  and  of  "the  sacrifice,"
give  Jung  the  opportunity  to  digress  into  discussion  of
a  great  variety  of  topics  ranging  over  the  whole  field  of
mythology  and  religion,  and  only  an  expert  in  these
matters  is  qualified  to  appraise  the  value  of  his  con-
clusions. The  ordinary  reader  will  find  the  argument
extremely  difficult  to  follow  owing  to  the  seeming  absence
of  method  in  the  exposition,  and  the  long  digressions
which  are  frequently  indulged  in.  It  is  due  to  the  reader
that  a  book  of  this  character  should  have  been  provided
with  a  concise  synopsis  of  the  argument  and  a  much
fuller  index.

In  accordance  with  the  biological  trend  of  thought
which  led  him  to  trace  back  the  libido  to  a  primordial
life-impulse,  Jung  postulates  in  the  unconscious  not  only
the  traces  of  human  experience,  both  individual  and
racial,  but  also  of  that  of  our  prehuman  ancestors.  Chief
stress,  is,  however,  laid  on  that  part  of  the  unconscious

1  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious,  pp.  231,  427.  *  Ibid.  p.  463.


xxxv.]  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis.  155

which  is  a  heritage  from  racial  experience  ;  and,  indeed,
it  is  of  that  part  alone  that  he  thinks  it  justifiable  to
speak  as  being  suitable  subject  matter  of  a  scientific
psychology.  For  the  individual  unconscious  is  in  every
instance  something  unique  and  incomparable.

He  believes  that  a  man's  mind  may  be  regarded  as
containing  not  only  the  traces  of  his  own  individual
experience,  but  also,  in  a  condensed  or  epitomised  form,
traces  of  the  experience  of  the  whole  race.  This  applies
to  modes  of  mental  functioning  as  well  as  to  the  con-
tents of  the  mind.  The  thinking  of  prehistoric  man  he
believes  to  have  been  predominantly  a  thinking  in  images
— a  dream  or  phantasy  thinking,  while  directed  thinking
— thinking  in  words,  is  a  modern  acquisition.  Our  dreams
and  the  phantasy  thinking  of  children  and  day-dreamers
are  thus  a  sort  of  re-echo  of  archaic  mental  process.
Similarly  the  phantasy  formations  which  psychoanalysis
has  revealed  in  the  unconscious  are  identical  in  character
with  the  conscious  thinking  of  prehistoric  man.  So  also
in  regard  to  the  content  of  the  unconscious  ;  the  symbols
of  the  dream  and  of  the  unconscious  phantasy  show  that
man  has  retained  a  condensation  of  the  psychic  history
of  his  development.

Jung  therefore  divides  the  materials  of  the  unconscious
into  personal  and  impersonal  or  collective  contents.  The
personal  contents  are  those  that  are  attributable  to
personal  experiences — reminiscences  of  tli9  life-history  of
the  individual.  The  impersonal  or  collective  contents  are
those  primordial  images- — or  at  least  the  inherited  poten-
tialities of  such  images — which  are  common  to  the  whole
race.  The  phantasies  arising  from  this  region  of  the
unconscious  have  no  basis  in  personal  reminiscence.

Now  Jung  would  seem  to  teach  that  all  the  content
of  the  impersonal  unconscious  is  derived  from  transfor-
mations of  the  primal  sexual  libido, — transformations  in
which  libido  became  desexualised  by  being  taken  away
from  its  proper  object  and  applied  to  other  objects  "  by
means  of  shifting  to  an  analogy."  All  the  sexual  symbols
on  which  he  descants  throughoiit  his  Psychology  of  the
Unconscious with so much learning and  ingenuity  are


156


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


nothing  but  the  phantasy  correlates  which  primitive  man
had  substituted  for  the  original  achievements  of  the  sexual
libido.  Moreover  such  diversions  of  the  libido  are  still
taking  place.  "  Where  this  operation  succeeds  without
injury  to  the  adaptation  of  the  individual  it  is  called
sublimation.  Where  the  attempt  does  not  succeed  it  is
called  repression."

The  transformations  of  the  libido  represented  iu  the
impersonal  unconscious  are  thus  the  sublimations  of  •  our
prehistoric  ancestors  by  which  libido  became  freed  from
the  immediate  sexual  and  became  applied  to  an  ever
increasing  range  of  objects,  thereby  assisting  the  dis-
covery of  and  the  adaptation  to  an  ever- widening  en-
vironment. In  this  way  arose  the  rich  sexual  symbolism
which  pervades  mythology  and  dream.  The  compulsion
towards  transformation  removed  a  certain  amount  of
libido  from  the  real  sexual  activity  and  created  a  symbolic
and  practically  valid  substitute  for  what  was  lost.

To  this  phantastic  analogy  formation  Jung  ascribes  a
great  role  in  the  mental  and  moral  development  of  man.
"It  is  a  question,"  he  says,  "  whether  the  human  con-
sciousness has  not  been  brought  to  its  present  state
entirely  or  in  great  part  in  this  manner.  ...  It  is  easy
to  believe  that  the  carry  over  of  the  libido  to  a  phan-
tastic correlate  has  led  primitive  man  to  a  number  of
the  most  important  discoveries."  1

We  thus  see  that  Jung  has  introduced  into  the  con-
ception of  the  unconscious  modifications  as  far-reaching
as  those  which  he  advocates  in  regard  to  the  use  of  the
terms  sex  and  libido.  As  we  have  seen  he  extends  the
application  of  the  word  sexual  so  as  to  make  it  co-
extensive with  the  impulse  of  procreation  and  refuses  to
call  sexual  all  that  has  no  direct  relation  to  procreation
and  all  that  has  no  longer,  though  it  may  once  have
had,  such  a  relation.  He  takes  away  from  the  word
libido  the  specific  character  which  it  has  possessed  since
classical  times  and  uses  it  as  a  generic  term  to  signify
the  psychic  energy  that  is  common  to  every  form  of
mental activity. Lastly, he includes within the  un-

1  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious,  p.  156.


xxxv.]  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis.  157

conscious  not  only  all  that  we  formerly  understood  by
the  subliminal  or  the  subconscious,  not  only  the  Uncon-
scious of  Freud,  originating  by  repression  in  the  course
of  the  individual  life,  but  also  a  vast  domain  inherited
by  each  one  of  us  from  the  collective  experience  of  the
race.

It  would  seem  as  if  Jung  has  wandered  far  from  the
original  standpoint  of  psychoanalysis,  and  there  is  some
justification  for  the  protest  of  Freud  that  he  has  no
longer  any  right  to  describe  either  his  theories  or  his
practice  under  that  name.  There  is  no  conception  more
fundamental  to  the  psychoanalytic  psychology  originated
and  developed  by  Freud  than  the  conception  of  "  Repres-
sion." By  repression  alone  is  the  existence  and  nature
of  the  unconscious  of  Freud  explained,  and  the  overcoming
of  the  resistances  is  the  one  aim  of  his  psychoanalytic
therapy.

But  Jung  no  longer  speaks  much  of  the  repression.
True,  he  does  occasionally  still  appear  to  do  it  lip-
service,  but  the  rejiression  he  has  in  mind  seems  to  have
a  totally  different  nature  and  a  different  origin.  Here,
again,  as  in  the  case  of  the  words  sexual,  libido,  and
the  unconscious,  he  continues  to  use  a  term  which  has
acquired  a  very  specific  meaning  in  psychoanalytic  writings
but  has  so  altered  its  applications  that  it  becomes  practi-
cally a  different  word.

In  Freudian  psychology  the  very  existence  of  the  un-
conscious was  explained  by  repression.  Freud's  theory
of  the  neuroses  was  built  upon  this  conception.  The
neurosis  was  the  product  of  an  unconscious  conflict
between  the  moral  nature  and  the  infantile  wish-tendencies
repressed  in  the  unconscious.  The  aim  of  psychoanalysis
was  the  overcoming  of  the  resistances,  the  freeing  of  the
repressed  complexes,  and  the  liberation  of  the  energy
attached  to  them  so  that  it  became  available  for  higher
ends.

Jung  gives  us  an  entirely  new  view  of  the  structure
and  functions  of  the  unconscious,  a  new  hypothesis  of
psychogenic  disturbances,  a  new  therapy  and  a  new
therapeutic aim. The personal  unconscious is not  for


158


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


him  the  result  of  repression  due  to  a  conflict  with  the
moral  consciousness  but  is  merely  a  consequence  of  the
tendency  of  every  individual  to  develop  one-sidedly  in
his  mental  growth.  In  his  adaptation  to  life  one  part
of  his  potentialities  is  neglected  in  favour  of  the  other,
and  the  neglected  part  tends  to  sink  into  the  unconscious.

By  analogy  with  the  opposite  tendencies  which  he
finds  to  be  characteristic  of  dementia  precox  and  hysteria
respectively,  he  maintains  that  there  are  two  great
psychological  types  under  which  all  men  may  be  classed.
In  one  type — the  extra  vert,  of  which  hysteria  is  the
extreme  example, — there  is  a  centrifugal  tendency  of  the
libido  ;  in  the  other  type — the  introvert,  of  which  de-
mentia precox  is  the  extreme  example, — there  is  a  centri-
petal tendency  of  the  libido.  "  In  the  one  type  the
fundamental  function  is  feeling,  and  in  the  other  it  is
thought.  The  one  feels  his  way  into  the  object,  the  other
thinks  about  it.  The  one  adapts  himself  to  his  surround-
ings by  feeling,  thinking  coming  later ;  whilst  the  other
adapts  himself  by  means  of  thought,  preceded  by  under-
standing." 1  "  Each  type  has  one  function  that  is  specially
well  developed,  the  introvert  using  his  thought  as  the
function  of  adaptation,  thinking  beforehand  about  how
he  shall  act  ;  whilst  the  extravert,  on  the  contrary,
feels  his  way  into  the  object  by  acting."  2  In  the  in-
trovert the  potentialities  of  feeling  tend  to  be  unconscious
to  the  extent  that  they  are  undeveloped  in  the  conscious
life.  In  the  extravert  the  potentialities  of  thought  tend
to  be  unconscious  in  a  similar  way.

Corresponding  to  their  divergence  along  these  different
paths  of  adaptation  the  values  of  the  one  type  become
more  and  more  opposed  to  those  of  the  other,  so  that
in  the  end  they  become  totally  incapable  of  understanding
each  other.  This  fundamental  opposition  between  the  two
types  is  compared  to  that  which  William  James  detected
between  philosophers  according  as  they  belonged  to  his
"  tough-minded  " or his "  tender-minded  "  group.

It  is  on  the  basis  of  this  hypothesis  of  psychological
types  that  Jung  has  constructed  his  theory  of  the  neuroses.

1  Analytical  Psychology,  2nd  edit.,  p.  391.  *  Ibid.  p.  402.


lxxv.]  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis.  159

He  still  holds  to  mental  conflict  being  the  proximate
cause  of  the  outbreak  of  neurosis,  but  the  conflict  is  no
longer  the  Freudian  conflict  between  adult  and  infantile
wish-tendencies,  but  a  conflict  between  "  the  adapted
function  and  the  co-function  that  is  undifferentiated,  and
that  lies  to  a  great  extent  in  the  unconscious  ;  there-
fore in  the  case  of  the  introvert,  between  thought  and
unconscious  feeling,  but  in  that  of  the  extravert,  between
feeling  and  unconscious  thought."  1  Thus,  for  example,
"  If  a  man  who  naturally  adapts  himself  by  thinking  is
faced  by  a  demand  that  cannot  be  met  by  thinking
alone,  but  which  requires  differentiated  feeling,  the  trau-
matic or  pathogenic  conflict  breaks  out.  On  the  contrary,
the  critical  moment  comes  to  the  man  who  adapts  by
feeling  when  he  is  faced  by  a  problem  requiring  differ-
entiated thought."  2

Jung  no  longer  looks  for  the  cause  of  the  neurosis  in
the  past.  He  does  not  ask  what  infantile  fixations  have
occurred  in  the  course  of  psycho-sexual  development,
nor  what  particular  infantile  phantasies  are  utilising  the
libido  withdrawn  from  adaptation  to  reality.  He  looks
for  the  cause  in  the  present.  He  asks,  what  is  the
necessary  task  in  the  patient's  life  which  he  will  not
fulfil  and  from  which  he  recoils.  He  now  seems  to  make
light  of  the  fact  that  the  "  life-task  "  before  which  the
neurotic  quails  is  invariably  a  task  inseparable  from  his
love-life,  and  he  no  longer  admits,  what  he  once  strongly
taught,  that  the  infantile  fixations  provide  the  true
explanation  why  the  fulfilment  of  that  particular  task
is  impossible.  The  dominating  power  of  the  impulses  as
a  causative  factor  of  neurotic  disturbances  is  now  replaced
by  the  conception  of  a  "  psychic  indolence  "  to  face  life's
difficulties,  which  seems  strangely  at  variance  with  the
abounding  "  will  to  live  "  emphasised  in  the  energic
theory  of  the  libido.

Jung's  therapeutic  practice  in  its  early  stages  would
seem  to  differ  very  little  from  that  of  Freud.  He  still
finds  it  necessary  to  trace  back  by  analysis  the  phantasy
products of the neurosis to their sources in  infantile

1  Ibid.  p.  405.  2  Ibid.  p.  405.


160


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


sexuality, — not  because  they  are  the  causes  of  the  neurosis
but  because  the  energy  which  the  patient  needs  for
adaptation  is  attached  to  them  and  is  wastefully  employed
in  their  production.  But  he  no  longer  regards  these
sexual  phantasies  literally.  He  acknowledges  the  universal
existence  of  the  "  CEdipus  complex  "  though  he  disbelieves
in  its  "  fixation  "  as  a  cause  of  the  neurosis,  but  be  sees
in  the  incest  wish  no  real  sexual  inclination  towards  the
parents  but  merely  a  regressive  revival  of  archaic  modes
of  thought.  The  symbolism  of  the  neurotic  phantasy  and
of  the  dream  is  the  only  way  of  thinking  open  to  the
unconscious,  and  the  unconscious  thought  of  the  neurotic
is  concerned  with  the  same  problem  as  that  which  proved
too  hard  for  his  conscious  thought,  namely,  the  problem
of  adaptation,  the  problem  of  the  life-task.  The  phantasy
symbolism  manifested  in  the  symptoms  is  an  unconscious
attempt  at  adaptation — an  attempt  that  has  failed.  The
symbolism  of  the  dream,  rightly  interpreted,  may  indicate
the  line  along  which  adaptation  maj  succeed.

Holding  such  views  regarding  the  causation  of  neurotic
disturbances  and  the  nature  and  significance  of  the  un-
conscious phantasies  and  the  symbolism  they  employ,
Jung  is  constrained  to  modify  both  his  therapeutic  aim
and  his  therapeutic  method.  His  therapeutic  aim  is  no
longer  the  overcoming  of  the  resistances,  for  the  uncon-
scious he  is  interrogating  is  not  primarily  the  product  of
repression.  His  method  is  no  longer  purely  analytic  or
reductive,  but  is  supplemented  by  measures  which  he
regards  as  synthetic  or  constructive.  He  is  no  longer
satisfied  by  the  freeing  of  the  libido  which  has  regressed
into  the  unconscious,  but  he  seeks  to  help  the  patient
to  find  the  "  life-line  "  along  which  his  future  develop-
ment may  most  satisfactorily  proceed.

The  need  of  supplementing  the  analytic  work  by  a
constructive  synthesis  seems  to  have  been  impressed  upon
Jung  by  considerations  very  similar  to  those  which  were
widely  expressed  in  the  early  criticisms  of  Freud's  work.
What  good  purpose  can  be  served,  it  was  asked,  by
stirring  up  the  repressed  tendencies  which  psychoanalysis
reveals  ? So  now  we  find  Jung  asserting  that  a  merely


lxxv.]  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis.  161

reductive  analysis  succeeds  only  in  reinforcing  the  primi-
tive trends  of  a  personality,  and  implying  that  the  patient,
since  he  cannot  obey  the  fundamental  and  primitive
impulses  of  his  nature  thus  laid  bare,  can  do  nothing
but  sink  into  a  state  of  resignation and  hopelessness.

It  is  difficult  to  understand  how  such  an  implication
can  be  made  by  Jung  after  so  many  years  of  presumably
successful  analytic  practice  upon  Freudian  lines.  If  it
be  true,  as  he  now  maintains,  that  the  sublimation  of
the  energies  liberated  by  the  analysis  is  possible  only  in
exceptional  cases,  and  that  the  disposable  energy  cannot  be
consciously  directed  to  a  suitable  object  but  will  sink
back  into  the  unconscious,  we  may  well  ask  :  Was  it  the
cure  of  exceptional  cases  only  that  upheld  the  enthusiasm
of  the  pioneers  of  psychoanalysis  ?  Did  they  not  lead  us
to  suppose  rather  that  it  was  only  in  exceptional  cases
that  the  method  failed  ?  Do  the  Freudian  analysts  of
to-day  cure  only  exceptional  cases  ?  Did  Jung  himself
cure  only  exceptional  cases  before  he  discovered  the
"  transcendental  function  "  of  his  synthetic  or  constructive
method  ?

The  absence  of  statistical  records  of  success  and  failure
in  psychoanalytic  treatment  may  be  a  not  undeserved
reproach  when  it  is  made  by  one  who  is  outside  the
psychoanalytic  movement  ;  but  when  we  find  a  psycho-
analyst justifying  his  introduction  of  a  new  method  by
implying  that  the  old  method  was  well  known  by  its
exponents- — though  they  did  not  say  so — to  be  of  use
only  in  exceptional  cases,  we  are  apt  to  feel  that  we  have
not  been  fairly  dealt  with  and  become  suspicious  that  the
new  method  also  may  be  similarly  restricted  in  its  appli-
cation.

Freud  dealt  quite  explicitly  with  the  fate  of  the  wishes
which  become  free  by  psychoanalysis,  and  the  means  by
which  they  are  made  harmless,  and  may  become  useful,
for  the  life  of  the  individual.  In  the  first  place  he  claimed
that  the  repression  might  be  supplanted  by  a  condem-
nation carried  through  with  the  best  means  at  one's
disposal.  In  the  maturity  and  strength  of  adult  life  the
patient may conquer without injury to himself  those


162


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


impulses  which  as  a  child  he  could  only  deal  with  by-
repression.  A  second  possibility  is  that  the  unconscious
impulses  revealed  in  the  analysis  may  now  follow  the
path  of  sublimation  which  in  the  case  of  undisturbed
development  they  would  have  found  earlier.  A  third
possibility  which  should  be  kept  in  mind  is  that  some
part  of  the  repressed  wishes  have  a  right  to  direct  satis-
faction and  ought  to  find  it  in  life.

Jung  would  seem  to  minimise  or  deny  the  two  former
possibilities,  and  to  imply  that  the  only  result  of  a  merely
reductive  analysis  is  to  liberate  wish  tendencies  whose
gratification  is  prevented  by  the  stern  necessities  of  life.
Hitherto  it  has  been  taught  that  the  final  stage  of  a
psychoanalysis  is  the  dissolution  of  the  transference  to
the  analyst  of  all  the  infantile  phantasies  which  have
been  projected  on  to  him  in  the  course  of  the  analytic
work.  When  this  had  been  accomplished  satisfactorily
the  patient  was  supposed  to  be  ready  and  able  to  utilise
the  full  libido  energy  now  at  his  disposal  and  to  apply
it  in  a  new  and  more  adequate  adaptation  to  life.  Now,
however,  Jung  tells  us  that  at  this  stage  of  the  analysis
the  process  of  freeing  the  patient  from  the  grip  of  the
unconscious  is  not  more  than  half  done.  The  libido
freed  in  the  dissolution  of  the  transference,  in  so  far  as
this  takes  the  form  of  the  projection  of  infantile  phan-
tasies derived  from  the  personal  unconscious,  has  open
to  it  an  easier  path  than  the  strenuous  one  of  sub-
limation into  ethical  and  social  activity.  "  It  sinks  down
into  the  depths  of  the  unconscious,  reviving  what  has
been  dormant  there  from  immemorial  ages." 1  If  now
the  analytic  process  be  carried  further,  new  phantasy
formations  are  projected  on  to  the  analyst  just  as  the
infantile  phantasies  were  ;  but  he  no  longer  appears  in
the  guise  of  father,  or  guardian,  or  any  other  form  having
a  basis  in  the  personal  reminiscence  of  the  patient,  but
acquires  the  attributes  of  god  or  devil.  The  libido  has
seized  upon  the  primordial  images  derived  from  the
history  of  the  race,  which  form  the  content  of  the  im-
personal or  collective  unconscious,  and  by  their  projection

1  Analytical  Psychology,  2nd  edit.  p.  411.


lxxv.]  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis.  163


on  to  the  analyst  a  new  and  more  dangerous  phase  of
transference is  begun.

The  method  of  analysis,  the  "  causal-reductive  "  pro-
cedure, which  reduces  the  dream  or  phantasy  to  its
component  reminiscences  is  obviously  inappropriate  here,
as  there  are  no  personal  reminiscences  to  which  these
phantasies  can  be  reduced.  To  attempt  to  do  so,  Jung
says,  is  not  only  inappropriate  but  actually  pernicious, —
a  fact  that  has  been  impressed  on  him  by  disagreeable
experiences.

It  is  at  this  point  that  the  need  arises  for  that  con-
structive or  synthetic  interpretation  of  unconscious  material
which  forms  perhaps  the  most  fundamental  difference
between  the  therapeutic  methods  of  Freud  and  Jung.
Theoretically  this  interpretation  should  not  be  necessary
and  should  not  be  applied  until  all  the  phantasies  based
upon  personal  reminiscences  have  been  subjected  to  the
analytic  (reductive)  procedure.  There  seems,  however,  to
be  a  tendency  amongst  Jung's  disciples  to  apply  the
constructive  method  from  the  very  beginning  of  their
analytic  treatment  and  to  regard  it  as  the  most  important
part  of  their  work.  But  although  Jung  admits  that  all
phantasy  thinking  is  open  to  constructive  interpretation,
he  himself  is  careful  to  insist  on  the  need  of  analytic
reduction  in  the  earlier  stages  of  therapeutic  psycho-
analysis.

The  essential  features  of  the  synthetic  or  constructive
method  may  be  illustrated  by  comparing  the  two  ways
of  dealing  with  the  symbols  of  dreams.  Its  fuller  appli-
cation in  the  "  transcendental  function  "  of  coming  to
terms  with  the  impersonal  unconscious  cannot  be  dealt
with  here.

In  their  treatment  of  dream  symbolism  we  find  revealed
some  of  the  fundamental  differences  between  Freud  and
Jung  in  their  outlook  upon  human  nature.  These  differ-
ences are  implicit  in  the  primary  conceptions  from  which
they  start  out  on  their  psychological  quest,  and  account
in  great  measure  for  the  differences  in  the  nature  of  the
treasures which they find. Freud sets out from  the


164


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


assumption  that  the  driving  force  behind  all  mental
activity  is  the  desire  for  pleasure  and  the  avoidance  of
pain.  The  gratification  of  desire  is  the  primary  aim  of
humanity,  and  adaptation  to  the  realities  of  life  is  a  hard
necessity  imposed  from  without.  Jung  sees  the  primal
libido  as  a  will  to  live.  The  fulfilment  of  .a  task — the
adaptation  to  life — is  the  primary  incentive.  Pleasure
appears  in  a  secondary  role  as  a  reward  for  duty  done.
Freud's  outlook  may  be  compared  to  that  of  Adam
before  the  fall- — the  pursuit  of  pleasure  in  a  paradise
of  desire  marred  only  by  the  interdict  placed  upon  the
fruit  of  the  forbidden  tree.  Jung's  outlook  is  rather
that  of  Adam  after  the  expulsion  from  the  garden,  con-
fronted with  the  task  of  adaptation  if  he  would  live.

For  Freud  the  instigator  of  the  dream  is  the  uncon-
scious wish  that  seeks  gratification,  and  the  function  of
the  symbol  is  so  to  distort  this  wish  that  its  true  nature
is  not  realised  in  consciousness.  For  Jung  the  dream  is
a  continuation  in  the  unconscious  of  the  attempt  to
solve  the  problems  of  adaptation  that  occupy  our  conscious
thoughts  during  waking  life.  The  occurrence  of  dream
symbolism  is  explained  as  a  reversion  during  sleep  to  an
archaic  mode  of  thinking.  The  conscious  purposive  think-
ing of  primitive  man  was  a  thinking  in  symbols,  and  in
the  symbolism  of  dreams  the  original  teleological  function
of  this  mode  of  thinking  is  retained.  Thus  for  Jung  the
dream  is  no  longer  merely  a  veiled  gratification  of
repressed  desires,  but  a  continuation  through  the  hours
of  sleep  of  that  struggle  for  adaptation  which  is  the
universal  and  inescapable  heritage  of  life.

Great  stress  is  laid  by  Jung  in  his  therapeutic  work
on  the  teleological  or  prospective  function  of  the  dream.
The  task  of  adaptation  to  life  is  so  difficult  that  its
fulfilment  requires  the  energies  of  the  whole  man.  Only
by  taking  into  consideration  all  aspects  of  the  problem, —
not  only  those  which  appeal  to  consciousness  but  also
those  which  have  received  only  unconscious  consideration
—is  the  most  satisfactory  solution  attained.  Hence  in
the  interpretation  of  dreams  Jung  looks  to  the  unconscious
for  guidance  in  his  therapeutic  task  of  helping  his  patients


lxxv.] Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis.  165

to  overcome  the  difficulties  of  adaptation  which  have  led
to  the  development  of  their  neuroses.

Jung  does  not  tell  us  why  he  thinks  the  dream  has
this  prospective  function.  There  is,  it  is  true,  a  certain
amount  of  evidence  to  show  that  unconscious  thought  is
sometimes  directed  towards  definite  aims,  and  that  this
sometimes  results  in  happy  solutions  of  problems  that
have  defied  our  conscious  thought.  But  he  does  not
invoke  this  evidence  in  favour  of  his  contention.  More-
over, although  such  perseverance  of  purpose  through  the
hours  of  sleep  may  occur  in  persons  who  have  excep-
tional powers  of  sustained  attention,  or  whose  will  to
succeed  is  not  easily  thwarted,  it  does  not  seem  to  accord
well  with  the  type  of  character  which  has  been  brought
to  a  neurosis  through  psychic  indolence  to  grapple  with
the  difficulties  of  life.  And  this  it  must  be  remembered
is  Jung's  explanation  of  the  origin  of  neurotic  maladies.  It
would  seem  more  in  keeping  with  the  hypothesis  of  psychic
indolence  as  the  cause  of  the  neuroses  that  in  sleep,  when
the  need  for  effort  is  abated,  the  mind  should  revert  to  less
strenuous  forms  of  activity  and  secure  the  gratification  in
phantasy  of  infantile  wishes  as  the  Freudians  maintain.

But  Jung's  way  of  regarding  the  significance  of  the
dream  content  is  consistent  with  his  view  of  the  com-
pensatory function  of  the  unconscious.  He  teaches  that
the  capacity  for  making  the  most  suitable  adjustments  to
life  is  present  in  the  psyche  as  a  whole  ;  what  is  missing
from  the  conscious  is  to  be  found  in  the  unconscious.
It  is  not  that  the  unconscious  attempt  at  adaptation  is
more  adequate  by  itself  than  the  conscious  one,  but  that
only  by  bringing  the  unconscious  to  the  aid  of  the  con-
scious is  the  best  possible  solution  of  any  of  life's  problems
to  be  found.  And  the  solution  provided  by  the  con-
structive interpretation  of  the  dream  need  not  be  regarded
as  the  result  of  thinking  directed  to  this  end  during
sleep,  but  is  rather  a  revelation  of  the  subliminal  aspect
of  the  reaction  of  the  psyche  as  a  whole  to  the  immediate
task  confronting  it.

Although  Jung  does  not  tell  us  why  he  supposes  the
dream to have this forward-looking function, he  gives


166


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


us  two  reasons  why  he  thinks  it  necessary  to  impose  this
interpretation  upon  all  dreams  which  in  analysis  reveal
the  fundamental  thoughts  and  impulses  of  the  unconscious
to  be  infantile  wishes,  and  to  read  into  them  a  pro-
spective import  indicative  of  a  definite  line  of  future
development.  His  first  reason  for  supplementing  the
analytic  by  a  synthetic  interpretation  is  that  we  cannot
exhaust  any  psychological  material  by  causal  methods
only.  We  cannot  get  the  meaning  of  any  psychological
phenomenon  by  analysing  it  into  its  causal  antecedents.
The  mind  lives  by  aims  as  well,  and  "  what  is  plainly
directed  towards  a  goal  cannot  be  given  an  exclusively
causalistic  explanation."  1

But  the  recognition  of  purpose  in  our  conscious  thinking,
— in  the  sense  of  aims  directed  towards  the  future —
would  not  warrant  the  attribution  of  such  purpose  to
our  unconscious  thought.  To  do  so  is  to  assume  the
conclusion  which  has  to  be  proved.  There  may  be  other
grounds  for  maintaining  that  dreams  are  purposive,  but
if  that  be  so  we  must  not  assume  that  the  purpose  of
the  dream  is  the  same  as  the  purpose  of  our  waking  life.
Any  evidence  which  clearly  shows  that  the  dream  has  a
purpose  should  also  reveal  what  that  purpose  is.  The
chief  danger  in  dream  interpretation  would  just  seem  to
be  that  we  may  read  into  the  dream  the  purpose  we
assume  to  be  there.

Such  at  all  events  is  the  impression  one  gets  from  the
dream  interpretations  of  analysts  belonging  to  different
psychoanalytic  schools.  According  as  the  analyst  has
come  under  the  influence  of  Vienna  or  of  Zurich  the  same
dream  will  be  interpreted  as  showing  the  fulfilment  of
an  unconscious  wish  or  as  indicating  the  attitude  towards
life  which  the  dreamer  should  adopt.  And  even  in  the
reduction  of  the  dream  to  a  wish,  the  wish  thus  found
is  not  always  the  same.  Freud  finds  it  to  be  a  wish
for  pleasure  ;  Adler  finds  it  to  be  a  wish  for  power.  It
is  often  asserted,  however,  that  all  the  different  interpre-
tations may  be  right.  It  is  claimed  that  the  different
parts of the dream may all be so "  over-determined  "

1  Analytical  Psychology ,  2nd  edit.  p.  x.


ixxv.]  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  mid  Psychoanalysis.  167

that  the  dream  as  a  whole  has  more  than  one  meaning.
This  may  be  true,  but  the  fanciful  nature  of  the  inter-
pretations given  in  some  records  of  dream  analysis,  and
the  obvious  imposition  of  the  analyst's  views  in  the
unveiling  of  the  symbolism  and  in  the  manipulation  of
the  dreamer's  associations,  may  make  the  sceptical  reader
think  that  the  psychoanalytic  study  of  the  unconscious
has  become  the  "  tumbling  ground  for  whimsies  "  against
which  we  were  warned  by  William  James.

Against  no  part  of  Freud's  work  is  criticism  so  readily
aroused  as  against  that  which  deals  with  the  interpre-
tation of  dreams.  The  reason  for  this  is  obvious.  One
may  hesitate  to  express  an  opinion  regarding  the  reduction
of  neurotic  symptoms  to  infantile  wish  fulfilments,  for
not  every  one  is  acquainted  with  neurotic  symptoms.  But
every  one  dreams  and  every  one  is  at  first  inclined  to
resent  as  absurd  and  intolerable  the  Freudian  interpre-
tation of  his  own  dreams.  Some  of  the  misunderstanding
in  regard  to  this  matter  may  be  obviated  if  two  considera-
tions are  steadily  kept  in  mind.  The  first  is  the  dis-
tinction between  the  manifest  dream  content — the  dream
as  remembered  by  the  dreamer — and  the  latent  dream
thoughts  which  contain  the  real  meaning  of  the  dream.
The  second  consideration  is  that  there  are  two  distinct
technical  methods  employed  in  dream  interpretation.
Neither  method  by  itself  is  sufficient  for  the  full  under-
standing of  the  dream.  This  is  only  possible,  when  it
is  possible,  by  the  use  of  both.

The  first  method,  and  from  one  point  of  view  the
more  important  for  the  purposes  of  psychoanalysis,  is  the
obtaining  of  the  free  associations  of  the  dreamer  to  the
various  parts  of  the  dream.  By  this  means  the  true
dream  thoughts  related  to  the  actual  conflicts  of  the
moment  are  revealed.  Thoughts  of  deep  personal  signifi-
cance, of  which  no  trace  is  to  be  found  in  the  manifest
dream  content,  are  thus  brought  to  light.  When  the  asso-
ciations to  all  the  different  parts  of  the  dream  have  been
obtained,  the  ideas  and  memories  so  recalled  are  found
to  be  related  in  such  a  way  that  they  form  a  more  or
Jess connected and intelligible whole. In this way  a


168


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[PAET


first  approximation  to  the  meaning  of  the  dream  may  be
obtained  and  a  mass  of  material  is  provided  for  further
analysis.  But  it  is  only  by  interpreting  the  symbols
which  the  dream-work  so  abundantly  provides  that  the
deeper  meaning  is  revealed,  ana  in  this  part  of  the  work
the  associations  of  the  dreamer  offer  but  little  help.

Freud  believes  that  symbols  are  used  predominantly
for  the  purpose  of  disguising  unconscious  sexual  wishes,
and  he  points  out  that  dream  symbols  are  widely  found,
having  a  similar  function,  in  myths  and  folk-lore  and  in
the  sayings  and  maxims  of  all  peoples.  According  to
Jung  the  value  to  be  attributed  to  the  symbol  depends
on  the  standpoint  from  which  we  regard  it.  From  the
standpoint  of  "  causality,"  that  is,  tracing  backwards  the
historical  origin  of  the  symbol,  he  admits  its  sexual
character.  But  from  the  standpoint  of  "  finality,"  that
is,  looking  forward  to  the  end  or  jmrpose  of  the  dream,
he  sees  in  the  symbol  an  attempt  to  comprehend,  by  means
of  analogy,  the  solution  of  the  problem  with  which  the
dreamer  is  confronted  in  his  life.  The  use  of  symbols
is  merely  the  mode  of  expression  used  by  the  unconscious.
Symbol  formation  was  the  means  by  which  primitive  man
succeeded  in  desexualising  his  libido,  and  the  symbol
reappears  in  the  language  of  the  dream  devoid  of  its
sexual  significance.

Jung's  way  of  regarding  the  symbol  is  part  of  his
attitude  towards  the  dream  as  a  whole.  He  admits  that
everything  in  the  dream  has  its  causal  or  historic  explana-
tion, as  everything  that  exists  must  have,  but  he  main-
tains that  neither  the  dream  nor  any  other  psychological
construction  can  be  fully  understood  from  the  causal
standpoint  only.  "  Only  on  one  side,"  he  says,  "  is  the
mind  a  Has  Been,  and  as  such  subordinate  to  the  causal
principle.  On  the  other  side  the  mind  is  a  Becoming
that  can  only  be  grasped  synthetically  or  constructively.
.  .  .  On  the  one  side  it  offers  a  picture  of  the  precipitate
of  the  past,  and  on  the  other  side  a  picture  of  the
germinating  knowledge  of  all  that  is  to  come,  in  so  far  as.
the  psyche  creates  its  own  future."  1

1  Analytical  Psychology,  '2nd  edit.  p.  341.


lxxv.]  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis.  169

His  acceptance  of  this  point  of  view  has  its  interest
in  that  it  impels  him  to  declare  that  its  adoption  is
opposed  to  scientific  method.  If  the  mind  and  its
activities  cannot  be  explained  on  those  principles  of
causation  which  are  alone  applicable  in  other  fields  of
scientific  investigation,  then  the  conclusions  of  psycho-
logical inquiry  will  be  lacking  in  scientific  validity  accord-
ing to  our  present  conceptions  of  science.  He  implies
that  the  future  is  not  contained  in  the  past  and  is  not
deducible  from  it  even  if  we  were  in  possession  of  all
the  facts ;  and  in  admitting  that  the  psyche  in  some
degree  "  creates  its  own  future "  he  is  apparently  in  full
retreat  from  that  rigid  psychic  determinism  which  was
originally  the  most  fundamental  postulate  of  the  psycho-
analytic method.  For  creation  is  the  bringing  of  some-
thing new  unto  the  universe  and  the  opening  of  a  door
to  contingencies  which  elude  calculation.

In  reviewing  the  first  edition  of  Jung's  Analytical
Psychology 1  I  ventured  to  indicate  the  logical  conclusions
to  be  drawn  from  his  few  brief  references  to  this  matter.
In  his  preface  to  the  second  edition  of  this  work  he  does
me  the  honour  of  replying  at  some  length  to  my  remarks,
and  in  the  important  new  contributions  to  this  volume
he  makes  frequent,  more  detailed,  reference  to  the  same  topic.
He  maintains  that  a  psychological  theory  must  adapt  itself
to  the  fact  that,  psychologically  speaking,  we  are  living  and
working,  day  by  day,  according  to  the  principle  of  directed
aim  or  purpose,  as  well  as  that  of  causality.  He  justifies
his  desire  to  hold  on  to  both  points  of  view  on  the
ground  that  "  our  theory  of  cognition  does  not  need  to
remain  on  a  pre-Kantian  level.  It  is  well  known  that  Kant
showed  very  clearly  that  the  mechanistic  and  the  teleo-
logical  view  points  are  not  constituent  (objective)  principles,
in  some  degree  qualities  of  the  object,  but  that  they  are
purely  regulative  (subjective)  principles  of  thought,  and  as
such  they  are  not  mutually  inconsistent."  2

Perhaps  I  owe  it  to  Dr.  Jung  to  make  the  confession
that in my criticism I was acting the part of  devil's

1  Proceedings  S.P.N.  Vol.  XXIX.  p.  191.

2  Analytical  Psychology,  2nd  edit.  p.  xi.


170


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


advocate,  and  that  my  own  personal  convictions  are  very-
much  in  accord  with  the  position  which  he  has  had  the
courage  to  take  up  in  this  matter.  But  I  thought  that
what  was  implicit  in  his  references  deserved  more  ex-
plicit statement  from  him,  and  I  am  pleased  to  find
that  my  remarks  have  been  successful  in  bringing  this
about.

The  acceptance,  however,  of  this  point  of  view  in  regard
to  that  part  of  the  mind  which  we  know  by  introspec-
tion, and  of  the  implications  which  it  may  carry  with  it,
does  not  bind  us  to  believe  that  the  same  point  of  view
necessarily  holds  good  when  the  unconscious  is  in  question.
The  unconscious  does  not  speak  plainly,  and  its  purpose,
if  it  has  one,  is  obscure.  Our  knowledge  of  its  purpose
can  only  be  obtained  by  interpretation  of  its  cryptic
utterances,  and  the  truth  of  what  we  discover  must  be
open  to  doubt  if,  before  beginning  our  investigation,  we
have  to  assume  both  the  presence  of  the  purpose  and
the  validity  of  our  interpretative  methods.  And  this  is
what  Jung,  in  his  constructive  inteipretation  of  the  dream,
appears  to  do.  Yet  here,  as  elsewhere,  we  may  perhaps
judge  our  conclusions  to  be  true  if  we  find  that  they
work.

Jung's  second  reason  for  supplementing  the  analytic
interpretation  of  the  dream  by  a  synthetic  or  constructive
one  is  that  he  considers  it  necessary  in  the  interests  of
the  patient.  Admitting  that  we  reach  very  dissimilar
interpretations  of  the  meaning  of  the  dream  according
to  the  point  of  view  adopted,  he  asks  the  question  :  Which
is  the  better  or  the  truer  version  ?  His  criterion  of  truth
is  here  an  essentially  practical  one.  He  considers  it  his
therapeutic  duty  to  lay  hold  of  any  means  that  will
enable  him  to  train  his  patients  effectually  and  to  fit
them  to  live.  And  since  he  believes  that  a  purely  re-
ductive analysis  merely  helps  to  reinforce  the  primitive
trends  of  the  patient's  personality,  and  releases  impulses
which  cannot  be  satisfied  "  without  gravely  injuring  him-
self or  his  fellow-beings,"  Jung  feels  bound  to  seek  out
some  symbolic  application  of  infantile  trends,  out  of  which
a philosophic or  religious attitude towards  life may  be


lxxv.]  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis.  171

evolved  that  will  help  the  patient  to  live  up  to  the  best
that  is  in  him.

It  would  look  as  if  Jung  implied  that  his  method  must
be  right  and  his  version  true  because  his  motives  are  so
good.  But  the  vital  necessity,  of  which  he  speaks,  to
find  for  his  patient  a  way  out  of  the  bog  into  which
psychoanalysis  had  led  him,  gives  us  no  guarantee  that
the  road  he  points  out  is  the  right  one  or  the  best  one.
Moreover  it  seems  impossible  to  reconcile  Jung's  latter-
day  contentions  with  the  knowledge  that  he  himself,
as  well  as  many  others,  have  for  years  successfully  used
Freudian  analysis  without  the  need  of  supplementing  it
by  any  didactic  methods.  The  alleged  dangers  of  reductive
analysis  on  which  Jung  now  lays  so  much  stress  have
been  explicitly  denied  by  Freud.  He  says  :  "In  relation
to  this  anxiety  we  must  consider  what  our  experiences
have  taught  us  with  certainty,  that  the  somatic  and
mental  power  of  a  wish,  if  once  its  repression  has  not
succeeded,  is  incomparably  stronger  when  it  is  unconscious
than  when  it  is  conscious,  so  that  by  being  made  con-
scious it  can  only  be  weakened.  The  unconscious  wish
cannot  be  influenced,  is  free  from  all  strivings  in  the
contrary  direction,  while  the  conscious  is  inhibited  by
those  wishes  which  are  also  conscious  and  which  strive
against  it.  The  work  of  psychoanalysis  accordingly  pre-
sents a  better  substitute,  in  the  service  of  the  highest
and  mos*  valuable  cultural  strivings,  for  the  repression
which  has  failed."  1

The  emphasis  laid  by  Jung  on  the  importance  of  his
constructive  method  may  prove  a  real  danger  to  the
rising  generation  of  analysts.  They  may  be  tempted  to
neglect  the  need  for  the  thorough  analysis  which  Jung
himself  admits  to  be  necessary,  and  to  embark  too
precipitately  on  the  constructive  course  which  they
may  find  ethically  and  aesthetically  more  attractive.
They  may,  by  so  doing,  succeed  in  temporarily  reinforcing
the  repression  which  has  failed,  but  they  will  have
wandered  far,  both  in  attainment  and  intent,  from  the
goal  of  psychoanalysis.

1  American  Journal  of  Psychology,  April,  1910,  pp.  216-217.


172


T.  W.  Mitchell  31. D.


[part


We  are  still  too  near  the  psychoanalytic  movement  to
judge  truly  of  the  place  it  may  ultimately  hold  in  the
history  of  thought.  More  than  most  new  departures  psycho-
analysis has  been  open  to  attack, — partly  by  the  nature
of  the  doctrines  which  it  teaches  and  partly  by  the  almost
cynical  indifference  to  the  conventions  shown  by  some
of  its  exponents  in  their  exposition  of  these  doctrines.
But  these  give  only  superficial  grounds  for  criticism  or
disagreement.  The  claims  of  psychoanalysis  are  so  im-
portant and  noteworthy,  and  have  already  so  great  a
weight  of  evidence  in  their  support,  that  no  one  who
seeks  the  truth  in  any  department  of  human  life  and
thought  can  any  longer  afford  to  neglect  the  methods
and  conclusions  of  this  new  psychological  discipline.

The  topics  discussed  in  the  previous  pages  suggest  at
least  two  points  of  view  from  which  psychoanalysis  may
be  regarded.  In  the  first  place  it  may  be  looked  at  in
the  light  of  its  development  as  a  therapeutic  method  in
the  treatment  of  the  neuroses  and  psychoses.  In  the
second  place  it  has  a  wider  significance  as  a  method
of  psychological  investigation.  Its  therapeutic  applications
are  justified  by  its  success  in  conditions  where  all  other
means  have  failed,  but  the  truth  of  its  theoretic  formu-
lations can  hardly  be  considered  proved  by  its  therapeutic
usefulness  alone.  In  the  long  history  of  man's  efforts  to
grapple  with  mental  and  bodily  disease  much  that  was
unessential  in  the  means  adopted  was  often  credited
with  the  cure.  And  so  it  may  be  with  psychoanalysis.
Some  possibility  of  this  kind  is  indeed  obvious  when  we
consider  that  both  Freud  and  Jung  obtain  therapeutic
success  although  holding  such  opposite  views  on  matters
whose  interpretation  in  a  particular  way  was  at  one
time  deemed  essential  in  psychoanalytic  theory  and
practice.  Time  alone  and  the  labours  of  many  workers
will  in  this  as  in  former  days  sift  the  chaff  from  the
grain  and  make  plain  what  is  important  and  what  is
unimportant  in  psychoanalytic  therapeutics.

Considered  as  a  method  of  psychological  investigation
the  claims  of  psychoanalysis  are  more  far-reaching  than
when it is regarded merely as a therapeutic  method,


lxxv.]  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psychoanalysis.  173

and  if  they  are  substantiated  or  extended  by  future
workers  it  will  have  to  be  recognised  that  the  intro-
duction of  psychoanalysis  was  the  most  important  contri-
bution of  modern  times  to  the  mental  and  moral  sciences.
For  the  application  and  pursuit  of  this  psychological
method  bears  fruit  not  only  in  the  domain  of  purely
psychological  problems  but  also  in  every  field  of  knowledge,
feeling  and  action.  The  claims  of  its  supporters  as  to
its  bearings  on  philosophy,  aesthetics,  ethics  and  religion,
amount  to  little  less  than  a  claim  to  a  new  revelation
of  the  meaning  of  life.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

PART  LXXVI
1918.

I.

FRESH  LIGHT  ON  THE  "  ONE-HORSE  DAWN  "
EXPERIMENT.

BY  J.  G.  PlDDINGTON.

KULTOl  TO  <y CUViyfl OVy]  TOV~iri6vTO<i  >)v

uvSpcx;  ciienrelv.

Soph.  O.T.  393-394.

On  an  unnamed  date  in  April  1901,  a  few  weeks  after  Mrs.
Verrall  had  begun  to  write  automatically,  her  husband,  Dr.
A.  W.  Verrall,  decided  to  try  the  experiment  of  fixing  his
mind  on  certain  words  with  a  view  to  getting  them  reproduced
in  her  script.  He  chose  for  the  subject  of  this  experiment
in  thought-transference  three  Greek  words  from  the  Orestes
of  Euripides  :  novoirwXov  e?  'Aw  (monopolon  es  Ao).  'E?  'Ato
means  "  to  the  Dawn  "  ;  but  the  word  /jlovottwKov  has
been  variously  interpreted.  It  has  usually  been  derived
from  /u>.6voi,  "  one  only,"  and  7rd>Ao?,  which,  though  mean-
ing a  "  foal,"  is  often  used  in  poetry  for  tWos  (hippos),
a  "  horse  "  ;  and  so  the  ordinary  rendering  has  been
"  with  one  horse."  Dr.  Verrall,  however,  thought  it
"  may  mean  no  more  than  /ulopos,  alone  or  solitary,  the
latter part of the  word, -71-00X05, being possibly  con-


176


J.  G.  Piddington.


Tpart

tm


nected  with  -n-oAeoiuat,  '  to  wander ' "  (Proc.  Vol.  XX.
p.  157).1

I  draw  attention  thus  early  to  this  linguistic  point  not
from  any  idle  desire  to  interest  my  readers  in  an  etymo-
logical problem  for  its  own  sake,  but  because  it  has  a
real  bearing  on  the  subject.  At  the  same  time,  it  may
not  be  out  of  place  to  remind  some  members  of  our
Society,  who  are  inclined  to  chafe  at  the  frequency  with
which  classical  subjects  are  discussed  in  our  Proceedings,
that  the  scripts  of  our  automat ists  (two  of  them,  by  the
way,  classical  scholars)  are,  so  it  is  claimed,  influenced  by
communicators  to  whom,  or  at  any  rate  to  some  of  whom,
the  literatures  of  Greece  and  Rome  made  an  absorbing
appeal  ;  and  that  no  one  could  have  felt  this  appeal  more
keenly  than  the  originator  of  the  novoirwKov  e?  'Aw
experiment.

We  have  to  deal,  then,  with  an  experiment  initiated  by
one  classical  scholar,  which  required  a  response  from  Mrs.
Verrall,  another  classical  scholar,  and  to  which  a  response
was — ostensibly,  at  least — made,  not  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  but
by  a  group  of  classical  scholars  through  her  ;  and,  pardessus
le  marche,  the  subject  selected  for  the  experiment  was  a
phrase  from  a  classical  author.

It  would  be  strange  indeed,  if,  in  these  circumstances,  I
could  refrain  from  eating  of  the  Forbidden  Fruit  of
classics.  But  I  will  do  nothing  more  dreadful  than  give
the  meaning  of  some  Greek  and  Latin  words  ;  relate  in
barest  outline  an  episode  in  one  Greek  play,  and  tell
something  more  of  the  story  of  another  ;  and  quote  trans-
lations in  good  English  of  some  passages  from  both  plays.
I  have,  moreover,  been  at  pains  throughout  to  make  things
easy  for  the  non-classical  reader,  so  that  he  may  not  be
handicapped  by  his  ignorance  of  Greek  and  Latin.

In  Proc.  Vol.  XX.  pp.  156-167  Mrs.  Verrall  gave  an
account  of  the  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  experiment ,  and  dis-
cussed how  far  it  succeeded  ;  and  in  an  Appendix  (id.  ib.
pp.  387-394)  she  reproduced  such  of  her  scripts,  or  such
parts  of  them,  as  she  thought  have  reference  to  the  experi-

^n  p.  164  Mrs.  Verrall  speaks  of  "  lonely-wandering "  as  "the  interpre-
tation preferred  by  my  husband."


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Dawn "  Experiment.  177

ment.  I  give  in  her  own  words  the  conclusions  which  she
reached  :

No  one  who  reads  the  detailed  account  of  the  writing
of  August  and  September,  1901,  can,  I  think,  have  any
doubt  that  there  is  a  connexion  between  the  persistent
efforts  of  the  script  and  the  test  that  had  been  devised
by  my  husband, (p.  165)

And  again  :

As  regards  success,  it  will  not  I  think  be  denied  that
the  script  made  an  attempt  at  the  problem — a  thing  itself
remarkable  in  the  circumstances.  Also  it  came  near  to
what  was  set  in  sound  and  sense.  The  script  is  full,  for
the  time,  of  the  ideas  morning  and  east,  named  or  sug-
gested in  various  ways  ;  more  than  once  occurs  a  transla-
tion, or  something  very  near  it,  of  the  original  words —
'  going  towards  the  east,'  '  in  the  east  to  the  daylight,'
and  so  on.  The  language  and  words  too  are  approached,
the  middle  word  is  correctly  and  repeatedly  given  ;  it
is  indicated  clearly  that  the  e?  is  preceded  by  a  compound
of  novo-,  and  it  is  suggested  that  the  final  word  begins
with  a  and  ends  with  o. (p.  166)

And  she  ends  her  comments  on  the  experiment  thus  :

.  .  .  Given  the  words  selected  by  my  husband  it  can,
in  my  view,  be  shown  that  the  script  from  Aug.  13  to
Sept.  20,  1901,  bears  unmistakeable  evidence  of  a  know-
ledge of  their  appearance  and  meaning.  But  had  we  not
known  the  words,  they  would  have  been  irrecoverable  from
the  script,  although  a  careful  examination  would  have
shown  an  effort  to  communicate  something  definite,  and
something  intelligible  to  my  husband.  Under  these  cir-
cumstances it  is  rash  to  count  as  rubbish  all  that  is  not
easily  understood.  We  should  rather  apply  in  other  cases  the
patience  and  scrutiny  which  were  in  this  case  justified.

Good advice this, and noteworthy as coming from  an
automatist who was almost always ready  to  underrate,
and  often  to  disparage,  the  value  of  her  own  phenomena.
It is  not,  however,  the "  rubbish  " to  be  found "  in


178


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


other  cases,"  but  the  "  rubbish "  in  this  very  One-Horse
Dawn  case  that  I  propose  to  scrutinise  on  this  occasion  ;
and  chiefly  one  particular  deposit  of  "  rubbish."

In  the  group  of  scripts  selected  by  Mrs.  Verrall  as
relating  to  her  husband's  experiment  there  are  repeated
allusions  to  a  solitary  old  man  in  a  white  robe,  carrying
a  long  stick  in  his  hand  and  "  going  towards  the  east."
The  only  explanations  that  Mrs.  Verrall  had  to  offer  of
the  many  things  said  about  this  old  man  were  that
they  served  to  introduce  the  idea  of  the  east,  and  the
ideas  of  solitariness  and  of  wandering  contained,  according
to  Dr.  Verrall's  view,  in  the  word  (xovo-wtakov ;  and  that
the  words  /j.ov6<tto\o<;  {monostolos)  and  /xovo^itosvo^  (mono-
chitdnos)  applied  to  the  old  man  represent  attempts  to
give  the  word  /jlovottwXov.  Some  of  these  explanations  are,
I  think,  sound,  so  far  as  they  go.  But  in  view  of  the
fact  that  the  references  to  the  old  man  are  frequent,  and,
on  the  whole,  clear  and  definite,  it  seems  unsatisfactory
to  have  to  dismiss  the  poor  old  man  as  no  better  than
a  cumbrous  piece  of  mechanism  :  a  mere  lay  figure  clothed
only  with  words  and  epithets  suggesting  the  sound
or  sense  of  ixovo-wushov  eV  'Aw.  Moreover,  if  this  is  really
the  best  that  can  be  done  with  him,  we  have  got  to
reconcile  the  relative  unimportance  of  this  lay  figure  with
a  statement  about  him  made  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of
March  27,  1902  (Script  R),  which  is  to  this  effect  :

Your  husband's  thought  was  good  but  not  complete.
The  old  man  in  white  was  the  best  part  of  it  but  I  have
not  been  able  to  finish  that,  and  now  it  has  all  gone
away. Put  it  aside  it  will  return  some  day.

Appended  are  all  the  references  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts
to  the  old  man  in  white,  together  with  some  other  refer-
ences which  do  not  at  first  sight  appear  to  belong  to  the
old  man,  but  which  nevertheless,  or  so  I  hope  to  show,
really  do  so.  Against  scripts  or  extracts  from  scripts  not
included  by  Mrs.  Verrall  in  her  account  of  the  "  One-
Horse  Dawn "  case  an  asterisk  is  placed.  The  Greek
and  Latin  of  the  scripts  being  often  incorrect,  translations
are necessarily sometimes conjectural. In the  main,


lxxvi.] The  "One-Horse  Dawn''''  Experiment.  179


however,  there  is  little  or  no  doubt  about  the  meaning
when  the  words  can  be  translated  at  all.

MowVoAof  e?  'Aw  Scripts

relating  to
The  Old  Man  in  White.

(A)  *  M.V.  3020 1  {April  10,  1901).

.  .  .  vagatur  in  montibus  degener  cum  nocru  ANT^o^;
koi  EXew;.  apciToi  [or,  apara]  omnia  nigrant  ante  oculos
nec  imago  superest  erro  pererro  in  solitudine  sine  solis
flexilla. nihil  nihil  cessare  iam  cessare.  .  .  .

(He  wanders  in  the  mountains  .  .  .  Antiphone  and
Helen.  Accursed  [masc.  pi.  or  neut.  pi.]  All  things  are
black  before  my  eyes  nor  does  an  image  remain.  I  wander,
I  wander  about  in  a  solitary  place  without  a  gleam  (?)  of
sunshine. Nothing,  nothing,  stop  now  stop.)

(B)  *  M.V.  3030  {May,  8,  1901).

.  .  .  caecus  pererro  per  prata  sine  luce  benefica.  Magni-
ficentior  semper  oratio  sed  non  possum  describere  illam,
nescio  quid  interponit  se  tuae  menti  mihique.  .  .  .

(Blind  T  wander  through  the  meadows  deprived  of  the
genial  light.  Ever  more  lofty  is  the  language,  but  I
cannot  describe  it  [fern.  sing.].  Something  interferes
between  your  mind  and  me.)

(C.)  M.V.  3049  {July  31,  1901).

.  .  .  crux  in  dextra— longaevus  senex  barba  alba
lAovoyjiTuivos  sine  apparatu — in  caput  corona 2  non  aurea
neque  gemmata.  viridenti  coma  eXalov  t>/9  TXavKwiriSo?
avTrji  nonne  vides  %  albipannosus  est.  signifer  ille — nomine
Iddio.  ...

(A  cross  in  his  right  hand — an  old  man  of  many  years
with  a  white  beard  single -tunicked  without  adornment — on
his  head  a  crown  2  not  of  gold  nor  jewelled. With  the  green

1  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  between  March  5,  1901  (when  they  began)  and  Dec.  30,
1904,  are  numbered  3000  to  3307;  from  Jan.  4,  1905,  to  their  conclusion  on
June  24,  1916,  they  are  numbered  1  to  739.

2  Corona  properly  means  a  wreath,  not  a  crown;  but  see  Script  M  below
where  the  "corona  non  aurea  neque  gemmata"  is  evidently  referred  to  as
"the  unjewelled  crown."


180


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


foliage  of  the  olive  [reading  eXalas  for  eXalov]  of  the  gray-
eyed  goddess  [i.e.  Athena]  herself.  Surely  you  see  ?  His
raiment  is  of  white  rags.  He  is  a  standard-bearer — in  the
name  of  God  (?).)

(D)  31. V.  3054  (Aug.  16,  1901).

■  • •  e'£,/'}"/cri? TTUpa <JOl KCLl aWo)  Til'}.

easier  and  easier  though  you  do  not  know.  The
cock  is  inside  a  circle  or  perhaps  a  coin.  Try  for  the
words  again.  Cano  cante  clam  no  carmen  cano  Canam
somehow  belongs,  albicapillus  and  albipannosus — aspera
tibi  dictito  sed  non  desperata — si  modo  interpretatore
utaris  commodo.

Long  trailing  draperies  of  white — turned  to  the  right,
he  carries  a  long  stick  in  one  hand,  and  a  small  square  bos
in  the  other.  There  is  a  pleasant  scent.  Someone  looks
at  him  and  watches  the  light  fall  as  he  passes  from
window  to  window,  going  towards  the  east.  A.  W.  V.
will  understand  this — I  think  of  him  when  I  say  it.  You
do  not  know.  Mone  inquit  alteram  ne  titubet — non  semper
recte  fit  quod  manu  incipiet.  .  .  .

(The  interpretation  is  with  you  and  another  [masc]  I
sing  a  song  "  Canam  "  [i.e.  fern.  acc.  sing,  of  canus,  white]
somehow  belongs.  White-haired  and  clothed-in-white-rags —
I  keep  on  saying  to  you  difficult  but  not  hopelessly  difficult
things — if  only  you  will  employ  a  suitable  interpreter.  .  .  .
Warn,  he  says,  the  other  person  [fern.]  not  to  stumble —
what  she  sets  her  hand  to  is  not  always  well  done.  .  .  •)

(E)  M.V.  3055  (Aug.  20,  1901).

.  .  .  But  to-night  I  have  another  message  a  white  shirt
— not  sheet — but  shirt  is  not  the  word  stiff  and  looks  new
— the  square  box  might  be  a  book,  a  little  dark  book
but  there  is  a  strong  sweet  scent  that  trails  behind.  The
light  nickers — he  does  not  see  you  watch  as  he  goes  past —
but  it  darkens  the  windows.  Wellington — is  it  the  Duke
or  the  place  ?  I  cant  tell — Evers  is  that  right  ?  He  will
know.  One  summer  long  ago — how  hot  it  was  in  the
room.  !  .  .  .


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Daum  "  Experiment.


181


Now  you  must  see  that  it  is  right.  The  long  room  with
the  many  windows  is  near  this  hot  room — he  was  outside
— how  plain  it  seems  to  me  !  but  you  dont  know.  Arthur
can  tell  you.  .  .  .

Kai  o-Te/uL/uaTa  evrjv.  ov  Sacpveia  aWa  (pvWa  SevSpos  [sic\
twos  eicei  (pevTOVTos  (pvTOv/uevov.  .  .  .

(And  there  were  wreaths  there.  Not  of  laurel  [the  word
Sacpvela  does  not  exist,  but  the  meaning  is  certain]  but
leaves  of  some  tree  growing  (?)  there.)

(F)  M.V.  3057  {Aug.  28,  1901).

.  .  .  Cappa  or  Cana  is  a  word  that  belongs.  Cantilupe
is  more  like — cant  ilenam  Cantiaris  sedile  iam  sedet  super
mundum  circumspectans


in  the  east  to  the  daylight.


happily.  Now  write  the  word — it  runs  round  a  dial  or
font  .  .  .  cut  on  grey  stone  glyptatus  in  marmoreo  lapide
cultellario  .  .  .  stars — five  I  see.  .  .  .

(He  now  sits  above  the  world  gazing  around.  .  .  .
Engraved  (?)  on  a  marble  stone  with  a  little  knife.)

(G)  M.V.  3058  [Aug.  29,  1901).

.  .  .  [xaXivSpoSea  letter  by  letter  is  easier  to  do  but
they  are  not  right  yet.  Begin  again  malvidba  den-
dron.  The  shape  of  the  letters  is  archaic  CHT  and  so
on. — Does  he  move  now  ?  Cantilect  is  not  so  good  as
before.  Cantiar  EC.  and  a  heraldic  bird — in  colours — the
light  comes  through,  on  a  window  to  the  east.  .  .  .

(H)  M.V.  3060  [Sept.  4,  1901).

.  .  .  now  the  letters  GC  agunto  CATUNTO  esagito.
Find  it  and  you  will  see — in  fine — But  the  long  white


182


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


drapery  has  long  ago  agone.  /jlovoutoXos  /uovo^towos
/uovo9  fxexa 6eov ovSe  aWov  twos.

Seen  but  not  followed,  there  were  others  there  but  he
knew  more  than  the  rest.  The  man  looks  old — white-
headed  but  upright.  .  .  .

(Alone  and  wandering  single-tunicked  alone  with  God
and  none  other.)

(I)  31. V.  3063  {Sept.  9,  1901).

.  .  .  Most  of  it  but  not  all.  ol  un  c  es  that's  not  right
— but  the  m  comes  before  the  e?  agiles.  I  can't  tell  you
the  sense  only  the  letters.  It  was  some  one  else's  words,
not  his.  His  are  the  other,  quite  separate,  moleskin —
that  is  more  like,  the  look  not  the  meaning.  Pye  is  a
bird  too  but  not  ours — gasur.  dailey  is  more  like,— daily
bent  — ^—  is  how  it  goes  and  the  first  rhymes  to  a —  Find
the  herb  moly  that  will  help — it  is  a  guide—

Xi'l~rei  kui  reXo?  A>/\|/ei?
Eveleen  does  not  believe— she  sits  alone — it  makes  it  hard.
Tell  her  from  me  about  the  blackhandled  knife — I  have
it. She  will  understand  then  and  believe.  .  .  .

(Seek  and  in  the  end  you  will  understand.  [The  future
form  X)/\|/e<9  is  found  only  in  late  Greek  writers,  but  the
sense  is  clear.] )

(J)  M.V.  3065  {Sept.  14,  1901).

.  .  .  then  the  word  that  ends  in  es  and  something  after
it.  Blow  hot  blow  cold  Mosset  is  a  name  that  belongs —
Pla  net  or  play  net.  illustre  vagatur  caelo  sine  comite.
palely  loitering  I  cant  get  it  to-night — wait — you  will  hear
loiter.  •  •  •

(Bright  it  wanders  [or,  brightly  he  wanders]  in  the
heavens  without  a  companion.)

(K)  M.V.  3066  {Sept.  18,  1901).

.  .  .  There  is  a  message  for  her  about  a  knife — on  a
table,  with  letters  engraved  upon  it— not  English — eynnroi
the letters  look  like that. It  is  a  friendly  wish.  Ask


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.


183


her,  not  Evie.  and  there  is  something  dark  about  the
knife — and  flat — curved  at  the  point.  .  .  .  Mrs.  Sidgwick
will  know.  .  .  .

(L)  M.V.  3067  (Sept.  20,  1901).

.  .  .  de  cultello  bene  imbuisti  mentem.  sed  impigre
consequi  vestigia  prodest.

Evie  does  not  know  about  the  knife — nor  the  inscription
— The  Balfours  or  Mrs.  Sidgwick  perhaps  would— but  your
husband  could  tell  you  all.  .  .  .

(You  have  got  the  right  notion  into  your  mind  about
the  knife.  But  it  is  worth  while  to  follow  the  traces
industriously.)

(M)*  M.V.  3070  (Oct.  12,  1901).

.  .  .  Superbiam  pone  exagito  maerorem  multiplex  iam
interpretatio  veritati  impedit.  .  .  .

Cantilupe  and  the  old  man  in  the  long  white  robe  with
the  unjewelled  crown.  This  belongs  to  A.  W.  V.  past  master.
Eversley  I  wanted  to  say  before, and  a  disaster  there.  .  .  .

(Lay  aside  pride,  stir  up  [reading  exagita  ;  but  there
is  probably  a  reference  back  to  "  esagito  "  in  H]  lamenta-
tion. Manifold  now  is  the  interpretation. It  hinders  truth.)

(N)*  M.V.  3081  (Dec.  5,  1901).

.  D[o]esnt  A  W.  remember  ?  the  light  fell  from  the
right  overhead — and  the  long  white  robe  moved  slowly
while  they  played — Plainer  to  other  eyes,  but  he  must
have  seen.  Kirkistan  kirkward  shall  carry  me — go  on.
not  Helen  but  another  and  not  Scotch  .  .  .

(0)*  M.V.  3096  (Jan.  17,  1902).

Malliola  malveola.  Not  to-night  later  in  the  month,  de
mortuis  non  desperandum.  post  tempora  fiet  lux.  tene-
brosum  iter  caeco  viatori  in  orientem  solem  pedibus  vagatur
nec  sine  monitore.  .  .  .

(One  must  not  despair  about  the  dead.  After  periods  of
time  there  will  be  light.  Dark  is  the  way  to  the  blind
traveller.  He  wanders  on  foot  towards  the  rising  sun  and
not  without  a  counsellor.)


184


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


(P)*  M.V.  3098  {Jan.  31,  1902).

Crux  et  praeterea  nihil.  Post  sempiternam  mansueti-
dinem  omnia  supervacua — in  terris.  pone  superbiam  sume
togaculam  caritatis  impigre — nutanti  adhibe  fundamentum
roscidulo  rore — sic  semper  monoicus  sine  apparatu  non  sine
beneficio  universi.  Cur  haesitas  ?  incumbe  alieno  bacillo  ?
Ita  sane  desiderium  attinges  magna  cum  gratia  sanctissimi.
(Drawing  of  two  crosses.)

(A  cross  and  nothing  else.  After  the  everlasting  clemency
everything  is  superfluous — on  the  earth.  Lay  aside  pride,
put  on  quickly  the  little  cloak  of  love — to  him  who  [or,
to  that  which]  is  tottering  give  a  support  with  dewy  dew —
Thus  always  the  solitary-dweller  without  adornment  not
without  advantage  to  the  world.  Why  do  you  hesitate  ?
Lean  upon  another's  staff.  Thus  assuredly  you  will  obtain
your  desire  with  the  favour  of  the  most  holy  one  [gen.
sing,  masc]  )

(Q)*  M.V.  3109  (March  14,  1902).
.  .  .  Nunc  incumbe  bacillo.  .  .  .
(Now  lean  on  your  staff.)

(R.)*  M.V.  3114  (March  27,  1902).

.  .  .  Your  husband's  thought  was  good  but  not  complete.
The  old  man  in  white  was  the  best  part  of  it  but  I  have
not  been  able  to  finish  that,  and  now  it  has  all  gone
away. Put  it  aside  it  will  return  some  day.  .  .  .

(S)*  M.V.  3118  (April  14,  1902).

.  .  .  ry\avKW7ri'S  A6/]v>]  crvv  6(piSecrcrii>  ewt  (JKYi'irTpov.  .  .  .

.  .  .  The  chapel  is  too  light,  something  has  been  taken
away  was  it  a  cross  in  the  east  ask  if  he  noticed.  I
tried  to  show  it  you  dont  understand — let  me  write.

Cant  uar  is  sedile  ubi  nunc  gentium  ?  non  tuum
respondere. defer  alii.  .  .  .

(Gray-eyed  Athena  with  the  snakes  upon  the  staff.  .  .  .

Where  now  is  (the  word)  gentium  ?  It  is  not  for  you
to  answer.  Give  it  over  to  another.  [See  Proc.  Vol.  XX.
pp.  187-89  for  explanation  of  the  translation  here  given  of
"  Ubi  nunc  gentium  ?  "]  )


JLXXVI.]


The  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.


185


(T)*  M.V.  3125  {May  31,  1902).

.  .  .  caeco  viatore  magnum  coercebit  examen  sine
adiutore.  .  .  .

(By  the  blind  traveller  he  will  hold  a  great  swarm  in
check  without  a  helper.)

(U)* M.V.  3224  {July  19, 1903. 9.30  p.m. H.  de  0.  V,

present.)

Horatio  Brwwn  [sic]  and  the  finds  mery  mends  find  this
every  noon  the  (scrawls)  free  men  (scrawls)  mass  firls

{Note. — This  was  written  while  H.  de  G.  V.  was  writing,
all  after  the  first  two  words  with  extreme  speed.

Before  writing,  I  had  a  clear  vision,  noted  just  after
reading  her  script,  as  below  :

"  thought  of  long  thin  tall  man  with  outstretched  right
hand,  very  stiff  attitude — white  long  robe — profile  looking
to  my  right.")

(V)*  H.V.  script  of  July  19,  1903. 9.30  p.m. M.  de  G.  V.

present.

.  .  .  contu  [sic]  contum  Conniston  [sic]  riverside  let  the
name  suffice  Mrs.  Verrall  must  write  better  more  (Drawing
of  a  notice-board)  notice  board

Vale. F.  W.  H.  Myers.  .  .  .

Comments  on  Scripts  A  to  V.
I  assume  throughout  this  paper,  and  particularly  at  this
point  where  I  am  proceeding  to  make  detailed  comments
on  the  foregoing  scripts,  that  the  reader  is  familiar  both
with  Mrs.  VerralTs  account  of  the  One-Horse  Dawn  Experi-
ment {Proc.  Vol.  XX.  pp.  156-167),  with  the  Appendix
relating  thereto  {ib.  pp.  387-493),  and  with  other  passages
{e.g.  ib.  pp.  186-189)  in  her  Report  on  her  own  automatic
writings  where  she  has  explained  various  points  in  the
One-Horse  Dawn  Scripts,  such  as  the  references  to  the
Cock,  to  "Wellington,  to  Eversley,  to  the  Archbishop  of
Canterbury,  and  to  "  the  long  room  with  the  many
windows."  Otherwise  I  should  have  to  lengthen  my
paper  unduly  by  incorporating  in  it  the  greater  part  of
what  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote.


186


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Script  A.

Dr.  Verrall  began  the  experiment  on  an  unnamed  day
in  April,  1901.  I  assume  that  this  day  was  not  later  than
April  10,  the  date  of  the  script.

A  is  clearly  connected  with  B,  O  and  T.

I  regard  this  script  as  containing  the  first  of  many  allusions
to  the  blind  and  exiled  Oedipus  wandering  in  the  company
of  his  daughters  Antigone  and  Ismene.

ANTi(poi>>]  (Antiphone)  I  take  to  be  a  mistake  for  'Avriyowi
(Antigone).  Misled  by  the  mistake,  and  yet  aware  that  the
name  of  a  woman,  and  of  a  Greek  woman,  was  wanted,
the  automatist  then  wrote  "/ecu  EAey>/  "  (and  Helen)  instead
of  "  and  Ismene."  We  may,  I  think,  see  in  N,  in  the
words  "  not  Helen  but  another  and  not  Scotch  "  {i.e.  not
Helen  of  Kirconnell)  a  retractiou  of  the  meaningless  EXew/
and  an  attempt  to  say  who  was  meant.

"  Vagatur  in  montibus  "  may  be  reminiscent  of  a  passage
in  the  Oedipus  Tyrannus  of  Sophocles  (11.  1449-1457)
where  Oedipus,  having  blinded  himself  on  discovering  the
horrible  truth  that  he  is  guilty  of  parricide  and  incest,
pleads  with  Creon  to  cast  him  out  of  Thebes  and  to  let
him  hide  his  shame  in  the  hill-country  of  Cithaeron.
"  Degener "  may  possibfy  allude  to  the  awful  disgrace
that  has  overtaken  Oedipus,  who  had  boasted  that  how-
ever lowly  his  birth  he  never  should  be  shamed  (id.  ib.
1076-1085).

"  Nocru "  is  nonsense;  as  is  also  "  flexilla,"  though  by
the  latter  "a  gleam"  or  "nicker"  must  be  meant.

Script  B.

"  Illam  "  [acc.  sing,  fern.]  ought  to  refer  to  oratio  ;  but
this  can  hardly  be  said  to  make  sense,  and  I  suspect  that
by  "  illam  "  Antigone  or  Ismene  is  meant.

Script  C.

"  Sine  apparatu  "  reappears  in  P.

Script  M.

With  "  superbiam  pone"  cf.  "pone  superbiam  "  in  P.


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.


187


Scripts  C,  D,  E,  H,  M,  N,  O,  P,  Q,  R,  T,  U  and  V.

These  scripts,  in  my  view,  all  contain  references  to  Oedipus  ;
chiefly  to  Oedipus  going  to  his  death  ;  and  always  with  one
single  exception — but  that  a  crucial  one — to  Oedipus  as  he
appears  in  the  Oecl.  Col.1  of  Sophocles.

In  Script  H  will  be  found  the  one  case  where  the
reference  is  not  to  Oedipus  as  represented  in  the  Oed.  Col.  ;
and  it  is  there  made  by  means  of  the  word  ixovocttoXos
(tnonostolos).  Mrs.  Verrall  translated  /j.ov6<tto\o<;  by  "  single-
vested,"  deriving  the  word  evidently  from  /xoVo?,  "  one  only,"
and  <ttoX>/,2  "  raiment  "  or  a  "  robe."  But  /j.ov6o-to\o?  is
not  found  in  this  sense  in  classical  authors,  who  use  it  in  the
sense  of  "  journeying  alone  "  :  the  derivation  being  from
moVo?,  "  alone,"  and  <tt6\os,  a  "  journey."

I  think  it  strange  that  Mrs.  Verrall,  who,  after  she  had
been  told  the  subject  of  her  husband's  experiment,  was,
as  her  account  shows,  on  the  lookout  for  phrases  or
words  meaning  "  journeying  alone  "  as  pointing  to  the  word
/UOfoVcoAoj',  should  have  given  to  /aovoo-toXos  a  sense  which,
though  permissible,  is  not  the  accepted  one,  which  has  no
authority,  and  which  fails  to  bring  in  the  idea  which  she
was  hoping  to  find.  No  doubt  her  mind  was  influenced
by  the  word  niovo-^lrcovog  (monochitonos),  which  immediately
follows  iulovoo-toXos,  and  which — though  incorrect  in  form —
can  only  mean  "  single-tunicked."

It  was  the  word  im-ouoa-roXog  (monostolos)  that  put  me
on  the  track  of  the  Oedipus  allusions.  For  reasons
which  are  not  material  to  the  present  discussion,  I
was  re -considering  in  November  1917,  the  group  of
early  M.  V.  Scripts  relating  to  the  One-Horse  Dawn
case.  In  the  course  of  doing  so,  I  was  pulled  up  short,
so  to  speak,  at  the  word  /uopocttoXo?.  I  did  not  exactly
question  Mrs.  Verrall's  translation  of  it  as  "  single-vested,"
but  I  thought  that  before  accepting  it  I  would  look  out
the  word  in  Liddell  and  Scott's  Greek  Lexicon.  The
Lexicon  gives  first  the  meaning  "  going  alone,"  and  refers

1  The  abbreviations  Oed.  Col.  and  O.C.  stand  for  the  Oedipus  Coloneus  of
Sophocles  :  Oed.  Tyr.  and  O.T.  for  the  Oedipus  Tyrannus  of  Sophocles.

2  Twice  at  least  this  word  aroXri — in  the  plural,  however, — is  used  in
the  O.C.  of  the  beggar's  garb  worn  by  Oedipus  (11.  1357,  1597).


188


J.  G.  Piddiugton.


[part


in  illustration  to  a  line  in  a  poem  of  Lycophron's.  It  next
gives  the  general  meaning  as  "  alone,  single,"  and  quotes
in  illustration  two  lines  from  two  plays  of  Euripides'.  And
then  it  adds  :  "  cf.  /movo^wvos.'"  So  I  looked  up  (tovoTwvos
(monozonos).  This  the  Lexicon  renders  :  "  girt  up  alone,  i.e.
journeying  alone  "  ;  and  adds  :  "  like  iuovo^uhttos,  oio^wvos."
So  then  I  looked  up  olofyvos  (oioznnos).  The  Lexicon
does  not  translate  oio^wvos,  and  merely  says  it  is  equi-
valent to  novoXwvos ;  but  it  gives  one  instance — and  one
only— of  its  use,  viz.  "  Soph.  O.T.  846."  So  I  looked  up
the  reference,  using  Jebb's  edition  of  the  Oedipus  Tyrannus
for  the  purpose,  and  found  that  oio^wvog  is  there  applied
by  Oedipus  to  himself.  The  situation  at  this  point  in  the
play  is  as  follows  : — Teiresias,  the  blind  seer,  has  denounced
Oedipus  as  the  murderer  of  Laius,  Oedipus'  predecessor  on
the  throne  of  Thebes.  Oedipus,  who  had  slain  Laius,
Jocasta's  first  husband,  without  knowing  who  he  was,  tells
his  wife  Jocasta  of  the  charge  brought  by  Teiresias  against
him.  Jocasta  says  the  charge  cannot  be  true,  because  an
oracle  had  foretold  that  Lai'us  was  to  be  slain  by  his  son,
and  Lams'  only  son  had  been  left  as  a  babe  of  three  days
old  to  die  by  exposure  on  Mount  Cithaeron  ;  and,  more-
over, Laius  had  been  slain  at  a  place  where  three  roads
meet  by  a  band  of  robbers,  as  she  had  learnt  soon  after
the  event,  from  the  sole  survivor  of  Laius'  attendants.
Oedipus,  who  had  in  his  youth  killed  a  man  at  a  place
where  three  roads  meet,  and  who  accordingly  has  begun  to
suspect  that  he  may  have  been  the  unwitting  murderer  of
Laius,  realises  that,  if  the  sole  survivor's  story  is  true,
his  fears  are  groundless  ;  for  when  he,  Oedipus,  had  killed
his  man,  he  was  quite  alone.  He,  therefore,  has  the  sole
survivor  sent  for  in  order  to  cross-question  him  ;  and
meanwhile  he  says  to  his  wife  Jocasta  :

Thou  wast  saying  that  he  [  the  sole  survivor]  spoke  of
Laius  as  slain  by  robbers.  If,  then,  he  still  speaks,  as
before,  of  several,  I  was  not  the  slayer :  a  solitary  man
could  not  be  held  the  same  with  that  band.  But  if  he
names  one  lonely  wayfarer  [avop  eV  olofywov],  then
beyond  doubt  this  guilt  leans  to  me.  (Jebb's  translation
of  Soph.  O.T.  842-847.)


LXXVI.]


The  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.


189


When  I  read  these  lines  I  felt  no  more  enlightenment
than  the  reader  is  probably  feeling  at  this  moment.
Luckily  my  eye  lighted  upon  Jebb's  note  on  the  word
oloi^wvov.  This  note — which  should  be  read  with  attention,,
as  my  whole  argument  turns  on  it — I  transcribe  in  full.
It  runs  thus  :

oloj>vov,  journeying  alone.  The  peculiarity  of  the  idiom
is  that  the  second  part  of  the  compound  is  equivalent  to  a
separate  epithet  for  the  noun :  i.e.  olo^wvos,  '  with  solitary
girdle,'  signifies,  '  alone,  and  girt  up.'  O.C.  717  twv
€KaToiJ.ir68wv  N>/jO?/cW,  not,  '  with  a  hundred  feet  each,'  but,
countless,  and  dancing  :  ib.  17  irvKvoirTepoi  atjSoves,  not,
thickly-feathered  [nightingales],  but,  many  and  winged  :  ib.
1055  StaToXov?  aSeXcpus,  not,  separately- journeying  sisters,
but,  two  sisters,  journeying :  Ai.  390  Sirro-apyas  /3acri\^?,
not,  diversely-reigning  kings,  but,  two  reigning  kings  :  Eur.
Ale.  905  Kopos  /movowai?,  not,  a  youth  with  one  child,  but,
a  youth,  his  only  child  :  Phoen.  683  Siwvv/uloi  Seal,  not,
goddesses  with  contrasted  names,  but,  several  goddesses,
each  of  whom  is  invoked.  So  I  understand  Eur.  Or.  1004
fAOvoiruikov  'Aw,  '  Eos  who  drives  her  steeds  alone  '  (when
moon  and  stars  have  disappeared  from  the  sky).

When  I  read  this  note  of  Jebb's  I  began  to  see  daylight,
because,  besides  the  fact  of  the  word  /jlovoo-toXos  having
led  me,  via  its  equivalents  /j.ov6Xoovo<s  and  oio^Wo?,  to  a
note  in  which  the  meaning  of  the  words  fxovoirwXov  'Aw  is
discussed,  previous  study  of  scripts — I  mean  of  scripts
generally,  not  only  Mrs.  Verrall's,  but  those  of  other  auto-
matists — had  convinced  me  of  the  existence  of  an  elaborate
cross-correspondence  based  on  a  passage  in  Modern  Painters,
where  Ruskin  compares  the  forest  wherein  Dante,  on
entering  the  Earthly  Paradise,  listens  to  the  voices  of  the
birds  mingling  with  the  wind,  with  the  Grove  of  Colonus,
haunted  by  the  feathered  choir  of  nightingales  (the
TrvKvoTrTepoL  a>]S6veg  of  Jebb's  note),  "  where  the  aged  and
blind  Oedipus  "  was  "  brought  to  rest."  (Modern  Painters,
Part  IV.  Ch.  XIV.  §§33,  34,  35.)

I  was  actually  working  at  this  cross-correspondence  when
I  looked  up  fxov6<TTo\o<;  in  the  Lexicon  ;  and  hence  it  was


190


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


easy  enough  for  me  to  jump  to  the  conjecture  that  the  old
man  in  white  was  the  Oedipus  of  the  Oedipus  Coloneus.
Moreover,  the  conjecture  came  readily  to  my  mind  for
another  reason.  More  than  two  years  previously  I  had
made  a  note  on  Script  D  to  the  effect  that  the  old  man
in  white  with  "  a  long  stick  in  one  hand,  and  a  small
square  box  in  the  other  "  might  be  Odysseus  disguised  as
an  old  beggar-man  with  wallet  and  staff  returning  to  his
home  in  Ithaca.1  From  Odysseus  thus  disguised  to  Oedipus,
the  old  blind  beggar  with  his  wallet,  who  speaks  of  his
two  daughters  as  his  staffs  (O.C.  1109  ;  and  see  also  846),
the  transition  is  not  difficult.

But  before  examining  how  far  the  references  to  the  old
man  in  white  do  suit  Oedipus,  I  must  go  back  to  Jebb's
note  on  oio^wpop  and  discuss  it  in  some  detail.

He  gives  in  all  seven  examples  of  compound  adjectives
of  the  same  type  as  oio^wvoi  :  three  from  plays  of  Euri-
pides, four  from  plays  of  Sophocles.  Of  the  three  Euri-
pidean  examples,  all  I  need  say  is  that  the  last  one  is
our  old  friend  imovoirwXov  is  'Aw.  Of  the  Sophoclean
examples,  three  out  of  the  four  are  taken  from  the  Oedipus
Coloneus  ;  and,  as  will  be  seen,  with  each  example  selected  by
J  ebb  from  the  Oedipus  Coloneus  the  One-Horse  Dawn  scripts
can  be  shown  to  have  distinct  points  of  contact. Thus  :

(1)  irvKvoirrepoi  aijSoi'e?.  The  Oedipus  Coloneus  opens  by
the  blind  Oedipus  asking  his  daughter  Antigone  to  tell
him  at  what  place  they  have  arrived  :

01. TeKi'OP  TvcpXoti  yepoPTO?  Aprtyop);,  tipus
^opovi  a^/'y/ueO'  5/  tipwp  avopwv  ttoXip  \
t/s  tov  ir\ap)')T>iP  Otmirovp  ku6  rj/uepap
t>]p  pup  criraviaTols  Sertoli  Siop/jjuuatp  ;

(O.C.  1-4.)

(Daughter  of  the  blind  old  man,  to  what  region  have  we
come,  Antigone,  or  what  city  or  men  ?  Who  will  entertain
the  wandering  [top  7rAaw/T>/c]  Oedipus  to-day  with  scanty
gifts  ?)2

1  See  pp.  215-219  below,  for  a  reference  to  this  episode  in  H.  V.  Script
combined  with  what  is  in  all  probability  a  reference  back  to  Script  H.

2  Here,  as  elsewhere,  I  give  Jebb's  translation.


LXXVI.]


The  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.


191


Antigone's  answer  follows  :


7t6\lv  aTeyovaLV,  d)?  cur'  o/x/xctTwi',  irpocrco'


e'/crco  icaT  qi'toj^  evcrroixova'  u>]S6ve^


(O.C.  14-21.)


(AN.  Father,  toil-worn  Oedipus,  the  towers  that  guard
the  city,  to  judge  by  sight,  are  far  off  ;  and  this  place  is
sacred,  to  all  seeming, — thick-set  with  laurel,  olive,  vine  ;
and  in  its  heart  a  feathered  choir  of  nightingales  makes
music.  So  sit  thee  here  on  this  unhewn  stone  ;  thou  hast
travelled  a  long  way  for  an  old  man.

OE.  Seat  me,  then,  and  watch  over  the  blind.)

The  context,  then,  of  the  -TruKvoTrrepoi  amoves  of  Jebb's
note  gives  us  the  blind  and  aged  wanderer  (7r\aw/T>?9)
Oedipus,  entering  the  nightingale-haunted  Grove  of  Colonus
on  his  daughter  Antigone's  arm.  Cf.  Scripts  A,  B,  O,
T,  and,  for  reasons  to  be  explained  later,  "  incumbe  alieno
bacillo "  in  P,  and  "  incumbe  bacillo  "  in  Q ;  and  with
Oedipus  7rXai/?/T>;? 1  cf.  "Planet  .  .  .  illustre  vagatur  "  in  J.
Jebb,  by  the  way,  remarks  on  irvKvoirTepoi  at]S6veg  that
Antigone  selects  the  nightingales  for  mention  as  affording
an  indication  which  her  blind  father  can  recognise.

(2)  'Ekccto/xtto'cW  ~N>ip>jSow  comes  from  the  famous  Chorus
in  praise  of  Colonus  and  Attica.  This  Chorus  consists  of
two  parts  :  the  first  devoted  to  the  glorification  of  Colonus,
the  second  mainly  to  that  of  Attica  and  Athens,  "  the
local  theme,"  says  Jebb,  being  "  skilfully  knitted  to  the
national  theme."  Even  a  careless  reader  could  hardly,  I
think,  fail  to  notice  one  thread  common  to  the  two  parts,
and  that  is  the  word  evi7riro<;  {euippos).  As  Jebb  says  :
"  The  first  word  [of  the  Chorus]  ev'nrircv  strikes  a  note

1  Not  only  does  Oedipus  call  himself  ttXcip^tijs  (wanderer),  bub  the
Chorus  so  speaks  of  him  emphatically  :  n-Xavdra^,  irXavaras  tis  o  wpicrj3vs
(O.C.  123-124).


192


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


which  connects  Colonus  nrTno?1  with  the  fame  of  Attica."
If  one  wanted  by  a  single  word  to  fix  an  allusion  to  the
ivliole  Chorus,  no  better  word  could  be  found  than  eunnros.
I  quote  the  opening  lines  of  the  first  part,  and  the  whole
of  the  second.

EwVttou,  ^eve,  TacrSe  ^w^oa?

'Ikov  to  KpuTiara  yac  eiravXa,
tov  dpyi]Ta  KoXwi'o'j',  ev6'
a  Xlyeca  /uivvpeTai
Oafx'iXpv&a  /ndXiuT  dtjSocv
^XcOjOai?  viro  (3acrcrai(z.  .  .  .

(O.C.  668-673.)

(Stranger,  in  this  land  of  goodly  steeds  thou  hast  come
to  earth's  fairest  home,  even  to  our  white  Colonus  ;  where
the  nightingale,  a  constant  guest,  trills  her  clear  note  in
the  covert  of  green  glades.  .  .  .)

"Ecttiv  o olov  eyw  <ya?  'Atria?  ovk  €7raKovoof

ovS' ev to fxeyaXa AwpiSi vdcrw TleXowos  TrwiroTe

j3Xa<TTOV

(pvTev/x a^eipwTOV  uvtottoiov,
ey^ecuv  (po^tj/ua  oa'uov,
6  TaSe  QdXXei  /j.eyi<TTCi  )(6ap<*,
yXavKus  Trai$OTp6(pov  (pvXXov  eAat'a?'
to  fJLev  Tig  ov  veapos  ovSe  y>}pa

crvvvalwv  dXiwcrei  X€Pl  7r^para'>'  0  yap  alev  opoov  kvkXo?
Xevcrcrei  viv  ^iloplov  Ato?
j^a  yXavKW7ri<>  'AOava.

aXXov  S'  cuvov  e'^w  fxaTpoiroXei  TaSe  KpaTicrTOv,

Swpov tov fxeydXov Sat/uovos, elweiv, ^Ooco?  at/^>/,aa

/ueyicrTOV,
eviinrov,  evTTwXov,  evOdXacrcrov.


w  ttoI  ]±povov,  crv  yap  viv  et?
too eiaas  awyn/UL ,  avay  lLocreioav,

1  Colonus  Utttios.  "  The  epithet  Hippius  belonged  to  the  god  Poseidon,
as  horse-creating  and  horse-taming  .  .  .  ;  it  was  given  to  this  place
because  Poseidon  Hippius  was  worshipped  there,  and  served  to  distin-
guish this  extramural  Colonus  from  the  Colonus  Agoraeus,  or  '  Market
Hill,'  within  tho  walls  of  Athens."  (Jebb,  Oedipus  Coloneus,  Introduc-
tion, p.  XXX.)


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.


193


lirirouriv  tov  aKeaTtjpa  ^aXtvov
irpwraiai  TatcrSe  ktIctw}  ayuialg.

a  §'  ew'ipeTfxos  eKirayX'  akla  XePai  7rapa7l"rotJL£V(*  7rActTri
6pu>aK€i,  twv  eKaTO/ATroStov
NrjpySwv  ciKoXovdog.

(0.(7.  694-719.)

(And  a  thing  there  is  such  as  I  know  not  by  fame  on
Asian  ground,  or  as  ever  born  in  the  great  Dorian  isle  of
Pelops, — a  growth  unconquered,  self-renewing,  a  terror  to
the  spears  of  the  foemen,  a  growth  which  mightily  flour-
ishes in  this  land, — the  gray-leafed  olive,  nurturer  of  children.
Youth  shall  not  mar  it  by  the  ravage  of  his  hand,  nor  any-
one who  dwells  with  old  age  ;  for  the  sleepless  eye  of  the
Morian  Zeus  beholds  it,  and  the  gray-eyed  Athena.

And  another  praise  have  I  to  tell  for  this  the  city  our
mother,  the  gift  of  a  great  god,  a  glory  of  the  land  most
high  ;  the  might  of  horses,  the  might  of  young  horses,  the
might  of  the  sea.

For  thou,  son  of  Cronus,  our  lord  Poseidon,  hast  throned
her  in  this  pride,  since  in  these  roads  [i.e.  of  Colonus]  first
thou  didst  show  forth  the  curb  that  cures  the  rage  of  steeds.
And  the  shapely  oar,  apt  to  men's  hands,  hath  a  wondrous
speed  on  the  brine,  following  the  hundred-footed  Nereids.)

The  context,  then,  of  the  eKaro/uLiroScov  NrjpflSwv  of  Jebb's
note  gives  Colonus  evnnros ;  Attica  eunnros  and  euTrcoXog  ;  and
y\avKu<;  (pvXXov  eXalag,  (pvTeu/ua  axelpcoTOv  (leaf  of  the  gray
olive,  a  growth  unconquered),  watched  over  by  yXavicwTris
'Adava  (gray-eyed  Athena).  For  these  cf.  "  eynnroi  "  in  Script
K,1  "  viridenti  coma  eXalov  t^?  TXavKwirtSoi  avrrj^  "  in  C  (where
eXalov,  genitive  of  'iXaiov,  olive-oil,  is  a  mistake  for  eXalus,
olive-tree),  and  "  kou  aTe/u/uaTu  evrjv.  ov  Scupvela  aXXa  cpvXXa
SevSpo?  tivos  €K€t  (pevTOvrog  (pvTov/uevov "  in  E.

As  regards  "  eynnroi  "  I  have  practically  no  doubt  that
the  references  to  a  knife  and  to  a  word  cut  with  a  knife

1  The  insertion  of  an  English  character  (y  here  =  i/)  in  the  middle  of
a  Greek  word  is  not  unparalleled  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  though  rare.
The  reverse,  i.e.  the  insertion  of  a  Greek  letter  or  letters  in  the  middle
of  an  English  word,  is  fairly  common.  Greek  words  are  frequently
transliterated  into  English.


194


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


upon  stone  in  Scripts  F,  G,  and  I,  are  merely  the  first
attempts  at  the  word  eunnrog.  I  imagine  that  the  auto-
matist  was  aware  that  a  Greek  word  was  wanted,  and  that
this  word  presented  itself  to  her  imagination  Greek
inscription.1  Note  that  in  the  very  next  script  after  eyiiriroi
has  been  successfully  written,  the  automatist  is  told  that
she  has  rightly  impressed  her  mind  concerning  the  knife
("  de  cultello  bene  imbuisti  mentem  "  in  L)  ;  and  that
thenceforward  the  knife  and  the  inscription  are  mentioned
no  more.

The  impossible  words  (pevTovTo?  (pvTovpevov  I  take  to
be  attempts  at  Sophocles'  (pvTevpa.  The  statement  that
the  leaves  are  not  laurel  leaves  shows,  I  suggest,  a  know-
ledge of  O.C.  17  (quoted  above),  where  the  Grove  of
Col  onus  is  said  to  be  "  thick-set  with  laurel,  olive,  vine  "  :
the  intelligence  responsible  for  the  script  being  aware  that
in  the  place  he  is  trying  to  describe  (eV«)  there  are
laurels  as  well  as  olives.  That  olive  leaves  are  the  leaves
intended  is  rendered  probable  not  only  by  the  mention
in  Script  C  of  the  olive,  but  by  the  phrase  crre/m/maTa  evrjv,
for  the  scholiast  on  Sophocles,  Oedipus  Tyr annus  1.  3  says
the  arkp.fj.aT a  were  wreaths  of  wool  wound  round  the  olive-
branch.  (See  Liddell  and  Scott,  s.v.  o-re'/xM"  ;  and  Jebb's
description  of  the  Scenario  of  the  O.T.)

(3)  AiaroXoug  aSe\(pa$.  Here  it  is  not  the  context  of
the  words,  but  the  word  ShttoXovs  (distolous)  itself  that  is
important. Jebb's  note  on  it  is  as  follows  :

8ictt6\ovs  =  '  two  journeying  '  sisters, — as  borne  off  by
their  captors  :  see  on  [O.C]  17  irvKvoirTepoi.  Not,
'  separately  earned  off,'  with  ref.  to  two  bands  of  Thebans
(cf.  818).2

The  account  of  the  word  Sla-roXog  (distolos)  in  Liddell
and  Scott's  Lexicon  is  as  follows  :

8i-o-To\os,  oi',  in  pairs,  two  together,  aSe\(pal  Soph.
O.C.  1055  ; cf.  fxov6(TTo\o<;.

1  Cf.  "  The  shape  of  the  letters  is  archaic,"  etc.,  in  Script  G.

2  By  the  onrTiXovs  adc\<pas  are  meant  the  two  daughters  of  Oedipus,  Antigone
and  Ismene,  who  have  been  seized  and  carried  off  by  Creon.


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.


195


It  will  be  remembered  that  it  was  this  very  word
/uovoo-toXos  {monostolos),  applied  in  Script  H  to  the  old  man
in  white,  that  put  me  on  to  the  word  oloQavov  (oiozonon),
the  subject  of  the  note  of  Jebb's  which  we  have  been
discussing.  Mov6<tto\o9  and  SicrroXos  are  both  formed  in
precisely  the  same  way,  and  o-toXo?  is  common  to  both.

In  view,  then,  first,  of  the  coincidences  between  various
phrases  in  the  foregoing  scripts  on  the  one  hand  and
the  passages  from  the  Oedipus  Coloneus  cited  in  Jebb's
note  on  olo(wvov  on  the  other,  and,  secondly,  in  view  of
the  fact  that  this  note  of  Jebb's  actually  quotes  the
words  chosen  by  Dr.  Verrall  for  his  experiment,  i"  maintain
that  one  of  the  main  objects  of  the  intelligence  responsible
for  the  One-Horse  Dawn  scripts  was  to  refer  to  Jebb's  note
and  to  indicate  thereby  the  words  ij.ov6tcw\ov  e?  Aw.

I  pass  on  now  to  examine  how  far  what  is  said  in  the
scripts  about  the  old  man  in  white  is  appropriate  to  the
Oedipus  of  the  Oedipus  Goloneus.

Great  emphasis  is  thrown  on  the  old  man's  dress  and
personal  appearance.  The  references  thereto,  and  some  other
relevant  points,  may  be  classified  roughly  as  follows  :

Dress.

/jLOVoyj.Tu>vo<; . C,  H.

Sine  apparatu. C,  P.

Albipannosus . C,  D.

Long  trailing  draperies  of  white.  D.

Long  white  drapery.  H.

Mov6<tto\o<;  (if  =  "  single-vested  ").  H.

The  long  white  robe. M,  N.

Sume  togaculam  caritatis.  P.

In  white.  Pv.

White  long  robe.  U.

Personal  Appearance.

Blind. Cf.  A,  B,  0,  T.
Longaevus.  C.
Old. H,  M,  R.


196


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Albicapillus,  White-headed. D,  H.
Barba  alba.  C.
Upright. H. Cf.  U.
Long,  thin,  tall  man.  U.

In  caput  corona  non  aurea  neque  gemmata.  C.
With  the  un jewelled  crown.  M.

Other  Points.

Vagatur. A,  I  0.

Pererro. A,  B.

Palely  loitering.  J.

Crux  in  dextra. C. Cf.  P,  S.

Going  towards  the  east. D,  0.

Carries  a  long  stick. D. Cf.  P,  Q.

Carries  a  small  square  box  or  book. D,  E.

M.OVO?  /uera  6eov  ovSe  aXXov  twos.  H.

Moi/oVtoXo?  (if  =  "  journeying  alone  ").  H.

Sine  comite,  Seen  but  not  followed. H,  J.

Nec  sine  monitore.  0.

Monoicus.  P.

Sine  adiutore.  T.

Signifer  ille.  C.

Non  sine  beneficio  universi.  P.

Magnum  coercebit  examen.  T.

One  question  will  at  once  present  itself  to  those  familiar
with  the  Oedipus  Coloneus.  If  the  old  man  of  the  One-Horse
Dawn  scripts  is  the  Oedipus  of  the  O.C.,  why  is  he  described
as  dressed  in  a  long  white  robe,  when  throughout  the  play
he  appears  dressed  in  a  beggar's  garb  ?  A  Greek  beggar  of  the
classical  period  might,  I  suppose,  have  worn  a  white  robe
faute  de  mieux,  but  a  stage  beggar  so  habited  would  have  had
to  explain  his  unconventional  attire  to  the  audience.  The
colour  of  Oedipus'  garments  is  not  mentioned  in  the  play,
though  their  squalor  is  twice  referred  to,  once  with  great
emphasis  (O.C.  1257-1260  and  1597).  But,  though  he  wears
his  squalid  beggar's  garb  so  long  as  he  is  on  the  stage,  we
learn  from  the  Messenger's  speech  that  when  he  went
forth,  like  Arthur,  to  meet  death  or  he  knew  not  what


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.


197


mysterious  doom,  he  put  off  his  rags  and  clothed  himself
as  for  burial  :

KaOe^eT'  eiT eXvae  i>vo-rrivel<;  tTToXas,
tcaireiT a'ucras  7ralSa$  >}vwyei  pvTwv
vSutwv  eveyKelv  Xovrpa  Kai  ^oas  iroBev'
too  S'  ev^Xoov  A>)fJ.t]Tpo?  els  7rpocr6^iov
irayov  pioAovcrai  toxto eiricrToAas  waTpi
Ta^ei  'Tropevarav  uvv  YjOoVco,  Xovrpoh  Te  viv

(0.(7.  1597-1603.)

(Then  sate  him  down,  and  loosed  his  sordid  raiment.
And  then  he  called  his  daughters,  and  bade  them  fetch
water  from  some  fount,  that  he  should  wash,  and  make
a  drink-offering.  And  when  they  went  to  the  hill  which
was  in  view,  Demeter's  hill  who  guards  the  tender  plants,
and  in  short  space  brought  that  which  their  father  had
enjoined  ;  then  they  ministered  to  him  with  washing,  and
dressed  him,  as  use  ordains.)

Jebb's  note  on  ea-QijTi  fj  vo/ml^erai  (literally :  "  with  the
raiment  with  which  it  is  the  custom  ")  is  as  follows  :

fj  vomeral,  as  the  dead  were  usually  dressed  for  burial,
i.e.  in  white.  Artemidorus  Oneir.  2.  3  avSpl  Se  vcktovvti
XevKU.  e%eiv  ifxaria  Oavarov  irpoayopevei,  Sia  to  tovs
onroQavovTu^  ev  XeuKoh  eKCpepeaOai.  ['  For  a  sick  man  to
be  wearing  white  clothes  betokens  death,  because  the
dead  are  carried  out  for  burial  dressed  in  white.']

The  old  man  in  the  long  white  robe,  then,  I  take  to  be
Oedipus  dressed  for  burial.  To  the  closing  scenes  of
Oedipus'  life  I  likewise  refer  the  following  phrases  :

(a)  juoi'O?  fxeTa  deov  ovSe  aXXov  Tiv6?  (in  H)  ;

(6)  "  Seen  but  not  followed,  there  were  others  there  but
he  knew  more  than  the  rest  "  ;  and  "  illustre
vagatur  caelo  sine  comite  "  (in  H  and  J)  ;

(c)  "  tenebrosum  iter  caeco  viatore  in orientem  solem

pedibus  vagatur  nec  sine  monitore  "  (in  O)  ;  and

(d)  "  caeco viatore magnum coercebit examen  sine

adiutore  "  (in  T).


198


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


(a)  is  generally  appropriate  to  the  death-scene,  and  specially
perhaps  to  the  moment  when,  after  the  thunder  and  after  the
silence,  he  hears  the  voice  of  the  god  summoning  him  "  with
many  callings  and  manifold "  to  enter  into  communion
with  the  Unseen  :

co  outo?  ovtos,  OiSI-ttovs,  t/  /u.e\\oju.ev
ywpelv  • irakai  S>j  toltto  <tov paSvverai .

('  Oedipus,  Oedipus,  why  delay  we  to  go  ?  Thou  tarriest
too  long.')

(6)  can  be  applied  with  sufficient,  though  not  complete,
accuracy  to  the  moment  when  Oedipus  bids  his  daughters
and  the  attendants  depart  from  him,  and  keeps  Theseus
only  with  him  "  to  see  the  end."  "  But  he  knew  more
than  the  rest  "  would  be  true  of  Theseus,  for  "  by  what
doom  Oedipus  perished,  no  man  can  tell,  save  Theseus
alone  "  (O.C.  1656-1657).

(c)  "  nec  sine  monitore  "  suits  Oedipus  led  by  the  voice
of  the  "  unguessed  accompanying  God."

(d)  Throughout  the  play  Oedipus,  blind,  aged  and  feeble,
cannot  walk  without  support,  until  he  goes  forth  to  die  ;
and  then  there  comes  a  sudden  change,  thus  described  by
Jebb  in  his  note  on  O.C.  1542-1555  :

A  more  splendid  dramatic  effect  could  hardly  be  con-
ceived than  Sophocles  has  created  here.  Hitherto,  through-
out the  play,  Oedipus  has  been  strongly  characterised  by
that  timidity  in  movement,  and  that  sense  of  physical
dependence,  which  are  normal  accompaniments  of  blindness.
(Cp.  21,  173  ff.,  495  ft,  1206,  etc.)  Now,  suddenly  inspired
by  the  Unseen  Power  which  calls  him,  he  becomes  the
guide  of  his  guides.  .  .  .  Eager  and  unfaltering,  the  blind
man  beckons  them  on.  And  so  he  finally  passes  from  the
eyes  of  the  spectators.

A  contrast  may  be  intended  between  "  the  blind  wayfarer
not  without  a  prompter "  (i.e.  a  divine  prompter)  of
Script  0,  and  "  the  blind  wayfarer  without  a  helper "
(i.e.  a  human  helper)  of  Script  T.

Albipannosus  in  C  and  D  Mrs.  Verrall  translated  "  white -
garmented."  The  word  does  not  occur  in  classical  authors,
nor,  I  think,  in  medieval  Latin  ;  but  it  is  correctly  formed,


LXXVI.]


The  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.


199


and  certainly  means  "  wearing  a  white  panmis."  Now,
panmis  usually  means  rags,  and  the  adjective  pannosus  (except
when  it  means  "  wrinkled  ")  always  means  "  ragged  "  or
"  tattered."  Accordingly  I  am  inclined  to  question  the
rendering  "  white-garmented,"  and  I  suspect  that  "  albi-
pannosus  "  is  a  "  portmanteau "  word,  which  serves  to
describe  both  Oedipus  in  his  beggar's  garb  and  Oedipus  in
his  white  burial  garment.  Something  of  the  same  kind  of
confusion  or  admixture  can  be  traced  in  the  statement
made  in  Script  D  that  the  old  man  is  "  going  towards
the  east,"  and  in  the  statement  made  in  Script  0  that
the  "  caecus  viator  "  "in  orientem  solem  pedibus  vagatur."
Both  statements,  I  believe,  are  due  to  the  automatist's
having  been  confusedly  aware  of  some  sort  of  connexion
between  the  old  man  and  the  blind  wayfarer  on  the  one
hand  and  the  idea  of  movement  towards  the  east  con-
tained in  the  phrase — not  normally  known  to  her,  of
course — /xovoirwXov  e?  'Aw  on  the  other.

Other  allusions  to  Oedipus  as  beggar  I  find  in  C  and  P
in  the  words  "  sine  apparatu,"  which  may  hint  as  well
at  the  contrast  between  his  former  magnificence  as  king
of  Thebes  and  the  destitution  of  his  old  age  ;  in  P  in  the
words  "pone  superbiam  sume  togaculam  caritatis,"  where  the
same  contrast  may  again  be  slightly  suggested  ;  in  "  incumbe
alieno  bacillo  "  1  in  P,  and  in  "nunc  incumbe  bacillo  "  in  Q.

So,  too,  the  phrases  in  C  and  M — "  in  caput  corona
non  aurea  neque  gemmata.  viridenti  coma  eXalou  rrjg
T\avKW7riSo<;  avTrjs"  and  "the  old  man  .  .  .  with  the
un jewelled  crown  " — seem  to  allude  to  the  lost  kingship,
and  to  mean  that  though  Oedipus  lost  a  corruptible  crown

'"Incumbe  alieno  bacillo,"  which  literally  means  "  lean  on  another  person's
staff,''  may  be  an  attempt  to  say  "lean  on  another  person  for  a  staff."
This  is  exactly  what  Oedipus  does  in  the  play  (see  11.  848-849,  1109).  Cf.,
moreover,  Oedipus'  description  of  his  dependence  on  others  (O.C.  146-148)  :

ov  yap  av  <I)5'  dWorpioi^
op.iJ.aaiv  eipirov
Ka7ri  crpiKpols  peyas  (oppovv.

(Else  would  I  not  be  walking  thus  by  the  eyes  of  others,  and
buoying  my  strength  upon  weakness.)

'AXXorpiots  here  answers  exactly  to  the  alieno  of  the  script.

For the  contrast  between  Oedipus as  king  and  Oedipus  as  beggar.


200


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


he  obtained  an  hicorruptible,  made  of  the  leaves  of  the
sacred  olive.  Should  some  matter-of-fact  critic  object
that  such  an  idea  is  out  of  harmony  with  the  sentiment
of  the  play,  I  would  reply  in  the  words  with  which  the
Messenger  closes  his  account  of  the  death  of  Oedipus  :
"If  to  any  I  seem  to  speak  folly,  I  would  not  woo  their
belief,  who  count  me  foolish."

In  D  the  old  man  is  said  to  carry  a  long  stick  in  one
hand  and  a  "  small  square  box "  in  the  other.  This,  in
spite  of  the  fact  that  in  E  the  automatist  hedges — as
all  automatists  will  do — ,  and  says  the  box  may  be  a  book,
I  have  little  hesitation  in  identifying  as  the  beggar's
wallet,  which  was  squarish  and  made  of  leather.  (Hence,
perhaps,  the  vacillation  between  a  box  and  a  book.)
Oedipus'  wallet  is  not  specifically  mentioned  in  the  Oedipus
Coloneus ;  but  Jebb  at  least  assigns  him  one,  as  witness
his  note  on  O.C.  1262  :

<f>op«i  is  taken  by  some  as  '  obtains  by  begging  '  ;  but
a  conjecture  to  that  effect  would  be  hardly  in  place.
Obviously  it  means  simply  '  carries,''  and  alludes  to  a
wallet  (-nrt'ipa)  carried  by  Oed.,  for  the  reception  of  the
airavLa-Ta  Swp7jjULara  (4)  ["  scanty  gifts  "].  This  was  a  part
of  the  conventional  outfit  for  the  wandering  beggar ;  so,
when  Athena  turned  Odysseus  into  that  guise,  she  gave
him  (TKrjTTTpov  Kat  aeiKea  Tri]pi}vt  I  7rvicva  pwyu\ei]V  ev
arpoipo?  ?iev  aopn'/p  :  '  a  staff,  and  a  mean,  much-tattered
wallet ;  and  therewith  was  a  cord  to  hang  it '  (Od.  13.  437).

In  this  connexion  I  would  remind  the  reader  of  what
has  already  been  stated  (see  above  p.  190),  namely,  that,
long  before  I  had  the  smallest  notion  that  the  One-Horse
Dawn  scripts  contain  references  to  Oedipus,  I  had  noted

cf.  the  following  lines  in  Oed.  Tyr.  454-456,  where  the  seer  Teiresias
forewarns  Oedipus  of  the  fate  in  store  for  him  :

Tv<p\bs  yap  e/c  dedopKdros

Kai  TTTtoxbs  avTi  ir\ovoLov  ^ivrfv  iiri

cncqTTTpip  TrpobtiKvvs  yalav  ifxTropeuaerai.

(A  blind  man,  he  who  now  hath  sight,  a  beggar,  who  now  is
rich,  he  shall  make  his  way  to  a  strange  land,  feeling  the  ground
before  him  with  a  staff.)


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.


201


that  the  old  man  carrying  "  a  long  stick  in  one  hand,
and  a  small  square  box  in  the  other  "  might  be  Odysseus
in  disguise.  I  was  thinking,  not  of  the  passage  in  the
13th  Book  of  the  Odyssey  quoted  by  Jebb,  but  of  the  passage
in  the  17th  Book  where  Odysseus  is  furnished  by  Eumaeus
the  swineherd  with  staff  and  wallet,  and  in  the  disguise
of  a  wretched  beggar  starts  for  his  home.  My  attention
was  drawn  to  this  passage  by  a  script  of  Miss  Verrall's
written  in  January  1915,  which  refers  to  it,  and  which
also  in  all  probability  refers  back  to  Script  H.  The
matter,  which  is,  it  is  true,  a  side-issue,  but  an  important
one,  is  dealt  with  in  Appendix  A.

Crux  in  dextra.

The  first  mention  of  the  old  man  in  white  (Script  G)
begins  with  the  words  "  Crux  in  dextra "  ("a  cross  in
the  right  hand  ").  The  phrase  is  itself  a  crux,  for  it  would
be  sheer  nonsense  to  represent  Oedipus  with  a  cross  in
his  hand.  The  simplest  plan  would  be  to  dismiss  the
phrase  as  a  mere  mistake  on  the  part  of  the  automatist.
A  mistake  I  feel  sure  it  was,  but  I  think  it  is  an  explicable
one.

The  second  mention  of  the  old  man  in  white  (Script  D)
describes  him  as  carrying  "  a  long  stick  in  one  hand,  and
a  small  square  box  in  the  other."  If  he  is  supposed  to
be  carrying  a  cross  as  well  in  one  of  his  hands,  he  must
have  had  that  hand  rather  full.  But  I  do  not  think  that
that  is  what  is  meant.  The  statement  in  Script  D
I  take  to  be  a  correction  (as  also  an  amplification)  of  the
statement  in  Script  C,  whereby  "  a  long  stick "  is  sub-
stituted for  the  cross.  But  how,  it  may  be  asked,  did
it  come  about,  if  all  along  a  stick  was  the  idea  wanted,
that  in  the  first  instance  the  idea  that  emerged  was  a
cross  ?  I  would  suggest  that  "  crux  in  dextra  "  may  have
been  the  automatist's  rendering  of  "a  crutch  in  the  right
hand." 1 A  crutch  is  a  beggar's  staff  with  a  crow-piece

1  So  far  as  this  conjectural  explanation  is  concerned,  it  does  not  matter
twopence  whether  the  idea  which  the  script  is  trying  to  express  is  being
instilled  into  the  automatist's  mind  ab  extra,  or  whether  it  is  merely  an
idea  latent  in  some  stratum  of  her  own  uninfluenoed  consciousness  which


202


J .  G.  Piddington.


[part


at  the  top,  and  is  ultimately  derived  from  the  Latin  crux,
a  cross.  So  either  the  similarity  of  sound  between  crux
and  "  crutch,"  or  the  philological  connexion  between  the
two,  or  both,  would  easily  enough  account  for  "  a  crutch
in  the  right  hand  "  emerging  as  "  crux  in  dextra."  The
occurrence  for  the  first  time  in  Script  P,  where  the  crux
is  again  mentioned,  of  the  word  bacillum — the  diminutive
of  baculus,1  the  proper  word  for  a  staff  or  crutch — tends,
I  think,  to  confirm  the  conjecture  here  advanced.

"  Crux  et  praeterea  nihil  "  in  Script  P — a  phrase  based,
of  course,  on  the  proverbial  "  Vox  et  praeterea  nihil  " —
may  represent  an  attempt  to  dismiss  the  "  Crux  in  dextra"
of  Script  C  as  a  mere  empty  echo.  The  outcome  of  the
attempt,  if  it  was  made,  was  hardly  a  happy  one ;  for  it
seems  fairly  clear  that  the  phrase  made  the  automatist's
thoughts  turn  in  a  Christian  direction,  with  the  result
that  the  remainder  of  the  script  is  coloured  in  such  a  way
(e.g.  "  sume  togaculam  caritatis,"  "  monoicus,"  "  sanctis-
simi  ")  that  no  one,  reading  it  by  itself  and  without
regard  to  its  connexions  with  Scripts  C  and  M,  would
imagine  it  referred  to  a  legendary  pagan  character.

I  suspect  that  the  Christian  associations  aroused  by
"  crux  in  dextra "  are  similarly  responsible  for  the  words

she  is  struggling  to  summon  up.  As  everyday  experience  teaches,  things
we  know  we  know  but  can't  remember  at  a  given  moment,  constantly
emerge  in  some  such  fashion  as  I  am  suggesting  here.  I  try  to  recall
the  word  "  cambric,"  and  my  mind  in  labour  gives  birth  to  the  name
Ypres, — a  town  which  according  to  tho  worst  authorities  gave,  like
Cambrai,  its  name  to  a  special  kind  of  linen  fabric.  Such  an  association
of  ideas  is  considerably  more  involved  than  the  one  I  am  suggesting  to
account  for  "  crux  in  dextra  "  ;  and  yet  no  one,  I  venture  to  think,
would  consider  it  unlike  what  really  happens.

1  Seneca  in  his  play  of  Oedipus,  1.  650,  uses  bacuius  of  Oedipus'  staff

or  crutch  :  "  repet  incertus  viae,

Baculo  senili  triste  praotentans  iter."

Jebb  gives  the  Seneca  quotation  in  his  notes  on  O.T.  455-456  (referred
to  above,  p.  200  footnote).

Diminutive  forms — some  extant,  others  not — of  both  Greek  and  Latin
words  are  very  common  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  early  scripts.  Script  O  alone
furnishes  two  examples  besides  bacillum  :  viz.  "  togaculam  "  (in  error  for
toyulam),  and  roscidulus  (a  very  odd  and  indefensible  diminutive  form  of
roscidus ).


lxxvi.] The  "  One -Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.


203


"  signifer  ille "  ("he  is  a  standard-bearer")  being  applied
to  the  old  man  in  white  in  Script  C.  To  the  automatist
the  old  man  with  a  cross  in  his  right  hand  becomes  the
bearer  of  the  Standard  of  the  Cross.  It  is  possible,  how-
ever, that  signifer  is  used,  as  it  is  by  Cicero  and  others,  in
the  sense  of  "leader,"  and  dimly  reflects  O.C.  1520-1521,
and  1588-1589  :

yS>dov  fxev  avTog  avruc'  ePqyijcrofJLai,,
aOiKTOS  yyt)Ttjpo$,  ou  /me  YjO>/  daveiv
(Anon, unaided, and with no hand to guide me,  I
[Oedipus]  will  show  the  way  to  the  place  where  I  must
die),

and

v<br/iy}]T>ipos  ovSevos  (plXwv,
aXX'  avro?  t]/uv  Tcatriv  efyyov/nevos
(with  no  friend  to  show  the  way,  but  guide  himself  unto
us  all).

Sic  semper  monoicus  sine  apparatu  non  sine  beneficio  universi
in  Script  P  Mrs.  Verrall  translated  :  "So  ever  living  alone
without  pomp  not  without  advantage  to  the  world."  The
meaning  of  monoicus  ( =  /ulovoikos)  is  quite  certain,  though
the  word  is  only  found  as  a  surname  of  Hercules,  "  Her-
cules who  dwells  alone,"  and  of  the  place  where  he  was
worshipped  under  this  title,  Arx  Monoeci,  the  modern
Monaco.  Monoicus,  in  my  view,  harks  back  to  the
fjLovotTToXog  inovoyjiTwvos  /movos  fxera  deov  ovSe  aXXov  rno?
of  Script  H  ;  only  the  word  (monoicus)  which,  I  suspect,
suggested  to  the  automatist  a  Christian  hermit,  but  which
should  have  denoted  Oedipus  bereft  of  all  human  com-
panionship and  walking  with  God  alone,  has  got  influenced
by  what  I  have  called  the  "  Christian  associations  "
evoked  by  the  opening  phrase  of  the  script,  "  Crux  et
praeterea  nihil."  In  Scripts  H  and  P  Oedipus  is  con-
ceived of  as  dying  in  complete  solitude  ;  nor  is  such  a
conception  repugnant  to  the  spirit,  though  it  be  to  the
letter,1  of  Sophocles'  play  ;  for  Oedipus  forbids  his  daughters

1  Ismene,  however,  ignoring  the  presence  of  Theseus,  as  I  suggest  the
scripts  do,  speaks  of  her  father  as  dying  alone  :

(LTCMpos  'iirnve  Si'xa  re  iravrbs (O.C.  1732).


204


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


— "  dear  though  they  are  "  1 — to  accompany  him  to  the
actual  scene  of  his  death ;  and,  though  he  does  take
Theseus  with  him,  he  takes  him  not  for  the  sake  of
companionship  but  solely  as  "  a  witness  of  those  things
which  are  to  be  "  2  and  as  the  official  repository  of  the
secret  of  his  tomb.

"  To  Theseus  alone  will  be  revealed  the  place  appointed
for  his  grave.  At  the  approach  of  death,  Theseus  shall
impart  the  secret  to  his  heir  alone  ;  and,  so,  from  age  to
age,  that  sacred  knowledge  shall  descend  in  the  line  of
the  Attic  kings.  While  the  secret  is  religiously  guarded,
the  grave  of  Oedipus  shall  protect  Attica  against  invading
foeman."  3

It  is  to  the  benefit  to  be  conferred  by  Oedipus'  tomb  on
the  State  that  I  think  that  the  words  in  Script  P,  "  non
sine  beneficio  universi,"  may  possibly  allude.  It  is  true
that  "universi"  cannot  mean  "the  State,"  and  must
mean  "the  world";4  but  it  is,  perhaps,  legitimate  to
assume  that  here  as  in  other  cases  the  automatist,  like

°Phelia'  "  speaks  things  in  doubt,

That  carry  but  half  sense."

The  phrase  in  Script  T,  "  Caeco  viatore  magnum
coercebit  examen  sine  adiutore,"  does  not  make  sense  as
it  stands.  Literally  the  words  mean  :  "  By  the  blind
traveller  he  will  hold  in  check  a  great  swarm  without  a
helper."  "  Caeco  viatore  "  probably  goes  back  to  "  caecus
pererro  "  in  B  ;  and  anyhow  it  is  impossible  to  dissociate
it  from  "  tenebrosum  iter  caeco  viatori  in  orientem  solem
pedibus  vagatur  nec  sine  monitore  "  in  O.  If  there  is  any
sense  at  all  in  "  magnum  coercebit  examen,"  I  would
suggest  that  it  is  an  attempted  allusion  to  the  protection
against  invasion  that  the  grave  of  Oedipus  will  afford  to
the  Athenian  State.  Cf.  Oedipus'  last  speech  to  Theseus
before  he  sets  out  to  die  :

Son  of  Aegeus, I  will  unfold  that  which  shall be  a
treasure  for  this  thy  city,  such  as  age  can  never  mar.

1  O.C.  1529.  2  O.C.  1644.

3  Jebb's  analysis  of  the  last  speech  of  Oedipus  (Introduction,  p.  xx).

4  "  Universorum  "  would, perhaps,  have  given  the  required  sense.


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Dawn "  Experiment.  205

Anon,  unaided,  and  with  no  hand  to  guide  me,  I  will
show  the  place  where  I  must  die.  But  that  place  reveal
thou  never  unto  mortal  man  .  .  .  ;  that  so  it  may  ever
make  for  thee  a  defence,  better  than  many  shields,  better
than  the  succouring  spear  of  neighboius.

And  thus  shalt  thou  hold  this  city  unscathed  from  the
side  of  the  Dragon's  blood  ;  full  many  States  [at  oe
juvptat  7ro\e/y]  lightly  enter  on  offence,  e'en  though  their
neighbour  lives  aright.

{O.O.  1518-1525,  1533-1535.)

"  Magnum  examen  "  would  stand  for  the  crop  of  armed
men  that  sprang  from  the  Dragon's  teeth  (i.e.  Thebes,
the  traditional  enemy  of  Athens),  and  for  the  /uvplai  7ro'Ae(?.
For  examen  (which  primarily  means  a  swarm  of  bees)
used  in  the  sense  of  an  army,  see  Hor.  C.  i.  35,  31  :

"  Juvenum  recens
Examen  Eois  timendum
Partibus."

Scripts  U  and  V.

I  have  now  dealt  with  all  the  scripts  relating  to  the
Old  Man  in  White  (A  to  T  inclusive)  which  were  pro-
duced by  Mrs.  Verrall  before  she  learnt  from  her  husband,
on  Oct.  17,  1902,  that  he  had  been  making  an  experiment
and  what  that  experiment  was.  There  remain,  however,
two  scripts,  U  and  V,  written  by  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Miss
Verrall  respectively,  which  deserve  consideration,  since,  if
I  rightly  understand  them,  they  tend  to  confirm  my
interpretation  of  Scripts  A  to  T.

On  July  19,  1903,  some  nine  months  after  Dr.  Verrall,
"  finding  no  further  development  had  occurred  for  a  year,"  1
had  related  the  whole  experiment  to  Mrs.  Verrall — after,
that  is,  both  parties  to  the  experiment  had  abandoned  it — ,
Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall  for  the  first  time  sat  together  in
the  same  room  to  write  script  simultaneously.  This  was
only  the  ninth  occasion  on  which  Miss  Verrall  had  pro-

1  Proc.  Vol.  XX.  p.  165.


206


J.  G.  Piddington.


[PART


duced  script.1  Five  times  out  of  the  previous  eight,  Mrs.
Verrall  had  been  present  when  her  daughter  had  been
writing  ;  but  this  was  the  first  instance  of  simultaneous
automatism.

Mrs.  Verrall's  script  was  marked  by  three  unusual
features  :

(1)  all  but  the  first  two  words  were  written  "  with
extreme  speed  "  ;

(2)  all  but  the  first  two  words  are  absolutely  meaning-

less ;

(3)  the  script  was  preceded — a  very  rare,  though  perhaps
not  quite  unparalleled  phenomenon — by  a  vision  ;  and
by  a  vision  sufficiently  impressive  to  make  the
automatist  append  a  record  of  it  to  the  script  itself.

The  first  two  words  are  "  Horatio  Brwwn "  [sic],  and
Mrs.  Verrall's  comment  on  them  is  :  "  H.  Brown  is  associ-
ated in  my  mind  with  Venice."  As  her  next  two  scripts
both  specifically  mention  Venice  and  a  picture  there,  I
regard  the  reference  in  U  to  Mr.  Horatio  F.  Brown,  the  author
of  several  well-known  books  about  Venice,  as  the  first
emergence  of  the  Venice  topic,  and  as  having  nothing  to
do  with  the  subject  of  the  vision.  The  vision  was  of  a
"  long  thin  tall  man  "  in  a  "  white  long  robe."  Nowhere
else,  except  in  the  One-Horse  Dawn  scripts,  do  Mrs.
Verrall's  scripts  mention  a  man  in  a  white  long  robe.
Although  Mrs.  Verrall  herself  never  associated  the  tall  man
of  this  vision  with  the  old  man  in  the  long  white  robe
"  white-headed  but  upright  "  of  Scripts  C,  T>,  E,  H,  M,
N  and  R — at  least  so  far  as  my  information  goes  ;  and
it  goes  a  long  way,  for  Mrs.  Verrall  kept  me  fully  and
constantly  acquainted  with  her  views  about  her  scripts — ,
I  have  no  hesitation  in  identifying  the  two.

Miss  Verrall's  script  contains  the  name  "  Conniston  "  [sic],
and  this is immediately  followed, except  for the  word

1  It  is  unfortunate  that  I  have  to  deal  in  this  paper  chiefly  with  early
scripts  both  of  Mrs.  and  of  Miss  Verrall's  ;  because  the  early  scripts  of
both,  like  those  of  all  automatists  known  to  me,  are  infinitely  more
halting,  fragmentary,  and  inconsequent,  and  contain  a  far  larger  propor-
tion of  sheer  rubbish  than  those  produced  when  the  automatic  faculty
has  developed.


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Dawn "  Experiment.  207


"  riverside  "  (with  which  I  will  deal  presently),  by  "  let
the  name  suffice":  "the  name"  being  evidently  "  Con-
niston."  Next  comes  a  reference  to  Mrs.  Verrall  as  an
automatic  writer  ;  and  finally  a  drawing  of  a  notice-board.

This  is  the  only  occurrence  of  the  name  Coniston  in
Miss  Verrall's  scripts,  which  by  now  number  some  550.  It
never  occurs  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  ;  but  it  does  occur
twice  in  Mrs.  Holland's  scripts,  and  once  in  Mrs.  Willett's.
These  scripts  of  Mrs.  Holland's  and  Mrs.  Willett's  connect
with  other  scripts  of  theirs  which  combine  allusions  to
Brantwood,  Ruskin's  home  near  Coniston,  to  Mrs.  Arthur
Severn,  Ruskin's  niece  who  lived  with  him  at  Brantwood
during  the  last  ten  years  of  his  life,  to  Coniston  Lake,
and  to  a  passage  in  Myers's  Obituary  Notice  of  Ruskin.

I  should  have  liked  to  give  these  scripts  of  Mrs.
Holland's  and  Mrs.  Willett's  in  full  ;  but  they  are  long,
they  would  require  a  good  deal  of  detailed  comment,  and
they  introduce  a  variety  of  topics  outside  the  scope  of
this  paper.  So,  to  save  space,  I  shall  cite  only  three  short
extracts  from  them.

Mrs.  Holland's  Scrip  of  Dec.  22,  1909.

.  .  .  Brantwood — The  other  side  of  the  lake  [i.e.  Lake
Coniston] — The  view  Joan  [i.e.  Joanna,  Mrs.  Arthur  Severn]
liked  best  .  .  .

Mrs.  Willett's  Script  of  July  16,  1911.

.  .  .  Well,  he  says,  say  Coniston.  I  am  trying  to  give
you  a  name  you  know  quite  well  ...  I  might  get  it
through  a  line,  he  says.  Oh,  how  very  strange.  Come
Oedipus,  he  says,  thou  hast  something  or  other  Jong  Col
Col  something  Col  Grove  [i.e.  Colonus  Grove].  .  .  .

Mrs.  Willett's  Script  of  March  15,  1912.

.  .  .  Oh  he  waited  in  the  groves,  unguessed  accom-
panying god.  .  .  .  Who  was  the  man  with  the  rather
beaked  nose  and  the  very  blue  eyes  ?  [Raskin.]  Somebody
said  try  the  name  of  a  river,  it's  not  it  but  it's  a  finger
post,  S  Serbern  Severn  someone  said  something  that
sounded  like  Brantwood.

o


208


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


In  this  last  extract  we  see  Mrs.  Willett  doing  what  she
often  does  :  namely,  interpreting  scripts  of  other  auto-
mat ists  which  she  has  seen.  Here  she  is  interpreting
Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Dec.  22,  1909,  Miss  Verrall's
script  of  July  19,  1903  (Script  V),  and  the  following
passage  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  Aug.  2,  1903,  which  I
have  not  hitherto  quoted  :

reverstone  Severn  the  banks  merely  the  old  place  but  new
associations.

Mrs.  Willett's  script  of  March  15,  1912,  calls  the  river
Severn  a  finger-post  (i.e.  as  pointing  to  Ruskin)  in  order
to  explain  the  "  Conniston  riverside  .  .  .  notice  board "
and  "  reverstone  Severn "  of  Miss  Verrall's  early  scripts.
Both  of  Mrs.  Willett's  scripts  (as  do  also  two  of  those
scripts  of  Mrs.  Holland's  which  form  part  of  the  Coniston-
Brantwood-Severn  series)  quote  from  the  concluding  passage
of  Myers's  Obituary  Notice  of  Ruskin.

This  Obituary  Notice,  which  appeared  first  in  the  Journal
of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  for  March  1900  (Vol.  IX.
pp.  208-210)  and  was  reprinted  in  1904  in  Myers's  Frag-
ments of  Prose  and  Poetry  (pp.  89-94),  ends  thus  :

And  turning  then,  with  heart  full  of  such-like  fancies,  to
that  well-loved  Leader's  fate  ; — imagining  his  baffled  isola-
tion, and  the  disheartenment  of  solitary  years  ; — I  have
pictured  him  waiting  in  the  Coniston  woodlands,  as  OEdipus
in  Colonus'  grove, — waiting  in  mournful  memory,  in  uncom-
plaining calm, — till  he  should  hear  at  last  the  august
summons, — nay,  sounded  it  not  like  the  loving  banter  ? —
of  the  unguessed  accompanying  God.  '  Come,  CEdipus,  why
linger  on  our  journey  ? Thou  hast  kept  me  waiting  long.'

In  view  of  the  foregoing  facts,  I  interpret  "  Conniston  "
in  Script  V  as  implying  a  reference  to  this  passage  in
Myers's  Obituary  Notice  of  Ruskin.1

On  the  assumption,  then,  that  "  Conniston  "  in  Script  V
implies  a  reference  to  the  death  of  Oedipus,  and  on  the

1  As  I  have  not  produced  the  whole  of  the  evidence  on  which  I  rely,
I  am  glad  to  be  allowed  to  say  that  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  Mr.  G.  W.
Balfour,  who  have  seen  all  the  Coniston-Brantwood-Severn  scripts,  agree
with  my  interpretation.


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Dawn "  Experiment.  209

assumption  that  the  tall  man  in  a  white  long  robe  of
Script  U  is  the  same  as  the  old  man  in  white  of  the
One-Horse  Dawn  Scripts,  it  appears  that  on  July  19,
1903,  within  a  few  moments  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  vision  of
the  tall  man  (whom  on  independent  grounds  I  have
identified  with  Oedipus  going  to  his  death),  Miss  Verrall
by  means  of  the  name  Coniston  gets  in  her  script  an
implied  reference  to  the  death  of  Oedipus.  Thus  two
distinct  lines  of  argument  have  led  us  to  the  same  con-
clusion.

The  Emphasis  thrown  on  "  Loneliness."

The  ideas  of  loneliness  and  of  lonely  wandering  are,  as
the  following  extracts show, considerably  insisted on  in
the  One-Horse  Dawn  scripts  :
A. Pererro  in  solitudine.

H. ItlovotTToXog  [  =  oioZwvos]  fxovos  (X€tu  6eov,  etc.
J. Planet  .  .  .  illustre  vagatur  caelo  sine  comite

[Alone  and]  palely  loitering.
P. Monoicus  .  .  .  incumbe  alieno  bacillo.
T. Caeco  viatore  .  .  .  sine  adiutore.

Mrs.  Verrall — who  was,  however,  referring  to  part  of
the  extract  from  H  and  to  the  extract  from  J  only  (see
Proc.  Vol.  XX.  pp.  164  and  392) — explained  the  allusions
to  lonely-wandering  as  attempts  to  give  the  sense  of
fiov67rwXo<i  preferred  by  her  husband.  I  agree  with  this
explanation,  but  think  it  incomplete.  I  have  suggested
above  (pp.  203-204)  that  there  is  also  an  attempt  to  allude
to  the  loneliness  of  the  wandering  Oedipus'  death,  although,
strictly  speaking,  he  was  not  alone.  But  to  the  stress
laid  on  loneliness  a  third  factor  may  have  contributed  :
namely,  the  passage  in  the  Obituary  Notice  of  Ruskin,
where  Myers  speaks  of

"  his baffled isolation, and the disheartenment  of

solitary  years."

The  lonely-wandering  dawn,  Oedipus  oio^Wos  and  Oedipus
parting  from  his  daughters  before  his  death,  and  the
isolation of Ruskin  ; — all these, I suggest, were  among


210


J.  G.  Piddiugton.


[part


the  elements  that  went  to  form  the  total  impression
received  and  recorded  by  the  automatist.1

If  it  be  a  fact  that  these  elements  did  enter  into  the
complex  forming  the  One-Horse  Dawn  scripts,  it  will
perhaps  suffice  to  meet  an  objection  which  might,  I  feel,
be  raised,  not  against  my  interpretation  of  the  One-Horse
Dawn  scripts,  but  against  the  manner  in  which,  according  to
my  interpretation,  these  scripts  made  a  response  to  Dr.
Verrall's  experiment.  A  critic  might  put  the  objection  in
some  such  way  as  this  :

"  According  to  your  theory,  the  aim  of  the  scripts  was
to  show  knowledge  of  the  words  chosen  by  Dr.  Verrall
by  pointing  to  Jebb's  note  on  oloToavov  which  refers  to
fxovoTrMXov  eg  'Aw.  You  argue  that  /uovocttoXos  represents
oloXwvov,  the  subject  of  the  note  ;  that  eynriroi,  viridenti
coma  eXalov  T>j$  TXavKW7riS6i  avrrj?,  etc.,  represent  the
first  (eKaTo/ui.7r6§wv  "NijprjSwv)  of  the  three  passages  from
the  Oed.  Col.  cited  in  the  note  ;  that  the  blind  traveller
and  the  old  man  leaning  on  a  staff,  etc.,  represent  the
second  (-wvKvoTTTepoi  cujSove?)  ;  and  that  /u.opoo-toXos,
besides  rej>resenting  oiofyvov,  points  to  Jebb's  third  and
last  quotation  from  the  Oed.  Col.  (SiutoXou?  aSeXcpus).
Without  disputing  your  interpretation,  I  should  like  to
raise  one  point  which  it  involves.  The  scripts,  as  you
yourself  have  observed,  lay  stress  on  the  old  man  in  white,
namely,  in  your  view,  on  Oedipvis  dressed  for  burial.
But  the  context  of  none  of  the  three  passages  quoted  in
Jebb's  note  relates  to  Oedipus  being  dressed  for  burial  or

1  With  regard  to  the  extract  from  Script  J  it  may  be  objected  that
it  is  a  Planet  which  "  illustre  vagatur  caelo  sine  comite,"  and  that  a
man  is  not  a  planet  and  is  not  spoken  of  in  the  neuter  (illustre).  To
this  I  should  reply  that  I  take  "  Planet  "  to  be  used  equivocally  of  the
■wandering  dawn  and  of  Oedipus  TrXavrjTijs  (i.e.  planetes  ="  wanderer  ")  ;
that  the  neater  illustre.  (if  it  really  be  neuter)  is  at  once  followed  by
the  words  "  palely  loitering,"  which  in  their  original  context  in  Keats'
poem  are  applied  to  the  Knight-at-arms  and  are  therefore  masculine  ;
and  that  the  fiovdaroXos  of  H,  to  which  the  "vagatur  sine  comite"  of
J  seems  to  correspond,  is  masculine  also.

The  Latin  of  the  scripts  being  far  from  classical,  it  is  possible  to  take
illustre,  not  as  neuter  singular,  but  as  the  adverb  ("  brightly  ")  of
illustris,  although  apparently  only  the  comparative  and  superlative  forms,
illustrius  and  illustrissime,  are  found.


lxxvi.] The  "  One- Horse  Dawn"  Experiment.  211

to  his  death  ;  and  this  being  so,  why  do  the  scripts
emphasise  an  incident — culminating  point  of  the  play
though  it  be — between  which  and  the  passages  quoted  by
Jebb  no  direct  and  immediate  connexion  is  to  be  found?  "

This  imaginary  criticism — which,  having  formulated  it
myself,  I  regard  as  quite  reasonable — is,  as  I  have  said,
to  a  large  extent  met,  if  we  suppose  that  the  intelligence
responsible  for  the  scripts  aimed  at  combining  with  the
allusions  to  Jebb's  note  allusions  to  the  closing  passage
of  Myers's  Obituary  Notice  and  so  to  the  death  of  Oedipus,
for  the  purpose  of  showing  that  it  knew  not  only  the
actual  words  chosen  by  the  experimenter  but  also  the  sense
of  loneliness  which  the  experimenter  thought  the  word
[aovottwXos  to  possess.

Another  consideration,  however,  may  have  actuated  the
intelligence  responsible  for  the  scripts.  By  repeatedly
attempting  to  describe  what  is  the  climax  of  the  play,
the  death  of  Oedipus,  he  may  have  sought  to  ensure
the  allusions  to  the  other  passages  in  the  Oedipus  Coloneus
{i.e.  those  cited  in  Jebb's  note  on  olo^wvov)  being
recognised  as  such.  The  fact  that  these  attempts  were
not  recognised  for  many  years  is  not,  I  think,  a  sound
reason  for  rejecting  this  suggestion.

Final,  Remabks.

//  the  interpretation  put  forward  in  this  paper  be  accepted
(this  conditional  clause  governs,  of  course,  all  that  follows),  it
seems  certain  that,  so  far  as  the  allusions  to  Oedipus  are
concerned,  a  result  was  obtained  which,  though  successful,
was  so  unlike  anything  expected  by  the  experimenter,
that  he  never  realised  the  success  achieved.

In  ordinary  life,  if  A  tried  to  make  B  do  a  particular
thing  in  a  particular  way,  and  B,  while  failing  to  do  the
thing  in  the  way  desired  by  A,  nevertheless  achieved  ^4's
object  by  some  totally  different  method,  we  should  not
ascribe  the  successful  result  to  A,  except  in  so  far  as  by
suggesting  to  B  an  object  to  be  achieved  he  had  stimu-
lated B  into  activity  in  a  given  direction.  We  might
attribute  the  successful  result  to  B  ; but whether  justi-


212


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


fiably  or  not  would  depend  on  circumstances  ;  for  B
might  have  been  coached  by  a  third  party,  whose  instruc-
tions had  proved  more  acceptable  or  more  intelligible  than
A's.  But  anyhow  A  would  get  only  the  credit  of  having
set  the  ball  rolling.

We  know  that  Dr.  Verrall  set  the  ball  rolling  ;  but  what
we  don't  know  is  whether  it  was  he  who  kept  it  rolling.

I  think  we  may  assume  with  absolute  confidence  that
Dr.  Verrall  did  not  consciously  try  to  transfer  telepathi-
cally  to  Mrs.  Verrall  the  substance  of  Jebb's  note  on  the
word  oloQavov.  Had  he  ever  done  so,  not  only  would
he  have  placed  the  fact  on  record,  as  he  did  when  he
deliberately  "  fixed  his  mind  on  the  notion  of  '  horse  '  "
(Proc.  Vol.  XX.  p.  164)  ;  but  he  could  hardly  have  failed
to  recognise  the  allusions  in  the  scripts  to  the  contexts  of
the  passages  from  the  Oed.  Col.  which  Jebb  cites  in  his
note  on  olo^oovov.  It  is,  I  think,  curious  that  he  never
recognised  the  allusions  to  Oedipus  even  though  he  did
not  in  any  way  consciously  associate  Oedipus  with  the
subject  of  his  experiment  ;  but  that  he  should  have  failed
to  do  so,  had  he  consciously  thought  of  Oedipus  oi6fyi'o<;
and  of  Jebb's  note  on  oloXwvov  in  connexion  with  idLovoTraihov
e?  'Aw,  is,  to  my  mind,  at  least,  incredible.

He  was,  of  course,  familiar  with  both  the  Oedipus  Tyrannus
and  the  Oedipus  Coloneus  ; and,  matter  of  fact,  he

possessed  and  used  Jebb's  editions  of  these  two  (and  other)
Sophoclean  plays.1  As,  moreover,  he  was  on  terms  of
close  friendship  with  Sir  Richard  Jebb,  and  was  for
several  years  a  neighbour  of  his,  and  as  both  he  and
Jebb  were  devoted  to  the  study  of  Greek  dramatists,
and  were  wont  to  exchange  views  on  points  of  interpre-
tation, grammar  and  so  forth,  it  would  be  absurd  to  argue
against  the  possibility  of  Jebb's  note  on  olo^m'ov  having
been  known  to  him.  That  he  may  well  have  been  ac-
quainted with  it,  is  certain  ;  that  he  was  acquainted  with
it,  however,  is  not.

But,  assuming  that  he  had  at  one  time  been  acquainted
with  it,  how  are  we  to  explain  his  failure  to  recognise  the
allusions  to  it  in  the  scripts  ?

1  For  detailed  information  see  Appendix  B.


*


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Dawn "  Experiment.  213

"Oh!",  I  fancy  I  hear  someone  saying,  "the  explana-
tion's simple  enough.  The  whole  thing  was  due  to  sub-
liminal memory  and  subliminal  activity.  Dr.  Verrall  had
no  conscious  recollection  of  Jebb's  note,  but  his  subcon-
sciousness remembered  it  and  impressed  Mrs.  Verrall
telepathically  with  it."

Well,  perhaps  so  ;  only  I  would  point  out  that  in  the
circumstances  Dr.  Verrall's  failure  to  recover  consciously  a
recollection  of  a  thing  so  accurately  retained  in  his  sub-
consciousness is  a  very  singular  phenomenon.  For  what
were  the  circumstances  ?  He  did  not  try  the  experiment
for  a  moment  or  two,  or  an  hour  or  two,  or  on  one  or
two  days,  and  then  drop  it  for  good  and  all.  On  the
contrary,  it  occupied  his  conscious  thoughts,  and  was  the
subject  of  his  conscious  efforts,  over  a  long  period,  during
which  he  regularly  examined  the  scripts  produced  by
Mrs.  Verrall  ;  and  when  the  experiment  was  concluded,
he  made  a  careful  study  of  the  scripts.  Moreover,  even
if  it  be  granted  that  the  allusions  in  the  scripts  to  Jebb's
note  on  ololwvov  are  recondite — so  recondite  as  to  baffle
what  Mr.  Bayfield  has  called  Dr.  Verrall's  "  more  than
Oedipodean  acuteness  as  a  solver  of  riddles  " 1 — ,  still
the  allusions  to  the  old  man  in  white  read  in  connexion
with  the  Greek  words  or  phrases  in  Scripts  C,  E  and  K,
ought  surely  to  have  put  one  so  versed  in  Greek  drama
on  the  track  of  Oedipus,  when  ex  hypothesi  his  subconscious
thoughts  were  actively  fixed  on  a  note  relating  to  Oedipus.

I  must  confess  that  I  find  such  a  cleavage  between  the
subliminal  and  supraliminal  strata  of  Dr.  Verrall's  conscious-
ness in  the  particular  circumstances  very  hard  to  imagine.
Ten  years  of  life  remained  to  him  after  the  experiment
was  ended,  and  yet  during  all  these  years,  notwithstanding
his  constant  study  of  Greek  literature,  he  was  to  come
across  nothing  to  awaken  a  conscious  recollection  of  the
connexion,  latent  in  his  mind,  between  Jebb's  note  and
the  words  /jlovottwXov  e<;  'Aw — the  subject  of  his  experiment
— discussed  in  that  note.

(It  may  be  thought  that  I  am  here  losing  sight  of  the

1  Memoir  of  Dr.  A.  W.  Verrall  by  the  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield  in
Verrall's  Collected  Literary  Essays,  p.  L.


214  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

fact  that  a  submerged,  memory  of  Dr.  Verrall's  has  been
held  to  be  responsible  for  the  appearance  in  Script  I
of  the  word  "  moly."  I  have  not  lost  sight  of  the  point ;
but  for  certain  reasons,  which  for  convenience'  sake
I  have  relegated  to  Appendix  C,  I  do  not  .  accept  this
explanation  of  "  moly.")

But  another  explanation  is  possible.  Dr.  Verrall  may
have  done  no  more  than  furnish  Mrs.  Verrall — telepathi-
cally,  of  course, — with  the  words  /moi'OTrwXov  eg  A« ;  and
Mrs.  Verrall  may  have  done  the  rest.  She  certainly  may
have  known  Jebb's  note.  She  certainly  had  read  the
Oedipus  Tyrannus  and  the  Oedipus  Coloneus ;  and  she
certainly  sometimes  consulted  Jebb's  editions  of  Sophocles'
plays.  I  know  that  in  the  spring  and  autumn  of  1915,
a  year  before  she  died,  she  read  in  Jebb's  edition  the
Chorus  in  praise  of  Colonus  and  Attica — the  evnnros
Chorus — and  also  the  Messenger's  account  of  the  death
of  Oedipus  ;  and  I  know  from  comments  she  sent  me  at
the  time  that  she  read  Jebb's  notes  on  both  passages.
Yet  neither  did  the  eunnros  Chorus  convey  any  hint  to  her  of
the  meaning  of  eyiTnroi  in  Script  K,  nor  the  account  of  Oedipus'
death  any  hint  of  the  identity  of  the  old  man  in  white.

How  strange  an  obfuscation  of  memory  must  be  postu-
lated, whether  the  origin  of  the  Oedipus  references  be
traced  to  Dr.  or  to  Mrs.  Verrall  !  Not  that  I  am  to  be
understood  as  advocating  any  theory  in  opposition  to  that
of  telepathy  inter  vivos  to  account  for  the  phenomena
under  discussion.  I  am  but  trying  to  bring  out  how
curious  are  the  assumptions  which  this  theory  involves.
It  isn't  by  any  means  a  simple  theory.1

Personally  I  advance  no  theory  of  this  particular  case
of  which  I  gladly  make  a  present  to  those  who  hold  that
telepathy  inter  vivos  is  the  true  explanation  of  the  super-
normal phenomena  observable  in  scripts.  They  need,  I
fancy,  cheering  up  a  little  ;  and  if  so  be  that  from  this
case  they  can  extract  any  comfort.,  so  far  as  I  am  con-
cerned, they  are  welcome  to  it.

Dec.  22,  1917.

1  At  the  end  of  Appendix  A  I  point  out  further  difficulties  that  up-
holders of  this  theory  must  face.


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.


2J5


APPENDIX  A.

Miss  Vebeall's  Sceipt  of  Jan.  28,  1915.

.  .  .  Alone  with  God  none  other  no  not  one(o) — the  flowing
tide(6) — there  is  a  tide

CO LeVS [SIC] 0<TTI$ 770T  €<TTly'

the  heaven  born(l,) — born  again

To strive(/)  & strive  again — aW  "lo/xev® — Homer(f) —
o8oiraiira\o^e) —

the  wanderer  home(e) — a  wanderer  on  the  face  of  the  word
[sic] — the  earth

&  wander  till  I  die(/) — the  song  of  the  road'?) — Uber
alien  Gipfeln  ist  Ruh'(W

Comments  on  the  above  Script.

(a)  Miss  Verrall  was,  of  course,  familiar  with  her  mother's
One-Horse  Dawn  scripts.  Furthermore,  between  May  and
December,  1912,  she  had  gone  through  Mrs.  Verrall's
scripts  of  1901-1904,  for  the  purpose  of  translating  the
Greek  and  Latin  contained  in  them.  Consequently  we
can,  I  think,  safely  set  down  "  alone  with  God  none  other
no  not  one  "  as  a  reproduction  of  the  phrase
/ulovos  /UL6TQ.  Oeov  ouSe  aXXov  tlvos

(translated  by  her  "  alone  with  God  and  none  other "),
which  occurs  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Sept.  4,  1901
(Script  H).  Neither  the  original  Greek  phrase,  nor  the
translation  of  it,  occurs  elsewhere  in  any  of  the  scripts.

(6)  "  The  flowing  tide  "  is  a  recurrent  phrase  in  H.  V.
script,  and  comparison  of  the  various  contexts  in  which
it  occurs  shows  that  its  chief  (though  not  necessarily  its
only)  meaning  is  the  tide  of  the  river  of  death.  The
phrase forms  the  subject  of  a  marked  cross-correspondence


216


J.  G.  Piddington.


[PART


with  several  of  Mrs.  King's  scripts,  where  it  bears  the
same  meaning,  and  in  one  of  which  (Dec.  12,  1913)  it
is  definitely  associated  with  the  tide  that  "  moving  seems
asleep "  of  Crossing  the  Bar.  I  cannot  enter  into  parti-
culars here  ;  and  so  the  reader  who  does  not  care  to
accept  statements  unsupported  by  detailed  evidence  can
ignore  what  is  said  here  on  the  subject  of  "  the  flowing
tide."

(c)  Aeschylus,  Agamemnon,  160.  For  the  immediate  pur-
pose in  hand,  I  think  this  quotation  may  be  fairly  treated
as  carrying  on  the  thought  implied  in  "  alone  with  God
none  other  no  not  one  "  ;  though  I  do  not  say  that  this
is  its  only  significance. The  context  is  as  follows  :

Zei/?,  o(tti<s  7tot eariv,  ei  too  av-

TW (plXoi'  K6K\t]IUI.eVlpy

touto  vlv  7rpocrevve7r<0.
ovk  e^w  7rpocreiKacrat,
irdvT  e7ri<TTa6iULWiu.evo9,

■7rX>]V AlO?, €1 TO jUUTClV UTTO (ppOVTlSo?  d^Oo?
YjO>/ fia\eiV  €T)1TU/ULWS.

"  Zeus,  whosoe'er  he  is,  I  bespeak  in  simple  wise,  if
such  address  be  pleasing  unto  him  ;  there  is  none
other  name,  though  I  ponder  all,  nor  cognisance  of  my
imagining,  save  Zeus,  which  shall  surely  discharge
my  spirit  of  this  heaviness."  (George  C.  W.  Warr's
translation.)

(d)  "  Heaven-born,"  as  the  context  shows,  means  Odys-
seus, to  whom  the  epithet  Sioyevw  ("  sprung  from  Zeus,"
or  "  heaven-born  ")  is  frequently  applied  in  the  Odyssey.
See  e.g.  Od.  x.  443,  488  ;  xi.  405,  473,  617,  etc.

(e)  The  allusion  is  to  the  scene  in  Odyssey  xvii  where
Odysseus,  accompanied  by  the  swineherd  Eumaeus,  returns
to  his  home  after  an  absence  of  twenty  years.

Now  all  this  while  Odysseus  and  the  goodly  swineherd
were  bestirring  them  to  go  from  the  field  to  the  city  ;
and  the  swineherd,  a  master  of  men,  spake  first  saying  :

1  Well,  my  friend,  forasmuch  as  I  see  thou  art  eager  to
be  going  to  the  city  to-day,  even  as  my  master  gave
command  ;  .  .  .


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.


217


Come  then,  let  us  go  on  our  way  [a  A  A'  aye  vvv  'tofxev],
for  lo,  the  day  is  far  spent,  and  soon  wilt  thou  find  it
colder  toward  evening.'

Then  Odysseus  of  many  counsels  answered  him  saying  :
'  I  mark,  I  heed  :  all  this  thou  speakest  to  one  with
understanding.  But  let  us  be  going  [aAA'  tofiev],  and  be
thou  my  guide  withal  to  the  end.  And  if  thou  hast
anywhere  a  staff  ready  cut,  give  it  me  to  lean  upon,  for
truly  ye  said  that  slippery  was  the  way '  [<5o?  Se  ,aoi,  e'l

7To6l  TOl poirakov TeTjJ.tJjJLeVOV ecrTiv,  K.T.A.]

Therewith  he  cast  about  his  shoulders  a  mean  scrip,  all
tattered,  and  a  cord  withal  to  hang  it,  and  Eumaeus  gave
him  a  staff  to  his  mind  [aeacea  ftaWero  7n'ip>]v,  tvvkvol
ptoyaXeriv'  ev  Se  <TTp6(pos  tjev  aopT)'/p.  E(Va*o?  S'  apu  oi
uKrj'TVTpov  OvfjLuph  eScoicev.']  So  these  twain  went  on  their
way  .  .  .•  And  the  swineherd  led  his  lord  to  the  city
in  the  guise  of  a  beggar,  a  wretched  man  and  an  old,
leaning  on  a  staff  [arK^irToiJ.evov']  ;  and  sorry  was  the
raiment  wherewith  he  was  clothed  upon.  But  as  they
fared  along  the  rugged  path  [oSov  kutu  7rai-ira\6etTO-ai>~\
they  drew  near  to  the  town.  .  .  .  (Butcher  and  Lang's
translation  of  Odyssey  xvii.  182-205.)

The  words  aAA'  "oisev  and  oSoiranrakos  are  quite  sufficient,
even  without  their  context  in  the  script,  to  fix  the  reference  to
this  passage.  The  word  oSo-KanraXos,  it  is  true,  does  not  exist,
but  no  one,  I  think, — no  scholar,  at  least — will  question  that
it  is  meant  for  o$o?  iranraXoea-aa,  a  phrase  found  only  here
and  in  Iliad  xii.  168.  The  context  in  the  script  being  utterly
unsuited  to  the  Iliad  passage  and  suitable  to  the  passage
in  the  Odyssey,  the  choice  must  fall  on  the  latter.

Now  Jebb,  it  will  be  remembered  (see  p.  200  above),  in
his  note  on  the  word  (pope!  in  O.C.  1262  maintains  that
it  does  not  mean  "  obtains  by  begging,"  but  simply
"carries,"  and  that  the  allusion  is  "to  a  wallet  (m'lpa)
carried  by  Oedipus."  And  he  quotes  in  illustration  of  the
wallet  forming  "  part  of  the  conventional  outfit  for  the
wandering  beggar  "  Odyssey  xiii.  437-438  :

SwKe  Se  ol  (TK>]7rTpov  kw  aeUeu  7n'jp>iv,
irvKva  pwyaXerjv  ev  Se.  crTpocpo?  yev  aopW/p.


218  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

If  the  reader  will  refer  back  to  the  Greek  words  inter-
polated in  the  English  translation  of  the  passage  from
Odyssey  xvii,  he  will  see  that  the  words  here  underlined
are  the  same  as  those  used  of  the  wallet  there.  In  each
case  the  word  <TKi)irTpov  is  used  of  the  staff,  though  in
Odyssey  xvii  po-wukov  is  used  as  well.

At  the  back  of  this  script  there  lies,  then,  it  seems  to
me,  a  knowledge  of  Jebb's  note  on  (popei  in  O.C.  1262,  and
of  a  connexion  between  it  and  the  old  man  in  white  of
the  One-Horse  Dawn  scripts.  For  otherwise  what  happy
chance  led  the  automatist  first  to  refer  back  to  the  old
man  in  white  "  journeying  alone  "  who  is  "  alone
with  God  and  none  other,"  and  then  to  follow  this
by  a  reference  to  Odysseus  as  described  in  Odyssey  xvii  ?
If  it  be  objected  that  the  reference  in  Miss  Verrall's
script  is  not  to  the  lines  in  Odyssey  xiii  quoted  by
Jebb,  but  only  to  a  parallel  passage  in  a  later  book,  I
would  reply  that  there  is  a  good  reason  for  the  substitu-
tion :  the  passage  in  Odyssey  xvii  involving  a  more  pointed
allusion  to  the  home-coming  of  Odysseus  (cf.  "  the  wan-
derer home  ")  than  the  passage  in  the  earlier  book  would
have  done.  The  passage  quoted  by  Jebb  might,  of  course,
have  served  to  point  to  the  home-coming  in  a  general
way  ;  but  the  setting-out  of  Odysseus  and  Eumaeus  "  from
the  field  to  the  city  "  as  told  in  Odyssey  xvii  marks  the
final  stage  of  the  long-delayed  return  ;  and  it  is  the  final
stage  of  the  journey  that  is  wanted  to  make  a  marked
parallel  with  Oedipus  going  to  his  death.

It  was  this  script  of  Miss  Verrall's,  as  already  stated  (see
pp.  190  and  200-201  above),  with  its  allusions  to  Odyssey
xvii.  182-205  that  led  me  more  than  two  years  ago  to  con-
jecture that  the  old  man  in  white  of  Scripts  C  and  D
might  be  Odysseus.  I  made  a  note  to  that  effect  on
Script  D,  which  I  copy  here  :

"  If  the  :  longaevus  senex  '  of  M.  V.  3049  [i.e.  Script  C]
and  here  [i.e.  Script  DJ  means  Odysseus  disguised  as  a
beggar,  the  words  '  Mone  inquit  alteram  ne  titubet  '  [in  D]
would  have  some  sense.  See  Odyssey  xvii.  196.  Odys-
seus borrowed  a  staff  (p6—a\ov)  from  the  swineherd  because


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.


219


the  way  was  slippery. The  '  box  ' [of  D]  would  have  to
be  the  Tn'/pij  or  wallet  which  Odysseus  carried — not  in  his
hand, but on  his  back. The poiraXov  is also called  a
triafirrpov  (ib.  199). Cf.  H.V.  17."
My reason for comparing H.V. 17 (i.e.  Miss  Verrall's
script  of  Nov.  22, 1906)  was  that  its  opening  words  are
as  follows  :

Senex  cum  albis  capillis  bifurcatis  in  sceptro  incumbens
senectute  praelapsus.

(An  old  man  with  white  hair  parted  in  two  (?) .  leaning
on  a  staff,  advanced  (?)  in  age.)
The  Latin  is  odd  and  incorrect.  Thus,  the  word  bifur-
catis (formed  from  an  imaginary  verb  bifurco)  does  not
exist,  though  bifurcus  ("two-forked"),  which  no  doubt  it
represents,  does.  Here  the  sense  intended  seems  to  be
"  parted  in  two."  1  Next,  sceptro  is  used  as  if  it  were  the
Greek  uKi']irTpGv  (skeptron),  which  may  mean  either  a  staff
used  for  support  in  walking,  or  a  staff  borne  by  a  king
as  an  emblem  of  authority,  i.e.  a  sceptre.  But  though
the  Latin  sceptrum  is  the  same  word  as  aK^irTpov,  and
means  a  sceptre,  it  is  not  used  in  the  sense  of  a  staff.
The  use  of  sceptro  in  the  script  to  mean  a  staff  accordingly
seems  to  point  to  a  Greek  rather  than  a  Latin  topic.
Praelapsus,  which  in  view  of  the  context  I  have  ventured
to  render  "  advanced,"  properly  means  "  having  glided
forward."

But  however  the  incorrect  words  be  rendered,  it  is
practically  certain  that  the  Latin  sentence  refers  back  to
the  "  longaevus  senex  barba  alba  "  of  Script  C,  who  in
Script  D  is  called  "  albicapillus,"  and  to  the  "  incumbe
bacillo  "  of  P  and  Q.

1  Mr.  G.  W.  Balfour  suggests  that  if  bifurcato  be  read  instead  of  bifur-
catis the  allusion  might  be  to  Oedipus  leaning  on  his  two  daughters.
Cf.  Oed.  Col,  848-849  :

oVkovv  wot'  £k  toijtolv  ye  fxr}  aK-qirTpoiv  Ztl
bdoLTroprjcrris

(So  those  two  crutches  [i.e.  Antigone  and  Ismene]  shall  never  more
prop  thy  steps)  ;
and  1109  (Oedipus  addressing  his  daughters)  :

Sj U  KTjTTTpQ.  <P<1>t6s

(Props  of  mine  age  !).


220


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


(/)  "  To  strive  and  strive  again  .  .  .  And  wander  till
I  die."  Though  there  may  be  a  reminiscence  here  of
"  I  wander'd  till  I  aied  "  in  Matthew  Arnold's  Thyrsis —
a  poem  several  times  quoted  in  H.V.  script — ,  the  context
points  rather  to  the  following  lines  in  Tennyson's  Ulysses
(Ulysses  being  the  Latin  form  of  the  name  Odysseus)  :

"  for  my  purpose  holds
To  sail  beyond  the  sunset,  and  the  baths
Of  all  the  western  stars,  until  I  die.

One  equal  temper  of  heroic  hearts,
Made  weak  by  time  and  fate,  but  strong  in  will
To  strive,  to  seek,  to  find,  and  not  to  yield."
If  the  allusion  is  to  these fines,  it  shows that "  the
wanderer  home "  means  not only  Odysseus  returning  to
his  home  in  Ithaca  but  Odysseus  going  to  his  long  home.

(g)  R.  L. .  Stevenson,  A  Song  of  the  Road.

(h)  Goethe,  Wanderer's  Nachtlied.

It  appears  from  what  I  have  said  above  that  Miss
Verrall's  script  of  Nov.  22,  1906  (H.  V.  17)  is  connected
with  the  One-Horse  Dawn  Experiment  begun  in  1901  and
ended  in  October  1902.  I  have  no  explanation  to  offer
of  why  the  subject  thus  cropped  up  again  four  years
after  the  experiment  was  brought  to  a  close,  unless  it
be  that  the  publication  in  or  about  October  1906  of
Mrs.  Verrall's  account  of  the  experiment  revived  interest
in  it.  But  then  what  about  the  re-emergence  of  the  sub-
ject on  July  19,  1903,  in  Scripts  U  and  V  ?  So  far  as
I  am  aware,  there  was  nothing  at  that  date  to  redirect
attention  to  the  experiment.  There  may,  of  course,  have
been  something  of  which  I  never  heard  ;  but  if  so,  how
then  did  Mrs.  Verrall  fail  to  associate  her  vision  of  a
tall  man  in  a  white  long  robe  (Script  U)  with  the  old
man  in  white  of  her  One-Horse  Dawn  scripts  ?

Furthermore,  I  have  argued  that  Miss  Verrall's  script
of  January  28,  1915,  likewise  harks  back  to  the  experi-
ment of  1901-1902.  What  intelligence  was  then  responsible
for  combining  a  "  crib  "  from  the  One-Horse  Dawn  scripts
— "  alone  with  God  none  other  no  not one  " — with  the


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.


221


home-coming  of  Odysseus  :  a  combination  which  has  every
appearance  of  reflecting  Jebb's  note  on  Oedipus'  wallet  ?
If  we  assume  a  revival  of  interest  on  Miss  Verrall's  part
in  the  One-Horse  Dawn  scripts  of  some  thirteen  years
earlier,  that  will  not  explain  the  combination  of  topics.
Was  Dr.  Verrall,  who  had  been  dead  for  two  years  and
a  half,  the  "  agent  "  ?  And  if  so,  before  or  after  death  ?
If  before  death,  then  Miss  Verrall  must  have  acquired  her
information  telepathically  from  him  more  than  two  years
and  a  half  before  it  emerged  in  her  script.

Or  was  Mrs.  Verrall  the  "  agent  "  ?  She  saw  Miss
Verrall's  script  of  January  28,  1915,  for  the  first  time  on
or  about  October  20,  1915.  Between  March  and  October  8,
1915,  not  only  had  her  own  script  twice  referred  to  the
death  of  Oedipus,  but  on  at  least  three  different  occasions
she  had  been  reading — in  connexion,  be  it  noted,  with
scripts  and  not  in  connexion  with  her  classical  studies —
various  passages  in  the  Oed.  Col.,  and  reading  them  in
Jebb's  edition,  and  consulting  several  at  least  of  Jebb's
notes  on  these  passages.  From  notes  she  made  between
September  28  and  October  8,  1915,  hi  my  possession,  it  is
clear  that  she  read  carefully  the  part  of  the  Messenger's
speech  where  he  describes  Oedipus  coming  to  the  hill  of
Demeter  Euchloos  and  being  washed  by  his  daughters  ;
and  in  these  notes  she  refers  specifically  to  O.C.  1598-1602.
Now  since  the  latter  part  of  1.  1602  and  1.  1603  are

\0VTp0l9 T6  VIV

ecrd>jTi  t e^)'i<TK>i<Ta.v  f]  vo/ul^erai

(Then  they  ministered  to  him  with  washing,  and  dressed
him,  as  use  ordains),

she  must  have  read  the  actual  lines  which  explain  why
the  old  man  of  the  One-Horse  Dawn  scripts  is  dressed  in
white.  Yet  when,  on  October  20,  1915 — or  a  day  or  two
later — she  saw  in  her  daughter's  script  of  January  28,
1915,  the  phrase  "  Alone  with  God  none  other  no  not
one,"  which  in  her  own  script  of  1901  had  been  applied
to  the  old  man  in  white,  she  failed  to  recognise  it  as  a
reference  back  to  the  old  man.  This  failure,  especially
when  her  recent  interest  in  the  Oedipus  Coloneus  is  taken


222


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


into  account,  seems  to  argue  a  singular  impenetrability
of  her  supraliminal  consciousness,  if  less  than  nine  months
earlier  her  subliminal  activities  had  really  been  responsible
for  the  allusion  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  to  Jebb's  note  on
the  wallet  of  Oedipus.  She  neither  recognised  the  refer-
ence back  to  Script  H  in  "  alone  with  God  none  other
no  not  one,"  nor  did  she  in  any  way  connect  her  daughter's
script  with  Oedipus.  This  I  know  because  she  sent  me
notes  on  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  January  28,  1915  ;  and
these  notes  make  no  mention  of  Script  H  or  of  Oedipus  ;
and  had  she  traced  any  connexion  with  either,  I  am
perfectly  certain  she  would  have  told  me.

Whatever  may  be  the  true  solution  of  the  problem,  it
will,  I  think,  be  generally  admitted  that  there  is  a  very
strong  presumption  indeed  that  whatever  intelligence  was
responsible  for  the  allusions  to  Jebb's  note  on  oioXiovov
in  1901-1902  was  likewise  responsible  for  the  allusions  to
the  tall  man  in  a  white  long  robe  and  to  Coniston  in
1903,  and  to  the  allusion  to  Jebb's  note  on  Oedipus'
wallet  in  January  1915.


APPENDIX  B.

Dr.  Verrall's  familiarity  with  Jebb's  editions  of  the
Oedipus  Coloneus  and  Oedipus  Tyr annus.

Dr.  Verrall  reviewed  Jebb's  edition  of  the  Oedipus
Coloneus,  probably  early  in  1886.  The  edition  of  the
Oedipus  Tyr  annus  he  had  reviewed  earlier.  These  facts
I  derive  from  the  Life  and  Letters  of  Sir  Richard  Claver-
Jiouse  J  ebb  (p.  262).

To  the  Life  and  Letters  he  also  contributed  a  chapter
on  Jebb  as  Scholar  and  Critic.  This  chapter  shows  his
thorough  and  detailed  acquaintance  with  Jebb's  work.  Of
Jebb's  editions  of  Sophocles'  plays  he  deals  in  this  chapter
only  with  the  Philoctetes  and  the  Trachiniae.  He  does
not,  I  think,  so  much  as  mention  the  editions  of  the
Oedipus  Coloneus  and  Oedipus  Tyr  annus  ;  though,  of  course,


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.


223


this  affords  no  reason  for  assuming  that  he  was  not  just
as  well  acquainted  with  them  as  with  the  editions  of  the
other  plays.

Mrs.  Salter  (Miss  Verrall)  has  kindly  allowed  me  to
examine  copies  of  Jebb's  Oedipus  Tyrannus  and  Oedipus
Coloneus  used  by  her  father.

In  the  copy  of  the  O.T.  I  have  found  no  pencilled
marginal  notes  either  on  the  text  or  on  the  foot-notes  ;
and  only  one  marginal  note  in  the  Appendix.  There  is
no  note  or  mark  of  any  kind  on  the  page  containing  the
foot-note  on  oloCoavov.

In  his  copy  of  Jebb's  edition  of  the  Oedipus  Coloneus
Dr.  Verrall  has  entered  a  number  of  marginal  notes,
relating  chiefly  to  the  text  or  to  the  apparatus  criticus ;
and  has  also  marked  a  good  number  of  the  foot-notes,
and  occasionally  made  a  comment  on  them.

As  regards  the  three  passages  from  the  Oed.  Col.  quoted
by  Jebb  in  his  edition  of  the  O.T.  in  connexion  with  the
word  oioCwvov,  I  find  that  Dr.  Verrall  has  made  no
mark  against,  or  comment  on,  S«tt6\ov?  aSe\<pa$,  and
none  on  7rvKv6-7TTepoi  cujSoves.  Against  Jebb's  note  on
eKaTo/unr68wi>  N>/|<j//cW  he  has  placed  the  following  comment  :
"  Surely  Sophocles  means  100  Nereids."  This  comment
does  not  concern  Jebb's  view  that  the  second  part  of  the
compound  adjective  is  equivalent  to  a  separate  epithet  for
the  noun ;  but  concerns  merely  Jebb's  view  as  to  the
number  of  the  Nereids,  which  he  (Jebb)  places  at  fifty,
with  characteristic  matter-of-factness  assigning  them  two
feet  apiece.


APPENDIX  C.

In  Proc.  Vol.  XX.  pp.  163-164  Mrs.  Verrall  dealing  with
the  words  in  Script  I  (September  9,  1901)  :

"  Find  the  herb  moly  that  will  help — it  is  a  guide,"

wrote  as  follows  :


We  could  attach  no  meaning  to  the  allusion  to  Milton's

p


224


J.  G.  Piddington.  [part


phrase  ;  1  the  passage  in  Comus  (11.  636-7)  seemed  to  have
no  bearing  on  the  context,  and  recalled  nothing  to  my
husband  either  at  the  time  or  later  when  he  revealed  his
experiment  to  me,  and  we  examined  in  detail  together  all
the  writing  of  these  weeks.  But  in  the  spring  of  1905,
when  I  was  writing  this  paper  and  had  ascertained  that
the  passage  of  the  Orestes  [containing  the  words  /j.ovowu>\ov
e?  'Aco]  was  set  in  the  last  paper  of  the  Classical  Tripos  of
1873,  it  occurred  to  me  to  look  at  the  other  papers  set
in  that  year,  and  I  found  that  the  subject  for  Latin  Hexa-
meters in  the  Tripos  of  1873  was  the  passage  from  Comus,
ending,

"  And  yet  more  med'cinal  is  it  than  that  moly
Which  Hermes  once  to  wise  Ulysses  gave."

It  appears  that  the  combination  of  the  letters  m  o  I,
produced  in  the  effort  to  give  the  word  p-ovoirwhov ,  had,
by  some  association  of  ideas,  suggested  a  reminiscence  of
another  paper  in  the  same  Tripos  examination.  The
curious  point  about  this  is  that  the  recollection  had
entirely  gone  from  my  husband's  mind ;  when  I  asked
him  if  he  had  any  recollection  of  other  papers  in  the
Tripos,  and  in  particular  of  the  Latin  Verse,  he  could
recall  nothing,  and  even  the  sight  of  the  passage  in  Comus
did  not  revive  any  memory  of  having  translated  it.  .  .  .
My  script  seems  to  have  registered  here  not  only  an
existing  mental  impression  of  my  husband's,  but  also  a
forgotten  past  impression,  once  closely  associated  with  the
first.

Mrs.  Verrall's  suggestion  (for  it  is  hardly  a  conclusion)
that  the  coincidence  between  the  "  moly "  of  her  script
and  the  "  moly  "  of  the  Tripos  paper  was  not  an  acciden-

1 1  suppose  that  Mrs.  Verrall  spoke  of  "  the  allusion  to  Milton's
phrase,"  because  of  the  preceding:  "  dailey  is  more  like, — daily  bent,"
which,  presumably,  she  connected  with

"  and  the  dull  swain
Treads  on  it  daily  with  its  clouted  shoon  ;
And  yet  more  med'cinal  is  it  than  that  Moly,"  etc.

If  this  was  not  her  reason,  I  see  no  justification  for  calling  the  words
in  the  script  an  "  allusion  to  Milton's  phrase."


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Dawn "  Experiment.  225


tal  one,  seems  to  me  to  ignore  two  important  considera-
tions :

(a)  the  wide  field  for  chance-coincidence  afforded  by  the

papers  set  in  a  Classical  Tripos  examination  ;

(b)  the  constant  appearance  in  her  scripts  of  1901  and

1902,  both  before  and  after  "  moly "  was  written,
of  words  in  which  the  letters  m  o  I  and  m  a  I  are
prominent,  and  the  absence  of  any  indication  that
"  Moly,"  rather  than  one  of  these  other  words,
was  the  word  wanted.

As  regards  (a)  nothing  further  need  be  said,  for  it  must,
I  think,  be  admitted  that  the  opportunities  for  chance-
coincidence  were  large.

As  regards  (b),  the  evidence,  tedious  though  it  be,  must
be  given  in  full.  I  accordingly  append  a  list  of  all  "  the
words  in  Mol "  (as  for  brevity  I  shall  call  them)  that  I
have  traced  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  during  the  period
covered  by  the  One-Horse  Dawn  Experiment.  The  numbers
attached  to  each  extract  will  show  how  many  scripts
intervened  between  one  instance  of  words  in  Mol  and
the  next.

M.V.  3058  {Aug.  29,  1901).

.  .  .  /uLaXivSpoSea  letter  by  letter  is  easier  to  do  but  they
are  not  right  yet.  Begin  again.  malvidea  dendron.
The  shape  of  the  letters  is  archaic  CHT  and  so  on.  .  .  .

M.V.  3059  (Sept.  2,  1901).

Canticlene  has  a  word  to  say — one  for  him  not  for  you.
Fundet  mith  in  tal  mallim  sham  i  tawan.  There  could  be
more. Malleson  a  daughter  .  .  .

M.V.  3060  {Sept.  4,  1901).

.  .  .  now  the  letters  GC  agunto  CATUNTO  esagito.  .  .  .
/uLOvoaToXos  /ulovo^tcovos  [xoi'OS  fxeTa  Qeov  ovSe  aXXov  tiv6$.  .

M.V.  3062  (Sept.  7,  1901).

.  .  .  saepe  sedebam  iliac  solus  vel  cum  illo  fiovw.  .  .  .

Mol  es  to but  the €C  is  the  end  of  a  word es —

there  are  o  and  1  before  the  es. oX  e?.  .  .  .


226  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

M.V.  3063  (Sept.  9,  1901).

.  .  .  Most  of  it  but  not  all.  ol  un  c  es  that's  not  right
—but  the  m  comes  before  the  e?  agiles.  I  can't  tell  you
the  sense  only  the  letters.  .  .  .  moleskin — that  is  more  like,
the  look  not  the  meaning.  .  .  .  dailey  is  more  like, — daily
bent  is  how  it goes  and  the  first  rhymes  to  a —

Find  the  herb  moly  that  will  help — it  is  a  guide.  .  .  .

M.V.  3064  (Sept.  12,  1901).

.  .  .  fxoX — eg  t'/uoXe?  mollis  to  wear.

M.V.  3065  (Sept.  14,  1901).

.  .  .  molves  that  is  the  old  mistake  • — estote  looks  like
a  part.  On  the  wall — mola  or  molina  is  more  like.  Strange
it  seems  that  you  cannot  read.  on  the  left  there  are
more  avent  then  the  word  that  ends  in  es  and  some-
thing after  it.  .  .  .

M.V.  3068  (Sept.  28,  1901).

.  .  .  Let  it  go  on.  it  will  come  clear.  Martin  was
the  word — a  name  not  a  swallow.  Moly  nnt  no  not  that.
Molyten  or  Molison  a  name — belongs  to  him.  .  .  .

M.V.  3069  (Oct.  6,  1901).

.  .  .  Molyneux  is  better  than  before.

M.V.  3072  (Oct.  26,  1901).

.  .  .  T^oWreig  or  malveolus  is  more  like.  .  .  .

M.V.  3074  (Nov.  1,  1901).

.  .  .  /maWiSeor—epov  koli  fxdXa.  ciXSvvi],  moles  divan  y
sur — moldresagato  thats  all.

M.V.  3081  (Dec.  5,  1901).

.  .  .  D[o]esnt  A.  W.  remember  ?  the  light  fell  from  the
right  overhead — and  the  long  white  robe  moved  slowly
while  they  played — Plainer  to  other  eyes,  but  he  must
have  seen.  Kirkistan  kirkward  shall  carry  me — go  on.  not
Helen  but  another  and  not  Scotch.  The  light  is  hid — moles
tone  note  not  tone  moles — ent  but  I  cant  get  the  rest — ends
with  escent  and  gives  a  pretty  shineing— something  before
mol — ammolescent  now  you  have  left  out  the  a  moleas  no
no  ales  and  mol


LXXVI.]


The  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.


227


M.V. 3087  {Dec.  18,  1901).

.  .  .  aXa^tov  aXeKrpuwpo?  KXayya  a-weroicrii'.  7rw9  ovk.
vus  a-vyyiyvwa-a-Kei  fxaXeSea-repa  '/jStj  yeypa(pe  avros.  Put
in  the  v. Correlate  the  rest.  .  .  .

M.V.  3096  (Jan.  17,  1902).

Malhola  malveola.  .  .  .  tenebrosum  iter  caeco  viatori  in
orientem  solein  pedibus  vagatur  nec  sine  monitore.

M.V.  3132  (July  1,  1902).

.  .  .  Cannabis  indica— is  more  like  the  word  I  want,  but
it  has  not  the  meaning.  Cantaber  induperatus  and  the
other  word  moleston  agon  lesto.  Molliston  est  /uoXaa-To
fio\i$  to  e'o-rw  fxaXa  Se  itjfu  no  you  do  not  understand
leave  it  till  it  is  clearer, till  after  Friday  next.

M.V. 3133  (July  7,  1902).

.  .  .  Now again the word  moles n molens sto  and

Hannibal's  Saguntum  belongs  Saguns  traxit  in  infinitum

verbum  autem  breve — cur  non  scribere  potes  ?  guns  mola-
guns  no  nono —

M.V.  3137  (July  23,  1902).

...  Cur  resolvere  nolis  ?  pertemptanti  facillimum  etsi  tu
nescis.  Roga— roga— rogare  semper  Malleolus  pro  te— pro
illo  autem  mansuescit  in  manu.  .  .  .

Comparison  of  these  extracts  convinces  me  that  there  is
no  justification  for  regarding  "  moly "  as  anything  more
than  one  of  numerous  attempts  at  • /xovoircoXov  (monopolon).
It  might,  perhaps,  be  claimed  that  the  words  that  follow
"Find  the  herb  moly,"  viz.  "that  will  help— it  is  a
guide,"  suggest  that  there  is  some  point  of  particular
importance  in  "moly";  but  I  see  no  reason  why  they
should  be  taken  to  mean  anything  more  pointed  than
that  "  '  moly '  will  help  as  a  guide  to  the  word
'  MonopOLon  '  "  ;  and  I  should  compare  the  passage
in  Mrs.  Willett's  script  of  March  15,  1912  (quoted  on
p.  207  above)  where  the  river  Severn  is  called  a  finger-
post as  pointing  to  Ruskin.  I  do  not  like  to  say
positively  that  "  Moly  "  is  rejected  in  M.  V.  3068,  because


228


J.  G.  Piddington.  [part


it  would  be  just  possible  to  argue  that  "  Molyten "  and
"  Molison  "  are  attempts  at  a  different  word  or  name  than
"  Moly "  ;  but  I  think  nevertheless  that  the  natural
meaning  is  that  "  Moly "  is  rejected  in  favour  of  other
words  which  by  the  addition  to  "  Mol  "  of  the  syllable
"  en  "  or  "  on  "  approach  more  nearly  to  MonopOLON.
Moreover,  no  sooner  has  the  word  "  moly "  been  written
than  in  the  next  two  scripts — not  to  speak  of  the  ten
other  subsequent  scripts — fresh  shots  at  words  in  Mol
continue  to  be  made  ;  and  this,  to  my  mind  at  least,
strongly  suggests  dissatisfaction  with  "  Moly."

The  theory,  then,  that  the  "  moly "  of  Script  I  is
causally  connected  with  Dr.  Verrall's  subliminal  recollection
of  the  occurrence  of  the  word  "  moly "  in  a  Classical
Tripos  paper,  seems  to  me  to  rest  on  an  insufficient
foundation.


APPENDIX  D.

In  compliance  with  a  suggestion  made  by  Sir  Oliver
Lodge  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson,  I  give  below  in  chrono-
logical order  the  dates  of  various  events  which  either
have  or  may  have  a  bearing  on  the  case.

1873.  Passage from Euripides' Orestes containing the  words
/uovottwXov  eg  'Aw  set  for  translation  in  the  Classical  Tripos.

Passage  from  Milton's  Comus  containing  the  word  "  moly  "
set  as  the  subject  for  Latin  Hexameters  in  the  Classical
Tripos.

1882.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Verrall  married.
Dec.  1883.

Publication of Jebb's edition of Sophocles'  Oedipus
Tyr annus.
1886  (early  in).

Publication  of  Jebb's  edition  of  Sophocles'  Oedipus
Coloneus.

Jan.  17,  1901.

Death  of  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


lxxvi.] The  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment.


229


March  1901.

Mrs.  Verrall's  automatic  writing  begins.

April  1901.

Dr. Verrall devises and initiates ixovottwXov e?  'Aw
Experiment.
April  10,  1901-May  31,  1902.

Scripts  A  to  T  written.
Oct.  17,  1902.

Experiment ends  ; and Mrs. Verrall told about  it.

April  20,  1903.

Mrs.  Verrall  gives  an  account  of  the  fxovoirwXov  e?  'Aw
experiment  at  a  Meeting  of  the  S.P.R.

July  19,  1903.

Scripts  U  and  V  written.

1905  (Spring  of).

Mrs.  Verrall  writes  her  account  of  the  Experiment.

Dec.  9,  1905.

Death  of  Sir  Richard  Jebb.

Oct.  1906.

Proc.  Vol.  XX.  containing  Mrs.  Verrall's  account  of  the
Experiment  published.
Nov.  22,  1906.

Date  of  Miss  Verrall's  script  beginning  "  Senex  cum
albis  capillis."

June  18,  1912.

Death  of  Dr.  Verrall.

Jan.  28,  1915.

Date  of  Miss  Verrall's  script  associating  "  Alone  with
God  none  other  no  not  one  "  with  the  homecoming  of
Odysseus.

July  2,  1916.

Death  of  Mrs.  Verrall.

Nov.  1917.

J.  G.  P.  reconsiders  One-Horse  Dawn  scripts.
Nov.-Dec,  1917.

J.  G.'P.'s  paper  written.


230


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[PART


II.

EVIDENCE  OF  SUPER-NORMAL  COMMUNICATIONS
THROUGH  MOTOR  AUTOMATISM.

A  Paper  read  at  a  Private  Meeting  op  the  Society
on  November  22,  1917.

By  Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.

The  cases  which  I  wish  to  bring  before  the  Society  in
this  paper  have  this  in  common,  that  in  them  we  see
supernormal  communication  issuing  in  motor  automatism.
The  source  of  the  communication  however  differs  in  an  im-
portant manner,  for  in  the  first  case  the  communicator  was
in  the  body  and  in  the  second  the  message  purports  to
come  from  the  discarnate.1

I  am  indebted  to  my  niece,  Mrs.  Cowdell  Barrett,  of
Weymouth,  for  putting  me  into  communication  with  her
friend,  Mr.  Arundel  Mackenzie- Ashton,  of  Dene  Court,
Taunton,  who  kindly  sent  me  the  contemporary  documents
which  narrate  this  case.2

1  am  permitted  to  give  his  name  and  also  that  of
Colonel  Nicholson,  whose  account  of  the  experiments,
written  down  at  the  time,  have  fortunately  been  preserved

1 1  do  not  here  raise  the  question  of  the  method  of  communication,  but  a
separate  note  by  me  on  Telepathy  and  Telergy  which  follows  this  paper  may
suggest  possibilities  and  tend  to  clearer  thinking  on  the  subject.

2  Subsequent  to  the  reading  of  this  paper  before  the  Society,  the
case  was  quoted  in  an  article  I  published  in  the  Contemporary  Review
for  February,  1918.


lxxvi.] Evidence  of  Super -normal  Communications.  231

and  axe  before  me,  otherwise  the  case  would  be  of  little
evidential  value  as  it  occurred  some  years  a^o  The
experiments  took  place  at  Walesby  Vicarage,  Nottingham-
shire, in  1882.

Mr.  Mackenzie-Ashton  writes  to  me  as  follows  :—

Dene  Court,  Taunton,
October  9th,  1917.
I  went  to  stay  at  Walesby  Vicarage  situated  in  Notting-
hamshire in  September,  1882.  I  was  there  a  week  or  ten
days  and  on  leaving  went  to  stay  with  my  father  and
mother  who  lived  at  a  place  called  Minewood  in  Hertford-
shire. The  distance  between  these  two  places  is  about
130  miles.  After  I  left  Walesby  Mr.  (now  Colonel)  Nichol-
son and  Mrs.  Nicholson  went  there,  I  believe  the  day
following  my  departure.  The  manifestation  referred  to  in
Mr.  Nicholson's  letters,  which  I  enclose,  took  place  at  the
first  sitting  at  which  Mrs.  Nicholson  assisted.

Here  I  will  give  Mr.  Nicholson's  first  letter  to  Mr
Mackenzie-Ashton,  which  was  sent  to  me  in  its  original
jXtT dated  P°St-mark'  as  also  were  his  subsequent

Newark  on  Trent,  14  9  '8°

Dear  Sir,

I  have  been  staying  at  Walesby  Vicarage  recently  and
last  evenmg  (Wednesday)  we  amused  ourselves  with  table-
turning.  The  table  when  asked  by  whose  spirit  it  was
possessed  answered  "  Arundel-Mackenzie,"  and  to  the
further  question  "where  is  he?"  it  said  "His  soul  is
here."  To  the  following  question  "How  is  his  bodv
occupied  ?  "  it  returned  a  perfectly  definite  answer.  Would
you l  mind  informing  me  how  you  were  really  occupied  last
night  from  10.30  to  11.30  p.m.  and  in  whose  company
you  were?  Would  you  mind  also  telling  me  what  you
were  doing  out  of  doors  in  the  day  time  ?  I  hope  you
will  excuse  me,  who  am  a  perfect  stranger  to  you,  asking
you  these  impertinent  questions,  but  I  am  most  anxious  to
be  satisfied  as  to  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the  "  manifesta-
tion. -Yours  very  truly,  E.  H.  Nicholson


232


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


Two  days  later  Mr.  Nicholson  writes  as  follows  :

Newark  on  Trent,  Sept.  16.

Dear  Sir.

Will  you  assure  me  on  your  word  of  honour  you  have
heard  nothing  from  any  person  who  was  at  Walesby
Vicarage  on  Wednesday  evening  relative  to  the  occurrence
about  which  I  wrote  to  you  ? — Yours  very  truly,

E.  H.  Nicholson.

Mr.  Mackenzie-Asbton  having  given  this  assurance  then
received  the  following  letter  from  Mr.  Nicholson  describing
what  occurred  :

Newark,  Sept.  19,  1882.

Dear  Sir,

When  I  asked  for  your  assurance  I  felt  it  was  scarcely
necessary,  but  the  experiences  being  so  extraordinary  it
seemed  more  satisfactory  to  have  it.

The  persons  who  had  their  hands  on  the  table  besides
Mrs.  Nicholson  and  myself  were  [giving  their  names].  The
table  began  immediately  to  move  and  on  being  asked  to
tilt  3  times  if  a  spirit  were  present  it  did  so,  asked
"whose  spirit,"  replied  "  Arundel-Mackenzie,"  and  would
give  no  further  name.  "  Asked  where  is  he,  and  what
is  he  doing?"  answered  "His  soul  is  here."  Asked  "what
is  his  body  doing,"  at  first  we  obtained  no  reply  and  were
rather  puzzled  how  to  proceed  thinking  possibly  you  were
in  bed.  However  after  waiting,  we  asked  the  same
question  again  and  the  reply  was  promptly  given  "  Playing
billiards."  Time  then  was  11.15  p.m.  Asked  who  is  in
the  room  with  him  ?  answer  "  Father,"  asked  "  who  is
winning  the  game?"  answer  "Son."  "How  many  games
have  been  played  ?  "  "Two."  "What  has  he  been  doing
during  the  day  ?  "  "  Shooting."  At  this  there  was  a
general  exclamation  "  Impossible  !  "  for  it  was  not  believed

you had any  shooting,  and  H asked  "  Pheasants  or

Partridges  "  laughing,  but  we  could  get  no  more. H by

request  then  left  the  table,  and  we  asked  the  spirit  why
it  had  not  replied.  It  answered  "  flippant."  After  a
message  '  silent  spirit  is  here,'  we  could  get  no  further
manifestation.


lxxvi.] Evidence  of  Super-normal  Communications.  233

This  is  a  literal  and  exact  statement  of  what  took  place.
Before  the  letters  at  which  the  table  tilted  were  reached  a
most  peculiar  tremor  went  through  it,  increasing  in  inten-
sity till  the  letter  was  reached  when  the  tilting  was
decided  and  distinct.  The  lights  in  the  room  were  not
lowered.  This  experience  has  thoroughly  astonished  me. —
Yours  faithfully,  E.  H.  Nicholson.

Now  all  the  above  particulars  given  by  Mr.  Nicholson
of  Mr.  Mackenzie-Ashton's  doings  were  perfectly  correct.
Mr.  Mackenzie-Ashton  writes  :

"  I  had  been  shooting  during  the  day  and  in  the  evening
I  had  two  games  of  billiards  with  my  father.  I  won  both
of  them,  and  after  that  I  lay  down  on  a  couch  in  the
billiard  room  and  fell  asleep.  Then  I  had  a  dream  that
I  was  back  in  Walesby  Vicarage.  One  point  of  interest
is  that  I  (my  spirit)  gave  only  my  original  name  ;  I  took
the  additional  name  of  Ashton  later "  [but  prior  to  this
experience].

It  is  unfortunate  that  Colonel  Nicholson  did  not  keep
Mr.  Mackenzie-Ashton's  letters  up  to  the  present  time,  as
in  that  case  we  should  have  written  contemporary  evidence
from  both  sides.  However,  Colonel  Nicholson  informs  me
that  he  preserved  the  letters  for  a  long  time  and  corrobo-
rates Mr.  Mackenzie-Ashton's  statement.

Of  the  trustworthiness  and  evidential  value  of  this  case
there  can  be  no  doubt.  It  is  of  considerable  psychological
interest  on  several  grounds.  Here  we  find  telepathy  from
a  living  person  giving  rise  to  motor  automatism  in  the
table  tilting,  whilst  answers  to  questions  are  given  just
as  we  are  accustomed  to  find  in  spiritistic  phenomena.  As
Colonel  Nicholson  informs  me  he  has  had  similar  experiences
elsewhere,  he  was,  presumably,  the  medium.

Telepathy  from  the  living  producing  motor  automatism
in  the  percipient  is  by  no  means  novel.  We  have  the
well-known  case  of  the  Rev.  P.  H.  Newnham  and  his
wife,  where  questions  mentally  asked  by  Mr.  Newnham
were  automatically  replied  to  by  Mrs.  Newnham  through


234


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


planchette  writing.1  Though  the  distance  apart  of  agent
and  percipient  was  here  only  a  few  feet,  care  was  taken
that  no  knowledge  of  the  question,  which  was  written
down  by  Mr.  Newnham,  should  reach  his  wife.  Similar
experiments  were  subsequently  tried,  with  more  or  less
success,  between  two  graduates  at  Cambridge,  and  there
are  other  cases  on  record  where  telepathic  impressions
from  the  living  were  able  to  produce  motor  automatism
through  planchette,  etc.  As  regards  table  tilting,  Prof.
Richet  2  long  ago — in  1884 — made  an  arrangement  whereby
letters  of  the  alphabet  were  silently  pointed  to  by  one
person  who  traversed  the  alphabet  mechanically,  whilst
Prof.  Richet,  standing  apart  from  the  alphabet  ana  others
present,  thought  of  a  name  or  word  which  neither  the
man  at  the  alphabet  nor  the  automatist  had  any  means
of  knowing.  The  automatist  was  seated  at  a  table,  which
tilted  when  the  man  at  the  alphabet  pointed  to  the  right
letter  in  the  word  thought  of  by  Prof.  Richet.  The
experiment  was  fairly  successful,  the  success  being  beyond
mere  chance  coincidence.  Here  it  will  be  noticed  that
both  agent  and  percipient  were  in  the  same  room  and
both  awake  and  in  their  normal  state.  There  is  a  case
given  by  Mr.  Myers,  the  Kirby  case,  where  messages  were
given  by  table  tilting  which  possibly  came  from  a  far
distant  and  sleeping  agent.3

In  the  last  named  case,  as  Mr.  Myers  points  out,  we
cannot  really  say  which  is  the  easier  hypothesis — telepathy
or  a  psychical  invasion  from  the  distant  agent.  The  well-
established  and  well-known  experiments  by  Mr.  S.  Beard,
Rev.  S.  Moses,  and  Rev.  C.  Godfrey,  where  the  different
experimenters  willed  that  they  should  be  seen  by  a  distant
person  who  was  unaware  that  the  experiment  was  being
made,  were  all  successful  when  the  agents  were  asleep.  The
self -projection  did  not  occur  when  the  agent  was  consciously
willing  it,  but  took  place  when  he  was  unconscious  in
sleep.  There  are  several  well-attested  cases  where  a
person  asleep  has  dreamt  he  has  visited  a  distant  friend

1  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.  p.  147.
"-Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  II.  pp.  239-264.
3  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.  p.  187.


lxxvi.] Evidence  of  Super-normal  Communications.  235

and  has  been  heard  speaking  by  that  friend.  These  and
other  cases  suggest  allocation,  or  some  excursive  action  of
the  soul  or  of  the  subliminal  self  of  the  '  agent '  during
sleep.  Myers  has  some  suggestive  remarks  on  the  freedom
of  the  spirit  from  the  material  organism  during  sleep.

I  will  now  pass  on  to  a  second  series  of  cases  of  super-
normal action  where  a  discarnate  intelligence  appears  to
be  the  agent,  causing  vigorous  motor  automatism  on  the
part  of  the  automatist.

Some  time  ago  my  friend,  the  Rev.  Savell  Hicks,  M.A.,
and  myself  read  a  paper  before  the  Society  describing  the
remarkable  experiments  with  a  novel  form  of  ouija  board,
which  a  small  circle  in  Dublin  had  been  conducting  with
great  care  and  critical  ability  for  many  months.  These
experiments  have  now  been  in  progress  for  over  two
years,  but  no  record  of  them  has  appeared  in  the  Pro-
ceedings of  our  Society.  In  my  recently  published  book
On  the  Threshold  of  the  Unseen,  I  have  fully  described
how  these  experiments  are  conducted,  and  some  of  the
startling  evidence  of  survival  after  death  which  they  appear
to  afford.1

Here  I  will  only  say  that  instead  of  the  usual  ouija
board,  with  the  alphabet  printed  on  the  board,  the
separate  letters  of  the  alphabet,  on  pieces  of  card,  are
placed  on  a  small  table  below  a  sheet  of  plate  glass
which  covers  the  whole  table.  The  traveller  or  indicator,
which  is  touched  by  the  two  sitters,  is  a  small  triangular
or  heart-shaped  piece  of  wood  or  metal  resting  on  three
toes  of  felt,  so  that  it  is  only  raised  some  quarter  of  an
inch  from  the  glass.  The  alphabet  can  be  arranged  in
any  order,  and  in  some  critical  experiments  which  I  have
described  the  letters  were  arranged  in  the  most  irregular
and  promiscuous  fashion,  whilst  the  sitters  were  out  of
the  room.  The  glass  top  was  then  covered  by  an  opaque
cloth,  the  sitters  were  recalled  and  carefully  blindfolded,
taking  every  precaution  to  make  the  blindfolding  abso-
lutely effective.  The  cloth  was  removed,  the  traveller
placed  on  the  glass  and  the  sitters  each  put  one  hand  on

1  On  the  Threshold  of  the  Unseen,  p.  179  et  seq.


236


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


the  traveller.  The  sitting  then  began  in  full  light  so  that
the  recorder  could  note  down  the  letters  indicated ;  the
recorder  was  either  the  Rev.  Savell  Hicks,  myself,  or  a
personal  friend, who  was  a  good  shorthand  writer;  this  was  very
necessary  in  some  of  the  sittings,  as  the  traveller  rushed
from  letter  to  letter  with  such  rapidity  that  it  was
difficult  to  keep  pace  with  it  in  writing  down  the  message.
In  one  memorable  instance,  when  a  message  was  being
spelt  out  with  great  rapidity,  an  opaque  fire-screen  was
silently  held  over  the  traveller,  so  that  had  the  sitters
not  been  blindfolded  they  could  not  then  see  the  alphabet
below,  and  the  recorder  had  to  adjust  the  light  and  his
position  to  enable  him  to  take  down  the  message,  which
came  through  rapidly  just  as  before.

Some  of  the  messages  appeared  to  be  pure  dream
creations,  but  given  with  great  dramatic  force.  They  may
have  been  the  product  of  some  unknown  intelligence  who
was  asleep,  whether  incarnate  or  discarnate  I  do  not  know.
Some  messages  were  veridical  and  purported  to  come
from  different  persons  recently  deceased.  The  sitters  were
usually  the  daughter  of  the  late  Professor  Dowden,  Mrs.
Travers  Smith,  the  wife  of  a  well-known  Dublin  medical
man,  and  her  friend,  Mr.  Lennox  Robinson,  an  author.
Blindfolding  was  often  dispensed  with.  In  the  case  I
narrated  at  a  recent  meeting  of  the  Society,  and  which
is  given  in  my  book,  the  "  Pearl  tie-pin  case,"  the  sitters'
were  Mrs.  T.  Smith  and  a  lady  friend,  Miss  D.  C,  the
daughter  of  a  physician.

As  the  exact  transcript  of  the  foregoing  message,  taken
down  at  the  time,  has  not  been  published,  I  give  it  here.
Miss  C.  had  a  cousin,  a  young  officer  in  the  army  in
France,  who  was  killed  a  month  previous  to  the  sitting.
This  was  known  to  the  sitters,  who  were  not  blindfolded
on  this  occasion.

The  sitting  took  place  at  61  Fitzwilliam  Square,  Dublin,
in  December,  1915. It  began  as  follows  :

Q. Who  is  there  ?

A.  [The  cousin's  full  name  was  given,  Christian

and  surname.]


lxxvi.] Evidence  of  Super-normal  Communications.


237


Q. Do  you  know  who  I  am  ?

A. Yes,  you  are  D  .

Q. Have  you  any  message  ?

A.  Yes.

Q. What  is  it  ?

A. Tell  my  mother  to  give  my  pearl  tie-pin  to  the  girl  I
was  going  to  marry. I  think  she  ought  to  have  it.

Q. What  is  her  address  ?

A. [An  address  in  London  was  given.]

Q. What  is  her  name  ?

[Full  Christian  name  and  surname  given  (an  unusual
one).]

A. I  want  to  go.  Good-bye.

Neither  of  the  sitters  knew  any  such  person  nor  of  any
engagement.  On  communicating  with  the  deceased  officer's
family  they  knew  nothing  of  the  lady  mentioned  in  the
message ;  moreover,  on  writing  to  the  address  given  the
letter  was  returned  by  the  Post  Office.  The  whole  message
was  therefore  considered  a  fabrication.

Six  months  later  it  was  discovered  that  the  officer  had
been  engaged,  shortly  before  he  left  for  the  front,  to  the
very  lady  whose  name  was  given ;  he  had  however  told
no  one.  Neither  his  cousin  nor  any  of  his  own  family
in  Ireland  were  aware  of  the  fact  and  had  never  seen
the  lady  nor  heard  her  name,  until  the  War  Office  sent
over  the  deceased  officer's  effects.  Then  they  found  that
he  had  put  this  lady's  name  in  his  will  as  his  next  of
kin,  both  Christian  and  surname  being  precisely  the  same
as  given  through  the  automatist  ;  and,  what  is  equally
remarkable,  a  pearl  tie-jnn  was  found  in  his  effects.  Both
the  sitters  have  signed  a  document  they  sent  me,  affirming
the  accuracy  of  the  above  statement,  the  message  being
recorded  at  the  time,  and  not  written  from  memory  after
verification  had  been  obtained.  Here  there  could  be  no
explanation  of  the  facts  by  subliminal  memory,  or  tele-
pathy or  collusion,  and  the  evidence  points  unmistakably
to  a  telepathic  message  from  the  deceased  officer.

Now  this  appears  to  be  an  unexpected  psychical  invasion
of  the  sitters  by  some  personality  of  whom  they  were  not


238


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.8.


[part


thinking.  A  mere  fragmentary  message  of  an  earth-memory,
a  voice  from  out  of  the  darkness,  "  only  a  signal  shown,
then  darkness  again  and  a  silence,"  and  it  suggests  that
it  might  have  been  a  passing  dream  of  the  discarnate
communicator  which  happened  to  synchronise  with  the
sitting  and  receptive  condition  of  his  relative.  Other
evidence,  as  we  know,  points  to  the  intelligent  co-operation
of  two  or  more  unseen  communicators,  which  cannot  be
attributed  to  their  passing  dreams.

In  the  next  case  we  are  presented  with  a  typical  com-
bination of  romance  and  veridical  statements  which  it  is
desirable  to  put  on  record  in  detail  for  the  future  student
of  experimental  psychology.

The  sitters  were  Mrs.  Travers  Smith  and  Mr.  Lennox
Robinson.  An  outline  of  the  first  part  of  this  remarkable
record  has  already  been  published  by  me  under  the  title
of  the  "  Hugh  Lane  Case,"1  but  full  details  have  not  been
given  hitherto.

In  the  first  of  these  sittings,  on  May  7,  1915,  both
sitters  were  blindfolded,  and  the  recorder  was  the  Rev.
Savell  Hicks,  M.A.,  who  writes  to  me  as  follows  :

"  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  this  sitting  took  place
without  any  idea  of  obtaining  anything  startling  or  evi-
dential. What  came  through  was  so  entirely  unexpected
that  both  sitters  were  laughing  and  talking  to  one  another
as  the  message  came  through,  and  I  gave  them  no  hint
of  the  purport  of  what  was  coming  through  until  the
message  was  completed.  I  am  quite  convinced  that  they
had  no  idea  of  what  their  hands  were  spelling  out.  When
the  first  part  of  the  message  was  completed  and  I
read  it  aloud,  both  the  sitters  broke  down  and  wept,  as
they  were  both  intimate  friends  of  Sir  Hugh  Lane.  Such
a  piece  of  heartless  playacting,  as  one  must  assume  if  they
were  cognisant  of  what  was  coming  through,  is,  as  no
doubt  you  will  agree,  knowing  them  both,  quite  unthink-
able. Whether  they  were,  in  some  mysterious  way,  sub-
consciously aware  of  what  they  were  doing,  I  cannot  of
course say  ; this of course can neither be proved  or


On  the  Threshold  of  the  Unseen,  p.  186.


lxxvi.] Evidence  of  Super-normal  Communications.  239

disproved."  [The  affirmation  would  involve  clairvoyance  by
the  sitters,  as  they  were  blindfolded.]

Mr.  Hicks  goes  on  to  say :

"  At  the  time  of  the  sitting  it  was  known  that  the
Lusitania  had  been  sunk,  but  it  was  only  after  the  first
part  of  the  message  had  come  through  that  Mr.  Lennox
Robinson  went  down  and  brought  up  a  stop  press  edition
of  an  evening  paper  just  issued  that  contained  the  news
that  Sir  Hugh  Lane  was  on  board.  [No  news  of  his  death
was  received  till  some  days  after  this  sitting.]  That  the
possibility  of  his  being  on  board  may  have  been  present
in  the  minds  of  the  sitters  is,  of  course,  conceivable.  [As
to  this,  see  Mrs.  T.  Smith's  letter  which  follows].

How  much  of  the  record  can  be  attributed  to  super-
normal agency  is  a  matter  which  must  be  left  to  individual
opinion  ;  on  this  point  the  sitters  have,  as  you  know,  an
entirely  open  mind  ;  and  none  of  us  concerned  in  this
record  have  any  dogmatic  opinion  on  the  subject."

Mrs.  Travers  Smith  writes  to  me  as  follows  :

Dear  Sir  William  Barrett,

As  you  were  not  present  at  our  seance  on  the  night
on  which  we  received  the  first  communication  from  Sir
Hugh  Lane,  telling  us  he  was  drowned,  I  think  it  is  best
that  I  should  give  the  facts,  which  are  as  follows  :  Mr.
Lennox  Robinson  and  I  were  both  friends  of  Sir  Hugh
Lane  ;  we  knew  that  he  had  gone  to  America,  but  he  had
been  there  for  a  very  short  time,  and  it  never  occurred
to  either  of  us  that  he  might  be  on  board  the  "  Lusitania."
We  knew  nothing  of  his  plans.  In  the  afternoon  of  the
day  on  which  the  "Lusitania"  sank,  the  Dublin  papers
announced  "  '  Lusitania  '  reported  sinking."  We  knew
nothing  further  than  this  at  8  p.m.  (when  our  seance
began)  ;  and  Sir  Hugh  Lane's  name  certainly  never  occurred
to  us  in  connection  with  the  lost  ship.

After  the  first  sentences  came  through  announcing  Hugh
Lane  as  present,  and  that  he  was  drowned,  a  "  stop  press  "
was  called  in  the  street.  Mr.  Robinson  ran  down,  brought
a  paper  up,  and  pointed  to  Sir  Hugh  Lane's  name  in  the
list  of  "  Lusitania  "  passengers.


240  Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.B.S.  [part

The  Rev.  E.  Savell  Hicks,  M.A.,  who  was  present,  will
bear  witness  that  my  statement  is  correct.  I  have  his
original  record  in  my  possession.  He  did  not  even  know
that  Sir  Hugh  Lane  had  gone  to  America.

As  to  satisfactory  blindfolding  and  bona  fides  of  sitters
at  the  seances  (which  took  place  at  my  house  twice  a  week
for  seven  or  eight  months),  I  can  only  say,  as  a  sitter,  that
the  blindfolding  was  perfect,  and  that  we  found  the  sittings
rather  dull  work.  We  never  had  any  idea  of  what  was
"coming  through,"  and  often  chatted  to  each  other  and
laughed,  to  pass  time,  even  when  tragic  messages  were
received  by  the  shorthand  writer,  who  had  great  difficulty
in  recording  the  messages,  owing  to  the  amazing  rapidity
with  which  the  traveller  flew  about.

Hester  Travers  Smith.

I  now  give  a  verbatim  record  of  all  that  transpired  at
this  sitting.

!F it z willi am  Square,  Dublin,  May  7,  1915.

Sitters — Mrs. Travers Smith and Mr. Lennox  Robinson.

Sitters  both  blindfolded.
Recorder — Rev.  Savell  Hicks,  M.A.,  who  put  the  questions  :
Control  began —

She  is  awfully  depressed.
Q. How  many  were  drowned  on  the  "  Lusitania  "  ?
A. [Very  doubtfully]  About  47  (?  470). Pray  for  Hugh

Lane,  he  is  drowned.
Q. Who  is  speaking  ?
A. I  am  Hugh  Lane.

Q. Can  you  give  us  any  evidence  of  identity  ?

A. She  made  a  great  impression  on  me  by  her  playing.

Q. Where  ?

A. In  her  own  house.

Q. When  ?

A. In  December. I  never  heard  her  before.

Q. Where  did  you  live  ?

A. In  Cheyne  Walk,  Chelsea.

Q. What  other  celebrated  men  lived  there  1

A .  Carlyle.


lxxvi.] Evidence  of  Super-normal  Communications.


241


Q. Tell  us  what  happened  when  the  "  Lusitania  "  sank.
A.  Panic.

Q. Tell  us  exactly  what  occurred.

A.  I  heard  shouts  and  ran  up  on  deck.  Boats  were  being
lowered.  Women  went  first.  I  leaped  into  one,  it
was  too  full.  I  was  thrown  into  the  sea. All  is  dark.

Q. Did  the  submarines  give  warning  ?

A. Yes,  about  7  minutes.

Q. How  many  [submarines]  were  there  %

A.  Two.

Q.  All  your  friends  will  be  very  sorry.
A. A  peaceful  end  to  an  exciting  life.

Here the Stop Press was called in the street.  Mr.
Robinson  ran  down  and  bought  a  paper  which  gave  a  list
of  the  "  Lusitania's  "  passengers,  including  Hugh  Lane.
Q. Any  particular  message  for  anyone  ?
A. Hester  [Mrs.  Travers  Smith]  must  not  tell  Ellie  tonight
Q. Is  she  to  tell  her  later  1
A. She  will  hear.

Q. Is  she  to  tell  her  about  this  communication  ?

A. Yes. Tell  Hester  she  must  work  at  that  fine  art  of

making  music-pictures.
Q. Can  you  see  who  is  at  the  board  besides  Hester  ?
A. Lennox  Robinson. I  do  not  know  who  you  are.
Q. I  am  Savell  Hicks.

A. I  know you preached  on  Wagner. I  laughed  with
Ellie  when  I  saw  the  notice  boards  at  Westland  Row.
Q. What  was  the  No.  of  your  cabin  1
A.  52.
Q. Sure  ?
A.  Yes.

Q. How  many  do  you  think  were  drowned  ?
A.  470.

Q. Can  you  give  any  names  ?

A.  I  had  a  man  at  my  side  who  was  called  Kenneth
Dowson.

Q. Any  relative  of  the  poet  Ernest  Dowson  ? Was  he

drowned  ?
A. I  do  not  know.
Q. Can  you  give  any  other  names  ?


242


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


A. I  can't  see  them.

Q. What  attracted  you  here  ?

A. I  saw  a  light. It  was  like  a  star  on  her  head.
Q. Any  other  special  message  ?

A.  The  only  one  is  to  Jim.  He  and  I  were  like  brothers.
Tell  him  I  shall  wait  till  his  face  appears  at  the  gate.
Good-bye  my  two  artist  mediums — good-bye.

Commenting  on  the  foregoing,  Mrs.  Travers  Smith  writes
to  me  as  follows  :

"  A  good  deal  of  the  message  as  you  see  is  very  personal.
I  had  played  for  Sir  Hugh  Lane  the  December  before  and
he  kept  me  at  the  piano  for  a  long  time  and  made  me
play  things  I  hadn't  looked  at  for  years.  If  you  had
known  Sir  Hugh  well,  you  would  understand  how  very
characteristic  of  him  the  remarks  he  made  were.  Ellie

and  Jim  are  Mr.  and  Mrs. ,  both  intimate  friends  of

mine  and  of  Sir  Hugh  also. Mr. and  Sir  Hugh  were

deeply  attached  to  each  other,  and  it  was  most  natural

the  latter  should  wish  me  to  tell  Mr.  and  Mrs. about

the  communication.  Mr.  Lennox  Robinson  and  I  were
very much moved when the record was read to  us."

Telepathy  from  the  recorder,  Mr.  Hicks,  is  excluded
as  he  knew  nothing  about  the  above  facts.  As  regards
certain  details  given  in  the  message,  such  as  to  the
number  on  board  the  "  Lusitania,"  the  cabin  occupied  by
Sir  Hugh  Lane,  and  the  person  named  Kenneth  Dowson,
I  understand  that  no  corroboration  has  been  obtained.

Various  other  messages  concerning  his  pictures  came  from
Sir  Hugh  Lane  which  were  of  interest  but  not  evidential.
Meanwhile  the  relatives  of  Sir  Hugh  Lane  doubted  the
authorship  of  the  message  which  they  understood  began
"  Pray  for  the  soul  of  Hugh  Lane,"  as  that  resembled  a
Roman  Catholic  expression  and  Sir  Hugh  Lane  was  a
Protestant.  The  record,  however,  says  "  Pray  for  Hugh
Lane"  not  '  soul  of.'  The  sitters  themselves,  however,  were
not  wholly  convinced,  and  when  Mrs.  T.  Smith  invited
me  to  a  sitting  with  Mr.  Lennox  Robinson  at  her  house
in  1917,  we  discussed  the  pros  and  cons  of  the  veridical
character  of  the  message.


lxxvi.] Evidence  of  Super-normal  Communications.  243

The  sitting  then  began  in  full  daylight  in  the  afternoon
of  August  22,  1917,  at  8  Upper  Fitzwilliam  Street,  Dublin.
Neither  of  the  sitters  (Mrs.  Travers  Smith  and  Mr.  Lennox
Robinson)  were  blindfolded  on  this  occasion,  but  the  latter,
whose  hand  controlled  the  movement  of  the  indicator,  sat
with  head  averted  and  eyes  closed  and  soon  fell  into  a
partial  trance.  Lady  Barrett  and  her  sister  besides  myself
were  present,  and  the  two  former  acted  as  recorders.

The  same  type  of  ouija  board  was  used,  a  slab  of  glass
with  alphabet  below.  The  right  hand  of  Mrs.  T.  Smith
and  left  of  Mr.  Robinson  were  on  the  traveller  with  little
fingers  interlocked.  At  first  the  traveller  rushed  round
and  round  as  if  polishing  the  glass,  and  then  proceeded
more  slowly  to  inspect,  as  it  were,  each  letter  of  the
alphabet,  going  round  each  letter  till  all  were  located.
The  decision  and  accuracy  of  this  inspection  were  notice-
able, albeit  the  sitters  were  not  looking  at  the  traveller.

I  will  give  the  whole  record,  as  it  presents  the  same
curious  mixture  of,  apparently,  fictitious  and  veridical
communications  which  are  so  characteristic  of  these  auto-
matisms :

Sitting,  August  22,  1917.

Q. Is  any  one  here  ?

A. Peter  Rooney  [the  usual  control].

Q. Do  you  recognise  any  one  present  ?

A. There  is  a  man  here  I  saw  in  the  other  house,  there
was  another  man  there  also,  a  younger  man.  [This
refers  to  myself  and  the  Rev.  Mr.  Robertson  at  the
sitting  we  had  in  Mrs.  Travers  Smith's  former  house.]
Q. Will  you  bring  some  one  here  we  know  ?
A. Let  me  make  my  experiment  first.

[Mrs.  T.  Smith  said  this  referred  to  guessing  a
number  written  on  paper  and  held  below  the  table.
This  was  done  and  the  traveller  rushed  to  the  corner
of  the  table  beneath  which  the  number  was  concealed
and  then  back  to  indicate  the  number  ;  but  the  success
was  only  partial.]
Q. Will  you  go  away  ?

A. Yes  I  am  going  to  send  a  new  control.


244


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


[The  hands  were  lifted  off  traveller  for  a  moment  and
then  replaced,  and  the  following  came]  :

A.  Why  am  I  sent  here  ?

Q.  Who  are  you  ?

A.  My  name  is  Lennon.

Q.  What  is  your  Christian  name  ?

A.  Frank.

Q.  Where  did  you  live  ?

A.  I  lived  at  22  Mills  [or  Mill]  Lane,  Sheffield.

Q.  When  did  you  pass  over  ?

A.  March  3,  1917.

Q.  What  was  the  matter  with  you  ?

A.  Paralysis. I  was  an  invalid  for  years.

Q.  What  was  your  age  %

A.  I  was  born  on  September  3,  1854.

Q.  Can  you  see  any  one  sitting  here  ?

A.  I  can  see  one  man  and  one  woman.

[Presumably  the  two  sitters.]

Q.  Tell  us  the  name  of  any  one  living  in  Sheffield.

A.  Smithson.

Q.  What  was  your  occupation  ?

A.  I  was  a  clerk  at  Smithsons.

Here  the  sitting  was  interrupted  by  those  present  dis-
claiming any  knowledge  of  the  persons  whose  names  were
given.  Subsequent  enquiry  made  by  me  through  the
Chief  Constable  of  Sheffield  showed  that  though  there  is
a  Mill  Lane  in  Sheffield,  no  one  named  Frank  Lennon
was  known  there,  and  the  whole  of  the  details  given
appear  to  be  fictitious.

Resuming,  another  control  came  :
Q. Who  are  you  ?

A.  I  am  Clara  Samuels.  Why  are  you  trying  to  make
me  talk  ?  The  letters  look  like  being  at  school.  A
queer  woman  is  here  now.  I  am  quite  a  little  girl.
Who  is  pulling  this  thing  about  ?

We  replied  no  one  is  pulling  it  about.

A.  Some  one  is  pulling  this  thing  about  that  you  talk
with.  [This  is  explained  by  the  advent  of  the  next
control.]


lxxvi.] Evidence  of  Super-normal  Communications.


245


This  child  control  was  told  to  go  away  and  hands  were
lifted  off  the  traveller  for  a  moment.  When  the  two  sitters
replaced  their  hands  an  extraordinary  change  of  control
occurred.  The  traveller  dashed  violently  about,  rushing
to  one  letter  after  the  other  so  quickly  that  it  was  im-
possible to  follow  the  message  spelt.

Mrs.  T.  Smith  said  :

Q. Don't  be  so  violent,  do  go  quietly. Who  are  you  ?
A. Surely  this  is  Lennox.
Q. Who  are  you  ?

A.  I  am  Hugh  Lane  [this  was  spelt  out  most  emphati-
cally]. I  have  been  waiting  for  a  long  time  to  talk,
and  am  unable  to  communicate  when  you  are  not
here.

The  traveller  became  most  excited  and  flew  about  so
swiftly  and  violently  that  Mrs.  T.  Smith  said  :

Q. Why  are  you  so  furious  ? Don't  be  so  violent.
A. I  am  very  angry  with  her,  with  Hester.
Q. Who  is  it  you  are  so  angry  with  ?

A.  [Given  most  emphatically].  I  am  angry  with  Hester
Travers  Smith.  I  am  vexed  because  I  heard  her
saying  it  was  not  I  who  spoke  that  night.  I  made
a  great  effort  to  speak  that  night  and  this  is  the
way  she  doubts  me.  I  was  here  again  and  again,
and  could  not  speak  because  Lennox  was  not  here.
I  tell  you  I  am  Hugh  Lane  [most  emphatically,  even
fiercely  given],  and  I  came  to  you  the  night  I  was
drowned.

Q. Why  did  you  say  "  Pray  for  the  soul  of  Hugh  Lane  "  ?

A.  I  did  not  say  that  [most  emphatic]  ;  the  control  who
was  at  the  board  and  guided  me  here  said  it.  I
would  never  have  thought  of  saying  such  a  thing.  I
only  said  "  I  am  Hugh  Lane."  [The  control  was
Peter  Rooney,  an  Irish  American  R.C.]

Questions  were  then  asked  if  Sir  Hugh  Lane  remembered
meeting  Sir  W.  Barrett,  and  he  replied,  "  Yes,  quite  well."
Asked,  can  you  see  him  ?  The  answer  was  "  No,  I  only
see  you  two." The  question  was  then  asked  :


246


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[PART


Q. What  are  you  doing  now  ?

A.  [Given  in  an  angry,  violent  manner].  I  did  not  come
here  to  make  an  interesting  sitting  for  your  friends  ;
I  came  to  tell  you,  Hester,  what  a  fool  you  are  !

Here  we  had  to  stop  for  a  moment  as  Mr.  Lennox
Robinson,  whose  averted  head  had  fallen  down,  seemed  as
if  he  would  faint,  and  we  asked  :

Q. Can  you  not  make  use  of  Mrs.  Travers  Smith  and  leave

Mr.  Robinson  alone  ?
A. I  only  have  hold of  Lennox. I  held  him  tight  until

I  could  get  no  more  out  of  him.

Again  we  had  to  stop  as  Mr.  Lennox  Robinson  was
evidently  on  the  point  of  complete  collapse.  So  we  led
him  to  the  sofa  and  made  him  lie  down.  In  a  few
minutes  he  recovered,  but  evidently  much  exhausted,  and
before  we  had  read  to  him  the  record,  he  said,  "There
was  some  very  strong  control  at  the  sitting,  it  was  so
powerful  that  it  has  caused  much  pain  in  my  arm,  and
filled  me  with  emotion,  a  distinct  feeling  of  anger  and
indignation  is  left  in  myself.  This  is  very  odd  as  there
is  no  cause  for  it  at  all."  f

During  the  sitting  Mr.  Robinson's  hand  was  obviously
used  to  move  the  traveller,  whilst  Mrs.  T.  Smith  did  all
she  could  to  restrain  its  rapid  and  violent  movement.
All  those  present  were  convinced  that  Mr.  Robinson  could
not  see  the  alphabet,  and  was  unaware  of  the  messages
coming  through.  Moreover,  none  of  us  with  our  eyes
open,  nor  with  the  greatest  effort,  could  spell  out  a
sentence  with  the  traveller  approaching  the  rapidity  with
which  these  messages  came  through.  Nor  would  any  con-
tinued practice,  I  venture  to  say,  enable  such  abnormal
speed  to  be  attained.  This  speed  is  not  always  attained,
for  the  results  vary  from  time  to  time.  In  this  par-
ticular instance  the  result  impressed  the  sitters  as  much
as  the  recorders.  Mrs.  T.  Smith,  after  it  was  over,  wrote
to  me  : — "  The  sitting  at  which  you  and  Lady  Barrett
were  present,  was  the  most  evidential  we  have  so  far
experienced  ;  we  are  quite  convinced  that  there  was  some


lxxvi.] Evidence,  of  Super-normal  Communications.  247

outside  influence,  for  the  message  could  not  have  been  due
to  our  sub-consciousness."

On  the  other  hand  it  is  possible  to  interpret  some  of
the  messages  as  dream-creations  of  the  sub-concious  self
of  the  sitters.  Thus  Mrs.  Travers  Smith  has  sent  me
the  record  of  some  recent  sittings  she  had  had  with  a
Mr.  Dodds  ;  a  startling  and  melodramatic  story  of  an
obsession  came  through,  and  also  later  on  what  purported
to  be  a  dream  of  which  she  had  no  recollection.  The
message  went  on : — -"  I  woke  you  with  a  terrible  fright
and  sat-  on  your  bed  and  laughed  till  I  cried."  Mrs.
Smith  says  it  then  proceeded  to  describe  her  thoughts  as
things  coming  one  by  one  into  the  room  like  little  fan-
tastic beings.  It  was  all  very  weird.  Here  is  the  record
of  one  of  these  sittings  a  month  or  so  ago  :

Sitting,  October  8,  1917.

Sitters — Mrs.  Travers  Smith  and  Mr.  Dodds.

I  am  the  body  of  your  thoughts.  I  have  grown  from
day  to  day  since  you  were  a  child.  I  am  getting  taller
and  taller,  now  that  your  thoughts  are  so  full  and  round.
You  dream  more  than  ever,  and  you  always  lived  in  your
dreams.  Soon  the  dream  will  be  reality.  [What  do  you
mean  1]  I  mean  I  am  a  dim  form  made  of  a  part  of
you  which  is  called  imagination.  The  outward  things  are
sharp  and  hard  for  you,  and  I  keep  you  alive,  the  time
is  near  when  I  shall  be  body  and  soul  both.  Dream  on
my  lady.  Do  not  check  your  slumbering  soul  ;  it  would
have  died  long  ago  from  sheer  hunger  and  thirst,  but  that
sweet  dreams  kept  you  alive  and  gave  you  strength  to
endure.  Let  me  grow  taller  still  : — soon  I  shall  have  no
longer  an  entity  of  my  own.  .  .  .  Forget  the  world's
misery,  and  let  me  grow  until  I  am  merged  in  you.

Another  record  Mrs.  T.  Smith  sent  me  is  of  psycho-
logical interest.  A  control  callinc;  itself  "  Eyan  "  two  years
ago  annoyed  the  sitters  by  constantly  intruding  itself  and
called  itself  Mrs.  Travers  Smith's  "guide."  At  last
Mr.  Lennox  Eobinson,  tired  of  this  intrusion,  drove  him
away  persistently,  and  the  control  disappeared  for  a  couple


248


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.8.


[part


of  years  ;  however,  when  Mr.  Wakeman  and  Mrs.  Travers
Smith  were  recently  sitting  the  following  message  from
Eyan  unexpectedly  came  through  with  great  dramatic
force.

Sitting,  October  8,  1917.
Sitters — Mrs.  Travers  Smith  and  Mr.  Wakeman.

Never  again, — the  sun  may  shine  the  moon  may  shed
her  beams, — but  I  am  banished  for  evermore.  Lennox
this  is  your  doing.  My  revenge  shall  be  to  watch  your
soul  die  for  I  am  banished  for  evermore.  Never  again, —
the  summer  may  come  with  all  its  flowers  and  joys,  the
Autumn  may  moan,  the  Winter  may  lie  white  like  a  corpse
in  a  shroud, — but  Lennox  I  shall  have  my  revenge.  Your
soul  dies  a  lingering  and  horrible  death,  for  I  am  banished
for  evermore.  Never  again.  The  web  of  time  is  being
woven,  but  the  shears  are  ready  to  cut  the  thread.  The
Universe  is  throbbing  but  Lennox  your  soul  is  dead.  You
have  no  soul  for  you  have  no  love.  Your  soul  is  dead.
Never  again.

Heaven  is  there,  the  paradise  of  the  soul.  Look,  would
you  not  enter  if  you  could.  Hell  is  there.  The  soul's
torture.  Would  it  not  be  better  to  feel  the  fire  than  be  a
dead  thing  ?  No  not  for  you  is  either  bliss  or  torture,
only  cold  and  numbness.  You  have  no  soul  you  wretched
being,  for  you  banished  me  for  evermore. — Eyan.

The  foregoing  will  illustrate  the  varied  character  of  these
automatisms,  a  larger  collection  of  which  Mrs.  Travers
Smith  intends  to  prepare  for  publication  in  book  form.
Their  explanation  will  afford  interesting  matter  for  future
psychological  enquiry.  That  the  sub-conscious  self  of  the
sitters  plays  a  considerable  part  is  very  probable,  but
unless  we  confer  upon  the  sub-conscious  or  sub-liminal  self
transcendental  faculties  this  explanation  fails  to  explain
all.  Thus  clairvoyance  is  constantly  exhibited  when  the
sitters  are  carefully  blindfolded.  Eor  instance,  quite
recently,  on  a  visit  of  Mrs.  Travers  Smith  and  Mr.  Lennox
Robinson  to  London,  some  friends  were  present,  and  the
following  experiment  was made  to  test  the  question  of


lxxvi.] Evidence  of  Super-normal  Communications.  249


clairvoyance.  In  their  normal  state  neither  of  the  sitters
is  in  the  least  clairvoyant.

First  Mrs.  Travers  Smith  was  carefully  blindfolded,  the
letters  of  the  ouija  board  were  then  re-arranged  promiscuously,
and  we  asked  for  a  sentence  to  be  spelt  out,  when  she  and
Mr.  L.  Robinson,  who  was  not  blindfolded,  had  their  hands
on  the  traveller.  Immediately  the  words  "  New  people
again "  were  spelt  out.  The  same  sentence  was  repeated
when  Mr.  L.  Robinson  was  blindfolded  carefully  and  not
Mrs.  T.  Smith,  the  letters  being  rearranged  after  each
experiment.  Then  both  sitters  were  taken  out  of  the  rooni
and  most  carefully  and  securely  blindfolded,  the  letters
entirely  rearranged  when  they  were  out  of  the  room,  and
we  asked  for  the  same  sentence  to  be  repeated.  "New
people  again  "  was  at  once  accurately  spelt  out.  It  is  hardly
necessary  to  say  that  I  satisfied  myself  the  blindfolding
prevented  the  sitters  seeing  the  letters,  and  they  assured
me  also  they  could  see  nothing.  We  must  therefore  assume
that  the  sub-liminal  self  of  both  sitters  is  clairvoyant,  or
that  some  extraneous  spirit  guided,  through  their  muscles,
the  movement  of  the  traveller.

Psychical  researchers  need  to  be  on  their  guard  against
what  Bacon  calls  "  the  idol  of  the  market  place,"  that  is
to  say  the  error  arising  from  the  influence  exercised  by
some  catch  word  or  phrase.  Having  found  a  vera  causa
for  certain  inexplicable  psychical  phenomena,  many  are
apt  to  think  it  a  tota  causa.  The  word  telepathy  has
been  abused  in  this  way,  even  by  some  who  formerly
believed  it  had  no  existence.  I  venture  to  think  we
are  in  some  danger  to  the  slavery  of  the  term  "  the  sub-
liminal self,"  which  is  no  more  accepted  as  an  explanation
by  official  science  than  is  that  of  an  extraneous  spirit
influencing  the  medium.  In  connection  with  this,  our
distinguished  colleague,  Dr.  W.  M'Dougall,  F.R.S.,  has
truly  said  : — "  The  phrase,  the  sub-liminal  self,  may  prove
detrimental  to  the  efficiency  of  our  Society,  if  we  do  not
sternly  resist  the  tendency  to  use  it  as  a  mere  cloak  for
our  ignorance  whenever  we  arc  confronted  by  inexplicable
events."  1

lProc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIX.  p.  431.


250


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[PART


The  history  of  physical  science  shows  how  progress  has
often  been  retarded  by  the  facile  use  of  phrases  to  account
for  obscure  physical  phenomena,  such  as  "  the  doctrine  of
sympathy,"  "  phlogiston,"  etc.  ;  words  which  explained
nothing,  and  now  are  ridiculed,  but  were  once  employed
as  a  learned  solution  of  difficulties;  they  formed,  as  Dr.
M'Dougall  says,  a  convenient  cloak  to  ignorance.


LXXVI.]


Note  on  Telepathy  and  Telergy.


251


III.

NOTE  ON  TELEPATHY  AND  TELERGY.
By  Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.

The  words  telepathy  and  telergy  form  part  of  the  valuable
terminology  we  owe  to  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers.  Telepathy
is  well  known,  and  may  be  considered  to  have  been
established  ;  but  though  recognized  as  a  new  and  impor-
tant addition  to  our  knowledge  by  all  serious  students
of  the  subject,  it  has  not  yet  been  accepted  as  indisput-
able by  the  general  body  of  official  science  in  any  country.
One  reason  for  this  is  that,  like  other  psychical  phenomena,
it  cannot  be  demonstrated  at  any  given  time  or  place
with  the  certainty  of  physical  phenomena.  Only  by
enlisting  a  wider  range  of  interest  and  observation  among
scientific  men  and  women  can  a  more  general  acceptance
of  this  fundamental  fact  of  psychical  research  win  its
way  into  the  accepted  truths  of  science.  "  The  mistake
of  agnosticism,"  as  Mr.  Lowes  Dickinson  has  truly  re-
marked, "  has  been  that  it  has  said  not  merely,  '  I  do
not  know,'  but  '  I  will  not  consider.'  Such  a  position
is  hampering  not  only  to  life  but  to  truth.  For  the
impulse  to  truth  is  desire,  and  all  discoveries  are  prompted
by  hope  and  by  faith."  1

Mr.  Myers  has  defined  telepathy  as  "  The  communication
of  impressions  of  any  kind  from  one  mind  to  another
independently  of  the  recognised  channels  of  sense."  Tele-
pathy therefore  includes  and  extends  the  term  "  thought-
transference,"  a  word  originally  employed  to  denote  those
novel phenomena, the result of experiments at  short

1  Religion  and  Criticism,  a  Forecast,  p.  xi,  by  G.  Lowes  Dickinson  (Brimley
&Co.).


252


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.B.S.


[part


distances,  which  were  first  brought  under  the  notice  of
science  by  the  present  writer  some  forty-one  years  ago.

I  will  return  to  the  discussion  of  telepathy  presently,
but  before  doing  so  let  us  try  to  get  at  the  meaning
of  the  much  less  familiar  term  telergy.

In  the  valuable  Index  of  the  publications  of  our  Society,
which  already  extends  over  two  volumes,  no  reference
whatever  is  made  to  the  word  telergy.  This  is  an
omission,  for  it  is  found  in  our  Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.
(1890),  p.  320,  where  Mr.  Myers,  in  a  paper  on  Phantasms
of  the  Dead,  says  :

*'  When  we  come  to  telergy — the  power  of  propagating
influences  or  phantasms  at  a  distance, — •  .  .  .  The  crisis
which  facilitated  telergic  action  was  not  necessarily  a
moment  of  conscious  excitement  or  strain.  Quite  other-
wise, for  it  was  proved  that  the  '  agent '  at  the  moment
of  the  apparition  was  often  asleep  or  fainting  or  in  a
state  of  coma.  ...  It  would  thus  be  nearer  the  truth
to  say  that  telergic  action  varies  inversely,  than  that
it  varies  directly  with  the  observable  activity  of  the
nervous  system  or  of  the  conscious  mind."

The  word  telergy  strictly  means  force  or  energy  acting
afar,  or  at  a  distance  from  its  source  ;  hence  in  the
Glossary  of  Terms  used  in  Psychical  Research  which  Mr.
Myers  compiled  and  published  in  our  Proceedings,  Vol.  XII.,
p.  174,  he  defines  telergy  as  follows  :

"  A  name  for  a  hypothetical  force,  or  mode  of  action,
concerned  with  the  conveyance  of  telepathic  impressions,
and  perhaps  with  other  supernormal  operations."

As  time  went  on  a  somewhat  different  and  more
restricted  meaning  was  given  to  telergy,  for  in  the  glossary
prefixed  to  his  magnum  opus  on  Human  Personality,
Myers  defines  telergy  as  follows  :  "  The  force  exercised  by
the  mind  of  an  agent  in  impressing  a  percipient, — in-
volving a  direct  influence  of  an  extraneous  spirit  on  the
brain  or  organism  of  the  percipient."

In  his  discussion  of  telergy  in  Vol.  II.  of  Human
Personality,  Myers  uses  the  term  in  a  more  general  sense
than  that  given  in  the  above  definition.  Thus  on  p.  526
he  writes  :


LXXVI.]


Note  on  Telepathy  and  Telergy.


253


"  That  law  [that  spirits  should  influence  men]  is  the
direct  transmission  of  thought  and  emotion  from  mind
to  mind,  and  the  telergy — to  use  here  a  word  more  active
in  its  connotation  than  telepathy — the  telergy  by  which
this  transmission  is  effected,  may  be  as  universally  diffused
in  the  metatherial  world  as  heat  in  the  material."  Again,
on  p.  197,  speaking  of  telepathy  as  involving  two  factors,
Myers  says  :

"  The  percipient's  mind  must  somehow  receive  the
telepathic  impression  ; — and  to  this  reception  we  can
assign  no  definite  physical  correlative ; — and  also  the
percipient's  motor  or  sensory  centres  must  receive  an
excitation  : — which  excitation  may  be  communicated,  for
aught  we  know,  either  by  his  own  mind  in  the  ordinary
way,  or  by  the  agent's  mind  in  some  direct  way, —
which  I  may  call  telergic,  thus  giving  a  more  precise
sense  to  a  word  which  I  long  ago  suggested  as  a  kind
of  correlative  to  telepathic.  That  is  to  say,  there  may
even  in  these  apparently  simple  cases  be  first  a  trans-
mission from  agent  to  percipient  in  the  spiritual  world,
and  then  an  action  on  the  percipient's  physical  brain
of  the  same  type  as  spirit-possession.  This  action  on
the  physical  brain  may  be  due  either  to  the  percipient's
own  spirit,  or  subliminal  self,  or  else  directly  to  the
agent's  spirit."

Here  Myers  (recognizing  as  elsewhere,  that  telepathy
is  a  psychical  and  not  a  mechanical  process,)  gives  an
alternative  mode  by  which  the  telepathic  action  on  the
percipient's  brain  may  be  made  to  reveal  itself,  and
apparently  would  keep  the  word  telergic  to  a  direct
action  of  the  agent's  mind  or  spirit  (he  uses  these  words
as  synonymous)  on  the  percipient's  brain.  This  view
he  states  more  definitely  on  p.  522,  where  he  refers
again  to  the  two  possible  modes  by  which  telepathy
may  influence  the  percipient's  brain  :  "  Shall  we  say
that  the  spirit  of  the  agent  affects  the  spirit  of  the
percipient,  and  thus  the  spirit  of  the  percipient  influences
his  own  brain  ?  Or  shall  we  say  that  the  agent's  spirit
directly  influences  the  percipient's  brain  in  like  manner
as it influenced his own  ? There may seem little  to


254


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


choose  between  two  such  unprovable  conceptions.  Yet  .  .  .
I  think  that  the  second  alternative  should  provisionally  not
be  excluded.  ...  It  is  certainly  simpler  to  suppose
that  here  also  the  agent's  spirit  is  directly  affecting  the
percipient's  brain, — not  needing,  so  to  say,  to  invite
the  percipient's  own  spirit  to  accomplish  that  task."

From  this  it  would  appear  that  Myers  was  disposed
to  regard  the  reception  and  manifestation  of  all  tele-
pathic influence  as  more  simply  explicable  by  the  agent's
spirit  directly  affecting  the  percipient's  brain.  "  On
this  view,"  he  says  in  the  next  paragraph,  "  we  shall
have  an  intelligible  series— though  a  series  advancing  by
leaps  and  bounds — to  represent  the  achievements  of  Will,
as  it  shakes  itself  free  from  the  limitations  which  are
but  shadows  as  contrasted  with  its  own  reality.  In
the  first  place  we  have  hyperboulia ; — the  extension  of
the  Will's  power  over  tissues  in  the  organism  which
its  mandates  have  ordinarily  failed  to  reach.  In  the
second  place  we  have  telergy  ; — the  extension  of  its  power
over  the  brain  molecules  of  an  organism  other  than
that  with  which  it  is  primarily  in  connection.  And
in  the  third  place  we  shall  have  '  telekinesis '  and  the
like  ;■ — a  group  of  phenomena  involving  control  over
inorganic  matter,  and  over  organic  matter  both  within
and  without  its  own  organism."

Earlier  in  the  same  volume  (Human  Personality,
Vol.  II.,  p.  204)  Myers  points  out  that  the  mystery
of  psycho-physical  interaction,  whilst  inexplicable,  occurs
in  our  ordinary  life,  where  our  own  spirits  affect  our
own  bodies  and  are  the  standing  examples  of  spirit
affecting  matter.  He  then  makes  his  own  position  clear
in  the  following  sentence  :

"  It  may  not  always  be  true  even  in  the  case  of  sensory
automatisms  that  the  distant  spirit  has  made  a  suggestion
merely  to  the  percipient's  spirit  which  the  percipient's
own  spirit  carries  out ;  and  in  motor  automatisms,  as
they  develop  into  'possession,  there  are  indications,  as
I  have  already  pointed  out,  that  the  influence  of  the
agent's  spirit  is  telergic  rather  than  telepathic,  and  that
we  have  extraneous  spirits  influencing  the  human  brain


lxxvi.]  Note  on  Telepathy  and  T clergy.


255


or  organism.  That  is  to  say,  they  are  producing  move-
ments in  matter  ; — even  though  that  matter  be  organized
matter  and  those  movements  molecular."

We  thus  arrive  at  the  definition  of  telergy  given  in
the  glossary  to  Human  Personality,  which  I  have  already
quoted.  Certainly  one  of  the  cases  of  motor  automatism
given  in  the  preceding  paper  seems  to  me  a  case  where
telepathy  merges  into  telergy.  Any  one  who  has  been
present  at  the  sittings  when  the  control  purporting  to
be  Hugh  Lane  violently  manifested,  completely  sub-
merging the  personality  of  the  automatist,  would  compare
it  to  a  case  of  possession.  It  was  not  mere  telepathy,
but  a  distinct  psychical  invasion  of  some  extraneous
power  or  personality  ;  and  with  our  present  knowledge,
it  is,  in  my  opinion,  simpler  to  assume  here  telergic
action  rather  than  confer  on  the  automatist  hypothetical
transcendental  powers  of  muscular  action  and  clairvoyance.

Nevertheless  others,  whose  opinion  is  entitled  to  great
weight,  do  not  take  this  view,  and  dispute  that  any
valid  evidence  has  been  adduced  on  behalf  of  telergy.
Thus  in  a  foot-note  {Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXVIII.,  p.  320)  to
her  valuable  monograph  "  On  the  Psychology  of  Mrs.
Piper's  Trance-Phenomena,"  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  states
that  whilst  not  dogmatically  affirming  that  "  no  influence
of  a  telergic  kind  can  ever  be  exercised  by  an  external
mind, — i.e.  that  an  external  mind  can  never  affect  our
nervous  system  in  the  same  way  our  own  mind  does, —
I  think  there  is  practically  no  evidence  for  it  at  present."
This  statement  is  however  somewhat  modified  in  a  later
remark  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  viz.  :  "  It  is  even  possible
that  telepathy  and  telergy  may  merge  into  each  other."

In  any  case  the  existence  of  telergy  can  only  be  an
inference,  as  it  is  incapable  of  being  experimentally  proved.
Obviously  the  only  definite  proof  of  the  direct  action
of  an  extraneous  spirit  on  the  molecules  of  the  brain
would  be  to  evoke  some  response  from  a  corpse,  for
when  the  percipient  is  merely  unconscious  or  entranced,
his  subliminal  life  is  not  extinct,  and  may  be  in  fact
more  accessible  to  a  telepathic  impact.

This  lengthy  discussion  of  the  meaning  of  telergy  may

R


256  Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.  [part


be  useful  in  removing  misconception  and  ambiguity,
though  it  adds  nothing  to  the  more  important  question
of  evidence  on  its  behalf.

Turning  to  the  subject  of  telepathy,  it  seems  also
desirable  to  remove  some  misconceptions  which  have  arisen.

The  words  "  agent "  and  "  percipient,"  used  in  the
Reports  of  the  Committee  on  Thought-Transference  pub-
lished in  the  first  two  or  three  volumes  of  the  Proceedings
of  the  S.P.R.,  are  apt  to  be  misleading.  They  convey  the
idea  that  the  agent,  or  transmitter,  must  be  actively  and
energetically  striving  to  communicate  an  impression  from
his  mind  to  the  passive'  percipient,  like  a  vigorous
electrical  transmitter  in  wireless  telegraphy.  Now  there
is  no  valid  evidence  to  indicate  that  telepathy  depends
for  its  success  on  the  "  agent "  concentrating  his  mind
upon  some  word  or  idea  and  energetically  striving  to
transmit  it.  On  the  contrary,  as  the  first  case  in  the
preceding  paper  shows,  the  agent  may  be  asleep  and
the  conscious  mind  for  the  time  in  abeyance.  As  Mr.
Myers  has  remarked  about  telergy,  in  the  passage  quoted
(p.  252),  it  would  be  nearer  the  truth  to  say  that  telepathic
action  varies  inversely  rather  than  directly  to  the
observed  mental  activity  of  the  agent  or  percipient.

It  seems  highly  probable  that  telepathy,  like  many
psychical  phenomena,  is  the  operation  of  the  sub-conscious
or  subliminal  self  of  the  so-called  agent,  which  in  some
unknown  way  influences  the  sub-conscious  self  of  the
automatist  or  percipient,  and  it  is  possible  that  a  vigorous
conscious  activity  of  mind  may  often  be  more  or  less
inimical  to  success.  The  word  "  agent,"  as  used  for
the  transmitter,  must  therefore  be  taken  to  mean  the
conscious  or  unconscious  originating  source  of  the  impres-
sion conveyed.

A  much  more  difficult  question  is  the  mode  of  trans-
mission  of  telepathy.  No  doubt  in  many  minds  the
first  conception  of  thought-transference  was  a  quasi-
mechanical  transmission  of  brain  waves  through  space.
The  well-known  phenomenon  of  resonance  in  physics
supported  this  idea.  A  tuning-fork  when  struck  will
cause another tuning-fork, in exact unison, to  respond,


LXXVI.]


Note  on  Telepathy  and  Telergy.


257


even  though  they  may  be  some  distance  apart.  The
resonance  of  a  sensitive  flame  (a  tall  jet  of  gas)  is  still
more  remarkable  ;  it  will  shorten  nearly  a  foot  in  response
to  a  note  of  the  proper  pitch  50  or  more  feet  distant.1
Moreover,  it  can  respond  to  vibrations  of  the  air  too  rapid
for  the  ear  to  perceive.2  In  radio-,  or  wireless  telegraphy,
we  have  the  resonance  to  undulations  of  the  ether  ex-
tending over  thousands  of  miles.  Whilst  the  transmission
of  intelligence  by  radio-telegraphy  rendered  telepathy  less
incredible  to  the  public,  it  also  supported  the  popular
view  that  a  somewhat  analogous  mode  of  transmission
occurred  in  the  two  cases.  This  however  is  highly
improbable  ;  albeit  some  years  ago  Sir  W.  Crookes,  in
his  Presidential  Address  to  our  Society  (Vol.  XII.,  p.  352),
made  a  provisional  suggestion  that  very  high  frequency
vibrations  [of  the  molecules  of  the  brain]  might  generate
minute  ethereal  waves  and  be  the  mode  of  telepathic
transmission.  Another  high  authority.  Dr.  W.  M'Dougall,
in  his  great  work  Body  and  Mind,  does  not  altogether
dismiss  the  idea  of  brain-waves  as  a  possible  explanation
of  telepathy  through  short  distances.

It  is  therefore  worth  while  to  state  the  reasons
why  telepathy  cannot  be  explained  by  any  known
method  of  mechanical  transmission  of  '  brain-waves  '  through
the  ether,  or  other  forms  of  radiant  physical  action.
"  Its  laws,"  as  Myers  has  remarked,  "  are  not  cognate  to
the  known  laws  of  the  material  world.  It  is  a  trans-
ference, not  of  a  pattern  of  vibrations,  but  of  a  knowledge,
an  impulse,  which  seems  to  implant  itself  in  the  perci-
pient's mind  like  a  living  thing "  (Op.  ext.  p.  521).  In
support  of  this  psychical  view  I  may  be  permitted  to
quote  an  extract  from  an  article  of  mine  in  the  Contem-
porary Review  for  February,  1918  :

"All  radiant  forces,  such  as  light,  heat,  gravitation,  etc.,
when  freely  diffused  through  space  diminish  in  intensity
as  the  square  of  the  distance  increases  between  the  source
and  the  receiver,  if  no  absorbing  medium  intervenes.  At
a  thousand  feet  apart  the  intensity  is  a  million  times  less

1  Philosophical  Magazine,  March,  1867,  Paper  by  W.  F.  B.

2  Nature,  May  3,  1877  :  Note  by  W.  F.  B.

r2


258


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.


[part


than  at  one  foot  apart.  To  transmit  a  wireless  message
across  the  Atlantic  therefore  requires  a  very  powerful
source  of  electric  waves  and  a  very  sensitive  receiver.
Now  there  are  well  attested  cases  of  telepathy  occurring
between  individuals,  not  only  thousands  of  feet  apart,  but
thousands  of  miles  asunder— if  apparitions  at  or  near  the
time  of  death  are  due  to  a  telepathic  impression,  as  seems
probable — a  phantasm  being  projected  from  the  mind  of
the  percipient.  Yet,  in  such  cases,  there  was  no  exhaus-
tion, no  exertion  even,  on  the  part  of  the  unconscious
source  of  these  imaginary  brain  waves.

It  is  therefore  highly  improbable  that  telepathy  is  trans-
mitted by  waves  radiating  in  every  direction,  like  light
from  a  candle.  Nor  can  we  conceive  of  unwritten  or
unspoken  thought  being  carried  by  a  messenger,  or  sent
through  a  conduit,  or  fired  like  a  bullet  at  a  target.
Moreover,  in  telepathy  ideas  and  feelings,  more  frequently
than  exact  words,  impress  the  percipient.  There  is
abundant  evidence  that  emotions  and  sensations  such  as
pain,  taste,  etc.,  experienced  by  one  person  are  simul-
taneously felt  by  a  distant  percipient,  under  conditions
that  exclude  the  possibility  of  fraud  or  any  verbal  com-
munication.1 The  remarkable  fact  is  also  coming  to  light,
that  telepathy  may  not  be  ultimately  due  to  any  conscious
and  voluntary  operation  of  the  mind,  either  in  the
originating  or  receiving  personality,  such  as  occurs  in  the
ordinary  operation  of  speech  or  writing.

Telepathy,  then,  cannot  be  explained  by  a  process  of
mechanical  transmission.  It  appears  to  be  a  case  of
'  action  at  a  distance.'  But  physicists  do  not  admit
action  at  a  distance  as  an  ultimate  fact,  although  the
attracting  influence  of  one  body  upon  another  throughout
the  realms  of  space  appears  to  be  such  an  action.  Gravi-
tation, however,  is  not  likely  to  be  an  exception  to  other
physical  forces,  though  we  may  have  to  wait  a  long  time

1  Mr.  Gerald  Balfour  has  also  pointed  out  (Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  XXVI. ,  p.  363)  that
whilst  the  transmission  of  wireless  telepathy  depends  on  the  use  of  symbols  there
is  good  reason  to  believe  telepathy  in  many  cases  is  the  direct  communication  of
meanings.  There  is  also,  he  remarks,  something  like  a  selective  action  in
telepathy,  a  power  on  the  part  of  the  agent  to  direct  the  communication  to  a
particular  person  and  no  other.


LXXVI.]


Note  on  Telepathy  and  Telergy.


259


for  its  satisfactory  explanation.  Telepathy  and  gravitation
are  only  alike  in  this,  that  at  present  we  are  ignorant
how  two  different  masses,  and  how  two  different  minds,
at  a  distance  apart,  can  transmit  their  influence.  The  two
operations  are  in  wholly  different  categories — one  belongs
to  the  physical  order,  the  other  to  the  psychical  order.

It  may  be,  as  my  friend  Mr.  F.  C.  Constable  suggested,
in  his  work  Persoriality  and  Telepathy,  that  we  may  find
in  telepathy  evidence  of  the  direct  operation  of  a  tran-
scendental part  of  our  being  which  is  not  conditioned  in
matter  or  space.  In  any  case,  telepathy  and  its  implica-
tions will  afford  a  profound  and  fruitful  subject  of  psycho-
logical discussion  in  the  near  future."

"  Telepathy,"  as  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick  has  remarked,  "  if  a
purely  psychical  process — and  the  reasons  for  thinking  it
is  so  increase — indicates  that  the  mind  can  work  inde-
pendently of  the  body,  and  thus  adds  to  the  probability
that  it  can  survive  it."  1  For  my  own  part  I  am  convinced
that  telepathy  is  a  purely  psychical  process,  and  if  this  be
so  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  how  an  idea  or  impression  can
be  telepathically  conveyed  except  by  the  direct  influence
of  the  transmitting  mind  on  that  of  the  percipient  ;  an
operation  which  suggests  an  excursive  action  of  the  mind,
or  soul,  or  sub-liminal  self ;  if  indeed  we  can  speak  of
excursive  action  in  a  process  which  is  probably  independent
both  of  matter  and  of  space.  A  "  telepathic  impact "
from  some  distant  mind  would  thus  appear  to  be  a
psychical  impact,  for  this  impact,  to  quote  Myers  again
(op.  cii.  p.  521),  "is  no  blunt  shock.  It  may  be  sudden;
but  it  may  also  be  persistent ;  it  may  sometimes  be
overwhelming,  but  it  can  be  insinuating  too.  It  is
not  a  bolt  discharged  and  done  with  ;  it  is  a  vital
influence  at  work  on  the  percipient's  subhminal  self."
Hence  the  distinction  between  this  and  a  psychical  invasion
of  the  percipient  by  an  extraneous  mind,  seems  (in  our
ignorance  of  the  modus  operandi)  to  be  only  a  question
of  the  degree  of  interpenetrating  influence  or  control
which  the  extraneous  mind  or  spirit  can  gain  over  the
receptive organism. When  the control  by  the  usurping

^Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXIX.,  p.  247.


260


Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.  [part


spirit  is  more  or  less  complete,  we  have  the  varied  pheno-
mena of  -possession,  on  which  subject  an  illuminating
exposition  has  been  given  by  Myers  in  Chap.  IX.  of  his
great  work  on  Human  Personality.


lxxvt.]  Review. .  261


REVIEW.

Experiments  in  Psychical  Research,  being  the  "  Leland  Stanford
Junior  University's  Psychical  Research  Monograph  No.  1."
By  John  Edgar  Coover,  Fellow  in  Psychical  Research
and  Assistant  Professor  of  Psychology.  With  a  Foreword
by  David  Starr  Jordan,  Chancellor  Emeritus,  an  Intro-
duction by  Professor  Frank  Angell,  Head  of  Department
of  Psychology,  and  a  Part  by  Professor  Lillien  J.  Martin,
Professor  Emeritus  of  Psychology.  Stanford  University,
California. Published  by  the  University. Pp.  xxiv,  641.

Psychical  Research  having  at  length  got  itself  endowed  academi-
cally, by  a  spiritualist  and  brother  of  the  late  Senator  Stan-
ford, the  authorities  of  Leland  Stanford  Junior  University
are  evidently  determined  to  prove  that  they  are  making  a
good  use  of  the  endowment  given  them,  and  are  worthy  of  further
favours.  Hence  this  enormous  volume.  Hence  also  a  good
deal  of  padding  in  it,  the  three  prefaces,  the  library  catalogue
of  72  pages,  the  abundant  citations  and  summaries  of  opinions,
which  occupy  30  pages  before  the  first  experiments  are  reached  ;
though  it  should  be  admitted  that  the  summaries  of  the
past  history  of  the  subject  are  sometimes  distinctly  convenient.
The  work  is  evidently  intended  to  impress  the  world  by
its  sheer  weight  (3  lbs.  3J  oz.  avoirdupois),  and  especially
the  academic  world.  It  is  hardly  meant  to  be  read,  at  all
events  by  the  general  public,  to  judge  by  the  lengthiness
and  diffuseness  of  its  style,  and  the  academic  jargon  in  which
it  is  written.  But  this  is  all  the  more  reason  for  summarizing
its  findings,  for  drawing  attention  to  the  important  material
it  contains,  and  for  discussing  its  value.  For  after  subtracting
the  padding,  six  plates,  and  nearly  a  hundred  pages  of  tables
and  '  curves,'  there  still  remain  over  400  pages  of  reports
on  experiments,  which  demand  consideration.


262


F.  G.  S.  Schiller.


[part


The  first  subject  to  be  investigated  was  Thought  Trans-
ference without  contact  (Part  L).  Pages  31-47  report  experi-
ments with  guessing  and  Lotto  Block  Numbers,  with  Dr.  Coover
as  the  '  experimenter  '  ( = '  Agent  ')  and  a  student  of  psychology
as  the  'reagent'  (  =  '  Percipient ').  The  results  were  in  general
negative,  showing  no  greater  amount  of  success  than  could
be  ascribed  to  chance,  and  no  correlation  between  the  reagent's
subjective  feeling  of  certainty  and  the  actual  success.

Pages  48-143  deal  with  the  guessing  of  Playing  Cards  (court
cards  omitted).  Here  the  participators  were  numerous,
numbering  over  200,  and  may  probably  be  regarded  as  a
'  fair  sample '  of  the  Calif ornian  student  population,  so  that
the  experiments  constituted  a  good  test  of  the  hypothesis
that  the  capacity  for  receiving  telepathic  impressions  is  faintly
diffused  throughout  the  human  race.  The  method  was  to
set  100  pairs  of  experimenters  each  to  do  a'  series  of  100
experiments,  in  half  of  which  (roughly)  the  agent  knew  the
card  and  tried  to  transfer  his  knowledge,  while  in  the  other
half  he  did  not  look  at  it  until  the  reagent  had  made  his
guess.  The  agent  determined  whether  a  regular  or  a  '  control  '
experiment  should  be  tried  by  a  throw  of  dice,  and  apparently
(though  this  is  not  distinctly  stated)  the  reagent  never  knew
which  it  was.  Nor  were  the  results  inspected  until  the  series
was  completed.  The  results  taken  in  bulk  were  again  negative
in  the  aggregate,  and  so  did  not  support  the  belief  in  faint
degrees  of  telepathy.  5135  '  card-imaged  '  experiments,  in
which  a  transfer  was  attempted,  yielded  153  correct  guesses
of  the  card  and  538  of  the  number,  though  not  of  the  suit,
the  most  probable  numbers  ascribable  to  chance  being  128  and
513.  The  4865  '  control  '  experiments  (which  were  supposed  to
be  pure  guesses)  yielded  488  correct  Numbers,  and  141  wholly
correct,  the  '  probable  '  numbers  being  486  and  122.  There
was  consequently  a  (slight)  excess  over  the  most  '  probable '
number  in  both  series,  and  a  slight  difference  in  favour  of
the  '  experiments,'  in  which  telepathy  might  conceivably  be
operative  ;  but  it  was  not  sufficient  to  warrant  any  inference
to  the  reality  of  telepathy,  as  it  was  not  above  the  limits  of
chance  variation.  Thus  the  complete  successes  among  the  '  pure
guesses  '  varied  between  7  and  23  per  1000  (the  probable
number being 12  J), while those among the '  experiments  '


LXXVI.]


Review.


263


varied  between  11  and  20  ;  so  that  one  series  of  a  thousand
'  pure  guesses  '  might  actually  have  been  taken  as  better
proof  of  telepathy  than  any  series  of  '  experiments.'

When,  however,  we  come  to  test  the  hypothesis  that  tele-
pathy occurs  in  certain  (rare)  subjects,  the  interpretation  of
these  figures  is  by  no  means  as  clear.  For  it  then  becomes
legitimate  to  argue  that  some  only  of  the  '  reagents  '  had
faint  telepathic  capacity,  and  to  select  their  answers  for
separate  analysis.  Hence  we  may  select  14  reagents  (Nos.  1,
25,  26,  30,  32,  40,  42,  49,  59,  63,  64,  66,  78  and  97)
and  tabulate  their  results.  It  then  appears  that  in  711
experiments  they  got  119  Numbers  right  and  scored  54  '  com-
plete successes.'  The  '  probable '  numbers  are  respectively
71  and  18.  There  was  therefore  a  considerable  excess  over
the  ordinary  chance  distribution.  But  was  it  too  great  to  be
ascribed  to  chance,  and  must  it  be  attributed  to  an  unknown
cause  ('telepathy')?  Dr.  Coover  goes  fully  into  the  methods
of  answering  this  question  by  the  calculus  of  probabilities,
though  he  only  applies  them  to  his  aggregate  results.

His  tables  appear  to  show  (p.  92)  that  if  in  a  series  of
700  guesses  5  per  cent,  are  complete  successes,  and  14*8  per
cent,  get  the  Numbers  right,  the  excess  above  the  '  probable  '
number  becomes  significant  of  something  beyond  chance,  and
of  course  the  larger  the  number  of  guesses  the  smaller  becomes
the  excess  above  the  '  probable '  number  which  suffices  to
establish  this.  Now  in  the  set  of  reagents  selected  as
possibly  telepathic,  the  percentage  of  complete  successes  is
actually  7-6,  and  of  '  Numbers  right  '  16- 73.  This  is  on  the
face  of  it  a  considerable  excess,  and  if  the  method  of  reasoning
is  sound,  would  appear  to  prove  some  degree  of  telepathy
in  the  14  selected  reagents.

But  it  will  no  doubt  be  objected  that  some  of  the  series
of  '  pure  guesses '  would  show  similar  results  if  selected  in
this  fashion.  To  test  this  suggestion  let  us  take  all  those
series  of  piire  guesses  which  scored  3  or  more  '  complete
successes.'  They,  too,  happen  to  be  14  (Nos.  1,  2,  17,  25,
32,  51,  52,  64,  66,  71,  76,  93,  99,  100),  and  they  add  up
to  a  somewhat  smaller  number,  viz.  690.  Out  of  these  49
were  complete  successes,  and  91  got  the  numbers  right.  The
resulting  percentages  are  7'1  and  13"  18,  which  is  appreciably


264


F.  CL  8.  Schiller.


[part


lower  than  7'6  and  1673,  though  higher,  as  regards  complete
successes,  than  is  regarded  as  compatible  with  pure  chance,
the  highest  percentages  so  compatible  being  51  and  15.

We  must  next  notice  that  of  the  two  sets  of  14  best  series
the  surprisingly  large  number  of  5  are  common  to  the  '  experi-
ments '  and  the  'pure  guesses.'1  In  these  5  (Nos.  1,  25,  32,
64,  and  66)  22  complete  successes  (8-46  per  cent.)  and  41
correct  numbers  (15-77  per  cent.)  were  scored  in  260  answers.
Subtracting  these,  for  reasons  to  be  presently  explained,
27  complete  successes  and  50  correct  numbers  remain  in
430  answers.  The  percentages  then  work  out  at  6-28  and
11-63,  which  compare  with  5-81  and  164  for  the  highest
percentage  compatible  with  chance  in  400  answers.  There
is  still  an  excess  of  complete  successes,  but  its  significance
is  evidently  much  reduced.  The  success  of  the  five  who
succeeded  alike  as  experimenters  and  as  guessers,  however,
remains  a  problem.

On  this  problem  we  may  shed  some  light  by  combining
the  '  pure  guesses  '  and  the  '  experiments '  in  the  five  good
series.  We  then  get  41  complete  successes  and  86  correct
numbers,  in  a  total  of  500.  The  percentages  work  out  at
8 '2  and  17  2,  and  are  very  markedly  higher  than  the  maxima
attributable  to  chance  according  to  Dr.  Coover,  viz.  5-46
and  15-7.

These  figures  therefore  distinctly  point  to  some  source  of
Tightness  beyond  chance  in  these  cases.  As  it  occurs  in  the
'  pure  guesses  '  as  well  as  in  the  '  experiments,'  it  cannot
be  of  the  nature  of  conscious  thought-transference.  But
may  it  not  be  due  to  a  sort  of  '  lucidity '  or  clairvoyance
in  the  '  reagent  '  ?  This  possibility  had  long  ago  presented
itself to my mind in connexion with some  card-guessing

1  How  curious  this  correlation  is  may  be  shown  by  comparing  the  worst
series  of  'experiments'  and  'pure  guesses.'  Twenty  series  of  'experiments'
and  23  of  '  pure  guesses '  did  not  score  a  single  complete  success.  Among
1090  answers  82  '  guesses '  got  the  Number  right  (against  a  '  probable '  109
and  27  'complete  successes');  among  1026  answers  68  'experiments'  got  the
Number  right  (against  a  'probable'  103  and  26  'complete  successes').  But
only  3  of  the  worst  series  were  common  to  the  1  guesses'  and  the  'experiments,'
and  in  general  no  correlation  could  be  traced  between  the  bad  series.  In  the
bad  'experiments'  the  'guesses'  were  about  the  'probable'  number,  while
in  the  bad  '  guesses '  the  corresponding  '  experiments  '  were  above  the  average
(38  instead  of  30  '  complete  successes,'  and  131  instead  of  121  'Numbers  right').


LXXVI.]


Review.


265


experiments  by  means  of  automatic  writing  made  in  1886,
and  recorded  in  Proc,  Vol.  IV.  p.  220.  In  this  case  a  dispute
arose  as  to  whether  the  results  attained  could  be  ascribed
to  chance,  the  automatist  (my  brother)  maintaining  that
they  could  ;  so  to  test  the  matter  we  all  embarked  on  series
of  64  '  pure  guesses.'  The  results  were  curious.  For  while
the  other  guessers  got  results  in  accordance  with  probability,
the  automatist,  though  he  never  did  quite  so  well  as  with
planchette,  invariably  scored  4-6  successes  in  his  series  of  64
(with  a  full  pack).

Of  course  the  long  arm  of  coincidence  may  cover  this  also,
for  no  series,  however  improbable,  can  ever  be  proved  to
be  incompatible  with  chance  ;  but  Dr.  Coover  is  hardly  entitled
to  deduce  from  his  data  that  "  no  trace  of  an  objective  thought-
transference  is  found  as  a  capacity  enjoyed  in  perceptible
measure  by  any  of  the  individual  normal  reagents  "  (p.  124).
He  should  recognize  not  only,  as  he  does  (p.  65),  that  his
'  control  '  experiments  assumed  the  non-existence  of  any
'  lucidity,'  but  also  that  this  may  have  been  wrong,  and  that
they  may  not  have  been  '  pure  guesses,'  and  endeavour  to
experiment  further  with  the  abnormal  coincidence  of  good
'  guessers  '  and  good  '  experimenters.'  If  the  excess  of  right
answers  continues  (with  these  subjects),  he  will  be  able
to  establish  the  existence  of  telepathy  on  a  statistical  basis.
Experiments  with  these  five  good  '  reagents  '  would  appear  on  the
evidence  to  be  more  promising  than  with  the  10  '  psychics,'
whose  530  '  experiments  '  only  showed  a  comparatively  slight
excess  over  probability,  and  whose  '  guesses  '  gave  no  hint
of  lucidity.

The  '  feeling  of  being  stared  at  '  and  the  supposed  power
of  '  willing  people  to  turn  round '  was  next  investigated.
It  was  found  (by  questionnaire)  that  these  beliefs  were  enter-
tained by  77  and  59  per  cent,  of  the  students  in  the  psycho-
logy classes,  and  the  experimenters  were  chosen  from  the
believers.  The  results  of  1000  experiments  were  negative.
When  the  believers  objected  that  the  laboratory  conditions
differed  too  much  from  those  of  real  life,  another  1000  experi-
ments were  made  in  which  the  subjects  were  not  told  they
were  to  be  stared  at  but  only  had  to  '  introspect  '  ;  but  in
no  case  was  the  feeling  of  being  stared  at  recorded.  Other


266


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part


experiments  with  a  plurality  of  starers  and  with  '  willing  '
proved  similarly  inconclusive.

Part  II.,  pp.  170-226,  deals  with  Subliminal  Impression,  and
confirms  experimentally  the  results  of  other  investigators
as  to  the  reality  of  this  influence,  though  its  numerical  value
was  not  found  to  be  as  high  as  in  the  earlier  experiments.
It  seems  obvious  that  the  influence  of  the  doubtfully  and
faintly  perceived  impressions,  which  are  called  '  subliminal.'
can  be  varied  to  any  extent  by  varying  the  conditions  of
experiment,  and  that  a  dispute  can  always  be  raised  as  to
whether  the  stimulation  was  truly  '  subliminal.'

Part  III.,  pp.  227-366,  is  on  Mental  Habit  and  Inductive
Probability,  and  first  devotes  some  sixty  pages  to  establishing
the  existence  of  mental  habits  in  various  matters  having
little  likeness  to  the  conditions  in  psychical  research,  such  as
the  preference  of  judges  for  round  numbers  in  sentencing
criminals.  It  is  then  argued  that  mental  habits  must  tend
to  increase  the  number  of  '  right  '  cases  in  thought-transference
experiments.  This  may  be  admitted  as  regards  experiments
with  ordinary  diagrams,  in  which  there  is  sure  to  be  a  pre-
ponderance of  simple  geometrical  forms,  and  it  may  of  course
occur,  also,  if  there  is  a  coincidence  between  the  number-habits
of  any  pair  of  percipients  and  agents  ;  but  (in  cases  where
there  is  no  reason — such  as  the  judges  had — to  give  a  pre-
ference to  round  numbers)  we  must  also  recognize  the  possi-
bility that  two  such  habits  may  clash  and  so  reduce  the
number  of  successes  ;  while  with  large  masses  of  experimenters
it  may  fairly  be  assumed  that  these  contrary  influences  will
cancel  out  without  appreciably  vitiating  the  results.

Part  IV.,  pp.  367-408,  reports  experiments  in  Sound  Assimila-
tion which  were  designed  to  test  the  trustworthiness  of  the
identification  of  articulate  sounds,  and  the  sceptical  explanation
that  when  '  speakers  with  tongues '  are  heard  to  be  speaking
to  each  man  in  his  own  language,  this  interpretation  proceeds
from  the  mind  of  the  hearer.  The  results  were  surprising,
important  and  conclusive.  A  number  of  lists  of  nonsense-
syllables  were  prepared  and  dictated  to  the  experimenters
(1)  by  means  of  a  dictaphone,  (2)  by  telephone,  (3)  at  a
distance  of  25  meters,  (4)  across  the  table.  Under  these
conditions  right  answers  were  obtained,  "  from  the  dictaphone


LXXVI.]


Review.


267


less  than  15  per  cent.,  from  the  telephone  less  than  40  per
cent.,  from  the  air  less  than  40  per  cent.,  across  the  table
less  than  75  per  cent."  The  rest  then  of  what  one  '  hears '
is  interpretation  and  the  work  of  the  mind.  A  sceptic,  who
would  net  believe  that  the  results  could  be  so  bad,  was
invited  to  dictate  a  list  to  the  dictaphone  himself,  and  immedi-
ately afterwards  to  record  what  he  heard,  only  got  37  per
cent,  correct,  and  even  an  expert  stenographer  could  only
get  42  per  cent.  It  was  further  shown  that  this  incorrectness
was  not  due  to  a  failure  to  hear  the  sounds  themselves,  but
to  their  being  heard  as  other  sounds.  This  was  proved  by
dictating  a  text  which  '  simulated '  an  English  sentence
which  made  sense,  though  it  did  not  actually  contain  the  sound
it  mimicked  in  a  single  instance.  Half  of  the  sounds  heard
were  transformed  into  the  corresponding  English  sounds,  while
when  the  recorders  were  simultaneously  looking  at  the  English
text  simulated  less  than  10  per  cent,  of  the  dictaphone  sounds
were  thought  to  be  wrong,  and  "  90  per  cent,  came  true
to  the  English  text — were  heard  as  other  sounds."  It  is
obvious  that  where  suggestion  or  emotion  guides  the  interpreta-
tions of  the  senses  the  gravest  errors  may  thus  be  committed
in  perfectly  good  faith,  and  perception  be  falsified  to  an
enormous  extent.  But  of  course  this  principle  cuts  both
ways.  It  is  not  merely  abnormal  perceptions  that  are  falsified
by  expectation  and  suggestion.  Normal  perception  comes
under  the  law  even  more  plainly.  It  cannot  but  be  an
interpretation  of  what  is  there,  in  the  light  of  personal  and
racial  experience  and  social  convention.  And  so  it  may
conceivably  be  the  '  abnormal  '  and  '  unstable '  alone  who
are  sufficiently  emancipated  from  the  idola  tribus  and  unbiassed
to  perceive  things  as  they  really  are,  and  not  as  they  are
conventionally  supposed  to  be.

Part  V.  consists  of  contributions  by  Prof.  Lillien  J.  Martin.
The  first  explains  that  a  supposed  prophecy  of  the  great
California  earthquake  of  1906,  on  a  poster  connected  with
an  undergraduate  skit  in  1903  showing  the  Stanford  University
Memorial  Arch  in  ruins,  was  really  based  on  a  geological
lecture  about  the  earthquake  rift  running  through  California.
Then  follows  a  study  of  ghost -seeing,  which  is  attributed
to  the  power  of  projecting  visual  images. The  interpretation


268


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[PAET


is  not  very  convincing,  but  the  stories  of  2  of  the  4  seers
are  interesting.  Prof.  Martin  also  tabulates  the  answers
given  by  her  classes  in  psychology  in  1912-6  to  the  Society's
questionnaire  about  hallucinations,  and  remarks  that  hallucina-
tions appear  to  be  much  commoner  among  Stanford  students
than  among  the  English  answers,1  and  also  that  auditory
hallucinations  were  much  commoner  (more  than  3  times)  than
visual,  whereas  in  the  English  results  visual  hallucinations
are  commoner  (nearly  twice  as  common,  crediting  multiple
hallucinations  to  each  of  the  senses  affected).  This  she  attri-
butes conjecturally  to  an  omission  of  many  simple  auditory
hallucinations  from  the  English  Report.  But  even  if  we
added  on  a  conjectural  3000  unrecorded  auditory  hallucinations
to  bring  their  ratio  up  to  the  Stanford  students'  level  the
17,000  answers  of  the  British  census  would  only  show  about
28  per  cent,  who  had  experienced  hallucinations,  whereas
at  Stanford  256  out  of  591  answers  were  affirmative,  i.e.
43  per  cent.  Evidently  the  breezy  Westerner  is  more  suscep-
tible to  the  things  which  aren't  there  than  the  stolid  Britisher.
It  would  be  interesting  to  learn  whether  there  is  any  marked
sex-difference,  but  Prof.  Martin's  table  is  silent  about  this.

Lastly  Prof.  Martin  gives  in  '  An  Experimental  Study  of
the  Subconscious  '  a  brief  account  of  some  attempts  to  get
automatic  writing,  and  a  comparison  of  the  value  of  this
method  of  exploring  the  subconscious  with  one  she  prefers,
the  '  image  '  method.  It  contains  nothing  of  special  interest,
save  perhaps  the  story  of  the  girl  (p.  426)  who  gave  herself
away  by  repeatedly  intruding  into  her  English  essays  the
name  of  a  football  hero  she  admired.

Among  the  Appendices  '  C  '  is  important  as  an  elaborate
criticism  of  the  '  proof  '  of  telepathy  put  forward  in  the
experiments  of  the  S.P.R.  The  early  Creery  experiments
are  regarded  as  utterly  vitiated  by  the  subsequent  confessions
of  fraud,  while  Mr.  D.  Blackburn's  revelations  in  1911  about
the  Smith-Blackburn  experiments  of  1882  are  fully  discussed.
Dr.  Coover's  verdict  on  the  whole  case  is  (p.  499)  that  "  the
best  of  the  evidence  .  .  .  which  occupied  first  place  in  the
Society's  authoritative  Proceedings  has  suffered  a  fatal  decline.
The Committee showed caution in guarding against  fraud

!Cf.  Proc.  Vol.  X.


LXXVI.]


Review.


269


and  error,  and  expressed  their  belief  that  both  had  been
eliminated.  Contemporaneous  critics  pointed  out  the  possible
operation  of  both,  and  challenged  the  trustworthiness  of
the  results.  Collusion  was  later  confessed  by  one  or  more
of  the  parties  to  the  experiments  in  both  the  principal  series.
As  against  the  presumption  of  false  confession,  or  a  segregation
of  untainted  results,  there  remains  in  the  published  records
of  both  series  of  experiments  internal  evidence  of  the  use
of  a  code."  Also  (p.  500)  the  general  conduct  of  the  investiga-
tion casts  discredit  upon  the  conclusions  drawn.  Appeal
was  constantly  made  for  the  assistance  of  incompetent  investi-
gators, winch  besides  facilitating  the  accumulation  of  results
which  must  be  entirely  untrustworthy  through  gross  error
in  procedure  and  records,  encouraged  skilled  collusionists  to
match  wits  with  the  Society's  representatives  in  a  contest
so  unequal  that  positive  results  of  a  spurious  character  were
insured."  The  Society  is  also  accused  of  suppressing  and
declining  to  publish  "  a  very  considerable  amount  of  negative
results."  So  "  the  Society,  on  account  of  its  fiascoes  and
persistent  lack  of  psychological  vision,  is  immeasurably  farther
from  its  goal  to-day  than  it  was  in  1886,  in  its  effort  to
produce  proof  of  thought-transference."  In  spite  of  this
indictment,  Dr.  Coover  does  not  think  that  the  Society  "  has
failed  to  justify  its  existence,"  for  "  it  has  been  of  great  service
to  mankind,  particularly  in  helping  it  to  rid  itself  of  fraud
and  delusion "  (p.  501).  The  real  moral  of  its  failures  is
that  "  technical  experience  in  experimental  psychology  is  requisite
both  for  the  control  of  the  experiments  and  for  the  interpretation
of  the  results."  Hence  the  only  hope  for  the  Society  lies
"  in  cooperating  with  a  psychological  laboratory  "  (p.  502).

This  contention  about  the  value  of  laboratory  apparatus
in  overcoming  the  difficulties  which  the  dark  seance  offers
to  the  scientific  investigator  is  signally  illustrated  in  Appendix
D,  which  narrates  how  a  '  Trumpet-Medium's '  phenomena
were  traced  to  their  source  by  quite  simple  apparatus  recording
her  respiration  and  pulse.  The  exposure  (or,  as  Dr.  Coover
prefers  to  call  it,  '  expose  ')  was  overwhelming,  and  is  only
enhanced  by  the  moderation  of  the  phrasing  which  ironically
professes  to  leave  the  question  open  for  a  future  investigation
(which  was  of  course  refused  by  the  medium)  and  by  trans-


270


F.  C.  8.  Schiller.


[part


scribing  the  very  inadequate  protests  of  those  members  of
the  investigating  Committee  of  the  California  Psychical  Research
Society  who  were  unwilling  to  accept  Dr  Coover's  demonstra-
tion. He  may  be  said  to  have  shown  conclusively  that  in
the  trial  of  wits  between  the  fraudulent  medium  and  the  scientist
the  victory  should  always  rest  with  the  latter,  if  he  will
only  take  the  trouble  to  devise  suitable  apparatus.

From  this  conclusion,  however,  a  number  of  morals  may
be  drawn.  For  fraudulent  mediums  the  moral  is  that  they
should  be  extremely  careful  and  that  their  whole  business
is  threatened  with  extinction,  alike  whether  they  refuse  the
test  by  apparatus  or  prefer  to  be  detected,  quietly  and  without
a  row,  by  the  inexorable  tracing  of  a  kymograph.  For  the
scientist  who  refuses  to  interest  himself  in  psychical  research
on  the  plea  that  the  conditions  do  not  lend  themselves  to
scientific  investigation,  the  moral  should  be  that  this  excuse
has  broken  down,  and  that  he  can  no  longer  absolve  himself
from  the  social  duty  of  educating  the  public  by  routing  popular
superstition.  For  the  psychical  researcher,  lastly,  the  moral
plainly  is  that  he  should  modernize  his  equipment,  provide
himself  with  a  specially  constructed  laboratory,  and  no  longer
trust  to  his  unaided  senses  and  sheer  intelligence.  It  may
be  suggested  also  that  the  present  time,  when  there  are  so
many  millions  who  have  been  cruelly  and  abnormally  bereaved
and  deprived  of  those  in  whom  their  hopes  were  centred,
when  there  is  such  keen  dissatisfaction  with  the  evasive
platitudes  of  conventional  creeds,  by  which  all  societies  have
from  time  immemorial  cheated  the  longing  of  the  freshly-
wounded  human  heart  not  to  be  totally  severed  from  those
it  loved,  and  when  nevertheless  the  critical  spirit  is  strong
enough  in  many  not  to  rest  content  with  consoling  deceptions,
affords  a  unique  opportunity  for  obtaining  a  favourable  response
to  an  appeal  for  the  means  to  establish  and  equip  a  Psychical
Research  Laboratory,  in  which  all  the  alleged  phenomena
may  be  systematically,  fairly,  and  sympathetically  examined.
Such  an  appeal  should  be  launched  by  our  Society,  which
has  been  in  existence  long  enough  to  have  become  widely
known  and  has  won  public  confidence  by  its  fair-mindedness,
prudence  and  candour,  and  has  made  comparatively  few
mistakes. For  it  is  by  this  time  clear  that  the  world  will


LXXVI.]


Bevieiv.


271


not  accept  the  verdict  either  of  those  who  will  believe  anything
or  of  those  who  will  believe  nothing.  Both  the  spiritists,
on  the  one  side,  and  the  experimental  psychologists  on
the  other,  have  (as  a  body)  shown  themselves  to  be  too
bitterly  biassed.  The  time  is  ripe  for  a  serious  investigation
which  prejudges  no  question,  and  is  biassed  only  in  favour
of  the  truth,  however  strange  and  unacceptable  it  may  prove
to  be.

Even  supposing,  however,  that  our  Society  had  obtained
its  laboratory  and  the  men  to  man  it,  we  should  be  prepared
to  find  that  the  question  could  not  be  easily  or  rapidly  settled.
For  it  is  one  of  those  questions  which  inevitably  arouse  party
spirit,  and  neither  party  is  ever  convinced  as  a  whole,  though
individuals  may  pass  from  one  side  to  the  other.  To  expect
the  question  of  another  world  to  be  settled  one  way  or  the
other  by  the  ordinary  methods  of  scientific  investigation
would  be  as  quixotic  as  to  expect  to  decide  in  this  way
whether  the  conservative  party  or  the  liberal  was  scientifically
right.  And  for  the  same  reason.  It  may  confidently  be
predicted  that  if  the  investigation  should  yield  entirely,  or
predominantly,  negative  results,  like  Dr.  Coover's,  the  believers
will  at  most  drop  such  parts  of  their  case  as  have  been  too
obviously  exploded,  while  clinging  to  the  rest  with  an  intenser
affection.  Or,  more  probably,  they  will  repudiate  the  methods,
and  impugn  the  fairness,  of  the  investigators.  If,  on  the
other  hand,  there  should  result  a  report  favourable  to  the
claims  of  a  subject  which  is  viewed  with  intense  repugnance
(for  reasons  which  are  by  no  means  all  creditable  or  avowed)
by  a  large  and  influential  section  of  human  opinion,  it  will
as  certainly  be  alleged  that  the  investigators  were  dishonest
or  incapable  and  deceived  by  undetected  sources  of  error,
which  their  critics  may  not  even  trouble  to  specifj*.  If
the  results  should  lie  between  these  two  extremes,  the  present
unsatisfactory  "state  of  affairs  will  continue,  and  it  will  depend
on  every  man's  taste  and  temper  how  much  or  little  he
chooses  to  believe.

What  then  is  to  be  done  ?  Is  the  situation  hopeless  ?
By  no  means,  if  the  parties  to  the  dispute  can  only  be  induced
to  provide  themselves  with  an  adequate  logic.  The  old  logic,
which abstracted from human feeling and the  disturbances


272


F.  C.  8.  Schiller.


[part


it  introduced  into  human  truth-seeking,  knew  of  no  higher
ambition  than  to  applaud  the  triumphal  march  of  pure  thought.
It  would  not  recognize  the  very  impure  thought  of  actual
humanity  and  could  make  nothing  of  its  procedure,  which
finds  every  step  in  advance  stubbornly  resisted  by  prejudice,
ignorance  and  indolence,  and  has  to  fight  its  way  through
errors  and  obstacles  of  every  description,  so  that  it  wins  no
truth  save  at  a  cost  fully  commensurate  with  its  value.

The  new  pragmatic  logic,  however,  does  not  deem  it  unworthy
of  the  dignity  of  human  reason  to  notice  these  facts.  It  can
consequently  observe  that  wherever  truth  has  become  a  party
question,  its  discovery  ceases  to  be  a  purely  theoretic  problem.
To  'prove'  a  truth,  cogently,  absolutely,  to  all,  and  for  all
time,  becomes  impossible.  It  becomes  a  question  of  inducing
those  to  accept  it  who  could,  if  they  wished,  hold  out  against
it,  and  of  pioviding  them  with  a  sufficient  motive  to  give
their  assent  to  it.  Now,  experience  shows  that  the  sole  sort
of  truth  which  silences  all  opposition,  and  becomes  indisputable,
is  that  which  develops  such  value  as  to  become  practically
indispensable.  Not  only  in  ordinary  life,  but  also  in  the
sciences,  beliefs  which  are  so  convenient  that  all  work  with
them,  and  so  useful  that  all  act  as  if  they  thought  them
true,  become  indisputable  :  theoretic  scruples  about  their
truth  die  away,  because  they  function  as  effective  truths.
Thus  no  one  now  urges,  or  confutes,  the  metaphysical  objections
to  the  use  of  anaesthetics  which  were  once  common,  because
their  use  has  become  a  part  of  the  regular  routine  of  medicine  :
but  such  scruples  are  still  urged  against  the  use  of  hypnosis,
because  this  treatment  is  not  yet  so  firmly  established  in
medical  practice.

It  follows  that  it  is  mistaken  and  vain  to  dispute  with
objectors  like  Dr.  Coover  about  the  scientific  value  of  certain
historical  records  as  a  proof  of  telepathy.  His  sweeping
condemnation  of  the  Society's  pioneer  work  'will  seem  to
most  of  us  entirely  unjust.  But  nothing  would  be  gained
by  disputing  about  its  justice.  The  best,  and  ultimately
the  only,  way  to  confute,  and  also  to  convert,  the  critic  is
to  develop  telepathy  into  a  working  method  of  communication.
If  telepathy  occurs  as  a  fact  in  nature,  it  must  be  supposed
that  it  occurs  under  certain  conditions. If  we  ascertain  these


LXXVI.J


Review.


273


conditions,  we  obtain  control  of  the  phenomena.  We  can
then  not  only  repeat  at  will  the  theoretic  proofs  of  its  existence
and  multiply  the  evidence  for  it  to  any  desired  extent,  but,
what  is  far  more  rapidly  and  universally  convincing,  we
can  use  it  and  exploit  it  as  an  alternative  to  telegraphy.
Neither  scientific  scepticism  nor  popular  indifference  can  long
refuse  recognition  to  a  truth-claim  which  is  actually  working,
and  yielding  valuable  results.  But  we  have  no  right  to  expect
that  the  investigation  of  anything  worth  knowing  will  be  cheap

and  easy-  F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

PART  LXXVII.
July,  1919.


I.

PRESIDENTIAL  ADDRESS.

Delivered  on  April  11th,  1919,

By  the  Right  Hon.  Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.

Before  entering  upon  the  matters  that  I  had  intended  to
lay  before  you,  it  is  fitting  that  I  should  refer  to  the  loss
we  have  sustained  within  the  last  few  days  in  the  death  of
Sir  William  Crookes,  a  former  President  of  the  Society  during
several  years  from  1896-1899,  and  a  man  of  world-wide  scientific
reputation.  During  his  long  and  active  life  he  made  many
discoveries  in  Physics  and  Chemistry  of  the  first  importance.
In  quite  early  days  his  attention  was  attracted  by  an  unknown
and  brilliant  green  line  in  the  spectrum,  which  he  succeeded
in  tracing  to  a  new  element  named  Thallium,  after  its  appear-
ance. Later  he  was  able  so  to  improve  vacua  as  to  open
up  fresh  lines  of  enquiry  with  remarkable  results  in  more
than  one  direction.  The  radiometer,  a  little  instrument  in
which  light,  even  candle-light,  or  ordinary  day-light,  causes
the  rotation  of  delicately  suspended  vanes,  presents  problems
even  yet  only  partially  solved.  And  his  discoveries  relating
to  electric  discharge  in  high  vacua  lie  near  the  foundation  of
the  modern  theories  of  electricity  as  due  to  minute  charged
particles  called  electrons,  capable  of  separation  from  ordinary

S


276


The  Right  Hon.  Lord  Rayleigh.


[part


chemical  atoms,  and  of  moving  with  speeds  of  the  order  of
the  speed  of  light.  One  is  struck  not  only  by  the  technical
skill  displayed  in  experiments  more  difficult  at  the  time  they
were  made  than  the  younger  generation  of  workers  can  easily
understand,  but  also  by  the  extraordinary  instinct  which
directed  Crookes'  choice  of  subjects.  In  several  cases  their
importance  was  hardly  realised  at  the  time,  and  only  later
became  apparent.

I  shall  have  occasion  presently  to  notice  in  some  little
detail  his  early  "  Notes  on  Phenomena  called  Spiritual."  It
was  these  that  attracted  my  own  attention  to  the  subject.
In  1889  he  published  further  "  Notes  of  Seances  with  D.  D.
Home "  in  Vol.  VI.  of  our  Proceedings.  I  fancy  that  he  was
disappointed  with  the  reception  that  his  views  met  with,  having
been  sanguine  enough  to  expect  that  he  would  obtain  the
same  credence  when  he  wrote  on  psychical  matters  as  when
he  was  dealing  with  Physics  or  Chemistry.  In  later  years
I  understand  he  did  not  often  introduce  the  subject,  but  when
questioned  was  firm  that  he  had  nothing  to  retract.  One  would
give  much  to  know  whether  this  attitude  is  still  maintained.

Any  hesitation  that  I  may  have  felt  in  undertaking  the
honourable  office  to  which  you  have  called  me  was  largely  due
to  the  fact  that  I  have  no  definite  conclusions  to  announce,
and  that  such  experiences  as  I  have  had  were  long  ago,  and
can  hardly  now  carry  weight  as  evidence  to  anyone  but
myself.  But  I  have  always  taken  an  interest  in  questions
such  as  those  considered  by  the  Society,  and  I  may  perhaps  as
well  give  a  short  account  of  what  I  have  seen,  for  it  will  at
any  rate  help  to  explain  my  attitude  and  serve  as  a  foundation
for  comment.

I  may  begin  with  what  is  now  called  hypnotism.  This  is  an
old  story ;  but  many  have  forgotten,  or  never  realised,  the
disbelief  which  was  general  in  the  fifties  of  the  last  century
both  on  the  part  of  the  public  and  of  medical  men.  As  to  the
former,  reference  may  be  made  to  Punch,1  and  as  to  the  latter

1Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  120  (1853),  Lecturer  on  Electro-biology,  "Now,  Sir!  you
can't  jump  over  that  stick."  Subject,  "Jump?  Eh!  Ugh!  Lor  bless  me,
jump  ?  No,  I  know  I  can't — never  could  jump — Ugh  !  "  (Thunders  of  Applause
from  the  Gentlemen  in  the  cane-bottoin  chairs — [i.e.  believers]).


LXXVII.]


Presidential  Address.


277


I  suppose  there  can  be  no  doubt,  although  of  course  there
were  distinguished  exceptions.  At  the  present  day  orthodox
medical  opinion  has  so  far  shifted  its  ground  as  to  claim  for
the  profession  control  of  what  was  formerly  dismissed  as
impossible  and  absurd — certainly  a  less  unreasonable  position.

It  was  some  ten  or  eleven  years  from  the  date  of  Punch's
cartoon  that  I  witnessed  in  a  friend's  rooms  at  Cambridge  an
exhibition  of  the  powers  of  Madame  Card.  I  think  eight  or  ten
of  us  were  tried,  including  myself.  We  were  made  to  gaze  for
a  time  at  a  "  magnetic  "  disc  ;  afterwards  she  made  passes  over
our  closed  eyes,  and  finally  defied  us  to  open  them.  I  and
some  others  experienced  no  difficulty ;  and  naturally  she  dis-
carded us  and  developed  her  powers  over  those — about  half  the
sitters — who  had  failed  or  found  difficulty.  Among  the  latter
were  personal  friends  of  my  own  and  two  well-known  Uni-
versity athletes.  One  was  told  that  he  could  not  give  his
name,  another  that  he  would  have  to  cross  the  room  towards
her  when  she  beckoned,  and  so  on.  In  spite  of  obvious
efforts  to  resist  her  influence  they  had  to  obey.  In  conver-
sation afterwards  they  assured  me  that  they  could  not  help
it ;  and  indeed  they  made  such  fools  of  themselves  that  I
had  no  difficulty  in  believing  them.  From  that  evening  I
have  never  felt  any  doubt  as  to  the  possibility  of  influencing
unwilling  minds  by  suggestion ;  and  I  have  often  wished
that  on  other  occasions,  where  dubious  phenomena  were  in
question,  some  of  which  I  shall  presently  refer  to,  conviction
one  way  or  the  other  had  followed  this  precedent.  I  ought
to  add  that,  although  stories  were  afloat  to  that  effect,  I
never  saw  the  influence  of  Madame  Card  conveyed  otherwise
than  by  word  or  gesture.

After  this  experience  I  was  not  disinclined  to  believe  that
what  was,  or  at  any  rate  had  recently  been,  orthodox  opinion
might  be  quite  wrong,  and  accordingly  became  interested  in
what  I  heard  from  friends  of  the  doings  of  Home  and  other
so-called  mediums.  Some  of  the  stories  could,  as  it  seemed,
be  explained  away  only  on  the  supposition  of  barefaced  lying,
or  more  charitably  as  the  result  of  hallucination,  whether
self-induced,  or  due  to  the  suggestion  and  influence  of  others.
The  possibility  of  the  latter  view  cannot  be  left  out  of  account,
but  I  have  never  seen anything  to  show  that  it  has  the


278


The  Right  Hon.  Lord  Rayleigh.


[part


remotest  application  to  my  own  experience  or  that  of  the
friends  with  whom  I  have  co-operated.

The  interest  that  I  felt  was  greatly  stimulated  by  the
appearance  of  Sir  W.  Crookes'  "  Notes  of  an  Enquiry  into  the
Phenomena  called  Spiritual  during  the  years  1870-73."  1  I  was
acquainted  with  some  of  the  author's  scientific  work,  and  knew
that  he  was  a  skilful  experimenter  and  likely  to  be  alive  to
the  precautions  required  in  order  to  guard  against  sense
illusions.  Presumably  also  he  would  feel  the  difficulty  of
accepting  conclusions  so  much  out  of  harmony  with  ordinary
and  laboratory  experience.  If  heavy  tables  in  a  dining-room
can  leave  the  floor,  how  is  it  that  in  the  laboratory  our
balances  can  be  trusted  to  deal  with  a  tenth  of  a  milligram  ?

I  have  lately  read  over  again  Sir  W.  Crookes'  article,  and
I  do  not  wonder  at  the  impression  it  produced  upon  me.
]  am  tempted  to  quote  one  or  two  passages  against  which  I
find  my  old  pencil  marks.  Under  the  heading — The  Appear-
ance of  Hands,  either  Self-luminous  or  Visible  by  Ordinary
Light,  he  writes,  "  I  have  retained  one  of  these  hands  in  my
own,  firmly  resolved  not  to  let  it  escape.  There  was  no  struggle
or  effort  made  to  get  loose,  but  it  gradually  seemed  to  resolve
itself  into  vapour,  and  faded  in  that  manner  from  my  grasp."
I  believe  that  the  rationalistic  explanation  is  that  the  hand
was  an  inflated  glove,  like  a  rubber  balloon,  from  which  the
air  gradually  leaked  away,  but  I  gave  Sir  W.  Crookes  credit
for  being  able  to  retain  the  rubber.

Another  incident  of  an  entirely  different  character  is  thus
described.  "  A  lady  was  writing  automatically  by  means  of
the  planchette.  I  was  trying  to  devise  a  means  of  proving
that  what  she  wrote  was  not  due  to  '  imconscious  cerebration.'
The  planchette,  as  it  always  does,  insisted  that,  although  it
was  moved  by  the  hand  and  arm  of  the  lady,  the  intelligence
was  that  of  an  invisible  being  who  was  playing  on  her  brain
as  on  a  musical  instrument,  and  thus  moving  her  muscles.
I  therefore  said  to  this  intelligence,  '  Can  you  see  the  contents
of  this  room?'  'Yes,'  wrote  the  planchette.  'Can  you  see
to  read  this  newspaper '  ?  said  I,  putting  my  finger  on  a
copy  of  the  Times,  which  was  on  the  table  behind  me,  but
without  looking  at  it. 'Yes,'  was  the  reply  of  the  planchette.

1  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science,  Jan.  1874.


LXXVII.]


Presidential  Address.


279


'  Well,'  I  said,  '  if  you  can  see  that,  write  the  word  which  is
now  covered  by  my  finger,  and  I  will  believe  you.'  The
planchette  commenced  to  move.  Slowly  and  with  great
difficulty,  the  word  '  however '  was  written.  I  turned  round,
and  saw  the  word  '  however '  was  covered  by  the  tip  of
my  finger."

"  I  had  purposely  avoided  looking  at  the  newspaper  when
I  tried  this  experiment,  and  it  was  impossible  for  the  lady,
had  she  tried,  to  have  seen  any  of  the  printed  words,  for  she
was  sitting  at  one  table,  and  the  paper  was  on  another  table
behind,  my  body  intervening."

The  two  mediums  whose  names  are  mentioned  in  the  article,
and  with  whom  most  of  the  observations  were  made,  are
Home  and  Miss  Fox,  afterwards  Mrs.  Jencken.  A  highly
desirable  characteristic  of  Home's  mediumship  was  the  unusual
opportunity  allowed  to  the  sense  of  sight.  Home  always
objected  to  darkness  at  his  seances.  "  Indeed,"  says  Sir
William  Crookes,  "  except  on  two  occasions  .  .  .  everything
that  I  have  witnessed  with  him  has  taken  place  in  the
light."

I  found  (and  indeed  still  find)  it  difficult  to  accept  what
one  may  call  the  "  knave  and  fool  theory  "  of  these  occurrences  ;
but  failing  that,  it  would  seem  to  follow  that  one  must  admit
the  possibility  of  much  that  contrasts  strongly  with  ordinary
experience,  and  I  was  naturally  anxious  to  obtain  first  hand
information  on  which  I  could  form  an  independent  judgment.
Home  was  no  longer  available,  but  I  was  able  to  obtain  the
co-operation  of  Mrs.  Jencken,  who  stayed  in  my  country  house
as  guest  during  two  or  three  visits  extending  altogether,  I
suppose,  over  fourteen  days  or  so.  She  was  accompanied  by
a  nurse  and  baby,  and  for  a  small  part  of  the  time  by  Mr.
Jencken,  who  seemed  curiously  slow  to  understand  that  we
had  to  regard  him  as  well  as  his  wife  with  suspicion,  when  I
explained  that  we  could  not  attach  importance  to  seances
when  both  were  present.  It  may  be  well  to  add  that  they
received  nothing  beyond  the  usual  courtesy  and  entertainment
due  to  guests.

The  results  were  upon  the  whole  disappointing,  and  certainly
far  short  of  those  described  by  Sir  W.  Crookes.  Nevertheless
there  was  a  good  deal  not  easy  to  explain  away. Very  little


280


The  Eight  Hon.  Lord  Rayleigh.


[part


of  importance  occurred  in  a  good  light.  It  is  true  that  at
any  hour  of  the  day  Mrs.  Jencken  was  able  to  get  raps  upon
a  door  by  merely  placing  her  fingers  upon  it.  The  listener,
hearing  them  for  the  first  time,  felt  sure  there  was  some  one
on  the  other  side,  but  it  was  not  so.  The  closest  scrutiny
revealed  no  movement  of  her  fingers,  but  there  seemed  nothing
to  exclude  the  possibility  of  bone-cracking  with  the  door
acting  as  sounding-board.  However,  on  one  or  two  occasions
loud  thumps  were  heard,  such  as  one  would  hardly  like  to
make  with  one's  knee.  With  the  exception  of  her  fingers
Mrs.  Jencken  seemed  always  to  stand  quite  clear,  and  the  light
was  good.

On  the  other  hand,  during  seances  the  light  was  usually  bad
- — gas  turned  very  low.  But  in  some  other  respects  the
conditions  may  be  considered  good.  Before  commencing,  the
room  was  searched  and  the  doors  locked.  Besides  Mrs.  Jenc-
ken, the  sitters  were  usually  only  Lady  Rayleigh  and  myself.
Sometimes  a  brother  or  a  friend  came.  We  sat  close  together
at.  a  small,  but  rather  heavy,  pedestal  table  ;  and  when  any-
thing appeared  to  be  doing  we  held  Mrs.  Jencken's  hands,
with  a  good  attempt  to  control  her  feet  also  with  ours  ;  but
it  was  impracticable  to  maintain  this  full  control  during  all
the  long  time  occupied  by  the  seances.  In  contrast  to  some
other  mediums,  Mrs.  Jencken  was  not  observed  to  fidget  or  to
try  to  release  her  limbs.

As  I  have  said,  the  results  were  disappointing  ;  but  I  do  not
mean  that  very  little  happened  or  that  what  did  happen  was
always  easy  to  explain.  But  most  of  the  happenings  were
trifling,  and  not  such  as  to  preclude  the  idea  of  trickery.
One's  coat-tails  would  be  pulled,  paper  cutters,  etc.,  would  fly
about,  knocks  would  shake  our  chairs,  and  so  on.  I  do  not
count  messages,  usually  of  no  interest,  which  were  spelt  out
alphabetically  by  raps  that  seemed  to  come  from  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  medium's  feet.  Perhaps  what  struck  us
most  were  lights  which  on  one  or  two  occasions  floated  about.
They  were  real  enough,  but  rather  difficult  to  locate,  though
1  do  not  think  they  were  ever  more  than  six  or  eight  feet
away  from  us.  Like  some  of  those  described  by  Sir  W.
Orookes,  they  might  be  imitated  by  phosphorus  enclosed  in
cotton  wool ; but  how  Mrs.  Jencken  could  manipulate  them


Lxxvn.]  Presidential  Address.  281


with  her  hands  and  feet  held,  and  it  would  seem  with  only
her  mouth  at  liberty,  is  a  difficulty.

Another  incident  hard  to  explain  occurred  at  the  close  of  a
seance  after  we  had  all  stood  up.  The  table  at  which  we
had  been  sitting  gradually  tipped  over  until  the  circular  top
nearly  touched  the  floor,  and  then  slowly  rose  again  into  the
normal  position.  Mrs.  Jencken,  as  well  as  ourselves,  was
apparently  standing  quite  clear  of  it.  1  have  often  tried
since  to  make  the  table  perform  a  similar  evolution.  Holding
the  top  with  both  hands,  I  can  make  some,  though  a  bad,
approximation ;  but  it  was  impossible  that  Mrs.  Jencken
could  have  worked  it  thus.  Possibly  something  better  could
be  done  with  the  aid  of  an  aj:>paratus  of  hooks  and  wires  ;
but  Mrs.  Jencken  was  a  small  woman,  without  much  apparent
muscular  development,  and  the  table  for  its  size  is  heavy.
It  must  be  admitted  that  the  light  was  poor,  but  our  eyes
were  then  young,  and  we  had  been  for  a  long  time  in  the
semi-darkness.

In  common,  I  suppose,  with  most  witnesses  of  such  things,
I  repudiate  altogether  the  idea  of  hallucination  as  an  explana-
tion. The  incidents  were  almost  always  unexpected,  and
our  impressions  of  them  agreed.  They  were  either  tricks  of
the  nature  of  conjuring  tricks,  or  else  happenings  of  a  kind
very  remote  from  ordinary  experience.

A  discouraging  feature  was  that  attempts  to  improve  the
conditions  usually  led  to  nothing.  As  an  example,  I  may
mention  that  after  writing,  supposed  to  be  spirit  writing,
had  appeared,  I  arranged  pencils  and  paper  inside  a  large
glass  retort,  of  which  the  neck  was  then  hermetically  sealed.
For  safety  this  was  placed  in  a  wooden  box,  and  stood  under
the  table  during  several  seances.  The  intention  was  to  give
opportunity  for  evidence  that  would  be  independent  of  close
watching  during  the  semi-darkness.  It  is  perhaps  unnecessary
to  say  that  though  scribbling  appeared  on  the  box,  there  was
nothing  inside  the  retort.  Possibly  this  was  too  much  to
expect.  I  may  add  that  on  recently  inspecting  the  retort
I  find  that  the  opportunity  has  remained  neglected  for  forty-
five  years.

Dining  all  this  time  I  have  been  in  doubt  what  interpre-
tation to  put  upon  these experiences. In  my  judgment  the


282


The  Right  Hon.  Lord  Rayleigh.


[part


incidents  were  not  good  enough,  or  under  good  enough  con-
ditions, to  establish  occult  influences  ;  but  yet  I  have  always
felt  difficulty  in  accepting  the  only  alternative  explanation.
Some  circumstances,  if  of  secondary  importance,  are  also  worthy
of  mention.  Unlike  some  other  mediums  that  I  have  known,
Mrs.  Jencken  never  tried  to  divert  one's  attention,  nor  did  she
herself  seem  to  be  observant  or  watching  for  opportunities.
I  have  often  said  that  on  the  unfavourable  hypothesis  her
acting  was  as  wonderful  as  her  conjuring.  Seldom,  or  never,
during  the  long  hours  we  were  together  at  meals  or  seances
did  she  make  an  intelligent  remark.  Her  interests  seemed
to  be  limited  to  the  spirits  and  her  baby.

Mr.  Jencken  is  another  difficulty.  He,  an  intelligent  man,
was  a  spiritualist,  and,  I  have  no  reason  to  doubt,  an  honest
one,  before  he  married  his  wife.  Could  she  have  continued
to  deceive  him  ?  It  seems  almost  impossible.  He  bore
eye-witness  to  the  baby — at  the  age  of  three  months  I  think
it  was — taking  a  pencil  and  writing  a  spirit  message,  of  which
we  saw  what  purported  to  be  a  photograph.  If,  on  the  other
hand,  he  had  found  her  out,  would  he  have  permitted  her  to
continue  her  deceptions  ?

After  the  death  of  Home  and  Mrs.  Jencken,  so-called  phy-
sical manifestations  of  a  well  attested  kind  seem  rather  to
have  fallen  into  abeyance,  except  in  the  case  of  Eusapia
Palladino.  Although  I  attended  one  or  two  of  her  seances
at  Cambridge  and  saw  a  few  curious  things,  other  members  of
the  Society  have  had  so  much  better  opportunities  that  I  pass
them  by.  There  is  no  doubt  that  she  practised  deception,
but  that  is  not  the  last  word.

One  of  the  difficulties  which  beset  our  inquiry  is  the  pro-
voking attitude  of  many  people  who  might  render  assistance.
Some  see  nothing  out  of  the  way  in  the  most  marvellous
occurrences,  and  accordingly  take  no  pains  over  the  details
of  evidence  on  which  everything  depends.  Others  attribute
all  these  things  to  the  devil,  and  refuse  to  have  anything  to
say  to  them.  I  have  sometimes  pointed  out  that  if  during  the
long  hours  of  seances  we  could  keep  the  devil  occupied  in
so  comparatively  harmless  a  manner  we  deserved  well  of  our
neighbours.

A  real  obstacle  to  a  decision  arises  from  the  sporadic  char-


LXXVII.]


Presidential  Address.


283


acter  of  the  phenomena,  which  cannot  be  reproduced  at
pleasure  and  submitted  to  systematic  experimental  control.
The  difficulty  is  not  limited  to  questions  where  occult  in-
fluences may  be  involved.  This  is  a  point  which  is  often
misunderstood,  and  it  may  be  worth  while  to  illustrate  it  by
examples  taken  from  the  history  of  science.

An  interesting  case  is  that  of  meteorites,  discussed  by  Sir
L.  Fletcher,  formerly  Keeper  of  Minerals  in  the  British  Museum,
from  whose  official  pamphlet  (published  in  1896)  some  extracts
may  be  emoted  : — "  1.  Till  the  beginning  of  the  present  [i.e.
19th]  century,  the  fall  of  stones  from  the  sky  was  an  event,
the  actuality  of  which  neither  men  of  science  nor  the  mass
of  the  people  could  be  brought  to  believe  in.  Yet  such
falls  have  been  recorded  from  the  earliest  times,  and  the
records  have  occasionally  been  received  as  authentic  by  a  whole
nation.  In  general,  however,  the  witnesses  of  such  an  event
have  been  treated  with  the  disrespect  usually  shown  to  re-
porters of  the  extraordinary,  and  have  been  laughed  at  for
their  supposed  delusions  :  this  is  less  to  be  wondered  at
when  we  remember  that  the  witnesses  of  a  fall  have  usually
been  few  in  number,  unaccustomed  to  exact  observation,
frightened  by  what  they  both  saw  and  heard,  and  have  had  a
common  tendency  towards  exaggeration  and  superstition."
After  mention  of  some  early  stones,  he  continues  : — ■
"  3.  These  falls  from  the  sky,  when  credited  at  all,  have
been  deemed  prodigies  or  miracles,  and  the  stones  have  been
regarded  as  objects  for  reverence  and  worship.  It  has  even
been  conjectured  that  the  worship  of  such  stones  was  the
earliest  form  of  idolatry.  .  .  .  The  Diana  of  the  Ephesians,
'  which  fell  down  from  Jupiter,'  and  the  image  of  Venus  at
Cyprus  appear  to  have  been,  not  statues,  but  conical  or  pyra-
midal stones."

"  5.  Three  French  Academicians,  one  of  whom  was  the
afterwards  renowned  chemist  Lavoisier,  presented  to  the
Academy  in  1772  a  report  on  the  analysis  of  a  stone  said  to
have  been  seen  to  fall  at  Luce  on  September  13,  1768.  As  the
identity  of  lightning  with  the  electric  spark  had  been  recently
established  by  Franklin,  they  were  in  advance  convinced  that
'  thunder-stones  '  existed  only  in  the  imagination  ;  and  never
dreaming of  the existence of  a '  sky-stone  ' which had  no


284  The  Right  Hon.  Lord  Rayleigh.  [part

relation  to  a  '  thunder-stone, '  they  somewhat  easily  assured
both  themselves  and  the  Academy  that  there  was  nothing
unusual  in  the  mineralogical  characters  of  the  Luce  specimen,
their  verdict  being  that  the  stone  was  an  ordinary  one  which
had  been  struck  by  lightning."

"  6.  In  1794  the  German  philosopher  Chladni,  famed  for  his
researches  into  the  laws  of  sound,  brought  together  numerous
accounts  of  the  fall  of  bodies  from  the  sky,  and  called  the
attention  of  the  scientific  world  to  the  fact  that  several  masses
of  iron,  of  which  he  specially  considers  two,  had  in  all  pro-
bability come  from  outer  space  to  this  planet."

In  1802  Edward  Howard  read  a  paper  before  the  Royal
Society  of  London  giving  an  account  of  the  comparative
results  of  a  chemical  and  mineralogical  investigation  of  four
stones  which  had  fallen  in  different  places.  He  found  from
the  similarity  of  their  component  parts  "  very  strong  evidence
in  favour  of  the  assertion  that  they  had  fallen  on  our  globe.
They  have  been  found  at  places  very  remote  from  each  other,
and  at  periods  also  sufficiently  distant.  The  mineralogists  who
have  examined  them  agree  that  they  have  no  resemblance  to
mineral  substances  properly  so  called,  nor  have  they  been
described  by  mineralogical  authors."  After  this  quotation
from  Howard,  Fletcher  continues  : —

"  13.  This  paper  aroused  much  interest  in  the  scientific
world,  and,  though  Chladni's  theory  that  such  stones  come
from  outer  space  was  still  not  accepted  in  France,  it  was
there  deemed  more  worthy  of  consideration  after  Poisson
(following  Laplace)  had  shown  that  a  body  shot  from  the  moon
in  the  direction  of  the  earth,  with  an  initial  velocity  of  7592
feet  a  second,  would  not  fall  back  upon  the  moon,  but  would
actually,  after  a  journey  of  sixty-four  hours,  reach  the  earth,
upon  which,  neglecting  the  resistance  of  the  air,  it  would  fall
with  a  velocity  of  about  31,508  feet  a  second."

"  14.  Whilst  the  minds  of  the  scientific  men  of  France  were
in  this  unsettled  condition,  there  came  a  report  that  another
shower  of  stones  had  fallen,  this  time  ....  within  easy  reach
of  Paris.  To  settle  the  matter  finally,  if  possible,  the  physicist
Biot  was  directed  by  the  Minister  of  the  Interior  to  inquire
into  the  event  on  the  spot.  After  a  careful  examination  .  .  .
Biot  was  convinced  that  on  Tuesday,  April  26, 1803,  about


1XXVII.]


Presidential  Address.


285


1  p.m.,  there  was  a  violent  explosion  in  the  neighbourhood  of
l'Aigle  ....  that  some  moments  before  ....  a  fire  ball  in
quick  motion  was  seen  ....  that  on  the  same  day  many
stones  fell  in  the  neighbourhood  of  l'Aigle.  Biot  estimated
the  number  of  the  stones  at  two  or  three  thousand  ....
With  the  exception  of  a  few  little  clouds  of  ordinary  character,
the  sky  was  quite  clear.  The  exhaustive  report  of  Biot,  and
the  conclusive  nature  of  his  proofs,  compelled  the  whole  of
the  scientific  world  to  recognise  the  fall  of  stones  on  the
earth  from  outer  space  as  an  undoubted  fact."

I  commend  this  history  to  the  notice  of  those  scientific  men
who  are  so  sure  that  they  understand  the  character  of  Nature's
operations  as  to  feel  justified  in  rejecting  without  examination
reports  of  occurrences  which  seem  to  conflict  with  ordinary
experience.  Every  tiro  now  knows  that  the  stones  to  be
seen  in  most  museums  had  an  origin  thought  impossible  by
some  of  the  leading  and  most  instructed  men  of  about  a  century
ago.

Other  cases  of  strange  occurrences,  the  nature  or  reality  of
which  is,  I  suppose,  still  in  doubt,  are  "  Globe  lightning "
and  "Will  of  the  wisp."  The  evidence  for  globe  lightning
is  fairly  substantial,  but  in  the  judgment  of  many  scientific
men  is  outweighed  by  the  absence  of  support  in  laboratory
experience.  At  one  time  I  was  more  disposed  to  believe  in  it
than  I  am  now,  in  view  of  the  great  extension  of  elec-
trical experimenting  during  the  last  thirty  years.  Kelvin
thought  it  might  be  explained  as  an  ocular  illusion.  By  a
lightning  flash  the  retina  is  powerfully  impressed,  it  may  be
excentrically,  with  the  formation  of  a  prolonged  positive
"  spectrum "  or  image  which,  as  the  eye  tries  to  follow  it,
appears  to  sail  slowly  along.  Some  seconds  later,  the  arrival
of  the  sound  of  thunder  causes  a  shock,  under  which  the
luminous  globe  disappears  and  is  thought  to  have  burst  ex-
plosively. I  think  this  explanation,  which  would  save  the
good  faith  and  to  some  extent  the  good  sense  of  the  observers,
deserves  attention.

Then  again  the  Will  of  the  wisp,  for  which  I  take  it  there
used  to  be  plenty  of  evidence.  I  have  been  told  by  the  Duke
of  Argyle — the  friend  and  colleague  of  Gladstone — that  in  his
youth  it  was  common  at  Inveraray,  but  had  been  less  seen


286


The  Right  Hon.  Lord  Rayleigh.


[part


latterly,  owing,  he  thought,  to  drainage  operations.  Chemists
will  not  readily  believe  in  the  spontaneous  inflammation  of
"marsh  gas,"  but  I  have  heard  the  suggestion  made  of  phos-
phoric gases  arising  from  the  remains  of  a  dead  sheep  that
had  got  entangled.

The  truth  is  that  we  are  ill  equipped  for  the  investigation
of  phenomena  which  cannot  be  reproduced  at  pleasure
under  good  conditions.  And  a  clue  is  often  necessary  before
much  progress  can  be  made.  Men  had  every  motive  for
trying  to  understand  malaria.  Exposure  at  night  on  low
ground  was  known  to  be  bad ;  and  it  had  even  been  sug-
gested that  mosquito  nets  served  as  a  protection ;  but  before
Pasteur,  and  indeed  for  some  years  after,  it  seems  never  to  have
occurred  to  any  one  that  the  mosquito  itself  was  the
vehicle.  Sir  A.  Geikie  has  remarked  that  until  recent  times
the  study  of  the  lower  forms  of  life  was  regarded  with  some-
thing like  contempt.  Verily,  the  microbes  have  had  their
revenge.

But  when  all  this  has  been  said  we  must  not  forget  that
the  situation  is  much  worse  when  it  is  complicated  by  the
attempts  of  our  neighbours  to  mislead  us,  as  indeed  occasionally
happens  in  other  matters  of  scientific  interest  where  money  is
involved.  Here  also  the  questions  before  this  Society  differ
from  most  of  those  dealt  with  by  scientific  men,  and  may
often  need  a  different  kind  of  criticism.

Such  criticism  it  has  been  the  constant  aim  of  the  Society
to  exercise,  as  must  be  admitted  by  all  who  have  studied
carefully  our  published  matter.  If  my  words  could  reach
them,  I  would  appeal  to  serious  inquirers  to  give  more  attention
to  the  work  of  this  Society,  conducted  by  experienced  men
and  women,  including  several  of  a  sceptical  'turn  of  mind,
and  not  to  indulge  in  hasty  conclusions  on  the  basis  of  reports
in  the  less  responsible  newspaper  press  or  on  the  careless
gossip  of  ill-informed  acquaintances.  Many  of  our  members
are  quite  as  much  alive  to  a  priori  difficulties  as  any  outsider
can  be.

Of  late  years  the  published  work  of  the  Society  has  dealt
rather  with  questions  of  another  sort,  involving  telepathy,
whether  from  living  or  other  intelligences,  and  some  of  the
most experienced and cautious investigators are of  opinion


lxxvii.]  Presidential  Address.  287

that  a  case  has  been  made  out.  Certainly  some  of  the  cross-
correspondences  established  are  very  remarkable.  Their  evalua-
tion, however,  requires  close  attention  and  sometimes  a  back-
ground of  information,  classical  and  other,  not  at  the  disposal
of  all  of  us.  In  this  department  I  often  find  my  estimate
of  probabilities  differing  from  that  of  my  friends.  I  have
more  difficulty  than  they  feel  over  telepathy  between  the
living,  but  if  I  had  no  doubts  there  I  should  feel  less  difficulty
than  many  do  in  going  further.  I  think  emphasis  should  be
laid  upon  the  fact  that  the  majority  of  scientific  men  do  not
believe  in  telepathy,  or  even  that  it  is  possible.  We  are  very
largely  the  creatines  of  our  sense-organs.  Only  those  physicists
and  physiologists  who  have  studied  the  subject  realise  what
wonderful  instruments  these  are.  The  eye,  the  ear,  and  the
nose — even  the  human  nose — are  hard  to  beat,  and  within
their  proper  range  are  more  sensitive  than  anything  we  can
make  in  the  laboratory.  It  is  true  that  with  long  exposures
we  can  photograph  objects  in  the  heavens  that  the  eye  cannot
detect ;  but  the  fairer  comparison  is  between  what  we  can
see  and  what  can  be  photographed  in  say  l-10th  second — all
that  the  eye  requires.  These  sense-organs,  shared  with  the
higher  animals,  must  have  taken  a  long  time  to  build  up,  and
one  would  suppose  that  much  development  in  other  directions
must  have  been  sacrificed  or  postponed  in  that  interest.  Why
was  not  telepathy  developed  until  there  could  be  no  question
about  it  ?  Think  of  an  antelope  in  danger  from  a  lion  about
to  spring  upon  him,  and  gloating  over  the  anticipation  of  his
dinner.  The  antelope  is  largely  protected  by  the  acuteness
of  his  senses  and  his  high  speed  when  alarmed.  But  would
it  not  have  been  simpler  if  he  could  know  something  tele-
pathically  of  the  lion's  intention,  even  if  it  were  no  more
than  vague  apprehension  warning  him  to  be  on  the  move  ?

By  telepathy  is  to  be  understood  something  more  than  is
implied  in  the  derivation  of  the  word,  the  conveying  of  feeling
or  information  otherwise  than  by  use  of  the  senses,  or  at
any  rate  the  known  senses.  Distance  comes  into  the  question
mainly  because  it  may  exclude  their  ordinary  operation.
Some  appear  to  think  that  all  difficulty  is  obviated  by  the
supposition  of  -an  unknown  physical  agency  capable  of  propa-
gating  effects from one brain  to another, acting  like  the


288  The  Right  Hon.  Lord  Rayleigh.  [part

transmitter  and  receiver  in  wireless  telegraphy  or  telephony.
On  a  physical  theory  of  this  kind  one  must  expect  a  rapid
attenuation  with  distance,  not  suggested  by  the  records.  If
distance  is  an  important  consideration,  one  might  expect
husbands  and  wives  with  their  heads  within  two  or  three  feet
of  one  another  to  share  their  dreams  habitually.  But  there
is  a  more  fundamental  objection.  Specific  information  is,
and  can  only  be,  conveyed  in  this  manner  by  means  of  a
code.  People  seem  to  forget  that  all  speaking  and  writing
depend  upon  a  code,  and  that  even  the  voluntary  or  involun-
tary indications  of  feeling  by  facial  expression  or  gestures
involves  something  of  the  same  nature.  It  will  hardly  be
argued  that  telepathy  acts  by  means  of  the  usual  code  of
common  language,  as  written  or  spoken.

The  conclusion  that  I  draw  is  that  no  pains  should  be
spared  to  establish  the  reality  of  telepathy  on  such  sure  ground
that  it  must  be  generally  admitted  by  all  serious  inquirers.
It  is  quite  natural  that  those  who  have  already  reached  this
position  should  be  more  interested  in  the  question  of  com-
munications from  the  dead.  To  my  mind  telepathy  with  the
dead  would  present  comparatively  little  difficulty  when  it  is
admitted  as  regards  the  living.  If  the  apparatus  of  the  senses
is  not  used  in  one  case,  why  should  it  be  needed  in  the  other  ?

I  do  not  underrate  the  difficulties  of  the  investigation.  Very
special  conditions  must  be  satisfied  if  we  are  to  be  indepen-
dent of  the  good  faith  of  the  persons  primarily  concerned.
The  performance  of  the  Zanzigs  may  be  recalled.  When  there
could  be  no  question  of  confederates,  answers  respecting  objects
suddenly  exhibited  were  given  with  such  amazing  rapidity
that  secret  codes  seemed  almost  excluded.  But  when  a  party
in  which  I  was  included,  attempted  to  get  a  repetition  under
stricter  conditions,  there  was  an  almost  entire  failure.  Our
requirement  was  simply  that  the  husband  should  not  speak
after  he  had  seen  the  object  that  was  to  be  described  by  the
wife.  But  I  must  add  the  inevitable  qualification.  Towards
the  end  of  the  evening  cards  were  correctly  told  several
times,  when  we  were  unable  to  detect  anything  that  could
serve  as  audible  signals.

I  have  dwelt  upon  the  difficulties  besetting  -the  acceptance
of  telepathy,  but  I  fully  recognise  that  a  strong  case  has  been


LXXVII.]


Presidential  Address.


289


made  out  for  it.  I  hope  that  more  members  of  the  Society
will  experiment  in  this  direction.  It  is  work  that  can  be  done
at  home,  at  odd  times,  and  without  the  help  of  mediums,
professional  or  other.  Some  very  interesting  experiences  of
this  kind  have  been  recorded  by  a  former  President,  Prof.
Gilbert  Murray.  With  perhaps  an  excess  of  caution,  he
abstained  from  formulating  conclusions  that  must  have  seemed
to  most  readers  to  follow  from  the  facts  detailed.  I  trust  we
may  hear  still  more  from  him.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  emphasise  that  in  evaluating
evidence  it  is  quality  rather  than  quantity  with  which
we  are  concerned.  No  one  can  doubt  the  existence  of  appar-
ently trustworthy  reports  of  many  occult  phenomena.  For
this  there  must  be  a  reason,  and  our  object  is  to  find  it.
But  whatever  it  may  be,  whether  reality  of  the  phenomena,
or  the  stupidity  or  carelessness  or  worse  of  the  narrators,  a
larger  sweep  is  sure  to  add  to  the  material.  However,  we
may  hope  that  such  additions  will  occasionally  afford  clues,
or  at  least  suggestions  for  further  inquiry.  And  if  the  pheno-
mena, or  any  of  them,  are  really  due  to  supernormal  causes,
further  solid  evidence  of  this  will  emerge.  I  feel  that  I
ought  to  apologise  for  giving  utterance  to  what  must  seem
platitudes  to  the  more  experienced  working  members  of  the-
Society.

Some  of  the  narratives  that  I  have  read  suggest  the  possi-
bility of  prophecy.  This  is  very  difficult  ground.  But  we
live  in  times  which  are  revolutionary  in  science  as  well  as  in
politics.  Perhaps  some  of  those  who  accept  extreme  "  rela-
tivity "  views  reducing  time  to  merely  one  of  the  dimensions
of  a  four-dimensional  manifold,  may  regard  the  future  as
differing  from  the  past  no  more  than  north  differs  from  south.
But  here  I  am  nearly  out  of  my  depth,  and  had  better  stop.

I  fear  that  my  attitude,  or  want  of  attitude,  will  be  dis-
appointing to  some  members  of  the  Society  who  have  out-
stripped me  on  the  road  to  conviction,  but  this  I  cannot
help.  Scientific  men  should  not  rush  to  conclusions,  but  keep
their  minds  open  for  such  time  as  may  be  necessary.  And
what  was  at  first  a  policy  may  become  a  habit.  After  forty-
five  years  of  hesitation  it  may  require  some  personal  experience
of  a  compelling  kind  to  break  the  crust. Some  of  those  who


290


The  Right  Hon.  Lord  Rayleigh.


[part


know  me  best  think  that  I  ought  to  be  more  convinced  than
I  am. Perhaps  they  are  right.

However  this  may  be,  I  have  never  felt  any  doubt  as  to
the  importance  of  the  work  carried  on  by  the  Society  over
many  years,  and  I  speak  as  one  who  has  examined  not  a  few
of  the  interesting  and  careful  papers  that  have  been  published
in  the  Proceedings.  Several  of  the  founders  of  the  Society
were  personal  friends,  and  since  they  have  gone  the  same
spirit  has  guided  us.  Our  goal  is  the  truth,  whatever  it  may
turn  out  to  be,  and  our  efforts  to  attain  it  should  have  the
sympathy  of  all,  and  I  would  add  especially  of  scientific  men.


Lxxvn.]


Note  on  Mr.  Piddington's  Paper.


291


II.

NOTE  ON  MR.  PIDDINGTON'S  PAPER  CALLED
"  FRESH  LIGHT  ON  THE  ONE-HORSE  DAWN
EXPERIMENT."

By  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.

In  reading  Mr.  Piddington's  extraordinarily  able  and
interesting  paper  in  the  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXX.,  pp.  175-229,
I  have  a  feeling  that  his  meaning  is  masked  and  real
intention  to  some  extent  obscured  by  the  semi-satirical
or  humorous  treatment  of  his  theme.

Probably  his  real  meaning  is  so  clear  to  himself  that  he
fails  to  realise  the  haste  and  comparative  inattention  of
the  majority  of  readers — inattention  which  I  feel  sure
would  vanish  if  they  perceived  clearly  what  he  was
driving  at.

Let  me  ask  Mr.  Piddington  whether  his  intention  is
not  something  like  what  I  conceive  it  to  be  ;  and,  for
brevity,  let  me  state  what  I  think  it  is,  and  ask  for
correction.

Dr.  Verrall  then,  in  his  lifetime,  tried  a  telepathic
experiment  on  his  wife,  who  had  recently  become  an
automatic  writer,  without  informing  her  of  the  fact.
He  endeavoured  to  transmit  to  her  at  intervals,  over  a
considerable  period  of  time,  a  phrase  from  the  Orestes
of  Euripides,  hovottwXov  e?  'Aw.  The  first  of  these  three
Greek  words  has  usually  been  taken  to  mean  "  with  one
horse  "  ;  but  Dr.  Verrall  thought  it  meant  the  attribute
"  solitary  journeying,"'  or  "  lonely- wandering,"  applied
to  Dawn.

Myers,  who  was  deceased  and  ostensibly  in  touch  with
Mrs.  Verrall  through  her  automatic  writing,  got  wind  some-
how of  this  intended  experiment  of  Dr.  Verrall's,  as  well

T


292


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


as  of  his  interpretation  of  /j.ov6ttw\ov ,  and  thought  he
could  use  the  intended  experiment  for  his  own  purposes
and  show  that  much  that  we  regarded  as  direct  telepathy
between  A  and  B  was  really  effected  through  the  agency
of  a  third  intelligence  C, — usually  a  discarnate  intelli-
gence.

To  Myers  the  idea  of  "  wandering  lonely  towards  a
dawn  " — whether  derived  from  Verrall  or  otherwise —
seems  to  have  suggested  the  pathetic  and  tragic  figure  of
(Edipus  in  Sophocles'  play  of  (Edipus  Goloneus,  who  in
the  strength  of  a  divine  summons  arose  superior  to  his
rags  and  blindness,  cast  aside  his  props  and  guides,  and
set  forth  solitary,  clad  in  white,  towards  the  end  of  all
his  sorrows  and  the  dawn  of  a  new  life.

Myers  also  seems  to  have  been  aware,  somehow,  that
a  certain  note  of  Sir  Richard  Jebb's,  in  his  edition  of
Sophocles,  contained  material  that  would  serve  his  purpose.
For  in  this  note,  Jebb,  in  commenting  on  the  word  olotwvov
(solitary  journeying)  occurring  in  the  (Edipus  Tyrannus,
gives  a  list  of  adjectives  of  similar  type.  In  this  list  he
(rather  singularly)  includes  the  hovottwXov  phrase  from
Euripides,  Orestes,  as  well  as  three  other  examples  all
taken  from  Sophocles'  play  (Edipus  Goloneus.

These  three  passages,  therefore,  Myers  contrived  to
infuse  into  Mrs.  Verrall's  automatic  script,  in  the  midst
of  the  gradual  development  of  Dr.  Verrall's  tekypathic
experiment  ;  and  also,  in  order  to  direct  attention  to
what  he  had  done  or  was  doing,  he  proceeded  to  em-
phasise that  particular  play  by  constant  and  repeated
reference  to  its  best  known  and  most  dramatic  incident.
That  this  incident  had  specially  aroused  Myers's  imagination
we  know,  because  of  the  striking  use  he  had  made  of
it  in  connexion  with  the  death  of  John  Ruskin.  For  in
his  Obituary  Notice  of  Ruskin,  Myers  likens  the  end  of
the  long  period  of  helplessness  at  Coniston  to  the  passing
of  the  blind  (Edipus,  who  was  thus  lovingly  summoned  by
the  unguessed  accompanying  God  to  enter  into  the  bright-
ness which  awaited  him  :

"  Come,  CEdipus,  why  linger  on  our  journey  ?
Thou  hast  kept  me  waiting  long."


lxxvii.] Note  on  Mr.  Piddington 's  Paper.


293


Accordingly  the  scripts,  ostensibly  influenced  by  Verrall
but  really  dominated  and  inspired  by  Myers,  make  persis-
tent reference  to  an  old  man  clad  in  white  and  going  with
outstretched  hand  and  raised  staff  on  foot  towards  the
rising  sun,  alone  with  God  and  with  none  other.  By
whose  aid  also  a  great  swarm  would  be  held  in  check.
Fragments  of  this  apparently  alien  theme — quite  remote
from  the  bare  Euripidean  phrase  and  from  anything
intended  by  Dr.  Verrall — are  scattered  throughout  the
attempts  at  telepathic  production  of  the  desired  words.
Yet  this  incursion,  both  at  the  time  and  subsequently,
when  ultimately  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Verrall  discussed  the  scripts
jointly,  is  treated  by  the  experimenters  as  rubbish  inevitably
superposed  upon,  and  somewhat  confusing  and  choking,
the  main  telepathic  transmission  ; — which  after  all  was  in
due  time  more  or  less  accomplished  : — -the  word  es,  and
words  beginning  with  mono,  and  some  reference  to  horse
as  well  as  dawn,  being  obtained.

But  the  scripts  themselves,  in  their  comments  on  what
was  obtained,  passt  these  successes  by  as  comparatively
unimportant,  and  emphasise  instead  the  theme  of  the
blind  traveller,  an  old  man  in  white.  This  theme  was
repeated  and  called  attention  to  as  if  it  were  the  most
important  part  of  the  script  : — -e.g.,  an  interim  statement,

"  your  husband's  thought  was  good  but  not  complete.
The  old  man  in  white  was  the  best  part  of  it  but  I
have  not  been  able  to  finish  that,  and  now  it  has  all
gone  away. Put  it  aside,  it  will  return  some  day."

To  clinch  the  matter  a  clear  reference  to  Coniston  and
Ruskin  was  made  in  the  script,  so  as  to  assure  anyone  who
had  begun  to  grasp  the  main  theme  that  he  was  right.

I  venture  to  think  that  the  whole  experiment  is  of  the
utmost  importance  as  showing  of  what  nature  some  of
our  telepathic  experiences  are,  and  how  closely  those  on
the  other  side  of  the  veil  can  watch  and  stimulate  and
modify  and  improve  our  efforts.

But  all  that  Mr.  Piddington  allows  himself  to  indicate
of  this  theory,  save  in  a  manner  which  may  be  sufficient
for  those  who  have  the  patience  to  dissect  it  out,  is  that


294


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


if  people  choose  to  consider  the  whole  incident  a  case  of
telepathy  between  the  living,  he  is  not  going  to  say  them
nay. Witness  the  following  quotations  from  his  paper  :

"  Not  that  I  am  to  be  understood  as  advocating  any
theory  in  opposition  to  that  of  telepathy  inter  vivos  to
account  for  the  phenomena  under  discussion.  I  am  but
trying  to  bring  out  how  curious  are  the  assumptions  which
this  theory  involves.  It  isn't  by  any  means  a  simple
theory.

"  Personally  I  advance  no  theory  of  this  particular  case,
of  which  I  gladly  make  a  present  to  those  who  hold  that
telepathy  inter  vivos  is  the  true  explanation  of  the  super-
normal phenomena  observable  in  scripts.  They  need,
I  fancy,  cheering  up  a  little  ;  and  if  so  be  that  from  this
case  they  can  extract  any  comfort,  so  far  as  I  am  con-
cerned, they  are  welcome  to  it."

This  is  just  the  semi-satirical  conclusion  which  one  is
liable  to  find  in  Mr.  Piddington's  recent  papers — a  satire
due  no  doubt  to  the  kind  of  uninstructed  comments
with  which  they  have  been  received  even  by  persons  of
high  intelligence  ; — and  it  is  in  the  hope  that  he  will
allow  to  posterity  at  any  rate  some  clue  or  hint  of  his
real  meaning  that  I  write  this  purely  interrogative  note.
For  to  one  who  has  worked  closely  at  any  given  pheno-
menon a  theory  must  have  occurred ;  and  a  worker's
opinion  concerning  any  given  theory  is  of  far  more  value
than  that  of  a  mere  reader.  If  then  the  worker  does  not
put  his  opinion  on  record,  in  clear  and  unmistakable
form,  it  may  happen  that  future  students,  overwhelmed
by  the  mass  of  material  set  before  them,  may  pass  over
lightly  and  cursorily  any  episode  which  is  not  properly
emphasised  and  stressed  by  the  original  worker.  If  he
has  not  found  clear  evidence  of  anything  valuable  therein,
it  will  seem  unlikely  that  anything  better  than  a  negative
and  rather  muddled  conclusion  can  be  deduced  from  it.

There  are  one  or  two  minor  points  on  which  I  might
ask  questions,  but  I  will  content  myself  with  one,  in  case
Mr.  Piddington  desires  to  say  anything  about  it.

On  page  212,  at  a  time  when  Mrs.  Verrall  got  the  word


LXXVII.]


Note  on  Mr.  Piddington 's  Paper.


295


'  euhippoi '  in  her  script,  Dr.  Verrall  is  said  to  have  "fixed
his  mind  on  the  notion  of  horse."  This  interpretation  of
polon  was  different  from  the  '  wandering  '  translation  in
Dr.  Verrall's  mind,  but  perhaps  it  was  so  simple  and
natural  and  obvious  a  rendering  that  he  chose  to  give  the
horse  motif  a  chance  ;  and  certainly  the  attempt  appeared
to  be  successful,  though  the  form  in  which  it  appeared
iu  the  script  is  peculiar  and  suggestive.


296


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


III.

A REPLY  TO  SIR  OLIVER  LODGE'S  NOTE.

By  J.  G.  Piddington.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge  asks  me  to  make  clear  what  was  the
object  of  my  paper  called  "  Eresh  Light  on  the  One-
Horse  Dawn  Experiment."  I  had  several  objects  ;  and
I  will  begin  by  stating  what  these  were,  and  then  go  on
to  deal  with  the  question  of  how  far  Sir  Oliver  has
correctly  represented  my  views.

My  first  object  was  to  offer  a  new  interpretation  of  Mrs.
Verrall's  One-Horse  Dawn  scripts.  Mis.  Verrall's  inter-
pretation of  them,  first  given  at  a  meeting  of  the  Society
in  1903  and  afterwards  published  in  1906  in  Proc,  Vol.
XX.,  met  with  general  acceptance  and  held  the  field  for
some  fourteen  years.  It  may,  roughly  speaking,  be  said
to  have  amounted  to  this  : — That,  amid  a  mass  of  irrele-
vant rubbish,  efforts  to  give  the  sound  or  sense  of  the
three  words,  /j-ovoiroikov  e?  'Aw,  were  plainly  discernible,
and  that  knowledge  was  shown  of  the  fact,  normally
unknown  to  Mrs.  Verrall,  that  her  husband  was  trying
to  transmit  these  three  words,  and  also,  perhaps,  of  Dr.
Verrall's  particular  view  about  the  meaning  of  the  word
/j.ovo7rw\ov.  This  interpretation  involved  the  rejection  of  a
very  considerable  amount  of  the  contents  of  the  scripts,
and  claimed  intelligibility  for  only  a  comparatively  small
residuum.

My  interpretation  claims  to  make  sense  of  much  that
Mrs.  Verrall  discarded  as  rubbish  by  referring  it  to  a
certain  note  of  Jebb's,  in  which  the  words  plovottwXov  'Aw
are  actually  quoted,  and  in  which  the  precise  meaning  of


lxxvii.] A  Reply  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  Note.  297

the  adjective  /ulovottcoXov  and  of  other  analogous  compound
adjectives  is  discussed.

My  second  object  was  to  show  that,  whereas  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  view  reference  to  the  experiment  ceased  in  the
scripts  when  in  1902  the  experimenter  abandoned  it,  in
reahty  the  subject  was  pursued  at  intervals  for  years
afterwards  up  to  1915,  and  that  these  later  references
fall  into  line  with  and  throw  light  upon  the  earlier  refer-
ences which  Mrs.  Verrall  had  rejected  as  rubbish.

So  far,  I  think,  my  intention  should  have  been  clear
to  any  but  a  careless  reader.

My  third  object  I  thought  would  be  clear  too  ;  and  if
I  expressed  myself  ironically,  I  hoped  thereby  not  to  ob-
scure but  rather  to  emphasise  my  meaning.  The  know-
ledge one  happens  to  possess  oneself  one  is  apt  to  impute
to  others  ;  and  so,  I  suppose,  I  assumed  the  body  of  our
members  to  be  more  familiar  with  the  publications  of  our
Society  and  especially  with  the  past  history  of  the  One-
Horse  Dawn  case  than  they  really  are.  Let  me,  then,
take  advantage  of  the  opportunity  kindly  afforded  me  by
Sir  Oliver  Lodge — whose  interest  in  my  paper  I  greatly
value — to  repair  my  omission,  and  recall  the  past  history
of  the  One-Horse  Dawn  case,  and  by  so  doing  prepare
the  way  for  explaining  my  third  object.

When  Mrs.  Verrall  first  laid  the  facts  of  the  One-
Horse  Dawn  case  before  the  Society,  she  classified  it
provisionally  as  "  telepathic,  in  the  sense  that  the  facts
in  question  were  known  to  some  living  person  at  the  time
that  reference  to  them  was  made  in  the  automatic  writing"
{Journal,  Vol.  XL,  p.  71).  It  is  true  that  Sir  Oliver
Lodge  expressed  at  the  time  the  view  that  ' 1  there  might
be  some  third  intelligence  at  work  "  {id.  ib.  p.  74)  ;  but,
barring  this  mildly-worded  caveat,  the  case  was  generally
accepted  by  psychical  researchers  of  all  schools  of  thought
as  one  of  telepathy  inter  vivos.  And,  indeed,  neither  the
experiment  as  devised,  nor  its  result  as  interpreted  by
Mrs.  Verrall,  differed  in  any  essential  feature  from  ordinary
cases  of  successful,  or  partially  successful,  thought-trans-
ference, such  as  those  where  an  agent  tries  to  convey  a
number or a diagram to a percipient, except for  the


298


J.  G.  Piddington.


[PAET


spiritistic  setting  in  which  the  percipient-automatist  framed
her  impressions.1  Reduced  to  its  simplest  elements  the
case  might  be  thus  summarised  :

AGENT  (Dr.  Verrall).  PERCIPIENT  (Mrs.  Verrall).

An  experiment  is  being  made.  An  experiment  is  being  made.

I  am  making  the  experiment.  My  husband  is making  the

experiment.

The  subject  of  the  experi-  Attempts  at  the  three  Greek
ment  is  the  words  /uovottwXoi'  words,  and  frequent  refer-
ee 'Aa'.  ences  to  Dawn  and  East.

Accordingly  those  who,  while  not  disputing  the  insuffici-
ency of  normal  causes  to  explain  the  scripts,  yet  argued
that  the  supernormal  forces  at  work  were  human,  found
in  this  case  an  effective  spoke  to  put  in  the  wheel  of
those  who  were  inclined  to  the  view  that  the  supernormal
forces  were  spiritistic.  This  was  the  line  taken  by  Mrs.
Anna  Hude  in  her  Evidence  for  Gommvnicatio?i  with  the
Dead,  by  various  speakers  during  discussions  at  our
meetings,  and  frequently  in  private  conversations.  Then,
in  1909,  Professor  A.  0.  Pigou,  in  his  discussion  of  whether
"  the  complementariness  in  complementary  cross-correspond-
ences is  intentional  or  not  "  (Proc,  Vol.  XXIII.,  pp.  286,
ff.),  rested  one  of  his  chief  arguments  on  the  assumption
that  the  phenomena  of  the  One-Horse  Dawn  case  were,
and  admittedly  were,  due  to  telepathy  between  the  living.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge  in  a  reply  to  Professor  Pigou's  article
(Journal,  Vol.  XIV.,  pp.  134  ff.) — either  forgetting,  or  for
his  immediate  purpose  ignoring,  the  caveat  he  had  previ-
ously entered — did  not  dispute  this  assumption.  Mr.
Gerald  Balfour,  likewise,  agreed  not  to  contest  Professor
Pigou's  argument  that  it  is  superfluous  to  invoke  spiritual
agency  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  the  One-Horse  Dawn
case,  though  he  was  careful  to  add  that  he  did  not  con-
sider "  the  argument  from  superfluity  "  "  absolutely
conclusive  "  (Proc,  Vol.  XXV.,  p.  44).

1  It  is  not  necessary,  I  think,  to  regard  Mrs.  Verrall's  ignorance  of  the  fact
that  an  experiment  was  being  made  as  constituting  an  essential  difference  ;  for
by  making  a  regular  practice  of  writing  automatically  she  was  thereby  putting
herself  into  much  the  same  attitude  of  expectancy  and  receptivity  as  a  "per-
cipient" falls  into  when  he  knows  that  an  "agent"  is  ttying  an  experiment.


lxxvii.] A  Reply  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  Note.  299


The  One-Horse  Dawn  case  has  proved,  then,  a  stumbling
block  in  the  way  of  those  who  attribute  to  spiritual
agency  more  or  less  of  the  supernormal  knowledge  shown
in  scripts.  And,  indeed,  how  could  it  have  been  other-
wise ?  For  it  seemed  certain  that  Dr.  Verrall  was  the
source  of  whatever  knowledge  of  things  unknown  to  Mrs.
Verrall  these  scripts  of  hers  displayed,  and  yet,  when  this
knowledge  emerged  in  them,  instead  of  its  being  said  to
come  from  Dr.  Verrall  or  of  its  being  given  in  a  colour-
less manner  without  indication  of  source,  it  was  represented
as  coming  from  a  discarnate  mind:  the  "I"  of  the  scripts
unquestionably  purporting  to  be  either  Frederic  Myers  or  one
of  the  group  of  discarnate  friends  whom  the  scripts  repre-
sent as  collaborating  with  him.  In  view  of  the  admittedly
human  source  of  the  knowledge  shown  in  the  scripts,
why,  it  was  argued,  treat  these  pretensions  and  the  whole
spiritistic  setting  of  the  "  communications  "  as  anything
more  than  subliminal  romance  and  masquerade  ?  Had
there  been  anything  in  the  scripts  apposite  to  the  subject
of  the  experiment  for  which  it  was  not  easy  to  hold
Dr.  Verrall  responsible,  or  which  did  not  appear  likely
to  have  been  contributed  by  Mrs.  Verrall  after  she  had
telepathically  grasped  the  purport  and  subject  of  the
experiment,  then  it  might  have  been  worth  while  to  ex-
amine whether  there  was  any  warrant  for  the  claim  of
spiritual  agency.  But  there  did  not  appear  to  be  any-
thing of  the  sort.

It  is  here  that  the  third  object  of  my  paper  comes  in.
If  my  new  interpretation  of  the  One-Horse  Dawn  scripts
is  right,  then  the  assumption  that  the  knowledge  displayed
in  them  had  its  source  in  Dr.  Verrall's  mind  can  no
longer  be  made  with  anything  approaching  to  the  same
confidence,  or  allowed  to  pass  with  the  same  mild  protest,
as  before.  Would  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  for  instance,  now
be  content  to  say  no  more  than  that  "  there  might  be
some  third  intelligence  at  work  "  ;  or  would  Mr.  Gerald
Balfour  agree  not  to  contest  the  assumption  that  Dr.  Verrall
was  the  sole  undoubted  "  agent "  ?  Or  would  Professor
Pigou  himself  make  the  same  assumption,  without  at  least
feeling  it  necessary  first  to  refute  my  reading  of  the  facts  %


300


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


So  much  for  the  three  chief  objects  I  had  in  view  in
writing  my  paper.  I  will  now  proceed  to  deal  with  other
points  raised  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  in  his  Note.

I  confined  myself  to  trying  to  show  some  of  the  difficul-
ties in  the  way  of  attributing  the  allusions  to  Jebb's
note  on  oloXoovov  to  Dr.  Verrall  or  to  Mrs.  Verrall  ;
and  I  deliberately  refrained  from  attempting  to  identify
the  intelligence  responsible  for  them.  I  will  explain  why
I  took  this  line.

Although  as  a  matter  of  fact  I  believe,  as  Sir  Oliver
rightly  divines,  that  Frederic  Myers,  either  alone  or  in
collaboration  with  other  discarnate  scholars,  was  responsible
for  the  allusions  to  Jebb's  note  on  the  word  oloCwvov,  to
the  death  of  Oedipus  and  to  the  Obituary  Notice  of  Ruskin,
I  do  not  find  in  the  One-Horse  Dawn  scripts  themselves
evidence  for  this  view  cogent  enough  to  be  worth  putting
forward.  (My  belief  rests  on  considerations,  to  explain
which  I  should  have  had  to  travel  far  outside  the
particular  case  I  was  concerned  with  ;  and  that  would
have  been  undesirable.)

The  knowledge  displayed  in  the  answer  made  by  MyersP
and  Myersv  to  Mrs.  Verrall's  question  about  avro?  ovpavos
aKVfxoav  (Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  107-172),  and  in  the  answer
made  by  MyersP  to  Mr.  Dorr's  question  about  Lethe  (Proc,
Vol.  XXV.,  pp.  86-144),  was  characteristic  of  Frederic
Myers.  It  was  the  kind  of  thing  he  knew,  and  it  was
not  the  kind  of  thing  that  the  experimenters  or  the
automatists  concerned  did  know  ;  and  so  I  was  ready  to
argue  that  the  nature  of  these  answers  pointed  to  Myers
as  the  author  of  them.  Similarly, — though  the  cases  are
not  on  all  fours  with  the  preceding,  because  the  "  com-
munications "  were  not  evoked  by  questions,  but  given
spontaneously — in  the  "  Statius  "  and  "  Dionysius'  Ear  "
cases  {Proc,  Vols.  XXVII. ,  pp.  221-243  ;  XXIX.  pp.  197-
238)  where  the  knowledge  shown  had  once  been  provably,
or  almost  provably,  possessed  by  the  soi-disant  "  com-
municator,"' and  was  not  normally  possessed  by  the
automatist,  the  emergence  of  this  knoAvledge  in  this
automatist's  scripts  could  be  urged  in  support  of  the
communicator's claim. But the knowledge of  Jebb's


lxxvii.] A  Reply  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  Note.


301


note  on  oiofyrov  cannot,  it  seems  to  me,  be  fairly
claimed  as  characteristic  of  Myers  or  of  any  of  his  colla-
borators. Myers  was  not.  I  believe,  interested  in  the
minutiae  of  classical  scholarship.  At  the  same  time,
since  he  greatly  admired  Jebb's  scholarship  and,  as  Jebb's
Life  shows,  was  on  terms  of  intimate  friendship  with
him,  and  was  himself  a  classical  scholar  of  rare  attain-
ments, there  is  no  reason  why  he  should  not  have  been
acquainted  with  Jebb*s  note.  But  to  say  this,  is  quite
a  different  thing  from  maintaining  that  he  was  acquainted
with  it,  or  that  knowledge  of  it  would  be  characteristic
of  him.

Hence  for  purposes  of  argument  I  should  prefer  to  call
the  intelligence  responsible  for  the  allusions  to  Jebb's  note
X,  and  to  leave  it  at  that  ;  provided  that  I  have  made
it  clear  that  anyone  who  should  seek  to  identify  X  with
Dr.  or  Mrs.  Verrall  ought  not  to  shirk  the  difficulties
in  the  way  of  this  identification,  and  should  recognise
how  profound  a  dislocation  it  involves  between  the  con-
scious and  sub-conscious  strata  of  whichever  of  the  two
he  may  fix  upon  as  the  guilty  agent.

Sir  Oliver  represents  me  as  supposing  that  "  Myers "
was  switched  on  to  the  topic  of  Oedipus'  death  by  the
idea  of  "  lonely  wandering  towards  a  dawn "  derivable
from  fxovoiTwKov  is  'Aw,  and  that  "somehow" — apparently,
in  a  casual  sort  of  way — he  became  aware  of  Jebb's  note.
This  is  not  my  view.  In  the  first  place  I  do  not  see
why  words  which  may  mean  "  to  the  lonely- wandering
dawn,"  but  which  cannot  mean  "lonely  wandering  to
the  dawn,"  should  by  themselves  remind  anyone  of
Oedipus  going  to  his  death.  In  the  second  place,  Sir
Oliver  seems  to  me  to  reverse  the  natural  logical  order
in  which  these  two  topics  would  have  been  evoked  by  the
words  fxovoirwkov  h  'Aw.  It  was  surely  the  note  of  Jebb"s
containing  and  discussing  these  very  words  that  must
first  have  come  into  X's  mind  when  he  got  scent  of  the
subject  of  Dr.  Verrall's  experiment,  and  only  subsequently
that  the  death  of  Oedipus  was  suggested  to  him  partly
by  the  quotations  from  the  Oedipus  Coloneus  in  Jebb's
note  and  partly  by  Dr.  Verrall's  interpretation  of  /uovottcoXov


302


J.  G.  Piddinglon.


[part


as  involving  the  idea  of  solitariness  and,  perhaps,  that
of  wandering.

Sir  Oliver  draws  attention  to  the  fact  that,  in  spite  of
Dr.  VerralPs  thinking  that  the  second  half  of  the  word
/j.ov67tw\ov  means  "  wandering  "  rather  than  "  horse,"
he  nevertheless  at  one  point  in  the  experiment  "  fixed
his  mind  on  the  notion  of  horse."  I  see  no  difficulty
here  I  presume  that  Dr.  Verrall  tried  any  and  every
means  that  occurred  to  him  of  transmitting  the  three
words,  and  that  if  he  had  thought  he  could  improve  the
chances  of  success  by  fixing  his  mind  on  "Monopoly,"
or  on  any  other  word  or  idea  suggestive  of  the  sound  or
sense,  he  would  have  done  so,  as  everyone  else  does
(if  I  may  judge  from  my  own  practice)  when  acting  as
"  agent  "  in  a  thought-transference  experiment.

There  is  this,  though,  to  be  observed  about  this  par-
ticular effort  of  Dr.  Verrall's.  If  my  interpretation  of
Scripts  F,  G,  I,  and  K  (Proc,  Vol.  XXX.,  pp.  181-182,
193-194)  is  right,  attempts  had  been  made  at  the  word
ev'nnroi — the  word,  that  is,  which  is  supposed  to  have
been  written  as  a  result  of  Dr.  Verrall's  stimulus — -two
or  three  weeks  before  he  "  fixed  his  mind  on  the  notion
of  horse."  Personally  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  Dr.
Verrall's  concentration  on  "  horse,"  by  reinforcing  the
hitherto  unsuccessful  efforts  of  X  to  get  eviinvoi  written,
helped  X  to  achieve  his  end.  Whether  this  was  so  or
not,  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  word  (emiriroi)  that  did
finally  emerge  corresponded  only  partially  to  Dr.  Verrall's
thought,  but  did  fit  in  perfectly  with  X's  previous  allusions
to  the  Oedipus  Coloneus,  for  X  had  already  in  Script  C,
and  perhaps  also  in  Script  E,  alluded  to  the  Chorus  in
that  play  which  opens  with  the  word  ev'nnrou.

I  avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  to  touch  on  three
points  not  mentioned  in  my  paper  :  the  first  two  being
points  of  detail,  the  third  of  more  importance.

(a)  The  word  u.ov6<tto\o<s,  used  in  Script  H  to  point  to,
and  as  an  equivalent  for,  the  word  otofyvos  which  forms
the  subject  of  Jebb's  note,  was  not,  though  it  might  well
have  been,  included  by  Jebb  among  the  examples  that  he


lxxvii.] A  Reply  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  s  Note.


303


gave  of  compound  adjectives  analogous  to  olo^wvos.  It
looks  as  if  X  meant  to  add  /xocoVtoXo?  to  Jebb's  list.

(6)  The  Old  Man  in  White,  i.e.  Oedipus,  is  called
"  signifer  "  in  Script  C,  and  "  viator  "  in  Scripts  O  and
T.  I  noticed  recently  that  both  these  words  occur  again
in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  June  21,  1903,  in  the  following
context  :

Viator

Monadelphas  signifer  ou^i  Aa/wm.  en  tv  <tk6tu>  irdvra  ovSe
Oyoara  ra  opw/xet'a.  (rxeipei.

The  Greek,  which  means  "  does  not  shine.  Everything
is  in  darkness,  nor  are  the  things  seen  visible.  Consider,"'
recalls  the  first  reference  to  the  blind  wanderer  Oedipus
in  Script  A  :

aparoi  [or, aparaj omnia  nigrant  ante oculos nec  imago
superest  erro  pererro  in  solitudine.

But  it  is  to  the  non-existent  word  "Monadelphas"  (iu.oi>aSe\(pu<;)
that  I  want  specially  to  draw  attention.  It  looks  uncommonly
like  an  attempt  at  cWto'Aoc?  aSe\<pas,  one  of  the  three
phrases  from  the  Oedipus  Coloneus  quoted  by  Jebb  in  his
note  to  illustrate  the  peculiar  idiom  of  adjectives  like
oi'o'cWo?.  The  attempt  failed,  I  suggest,  owing  to  the
word  ijlov6<tt(Ao<;  (monostolos)  obtruding  itself,  and  then  being
run  into  SiutoXou^  a$e\d)a$  (distolous  adelphas),  and  so  pro-
ducing the "  portmanteau  "  monadelphas.

(c)  On  the  assumption  that  the  One-Horse  Dawn  scripts
did  by  way  of  response  to  Dr.  Verrall's  experiment  refer
to  Jebb's  note  and  so  on,  we  may,  I  would  urge,  see  in
this  fact  the  first  manifestation  of  a  novel  and  striking
type  of  phenomenon  not  hitherto  recorded  in  the  history
of  psychical  research.

Frederic  Myers  died  in  January,  1901.  None  kneAV
better  than  he  did  how  greatly  the  difficulties  of  demon-
strating the  agency  of  the  dead  had  been  increased  by
the  evidence  for  telepathy  between  the  living.  Broadly
speaking,  up  to  the  time  of  his  death  the  evidence  for
communication  from  the  dead  was,  if  I  may  so  express  it,
of  a  straightforward  kind. Even  when  varied,  it  was  simple


304


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


ill  character  ;  it  consisted  largely  of  trivial  and  every-
day details  ;  and  even  in  the  best  examples,  such  as  the
G.  P.  case,  it  showed  no  such  marked  divergence  from  the
results  obtained  in  ordinary  thought-transference  experi-
ments as  to  debar  a  critical  mind  from  treating  it  as
more  than  an  intensive  exhibition  of  telepathy  inter
vivos.

I  have  implied  above  that  the  results  obtained  up  to
the  time  of  Myers's  death  in  thought-transference  experi-
ments, where  there  is  no  question  of  any  but  the  living
being  concerned,  were  of  a  simple  type.  Our  published
records  show  that  to  have  been  the  case  (and  our  later
records,  I  may  add,  tell  the  same  tale).  The  agent
thought  of  a  Cat  :  the  percipient  got  an  impression  of  a
Cat.  So  uniform  was  the  simplicity  of  the  phenomena
that  when  on  one  occasion  the  thoughts  of  two  agents
became  merged  into  one  in  the  impression  received  by
the  percipient,  the  fact  is  singled  out  for  remark  (Proc,
Vol.  II.,  p.  194  and  p.  190).

This,  in  broad  outline,  was  the  position  when  Myers
died.  Then  within  a  few  weeks  of  his  death  Mrs.  Verrall
begins  to  write  automatically  ;  and  after  the  lapse  of  a
few  more  weeks  Dr.  Verrall  starts  his  experiment.  Except
that  he  did  not  tell  her  what  he  was  doing,  he  was  mak-
ing just  the  same,  straightforward  kind  of  experiment  as
had  hitherto  been  the  rule,  and  was  aiming  at  and  hoping
for  just  the  same  kind  of  straightforward  result  as  we
were  all  quite  pleased  to  obtain  at  that  time.  No  one
had  at  that  time  evolved  the  theory  of  complex  cross-
correspondences,  or  suggested  that  oblique  and  non-
obvious  answers  to  questions  might  carry  more  weight
evidentially  than  direct  and  expected  ones.

The  indirectness,  the  complexity,  the  ingenuity  and  the
literary  quality  of  the  response  made  in  the  scripts  to
Dr.  VerralTs  experiment  were  an  entirely  original  depar-
ture ;  and  the  credit — or  should  I  say  the  discredit  ? —
of  it  must  be  ascribed  to  the  intelligence  whom  I  call
X.  If  X  is  only  Mrs.  VerralTs  subconsciousness,  whether
acting  independently  or  stimulated  telepathically  by  Dr.
Verrall,  we  must  admit  that  the  moment  was  well  chosen


lxxvii.] A  Reply  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  Note.


305


for  this  novel  display  of  the  powers  of  the  subliminal
mind.  Not  three  months  had  passed  since  Myers  had
died,  convinced  himself  of  survival,  but  conscious  of  the
weak  spots  in  the  evidence  on  which  his  belief  was  based.
If  fact,  how  natural  !  if  fiction,  how  plausible  !  that  his
death  should  be  promptly  followed  by  the  appearance  of
a  completely  new  type  of  phenomenon,  adapted  to  supply
a  deficiency  inherent  in  the  old  evidence,  and  suggestive,
too,  of  the  workings  of  his  complex  and  richly-endowed
mind.

And  this  new  type  of  evidence  has  neither  ceased  with
the  One-Horse  Dawn  case  nor  been  confined  to  the
scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall,  who  might  be  supposed  to  be —
and,  indeed,  was — not  unfitted  by  education  and  natural
endowments  to  create  a  subliminal  personation  of  Frederic
Myers.  It  has,  as  our  Proceedings  testify,  continued  ever
since  ;  and  the  infectious  example  has  spread,  and  spread
not  to  highly-educated  automatists  only  like  Mrs.  Holland,
Mrs.  Salter  and  Mrs.  Willett  ;  but  Mrs.  Piper,  too,  supplies
us  with  a  "  Myers  "  who,  when  asked  what  the  word
"  Lethe  "  suggested  to  him,  gave  not  a  simple  and  direct
reply  such  as  Mrs.  Piper  might  have  coined  herself  or
drawn  from  the  mind  of  the  experimenter,  Mr.  Dorr,  but
a  non-obvious  and  scholarij^  reply  :  a  reply,  in  fact,  that
resembles  very  closely  in  character  X's  response  to  Dr.
Verrall 's  experiment.


306


W.  Whately  Smith.


[part


IV.

"  THE  REALITY  OF  PSYCHIC  PHENOMENA."  1
By  W.  Whately  Smith.
I.

It  is  probable  that  no  branch  of  Psychical  Research
has  proved  more  uniformly  disappointing  to  investigators
than  the  study  of  what  are  commonly  known  as  "  physical
phenomena."  The  history  of  such  investigations  forms
an  almost  unbroken  record  of  fraud  and  malobservation,
of  initial  plausibility  and  subsequent  exposure.  Again
and  again  cases  have  been  reported  of  mediums  who  could
produce  the  most  striking  phenomena  "  under  the  strictest
test  conditions,"  and  again  and  again  it  has  been  found
on  further  investigation  that  insufficient  precautions  had
been  taken  to  exclude  trickery.  Even  the  cases  in  which
no  fraud  has  been  found  have  usually  borne  so  close  a
resemblance  to  others  in  which  it  has  that  the  cautious
student,  arguing  by  analogy,  rightly  hesitates  to  attach
any  great  importance  to  them.  Moreover,  as  we  learn
more  of  spurious  methods,  so  the  standard  we  demand
becomes  increasingly  strict,  and  for  this  reason  we  are
obliged  still  further  to  discount  some  of  the  older  records.

In  face  of  all  this  it  looks  rather  like  asking  for  trouble
to  profess  a  strong  opinion  in  favour  of  any  phenomena
of  this  class.

None  the  less  I  believe  that  "  The  Reality  of  Psychic
Phenomena  "  is  likely  to  become,  a  classic  of  the  subject,
for,  as  I  hope  to  show,  the  experiments  described  therein
present  features  not  to  be  found  in  any  similar  research.

1  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena.  By  W.  J.  Crawford,  D.Sc.  John  M.
Watkins. London,  1916. 4s.  6d.  net.


Lxxvn.] "  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena."  307

I  need  hardly  say  that  I  do  not  proffer  this  opinion
in  a  spirit  of  dogmatic  assertion.  I  am  well  aware  that
a  single  sitting,  however  satisfactory,  is  not  sufficient
evidence  for  the  formation  of  final  judgments,  especially
on  so  precarious  a  subject.  But,  in  the  last  analysis
all  sound  judgments  are  provisional ;  even  our  so-called
"  certainties  "  are  never  more  than  assessments  of  proba-
bilities at  a  fraction  closely  approaching  unity,  and  I
think  that  on  the  most  conservative  estimate  we  can
fairly  say  that  Dr.  Crawford's  work  has  raised  "  physical  "
phenomena  to  a  position  very  near  indeed  to  the  top  of
the  "  credibility  scale."

It  is  true  that  results  of  similar  importance  would  not
be  unreservedly  accepted,  by  Physicists  for  example,  with-
out thorough  confirmation  by  independent  investigators,
and,  in  spite  of  the  rarity  of  good  cases  of  this  kind,  it
is  especially  necessary  in  Psychical  Research  to  relax  in
no  smallest  degree  the  most  rigorous  canons  of  Scientific
Caution.  Still,  I  see  no  reason  for  professing  doubts
which  I  do  not  feel  or  inventing  criticisms  merely
for  the  sake  of  appearing  judicious,  so  I  may  as  well
state  outright  that  I  quite  agree  with  Dr.  Crawford  when
he  says  :  "To  all  visitors  the  phenomena  are  so  mani-
festly and  palpably  genuine  that  they  are  never  troubled
again  with  doubts  as  to  whether  there  is  such  a  thing
as  psychic  force."

II.

The  experiments  dealt  with  cover  some  three  years'  work
concentrated  almost  exclusively  on  the  two  phenomena
of  "  raps  "  and  "  levitation  without  contact."

The  salient  features  of  the  results,  all  of  which  were
obtained  through  the  remarkable  mediumship  of  Miss
Kathleen  Goligher  of  Belfast,  are  as  follows  :

A.  Levitation.

(i)  Levitation  without  contact  of  any  kind  has  been
obtained  on  numberless  occasions  and  with  the  utmost
regularity. It  is  by  no means  capricious  or  erratic  in

u


308


W .  Whately  Smith.


[part


its  occurrence,  but  can  almost  invariably  be  produced  on
demand.

(ii)  During  levitation  the  weight  of  the  medium  is  in-
creased by  an  amount  practically  equal  to  that  of  the  table.

(iii)  There  is,  normally,  no  pressure  on  the  floor  verti-
cally under  the  table  during  levitation.

(iv)  If  a  balance-supported  platform  is  inserted  under
the  table,  a  downward  pressure  is  exerted  on  it  during
levitation,  provided  that  its  height  above  the  floor  exceeds
3-4  inches.  This  pressure  increases  with  the  height  of
the  platform  above  the  floor  and  may  be  considerably
in  excess  of  the  weight  of  the  table.

(v)  There  appears  to  be  a  definite  connection  between  the
medium  and  the  table  possessing  all  the  usual  character-
istics of  a  rigid  structure  except  visibility  and  palpability.
It  is  approximately  of  V  form,  one  limb  supporting  the
table  while  the  other  is  attached  in  some  fashion  to  the
body  of  the  medium.

(vi)  A  thin  rod  may  be  passed  freely  across  the  space
occupied  by  this  structure  without  producing  any  effect,
but  the  interposition  of  a  large  object  appears  to  inter-
fere with  the  structure  and  causes  the  table  to  drop.

(vii)  This  structure  can  resist  or  transmit  torsional,
compressional,  tensional  or  shearing  stresses  of  considerable
magnitude.

B.  Raps.

(i)  Raps  of  every  degree  of  loudness  up  to  "  sledge-
hammer blows "  have  been  obtained  in  great  abundance.

(ii)  They  cannot  be  produced  unless  the  medium's  weight
is  first  reduced. The  usual  reduction  is  about  8  lbs.

(iii)  The  intensity  of  the  rap  is  apparently  directly
proportional  to  the  decrease  in  weight  of  the  medium.

(iv)  The  loss  of  weight  is  only  temporary.

(v)  The  loss  of  weight  is  not  effected  suddenly  but,
on  the  contrary,  quite  gradually.

(vi)  After  a  time  (for  a  given  experiment)  the  loss
reaches  a  final  amount  and  thereafter  does  not  vary.

(vii)  Any  rap  or  blow  produces  a  momentary  reaction
on  the  medium.


lxxvii.] "  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena. ,"  309
C.  General.

(i)  The  phenomena  are  under  the  control  of  some  kind
of  intelligence  which  seems  to  co-operate  actively  with  the
experimenter.

(ii)  The  production  of  phenomena  is  apparently  accom-
panied by  the  removal  of  actual  matter,  in  some  form  or
other,  from  the  body  of  the  medium,  and  this  process  seems
to  be  an  indispensable  preliminary  to  their  occurrence.

(iii)  These  experiments  have  all  been  performed  in  a
good  red  light — not  in  darkness.

(iv)  Copious  quantitative  measurements  have  been  made
of  the  forces  involved.

The  foregoing  is  no  more  than  a  bald  resume  of  results
and  inferences  which  lack  of  space  prevents  me  from
giving  in  extenso.  For  the  full  details  of  the  actual
experiments  and  reasoning  reference  should  be  made  to
Dr.  Crawford's  book.

It  is  particularly  fortunate  that  the  study  of  these  very
interesting  phenomena  should  have  fallen  to  the  lot  of
a  scientist  accustomed  to  look  at  things  from  a  mechanical
standpoint.  Every  investigator  must  have  a  natural  tend-
ency to  employ  the  methods  with  which  he  is  most
familiar,  and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  Dr.  Crawford's
position  as  Lecturer  in  Mechanical  Engineering  at  the
Municipal  Technical  Institute  of  Belfast  must  have  influ-
enced his  decision  to  begin  his  research  with  a  thorough
analysis  of  the  fundamental  mechanics  of  the  phenomena.
It  is  unlikely  that  any  other  line  of  attack  would  have
yielded  such  satisfactory  results,  and  it  has,  in  addition,
automatically  introduced  a  far  greater  measure  of  control
than  would  have  accompanied  more  recondite  methods.

For  the  benefit  of  those  who  are  not  familiar  with
Dr.  Crawford's  book,  and  in  order  to  give  a  general  idea
of  the  kind  of  experiment  on  which  his  conclusions  are
based,  I  will  here  quote  a  few  paragraphs  dealing  with
some  of  the  more  important  examples.

"  Experiment  2  :  Reaction  on  the  medium  during  levitation.

The  table  used  was  No.  I.  (the  ordinary  seance  table.,
.  .  .  ). I accurately balanced the weight of  medium,


310


W.  Whately  Smith.


[part


chair  on  which  she  was  sitting,  and  drawing  board.  [On  the
weighing  machine  which  frequently  supported  the  medium
in  these  experiments.  W.  W.  S.]  The  medium  sitting
perfectly  still,  I  asked  the  operators 1  to  levitate  the  table
and  keep  it  as  steadily  levitated  as  they  possibly  could
— i.e.  without  up-and-down  or  to-ancl-fro  motion — while
I  was  making  my  observations.  Immediately  on  request
the  table  rose  about  8  in.  into  the  air  in  an  approxi-
mately horizontal  plane  .  .  .  and  became  to  all  appearance
quite  steady  in  the  air.  As  soon  as  I  was  satisfied  that
all  was  right  and  that  the  medium  was  sitting  perfectly
still  as  I  had  placed  her,  I  examined  the  weighing  machine.
The  steelyard,  which  before  the  levitation  was  just  on
the  balance,  was  now  hard  up  against  the  top  stop.
I  moved  the  rider  along  until  it  again  just  balanced.
The  following  were  the  readings  :

Weight  of  medium  +  chair  +  draw-) n , .  ,,  ' n  .
. , nin \ J  -  =  9  st. 4  lbs.  14  oz.

mg  board,  before  levitation,  -J

Weight  of  medium  +  chair  +  draw-)  ^
ing  board  during  steady  levitation  J  "

Increase  in  medium's  weight  due)
to  levitation. -  -I  "  "

Weight  of  table,  10 ,, 6  ,,

Conclusion.  The  increase  in  weight  of  the  medium
due  to  levitation  is  10  oz.  short  of  the  weight  of  table.

Notes.  The  levitation  was  as  nearly  perfect  as  could  be,
and  time  was  not  a  factor,  as  I  had  concluded  my  observa-
tions and  there  were  no  signs  of  the  table  descending.
I  had  in  fact  to  inform  the  operators  that  I  had  finished,
and  to  ask  them  to  drop  the  table,  which  they  did
suddenly,  so  that  it  reached  the  floor  with  a  crash."

"  Experiment 7  : The effect on the medium's weight  of
levitated  table  jerking  vertically  up  and  down  in  the  air.
The table used was No. I. (the ordinary  seance
table).

1  Dr.  Crawford  considers  that  the  phenomena  are  directed  by  "the  spirits  of
human  beings  who  have  passed  into  the  Beyond."  These  are  the  "operators"
referred  to.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  phenomena  are  under  intelligent
control  of  some  kind ;  but  I  myself  prefer  to  suspend  judgment  as  to  its
nature. W.  W.  S.


lxxvii.] The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena."


311


Method.  The  medium  being  seated  quietly  on  the
weighing  machine,  with  hands  on  knees  as  in  Experiment
2,  I  asked  for  steady  levitation  of  the  table,  which  was
immediately  given.  The  weight  of  the  medium  +
chair  +  drawing  board  before  levitation  was  9  st.  4  lbs.
During  the  period  of  steady  levitation  the  combined  weight
was  10  st.  0  lb.  8  ozs.  Having  balanced  the  machine
at  this,  I  asked  the  operators  to  jerk  the  table  (which
up  to  then  was  steadily  levitated)  vertically  upwards
into  the  air.  This  they  at  once  did,  the  table  rising
quickly  from  6  in.  to  8  in.  into  the  air.  I  asked  them  to
do  it  several  times.  The  result  was  always  the  same.
At  each  upward  jerk  of  the  table  the  steelyard  of  the
weighing-machine  rose  and  pressed  against  the  top  stop
and  then  returned  to  its  position  of  balance.

I  also  asked  the  operators  to  let  the  table  slowly  sag
vertically  in  the  air,  and  to  arrest  its  motion  suddenly
before  it  reached  the  floor.  This  they  did  several  times.
I  found  that  this  motion  also  synchronised  with  instan-
taneous and  temporary  increase  of  the  medium's
weight  in  addition  to  the  increased  weight  due  to  steady
levitation.

Conclusion.  When  the  table  is  steadily  levitated  the
medium's  weight  is  increased  by  an  amount  practically
equal  to  the  weight  of  the  table.  If  the  table  is  jerked
up  and  down  in  the  air,  there  is  an  additional  instan-
taneous weight  on  the  medium  while  the  jerking  is  pro-
ceeding."

"  Experiment  48  :  To  find  the  horizontal  component  of  the
reaction  [exerted  during  levitation  on  a  compression
balance  placed  under  the  table. W.  W.  S.].


T


To  Medium

«r—


a


A


s


312  W.  Whately  Smith.  [part

.  .  .  B  is  the  compression  balance  (reading  to  14  lb.)
placed  on  top  of  an  iron  carriage  C,  which  runs  on  ball
bearings,  and  which  is  so  free  from  friction  that  a  force
of  iV  lb.  suffices  to  pull  it  along  the  floor.  N  is  a  nail
driven  into  the  floor.  S  is  an  ordinary  Salter  tension
spring  balance  reading  to  20  lb.,  tied  to  the  nail  N  and
to  the  carriage  C.  T  is  the  levitated  table.  Between
A  and  N  is  my  approximate  position  of  observation.

I  placed  a  finger  of  the  right  hand  on  the  pointer  of
the  tension  balance  S,  and  a  finger  of  the  left  hand  on
the  pointer  of  the  compression  balance  B.  I  then  asked
the  operators  to  levitate  the  table,  when  in  the  usual
way  the  pointer  on  B  gradually  moved  to  14  i  lb.  against
the  stop,  and  then  the  table  sprang  up  into  the
air.  The  pointer  on  the  tension  balance  also  simul-
taneously moved  along  the  scale,  and  the  average  of
half  a  dozen  levitations  gave  for  it  a  rough  value  of
about  4  lb.  .  .  .

Conclusion.  The  horizontal  component  of  the  reaction
when  the  seance  table  of  weight  10f  lb.  is  levitated
above  the  14  lb.  balance  is  apparently  about  4  lb.  ;  and
this  component  acts  directly  outwards  from  the  medium."

There  are  many  other  experiments  I  should  like  to
quote  if  space  permitted,  but  the  foregoing,  selected  almost
at  random,  are  typical  and  should  suffice  to  indicate
their  simplicity  and  directness  and  what  I  may  call  the
commonsense  nature  of  the  methods  employed.

The  following  account  of  the  sitting  witnessed  by  myself
is  taken  from  my  contemporary  notes.  For  the  sake
of  brevity  I  have  omitted  a  few  irrelevant  details,  but
none  which  would  affect  the  main  issues  involved.

This  sitting  took  place  in  Belfast  on  Saturday,  Dec.
9th,  1916,  at  8.0  p.m.  It  was  held  in  the  room  in  which
most  of  Dr.  Crawford's  work  has  been  done,  at  the  house
of  Mr.  Goligher,  the  father  of  the  medium.  There  were
present  Mr.  Goligher,  Miss  Anna  Goligher,  Miss  Lily
Goligher,  Mr.  Morison,  Mrs.  Morison  and  Miss  Kathleen
Goligher,  the  medium.

These  formed  a  circle  of  about  5  ft.  in  diameter,  sitting


lxxvii.] "  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena.'"


313


with  joined  hands  in  the  order  named,  i.e. — with  Miss
Kathleen  Goligher  between  Mrs.  Morison  and  Mr.  Goligher.

Dr.  Crawford  and  I  sat  outside  the  circle  and  were
free  to  move  about  as  we  pleased.

The  ordinary  seance  table  was  placed  in  the  centre
of  the  circle  and  a  large  two-piece  metal  trumpet  stood
just  outside  the  circle,  between  Mr.  Goligher  and  the
medium. The arrangement is shown in  the  diagram.


x  Miss  K.  G.


x  Miss  A.  G.


Light

□


x  Mr.  M.


x  Miss  L.  G.


Dr.  C.


 ■  1  x  W.  tV.  S.

The  room  was  lighted  by  a  fish-tail  gas  burner  enclosed
in  a  sheet-metal  box  fitted  with  ruby  glass  sides  and
placed  on  the  chimney-piece  to  the  medium's  right  front
as  shown.  It  was  warmed  by  a  gas-stove  which  stood  on
the  floor  diagonally  opposite  the  light.  This  was  rather
important,  as  will  appear  later.

It  is  difficult  to  give  any  precise  idea  of  the  degree  of
illumination  given  by  the  gas.  I  can,  perhaps,  best
indicate  it  by  saying  that  it  was  a  good  deal  stronger
than  I  should  care  to  use  in  a  photographic  dark-room.
I  found  that  when  my  eyes  had  become  accustomed  to
the  light,  i.e.  after  about  ten  minutes,  I  could  clearly
see  every  object  in  the  room  unless  it  happened  to  be
in  deep  shadow.

The  proceedings  opened  with  singing.  After  a  few
minutes,  and  while  the  singing  was  still  in  progress,  strong
raps  were heard  which  beat  time  to the tune.  These


314  W.  Whately  Smith.  [part

were  apparently  produced  on  the  floor  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  the  medium.  They  sounded  very  definite,  that
is  to  say,  as  if  someone  were  knocking  firmly  on  the  floor
with  a  piece  of  hard  wood  ;  they  in  no  way  resembled
the  sound  of  an  electric  discharge  as  some  raps  have
been  said  to  do  by  certain  observers.

The  singing  stopped  and  the  proceedings  proper
began.

First  came  a  variety  of  raps  of  all  kinds  from  scarcely
audible  taps  to  real  "  sledge  hammer  "  blows  which  shook
the  whole  floor.  These  latter  could  not  normally  have
been  produced  without  the  aid  of  some  heavy  percussive
instrument  or  violent  kicks  with  the  heel  of  a  boot.

The  members  of  the  circle  were  holding  hands  and  all
hands  were  clearly  visible  to  me.  I  am  sure  that  no  one
present  could  have  made  sufficiently  violent  movements
with  their  feet  without  attracting  my  attention.

When  the  raps  ceased  the  large  metal  trumpet  already
mentioned  moved  into  the  circle  sliding  along  the  ground
apparently  under  its  own  power,  so  to  speak,  the  sitters
next  to  it  (Miss  Kathleen  Goligher  and  Mr.  Goligher)
raising  their  hands  to  allow  it  to  pass.  It  then  fell  on
the  floor  under  the  table,  and  after  a  few  moments'  scuffling
about  it  was  separated  into  its  two  component  parts.
These  two  parts  then  rose  into  the  air  and  projected
towards  me  from  under  the  table,  being  at  this  juncture
not  more  than  18  inches  from  me.

I  was  invited  to  take  hold  of  these  two  parts  and  I
accordingly  grasped  each  in  turn.

I  found,  in  each  case,  that  I  could  move  the  end  which
I  held  to  and  fro  in  any  direction  with  the  greatest  ease,
although  I  was  conscious  of  a  slight  elastic  resistance.
But  when  I  tried  to  twist  either  of  them  about  a  longi-
tudinal axis  I  was  quite  unable  to  do  so.  So  great
was  the  resistance  to  torque  that  I  can  only  describe  it
by  saying  that  it  felt  as  if  the  lower  ends  of  the  two
parts  were  embedded  in  a  large  mass  of  solid  concrete,
freely  suspended  so  as  to  allow  of  transverse  and  longi-
tudinal movement,  but  so  heavy  as  to  preclude  twisting.

After  a  few  moments  these  two  parts  of  the  trumpet


lxxvii.] "  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena."


315


fell  to  the  ground,  and  shortly  after  the  table  began  to
move  about.

This  table  was  about  2  feet  long  and  H  feet  broad
and  was  made  of  dark  painted  or  stained  wood.  It
had  four  legs  of  the  ordinary  turned  variety,  which  had  no
cross-bars  between  them,  and  weighed  about  ten  pounds.

First  it  moved  to  and  fro  over  a  range  of  about  a  foot.
Then  it  was  rotated  about  a  vertical  axis  at  the  rate  of
about  15-20  revolutions  per  minute.  At  the  request  of
Dr.  Crawford  the  direction  of  rotation  was  reversed
without  delay  and  apparently  without  difficulty.  This
rotation  was  distinctly  jerky  rather  than  smooth,  and
on  the  whole  I  should  say  that  this  irregularity  was
due  rather  to  the  intermittent  nature  of  the  rotating
impulses  than  to  inequalities  of  friction  against  the  floor.

The  table  then  moved  again  slightly,  to  adjust  itself
apparently,  gave  one  or  two  tilts,  and  finally  rose  clear
off  the  floor  to  a  height  of  at  least  12  inches.

In  the  course  of  the  evening  it  did  this  some  six  or
more  separate  times.  On  each  occasion  I  bent  down  and
looked  clear  under  the  table.  I  was  particularly  well
situated  for  this  observation,  since,  as  already  explained,
the  gas  stove  used  for  warming  the  room  was  diagonally
opposite  me  and  emitted  a  reddish  glow  from  the  heated
metal,  as  well  as  gleams  of  light  from  cracks  or  the  like.
It  was  easy,  as  the  table  swayed  gently  to  and  fro  in
the  air,  to  bring  each  leg  in  turn  in  line  with  this  glow —
by  moving  my  head  slightly  from  side  to  side — and  thus
to  satisfy  myself  that  there  was  nothing  in  contact  with
any  of  the  legs.

On  two  occasions  when  the  table  was  clear  off  the
ground  all  the  members  of  the  circle  lifted  their  hands
above  their  heads,  in  which  position  they  were  verified
by  me.

After  two  or  three  of  these  preliminary  levitations  I
was  invited  to  step  inside  the  circle,  and  I  accordingly
did  so.  I  grasped  the  table  firmly  with  both  hands  and
did  my  utmost  to  prevent  it  moving,  but  I  was  quite
unsuccessful.  By  dint  of  great  exertion  I  could  prevent
it  from  moving  in  any  one  direction  and  could  keep  it


316  W.  Whately  Smith.


[part


steady  for  a  second  or  so,  but  it  instantly  moved  in
some  other  direction,  the  force  changing  with  great  rapidity.
The  amount  of  force  exerted  was  quite  extraordinary,
indeed  incredible  to  anyone  who  has  not  actually  ex-
perienced it.  I  estimate  that  at  times  I  exerted  pressures
of  fully  100  lbs.  weight.  At  one  time  the  table  was
made  so  heavy  that  I  could  not  lift  it.  At  another  time,
when  I  had  for  a  moment  relaxed  my  grip,  it  levitated
within  six  inches  of  me.  While  it  was  thus  suspended
in  the  air  I  again  took  hold  of  it  and  found  that  although
I  could  move  it,  within  limits,  easily  in  any  direction  in
the  plane  of  its  top,  I  encountered  a  remarkably  solid
resistance  when  I  tried  to  push  it  downwards  and  towards
the  medium  at  an  angle  of  about  45  degrees.  So  great
was  the  resistance  in  this  direction  that  it  felt  like  push-
ing against  a  solid  strut  of  wood  or  metal.

During  the  whole  of  this  time  I  was  standing  within
three  feet  of  the  medium  and,  most  of  the  time,  facing
her.  I  could  see  distinctly  the  whole  of  her  body  down
to  the  knees,  and  the  light  from  the  lamp  fell  directly
on  to  her  lap.  Her  feet  were  in  shadow  and  I  could  not
make  them  out  distinctly.  This  is  natural  as  she  always
sits  with  them  tucked  under  her  chair  and  her  heels
against  its  crossbar.

I  could  infallibly  have  detected  any  movement  of  the
medium,  and  I  can  certify  that  she  sat  absolutely  motion-
less during  the  whole  time  that  the  table  was  performing
these  violent  evolutions.

I  later  sat  on  the  table  and,  with  my  feet  clear  of  the
floor,  was  moved  a  distance  of  about  six  or  eight  inches.
In  addition,  the  table  was  three  times  tilted  up  to  such
an  angle  that  I  was  unable  to  retain  my  seat.

Finally,  after  I  had  dismounted,  it  pushed  me  to  the
extreme  edge  of  the  circle,  moving  to  a  distance  of  fully
four  feet  from  the  medium  in  the  process.  In  this  posi-
tion I  tried  my  hardest  to  push  it  back.  Again  it  felt
like  pushing  against  a  solid  strut.  By  putting  out  all
my  strength  I  was  only  able  to  move  it  an  inch  or  so.

Certain  minor  incidents  also  took  place,  and  one  or  two
interesting  variations  on  the  above  were  introduced.


lxxvii.] "  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena."


317


For  instance,  raps  were  produced  on  the  under  surface
of  the  table  while  I  rested  my  hands  on  the  top,  and
I  could  plainly  feel  the  wood  quivering  under  the  blows.

Again,  at  one  time  the  table  was  thrown  upon  the
ground,  levitated  in  this  position  (legs  horizontal  and
pointing  towards  the  medium),  and  finally  restored  to  its
upright  position.  This  last  process  was  performed  with
difficulty  and  only  succeeded  after  several  attempts.  It
was  done  by  a  series  of  strong  jerks,  exactly  as  if  manipu-
lated by  an  invisible  hand  which  appeared  to  try  to
change  its  grip  rapidly  but  sometimes  missed  it.

III.

In  discussing  these  phenomena  the  first  question  to  be
dealt  with  is  that  of  genuineness,  for,  as  Dr.  Crawford
says  "...  all  the  experiments  recorded  .  \  .  depend
for  any  value  they  may  have  on  the  fact  that  the  table
movements,  levitations,  raps,  blows  and  other  phenomena
are  genuine  productions  due  to  the  action  of  psychic
force  and  in  no  way  caused  by  fraudulent  action  on  the
part  of  the  medium  or  members  of  the  circle."

The  two  possibilities  which  must  be  considered  in  this
connection  are  Illusion  and  Fraud.

ILLUSION,  (i)  It  may  be  doubted  whether  true
illusion  has  ever  been  a  source  of  error  in  the  study  of
cases  of  this  type.  By  '  true  illusion  '  I  mean  the  direct
imposition  by  a  trickster  of  an  hallucination  which  has
no  foundation  in  objective  reality,  as  opposed  to  faulty
conclusions  arising  from  malobservation,  or  unwarranted
extrapolation  from  correct  observations  or  unsound  reason-
ing, which  have,  of  course,  been  common  enough,  as
have  also  false  suggestions  by  the  performer.  Such
hallucinations  may  be  imposable  on  suitably  sensitive
subjects  in  certain  hypnotic  states,  but  I  am  not  aware  of
any  evidence  which  suggests  that  normal  persons  can  be
so  deluded.

(ii)  One  of  the  mainstays  of  the  professional  illusionist
is  the  creation  in  the  minds  of  his  audience  of  an  anticipa-
tion that  a  certain  event  is  about  to  happen,  followed  by


318


W.  Whately  Smith.


[part


a  suggestion  that  it  has  happened  and  commonly  supple-
mented by  an  adroit  distraction  of  attention  at  the
moment  when  it  is  supposed  to  happen  but  does  not.
I  may  say  in  parenthesis  that  several  excellent  examples
of  this  method  are  to  be  found  in  Zollner's  account  of
his  sittings  with  Slade,  who  seems  to  have  been  a  past-
master  at  this  sort  of  thing.  But  the  method  can  only
work  when  the  illusionist  is  in  charge  of  the  proceedings,
which  is  not  the  case  here.

(iii)  It  is  impossible  to  reconcile  the  idea  of  illusion,
whether  imposed  or  self-induced,  with  results  recorded
by  mechanical  apparatus.

(iv)  Finally,  speaking  personally,  I  cannot  believe  that
my  own  very  vigorous  "  wrestle  "  with  the  table — a
considerable  exertion  I  may  say — could  have  been  an
hallucination  imposed  and  removed  without  my  knowledge.

I  do  not  think  it  likely,  however,  that  anyone  will
attempt  to  explain  away  the  phenomena  along  these  lines,
so  I  will  say  no  more,  except  that  if  anyone  does  seriously
think  that  illusion  is  a  probable  explanation  and  can
adduce  evidence  to  support  his  views  I  shall  be  pleased
to  undertake  a  more  exhaustive  analysis  of  the  possibilities.

FRAUD.  The  possibility  of  trickery  demands  much
more  serious  consideration,  and  I  am  sure  that  neither
Dr.  Crawford  nor  the  members  of  the  circle  will  resent
my  discussing  it  with  the  utmost  care,  especially  as  I
anticipate  that  the  great  majority  of  those  who  are
disinclined  to  accept  the  experiments  at  their  face  value
will  base  their  objections  on  an  accusation  of  fraud.  Nor
do  I  blame  them,  for  fraud  has  occurred  so  frequently
throughout  the  history  of  Psychical  Research,  has  stultified
so  much  research  and  vitiated  so  many  cases  in  which
there  is  reason  to  suppose  that  genuine  phenomena  were
also  produced,  that  it  is  both  natural  and  necessary  to
suspect  its  presence  in  contemporary  cases  of  similar
type.

But  this  attitude  of  suspicion,  right  and  proper  though
it  is,  arises  from  an  argument  by  analogy,  and  is  only
legitimate  in  proportion  as  the  analogy  is  exact.  Essentially
this  argument  runs  as  follows  :


lxxvii.] "  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena.'''


319


"It  is  found  from  experience  that  there  is  a  chance
"  P "  of  any  member  of  a  class  "  A "  of  objects  a1;  a.2,
a33  .  .  .  etc.,  possessing  a  certain  quality  "  B  "  :  the
object  aH  belongs  to  the  class  "  A "  ;  therefore  there  is
a  chance  "  P  "  that  the  object  an  possesses  the  quality
"  B."

This  is  no  more  than  a  thinly  disguised  form  of  the
syllogistic  type:  "  All  S  is  P  :  M  is  S  ;  therefore  M  is  P."
Its  soundness  in  this  particular  case  is  most  likely  to  be
vitiated  by  the  inaccuracy  of  the  minor  premise — "  the
object  an  belongs  to  the  class  "A."

In  other  words,  we  have  found  from  experience  that  of
a  certain  class  of  cases  99  out  of  100,  say,  are  fraudulent  ;
we  therefore  argue  that  the  chances  are  about  99  to  1  in
favour  of  another  case  of  the  same  class  being  also  fraudu-
lent. But  this  argument  only  holds  good  provided  that
the  characteristics  of  the  particular  case  under  considera-
tion are  sufficiently  like  those  of  the  previous  cases  to
warrant  our  placing  it  unreservedly  in  the  same  class
with  them.

If  they  are  wholly  dissimilar,  the  special  case  cannot
be  placed  in  the  previously  experienced  class  at  all  and  the
argument  from  analogy  is  wholly  inapplicable.

If  the  resemblance  is  only  partial  we  must  proportion-
ately discount  our  deduced  chance  of  the  presence  of  the
quality  "  B  "  (in  this  case  fraud).

Now  although  at  first  sight  the  fact  that  this  case  is
one  of  a  "  physical  "'  phenomenon  may  seem  sufficient
to  warrant  our  classing  it  without  more  ado  with  all
other  cases  of  "  physical  "  phenomena,  I  do  not  think
that  this  will  hold  good  in  practice.  In  the  first  place,
physical  phenomena  shade  off  gradually  into  non-physical,
and  it  is  hard  to  draw  any  exact  boundary  between  the
two.  It  would  be  unwise,  for  instance,  unreservedly  to
class  telekinetic  phenomena,  such  as  these,  with  para-
kinetic1,  or  with  the  obscure  manifestations  of  the  "Direct

xThe  distinction  between  "telekinetic"  and  "  parakinetic "  phenomena  is
that  in  the  former  there  is  no  contact  of  any  kind  between  the  object  moved  and
the  members  of  the  circle,  whereas  in  the  latter  there  is  contact,  but  not  of  a
kind  to  account  for  the  observed  movements  on  normal  lines.  Ordinary  "  table-
turning  "  is  an  example  of  parakinesis.


320


W.  Wliately  Smith,


[part


Voice,"  which,  if  all  that  is  claimed  for  them  be  true,
must  be  at  least  quasi-physical.

Moreover,  the  characteristics  by  which  various  cases
are  classified  for  the  purpose  of  forming  such  an  a
priori  expectation  must  be  those  presented  by  them
before  the  question  of  their  genuineness  was  decided  by
the  "  reagent  "  of  a  special  investigation  ad  hoc  con-
ducted under  test  conditions,  may  be,  or  by  particularly
stringent  observers.

In  other  words,  the  special  conditions  which  determined
the  frequency  of  association  of  the  quality  "  B  "  with
members  of  the  class  "  A  "  must  not  be  used  for  defining
the  class  "  A  "  or  for  identifying  the  object  an  as  a  mem-
ber of  that  class.

In  this  case,  for  example,  it  would  be  fallacious  to
argue  that  phenomena  originally  produced  in  a  good  light
are,  for  the  purpose  of  assessment  of  the  a  priori
chance  of  fraud,  to  be  counted,  without  qualification,
as  members  of  the  same  class  which  includes  phenomena
originally  produced  in  darkness  and  subsequently  found  to
be  fraudulent  when  the  additional  factor  of  good  light
was  added.

In  fact,  all  a  priori  judgments  are  comparative
judgments  based  on  evidence  available  up  to  a  certain
point,  and  it  is  essential  that  this  point  should  be  the
same  for  the  two  sets  of  experiences  compared.  It  may
be  defined,  for  present  purposes  at  any  rate,  as  the  point
where  casual  observation  ends  and  systematic  observation
begins.  If  we  place  it  later  for  early  cases  possessing  a
known  probability  of  fraudulence  we  must  do  the  same  for
the  present  case,  and  we  are  at  once  committed  to  the
formation  of  a  judgment  which  is  not  a  priori  at  all.

It  follows  that  a  priori  judgments  have  their  logical
basis  in  the  similarity  of  superficial  characteristics,  and  that
our  resultant  expectation  must  be  suitably  discounted  if
the  similarity  is  imperfect.

I  do  not  pretend,  of  course,  that  this  reasoning  can  be
applied  with  quantitative  precision  to  this  or  any  other
special  case  of  the  type  we  are  considering.

The  point  I  wish  to  make  is  that  we  are  only  entitled


lxxvii.] "  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena."  321

to  approach  the  case  with  a  strong  expectation  of  fraud
if  we  have  first  satisfied  ourselves  that  its  superficial
characteristics  are  truly  similar  to  those  of  cases  with
which  we  have  come  to  associate  fraud  in  the  past,  and
we  must  discount  this  expectation  in  proportion  to  any
dissimilarity  we  may  find.

I  have  dwelt  on  this  point  at  some  length  because
a  priori  judgments  are  too  commonly  formed  without
any  real  comprehension  of  the  logical  processes  involved.

If  now  we  compare  what  I  have  called  the  superficial
characteristics  of  these  experiments  with  those  of  past
cases  of  "  physical "  phenomena  I  think  we  shall  find
a  number  of  points  of  marked  difference.  I  am  somewhat
handicapped  by  writing  without  books,  so  I  cannot  bring
out  these  differences  point  by  point,  giving  chapter  and
verse  as  I  should  like  to  do.  But  I  do  not  think  it
likely  that  anyone  well  acquainted  with  the  literature
of  the  subject  could  fail  to  be  struck  by  the  difference
between  the  general  "  atmosphere  "  of  these  experiments
and  that  of  other  previous  cases  of  which  I  suppose  that
of  Eusapia  Palladino  is  the  classical  example.  Of  special
points  the  following  are  among  the  more  obvious  charac-
teristics where  important  differences  may  be  looked  for :

(i)  The  type  of  phenomenon  produced.

(ii)  The  order  of  their  intensity.

(hi)  The  regularity  and  ease  with  which  they  are  pro-
duced.

(iv)  The  degree  of  light  in  which  they  occur.

(v)  Whether  the  medium  is  entranced  or  not.

(vi)  Whether  he  or  she  is  a  paid  professional  or  not.

(vii)  His  or  her  past  history.

I  am  sure  that  any  comparison  of  this  kind  is  bound
to  lead  us  to  the  conclusion  that  our  a  priori  preposses-
sions in  favour  of  fraud  must  be  heavily  discounted  by
reason  of  the  difference  between  the  superficial  character-
istics of  this  and  previous  cases.1

1 1  wish  to  make  it  clear  that  I  am  not  in  any  way  trying  to  depreciate  the
value  of  the  evidence  obtained  from  the  study  of  these  "previous  cases,''  which
was  of  the  utmost  intrinsic  value.  My  point  is  that  the  conditions  obtaining
at  Belfast  have  been  so  different  from  and,  incidentally,  better  than  those  of


322


W.  Whately  Smith.


[PART


It  must  be  noted  that  this  is  an  argument  from  mere
differences  as  such  and  is  in  no  way  dependent  on  the
sense  of  these  differences.  It  would  apply  with  equal
force  even  if  all  the  differences  were  of  such  a  nature
as  to  increase  the  suspicion  of  fraud  when  forming  an
a  'posteriori  judgment.  This  is  not  the  case  here  as  I
shall  now  proceed  to  show.

Fraud  is  frequently  discussed  under  the  two  heads  of
Conscious  and  Unconscious,  but  in  this  case  the  distinction
is  unnecessary  for  the  question  is  one  of  fact  only.  Is
it  possible  for  the  medium  to  produce  the  phenomena
observed  by  ordinary  physical  means,  in  spite  of  the
prolonged  and  close  scrutiny  of  Dr.  Crawford  and  in  view
of  their  characteristic  features  ?  If  it  is  possible,  does
she  in  fact  do  so  ?

These  are  questions  which  must  be  answered,  and  I
think  that  the  evidence  at  our  disposal  is  sufficient
to  enable  us  to  do  so  with  a  very  high  degree  of
certainty.

I  do  not  propose  to  dwell  at  length  on  whether  there
might  be  a  desire  or  motive  for  deception,  preferring  to
treat  the  question  as  a  matter  of  bare  fact.

None  the  less,  it  is  well  to  point  out  that  the  sittings
at  which  these  phenomena  are  produced  are  entirely
private  in  nature,  and  therefore  cupidity  or  the  desire
for  notoriety,  which  may  form  a  powerful  incentive  in
the  case  of  the  professional  medium,  are  here  entirely
lacking.  Dr.  Crawford  has  never  paid  a  penny  for  the
facilities  accorded  him — often  at  the  cost  of  considerable
inconvenience — by  the  medium  and  her  family.  Nor
do  the  members  of  the  circle  encourage  the  promiscuous
introduction  of  persons  other  than  their  own  friends  ;
and  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  sittings  have  recently  been
restricted  solely  to  scientific  work.

previous  cases  that  we  must  exercise  considerable  care  in  "carrying  forward  "
past  experience  and  applying  it  in  this  ease.

The  records  of  earlier  investigators  who  claim  to  have  obtained  levifcations
without  contact  (cp.  Sir  William  Crookes'  "  Researches  in  Spiritualism  "  and  the
Naples  experiments  with  Eusapia  Palladino,  reported  in  Proc.  S.  P.  R. ,  Vol.  XXIII. )
are,  of  course,  greatly  strengthened,  if  we  accept  the  Belfast  phenomena  as
genuine.


lxxvii.] "  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena."  323

I  feel  that  it  amounts  to  something  very  like  an  imper-
tinence on  my  part  to  presume  to  testify  to  the  integrity
of  those  concerned  ;  but,  for  the  purpose  of  mere
scientific  record,  I  may  say  that  the  members  of  the  circle
struck  me  as  being  eminently  upright,  honourable  and
likeable  people  of  the  best  type — quite  incapable  of
practising  a  mean  and  objectless  trickery.

But  these  considerations,  however  much  they  may
weigh  with  those  who  have  come  under  their  immediate
influence,  cannot  be  expected  to  appeal  with  the  same
force  to  others  who  approach  the  subject  only  at  second
hand.  Nor  are  they  admissible  as  evidence  of  the  first
order  from  the  strictly  scientific  point  of  view.

It  is  right,  therefore,  for  the  purpose  of  the  immediate
discussion,  to  assume  that  the  desire  to  deceive  may  exist,
and  that  it  may  be  coupled  with  the  utmost  imaginable
cunning  and  ingenuity.

As  already  indicated,  my  own  strong  opinion  is  that
the  phenomena  are  genuine.  To  be  more  specific,  I
believe  that  when  the  table  is  levitated  it  is  not  supported
either  by  the  hands  or  feet  of  the  medium  or  of  any
member  or  members  of  the  circle,  or  by  any  mechanical
contrivance  devised  or  controlled  by  her  or  by  them  or
by  a  confederate.  I  do  not  mean  by  this,  of  course,
to  dissent  from  Dr.  Crawford's  "  cantilever "  theory,  with
which  I  entirely  agree  ;  but  this  is  not  a  "  mechanical
contrivance "  in  any  usual  sense  of  the  word.

I  think  the  reasons  supporting  this  view  may  conveni-
ently be  divided  into  two  groups.  First,  there  are  general
considerations  obtained  from  Dr.  Crawford's  own  records
and  from  the  comparison  of  this  case  with  preceding
cases  ;  and,  secondly,  those  arising  from  my  own  personal
observations.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  latter  inevitably
strengthen  the  former.  Even  a  single  sitting  by  an
independent  observer  is  a  very  valuable  check  on  the
original  observer's  work.  Unless  I  and  all  other  observers
who  have  seen  the  phenomena  are  ipso  facto  suspect,  it
eliminates  the  possibility  of  Dr.  Crawford  being  mad,  or
himself  implicated  in  a  fraud — and  even  such  far-fetched
possibilities  are  worth  putting  out  of  court.


324


W.  Whately  Smith.


[part


Again,  if  the  main  features  of  a  piece  of  work  of  this
kind  are  substantiated,  there  is  little  need  to  worry  about
the  minor  points.

As  regards  general  considerations,  then,  it  may  first
be  noted  that  a  comparison  of  such  features  of  this  case
as  exert  a  direct  influence  on  the  possibility  of  fraud
with  the  corresponding  features  of  preceding  cases  is
heavily  in  favour  of  these  phenomena  being  genuine.

This  comparison  is,  of  course,  essentially  a  matter  of
the  sense  of  differences,  not  of  their  mere  existence,  as  was
the  case  when  I  was  discussing  the  formation  of  a  priori
prepossessions,  and  includes  the  results  of  "  systematic
observation"  as  well  as  the  "superficial  characteristics."

(i)  It  is  well  known  that  a  trick  which  appears  mystify-
ing at  first  sight  is  easier  to  detect  every  time  that  it
is  repeated.  Dr.  Crawford  has  observed  some  hundreds
of  levitations,  has  worked  under  and  all  round  the  table,
both  with  and  without  apparatus,  and  the  conditions  of
observation have been uniformly  favourable.

(ii)  The  phenomena  occur  with  the  utmost  regularity.
It  is  easy  to  make  errors  of  observation  when  events
take  the  observer  by  surprise  and  when  it  is  necessary
to  look  for  everything  at  once.  But  this  is  not  the  case
when  a  phenomenon  is  repeated  again  and  again  at  the
word  of  command  and  with  variations  caused  only  by  the
observer's  own  modifications  of  conditions,  for  this  means
that  he  can  attend  to  various  points  one  by  one  and  with
any  amount  of  checking  that  he  pleases.

(ill)  The  lighting  has  been  good.  This  is  enormously
important,  for  our  sense  of  sight  is  by  far  the  most  reliable
that  we  possess,  and  without  its  help  an  investigation  is
very  heavily  handicapped.  I  do  not  know  of  any  well-
authenticated  case  of  phenomena  of  this  intensity  occurring
in  a  good  light,  except  perhaps  those  of  D.  D.  Home
many  years  ago.  But  in  this  case  the  light  available  for
observation  is  undeniably  good,  although  it  is,  of  course,
to  be  hoped  that  Dr.  Crawford  may  ultimately  be  able
to  use  a  much  stronger  light  by  finding  and  eliminating
the  particular  wave-lengths  which  prevent  phenomena
developing.


lxxvii.] "  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena."  325

(iv)  There  is  a  great  difference  between  quantitative
and  qualitative  work.  The  former,  which  has  been
abundant  in  this  case,  postulates  an  intimate  control  of
the  phenomena  and  cannot  be  extensively  undertaken
when  they  are  fugitive  or  sporadic.  Conditions  must  be
very  good  indeed  for  qualitative  observation  before  they
become  possible  for  quantitative  measurements.

(v)  Difficult  as  it  is  to  see  any  opening  for  fraud  at
all,  it  becomes  much  more  so  when  we  reflect  that  the
fraudulent  person  or  persons  would  have  been  obliged
not  only  to  simulate  the  phenomena  but  to  "  fake  "
the  readings  of  the  apparatus  at  the  same  time,  and,
moreover,  in  such  a  way  as  to  give  concordant  results
uniformly  pointing  towards  a  definite  theory,  and  main-
taining this  concordance  even  in  the  face  of  experiments
especially  designed  by  Dr.  Crawford  to  test  it,  and  whose
import  was  unknown  to  the  members  of  the  circle.

Dr.  Crawford  has  dealt  very  thoroughly  with  this  aspect
of  the  question  on  pp.  16-26  of  his  book,  and  there  is
therefore  no  need  for  me  to  enlarge  further  on  it.

(vi)  The  research  has  been  continuously  conducted
throughout  by  the  one  observer  only — with  checks  on  the
main  features  by  various  independent  observers,  such  as
myself.  It  is  clearly  far  more  difficult  for  a  trickster
to  maintain  a  deception  in  the  face  of  continuous  observa-
tion of  this  kind — unless  the  chief  investigator  is  quite
extraordinarily  gullible — than  it  is  in  cases  where  the
investigation  takes  the  non-cumulative  form  of  the  observa-
tion of  a  few  sittings  each  by  a  series  of  committees
who  do  not  know  quite  what  to  look  for  and  who  can
easily  be  put  off,  if  need  be,  by  a  sudden  "  failure  of
power,"  "  bad  conditions,"  or  the  like.

(vii)  As  already  pointed  out,  there  seems  no  motive  for
fraud.

In  addition  to  these  general  considerations  there  are
more  specific  reasons  for  believing  fraud  to  be  absent.

A  spurious  levitation  could  be  accomplished  in  one  of
three  ways  only :

(a)  The  medium  or  one  of  the  other  members  of  the
circle  might  use  their  hands  or  feet  directly.


326  W .  Whately  Smith.  [part

(b)  They  might  use  hands  or  feet  indirectly,  that  is  to
say,  by  the  intermediary  of  rods,  clamps  or  similar
appliances.

(c)  A  special  and  elaborate  apparatus  might  be  installed,
operating,  e.g.  through  trap-doors  in  the  floor,  and  con-
trolled either  by  a  member  of  the  circle  or  by  a  con-
federate.

The  last  possibility  is  inserted  only  for  the  sake  of
logical  completeness.  It  may  be  eliminated  at  once,  for,
in  addition  to  its  inherent  improbability,  it  must  be  re-
membered that  all  the  principal  phenomena  in  question
have,  on  occasion,  been  produced  in  Dr.  Crawford's  house
and  in  various  other  rooms.  The  direct  or  indirect  use
of  hands  is  also  eliminated,  because,  as  already  stated,
I  have  myself  twice  seen  the  sitters  raise  their  joined
hands  above  their  heads  while  the  table  was  levitated
clear  of  the  ground.

We  are  left  with  the  possibihty  of  the  direct  or  indirect
use  of  feet  by  the  medium  or  a  member  of  the  circle.

The  members  of  the  circle  other  than  the  medium  may
be  left  out  of  the  question,  because,  in  the  first  place,
all  Dr.  Crawford's  quantitative  work  goes  to  show  that
the  medium  is  primarily  responsible  for  the  phenomena,
and,  in  the  second,  during  the  time  I  was  within  the
circle  myself  I  moved  all  round  the  table  except  into  the
space  between  it  and  the  medium.  This  would  have
prevented  any  member  of  the  circle  from  using  his  or
her  feet,  because  my  own  legs  would  have  been  in  the
way.

The  question,  therefore,  reduces  to  whether  the  medium
uses  her  feet  or  not.

The  following  points  seem  to  me  to  answer  this  satis-
factorily :

(i)  I  tried  to  lift  the  table  with  my  feet  myself  but
failed.  The  legs  have  no  cross-bars  and  it  is  impossible
to  get  a  proper  grip.

(ii)  When  the  table  was  levitated  I  was  in  a  position
to  see  each  leg  in  turn  against  the  light  from  the  stove —
as  already  explained — and  there  was  nothing  in  contact
with  any  of  them.


lxxvii.] "  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena."


327


(iii)  When  the  table  was  thrown  into  the  horizontal
position  with  the  legs  pointing  towards  the  medium  there
was,  naturally,  no  shadow  thrown  by  its  top  to  hinder
observation.  In  this  position  all  four  legs  were  clearly
visible  simultaneously  and  were  not  in  contact  with  any-
thing.

(iv)  In  the  course  of  the  proceedings  the  table  moved
to  a  distance  of  at  least  four  feet  from  the  medium,
which  is  well  beyond  the  reach  of  a  person  sitting  up-
right in  a  chair.

(v)  The  leverage  exerted  by  a  ten-pound  table  at  a
radius  of  the  legs  is  considerable,  as  anyone  may  test  for
themselves.  Even  if  it  were  possible  for  the  medium,
by  long  practice  or  the  use  of  specially  devised  clamps,
to  raise  the  table  from  the  ground,  it  would  be  physically
impossible  for  her  to  keep  it  steady  for  any  length  of
time.  This  is  doubly  so  when  the  very  heavy  pressures
exerted  by  myself  are  taken  into  account.

(vi)  I  know  a  little  of  the  way  muscle  behaves  when
fatigued.  Throughout  the  seance  the  table  moved  with
a  poise  and  precision  which  did  not  at  all  convey  the
impression  of  muscular  action.

(vii)  When  the  table  was  levitated  I  tried  the  effect
of  pushing  it  in  various  directions.  The  direction  of
maximum  resistance  was  about  45°  downwards  and  to-
wards the  medium.  This  is  just  about  the  least  favour-
able angle  for  resistance  on  the  assumption  that  the
medium  was  using  her  feet,  because  at  that  angle  my
pressure  would  exert  an  approximately  maximal  turning
moment  about  the  medium's  hips.  The  direction  most
favourable  for  resistance  would,  of  course,  be  along  the
line  of  the  legs — i.e.  more  or  less  horizontally  towards  the
medium,  but  somewhat  upwards,  since  she  could  not  raise
her  legs  above  the  horizontal  without  moving  her  knees,
which  were  in  full  view.  In  practice  the  resistance
was  extraordinary  and  quite  beyond  the  medium's  normal
physical  power.

(viii)  At  the  time  that  I  was  within  the  circle  until
I  was  pushed  to  its  confines  by  the  table,  I  was  within
three feet of the medium, and, as already  explained,


328  W.  Whately  Smith.  [part

I  could  see  clearly  the  whole  of  her  body  down  to  her
knees.  Even  if  we  postulate  the  most  ingenious  mechan-
ism for  grasping  the  table  and  a  physical  strength  on
the  part  of  the  medium  quite  disproportionate  to  her
weight  and  general  build,  it  is  surely  impossible  that  she
could  have  sat  absolutely  motionless,  as  she  did,  while
the  table  writhed  and  twisted  beneath  my  hands  with
the  utmost  violence.

(ix)  Several  times  while  pushing  hard  against  the  table
I  suddenly  relaxed  my  pressure.  If  the  medium  had
been  pushing  against  me  she  could  not  have  restrained  a
synchronous  jerk. No  such  movement  took  place.

In  concluding  this  account  of  my  reasons  for  believing
the  phenomena  to  be  wholly  genuine  I  cannot  refrain
from  saying  that  I  consider  that  a  certain  onus  pro-
bandi  rests  with  those  who  support  the  theory  of  fraud  as
well  as  on  those  who  do  not.  No  accusation  of  trickery
should  be  made  unless  its  author  is  prepared  to  show,
roughly,  at  any  rate,  how  such  trickery  could  be  effected.
I  do  not  think  anyone  has  answered  Dr.  Crawford's  chal-
lenge (see  pp.  21-26),  but,  speaking  as  one  to  whom  the
explanation  of  fraud  has  always  seemed  the  most  likely
in  these  cases,  I  should  be  exceedingly  interested  to  hear
of  any  really  plausible  explanation  on  these  lines,  if  any
reader  can  produce  one,  which  will  cover  the  facts  and  con-
tains a  sketch  of  the  '  modus  operandi.'

It  may  be  noted  here  that  Dr.  Crawford's  work  has
already  had  the  effect  of  greatly  lightening  the  labours
of  future  students  of  telekinetic  phenomena.  When
next  we  find  a  good  case  of  the  type,  we  need  not  begin
de  novo  groping  in  the  dark.  We  can  get  to  work
light  away  confirming  his  fundamental  experiments  and
following  up  the  methods  which  he  has  inaugurated.
This  should  result  in  a  great  economy  of  time  and  of
rare  material.

IV.

In  view  of  the  reasons  which  I  have  adduced  in  support
of  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena  it  seems  permissible


lxxvii.] "  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena.'"  329

to  conclude  with  some  observations  based  on  the  assump-
tion that  fraud  may  be  regarded  as  eliminated.

I  do  not  propose  to  discuss  the  ultimate  origin  of  the
phenomena,  or  whether  the  controlling  intelligence  is  in-
carnate or  discarnate,  a  primary  or  a  secondary  person-
ality. Such  questions,  associated  with  the  problem  of
survival,  do  not  constitute  the  principal  and  peculiar  interest
of  phenomena  of  this  type.  The  evidence  for  survival
must  always  reduce  to  a  matter  of  identity  and  of  identity
alone,  and  although  the  evidential  matter  necessary  for
its  study  may  be  obtained  by  "  physical  "  phenomena —
e.g.  by  raps — its  evidential  value,  if  any,  is  to  be  found  in
its  content  and  not  in  the  manner  by  which  it  is  received.

The  peculiar  interest  of  telekinetic  phenomena  lies,
then,  in  their  proximate  rather  than  their  ultimate  causes.
There  can  be  no  doubt,  in  this  case  at  least,  that  they
are  directed  by  an  intelligence  of  some  kind  or  other,
and  it  follows  that  we  have  a  case  of  a  Consciousness 1
acting  upon  matter  otherwise  than  through  the  usual
intermediary  of  brain,  nerve  and  muscle  to  which  we
are  accustomed.

This  being  so,  it  is  clearly  probable  that  a  study  of
the  means  whereby  this  control  is  exercised  may  throw
light  on  the  relation  which  matter  and  consciousness  bear
to  one  another.

Consciousness  normally  acts  on  matter  through  the  body,
and  hitherto  we  have  not  succeeded  in  discovering  the
precise  nature  of  the  connection  between  the  two,  largely
by  reason  of  the  experimental  difficulties  involved.

In  this  case  some  mechanism,  using  the  word  in  its
widest  sense,  seems  to  be  employed  which  must  be  of  a
very  different  nature.

On  the  one  hand,  since  it  is  under  intelligent  control,
it  must  be  in  contact,  so  to  speak,  with  Consciousness  ;
on  the  other,  since  it  affects  matter,  it  must  be  quasi-
physical.

1 "  Consciousness "  is  admittedly  a  somewhat  vague  and  controversial
word  to  use  here.  It  must  not  be  taken  as  indicating  any  special  philosophic
or  metaphysical  doctrine  on  my  part  beyond  a  general  belief  in  the  "  trans-
missive  "  view  of  the  relation  between  brain  and  consciousness.


330


W.  Whately  Smith.


[part


It  forms,  as  it  were,  a  mean  proportional  between  the
physical  and  mental  realms,  and  if  we  succeed  in  elucidat-
ing its  precise  nature  we  shall,  I  believe,  have  obtained
the  missing  link  which  will  enable  us  to  understand  some-
thing of  the  relation  between  the  two  and  to  express
both  in  terms  of  a  common  and  coherent  whole.

This  might  almost  be  described  as  the  primary  aim
of  Psychic  and  Psychological  Science.

The  results  so  far  obtained  by  Dr.  Crawford  do  not
enable  us  to  form  any  definite  conclusions  on  the  subject
of  a  positive  nature.  They  do,  however,  allow  us  to
eliminate  certain  possibilities  with  considerable  assurance.

I  do  not  propose  to  deal  with  the  sort  of  explanation
which  speaks  vaguely  of  undefined  "  forces  "  or  "  negative
gravity  "  or  postulates  the  existence  of  an  "  etheric
duplicate"  of  the  material  table.  These  fantastic  "ex-
planations "  simply  do  not  explain  :  for  explanation
consists  essentially  of  the  restatement  of  the  highly  obscure
in  terms  of  the  less  obscure  and  is  not  effected  by  the
introduction  of  new  concepts  as  unintelligible  as  the
original  problem.

It  is  therefore  necessary,  in  accordance  with  the  uni-
versal scientific  principle  of  minimum  assumption,  to
exhaust  all  known  modes  of  action  and  analogues  thereof
before  launching  out  into  entirely  unprecedented  lines  of
speculation.

This  method  has  been  pursued  by  Dr.  Crawford  with
the  happiest  results.

Before  dealing  with  the  line  of  explanation  to  which
he  has  been  led  I  will  first  mention  one  or  two  possibilities
which  may  be  definitely  eliminated  from  the  start.

Matter  moves  only  when  force  is  applied  to  it,  and  forces
may  normally  be  transmitted  in  one  of  two  ways  only.

(i)  Through  the  intermediary  of  matter,  e.g.  by  the
direct  action  of  a  mechanical  structure  capable  of  trans-
mitting tension,  compression,  torque  or  shear,  or  by  the
impact  of  material  particles  as  in  the  case  of  the  pressure
of  a  gas.

(ii)  Without  the  intervention  of  matter,  that  is  to  say,
when  the  force  is  transmitted  solely  by  the  ether,  as  in


lxxvii.] "  The  Reality  of  Psychic,  Phenomena."  331

electrical  or  magnetic  actions  or  gravitation.  In  all
cases  of  this  class  the  forces  obey  the  law  of  inverse
squares  and  are  propagated  rectilinearly.

The  whole  of  this  second  type  of  force  transmitted  may
safely  be  rejected  at  once.  The  behaviour  of  the  table
in  no  way  resembles  the  effect  of  any  of  the  forces  com-
prised in  this  group.  I  am  sure  that  no  one  who  has
seen  the  phenomena  and  has  any  acquaintance  with  the
nature  of  electro-magnetic  forces  could  possibly  think
that  the  movements  of  the  table  are  produced  by  the
action  of  any  force  obeying  the  inverse  square  law  and
emanating  from  the  medium  or  any  other  source  or
sources.

The  same  applies  to  any  supposition  that  the  table  is
bombarded  by  a  stream  of  material  particles  projected
from  the  medium  or  elsewhere.  This  idea  is  negatived
by  the  normal  absence  of  any  reaction  on  the  floor  verti-
cally under  the  table,  by  the  failure  of  a  manometer
to  detect  any  pressure  and  by  the  extreme  rapidity
with  which  the  force  changes  its  direction.

I  may  say,  however,  that  although  this  line  of  explana-
tion seems  untenable  in  its  simplest  form,  I  should  not
be  surprised  to  find  that  it  entered  into  the  complete
explanation  in  a  modified  form  and  in  an  ancillary
capacity.

As  opposed  to  these  possibilities,  with  which  the  observed
phenomena  present  no  analogy,  we  find  a  striking  and
indeed  perfect  resemblance  to  the  simplest  of  all  forms
of  force  transmission,  namely,  a  rigid  structure.

The  direction  and  magnitude  of  the  forces  measured
correspond  accurately  with  those  which  would  obtain,
if  the  connection  between  the  medium  and  the  table
were  a  material  beam  of  a  certain  shape  and  possessing
considerable  rigidity.

Dr.  Crawford  has  been  at  pains  to  test  this  hypothesis
by  deduction  and  experiment,  and  the  results  have  been
uniformly  coherent  and  confirmatory.  We  may  therefore
say,  at  least,  that  although  we  can  neither  see  nor  feel
any  material  structure  between  the  medium  and  the  table,
yet  the  latter  behaves  precisely  as  if  such a  structure


332


W.  Whatehj  Smith.


[PAET


were  there.  Not  only  is  this  the  case  as  regards  the
forces  called  into  play  during  the  phenomena,  but,  in
addition,  it  is  possible  to  locate  the  structure  and  to
determine  approximately  its  size  and  form  by  observing
in  what  positions  an  interposed  solid  object  causes  the
levitated  table  to  drop,  and  by  tracing  out  the  lines  of
stress  in  the  space  between  the  medium  and  the  table.
These  methods  confirm  the  conclusions  drawn  from  measure-
ments of  the  forces.

At  this  point  we  are  faced  by  a  somewhat  awkward
dilemma.  Short  of  denying  the  facts — a  course  which  I
hold  to  be  unjustifiable  on  the  evidence — we  must  admit
one  of  two  things.

Either  we  must  say  that  there  exists  a  concatenation
of  forces  of  an  entirely  unknown  nature  and  so  adjusted
as  to  produce  a  perfect  but  illusory  simulacrum  of  a
rigid  cantilever,  or  we  must  admit  that  there  can  exist
a  material,  or  quasi-material,  structure  which  combines
the  properties  of  rigidity  and  impalpability.

The  former  is  in  every  Avay  unsatisfactory  ;  it  is  un-
precedented and  quite  fails  to  throw  any  real  light  on
the  subject.  The  latter  is  a  mechanical  contradiction  in
terms.

None  the  less,  it  is  the  second  alternative  which  I
think  we  should  adopt.  Most,  if  not  all,  scientific  dis-
coveries have  originated  in  the  observation  of  facts  which
at  first  sight  have  appeared  incompatible,  and  have
remained  so  until  the  unifying  clue  has  been  forth-
coming.

I  believe  that  the  whole  essence  of  the  problem  before
us  in  this  case  lies  in  the  reconciliation  of  these  contra-
dictory properties  of  the  cantilever.

When  we  have  solved  the  secret  of  its  rigidity — or
even  got  so  far  as  to  imagine  any  means  whereby  that
rigidity  could  be  obtained — I  believe  we  shall  hold  in  our
hands  the  key  which  will  in  time  unlock  most  of  the
closed  doors  which  at  present  confront  us  in  the  investiga-
tion of  Psychic  forces.

At  the  present  time  I  do  not  think  that  we  are  in  a
position even to adumbrate the final solution of  the


lxxvii.] "  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena."  333

mystery,  and  in  this  vague  and  somewhat  unsatisfactory
state  I  must  be  content  to  leave  the  subject.

But  before  we  can  hope  to  solve  any  problem  we  must
first  be  assured  of  the  phenomena,  which  give  rise  to  it,
and  then  narrow  the  investigation  down  to  the  minimum
number  of  specific  points  by  the  elimination  of  all
irrelevant  details  and  untenable  possibilities.

It  is  in  these  preliminary  steps  that  I  hope  the  pre-
ceding paragraphs  may  be  of  some  slight  value.


334


Sir  William  Barrett.


[part


V.

REPORT  OF  PHYSICAL  PHENOMENA  TAKING  PLACE
AT  BELFAST  WITH  DPv.  CRAWFORD'S  MEDIUM,
read  to  the  Council  of  the  S.P.R.  on  January  8,  1916.

By  Sir  William  Barrett,  F.R.S.

Dr.  Crawford,  lecturer  on  Mechanical  Engineering  at
the  Queen's  University  and  Technical  College,  Belfast,
has  for  several  months  been  investigating  the  remarkable
physical  phenomena  which  take  place  in  a  small  family
circle  of  working  people  in  Belfast.  The  medium  is  the
eldest  daughter,  Kathleen,  a  girl  of  about  seventeen.
Dr.  Crawford  has  described  in  Light  the  very  interesting
mechanical  arrangements  he  has  devised  to  test  the  weight
of  the  medium  simultaneously  with  that  of  the  table
which  is  levitated,  and  also  of  the  forces  apparently  eman-
ating from  the  medium,  and  has  determined  the  direction
as  well  as  amount  of  these  forces.

Through  Dr.  Crawford's  kindness  I  was  permitted  to
join  the  circle  in  Belfast,  during  the  Christmas  vacation,
1915,  and  was  allowed  to  bring  with  me  a  medical  friend,
Dr.  W.,  who  kindly  consented  to  make  any  pathological
or  physical  examinations  of  the  medium  that  might  be
necessary.

The  sitting  took  place  at  the  residence  of  the  medium's
family,  a  small  upper  room  having  been  regularly  used  for
the  sittings.  This  room  was  lighted  by  an  incandescent
gas  burner,  and  a  flat  flame  gas  burner  inside  a
lamp  with  a  large  pane  of  red  glass  on  the  side  facing
the  circle.  The  circle  of  seven  persons  sat  round  a  small
table  and  each  clasped  hands  with  the  adjoining  sitter.
We  sat  just  outside,  and  close  to,  the  circle.  After
some  hymns  had  been  sung,  the  gas  burner  was  turned  off,


lxxvii.]  Report  of  Physical  Phenomena.


335


and  the  red  light  illuminated  the  room  •  sufficiently  to
enable  us  to  see  the  sitters  and  the  table.  The  gas  flame
inside  the  red  lantern  was  at  my  request  subsequently
raised,  so  that  there  was  quite  enough  light  to  see  the
objects  and  sitters  in  the  room.  A  tin  trumpet  stood
beloAV  the  table,  the  latter  had  four  legs,  with  no  cross
bar  on  two  sides,  but  a  cross  bar  between  the  legs  on  the
two shorter sides, away from the  medium.

Knocks  soon  came  and  answered  questions.  Three
knocks  for  yes,  two  for  doubtful,  and  one  for  no.  Mes-
sages were  also  slowly  spelt  out  by  repeating  the  alphabet
aloud,  a  knock  coming  at  the  right  letter.  The  knocks
appeared  in  some  cases  to  come  from  the  table,  at  others
from  outside  the  circle.  Suddenly  a  very  loud  knock
came  in  response  to  a  request,  and  was  repeated  with
violence.  Dr.  W.  asked  for  it  to  be  still  louder,  and
a  tremendous  bang  then  came,  which  shook  the  room  and
resembled  the  blow  of  a  sledge  hammer  on  an  anvil.
After  the  sitting  we  examined  the  feet  of  the  sitters  and
all  had  felt  slippers  on,  except  one  who  had  light  shoes,
and  none  could  have  produced  these  sounds  with  their
feet.

Then  came  some  remarkable  sounds  resembling  the
sawing  of  wood,  the  boring  of  timber,  and  the  bouncing
of  a  ball.  First  a  small  ball  bouncing  up  and  down,
and  then  apparently  a  larger  ball  bouncing  up  and  down,
the  gradual  dying  away  of  the  sounds  as  the  ball  came
to  rest  very  cleverly  reproduced.

The  trumpet  below  the  table  then  began  to  move  about,
and  the  smaller  end  poked  itself  from  under  the  top  of
the  table  towards  Dr.  W.  and  myself.  We  were  allowed
to  try  and  catch  it,  but  in  spite  of  all  our  endeavours
it  eluded  us,  darting  in  and  out  and  changing  its  position
as  we  tried  to  seize  it.  The  medium  was  on  the  opposite
side  of  the  table  to  us  and  all  the  circle  held  up  their
hands — so  that  we  could  see  each  linked  hand  clearly —
as  the  trumpet  played  hide  and  seek  with  us.

Then  the  table  began  to  rise  from  the  floor,  until  it
reached  a  height  of  some  twelve  or  eighteen  inches,  and
remained thus suspended and quite level. We  were


336


Sir  William  Barrett.


[part


allowed,  first  myself  and  then  Dr.  W.,  to  go  beneath
the  clasped  hands  of  the  sitters  into  the  circle  and
try  to  force  the  table  down.  This  both  of  us  found  it
impossible  to  do  ;  though  we  laid  hold  of  the  sides  of  the
table  it  resisted  our  strongest  efforts  to  push  it  down.  I
then  sat  on  the  table  when  it  was  about  a  foot  off  the
floor  and  it  swayed  me  about,  finally  tipping  me  off.

We  then  returned  outside  the  circle,  when  the  table
turned  itself  upside  down  and  moved  up  and  down  with
the  legs  uppermost.  Again  we  entered  the  circle  and
tried  to  lift  the  table  top  from  the  floor,  but  it  appeared
riveted,  and  we  were  unable  to  stir  it.  When  we  resumed  our
place  outside  the  circle,  the  table  floated  up  and  turned
itself  over  again  with  its  right  side  uppermost.  During
these  experiments  and  whilst  the  table  was  levitated,  all
the  sitters  repeatedly  held  up  their  clasped  hands,  so  that
we  could  see  no  one  had  any  contact  with  the  table,  they
were  in  fact  so  far  from  it  that  we  could  walk  between
them  and  the  table.

Other  knockings  came,  and  then  the  knocks  bid  us  good-
night by  rapping  two  or  three  times  to  each  person  in
succession,  particularly  loud  knocks  being  given  to  Dr.
W.  and  myself.

The  circle  then  sang  the  Doxology,  and  offered  up
prayer,  and  the  sitting  terminated.

The  next  evening  Dr.  Crawford  had  arranged  his  tests
with  weighing  machines,  and  Dr.  W.  took  the  pulse  and
breathing  of  the  medium,  with  the  object  of  noting
any  change  during  the  manifestations.  After  half  an
hour  of  waiting  and  hymns,  knocks  came  and  a  message
was  sjDelt  out,  "  We  are  sorry  we  cannot  give  any  demon-
strations to-night."  Asked  if  we,  the  visitors,  were  the
cause,  "  No  "  was  replied.  Could  we  remove  the  cause  ?
"  No."  Was  the  cause  on  their  side,  a  spiritual  one  ?
"  No." Was  it  a  material  cause  ? "  Yes."

After  the  previous  sitting  Dr.  W.  had  made  some  trials
of  lifting  the  table  by  putting  the  feet  beneath  the  short
cross  bars  of  the  table.  This  could  be  done  clumsily,  and
the  table  raised  (but  not  level)  for  a  few  inches.  So  the
next  evening  we  went  provided  with  a  long  strip  of  paper


lxxvii.]  Report  of  Physical  Phenomena.


337


to  paste  round  the  lower  part  of  the  table,  to  prevent
these  cross  bars  being  used  if  the  medium  attempted  to
lift  the  table  in  this  way.  What  was  our  surprise  to  find
the  cross  bars  had  been  sawn  off  close  to  the  legs  ;  then
we  were  told  that  our  trials  had  shown  that  the  table
could  be  partly  lifted  by  the  feet  under  the  cross  bars,
and  so  thej^  had  sawn  off  the  bars  to  remove  any  sus-
picion. We  asked  the  unseen  friends  if  this  caused  the
manifestation  to  cease,  and  were  told  "  no,"  but  we  should
have  asked  them  about  it  beforehand.  Finally  we  were
led  to  infer  the  material  cause  was  in  the  medium  herself.
After  the  circle  had  broken  up  Dr.  W.  remained  behind
and  examined  the  medium,  and  found  that  she  was
suffering  from  a  feminine  disorder  that  evening.  It  was
useless  to  sit  again  until  the  medium  was  well,  so  we
returned  to  Dublin  the  next  day ;  but  were  cordially
invited  to  .go  again  later  on.  which  I  hope  to  do.

[Since  Sir  William  Barrett  has  had  no  further  opportunity  of
studying  Miss  Kathleen  Golighers  phenomena,  we  now  print  his
short  preliminary  report  as  given  above.  Ed.]


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

PART  LXXVIII.
December,  1919.


ON  A  SERIES  OF  SITTINGS  WITH  MRS.  OSBORNE

LEONARD.

By  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  (Una)  Lady  Troubridge.

INTRODUCTION.

When  extracts  from  this  paper  were  read  at  the  meetings
of  the  Society  in  January  and  March  1918,  we  mentioned
the  possibility  of  the  publication,  at  a  later  date,  of  a
fuller  report  on  the  series  of  sittings  held  by  us  with
Mrs.  Osborne  Leonard  between  August,  1916,  and  August,
1917.

As  is  well  known,  Mrs.  Leonard  is  a  professional  medium,
and  she  has  always  received  her  customary  fee  from  us.
We  are  well  aware  that  many  members  of  the  Society
look  askance  upon  professional  mediums,  and  that  the
attitude  of  the  Society  as  a  whole  has  always  been
largely  sceptical  of  evidence  received  through  paid
mediumship.  Mrs.  Leonard  is  more  or  less  at  the
disposal  of  any  member  of  the  public  who  can  prove
him  or  herself  a  bona  fide  inquirer.  Therefore,  as  we
propose  to  base  this  paper  on  evidence  received  through
a  professional  medium,  we  feel  that  it  is  incumbent  upon
us to  preface that evidence by  a short  resume  of  the


340  Miss  Radclyffe-Hatt  and  Lady  Trouhridge.  [part

circumstances  connected  with  our  earliest  investigations
of  Mrs.  Leonard's  phenomena.

1 1  first  heard  of  Mrs.  Leonard  through  a  lady  who
had  written  to  Mr.  J.  Arthur  Hill  for  advice.  As  far  as
I  can  remember  this  was  either  at  the  end  of  July  or
at  the  beginning  of  August,  1916.  This  lady  requested
me  to  test  Mrs.  Leonard  on  my  own  behalf  and  hers,
for  although  I  was  not  an  experienced  investigator,  she
considered  that  I  should  be  an  impartial  judge  of  evidence
received.  I  therefore  went  to  Mrs.  Leonard's  flat  to
arrange  for  a  sitting.  Mrs.  Leonard  was  away,  and  a
friend  of  hers  who  was  taking  charge  of  the  flat,  told  me
that  it  would  be  necessary  for  her  to  write  to  Mrs.  Leonard,
and  requested  me  to  leave  my  name  and  address.  This
I  refused  to  do,  promising  to  call  again  in  three  days
time  for  my  answer.  In  three  days  time  I  did  so,  and
an  appointment  was  given  me  for  August  16th,  1916,
at  3  p.m.  On  leaving  Mrs.  Leonard's  flat  I  went  directly
to  the  station,  and  thence  to  the  country,  not  returning
to  London  till  the  day  of  the  sitting.  I  addressed  no
conversation  to  Mrs.  Leonard  prior  to  my  sitting,  beyond
thanking  her  for  the  appointment,  and  she  went  quietly
into  trance.  Her  control,  Feda,  began  by  describing  a
young  soldier  ;  I  did  not  recognise  him,  and  said  so,
asking  if  there  were  no  other  communicators  wishing  to
speak.  It  seemed  that  there  were,  for  I  very  soon  got
the  description  of  a  great  friend  of  mine  who  had  died
some  months  previously.  Later  on  we  shall  give  an
extract  from  that  first  sitting.

The  description  was  brief,  but  unmistakeable  ;  except
my  friend,  whom  it  fitted  exactly,  I  had  lost  no  one
to  whom  it  corresponded '  in  the  very  least.  After  Mrs.
Leonard  had  been  in  trance  for  what  I  think  must  have
been  a  little  over  half  an  hour,  Feda  complained  that
my  friend  was  an  inexperienced  communicator,  and  would
probably  get  on  much  better  if  I  had  a  table-sitting.
Feda  therefore  withdrew  and  the  medium  awoke  suddenly.  I

1  Throughout  this  paper  the  first  person  singular  refers  to  Miss  Radcryffe-
Hall,  by  whom  extracts  from  it  were  read  at  two  meetings  of  the  Society
on  January  31st  and  March  22nd,  1918.


lxxvue.]  Introduction.  341

told  Mrs.  Leonard  what  had  happened  and  we  had  a
table-sitting.  Mrs.  Leonard  had  both  her  hands  on  the
table,  but  for  the  best  part  of  the  time  only  one  of  my
hands  rested  on  the  table,  as  I  was  taking  notes  with
the  other.  My  friend  immediately  gave  her  full  name
through  the  table,  though  I  should  have  preferred  her
not  to  do  so.  She  also  gave  the  name  of  a  place  to
which  we  had  been  together.  When  the  table  spelt  out
"  Do  you  remember  a  place  we  went  to,  called —
I  instantly  thought  of  Orotava,  a  town  that  had  been
visited  by  my  friend  and  myself.  For  some  reason  I
felt  almost  certain  that  this  name  would  come,  but,
curiously  enough,  instead  of  getting  it  I  got  the  name
"  Watergate."  I  recognised  the  name,  and  asked  if  it
had  another  name  as  well,  to  which  the  table  replied,
"  Yes,  Bay."  Now  Watergate  Bay  was  the  last  place
visited  by  myself  and  my  friend  prior  to  her  death.  We
fully  realise  that  the  influence  of  the  subliminal  and
supraliminal  minds  must  to  a  certain  extent  be  dis-
counted, especially  in  table- sittings,  when  at  least  one  of
the  sitters  is  cognisant  of  the  facts  given ;  and  although
what  was  given  at  this  sitting  appears  to  eliminate  con-
scious fraud,  nothing  was  obtained  through  the  table
which  could  not  be  accounted  for  by  unconscious  muscular
guidance  by  those  who  incline  to  that  hypothesis.  It
will  remain  for  the  reader  to  decide  at  the  end  of  our
paper,  whether  another  hypothesis,  namely,  that  of  tele-
pathy between  the  living,  is  an  adequate  explanation  of
the  subsequent  trance-sittings  with  which  we  propose  to
deal.

After  the  first  sitting,  at  which  I  alone  was  present,
acting  as  my  own  recorder,  I  had  another  table-sitting
with  Mrs.  Leonard  on  August  25th,  1916,  for  the  benefit
of  the  lady  through  whom  I  had  originally  heard  of  Mrs.
Leonard.  This  lady  accompanied  me  in  order  to  take
notes.  We  were,  of  course,  both  anonymous.  The  results
of  this  second  table  sitting  were  practically  nil.  Mrs.
Leonard  complained  that  the  weather  was  very  damp.
For  whatever  reason,  there  was  an  immense  amount  of
confusion  and  no  sensible  messages  were  obtained  for  either


342  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

my  friend  or  myself.  I  did  not  again  go  to  Mrs.  Leonard
until  October  2nd,  1916,  when  I  visited  her  together  with
Lady  Troubridge.  We  went  as  anonymous  sitters  recom-
mended by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  I  asked  Mrs.  Leonard
whether  she  remembered  me ;  she  said  that  she  thought  she
did,  but  could  not  be  certain  as  she  saw  so  many  people.
I  took  the  sitting,  Lady  Troubridge  acting  as  recorder.
The  control  Feda  recognised  me  immediately,  not  by
name,  of  course,  but  as  having  sat  before.  After  this
sitting  of  October  2nd,  1916,  we  arranged  for  a  series  of
regular  sittings.  For  the  first  five  months  of  our  weekly
sittings  with  this  medium — and  we  sat  sometimes
oftener  than  once  a  week — neither  Lady  Troubridge  nor
I  ever  visited  her  alone,  one  or  other  of  us  always  acting
as  recorder.  The  recorder  bore  specially  in  mind  the
importance  of  taking  down  everything  said  by  the  sitter,
and  equally  careful  notes  were  made  of  any  conversations
held  with  the  medium  in  a  normal  state,  before  and
after  the  sittings,  which  conversations  were  invariably
brief.

There  is  another  statement  which  we  think  it  is  well
to  make.  During  those  early  sittings  descriptions  were
received  of  The  White  Cottage,  at  Malvern  Wells,  a  house
much  loved  by  my  deceased  friend  and  myself,  together
with  a  description  of  characteristic  features  of  the  neigh-
bourhood and  references  to  the  neighbours.

There  appeared  to  be  only  two  possible  explanations
of  the  descriptions  in  question  :  either  the  knowledge
displayed  by  Mrs.  Leonard,  when  in  trance,  was  obtained
in  some  supernormal  manner ;  or  else  pretty  extensive
enquiries  had  been  made  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Malvern
Wells.  We  had  absolutely  no  reason  to  doubt  Mrs.
Leonard's  integrity,  but  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that
my  friend's  name  had  been  received  through  the  table,
and  that  we  had  in  those  days  very  little  first-hand
knowledge  of  Mrs.  Leonard's  phenomena.  It  has  always
appeared  to  us  that  those  who  are  engaged  upon  such
a  momentous  investigation  as  that  of  phenomena  pur-
porting to  be  occasioned  by  discamate  human  beings,
should  leave  no  stone  unturned  to  make  each  step  of  the


LXXVIII.]


Introduction.


343


ground  as  sure  as  possible  before  proceeding.  I  therefore
felt  it  incumbent  upon  me  to  employ  a  good  detective
agency,  and  from  this  agency  I  received  a  report  on
November  14th,  1916.

As  the  result  of  their  investigations  at  Malvern  Wells
and  in  the  surrounding  district,  it  was  ascertained  that
no  enquiries  regarding  myself  or  my  deceased  friend  had
been  made  from  any  likely  sources  of  information  since
her  death.  No  such  enquiries  would  have  been  made  prior
to  her  death  by  a  fraudulent  medium,  as  during  her  life-
time neither  she,  nor  I,  nor  Lady  Troubridge  had  ever
visited  a  medium,  or  taken  any  interest  in  Psychical
Research.

The  detective  also  by  my  instructions  made  some
enquiries  in  London,  but  here  again  he  failed  to  discover
anything  suspicious.  As,  however,  the  description  of  The
White  Cottage  touched  upon  its  interior,  I  did  not  stop  short
at  the  detective's  report.  I  wrote  to  the  lady  who  had
taken  possession  of  the  house  immediately  after  I  left,
and  I  fear  that  I  descended  to  subterfuge  in  order  to
avoid  creating  a  bias.  I  worded  my  letter  as  expressing
the  hope  that  a  person  from  the  Colonies,  known  to
my  deceased  friend  and  myself,  and  who  had  expressed
a  wish  to  see  over  the  house,  had  been  permitted  to
do  so.  It  struck  us  at  the  time  that  some  pretext
of  this  sort  would  probably  be  used  by  a  fraudulent
person  wishing  to  gain  admittance  to  the  house.  From
the  lady  I  obtained  a  reply  to  the  effect  that  no
friend  had  called  at  The  White  Cottage  requesting  to  see
over  it.  At  a  later  date  Lady  Troubridge  and  I  visited
Malvern  Wells  ourselves  for  the  purpose  of  making  some
enquiries  personally,  the  results  of  which  again  proved
favourable  to  the  medium.  I  also  wrote  to  my  former
head-gardener  at  The  White  Cottage,  who  had  joined  the
Army,  but  who,  as  I  knew,  was  in  the  habit  of  visiting
Malvern  Wells  from  time  to  time,  and  he  assured  me  that
nobody  had  ever  questioned  him  regarding  myself  or  my
deceased  friend.  All  the  correspondence  with  regard  to  this
matter  of  investigating  Mrs.  Leonard's  honesty  is  in  our
possession.


344 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

We  have  recently  informed  Mrs.  Leonard  of  the  fact
that  detectives  were  employed  by  us  in  connection  with
her  phenomena,  and  she  fully  realised  that  the  reports
furnished  by  the  detectives  represented  a  valuable  testi-
monial to  the  genuineness  of  her  powers.

With  regard  to  the  extracts  from  the  sittings  with
which  we  propose  to  deal,  the  purporting  communicator
has  on  every  occasion  except  one  been  my  friend  of
whom  a  description  was  given  at  the  first  sitting.  On
the  one  occasion  when  she  was  not  the  principal  com-
municator, I  was  given  to  understand  at  a  later  sitting
that  she  had  been  instrumental  in  helping  Feda  to  get
messages  through.  My  friend  will  be  alluded  to  in  the
sittings  as  A.  V.  B.,  I  shall  appear  as  M.  R.  H.,  and
Lady  Troubridge  as  U.  V.  T.  Feda  is  in  the  habit  of
addressing  me  as  "  Mrs.  Twonnie,"  her  own  version  of
the  name  by  which  I  am  often  called,  and  Lady  Trou-
bridge as  "Mrs.  Una."  During  the  sittings,  Feda  has
gradually  acquired  the  habit  of  calling  A.  V.  B.  "  Ladye,"
a  nickname  which  belonged  to  her  in  life,  and  was
given  spontaneously  through  Feda  at  an  early  sitting.
Of  Feda  we  need  say  very  little,  as  she  is  already  known
to  the  public  through  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  book  Raymond.

Throughout  the  sittings  we  have  in  our  records,  for
the  sake  of  brevity  and  clarity,  treated  the  medium,
during  her  trance,  as  being  non-existent,  except  in  those
instances  when  Feda  alludes  to  her  as  "  my  medium,"
or  "  this  one,"  etc.  We  have  assumed  that  Feda  takes
her  place,  or  at  times  A.  V.  B.,  and  have  attributed
to  these  controls  all  words  spoken  by,  or  movements  made
by  Mrs.  Leonard.  For  instance,  it  will  be  noticed  that
in  the  records,  we  say:  "Feda  touches  her  forehead,"  etc.,
instead  of  :  "  Feda  touches  the  medium's  forehead,"  or  :
"  Mrs.  Leonard  touches  her  forehead."  In  our  records
we  have  not  closely  followed  Feda's  broken  English,  it
would  have  taken  too  long  to  think  out  suitable  spelling
for  her  idiosyncrasies.  Her  knowledge  of  the  English
alphabet  is  shaky,  and  although  she  will  at  times  recognise
and  mention  letters  quite  accurately,  at  other  times  she
appears  to  be  at  a  loss,  and  is  reduced  to  attempting  to


LXXVIII.]


Introduction.


345


draw  with  her  finger  the  letters  that  are  apparently  shown
her,  or  to  such  descriptions  as  :  "  It's  a  curly  letter  like
a  snake,  or  ''It's  like  a  cross  without  a  top."  She  will
generally  speak  of  O  as  a  little  circle,  and  she  will  also
describe  any  letter  that  has  a  stroke  above  or  below  the
line,  as,  for  instance,  small  Y  or  B,  as  "  a  long  letter,"
while  others,  such  as  small  U  or  E,  are  "little  letters."
Her  English  varies ;  it  is  almost  correct  when  she  purports
to  be  repeating  a  message  verbatim,  and  at  all  times  is
quite  intelligible  in  spite  of  its  eccentricities.

As  throughout  the  following  Paper  we  propose  to  deal
exclusively  with  the  purporting  attempt  of  discarnate
intelligences  to  communicate  evidential  matter,  we  have,
in  some  of  the  longer  extracts  from  sittings,  occasionally
omitted  remarks  interlarded  by  Feda,  concerning  conditions
in  the  "  spirit  world,"  etc.  In  order,  however,  to  do  full
justice  to  the  sustained  and  consecutively  coherent  nature
of  the  sittings,  it  is  only  fair  to  state  that  these  remarks
of  Eeda's,  although  non-evidential,  were  seldom  irrelevant,
being  usually  in  the  nature  of  parallels  suggested  by  the
topic  in  hand.

It  may  perhaps  be  as  well  to  remark  here  that  the  records
of  our  sittings  have  always  been  copied  by  hand,  or  typed,
on  the  afternoon  of  the  day  upon  which  the  sitting  took
place.  Of  course,  since  the  original  notes  were  made,
some  few  facts  have  come  to  light,  and  occasionally  our
memory  has  afforded  a  further  verification  of  certain
incidents  ;  this  has  led  to  some  trifling  modifications  of,
or  additions  to,  our  original  annotations  appended  to  the
records.  OccasionaUy,  also,  mature  consideration,  consequent
upon  a  deeper  study  of  the  sittings,  has  thrown  a  new
light  on  some  of  Feda's  statements.

In  view  of. the  fact  that  evidential  pantomime  is  some-
times a  feature  of  the  Leonard  phenomena,  it  is  necessary
to  mention  the  amount  of  light  permitted  by  Mrs.  Leonard
during  the  sittings.  Mrs.  Leonard  does  not  sit  in  full
daylight — the  sittings  are  held  with  drawn  curtains,  by
the  fight  of  a  shaded  lamp.  This  lamp  is  placed  in  front
of  the  recorder,  who,  when  two  people  are  present,
sits a few feet away  from the medium. During  the


346  Miss  Badclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

summer  time,  therefore,  when  there  is  no  fire,  it  is
not  always  possible  for  the  recorder  to  distinguish
clearly  gestures  made  by  the  medium.  The  recorder
at  these  times  depends  partially  upon  the  sitter  to
describe  the  gestures  verbally  one  by  one  as  they  are
made,  the  light  being  always  sufficient  to  render  all
gestures  and  the  facial  expression  of  the  medium
clearly  visible  to  the  sitter,  who  is  placed  directly  in
front  of  her,  sometimes  in  contact  with  her  hand  and
sometimes  not.  When  only  one  person  is  present  and
the  sitter  takes  his  or  her  own  notes,  the  table  upon
which  the  lamp  stands  is  placed  quite  close  to  the  medium,
and  there  is  often  little  or  no  contact,  the  sitter  requiring
both  hands  free.  During  the  winter  months  it  is  never
necessary  for  the  sitter  to  describe  verbally  to  the  recorder
any  gestures  that  are  made,  as,  owing  to  the  fact  that
Mrs.  Leonard  feels  the  cold  when  she  comes  out  of  trance,
there  is  always  a  very  large  fire  in  the  grate,  which,  in
addition  to  the  lamp,  makes  a  sufficient  illumination  for
the  recorder  as  well  as  the  sitter  to  observe  all  move-
ments made  by  the  medium.  But  as  the  recorder  is  naturally
looking  down  to  write,  our  method  has  been  for  the
sitter  to  call  the  recorder's  attention  to  any  pantomime
by  saying  :  "  Feda  is  making  a  gesture  for  you  to  record,"
or: "Watch  Feda's  gestures,"  or  words  to  that  effect.

Our  thanks  are  due  to  Feda  for  the  full  and  accurate
records  which  we  have  been  able  to  obtain.  She  has
always  shown  the  greatest  solicitude  on  this  point,  re-
peating slowly  and  carefully,  more  than  once,  anything
intricate  that  appeared  to  her  to  be  of  evidential  value  ;
unlike  most  controls  she  can  be  stopped  with  impunity
should  the  recorder  be  in  fear  of  getting  behind-hand,
and  yet  cleverly  take  up  the  thread  the  moment  she  is  told
that  the  recorder  is  ready.  We  have  both  remarked  that  she
often  appears  to  have  a  curious  knowledge  of  the  exact
stage  in  the  notes  that  the  recorder  has  reached,  and  has
been  known  to  rebuke  the  communicator,  saying  :  "  Don't
speak  so  quickly;  Mrs.  Twonnie "  (or  "Mrs.  Una,"  as
the  case  may  be)  hasn't  got  that  down  yet,"  and  at  other
times,  when  the  sitter  has  enquired  whether  the  recorder


LXXVIII.]


Introduction.


347


is  ready,  Feda  will  answer  glibly  and  correctly  for  the
recorder:  "Oh,  yes,  she's  got  that  down  all  right,"  or
the  contrary.  The  above  has  been  our  experience ;  possibly
we  have  been  particularly  fortunate,  owing  perhaps  to
the  fact  that  a  very  real  mutual  liking  has  grown  up
between  ourselves  and  Feda.  This,  we  have  been  given
to  understand,  is  not  invariably  the  case.


348  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


CHAPTER  I.


Description  by  Fed  a  op  Communicator's  Personal
Appearance  as  Evidence  of  Identity.

The  first  evidence  with  which  we  shall  deal  is  that  relating
to  personal  appearance  and  conditions  as  a  proof  of  identity,
when  given  through  a  control  who  purports  to  be  in
touch  with  the  communicating  spirit  ;  and  in  this  connec-
tion we  shall  give  a  few  extracts  from  early  sittings,
beginning  with  my  first  sitting  of  August  16th,  1916,  at
which  I  was  my  own  recorder.

We  will  begin  the  extract  after  Feda's  description  of
the  unknown  soldier  aforementioned.

M.  R.  H. I  do  not  know  him,  is  there  no  one  else  ?

F.  Yes,  there's  a  lady  of  about  sixty  years  old,  perhaps.

M.  Pv.  H.  Please  describe  her,  she  interests  me  more.  (Feda
did  not  take  the  hint,  however,  but  continued
to  describe  the  soldier,  who  appeared  to  be  very
insistent.)

M.  R.  H.  Please  leave  him ;  as  I  do  not  know  him,  I  am
afraid  I  cannot  help,  though  I  would  do  any-
thing I  could.  Will  you  describe  the  lady  of
about  sixty  1

F.  The  lady  is  of medium  height,  has  rather  a  good

figure  but  is  inclined  to  be  too  fat,  Feda  thinks  ;
she  has  a  straight  nose,  a  well  shaped  face,  but
the  face  is  inclined  to  lose  its  outline  a  little.
The  eyebrows  are  slightly  arched,  her  hair  is
not  done  fashionably.

M.  R.  H. Is  it  worn  in  the  neck  ?

F.  No,  it's  done  on  the  crown  of  her  head. She  has

passed  over  quite  recently.  She  had  not  been
well for some time prior to passing, she  was


Lxxvni.] Communicator's  Personal  Appearance


349


sometimes  conscious  of  this,  but  put  it  behind
her.  Feda  doesn't  mean  to  say  that  she  worried
over  it  much,  or  that  she  suffered  much,  she
didn't.  Feda  thinks  she  didn't  know  how  ill  she
really  was.  She  went  about  doing  things  just  as
usual,  she  gives  Feda  the  impression  of  internal
weakness.  You  were  much  with  her  in  her  earth
life,  you  gave  her  vitality,  you  kept  her  up  with
your  vitality  .  .  .  The  lady's  eyes  look  to  Feda
to  be  dark,  perhaps  grey.

Regarding  this  description  :  A.  V.  B.  was  fifty-seven
when  she  died,  had  had  a  fine  figure,  but  latterly  be-
came too  stout ;  she  had  a  straight  nose,  which  was
very  slightly  tip-tilted,  she  wore  her  hair  dressed  high
on  her  head,  and,  at  the  time  of  this  sitting,  she  had
only  been  dead  two  months  three  weeks  and  a  day.  For
some  time  prior  to  her  death  she  had  not  been  strong,
partly  owing  to  the  effects  of  a  bad  motor  accident.  She
must  often  have  put  her  ailments  behind  her,  however,
and  we  do  not  think  for  a  moment  that  she  had  any  idea
of  how  ill  she  was  ;  I  can  only  say  that  I  had  none.
She  went  about  doing  things  as  usual  up  to  the  very
day  of  her  last  illness,  which  came  on  without  the  slightest
warning.  She  did  suffer  from  internal  weakness,  though
this  had  nothing  to  do  with  her  death.  A.  V.  B.  and  I
were  the  closest  friends  for  eight  years,  and  lived  together
for  a  great  part  of  that  time.  She  would  sometimes  say
to  me  that  she  believed  that  my  vitality  kept  her  up  and
helped  her ;  we  used  to  discuss  this  together.  A.  V.  B.'s
eyes  were  of  a  dark  blue,  some  people  might  have  called
them  of  a  dark  bluey-grey  colour.

After  these  details  had  been  obtained  through  Mrs.
Leonard's  trance,  together  with  descriptions  fairly  appli-
cable to  some  of  my  deceased  relations,  Mrs.  Leonard  was
awakened  by  Feda,  for  the  purpose  of  the  table-sitting
mentioned  above.  This  table- sitting  was  very  brief,  and
contained  nothing  evidential  beyond  the  points  already
quoted.

On October 2nd, 1916, I took a sitting with  Mrs.


350  Miss  Baddy ffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


Leonard,  Lady  Troubridge  acting  as  recorder.  After
a  few  words  of  greeting  the  sitting  opened  by  Feda
recognising  the  communicator  as  the  lady  whom  she  had
seen  at  my  first  sitting.  I  asked  Feda  to  describe  her
again,  and  she  did  so  accurately  and  much  more  fully
than  on  the  first  occasion.  There  are  a  few  points  of
interest  that  we  must  quote  from  this  second  description  ;
they  are  as  follows  :

F.  Not a young, rather an elderly lady,  bringing

again  the  funny  feeling  in  her  legs,  no  circu-
lation in  her  legs,  cold  and  numb.  She  must  have
had  that  before  she  died.  She  is  about  medium
height,  in  build  not  exactly  fat,  but  rather
spreaded  out.  She  has  a  nice-shaped  face  and
a  very  humorous  look,  as  if  she'd  smile  over
things  and  have  jokes  with  you  that  other  people
didn't  come  into.  She  looks  elderly  but  has  a
young  soul  ;  she  is  laughing  ;  she  was  about
sixteen  sometimes,  she  never  grew  old  in  soul,
her  body  was  a  nuisance  to  her.  She  was  always
wanting  to  do  things  that  she  could  not  do.

A  little  later  on  Feda  says  :

F.  She has regular  features, with character, a  firm

chin,  not  prominent,  round,  she  has  lost  the
shape  of  her  face  a  bit,  it's  a  little  flabby  under
the  chin — mouth  medium  size — not  very  red,
which  makes  the  lips  not  look  full.  Eyes  deep
set,  she  doesn't  open  them  very  wide,  that's
why  Feda  can't  tell  their  colour.  She  looks
sideways  at  people  sometimes,  without  moving
her  head,  she's  looking  at  you  like  that  now.

And  later  on  still  in  this  sitting  :

M.  R.  H. Ask  her  if  she  suffered  much  when  she  died.

F.  She  says  not  as  much  as  one  would  think.  Some-

thing had  come  up  to  her  head,  and  before  she
passed  over  worked  up  to  the  brain,  and  formed
a  small  clot  on  some  part  of  the  brain  that
stopped her  feeling. It doesn't seem to  worry


lxxviii.] Communicator  s  Personal  Appearance.


351


her,  but  she  wants  to  know  if  that  is  what
happened.

M.  R.  H. Yes,  that  is  what  happened.

F.  It  pressed,  and  prevented  her  feeling.

M.  R.  H. Was  she  frightened  ?

F.  She  says  :  "  When  I  woke  up  it  felt  strange,  I  had

an  idea  I  was  still  dreaming,  I  had  rather  strange
dreams,  I  don*t  know  if  I  told  anyone.  Often
I  was  half  awake  and  half  asleep."

M.  R.  H. Quite  right ;  did  she  know  me  at  all  ?

F.  She  says  it's hard  to  explain, but yes, she  did

know  you,  but  was  not  sure  if  you  were  part
of  the  drearn,  or  real.  She  says :  "I  could  feel
you.  You  seemed  to  be  mentally  impressing  me
with  all  your  might  with  " — (sotto  voce  :  Old
Lady,  old  Lady,  oh,  Lady  ?)  She  says  you
said  :  '  Oh  !  Ladye,  oh  !  Ladye  it's  all  right."
"  And  now  and  again  holding  me  physically  as  if
wanting  to  hold  me  up."  Did  she  ever  choke
in  her  throat  ?  because  she's  just  put  her  arm
around  you  for  a  minute,  and  Feda  felt  her
physical  body.

The  first  point  of  interest  in  the  above  extract  occurs
when  Feda  says,  regarding  the  numbness,  etc.,  in  the  legs  :
"  Bringing  again  a  funny  feeling  in  her  legs."  As  A.  V.  B.
died  of  a  stroke,  Feda's  description  of  the  sensations  is
perfectly  correct,  but  why  she  uses  the  word  £i  again  "  is
not  apparent,  since,  during  my  sitting  of  August  16th,
1916,  she  never  described  any  sensations  of  this  nature.
As  will  be  remembered,  on  that  occasion,  she  only  alluded
to  internal  weakness,  which  although  correct  had  nothing
to  do  with  death-conditions.  As  Feda  says  in  the  present
sitting,  A.  V.  B.  had  a  very  humorous  look,  and  it  was
certainly  her  custom  to  have  many  jokes  with  me,  in
which  other  people  were  not  always  included.  A.  V.  B.
had  a  very  strong  sense  of  humour.  She  also  had  what  may
be  called  a  young  soul,  retaining  up  to  the  last  an  almost
childish  enjoyment  of  things  ;  that  her  body  became  a
nuisance  to  her  is  perfectly  true,  and  Feda  is  right  in


352  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

saying  that  she  always  wanted  to  do  things  that  she
was  unable  to  do.  Owing  to  her  failing  health  she  was
prevented  from  enjoying  exercise,  such  as  walking,  or
swimming,  a  sport  to  which  she  was  devoted.

A.  V.  B.  had  rather  deep-set  eyes,  and  often  kept  her
lids  lowered.  She  never  in  fact  opened  her  eyes  very
wide.  But  the  striking  part  of  the  description,  to  me  who
knew  her  so  well,  comes  when  Feda  remarks  that  she
was  in  the  habit  of  looking  at  people  sideways,  without
moving  her  head.  This  sidelong  glance  was  extraordinarily
characteristic  of  A.  V.  B.  I  had  often  remarked  on  it  to
her  during  her  lifetime.

As  we  have  said  already,  A.  V.  B.  died  of  an  apoplectic
seizure.  There  was  cerebral  haemorrhage  which  formed
a  clot  on  the  brain,  and  this  led  to  progressive  paralysis.
She  lay  for  eleven  days  prior  to  her  death  with  only
occasional  flashes  of  semi-consciousness.  A.  V.  B.  lost  all
power  of  coherent  speech  almost  immediately  after  her
seizure  ;  we  find  Feda,  however,  saying  that  A.  V.  B.
wondered  whether  she  had  told  anyone  of  her  strange
dreams.  She  could  not,  of  course,  have  actually  told
anyone  anything,  though  one  cannot  be  certain  as  to  how  far
she  was  conscious  of  this  loss  of  speech  ;  occasionally  she
used  to  make  inarticulate  sounds,  as  though  trying  to
speak.

As  we  have  already  said,  A.  V.  B.'s  nickname  was
"  Ladye  "  :  during  her  illness,  when  speaking  to  her,  I  most
certainly  said,  "Oh,  Ladye,"  on  several  occasions;  I  never
called  A.  V.  B.  "  old  lady  "  in  my  fife,  and  this  indecision
on  Feda's  part  as  to  whether  the  words  used  were  "  Oh,
Ladye  "  or  "  old  lady  "  is  rather  enlightening,  as  showing,
it  appears  to  us,  the  bias  occasionally  given  to  certain
messages  owing  to  preconceived  ideas  on  the  part  of  the
control.  "  Ladye  "  being  an  unusual  nickname,  Feda  cannot
quite  believe,  apparently,  that  she  has  heard  correctly.
"  Old  Lady  "  is  a  more  familiar  form  of  address  to  Feda  ;
she  therefore  decides  to  try  both.

The  choking  in  the  throat  referred  to  by  Feda  is
perfectly  correct  ;  owing  to  the  paralysis,  A.  V.  B.  had
difficulty in swallowing. With regard to my  holding


lxxviii.] Communicator' s  Personal  Appearance.


353


A.  V.  B.  up  physically,  I  did  so,  but  only  to  the  best
of  my  belief  on  one  occasion.

We  next  come  to  a  Leonard  sitting  of  October  9th,
1916  ;  I  took  the  sitting  and  Lady  Troubridge  was  the
recorder. Speaking  of  A.  V.  B.,  Feda  says  :

F.  She  looks  much  better  than  when  Feda  saw  her  last.

M.  R.  H. Can  you  tell  me  the  colour  of  her  hair  1

F.  Brown like  this one's, Feda  thinks. (Here  Feda

touches  the  medium's  hair.) But  she  does  it  high

up,  not  in  her  neck.

Later  on  in  the  sitting  I  asked  whether  A.  V.  B.
realised  that  her  death  had  come  as  a  great  shock  to  me,
as  I  had  not  known  that  she  was  seriously  ill.  I  gave  no
details  or  clues  regarding  the  nature  of  her  illness.  Feda
replied  to  my  question  as  follows  :

F.  She  says: "Of  course  you  didn't  know  I  was  ill,

I  didn't  know  it  myself  until  too  late ;  perhaps
it was coming on for some time. I  couldn't
expect  you  to  know  what  I  didn't  know  myself."
And  again  :

F.  She  says  nothing  could  have  been  done  for  her,

unless  something  had  been  done  to  her  whole
system,  not  only  a  part  of  it,  two  or  three  years
ago,  and  that  would  only  have  kept  it  at  bay.
She  says  after  all  she  was  spared  suffering  and
a  long  illness.

Now  regarding  the  above  extract,  A.  V.  B.'s  hair  was
brown,  but  considerably  darker  in  colour  than  the  medium's.
We  have  repeatedly  noticed  that  one  of  Feda's  weakest
points  is  describing  the  colour  of  people's  hair.  A.  V.  B.
had  spent  a  pleasant  afternoon,  and  had  actually  felt  well
enough  to  sing  at  a  tea-party  on  the  very  day  that  she
was  taken  ill  ;  it  is  therefore  logical  to  suppose  that,  as
Feda  says,  she  herself  was  quite  as  unconscious  of  the
gravity  of  her  condition  as  I  was.  Undoubtedly,  however,
the  illness  had  been  coming  on  for  some  time  past.  In
the  opinion  of  certain  doctors  who  attended  her  during
her  last illness, A.  V.  B. must have been  suffering  for


354 Miss  Badclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [pabt

several  years  from  arterial  sclerosis,  and  throughout  this
time  her  blood  pressure  must  have  been  such  as  to
constitute  a  serious  danger.  To  have  checked  these
maladies,  radical  steps  should  have  been  taken  several
years  before.  These  steps  would  have  necessitated  a  total
alteration  in  her  diet  and.  her  whole  habit  of  life,  and
presumably,  as  Feda  states,  something  wovdd  have  had
to  be  done  for  her  whole  system  ;  but  even  had  these
steps  been  taken  the  trouble  would  only  have  been
kept  at  bay,  as  arterial  sclerosis  is  a  disease  for  which,
unfortunately,  there  is  no  complete  cure.

And  here  it  may  be  as  well  to  state  that  I  instructed
the  detective  to  go  to  the  Registrar  of  Deaths  for  the
district  in  which  A.  V.  B.  died,  and  ascertain  whether
inquiries  had  been  made,  by  any  person,  as  to  the  nature
of  A.  V.  B."s  last  illness.  The  detective  was  told  that  in
this  case  no  inquiries  had  been  made,  and  that  even  had
they  been,  under  no  circumstances  would  such  questions
be  answered  at  the  office.  Lady  Troubridge  visited  the
hotel  where  A.  V.  B.  died  ;  she  found  that  the  former
hall-porter  had  left,  but  she  interviewed  the  proprietress,
using  again  the  pretext  that  some  hypothetical  friend  of
A.  V.  B.'s  might  have  come  to  inquire  for  her,  and  have
asked  for  details  regarding  her  last  illness.  The  proprietress
assured  Lady  Troubridge  that  she  herself  had  received  no
inquiries,  and  that  had  any  inquiries  been  made  of  the
hall  porter,  or  of  any  other  employe  of  the  hotel,  the
enquirers  would  at  once  have  been  referred  to  herself.

Nothing  further  of  importance  with  regard  to  A.  V.  B.'s
a  ppearance  occurred  till  eight  months  later,  when  on
June  6th,  1917,  a  much  more  detailed  description  of  her
was  given  by  Feda.  By  this  date,  as  we  shall  see  later,
A.  V.  B.  had  been  trying  her  hand  at  a  personal  control 1
of  the  medium,  and  during  a  personal  control  which
had  occurred  a  short  time  prior  to  this  sitting  of
June  6th,  1917,  A.  V.  B.  complained  that  Feda  always
described  her  as  being  too  old  looking.  I  did  not
thereupon  begin  to expatiate  upon  A.  V.  B.'s  appearance

1  We  use  the  term  "  personal  control "  for  convenience  without  making  any
assumption  as  to  what  actually  occurs  during  this  phenomenon.


lxxvtel] Communicator's  Personal  Appearance.


355


when  at  her  best  ;  I  merely  remarked  that  she  had
always  been  a  young-looking  woman.  As  a  matter  of  fact
Feda's  earlier  descriptions,  although  not  flattering,  and
inclined  to  pick  out  the  weak  points  and  ignore  the
good,  were  on  the  whole  good  descriptions  of  A.  V.  B.
as  she  was  for  a  little  time  before  her  death.  The  des-
cription which  we  will  now  quote  is  a  very  remarkable
one  of  A.  V.  B.  as  she  was  when  she  was  younger.  Here
is  the  extract  from  the  sitting  of  June  6th,  1917.  Lady
Troubridge  took  the  sitting  and  I  recorded.

F.  Mrs.  Una,  she's  got  a  nice  complexion,  very  nice,

it  isn't  a  bit  wrinkled,  it's  very  smooth.  Before
she  passed  on  her  cheeks  fell  in  a  little  bit,  and
do  you  know  her  mouth  had  got  drawn  down  a
little  in  the  left  corner,  like  this  1  (Feda  draws
down  one  side  of  her  mouth  a  little)  She's  showing
that  ;  it  was  straight  at  the  other  corner,  but
the  left  side  is  drawn  down,  and  in  a  bit,  but
not  very  much.

M.  R.  H.  Yes,  that  was  so,  but  I'm  not  sure  that  you've
got  the  right  side.

F.  Well, Feda thinks she shows the left side.  It

gives  her  face  rather  a  drawn  look.  She  used  to
have  a  very  pretty  chin  and  neck,  but  the
muscles  had  got  a  little  flabby  and  let  it  fall  a
bit,  so  that  when  you'd  see  her  side-face,  it  didn't
look  quite  so  stucked  out  and  pretty  as  it  used  to.

M.  R.  H.  She's  always  making  mistakes  between  the  right
and  left.

F.  Yes,  she  explained  that  to  you  once. You  see  it's

like  a  negative  to  Feda,  what  she  shows.  You
know,  Mrs.  Una,  how  in  a  photo,  if  you've  been
wearing  something  on  your  right  side,  it  comes
out  as  though  it  were  your  left.

U.  V.  T.  Well,  but  the  fact  is  perfectly  right  and  it's  a
very  good  evidential  proof.

F.  It  took  away  that  pretty, chirpy  look  from  her

face.  (Feda  begins  pouting  out  her  lips.)  Mrs.
Una, when she had  her under lip  coming  out


356


Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


like  this  (Feda  slightly  pulls  out  her  under-lip
with  finger  and  thumb),  it  made  her  look  cheeky-
looking.  It  stuck  out  a  little  firmly  ;  under  the
lip  it  was  tucked  in,  in  a  little  dip,  and  then  it
came  out  in  a  pretty  rounded  chin  ;  Feda  can
see  all  this  because  she's  like  that  now,  you  know,
but  when  she  first  came  here  she  was  not  so
pretty  as  she  is  now.  You  don't  think  she'll
mind  Feda  saying  that  she  has  rather  a  cheeky
mouth  and  chin  do  you  ?

U.  V.  T. No,  of  course  not,  it's  a  very  good  description.

F.  She says  she  doesn't  know,  perhaps  she  does  look

cheeky  now.  Her  face  has  got  pretty,  soft  curves,
but  Feda  feels  that  under  that  softness  there
would  be  a  little  sharp  determinedness  ;  Feda
feels  it  would  be  like  looking  awful  softly  at
people  when  they  were  off  their  guard,  and  that
then  she  would  suddenly  come  out  and  put  her
foot  down  and  get  her  own  way.  They  would
be  so  surprised,  but  while  their  mouths  were  still
open,  she  would  have  done  it.  She's  got  a  lot
of  determination,  but  there's  no  fuss,  no  noise,
she  didn't  say  much,  but  she  managed  it  some-
how. Feda  doesn't  think  that  her  nose  and  eyes
were  so  cheeky  as  her  mouth  and  chin.

U.  V.  T. Why  ?

F.  Her  nose  is  not  turned  up,  it's  straight,  or  nearly

so,  but  it  scoops  in  a  little  at  the  bridge,  Feda
sees  ;  it's  not  a  nose  that  comes  out  at  all  at
the  bridge  ;  you  see  where  the  forehead  starts
it  comes  down  straight,  and  there's  no  sharp
division  between  the  nose  and  the  forehead,  it's
more  curved  in,  and  a  little  flat  at  the  bridge
part,  and  then  it  comes  out  a  little  bit  more  at
the  tip,  but  it's  not  a  puggy  nose ;  she  says  :
"  Certainly  not."  But  look,  Mrs.  Una,  it  widens
here  a  little  bit,  (Feda  touches  her  nostrils)  the
nostrils  are  wider  than  the  tip ;  she  hasn't  got
a  wide  tip  to  her  nose  at  all,  it's  a  pretty  shape
at  the  tip.


lxxviii.] Communicator's  Personal  Appearance.  357

U.  V*.  T. You  do  see  her  clearly  to-day,  Feda.

F.  Yes,  Feda  feels  that  her  nostrils  used  to  move  a

bit  too,  but  perhaps  everybody's  do  a  bit,  but
her's  were  sensitive  ;  from  the  nose  to  the  upper
lip  is  very  pretty,  it  looks  rather  straight  when
it's  seen  sideways,  but  there's  a  little  dip  in  it,
a  groove  ;  it's  not  at  all  long  though  ;  her  upper
lip  doesn't  look  very  full,  but  it's  very  prettily
curved,  it's  got  a  clean  little  curve,  and  going
from  the  middle,  the  upper  lip  has  a  very  pretty
clean  little  curve.  (Feda  traces  the  mouth  from
centre  to  corner  along  the  top  lip.)  The  lip
doesn't  spread  out  at  all  over  the  side,  her  under
lip  is  a  little  tiny  bit  bigger  than  the  top  lip,
it  shows  more,  because,  when  she  turns  sideways,
some  people  might  say  it  was  almost  too  much,
because  the  under  lip  protruded  a  tiny  bit  beyond
the  top  lip.  You  would  notice  that  sometimes,
when  people  were  talking  to  her,  or  she  was
just  thinking.

IT.  V.  T. Excellent  !

F.  She doesn't mind a bit Feda saying that  she's

got  a  cheeky  face  ;  it's  a  rounded  face  with  soft
curves,  but  you  can  see  by  the  mouth  and  chin
that  she  was  determined  although  she  had  a
soft  face.  Do  you  know  what  Feda  means  by
a  moving  face,  an  easy  moving  face  ?

U.  V.  T. Yes,  you  mean  mobile.

F.  Yes, that's it. She wouldn't sit stiff-faced  like

most  people  in  this  country  do  ;  she  wasn't  stiff
and  frigid,  she  could  move  her  eyes  very  quickly,
but  not  in  a  jumpy  way,  she  had  an  easy  way
of  moving  them.  She  moved  her  lids  very
prettily  ;  she's  got  very  prettily  cut  eyelids,
especially  when  they  are  closed.  When  she
drooped  her  eyes  and  looked  down  as  she  some-
times did,  when  she  stucked  her  mouth  out,  it
was  very  pretty.  She  sometimes  did  that  you
know,  stucked  out  her  under-lip,  and  drooped
her  eyes  and  looked  down  (Feda  gives  an  imita-


358 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


tion  of  this  with  the  head  held  very  well  back)
She says she  knew  when  she  was  doing  that  ,
she  says  she  didn't  always  do  it  accidentally.
U.  V.  T. Then  why  did  she  do  it  ?

F.  She  says  : "It  was just a  little  pose  of  mine."

but  Feda  can  see  that  it  isn't  a  way  many
people  have ;  they  wouldn't  have  the  ease  of
face  to  carry  it  out.  She  used  to  hold  her  neck
up,  but  she  always  did  that.  Do  you  know  her
back  was  curved  in  a  bit  here  ?  (Feda  touches
her  waist  at  the  back.)  She  had  a  kind  of
hollow,  she's  laughing  at  that  ;  but  though
she  was  hollow  there,  it  didn't  make  her  have
big  shoulder  blades  ;  it  was  just  a  natural
curve  that  she  had  in  her  body,  just  there.
She  dipped  in  there,  (Feda  indicates  her  back
again.)  Feda  thinks  that's  very  nice.  When
she  walked  it  was  the  same  as  when  she  was
sitting,  it  was  like  this,  (Feda  holds  her  shoulders
very  straight  but  easily),  and  then  her  back  curved
in,  but  she  was  straight  from  here  downwards
(indicates  the  line  from  bust  to  waist),  it  looks
rather  a  straight  line  down  the  front,  though  she
was  a  bit  full  here,  not  too  full,  nicely  (Feda
indicates  her  bust).  You  can't  help  seeing  that
she  goes  in  at  the  waist  because  of  the  curve  at
the  back.  When  she  walked  she  didn't  jerk,  she
didn't  go  like  this,  (here  Feda  moves  her  shoulders
to  indicate  an  uneven  walk).  She  walked  very
smoothly,  it's  a  bit  as  if  she  were  on  rollers.
Did  she  sometimes  have  her  hair  raised  up  here  ?
(Feda  touches  the  front  of  her  head.)  Feda
.  means  across  here  ;  it  doesn't  seem  as  though
she  wore  it  just  straight  back,  it  looks  as  if  it
had  been  pulled  forward  ;  she  didn't  drag  it
back,  and  she  hasn't  got  it  done  low  at  the
back,  it  was  taken  up.  It  stuck  out  on  the
crown  of  her  head,  and  she  didn't  wear  it  there
just  in  one  coil,  it  seems  to  Feda  to  be  in
several  bits,  and  it  was  rather  puffed  out  behind


lxxviii.] Communicator 's  Personal  Appearance.


359


too.  It  wasn't  dragged  up  from  the  back  of  the
ears,  it  was  worn  more  loosely.

As  will  have  been  noticed,  this  description  of  A.  V.  B.
is  broken  into  just  at  the  beginning  by  the  description
of one  side of  the  mouth,  which  is  said  to  have  been
drawn  down  a  little  before  she  died. A.  V.  B.  is  said
to be showing  that. Now  this  slight  drawing  down  of
the  mouth  on  one  side  was  a  consequence  of  A.  V.  B.'s
stroke  ; it  was  the  only  visible  blemish  caused  by  the
stroke. Only  those  few  people  who  were  with  her  during
her last illness can have seen this blemish, as it  dis-
appeared a  short  time  after  her  death. Our  impression
had  been  that  this  drawing  down  of  the  mouth  was  on
the  right  side,  not  the  left,  and  we  accordingly  contra-
dicted  Feda on this point. It appears, however,  that
she was right, and we were wrong  ; for the  paralysis
was  right-sided  and  we  now  learn  from  our  medical  friends
that  right-sided  paralysis  affecting  the  face  would  cause  the
mouth  to  be  drawn  down  on  the  left  side. Feda  prefaces  this
long  description  of  A.  V.  B.  by  remarking  that  the  muscles
of  the  chin  and  neck  had  got  a  little  flabby. This  suggests
earlier  descriptions. The  whole  of  the  description  which
follows  on  U.  V.  T.'s  remark  that  Feda's  reference  to  the
mouth  having  been  drawn  down  is  correct,  is  very  note-
worthy indeed. There  is  not  one  detail  which  is  wrong
in the description, either of A.  V.  B.'s  appearance,
mannerisms  or  characteristics. There  are  one  or  two  points,
of  course,  which  are  pre-eminent  in  interest,  and  the  first
of  these  occurs  when  Feda  gives  us  to  understand  that
A.  V.  B.  was  in  the  habit  of protruding  her  under-lip.
And  a  little  further  on  she  slightly  elaborates  this  statement
by  telling  us  that  one  would  notice  this  peculiarity  some-
times when  people  were  talking  to  A.  V.  B.,  or  when  she
was  just  thinking. A.  V.  B.  had  a  habit  of  protruding
her  under-lip ;  she  often  did  it  when  people  were  talking
to  her,  or,  as  Feda  says,  when  she  was  thinking. The  next
point  of  special  interest  we  find  contained  in  Feda's  words  :
"  She's  got  very  prettily  cut  eyelids,  especially  when  they
are closed."' A.  V.  B. was always said to have  very
perfectly modelled eyelids, especially when they  were


360  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [paet

closed ;  they  were  considered  one  of  her  best  points.  But
when  we  come  to  Feda's  description  of  what  A.  V.  B.
herself  defines  through  Feda  as  "  just  a  little  pose  of
mine "  it  is  still  more  interesting  ;  because  what  Feda
has  described  regarding  the  drooped  eyelids,  the  pro-
truded hp,  and  the  head  well  back,  all  of  which  A.  V.  B.
gives  us  to  understand  she  didn't  always  do  accidentally,
is  an  exact  description  of  a  characteristic  attitude  of
A.  V.  B.'s ;  a  pose  so  familiar  as  to  have  become  almost
second  nature.  The  next  point  of  particular  interest
occurs  when  Feda  describes  the  curve  or  hollow  in  A.  V.  B.'s
back.  This  was  a  marked  characteristic,  and  she  often
grumbled  about  it,  as  it  gave  her  backaches.  If  she
were  ill  in  bed  for  any  length  of  time,  her  unusually
arched  back  would  cause  her  inconvenience,  and  pillows
would  have  to  be  arranged  in  order  to  support  it.

Although  there  are  in  existence  sketches  and  portraits
of  A.  V.  B.,  two  of  which  at  least  have  been  reproduced
in  print,  none  of  these  portraits  or  sketches  show  the
arch  in  the  back.

A.  V.  B.'s  walk  is  also  admirably  described.  We  can
only  add,  regarding  the  whole  of  the  description,  in-
cluding that  of  her  manner  of  walking,  that  it  is  life-
like of  A.  V.  B.  as  she  was  some  years  ago,  and  that  the
points  of  particular  interest  which  we  have  mentioned
would  have  been  just  the  points  which  A.  V.  B.  would
have  endeavoured  to  get  described,  in  order  that  there
should  be  no  mistake  as  to  her  identity.


Lxxvni.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator  361


CHAPTER  II.

Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  the  Communicator.

We  shall  now  leave  descriptions  of  personal  appearance
and  conditions,  and  treat  of  memory  as  a  proof  of  identity.

From  the  beginning  proofs  of  persistent  memory  have
occurred  ;  during  various  sittings  A.  V.  B.  has  given
through  Feda  descriptions  of  articles,  including  certain
pieces  of  jewellery,  which  had  been  in  her  possession.
All  these  pieces  of  jewellery  I  have  been  able  to  identify
with  the  exception  of  one  ;  we  will  not,  however,  enumerate
them,  because  portions  of  A.  V.  B.'s  Will  appeared  in
the  newspapers,  including  a  description  of  some  of  her
jewels.

Section  I. Memory  of  Riding  and  M.  R.  H.'s  Horse.

Another  point  concerning  which  we  think  that  A.  V.  B.
has  demonstrated  clear  memory  is  my  fondness  for  horses
and  riding.  At  the  sitting  of  October  2nd,  1916,  when,
as  has  already  been  said,  I  took  the  sitting,  Lady  Trou-
bridge  recording,  the  following  occurred  :

F.  Feda  sees  a  horse,  how  funny  ! He's  looking  over

her  shoulder,  he's  a  brown,  sleek  horse,  she  says
she's  keeping  it  for  when  you  come  over.

M.  R.  H. Describe  it.

F.  Thin  face,  slender  face, slim horse. Feda  knows

the  difference  between  this  kind  and  the  kind
that  draws  carts. He's  got  a  very  soft  mouth.

M.  R.  H. Is  there  any  colour  on  his  face  ?

F.  There  is  some  mark  on  his  forehead  ; the  ears  are

not  very  big,  little  ears,  a  beautiful  shiny-looking
face.  He  has  large  eyes,  and  a  beautiful  ex-
pression. The little ears give him a  naughty,


362


Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.


[part


smart  look,  but  his  eyes  and  mouth  have  a
sweet,  kind  look.  She  seems  to  think  you  like
horses. She  thinks  you  will  be  pleased.

During  the  sitting  of  October  9th,  191G,  at  which  I
was  the  sitter  and  Lady  Troubridge  the  recorder,  we
obtained  the  following  words  :

F.  She says  : "  Don't  laugh, I've been learning  to

ride."  She  means  on  a  horse,  she's  watching
if  you  laugh.

M.  R.  H. I  know  she  tried  once  when  we  were  together.

F.  She says she thinks she's getting on very  well.

She  says  are  you  sure  you're  not  laughing  ?  She
says  she  doesn't  really  mind  if  you  are.  She
says  she  always  thought  she'd  like  to  ride,  and
that  you  will  love  it  when  you  come.  There  are
plenty  of  horses  that  love  to  be  exercised,  and
the  ground  is  so  springy.

Later  on  in  the  same  sitting  Feda  remarks  :  "  She
says  : '  You  wouldn't  like  to  be  without  dogs  and  horses.'  "

On  December  6th,  1916,  when  I  was  the  sitter  and
Lady  Troubridge  recorded,  the  sitting  opened  with  another
reference  to  the  horse. It  was  as  follows  :

F.  Your  Ladye's  here,  she's  got  that  nice  horse  with

her  again.  She's  got  her  arm  round  his  neck,
she  seems  to  think  he  wouldn't  bite,  but  she
wants  you  to  see  that  she's  got  her  arm  around
him.  She  seems  a  bit  careful  about  it.  It's
that  horse  with  the  funny  mark  between  his  eyes.
He's  got  a  nice  face,  he  moves  his  ears  about
a  lot — jerks  and  twitches  them.  She  seems  glad
she's  got  horses,  but  Feda  doesn't  think  it's  for
her  own  sake  but  for  yours.

And  later  in  the  same  sitting  Feda  remarks  :

F.  She  says  horses  must  be  kept  for  you,  but  not  so

much  for  her,  but  she  says  her  riding  has  im-
proved. She  says,  "  I  wasn't  a  success  on  the
earth plane  with riding," but she's  keeping  the


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator  363

horses  ready  for  you,  and  she  says  there  are  no
overworked  or  badly  treated  horses  over  there.

On  January  3rd,  1917,  upon  which  day  I  was  sitting
and  Lady  Troubridge  was  recording,  the  following  was
given  :

F.  She's  so  glad  there  are  animals  in  the  spirit  world,

she's  not  really  afraid  of  horses,  and  she  knows
now  that  they  can't  hurt  her,  but  when  she
first  passed  over  she  was  still  a  bit  wary  of
them.

In  the  first  extract  I  recognised  in  the  description
given  by  Feda  a  favourite  hunter  of  mine  who  had  been
shot  some  years  prior  to  A.  V.  B.'s  death,  and  who  had
been  well-known  to  her.  This  particular  hunter  is  the
only  horse  I  have  ever  had  destroyed,  or  who  has  died,
while  in  my  possession.  The  "  little  ears  "  upon  which
Feda  remarks  were  a  marked  characteristic  of  this  horse.
Throughout  these  extracts  we  appear  to  find  A.  V.  B.
clearly  remembering  my  love  of  horses,  animals  in  which
she  personally  took  no  particular  interest.  When  A.  V.  B.
first  knew  me  intimately,  I  hunted  a  great  deal,  and  from
the  fact  that  she  is  said  to  think  that  I  shall  be  glad
that  she  is  keeping  for  me  the  particular  horse  described,
we  may  perhaps  conclude  that  she  remembers  that  I  was
greatly  attached  to  him.

With  regard  to  A.  V.  B.'s  saying  through  Feda  on
October  9th,  1916,  that  she  has  been  learning  to  ride,
and  watching  at  the  same  time  to  see  if  I  should  laugh
at  her,  we  do  not  propose  to  offer  any  opinion  upon
rather  startling  statements  of  this  kind  regarding  con-
ditions after  death.  In  the  present  state  of  our  know-
ledge they  cannot  be  evidential.  We  propose  to  treat
this  particular  statement  only  from  the  standpoint  of
its  value  as  demonstrating  persistence  of  memory.  As  a
young  bride  in  India  A.  V.  B.  had  ridden,  not  very  well
I  believe  ;  but  on  one  occasion,  many  years  later,  when
we  were  living  together,  she  suddenly  took  it  into  her
head  that  she  wanted  to  ride  again.  She  had  not  been
on  a  horse  since  she  left  India,  as  far  as  I  know  ;  never-


364  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

theless  she  went  to  a  riding  school  and  got  as  far  as
having  an  expensive  habit  made.  We  were  going  abroad
at  the  time  to  a  place  where  A.  V.  B.  thought  that
riding  would  be  useful.  Now  I  made  fun  of  this  riding
episode,  and  teased  her  a  great  deal,  especially  as
we  did  not  go  to  the  place  intended  and  the  new
habit  was  never  worn.  In  this  connection,  as  will
have  been  noticed,  we  may  again  infer  from  Feda's
words  that  it  is  I  who  love  horses,  and  will  avail  myself
of  them  in  my  next  state  of  existence.  There  also
appears  to  be  a  memory  shown  here  of  my  love  of
dogs.  During  her  lifetime,  A.  V.  B.,  who  was  not  herself
very  fond  of  dogs  in  general,  suffered  patiently  a  succession
of  my  pets.

In  the  extract  from  the  sitting  of  December  6th,  1916,
Feda  tells  me  that  A.  V.  B.  has  got  her  arm  round  the
horse's  neck,  and  that  she,  A.  V.  B.,  wishes  me  to
notice  this ;  Feda  adds  that  A.  V.  B.  "  seems  a  bit
careful  about  it."  Later  in  that  same  sitting  we  find
A.  V.  B.  again  returning  to  the  topic  of  riding,  and
definitely  stating  that  horses  must  be  kept  for  me  and
not  so  much  for  her,  admitting  with  candour  that  her
riding  during  her  earth  life  was  not  a  success.

Again,  in  the  extract  from  the  sitting  of  January  3rd,
1917,  we  are  told  that  A.  V.  B.  is  not  really  afraid  of
horses,  as  she  knows  now  that  they  cannot  hurt  her,  but
that  she  .was  still  wary  of  them  when  she  first  passed
over.

All  these  statements  are  characteristic  from  several
standpoints.

It  is  superfluous  to  comment  upon  the  reiteration  of
the  fact  that  it  is  my  affection  for  horses  that  is  to  be
gratified.  As  has  already  been  said,  A.  V.  B.,  during
her  lifetime  was  no  horsewoman,  she  was  very  frightened
of  horses,  and  if  it  should  be  true  that  in  her  present
state  of  existence  she  has  overcome  this  nervousness,  she
would  certainly  wish  to  call  my  attention  to  the  fact,
as  she  apparently  tries  to  do  by  intimating  that  she
wishes  me  to  notice  that  her  arm  is  around  my  horse's
neck.


lxxvhi.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  365


In  the  second  extract  from  the  sitting  of  December  6th,
1916,  there  is  an  implication  of  the  memory  of  another
aspect  of  my  love  for  horses.  A.  V.  B.  assures  me
through  Feda  that  there  are  no  over-worked  or  badly
treated  horses  in  the  spirit  world.  It  would  appear  that
she  has  not  forgotten  the  many  times  during  our  long
friendship  when  I  was  greatly  angered  and  distressed  by
the  sight  of  an  over-worked  or  ill-used  horse.

Section  II. Memory  of  Characteristics  of  M.  R.  H.

We  now  come  to  another  point  upon  which  A.  V.  B.
appears  to  have  retained  her  memory.  During  the  sitting
of  October  2nd,  1916,  which  I  took,  Lady  Troubridge
acting  as  recorder,  the  foUowing  occurred  :

M.  R.  H. Does  she  know  I  am  going  away  ?

F.  Yes, she seems anxious about it. It isn't  what

you're  going  to  do  there.
M.  R.  H. Tell  her  Una  will  look  after  me.

F.  She  says,  yes,  she  is  very  glad  if  she  will  ;  that

is,  if  you  will  let  her  ;  she  says  she  has  got  a
very  difficult  task.

The  sitting  of  October  13th,  1916,  which  was  taken  by
Lady  Troubridge  and  recorded  by  me,  terminated  with
the  following  :

U.  V.  T. Tell  Ladye  she's  got  to  help  me  to  take  care  of
Twoimie.1

F.  She  says, yes, she  wants  that, she puts  her  in

your  charge.
U.  V.  T. Tell  her  I  will  do  my  best.

F.  She says she's afraid you hardly appreciate  the

magnitude  of  your  task.  It  will  be  perfectly
awful  sometimes,  terrible  !

Now  this  would  appear  to  show  a  memory  of  one  of
my  tiresome  characteristics.  With  reference  to  Lady  Trou-
bridge's  looking  after  me,  it might  have been  gathered

1  Lady  Troubridge  at  the  time  of  this  sitting  always  employed  Feda's
version  of  my  nickname  when  speaking  of  me  in  Feda's  hearing,  as  the  said
nickname  was  not  pronounced  correctly  by  Feda  until  a  later  date.


366  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


that  I  liked  being  looked  after,  since  I  myself  suggested
that  it  should  be  so  ;  whereas  it  would  seem  that  A.  V.  B
remembers  that  when  I  am  not  well  I  do  not  like  being
fussed over, and that I become stubborn and  irritable.

Section  III. Memory  of  Places  where  the  Communicator  and
M.  R.  H.  have  been  together. (A)  Malvern  Wells.

A.  V.  B.  has  also  shown  evidence  of  memory  on  many
occasions  regarding  places  which  she  and  I  visited  to-
gether. Space  forbids  that  we  should  record  all  the
instances,  and  we  will  only  discuss  a  few  of  them.  But
even  so,  it  is,  we  fear,  inevitable  that  descriptions  of
places  unknown  to  the  reader,  and  the  necessary  comments
on  them,  should  seem  long  and  tedious,  and  be  difficult
to  follow.  We  recommend  the  omission  of  at  any  rate
those  relating  to  Malvern  Wells  on  a  first  reading,  although
they  are,  we  think,  important  for  students  of  these
phenomena.

On  October  9th,  1916,  at  a  sitting  which  I  took,  Lady
Troubridge  acting  as  recorder,  A.  V.  B.  alluded  to  a  fall
on  to  her  knees  which  she  had  once  had,  and  that  allusion
led  up  to  the  following  description  of  a  house.

F.  There is a little vestibule  with a  door  to  right

and  left,  you  pass  these  doors  and  the  hall  goes
on,  broken  into  by  a  staircase.  She  thinks  you
were  with  her.  The  hall  goes  on  beyond,  and
grows  darker,  but  there  is  light  coming  down
the  stairs,  as  if  from  a  skylight  or  something.
Feda  sees  something  hanging  at  the  side  of  the
staircase  like  pictures.  The  staircase  goes  up  a
little  and  then  a  space  and  then  up.  Feda  thinks
there  is  a  way  to  go  up  to  another  floor  but
by  a  different  staircase.  Feda  sees  something  at
the  top  of  the  staircase,  it  looks  like  a  big  box
or  chest,  not  exactly  a  seat,  but  it  looks  as  if
you  could  sit  on  it  if  you  wanted  to  ;  it's  wood,
carved,  not  plain  ;  it's  got  fat  legs,  it  can't  be
a chest quite  ; it's  not the  same side as  the


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  367


stairs,  more  like  the  other  side  of  the  stairs  on
the  landing.
M.  R.  H. I  don't  place  that.

F.  Can you make inquiries, it would be an  awful

good  test  ?

M.  R.  H.  There  was  nothing  like  that  on  the  landing  in  my
time.  If  it's  the  house  I  think  it  is,  I  don't
see  where  they  could  put  it.

F.  Well,  she  shows  it  for  some  purpose  ; could  it  be

that  it's  there  now  ?

U.  V.  T. That  would  be  a  good  test.

F.  Feda  thinks  she  means  now,  she  seems  anxious  it

should  be  cleared  up.  There  doesn't  seem  a
lot  of  room,  perhaps  she's  just  been  there  and
seen  it,  so  you  must  ask.

M.  R.  H. I  will  write.

F.  Now Feda  thinks she's making  fun,  you  couldn't

stand  on  the  roof  there,  could  you  ?
M.  R.  H.  No.

F.  She  says  there's  a  reason  why  one  might  want  to

stand  on  the  roof.  She  doesn't  mean  that  you
walk  about  it,  but  someone  had  to  get  on  the
roof  for  a  purpose,  and  they  didn't  use  a  ladder.

M.  R.  H. I  can't  understand.

F.  She  gets  impatient  ; it  doesn't  look  to  Feda  like  a

house  you  could  stand  on  the  roof,  it's  an  ordi-
nary roof.  It  had  to  be  mended,  Feda  thinks,
no  one  conld  have  walked  on  the  roof,  they
would  have  fallen  off.  Feda  is  right,  she  gives
in  that  much  ;  Feda  can  only  sense  what  she
means. She's  awfully  pleased,  she's  laughing.

In  this  description  there  are  several  mistakes,  and  yet,
taken  in  conjunction  with  the  fall  which  is  mentioned
just  before  it  begins,  it  is  pretty  clear  that  The  White
Cottage,  Malvern  Wells,  is  meant ;  the  house  which  we
referred  to  at  the  beginning  of  this  paper  as  having  been
much  loved  by  A.  V.  B.  and  myself.  A.  V.  B.  had  a
fall  on  to  her  knees  at  the  house  in  question.  In  this
house  of  mine  there  was  a  little  vestibule  with  a  door


368  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

to  right  and  left  ;  passing  those  doors  as  you  entered
the  house,  the  hall  ran  on,  broken  into  by  a  staircase,
and  towards  the  end  of  this  hall,  or  little  vestibule,  it
grew  darker.  Light  came  down  the  staircase  as  Feda
says  ;  she  does  not  get  quite  clearly  why  this  was.  It
was  not  from  a  skylight,  it  was  from  the  panes  of  a
door  on  the  first  landing,  which,  facing  the  staircase,
led  out  on  to  a  back  road.  All  the  way  up  the  stairs
were  small  pictures,  but  at  this  point  Feda  makes  a
mistake,  because  the  stairs  ran  up  in  one  straight  flight
and  had  no  half-landing.  Feda  is  correct,  however,  when
she  says  that  there  is  a  way  to  go  up  to  another  floor,
but  by  a  different  staircase.  Two  of  the  servants'  bed-
rooms in  this  house  were  approached  by  a  little  enclosed
staircase  which  led  up  from  the  first  landing,  and  which
had  no  connection  whatever  with  the  main  stairs
or  the  back  staircase.  This  little  staircase  could  not
be  seen  from  the  front  hall  or  from  the  landing,  you  only
discovered  it  when  you  were  actually  in  front  of  it.
Feda  is  entirely  wrong  regarding  a  big  box  or  chest.
I  wrote  to  the  lady  who  purchased  our  house,  and  she
assured  me  that  nothing  of  the  kind  had  ever  been  on
the  landing.  With  regard  to  the  reference  to  the  roof,
about  which  A.  V.  B.  appears  to  be  making  fun,  the
amount  of  repairing  required  by  this  house  had  become
a  standing  joke  ;  there  was  always  something  going  wrong
with  some  part  of  the  house  or  another,  including  the
roof  ;  so  much  so,  that  I  once  wrote  a  skit  about  it  for
A.  V.  B.'s  amusement.  I  do  not,  however,  understand
the  reference  to  someone  getting  on  to  the  roof  without
a  ladder  ;  as  far  as  I  can  remember  the  workmen  always
used  a  ladder.  At  the  same  time  the  roof  at  the  back
sloped  down  very  much,  coming  close  to  a  fairly  low
wall,  and  might,  I  should  say,  have  been  accessible  with-
out a  ladder ;  one  part  of  the  roof  could  also  be  reached
from  an  upper  window.  This  is  the  first  description  of
The  White  Cottage  ever  attempted  by  A.  V.  B.  through
Feda  ;  other  and  more  evidential  descriptions  of  the  house
and  the  neighbourhood  occurred  later  on.  Here  is  one
of  them.


Lxxvm.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  369


On  October  18th,  1916,  at  a  sitting  which  I  took,  Lady
Troubridge  recording,  we  got  a  description  of  some
garden  and  green-house  flowers,  which  we  omit  because,
although  correct,  it  was  not  very  interesting.  This  des-
cription of  flowers,  however,  led  on  to  the  following  :

F.  She's  taking  Feda  inside  the  house  and  upstairs.

It's  a  straggly  house,  when  you've  got  upstairs
and  want  to  get  to  a  certain  room  you  have  to
go  up  more  stairs.  Feda  thinks  there's  no  need
for  them  !  She  says  there  are  two  staircases  with
a  long  passage  in  between  them.  She  says  there's
a  Persian  rug  in  a  room,  a  large  one  with  a
very  light  ground,  it's  on  something  rather  browny
— a  brown  floor  cover.  Down  the  passage,  half-
way up  the  walls  it  is  dark,  then  there's  a
little  ledge  and  it  goes  lighter  to  the  top.  In  a
way  the  garden  is  rather  a  funny  shape,  it's  in
three  distinct  parts  and  yet  they  all  run  into
one  another.

M.  R.  H. Yes,  that's  right.

F.  But  there's  something  at  one  side,  cuts  them  up

rather.
M.  R.  H. What  ?

F.  It  looks  like  a  kind  of  outbuilding,  it's  not  water.

Feda  sees  very  indistinctly  something  built  out.
You  can  get  right  round  the  house  and  get  in
at  the  other  side.  You  can  get  in  three  ways  ;
two  often  used,  but  one  not  so  much.  From
the  front  she  takes  Feda  round  ;  it's  a  funny
shape,  it  goes  in  and  comes  out  again.  You  can
go  in  and  get  out  at  another  place  too.

M.  R.  H.  Right.  There  are  three  entrances  if  it's  the  house
I  mean.

F.  She  thinks  most  of  the  one  at  the  front  and  the

one  you  go  right  round  to.  She's  most  interested
in  that  back  one.  She's  smiling.  She's  talking
about  a  room,  nothing  to  do  with  the  house  at
all,  cut  off  from  it  ;  it's  a  properly  furnished
room,  a  comfy  room,  you  could  sit  in.


370 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


M.  R.  H.  Right.

F.  There's  something  wicker  in  it.

M.  R.  H. Quite  right.

F.  There's something hanging on the wall, not  a

picture,  but  something  in  colours — Feda  can't
quite  see,  it  looks  like  a  little  curtain  not  very
low  down.  It  hangs  in  folds  carelessly,  it  was
something  used  sometimes,  but  not  always.  People
used  to  come  in  and  put  it  there.

M.  R.  H I  can't  quite  place  that.

F.  Also  in  a  corner  it  looks  as  though  someone  had

left  an  umbrella  and  a  stick.  There  is  a  table
too,  with  a  book  on  it.  What  is  she  saying  ?
She  says  something  about  "  guilty  of  having
tea  there."  Feda  doesn't  know,  it  looks  as  though
someone  had  carried  a  tray  there  as  though  for  tea.

M.  R.  H.  Yes,  that's  all  right  ;  but  I  don't  understand  what
she  means  by  "  guilty."

F.  "Guilty" must have got through wrong,  Feda

expects.

M.  R.  H. Ask her, does she  remember that the place  she

speaks  of  has  been  sold  ?
F.  She  didn't  seem  to  remember  until  you  said  it.

M.  R.  H. Does  she  remember  it  now  ?

F.  She  says  she  really  hadn't  thought  of  the  place  as

having  been  sold  or  not,  only  as  a  test.
M.  R.  H. It's  a  good  test.
F.  Was  it  right  about  the  tea-tray  ?

M.  R.  H. Quite  right.

F.  Is there a square window in that room, not  a

long-shaped  one  ?
M.  R.  H. Well,  yes.

F.  Were  there,  do  you  remember,  some  pinky-coloured

cushions  that  were  taken  there,  plain  cushions  ?
M.  R.  H. Yes,  there  were.

F.  She  says  it  used  to  be  damp  in  there,  and  things

couldn't  be  left  there — it  was  nice  and  dry  in
warm  weather,  but  not  at  other  times.  There
was  a  nasty  smell  once,  after  its  being  closed
up,  which  worried  her.


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  371


M.  R.  H. I  can't  remember  the  smell.

F.  Feda  doesn't  think  she's  right,  but  she  says  some-

thing about  clothes  being  left  in  there.
M.  R.  H. She  is  partially  right.

F.  It doesn't feel like a place for clothes — there's

another  place  just  near  it  with  tools  in.  She's
showing  Feda  a  thing  with  a  long  handle  and  a
round  thing  on  it.

M.  R.  H.  Right.

F.  There  are  all  kinds  of  iron  things  in  there.  Feda

hears  them  clankety. She  says  a  tree  came  down.
M.  R.  H. That's  right.
F.  After  some  delay  it  was  cut  up.

M.  R.  H. I  don't  place  the  cutting  up.
F.  Not  at  the  time,  it  wasn't.

M.  R.  H. Yes,  I  can  place  that,  I  think,  perhaps.
F.  Pieces  were  taken  off  it  purposely.

M.  R.  H.  Perhaps.

F.  She's thinking of a storm, a very windy  time

there.  You  remember  a  road  runs  across  the
front  of  the  house,  and  another  runs  down  the  side
making  a  right  angle  ;  you  couldn't  see  the  road
when  you  were  standing  in  the  garden.

M.  R,  H. Quite  right.

F.  But  sometimes  you  can  hear  noises  on  it.

M.  R.  H. Do  you  mean  this  side  road  has  something  to  do

with  the  garden  ?
F.  Yes,  it's  soft  and  gravelly,  Avith  a  border  running

down  it. It's  not  a  wide  road.
M.  R.  H.  Right.

F.  She  says  now  something about a  church not  far

away.

M.  R,  H. That's  correct.

K.  Lf you walk a little  further  along  the road  that

runs  past  the  house,  you  can  see  steam  from  a
steam  engine.

M.  R.  H.  Correct.

F.  As you're standing by the side of the  house,

looking there  (Feda points out beyond),  you'll
see  the  ground  rises  right  up  sharply.
2  a


372  Miss  Baddy ffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


M.  R.  H. Quite  right.

F.  She  says  she's  clever.

M.  R,  H. You  both  are.

F.  Yes, she  is, Feda  can't  get  it  if  she  can't  ;  she

says  she  loved  that  place,  and  loves  to  think
of  it,

M.  R.  H. So  do  I.

F.  She says  : "  Happy times." She says you  could

go  to  one,  two,  or  three  parts  of  that  house,
and  think  each  was  separate,  but  Feda  thinks
that's  not  quite  right.  It's  a  very  funny  shaped
house ;  you  know  when  you  get  to  the  top  of
those  stairs,  you  can  turn  one  way  or  the  other,
if  you  go  to  the  right  you  go  through  a  narrow
part  and  come  to  a  broader  part — a  landing.

M.  R.  H.  Yes.

F.  She says  that  from  the floor, that  is  the  ground

floor,  you  can  go  down  again,  she  says  right
inside  the  house  there  are  stairs  going  down
again.  She  says  there  are  rooms  downstairs
underneath  the  back  of  the  house,  back  of  the
house  the  rooms  are — it  makes  another  floor,
you  used  to  keep  things  down  there.

M.  R.  H. Cellars  ?

F.  No,  not  coals,  far  more  important  things  ; it  makes

an  extra  floor.  You  or  she  wouldn't  like  to  live
there,  but  one  could  live  there.

M.  R.  H. Feda,  I  am  addled  !

F.  Can't  Mrs.  Una  remember  ?

U.  V.  T.  No.

F.  Under the ground  floor there are other  rooms.

underneath  the  floor  the  dining-room's  on.
M.  R.  H. I  can't  remember,  she  must  have  made  a  mistake.
F.  She  says,  "  No,  no,"  you  can  get  right  into  them  from

the back of  the  house, but they're not  visible

from the  front. You know  when  she's  positive,

she's  awful  positive  about  things.
M.  R.  H. Yes.  I  know.

F.  She  doesn't  want  you  to  forget  that  point,  and  she

wants you to tell her if you remember.  You


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  373


know  the  part  that  sticks  out  from  the  house-
it  ■  looks  to  Feda  not  so  high  as  the  house,  a
bit  lower.  Now,  it's  difficult  to  explain,  but
when  you  look  towards  where  the  ground  slopes
up,  the  view  is  cut  by  something  that  looks
light,  almost  like  a  line  ;  Feda  doesn't  know  if
everyone  would  notice  it  that  way,  but  it  cuts
the  view.  There's  a  very  old  building  in  a  bad
state  of  repair,  some  of  the  windows  are  out,  it's
dark  grey  stone,  it's  not  far  from  the  house  ;
Feda  doesn"t  think  you  can  see  it  from  the  house
but  you  get  to  it  very  easily  ;  it's  very  old  and
dark.  It's  been  there  not  fifty  or  a  hundred,
but  several  hundred  years.
Yes.

Feda  doesnt  know  why  she's  interested  in  telegraph
poles  and  wires.  Oh  !  you  know  the  road  that
runs  across  the  front  of  the  house,  if  you  go
further  up  that  road,  on  the  left  side  there's
a  clump  of  trees.

We  are  of  opinion  that  the  above  description  undoubtedly
refers  to  the  same  house  of  which  a  very  slight  description
was  received  on  October  9th,  1916.  This  house,  The
White  Cottage,  Malvern  Wells,  was  as  Feda  says,  a
straggly  one.  It  had  once  been  an  old  inn,  with  a  cider
house  standing  beside  it,  the  two  being  probably  connected  ;
the  inn  and  the  cider  house  had  later  been  turned  into
a  dwelling-house.  At  least  local  tradition  says  so.  If
you  entered  this  house  by  the  front  door  and  went
upstairs,  and  you  wished  to  reach  the  second  floor,  you
had  to  ascend  the  little  enclosed  staircase  which  we  have
alluded  to  in  our  remarks  upon  the  description  given
on  October  9th,  1916.  We  do  not  know  why  Feda  gives
it  as  her  opinion  that  there  is  no  need  for  this  small
staircase,  as  without  it  the  rooms  could  not  have  been
reached.  She  is  correct  when  she  speaks  of  there  being
two  staircases  with  a  long  passage  in  between  them  ;
what  had  originally  been  the  inn  possessed  one  staircase,
and  what  had  originally  been  the  cider  house  possessed


M.  R.  H.
F.


374  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

another.  There  was  a  bathroom  connecting  the  two  wings
of  the  house,  which,  when  not  in  use,  was  the  common  way  of
approach  between  one  staircase  and  another.  This  bath-
room had  presumably  at  one  time  been  a  passage,  it
always  gave  me  that  impression.  In  my  dressing-room
I  had  a  Persian  rug,  at  least  I  think  it  was  Persian,  at
all  events  it  was  Oriental.  It  had  a  dark  blue  design
on  a  white  ground,  and  the  floor  on  which  this  rug  was
laid  was  covered  with  brown  linoleum.  As  to  the  size
of  the  rug  I  should  say  it  would  have  been  better  to
describe  it  as  fairly  large.  A.  V.  B.  was  particularly
fond  of  this  rug,  begging  me  not  to  sell  it  when  we
broke  up  the  house  shortly  before  her  death  ;  we  had
quite  a  long  discussion  on  the  subject.  Feda  makes  a
curious  mistake  when  she  says  that  the  walls  of  the
passage  are  dark,  and  that  then  there  is  a  little  ledge
with  light  colour  above  it.  All  the  walls  of  the  passages
of  this  house  were  distempered  in  cream,  but,  curiously
enough,  A.  V.  B.  and  I  had  many  times  discussed  the
advisability  of  panelling  the  hall,  stairs  and  passages  with
oak,  which  was  to  have  ended  about  half  way  up  in
a  ledge.

The  garden  of  our  house  was  rather  an  unusual  shape  ;
it  was  more  or  less  on  the  side  of  a  hill,  and  in  three
distinct  parts.  I  should  have  divided  it  myself  as  follows  :
one  part  of  the  garden  consisting  of  two  lawns  in  front
of  the  house  ;  another  part  of  the  garden  consisting  of
a  wide  herbaceous  border,  etc.,  completely  hidden  from
the  first  part  mentioned  by  a  tall  hedge  and  trees  ;
and  yet  another  part  lying  below  the  lawns,  which
was  totally  different  from  the  rest  of  the  garden.  Feda's
alhision  to  something  which  seems  to  cut  the  garden  up,
something  built  out  which  she  cannot  see  distinctly,
probably  refers  to  a  cottage  which  stood  in  the  garden
a  very  short  distance  from,  and  on  the  same  level  as,
the  house. We  shall  have  to  refer  to  this  cottage  later  on.

And  now  we  come  to  a  rather  interesting  point.  Feda
says  that  you  can  go  round  the  house  and  get  in  at  the
other  side.  She  says  that  the  house  has  three  entrances,
two  of  which  are  often  used,  but  one  not  so  much,  and


Lxxvm.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  375

goes  on  to  say  that  A.  V.  B.  is  taking  her  round  the
house  from  the  front,  presumably  we  may  suppose  for
some  special  reason  ;  and  she  further  says  that  you  can
get  in  at  one  part  of  the  house  and  get  out  at  another
place,  and  that  A.  V.  B.  thinks  most  of  the  entrance
at  the  front  and  the  entrance  you  have  to  go  right
round  the  house  to  get  to,  and  that  A.  V.  B.  is  most
of  all  interested  in  the  back  entrance.

The  house  in  question  was  on  the  side  of  a  hill.  It
had,  in  addition  to  the  tradesmen's  entrance,  two  principal
entrances,  one  at  the  back  and  one  at  the  front  ;  the  front
door  was  on  a  lower  level  than  the  back  door,  but  was
reached  by  a  steep  path  up  the  garden.  The  other  door
was  directly  opposite  the  front  door,  but  was  at  the  top
of  the  stairs  on  the  first  floor.  This  last  door  was  ap-
proached from  outside  by  a  comfortable  road  ;  it  was  on
a  level  with  that  road,  and  if  you  entered  the  house  from
that  side  you  entered  it  directly  on  the  bedroom  floor —
in  fact,  one  may  say,  that  the  hind  legs  of  the  house
were  shorter  than  its  forelegs.  A.  V.  B.  particularly
disliked  hills,  she  also  disliked  stairs,  her  heart  being
rather  delicate  ;  it  was  therefore  her  invariable  habit  to
use  this  back  entrance  in  preference  to  the  front  one  ;
our  motor  was  always  stopped  at  this  back  entrance,
and,  when  walking,  she  preferred  the  gentle  incline  which
led  up  to  the  road  running  past  this  back  door,  rather
than  the  steep  incline  which  led  up  through  the  garden
to  the  front  door.  This  back  entrance  to  the  cottage
was  often  remarked  on  by  A.  V.  B.  as  being,  for  her,
one  of  its  principal  attractions,  and  she  was  very  fond
of  leaving  this  door  open  in  the  summer,  by  doing  which
one  obtained  a  beautiful  view  of  the  hill  beyond.  As
I  have  already  said,  in  addition  to  the  two  entrances
described  there  was  a  tradesmen's  entrance,  making,  as
Feda  states,  three  entrances  in  all.

Shortly  after  this  description  of  the  entrances,  Feda
says  that  A.  V.  B.  is  talking  about  a  room  :  a  room  that
has  nothing  to  do  with  the  house  at  all,  that  is  cut  off
from  it,  and  yet  that  is  properly  furnished ;  in  fact,  a
comfortable  room that  you  could  sit  in. She  speaks  of


376  Miss  Badclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

something  wicker  in  this  room,  of  pinky-coloured,  plain
cushions,  and  also  of  a  tea-tray  having  been  carried  out
there.  Now  in  the  cottage  to  which  we  have  already
referred  as  standing  beside  the  house,  there  were  two
communicating  rooms,  used  by  the  servants,  one  as  a
double  bedroom  and  one  as  a  servants'  hall.  This  cottage
was  only  a  stone's  throw  away  from  the  house,  and  our
servants  were  in  the  habit  of  having  their  tea  there.
In  this  connection  the  word  "  guilty  "'  is  not  understood
by  us,  though  I  am  bound  to  say  that  A.  V.  B.  and  I
occasionally  deplored  the  noise  our  servants  made  at
teatime  when  we  were  in  the  garden.  I  think  it  must
be  admitted  that  it  is  not  very  usual  to  have  a  well-
furnished  room  which  is  used  as  a  servants'  hall  in  a
separate  building  detached  from  the  house.  There  were
wicker  chairs  in  this  servants'  hall,  and,  of  course,  a  table.
I  cannot  remember  any  coloured  thing,  like  a  curtain
hanging  on  the  wall  such  as  Feda  speaks  of,  a  thing  that
people  used  to  put  there — it  may  have  been  a  cloth  or
duster  left  there  by  the  servants.  The  window  of  this
servants'  hall  was  practically  square,  and  as  Feda  states
there  were  plain  pink  cushions  in  that  room.

Now,  one  of  the  great  drawbacks  to  that  annexe  was
the  damp  ;  as  Feda  says,  it  was  dry  in  warm  weather,
but  not  at  other  times.  A.  V.  B.  knew  this  well
enough ;  we  received  heavy  gas  bills  for  keeping  a
constant  gas-fire  in  the  annexe  throughout  the  winter  or
during  wet  weather.  On  one  occasion  both  the  servants'
hall  and  its  communicating  bedroom  were  not  used  for
some  little  time.  A.  V.  B.  was  present  when  the  rooms
were  opened  up,  but  I  cannot  remember  that  she  remarked
on  their  smelling  nasty,  though  they  probably  did  so.
A.  V.  B.  speaks  of  clothes  having  been  left  in  that  room,
and,  in  spite  of  Feda's  demur,  she  is  right.  Some
months  prior  to  A.  V.  B.'s  death  we  let  the  house
furnished,  reserving  for  ourselves  these  two  outside  rooms,
and  A.  V.  B.  stored  a  quantity  of  clothes  in  the  servants'
bedroom.  The  last  time  that  A.  V.  B.  ever  saw  our
house  at  Malvern  Wells  was  when  she  went  there  on  a
visit, solely for the purpose of collecting and  packing


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  377

these  clothes.  We  put  our  trunks  in  the  servants'  hall,
and  removed  the  clothes  from  the  servants'  bedroom,
strewing  them  all  over  the  servants*  hall,  where  they
remained  for  several  days  during  the  process  of  packing.
It  must  be  clearly  understood  that  these  rooms  were,  in
a  way,  more  like  one  room  than  two,  inasmuch  as  the
bedroom  where  the  clothes  were  stored  had  no  separate
entrance,  and  had  to  be  approached  through  the  servants'
hall.

At  the  end  of  the  garden  path,  which  led  from  the  door
of  this  servants'  hall,  there  was  a  tool  shed,  which
A.  V.  B.  and  I  had  erected  principally  for  the  accommo-
dation of  my  particular  gardening  tools.  With  regard  to
the  tree  said  to  have  come  down,  this  reference  may
refer  to  one  of  two  trees  ;  either  to  a  favourite  tree  of
A.  V.  B.'s  which  died,  and  had  to  be  cut  down,
owing  to  the  strong  winds  which  made  it  a  danger  ; — this
tree  I  have  since  remembered  I  did.  gradually  have  cut
up  for  firewood  : — or  it  may  refer  to  an  accident  which
A.  V.  B.  heard  of  shortly  before  her  death.  She  was
herself  at  The  White  Cottage  when  her  favourite  tree
was  cut  down,  but  was  in  London  when  she  heard  of
the  accident.  A  builder  who  had  worked  for  us  for  some
years  was  killed  by  a  falling  tree  during  a  great  storm  at
Malvern  Wells.  This  accident  particularly  impressed  itself
upon  A.  V.  B.,  the  more  so  because  she  though c  at  first
that  this  man  had  been  killed  by  a  tree  in  he]'  own
garden.  We  afterwards  discovered  that  this  was  not  the
case.

Regarding  the  roads,  one  of  which  is  said  to  run  across
the  front  of  the  house  and  the  other  at  a  right  angle,
there  is  a  road  running  in  front  of  the  house  at  the  foot
of  the  garden.  There  is  no  road  running  at  right  angles
to  the  house,  at  »,least  none  very  near,  but  there  is  a
garden  path.  We  think,  however,  that  I  gave  Feda  a
clue  regarding  this  right-angle  road,  which  she  afterwards
turned  into  a  path.  It  appears  to  us  that  my  words
may  have  done  so.  This  right- angle  path,  if  it  were
really  meant,  was  completely  hidden  from  the  front  garden,
and  had  a  border  down  one  side  of  it.


378  Miss  Badclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

The  church  which  A.  V.  B.  attended  was  not  far  from
the  house  ;  and  after  this  reference  to  a  church  we  get
an  extremely  good  remark  from  Feda.  who  says  that  if
you  walk  a  little  further  on  along  the  road  that  runs
past  the  house  you  can  see  steam  from  a  steam
engine.  Now  a  little  further  on  along  the  road  which
Feda  describes,  is  a  large  stone-quarry  which  employs
traction-engines.  These  traction-engines  had  become  a
veritable  curse  to  the  neighbourhood.  There  was  always
a  traction-engine  steaming  at  the  quarry,  and  a  few  steps
beyond  the  quarry  again,  on  the  same  road,  was  a  little
yard  where  these  engines  were  kept.  There  were  nearly
always  one  or  two  of  them  steaming  in  the  yard  as  well.
No  one  deplored  the  eyesore  of  these  traction-engines  and
their  noise  more  than  did  A.  V.  B.  On  one  occasion  they
cut  up  the  back  road  used  by  our  motor,  and  A.  V.  B.
was  not  unnaturally  annoyed.  Feda  is  quite  correct  in
saying  that  standing  by  the  house  and  looking  out  you
would  see  the  ground  rise  sharply.  Supposing  you  were
standing  by  the  back  door,  or  to  the  side  of  the  house,  you
would  see.  across  the  road,  the  hill  rising  sharply  up  ;  it  was
A.  V.  B.'s  favourite  view.  And  just  here  in  the  sitting
we  get  a  little  personal  touch,  which,  in  view  of  the
detective's  report,  is  of  interest.  A.  V.  B.  says  that  she
loved  the  place,  that  she  loves  to  think  of  it,  and  she
speaks  of  happy  times.

Now,  while  making  inquiries  in  Malvern  Wells  and  the
neighbourhood,  the  detective  employed  by  me  ascertained
that  there  was  an  almost  universal  impression  current  to
the  effect  that  A.  V.  B.  disliked  The  White  Cottage,
Malvern  Wells,  and  the  neighbourhood  thereof  intensely.
My  detective  was  told  by  several  people  that  it  was
entirely  A.  V.  B.'s  fault  that  the  house  had  been  sold  ;
that  I  should  have  been  contented  to  remain  there  had
it  not  been  for  her  influence ;  and  indeed  he  found  that
there  existed  quite  a  prejudice  in  the  neighbourhood
against  A.  V.  B.  on  this  score.  But  in  reality,  as  A.  V.  B.
stated  clearly  through  Feda  during  the  sitting  we  are
discussing,  she  loved  The  White  Cottage  and  all  the
surrounding country. She felt deeply the necessity  of


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator .  379

having  to  sell  the  house  owing  to  the  war.  Lady  Trou-
bridge was  staying  at  the  same  hotel  as  A.  V.  B.  while
I  was  away  making  the  final  arrangements  for  selling
The  White  Cottage,  and  she  assures  me  that  A.  V.  B.
fretted  very  much,  and  spoke  to  her  constantly  of  the
deep  regret  which  she  felt  at  severing  her  connection
with  Malvern  Wells.  In  going  over  A.  V.  B.'s  papers
after  she  died,  I  found  that  she  had  kept  a  letter  from  me
which  I  had  written  during  my  last  visit  to  our  house.
She  had  apparently  felt  so  much  sentiment  about  this
house  that  a  note  had  been  pencilled  by  her  on  the
envelope  of  this  letter,  to  the  effect  that  I  had  written
it  from  The  White  Cottage  at  a  time  when  we  were
about  to  give  it  up.

We  cannot  but  feel  that  an  excellent  proof  of  Mrs.
Leonard's  honesty  is  afforded  by  this  diversity  between
the  opinion  held  in  the  neighbourhood  and  A.  V.  B.'s
real  sentiments,  since  it  appears  that  had  anybody  been
inquiring  •  regarding  A.  V.  B.  and  myself  among  the  local
people,  he  would  have  received  information  on  this  point
entirely  contrary  to  that  which  we  received  through  Feda.

We  now  come  to  that  part  of  the  extract  in  which
Feda  returns  to  the  description  of  the  inside  of  the  house.
Feda  states  that  A.  V.  B.  says  there  were  one,  two,
three  parts  of  the  house,  and  that  you  would  think  each
part  was  separate,  but  she  goes  on  to  say  that  she  does
not  think  that  A.  V.  B.  is  quite  right.  In  our  opinion
there  were  decidedly  two  parts  of  that  house,  each  of
which  you  would  think  was  separate  if  you  did  not  know
the  house  well.  This  was  certainly  the  impression  left
on  Lady  Troubridge  during  the  two  visits  she  paid  to  The
White  Cottage.  We  have  already  said  that  at  one  time
the  house  had  consisted  of  an  inn  and  a  cider  house ;
as  Feda  says,  it  was  a  very  funnily  shaped  house.  With
regard  to  the  third  part  of  the  house,  A.  V.  B.  may  have
been  thinking  of  the  upper  servants"  rooms  which,  as  has
already  been  stated,  were  approached  by  a  staircase  which
was  so  far  from  being  obvious  that  Lady  Troubridge  did
not  discover  its  existence  until  she  had  stayed  with  me
for  two  days. Or  A.  V.  B.  may  have  been  thinking  of


380  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


the  outside  cottage,  which,  it  will  be  remembered,  con-
tained a  servants'  hall  and  a  double  servants'  bedroom,
and  which,  although  not  attached  to  the  house,  was  only
a  few  steps  away.  Both  these  suppositions  are  possibly
a  little  far-fetched  however,  so  we  do  not  press  them  ;
we  will  merely  say  that  the  statement  is  correct  with
regard  to  two  parts  of  the  house.  Feda  is  again  practi-
cally right  when  she  says  that  having  reached  the  top
of  the  stairs  you  can  turn  one  way  or  the  other,  and
that  if  you  go  to  the  right  you  go  through  a  narrow
part,  and  come  to  a  broader  p  landing.

If  you  turned  sharply  to  the  left,  having  mounted  to
the  top  of  the  principal  stairs,  you  came  to  some  of
the  bedrooms  ;  if  you  turned  sharply  to  the  right  you
would  go  through  the  bathroom,  previously  alluded  to,
entering  it  by  one  door  and  leaving  it  by  another  door
directly  opposite,  and  would  find  yourself  on  a  landing
in  a  totally  different  part  of  the  house  ;  the  part  of  the
house  in  fact  which  had  at  one  time  been  a  cider  house.
This  bathroom  was  a  narrow  apartment.  I  do  not,  how-
ever, consider  that  the  landing  upon  which  you  came  out
was  broader  than  the  bathroom.  To  the  best  of  my
recollection  it  was  narrower,  unless  you  included  the
staircase  that  led  down  from  this  landing,  in  which  case,
should  you  measure  from  the  landing  window  straight
across  the  stairs  to  the  wall  on  the  far  side,  the  space
might  be  wider  than  that  occupied  by  the  bathroom.

We  now  come  to  a  definite  mistake,  and  it  is  inter-
esting to  notice  with  what  tenacity  A.  V.  B.,  or  perhaps
Feda,  clings  to  this  wrong  assertion,  in  spite  of  the  fact
that  we  both  of  us  contradict  it.  We  may  possibly  be
entitled  to  assume  from  this  that  Mrs.  Leonard  is  not
very  suggestible  when  in  trance.  We  refer  to  Feda's
statement  regarding  the  basement  rooms.

As  will  have  been  gathered  from  our  remarks  during
that  part  of  the  sitting,  there  were  no  basement  rooms
at  The  White  Cottage.  But  Feda  sticks  to  the  assertion
that  there  were  such  rooms,  which  could  be  entered
from  the  back  of  the  house.  We  will  refer  again  later
to these basement rooms. We  wish  first to deal  with


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  381

the  few  other  details  of  description  given  by  Feda  in  the
present  sitting.  Feda  speaks  of  a  part  which  sticks  out
from  the  house,  and  which  does  not  appear  to  be  so  high
as  the  house.  This  may  quite  well  be  taken  to  refer  to
a  bow-window  recently  added  to  one  side  of  the  house ;
this  window  had  a  roof  which  gave  it  the  appearance
from  outside  of  being  in  keeping  with  the  general  archi-
tecture of  the  building.  Feda  next  speaks  of  something
which  cuts  the  view  as  you  look  out  towards  where  the
ground  slopes  up.  She  says  that  it  is  light  in  appearance,
almost  like  a  line,  but  appears  to  think  that  it  is  probable
that  she  has  only  caught  a  fleeting  impression  of  this
thing,  since  she  says :  "  Feda  does  not  know  if  everyone
would  notice  it  that  way,  but  it  cuts  the  view."

Now  I  cannot  think  to  what  this  refers,  unless  we
give  Feda  the  benefit  of  supposing  that  she  was  not
seeing  the  picture  very  clearly  at  the  moment  ;  in  which
case  I  should  say  without  the  slightest  hesitation  that
A.  V.  B.  was  harking  back,  for  the  sake  of  evidence,  to
an  old  grievance.  A.  V.  B.  was  particularly  fond,  as  I
have  already  said,  of  a  bit  of  wild  hillside  at  the  back
of  the  house.  She  opposed  every  effort  on  my  part  to
bring  this  land  under  cultivation,  and  was  very  much
annoyed  when  I  finally  built  a  long  green-house  on  the
spot.  This  green-house  was  painted  white,  and  straight
along  the  top  of  it  ran  the  usual  narrow  beam  of  the
roof.  I  remember  well  that  we  returned  home  one  day
to  find  that  this  green-house  had  been  completed  during
our  absence,  and  that  A.  V.  B.  exclaimed  with  great
regret  that  the  hillside  was  entirely  ruined,  and  that  the
white  line  running  along  the  top  of  my  green-house  was
painfully  obvious ;  in  fact,  that  I  had  cut  her  view.  I
must  admit  that  I  myself  was  somewhat  appalled  at  the
hideous  effect  which  I  had  produced,  and  as  soon  as
possible  had  all  the  woodwork  painted  green,  hoping  that
thereby  it  would  blend  into  the  hillside.  A.  V.  B.,  how-
ever, never  ceased  to  deplore  the  effect  of  this  green-
house.

The  very  old  building  said  by  Feda  to  be  built  of
dark  grey  stone,  to  be  in  a  bad  state  of repair  with


382  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

some  of  the  windows  out,  and,  although  you  could
not  see  it  from  the  house,  to  be  easily  accessible,
appears  to  me  to  refer  to  Little  Malvern  Church  and  its
ruined  cloister ;  this  church  and  ruins  stand  actually  in
the  garden  of  Little  Malvern  Court.  These  ruins,  as  Feda
says,  are  of  dark  grey  stone,  and  are  several  hundred
years  old.  They  were  well  known  to  A.  V.  B.  during
her  lifetime,  as  she  had,  on  several  occasions,  seen  and
admired  them  when  visiting  Little  Malvern  Court.  After
this  reference  to  the  ruins,  Feda  says  suddenly :  "  Feda
doesn't  know  why  she  is  interested  in  telegraph  poles
and  wires."  Now  not  so  very  long  before  A.  V.  B.
died  we  were  both  much  distressed  at  finding  that  during
our  absence  from  The  White  Cottage,  some  fine  old  thorn
trees  on  the  back  road  had  been  cut  down.  We  enquired
rather  indignantly  why  this  had  been  done,  and  were
told  that  the  telegraph  company  had  ordered  it.  They
had  said  that,  as  their  poles  ran  along  the  bank,  the
branches  of  the  trees  in  question  interfered  with  their
wires.  We  took  a  great  deal  of  trouble  to  investigate
this  matter ;  I  remember  that  we  drove  some  distance  in
order  to  interview  the  agent  of  the  estate  upon  which
the  trees  had  been  cut  down.  These  details  are  only
mentioned  in  order  to  show  that  it  would  not  be  far-
fetched to  suppose  that  A.  V.  B.  would  remember  tele-
graph poles  and  wires  in  connection  with  The  White
Cottage.

Feda  is  quite  correct  in  saying  that  if  you  went  along
the  road  that  runs  past  the  house  you  would  come  to
a  clump  of  trees  on  the  left.  I  am  taking  it  for  granted
that  she  is  taking  me  along  that  road  in  the  same
direction  as  she  did  when  she  mentioned  the  steam-
engine.  As  a  matter  of  fact  you  would  also  come  to  a
clump  of  trees  if  you  turned  in  the  other  direction,  but
I  do  not  think  that  they  are  the  trees  meant,  because,
supposing  yourself  to  be  going  in  the  direction  of  the
steam-engine,  you  would  come  upon  a  clump  of  trees  on
your  left,  which  you  would  have  to  pass  to  reach  British
Camp,  a  favourite  walk  of  A.  V.  B.'s  ;  you  would  also
have  to  pass  close  to  them  to  reach  Little  Malvern  Court,


1


Lxxvni.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  383

near  which  was  the  very  old  building  described  shortly
before  the  mention  of  the  trees.

During  the  description  of  the  inside  of  the  house  in
this  sitting  of  October  18th,  1916,  Feda  mentioned  some-
thing that  sounded  like  a  bell-indicator.  This  she  said
was  in  an  oblong  room,  towards  the  back  of  the  house,
on  the  ground  floor.  We  omit  this  description  for  the
sake  of  brevity.  There  was  an  oblong  room  at  the  back
of  the  house  on  the  ground  floor,  namely,  the  pantry,
and  there  may  or  may  not  have  been  a  bell-indicator
there.  I  do  not  think  there  was,  though  we  had  electric
bells. However,  the  point  is  a  trifling  one.

We  now  return  to  the  mis-statement  made  by  Feda
to  the  effect  that  the  house  contained  basement  rooms  ;
and  we  will  give  in  detail  what  would  appear  to  be  the
correction  of  this  curious  mistake.  During  the  sitting
of  October  25th,  1916,  which  I  took,  Lady  Troubridge
being  the  recorder,  the  following  occurred  :

M.  R.  H. Do  you  remember,  Feda,  that  you  described  a  house,

two  sittings  ago  ?
F.  Yes.

M.  R.  H.  She  insisted  on  there  being  basement  rooms  in  that
house,  and  told  me  to  tell  her  if  I  remembered,
but  I  know  that  there  were  no  basement  rooms,
and  by  the  description  there  is  only  one  house
she  can  have  meant.  She  must  have  got  it
through  wrong.

F.  She  still  says  that  there  are. — not  at  the  front  but

at  the  back.

M.  R.  H. You  know  she  said  underneath  the  ground  floor.
F.  She  says,  yes,  it  had  rooms.

M.  R.  H. Does  she  mean  that  you  enter  the  house  from  the

front  or  the  back  ?
F.  You  know  as  you  come  in  at  the  front, you  go

straight  along,  and  she  says  the  rooms  are  under

that.

M.  R.  H. No. How  many  rooms  does  she  say  there  are  ?
F.  Two  at  the  back. It's  not  like  this  house  (meaning

Mrs. Leonard's flat). They  are  lower  down  than


384  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

in  this. She  says  you  would  find  them  if  you
examined. Were  there  any  cellars  ?
M.  R.  H. No  ; but I may be mistaking the house,  could
she  show  the  first  letter  of  the  place  were  the
house  was  ?

F.  Feda  thinks  she's  got  two  houses  in  her  mind,  and

is  mixing  them  up.  Feda  remembers  the  house
she  was  so  sure  about.  Feda  thinks  she's  going
on  to  something  else,  she  says  she  isn't.  (To
A.  V.  B.)  Now  try  and  tell  Feda  something  more
about  it.  (To  M.  R.  H.)  Didn't  she  say  last
time  that  the  house  was  in  a]  westerly  direction  ?

M.  R.  H. She  didn't  say  so,  but  it's  correct.

Here ensued a little argument, as Lady  Troubridge
whose geography was apparently shaky, interrupted  to
say  that  she  did  not  consider  that  the  house  was  in  a
westerly  direction. Feda stuck  tenaciously  to her  point
however,  and  was  found  to  have  been  correct.

F.  It is westerly, and she won't say there are  not

cellars.

U.  V.  T. (to M.  R.  H.) Is it utterly impossible that  there

should  be  rooms  that  were  unknown  to  you  ?
M.  R.  H. She  said  I  kept  things  there.

F.  (to  A.  V.  B.)  Now  don't  you  get  mixed  up. (To  M.  R.  H.)

Feda  doesn't  want  her  to  get  mixed,  but  she's
describing  another  house  now.  It's  a  more
uniform  shape,  looks  to  Feda  there  would  be  one,
two,  looks  to  Feda  three  storeys.  Feda  sees  two
quite  clear.  It's  a  more  compact  shape  than  the
other  house,  more  commonplace,  not  so  much
spread  out.  The  entrance  is  at  the  centre  of
the  house,  not  the  side,  it's  got  grounds  around
it,  but  a  more  ordinary  sort  of  garden  than  the
other  one,  there's  grass  coming  up  to  the  house
making  a  space  around  the  house.  Isn't  it  a
little  bit  sloping  up  to  the  house  1  She  says
something  about  a  gate  that  was  removed  and
another  put  in  its  place.

M.  R.  H.  Correct.


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator .  385


F.  This  isn't  the  other  house  is  it  ?

M.  R.  H.  No.

F.  But Feda thinks this is the house with  cellars.

It  has  rather  large  windows  on  the  ground  floor,
the  windows  above  are  not  so  broad  but  there  are
more  of  thern.

M.  R.  H. What  colour  is  the  house  ?

F.  It  seems  to  be  in  two  colours,  as  though  the  front

part  is  one  colour  picked  out  in  lighter,  it's  not
all  grey  stone,  because  around  the  windows  and
things  seems  different.  She  says  especially  that
that  gate  was  changed  entirely,  and  an  entirely
different  kind  of  gate  put  on.

M.  R.  H.  Correct.

F.  Something was done to one of the  gate-posts,

something  was  done  not  at  the  front  but  at  the
side  of  it.  They  had  some  difficulty  about  the
new  gate,  she  says  perhaps  you  wouldn't  remember
that.  It  seems  as  if  they  had  to  take  a  piece
out  of  the  side  part,  but  it's  not  very  important.
The  front  door  sticks  out,  you  can  stand  in  out
of  the  rain,  it  has  a  ledge  that  shelters  you,  the
front  door  looks  very  dark  to  Feda.  Around  the
door  is  very  whitey.

M.  R.  H. Stone  ?

F.  Whitej-'Coloured  stone. When  you  get  inside  there's

furniture  suddenly  inside  the  door,  as  you  push
the  door  open,  a  dark,  rather  long  piece  of
furniture  just  behind  it.  She  says  there  used  to
be  a  railing  round  the  house,  it  doesn't  look  to
Feda  like  a  house  that  would  have  had  a  railing,
it  looks  more  like  a  house  that  would  have  had
a  wall  around  it  bixt  she  says  a  railing  ;  can  you
remember  ?

M.  R.  H. I'm  not  sure.

F.  She says part of it is there still. She  doesn't

contradict  Feda  when  Feda  says  that's  the  house
with  the  cellars.

M.  R.  H. Cellars  ! But  she  said  they  were  rooms  you  could
live  in.


386  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


F.  She  says  it  wouldn't  hurt  you  if  you  had  a  meal

there.

M.  R.  H. Does  she  think  it's  near  the  other  house  ?

F.  Not  very  near,  not  far  away. She  says  it's  not  as

near  as  it  ought  to  have  been.
M.  R.  H. What  does  she  mean  ?

F.  Feda  can't  make  out. Feda  thinks  she  means  that

there  was  some  time  when  she  wished  there  wasn't
so  far  between  the  houses.  She  thinks  you  ought
to  know.  It  is  the  house  with  the  basement
rooms.

M.  R.  H.  Feda,  what  makes  confusion  sometimes  ?  when  she's
getting  a  thing  well,  then  it  goes  all  wrong.

F.  You  see  when  she's  in  her  own  sphere  she  remembers

things  quite  clearly,  but  when  she  comes  here
it's  like  coming  into  a  dark  room,  misty,  and  it
affects  her  memory.  It's  awfully  difficult  for  Feda
sometimes,  they  remember  one  thing  sometimes,
and  then  go  on  to  a  bit  of  another,  without
making  any  difference.  Was  it  at  the  end  of
describing  the  first  house  that  she  said  about
the  basement  rooms  ?

M.  R.  H.  Yes.

U.  V.  T.  Quite  right,  sometimes  good  descriptions  go  off  at
the  end.


As  will  have  been  noticed  from  the  above,  it  took
some  little  time  to  disentangle  the  thread,  and  even  then
there  remain  inaccuracies,  or  rather  partial  inaccuracies  ;
for  although  Feda  describes  correctly  another  house  which
had  basement  rooms,  she  appears  to  be  undecided  as  to
whether  they  are  rooms  or  cellars  which  she  is  describing,
and  whatever  they  are,  she  says  that  they  are  at  the
back  of  the  house.

The  description  of  a  house  which  Feda  gives  during
this  sitting  of  October,  25th,  1916,  applies  well  to  High-
field  House,  Malvern  Wells.

Highfield  House  was  well-known  to  A.  V.  B.  It  had
belonged  to  me  before  I  knew  her  intimately,  she  had
stayed with me there, and was practically living  with


xxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  387

me  there  at  the  time  when  we  bought  The  White  Cottage.
There  were  basement  rooms  at  Highfield  House,  two  of
them,  as  Feda  says,  but  one  was  at  the  front  of  the
house,  the  other  at  the  side,  and  neither  could  be  entered
from  the  back  of  the  house.  There  was  also  one  large
and  rather  remarkable  cellar,  but  nothing  was  ever  kept
in  it.  Highfield  was  a  more  uniform  house  than  The
White  Cottage  and  had  three  storeys.  It  was  a  much
larger  house  but  more  common -place.  The  front  door
was  in  the  middle  of  the  front  of  the  house,  it  had  a
stone  porch  over  it,  rather  a  deep  porch,  the  inside  of  the
porch  was  of  whitey-coloured  stone  or  cement,  and  the  door
itself  was  of  very  dark  oak.  The  garden  of  this  house
was  certainly  more  ordinary  than  that  of  The  White
Cottage,  and  there  was  a  small  grass  plot  coming  up
against  the  house  at  the  front,  and  another  at  the  side.
There  was  a  steep  drive  up  to  the  house,  which  approach
Feda,  however,  only  sees  as  being  a  little  bit  sloping.

We  now  come  to  an  interesting  point,  for  Feda  speaks
about  a  gate  which  was  removed,  and  says  that  a  gate
of  a  totally  different  kind  was  put  in  its  place.  This  is
what  was  actually  done  after  A.  V.  B.  and  I  left  High-
field.  A  large  iron  gate  was  removed  at  the  entrance
to  the  carriage  drive,  and  a  small  and  very  ugly  wooden
gate,  rather  like  a  door,  was  put  in  its  place.  A.  V.  B.
often  remarked  on  this  change  when  passing  the  house.
The  windows  of  Highfield  are  correctly  described,  as  is
the  colour  of  the  building,  which  was  of  grey  stone  with
facings  of  a  fighter- coloured  bath  stone  or  some  such
material.  The  windows,  as  Feda  says,  were  surrounded
by  this  lighter-coloured  stone.  As  will  have  been  noticed
A.  V.  B.  lays  special  stress  upon  the  change  in  the  gate,
which  is  evidential.  I  am  not  quite  clear  as  to  what
is  meant  regarding  "  something  "  which  is  said  to  have
been  done  to  one  of  the  gate  posts.  I  have  a  vague
recollection  that  we  did  hear  that  a  five-barred  gate
which  had  been  put  to  a  newly  constructed  motor  drive
had  been  found  to  be  too  narrow,  but  my  memory  must
not  be  taken  to  be  infallible  on  this  point.

During  the  time  when  A.  V.  B.  and  I  lived  at  High-

2b


388 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

field  there  was  rather  a  long  piece  of  furniture  just
behind  the  front  door.  There  were  railings  around  High-
field  House,  at  least  around  three  sides  of  it,  I  do  not
think  they  went  all  round  the  house.  When  A.  V.  B.
is  reported  to  say  that  a  part  of  the  railing  "  is  there
still "  we  may  suppose,  as  we  were  obliged  to  do  with
regard  to  the  new  gate,  that  she  has  retained  the  memory
that  the  house  changed  hands,  and  that  both  the  house
and  grounds  were  greatly  altered  by  the  new  owners.
They  did  leave,  however,  a  part  of  the  railing  at  the  back
of  the  house.  Feda  is  rather  evasive  in  her  statement
regarding  the  proximity  of  Highfield  to  The  White  Cottage.
I  should  say  that  the  two  houses  were  half  a  mile  to  a
mile  apart.  I  do  not  quite  understand  what  can  be
meant  by  there  having  been  some  time  when  A.  V.  B.
wished  that  these  houses  had  been  nearer  together,  unless
she  should  be  remembering  vaguely  our  rather  trouble-
some move,  or  the  very  marked  rise  in  cab  fares  which
we  had  to  put  up  with  when  we  went  to  The  White
Cottage,  which  was  looked  upon  as  being  considerably
further  from  the  station  than  Highfield.

We  have  given  Feda's  own  explanation  of  the  reason
for  the  confusion  with  regard  to  the  basement  rooms.
In  subsequent  sittings  Feda  has  become  quite  clever  in
detecting  these  sudden  jumps  from  subject  to  subject,
or  conceivably  A.  V.  B.  has  become  more  skilled  and
careful  in  her  transitions,  though  just  such  another  muddle
does  occur  much  later  on,  during  a  sitting  with  which
we  shall  presently  deal.  In  the  course  of  this  present
sitting  of  October  25th,  1916,  a  return  was  made  to  The
White  Cottage,  in  connection  with  which  it  was  said  that
A.  V.  B.  liked  it  much  better  than  the  other  house
(namely  Highfield),  and  that  she  seemed  to  think  it  funny
that  she  should  have  liked  it  best.  Now  A.  V.  B.  during
her  lifetime  often  remarked  to  me  that  she  thought  it
peculiar  of  herself  to  prefer  the  rather  humble  White
Cottage  to  the  more  luxurious  Highfield  House.

In  further  connection  with  The  White  Cottage,  during
this  same  sitting  were  given  the  letters  W.  and  C,  and
A.  V.  B.  also  said  that  there  was  a  place  called  L.  not


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  389

very  far  away,  in  which  some  building  had  been  turned
to  an  entirely  different  purpose  owing  to  the  war.  The
L.  is  correct  for  Ledbury,  a  town  a  few  miles  from  The
White  Cottage,  and  well-known  to  A.  V.  B.,  in  which
town  The  Upper  Hall,  a  dwelhng-house,  has  been  turned
into  a  hospital  owing  to  the  war.  One  or  two  initials
were  also  given  quite  correctly  as  pertaining  to  people
in  the  neighbourhood.  A  description  was  also  given  of
the  Roman  Catholic  Church  which  A.  V.  B.  attended,
and  this  description  was  not  only  correct  with  regard
to  the  appearance  of  the  church,  but  was  remarkably
pertinent  with  regard  to  the  pohcy  of  a  recently  appointed
priest  in  his  conduct  of  parish  affairs.  A  correct  des-
cription was  also  given  of  a  certain  walking-stick  which
A.  V.  B.  had  constantly  used.

Another  walking-stick  was  alluded  to  in  these  words.
"  She  says  do  you  remember  that  she  had  one  that  hurt
her  hand.  It  wasn't  comfortable — it  strained  her  hand."
I  denied  all  knowledge  of  this,  but  A.  V.  B.'s  allusion
was  subsequently  verified  in  rather  an  unexpected  manner
ten  months  after  the  sitting.  Lady  Troubridge  was  staying
with  A.  V.  B.'s  daughter,  and  prior  to  a  country  walk
was  invited  to  select  a  walking-stick  from  a  stand  in
the  hall.  She  proceeded  to  examine  the  sticks,  and  was
on  the  point  of  choosing  one,  when  A.  V.  B.'s  grand-
daughter, who  was  standing  near,  exclaimed  :  "  Oh !
don't  take  that  one,  it  has  such  an  uncomfortable  handle —
it  strains  one's  hand."  Struck  with  these  words,  which
awoke  a  memory  of  those  spoken  at  the  sitting  of
October  25th,  1916,  Lady  Troubridge  asked:  "Who  does
this  stick  belong  to  ?  "  and  A.  V.  B.'s  grand-daughter
answered  that  it  had  belonged  to  her  grandmother,  A.  V.  B.
A.  V.  B.'s  daughter,  who  was  coming  downstairs  at  the
time,  overheard  the  statement  and  confirmed  it,  commenting
also  upon  the  uncomfortable  straining  nature  of  the  handle
of  the  stick  under  discussion.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  quite
apart  from  the  question  of  this  walking  stick,  it  was  an
idiosyncrasy  of  A.  V.  B.'s  to  strain  her  wrists  and  hands
very  easily.

One thing occurred in this present sitting which  I


390 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


think  we  must  record,  although  as  far  as  we  can  see  it
has  no  meaning  whatsoever.  The  allusion  came  suddenly,
with  nothing  to  lead  up  to  it.  There  had  just  been  some
fairly  accurate  references  to  clothes  formerly  worn  by
A.  V.  B.,  when  suddenly  the  following  words  occurred:

F.  She  doesn't  smile  you  know,  and  yet  she's  saying

she  had  a  wild  idea  of  having  an  Ark,  she  thinks
you  should  know.

M.  R.  H. What  does  she  mean  ?

F.  Feda  thinks  like  Noah  had,  she  says  you  ought  to

know,  she's  spoken  of  it  to  you.  She  says,  keep
a  clear  and  faithful  account  of  this,  you  will
understand  after  what  I  mean.  Feda  thinks  she
means  a  kind  of  boat.  Feda  has  asked  her  would
she  have  it  on  the  sea  ?  She  says  she  was  not
so  ambitious  as  that,  she  would  have  had  it  on
a  river. She  thought  of  it  in  the  spring.

M.  E.  H. I  am  very  stupid.

F.  She  says  no.  if  positions  were  reversed  I  shouldn't

know.  I  don't  expect  you  to  remember  on  the
spur  of  the  moment,  but  you  will  later,  and  be
pleased  that  I  spoke  about  it.  She  didn't  do  it.
but  spoke  of  it,  and  it  had  been  calculated  about.
She  says  : "I  had  ideas  regarding  an  Ark."

We  have  really  not  the  slightest  idea  what  this  means.
Diiring  the  ten  months  that  have  elapsed  we  have  thought
it  over  carefully,  without  so  far  finding  any  solution  ;  on
the  other  hand  it  does  seem  curious  that  Feda,  un-
solicited, should  have  volunteered  such  an  unnecessarily
odd  statement.  Some  day  we  may  find  that  it  was
correct,  yet  A.  V.  B.  seems  to  think  that  /  should  know
about  it,  and  I  certainly  do  not,  or,  if  I  ever  did,  have
completely  forgotten  it  ;  an  improbable  hypothesis,  as
my  memory  is  particularly  clear  regarding  everything  that
concerned  A.  V.  B.  One  point  is  worthy  of  notice  in
this  connection,  and  it  is  this  :  Mrs.  Leonard  herself  has
stayed  on  house-boats,  and  has  told  us,  Avhen  in  the  normal
state,  that  she  enjoys  that  form  of  vacation.  It  is  possible
that  some  memory  in the medium's sub-conscious  mind


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  391

has  here  obtruded  itself,  and,  its  source  being  unrecognised
by  Feda,  has  been  mistaken  for  a  memory  of  A.  V.  B.'s.

(B)  Teneriffe.

We  propose  next  to  deal  with  a  series  of  references
to  another  particular  place.  The  first  of  these  occurred
on  November  22nd,  1916,  the  second  on  January  3rd,
1917,  the  third  on  January  17th,  1917,  and  the  fourth,
and  up  till  now  the  last,  on  May  23rd,  1917.  There
appears  to  us  to  be  something  very  natural  in  this
repeated  recurrence  to  one  topic.  At  all  events  it  would
seem  to  suggest  that  the  memory  of  past  events  is  not
limited  to  a  flash  during  an  isolated  sitting,  but  is  very
much  a  part  of  the  intelligence  purporting  to  communicate.

On  November  22nd,  1916,  at  a  sitting  which  was  taken
by  me,  Lady  Troubridge  acting  as  recorder,  the  following
occurred  :

F.  She says she used to do climbing. Feda  can't

imagine  her  climbing.  Feda  doesn't  think  she'd
like  it.  (To  A.  V.  B.)  Where  did  you  climb  ?
(To  M.  R.  H.)  She  is  saying  something  funny  to
Feda,  that  she  climbed  up  the  side  of  a  house  !

M.  R.  H. What  does  she  mean  ?

F.  She's  showing  Feda  something  like  a  wall,  the  wall

doesn't  seem  quite  straight,  it  is  rounded  and
then  goes  up,  and  then  a  ledge,  and  then  up
again,  and  she  puts  her  foot  and  then  her  stick
on  a  ledge,  and  then  goes  up  onto  another  ledge,
and  now  she's  getting  on  top.  Oh,  and  Feda
sees  now  that  it  is  nothing  to  do  with  a  house.
It  seems  to  Feda  as  though  this  place  were  far
away  from  here ;  it  looks  to  Feda  almost  like
precipices,  and  Feda  sees  a  small  horse,  no,  it's  not
a  horse,  it's  more  like  a  mule,  and  someone  is  leading
it  along  the  ledge. Oh,  they  are  nasty  places.

M.  R.  H.  (To  A.  V.  B.)  I  think  I  recognise  the  place,  but  not
your  climbing.

F.  It  is  a  funny  place,  and  doesn't  seem  as  though

you  would  take  a  horse  there,  but  they  do  lead


392 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


horses  up  those  ledges,  and  this  horse  has  a
saddle  across,  with  something  hanging  on  either
side.  Now  the  man  is  pulling  it  up  somewhere.
Your  Ladye  is  not  at  the  top,  she's  more  nearly
at  the  bottom.  She  has  a  stick  and  she  is
pointing  with  the  stick  to  show  how  people  do
go  up,  but  she's  not  going  herself,  she's  pointing
to  the  ledges,  they  are  not  straight  like  steps.
Feda  sees  it  more  clearly  now,  you  go  up  side-
ways, and  then  up  sideways  again.  It  is  a
nasty  place.
M.  R.  H. What  country  is  this  in  ?

F.  Not  this  country. There looks  to  Feda  to  be  a

kind  of  valley  with  something  steep  rising  up
on  each  side  ;  then  you  go  along  the  valley,
and  at  the  end  of  it  there  is  a  little  opening,
but  beyond  the  opening  something  steep  rises
up  again.  She  seems  to  think  a  lot  of  that
place  ;  she's  very  much  interested  in  it.

M.  R.  H. I  know  the  place.

F.  She takes  Feda  along, and  there  seems  to be  a

kind  of  opening  out  of  the  vallej^,  and  then  you
go  along  a  kind  of  winding  road.  As  you  look
around  you,  you  can  see  the  ground  rising  all
round,  and  it  must  be  sunrise  or  sunset,  because
Feda  sees  half  of  a  great  big  sun  sticking  up  over
one  of  the  banks,  it's  either  setting  or  rising.

M.  R.  H. What  colour  is  that  road  1

F.  It's dusty  looking and  funny  looking,  it's not  an

ordinary  road  ;  Feda  didn't  feel  sure  it  was  a
road.

M.  R.  H. (to  A.  V.  B.)  Try and give Feda an  idea  of  the
colour  of  it.

F.  It looks white rather to Feda, but it isn't  very

smooth  either,  it's  like  as  though — oh,  it's  not
white  at  all,  it's  greyish  colour,  it's  awful  funny  !
Feda  Avouldn't  like  to  walk  along  it  with  bare
feet,  it's  not  exactly  powdery,  it's  like  in  bits,
it  feels  to  Feda  like  walking  on  cinders.  As  you
walk  it  crushes  under  your  feet,  it's  a  kind  of


Lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  393


grey  colour,  but  not  quite  like  any  ordinary  grey
colour  you  see.  Funny,  it's  very  uneven  too,
people  walking  along  it  lift  up  their  feet,  it's
Avhat  you  would  call  here  very  heavy  walking.
It  seems  to  Feda  as  though  you  have  to  prepare
for  a  good  walk,  this  road  goes  a  long  way.
It  seems  to  Feda  that  further  on  it  forms  a  kind
of  bridge  just  for  a  little  way,  Feda  can  look
down  on  either  side  of  it.

M.  R.  H. Are  you  sure  you  mean  the  same  road  ?

F.  She  says  no,  it  isn't  the  same  road,  but  it's  con-

nected with  the  same  place,  she  forgot  to  tell
Feda  that  she  had  changed  to  another  road.

M.  R.  H. All  right.

F.  She  says,  do  you  think  it  strange  that  she  comes

and  shows  you  bits  of  scenery  1
M.  R.  H No,  it's  a  good  proof.

F.  She  says she  gets  the  unexpected  things  through

easier.  She  says  you  have  pleasant  recollections
of  this  place,  but  that  some  people  haven't
pleasant  recollections  of  it  at  all.  Feda  thinks
she  means  that  there  has  been  some  accident
there,  and  that  you  heard  of  it  when  you  were
there,  Feda  thinks  it  might  have  happened  to
anyone  too  venturesome,  Feda  thinks  she  means
someone  falling.  Think  it  over  and  tell  her  about
it  next  time.  She's  going  on  a  little  journey
from  there,  she  says  you  both  stayed  at  another
place.

M.  R.  H. Perhaps  we  did.

F.  It's  not  a  long  way  from  there,  she  says  you  were

held  up  at  two  places,  put  it  down  and  perhaps
you  will  remember.  She  says  there  were  two
extremes  of  climate  in  the  place  you  went  to,
Feda  doesn't  know  what  that  means,  she  says
in  a  way  you  can  taste  two  climates  at  once.

M.  R.  H. I  think  that's  got  through  wrong.

F.  Feda  thinks  so  too,  but  she  won't  go  back  on  it,

she  will  have  it  that  there  are  two  extremes
of  climate  ; but  you  can't  have  two  climates  at


394  Miss  Radclyjfe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


once,  can  yon  Mrs.  Twonnie  1  She  Avon't  go
off  it,  so  Feda's  going  to  try  and  get  her  off  it.
She  says  something  about  two  conditions  of
feeling  in  that  place  that  everyone  could  feel,
and  she  sticks  to  her  point.  She  says  she  used
to  enjoy  herself  so  much  with  you,  she  says
you  had  heaps  and  heaps  of  happy  times.

Now  the  whole  of  this  description  is  in  my  opinion
absolutely  applicable  to  Teneriffe,  in  the  Canary  Islands,
a  place  to  which  A.  V.  B.  and  I  were  much  devoted,
but  which  neither  of  us  had  visited  for  more  than  six
years  prior  to  her  death.  If  we  assumed  that  Mrs.
Leonard  had  taken  normal  means  to  acquire  knowledge
regarding  A.  V.  B.'s  life,  she  could  have  ascertained
the  fact  that  A.  V.  B.  had,  at  some  period  in  her  life,
visited  Teneriffe.  In  A.  V.  B.'s  will  she  mentions  a
brooch  that  she  lost  and  found  at  Teneriffe,  giving  no
details  beyond  this,  however,  and  there  is  nothing  what-
ever in  the  will  to  inform  any  one  as  to  what  period
of  her  fifty-seven  years  of  life  saw  A.  V.  B.'s  visit  to
Teneriffe,  and  there  is  equally  nothing  to  indicate  that
she  visited  Teneriffe  with  me.  I  could  not  at  first
make  out  the  reference  to  her  climbing,  as  she  was  not
an  active  woman  ;  but  the  stupidity  of  the  sitter  is
often  quite  remarkable.  On  returning  home,  I  quickly
remembered  that  A.  V.  B.  had  developed  an  abnormal
activity  when  at  Teneriffe,  owing  no  doubt  to  the  bene-
ficial effects  of  the  climate,  and  that  on  several  occasions
she  had  taken  long  walks  and  climbs,  and  moreover  that
we  had  often  discussed  with  surprise  her  being  able  to
do  so.  Teneriffe  is  extremely  mountainous,  the  mountain
paths  are  mere  ledges,  and  there  certainly  are  precipices.
Feda  sees  what  she  at  first  takes  to  be  a  small  horse,
but  what  she  afterwards  thinks  is  more  like  a  mule,
being  led  along  one  of  the  ledges.  Now  mules  are
constantly  led  along  these  ledges,  so  probably  are  ponies,
but  my  memory  is  of  mules  and  donkeys.  Feda,  however,
forgets  about  the  mule,  and  carelessly  refers  to  this
animal  again  as  a  horse  a  few  words  further  on.  The


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  395

saddle  said  to  be  used  on  this  horse  or  mule  has  some-
thing hanging  on  either  side  of  it  ;  I  think  myself
that  this  is  a  reference  to  a  pack-saddle,  as  A.  V.  B.
always  insisted  upon  a  pack-saddle  for  excursions,  she
being  extremely  dexterous  in  balancing  herself  thereon.
We  next  find  Feda  describing  A.  V.  B.  as  being  nearly
at  the  bottom  of  a  place,  and  indicating  with  her  stick
the  ledges  above  her.  Feda  appears  to  get  a  good  impres-
sion of  these  ledges,  since  she  describes  the  mode  of
ascent  as  "  going  up  sideways,  and  then  going  up  side-
ways again'";  this  gives  us  the  impression  of  -paths
winding  up  and  round  a  mountain  in  successive  ledges,
and  that  is  precisely  what  many  of  the  mountain  paths  are
like  at  Teneriffe.

We  next  find  Feda  describing  a  valley  which  has  some-
thing steep  rising  up  on  each  side  of  it  ;  she  elaborates
this  description  by  saying  that  you  go  along  this  valley,
and  that  at  the  end  of  it  you  find  a  little  opening,  but
that  beyond  that  opening  something  steep  rises  up  again.
Here,  to  my  mind,  we  have  an  attempt  at  a  description
of  the  Baranco  del  Anavingo,  a  place  visited  by  A.  V.  B.
and  me  during  our  stay  at  Teneriffe.  This  Baranco  was
a  rock-strewn  valley,  with  sheer  rocks  of  a  great  height
rising  up  on  either  side.  If,  after  entering  the  valley,
you  proceeded  along  it,  you  found  that  it  ended  in  a
very  curious  manner  ;  the  sheer  rocks  gradually  closed
in  on  you  on  either  hand,  leaving  only  what  appeared
to  be  a  very  small  opening.  I  did  not  proceed  very  far
through  this  opening,  nor  do  I  think  that  it  would  have
been  possible  to  have  done  so,  since  it  appeared  to  grow
narrower  and  narrower,  until  finally  blocked  by  un-
scalable rock.  After  describing  this,  Feda  says  that  she
is  taken  along  to  another  opening  out  of  the  valley,  she
does  not  actually  say  "another"  opening,  but  one  must
suppose  that  she  is  seeing  the  usual  exit  from  the  valley,
since  she  begins  to  describe  a  winding  road  onto  which
this  opening  leads  you.  Now  the  road  leading  to  and
from  the  Baranco  del  Anavingo  is  a  very  peculiar  one,
in  fact  it  would  not  be  considered  a  road  at  all  in  any
place  except  the  Canary  Islands. It  is  nothing  less  than


396 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

a  solidified  lava  river  left  by  the  last  eruption  of  the
Peak  of  Teide.

On  either  side  of  this  road  the  country  is  more  or  less
of  a  mountainous  nature,  and  it  is  interesting  that  A.  V.  B.,
through  Feda,  manages  to  convey  the  impression  of
sunrise  or  sunset,  since  when  A.  V.  B.  and  I  started
on  our  homeward  journey  after  our  visit  to  the  Baranco,
the  sun  was  setting,  making  a  fine  red  glow  across  the
lava  road.  This  made  a  deep  impression  on  us  both
at  the  time,  and  I  afterwards  included  a  description  of
it  in  a  short  story,  which,  however,  fortunately  for  this
description  of  Feda's,  has  never  appeared  in  print.  Feda
describes  this  lava  river  very  well  indeed ;  it  is,  as  she
says,  not  exactly  powdery — but  "  like  in  bits,"  its  colour
is  a  curious  and  rather  forbidding  grey.  It  is  excessively
rough  and  uneven,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  if  Feda
was  made  to  sense  walking  on  this  road,  it  did  feel  to
her  like  walking  on  cinders,  since  that  is  precisely  what
the  road  is  composed  of.  Feda  describes  this  road  as  going
a  long  way,  which  it  does ;  there  are  several  miles  of  it
which  had  to  be  traversed,  though  we  did  not  walk  it,  as
we  were  riding.  She  then  says  that  this  road  forms  a  kind
of  bridge,  and  I  think  that  even  with  reference  to  this
particular  road  she  may  be  partially  right,  though  at  the
time  I  was  not  sure.  In  any  case  when  I  ask  her  if
she  means  that  the  bridge  is  on  this  same  road  she  says
that  A.  V.  B.  says  that  it  is  not.  Now  unless  Feda
was  acting  upon  my  suggestion  (which  is  unusual  with
her,  she  being  indeed  more  given  to  stubborn  tenacity,
as  witness  the  allusion  to  the  two  climates),  I  con-
sider that  A.  V.  B.  had  jumped  to  another  memory,
and  was  making  a  rather  poor  effort  to  describe  some
of  the  mountain  paths.  These  mountain  paths  were
formed  by  narrow  stone  aqueducts,  which  had  occasion-
ally an  uncomfortable  way  of  running  on  after  the
mountain  ceased  to  be.  In  this  manner  they  spanned
deep  chasms.  It  will  be  noticed  that  Feda's  actual
words  are  :  "It  forms  a  kind  of  bridge  just  for  a  little
way,  Feda  can  look  down  on  either  side  of  it."  This  is
precisely  what  those  little  aqueducts  do,  and  if  A.  V.  B.


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  397

has  retained  any  memory  at  all  regarding  the  Canary
Islands,  I  think  she  would  remember  those  aqueducts,
since  she  constantly  terrified  me  by  crossing  them,  I
being  unable  to  follow  her  owing  to  vertigo.  Had  the
lava-river  road  been  meant,  Feda  should  not,  I  think,
have  said  "  a  kind  of  bridge  " — nor  should  she  have  said
that  the  road  formed  it.  My  recollection  of  bridges  on
all  roads  other  than  the  mountain  paths  is  that  they
were  ordinary  stone  bridges.  I  am  not  at  all  sure  that
there  was  not  one  of  these  ordinary  bridges  on  the  lava
road.  But  to  my  mind  Feda's  words  seem  rather
to  suggest  an  aqueduct  such  as  I  have  described.  It
is  a  correct  and  a  natural  touch  when  A.  V.  B.  speaks
through  Feda  of  the  pleasant  recollections  connected  with
that  place  (meaning  Teneriffe).  Just  after  this  reference
to  our  own  pleasant  recollections  there  comes  an  allusion
to  some  people  who  did  not  have  pleasant  recollections
of  the  place.  And  it  happens  that  while  A.  V.  B.  and
I  were  staying  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Baranco  del  Anfivingo
we  heard  of  some  people  in  the  neighbourhood  who  had
had  a  very  tragic  experience,  or  at  least  it  impressed  us
as  having  been  tragic  ;  we  visited  their  house  and  saw
one  of  the  people  in  question,  and  the  circumstances  made
so  deep  an  impression  on  us  that  I  afterwards  used  the
incident  for  a  short  story,  the  same  unpublished  story
to  which  I  have  previously  alluded.  The  tragedy  had,
however,  nothing  to  do  with  a  mountain  accident,
and  one  could  have  wished  that  just  here  Feda  would
have  refrained  from  supplying  her  own  interpretation  of
the  impression  received  by  her.  The  reference  to  two
different  climates  might  possibly  apply  to  the  extreme
cold  which  is  sometimes  experienced  when  crossing  some
of  the  higher  passes.  The  climate  in  the  vaUeys  of  the
Canary  Islands  is  semi-tropical,  but  some  hotel  acquaint-
ances of  ours  made  an  excursion  over  the  passes,  where
they  told  us  that  they  had  experienced  severe  cold.
Unless  the  words  refer  to  this,  we  do  not  understand  them.

I  have  omitted  to  mention  that  A.  V.  B.  is  quite  right
when,  after  describing  the  Anfivingo,  she  goes  on  to  say
through  Feda  that  we  were  both  staying  at  another  place.


398 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

We  were  staying  at  Santa  Cruz,  and  had  only  remained
in  the  vicinity  of  the  Anavingo  for  a  couple  of  nights
and  I  think  she  is  also  right  in  saying  that  we  were  held
up  at  two  places.

On  January  3rd,  1917,  at  a  sitting  taken  by  me,  Lady
Troubridge  recording,  we  got  another  reference  to  Teneriffe.
During  this  sitting  A.  V.  B.  spoke  through  Feda  about
a  certain  pair  of  monkeys.  She  said  that  they  had
greatly  amused  her,  and  that  she  did  not  think  that  such
another  pair  of  monkeys  existed,  etc.  Feda  described
these  monkeys  as  being  at  the  end  of  a  little  path.  Now
in  the  garden  of  the  Hotel  Quisisana  at  Santa  Cruz  there
were  at  the  end  of  a  little  path  a  pair  of  monkeys  and
one  baby  monkey,  that  A.  V.  B.  and  I  used  to  watch
by  the  hour ;  they  were  an  intensely  amusing  family,
and  were  the  only  monkeys  in  which  I  ever  knew  A.  V.  B.
to  take  an  interest  during  our  life  together.  This  refer-
ence to  the  monkeys  occurred  suddenly  in  the  sitting,
and  was  in  no  way  solicited.  Two  letters,  A.  and  H.,
were  given  as  having  some  connection  with  the  monkeys.
I  cannot  up  to  the  present  place  these  letters.  Together
with  the  mention  of  the  monkeys  was  given  a  fairly  good
description  of  the  Hotel  Quisisana  at  Santa  Cruz,  where
we  stayed  ;  the  description  including,  among  other  things,
a  statement  that  the  door  of  this  "  house "  was  elevated
from  the  ground,  that  you  went  up  steps  to  it,  that  the
corner  of  the  house  was  rounded,  that  there  was  some-
thing around  the  house  under  the  roof  which  formed  an
up  and  down  pattern  ;  that  the  windows  were  not
uniform,  and  finally  that  there  was  a  little  terrace  with  a
slope  down  from  it,  upon  which  terrace  A.  V.  B.  used
to  sit,  having  something  brought  to  her  while  she  sat
there.  There  was  such  a  terrace  where  A.  V.  B.  used
to  sit ;  sometimes  coffee  would  be  brought  to  her  there.
The  rest  of  the  description  was  also  correct.  At  this
same  sitting  A.  V.  B.  said  through  Feda  in  reference  to
the  climate  of  the  place  :  "  The  weather  was  just  beautiful,
neither  too  hot  nor  too  cold,"  which  correctly  describes
the  climate  of  the  Canary  Islands.

On  January  17th,  1917,  we  obtained  a  further  reference


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  399


to  Teneriffe.  I  had  told  Feda  that  I  was  sure  I  knew
what  particular  monkeys  had  been  spoken  of  at  the  last
sitting,  and  went  on  to  say  that  I  supposed  them  to  have
been  monkeys  in  the  garden  of  the  hotel  where  we  had
stayed  ;  I  did  not  of  course  mention  the  name  of  the  hotel,
or  give  any  indication  of  where  this  hotel  might  be.  After
some  talk  upon  different  matters  the  following  occurred :

F.  She  says, do  you  remember  the  hotel where  the

monkeys  were  ?
M.  R.  H.  Yes.

F.  She  says,  it  was  not artistic,  not  pleasing  to  the

eye.  She  says  that  when  you  turned  the  corner
and  it  came  into  view,  you  used  to  think  how
ugly  it  was.

M.  R.  H. Yes,  we  sometimes  said  so.

F.  She  says  she  has  stayed  with  you  in  artistic  places,

but  this  building  might  have  been  a  barrack  or
anything.  She  says  it  was  fairly  comfortable
inside,  a  sort  of  heavy  comfort,  but  judging  from
the  outside  no  one  would  have  gone  there  at  all.
She  says,  do  you  remember  a  very  dark-skinned
man  there,  she  says  he  was  very  swarthy,  and
had  generally  rather  an  oily  appearance.

M.  R.  H. Yes,  I  think  I  do.

F.  She  says  he  had  dark  eyes  and  black  hair,  and

she  says  you  had  to  come  across  him.  "As  a
matter  of  a  fact,"  she  says,  "  we  were  always
dodging  him."  She  wasn't  interested  in  him,  he
wasn't  only  there  when  you  were,  she  says,  he
was  very  much  a  fixture.

M.  R.  H. Yes,  I  place  him. We  were  very  happy  there.

F.  She  says  :  "  Yes,  and  the  climate  was  such  a  relief,

it  was  so  warm."

M.  R.  H.  (to  A.  V.  B.)  Can  you  remember  Avhy  we  went  there  ?

F.  She  doesn't  seem  able  to  get  that  through,  but  it

wasn't  just  for  a  holiday,  it  was  for  a  special
purpose,  and  you  didn't  know  whether  that
purpose  would  be  accomplished  there.

M.  R.  H. Never  mind,  I  don't  approve  of  pressing  questions.


400


Miss  Baddy ffe- Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


F.  One day she'll get it through. Mrs.  Twonnie,

weren't  you  very  well  then  ?
M.  R.  H. I  don't  quite  understand  that  question,  Feda.
F.  Feda means, were you not well when you  went

there  ? Feda  feels  that  you  were  not  very  well.
M.  R.  H. No,  I  was  not  very  well.

F.  Feda  knows  it,  because  your  Ladye  has  just  said  so,

and  she's  showing  you  to  Feda,  pale  and  pulled-
down  looking,  and  she  says  you.  pulled  up  there,
but  that  you  weren't  well  before  you  went  there.

M.  R.  H.  Quite  right.  I  expect  some  day  she'll  remember
why  I  was  ill  then.

F.  Yes,  she  will,  and  she  says  that  that  place  put  new

life  in  you.  She  says  it  was  not  an  ordinary
illness  that  you  had.  (Sotlo  voce  :  Worry  ?
Worry  aboiit  someone  else  ?)  Feda  can't  get  much
more  from  her,  but  she  says  there  was  worry
about  someone  else.  She's  got  on  to  something
a  bit  different,  and  she  says  that  she  was  antici-
pating that  there  might  be  a  hitch  about  someone
else,  who  might  somehow  have  indirectly  prevented
your  going  away  with  her  when  you  did.

With  regard  to  this  extract,  the  Hotel  Quisisana  was
certainly  not  artistic,  it  was  a  large  and  hideous
building,  terribly  ornate,  having  rather  the  appearance  of
a  cheap,  imitation  fortress.  A.  V.  B.  and  I  had  always
considered  it  a  blot  on  the  landscape.  We  found  it
comfortable  enough  inside,  though  certainly  not  with  what
Feda  calls  "  a  sort  of  heavy  comfort."  Lady  Troubridge
and  I  are  inclined  to  think  that  this  must  have  been  a
little  personal  touch  of  Feda's.  And  in  view  of  the  fact
that  on  January  3rd,  1917,  A.  V.  B.  refers  through  Feda
to  the  beautiful  climate  of  this  place,  and  in  the  present
sitting  when  referring  again  to  the  climate,  speaks  of
it  having  been  "  such  a  relief,  it  was  so  warm,"  this
mistake  re  the  furniture  is,  we  think,  a  distinct  point  in
favour  of  the  medium's  honesty.  It  is  a  matter  of  fairly
common  knowledge  that  a  heavy  sort  of  comfort  is  not
what  you  meet  with  in  hotels  in  semi-tropical  climates,


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  401

quite  the  contrary.  We  find  A.  V.  B.  asking  through  Feda
whether  I  remember  a  dark-skinned  man  there,  and  the
description  which  follows  is  exactly  applicable  to  the
manager  of  the  hotel,  who  was  rather  oppressively  atten-
tive. The  words  :  "  She  says,  '  Yes,  and  the  climate  was
such  a  relief,  it  was  so  warm  ',"  suggest  the  fact  that
A.  V.  B.  has  retained  a  memory  of  her  great  distaste
for  cold  weather,  which  always  made  her  feel  ill  and
uncomfortable.  When  I  asked  A.  V.  B.  if  she  remembered
why  we  went  there,  I  had  hoped  to  get  a  simple  state-
ment regarding  a  hunting  accident  ;  instead,  however,  I  got
the  indefinite  reply  which  is  often  the  result  of  putting  a
direct  question,  but  I  did  get  the  facts  that  I  had  not
gone  there  just  for  a  holiday — that  /  was  ill — that  the
place  put  new  life  into  me,  and  that  mine  was  not  an
ordinary  illness  ;  also  that  there  had  been  worry  about
someone  else  who  might  have  indirectly  prevented  our
going  there.  My  illness  was  the  result  of  a  fall  out
hunting,  we  certainly  did  not  go  to  the  Canary  Islands
purely  for  a  holiday  on  that  occasion,  but,  as  Feda
says,  for  a  special  purpose,  which  we  did  not  know
would  be  accomplished.  The  purpose  was  my  ultimate
recovery,  which  it  was  hoped  a  sea  voyage  would  assist.
I  did,  as  stated,  pull  up  there.  Prior  to  undertaking  the
voyage  we  were  much  worried  by  a  relation  of  mine,  who
wished  to  substitute  a  rest-cure  for  the  intended  voyage.
It  is  worthy  of  note  that  this  first  visit  to  the  Canary  Islands
was  one  of  the  only  two  occasions  throughout  my  long
friendship  with  A.  V.  B.  when  my  health  and  not  hers
was  in  question.

There  was  no  further  allusion  to  the  Canary  Islands
until  May  23rd,  1917,  upon  which  day  I  was  the  sitter
and  Lady  Troubridge  the  recorder.  The  subject  was
opened  by  Feda  almost  immediately  after  Mrs.  Leonard
went  into  trance  ;  what  follows  is  rather  a  long  extract,
but  we  feel  that  it  must  be  given  in  full.  After  I  had
promised  to  think  over  a  point  connected  with  another
matter,  Feda  began  speaking  as  follows  :

F.  (Sotto voce  : They  says  Mrs. Twonnie not at  all

strong  and  ought  to  go  away.)


402


Miss  Baddy ffe-H all  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


M.  R.  H. Who  says  so  ?

F.  Feda  doesn't  know,  but  it  was  some  time  ago,  you

weren't  well,  and  you  were  told  you  ought  to  go
away,  and  she  took  you  away. It  was  a  long  way.

M.  R.  H. Was  it  during  her  earth  life  ?

F.  Yes,  of  course.

M.  R.  H. Then  I  understand.

F.  She  says  unfortunately  she  can't  take  you  away  now,

but  she  can  go  with  you  now,  and  then  she  feels
that  you  are  taking  her.  She  says  that  you
touched  at  two  or  three  places  that  time  when
she  took  you  away.  It  was  a  nice  journey,  she
says.  She  says  the  going  out  there  was  delicious
after  the  first  day  or  two.

M.  R.  H. She's  quite  right.

F.  The  first  couple  of  days  she  says  you  could  have

done  without,  but  after  that,  she  makes  Feda
feel  that  it  was  some  time  during  the  third  day,
you  made  up  your  minds  to  enjoy  yourselves,
and  she  saw  you  looking  quite  perky  again,  and
wanting  to  take  an  interest  in  things.  She  says
the  first  days  you  didn't  feel  like  it  at  all,  but
afterwards  it  went  beautifully.  Wait — this  is  a
place  called  Cruz — Cruz — Cruth — Cruz.

M.  R.  H. Is  she  trying  to  give  you  something,  Feda  ?

F.  Feda  is  afraid  that's  only  part  of  the  word.

M.  R.  H. It  is  only  part  of  it.

F.  (Sotto  voce  : Cruth — Vera — Vera. Now  Ladye,  don't

mix  it  up).  She's  mixing  it  up  Avith  something
else  that  she  tried  to  say  when  she  was  con-
trolling herself,  last  time,  she's  thinking  of  two
places  and  she's  got  hold  of  part  of  each.  (Sotto
voce  :  Do  try  and  forget  the  other  place,  Ladye.)
Cruz — Cruth,  it  is  a  funny  word.  It  isn't  a  word
that  Feda's  heard  before.  Cruth.

M.  R.  H.  That's  right  as  far  as  it  goes,  ask  her  now  where
she  thinks  it  is.

F.  It isn't here,  Mrs. Twonnie, it's some way  away

from  here,  it  doesn't  sound  like  a  name  that
Feda  knows  at  all.


Lxxvm.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  403


M.  R.  H. Perhaps  she'll  get  it  through  later.
F  She  wanted  to  get  it  through.

M.  R.  H. Well,  I  know  what  she  means.

F.  And  so  does  she  ; she  says  it's  a  name  that  would

mean  something  to  you  and  her.  (Sotto  voce  :
Lony — Lony — .)  This  sounds  to  Feda  some-
thing like  Leony,  it's  not  quite  that  but  it's
something  like  it,  Feda  can't  get  it  now.

M.  R.  H.  Never  mind,  it  was  very  good  about  the  first  two
or  three  days,  I'd  forgotten  about  that  until  she
reminded  me  of  it.

F.  She says she hadn't. After  that beginning  part

came  this  Cruth  word,  the  word  doesn't  finish
with  one  or  two  more  letters,  she's  spread  the
Avord  out  a  bit,  it's  not  a  short  word,  and  Feda
can't  get  it.  She  says  it  was  nice  weather  and
nice  air  there  and  a  nice  sky  at  that  place  you
went  to,  she  says  the  sky  was  blue  and  the  water
was  blue.  (Sotto  voce  :  Feda  thinks  water's  green
sometimes),  well,  she  says  it  was  blue  there
anyway.

M.  R.  H. Yes,  it  was.

F.  And  she  says  the  water  was  clear,  and  that  there

was  a  cloudless  sky  nearly  turquoise  colour,  and
that  it  was  warm  and  lovely.  The  place  that  you
stayed  at  was  near  the  water,  she  says  you
didn't  go  inland  to  it,  but  it  must  have  been
country,  too,  because  you  could  get  out  from
it  to  where  there  were  wooded  and  hilly  places
all  round  about.  She  says  there  was  one  wood
with  flowers  growing  in  it,  flowers  like  you  would
have  to  buy  here  or  raise  in  gardens,  but  they
were  growing  wild  in  that  j)articular  wood,  she
didn't  notice  them  elsewhere.  She's  still  worrying
about  that  word  beghnnng  with  Cruth,  and  she
says  there  was  a  well-known  place  a  few  miles
from  the  place  you  stayed  at,  that  lots  of  people
went  to  visit,  an  awful  well-known  place,  Mrs.
Twonnie.  She  liked  going  there,  but  she  liked  the
place  you  stayed  at  best,  the  other  place  wasn't


404


.Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


far  from  your  place,  you  could  go  to  it  by  train
or  you  could  drive  there,  it  was  a  sort  of  building,
people  went  there  to  look  at  it  and  walk  about.

M.  R.  H.  I  can't  place  that,  is  she  certain  about  going  there
by  train  ?

F.  No,  she  isn't.

M.  R.  H. Because  it  might  be  one  of  two  places.

F.  Feda  thinks  she'd  better  leave  out  about  that  train,

she  isn't  too  sure  of  it.  No,  she  won't  have  Feda
say  that,  quite,  she  says  she  must  wait  and  think  ;
she  says  :  "I  believe  there  were  trains  going  close
there."  (S otto  voce  :  Don't  mix  things  up,  Ladye).
Look  Mrs.  Twonnie,  there  was  a  place  called  M.
close  to  where  you  were  at — M. — she  says  ;  she's
quite  sure  it  was  M.,  it's  not  a  very  short  name,
Feda  doesn't  think,  there  seems  to  be  about
eight  letters  in  it.  You  didn't  have  a  house  in
the  place  where  you  stayed  ;  she's  trying  to  show
Feda  a  kind  of  hotel  place,  there  are  a  good
many  steps  to  it,  not  just  a  few  steps,  a  flight
right  up  to  the  front.

M.  R.  H. That's  correct.

F.  It looks almost like stairs inside a house,  more

than  just  like  steps.  And  there's  a  place  where
you  can  walk  about,  connected  with  this  house,
because  she's  showing  Feda  not  quite  a  house,
but  a  kind  of  promenade  place,  it  looks  to  Feda
as  if  people  walked  up  and  down  in  front  of  the
house  and  at  the  sides  of  the  house,  too.  She's
showing  Feda  that  you  could  stand  outside  the
windows  and  look  straight  across,  as  though  you
could  watch  joeople  passing  a  few  yards  in
front  of  the  windows.  She  tells  Feda  that  people
used  to  sit  outside  the  house,  some  would  be
walking  and  some  sitting  down,  and  it  feels  to
Feda  as  though  most  of  them  had  on  light-
looking  clothes.

M.  R.  H. Yes,  that  would  be  right.

F.  When  you  get  inside  the  house  to  which  those  steps

lead  up, you get  into a  sort  of  hall  place,  it's


Lxxvra.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  405


not  a  narrow  passage,  it's  a  hall  more  like  a
room,  and  in  this  hall  are  places  where  you  can
sit  down.  And  she  says,  do  you  remember  a
place  that  is  not  quite  a  door,  at  least,  if  there
is  a  door  Feda  can't  see  it,  it's  a  place  that
seems  to  Feda  to  be  on  one  side  of  the  hall,
though  Feda  couldn't  be  quite  sure  which  side
of  the  front  door  it  is  ;  as  she  shows  it  to  Feda
it  seems  to  be  a  kind  of  archway  ;  of  course,
there  may  be  a  door,  but  Feda  only  sees  the
opening.

M.  R.  H. Well,  at  the  moment  I  can't  remember  that.

F.  Now, she says, do you remember the  furniture,

it's  what  you  would  call Well,  it's  not  at  all

like  this,  Mrs.  Twonnie.  (Here  Feda  touches  a
heavily  upholstered  chair.)

M.  R.  H. Do  you  mean  it's  not  upholstered  ?

F.  No,  it's  not,  it's  made  of  some  kind  of  thin,  light

wood.  Oh,  you  know,  it's  more  like  that  stuff
they  make  baskets  of.  Well,  some  of  the  furniture
in  that  hall  place  was  like  that,  Feda  knows  it
was  because  she  can  see  a  chair,  and  near  one
corner  she  can  see  a  sofa,  at  least  it's  not  quite
a  sofa,  but  it's  a  seat  that  two  or  three  people
can  sit  on.  It's  a  much  stiff er  thing  than  what
Mrs.  Una  is  sitting  on  now.

M.  R.  H. That  would  be  correct.

F.  And now  Feda  sees  that  there  are  plants  in  that

hall  place  too,  not  just  one  plant,  Feda  sees
several  in  different  places,  but  they're  not  flowering
plants.

M R.  H. That's  right.

F.  Feda  thinks  there  must  have been  something  of  a

kind  of  a  yellowish  colour  in  this  place,  but  you'd
have  to  go  back  there  to  see  that,  wouldn't  you,
Mrs.  Twonnie  ?  Ladye's  just  giving  it  in  case
you  should  remember.  Now,  Mrs.  Twonnie,  in
this  same  hall  place  do  you  remember  a  sort  of
cabinet  or  something  on  one  side  ?  One  part  of
this thing seems to be about as high as  this


406  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

mantelpiece,  and  above  that  there  seems  to  be
some  glass  thing,  a  sort  of  glass  thing  over  it,
it's  not  very  pretty  and  it  doesn't  stick  out
very  far.

M.  R.  H.  Now,  I  want  to  put  a  leading  question  Feda,  it's
about  those  steps  that  lead  up  to  the  front  door
which  you  go  through  to  get  to  the  entrance  hall.

F.  Yes,  she  remembers  those  steps  particularly.

M.  R.  H.  Well  then,  ask  her  if  she  remembers  some  parti-
cular thing  which  stood  on  top  of  those  steps,
outside  the  door  ;  and  if  she  remembers  that
thing,  can  she  remember  to  what  use  it  was  put,
sometimes  by  us  and  sometimes  by  other  people.

F.  Yes,  she  does  remember,  she  remembers,  but  .  .  .

M.  R.  H.  Oh  well,  never  mind  if  you  can't  get  it,  perhaps
after  all  there  were  several  things  outside  the
door.

F.  Well, the thing that she remembers seemed  to

stand  rather  high,  it  wasn't  like  a  railing  or  any-
thing like  that,  it  was  more  like  this  (here
Feda  indicates  something  like  a  tripod  with  her
hands).  It's  a  thing  that  stands  up.  No,  it
certainly  isn't  just  a  railing,  it  stands  up  and
seems  separate  from  other  things,  and  there's
something  about  it  that  seems  rounded,  it's
shaped  sort  of  round  in  one  part,  the  part  near
the  top  is  certainly  round  in  shape.

M.  R.  H.  Well,  can  she  remember  to  what  use  we  put  that
thing  ?

F.  Feda can't quite make this out, she speaks  as

though  you  were  putting  something  on  it  like
that  (here  Feda  makes  a  sort  of  slapping
movement  with  her  hand).  Feda  doesn't  know
what  she  can  mean,  but  she  keeps  on  repeating
that  movement,  like  that.  (Feda  again  makes  the
slapping  movement.)  She  knows  quite  well  about
this  thing,  Mrs.  Twonnie,  and  there's  something
about  it  that  amuses  her,  Feda  thinks  there's
something  about  it  that's  a  bit  funny.  (Sotto
voce : Used to catch  something  ? Catch,  catch,


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  407

catch  ?) Oh, Feda doesn't know what  she
means,  yet  it  is  to  do  with  this  place  too.
M.  R.  H. Oh  well,  never  mind,  leave  it.
F.  Yes,  but  she  doesn't  like  leaving  things.

M.  R.  H. Well,  I'll  try  to  remember  afterwards.
F.  Now,  do  you  remember  anything  of  a  grey  colour

in  that  hall  ? Feda  would  call  it  a  stone  colour,
it  was  something  like  carved,  you  know,  like  the
things you call heads, this one seems to  have
been  part  of  a  wall.
H. I  can't  remember.

Mrs.  Twonnie,  through  that  opening  that  Feda
described  in  the  hall,  you  can  turn  down  a
passage  and  go  into  a  room,  it's  not  a  small
room  either,  quite  a  big  one  ;  and  in  that  room
Feda  sees  several  tables,  and  there  are  not  just
one  or  two  windows,  there  are  several  big
windows,  they  run  up  high,  and  yet  they're
low  down  to  the  ground.  Oh,  and  there  are  a
good  many  tables,  some  of  them  are  near  the
windows,  and  there  seems  to  be  a  bigger  one
in  the  middle  of  the  room.  Now,  she  says
that  this  room  is  on  the  floor  that  you  came
in  at,  what  you  call  the  ground  floor,  and  yet
it  doesn't  seem  to  Feda  to  be  like  the  ground
floor  of  this  house,  Feda  means  the  medium's
house,  because  Feda  gets  the  impression  that
when  you  look  out  of  one  of  those  windows  you
seem  to  be  raised  up,  not  at  all  like  here.  Yes,
and  you  seem  to  look  down  on  things.
M.  R.  H. I  understand  that.

F.  Feda would think that this room was a  corner

room,  because  from  the  windows  you  can  cer-
tainly see  two  ways.  (Sotto  voce  :  Yes,  you
can,  Ladye).  And  Feda  thinks  that  there  are
several  mirrors  in  this  room,  several  awful  big
ones.  One  part  of  the  room  looks  over  quite
a  wide  view  but  out  of  some  of  the  other  windows
it  doesn't,  it's  as  though  out  of  the  other  windows
you looked on walls, or something like  that,


M.  R.
F.


408  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


anyhow  it's  as  though  walls  or  some  places  came
up  closer,  and  prevented  the  view.  She  says  that
that  place  belonged  to  the  more  careless  part  of
your  life  together,  she  was  weller  then,  and  there
was  nothing  that  interfered  with  you  both  ;  she
says  that  at  that  place  you  were  together  all
the  time,  both  of  you  being  able  to  do  every-
thing, and  not  having  to  worry  about  time  or
anything  else.  (Here  some  people  were  des-
cribed as  having  been  at  the  hotel,  and  as  I
could  not  definitely  place  them  we  have  omitted
the  descriptions  for  the  sake  of  brevity.  It  is
not  improbable  that  people  answering  to  the
description  may  have  been  in  the  hotel  with  us,
but  if  so,  they  did  not  make  a  very  deep  im-
pression on  me,  as  I  have  forgotten  them.  We
also  omit  the  description  of  the  manager  of  the
hotel,  which  occurs  again  in  this  sitting,  as  it
has  already  been  given  in  a  previous  sitting.  In
the  present  sitting,  however,  Feda  adds  these
words  to  his  description  :  "  He  used  to  come  in
and  walk  around  the  rooms,  that  sort  of  thing."
We  give  these  words,  as  they  add  value  to  the
description,  being,  as  they  are,  distinctly  suggestive
of  an  hotel  manager.  We  will  now  resume
Feda's  remarks.)

F.  Oh, now she's showing that letter M. again  in

connection  with  this  place.  Feda  can't  make
out  why,  but  it  must  have  some  connection.
And  there's  a  letter  that  looks  like  a  C.  too,
and  that  has  a  bearing  on  this  place.  You  see,
Mrs.  Twonnie,  she  says  that  this  place  is  on  the
water,  it's  very  close  to  the  water  indeed,  and
now  she's  trying  to  show  Feda  the  position  of  it,
it's  like  this — supposing  you  were  on  the  sea,  you
see  the  land  and  a  bit  of  it  seems  to  stick  out
like  a  tongue  of  land  into  the  sea,  it  seems  to
go  like  this  (here  Feda  draws  wildly  in  the  air,
appearing  to  indicate  hills,  etc.).

M.  R.  H. I  can't  quite  understand  all  that,  Feda.


Lxxvni.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  409


F.  Do you know anything  about an  island, that  is

not  far  from  there  ?
M.  R.  H. Yes, I do know something  about an island,  how

was that mention of an island given to  you,

Feda  ?

F.  She  suddenly  said  :  "  Island, island, island,"  some-

thing seems  to  have  reminded  her  of  an  island
there,  she  keeps  on  showing  Feda  a  piece  of  land
standing  in  the  middle  of  water,  and  she  says  :
"  It's  a  piece  of  land  standing  in  water."

M.  R.  H, What  is  ?

F.  That  place  is,  she  says. The  place  is  an  island.

M.  R.  H. Yes,  it  is  an  island.

F.  She  says  that place  is called  Ter — ter — terra — Oh  !

Feda  can't  quite  get  it,  but  she  wants  to  say
that  it's  a  place  called  Ter — Te — no,  Feda  can't
get  it,  but  it  starts  Te.  It's  Tener — Tener — •
Ten— Ten— What,  Ladye  ?  Tener—

M.  R.  H. Tener  is  right.

F .  Teneri  —  Teneri — ee — ee — ff — ff  e — iff  e  —  Teneri — f  er .

She  says  she  doesn't  agree  with  the  tc  fer  "  she
says  Tener  is  right,  she  says  cut  off  the  last
"  er  "  and  it's  right.

M.  R.  H.  (to  U.  V.  T.)  Is  it  right  ?

IT.  V.  T. Quite  right.

F.  (Sotto  voce : Teneriffe, it's Teneriffe  !) She  keeps

on  saying  an  island,  it's  an  island  she  says,  and
she  says  it's  a  nice  place,  she  says  :  "  Teneriffe  !  "
Do  you  know,  she  pushed  that  through  suddenly  ?
She  pretended  that  she  was  exasperated  at  your
not  understanding.  She  thought  that  Feda  w  ould
get  hold  of  it  if  she  pretended  to  be  cross.  Now,
she's  saying  there's  that  place  called  M.  again, —
Masagar — Masagar — Madaga — Maza.

M.  R.  H. Maza  is  right,  Feda.

F.  Mazaga — Mazager — Mazagi — Mazagon —

(We  here  omit  several  other  efforts  on  Feda's  part
to  pronounce  the  name,  which  efforts  end  with
Mazagal).

M.  R.  H. No,  not  quite  Mazagal,  Feda.


410 Miss  Baddy ffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


F.  Mazagan  !

M.  R.  H. That's right, Feda. Well, what about Mazagan  ?

Is  Mazagan  the  M.  that  you  first  mentioned  ?

F.  No,  it  isn't,  she  suddenly  thought  of  Mazagan  and

got  it  through.  Mazagan  and  Teneriffe.  She
somehow  couples  them  together  ;  Mazagan,  she
says  it's  a  place,  it's  not  somebody's  name.

M.  R,  H. Quite  right.

F.  She  can't  get  any  more  about  that,  but  it  wasn't

the  first  M.  She  was  thinking  of  the  first  M.
and  that  thought  led  her  on  to  this  one.

M.  R.  H. Is  the  first  M.  a  place  ?

F.  Yes.

M.  R.  H. Is  the  first  M.  in  Teneriffe  ?
F.  No,  she  says.

M.  R.  H.  Had  it  anything  to  do  with  our  journey  to
Teneriffe  ?

F.  Well,  it  wasn't  in  Teneriffe,  but  it  had  to  do  with

your  journey  there.  At  all  events  it  was  a  kind
of  objective,  she  keeps  on  saying  something  about
for  after.

M.  R.  H. An  objective  for  after  we  got  to  Teneriffe  ?

F.  No,  that's  not  right,  not  after  you  went  to  Teneriffe,

she  means  that  you  knew  about  this  M.  place
from  the  first,  it  was  before  you  got  to  Teneriffe.

M.  R.  H.  Do  I  understand  that  this  M.  place  came  before
we  got  to  Teneriffe  or  did  it  come  after  ?

F.  Look,  Mrs.  Twonnie,  Feda  didn't  think  so  at  first,

but  now  she  says  that  the  M.  came  before
Teneriffe,  and  that  is  what  she  meant  by  saying
that  it's  an  objective,  you'd  thought  of  it  before.

In  this  fourth  and  last  extract  we  get  a  more  prolonged
description  of  the  Canary  Islands.  It  is  led  up  to,  as
will  have  been  seen,  by  a  reference  to  my  state  of  health,
which,  as  we  have  already  said,  was  the  first  cause  of
A.  V.  B.  and  myself  visiting  Teneriffe.  The  first  evidential
point  to  which  we  would  refer  in  the  present  description
is  the  allusion  to  the  journey  out  ;  this  occurs  towards
the beginning  of the extract and is elaborated  towards


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  411

the  end.  A.  V.  B.  says  through  Feda  that  she  and  I
touched  at  one  or  two  places  when  she  took  me  away.
This  is  correct,  as  it  happens  that,  for  the  sake  of  the
long  sea  voyage,  we  went  to  Teneriffe  via  Morocco  ;
and  here  I  would  point  out  that  it  is  not  usual  for
people  intending  to  make  a  long  stay  at  Teneriffe  to  go
by  that  route.  We  were  the  only  passengers  on  the  boat
who  left  the  ship  at  Teneriffe.  The  Royal  Mail  Steam-
ship Company  used  to  run  ships  from  London  to  Madeira
and  back,  taking  Gibraltar,  Morocco  and  the  Canary  Islands
en  route.  It  was  on  one  of  their  ships  that  we  went.
Most  people  not  intending  to  make  the  round  trip  go,
I  believe,  by  a  more  direct  route  which  gets  them  to  the
Canary  Islands  in  about  a  week.  A.  V.  B.  speaks
through  Feda  about  the  conditions  during  the  first  two
or  three  days  of  our  journey,  saying  that  after  these
first  few  days  it  was  delicious.  This  is  a  good  point,
for  it  so  happens  that  we  ran  into  almost  Arctic  cold
during  the  first  two  or  three  days  of  our  voyage  ;  the
ship  was  small,  the  weather  abominable,  and  we  wished
many  times  that  we  had  not  left  home.  We  often  used
to  remind  one  another  afterwards  of  those  first  few  days
of  misery  ;  they  being  passed,  the  remainder  of  the  voyage
was,  as  Feda  says,  delicious.

We  next  find  Feda  struggling  with  the  name  "  Cruz,"
and  getting  the  word  "  Vera  "  tacked  on  to  it,  which  is,
of  course,  a  mistake.  The  place  to  which  we  think  that
A.  V.  B.  intended  to  refer  was  not  Vera  Cruz,  but  Santa
Cruz  in  Teneriffe,  and  it  is  interesting  to  notice  just  here
that  Feda  seems  cognisant  of  the  fact  that  A.  V.  B.  men-
tioned the  word  "  Vera  "  during  a  personal  control  at  the
sitting  prior  to  the  present  one.  We  think  that  during  that
control  A.  V.  B.  was  attempting  to  say  "  Viareggio,"  a  place
which  she  also  knew.  Feda  seems  to  think  that  A.  V.  B.
is  confounding  some  other  place  with  this  "  Cruz  "  in
the  present  sitting,  but  Lady  Troubridge  is  of  the  opinion
that  Feda  may  have  found  the  ready-made  association
of  "  Vera "  and  "  Cruz  "  in  the  medium's  brain,  and
while  recognising  it  as  erroneous,  failed  to  recognise  its
source. With  regard  to  this  mention  of  the  word  "  Cruz,"


412  Miss  Radclyffe-HaU  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

we  think  it  worthy  of  notice  that  Feda,  after  pronouncing
it  several  times  as  "  Cruz,"  corrects  the  pronunciation
to  "  Cruth  " — to  which  pronunciation  she  subsequently
adheres.  We  think  it  is  usual  among  English  people,
or  at  all  events  among  those  of  them  that  have  not
travelled,  to  pronounce  these  Spanish  names  as  written,
many  English  people  being  actually  ignorant  of  the
Spanish  lisp  which  substitutes  in  certain  instances  a  "  th  "
for  the  sibilant  sound.  A.  V.  B.,  however,  being  acquainted
with  Spanish,  always  instinctively  used  the  correct
pronunciation,  and  in  the  sitting  under  consideration
it  almost  seems  as  though  she  attempts  to  correct  Feda's
mistake.  The  implication  that  the  place  "  Cruz  "  is
a  long  way  away  is  of  course  correct.  What  the  word
"  Leony  "  means  is  not  apparent,  nor  is  it  apparent
why  Feda  says  that  the  word  (supposedly  "  Cruz  ")  doesn't
finish  with  one  or  two  more  letters  ;  it  is  evident  that
Feda  is  somewhat  muddled  just  here.  The  turquoise
coloured  sky,  etc.,  are  features  of  the  Canary  Islands,
as  is,  of  course,  the  warm  and  lovely  weather.  It  is
correct  to  say  that  the  place  we  stayed  at  was  near
water,  and  it  is  rather  interesting  to  note  the  statement
that  we  did  not  go  inland  to  it,  because,  Santa  Cruz,
where  we  stayed,  was  reached  direct  by  ship.  In  the
ordinary  way,  however,  I  think  I  am  right  in  saying  that
most  people  making  a  long  stay  at  Teneriffe  do  so  at
Orotava,  a  town  which  must  be  approached  by  an  inland
route,  although  it  is  also  by  the  sea.  Unlike  most  of
the  other  visitors,  A.  V.  B.  and  I  visited  Orotava  for
a  few  days  only,  making  Santa  Cruz  our  headquarters.
As  stated  through  Feda,  there  are  hilly  places  round
Santa  Cruz,  though  I  cannot  remember  that  they  were
particularly  wooded.  A  memory  appears  to  have  been
retained  of  one  special  wood,  wherein  grew  flowers  not
usually  found  wild.  This  is  correct,  as  such  a  wood
exists  and  was  visited  by  us.  It  was  not  very  far  from
Santa  Cruz,  and  I  remember  that  we  remarked  upon
finding  some  Arum  Lilies  growing  there  wild,  which  we
had  not  seen  elsewhere  on  the  island.

The well-known place said to be near Santa  Cruz.


Lxxvin.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  413

which  was  a  sort  of  building,  may  refer  to  an  old  Spanish
building  having  a  very  beautiful  courtyard  or  Patio
Interior.  We  visited  this  building,  and  my  impression
is  that  it  was  then  being  used  as  a  scholastic  institution.
My  memory  is  not  clear  on  this  point,  but  I  presume
that  it  must  have  been  some  sort  of  show  place,  other-
wise Ave  should  not  have  heard  of  it.  Regarding  this
place,  a  mistake  is  made,  however,  since  A.  V.  B.  speaks
through  Feda  of  reaching  it  by  train  or  driving,  she
should  have  said  by  tram  or  driving.  The  town  in  which
this  building  was  situated  could  be  reached  by  tram  or
carriage,  there  were  no  trains  on  Teneriife.  The  words
train  and  tram  are  very  similar,  and  if  we  wish  to  be
lenient  we  may  suppose  that  the  communicator  said  tram,
and  that  Feda  mistook  it  for  train  ;  if  we  do  not  wish
to  be  lenient,  however,  it  is  a  bad  mistake.  On  the
other  hand  it  is  a  point  upon  which  a  fraudulent  medium
could  obtain  correct  information  from  a  tourist  office.
It  also  appears  probable  that  had  Mrs.  Leonard  by  some
chance  been  possessed,  to  any  extent,  of  normal  knowledge
of  the  Canary  Islands,  the  salient  fact  of  there  being
no  trains  on  Teneriffe  would  surely  have  been  included
therein.  Just  here  in  the  sitting  is  given  the  letter  M.
as  pertaining  to  a  place  near  Teneriffe,  the  name  of  the  place
is  said  to  have  about  eight  letters  in  it.  This  M.  occurs
again  later  in  the  extract,  when  we  shall  deal  with  it.

We  next  find  Feda  elaborating  her  description  of  the
hotel  at  Santa  Cruz,  which,  as  will  be  remembered,  was
mentioned  in  previous  sittings.  In  this  present  sitting
she  returns  to  the  long  flight  of  steps  leading  up  to  the
front  door,  and  there  is  every  reason  why  A.  V.  B.
should  have  remembered  these  steps,  since  she  particularly
disliked  them  ;  so  trying  were  they  that  I  believe  the
management  have  since  been  obliged  to  put  a  passenger
lift  from  the  garden  to  the  entrance  door  of  the  hotel.
There  were  many  terraced  promenades  in  the  garden  of
the  hotel,  and  it  is  correct  to  say  that  you  could  stand
outside  the  windows  and  look  straight  across  at  any
passers  by.  The  light  clothes  said  to .  be  worn  by  people
are also correct, the climate bemg semi-tropical.  The


414 Miss  Baddy ffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

lounge  hall  of  the  hotel  is  well  described,  there  were
several  archways  in  this  lounge  hall,  and  here  Feda
appears  to  realise  that  she  had  wrongly  described  the
furniture  of  the  hotel  when  referring  to  "a  heavy  sort
of  comfort "  on  January  17th,  1917.  In  this  present
sitting  she  describes  it  corrrectly.  The  furniture  was
wicker  and  light  wood,  and  there  were  seats  which  would
accommodate  two  or  three  people.  There  were  plants
in  the  hall  as  described.  I  cannot  place  either  the  yellowish
colour,  or  the  grey  carved  thing  said  to  be  in  the  hall.
These  statements  may  be  correct,  but  I  am  not  in  a
position  to  verify  them.  There  was  a  cabinet  in  the  hall
of  the  hotel,  used  by  the  book-keeper,  it  was  not  very
large,  the  lower  part  was  of  wood  and  the  upper  part
of  it  consisted  of  glass  panes,  and  was  surmounted  by
a  clock  and  three  electric  lights.  From  the  ground  to
the  opening  of  the  cabinet  would  I  think  have  been  about
the  height  of  an  ordinary  mantelpiece.

The  leading  question  which  I  put  regarding  something
which  had  stood  on  top  of  the  steps  outside  the  door
referred  to  a  telescope  on  a  tripod  stand.  As  often
happens  when  a  question  is  put  point  blank,  I  did  not
obtain  the  actual  name  of  the  object.  In  this  case  I
got  a  description  which  we  consider  barely  applicable  to
the  telescope  in  question  ;  as  will  have  been  noticed
Feda  indicates  with  her  hands  something  like  a  tripod,
she  says  that  it  is  a  thing  which  stood  up,  and  which
appeared  to  be  separate  from  the  other  things  ;  this  is
to  the  good.  She  says  also  that  there  is  something
near  the  top  which  is  certainly  round  in  shape.  But
this  description  is  vague,  so  I  asked  to  what  use  that
thing  was  put.  Now  why  just  here  Feda  makes  a
slapping  movement  with  her  hand  we  have  never  been
able  to  imagine,  but  I  quite  understand  why  A.  V.  B.
should  feel  amusement,  and  remember  something  funny
with  reference  to  the  telescope,  if  that  were  meant,
especially  as  her  amusement  is  followed  by  the  words
"  used  to  catch  something. Catch,  catch,  catch."

Teneriffe  is  not  an  easy  place  to  leave,  as  it  is  difficult  to
procure  sea-passages,  and  the  difficulty  is  greatly  augmented


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  415

by  the  fact  that  one  never  knows  on  what  days  the
homeward-bound  boats  are  likely  to  arrive.  It  often
happened,  therefore,  when  we  were  there,  that  prospective
passengers  would  have  had  their  trunks  packed  and  in
the  hall  for  several  days,  throughout  which  period  they,
or  the  porter  of  the  hotel,  remained  with  an  eye  glued
to  the  telescope,  in  order  to  sight  the  ship  as  far
away  as  possible.  Their  fussiness  became  a  standing
joke  ;  yet  it  was  very  necessary  if  the  ship  was  to  be
caught,  because  she  would  only  make  a  short  stay  at
Teneriffe,  and  there  was  usually  great  difficulty  in  getting
the  luggage  taken  down  to  the  wharf  in  time  for  her
departure.  On  one  occasion  our  trunks  did  not  arrive
alongside  the  ship  until  she  had  begun  to  move,  and  a
box  of  mine  fell  into  the  water  in  the  rush  of  getting
it  on  board.

We  next  come  to  a  description  of  the  dining  room  of
the  Hotel  Quisisana.  Feda  describes  this  room  as  being
entered  through  an  opening,  or  archway ;  I  think  this  is
correct,  but  cannot  quite  remember.  The  dining  room  with
its  big  windows  is  well  described,  and  Feda's  bewilderment
regarding  the  position  of  this  room  is  quite  explicable.
A.  V.  B.  has  apparently  told  her  that  the  room  is  on
the  ground  floor,  but  it  will  be  remembered  that  a  very
long  flight  of  steps  has  already  been  described  as  leading
up  to  the  entrance  of  this  hotel,  which  will  have
given  the  impression  that  the  ground  floor  was  in  the
position  of  the  average  first  floor  of  a  house  ;  this
impression  is  correct.  Underneath  this  so-called  ground
floor  there  was  enough  space  for  shops  and  an  American
bar,  so  it  will  be  understood  that  it  was  unusually  elevated.
The  dining  room  was  a  corner  room  as  Feda  states  ;
it  probably  contained  mirrors  though  I  cannot  be  certain
of  that.  From  some  of  the  windows,  as  Feda  says,  there
was  a  wide  view,  from  others,  as  she  states,  there  was  not.
I  cannot  remember  that  any  wall  came  up  close  to  the
side  windows.  Feda  herself  does  not  seem  quite  sure
about  this,  she  says  :  "  Anyhow  it's  as  though  walls  or
some  places  came  up  closer  and  prevented  the  view."
What  did  come  up  fairly  close  to  the  side  windows  was


416  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

a  bit  of  hill-land.  From  the  windows  commanding  the
wide  outlook  one  got  a  magnificent  view.

A  good  touch  occurs  when  A.  V.  B.  says  through  Feda
that  the  place  in  question  belonged  to  the  more  careless
part  of  our  life  together,  that  her  health  was  better  then,
and  that  there  was  nothing  to  interfere  with  us,  we  being
able  to  do  everything  together. This  is  perfectly  correct.

We  now  find  Feda  returning  to  the  letter  M  previously
given  ;  she  also  mentions  a  letter  which  she  takes  to  be
a  C,  both  of  which  letters  are  said  to  be  connected  with
the  place  in  question.  It  is  permissible,  we  think,  to
take  C  as  standing  for  the  Canaries.  We  find  Feda  saying
that  the  place  is  on  the  water,  and  endeavouring  to  catch
from  A.  V.  B.  the  position  of  it.  She  cannot  do  this
completely,  but  evidently  gets  the  impression  of  an  island.
She  asks  if  I  know  of  an  island  not  very  far  from  the
place  ;  and  the  real  meaning  of  the  word  island  is  cleared
up  when  I  make  Feda  tell  me  how  she  got  the  mention
of  an  island  given  to  her.

In  reply  to  my  question  she  tells  me  that  A.  V.  B.
has  said :  "  Island,  island,  island,  it  is  a  piece  of  land
standing  in  water."  I  then  ask:  "What  is?'"  to  which
Feda  replies :  "  That  place  is,  she  says.  The  place  is
an  island."  After  which  we  find  Feda  after  several  efforts
successfully  giving  the  name  Teneriffe,  in  conjunction  with
the  fact  that  it  is  an  island.

Next  we  find  Feda  returning  for  the  third  time  to  the
place  called  M.,  and  finally,  after  several  mis-pronuncia-
tions, accomplishing  the  word  Mazagan.  Now  Mazagan
is  a  port  in  Morocco  which  A.  V.  B.  and  I  visited  en
route  to  Teneriffe,  and  having  admitted  that  that  name
is  correct.  I  ask  Feda  whether  the  first  M.  mentioned
stood  for  Mazagan,  to  which  Feda  replies  in  the  negative.
She  tells  me  that  A.  V.  B.  was  thinking  of  the  first  M„
and  that  that  thought  led  her  on  to  Mazagan.  She
says  in  reply  to  my  question  that  the  first  M.  is  a  place,
and  when  I  ask  if  it  is  a  place  in  Teneriffe,  she  replies
that  A.  V.  B.  says  "  No."  At  first  she  appears  to  think
that  this  first  M.  place  was  an  objective  from  Teneriffe,
but  she  corrects  this  error, saying  that  we  knew  about


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  417


this  M.  from  the  first,  and  that  it  was  not  after,  but
before,  we  got  to  Teneriffe.  Now  this  first  M.  would  be
correct  for  Mogador,  the  last  port  in  Morocco  touched  at
before  arriving  at  Teneriffe  ;  it  would  also  be  correct  for
Morocco,  and  as  it  is  said  to  have  been  an  objective,
I  think  that  Morocco  is  meant.

Section  IV. Memory  of  a  Motor  Accident  and  of  certain
Uncomfortable  Physical  Symptoms.

We  will  now  proceed  from  the  memory  of  places  to  what
would  appear  to  point  to  a  clear  memory  of  certain
uncomfortable  physical  symptoms,  and  of  a  motor  accident
which  caused  them.

On  December  30th,  1916,  Lady  Troubridge  took  a
sitting  at  which  I  recorded.  Quite  suddenly  Feda  showed
signs  of  being  uncomfortable,  moving  about  restlessly,
and  the  following  occurred  :

F.  Oh, what is she doing  ? Something  funny,  she's

twisting  about.  (To  A.  V.  B.)  What  are  you
doing  ?  Feda  can't  make  out  what  she's  doing,
she's  moving  about  and  speaking  without  saying
any  words  (here  Feda  moves  her  lips  without
articulating).  No,  Feda  is  afraid  she  can't  get
this,  it's  too  wrapped  up,  Feda  can't  get  it,  she's
doing  such  funny  things,  like  this  :  (here  Feda
rubs  her  neck  with  her  right  hand,  downwards,
from  the  back  of  the  neck  to  the  side).

U.  V.  T. Interesting  and  very  odd.

F.  She  wants  you  to  notice  it.

U.  V.  T. We  do.

F.  She's  opening  her  mouth  to  speak,  and  not  letting

words  come,  it's  got  something  to  do  with  some-
thing that  happened  before  she  passed  on.  (Here
Feda  bends  her  head  forward  and  holds  the  back
of  her  neck,  then  with  her  hand  still  on  the
back  of  her  neck,  she  lifts  her  head  and  moves
it  stiffly  from  side  to  side,  making  a  grimace.)
Mrs.  Una  she's  screwing  up  her  mouth  and  face.

U.  V.  T. I  think  we  understand  that.


418


Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


F.  It  looks  to  Feda  dreadfully  uncomfortable.

U.  V.  T. I  do  hope  she  is  not  uncomfortable  now.

F.  Oh no, she's only showing that she moved  her

head  as  though  it  were  uncomfortable  when  she
did  move  it.  It  seems  to  Feda  to  have  been
just  here,  just  where  the  knob  is  (Feda  indicates
from  the  seventh  cervical  upwards).  Feda  doesn't
feel  it  below  that,  but  Feda  feels  just  under  the
roots  of  the  hair  a  kind  of  soreness,  a  tenderness,
not  cpjite  pain,  a  funny  feeling.  Feda  wants  to
keep  moving  like  this  (she  again  moves  her  head
stiffly  from  side  to  side).  It's  as  though,  although
it's  uncomfortable  to  move,  yet  you  want  to  move.
(Feda  now  begins  to  rub  her  arm).  She's  making
Feda  feel  a  funny  feeling  in  the  arm,  or  is  Feda
getting  it  from  your  arm  ?

U.  V.  T. It  may  easily  be  my  arm,  because  I  have  had  some-
thing the  matter  with  my  arm  lately.

F.  Wait  a  minute,  no,  it's  her  arm. She  thinks  that

your  arm  may  have  helped  to  put  Feda  on  the
track.  You  have  like  a  toothache  in  your  arm,
but  hers  was  different  to  yours,  she  had  a  nasty
feeling,  it  made  her  arm  feel  limp,  and  though  it
felt  limp  there  was  a  heaviness  in  the  arm  too,
the  fingers  felt  dry  at  the  ends  and  nervy,  as
though  you  wanted  to  keep  moving  them.  No,
it  was  not  a  pain  like  yours.  She  says,  that
this  means  something  to  do  with  her  before  she
passed  on.  Feda  wonders  why  she  wants  to  give
it  this  morning.

U.  V.  T. Ifs  good,  I'm  interested,  tell  her.

F.  She says, she didn't only have that  for a  very

little  while  though,  it  was  spread  over  a  time,
there  was  a  cause  for  it  which  dated  some  time
back,  a  cause  for  this  thing  there  (here  Feda
touches  the  back  of  her  neck).  Now  she  tries
to  show  Feda  that  she  sometimes  breathed  a
little  heavily  (here  Feda  breathes  in  and  out  as
if  with  difficulty),  and  then  she  used  to  move  her
head,  it was nasty. Do you know  she had  a


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator .  419


very  peculiar  feeling  in  her  head.  She  knows
more  about  it  now,  Feda  thinks,  because  she
manages  to  give  it  so  well  to  Feda,  it's  not  quite
like  pain,  it  is  as  though  something  came  from
the  back  which  seemed  to  numb  (here  Feda
stretches  her  neck  up  and  bends  her  head  back
stiffly). It's  a  strange  feeling.

TJ.  V.  T. Well,  I  am  glad  she  hasn't  got  it  now,  then.

F.  She's  smiling. She's  so  glad  she  can  get  it  through.

U.  V.  T.  Tell  her  it  has  very  much  pleased  us,  because  we
see  that  she  has  remembered  something  that  she
ought  to  have  remembered.

F.  She stretched her head  ! (Feda now  touches  the

front  of  her  head  a  little  to  the  side  of  the
centre.)  There  was  something  just  here,  but  it
was  different  to  that  thing  at  the  back,  a  different
condition  somehow,  it  isn't  cpiite  a  pain,  it  is
as  if  there  was  something  that  caused  pressure.
(Feda  again  indicates  the  front  of  her  head,  then
proceeds  to  hold  her  head  with  her  hand.)  Mrs.
Una,  it  isn't  like  pressure  in  one  particular  spot,
it's  across  there.  (Feda  indicates  the  front  of  the
head.)  Do  you  know  it  gave  her  a  heavy  sort
of  feeling  in  her  eyes,  as  though  she  wanted  to
half  close  them ;  it  wasn't  awful  pain,  it  was
as  though  something  got  on  the  nerves  and  made
everything  all  round  feel  funny.

U.  V.  T.  Did  I  understand  you  to  say  that  this  feeling  was
in  the  middle  of  the  head  or  at  the  side  ?

F.  It seems to Feda to begin in the middle  and

makes  the  whole  front  feel  funny.  It  was  a
different  condition  to  that  at  the  back  entirely.
This  front  condition  was  not  exactly  .  .  .  Oh,
Feda  wishes  she  could  find  the  word,  it's  im-
portant, it  makes  all  the  difference,  it's  as
though  this  trouble  in  front  was  in  some  way
made  to  be,  caused.  Feda  doesn't  think  that  is
quite  right,  but  she  seems  to  be  saying  that  the
front  part  had  been  made  bad,  as  though  some-
thing had  made  the  funny  sensation,  the  back  is


420  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


different,  she  wasn't  made  to  have  the  back.
She  says  she  wants  you  to  clearly  understand
that  she's  not  worrying  over  it,  but  to  some
extent  there  was  something  that  made  her  have
that  strange  feeling  across  the  front  part  of  the
head.

U.  V.  T.  We  understand  that,  and  now  perhaps  she  can
give  something  that  will  tell  us  what  caused
these  feelings  which  you  have  described.

F.  She  couldn't  think  very  clearly,- — what  is  she  doing  ?

She  wants  to  jerk  Feda  in  some  way,  it's  a
movement  that  was  partly  unconscious.  She  wants
to  make  Feda  make  a  movement,  automatic  !

U.  V.  T. What  movement  ?

F.  It's  some  particular  movement  that  was  connected

with  these  conditions.  She  is  wanting  to  give
Feda  jerking,  automatic,  unconscious  movements.
Feda  can't  make  out  if  she  actually  did  move,
but  she  certainly  wanted  to.  She  says  she
thought  Mrs.  Twonnie  was  there.

U.  V.  T. Where,  when  ?

F.  At a  later stage she thought Mrs. Twonnie  was

there.  She  thought  Mrs.  Twonnie  was  bending
over  her.

M.  R.  H. So  I  was.

F.  She  says  that  even  then  her  mind  worked  a  little

bit  strangely.  She  wondered  how  it  seemed  to
other  people.

U.  V.  T.  Were  all  these  conditons  just  before  she  passed
over  or  some  time  ago  ?

F.  No,  not  just  before  she  passed  over, because  she

speaks  of  later  stages  afterwards.  She's  going
back  for  a  good  many  of  the  things.  It  was  not
just  before  she  passed,  but  do  you  know,  though
there  was  a  time  in  between,  she  certainly  links
the  two  things  up.

U.  V.  T.  Will  she  give  the  letter  of  the  month  when  the
first  neck  condition  was  caused  ?

F.  She'll  try. You  say  the  letters  of  the  month  over

out  loud. (U.  V.  T.  repeats  the  alphabet  slowly,


lxxvih.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  421


and is stopped at the letter V. by Feda  ex
claiming  11  Oh,  she  says,  she  has  passed  it  ").

U.  V.  T.  I  will  make  it  easier  by  repeating  only  the  letters
of  the  actual  months  (U.  V.  T.  repeats  the  first
letter  of  every  month  and  is  stopped  by  Feda
at  the  letter  M.).

F.  Wait a  minute. (U.  V.  T. waits,  but  Feda  seems

confused.)

U.  V.  T.  Well,  look  here,  I'll  make  it  easier  by  saying  the
names  of  the  months  of  the  year  (U.  V.  T.
repeats  the  names  of  the  months  and  is  stopped
by  Feda  at  October).

F.  Oh,  wait  a  minute. She  doesn't  want  you  to  go

further.  She  stopped  Feda  in  two  places.  It
seems  to  Feda  it  was  somewhere  around  March
or  April  and  then  between  October  and  November.

U.  V.  T.  (to  A.  V.  B.)  I  wish  you  could  get  that  month
connected  with  the  pain  at  the  back  of  your  neck,
try  and  stop  me  at  the  right  month.  (U.  V.  T.
repeats  the  names  of  the  months  again  and  is
stopped  by  Feda  at  July).

F.  Feda  can't  get  it. She  is  stopping  Feda  at  different

places,  she  knows  that  last  place  is  wrong.  She
says,  "  No,  no."  Feda  gets  it  that  she  makes
one  condition  happening  one  season,  and  one
condition  happening  in  another  season.

U.  V.  T. She  is  right  about  seasons.

F.  Feda  can't  get  the  months.

TJ.  V.  T.  It  is  curious  that  she  doesn't  give  what  led  up  to
that  feeling  in  her  neck  ;  what  caused  it.  (Here
Feda  suddenly  begins  jerking  about  in  the  chair
rather  violently.)

F. (to  A.  V.  B.) What do you want to jerk Feda for  ?

(Feda  jerks  up  and  forward  almost  out  of  her
seat.)  Mrs.  Una,  she  says,  she  pitched  forward,
she  didn't  fall  or  slide,  she  pitched  !  Oh,  now  she
says  :  "  No,  that's  not  quite  right,"  she  says  she
pitched  forward  but  a  little  to  one  side  too,
she  says  it's  not  quite  forward.

M.  R.  H. She's  right.


422  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  mid  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


F.  (with  a  sigh  of  relief.)  Now  she  doesn't  worry  Feda  so
much.  She  wanted  to  show  Feda  that  it  was
not  softly  falling,  but  jerking.  (Here  Feda  puts
her  fingers  just  under  the  hair  of  the  front  of
her  head  and  draws  in  her  breath  with  a  little
hissing  sound  as  if  in  pain.)  She  says,  when  she
jerked  like  that  there  was  something  at  the  side,
something  she  was  afraid  of,  she  says,  it  only
caught  her  eye,  "  It  was  like  a  sudden  flash,"
she  says,  it's  because  it  was  so  sudden  that  it
impressed  itself  on  her.

M.  R.  H. Good  !

F.  (drops  her  head  on  her  breast  and  assumes  a  collapsed
position.)  She  was  doubled  down  like  this.  She
makes  Feda  feel  funny  all  round  her  neck.  That's
all  she  can  say  about  that.

XJ.  V.  T. It  has  been  splendid.

F.  She  laid  great  stress  upon  that  thing  just  catching

her  eye,  it  was  like  this  :  (here  Feda  makes  a
sudden  wave  of  her  hand  sideways).  Oh  dear,
it  seems  to  have  taken  the  power  from  us.
Describing  that  was  hard  work,  she  had  to  make
Feda  understand  that  she  wasn't  playing,  at
first.

The  whole  of  the  above  description  is  applicable  in
every  detail  to  a  serious  motor  accident  which  A.  V.  B.
and  I  had  on  September  22nd,  1914,  and  to  certain
symptoms  accruing  from  injuries  which  A.  V.  B.  then
received.  We  will  give  the  circumstances  as  briefly  as
possible,  beginning, as  Feda  does,  with  the  symptoms.

In  that  accident  A.  V.  B.  sustained,  among  others,
three  injuries,  the  effects  of  which  continued  to  trouble
her  up  to  the  time  of  her  death  ;  namely,  a  chip  off
the  spinous  process  of  one  of  the  cervical  vertebrae,  a
chip  off  one  of  the  bones  of  the  elbow,  and  two  severe
scalp  wounds,  one  slightly  to  the  side  of  the  front  of  the
head,  the  other  a  little  more  towards  the  back,  but  also  at
the  side.

The  result  of  the  injury  to  the  vertebra  was  a  chronic


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  423

stiffness  of  the  neck,  accompanied  by  much  discomfort,
to  ease  which  A.  V.  B.  was  in  the  habit  of  rubbing
her  neck  downwards  from  the  back  towards  the  side,
which  gesture  was  reproduced  with  startling  exactness
by  Feda.  As  will  have  been  remarked  A.  V.  B.  appears
to  wish  to  bring  the  gesture  to  our  notice.  Feda  speaks
of  her  opening  her  mouth  and  letting  no  words  come.
This  description  suggested  to  Lady  Troubridge  and  myself
a  very  familiar  grimace  often  made  by  A.  V.  B.  when  in
acute  discomfort  from  her  neck.  We  find  Feda  saying
correctly  that  the  above  actions  have  something  to  do
with  an  occurrence  before  A.  V.  B.'s  death,  and  here
again  Feda  makes  a  startlingly  familiar  gesture,  namely,
that  of  placing  the  hand  at  the  back  of  the  neck  with
the  head  bent  forward,  then  with  the  hand  still  on  the
back  of  the  neck  raising  the  head  and  moving  it  from
side  to  side  making  a  grimace  at  the  same  time.  A.  V.  B.,
when  uncomfortable,  often  did  this,  from  the  time  of  the
accident  to  the  date  of  her  last  illness.  The  position  given
by  Feda  regarding  the  seat  of  the  neck  injury  is  correct,
and  the  tenderness  said  to  be  felt  under  the  roots  of  the
hair  must  of  course  have  existed  at  the  time  of  the  accident.
After  moving  her  head  once  again  stiffly  from  side  |  to
side  Feda  begins  to  rub  her  arm  ;  for  a  moment  there
appears  to  be  some  doubt  in  Feda's  mind  as  to  whether
she  is  not  catching  a  sensation  from  Lady  Troubridge's
arm,  which  was  in  contact  with  medium's.  Feda,  however,
decides  that  this  is  not  so,  and  proceeds  to  diagnose
correctly  the  type  of  pain  being  suffered  by  Lady  Trou-
bridge, which  she  says  is  different  from  that  in  A.  V.  B.'s
arm.  Now  A.  V.  B.  suffered  much  pain  owing  to  her
injured  elbow,  especially  at  first  ;  we  do  not  know
whether  her  arm  felt  limp  and  heavy,  but  we  have  no
doubt  that  an  injury  to  the  elbow  would  produce  a  feeling
of  nerviness  in  the  fingers  ;  we  have  all  experienced  this
feeling  when  we  have  knocked  our  funny-bone.  The
next  good  point  is  made  when  A.  V.  B.  says,  through
Feda,  that  she  did  not  have  these  symptoms  for  a  little
while  only,  but  that  all  this  was  spread  over  a  time  ;
that  there  was  a  cause  which  dated  some  time  back  for


424 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Trotibridge.  [part

the  neck  injury.  As  we  have  said,  the  accident  occurred
in  1914,  over  a  year  and  a  half  before  A.  V.  B.  died.

Just  about  here  A.  V.  B.  appears  to  wish  to  show,
through  Feda,  another  of  her  symptoms,  namely,  breath-
lessness.  She  had  suffered  from  breathlessness  for  some
time  prior  to  the  accident,  and  although  it  grew  worse
after  the  shock  it  cannot  be  said  that  it  was  caused  by
the  accident,  although  it  would  almost  seem  as  if  Feda
linked  the  two  things  up  together,  since,  after  describing
the  breathlessness,  she  says  :  "  And  then  she  used  to
move  her  head,  it  was  nasty."

It  may  probably  be  correct  to  say  that  something  came
from  the  back  of  the  head  which  seemed  to  numb  ;  at
the  time  of  the  accident  the  violence  of  the  blow  on  the
back  of  the  neck  must  have  caused  a  certain  amount
of  numbness  ;  in  any  case  A.  V.  B.  was  unconscious,
and  her  medical  attendant  was  in  doubt  for  a  time  as  to
whether  or  not  she  had  fractured  the  base  of  her  skull.
Here,  again,  we  find  Feda  making  a  familiar  gesture  ;
this  time  she  does  not  touch  the  back  of  her  neck  with
her  hand,  but  stretches  her  neck  up  and  bends  her  head
back  stiffly  ; this  also  A.  V.  B.  did  constantly.

Next  we  find  Feda  touching  the  front  of  her  head  a
little  to  the  side,  and  saying  that  there  was  something
just  there,  but  that  it  was  a  different  condition  from  that
at  the  back  ;  she  also  speaks  of  something  which  caused
pressure,  and  holds  her  head  with  her  hand,  as  one  might
when  suffering  from  a  headache.  Regarding  the  pressure,
she  says  that  it  was  not  in  one  particular  spot,  but
across  the  front  of  the  head,  and  that  this  pressure  was
caused,  made  to  be.  We  have  already  spoken  of  the
two  scalp  wounds  sustained  by  A.  V.  B.,  which  could
certainly  be  termed  a  different  condition  from  the  injury
of  the  bone  at  the  back  of  the  neck.  After  the  scalp
wounds  healed,  up  to  the  day  of  her  last  illness,  A.  V.  B.
could  never  bear  any  pressure  on  the  front  part  of  her
head  ;  all  her  hats  seemed  to  cause  pressure,  and  Lady
Troubridge  and  I  can  both  remember  days  when  she
would  change  her  hat  two  or  three  times,  complaining
that all her hats felt too heavy,  and  that  she  could


Lxxvni.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  425

not  stand  the  pressure.  Having  got  thus  far,  we  en-
deavoured to  find  out  whether  any  memory  had  been
retained  by  A.  V.  B.  regarding  the  cause  of  these  symptoms.
It  will  be  noticed  that  the  question  which  we  put  to
Feda  regarding  this  gives  nothing  away  ;  and  here  again,
as  on  many  previous  occasions,  instead  of  getting  a  direct
answer,  such  as  motor  car,  or  accident,  we  receive  rather
a  long,  drawn-out  description,  accompanied  by  a  good
deal  of  pantomime.

We  are  told  first  of  all  that  A.  V.  B.  could  not  think
very  clearly.  It  goes  without  saying  that  she  could  not
have  thought  clearly  at  the  time.  After  that  we  get
Feda  saying  that  A.  V.  B.  is  trying  to  jerk  her,  and  to
convey  the  impression  that  the  movement  was  partly
unconscious  and  automatic.

Now  the  circumstances  of  the  accident  were  these  :
A.  V.  B.  and  I  were  passing  the  Cross  Roads  at  Burford,
in  our  Limousine  car,  when  suddenly  a  smaller  car  dashed
into  the  side  of  our  motor  with  great  violence  ;  the  lady
who  was  driving  the  smaller  car  mistook,  in  her  panic,
the  accelerator  for  the  brake  ;  consequently  the  force  of
the  impact  was  enormous,  and  our  heavy  car  was  jerked
backwards  and  forwards  several  times  before  it  finally
fell  over  on  to  a  stone  wall,  which  it  partly  demohshed,
and  then  our  car  partially  rebounded  on  to  the  road.
I  was  thrown  from  my  seat,  and  when  I  could  collect
myself,  I  found  that  A.  V.  B.  had  been  flung  across  the
car  from  the  place  where  she  had  been  sitting  to  what  had
originally  been  my  seat  ;  that  is  to  say,  she  had  been
pitched  from  right  to  left,  the  collision  having  taken
place  on  her  side.

I  think  that  makes  it  quite  clear  that  Feda's  des-
cription of  A.  V.  B.'s  movements  as  having  been  jerky,
automatic  and  unconscious  is  correct.  Of  course  I  was
there  the  whole  time  during  the  accident,  but,  as  I  have
said  previously,  A.  V.  B.  was  unconscious  at  first,  and
I  was,  as  Feda  states,  bending  over  her  at  a  later  stage,
namely,  when  she  recovered  consciousness.  When  Lady
Troubridge  asks  if  aU  these  conditions  occurred  just
before  A.  V.  B.  passed  on A.  V.  B.  says through  Feda


426  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

that  they  did  not,  but  that  although  there  was  a  time
between,  she  certainly  links  up  her  death  with  her  accident.
This  is  a  distinctly  good  point  ;  because  although  to  all
appearances  A.  V.  B.  made  a  good  recovery  from  that
accident,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  she  really  never
recovered  from  the  shock,  and  several  doctors  have
told  me  that  it  very  probably  hastened  her  end.  It  is
undoubted  that  the  consequences  of  the  accident  accen-
tuated her  tendency  to  lead  the  sedentary  life  most
favourable  to  the  development  of  the  high  blood-pressure
which  was  the  ultimate  cause  of  her  death.

As  will  have  been  noticed  we  did  not  succeed  in
obtaining  from  Feda  the  name  of  the  month  in  which
the  accident  occurred  ;  we  got  M.  given,  which  is  correct
for  the  month  of  A.  V.  B.'s  death,  but  no  correct  letter  was
given  for  the  month  of  the  accident.  We  did,  however,
obtain  a  correct  statement  regarding  the  fact  that  one
condition  occurred  at  one  season  of  the  year,  and  the
other  condition  at  another  season  of  the  year  :  meaning
presumably  the  motor  accident  and  her  death.  Feda
gives  two  approximate  times,  namely,  March  or  April,
and  October  or  November  ;  although  it  must  be  noticed
that  Feda  actually  stopped  Lady  Troubridge  at  the  mention
of  October.  She  is  very  near  the  mark,  since  A.  V.  B.
died  in  May,  while  the  accident  occurred  late  in  September.
When,  owing  to  a  misunderstanding,  Feda  stops  on  one
occasion  at  the  month  of  July,  it  will  have  been  noticed
that  A.  V.  B.  protests,  saying :  "  No,  No,"  appearing  to
know  that  this  is  wrong.

After  this  reference  to  the  month  we  find  A.  V.  B.
endeavouring,  in  order  apparently  to  satisfy  us,  to  make
Feda  show  by  pantomine  exactly  what  happened,  for  Feda
says,  acting  the  movement  at  the  same  time,  that  A.  V.  B.
is  trying  to  jerk  her  ;  A.  V.  B.  tries  to  jerk  her  violently
it  seems,  since  she  is  thrown  forward  nearly  out  of  her
seat,  and  we  find  Feda  saying  that  this  was  no  ordinary
fall  or  slide,  but  that  A.  V.  B.  was  pitched.  And  here
we  get  A.  V.  B.  correcting  Feda  with  regard  to  the
direction  in  which  she  was  pitched,  and  stating  that  she
pitched forward, but a little  to one  side as well,  not


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  427

quite  forward  ;  this,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  at  the
moment  of  the  accident  A.  V.  B.  was  sitting  forward
in  her  seat  with  her  body  practically  turned  towards  me,
and  was  flung  across  the  seat  of  the  car,  is  perfectly
correct.

After  this  there  comes  another  familiar  gesture  of
A.  V.  B.'s  ;  Feda  runs  her  fingers  under  the  hair  at  the
front  of  the  head,  drawing  in  her  breath  as  though  in
pain.  A.  V.  B.  always  did  this  when  the  old  scars  used
to  shoot,  as  they  frequently  did.  She  may  also  have
wished  to  imply,  correctly,  that  the  scalp-wounds  were
incurred  owing  to  her  pitching  sideways  against  the  broken
window  of  the  car.

And  now  we  come  to  what  I  feel  is  one  of  the  best
points  in  the  whole  description.  It  is  this  :  A.  V.  B.
says  through  Feda  that  when  she  was  jerked  there  was
something  at  the  side  which  frightened  her,  something
which  only  caught  her  eye  ;  according  to  Feda,  A.  V.  B.'s
own  words  are  :  "It  was  like  a  sudden  flash."  At  the
time  of  the  collision  I  did  not  think  that  A.  V.  B.  who,
as  I  have  said,  was  turning  towards  me,  had  seen  the
approaching  motor  ;  I  questioned  her  about  this  after-
wards, and  many  were  the  arguments,  which  invariably
ended  with  the  assertion  on  her  part  that  she  knew
perfectly  well  that  she  had  seen  something ;  she  used  to
say  :  "  I  tell  you  I  did  see  something,  what  I  saw  was
like  a  sudden  flash."

After  getting  the  evidential  words  regarding  the  "  sudden
flash,"  through  Feda,  I  feel  quite  sure  that  I  allowed  a
certain  amount  of  excitement  to  come  into  my  voice
when  I  said  "  good  !  "  At  all  events  I  recorded  in  my
notes,  as  a  fact  against  myself,  that  I  had  spoken  ex-
citedly. Therefore,  when  a  little  further  on  Feda  says
that  A.  V.  B.  laid  great  stress  on  the  thing  that  just
caught  her  eye,  we  must  look'  on  that  last  reference  to
the  approaching  motor  as  non -evidential.  There  was,
however,  nothing  in  my  excited  comment  of  "  good "  to
give  Feda  the  least  clue  as  to  the  position  in  which  I
found  A.  V.  B.  after  the  accident  ;  and  yet  Feda  assumed
the  exact  position. She  dropped  her  head  on  her  breast


428 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

and  collapsed  in  a  land  of  heap  in  the  chair,  remarking
as  she  did  so,  "  she  was  doubled  down  like  this."  Through-
out this  whole  description  I  have  never  seen  anything
so  life-like  as  was  the  pantomime.  With  some  of  the
gestures,  particularly  those  connected  with  the  stiffness
in  the  neck,  Lady  Troubridge  is  just  as  familiar  as  I  am,
and  she  entirely  agrees  with  me  as  to  their  startlingly
faithful  character.


On  June  6th,  1917,  at  a  sitting  taken  by  Lady  Trou-
bridge, I  acting  as  recorder,  there  was  another  apparent
reference  to  the  motor  accident. It  ran  as  follows  :

F.  Oh,  dear  ! she's  trying  to  show  Feda  funny  things

this  morning,  they  seem  different  to  usual.  This
must  be  another  place  that  she  thinks  she's  been
to,  it's  a  funny  looking  place.  Now,  why  is
she  touching  her  neck  ?

U.  V.  T.  I  don't  know.  (Feda  begins  to  rub  the  back  of  her
neck  and  smooths  the  hair  up  at  the  back.)

F.  Feda  doesn't  know  why  she's  touching  her  head.

U.  V.  T. Where  is  she  touching  it  1

F.  She's going like  this  :  (here Feda  strokes  her  left

eye.)  Oh,  no  !  that's  not  quite  right.  (Feda
makes  some  more  gestures  around  her  head.)

U.  V.  T. What  is  it  ?

F.  She  keeps  touching  her  head  all  over,  and  yet  she

can't  quite  show  Feda  what  she  wants.  (Here
Feda  begins  stroking  her  face  all  over.)  She
says,  that  this  has  more  to  do  with  Mrs.  Twonnie
than  with  you,  she  touches  her  face,  she  touches
it  here.  (Feda  touches  her  cheek-bones  and  all
around  the  nose.)

M.  R.  H. I  think  I  understand,  perhaps.

F.  She  puts  up  her*  hand  and  touches  that  part  of  her

face  all  round,  there  is  some  meaning  in  it.
IT.  V.  T. Well,  can  she  remember  any  place  connected  with  it?
F.  A  place  on  the  earth  plane  do  you  mean  ?

U.  V.  T.  Yes.

F.  She  keeps  stroking  her  face  like  this,  it's  down  the


Lxxvin.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  429


middle  part  more  (Feda  strokes  her  face  from  the
cheek  bone  downwards).  She  says  it  wasn't  here
in  London,  she  does  say  mysterious  things  this
morning,  it's  all  so  mysterious.

U.  V.  T. Never  mind,  Feda,  you  try  to  tell  me.

F.  (Sotto voce  : Bur — Bur — Bur — Bur. Burn — Burner —

Bearer).  Oh,  no  !  it's  not  Burner.  Feda  thinks
that  this  was  some  kind  of  place  that  she's
trying  to  say.  Bur,  and  then  there's  something
more,  it's  not  Berrell  she  says,  but  it  does  begin
with  a  "  B,"  and  it  has  something  to  do  with
why  she's  touching  her  face.

U.  V.  T. I'm  afraid  I  can't  follow.

F.  No,  °  it's a funny word. Feda thinks it's  got

more  the  sound  of  B — u  than  B — e.

U.  V.  T. WeU  don't  try,  it  will  come  easier  later  on.

F.  No,  Feda  won't  try,  it  might  be  a  person  and  not

a  place,  but  if  it's  a  person  it's  no  one  very
close  to  her.  Now  she  says  that  someone  else
was  brought  into  these  conditions  at  that  time
who  had  nothing  to  do  with  her,  and  now  she
gives  the  letter  S  very  clearly ;  and  it  all  has
to  do  with  this  time,  and  with  her  face,  but  not
to  do  with  you  very  much ;  it's  Mrs.  Twonnie
that  Ladye  remembers,  it's  to  do  with  her  that
Ladye  remembers  it.  It  wasn't  close  here  at
all,  it  looks  to  Feda  as  though  she's  showing
more  a  country  place,  Feda  sees  more  space  than
if  it  were  London.

In  the  above  extract  A.  V.  B.  appears  to  be  returning
to  her  motor  accident,  and  to  be  thinking  of  the  place
where  that  accident  occurred,  since  she  seems  to  try  to
give  Feda  the  impression  of  some  place  that  she  has  been
to,  and  then  proceeds  to  touch  her  neck.  Feda  makes
a  rubbing  gesture  at  the  back  of  the  neck  as  she  did  on
December  30th,  1916,  but  in  this  present  sitting  we  find
Feda  stroking  her  left  eye  and  feeling  her  face,  at  one
time  all  over,  and  at  another  time  indicating  the  cheek
bone  and  around  the  nose, and  yet  again  stroking  her


430 .Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

face  all  the  way  down.  These  movements  are  an  ampli-
fication of  the  movements  given  on  December  30th,  1916  ;
they  point  to  a  memory  of  injuries  other  than  those
mentioned  in  that  sitting.  For  although  Feda  does  not
seem  to  think  that  she  has  been  quite  right  in  stroking
her  left  eye,  this  gesture  was  in  reality  very  accurate,
since  there  was  an  immense  amount  of  bruising  and
tenderness  all  down  one  side  of  A.  V.  B.'s  face,  the  left
eye  being  particularly  discoloured.  When  Lady  Troubridge
asks  whether  a  memory  has  been  retained  of  any  place
connected  with  the  condition  Feda  is  describing,  the  reply
is  that  A.  V.  B.  says  it  wasn't  in  London.  A  propos
of  where  it  was,  Feda  gets  as  far  as  repeating  the  word
Bur —  four  times,  and  tells  us  that  there  is  something  which
should  follow  after  Bur,  in  other  words  that  she  has  not
completed  the  name,  also  that  this  refers  to  a  place,  and  that
this  place  which  begins  with  B.  has,  according  to  A.  V.  B.,
got  something  to  do  with  her  reason  for  touching  her  face.
A  little  later  on  Feda  says  that  A.  V.  B.  speaks  of
somebody  else  having  been  brought  into  those  conditions
at  that  time,  someone  who  had  nothing  to  do  with  her,
with  whom  she  gives  a  very  clear  letter  S.  A.  V.  B.
also  gives  Feda  to  understand  that  it  is  with  me  and  not
with  Lady  Troubridge  that  all  this  is  associated  in  her
mind,  she  also  shows  Feda  that  the  place  was  some
distance  from  London,  and  that  it  was  a  country  place.
As  we  have  already  said,  the  gestures  regarding  the  face
were  correct,  Bur.  was  also  correct  so  far  as  it  went,  for
it  will  be  remembered  (see  p.  425)  that  when  commenting  on
the  sitting  of  December  30th,  1916,  we  mentioned  the  fact
that  the  motor  accident  occurred  at  Burford.  With
regard  to  the  person  called  S.  I  believe  this  to  be  the
chauffeur  who  was  driving  our  car  at  the  time  of  the
accident,  whose  name  was  Serpell.  There  is  a  little
doubt,  perhaps,  regarding  this  point,  as  Feda  says  that
this  person  had  nothing  to  do  with  A.  V.  B.,  but  we
think  that  these  words  were  intended  to  convey  that  S.
was  not  a  relation  or  friend,  as  they  follow  imme-
diately after  Feda's  remark  concerning  Bur  :  "If  it's
a person it's no one very close to her." Feda  may


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  431

have  been  continuing  this  train  of  thought  when  she  refers
to  S.

Immediately  following  on  the  extract  we  have  just
dealt  with  came  the  description  of  a  narrow  lane  and  a
gate,  afterwards  corrected  to  a  narrow  road  with  a  gate
across  it.  This  we  could  not  place  and  said  so.  There
then  followed  the  description  of  a  place  with  hills,  and
with  roads  running  down  ;  hills  in  the  distance  were  also
mentioned.  A.  V.  B.  then  showed  herself  to  Feda  coming
down  the  side  of  a  hill,  not  coming  perfectly  straight  down,
but  curving  round,  and  this,  it  was  said,  led  A.  V.  B.
to  a  place  where  she  used  to  be  ;  the  walking  was  said
to  be  rough,  and  after  you  had  descended  further  down
the  hill  you  were  said  to  come  to  a  shady  part,  like  a
line  of  trees  or  something,  near  the  bottom,  not  quite
like  a  wood,  however.  Feda  said  that  A.  V.  B.  knew
that  part  and  remembered  it.  Next  came  the  description
of  a  house  and  a  cottage,  people  were  said  to  go  up
and  down  between  the  cottage  and  the  house,  as  there
always  used  to  be  a  little  link  between  them.  Some
steps  and  a  gate  were  next  described,  and  we  were  told
that  if  you  entered  the  gate  and  turned  in  one  direction
you  came  to  a  door,  whereas  if  you  turned  in  the  opposite
direction  you  came  to  an  open  kind  of  place,  but  that
nobody  walked  round  there  much.  Concerning  this
open  kind  of  place,  Feda  suddenly  asked  the  following
question  :  "  Do  you  understand  why  she  is  showing  Feda
flags  ?  "  When  asked  what  kind  of  flags,  Feda  replied  :
"  Not  waving  flags,  not  silk  or  cotton,  Feda  means  stone/'
She  was  told  that  we  did  understand  this,  whereupon
she  said,  "  Well,  she's  showing  them  to  Feda,  big  flags,
big  square  ones,  there  were  a  lot  of  them  there,  and
there's  green  too,  short  green."  Some  further  description
was  given  of  which  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that  it  was  all
applicable  to  the  same  place.

In  our  opinion  the  place  described  is  Malvern  Wells,
and  it  is  quite  logical  that  A.  V.  B.  should  link  it  up
in  her  mind  with  Burford  and  the  motor  accident,  since
she  lay  in  a  stranger's  house  in  Burford  for  eleven  days
or  so  after  the  accident, but  as  soon  as  she  could  be


432


Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.


[PABT


moved  was  taken  to  The  White  Cottage,  Malvern  Wells,
whither  we  were  bound  when  the  accident  occurred.  We
have  already  quoted  one  or  two  descriptions  of  this
house  and  its  surroundings,  and  it  will  have  been  gathered
from  them  that,  as  Feda  states  in  the  present  sitting,
the  country  is  very  hilly.  In  the  present  sitting  this
reference  to  hilliness  is  somewhat  elaborated,  as  A.  V.  B.
shows  herself  walking  down  a  hill  path,  which  is  correctly
described  as  curving  round  and  as  being  rough  under
foot.  This  path  is  said  to  take  A.  V.  B.  to  the  place
where  she  used  to  be,  presumably  meaning  The  White
Cottage  or  the  village  of  Malvern  Wells  ;  there  were
many  such  paths  near  our  house  which  were  suffi-
ciently easy  to  be  negotiated  by  A.  V.  B.,  and  by  which
she  would  occasionally  return  home.  One  such  path
had  trees  towards  the  bottom  of  it  ;  it  was  a  favourite
walk  of  A.  V.  B.'s,  she  said  it  reminded  her  of  Simla,
and  christened  it  the  "  Simla  Walk."

The  reference  to  the  house  and  the  cottage  which  are
said  to  have  had  people  going  constantly  between  them
would  apply  to  our  house  and  the  small  cottage  which
stood  in  the  garden,  and  which  contained  the  servants'
hall  and  servants'  double  bed-room,  descriptions  of  which
it  will  be  remembered  were  obtained  at  earlier  sittings.
The  gate  and  steps  referred  to  in  the  present  sitting  are
correctly  described.  We  are  told  that  if,  after  having
entered  this  gate,  we  turned  in  one  direction  we  would
come  to  a  door,  but  if  we  turned  in  another  direction
we  would  come  to  a  wider  place  ;  this  is  correct.  The  gate
was  a  front  garden  gate,  and  if  you  entered  it  and  turned
to  the  right  you  would  come  by  a  winding  path  to  the
front  door  of  the  house  ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  you  turned
to  the  left  you  came  to  the  third  section  of  the  garden,
which  was  referred  to  by  us  when  commenting  on  the
sitting  of  October  9th,  1916.  This  section  of  the  garden
was  an  open  space  which  A.  V.  B.  and  I  had  turned
into  an  Italian  garden.  Immediately  after  referring  to
this  open  place  in  the  present  sitting,  Feda  speaks  of
stone  flags.  Now  these  stone  flags  were  a  feature  of
that Italian garden  which A.  V.  B. would be  likely  to


Lxxvin.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  433

remember,  since  we  ourselves  obtained  them  with  con-
siderable trouble,  and  A.  V.  B.  was  very  proud  of  the
effect.  The  short  green  spoken  of  by  Feda  in  this
connection  may  be  the  rock  plants  which  we  endeavoured
rather  unsuccessfully  to  grow  between  the  flags,  or  her  words
could  equally  well  be  taken  to  refer  to  grass  which  grew  down
to  the  flags  on  one  side,  or  to  short  plants,  of  which  there
were  many.  Feda  says  that  A.  V.  B.  tells  her,  in  refer-
ence to  the  open  place,  that  nobody  walked  round  there
much.  This  as  it  happens  is  quite  true,  for  oddly  enough
we  seldom  used  the  Italian  garden  which  we  had  taken
such  trouble  to  create.

On  June  13th,  1917,  I  took  a  sitting  and  Lady  Trou-
bridge  recorded.  Space  forbids  that  we  should  give  a
long  extract  from  this  sitting,  but  in  it  there  occurred  a
further  reference  to  the  motor  accident.  Feda  said
suddenly  :  "  Now,  she's  going  back  to  this,"  and  began
a  stroking  movement  of  the  face,  saying,  at  the  same
time,  that  all  this  had  more  to  do  with  me  than  with
"  Mrs.  Una."  I,  wishing  to  get  a  still  clearer  description,
said  that  I  did  not  quite  understand  ;  whereupon  Feda
said  that  it  was  not  my  face  but  A.  V.  B.'s,  but  that
I  knew  about  it.  She  said  that  this  had  not  happened
"  only  just  a  little  time  "  before  A.  V.  B.  passed  on,  and
that  A.  V.  B.  was  most  anxious  to  get  it  through.
A.  V.  B.  then  endeavoured  apparently  to  describe,  through
Feda,  the  sensations  caused  by  a  violent  blow  on  the
head,  she  spoke  of  a  sensation  of  falling,  a  giddy  feeling,
that  made  you  feel  as  if  you  must  fall  to  the  ground,
she  also  impressed  Feda  with  the  feeling  that  everything
was  going  black,  as  if  one  were  becoming  unconscious  as
if,  as  Feda  said,  "  you  were  going  down,  sinking,  sinking."
She  then  added,  "  This  has  nothing  to  do  with  her  passing
on,  it  was  before."  There  followed  a  little  more  des-
cription regarding  the  blackness,  a  humming  noise  in
A.  V.  B.'s  head,  etc.,  and  then  came  these  words  spoken
by  Feda  :  "  This  happened  a  good  time  before  she  passed
on,  but  she  says  that  from  that  time  everything  that
happened  tended  towards  her  passing  on.  What  she's
just  described  seemed  like  the  first  definite  step  towards


434


Miss  Badclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


her  passing,  yet  she  says  she  had  an  interval  of  time  in
between,  when  it  seemed  as  if  that  condition  had  not
contributed  towards  her  passing  on."

It  will  be  remembered,  perhaps,  that  when  the  first
description  of  the  motor  accident  was  given  on  December
30th,  1916,  A.  V.  B.  said  through  Feda  that  she  finked
the  motor  accident  and  her  death  together,  though  it
was  clearly  intimated  at  that  sitting  that  there  had  been
an  interval  of  time  between  the  two  occurrences.  The
reference  to  this  same  thing  in  the  present  sitting  would
therefore  appear  to  be  an  elaboration  of  what  was  given
regarding  that  point  on  December  30th,  1916,  and  rather
a  good  elaboration,  too,  since  A.  V.  B.  tells  us  through
Feda  in  the  present  instance,  that  there  was  an  interval
of  time  between  the  two  occurrences  when  it  seemed  as
if  that  condition,  i.e.  the  motor  accident,  had  not  con-
tributed towards  her  passing  on.  Now  we  said  when
referring  to  the  sitting  of  December  30th,  1916,  that
A.  V.  B.  had,  to  all  appearances,  made  a  very  good
recovery  from  the  accident,  and  there  certainly  was  an
interval  of  time  when  those  who  knew  her  best  thought  that,
after  all,  she  might  be  going  to  shake  off  the  effects  of
the  shock.

After  Feda's  remarks  on  June  13th,  1917,  above  referred
to,  there  came  some  more  allusions  to  the  sudden  black-
ness,  etc. Then the following occurred  :

F.  She  says  they  put  something  over  her  face.

M.  R.  H. What  and  when  ?

F.  Wait  a  minute,  she  wants to  give  that. She  felt

something  soft  touching  her  face  she  says,  and  it
felt  damp,  she  says,  it  felt  damp,  Feda  doesn't
think  this  is  important.

M.  R.  H. Yes,  it  is.

F.  She  says  she  didn't  like  it,  it  worried  her.

A  little  later  on  Feda  described  a  feeling  of  sickness,
later  on  again,  but  still  continuing  with  the  description
of  things  pertaining  to  the  accident,  Feda  said  the  following
words  :  "  Mrs.  Twonnie,  she  didn't  at  all  like  to  think
that  all  that  might  happen  again  you  know,  it  made  much


lxxvih.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  435


more  impression  on  her  than  people  knew.  She  says
that  always  after  that  she  had  uncomfortable  feelings,
she  says  that  she  never  got  quite  right,  but  that  she
didn't  know  herself  how  wrong  things  were."

The  soft  damp  thing  which  appears  to  have  worried
A.  V.  B.  may  well  have  been  the  sponge  with  which
I  was  bathing  her  face  and  head  when  she  regained
consciousness  after  the  accident.  The  feeling  of  sickness
described  by  Feda  is  correct,  as  A.  V.  B.  suffered  from
intense  sickness  after  the  blow  on  her  head  ;  it  is  also
perfectly  correct  when  Feda  says  that  A.  V.  B.  did  not
like  to  think  that  all  this  might  happen  again,  that
it  had  made  more  impression  on  her  than  people
knew.  Although  A.  V.  B.  had  great  self-control,  she  was
very  nervous  after  the  accident.  No  one  but  a  person
like  myself  who  knew  her  intimately  would  have  known
how  nervous  of  motoring  she  was  after  our  collision;  I
remember  that  people  used  to  congratulate  her  on  the
wonderful  nerve  she  showed.

A.  V.  B.  is  quite  right  in  telling  us  through  Feda
that  after  her  accident  she  always  had  "  uncomfortable
feelings "  ;  we  have  already  described  the  stiffness  of  the
neck,  etc.,  left  by  her  injuries,  and  that  she  did  not
know  herself  how  wrong  things  were  Lady  Troubridge
and  I  can  quite  believe.  On  October  9th,  1916,  when
referring  to  her  condition,  A.  V.  B.  said  something  very
similar  to  this  through  Feda,  telling  us  that  she  had  not
grasped  how  serious  her  condition  was.

With  regard  to  these  descriptions  of  The  White  Cottage,
Malvern  Wells,  the  motor  accident  and  things  pertain-
ing thereto,  it  is  interesting  to  notice  how  well  sus-
tained is  the  train  of  thought.  In  each  of  the  descrip-
tions occurring  upon  different  dates,  the  original  idea
remains  clearly  defined,  but  new  points,  just  as  evidential
as  those  already  given,  and  quite  as  relevant  to  the
topic  in  hand,  are  introduced  with  each  new  reference.
Very  little,  if  any,  of  the  old  ground  is  gone  over  on  the
several  separate  occasions  when  these  two  topics  are
introduced. Thus on October 9th and October  18th,

2e


436  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

1916,  we  get  the  interior  of  the  cottage  described,  the
shape  of  the  garden,  and  certain  features  of  the  neigh-
bourhood. On  June  6th,  1917,  we  do  not  get  the  interior
of  the  cottage  described,  but  we  get  new  features  of  the
neighbourhood,  such  as  the  hills,  and  the  hill  path  upon
which  A.  V.  B.  walked  ;  we  get  the  garden  of  the  house
referred  to  again,  but  not  in  the  same  way  as  on  previous
occasions,  since  new  features  regarding  the  garden  are  here
introduced.  On  December  30th,  1916,  we  obtain  a
description  of  the  motor  accident  and  symptoms  accruing
therefrom,  but  on  June  6th,  1917,  although  the  motor
accident  is  again  returned  to,  we  get  new,  though  equally
relevant  symptoms  described,  together  with  an  attempt
to  give  the  name  of  the  place  where  the  accident  occurred,
the  initial  of  the  chauffeur  who  was  driving,  and,  in  fact,
several  new  points  not  hitherto  mentioned. On  June  13th,

1917,  there  is  a  further  reference  to  the  motor  accident,
and  here  again  new  points  are  given,  when  A.  V.  B.
endeavours  to  describe  her  feelings  just  prior  to,  or
subsequent  to,  unconsciousness,  and  would  appear  to  refer
to  the  damp  sponge  applied  to  her  face,  and  also  to  her
own  nervous  apprehension  lest  at  any  time  another  such
accident  might  occur,  and  to  her  realisation  that  she  had
been  able  to  disguise  her  feelings  on  this  point.

Section  V. Memory  of  U.  V.  T.'s  Photographs.

We  now  propose  to  deal  with  a  few  odds  and  ends  of
memory  which  have  cropped  up  during  various  sittings.
Here  is  one  of  them.

On  October  13th,  1916,  Lady  Troubridge  took  the  sitting
and  I  acted  as  recorder.  At  the  time  Lady  Troubridge  and
I  thought  of  going  abroad  on  war  work,  and  had  asked
A.  V.  B.  whether  she  knew  that  we  were  going  away.  It
appeared  that  the  purporting  communicator  was  aware  of
our  plans.  After  a  good  deal  of  discussion  on  the  topic,
the  following  occurred  :

F.  She  says  you're  to  take  a  camera,  }^ou'll  be  glad

you've  taken  it  afterwards.
U.  V.  T. But  would  it  be  allowed  ?


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  437


F.  She  says  she's  sure  it  would  be  allowed,  but  she

says,  please  take  a  good  one.  She  says  some-
thing about  horrible  things  having  been  taken  with
a  camera,  not  professional  ones,  amateur  ones ;
they  were  not  taken  in  a  room,  but  outside  a
room,  and  there  was  some  sort  of  leanness  at
the  back.

U.  V.  T.  Tell  her  :  yes,  they  were  dreadful  things,  I  won't
let  anyone  see  them.

F.  She  says  they  were  nightmares. There  were  clusters

of  leafies  at  the  back.  The  background  looks  in
humps.  She  says,  it  is  all  hard  lights  and  a
lot  of  shadow,  they're  so  awful  looking.  She  says,
wouldn't  it  have  been  awful  if  they  had  been  a
head  and  shoulders  enlarged.

U.  V.  T. Does  she  remember  where  they  were  taken  ?

F.  They  were  taken  a  little  way  from  here, not  in

London.  There  are  shrubs  in  London,  but  it
wasn't  here.  She  says,  if  you  went  there  from
here  you'd  be  going  in  a  slightly  westerly  direc-
tion. She  knows  the  place  well.  She  says  the
pictures  were  taken  a  little  away  from  the  house,
they  were  not  taken  against  the  wall  of  the  house,
but  against  leafies.

TJ.  V.  T.  Something  that  she  did  there  used  to  frighten  us.
Ask  her  if  she  can  remember  what  it  was.

Now,  about  seven  months  prior  to  A.  V.  B.'s  death
she  and  I  and  Lady  Troubridge  visited  Watergate  Bay,
near  Newquay  in  Cornwall  ;  while  there  Lady  Troubridge
took  some  photographs,  some  of  A.  V.  B.  and  some  of
myself.  Those  taken  of  me  were  a  great  success,  but  those
taken  of  A.  V.  B.  were  quite  a  libel.  A.  V.  B.  disliked
them  enormously,  and  knowing  that  Lady  Troubridge
always  pasted  her  photographs  into  albums,  was  rather
distressed  that  they  had  not  been  a  greater  success.
She  mentioned  these  photographs  disparagingly,  not  only
to  me  but  to  one  or  two  friends  ;  in  fact,  at  the  time
she  seemed  quite  hurt  about  them,  though  she  did  not
mention it to  Lady Troubridge. Fortunately,  although


438 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

Lady  Troubridge  disliked  the  photographs  quite  as  much
as  A.  V.  B.,  there  is  a  print  of  one  of  them  in  existence,
and  Lady  Troubridge  retains  the  negative.  The  print
in  our  possession  shows  A.  V.  B.  standing  against  a
background  of  uneven  rock  and  shrubs  ;  the  rock  formed
a  sort  of  wall  to  a  part  of  the  garden.  In  front
of  this  wall  of  rock,  and  just  behind  A.  V.  B.,  is  a  strip
of  earth,  from  the  earth  rise  low  shrubs  to  the  level  of
A.  V.  B.'s  waist,  from  which  level  to  well  above  her
head  is  the  rough,  rather  "  humpy "  looking  rock,  while
at  the  top  of  the  photograph  the  leaves  of  some  rock
plants  are  visible ;  the  site  chosen  for  the  photograph
was  a  few  feet  away  from  the  house.

There  were  also  some  photographs  of  A.  V.  B.  taken
in  a  room  on  the  same  occasion  ;  these  however  were  so
bad  that  Lady  Troubridge  destroyed  them  at  once,  a
fact  known  to  A.  V.  B.  The  only  photographs  therefore
about  which  she  felt  any  annoyance,  lest  they  should,  so  to
speak,  be  handed  down  to  posterity,  were  those  taken
against  the  background  which  we  have  just  described,  and
which  she  mentions  through  Feda.  These  photographs
had  been  pasted  into  Lady  Troubridge's  album,  a  fact
known  to  A.  V.  B.

It  will  be  noticed  that  Lady  Troubridge  asks  Feda  if
A.  V.  B.  can  remember  what  it  was  she  did  at  the
place  where  the  photographs  were  taken,  which  thing
used  to  frighten  us.  In  reply  to  this  question  Feda
launched  into  a  very  long  and  involved  description,
which  we  consider  unduly  lengthy  for  insertion  in  this
paper.  It  was  extremely  intricate,  and  as  an  example
of  a  successful  reply  finally  obtained  to  a  direct  question,
it  was  in  itself  interesting,  but  its  only  bearing  on  our
present  point  lies  in  the  fact  that  it  left  us  no  doubt
whatever  that  Watergate  Bay  was  the  place  indicated,
and,  incidentally,  that  the  photographs  taken  there  were
the  subject  of  A.  V.  B.'s  communication.

Section  VI. Memory  of  A.  V.  B.'s  Guitar.

The  next  example  we  would  give  deals  with  A.  V.  B.'s
favourite  musical  instrument.


lx xviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  439

On  November  15th,  1916,  I  took  the  sitting  and  Lady
Troubridge  recorded.  It  was  not  a  good  sitting,  as  I
not  only  asked,  but  pressed,  too  many  direct  questions.
I  was  feeling  ill,  and  was  undoubtedly  injudicious  ;  a  fact
which  Feda  seemed  to  realise.

One  of  my  questions  was  as  follows  :  "  Does  she  re-
member a  musical  instrument  she  was  very  fond  of  ?
In  reply  to  this  question  I  got  a  statement  to  the  effect
that  it  was  not  like  a  piano  ;  which  statement  Feda
elaborated  by  describing  some  instrument  which  suggested
an  organ.  She  even  went  so  far  as  giving  an  imitation
of  air  going  in  and  out  of  pipes.  When  I  asked  what
kind  of  music  A.  V.  B.  used  to  play  Feda  declared
that  it  sounded  to  her  like  rather  grand  music,  "  like
a  grand  kind  of  march."  I  was  quite  bewildered  and
said  so,  asking  whether  A.  V.  B.  thought  that  she
had  played  this  thing  herself.  To  which  Feda  replied  :
"  No,  she  doesn't  say  she  did  it  herself,  she  says  it  is
hard  to  get  anything  through."  Now,  this  was  an
unaccountable  mistake,  seeing  that  the  instrument  played
by  A.  V.  B.  was  a  guitar,  and  during  a  personal  A.  V.  B.
control  which  occurred  some  time  after  this  sitting,  I
told  A.  V.  B.  that  Feda  had  never  succeeded  in  describing
to  me  the  instrument  she  played.  I  laughed  and  said  :
"  She  told  me  that  you  played  the  organ."  Whereupon
A.  V.  B.  remarked  :  "  How  absurd,  what  kind  of  an  organ  ?  "
Nothing  else  was  mentioned  regarding  this  instrument
by  us,  as  we  did  not  wish  to  give  any  clues,  and  I  had
practically  forgotten  the  incident,  when,  on  April  25th,
1917,  at  a  sitting  at  which  I  alone  was  present,  acting
as  my  own  recorder,  the  following  occurred  :

F.  (Beginning  to  hum  a  tune)  She's  singing,  she's  singing,
something  pretty  too,  do  you  know,  Mrs.  Twonnie,
it  sounds  as  though  she  could  sing.  She's  not
singing  loudly,  rather  softly,  she's  telling  Feda
that  she  does  sing  in  the  spirit  world.  Mrs.
Twonnie,  she  likes  singing  awful  much.

M.  B.  H.  Yes.


440


Miss  Badclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


F.  Do  you  know she  likes  all  these  kind  of  things.

She  likes  the  talking  that  is  like  singing.

M.  R.  H. What  do  you  mean  by  that,  Feda  ?

F.  Well,  like  people  will  say  poetry,  people  that  say

poetry  reaUy  well,  she  is  very  interested  in  all
that.  And  now  she's  showing  Feda  something
that  you  can  pull  strings  to,  she's  going  turn,
turn,  turn.  (Here  Feda  gives  an  exact  imitation
of  the  sound  of  notes  picked  on  a  guitar,  imi-
tating with  her  hand  the  plucking  of  strings.)
Mrs.  Twonnie,  she's  plucking  them.

M.  R.  H. That's  splendid,  you  are  making  the  exact  noise.

F.  She's making the noise, and Feda can  always

imitate  what  she  can  do.  she  says  it  does  make
your  fingers  sore  too,  she  says  she  might  as  well
tell  you  that  she  is  not  trying  to  imitate  a  cornet
or  a  trombone  !  (Here  Feda  again  makes  the
exact  noise  of  notes  picked  on  a  guitar.)  She
says,  do  you  know,  she  sees  them  in  the  spirit
world  plucking  those  string  things  and  singing
softly  to  them.  She  says  she  thinks  it's  getting
to  be  almost  a  lost  art  on  the  earth  plane  ;  where
she  is  she  can  do  it  herself  and  she  loves  it,  she
likes  also  to  hear  other  people  do  it,  sometimes
she  goes  to  listen  to  them  in  the  evenings,  she
says,  and  they  sing  lovely  things.  Sometimes
they  say  things  while  they  play,  it's  more  like  a
chant,  they  don't  always  sing  them,  sometimes
they  say  them.  Oh  !  she  did  like  that  turn,
turn,  turn,  when  she  was  on  the  earth  plane
more  than  anything.  (Here  Feda  again  imitates
a  guitar.)  Mrs.  Twonnie,  she  saj^s  that  when
first  she  got  over  and  saw  this  thing  on  which
you  do  turn,  turn,  turn,  it  made  her  feel  most
awfully  glad,  it  brought  back  so  many  remem-
brances of  her  earth  life  to  her.  She  says,  she's
got  one  of  these  things  standing  in  the  corner
of  her  sitting  room  in  her  spirit  home,  she  par-
ticularly says  standing,  not  lying  down.  (Here
Feda  began  to  murmur  something  about  a  gold


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator .  441


frame  with  mother-of-pearl,  asking  me  if  the
instrument  could  have  a  gold  frame  ;  I  replied
that  I  didn't  know,  but  that  I  didn't  quite
understand  the  gold,  after  which  Feda  said  :)

F.  Now,  Mrs.  Twonnie,  she's  showing  Feda  the  thing

itself,  and  she's  showing  Feda  that  some  part  of
it  is  rounded  towards  the  bottom  of  that  mother-
of-pearl,  she  says  that  she  has  this  thing  leaning
up  in  a  corner  of  her  room,  she  says  there  is
only  a  little  bit  of  mother-of-pearl  which  is  set
into  it,  and  she  keeps  on  telling  Feda  that  this
instrument  is  rounded  at  one  end  and  then  goes
in  a  bit,  making  it  have  a  little  bit  of  a  waist.
(Here  Feda  draws  in  the  air  the  exact  shape
of  a  guitar.)  She's  showing  Feda  that  there  are
some  strings  which  go  over  that  mother-of-pearl.

M.  R.  H. Quite  right.

F.  Oh  ! and  now  she's  trying  to  make  Feda  under-

stand that  she  used  to  screw  something  up,  she
is  showing  Feda  something  that  looks  like  little
screws.  (Here  Feda  gives  an  imitation  of  tuning
a  stringed  instrument.)  She  says  that  she  used
to  turn  one  of  those  pegs,  screw  it  up,  and  then
go  :  "  turn,"  and  that  then  she  used  to  screw
up  another  one  and  go  :  "  turn,"  again.  (Here
Feda  makes  the  sound  of  a  lower  note  on  the
guitar.)  She's  trying  to  show  Feda  that  this
instrument  was  browny  coloured,  but  she  keeps
on  saying  she's  got  a  gold  case  for  it,  but  Feda
doesn't  think  that  the  thing  itself  is  gold,  it's
browny  coloured,  it's  light  brown  in  one  place,
and  much  darker  in  another,  and  it's  like  one
that  she  knew  on  the  earth  plane ;  she's  trying
to  show  Feda  that  the  part  of  it  where  you  touch
the  strings  is  of  a  lighter  colour  than  the  sides,
and  she  says  that  she  had  one  like  this  on  the
earth  plane.

M.  R.  H. That's  right.

F.  (Whispering over and over again to herself  an

inarticulate word.) Oh  ! dear, Feda can't  get


442 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


this,  but  she's  trying  to  say  that  this  word  has
something  to  do  with  the  earth  plane  and  this
thing  that  she's  been  describing.  No,  Feda  can't
get  it,  it's  a  very  funny  word,  and  it  seems  to
start  with  a  B,  Mrs.  Twonnie.  She  used  to
touch  this  instrument,  that  she  has  been  des-
cribing, properly,  she  touched  it  properly,  your
Ladye,  and  she  used  to  do  it  for  people,  people
that  liked  it.  She  says  that  she  hadn't  got  any
ribbons  on  this  instrument,  she's  laughing  over
that,  Mrs.  Twonnie,  and  she  says  that  she  doesn't
intend  to  have  any  on  it  either  ;  she  says  :  "  I
haven't  got  ribbons  on  it  •  "  funny,  Mrs.  Twonnie,
do  you  know  she  doesn't  seem  to  like  ribbons ;
Feda  likes  ribbons,  lots  of  ribbons.

As  we  have  already  stated  the  instrument  played  by
A.  V.  B.  was  a  guitar  ;  she  was  an  expert  player,  and
used  to  sing  Spanish  folk  music  to  the  guitar.  As  will
have  been  noticed  Feda  prefaces  her  description  of  this
instrument  by  remarking  that  A.  V.  B.  is  singing.
A.  V.  B.  was  considered  a  very  fine  amateur  singer.
Feda  tells  us  that  she  is  not  singing  loudly,  but  rather
softly  ;  this  was  characteristic  of  A.  V.  B.,  who  had  a
small  voice  which  she  never  forced.  Feda  appears  to
gather  that  A.  V.  B.  liked  singing  very  much,  and  also
poetry,  which  she  most  certainly  did.  The  noise  made
by  Feda  to  imitate  the  notes  of  a  guitar  was  very
realistic.

We  suppose  that  guitar  playing  usually  does  make  the
fingers  sore,  and  that  this  is  non-evidential  ;  at  the  same
time  this  soreness  of  the  fingers  was  often  complained
of  at  some  length  by  A.  V.  B.  As  in  the  case  of
the  riding  previously  dealt  with,  so  here  again  we  do
not  propose  to  put  forward  any  opinion  with  regard  to
Feda's  statement  that  guitars  are  played  in  the  next
state  of  existence  ;  the  only  evidential  point  of  interest
in  this  statement  lies  in  the  description  of  the  music
which  A.  V.  B.  tells  us  through  Feda  that  she  hears
being played in her present state. We do not  know


lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  443

whether  any  of  our  readers  are  acquainted  with  Spanish
Malagenas,  and  other  forms  of  Spanish  folk  songs  ;  if
they  are,  they  will  recognise  at  once  how  very  like  a
chant  much  of  that  music  is.  Also  that  some  parts
of  the  song  are  occasionally  spoken.

This  Spanish  music  was  the  only  music  that  A.  V.  B.
considered  to  be  suitable  for  a  guitar,  she  was  intensely
interested  in  it,  had  learnt  a  good  deal  of  it  in  Spain,
and,  whenever  any  Spanish  musicians  came  to  London,
would  always  have  lessons.  In  fact,  I  think  that
A.  V.  B.  was  almost  the  only  amateur  in  England  who
was  an  expert  exponent  of  the  music  in  question.  She
was  devoted  to  it.

We  find  A.  V.  B.  saying  through  Feda  that  her  present
guitar  stands  in  a  corner  of  her  room,  and  emphasizing
the  fact  that  it  stands  and  does  not  lie  down  ;  most
people's  guitars  stand  in  the  corner  of  their  room,  and
we  would  not  have  troubled  to  refer  to  this  statement  had
it  not  been  that  A.  V.  B.  was  very  particular  that  her
numerous  guitars  should  never  be  laid  down  on  their
backs  ;  she  said  that  it  made  them  go  out  of  tune  unless
they  were  laid  down  on  their  strings,  and  as  it  was
impossible  always  to  remember  to  do  this,  they  were  kept
upright  in  different  corners  of  the  rooms.

Feda's  remarks  regarding  a  gold  frame  with  mother-of-
pearl,  and  later,  a  gold  case,  appear  rather  childish,  and
do  not  sound  to  us  at  all  as  though  they  emanated  from
A.  V.  B.  who  disliked  everything  tawdry.  With  regard  to
the  reference  to  the  '"  cornet  "  and  "  trombone  ",  this  would-be
attempt  at  humour  jarred  upon  us,  and  certainly  was  in
no  way  characteristic  of  A.  V.  B.  to  whom  Feda  attributes
it.  We  think  it  was,  together  with  the  gold  case,  a
little  Feda  interlude.  The  word  which  Feda  whispers
inarticulately,  but  which  she  says  begins  with  B  and
has  something  to  do  with  a  guitar  and  the  earth  plane,
may  possibly  have  been  an  attempt  at  the  word  "  ban-
duria "  ;  the  banduria  is  the  Spanish  equivalent  of  a
mandoline.  I  used  to  play  the  mandoline,  accompany-
ing A.  V.  B.'s  guitar,  but  she  was  anxious  that  I
should  learn  the  banduria,  and  got  one  sent  to  me  from


444  Miss  Badclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

Spain  ;  I  did  not  master  it,  however,  which  A.  V.  B.  always
deplored.

We  now  come  to  the  most  evidential  point  in  the
description,  and  that  occurs  when  A.  V.  B.  states  with
emphasis,  through  Feda,  that  she  did  not  have  any
ribbons  on  her  guitar,  has  not  got  any  now,  and  does
not  intend  to  have  any:  and  Feda  says  that  A.  V.  B.
is  laughing  over  this.  Now  we  think  it  will  be  admitted
that  nearly  all  English  women,  if  they  play  the  guitar  at
all,  have  streamers  of  bright-coloured  ribbons  from  the
instrument.  This  always  amused  A.  V.  B.  immensely,
because  she,  knowing  Spain,  was  aware  of  the  fact  that
Spanish  ladies  do  not  usually  indulge  in  this  particular
foible.  It  was  a  great  joke  between  us,  that  the  less
expert  the  English  player  the  more  magnificent  the
ribbons. A.  V.  B. never  had  ribbons on her  guitars.

Section  VII. Memory  of  Words  Peculiar  to  A.  V.  B.

We  will  now  deal  with  two  examples  of  what  would
appear  to  be  a  rather  more  subtle  retention  of  memory
than  those  hitherto  given,  since  it  is  the  retention  of
memory  regarding  the  meaning  or  sense  of  certain  words
invented  by  A.  V.  B.  herself.  We  must  first  of  all  record
some  words  of  mine  spoken  during  the  sitting  of  November
15th,  1916,  which  sitting  we  have  stated  in  another
connection,  was  a  bad  one,  probably  owing  to  the  fact
that  I  pressed  questions.  One  of  my  questions  on  that
occasion  was  as  follows  :  "  Ask  her  does  she  remember
a  funny  word  she  invented  with  Adela  for  people  they
didn't  like  ?  "  Feda  replied,  that  A.  V.  B.  would  try
to  remember  it,  would  put  it  in  a  mental  note-book,
but  that  it  made  it  extremely  difficult  when  I  asked  things
point  blank.  We  only  mention  this  because  it  must  be
borne  carefully  in  mind  that  I  distinctly  said  that  the
word  which  A.  V.  B.  had  invented,  was  applicable  to
people  she  did  not  like.

On  January  17th,  1917,  a  sitting  which  I  took,  Lady
Troubridge  recording,  I  suddenly  put  the  following
question  :


lxxvhi.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  445


"  Does  she  remember  the  word,  '  Poon  ?  '  ;  perhaps
she  will  laugh,  but  I'd  like  to  know  whether  she  remembers
what  that  word  meant  ?  "

F.  Yes,  she  is  laughing,  she  says  that  word  meant  a

state.  It  was  a  word  used  to  express  a  state
or  condition.

M.  R.  H. It  was  a  word  she  used.

F.  Feda  can't  understand,  but  she  says  it  was  a  -n  ord

that  she  used  to  you.  She  says  she  sometimes
thought  of  you  in  connection  with  it.  Feda  does
hope  it's  not  a  nasty  word,  because  she  says
she  doesn't  mean  that  she  just  thinks  of  it
because  she  heard  you  say  it,  she  means,  that  she
would  use  it  in  connection  with  thinking  of  you.
"  Poon,  Poon,"  she  calls  you  that.  Poon  isn't
a  name  !  But  she  calls  you  that  in  her  mind
now,  she  thinks  of  you  as  "  Poon,"  she  likes  to
think  of  you  as  that.  Feda's  got  just  to  say
what  she  says,  and  she  says  that  she  hopes
you  think  of  her  as  that  too.

M.  R.  H. Of  course,  I  think  of  her  as  that. (To  A.  V.  B.)

There  was  a  word  that  was  the  opposite  word
to  "  Poon."  Do  you  remember  ?  You  and  I
had  two  words.

F.  Yes,  she  says  it  was  the  antithesis,  but  that  she

can't  remember  the  word  itself.  No,  Feda  mustn't
say  that  she  can't  remember,  it  is  that  she  can't
get  it  through.

M.  R.^H. Oh  !  Ask  her  to  try  and  get  the  first  letter  through.

F.  Oh  dear  ! Feda  can't  get  it. But  it  is  only  a

short  word.  (Here  Feda  begins  drawing  violently
in  the  air  and  distinctly  forms  an  "  S.")  It's
a  curly  letter  like  a  snake,  look,  Feda  will  do  it
on  your  hand.

M.  R.  H. Yes,  that's  right,  it's  an  "  S."

F.  It  isn't  a  long  word,  it's  a  short  one,  and  she  did

manage  to  give  it  quick  to  Feda  once,  but  Feda
couldn't  get  it,  she'll  give  it  one  day  though.

Between  this  sitting  of  January  17th,  1917,  and  that  of


446 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

May  2nd,  1917,  with  which  we  are  about  to  deal,  an
attempt  was  made  during  an  A.  V.  B.  Control,  to  pro-
nounce this  word  beginning  with  an  "  S."  The  word
was  not  articulated,  however,  and  A.  V.  B.  did  not  get
beyond  making  the  opening  sibilant  consonant,  and  when
I  asked  A.  V.  B.  what  she  was  doing,  she  said  she  was
trying  to  get  the  word  which  was  the  antithesis  of
"  Poon."  I  remarked  that  I  did  not  intend  to  give
her  the  word,  as  I  wished  it  kept  as  a  test  ;  to  which
A.  V.  B.  cordially  agreed.

On  May  2nd,  1917,  Lady  Troubridge  took  the  sitting
and  I  acted  as  recorder.  A.  V.  B.  had  been  conversing
with  us  through  Feda  regarding  a  certain  person,  some
of  whose  ways  A.  V.  B.  rather  disapproved  of,  when
suddenly,  Feda  broke  out  as  follows  :

F.  She says that's senseless and reasonless  too.

(Sotto  voce  :  It's  what,  Ladye  ?  What  are  you
trying  to  say  S — ss — Sss — S — ss.)  What  is  the
word,  Ladye  ?  It's  Spor — Spor — Spor  !  She's
trying  to  get  a  word  through  that  Feda  can't
make  out,  Feda  doesn't  believe  it's  a  proper
word  at  all  ;  it's  a  very  funny  word,  but  it  must
mean  something,  because  she  is  trying  so  hard
to  get  it  through,  it  means  ...  it  means  .  .  .
Oh  !  Feda  doesn't  know.  It  seems  to  be  some
sort  of  more  expressive  word  for  senseless.  (Sotto
voce  :  Spor  .  .  .  Spor  .  .  .  Spor  .  .  .  Spor  .  .  .)
Well,  it's  Spor,  anyhow.

U.  V.  T.  What's  the  letter  after  "  Spor  "  do  you  think,
Feda  ?

F.  It's  a  long  letter. After  the  "  R  "  comes  a  long

letter.

U.  V.  T.  When  you  say  a  long  letter,  Feda,  do  you  mean
long  above  the  line,  or  long  below  the  line  ?

F.  It  seems  to  Feda  to  be  long  at  the  bottom.  (Feda

has  for  some  moments  been  making  perpendicular
strokes  in  the  air.)  It  isn't  an  ordinary  word
at  all  ;  it's  a  funny  word  that  Feda  has  never
heard  before. Oh  ! Mrs.  Una,  Feda  sees  that  it


Lxxvin.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  447


isn't  long  under  the  line,  it's  long  above  the  line  ;
well,  there's  that  letter,  then  comes  a  small  letter
(sotto  voce  :  Sporti  .  .  .  Sporbi).  This  little  letter
sounds  something  like  "  I  "  ;  (Feda  pronounces
the  I  as  in  the  word  "fish  ").  And  after  this  small
letter  there  comes  a  curved  letter,  and  then  it
seems  to  Feda  there's  another  long  letter.  (Here
Feda  whispers  quite  inarticulate  things.)

U.  V.  T.  Well,  Feda,  perhaps  it  will  be  easier  if  you  try  to
draw  the  first  long  letter  on  my  hand.  (Feda
begins  drawing  vigorously.)

F.  It's  S  ...  P  ...  0,  Mrs.  Una,  then  a  little  letter,

and  then  a  letter  like  this  ;  (she  draws  a  "  K  "
on  U.  V.  T.'s  hand).  It's  a  down  stroke  like
this,  with  a  little  bit  like  this  sticking  on  to  it  ;
Sporki  .  .  .  Sporkif  ?

IT.  V.  T.  Well,  Feda,  try  to  draw  the  letter  which  you  said
was  curved,  on  my  hand  ;  the  letter  that  you
said  came  after  the  long  one.

F.  That letter goes like this, Mrs. Una (here  Feda

draws  an  "  S "  on  U.  V.  T.'s  hand).  And  then
there's  another  letter  like  this  (here  Feda  draws
an  -  H  ").

II.  V.  T.  Is  that  the  last  letter  of  the  word,  Feda,  or  are
there  others  ?

F.  Well,  Feda  can't  see  any  more,  (suddenty  and  very

loud)  SPORKISH!  SPORKISH!  But  that  isn't
a  word  at  all!  Ladye  says:  "Yes,  it  is,"  and
that  it  applies  to  people  who  rake  things  up.
"  Not  Poon,"  she  says,  she  says  it's  the  anti-
thesis to  "  Poon."

M.  E.  H. At  last  you"ve  got  it.

F.  "  Sporkish,"  she  says  it  in  such  a  funny  way,  Mrs.

Twonnie,  she  says  that  you  and  she  used  to  call
people  that  sometimes,  you  used  to  say :  "  So-
and-so  is  sporkish,"  Feda  knows  that  it  isn't
a  proper  English  word  though.

Now  with  regard  to  these  two  coined  words,  we  must
deal first with the word "  Poon." As will be  re-


448  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

membered,  I  asked  on  January  17th,  1917,  whether
A.  V.  B.  could  remember  what  "  Poon  "  meant.  There
had  been  a  suggestion  given  by  me  on  November  15th,

1916,  as  has  been  stated,  that  there  did  exist  a  word
which  had  been  invented  by  A.  V.  B.  and  a  certain
"  Adela,"  for  people  they  did  not  like.  We  may,  there-
fore, justifiably  conclude,  that  had  Mrs.  Leonard  only
normal  knowledge  to  work  on,  she  would  have  retained
a  memory  of  my  words  spoken  on  November  15th,  1916.
and  have  made  a  mental  note  to  the  effect  that  there
existed  some  curious  word  which  had  been  used  by
A.  V.  B.,  the  meaning  of  which  word  was  uncompli-
mentary. As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  word  which  I  tried  to
get  on  November  15th,  1916,  was  an  uncomplimentary
word,  and  there  is  no  apparent  reason  why,  when  I
myself mentioned  the word "  Poon " on  January  17th,

1917,  Mrs.  Leonard,  had  her  knowledge  been  normal,
should  not  have  jumped  to  the  conclusion  that  this
strange  word  "  Poon,"  was  the  -uncomplimentary  word
which  I  had  hoped  to  get  on  November  15th,  1916.
But,  in  reply  to  my  question  of  January  17th,  1917,
we  find  Feda  speaking  of  this  word  "  Poon  "  as  a  state
or  condition  ;  telling  us  that  A.  V.  B.  says  it  was  a
word  she  used  to  me,  that  she  sometimes  thought  of  me
in  connection  with  it,  that  she  calls  me  "  Poon,"  that  she
thinks  of  me  as  '"Poon,"  that  she  likes  to  think  of  me  as
that,  and  that  she  hopes  I  will  think  of  her  as  that  too.

Now,  the  word  "  Poon  "  was  A.  V.  B.'s  own  invention.
It  was  meant  to  express  all  the  pleasant,  indefinable
qualities  in  people  whom  she  liked.  When  A.  V.  B.  said
that  a  person  was  a  "  Poon,"  or  that  they  were  "  Poony,"
she  meant  it  as  a  summing  up  of  all  those  attri-
butes which  most  appealed  to  her.  I  do  not  lay  any
claim  to  the  attributes  with  which  her  affection  en-
dowed me,  but  in  spite  of  that  she  did  apply  this  term
to  me.

After  getting  on  January  17th,  1917,  a-  satisfactory
definition  of  the  word  "  Poon,"  I  again  return  to  my
original  idea  of  November  15th,  1916,  and  try  to  obtain
from  the  communicator  its  antithesis. I  do  not  succeed


Lxxvin.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator .  449

in  getting  further  on  this  occasion  than  the  statement
that  it  is  a  short  word  beginning  with  "  S."

On  May  2nd,  1917,  however,  as  will  have  been  seen,
we  obtained  the  word  "  Sporkish  "  ;  the  application  of
the  word  was  perfectly  correct,  and  its  use  just  where
it  occurred  in  the  conversation  was  entirely  characteristic
of  A.  V.  B.  "  Spork  "  and  "  Sporkish  "  were  words  also
invented  by  A.  V.  B.  Their  meaning  embraced  all  tire-
some and  unpleasant  people  and  their  characteristics.  These
words  were  semi-humorously  applied  by  A.  V.  B.  to  all
people  and  things  that  bored  her,  irritated  her,  or  other-
wise incurred  her  disapproval.  It  is  interesting  to  note
that  the  word  "  Sporkish  "  was  finally  obtained  at  the
sitting  of  May  2nd,  1917,  as  a  comment  upon  circumstances
that  were  precisely  such  as  would  have  evoked  it  from
A.  V.  B.  during  her  earth  life.  Interest  is  added  by
the  fact,  that  whereas  I  gave  on  January  17th,  1917,
the  word  "  Poon  "  as  a  noun,  and  asked  for  its  opposite,
by  which  it  might  be  reasonably  understood  that  its
opposite  was  also  a  noun  ;  and  whereas  I  implied  on
November  15th,  1916,  also,  that  the  word  I  wanted  was
a  noun,  and  whereas  we  were  definitely  endeavouring
to  obtain  a  noun,  to  wit  "  Spork,"  we  obtained  on
May  2nd,  1917,  most  unexpectedly,  the  equally  familiar
and  characteristic  adjective "  Sporkish."

Section  VIII. Memory  of  M.  R.  H.'s  Method  of  Composing.

We  next  come  to  what  would  appear  to  be  a  retention
of  memory  regarding  my  methods  of  writing  poetry ;  these
were  remarked  upon  by  A.  V.  B.  through  Feda  on  June
27th,  1917,  at  a  sitting  taken  by  me,  Lady  Troubridge
acting  as  recorder.  At  a  previous  sitting  on  December
6th,  1916,  at  which  I  was  the  sitter  and  Lady  Troubridge
recorded,  I  had  repeated  the  first  verse  of  one  of  my
own  poems  ;  I  naturally  did  not  say  that  it  was  my
own,  merely  asking  A.  V.  B.  through  Feda  whether  she
remembered  it.  It  appeared  that  she  did  so,  since  Feda
gave  me  to  understand,  after  having  said  that  the  poem
was recognised, that the communicator wished to  add


450  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

something  to  what  I  had  said,  which  was  correct,  as
there  was  one  other  verse  to  that  particular  poem.  After
this  Feda  said  the  following  words :  "  Mrs.  Twonnie,  she
says,  '  She  makes  it  herself.'  "  In  reply  to  this  I  asked
Feda  to  make  her  words  a  little  less  ambiguous  ;  I  said :
"I  don't  quite  understand,  Feda;  did  she  say,  'I  make  it
myself,'  or  did  she  say,  'She  makes  it  herself?"  To  which
Feda  replied :  "  No,  she  didn't  say,  '  I  make  it  myself,'
her  words  were,  '  She  makes  it  herself  '  "  ;  by  which  I
understood  that  A.  V.  B.  had  been  trying  to  give  Feda
to  understand  that  I  wrote  poetry.

I  am  a  very  minor  poet,  still,  several  books  of  my
verses  have  been  published  and  a  number  of  my  lyrics
set  to  music.  Supposing  therefore  that  my  anonymity  had
not  been  preserved,  as  we  think  it  had,  Mrs.  Leonard  in
the  normal  state  might  easily  have  come  across  some  of
my  poems  and  recognised  in  me  their  author  ;  this
possibility  should  be  taken  into  account.  On  June  27th,
1917,  however,  there  occurred  a  further  reference  to  my  work.
Feda  began  it  by  giving  a  word  here  and  there,  such  as
"  flights,"  "  canopy,"  "  vast,"  "  space,"  etc.,  which  words  she
stated  were,  according  to  -  A.  V.  B.,  contained  in  some  of
my  poems.  There  appeared  to  be  an  effort  to  recall,  by
this  method,  certain  poems  to  my  mind.  No  doubt
these  words  do  appear  in  my  poems,  I  should  think  they
probably  did  in  most  poems ;  at  all  events  the  references
were  not  sufficiently  clear  to  be  of  any  interest.  What
is  of  interest,  however,  is  the  following  :

F.  She  says  that  you  used  to  get  a  first  and  second

line  like  in  a  flash,  and  then  you  used  to  get
succeeding  lines,  perhaps  two,  and  then  you  used
to  go  back  and  have  to  alter  the  first  a  bit,
sometimes.  She  says  it  seemed  as  though  the
first  and  second  came  in  a  flash,  and  you  wouldn't
be  perfectly  certain  what  was  to  follow.  Although
the  first  and  the  second  lines  would  suggest  a
theme,  you  wouldn't  know  Avhat  was  to  follow
them  at  all.  You  would  hang  on  to  the  first  line,
it  would  sing  in  your  brain as  though  making


Lxxviii.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  451


music. She says it's funny, with your  things

more  than  anyone  else's,  the  first  fine  is  always

the  key-note  to  the  rest.
M.  R.  H. How  long  ago  is  she  speaking  of  %
F.  Some  time  ago,  not  only  just  before  she  passed  on.

M.  R.  H. I  only  meant  to  ask  whether  it  was  before  or  after

she  passed  on.
F.  Oh  !  before.

As  A.  V.  B.  lived  with  me  for  years,  she,  more  than
anyone  else  perhaps,  was  aware  of  my  methods  of  work.
It  is  perfectly  correct  to  say  that  my  first  and  second
lines  come  to  me  in  a  flash.  It  is  also  absolutely  correct
to  say  that  having  got  hold  of  two  lines  that  please  me,
I  have  very  often  not  the  slightest  idea  what  I  am  going
to  follow  them  up  with.  Lady  Troubridge,  in  going  over
my  papers  the  other  day,  came  upon  innumerable  scraps
of  paper,  as  well  as  scrawls  in  exercise  books,  containing
two  first  lines,  or  sometimes  only  one,  of  a  poem  which
I  had  apparently  never  followed  up.  Feda  says  that
A.  V.  B.  says  that  I  would  hang  on  to  the  first  line ;
that  it  would  "  sing  in  my  brain  as  though  making  music."
Now  it  is  usually  impossible  for  me  to  conceive  a  line
of  original  poetry  without  singing  it  mentally,  so  to  speak  ;
in  other  words,  my  lines  always  suggest  to  me  a  com-
plementary tune.  It  is,  and  always  has  been  my  habit
to  write  my  poems  at  the  piano,  composing  words  and
music  simultaneously.  No  one  was  as  familiar  with  this
habit  as  A.  V.  B.,  as  she  was  also  with  the  fact  that,
having  got  my  two  first  lines,  I  would  go  to  the  piano,
playing  and  at  the  same  time  singing  them  over  and  over
again,  in  what  must  have  been  a  most  tiresome  manner,
while  waiting  for  further  inspiration.  Since,  needless  to
say,  I  am  not  in  the  habit  of  doing  this  in  public,  it  is
difficult  to  see  how  knowledge  of  my  methods  of  work  can
have  reached  the  medium  normally.

Section  IX. Memory  of  Swimming  and  Bathing.

We  will  next  refer  to  memory  shown  regarding  the
only  form  of  sport  much  loved  and  at  one  time  largely

2f


452 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

indulged  in  by  A.  V.  B.,  namely,  that  of  bathing  and
swimming.  There  are,  in  all,  six  sittings  in  which
A.  V.  B.  has  mentioned  bathing  and  swimming  through
Feda.  The  first  reference  occurred  on  October  13th,
1916,  during  the  description  of  Watergate  Bay  (see  p.  437).
Mention  was  made  at  that  sitting  of  A.  V.  B.'s  having
bathed  at  Watergate  Bay. The  words  are  as  follows  :

"  Oh  !  There  is  water  near  there,  she's  showing  Feda
splashing,  blowing,  ducking  her  head,  spreading  out  her
arms. (Here  Feda  gives  an  illustration  of  swimming.)

The  second  reference  occurred  on  October  20th,  1916,
and  was  given  in  the  following  words  :

"  She  wanted  you  to  know  that  she  has  got  a  private
bathing  pool  in  her  own  garden,  it's  perfectly  safe,  and
clean,  and  clear,  no  rushes,  she  thoroughly  enjoys  it."

The  third  reference  occurred  on  October  25th,  1916,
and  was  to  this  effect  :

"  Since  she's  gone  over  she's  been  swimming,  and  doing
all  sorts  of  things."

The  fourth  reference  occurred  on  December  6th,  1916,
and  was  as  follows  :

"  She  likes  bathing  better  than  riding."

The  fifth  reference  occurred  on  January  24th,  1917,  when
Feda  said  :

"  Now  she  says  she  supposes  you  will  be  surprised  to
hear  that  she  was  bathing  this  morning,  because  it's  so
cold  and  wretched  here  on  the  earth  plane."

The  sixth  and  hitherto  the  last  reference  occurred,  on
March  9th,  1917,  and  was  given  by  Feda  in  A.  V.  B.'s
own  words,  which  followed  on  a  description  of  A.  V.  B.'s
supposed  pursuits  in  her  present  state  :

"  Then  I  bathe  ;  you  know,  don't  you,  that  I  always
loved  that,  I  simply  revel  in  that  part  of  it."

We  have  already  said  that  A.  V.  B.  loved  swimming
and bathing, and  that  it  was her  only  form of  sport.


lxxvhi.]  Evidence  of  Memory  retained  by  Communicator.  453

She  loved  it  more  intensely  than  most  people  clo.  To
give  an  idea  of  how  keen  she  used  to  be,  she  once  gave
herself  an  attack  of  rheumatic  fever  by  insisting,  against
all  advice,  on  bathing  in  the  Lake  of  Como  in  the  icy  water
of  early  spring.  Latterly,  however,  owing  to  her  failing
health,  she  was  almost  entirely  debarred  from  bathing.  She
bathed  on  one  occasion  only  at  Watergate  Bay.  In  all  the
years  I  knew  her  she  only  swam  about  four  times  at  the
Bath  Club,  of  which  she  was  a  member  ;  but  then  so  am
I,  who  cannot  swim  a  stroke.  I  think  I  am  safe  in  saying
that  latterly,  at  all  events,  few  people  realised  what  a  fine
swimmer  A.  V.  B.  was,  but  if  we  should  accept  the  spirit
hypothesis,  I  cannot  conceive  of  anything  in  the  next  state
which  would  fill  A.  V.  B.  with  a  greater  joy  than  finding
herself  able  once  again  to  indulge  in  one  of  her  greatest
pleasures.

On  the  other  hand,  supposing  /  purported  to  com-
municate after  my  death,  and  mentioned  through  a
medium  no  less  than  six  times  the  fact  that  I  had
bathed,  and  that  I  not  only  had  a  private  bathing  pool,
but  that  I  was  enjoying  the  use  of  it,  it  would  certainly
lead  anyone  who  knew  me  well  to  doubt  seriously  the
identity  of  the  communicator,  as  I  dislike  bathing  quite
as  cordially  as  it  dislikes  me.

And  this  we  think  is  the  last  instance  of  memory,
given  through  Feda,  which  it  would  seem  necessary  to
include  in  this  paper.


454 Miss  Radclyffe-Hcdl  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


CHAPTER  III.
Apparent  Knowledge  of  Contemporary  Events.

Section  I. Actions  and  Conversations.

We  will  next  deal  with  what  would  appear  to  be  a
knowledge  of  contemporary  events,  shown  by  a  dis-
carnate  intelligence  retaining  an  interest  in  the  mundane
affairs  of  friends.

And  here  we  find  ourselves  immediately  confronted  by
a  difficulty,  since  two  or  three  of  the  best  examples
of  this  type  of  evidence  that  we  have  received  are  of  so
private  a  nature  that  they  cannot  be  included  in  this
paper.  For  instance,  we  had  on  one  occasion  an
interesting  example  of  this  kind  of  knowledge,  when  the
mental  attitude  of  a  certain  person,  and  the  situation
that  had  resulted  therefrom,  appeared  to  have  been
thoroughly  grasped  by  the  communicator.  Limitations
pertaining  to  my  own  position  had  also  been  noted  and
taken  into  account.  The  case  was  stated  more  clearly
than  /  could  have  stated  it  in  so  few  words ;  in  fact,
at  the  time  I  had  not  formed  any  very  definite  judgment,
being  rather  bewildered.  I  have  now  no  doubt,  however,
that  the  analysis  given  was  correct.  Quite  recently  we
have  obtained  references  to  another  person,  one  who  was
far  from  England  at  the  time  of  the  sitting.  This  person
was  described  in  an  unmistakable  manner,  together  with
facts  that  we  did  not  know  ;  namely,  that  there  had
been,  and  was,  a  state  of  mental  anxiety,  of  scheming  and
planning  to  effect  some  change,  regarding  which  the
way  was  not  clear.  This  change  it  was  said  would  be
of  assistance  to  someone  else,  and  one  of  us  was  warned
that she might hear something  in this connection,  and


lxxviii.]  Apparent  Knowledge  of  Contemporary  Events.  455

told  that  that  was  why  this  had  been  given ;  in  order
that  if  she  did  hear  she  should  not  be  worried,  as  in
some  ways  the  results  would  be  for  the  best.  We  also
obtained  a  description  of  certain  actions  performed  by
this  person  in  the  course  of  everyday  life,  and  some  details
regarding  work,  with  a  statement  that  A.  V.  B.  was  trying
to  help.

Now  neither  of  us  had  the  slightest  idea  at  the  time
of  that  sitting  that  this  person  was  contemplating  any
change,  since  no  mention  of  it  had  ever  been  made  in
letters  received  from  them.  But  two  days  after  that
sitting  one  of  us  did  receive  unexpected  news  regarding
the  person  in  question,  the  very  news  for  which,  it  would
appear,  we  were  being  prepared  by  A.  V.  B.,  since  it
transpired  later  that  the  news  received  was  a  direct  con-
sequence of  the  mental  processes  accurately  described  by
her  through  Fecla.  We  had  ample  opportunity  later  on
of  proving  that  all  her  statements  had  been  correct,  even
to  the  little  details  given  regarding  certain  actions  ;  and
had  the  desired  plans  been  able  to  be  carried  out  in
accordance  with  the  wishes  of  the  person  concerned,  there
is  no  doubt  that  the  results  would  have  been  of  value
and  of  great  help  to  someone  else.  Even  in  spite  of
the  fact  that  the  plans  in  question  were  not  carried  out,
events  did  prove  beneficial,  as  A.  V.  B.  had  foretold.  This
we  fear  is  but  a  bald  statement  of  what  was  an  interesting
incident,  and  it  seems  more  than  a  pity  that  the
extract  cannot  be  given  and  annotated  in  full,  instead
of  the  statement  resting,  as  it  must  do,  on  our  word
alone.  It  is  admissible  to  say,  however,  that  considering
all  the  circumstances,  and  supposing  that  we  admit  of
an  A.  V.  B.  who  still  retains  memory,  and  through  that
a  kindly  interest  in  mundane  affairs,  there  is  nothing
far-fetched  in  the  idea  that  she  should  have  endeavoured
to  get  into  touch  with  the  person  in  question,  with  a
view  to  helping,  if  possible,  as  she  stated  through  Feda
that  she  had  done.

On  May  2nd,  1917,  a  sitting  was  taken  by  Lady  Trou-
bridge,  I  acting  as  recorder,  and  in  this  case  it  is  a
matter  of  infinite  regret  to  us,  that,  owing  to  the  diffi-


456 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

culty  of  sufficiently  disguising  the  circumstances  discussed,
it  is  impossible  for  us  to  do  more  than  allude  to  this
sitting  in  general  terms ;  this,  however,  must  be  done,
as  the  sitting  in  question  was,  as  far  as  our  experience
goes,  almost  unique  of  its  kind.

In  this  sitting  no  attempt  was  apparently  made  to
furnish  evidential  matter  for  subsequent  verification  ;  the
sitting  opened  immediately  with  the  introduction  by  A.  V.  B.
of  a  topic  which  was  practically  sustained  throughout  the  en-
tire trance,  which  lasted  one  hour  and  three-quarters.  A.  V.  B.
began  by  referring  through  Feda  to  certain  circumstances
that  had  troubled  Lady  Troubridge  some  two  or  three
weeks  prior  to  the  sitting.  These  circumstances  were
summed  up  with  perfect  accuracy,  and  allusions  followed
which  were  extremely  relevant  to  persons  connected
with  these  circumstances,  and  to  Lady  Troubridge's  mental
attitude.  Enough  was  said  by  A.  V.  B.,  through  Feda,
to  make  it  appear  that  she  had  for  some  time  past  not
only  accurately  sensed  my  mental  condition  and  that
of  Lady  Troubridge,  but  that  she  had  apparently,  at  all
events  in  Lady  Troubridge's  case,  gathered  the  substance
of  a  conversation  held  privately  by  Lady  Troubridge  with
a  third  person,  whose  mental  attitude  and  motives  had
also  apparently  been  grasped ;  the  fact  of  this  con-
versation having  been  held  was  unknown  to  me  at
the  time  of  the  sitting.  The  train  of  thought  suggested
by  the  allusion  to  the  said  person  led  to  the  description
of  a  fourth  person,  who  was  correctly  stated  to  be  con-
nected with  myself  ;  the  transition  was  affected  with  perfect
naturalness  in  the  following  words  :  "  Oh  !  while  speaking
of  this,  she  says,  by  the  way,  there  is  someone  who  is
equaUy  to  do  with  Mrs.  Twonnie  who  has  very  much  the
same  gift."  The  thread  was  then  maintained  throughout
a  description  of  this  person  connected  with  me,  and  a
very  clear  and  eminently  characteristic  statement  of
A.  V.  B.'s  views  upon  the  subject  under  discussion  was
given.  This  we  are  afraid  is  all  that  we  can  say  re-
garding this  sitting.  What  struck  us  particularly  was
that  the  coherence  and  continuity  with  which  a  natural
discourse  based  upon  one  general  topic  was  sustained  in


lxxvhi.]  Apparent  Knowledge  of  Contemporary  Events.  457

this  sitting  exceeded  any  example  of  that  nature  which
we  had  hitherto  met  with  ;  although  no  names  were  given
by  the  communicator,  it  was  quite  impossible  in  any
instance  to  mistake  the  identity  of  the  people  to  whom
reference  was  made.

Section  II. A  Flash  of  Colour.

We  will  now  turn  to  sittings  with  which  we  can  deal
more  freely,  and  begin  by  giving  a  very  slight  extract
from  the  sitting  of  October  9th,  1916.  This  was  a  very
early  sitting,  and  I  was  curious  to  know  whether  A.  V.  B.
laid  any  claim  to  be  able  to  see  my  physical  surroundings ;
I  therefore  put  the  following  question  :

M.  R.  H. Can  you  see  me  in  my  flat  ?

F.  Not always, in  good physical conditions  she  can,

as  at  a  Materialising  Seance  where  the  Medium
gives  power ;  when  you  are  extra  strong  and
well,  and  the  weather  dry,  she  can  see  you.  She
says,  one  night  she  saw  something  blue  near  the
bed  and  said :  "  That's  a  flash  of  colour,  I'll
remember  and  tell  her  that."

Now  this  is  only  a  little  incident,  but  one  not  entirely
devoid  of  interest.  My  bedroom  contains  nothing  blue.
There  are  one  or  two  bits  of  Italian  woodwork  painted
rather  a  dark  sort  of  duck's-egg  colour,  but  this  is  the  nearest
approach  to  blue  anywhere  in  the  room,  and  these  pieces
of  Italian  wood- work  are  not  near  the  bed.  I  have  in
my  possession,  however,  a  dressing-gown  of  a  very  bright
pale  blue.  I  seldom  wear  it,  in  fact  it  had  been
put  away  for  months,  but  had  been  taken  out  about  a
week  prior  to  this  sitting,  to  replace  another  gown  that
had  gone  to  the  cleaners  ;  and  it  so  happened  that  I  had
been  leaving  this  bright  blue  dressing-gown  on  one  or
two  occasions  just  then  hanging  over  a  chair  at  the  foot
of  my  bed.  Nothing  else  of  a  blue  colour  had  been  near
my  bed.

Section  III. A  Diagram.
Another  slight  indication  of  knowledge  of  contemporary


458 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [pabt


events  was  received  by  us  on  October  20th,  1916,  at  a
sitting  taken  by  Lady  Troubridge,  I  acting  as  recorder.

Feda  had  just  described  a  paper  which  we  thought  we
recognised,  when  she  switched  off  to  quite  another  paper
which  she  described  in  the  following  words  :


F.  One  day  she  was  doing  something  with  you,  that

also  had  to  do  with  a  paper.  It  was  very  funny  ;
there  was  something  from  A  to  B,  and  strokes
in  between.  A  to  B  and  B  to  C,  and  lines
from  one  to  the  other.  It  was  not  the  same
paper  as  she  spoke  of  before,  it  was  another  one,,
it  was  like  this  :  (here  Feda  indicates  with  her
finger  in  the  air  the  letters  and  connecting  lines).

U.  V.  T. She  must  have  looked  over  my  shoulder.

F.  She thought it was very perplexing, she  didn't

understand  it  herself,  and  she  didn't  think  you
did,  she  says  she  thought :  "  Oh  !  poor  Una,  she'll
never  be  able  to  understand  it."

A  few  days  prior  to  this  sitting  Lady  Troubridge,  when
alone  in  her  bedroom,  had  been  puzzling  over  the  diagrams
in  Dr.  Morton  Prince's  book,  The  Dissociation  of  a
Personality.  If  page  465  of  the  said  book  be  turned  up,
it  will  be  seen  how  applicable  are  Feda's  words  to  the
diagram  on  that  page.  This  was  the  only  book  containing
such  diagrams  that  Lady  Troubridge  had  then  read
since  the  beginning  of  her  sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard,
or,  in  fact,  for  many  years  past.  Why,  however,  did
Feda  call  it  a  paper  instead  of  the  page  of  a  book  ?
It  is  perhaps  just  possible  that  she  got  a  mental  picture
of  that  one  page  only,  as  detached  from  its  context.


Section  IV. U.  V.  T.'s  House  and  circumstances
connected  with  it.

On  December  6th,  1916,  a  description,  decidedly  good
on  the  whole,  was  given  of  the  interior  of  my  flat,  but
we  omit  it  in  order  not  to  add  to  the  length  of  the
paper,  and  we  will  proceed  to  a  more  sustained  effort  to
demonstrate knowledge of contemporary events  and


lxxviii.]  Apparent  Knowledge  of  Contemporary  Events.  459


conditions,  beginning  with  a  rather  good  description  of
a  room.

On  December  30th,  1916,  Lady  Troubridge  took  a  sitting
and  I  acted  as  recorder,  when  the  following  occurred  :


F.  She's  been  to  you  since  Feda  saw  you  last,  not  at

Mrs.  Twonnie's,  somewhere  else  ;  she  would  have
been  glad  to  speak  to  you  but  she  couldn't
succeed,  she  did  try.  She's  showing  Feda  a
square  room,  it's  a  sitting  room,  not  very  large,
the  walls  are  light,  and  there  are  pictures  on
them,  but  not  heavy  ones  ;  Feda  can't  see  the
details  very  well  but  they  seem  to  be  in  light
colours  and  in  light  frames.  The  frames  are
about  the  -width  of  your  two  fingers,  and
they  are  flat,  not  rounded.  The  furniture  in
that  room  is  not  heavy,  there  are  no  big,  fat
chairs,  like  the  one  you  are  sitting  in  (here
Feda  points  to  a  heavily  upholstered  armchair),
the  chairs  are  mostly  like  the  one  Mrs.  Twonnie
is  sitting  in.  (I  was  sitting  in  a  small  wooden
chair  with  arms.)  Feda  sees  something  on  the
floor  that  is  not  quite  light,  but  has  something
in  it  that  shows  up  light,  the  floor  looks  to
Feda  a  fawny,  lighty  brown.  Feda  doesn't  know
what  it  is,  but  as  you  look  to  where  the  floor
goes  off  to  the  wall  it's  darker  where  it  meets
the  wall.

U.  V.  T. Yes,  that's  right,  Feda.

F.  It  feels  to  Feda  like a  pretty,  nice  room. Oh  !

she  says  there's  a  picture  of  an  outside  place,
of  an  exterior  ;  in  this  picture  there  is  something
slightly  arched  half-way  up  the  picture,  it's  light
underneath  the  arch,  and  there's  a  dark  ridge,
it's  not  in  a  wide  frame,  and  there's  white  all
round  outside  of  the  picture,  then  comes  the  frame
and  the  picture  is  in  the  centre  of  the  white.

U.  V.  T. I  can't  remember,  I  haven't  looked  very  carefully.

F.  She  says  there  is  something in  the  room  covered


460


Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


with  a  square  of  a  bluey-green  colour,  it's  a
smooth  stuff,  not  painted.

Are  you  sure  that  there  is  nothing  on  the  bluey-
green  ?

No,  Feda  can't  see  that  there  is.  She  says,  that
there  is  something  in  the  room  that  has  got  a
bird  on  it,  it's  either  drawn  or  worked,  it  seems
to  be  in  a  fumi}?-  kind  of  place  to  Feda,  you
might  not  notice  it  at  first,  look  carefully,  you
may  laugh  when  you  find  it.

Now,  this  description  is  remarkably  applicable  to  the
drawing-room  of  a  furnished  house  in  which  Lady  Trou-
bridge was  living  at  the  time  of  the  sitting.  It  was
a  house  belonging  to  Colonel  B.  (the  initial  is  altered),
which  had  been  taken  furnished  by  Lady  Troubridge
since  A.  V.  B.'s  death.  This  room  was  not  very  large ;
although  we  have  never  actually  measured  the  dimen-
sions, it  certainly,  judging  by  appearances,  gave  the
impression  of  being  approximately  square  ;  the  walls
were  panelled  in  cream,  and  the  only  pictures  on  the
walls  were  lightly  coloured  Japanese  prints.  These
prints  were  framed  in  light  fumed  oak,  and  the  Avidth
of  the  frames  measured  approximately  two  fingers,  as
stated  by  Feda.  These  frames  were  not  rounded.  In-
side the  frames  was  a  fairly  wide  white  mount  in
every  instance.  The  furniture  in  this  room  was  rather
strikingly  light  in  character,  there  was  no  Chesterfield,
or  heavily  upholstered  armchair  of  any  land,  there  were
several  small  chairs  very  similar  to  the  one  on  which  I
was  sitting  while  taking  notes.  Two  armchairs  and  a
settee  there  certainly  were  in  the  room  in  question,  but
they  were  composed  of  light  wooden  frames  and  cane
with  cushions.  The  carpet  of  this  room  is  accurately
described  by  Feda  when  she  says  that  the  floor  looks
"  a  fawny  lighty  brown."  She  appears,  however,  to  get
rather  involved  in  her  description  of  the  carpet ;  first  she
says :  "  The  floor  in  not  quite  light,  but  has  something
in  it  that  shows  up  light,"  immediately  after  this  she
states that "  the floor looks to Feda a fawny  lighty


U.  V.  T.


lxxvih.]  Apparent  Knowledge  of  Contemporary  Events.  461

brown,"  which  latter  statement,  as  we  have  already  said,
is  correct  ;  the  carpet  was  a  plain  fawn  all  over,  but  we
think  that  Feda  may  have  been  bewildered  by  the  con-
trast between  the  carpet  and  the  darker  floor  covering
surrounding  it  when  she  speaks  of  the  floor  having  some-
thing in  it  that  shows  up  light,  as  she  is  perfectly  right
when  she  says  :  "As  you  look  to  where  the  floor  goes
off  to  the  wall,  it's  darker  where  it  meets  the  wall."
Between  the  carpet  and  the  wall  of  that  room  there  was
a  fairly  deep  margin  of  black  linoleum.

The  allusion  to  one  particular  picture,  in  which  we
are  told  there  is  something  slightly  arched  half-way  up,
appears  to  refer  to  one  of  the  Japanese  prints.  In  this
print  was  shown  a  semi-arched  tree  trunk,  upon  which
sat  a  bird.  The  tree  trunk  came,  roughly  speaking,  about
half-way  up  the  picture,  and  that,  together  with  the  bird,
formed  the  sole  subject  of  this  print.  The  background,
which  was  of  a  light  fawn  colour,  showed  beneath  the
arch  of  the  tree  trunk,  thereby  throwing  the  latter  into
distinct  relief.  None  of  the  other  prints  in  the  room
resembled  this  in  the  least  in  design.  Had  Feda  con-
tented herself  with  saying  that  this  was  the  picture  of
"  an  outside  place "  it  would  have  been  to  the  good,
but  she  added  the  word  "  exterior,"  which  is  suggestive
of  something  architectural.  Feda,  however,  is  fond  of
long  words,  cuUed  from  her  various  sitters,  and  her
knowledge  of  English  does  not  always  permit  of  her  using
them  correctly.

The  thing  in  the  room  which  is  said  to  be  covered  with
a  square  of  bluey-green  smooth  stuff  is,  we  think,  a
small  card  table,  which  had  a  folding  top  in  two  pieces.
Lady  Troubridge  was  in  the  habit  of  opening  only  one
of  these  folds,  thereby  exposing  to  view  a  square  of
green  baize.  This  baize  had  a  very  smooth  surface.
The  baize  on  this  particular  table  was  not  of  that  mossy-
green  that  one  usuaUy  sees,  it  was  decidedly  blue-green
in  tint.  The  only  bird  other  than  those  in  the  Japanese
prints,  which  we  could  discover,  was  one  of  several  on
some  cretonne,  yet  Feda's  description  suggests  rather  an
amusing  and  unexpected  bird. At  a  later  sitting,  however,


462 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


she  says  that  A.  V.  B.  says  that  this  bird  was  on  the
cretonne.  A  little  later  on  in  the  present  sitting  the
topic  of  Lady  Troubridge's  house  recurs  in  the  following
words  :

F.  Mrs.  Una,  she  says,  she  doesn't  feel  settled  in  that

place  where  you  are  now.
U.  V.  T. How  settled  ?

F.  She  says,  when  she's  been  there  to  see  you,  she

feels  as  though  it  were  not  going  to  be  yours
much  longer  ;  she  says  there's  an  agitated  vibra-
tion which  makes  her  feel  that  you  are  only
going  to  be  there  for  a  while,  she  wishes  she
could  make  it  yours.

U.  V.  T. I  wish  she  could.

F.  She wonders if she could be permitted to  help.

She  says  :  "It  wouldn't  hurt  anybody  if  that  place
were  your  own,"  in  fact,  it  would  be  doing  some-
body a  good  turn  she  thinks,  she  says  she  wishes
the  vibrations  there  could  be  made  yours,  she's
going  to  see  what  she  can  do  about  it,  and  she
says  you  must  think  her  extra  clever  if  she
succeeds.  It  seems  to  Feda  that  she  connects
your  place  with  someone  at  a  distance,  that  it
belongs  to  them  more  than  to  you.  She  says
that  everything  in  it  seems  to  suit  you  exactly,
and  yet  that  she  has  a  feeling  that  you  should
not  get  too  fond  of  it  because  it  isn't  yours.

After  this  Feda  went  on  to  say  that  "  Ladye "  said
that  "Mrs.  Una"  got  very  fond  of  certain  things  and
hated  leaving  them,  etc.,  and  that  that  peculiarity  was
more  developed  in  her  than  in  most  people,  or  words
to  that  effect.  This  statement  Lady  Troubridge  con-
siders incorrect  in  the  general  way  in  which  it  was  given,
though  applicable  to  her  in  the  isolated  instance  of  this
particular  house.

At  the  time  of  this  sitting,  although  the  house  in
question  had  only  been  taken  furnished  on  a  short
agreement,  Lady  Troubridge  had  no  idea  that  anything
was  about  to  occur  which  would  lead  to  an  unexpected


lxxviii.]  Apparent  Knowledge  of  Contemporary  Events.  463


termination  of  her  tenancy  ;  quite  the  contrary,  for  she
had  definitely  been  told  by  Mrs.  B.  that  she  would  be
able  to  renew  her  agreement  if  she  so  desired,  and  in
all  probability  to  keep  the  house  on  until  the  end  of
the  War.  Although,  therefore,  we  were  struck  with  the
description  of  the  room,  and  also  with  the  remark  that
the  owner  of  the  house  was  a  long  way  away  (we
understood  Colonel  B.  to  be  in  France  at  the  time,
although  we  learnt  afterwards  that  he  had  just  returned
to  Ireland),  we  did  not  understand  why  A.  V.  B.  should
feel  that  there  were  any  particularly  unsettled  conditions
pertaining  to  the  house.  We  were  soon  to  find,  however,
that  A.  V.  B.  was  justified  in  her  prognostications,
for  only  two  days  after  this  sitting  of  December  30th,
1916,  Lady  Troubridge  received  a  letter  from  Mrs.  B.
making  the  unusual  suggestion  that  she  should  cancel  her
present  agreement,  and  allow  Colonel  B.  and  his  wife
to  take  immediate  re-possession.  From  this  letter  it
appeared  pretty  clear  that  it  would  be  difficult  for  Lady
Troubridge  to  renew  her  agreement  under  any  circum-
stances. The  letter  was  written  from  Ireland,  and  a
curious  point  is,  that  this  letter  was  dated  Saturday,
December  30th,  1916,  and  had  therefore  actually  been
written  on  the  very  day  of  the  sitting.

Section  V. U.  V.  T.'s  Dining-room  and  the  Work

done  there.

The  last  reference  to  the  house  which  we  propose  to
quote  occurred  on  January  31st,  1917.  I  alone  was  present
at  the  sitting,  acting  as  my  own  recorder.  As  sometimes
happens  when  I  am  taking  my  own  notes,  I  had  not
time  to  consider  carefully  the  descriptions  which  were
being  given,  and  on  this  occasion,  as  will  be  seen,  I  denied
and  contradicted  some  of  the  points  which  afterwards
turned  out  to  be  correct.

Here  is  the  extract  :

F.  She  says  something  about  a room  at  the  back  of

a  house.  A  room  that  she  sometimes  goes  into
in  the  early  part of  the evening  ; it's at  the


464


Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.


[paet


back  of  the  house  on  the  ground  floor,  and  it
opens — wait  a  minute,  Feda  can't  get  this — it's
as  though  a  window  opened  in  that  room  low
down,  a  window  from  which  you  can  see  something
green  now.

M.  R.  H. I  don't  understand  that — I'm  not  sure  there's  not

some  muddle  about  the  window.
F.  Wait a minute — Feda sees better now what  she

means. That  room  opens  with  two  doors.
M.  R.  H. That  may  be  correct.

F.  Feda  doesn't  quite  understand  this,  but  she  says  that

the  two  doors  meet.  (To  A.  V.  B.)  What  do
you  mean  ?  She  is  showing  Feda  that  if  you
Avalk  through  those  two  doors  you  get  into
another  room,  not  into  the  hall.

M.  R.  H. That's  right.

F.  She says that this back room is  furnished  in  a

different  style  from  the  room  at  the  front  part,
and  she  says  that  if  you  liked  you  could  make
one  big  room  of  it,  but  that  you  have  it  as
it  is  because  the  back  room  is  used  for  a  different
purpose  from  the  front  one.  You've  got  a  larger
table  hi  one  room  than  the  other.

M.  R.  H. In  which  room  do  you  mean  ?

F.  The  table  seems  to  Feda  to  be  in  the  back  room — •

it's  rather  a  large  table.  You've  got  a  table  in
the  front  room  too,  but  it's  not  so  large,  it's  a
smaller  one  altogether,  and  it's  in  a  different
position  to  the  table  in  the  back  room.  One
part  of  the  table  in  the  back  room  comes  pretty
near  the  fire,  so  that  when  any  one  is  sitting  on
that  side  of  it,  and  she  goes  to  get  close  to  them,
she  can  feel  the  fire.

M.  R.  H. How  can  she  see  so  well  ?

F.  She  can't  always,  but  sometimes  she  can  ; she  says  :

"  I  often  try  to  get  into  physical  touch,  but  I
don't  always  manage  to  do  it."  She  says  some-
times, when  she  goes  there,  all  she  feels  is
that  you  are  there,  but  that  one  evening,  she's
not  quite  sure  which,  she  went  there  to  be  near


lxsviii.]  Apparent  Knowledge  of  Contemporary  Events.  465


you, and  to  her  great  surprise, she  found  that

she  could  see  the  room  physically.
M.  R.  H. (To  A.  V.  B.) I'm  so  glad  you  could.
F.  She  says  when  a  thing  like  that  does  happen  she

makes  up  her  mind  to  tell  you  about  it  here.

She  supposes  that  you  were  surprised  at  her  being

able  to  see  Mrs  Una's  room  so  plainly  ?
M.  R.  H. Yes,  it  was  most  interesting.

F.  Do you understand it when she says that  this

room  of  yours  is  a  heavier  type  of  room  than
that  one  of  Mrs  Una's  which  she  described  before  ?

M.  R.  H. Ask  her  where  she  thinks  this  room  that  she  has
just  described  is.

F.  She's  not  very  clear  what  you  mean  by  that,  but

she thinks it's your room — yes, she does.  She
thinks  it  appears  to  be  your  room  at  present —
it's only lately that she has seen it.  Mrs.
Twonnie, have you anything like fur in  that
room  ?

M.  R.  H.  No.

F.  Something  with  long  stuff  like  fur  ?

M.  R.  H. No,  not  if  you're  describing  the  room  I  mean.

F.  It's  something  she  has  sensed — she  hasn't  seen  it

physically,  and  it  doesn't  seem  to  Feda  to  be
in  a  conspicuous  position.  Now  she's  trying  to
give  Feda  an  impression  of  it,  trying  to  make
Feda  feel  it,  and  it  feels  to  Feda  too  long  and
stiff  to  be  fur,  and  it  doesn't  feel  like  a  thing
that  you  would  keep  in  a  room,  to  Feda.  You
can  pull  the  stuff  out,  like  hair,  only  it  feels
coarser  and  thicker  than  hair.  It's  not  very
large,  it's  about  so — (Here  Feda  indicates  a  length
of  about  two  feet).  Oh  !  now  she  says  she  thinks
you  will  laugh  when  you  do  see  it.  Mrs.  Twonnie,
that  window  was  not  right,  the  way  Feda  saw  it
before  ;  she  seems  to  be  trying  to  show  Feda
that  it  bulges  out  a  bit,  and  yet  that  the  window
sort  of  sinks  a  bit.  (Here  Feda  indicates  a
curve  with  her  hand.)  (To  A.  V.  B.)  What  are
you showing  ? She's showing Feda that  the


466  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


furniture  looks  rather  dark  in  that  room  ;  there
don't  seem  to  be  any  light-coloured  stuffs,  not
creamy  with  roses  on  them,  like  Feda  sees  in
so  many  rooms.  And  some  of  the  chairs  are
of  dark  Avood,  and  she's  showing  Feda  that
they've  got  straight  backs.  She  says  that  they
are  polished,  but  not  highly  ;  they  haven't  got
that  very  bright  varnished  look.  Now  she's  show-
ing Feda  the  fireplace.  Look,  Mrs.  Twonnie,
supposing  the  fireplace  in  that  room  to  be  there
(here  Feda  indicates  a  wall  in  Mrs.  Leonard's
sitting-room),  well,  there's  a  rather  low  seat —
it's  not  a  chair — it's  like  a  seat  of  some  kind,
it's  about  so  long  (here  Feda  stretches  out  her
arms  to  their  full  width  and  manages  to  indicate
about  five  feet).  Now  supposing  the  fireplace
were  there  (pointing),  this  seat  would  be  against
another  wall  along  the  side  of  the  fireplace.

Feda  went  on  to  describe  some  other  points  in  the
room,  difficult  to  follow  and  apparently  not  correct.
She  also  described  rather  well  a  bedroom  in  the  house,
but  we  will  spare  the  reader  these  details.  At  a  certain
point  M.  R.  H.  asked  the  following  question  :

M.  R.  H.  Does  she  [A.  V.  B.]  know  whose  house  I'm  living
in,  or  has  she  muddled  it  up  with  places  to  which
I  go  ?

F.  She  looks  puzzled. She  says  : "  Yes,  I  do  know,

but  I  don't  think  I  can  say  it.  She  feels  you
in  different  places,  but  she  happens  to  have  been
in  this  place  lately,  and  she  says  you've  been
in  a  room  at  the  back,  and  she  thinks  also  in
that  bedroom,  but  she's  not  perfectly  sure.  You
see,  Mrs.  Twonnie,  she's  not  always  able  to  get
things  through  very  soon  after  she  has  seen  them  ;
sometimes  she  has  to  wait  quite  a  long  time
and  to  give  them  long  after  she  wants  to.  She's
not  perfectly  sure  about  the  bedroom,  but  she's
quite, quite sure about the other  room.


lxxviii.]  Apparent  Knowledge  of  Contemporary  Events.  467


M.  R.  H. What  does  she  think  I  do  in  that  room  ?'

F.  Well,  she  says  you  have  something  to  eat  there.

Oh  !  it  seems  to  be  a  mixture,  because  some-
times you  do  some  work  there.  Sometimes  the
work  seems  to  be  connected  in  a  way  with  her,
and  that  helps  her  to  sense  the  room.  She  says
when  you  "re  there  it's  a  kind  of  general  post
sometimes.  What  does  she  mean  ?  She  says  it
sometimes  looks  like  a  sorting — sorting  depart-
ment, she  says — she  sees  some  sorting  going  on  ;
she  says  she  hears  this  sort  of  thing  :  "  Put  that
there,  and  that  there  ;  that  belongs  to  so-and-so  ;
now  you've  got  them  mixed  up.  Oh  dear  !
I've  put  that  Avith  the  other  one."  She  says
sometimes  she  feels  as  if  it  were  a  serious  affair
of  State,  but  she  says  she  likes  to  feel  it's  that.
Is  she  making  fun  ?  She  says  it's  like  an  Intelli-
gence Department,  collecting  and  cataloguing.
Sometimes  she  sees  a  strange  person  there,  Feda
thinks  she's  teasing,  but  she  says  that  when  that
strange  person  comes  she  sees  wild  excitement,
getting  things  in  order,  and  there's  a  good  deal
of  discussion  too,  and  a  land  of  re-shuffling.
She  says  she's  glad  to  see  that  you  have  got
someone  to  do  the  laborious  part  of  the  work
instead  of  you  and  Mrs.  Una  doing  it.  (Sotto
voce  :  Papers,  papers,  papers.)  She's  showing
Feda  papers,  not  letters,  they  seem  to  be  held
together  with  something  ;  they  look  like  tins  :
(here  Feda  gives  an  exact  indication  of  the
size  of  the  quarto  sheets  used  by  M.  R.  H.  and
U.  V.  T.  in  typing).  Now  she  says  they're  some-
times held  together,  but  sometimes  they're  any-
thing but  held  together.  She  says  she  thoroughly
enjoys  it,  but  she  says  you  must  forgive  her  if
she  sees  the  humorous  side.  She  says  if  she
smiles  sometimes,  you  mustn't  mind.  She  feels
that  she  ought  not  to  smile,  because  it  is  such  a
labour  of  love.  She  says  she  doesn't  think  that
stranger  always  understands  what  it  means.  She
2  a


4  (is


Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


says  : "  Does  that  strange  person think  you  are
writing  a  detective  story  ?  "
Why  should  she  ?

Oh  !  she  just  wondered.  She  says  it  seems  to  her
it  must  read  so  strangely.  She  says  she  senses
sometimes  that  that  person  thinks  and  says  so,
but  she  says  it  doesn't  matter.

As  will  have  been  seen  by  the  extract,  the  descriptions
obtained  here  are  rather  complicated  ;  we  will  do  our
best,  however,  to  annotate  them.

The  first  reference  is  to  the  back  room  of  a  house,
this  room  is  said  to  be  on  the  ground  floor,  and  A.  V.  B.
is  said  to  go  there  sometimes  in  the  early  part  of  the
evening.  Now,  there  can  be  little  doubt,  in  our  opinion,
that  the  description  that  follows  is  intended  to  apply
to  the  dining-room  in  Lady  Troubridge's  house,  in  which
apartment  we  were  at  the  time  of  this  sitting  in  the  habit
of  doing  the  recording  of  our  Psychical  Research  work  :
we  usually  worked  there  from  3  until  6.30  p.m.  and
often  later.  This  room  is  at  the  back  of  the  house,  and
on  the  ground  floor.  Feda  begins  by  describing  a  window,
which  she  says  opens  low  down,  from  which  can  be  seen
something  green,  but  she.  has  apparently  seen  wrong,
or  misunderstood  the  communicator,  as  she  goes  on  to
say:  ''Wait  a  minute,  Feda  sees  better  now  what  she
means,  that  room  opens  with  two  doors,"  and  tells  us
that  the  two  doors  meet,  and  that  if  you  walk  through
them  you  get  into  another  room.  This  is  perfectly  correct ;
the  dining-room  in  that  house  was  separated  from  the  drawing-
room  by  double  doors  opening  in  the  centre.  What  the  green
thing  is  that  Feda  sees  it  is  impossible  to  say  :  had  the  window
of  the  dining-room  been  meant,  this  statement  regarding
green  would  be  correct,  as  the  window  looked  on  to  the
garden,  where  there  were  green  tubs  and  green  woodwork  ;
as  it  is,  we  can  only  say  that  there  were  some  green
cushions  and  a  card  table  covered  with  bluey-green  baize
in the communicating  drawing-room.

W7hen  Feda  says  that  the  back  room  is  furnished
differently from the front one she is perfectly  correct,


M.  R.  H.


lxxviii.]  Apparent  Knowledge  of  Contemporary  Events.  469

and  yet  it  is  also  quite  pertinent  when  she  says  that  if
one  liked  one  could  use  the  two  rooms  as  one  big  room,
but  that  ive  had  it  as  we  did.  because  that  back  room  was
used  for  a  different  purpose  from  the  front  one.  When
Lady  Troubridge  took  the  house  there  was  no  bolt  or
other  means  of  closing  the  communicating  doors,  the  two
rooms,  though  furnished  and  coloured  quite  separately,  having
apparently  always  been  used  as  one ;  but  on  account
of  our  work  Lady  Troubridge  had  fastenings  put  to  the
doors,  and  we  kept  the  rooms  separate.  Feda  is  correct
in  saying  that  there  is  a  larger  table  in  one  room
than  the  other,  especially  as  she  defines  clearly  that  the
larger  table  is  in  the  back  room  ;  a  big,  round  dining-
table  stood  in  the  back  room,  and  an  altogether  smaller
table  in  the  front  room.  We  had,  ourselves,  put  the
smaller  table  in  the  front  room  in  order  to  have  meals
there,  owing  to  the  dining-room  being  used  for  work  ;
it  is  perfectly  true  that  a  part  of  the  table  in  the  back
room  came  very  near  to  the  fire- — we  know  this  to  our
cost,  as  we  later  received  a  claim  for  damage  to  the
table  caused  by  the  heat.

This  back  room,  although  not  very  heavy  in  type,
was  certainly  more  so  than  the  front  room,  having  in
it  among  other  things,  and  in  addition  to  the  large  table,  a
long,  rather  heavy  oak  settee,  and  several  large  oil  paintings
in  very  heavy  frames  on  the  walls.  A.  V.  B.  seems  to  have
derived  the  impression  that  the  room  in  question  was  my  room,
or  appeared  to  be  so  at  the  time  of  this  sitting,  adding  that
it  was  only  lately  that  she  had  seen  it.  This,  we  think,
is  quite  understandable  ;  I  was,  at  the  time  of  the  sitting,
staying  with  a  relation,  in  whose  house  there  was  no
room  available  for  my  work ;  Lady  Troubridge  therefore  had
placed  her  dining-room  entirely  at  my  disposal,  and  all
our  work  was  done  in  that  room.

We  cannot  imagine  what  is  meant  by  the  mysterious
thing  that  appears  to  be  something  like  fur  and  yet
which  seems  too  long  and  stiff  to  be  fur.  Feda  says
that  it  is  something  like  hair,  only  coarser  and  thicker,
and  apparently  A.  V.  B.  thinks  that"  I  will  laugh  when
I  see  it. A  wire-haired  terrier,  which  I  then  possessed,


470 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

and  which  had  a  very  shaggy,  long  coat,  used  often  to
lie  in  that  room  while  we  worked  ;  he  is  the  nearest
approach  to  the  article  described  that  we  can  think  of  !

The  final  description  of  the  window  in  that  room  is
rather  vague.  The  window  in  the  dining-room  was  an
ordinary  sash  window,  but  on  either  side  of  it  the  wall
was  curved  outwards,  forming  two  semi-circles,  in  the
centre  of  which  was  set  the  window.  The  window,
however,  not  being  in  itself  bowed  or  curved,  may  have
given  Feda  the  impression  which  she  tries  to  express  in
the  words,  "  the  window  sort  of  sinks  a  bit."  The
furniture  in  that  room  was  dark,  and,  as  stated  by  Feda,
there  were  no  light-coloured  stuffs.  The  chairs  were  of
dark  wood,  had  straight  backs,  and  were  not  highly
polished.  The  reference  to  the  fireplace  with  the  seat,
about  five  feet  long,  which  is  said  to  be  "  against  another
wall — along  the  side  of  the  fireplace,"  is  good.

A.  V.  B.  appears  to  be  so  sure  about  the  back  room
at  that  house,  that  I  ask  her  what  she  thinks  I  do  there,
and  the  reply  is  interesting.  First  of  all  she  tells  us
through  Feda  that  I  seem  to  have  something  to  eat
there,  but  that  it  seems  to  be  a  mixture,  because  some-
times I  do  work  there  which  seems  to  be  connected
in  a  way  with  her.  Now  this  is  absolutely  accurate,
since  although  that  room,  as  has  already  been  stated,
was  given  over  to  me  for  work,  we  did  upon  several
occasions  have  a  meal  there,  when  we  asked  a  few  friends
to  the  house  in  order  to  discuss  Psychical  Research  ;
on  one  occasion  Miss  Isabel  Newton,  the  Secretary  of  the
Society  for  Psychical  Research,  was  among  those  friends.
The  description  given  by  A.  V.  B.  through  Feda  of  what
she  would  appear  to  have  overheard  or  sensed  when  I
was  working  there  is  rather  amusingly  accurate.

The  stranger,  whose  arrival  occasionally  causes  wild
excitement  about  getting  things  in  order,  etc.,  is  no  doubt
the  typist,  as  A.  V.  B.  expresses  pleasure  that  we  now
have  someone  to  do  the  laborious  part  of  the  work  instead
of  undertaking  it  ourselves.  At  the  beginning  of  our
studies  we  did  not  employ  a  typist,  Lady  Troubridge
doing  all  that  part  of  the  business  single-handed  ; it  was


lxxviii.]  Apparent  Knowledge,  of  Contemporary  Events.  471


only  a  short  time  prior  to  this  sitting  that  we  had  engaged
a  typist.  This  typist  was  rather  a  supercilious  young
person,  and  A.  V.  B.  is  correct  when  she  says  that  this
person  not  only  thinks  that  the  work  is  strange,  but
that  she  sometimes  says  so.  From  our  typist's  occasional
remarks  we  gathered  that  her  frame  of  mind  was  decidedly
sceptical.  There  is  nothing  evidential  in  Feda's  indicating
sheets  of  paper  of  a  quarto  size,  as  Mrs.  Leonard  cannot
have  failed  to  notice  that  our  notes  are  always  made
on  quarto-sized  blocks  ;  it  does  happen,  however,  that  we
always  use  quarto  sheets  and  not  foolscap,  for  our  type-
written records,  which  records  Mrs.  Leonard  had  never
seen.  In  the  reference  to  our  work  there  is  clearly  visible
that  keen,  though  kindly  sense  of  humour  which  was
very  characteristic  of  A.  V.  B.  during  her  lifetime.

Section  VI. Daisy's  Plans  and  Movements.

We  now  come  to  quite  a  short  extract  which  occurred
on  February  21st,  1917,  during  a  sitting  at  which  I  alone
was  present,  acting  as  my  own  recorder.  The  extract
refers  to  a  person  whom  we  will  call  Daisy,  and  of  whom
we  shall  have  more  to  say  later  on.  This  extract  was  of
a  prophetic  nature  so  far  as  my  knowledge  was  concerned  ;
here  it  is  :

F.  She  says,  did  you  see  Daisy  ?

M.  R.  H. No,  I  can't  see  Daisy.

F.  But  she  says  won't  you  be  able  to  see  her  ?

M.  R.  H. No,  I'm  afraid  I  won't  ; has  she  got  a  message  for
Daisy  ?

F.  You  won't  be  able  to  see  her  ?

M.  R.  H. I  can't  see  her  because  she  isn't  here.

F.  Your  Ladye  thought  somehow  that  she  was  going  to

be here  ; are  you  sure she  has  no  intention  of

coming  here  ?
M.  R.  H. As  far  as  I  know  she  has  none.

F.  Your  Ladye  doesn't  know  why, but she  gets  the

impression,  the  sort  of  feeling,  that  you  will  have
a  chance  of  seeing  Daisy.


472  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

And  again  a  few  lines  further  on  in  my  notes,  after
a  reference  to  Daisy  having  gone  north  and  south,  there
occur  the  following  words  :

M.  R.  H. Do I understand her to mean that this was  in
England  ?

F.  She  doesn't  mention  any  particular  country  in  con-

nection with  it,  but  she  does  seem  to  feel  that
things  are  tending  towards  your  seeing  Daisy.

Now,  at  the  time  of  this  sitting,  the  Daisy  in  question
was  nursing  the  wounded  in  the  Near  East.  I  had  not
the  slightest  idea  that  it  would  be  possible  for  her  to
break  her  contract,  even  in  the  event  of  her  wishing  to
do  so,  as  I  had  always  understood  that  one  was  obliged
to  sign  on  for  a  definite  period  of  time  when  undertaking
such  work.  I  was  not  expecting  to  see  Daisy  for  at
least  a  year,  if  then.  I  wrote  to  Daisy,  sending  her  out
a  series  of  questions,  among  which  I  asked  her  whether
she  had  any  intention  of  returning  to  England.  She
replied  in  the  following  words  :  "  Yes,  it  is  possible  that
I  may  return  to  England  next  month,  in  which  case  I
should  of  course  see  you.  I  have  given  in  my  resigna-
tion here."  This  reply  was  written  from  the  Near  East
on  March  10th,  1917,  and  I  saw  Daisy  shortly  after  her
return  to  England,  which  she  reached  on  April  20th,
1917.  She  has  since  consulted  her  diary  at  our  request,
and  finds  that  her  resignation  was  given  in  on  February
18th,  1917  ;  she  says  that  she  had  been  meaning  to  resign
for  some  time  prior  to  that  date.  The  question  will
naturally  arise  as  to  why  A.  V.  B.  should  have  troubled
to  get  into  Daisy's  conditions,  and  to  have  divined
the  unsettled  state  of  her  mind,  which  undoubtedly  was
present  at  about  the  date  of  this  sitting.  There  was  a
reason  why  A.  V.  B.  should  have  been  interested  in
Daisy,  but  we  will  not  deal  with  this  point  here,  as  it
belongs  to  a  later  portion  of  this  paper.


Lxxvm.]  Apparent  Knowledge  of  Contemporary  Events.  473


Section  VII. Knowledge  of  Small  Incidents  connected
with  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.

We  will  next  mention  another  slight  indication  of  know-
ledge regarding  contemporary  events ;  it  occurred  on
February  28th,  1917.  I  took  the  sitting  and  Lady  Trou-
bridge  acted  as  recorder.  A.  V.  B.  gave  the  following
words  through  Feda  :

F.  She  says  :  "  Shall  I  come  this  afternoon  ?  "

M.  R.  H.  Yes,  and  ask  her  to  notice  something  about  the
room  and  tell  us  about  it  next  time.

F.  She says  : "  Yes, I  will ; I've been many,  many

times  before  when  you  were  working,  and  I  was
with  you  this  morning  before  you  got  up."  She
thought  you  spoke  to  somebody,  moved  over  and
called  out  to  somebody,  not  speaking  quietly,
calling  out  something,  can't  you  remember  ?
Only  a  few  words,  you  just  moved  over  and  said
a  few  words.

At  the  time  of  the  sitting  I  denied  this  incident,  but
immediately  on  our  return  home  Lady  Troubridge  and  I
remembered  it  perfectly.  I  had  spent  the  previous  night
at  Lady  Troubridge's  house,  and  she  had  come  in  herself
to  wake  me  in  the  morning.  She  did  so  by  letting  the
blind  go  up  with  a  bang,  and  a  flood  of  light  struck
my  eyes  suddenly.  I  rolled  over  on  to  the  other  side
of  the  bed,  loudly  voicing  my  indignation.  The  usual
proceeding,  when  I  am  in  my  own  flat,  is  much  less
abrupt,  I  being  discreetly  aroused  by  a  servant  with  a
cup  of  tea ;  there  is  also  no  garish  light  let  in  upon  me,
so  I  have  no  occasion  to  expostulate.

We  will  now  give  an  extract  from  the  sitting  of  June
6th,  1917,  taken  by  Lady  Troubridge  and  recorded  by  me.

F.  (sotto  voce ; Pictures, pictures, pictures.) She  wants  now

to  talk  about  pictures.
U.  V.  T. What  pictures  ?

F.  They're pictures on the earth plane, and  it's

not one, particular picture either, it's  pictures


474


Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [paet


that  people  would  go  and  look  at. She's  interested
in  them  specially,  they're  pictures  that  have  to
do  with  you  just  now  .
U.  V.  T. It's  funny.

F.  It's  a  place  she  wants  to  go  to  with  you  to  look

at  pictures  for  a  special  purpose.  Oh  !  she  says,
she's  not  only  going,  but  that  she  has  been  there,
and  lately  too.  She  says,  there  were  several  of
them,  but  one  particular  one,  she  wanted  to  see
how  it  was  put.

U.  V.  T. Yes  ?

F.  She says  she  thought  it  was  not  put  badly,  but

that  it  certainty  might  have  been  put  better.
She  was  pleased  about  it  though,  not  so  much
about  where  it  was  put,  but  about  the  picture
itself.  She  keeps  on  showing  Feda  a  picture  ;
it  looks  to  Feda  as  if  there  was  a  very  dark
shade  half  way  across  it  ;  it  seems  to  be  much
lighter  across  the  top,  then  it's  all  dark  at  one
point  in  the  middle.  It's  light  on  top  and  a
kind  of  particular  streak  seems  to  come  across
the  middle,  like  a  dark  shade.

U.  V.  T. What's  the  bottom  like  ?

F.  It's  light again  at  the  bottom, but  the  lightness

at  the  bottom  is  a  different  kind  to  the  top.
U.  V.  T. I  think  I  place  it.

F.  Mrs. Una, it  seems  to  be  mixed  up  like  at  the

bottom,  it's  got  a  muddly  look.

U.  V.  T. I  wonder  why  she  mentions  all  this.

F.  Oh  ! she  only  wanted  you  to  know  that  she  had

seen  it,  she  likes  to  let  you  know  when  she  sees
things  on  the  earth  plane  clearly,  she  says  that
lately  she  has  been  trying  to  exercise  this  faculty,
and  to  practise  getting  through  what  she  has
seen.  She  says  that  she  sees  a  great  deal,
much  more,  she  says,  than  she  could  ever  get
on  to  Feda's  brain  ;  Mrs  Una,  Feda  doesn't  think
that  that  picture  was  very  important,  it  was
only  something  that  she  happened  to  see  with
you.


lxxviii.]  Apparent  Knowledge  of  Contemporary  Events.  475

U.  V.  T. Why  did  she  say  she  was  pleased  ?
F.  Because,  she  says,  she  does  like  it,  she  did  and  she

does.

Regarding  the  above  extract,  Lady  Troubridge  had
recently  taken  a  house,  and  on  May  31st,  1917,  just  six
days  prior  to  this  sitting,  she  and  I  had  been  together
to  a  Depository,  in  order  to  speak  about  her  furniture
and  effects  which  were  stored  there.  She  particularly
wished  to  go  over  a  number  of  pictures,  and  for  this
purpose  was  conducted  into  a  special  room  ;  she  found
to  her  great  distress  that  her  pictures  had  been  stacked
up  anyhow,  one  against  another  ;  with  the  result  that
some  glasses  were  broken,  and  several  frames  injured.
She  was  particularly  anxious  as  to  the  whereabouts  and
condition  of  one  special  picture  ;  this  was  a  large,  square,
water-colour  painting  presented  to  her  some  years  ago
by  Admiral  Togo.  We  found  that  this  picture  had  not
suffered  any  damage,  having  been  placed  rather  more
carefully  than  the  others.  We  think  that  this  picture,
which  A.  V.  B.  both  knew  and  admired  during  her  life-
time, is  the  one  to  which  she  alludes  in  the  present
sitting.  This  picture  is  not  only  rather  beautiful,  but
in  its  composition  is,  to  the  European  eye,  unusual,  and
we  think  that  Feda's  description  is  not  devoid  of  interest.
Feda  tells  us  that  A.  V.  B.  is  showing  her  a  picture
that  looks  light  at  the  top,  with  a  land  of  particular
streak  like  a  dark  shade  across  the  middle,  that  it  seems
to  be  much  lighter  across  the  top,  and  then  that  it  is
all  dark  at  one  point  in  the  middle.  Now,  the  upper
part  of  the  picture  in  question  shows  snow-capped  Fuji
Yama,  the  sacred  mountain,  in  early  dawn  against  a  pale
sky  ;  nearly  half-way  down  the  picture  in  the  middle
distance  is  a  line  of  low  hills  forming,  as  Feda  says,
a  streak  across  the  middle  of  the  picture  like  a  dark
shade ;  in  the  very  centre  of  the  picture  in  the  nearer
distance  is  a  bold  mass  of  black  rock  rising  from  the
sea  ;  this  is  apparently  the  object  which  leads  Feda  to  say
that  the  picture  is  all  dark  at  one  point  in  the  middk .
Lady  Troubridge  then  asks  Feda  what  the  bottom  of  the


476  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

picture  is  like,  and  Feda  replies  by  saying  that  it  is
light  at  the  bottom,  but  that  the  lightness  at  the  bottom
is  of  a  different  kind  to  the  lightness  at  the  top,  she
adds  that  it  seems  to  be  "  mixed  up  like  "  at  the  bottom,
and  that  it  has  got  a  "  muddly  look."  Now,  the  whole
foreground  of  the  picture  which  we  believe  A.  V.  B.
to  have  been  attempting  to  show  Feda,  is  a  mass  of
swirling,  foamy  shallows,  the  water  and  the  foam  together
giving  a  light,  but  as  Feda  rightly  describes  it,  a  mixed
up  or  muddly  look.  There  are  one  or  two  half -submerged
points  of  rock  among  the  shallows,  but  the  general  effect
of  the  foreground  is  one  of  light,  swirling  water.

And  this,  we  think,  is  the  last  extract  pertaining  to
what  would  appear  to  be  a  knowledge  of  contemporary
events  on  the  part  of  a  purporting  communicator,  which
we  will  include  in  this  paper.  There  are,  of  course,  other
instances  of  this  kind,  but  those  that  we  have  given,  or
to  which  we  have  alluded  are,  we  think,  among  the  most
interesting.


\


lxxviii.]  Personal  Touches  and  the  A.  V.  B.  Control.  ±17


CHAPTER  IV.

Personal  Touches  and  the  A.  V.  B.  Control.

We  now  feel  it  necessary  to  treat  of  what,  for  want  of
a  better  term,  we  will  call  personal  touches,  which,  although
they  must  rank  as  of  very  considerable  importance  among
those  things  which  would  appear  to  prove  identity,  are
none  the  less  extremely  difficult  to  define  in  a  manner
which  will  carry  conviction  to  the  minds  of  those  who
have  not  known,  and  known  intimately,  the  purporting
communicator.  What  are  personal  touches  ?  At  best
they  are  very  subtle  and  often  very  elusive.  We  presume
that  they  would  include,  among  other  things,  attitude  of
mind  towards  life  in  general,  and  if  this  be  admitted,
then  we  feel  that  we  have  obtained  (as  far,  that  is  to
say,  as  it  is  possible  to  obtain  such  a  thing  through  an
intermediary),  a  certain  amount  of  evidence  as  to  the
identity  of  the  purporting  communicator.

To  begin  then  with  the  attitude  of  mind  :  throughout
the  communications  purporting  to  come  from  A.  V.  B.
which  we  have  received  through  Mrs.  Leonard,  there  have
been  obvious  a  very  marked  tolerance,  balance,  and
moderation  in  the  judgment  of  others  ;  together  with  a
sense  of  humour  which  was  never  of  an  unkindly  nature.
All  these  things  were  strongly  characteristic  of  A.  V.  B.
From  time  to  time  there  has  also  appeared  a  desire  on
the  part  of  the  purporting  communicator  to  moderate
any  severe  judgments  on  our  part,  and  any  tendency  to
go  to  extremes,  even  in  the  matter  of  our  work.  This
mental  balance  was  also  characteristic.  Throughout  the
sittings  there  has  also  appeared  a  quiet  determination,
almost  amounting  to  a  gentle  sort  of  stubbornness,  which


478  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

was  very  characteristic  of  A.  V.  B.  This  stubbornness
has  once  or  twice  been  remarked  on  by  Feda,  as,  for
instance,  in  the  case  of  the  mistake  regarding  the  basement
rooms  at  the  house  in  Malvern  Wells.  Another  character-
istic which  we  have  noticed,  is  that  of  a  particular  kind
of  childishness  which  A.  V.  B.  retained  until  her  last
illness.  This  childishness  took  the  form,  among  othei
things,  of  a  love  of  appreciation,  not  of  those  things  in
which  she  seriously  excelled,  but  of  unimportant  actions,
or  little  new  accomplishments  acquired  ;  for  instance,  I
heard  a  great  deal  more  from  her  about  the  first  sock
that  she  knitted  than  about  the  many  songs  that  she
had,  from  time  to  time,  composed  and  published,  or  about
her  much  admired  singing,  which  she  was  inclined  to
neglect.  Quite  characteristic  of  this  attitude  of  mind
was  the  incident  of  the  horse,  around  whose  neck  A.  V.  B.
was  said  to  have  placed  her  arm,  an  action  which  she  was
particularly  anxious  that  I  should  notice.  (See  above,  p.  362)
Had  A.  V.  B.  succeeded  in  sufficiently  overcoming  her  fear
of  horses  to  put  her  arm  around  the  neck  of  one,
she  would  most  certainly,  in  this  life,  have  called  my
attention  to  it,  and  expected  me  to  praise  her,  as
I  should  equally  certainly  have  done.  This  childishness
which  we  have  spoken  of  often  led  to  A.  V.  B.
getting  her  own  way  in  a  manner  that  was  pleasant  to
all  concerned.  When  bent  upon  some  particular  little
trifle,  or,  in  fact,  on  doing  anything  that  amused  her,
A.  V.  B.  would  sometimes  repeat  over  and  over  again
to  herself  in  a  monotonous  undertone,  such  words  as  :
'•I  will,"  or  "I  want  it,"  or  "I  shall,"  or  "I  love  it,"
in  so  humorous  a  manner  that  all  opposition  waned.
The  first  allusion  to  this  habit  of  repetition  was  given
through  Feda  on  June  6th,  1917.  Lady  Troubridge  took
the  sitting  and  1  recorded.  Here  is  the  extract.  Lady
Troubridge  had  just  been  remarking  how  very  good  and
patient  Feda  was,  when  the  following  occurred  :

F  Oh  ! but  Feda  loves  it. Ladye  says  she  loves  it,

she  loves  it,  she  loves  it,  she  loves  it.
U V.  T. Did  she  say  that,  Feda  %


ixxviii.]  Personal  Touches  and  the  A.  V.  B.  Control.  479

F.  Yes,  you  know  she  does  repeat  things  sometimes,

like  that.

U.  V.  T. How  do  you  mean,  Feda  ?

F.  Oh  ! sometimes Feda catches her saying one  or

two  Arords  over  and  over  again  like  that,  some-
times she  does  say  little  words  over  to  herself,
in  a  funny  little  way  unlike  other  people.

Another  and  still  more  characteristic  repetition  of  words
occurred  during  an  A.  V.  B.  control  later  on  in  the  same
sitting.  It  was  coupled  with  a  point  of  evidential  interest,
with  which  we  will  presently  deal.  And  here  it  is
necessary  to  make  a  slight  digression,  in  order  to  give
a  few  details  regarding  the  A.  V.  B.  control.

The  first  personal  control  attempted  by  A.  V.  B.  took
place  on  January  19th,  1917.  I  was  taking  the  sitting
alone,  and  my  attention  was  first  called  to  the  fact  thai,
something  unusual  was  about  to  occur  by  Feda,  who
fidgeted  uncomfortably,  exclaiming  at  the  same  time  :
"  What  are  you  trying  to  do,  Ladye,  what  are  you  trying
to  do  ?  "  After  these  words,  no  more  was  heard  of  Feda,
the  medium  remaining  perfectly  still,  and  apparently,
deeply  entranced,  for  what  I  should  say  was  the  space
of  a  minute  or  two.  When  she  began  to  speak  again
she  did  so  in  an  almost  inaudible  whisper,  her  first  words
being :  "  Where  are  you  ?  Pull  me  forward."  There  was
nothing  evidential  in  this  first  A.  V.  B.  control,  as  speech
appeared  very  difficult  and  movement  almost  impossible.
A  certain  amount  of  emotion  was  shown,  but,  on  the
whole,  admirable  self-control  was  maintained  on  the  part
of  the  purporting  communicator,  which  was  again  very
characteristic  of  A.  V.  B.  who  was  extremely  self-controlled
during  her  life-time.  Since  January  19th,  1917,  there
have  been  repeated  efforts  at  an  A.  V.  B.  control,  which  has
been  very  slowly  growing  in  power  and  evidential  value.

To  return  to  the  sitting  of  June  6th,  1917  ;  after
the  allusion  made  by  Feda  to  A.  V.  B.'s  habit  of
repeating  words,  there  occurred  dining  an  A.  V.  B.
control,  at  the  end  of  the  same  sitting,  a  spontaneous
example of this characteristic. A.  V.  B.  made a  state-


480  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

ment  the  accuracy  of  which  I  doubted  (but  which  after-
wards proved  to  be  correct),  and  when  I  demurred,  she
said  :  "I  know  it,  I  know  it,  I  know  it."

Another  example  of  the  habit  of  repeating  words
occurred  on  August  6th,  1917,  during  an  A.  V.  B.  control.
A.  V.  B.  had  just  announced  her  intention  of  accom-
plishing some  difficult  feat  in  connection  with  communi-
cation, and  when  Lady  Troubridge  expressed  some  doubt,
A.  V.  B.  rejoined: "I  will,  I  will,  I  will,  I  will."

During  the  early  A.  V.  B.  controls,  A.  V.  B.  com-
plained that  she  could  not  make  the  medium  laugh.  One
day,  however,  she  suddenly  succeeded  in  doing  so,  and
what  ensued  was  extraordinarily  reminiscent  of  A.  V.  B.'s
own  laugh,  and  this  characteristic  laugh  has,  since  thenr
often  occurred.  On  several  occasions  the  timbre  of  Mrs.
Leonard  s  voice  has  changed,  and  has  become  very  like
A.  V.  B.'s  voice  ;  startlingly  so,  once  or  twice.  A.  V.  B.
herself  has  remarked  upon  this,  which  appears  only  to
be  possible  during  the  earlier  part  of  the  personal  controls.
On  one  occasion  A.  V.  B.  said  discontentedly  :  "  Oh  !
noAv  the  power  is  going,  can"t  you  hear  my  voice  getting
Mrs.  Leonardy  again  ?  "  which  statement  was  correct.

Many  little  characteristic  things  have  occurred  during
these  A.  V.  B.  controls,  which,  however,  are  somewhat
difficult  to  put  into  words.  With  regard  to  the  timbre
of  the  voice  and  laugh,  I  fully  realise  that  under  such
circumstances  one's  own  imagination  may  play  a  very
large  part,  but  fortunately  my  collaborator,  Lady  Trou-
bridge, has  been  present  on  many  occasions  when  these
familiar  intonations  and  the  laugh  have  occurred,  and  she
also  considers  that  they  are  strongly  reminiscent  of  the
purporting  communicator.

On  July  13th,  1917,  there  was  a  personal  control  by
A.  V.  B.,  and  the  first  movement  that  was  made  was  an
attempt  at  a  posture  of  the  hand.  This  pose  of  the  hand
was  not  quite  completed,  but  appeared  to  be  the  beginning
of  an  old  and  well-known  attitude  characteristic  of
A.  V.  B.'s  hand.  We  made  no  remark  upon  it,  hoping
that  some  day  the  position  of  holding  the  hand  might
be  accurately  demonstrated.


lxxviii.]  Personal  Touches  and  the  A.  V.  B.  Control.  481


Another  interesting  feature  of  the  A.  V.  B.  control
is  the  fact  that  the  purporting  communicator  has  occasion-
ally appeared  to  be  dissatisfied  with  the  pronunciation
of  certain  words.  For  instance,  A.  V.  B.  has  struggled
with  the  word  "  often."  Mrs.  Leonard,  in  the  normal
state,  pronounces  the  T  in  this  word,  she  says  "  off -ten.''
A.  V.  B.  always  pronounced  it  "  orfen."  Constantly
during  an  A.  V.  B.  control  this  word  is  pronounced  in
Mrs.  Leonard's  fashion  ;  on  one  occasion,  however,  A.  V.  B.
appeared  to  realise  what  was  happening,  and  a  little
rehearsal  ensued.  She  only  once  succeeded  in  saying
"  orfen,"  repeating  "  off-ten,"  and  then  "  orferten,
orferten,"  several  times  in  rather  a  bewildered  manner.
When  asked  what  she  was  doing,  she  replied  vaguely  that
she  t;  was  just  trying  it."

On  August  5th,  1917,  however,  during  an  A.  V.  B.
control,  this  word  "  often  "  was  pronounced  in  A.  V.  B.'s
own  fashion  ;  after  having  said  "  orfen,"  twice,  with
perfect  ease  and  naturalness,  the  purporting  communicator
suddenly  slipped  back  into  Mrs.  Leonard's  pronunciation,
without  apparently  noticing  the  difference.

A  personal  touch  occurred  very  early  in  our  sittings
with  Mrs.  Leonard,  in  fact,  it  was  at  the  end  of  our
first  joint  sitting,  on  October  2nd,  1916.  When  saying
"  goodbye  "  Feda  said  :  "  She  says  '  Bless  you  both."  "
Bless  you,  or  Bless  you  both,  were  expressions  constantly
used  by  A.  V.  B.,  and  had  been  used  by  her  to  Lady
Troubridge  and  myself  many  times,  if  we  chanced  to
be  going  out  together  on  any  occasion  when  A.  V.  B.
did  not  accompany  us.  This  expression  of  "  Bless  you  "
or  "Bless  you  both"  has  recurred  through  the  sittings,
and  on  August  5th,  1917,  during  an  A.  V.  B.  control,
was  used  for  the  first  time  by  one  of  us.  Lady  Trou-
bridge, alluding  to  A.  V.  B.  and  another  person,  said  :
"  Well,  bless  you  both."  A.  V.  B.  looked  puzzled  for
a  few  moments,  remarking  after  a  pause  :  "  /  said
'  Bless  you  both,'  too."  It  was  as  though,  in  searching
her  memory  for  the  association  called  up  by  these  words,
it  had  struck  her  that  they  were  words  which  she  herself
had  been  in  the  habit  of  using. It  must,  of  course;'  be


482 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

understood  that  A.  V.  B.'s  memory  and  powers  of  ex-
pression always  appear  to  be  adversely  affected  during
a  personal  control  of  the  medium  ;  she  has  herself  com-
plained bitterly  of  this  on  several  occasions.  And  now,
before  leaving  the  subject  of  the  A.  V.  B.  control,  we
must  mention  three  incidents,  although  they  have  no
bearing  on  personal  touches.

On  January  23rd,  1917,  at  which  sitting  A.  V.  B.  was
controlling  for  the  second  time  only,  she  began  almost
immediately  to  feel  Mrs.  Leonard's  face,  with  apparent
curiosity  ;  she  then  remarked  :  "  What's  the  matter  with
my  face  ?  It  feels  thinner  and  bonier  than  it  used  to  be."
Now,  this  was  correct,  as  Mrs.  Leonard's  face  is  quite
a  different  build  from  A.  V.  B.'s,  it  being  not  only
thinner,  but  the  bony  construction  being  larger  and  more
marked.

On  May  2nd,  1917,  another  interesting  incident  occurred.
A.  V.  B.  begged  us  not  to  talk  while  she  thought  some-
thing out,  she  then  asked  what  date  it  was,  and  was
told  that  it  was  May  2nd.  A  pause  ensued,  during  which
the  communicator  was  apparently  thinking  deeply  ;  after
which  she  remarked  that  something  had  occurred  about
this  time  of  the  year,  and  asked  whether  an  anniversary
were  not  coming.  She  then  murmured  :  "  The  first  of
May  "  several  times.  Being  unable  to  place  the  date
for  the  moment,  I  promised  to  refer  back  to  her  old
diary,  but  A.  V.  B.  said  that  there  was  no  necessity  for
this.  I  was  still  at  sea,  but  having  in  mind  the  date
of  her  death,  which  took  place  on  May  25th,  I  told
A.  V.  B.  that  one  important  thing  had  occurred  about
this  time  of  the  year,  asking  her  whether  she  remembered
what  sort  of  a  thing  it  was  ;  to  which  she  replied  in
words  to  this  effect  :  "  You  must  look  upon  it  as  my
birthday,  never  think  of  funerals,  they  are  horrible  things,
you  see  it  was  like  a  birthday  to  me,  as  you  will  realise
for  yourself  when  you  come  over.  But  something  did
occur  on  the  1st  of  May,  or  round  about  that  time,  which
led  up  to  the  other  thing."  Now  the  date  of  A.  V.  B.'s
death  appeared  in  the  Press  at  the  time,  and  consequently
the  evidential  value  of  the  reference,  as  above  given,  is


lxxviii.]  Personal  Touches  and  the  A.  V.  B.  Control.  483

largely  diminished  ;  but  one  evidential  thing  there  does
remain  in  this  statement,  namely,  the  reference  to  "  some-
thing "  which  was  said  to  have  occurred  round  about
the  1st  of  May,  and  which  led  up  to  the  other  thing,
namely,  to  her  death.  On  the  29th  of  April,  1916,
A.  V.  B.  got  a  sudden  affection  of  her  sight  ;  she  began
to  see  long  black  streaks,  which  she  described  as  being
like  bits  of  chenille  velvet  floating  in  front  of  one  of  her
eyes.  She  consulted  an  oculist,  who  thought  that  this
condition  would  clear  up,  which,  however,  it  did  not  do.
And  on  the  15th  of  May,  1916,  there  occurred  her  stroke.
We  have  had  the  opportunity  of  consulting  two  doctors,
in  whose  opinion  we  have  confidence,  and  they  both  tell
us  that  it  often  happens  that  just  such  an  affection  of
the  eye  as  A.  V.  B.  suffered  from,  is  liable  to  occur  when
a  stroke  is  imminent.  Neither  of  these  doctors  was
aware  when  we  questioned  them  that  our  interest  in
this  matter  was  connected  even  partially  with  Psychical
Research.  This  visual  affection  being  of  very  short
duration,  there  was  no  opportunity  for  it  to  become
generally  known.  A  few  people  may  have  known  of  it
outside  of  A.  V.  B.'s  immediate  home  circle,  but  we  do
not  think  so.  Normal  knowledge  regarding  this  point
on  Mrs.  Leonard's  part  would  therefore  appear  to  be
improbable.  It  may  be  as  well  to  insert  here,  one  or
two  extracts  from  A.  V.  B.'s  diary,  on  the  subject  of
this  affection  of  the  eye.

EXTRACT  FROM  A.  V.  B.'s  DIARY,  1916.

First  Entry  re  Eyes.

Saturday,  April  29th,  1916.  Sat  in  Green  Park  trying
to  read.  Had  black  specks  floating  before
my  eyes.

Sunday,  April  30th,  1916. My  left  eye  bothered  with

floating  chenille  worms  !
Monday,  May  1st,  1916. Eyes  rather  better.
Wednesday, May  3rd, 1916. John  went  off  at  9.30

to  the  flat. Picked  me  up  at  noon  to  see

2  H


484 Miss  Radclyffe-HaM  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

P.  [oculist],1  he  examined  my  eyes,  thought
a  small  blood  clot  accounted  for  the  specks
before  my  left  eye.  Slept  and  felt  better,
but  eye  still  bothering  me.

There  are  other  entries  regarding  the  eye,  which,  as
we  have  previously  stated,  never  got  well.  But  those
given  are,  we  think,  sufficient  to  show  that  the  affection
of  the  eye  occurred  around  about  the  1st  of  May,  which
affection,  as  we  have  said,  was  considered  by  two  doctors
to  have  been  a  premonitory  symptom  of  the  stroke.
[See  Appendix  A.]

Another  interesting  little  incident  during  a  personal
control  occurred  on  June  13th,  1917.  A.  V.  B.  put
her  hand  up  to  her  head  and  began  to  laugh,  remarking,
as  she  did  so  :  "  I  am  wearing  a  hair-net,  hoiv  funny  !  "
Now,  A.  V.  B.  during  her  lifetime  never,  under  any
circumstances,  wore  a  hair-net.  She  had  naturally  wavy
hair,  and  knowing  her  as  well  as  I  do,  I  feel  sure  that
it  would  have  struck  her  as  humorous  that  she  should
wear  a  net.

It  may  be  as  well  to  state  how  the  notes  of  these
A.  V.  B.  controls  have  been  made.  It  has  not  been
possible  to  write  them  down  during  the  actual  control,
as  it  appeared  to  be  absolutely  necessary  that  the  sitter,
and,  when  present,  the  recorder  as  well,  should  con-
centrate their  entire  attention  on  the  medium,  in  order
to  observe  closely  all  gestures  ;  and  still  more  in  order
to  be  able  to  catch  every  word  spoken,  because  the  voice
during  an  A..  V.  B.  control  is  sometimes  very  weak  and
low.  The  A.  V.  B.  controls  always  occur  at  the  end  of
the  sitting  ;  our  method  has  therefore  been  to  record
the  notes  while  the  medium  is  coming  out  of  trance,
getting  down  in  that  interval  all  points  of  evidential
interest,  and  omitting  everything  of  a  merely  personal
and  non-evidential  nature.  This  has  not  proved  difficult
up  to  the  present,  as  the  A.  V.  B.  controls  have  generally
been but of short duration, and there have  seldom

1  The  initial  has  been  altered  and  the  full  name  omitted.


lxxviii.]  Personal  Touches  and  the  A.  V.  B.  Control.  485

occurred  more  than  one  or  two  evidential  points  during
each  control.

Nothing  of  any  kind  has  ever  been  given  away  by
Lady  Troubridge  or  myself,  who  have  regarded  the  personal
control  as  a  possible  fruitful  source  of  further  evidence.

After  this  digression  we  must  return,  before  closing  this
section  of  our  paper,  to  two  other  personal  touches  which
were  obtained  through  Feda.  On  December  20th,  1916,
at  a  sitting  taken  by  me,  Lady  Troubridge  recording,  we
obtained  the  following  :

M.  R.  H.  Tell  Ladye  that  next  Wednesday  I  shan't  take
the  sitting  myself  because  I'm  bringing  a  gentle-
man who  will  take  it.

F.  She says, all right, but unless you're good  at

Christmas,  she'll  push  that  gentleman  out,  and
make  you  take  the  sitting  yourself.  And  she
says  you  must  be  good  after  that  awful  threat.
Awful  threat  !  That  sounds  dreadful  to  Feda,
but  she's  only  joking.

Now,  A.  V.  B.  during  her  lifetime  constantly  used  the
words  "  awful  threat."  If  I  suggested  doing  anything
of  which  she  disapproved,  she  would  laughingly  cap  my
suggestion  by  a  far  rasher  one,  which  she  proposed  to
carry  out  herself,  in  the  event  of  my  proving  intractable.
She  would  often  say  :  "  Now,  I  know  you  can't  do  it
after  that  awful  threat."  If  /  made  any  wild  proposal
she  was  in  the  habit  of  saying  :  "  What  an  awful  threat  !  "
Consequently,  when  these  words  came  through  Feda  they
struck  us  as  being  very  familiar.

On  May  30th,  1917,  at  a  sitting  at  which  I  alone  was
present,  acting  as  my  own  recorder,  a  new  communicator
arrived  at  the  same  time  as  A.  V.  B.  He  was
apparently  a  close  relation  of  mine,  and  attempted  to
prove  his  identity  by  describing  through  Feda,  among
other  things,  the  painting  of  pictures,  for  which  he  had
a  talent  during  his  lifetime.  This  purporting  communi-
cator was  able  to  give  a  very  good  account  of  himself,
assisted,  as  it  appeared,  by  A.  V.  B.,  but  he  got  rather
stuck  when  he  tried  to  show  Feda  that  he  had  been  in


486 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

the  habit  of  squeezing  paints  on  to  a  palette  from  a
tube. Here  is  the  extract  :

F.  And  now  he  takes up  something and  does  this  :

(sotto  voce  :  Squish.)  (Here  Feda  makes  the
gesture  of  squeezing  paint  out  of  a  tube  on
to  a  palette.)  It's  something  very  small  he's
got  in  his  right  hand.

M.  R.  H.  (laughingly)  I  understand  that,  but  what  made  you
say  "  Squish  "  ?

F.  Ladye says "  Squish,"  she says it didn't  always

make  that  noise,  of  course,  but  that  somehow  it
suggests  it ; you  expect  it  to  say  "  Squish."

Now,  this  is  just  the  sort  of  thing  that  A.  V.  B.
would  have  said  ;  she  was  fond  of  coining  words  and  often
thought  of  humorous  similes  ;  in  fact,  it  sounded  like
her.


lxxviii.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.


487


CHAPTER  V.


Knowledge  shown  of  Matters  entirely  unknown

to  the  Sitters.

We  will  bring  this  paper  to  a  close  by  giving  three
extracts  from  sittings  which  we  consider,  in  one  respect
at  all  events,  to  be  the  most  remarkable  which  we  have
had  with  Mrs.  Leonard.  We  feel  that  the  extracts  with
which  we  are  about  to  deal  have  a  right  to  stand  alone .
since  they  treat  principally  of  matters  which  were  entirely
unknown  either  to  myself  or  to  Lady  Troubridge  at  the
time  of  the  sittings.

Section  I. Concerning  the  Dog  Billy.

We  will  begin  with  an  extract  from  the  sitting  of
Dec.  6th,  1916.  I  took  the  sitting,  Lady  Troubridge
recording,  and  the  following  occurred  :

F.  Bihy,  she  says  : "  Billy." Do  you  know  who  that

is  ?

M.  R.  H.  No.

F.  She  says  : "  Billy."

U.  V.  T. Who  is  it  ? Someone  she  knew  on  the  earth  plane  ?

F.  When  Feda  asks  her  she  is  rather  confusing.  She

says  :  "I  do  know  him,  but  in  rather  a  peculiar
sense."  You've  got  to  go  into  the  country  for
this,  right  into  the  proper  country,  and  Billy
doesn't  seem  to  belong  to  the  house,  but  to  just
outside  the  house.  She  says  Billy  is  a  well-
known  character. She  thinks  it  will  come  to  you.


488


Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


U.  V.  T. I  think  I  understand.

F.  It seems funny, very  funny to Feda. She  says

it's  rather  difficult  to  explain  her  acquaintance
with  this  Billy.  She  says  it's  not  quite  on  the
usual  lines.

U.  V.  T. Is  Billy  nice  to  look  at  ?

F.  She  says  : "  Not  very  pretty."

U.  V.  T. That's  true.

F.  She  says  it  just  depends  upon  your  eye  for  beauty.

U.  V.  T. Is  she  sure  she  knew  Billy  on  the  earth  plane  ?
F.  She  doesn't  seem  sure,  but  she  knows  Billy  quite

well  now.
U.  V.  T. Did  I  know  him  ?
F.  Yes.

U.  V.  T. How  old  was  Billy  when  he  left  the  earth  plane  ?

M.  R.  H. She  hasn't  said  he's  dead.

U.  V.  T. But  she  said  that  she  knows  him  now.

F.  Yes,  she  doesn't  think  she  knew  him  on  the  earth

plane,  but  she  knows  him  now,  he  has  become
rather  attached  to  her,  rather  to  the  amusement
of  some  of  the  people  over  there.

U.  V.  T. I'm  rather  interested  in  Billy.

F.  She  says  Billy  takes  quite  an  uncanny  interest  in

her.  (Here  Feda  gives  an  excellent  imitation  of
a  dog  sniffing.)  She's  doing  like  this,  and  she
says  he  takes  an  uncanny  interest  in  her.  She
says  it's  quite  embarrassing  sometimes.  She  says  :
"  I  can't  say  more,  but  do  you  understand  ?  "

U.  V.  T. Yes,  will  she  give  my  love  to  Billy  ?

F.  Yes,  she  says  do  you  want  her  to  kiss  Billy  ?

U.  V.  T. Yes,  please.

F.  (Touches  her  forehead)  She  says  she  will  kiss  him

just  here,  not  on  his  month.  She  says  she  won't
kiss  him  mi  his  mouth  and  she  canM  very  well
kiss  him  on  his  cheek,  she  would  rather  kiss  him
here.  (Feda  again  indicates  her  forehead,  and
begins  making  sniffing  noises  like a  dog.)  Feda


lxxviii.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  489

would  like  to  know  why  she  does  that.  She's
very  happy  to-day,  and  she's  enjoying  herself.

Now  this  Billy,  who  was,  at  first,  unrecognised  by
either  of  us,  was  recognised  quite  soon  by  Lady  Trou-
bridge  as  being  a  wire-haired  terrier  of  hers,  who  had
died  about  fifteen  months  prior  to  this  sitting,  and  about
eight  months  prior  to  A.  V.  B.'s  death.  The  dog  had
been  pensioned  by  Lady  Troubridge's  mother  with  some
ladies  at  Boscombe,  owing  to  Lady  Troubridge  being  much
abroad,  and  Lady  Troubridge  had  not  seen  him  for  eleven
years.  Feda  says  you  have  got  to  go  right  into  the
proper  country,  when  she  describes  Billy  ;  this  may  mean
that  you  pass  through  the  country  from  London  to  reach
Boscombe.  Boscombe  itself,  of  course,  is  a  town.  All
his  life  Billy  had  been  considered  to  be  quite  a  character,
being  not  only  remarkably  intelligent,  but  very  original.
In  the  present  sitting,  Feda  does  not  appear  to  grasp
the  fact  that  Billy  is  a  dog,  although  her  description  of
him  is  pretty  unmistakable  as  such.  In  any  case,  if
she  has  grasped  that  he  is  a  dog,  she  either  cannot  say
so,  or  wishes  to  keep  up  the  pretence  of  not  imderstanding.
Elaborate  description,  allied  with  apparent  inability  to
recognise  and  name  the  simplest  object,  does  sometimes
occur  in  the  Leonard  phenomena,  as  in  that  of  most
trance  mediums,  and  suggests  forcibly  that  we  are  very
far  from  understanding  in  what  manner  the  impressions
described  reach  the  so-called  "  Control."  Sentences  occasion-
ally occur  during  the  sittings  which,  although  attributed
by  Feda  to  A.  V.  B.,  do  not  suggest  A.  V.  B.'s  way  of
expressing  herself.  One  occurs  in  this  extract  when  Feda
says  :  "  She  says  it  just  depends  on  your  eye  for  beauty."
It  is  as  if  from  time  to  time,  words  calculated  to  express
the  sense  of  the  communicator's  remarks  were  picked
from  the  medium's  brain,  or  perhaps  have  been  learnt
by  Feda  from  other  sitters,  and  are  used  by  her  to  save
herself  trouble.  On  the  other  hand,  very  many  turns  of
phrase  and  of  mind  have  been  startlingly  reminiscent  of
the  purporting  communicator.

The next reference to Billy occurred on  December


490 Miss  Radclyffe-Hatt  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


13th,  1916,  at  a  sitting  taken  by  Lady  Troubridge  which
I  recorded.  The  reference  was  spontaneously  made  by  Feda,
and  was  as  follows  :

F.  She  says,  she's  seen  Billy  and  kissed  him.

IT.  V.  T. I'm  glad.

F.  She  says  Billy  rubbed  against  her  face. She  says

he  didn't  lick  her  face,  she  says  that  wouldn't
have  been  very  nice.  She  says  he  rubbed  her
with  his  muzzle.  What  does  she  mean  by
muzzle  ?

U.  V.  T. Well,  ask  her  why  she  doesn't  show  you  Billy  ?
F.  Yes,  Feda  would  like  to  see  him. She  says  he's

not very pretty. Is his nioiith dark  inside  ?

(Here  Feda  indicates  lips  and  gums.)
U.  V.  T. Dark  ?

F.  Yes,  like  liver  colour,  not  pink  colour,  a  kind  of

mottly  colour,  she  thinks  you  ought  to  know.
U.  V.  T. Well,  I'm  not  sure.

F.  She  says  it  was  mottly  inside,  and  she  says,  can't

you  ask  someone  who  knows  ?
U.  V.  T. I  will  see,

F.  She  says  he  is  two  shades,  and  that  one  merges

into  the  other  and  harmonises  very well.  (Sotto

voce  : Brun  Brin  Brun  Brin  .) Oh  f

It's  a  funny  word,  Feda  can't  get  it.  It  doesn't
sound  to  Feda  like  a  colour,  but  it  begins  with  a
B,  but  it's  not  brown  or  black  or  blue,  She  says
it's  a  bit  mottled,  and  that  when  you  look  at  him,
it  strikes  you.  It's  somehow  more  like  two  shades.
(Sotto  voce  :  Try  to  show  Feda  what  he's  like,
now.)  She  says  she  told  him  she  was  kissing
him  from  you,  on  the  forehead.  She  says  he
jumps  about,  that  he  bounds  and  jumps  over
things,  and  that  he's  more  graceful  than  Feda
thinks.  She  says  he's  very  well,  and  will  be  in
a  very  good  condition  for  you  when  you  come
over.  Did  you  know  that  when  he  first  passed
over  he  was  not  in  a  good  condition  ?  Because
he  was  not,  and  there  was  something  the  matter


lxxviii.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  491


with  his  hind  leg,  or  his  foot.  He  was  not  in
an  unhealthy  state  for  very  long,  she  says  he
went  over  rather  suddenly.  There  was  some-
thing wrong  with  his  foot,  or  the  lower  part  of
his  leg.  Oh  !  Now  she  sarys  there  was  some-
thing wrong  once  underneath  his  arm.  (Here
Feda  indicates  the  arm-pit.)  Only  he  hasn't  got
any  arms,  but  it  was  under  there.
U.  V.  T. I  remember  that.

F.  But she says that had nothing to do with  his

passing  on,  but  that  he  certainly  had  something
wrong  with  his  foot  or  his  back  leg.

U.  V.  T. That  I  can  find  out,  perhaps.

F.  She  savs  that  they  used  to  turn  his  feet up,  and

look  at  them  between  the  toes.
U.  V.  T. Yes  ?

F.  She says he didn't like it. (Sotto voce  :  What

are  you  saying  ?  He  couldn't  go  for  a  walk
by  himself.)  She  says  he  goes  off  by  himself
sometimes  on  what  she  calls  "foraging  expeditions  "
and  that  he  seems  to  enjoy  himself,  because  he
looks  so  awfully  pleased  and  proud  when  he
comes  back.  She  says  he's  got  a  good  deal  of
expression.  She  says  it's  funny  to  talk  of  ex-
pression in  anyone  like  Billy,  but  that  he  does
look  as  though  he  had  done  something  he  would
like  to  tell  you  all  about.  She  says  his  front
legs  are  rather  shorter  than  his  hind  legs.

U.  V.  T. I  don't  remember  that.

F.  His  coat  is  very  good, she  says. She  says  she's

got  him  a  collar.
U.  V  T. That's  very  nice  of  her.

F.  She  shows  Feda  that  it's rather  a  funny  shape,  it

seems  to  be  broader  under  the  chin,  and  it
seems  to  have  sparklies  on  it.  She's  very  fond
of  Billy,  she  says  she's  not  at  all  wary  of  him.
She  says  that  on  the  earth  plane,  she  might  have
wanted  to  keep  him  at  his  distance.  She  says
he  goes  walks  by  himself.  Feda  wishes  she*d
show  him  to  Feda.


492


Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.


[part


U.  V.  T. Why  won't  she  ?

F.  She  can't,  perhaps  ; she  doesn't  have  him  in  the

house.  There's  a  place  for  him  in  the  garden,
she  thinks  he  would  feel  strange  in  the  house.
He  loves  the  garden  and  he  rolls  and  lies  on  his
back  and  kicks  his  legs,  and  he  grunts  and  makes
a  funny  noise,  not  like  a  pig.  She  says  he  once
had  a  knobbly  thing,  sticking  out  on  one  of  his
legs,  it  was  a  little  peculiarity,  she  says.

U.  V.  T. I  don't  remember  that.

F.  She  says  that  all  these  trifling  things  might  appear

to  some  people  like  rubbish,  but  that  these
intimate  things  are  important.

This  second  reference  to  Billy  included  statements  of
facts  about  the  dog  that  were  quite  unknown  to  Lady
Troubridge  or  myself  at  the  time  of  the  sitting.  Before
dealing  with  these,  some  mention  must  be  made  of  those
points  which,  while  being  accurate,  were  within  the
knowledge  of  one  or  both  of  us.

An  attitude  of  mind  very  characteristic  of  A.  V.  B.
where  dogs  were  concerned  is  shown  at  the  beginning  of
the  extract,  when  Feda  tells  us  that  A.  V.  B.  says  that
it  would  not  have  been  very  nice  had  Billy  licked  her
face.  A.  V.  B.  was  never  a  real  dog  lover,  and  would
certainly  have  objected  to  a  dog  licking  her  face.  She
never  allowed  this  even  in  the  case  of  a  dog  that  I  gave
her,  and  of  which  she  grew  very  fond.  On  the  other
hand,  Mrs.  Leonard,  who  is  a  great  dog-lover,  has  been
seen  by  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.  to  allow  her  dog  to  do
this.

Fecla  next  tells  us  that  Billy's  mouth  is  dark  inside,
indicating  the  lips  and  gums.  Undoubtedly  most  dogs'
Hps  are  liver-coloured  or  black,  Billy's  certainly  were ;
the  roof  of  his  mouth  was  dark  and  mottled,  and  his
gums  may  likewise  have  been  mottled.

We  next  come  to  the  description  of  his  general  colouring,
which,  according  to  Feda,  is  of  two  shades,  and  she  tries
to  pronounce  some  word  that  appears  to  us  to  be  an
attempt  at  "  brindle." Billy  was  a  very  heavily  marked


lxxviii.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  493

terrier,  especially  about  the  head  and  muzzle.  There  is
an  oil  painting  of  his  head  by  Lady  Troubridge  in  exist-
ence, which  shows  this  very  clearly.  The  dog's  body
was  also  heavily  marked ;  his  coat  consisted  of  three  colours,
to  be  accurate,  white,  black  and  tan.  Feda  mentions  only
two.  His  tan  and  black  merged  into  each  other,  but
brindle  is  not  a  very  usual  term  to  use  in  this  con-
nection when  speaking  of  a  terrier,  although  it  is  not
incorrect.  Undoubtedly  Billy  had  markings  on  him  that
were  a  mixture  of  black  and  tan.

A.  V.  B.  next  tells  us,  through  Feda,  that  Billy  jumps
about  and  bounds  over  things.  One  may  say  that  this
would  be  apphcable  to  very  many  dogs,  and  yet  Lady
Troubridge  and  I  have  both  had  several  dogs  who
never  did  anything  of  the  kind.  Billy,  on  the  other
hand,  was  very  active  in  his  youth,  and  was  given  to
jumping  over  spiked  railings  among  other  things,  to
the  great  anxiety  of  his  owner.  And  now  occur  the
points  re  Billy's  health,  all  of  which,  with  two  exceptions,
were  unknown  to  us  at  the  time  of  this  sitting.  We
must  skip  these  points,  for  the  moment,  however,  and
deal  with  the  remaining  generalities  first.

A.  V.  B.  tells  us,  through  Feda,  that  Billy  goes  for  walks
by  himself  on  foraging  expeditions.  Now  this  was
markedly  characteristic,  at  all  events  of  the  earthly  Billy,
when  Lady  Troubridge  had  him.  Billy  was  a  person  of
great  independence,  and  would  walk  all  over  London  by
himself,  finding  his  way  home  from  the  most  unlikely
places.  He  was  not  only  a  rover  by  nature,  but  a  most
unregenerate  scavenger,  and  his  foraging  expeditions,  on
this  plane,  led  to  a  permanent  muzzle  for  the  protection
of  his  digestion.

We  do  not  know  whether  Feda  is  correct,  or  not,  when
she  states  that  Billy's  front  legs  are  shorter  than  his  back
ones.  Many  terriers  that  are  not  pure  bred  have  this
defect,  but  Lady  Troubridge  cannot  remember  whether  it
existed  in  Billy's  case.

Feda  next  tells  us  that  A.  V.  B.  remarks  on  his  coat
being  very  good.  In  life  Billy's  coat  was  rather  a
feature,  at  all  events  in  the  eyes  of  the  uninitiated  ;  it  was


494


Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [pakt


thick  and  very  silky  in  texture ;  it  is  highly  improbable
that  A.  V.  B.  would  consider  this  a  blemish,  as  I  never  kept
wire-haired  terriers  during  our  life  together,  and  she  knew
nothing  at  all  regarding  their  points.  Following  on  the
remark  about  Billy's  coat,  there  occurs  an  example  of  pure
"  Feda  talk,"  when  Feda  begins  to  describe  a  collar  of  a
fancy  shape,  and  goes  on  to  elaborate  her  statement  by  saying
that  this  collar  seems  to  have  "  sparklies  "  on  it,  "  sparklies  "
being  her  term  for  precious  stones.  It  would  be  hard
to  imagine  a  collar  more  unsuitable  for  Billy  than  the
one  described  by  Feda  ;  especially  in  view  of  the  de-
scription of  Billy  himself  that  she  has  already  given.
Later  on,  she  accentuates  the  fact  that  Billy  was  a  rough
dog,  by  telling  us  that  he  is  not  kept  in  the  house,  but
in  the  garden,  and  yet  this  out-door  dog  is  said  to  be
wearing  a  jewelled  collar  !  It  appears  possible  that
A.  V.  B.  did  actually  say  that  she  had  given  a  collar  to
Billy,  the  description  thereof,  however,  can  only  have
emanated  from  Feda.  It  is  not  at  all  suggestive  of  Mrs.
Leonard's  influence.1

This  kind  of  elaboration  on  the  part  of  the  control
occurs  very  seldom  during  the  Leonard  trances,  and
when  it  does occur, it  nearly  always seems  to  partake

1  Since  this  Paper  has  been  completed,  our  attention  has  been  drawn
to  a  photograph  of  A.  V.  B.  taken  with  her  French  bull-dog.  In  this
photograph  the  dog  is  wearing  a  deep  collar  heavily  studded  with
circular  brass  bosses ;  the  brass  bosses  show  up  very  brightly  in  the
photograph,  and  I  remember  that  A.  V.  B.  always  insisted  on  their
being  polished  daily.  In  addition  to  the  deep  collar  the  dog  is  wearing
a  jade  ball  on  a  chain,  the  chain  is  partly  concealed  by  the  collar,
being  only  visible  in  front,  where  it  hangs  down  in  a  V  with  the  ball
on  the  end,  giving  the  impression  that  it  forms  a  part  of  the  collar.
It  is  just  possible  that  it  is  this  collar  and  ornament  that  the  com-
municator was  trying  to  show.  The  impression  of  "Sparklies"  may
have  been  derived  by  Feda  from  the  shiny  brass  bosses,  and  her  curious
impression  that  the  collar  was  "  broader  under  the  chin "  may  have
been  derived  from  an  imperfect  vision  on  her  part  of  the  jade
ball  on  the  chain  above  referred  to.  Dog-collars  set  with  imitation
jewels  are  occasionally  sold,  but  a  dog-collar  that  is  broader  under
the  chin  is  practically  unknown  ;  at  least  I  have  never  come  across  such
a  thing,  and  this  fact  in  itself  makes  it  appear  unlikely  that  Feda  would
have  mentioned  such  a  peculiarity  unless  she  had  had  something  to
go  on.


lxxviii.]  Knoivledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  495

of  the  Oriental's  childish  love  of  gaudiness.  A  similar
instance  was  remarked  on  by  us,  when  dealing  with  the
sitting  of  April  25th,  1917,  during  which  Feda  stated  that
A.  V.  B.  had  a  gold  case  for  her  guitar.  Curiously
enough,  in  that  instance,  there  came,  side  by  side  with
the  mention  of  the  gold  case,  the  evidential  statement
with  regard  to  there  being  no  ribbons  on  A.  V.  B."s
guitar.  It  would  seem  as  though  Feda's  imagination
must  have  been  strenuously  controlled  just  there,  and  it
is  rather  amusing  to  notice  a  slight  disapproval  on  her
part,  regarding  the  simplicity  of  the  instrument.  She
remarks  :  "  Funny,  Mrs.  Twonnie,  do  you  know,  she
doesn't  seem  to  like  ribbons.  Feda  likes  ribbons,  lots
of  ribbons  !  "

To  return  to  the  present  sitting  of  Dec.  6th,  1916.
Feda  says  that  A.  V.  B.  is  very  fond  of  Billy,  and  is
not  at  all  "  wary  "  of  him,  but  admits  that  on  the  earth
plane,  she  might  have  wanted  to  keep  him  at  his  distance,
and  that  Billy  lives  in  the  garden,  as  A.  V.  B.  thinks
he  would  feel  strange  in  the  house.  There  is  no  doubt
that  A.  V.  B.  would  have  wanted  to  keep  a  dog  of  the
"  Billy "  type  very  much  at  his  distance,  in  her  lifetime.
She  was  not  at  all  fond  of  rough,  effusive  dogs ;  in  fact,
she  was  timid  of  them.  When  I  first  met  her  this
timidity  was  very  marked  ;  she  was  frankly  frightened
of  dogs  in  those  days.  In  this  connection  Feda  uses  the
word  "  wary,"  as  she  did  also  at  a  subsequent  sitting  on
January  3rd,  1917,  when  speaking  of  A.  V.  B.'s  fear  of
horses  (see  above,  p.  363),  and  we  comment  upon  it,  because,
although  we  cannot  remember  that  it  was  ever  an  ex-
pression of  A.  V.  B.'s,  "  wary "  is  an  expression  of  Mrs.
Leonard's.  Both  Lady  Troubridge  and  I  heard  her  use  this
word  one  day,  when  in  her  normal  state.  But  although
the  word  may  have  been  picked  from  the  medium's
brain,  the  sense  conveyed  thereby  is,  in  this  instance,
perfectly  accurate,  as  expressing  A.  V.  B.'s  feelings  in  the
past  towards  dogs  in  general,  and  more  especially  towards
dogs  of  the  "  Billy  "  type.

Billy  is  said  to  prefer  the  garden  to  the  house,  and
here  again  a  good  point  is  made,  as  Billy,  during  his  life


496  Miss  Radclyffe-HaU  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

with  Lady  Troubridge,  spent  his  days  preferably  outside
the  front  door,  showing  a  marked  aversion  to  remaining
in  the  house.

We  will  now  return  to  the  points  about  Billy's  health,
around  which  centres  the  principal  interest  of  this  sitting.
These  points  were  as  follows  :

1.  Billy  was  not  in  a  good  condition  when  he  first  went

over  (i.e.  at  the  time  of  his  death),  but  was
not  in  an  unhealthy  state  for  very  long ;  he  died
suddenly.

2.  Billy  had  something  the matter  with his hind  leg

or  his  foot.

3.  Billy  had  once  had  something  wrong  with  him,  under

his  arm  in  the  arm-pit  (i.e.  under  the  fore  leg,
where  it  joins  the  body).

4.  But  that  particular  condition  had  nothing  to  do  with

his  death.

5.  They  would  turn  Billy's  feet  up  and  examine  between

the  toes,  a  proceeding  which  he  did  not  like.

6.  And  lastly,  Billy  had  a  knobbly  thing  sticking  out

on  one  of  his  legs.

We  will  deal  first  with  the  two  points  out  of  the  six
which  were  known  to  us  at  the  time  of  the  sitting.
Firstly,  then,  Feda  is  correct  when  she  states  that  Billy
died  suddenly.  Billy  was  destroyed  at  the  request  of
Lady  Troubridge's  mother,  who  hearing  that  he  was
both  blind  and  deaf  from  old  age,  took  the  most
merciful  course  open  to  her.  Some  time  afterwards,
when  Lady  Troubridge  happened  to  mention  Billy,  she  was
told  that  he  had  been  destroyed.  Secondly,  and  thirdly,
Feda  is  correct  in  stating  that,  at  one  time,  Billy  had  an
injury  under  what  she  calls  his  arm,  but  that  this  parti-
cular condition  had  nothing  to  do  with  his  death.  During
Billy's  life  with  Lady  Troubridge,  he  had  a  very  bad
fight.  He  was  attacked  by  a  large  bulldog  and  severely
bitten  under  the  fore  leg,  nearly  into  the  lung ;  the  wound
very  nearly  proved  fatal,  and  was  the  only  serious  dis-
aster  that ever befell him, so far  as Lady  Troubridge


Lxxvm.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  497

knew  at  the  time  of  the  sitting.  We  feel  practically
certain  that  A.  V.  B.,  during  her  lifetime,  had  heard  an
account  of  this  battle,  and  we  fancy,  also,  that  she  knew
that  Billy  had  been  destroyed,  though  we  cannot  be  sure
of  either  of  these  points.  Regarding  the  other  four  points
mentioned  Lady  Troubridge  and  I  were  in  entire  ignorance.
It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  Lady  Troubridge  had  not
seen  the  dog  for  many  years,  and  I  never.  It  was
necessary,  therefore,  to  write  to  Miss  Collis,  at  Boscombe,
the  lady  with  whom  Billy  had  been  boarded,  and  when  doing
so,  it  appeared  inadvisable  to  mention  the  alarming  word
"  Medium."  Lady  Troubridge  therefore  wrote  to  the  effect
that  she  had  had  a  very  vivid  dream  about  her  old  dog,
and  proceeded  to  enumerate  the  points  regarding  his
health  which  she  said  she  had  dreamt  of.  She  asked
Miss  Collis  whether  any  of  these  symptoms  had  ever
existed  in  Billy's  case.  Here  is  Miss  Collis's  reply  to
that  letter  :

St.  Thomas's  Day,  1916.

Dear  Madam,

We  do  not  remember  dear  little  Billy  hurting  his
foot  specially  at  any  time,  but  for  years  he  used  often
to  cry  out  if  his  leg  was  touched.  We  used  to  think
it  was  rheumatism.  And  latterly  he  did  have  a  wart,
my  sister  thinks  it  was  on  the  top  of  his  left  leg,  also
during  the  last  part  of  the  time  he  got  little  lumps  or
warts  all  over.  The  vet.  said  it  was  from  old  age.  He
was  very  old,  I  think  Mrs.  Taylor  said  seventeen  years,
and  very  blind,  and  it  made  one  anxious,  and  we  thought
it  better  he  should  be  put  to  sleep.  Also,  a  few  weeks
before  the  end,  he  had  a  bite  from  another  dog  on  his
back,  which  we  were  afraid  would  not  heal.  I  think  this
helped  us  to  make  up  our  minds  to  part  with  him.  Mrs.
Taylor  thought  when  she  saw  him  in  the  summer  that  it
might  not  be  well  to  keep  him  much  longer.  I  think  it
was  the  2oth  of  September,  last  year,  that  he  was  put
to  sleep.  We  did  not  lay  him  to  rest  till  the  next  day,
when  we  did  it  ourselves  in  his  basket  and  his  rugs,  just


498 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


as  he  was, and  covered  him  up  very  gently. He  was
such  a  dear,  funny  little  dog,  with  such  sweet  ways.
Hoping  Mrs.  Taylor  and  all  are  well,

Yours  faithfully,

(Signed) Edith  F.  S.  Collis.

This  letter  was  quite  clear,  and  corroborated  Feda's
statements,  inasmuch  as  Miss  Collis  said  that  Billy  had
had  a  bite  on  his  back  shortly  before  the  end,  which
would  not  heal,  and  which  we  may  therefore  conclude
produced  a  specifically  unhealthy  condition.  Also  that
he  had  had  for  some  time  an  affection  of  his  leg,  which
caused  him  to  cry  out  when  the  leg  was  touched,  and
also  that  he  had  a  wart  on  his  leg.  She  omitted  to
state,  however,  whether  anyone  had  examined  Billy's
feet  between  the  toes,  and  also  which  leg  it  was  that
caused  Billy  to  cry  out  when  it  was  touched.  Lady
Troubridge  therefore  wrote  again  to  Miss  Collis,  asking
her  to  clear  up  these  points,  but  being  very  careful  in
no  way  to  suggest  to  her  which  leg  we  thought  it  might
be  that  had  hurt  him. Miss  Collis  replied  as  follows  :

Dec.  29th,  1916.

I  am  sorry  to  have  been  so  long  in  replying  to
your  second  letter  about  dear  little  Billy.  One  could
wish  there  was  a  future  for  him,  and  I  felt  that  at  the
time  we  lost  him,  but  we  can  trust  him  with  his  Maker
and  knoAv  that  if  it  is  best,  it  will  be  so.  It  was  a
back  leg  he  did  not  like  touched,  but  though  my  sister
washed  him  once  a  week,  I  am  sorry  we  never  thought
to  look  between  his  toes.  I  can't  think  of  anything
more  specially  to  tell  you  about  him  to-night,  but  shall
always  be  pleased  to  write  about  him  if  you  think  of
anything.  .  .  .

Yours  sincerely,

(Signed) E.  Collis.

All  the  points  given  by  Feda  had  thei'efore  been
corroborated  by  Miss Collis,  with the exception  of  one.


lxxviii.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  499

Feda  speaks  of  someone  having  looked  between  Billy's
toes,  a  proceeding  to  which  he  objected,  but,  according
to  Miss  Collis,  no  one  had  looked  between  Billy's  toes,
and  we  consequently  wrote  that  down  as  a  mistake.

It  appeared  to  me  to  be  likely  that  Lady  Troubridge's
mother  had  known  many  of  the  details  given,  especially
as  she  had  seen  the  dog  during  the  summer  prior  to  his
death,  and  I  thought  it  just  possible  that  she  might  have
mentioned  them  to  Lady  Troubridge  in  the  course  of
conversation.  Lady  Troubridge  felt  quite  sure  that  this
was  not  the  she  had  a  definite  recollection  of

her  mother's  reply,  on  the  last  occasion  when  she  had
asked  her  about  Billy.  She  called  upon  her  mother,
however,  and  made  enquiries,  in  the  course  of  conver-
sation, regarding  Billy's  ailments.  During  this  conver-
sation Mrs.  Taylor  did  not  mention  any  of  the  four
symptoms  under  discussion.  Lady  Troubridge  then  told
her  mother  about  these  symptoms,  and  Mrs.  Taylor  said
that  this  was  the  first  that  she  had  heard  of  them.  We
allowed  a  little  time  to  elapse,  and  then  Lady  Troubridge
wrote  to  her  mother,  clearly  stating  the  symptoms  and
requesting  her  mother  to  make  a  statement  in  writing,
regarding  her  knowledge  of  same.  Mrs.  Taylor's  reply
was  as  follows  :

10.  3.  1917.

I cannot have told you the following facts  about
Billy,  because I  did  not  know  them  myself, until  you
*  told  me  of  them  in  February  of  this  year.

1.  That  he  had  any  kind  of  a  lumpy  thing  on  one  of
his  legs.

2.  That  his  back  leg  was  painful  in  any  way,  or  had
anything  the  matter  with  it.

3.  That  there  was  any  special  reason  why  he  should
have  been  in  a  particularly  unhealthy  condition  just  a
little  while  prior  to  his  death,  and  I  did  not  know  that
he  had  been  bitten  by  another  dog  just  then.

(Signed) Minna  Taylor.

Having  got  thus  far,  we  read  the  sitting  to  Miss  Newton,
and  she  felt that  it  would  be advisable to  get  corro-

2i


500  Miss  Radciyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


boration  of  the]  points  I  regarding  Billy's  ailments  from
someone  in  addition  to  Miss  Collis,  as  the  more  evidence
obtained  on  such  a  point,  the  better.  She  suggested
that  the  Veterinary  Surgeon  who  had  attended  Billy
should  be  communicated  with,  especially  regarding  the
bite  on  the  back  which  Miss  Collis  had  feared  would
not  heal,  and  which,  having  been  received  only  a  few
weeks  prior  to  Billy's  death,  appeared  to  give  a  certain
importance  to  Feda's  words  when  she  said  that  he  had
been  in  an  unhealthy  state  at  the  time  of  his  death,
but  not  for  long.  This  statement  of  Feda's  appeared
to  us  to  point  to  some  recent  and  particular  condition,
rather  than  to  a  general  and  gradual  state  of  infirmity
resulting  from  old  age.  We  decided,  therefore,  to  visit
Boscombe  on  the  earliest  opportunity,  and  did  so  on
April  10th.  1917.  During  that  visit,  we  drew  up  very
complete  notes  of  our  proceedings,  from  which  we  have
been  able  to  prepare  a  statement,  and  we  cannot  do
better,  we  think,  than  include  it  here.

The  Linden  Hall  Hydro,
Boscombe.
April  13th,  1917.

Statement  by  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.
The  Billy  Incident.
Leonard  Sittings  of  Dec.  6th  and  Dec.  13th,  1916.

•

It  was  suggested  by  Miss  Isabel  Newton,  Secretary  of
the  S.P.R.,  after  the  notes  of  the  above-mentioned  sittings
had  been  read  to  her,  that  a  further  investigation  re  the
details  concerning  Billy's  state  of  health  prior  to  his
death  should  be  undertaken,  and,  if  possible,  corroborative
statements  or  the  reverse  obtained  from  the  Veterinary
Surgeon  and  any  persons,  other  than  the  Misses  Collis,
who  had  seen  Billy.  In  view  of  this,  M.  R.  H.  and
U.  V.  T.  went  to  Boscombe,  on  April  10th,  1917.  On
April  11th,  they  called  on  the  Misses  Collis.  They
were  only  able  to  see  one  of  the  Misses  Collis,  namely,
the  writer  of  the  letters  appended to  the  above-mentioned


lxxviii.]  Knoivledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  501

sitting  of  Dec.  13th,  1916,  the  other  Miss  Collis  being  in
quarantine  owing  to  measles.

M.  E.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.  talked  to  Miss  Collis  about
Billy,  visiting  his  grave,  etc.,  maintaining  always  that
their  interest  in  his  symptoms  had  been  aroused  owing
to  a  very  vivid  dream.  This  was  the  explanation  given
by  U.  V.  T.  in  the  first  instance,  when  she  wrote  to  Miss
Collis,  as  it  was  unfortunately  thought  necessary  to  sup-
press the  truth  for  the  time  being,  in  order  to  avoid
creating  a  bias.

During  this  call  they  were  unable  to  get  any  infor-
mation beyond  that  which  Miss  Collis  had  already  given
in  her  letters.  Miss  Collis  mentioned,  however,  that  Billy
had  a  very  beautiful,  silky  coat,  which  was  rather  inter-
esting in  view  of  the  fact  that  A.  V.  B.  had  remarked
on  his  coat  through  Feda.  Unfortunately  a  certain  curate,
formerly  a  guest  at  the  Misses  Collis 's  house,  who  had
known  Billy  well,  was  found  to  have  left  Boscombe,  so
his  testimony  could  not  be  obtained.

Miss  Collis,  however,  kindly  supplied  the  name  and
address  of  the  Veterinary  Surgeon  who  had  attended  Billy
prior  to  his  death,  and  who  had  finally  destroyed  him,
at  Miss  Collis 's  request.

Upon  leaving  Miss  Collis's  house,  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.
drove  to  the  address  of  the  Veterinary  Surgeon,  Miss  Dutton,
of  Boscombe,  where  they  saw  this  lady's  mother,  Miss
Dutton  being  out.  It  happened  that  Miss  Dutton 's  services
were  required  for  U.  V.  T.'s  present  dog,  who  was  with
them.  They  asked,  therefore,  that  Miss  Dutton  should  call
at  their  hotel  on  the  following  morning.

On  April  12th,  1917,  Miss  Dutton  called  at  the  Linden
Hall  Hydro  at  11.30  a.m.,  and  after  an  examination  of
the  dog's  eye,  in  which  he  had  a  cold,  had  been  made,
U.  V.  T.  introduced  the  subject  of  Billy,  by  telling  Misa
Dutton  that  Billy  had  belonged  to  her,  up  to  eleven
years  ago,  and  that  her  father  had  been  very  devoted
to  him.  Miss  Dutton  did  not  appear  to  know  that  the
dog  had  ever  belonged  to  U.  V.  T.  It  was  evident  that
she  remembered  Billy  merely  as  Miss  Collis's  dog  and  as
a  very  bad  case.


502  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

U.  V.  T.  then  introduced  the  subject  of  the  dream,
which  she  said  had  been  of  a  very  vivid  kind,  and  had
dealt  with  Billy's  recent  ailments.  She  said  that  she  had
been  sufficiently  interested  to  write  to  Miss  Collis  on  the
sxibject,  and  much  surprised  to  hear  from  that  lady  that
nearly  every  detail  that  she  had  dreamt  was  correct.
Miss  Dutton  expressed  interest,  and  fully  confirmed  aU  the
details  that  had  previously  been  confirmed  by  Miss  Collis,
after  they  had  been  carefully  enumerated  to  Miss  Dutton
by  U.  V.  T.

Miss  Dutton  was  especially  clear  regarding  the  lump
on  Billy's  leg,  giving  details  regarding  it  and  its  exact
jwsition  high  up  in  front  of  the  fore  leg.  This  particular
lump,  or  as  Feda  calls  it,  "  knobbly  thing,"  had  apparently
been  of  sufficient  dimensions  to  have  remained  in  her
memory,  as  in  that  of  Miss  Collis's  sister,  and  of  Miss
Collis  herself.

U.  V.  T.  told  Miss  Dutton  that,  in  view  of  her  having
dreamt  that  Billy  was  in  an  unusually  unhealthy  condition
only  for  a  short  time  prior  to  his  death,  she  had  naturally
been  interested  to  learn  from  Miss  Collis's  letter,  that
he  had  received,  a  few  weeks  prior  to  his  death,  a  bite
on  his  back  from  another  dog,  which  bite,  it  was  feared,
would  not  heal.  U.  V.  T.  asked  Miss  Dutton  whether
there  had  really  been  any  reason  to  suppose  that  this
bite  would  not  heal  ;  to  which  Miss  Dutton  replied
that  although  the  bite  had  been  received  three  weeks  or
so  before  Billy's  final  removal,  so  far  from  healing  it  had
been  in  a  very  bad  condition  from  the  first,  having
rapidly  become  mortified ;  and  she  went  on  to  say  that
the  smell  of  the  wound  had  been  so  offensive  that  it
was  unpleasant  having  to  dress  it,  which  she  had  done
daily,  the  dog  being  brought  to  her  by  a  servant.

Having  ascertained  this  much,  M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.
expressed  their  interest,  and  U.  V.  T.  remarked  that
apparently  the  only  erroneous  detail  in  her  dream  had
been  that  someone  had  picked  up  Billy's  feet  to  look
between  the  toes,  which  proceeding  he  much  disliked,
whereas  Miss  Collis  stated  in  her  letter  that  neither  she
nor  her  sister  could  remember  ever  having  done  so.  To


lxxviii.]  Knoivledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.


503


this  Miss  Dutton  rejoined  instantly  :  "  Oh  !  but  I  did  ;
he  had  pustules  between  his  toes,  and  the  examination
must  have  hurt  him."'

After  all  the  details  above  given  had  been  verbally
obtained,  M.  R.  H.,  who  had  been  present  throughout
the  interview,  told  Miss  Dutton  that  she  and  U.  V.  T.
were  both  interested  in  the  investigation  of  dreams.  She
asked  Miss  Dutton  whether  she  would  be  willing,  therefore,
to  give  a  written  statement  regarding  Billy's  symptoms.
Miss  Dutton  replied  that  she  was  quite  willing  to  do  so,  and
asked  if  she  should  write  it  from  memory,  or  go  home
and  look  at  her  ledger,  in  which  all  her  cases  were  recorded.
M.  R.  H.  and  U.  V.  T.  requested  that  she  should  go  home
and  examine  her  ledger  before  putting  the  statement  in
black  and  white.

We  think  that  the  above  account  sets  forth  quite
clearly  our  mode  of  procedure  in  order  to  ascertain  the
facts  regarding  Billy's  ailments.  We  received  Miss  Dutton's
written  statement  on  April  14th,  1917. It  ran  as  follows  :

John  Dutton,

Canine  and  Feline  Specialist.

Re  Miss  Collis' s  Terrier  "  Billy."

I  found  the  "Terrier,"  after  examining  and  treating  same,
suffering  from  as  follows  :

Pustules  between  toes  caused  from  old  age.

Lump  on  top  of  right  front  leg  caused  from  acute
Rheumatism.

Bite  on  back,  shortly  before  death,  the  which  was
mortifying  and  in  a  very  bad  state.

(Signed) (Miss)  G.  C.  Dutton,

Canine  and  Feline  Specialist.

April  13th,  1917.

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  four  points  regarding  "  Billy's  "
condition  prior  to  his  death,  were  given  by  A.  V.  B.
through  Feda,  which  were  entirely  unknown  to  either
Lady  Troubridge  or  myself  at  the  time  when  they  were


504  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

given.  All  these  four  points  were  subsequently  verified
by  one  or  more  persons  as  follows  :

1.  That  Billy  was  not  in  a  specifically  unhealthy  state

for  very  long  prior  to  his death. This point  was

testified  to  by  Miss  Collis  in  her  own  name  and  her

sister's,  and  by  Miss  Dutton.

2.  That  Billy  had  something  the  matter  with  his  hind

leg,  or  his  foot.  This  was  corroborated  by  Miss
Collis,  on  her  sister's  behalf  and  her  own.

3.  That  Billy  had  a  knobbly  thing  sticking  out  on  one

of  his  legs.  This  fact  was  clearly  remembered  by
both  the  Misses  Collis  and  Miss  Dutton.

4.  That  they  would  turn  Billy's  feet  up  and  examine

between  the  toes,  a  proceeding  which  he  did  not
like.  Neither  of  the  Misses  Collis  had  any  know-
ledge of  such  a  thing  having  been  done,  whereas
Miss  Dutton  clearly  remembered  the  fact  of  having
done  it  herself,  and  of  its  having  been  painful  to
the  dog.

The  next  reference  to  Billy  occurred  on  March  9th,
1917,  at  a  sitting  taken  by  me,  acting  as  my  own  re-
corder. I  was  curious  to  know  why  and  how  A.  V.  B.
had  hit  upon  Billy  as  a  test.  On  this  occasion,  therefore,
I  introduced  the  subject  myself,  and  although  the  ex-
tract we  are  about  to  give  is  devoid  of  evidential  value,
we  think  that  it  is  not  altogether  without  interest.  The
extract  is  as  follows  :

M.  R.  H. (To  A.  V.  B.) And  now  I  want  to  ask  a  question.

How  did  you  meet  Billy,  and  how  did  you  know
that  he  was  Una's  Billy  ?

F.  She says  : "  Well, I must tell you that I  was

helped  about  Billy ;  you  know  I  told  you  that  I
had  seen  him,  but  I  got  to  know  in  a  very  round-
about way  about  that  leg  of  his.  You  see  I'm
not  clever  enough  to  get  a  thing  like  that  through
without  help,  a  thing  from  an  animal  mind.
Had  Billy  been  a  person,  I  could  have  asked
him,  or  have  tapped  his  intelligence  ;  but  I  think


lxxviii.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.


505


that  the  minds  of  two  people  who  were  helping
me  on  this  side  were  able  to  interpret  that  part
for  me.  In  some  strange  way  that  I  don't  under-
stand yet,  they  Avere  able  to  tap  the  minds  of
people  on  earth,  who  knew  about  that  leg,  and
they  were  also  able  to  tap  for  me  Billy's  own
memory.  I  suppose  it  is  admissible  to  speak
about  a  dog's  memory.  In  any  case  this  was
done  for  me,  in  order  that  I  might  give  that
test."

M.  R  H. But how could you have known that Billy  was
Billy  ?

F.  She  says  : "  That  is  difficult  to  explain,  I  can  only

tell  you  that  an  understanding  of  facts  of  that
kind  occasionally  comes  to  one  over  here,  not
always.  I  suppose,  in  this  case,  there  must  have
been  some  sort  of  link  between  Billy  and  Una
and  you  and  myself,  if  only  from  the  point  of
view  of  something  that  would  be  of  interest.
I  don't  know  how  those  things  come  to  one,
but  they  do,  and  I  found  myself  somehow  auto-
matically in  touch  with  Billy.  We  have  a  far
fuller  knowledge  of  things  here  than  I  can  ever
hope  to  explain  to  you  through  Feda,  it's  much
too  big  a  thing  to  get  through  one  brain."

M.  R.  H. Have  you  actually  got  Billy,  then  ?

F.  She  says  : "  Yes,  I  have,  and  you  may  ask  why

I  have.  I  think  because  Billy  was  a  link  and
it  was  extremely  useful  to  have  Billy,  in  order
to  get  that  test  through."

With  this  concludes  the  Billy  incident.  Since  the
sitting  of  March  9th,  1917,  the  dog's  name  has  been
mentioned  by  A.  V.  B.  once  or  twice,  but  only  as  having
been  the  subject  of  an  excellent  test.  Before  leaving  the
incident,  however,  we  feel  it  incumbent  upon  us  to
apologise  to  Miss  Collis  and  Miss  Dutton  for  the  little
deception  we  felt  it  necessary  to  practice  on  them,  and
we  sincerely  hope  that  in  the  unlikely  event  of  this  paper
ever falling into  their  hands  they  will  find  it  in  their


506


Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.


[part


hearts  to  forgive  us,  and  will  realise  how  necessary  it  is
in  such  a  matter  to  avoid  any  statement  that  might
create  a  bias.  We  have  not  hesitated  to  use  the  correct
names,  in  this  instance,  as  no  personal  family  matters
were  under  discussion.

Our  grateful  thanks  are  due  to  both  the  ladies  in  question
for  the  sympathetic  and  helpful  attitude  they  displayed
towards  our  enquiries.

(See  Appendix  B.)


We  will  now  deal  with  an  extract  from  a  sitting  of
December  20th,  1916,  I  took  the  sitting  and  Lady  Trou-
bridge acted  as  the  recorder.  I  had  been  asked  by
A.  V.  B.'s  daughter  to  put  a  certain  question  to  A.  V.  B.
As  neither  Lady  Troubridge  nor  myself  knew  the  answer,
it  was  considered  that  it  would  be  a  good  test.  The
following  is  the  extract  :

M.  R.  H.  [A.  V.  B.'s  daughter]  has  asked  me  to  ask  her  a
few  questions,  but  never  mind  if  the  conditions
aren't  good  to  answer  them.

F.  She  says,  yes,  you  can  ask  them.

M.  R.  H.  Well,  ask  her  does  she  remember  Dick  Rogers  [pseu-
donym] .

F.  She  says,  in  answer  to  that,  that  it  was a  long

time  ago.

M.  R.  H. Does she remember a place where Dick  Rogers

lived,  called  Burnham  [pseudonym]  ?
F.  She doesn't say anything about that  gentleman,


Dick  Rogers,  nothing  at  all,  she  only  tells  Feda
about  a  rather  old-fashioned  house  ;  it  looks  to
Feda  like  an  old  house,  not  a  large  house,  though,
it  looks  like  a  big  cottage  ;  are  you  sure  she
really  knew  Dick  Rogers  ?


Section  II. Concerning  "  Burnham.


M.  R


H.


Yes.


V.


Well,  she  says  it  was  a  long  time  ago,  and  it
seems  to  Feda  as  though  she  knew  more  about
the  house  than  about  the  man,  she  says  he's
not  over  there.


lxxviil]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  507


M.  R.  H. Not  in  the  spirit  world. No,  I  don't  think  so.

F.  No,  and  she  hadn't  seen  him  for  a  long  time.

M.  R.  H.  Ask  her,  can  she  remember  what  kind  of  animals
they  were,  that  this  Dick  Rogers  kept  in  a  cage
in  the  garden  at  Burnham.

F.  Feda  will  try  and  get  it,  Feda  feels  that  it  is  to

do  with  the  old-fashioned  house  that  she  is
showing,  which  has  a  roof  that  goes  up  and  down.

M.  R.  H. You  don't  mean  the  cottage,  do  you  ?

F.  No,  but  there  is  a  cottage  in  connection  with  that

gentleman,  but  this  is  a  larger  house.

M.  R.  H.  What  [A.  V.  B.'s  daughter]  wants  to  know  is  about
the  animals  kept  in  a  cage.

F.  Yes,  she  remembers,  she  remembers  they  were  not

very  close  to  the  house.  You  might  be  close
to  the  house  and  not  see  them  unless  you  looked
for  them.  And  in  addition  to  the  cages,  and
near  to  them,  there  was  a  kind  of  little  out-
building. She's  leading  up  to  telling  you,  she's
trying,  (sotto  voce  :  can't  you  tell  Feda  ?)  She
says  they  made  a  noise,  (sotto  voce  :  do  you
mean  a  squeak  ?)  As  near  as  Feda  can  get  it
she  says  they  made  a  squeaky  noise.  And  now
she's  trying  to  show  Feda  something  that  sticks
up  across  the  cage,  it  doesn't  stick  up  quite
straight,  it  slants  in  a  way  from  corner  to
corner  (here  Feda  indicates  what  might  be
taken  for  a  pole  or  branch  slanting  upwards  and
crossways)  ;  she  says  it  isn't  quite  a  cage  in  the
ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  not  just  wirework  like
a  bird  cage,  it's  made  too  solidly  for  that,  she
says,  and  she  says  that  there  used  to  be  two
cages  not  only  one  cage.  She's  not  sure  that
there  were  always  two,  but  there  had  been  at
one  time.  It  seems  to  Feda  as  though  some-
thing dropped  from  the  top  of  the  cage  to  the
ground,  Feda  saw  something  dark  drop,  and  now
there's  a  sort  of  scratching  noise,  but  she  calls
it  a  screechy,  squeaky  noise  as  well,  but  Feda
can't quite get from her what that is.  She


508


Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


hadn't  seen  Dick  Rogers  for  a  long  time  before
she  passed  on.
M.  R.  H.  True.

F.  And  she  doesn't  think  [A.  V.  B.'s  daughter]  had  either.

M.  R.  H. That's  quite  true  too.

F.  She  says  he  was  very  unusual  in  some  ways,  and

that  he  had  a  lot  of  books,  too ;  not  ordinary
books  that  you  read,  like  novels,  but  books  upon
a  particular  subject  ;  a  collection  of  books  on
some  life  away  from  here  altogether,  away  from
civilization  ;  something  he  evidently  took  an
interest  in.  And  he  was  interested  in  the  people
who  had  to  do  with  that  kind  of  life.  He  had
something  hanging  on  the  walls  too,  long  shaped
things,  but  not  pictures.  She  says  they  were
not  all  long  shaped,  but  the  ones  she's  showing
Feda  on  the  wall  are  long  shaped.  Oh  !  she  says
one  thing  he  had  got  there  had  been  dried.
It's  nothing  to  do  with  pictures.

M.  R.  H. All  right  Feda,  we've  got  that  down.

F  Then  there's  a  room  that  she  seems  interested  in,

it's  not  at  the  front  of  the  house  but  at  the
back,  it's  a  corner  room  at  the  back,  a  room  that
he  was  very  fond  of  being  in.  It  had  shelves
in  it  and  a  kind  of  case,  not  a  cupboard,  it's
not  built  into  the  wall,  it  stands  out.  She  says
he  had  some  glass  cases  with  something  inter-
esting in  them,  she  knows  of  two  cases,  not  this
cupboard  thing  but  smaller  ones  ;  oh  !  and  he
used  to  have  several  big  books  ;  you  opened
them  and  you  could  pull  out  pieces  of  stiff  paper
with  things  on  them,  not  writing,  some  kind  of
design  or  drawing.  It  seems  to  Feda  that  they
were  loose,  because  you  can  pull  them  out  ;  and
she  says  do  you  know  if  [A.  V.  B.'s  daughter]
would  remember  a  very  old  chest  that  he  had  ?

M.  R.  H. I  will  ask  her.

F.  She  can't  say  more  now  about  the  thing  in  a  cage.

It  wasn't  a  usual  thing,  it  was  something  out  of
the  ordinary,  that's  all  she  can  say  about  him  now.


lxxviii.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  509

We  must  first  state  that  in  the  above  extract  the  correct
names  have  been  disguised  by  request.  Sir  Richard  Rogers,
as  we  have  called  him,  was  an  old  friend  of  A.  V.  B.'s,
he  is  entirely  unknown  to  Lady  Troubridge,  and  I  myself
have  only  had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  him  on,  I  think,
two  occasions,  some  years  ago.  At  the  time  of  this  sitting
Sir  Richard  was  in  Egypt.

The  first  thing  I  did  after  the  sitting  was  to  consult
A.  V.  B.'s  daughter.  She  told  me  that  the  animal  in
the  cage,  which  she  had  hoped  would  be  mentioned,  was
a  bear.  Now  there  does  not  appear  to  be  anything  in
Feda's  description  applicable  to  a  bear,  except  the
scratching  noise,  the  branch  or  pole  indicated  (for
although  Sir  Richard  in  his  answer  does  not  mention  this,
as  will  be  seen  later,  a  bear's  cage  usually  contains  some-
thing of  the  sort),  the  solidity  of  the  cage,  and  possibly
the  final  remark  to  the  effect  that  the  cage  contained  an
unusual  sort  of  animal.  It  would  almost  appear  as
though  some  other  animals  or  birds  had  been  shown  to
Feda.  It  would  seem,  however,  as  if  towards  the  end
of  the  extract  A.  V.  B.  had  remembered  some  single
animal ;  because  in  my  original  question  I  spoke  of
animals  in  the  plural,  but  A.  V.  B.,  speaking  through
Feda,  says  that  she  cannot  say  more  about  the  thing
in  a  cage,  thereby  indicating  the  singular.

A.  V.  B.'s  daughter  was  unable  to  be  of  much  assist-
ance to  me,  as  she  had  not,  I  understood,  been  to
Burnham  (pseudonym)  since  she  was  a  child,  and  could  not
remember  any  of  the  objects  mentioned.  Some  of  the  points
I  myself  knew  to  be  correct,  and  we  will  deal  with  these
first.  I  knew  it  was  correct  when  Feda  said  that
A.  V.  B.  had  not  seen  the  gentleman  in  question  for  a
long  time  ;  the  last  occasion  upon  which  she  saw  him
was,  to  the  best  of  my  belief,  when  we  lunched  together
with  him  several  years  ago.  I  knew,  however,  that  at
one  time  A.  V.  B.  and  her  husband  had  been  in  the
habit  of  staying  with  Sir  Richard  at  Burnham,  and
that  in  those  bygone  days  they  saw  a  good  deal  of  him,
and  were  intimately  acquainted  with  the  house  ;  although
Feda's supposition  that A.  V.  B. knew  more  about  the


510  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

house  than  the  man  was  wrong.  During  all  the  years
that  A.  V.  B.  and  I  lived  together  Sir  Richard  was
seldom  in  residence  at  his  house,  I  think  ;  or  if  he  was,
we  did  not  meet  him,  except  as  I  have  said  upon  about
two  occasions.  I  also  knew  that  it  was  correct  when
Feda  stated  that  A.  V.  B.*s  daughter  had  not  seen  him
for  a  long  time  either.

The  old  house  which  was  given  in  connection  with  him,
and  which  appeared  to  Feda  to  look  like  a  big  cottage,
I  placed  at  once,  as  I  remembered  that  Sir  Richard  had
written  to  A.  V.  B.  on  one  occasion  saying  that,  as
Burnham  was  let,  he  was  living  in  a  Manse  on  his
property.  I  had  also  seen  a  photograph  of  the  exterior
of  Burnham  itself,  from  which  I  was  able  to  gather  that
Feda's  remarks  regarding  the  roof  of  that  house  were
correct.  I  knew  also  that  Sir  Richard  had  some  sort  of
an  aviary  at  Burnham.  When  I  lunched  with  him
at  his  hotel  he  showed  me  a  tame  bullfinch,  with
which  he  apparently  travelled  about  ;  and  it  was  then
that  he  told  me  that  he  kept  a  great  many  birds  at  his
place  in  the  country.  Sir  Richard  and  I  had  found  a
congenial  topic  of  conversation  in  our  mutual  love  of
birds.  He  did  not  mention  any  other  pets,  however,
nor  had  I  ever  heard  of  them  from  A.  V.  B.  In  speaking
of  his  birds  Sir  Richard  did  not  give  me  any  details
regarding  the  position  of  the  cages  or  aviaries  at  Burnham.
It  appeared  wise,  however,  to  be  quite  sure  that  my
memory  on  these  points  had  been  accurate,  and  I  was
fortunately  able  to  verify  them  later  on,  with  Sir  Richard's
assistance.  With  the  points  above  mentioned  my  know-
ledge of  Burnham  ended.  I  have  never  entered  the
house,  or  been,  to  the  best  of  my  belief,  in  its  vicinity,
nor  have  I  ever  heard  a  description  of  its  interior  from
A.  V.  B.  During  our  long  friendship  she  never  went
there,  and  beyond  telling  me  on  one  occasion,  the  occasion
I  think  when  we  lunched  with  Sir  Richard,  that  Burnham
was  a  beautiful  place,  having  pine  woods  near  it,  I  cannot
remember  having  heard  her  mention  it.

I  wrote  to  Sir  Richard  in  Egypt,  and  in  that  letter
I  was  very  careful  not  to  give  him the  least  intimation


lxxviii.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  511

that  there  was  any  question  of  communication  between
myself  and  A.  V.  B.  I  wrote  of  a  clairvoyant  who  had
described  to  me  a  person  resembling  Sir  Richard,  and
had  given  me  details  regarding  what  might  possibly  be
his  house.  It  was  unpleasant  having  to  use  subterfuge,
but  as  in  the  case  of  the  "  Billy  Incident "  it  appeared
absolutely  essential  not  to  create  a  bias.  Wishing  to
save  Sir  Richard  all  possible  trouble,  and  at  the  same
time  to  obtain  clear  answers,  I  enclosed  in  my  letter
eight  question  sheets  ;  upon  each  of  these  sheets  was
written  a  separate  question,  space  being  left  beneath  it
for  an  answer.  We  will  give  the  questions  and  answers
exactly  as  they  stand,  the  names  alone  being  altered.
The  original  question  sheets  with  their  answers  are  in
our  possession.  We  will  begin  with  the  confirmation  of
those  points  already  known  to  me  at  the  time  of  the
sitting,  two  fully  and  one  partially.

Question  1.

Is  the  roof  of  Burnham  gabled,  or  has  it  turrets  ?
Can  it  in  fact  be  considered  up  and  down,  and  not  flat
in  any  way  ?

Answer.

The  roof  is  all  up  and  down,  and  gabled  and  turreted,
not  flat  in  any  way.

Question  2.

Has  Sir  Richard  lived  since  the  War,  or  at  some
previous  time,  in  any  farm,  lodge,  or  cottage,  on  or  near
his  estate  ?

Answer.

Yes,  for  some  months  in  the  Manse  of  B.,  about  two
miles  from  Burnham,  because  the  shooting  was  let  when
the  War  broke  out,  and  I  could  not  get  into  Burnham
for  some  weeks  or  months.

Question  3.

Were  there  ever  any  cages  in  the  garden  at  Burnham,
and  if  so, how  many  ? Were  these  cages  unseen  from


512  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


the  house  and  surrounding  garden  ?  Was  there  any  kind
of  shed  or  out -building  near  them  ?  Was  there  a  slanting
branch  or  pole  of  any  kind  in  one  of  these  cages  ?  What
kind  of  birds,  animal,  or  animals  were  kept  in  a  cage
or  cages  ?

Answer.

Many  cages,  but  not  in  the  garden,  in  the  Park,  all
unseen  from  the  house  or  garden,  many  out-buildings
also,  at  the  kennels  near  the  cages.  A  pole  or  poles
in  the  eagle's  cage.  Golden  eagle,  owls,  hawks,  falcons,
in  one  lot  of  aviaries.  Golden  and  silver  pheasants  in
others.  Also  a  bear,  and  ferrets  near  his  cage.  I  think
also  at  one  time,  monkeys  ;  the  scratching  noise  might  be
made  by  ferrets.

(It  will  have  been  noticed  that  Sir  Richard  tells  us  that
the  cages  were  in  the  park  and  not  in  the  garden,  and
it  must  be  also  noticed  that  the  suggestion  that  the  cage
in  question  was  in  the  garden  at  Burnham  emanated  from
the  wording  of  A.  V.  B.'s  daughter's  question,  and  not
from  Feda.  Sir  Richard  refers  to  the  scratching  noise
which  was  not  alluded  to  in  my  question,  but  in  an
accompanying  letter.  We  now  come  to  those  questions,
the  answers  to  which  were  entirely  unknown  to  us  at  the
date  of  the  sitting.)

Question  4.

Did  any  things  hang  on  the  walls  at  Burnham  that
were  not  pictures,  that  were  some  of  them  long  in  shape,
and  one  of  which  had  at  one  time  been  dried,  if  so,
what  ?

Answer.

Many  things,  weapons,  shields  and  stuffs  from  the
Soudan  and  elsewhere,  many  of  them  long  in  shape.
Also  a  dried  crocodile  from  the  Nile.

Question  5.

Was  there,  or  is  there.fany  particular  room  used  by
Sir  Richard,  which  room  is  a corner  room,  towards  the


lxxvhi.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.


513


back  of  the  house  ?  Did  or  does  it  contain  a  case  like
a  cupboard  which  is  not  built  into  the  wall  ?  Are
there  any  smaller  glass  cases  anywhere  containing  articles
of  interest  ? Were  there  shelves  in  this  room  ?

Answer.

My  smoking  room  was  at  the  back  of  the  house,  there
were  in  this  room  cupboards  under  the  bookcases,  but  it
was  hardly  a  corner  room.  A  glass  case  containing
Egyptian  antiquities  is  in  the  vestibule.

Question  6.

Had  Sir  Richard  any  designs  or  sketches,  or  plans  of
any  kind,  which  were  kept  on  loose  sheets  of  paper  in  a
book  or  portfolio  ?

Answer.

Yes,  portfolio,  containing  plans  of  buildings  and  sketches.

Question  7.

Had  Sir  Richard  any  collection  of  books  on  some
subject  pertaining  to  distant  life  or  peoples  of  a  semi-
civilized  nature,  in  which  Sir  Richard  was  or  is  interested  ?

Answer.

Yes,  books  on  Central  Africa  and  earfy  travels  in  Egypt
and  the  Soudan.

Question  8.

Had  Sir  Richard  in  his  possession  an  old  chest  of  any
kind  ?

Answer.
Yes, r  an  old  Italian  Cassone.

This  is  the  end  of  the  first  batch  of  questions  and
answers  which  I  sent  to  and  received  back  from  Sir
Richard.  As  we  have  already  said  the  answers  to
Questions  1  and  2  were  known  to  me  at  the  time  of  the


514


Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


sitting  and  only  required  the  corroboration  of  Sir  Richard,
which  I  obtained  ;  while  something  was  also  known  by
me  regarding  Question  3.

Feda  does  not  appear  to  be  able  to  give  anything  very
definite  regarding  the  cage  and  its  occupant.  The  direct
question  put  by  me  met  with  the  fate  of  many  direct
questions,  and  drew  very  nearly  blank.  The  result  of
my  question,  however,  was  curious  :  it  appeared  as  though
the  mention  of  the  name  "  Dick  Rogers,"  coupled  with
Burnham,  had  touched  a  spring  of  memory  in  the  mind
of  the  purporting  communicator,  who,  although  when  asked
a  question  point-blank,  could  not  for  the  moment  give
the  correct  answer,  was  nevertheless  led  by  that  question
to  remember  numerous  other  things  which  were  in  a
sense  connected  with  it.  And  regarding  the  question
itself,  although  the  answer  expected  by  A.  V.  B.'s
daughter  was  not  obtained,  still  Feda's  description  of
what  was  kept  in  a  cage  or  cages  at  Burnham,  although
somewhat  vague,  is  fairly  applicable  to  several  of  the  pets
kept  by  Sir  Richard.

We  find  Feda  telling  us  that  A.  V.  B.  remembers
animals  that  were  not  kept  close  to  the  house.  She  says
you  might  be  close  to  the  house  and  not  see  them  unless
you  looked  for  them.  Sir  Richard,  in  replying  to  this
point,  states  that  the  cages  were  in  the  Park,  and  unseen
from  the  house  or  garden,  and  this  is  the  first  of  the
statements  regarding  those  things  which  were  unknown
to  us  at  the  time  of  the  sitting.

Feda  tells  us  that  near  those  cages  there  was  a  kind
of  little  out-building,  and  we  find  that,  according  to  Sir
Richard,  there  must  have  been  such  an  out-building,  as
he  states  that  there  were  out-buildings  at  the  kennels,
near  the  cages,  at  Burnham.

Feda  tells  us  that  there  was  more  than  one  cage,  two
perhaps,  at  one  time.  From  Sir  Richard  we  learn  that
there  were  many  cages  ;  just  here,  therefore,  Feda's
statement  might  have  been  more  accurate.  Incidentally
we  find  A.  V.  B.  remarking,  through  Feda,  that  Sir
Richard was  an unusual man, and  I know that he  is


xxxvni.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  515

clever  and  that  in  some  respects  he  is  considered  to  be
original,  and  rather  out  of  the  ordinary.

Feda  next  tells  us  that  he  had  a  lot  of  books,  and  she
'  defines  these  books  as  being  upon  a  particular  subject  ;
she  says  that  they  are  books  on  some  life  and  people
far  from  civilization,  in  which  Sir  Richard  evidently  took
an  interest.  To  this  Sir  Richard  replies  once  more  in
the  affirmative,  stating  that  he  had  a  collection  of  books
on  Central  Africa,  and  early  travels  in  Egypt  and  the
Soudan.

Feda  next  describes  things  said  to  be  hanging  on  the
walls,  which  things  are  long  in  shape,  though  not  all  long
in  shape  ;  they  are,  however,  nothing  to  do  with  pictures,
and  one  of  them  is  said  to  have  been  dried.  To  this
Sir  Richard  replies  that  he  had  on  the  walls  weapons,
shields,  etc.,  many  of  which  were  long  in  shape,  and  also
a  dried  crocodile  from  the  Nile.

We  are  next  told  of  a  room  in  which  A.  V.  B.  seems
interested,  a  corner  room  at  the  back  of  the  house,  a
room  which  Sir  Richard  was  fond  of  ;  this  room  is  said
to  have  contained  shelves,  and  a  kind  of  case  which  was
not  a  cupboard  and  was  not  built  into  the  wall.  We
learn  from  Sir  Richard  that  his  smoking-room  was  at  the
back  of  the  house,  though  it  was  not  exactly  a  corner  room,
that  this  smoking-room  or  study  contained  bookcases,
£tnd  we  shall  see  later  on  why  this  room  may  have  been
taken  by  Feda  to  be  a  corner  room,  and  also  in  all
probability  why  A.  V.  B.  might  be  interested  in  it.  Feda
refers  to  some  glass  cases  containing  objects  of  interest  ;
she  does  not  tell  us  exactly  where  these  cases  were,  but
A.  V.  B.,  it  appears,  remembers  two  of  them.  Sir  Richard
tells  us  of  one  such  case  which  contained  .  Egyptian
antiquities,  which  he  says  is  in  the  vestibule.  We  shall
see  later  on  that  there  was  more  than  one  case  containing
objects  of  interest  at  Burnham.

Feda  next  speaks  of  what  she  describes  as  several
big  books  containing  loose  sheets  of  paper  which  you
could  pull  out,  she  particularly  tells  us  that  writing  did
not  appear  on  these  sheets,  but  that  they  contained  some
kind  of  design  or  drawing. (We  may  reasonably  suppose.

•2  k


516 Miss  Badclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

I  think,  that  when  Feda  says  books  in  this  instance
portfolios  are  meant.  We  noticed  on  one  other  occasion
that  she  referred  to  a  portfolio  as  a  kind  of  book  con-
taining loose  sheets  of  paper.)  Regarding  this  Sir  Richard
tells  us  that  he  had  a  portfolio  containing  plans  of
buildings,  and  sketches.

And  lastly,  A.  V.  B.  asks  through  Feda  whether  A.  V.  B.'s
daughter  remembers  a  very  old  chest  that  was  in  the
possession  of  Sir  Richard ;  and,  although  she  did  not
remember  it,  Sir  Richard  replies  that  he  had  such  a  chest,
an  old  Italian  Cassone.

Thus  we  have  a  number  of  details  given  regarding  the
interior  of  a  house  never  visited  by  Lady  Troubridge  or
myself,  together  with  indications  of  the  owner's  literary
tastes,  of  which  we  had  no  knowledge,  and  mention  is
made  of  certain  sketches  and  designs  contained  in  a
portfolio.

All  this  appeared  to  us  to  be  interesting  at  the  time,
but  there  arose  the  question,  suggested  by  Miss  Newton,  the
Secretary  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  as  to  whether
or  no  there  was  any  reason  for  supposing  that  A.  V.  B.
had  ever  seen  the  things  mentioned,  or  taken  any  interest
in  them,  and  might  therefore  be  presumed  to  have  retained
a  memory  of  them.  Acting  upon  Miss  Newton's  sugges-
tion I  again  wrote  to  Sir  Richard  in  Egypt,  enclosing  a
fresh  batch  of  question  papers,  as  in  addition  to  the
point  raised  by  Miss  Newton  there  were  one  or  two  other
points  we  wanted  cleared  up.  This  time  I  enclosed  the
extract  from  the  sitting,  and  told  him  quite  frankly  that
I  was  investigating  the  possibility  of  communication
between  myself  and  A.  V.  B.  We  will  again  quote  the
questions  and  the  answers  just  as  they  stand,  merely
changing  the  names  as  on  the  former  occasion.

Question  1.

Can  Sir  Richard  say  whether  he  thinks  it  probable  that
A.  V.  B.  during  her  visits  to  Burnham  saw  the  trophies,
etc.,  including  the  dried  crocodile  on  the  wall.  Also  the
cages  of  ferrets,  birds,  etc.,  in  the  park.


lxxvih.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  517

Answer.

Certainly  A.  V.  B.  saw  all  the  things  mentioned  in  the
question,  hundreds  of  times,  she  often  went  to  the  cages
in  the  park  to  feed  the  bear  with  sweets.

Question  2.

Does  Sir  Richard  remember  whether  A.  V.  B.  or  her
husband  ever  saw  or  heard  him  speak  of  the  sketches
and  plans  kept  in  a  portfolio  ?  Was  there  more  than  one
portfolio  containing  such  things  ?

Answer.

Yes,  the  portfolio  (I  can  only  think  of  one,  but  there
may  have  been  more)  contained  sketches  for  the  alteration
and  decoration  of  the  vestibule  where  the  dried  crocodile
hangs,  and  I  am  sure  that  both  A.  V.  B.  and  her  husband
saw  the  sketches  and  discussed  them.

Question  3.

Was  the  collection  of  books  on  the  Soudan,  Central
Africa,  etc.,  only  one  of  many  collections,  or  does  Sir
Richard  consider  it  a  special  collection  in  which  he  takes
a  special  interest  ?  Can  he  remember  whether  he  ever
mentioned  these  books  to  A.  V.  B.  or  her  husband  1

Answer.

There  are  many  books,  but  there  is  a  special  collection
of  books  on  Africa,  the  Soudan,  etc.  I  have  no  distinct
recollection  of  having  mentioned  these  special  books  to
A.  V.  B.,  but  I  think  there  is  no  doubt  that  I  did  mention
them  to  her,  and  she  probably  saw  many  of  them.

Question  4.

Why  does  Sir  Richard  say  that  his  study  can  hardly
be  called  a  corner  room,  is  it  near  the  corner  of  the
house  in  any  way  ?


518  .Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


Answer.

Rough  plan  of  part  of  the  house  below  shows  where
the  study  was,  the  entrance  is  at  the  back  of  the  house,
drawing-room,  etc.,  look  the  other  way.

(Here  Sir  Richard  sketched  a  rough  plan  of  the  house,
showing  that  the  study  was,  as  stated  by  Feda,  at  the
back  of  the  house.  His  qualification  as  to  this  study
being  "  hardly  "  a  corner  room  seems  to  have  been
suggested  by  the  fact  that,  although  not  strictly  speaking
a  corner  room,  it  juts  out  beyond  the  room  adjoining  it,
thus  forming  a  distinct  angle.  In  drawing  the  plan  of
the  study  Sir  Richard  has  written  across  it  these  words,
"  Study  where  the  portfolio  was."  Now,  if  the  port-
folio was,  as  stated,  in  the  studj^,  and  if  A.  V.  B.  both
saw  and  discussed  the  contents  of  this  portfolio,  we  may
logically  presume  that  she  may  have  done  so  in  the
room  in  question  ;  and  that  being  familiar  with  the  room
she  would,  as  Feda  says,  be  interested  in  it.

We  only  mention  this  point  because  it  seemed  strange
at  first  that  A.  V.  B.  should  have  mentioned  the  study
or  smoke-room  as  an  apartment  in  which  she  was  inter-
ested, but  the  fact  that  the  portfolio  and  some  books
were  kept  there  appears  to  make  this  reference  to  the
study  more  intelligible.

Sir  Richard's  Plan  of  Burnham  is  appended.)  [See
Appendix  C]

Question  5.

Can  Sir  Richard  remember  more  than  one  glass  case
containing  objects  of  interest  at  Burnham  ?  He  mentions
one  in  the  vestibule  containing  an  Egyptian  collection.
Was  there,  anywhere  in  the  house,  any  other  glass  case,
or  were  there  any  other  glass  cases,  that  contained  any
objects  of  interest,  Egyptian  or  otherwise  ?

Answer.

I  cannot  remember  more  than  one  case  containing
Egyptian  antiquities,  but  many  cases  containing  stuffed
birds.


lxxviii.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unhnovm  to  Sitters.  519

(It  will  be  remembered  that  A.  V.  B.  mentioned  through
Feda  two  cases  containing  objects  of  interest,  but  that
Sir  Richard,  in  an  answer  to  one  of  my  questions  in  the
first  batch,  spoke  of  one  case  only  ;  from  the  later  answer
above  given  we  see  that  there  were  many  glass  cases
at  Burnham,  two  of  which  would  appear  to  have  remained
especially  in  the  memory  of  the  purporting  communicator.

I  put  one  last  question  to  Sir  Richard  Rogers,  as  in
view  of  the  fact  that  so  many  of  his  replies  were  in
the  affirmative  we  began  to  fear  that  Sir  Richard,  in  his
desire  to  be  kind,  might  have  been  giving  certain  points
the  benefit  of  a  doubt.  This  is  the  question  I  put  to
him  therefore.)

Question  6.

Will  Sir  Richard  give  his  candid  opinion  on  the  extract
from  the  sitting  of  December  20th,  in  view  of  the  com-
munications purporting  to  come  from  an  old  friend  of
his,  who  knew  Burnham  ?

His  answer  was  as  follows :  "  Some  of  the  remarks
certainly  seem  to  apply  to  Burnham,  but  they  are  not
quite  so  accurate  as  might  have  been  expected  from  an
old  friend  who  knew  Burnham  extremely  well."

We  think  that  this  frank  statement  of  opinion  on  Sir
Richard's  part  strengthens  rather  than  weakens  the
evidence  obtained,  since  it  shows  clearly  that  his  frame
of  mind  is  quite  unbiassed,  or  if  bias  there  be,  it  certainly
is  not  on  the  side  of  credulity.  We  may  conclude,  there-
fore, that  all  the  statements  which  he  has  confirmed  had
been  carefully  weighed  and  considered  by  him.  We  do
not  think  that  Sir  Richard  has  ever  been  a  student  of
Psychical  Research,  and  it  is,  therefore,  quite  natural
that  the  enormous  difficulties  attendant  upon  the  investi-
gation of  phenomena  purporting  to  convey  communication
from  the  dead  should  be  unfamiliar  to  him.  In  any  case
I  feel  deeply  indebted  to  Sir  Richard  for  the  trouble  and
courtesy  which  he  expended  on  the  matter  ;  without  his
assistance  I  should  have  been  unable  to  verify  nearly  all
the statements. There still arises one more point  to


520 Miss  Raddyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

consider,  namely,  whether  it  is  probable  that  Mrs.  Leonard
may  at  any  time  have  seen  the  interior  of  Burnham.
With  this  in  mind  I  cabled  to  Sir  Richard,  asking  if
Burnham  was  ever  opened  to  the  public.  His  reply  by
telegram  was  "  Rarely."  In  a  letter  received  by  me  from
him  at  a  later  date,  he  referred  to  my  cable,  telling  me  that
Burnham  was  very  seldom  open  to  the  public,  and  that  he
could  not  recollect  when  last  it  had  been  so,  but  certainly
not  for  some  years.  He  told  me  that  the  place  had
been  let  several  times  during  his  absence,  and  that  it
had  occurred  to  him  that  it  might  have  been  possible  for
friends  and  guests  of  the  tenants  to  have  seen  the  house.
This  latter  possibility  we  do  not  think  affects  Mrs.
Leonard,  as  she  would  not  be  likely  to  have  seen  Burnham
as  a  friend  or  guest  of  the  tenants.  With  regard  to  her
having  visited  it  as  a  sightseer — that  also  is  unlikely,  we
think,  as  Burnham  is  not  a  show  property  in  the  ordinary
sense  of  the  word.  I  had  never  heard  of  it  until  I  met
A.  V.  B.,  and  Lady  Troubridge  had  never  heard  of  it  at
all  until  I  put  the  question  suggested  by  A.  V.  B.'s  daughter
at  the  sitting  under  consideration.  It  also  appears  to  us
that  neither  a  casual  guest  of  a  furnished  tenant,  nor  a
tourist  admitted  to  view  the  house,  would  be  likely  to
be  allowed  to  inspect  a  special  collection  of  the  owner's
books,  or  to  go  over  the  contents  of  his  portfolios.

However,  with  a  view  to  ascertaining  whether  Mrs.
Leonard  had  ever  been  in  the  vicinity  of  Burnham,  I
introduced  the  subject  of  Scotland,  after  a  sitting  on
April  18th,  1917.  I  knew  that  Mrs.  Leonard  knew  Scotland,
because  she  had  said  so  on  a  previous  occasion,  when,
however,  I  had  not  pressed  the  question,  wishing  as  long
a  time  as  possible  to  elapse  before  questioning  her  closely,
after  the  description  of  Burnham  had  been  given  in  trance,
in  order  to  avoid  any  association  of  ideas.  On  April  18th,
1917,  I  introduced  the  subject  by  saying  that  I  thought
of  going  to  a  little  place  called  X  (here  I  mentioned  the
name  of  the  station  for  Burnham)  for  the  summer  holidays,
I  asked  Mrs.  Leonard  if  she  knew  whether  it  was  a  nice
place.  Mrs.  Leonard  replied  that  she  did  not  know  X.
She  asked  me  in  what  part  of  Scotland  it  was. I  said


Lxxvin.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  521

vaguely  that  I  thought  it  was  North,  to  which  Mrs.
Leonard  replied  that  she  had  never  been  there.

On  September  5th,  1917,  while  we  were  preparing  this
paper,  I  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Leonard,  and  after  the
sitting  I  again  asked  Mrs.  Leonard  whether  she  had
been  to  X,  the  station  for  Burnham.  I  mentioned  the
correct  name,  a-nd  also  asked  if  she  knew  a  place  called
Burnham,  giving  again  the  correct  name.  She  said  she
had  never  heard  of  Burnham,  but,  as  I  was  anxious  to
be  certain,  she  wished  to  ask  her  husband  about  the
station.  I  gave  her  no  reason  for  my  question.  On
September  12th,  1917,  Lady  Troubridge  took  a  sitting,  and
after  the  sitting  Mrs.  Leonard  told  Lady  Troubridge
that  she  had  asked  her  husband  about  Burnhani  and  the
station  in  question,  and  that  he  said  he  had  never  heard
of  Burnham,  and  also  that  he  had  no  recollection  that
he  or  his  wife  had  ever  been  to  the  station  X.  In  fact
they  were  both  certain  that  they  never  had  been  to  these
places.  Mrs.  Leonard,  we  gathered,  had  only  travelled  in
Scotland  with  her  husband,  and  we  have  no  reason  to
doubt  Mr.  or  Mrs.  Leonard's  veracity.

Section  III. Concerning  Daisy's  Second  Father.

We  have  now  arrived  at  the  last  of  those  incidents
selected  by  us  as  being  worthy  of  special  notice.  The
extracts  that  we  are  about  to  give  concern  a  lady  whom
Lady  Troubridge  did  not  know  personally,  and  although
this  lady  has  been  a  friend  of  mine  for  many  years,  I
have  seen  very  little  of  her,  she  having  been  out  of
England  for  long  periods  together.  She  has  already  been
referred  to  in  the  extract  from  the  sitting  of  February  21st,
1917,  as  Daisy.  (See  above,  p.  471.)  At  her  request  her
name,  and  those  of  other  individuals  mentioned,  are  dis-
guised. It  may  be  as  well  to  state  the  circumstances  which
led  up  to  the  incidents  about  to  be  considered.

Daisy  Armstrong  lost  her  husband  in  the  War  ;  she
was,  and  still  is,  almost  entirely  unacquainted  with
Psychical  Research.  Prior  to  leaving  England  for  the
Near  East  she  had  had  two  anonymous  sittings  with  an


522


Miss  Raddyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Trowbridge.


[PART"


obscure  medium,  obtaining  no  results  on  the  first  occasion
at  which  I  was  present,  and  but  very  scanty  results  on
the  second.  She  was  alone  on  this  last  occasion,  but.
assures  me  that  she  gave  nothing  away.  I  believe  this
to  be  the  case,  as  I  noticed  how  careful  she  was  at  her
first  sitting,  and  I  have  since  taken  notes  for  her
at  Mrs.  Leonard's,  and  have  found  her  an  admirably  discreet
sitter.  During  the  early  weeks  of  1917,  Daisy  wrote  to
me  from  the  Near  East  asking  me  if  I  would  try  and
obtain  through  Mrs.  Leonard  some  evidence  with  regard
to  her  husband.  I  replied  immediately,  promising  to  do
my  best,  but  pointing  out  the  difficulties  of  a  proxy
sitting  and  telling  her  that  I  would  await  a  favourable
opportunity  before  mentioning  her  wishes  to  the  pur-
porting communicator,  A.  V.  B.,  who  had  both  known
and  liked  Daisy  during  her  lifetime.  At  the  time  of
writing  I  had  not  decided  upon  any  special  date  for
making  my  experiment  ;  consequently,  Daisy  could  have
had  no  idea  when  the  subject  would  be  broached  at  Mrs.
Leonard's.

A  few  days  after  I  had  posted  my  letter  I  happened
to  have  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Leonard,  namely,  on  February
14th,  1917.  Lady  Troubridge  was  recording,  and  I  enquired
of  Feda  whether  the  purporting  communicator,  A.  V.  B.,
remembered  an  old  friend  of  mine  called  Daisy,  who  had
stayed  with  us  in  the  country  when  A.  V.  B.  was  ill.
The  following  is  the  record  of  my  questions  and  of  the
ensuing  dialogue  :

M.  R.  H.  I  think  she's  [A.  V.  B.]  rather  confused  this  morning,
but  I  am  going  to  ask  her  a  question.  I  want  to
know  whether  she  remembers  an  old  friend  of
mine  called  Daisy,  who  came  to  stay  with  us
in  the  country  after  Ladye  was  ill  ?

F.  She can remember Daisjr, hut she says  Daisy's

not  with  her.

M.  R.  H. No,  that's  right.

F.  She's  not  with  Ladye. Ladye  says  Daisy  is  con-

nected with  somebody  whose  name  begins  with  a,
round  letter,  it's  not  an  0,  it's  a  C  or  a  G.


Lxxvm.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknoivn  to  Sitters.


523


M.  R.  H. I  don't  place  that  letter.

F.  Wait  a  minute  she's  got  some  word  she's  trying

to  get  through.  It  isn't  an  ordinary  kind  of
name  at  all  (here  Feda  gave  a  sotto  voce  rehearsal
of  attempts  at  Daisy's  surname,  which  she  gave
quite  correctly  twice).

M.  R.  H.  (to  A.  V.  B.)  All  right,  what  Feda  has  said  is  quite
correct,  and  you  understand  which  Daisy  it  is.

F.  Yes,  she  does,  certainly.

M.  R.  H.  I  Avant  to  know  if  she's  met  anyone  on  her  side-
who  is  connected  with  Daisy.  And  I  want  to
be  very  careful  not  to  say  anything  myself  that
may  spoil  any  proofs  that  come  through  for
Daisj'.

F.  She  says  :  "  Yes,  I  have,  but,  you  understand,  not

soon  after  I  passed  over."  There  is  some  reason
why  she  wouldn't  meet  them  soon  after  she
passed  over,  their  ways  lay  differently.

M.  R.  H. But  she  has  met  them  1

F.  Yes,  she  has.

M.  R.  H.  This  is  for  Daisj^  and  not  for  me,  and  that  is  why
I  cannot  speak  openly.  Can  she  give  me  some
description  so  that  I  am  sure  that  we  are  thinking
of  the  same  person  ?

F.  (sotto  voce  to  A.  V.  B.  :  A  lady  did  you  say,  are  you
sure  it's  a  lady  ?)  She  has  met  a  lady  connected
with  Daisy,  but  that  lady  passed  on  befcre  Ladye
did.  She  has  met  someone  else  as  well,  and  she
says  :  "  I  saw  the  lady  first  "  ;  this  other  one  isn't
a  lady  at  all,  Feda  doesn't  know  why  Ladye
brings  her  in,  as  she  is  not  the  most  important.
She  passed  over  long  ago,  but  afterwards  Ladye
met  a  gentleman  whom  she  says  Daisy  knows
quite  well ;  and  Ladye  thinks  she  could  get  more
through  about  him  if  you  would  give  her  time,
but  she  says  :  "It's  never  so  good  if  I  try  too
much."

M.  R.  H.  No.  Did  she  know  him  on  the  earth  plane  or  not  ?
F.  She  says  it  teas  the  one  she  knew  on  the  earth

plane.


524


Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.


[part


M.  R.  H. Does  she  think  she  could  see  him  ?

F.  She says  :  "I'll try ; I got that name  through

because you weren't expecting it, I am  clever

sometimes."

.H.  R.  H.  Daisy  is  very  anxious  to  obtain  a  message,  and  it
would  be  most  charitable  if  Ladye  would  help.

F.  She  says  :  "  I  will  try,  because  someone  else  is  just

as  anxious  to  get  a  message  through  to  Daisy
as  Daisy  to  him,  and  I'll  try  and  push  something
through  about  him."  And  she  kno-ws  which
Daisy  it  is.

M.  R.  H. Yes,  because  she  gave  me  a  name.

F.  Yes,  she's  cleverer  at  names  than  anyone.

Having  got  thus  far  we  did  not  write  to  Daisy,  as  we
were  desirous  of  keeping  her  mind  off  the  subject  as
much  as  possible,  and  were  most  anxious  that  she  should
not  know  the  dates  on  which  sittings  which  concerned
her  were  talcing  place.  A  week  later,  on  February  21st,
1917,  I  took  a  sitting  alone,  acting  as  my  own  recorder.
I  was  scarcely  expecting  to  obtain  any  reference  to
Daisy's  affairs,  yet  the  sitting  had  not  progressed  very
far  before  a  spontaneous  allusion  to  Daisy  was  made  by
Feda.

The  beginning  of  this  reference  we  have  already  given
in  the  section  of  this  paper  dealing  with  knowledge  of
contemporary  events,  when  treating  of  what  appeared  to
be  a  prophetic  statement  on  the  part  of  A.  V.  B.  re-
garding my  seeing  Daisy.  After  that  statement,  which,
as  will  be  remembered,  came  true,  A.  V.  B.  said  through
Feda  that  Daisy  had  gone  north  and  come  south  again,
and  that  that  happened  a  little  time  ago  ;  she  thought  it
might  have  been  a  few  weeks  ago.

The  statement  regarding  a  few  weeks  is  incorrect.  We
subsequently  learned  from  Daisy  that  she  had  made  no
excursion  from  where  she  was  at  the  time  of  the  sitting,
which  had  taken  her  north  and  south.  This  reference,
however,  reminded  her  of  her  journey  out,  which  had  been
interrupted  by  the  ship's  calling  at  Mudros  after  leaving
Naples. Had  A.  V.  B.  said  through  Feda  that  this  going


Lxxvm.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  525

north  and  then  south  on  Daisy's  part,  had  been  accom-
plished some  months  ago  instead  of  some  weeks  ago,
the  reference  would  have  been  interesting.  As  it  is  it
is  not  entirely  devoid  of  interest.  Peculiarly  poignant
circumstances  were  connected  with  Mudros  for  Daisy,
whose  ship,  going  out  of  its  usual  course,  stopped  there
quite  unexpectedly  on  the  exact  date  upon  which  her
husband's  ship  had  called  at  that  port  when  he  was  on
his  way  to  the  Front  one  year  previously.

We  will  now  take  up  the  extract  from  the  sitting  of
February  21st,  1917.

F.  Now  Feda  wonders  if  she's  getting  mixed,  because

she's  speaking  of  the  sea  in  connection  with  Daisy,
and  it's  not  a  little  bit  of  sea  like  it  would  be
if  you  were  going  to  France— it's  not  like  a
Channel  crossing.  She  is  speaking  of  a  big  lot
of  water,  many,  many  miles  by  sea,  she  says.
Wait  a  minute,  now  she  says  something  about
Daisy  lost  someone.  She  says  did  Daisy  lose
two  people — one  of  them  rather  lately,  and  one
of  them  two  or  three  years  ago  ?  Because  your
La  dye  says  she's  been  looking  about  since  you
were  here  last  time,  and  she's  got  into  touch
with  them.  But  all  this  is  very  difficult  to  get
through,  she  says,  because  she  is  so  anxious  to
do  it.

M.  R.  H. Tell  her  to  take  her  time.

F.  (To  A.  V.  B.  :  Are  they  both  men  ?)  She  says  they
are  both  men,  and  that  one  of  them  is  a  man
who  is  not  young,  a  man  in  the  prime  of  life.
Feda  can  see  him.

M.  R.  H. Is  he  here  then  ?

F.  Yes.

M.  R.  H.  Well,  tell  him  I  am  ready  to  give  up  the  morning
to  anything  he  wishes  to  say.

F.  Feda  sees  a  man  in  the  prime  of  life,  he  is  about

medium  height,  perhaps  on  the  tall  side  ;  but  this
is  difficult  to  judge  because  Feda  can't  see  his
legs. He  seems  to  be  broad  across  the  chest  and


526 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

shoulders.  He  has  rather  a  habit  of  throwing
his  shoulders  back  and  sticking  his  stomach  out.
He  used  to  put  his  hand  in  his  pocket.  He  has
rather  a  good-shaped  face,  broad  across  the
cheek-bones,  and  the  lower  part  of  the  face  looks
rounded.  He's  got  a  brownish  moustache,  yet
now,  when  Feda  looks  again,  that  moustache  is
not  there.

M.  R.  H.  I  don't  quite  understand  ;  is  he  showing  hair  on  his
face  this  morning  ?

F.  Oh  ! Mrs.  Twonnie,  when  Feda  said  just  now  that

the  lower  part  of  his  face  seemed  rounded,  Feda
sees  that  it  was  not  his  chin  that  comes  round
like  that  ;  now  it  looks  like  a  beard,  but  not  a
long  one ;  it  seems  to  surround  his  chin  and  is
not  straggly.  He's  got  a  nose  that  shows  the
bridge,  and  then  curves  in  a  little  at  the  end  ;
the  tip  curves  downward  (here  Feda  indicates  a
small  aquiline  nose).  The  nose  is  not  broad
across  the  bridge  but  broadens  at  the  nostrils.
He  is  so  afraid  he's  not  getting  this  description
clear.

M.  R.  H. Tell  him  to  take  heart  and  cheer  up.

F.  Feda  can't  see  his  eyes  very  well,  but  they  don't

look  big,  and  they're  rather  twinkly ;  the  colour
seems  to  be  mixed — hazel  perhaps  ;  Ins  eyebrows
are  broadly  marked  ;  they  are  more  straight  than
arched,  but  they  bend  round  a  little  at  the
extreme  end  ; they  look  browny.

M.  R.  H. Would  he  like  to  give  any  message  to  Daisy  ?

F.  He  wants  to  give  a  description  first  ; he's got  a

square  forehead,  and  it  looks  to  Feda  as  though
the  hair  receded  on  the  temples,  or  else  it  is  that
he  brushes  it  back  very  much.  He  wears  a  soft
sort  of  hat  ;  Feda  doesn't  think  it's  a  cap  with  a
peak,  it  looks  like  a  hat  with  a  brim,  and  the
brim  seems  to  be  turned  up  more  one  side  than  the
other.  He's  showing  a  suit  that  he  thinks  Daisy
would  recognise ;  it's  a  sort  of  browny  coloured
suit, and  has  what  looks  like  a  check  pattern,


xxxviii.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  527

but  it's  a  mixed-up  pattern,  not  a  decided  check,
and  there  seem  to  be  other  shades  in  it  as  well
as  brown.  He  once  had  a  whole  suit  of  that  sort,
but  sometimes  he  would  wear  something  light
instead  of  the  waistcoat  that  belonged  to  the
suit.  He  is  making  Feda  feel  that  he  has  travelled
a  good  deal, — not  always  stuck  in  one  place,  and
that  when  he  passed  on  he  had  an  awfully  choky
feebng  in  the  throat.  You  know,  Mrs.  Twonnie,
Feda  doesn't  think  that  he  had  been  well  for
some  time  before  he  passed  on,  though  she
doesn't  mean  that  he  had  always  been  awfully
ill.  He  looks  like  a  very  kind  man,  but  a  man
of  the  world  ;  he  was  kind,  but  very  obstinate
sometimes.  Your  Ladye's  been  helping  him,  he
says.  Since  you  were  here  last  time  she  says
she's  seen  quite  a  lot  of  him.  She  says  :  "  Isn't
it  funny  ?  "  He's  trying  to  show  Feda  how
awfully  obstinate  he  would  be  sometimes  with
regard  to  anytliing  that  was  for  his  own  good.
He  thinks  Daisy  will  recognise  that.  Now  Feda
doesn't  know  about  this,  it's  not  clear,  but  he
seems  to  be  trying  to  tell  her  about  something
to  do  with  the  sea  in  connection  with  him.  It's
not  living  on  the  sea  properly,  but  it  has  to  do
with  going  over  water,  and  there's  some  parti-
cular thing  to  do  with  a  certain  place.  He  is
showing  Feda  a  place  with  very  high  buildings  ;
it's  curious,  because  the  buildings  are  so  high
that  they  make  the  street  look  like  an  alley
almost.  The  buildings  rise  up  very  straight  on
each  side  of  the  street.
M.  B.  H. Would  Daisy  know  about  this  ?

F.  He  thinks  she  ought  to,  because  it's  connected  with

him.  Now  he  is  speaking  of  a  wide  street,  a
street  that  has  a  budding  in  the  very  middle  of
it,  and  streets  that  branch  on  each  side  from  that
building  that  is  in  the  middle  of  the  wide  street.
It  goes  like  this  :  (here  Feda  draws  with  her
finger  on  M.  R.  H.'s  knee,  and  indicates  a  straight


528


Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.


[part


street  with  a  building  apparently  in  the  middle
of  the  road,  and  two  streets  branching  left  and
right  backwards  from  the  building).  These  streets
have  got  houses  in  them,  no,  Feda's  not  sure
that  they  are  only  houses,  she  thinks  there  are
shops  as  well.
M.  R.  H. He's  getting  on  very  nicely.

F.  You  see,  he  says  that  he  remembers  this  place  that

he  has  just  described,  this  street  with  the  building
in  the  middle  of  it,  very  well  indeed  ;  he  re-
members it  so  well  because  he  nearly  always  came
up  that  broad  street  and  the  building  would  face
him,  and  he  says  it  nearly  always  struck  his
attention.  Now  he's  telling  Feda  that  he  used
sometimes  to  sit  at  a  table  and  write  in  jerks.
He  must  be  trying  to  show  a  house  ;  there  seem
to  have  been  two  rooms,  one  opening  out  of  the
other,  and  he  would  sit  in  the  second  room.
Oh,  they're  trying  to  show  Feda  something  which
is  very  difficult,  it  looks  as  though  in  one  of
those  rooms  there  was  something  almost  like  a
machine,  it  seems  to  be  on  a  table  ;  it's  nearly
all  made  of  some  dark-coloured  metal.  Now  Feda
sees  that  it  looks  like  rather  a  big  thing  on  a
stand  ;  perhaps  it  is  a  stand  that  it  was  on  and
not  a  table.  There's  like  a  roily  tiling  or  rod
running  through  the  middle  of  this  machine,  and
there  are  two  other  narrower  rods  as  well,  and
above  the  rods  something  seems  to  rise  up,  some-
thing that  looks  curved.  He  says  that  Daisy
ought  to  know,  as  it  was  something  that  he  used,
and  that  even  if  she  has  not  seen  it  he  must
have  spoken  to  her  about  it.

M.  R.  H. I  think  I  recognise  him.

F.  He's  awfully  pleased.

M.  R.  H.  But  of  course  I  should  like  to  have  it  clearly
defined  what  relation  he  was  to  Daisy,  but  I
don't  want  you  to  force  it.

F.  He  won't  give  it  unless  he  can  be  sure  of  it.  Feda

doesn't know what this means, but he says  :


lxxviii.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.


529


"  There  were  two  of  us  that  stood  in  the  same
relation  to  Daisy,  but  in  a  slightly  different  way."
He  says  that  means  something,  and  he  hopes  it
won't  be  mi  sunder  stood.
M.  R.  H. If  he  can't  get  it  clear,  leave  it.

F.  But  he  says  those  words  are  quite  clear,  you  can

take  them  absolutely  literally.  He  says  :  "  Two
of  us  did  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  Daisy,
with  a  slight  difference."  He's  so  afraid  she
won't  understand  his  putting  it  in  that  way.
He  says  :  "  Do  you  follow  me  ?  "

M.  R.  H. Yes,  I  think  I  do.

F.  He  wants  you  to  tell  Daisy  that  he  was  glad  about

everything  she  did  after  his  passing  ;  he  considers
that  she  did  everything  for  the  best.  Now  this
is  important  :  he  says  that  he  was  worried,
because  he  felt  that  he  ought  to  have  arranged
something  differently.  After  he  had  passed  on
he  felt  that  he  had  tied  her  up,  limited  and
restricted  her  by  some  condition  or  some  arrange-
ment that  he  had  made.  He  is  very  sorry  that
he  did  so,  he  knows  that  it  was  a  mistake  now,
and  that  there  was  nothing  to  be  gained.  He
says,  and  now  he's  speaking  to  you,  Mrs.  Twonnie  :
"  I  suppose  you  have  gathered  that  this  has  got
to  do  with  financial  matters  ;  do  you  understand  ?  "

M.  R.  H. No,  but  Daisy  may.

F.  He  says  Ladj'-e  has  been  good  to  him,  helping  him.

M.  R.  H. Does  he  think  that  he  can  get  anyone  else  to  come
here  for  Daisy  ?

F.  He  says  : "  I  think  so  ; you  know  I've  seen  him,

and  it  was  decided  that  I  should  come  first,
as  I  have,  to  a  certain  extent,  been  able  to
master  conditions  more  quickly  than  he  could."
He's  trying  to  say  some  name.  (Here  Feda
makes  inarticulate  sounds).  He  knows  who  if
is  you  want  him  to  bring,  he  says  it's  a  much
younger  man  than  he  is.

M.  R.  H.  Correct.


530


Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


F.  He  says  : "It's  all  right,  I  thought  Daisy  would

know  that  I  should  see  him."  And  now  he
says  to  you,  Mrs.  Twonnie  :  "  It's  funny,  I
never  thought  I  should  be  speaking  to  you  in
this  way,  it's  most  unlooked  for,  unexpected  and
extraordinary  !  "  He  says  he  has  many  good
friends  in  the  spirit  world,  but  that  he  finds
life  there  very  •  different  to  the  earth  life.  Your
Ladye  says  she  doesn't.

M.  R,  H. Why  is  that  ?

F.  Because  people  look  at  things  differently. It's  to

do  with  the  different  way  that  things  appeal  to
us  here.  This  gentleman  says  he  likes  it,  though.
Oh,  he  had  a  stick,  Feda  thinks  it  was  a  walking-
stick,  and  that  it  had  been  given  to  him.  It
seems  to  have  a  rather  pretty,  light  top  to  it.
The  stick  is  of  dark  wood,  but  it  seems  to  have
a  light  handle,  and  it  impresses  Feda  that  there
are  two  different  sorts  of  material  used  in  that
handle.  He  says  he  does  apologise  for  taking
up  so  much  time.

M.  R.  H. Tell  him  not  to,  because  I  am  glad  for  Daisy.

F.  He  says  it  has  been  very  hard  indeed  for  Daisy,

Why  does  he  keep  on  building  up  a  letter  R.  ?
Now  he's  trying  to  say  something  more  about
that  3roung  man.  He  says  that  he  passed  on
in  quite  a  different  manner  from  Avhat  he  did
himself.  Oh,  now  he's  jumping,  like  your  Ladye
does  sometimes,  and  speaking  of  himself  again.
He  says  that  he  was  clean-shaven  once,  or  that
he  did  shave  once,  only,  he  says,  that  people
didn't  like  it  very  much.

On  receipt  of  these  numerous  details  we  prepared  and
sent  out  question  papers  to  Daisy  to  the  Near  East.
We  shall  not  in  this  case  insert  the  original  question
papers  as  Ave  did  in  the  case  of  Sir  Richard  Rogers,  as
Daisy's  answers  were  rather  discursive,  and  would
require  too  much  space.  We  shall  deal  with  the  whole
subject therefore, in narrative form. Of course  all


Lxxvin.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  531

the  original  correspondence,  including  question-papers  and
answers,  is  in  our  possession.  Certain  of  the  points
given  regarding  the  gentleman  with  the  short  beard  I
myself  knew  to  be  correct,  and  through  them  I  had
quickly  gathered  that  the  purporting  communicator  was
Daisy  Armstrong's  father,  Mr.  Benson  (pseudonym).  I  had
made  Mr.  Benson's  acquaintance  about  fifteen  years  ago,  he
was  then  living  in  a  small  country  town,  in  which
I  had  been  lent  a  hunting-box.  We  met  on  several
occasions,  though  I  never  saw  very  much  of  him  ;  his
daughters  became  friends  of  mine,  but  he  was  seldom
present  when  I  visited  them,  nor  did  he,  to  the  best  of
my  memory,  visit  me  more  than  once,  if  at  all.  But  his
appearance  has  remained  in  my  memory,  and  I  recognised
several  details  in  the  descriptions  of  himself,  etc.,  which  he
gave  through  Feda  during  the  sitting  under  discussion.
There  were  certain  important  points,  however,  given  by
this  communicator  of  which  I  had  absolutely  no  know-
ledge until  they  were  verified  by  Daisy  and  her  sister
many  weeks  later.

When  preparing  question-papers  pertaining  to  the  sitting
of  February  21st,  1917,  we  included  one  or  two  questions
also  regarding  points  which  had  been  mentioned  on
February  14th,  1917  ;  we  had,  as  has  been  stated,
suppressed  all  mention  of  that  sitting  until  further  definite
evidence  had  been  obtained.

Regarding  the  sitting  of  February  14th,  1917,  Daisy
was  unable  to  place  the  lady  who  was  said  to  have  been
connected  with  her,  and  to  have  passed  over  long  ago  ;
she  thought  that  that  person  might  be  some  female
relation,  but  could  not  remember  any  particular  female
relation  who  would  be  likely  to  retain  any  great  interest
in  her.  The  letter  G,  standing  for  a  name  with  which
Daisy  was  said  to  be  connected,  was  placed  by  her  as
being  applicable  to  either  of  two  people  ;  namely,  to  a
young  girl  whose  surname  began  with  G,  and  who  had
died  unexpectedly  the  month  prior  to  that  sitting  of
February  14th,  1917  ;  or  to  her  husband's  best  man,
killed  in  France,  whose  Christian  name  and  surname  both
began  with  G. Daisy  said  that  the  girl  friend  would  be

2l


532 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

a  good  deal  connected  with  her,  and  in  view  of  a  subse-
quent mention  at  a  later  sitting,  by  a  communicator  pur-
porting to  be  Daisy's  husband,  of  an  abbreviation  of  this
girl's  Christian  name,  by  which  she  was  always  called  by
Daisy  and  her  husband,  it  would  seem  likely  that  she  was
the  person  meant  on  February  14th,  1917.  Beyond  the  fact
that  I  obtained  Daisy's  surname  at  that  sitting  nothing
very  remarkable  occurred  on  February  14th,  1917.

There  is,  however,  one  other  point  worthy  of  mention  :
when  A.  V.  B.  was  asked  whether  she  had  known  the
particular  man  connected  with  Daisy  during  her  lifetime,
she  replied  through  Feda  in  the  affirmative,  stating  that
he  was  the  one  that  she  had  known,  thus  clearly  implying,
and  correctly  so,  that  although  she  had  personally  known
Daisy's  husband,  there  was  another  man  connected  with
Daisy  whom  she  had  not  known.  This  implication  of
A.  V.  B.'s  is  further  emphasized  on  February  21st,  1917,
as  we  shall  see.

We  will  now  consider  the  extract  from  the  sitting  of
February  21st,  1917.  To  begin  with  Feda  tells  us  that
A.  V.  B.  is  speaking  of  the  sea  in  connection  with  Daisy ;
not  a  little  bit  of  sea,  like  a  Channel  crossing,  but  many,  many
miles  of  sea.  This  is  correct.  We  next  find  A.  V.  B.  telling
us  through  Feda  that  Daisy  has  lost  two  people,  both  men,
one  of  them  rather  lately,  and  one  of  them  two  or  three  years
ago.  It  is  correct  to  say  that  Daisy  has  lost  two  people  ;
her  husband  and  her  father  are  both  dead.  Her  husband
had,  at  the  time  of  this  sitting,  been  dead  a  little  over
a  year,  but  her  father  had  been  dead  a  little  over  ten
years  ;  she  has  lost  no  special  person  who  died  two  or
three  years  ago.  This  is  a  mistake  in  time  again,  as
from  what  subsequently  occurred  there  cannot  be  any
doubt  that  the  husband  and  the  father  are  the  people
meant  ;  both  these  people  are  said  to  be  men,  one  of
them  a  man  not  young,  a  man  in  the  prime  of  life.
Daisy's  father,  Mr.  Benson,  was  sixty-three  when  he  died,
but  according  to  his  daughter  he  was  very  vital,  and
mentally  the  equal  of  any  man  in  his  prime  ;  in  any  case
this  elderly  gentleman  leaves  no  manner  of  doubt  regarding
his  identity.


lxxviii.]  Knowledge,  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  533

Mr.  Benson  is  described  as  being  broad  across  the  chest
and  shoulders ;  I  recognised  this  as  correct,  I  also  re-
membered him  as  having  been  rather  corpulent,  and  I
thought  at  the  time  that  I  recognised  his  habit,  described
by  Feda,  of  throwing  his  shoulders  back  and  sticking  his
stomach  out.  I  may  also  have  noticed  his  habit  of
keeping  his  hand  in  his  pocket  ;  in  any  case  it  would
not  be  safe  to  presume  that  I  had  not  noticed  these
things.  I  asked  Daisy  whether  this  description  was
characteristic,  and  she  replied  in  the  affirmative ;  she  also
consulted  her  sister  regarding  these  points,  who  not  only
confirmed  them  but  reminded  Daisy  of  a  painting  of
then  father  in  uniform,  in  which  he  was  represented  as
having  one  hand  thrust  into  his  pocket  ;  according  to
the  sister  this  habit  of  thrusting  a  hand  into  the  pocket
and  squaring  the  shoulders  had  been  characteristic  of
Mr.  Benson  during  practically  the  whole  of  his  adult
life.  I  cannot  remember  having  seen  the  portrait,  though
it  is  possible  that  I  may  have  done  so.

The  shape  of  Mr.  Benson's  face  is  well  described  by
Feda,  as  is  his  beard,  which  surrounded  his  chin  and  was
not  straggly.  The  nose  is  particularly  well  described  ;
in  life  it  very  much  resembled  that  of  his  daughter  Daisy.
The  eyes  are  also  well  described,  as  far  as  their  twinkly
look  goes  and  the  fact  that  they  were  not  very  big.
Feda  apparently  cannot  see  their  colour  distinctly,  hazarding
a  guess  that  they  may  be  hazel ;  as  a  matter  of  fact
they  were  blue.  The  eyebrows  are  weU  described,  and
the  hair,  as  stated  by  Feda,  grew  far  back  on  his  forehead.

We  next  come  to  the  mention  of  a  certain  soft  hat,
followed  by  the  description  of  a  suit  ;  now  I  may  have
seen  this  hat,  but  my  recollection  of  Mr.  Benson  is  that
he  wore  a  cap  ;  I  may  also  have  seen  the  suit,  but  that
is  not  so  important.

In  Daisy's  answer  to  my  question  regarding  this  hat  she
merely  stated  that  her  father  had  worn  such  a  hat  as
described  ;  later  on,  however,  her  sister  amplified  this
by  reminding  Daisy  that  such  a  hat  as  described  had
been  in  their  father's  possession  for  many  years,  that  it
went  by  the  name  of  "  the  old  hat,"  and  that  he  was  in


534  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Tronbridge.  [paet

the  habit  of  remarking  :  "  You  will  spoil  my  afternoon  if
you  won't  let  me  wear  the  old  hat."  Daisy  was  able
to  verifv  the  suit  described,  at  least  inasmuch  as  that
her  father  had  a  fawny-brown  suit  of  Harris  tweed  with
orange  and  darker  flecks  in  it ;  she  described  it
mixture.  Feda,  as  will  have  been  noticed,  speaks  of
it  as  containing  colours  other  than  brown,  but  as  being  of
a  check  pattern,  but  goes  on  to  say  that  it  is  a  mixed
up  pattern,  and  not  a  decided  check.  With  regard  to
the  "  something  light  "  which,  according  to  Feda,  Mr.
Benson  wore  occasionally  instead  of  the  waistcoat  belonging
to  the  suit,  Ins  daughters  think  that  this  must  refer  to
Mr.  Benson's  shirt-front,  as  he  was  in  the  habit  of  taking
off  his  waistcoat  in  hot  weather.  This,  I  may  state,
was  a  habit  entirely  unknown  to  me  ;  I  had  only  seen  Mr.
Benson  in  the  winter  time.

We  next  find  the  communicator  making  Feda  feel  that
he  had  travelled  a  good  deal,  and  the  words  "  not  always
stuck  in  one  place  "  are  very  characteristic  of  him.  I
did  not  know  that  he  had  travelled,  but  I  did  know  that
he  had  had  a  passion  for  moving,  being  never  contented
in  one  house  or  town  for  long.  His  daughters  were  both
struck  by  this  remark,  and  commented  on  it  to  me.
From  his  daughters  I  afterwards  learnt  that  Mr.  Benson
had  travelled  abroad  quite  a  lot  in  his  youth.  The
choky  feehng  described  in  his  throat  at  the  time  of  his
death  is  correct.  Mr.  Benson  died  of  angina  pectoris,
a  fact  which  was  known  to  me  at  the  time.  Feda  tells
us  that  she  gathers  that  he  had  not  been  well  for  some
time  before  he  passed  on ;  this  statement  is  correct,  and
the  fact  that  he  had  for  some  years  suffered  much  from
his  heart  was  also  known  to  me.  And  just  here  there
occurs  a  comment  of  A.  V.  B.'s  which  further  strengthens
her  remark  made  on  February  14th,  1917,  alluding
apparently  to  Daisy's  husband  as  "  the  one "  that  she
had  known  during  her  lifetime.  In  this  present  sitting,
after  telling  us  that  she  has  seen  quite  a  lot  of  Mr.
Benson  since  I  was  last  at  Mrs.  Leonard's,  she  says  :
"  Isn't  it  funny  ?  "  There  would  have  been  nothing  funny
about  it  had  A.  V.  B.  and  Mr.  Benson  known  each  other


lxxviii.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  535

during  their  lifetime,  but  point  is  given  to  the  words  by
the  fact  that  they  had  never  met  this  side  of  the  grave. :

Mr.  Benson  tries  to  show  Feda  that  he  was  very
obstinate  with  regard  to  things  that  were  for  his  good.
I  had  no  idea  that  Mr.  Benson  was  an  obstinate  man  ;
as  I  have  said,  I  only  saw  him  upon  a  few  occasions,
and  his  daughters  were  not  in  the  habit  of  discussing
their  private  affairs  with  me.  Daisy,  however,  recognised
this  obstinacy  at  once,  as  indeed  the  communicator  had
said  through  Feda  that  he  thought  she  would.

Mr.  Benson  next  tries  to  make  Feda  understand  that
there  was  something  connected  with  him  that  had  to  do
with  going  over  water,  some  particular  thing  to  do  Avith
a  certain  place.

I  knew  nothing  at  all  about  this,  but  was  able  later
to  ascertain  from  the  daughters  firstly  that  Mr.  Benson
when  much  younger  used  to  go  constantly  to  Canada  for
salmon  fishing,  and  secondly  (and  it  is  to  the  following
incident  that  Daisy  and  her  sister  think  he  is  alluding),
that  many  years  ago,  before  Daisy  was  born,  Mr.  Benson,
accompanied  by  his  wife  and  Daisy's  sister,  set  sail  from
England  for  Canada,  with  a  view  to  settling  there.  The
journey  out  proved  adventurous,  an  explosion  occurred
on  the  ship,  and  the  family  was  obliged  to  return  to
England  and  start  afresh.  Arrived  in  Canada,  they
remained  there  only  three  months,  when  the  failure  of  a
Bank  in  which  Mr.  Benson  had  large  interests  affected
his  fortunes  ;  and  he,  and  his  wife  and  child,  returned
once  more  to  England.  Daisy  and  her  sister  remember
that  their  father  very  often  alluded  to  this  adventurous
journey,  remarking  that  he  had  had  tracts  of  the  ground
upon  which  Toronto  now  stands  offered  to  him  in  those
days  for  a  mere  song,  and  that  had  he  only  bought
them  he  would  have  become  a  very  rich  man.

In  connection  with  this  going  over  water,  and  this
certain  place,  Mr.  Benson  shows  Feda  a  street  in  which
the  buildings  are  so  high  that  they  make  the  street  look
almost  like  an  alley  ;  these  buildings  are  said  to  rise
up  very  straight  on  either  side  of  the  street.  I  have
since  learnt  from  the  daughters  that  on  several  occasions.


536 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

during  subsequent  trips  to  Canada,  Mr.  Benson  visited
New  York,  to  which  city  they  think  the  allusion  to  high
buildings  refers.  I  had  no  idea  that  Mr.  Benson  had
ever  set  foot  in  America,  or  that  he  had  ever  been  to
Canada.

We  next  find  him  speaking  through  Feda  of  a  wide
street,  in  the  very  middle  of  which  there  is  a  building  ;
he  tells  us  that  streets  branch  off  on  each  side  of  this
building,  and  that  these  streets  have  got  houses  in  them,
and  shops  as  well.  He  says  that  he  remembers  this
place,  this  particular  street  with  a  building  in  the  middle
of  it  ;  and  that  the  reason  why  he  remembers  it  so  well
is  because  he  nearly  always  came  up  that  broad  street,
when  the  building  in  the  middle  would  face  him,  nearly  always
striking  his  attention.  The  streets  and  the  building  in  question
were  immediately  recognised  by  me  as  being  unmistakably
characteristic  of  the  country  town  in  which  Mr.  Benson
was  living  at  the  time  when  I  met  him.  We  are  not
at  liberty  to  give  the  name  of  the  town,  but  there  are
not  many  like  it  in  England.  In  the  very  middle  of
its  High  Street  there  stands  a  beautiful  old  Market  Hall  ;
it  is  quite  unique,  and  from  the  back  of  it  to  right  and
left  branch  other  streets,  containing  shops  as  well  as
houses.  Daisy  and  her  sister  both  tell  me  that  while
living  in  that  town  then  father  frequently  commented
upon  the  beauty  of  the  Market  Hall,  which  he  passed
nearly  every  day.

We  will  now  skip  a  part  of  the  extract,  to  which  we  shall
return  later,  it  requires  separate  treatment  and  cannot
be  dealt  with  just  here.

The  next  remark  on  the  part  of  the  purporting  com-
municator with  which  we  will  deal  is  that  in  which  he
sends  a  message  to  Daisy,  to  the  effect  that  he  was  very
glad  about  everything  which  she  did  after  his  passing,
as  he  thinks  it  was  all  for  the  best.

Daisy  and  I  both  consider  that  these  words  refer  to
her  engagement  and  marriage,  which  occurred  a  short
time  after  Mr.  Benson's  decease.  He  next  tells  me  that
after  his  death  he  felt  worried  regarding  some  arrange-
ment ; after  he  passed  on,  he  says,  he  felt  that  he  had


lxxviii.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknoion  to  Sitters.  537

limited  and  restricted  Daisy  by  some  condition  that  he
had  made  ;  he  goes  on  to  express  his  regret,  and  to  say
that  he  now  knows  that  there  was  nothing  to  be  gained.
Apropos  of  this  he  says  to  me,  "  I  suppose  you  have
gathered  that  this  has  got  to  do  with  financial  matters,
do  you  understand  ?  "

Being  in  total  ignorance  regarding  all  Mr.  Benson's
financial  arrangements  I  did  not  understand ;  nor  had
I  ever  heard  his  Will  mentioned  or  discussed,  or  seen
it  in  the  papers.  In  answer  to  my  question,  Daisy
replied  to  the  effect  that  her  father  had  left  a  letter
for  his  Executors,  in  which  he  particularly  specified  that
it  was  his  earnest  wish  and  desire  that  when  his  daughters
inherited  their  capital  they  should  themselves  tie  it  up
in  such  a  manner  as  to  prevent  their  husbands  touching
it.  He  laid  great  stress  on  this,  and  Daisy  assures  me
that  both  she  and  her  sister  looked  upon  his  wish  as  a
binding  obligation.  In  Daisy's  case  there  was,  as  Mr.
Benson  states,  nothing  to  be  gained,  since  Daisy  has  not
yet  inherited  her  capital,  and  her  husband  is  dead.

We  next  find  the  communicator  saying  that  he  knows
who  it  is  that  I  want  him  to  bring,  and  that  it  is  a
much  younger  man  than  himself  ;  which,  as  referring  to
Daisy's  husband,  is  a  correct  statement.  A  little  later
on  Mr.  Benson  expresses  his  astonishment  at  finding  him-
self speaking  to  me,  and  says  :  "  It's  funny,  I  never
thought  I  should  be  speaking  to  you  in  this  way,  it's
most  unlooked  for,  unexpected  and  extraordinary."  Con-
sidering our  very  slight  acquaintance  during  Mr.  Benson's
lifetime,  and  also  that  I  very  much  doubt  whether  the
idea  of  communication  between  this  state  and  another
ever  entered  his  head,  these  words  seem  quite  to  the  point.

He  next  speaks  of  a  walking-stick  which  had  been
given  to  him  ;  apparently  he  shows  it  to  Feda,  who
tells  me  that  it  seems  to  have  rather  a  pretty  light  top,
but  that  the  stick  itself  is  of  dark  wood,  though  it  seems
to  her  to  have  a  light  handle  composed  of  two  different
sorts  of  material.  In  reply  to  my  question  regarding
this  stick,  Daisy  told  me  that  the  stick  in  question  was
one  which  her  father  was  actually  carrying  when  he  fell


538 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

dead  in  the  street.  Daisy  described  this  walking-stick
of  her  father's  as  being  of  dark-brown  bamboo  cane,  the
handle  being  composed  of  light-coloured  horn,  with  a
silver  band  ;  from  her  I  also  learnt  that  this  walking-
stick  had  been  a  present  to  her  father  from  her  mother,
some  thirty  years  ago.

I  cannot  remember  ever  having  seen  the  walking-stick
in  question  ;  I  asked  Daisy's  opinion  on  this  point,  and
she  assures  me  that  her  father  did  not  make  a  practice
of  carrying  this  stick  every  day  in  the  country.  She
told  me  that  at  the  time  when  I  met  him  in  the  country
town  that  must  be  nameless,  she  is  sure  that  he  was
using  a  rough  ash  stick.

At  the  end  of  the  extract  we  find  Mr.  Benson  saying
that  things  have  been  very  hard  indeed  for  Daisy.
Without  going  into  private  details,  it  is  admissible  for
me  to  say  that  this  statement  is  correct.  Mr.  Benson
builds  up  a  letter  R  which  up  to  the  present  we  have
been  entirely  unable  to  place.  He  tells  me  that  the
death  of  the  young  man,  presumably  Daisy's  husband,
occurred  in  quite  a  different  manner  to  his  own  ;  and  this
is  true.  And  at  the  extreme  end  of  the  extract  he
suddenly  says  through  Feda  that  he,  Mr.  Benson,  was
clean-shaven  once,  or  that  he  did  shave  once,  only  people
didn't  like  it  much.  I  have  ascertained  that,  as  far  as
his  family  can  remember,  Mr.  Benson  was  never  clean-
shaven, though  at  one  time  he  had  a  moustache  only.
Why  he  says  that  people  didn't  like  it  much  is  up  to
the  present  moment  not  apparent.

We  now  return  to  the  interlude  which  we  skipped,  and
which,  as  will  have  been  noticed  in  the  extract,  began
after  the  communicator  had  finished  his  description  of  the
street  with  the  building  in  the  middle  of  it,  and  ended
just  prior  to  his  request  that  I  should  reassure  Daisy
concerning  all  that  she  had  done  since  his  death.

The  interlude  in  question  begins  with  a  mention  of  some
one,  who  is  said  to  be  the  communicator,  sitting  at  a  table
and  writing  in  jerks,  and  continues  with  the  description
of  some  communicating  rooms,  in  one  of  which  there  is
said  to  be  some  kind  of  a  machine. I  did  not  recognise


lxxviii.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  539

the  rooms  at  the  time  of  the  sitting,  but  thought  never-
theless that  they  might  have  been  correctly  described,
and  that  I  had  forgotten  the  construction  of  Mr.  Benson's
house.  Just  here  in  the  sitting  it  seemed  advisable  to
endeavour  to  get  from  the  communicator  some  statement
to  the  effect  that  he  was  Daisy's  father.  Accordingly  I
asked  what  relation  he  was  to  Daisy,  and  to  my  question
I  obtained  a  reply  which  completely  bewildered  me.
Mr.  Benson  is  reported  to  say :  "  There  were  two  of  us
that  stood  in  the  same  relation  to  Daisy,  but  in  a  slightly
different  way,"  and  to  remark  that  this  statement  of  his
"  means  something,  and  he  hopes  that  it  won't  be  mis-
understood." Now  to  me  these  words  convej^ed  nothing  ;
hence  my  remark  that  if  the  thing  could  not  be  stated
clearly  it  had  better  be  left.  But  my  suggestion  was
ignored,  as  will  have  been  noticed,  and  the  communicator
says  emphatically  through  Feda  :  "  Those  words  are  quite
clear,  you  can  take  them  absolutely  literally,  two  of  us
did  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  Daisy,  with  a  slight
difference  "  ;  he  also  expresses  a  fear  lest  Daisy  should  not
understand  his  putting  it  in  that  way,  concluding  with  the
words  :  "  Do  you  follow  me  ?  "

I  sent  the  extract  to  Daisy  together  with  the  question-
papers  previously  referred  to,  and  received  them  back
from  her  in  due  course  with  a  letter,  from  which  we  will
give  an  extract ;  the  names  and  addresses  have  been  changed,
otherwise  it  is  unaltered.

Extract  from  Mrs.  Armstrong's  Letter.

"  X  "  Hospital,  Sisters'  Mess,
X  ,  10/3/17.

There  is  one  point  I  would  like  to  consult  you  about,
A  very,  very  dear  friend  of  mine  passed  over  some  time
between  February  18th  and  February  24th  of  this  present
year.  He  was  my  father's  great  friend,  and  devoted  to
my  sister  Norah  and  me.  After  Father  died  he  told  me
he  wished  to  stand  in  my  father's  place,  and  I  always
called  him  "  Daddy,"  and  we  were  more  to  each  other
than  many  fathers  and  daughters  are. Now  I  only  heard


-540 Miss  Raddyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

of  his  death  yesterday,  and  I  do  not  know  the  date,
but  when  my  father  said  "  there  were  two  of  us  that
stood  in  the  same  relation  to  Daisy  but  in  a  slightly
different  way  "  tins  came  into  my  mind.  Also  Mr.  Wilson
[pseudonym]  had  a  sitting-room  which  led  into  another  room,
and  from  that  to  his  carpenter's  shop  and  photography
room.  In  the  first  of  these  rooms  stood  a  lathe  at  which  he
frequently  worked,  and  T  would  help  him  at  it;  also  a
printing  press,  which  he  used  a  great  deal.  He  wrote
nearly  all  day  at  a  table ;  and  a  good  deal  of  the  des-
cription of  the  house  suggested  this  Second  Father's  home
rather  than  my  own  father's.  Look  up  his  death  will
you  %  His  name  is  the  Rev.  Bertram  Wilson,  The  Pines,
Wickham,  Nr.  York.

Thus,  it  appears  to  us  that  we  have  quite  an  interesting
little  problem.

It  seems  that  Daisy  had  two  fathers  :  her  real  father
Mr.  Benson,  and  her  second,  or  adopted  father,  the  Rev.
Bertram  Wilson.  On  receipt  of  the  extract  from  the
sitting  of  February  21st,  1917,  she  is,  it  seems,  at  once
struck  by  her  father's  words  :  "  There  were,  two  of  us  that
stood  in  the  same  relation  to  Daisy  but  in  a  slightly
different  way,"  and  she  is  also  struck  by  the  fact  that  the
rooms  described  resemble  her  Second  Father's  rooms,
rather  than  those  of  her  real  father,  in  wdiose  house,
according  to  an  answer  on  one  of  my  question- papers,
the  sitting-rooms  did  not  communicate.  She  tells  us
that  this  Second  Father  sat  at  a  table  writing  nearly  all
day,  and  that  he  had  a  printing-press  and  also  a  lathe
standing  in  one  of  the  communicating  rooms  ;  and  as,
in  addition  to  this,  she  added  on  one  of  my  qiiestion-
papers,  the  fact  that  this  Second  Father  was  a  musical
composer,  we  think  that  in  that  fact  may  perhaps  be
found  the  explanation  of  what  Feda  calls  "  writing  in
jerks,"  as  the  writing  of  MS.  music  can  fairly  be  des-
cribed as  jerky,  in  comparison  to  ordinary  script.  This
point  did  not  strike  Daisy,  and  we  merely  put  it  forward
as  a  suggestion.  In  addition  to  this,  an  inspection  of
the "  Excelsior  " and "  Model  " Hand-Printing  Machines


lxxvih.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  541

has  revealed  that  Feda's  description  of  the  "  machine
nearly  all  made  of  some  dark  coloured  metal,  etc.,"  was
very  near  the  mark  indeed.1

Now  comes  the  problem.  Before  the  words  in  answer
to  my  question  re  what  relation  the  communicator  is  to
Daisy,  Feda  describes  some  rooms  communicating,  and  a
machine,  as  belonging  to  Mr.  Benson  ;  which  rooms  it  would
seem  were  not  his  at  all,  but  belonged  apparently  to  his
old  friend,  Daisy's  Second  Father.  How  does  a  mistake
of  this  kind  arise  ?  There  appear  to  us  to  be  two  just
possible  explanations,  for  either  of  which,  however,  it
would  be  necessary  to  assume  the  hypothesis  of  genuine
communication  with  a  discarnate  spirit.  It  is  conceivable
then  that  Mr.  Benson  may  have  wished  to  show  a  man
other  than  himself  as  the  occupant  of  those  rooms,  but
have  failed  to  teU  Feda  that  the  mental  picture,  or  what-
ever modus  operandi  he  may  have  been  employing,  did
not  apply  to  him  personally.  In  other  words,  he  may
have  jumped  suddenly  from  one  stibject  to  another  ;  a
failing  often  ascribed  by  Feda  to  novice  communicators.
Another  explanation  might  be,  that  the  Second  Father
himself  was  somewhere  in  the  offing,  crossing  the  line  for
a  moment  or  two,  or  flinging  as  it  were  his  own  mental
pictures  on  to  the  screen,  and  that  Feda  thought  they
emanated  from  Mr.  Benson,  who  lacked  the  skill  to
clear  up  the  mistake.  Such  explanations  are  merely
hypothetical  of  course,  and  do  not  lead  us  much  further
towards  solving  the  riddle.

The  importance  of  this  mistake,  whatever  its  cause  may
have  been,  is,  we  think,  echpsed  by  the  interest  attaching
to  Mr.  Benson's  words  "  there  were  two  of  us,  etc.,"  and
"  two  of  us  did  stand,  etc.,"  which  we  must  now  analyse.

At  the  time  of  the  sitting  we  had  no  idea  that  Daisy
had  ever  possessed  a  Second  Father,  in  fact  we  did  not
know  that  such  a  person  as  the  Rev.  Bertram  Wilson  had
existed,  much  less  that  he  had  stood  in  a  paternal  relation

1 1  have  since  learned  that  the  Rev.  Bertram  Wilson's  printing  press  was  a
hand-printing  machine  of  the  kind  usually  used  in  private  houses.  It  seems
probable  that  it  was  an  "Excelsior"  or  a  "Model,"  as  these  are  the  makes
usually  patronised  by  amateurs.


542  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

to  Daisy.  We  were,  therefore,  much  interested  on  receipt
of  her  letter,  the  more  so  as  she  states  therein  that  she
has  heard,  on  March  9th,  1917,  namely,  not  until  two  weeks
and  two  days  after  the  sitting  of  February  21st,  1917,  that
this  Second  Father  had  died  upon  some  date  between
February  18th  and  February  24th,  1917  ;  and  begs  me
to  ascertain  the  exact  day.  Accordingly  I  wrote  to  the
vicar  of  Wickham,  saying  that  Mrs.  Armstrong  was
desirous  of  knowing  the  date  of  the  Rev.  Bertram  Wilson's
death.  His  reply  was  as  follows  (the  names  of  course
are  changed) :

Extract  from  the  Rev.  R.  A.  Smith's  Letter.

The  Vicarage,  Wickham,
Nr.  York,  20/3/17.

Dear  Madam,

The  Rev.  Bertram  Wilson  died  on  February  18^
at  9.15  p.m.  He  had  been  failing  for  some  months  and
latterly  suffered  great  pain,  etc.

From  the  above  extract  we  see  that  Daisy's  Second
Father  was  actually  dead  at  the  time  of  my  sitting  of
February  21st,  1917,  a  fact  entirely  unknown  to  Daisy
at  the  time  of  the  sitting.  She  did  not  know  the  date
of  his  death,  even  when  she  heard  of  his  decease  two
weeks  and  two  days  later.  Now  neither  Lady  Troubridge
nor  I  can  have  known  of  the  Rev.  Bertram  Wilson's  death,
seeing  that  we  did  not  know  of  his  existence.  Hence  it
appears  to  us  that  a  considerable  significance  attaches  to
the  use  of  the  past  tense  by  Mr.  Benson,  when  he  speaks
of  this  Second  Father  in  the  words :  "  there  were  two
of  us  that  stood  in  the  same  relation  to  Daisy,  etc."'
And  later :  "  two  of  us  did  stand,  etc."  Mr.  Benson
might  reasonably  be  supposed  to  have  met  his  old  friend
on  the  other  side,  and  to  have  wished,  in  answer  to  my
question,  to  kill  two  birds  with  one  stone  ;  namely,  to
convey  to  his  daughter  Daisy  his  relationship  to  her,
in  a  manner  calculated  to  do  away  with  the  hypothesis  of
mind-reading  from the  sitter,  and  at  the  same  time  to


ixxvui.]  Knowledge,  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  543

give  Feda  no  clue  as  to  his  relationship  to  Daisy  ;  and
thus  forestall  any  attempt  on  her  part  to  elaborate  state-
ments off  her  own  bat,  a  temptation  to  which  controls
occasionally  succumb.

To  Lady  Troubridge  is  due  the  credit  of  having  grasped
the  significance  of  the  use  of  the  past  tense  by  Mr.
Benson.  But  we  were  both  uncertain  as  to  how  far  her
interpretation  was  admissible ;  therefore,  upon  the  receipt
of  the  letter  from  the  vicar  of  Wickham,  I  wrote  out
a  statement  giving  briefly  the  incidents  that  had  led  up
to  that  part  of  the  extract  from  the  sitting  of  February
21st,  1917,  in  which  Mr.  Benson's  significant  words  occur,
and  sent  it  with  an  accompanying  letter,  and  the  extract
itself,  to  Mrs.  Salter,  Miss  Newton,  the  Rev.  M.  A.
Bayfield,  Mr.  J.  G.  Piddington,  and  Mr.  J.  Arthur  Hill,
and  to  Mrs.  Alice  Perrin,  the  well-known  authoress.  We
asked  their  opinion  as  to  whether,  in  view  of  the  words
spoken  at  the  sitting,  we  must  conclude  that  both  men
were  dead,  or  one  dead  and  the  other  alive  on  February
21st,  1917.  We  were  naturally  very  careful  to  give  no
hint  as  to  what  reply  would  be  most  acceptable.

We  thus  obtained  the  opinion  of  six  people,  well  quali-
fied, we  think,  to  form  unbiassed  judgments.  The  pre-
ponderance of  opinion  is  certainly  on  the  side  of  Daisy's
Second  Father  having  been  dead  at  the  time  of  the  sitting.
Mr.  J.  Arthur  Hill  inclines  strongly  to  the  behef  that
both  the  men  should  have  been  considered  to  have  been
dead.  He  expresses  himself  as  being  "  almost  certain."
Mrs.  Alice  Perrin  has  no  doubt  whatever  that  the  message
was  meant  to  convey  that  Daisy's  Second  Father  was
already  dead.  Mrs.  Salter  feels  rather  doubtful,  finding
the  communicator's  words  ambiguous,  she  thinks,  however,
that  if  the  communicator  had  wished  to  make  it  clear
that  the  other  man  was  still  alive  he  should  have  said
"  someone  now  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  Daisy  in
which  I  stood,"  or  words  to  that  effect  ;  and  although
she  feels  that  the  communicator's  words  really  leave  the
question  open,  she  thinks  that  the  weight  is  a  little  on
the  side  of  supposing  that  the  other  man  was  dead.  Miss
Newton  considers that the inference to  be  drawn  from


544 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

the  words  is  that  both  the  real  father  and  the  Second
Father  have  passed  away.  Mr.  M.  A.  Bayfield  considers
that  the  natural  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  the  words
is  that  the  Second  Father  is  also  dead.  Mr.  J.  G.
Piddington  cannot  see  how  any  meaning  can  be  read
into  the  words,  other  than  that  the  real  father  and  the
Second  Father  both  were  dead.

In  view  of  the  opinions  above  given,  it  would  seem
that  there  is  good  ground  for*  supposing  that  the  state-
ment made  by  Mr.  Benson  meant  something,  as  he  told
us  through  Feda  was  the  case.

There  remained,  however,  yet  one  more  point  to  con-
sider ;  namely,  whether  Daisy  was  actually  in  fear  of
her  Second  Father's  imminent  death  at  the  date  of  the
sitting  in  question.  I  wrote  to  her  regarding  this,  and
will  quote  my  questions  and  her  answers  just  as  they
stand .

Question.  1.

Were  you  feeling  anxious  about  Mr.  Wilson  prior  to
February  21st,  1917  ?

Answer.

I  had  experienced  an  uneasy  feeling  that  all  was  not
well  with  him,  which  was  purely  a  presentiment  because
I  had  had  no  news  of  him  for  some  months,  and  had
myself  written  for  his  birthday  on  February  24th.  I
was  alwaj^s  a  little  anxious,  as  his  health  was  poor  and
he  was  over  seventy.

Question  2.

Did  you  know  he  was  in  ill  health  prior  to  February
21st,  1917  ?

Answer.

Yes,  his  health  had  been  very  poor  for  the  past  eighteen
months,  but  not  of  course  bad  enough  to  prevent  his
writing  and  getting  about  a  certain  amount.

Question  3.

Did  you  fear  he  was  in  danger  of  dying  prior  to  Feb-
ruary 21st,  1917  ?


lxxviii.]  Knowledge  of  Matters  unknown  to  Sitters.  .">4.i

Answer.

No,  but  I  knew  the  nature  of  his  illness  (as  he  had
told  me  privately  the  Doctor's  opinion)  ;  but  from  what
he  said  I  imagined  he  might  go  on  living  for  some  years.

It  appears  clear  that  although  Daisy  had  a  presentiment
chat  all  was  not  well,  and  that  although  she  knew  that
Mr.  Wilson  was  not  in  good  health,  she  was,  according
to  her  own  statement,  under  the  impression  that  he  might
live  for  some  years  to  come  ;  and  that  although  she  Avas
worried  about  him  at  about  the  time  of  the  sitting  in
question,  she  was  not  feeling  any  apprehension  regarding
his  imminent  decease.  I  have  questioned  Daisy  very
closely  on  all  matters  pertaining  to  this  Second  Father
incident.  One  point  especially  appeared  to  us  to  require
further  confirmation,  namely,  whether  there  had  ever
been  any  suggestion  of  Mr.  Wilson  being  regarded  by
Daisy  in  the  light  of  a  second  father  during  her  real
father's  lifetime.  Had  this  been  the  case,  there  would
have  been  far  less  importance  attaching  to  the  use  of
the  past  tense  by  the  communicator  as  being  indicative
of  the  fact  that  Mr.  Wilson  was  already  dead  on  February
21st,  1917.  In  her  letter  dated  March  10,  1917  (see
above,  p.  539),  Daisy  states  that  Mr.  Wilson  told  her  that
he  wished  to  stand  in  her  father's  place  after  her  father
died,  but  she  did  not  definitely  state  that  this  suggestion
had  never  been  broached  during  her  real  father's  lifetime,
and,  although  improbable,  it  seemed  just  possible  that
Mr.  Wilson  might  have  assumed  the  role  of  second  father,
while  the  real  father  lived.  This  it  appears  was  not  the
case,  and  Daisy  has  most  kindly  signed  a  statement
regarding  this  and  other  points.

I  may  say  that  Lady  Troubridge  had  never  any  doubt
that  Mr.  Benson's  words  must  be  taken  as  meaning  that
his  old  friend  was  dead  at  the  date  of  the  sitting.  She
argued  in  this  way  :  "  Supposing  a  man's  first  wife  to
be  communicating  with  his  second  wife  during  a  sitting,
and  the  first  wife  when  asked  to  define  her  relationship
to  the  husband  replied  "  there  were  two  of  us  that  stood
in  the same  relation  to  Tom," and  again "  two of  us


546  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

did  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  Tom,"'  the  sitter,  being
the  second  wife,  might  reasonably  reply  :  "  that  is  in-
correct, because  I  did  not  stand  in  that  relationship  to
Tom  at  the  same  time  as  you  did,  but  I  do  stand  in
it  now  that  you  have  ceased  to  do  so."  And  this  I
think  is  quite  logical.

It  may  be  added  that  both  Mr.  Benson's  daughters
were  much  struck  by  the  phrase:  "Do  you  follow  me?"
This  phrase,  they  tell  us,  was  frequently  used  by  Mr.
Benson  during  his  lifetime,  just  as  were  the  words :  "  Do
you  understand  1  "  which  occurred  earlier  in  the  sitting.

With  this  incident  of  Daisy's  Second  Father  we  end
this  paper.  At  a  later  sitting,  referred  to  in  Mrs.  Arm-
strong's statement,  namely,  on  February  28th,  1917,  Daisy
Armstrong's  husband  purported  to  communicate.  This
communicator  gave  some  good  proofs  of  identity,  and  from
him  also  we  obtained  facts  which  were  entirely  unknown
to  us  at  the  date  of  the  sitting.  They  were,  however,
owing  perhaps  to  the  fact  of  the  purporting  communi-
cator being  one  of  many  young  officers  killed  in  the  war,
not  so  striking  as  those  purporting  to  come  from  Daisy's
father,  Mr.  Benson.


LXXVIII.]


Appendix  A.


547


APPENDIX  A.

It  has  seemed  advisable  to  us  to  obtain  in  writing  from
the  two  medical  men  whom  we  consulted,  a  confirmation
of  their  verbal  statement  made  to  us  regarding  the  affec-
tion of  A.  V.  B.'s  eye,  which,  in  their  opinion,  was  a
premonitory  symptom  of  her  stroke.  Lady  Troubridge
therefore  wrote  to  these  two  gentlemen,  and  a  copy  of
the  relevant  portion  of  their  letters  in  reply  appears  below.
The  first  extract  is  from  the  letter  of  one  of  the  medical
men  who  actually  attended  A.  V.  B.  from  the  onset  of
her  last  illness.  The  second  extract  is  from  the  letter
of  a  medical  man  who  did  not  attend  A.  V.  B.,  but  who
knew  her  personally,  and  in  addition  to  this,  whose
practice  has  been  of  a  nature  to  give  him  exceptionally
extensive  experience  in  cases  of  apoplectic  seizure.

Extract  from  Dr. 's  Letter.

George  Hotel, ,

Sussex,  June  26th,  1918.

Dear  [Lady]  Troubridge,

Many thanks for your letter. I remember  quite

well all you mentioned with regard to  Mrs. .

Cerebral  haemorrhages  are  often  preceded  by  a  rupture
of  a  delicate  vein  or  artery  in  the  eye,  causing  the  exact
symptom  of  impaired  vision  you  quote.1  There  can  be
no  doubt  whatever  that  the  condition  was  a  part  of  the
whole  ending,  practically  the  first  evidence  of  it,  though
it  may  occur  without  the  subsequent  cerebral  haemorrhage
coming  on  at  the  time.

1The  symptom  quoted  was  that  described  by  A.  V.  B.  in  her  diary
for  1916,  in  which  she  described  her  visual  affection  as  being  like
"  floating  chenille  worms  "  in  front  of  her  left  eye.

2  M


548  Miss  Radclyjfe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part


Extract  from  Dr.  's  letter.

St.  John's  Wood,  N.W.,
July  2nd,  1918.

My  dear  Una,

Please  excuse  the  delay  in  answering  your  letter,
but  I  was  away  in  the  country  for  the  week  end.  Now

in reference to Mrs.  B  ,  I  can  assure  you  that  our

mutual  friend  can  let  her  mind  rest  quite  tranquil.  The

attack  that  Mrs.  B  had,  there  is  no  doubt  had  been

coming  on  for  some  time,  and  the  black  streaks  which
you  very  well  describe  as  like  chenille  worms  often  are
seen  by  the  person  when  a  clot  has  been  forming  on  the
brain.

One  lady  I  attended  at  ,  called  me  in  one  day  on

account  of  having,  as  she  described  it,  floating  string
before  her  eyes ;  well,  ten  days  after,  although  seeming
well  at  the  time,  she  had  a  stroke  from  which  she  never
recovered.

I  had  also  another  case  which  I  well  remember,  a  woman
about  fifty  sent  for  me,  and  said  "  I  am  sorry  to  trouble
you  to  come  and  see  me,  for  I  am  sure  you  will  laugh
when  I  tell  you  what  I  am  suffering  from  .  .  .
(some  irrelevant  symptoms  omitted),  and  what  is  strange
is  I  see  things  floating  before  my  eyes  and  I  want  to
catch  them  with  my  hands."  I  simply  said  they  were
nothing,  although  I  had  my  doubts.  Well,  three  days
after,  she  had  a  seizure,  she  lived  for  about  three  months.


LXXVIII.]


Appendix  B.


549


APPENDIX  B.

Since  the  above  was  written  on  the  "  Billy "  episode  it
has  become  necessary  to  add  yet  a  few  more  words,  for
A.  V.  B.  through  Feda  has,  we  think,  rounded  up  the
episode  in  question  by  clearly  indicating  that  "  Billy  "
was  indeed  a  wire-haired  terrier.

First  of  all  it  is  necessary  to  remember  that  although
during  the  sittings  of  Dec.  6th,  1916,  and  Dec.  13th,  1916,
the  description  given  apparently  stamped  the  dog  as
being  "  Billy,"  Lady  Troubridge's  wire-haired  terrier,  there
was  very  little  reference  made  to  "  Billy's "  personal
appearance.  But,  on  Oct.  17th,  1917,  during  a  Leonard
sitting,  taken  and  recorded  by  me  at  Datchet,  words  were
spoken  by  Feda  which  we  think  it  is  admissible  to
assume  defined  the  dog  "  Billy  "  as  being  a  wire-haired
terrier.  Because,  although  "  Billy  "  is  not  mentioned  by
name  in  the  present  sitting,  and  is  only  referred  to  as  a
dog  in  what  Feda  calls  the  "spirit  world"  of  whom
A.  V.  B.  sees  a  good  deal,  we  have  been  clearly  told  on
Dec.  6th,  1916,  and  Dec.  13th,  1916,  that  A.  V.  B.  sees
a  lot  of  "  Billy  "  and  on  no  occasion  has  any  other  dog
been  mentioned  in  conjunction  with  her  life  in  her  present
state.

It  happens  that  Lady  Troubridge  had  accompanied  me
to  Datchet,  together  with  a  wire-haired  terrier  at  present
in  her  possession.  She  had  not,  however,  attended  the
sitting.  But  prior  to  the  sitting  Mrs.  Leonard  had  seen
and  petted  the  terrier  in  question.  This  was  the  first
time  that  Mrs.  Leonard  had  spoken  to  the  dog,  though
she  had  seen  him  casually  once  after  a  sitting.

During  the  sitting  of  October  17th,  1917,  just  as  Feda
was  about  to  leave  her  medium,  I  obtained  the  following
words  :

F.  She  says  give  her  love  to  Mrs.  Una. Ladye  says


550 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.  [part

there  is  a  dog  like  that,  she  often  sees  in  the
Spirit  World.
M.  R.  H. Like  what  ?

F.  Like  the  dog  that  Mrs.  Una's  got  with  her  to-day,

a  white  dog,  with  dirty  marks  on  it.

Here  we  have  apparently  A.  V.  B.  or  Feda  recognising
a  similarity  which  most  certainly  does  exist  between  Lady
Troubridge's  present  wire-haired  terrier  and  the  "  Billy  "
of  former  days.  When  Feda  says,  "  a  white  dog  with
dirty  marks  on  it  "  the  description  is  correct  for  both
the  terriers,  but  especially  so  for  "  Billy  "  who  was  more
heavily  marked  and  had  much  more  black  about  him
than  the  present  dog.

One  may  ask,  how  comes  it  that  Feda  or  A.  V.  B.
saw  the  present  dog,  on  October  17th,  1917,  as  he  was
not  in  the  room  when  the  medium  was  in  trance,  and  the
fact  that  the  medium  had  spoken  to  the  dog  just  prior
to  the  sitting  might  suggest  that  a  picture  of  him  had
been  found  photographed  on  her  mind  and  had  been
utilised  by  the  trance-personality  or  the  purporting  com-
municator. This  does  not  explain,  however,  the  fact  of
the  comparison  being  made  between  the  living  dog  and
a  dog  often  seen  by  A.  V.  B.  in  the  "  spirit  world."
Feda  and  A.  V.  B.  both  claim  to  be  on  the  spot,  as  it
were,  before  sittings  begin,  they  both  claim  to  overhear
conversations  that  occur,  and  to  observe  actions  and
objects  prior  to  sittings.

Interest  is  added  to  this  little  rounding  up  of  the
"  Billy "  incident  by  the  fact  that  about  two  months
prior  to  this  sitting  of  October  17th,  1917,  Lady  Trou-
bridge and  myself,  although  still  anonymous,  had  spent
a  couple  of  nights  with  Mrs.  Leonard  in  Devonshire  for
the  purpose  of  holding  sittings  during  Mrs.  Leonard's
vacation.  During  that  visit  we  had  with  us  a  black  and
tan  Pekinese,  with  whom  Mrs.  Leonard  made  tremendous
friends.  During  that  visit  also  my  collie-dog  was  mentioned
once  in  Mrs.  Leonard's  hearing,  although  no  description
of  him  was  given,  and  his  name  was  not  mentioned.
One would think that had any dog been very  much


LX  XVIII.]


Appendix  B.


551


associated  with  us  in  Mrs.  Leonard's  mind  it  should  have
been  the  Pekinese,  yet,  although  we  had  four  sittings
during  our  stay  with  Mrs.  Leonard  in  Devonshire,  no
mention  was  made  of  "Billy,"  and  no  comparison  was
drawn  between  the  Pekinese  with  whom  Mrs.  Leonard
was  hving  in  close  contact  and  any  dog  in  the  "  spirit
world."  She  was.  in  fact,  seeing  the  Pekinese  almost  every
moment  of  the  day.  It  was  not  until  the  present  wire-
haired  terrier  was  brought  upon  the  scene  that  what  we
think  may  reasonably  be  taken  as  being  another  allusion
to  "  Billy "  occurred,  the  memory  of  him  having  been
revived  apparently  by  the  proximity  of  a  dog  of  his  own
particular  breed.


552


■

Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.
APPENDIX  C.


[part


W

X

pq
O


LXXVIII.]


Appendix  D.


553


APPENDIX  D.

Mrs.  Armstrong's  Statement.

Regarding  the  sittings  of  February  14th,  February  21st,
and  February  28th,  1917,  which  were  held  with  Mrs.
Leonard by M. Radclyffe-Hall at my  request, I  being

in  X at  the  time  : — I  wish  to  state  that I  had  not

the  slightest  idea  that  the  sittings  were  taking  place  upon
the  above-mentioned  dates.  I  had  written  to  M.  Radclyffe
Hall  requesting  her  to  endeavour  to  get  into  touch  with
my  late  husband,  but  I  did  not  of  course  know  when  she
proposed  making  the  effort.  The  first  intimation  I  had
from  M.  Radclyffe-Hall  that  the  sittings  of  the  14th  and
21st  had  occurred  was  when,  some  weeks  later,  I  received
extracts  from  the  sittings  sent  to  me  by  her  ;  and  the
same  applies  to  the  sitting  of  February  28th.  With
these  three  extracts  M.  Radclyffe-Hall  sent  me  question
papers  dealing  with  points  in  the  sittings,  which  question
papers  I  answered  to  the  best  of  my  ability  at  the  time,
returning  them  to  her.  On  my  return  to  England  I
made  further  inquiries  re  certain  details  at  the  suggestion
of  M.  Radclyffe-Hall  ;  and  through  the  assistance  of  my
mother  and  sister  was  able  to  completely  verify  one  or
two  little  points.  On  May  10th,  1917,  I  went  to  M.
Radclyffe-Hall's  flat,  and  during  the  afternoon  and  evening
was  able  to  communicate  to  her  the  further  pieces  of
information  which  I  had  obtained.  M.  Radclyffe-Hall
made  careful  notes  while  I  did  so.  She  was  very  parti-
cular about  one  point,  namely,  whether  my  Father's
friend,  the  Rev.  Bertram  Wilson,  had  stood  in  the  relation
of  a  "  Second  Father "  to  me  during  my  own  Father's
lifetime.  I  assured  M.  Radclyffe-Hall  that  there  had
never  been  the  slightest  intimation  given  during  my
Father's  lifetime  that  Mr.  Wilson  wished  to  stand  in  a
paternal  relationship  to  me  ;  it  was  only  after  my  Father's


554 Miss  Radclyffe-Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.


death  that  this  gentleman  asked  me  to  look  upon  him  as
a  Father,  and  insisted  that  I  should  call  him  "  Daddy."
Mr.  Wilson  wished  me  to  go  and  live  with  him  and  fill
a  daughter's  place  in  his  life.  I  did  not  go  and  five
with  him,  although  after  my  Father's  death  he  became
to  all  intents  and  purposes  my  Father. As  may  be  seen

by  my  letter,  written  from  "  X  "  Hospital,  X  ,  10.3.17,

I  did  not  know  of  my  "Second  Father's"  death  until
some  sixteen  days  after  M.  Radclyffe-Hall's  sitting  of
February  21st,  and  even  then  I  did  not  know  the  date
of  his  death,  having  only  heard  that  he  had  died
some  time  between  February  18th  and  24th  of  this
present  year.  During  my  visit  to  M.  Radclyffe-Hall's
flat  on  May  10th,  1917,  I  told  her  that  I  had  turned
up  the  letter  written  to  me  by  my  late  husband  from
Malta,  and  posted  after  he  left  that  place.  Having  the
letter  with  me,  I  requested  M.  Radclyffe-Hall  to  read  for
herself  that  portion  of  the  letter  which  pertained  to  my
husband's  kit,  etc.,  and  which  appeared  to  have  a  direct
bearing  upon  some  words  given  through  Feda  during  the
Leonard  sitting  of  February  28th,  1917.  M.  Radclyffe-
Hall  read  that  portion  of  the  letter,  and  requested  me  to
make  a  copy  of  same,  which  I  did.  I  saw  the  letter
written  by  M.  Radclyffe-Hall  to  Mrs.  Leonard  asking  for
an  appointment  for  me.  In  it  she  gave  no  clue  as  to
my  having  returned  from  abroad — on  the  contrary,  she
said  that  I  was  a  friend  of  hers  who  was  about  to  leave
England.  I  do  not  consider  that  her  letter  gave  the
slightest  clue  to  my  identity.

(Signed) Daisy  Armstrong.

May  Uth,  1917.


FORMER  PRESIDENTS  OF  THE  SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


Professor  Henry  Sidgwiok,  -  1882-84.
Professor  Balfour  Stewart,

F.R.S., 1885-87.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwiok,  -  1888-92.
The  Right  Hon.  a.  J.  Balfour,

M.P.,  O.M.,  F.R.S., - - -  1893.

Professor  William  James,  - -  1894-95.

Sir  William  Crookes,  O. M.,  F.R.s.,  1896-99.

Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  - - -  1900.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.  -  1901-03.

Sir  William  Barrett,  F.R.S. , -  1904.

Professor  Charles  Richet,  - -  1905.

The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,-  1906-07.


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwiok,  - - -  1908-09.

H.  Arthur  Smith,  - -  -  1910.

Andrew  Lang,  1911,

Rt.  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Car-
penter, D.D., ....  i9i2.

Professor  Henri  Bergson,  - -  1913.

F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc, - -  1914.

Professor Gilbert  Murray,

LL.D.,  Litt.D.. - - -  1915-16.

L.  P.  Jacks.  LL.D.,  D.D., -  -1917-18.

The  Rt.  Hon.  Lord  Rayleigh,

O.M.,  F.R.S. , -  1919


OFFICERS  AND  COUNCIL  FOR  1920.

PRESIDENT.

Wm.  M'Dougall,  F.R.S.,  M.Sc,  M.B.


VICE-PRESIDENTS.


Rt.  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  O.M.,
F.R.S.

Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.

Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.

George  B.  Dorr.

Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  Ph.D.


L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.,  D.D.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  D.Sc.

Professor  Gilbert  Murray,  LL.D.,

Litt.D.
F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  D.Litt.,  LL.D.


COUNCIL.


W.  W.  Baggally.

The  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.

Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.

Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.

Sir  George  Beilby,  F.R.S.,  LL.D.

Captain  Ernest  N.  Bennett.

G.  Lowes  Dickinson.

The  Hon.  Everard  Feilding.

L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.,  D.D.

Sir  Lawrence  J.  Jones,  Bart.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.

T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.

Prof.Gilbert  Murray,  LL.  D.,Litt.  D.


J.  G.  PlDDINGTON.

St.  George  Lane  Fox  Pitt

W.  H.  Salter.

F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.

Sydney  C.  Scott.  "

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  D.Litt.,  LL.D.

H.  Arthur  Smith.

W.  Whately  Smith.

Sir  Joseph  J.  Thomson,  O.M.,  P.R.S.

Charles  Lloyd  Tucket,  M.D.

V.  J.  Woollet,  M.D.

M.  B.  Wright,  M.D.


HON.  TREASURER.

J.  G.  Piddington,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.

HON.  SECRETARY.
Mrs.  Henrt  Sidgwick,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  l.

EDITOR  AND  HON.  RESEARCH  OFFICER.
Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.

SECRETARY  AND  LIBRARIAN.
Miss  I.  Newton,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.

AGENTS  FOR  AMERICA.

The  F.  W.  Faxon  Co.,  83  Francis  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.


May,  1920.

President — Wm.  M'Dougall,  F.R.S.  M.Sc,  M.B.

Vice-Presidents.

The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  O.M.,  F.R.S. ,  4  Carlton

Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.
Sir  William F. Barrett, F.R.S., Longcross House,  Chertsey,

Surrey .

George  B.  Dorr,  18  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  519  West  149th  Street,  New  York  City.
L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.,  D.D.,  Shotover  Edge,  Headington,  Oxford.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  Mariemont,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
Professor  Gilbert  Murray,  LL.D.,  Litt.D.,  82  Woodstock  Road,
Oxford.

F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc,  Corpus  Christi  CoUege,  Oxford.
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  D.Litt.,  LL.D.,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,
W.  1.

Honorary  Members.

Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  Longcross  House,  Chertsey,
Surrey.

Madame  Curie,  Faculte  des  Sciences  de  Paris,  Laboratoire  de
Physique  Generale,  12  rue  Cuvier,  Paris.

Miss  Alice  Johnson,  Meadowside,  Grantchester  Meadows,  Cam-
bridge.

Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo, c/o  The  Russian  Legation,

Christiania,  Norway.
Sir  Joseph  J.  Thomson,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  Trinity  Lodge,  Cambridge.


558


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Corresponding  Members.

Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa  906,  Rio  Janeiro.

Professor  H.  Beaunis,  Villa  Printemps,  Le  Cannet  (Alpes  Mari-

times),  France.
Professor  Henri  Bergson,  31  Rue  d'Erlanger,  Paris.
Professor  Bernheim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy,  France.
President  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  University,  New  York,

U.S.A.
Dr.  Dariex.

Dr.  Max  Dessoir,  Speyererstrasse  9,  Berlin,  W.

Professor  Th.  Flournoy,  The  University,  Geneva.

Professor  Dr.  Freud,  ix.,  Berggasse  19,  Vienna.

President  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Mrs.  William  James,  95  Irving  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Professor  Pierre  Janet,  54  Rue  de  Varenne,  VIIe,  Paris.

Dr.  C.  G.  Jung,  Seestrasse  228,  Kusnacht,  E.  Zurich,  Switzerland.

M.  Maurice  Maeterlinck,  32  rue  Perronet,  Neuilly-s.-S.,  France.

Professor  Wm.  Romaine  Newbold,  Ph.D.,  Univ.  of  Pennsylvania,

Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Dr.  Morton  Prince,  458  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Professor  Charles  Richet,  15  Rue  de  l'Universite,  Paris.
Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  2  Max  Joseph  Strasse,  Munich.

Honorary  Associates.
Alrutz,  Dr.  Sydney,  Upsala,  Sweden.

Browning,  Oscar,  Palazzo  Simonetti,  via  Pietro  Cavallini,  Rome.
Dallas,  Miss  H.  A.,  Innisfail,  Crawley,  Sussex.
Edmunds,  Miss  L.,  P.O.  Box  111,  Alton,  R.I.,  U.S.A.
Falcomer,  Professor  M.  T.,  Regio  Institute  Tecnico  e  Nautico,
Venice.

Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  63  Newbridge  Road,  Bath.
Grubb,  Edward,  26  Avondale  Road,  Croydon,  Surrey.
Hill,  J.  Arthur,  Claremont,  Thornton,  Bradford.
Muirhead,  Professor  J.  H.,  The  Rowans,  Balsall  Common,  nr.
Coventry.

Reed,  Miss  E.  M.,  2  Gledhow  Gardens,  S.  Kensington,  London,
S.W.  7.

Sage,  M.,  33  Rue  de  Coulmiers,  XIVe  Arrt.,  Paris,
van  Eeden,  Frederik,  M.D.,  Walclen,  Bussum,  Holland.


LXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


559


Members  and  Associates.

An  asterisk  is  i^refixed  to  the  names  of  Members.

Abernethy,  Mrs.,  10  St.  Colme  Street,  Edinburgh.
Acland-Hood,  Lady  Helena,  23  Vale  Avenue,  Chelsea,  London,
S.W.  3.

Adair,  Desmond,  Little  Flixton,  Forest  Road,  Worthing.
Adamowska,  Madame  S.,  11  Channing  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Adamson,  T.,  16  Dominion  Buildings,  Edmonton,  Alberta,  Canada.
*Agar,  Mrs.  J.  S.,  c/o  Messrs.  Agar,  Cross  &  Co.,  Carlton  House,

11d  Regent  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
Aglen,  F.  A.,  Inspectorate  General  of  Customs,  Peking,  China.
Albree,  John,  Swampscott,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Alden,  H.  W.,  21  Edison  Avenue,  Detroit,  Michigan,  U.S.A.
Alexander,  Professor  S.,  Victoria  University,  Manchester.
Allan,  Miss  J.,  Sauchrie,  Maybole,  Ayrshire.

Allan,  Percy,  M.D.,  Crogdene,  Croham  Road,  South  Croj^don,
Surrey.

Allen,  B.  M.,  14  Gainsborough  Gardens,  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.  3.

Allen,  Professor  H.  J.,  c/o  The  National  Bank  of  India,  26  Bishops-
gate,  London,  E.G.  2.

*  Allen,  P.  F.,  c/o  W.  E.  Clark  Lbr.  Co.  Inc.,  207  Whitney  Central

Building,  New  Orleans,  La.,  U.S.A.
Allen,  William,  M.B.,  20  Sandyford  Place,  Glasgow.
Alston,  Mrs.  Rowland,

*  Anderson,  Lady,  4  Trebovir  Road,  London,  S.W.  5.
Anderson,  Mrs.,  Brackenboro',  Bramhall,  Cheshire.

Anderson,  Brig, -General  A.  T.,  R.A.,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co.,  16

Charing  Cross,  London,  S.W.  1.
Anderson,  F.,  1628  19th  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Anderson,  Mrs.  Henry  C,  East  Morningside  House,  Clinton  Road,

Edinburgh.

Andrews,  Dr.  Marion  B.,  73  Shrubbery  Avenue,  Worcester.
Anstey,  Lieut. -Colonel  E.  C,  R.A.,  Junior  Naval  and  Military
Club,  96  Piccadilly,  London,  W.  1.

*  Appleby,  Joseph,  Farnley,  Great  Crosby,  Liverpool.
Armstrong,  Charles  W.,  Caixa  196,  S.  Paulo,  Brazil.


560


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Armstrong,  Miss  M.  M.,  57  Redington  Road,  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.  3.

Arnold,  Mrs.  A.  E.,  98  Masbro'  Road,  London,  W.  14.

*  Arnold-Foster,  Mrs.  H.  0.,  Basset  Down,  Swindon,  Wilts.
Ashcroft,  Mrs.,  Ladies'  Athenaeum  Club,  32  Dover  Street,  London,

W.  1.

* Assheton-Smitb ,  Lady,  c/o  Lady  Montgomery,  25  Bruton  Street,
London,  W.  1.

Atwater,  Horace  G.,  Norfolk,  St.  Lawrence  Co.,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
*Auden,  Harold  A.,  52  Calthorpe  Street,  Garston,  Liverpool.

Aune,  E.,  Raub,  Pahang,  Federated  Malay  States.
*Aun6n,  Marquis  de,  Palazzo  di  Spagna,  Rome.

Austen,  Harold  W.  C,  M.D.,  2  Freeland  Road,  Ealing,  London,
W.  5.

Austin,  C.  G,  I.C.S.,  District  Judge,  Kurnool,  South  India.
Babcock,  Mrs.  Bernie,  512  Palm  Street,  Little  Rock,  Arkansas,
U.S.A.

Bacon,  Mrs.  Sewell,  Highground,  Waterford  Rd.,  Oxton,  Birken-
head, Cheshire.

*Baddeley,  Colonel  C.  E.,  C.M.G.,  c/o  Miss  F.  Baddeley,  Cathedral
House,  Gloucester.

Baddeley,  Miss  Florence  A.,  Cathedral  House,  Gloucester.
*Baggally,  Wortley  W.,  7  Sillwood  Place,  Brighton.

Baggally,  Mrs.  W.  W.,  7  Sillwood  Place,  Brighton.
*Bagot,  Richard,  Travellers'  Club,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.  1.

Baikie,  W.  S.,  Southend,  Stromness,  Orkney  Islands.

Bailey,  Cyril,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.

Bailey,  Hon.  Mabel,  Hay  Castle,  Hay,  by  Hereford.

Baker,  Alfred,  L.,  Lake  Forest,  Illinois,  U.S.A.

Baker,  Mrs.  Charles,  27  Kensington  Gardens  Square,  London,  W.  2.
*Baker,  Rev.  F.  C,  69  Cunningham  Park,  Harrow,  Middlesex.

Baker,  Miss  Mabel,  21  Lansdowne  Avenue,  Slough,  Bucks.

*  Baldwin,  Mrs.,  1  Gloucester  Place,  London,  W.  1.
*Balfour,  Miss,  4  Carlton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.

*Balfour,  Right  Hon.  A.  J.,  M.P.,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  4  Carlton  Gardens,
London,  S.W.  1.

Balfour,  F.  C.  C,  32  Addison  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.  14.
*Balfour,  Right  Hon.  G.  W.,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.

Banner,  Mrs.,  Triven,  Benson-on-Thames,  Wallingford.
-*Barcellos,  A.  M.  S.,  47  Hampstead  Road,  Wallasey,  Cheshire.


LXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


561


Barclay,  Edwyn,  8  Egerton  Terrace,  London,  S.W.  3.
Barclay,  Mrs.  Edwyn,  8  Egerton  Terrace,  London,  S.W.  3.
Baretti,  Mrs.,  156  Mill  Lane,  West  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.  6.
*Barker,  Mrs.  C.  F.,  2327  Grand  Avenue,  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  U.S.A.
Barkley,  Dr.  M.,  Box  162,  Carlyle,  111.,  U.S.A.
Barkworth,  Mrs.,  Ladies'  Imperial  Club,  17  Dover  Street,  London,
W.  1.

*Barlow,  Miss  Katharine,  St.  Valerie,  Bray,  Co.  Wicklow,  Ireland.

Barrett,  Lady,  M.D.,  Longcross  House,  Chertsey,  Surrey.
*Barritt,  E.  H.,  J.P.,  White  House,  Layer  Breton,  Kelvedon.
*Barrow,  J.  R.,  Chittagong,  Bengal,  India.

Baruch,  Edgar,  563  I.  W.  Hellman  Building,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.,
U.S.A.

Basden,  Miss  Isabel  K.,  21  The  Drive,  Hove,  Sussex.
*Batchelor,  E.,  I.C.S.,  Chhindwara,  Central  Provinces,  India.
*Battersea,  The  Lady,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring,  Herts.
*Batty,  Mrs.  V.  Roy,  40  Harley  House,  Regent's  Park,  London,
N.W.  1.

*Bayley,  Weston  D.,  M.D.,  1524  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Bayfield,  L.  Arthur.  Park  Grange,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
*Bayfield,  Rev.  M.  A.,  The  Rectory,  Hertingfordbury,  Hertford.

Baynes,  W.  E.  C,  Assiut,  Upper  Egypt.
*Beadon,  Mrs.,  at  11  Cheyne  Walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Beattie,  Ivor  Hamilton.

*Beavis,  Captain  P.  E.,  O.B.E.,  North  Lynn,  106  Highbury  New
Park,  London,  N.  5.
Beckett,  Mrs.  Clifford,  111  Iverna  Court,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
*Beckett,  W.  N.,  D.Sc,  Lieut.  R.N.,  c/o  Messrs.  Stilwell  &  Sons,

42  Pall  Mall,  London,  "S.W.  1.
*Behrens,  Captain  Clive,  Swinton  Grange,  Malton,  Yorks.

Behrens,  Noel  Edward.
*Beilby,  Sir  George,  F.R.S.,  LL.D.,  11  University  Gardens,  Glasgow.
Belaribi,  Mrs.,  Bartlands,  Holt  Heath,  Worcestershire.
Bell,  Miss  Alison  H.,  Exmoor,  Quickley  Lane,  Chorley  Wood,
Herts.

*Bell,  Dr.  Mary  C,  30  Priory  Road,  London,  N.W.  1.
Bello,  Constantin,  Delegation  Hellinique,  Hotel  Mercedes,  Paris,
France.

Bennett,  Colin  N,  Escot,  Penzance,  Cornwall,


562


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Bennett,  Captain  E.  N,  12  Prince  Arthur  Road,  Hamjostead,
London,  N.W.  3.

Benson,  Miss  A.  M.,  M.D.,  c/o  Messrs.  H.  S.  King  &  Co.,  65  Cornhill,
London,  E.G.  3.

Benson,  Arthur  C,  C.V.O.,  The  Old  Lodge,  Magdalene  College,
Cambridge.

*Benson,  E.  F.,  25  Brompton  Square,  London,  S.W.  3.

Benton,  Dr.  J.  R.,  Gainesville,  Florida,  U.S.A.
*Benton,  W.  E.,  18  Emanuel  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.  3.

Bergen,  Axel  von,  Abbey  Road,  Darlington,  Durham.

Berrington,  Rev.  Leslie  G.,  Churchover  Rectory,  Rugby.
*Berry,  Mrs.  F.  M.  Dickinson, M.D., 21  Wimpole  Street, London,  W.  1.
*Bertie,  L.  W.  H.,  M.A.,  The  Nook,  110  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.

Betton,  C.  Steuart,  c/o  Grincllay  &  Co.,  54  Parliament  Street,
London,  S.W.  1.

Bevan,  Arthur  0.,  Townsend  House,  Nantwich,  Cheshire.

Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131  Gloucester  Road,  London,  S.W.  7.

Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9  Rutland  Gate,  London,  S.W.  7.

Bevan,  Rev.  W.  0.,  Kalutara,  Ceylon.
*Beveridge,  Erskine,  L.L.D.,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermlime,  N.B.

Bibesco,  H.H.  Prince  Antoine,  114  Grosvenor  Road,  London,
S.W.  1.

Bidder,  George  P.,  Cavendish  Corner,  Hills  Road,  Cambridge.
*Bigg,  Miss  Louisa,  2  York  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.  L
:;:Binney,  Lady  Marjory,  Pampisford  Hall,  nr.  Cambridge.
*Binney,  Rev.  Maximilian  F.  B.,  The  Vicarage,  Ringwood,  Hants.

Black,  Mrs.,  33  Rectory  Place,  Woolwich,  London,  S.E.  18.

Blackburn,  A.  J.,  Aruba  House,  The  Leazes,  Burnopfield,  Durham.

Blacklock,  Miss  O,  Salvington  Grange,  nr.  Worthing,  Sussex.

Blane,  Miss  Edith  H.,  16  St.  Augustine.'s  Mansions,  Vincent  Street,
London,  S.W.  1.

Blathwayt,  W.,  Eagle  House.  Batheaston,  Bath.

Bligh,  Stanley  M.,  28  Grosvenor  Road,  Westminster,  London,
S.W.  1.

Bloemfontein,  The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of,  Bishop's  Lodge,

Bloemfontein,  O.R.C.,  S.  Africa.
*Bodley,  Mrs.,  Exton,  Lopsham,  Devon.
Bois,  H.  G.,  c/o  Messrs.  Robertson  Bois  &  Co.,  12  Fenchurch

Street,  London,  E  C.  3.
Bond,  F.  Bligh,  F.R.I.B.A.,  25  Sydenham  Hill,  Bristol.


LXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


563


♦Bond,  Major  W.  G,  O.B.E.,  Shalesbrook,  Forest  Row,  Sussex.
Bond,  Mrs.  W.  C,  Shalesbrook,  Forest  Row,  Sussex.
Bonus,  A.  R,,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.  1.

Boothroyd,  A.  E.,  Warley,  4  Meadway  Gate,  Hampstead  Garden

Suburb,  London,  N.W.  4.
Booyalsky,  Jean  de,  54  Rue  de  la  Liberte,  Liege,  Belgium.
Bosanquet,  Miss  Theodora,  38  Cheyne  Walk,  London,  S.W.  3.
♦Boustead, Mrs., Westfield, Wimbledon Common,  London,
S.W.  19.

Bouwens, B. G.,  Old  Manor House, Littleton,  Shepperton,

Middlesex.
Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.

Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  Careys,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.
♦Bowditch,  C.  P.,  Ill  Devonshire  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Bowen,  Miss  Anna  O,  210  E.  Main  Street,  Batavia,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Bower,  James  Garton,  Junr.,  Earlham  House,  Norwich.

Box,  Alfred  Marshall,  Woodlands,  14  Magrath  Avenue,  Cambridge.

Boxer,  Miss  Cecile  F.,  Firwood,  Alum  Chine,  West  Bournemouth.

Boxer,  Major  H.  C,  Firwood,  Alum  Chine,  West  Bournemouth.

Bozzano,  E.,  Salita  Emanuele  Cavallo,  N.  92,  Genoa.

Brabrook,  Sir  Edward  W.,  C.B.,  Langham  House,  Wallington.
♦Bradley,  Miss  A.  A.,  Hingham,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Bradley,  Professor  A.  C,  54  Scarsdale  Villas,  Kensington,  London,
W.  8.

Bradley,  F.  H.,  Merton  College,  Oxford.
♦Braithwaite,  Lieut. -General  Sir  Walter,  K.C.B.,  e/o  Messrs.  Cox  &

Co.,  16  Charing  Cross,  London,  S.W.  1.
♦Brandt,  Rudolph  E.,  4  Fenchurch  Avenue,  London,  E.G.  3.

Bray,  F.  E.,  17  The  Boltons,  London,  S.W.  10.

Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

Brewster,  Bertram,  59  Madeley  Road,  Ealing,  London,  W.  5.
Brierley,  Mrs.  D.  F.,  Hazel  Hurst,  Haywards  Heath.
Bristowe,  The  Hon.  Mr.  Justice,  Supreme  Court,  Pretoria,  South
Africa.

♦Broad,  C.  D.,  Litt.D.,  159  South  Street,  St.  Andrews.
Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama,  U.S.A.
Brooke,  Colonel  C.  K.,  Army  and  'Navy  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.  1.

Brooke,  E.  G.  de  C,  Brushford,  Dulverton,  Devonshire.


564


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Brown,  Captain  A.  D.  Burnett,  M.C.,  Greenhurst,  Beaconsfield,
Bucks.

*Brown,  B.  G.,  46  Regent's  Park  Road,  London,  N.W.  1.
*Brown,  B.  H.  Inness,  24  Broad  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Brown,  Charles,  M.B.,  Inglewood,  Pathhead,  Kirkcaldy.

Brown,  Mrs.  Frank  Clifton,  16  Half  Moon  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*  Brown,  Haydn,  L.R.C.P.,  Manor  Lodge,  Chislehurst,  Kent.

Brown,  Leo  M.,  P.O.  Box  953,  Mobile,  Alabama,  U.S.A.
*Brown,  Wm.,  M.D.,  D.Sc,  14  Welbeck  Street,  Cavendish  Square,
London,  W.  1.

Browne,  Professor  Edward  G.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cam-
bridge.

Browne,  0.  H.,  Hyderabad,  Deccan,  India.

Brownrigg,  Lady,  White  Waltham,  Maidenhead,  Berks.

Bruce,  James,  Craik,  Sask.,  Canada.
*Bubb,  Henry,  J.P.,  Ullenwood,  near  Cheltenham.
*Buchanan,  Lieut. -Colonel  H.  M.,  Medical  Headquarters,  4th  N.Z.

Inf.  (Res.)  Brigade,  Sling  Camp,  Bulford,  Salisbury.
*Buist,  Mrs.,  Swalcliffe  Lea,  Banbury,  Oxon.

Bullard,  Dr.  W.  N,  89  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Buller,  Professor  A.  H.  Reginald,  University  of  Manitoba,  Winnipeg,
Canada.

*Bulley,  Mrs.  Arthur,  Ness,  Neston,  Cheshire.
*Bullough,  EdAvard,  6  Huntingdon  Road,  Cambridge.

Burnett,  Miss  Ethel,  Crathes  Castle,  Crathes,  N.B.

Burnham,  Mrs.,  Staindrop  Lodge,  Chapeltown,  Sheffield.

Burns,  Nesbitt,  M.B.,  The  Lodge,  Highbridge,  Somerset.

Burrard,  Mrs.  Charles,  c/o  Lloyds  Bank,  Knightsbridge  Branch,
Brompton  Road,  London,  S.W.  1.

Burton,  Mrs.  Harry,  25  via  dei  Bardi,  Florence,  Italy.

Bury,  Henry,  Mayfield  House,  Farnham,  Surrey.

Bury,  Mrs.  Henry,  Mayfield  House,  Farnham,  Surrey.
*Bush,  E.,  11  Silver  Street,  Wakefield,  Yorks.

Bushell,  Miss  S.  D.,  The  Hermitage,  Harrow-on-the-Hill.
*Busk,  Mrs.,  6  Wadham  Gardens,  London,  N.W.  3.

Butler,  Mrs.  Charles,  25  Broadwater  Down,  Tunbridge  Wells.

Butt,  Lady,  c/o  London  Joint  City  &  Midland  Bank,  South  Ken-
sington Branch,  Gloucester  Road,  London,  S.W.  7.

Buttemer,  Robert  Wm.,  St.  Mary's,  Godalming,  Surrey.

Butterworth,  Miss  A.  M.,  9  Huskisson  Street,  Liverpool.


LXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


565


Caccia,  Major  A.  M.,  24  Morpeth  Mansions,  Westminster,  London,
S.W.  1.

Cadell,  Mrs.  Lewis,  Brae  Lodge,  Murrayfield,  Edinburgh.

Caird,  Mrs.  Henryson,  34  Woronzow  Road,  St.  John's  Wood,
London,  N.W.  8.

Cairns,  Rev.  David  S.,  D.D.,  62  Hamilton  Place,  Aberdeen.

Call,  Major  Felix,  D.S.O.,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co.,  16  Charing

Cross,  London,  S.W.  1.
'"Campbell,  Lady  Archibald,  Coombe  Hill  Farm,  Kingston-on-
Thames,  Surrey.

Campbell,  Mrs.  Burnley,  Ormidale,  Glendaruel,  Colintraive,  Argyll-
shire.

*Campbell,  Mrs.,  Arduaine,  Lochgilphead,  N.B.
Campbell,  Colin  E.,  9  Lower  Belgrave  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
Campbell,  Rev.  R.  J.,  Christ  Church  Vicarage,  Westminster,
London,  S.W.  1.

*Campbell-Lang,  Miss,  c/o  Professor  Brunton,  LL.B.,  180  Hope
Street,  Glasgow.

Candler,  H.  A.  W.,  37  Commercial  Road  East,  London,  E.  1.

Candler,  Miss  M.  I.,  37  Commercial  Road  East,  London,  E.  1.
*Carew,  Mrs.  R.  T.,  4  Trebovir  Road,  London,  S.W.  5.
*Carlton,  Arthur,  J.P.,  Colehurst,  Worcester.
*Carnarvon,  The  Earl  of,  13  Berkeley  Square,  London,  W.  1.

Carnock,  Lord,  53  Cadogan  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Carpenter,  Mrs.,  43  Teignmouth  Road,  Cricklewood,  London,
N.W.  2.

Carr,  H.  Wildon,  D.Litt.,  107  Church  Street,  Chelsea,  London,
S.W.  3.

Carr,  Lucien,  163  Brattle  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Carrington,  Hereward,  Ph.D.,  504  West  111th  Street,  New  York
City,  U.S.A.

Carruthers,  Mrs.  W.,  c/o  Bank  of  Montreal,  9  Waterloo  Place,  Pall

Mall,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Carter,  Mrs.  F.  M.,  252  Union  Street,  Aberdeen,  N.B.
*Carter,  Mrs.  H.  A.,  Mena  House,  St.  Erth,  Hayle,  Cornwall.

Case,  Miss  A.  J.,  35  Elm  Bank  Mansions,  Barnes,  London,  S.W.  13.

Cathels,  Rev.  David,  The  Manse,  Hawick,  Scotland.

Cave,  Captain  A.  L.,  Sherwood,  Newton  St.  Cyres,  Devon.
*Cave,  Charles  J.  P.,  Ditcham  Park,  Petersfield,  Hants.

Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Alford  House,  Alford,  Somerset.


566


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Chadwick,  Mrs.  Ellis,  St.  Moritz,  Parkstone,  Dorset.
*Chadwick,  Miss  M.  W.,  34  Brunswick  Square,  London,  W.C.  1.
*Chambers,  John,  Mokopeka,  Hastings,  Hawkes  Bay,  New  Zealand.
^Champion  de  Crespigny,  Mrs.  Philip,  Artillery  Mansions,  West-
minster, London,  S.W.  1.
*Chapman,  C.  F.,  6  St.  Aubyns  Mansions,  Hove,  Sussex.
Chapman,  E.  &.,  Belsize,  Friern  Watch  Avenue,  N.  Finchley,
London,  N.  12.

Charles, Clifford P., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., Bancroft,  Hitchin,
Herts.

Charlton,  Miss  Frances  M.,  23  Kensington  Square,  London,  W.  8.
Chatterjee,  A.  K.,  Deputy  Magistrate  and  Collector,  P.O.  Birham-

pur,  District  Murshidabad,  Bengal,  India.
Chattock,  Arthur  P.,  D.Sc,  Heathfield  Cottage,  Crowcombe,  nr.

Taunton,  Somerset.
Cheney,  Dr.  Frederick  E.,  64  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,

Mass.,  U.S.A.

Childe-Pemberton,  Miss  A.  H,  The  Wyche  Cottage,  Malvern.
Chitty,  Hubert,  M.S.,  M.B.,  46  Pembroke  Road,  Clifton,  Bristol.
Chubb,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Longf organ,  The  Ridgway,  Wimbledon,  London,
S.W.  19.

Clapham,  Mrs.  H.  H,  50  South  6th  Street,  San  Jose,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Clapham,  J.  H,  Bang's  College,  Cambridge.

Clark,  Mrs.  Cecil,  c/o  Bank  of  Canada.  Port-of-Spain,  Trinidad,
B.W.I.

Clark,  Rev.  F.  H.  H,  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge.
Clarke,  J.  F.  Mostyn,  Whins,  Polzeath,  Wadebridge,  N.  Cornwall.
Clarke,  Ronald  Stanley,  The  Ship  Hotel,  Crediton,  Devon.
Clarkson,  Mrs.  St.  John,  8  Milner  Street,  Cadogan  Square,  London,
S.W.  1.

Clay,  The  Hon.  Mrs.,  11  Tite  Street,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
Clayton,  Mrs.  C.  E.,  Holmbush  Lodge,  Woodmancote,  Nr.  Henfielcl,
Sussex.

Clive,  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.
Closson,  Miss  Olivia  T.,  Apt.  405  The  Woodward,  Connecticut

Avenue,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
*Clowes,  Major  C.  E.,  Arthur's  Club,  69  St.  James's  Street,  London,

S.W.  1.

*Clwyd,  Lady,  Bryngwenallt,  Abergele,  N.  Wales.
Coates,  Mrs.,  Hazel  well,  Cheltenham.


LXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


567


Cobden-Sanderson,  Mrs.,  15  Upper  Mall,  Hammersmith,  London,
W.  6.

Cockle,  Rev.  Francis  T.,  The  Rectory,  Swinford,  Co.  Mayo,  Ireland.
Coe,  Mss  M.  A.,  195  Via  Le  Alessandro  Villa,  Florence,  Italy.
*Coggin,  Rev.  F.  E.,  White  Lodge,  Meads,  Eastbourne.
*Cole-Hamilton,  Mrs.  L.  A.,  c/o  Messrs.  H.  S.  King  &  Co.,  9  Pall
Mall,  London,  S.W.  1.
Coleridge,  Miss  Christabel  R.,  Cheyne,  Torquay.
Collard,  Mrs.,  120  St.  Julian's  Farm  Road,  W.  Norwood,  London,
S.E.  27.

Collins,  Miss  M.,  29  Glenluce  Road,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.  3.
Colquhoun,  Daniel,  M.D.,  44  High  Street,  Dunedin,  New  Zealand.
Compton,  Henry, 1709 Sills Street, Fort William,  Ontario,
Canada.

^Constable,  F.  C,  Wick  Court,  near  Bristol.

Conway,  Lady,  A9  The  Albany,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.  1.

Cook,  Mrs.  T.  S.,  Bailey's  Hotel,  Kensington,  London,  S.W.

Cooper,  Rev.  F.  W.,  Prestwich  Rectory,  Manchester.

Cooper,  Mrs.  P.  H.,  283  South  Street,  Morristown,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
*Coote,  J.  F.,  3  Malwood  Road,  Balham,  London,  S.W.  12.

Cornford,  Rev.  Bruce,  43  Havelock  Road,  Portsmouth.

Cornish,  J.  Easton,  The  Water  Works,  Alexandria,  Egypt.
*Corry,  Miss  Lucy,  13  Argyll  Road,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.  8.

Cort  van  der  Linden,  P.  W.  A.,  Councillor  of  State,  Groenhove,
The  Hague.

*Cory,  Mrs.,  The  Empress  Club,  Dover  Street,  London,  W.  1.
Cotesworth,  Miss  Lilias  E.,  45  Westminster  Mansions,  Great  Smith
Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Cotterell,  Miss  Alice,  1g  Montagu  Mansions,  Portman  Square,

London,  W.  1.
*Courage,  Mrs.,  The  Mount,  Ifield,  Crawley,  Sussex.
Courtauld,  R.  M.,  M.B.,  Grey  Friars,  Whiting  Street,  Bury  St.
Edmunds.

♦Cowan,  Sir  W.  H.,  M.P.,  The  Crow's  Nest,  Fairwarp,  Uckfield,
Sussex.

Cox,  Mrs.  Rowland,  310  West  7th  Street,  Plainfield,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
Coxe,  Henry  R.  H.,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  &  Co.,  54  Parliament

Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
Coxeter,  Harold,  34  Holland  Park  Road,  London,  W.  14.
Cozens,  J.  C,  Brigus,  Conception  Bay,  Newfoundland.


568


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Craufurd,  Commander  Quentin  C.  A.,  R.N.,  c/o  Admiralty,  London,
S.W.  1.

Crook,  A.  H.,  4  Torres  Buildings,  Kowloon,  Hong  Kong.
*Crosfield,  J.  J.,  Gwernyfed  Park,  Three  Cocks  R.S.O.,  Wales.
*Oosfield,  Miss  M.  C,  Undercroft,  Reigate,  Surrey.

Crouch,  H.  N.,  Summerfield,  Weston  Park,  Bath.

Currey,  Mrs.,  29  Dover  Street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.  1.
*Currie,  Mrs.,  7  Sunderland  Terrace,  Bayswater,  London,  W.  2.
*Curtois,  Miss  Margaret  A.,  53  Romney  Street,  Westminster,
London,  S.W.  1.

Curzon  of  Kedleston,  The  Earl,  Hackwood,  Basingstoke,  Hants.

Dale,  J.  Gilbert,  68  Holland  Park,  Kensington,  London,  W.  11.
*Dalton,  J.  H.  C,  M.D.,  The  Plot,  Adams  Road,  Cambridge.

Damant,  Mrs.  H.  C,  Kendal  Mount,  Totlancl  Bay,  Isle  of  Wight.

Daniell,  Mrs.  Averell.
*Danson,  F.  C,  74  Bidston  Road,  Birkenhead.

DArcy,  Rev.  G.  J.  A.,  The  Vicarage,  Worksop,  Notts.

Davies,  Benjamin,  Wilford,  Chase  Green  Avenue,  Enfield,  Middlesex.
*Davies,  D.  Berrington  G.,  J.P.,  Parcygors,  Llechryd,  Cardiganshire.

Davies,  Mrs.  G.  R.,  Glenlaggan,  Parton,  N.B.

Davies,  Miss  M.  H.  Lloyd,  Lynton,  Curzon  Road,  Hoylake,  Cheshire.
Davis,  A.  E.,  F.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  71  Rodney  Street,  Liverpool.
*Davis,  Mrs.  Kennard,  The  School  House,  Woodbridge,  Suffolk.
Davis,  Romney  R.,  Old  Grove  House,  The  Grove,  Hampstead,

London,  NW.  3.
*Davis,  Mrs.,  46  Sussex  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Davison,  Miss  Annie,  4  Ranelagh  Grove,  Pimlico  Road,  London,
S.W.  1.

Davison,  Miss  R.,  Milverton,  Wilmslow  Road,  Alderley  Edge,
Manchester.

Davys,  Lieut. -Colonel  G.  I.,  I. M.S.,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  &  Co.,

Hornby  Road,  Bombay,  India.
Dawes,  Mrs.  Frank,  11a  Portland  Place,  London,  W.  1.
*Dawson,  Captain  G.  de  H.,  R.A.M.C.,  Ashhurst  War  Hospital,

Littlemore,  Nr.  Oxford.
Dawson,  Lt. -Colonel  Henry  P.,  Hartlington  Hall,  Skipton.
Day,  Rev.  Dr.  E.  H.,  Newton  House,  Belmont,  Hereford.
Day,  Miss  Mabel  K.,  15  Elgin  Court,  Elgin  Avenue,  London,  W.  9.
Dearmer,  Rev.  Dr.  Percy,  Corner  House,  Radnor  Place,  London,

W.  2.


LXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


569


De  Gramont,  Comte  A.,  179  Rue  de  l'Universite,  Paris,  France.
Deichmann,  Baroness,  Abbey  Lodge,  Regent's  Park,  London,
N.W.  1.

De  Jong,  Dr.  K.  H.  E.,  Anthoine  Duyck  Str.  48,  The  Hague.
Deland,  Mrs.  Lorin  F.,  35  Newbury  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Delap,  Alfred  D.,  Priorsland,  Carrickmines,  Co.  Dublin,  Ireland.
Denny,  Rev.  H.  L.  L.,  St.  Mark's  Vicarage,  66  Myddelton  Square,
London,  E.G.  1.

Derby,  Miss  Isabel  C,  66  Cheyne  Walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Devenish,  Mrs.,  The  Mount,  Whitchurch,  Oxon.
*Dewar,  Lady,  East  Cosham  House,  Cosham,  Hants.
*Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  Rothesay,  Scotland.

de  Winton,  Mrs.  R.  F.,  c/o  The  Grange,  Shorncliffe  Road,  Folke-
stone.

De  Wyckoff,  Joseph,  Arlena  Towers,  Ramsey,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
Dickie,  H.  Elford,  British  Consulate,  Pernambuco,  Brazil.
Dickinson,  Miss,  Trebrea  Lodge,  Tintagel,  Cornwall.
Dickinson,  Miss  A.  J.,  3a  Clareville  Grove,  London,  S.W.  7,fand

Poultry  Court,  Painswick,  Gloucestershire.
Dickinson,  G.  Lowes,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Dicksee,  Frank,  R.A.,  3  Greville  Place,  London,  N.W.  6.
*Dimmock,  Mrs.  H.  P.,  77  MayowRoad,  Sydenham,  London,  S.E.  26.

*  Dingwall,  E.  J.,  73  Corringham  Road,  London,  N.W.  4.

*  Dixon,  Edward  T.

Dixon,  Hugh  N.,  17  St.  Matthew's  Parade,  Northampton.
*Dixon,  Professor  W.  Macneile,  LL.B.,  Litt.D.,  2  South  Park

Terrace,  Hillhead,  Glasgow,  W.
Doane,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Dodge,  Miss  Mary  H.,  Warwick  House,  St.  James's,  London,  S.W.  1.
Doe,  George  M.,  Enfield,  Great  Torrington,  N.  Devon.
Donne,  Mrs.,  c/o  Messrs.  Holt  &  Co.,  3  Whitehall  Place,  London,

S.W.  1.

Dorr,  George  B.,  18  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Dougall,  Miss  Lily,  Cutts  End,  Cumnor,  Oxford.
Douglas,  Mrs.,  4  Campden  House  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
Douglas,  Mrs.  Charles,  Auchlochan,  Lesmahagow,  Lanarkshire.
Douglas,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  W.,  5  East  88th  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.,
U.S.A.

Dowson,  Mrs.,  Landhurst  Wood,  Hartfield,  Sussex.
Dowson,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Felixstowe,  The  Park,  Nottingham.


570


Members  and  Associates.


[part


♦Doyle,  Sir  A.  Conan,  M.D.,  Windlesham.  Crowborough,  Sussex.
Drew,  Ringrose  C,  Klaung,  Johore,  via  Singapore,  Federated
Malay  States.

Drewry,  Mrs.  George,  4  Calverley  Park,  Tunbridge  Wells.
Driesch,  Professor  Dr.  Hans,  Universitat,  Lindenstrasse  38,  Coin.
♦Dudley,  James,  M.Sc.,  23  Albert  Road,  Wimbledon,  London,
S.W.  19.

♦Duff,  J.  R.  K.,  100  Sunningfields,  Hendon,  London,  N.W.  9.
♦Duncan,  Harold  M.,  c/o  Dr.  G.  W.  Stewart,  Oak  Lane,  Philadelphia,
U.S.A.

*Duncan,  Mrs.,  Earlston,  Epsom  Road,  Guildford,  Surrey.

Dunne,  D.  P.,  Yetholme,  Liverpool  Road,  Birkdale,  Southport.
♦Dutton,  Miss  A.,  Somerdon,  Sidmouth,  Devon.
♦Duveen,  Mrs.  Geoffrey,  15  Stratton  Street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.  1.

Eastwood,  H.  E.,  The  Conservative  Club,  74  St.  James's  Street,
London,  S.W.  1.

*  Eckstein,  Mrs.,  18  Park  Lane,  London,  W.  1.

Edelsten,  Colonel  John  A.,  8  Reach  Lawn,  Waterloo,  nr.  Liverpool.
Edie,  H.  S.  Ker,  c/o  Messrs.  Thos.  Cook  &  Son,  Ludgate  Circus,
London,  E.C.  4.

♦Edwardes,  Mrs.  Dyer,  Charmandene,  Broadwater,  nr.  Worthing.
♦Ekin,  James,  West  Rocks,  Grand  Parade,  Eastbourne,  Sussex.
♦Elder,  Frederick,  57  Antrim  Mansions,  Haverstock  Hill,  London,
N.W.  3.

Eldred,  Fleet-Paymaster  E.  H,  R.N.,  c/o  Capital  and  Counties

Bank,  Ltd.,  Southsea,  Hants.
♦Ellershaw,  Major  Henry,  R.A.F.,  124  Pembroke  Road,  Clifton,
Bristol.

Elliot,  Miss  A.  I.  M.,  Women's  University  Settlement,  44  Nelson

Square,  Blackfriars  Road,  London,  S.E.  1.
Elliot,  Mrs.  Gilbert,  9  Grafton  Street,  London,  W.  1.
Elliott,  Captain  B.  H,  R.A.,  Oakleigh,  Godstone,  Surrey.

*  Ellis,  Herbert,  The  Gynsills,  Groby  Road,  Leicester.
Emmerson,  Robert,  M.D.,  Apartado 143,  Calle  Aldama  107,

Chihuahua,  Chih.,  Mexico.
Emmet,  Rev.  C.  W.,  West  Hendred  Vicarage,  Steventon,  Berks.
Engall,  John  S.,  62  Goldsmith  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.  3.
Eno,  H.  L.,  Princeton,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.
Entee,  Professor  B.  A.,  Samaldas  College,  Bhaunagar,  India.
♦Enthoven,  Mrs.  F.  V.,  33  Cambridge  Square,  London,  W.  2.


LXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


571


Erskine,  Mrs.  Gratney,  The  Buries,  Bishopstrow,  Warminster,
Wilts.

Evans,  W.  A.,  Inglewood,  Ratcliffe  Road,  Leicester.

Everard,  Captain  H.  N,  R.A.M.C.,  21  Denning  Road,  Hampstead,
London,  N.W.  3.
*Farrer,  The  Dowager  Lady,  Idlerocks,  Stone,  Staffordshire.

Farwell,  Mrs.,  Roanoke,  Chorley  Wood  West,  Herts.

Faulkner,  W.  B.,  52  South  Molton  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  5  John  Street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.  1.

Felkin,  Mrs.,  119  Grosvenor  Road,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Fellowes,  The  Hon.  Lady,  Honingham,  Norwich.

Fergusson,  Rev.  A.  W.,  The  Manse,  Dundee.
*Fernald,  Mrs.  C.  B.,  4  Marlborough  Road,  London,  N.W.  8.

Findlay,  J.  Arthur,  Woodside,  Beith,  Ayrshire.
*Fisher,  Mrs.  C.  D.  Corbett,  11  Upper  Cheyne  Row,  London,  S.W.  3.

Fisk,  Rev.  George,  c/o  British  Emigration  Bureau,  Weihsien,
Shantung,  China.
*Fitch,  Hugh  B.,  31  Campden  Grove,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
^Fitzgerald,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Eustace,  15  Neville  Street,  Onslow

Square,  London,  S.W.  7.
"Fletcher,  L.  S.,  3  Elm  Court,  Temple,  London,  E.G.  4.
*Flude,  Mrs.,  Glyn  House,  Argyle  Road,  Bognor.

Flugel,  J.  C,  11  Albert  Road,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.  1.

Footner,  Mrs.,  187  Ebury  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Forman,  Josef,  c/o  Messrs.  Agar  JJutton  &  Coe,  6  Princes  Street..
Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.

Forman,  Colonel  R.  H.,  A.M.S.

Forrester,  Mrs.  Robert,  Annfield,  Stirling,  N.B.

Fortescue,  Miss  Frances,  45  Alexandra  Road,  Worthing.

Foster,  Mrs.  Garland,  Nelson,  B.C.,  Canada.

Fotheringham,  W.  B.,  17  Upper  High  Street,  Worthing.

Fowler,  Major  Alfred,  17  Board  of  Trade  Buildings,  Kansas  City,
Mo.,  U.S.A.

*Fox,  Mrs.,  Fawe  Park,  Keswick,  Cumberland.

Fraenkel,  Dr.  Joseph,  101  East  94th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*  Francis,  Mrs.  Francis.

Franklin,  The  Hon.  Mrs.,  50  Porchester  Terrace,  London,  W.  2.

Franks,  Mrs.,  51  Dacre  Hill,  Rock  Ferry,  Birkenhead.

Freeman,  Miss  Adelaide  C,  Queen  Anne's  Mansions,  London.  S.W.  1.

Freeman,  Rev.  H.  B.,  The  Vicarage,  Burton-on-Trent,  Staffs.

2o


572


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*  Frith,  Mrs.,  Swynnerton  Rectory,  Stone,  Staffordshire.

*Frost,  Miss  Annie,  Carnelloe  Cottage,  Zennor,  nr.  St.  Ives,  Cornwall.

Frost,  Lowell  C,  M.D.,  6856  de  Longpre  Avenue,  Hollywood,  Los
Angeles,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Frostick,  J.  A.,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.
*Pry,  Miss  Agnes,  Failand  House,  Failand,  near  Bristol.
*Fry,  Lewis  George,  Stonycroft,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.

Fryer,  Mrs.  F.,  9  St.  Peter's  Grove,  York.
*Fullerton,  Colonel  J.  D.,  172  Gloucester  Terrace,  Hyde  Park,
London,  W.  2.

Gabb,  F.  B.,  The  Willows,  Abergavenny,  Wales.

Gaff,  T.  T.,  1520  20th  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Gage,  Lyman  J.,  Point  Loma,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Gantz,  Mrs.,  3  South  Place,  Letchworth,  Herts.

Gardiner,  Professor  H.  N.,  187  Main  Street,  Northampton,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

"'Gardner,  Mrs.,  3a  White  Gables,  Wood  Vale,  Forest  Hill,  London,
S.W.  23.

*  Gardner,  Rev.  A.  R.  L.,  52  Beaufort,  Mansions,  Chelsea,  London,

S.W.  3.

Gard'ner,  Miss  K.  L.,  126  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.  7.
*Gaskell,  Mrs.  J.  B.,  Roseleigh,  Woolton,  Liverpool.
Gates,  Rev.  Horatio,  355  Oakland  Avenue,  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  U.S.A.
Gatliff,  H.  E.  C,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.
GeUert,  J.  W.,  c/o  Box  396,  G.P.O.,  Adelaide,  S.  Australia.
*George,  Mrs.,  88  Prince  of  Wales  Mansions,  Prince  of  Wales  Road,.

Battersea  Park,  London,  S.W.  11.
*George,  H.  Trevelyan,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  33  Ampthill  Square,
London,  N.W.  1.

Gibson,  Professor  W.  R.  Boyce,  D.Sc,  Ennerdale,  Tower  Street,
Surrey  Hills,  Melbourne,  Australia.
*Gill,  A.  Wilson,  M.D.,  Chatterley  Cottage,  Hanley,  Stoke-on-Trent.

Gilson,  R.  Gary,  King  Edward's  School,  Birmingham.
*Girdlestone,  Mrs.  Frank,  The  Bridge  House,  Sible  Hedingham,
Essex.

Girod,  Madame,  4  Avenue  Hoche,  Paris.
Glasson,  J.  W.,  I.C.S.,  51  St.  George's  Road,  Harrogate.
Gledstone,  Miss  Mary,  73  Gleneldon  Road,  Streatham,  London,
S.W.  16.

*Glenconner,  Lord,  34  Queen  Anne's  Gate,  London,  S.W.  1.


LXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


573


Glenconner,  Lady,  34  Queen  Anne's  Gate,  London,  S.W.  1.
Glenny,  George  C,  Old  Croft,  Stanwix,  Carlisle.
Glenny,  Mrs.  G.  C,  Old  Croft,  Stanwix,  Carlisle.
Glidden,  Walter  S.,  13  Centre  Street,  Bath,  Maine,  U.S.A.
Glover, Cedric H., 35 Steele's Road, Hampstead,  London,
N.W.  3.

Goedhart,  P.,  Koningen  Maria  Straat  18,  The  Hague.
*Goldschmidt,  Mrs.  Beni  de,  Clarefield,  Pinkney's  Green,  Maidenhead,
Berks.

Gooch,  G.  P.,  South  ViUa,  Campden  Hill  Road,  London,  W.  8.
*Goodden,  Mrs.  Robert,  The  Cheyney  Court,  The  Close,  Winchester.
Gorce,  M.,  19  Grande  Rue,  Gueret  (Creuse),  France."
Goucher,  F.  S.,  Ph.D.,  Toynbee  HaU,  28  Commercial  Street,

Whitechapel,  London,  E.
Gough,  A.  B.,  Ph.D.,  Sandcroft,  Upper  Bridge  Road,  Redhill,

Surrey.

Gough,  Rev.  E.  P.,  The  Vicarage,  Chiswick,  London,  W.
*Gould,  Mrs.,  8  Elsham  Road,  London,  W.  14.
Gover,  J.  M.,  LL.D.,  5  New  Square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,
W.C.  2.

*Gowan,  Commander  C.  H.  B.,  R.N.,  United  Service  Club,  Pall
Mall,  London,  S.W.  1.
Gower,  John  H.,  Mus.Doc.  (Oxon.),  23  East  18th  Avenue,  Denver,
Colo.,  U.S.A.

Graham,  J.  W.,  Dalton  Hall,  Victoria  Park,  Manchester.

Graham,  Mrs.  W.  P.  Gore,  Burntwood,  Goring- on-Thames.

Grahame,  Miss  Helen,  c/o  Mrs.  Taylor,  71  Edith  Road,  London,  W.
*Grant-Suttie,  Major  H.  F.,  R.A.,  R.A.  Mess.,  Shorncliffe,  Kent.

Green,  Mrs.  Alan  B.,  Riviere  House,  Phillack,  Hayle,  Cornwall.

Green,  Mrs.,  Northcott,  Chesham  Bois,  Bucks.

Green,  H.  W.,  35  Gate  Street,  Sedgley,  nr.  Dudley.
*Greene,  J.  G.,  34  Stiles  Street,  Elizabeth,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.

Greg,  Mrs.,  56  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.

GrenfelL  Prof.  B.  P.,  D.Litt.,  Queen's  CoUege,  Oxford.
*Grenfell,  Field-Marshal  Lord,  G.C.B.,  G.C.M.G.,  Overstone  Park,
Northants.

Grew,  J.  C,  c/o  American  Embassy,  4  Grosvenor  Gardens,  London,
S.W.  1.

Grey,  E.  H.,  261  Essex  Road,  Islington,  London,  N.  1.
*Grey,  R.  C,  Meelich,  Wlhtegate,  Co.  Galway  (via  Limerick).


574


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Grignon,  Miss  A.  E.,  41  Filton  Avenue,  Horfield,  Bristol.
Grosvenor,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  C,  13  Motcomb  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
Grottendieck,  W.  G.,  Charlotte  de  Bourbon  Str.  8,  The  Hague.
*Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  South  wold,  Suffolk.

*Gunnell,  A.  Mortimer,  F.R.A.I.,  F.R.Met.Soc,  Broomfield  Park
College,  New  Southgate,  London,  N.  11.
Gurbaxani,  Professor  H.  M.,  D.J.  Sind  College,  Karachi, Sind,  India.
*Guttwoch,  Charles,  7  Kingswood  Avenue,  Queen's  Park,  London,
N.W.  6.

*Gwyn,  W.  J.,  8  Netherhall  Gardens,  South  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.  3.

*Hackett,  James  T.,  c/o  The  Bank  of  Adelaide,  11  Leadenhall  Street,
London,  E.G.

Haldar,  Professor  Hiralal,  39/3b  Sukeas  Street,  Calcutta.
*Hall,  Captain  Basil,  R.N.,  Hotel  d'Angleterre,  Geneva.
Hall,  R.  D.,  c/o  W.  H.  Hart,  Esq.,  Sutton-on-Hull,  Yorks.
Hall,  Miss  S.  Elizabeth,  6  Prince  Arthur  Road,  Hampstead,

London,  N.W.  3.
Hall,  Wilfred,  9  Priors  Terrace,  Tynemouth,  Northumberland.
Hambro,  Lady,  4  Norfolk  Street,  Park  Lane,  London,  W.  1.
*Hamilton  and  Brandon,  The  Duchess  of,  Hamilton  Palace,  Lanark-
shire.

Hamilton,  Mrs.  C.  M.,  Fulton  Apartments,  1084  W.  7th  Street,  Los

Angeles,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Hamilton,  J.  J.
Hamilton,  Mrs.  Vera.
Hamilton,  W.  Bernard.

Hammond,  Miss  Winifred  B.,  386  East  51st  Street,  Portland,
Oregon,  U.S.A.

Hannes,  Mrs.,  c/o  London  County  and  Westminster  Bank,  1  Con-
naught  Street,  London,  W.  1.

Hanson,  Mrs.,  Pleasaunce  Cottage,  Dormans  Park,  Surrey.

Hardeman,  Miss  Frances  E.,  Beulah,  Green  Lane,  Godalming.

Harding,  Miss  A.  K.,  34  Colville  Terrace,  London,  W.  11.

Hardwick-Terry,  Mrs.  E.,  Urquhart,  Boxwell  Road,  Berkhamsted.
*Hare,  Dr.  A.  W.,  59  York  Road,  Birkdale,  Lanes.

Hargreaves,  Miss,  115  Clarence  Gate  Gardens,  Regent's  Park,
London,  N.W.  1.

Harper,  Miss  E.  K.,  The  Apple  Gate,  Coombe  Hill  Farm,  nr.
Kingston-on-Thames,  Surrey.


LXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


575


Harriman,  T.  G.,  M.P.,  2291  East  Ocean  Avenue,  Long  Beach,
Calif.,  U.S.A.

Harris,  Alan  C,  c/o  Messrs.  Morgan,  Harjes  &  Co.,  14  Place

Vendome,  Paris.
Harris,  Miss  Agnes  G.,  8  Cambridge  Place.  Falmouth,  Cornwall.
*Harris,  Rev.  C,  D.D.',  Colwall  Rectory,  Malvern.

*  Harris,  Mrs.  Herbert  A.,  22  Bina  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  5.
*Harris,  Lady,  98  Gloucester  Terrace,  London,  W.  2.

*  Harris,  Hon.  J.,  Lyndhurst,  Hampshire.

Harris,  Mrs.  W.  F.,  The  Willows,  Westbourne  Avenue,  Hull.

*  Harrison,  Francis,  104  Craven  Park,  Harlesden,  London,  N.W  10.
Harrison,  William,  17  Tirlemont  Road,  Croydon,  Surrey.

*Hart,  Mrs.  H.  Burcham,  Eshott, Eastbury  Road,  Northwood,
Middlesex.

Hart,  Mrs.  H.  H.,  H.B.  "  Zephyr,"  Srinigar,  Kashmir,  India.
Hart,  General  Sir  Reginald  Clare,  V.C.,  K.C.B.,  K.C.V.O.,  39  West
Cliff  Road,  Bournemouth.
*Hartness,  James,  Springfield,  Vermont,  U.S.A.
Hartshorn,  Miss  Cornelia,  Ware  Hall,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Harvey,  G.  H.,  P.O.  Box  254,  Quebec,  Canada.
*Haslam,  Oliver  H.,  Sand  Ridge,  St.  Anne's-on-the-Sea,  Lanes.
Hasler.  Miss  K.  M.,  East  Mount,  Brunswick  Road,  Douglas,  Isle
of  Man.

Hassan,  Princess  Aziza,  139  Mahmoudia,  Alexandria,  Egypt.
Hastie,  Miss,  c/o  Messrs.  Street,  30  Cornhill,  London,  E.C.  3.
Hastings,  Rev.  J.  H.,  The  Manor  House,  Halton,  Lancaster.
*Hatton,  G.  C,  3  Vernon  Chambers,  Southampton  Row,  London,
W.C.  1.

Hauxhurst,  Mrs.  W.,  Columbus  Avenue  and  East  6th  Street,

Mount  Vernon,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Hawarden,  The  Viscountess.

Hawker,  Mrs.  George,  55  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  3.
Hawker,  Miss  Elizabeth,  55  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  3.
Hawley,  Miss  Zoe,  129  Church  Street,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
Hayes,  Rev.  Joseph  W.,  West  Thurrock  Vicarage,  Grays,  Essex.
Head,  Miss  Alice  L.,  52  Pembridge  Villas,  Notting  Hill  Gate,
London,  W.  11.

*Heape,  Mrs.  Walter,  10  King's  Bench  Walk,  Temple,  London,
E.C.  4.

Heard.  G.  H.,  Percy  Villa,  Front  Street,  Tynemouth.


57G


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Heath,  George  H.,  277  Brockley  Road,  London,  S.E.  4.
Heaton,  Guy,  51  Westcliff  Road,  Bournemouth.
Hedley,  Dr.  E.  P.,  Chesterfield  Villas,  Ockbrook,  Derby.
*Hefford,  Percy  H.,  387  Pershore  Road,  Selly  Park,  Birmingham.
Heller, Rabbi James G., 1807 Arch Street, Little  Rock,

Arkansas,  U.S.A.
Hemenway,  Mrs.  Augustus,  Readville,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Hemmerle,  Madame,  Colbjornsensgade  6iii,  Copenhagen,  Denmark.
Henderson,  J.  J.,  494  Fifth  Avenue,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Henderson,  Miss  Lilian,  The  Sesame  Club,  29  Dover  Street,  London,

W.  1.

Henrici,  Jacob,  201-203  Chestnut  Street,  Meadville,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1  Argyll  Villas,  Cheltenham.
*Hepworth,  Captain  W.  C.  P.,  Moorings,  Dovercourt.
Herriot,  Miss  E.  F.,  2  Sunningdale  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,
W.  8.

Herschel,  Colonel  John,  F.R.S.,  Ro}^al  Engineers,  Slough,  Bucks.
*Hervey,  Miss  G.  M.,  8  Gliddon  Road,  West  Kensington,  London,
W.  14.

Heseltine,  Mrs.,  19  Launceston  Place,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.

Hesketh,  Thomas,  42  Castle  Hill  Avenue,  Folkestone,  Kent.
*Heyer,  J.  C,  LL.D.,  83  Nic.  Maestreet,  Amsterdam.

Heymans,  Prof.  G.,  Ubbo-Emmiussingel  2,  Groningen,  Holland.
*Hichens,  Rev.  Canon  A.  S.,  The  Rectory,  Penicuik,  Midlothian.
*Hichens,  Mrs.  Cyril,  Summertree,  nr.  Herstmonceux,  Sussex.

Hichens,  Mrs.  W.  Lionel,  15  Buckingham  Palace  Gardens,  London,
S.W.  1.

*Hicks,  Miss  Lucy,  36  Westminster  Mansions,  London,  S.W.  1.

Higbee,  Colonel  George  H.,  Burlington,  Iowa,  U.S.A.

Hildyard,  F.  W.,  14  Lambridge,  Bath.
*Hillard,  Miss  Mary  R.,  Westover  School,  Middlebury,  Conn.
U.S.A.

Hillman,  E.  Haviland,  4  Somers  Place,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.  2.
Hills,  Miss  H.  D.,  Cecil  House,  14  Bernard  Street,  London,  W.C.  1.
Hillsmith,  Mrs.  Montfort,  Ragged  Place,  South  Danbury,  New

Hampshire,  U.S.A.
*Hinkley,  Mrs.  W.,  Meadowland,  Headington,  Oxford.
Hoare,  Fred  H.,  37  Fleet  Street,  London,  E.G.  4.
Hcare.  Mrs.  Henry,  20  Montagu  Street,  Portman  Square,  London,

W.  1.


Lxxvur.]


Members  and  Associates.


577


Hobart-Hampden,  Rev.  A.  K.,  127  Queen's  Gate,  S.  Kensington,
London,  S.W.  7.
*Hobhouse,  Mrs.  Henry,  1  Airlie  Gardens,  London,  W.  8.
*Hobson,  Walter  D.,  Tan-y-Bryn,  Bangor,  N.  Wales.
*Hockliffe,  ]\lrs.  Ernest,  Littlebrook,  Uppingham.
Hodding,  Miss,  28  The  Close,  Salisbury.
Hodgkinson,  Rev.  F.  K.,  67  Clifton  Hill,  London,  N.W.  8.
Hodson,  L.  J.,  LL.B.,  The  Mill  House,  Robertsbridge,  Sussex.
Hoernle,  Professor  R.  F.  Alfred,  Emerson  Hall,  Harvard  Univer-
sity, Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
♦Hogg,  Henry  R.,  23  Hornton  Street,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
Hogg,  Mrs.  Henry  R.,  23  Hornton  Street,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
Hoggan,  Mrs.  Frances,  M.D.,  Hillview,  Squire's  Lane,  Finchley,
London,  N.  3.

Holder,  Henry  L.,  Monkbarns,  Wheatlands  Road,  Harrogate.

Holding,  Sam,  Columbia,  Tenn.,  U.S.A.

Holland,  Miss,  1a  Holland  Park,  London,  W.  11.
♦Holland,  Mrs.  H.  C,  The  Wheathills,  Kirk  Langley,  Derby.

Holland,  W.  A.,  Plantation  House,  Bishop's  Stortford,  Herts.

Hollander,  Bernard,  M.D..  57  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Hoilick,  Captain  A.  J.,  9  Eaton  Gardens,  Hove,  Sussex.
*Hollick,  Mrs.  A.  J.,  9  Eaton  Gardens,  Hove,  Sussex.

Hollins,  Mrs.,  24  Sussex  Place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.  1.

Hollins,  Mrs.  A.  E.,  Dunsfold  Rectory,  Godalming,  Surrey.

Holme,  Strachan,  Bridgewater  Offices,  Walkden,  Manchester.

Holmes,  Miss  Lilian,  The  Firs,  Charing,  Kent.

*Holmyard,  R.,  5  Hedgerow  Lane,  Clifton,  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
♦Holt,  Henry,  34  West  33rd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
♦Holt,  Miss  M.  D.,  Bryans'  Ground,  Presteign,  Radnorshire.

Homan,  C.  H.,  12  Sogaden,  Christiania,  Norway.

Home,  Miss  Georgina,  Halcyon  Club,  13/14  Cork  Street,  London,
W.  1.

Home,  Miss  Mary  M.,  34  Victoria  Road,  London,  W.  8.
♦Home,  Mrs.  Robert,  b/78  Portsdown  Road,  Maida  Vale,  London,
W.  9.

Home,  Walter,  CLE.,  34  Victoria  Road,  London,  W.  8.
Hookham,  Philip,  15  Chad  Road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
Hope,  Lieut. -Commander  R.  H.  K,  R.N.
Hopkinson,  Mrs.,  Ellerslie,  Adams  Road,  Cambridge.
Hoppin,  J.  C,  310  Sears  Building,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.


578


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Horridge,  Miss  J.  G.,  43  Alexandra  Road,  Southport.
*Horwood,  C.  Baring,  D.Sc,  F.C.S.,  Phelps  House,  Castle  Gary.
*Hoseason,  A.  G.,  The  Bungalow,  Tanworth-in-Arden,  Birmingham.

Hotblack,  Prank  A.,  Fairfield,  Hambledon,  Hants.

Howden,  Mrs.,  11  Eton  Terrace,  Edinburgh.

Howe,  Mrs.  M.  A.  De  Wolfe,  26  Brimmer  Street,  Boston,  Mass...
U.S.A.

*Howell,  Mrs.,  Ethy,  Lostwithiel,  Cornwall.
*Howell,  Mrs.  Philip,  5  Carlyle  Square,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
Howgrave-Graham,  Captain  A.  H.,  M.C.,  Box  59,  Randfontein,
Transvaal.

Hubback,  Mrs.,  19  Reynold's  Close,  London,  N.W.  4.
Hubbard,  Mrs.  Cyril,  Willingdon,  Sussex.
Hude,  Mrs.  Anna,  Ph.D.,  35  Vestre  Boulevard,  Copenhagen,  B.
Hudson,  Miss  Alice,  Meads  Court,  Eastbourne.
Hudson,  Miss  Katie  E.,  Meads  Court,  Eastbourne.
Hudson,  Morris,  St.  Cuthbert's,  Bathampton,  Somerset.
Hughes,  Professor  Alfred,  Eastnor  House,  Malvern  Link.
*Hull,  Mrs.  Carrie  G.,  20  Garfield  Place,  Poughkeepsie,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Hume-Rothery,  J.  H.,  Mendip  House,  Headington  Hill,  Oxford.
Humphreys,  E.  Noel,  Caerycaee,  Hoole,  Chester.
Humphreys,  T. H. A., Survey Department, Giza  (Mudiria)^
Egypt.

Hunkin,  Rev.  J.  W.,  M.C.,  C.F.,  126  Huntingdon  Road,  Cambridge.
Hurwitz,  W.  A.,  Ph.D.,  Cornell  University,  Ithaca,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Hutchinson,  F.  W.  H.,  Grove  Lawns,  St.  Albans,  Herts.
*Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  519  West  149th  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Imamura,  Prof.  Shinkichi,  Clinic  for  Psychiatry,  Imperial  Univer-
sity, Kioto,  Japan.

Ince,  Miss  Gladys,  c/o  R.  Hasted,  Esq.,Yeatton  Lodge,  Ootacamund,
S.  India.

"Tngham,  Charles  B.,  Moira  House,  Eastbourne.
Ingram,  Mss  M.  I.,  The  Priory,  Wimbledon  Common,  London,
S.W.  19.

limes,  C.  E.,  31  Randolph  Crescent,  London,  W.  9.
Innes,  Miss  H.  K.,  4  Greycoat  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
*  Irving,  Rev.  W.  S.,  Oxenhall  Vicarage,  Newent,  Glos.
Isaac,  Miss  Edith,  The  Lodge,  Kempsey,  Worcester.
Jacks,  L.  P.,  LL.D.,  D.D.,  Shotover  Edge,  Headington,  Oxford.


LXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


579


James,  Brig. -General  C.  H.  L.,  C.B.,  United  Service  Club,  London,
S.W.  1.

*Janies,  Major  E.  A.  H.,  Newtown,  Newbury,  Berks.
James,  Henry,  10  East  10th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
James,  Mrs.  Joseph,  Southwood,  Barnt  Green,  Birmingham.

*  James,  Miss  S.  Boucher,  Hallsannery,  Bideford,  N.  Devon.

*  Jameson,  David,  New  Castle,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

*Janson,  E.  W.,  11  Eaton  Mansions,  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.  1,
Jaye,  William  R.,  Springwood  Lodge,  Oakfield  Road,  Clapton.
London,  E.  5.

Jeboult,  F.  M.,  19  Edith  Villas,  West  Kensington,  London,  W.  14.
*Jekyll,  Miss  D.,  Sunnybank,  San  Remo,  Italy.
Jenkinson,  W.  E.,  Highthorn,  King  Cross  Road,  Halifax,  Yorks.
Jennings-Bramly,  Mrs.,  Hampton  Court  Palace,  Middlesex.
Jennings-Bramly,  Mrs.,  Asolo  (Treviso),  Italy.
Job,  H.  S.,  c/o  The  National  Bank  of  Egypt,  Khartoum,  Egypt.
Johnson,  Charles  R.,  340  Main  Street,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Johnson,  Miss  E.  C,  25  York  Street  Chambers,  Bryanston  Square,

London,  W.  1.
Johnson,  Mrs.,  Abbot's  Bay,  nr.  Keswick.

Johnson,  R.  F.,  Chang  Wang  Hutung,  The  Old  Drum  Tower  Road,
Peking,  China.

*  Johnstone,  Hon.  Gilbert,  43  Wilton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.  1.
Jones,  Miss  Constance.  Meldon  House,  Weston-super-Mare.
Jones,  J.  Herbert,  Hollydene,  Montague  Road,  Cambridge.

*  Jones,  Sir  Lawrence  J.,  Bart.,  39  Harrington  Gardens,  London,

S.W.  7.

*  Jones,  Miss  Lilian  I.,  120  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.  9.

*  Jordan-Smith,  Benjamin,  Orchardlea,  Grosvenor  Road,  Caversham,

Reading.

Joscelyne,  A.  F.  Cecil,  65  Richmond  Road,  Dalston,  London,
E.  8.

*Judah,  Noble  B.,  2701  Prairie  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Judd,  Mrs.  Sylvestre  Dwight,  163  Maple  Street,  Maiden,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Justum,  J.  A.,  224  Ashley  Gardens,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Karstaedt,  L.,  6015  Washington  Avenue,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  The  Hut,  Holmwood,  Dorking.
*Kellett,  Mrs.  Kelsall.

Kelly,  Miss  Eleanor  B.,  Windy  Harbour,  Ash  well,  Baldock,  Herts.


580


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*  Kelso,  Captain,  R.N.,  Horkesley  Park,  Colchester,  Essex.

Kelso,  Mrs.  H.  J.,  425  W.  Church  Avenue,  Knoxville,  Term.,  U.S.A.

Kenneth,  H.,  Lindley,  Bycullah  Park,  Enfield,  Middlesex.
*Kennion,  T.  Alfred,  The  Maples,  Hoddesdon,  Herts.

Ken  way,  Mrs.,  Mendip  View,  Winscombe,  Somerset.

Keough,  John  J.,  119|  Calyer  Street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Ker,  Miss,  Napier  Lodge,  Strathblane,  Glasgow.
*Kerr,  George,  M.B.,  6  St.  Colme  Street,  Edinburgh.

Kerr-Clark,  Lady,  Moore  Abbey,  Monasterevan,  Ireland.

Kershaw,  Mrs.  Ronald  H.,  Seacourt,  Hayling  Island,  Hants.

King,  Miss  R.  Estelle,  19  Highfield  Road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
*King,  H.  F.  Locke,  J. P.,  Brooklands,  Weybridge,  Surre}^.
*King,  Dr.  W.  A.  D.,  1  Bishop's  Place,  Paignton,  Devon,
*Kingscote,  Mrs.,  4  South  wick  Crescent,  London,  W.  2.
*Kingsford,  Miss  S.  M.,  5  Doneraile  Street,  Fulham,  London,  S.W.  6.

Kingsley,  Mrs.,  65  Belsize  Park  Gardens,  London,  N.W.  3.

Kitter master,  Rev.  Digby  B.,  Dame  Armstrong  House,  Harrow-
on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.

Knight,  Charles  N.,  36  Kensington  Park  Road,  London,  W.  11.

Knight,  Maxwell,  18  University  Mansions,  Putney, London,  S.W. 15.
*Knoblock,  Edward,  G2,  The  Albany,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.  1.

Lafone,  A.  W.,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  Walton-on-Thames.

Laing,  R.  M., "  Ogilvie,"  Cashmere  Hills,  Christchurch,  New
Zealand.

Lamb,  Charles  George,  77  Glisson  Road.  Cambridge.

Lambert,  G.  W.,  86  Chester  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Larken,  E.  P.,  98  Warwick  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.  14.

Latham,  Miss  Edith,  9  Newbury  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Latshaw,  Allen,  Berwyn,  Penn.,  U.S.A.

Lauritzen,  Severin,  Holte,  Denmark.

Laverton,  Major  H.  S.,  Leigh  ton,  Westbury,  Wilts.

Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  Woodcroft,  Oxted,  Surrey.

Leaf,  Mrs.  A.  H.,  Woodcroft,  Oxted,  Surrey.

Leaf,  Miss  E.  M.,  4  Barton  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Leaf,  F.  A.,  Newlands,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.
*Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.D.,  6  Sussex  Place,  Regent's  Park,  London,
N.W.  1.

Ledyard,  Mrs.  R.  F.  H.,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Lee,  Blewett,  c/o  Illinois  Central  Railroad  Co.,  32  Nassau  Street,
New  York,  U.S.A.


LXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


581


*Lee,  Dr.  H.  D.  C.,  Technical  College,  Huddersfield.

*Legg,  W.  A.,  14  Victoria  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.  1.

*Leigh,  Lord,  Stoneleigh  Abbey,  Kenilworth,  Warwickshire.

Lenon,  J.  W.,  c/o  P.O.  Kyambu,  British  East  Africa.

Leon,  Mrs.  Philip,  4m  Montagu  Mansions,  Portman  Square,
London,  W.  1.

Leonard,  Thomas,  223  W.  School  Lane,  Germantown,  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  U.S.A.

Le  Patourel,  Miss  M.  L.,  26  Walpole  Street,  Chelsea,  London,
S.W.  3.

Leslie,  Rev.  G.  Lindsay,  The  Manse,  Eddleston,  Peebleshire.
Leslie,  James,  1029  Corydon  Avenue,  Winnipeg,  Canada.
*Lethbridge,  Alan  B.,  Stockwood  House,  nr.  Keynsham,  Somerset.
Lewin,  Rev.  C.  H.,  St.  John's  Parsonage,  Keswick.
Lewis,  David  J.,  United  States  Tariff  Commission,  Washington,
D.C.,  U.S.A.

Lewis,  Mrs.  Gerald  V.,  The  Yews,  Bletchingley,  Surrey.

Librarian,  Public  Library  of  Adelaide,  Australia.

Librarian,  Adelbert  College  of  Western  Reserve  University,  Cleve-
land, Ohio,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Amsterdam  Free  Library,  Amsterdam,  New  York,
U.S.A.

Librarian,  Binghamton  Public  Library,  Binghamton,  New  York,
U.S.A.

Librarian,  Birmingham  Public  Libraries,  Reference  Department,

Ratcliff  Place,  Birmingham.
Librarian,  Boston  Athenaeum,  lOf  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,

U.S.A.

Librarian,  Bowdoin  College  Library,  Brunswick,  Maine,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Public  Library,  etc.,  Church  Street,  Brighton.
Librarian,  Public  Library  of  the  District  of  Columbia,  Washington,
D.C.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Library  of  Congress,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Librarian (Hon.) of the Constitutional Club,  Embankment,

London,  W.C.  2.
Librarian,  The  John  Crerar  Library,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Enoch  Pratt  Free  Library  of  Baltimore  City,  Baltimore,

Md.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Grosvenor  Public  Library,  c/o  Messrs.  Stevens  &  Brown,
4  Trafalgar  Square,  London,  'W.C.  2.


582


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Librarian,  Guildhall  Library,  London,  E.G.  2.
Librarian,  Hackley  Public  Library,  Muskegon,  Mich.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Harvard  College  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Imperial  Library,  Metcalfe  Hall,  Calcutta,  India.
^Librarian,  Iowa  State  Library,  Des  Moines,  Iowa,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Jamsetjee  Nesserwanjee  Petit  Institute,  Hornby  Road,
Bombay.

Librarian,  Free  Public  Library  of  Jersey  City,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Leeds  Library,  Commercial  Street,  Leeds.

Librarian,  Leland  Stanford  Junior  University,  Calif.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Library  Association,  Portland,  Oregon,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Meadville  Theological  School,  Meadville,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Mercantile  Library,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Minneapolis  Athenaeum,  Minneajiolis,  Minn.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Natal  Society  and  Central  Library,  Pieterrnaritzburg,
Natal,  S.  Africa.

Librarian,  Newberry  Library,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society,  Newcastle-upon-
Tyne.

Librarian,  Public  Library,  New  Bridge  Street,  Newcastle-upon-
Tyne.

Librarian,  New  Hampshire  State  Library,  Concord,  N.H.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Public  Library  of  New  South  Wales,  c/o  Messrs.  Truslove

&  Hanson,  153  Oxford  Street,  London,  W.  1.
Librarian,  New  York  Public  Library,  c/o  Messrs.  Stevens  &  Brown,

4  Trafalgar  Square,  London,  W.C.  2.
Librarian,  Ohio  State  Library,  Columbus,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
*Librarian,  Omaha  Public  Library  and  Museum,  19  and  Harvey

Streets,  Omaha,  Nebraska,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Pennsylvania  State  Library,  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Public  Library,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Seattle  Public  Library,  Seattle,  Washington,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Selskabet  for  psykisk  Forskning,  Nordahl  Brunsgade  22,

Christiania,  Norway.
Librarian,  Selskabet  for  psykisk  Forskning, Graabrodretorv  7,

Copenhagen.

Librarian,  Theological  Seminary,  Rochester,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Theosophical  Society,  18  Tavistock  Square,  London
W.C.  1.

Librarian,  The  University,  Aberdeen.


LXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


583


Librarian,  General  Library  of  the  University  of  Chicago,  Chicago,
111.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Bibliotheque  Victor  Cousin,  L'Universite  de  Paris,
Librarian,  University  Library,  Glasgow.

Librarian,  University  of  Minnesota  Library,  Minneapolis,  Minne-
sota, U.S.A.

Librarian,  University  of  Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  University  of  Sydney,  New  South  Wales,  Australia.
Librarian,  Victoria  Public  Library,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Librarian,  Wellesley  College,  Wellesley,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Dr.  Williams'  Library,  Gordon  Square,  London,  W.C.  1.
Librarian,  Yale  University  Library,  New  Haven,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
*  Linden,  Edward  F.  B.,  11  South  Mansions,  Brondesbury,  London,
N.W.

*Little,  Mrs.,  Park  House,  Whaley  Bridge,  nr.  Stockport.
*Llewellin,  Mrs.  W.,  Upton  House,  nr.  Poole,  Dorset.

Lloyd,  Judge  Frank  T.,  Camden,  N.J.,  U.S.A.

Lloyd,  Miss  Julia,  Hillside,  Berkswell,  nr.  Coventry.

Lodge,  Miss  E.  C,  Lady  Margaret  Hall,  Oxford.
*Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  F.R.S.,  Mariemont,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.

Lodge,  Robert,  Compton  Wood,  28  Carlisle  Road,  Eastbourne.

Lombardi,  G,  2817  Routh  Street,  Dallas,  Texas,  U.S.A.

Long,  Miss  Constance,  M.D.,  48  Gordon  Square,  London,  W.C.  1.

Lorimer,  Miss  Emilia  S.,  45  Marston  Street,  Oxford.

Lubbock,  Mrs.  Geoffrey,  Greenhill,  Sutton-Veny,  Wiltshire.

Lucy,  Miss  Mabel,  1  Laurence  Mansions,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.

Ludford-Astley,  Mrs.  A.  G.,  8  Sloane  Terrace  Mansions,  Sloane
Terrace,  London,  S.W.  1.

Lunn,  Arnold,  Palace  Hotel,  Montana,  Sur  Sierre,  Switzerland.

Lyall,  Mrs.,  6  York  Street  Chambers,  Bryanston  Square,  London,
W.  1.

Lyall,  Sir  Charles  James,  82  Cornwall  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  7.
*Lyall,  Major  Edward,  D.S.O.,  19  Victoria  Road,  Darlington.
Lyell,  Major  A.  G.,  68  Upper  Richmond  Road,  Putney,  London,
S.W.  15.

*Lyon,  Miss  C.  C,  Ashcroft,  Prestwood,  Great  Missenden.
Lyttelton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Alfred,  16  Great  College  Street,  Westminster,
London,  S.W.  1.

*Macaulay,  Miss  Gertrude  F.,  Cairnbrae, 109  The  Boulevard,
Westmount,  Montreal,  Canada.


584


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Macdonald,  Prof.  Duncan  Black,  Hartford  Theological  Seminary,

Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
Macdonald,  Miss  Isabelle  M.,  M.B.,  47  Seymour  Street,  Portman

Square,  London,  W.  1.
*Macfarlane,  Mrs.  Scott  B.,  Torpedo  Station,  Newport,  R.I.,  U.S.A.
Mackay,  N.  Douglas,  M.D.,  Dall-Avon,  Aberfeldy,  Perth.
Mackenzie,  Miss  Maud  R.  R.,  56  South  Eaton  Place,  London,

S.W.  1.

Mackenzie,  Lady  Muir,  22  Draycott  Place,  Cadogan  Gardens,

London,  S.W.  3.
*Mackie,  Dr.  John,  Ockbrook,  nr.  Derby.
Mackintosh,  Robert,  3  Frognal  Lane,  London,  N.W.  3.
Macklin,  Miss  Helen  E.,  141  Inverness  Terrace,  London,  W.  2.
Macleod,  Surgeon  Commander  G.  E.,  R.N.,  18  Vyvyan  Terrace,

Clifton,  Bristol.

Macnaghten,  E.  L.,  c/o  National  Bank  of  India.  Bishopsgate,
London,  E.G.

Madders,  Mrs.  H.  F.,  87  Hampstead  Way,  London,  N.W.  4.
*Magrane,  Mrs.  Victor,  c/o  Willett  Building,  Sloane  Square,  London,
S.W.  1.

Mahler,  Mrs.  John,  Bronygarth,  Oswestry,  Salop.
Main  waring,  Mrs.,  11  Wilton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.  1.
Malda,  Luis,  Gante  No.  1,  Mexico  City,  Mexico.
Mallet,  Right  Hon.  Sir  Louis,  G.C.M.G.,  C.B.,  Wardes,  Otham,
Maidstone,  Kent.
*Mander,  Geoffrey  Le  Mesurier,  Wightwick  Manor,  Wolverhampton.
*Manfield,  Miss  Muriel  R.,  63  Delaware  Mansions,  London,  W.  9.
Mann,  Rev.  Frederic,  Coombe  Dale,  Coombe  Road,  South  Croydon,
Surrey.

*Manning,  Miss  H.  T.,  102  Central  Avenue,  Plainfield,  New  Jersey,
U.S.A.

Mansell,  Andrew  Evans,  Mount  Vernon,  Melton  Mowbray,  Tas-
mania.

Mantell,  Colonel  A.  M.,  c/o  Rev.  T. C.  Angrave,  East  Leake  Rectory,
Loughborough.

Marriott,  Mrs.,  11d  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  N.W.  1.
*Marsden-Smedley,  Mrs.,  Lea  Green,  Matlock,  Derbyshire.
Marsden,  E.,  12  Ellerdale  Road,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.  3.
Marsh,  Edward  H.,  5  Raymond  Buildings,  Gray's  Inn,  London,
W.C.  1.


Lxxvur.]


Members  and  Associates.


585


Marston,  Charles,  J. P.,  Afcot,  Compton,  nr.  Wolverhampton.
*Marston,  Commander  G.  M.,  R.N.,  Park  Lodge,  Albert  Gate,
Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.  1.
Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  Osbornes,  Liphook,  Hants.
Marten,  Rev.  G.  H.,  St.  Mark's,  Purley,  Surrey.
*Martin,  E.  Le  Breton,  20  Portland  Place,  London,  W.  1.
Martin,  Mrs.  J.  Biddulph,  Norton  Park,  Bredon's  Norton,  near
Tewkesbury.

Martin,  T.  B.,  Woodlands,  Snaresbrook,  London,  E.  18.
*Martindale,  Miss  B.,  4  Piazza  Paganica,  Rome,  Italy.

Martineau,  Alfred  Edward,  Norfolk  Lodge,  Crowborough.
*Mason,  Miss,  211  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Mason,  Miss  M.  H.

*Mather,  Mrs.,  Langholme  Bridge  Cottage,  Lowick,  nr.  Ulverston.
*Mather,  Rev.  Herbert,  Royal  Automobile  Club,  PaU  Mall,  London,
S.W.  1.

*Matthews,  Dr.  F.,  Welsh  Row  House,  Nantwich.
*Matthews,  H.  N.,  Aldwick  House,  Bognor,  Sussex.
Matthews,  Dr.  Caroline,  13  Longton  Grove,  Sydenham,  London,
S.E.  26.

*Maunsell,  Captain  G.  A.,  R.E.,

Maxwell,  Dr.  Joseph,  37  rue  Thiac,  Bordeaux,  France.
*Maxwell,  Sir  John  Stirling,  Bart.,  21  Portland  Place,  London,  W.  1.
Mayor,  R.  G.,  11  Campden  Hill  Square,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
M'Alpine,  Robert,  The  Croft,  Totteridge,  Herts.
M'Clellan,  Mrs.  Clara  D.,  Briarcliff  Manor,  New  York,  U.S.A.
McClelland,  Rev.  C.  P.,  Carmel,  New  York,  U.S.A.
M'Clure,  Henry,  M.D.

*M'Connel,  D.  R.,  M.A.,  The  Camp,  Steep,  Petersfield,  Hants.

M'Connel,  Mrs.  D.  R.,  The  Camp,  Steep,  Petersfield,  Hants.

M'Connel,  H.  W.,  M.B.,  M.R.C.S.,  Matlaske  Hall,  Norwich.

M'Connel,  Mrs.,  Matlaske  Hall,  Norwich.
*M'Donald,  Miss  E.  M.,  6  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  Ireland.

M'Dougall,  WiUiam,  F.R.S.,  M.Sc,  M.B.,  89  Banbury  Road,
Oxford.

M'Gusty,  G.  A.,  35  Leeson  Park,  Dublin,  Ireland.
*MKay,  H.  G.,  St.  Bede's  School,  Duke's  Drive,  Eastbourne.

M'Keever,  Buell,  3900  Lake  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
*M'Kenna,  Mrs.  Theodore,  24  Bryanston  Square,  London,  W.  1.

MTntyre,  Mrs.,  The  Nook,  Cross  Lanes,  Findon,  Sussex.


586


Members  and  Associates.


[part


M'Laren,  Rev.  David  J.,  The  Manse,  Trinity  Gask,  Auchterarder.
M'Laren,  Miss  M.  C,  Great  Comp,  Borough  Green,  Kent.
M'Lauchlan,  G.  M.,  Claremont  Lodge,  College  Hill,  St.  Heliers,

Jersey,  C.I.
M'Neile,  Rev.  R.  F.,  Redgate,  Uppingham.

M'Vickar,  Mrs.  John  A.,  128  East  60th  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Mead,  G.  R.  S.,  47  Campden  Hill  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.

Meek,  Maximilian  de.
*Meek,  Mrs.,  6  Alexandra  Villas,  Brighton.

Megson,  Albert,  Fern  Villa,  Headlands,  Ossett,  Yorks.

Mehrji,  Munchershaw  Hormusji,  M.D.,  3  Batlivala  Villa,  Sleater
Road,  Bombay,  India.

Meissner,  Mrs.  de,  1524  31st  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
*Merton,  Gerald,  Slopes,  Woldingham.
*Micklethwait,  Richard  K.

Milburn,  Rev.  R.  Gordon,  Black  Bridge,  Beaulieu,  Hants.
*Mildmay,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  St.  John,  121  Mount  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Miles,  Miss,  59  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Millard,  Mrs.  Alrnira  B.,  c/o  The  American  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  44  East  23rd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

*  Millard,  C.  Killick,  M.D.,  Groby  Road,  Leicester.
Miller,  Mrs.  Carolyn  A.,  Gainesville,  Florida,  U.S.A.

*Milward,  Graham,  77  Colmore  Row,  Birmingham.
*Mirlees,  W.  J.,  Shelford,  Cambs.

*  Mitchell,  T.  W.,  M.D.,  Hoath  Cottage,  Hadlow,  nr.  Tonbridge.
*MoncriefT,  Captain  M.  M.,  Hemley,  Woodbridge.

*  Montague,  Mrs.,  Penton,  Crediton,  Devon.

Monteagle, The Lord, K.P.,  Mount Trenchard,  Foynes,  Co.
Limerick.

Monypenny,  Mrs.  A.  E.  G.,  5  Talbot  Square,  London,  W.  2.
*Moore-Brabazon,  Lieut. -Colonel  J.  T.  C,  11  Ennismore  Gardens,

London,  S.W.  7.
*Moore,  His  Honour  Judge,  42  Acacia  Road,  London,  N.W.  8.
Morier,  Mrs.,  65  Hamilton  Terrace,  London,  N.W.  8.
*Morley,  Mrs.  Evelyn,  7  Green  Street,  Park  Lane,  London,  W.  1.
Morris,  Miss  D.  M.,  284  Bramham  Gardens,  South  Kensington,
London,  S.W.  5.

Morris,  Mrs.,  284  Bramham  Gardens,  South  Kensington,  London,
S.W.  5.


LXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


587


*Morse,  Major  John,  Vinehelez-de-Haut  Manor,  St.  Ouen,  Jersey,
CJ.

Morton,  Mrs.  F.  N.,  73  West  La  Crosse  Avenue,  Lansdowne,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Morton,  Miss  Mary,  15  Greville  Road,  London,  N.W.  6.
Moses,  E.  J.,  c/o  Messrs.  E.  D.  Sassoon  &  Co.,  4  Mission  Row,  Cal-
cutta.

Moss-Blundell,  F.  B.,  19  Lebanon  Park,  Twickenham,  Surrey.
Moultrie,  Miss  A.  J.  C,  6  Oakhill  Road,  Putney,  London,  S.W.  15.
Muirhead,  Mrs.  James  F.,  19  Lancaster  Road,  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.  3.

*Mullins,  Colonel  W.  B.,  Ambersham  House,  Midhurst,  Sussex.
-Murphy,  Gardner,  88  Main  Street,  Concord,  Massachusetts,  U.S.A.
Murphy,  Miss  Imogen  H.,  23  Somerset  Terrace,  Duke's  Road,
London,  W.C.  1.

*Murray,  Professor  Gilbert,  LL.D.,  Litt.D.,  82  Woodstock  Road,
Oxford.

Murray,  Miss  Jessie,  M.B.,  14  Endsleigh  Street,  Tavistock  Square,

London,  W.C.  1.
Murton,  Miss  Josephine,  The  Firs,  Charing,  Kent.
*Myers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  12  Cleveland  Row,  St.  James's,  London,

S.W.  1.

*Myers,  L.  H.,  Twyford  Lodge,  East  Grinstead.
Myers,  W.  Wykeham,  M.B.,  H.B.M.'s  Consular  Agency,  Pagoda
Anchorage,  China.
*Nash,  Miss  Diana,  2611  Guilford  Road,  Cleveland  Heights,  Cleve-
land, Ohio,  U.S.A.
*  Nation,  Captain  Cecil,  R.E.,  59  St.  James's  Court,  London,  S.W.
*Neale,  Edward,  6  Lyndhurst  Gardens,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.  3.
Neild,  Miss  Maria,  27  Brompton  Square,  London,  S.W.  3.
Neustadter,  Louis  W.,  461  Mission  Street,  San  Francisco,  CaL,
U.S.A.

*Neville,  Lady,  Banstead  Place,  Banstead,  Surrey.
*Newbold,  Eric,  Roundbush,  Aldenham,  Herts.
*Newbold,  Mrs.  E.,  Roundbush,  Aldenham,  Herts.
^Newcastle,  The  Duke  of,  Clumber,  Worksop,  Notts.

Newton,  Miss  F.  E.,  156  Sloane  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.

Newton,  Heber,  Oamaru,  New  Zealand.

Newton,  Miss  I.,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.

Nicholson,  Lady,  35  Harrington  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  7.


588


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Nicoll,  Mrs.  DeLancey,  3  Seamore  Place,  Park  Lane,  London,  W.  1.
*Nicolls,  Brig.-General  E.  G.,  C.B.,  19  St.  Andrew's  Road,  Bedford.
*Ninnis,  Roger  E.,  M.B.,  H.M.S.  Neptune,  c/o  G.P.O.,  London.
*Nisbet,  E.  T.,  Birnieknowes,  Cullercoats,  Northumberland.
Niven,  G.,  Shiantelle,  Aldrington  Road,  Streatham  Park,  London,
S.W.  16.

Noel,  Miss  Frances,  Becket  House,  Thaxted,  nr.  Dunmow,  Essex.
Noel-Cox,  H.  L.,  M.D.,  F.R.A.S.,  12  Kilburn  Priory,  London,
N.W.6.

Norris,  Stuart,  3  Birchfield  Road,  Birmingham.
Northcote,  Rev.  H.,  Twinstead  Rectory,  Sudbury,  Suffolk.
Nott,  William  F.,  3  Glebe  Villas,  London  Road,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Nutter,  Miss  H.  G.,  6  Acacia  Road,  Norbury,  London,  S.W.  16.
Odell,  S.  W.,  410  Citizens  Savings  Bank  Building,  Pasadena,  Cal.,
U.S.A.

Ogilvie,  Mrs.  Robert,  c/o  R.  G.  Ross,  Esq., 10  Hill  Street,
Edinburgh.

Ogle,  Major  N.,  67th  Punjabis,  Quetta,  Baluchistan,  India.
*01dham,  Mrs.,  11  Albany  Villas,  Hove.
Oldham,  G.  F.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Dunelm,  Haden  Road,  Old
Hill,  Staffs.

Oman,  Sir  Charles  W.  C,  Frewin  Hall,  Oxford.
"Onslow,  Hon.  H.,  Clandon  Park,  Guildford.

Osborne,  Miss  H.,  2  Northcote  Mansions,  Heath  Street,  Hampstead,
London,  N.W.  3.
:::Osmaston,  Mrs.,  Stoneshill,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.
:::Owen,  A.  S.,  Keble  College,  Oxford.

Owen- Williams,  Mrs.,  Ridgeway,  nr.  Nar  berth,  Pembrokeshire.

Oxenham,  Mrs.,  3  Baring  Crescent,  Exeter.

Pack-Beresford,  Denis  R.,  J.P.,  Fenagh  House,  Bagenalstown,  Co.
Carlo  w.

Pagan,  Mrs.  G.  L.,  6  Clarendon  Crescent,  Edinburgh.
Paget,  Sir  Richard,  12  Chester  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.
Page-Turner,  G.  A.,  J. P.,  15  Palmeira  Square,  Hove,  Sussex.
*Paley,  G.  A.,

*  Palmer,  Mark,  B.A.,  33  Fitzjames  Avenue,  West  Kensington,

London,  W.  14.

*Park,  Major  William,  28  Nassington  Road,  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.  3.

*  Parkin,  John,  Blaithwaite,  Carlisle.


LXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


589


*Parr, F. C, Llwynoun, Great  Ormes  Head, Llandudno,  N.
Wales.

Parr,  W.  H.,  10  Westbury  Park,  Bristol.
Parsons,  Ambrose,  Said  House,  Chiswick  Mall,  London,  W.  4.
Parsons,  Karl,  Speedwell,  Northwood,  Middlesex.
*Parsons,  Miss  Llewellyn,  99  Park  Avenue,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Parsons,  N.  M.,  19b  Pembridge  Square,  London,  W.  2.
Patel,  F.  J.,  L.R.C.P.,  3  Church  Gate  Street,  Bombay.
Paterson,  Miss  Mary  N.,  Royal  Marine  Hotel,  Ventnor,  Isle  of
Wight.

*Patton,  Mrs.,  Sesame  Club,  29  Dover  Street,  London,  W.  1.
Paul,  J.  Rodman,  505  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Payne, Ernest, 10  Wellington  Court, Knightsbridge,  London,
S.W.  1.

Pease,  Mrs.  J.  R.,  Sesame  Club,  29  Dover  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Peck,  Miss  Charlotte  L.,  Maidencombe  House,  St.  Mary  Church,
S.  Devon.

Peck,  Geo.  L.,  227  Walnut  Street,  Sewickley  Pennsylvania,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Peckham,  Orville,  Oak  Hall,  Tryon,  N.C.,  U.S.A.
Pedley,  Chas.  H.,  Winterley  House,  nr.  Crewe.

Pennington,  Mrs.  Henry,  c/o  Barclays  Bank  Ltd.,  10  London

Road,  Camberley,  Surrey.
Penny,  W.  R.,  Railway  Stores  Department,  S.A.  Railways,  Salt

River,  nr.  Cape  Town,  S.  Africa.
Perceval,  Hon.  Mrs.  Dudley,  153  Church  Street,  Chelsea,  London,

S.W.  3.

*Perdicaris,  Ion,  The  Manor  House,  Chislehurst,  Kent.
Perkins,  Miss  S.  R.,  c/o  Dr.  Perkins,  57  Harley  Street,  London,
W.  1.

Perry,  Sir  E.  Cooper,  M.D.,  Superintendent's  House,  Guy's  Hospital,
London,  S.E.  1.

Perrott,  F.  D.  M.,  24  Bridge  Road,  Worthing.

Perry,  Horace  H.,  Court  Royal,  144  King's  Cliff,  Brighton.

Perry,  T.  S.,  312  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Perry,  Mrs.  T.  S.,  312  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Pfau,  A.  R.,  Junr.,  Mankato,  Minnesota,  U.S.A.
*Phillimore,  Hon.  Mrs.,  Kendals,  Elstree,  Herts.
*Pickard,  Mrs.  Fortescue,  31  Buckingham  Gate,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Piddington,  J.  G.,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.


590


Members  and  Associates.


[PAKT


*Piercy,  Major  B.  H.,  94  Piccadilly,  London,  W.  1.

Pigou,  Professor  Arthur  Cecil,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
*Pilcher,  Giles  T.,  Treen,  Frith  Hill,  Godalming,  Surrey.
*Pinney,  Miss  Ida  A.,  17  Doune  Terrace,  North  Kelvinside.  Glasgow.
Piper,  John  E.,  LL.B.,  10  Herondale  Avenue, Wandsworth  Common,

London,  S.W.  18.
Pithapuram,  The  Rajah  of,  Pithapuram,  Godavari  Dist.,  Madras
Presidency,  India.
*Pitt,  St.  George  Lane  Fox,  Travellers'  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.  1.

Pitt,  Mrs.  Fox,  Presaddfed,  Bodedern.  Valley,  Anglesey.

Place,  Rev.  C.  A.,  Lancaster,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Platt,  Mrs.  Evelyn,  Kingwood,  Thames  Ditton,  Surrey.

Plenty,  E.  P.,  Hill  House,  Wash  Hill,  Newbury,  Berks.

Plowden,  Mrs.  Strachur  Park,  Loch  Fyne  Side,  Argyllshire.

Pollard,  J.  Ellery,  L.R.C.P.,  7  Esme  Road,  Sparkhill,  Birmingham.
*Pollard,  W.  H.,  M.B.,  343  Hagley  Road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.

Ponsonby,  Hon.  Mrs.  C.  B.,  14  West  Halkin  Street,  London,
S.W.  1.

*Pontifex,  Dudley  D.,  73  Alleyn  Park,  West  Dulwich,  London,
S.E.  21.

Pooley,  H.  F.,  Scotter,  Well  Walk,  Hampstead,  London,  NW.  3.
*Poore,  Mrs.  J.  B.,  17  Rosemount  Road,  Bournemouth  West.
Portsmouth,  The  Countess  of,  Hurstbourne  Park,  Whitchurch,
Hants.

Post,  Mrs.  Wm.,  St.  Lucie,  Fla.  ;  and  Buckhannon,  W.  Va.,  U.S.A.
*  Potter,  John  Wilson,  219  Ashley  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
Powell,  C.  Berkeley,  J.P.,  283  Metcalfe  Street,  Ottawa,  Canada.
Powell,  Mrs.  C.  Berkeley,  283  Metcalfe  Street,  Ottawa,  Canada.
Powell,  Ellis  T.,  D.Sc,  Rosedene,  Brondesbury  Park,  London,
NW.  6.

*Powell,  Mrs.,  Ashdown  Place,  Forest  Row,  Sussex.

Powles,  Lewis  Charles,  Bother  Cliff,  Rye,  Sussex.
*Preedy,  Kenelm,  77  Warwick  Road,  London,  S.W.  5.
:;:Prideaux-Brune,  H.,  21  Micheldever  Road,  Lee,  London,  S.E.

Prindle,  H.  E.,  New  Paltz,  Ulster  Co.,  New  York,  U.S.A.
*Proctor,  Captain  G.  Norman,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co.,  Hornby  Road,
Bombay,  India.

*Pulver,  S.  H,  Dunedin  House,  Basinghall  Avenue,  London,  E.G.  2.
*Pumphrey,  Mrs.,  Hindley  Hall,  Stockfield-on-Tyne.


LXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


591


Putman,  Miss  Irene,  328  Walnut  Avenue,  San  Diego,  CaL,  U.S.A.
Pye,  W.  A.,  Priest  Hill,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.
*Pynsent,  R.  B.,  Isthmian  Club,  105  Piccadilly,  London,  W.  1.
Quackenbos, John  D.,  M. !)..  37  West  73rd  Street,  New  York
City,  U.S.A.

*Quinby,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Br'idgewater,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Radcliffe-Whitehead,  Ralph,  Woodstock,  Ulster  Co.,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
*RadclyftVHall,  Miss  M.,  Chip  Chase,  Hadley  Wood,  Herts.

Rae,  J.  Burnett,  M.B.,  145  Harley  Street,  London,  W.  1.

Raikes,  E.  B.,  Drayton  Old  Lodge,  Norwich.

Raikes,  Mrs.,  Beomonds,  Chertsey,  Surrey.

*  Raines,  Lady,  46  Sussex  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.  2.
*Rajagopaliengar,  R.  V.,  Royampet,  Tiruvadi  P.O.,  Tanjore  Dt.,

Madras  Presidency,  India.
*Rampling-Rose,  W.,  Llyndir  Hall,  Rossett,  nr.  Wrexham.
Ramsden,  Miss,  16  Incognito  Gade,  Christiania.

*  Ransom,  Francis,  Newlands,  Hitchin,  Herts.
*Rashdall,  The  Very  Rev.  Hastings,  The  Deanery,  Carlisle.
*Rashleigh,  John  C.  S.,  M.D.,  Throwleigh,  Okehampton,  Devon.

Rawlinson,  Rev.  G.  C,  20  Holbein  House,  London,  S.W.  1.
Rawsthorn,  Mrs.,  Yew  Trees,  Ashton-on-Ribble,  Preston.
*Rayleigh,  Lady,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.
Reade,  Herbert  V.,  C.B.,  181  Queen's  Gate,  S.  Kensington,  London,
S.W.  7.

Ready,  Miss  E.  A.,  74  Regent  Road,  Leicester.
*Reckitt,  Miss  Juliet  E.,  20  Dulwich  Wood  Park,  Upper  Norwood,
London,  S.E.  19.
Regina  Madre,  S.  M.  La,  Palazzo  Margherita,  Rome.
Reid,  Mrs.,  Crescent  House,  Effingham  Road,  Surbiton.
Rendall,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  H.,  Dedham  House,  Dedham,  Essex.

*  Richardson,  Dalton,  M.D.,  19  Chalfont  Court,  Upper  Baker  Street,

London,  N.W.  1.

Richardson,  Frederick  W.,  County  Analyst's  Office,  Hustlergate,
Bradford.

Richmond,  Kenneth,  St.  Merryn,  North  Cornwall.
Riddle,  Mrs.,  Hillstead,  Farmington,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
*Ridley,  Henry  N,  F.R.S.,  C.M.G.,  7  Cumberland  Road,  Kew,
Surrey.

Ridley,  M.  Roy,  11  Percival  Road,  Clifton,  Bristol.

*  Ridley,  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Daleham  Gardens,  London,  N.W.  3.


592


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Ridley,  The  Viscountess, 10  Carlton  House  Terrace,  London,
S.W.  1.

Ritchie,  A.  J.,  Oriental  Club,  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.
Ritchie,  Thomas,  J.P.,  Conservative  Club,  St.  James's  Street,
London,  S.W.  1.

Riviere,  Mrs.  Evelyn,  10  Nottingham  Terrace,  York  Gate,  London,
N.W.  1.

Rix,  Rev.  A.  H.,  The  Vicarage,  Shelf  near  Halifax,  Yorks.
*  Roach,  0.  A.,  401  Cedar  Street,  San  Antonio,  Texas.
Robbins,  Judge  Rufus  M.,  West  Palm  Beach,  Florida,  U.S.A.
Roberts,  Mrs.  Hugh.

Roberts,  W.  M.,  Bar  Harbour,  Maine,  U.S.A.

Robertson,  Mrs.  J.  G.,  90  Regent's  Park  Road,  London,  N.W.  1.

Robinson,  George  R.,  25  Water  Street,  Liverpool.
♦Robson,  Miss  E.  M.  U.,  35a  Charlwood  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.

Robson,  Hon.  Kathleen,  26  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.

Rogers,  Edmund  J.  A.,  M.D.,  CM.,  222  West  Colfax  Avenue,
Denver,  Colo.,  U.S.A.

Rogers,  Rev.  E.  C,  St.  John's  Vicarage,  Colchester,  Essex.
♦Rogers,  George  F.,  M.D.,  4  King's  Parade,  Cambridge.

Rogers,  T.  Percival,  Henleaze  Park,  Westbury-on-Trym,  Glouces-
tershire.

Rolleston,  T.  W.,  Ineld,  16  Prince  Arthur  Road,  Hampstead,
London,  N.W.  3.

♦Romanes,  N.  H.,  c/o  Rev.  W.  Ingham,  The  Hall,  Old  Malton,
Yorks.

Ross,  Samuel,  67  Willis  Street,  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Row,  Miss  L.  M.
Rublee,  Mrs.

Russell,  Mrs.,  68  Madeley  Road,  Ealing,  London,  W.  5.
♦Russell,  Mrs.  E.  S.,  Bryans'  Ground,  Presteign,  Radnorshire.
*Rust,  Dr.  Montague,  Boyndie,  Newport,  Fife.

Ryder,  Miss  M.  L.,  122  Pevensey  Road,  Eastbourne.

Ryves,  Miss  Evangeline,  Damory  Cottage,  Walton-on-the-Hill.

St.  Hill,  Mrs.,  Thimble,  Littlewick  Green,  Berks.

St.  John,  Mrs.  E.  N.,  13  Washington  House,  Basil  Street,  London,
S.W.  3.

*Salter,  F.  R.,  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge.
''Salter,  W.  H.,  The  Crown  House,  Newport,  Essex.
*Salter,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  The  Crown  House,  Newport,  Essex.


LXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


593


Samaldas,  Hon.  Lalubhai,  99  Apollo  Street,  Fort,  Bombay,  India.
Sanderson,  W.  R.,  Little  Highleigh  Farm,  Exbridge,  N.  Devon.
Savill,  Mrs.,  M.D.,  35  Weymouth  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Savory,  Ernest  J.  C,  61  Carey  Street,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,
W.C.  2.

*Scatcherd,  Miss  F.  R.,  14  Park  Square,  Regent's  Park,  London,
N.W.  1.

Schaaf,  Albert  E.,  Autonller  Pen  Co.,  Zenobia  Buildings,  Toledo,

Ohio,  U.S.A.
Schauffler,  R.  H.
*Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  D.Sc,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.
Schofield,  Mrs.,  1  Phillimore  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
Schoff,  Wilfred  H.,  110  Montgomery  Avenue,  Cynwyd,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Scott,  Miss  A.  D.,  Darent  Hulme,  Shoreham,  nr.  Sevenoaks.
Scott,  Rev.  D.  D.,  OF.,  The  Manse,  Onehunga,  Auckland,  New

Zealand.

*Scott,  Major  G.  B.,  27th  Punjabis,  Egyptian  Expeditionary  Force.

Scott,  Captain  J.  E.,  Chelsfield,  Sneyd  Park,  Bristol.

Scott,  Mrs.  Minturn,  Waterside  Copse,  Liphook,  Hants.
*Scott,  Sydney  O,  92  Westbourne  Terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.  2
*Scott,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  3  Newnham  Walk,  Cambridge.

Scott,  W.  Sibbald,  M.B.,  Irwell,  Winchcombe,  Glos.

Seabra,  Alberto,  M.D.,  rua  15  de  Novembre  No.  9,  Sao  Paulo,
Brazil.

*Sebastien,  O,  Sanchez,  Samana,  Republica  Dominicana,  W.  Indies.

Sedgwick,  Mrs.  H.  D.,  120  E.  22nd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Selborne,  The  Earl  of,  K.G.,  Blackmoor,  Liss,  Hants.
Sellers,  Miss  R.  A.,  Wellesley  Girls'  High  School,  Naini  Tal,  India.
*Sempill,  Colonel  The  Master  of,  12  Gardnor  Mansions,  Church  Row,
Hampstead,  London,  N.W.  3.
Seton-Karr,  Captain  H.  W.,  8  St.  Paul's  Mansions,  London,  W.6.
*Sewell,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  21  Royal  York  Crescent,  Clifton,  Bristol.
Seymour,  Admiral  of  the  Fleet  Sir  E.  H.,  O.M.,  G.C.B.,  G.C.V.O.,

Hedsor  View,  Maidenhead  Court,  Maidenhead,  Berks.
Shackleford,  Hon.  Thomas  M.,  Room  420,  American  National

Bank  Building,  Tampa,  Florida,  U.S.A.
Shakespear,  Mrs.,  12  Brunswick  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
Shand,  Alexander  F.,  1  Edwardes  Place,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
Shastri, B. G., Railway Magistrate and Registrar,  Udaipur
(Mewar),  India.


594


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Shaw,  Arnold  E.,  Grove  House,  Aspley  Guise,  Beds.
*Shaw,  Mrs.  Bernard,  10  Adelphi  Terrace,  Strand,  London,  W.C.  2.
Shaw,  Rev.  Sir  Charles  J.  Monson,  Bart.,  The  Rectory,  Wrotham,
Kent.

Shaw,  Lady,  10  Moreton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
Sheldon,  Miss  M.,  The  High  School,  Bargate,  Grimsby.
Sheets,  J.  C.

*Shewan,  R.  G.,  c/o  Shewan,  Tomes  &  Co.,  Hong  Kong,  China.
*Shore,  Mrs.  Ross,  8  Delamere  Terrace,  Paddington,  London,  W.  2.
*Shove,  Miss  E.,  M.B.,  30  York  Street  Chambers,  Bryanston  Square,
London,  W.  1.

Sibly,  F.  Arthur,  LL.D.,  Haywardsfield,  Stonehouse,  Glos.
*Sidgwick,  Arthur,  LL.D.,  64  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.
*Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.

Silver,  Mrs.  Kingston,  33  Marsham  Street,  Westminster,  London,
S.W.  1.

Silvester,  Captain  R.  S.,  27  St.  John's  Hill,  Clapham  Junction,

London,  S.W.  11.
Simmonds,  Miss  C.  E.,  33  Clarence  Gate  Gardens,  London,  N.W.  1.
Simmons,  Judge  Daniel  A.,  Jacksonville,  Florida,  U.S.A.
Simpson,  Captain  H.  V.,  R.N.,  C.M.G.,  United  Service  Club,  Pall

Mall,  London,  S.W.  1.
Simpson,  Miss  Price,  Beech  Barns,  Alton,  Hants.
Sinclair,  Miss  May,  1  Blenheim  Road,  St.  John's  Wood,  London,

N.W.  8.

Singh,  Amar,  Hoshiarpur,  Punjab,  India.
*Slight,  L.,  66  Wadham  Road,  North  End,  Portsmouth.
Sloggett,  Lieut. -General  Sir  Arthur,  K.C.M.G.,  K.C.B.,  6s  Bicken-

hall  Mansions,  London,  W.  1.
:;:Sloss,  Mrs.,  c/o  Sunderland  House,  Curzon  Street,  London,  W.  1.
Smith,  Adolphe,  12  Crookham  Road,  Fulham,  London,  S.W.  6.
Smith,  Miss  Beatrice  E.,  Lea,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.
Smith,  G.  Albert,  Rosedene,  7  Melville  Road,  Hove,  Brighton.
*Smith,  H.  Arthur,  7  Queen's  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,  W.  6.
Smith,  Sir  H.  Babington,  C.B.,  121  St.  James's  Court,  Buckingham

Gate,  London,  S.W.  1.
Smith,  J.  Hoyle,  Spring  Bank,  Eccles,  Lancashire.
*Smith,  J.  Parker,  P.C.,  J.P.,  D.L.,  41  Drumsheugh  Gardens,.
Edinburgh.

Smith,  Rev.  Sidney  M.,  Hebden  Bridge  Vicarage,  Yorkshire.


lxxviil]  Members  and  Associates.


595


*Smith,  Mrs.  Wansey,  71  Queen's  Avenue,  Finchiey,  London,  N.  3.
Smith,  Mrs.  William,  c/o  The  Royal  Bank  of  Australia,  18  Bishops-
gate,  London,  E.G.  2.
'  Smith,  William  Hawley,  2039  Knoxville  Avenue,  Peoria,  111.,  U.SA.

Smith,  Rev.  William  J.,  St.  Marnock's  Manse,  Kilmarnock.
*Smith,  W.  Whately,  Rackenford  Lodge,  Wey bridge,  Surrey.
*Smithson,  Mrs.,  42  Tilehouse  Street,  Hitchin,  Herts.
Snow,  Mrs.,  1  Brown  Road,  Hoe  Street,  Walthamstow,  Essex.
Soley,  Mrs.,  66  Holbein  House,  Sloane  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.
Southern,  H.,  24  Carholme  Road,  Forest  Hill,  London,  S.E.  23.
*Spencer,  H.  H.  F.  E.,  58  Hornsey  Lane,  London,  N.  6.
Spencer,  Captain  R.  E.  E.,  Walbottle  Hall,  Newbum-on-Tyne,

Northumberland.
Spens,  WiUiam,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Cambridge.
Stacey,  F.  C,  5  Fulreacly  Road,  Leyton,  London,  E.  10.
Stanton,  Rev.  Horace  C,  Ph.D.,  D.D.,  1818  Arch  Street,  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  U.S.A.
Stawell,  Miss  F.  M.,  33  Ladbroke  Square,  Notting  Hill  Gate,
London,  W.  11.
*Steel,  Mrs.,  Court  o'  Hill,  Tenbury,  Worcestershire.
Steele-Perkins,  G.,  M.D.,  Arts  Club,  40  Dover  Street,  London.  W.  1.
Stephens,  Mrs.,  Hotel  Continental,  rue  Castiglione,  Paris.
Stephens,  W.  F.,  Mahe,  Seychelles,  via  Bombay.
*Stevenson,  Mrs.,  52  Abinger  Road,  Bedford  Park,  London,  W.  4.
Stevenson,  A.  Creery,  Cranbrook,  Fellowes  Road,  South  Farn-

borough,  Hants.
Stewart,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Larghan,  Coupar  Angus,  N.B.
Stewart,  Miss  M.  A.,  Queen  Anne's  Mansions,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Stobart,  Mrs.  St.  Clair,  7  Turner's  Wood,  Hampstead  Garden
Suburb,  London,  N.W.  4.
Stoehr,  Miss,  Hotel  Belvedere,  Bordighera,  Italy.
Stout,  Professor  George  F.,  Craigard,  St.  Andrews,  N.B.
Strachan,  W.  M.,  Stroocl  Park,  Horsham,  Sussex.
*Strachey,  John  St.  Loe,  Spectator  Office,  1  Wellington  Street,

Strand,  London,  W.C.  2.
*Stradling,  Capt.  R.  E.,  R.E.,  Civil  Enginering  Dept.,  The  University,
Birmingham.

Stratton,  F.  J.  M.,  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cambridge.
Streatfeild,  W.  H.  R„  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  42  Ovington  Square,
London,  S.W.  3.


596


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Strode,  Miss  E.  L.  C,  63  Lonsdale  Road,  Barnes,  London,  S.W.  13.

Strutt,  Captain  Hon.  A.  C,  R.N.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.
*Strutt,  Hon.  Richard,  Rayleigh  House,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
*Sturdy,  Edward  T.,  Norburton,  Burton  Bradstock,  Bridport, Dorset.

Sturge,  Miss  M.  Carta,  Cranbourne  Grange,  Wonston,  Micheldever,
Hants.

*Summerson,  E.  C,  St.  Bernards,  Lancing,  Sussex.
Swaine,  Mrs.  R.  C,  Letchworth  Lane,  Letchworth,  Herts.
Swainson,  Miss  E.  J.,  Stonecross,  Kendal.
*Swainson,  Miss  M.,  23  Warrington  Crescent,  London,  W.  9.
*Swayne,  Mrs.  Noah  Haynes,  Junr.,  Drawer  N.,  Ardmore,  Pennsyl-
vania, U.S.A.
Swinburne,  Mrs.,  Western  Withdean,  Brighton.
Tait,  Mrs.,  St  Andrew's  House  Club,  31a  Mortimer  Street,  London,
W.  1.

Tait,  Mrs.  W.  J.,  Lismullen,  Arthur  Road,  Wimbledon  Park,

London,  S.W.  19.
*Talbot,  Mrs.  Hugh,  1  Oakwood  Court,  Kensington,  London,  W.  14.
Talbot,  P.  Amaury,  c/o  Mrs.  Hugh  Baker,  The  White  House,
Netherbury,  nr.  Beamster  S.O.,  Dorset.
*Tatham,  A.  T.,  Mountain  Rise,  Pietermaritzburg.
Tatham,  Hon.  Justice  F.  S.,  D.S.O.,  Parkside,  Alexandra  Road,
Pietermaritzburg,  S.  Africa.
*Taylor,  Miss  E.  Waring,  23  Warrington  Crescent,  Maida  Hill,

London,  W.  9.
*Taylor,  H.  Dennis,  Stancliffe,  Mount  Villas,  York.
*Taylor,  Mrs.  Lewis  S.,  14  Frobisher  Terrace,  Falmouth.
*Telling,  W.  H.  Maxwell,  M.D.,  29  Park  Square,  Leeds.
Temple,  Reginald  W.

Tennent,  W.  J.,  69  Essex  Street,  Masterton,  New  Zealand.
Thatcher,  Mrs.  G.  R.,  20  Alexandra  Road,  Kingston  Hill,  Surrey.
*Thaw,  A.  Blair,  29  Washington  Square  West,  New  York,  N.Y.,
U.S.A.

*Thesiger,  Mrs.  Ernest,  6  Montpelier  Terrace,  London,  S.W.  7.
*Thomas,  Rev.  C.  D.,  South  Hill  Lodge,  Bromley,  Kent.

Thomas,  Miss  Edith  J.,  Mynydd  Ednyfed,  Criccieth,  N.  Wales.

Thomas,  Ernest  Seymour,  Turf  Club,  Cairo,  Egypt.

Thompson,  Edwin,  Woodlands,  13  Fulwood  Park,  Liverpool.

Thompson,  Sir  Matthew  W.,  Bart.,  39  Steeles  Road,  Haverstock
Hill,  London,  N.W.  3.


lxxviii.]


Members  and  Associates.


597


^Thompson,  Owen,  K.C.,  2  Arkwright  Road,  Harnpstead,  London,
N.W.  3.

^Thomson,  Edward  J., 6  Windsor  Terrace  West,  Kelvinside,
Glasgow.

Thomson.  Mrs.  Leslie,  9a  St.  Mary  Abbott's  Place,  Kensington,
London,  W.8.

Thorburn,  Rev.  T.  J.,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  The  Bungalow,  St.  Helen's

Down,  Hastings.
Thornley,  Miss  F.  J.,  36  Downleaze,  Stoke  Bishop,  Bristol.
Thorp,  Richard,  Colenso  Hill,  Napier,  New  Zealand.
Thrupp,  T.  C,  Claremont,  Woodlands  Road,  Redhill,  Surrey.
Thurston,  Rev.  Herbert,  31  Farm  Street,  Berkeley  Square,  London,

W.  1.

Tipping,  Miss  K.,  7  Lansdowne  Circus,  Leamington.
Torkildsen.  Vilhelm,  Bergen,  Norway.

Tottenham,  Miss  Mary  T.  A.,  Ballycurry,  Ashford,  Co.  Wicklow,
Ireland.

*Trethewy,  A.  W.,  4  St.  James's  Place,  London,  S.W.  1.

Trevor,  The  Lady  Juliet,  16  Upper  Brook  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Trotter,  Mrs.,  Chatley,  Norton  St,  Philip.,  Bath.
*Troubridge,  Lady,  Chip  Chase,  Hadley  Wood,  Herts.
*Tubby,  Miss  G.  Ogden,  5  West  47th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Tuckey,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  27  Silverdale  Road,  Eastbourne.

Tudor,  Owen  S.,  Friday's  Hill.  Haslemere,  Surrey.
*Tugwell,  Mrs.  Arthur,  Harlyn,  Chessel  Avenue,  Boscombe,  Bourne-
mouth.

Turton,  R.  W.,

Tuson,  K.  H.,  Lieut.,  R.E.,  Brompton  Barracks,  Chatham.
Tyler,  Professor  C.  M.,  1601  Washington  Avenue,  Scranton,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

*Tyrone,  The  O'Neill  de,  59  rua  das  Flores,  Lisbon,  Portugal.
Tyrrell,  G.  N.,  73  Park  Road  North,  Acton.

Tyrwhitt,  Rev.  H.  M.,  19  The  Glebe,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.  3.
Ulman,  Mrs.  J  acob  A. ,  Brooklandville,  Baltimore  County,  Md. ,  U.S.A.
*  Upton,  Miss  Florence  K.,  21  Great  College  Street,  Westminster,
London,  S.W.  1.

Urquiola,  Manuel  de,  Calle  de  Alfredo  Calderon  8,  Valencia,  Spain.
Van  Deren,  H.  S.,  Nashville,  Term.,  U.S.A.

*Van  Loon,  Dr.  F.  H.,  c/o  Hoofdbureau  B.G.D.,  Weltevreden,  Java.
Van  Meurs,  H.,  Schenck-de-jong-weg  6,  Buitenzorg,  Java.


598


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Van  Renterghem,  A.  W.,  M.D.,  1  Van  Breestraat,  Amsterdam.

Vanderspar,  Mrs.,  Spring  Vale  House,  Spring  Vale,  I.  of  Wight.

Vatcher,  Mrs.,  21  St.  Leonard's  Road,  Ealing,  London,  W.  13.
*Venancourt,  Comte  de,  7  Rue  Duperre,  Paris.
*Verney-Cave,  Hon.  Mrs.,  Stanford-on-Avon,  Rugby.

Verrall,  Miss  M.  E.,  The  Lydd,  West  Hoathly,  Sussex.

Vyvyan,  Mrs.  T.  C,  Poldhu,  Richmond,  Natal,  South  Africa.

Wagner,  W.  Q.,  St.  John  Street,  Melrose,  Johannesburg,  S.  Africa..

Waite,  Miss  E.  V.,  Ackworth,  Station  Road,  Epping,  Essex.
*Wales,  Hubert,  Homewood,  Hindhead,  Surrey.

Walker,  Mrs.  Claude,  19  West  Ashton  Road,  Trowbridge.

Walker,  Miss  Madeline  J.,  107  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.  7.

Walker,  Miss  May  C,  Halcyon  Club,  14  Cork  Street,  London,  W.  1.
♦Walker,  Lieut.-Col.  P.  L.  E.,  36  Princes  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  7

Walker,  R.  A.,  Rolleston,  Stretton,  Cromer  Road,  Bournemouth.
* Walker-Munro ,  L.,  R.N.,  Rhinefield,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.

Walker-Munro,  Mrs.,  Rhinefield,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.

Wall,  Perry  G.,  Tampa.  Florida,  U.S.A.
*Wallace,  Abraham,  M.D.,  Wendela,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.

Wallace,  C.  A.,  1  Adelaide  Avenue,  Belfast,  Ireland.

Walsh,  Rev.  A.  Bigby,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Club,  Pall  Mall,
London,  S.W.  1.

Walsh,  Correa  M.,  Belleport,  Long  Island,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Wanderley,  F.  M.,  Corumba,  Matto  Grossa,  Brazil.

Wang,  C.  Y.,  Rue  de  Paris  Extension,  Hankow,  China.

Ward,  Hon.  Kathleen,  Cairnbinn,  Whitehouse,  Co.  Antrim,  Ireland.

*  Warner,  Rev.  D.  V.,  42  Belsize  Park,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.  3.
Warren,  Mrs.  Fiske,  8  Mount  Vernon  Place,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Warrender,  Miss  Margaret,  50  Wilton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.  1.
Wastell,  Mrs.,  The  Rowans,  Crowborough,  Sussex.

Watson,  Mrs.  Milne,  73  Eccleston  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.
Watson-Taylor,  Mrs.,  Dibleys,  Blewbury,  Didcot.
Webster,  Mrs.  Julia  C,  Swanton,  Vermont,  U.S.A.
Weinberg,  Dr.  A.  A.,  Helperoostsingel  2,  Groningen,  Holland.

*  Weinberg,  Harry,  J.,  North  Road,  The  Park,  Nottingham.
*Wellesley,  Victor  A.  A.  H,  C.B.,  20  St.  Loo  Mansions,  St.  Loo

Avenue,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
Wemyss,  Countess  of,  23  St.  James's  Place,  London,  S.W.  1.
Western,  F.  J.,  Cambridge  Mission,  Delhi,  India.
*Westlake,  Ernest,  Godshill,  Fordingbridge,  Salisbury.


LXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


599


Weston,  Miss  Lena  E.,  Shipbourne  Grange,  nr.  Tonbridge,  Kent.
*Westray,  Mrs.,  25  Cavendish  Road  West,  St.  John's  Wood,  London,
N.W.  8.

Wheeler,  C.  Bickersteth,  80  Hamilton  Terrace,  London,  N.W.  8.
*Whetham,  W.  C.  D.,  F.R.S.,  Cadhay,  Ottery  St.  Mary,  Devon.
Whitaker,  Joseph  J.  S.,  ViUa  Malfitano,  Palermo,  Sicily.

*  Whitehead,  Miss  Mercia  D.,  St.  Mary's,  Trumpington,  Cambridge.
*Whitfield,  A.  Stanton,  F.R.Hist.S.,  Bentley  Moor,  Walsall,  Staffs.
"*Whitmee,  A.  C,  Homelands,  Fortis  Green,  London,  N.  2.

Whiton,  Rev.  J.  M.,  Ph.D.,  65  West  127th  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

*Whittingham,  F.  S.,  Rodborough  Rectory,  nr.  Stroud,  Gloucester-
shire.

Wigan,  W.  L.:  Clare  Cottage,  East  Mailing,  Maidstone,  Kent.
Wight,  Edward,  M.R.C.S.,  9  Regency  Square,  Brighton.
Wild,  Miss  Ida,  Old  Larkshayes,  Dalwood,  Axminster,  S.  Devon.
Wilding,  Mrs.,  Penbryn,  Montgomery,  Wales.
Wilkins,  Mrs.,  10  Grosvenor  Square,  Rathmines,  nr.  Dublin.
Wilkins,  C.  F.,  c/o  Messrs.  H.  S.  King  &  Co.,  9  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.  1.

*Wilkins,  Rev.  H.  J.,  D.D.,  Redland  Green,  Bristol,  Glos.
■"Wilkinson.  Mrs.  L.  G.,  Cromwell  House,  Haresfielcl,  nr.  Stonehouse.

Wilkinson,  Miss  Marian,  S.,  7  The  Avenue,  Clifton,  York.

Wilkinson,  Sidney,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  49  Rodney  Street,  Liver-
pool.

Willcocks,  Miss  M.  P.,  35  Pennsylvania  Road,  Exeter.
Willett,  Mrs.,  Fir  Tree  End,  Haywards  Heath,  Sussex.
Willett,  Miss  Cicely.

Williams,  Mrs.  Glynne,  7  Berkeley  House,  Hay  Hill,  London,  W.  1.
Williams,  Mrs.  S.  R.,  12  Lome  Road,  Oxton,  Cheshire.
'Williamson,  Mrs.,  The  Copse,  Brook,  Godalming.  Surrey.

*  Williamson,  John,  M.D.,  The  Rhallt,  Burgh  Heath  Road,  Epsom,

Surrey.

*Williamson,  The  Very  Rev.  Dr.  Wallace,  44  Palmerston  Place,
Edinburgh.

Williams-Walker,  A.,  Surgeon- Lieut.,  R.N.,  25 Belchers  Lane,
Birmingham.

Willis,  Grant  B.,  173  W.  Second  Street,  Mansfield,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
*Willock,  Mrs.  C.  J.,  Elderton  Lodge,  Thorpe  Market,  Norwich.
Wilson,  Charles  J.,  Derlamogue,  Ailesbury  Park,  Dublin.


600


Members  and  Associates.


[part  lxxviii.]


*Wilson,  Mrs.  C.  Stuart,  Gresham  House,  Sharia  Sulieman  Pasha,
Cairo,  Egypt.

Wilson,  Mrs.  F.  E.,  c/o  Hon.  W.  Warren- Vernon,  105  Cadogan

Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
Wilson,  Mrs.  H.  J.,  12  Cheyne  Court,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
Wilson,  Perey,  48  Clarendon  Road,  Putney,  London,  S.W.  15.

*  Wilson,  W.  E.,  45  Maiden  Road,  Kentish  Town,  London,  N.W.  5.
*Winby,  Lieut. -Col.  L.  P.,  39  Upper  George  Street,  London,  W.  1.

Wingham,  T.  A.,  174  Aberdeen  Avenue,  Hamilton,  Ontario, Canada.

Wise,  Miss  A.  Stewart,  16  West  Kensington  Gardens,  London,  W.  14.

Witherby,  Arthur  George,  Newtown  Grange,  Newbury,  Berks.
*Wodehouse,  The  Lady  Isabel,  Kimberley  House,  Wymondham.
*Wolf,  Franciso  Eugene  de,  P.O.  Box  269,  Bristol,  Rhode  Island,
U.S.A.

Wood,  E.  Cope,  150  School  Lane,  Germantown,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

*Wood,  Richard,  RoseviUe,  Sunday's  Well,  Cork.
*Wood,  T.  Eugene,  The  Limes,  Kedleston  Road,  Derby.

Wooclhull,  Miss  Zula  M.,  Norton  Park,  Bredon's  Norton,  near
Tewkesbury,  Gloucestershire.

Woods,  Miss  Alice,  St.  Ives,  Radlett,  Herts.

Woods,  Miss  C.  E.,  13  Cowley  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.  1.
Woollett,  Lieut. -Colonel  W.  Charles,  F.S.A.,  4  The  Ridges,  Farn-
boro',  Hants.

*Woolley, F. Duke  M.D.,  13  Maresfield  Gardens,  Hampstead,
London,  N.W.  3.
Woolley,  V.  J.,  M.D.,  18  Freta  Road,  Bexley  Heath,  Kent.
*Worsfold,  Mrs.  Basil,  Romden  Place,  Smarden,  Kent.
Wrangham,  W.  H.,  78  Barmouth  Road,  Wandsworth,  London,
S.W.  18.

Wriford,  Mrs.,  21  Bullingham  Mansions,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Wright,  Captain  A.  F.,  M.C.,  Trent  Valley  House.  Lichfield.
!:Wright,  G.  E.,  Plas  Macloc,  York  Road,  Guildford,  Surrey.

*  Wright,  Maurice  B.,  M.D.,  118  Harley  Street,  London,  W.  1.
Wynn,  John,  Lieut.,  Widney,  Solihull,  Warwickshire.
Yaraschenko,  Madame,  La  Cava,  Bordighera,  Italy.

Yeats,  W.  B.,  18  Woburn  Buildings,  Tavistock  Square,  London,
W.C.  1.

Younghusband,  Sir  Francis,  3  Buckingham  Gate,  London,  S.W.  1.
Zeehandelaar,  Dr.  I.,  39  Sarphatistraat,  Amsterdam,  Holland.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

INDEX  to  VOL.  XXX
(PARTS  LXXV-LXXVIII  AND  APPENDIX)

1920

A.  V.  B. See Leonard, Mrs. Osborne : Communicators  and
Controls.

Abnormal  psychology,  Problems  in - - - - 1-32,  134-173

Adaptation  to  reality,  Function  and  Difficulties  of

3,  6,  22-23,  32,  148,  149-150,  158,  159-162,  164-165
Address,  Presidential - - - - - - -  275

Adler,  AIL,  Interpretation  of  dreams - - - - -  166

Aeschylus. See  Scripts,  Literary  references.

Anaesthesia,  Hysterical -------  138-139

Analyses  of  Dreams 10-11,  16-22,  30-31,  39,  44-46,  47-58,  60-69,

70-79,  80-91,  92-118,  123-124
Analytical  Psychology,  Collected  Papers  on,  by  Dr.  C.  G.  Jung,

2nd  edit.,  Review  of - - - - - - - -  134

Animals,  Trance-communications  about  -  361-365
"  Armstrong,"  Mrs.,  and  evidence  contributed  by  her  521-546,  553-554
Automatic  Messages  (Table-Tilting,  Writing,  etc.)

115-229,  230-250,  268,  278-279,  340-341,  349
Automatic  Writing,  Analogy  between  and  dreaming  -  -  34,  132-133
Azam,  Dr.,  Case  of  Felida  X.,  Reference  to -  - -  145

Balfoub,  The  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.,  References  to  :

On  the  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment 219  (footnote),  298,  299
,, Statius  case - - - - - - - -  106

On  Telepathy  258  (footnote)


602


Index  to  Vol.  XXX.


[parts  lxxv-


Barrett,  Sir  W.  F.

Evidence  of  Super-normal  Communications  through  Motor

Automatism  ---------  230

Experiments  with  a  ouija-board -  235
Note  on  Telepathy  and  Telergy - - - 230  (footnote),  251
On  the  Threshold  of  the  Unseen ------  235

Report  on  a  Sitting  with  Dr.  Crawford's  medium - -  334

Bayfield,  Rev.  M.  A.,  On  a  point  in  the  "  Daisy's  Second  Father  "

case  543,  544

"  Benson,  Mr." See  Comiminicators.

Billy. See  under  Mrs.  Leonard's  Trance-phenomena.

Brevier  (and  Freud),  Studien  iiber  Hysteric,  References  to - -  33,  63

Burnham. See under Mrs. Leonard's Trance -phenomena  :
Memory  of  places.

Card,  Madame,  Reference  to ------ -  277

Co-consciousness,  The  Hypothesis  of  a - 139-140,  141,  142,  144-145
Collected  Papers  on  Analytical  Psychology,  by  Dr.  C.  G.  Jung.

2nd  edit.,  Review  of - - - - - - - -  134

Collected  Papers  on  Analytical  Psychology,  by  Dr.  C.  G.  Jung,

Reference  to ------- 66  (footnote)

Collis,  Miss,  Evidence  contributed  by - - - -  497-498

Communications, Evidence of Super-normal, through  Motor

Automatism ---------  230

Communicators —

A.  V.  B.  (Ladye) ... -  340-341,  344,  348-554

Mr.  "  Benson  " 525-530,  531,  532-538

"  Daisy  Armstrong's  "  husband  -----  546,  554
"  Daisy's  Second  Father  "  (Rev.  "  Bertram  Wilson  ")

521-546,  553-554

Sir  Hugh  Lane 238-242,  245-247

F.  W.  H.  Myers. See  "  Fresh  Light  on  the  One-Horse

Dawn  Experiment  " 238-242,  245-247

Condensation  of  dream  ideas ----- 29-31,  91-101

Coniston. See  Cross-correspondence.

Consciousness,  Modifications  of,  as  the  explanation  of  conserva-
tion of  past  experience -----  -1-2,135-145

Constable,  F.  C,  Personality  and  Telepathy,  Reference  to  -  -  259
Controls —

A.  V.  B. 344,354,411,439,446,479-485

Feda. See  Mrs.  Leonard's  Trance-phenomena.

Hugh  Lane ...  - -  238-242,  245-247

Peter  Rooney -  .... 243,  245

Coover,  John  Edgar,  Experiments  in  Psychical  Research,  Review  of  261
Crawford,  W.  J.,  D.Sc,  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena.  By

W.  Whately  Smith  306


LXXVIII.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXX.


603


Creery  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference,  Reference  to -  268
Crookes,  Sir  William,  Death  and  scientific  work  of - -  275-276
„ "  Notes  on  an  Enquiry  into  the  Phenomena

called  Spiritual "  - - - 278-279,  280
Cross-Correspondence  :  Coniston,  Brantwood,  Severn  189,  206-209


"  Daisy's  Second  Father." See  Communicators.

Dionysius,  Ear  of,  Reference  to  - - - - - - -  300

Dissociation  of  consciousness,  Hypothesis  of - 138-139,  140,  144
Dream- Analysis,  by  Alice  Johnson -----  33-133

Dream  Analysis,  Bearing  of,  on  automatic  Scripts - -  132-133
Method  of -  14,  15-22,  31-32,  34,  38-40,  163

,, „  ,, Hermeneutical - - - -  17

Dream,  Psychology  of  the 4,  22,  24,  27-28,  29,  34-37,  58-60,  91,  121-

123,  125-131,  155,  156,  160,  163-168,  170

Dream  Censor 36-37,120-125

„ Condensation  29-31,  91-101

,,  „ Cryptic  words  -----  91-101

„ Content,  Latent - - - 11-12,  34,  91-92,  128,  131,  167
Manifest  - - - - 11-12,  29,  34,  125,  126,  167
„ Interpretation - 11-12,  13-14,  17,  59,  160,  163-169,  170-171
„  „  Technical  methods ...  167-171

Personalities,  Identification  of  27,  29,  34,  58-60,  91,  93,  95,  98-99
„ Symbolism 4,  24,  29,  30-31,  66,  68,  155,  156,  160,  163-164,  168
Dreams,  Analogies  between  myths  and  4,  35-36,  152-154,  155,  156,  168
,,  ,,  ,,  literary  compositions  and 34-35,  40-43,  59

„ Analyses  of  10-11,  15-22,  30-31,  39,  43-58,  60-65,  69-91,  92-120,

123-125,  152-154

Self 32,  33-133

Continuity  of  thought  in - - - -  126-128,129
Dutton,  Miss,  Evidence  contributed  by - - - -  501-503


Experiments  in  Psychical  Research,  by  John  Edgar  Coover,


Review  of  - - - - - - - - -  -  261

Extravert  type 158-159

Feda. See  Mrs.  Leonard's  Trance-phenomena  :  Controls.
Fox,  Miss. See  Jencken,  Mrs.

Fresh  Light  on  the  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment - -  175,  291,  296

Freud  (and  Breuer)  Studien  uber  Hysterie,  References  to -  -  33,  63

„ Three  Contributions  to  the  Theory  of  Sex,  Reference  to  -  146

„ The  Unconscious  in  Psycho -Analysis,  Reference  to -  -  34


Freud's  Psychology  1-2,  3,  4,  6,  29,  33,  34,  36,  37,  39-40,  58,  59,  63,
65-66,  67,  68,  91,  93-94,  96,  98,  121-122,  128,  142-148,  150,  152,
157,  159,  161-162,  163-164,  166,  167,  168,  171,  172

2q


604


Index  to  Vol.  XXX.


[parts  lxxv.-


Freud's  Psychology,  Use  of  the  word  Sexual,  -  -  146-148,150
Unconscious,  The,  Views  of  -  -  -  1-2,  33-34,  142-145
Views,  and  Jung's,  Fundamental  differences  between

1-3,  4,  65-68,  145-172

Globe  lightning  £85
Goethe. See  Scripts,  Literary  references.

Goligher,  Kathleen,  Mediumship  of 306-337

»  Genuineness,  Question  of - -  321-328

»  ,,  Salient  features ....  307-309


Hicks,  Rev.  Savell,  Experiments  with  a  ouija-board

235,  238-239,  240,  242
Highfield  House,  Malvern  Wells. See  Mrs.  Leonard's  Trance-
phenomena  :  Memory  of  places.
Hill,  J.  Arthur,  On  a  point  in  the  "  Daisy's  Second  Father  "  case  543
Hinkle,  Dr.  Beatrice,  Introduction  to  Jung's  Psychology  of  the

Uyiconscious,  Reference  to  - - - - - - -  146

Holland  Script,  References  to - 73-75,  76,  81,  94-95,  100,  207,  208
Home,  Reference  to  the  mediumship  of  277,  279

Hude,  Mrs.  Anna,  Evidence  for  Communication  with  the  Dead,

Reference  to -------- -  298

"  Hugh  Lane  Case  "  - -  ... 238-242,  245-247,  255

Human  Personality,  References  to - - 33,  63,  77,  78,  95,  141
Hypnagogic  vision .........  25

Hypnotism,  Its  relation  to,  and  difference  from,  Psycho-analysis  4-6


Identity,  Evidence  of. See  under  Mrs. Leonard's  Trance-
phenomena.

Infra-conscious,  The  - - - - - - - - -  137

Interpretation  of  dreams - 11-12,  13-14,  17,  59,  160,  163-169,  170-171
Technical  methods - - - - - - -  167-171

Introvert  type  ---------  158-159

James,  William,  cited ........  167

Janet,  Dr.  Pierre,  Hypothesis  of  dissociation  of  consciousness

138-139,  140,  144
Jebb's  note  on  ow^coiw. See  Scripts,  Literary  references  ;  and

"  The  '  One-Horse  Dawn  '  Experiment."
Jencken,  Mrs.,  Reference  to  the  mediumship  of  - - -  279-282
Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  Dream-Analysis  - ....  33-133
Jung,  Dr.  C.  G.

Collective  Papers  on  Analytical  Psychology  (Second  edit.),

Review  of - - - - • - - - -  134


LXXVIII.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXX.


605


Jung,  Dr.  C.  G.

Psychology  of  the  Unconscious. A  Study  of  the  Transforma-
tions and  Symbolisms  of  the  Libido,  Review  of - -  134
Wandlungen  und  Symbole  der  Libido,  Review  of  - - -  134
Jung's  Psychology  2-3,  4,  6,  9,  27-28,  31,  32,  58,  66-68,  134-135,

145-146,  148-173

Sexual,  Use  of  the  word 150,  156,  157

Unconscious,  The  -  -  2-3,  4,  6,  9,  31,  32,  145-146,  148-173
Views,  and  Freud's,  Fundamental  differences  between

1-3,  4,  65-68,  145-172

King,  Mrs.,  Automatic  Script  of,  reference  to - - - -  216

Kirby,  Mrs.,  Case  of,  reference  to  234

Knowledge,  Apparent  super-normal,  shown  in  trance-communica-
tions 454-476,  487-554

Ladye. See  Communicators.

Leland  Stanford  Junior  University's  Psychical  Research  Mono-
graph, No.  1,  Review  of - - - - - - -  261

Leonard,  Mrs.  Osborne,  On  a  Series  of  Sittings  with,  by  Miss

Radclyffe-Hall  and  (Una)  Lady  Troubridge - -  339-554
Communicators  :
A.  V.  B.  (Ladye).

"Rilly. See  below,  under  Knowledge  .  .  .  unknown  to
the  Sitters.

Burnham. See below, under Knowledge  .  .  .  un-
known to  the  Sitters.
Controlling. See  below,  under  Controls.

Identity,  Evidence  of  -  -  -  -  348-453, 477-486
Appearance,  Description  of  348-360
Gestures,  Familiar ----- 424,  427

Memory 361-453

Personal  Touches -  477-486,  492

Knowledge,  Apparent,  of  contemporary  events  454-476
Actions  and  Conversations  -  -  -  454-457
A  flash  of  colour ------  457

A  diagram 457-458

Daisy's  plans  and  movements -  471-472,524-525

Small  incidents 473-476

U.  V.  T.'s  House,  Circumstances  connected  with

it,  and  work  done  there - - -  458-471
Knowledge  shown  of  Matters  entirely  unknown  to

the  Sitters  ------  487-546

Concerning  the  dog  Billy -  487-506,  549-551

"Burnham" - - -  506-521,552
"  Daisy's  Second  Father  " 521-546,  553-554
2q2


606


Index  to  Vol.  XXX.


[pa  rts  lxxv.-


Leonard,  Mrs.  Osborne,  On  a  Series  of  Sittings  with  :
Communicators  :
A.  V.  B.  (Ladye).

Memory  shown  by  the  Communicator - -  361-453
Characteristics  of  the  Sitter -  361-366,  449-451

Guitar 438-444

M.  R.  H.'s  method  of  composing  -  -  449-451
Photographs  of  U.  V.  T. -  - -  436-438

Physical  Symptoms - - -  417-436,  547

Places  - -  366-417,  431-433,  435-436

Burnham. See  above,  under  Knowledge  .  .  .

unknown  to  the  Sitters.
Malvern  Wells,  Highfield  House  - -  384-389
White  Cottage 342-343,  366-383,
431-433,  435-436

Teneriffe  391-417

Swimming  and  Bathing  -  451-453
Words  peculiar  to  Communicator - -  444-449

Personal  Touches 477-486,  492

Mr.  "Benson" 525-530,531,532-538

"  Daisy  Armstrong's  "  husband .... 546,  554
"Daisy's  Second  Father"  (Rev.Bertram  Wilson)  521-546, 553-554
Controls:  A.  V.  B. - - -  344,354,411,439,446,479-485
Feda 340,  342,  344-345,  346-347,  348-479,  481,  485-510,
512,  514-516,  518,  519,  522-544,  549-550
„ Characteristics  of - 344-345,  346-347,  494-495
Integrity  of  the  Medium,  On  the ....  342-344
On  the  possibility  of  her  knowledge  of  Subject-
matter  - - - 342-344,  354,  378-379,  400,  413

Sittings,  Conditions  (Light) 345-346

Gestures  at 345-346

Number  of  342

Proxy 506-508,  514,  522

Records  of .......  345

Table 340-341,  349

Lethe  Case,  References  to  ...  . 300,  305

Levitations - - -  307-308,  309-312,  314-317,  335-337

Libido,  Freud's  use  of  the  term  ------  145-148

„ Jung's „ „  6,  145,  148-151,  155-156,  157

Symbolisms  of -  -  - -  152-154

„ Theory  of  the -  ... 6-7,  134-135,  145-151

Libido,  A  Study  of  the  Transformations  and  Symbolisms  of  the,  by

Dr.  C.  G.  Jung 134,  145-173

Lodge,  Sir  Oliver.

Note  on  Mr.  Piddington's  paper,  Fresh  Light  on  the  '  One-
Morse  Dawn '  Experiment - ■ - - - -  291


LXXVUI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXX.


607


Lodge,  Sir  Oliver.

Reply  to,  by  Mr.  Piddington  296

Long,  Dr.  Constance  E.,  The  Psychoanalytic  Use  of  Subliminal

Material  1-32

Mackenzie-Ashton,  Arundel,  Case  contributed  bj-  -  -  230-233
Malvern  Wells. See  under  Mrs.  Leonard's  Trance-phenomena  :

Memory  of  places.
Martin, Professor Lillien J., Contributions to the  Leland

Stanford  Junior  University's  Psychical  Research  Monograph,

No.  1 267-268

Medical  Part  of  the  Proceedings  - - - -. - -  -1-173

Members  and  Associates,  List  of ------  555

Memory  retained  by  Communicator  (Trance-phenomena) -  361-453

Miller,  Miss  Frank  152-154

Mitchell,  Dr.  T.  W.,  On  Psychoanalysis,  References  to  33  (and  footnotes)

,,  ,, Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and  Psycho-

analysis ......  134

Morgan,  Professor  Lloyd,  Hypothesis  of  the  Infra-Conscious  -  137
Motor  Automatism,  Evidence  of  Super-normal  Communications

through  230

Murray,  Professor  Gilbert  289

Myers,  F.  W.  H. See  Communicators  ; and  Scripts,  Literary

references.
Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  References  to —

On  Freud's  early  work ------ 33,  63,  95

„ the  Subliminal  Self -  - - 2,  33,  140-141,  143

„ Telepathy  and  Telergy - - 234,  251-255,  256,  257,  259

See  also  Scripts,  Literary  references.

Nbwkham,  Rev.  P.  EL,  Experiments  in  Thought-transference,

Reference  to -------  233-234

Newton,  Miss  I.,  On  evidence  in  Miss  Radclyrfe-Hall's  paper

500,  516,  543-544

Nicholson,  Colonel  E.  EL,  Evidence  contributed  by  230,  231,  232,  233
Note  on  Mr.  Piddington  s  paper  called  "  Fresh  Light  on  the  '  One-

Horse  Dawn  '  Experiment,'"  by  Sir  O.  Lodge - - -  291
Reply  by  Mr.  Piddington  296

Oedipus. See  "  The  '  One-Horse, Dawn  '  Experiment,'"

"  Old  Man  in  White  "  ("  The  '  One-Horse  Dawn  '  Experiment  "),

Scripts  relating  to ------ .  179-185

"  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment,  Fresh  Light  on  the,  by  J.  G.

Piddington  17  5

Note  on,  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  291

A  Reply  to,  by  J.  G.  Piddington - - -  296
Ouija-board  Experiments .  235-249


608


Index  to  Vol.  XXX.


[parts  lxxv.-


Palladino,  Etxsapia,  References  to  -  -  282,  321,  322  (footnote)
Parakinesis  319

"  Pearl  tie-pin  "  case 236-238

Perception  falsified  by  suggestion  or  emotion - - -  266-267
Perrin,  Mrs.  Alice,  On  a  point  in  the  "  Daisj^'s  Second  Father  "

case -----------  543

Personality,  Double  or  multiple,  On  ----- 139,  145

Phantasy,  Subconscious 7,  8-12,  13,  19,  20,  22,  23,  25,  152-154,  155,

159-160,  162-163

Physical  Phenomena 280-282,  306-333,  334-337

Piddington,  J.  G.

Fresh  Light  on  the.  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment - -  175
Reply  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge's  Note  on - - - -  296
On  a  point  in  the  "  Daisy's  Second  Father  "  case - 543,  544
Pigou,  Professor  A.  O,  On  Cross-Correspondences,  references  to

298,  299

Preconscious,  Freud's  conception  of  the - -  2,  142-143,  144

Presidential  Address,  by  the  Right  Hon.  Lord  Rayleigh  -  -  275
Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  Hypothesis  of  Co-consciousness  -  -  '  -  139
Prophecy,  Supposed,  of  California  Earthquake  in  1906  -  -  267
Psychic  energy. See  Libido  theory.

Psychic  Phenomena,  The  Reality  of,  W.  Whately  Smith  on -  306-333
Psychical  Research,  Analogies  in  Science  and - - -  283-285
Difficulties  in -  282-283,  286,  288,  318

,,  ,, On  the  need  for  a  laboratory  - 270  271

Psychoanalysis,  Definition  and  therapeutic  function  of

4-6,  34,  142,  143,  155,  157,  160-163,  171,  172-173
Differences  between  the  two  Schools  of 65-68,  157-171
,,  As  a  method  of  psychological  investigation

33-133,  172-173

,,  References  to  discussion  on,  in  Proceedings -  33-34

Psychoanalysis,  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious  and - - -  134

Psychoanalytic  Use  of  Subliminal  Material  1

Psychology,  Analytical,  Collected  Papers  on,  by  Dr.  C.  G.  Jung,

2nd  edit.,  Review  of

Psychology  of  the  Unconscious,  by  Dr.  C.  G .  Jung,  Review  of -  134

"  Quelqttes faits d' imagination creatrice subconsciente  "

(Archives  de  Psychologie) -----  152-154

Radclyffe-Hai.l,  Miss  M.,  On  a  Series  of  Sittings  with  Mrs.

339

Osborne  Leonard - - - -  -
Raps 280,  308,  313-314,  317,  335,  336

Rayleigh,  The  Right  Hon.  Lord,  Presidential  Address -  275

Beality,  The,  of  Psychic  Phenomena - - - -  -  306


LXXVIII.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXX.


609


Reviews —

John  E.  Coover's  "  Experiments  in  Psychical  Research  "
{Leland  Stanford  Junior  University^  Psychical  Research
Monograph,  No.  1) - - - - - - -  261

Dr.  W.  J.  Crawford's  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena -  306
Dr.  C.  G.  Jung's  Collected  Papers  on  Analytical  Psychology

(Second  edition)  ;  and  Psychology  of  the  Unconscious -  134
Richet,  Professor  Charles,  Experiments  in  Thought-transference,

reference  to ---------  234

Robinson,  Lennox,  Experiments  with  a  ouija-board  -  -  235-249
"  Rogers,"  Sir  Richard,  and  evidence  contributed  by  him  509-520,  552
Ruskin. See  Cross-correspondence  :  Coniston.

Salter,  Mrs.,  On  a  point  in  the  "  Daisy's  Second  Father  "  incident  543
Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  D.Sc,  Review  of  Experiments  in  Psychical

Research,  by  John  Edgar  Coover -----  261
Scripts,  Literary  references  and  reminiscences —

Aeschylus,  Agamemnon ...... 215,  216

Arnold,  Thyrsis  215,  220

Goethe,  Wanderer's  Nachtlied  215,220

Homer,  Odyssey  - -  215,  216-219

Jebb,  Note  on  olofavov (Oed.  Tyr.)  189-195,  210-211,  212,  213,
214,  218-219,  222-223,  292,  296-297,  300,  301,  302-303
Myers,  Obituary  Notice  of  Ruskin - - 207-211,  292,  300
Scripts. One-Horse.  Dawn  - - - - - - 215,  220

Sophocles. Oedipus  Coloneus

179-180,  181,  183-184,  185,  187,  195-205
Oedipus  Tyrannus  -  179,  182,  186,  188-189,  292

Stevenson,  R.  L.,  A  Song  of  the  Road  - - - - 215,  220

Tennyson. Crossing  the  Bar -----  215-216

Ulysses  215,  220

Self -projection,  Telepathic,  reference  to  cases  of - -  234-235
Sex,  Three  Contributions  to  the  Theory  of - - - - -  146

Sidis,  Dr.  Boris,  Conception  of  a  Subconscious  Self  as  a  diffused

Consciousness --------  141-142

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry,  "  The  Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance-
phenomena,"  reference  to  - - -  133
»  >>  On  Telergy  and  Telepathy,  reference  to  255,  259

Smith,  Mrs.  Travers,  Experiments  with  a  ouija-board -  235-249
Smith,  W.  Whately,  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena,  by  W.  J.

Crawford,  D.Sc.  ---------  %qq

Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Dr.  Coover  on  -  -  268-269,  272
Sophocles. See  Scripts,  Literary  references.

Statins  Case,  Reference  to  -  -  -  -  -  .  .  106  300
Stevenson,  R.  L. See  Scripts,  Literary  references.

Studien  iiber  Hysterie,  Reference  to  33,  63


610


Index  to  Vol.  XXX.


[parts  lxxv-


"  Subconscious,  An  Experimental  Study  of  the,"  by  Professor

L.  J.  Martin,  reference  to  -  -  -  .  .  .  -  268
Subconscious,  Difference  between  the,  as  applied  by  writers  on

normal,  and  on  abnormal,  psychology  -  139
Subliminal  Material,  The  Psychoanalytical  Use  of  1

Subliminal  Self,  Hypothesis  of  a  2,  140-142

Suggestion,  Effect  of,  on  perception 266-267

Survival,  A  development  in  the  evidence  for - - -  303-305

Table  Sittings 340-341,  349

Taylor,  Mrs.,  Evidence  contributed  by  499

Telekinesis —

Distinction  between,  and  parakinesis  - - - 319  (footnote)
Dr.  Crawford's  experiments ....  306-333,  334-337
On  the  question  of  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena  317-328
On  the  means  by  which  the  control  is  exercised -  329-333
Phenomena  of —

Levitatidns  -  -  -  307-308,  309-312,  314-317,  335-337
Raps  - -  -  280,  308,  313-314,  317,  335,  336

Telepathy,  Experimental 233-235,  262-266

»  „  Self -projection,  Cases  of,  reference  to  234-235

,, Spontaneous  ,230-233

Telepathy,  On 251-260,  262-266,  268-269,  272-273,  286-289,  303-304
,,  On  the  mode  of  transmission  of  256-260

Telepathy  and  T clergy,  Note  on  -  -  -  -  230  (footnote),  251
Telergy,  Note  on  Telepathy  and  -  -  -  -  230  (footnote),  251
Teneriffe. See under Mrs. Leonard's Trance-phenomena :

Memory  of  places.
Three  Contributions  to  the  Theory  of  Sex,  Reference  to - -  146
Thought-transference,  Experiments  in  262-266
Trance-phenomena. See  Leonard,  Mrs.  Osborne.
Troubridge,  (Una)  Lady,  On  a  Series  of  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Osborne

Leonard ..........  339


Unconscious,  The -  ...  1.32,  134-173

See  also  Dream- Analysis,  by  Alice  Johnson.
Unconscious,  The,  Psychology  of,  by  Dr.  C.  G.  Jung,  Review  of  -  134
Unconscious,  The,  Psychology  of,  and  Psychoanalysis  - - -  134
Unconscious,  The,  in  Psychoanalysis,  reference  to - - -  34

Verrall,  Dr.  A.  W. Sec  "  Fresh  Light  on  the  '  One-Horse

Dawn  '  Experiment."
Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  On  the  "  One-Horse  Dawn  "  Experiment,

references  to  176-178,  185,  187,  198-199,  203,  209,  220,  229,296-297
Verrall  (H.  V.)  Script,  References  to 95-96,  100,  185,  190  (footnote),.

201,  205-207,  208,  209,  215-222,  229


LXXVIII.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXX.


611


W.,  Db.,  Sittings  with  Miss  K.  Goligher ....  334-337

Wandlnngen  und  Symbole  der  Libido,  by  Dr.  C.  G.  Jung - -  134
Ward,  Professor  James,  Hypothesis  of  subconscious  presenta-
tions ---------- 136,  137

White  House. See  under  Mrs.  Leonard's  Trance-phenomena  :
Memory  of  places.

Will  of  the  Wisp 285-286

Willett,  Mrs.,  Automatic  Scripts  of - - - - 207-208,  227

"  Wilson,  Rev.  Bertram." See  "  Daisy's  Second  Father."

Woolley,  Dr.  V.  J.,  On  Psychoanalysis,  references  to  - - -  33
