Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. VI (1889-1890)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1889 London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co. edition (Parts XV-XVII) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc06soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE


SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


VOLUME  vr.

(CONTAINING PARTS XV— XVII.)
1889—90.


London  :

KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER and CO.,  Limited,

LUDGATE  HILL.

1890.


London  :

National  Press  Agency,  Limited,
13,  Whitefriars  Street,  E.G.


.  CONTENTS.

_j  PAGE

(}  Address  by  the  President,  Professor  Sidgwick,  on  The  Canons  of

A Evidence  in  Psychical  Research  ........  1

J  Address  by  the  President  on  The  Census  of  Hallucinations  ...  7
On  Recognised  Apparitions  Occurring  more  than  a  Year  after  Death.  By

W F.  W.  H.  Myers  13

^  Further  Experiments  in  Hypnotic  Lucidity  or  Clairvoyance. By  V^o-

FESSOR  Charles  Richet .........  66

J  Duplex  Personality. An  Essay  on  the  Analogy  between  Hypnotic
•  J Phenomena  and  certain  Experiences  of  the  Normal  Consciousness.

By  Thomas  Barkworth .........  84

7Notes  of  Seances  with  D.  D.  Home. By  William  Crookes,  F.  R.  S.  98
Experiments  in  Thought-Transference. By  Professor  and  Mrs.  H.

SiDGwicK,  and  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  128

Supplement.

^ I.  International  Congress  of  Experimental  Psychology. By  A.  T.

^  Myers,  M.D  171

<l  II.  Ad  Interim  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations  .  .  .  183
^ III.  Professor  Pierre  Janet's  "  Automatisme  Psychologique."  By

^  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers  186

^ .IV.  Binet  on  the  Consciousness  of  Hysterical  Subjects. By  F.W.H.

^ ■  Myers  200

V.  "Das  Doppel-Ich." By  F.  W.  H.  Myers  207

, VI.  Dr. ules  Janet  on  Hysteria  and  Double  Personality.  By

A  F.  W.  H,  Myers  216

J VII.  Professor  Liegeois  on  Suggestion  and  Somnambulism  in  Relation
t  to  Jurisprudence. By  Walter  Leaf,  Litt.  D. . . .  222

o VIII.  Two  Books  on  Hypnotism. By  Walter  Leaf,  Litt.  D. . .  225
^ Phantasms  of  the  Dead  from  Another  Point  of  View. By  F.  Podmore  .  229
j A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead. By  F.  W.  H.  Myers . .  314
A  Record  of  Telepathic  and  Other  Experiences. By  the  Author  of

"A  Record  of  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal  Vision  " . .  358
Experimental  Comparison  between  Chance  and  Thought-Transference

ii:  Correspondence  of  Diagrams.  By  Lieut. -Colonel  G.  Le  M.  Taylor  398
Supplement.

I.  Observations  on  Clairvoyance,  &c. By  Drs.  Dufay  and  Azam  .  407
Address  by  the  President,  Professor  Sidgwick,  on  the  Census  of

Hallucinations  (his  second  address  on  this  subject) . . .  429
A  Record  of  Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance —

(1)  Introduction,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers ....  436

(2)  Part  I.,  byPROFE_ssoR  0.  J.  Lodge,  F.R.S. .  .443


Contents.

'.  '.  '  I  .",  ' • ;*..* ,•• •  *, ;  •  '  PAGE

(3y'pii4"iL;%^^\^ALTiR-lEiFi  tittv!b^ .  .558

(4)  Index  to  Items  in  Parts  I.  and  IT.,  specially  difficult
; "ta".  exfUiJii  rbyUlifCCfc.'tlViught'tKinsference.  By

(5)  Part  III.,  by  Professor  William  James,  of  Harvard

University.  .... ...  651

Supplement.

I.  Second  Ad  Interim  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations .  661
II.  Review of A. Aksakof's Animisnuis and Spiritismus.  By

F.  W.  H.  Myers 665

Supplementary  Catalogue  of  the  Edmund  (xurney  Library . . .  675

List  of  Members  and  Associates ........  679

List  of  Members  and  Associates  of  the  American  Branch . . .  697


SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


I.

THE  CANONS  OF  EVIDENCE  IN  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.

Address  given  by  the  President,  Professor  Sidgwick,  at  the  thirty-
second  General  Meeting  of  the  Society,  held  at  the  Westminster  Town
Hall,  on  2Iay  10th,  18S9.


I  may  iDegin  by  apologising  for  the  pretentiousness  of  my  announce-
ment, which  will,  I  feai',  lead  those  who  read  it  to  expect  a  more  precise
and  detailed  statement  of  the  rules  to  be  followed  in  such  an  investiga-
tion as  ours  than  I  am  at  all  prepared  to  offer.

As  will  appear,  my  view  is  that  the  i^ivestigation  is  inevitably  of
too  obscure  and  tentative  a  kind  to  render  it  possible  to  treat  it  by  any
very  exact  method  ;  but  there  are  certain  general,  though  vague,  princi-
ples which  seem  to  me  reasonable  in  dealing  with  the  kind  of  evidence
that  comes  before  us,  and  Avhich  the  very  obscurity  and  tentativeness
of  the  inquiiy  renders  it  desirable  to  put  forward  for  discussion.

I  mean  by  "  the  kind  of  evidence  "  evidence  for  marvels  ;  evidence
tending  to  prove  the  intrusion — if  I  may  so  call  it — into  the  world  of
ordinary  experience,  material  or  mental,  either  of  causes  that  find  no
place  at  all  in  science — i.e.,  in  our  systematised  knowledge  of  the  world
of  experience— or  of  unknown  modes  of  operation,  of  known  causes.

That  there  is  an  immense  divergence  of  opinions  among  thoughtful
persons  as  to  the  manner  in  which  this  evidence  should  be  dealt  with  is
shown  in  other  ways  than  in  the  criticism  passed  on  our  work  ;  it  is
shown,  e.g.,  in  the  controversies  that  from  time  to  time  go  on  between  the
representatives  of  orthodox  theology  and  the  lights  of  modern  science.
But  the  question  of  the  evidential  value  of  narratives  of  miracles,  as
credentials  of  a  prophet  or  teacher  sent  from  God,  is  complicated  with
profound  philosophical  and  ethical  considerations  which  do  not  enter
into  the  c^uestion  with  which  we  are  concerned.  Most  thoughtful
■writers  on  Christian  evidences  in  the  present  age  would,  I  think,  agree
that  the  eA'idence  which  the  marvellous  narratives  of  the  Gospels  afford
of  the  Di\'ine  origin  of  Christianity  must  be  taken  in  connection  with
the  direct  appeal  that  Christianity  makes  to  the  moral  and  religious
consciousness  of  the  individual ;  thus,  e.g.,  if  we  had  similar  evidence
tending  to  show  the  Divine  origin  of  such  a  religion  as  Mormonism,  we
should  certainly  refuse  to  regard  it  as  conclusive.


2


The  Canons  of  Evidence  in  Psychical  Research.  [May  10,


I


In  this  religious  controversy,  therefore,  we  do  not  have  the  question
of  the  right  scientific  attitude  to  take  up  towards  evidence  for  marvels
as  such,  presented  in  a  simple  form.  To  find  it  so  presented,  we  must
turn  to  our  own  inquiiy.  Any  meml^er  of  our  Society  who  has  followed
the  controversy  to  which  our  publications  have  given  rise  must  have
felt  that,  as  regards  what  is  to  most  the  most  interesting  subject  of
our  investigation — the  possible  action  of  intelligences  other  than  those
of  living  human  beings  in  the  world  of  our  experience— we  occupy  a
very  peculiar  position.  It  is  not  only  that  we  are  attacked  with  equal
vigour  by  Materialists  and  Spiritualists  :  but  that  each  of  the  opposing
parties  attributes  to  us  an  extreme  and  irrational  bias  in  favour  of  the
other  extreme.  Our  materialistic  opponents  seem  to  hold  that  there  is
practically  no  difference  worth  considering,  in  respect  of  credulity  and
superstition,  between  admitting  the  evidence  of  Spiritualists  to  be
deserving  of  serious  and  systematic  consideration,  and  accepting  their
conclusions  ;  while  the  Spiritualists  seem  to  think  that  the  manner
in  which  we  treat  their  evidence  shows  that  we  are  as  obstinately
prejudiced  against  their  conclusions  as  the  most  bigoted  Materialists
can  be.

I  do  not  infer  from  this  that  the  position  which  we  thus  occupy  be-
tween the  extremes  is  necessarily  a  right  position  :  for,  granting  that
truth  generally  lies  somewhere  between  extreme  views,  it  is  obvious  that
the  wider  the  interval  between  the  extremes,  the  greater  the  chance  that
any  particular  position  taken  up  in  this  interval  may  itself  be  remote
from  the  truth.  My  object  is  rather  to  show  how  vast  the  intellectual
interval  is  between  the  opposing  extremes,  when  our  intermediate  posi-
tion is  thus  viewed  on  either  side  as  almost  indistinguishable  from  the
opposite  extreme.

What,  then,  is  the  cause  of  this  immense  divergence  as  to  the  right
manner  of  dealing  with  the  evidence  ?  Is  it  possible  by  any  reasoning
to  diminish  it,  and  to  bring  the  divergent  extremes  to  something  more
like  a  mutual  understanding  1  These  questions  naturally  force  them-
selves on  us  :  and  from  our  intermediate  position,  subjected  as  it  is  to
vehement  attacks  from  both  sides,  we  are,  I  think,  very  favourably
situated  for  considering  the  question.

It  is  this  question  that  I  wish  briefly  to  deal  with  this  evening.
I  wish  to  show  that  in  such  inquiries  as  ours  it  is  inevitable  that  there
should  be  a  very  wide  mai-gin  within  which  neither  side  can  prove,  or
ought  to  try  to  prove,  that  the  other  is  wrong  :  because  the  important
considerations,  the  ^;ros  and  cons  that  have  to  be  weighed  against
each  other,  are  not  capable  of  being  estimated  with  any  exactness.
And  therefore  there  is  properly  a  very  wide  interval  between  the  point
— as  regards  weight  of  evidence — at  v/hich  it  is  reasonable  to  embark
upon  an  inquiry  of  this  kind  and  the  point  at  which  it  is  reasonable


1839.] The  Canons  of  Evidence  in  Psychical  Research.


3


to  come  to  a  positive  decision.  Moreover,  it  would  save  useless
controversy  to  keep  in  mind,  that  the  considerations  in  favour  of  accept-
ing the  evidence  for  the  marvels  as  real  is  necessarily  and  reasonably
taken  at  a  different  value  by  different  persons,  according  to  the  different
relations  in  which  they  stand  to  it.

Let  me  first  state  briefly  why  the  decisive  considerations  cannot  be
estimated  with  any  exactness.  In  considering  whether  the  evidence
for  a  marvellous  fact  is  to  be  taken  as  true  and  adequate  we  have
necessarily  to  compare  opposing  improbabilities  :  it  is  improbable  that
the  marvel  should  have  really  happened,  and  it  is  improbable  that  the
testimony  to  its  happening  should  be  false — otherwise  the  testimony
would  not  be  what  we  call  evidence  at  all.

Now  these  opposing  improbabilities  are  quite  diverse,  and  we  have
no  intellectual  scales  in  which  Ave  can  weigh  them  accui'ately  one  against
the  other.  Some  of  our  opponents  offer  us,  by  way  of  such  scales,
Hume's  summary  argument  against  miracles  :  "  It  is  contrary  to  experi-
ence that  miracles  should  be  true,  and  not  contrary  to  experience  that
testimony  should  be  false."  But  in  saying  that  a  marvel  is  contrary  to
experience  we  can  mean  no  more  than  that  it  is  unlike  previous
experience — or  rather  that  it  is  unlike  that  portion  of  experience  which
lias  been  collected,  handed  down,  and  systematised  by  competent
persons.  But  this  only  means  that  it  is  entirely  novel  and  strange  :
and  in  the  course  of  the  life  of  the  human  race,  during  the  period  in
which  it  has  handed  down  and  communicated  experiences,  different
portions  of  mankind  have  been  continually  coming  across  things  that
were  at  first  entirely  novel  and  strange,  though  further  acquaintance
has  rendered  them  familiar.

Let  us  take  the  strangest  of  the  marvels  that  we  are  investigating,
the  physical  phenomena  of  Spiritualism :  and  let  us  grant — for  the
sake  of  argument — that  they  are  as  strange  to  human '  experience  as
they  certainly  are  to  modern  science.  No  one  will  maintain  that  it  is
impossible  that  the  human  race  should  ever  come  across  anything  so
entirely  novel  in  the  course  of  its  accumulation  of  experiences  ;  they
can  only  say  that  it  is  highly  improbable.  What  is  impossible  is  to
estimate  this  improbabiUty  with  anything  like  exactness  :  since  to  make
such  an  estimate  we  should  require  to  ascertain  the  proportion  that
what  we  do  know  about  the  universe  bears  to  what  we  do  not  know
<about  it ;  and  that  proportion  is  certainly  one  of  the  things  that  we  do
not  know.

We  are,  therefore,  in  this  position — not  very  satisfactory  to  the
logical  mind,  but  one  that  we  are  bound  to  face  :  we  must  admit  that
the  statement  of  a  fact  novel  beyond  a  certain  degree  of  novelty  is  in
itself  an  improbable  statement,  and  that  the  improbability  grows  as  the
novelty  grows  :  but  we  must  admit  that  no  one  can  pretend  to  lay  down

B  2


4 The  Canons  of  Evidence  in  Psi/cJdcal  Research. [May  10,


at  what  rate  the  improbability  grows.  The  improbability  of  course
vanishes  when  we  come  to  understand  the  conditions  of  the  marvel,  since
this  process  of  "understanding" — as  we  call  it — brings  it  into  harmony
with  the  rest  of  our  experience  :  but  till  we  have  reached  this  under-
standing the  improbability  must  remain  solid  but  indefinite,  and  all  we
can  do  is  to  weigh  this  improbability — not  in  any  scales  furnished  by
exact  science,  but  in  the  rough  scales  of  common-sense — against  the
improbability  that  the  testimony  should  be  false.  The  greater  the
marvel,  the  better  must  be  the  testimony  ;  of  that  common-sense  has
no  doubt ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  say  precisely  what  accumulation  of
testimony  is  requii'ed  to  balance  a  given  magnitude  of  marvel.

Some  of  the  advocates  of  Modern  Spiritualism  are  inclined  to  join
issue  with  common-sense  on  this  point.  They  say,  If  you  admit  that  the
marvel  in  question  is  not  strictly  impossible,  and  the  testimony  would
be  amply  sufficient,  in  quantity  and  quality,  to  establish  any  ordinary
fact,  would  be  accepted  without  hesitation  in  law  courts,  and  in  tho
ordinary  affairs  of  life,  you  ought  not  to  treat  it  with  excejjtional  sus-
picion because  the  fact  is  novel  and  extraordinai-y.  Now,  doubtless,  as
Dr.  Butler  says,  "  Probability  is  the  guide  of  life,"  and,  therefore,
when  it  is  highly  improbable  that  testimony  should  be  false,  we  treat
this  improbability  as  if  it  were  equivalent  practically  to  negative
certainty  in  ordinary  affairs.  But  this  only  happens  when  there  is  no
opposing  improljability  of  equal  weight :  when  in  law  courts,  or  in
ordinary  life  we  are  met  with  conflicting  improbabilities — as  {e.g.)  when
two  generally  trustworthy  persons  contradict  each  other — then  the
degree  of  impi'obability  of  either  being  wrong  has  to  be  roughly  esti-
mated and  is  estimated  for  pi'actical  purposes.  And,  similarly,  when
the  improbability  of  a  marvel  is  met  by  the  improbability  of  testimony
being  false,  we  have  to  make  some  kind  of  estimate  of  the  latter,
and  in  so  doing  to  take  note  carefully  of  different  sources  of  possible
error.  I  need  not  dwell  on  these  sources  of  error,  as  our  Proceedings
have  by  this  time  made  us  all  very  familiar  with  the  different  species.
The  chief  are  (1)  alteration  of  a  narrative  or  tradition,  when  it  is  not
obtained  at  first  hand;  (2)  errors  in  memory, when  the narrati^-e  is  told
a^ter  lapse  of  time ;  (3)  errors  in  the  actual  apprehension  of  fact,  partly
through  failure  to  observe  material  circumstances,  partly  through  the
mingling  of  inference  with  observation.  But  as  regards  this  last  source
of  error,  it  may  be  worth  while  to  observe  that  an  important  part  of
our  work — in  collecting  evidence  for  telepath}' — was  free  from  it,  and
was  thereby  in  a  decidedly  advantageous  position  as  compared  {e.g.)
with  the  inquiry  into  the  physical  phenomena  of  Spiritualism.  For  in
the  proof  that  "  Phantasms  of  the  Living  "  are  soinetimes  "  veridical " —
i.e.,  correspond  to  deaths  or  other  ci'itical  events  in  the  life  of  the
persons  they  represent — we  are  only  concerned  with  observation  of  a


1889.] Tlie  Canons  of  Evidence  in  Psychical  Research.  5


mental  fact,  as  to  which  the  observer  cannot  be  mistaken  :  in  his  state-
ment that  a  distant  friend  appeared  to  be  in  his  room,  there  can  be  no
erroneous  inference  ;  error  only  comes  in  if  he  infers  that  the  friend
was  physically  there.  The  fact  of  the  apparition  is  undeniable,  and
that  fact  is  all  we  require  for  our  argument.  But  in  dealing  with  the
evidence  for  physical  phenomena  tliis  source  of  error  has  to  be  guarded
figainst.  If  a  man  tells  us  that  he  saw  a  table  get  off  the  ground  with
no  one  touching  it,  though  the  fact  that  he  had  this  impression  is
interesting  and  notevrorthy,  it  is  not  complete  proof  of  the  levitation
of  the  table ;  we  have  still  to  inquire  whether  the  impression  on  his
mind  could  be  produced  otherwise  than  by  the  physical  fact.  If  there
was  anyone  else  tliere,  it  is  prima  facie  possible  that  he  may  have
produced  an  illusion  in  the  narrator's  mind  ;  therefore  it  becomes  need-
ful (1)  to  study  the  art  of  producing  illusions,  and  (2)  to  examine  how
far  the  situation  and  circumstances  of  the  narrator  at  the  time  at  which
the  impression  was  produced,  gave  opportunities  for  the  exercise  of  this
-art.  ^Ye  have  also,  of  course,  to  consider  the  possibility  of  the  observer
havinof  been  in  an  abnormal  state  of  nerves  or  mind,  tendinir  to  make
-self-deception  natural — and  even  perhaps  deception  of  others.

My  object  now  is  not  to  emphasise  these  sources  of  error ;  but
rather  to  show  how  in  every  case  the  probabilities  are  only  capable  of
being  vaguely  estimated  ;  and  how  in  many  cases  they  must  necessarily
be  estimated  differently  by  different  persons,  according  to  their  know-
ledge of  the  persons  concerned.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  I  feel  that  a
part  of  my  grounds  for  believing  in  telepathy,  depending,  as  it  does,
on  personal  knowledge,  cannot  be  communicated  except  in  a  weakened
form  to  the  oi'dinary  reader  of  the  printed  statements  which  represent
the  evidence  that  has  convinced  me.  Indeed,  I  feel  this  so  strongly
that  I  ha^-e  always  made  it  my  liighest  ambition  as  a  psychical  researcher
to  produce  evidence  which  will  drive  my  opponents  to  doubt  my  honesty
or  veracity ;  I  think  that  thei'e  are  a  very  small  minority  of  persons
who  will  not  doubt  them,  and  that  if  I  can  convince  them  I  have  done
all  that  I  can  do:  as  regards  the  majority  even  of  my  own  acquaintances
I  should  claim  no  more  than  an  admission  that  they  were  considerably
surprised  to  tind  me  in  the  trick.

Perhaps  my  hearers  may  be  inclined  to  ask  me  whethei',  having
reduced  the  arguments  on  both  sides  to  this  degree  of  indehniteness,  I
wish  to  leave  the  matter  in  this  hazy  condition.  Ko ;  that  is  just
what  I  do  not  wish  to  do.  But  I  think  it  will  be  a  long  process
getting  it  out  of  this  condition,  and  one  that  demands  patience.  What
anyone  has  to  do  who  is  convinced  himself  of  the  reality  of  any  alleged
raar\'el,  is  first  to  try,  if  he  can,  to  diminish  the  improbability  of  the
marvel  hy  offering  an  explanation  which  harmonises  it  with  other  parts  of
our  experience ;  and  secondly,  to  increase  the  improbability  on  the  side


G Tlte  Canons  of  Evidence  in  Psychical  Research. [May  10,


of  the  testimony,  by  accumulating  experiences  and  varying  conditions
and  witnesses.

And  may  I  conclude  by  saying  again  what  I  said  last  time,  that  con-
sidering the  difficulties  in  which  our  investigation  is  involved,  I  think  it
unreasonable  to  complain  at  our  slow  rate  of  progress.  I  feel  confident
that  if  at  the  end  of  the  next  seven  years  we  and  our  cause  have  made-
as  much  way  as  has  been  made  in  the  seven  that  have  elapsed,  the
whole  attitude  of  at  least  the  progi'essive  past  of  the  scientific  woi'ld,
in  relation  to  the  subjects  that  we  are  studying,  will  be  fundamentally
changed.


4


1889.]


The  Census  of  Hallucinalions.


1


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON
July  8lh,  1889.

The  thirty-third  General  Meeting  of  tlie  Society  was  held  at  the
Westminster  Town  Hall,  on  July  8th,  1889.

The  President,  Professor  Sidgwick,  in  the  Chair.

The  programnie  consisted  of  an  address  by  the  President,  and  a
paper  by  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on  "  Recognised  Apparitions
Occurring  more  than  a  Year  after  Death,"  both  of  which  are  printed
below.

II.

Address  by  the  President  on
THE  CENSUS  OF  HALLUCINATIONS.

It  is  known  to  all  members  and  associates  of  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research — at  least  to  all  who  read  this  journal— that  an
attempt  is  being  made  on  a  large  scale  to  obtain  as  accurate  statistics
as  possible  relative  to  the  frequency,  tlie  specific  nature,  and — so  far
as  may  be — the  causes  of  what  I  will  briefly  call  Hallucinations.

The  scale  on  which  we  are  planning  our  census  of  Hallucinations
is  an  ambitious  one  :  it  must  be  an  ambitious  one  if  we  are  to  succeed
in  our  aim  ;  I  do  not  think  we  can  be  satisfied  with  less  than  50,000
answers  to  the  first  and  most  general  question  that  we  are  asking  ;
and  if  we  ai-e  to  get  50,000  answers,  we  want  a  great  deal  more  assis-
tance than  Ave  have  as  yet  got.

I  wish  to  express  my  gi'atitude,  and  the  gratitude  of  those  who  are
working  with  me,  to  the  members  and  otliers  who  are  aiding  us  in  this
toilsome  task  ;  at  the  same  time,  I  wish  to  urge  on  all  members  and
associates  who  have  not  yet  offered  aid  that  this  is  eminently  a  task  for
co-operative  labour,  in  which  everyone  interested  in  Psychical  Research
ought  to  take  a  share.  A  copy  of  the  single  question  that  we  wish  to
be  asked  in  all  cases  has  been  sent  to  every  member  and  associate,
with  spaces  for  25  answers ;  we  sliall  be  happy  to  send  any  more  copies
to  anyone  who  will  apply  for  them  ;  and  if  every  member  and  associate
■would  only  collect  a  single  batch  of  twenty-five  answers,  and
persuade  some  one  friend  to  collect  another  batcl),  we  should  get  in
this  way  over  30,000  answers  and  should  have  no  doubt  of  being  able
to  make  up  our  50,000.

I  fear,  however,  that  it  is  too  much  to  expect  this  universal
co-operation.  I  hope,  therefore,  that  every  zealous  person  will  collect,
either  personally  or  by  friends,  as  many  batches  as  possible. And  I


8  ■  The  Census  of  Hallucmations.  [July  8,


may  add  that  we  shall  equally  welcome  assistance  from  persons  who
are  not  membei's  or  associates.  I  ought  to  add  that  we  have  carefully
framed  our  question  so  that  we  may  fairly  ask  for  co-operation  from
persons  of  all  opinions  ;  it  does  not  imply  either  belief  or  disbelief  in
the  reality  of  ghosts,  or  in  telepathy,  or  in  any  other  explanation  of  the
phenomena  inquired  into.  It  runs  as  follows  :  "  Have  you  ever,
when  believing  yourself  to  be  completely  awake,  had  a  vivid  impression
of  seeing  or  being  touched  by  a  living  being  or  inanimate  object,  or  of
hearing  a  voice,  wliich  imjjression,  so  far  as  you  could  discover,  was
not  due  to  an  external  physical  cause  ?  "  I  hope  it  will  be  seen  how
impartially  the  question  has  been  framed.  The  most  bigoted  Materialist
does  not  deny  that  certain  persons  have  the  impressions  here  described;
the  most  convinced  Spiritualist  does  not  usually  attribute  them  to  an
"  external  physical  cause."

This  leads  me  to  say  a  word  on  the  general  term  used  to  denote
these  experiences.  We  require  some  one  general  term,  and  the  best
that  we  can  find  to  include  all  the  species  is  "Hallucination."  I
admit  the  word  to  be  open  to  some  objection  ;  because  some  people
naturally  understand  from  it  that  the  impression  so  described  is
entirely  false  and  morbid.  But  I  need  not  say  to  readers  of
Phantasms'^  that  this  is  not  our  view:  many  of  these  experiences —
though  doubtless  they  all  involve  some  disturbance  of  the  normal
action  of  the  nervous  system — have  no  tracetible  connection  with
disease  of  any  kind  :  and  a  certain  number  of  them  are,  as  we  hold,
reasonably  regarded  as  "veridical"  or  truth-telling;  they  imply  in
the  percipient  a  capacity  above  the  normal  of  receiving  knowledge,
under  certain  rare  conditions.

Why,  then,  it  may  be  asked,  do  we  use  a  term  that  implies
erroneous  and  illusory  belief  1  I  answer,  first,  because  in  every  experi-
ence that  we  call  a  Hallucination  there  is  an  element  of  erroneous
belief,  though  it  may  be  only  momentary,  and  though  it  may  be  the
means  of  communicating  a  truth  that  could  not  otherwise  have  been
known.  If  I  seem  to  see  the  form  of  a  friend  pass  through  my  room,
I  must  have  momentarily  the  false  belief  that  his  physical  organism  is
occupying  a  portion  of  the  space  of  my  room,  though  a  moment's  reflection
may  convince  me  that  this  is  not  so,  and  though  I  may  immediately
draw  the  inference  that  he  is  passing  through  a  crisis  of  life  some  miles
off,  and  this  inference  may  turn  out  to  be  true.  In  the  case  of  a
recurrent  Hallucination  known  to  be  such,  we  cannot  say  that  the
false  belief  ever  completely  dominates  the  percipient's  mind;  but  still,  I
conceive,  it  is  partially  there ;  here  is  an  appearance  that  has  to  be
resisted  by  memory  and  judgment.

It  is,  then,  this  element  of  error — perhaps  only  momentary  and
partial — which  is  implied  in  our  term  "  Hallucination,"  and  so  much


1889.]


The  Census  of  Hallucinations.


9


Avill  be  admitted  by  most  intell'gent  believers  in  ghosts  :  for  there  aro
few  of  such  believers  who  really  hold  that  a  ghost  is  actually  seen  as
an  ordinary  material  object  is  seen :  i.e.,  that  it  aifects  the  percipient's
eyes  from  the  outside  by  reflecting  rays  of  light  on  them.  But  we  wish
even  those  ghost-seers  who  hold  tliis  belief  to  have  no  difliculty  in  answer-
ing "  Yes  "  to  our  general  question  :  and  therefore  in  framing  it  we
avoided  the  word  "  Hallucination,"  though  we  have  thought  ourselvc^
justified  in  using  it  in  the  "  Instructions  to  Collectors  "  at  tlie  back  of
the  paper.

And  all  would  certainly  admit  that  in  many  cases  "  Hallucination  "
is  the  only  proper  term.  For  instance,  one  of  our  informants  saw  a
hand  and  arm  apparently  suspended  from  the  ceiling — the  owner  of
the  real  counterpart  of  this  hand  and  arm  being  alive  and  heard  at  the
time  moving  about  in  the  next  room.

The  word  "  apparition  "  is,  no  doubt,  a  neutral  word  that  might  be
used  of  all  visual  exjDeriences  of  this  kind  ;  but  it  could  only  be  used  of
visual  cases.  Usage  would  not  allow  us  to  apply  it  to  apparent  sounds
or  apparent  touches.

I  think,  then,  that  we  must  use  "  hallucinations  of  the  senses  "  as  a
general  term  for  the  experiences  we  are  collecting  :  meaning  simply  to
denote  by  it  a  sensory  effect  which  we  cannot  attribute  to  any  external
physical  cause  of  the  kind  that  would  ordinai'ily  produce  this  eflect.
In  some  cases  we  can  refer  it  clearly  to  a  physical  cause  within  the
organism — some  temporary  or  permanent  physical  condition.  In  other
cases — quite  apart  from  telepathy — it  is  equally  clear  that  the  cause  is
primarily  psychical.  For  instance,  in  the  case  of  persons  who  have
been  hypnotised,  it  may  result  from  a  post-hypnotic  order.  Thus  in  an
ai'ticle  by  Mr.  Gurney,  in  Proceedings,  Part  XII.,  pp.  12,  13,  there  is  an
interesting  account  of  the  result  of  a  suggestion  made  by  him  to  a
subject  named  Zillah  in  the  hypnotic  trance,  that  she  would  have  a
hallucination  of  him  at  a  certain  fixed  time  on  the  following  day  ;  and
there  is  a  letter  from  Zillah's  mistress  describing  the  surprise  caused
to  Zillah  by  seeing  Mr.  Gurney  come  into  the  kitchen  and  say  "  Good-
afternoon,"  at  the  appointed  time.  Here  we  can  trace  the  origin  of  the
idea  which  thus  externalised  itself.  In  other  cases,  as  with  the  arm
above  mentioned,  the  idea  arises  .spontaneously  by  association  or  other-
wise in  the  mind.  In  other  cases,  again,  the  idea  which  thus  externalises
itself  may,  as  we  believe,  come  into  the  mind  from  the  mind  of  a
person  at  a  distance — the  idea  of  a  dying  friend  reaching  us  from  his
juind  and  rising  above  the  threshold  of  consciousness  in  the  form  of  a
hallucination,  just  as  the  idea  of  Mr.  Gurney  rose  above  the
threshold  of  consciousness  in  Zillah's  case  in  the  form  of  a  hallucination.
A  link  between  the  two  is  afforded  by  those  rare  and  interesting
cases,  of  which  several  have  been  recorded  in  the  publications  of  our


10  The  Census  of  Hallucinations.  [July  8


Society,  where  one  person  is  able  from  a  distance  and  by  a  mental  pro-
cess alone  to  cause  an  apparition  of  himself  to  another.  We  have  reason
to  think  that  the  resulting  sensory  effect  is  in  all  these  cases  essentially
the  same,  though  the  cause  of  it  is  very  different  in  different  cases  ;  and,
therefore,  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  it  seems  best  to  apply
the  term  "hallucination"  to  all.

I  have  dwelt  thus  long  upon  the  use  of  the  word  hallucination —
because  the  discussion  brings  out  incidentally  the  importance  of
making  the  statistical  inquiry  we  are  engaged  in  as  to  the  kind  of
hallucinations  that  occur,  and  the  proportion  of  people  that  experience
them.  It  is  clear  from  what  we  have  said  that  the  subject  of  hallu-
cinations is  of  importance  to  psychologists  and  physiologists,  for  whon>
they  throw  light  on  the  workings  of  the  mind  and  senses.  And  it  is
also  of  some  practicaf  use  to  inquire  into  them  with  a  view  to  dispelling
the  alarm  they  frequently  cause.  But  it  is  for  those  interested  in
Psychical  Research  that  they  are  at  present  most  important — and  that
whether  they  are  supporters  or  opponents.  For  those  who  believe  iu
telepathy  it  is  of  course  veiy  important  to  study  as  completely  as
possible  tlie  mode  in  which,  as  it  appears,  telepathically  imparted  ideas
are  apt  to  manifest  themselves.  But,  apart  from  this,  it  is  absolutely
necessary,  in  order  to  prove  that  the  hallucinations  of  dying  persons
are  really  connected  with  their  death,  to  form  some  idea  of  the  relative
frequency  of  sucli  hallucinations  compared  with  those  which  do  not
correspond  with  any  external  event.  Apparitions  of  living  persons
when  nothing  seemingly  is  happening  to  them  ai-e  common — much
commoner  than  veridical  ones.  Mr.  Gurney  calculated  that,  if  a  man
saw  an  apparition  of  his  friend,  he  would  be  justified  in  assuming  the
chance  that  his  friend  had  died  within  an  hour  of  that  time  as  about
1  in  40.  If  this  conclusion  be  correctly  drawn  from  adequate  data,  we
need  not  feel  extremely  alarmed  about  our  friend  if  we  see  his  apparition;
though,  at  the  same  time,  the  frequency  of  the  coincidence  is  very  far
beyond  what  chance  would  give.  But  it  has  been  doubted  whether  the
number  of  answers  which  Mr.  Gurney  collected — 5,700 — is  sufficient
to  give  accurately  the  proportion  of  the  population  who  have  seen
apparitions ;  and  Mr.  Gurney  himself  considered  it  quite  insufficient
to  determine  the  proportion  of  coincidental  to  non-coincidental  cases.
To  arrive  at  this  he  endeavoured  to  form  an  estimate  of  the  size  of
the  circle  from  which  our  veridical  cases  are  drawn.  This  is  necessardy
extremely  uncertain,  and  though  I  think  the  estimate  given  in
Phantasms  is  probably  in  excess  of  the  truth  and  therefore  allows
a  margin  against  the  telepathic  hypothesis,  this  view  has  not  been
taken  by  critics  of  that  work,  some  of  whom  think  that  the  circle  has
not  been  assumed  large  enough.  At  any  rate  we  should  all  agree  with
the  critics  in  thiid?in2;  that  it  would  be  much  better  if  we  could


1889.]


The  Census  of  Ilallv.cinations.


11


dispense  ■with  conjecture  altogetlier  and  know  the  experiences  of  a
sutHcient  number  of  persons  to  enable  us  to  tell  from  the  statistics
alone  what  proportion  of  the  population  have  hallucinations  and  what
proportion  of  these  are  coincidental.  If  we  can  collect  50,000  answer.^
I  think  we  could  do  this,  but  the  coincidental  cases  are  too  I'are  for  us-
to  rely  on  a  smaller  number.

[Some  account  of  the  progress  of  the  census  so  far  was  here  giren.
An  account  of  the  answers  received  up  to  October  i-tth,  1889,  will  he
found  in  the  Supplement.]

I  have  tried  to  show  that  all  the  phenomena  to  which  our  question
relates — veridical  or  not — should  be  called  hallucinations.  I  must,,
however,  admit  that  it  is  not  very  easy  to  draw  the  line  unmistakably
between  what  is  a  hallucination  and  what  is  not.  The  difficulty  meets
us  in  all  directions.  For  instance,  ai'e  sounds  heard  in  a  so-called
haunted  house  hallucinations  or  are  they  real  sounds'?  This  question
would  be  answered  difl'erently  by  different  persons,  and  it  was  because-
we  felt  that  hopeless  ambiguity  would  be  introduced  into  our  results
by  including  noises  as  distinct  from  voices  that  we  limited  our  inquiry
in  auditory  experiences  to  voices.  But  the  ditficulty  of  drawing
the  line  is  not  thus  entirely  avoided.  It  is  often  difficult  to  decide  on
the  degree  of  externalisation  of  an  experience  both  in  ^-isual  and
auditory  cases.  For  instance,  it  may  be  asked — how  does  a  vivid
visual  impi'ession  seen  with  the  eyes  sh\it  count,  and  how  does  this,
differ  from  an  apparition  seen  in  the  dark  ■?  Or  again,  how  far  is  the
kind  of  experience  which  is  sometimes  described  as  an  internal  voice,,
or  as  a  soundless  sound,  an  auditory  hallucination  ?  I  do  not  think
that  in  fact  there  is  any  sharp  line  between  such  a  mental  image  as
most  of  us  can  call  up  and  a  genuine  hallucination — experiences  of  all
degi'ees  of  externalisation  occur  between  the  two.  There  are  somo
which  we  have  no  hesitation  in  calling  hallucinations  and  some  which
we  can  equally  confidently  say  are  not,  but  there  are  some  which  it  is
difficult  to  decide  about.  As  regards  these,  I  would  say  to  those  who
answer  our  question — put  clown  either  yes  or  a  query,  and  give  details,
leaving  to  the  Committee  who  will  have  to  analyse  the  results  the-
burden  of  deciding  how  they  should  be  classed.

One  other  point  of  doubt  about  our  question  may  here  be  men-
tioned. We  determined  to  secure  as  far  as  possible  that  our  answers
should  be  the  howl  fide  answers  of  grown-up  people  by  asking  the
question  only  of  people  who  have  attained  the  age  of  21.  But  we
did  not  mean  by  this,  as  has  been  understood  in  some  cases,  to-
exclude  experiences  which  had  occurred  to  those  answering  at  any  age.

Again  some  collectors  have  asked  me  whether  uneducated  people
may  be  included  in  the  census.  There  is  no  objection  to  this — indeed
I  think  it  desirable  to  include  all classes — but collectors will  find


12


TliG  Census  of  Hall acinat ions.


[July  8,


that  a  good  deal  of  care  and  trouble  must  be  taken  to  make  sure
that  uneducated  people  quite  understand  the  question.

I  have  kejDt  to  the  last  the  most  important  of  tlie  special  points  to
which  I  wish  to  draw  attention.  It  is  not  only  necessary,  as  I  have
said,  that  our  census  shall  be  sufliciently  extensive,  but  it  is  also  of
fundamental  importance  that  it  shall  be  impartial,  that  the  collector
should  not  yield  to  any  bias  in  favour  of  collecting  cither  positive  or
negative  answers.  It  is,  of  course,  natural  that  the  collector  should  )je
more  interested  in  obtaining  experiences  of  the  positive  kind,  and  it  is,
of  course,  very  probable  that  when  it  is  known  in  his  circle  of  friends
and  acquaintances  that  he  is  making  this  collection,  that  cases  of  such
experiences  should  be  mentioned  to  him.  It  is,  however,  obvious  that
if  answers  to  whicli  he  is  directed  in  this  way  were  simply  included  in
his  list  witliout  any  special  mark,  the  impartiality  of  the  result  would
be  fundamentally  vitiated.  In  order  to  guard  against  this  danger,
and  at  the  same  time  not  to  lose  any  information  which  might  have  an
important  value  for  our  inquiry,  we  advise  all  our  collectors  when  they
send  in  their  lists,  to  put  a  cross  against  any  answer  the  nature  of  which
was  known  to  them  through  information  received  before  they  asked  the
<luestioa


188D.]  On  Recognised  A2-)paritions.  13


TIT.

ON RECOGNISED APPARITIONS OCCURRING  MORE
THAN  A  YEAR  AFTER  DEATH.i

By  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


The  last  Part  of  tliese  Proceedings  included  an  exposition, — begmx
by  the  late  Mr.  Edmund  Gurney  and  completed  by  myself, — of  the
principal  cases  in  our  possession  where  an  apparition  occurring  sooi
after  the  death  of  tlie  person  figured  seems  plausibly  referable  to  some,
other  than  a  merely  subjective  origin  ; — seems,  in  fact,  to  have  been
telepathic  or  veridical, — a  real  communication  from  some  mind  outside
the  percipient's  own.  In  choosing  tliese  cases  a  line  was  drawn  at  a.
year  after  death; — a  line  partly  arbitraiy,  but  partly  determined  by
the  fact  that  after  that  lapse  of  time  recognised  apparitions  with  even
a  2J')'imd  facie  claim  to  be  classed  as  veridical,  become  exceedingly  rare..

They  are  rare,  and  they  are  in  many  ways  perplexing  ;  hut  it  ia
none  the  less  our  duty  to  discuss  tliem.  Inconclusive  wlien  considered
by  themselves,  they  are  full  of  instruction  when  we  compare  them  -witli
the  larger  groups  which  include  apparitions  at  or  shortly  after  death.

The  momentous  step,  of  course,  is  already  taken  so  soon  as  we
consent  to  refer  any  j)ost-mortem  apparition, — dating  even  from  the
morrow  of  the  death, — to  the  continued  agency  of  the  decedent.  Few
readers  will  question  the  assumption  that  in  that  unknown  journey
ce  n'est  que  le  premier  pio-S  qui  coute.

And  since  we  are  standing  hei'e  on  the  threshold  of  new  per-
plexities, let  us  pause  for  a  moment  and  consider  what  is  tlie
phenomenon  which  we  are  looking  for, — what  connotation  we  are  to
give  to  the  word  "ghost," — a  word  which  has  embodied  so  many
unfounded  theories  and  causeless  fears.  It  wovild  be  more  satisfactory,
in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  simply  to  collect  facts  without
offering  speculative  comment.  But  it  seems  safer  to  begin  by  briefly
pointing  out  the  manifest  errors  of  the  traditional  view  ;  since  that

1  The  papers  in  these  Proceedings  which  deal  with  evidence  aim  rather  at  setting'
forth  that  evidence  accurately  and  imisartially  than  at  expressing — what  is  compara-
tively unimportant — the  precise  degree  of  belief  at  which  the  writer  himself  may
have  arrived.  But  in  these  papers  on  posthumous  apparitions  the  hypothese;
discussed  are  at  once  so  moinentous  and  so  disputable  that  it  seems  well  to  repeat  here
the  notice  prefixed  to  all  these  Proceedings,  and  to  remind  the  reader  that  I  am  not.
speaking  as  the  mouthpiece  of  my  colleagues  in  the  Council  of  the  S.P.R.  Various
converging  lines  of  evidence  have  led  me  individually  to  think  it  probable  that  in  some
at  least  of  the  cases  here  cited  there  has  been  a  real  agency  of  deceased  j  ersons.  But
no  one  else  is  responsible  for  that  opinion;  nor  do  I  even  claim  that  the  evidence
cited  is  enough  to  prove  its  truth.


l-i  On  Recognised  Apparitions  occurring ['Tuly  8,


tradition,  i£  left  unnoticed,  would  remain  lodged  in  the  background
=even  of  many  minds  which  liave  never  really  accepted  it.

Briefly,  then,  the  popular  view  regards  a  "  gliost "  as  a  deceased
person  jjermitted  by  Providence  to  hold  communication  luith  survivors.
And  this  short  definition  contains,  I  think,  at  least  three  unwarrantable
assumptions.

In  the  first  place,  such  words  as  permission  and  Providence  are
simply  neither  more  nor  less  applicable  to  this  phenomenon  than  to
any  other.  We  conceive  that  all  phenomena  alike  take  place  in
accordance  with  the  laws  of  the  universe ; — and  consequently  by
pennission  of  the  Supreme  Power  in  the  universe.  Undoubtedly  the
phenomena  with  which  we  are  dealing  are  in  this  sense  permitted  to
occur.  Cut  there  is  no  «  priori  reason  whatever  for  assuming  that
they  are  permitted  in  any  especial  sense  of  their  own,  or  tliat  they  form
exceptions  to  law,  instead  of  being  exemplifications  of  law.  Nor  is
there  any  a  posteriori  reason  for  thus  su2:)230sing, — any  such  inference
•deducible  from  a  study  of  the  phenomena  themselves.  If  we  attempt
to  find  in  these  phenomena  any  poetical  justice,  or  manifest  adaptation
to  human  cravings,  we  shall  be  just  as  much  disappointed  as  if  we
endeavoured  to  find  a  similar  satisfaction  in  the  ordinary  course  of
terrene  history.

In  the  second  place,  we  have  no  warrant  for  the  assumption  that
the  phantom  seen,  even  though  it  be  somehow  caused  hy  a  deceased
2:)erson,  is  that  deceased  person,  in  any  ordinary  sense  of  the  word.
Instead  of  appealing  to  the  crude  analogy  of  the  living  friend  who,
when  he  has  walked  into  the  room,  is  in  the  room,  we  shall  find  for  the
gliost  a  much  closer  parallel  in  those  hallucinatory  figures  or  phantasms
which  living  persons  can  sometimes  project  at  a  distance.  When
Baron  von  Notzing,  for  instance,  caused  by  an  effort  of  will
an  apparition  of  himself  to  a  waking  percipient,  out  of  sight,  he  Avas
himself  awake  and  conscious  in  the  place  where,  not  his  phantom  but
his  body  stood.  Whatever,  then,  that  phantom  teas, — however
generated  or  conditioned, — we  cannot  say  that  it  v/as  himself.  And
equally  unjustifiable  must  be  the  common  parlance  which  speaks  of  the
ghost  as  though  it  were  the  decedent  himself — a  revenant  coming  back
amongst  living  men.

All  this,  of  course,  will  be  already  familiar  to  most  of  my  readers,
and  only  needs  repetition  here  because  experience  shows  that  when — as
with  these  post-mortem  phantoms — the  decedent  has  gone  well  out  of
sight  or  reach,  there  is  a  fresh  tendency  (so  to  say)  to  antlrropomorpltise
the  apparition ;  to  suppose  that,  as  the  decedent  is  not  provably
anywhere  else,  he  is  probably  liere  ;  and  that  the  apparition  is  bound
to  behave  accordingly.  All  such  assumptions  must  be  dismissed,  and
the  phantom  must  be  taken  on  its  merits, — as  indicating  merely  a


1SS9.]


Mgre . tli.ctn,  a  Xeav  a ftc r,  DecU h


15


certain  connection  with  the  decedent,  the  precise  nature  of  tliat
connection  being  a  ,pg,vt  of  Uie.prohlem  to,be^solvefl,  .  ■.

And  in  tlie  third  plajj^;.  uifit  as  we  fcfjaSKiiO.siiy;  Uuit  the  phantom  is
the  decedent,  co  also  must  we  cease  to  ascribe  to  tlie  pliantom  the
motives  by  which  we  imagine  that  the  decedent  might  be  swayed.  AYe
must  therefore  excUide  from  our  definition  of  a  ghost  any  words  whicli
assume  its  intention  to  communicate  witli  the  living.  It  may  bear
<3uch  a  relation  to  the  decedent  that  it  can  reflect  or  represent  his
presumed  v/ish  to  communicate,  or  it  may  not.  If,  for  instance,  its
^■elation  to  his  j'^ost-morlem  life  be  like  the  relation  of  my  dreams  to  my
earthly  life,  it  may  represent  little  that  is  truly  his,  save  such  vague
iiemories  and  instincts  as  give  a  dim  individuality  to  each  man's  trivial
dreams,

Let  us  attempt,  then,  a  truer  definition.  Instead  of  describing  a
"  ghost "  as  a  dead  person  permitted  to  communicate  with  the  living,
let  us  define  it  as  a  manifestation  of  j)ersistent  2'>STSonal  energy, — or  as
ma  indication  that  some  kind  of  force  is  being  exercised  after  death
which  is  in  some  way  connected  with  a  person  previously  knov/n  on
earth.  In  this  definition  we  have  eliminated,  as  will  be  seen,  a  great
mass  of  popular  assumptions.  Yet  we  must  introduce  a  further
proviso,  lest  our  definition  still  seem  to  imply  an  assumption  which  we
have  no  right  to  make.  It  is  theoretically  possible  that  this  force  or
influence  which,  after  a  man's  death,  creates  a  phantasmal  impression
of  him,  may  indicate  no  continuing  action  on  his  part,  but  may  be  some
residue  of  the  force  or  energy  which  he  generated  while  yet  alive.
There  may  be  veridical  after-images  : — such  as  Mr.  Gurney  hints  at
{Proceedings,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  417),  when  in  his  comments  on  the  recurring
figure  of  an  old  woman ; — seen  on  the  bed  where  she  was  murdered, —
he  remai'ks  that  this  figure  suggests  "not  so  much  any  continuing  local
action  on  the  part  of  the  deceased  person,  as  the  survival  of  a  mere
image,  impressed,  we  cannot  guess  how,  on  we  cannot  guess  what,  by
that  person's  physical  organism,  and  perceptible  at  times  to  those
endowed  with  some  cognate  form  of  sensitiveness."

Strange  as  this  notion  may  seem,  it  is  strongly  suggested  by  many
of  the  cases  of  haunting  which  do  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  the
present  paper.  It  will  be  remembered  that  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper  on
Phantasms  of  the  Dead  brought  out  the  fact  that  there  is  strong
■evidence  for  the  recurrence  of  the  same  hallucinatory  figures  in
the  same  localities,  but  weak  evidence  to  indicate  any  purpose  in
most  of  these  figures,  or  any  connection  with  bygone  individuals,  or
wdth  such  tragedies  as  ai-e  popularly  supposed  to  start  a  ghost  on  its
career.  In  some  of  these  cases  of  frequent,  meaningless  recurrence
of  a  figure  in  a  given  spot,  we  are  driven  to  wonder  whether  it  can
te  some  decedent's  Dast  frequentation  of  that  spot,  rather  than  anv


16  On  Reco(ynised  Appc!,ritio')i^  ofip^rfing [July  8,

fi'csli  action  of  his  after  death,  •which  has  generated  what  I  have
termed  the  veridical  after-imago,— ve-idicp.l  in  the  sense  that  it  com-
municates inforiiiatlon,,  '^rbvionsly  runkilo^vn  ro  "th.e  percipient,  as  to  a
former  inhaljitant  of  the  liaunted  locality.

Such  are  some  of  the  questions  which  our  evidence  suggests.  And
I  may  point  out  that  the  very  fact  that  sucli  bizarre  problems  should
present  themselves  at  every  turn  does  in  a  certain  sense  tend  to  show
that  these  apparitions  are  not  purely  subjective  things, —  do  not
originate  merely  in  the  percipient's  imagination.  For  they  are  not  like
what  any  man  would  liave  imagined.  What  man's  mind  tends  to  fancy
on  such  topics  maybe  seen  in  the  endless  crop  of  fictitious  ghost-stories ;
— which  furnish,  indeed,  a  curious  proof  of  the  persistence  of  pre-
conceived notions.  For  they  go  on  being  framed  according  to  canons
of  their  own,  and  deal  witli  a  set  of  imaginary  phenomena  quite
different  from  those  which  actually  occur.  The  actual  phenomena,  I
may  add,  could  scarcely  be  made  romantic.  One  true  "  gliost-story  "
is  apt  to  be  very  like  another ;— and  all  to  be  fragmentary  and
appai'ently  meaningless.  Their  meaning,  that  is  to  say,  lies  in  their
confoiTnity,  not  to  the  mythopceic  instinct  of  mankind,  which  fabricates
and  enjoys  the  fictitious  tales,  but  to  some  unknown  law,  not  based  on
human  sentiment  or  convenience  at  all.

And  thus,  absurdly  enough,  we  sometimes  hear  men  ridicule  the
phenomena  which  actually  do  happen,  simply  because  tliose  phenomena
do  not  suit  their  preconceived  notions  of  what  gliostly  phenomena
ought  to  be  ; — not  perceiving  tliat  this  very  divergence,  this  very
unexpectedness,  is  in  itself  no  slight  indication  of  an  origin  oidsidc  the-
minds  which  obviously  were  so  far  from  anticipating  anything  of  the  kind.

All  this  needs  to  be  remembered  before  we  approach  the  sj^ecial
cases  which  form  the  subject  of  this  paper.  For  the  naiTatives  on
which  we  sha,ll  now  have  to  dwell  are  precisely  those  wliich  do  the  most
nearly  correspond  to  the  popular  view  of  what  a  gliost  should  be.  They
are  cases,  at  any  rate,  where  the  figure  was  recognised,  and  in  some  of
whicli  there  was  an  apparent  object  in  its  appeai'ance.  It  is,  of  course,,
not  tlie  emotional  but  the  evidential  value  of  these  recognitions  which
interests  us  here.  The  identification  of  a  figure  previously  unknown,,
or  of  a  previously  known  figure  under  certain  conditions,  is  naturally  a
point  de  repsre  of  first-rate  evidential  importance.

Two  main  points  ]la^'e  to  be  made  clear  in  every  such  case.  Firstly,,
we  have  to  assure  ourselves  that  the  apparition  was  really  veridical, —
not  a  mere  sulyective  hallucination,  or  a  trick  of  memory,  or  a  hoax.
And,  secondly,  Ave  have  to  make  sure  that  it  was  really  recognised ; —
that  some  kind  of  link  existed  between  the  phantasm  and  some
deceased  person.  Some  kind  of  link  we  demand ;  but  what  that  link
may  be, — in  what  sense  the  ghost  represents  the  decedent,— this  is  our


18S9.J


More  than  a  Year  after  Death.


11


most  perplexing  question.  And  in  order  to  get  what  liglit  we  can  on
this  point,  it  will  be  well  to  arrange  our  cases  in  what  may  be  called  a
descending  scale  of  pei'sonality  ;— beginning  with  those  where  there
seems  to  be  an  intelligent  purpose  in  the  phantom  ;  then  giving  those
where  there  seems  to  be  a  purpose,  but  not  in  our  sense  an  intelligent
one ;  and  lastly,  taking  those  where  no  purpose  is  discernible,  but  the
whole  manifestation  seems  like  a  dead  man's  incoherent  dream.

The  diiliculties  and  weaknesses  of  tlie  evidence  will  be  pointed  out
as  we  proceed.  And  finally  we  may  discuss,  by  the  aid  of  such
analogies  as  we  possess,  what  are  the  least  improbable  conjectures
which  we  can  form  as  to  the  nature  of  these  phantoms,  and  what  light
our  evidence  throws  upon  any  theory  of  2)OSt-mortenrb  existence.

I.  Let  us  begin,  then,  with  phantoms  raised,  so  to  say,  to  their
highest  power ; — apparently  showing  intelligence,  and  knowledge  of
earthly  matters.  Are  there  any  grounds,  we  may  in  the  first  place  ask,
for  the  popular  notion  that  ghosts  may  possess  more  knowledge  of
things  on  earth  than  survivors  possess  ?  Especially  that  they  come  to
warn  of  death  or  disaster  which  for  men  on  earth  is  still  hidden  in
obscurity  ?  Or  can  they  discern  physical  dangers, — robbers,  precipices,
or  the  like, — which  the  living  man  fails  to  see  ?  and  do  they  ever
intervene  to  guide  or  protect  him  ?

It  will  be  seen  that  we  have  very  little  evidence  which  points  to
such  powers  as  these.  I  will  begin  with  the  most  striking  case  ; — one
which  was  sent  in  1887  to  the  American  S.P.R.  Pi'ofessor  Royce  and
Mr.  Hodgson  vouch  for  the  high  character  and  good  position  of  the
informants ;  and  it  will  be  seen  that,  besides  the  percipient  himself,  his
father  and  brother  are  first-hand  witnesses  as  regards  the  mo.st
important  point ; — the  efiect  produced  by  a  certain  symbolic  item  in
the  phantom's  aspect.

I.— From  Mr.  F.  G.,  Boston.

' January  IWi,  1888.

Sir, — Replying  to  the  recently  published  request  of  your  Society  for
actual  occurrences  of  psychical  phenomena,  I  respectfully  submit  the  fol-
lowing remarkable  occurrence  to  the  consideration  of  your  distinguished
Society,  with  the  assurance  that  the  event  made  a  more  powerful  impression
on  my  mind  than  the  combined  incidents  of  my  whole  life.  I  have  never
mentioned  it  ovitside  of  my  family  and  a  few  iiitimafce  friends,  knowing  we
that  few  would  believe  it,  or  else  ascribe  it  to  some  disordered  state  of  my
'mind  at  the  time,  but  I  well  know  I  never  was  in  better  health  or
possessed  a  clearer  head  and  mind  than  at  the  time  it  occurred.

In  1867,  my  only  sister,  a  young  lady  of  18  years,  died  suddenly  of
cholera,  in  St.  Louis,  Mo. My  attachment  for  her  was  very  strong,  and  the
blow  a  severe  one  to  me. A  year  or  so  after  her  death,  the  writer  became
commercial  traveller,  and  it  was  in  1876  while  on  one  of  my  Western  trips
that  '-^  e  event  occurred.

.  0


13


Oil  Uecojnisccl  A^'yparitions  occurring [July  8,


I  had  "  drummed  "  the  ciby  of  St.  Juseph,  Mo.,  and  had  gone  to  my
room  at  the  Pacific  House  to  send  in  my  orders,  which  were  unusually  large
ones,  so  tliat  I  was  in  a  very  happy  frame  of  mind  indeed.  My  thoughts,  of
course,  were  about  these  orders,  knowing  how  pleased  my  house  would  be  at
my  success.  I  had  not  been  thinking  of  my  late  sister,  or  in  any  manner
reflecting  on  the  past.  The  hour  was  high  noon,  and  the  sun  was  shining
cheerfully  into  my  room.  While  busily  smoking  a  cigar,  and  writing  out  my
orders,  I  suddenly  became  conscious  that  some  one  was  sitting  on  my  left,
vi'ith  one  arm  resting  on  the  table.  Quick  as  a  flash  I  turned  and  distinctly
saw  the  form  of  my  dead  sister,  and  for  a  brief  second  or  so  looked  her
SL^uarely  in  the  face  ;  and  so  sure  was  I  that  it  was  she,  that  I  sprang  forward
in  delight,  calling  her  by  name,  and,  as  I  did  so,  the  apparition  instantly
vanished.  Naturally  I  was  startled  and  dumbfounded,  almost  doubting  my
senses  ;  but  the  cigar  in  my  mouth,  and  pen  in  hand,  with  the  ink  still  moist
on  my  letter,  I  satisfied  myself  I  had  not  been  dreaming  and  was  wide  awake.
I  was  near  enough  to  touch  her,  had  it  been  a  physical  possibility,  and  noted
her  features,  expression,  and  details  of  dress,  &c.  She  appeared  as  if  alive.
Her  eyes  looked  kindly  and  perfectly  natural  into  mine.  Her  skin  was  so
life-like  that  T  could  see  the  glow  or  moisture  on  its  surface,  and,  on  the
wliole,  there  was  no  change  in  her  appearance,  otherwise  than  when  alive.

Now  comes  the  most  remarkable  confirmation  of  my  statement,  which
cannot  be  doubted  by  those  who  know  what  I  state  actually  occurred.  This
visitation,  or  whatever  you  may  call  it,  so  imjiressod  me  that  I  took  the  next
train  home,  and  in  the  presence  of  my  parents  and  others  I  related  what
had  occurred.  My  father,  a  man  of  rare  good  sense  and  very  practical,  was
inclined  to  ridicule  me,  as  he  saw  how  earnestly  I  believed  what  I  stated  ;
but  he,  too,  was  amazed  when  later  on  I  told  them  of  a  bright  red  line  or
s;mtch  on  the  right-hand  side  of  my  sister's  face,  which  I  distinctly  had
seen.  When  I  mentioned  this,  my  mother  rose  trembling  to  her  feet  and
nearly  fainted  away,  and  as  soon  as  she  sufficiently  recovered  her  self-
possession,  with  tears  streaming  down  her  face,  she  exclaimed  that  I  had
indeed  seen  my  sister,  as  no  living  mortal  but  herself  was  aware  of  that  scratch,
which  she  had  accidentally  made  while  doing  some  little  act  of  kindness  after
my  sister's  death.  She  said  she  well  remembered  how  pained  she  was  to
think  she  should  have,  unintentionally,  marred  the  features  of  her  dead
daughter,  and  that  unknown  to  all,  how  she  had  carefully  obliterated  all
traces  of  the  slight  scratch  with  the  aid  of  powder,  &c.,  and  that  she  had
never  mentioned  it  to  a  human  being,  from  that  day  to  this.  In  proof,  neither
my  father  nor  any  of  our  family  had  detected  it,  and  positively  were  unaware
of  the  incident,  yet  I  saw  the  scratch  as  bright  as  if  just  mculc.  So  strangely
impressed  was  my  mother  that  even  after  she  had  retired  to  rest,  she  got  up
and  dressed,  came  to  me  and  told  me  she  knew  at  least  that  I  had  seen  my
sister.  A  few  weeks  later  my  mother  died,  happy  in  her  belief  she  would
rejoin  her  favourite  daughter  in  a  better  world.

In  a  further  letter  Mr.  F.  G.  adds  : —

There  was  nothing  of  a  spiritual  or  ghostly  natm'e  in  either  the  form  or
dress  of  my  sister,  she  appearing  perfectly  natural,  and  dressed  in  clothing
that  she  usually  wore  in  life,  and  which  was  familiar  to  me.  From  her  position
iit  the  table,  I  could  only  see  her  from  the  icaist  up,  and  her  appearance


1889.]


Ilore  than  a  Year  after  Death.


1^


and  everytliing  slie  wore  is  indelibly  photographed  in  my  mind.  I  even  had
time  to  notice  the  collar  and  little  breastpin  she  wore,  as  well  as  the  comb  in
her  hair,  after  the  style  then  worn  by  young  ladies.  The  dress  had  no
Ijarticular  association  for  me  or  my  mother,  no  more  so  than  others  she  was  in
the  habit  of  wearing  ;  but  to-day,  while  I  have  forgotten  all  her  other  dresses,
2nns,  and  combs,  I  could  go  to  her  trunk  (which  we  have  just  as  she  left  it)
and  pick  out  the  very  dress  and  ornaments  she  wore  when  she  appeared  to
me,  so  well  do  I  remember  it.

You  are  coi  vect  in  understanding  that  I  returned  home  earlier  than  I  had
intended,  as  it  had  such  an  effect  on  me  that  I  could  hardly  think  of  any
other  matter  ;  in  fact,  I  abandoned  a  trip  that  I  had  barely  commenced,  and,
ordinarily,  would  have  remained  on  the  road  a  month  longer.

Mr.  F.  G.  again  writes  to  Mr.  Hodgson,  January  23rd,  1888  :—

As  per  your  request,  I  enclose  a  letter  from  my  father  which  is  indorsed  by
my  brother,  confirming  the  statement  I  made  to  them  of  the  apparition  I  had
seen.  I  will  add  that  my  father  is  one  of  the  oldest  and  most  respected
citizens  of  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  a  retired  merchant,  whose  winter  residence  is  at

 ,  Ills.,  a  few  miles  out  by  rail. He  is  now  70  years  of  age,  but  a

remarkably  well-preserved  gentleman  in  body  and  mind,  and  a  very  learned
man,  as  well.  As  I  informed  you,  he  is  slow  to  believe  things  that  reason
cannot  explain. My  brother,  who  indorses  the  statement,  has  resided  in

Boston  for  12  years,  doing  business  on  street,  as  per  letter-head  above,

and  the  last  man  in  the  world  to  take  stock  in  statements  without  good  proof.
The  others  who  were  present  (including  my  mother)  are  now  dead,  or  were
then  so  young  as  to  now  have  but  a  dim  remembrance  of  the  matter.

You  will  note  that  my  father  refers  to  the  "scratch,"  and  it  was  this  that
puzzled  all,  even  himself,  and  which  we  have  never  been  able  to  account  for,
further  than  that  in  some  mysterious  way  I  had  actually  seen  my  sister  nine
years  after  death,  and  had  particularly  noticed  and  described  to  my  parents
and  family  this  bright  red  scratch,  and  ^\diich,  beyond  all  doubt  in  our  minds,
was  unknown  to  a  soul  save  my  mother,  who  had  accidentally  caused  it.

When  I  made  my  statement,  all,  of  course,  listened  and  were  interested  ;
but  the  matter  would  probably  have  passed  with  comments  that  it  was  a  freak
of  memory,  had  not  I  asked  about  the  scratch,  and  the  instant  I  mentioned  it,
my  mother  was  aroused  as  if  she  had  received  an  electric  shock,  as  she  had
kept  it  secret  from  all,  and  she  alone  was  able  to  explain  it.  My  mother  was
a  sincere  Christian  lady,  who  was  for  25  years  superintendent  of  a  large
infant  class  in  her  church,  the  Southern  Methodist,  and  a  directress  in  many
charitable  institutions,  and  was  highly  educated.  No  lady  at  the  time  stood
higher  in  the  city  of  St.  Louis,  and  she  was,  besides,  a  woman  of  rare  good
sense.

I  mention  these  points  to  give  you  an  insight  into  the  character  and
standing  of  those  whose  testimony,  in  such  a  case,  is  necessary.

. -  (Signed)  F.  G.

From  Mr.  H.  G.

 ,  Ills.,  Jamtartj  20th,  1888,

Dear  F.,— Yours  of  16th  inst.  is  received.  In  reply  to  your  questions
relating  to  your  having  seen  our  Annie,  while  at  St.  Joseph,  Mo.,  I  will  state

c  2


20


On  R^cognisecl  Apparitions  occurring


[July  8,


tliat  I  well  remember  tlie  statement  you  made  to  family  on  yonr  return  liome.
I  remember  your  stating  how  slie  looked  in  ordinary  home  dress,  and
particularly  about  the  scratch  (or  red  spot)  on  her  face,  which  you  could  not
account  for,  but  which  was  fully  explained  by  your  mother.  The  spot  was-
made  while  adjusting  something  about  lier  head  while  in  the  casket,  and
covered  with  powder.  All  who  heard  you  relate  the  phenomenal  sigiit
thought  it  was  true.  You  well  know  how  sceptical  I  am  about  things  which
reason  cannot  explain.  Aflectionately,

(Signed)  H.  G.  (father).

I  was  present  at  the  time  and  indorse  the  above.

(Signed)  K.  G.  (brother).

The  apparent  redness  of  the  scratch  on  the  face  of  the  apparition
goes  naturally  enough  with  tlie  look  of  life  in  the  face.  The  phantom
did  not  appear  as  a  corjjse,  but  as  a  blooming  girl,  and  the  scratch
showed  as  it  would  have  sliown  if  made  during  life.

This  symbol,  in  its  essential  point, — the  manifestation  in  a  pliantom
of  a  change  in  personal  appeai'ance  which  the  percipient  had  no  oppor-
tunity of  observing  during  life, — may  be  compared  with  the  "Newgate
fringe "  grown  before  death  by  Lieutenant  B.  {Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,
p.  470),  and  observed  by  General  Barter  in  Lieutenant  B.'s  phantom.
But  it  can  seldom  liappen  that  the  aspect  of  a  near  relation  can  furnisli
ail  evidential  indication  so  distinct  as  this.  Even  assuming  an
intelligent  purpose  in  the  jDhantom,  one  does  not  see  what  could  in
most  cases  be  represented  beyond  a  mere  likeness  of  the  deceased ;  and
a  mere  likeness  of  a  known  face  must  always  be  liable  to  be  taken  for
a  purely  subjective  hallucination.  The  death  of  tlie  mother  in  tliis
case,  a  few  weeks  after  the  apparition,  is  noteworthy.  If  the  apjaarition
had  been  delayed  there  would  have  been  no  one  left  on  earth  Avho  wa&
capable  of  interpreting  its  symbolism.  We  may  tlierefore  class  this  as
a  case  in  which  it  is  possible, — though  not,  of  course,  provable, — thai
the  decedent  was  aware  of  the  approaching  death  of  a  survivor.  I
the  incident  is  correctly  recorded,  or  if  it  is  not  a  mere  extraordinarj
coincidence,  it  certainly  seems  probable  that  recognition  was  intelli
gently  aimed  at.

In  tlie  next  cass  the  ghost  is  seen  by  several  persons,  and  it  moves
into  a  room  where  the  decedent's  sister  is  lying  on  her  death-bed
There  is,  therefore,  an  indication  of  knowledge  of  earthly  events, — bu*
not  of  an  earlier  or  fuller  knowledge  than  survivorsi  themselves  possess

II. — From  Miss  Pearson,  15,  Fitzroy-square,  W.C.

April,  1888.

TIio  house,  ly,  St.  James's-place,  Green  Park,  had  been  taken  on  a  very
ong  lease  by  my  grandfather,  a  solicitor,  in  large  county  practice,  having  his
oflvces  in  Essex-street,  Strand.

Tliere  my  father  was  born  and  his  two  sisters,  Ann  and  Harriet.  Aunt
Ann  died  in  1858.  leaving  all  she  possessed  to  Aunt  Harriet,  who  remained  in


1889.]


More  than  a  Year  after  Death.


2X


the  house.  They  had  been  devotedly  attached  to  each  other.  In  November,
1864,  I  was  suinmoned  to  Brighton.  My  Aunt  Harriet  was  then  very  ill
there.  Mrs.  Coppinger,  the  daughter  of  Mr.  Thomas  Pearson,  my  father's
brother,  was  there,  and  her  son,  Mr.  George  James,  by  her  first  husband,
•came  up  and  down.  Eliza  Quinton  was  nursing  her.  She  only  craved  to
go  back  to  the  old  house  where  she  was  born,  and  I  made  arrangements  with
the  railway  company  and  took  her  home.

This  was  in  the  second  week  in  December.  She  became  worse  and
worse.  Eliza  continued  to  nurse  her,  and  Mrs.  Coppinger,  Mrs.  John
Pearson,  the  wife  of  a  nephew,  and  myself  helped  with  the  night  work.

Miss  Harriet  Pearson  slept  in  a  large  three-windowed  bedroom  over  the
■drawing-room.  The  room  behind  was  occupied  by  Mrs.  Coppinger  and
myself,  though  one  of  iis  was  generally  in  the  patient's  room  at  night.  On
the  night  of  December  22nd,  1864,  Mrs.  John  Pearson  was  in  the  room,
Mrs.  Coppinger  and  myself  in  the  back  room  ;  the  house  lighted  uj)  on
the  landings  and  staircases,  our  door  wide  open.

About  1  or  2  a.m.  on  the  morning  of  December  23rd,  both  ]\Irs.
Coppinger  and  myself  started  up  in  bed  ;  we  were  neither  of  us  sleeping,  as
we  were  watching  every  sound  from  the  next  room.

We  saw  some  one  pass  the  door,  short,  wrapped  up  in  an  old  shawl,  a
wig  with  three  curls  each  side  and  an  old  black  cap.  Mrs,  Coppinger  called
■out,  "Emma,  get  up,  it  is  old  Aunt  Ann."  I  said,  "So  it  is,  then  Avuit
Harriet  will  die  to-day."  We  jumped  up,  and  Mrs.  John  Pearson  came
Tushing  out  of  the  room  and  said,  "  That  was  old  Aunt  Ann.  Where  is  she
gone  to  ? "  I  said  to  soothe  her,  "Perhaps  it  was  Eliza  come  down  to  see  how
her  mistress  is."  Mrs.  Coppinger  ran  upstairs  and  found  Eliza  sleeping
in  the  servants'  room.  She  was  very  awestruck  but  calm,  dressed  and
came  down.  Every  room  was  searched,  no  one  was  there,  and  from  that
day  to  this  no  explanation  has  ever  been  given  of  this  ajipearance,  except
that  it  was  old  Aunt  Ann  come  to  call  her  sister,  and  she  died  at  6  p.m.
that  day.  Emma  M.  Peaeson.

The  housekeeper,  who  is  still  with  ]\[iss  Pearson,  writes  as  follows: —

I  was  living  with  Miss  Ann  and  Miss  Harriet  Pearson,  in  19,  St.  J ames's-
place.  After  the  death  of  Miss  Ann  I  remained  with  her  sister,  and  Avhen
she  became  very  ill  and  was  ordered  change  of  air,  I  went  with  her
as  nurse  to  Brighton.  Mrs.  Coppinger  was  there  and  Mr.  George  James
Tiow  and  then.  Miss  Emma  Pearson  w"as  sent  for  and  came  down.  She
lirought  her  aunt  back  to  London.  I  continued  to  nurse  her.  I  remember
on  the  early  morning  of  December  23rd  being  called  up  by  Mrs.  Coppinger,
who  said  that  she,  Miss  Emma,  and  Mrs.  John  Pearson  had  seen  someone
<;ome  upstairs  and  pass  into  the  patient's  room.  Was  it  I  ?  I  said  no.  Mrs.
Copp)inger  said,  "They  said  it  was  old  Aunt  Ann."  "We  searched  the  house
and  could  find  no  one.  Miss  Harriet  died  in  the  evening  of  that  day,  but
"before  that  told  all  of  us  that  she  had  seen  her  sister  and  knew  it  was
her,  and  she  had  come  to  call  her.  Eliza  Quinton.

Api-il  3)tZ,  1888.

In  a  separate  letter  of  the  same  date  Miss  Pearson  adds  : —
"  I  now  remember  my  aunt  saying  '  her  sister  had  come  for  her,  for  she
had  seen  her.' "  ...... •. .  .  .  -  ,


22  On  Recognised  Apioaritions  occurring [July  8


The  next  case  wliich  I  shall  cite  is  more  remote,  and  depends  on  a
single  memory.  Tlie  relation  of  time  between  the  apparition  and  tht
deatli  is  also  uncertain.  The  phantom's  brother  was  undergoing  at  tlia
time  his  last  illness  ;  but  that  illness  was  a  long  one.

III.— From  Madame  de  Gilibert,  The  Paddocks,  Hayward's  Heath.

The  Hon.  Auberon  Herbert  and  other  members  of  the  family  have
kindly  looked  through  the  dates,  &c.,  in  this  narrative,  which,  so  far  as
given  by  Madame  Gilibert,  were  correct.

Sir  Robert  Herbert,  Iv.C.M.G.,  writes  : —

"It  is  an  unusually  well  authenticated  story,  as  far  as  the  honesty  of  the
reporter  goes."  Mr.  Robert  Marsliam  remarks  that  "the  fact  that  the
superior  servant  Garland  seemed  vexed  at  first  when  the  little  Charlotte
King  described  what  she  had  seen,  would  rather  seem  to  imply  that  the
ghost  had  been  known  to  appear  before."

Lady  Carnarvon  died  February  10th,  182(1.

The  Earl  of  Egremont  died  November  11th,  1837.

June,  1883.

In  my  early  days  I  lived  in  a  large  house,  belonging  to  my  grandfather
[the  Earl  of  Egremont],  at  Petworth,  from  which  we  removed  on  his  death
(1837) ;  from  this  date  I  conclude  that  I  could  not  have  been  younger  than
11  or  older  than  12  when  the  following  occurrence  took  place,  between  the
beginning  of  the  year  183(j  and  the  winter  of  1837.

I  must  describe  that  part  of  the  house  which  we,  the  family,  occupied  on
the  ground  floor.  My  grandfather's  room  was  on  tlie  south  side  of  a  long
passage,  wliich  communicated  with  the  more  public  parts  of  the  house.
Opposite  his  door,  on  the  north  side  of  the  passage,  was  a  swinging,  red
baize  door,  wliich  led  to  a  narrow  corridor,  liaviag  on  one  side  two  doors,
one  my  mother's  bedroom,  and  tlie  other  the  door  of  my  father's  dressing-
room  ;  on  the  other  side  was  a  small  staircase,  leading  to  two  rooms  occupied
by  Garland,  a  superior  servant,  who  took  care  of  my  grandfather,  who  was
very  old.  All  the  grandchildren  were  very  fond  of  Garland,  who  sj^oilt  us
all.  One  afternoon  I  had  gone  up  t"  her  rooms,  and  not  finding  her,  as  she
had  not  returned  from  the  stew:'  d'j  room  from  dinner,  I  tui-ned  to  go
downstairs.  I  generally  "slid"  co.vii  those  stairs  in  a  way  jjeculiar  to
myself.  Balancing  myself  on  my  chest,  and  straiglitening  myself  into  a
nearly  horizontal  position,  I  used  to  let  myself  go  down  the  incline  with  an
impetus.  I  was  in  this  position,  just  about  to  launch  myself,  when  I  was
aware  of  a  figure,  which  came  from  the  baize  door,  and  which  astonished  me
and  made  me  pause.  It  was  a  female  figure,  in  soft,  clinging  drapery,
greyish  whitish, — some  sort  of  shawl  or  kerchief  crossed  over  the  bosom  ;
the  features,  well-cut,  delicate,  and  of  an  aquiline  type  ;  but  what  struck  me
most  was  the  head-dress  or  coif,  which  had  lace  lappets  or  strings  which,
passing  under  the  chin,  were  tied  in  a  bow  on  the  top  of  the  head.  I  was,
as  I  said,  astonislicd,  but  not  frightened.  So  many  people  did  go  about  the
house  that  it  never  occurred  to  me  to  be  anything  supernatural.  But  when
the  figure  glided  jiast  the  two  doors  I  have  mentioned,  a  sort  of  revulsion
took  place  in  me. I  let  myself  slide  down  the  balustrade  and  rushed  to  stoi?


1889.]


More  than  a  Year  after  Death.


'23


her  and  tell  her  that  there  was  no  "  way  out."  (There  was  a  disused  door,
but  it  had  been  long  blocked  up.)  I  could  not  have  been  live  seconds
behind  the  figure,  but  when  I  reached  the  blocked  door,  there  was  nothing.

I  kneiv  no  one  could  pass,  but  I  ran  round  to  the  children's  nurseries,
with  which  that  door  had  communicated,  and  began  asking  the  nurses
whether  they  had  seen  ' '  an  old  woman  in  a  white  dressing-goAvn  and  grey
shawl  and  lace  ribbons  under  her  chin  tied  on  the  top  of  her  head,"  adding,
"and  she  had  a  nose  like  Mrs.  PuUen  "  (the  head  laundress,  who  was  a  sort
of  female  Duke  of  Wellington).  I  only  got  laughed  at  and  snubbed  by  the
nurses,  but  when  Garland  came  in  and  I  told  her,  she  seemed  vexed  at  first,
and  ended  by  scolding  me,  so  I  was  "  shut  xip  "  ;  but  nevertheless  I  knew
that  I  could  not  account  for  it,  and  every  detail  of  dress,  feature,  and  gait  is
as  vivid  now  as  it  was  at  the  time.

Many  years  afterwards  I  was  in  Paris  after  my  marriage,  and  I  used  to
see  a  cousin  of  my  mother's,  who  had  married  abroad,  and  I  told  her  once
what  I  have  above  narrated.  Madame  de  Valmer  at  once  said  to  me,  "My
dear,  you  have  described  your  great  aunt  to  the  minutest  item  of  her  dress
and  aj^pearance."  (Madame  de  Valmer  had  been  brought  up  by  Lady
Carnarvon,  her  aunt.)  "  And,"  continued  Madame  de  Valmer,  "  she  came,
you  say,  from  the  swing  door  which  led  to  your  grandfather's  room.  She
came  to  fetch  her  brother.  He  died  very  soon  after."  Of  course,  I  do  not
believe  this  explanation  of  the  mysterious  figure  ;  still,  the  nurseries  with
which  the  disused  door  communicated  had  been  Lady  Carnarvon's  ajjart-
ments,  and  she  had  died  there.

C. DE  GiLIBEET.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Madame  de  Gilibert  says  : —

The  only  two  portraits  of  Lady  Carnarvon  at  Petworth  represent  her
very  young.  In  one  she  is  with  my  grandfather,  and  is  quite  a  child.  In
the  other — a  Gainsborough  looking  head — she  is  quite  a  young  woman,  her
brown  hair  tied  with  a  ribbon,  nothing  at  all  resembling  the  muffling  head-
dress I  saw.  C.  DE  GiLIBEKT.

[I  have  had  an  interview  with  Madame  de  Gilibert,  who  seems  a  very
intelligent  and  clear-headed  person.  She  gave  me  precisely  the  same  account
viva  voce. — E.G.]

Madame  de  Gilibert  has  had  no  other  hallucinations.

"  1  have  never  even,  as  far  as  I  can  remember,  dreamt  a  dream."

In  each  of  these  cases  there  has  been  some  evidential  point  to
distinguish  the  apparition  from  a  merely  subjective  hallucination.  In
the  first  there  was  the  unknown  alteration  in  the  familiar  face ;  in  the
second  there  were  more  percipients  than  one  ;  in  the  third  the  figure  was
imkuown  to  the  percipient,  but  seemingly  recognised  by  others  from  her
account.  We  possess  a  few  other  cases  resembling  these  except  for  the
absence  of  precisely  this  evidential  quality.  That  is  to  say,  they  are
apparitions  of  a  deceased  friend,  coinciding  with  the  beginning  of  a
survivor's  fatal  illness,  or  symbolising  in  some  way  his  approaching
death.  This  amount  of  coincidence  may,  of  course,  be  highly
impressive  to  the  percipient,  if  he  has  never  before  experienced  any


24<  On  Recognised  Apparitions  occurring [July  8,


hallucination.  Cut  we  cannot  claim  such  cases  as  evidential ;  since  it
is  possible  that  the  hallucination  may  have  been  determined  by  the
oncoming  illness ;  or,  although  occurring  during  health,  it  may,  by
alarming  the  percipient,  have  helped  to  fulfil  its  own  prognostication.^

This  would  have  been,  perhaps,  the  fittest  place  for  a  case  which
was  printed  in  the  last  article  {Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  p,  422),  where
Mrs.  Bacchus  sees  the  phantom  of  a  man  recognised  from  her  descrip-
tion as  the  deceased  husband  of  a  lady  whose  corpse  was  then  lying  in
the  liouse  where  the  ghost  appeared.  If  we  accept  that  recognition  as
valid,  we  must  suppose  that  the  phantom  was  in  some  way  induced  by
the  death  of  the  wife.

And  to  this  category,  in  fact,  belong  the  rather  numerous  cases  (see
Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  p.  459,  note)  where  a  dying  person  sees  the  forms  of
friends  already  dead.  Dying  men  may,  for  aught  we  know,  be  specially
liable  to  subjective  disturbances  of  perception  ;  and  we  cannot,  therefore,
take  account  of  cases  where  the  dying  man,  and  he  alone,  sees  figures  of
friends  whom  he  knows  to  be  dead.  But  in  a  few  cases  a  dying  man  is
reported  to  have  seen,  mixed  with  figures  of  those  whom  he  knows  to  be
dead,  the  figure  of  someone  of  whose  decease  he  has  not  yet  heard.  As
regards  the  dying  man,  we  may  call  such  a  vision  a  kind  of  clairvoyance
in  extremis.  But  the  apparition  seen — if  more  than  a  mere  fancy —
must  be  classed  as  a  phantom  which  indicates  knowledge  of  what  is
passing  on  earth,  and  is  in  some  way  conditioned  by  the  death  of  the
surviving  friend.  Such  death-bed  visions  are  by  their  very  nature  not
likely  to  be  shared  by  more  than  one  person.  We  have  only  one  case,
and  that  at  second-hand,  where  a  watcher  beside  the  dying  bed  sees
distinctly  the  same  figures  which  the  dying  person  sees.  But  death-bed
experiences  have  very  rarely  been  observed  with  the  right  kind  of  care,
and  we  may  hope  for  a  good  deal  more  information  when  the  scientific
interest  of  these  visions,  as  from  "a  peak  in  Darien"  (to  use  Miss
Cobbe's  simile),  is  more  generally  understood.

But  apart  from  knowledge  as  to  the  deatli  of  survivors,  is  any
knowledge  of  otiier  earthly  matters  ever  displayed  by  a  ghost  1  There
are  many  stories  of  dangei's  averted  by  ghostly  iuttfivention ;  are  we  to
assume  that  the  departed  watch  over  us,  and  guard  our  eartUy  days  ?
The  following  case  is  a  striking  specimen  of  this  class,  the  phantom
having  been  seen  by  two  persons.  The  brevity  of  the  rebuke,  conveyed
merely  by  a  name  twice  repeated,  is  a  point  in  favour  of  the  narrative  ;
for  iong  speeches  put  into  the  mouths  of  ghosts  are  pretty  sure  to  be

'  In  the  Journal  S.P.R.  for  December,  1888,  p.  359,  will  be  found  an  account  of  an
apparent  prediction  to  a  moribund  person  of  the  date  of  his  death  by  his  deceased
fathers  figure,  seen  in  a  dream.  This  case,  which,  taken  alone,  would  have  no
evidential  value,  is  rendered  interesting  by  the  other  exxjeriences  of  the  same  family,
which  %vill  be  found  in  the  Journal,  loc.  cit.


18S9.]


More  than  a  Tear  after  Death.


25


Jipocrvphal.  It  is  noteworthy  that  one  of  the  percipients  in  this  cast
had  ah-eady  experienced  a  "  vision  of  consolation  "  under  circumstances
of  strong  emotion.  Taken  by  itself,  that  consolatory  vision  might
certainly  have  been  classed  as  purely  subjective.  But  the  fact  that
the  only  other  hallucination  which  this  percipient  exj^erienced  was  (ai.
I  should  mj'self  hold)  a  veridical  one,  may  inspire  some  doubt  as  tt
whether  that  earlier  vision  also  may  not  have  had  some  veridical  basis.

lY. — From  a  lady  who  desires  that  names  may  not  be  published.

June  9th,  1885.

Our  mother  died  wliile  we  were  all  very  young  ;  and  as  I,  the  fourth
child  of  seven,  was  the  eldest  living  daughter,  I  became  early  acquainted
(from  my  eighth  year)  with  sorrow  of  various  kinds  and  degrees,  principally
caused,  however,  by  the  harshness  and  frequent  neglect  of  housekeeper  and
serviints  towards  my  baby  brother  and  sister.  The  two  eldest  boys — between
whom  and  myself  was  a  gap  of  some  years — were  almost  alwaj-s  away  from
home,  and  ultimately  went  abroad,  so  that  from  the  time  I  was  quite  a
little  child  I  was  continually  with  my  father,  who  made  much  of  me,  aird  at
last  I  became  his  constant  companion.  He  never  married  again,  and  our
love  was  probably,  therefore,  a  closer  union  even  than  commonly  exists
between  a  father  and  daughter  while  the  latter  is  of  tender  years.  It  was  a
great  pain  to  me  ever  to  be  away  from  him,  especially  after  my  14th
year,  at  which  time  he  began  to  make  me  his  confidante  as  well  as  companion  ;
and  we  had  frequent  earnest  talks  and  discussions  on  many  subjects.  At
length,  when  I  was  about  18  years  old,  a  terrible  grief  befell  us,  viz.,
the  death  of  my  two  elder  brothers  within  a  ie\v  weeks  of  each  other,  whUe
they  were  still  abroad.

jNIy  father's  sorrow  was  great ;  and  at  the  same  time  he  became  seriously
troubled  with  many  doubts  regardmg  various  points  of  Christian  faith,  and
so  gradually  lost  nearly  all  his  buoyancy  of  spirit,  and  became  sadly  depressed
and  worn-lookuig,  though  cn!y  48  years  old.  For  a  year  he  thus  sufiered,
when  it  was  arranged  that,  so  soon  as  he  could  plan  to  leave  home,  he  should
go  to  some  seaside  pln,ce,  and  try  what  new  scenes  would  effect.  He  also
persuaded — nay,  insisted — that  I  should  go  awnj'  for  avrhile,  without  waitmg
for  huu,  and  accompanj-  some  friends  to  South  Devonshire.

The  writer  then  narrates  how  a  sudden  summons  brought  her  back
to  find  her  father  dead.

I  went  early  to  bed,  to  escape  the  presence  and  sympathetic  muiistrations
of  the  many  in  that  kind  household  who  gathered  around  me  ;  and  by  my
o\ra  choice  I  shared  the  room  of  a  motherly -looking  personage,  whom  I
supposed  to  be  my  cousin's  nurse.  She  occupied  the  larger  bed  in  the  room,
and  I  a  smaller  one  placed  at  some  distance  from  hers.  She  was  soon  asleep
and  breathing  heavily  :  but  I  was  lying  in  deepest  anguish,  beset  not  only
with  the  grief  of  the  sudden  loss  sustained,  but  with  the  -n-retched  fear  that
my  beloved  father  had  died  too  suddenly  to  find  peace  with  God,  regarding
those  miserable  doubts  that  had  so  troubled  hun.  As  the  night  wore  on,
the  pain  of  heart  and  thought  grew  worse  and  worse,  and  at  length  I  knelfc
in  prayer,  earnestly  pleading  that  my  distressful  thoughts  might  be  taken


2G  On  Recognised  AppLwUions  occurring [July  8,


away,  ancl  an  assurance  of  my  father's  peace  he  given  me  by  God's  Most-
Holy  Spirit.  No  immediate  relief  came,  however,  and  it  was  early  dawn
when  I  rose  from  my  knees,  and  felt  that  I  must  be  patient  and  wait  for  the
answer  of  my  prayer.

Now  a  longing  suddenly  seized  me  to  creep  into  that  kind-faced  woman's
bed,  and  to  feel  perhaps  less  lonely  there.  Her  bed  was  opposite  a
window,  over  which  a  white  blind  was  drawn,  and  as  I  softly  lifted  the  bed-
clothes and  sat  for  a  moment  after  drawing  my  feet  up  into  the  bed,  I
noticed  the  pale  dawn  feebly  lighting  up  the  window,  and  the  movement  of
a  little  bird  on  the  sill  outside  ;  but  the  room  itself  was  as  yet  almost  dark.

I  was  just  about  to  slip  quietly  down  into  the  bed,  when  on  the  opposite
side  of  it  (that  on  wliich  the  nurse  was  sleeping)  the  room  became  suddenly
full  of  beautiful  light, in  the  midst  of  which  stood  my  father  absolutely  trans-
figured, clothed  with  brightness.  He  slowly  moved  towards  the  bed,  raising
his  hands,  as  I  thought,  to  clasp  me  in  his  arms  ;  and  I  ejaculated  :  "Father  !  "
He  replied,  "  Blessed  for  ever,  my  child  !  For  ever  blessed  !  "  I  moved  to
climb  over  nurse  and  kiss  him,  reaching  out  my  arms  to  him  ;  but  with  a
look  of  mingled  sadness  and  love  he  ap^ieared  to  float  back  with  the  light
towards  the  wall  and  was  gone  !  The  visiiin  occupied  so  short  a  time  that,
glancing  involuntaiily  at  the  window  again,  I  saw  the  morning  dawn  and  the
little  bird  just  as  they  had  looked  a  few  minutes  before.  I  felt  sure  that  God
had  vouchsafed  to  me  a  wonderful  vision,  and  was  not  in  the  least  afraid,
but,  on  the  contrary,  full  of  a  joy  that  brought  floods  of  grateful  tears,  and
comi>letely  removed  all  anguish  except  that  of  having  lost  my  father  from
earth.  I  ofler  no  explanation,  and  can  only  say  most  simply  and  truthfully
that  it  all  happened  just  as  I  have  related.

You  may  iind  a  solution  to  the  occurrence  in  the  sympathy  which  had
existed  between  my  dear  father  and  myself  ;  or,  as  friends  have  often
insisted,  in  the  condition  of  excitement  and  exhaustion  which  I  was  suffer-
ing at  the  time  ;  but  after  all  these  years  of  life  and  experience,  the  memory
of  that  wonderful  morning  is  ever  vividly  fresh,  and  real,  and  true.

The  writer's  husband  adds,  under  date  June  ITtli,  1885  : —
The  narrative,  as  related  above,  is  substantially  the  same  given  to  me  by
Mrs.  P.  as  early  as  18G5,  and  at  subsequent  periods.

W.  B.  P.

And  Dr.  and  Mrs.  0.,  referred  to  above,  write,  June  IGth,  1885  : —
The  preceding  narrative  v/as  related  to  us  by  Mrs.  P.,  substantially  as
here  recorded,  some  four  or  live  years  ago.

James  C. Ellen  H.  C.

[Now  comes  the  case  which  has  evidential  importance.]
In  the  year  1867  I  was  married,  and  my  husband  took  a  house  at

S  ,  quite  a  new  one,  just  built  in  Avhat  was,  and  still  is  probably,

called  "  Cliff  Town,"  as  being  at  a  greater  elevation  than  the  older  i^art  of
the  town.  Our  life  was  exceedingly  bright  and  happy  there  until  towards
the  end  of  1869,  when  my  husband's  health  appeared  to  be  failing,  and  he
grew  dejected  and  moody.  Trying  in  vain  to  ascertain  the  cause  for  this,
and  being  repeatedly  assured  by  him  that  I  was  "  too  fanciful,"  and  that


1889.]  More  than  a  Year  after  Death.  27


there  was  "nothing  the  matter  with  him,"  I  ceased  to  \-ex  him  with
questions,  and  the  time  passed  quietly  away  till  Christmas  Eve  of  that
year  (1869).

An  uncle  and  aunt  lived  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  they  invited  us  to
spend  Christmas  Day  with  them — to  go  quite  early  in  the  morning  to-
breakfast,  accompanied  by  the  whole  of  our  small  household.

We  arranged  therefore  to  go  to  bed  at  an  early  hour  on  the  night  of  the
24th,  so  as  to  be  up  betimes  for  our  morning  walk.  Consequently,  at  9
o'clock,  we  went  upstairs,  having  as  usual  carefully  attended  to  bars  and
bolts  of  doors,  and  at  about  9.30  were  ready  to  extinguish  the  lamp  ;  but  our
little  girl — a  baby  of  15  months — generally  woke  up  at  that  time,  and  after
drinking  some  warm  milk  would  sleep  again  for  the  rest  of  the  night ;  and,
as  she  had  not  yet  awakened,  I  begged  my  husband  to  leave  the  lamp  burning
and  get  into  bed,  while  I,  wrapped  in  a  dressing-gown,  lay  on  the  outside  of
the  bed  with  the  cot  on  my  right  hand.  The  bedstead  faced  the  fireplace,  and
nothing  stood  between  but  a  settee  at  the  foot  of  the  bed.  On  either
side  of  the  chimney  was  a  large  recess, — the  one  to  the  left  (as  we  faced  in
that  direction)  having  a  chest  of  drawers,  on  which  the  lamp  was  standing.
The  entrance  door  was  on  the  same  side  of  the  room  as  the  head  of  the  bed
and  to  the  left  of  it — facing,  therefore,  the  recess  of  which  I  speak.  The  door
was  locked  ;  and  on  that  same  side  (to  my  left)  my  husband  was  lying,  with
the  curtain  drawn,  towards  which  his  face  was  turned.

Roughly,  the  position  was  thus —


Door


_  i'unutulu

i:

Drawers  and
Lamp

Bed

Settoe

Chimney

1 Cot  1

o

Arm-ciiair

Lay  Window

J

Fiuuitiira

1

As  the  bed  had  curtains  only  at  the  head,  all  before  us  was  open  and
dimly-lighted,  the  lamp  being  turned  down.

This  takes  some  tim.e  to  describe,  but  it  was  still  just  about  9.30,
Gertmde  not  yet  awake,  and  I  just  pulling  myself  into  a  half-sitting  posture
against  the  pillows,  thiiiking  of  nothing  but  the  arrangements  for  the  follow-
ing day,  when  to  my  great  astonishment  I  saw  a  gentleman  standing  at  the
foot  of  the  bed,  dressed  as  a  naval  officer,  and  v>-ith  a  cap  on  his  head  having  a
projecting  peak.  The  light  being  in  the  i>osition  which  I  have  indicated,  the
face  was  in  shadow  to  me,  and  the  more  so  that  the  visitor  was  leaning  upon
his  arms  which  rested  on  the  foot-rail  of  the  bedstead. I  was  too  astonished.


28


On  Recognised  A'pixirilions  occurring


[July  8,


to  be  afraid,  but  simply  wondered  who  it  could  be  ;  and,  instantly  touching
my  husband's  shoulder  (whose  face  was  turned  from  me),  I  said,  "Willie,
who  is  this  ?  "  My  husband  turned,  and  for  a  second  or  two  lay  looking  in
intense  astonishment  at  the  intruder  ;  then  lifting  himself  a  little,  he
shouted  "  What  on  earth  are  you  doing  here,  sir  1 "  Meanwhile  the  form,
slowly  drawing  himself  into  an  upright  position,  now  said  in  a  commanding,
jet  reproachful  voice,  "  Willie  !  Willie  !  "

I  looked  at  my  husband  and  saw  that  his  face  was  white  and  agitated.  As
I  tiu'ned  towards  him  he  sprang  out  of  bed  as  though  to  attack  the  man,  but
«tood  by  the  bedside  as  if  afraid, or  in  great  perplexity, while  the  figure  calmly
•and  slowly  moved  towards  the  wall  at  right  angles  with  the  lamp  in  the  direc-
tion of  the  dotted  line.  As  it  passed  the  lamp,  a  dec])  shadow  fell  upon  the
room  as  of  a  material  j^erson  shutting  out  the  light  from  us  by  his  intervening-
body,  and  he  disappeared,  as  it  were,  into  the  wall.  My  husband  now,  in  a
^ery  agitated  manner,  caught  up  the  lamp,  and  turning  to  me  said,  "  I  mean
"to  look  all  over  the  house,  and  see  where  he  is  gone."

I  was  by  this  time  exceedingly  agitated  too,  but  remembering  that  the
-door  was  locked,  and  that  the  mysterious  visitor  had  not  gone  to^^-ards  it  at
all,  remarked,  "  He  has  not  gone  out  by  the  door  !  "  But  without  pausing,
my  husband  unlocked  the  door,  hastened  out  of  the  room,  and  was  soon  search-
ing the  whole  house.  Sitting  there  in  the  dark,  I  thought  to  myself,  "We
have  surely  seen  an  apparition  !  AVhatever  can  it  indicate — perhaps  my
brother  Arthur  (he  was  in  the  navy,  and  at  that  time  on  a  voyage  to  India)
is  in  trouble  :  such  things  have  been  told  of  as  occurring."  In  some  such
way  I  pondered  with  an  anxious  heart,  holding  the  child,  who  just  then
awakened,  in  my  arms,  until  my  husband  came  back  looking  very  white  and
miserable.

Sitting  upon  the  bedside,  he  put  his  arm  about  me  and  said,  "Do  you
know  what  we  have  seenl"  And  I  said,  "Yes,  it  was  a  spirit.  I  am  afraid
it  was  Arthur,  but  could  not  see  his  face  " — and  he  exclaimed,  "Oh  !  no,  it
w^as  my  father  !  "

My  husband's  father  had  been  dead  fourteen  years  :  he  had  been  a  naval
<jfficer  in  his  young  life  ;  but,  through  ill-health,  had  left  the  ser%ace  before
my  husband  was  born,  and  the  latter  had  only  once  or  twice  seen  him  in
uniform.  I  had  never  seen  him  at  all.  My  husband  and  I  related  the  occur-
rence to  my  uncle  and  aunt,  and  we  all  noticed  that  my  husband's  agitation
■and  anxiety  were  very  great :  whereas  his  usual  manner  was  calm  and
reserved  in  the  extreme,  and  he  was  a  thorough  and  avowed  sceptic  in  all —
.so-called— supernatural  events.

As  the  weeks  passed  on  my  husband  became  very  ill,  and  then  gradually
disclosed  to  me  that  he  had  been  in  great  financial  difficulties  ;  and  that,  at
the  time  his  father  was  thus  sent  to  us,  he  was  inclining  to  take  the  advice
■of  a  man  wlio  would  certainly— had  my  husband  yielded  to  him  (as  he  had
intended  before  hearing  the  warning  voice) — liave  led  him  to  ruin,  perhaps
worse.  It  is  this  fact  whicli  makes  us  most  reticent  in  speaking  of  the  event  ;
in  addition  to  wliich,  my  husband  had  already  been  led  to  speculate  upon
•certain  chances  which  resulted  in  failure,  and  infinite  sorrow  to  us  both  as

well  as  to  others,  and  was  indeed  the  cause  of  our  coming  to  ,  afte.r  a

year  of  much  trouble,  in  the  January  of  1871.  • -  ■


1889.]


More  than  a  Year  after  Death.


29


None  of  us  were  particularly  ready  to  believe  in  such  evidences,
notwithstanding  my  experience  at  my  father's  death,  because  v/e  had  re-
garded that  as  a  special  answer  to  prayer;  so  that  no  condition  of  "  over-
wrought nerves,"  or  "superstitious  fears,"  could  have  been  the  cause  of  the-
manifestation,  but  only,  so  far  as  we  have  been  able  to  judge  by  subsequent
events,  a  direct  warning  to  my  husband  in  the  voice  and  appearance  of  the
one  that  he  had  most  reverenced  in  all  his  life,  and  was  the  most  likely  to-
obey.

Dr.  and  Mrs.  C,  friends  of  Mvs.  and  Mr.  P.,  add  the  following  note: — -

June  IQtJi,  1885.

This  narrative  was  told  us  by  Mrs.  P.,  as  here  recorded,  some  years  ago.

J.  C. Ellex  H.  C.

Mr.  P.  confirms  as  follows,  June  17th,  188-5  : —

Without  wishing  to  add  more  to  the  incidents  recorded  herein  by  my
wife,  I  would  simply  note  that  the  details  of  No.  2  are  quite  correct,  and  that
the  occurrence  took  place  as  stated. * * *  "VV.  B.  P.

I  will  add  one  other  first-hand  narrative,  which  comes  from  a
respectable  source,  although  the  death  of  all  persons  concerned  in  it
prevents  corroboration.

V. — From  Mr.  Happerfield,  Postmaster.

Road,  Bath,  May  12th,  1884.
When  my  old  friend  .Tohn  Harford,  who  had  been  a  Wesleyan  lay
preacher  for  half  a  century,  lay  dying,  in  .June  of  1851,  he  sent  for  me,  and
when  I  went  to  his  bedside  he  said,  "  I  am  glad  you  have  come,  friend
Happerfield  ;  I  cannot  die  easy  until  I  am  assured  that  my  wife  will  b&
looked  after  and  cared  for  until  she  may  be  called  to  join  me  in  the  other
world.  I  have  known  you  for  many  years,  and  now  want  you  to  promise  to
look  to  her  well-being  during  the  little  time  which  she  may  remain  after  me."
I  said,  "  I  will  do  what  I  can,  so  let  your  mind  be  at  rest."  He  said,  "  I  can
trust  you,"  and  lie  soon  after,  on  the  20th  day  of  the  month,  fell  asleep  in
the  Lord.  I  administered  his  aftairs,  and  when  all  was  settled  there  remained
a  balance  in  favour  of  the  widow,  but  not  sufficient  to  keep  her.  I  put  her
into  a  small  cottage,  interested  some  friends  in  her  case,  and  saw  that
she  was  comfortable.  After  a  while  Mrs.  Harford's  grandson  came  and
proposed  to  take  the  old  lady  to  his  house  in  Gloucestershire,  where  he  held
a  situation  as  schoolmaster.  The  request  seemed  reasonable.  I  consented,
providing  she  was  quite  willing  to  go  ;  and  the  young  man  took  her  accord-
ingly. Time  passed  on.  We  had  no  correspondence.  I  had  done  my  duty
to  my  dying  friend,  and  there  the  matter  rested.  But  one  night,  as  I  lay  in
bed  wakeful,  towards  morning,  turning  over  business  and  other  matters  in
my  mind,  I  suddenly  became  conscious  that  someone  was  in  the  room.  Then
the  curtain  of  my  bed  was  drawn  aside,  and  there  stood  my  departed  friend,
gazing  upon  me  with  a  sorrowful  and  troubled  look.  I  felt  no  fear,  but
surprise  and  astonishment  kept  me  silent.  He  spoke  to  me,  distinctly  and
audibly  in  his  0"wn  familiar  voice,  and  said  :  "  Friend  Happerfield,  I  have


BO


On  Recognised  A2yparitions  occurring [July  S,


come  to  you  because  you  have  not  kept  your  promise  to  see  to  my  wife.  She
is  in  trouble  and  in  want."  I  assured  liim  that  I  had  done  my  duty,  and.
■was  not  aware  that  she  was  in  any  difficulty,  and  that  I  would  see  about  her
first  thing,  and  have  her  attended  to.  He  looked  satisfied  and  vanished  from
my  sight.  I  awoke  my  wife,  who  was  asleep  at  my  side,  and  told  her  what
liad  occurred.  Sleep  departed  from  us,  and  on  arising,  the  first  thing  I  did
was  to  write  to  the  grandson.  In  reply  he  informed  me  tliat  he  had  been
deprived  of  his  situation  through  persecution,  and  was  in  great  straits,
insomuch  that  he  had  decided  on  sending  his  grandmother  to  the  Union.
Forthwith  I  sent  some  money  and  a  request  to  have  the  old  lady  forwarded
to  me  immediately.  She  came,  and  was  again  provided  with  a  home  and  had
her  wants  supplied.  These  are  the  circumstances  as  they  occurred.  I  am
not  a  nervous  man  ;  nor  am  I  superstitious.  At  the  time  my  old  friend  came
to  me  I  was  wide  awake,  collected,  and  calm.  The  above  is  very  correct,  not
overdrawn.  C.  Happerfield.

This  last  case,  however,  suggests  a  fresh  difficulty, — namely,
as  to  the  real  origin  of  the  monitory  voice.  There  is  a  good
deal  of  evidence,  from  the  Dtemon  of  Socrates  downwards,  to  the
occurrence  of  monitions  or  warnings  which  in  various  ways  inform
tlie  percipient  of  some  approacliing  danger.  And  sometimes  these
monitions  are  associated — by  an  im^aression,  or  by  an  actual  vision —
witli  some  deceased  person,  who  is  supposed  to  be  acting  as  a  guardian
or  protector  to  the  person  tlius  admonished.

But  it  is  a  well-known  fact, — pointed  out  by  Elliotson,  and
repeatedly  noticed  since  his  day, — that  Iiypnotised  or  somnambulic
subjects  have  a  tendency  to  develojj  a  pseudo-guardian, — to  refer  the
knowledge  or  sensation  wliicli  comes  from  sub-conscious  strata  of  tlieir
own  mind  to  some  imaginary  sioirit,  whom  they  sometimes  see  beside
them  in  visible  form.  Tlius,  in  the  classical  case  of  "  Estelle," — that
patient  of  the  elder  Despine,  whose  history  is  so  curiously  concordant
■with  the  most  recent  observations, — Estelle  in  her  secondary  condition
supposed  herself  to  be  directed  by  a  spirit,  "  Angi^lique,"  who  was
obviously  a  mere  personification  of  her  own  supernormal  knowledge  of
the  state  of  her  own  organism.  Similarly  in  cases  of  automatic  writing,
the  message  which  really  comes  from  the  unconscious  self  of  the  writer
will  sign  itself  by  the  name  of  some  deceased  relative.  It  is  therefore
possible,  and  even  probable,  that  in  some  of  the  cases  wliere  warnings
have  been  conveyed  by  some  phantasmal  figure  simulating  a  dead
friend,  the  real  source  of  the  warning  has  been  somewhere  in  the
percipient  himself.  And  thus,  for  instance,  in  the  Happerfield  case,
just  cited,  the  phantom  may  have  been  the  mere  dramatic  projection,
either  of  knowledge  telej^athically  acquired  by  the  percipient,  or  of  a
mere  sub-conscious  current  of  anxiety  as  to  the  welfare  of  a  2)T0tegde  of
"whom  he  liad  heard  no  news  for  some  time.

While  thus  discussing  the  indications  of  a  knowledge  of  eartlily


1889.]


More  than  a  Tear  after  Death.


events  alforded  by  phantoms,  tliere  is  one  curious  type  of  cases  which  I
ought  to  mention,  although  by  tlieir  very  nature  they  can  hardly  occur
more  than  a  year  after  death — I  mean  cases  where  some  manifestation
occurs  iust  before  the  iiews  of  the  death  is  received  by  the  percipient.
In  a  case  given  in  the  last  paper  (Proceedinr/s,  Vol.  V.,  p.  408),  the
Rev.  G.  M.  Tandy  saw  Canon  Robinson's  apparition  just  before  he
opened  a  newspaper — given  to  him  in  its  wrapper  by  a  friend — which
contained  the  announcement  of  the  Canon's  death.  In  that  case  no
telepathic  communication  from  living  persons  seems  possible ;  for
neither  would  the  Canon's  surviving  friends  think  specially  of  Mr.
Tandy,  nor  could  they  possibly  know  when  the  news  of  the  death  would
reach  him.

"We  have  received  a  similar  case  from  Mr.  Magnusson,  Assistant
Librarian  in  tlie  Cambridge  University  Library,  where  a  strong
impression  of  the  death  of  a  friend  in  Iceland  came  upon  him — not
-at  the  time  of  the  death,  but  at  the  time  when  the  letter  announcing
the  death  had  just  reached  England.  As  this  was  only  an  impression, —
though  a  painfully  strong  one, — and  was  not  recorded  at  the  time,  I  do  not
quote  the  incident  at  length.  But  a  case  of  J\L'.  Cameron  Grant's,  briefly
mentioned  by  Mr.  Gurney  i*i  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (II.,  p.  690),  seems,
on  further  study  of  his  diary,  to  illustrate  the  present  point  so  curiously
that  I  must  refer  to  it  here.  After  mentioning  two  other  cases  in
"vvhich  entries  in  Sir.  Grant's  diary  confirm  his  recollection  of  strong
impressions  nearly  coincident  with  deaths,  JSIr.  Gurney  continues  : —

"I  have  studied  in  Mr.  Grant's  diary  the  full  record  of  a  third  case
which  was  even  more  remarkable  than  the  first,  as  it  included  the
peculiarity  that,  for  some  time  after  his  first  impression,  he  felt  forcibly
imiDelled  to  dratv  the  figure  of  the  person  who  died.  The  case  was  made
the  more  striking  to  me  by  the  fact  that  Mr.  Grant  was  so  certain  that
the  death  (the  time  of  which  he  had  only  very  vaguely  learnt)  must
liave  coincided  in  date  with  his  impression,  that  he  had  actually  not  taken
the  trouble  to  verify  the  coincidence.  He  left  it  to  me  to  find  in  the
Times  obituary — as  he  confidently  foretold  that  I  should — that  the
death  (which  was  quite  unexpected)  occui-red,  thousands  of  miles  from
the  place  where  he  was,  on  the  day  preceding  that  on  which  the  entry
in  his  diary,  relating  his  impression  of  the  previous  night,  was  written.
The  impression  of  that  night  did  not,  however,bear  distinct  reference  to
the  particular  person  who  died,  but  was  a  more  general  sense  of  calamity.
Certain  reasons  which  at  present  make  it  desirable  not  to  publish  the
■details  of  this  case  may  in  time  cease  to  exist."

Fow  on  a  fuller  inspection  of  Mr.  Grant's  voluminous  journal, (largely
a  busir  es  j  record, )  which  he  has  kindly  permitted  me  to  make,  it  appeared
that  the  impulse  to  dratv  the  dying  man  was  the  most  marked  feature
n  the  whole  incident,  and  furthermore  that  this  impulse  came  on  some


32


On  Recognised  Apparitions  occurring


[July  8,


months  aftei'  the  death— but  on  the  night  previous  to  the  day  on  which
Mr.  Grant  saw,  in  a  casual  newspaper  received  in  Brazil,  the  announce-
ment of  his  friend's  demise  in  Scotland.^

The  possibility  of  a  telepathic  impulse  from  the  surviving  members
of  the  family  of  course  suggests  itself :  but  Mr.  Grant  was  in  a  wild  up-
country  station  in  Brazil ;  and  it  seems  impossible  that  anyone  could
guess  at  what  date  the  news  would  reach  him.  The  rough  sketcli  wliich
Mr.  Grant  was  impelled  to  make  contained  two  figures  (of  which  tlie
second  was  a  servant)  and  a  window ;  and  it  truly  represented,  as  he
afterwai'ds  learnt,  the  circumstances  of  the  death.

This  narrative  in  some  sense  fits  in  with  a  few  cases  {cf. Phantasms
of  the  Living^  I.,  272,  and  possibly  II.,  52)  where  an  impression  or
hallucination  seems  to  have  continued  for  some  time  and  then  ceased
when  the  news  of  a  death  arrived.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  a  few
cases  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  p.  519)  which  suggest  that  if  indepen-
dent clairvoyance  exist,  the  perception  of  letters  arriving,  or  about  to
arrive,  may  form  one  of  its  readiest  manifestations.  The  subject  is  one
to  which  observation  should  be  specially  directed.

On  the  whole,  therefore,  our  cases  where  knowledge  of  earthly
affairs  on  the  decedent's  part  is  cleai'ly  indicated  are  few  indeed.  I
may  add  a  case  of  Mr.  Dale  Owen's,^  where  the  knowledge  whicli  the
ghost  seems  to  show  is  not  of  a  death,  but  of  a  more  mundane  event.

VI.— In  March,  184G,  Mrs.  R.,  wife  of  Dr.  R.,  of  Philadelphia, was  sitting
with  her  two  daughters  in  her  dining-room  about  midday.  They  all  three
saw  a  figure  enter,  move  through  the  room,  contemplate  a  portrait  of  Dr.
R. ,  and  disappear.  Mrs.  R.  and  the  elder  daughter,  who  saw  the  figure  best»
identified  it  in  dress  and  aspect  with  Dr.  R.'s  mother,  who  had  died  about
10  years  before.

The  ladies  narrated  this  incident  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Y.,  and  he  independently
gave  to  Mr.  Owen  (at  what  date  is  not  said)  an  account  "  tallying  exactly  "
with  the  account  given  to  him  by  the  two  ladies  mainly  concerned.

On  the  return  liome  of  Dr.  R.  that  evening  it  furtlier  appeared  that  the
apparition  involved  a  remarkable  coincidence. "  Shortly  before  her  death,'

1 1  am  not  sure  how  many  hours  the  impulse  lasted,  Mr.  Grant  having  been  obliged
to  return  to  Brazil  before  sending  me  a  copy  of  the  passage  in  his  journal.

2  The  Di:hatcahlc  Land,  2nd  Ed.,  p.  319.— Mr.  Robert  Dale  Owen's  works  contain
several  narratives  which  might  find  place  in  this  collection.  I  have  preferred  to  leave
tlie  reader  to  consult  them  for  himself,  and  judge  of  the  value  to  be  attached  to  them.
Mr.  Owen  cannot  be  classed  as  a  first-rate  observer ;  having  been  once  at  least  grossly-
deceived  by  fraudulent  mediums.  Nor  is  his  standard  of  what  constitutes  evidence  very
high,  as  is  shown  by  the  admission  to  his  volumes  of  sundry  remote  and  inconclusive
stories.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  his  own  honesty  and  his  strong  wish  to  be  accurate  ara
undoubted.  He  wrote  out  the  accounts  given  to  him  with  care,  and,  as  a  rule,  submitted
them  for  revision  to  the  narrator.  Where  the  narrators  were  known  to  him  as  iiersons  of
probity  and  position,  and  give  their  account  at  first-liand,  we  may  be  j^retty  sure  that  tlie
main  facts  are  correct.  It  is  greatly  to  be  regretted  that  the  full  names  are  so  rarely  given,,
and  that  Mr.  Owen's  papers  either  liave  not  been  preserved,  or  are  not  now  accessible.


1889.]


More  than  a  Year  after  Death.


33


says  Mrs.  Owen,  "Dr.  R.  's  mother  had  strongly  advised  her  son  to  buy  a  house
in  the  neighbourhood,  which  he  ultimately  purchased.  She  had  also  about
that  time  stated  to  a  friend  of  hers,  Mrs.  C,  that  if  her  son  did  well,  she
■would,  if  permitted,  return  from  the  other  world  to  witness  his  prosperity.
.  .  .  As  nearly  as  could  be  ascertained,  at  the  very  hour  [of  the  apparition]
the  deeds  by  which  Dr.  R.  became  the  legal  proprietor  of  the  house  in  which
she  appeared  were  delivered  to  him  by  its  former  possessor."

The  inference  suggested  is  that  here  the  prosperous  action — as  in  other
cases  the  impending  or  the  actual  decease  of  the  survivor — attracted  the
attention,  and  thence  in  some  way  induced  the  appearance,  of  the  long-
departed  friend.

We  proposed  roughly  to  divide  the  apparently  motived  actions  of
these  apparitions  into  the  reasonable  and  the  unreasonable  : — that  is  to
say,  into  actions  which  seem  to  imply  real  intention  on  the  decedent's
part,  and  actions  which  suggest  the  mere  unconscious  working  out  of
some  old  prejudice  or  bygone  impulse.  Under  which  class  of  motives
are  we  to  place  the  desire  to  pay  one's  debts  ?  This  desire  is  in  itself
legitimate ;  but  nevertheless,  when  the  debts  are  trifling,  there  seems
something  undignified  in  a  post-7nor(em  preoccupation  with  a  small
account  wliicli  the  decedent  has  left  no  funds  to  settle ;  so  that  all  he
can  now  do  is  to  get  a  stranger  to  pay  it  for  him.  Yet  such  is
the  situation  suggested  in  a  narrative  which  Dr.  Binns,  an  author  of
some  scientific  repute  in  his  day,  gives  in  his  Aiiatomy  of  Sleep,  p.  462,
adding  that  "  perhaps  there  is  not  a  better  authenticated  case  on
record."  It  consists  of  a  letter  written  October  21st,  1842,  by  the
Rev.  Chai'les  M'Kay,  a  Catholic  priest,  to  the  Countess  of  Shrewsbury.
The  Earl  of  Shrewsbury  sent  on  the  letter  to  Dr.  Binns.  It  is  quoted
by  Dale  Owen  {Footfalls,  p.  294). I  abbreviate  it  here  : —

VII.—"  In  July,  1838,  I  left  Edinburgh  to  take  charge  of  the  Perthshire
missions.  On  my  arrival  inPerth,  I  was  called  upon  hj  a  Presbyterian  woman,
Anne  Simpson,  who  for  more  than  a  week  had  been  in  the  utmost  anxiety  to
see  a  priest.  [This  woman  stated  that  a  woman  lately  dead  (date  not  given)
named  Maloy,  slightly  known  to  Anne  Simpson,  had  '  appeared  to  her  during
the  night  for  several  nights  '  vu'ging  her  to  go  to  the  priest,  who  would  pay  a
sum  of  money,  three  and  tenpence,  which  the  deceased  owed  to  a  person
not  specified.]

"  I  made  inquiry,  and  found  that  a  woman  of  that  name  had  died,  who  had
acted  as  washerwoman  and  followed  the  regiment.  Following  up  the  inquiry
I  found  a  grocer  with  whom  she  had  dealt,  and  on  asking  him  if  a  female
named  Maloy  owed  him  anything,  he  turned  up  his  books,  and  tuld  me  she  did
owe  him  three  and  tenpence.  I  paid  the  sum.  Subsequently  the  Presbyterian
woman  came  to  me,  saying  that  she  was  no  more  troubled."

This  account,  though  first-hand,  is  remote,  and  I  know  of  no  recent
cases  that  are  quite  parallel.  But  the  point  on  v/hich  I  here  insist  is
that  the  triviality  of  the  ghost's  alleged  motive  is  no  reason  for
disbelieviiio-  the  narrative. "NVe  have  no  riaht  to  assume  that  a

n


'34  On  Ilecognised  Apparitions  occurring [July  8,

decedent,  by  the  mere  fact  of  his  decease,  will  see  things  in  a  larger
light,  or  shake  off  the  anxieties,  the  pi-epossessions,  the  superstitions
of  earth.  Or  even  if  we  assume  that  he  does  in  some  sort  enter  on  a
larger  existence,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  conduct  of  his  apparition
will  reflect  his  new  knowledge  rather  than  the  impulses  originated  by
his  earthly  being.^

In  fact,  as  we  shall  presently  try  to  show,  there  is  some  reason  to
suppose  that  the  apparition  is  due  to  something  like  the  working  out  of  a
post-hypnotic  suggestion.  It  may  be  entirely  absorbed  in  the  fulfilment
of  an  idea  implanted  in  the  decedent's  mind  in  his  eartlily  days,  or
impressed  upon  him  at  the  moment  of  death.  Thus  we  may  conceive  a
murdered  man,  for  instance,  as  feeling  persistently  that  he  ought  not
to  have  been  murdered, — that  his  existence  should  still  be  continuing
in  liis  earthly  home.  And  if  his  apparition  is  seen  in  that  home,  we
need  not  say  that  he  is  "  condemned  to  walk  there,"  but  rather  that
his  memory  or  his  dream  goes  back  irresistibly  to  the  scene  to  which  in
a  sense  he  feels  tliat  he  still  belongs.

I  say  "  his  memory  or  his  dream  "  ;  but  it  is  of  course  possible
that  neither  word  may  suggest  a  close  parallel  to  what  actually  occurs.
There  may  be  a  deeper  severance  in  the  personality  of  the  dead —
a  psychical  fractionation  such  as  that  on  wliich  Indian  and  other
philosophies  have  been  wont  to  dwell — which  may  allow  of  a  greater
independence  and  persistence  in  the  apparition  than  we  usually
associate  with  the  notion  of  a  dream.  There  is  notliing  pe?"  se  improbable
in  the  idea  that  our  personality — so  much  more  f  i-actionable  even  during
our  earthly  life  than  we  were  wont  to  imagine — should  be  susceptible,
wlien  liberated  from  the  body,  of  still  profounder  divisions.  For  the
present,  however,  it  seems  better  to  keep  to  more  familiar  analogies,
and  to  use  the  word  "  dream  "  as  the  widest  term  available  ;  though,
of  course,  without  assuming  that  the  decedent  is  in  any  sense  asleep.

Let  us  suppose,  then,  that  the  decedent  tends  to  dream  of  scenes  and
events  in  tlie  past,  and  that  tlie  way  which  he  has  of  old  been
accustomed  to  regard  such  scenes  or  events  is  still  dominant  in
that  dream. We  shall  not  then  be  surpi-ised  to  find  that  what  I  have

1  It  has  been  i-emarked  that  dying  persons  seem  inwardly  sometimes  to  be  pre-
occupied with  some  very  small  and  remote  matter.  Dr.  Fere  gives  a  case  where  a
man  dying  from  disease  of  the  spinal  marrow  had  already  lost  consciousness,  but  was
momentarily  revived  liy  the  injection  of  ether.  He  raised  his  head  and  spoke  eagerly
in  a  language  which  no  one  present  understood.  He  then  made  signs  for  pencil  and
paper  and  wrote  a  few  lines.  These  M'ere  found  to  be  a  statement  in  Flemish,  the
language  of  his  childhood,  as  to  a  debt  of  15  francs  which  he  had  contracted  at
Brussels,  about  20  years  previously.  Another  dying  man,  with  scarcely  perceptible
pulse,  was  similarly  revived  by  the  injection  of  ether.  He  turned  to  his  wife  and
said  brusquely,  "You  will  never  find  that  pin;  all  the  floor  has  been  re-boai'ded."
This  referred  to  an  incident  which  had  occurred  18  years  before.  Having  so  said,  he
expired.


1889.]  More  than  a  Year  of ter  Death.  '  '^35


■called  irrational  motives  appeal-  to  influence  the  apparition.  And
amongst  these  we  shall  observe  a  frequent  preoccupation  with  the  mortal
remains  or  skeleton  of  the  departed  person.  There  is  at  any  rate  a
well-marked  group  of  cases  where  the  phantom  seems  to  wish  to  di-aw
attention  to  the  fact  that  a  skeleton  is  concealed  in  some  unexpected
place.  When  skeletons  are  found  thus  hidden,  it  is  of  course  probable  that
tliere  has  been  foul  play  ;  and  the  cause  of  the  phantom  may  be
supposed  to  have  been  in  the  first  instance  the  desire  of  the  deceased
to  reveal  the  murder  ;  althougli  the  haunting  may  continue  when  all
3)0ssibility  of  bringing  the  criminal  to  justice  may  have  passed  away.

There  is,  however, another  possible  way  of  accounting  for  this
connection  between  apparitions  and  skeletons. We  may  ascribe  the
hallucinatory  figure,  not  to  any  action  on  the  part  of  the  dead,  but  to
the  hyperesthesia  of  the  living. It  has  often  been  supposed  that
certain  "  sensitives  "  are  aware  in  some  obscure  manner  of  the  proximity
■of  dead  bodies. Developing  this  possibility  {Proceedings,  Vol.  IV.,
p.  154),  I  cited  two  cases  where  such  susceptibility  might  serve  to  explain
a  feeling  of  horror  experienced  (1)  in  a  room  in  whose  roof  (one  story
higher)  the  dried-up  body  of  a  murdered  baby  was  afterwards  found  ;
(2)  in  (and  above)  a  room  beneath  whose  flooring  several  skeletons  were
subsequently  discovered. In  each  of  these  cases  there  was  proximity
under  the  same  roof. But  in  the  case  which  I  shall  now  cite  there  was
no  such  proximity  between  the  percipient  and  the  skeleton.  The.
skeleton,  as  will  be  seen,  was  buried  in  an  open  field  which  the
percipient  merely  traversed  from  time  to  time. The  bones  were  some  40
yeai-s  old  ;  and  kelp  had  been  burnt  above  the  spot  where  they  lay.  It
seems  incredible  that  a  man  should  be  thus  afi'ected  by  a  distant
skeleton  and  yet  capable  of  fulfilling  the  ordinary  duties  of  life  ;  which
in  the  case  of  a  serious  Scotch  bailifi"  must  undoubtedly  have  included
attendance,  in  the  midst  of  buried  skeletons,  at  church. The  facts  of
this  case  are  unusually  clear  and  weU-evidenced  ;  the  interpretation  is
more  than  commonl)'  difficult.

^^Ul- — Discovery  OF  a  Human  Skeleton  by  Eevelation  in  a  Dream.
From  the  Banffshire  Journal  of  January  30th,  1872.

A  most  unusual  and  extraordinary  occurrence  has  excited  considerable
interest  in  the  district  around  Banfi'  durmg  the  past  few  days,  the  chain  of
cu'cumstances  leading  to  which  we  are  in  a  position  to  relate  authoritatively.

William  Moir  is  grieve  at  the  farm  of  Upper  Dallachy,  in  the  parish  of
Boyndie,  about  three  and  a-lialf  miles  west  of  Banff,  and  a  mile  west  of  the
fishing  village  of  Whitehills.  Moir  is  an  intelligent,  steady,  and  modest
man,  35  years  of  age,  and  married.  Shortly  after  Wliic  Sunday  last,  he
dreamed  tliat,  on  a  particular  spot  near  the  farui  of  Dallachy,  he  saw  lying
a  dead  body  with  blood  upon  the  face.  The  dream  was  so  vivid  that  every
point  connected  with  it  was  deeply  impressed  upon  his  memory. The  spot

D  2


..^6  On  Recognised  Apixiritions  occurring [July  8^


on  which  he  dreamed  he  saw  the  body  lie  was  a  slight  mound  on  the  sloping,
ground  which  bounds  the  farm  and  stretches  to  the  seaside,  and  about  16ft.
from  the  high  water  mark.  For  a  time  after  the  dream,  Moir  did  not  think
much  about  it ;  but  the  idea  of  the  dead  man  afterwards  haunted  him,  and
he  could  not  exclude  it  from  his  mind.  By-and-bye  the  matter  took  so  firm
a  hold  upon  his  thoughts  that  never  was  he  a  moment  unoccupied  but  the
idea  and  the  vision  returned  to  him.

An  incident  happened  in  the  month  of  July  last,  which  Moir,  at  the  time,
thought  was  the  interpretation  of  his  dream.  A  person  who  had  been  an
inmate  of  tlae  Banffsliire  Lunatic  Asylum, at  Ladysbridge,  was  found  drowned  at
apoint  about  200yardsfrom  where  Moirdreamt  he  saw  the  dead  body  lie.  There
is  a  boat  belonging  to  the  farm  at  Ujiper  Dallachy,  in  which  Moir  and  some  of
the  men-servants  occasionally  went  to  Lea  and  amused  themselves  with  fishing;
and  it  was  while  out  in  this  boat  that  the  dead  body  of  the  lunatic  was
observed.  It  so  happened  that  Moir  was  the  first  person  to  put  his  hand  upon
the  dead  body  ;  and  he  and  his  companion  proceeded  to  carry  the  body  tO'
the  village  of  Whitehills.  When  the  two  men  were  so  carrying  the  dead  body
of  the  lunatic,  they  passed  over  the  exact  spot  where  Moir  in  his  dream  had
seen  the  dead  man  lying,  and  the  recollection  of  his  dream  became  very  vivid
at  that  moment.  When  about  six  yards  beyond  the  spot,  Moir's  companion
slipped  his  foot,  and  the  end  of  the  board  upon  which  lay  the  lunatic's  body
fell  to  the  ground.  Moir,  keeping  lnjld  of  his  end  of  the  board,  observed
that  there  was  blood  upon  the  face  of  the  corpse,  and  he  looked  upon  the-
incident  as  the  fulfilment  of  his  dream.

Still,  however,  the  vision  of  the  dream  came  back  upon  the  man.  He-
could  not  go  out  walking  or  sit  down  at  home  in  the  evening  without  the
recollection  coming  before  his  mind.  Indeed,  he  began  to  think  that  his
intellect  was  being  affected,  and  he  was  conscious  of  becoming  taciturn,
morose,  and  absent.  The  disagreeable  feeling  continued  to  increase  in  in-
tensity, and,  during  last  week,  it  became  positively  painful.  On  Wednesday
last,  in  the  discharge  of  his  ordinary  duties,  he  went  to  an  outlying  portion
of  the  farm,  and,  while  he  was  there  occupied,  the  idea  of  the  dream  left
him.  On  Wednesday  evening,  however,  it  came  back  with  increased  force.
On  Thursday  morning  he  went  down  to  Stakeness,  a  portion  of  ground
recently  attached  to  the  farm,  and  about  400  yards  from  the  spot  with  which
his  vision  was  associated,  and,  while  there  engaged,  his  oppressive  thoughts
were  dissipated.  He  returned  to  his  house  on  the  farm,  and,  after  sitting
awhile,  he  intended  to  proceed  to  the  portion  of  the  farm  at  which  he  had
been  on  Wednesday,  which  lay  on  the  side  furthest  fi-om  the  sea.

■  "While  Moir  was  on  the  way  from  the  house,  tlie  idea  of  his  dream
occurred  to  him  with  such  intense  vividness  that  he  turned  and  went  bade
to  the  house.  Saying  nothing  to  anyone  in  the  house,  he  took  a  S23ade,  and
walked  direct  to  the  spot  of  which  he  had  so  distinct  a  recollection  in  con-
nection with  his  dream,  and  removed  a  little  of  the  turf  from  the  surface.
After  he  had  done  so,  he  put  the  spade  down  its  full  length  into  the  ground,
and  lifted  up  the  earth.  In  the  sjjadeful  of  earth,  liowever,  there  was  an
entire  human  skull.  The  man  was  not  at  all  aff"ected  by  the  appearance  of
the  skull,  the  idea  in  his  mind  being  that  the  turning-up  of  the  skull  was


1889.]


3Iore  than  a  Year  after  Death.


37


nothing  more  than  what  was  to  have  been  expected.  He  took  other  spade-
fuls of  earth,  and  brought  up  the  lower  jaw  with  teeth,  followed  by  the
shoulder  bones,  and,  digging  further  along,  dug  up  other  bones  of  a  human
body  as  far  as  the  thigh.  Laying  the  bones  out  on  the  surface  of  tlie  ground
just  in  the  position  he  had  found  them  buried,  he  realised  that  he  was  digging
up  a  skeleton.  At  that  juncture  Iiloir  stopped  digging,  and  went  to  an
•elevated  spot  about  50  yards  from  the  grave,  where  he  called  upon  William
Lorimer,  the  cattleman  at  the  farm,  who  was  pulling  turnips  in  a  field.
Lorimer  went  to  IMoir,  and  both  returned  to  the  spot,  when  Moir  recom-
manced  digging,  and  brought  out  the  lower  bones  of  the  skeleton.  Both  men
then  threw  tha  bones  into  the  cavity,  and  covered  them  up.  Moir's  first
intention  was  to  let  the  bones  lie,  but,  on  second  thoughts,  he  went  to  the
village  of  Whitehills  t  j  consult  Mr.  Taylor,  merchant  there,  as  to  what  he
■should  do.  Moir  had  not  been  10  minutes  in  the  shop  when  Inspector
M'Gregor,  of  the  county  police,  who  had  been  in  Whitehills,  accidentally
called  at  the  shop.  Moir  reported  to  the  inspector  what  had  taken  place,
and  the  two  proceeded  to  the  spot  where  the  bones  lay.  By  the  time  they
arrived  there  it  was  dusk,  but  the  inspector  had  the  skull  and  some  of  the
"bones  uncovered  at  once.

On  Friday  morning  Inspector  M'Gregor  returned  to  the  place,  and  had
the  whole  of  the  skeleton  taken  up.

The  place  where  the  remains  were  found,  and  whicli  had  been  so  long
jissociated  with  the  disagreeable  dream  in  the  mind  of  Moir,  is  not  at  all  a
likely  spot  for  an  ordinary  grave.  The  body  could  have  only  been  covered
with  about  18in.  of  mould,  and  underneath  it  there  were  only  two  or  three
inches  of  shingle,  covering  a  surface  of  rock.  The  bones  were  considerably
■decomposed,  and  they  may  have  lain  there  for  about  half  a  century.  The  spot
was  enclosed  by  a  circle  of  stones,  from  eight  to  10  yards  in  circumference  ;
and  the  stones  and  shingle  were  so  discoloured  as  to  indicate  that  they  had
been  subjected  to  the  influence  of  fire.  It  is  believed  that  the  enclosed  circle
was  the  site  of  a  kiln  for  burning  kelp.  At  one  time  kelp-burning  was  a
"business  of  some  importance  in  the  district,  and  there  were  more  than  a  dozen
•of  these  kilns  upon  the  beach,  within  a  few  miles  to  the  west  of  Bans',  the
last  of  which  were  only  discontinued  about  half  a  century  ago.

The  finding  of  the  remains  has  been  reported  to  the  Procurator-Fiscal,
and  the  bones  have  been  taken  charge  of  by  the  police,  pending  an  investiga-
tion and  instructions  as  to  their  disposal.

Curiosity  will  naturally  exist  as  to  how  the  finding  of  the  skeleton  has
after  a  time  afi'ected  the  mind  of  Mr.  Moir.  After  meeting  with  Inspector
M'Gregor,  the  subject  of  the  dream  ceased  to  harass  him,  and  he  has  since
«njoyed  an  entire  immunity  from  his  previous  mental  troubles.

The  whole  circumstances  of  the  case,  as  we  have  related  them,  are  con-
firmed by  a  variety  of  evidence,  which  shows  them  to  be  as  undoubted  as  they
are  unusual  and  remarkable.

Supplementary  statement  by  Mr.  Moir,  Dallachy,  at  a  conversation
held  in  the  Journal  ofSce,  BajifF,  on  Friday,  July  19th,  1872.

Mr.  William  Moir  is  a  native  of  the  parish  of  Monymusk,  in  Aberdeen
shire. He  is  35  years  of  age,  is  married  to  a  Miss  Humphrey,  from.


3S


On  Recognised  Apparitions  occurring


[July  8,


Banftshire.  Both  Moir  ami  his  wife  saw  Dallachy  for  tlie  first  time
wlien  they  came  to  live  there  four  years  ago.  Moir  had  become
familiar  with  all  the  ground  on  the  farm  Ly  walking  over  it,  in  the  ordinary
course  of  his  duties.  There  was  nothing  particular  to  attract  his  attention
to  the  spot  mentioned  in  the  narrative,  and  he  had  not  paid  any  attention  to-
it  more  than  to  any  other  part  of  the  farm,  till  in  June,  1870,  he  dreamed
that  he  came  to  the  spot  and  saw  a  man  lying  on  it,  with  his  clothes  on,  but
bare-headed.  The  man  seemed  to  be  lying  on  that  particular  spot,  the  same
as  if  he  were  drunk  or  in  a  senseless  condition.  The  first  time  Moir  had
occasion  to  pass  the  spot  after  he  had  the  dream,  it  occurred  to  him  when  he
came  to  it  that  it  was  the  spot  on  which  he  had  seen  the  man  lying.  He
never  dreamed  before  nor  since  about  anytliing  of  the  same  kind,  and  is
generally  a  very  sound  sleeper.  Moir  could  not  say  whether  the  man  waa
dead  or  alive  when  he  saw  him  in  tlie  dream,  but  he  dreamed  that  he  stood
and  looked  at  the  man,  and  on  seeing  the  head  bare  and  the  face  covered  with
blood,  he  said  to  himself  in  an  offhand  sort  of  way,  ' '  That  man  has  come  off
witli  the  worst  of  it."  Subsequent  to  tlie  dream  Moir  forgot  about  the  man,
but  his  mind  was  always  troubled  about  the  spot  of  ground  upon  which  he  saw
the  man  lying.

Moir  carefully  read  over  tlie  narrative  and  said  it  was  quite  correct.  He
liad  read  tlie  narrati-\'e  over  and  made  corrections  when  it  was  written  before
being  printed,  and  immediately  after  the  event  occurred.
Certified  by

(Signed)  A.  Ramsay,  Editor  Bunffsliire  Journal.
The  next  letter  is  from  Mr.  Alexander  Thurburn,  of  Keith,  to  Mr.
T.  A.  Stewart,  one  of  H.M.  Inspectors  of  Scliools.

Keith,  March  L2th,  1883.

My  Dear  Stewart, — I  send  herewith  a  reprint  from  the  Banffshire
Journal  of  the  story  of  Moir's  dream,  from  which  is  omitted  a  suggestion
as  to  the  identity  of  the  skeleton  which  proved  erroneous.  I  also  enclose  a
copy  of  a  supplementary  statement  which  gives  a  few  further  particulars  and
exjjlains  the  step  5  taken  for  checking  the  accuracy  of  the  original  narrative.
Tlie  supplementary  statement  is  written  from  notes  which  Nicol  wrote  in
sliortliand  while  Mr.  Ramsay  was  questioning  Moir  on  some  points  which  I
had  asked  him  to  investigate.

As  the  matter  was  investigated  by  the  criminal  authorities  there  can  be
no  doubt  of  the  substantial  accuracy  of  the  facts.  The  Fiscal  might  tell  you  if
desired  what  was  done.  I  learned  from  Mr.  Ramsay  that  there  was
no  story  of  murder,  robbery,  or  the  like  associated  with  the  spot  where  the
body  was  found.  If  hypertesthesia  can  be  admitted  as  the  cause,  Moir  was
just  the  sort  of  man  in  whom  we  could  imagine  such  a  condition  to  arise.  He
seems  to  have  been  of  an  exceedingly  sensitive,  nervous  temperament,  and  if
I  remember  riglit  he  fell  into  a  state  of  religious  depression  such  as  seriously
to  unhinge  his  mind  before  his  death,  which  took  place  in  or  about  October,
1873.  Miss  Cobbe's  theory  in  the  Echo,  therefore,  seems  to  me  the  most
possible  one.  I  made  some  inquiries  (with  the  view  of  testing  another
suggestion  of  Miss  Cobbe's)  regarding  his  early  history  and  the  possibility  of
his  having  heard  the  story  in  Ijoyliood  and  forgotten  about  it.  It  is,  of
Cviurse,  impossible  to  obtain  absolute  proof  of  the  negative  in  such  a  case.


issa.]


Ilore  than  a  Year  after  Death.


39


but  IMoir,  the  g<ard.ener,  told  me  of  the  movements  of  all  the  members  of  the
family,  and  I  could  find  no  trace  of  any  means  whereby  they,  who  came
comparatively  recently  to  the  county,  could  have  known  circumstances
connected  with  the  mystery  of  wliich  the  people  in  the  immediate  district
were  ignorant. If  I  can  furnish  any  further  details  I  shall  be  glad  to  do  so.

Alex.  Thurbukn.

Mr.  Tliurbuni  adds  further  particulars  as  follows  : —

Keith,  May  2Gtlt,  1874.

I  have  been  making  inquiry  as  to  the  points  on  which  you  suggested
that  information  might  be  got  about  the  late  INIr.  Moir,  who  dreamed  of  the
corpse  at  Dallachy,  but  all  that  I  have  learned  is  of  a  negative  character.  I
discovered  that  there  was  an  uncle  of  his,  a  James  Moir,  a  jobbing  gardener
in  Keith,  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for  my  facts, — the  minister  of  Monymusk
to  whom  I  wrote  having  told  me  that  nothing  could  be  learned  there  as  all
the  family  had  left  that  parish  years  ago.

I  find  from  James  Moir  that  the  deceased's  grandfather  was  a  native  of.
Insch,  in  Aberdeenshire,  and  had  a  family  of  six,  of  whom  the  deceased's
father  was  the  third,  and  James  (my  informant)  the  fifth,  and  that  he
removed  to  the  parish  of  Monymusk  when  James  was  a  mere  child.  The
deceased's  father  was  also  very  young  when  lie  was  taken  with  the  others  to
Monymusk,  and  he  continued  in  that  parish  where  the  deceased  was  also
brought  up  until  he  left  it  to  go  to  service.

James  Moir,  the  gardener,  knows  of  no  previous  connection  with  the  Banff
district,  nor  of  any  friends  of  the  f;imily  from  that  neighbourhood  who  could
have  communicated  to  any  of  them  the  history  of  any  events  that  miglit
have  occurred  there.  The  tragedy  at  Dallachy  must  have  been  kept  a
profound  secret,  since  the  inquii'ies  of  the  authorities  have  afforded  no  clue
to  its  solution,  and  therefore  anyone  acquainted  with  the  facts  is  not  likely
to  have  spoken  of  them  except  to  a  very  confidential  friend.  I  think  it  may
safely  be  assumed  that  had  such  a  close  confidence  existed  between  anyone
from  the  neighbourhood  of  Banff'  who  could  have  known  about  the  story,
and  any  of  the  Sloir  family,  during  the  lifetime  of  the  late  Mr.  M<:iir,  his
uncle,  the  gardener,  would  have  known  of  it ;  so  that  it  appears  extremely
improbable  that  the  story  can  have  been  told  in  Moir's  hearing  in  his  child-
hood and  been  forgotten  by  him.

Mr.  Stewart  kindly  inquired  personally  into  the  ease,  and  writes  as
follows  : —

Keith,  Ajyril  7th,  1883.
Dear  Sir, — I  have  to-day  interviewed  Mrs.  Moir,  and  I  enclose  a  state-
ment signed  by  her.  She  is  an  intelligent,  fresh-faced  woman,  apparently
between  40  and  50.  She  was  very  willing  to  answer  my  questions,  and  said
she  had  received  many  letters  and  answered  many  inquiries  already.  I
asked  her  if  she  had  seen  the  spot  where  the  skeleton  was  found,  and  whether
its  appearance  suggested  a  grave  ?  She  said  she  had  often  seen  it,  that  it  had
no  appearance  of  being  a  grave,  and  that  the  fishermen  passed  over  it  on  their
way  from  the  sea.  I  asked  her  if,  after  the  skeleton  had  been  unearthed,  her
husband  still  had  these  dreams  ?  She  said  he  had  not,  but  that  the  shock  to
his  system  led  to  his  death. She  described  all  the  circumstances,  how  her


49


On  Recognised  Apparitions  occurring


[July  8,


husband  had  this  weiglit  on  his  mind,  which  she  often  urged  him,  even  on
her  knees,  to  impart  to  her,  as  she  knew  that  something  was  preying  upon
him.  But,  in  her  own  words,  "  he  had  not  the  jDower  "  to  do  it.  I  asked
her  if  slie  meant  that  he  was  unwilling  to  tell  her  about  it,  because  it  might
make  her  uneasy,  and  slie  said  this  was  not  the  way  of  it,  but  that  he  felt
himself  bovmd  not  to  reveal  his  experience,  even  to  lier.  He  often  went  out
and  prayed  to  be  delivered  from  the  burden,  and  at  last  thought  that  his
reason  was  going.  And  now  comes  part  of  the  history  I  had  not  heard  before.
She  said  that  the  old  jieople  in  Boyndie  knew  of  the  sudden  disappearance  of
a  man  named  Elder  some  40  or  50  years  ago.  He  was  said  to  have  gone  to
America,  but  had  not  been  traced,  and  it  was  generally  believed  that  he  had
been  murdered,  and  that,  too,  in  the  room  in  which  Muir  slept.  Drs.  Hirschfeld
and  Mawson,  who  examined  the  skeleton,  gave  as  their  opinion  that  it  had
lain  there  for  about  40  years.  Mrs.  Moir  also  said  that  the  soil,  some  16
inches  deep,  covering  the  skeleton  must  have  been  brought  there  for  the  pur-
pose, as  there  was  no  soil  of  that  kind  in  the  neiglibourhocd.  Her  opinion  was
that  the  case  had  been  hushed  up  to  spare  tlie  feelings  of  their  friends.  Now,
of  course,  you  must  take  all  this  for  what  it  is  worth.  Mrs.  Moir  made  the
statements  to  me  to-day.

T.  A.  Stewart.

P.S. — I  omitted  to  mention  that  Mrs.  Moir  said  that  the  skull  bore
marks  of  violence. — T.  A.  S.

D0CUME>T  in.

I  hereby  certify  in  presence  of  T.  A.  Stewart,  Esq.,  H.M.I.S.,  that  the
account  given  in  the  Eanffsldre  Journal  ol  my  late  husband's  dream  was  a
correct  record  of  the  facts  of  the  case. — Jessie  Mom,  Lower  Towie,  Botriphny.

Document  IV.

Milton  of  Noth.

Janiianj  29/7/,  1883.
IMrs.  Wiston,  of  Milton  of  Noth,  to  whose  husband  Moir  acted  as  grieve,
gives  a concordant  account of  the  incident,  under  date  January  29th,
1883,  and  adds

It  was  very  strange  that  from  the  night  of  his  dream  until  the  day  he  dug
up  the  grave  he  never  told  anyone  what  was  causing  him  to  be  so
absent  and  unhappy.  He  told  me  after  that  ho  felt  he  could  not,  although
the  thought  of  it  was  sometimes  like  to  deprive  him  of  his  reason.  He  then
spoke  of  it  quite  openly,and  said  it  gave  him  no  more  trouble;  but  why  this  pooi
man  should  have  had  any  trouble  with  it  at  all  seems  to  me  incomprehensible.
He  was  more  than  an  ordinary,  honest,  hardy,  straightforward  man,  much
respected  by  Mr.  Wilson  and  also  his  former  mastei's.  Neither  he  nor  any  ol
his  relatives  had  ever  been  in  that  part  of  the  country  until  he  was  sent  from
Milton  to  take  charge  of  the  farm.

Miss  M.  F.  Reid,  whose  father  was  in  1872  parish  minister  of  Auchendoir,
Aberdeenshire,  gives  a  concordant,  but  more  detailed  account,  and  adds  : —

February  2Uh,  1883.
Any  addition  to  the  statement  of  Mrs.  Wilson,  which  you  may  find  in  my
aocoujit,  I  have  taken  from  notes  of  the  story  I  made  at  the  time,  as  related


1889.]


J/ore  than  a  Year  after  Death.


41


to  me  by  reliable  persons  in  the  district  where  I  lived,  who  knew  Moir
before  his  migration  to  this  sea-board  farm.  I  remember  distinctly  being
told  then  that  Moir's  reticence — as  he  said  afterwards — during  these  months
in  which  he  did  not  divulge  his  dream  proceeded  from  an  unaccountable
feeling,  as  if  he  himself  had  somehow  been  witness  of,  or  implicated  in,  the
murderous  act.  This  does  not  quite  come  out  in  the  Wilson  narrative,  but
I  know  this  fact  impressed  itself  on  me  at  the  time,  and  I  remember
thinking  that  did  I  believe  the  doctrine  of  metempsychosis,  this  circumstance
would  have  indicated  that  in  some  other  phase  of  existence  Moir  had
witnessed  the  deed,  which  on  his  revisiting  the  spot  he  now  became  conscious
of  through  the  medium  of  this  confused  dream.  The  revolution  in  his- feelings,
after  the  whole  circumstance  became  known,  was  most  remarkable.  IMoir
then  spoke  feelingly  of  tlie  matter  in  all  its  details,  and  said  his  former
morbid  feelings  seemed  like  the  memory  of  a  painful  dream.

Mary  F.  Reid.

If  in  tliis  case  we  reject — as  it  seems  to  me  that  we  are  forced  to
reject — both  the  hypothesis  of  chance  coincidence  and  the  hyjoothesis  of
hyperasstliesia,  we  are  confronted  with  a  conception  of  a  strange  and
painful  kind.  A  man — himself,  as  the  tradition  hints,  not  blameless —
is  mui'dered  in  a  bedroom  of  a  Scotch  fai'mhouse.  His  body  is  carried
out  and  hastily  buried  in  the  open  field.  For  40  years  the  murdered
man  retains  some  consciousness  of  this  tragedy.  He  broods  over  tlie
fact  of  his  death  in  that  room,  his  interment  in  that  stony  hillock.  At
last  the  bedroom  is  occupied  by  a  man  sensitive  to  the  peculiar  influence
which  (on  our  hypothesis)  these  broodings  of  deceased  persons  diffuse.
The  dream  of  the  dead  passes  into  the  dream  of  the  living  ;  it  persists
in  Moir's  inind  with  tlie  same  intensity  as  in  the  murdered  man's  own
imagination.  The  purpose  once  achieved, — the  discovery  made, — tlie
obsession  ceases.

And  we  may  indeed  say  that  if  we  carry  our  ideas  of  telepathy  into
an  unseen  world,  this  is  the  kind  of  haunting  which  we  should  expect
to  find.  We  are  dealing  presumably  with  a  world  of  influences  ;  and
we  can  believe  that  a  man  may  come  within  a  current  of  influence
against  which  no  ordinary  means  of  self-defence  can  avail,  and  which
may  persist  as  long  as  certain  links  between  the  unembodied  and  tlie
embodied  mind  hold  good.  And  on  the  same  principle  we  might
interpret  the  horror  connected  with  tlie  presence  of  a  baby's  corpse  in
the  roof  ;  referring  this  to  some  persistent  current  of  influence  from  the
unhappy  mother  who  presumably  placed  it  tliere.

All  this  must  at  present  be  mere  speculation  ;  but  at  any  rate  these
discoveries  of  skeletons  a,re  in  civilised  countries  so  rare,  that  any  account
of  haunting  which  can  be  shown  to  have  originated  before  the  discovery
of  the  skeleton  has  considerable  value  as  a  coincidence.

I  give  another  case  of  this  kind  (already  alluded  to),  from  Mrs.
Montague,  Crackanthorpe,  Newbiggin  Hall,  Westmoreland.


42


Oil  Becognised  Apr/aritions  occurring


[July  8,


June  IVh,  1883.

IX. — Herewith  my  "  Nortliamptonsliire  nights  " — and  days,  as  accurately
told  as  I  can.  But,  beyond  being  very  real  to  me,  I  am  afraid  they  won't  avail
you  much.  'For  you  see  I  heard  nothing,  saw  nothing,  neither  did  the  maid.
I  was  startled  when  my  father  told  me  of  the  rector's  confession  as  to  the
"  disagreeableness  "  of  that  end  of  the  house — months  afterwards — but  what
made  most  impression  upon  me  was,  that  having  battled  through  the  night
with  my  Vrague  terrors  successfully,  I  could  not  sit  in  that  arm-chair,  in  the
sunshine,  next  day,  with  the  sound  of  the  cook  singing  over  her  work  close
at  hand.

In  tlio  summer  of  1872,  my  father  occupied  a  rectory  house  (Passenham)
not  far  from  Blisworth,  in  Northamptonshire,  for  a  few  weeks,  and  I  went
down  to  spjcnd  three  days  with  him  and  my  mother  at  Whitsuntide  ;  my  twa
clnklrcn  and  their  nurse  being  already  there.  The  room  given  to  me  was  over
the  dining-room ;  next  door  to  it  was  the  night  nursery,  in  which  my'nurse  and
children  slept,  the  rest  of  the  inmates  of  the  house  being  quite  at  the  other
end  of  a  rather  long  passage.  I  hardly  slept  at  all  the  first  (Saturday)  niglit,
being  possessed  with  the  belief  that  someone  was  in  my  room  wliom  I  should
shortly  see.  I  heard  nothing,  and  I  saw  nothing.  The  next  morning,
Sunday,  I  did  not  go  to  church,  but  betook  myself  to  tlie  dining-room  with  a
book.  It  was,  I  remember,  a  perfectly  lovely  .June  morning.  Before  I  had
been  a  quarter  of  an  liour  in  the  room,  and  whilst  wholly  interested  in  the
book,  I  was  seized  with  a  dread,  of  what  I  did  not  know  ;  but  in  spite  of  the
sunshine  and  the  servants  moving  about  the  house,  I  found  it  more
intolerable  to  sit  there  than  it  had  been  to  remain  in  the  room  above  the  night
before,  and  so,  after  a  struggle,  and  feeling  not  a  little  ashamed,  I  left  the
room  and  went  to  tlie  garden.  Sunday  night  was  a  repetition  of  Saturday.
I  slept  not  at  all,  but  remained  in  what  I  can  only  describe  as  a  state  of
expectation  till  dawn,  and  very  thankfully  I  left  on  the  Monday  afternoon.
To  my  father  and  mother  I  said  nothing  of  my  two  bad  nights.  The  nurse
and  cliildren  remained  behind  for  another  week.  I  noticed  that  the  nurse
looked  gloomy  when  I  left  her,  and  I  put  it  down  to  her  finding  the  countiy
dull,  after  London.  When  she  returned  she  told  me  that  she  hoped  she
would  never  have  to  go  to  stay  in  that  house  again,  for  she  had  not  been  able
to  sleep  there  during  the  fortnight,  being  each  night  the  prey  of  fears,  for  which
she  could  not  account  in  any  way.  My  father  left  this  rectory  at  the  end  of
the  summer  ;  and  some  time  afterwards  he  was  talking  of  the  place  to  me,
and  menti(med  laughingly  that  before  he  entered  it  the  rector  had  "  thought
it  right  to  let  him  know  that  that  end  of  the  house  in  which  I  and  my
children  were  put  up  was  said  to  be  haunted,  my  room  especially,  and  that
.several  of  his  visitors — his  sister  in  particular — had  been  much  troubled  by
this  room  being  apparently  entered,  and  steps  and  movements  heard  in  the
dead  of  night.  I  do  not  like  to  let  you  come  in,"  the  rector  added,  "  without
telling  you  this,  though  my  own  belief  in  it  is  small."  Within,  I  think,  a  year
or  18  months  at  most  of  my  father's  leaving,  the  house  had  to  undergo
considerable  repair,  and  amongst  others,  a  new  floor  had  to  be  laid  in  the
dining-room.  On  taking  up  the  old  boards  four  or  five  (I  forget  whicli)
skeletons  were  found  close  under  tlie  boarding  in  a  row,  and  also  close  to  the
hcartlistone. Some  of  the  skulls  of  these  skeletons  were  very  peculiar  in  form.


1889.]


More  than  a  Year  after  Death.


43-.


They  were  sent  up  to  London  for  examinatioii.  I  am  ashamed  to  say,  at  this
moment,  I  forget  what  was  the  exact  verdict  i^ronounced  on  them  by  the
experts.

The  Rev.  G.  M.  Capell,  writing  from  Passenhani  Rectory,  October,.
1889,  says  : "  I  found  seven  skeletons  in  my  dining-room  in  1874."

In  the  above  cases  there  is  no  account  of  the  continuance  of  the-
apparition  or  influence  after  the  removal  of  the  skeleton.  But  I
will  close  this  group  with  a  narrative  of  an  apparition  observed  in  a
room  from  which  a  skeleton  had  been  removed  (without  the  percipient's,
knowledge)  some  considerable  time  before  the  figure  was  seen.

X.— Sent  by  Mrs.  Bevan,  Plumpton  House,  Bury  St.  Edmund's.

The  following  account  was  written  at  my  request  by  Mdlle.  Julie
Marchand,  whom  I  have  known  for  22  years  as  governess  to  my  friends  the
Andrewes. At  the  time  of  which  she  speaks,  she  was  governess  to  the

De  G  's,  and  the  scene  of  the  story  was  a  house  in  a  street  in  Mannheim.

I  read  it  to  her  to  be  sure  that  I  clearly  understood  it  ;  and  is,  like  all  ghost
stories,  thoroughly  unsubstantial,  though  not  therefore  unreal.  It  was
written  on  the  23rd  February,  1878,  30  years,  at  least,  after  the  occurrence,
but  not  the  less  very  present  to  the  mind  of  the  writer.  S.  C.  B.

The  children's  names  were  "  Nette  "  (Antoinette)  and  Charlotte.

Mdlle.  Marchand  informs  me  (July,  1889)  that  she  has  had  no  other
hallucinations.  She  is  not  aware  how  long  the  skeleton  had  been  removed
before  the  figure  was  seen.

Avant  de  commencer  mon  recit,  il  faut  que  je  donne  tine  description  de-
ma  chambre,  qui  efcait  une  assez  grande  chambre,  presque  carree,  ayant  inie
tenture  tres  claire,  ainsi  que  tous  es  meubles,  qui  etaient  aussi  de  bois  clair.


I ma  I


I  toilettes  |


I  toilettes  |
enfans


toiletto


des


ID

O


c

c:

a


o


table


44


On  Recognised  Apparitions  occurring [July  8,


C'etiiit  pendant  le  Careme  de  184 — .  II  faut  que  je  mentionne  que  pres
de  mon  lit  j'avais  une  petite  table,  ou  je  posais  une  laiape,  comme  j 'avals
J'habltude  de  lire  tous  les  suirs  pour  une  lieure  et  plus,  lorsque  j'etais  couch^e.
Sur  la  table  au  milieu  de  la  chambre  il  y  avait  un  luniignon,  ce  qu'on  nomme  ici
German  night-lights,  mais  plus  grand  que  ceux  que  j  'ai  vus  ici.  II  etait  mis
dans  un  grand  verre  d'eau  claire,  de  sorte  qu'il  ne  donnait  aucunc  ombre.
II  n'y  avait  aucun  rideau  dans  la  chambre  excepte  des  rideaux  aux  fenetres,
■qui  reposaient  sur  la  fenetre  lorsqu'ils  etaieut  tires.

Un  soir  que  j'etais  couchee  et  los  deux  enfans  dormant  paisiblement,
j'eprouvai  un  sentiment  comme  celui  qu'on  eprouve  en  sentant  une  personne
pres  de  soi.  Je  levai  les  yeux,  et  je  vis  devant  moi,  je  puis  a  peine  dire  une
ombre  puisqu'une  ombre  vous  apparait  plate,  mais  c' etait  plutot  la  figure  d'uii
homme  que  je  vis  distinctemant  ;  seulement  je  ne  pouvais  distinguer  les
traits  d3  sa  figure,  qui  etaient  caclies  par  I'ombre  d'un  grand  chai^eau.  Chose
■extraordinaire  pour  moi,  je  n'eprouvai  aucune  frayeur.  Je  regardai  la  figure
longtemps,  m'imaginant  que  c'etaifc  une  illusion  de  ma  vue.  Je  me  remis  h,
lire  ;  apres  un  temps  je  regardai  de  nouveau  ;  la  figure  etait  to uj ours
immobile  et  a  la  meme  place.  A  la  fin  j'eteignis  la  lumiere,  je  tournai  le  dos
a  cotte  figure, et  je  m'endormis,  pensant  que  ce  n'etait  qu'imagination.

La  meme  chose  arriva  pendant  plusieurs  jours  de  suite.  Craignant  qu'on
ne  se  moquat  de  moi,  je  ne  mentionnai  la  chose  h.  personne.  Les  enfans  etanfc
-encore  tros  jeunes,  de  9  et  10  ans,  elles  avaient  leur  souper  a  7  heures  ;  moi,
je  desceudais  a  9  heures  pour  souper  avec  le  Baron  et  la  Baronne  ;  a  10  heures
je  montais  ordinairement  pour  ma  coucher.  Pendant  ce  temps  le  lumignon
restait  sur  la  table,  comme  il  etait  toujours  allume  lorsque  les  enfans  etaient
au  lit  ;  puis  la  chambre  d'etude  restait  eclairee  pendant  que  j'etais  en  bas.
II  faut  que  je  disc  que  I'ainee  des  enfans  ^tait  tres  craintive.

Un  soir  que  je  montais  apres  souper  j'entendis  des  cris  d'angoisse  terrible
■dans  la  chambre  a  coucher.  J'y  courus,  et  vis  mon  eleve  hors  de  son  lit,
cherchant  a  arracher  hors  de  son  lit  =!a  sceur,  qui  dormait  profonddment,
la  suppliant  de  se  reveiller,  lui  disant,  "Chere  C,  0  r(5veille-toi. "
lorsque  I'enfant  me  vit  elle  courut  se  coucher.  Je  lui  dis  simplement,
"J'espere  que  tu  ne  feras  plus  un  tol  tapage."  Le  lendemain  I'enfant
paraissait  si  miserable  qu'elle  m'inquieta  un  peu.  Je  lui  demandai  si
■elle  (5tait  malade  ou  non  ;  elle  me  repondit,  "  Non,  je  suis  bien."
L'idee  me  vint  de  la  questionner  surle  sujetdesa  frayeur  dehier  au  soir,  car
j'etais  sure  que  son  etat  d'etre  provenait  de  sa  frayeur  de  hier  au  soir.  Jela
pris  dans  une  chambre  seule  pour  la  questionner.  Pendant  longtemps  je  ne
pus  rion  lui  faire  avouer  ;  enfin,  apres  lui  avoir  promis  qu'elle  ne  serait  pas
grondee,  qu'elle  pourrait  me  dire  quelle  absurdite  elle  voudrait,  que  jo
•desirais  savoir  la  cause  de  sa  peur  afin  de  lui  parler  la-dessus,  enfin,  apres  bien
■des  hesitations  elle  me  dit,  "  Je  sais  que  ce  n'estpas  vrai,  mais  cela  cependant
m'eflraye."  Elle  me  dit  ;  "  Des  que  vous  desccndez  on  frappe  a  la  porte  de
la  chambre  d'etude,  et  au  pied  de  mon  lit  je  vois  un  homme."  Cela  me
f rappa.  Je  lui  dis,  ' '  Je  voudrais  bien  savoir  comment  ton  imagination
efi'rayee  te  le  represente."  Elle  me  dit,  "  Jesais  quece  n'estpas  vrai,"  mais
enfin  elle  me  dit  U  porte  un  long  manteau,  avec  un  long  col,  un  chapeau  avec
la  tete  basse,  avec  une  large  aile.  J'eus  presque  peur  que  I'enfant  ne  vit  mon
■etonnement,  car  c'etait  exactement  la  meme  figure  aue  -j'avais  vu  plus'eura


1889.]


More  than  a  Year  after  Death.


45


fois  auparavant  debout  devant  ma  commode,  entre  deux  lumiferes  et  pcut-etre
a  qiiatre  ou  cinq  pieds  de  moi.

Apres  bien  des  reflexions  je  me  decidai  a  mentionner  la  chose  au  Baron,
puisque  j'etais  sure  que  la  Baronne  ne  ferait  que  s'en  moquer.  Je  craignais
que  I'imagination  de  I'enfant,  frappee  ainsi,  a  tort  ou  a  raison,  pourrait  nuire
a  la  sante.  Le  Baron,  contre  mon  attente,  devint  si  serieux  que  jetais
etonnee.  II  me  dit,  •'  Je  viendrai  ce  soir  dans  la  chambre  d'etude  et  nous
parlerons  de  choses  indifierentes, "  car  je  savais  que  N.  ne  dormirait  pas.
jusqu'a  ce  que  je  fusse  au  lit.  Nous  attendimes  jusqu'a  prfes  11  heures  ;  nous,
n'entendimes  qu'un  bruit  qui  pouvait  etre  occasionne  par  des  souris,  mai.5
apres  un  certain  temps  nous  ontendimes  mon  nom,  aussi  distinctement  quo
possible,  provenant  d'un  coin  de  la  chambre.  J'allai  dans  la  chambre  a
coucher  ;  je  demandai  a  N.  si  elle  m'avait  appele.  Elle  etait  tout  a  fait
reveilles  et  elle  me  dit  non.  Le  Baron  me  dit,  "  Demain  les  enfans
quitteront  ce  palier."  On  nous  donna  deux  chambres  au  plain-pied.  Quand
nous  eumes  qviitte  nos  chambres,  le  Baron  me  dit,  "  En  faisant  les  armoires
dans  la  salle  d' etude  on  a  trouve  une  squelette  dans  le  mur. "  Jenel'avais
jamais  su  auparavant.  J 'avals  habite  ces  chambres  pendant  des  annees  sans
jamais  avoir  rien  vu  ni  entendu,  excepte  cette  annee.  Plus  tard  ces  memes
appartements  furent  habites  par  les  deux  neveux  orphelins,  avec  leur
gouverneur.  lis  ne  virent  jamais  rien.  Plus  tard  je  suis  allee  tres  souvent
dans  ces  appartements  sans  rien  voir.

Quoique  je  puisse  dire  avec  verite  que  j'ai  regarde  cette  figure  maintes-
fois,  mefrottant  les  yeux,  et  que  je  n'ai  jamais  vu  la  figure  disparaitre,  et  que
je  me  suis  endormie,  la  laissant  a  la  meme  place,  je  n'ai  jamais  eu  peur,  ce
qui  me  fait  croire  que  je  n'ai  jamais  pense  que  la  chose  etait  reelle.

We  have  now  discussed  most  of  the  recent  cases  where  a  definite
motive — reasonable  or  unreasonable — can  be  plausibly  suggested  for  the
behaviour  of  a  post-mortem  phantasm.  Such  motived  cases  foi'm  a  small
proportion  only  of  the  narratives  of  ghostly  appearances.  On  the  "S'iew
here  advanced,  this  was  likely  to  be  tlie  case  ;  the  great  majority  of
such  manifestations  were  likely  to  have  no  distinct  meaning  or  purpose.
In  popular  tradition,  on  the  other  hand,  the  meaning,  the  object,  of  a
ghost's  appearance  is  apt  to  make  the  principal  point  of  the  story.
Accordingly  we  find  that  when  ghosts  have  no  motive  it  has  been
thought  necessary  to  invent  one  ;  and  houses  where  haunting  figures,
occur  have  been  lavishly  decorated  with  ancient  tragedies — murders  and
suicides  of  the  most  shadowy  type — in  order  to  justify  the  phantasmal
visits.

All  these  dim  unhistorical  stories  we  must  set  aside.  We  must
realise  the  fact  that  haunting  figures  usually  occur  witliout  any  such
sensational  background.  And  we  must  simply  consider  the  few
indications  as  to  their  true  nature  which  the  actual  evidence  ofiers.

In  the  first  place,  and  having  regard  to  t'le  popular  division  of
liauntings  into  local  and  personal  cases, — haunted  houses  and  haunted
men, — we  observe  that  the  evidence  for  haunted  me7i  is  of  a  very  weak


46


On  Recognised  Aj)parit%ons  occurring [July  8,


order.  That  is  to  say,  in  few  of  the  cases  where  a  man  is  troubled  with
the  same  phantom,  recurring  again  and  again  in  different  places,  is
there  reason  to  class  the  apparition  as  more  than  a  mere  subjective
hallucination.  We  do  not  find  modern  parallels  to  confirm  the
■often-cited  story  of  Mdlle.  Claizon,  who  was  haunted  nightly  by
the  sound  of  a  pistol  shot  (connected  with  the  dying  threat  of  a
slighted  lover),  which  sound  is  said  to  have  been  heard  equally
by  other  persons  present  at  the  time.  The  drift  of  the  evidence,  I
repeat,  makes  not  for  haunted  men  but  for  haunted  places.  It  tends
to  show  that  figures  resembling  deceased  persons  ai-e  sometimes  seen
in  the  former  habitat  of  those  persons,  under  circumstances  which
make  tlieir  explanation  as  after-images  or  as  chance-resemblances  im-
probable. It  is  plain,  however,  that  these  figures  can  seldom  occur
under  good  evidential  conditions.  If  I  see  the  figure  of  my  dead  friend
in  the  room  in  which  he  lived,  you  may  say  that  this  was  a  mere  after-
image ;  a  vivid  recollection  of  how  my  friend  used  to  look.  If  you,
who  never  knew  my  friend,  see  a  phantom  in  the  same  house,  you  do
noi  realise  whom  the  phantom  represents.  To  make  evidence,  our  two
-visions  must  be  juxtaposed  ;  and  your  description  of  the  figure  must
be  identified  with  the  known  figure  which  I  saw.  This  uiay  be  done,
and  has  been  done,  more  or  less  perfectly,  in  a  variety  of  ways.  Or,  of
■course,  a  mere  single  vision  of  an  unrecognised  figui'e  may  be  in  itself
strongly  evidential,  if  only  the  percipient  can  identify  the  personage,
with  proper  precautions,  from  picture  or  photograph.

But  there  is  no  part  of  our  inquiry  where  more  care  as  to  evidential
■conditions  is  needed,  or  where  less  care  has  actually  been  used.  In
our  former  discussions  on  apparitions  coincident  with  a  death,  we  found
that  even  the  strongest  personal  interest  in  the  vision  was  often  in-
sufficient to  induce  the  percipient  to  record  it  properly,  or  to  collect  the
most  necessary  corroborations.  And  in  these  cases  of  so-called  "  haunt-
ing "  the  meaning  of  the  apparition  is  still  less  the  personal  concern  of
any  given  percipient.  Posterity — let  us  hope — will  smile  at  the  tone
of  many  of  the  accounts  which  people  give  of  such  experiences, — their
sense  of  personal  injury  at  the  idea  that  such  a  thing  should  happen  to
them, — their  unabashed  avowal  of  having  Ijeen  terribly  frightened  at  a
poor  phantom  which  could  not  hurt  a  fly.  While  there  is  so  much
diffused  timidity  in  regard  to  the  so-called  "supernatural,"  the  owners
of  house-property  naturally  take  the  fact  into  account,  and  conceal
well-attested  ghosts  as  carefully  as  defective  cesspools.  The  result  is
that  we  have  a  great  number  of  incomplete  narratives, — narratives
which  do  not  indeed  break  down,  but  which  stop  short ; — the  experience
of  one  percipient  being  given  first-hand  and  in  detail,  but  other  cor-
roborative experiences  being  promised,  perhaps,  and  then  withdrawn,  or
_given  with  restrictions  which  render  them  useless  as  evidence. In  this


1SS9.]  More  than  a  Year  after  Death,  'i  47


•department  we  have  repeatedly  had  reason  to  believe  that  unwilling
informants  have  minimised  or  even  denied  their  own  experiences,  from
the  quite  groundless  fear  that  we  might  so  use  their  narratives  as  to
■depreciate  the  letting  value  of  tlie  haunted  residence.  We  trust  that
with  a  truer  conception  of  the  facts  involved  these  repugnances  are
already  beginning  to  give  way  ;  but  they  have  thus  far  kept  most  of
our  evidence  for  hauntings  in  a  state  ill-suited  for  public  production.
There  are  various  cases  where  from  my  knowledge  of  the  infor-
mants,— and  (if  I  may  so  say)  of  the  won-informants, — -I  see  strong
reason  for  believing  that  something  supernormal  has  occurred.  But
there  are  few  cases  which  I  can  print  in  anytliing  like  a  complete  form.
The  publication  of  even  a  few  narratives,  however,  may  do  something
to  remove  vulgar  prejudice,  and  to  prompt  to  further  inquiry.

"  It  came  to  nothing  "  ;  "  What  was  the  meaning  of  it  ?  "  ;  "  It
seems  such  a  senseless  thing  for  a  departed  spirit  to  do  "  ; — such  are
the  usual  coinments  on  the  purposeless  class  of  manifestations  on  which
we  enter  now.  I  have  already  implied  that  this  very  pui'poselessness,
in  my  view,  ought  d  priori  to  have  been  expected,  and  forms  a  strong
argument  in  favour  of  the  oi-igination  of  these  phantoms  somewhere
outside  the  observer's  mind.  For  I  hold  that  now  for  the  first  time
-can  we  form  a  conception  of  ghostly  communications  which  shall  in
any  way  consist  or  cohere  with  moi'e  established  conceptions ;  which
can  be  pi'esented  as  in  any  way  a  development  of  facts  which  aie
already  experimentally  known.  Two  preliminary  conceptions  were
needed, — conceptions  in  one  sense  ancient  enough  ;  but  yet  the  first  of
which  has  only  in  this  generation  found  its  place  in  science,  while  the
second  is  as  yet  awaiting  its  brevet  of  orthodoxy.  The  first  conception
is  that  with  which  hypnotism  and  various  automatisms  have  familiarised
us, — the  conception  of  multiplex  personality,  of  the  potential  co-
existence of  many  states  and  many  memories  in  the  same  individual.
The  second  is  the  conception  of  telepathy  ;  of  the  action  of  mind  on
mind  apart  from  the  ordinary  organs  of  sense ;  and  especially  of  its
action  by  means  of  hallucinations ;  by  the  generation  of  veridical
phantasms  which  form  as  it  were  messages  from  men  still  in  the  flesh.
And  I  believe  that  these  two  conceptions  are  in  this  way  connected,
that  the  telepathic  message  generally  starts  from,  and  generally
impinges  upon,  a  suV>conscious  or  submerged  stratum  in  both  agent,
and  percipient.!  Wherever  there  is  hallucination, — whether  delusive
or  veridical, — I  hold  that  a  message  of  some  sort  is  forcing  its  way
upwards  from  one  stratum  of  personality  to  another, — a  message  which
may  be  merely  dreamlike  and  incoherent,  or  which  may  symbolise  a
fact  otherwise  unreachable  by  the  percipient  personality. And  the


1  See  Phantasms  of  the  Liviaa  Vol.  I.,  d.  231,


48  On  Recognised  Aj^paritions  occurring [July  8,


mechanism  seems  much  the  same  whether  the  message's  path  be
continued  within  one  individual  or  pass  between  two  ; — whether  A's
own  submerged  self  be  signalling  to  his  emergent  self,  or  B  be
telepathically  stimulating  the  hidden  fountains  of  perception  in  A.
If  anything  like  this  be  true,  it  seems  plainly  needful  that
all  that  we  know  of  abnormal  or  supernormal  communications
between  minds,  or  states  of  the  same  mind,  still  embodied  in  flesh,
should  be  searched  for  analogies  which  may  throw  light  on  this
strangest  mode  of  intercourse  Vjetween  embodied  and  disembodied
minds.  Our  steps  on  this  uncertain  ground  must  needs  be  short  and
wavering.  But  they  may  help  to  mai'k  the  right  direction  for  future
inquiry,  and  to  dispel  certain  vulgar  preconceptions  which  can  only
mislead.

A  communication  (if  such  a  thing  exists)  from  a  departed  person
to  a  person  still  on  earth  is  at  any  rate  a  communication  from  a  mind
in  one  state  of  existence  to  a  mind  in  a  very  diflerent  state  of  existence.
And  it  is,  moreover,  a  communication  from  one  mind  to  another  which
passes  through  some  channel  other  than  the  ordinary  channels  of  sense;
— since  on  one  side  of  the  gulf  no  material  sense-organs  exist.  It  will
apparently  be  an  extreme  instance  of  both  these  classes — of  communi-
cations between  state  and  state,'  and  of  telepathic  communications  ;
and  we  ought,  therefore,  to  approach  it  by  considering  the  less  advanced
cases  of  both  these  types.

On  Avliat  occasions  do  we  commonly  find  a  mind  conversing  with
another  mind  not  oh  the  same  plane  with  itself? — -with  a  mind
inhabiting  in  some  sense  a  different  world,  and  viewing  the  environ-
ment witli  a  difference  of  outlook  greater  than  the  mere  difference  of
character  of  the  two  personages  will  account  for  ?

The  first  instance  of  this  sort  which  will  occur  to  us  lies  ia
spontaneous  somnambulism, — or  colloquy  between  a  person  asleep  and
a  person  awake.  And  observe  here  how  slight  an  accident  allows  us
to  enter  into  converse  with  a  state  which  at  first  sight  seems  a  type  of
incommunicable  isolation.  "  Awake,  we  share  our  world,"  runs  the  old
saying,  "but  each  dreamer  inhabits  a  world  of  his  own."  Yet  the
dreamer,  apparently  so  self-enclosed,  may  be  gently  led,  or  will
spontaneously  enter,  into,  converse  with  waking  men.

The  somnambulist,— or  rather  the  somniloquist, — for  it  is  the  talking
rather  than  the  walking  which  is  the  gist  of  the  matter, — is  thus  our
first  natural  type  of  the  revenant.

1  Some  word  is  much  needed  to  express  commimications  between  one  state  and'
another— c.f/.,  between  the  somnambulic  and  the  waking  state,  or,  in  liypnotism,  the-
cataleptic  and  the  somnambulic,  &o.  The  word  "methectic"  (ficOfKriKos)  seems  to  me
the  most  suitable  ;— especially  since  fJ-ede^is  happens  to  be  the  word  used  by  Plato-
(Parm.  132  D.)  for  participation  between  ideas  and  concrete  objects.  Or  the  word.
"  inter-statc  "  might  be  pressed  into  this  new  duty.  '


1889.]


More  than  a  Tear  after  Death.


49


And  obsei'vinsf  the  habits  of  somnambulists  we  note  tftat  the  decree
in  which  they  can  communicate  with  other  minds  varies  greatly  in
different  cases.  One  sleep-waker  will  go  about  his  customary  avocations,
witliout  recognising  the  presence  of  any  other  person  whatever.
Another  will  recognise  certain  persons  only  ;  or  will  answer  when
addressed,  but  only  on  certain  subjects  ; — his  mind  coming  into  contact
with  other  minds  only  on  a  very  few  points.  Rarely  or  never  will  a
somnambulist  spontaneously  notice  what  other  persons  are  doing,  and
adapt  his  own  actions  thereto.

Next  let  us  turn  from  natural  to  induced  sleep-waking  ; — from
idiopathic  somnambulism  to  the  hypnotic  ti-ance. — Here  too,  throughout
the  different  stages  of  the  trance,  we  find  a  varying  and  partial  (or
elective)  power  of  communication. — Sometimes  the  entranced  subject
makes  no  sign  whatever.  Sometimes  he  seems  able  to  hear  and  answer
one  person,  or  certain  persons,  and  not  others. — Sometimes  he  will  talk
freely  to  all ;  but  however  freely  he  may  talk,  he  is  not  exactly  his
waking  self.— And  as  a  rule  he  has  no  recollection,  or  a  very  impei'fect
recollection,  in  waking  life  of  what  he  has  said  or  done  in  his  trance.

Judging,  then,  from  such  analogy  as  communications  from  one
living  state  to  another  can  suggest  to  us,  we  shall  expect  that  the
communication  of  a  disembodied  or  discarnate  person  witli  an  incarnate,
if  such  exist,  will  be  subject  to  narrow  limitations,  and  very  possibly
will  not  form  a  part  of  the  main  current  of  the  supposed  discarnate
consciousness.

Looking  back  upon  some  of  the  cases  above  given,  we  shall  recognise
that  this  description  is  at  any  rate  consistent  with  their  details,  so  far
as  it  goes.  The  pliantasmal  figure  has  rarely  seemed  to  meet  the  living
percipient  with  any  direct  attention,  but  I'ather  to  be  working  out  some
fore-ordained  suggestion  with  little  reference  to  any  other  mind.

And  now  to  take  the  other  aspect  of  the  analogy  which  presented
itself.  Let  us  consider  the  characteristics  of  telepathic  communication;
since  the  intercourse  of  the  discai'nate  with  the  incarnate, — however
different  it  may  be  from  thought-transference  among  living  persons, —
must,  at  least,  be  less  different  from  thought-transference  than  from
ordinary  speech  or  gesture.

Beginning,  then,  with  small  experimental  cases  of  thought-trans-
ference, we  observe  that  the  agent  who  projects  a  mental  picture  is
not  commoiily  aware  whether  he  has  succeeded  in  transfering  it  or  no ;
and  we  also  observe  that  it  is  often  imperfectly  transferred,  or
incorrectly  realised  by  the  percipient.  Analogically,  we  may  suppose
that  the  discarnate  intelligence  may  project  a  picture  into  some  living
mind  without  being  aware  that  he  has  done  so  ;  and  moreover,  that
this  picture,  as  realised  by  the  living  person,  ma^'  differ  considerably
from  the  picture  existing  in  the  discarnate  mind. Our  next  step  is

S


50


On  Recognised  Apparitions  occurrhir]


[July  8,


still  more  important.  For  we  come  to  cases  where  the  image  projected
before  the  percipient's  consciousness  is  not  tliat  of  a  mere  diagram,  or
number,  or  material  object  of  any  kind,  but  is  an  image  of  the
"agent  "  himself.  Readers  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living  will  remember
that  in  these  cases  the  agent  is  not  usually  aware  of  having  produced
this  effect  on  the  percipient.  There  ai'e,  indeed,  some  instances  where
he  himself  has  some  kind  of  corresponding  impression, — as  of  seeing
the  percipient  at  the  moment  when  the  percipient  sees  him, — and  to
these  we  have  given  the  name  of  recijn-ocal  cases.  And  in  many  cases
it  is  impossible  to  say  whether  this  reciprocity  existed  or  no,  since  the
agent  dies  almost  at  the  moment  of  the  apparition.  Still,  these  cases
as  a  whole  confirm  the  view  already  suggested,  that  the  agent  in
apparitions  is  not  necessarily  conscious  of  the  effect  which  he  is  in
some  way  producing.  And,  finally,  there  is  a  small  but  very  instructive
group  of  cases  where  the  agent  has  voluntarily  induced  an  apparition
of  himself  to  a  distant  percipient,  as  a  matter  of  experiment ; — acting
thus  as  nearly  as  possible  in  the  way  in  which  we  may  imagine  a
departed  friend  to  act,  if  he  desires  to  make  an  impression  of  his
presence  upon  a  friend  who  survives.  What,  then,  is  the  behaviour  of
the  apparition  thus  produced  1  How  far  does  it  indicate  intelligence  or
initiative  1  How  far  does  its  action  form  a  part  of  the  normal  train  of
consciousness — or  enter  into  the  nonnal  train  of  memory — of  the  agent
froi.x  whom  it  in  some  way  emanates?  Let  us  consider  the  principal
cas(i.^  of  this  kind  recorded  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living.

Case  13,  Vol.  I.,  p.  103. — Figure  speaks — uncertain  with  what
a'rount  of  intelligence.  Agent  (asleep  at  the  time)  is  not  conscious  of
having  succeeded  in  appearing.

Cases  14,  15,  16,  Vol.  I.,  p.  104-109.— Mr.  S.  H.  B.'s  figure  is  seen,
jn  four  occasions,  as  willed  by  him.  On  three  of  the  occasions  he  is
asleep,  o.n  the  fourtli  in  a  state  of  self-induced  trance-like  concentration.
— In  no  case  does  he  know  afterwards  whether  he  has  succeeded  or
not. — On  one  occasion  the  figure  performs  a  trifling  act  which  Mr.
S.  H.  B.,  had  willed  that  it  should  perform.  On  another  occasion  it
performs  a  similar  action  without  any  previous  intention  on  Mr.  S.  H,
B.'s  part.

Case  685,  Vol.  II.,  p.  671. — Mr.  Cleave  is  hypnotised  ;  sees  a
room  at  a  distance ;  is  twice  seen  in  that  room. — In  this  case  the  agent
remembers  his  own  apparent  presence  in  the  distant  room. — The
figure  merely  stands  in  the  room  ;  does  not  act.

Case  686,  Vol.  II.,  p.  675.—  Mrs.  Russell,  in  waking  state,  desires
intensely  to  become  manifest  to  her  family  at  a  distance  (Scotland
to  Germany).  She  is  seen  ;  has  no  knowledge  of  liaving  been  thus  seen.

Case  given.  Vol.  I.,  p.  Ixxxi. — Mr.  Godfrey  three  times  wills  to  be
derceived  by  a  certain  person. Twice  his  figure  is  perceived, — on  the


1889.]


More  than  a  Year  after  Death.


51


third  occasion  he  fails.— After  each  success  he  had  a  vague  knowledge
that  he  had  succeeded. — On  one  occasion  the  figure  seems  to  speak
but  only  a  word.

Case  given  in  Journal. — Baron  v.  Notzing,  in  wali'ng  conditioivs,
desires  to  impress  Iiimself  upon  a  person  out  of  sight.  He  succeeds  ;
has  no  knowledtre  that  he  has  succeeded.

It  will  be  seen  that  these  cases  which,  as  we  have  said,  ouglib
theoretically  to  form  the  closest  parallel  to  post^moitem  apparitions,
do  in  effect  actually  present  us  incidents  strongly  resembling  the
behaviour  of  those  posthumous  phantoms.

To  put  the  matter  in  a  crude  way  ;  the  behaviour  of  phantasms  of
the  living  suggests  dreams  dreamt  by  the  living  persons  whose  phantoms
appear.  And  similarly  the  beh.aviour  of  j^hantasms  of  the  dead  suggests
dreams  dreamt  by  the  deceased  persons  whose  phantasms  appear.  The
actions  of  these  phantasms  may  therefore  be  expected  to  be  vague  and
meaningless,  or  at  any  rate  to  offer  little  response  or  adaptation  to  tlie
actions  of  the  persons  who  observe  them.  For  they  will  presumably
be  conditioned  either  by  some  definite  previous  self-suggestion,  (as  in
S.  H.  B.'s  case,  above  cited),  or  by  some  automtitic  recurrence  to  a
familiar  train  of  associations.

And  under  the  heading  of  "  automatic  recurrence "  we  ought
probably  to  place  the  appearances  which  seem  to  depend  on  localitij
alone.  Whatever  position  the  departed  may  hold  towards  space, —
whether  they  inhabit  our  space,  or  some  other  form  of  space,  or  are
extra-spatial  entities, — we  must  suppose  that  their  memory  deals  with
the  space-relations  of  the  past.  And  if  there  be  a  memory  of  space,
this  is  in  itself  a  relation  to  space.  If  the  decedent  recollects  scenes
which  he  has  known,  then  we  may  conceive  that  this  recollection  of  his
may  become  somehow  perceptible  to  other  minds.

The  notion  that  unembodied  intelligences  can  have  any  relation  to
space  may  appear  to  some  minds  as  unphilosophical.  It  seems  to  lead
■on  to  those  primitive  forms  of  materialism  ;  those  savage  conceptions  of
the  spirits  of  the  dead,  which  modern  Spiritualism  undoubtedly  i-epro-
■duces  under  a  new  colour,  but  which  philosophy  has  learnt  to  disdain.
We  can,  however,  form  no  real  conception  of  a  disembodied  existence  ;
and  it  is  better  not  to  assume  as  a  matter  of  course  either  any
resemblances  or  any  differences  from  our  own  condition  beyond  what
the  actual  evidence  points  to.  And  at  any  rate  this  conception  of
a  dead  man^s  dream, — of  a  probably  unconscious  gravitation  of  some
fraction  of  his  disembodied  entity  towards  liis  old  associations  ; — a
flowing  of  some  backwater  of  his  being's  curi'ent  into  cliannels  familiar
long  ago ; — will  serve  to  supply  a  fairly  coherent  conception  of  the
meaning  of  those  vague  Itauntings  into  which,  as  we  haA^e  seen,  our
narratives  of  recognised  post-mortem  npparitions  imperceptibly  glide.

E  2


On  Recognised  Ai^ixirUions  occurring [J^ly  8,


The  strong  and  weak  points  of  the  evidence  for  recognised  appari-
tions and  for  vague  hauntings  are  in  some  sense  complementary  to
each  other.  Recognised  apparitions  have  an  obvious  meaning,  but
weak  attestation  ;  vague  hauntings  have  strong  attestation,  but  are
hard  to  interpret.  If  recognised  apparitions  of  the  dead,  inider
circumstances  precluding  the  possibility  of  mere  subjective  hallucina-
tion, occurred  so  frequently  that  chance-coincidence  were  excluded,  we
should  have  a  right  to  assume  that  the  so-called  dead  were  still  in  some
way  influencing  the  living.  But,  as  we  have  seen,  the  evidence  to  suck
appearances  is  as  yet  so  scanty  that  although  personally  I  incline  to
accept  it,  I  cannot  present  it  to  others  as  at  present  conclusive.  On
the  other  hand,  the  evidence  that  in  certain  houses  several  persons
have  had  hallucinations,  independently  of  eacli  other,  and  beyond  the
limits  of  chance-coincidence,  is,  I  think  (as  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper  in
Vol.  III.  showed),  exceedingly  strong.  The  question  remains  as  to
what  the  meaning  may  be  of  these  localised,  recurrent  hallucinations;
' — whether  they  indeed  bear  any  relation  to  departed  men.  And  the-
grotesqueness  of  these  haunting  phenomena, — their  unlikeness  to  any
effect  which  a  reasonable  decedent  might  be  expected  to  wish  to
pi'oduce, — has  been  a  sti'ong  argument  against  ascribing  them  to  the
agency  of  a  departed  spirit.

But  these  incongruities  seem  less  puzzling  if  we  regard  these
haunting  sights  and  sounds  as  the  fragmentary  I'eflection  of  some  dead
man's  ineradicable  dream.  On  that  view  we  need  not  look  for  reason
in  what  is  unreasonable,  for  purpose  from  what  is  purposeless.  Eor
though  in  the  last  resort  it  would  be  an  intelligence  like  our  own  from
whicli  these  phenomena  would  spring,  yet  that  intelligence  would  be
one  with  which  we  could  enter  into  no  real  community.  We  should  be
observing  and  analysing, — not  messages  from  those  who  love,  nor
revelations  from  those  who  know,— but  the  incoherent  nightmare,  the
incognisable  reverie,  of  the  innumerable  uni'emembered  dead.

These  reflections  apply  to  a  great  number  of  narratives  of  haunting
which,  as  above  explained,  are  in  themselves  almost  necessarily  tedious
and  inconclusive.  I  will  give  one  or  two  only  at  length  ;  but  will  first
briefly  indicate  the  character  of  some  of  the  rest.

We  have,  for  example,  a  case  ("  tlie  Gillingliam  ghost ")  where
three  persons  separately  see  the  figure  of  an  old  woman  in  a  house
where  an  old  woman,  reputed  of  similar  aspect,  used  to  reside.  We
have  a  case  where  a  young  man  reading  with  a  tutor  (at  Waterperry,
near  Oxford)  sees  a  phantom  of  a  farmer  of  very  upright  cariiage  on  a
bridge  where,  (unknown  to  the  percipient,)  a  farmer,  formerly  a
soldier,  had  been  found  dead  some  years  before.  We  have  a  case
where  a  lady  sees  the  figure  of  a  young  girl  run  across  a  room  (at
Combermere  Abbey),  which  room  had  previously  been  the  nursery


18S9.J


MoTe  than  a  Year  after  Death.


in  which  (as  family  tradition,  unknown  to  the  percipient,  went)  a
16-year-old  daughter  of  the  house  had  been  found  one  morning  dead
in  her  bed.  We  have  a  case  where  three  persons  independently  saw
the  phantom  figure  of  a  young  woman  (at  B.  Court).  One  of  these
percipients,  at  least  (probably  all  of  them),  remarked  (in  1881)  that  the
head  of  the  figure  was  not  visible.  In  1883  a  skull  was  discovered
beneath  the  foundations  of  the  room  into  which  this  figure  disappeared.
We  have  several  cases  of  an  isolated  hallucination  seen  in  a  room
which  had  previously  been  frequented  by  a  person  resembling  the
figure  seen,— this  fact  being  unknown  to  the  percipient.  Thus  Mr.
A.  W.  Plall,  of  St.  Thomas's  House,  Oxford,  tells  us  how  he  saw  a
venerable  old  man  "sitting  writing  at  the  table  in  the  centre  of  the
room  in  which  I  was,"  the  room  being  one  in  which  there  had,  in  fact,
been  previous  rumours  (unknown  to  Mr.  Hall)  of  the  appearance  of
Lord  Hood,  Mr.  Hall's  great-grandfather,  whom  he  had  never  seen.
And  through  the  kindness  of  the  Bishop  of  Ripon  we  have  procured
the  following  narrative  from  Mrs.  Pittar  (a  near  connection  of  the
Bishop's),  whose  verbal  account  was  given  to  us  in  nearly  the  same
words.  I  print  the  case  ; — not  as  possessing  high  evidential  value,  for
the  identification  of  the  figure  is  plainly  conjectural ;  but  in  the  hope
that  some  reader  may  be  able  to  get  further  information  as  to  the
Chateau  de  Prangins, — an  easily  accessible  place.

XI. — In  the  year  1867  I  was  travelling  in  Switzerland  with  my  husband,
and  we  stopped  at  the  Chateau  de  Pnuigius,  near  Nyon,  which  is  now  a
collegiate  school  for  boys.  ■  .  •

Our  bedroom  was  a  large,  oblong  room,  overlooking  the  Terrace  and  Lake
Leman,  v/ith  an  old-fashioned  black  writing-table  in  the  middle  of  it.  There
was  nothing  unusual  about  the  room  or  the  circumstances,  and  I  went  to  bed
and  slept  soundly.  But  in  the  middle  of  the  night  I  suddenly  awoke  in  a
state  of  terror,  not,  apparently,  from  a  dream,  for  I  had  no  impression  of
having  been  dreaming,  but  with  a  sort  of  certainty  that  a  tall,  thin,  old  man,  in
a  long  flowered  dressing-gown,  was  seated  and  writing  at  the  table  in  the
middle  of  the  room.  I  caimot  say  what  gave  me  this  certainty,  or  this
distinct  picture^  for  I  did  not  once  turn  my  eyes  to  the  place  where  I  felt  that
the  intruder  was  seated.  It  did  not,  in  fact,  occur  to  me  at  the  time  how  odd
it  y/as  that  I  thus  knew  of  his  appearance  without  seeing  him.  The  room  was
flooded  with  brilliant  moonlight  ;  but  I  did  not  ventiu-e  to  turn  my  head.
My  cries  awoke  my  husband,  who  naturally  thought  that  I  had  had  a  night-
mare, and  coidd  not  understand  my  persistent  assertion  that  an  old  man  in  a
flovfered  dressing-gov/n  was  in  the  room.  At  last  he  persuaded  me  to  look  at
the  table  where  I  had  felt  that  the  old  man  was  sitting  ;  and  there  was  no
one  there.

Next  morning  my  husband  mentioned  my  extraordinary  nocturnal  terror  ;
the  account,  to  our  great  surprise,  was  received  as  a  matter  of  course,  the
landlord's  married  daughter  merely  remarking,  "  Ah,  you  have  seen
Voltaire. " It  appeared  on  inquiry  that  Voltaire,  in  ex  treme  old  age,  used


On  Recognised  Appaviilons  occurring


[July  8,


often  to  visit  this  Chateau,  then  the  property,  I  believe,  of  Lucien  Bonaparte,
and  the  room  in  which  we  slept  was  known  to  have  been  his  sitting-room.  Of
tliis  neither  my  husband  nor  myself  knew  anything.  I  had  not  been  thinking
about  Voltaire,  nor  looking  at  any  portrait  of  him,  nor  did  it  once  occur  to-
me  that  the  figure  could  be  his  until  I  heard  that  morning  from  the  landlord
tliat  tlie  same  figure  was  reported  to  have  been  seen  in  the  same  room,  and
that  it  was  supposed  to  be  Voltaire's.

■ I  have  never  had  any  other  hallucination  of  any  kind,  ■•  ■■

1885.  Emily  Pittae.

How  long  after  death — we  may  ask,  apropos  of  this  story  of
Voltaire — 1.3  there  any  evidence  for  the  continued  action  of  the
departed  ?

There  are  a  good  many  accounts  of  appearances  jwinvl  facie
representing  persons  dead  for  50  or  100  years.  But  obviously  tlie
cases  where  identification  of  so  remote  a  figui'e  is  possible  are  likely  to
be  also  cases  where  there  may  have  been  some  kind  of  anticipation  on.
the  percipient's  part ; — some  association  of  a  famous  personage  (the
Empress  Catherine  of  Russia,  etc.),  with  rooms  which  that  personage  is-
known  to  have  inhabited.

We  have  a  few  cases  where  an  unrecognised  figure  in  old-fashioned
costume  has  been  seen  by  more  than  one  person,  simultaneously  or
successively.  Thus  a  phantom  in  cavalier's  garb  was  seen  in  cb.ylight
by  two  percipients  together  in  an  avenue  at  Twickenham.  The
evidential  value  of  such  cases  will  depend  on  the  view  wliich  we
ultimately  adopt  as  to  whether  collective  hallucinations  are  ever  wholly
delusive,  or  imply  some  sort  of  reality  outside  the  percipients'  minds.

There  is  a  case  investigated  by  Dale  Owen  [Footfalls,  p.  304)
which,  unless  it  be  an  elaborate  and  purposeless  hoax,  stands  almost
alone  in  tlie  defmiteness  of  date  and  communication.  This  was  given
to  Mr.  Owen  by  the  two  principal  percipients, — the  "  wife  of  a  field-
oificer  of  high  rank  in  the  British  army  "  and  a  young  lady,  her  friend
and  visitor.  It  was  also  independently  confirmed  by  a  Mrs.  O.,  who
liad  been  a  servant  in  the  house  at  the  time  of  the  occurrences.  The
story  seems  too  complex  to  admit  of  being  explained  away  by  anything
short  of  an  elaborate  hoax  played  on  Mr.  Owen;  and  it  seems
improbable  that  these  ladies  should  have  contrived  sucli  a  deceit,  or
should  have  induced  the  former  nurse  to  take  part  in  it,  or  sliould  have
allowed  the  story,  if  false,  to  be  printed  and  reprinted  witiiout
comment.  Mr.  Owen,  it  must  be  remembered,  was  a  man  of  the  world
and  a  diplomatist ; — in  no  way  an  absurd  personage,  but  liked  and
esteemed  in  good  society  in  several  countries.  We  have  endeavoured
ill  vain  to  trace  the  percipients  ;  and  even  the  house  (now,  as  Owen
says,  a  farmhouse)  could  not  be  positively  identified  by  an  inquiry
■which  we  caused  to  be  made  on  the  spot.. ....  .... _  ,. ,.


18SD.]


More  than  a  Year  after  Death.


m


The  gist  of  the  story  is  that,  after  many  noises  heard  at  Ramhurst
Manor  by  vaiious  jjersons,  three  figures  appeared  to  Miss  S.,  and  one  of
them  also  to  Mrs.  R.,  and  that  to  both  percipients  the  figures  gave  the
surname  of  Children,  adding  that  Richard  Children,  one  of  the  figures,
died  in  1753.  In  Hasted's  History  of  Kent  (published  1778)  the  facts
of  Richard  Children's  residence  at  Ramhurst  Manor,  of  his  having  a
wife  and  son,  and  of  his  death  in  1753,  were  verified.

To  this  class  of  cases  belongs  the  remarkable  nari'ative  which  forms
the  gist  of  Mr.  Hugh  Hastings  Romilly's  True  Story  of  the  Wentern
Pacific  (Longmans,  1882).  Mr.  Romilly  has  since  been  Deputy-
Commissioner  of  the  Western  Pacific.  On  his  book  Mr.  Gurney  has
the  following  note  : — ■

Tins  book  gives  one  the  highest  opinion  of  its  writer's  strength  of
cliaracter,  as  well  as  of  his  modesty.  Mr.  Romilly's  mother.  Lady  Elizabeth
Romilly,  assures  me  that  the  story  is  rather  under-coloured  than  exaggerated,
and  that  it  is  a  most  literal  transcript  of  events,  which  Mr.  H.  H.  Romilly
wrote  out,  very  unwillingly,  at  his  father's  urgent  request. — E.  G.

I  give  an  abstract  of  the  incident,  which  is  at  any  rate  interesting
as  one  of  the  few  recorded  cas^s  of  really  close  scrutiny  into  the
grounds  of  a  savage  belief  by  a  cool  and  capable  observer.

XII. — In  the  earlier  part  of  his  naiTative,  Mr.  Romilly  has  described  the
murder  on  Christmas  Eve,  1879,  of  a  native  called  Kimueli,  in  the  island
of  Rotumah,  by  an  Australian  half-caste,  who  was  afterwards  convicted  of
the  crime.  Mr.  Romilly  had  seen  the  wounded  man  before  his  death.  "  A
piece  of  coarse  cloth  or  calico  was  over  the  top  of  the  head,  and  round  it,
to  keep  it  in  its  place,  were  strips  of  banana  leaves.  The  whole  was  secured
with  cotton  and  strips  of  fibre."  Next  year  at  the  same  season,  Mr.
Romilly,  with  a  friend  named  Allardyce,  was  inhabiting  a  house  in  Rotumah,
about  200  yards  from  the  house  of  a  friendly  influential  native  called  Alipati,
or  Albert,  who  used  usually  to  come  with  other  friends  and  smoke  witli
Mr.  Romilly  in  the  evening.

For  two  days  before  Christmas  Day  this  man  All^ert  did  not  appear  ;  and
Mr.  Romilly  learnt  that  he  was  afraid  to  walk  from  one  house  to  the  other
because  Kimueli's  ghost  had  been  repeatedly  seen.

Of  course  I  laughed  at  him.  It  was  an  every-day  occvu'rence  for  natives
who  had  been  out  late  at  night  in  the  bush  to  come  home  saying  they  had
seen  ghosts.  If  I  wished  to  send  a  message  after  sunset,  it  was  always  neces-
sary to  engage  three  or  four  men  to  take  it.  Nothing  would  have  induced  any
man  to  go  by  himself.  The  only  man  who  was  free  from  these  fears  was  my
interpreter,  Friday.  He  was  a  native,  but  had  lived  all  his  life  among  white
people.  When  Friday  came  down  from  liis  own  village  to  my  house  that
morning,  he  was  evidently  a  good  deal  troubled  in  his  mind. He  said  :

"  You  remember  that  man  Kimueli,  sir,  that  Tom  killed."

I  said,  "  Yes,  Albert  says  he  is  walking  about."

I  expected  Friday  to  laugh,  but  he  looked  very  serious  and  said  :

"  Every  one  in  Motusa  has  seen  him,  sir  ;  the  women  are  so  frightenecl
that  they  all  sleep  together  in  the  big  house."  • ■  ■  .


56


On  Recognised  A2^paritions  occurring [July  8,


"  What  does  he  do  1  "  said  I.  "  Where  has  he  been  to  ?  What  men
have  seen  him  1  "

Friday  mentioned  a  number  of  houses  into  which  Kimueli  had  gone.  It
appeared  that  his  head  was  tied  up  with  banana  leaves  and  his  face  covered
with  blood.  No  one  had  heard  him  speak.  This  was  unusual,  as  the  ghosts
I  had  heard  the  natives  talk  about  on  other  occasions  invariably  made
remarks  on  some  commonplace  subject.  The  village  was  very  much  upset.
For  two  nights  this  had  happened,  and  several  men  and  women  had  been
terribly  frightened.  It  was  evident  that  all  this  was  not  imagination  on  the
part  of  one  man.  I  thought  it  possible  that  some  madman  was  personating
Kimueli,  though  it  seemed  almost  impossible  that  any  one  could  do  so
^\'ithout  being  found  out.  I  announced  my  determination  to  sit  outside
Albert's  house  that  night  and  watch  for  him.  I  also  told  Albert  that  I  should
liring  a  rifle  and  have  a  shot,  if  I  saw  the  ghost.  This  I  said  for  the  benefit
of  any  one  who  might  be  playing  its  part.

Poor  Albert  had  to  undergo  a  good  deal  of  chaff  for  being  afraid  to  walk
200  yards  through  the  bush  to  my  house. He  only  said  :

"  By-and-bye  you  see  him  too,  then  me  laugh  at  you."

The  rest  of  the  day  was  spent  in  the  usual  maimer.  Allardyce  and  I  v/ere
to  have  dinner  in  Albert's  house  ;  after  that  we  were  going  to  sit  outside  and
watch  for  Kimueli.  All  the  natives  had  come  in  very  early  that  day  from  tlie
bush.  They  were  evidently  unwilling  to  run  the  risk  of  being  out  after  dark.
Evening  was  now  closing  in,  and  they  were  all  sitting  in  clusters  outside  their
houses.  It  was,  however,  a  bright  moonlight  night,  and  I  could  plainly
recognise  people  at  a  considerable  distance.  Albert  was  getting  very  nervous,
and  only  answered  my  questions  in  monosyllables.

For  about  two  hours  we  sat  there  smoking,  and  I  was  beginning  to  lose
faith  in  Albert's  ghost,  v^hen  all  of  a  sudden  he  clutched  my  elbow  and
pointed  with  his  finger.  I  looked  in  the  direction  pointed  out  by  him,  and  ho
whispered  "  Kimueli."

I  certainly  saw  about  100  yard?  off  what  appeared  to  be  the  ordinary
figure  of  a  native  advancing.  He  had  something  tied  round  his  head,  as  yet
I  could  not  see  what.  He  was  advancing  straight  towards  us.  We  sat  still
and  waited.  The  natives  sitting  in  front  of  their  doors  got  closer  together
and  pointed  at  the  advancing  figure.  All  this  time  I  was  watching  it  most
intently.  A  recollection  of  having  seen  that  figure  was  forcing  itself  upon  my
mind  more  strongly  every  moment,  and  suddenly  the  exact  scene,  when  I  had
gone  with  Gordon  to  visit  the  murdered  man,  came  back  on  my  mind  with
great  vividness.  There  v/as  the  same  man  in  front  of  me,  his  face  covered
v,-ith  blood,  and  a  dirty  cloth  over  his  head,  kept  in  its  place  by  banana-leaves
which  were  secured  with  fibre  and  cotton  thread.  There  was  the  same  man,
and  there  was  the  bandage  round  his  head,  leaf  for  leaf,  and  tie  for  tie,
identical  with  the  picture  already  present  in  my  mind.

"  By  Jove  it  is  Kimueli,"  I  said  to  Allardyce  in  a  whisper.  By  this  time
he  had  passed  us,  walking  straight  in  the  direction  of  the  clump  of  bush  in
which  my  house  was  situated.  We  jumped  up  and  gave  chase,  but  he  got  to
tlic  edge  of  the  bush  before  we  reached  him.  Though  only  a  few  yards  ahead
■)i  us,  and  a  bright  moonlight  night,  we  here  lost  all  trace  of  him.  He  had
iisappeared,  and  all  that  was  left  was  a  feeling  of  consternation  and


1889.]


More  than  a  Year  after  Death.


.51


nnnoyance  on  niy  mind.  We  had  to  accept  what  we  had  seen  ;  no  explana-
tion was  possible.  It  was  impossible  to  account  for  his  appearance  or
disappearance.  I  went  back  to  Albert's  house  in  a  most  perplexed  frame  of
mind.  The  fact  of  its  being  Christmas  Day,  the  anniversary  of  Tom's  attack
•on  Kimueli,  made  it  still  more  remarkable.

I  had  myself  only  seen  Kimueli  two  or  three  times  in  my  life,  but  still  1
remembered  him  perfectly,  and  the  man  or  ghost,  whichever  it  was  who  had
just  passed,  exactly  recalled  his  features.  I  had  remembered,  too,  in  a  general
way  how  Kimueli's  head  had  been  bandaged  with  rag  and  banana-leaves,  but
on  the  appearance  of  this  figure  it  came  back  to  me  exactly,  even  to  the
position  of  the  knots.  I  could  not  then,  and  do  not  now,  believe  it  was  in  the
power  of  any  native  to  play  the  part  so  exactly.  A  native  could  and  often
does  work  himself  up  into  a  state  of  temporary  madness,  under  the  influence
of  which  he  might  believe  him^self  to  be  any  one  he  chose  ;  but  the  calm,
<|uiet  manner  in  which  this  figure  had  passed  was,  I  believe,  entirely
impossible  for  a  native,  acting  such  a  part,  and  before  such  an  audience,  to
assume.  Moreover,  Albert  and  every  one  else  scouted  the  idea.  They  all
knew  Kimueli  intimately,  had  seen  him  every  day  and  could  not  be  mistaken.
Allardyce  had  never  seen  him  before,  but  can  bear  witness  to  what  he  saw
that  night.

I  went  back  to  my  house  and  tried  to  dismiss  the  matter  from  my  mind,
hnt  with  indifferent  success.  I  could  not  get  over  his  disappearance.  We
were  so  close  behind  him,  that  if  it  had  been  a  man  forcing  his  way  through
the  thick  undergrowth  we  must  have  heard  and  seen  him.  There  was  no
patli  where  he  had  disappeared.

[The  figure  was  never  seen  again.]

From  this  savage  scene  I  pass  to  a  similar  incident  wliich  occurred
to  a  gentleman  personally  known  to  nie,  (jind  widely  known  in  the
scientific  world),  in  a  tranquil  and  studious  environment.  The  initials
here  given  are  not  the  true  ones.

XIII. — On  October  12th,  1888,  Mr.  J.  gave  me  v'tvd  voce  the  following
account  of  liis  experience  in  the  X.  Library,  in  1884,  which  I  have  taken
dov.  n  from  memory  next  day,  and  which  he  has  revised  and  corrected  : —

"In  1880  I  succeeded  a  Mr.  Q.  as  librarian  of  the  X.  Library.  I  had
never  seen  Mr.  Q. ,  nor  any  photograph  or  likeness  of  him,  when  the  follow-
ing incidents  occurred.  I  may,  of  course,  have  heard  the  library  assistants
describe  his  appearance,  though  I  have  no  recollection  of  this.  I  was  sitting
alone  in  the  library  one  evening  late  in  March,  1884,  finishing  some  ^\'ork
after  hours,  when  it  suddenly  occurred  to  me  that  I  should  miss  the  last
train  to  H.,  where  I  was  then  living,  if  I  did  not  make  haste.  It  was
then  10.55,  and  the  last  train  left  X.  at  11.5.  .  I  gathered  up  some  books
in  one  hand,  took  the  lamp  in  the  other,  and  prepared  to  leave  the  librarian's
room,  which  communicated  by  a  passage  with  the  main  room  of  the  library.
As  my  lamp  illumined  this  passage,  I  saw  apparently  at  the  further  end  of
it  a  man's  face.  I  instantly  tliought  a  tliief  had  got  into  the  library.  This
was  by  no  means  impossible,  and  the  probability  of  it  had  occurred  to  me
l)efore.  I  turned  back  into  my  room,  put  down  the  books,  and  took  a
revolver  from  the  safe,  and,  holding  the  lanni  cautiously  behind  me.  I  made


58  On  Hecognised  Apparitions  occurring [July  8,


my  way  along  the  passage — which  had  a  corner,  behiiid  which  I  thought  my
thief  might  be  lying  in  wait — into  the  main  room.  Here  I  saw  no  one,  but
the  room  was  large  and  encumbered  with  bookcases.  I  called  out  loudly  to
the  intruder  to  show  himself  several  times,  more  with  the  hojie  of  attracting
a  passing  policeman  than  of  drawing  the  intruder.  Then  I  saw  a  face
looking  round  one  of  the  bookcases.  I  say  looking  round,  but  it  had  an  odd
ajjpearance  as  if  the  bochj  were  in  the  bookcase,  as  the  face  came  so  closely
to  the  edge  and  I  could  see  no  body.  The  face  was  pallid  and  hairless,  and
the  orbits  of  the  eyes  were  very  deep.  I  advanced  towards  it,  and  as  I  did
so  I  saw  an  old  man  with  high  shoulders  seem  to  rotate  out  of  the  end  of
the  bookcase,  and  with  his  back  towards  me  and  with  a  shuffling  gait  walk
rather  quickly  from  the  bookcase  to  the  door  of  a  small  lavatory,  which
opened  from  the  library  and  had  no  other  access.  I  heard  no  noise.  I
followed  the  man  at  once  into  the  lavatory  ;  and  to  my  extreme  surprise
found  no  one  there.  I  examined  the  window  (about  14in.  x  12in.),  and
found  it  closed  and  fastened.  I  opened  it  and  looked  out.  It  oj)ened  into
a  well,  the  bottom  of  which,  10  feet  below,  was  a  sky-light,  and  the  top  open
to  tlie  sky  some  20  feet  above.  It  was  in  the  middle  of  the  building  and  no
one  could  have  dropped  into  it  without  smashing  the  glass  nor  climbed  out
of  it  without  a  ladder — but  no  one  was  there.  Nor  had  there  been  any-
tliing  like  time  for  a  man  to  get  out  of  tlie  window,  as  I  followed  the
intruder  instantly.  Completely  mystified,  I  even  looked  into  the  little
cupboard  under  the  fixed  basin.  There  was  nowhere  hiding  for  a  child,  and
I  confess  I  began  to  experience  for  the  first  time  what  novelists  describe  as
an  '  eerie  '  feeling.

"  I  left  tlie  library,  and  found  I  had  missed  my  train.

"  Next  morning  I  mentioned  what  I  had  seen  to  a  local  clergyman,  who,
on  hearing  my  description,  said,  "Why  that's  old  Q.  !"  Soon  after  I  saw
a  photograph  (from  a  drawing)  of  Q.,  and  the  resemblance  was  certainly
striking.  Q.  had  lost  all  his  hair,  eyebrows  and  all,  from  (I  believe)  a
gunpowder  accident.  His  walk  was  a  peculiar,  rapid,  high-shouldered
shuffle.

"  Later  inquiry  proved  he  had  died  at  about  the  time  of  year  at  which  I
saw  tlie  figure.

"I  have  no  theory  as  to  this  occurrence,  and  have  never  given  sjDecial
attention  to  such  matters.  I  have  only  on  one  other  occasion  seen  a
phantasmal  figure.  When  I  was  a  boy  of  ten  I  was  going  in  to  early  dinner
with  my  brothers.  My  mother  was  not  at  home,  and  we  children  had  been
told  that  she  was  not  very  well,  but  though  we  missed  her  very  much  were
in  no  way  anxious  about  her.  Suddenly  I  saw  her  on  the  staircase.  I
rushed  up  after  her,  but  she  disappeared.  I  cried  to  her  and  called  to  the
rest,  "  There's  mother  !  "  But  they  only  laughed  at  me  and  bade  me  come
in  to  dinner.  On  that  clay — I  am  not  sure  as  to  the  hour — my  second  sister
was  born.

"I  have  had  no  other  Iiallucinations.  When  I  saw  the  figure  of  X.  I  was
in  good  health  and  spirits."

In  a  subsequent  letter  Mr.  J.  adds:  "I  am  under  a  pledge  to  the  X.
people  not  to  make  public  the  story  in  any  Avay  that  would  lead  to  identity.
Of  course  I  shall  bo  glad  to  answer  any  private  inquiries,  and  am  willing


1889.]


More  tJian  a  Year  after  Death.


59-


that  my  name  should  be  given  in  confidence  to  bond  fde  inquirers  in  tlie-
usual  way. ''

The  evidential  value  of  the  above  account  is  much  enhanced  by  the  fact
that  the  principal  assistant  in  the  library,  Mr.  R.,  and  a  junior  clerk,  Mr.
P.,  independently  witnessed  a  singular  phenomenon,  thus  described  by  Mr..
E.  in  1889  :—  ■

"A  fev,^  years  ago  I  was  engaged  in  a  large  building  in  the  ,  and

during  the  busy  times  was  often  there  till  late  in  the  evening.  On  one-
particular  night  I  was  at  work  along  with  a  junior  clerk  till  about  11  p.m.,
in  the  room  marked  A  on  the  annexed  sketch.  All  the  lights  in  the  place
had  been  out  for  hours  except  those  in  the  room  which  we  occupied.  Before
leaving,  Ave  turned  out  the  gas.  We  then  looked  into  the  fireplace,  but  not
a  spark  was  to  be  seen.  The  night  was  very  dark,  but  being  thoroughly
accustomed  to  the  place  we  carried  no  light.  On  reaching  the  bottom  of  the
staircase  (B),  I  happened  to  look  up  ;  when,  to  my  surprise,  the  room  which
v.'e  had  just  left  appeared  to  be  lighted.  I  turned  to  my  companion  and
pointed  out  the  light,  and  sent  him  back  to  see  what  was  wrong.  He  went
•at  once  and  I  stood  looking  through  the  open  door,  but  I  was  not  a  little
astonished  to  see  that  as  soon  as  he  got  within  a  few  j-ards  of  the  room  the
light  went  out  quite  suddenly.  My  companion,  from  the  positi(Hi  he  was  in
at  the  moment,  could  not  see  the  light  go  out,  but  on  his  reaching  the  door
everything  was  in  total  darkness.  He  entered,  however,  and  when  he
returned,  reported  that  both  gas  and  fire  were  completely  out.  The  light  in
the  daytime  was  got  by  means  of  a  glass  roof,  there  being  no  windows  on  the
sides  of  the  room,  and  the  night  in  question  was  so  dark  that  the  moon
shining  through  the  roof  was  out  of  the  question.  Although  I  have  often
been  in  the  same  room  till  long  after  dark,  both  before  and  since,  I  have
never  seen  anything  unusual  at  any  other  time.

"  "When  the  light  went  out  my  companion  was  at  C."  [marked  on  plan.]

Mr.  P.  endorses  this  :  "I  confirm  the  foregoing  statement."

In  subsequent  letters  IMr.  R.  says  : —

"  The  bare  facts  are  as  stated,  being  neither  more  nor  less  than  what
took  place.  I  have  never  on  any  other  occasion  had  any  hallucination  of  the
senses,  and  I  think  you  vrill  find  the  same  to  be  the  case  with  Mr.  P. "

The  light  was  seen  after  the  phantom  ;  but  those  who  saw  the  light  were
not  aware  that  the  phantom  had  been  seen,  for  Mr.  J.  mentioned  the
circumstance  only  to  his  wife  and  to  one  other  friend  (who  has  confirmed  to
us  the  fact  that  it  was  so  mentioned  to  him),  and  he  was  naturally  particu-
larly careful  to  give  no  hint  of  the  matter  to  his  assistants  in  the  library.

In  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  Yol.  III.,  p.  207,  will  be  found  a  first-hand
record,  sent  by  the  Rev.  AV.  S.  Grignon,  "of  two  apparitions  of  the
same  deceased  person  to  two  pei'sons, — relatives, — at  intervals  of  two
to  four  years  after  the  death — apparently  on  the  same  spot."  Some
other  cases  which  might  have  been  noticed  in  the  present  paper  will  be-
found  in  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper  on  rhantasms  of  the  Dead,  already
cited.  Specially  important  is  the  case  of  haunting  in  a  modern  villa
(Yol.  III.,  p.  117),  which  haunting  has  continued  since  the  publication


-60


On  Recognised  Apparitions  occiorri'iig [July  8,


-of  Mrs.  Sitlgwick's  paper,  though  we  are  not  permitted  to  give  any
account  which  niiirht  lead  to  recoirnition.

I  will  conclude  my  quoted  cases  with  a  somewhat  painful  and
complex  narrative,  which  ought,  I  think,  to  be  considered  when  we  are
trying  to  form  a  conception  as  to  the  true  significance  of  "  haunting  "
•sounds  and  sights.

XIV. — The  following  case,  which  we  owe  to  the  kindness  of  Mr.
Wilfrid  Ward  (and  of  Lord  Tennyson,  for  whom  it  was  first  committed
to  writing  some  years  ago),  is  sent  by  Mrs.  Penn^e,  of  St.  Anne
de  Beaupre,  Quebec,  daughter  of  the  late  Mr.  William  Ward  (a
Conservative  M. P.  for  London),  and  sister  of  the  late  Rev,  A.  R.  Ward,
of  Cambridge.

Weston  Manor,  Freshwater,  Isle  of  Wight.

1884.

It  was  in  the  year  1853  that  my  husband  took  me  to  live  at  a  house  called
Binstead,  about  five  miles  from  Charlofctetown,  P.  E.  Island.  It  was  a  good-
sized  house,  and  at  the  back  had  been  considerably  extended  to  allow  of  extra
offices,  since  tliere  were  about  200  acres  of  farm  land  around  it,  necessitating
several  resident  farming  men.  Although  forming  part  of  the  house,  these
premises  could  only  be  entered  through  the  inner  kitchen,  as  no  wall  had
ever  been  broken  down  to  form  a  door  or  passage  from  upstairs.  Thus  the
farming  men's  sleeping  rooms  were  adjacent  to  those  occupied  by  the  family
and  visitors,  although  there  was  no  coaimunication  through  the  upstairs
corridor.

It  was  always  in  or  near  the  sleeping  apartment,  immediately  adjacent  to
the  men's,  that  the  apparition  was  seen,  and  as  that  was  one  of  our  spare
bedrooms,  it  may  have  frequently  been  unperceived.

About  10  days  after  we  had  established  ourselves  at  Binstead,  we  com-
menced hearing  strange  noises.  For  many  weeks  they  were  of  very  frequent
occurrence,  and  were  heard  simultaneously  in  every  part  of  the  house,  and
always  appeared  to  be  in  close  proximity  to  each  person.  The  noise  was
more  like  a  rumbling  which  made  the  house  vibrate,  than  like  that  produced
by  dragging  a  heavy  body,  of  which  one  so  often  hears  in  ghost  stories.

As  spring  came  on  we  began  to  hear  shrieks,  which  would  grow  fainter
-or  louder,  as  if  someone  was  being  chased  round  the  house,  but  always
culmin-iting  in  a  regular  volley  of  slirieks,  sobs,  moans,  and  half-uttered  words,
proceeding  from  beneath  a  tree  that  stood  at  a  little  distance  from  the  dining-
room  window,  and  whose  branches  nearly  touched  the  window  of  the
bedroom  I  have  mentioned.

It  was  in  February  (I  think),  1857,  that  the  first  apparition  came  under
my  notice.  Two  lalies  were  sleeping  in  tlie  bedroom.  Of  course,  for  that
fse.'tson  of  tlie  year  a  fire  had  been  lighted  in  the  grate,  and  the  fireplace
Tcally  contained  a  grate  and  not  an  Amsrican  substitute  for  one.

About  2  o'clock,  Mrs.  M.  was  awakened  by  a  bright  light  which  pervaded
i.lic  room.  She  saw  a  woman  standing  by  the  fireplace.  In  her  left  arm  was
a  young  baby,  and  with  her  right  hand  she  was  stirring  the  ashes,  over  which
^hc  was  slightly  stooping.  •  ■ ■ - ■ •  •  '■-  .


1889.]


More  than  a  Year  after  Death.


Mrs.  M.  pushed  Miss  C.  to  a'waben  her,  and  just  then  the  figure  turned
her  face  towards  them,  disclosing  the  features  of  quite  a  young  woman  with
a  sing-ularly  anxious  pleading  look  upon  her  face.  They  took  notice  of  a
little  check  shawl  which  was  crossed  over  her  bosom.  Miss  C.  had  previously
heard  some  tales  concerning  the  house  being  haunted  (which  neither
Mrs.  M.  nor  I  had  ever  heard),  so  jumping  to  the  conclusion  that  sh&
beheld  a  ghost,  she  screamed  and  pulled  the  bedclothes  tightly  over  the
heads  of  herself  and  her  companion,  so  that  the  sequel  of  the  ghost's  pro-
ceedings is  unknown.

The  following  spring  I  went  home  to  England,  and  just  before  starting  I
had  my  own  experience  of  seeing  a  ghost.  I  had  temporarily  established  myself
in  the  room,  and  one  evening,  finding  my  little  daughter  (now  Mrs.  Amyot}
far  from  well,  had  her  bed  wheeled  in  beside  mine  that  I  miglit  attend  to-
iler. About  12  o'clock  I  got  up  to  give  her  som.e  medicine,  and  was  feeling
for  the  matches  when  she  called  my  attention  to  a  brilliant  light  shining  under
the  door.  I  exclaimed  that  it  was  her  papa  and  threw  open  the  door  to  admit
him.  I  found  myself  face  to  face  with  a  woman.  She  had  a  baby  on  her  loft
arm,  a  check  shawl  crossed  over  her  bosom,  and  all  around  her  shone  a
bright  pleasant  light,  whence  emanating  I  could  not  say.  Her  look  at  me
was  one  of  entreaty — almost  agonising  entreaty.  She  did  not  enter  the  room
but  moved  across  the  staircase,  vanishing  into  the  opposite  wall,  exactly
■where  the  inner  man-servant's  room  was  situated.

Neither  my  daughter  nor  myself  felt  the  slightest  alarm  ;  at  the  moment
it  appeared  to  be  a  matter  of  common  occui-rence.  When  Mr.  Pennee  came
upstairs  and  I  told  him  wliat  we  had  seen,  he  examined  the  wall,  the  stair-
case, the  passage,  but  found  no  traces  of  anything  extraordinary.  Nor  did
my  dogs  bark.

On  my  return  from  England  in  1858  I  was  informed  that  "  the  creature
had  been  carrying  on,"  but  it  was  the  screams  that  had  been  the  worst.
However,  Harry  (a  farm-servant)  had  had  several  visits  but  would  tell  no'
particulars.  I  never  could  got  Harry  to  tell  me  much.  He  ackno^x  ledged
that  the  woman  had  several  times  stood  at  the  foot  of  his  bed,  but  he  woidd
not  tell  me  more.  One  night  Harry  had  certainly  been  much  disturbed  in
mind,  and  the  other  man  heard  voices  and  sobs.  Nothing  would  ever  induce
Harry  to  let  any  one  share  his  room,  and  he  was  most  careful  to  fasten  his-
door  before  retiring.  At  the  time,  I  attached  no  importance  to  "  his  ways,"
as  we  called  them.

In  the  autumn  of  the  following  year,  1859,  my  connection  with  Binstead
ceased,  for  we  gave  up  the  house  and  returned  to  Charlottetown.

I  left  Prince  Edward  Island  in  1861,  and  went  to  Quebec.  In  1877  I
happened  to  return  to  the  island,  and  spent  several  months  tliere.  One  day  I
Avas  at  the  Bishop's  residence,  when  the  parish  priest  came  in  with  a  letter  in
his  hand.  He  asked  me  about  my  residence  at  Binstead,  and  whether  I  could
throw  any  light  on  the  contents  of  his  letter.  It  was  from  the  wife  of  the
then  owier  of  Binstead,  asking  him  to  come  out  and  try  to  deliver  them  from
the  ghost  of  a  woman  with  a  baby  in  her  arms,  who  had  appeared  several
times.

After  I  went  to  live  in  Charlottetow.a  I  became  acquainted  with  the
following  facts,  which  seem  to  throw  light  on  my  ghost  story.


'62  On  Recognised  Aioparit'ions  occurring [July  8,


Tlie  gi'ound  on  which  Binstead  stood  had  been  cleared,  in  about  1840,  by
a  rich  Englishman,  who  had  built  a  very  nice  house.  Getting  tired  of  colonial
life,  he  sold  the  property  to  a  man  whose  name  I  forget,  but  whom  I  will  call
Pigott  (that  was  like  the  name).  He  was  a  man  of  low  tastes  and  immoral
habits  ;  but  a  capital  farmer.  It  was  he  who  added  all  the  back  wing  of  the
house  and  made  the  necessary  divisions,  etc.,  for  farming  the  land.  He
had  two  sisters  in  his  service,  the  daughters  of  a  labourer  wlio  lived  in  a
regular  hovel,  about  three  miles  nearer  town.  After  a  time  each  sister  gave
birth  to  a  boy.

Very  little  can  be  learnt  of  the  domestic  arrangements,  since  Pigott  bore
so  bad  a  name  that  the  house  was  avoided  by  respectable  people  ;  but  it  is
certam  that  one  sister  and  one  baby  disappeared  altogether,  though  when
and  how  is  a  complete  mystery.

When  the  otlier  baby  was  between  one  and  two  years  old,  Pigott  sold
Binstead  to  an  English  gentleman  named  Fellowes,  from  whom  we  hired  it,
with  the  intention  of  eventually  buying  it.  The  other  sister  returned  to  her
father's  house,  and  leaving  the  baby  with  Mrs.  Newbury,  her  mother,  went
to  the  States,  and  has  never  returned.  Before  leaving  she  would  reveal
nothing,  except  that  the  boy  was  her  sister's,  her  own  being  dead.  It  was
this  very  Harry  Newbury  that  we  had  unwittingly  engaged  as  farm-servant.
He  came  to  bid  me  farewell  a  few  months  after  I  left  Binstead,  saying  he
would  never  return  there.  In  1877,  I  inquired  about  him,  and  found  that
he  had  never  been  seen  since  in  Prince  Edward  Island.

In  another  letter  dated  September  24tli,  1887,  Mrs.  Pennee  adds

Another  fact  has  come  to  my  notice.  A  young  lady,  then  a  child  of
from  5  to  10,  remembers  being  afraid  of  sleeping  alone  when  on  a  visit  at
Binstead  on  account  of  the  screams  she  heard  outside,  and  also  the  ' '  woman
with  a  baby,"  whom  she  saw  passing  through  her  room.  Her  experience
goes  back  some  10  to  15  years  before  mine.

In  a  further  letter,  dated  St.  Anne  de  Beaupre,  Quebec,  January
23rd,  1889,  Mrs.  Pennee  gives  additional  facts,  as  follows: —

(1)  Mrs.  Pennee  interviewed  Father  Boudreault,  the  priest  sent  for  by  the
C.  family  to  exorcise  the  house.  Father  B.,  however,  was  on  his  death-bed  ;
and  although  he  remembered  tlie  fact  that  he  had  been  sent  for  to  Binstead
for  this  i^urpose,  he  could  not  recollect  what  had  been  told  him  as  to
apparitions,  &c.

(2)  Mrs.  M.,  who  first  saw  the  figure,  has  gone  to  England,  and  cannot
now  be  traced.  Mrs.  Pennee  adds : — "The  lady  in  question  told  several  people
that  she  saw  a  woman  with  a  baby  in  her  arms  when  slie  slept  at  Binstead  ;
and,  like  myself,  she  noticed  a,  frilled  cap  on  the  woman.  The  woman  whose
gliost  we  imagine  this  to  be  was  an  Irish  woman,  and  perhaps  you  have
noticed  their  love  of  wide  frills  in  their  head-gear."

(3)  Mrs.  Pennee  revisited  Binstead  in  1888,  and  says,  "  The  tree  whence
the  screams  started  is  cut  down  ;  the  room  where  all  saw  the  ghost  is  totally
uninhabited  ;  and  Mrs.  C.  would  not  let  us  stay  in  it,  and  entreated  us  tc
talk  no  further  on  the  subject.  From  the  man  we  got  out  a  little,  but  she
followed  us  up  very  closely. He  says  that  since  the  priest  blessed  tlie  houses


1889.]


More  than  a  Year  after  Death.


63


Tvoman  has  been  sDsn  (or  said  to  have  boen  seen,  he  corrected  himself)
round  the  frant  entrance,  and  once  at  an  upper  window."

The  list  of  cases  cited  in  this  and  the  previous  paper,  while
insufficient  (as  I  have  already  said)  to  compel  conviction,  is  striking
enough  to  plead  for  serious  attention  to  a  subject  which  will  never  be
pi'operly  threshed  out  unless  the  interest  taken  in  it  assumes  a  scientific
rather  than  an  emotional  form.  Consideiing  how  long  this  scattered
belief  in  the  appearances  of  dead  persons  has  existed,  it  is  really  extra-
ordinary that  so  little  trouble  should  have  been  taken  to  determine
whether  tliat  belief  was  well-founded  or  no.  For  be  it  observed  that
there  has  been  just  as  little  diligence,  just  as  little  acumen,  shown
amongst  the  scoffers  as  amongst  the  credulous.  It  is  often  said  that
^'  ghost-stories  break  down  on  examination  but  what  really  happens
is,  not  that  the  inquirer  detects  fraud  or  mistake  in  the  story,  ljut  that
the  story  is  both  presented  and  criticised  in  a  vague  and  careless  way,
is  sifted  by  nobody,  and  sinks  or  swims  as  a  mere  matter  of  luck.  Mr.
Gurney  was  in  the  habit  of  collecting  specimens  of  cases  sent  to
ourselves  which  broke  down  on  his  incjuiry.  These  contain  some
-curious  specimens  of  human  error ;  and  we  hope  some  time  to  offer
some  of  them  to  the  public.  But  hardly  any  hints  of  value,  it  was
found,  could  be  drawn  from  previous  destructive  criticisms,  which
are  generally  of  the  most  superficial  kind.  In  fact,  so  far  as  any
■exact  investigation  goes,  the  present  subject  is  almost  absolutely
neiu  ;  and  the  group  of  cases  now  presented — of  whose  evidential
imperfections  I  am  thoroughly  aware — must  be  taken  as  a  vindemiatio
prima,  or  mere  first  handful  from  an  ungarnered  field.

Something  will  have  been  done,  I  hope,  to  encourage  the  quest  for
further  evidence  if  I  am  thought  to  have  suggested  a  parallel  between
the  now  known  modes  of  action  of  the  embodied  mind  and  the  possible
modes  of  action  of  the  disembodied  mind,  which  may  at  least  enable  us
to  see  something  logically  probable, — rather  than  something  grotesc[uely
meaningless, — in  the  reported  behaviour  of  the  ordinary  apparition.
Most  assuredly,  if  these  supernormal  phenomena  are  to  be  explained  at
all,  they  must  be  explained  by  finding  some  laws  which  govern  at  once
these  post-mortem  manifestations  and  the  manifestations  of  spirits  still
in  the  flesh.  Two  such  laws  I  believe  to  exist.  In  the  first  place,  I
believe  that  telepathy — the  transference  of  thought  through  other  than
sensory  channels — exists  both  as  between  embodied  spirits  and  as
between  embodied  and  disembodied  spirits.  I  hold  that  there  is  a
■continuous  series  of  manifestations  of  such  power,  beginning  with
thought-transference  experiments  and  hypnotism  at  a  distance,  pro-
ceeding through  experimental  apparitions  and  apparitions  coincident
with  crisis  or  death,  and  ending  with  apparitions  after  death ; — the


G4!  On  Recognised  Apparitions  ocmrr'mg [July  8,


results,  in  my  view,  of  the  continued  exercise  of  the  same  energy  by
the  spirits  of  the  departed.

And  in  the  second  place  I  regard  it  as  analogically  probable
that  the  thesis  of  multiplex  personality, — namely,  that  no  known
current  of  man's  consciousness  exhausts  his  whole  consciousness,
and  no  known  self-manifestation  expresses  man's  whole  potential
being, — may  hold  good  both  for  embodied  and  for  disembodied
men.  And  consequently  I  believe  that  the  self-manifestations  of  the
departed, — being  communications  between  states  of  being  almost
impassably  disunited, — must  needs  form  an  extreme  type  of  thoso
fugitive  and  unstable  communications  between  widely  different  strata
of  personality  of  which  living  minds  oli'er  us  examples ;  and  that
"ghosts"  must  therefoi'e  as  a  rule  represent — not  conscious  or  central
currents  of  intelligence — but  mere  autouiatic  projections  from  con-
sciousnesses which  have  their  centres  elsewhere.

&  TTOUOI,  Tj  pa  Tis  e(TTi  Koi  elv  'Al8ao  Sofioiaiv
'^v^i]  Kill  e'ibwXov,  drap  (ppives  ovk  evi  TrdpTrav-

I  believe  that  the  simple,  primitive  cry  of  Achilles  is  the  direct
expression  of  the  actual  observation  of  mankind.  "  There  is  some  soul
and  wraith  even  in  Hades,"  as  Mr.  Leaf  translates,  "  but  there  is  no
heart  in  them  or,  in  modern  phraseology,  "  Influences  and  images
generated  by  the  dead  persist  amongst  us,  but  have  no  true  initiative
nor  objective  reality."

Thus  much,  I  believe,  careful  observation  will  teach  us  moderns  also.
What  further  deduction  we  may  di'aw  is  a  matter  for  philosophy  rather
than  for  science.  In  Homer's  view  the  dead  men  themselves — in  the  only
personality  worth  possessing — were  lying,  a  prey  to  dogs  and  to  every
bird,  on  the  jilain  of  Troy.  Plotinus,  on  the  other  hand,  could  not
believe  that  the  automatic  self-glorifications,  the  fading  recollections  of
"  Hades'  house,"  could  represent  the  true  personality  of  the  ascending^
soul.  "  The  shade  of  Hcrakles,"  he  said,  "might  boast  thus  to  shades;
but  the  true  Heraklcs  for  all  tliis  cares  nought;  being  transported  into
a  more  sacred  place,  and  strenuously  engaging,  even  above  his  strength,
in  those  contests  in  which  the  wise  wish  to  enjrage."

It  must  be  enough  thus  to  indicate  that  the  view  here  taken  of  the\
inadequacy  of  apparitions  as  a  true  means  of  communication  between
t!ie  dead  and  the  living  does  by  no  mea.ns  negative  any  belief  which  we-
may  hold  on  other  grounds  as  to  the  life  and  love  of  the  departed.
The  present  need  is  not  of  speculation,  but  of  evidence  ; — of  a  real
direction  of  competent  intelligence  towards  the  collection  and  criticism
of  a  far  larger  mass  of  well-attested  narratives  than  the  efforts  of  a  few
men  during  a  few  years  have  succeeded  in  getting  together.  It  may
indeed  be  tliat  such  records  may  prove  explicable — I  can  scarcelv  sav


1889.]


More  than  a  Year  after  Death.


65


by  known  laws — but  by  laws  whose  discovery  will  only  slightly  further
extend  our  experimental  psychology  in  some  of  the  directions  in  which
it  is  now  rapidly  advancing.  Or  it  may  be  that  these  long  despised,
long  neglected  narratives  will  prove  the  smooth  stones  from  the  l)rook,
and  find  a  vulnerable  point  in  that  Goliath  of  our  inscrutable  Destiny,
against  whom  so  many  prouder  veapons  have  been  levelled  in  vain.


66


Further  Experiments  in  RypnotiG


IV.

FURTHER  EXPERIMENTS  IN  HYPNOTIC  LUCIDITY  OR

CLAIRV0YANCE.1

By  Professor  Charles  Riciiet.

[This  translation  has  heen  revised  hy  the  Author.\

PART  I.

Since  the  conclusion  of  the  experiments  recounted  in  Part  XII.  of
the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  (pp.  18-168) —
that  is  to  say,  since  the  month  of  March,  1888, — I  have  had  the  oppor-
tunity of  making  some  further  experiments  with  Leonie  B.,  the  same
person  mentioned  in  Chapter  III.,  p.  31,  of  my  former  paper.  These
new  experiments  are,  in  my  view,  more  decisive  than  any  of  those
whicli  I  have  detailed  in  the  above-mentioned  memoir.

In  fact,  as  I  had  there  remarked,  the  earlier  experiments  were
gravely  compromised  by  the  most  important  and  incontestable  fact  that
when  playing  cards  were  used  there  was  no  lucidity.  "Here,"  I  said  in
conclusion,  "we  have  a  fact  absolutely  negative,  which  must  inevitably
cast  some  doubt  on  the  exj^eriments  in  the  reproduction  of  diagrams."
(p.  149.)

AVhen  the  subject  is  called  upon  to  divine  a  drawing,  a  name,  a
malady,  an  incident  of  some  kind,  the  probability  of  a  right  or
approximately  riglit  answer  is  hard  to  calculate.  To  take  an  example  :
AVhat  is  tlie  probability  tliat,  given  a  drawing  sucli  as  Figure  66,  p.  99,
a  reproduction  as  accurate  as  Figure  66  his  will  be  obtained  by
chance  alone  ?  The  calculation  is  an  impossible  one.  One  can  only
say  that  the  chance  of  such  reproduction  is  not  very  small.

On  the  other  hand,  when  a  playing  card  is  used,  the  probability  is
a  known,  a  measurable  quantity ;  as  measurable  as  any  fact  in  science.

If  I  put  the  queen  of  hearts,  without  knowing  myself  what  card  it
is,  in  an  envelope,  and  am  told  that  the  queen  of  diamonds  is  in  the
envelope,  I  can  calculate  all  the  probabilities  involved  ;  the  chance
that  a  queen  will  be  chosen  (y^y),  tliat  a  red  queen  will  be  chosen  (^V),
the  chance  that  the  card  chosen  will  not  be  the  queen  of  hearts  (|i),
that  it  will  not  be  a  heart  at  all  (1),  &c.,  &c.  All  this  is  a  matter  of
simple  and  exact  computation.

I  am  well  aware  that  objections  are  taken  to  this  method.  Persons


1  Professor  Richet  uses  the  word  luciditi.


LiLCidity  or  tuarvoyance.


67


unfamiliar  ^vitli  the  doctrine  of  chances,  or  with  its  application  to  these
problems,  maintain  that  these  figures  prove  nothing,  and  that  a  lucky-
run  -will  explain  all.  This  argument — which  I  am  surprised  to  note
in  the  German  magazine  Sphinx^ — is  far  from  sound.  For  if  by-
experiment  one  obtains  a  result  antecedently  very  improbable,  it  is
^issuredly  permissible  to  conclude  that  something  besides  chance  has
been  at  work.  Otherwise  one  would  never  come  to  any  conclusion  at
all.  The  doctrine  of  chances,  in  fact,  is  at  the  bottom  of  all
scientific  argument,  in  chemistry,  physics,  physiology  alike,  although
masked  in  these  cases  by  the  predominant  importance  of  the  special
conditions  of  each  experiment.

A  chemist  seeking  to  determine  the  atomic  weight  of  potassium,
and  obtaining  the  number  -39  in  two  successive  experiments,  will  not
set  the  result  aside  as  due  to  chance.  He  will  try  once  more  with
increased  exactness,  and  if  he  again  obtains  39  he  will  accept  the
result.  He  will  not  attribute  the  coincidence  of  the  three  numbers  to
a  lucky  run."

If,  then,  I  obtain  a  series  of  concordant  results  whose  antecedent
probability,  on  the  ground  of  chance  alone,  is  of  one  to  a  thousand
millions,  I  shall  maintain  that  chance  does  not  explain  tliis  ;  but  that
either  lucidity  veritably  exists,  or  there  is  some  defect  in  the  method
of  experimentation.

And  this  may  be  advanced  with  the  more  confidence,  inasmuch  as
the  alternative  between  lucidity  and  non-lucidity  is  in  these  experi
ments  a  perfectly  distinct  one.  Up  till  now — if  you  will— lucidity  had
never  been  clearly  proved  either  by  myself  or  by  anyone  else.  The
experiment  was  still  to  be  made  ;  and  either  the  affirmative  or  the
negative  view  could  still  be  maintained.  If,  then,  my  new  experiment
is  indisputably  cogent  in  one  or  the  other  direction,  it  must  be  regarded
as  deciding  the  question.

Well,  in  the  series  of  expeiiments  which  I  shall  now  recount,
lucidity  has  shown  itself  in  the  clearest  manner  ;  and,  so  far  as  the
possibility  of  chance  is  concerned,  there  is  left  no  room  for  doubt.

The  subject  on  whom  tliese  experiments  were  made  was  Leonie
15.,  well-known  in  connection  with  the  celebrated  experiments  of
M.  Gibert  and  M.  Pierre  Janet.^  I  need  not,  therefore,  insist  on
the  special  characteristics  which  her  hypnotic  trance  presents.

These  experiments  ha^'e  been,  for  my  part,  of  a  very  laborious

1  Die  sorjennantcn  Spirit isiischen  Vcrsuehe  dcs  Professors  diaries  Bichct,  von  L.
Kiililenbeck,  Sphinx,  September,  18S8,  p.  177.  I  may  remark  that  the  author  does
not  seem  to  have  taken  the  trouble  to  read  in  the  original  the  work  which  he
criticises.

-  See  Phantasms  of  the  Livinrj,  Vol.  II.,  p.  679  seq  ,  and  Bulletins  de  la  Sociite  d&
I'sychologie  Physiologique,  1887,  passim.

V2


6S


Farther  Experiments  in  Ilypnotio


character.  She  spent  two  months  and  a-half  in  my  house  (June  29th —
September  11th,  1888).  As  I  covild  keep  her  entranced  for  a  long  time
without  injury  to  her — generally  during  the  night — I  have  repeatedly
sat  by  her  side  from  8  p.m.  till  6  a.m.  For  it  was  not  in  the  earliest
moments  of  her  trance  that  she  could  tell  the  cards  under  the  envelope^
but  after  long  and  apparently  very  laborious  endeavour.

The  manner  in  which  she  arrived  at  this  result  was  very  curious — -
possibly  very  instructive,  if  any  real  clue  to  the  process  can  be  found.
She  held  the  envelope  between  her  hands,  and  then  drew  on  a  sheet  of
paper  a  club,  a  heart,  a  diamond,  a  spade  ;  and  she  repeated  these
drawings  over  and  over  again,  saying,  "  It  is  red,  black,  club,  heait,"
&c.,  but  not  making  up  her  mind  to  a  definite  choice  till  after  a  long
period  of  uncertainty.  This  period  of  guessing  was  still  longer  when  the-
exact  number  of  pips  on  the  card  was  to  be  told.  In  that  case  she
counted  on  her  fingers,  repeating  the  pi'ocess  again  and  again
ad  riauseam.

My  patience  was  thus  pretty  severely  tried.  To  wait  three,  four,
or  five  hours  at  dead  of  night  till  a  card  is  named,  one  needs  a
considerable  share  of  persevei'ance.  Had  it  been  my  intention — which
Heaven  forbid  ! — to  submit  these  experiments  to  some  academic
commission,  I  should  not  have  ventured  to  ask  of  anybody  whatever  to
endure  seances  like  these,  often,  alas  !  completely  without  success.  To
endure  such  seances^  one  must  be  directly  interested  in  tlie  experiment.
An  onlooker  would  have  lost  patience  before  attaining  the  smallest
result.

JMoreover,  during  all  this  time  she  never  ceased  talking  of  other
things — asking  me  all  kinds  of  questions,  describing  the  episodes  of
her  past  life,  expressing  a  kind  of  childish  aflection  for  me — full
of  gaiety  and  mockery,  and  rapidly  catching  the  ridiculous  side  of
everyone  whom  she  had  come  across^ — talking,  in  short,  of  everything
except  the  card  wliich  she  was  trying  to  tell.  "  She  was  waiting  for  it
to  come,"  she  said,  and  suddenly,  in  the  midst  of  our  conversation,  she
would  stop  and  name  a  card — then  begin  again  two  or  three  times  to
talk  ;  and  it  was  only  at  the  end  of  all  this  that  she  settled  definitely
what  cai'd  she  would  name.

It  is  clear,  I  think,  that  had  I  known  the  card  I  should  have  ended
by  indicating  it  to  her  in  spite  of  myself.  From  weariness  or  inad-
vertence, I  should  have  given  some  sign  which  would  have  betrayed  my
thought.  I  believe,  indeed,  that  in  a  sitting  of  five  hours  I  could
myself  manage  to  discover  any  card  known  to  the  experimenter,  merely
by  aid  of  the  hints  wliich  his  exhaustion  might  allow  to  escape  him  in
the  course  of  so  tedious  a  trial.  But,  as  the  case  actually  stood,  I  could
reveal  nothing  to  Leonie,  for  I  was  myself  absolutely  ignorant  as  to
■what  the  card  in  the  envelope  might  be.


Lucidity  or  Clairvoyance.


60


As  in  my  previous  experiments,  the  card  was  taken  by  me  (at
random  and  unseen)  from  a  mixture  of  10  paclis  of  52  cards  each;  the
number  of  packs  thus  admitting  of  the  recurrence  of  the  same  card
several  times  runnins;.  Tlie  cards  which  had  once  been  used  were  not
■employed  a  second  time.  I  placed  the  card  in  an  opaque  envelope,  which
I  closed  myself  completely  and  gave  to  Leonie.  When  she  had  decided
on  the  card,  I  took  back  the  envelope ;  I  satisfied  myself  that  it  was
intact,  and  I  opened  it,  and  took  the  card  out.  Sometimes  Leonie
■opened  the  envelope  herself  ;  but  I  had  always  first  satisfied  myself
■of  the  absolute  integrity  of  the  envelope — a  condition  without  which,
as  I  assured  her,  the  experiment  could  not  count.

These  envelopes,  called  opaques  in  trade,  were  in  fact  not  absolutely
-opaque.  They  were  sufficiently  so,  however,  entirely  to  prevent  the
-colour  of  pips  from  being  discerned  by  transmitted  light,  whatever
the  source  of  illumination.  I  succeeded,  with  great  difficulty,  and
-after  efibrts  which  lasted  some  minutes,  by  placing  the  card  in
full  sunshine  or  in  the  light  of  a  powerful  lamp,  in  seeing  the
pips  and  colour  of  the  card  by  reflected  light.  But  Leonie  never
acted  in  this  way.  She  made  no  effort  to  look  at  the  card,  but
contented  herself  with  feeling  it  between  her  fingers,  and  crumpling
the  envelope  in  her  hand,  scribbling;  meantime,  upon  the  envelope  itself
her  interminable  scrawls,  representing  club,  spade,  heart,  and  diamond.
She  remained,  moreover,  almost  constantly  in  a  dim  light,  at  some
-distance  from  my  armchair,  and  never  tried  to  hold  the  card  in  the
light  of  the  lamp.

Furthermore,  in  order  to  preclude  all  possibility  of  ordinary,  even
hyperffisthetic  sight,  from  the  experiments  of  July  22nd  onwards,  I
placed  the  card  and  envelope  in  a  second  opaque  envelope,  so  that  the
two  superimposed  opacities  rendered  the  card  absolutely  invisible  to
the  sight  of  normal  people.  It  will  be  seen  that  this  pi'ecaution  in  no
way  modified  the  success  of  the  experiment.^

1  I  made  several  experiments  on  diar/rariis  with  Leonie.  Some  of  these  succeeded
tetter  than  any  of  those  which  I  recounted  in  my  last  memoir,  but  I  do  not  mention
them  here,  for  I  -wish  to  confine  myself  to  matter  of  absolute  proof,  and  I  do  not  think
that  experiments  with  diagrams  have  the  same  deuionstrative  force  as  experiments
with  cards,  where  the  chances  are  exactly  known.  I  will  mention  one  observation
alone ;  a  remarkable  instance  either  of  thoug-ht-transference,  or,  as  I  am  strongly  in-
clined to  suppose,  of  lucidity.

On  Monday,  July  2nd,  after  having  passed  all  the  day  in  my  laboratory,  I
hypnotised  Leonie  at  8  p.m.,  and  while  she  tried  to  make  out  a  diagram  concealed  in
an  envelope  I  said  to  her  quite  suddenly:  "What  has  happened  to  M.  Langlois?"
Leonie  knows  M.  Langlois  from  having  seen  him  two  or  three  times  some  time  ago  in
my  physiological  laboratory,  -(vhere he  acts  as  my  assistant.  "He  has  burnt  himself,"
Leonie  replied. "  Good,"  I  said,  "and  where  has  he  burnt  himself  ? " "On  the  left

hand. It  is  not  fire  :  it  is  I  don't  know  its  name. Why  does  he  not  take  care

■when  he  pours  it  out? " "Of  what  colour,"  I  asked,  "is  the  stuff  which  he  pours


70


Further  Experiments  in  HypnotiG


Record  of  the  Experiments. — This  record  of  experiments  consists
entirely  of  a  conspectus  of  the  cards  as  guessed  by  Leonie.  To  this  I
subjoin  a  consjaectus  of  the  results  actually  given  by  chance  alone  in
an  identical  series  of  drawings.  The  table  explains  itself.  I  have,  of
course,  neglected  the  guesses  made  by  Leonie  in  tlie  course  of  her
groping  search,  and  have  counted  the  final  guess  alone.

First  Series.


Card  in  an  O^mque  Envclojje.

H  stands  for  hearts,  D  for  diamonds,  &c.  ;  K  for  king',  &c. -F  means  figure  or  court-
card,  when  the  special  court-card  is  not  stated.


Card

Card
guessed

by.
Leonie.

Card

jJate.

in

drawn  at

liemarks.

^  '-I

IJt.lAt.il  KX,

1

.Tiilv  15

4  H

H

9  H

2

10  H

D

3  H

ft

July  16

10  H

K  H

2  D

4

>»

Q  H

H

1  C

5

»»

8  S

S

2  S

6

2  D

c

7  H

7

July  18

Kn  C

c

QH

8

0  C

c

6  H

9

»>

D  H

0

3  C

She  had  guessed  hearts  all  the
time,  but  said  club  at  the  last
moment.

JO

J»

Kn  D

F  D

5  H

11

8  H

H

9  H

12

July  19

1  C

S

G  S

Here  again  she  guessed  clubs  till
the  last.

13

»j

5  C

c

4  D

14

j»

3  C

D

Q  S

15

11

K  D

KB

8  D

k;

11

3  D

D

5  H

17

11

10  C

S

1  S

18

11

6  S

H

10  c

out  ?  "  "  It  is  not  red,  it  is  brown  ;  he  has  hurt  himself  very  much  — the  skin  puffed
\ip  directly."

Now,  this  description  is  admirably  exact.  At  4  p.m.  that  day  M.  Langlois  had
wished  to  pour  some  bromine  into  a  bottle.  He  had  done  this  clumsily,  so  that  some
of  the  bromine  flowed  on  to  his  left  hand,  which  held  the  funnel,  and  at  once  burnt
him  severely.  Although  he  at  once  put  his  hand  in  M-ater,  wherever  the  bromine  had
touched  it  a  blister  was  formed  in  a  few  seconds— a  blister  which  one  could  not  better
describe  than  by  saying,  "  the  skin  puffed  up."  I  need  not  say  that  Leonie  had  not
left  my  house,  nor  seen  anyone  fi-om  my  laboratory.  Of  this  I  am  uhsolnUhi  certain,
and  I  am  certain  that  I  had  not  mentioned  the  incident  of  the  burn  to  anybody.  More-
over, this  was  the  first  time  for  nearly  a  year  that  M.  Langlois  had  handled  bromine,
and  when  Leonie  saw  him  si.-c  months  before  at  the  laboratory  he  was  engagi;d  in
experiments  of  quite  another  kind.  Of  course,  I  give  here  all  tlie  words  I  used,  and
only  the  words  I  used,  when  I  interrogated  Leonie.

.Decisive  though  this  observation  was,  I  should  find  it  very  hai-d  to  estimate  the
probability  of  a  correct  guess.  I  think  tlie  incident  a  very  important  one  ;  but  I
prefer  the  cases  now  to  be  detailed,  where  the  probability  is  exactlv  measurable.


Lucidity  or  Clairvoyav.ce.


71


Date.

Card
in

Card
guessed

Card
drawn  at

Remarks,

Envelope.

hazard.

19

July  19

K  D

c

4H

I  opened  envelope  and  looked  at

card  unseen  by  her ;  asked
what  it  was. "It  is  not  a
club,"  she  answered, "it  is

the  queen  of  diamonds."

20

1  ?

3  S

s

10  H

21

July  20

7  C

c

2  S

22

)  »

K  S

c

7  S

Said  spades  till  the  last.

23

)J

10  H

c

5  D

24

5)

1  C

1  c

K  C

25

)  )

9  D

c

5  C

Said  diamonds  till  the  last.

26

)  )

Q  S

F  S

QS

27

)9

4  C

C

10  H

28

July  21

K  S

H

1  H

29

J5

5  S

S

8  D

There  were  by  accident  two  cards
in  the  envelope,  of  which  one
was  5  S.

30

J  )

8  D

H

8  C

31

)>

10  H

H

QS

32

)  )

7  C

H

5  H

33

5  )

2  C

H

2  H

34

))

A  D

S

K  C

35

)  ?

1  H

1  H

6  C

36

)  )

4  S

C

3D

37

})

3  H

D

Q  D

38

> )

Q  C

H

3  H

39

July  22

Kn  C

Kn  S

Q  H

Experiments  of  July  22  made  in

presence  of  M.  R.  Alexandre.

40

7  H

H

8  S

41

5?

KG

K  C

1  C

42

?5

2D

2D

9  H

43

9  H

C

3  S

Said  hearts  till  the  last,

44

5  J

JfD

4D

2  D

45

5  '

KH

KH

QS

Second  Series  of  Expeeiment.s.
Cards with Ttvo Opaque  Envelopes.


Remarks.


Violent  storm,  which  made  her
very  ill.

Experiments  of  July  24  made  in
presence  of  M.  P.  Langiois.


C4-I  .

O

d  i7

Date.

Card
in

Envelripe.

Card

guessed

lieonie.

46
47
48

July  22
July  23

9  S
QD
Kn  S

D

QD
H

49

July  24

9  S

S

Card
drawn  at
hazard.


3  C
3  D
9  S

K  C


72


Farther  Experiments  in  Ilypnotlo


o

Card

Card

Card

^  a
o

Date.

in

py

drawn  at

Remarks.

Envelope.

hazard.

50

July  24

i  C

1  c

5  H

51

7  D

D

9  H

52

Q  S

D

K  S

53

0  s

D

Kn  H

54

?  >

2  S

D

5  S

55

QH

Q  D

1  S

56

July  25

10  H

10  D

57

K  G

K  a

Kn  D

Experiments  of  July  25  in  pre

sence  of  M.  E.  Guiard.  In
Experiment  57  M.  Guiard  had
seen  the  card  before  he  placed
it  in  the  envelope.

58

»»

10  S

D

]0  C

59

G  II

D

4  II

€0

9  D

9  D

7  D

(il

July  26

Q  D

C

Kn  C

Third  Semes  of  Experiments.

Cards  tvitli  Two  Envelopes  and  a  Fresh  Pael-A


U-l  .

o  -t^

Card

Card
gne.ssed

by.

Leonie.

Card

C  ^

Date.

in

drawn  at

; Remarks.  .

Envelope.

hazard.

02

July  26

4  S

S

7  S

6o

Kn  II

H

9  S

G4

July  30

Q  D

S

Kn  D

Experiments  made  in  the  pre-
sence of  Dr.  J.  Hericourt.

65

?>

QH

II

4  C

CG

>>

8  C

c

Kn  D

She  counted  10,  and  said,  "It  is

whiter  than  a  10."

GT

Aug.  2

4  S

II

1  S

GS

51

K  S

s

9  11

Discussion  and  C.-vlculatiox  Based  on  tiiesk  E.xperiments.

In  undertaking  the  di.scussion  of  these  68  experiments  we  at  once
perceive  that  wo  must  divide  tlieui  into  two  parts.  In  the  first  place,
we  have  one  set  in  whicli  the  card  was  told  completely,  pips,  suit,  and
coloui',  and  another  set  in  which  only  the  suit  was  told.  But  let  us
begin  by  examining  tlie  whole  group  of  the  experiments ;  we  shall
then  see  what  arc  the  lines  of  division  which  we  must  draw  between
t!iem.

In  these  G8  experiments  t!ie  antecedently  probable  number  of
cards  told  completely  riglit  will  be  either  one  or  two  ;  the  probable

*  I  wi-hed  to  try  the  same  experiment  with  a  completely  new  pack.


Lucidity  or  Clairvoyance.


73


number  of  suits  rightly  named  will  be  17,  and  the  probable  number  of
colours  rightly  named  34.

We  may  compare  these  numbers  with  the  cards  actually  drawn  at
hazard,  and  then  with  the  cards  guessed  by  Leonie.  •  •

A. — Cards  entirely  rirjht,  ■
Antecedent  probability
By  actual  chance- drawing  ...
Guessed  by  Leonie  ...

B. — Cards  v:lth  suit  rvjlit.

Antecedent  probability

By  actual  chance-drawing

Guessed  by  Leonie  ...  ...

C. — Cards  v;ith  colour  rigid.

Antecedent  probability

By  actual  chance- drawing  ...  ...

Guessed  by  Leonie  ...  ...

It  will  be  seen  that  under  each  of  these  three  categories  thei'e  was
a  notable  excess  of  actual  successes  over  Ihe  antecedent  probabilities,
and  that  this  excess  was  more  marked  in  proportion  as  the  antecedent
probability  was  smaller.  The  result  of  actual  chance-drawing  will  be
seen  to  have  corresponded  pretty  closely  to  the  theoretic  probabilities.

If  we  consider  the  numbers  day  by  day  we  shall  see  that  almost
every  day  there  was  a  marked  excess  of  successes.  Let  us  take  the
indication  of  suits  alone.


1  or  2
1
12

...  17

...  19

...  36'

...  34

...  33

...  45


Number

Suits

.  Suits

Suits  lil:ely
to  be  drav.'n
right  l>y  theory
of  chances.

Day.

Date.

of

Drawings.

guessed
riglit.

drawn
right.

1

July  15

2

1

2

0-5

o

10

b

1

1

o
O

<  »

IS

5

4

1

1-25

4

)  >
)  )

10

9

4

1

2^25

5

20

7

4

3

1-75

6

5>

£1

11

3

0

2-75

7

)  J
J  ?

22

9

G

4

2-25

8

t".  o
-O

1

0

1

0-25

9

)  ?

24

8

4

2

2

10

?  7

25

4

2

2

1

11

)  )

28

3

2

1

0-75

12

SO

3

2

2

0-75

13

Aug.

o

2

1

1

0-50

Among  these  13  days  of  experimentation  we  find  once  only  an  excess
•of  the  theoretical  number  over  the  cards  guessed  by  Leonie.  And  on
tliat  day  only  one  card  was  tried,  Leonie  being  extremely  ill.  The
actual  chance-drawing  twice  shows  an  excess  over  Leonie's  successes,  is
twice  equal,  and  on  the  other  nine  days  is  inferior.


74)  Fiirllter  Experiments  in  IIijpnotiG

It  will  be  seen  also  that  (1)  the  interposition  of  a  second  envelope,
and  (2)  the  employment  of  a  new  pack  of  cards  did  not  apparently
modify  Lconie's  lucidity.  In  the  first  series  (one  envelope)  in  45  trials
we  find  7  cards  told  completely  right,  and  23  with  suit  right — the
theoretic  numbers  being  1  and  11.  In  the  second  series  (two  opaque
envelopes)  in  16  trials  we  find  5  cards  were  told  completely  right,
and  7  cards  with  suit  right — the  theoretic  numbers  being  0  and  4.
In  the  third  series  (fresh  pack  of  cards  and  two  opaque  envelopes)
in  seven  trials  we  find  5  cards  with  suifc  told  rightly — the  theoretic
number  being  2.

By  a  rough  calculation,  the  probability  tliat  in  68  trials  there
will  be  36  successes  at  least  in  guessing  the  suit  is  found  to  be  less
than  ^'

lUO.OJU  ■

lieturning  to  what  has  been  already  said,  we  see  at  once  that  these
trials  must  be  divided  into  two  groups.  In  the  first  group  come  the
trials  where  the  card  guessed  was  completely  described  (pips,  suit,  and
colour) ;  in  the  second  group  come  the  cases  where  the  suit  alone  was
guessed.

It  is  remarkable  in  how  large  a  proportion  of  those  cases  in  which
Leonie  described  the  guessed  card  completely,  the  description  was
completely  right.

The  following  is  a  list  of  the  cases  where  the  guessed  card  was
comjpletely,  or  nearly  completely  described  : —


True  Card.

Card  Described.

1

10  H

K  H

2

Kn  D

F  D

O

•  •  •

KD

K  D

4

10

1  C

5

QS

F  S

6

IH

IH

7

KnII

Kn  S

8

KC

K  C

9

2D

2D

10

4D

4D

11

K  H

K  H

12

Q  D

QD

13

ic

1  G

14

•  •  •

QH

QD

15

10  H

10  H

16

K  C

K  C

17

9D

9  D

Thus  in  68  trials  Leonie  only  17  times  offered  a  full  description,  and
of  these  descriptions  there  were  two  where  the  description  was
incomplete — "  court-caixl  in  diamonds  "  for  knave  of  diamonds,  and
"  court-card  in  spades"  for  queen  of  spades — an  incompleteness  which
assuredly  ought  not  to  count  as  an  error. But  let  us  set  aside  these


Liicid'ity  or  Clairvoyance.


75


two  incomplete  descriptions,  and  consider  only  the  15  complete  ones..
We  find  that  in  15  cards  completely  described  there  were  three  errors.
And  these  errors  were  only  partial  ;  king  of  hearts  for  10  of  hearts  ;
knave  of  spades  for  knave  of  hearts  ;  queen  of  diamonds  for  queen  of
hearts.

Now  the  antecedent  probability  of  a  completely  correct  description
is -i- ;  and  if  we  calculate  the  probability  of  correctly  describing  12
cards  out  of  15  we  arrive  at  a  fraction  so  small  as  to  leave  us  a  moral
certitude  that  chance  alone  cannot  have  brought  about  such  a  result.

This  probability  is  approximately  1  in  1,000,000,000,000,000,000.

It  seems  to  me,  then,  to  be  needless  to  insist  further  that  chance  is
not  here  the  agent.  It  is  not  chance,  it  is  something  else  ;  ^t7^a^  else-
we  must  presently  try  to  determine.

But  first  let  us  see  what  is  to  be  made  of  the  other  experiments  if
we  eliminate  these  17  trials.  Fifty-one  trials  remain,  in  which  Leonie
told  the  suit  right  21  times;  whereas  the  probable  number  was  13,
The  chance  of  telling  the  suit  right  21  times  in  51  trials  is  small ;  but
yet  far  greater  tlian  the  chances  with  which  we  have  just  been  dealing.
This  result  alone  would  not  suffice  to  establish  Leonie's  lucidity.  It
proves,  however,  that  even  when  the  best  experiments  are  omitted,  she-
still  replied  Avith  more  accuracy  than  chance-drawings  actually  gave,,
or  theoretically  should  give.

But  there  is  a  wide  difference  between  these  51  trials  where  the-
complete  description  of  the  card  was  not  given,  and  the  17  trials  where-
it  tvas  given.  Taking  the  suit  alone  (chance  of  rightness  \)  we  find,
in  the  first  group  of  51,  21  successes;  in  the  second  group  of  17,  15-
successes.  The  chance  of  15  successes  in  17  trials  is  roughly  1  in  10,000,000.
I  shall  not  dwell  further  on  the  hypothesis  of  chance,  which  seems  to
me  absurd.  It  is  not  chance  which  can  give  the  right  card  12  times
in  15.1

Since,  then,  the  hypothesis  of  chance  must  be  rejected,  we  need  to
scrutinise  the  conditions  of  the  experiments.  In  the  first  place  it  is
plain  that  thought-transference  {suggestion  mentale)  cannot  be
invoked  as  an  explanation.  Only  in  two  cases  (Experiments  57  and  19)-
was  such  transference  possible.  In  Experiment  57  my  friend  M.  E.
Guiard  had  looked  at  tlie  card  before  he  placed  it  in  the  envelope.  He
abstained  from  giving  any  indication,  and  contented  himself  with
finswering,  "  Eight !  "  when  Leonie  said,  "  It  is  the  king  of  clubs."

In  Experiment  19,  after  Leonie  had  said  erroneously,  "  It  is  a.
club,"  I  looked  at  the  card  and  saw  that  it  was  a  king  of  diamonds.
I  am  absolutely  certain  that  she  could  not  see  the  card  while  I  looked

1  See  p.  151  in  ProccaUnrjs  XII.  In  the  433  trials  recounted  in  my  previous
paper  there  were  only  si.-v  cards  fully  described.


76


Further  Experiments  in  Ili/pnotio


at  it.  Slie  tlien  said,  "  It  is  the  queen  of  diamonds,"  without  any
indication  on  my  part  further  than  by  telling  her  that  it  was  not  a
club. (This  experiment  has,  of  course,  been  counted  as  a  failure.)

Tlie  examination  of  the  cards  of  which  a  full  description  was  given,
sliows  an  interesting  peculiarity.  They  were  mainly  court-cards  and
aces.  Among  the  17  fully-described  cards,  while  the  proportion  given
by  cliaucc  would  have  been  5  or  6  court-cards  and  aces,  there  were  in
fact  13. She  seems  then  to  see  court-cards  better  than  cards  with  pips.

AVe  come  now  to  the  delicate  and  difficult  question  :  "Was  her
success  due  to  some  defect  in  tlie  experimentation  ■?

jMy  mode  of  procedure  was  as  follows  :  From  the  midst  of  10  packs
-(if  .32  cards  cacli,  I  drew  at  hazard  a  card  which  I  placed  in  an  opaque
envelo])e.  I  did  tliis  in  low  liglit  at  one  end  of  my  library,  whiCvi  is
nearly  ilvc  metres  in  length,-  Leonie  sitting  at  tlie  opposite  end,  with
her  back  turned  to  me.  Moreover,  I  drew  the  card  very  rapidly,  so
that  in  order  to  see  it  it  would  lia\'c  boon  necessary  (1)  to  lie  on  the
floor  in  front  of  me  ;  (2)  to  bri7ig  the  lamp  and  set  it  on  the  floor.  It
is  then  absolutely  (I  say  absoI-(tt'?Jy)  impcssible  that  tliecard  could  have
been  seen  at  the  moment  wlien  I  pat  it  in  the  envelope.  The  envelope
was  gummed,  and  I  closed  it  at  once.  Certainly,  dui-iug  an  experiment
wliich  sometimes  lasted  two  or  tlirce  hours,  I  occasionally  took  my  eyes
oflf  the  subject  for  some  instants  ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  open  a  gummed
envelope  in  a  few  instants — water  and  miriute  care  are  needed —
without  leaving  some  trace.  At  the  moment  when  I  was  about  to
open  tlie  envelope  I  rigoi'ously  observed  that  it  was  the  same
envelope,  tliat  it  had  no  tear  in  it,  and  that  the  fastening  was
absolutely  intact.  Consequently  tiie  envelope  had  not  been
opened,  and  it  vs^as  the  same  envelope.  The  name  of  the  card
indicated  by  Leonie  was  written  by  her  in  full,  or  written  by  me,
before  tlie  envelope  was  opened ;  and,  moreover,  I  kept  an  exact — a
religiously  exact — account  of  all  the  experiments  made ;  so  that  the
15  experiments,  with  12  successes,  must  be  regarded  as  the  exact
number.  No  conscious  or  unconscious,  mental  or  non-mental  sugges-
tion could  be  made  by  mo,  since  I  Avas  totally  ignorant  of  the  card
placed  in  the  envelope.

At  the  moment  when  the  envelope  was  opened  my  eyes  did  not
■quit  the  card  v/hich  Leonie  drew  from  the  envelope  till  tlie  moment
Avhen  I  had  recognised  what  it  was.  Often  I  withdrew  the  card  myself,
in  whicli  case  no  trickery  was  possible.  Unfortunately,  in  some  cases,
which  I  luive  very  wrongly  omitted  to  note,  Leonie,  as  I  have  said,
withdrew  the  card  herself.  I  followed  it  witli  my  eyes  carefully  when
she  did  not  show  it  to  me  immediately,  and  I  am  sure  that  it  was  in
fact  t!io  card  witlidrawn  from  the  envelope  which  she  sliowed  me.  Still,
this  is  a  small  flaw  in  my  method,  necessitating,  to  my  great  regret,  a


Lucidity  or  Clairvoyance.


17


certain  reserve  in  my  expressions  of  absolute  certitude.  Tlie  reader,
doubtless,  will  consider  my  scruples  as  exaggerated  ;  for  it  is  absurd  to:
assume  in  Leonie  a  manual  skill  greater  than  that  of  the  most  accom-
plished conjui'er.  To  make  the  card  in  the  envelope  disappear,  and  tO'
replace  it  by  another  at  25  centimetres  from  me, — that  is  all  but
impossible ;  and  if  I  give  expi-ession  to  this  objection  it  is  not  that  I
suppose  that  Leonie  could  have  tricked  me  in  these  experiments,  but
because  I  desire  to  suggest  against  myself  all  the  objections  which  can
possibly  be  made.  This  objection,  then,  seems  to  me  to  have  little  force,,
for  the  following  reasons  : —

1.  Because  the  good  faith  of  Leonie  was  almost  always  complete..
(On  this  point  a  special  discussion  will  be  needed.)

2.  Because  in  many  cases — half  at  least  of  the  cases — it  would  have
been  absolutely  impossible  for  her  to  use  any  trickery.

3.  Because  it  would  be  necessary  to  credit  her  witli  an  incredible-
skill  in  prestidigitation,  of  which  she  certainly  is  quite  devoid.  She
barely  knows  the  names  of  the  cards.

We  come,  then,  to  the  question  of  Le'onie's  good  faitli.  I  need  not
say  that  I  am  not  speaking  of  simulation  of  the  hypnotic  trance.  Tliis
she  does  not  and  cannot  simulate.  But  there  is  in  her  a  double
existence.  She  is  Leonie  when  she  is  awake,  and  Leontine  when  she
is  entranced.  Leonie  and  Leontine  are  two  quite  distinct  personages  ;
and  assuredly  Leontine  does  not  simulate  the  trance ;  her  entranced
state  is  as  real  as  Leonie's  waking  state.

But  this  Leontine  has  a  very  active  and  definite  character  of  lier
own.  She  has  tastes,  affections,  memories,  which  have  created  for  her
a  real  personality.  It  would  then  be  quite  possible  that  tliere  should
be,  not  indeed  simulation  of  the  trance,  but  trickery  in  the  trance,
wdiich  is  a  very  different  thing.  The  question  is  :  Is  Leontine  capable
of  deceiving  me  1

To  my  great  regret  she  is  so  capable.  I  am  obliged  to  state  that  I
have  once  caught  her  actually  cheating  me  ; '  and  this,  in  fact,  is  the

1  The  way  in  which  Leontine  cheated,  during  one  of  those  states  of  unconsciousness
of  which  I  spoke  above,  was  this  :  I  had  drawn  a  card  and  marked  it,  without  seeing  it,
and  taken  it  into  the  next  room.  Then  I  told  her  to  try  to  guess  it.  She  said  10  of  spades.
Now  the  card  that  I  had  taken  into  the  next  room  was  really  a  king  of  hearts,  which
I  found  the  next  day  with  the  mark  that  I  had  made  on  it.  That  is  what  Leonie's
trickery  consists  in.  I  say  nothing  about  the  cards  enclosed  in  an  envelope,  which  are
left  with  her  so  that  she  may  guess  them  in  the  course  of  the  day  or  night,  for,  in  this
case,  there  is  no  doubt  that,  in  an  unconscious  interval,  she  opens  the  envelope  to  loolc
at  the  card  and  then  puts  it  back  at  once  very  carefully  into  the  envelope.  The-
personality  which  carries  on  all  these  operations  does  so  without  either  Leonie  or
Leontine  knowing  anything  about  it,  and  Leonie,  in  the  utmost  good  faitli,  thinks
that  she  has  made  a  right  guess  about  the  card  which  she  claims  never  to  have  seen.
I  therefore  consider  as  reliable  experiments  only  those  in  which  I  have  been  able,  to
watch  Leonie  all  the  time.


78


Further  Experiments  in  HyimotiG


reason  wliich  prevents  me  from  citing  a  series  of  experiments  made
later,  from  August  2nd  to  September  lOtli,  and  intended  to  exclude  the
liypothesis  of  hypertestliesia  of  touch  or  sight — for  in  these  experiments
trickery  was  possible,  while  it  was  not  possible  in  the  earlier  ones.  But
a  fraud  of  Luontine's  is  not  the  same  thing  as  a  fraud  of  an  ordinary
person,  on  account  of  the  complexity  of  Madame  B.'s  constitution.
We  have,  as  already  said,  Leonie,  tiie  waking  personage,  Leontine,  the
entranced  personage,  and  moreover  Leonore,  a  different  personage,
whose  somnambulism  is  extremely  profound,  and  on  whom  M.  Perrier,
and  afterwards  M.  Janet,  have  made  some  instructive  experiments.
Besides  these  three  different  personalities,  characterised  by  memories
special  to  each,  there  are  others  also — -Leonora,  let  us  say,  for
instance — corresponding  to  Madame  B.'s  condition  of  spontaneous
somnambulism  during  normal  sleep, ^  and  perhaps  other  states  of
consciousness,  of  which  we  have  no  knowledge.

Thus  Leontine  sometimes  performs  actions  of  which  she  retains  no
recollection.  She  writes  whole  phrases  without  knowing  that  she
has  written  them.  M.  Pierre  Janet  has  taught  her  to  do  this ;
so  that  I  should  be  tempted  to  believe  that  if  thei'e  has  been  fraud  on
Leontine's  part,  that  fi'aud  has  been  unconscious.  This  distinction  is
important  from  a  moral  point  of  view  ;  but  from  our  present  experi-
mental standpoint  it  ought  to  inspire  us  with  a  great  distrust,  a
marked  prudence  in  our  conclusions.  I  only  insist,  therefore,  on  the
15  experiments  above  given,  because  I  am  certain  that  no  conjurer,
however  accomplished,  could  have  told  me  the  12  cards  which  L^onie
did  actually  tell  me.

PART  II,

The  experiments  described  above  were  made  in  June  and  July,
1838.  They  did  not  completely  satisfy  either  my  friends  or  me  ;  in
fact,  though  they  are  conclusive  against  the  hypothesis  of  chance,  they
do  not  show  in  an  absolutely  irrefutable  manner  that  there  is  not  some
sort  of  extraordinary  visual  (retinal)  acuity,  and,  moreover,  they  leave
a  not  altogether  negligible  place  for  the  hypothesis  of  trickery.

It  was  necessary  therefore  to  try  to  meet  this  two-fold  objection,
and,  on  this  account,  I  tried  two  new  series  of  experiments  with
Le'onie.

The  defective  points  in  the  former  experiments  are  : —
(a)  Leontine  may  change  the  envelope  that  I  give  her  containing
the  card  to  be  guessed,  and,  having  with  her  an  envelope  containing  a
similar  cai'd,  may  present  it  to  me  as  if  it  were  the  envelope  that  ^
liad  given  her.

'  Ordinary  nomenclature  is  quite  inadequate  to  represent  these  different  phases.


Lucidity  or  Clairvoyance.


79


(5)  L^ontino  may  open  the  envelope  tliat  I  give  lier,  take  tlie
card  out,  look  at  it,  sliut  up  the  envelope  again  and  pretend  to  have
guessed  it.

(c)  Leontine  may  hide  a  card  in  her  hand,  and,  when  she  opens
the  envelope  herself,  may  give  it  to  me  as  the  one  guessed.

I  have  already  explained  that  these  three  objections  are  not,  in  my
opinion,  valid,  for

(1)  I  hardly  took  my  eyes  off  L.  from  the  moment  when  I  gave
her  the  envelope,  and  there  was  never  any  suspicious  gesture,  as  if
she  were  attempting  to  unfasten  the  two  superposed  envelopes.  One
tnows  how  difficult  it  is  to  unfasten  a  gummed  envelope.

(2)  Tlie  envelope  that  I  gave  her  was  almost  (but  not  quite)
Always  marked,  so  that  the  substitution  of  another  for  it  was  im-
possible.

(3)  From  the  moment  when  L.  opened  the  envelope,  I  absolutely
never  took  my  eyes  oti"  the  card  that  she  took  out  of  ifc,  and,  in  some
cases,  I  opened  the  envelope  myself.

But  although  these  objections  do  not  seem  to  me  to  have  much
force,  the  fact  of  their  being  raised  demands  for  them  a  complete
refutation. I  therefore  took  the  following  precautions  : — •

(1)  The  selected  card  was  marked,  and  I  kept  in  my  pocket  the
ten  packs  of  cards  from  which  I  had  taken  it.

(2)  Tke  envelope  in  which  the  card  was  put  was  sealed  with
sealing-wax  and  had  a  special  mark.

(3)  I  opened  the  envelope  myself,  and,  when  once  Leonie  had
designated  the  card,  she  touched  neither  it  nor  the  envelope.

These  precautions  are  such  that  no  conjurer  could  find  satisfactory
'objections  to  them.

I  made  two  series  of  experiments  with  Leonie ;  the  first  in  Mr.
Myers'  house  at  Cambridge  from  Thursday,  January  31st,  to  February
15th,  1889.  This  series  failed  completely,  which  seems  to  happen  when
the  series  of  experiments  is  not  sufficiently  prolonged.  Thus,  for  the
cards  of  the  first  part — the  first  expei'iment  was  on  July  10th.  But  I
had  hypnotised  Leonie  at  intervals  since  May  20th,  that  is,  for  a  month
-and  a  half.

The  last  series  of  experiments  was  carried  out  at  my  house  in  Paris,
from  July  12th  to  August  26th,  under  the  conditions  described  above,
the  only  difi'erence  being  that,  having  no  more  "  opaque  "  envelopes,  I
used  some  which  are  not  opaque  to  transmitted  light  and  the  card  in
the  envelope  was  then  enclosed  in  a  second  envelope,  so  that  each  card
Avas  in  a  double  envelope.  Of  course  I  satisfied  myself  that  the  card
thus  enclosed  was  absolutely  invisible  to  our  normal  eyes.


80


Further  Expe7'iments  in  Hyjmotio


This  series  of  experiments  is  tabulated  below,  with  the  Scame


arrangement  as  before.


1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

24

25
26
27
28
29
30
31


Date.


July  13


July

1 1
)1

1 1

July

1  )

July
July

July

»

July
July


14

15

17

18

21

22
29


July  30

July  31

Aug.  1
It

Aug.  4


Card
in

Envelope.


2S

9  H

4  H

6  C

10  D
10  D
QD
K  H
10  C

9  D
8  C

7  D

8  H

3  C

5  S
2  C

Kn  H

6  C
Ku  S

2  D

4  S
8  S

K  D

A  H

Kn  S
A  C

3  S

5  S
5D
AS
8  H


CarJ

guessed

Leonie


H

S
D
S

c
c
c
c
n
s
s
c
c

H

s
c
c
c

FS

s
s
s

Q  S

D

Kn  S
4  D
3  H
2  S

D

S

8  G


Card
drawn  at
hazard.


Remarks,


QS

2  D

3  S

9  H
A  C
8  S
Q  H
3  H
Q  D
3  D
0  C
K  C
2  H
5  H
QS
8  C
8D
A  H

10  H
8  C

A  H
2  C

Kn  S

2  H

Kn  D
10  H
7  C
Kn  S
K  S
5  S
2  H


(A  small  card,  that  is,  2,  3,  4  or  5.)
She  wrote  C.
She  wrote  D.

She  wrote  0.


She  wrote  0.

She  wrote  H,
She  wrote  0,


She  wrote  H.
She  wrote  S.

She  said  suddenly  :  "  There  is  a
figure,  a  queen  or  a  king."

She  drew  persistently  an  ace  on
the  envelope  and  wrote  C.


She  said  S.all  the  time, and 3  of  S.
She  said  :  "  A  small  D.


From  this  expeiiment  onwards,  the  cards  were  put  into  a  three-fold  envelope


She  said  :  "  It  is  a  figure,"  at  tht
moment  when  I  was  going  tc
open  the  envelopes.


32

Aug

4

4  C

H

8  D

33

7  D

S

10  D

34

Aug

6

2  D

5  S

Kn  H

35

0  C

C

10  D

38

Aug.

10

K  S

2  H

4  H

37

KG

F  C

Kn  D

38

4  D

C

5  H

39

Aug.

13

8  H

7  S

4  G

40

K  S

S

Kn  D

41

8  S

G

9  S

42

Aug.

15

7  H

3  C

7  S

Lucidity  or  Clairvoyance


-81


From  this  experiment  onwards,  two  envelopes  were  used.

(A  small  card.)
She  said  H.  all  the  time.


43

Aug.  15

Kn  C

H

Kn  n

44

» »

QD

F  D

7  D

45

2  11

D

4  H

46

Aug.'  18

4  S

•6  H

10  C

47

>»

Kn  D

D

Kn  D

48

11

A  D

F  H

10  D

49

j»

7  0

S

A  S

50
51
52
53
54
55
58
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65


Shesaid:  "I  thinkitisan  ace."
From  this  experiment  onwards,  three  envelopes  were  used.


Aug.  19

4  C

S

5  S

5  D

2  S

Kn  H

9?

KnH

F  H

K  S

3  S

S

9  H

Aug.'  21

4  S

2  C

5  H

)?

8S

3  S

K  C

i>

9  H

3  8

9S

11

6  D

F  D

3  D

Aug.  25

5  D

H

3  C

5  )

9  H

S

K  D  (

1  >

5  fl

5  H

KnD

<;h

3  C

A  S

Aug.'  20

oH

2  S

9  R

8  S

H

8  C

5  D

11

2  H

Kn  S

F  C

Q  C

("There  is  a  point  in  the  middle.")


("A  point  in  the  middle.")


Although  if  we  take  the  whole  of  this  second  series  of  experi-
ments, the  amount  of  success  is  not  more than we  might  have
expeeted  by  chance,  there  is,  I  think,  nevertheless,  some  evidence  point-
ing to  lucidity. Leonie  only  attempted  to  guess  anything  more  than
the  suit  in  25  cases ;  in  9  of  those  25  cases  she  guessed  tliat  tlie  card
was  a  court-cai  d,  and  in  7  out  of  the  9  this  was  true. In  5  of  these
cases,  moreover,  she  guessed  rightly  the  suit  to  which  the  court-card
belonged. Only  once,  when  a  court-card  was  drawn  and  she  attempted
to  guess  more  than  the  suit,  did  she  fail  to  designate  it  as  a  court-card.
This  certainly  looks  like  some  abnormal  capacity  for  discerning  court-
cards,  especially  when  we  remember  that  it  was  mainly  in  guessing
court-cards  and  aces  that  she  succeeded  in  the  first  series.

Conclusion.

As  to  the  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from  this  long  series  of  experi-
ments, there  are  only  four  possible  hypotheses.

(1)  Some  defect  in  the  experimentation.

(2)  Chance.

(3)  Some  exceptional  acuteness  in  retinal  vision  or  in  the  sense  of
touch

(4)  Some  capacity  of  obtaining  knowledge,  whose  modus  operandi
»s  absolutely  unknown  to  us. —  '


S2


Further  Experiments  in  IlyimotiG


(1)  As  far  as  I  can  see,  there  was  no  defect  of  experimentation  in
the  second  series  of  trials.  I  have  not  the  presumption  or  conceit  to
affirm  that  there  was  none,  but,  for  my  part,  I  do  not  see  in  wliat  point
the  experiments  can  be  defective.  Tlie  card  is  marked  by  me  and  put
into  three  envelopes  sealed  with  sealing-wax;  Leonie  attempts  to  guess
it  in  my  sight.  1  take  it  out  of  the  envelope  myself,  and  1  only  take
account  of  her  final  guess.

In  the  first  series  the  defect  in  the  experiments  was  very  slight,
so  sliglit  that  I  myself  consider  the  experiments  to  be  valid  :  the
hypotliesis  tliat  Leonie  cheated  me  as  often  as  would  be  required  to
account  for  her  success — by  substituting  a  card  chosen  by  her  for  the
one  that  I  had  taken,  or  another  envelope  for  the  envelope  that  I  gave
lier — seems  to  me  absurd.  Experiment  57,  besides,  t«!ls  against  this
greatly  strained  explanation,  and  so  does  the  fact  that  so  large  a
proportion — ^13  out  of  17 — of  the  cards  fully  guessed  were  court-cards
and  aces.

We  must  then  accept  the  experiments  of  the  second  series  as
irreproachable  and  those  of  the  iirst  series  as  almost  irreproachable.

(2)  Chance  cannot  be  credited  with  the  designations  of  the  first
series.  In  fact  the  probability  of  guessing  12  out  of  15  cards  right  is
so  small  that  it  is  absolutely  certain  that  chance  could  not  produce
such  a  series.

The  experiments  of  the  second  part  are  less  conclusive,  but  L^onie's
success  in  designating  court-cards  in  these  experiments  appears  to  me
to  afford  distinct  confirmation  of  tlie  first  series.  It  would  certainly
liave  been  more  satisfactory  if  the  second  series  of  experiments  had
been  as  successful  as  the  first,  but  nevertheless,  I  think,  we  may  con-
clude from  the  two  series  taken  together  that  neither  chance  nor
trickery  will  explain  Leonie's  success.

(3)  We  are  left,  then,  to  the  two  other  hypotheses  of  visual  or  tactile
hyperacuity  on  the  one  part,  and  on  the  other  part  of  a  faculty  of
knowledge  whose  modus  agencli  is  unknown  to  us.

And  first  as  to  tactile  hypera^sthesia.  The  pips  and  the  figures  are
painted  on  the  cards,  and  rise  in  a  relief  which,  though  very  slight,  might
.enable  a  person  whose  sense  of  touch  was  abnormally  acute  to  recog-
uiise  a  card  enclosed  in  an  envelope.  But  I  do  not  regard  it  as  possible
that  this  could  be  done  through  two  thicknesses  of  paper.  The  sense  of
touch  which  could  accomplish  this  feat  would  be  very  unlike  the
sense  of  touch  which  we  actually  know.

Is  it  then  to  be  explained  by  some  specially  keen  power  of  retinal
vision  1

That  is  possible,  and  I  confess  that  my  mind  is  not  quite  made  up  on
this  point.  The  fact  that  Leonie  discerns  court-cards  and  aces  especially


Lucidity  or  Clairvoyance.


83


well  would  seem  to  point  to  retinal  vision.  But  on  the  other  lianrl,
the  addition  of  a  second  envelope  did  not  affect  the  result.  Also  tlie
entranced  Leontine  seems  to  have  her  eyes  closed.  I  believe  that  the
eyelids  are  only  lowered,  and  that  the  rays  of  light,  half-intercepted
by  the  eyelids,  do  reach  the  retina,  but  at  any  rate  she  never  looks
at  anything  except  with  nearly  closed  eyes,  and  allowing  only  a  small
ray  of  light  to  enter  beneath  her  eyelids,  and  this  is  by  no  means  a
convenient  way  to  look  at  things.  And  further,  she  does  not  attempt
to  take  the  cards  into  the  sunlight  or  laiuplight.

Moreover,  in  judging  of  this  question  we  must  not  leave  out  of
account  the  numerous  instances  of  lucidity  shown  by  Leonie  and  other
somnambules,  in  cases  where  it  cannot  be  due  to  retinal  vision.  (See,
e.g.,  the  example  quoted  by  me  on  p.  164,  Proceedings,  Part  XII.)

I  may  add  that  even  if  it  be  retinal  vision,  a  retinal  vision  so  much
more  developed  than  ours  would  almost  amount  to  a  new  perceptive
faculty.

(4)  "We  have,  consequently,  to  admit  the  existence  of  some  faculty
entirely  unknown  to  us—hcciditij  or  seco7ld-sight—^vhic]\evev  name  is
applied  to  it— which  is  to  be  met  with  quite  exceptionally  in  certain
subjects,  and,  even  with  thear,  quite  irregularly  and  with  no  possibility
hitherto  of  determining  the  conditions  of  its  occurrence.

But  the  method  that  I  have  adopted  to  prove  this  important  fact  is
purely  empirical  and  cannot  carry  conviction  with  it.  In  the
experimental  science.s,  one  thing  is  necessary,  viz.,  to  be  able  to  control
the  conditions  of  the  experiment.  If  a  chemist  were  to  find  a  new
substance  and  were  to  declare  himself  unable  to  say  how  he  found  it
or  to  produce  it  again,  nobody  would  listen  to  him,  and  that  would
perhaps  be  reasonable.  In  the  same  way,  I  have  obtained  some
phenomena  of  lucidity,  but  I  frankly  declare  myself  unable  to  tell  how
I  obtained  them  or  why  I  succeeded  sometimes  and  sometimes  failed,
and  I  cannot  undertake  to  produce  them  again.  This  is  empiricism
not  science.

I  cannot,  however,  draw  from  this  any  discouraging  conclusion.
On  the  contrary,  we  have  here  a  whole  series  of  absolutely  new
phenomena  immersed  in  deep  shadow,  like  every  science  in  its  infancy.
The  problem  then  must  be  attacked  resolutely  but  methodicallv,
as  in  experimental  sciences.  Perhaps  after  all  tlie  so-called  occult
sciences  are  only  a  chapter  in  Physical  Science— a  singularly  delicate
Physical  Science— and  I  am  firmly  convinced  that  we  must  have
recourse  to  Physical  Science  in  attempting  some  explanation  and  some
definition  of  these  phenomena,  which,  to  my  mind,  are  certain  but
iaexplicable


84  Du2)lex  Personality.


V.

DUPLEX  PERSONALITY.

an  essay  on  the  analogy  between  hypnotic  phenomena  and  ceetain
experiences  op  tue  norimal  consciousness.!

By  Thomas  Barkworth.

"  A  good  use  of  vmcommon  things  is  to  force  us  to  look  more  curiously  at  the-
meaning  of  common  things  which  we  overlook  habituallj-. " — Maudsley.

Seeing  tliat  no  result  can  be  produced  experimentally  in  an  organ-
ism, of  wliicli  the  causes  and  the  constituents  are  not  pre-existent  in  it,
it  would  be  strange  indeed  if  the  remarkable  performances  of  Iiypnotised
pei'sons  had  no  parallel  in  the  experiences  of  daily  life.  For,  however
widely  the  one  may  differ  from  the  other  in  the  degrees  and  modes  of
manifestation,  there  will  be  sufficient  resemblance  in  tlieir  nature  and
opei'ation  to  enable  us  to  recognise  them  as  symptoms  of  tlie  same
functions,  or  effects  of  the  same  forces.  Naturally,  the  first  class
affords  the  most  attractive  subjects  for  speculation,  being  more  clearly
defined,  more  salient  in  feature,  and  more  startling  in  results  ;  but
granting  these  points  of  vantage,  and  allowing  moreover  that  beyond
their  inherent  interest  tliey  have  a  relative  value  in  throwing  light
upon  the  constitution  of  mind  in  abnormal  states,  I  am  inclined  to
think  that  one  of  their  chief  points  of  interest  will  prove  to  be  the
directing  of  attention  to  corresponding  normal  features,  laws,  and
operations  of  mind,  wldcli  we  might  otherwise  leave  unnoticed  although
continually  in  presence  of  them.

As  an  instance  I  may  point  to  those  indications  of  distinct  phases
of  consciousness  which  liave  been  termed  "  Duplex  "  or  "  Multiplex
Personality."  At  present  it  seems  to  me  that  "  Duplex  Personality"'
would  be  a  term  wide  enough  to  cover  nearly  all  the  phenomena
recorded ;  but  at  all  events,  without  these  and  similar  investigations,,
the  Unity  of  human  consciousness  would  have  remained  a  dogma
unshaken  and  almost  unchallenged.  It  is  to  the  manifestation  of  this-
Duplex  Personality — called  elsewhere,  and  in  relation  to  other  cases,,
primary  and  secondary  consciousness — tliat  I  wish  to  address  myself,
with  the  object  of  showing  how  their  comparatively  dissevered  and
almost  opposite  action  is  not  only  observable  in  the  Iiyj^notic  state,,
but  also  in  the  every-day  actions  of  life,  and  that  it  is  chiefly  owing

1  What  is  here  published  is  a  portion  of  an  essay  by  Mr.  Barkworth,  somewhat
enlarged  since  it  was  road  at  a  meeting  of  the  Society  on  -January  25th,  1880.  It
ought  to  be  stated  that  the  Editor  of  the  Proceedings,  and  not  the  author  of  the  paper,
is  responsible  for  the  selection  of  the  portion  here  published.


Duplex  Personality.  85

to  the  very  frequency  and  commonplace  nature  of  the  evidences  for
it  that  they  have  remained  so  little  recognised,  and  tlicir  import  so
xinsuspected.

The  most  prominent  and  pi'evailing  characteristic  of  the  ordinarv
actions  of  our  waking  life  is  that  they  are  performed  in  obedience  to  the
will,  and  as  a  rule,  the  will  not  only  suggests  the  action,  but  presides
over  its  fulfilment.

This  rule  is,  however,  subject  to  numerous  exceptions  to  be  pre-
sently noticed.  The  actions  of  the  hypnotic  state,  on  the  other  hand,
are  largely  characterised  by  what  may  be  called  automatism  ;  that  is  to
say,  being  started  by  suggestioni  they  seem  to  be  carried  on  Avithout
volition  until  the  efiect  of  the  impulse  dies  out,  or  until  the  suggested
action  is  fully  completed,  and  cannot  therefore  be  any  longer  continued,
or  until  the  suggestion  is  changed,  or  put  an  end  to,  by  the  operator. 2
In  these  cases,  however,  it  is  only  the  execution  and  not  the  initiation
of  the  movements  which  is  automatic,  the  suggestion  for  them  being
external  to  the  subject's  own  personality.

Hypnotic  subjects  are  usually  so  harried  with  suggestions  as  to  have
little  opportunity  for  shov^ing  what  they  would  do  if  permitted  to  foUo^v
their  own  inclinations,  and  just  as  any  absurdity  seems  in  dreams  to  be
perfectly  natural  and  commonplace,  so  in  the  hypnotic  trance  the  most
bizarre  notions  can  be  imposed  upon  a  subject  mthout  arousing  in  him
any  sense  of  incongruity. A  man  can  be  made  to  believe  that  he
is  a  hen,  and  to  chuckle  and  spread  his  wings  over  an  imaginary  brood
of  chickens,  but  neither  in  this  case,  nor  in  the  more  or  less  similarly
absurd  dreams  which  are  often  experienced  in  natural  sleep,  does  any
sense  of  improbability,  still  less  of  the  ludicrous,  seem  to  strike  the
sleeper. I  except,  however,  those  dreams  which  the  harassed,  over-
worked man  suffers  from  when  he,  in  sleep,  goes  over  again  the
anxieties  and  worries  of  the  day's  study  or  business,  or  rehearses  those
of  the  morrow. In  this  case  his  sleep  is  not  sufficiently  profound  to  let
the  reasoning  powers  rest,  or  in  the  language  of  hypnotists,  his  primary
■consciousness  is  not  completely  inhibited,  consequently  his  dreams  are,
•even  painfully,  rational  and  coherent,  and  he  commonly  remarks  on
waking  that  he  feels  fatigued  rather  than  refreshed. We  have,  how-
ever, instances  of  complete  automatism  in  the  case  of  the  sleep-walker
who  goes  through  a  variety  of  complicated  actions  entirely  self-sug-
gested. In  the  great  majority  of  even  these  cases,  however,  the

1  The  term  suggestion  is  used  throughout  this  paper  in  the  technical  sense  familiar
to  students  of  hypnotism.

_  -  If  the  limbs  (of  the  hypnotised  subject)  are  disposed  so  as  to  begin  anv  action
It  is  earned  on  by  the  subject,  and  in  this  -n-ay  he  may  be  made  to  climb  or  go  on  all
fours,  or  if  a  pen  or  a  piece  of  work  be  put  into  his  hand,  he  ^^•ill  \vrite  or  sew.

Animal  Blagnetisni,  Binet  and  Fere,  p.  181.  i


Duplex  Personality.


element  of  suggestion  is  not  entirely  absent,  the  suggestion  being
supplied  by  the  subject's  own  memory  or  engrained  habits.  Thus  the
somnambulic  dairymaid  will  turn  the  churn, the  needlewoman  will  woi'k
away  at  the  unfinished  garment,  to  the  completion  of  which  she  has
been  anxiously  looking  to  provide  her  weekly  i-ent,  and  so  on.  A  far
rarer  and  more  interesting  case,  of  which  instances  are  not  wanting,  is
that  of  the  sleep-walker,  whose  actions  are  not  only  not  suggested  by  the
memories  of  his  waking  life,  but  are  of  such  a  nature  as  he  could  not
perform  in  his  waking  state,  e.g.,  physically — walking  or  climbing  along
the  edges  of  roofs  or  narrow  parapets  where  a  single  false  step  would
)je  death  mentally — writing  poetry,  or  composing  music  above  the
level  of  his  ordinary  powers.  In  these  last-named  cases  automatism
seems  to  rise  to  intuition.

Having  thus  distinguished  between  actions  mental  or  physical,
wliich  are  («)  voluntary,  (i)  suggested  and  automatic,  and  (c)  intuitive
niid  automatic,  we  may  now  j^roceed  to  inquire  how  far  the  two  latter
states  are  exhibited  in  the  ordinary  actions  of  healthy  pei'sons  in  their
waking  hours,  bearing  in  mind  tliat  in  their  case  the  term  suggestion
must  be  restricted  to  tlie  self-imposed  dictates  of  their  own  will  auto-
ijiatically  executed.

(A)  On  the  lirst  of  tliese  classes  there  is  no  need  to  dwell.  The
mental  processes  and  actions  comprised  in  it  cause  or  constitute  the
vast  majority  of  the  conscious  acts  of  sane  persons.  The  will  not  only
determines  upon  them, but  presides  over  their  fullilment,and  they  attain
their  end  by  a  succession,  or  a  combination  of  thoughts,  or  thoughtful
acts,  consciously  planned,  or  co-ordinated,  to  a  definite  intelliriblc  end.
In  reading  a  book,  in  writing  (not  copying")  a  letter,  in  conversation,
and  in  all  forms  of  study  we  have  examples  of  this  class.

(B)  The  second  class,  which  includes  the  bulk  of  the  phenomena
with  wliich  it  is  my  present  purpose  to  deal,  presents  to  us  voluntary
and  automatic  consciousness  acting  in  combination,  but  far  more  inde-
pendently than  is  commonly  supposed.  Just  as  a  suggestion  made  to  a
hypnotic  sulijcct  by  another  jaerson  is  automatically  carried  out  by  the

1  "Dr.  Paul  Garnier  gives  an  instance  of  a  patient,  a  dentist's  assistant,  of  fceLle
bodily  and  mental  health,  wlio  frequently  fell  into  a  stato  of  somnambulism.  On  ono
of  these  occasions  he  escaped  by  a  window  from  a  ward  of  the  Hutel  Dieu,  in  whicli
he  was  undergoing  treatment,  and,  though  a  peculiarly  miathletic  person,  walked
easily  and  fearlessly  along  the  sloping  parapet  of  the  fajade,  a  feat  which  a  trained
gymnast  could  liai  dly  have  accomplished.  He  awoke  in  the  course  of  this  dangerous
performance,  and  had  to  be  rescued  by  mean.?  of  a  ladder.  With,  the  return  of  con-
sciousness reason  awoke  and  he  imdcrstood  the  horror  of  liis  position."  Somnariibidisme
dcvant  Ics  T)-(i)!<nrai(r,Paris,lS8S,  quoted  by  Dr.  Lloyd  Tuckey.  The  italics  are  mine.
An  exactly  similar  case  occurred  not  long  since  at  one  of  the  large  hotels  near  Charing,
Cross.  In  this  case  the  individual  in  question  had  dreamed  that  the  house  was  on
fire  and  that  he  had  to  escape  by  the  roof.  He  woke  in  a  most  perilous  position,,
and  liii.ijfies  of  terror  brought  assistance  and  rescue.


Diqjlex  Personality.


87


former,  o,  in  the  case  of  normal  self-suggestion,  the  will  prescribes  a
course  of  action  which  is  then  automatically  carried  out  by  tlie  voluntary
muscles.  The  mind  having  in  the  meantime  become  engaged  with  other
s'abjects,  the  limbs  nevertheless  continue  to  perform  the  prescribed
fiction  until  the  mind,  being  recalled  to  the  subject,  chooses  to  arrest  or
\ary  it;

1.  The  simplest  cases  in  illustration  of  this  are  those  of  walking,
eating,  or  dressing,  where  the  action  once  voluntarily  commenced  is
continued  to  completion,  although  the  mind  has  in  the  meanwhile
become  wholly  engrossed  with  another  subject.  The  case  is  shown  much
more  clearly,  Iiowever,  when  the  suggestion  takes  the  form  of  a  standing-
order  engrained  by  habit.  If  a  good  hypnotic  subject  were  ordered
thus  :  "  Every  morning  at  nine  o'clock  you  will  leave  your  house  and
walk  to  the  end  of  the  street  where  you  will  catch  the  bus,"  he  would
do  so  until  the  suggestion  wore  off.

Now,  let  it  be  supposed  that  a  man  who  is  usually  accustomed  to
do  this  very  thing,  one  morning  receives  a  letter,  which  absorbs  his
attention  at  the  time  when  he  is  leaving  his  house  to  go  in  a  new  and
different  direction.  If  his  mind  be  so  engrossed  with  the  letter  as  to  be
withdrawn  from  considering  his  destination,  and  so  from  imposing  a
new  suggestion  upon  his  movements,  the  old  suggestion  will  continue  to
operate,  and  he  will  from  "  force  of  habit,"  as  it  is  termed,  walk  to  the
end  of  the  street  and  perhaps  even  get  into  the  "  bus,"  and  proceed  some
distance,  till  his  mind,  accidentally  recalled  to  the  subject,  peremptorily
suggests  to  him  to  stop  the  "  bus "  and  retrace  his  route.  This  is
called  "  absence  of  mind  "  to  which  some  persons  are  more  subject  than
others,  just  as  some  persons  are  better  hypnotic  subjects  than  others.
If  you  have  an  office  or  chambers  from  which  you  set  out  to  transact
business  at  another  place,  afterwards  returning  to  your  own  office,  the
habit  of  always  returning  there  will  become  a  standing  suggestion,  and
when  a  day  comes  that  you  have  three  or  four  places  to  go  to  instead
of  one,  you  will  find,  if  your  mind  is  much  engrossed  with  business,  that
instead  of  going  the  round  of  these  places  at  once,  you  persist  in

eturning  to  your  own  quarters  between  each  call,  and  to  your  great
vexation  have  to  go  back  more  or  less  over  the  same  ground,  just  when

ou  arrive  at  your  own  door.  This  is  a  case  taken  from  repeated
experience.

2.  The  case  becomes  more  interesting  when  the  action  is  more  com-
plicated. It  is  often  found  that  in  reading  music  at  the  pianoforte,  for
instance — it  matters  not  whether  the  piece  is  seen  for  the  first  time  or
not — the  player  will  frequently  allow  his  min^.  to  wander  to  other
topics,  and  become  so  interested  in  them  as  c^uite  to  forget  what  he  is
doing,  and  cease  to  be  conscious  of  any  attention  to  it.  Nevertheless
the  suggestion  having  been  originally  imposed  by  the  mind  to  plav  the


§8


Duplex  Personality.


music,  the  fingers  will  continue  automatically  to  do  so,  and  the'  eyes  to
follow  the  type,  while  all  the  time  the  thoughts  and  the  attention  are
far  away,  and  this  will  continue  until  something  occurs  to  recall  the
mind  to  the  music,  such  as  reaching  the  end  of  the  piece,  or  coming  to
a  passage  presenting  new  difficulties  for  consideration — such  as  the
mode  of  fingering  it — when  normal  and  conscious  exercise  -  of  the
intellect  or  reasoning  power  is  called  for  to  solve  the  new  question
thus  raised.  This  case  is  a  distinct  a,nd  marked  advance  upon  the
former  one.  In  that  the  action  was  only  the  simple  act  of  walking
continuously  in  a  given  direction,  repeating  the  same  movement  of  the
legs  till  the  goal  was  reached,  while  in  the  case  of  the  pianoforte
player  there  ai'e  the  separate  movements  of  ten  fingers  co  oixlinated  to
one  end,  not  monotonous,  but  varied  in  every  successive  bar,  read
and  followed  from  the  printed  page,  yet  all  done  without  consciousness
of  the  ordinary  kind,  and  with  no  exercise  of  the  will  beyond  the  first
suggestion  whicli  started  it.  With  this  case  may  be  compared  those
planchette  experiments  related  by  the  late  Mr.  Gurney  {Proceedings
of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Eesearch,  Part  XL,  No.  3)  in  which  certain
suggestions  of  words  to  be  written,  or  of  calculations,  were  offered  to  a
subject  during  hypnotisation.  Being  then  awakened  and  made  to
read  aloud,  his  hand  ou  a  planchette,  he  automatically  executed  the  sug-
gested task,  although  his  mind  was  wholly  given  to  the  book.  The
performance  of  music  affords,  however,  a  still  more  striking  illustration
of  the  relative  functions  of  the  primary  and  the  secondary  conscious-
ness. In  learning  a  new  instrument,  tlie  production  of  each  noto  is  for
a  long  time  a  separate  intellectual  act.  The  choice  of  the  note  ixi
correspondence  with  the  printed  sign  upon  the  page,  the  mode  of  pro-
ducing it  with  the  lips,  or  the  bow,  in  combination  with  the  fingers,
are  all  subjects  of  distinct  thoughts,  of  which  we  are  defin'tely  awai-e.
By  slow  degrees  and  continued  practice  the  action  tends  to  become
automatic,  that  is  to  say  the  sight  of  the  printed  note  suggests
instinctively  to  the  lips- and  the  fingers  those  combined  movements  which
are  necessary  to  produce  it.  At  length  there  conies  a  time  when  we
pass  from  the  one  state  to  the  other,  and,  when  playing  a  scale,  for
instance,  we  abandon  the  attempt  to  think  of  each  note  separately,
and  simply  starting  from  the  top  of  the  scale,  and  trusting  ourselves
to  automatic  guidance,  we  arrive  at  the  bottom  of  it  we  know  not  how  ;
and  after  further  practice  are  enabled  to  play  the  scale  with  a  rapidity
which  defies  the  effort  to  follow  with  the  mind  the  separate  pro-
duction or  fingering  of  the  notes.  Not  only  is  the  action  of  the  primary
or  voluntary  consciousness  of  no  use  here,  but  the  attempt  to  exercise  it
is  a  distinct  obstacle  to  success,  and  we  have  in  this  fact  one  reason  why
"nervousness"  causes  performers  to  fail  or  "break  down,"  as  it  is  called.
The  anxiety  to  do  well  and  the  fear  of  failure  cause  the  olaver  instead


Duplex  Personality.


80


of  abandoning  himself  to  the  action  of  liis  automatic  faculties,  to
obtrude  operations  of  thought  and  will  upon  liis  fingers,  and  as  his
thoughts  are  not  capable  of  following  his  fingers  with  sufficient
rapidity,  there  ensues  a  want  of  corresjoondence  between  the  two  modes
of  action,  the  first  not  being  able  to  keep  pace  witli  tlie  second,
wliich,  as  it  wex'e,  is  tripped  up.  The  plaj'er  is  in  fact  thinking
of  one  note  when  he  is  playing  another,  although  he  may  not  be  able
to  discern  the  fact.

A  physiological  account  of  this  phenomenon  is  given  by  Fcrricr
(Functions  of  the  Brain,  pp.  252-3)  as  follows  ; — ■

"  We  have  reason  from  the  facts  of  comparative  physiology  to  regard  the
corpora  striata  as  the  centres  in  which  these  habitual  or  automatic  movements
become  organised.  .  „  .  Though  the  consciousness  of  sensory
impressions  must  precede  any  truly  volitional  act  in  response  thereto,  we
find  that  by  education  and  frequent  repetition  the  action  becomes  so  easj'  as
to  follow  impression  without  conscious  discrimination  or  attention,  the  nexus
between  impression  and  action  becoming  so  organically  welded  in  the  sensory
and  motor  centres  as  to  assume  the  character  of  reflex  action  below  the  domain
■of  consciousness.  In  this  case  we  may  suppose  that  impressions  made  on  the
organs  of  sense  travel  up  to  the  optic  thalami,  and  thence  pass  directly  to
the  corpora  striata  instead  of  takiiig  the  larger  or  conscious  circle  through  the
sensfry  and  motor  centres  of  the  hemispheres.  .  .  .  We  may  express  it
thus  that  in  actions  requiring  conscious  discrimination,  and  vohmtary  effort,
the  larger  circle  of  the  hemispheres  is  involved,  but  that  in  the  actions  which
have  become  habitual  and  automatic,  tlie  lai-ger  circle  is  greatly  relieved  by
the  organic  nexus  between  impression  and  action  which  has  been  established
in  the  sensory  and  motor  basal  ganglia."

The  physiological  theory  thus  stated  may  suffice  to  account  for  the
simpler  classes  of  automatic  actions.  But  even  here  it  is  noteworthy
that  the  distinguished  writer  from  whom  I  have  quoted,  in  his
endeavour  to  show  that  the  reactions  in  question  ai'e  "  outside  the  sphere
of  psychical  activity  properly  so  called,"  is  unable  even  to  state  his  own
view  without  resorting  to  the  language  of  metaphor  when  he  speaks  of
the  "  nexus  between  impression  and  action  becoming  organically  welded
in  the  sensory  and  motor  centres": — we  might  safely  challenge  the
author  to  show  us  anatomically  the  "organic  weld"  of  which  he  speaks.

We  shall,  however,  presently  see  that  both  in  hypnotic  experiments
and  in  ordinary  states  of  consciousness  there  is  abundant  evidence  of
psychical  activities,  involving  the  action  of  the  hemispheres  and  the
higher  centres  of  the  brain,  which  nevertheless  are  outside  the  domain
of  normal  consciousness  and  volition.

The  higher  we  go  in  tracing  the  physical  correlative  of  the  mental
process  the  more  difficult  it  becomes  to  locate  it.  While  the  merely
somatic  energies,  whether  motor  or  sensory,  can  be  assigned  with  reason-
able certainty  to  their  respective  centres,  the  higher  seats  of  thought


Duplex  Personality,


and  reason  cannot  be  found  at  all.  The  most  that  Dr.  Terrier  feels  him-
self entitled  to  say  on  this  point  is  that  "  there  is  nothing  inherently
improbable  in  the  view  that  frontal  development  in  special  regions-
may  be  indicative  of  the  power  of  concentration  of  thought  and  intel-
lectual capacity  in  special  directions,"  although  considerable  portions  of
the  frontal  lobes  may  be  removed  without  any  obvious  impairment  of
function. Nor  do  they  respond  to  electrical  stimulation.

At  this  point  I  shall  venture  to  change  the  nomenclature  which  is
xisually  employed — and  which  I  have  so  far  myself  used — to  designate
the  two  modes  of  consciousness  tliat  I  have  distinguished,  viz.,  primary
and  secondary.  These  terms  appear  to  me  objectionable  as  implying
either  (1)  an  order  of  succession  in  time  whicli  is  not  found  in  the
facts,  or  (2)  a  difference  in  moral  dignity  or  functional  importance
which  is  at  present  a  mere  assumption.  The  terms  "  active  "  and  "pas-
sive "  consciousness  seem  to  me  better  adapted  to  express  my  own  view
of  the  duality  of  consciousness,  and  I  propose  therefore  to  adopt  them
in  future.  Under  the  head  of  "active  consciousness"  I  shall  include
all  those  voluntary  operations  of  the  mind  which  normally  determine
our  actions;  while  referring  to  "  passive  consciousness  "  all  the  phe-
nomena of  automatism,  whether  in  the  normal  or  hypnotic  state,  and
the  power  which,  while  employed  to  carry  out  the  suggestions  of  the
will,  either  of  tlie  individual  himself  or  of  another  person,  is  occasion-
ally able  to  transcend  the  behests  laid  upon  it  with  highly  interesting"
results.

3.  We  may  now  advance  to  higher  forms  of  the  exhibition  of  the
passive  consciousness.  In  walking  we  had  an  instance  of  simple  auto-
matism ;  in  playing,  of  combined  and  complicated  automatic  action,
but  in  neither  case  was  the  passive  consciousness  called  upon  to  do  any-
thing more  than  follow  mechanically  a  prescribed  course  of  action,
indicated  in  the  first  instance  by  the  initial  movement  of  the  limbs  set
going  by  the  will,  and,  in  the  second  case,  by  the  notes  printed  on  a
sheet  of  music.  In  the  case  of  adding  up  long  columns  of  addition,
however,  we  get  to  something  beyond  either  of  these.  Here,  again,  tlie
action  is  at  fii'st  voluntary  throughout,  and  gradually  tends  to  become
automatic.  A  beginner  needs  all  his  attention,  the  addition  of  each
figure  as  he  ascends  the  column  being  a  problem  to  be  separately  con-
sidered ;  but  I  have  found  tliat  by  degrees  it  is  possible  to  cease  think-
ing of  the  figures,  and  by  constant  practice  to  be  able  to  add  with  great
rapidity  and  correctness  while  the  mind  is  far  away  and  busily  engaged
with  other  subjects.  Hei'e  there  is  no  longer  a  merely  monotonous,
movement  to  be  kept  up,  nor  a  printed  guide  to  be  followed,  but  a
succession  of  independent  mental  actions  which  are  not  foreseen,  nor-
taken  at  second-hand  from  a  pi'inted  page,  but  arise  spontaneously  and
adajpt  themselves  to  any  combination  of  figures.


Dui'>lex  Personalily.


The  fact  tliat  these  combinations  are  not  foreseen,  and  yet  are  dealt
■with  as  fast  as  they  arise,  would  at  first  sight  seem  to  show  that  the
passive  consciousness  was  capable  of  originating  as  well  as  of  executing
psychical  actions.  Further  consideration  will,  however,  disprove  this,
so  far  as  the  present  case  goes.  We  have  here,  in  fact,  the  develop-
ment of  the  operation  of  standing  suggestions.  It  has  become  a  stand-
ing order  of  the  mind  that  two  and  two  make  four,  and  that  nine  and
four  make  thirteen,  and  so  on  ;  and  hence  it  is  no  longer  necessary  for
the  mind  to  re-enact  the  rule  on  every  separate  occasion,  but  the  passive
consciousness  automatically  obeys  it,  although  the  mind  is  "absent."  A
pai'allel  case  in  hypnotics  is  thus  I'elated  by  Mr.  Gurney  {Proceedings,
Part  XII.,  pp.  4  and  5  )

"  A  large  number  of  experiments  were  made  in  the  working  out  of  sums
by  the  'secondary  intelligence,'  the  sum  being  given  to  the  subject  while  he-
was  in  the  hypnotic  state,  and  the  answer  being  written  down  by  him
r.utomatically  with  a  plancliette,  while  he  was  in  the  normal  state,  and  wholly
I'.naware  both  of  the  act  of  reckoning  and  of  what  he  was  writing,
lie  was  made  to  place  his  right  hand  on  the  jilanchette  '  his  attention  hein^
vccupied  by  reading  aloud  ' ... or  some  similar  device."

The  italics  are  my  own.

In  these  cases  and  that  of  unconscious  sight  reading  of  music,  it
does  not  seem  possible  to  consider  the  mental  action  (which  is  a,pplied,
for  the  first  time,  to  a  new  subject  requiring  the  exercise  of  much
higher  than  merely  mechanical  powers),  as  being  accomplished  by  the
shorter  circuit  of  which  Dr.  Ferrier  writes.  We  must  therefore  con-
clude that  automatic  processes  are  occasionally  wrought  out  in  the:
higher  cerebral  tracts  also.

A  curious  case  bearing  on  the  same  point  was  mentioned  by  Mr.
Tilyei'S  at  one  of  the  meetings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.  A.
certain  clerk  in  a  French  office  having  been  hypnotised  was  told  that
two  and  two  made  live.  Next  day  all  his  work  went  wrong,  and  it
was  not  for  some  time  discovered  that  he  had  in  every  place,  when  two
and  two  came  together,  added  them  as  five.  In  his  case  the  standing
order  of  his  own  intellect  to  consider  two  and  two  as  four  liad  been
superseded  by  the  new  injunction  Avhicli  continued  to  operate,  although
he  had  no  recollection  of  receivino-  it.

(C)  We  now  come  to  the  consideration  of  the  third  class  of  mental
and  physical  actions,  those,  namely,  which  I  have  ventui'ed  to  describe-
as  not  only  automatic  but  intuitive.  I  mean  by  this  term  actions  that
appear  to  involve  intuitive  mental  powers.  I  am  aware,  of  course,
that  the  existence  of  such  powers  is  denied  by  some  metaphysicians,
who  attribute  the  performance  of  actions  which  can  be  acquired  neither-
by  instruction,  nor  by  personal  experience,  to  hereditary  instinct,  and
the  embodied  experience  of  the  race. This  denial  is  not  surprising,.


'92


Dii2ylex  Personality.


since  if  we  allow  the  existence  of  purely  intuitive  powers,  we  seem
virtually  to  assert  that  effects  can  exist  without  a  cause.  Nevertheless
there  remains  a  class  of  phenomena  which  apparently  fulfils  this  very
■definition,  and  although  far  from  asserting  that  there  is  no  cause  for
them,  I  think  it  is  impossible  in  our  present  state  of  knowledge  to
show  the  cause,  and  I  therefore  adopt  the  word  intuitive,  provisionally,
to  describe  them.

I  will  take  as  a  first,  and  typical,  instance  of  intuitive  tliought
and  action,  the  case  of  musical  improvisation.  The  power  of  i7nprovis-
ing  music  so  as  to  employ  the  full  capacity  of  the  instrument,  and  to  do
■so  with  unhesitating  fluency  and  without  any  conscious  effort  of  the
mind,  is  somewhat  I'are  ;  and  in  describing  it,  I  am  compelled  to  rely
chiefly  on  my  own  experience.  Where  this  power  exists  it  exhibits  the
faculty  of  intuitive  passive  consciousness  in  full  exercise.  The  will
is  entirely  inoperative.  Not  only  is  no  decision  formed  as  to  the  theme
or  its  modifications,  but  there  is  not  even  any  knowledge  of  what  the  next
bar  will  be.  Thus  I  have  constantly  sat  and  listened  to  my  own  impro
visations^  with  as  much  interest  as,  and,  with  no  more  knowledge  of,
what  was  coming  next,  than  another  listener  would  have,  and  this
statement  applies  not  only  to  melody  or  theme,  but  to  the  most  elabor-
ate modulations  of  harmony,  effected  equally,  moreover,  without  any
dependence  on  a  theoretical  knowledge  of  music,  and  in  accordance  with
some  unknown  instinct.

We  have  seen  that  in  those  actions  which  are  suggested
and  automatic,  the  will  is  able  to  control  the  passive  conscious-
ness sufficiently  to  initiate  them  and  to  ensure  their  ultimate
fulfilment.  It  is  far  otherwise  with  those  which  are  intuitive
and  automatic.  The  will  of  the  player  may  seat  him  at  the  organ,  but
all  its  efforts  will  not  cause  ideas  to  flow.  The  faculty  will,  indeed,  not
l)eing  extinguished  but  only  dormant,  respond  to  a  limited  extent — the
limits  being  those  of  habit,  and  of  facility  resulting  from  experience
• — but  the  result  will  be  poor  and  tame,  and  will  disappoint  no  one  more
than  the  performer  himself.  The  fact  of  eifoi't,  tlien,  will  at  once  prove
i;he  absence  of  inspiration,  and  warn  the  artist  to  desist.

The  independence  of  the  will  shown  by  the  passive  consciousness  in
its  liigher  manifestation  of  intuitive  power  is,  in  fact,  one  of  its  most
I'cniarkable  cliaractei-istics ;  and  tlie  efforts  of  will  not  only  fail  to
induce  these  manifestations,  but  lend  to  hinder  them,  by  disturbing  that
serene  and  complete  absorption  in  tlie  task,  which  is  essential.  It  seems
highly  probable  that  the  extraordinary  powers  of  impromptu  versification
shown  by  Theodore  Hook  and  the  late  Mr.  Serjeant  Payne  were  of  the
same  intuitive  kind  as  the  faculty  of  musical  improvisation  above  spoken
of.  To  sit  down  to  the  piano  at  a  moment's  notice  and  reel  off  verse
after  verse  of  rhyme,  without  any  consciousness  of  efibrt  and  without


Bnplex  Personality.


9?


the  least  previous  preparation,  seems  to  imply  intuitive  power  able  to-
dispense  with  the  ordinary  process  of  intellectual  construction.  For
consider,  in  the  composition  of  even  the  simplest  verses  on  a  given
subject,  accoi'ding  to  the  usual  method,  how  many  elements  of  construc-
tion have  to  be  kept  in  view.  There  is,  first,  the  rhythm  or  correct
syllabic  balance  of  the  lines ;  next  the  rhyme  requiring  a  word  to  be
found  at  the  end  of  each  line  phonetically  in  con-espondence  with  the^
one  above,  and,  concurrently  with  these,  the  invention  of  coherent
sentences  which  shall  not  only  convey  definite  ideas,  but  shall  do  so  with
so  much  wit  and  appropriateness  as  to  cause  the  greatest  amusement
to  the  company.  I  think  it  jjrobaljle  that  if  Mr.  Hook  or  Mr.  Payne
had  been  asked  the  question,  they  would  have  said  that  their  conscious-
mental  participation  in  the  performance  was  confined  to  that  of  a.
listener,  and  that  they  were  wholly  unable  to  say  how  it  was  produced,
or  to  foresee  the  termination  of  a  verse  at  the  beginning  of  it.

To  a  limited  extent,  and  with  important  moditications,  the  same=
powers  are  exhibited  by  an  orator.  The  subjects  of  an  oration  are,  of
course,  prepared  entirely  by  the  voluntary  activity  of  the  intellect,  sc-
are also  the  order  in  which  tliey  come,  and  similar  intellectual  activity
is  very  seldom  entirely  absent  during  delivery.  But  in  the
extemporaneous  composition  of  individual  sentences  there  is  much  that
seems  intuitive.  A  sentence  will  be  begun  of  wliich  the  conclusion  is
not  foreseen.  Words  rise  at  the  right  moment  spontaneously  to  com-
plete it.  Sometimes,  indeed,  when  the  speaker  is  searching  either  his-
memory  or  his  notes  for  the  next  head  of  his  discourse,  his  mind  will  be
so  occupied  with  this  endeavour  that  he  has  for  a  few  sentences  to
trust  almost  entirely  to  the  phrase-forming  intuition  to  keep  him  going
till  he  is  ready  to  start  on  the  new  subject.  In  proportion  as  he  is  able-
to  abandon  himself  to  this  phrase-forming  faculty  with  confidence,  sO'
will  his  address  be  fluent  and  unconstrained,  and  so  also  will  he  reap
the  advantage  of  being  able  to  concentrate  his  mind  tipon  the  more-
important  task  of  marshalling  his  subjects  and  elaborating  his  argu-
ment. In  an  unpractised  speaker,  or  at  the  commencement  of  a  speech,
"we  see  the  same  hindrance  offered  by  the  intrusion  of  the  will  upon  the^
automatic  powers  which  we  previously  noted  in  the  case  of  the  musical
performer.  The  self-conscious  speaker,  unable  to  trust  him-
self to  automatic  guidance,  labours  to  compose  each  sentence-
separately,  and  consequently  trips  and  stumbles  like  the  player  on  an
instrument  to  which  he  is  not  accustomed.  In  connection  witli  the
automatic  power  of  phrase-forming  I  may  here  mention  a  fact  drawn
from  my  own  experience.  It  often  happens  that  in  the  drowsy  con-
dition of  incipient  slumber,  when  the  active  consciousness  is  almost-
inhibited  though  not  entirely  lost,  phrases  form  themselves  spon
taneously  in.  the  mind,  having  relation  to  no  subject  in  particular,.


94


Duplex  Personality.


entirely  disjointed  from  one  anothei',  and  of  course  devoid  of  any
connected  sense.  This  suggests  an  interesting  question,  viz.,  whether,
when  the  condition  passes  from  drowsiness  into  sleep,  these  broken
fragments  of  language  ever  weld  themselves  into  a  coherent  whole,  and
if  so,  Avhat  may  be  the  effect  produced  1  Now,  it  sometimes  has
happened  to  persons,  entirely  devoid  as  they  and  their  friends  suppose  of
any  poetic  faculty,  to  dream  of  reciting  or  reading  long  pieces  of  poetry.
Tliey  seem  in  their  dream  to  be  reading  or  reciting  it  without  the
slightest  effort  of  either  memory  or  invention,  and  to  continue  some-
times for  a  space  that  would  occupy  several  pages.  Yet,  on  waking,  not
a  word  is  remembered.  The  question  then  arises  :  Did  I,  in  my
dream,  repeat  real  lines  of  poetry,  or  did  I  only  fancy  that  I  was  doing
so  upon  a  merely  general  idea  of  poetry  in  the  mass  ?  The  latter  idea  is
usually  accepted  by  the  person  himself,  on  the  ground  that  as  he  could
not  possibly  write  poetry  with  any  amount  of  effort  when  he  was  awake,
it  would  be  incredible  that  he  should  compose  it  without  effort  when  he
was  asleep.  I  have  lately,  however,  had  occasion  to  doubt  this  con-
clusion. Dreaming  of  being  at  the  Royal  Academy  and  of  referring  to
the  catalogue  for  the  name  of  a  picture,  I  found  it,  as  is  often  really
the  case,  described  not  by  a  title,  but  by  a  verse  of  poetry  having
relation  to  its  subject.  I  read  off  this  verse  with  the  same  tot;il
absence  of  effort  and  unconsciousness  of  inveiition  that  attends  all
dreams,  and,  as  it  happened,  instantly  woke.  The  verse  is  not  worth
quoting,  but  it  rhymed  and  scanned  correctly,  had  a  metaphorical
application  quite  appropriate  to  the  subject  of  the  picture,  and  (wharj
is  most  significant)  it  would  have  been  quite  beyond  my  powers  to
have  invented  it  when  awake.  What  followed  was  equally  curious.
While  T  lay  for  some  time  in  a  drowsy  state,  the  phrase-forming
faculty  T  have  before  alluded  to  seemed  to  have  been  set  going  by  the
dream,  nly  that,  instead  of  broken  fragments  of  prose,  there  ensued
broken  snatches  of  verse,  fragments  of  lines  entirely  disconnected,
both  as  to  subject  and  matter.

It  would  be  interesting  at  this  point  to  search  for  any  parallel  to
these  intuitive  and  automatic  processes  of  mind  that  could  be  found
in  the  history  of  hypnotic  experiment.  Unfortunately,  however,  the
last  thing  hypnotisers  ever  seem  to  think  of  is  to  encourage  the  subject
to  follow  his  own  intuitions  or  exercise  his  own  inventive  powers,  and
from  first  to  last  he  is  made  the  slave  of  external  suggestion.  The  only
cases  at  all  resembling  the  intuitive  manifestation  of  the  passive
consciousness  I  can  recall  are  those  of  the  famous  Madame  B.,  whose
secondary  self  sometimes  induced  her  to  take  railway  journeys,  or
write  lettei's  j  of  the  patient  described  in  Animal  2£agnetism,'^  who,


1  Page  199.


Duplex  Personality.


95


in  a  spontaneous  attack  of  hysteria,  commanded  his  own  arm  to  bleed,
Avhereupon  soon  afterwards  the  cutaneous  liremorrhage  was  dispkxyed;
■and  of  others  acting  under  what  is  called  "  seli-suggestion."

That  these,  wei'e  not  self-suggestions  in  the  oixlinary  sense,  that  is,
'that  they  were  not  suggestions  proceeding  from  the  primary  or  active
consciousness,  and  executed  by  the  secondary  or  passive  conscious-
ness, is  proved  by  the  fact  that  as  soon  as  Madame  B.'s  primary
•consciousness  was  aroused  she  put  a  stop  to  proceedings  which  it
■had  never  sanctioned.  Thus  having  embai'ked  in  a  train  under  tlie
■secondary  influence,  she  left  it  and  returned  home  as  soon  as  the
primary  self  resumed  its  sway.

So  also  in  the  other  case  the  suggestion  and  its  execution  both
took  place  while  the  patient  was  in  the  abnormal  condition  of  spon-
taneous hysterical  trance.

To  sum  up  :  in  contrast  to  our  ordinary  experience  of  voluntary
intellectual  and  ratiocinative  activity,  which  progresses  by  effort  and.
gradation,  we  must  recognise  the  existence  in  man  of  a  different  kind
of  consciousness,  which  I  distinguish  as  "  passive,"  which  operates
automatically,  instinctively,  and  sometimes  intuitively,  and  progresses
2')er  saltum  and  without  effort.  To  the  latter  kind  of  consciousness
belongs  what  is  called  Genius,  in  contrast  with  Talent,  which  is
exhibited  by  the  former.

I  now  proceed  to  consider  how  far  the  active  and  the  passive
■consciousness  are  distinguishable  in  the  operations  of  the  faculty  of
memory.  An  ordinary  operation  of  memory  consists — as  is  well  known
— in  a  chain  of  associated  ideas,  each  idea  leading  to  the  next,  and  that
"to  the  one  beyond.  Tlius  the  mention  of  Spain  in  a  geography  lesson
provokes  the  associated  ideas  of  Madrid  and  Sherry  :  the  occurrence  of
the  first  notes  in  a  tune,  or  the  first  words  in  a  poem,  provoke  the
■associated  idea  of  those  whicli  follow  ;  if  we  have  an  appointment  to
keep  at  noon,  the  arrival  of  noon  provokes  tlie  associated  idea  of  the
appointment,  and  so  on.  Taking  this  to  be  the  memory  belonging  to
the  active  consciousness,  I  would  hazard  the  conjecture  that  the  passive
■consciousness  has  also  a  memory  peculiar  to  itself  and  fundamentally
,<liffei'ent  from  the  other : — the  first  memory  consisting  of  successive
•concatenated  impressions,  the  second  of  a  homogeneous  pictorial
impression.

According  to  this  view  we  should  expect  the  secondary  memory  of
■Vi  hypnotised  subject  to  be  able  to  repeat  a  lesson  as  well  backwards  as
forwards,  and  this  is  pretty  much  what  is  found  to  be  tlie  case  in  the
very  few  experiments  that  have  been  tried.

In  November,  1888,  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  kindly  consented  to  make
some  experiments  for  me  of  this  nature,  and  though  there  was  only
opportunity  to  try  them  on  one  subject,  the  results  as  far  as  they  went


96


Duplex  Personality.


may  be  claimed  in  support  of  this  view.  After  a  number  of  experi-
ments in  repeating  figures  forwards  and  backwards  and  adding
them  up  while  in  the  hypnotic  sleep,  with  remarkable  results  which
there  is  no  time  now  to  consider,  the  memory  peculiar  to  the  passive
consciousness  was  further  tested  with  short  sentences  both  durino-  the
sleep  and  after  wakening. — e.g.,  Sentence  read  to  the  subject  "  all  the
makers  named  are  good."  He  was  then  told  to  write  the  sentence
backwards  with  the  planchette  and  being  awakened  he  recollected  as
usual  nothing  about  it.  He  was  then  set  to  work  with  t!ie  planchette
while  a  newspaper  was  held  over  it  and  he  was  occasionally  engaged
in  conversation.  When  the  planchette  ceased  tlie  following  curious
result  was  found  to  have  occurred.  AVhen  told  to  write  the  sentence
backwards,  the  intention  was  that  the  words  only  should  be  written
in  reverse  order,  but  otlierwise  in  the  usual  way;  the  subject  had,
however,  understood  the  command  to  be  that  he  should  spell  the
words  backwards  and  turn  the  letters  the  wrong  way.  In  order  to
read  the  writing,  therefore,  it  was  necessary  to  hold  it  to  a  lookin"-
glass,  and  so  held  it  was  quite  legible.  If  any  person  will  attempt  to
do  the  same  in  his  ordinary  condition  he  will  discover  the  difficulty  of
the  performance,  which  can  only  be  accomplished,  if  at  all,  for  the  first
time,  by  picturing  to  his  own  mind  the  reversed  appearance  of  the
letters  and  words,  and  tliis  requires  a  considerable  effort;  but — as  I
suggest — the  pictorial  memory  of  the  passive  consciousness  succeeded  in
doing  it  without  the  least  hesitation  or  difficulty,  (See  also  Proceed-
inrjfi,  Part  XI.,  pp.  306  and  307,  in  which  a  subject  of  Mr.  Gurney's
is  reported  to  have  spelt  words  with  a  plancliette  backwards  as  well  as
forwards.)

Another  instance  of  the  pictorial  or  impressional  memory  is  quoted
by  Mr.  Myers  from  Dr.  Mesnet  {Proceedings,  Part  XI.,  p.  235).  The
subject,  a  soldier  who  had  received  a  gunshot  wound  in  the  head  at
Sedan,  leaving  extraordinary  effects,  "  was  writing  on  a  sheet  of  paper
which  lay  on  a  pile  of  about  ten  similar  sheets.  We  quickly  drew  the  top
sheet  away,  and  his  pen  continued  to  write  on  the  second  sheet."  The
automatic  nature  of  the  process  proves  it  to  have  been  the  work  of  the
passive  consciousness.  "Tliis  process  was  repeated,  and  on  the  fifth  sheet-
there  was  nothing  but  his  signature  at  the  bottom.  Nevertheless,  he
read  over  and  corrected  his  letter  on  this  blank  fifth  sheet,  scattering
stops  and  corrections  over  the  empty  page,  each  of  which  corresponded
to  mistakes  made  on  the  co-ordinate  points  of  the  pages  which  had  been,
snatched  away  from  him."  He  was,  therefore,  acting  upon  a  pictorial;
memory  of  wliat  he  had  written  on  the  preceding  sheets.

A  similar  explanation  may  be  suggested  of  the  memory  of  drowning
nersons  who  on  recovery  have  repeatedly  declared  that  they  saw  the-
■^hole  of  their  cast  lives  spread  out  before  them,  including  everv-'


'  ■ '  Duplex  Personality  -  i"9-7

incident.!  We  may  suppose  that  when  the  active  consciousness  is
inhibited  by  suiibcation,  the  pictorial  memory  of  the  passive  conscious-
ness is  sometimes  brought  into  prominence,  by  which  tlie  past  life  is
presented  as  on  a  canvas,  so  as  to  form  one  complete  and  homogeneous
impression.  It  is,  however,  not  only  iti  such  supreme  crises  that°indica-
tions  of  the  passive  memory  are  to  be  found.

In  counting,  for  instance,  we  usually  adopt  the  primary  method  of
reckoning  each  unit  separately.  It  sometimes  happens,  however,  that
in  listening  to  a  clock  striking  in  the  night  we  may  forget  to  count  the
strokes  until  several  have  struck,  but  are  nevertheless  able  to  recover
the  lost  ground  by  considering  them  as  one  impression,  conveying  the
idea  of  the  correct  number  to  the  mind.  This  is  in  fact  counting  by
groups  instead  of  units.  I  am  able  to  adopt  it  as  far  as  four,  but  other
persons  have  told  me  that  they  can  go  as  far  as  six  or  eight.  I  conceive
these  groups  to  be  realised  by  the  pictorial  memory  just  as  the  picture
of  four  dots  on  a  screen  would  be  recognised  as  such' by  the  eye  without
any  conscious  process  of  counting.

Binet  {La  Vision  Mentale)  remarks  on  this  subject— as  the  result
of  a  long  series  of  elaborate  experiments  upon  the  subjects  of  hysterical
anaesthesia  :  "  Quant  a  la  complexity  des  operations  accomplies  par
la  conscience  secondaire,  nous  en  avons  cet  exemple,  que  si  on  fait  un
nombre  donne  d'excitations  insensibles,  c'est  souvent  la  conscience
secondaire  qui  les  compte,  et  la  conscience  primaire  n'en  connait  que  le
total."  ^

The  remainder  of  Mr.  Barkworth's  paper  deals  with  analogies
between  the  phenomena  of  natural  and  hypnotic  sleep  and  emotio°nal
stress;  emotional  and  hypnotic  anesthesia;  hypersthenic  muscular
exertion  during  hypnotic  catalepsy,  somnambulism  or  emotional  excite-
ment ;  delusions  due  to  insanity  and  to  hypnotic  suggestion,  &c.  The
apparent  submergence  of  moral  discrimination  sometimes  exhibited  in
dreams  and  in  the  hypnotic  state  is  also  dwelt  upon  and  inferences
drawn  from  it. :  .


1  Instances  of  this  are  too  numerous  to  quote.  Since  this  paper  was  written  [
Have  seen  fresh  ones  meotioned  by  Du  Erel,  &Ci


98


Notes  of  Seances  with  D.  D.  Home.


TZ

NOTES  OF  STANCES  WITH  D.  D.  HOME.
By  William  Cbookes,  F.R.S.

In  the  year  1874  I  published  in  a  collected  form  various  papers,
dating  from  1870  to  1874,  describing  inquiries  made  by  myself,
alone  or  with  other  observers,  into  the  phenomena  called  Spiritual.  In  a
paper  reprinted  from  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science,  for  January,
1874,  I  announced  my  intention  of  publishing  a  book,  which  should
contain  my  numerous  printed  and  unprinted  observations.

But  this  projected  work  has  never  seen  the  light.  My  excuse, — a
real  excuse,  though  not  a  complete  justification,— Kes  in  the  extreme
pressure  of  other  work  on  ray  time  and  energies.  The  chemical  and
physical  problems  of  my  professional  life  have  become  more  and  more
absorbing ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  few  fresh  opportunities  have
occurred  of  prosecuting  my  researches  into  "  psychic  force."  I  must
confess,  indeed,  that  I  have  been  disappointed  with  the  progress  of
investigation  into  this  subject  during  the  last  fifteen  years.  I  see  little
abatement  of  the  credulity  on  the  one  hand  and  the  fraud  on  the  other
which  have  all  along  interfered,  as  I  hold,  with  the  recognition  of  new
truth  of  profound  interest.

The  foundation  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  has,  however,
somewhat  altered  the  situation.  We  have  here  a  body  of  inquirers  of
whom  the  more  prominent,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  are  quite  sufficiently
critical  in  their  handling  of  any  evidence  making  for  extraordinary
phenomena,  while  they  bring  to  the  task  that  patience  and  diligence
without  which  an  investigation  of  this  sort  is  doomed  to  failure.
Invited  to  contribute  to  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  Proceed-
ings, some  of  my  notes  on  seances  with  D.  D.  Home,  I  feel  I  ought  not
to  decline.  I  am  not  satisfied  with  these  notes ;  which  form,  so  to
say,  only  a  few  bricks  for  an  intended  edifice  it  is  not  now  probable
I  shall  ever  build.  But,  at  least,  they  are  accurate  transcripts  of  facts
Avhicli  I  still  hold  to  be  of  deep  importance  to  science.  Their  publica-
tion will,  at  any  rate,  show  that  I  have  not  changed  my  mind ;  that
on  dispassionate  review  of  statements  put  forth  by  me  nearly  twenty
years  ago  I  find  nothing  to  retract  or  to  alter.  I  have  discovered  no
flaw  in  the  experiments  then  made,  or  in  the  reasoning  I  based  upon
them.

I  am  too  well  aware  there  have  been  many  exposures  of  fraud  on
ihe  part  of  mediums ;  and  that  some  members  of  the  Society  foi
Psychical  Research  have  shown  the  possibility  of  fraud  under  circum.


Notes  of  Seances  with  D.  D.  Home.


stances  where  Spiritualists  had  too  readily  assumed  it  was  not  possible.
I  am  not  surprised  at  the  evidence  of  fraud. I  have  myself  frequently
detected  fraud  of  various  kinds,  and  I  have  always  niade  it  a  rule  in
weighing  Spiritualistic  evidence  to  assume  that  fraud  may  have  been
attempted,  and  ingeniously  attempted,  either  by  seen  or  unseen  agents.
I  was  on  my  guard  even  in  D.  D.  Home's  case,  although  I  am  bound
to  say  that  with  him  I  never  detected  any  trickery  or  deceit  what-
ever, nor  heard  any  first-hand  evidence  of  such  from  other  persons.
At  the  same  time,  I  should  never  demand  that  anyone  should  con-
sider Home,  or  any  other  medium,  as  "incapable  of  fraud,"  nor  should
I  pin  my  faith  upon  any  experiment  of  my  own  or  others  which  fraud
could  explain. The  evidence  for  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena
obtained  by  Home  in  ray  presence  seems  to  me  to  be  strengthened
rather  than  weakened  by  the  discussions  on  conjuring,  and  the  ex-
posures of  fraud  which  have  since  taken  place. Tlie  object  of  such
discussions  is  to  transform  vague  possibilities  of  illusion  and  deception
into  definite  possibilities  ;  so  far  as  this  has  yet  been  done,  it  has,  I
think,  been  made  more  clear  that  certain  of  Home's  plienomena  L\l
quite  outside  the  category  of  marvels  producible  by  sleight  of  hand
or  prepared  apparatus.

But  I  must  not  be  supposed  to  assert  that  all,  or  even  most  of,
the  phenoinena  recorded  by  me  were  such  as  no  juggling  could  simulate!
Many  incidents,— as  slight  movements  of  the  table,  ic.,— were
obviously  and  easily  producible  by  Home's  hands  or  feet.  Such'  move,
ments,  &c.,  I  have  recorded,— not  as  in  themselves  proving  anything
strange,— but  simply  as  forming  part  of  a  series  of  phenomena,  some
of  which  do  prove,  to  my  mind,  the  operation  of  tliat  "  new  force  "
in  whose  existence  I  still  firmly  believe.  Had  I  described  these  seances
with  a  view  to  sensational  efi-ect,  I  should  have  omitted  all  the  non-
evidential  phenomena,  and  thus  have  brought  the  marvels  out  in
stronger  relief.  Such  was  not  my  object.  In  most  cases  the  notes
were  written— primarily  for  my  own  information,— while  the  phenomena
were  actually  going  forward,  but  on  some  few  occasions  they  were
copied  or  expanded  immediately  after  the  stance  from  briefer  notes
taken  at  the  time.  They  are  here  reprinted  verbatim  ;  and  the  petty
details  which  render  them  tedious  to  read  will  supply  the  reader  with
all  the  material  now  available  for  detecting  the  imposture,  if  any,
which  my  friends  and  I  at  the  time  were  unable  to  discover.  '

My  object  in  publishing  these  notes  will  have  been  attained  if  they
should  aid  in  inducing  competent  observei-s,  in  this  or  other  countries,
to  repeat  similar  experiments  with  accurate  care,  and  in  a  dispassionate

o  1  \'?!u"°/^?  ^^""^  published  are  accounts  of  selected  stances,  but  in  each  case
seiectfd,  the  fuU  account  of  the  seance  is  given.

H  2


100


I\^otes  of  Seances  ivith  D.  D.  Home.


spirit.  Most  assuredly,  so  far  as  my  knowledge  of  science  goes,  there  is
absolutely  no  reason  a  jwiori  to  deny  the  possibility  of  such  phenomena
as  I  have  described.  Those  who  assume — as  is  assumed  by  some
popular  writers — -that  we  are  now  acquainted  with  all,  or  nearly  all,  or
even  with  any  assignable  propoi'tion,  of  the  forces  at  work  in  the
universe,  show  a  limitation  of  conception  which  ought  to  be
impossible  in  an  age  when  the  widening  of  the  circle  of  our  definite
knowledge  does  but  reveal  the  proportionately  widening  circle  of
our  blank,  absolute,  indubitable  ignorance.

(I.)  Wednesday,  May  9th,  1871. — Sitting  at  81,  South  Audley-street,
(Miss  Douglas's  house). From  9  to  11  p.m.

Present : — Mr.  D.  D.  Home  (medium),  Miss  Douglas,  Mrs.  Gregory,  Mr,
O.  R.,  Mr.  W.  F.,  Mrs.  W.  F.,  Mr.  Crookes.

In  the  front  drawing-room,  at  a  loo  table  on  centre  pillar  and  three
feet,  diameter  three  feet,  weight  321b.,  cloth  on  (occasionally  turned  up  to
give  light  below).

One  candle  on  table,  two  on  mantelpiece,  one  on  side  table.  Towards
end  of  sitting  (during  the  fire  test)  the  candle  on  the  table  and  one  on
the  mantelijiece  were  put  out.  The  otliers  were  alight  the  whole  time.  An
accordion  was  on  the  table.

A  wood  fire,  somewhat  dull,  in  the  grate.

Temperature  very  comfortable  all  the  evening.

Order  of  sitting  :  ■


A  small  sofa  table  stood  about  two  feet  from  Miss  Douglas  and  Mr.
Home  in  the  position  shown  in  diagram.  Miss  Douglas  commenced  by
reading  aloud  a  few  extracts  from  Robert  Chambers's  introduction  to  Mr,
Home's  book,  Incideids  of  my  Life.

Phenomena. — The  table  tilted  several  times  in  four  or  five  directions  at
an  angle  of  about  25deg. ,  and  kept  inclined  sufliciently  long  for  those  who-
wished  to  look  under  with  a  candle  and  examine  how  the  hands  of  Mr.  Home
and  the  others  present  were  touching  it.  Sometimes  it  stood  on  two  legs,
and  sometimes  it  was  balanced  on  one.  I,  who  had  brought  a  si>ring
•  balance  in  my  pocket,  was  now  invited  by  Mr.  Home  to  try  an  experiment
in  the  alteration  of  weight.  •


.Notes  of  Seances  ivlth  D.  D.  Home.


101


As  it  would  have  been  inconvenient  without  disturbing  the  sitting  to
have  experimented  on  the  total  weight  of  the  table,  the  balance  was
hooked  under  one  edge  of  the  table,  and  the  force  required  to  tilt  it
measured.

Experiment  1. — "  Be  light."  An  upward  pull  of  21b.  required  to  lift  one
■of  the  feet  off  the  ground,  all  hands  lightly  touching  the  top  of  the  table.

Experiment  2. — "Be  heavy."  As  soon  as  this  was  said,  the  table
■creaked,  shuddered,  and  appeared  to  settle  itself  firmly  into  the  floor.  The
•effect  was  as  if  the  power  of  a  gigantic  electro-magnet  had  been  suddenly
turned  on,  the  table  constituting  the  armature.  All  hands  were,  as  before,
very  lightly  touching  the  upper  surface  of  the  table  with  their  fingers.  A
force  of  361b.  was  now  required  to  raise  the  foot  of  the  table  from  the  floor.
I  lifted  it  up  and  down  four  or  five  times,  and  the  index  of  the  balance  kept
pretty  constant  at  361b.,  not  varying  more  than  ilb.  Whilst  this  was  going
on,  each  person's  hands  \ieve.  noticed.  They  were  toucliing  the  table  so
lightly  that  their  aggregate  downward  pressure  could  not  have  been  many
ounces.  Mr.  Home  once  lifted  his  hands  for  a  moment  quite  off  the  table.
His  feet  were  tucked  back  under  his  chair  the  whole  time.

Experiments. — "Be  light."  Conditions  the  same  as  before.  An  upward
jnill  of  71b.  required  to  tilt  the  table.

Experiment  4.—"  Be  heavy."  The  same  creaking  noise  as  in  Experiment  2
was  again  heard.  Every  person  (except  Mr.  O.  R.  and  myself,  who  was
.•standing  up  trying  the  experiment)  put  the  ends  of  the  fingers  under-
neath the  table  top, the  palms  being  upwards  and  the  thumbs  visible,  so  that,
if  any  force  were  unconsciously  exerted,  it  should  tend  to  diminish  the
weight.  At  the  same  time  Mr.  O.  R.  took  a  candle  and  stooped  under  the
table  to  see  that  no  one  was  touching  the  legs  of  the  table  with  their  knees
■or  feet.  I  also  stooped  down  occasionally  to  verify  Mr.  O.  R. 's  statement
that  all  was  fair  beneath.  Upon  applying  the  spring  balance,  I  saw  that
the  table  was  pulled  up  at  451b.  Immediately  this  was  announced  I  felt
an  increase  of  weight,  and,  after  a  few  trials,  the  pull  was  increased  to  481b.,
at  which  point  the  index  stood  steady,  the  leg  of  the  table  being  about  3in.
off  the  floor.

Experiment  5. — "Be  heavy."  The  conditions  were  the  same  as  before,
■a  little  more  care  being  taken  by  th-j  sitters  to  keep  their  feet  well  tucked
under  their  chairs.  Hands  touching  the  under  side  of  the  table  top  as  before.
'The  index  of  the  balance  rose  steadily,  without  the  table  moving  in  the
least,  until  it  pointed  to  461b.  At  this  point  the  table  rose  an  inch,  when
the  hook  of  the  balance  slipped  off,  and  the  table  returned  to  its  place  with
a  crash.  The  iron  hook  had  bent  out  sufficiently  to  prevent  it  holding  the
table  firmly  any  longer,  so  the  experiments  were  obliged  to  be  discontinued.

(After  the  seance  was  over,  the  normal  weight  of  the  table  was  taken.  Its
total  weight  was  321b.  In  order  to  tilt  it  in  the  manner  described  in  the
experiments  a  pull  of  81b.  was  required.  When  lifted  straight  up  at  three
equi-distant  points,  the  spring-balance  being  at  one  point,  a  pull  of  101b.  was
required.  The  accuracy  of  the  balance  could  be  depended  on  to  about  |lb.,
not  more. )

Raps  were  heard  from  different  parts  of  the  table  and  the  floor,  and  th©
table  quivered  rapidly  several  times.  "■


102


Notes  of  Seances  with  D.  B.  Home,


IVIr.  Home  appeared  slightly  convulsed  about  the  arms  and  body.  Sud-
denly he  said  aloud,  ' '  Robert  Chambers  is  here ;  I  feel  him. "  Three  loud
raps  were  immediately  heard  from  the  small  sofa  table  about  two  feet  behind
Miss  Douglas,  and  this  table  then  slowly  glided  up  to  within  five  inches  of
Miss  Douglas  and  Mr.  Home.  The  movement  was  very  steady  and  noiseless,
and  occupied  about  five  seconds  in  going  the  distance  of  20  inches.  When
it  stopped,  Mr.  Home  drew  attention  to  tlie  fact  that  both  his  feet  were  under
his  chair  and  all  hands  were  on  the  table.  He  moved  a  little  nearer  to
Mr.  O.  R.  and  turned  his  legs  and  feet  as  far  away  from  the  table  as  he
could,  asking  the  sitters  to  make  themselves  quite  certain  that  he  could
not  have  produced  the  movement  of  the  table.  While  this  was  being
noticed,  the  small  table  again  moved,  this  time  slowly  and  a  quarter  of  an
inch  at  a  time,  until  it  was  again  close  to  Mr.  Home  and  Miss  Douglas.

A  flower  in  a  glass  standing  in  the  centre  of  the  small  table  was  moved,
but  not  taken  out  of  the  glass.

Mr.  Home  and  then  Miss  Douglas  said  they  felt  touched  under  tlie
table.  The  sleeve  of  Miss  Douglas's  dress  was  pulled  up  and  down  several
times  in  full  view  of  all  present.  Mr.  Home  said  he  saw  a  hand  doing  it.
No  one  else  saw  this  ;  but  Miss  Douglas  felt  a  hand,  which,  however,  was  in-
visible, put  on  her  wrist  immediately  after.

Mr.  Home  held  the  accordion  under  the  table  by  one  hand,  letting  the
keyed  end  hang  downwards.  Presently  it  commenced  to  sound,  and  then
played  "  Ye  Banks  and  Braes,"  &c.,  and  other  airs,  and  imitated  an  echo-
very  beautifully.  Whilst  it  was  playing  in  Mr.  Home's  hand  (his  other  hand
being  quietly  on  the  table)  the  other  gentlemen  looked  under  the  table  to
see  what  was  going  on.  I  took  particular  notice  that,  when  the  instru-
ment was  playing,  Mr.  Home  held  it  lightly  at  the  end  opposite  the  keys,
that  Mr.  Home's  feet  had  boots  on  and  were  botli  quiet  at  some  distance
from  the  instrument,  and  that,  although  the  keyed  end  was  rising  and  fall-
ing vigorously  and  the  keys  moving  as  the  music  required,  no  hand,  strings,,
wires,  or  anything  else  could  be  seen  touching  that  end.

Mr.  0.  R.  then  held  the  accordion  by  the  plain  end,  Mr.  Home  touching
it  at  the  same  time.  Presently  it  began  to  move  and  then  commenced  to-
play.  Mr.  Home  then  moved  his  hand  away  and  the  instrument  continued
playing  for  a  short  time  in  Mr.  0.  R.'s  hand,  both  of  Mr.  Home's  hands
being  then  above  the  table.

Some  questions  were  then  asked  and  answers  were  given  by  raps  and
notes  on  the  accordion.  The  alphabet  being  called  for  by  five  raps,  the
following  message  was  spelled  out: — "It  is  a  glorious  truth.  It  was  the
S(jlace  of  my  earth  life  and  the  triumph  over  the  change  called  death.  Robert
Chambers. "

A  private  message  to  Miss  Douglas  was  given  in  the  same  manner.

The  table  was  then  tilted  several  times  as  before,  and  once  rose  com-
pletely off  the  ground  to  a  height  of  about  three  inches.

Mr.  Home  sank  back  in  his  chair  with  his  eyes  closed  and  remained  still
for  a  few  minutes.  He  then  rose  up  in  a  trance  and  made  signs  for  his-
eyes  to  be  blindfolded.  .  This  was  done.  He  walked  about  the  room
in  an  undecided  sort  of  manner,  came  \x\)  to  each  of  the  sitters  and  made-
some  remark  to  them. He  went  to  the  candle  on  a  side  table  (close  to-


Ifofes  of  Seances  with  D.  L.  Home.  103


the  large  table)  and  passed  his  fingers  backwards  and  forwards  througli
the  flame  several  times  so  slowly  that  they  must  have  been  severely
burnt  under  ordinary  circumstances.  He  then  held  his  fingers  up,
smiled  and  nodded  as  if  pleased,  took  up  a  tine  cambric  handkerchief
belonging  to  Miss  Douglas,  folded  it  up  on  his  right  hand  and  went  to  the
fire.  Here  he  threw  off  the  bandage  from  his  eyes  and  by  means  of
the  tongs  lifted  a  piece  of  red  hot  charcoal  from  the  centre  and  deposited
it  on  the  folded  cambric  ;  bringing  it  across  the  room,  he  told  us  to
put  out  the  candle  which  was  on  the  table,  knelt  down  close  to  Mrs.
W.  F.  and  spoke  to  her  about  it  in  a  low  voice.  Occasionally  he  fanned
the  coal  to  a  white  heat  with  his  breath.  Coming  a  little  further  round
the  room,  he  spoke  to  Miss  Douglas  saying,  "We  shall  have  to  burn  a
very  small  hole  in  the  handkerchief.  We  have  a  reason  for  this  which
you  do  not  see."  Presently  betook  the  coal  back  to  tlie  fire  and  handed
the  handkerchief  to  Miss  Douglas.  A  small  hole  about  half  an  inch  in
diameter  was  burnt  in  the  centre,  and  there  were  two  small  points  near
it,  but  it  was  not  even  singed  anywhere  else.  (I  took  the  handkerchief
away  with  me  and  on  testing  it  in  my  laboratory,  found  that  it  had  not
undergone  the  slightest  chemical  preparation  which  could  have  rendered  it
fire-proof. )

ISlr.  Home  again  went  to  the  fire,  and  after  stirring  the  hot  coal  about
with  his  hand,  took  out  a  red-hot  piece  nearly  as  big  as  an  orange,  and  put-
ting it  on  his  right  hand,  covered  it  over  with  his  left  hand  so  as  to  almost
:;ompletely  enclose  it,  and  then  blew  into  the  small  furnace  thus  extemporised
until  the  lump  of  charcoal  was  nearly  white-hot,  and  then  drew  my  attention
to  the  lambent  flame  which  was  flickering  over  the  coal  and  licking  round
his  fingers  ;  he  fell  on  his  knees,  looked  up  in  a  reverent  manner,  held  up
the  coal  in  front  and  said:  "Is  not  God  good?  Are  not  His  laws  won-
derful 1  "

Going  again  to  the  fire,  he  took  out  another  hot  coal  witli  his  hand  and
holding  it  up  said  to  me,  ' '  Is  not  that  a  beautiful  large  bit,  William  ?  Wu
want  to  bring  that  to  you.  Pay  no  attention  at  present."  The  coal,  how-
ever, was  not  brought.  Mr.  Home  said:  "The  power  is  going,"  and  soon
came  back  to  his  chair  and  woke  up.

Mr.  O.  R.  left  at  11  o'clock. After  this,  nothing  particular  took  place.

The  following  refers  to  a  somewhat  similar  incident : —

Extract  from  a  letter  from  Mr.  Crookes  to  Mrs.  Honeywood,  describing  an  inci-
dent at  a  Seatice  on  April  28th,  and  incorporated  in  Mrs.  Honeyivood's
notes  of  the  Seance.

At  Mr.  Home's  request,  whilst  he  was  entranced,  I  went  with  him
to  the  fireplace  in  the  back  drawing-room.  He  said,  "We  want  you  to
notice  particularly  what  Dan  is  doing."  Accordingly  I  stood  close  to  the
fire  and  stooped  down  to  it  when  he  put  his  hands  in.  He  very  deliberately
pulled  the  lumps  of  hot  coal  oflT,  one  at  a  time,  with  his  right  hand  and_
touched  one  which  was  bright  red.  He  then  said,  "  The  power  is  not  s^-rong
on  Dan's  hand,  as  we  have  been  influencing  the  handkerchief  most.  It  is
more  ditiicult  to  influence  an  inanimate  body  like  that  than  living  flesh,  so,  as
the  circumstances  were  favourable,  we  thought  we  would  show  you  that  we


■104


Notes  of  Seances  ivith  D.  D.  Home.


could  prevent  a  red-hot  coal  from  burning  a  handkerchief.  We  will  collect
more  power  on  the  handkerchief  and  repeat  it  before  you. Now  !  "

Mr.  Home  then  waved  the  handkerchief  about  in  the  air  two  or  throe
times,  held  it  up  above  his  head  and  then  folded  it  up  and  laid  it  on  his  hand
like  a  cushion:  puttinj;  his  other  liand  into  the  fire,  took  out  a  large  lump  of
cinder  red-hot  at  the  lower  part  and  placed  the  red  part  on  the  handkerchief.
Under  ordinary  circumstances  it  would  have  been  in  a  blaze.  In  about  half  a
minute,  he  took  it  off  the  handkerchief  with  his  hand,  saying,  "  As  the  power
is  not  strong,  if  we  leave  the  coal  longer  it  will  burn. "  He  then  put  it  on
las  hand  and  brought  it  to  the  table  in  the  front  room,  where  all  but  myself
had  remained  seated.

(Signed)  William  Crookes.

(II.)  Monday,  May  22nd,  1871.— Sitting  at  81,  South  Audley-street,
the  residence  of  Miss  Douglas. From  9.45  to  11  p.m.

Present:— Mv.  D.  D.  Home  (medium),  Miss  Douglas,  Mr.  B.,  Mr.
Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes,  Mr.  Wm.  Crookes.

In  tlie  front  drawing-room,  at  a  loo  table,  suj^ported  on  centre  pillar  and
three  feet. Liglited  with  candles  the  whole  of  the  evening.

Order  of  sitting  : —


The  small  sofa  table,  mentioned  in  the  account  of  tlie  last  seance  at  this
nouse,  was  about  two  feet  behind  Miss  Douglas.  An  accordion  belonging  to
nie  was  on  the  table,  and  a  small  candlestick  and  candle.

Pliotomcna. — In  a  few  minutes  a  sliglit  tremor  of  the  table  was  felt.  Mr.
A.  II.  Wallace  was  touched.  Then  Mrs.  Crookes  felt  her  knee  touched  and  her
dress  pulled.  Miss  Douglas's  dress  was  pulled,  and  I  was  touched  on  my
riglit  knee  as  by  a  heavy  hand  firmly  placed  on  it.

The  table  tilted  up  on  two  and  sometimes  on  one  leg  several  times,  rising
at  the  side  opposite  each  person  successively,  whilst  all  who  wished  took  the
candle  and  examined  underneath  to  see  that  no  one  of  the  party  was  doing
it  with  the  feet.  Granting  that  Mr.  Home  might  have  been  able,  if  he  so
desired,  to  influence  mechanically  the  movement  of  the  table,  it  is  evident
that  he  could  only  have  done  so  in  two  directions,  but  here  the  table  moved
successively  in  six  directions.

Tlie  table  now  rose  completely  off  the  ground  several  times,  whilst  the
gentlemen  present  took  a  candle,  and  kneeling  down,  deliberately  examined
the  position  of  Mr.  Home's  feet  and  knees,  and  saw  the  three  feet  of  the
table  quite  off  the  ground.  Tliis  was  repeated,  until  each  observer  expressed
himself  satisfied  that  the  levitation  was  not  produced  by  mechanical  means
on  the  part  of  the  medium  or  any  one  else  present.


-iVo/es  of  Seances  with  D.  D.  Home,


105


The  alphabet  was  now  called  for  by  five  raps. The  letters  given  out  were

taken  down  ; — ■  -

"We igh— "

Thinking  this  the  commencement  of  a  sentence  we  tried  to  get  the  next
letter,  but  no  response  was  given.  Then  we  said  that  some  letter  had  been
given  wrong.  One  thump  said  emphatically,  "No."  We  then  said,  "We
have  got  the  first  word  '  We '  all  right,  but  we  want  the  second  word."  "  Is
i  right?" "Yes." "  Is right  ?" "Yes." "  Is right  ?  "  "Yes."

After  thinking  for  a  moment  it  suddenly  occurred  to  us  that  the  word  was
"Weigh,"  and  that  it  referred  to  an  experiment  I  had  come  prepared  to
repeat — that  of  measuring  the  variation  in  weight  of  tlie  table  by  means  of
a  spring  balance.

A  perfect  shower  of  raps  showed  that  this  interpretation  was  the  correct
one.

I  accordingly  repeated  the  experiments  which  were  tried  at  the  last
.sitting  at  this  house,  using  a  stronger  spring  balance.

Experiment  1. — "  Be  light."  The  table  tilted,  when  the  balance  showed
a  weight  of  scarcely  half  a  pound.

Experiment  2.  — "  Be  heavy."  The  table  now  bore  a  pull  of  201b.  before
it  tilted  up  on  one  side,  all  hands  being  placed  under  the  top  edge  of  the
table,  thumbs  visible.

Experiments. — I  now  asked  if  the  opposing  force  could  be  so  applied  as  to
cause  the  table  to  rise  up  off  the  ground  quite  horizontally  when  I  was  pulling.
Immediately  the  table  rose  up  completely  off  the  ground,  the  top  keeping
quite  horizontal,  and  the  spring  balance  showing  a  pull  of  231b.  During
this  experiment  Mr.  Home's  hands  were  put  on  the  table,  the  others  being
under  as  at  first.

Experiment  4. — "Be  heavy."  All  hands  beneath  the  table  top.  It
required  a  pull  of  4.51b.  to  lift  the  table  from  the  floor  this  time.

Experiment  5. — "  Be  heavy."  This  time  Mr.  B.  took  a  lighted  candle  and
looked  under  the  table  to  assure  himself  that  the  additional  weight  was  not
produced  by  anyone's  feet  or  otherwise.  Whilst  he  was  there  observing  I
tried  with  the  balance  and  found  that  a  pull  of  271b.  was  required  to  lift  the
table  up.  Mr.  Home,  Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace,  and  the  two  ladies  had  their  fingers
fairly  under  the  top  of  the  table,  and  Mr.  B.  said  that  no  one  was  touching
the  table  beneath  to  cause  the  increase  of  weight.

When  these  experiments  were  finished  we  all  sat  quietly  round  the  table
for  a  few  minutes,  when  suddenly  the  small  sofa-table  came  up  to  within
about  six  inches  of  Miss  Douglas.  It  glided  along  with  a  quick,  steady
movement. It  did  not  move  again  after  it  stopped  the  first  time.

(Just  before  I  sat  down  to  the  seance,  remembering  that  this  table  had
moved  up  to  the  circle  apparently  of  its  own  accord  the  last  time  we  had  a
stance  here,  I  pushed  the  table  a  little  away  from  its  usual  place,  putting  it
just  about  two  feet  behind  Miss  Douglas's  chair.

I  took  notice  then  that  there  was  no  string  or  anything  else  attached  to  it.
After  I  had  so  placed  it  no  one  else  went  near  it,  so  that  its  movement  on  this
occasion  was  entirely  beyond  suspicion. )

Miss  Douglas's  chair  moved  partly  round. On  attemptmg  to  replace  it  as


106


Notes  of  Seances  tuith  D.  D.  Home.


before  she  said  she  could  not  move  it,  as  it  was  firmly  fixed  to  the  floor.  I
attempted  to  pull  it  along,  but  it  resisted  all  my  efforts.

Mr.  Home's  chair  then  moved  scvei'al  times,  and  tilted  up  on  two  legs,
"whilst  Mr.  Home's  feet  were  up  iu  the  chair  in  a  semi-kneeling  posture,  and
his  hands  before  liim  not  touching  anything.

The  table  cloth  in  front  of  Mr.  Home  just  at  the  edge  of  the  table  was
bulged  outwards  as  if  a  hand  were  beneath  it,and  we  then  saw  a  movement  of
the  cloth  as  if  fingers  were  moving  under  it.

Mr.  Home  then  took  the  accordion  in  one  hand  in  liis  usual  manner,  and
held  it  beneath  the  table.  At  first  chords  were  sounded,  and  then  a  very
beautiful  piece  with  bass  and  treble  was  played.  Each  of  the  gentlemen  in
turn  looked  at  the  accordion  under  the  table  whilst  it  was  playing.

Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace  then  asked  for  "  Home,  sweet  Home."  A  few  bars
of  this  air  were  immediately  sounded.  He  looked  under  the  table  and  said
he  saw  a  hand  distinctly  moving  the  instrument  up  and  down,  and  playing
on  the  keys.  Mr.  Home  had  one  hand  on  the  table  and  was  holding  the  top
end  of  the  accordion,  whilst  ]Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace  saw  this  hand  at  the  bottom
end  where  the  keys  were.

(III.)  Monday,  June  19th,  1871.— Sitting  at  81,  South  Audley-strect.
From  9  to  11  jj.m,

Firacnt  /—Mr.  D.  D.  Home  (medium).  Miss  Douglas,  Mrs.  Gregory,  Mrs.
Wm.  Crookes,  Mr.  Wm.  Crookes,  Mr.  H.

In  the  front  drawing-room  at  the  small  round  table  three  feet  in  diameter
Order  of  silting,  &c.  : —


10


3.  FT


7.  — Original  position  of  small  table.

8.  — Position  where  table  (7)  was  first  taken  to,

9.  ,,  ,,  ,,  next

10.  — Small  table  behind  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes.

11.  - — Position  where  table  (10)  was  taken  to.

Just  before  sitting  down,  remembering  that  the  table  (7)  had  been
moved  on  the  last  occasion,  I  went  to  it  and  pushed  it  into  the  furthest
corner  <  f  tlie  room.

After  sitting  for  some  little  time  we  had  raps,  and  movements  of  the


Notes  of  Seances  with  D.  D.  Home.  lOT


table.  I  asked  if  I  might  weigh  the  tiible  when  Mr.  Home  was  not  touching
it  at  all.— "  Yes."

Experiment  1. — I  thereupon  fixed  the  spring  balance  to  it,  and  asking
for  it  to  be  made  heavy  tried  to  lift  it  off  the  ground.  It  required  ?„
pull  of  231b.  to  raise  it.  During  this  time  Mr.  Home  was  sitting  back  in
his  chair,  his  hands  quite  off  the  table  and  his  feet  touching  those  on  each
side  of  him.

Experiment  2. — "  Be  heavy  "  again.  Mr.  H.  now  took  a  candle,  and
stooping  down  looked  under  the  table  to  see  that  no  one  was  touching-
it  there,  whilst  I  was  observing  the  same  at  the  top.  Mr.  Home's
hands  and  feet  were  the  same  as  before.  The  balance  now  showed  a  tension
of  221b.

Experiment  3  was  now  tried,  Mr.  Home  being  further  from  the  table.
A  pull  of  171b.  was  required.

Experimeyit  4. — When  we  said  "  Be  light,"  the  table  rose  at  121b.  On
trying  afterwards  the  normal  pull  required  to  tilt  it,  we  found  it  to  bo
141b.

It  was  now  proposed  to  put  out  the  candles  and  sit  by  the  light  coming  in.
from  the  windows,  which  was  quite  sufficient  to  enable  us  to  see  each  other,
and  the  principal  articles  of  furniture  in  the  room.  .

We  presently  heard  a  noise  in  the  back  drawing-room  as  if  a  man  had  got
off  the  couch  and  was  coming  to  us.  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes  said  it  came  up  to  her,
and  she  then  felt  a  pair  of  large  hands  on  her  head,  then  on  her  shoulders
and  on  her  back.  Her  chair  was  then  moved  partly  round  towards  Mrs.
Gregory  away  from  Mr.  Home.

A  noise  and  cra.sh  as  of  something  falling  was  now  heard  behind  Mrs.
Wm.  Crookes's  chair,  and  the  small  table  (10)  was  pressed  up  close  to  her.
Her  chair  was  tilted  up  till  she  was  jammed  betw^een  the  back  of  the  chair  and
the  table  we  were  sitting  round,  and  her  chair  resisted  all  her  efforts  to  press
it  down.

Raps  came,  and  a  message  to  get  a  light.

On  lighting  the  candle  it  was  seen  that  the  noise  had  been  caused  by  a
picture  which  had  been  on  the  table  resting  against  the  wall,  falling  down  on
to  the  floor.  It  was  uninjured.  The  table  (10)  had  been  moved  vip  close  to
Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes,  between  her  and  Mr.  Home.

Mr.  Home  then  took  the  accordion  in  his  right  hand  in  the  usual  manner,
and  placing  his  left  on  the  table  it  was  held  both  hy  Miss  Douglas  and  Mrs.
Wm.  Crookes, The  light  was  their  put  out,  and  the  following  message  was.
spelt : —

"  The  Four  Seasons. Winter  first."

Spring.— The  Birth  of  the  Flowers."
"  Birds  in  Summer."

The  above  messages  were  given  whilst  the  piece  was  being  played.  Ifc
would  be  impossible  to  give  any  idea  of  the  beauty  of  the  music,  or  its
expressive  character.  During  the  part  typifying  summer  we  had  a  beautiful
accompaniment,  the  chirping  and  singing  of  the  birds  being  heard  along  v.-ith
the  accordion.  During  autumn,  we  had  "The  Last  Rose  of  Summer"'
played.


lOS


.'Notes  of  Seances  with  D.  D.  Home.


Home  said  that  the  spirit  playing  was  a  stranger  to  him.  It  was  a  high
■and  very  powerful  one,  and  was  a  female  who  had  died  young.

Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes  said  :  "  Is  it  my  cousin  M  1 It  has  flashed  into

any  mind  that  it  is  she."

Answer  by  raps  :  "Yes."

We  then  heard  a  rustling  noise  on  a  heliotrope  which  was  growing  in  a
flower-pot  standing  on  the  table  between  Mr.  Home  and  Mrs.Wm.  Crookes.  On
looking  round  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes  saw  what  appeared  to  be  a  luminous  cloud
■on  the  plant.  (Mr.  Home  said  it  was  a  hand.)  We  tlien  heard  the  crackling
as  of  a  sprig  being  broken  off,  and  then  a  message  came  : —

"Foot  Ellen."

Immediately  the  white  luminous  cloud  was  seen  to  travel  from  the  helio-
trope to  Mrs.  Wm.  C.'s  hand,  and  a  small  sprig  of  the  plant  was  put  into  it.
She  had  her  hand  then  patted  by  a  delicate  female  hand.  She  could  not  see
the  hand  itself,  but  only  a  halo  of  luminous  vapour  over  her  hand.

The  table  (7)  was  now  heard  to  be  moving,  and  it  was  seen  to  glide  slowly
\ip  to  the  side  of  Miss  Douglas,  to  the  position  marked  (8),  about  three  feet.
Miss  Douglas  cried  out, "  Oh  !  Oh  !  How  very  curious  !  I  have  had  something
■carried  round  my  neck.  It  is  now  put  into  my  hand.  It  is  a  piece  of  heath."
A  message  came  : —

"  In  Memoriam."

Mr.  Home  said,  "  Count  the  number  of  flowers  on  the  sprig.  There  is
•a  meaning  in  all  this."  Eleven  were  counted.  (Mr.  Robert  Chambers  had
■eleven  children.)

The  candle  (which  had  been  lighted  to  ascertain  this)  was  again  put  out.
Mr.  Home  took  the  accordion  in  his  right  hand,  whilst  his  other  hand  was
held  by  Miss  Douglas  and  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes.  The  others  present  also
joined  hands.  The  accordion  played,  and  we  then  saw  something  white
jnove  from  the  table  close  to  Miss  Douglas,  pass  behind  her  and  Mr.  Home,
and  come  into  the  circle  between  him  and  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes.  It  floated  about
for  half  a  minute,  keeping  a  foot  above  the  table.  It  touched  Mrs.  Wm.
■Crookes,  then  went  round  near  to  the  others  as  if  floating  about  with  a  cir-
<3ular  movement.  It  presently  settled  on  the  backs  of  Miss  Douglas's,  Mr.
Home's,  and  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes's  hands,  which  were  grasped  together.  The
■message  was  given  : —

"Light,  and  look,"
and  we  then  saw  that  the  floating  object  had  been  a  china  card  plate  with
cards  in  it,  which  had  previously  been  on  the  table  behind  Miss  Douglas.

The  light  was  again  put  out,  and  we  then  heard  a  sticking  and  scraping
along  the  floor,  and  then  a  heavy  bump  against  the  door.  Very  loud  raps
were  then  heard  on  the  table  and  in  other  parts  of  the  room.  Movements
of  the  table  were  felt,  and  then  all  was  quiet.  We  lighted  the  candle  and
.saw  that  the  small  table  which  had  already  moved  up  to  Miss  Douglas,  had
travelled  right  across  the  room,  a  distance  of  nine  feet,  and,  thumping  against
■the  door,  had  produced  the  noise  we  had  all  heard.

Nothing  else  took  place  after  this.

(IV.)  Wednesday,  June  21st,  1871. — Sitting  at  20,  Mornington-road
--(private  residence  of  Mr.  Crookes). From  8.40  to  10.30  p.m.


Notes  of  Seances  tvith  D.  £>.  Home.


109>


Present:-—'Mi:  D.  D.  Home  (medium),  Mrs.Wr.  Crookes,  Mr.Wr.  Crookes,.
Mrs.  Humphrey,  Mr.  C.  Gimingham,  Mr.  Serjt.  Cox,  Mr.  Wm.  Crookes,,
Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes,  Miss  A.  Crookes.

Ill  the  dining-room  lighted  by  one  gas  burner.  Round  the  dining  table-
without  a  leaf  in  it.

On  the  table  was  an  accordion  belonging  to  myself  ;  a  long  thin  wooden,
lath  ;  a  pencil  and  some  paper  ;  and  by  the  side,  partly  resting  on  the  table,  was.
an  apparatus  for  testing  alteration  in  the  weight  of  a  body. It  consisted  of  a


mahogany  board,  AB,  36  inches  long,  9  inches  wide,  and  1  inch  thick,  supported
at  the  end  B  by  a  spring  balance,  and  resting  at  C  on  the  flat  stand  by  means,
of  a  wooden  fulcrum  cut  to  a  knife  edge  and  3  inches  from  the  end  A.  D  is  a
glass  bowl  of  water,  standing  on  the  board  in  such  a  manner  that  its  weight
partly  fell  between  the  fulcrum  C  and  the  end  B,  producing  with  the  weight
of  the  board  a  tension  of  51b.  on  the  spring  balance.  E  is  a  hemispherical
copper  vessel,  perforated  at  the  bottom  and  firmly  supported  on  a  massive
iron  stand  rising  from  the  floor.  E  was  so  arranged  that  it  dipped  into  water
in  D,  but  was  2  inches  from  D  all  round  the  circumference,  and  5i  inches,
from  the  bottom.  It  was  sufficiently  firmly  supported  to  prevent  any  knock-
ing or  pushing  to  which  it  miglit  be  subjected  from  being  communicated  to
the  glass  vessel  D  and  thence  to  the  board  and  spring  balance.  I  and  my
assistant  had  well  tested  it  in  this  respect  beforehand. ^

Under  the  table  was  the  wire  cage  described  previously,^  and  three  Groves
cells  were  in  connection  with  the  surrounding  wire.  A  commutator  in  the
circuit  prevented  a  cvirrent  circulating  till  I  pressed  down  a  key.

.  Phenomena. — Almost  immediately  very  strong  vibrations  of  the  table  were
felt.  Answers  to  questions  "Yes"  and  "No"  were  given  by  these
vibrations.

Mr.  Home's  hands  were  contracted  in  a  very  curious  and  painful  looking
manner.  He  then  got  up  and  gently  placed  the  fingers  of  his  right  hand  in-
the  copper  vessel  E,  carefully  avoiding  coming  near  any  other  part  of  the  ajipa-
ratus.  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes,  who  was  sitting  near  the  apparatus,  saw  the  end  B
of  the  board  gently  descend  and  then  rise  again.  On  referring  to  the  automatic
register  it  showed  that  an  increased  tension  of  10  ounces  had  been  produced..

Nothing  more  took  place.  • -- -  .


1  Compare  Quartcrljj  Journal  of  Sricncc  for  Octoljer,  1871.
*  See  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science  for  July,  1871.


110


Notes  of  Seances  with  D.  D.  Home,


CV.) Wednesday,  June  21sfc,  1871. — Sittincr  at  20,  Morningfcon-road.
TFrom  10.45  to  11.45. (This  SiSance  was  held  shortly  after  the  previous  one.
We  all  got  up,  moved  about,  opened  tlie  windows,  and  changed  our  positions.
Miss  A.  Crookes  then  left,  and  we  proposed  sitting  down  again.)

Present: — Mr.  D.  D.  Home  (medium),  Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes, Mr.  Wr.
Crookes,  Mrs.  Humphrey,  Mr.  C.  Gimingham,  Mr.  Serjt.  Cox,  Mr.  Wra.
•Crookes,  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes.

In  the  dining-room. The  table  and  apparatus  the  same  as  before.
The  light  was  diminished,  but  there  was  still  light  enough  to  enable  us  to
distinguish  each  other  plainly  and  see  every  movement. The  apparatus  was .
.  also  distinctly  visible.

The  automatic  register  was  pushed  up  close  to  the  index  of  the  balance.
We  sat  in  the  following  order  : —


D.D.H.


SercT  C.


MR?  H.


A  was  a  lath  already  mentioned.^

Almost  immediately  a  message  came,  "Hands  off."  After  sitting  quiet  foi
a  minute  or  two,  all  holding  hands,  we  heard  loud  raps  on  the  table  ;  then
on  the  floor  by  tlie  weight  apparatus.  The  ajiparatus  was  then  moved  and
the  spring  balance  was  heard  to  move  about  strongly.  We  then  had  the
following  message  : —

"  Weight  altered  a  little.  Look."

I  then  got  up  and  looked  at  the  register.  It  had  descended  to  141b.,  showing
an  additional  tension  of  (14 — 5=)  91b.

As  this  result  had  been  obtained  when  there  was  scarcely  light  enough  to
see  the  board  and  index  move,  I  asked  for  it  to  be  repeated  when  there  was
more  light.  The  gas  was  turned  up  and  we  sat  as  before.  Presently  the
board  was  seen  to  move  up  and  down  (Mr.  Home  being  some  distance  off
and  not  touching  the  table,  his  hands  being  held),  and  the  index  was  seen  to
descend  to  71b.,  where  the  register  stopped.  This  showed  a  tension  of
■7— 5=21b.


1  See  Stance  IV,


Notes  of  Seances  tvith  D.  D.  Home.  Ill

Mr.  Home  now  told  us  to  alter  our  position. We  now  sat  as  follo^vs  : —
M?s\VHC,  " WRSW^C.  SercTC.


M5W5C.


.M?C.C,


I


M^HOME


A  message  was  given  : —

"All  hands  except  Dan's  off  the  table."

Mr.  Home  thereupon  moved  his  chair  to  the  extreme  corner  of  the  table
^md  turned  his  feet  quite  away  from  the  apparatus  close  to  Mrs.  H.  Loud
raps  were  heard  on  the  table  and  then  on  the  mahogany  board,  and  the
latter  was  shaken  rather  strongly  up  and  down.  The  fallowing  message  was
then  given  ; —

"  We  have  now  done  our  utmost."

On  going  to  the  spring  balance  it  was  seen  by  the  register  to  have
■descended  to  91b  ,  showing  an  increase  of  tension  of  (9 — 5  =  )  41b.

The  apparatus  was  now  removed  away  from  the  table,  and  we  returned  to
■our  old  places  (see  first  diagram).

We  sat  still  for  a  few  minutes,  when  a  message  came  : —

"  Hands  off  the  table,  and  all  joined."
"We  therefore  sat  as  directed.

Just  in  front  of  Mr.  Home  and  on  the  table,  in  about  the  position  shown
at  A  on  the  hrst  diagram,  was  a  thin  w<joden  lath  23^  inches  long,  li  inch
wide,  and  §  inch  thick,  covered  with  white  paper.  It  was  plainly  visible  to
all,  and  was  one  foot  from  the  edge  of  the  table.

Presently  the  end  of  this  lath,  pointing  towards  Mr.  Wr.  Crookes,  rose  up
in  the  air  to  the  height  of  about  10  inches.  The  other  end  then  rose  up  to  a
Tieight  of  about  five  inches,  and  the  lath  then  floated  about  for  more  than  a
minute  in  this  position,  suspended  in  the  air,  with  no  visible  means  of  sup-
port. It  moved  sideways  and  waved  gently  up  and  down,  just  like  a  piece
of  wood  on  the  top  of  small  waves  of  the  sea.  The  lower  end  then  gently
sank  till  it  touched  the  table  and  the  other  end  then  followed.

Whilst  we  were  all  speaking  about  this  wonderful  exhibition  of  force  the
lath  began  to  move  again,  and  rising  up  as  it  did  at  first,  it  waved  about  in  a
;somewhat  similar  manner.  The  startling  novelty  of  this  movement  having
now  worn  off,  we  were  all  enabled  to  ff)llow  its  motions  with  more  accuracy.
Mr.  Home  was  sitting  away  from  the  table  at  least  three  feet  from  the  lath
all  this  time  ;  he  was  apparently  quite  motionless,  and  his  hands  were


112


;  Notes  of  Seances  with  D.  B.  Home.


tightly  grasped,  his  right  by  Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes  and  his  left  by  Mrs.  Wm.
Crookes.  Any  movement  by  his  feet  was  impossible,  as,  owing  to  the  large
cage  being  under  the  table,  his  legs  wei'e  not  able  to  be  put  beneath,  but  were
visible  to  those  on  each  side  of  him.  All  the  others  had  hold  of  hands.  As
soon  as  this  was  over  the  following  message  was  given  : —

"  We  have  to  go  now  ;  but  before  going  we  thank  you  for  your  patience.
Mary  sends  love  to  aunt,  and  will  play  another  time."

The  seance  then  broke  up  at  a  quarter  to  twelve.

(VI.)  Friday,  June  23rd,  r71.  Sitting  at  20,  Mornington-road.  From
8.30  to  11  p.m.

Present  : — Mr.  D.  D.  Home  (medium),  Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes,  Mr.  Wr.
Crookes,  Miss  Bii'd,  Serjt.  Cox,  Mrs.  Humphrey,  Dr.  Bird,  Miss  A.
Crookes,  Mr.  Wm.  Crookes,  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes.

In  the  dining-room  ;  lighted  sometimes  by  one  gas  burner,  sometimes  by
salted  spirit  lamp,  sometimes  by  light  from  street.

The  dining-table  had  no  Qap  in  it,  but  was  slightly  opened  in  the  centre
(about  four  inches).  On  the  table  were  the  accordion,  a  small  hand  bell,
lath,  paper,  pencil,  phosphorus  half  under  water,  and  a  spirit  lamp  with  a
salted  wick.

Order  of  sitting  : —

miss.b:  mrwrc.


M"?  HOME


D?B. Miss.A.c.  mmc.

The  cloth  was  on  the  table  all  this  time.
At  first  we  sat  with  one  gas  burner  alight.

After  sitting  for  about  10  minutes  the  table  vibrated  strongly,  and  gave
a  definite  number  of  vibrations  at  our  request  on  two  or  three  occasions.  It
felt  like  a  strong,  quick  shudder  passing  through  it.

Mr.  Home  liow  took  the  accordion  in  the  usual  manner  and  held  it  under
the  table.  It  was  presently  sounded  and  notes  played.  During  this  time
Miss  Bird  and  Dr.  Bird  got  under  the  table  and  saw  the  movement.  The
gas  was  now  put  out  and  the  spirit  lamp  lighted.  The  yellow  flame  made
everything  look  very  ghastly  and  quite  took  the  colour  out  of  Mrs.  Wm.
;Crookes's  coral  ornaments.  She  took  off  her  coi'al  necklace,  and  laid  it  on  the
'.table  cloth,  just  over  the  opening  in  the  table  by  the  spirit  lamp. In  a  short


SERCTC.


■Notes  of  Seances  ivith  D.  D.  Home.


113


time  something  poked  up  the  cloth  and  moved  the  corals,  repeating  the
movement  two  or  three  times.  *

Mr.  Home  then  put  the  accordion  on  the  floor,  and  placed  both  his  hands
on  the  table.  In  a  short  time  we  all  heard  a  movement  of  the  accordion
under  the  table,  and  accordingly  Mr.  Home  placed  one  hand  in  Mrs.
Wm.  Crookes's  hands,  the  otlier  in  Mrs.  VVr.  Crookes's  hands,  and  placed
both  his  feet  beneath  my  feet.  In  this  manner  it  was  physically  impossible
for  him  to  have  touched  the  accordion  with  hands  or  feet.  The  lamp
also  gave  plenty  of  light  to  allow  all  present  seeing  any  movement  on
his  part.  The  accordion  now  commenced  to  sound,  and  tlien  played
several  notes  and  bars.  Every  one  pi'esent  expressed  themselves  quite
convinced  that  this  result  could  not  possibly  have  been  effected  by  Mr.
Home's  agency.

Mr.  Wr.  Crookes  now  said  that  the  accordion  was  brought  up  to  his  knees
and  pressed  against  them.  He  put  his  hand  down  and  took  it  by  the  handle.
It  then  played  in  his  hand,  Mr.  Home's  hands  and  feet  being  held  by  others
as  before.  Presently  Mr.  Wr.  Crookes  said  that  the  accordion  had  left  his
hand  (which  he  then  put  on  to  the  table).  We  could  hear  it  moving  about
under  the  table,  and  then  it  pressed  up  against  my  knees,  and  on  putting  my
hand  down  I  felt  the  handle  turned  into  my  hand.  I  held  it  for  a  mhiute
but  it  did  not  play.  I  then  gave  it  to  Mr.  Home,  and  it  then  played
in  his  right  hand  a  tune  which  Serjt.  Cox  had  asked  for,  "Ye  Banks
and  Braes,"  &c.

After  this  a  very  beautiful  piece  of  music  was  played. It  was  remarked,
This  must  be  the  music  of  the  spheres." A  message  was  given  :—

"This  is."

After  a  little  time  the  music  stopped  and  we  turned  tlio  light  lower,  but  still
^  Miss  Bird  writes  :—

I  remember  the  circumstances  stated  in  this  se'ance.  I  had  noticed  that  the
necklace  worn  by  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes  looked  green.  I  asked  her  why  her  beads
were  green.  She  assured  me  they  were  her  corals,  and  to  convince  me  the
necklace  was  passed  into  my  hands.  Instead  of  passin-  the  necklace  back  I  simply
put  it  opposite  me  in  the  middle  of  the  table.  Almost  as  soon  as  I  had  placed  the
necklace  it  rose  in  a  spiral  shape.  I  called  out  eagerly  to  my  brother,  Dr.  Bird,
to  look  at  the  extraordinary  conduct  of  the  threaded  corals,  and  whilst  I  was
endeavouring  to  get  his  attention  the  erect  necklace  quietly  subsided  in  a  coil  on  the
table.  I  have  often  recalled  the  incident,  and  although  a  sceptic  by  instinct,  this  one
strange  experience  has  made  it  impossible  for  me  to  doubt  the  assertions  of  others
whose  judgment  is  clear  and  whose  uprightness  is  above  suspicion.

October.  1889.  ^lich  L.  Bibd.

, To  this  Dr.  Bird  adds  :—

-  I  recollect  my  sister  calling  out  to  me,  ' '  Look,  look,  at  the  necklace, "  but  at  that
jnoment  my  attention  was  directed  elsewhere,  and  I  did  not  actually  see  the  pheno-
menon m  question.  George  Bikd.

At  the  moment  this  occurred  I  was  writing  my  notes  and  only  caught  sight  of  the
necklace  as  it  was  settling  down  from  its  first  movement.  It  made  one  or  two  slight
movements  afterwards,  and,  as  I  state,  it-seemed  to  me  as  if  it  had  been  moved  from
X  .  I  "mentioned  this  at  the  time  and  was  then  told  by  Miss  Bird  and  others  that
the  necklace  had  behaved  as  is  now  described  by  her.  Not  having  seen  it  myself  I
did  not  alter  the  statement  in  my  note-book. -  W.  Ckookes.


114-


Kotes  of  Seances  with  D.  D.  Home.


keeping  enough  to  enable  us  to  see  plainly  all  that  was  going  on.  The  music
commenced  again  strongly,  and  then  Mr.  Home  brought  the  accordion  over
tlie  top  of  the  table  and  held  it  O2iposite  to  Dr.  Bird.  We  then  all  saw  it  con-
tracting and  expanding  vigorously,  and  heard  it  emitting  sounds,  Mr.  Home
part  of  this  time  supporting  the  instrument  on  his  little  finger  tip  by  means
of  a  string  I  had  tied  round  the  handle.

Serjt.  Cox  held  a  flower  under  the  table  with  the  request  that  it
might  be  taken  and  given  to  a  lady.  It  was  soon  taken  from  his  hand,  and
after  a  considerable  time,  when  the  circumstance  was  almost  forgotten,
a  white  object  was  laid  on  the  edge  of  the  table,  between  Miss  Bird  and
Mr.  Wr.  Crookes,  and  she  said  her  dress  was  pulled  very  much.  As  the
object  moved  about  it  was  seen  to  be  Serjt.  Cox's  flower.  The  message
then  came : —

"  We  gave  i'j  you. A  flower."

Mr.  Home  then  went  into  a  trance,  spoke  a  little  to  Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes  in
a  low  tone,  and  then  got  up.  He  walked  about  the  room  in  an  undecided
sort  of  way,  but  finally  sat  down  again,  saying  it  all  f.elt  confused,  and  then
woke.

A  message  was  then  given  : —

"Hands  oflfthe  table.

We  accordingly  removed  our  hands  and  joined  hands  all  round.  In  a  minute
a  sliglit  movement  of  my  note-book  was  heard,  and  I  could  sl'C  that  a  volume
(Lncidcnts  in  my  Life),  which  was  resting  on  the  leaves  to  keep  them  down,
was  gradually  sliding  over  it  in  jerks  about  an  eighth  of  an  inch  at  a  time.
The  motion  was  visible  to  all  present  and  the  noise  was  also  plainly  heard  by
everyone.  Nothing  more  than  this  took  place,  and  we  soon  had  the
message  : —

"  We  find  wo  have  no  more  power."
The  meeting  then  broke  up.

During  the  latter  part  of  the  evening  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes,  who  was  sitting
near  Mr.  Home,  felt  her  hands  and  arm  constantly  touched  and  stroked,  and
the  form  of  fingers  was  for  some  time  moving  about  under  the  cloth  close  to
lier.  These  were  felt  by  myself  and  Miss  A.  Crookes,  and  our  hands  were
patted  by  them  at  our  request.  Mi's.  Wm.  Crookes  also  saw  a  delicate
finger  and  thumb  playing  about  a  rose  in  Mr.  Home's  coat  and  plucking  the
petals  one  at  a  time  and  laying  some  on  the  table  by  her  side  and  giving
others  to  Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes.  Three  times  she  saw  an  entire  hand  rise  up
and  pass  quite  over  her  own  hands,  which  were  on  the  table.  It  was  small,
plump,  and  delicately  shaped,  ending  at  the  wrist  in  a  cloud.

At  another  time  luminous  appearances  were  seen  on  Mr.  Home's  head
and  before  his  face.  All  present  saw  so  much,  and  Mrs,  Wm.  Crookes  said
they  were  hands.

(VII.) Sunday,  July  16th,  1871. — Sitting  at  20,  Momington-road.

Present: — Mr.  D.  D.  Home  (medium),  Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes,  Mr.  Wr
Crookes,  Mrs.  Humphrey,  Mr.  Wm.  Crookes,  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes.


Notes  of  Seances  with  D.  B.  Home.  115


In  the  folIo\Yin2  order  : —


1

-  (  \

1  *
I  1
1  1

I i  1

U  i  i

D  I-

J 1  1
1  1

1  '

'  '  '

12


mm  c.


7—  Is  a  bouquet  of  flo^vers  which  my  wife  and  I  had  brought  from
Brook  Green  this  evening. They  had  been  given  to  the  servant  to°arranae
and  were  brouglit  into  the  room  and  put  on  tlie  table  after  we  had  all  sat
do«-n  and  the  seance  had  commenced.

8—  Is  the  part  of  the  crack  in  the  table  subsequently  referred  to.

9—  Is  the  wooden  wand.  10— Is  a  sheet  of  note-paper.  ll_Is  a
pencil.

At  the  first  part  of  the  seance  the  phonautograph  i  was  on  the  table  in
front  of  Mr.  Home,  and  I  sat  or  stood  at  position  12.

On  this  occasion  I  asked  for  the  spirits  not  to  rap  on  the  membrane  but
to  press  on  it  as  in  the  experiment  to  make  the  board  light  and  heavy

This  was  accordingly  done,  and  10  tracings  of  curves  were  taken  on  the
smoked  glass  : —

No.  1.— Mr.  Home's  hand  on  edge  of  drum.

No.  2.  C  Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes's  fingers  on  edge  of  drum,  and  Mr.  Home's

No.  3.  (  hands  touching  hers.

No.  4.— Mr.  Home's  fingers  on  edge  of  drum.

No.  5.— ]Mr.  Home's  fingers  on  support  not  touching  the  drum.

No.  6. -Mr.  Home's  fingers  touching  the  membrane.  On  looking  at  this
1  remarked  that  this  curve  might  have  been  produced  by  pressure  of  the
nngei-s. The  message  was  then  given  :—

"Hands  ofi" table."

No.  7.— Mr.  Home's  hands  on  the  table,  no  one  else  touching  ifc
No.  8. -Mr.  Home's  hand  held  over  the  parchment,  fingers  pointin<r
downwards  quite  still.  ^ x  r>

No.  9.— Tlie  same  as  No.  8.

No.  10.— Mr.  Home's  fingers  touching  stand  ;  not  touching  the  drum  or
parchment.

After  taking  these  tracings  the  phonautograph  was  removed,  and  we  sat
down  quietly  in  the  positions  shown  on  diagram. The  room  was  sufliciently

OctobSwf''''^^'^''  °^ phonautograph  see  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science  far


I  2


lie:


Notes  of  Stances  with  D.  D,  Home.


lighted  by  means  of  two  spirit  lamps  with  socl<a  flames  placed  on  the  top  of
the  gaselier.

After  a  few  minu'res  the  wooden  wand  moved  a  little  on  the  table,  gently
sliding  along'.  It  then  raised  itself  uj)  at  one  end  and  then  fell  down  again.
Next  it  lifted  up  sideways  and  turned  half  over.  It  continued  moving  about
in  this  manner  for  several  minutes.  Mr.  Home  said  he  saw  a  hand  over  the
lath  moving  it  about. No  one  else  saw  the  hand.

The  flowers  in  the  bouquet  were  moved  and  rustled  about  several  times.

A  message  was  then  given,  the  answers  being  som.etimes  given  by  raps
on  the  table  and  sometimes  by  the  wand  rising  up  and  striking  the  table
three  times  in  rapid  succession  : —

"A  prayer."

Mr.  Home  took  th^  accordion  in  the  usual  manner  and  we  then  wore-
favoured  with  the  most  beautiful  piece  of  music  I  ever  heard.  It  was  very
.solemn  and  was  executed  perfectly  :  the  "fingering"  of  the  notes  was
finer  tlian  anything  I  could  imagine.  During  this  piece,  which  lasted  f
about  10  minutes,  we  heard  a  man's  rich  voice^  accompanying  it  in  one  corner
of  the  room,  and  a  bird  whistling  and  chirping.

Mr.  Home  then  held  his  hand  over  the  bouquet  and  shook  it  (his  hand)
with  a  rapid  quivering  movement.

I  asked  if  the  pencil  would  be  taken  and  a  word  written  on  the  pajjcr
before  our  eyes.  The  pencil  was  moved  and  lifted  up  two  or  three  times,  but
it  fell  down  again.  The  lath  moved  up  to  the  pencil  and  seemed  trying  to
help  it,  but  it  was  of  no  use.

■ A  message  was  given  :  —

"  It  is  impossible  for  matter  to  pas3  through  matter  ;  but  wo  will  .show'
you  what  we  can  do."

We  waited  in  silence.  Presently  Mrs.  Y/in.  Crookes  said  she  saw  a
luminous  apjiearance  over  the  bouquet.  Mr.  Wr.  Crookes  said  he  saw  the
same,  and  Mr.  Homo  said  he  saw  a  hand  moving  about.

A  piece  of  ornamental  grass  about  inches  long  here  moved  out  of  the
bouquet,  and  was  seen  to  slowly  diss  pear  just  in  front  at  the  position  (8)  on
the  plan, as  if  it  were  passing  thro ugt  the  table.

Immediately  after  it  had  disappeared  through  the  table  IMrs.  Wm.  Crookes
saw  a  hand  appear  from  beneath  the  table,  between  her  and  Mr.  Home,
holding  the  piece  of  grass.  It  brought  it  up  to  her  sh'  *kler,  tapped  it  against
Jier  two  or  three  times  with  a  noise  audible  to  all,  and  then  took  the  grass
down  on  to  the  floor,  where  the  hand  disappeared.  Only  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes
and  Mr,  Home  saw  the  hand  ;  but  we  all  saw  the  movements  of  the  piece  of
grass,  which  were  as  I  have  described.

It  was  then  told  us  that  the  grass  had  been  pa"^  -•'^^Jirough  the  division  in
the  table.  On  measuring  the  diameter  of  this  divisKjn  found  it  to  t  s  barely
l^th  inch,  and the  piece  of  grass  was  far  too  thick  to  enable  me  to  force  it


*  S;e  incident  on  ix  121


Notes  of  Seances  ivith  D.  D.  Home.  lil


,throngli  without  injuring  it. Yet  it  passed  through  the  chink  very  quietly
and  smoothly  and  did  not  sliow  the  least  signs  of  pressure.
The  message  v/as  then  given  by  notes  on  the  accordion  :  —

, "  God  bless  you.  Goodnight."

A  parting  tune  was  then  played  on  the  accordion,  and  the  sjanc3  then
broke  up  at  half-past  11.

(VIII.)  Sunday,  July  30fch,  1871. Sitting  at  20,  Mornington-road.

Present  D.  D.  Home,  Mr.  Wm.  Crookes,  Mrs.  Wri.'  Crookes,

Mrs.  Humphrey,  Mr.  Wr.  Crookes,  Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes,  Mrs.  I.,  Miss  A.
Crookes,  Mr.  H.  Crookes,  Mr.  T.,  and  at  11  p.m.  Lord  A.

In  tlie  dining-room  round  the  dining-table.

During  the  former  part  of  the  evening  the  gas  was  lighted  ;  during  the
latter  part  the  room  was  illumiuated  by  two  spirit  lamps. -  \

The  first  experiment  tried  was  the  alteration  of  the  weight  of  the  board
by  means  of  the  improved  apparatus,  by  which  the  movements  are  registered
on  smoked  glass.  In  order  to  meet  Mr.  G.'s  objection  the  short  end  of
the  board  was  firmly  supported  on  a  foot  (A)  in  such  a  manner  that  no  amount


of  pressure  of  the  hands  at  (B)  produced  any  appreciable  movement  of  the
long  end.  The  adjustments  were  made  and  well  tested  by  myself  before  Mr.
Home  entered  the  room.

I  took  Mr.  Home's  two  hands  and  placed  them  myself  in  the  proper
position  on  the  board,  the  tips  of  his  finger.s  being  (at  B)  just  half-way  from
the  extremity  to  the  fulcrum.  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes,  who  was  sitting  next  to
Mr.  Home,  and  by  the  side  of  the  apparatus,  watched  his  hands  the  whole
time,  and  I  also  watched  him  whilst  the  plate  of  glass  was  moving.  Six  plates
were  tried  and  good  results  obtained.  The  experiments  were  not  tried
tlirectly  one  after  the  other,  but  when  all  was  ready  Mr.  Home  generally
told  me  when  to  set  the  clock  going,  saying  that  he  felt  an  influence  on  the
instrument  or  that  he  saw  a  spirit  standing  near.  On  one  or  two  occasions
loud  raps  were  heard  on  the  board,  and  the  signal  to  set  the  clock  going  was
given  at  my  request  by  three  raps.  The  board  sometimes  swayed  "side^ways
as  well  as  vertically.

During  the  progress  of  one  of  these  experiments  the  chair  in  which  I
had  been  sitting,  which  was  standing  near  the  apparatus,  was  seen  to  move
up  close  to  the  table.

The  register  of  the  index  showed  a  maximum  pull  of  21b.,


118


Notes  of  Seances  ivith  D.  D.  Home.


The  apparatus  was  removed,  and  we  took  our  scats  round  the  table  in  the
following  positionj  ; —


M??  f.


D?f  H.


:L9A..  MflW^G,,

.CAME  AT.

ii.p.M.r


Raps  occurred  in  different  parLs  of  the  table  when  I  placed  my  hands
there.  Raps  were  then  given  on  the  wooden  lath  when  Mr.  Home  had
hold  of  one  end.

The  accordion  was  held  by  Mr.  Home  in  the  usual  position  under  tlia
table. Whilst  it  played  Mrs.  I.  looked  beneath  and  saw  it  playing.  Mr.
Home  removed  his  hand  altogether  from  it,  and  held  both  hands  above  tho
table. During  this  Mrs.  I.  s;i,id  she  saw  a  lunihious  hand  playing  the-
accordion.

The  gas  was  now  turned  out,  and  three  spirit  lamps  were  lighted.
Loud  raps  were  heard,  and  the  planchette  moved  across  a  sheet  of  papci\
leaving  a  mark  with  the  pencil.
The  lath  moved  some  inches.

The  accordion,  which  had  been  left  by  llr.  Home  under  the  table,  now
began  to  play  and  move  about  without  anyone  touching  it.  It  droppul
on  to  my  foot,  then  dragged  itself  away,  playing  all  the  time,  and  went  to
Mrs.  I. It  got  on  to  her  knees.

Mr.  Home  then  took  it  in  his  hand,  where  it  played,  and  delivered  tlio
following  message  by  chords  in  the  usual  way  :  —

"  Our  joy  and  thankfulness  to  have  been  allowed  to  make  our  presence'
manifest.  We  thank  you  for  your  patience  and  we  thank  GOD  for  Hia
love."

Mr.  Home  got  up  and  stood  behind  in  full  viev/  of  all,  holding  the
accordion  out  at  arm's  length.  We  all  saw  it  expanding  and  contracting  and
heard  it  playing  a  melody.  Mr.  Home  then  let  go  of  the  accordion,  which
went  behind  his  back  and  there  continued  to  play ;  his  feet  being  visibla
and  also  his  two  hands,  which  were  in  front  of  him.


Notes  of  Seances  with  D.  D.  Home.


119


Mr.  Tlome  then  walked  to  the  open  space  in  the  room  between  Mrs.  I.'s
chair  and  the  sideboard  and  stood  there  quite  upright  and  quiet.  He  theii
said,  "I'm  rising,  I'm  rising"  ;  when  we  all  saw  him  rise  from  the  ground
slowly  to  a  height  of  about  six  inches,  remain  there  for  about  10  seconds,  and
then  slowly  descend.  From  my  position  I  could  not  see  his  feet,  but  I
distinctly  saw  his  head,  projected  against  the  opposite  wall,  rise  up,  and  Mr.
Wr.  Crookes,  who  was  sitting  near  where  Mr.  Home  was,  said  that  his  feet
"were  in  the  air.  There  was  no  stool  or  other  thing  near  which  could  have
aided  him.  Moreover,  the  movement  was  a  smooth  continuous  glide  upwards.

Whilst  this  was  going  on  we  heard  the  accordion  fall  heavily  to  the
ground.  It  had  been  suspended  in  the  air  behind  the  chair  where  Mr.  Home
liad  been  sitting. When  it  fell  Mr.  Home  was  about  10ft.  from  it.

Mr.  Home  still  standing  behind  Mrs.  I.  and  Mr.  Wr.  Crookes,  the
accordion  was  both  seen  and  heard  to  move  about  behind  him  without  his
hands  touching  it.  It  then  played  a  tune  without  contuct  and  floating  in  the
air.

Mr.  Home  then  took  the  accordion  in  one  hand  and  held  it  out  so  that  we
could  all  see  it  (he  was  still  standing  up  behind  Mrs.  I.  and  Mr.  Wr.  Crookes).
We  then  saw  the  accordion  expand  and  contract  and  heard  a  tune  played.
Birs.  Wm.  Crookes  and  Mr.  Home  saw  a  light  on  the  lower  part  of  tha
accordion,  where  the  keys  were,  and  we  then  heard  and  saw  the  keys
clicked  and  depressed  one  after  the  other  fairly  and  deliberately,  as  if  to
show  us  that  the  power  doing  it,  although  invisible  (or  nearly  so)  to  us,  had
full  control  over  the  instrument.

A  beautiful  tune  was  then  played  whilst  Mr.  Home  v/as  standing  np
holding  the  accordion  out  in  full  view  of  everyone.

Mr.  Home  then  came  round  behind  me  and  telling  me  to  hohl  my  loft
arm  out  placed  the  accordion  under  ray  arm,  the  keys  hanging  down  and  th.2
upper  part  pressing  upwards  against  my  upper  arm.  He  then  left  go  and  the
accordion  remained  there.  He  then  placed  his  txfo  hands  one  on  each  of  my
shoulders.  In  this  position,  no  one  touching  the  accordion  but  myself,  and
every  one  noticing  what  was  taking  place,  the  instrument  pliiyed  notes  but
no  tune.

?.Ir.  Home  then  sat  down  in  his  chair,  and  we  were  told  by  raps  to  open
the  taltle  about  an  inch  or  an  inch  and  a-half.

IMr.  T.  touched  the  point  of  the  lath,  when  raps  immediately  came  on  it.

Tlic  planclxette,  which  was  on  the  table  resting  on  a  sheet  of  paper,  now
moved  a  few  inches.

Sounds  were  heard  on  the  accordion,  which  was  on  the  floor,  not  held  by
llr.  Home.

The  corner  of  the  paper  next  to  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes  (on  which  the  plan-
chette  was  standing)  moved  up  and  down.  (These  three  last  phenomena  were
going  on  simultaneously.)

I  felt  something  touch  my  knee;  it  then  went  to  Mrs.  I.,  then  to  MLss
A.  Crookes.

Whilst  this  was  going  on  I  hold  the  bell  under  the  table,  and  it  was  taken
from  me  and  rung  round  beneath.  It  was  then  given  to  Mrs.  I.  by  a  hand
ivhich  she  desciibed  as  soft  and  warm.

The  lath  was  now  seen  to  move  about  a  little.


120


Notes  of  Seances  with  D.  D.  Home.


'  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes  saw  a  hand  and  fingers  touching  the  flower  in  Mr.
Home's  button-hole.  The  flower  was  then  taken  by  the  hand  and  given  to
Mrs.  I.  and  the  green  leaf  was  in  a  similar  manner  given  to  Mr.  T.

Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes  and  Mr.  Home  saw  the  hand  doing  this,  the  others
only  saw  the  flower  and  leaf  moving  through  the  air.

Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes  held  a  rose  below  the  table  ;  it  was  touched  and  then
taken.

The  sound  as  of  a  drum  was  heard  on  the  accordion.

The  lath  lifted  itself  up  on  its  edge,  then  reared  itself  ujDonone  end  and  fell
down.  It  then  floated  up  four  inches  above  the  table,  and  moved  quite
round  the  circle,  pointing  to  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes.  It  then  rose  up  and  passed
over  our  heads  outside  the  circle.

Tlie  planchette  moved  about  a  good  deal,  marking  tlie  paper.

Tlie  cloth  was  dragged  along  the  table.

Whilst  the  lath  was  moving  round  the  circle,  the  accordion  played  a  tune
ill  Mr.  Home's  hand  whilst  Mi's.  Wm.  Crookes's  hand  was  also  on  it.

Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes  put  her  hand  near  the  lath,  when  it  came  up  to
it,  and  moved  about  it  very  much.

The  paper  on  which  the  planchette  was  resting  moved  about  us  as  if  I)}'  a
l-and.  Many  present  saw  a  hand  doing  it.  (Mr.  Home  and  Mrs.  Wm.
Crookes  saw  this  hand. )

Mr.  H.  Crookes  saw  a  luminous  hand  come  up  between  Mr.  Home  and
Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes.

Some  time  during  the  evening  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes's  handkerchief,  which
had  been  in  her  pocket,  was  taken  out  of  it  by  a  hand.

I  saw  something  white  moving  about  in  the  furtlier  corner  of  tlie  room
(diagonal  to  door)  under  a  chair.  On  my  remarking  this,  a  message  was
given  by  raps  : —

"William  !  take  it."

On  getting  up  and  taking  it  I  saw  that  it  was  my  wife's  pocket  handker-
chief tied  in  a  knot,  and  having  the  stalk  of  the  rose  which  had  been  taken
from  her  tied  up  in  it.  The  f)kace  where  I  picked  up  the  handkerchief
^vas  hfteen  feet  from  where  she  had  been  sitting.

A  glass  water  bottle  which  was  on  the  table  now  floated  up  and  rajopcd
against  the  planchette.

Mr.  Home  said  :  "I  see  a  face. I  see  Philip's  face. Pliilip  !  Brother  !  "

The  water  and  tumbler  now  rose  up  together,  and  we  had  answers  to
cpiestions  by  their  tapping  together  whilst  floating  in  the  air  about  eight
inches  above  the  table,  and  moving  backwards  and  forwards  from  one  to  the
other  of  the  circle.

Mr.  H.  Crookes  said  a  hand  was  tickling  his  knee.

A  finger  was  protruded  up  the  opening  of  the  table  between  Miss  A.
Crookes  and  the  water  bottle.

Miss  A.  Crookes,  Mr.  H.  Crookes,  and  Mrs.  I.  were  then  touched.

Fingers  came  up  the  opening  of  the  table  a  second  time  and  waved  about.

The  lath,  which  on  its  last  excursion  had  settled  in  front  of  tlic  furtlier
window,  quite  away  from  the  cin-le,  now  moved  along  the  floor  four  or  five
times  very  noisily. It  then  came  up  to  Mr.  T.,  and  passed  into  the  circle


Notes  of  Seances  ivith  D.  D.  Home.


121


over  his  shoulder.  It  settled  on  the  table  and  then  rose  up  again,  pointing
to  Mrs.  \Vm.  Crookes's  mouth.

The  lath  then  went  to  the  water  bottle  and  pushed  it  several  times  nearly
over,  to  move  it  away  from  the  opening  in  the  table.  The  lath  then  went
endways  down  the  opening.

The  tumbler  moved  about  a  little.

The  lath  moved  up  through  the  opening  in  the  table  and  answered  "Yes"
and  "No"  to  questions,  by  bobbing  up  and  down  three  times  or  once.

A  hand  was  seen  by  some,  and  a  hmiinous  cloud  by  others,  pulling  the
f.owers  about  which  were  in  a  stand  on  the  table.  A  flower  was  then  seen  to
be  carried  deliberately  and  given  to  Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes.

Another  flower  was  taken  by  the  hand  and  brought  over  to  Mrs.  Wm.
Crookes  ;  it  was  dropped  between  her  and  Mr.  Home.

Raps  then  said  : —

"  We  must  go."

The  raps  then  commenced  loudly  all  over  the  room  and  got  fainter  and
fainter  until  they  became  inaudible.
The  seance  then  broke  up.

(TX.)  Satukdat,  November  25th,  1871. — Sitting  at  20,  Mornington-
road. From  9.15  p.m.  to  11.30  p.m.

Presciii .- —Mr.  D.  D.  Home  (medium),  Mrs.  Home,  Miss  Douglas,  Mrs.
Humphrey,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes,  Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes,  Miss  Crookes,
Mr.  C.  Gimingham.

In  the  dining-room  round  the  dining-table  ;  no  leaf  in.


MlSS.A.C,


C:G.


IRS


!^(1?D.0,H0r,',E


MR?  H,


On  the  table  were  two  glass  troughs  of  flowers  ;  accordion  ;  paper  ;  plan-
chette  ;  some  marked  pieces  of  paper  ;  pencils  ;  handbell ;  spirit  lamps  ;
matches,  &c. A  cloth  was  on. The  lath  was  on  the  table.

There  was  a  good  fire  in  the  room,  which,  however,  got  low  towards  the
end  of  the  sitting,  and  a  gas  light  was  burning  during  the  greater  part  of  the
time.  When  that  was  put  out  there  was  still  light  enough  in  the  I'oom  from
the  fire  and  the  street  to  enable  us  to  distinguish  each  other,  and  see  the
objects  on  the  table.


122


Notes  of  Seances  with  D.  D.  Home.


We  had  scarcely  sab  down  a  minute  when  raps  were  heard  from  different
parts  of  the  table  ;  a  strong  vibration  of  our  chairs  and  the  table  was  felt,
and  sounds  like  thumps  on  the  door  were  heard.  A  curious  metallic  tappin;^
sound  was  heard  on  the  iron  screw  of  the  table.

A  message  i—^'  Selfish,"  in  reply  to  a  remark  I  made.

A  rustling  was  heard  on  the  table,  and  one  of  the  glass  flower  troughs  was
seen  to  move  along  by  jerks,  till  it  had  travelled  about  two  inches  and  had
got  a  little  on  to  a  large  sheet  of  papex'.  This  movement  continued  whilst  all
were  watching  it. Mr.  Home's  hands  were  quiet  in  front  of  him.

The  wooden  lath  was  tlien  seen  to  slide  an  inch  or  so  backwards  and
forwards.

Mr.  Home  took  the  accordion  in  the  usual  manner,  holding  it  under  the-
table.  It  immediately  began  to  sound.  Mr.  Home  then  brought  it  from
under  the  table  (he  said  it  appeared  to  move  of  its  own  accord,  dragging  his-
hand  after  it),  playing  all  the  time,  and  at  last  held  it  hanging  down  at  the
back  of  his  chair  in  a  very  constrained  attitude,  his  feet  being  under  the
table  and  his  other  hand  on  the  table.  In  this  position  the  instrument
played  chords  and  separate  notes,  but  not  any  definite  tune.  The  sounds  on
it  became  Lnider  and  the  table  began  to  vibrate  ;  this  got  stronger  and
stronger  until  the  noise  of  the  accordion  j'kxying  simple  chords  v/as  very
great,  whilst  the  table  actually  jumped  up  and  down  keeping  accurate  time
with  the  music.  This  became  so  violent  that  it  might  have  been  heard  alL
over  the  house. It  ceased  suddenly  and  in  a  minute  recommenced.

Miss  Douglas  said:  "Dear  spirits,  how  pleased  you  would  have  becix
had  you  lived  to  witness  the  progress  Spiritualism  is  now  making."  Imme-
diately a  message  was  given  in  reply  : —

"We  are  not  dead  !"

Mr.  Home  brought  the  accordion  back  founder  the  table,  when  it  sounded
notes  again.  There  was  a  sound  as  of  a  man's  bass  voice-"^  accompanying  it.
On  mentioning  this,  one  note,  "No,"  was  given,  and  the  musical  bar  re-
peated several  times  slowly,  till  we  found  out  that  it  was  caused  by  a  peculiar
discord  played  on  a  bass  note.  On  finding  this  out  the  instrument  burst  out
with  its  usual  jubilant  bar.

Miss  Douglas  saying  that  she  felt  touched,'  I  asked  if  we  might  get  some
direct  writing.  Two  raps  were  given.  I  asked  Miss  Douglas  to  put  the
marked  sheets  of  jiaper  and  pencil  under  the  table  by  her  feet,  and  requested
that  something  might  be  written  on  it.

Three  raps.

The  power  now  seemed  to  go  to  the  lath  ;  it  was  lifted  up  several  times-
at  alternate  ends  to  a  height  of  several  inches  and  then  floated  quite  above
the  table.

The  jilanchette  moved  irregularly  along  the  pa^^er,  making  a  mark  with
the  pencil.

Some  of  tliose  who  were  present  said  they  saw  a  luminous  hand  touching
the  paper. I  saw  the  pai)er  raised  up  at  the  side  away  from  Mr.  Home.
I  felt  touched  strongly  on  the  knee  by  something  feeling  like  fingers.  Or


1  See  incident  on  p.  IIO.


Notes  of  Seances  ivith  D.  D.  ILjrne.


12S


pu;;ting  my  hand  down  a  sheet  of  pr-per  was  put  into  it. I  said,  "Is  any-
thing written  on  it  1 "
"Yes."

It  being  too  dark  to  see  what  was  written,  I  asked  that  it  mi^'ht  ba
told  me  by  raps,  and  on  repeating  the  alphabet  I  got  tlie  following  : —

"  Kctojdourdanie."
On  striking  a  light  ohc  following  was  seen  neatly  v.'ritten: —

R.  C.  to  J.  D.
Our  Daniel.

Miss  Douglas  said  the  R.  C.  was  Robert  ChamberG,  whilst  J.  D.  were  the
initials  of  her  own  name.

As  the  paper  was  a  sheet  I  had  marked  and  it  was  free  from  any  writing
when  put  under  the  table,  whilst  no  one  had  moved  from  the  table  in  the-
meantime,  this  was  as  striking  a  manifestation  as  I  had  ever  seen.

Mrs.  Home,  wlio  for  some  time  past  had  said  a  hand  was  holding  her  liand,.
now  said  that  the  hand  was  under  her  dress.  Each  of  us  in  turn  went  round
and  felt  it.  To  me  it  felt  very  small  and  I  could  not  distinguish  any  forriL
wliich  I  could  be  certain  was  a  hand.  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes,  who  went  next,
said  it  was  at  first  very  small  but  it  seemed  to  grow  large  as  she  felt  it  until
it  was  exactly  like  a  large  hand,  the  knuckles  and  fingers  being  very  distinct.
The  hand  remained  with  Mrs.  Home  for  half  an  hour  at  least.  On  a;jking  for
the  name  of  the  hand  which  had  held  hers,  the  name

"  Alexandrine  "

Yfas  spelt  out.  '

A  sound  like  the  snapping  of  fingers  was  heard.  On  speaking  of  this  it
was  repeated  at  our  request  in  diflferent  parts  of  the  room.

The  wooden  lath  v/hich  was  lying  just  in  front  of  me  appeared  to  move
slightly,  whereupon  I  leaned  forward  and  watched  it  intently.  It  rose  up-
about  half  an  inch,  then  sank  down,  and  afterwards  turned  up  on  one  end
till  it  was  upright,  and  then  descended  on  the  other  side  till  it  touched  one-
of  Mr.  Home's  hands.  One  end  remaiiied  all  the  time  on  the  taljle  whilst
the  other  end  described  a  semicircle.  The  movement  was  very  deliberate.
The  lath  then  moved  away  from  Mr.  Home's  hands  and  laid  itself  across  the
planchctte.  Both  it  and  tlie  planchette  moved  sliglitly.  The  lath  then  moved.
ofli"and  stood  quite  uj^right  on  the  table. It  then  slowly  descended.

The  accordion,  which  had  been  for  some  time  quiet  under  tlie  table,  now
Ti-as  heard  to  sound  and  move  about.  Presently  Miss  Douglas  felt  it  come
to  her  and  push  against  her  knees.

The  window  curtains  at  the  end  of  the  room  furthest  from  the  door,  and.
seven  feet  from  where  Mr.  Home  was  sitting,  were  seen  to  move  about.
They  opened  in  the  centre  for  a  space  of  about  a  foot,  exactly  as  if  a  man  lir.d.
divided  them  with  his  hands.  Mr.  Home  said  he  saw  a  dark  form  standing
in  front  of  the  window  moving  the  curtains,  and  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes  and
Mr.  C.  Gimingliam  also  said  they  saw  a  shadow  of  a  form.  The  form  «as
then  seen  to  go  behind  one  curtain  and  move  it  outwards  into  the  room  for
a  distance  of  about  18  inches. This  was  rejieated  several  times.

The  wooden  lath  now  rose  from  the  table  and  rested  one  end  on  my
knuckles,  the  oth<?r  end  being  on  the  table. It  then  rose  up  and  ta])ped  in&


124.


Azotes  of  Seances  tvlth  B.  D.  Home.


•several  times.  Questions  which  I  put  were  answered  "  Yes  "  or  "  No,"  in
this  manner.  I  said,  "Do  you  know  the  Morse  alphabet?"  "Yes."
"  Could  you  give  me  a  message  by  it  ?  "  "  Yes."  As  soon  as  this  was
rapped  out  the  lath  commenced  rapping  my  knuckles  in  long  and  short  taps,
in  a  manner  exactly  resembling  a  "  Morse"  message.  My  knowledge  of  the
code  and  of  reading  by  sound  is  not  sufficient  to  enable  me  to  say  positively
tluxt  it  was  a  message  ;  but  it  sounded  exactly  like  one;  the  long  and  short
taps  and  the  pauses  were  exactly  similar,  and  Mr.  C.  Gimingliam,  who  has
had  practice  with  the  Morse  code,  feels  almost  certain  that  it  was  so.

Afterwards  at  my  request  the  Morse  alphabet  was  given  distinctly  by  taps
-on  the  table.  During  this  time  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookcs  was  standing  on  the  other
side  of  the  table  by  Mrs.  Home.  Her  chair  between  me  and  Mr.  Home
w.is  empty  and  I  could  see  Mr.  Home's  hands  resting  quietly  on  the  table
i'A  front  of  him.

Mr.  Home  went  into  a  trance,  and  addressed  several  of  us  in  turn.
•  The  seance  ended  at  about  11.30  p.m.

(X.)  Tuesday,  ArraL  16th,  1872. — Sitting  at  20,  Mornington-road.
From  8.50  p.m.

Present:— Islr.  D.  D.  Home  (medium),  Mr.  Serjt.  Cox,  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Wm.  Crookes,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes,  Mrs.  Humphrey,  Mr.  F.  G.,  in
the  following  order  : —


mmt.


|E??Vi/MC


m  vv¥  c.

On  the  table  were  flowers,  an  accordion,  a  lath,  a  bell,  paper,  and
pencils.

P//cHO»icaa.— Creaks  were  heard,  followed  by  a  trembling  of  the  table
and  chairs.

The  table  gently  moved  from  Mr.  Wr.  Crookes  to  Mr.  Home.
E-aps  were  heard  on  different  [jarts  of  the  table.

Iilr.  F.  G.  was  under  the  table  when  the  movements  were  going  on.
There  was  vibration  and  knocks  on  the  floor.  The  table  moved  six  inches
from  Mr.  F.  G.  to  me  ;  and  there  was  a  strong  trembling  of  the  table.

A  shiiwer  of  loud  ticks  by  Mr.  F.  G.  was  heard,  and  thumps  as  of  a  foot
on  the  floor.

The  table  trembled  twice  at  Mr.  F.  G.'s  request ;  then  twice  and  a  thirtl
time  after  an  interval. This  was  done  several  times.


Notes  of  Seances  luith  D.  D.  Home.


125.


The  table  became  light  and  heavy.  Mr.  F.  G,  tested  it,  and  there  was-
no  mistake.

There  were  strong  movements  of  the  table  when  Mr.  F.  G.  was  under  it.
Mr.  Home's  chair  moved  back  six  inches.

The  accordion  was  taken  by  Mr.  Home  in  the  usual  manner  and  sounded,^
Mr.  F.  G.  looked  under,  whilst  it  was  expanding  and  contracting.
We  were  speaking  of  the  music,  when  a  message  was  given  : —

"  It  comes  from  the  heart. A  hymn  of  praise."

After  which  beautiful  sacred  music  was  played.

The  bell  was  taken  from  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes,  and  tinkled  under  the  tablr
for  some  time. It  was  thrown  down  close  to  Mr.  F.  G..,  who  took  it.

The  accordion  laid  down  under  tho  table  by  Serjt.  Cox  and  played  a  few
notes,  when  all  hands  were  on  tlie  table.  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes  pub  her  feet  ort^
BIr.  Home's.  A  big  hand  pushed  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes's  feet  away.  The
accordion  played  and  then  pushed  into  Mr.  F.  G.'s  hand.  Mr.  F.  G.  held  it
for  so^ie  time,  but  there  was  no  sound,  and  it  was  given  to  Mr.  Home.

Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes's  dress  was  pulled  round,  while  Mr.  F.  G.  was  looking
on. Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes  put  her  feet  touching  Mr.  F.  G.  's.

The  accordion  played  in  Mr.  Home's  hands.  He  said  he  felt  a  touch,  orL
which  there  were  five  raps,  and  a  message  came  : —

"  We  did."

"The  Last  Rose  of  Summer  "  was  played  exquisitely.  Mr.  Home  then  put
the  accordion  down.  There  was  quietness  for  a  minute,  followed  by  move-
ments of  the  table,  and  a  message  was  given  : —

"  We  have  no  more  power."

(XI.)  Sunday,  April  21st,  1872.— Sitting  at  2-1,  Motcombe-street.  Tha
residence  of  my  brother,  Mr.  Walter  Crookes.

Fresent: — Mr.  D.  D.  Home  (medium),  Mrs.  Douglas,  Capt.  C,  Mr.  and.
Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes.

In  the  drawing-room,  round  the  centre  table.


■  Fhenomena : — Strong  vibrations  of  the  cabinet  behind  Mr.  Home  :  con^^.


126


Notes  of  Seances  with  D.  D.  Home.


tinuous  raps  on  the  table  :  very  strong  vibrations  of  the  cabinet.  Then  a
long  silence. Mr.  Home  went  to  the  piano.

On  his  return  the  vibrations  recommenced  ;  then  there  were  powerful
raps  on  the  table  in  front  of  me.

There  were  thumps  on  the  table  and  then  on  the  floor.

I  was  touched  on  the  knee.

I  was  touched  again  on  the  knee.  The  table  then  rattled  about  so
violently  that  I  could  not  write.

Mr.  Home  took  the  accordion  in  the  usual  manner. It  played  a  tune.

Mrs.  Douglas's  handkerchief  was  taken  from  her  lap  by  a  hand  visible  to
her  and  Mr.  Home,  the  accordion  playing  beautifully  all  the  time.  A
message  was  given  : —

"  Try  less  light."

'The  handkerchief  moved  about  along  the  floor,  visible  to  all.

Mr.  Home  nearly  disappeared  under  the  table  in  a  curious  attitude,  then
he  was  (still  in  his  chair)  wheeled  out  from  under  the  table  still  in  the  same
attitude,  his  feet  out  in  front  ofi'  the  ground.  He  was  then  sitting  almost
horizontally,  his  shoulders  resting  on  his  chair.

He  asked  Mrs.  VVr.  Crookes  to  remove  the  chair  from  under  him  as  it
vras  not  supporting  him.  He  was  then  seen  to  be  sitting  in  the  air  sup-
,  ported  by  nothing  visible.

Then  Mr.  Home  rested  the  extreme  top  of  his  head  on  a  chair,  and  liis
feet  on  the  sofa.  He  said  he  felt  supported  in  the  middle  very  comfortably.
The  chair  then  moved  away  of  its  own  accord,  and  Mr.  Home  rested  flat  over
the  floor  behind  Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes.

A  stool  then  moved  up  from  behind  Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes  to  between  her
.and  Mr.  Home.

Mr.  Home  then  got  up,  and  after  walking  about  the  room  went  to  a  largo
glass  screen  and  brought  it  close  up  to  me,  and  opened  it  out  thus  ; —


Mr.  Home  then  put  his  hands  on  the  screen,  and  we  had  raps  on  the
:glass. (The  gas  was  turned  brightly  up  during  these  experiments.)


Notes  of  Seances  ivith  D.  D.  Home,


127


Then  Mr.  Home  put  his  hand  on  one  leaf  of  the  screen,  and  I  put  my
liand  where  I  chose  on  the  other  leaf. Raps  came  from  under  my  hand.

The  screen  was  then  put  thus  : —


Mr.  Home  stood  behind  the  screen  and  had  the  gas  liglit  shining  full  on
liim.  He  rested  his  two  hands  lightly  on  the  top  of  the  centre  leaf  of  the
screen.  In  this  position  we  had  the  table  cloth  moved,  raps  on  the  table  in
front  of  the  screen,  and  raps  on  the  glass  leaves  (either  one  at  request).  A
lady's  dress  was  pulled,  and  the  chairs  were  shaken.

The  screen  was  then  folded  up  and  laid  horizontally  on  tv/o  chairs,  so  as
to  form  a  glass  table.  Mr.  Home  sat  at  one  side  and  I  sat  at  the  other  side,
by  ourselves.  The  light  was  very  good,  and  the  whole  of  his  legs  and  feet
v.-ere  easily  seen  through  the  screen.

Many  experiments  were  then  tried  on  this  glass  table.  Raps  came  from
it  at  my  request  where  I  desired.  It  was  vibrated  ;  and  once  raps  came  when
Mr.  Home  was  not  touching  it.

The  light  was  then  lowered  and  the  screen  put  aside.

The  cushion  from  the  sofa  floated  off  it  and  came  between  Mr.  Heme  and
Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes.

Mr.  Home  took  the  accordion,  and  it  played  "  Auld  Lang  Syne."

Someone  was  seen  standing  behind  Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes.

Mrs.  Wm.  Crookes  had  severe  pain  in  her  head.  Mr.  Home  came  behind
lior  and  mesmerised  her,  and  the  pain  went.

A  message  came  to  Mrs.  Wr.  Crookes.

Nothing  more  took  place  after  this.


I2&


Experiments  in  Thought- Transfei^ence,


Ylt

EXPERIMENTS  IN  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE,
By  Professor  and  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick,  and  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith.

The  experiments  in  thought-transference  about  to  be  described  have
"been  carried  out  with  four  diiferent  percipients  while  in  the  hypnotic
trance,  Mr.  Smith,  who  liypnotised  them,  being  the  agent.  Tha
experiments  were  usually  directed  and  arranged  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  Avho
also  took  the  notes  which  form  the  basis  of  the  present  paper.  On  two
or  three  occasions,  however,  she  was  absent  and  her  place  was  taken
by  Professor  Sidgwick,  who  was  also  present  on  most  other  occasions
in  .July  and  August.

Most  of  the  experiments  were  in  the  transference  of  numbers  of
two  digits,  Mr.  Smith  looking  at  the  numlDcrs  and  the  percipient
guessing  them.  The  number  of  experiments  of  this  nature  tried  with
Mr.  Smith  in  the  same  room  as  the  percipient  was  644,  of  which.
131  were  successes  ;  and  the  number  tried  with  Mr.  Smith  in  another
room  was  228,  of  which  only  9  were  successes.  In  these  numbers  a:i
experiment  in  which  two  percipients  were  at  work  at  the  same  time  is
counted  as  two.  By  a  success  we  mean  that  both  digits  are  cori-ectly
given,  but  not  necessarily  placed  in  the  right  order.  Of  the  131
successes  with  Mr.  Smith  in  the  same  room  the  digits  were  reversed  in
14  ;  and  of  tlie  9  successes  with  Mr.  Smith  in  a  different  room  the  digits.^
were  reversed  in  1.  We  had  no  numbers  above  90  among  those  we-
used.  If  the  percipients  had  been  aware  of  this  the  probability  of  their
guessing  the  right  digits  in  the  right  order  in  one  trial  by  pure  chanc3=
would  have  been  1  to  81,  and  the  probability  of  their  guessing  the  right
digits  in  any  order  half  that.  But,  as  at  difierent  times  they  guessed
all  the  numbers  between  90  and  100,  we  believe  that  they  were  not  awar&
that  our  series  stopped  at  90,  in  which  case  their  chance  of  being  right-
in  a  single  guess  was  1  to  90.  No  one  will  suppose  therefore  that  117
complete  successes  in  664  guesses  was  the  result  of  chance.  Good  days
and  bad  days  alike  are  included  in  the  numbers  given,  though,  as  will
be  seen  in  the  sequel,  on  some  days  no  success  at  all  was  obtained.  It-
was  clear  that  the  power  of  divining  the  numbers  was  exceedingly  vari-
able, but  whether  the  difference  was  in  the  agent  or  the  percipient  or  on.
what  circumstances  it  depended  we  have  so  far  been  unable  to  discover.

Eight  persons,  at  least,  besides  Mr.  Smith,  tried  to  act  as  agents,
but  either  failed  to  hypnotise  the  percipients,  or  to  trans/er  any  imprca-


Experimenis  in  Thought-Transference.  129


sion.  Nor  did  others  succeed  in  transferring  impressions  when  the
hypnotic  state  had  been  induced  by  Mr.  Smith.  Mr.  Smith  himself
did  not  succeed  except  when  the  percipients  were  hypnotised.

We  shall  give  in  full  the  account,  written  at  the  time,  of  the  firsfc
day's  experiments  with  each  of  the  percipients — not  because  these
experiments  are  the  most  conclusive,  or  wei'e  carried  out  under  the  best
conditions,  but  because  they  give  perhaps  more  insight  than  others
into  the  impressions  of  the  percipients,  who  were  more  lively  and
interested  in  the  matter  while  it  was  new  to  them.  We  do  not  profess
to  give  every  remark  made ;  Mrs.  Sidgwick  had  not  time  to  take  down
all  that  was  said,  but  she  believes  that  she  recorded  all  that  was
important.

The  first  subject  with  whom  any  success  was  obtained  was  a  Mr.
W.,  a  clerk  in  a  shop,  aged  probably  about  twenty-one  or  twenty
two.  ]\Ir.  Smith  had  hypnotised  him  on  three  previous  occasions,
twice  in  public  and  once  in  private,  but  had  not  tried  thought-
transference  experiments  with  him  before.  The  last  occasion  on
which  he  had  been  hypnotised  was  on  June  13th,  1889,  on  which
occasion  we  had  tried  experiments  of  a  diiferent  kind  with  him.
He  is  a  very  sensitive  hypnotic  subject,  but  to  all  appearance
a  normal  and  healthy  young  man,  somewhat  athletic.  Between  Juno
13th  and  July  4th  thought-transference  was  attempted  with  several
subjects  in  vain.  On  July  4th  Mr.  W.  came  to  Mr.  Smith's  house
again,  and  after  some  other  experiments,  it  was  for  the  first  time
tried  with  him.  First  we  tried  him  in  guessing  colours,  pieces  of
coloured  paper  gummed  on  to  cards  being  used.  Mr.  W.'s  eyes  were
apparently  closed ;  Mr.  Smith  sat  in  front  of  him,  facing  him  and
holding  the  card  up  with  its  back  to  him.  We  feel  practically  certain
that  Mr.  W.  could  not  see  the  colour  normally.  After  each  guess  Mr.
Smith  said,  "  Now  we'll  do  another,"  whether  the  colour  was  changed
or  not.

The  following  series  was  obtained  : —

KEAL  COLOUR. . .  MR.  W.'S  GUESSES  AND  REMARKS.

Orange "Red."

Same  "Red."

Same "  Red,  they're  all  red.

Same  colour,  but  another  shape... "  The  same."

Emerald  Green "  Pretty  nearly  the  same."

Black "  Same  colour — red."

Red "Same. They're  all  ahke."

Blue "  That  one's  ditterent— a  kind  of

blue."

Orange ... "About  the  same  red  colour  as

you  had  before. "

Brown .. , "  You  had  that  colour  just  now-

that  blue."

K


ISO  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


REAL  COLOUR.  MR.  W.'S  GUESSES  AND  REMARKS.

Black  "  Same  as  last — blue."

Emerald  Green ... ... ... "  Haven't  seen  that  one  before —

sort  of  gi-een."

Red ... ,„ ... ... ... "An  old  colour — one  of  those  red

ones."

Yellow "Bluificd."

Up  to  the  seventh  attempt  it  appeared  as  though  he  Avcre  simply
describing  the  red  light  through  his  closed  eyelids,  but  after  that
there  seemed  to  be  some  success,  and  we  v/ere  encouraged  to  try
further.  We  determined  to  try  numbers.  Mr.  Smith  sat  in  the  same
position  as  before  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick  Avrote  numbers  on  cards  and
lir  nded  them  to  him.

NUMUEll  LOOKED  AT.  KR,  W.'S  GUESSES  AXD  REMARKS.

7  "6"
4  "  4  "

3  ■  "9"

At  this  point  Mr.  W,  was  told  that  there  would  be  two  figures
and  the  numbers  belonging  to  a  "sixty"  puzzle  were  used,  and  drawn
at  random  so  as  to  avoid  bias.  .  ■

15  "IG"
24  "24"

11  "  Tliat's  got  only  one  figure,  1."

20  "20"

Mr.  Smii'i  now  moved  to  a  place  behind  Mr.W.'s  chair,  and  for  still
further  precaution  against  the  possibility  of  Mr.  W.  seeing  anything,
the  number  was — after  the  first  minute  or  two  of  the  fii'st  experiment
that  follows  (which  book  a  long  time) — placed  in  a  match-box  held  in
the  palm  of  Mr.  Smith's  hand.  We  give  remarks  made  by  Mr.  Smith.
as  well  as  Mi'.  W.

7 S. :"  Do  you  see  this  W.  :"  I  hardly  see  it." "It's  nob

figure?"  one  figure  I  can  see."  "It

looks  like  6."

16  "16"

23  "18"

After  this  numbers  taken  out  of  a  pile  of  them  written  on  scraps
of  card  were  used.

24  ' ■  "24"

37 S.  :  "  Do  you  see  this  ? "  W.  :"  Where  ?"  (Pause.) "  I  see

him  now — a  3."

S.  :  "Yes. Do  you  see

anymore?"  W.  :  "No."
32 S.  :  "Now  then,  Mr.  W.,

here's  another  one."  W.  :  "Where?"

S.  :  "  Here  it  is."  W.  drox^ped  off  into  a  deeper  state.


Experiments  in  Tliought-Transjerence.


MEMBER  LOOKED  AT  MR.  W.'S  GUESSES  AND  REMARKS.

S.  :  "Mr.  W.,  don't to

sleep"  (rousedhini).  \T.  :  «  12,  isn't  it  ?  "
S.  :  "  Wliicli  figure  looks

most  distinct  ?  "  W.  :  "  Tlie  2,  I  think.'

S.  :"Yes. Tlien look  W. :"  I  can't  see." (Pause.)  "t

again  at  the  other.  think  it's  a  3."

Arej^ousureit'sal?"
S.  :  "  Well,  then,  what's

the  number?"  AY.  :  "  Yfhy,  it's  3  2. "

Then  after  a  momsut  or  two  he  suddenly  awoke  of  himself.  It  was
interesting  to  watch  the  gesture  and  loo!:  of  intelligence  with  which  he
said  "  Oh  I  see  it,"  when  he  realised  the  number— sometimes  almost
instantly.  Mr.  XT.  promised  to  return  on  another  day  but  did  not  dc
so,  and  we  have  had  no  further  opportunity  of  experimenting  with

As  will  be  perceived  the  above  experiments  were  improvised,  and
we  were  not  provided  with  suitable  numbers.  Before  the  'next
attempt  we  procured  a  bag  full  of  numbers  belonging  to  a  game  of
Loto,  and  drew  the  numbers  out  of  the  bag.  The  bag  contahied  all
the  double  numbers  up  to  90.  The  numbers  were  stamped  in  raised
figures  on  little  round  wooden  blocks  and  wer-  coloured  red— the  sur-
rounding wood  being  uncoloured.  We  give  facsimiles  as  to  form  of  some
of  these  blocks,  so  that  our  readers  may  have  what  means  there  are  of
judging  whether  it  was  the  image  of  the  number  or  the  idea  of  it  in
Mr.  Smith's  mind  that  was  effective.  We  may  remark  here  that  Mr.
Smith  believes  himself  to  have  the  power  of  vivid  visualisation.


On  July.Dth,  Mr.  T.,  a  clerk  in  the  telegraph  office,  came  to  be
hypnotised.  He  is  a  young  man  aged  about  19,  who  has  been  very
frequently  hypnotised  by  Mr.  Smith,  and  with  whom  many  of  Mr
Gurney's  experiments  described  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  were  tried'
had  tried  some  thought-transference  experiments  of  a  diflerent
land  with  him  in  the  winter  and  spring— Mr.  Smith  silently  willin-
him  to  hear  or  not  to  hear  certain  sounds  or  questions  addressed  to

^  He  wrote  the  following  post-card :—  ■  -

"DE.iR  SiH,-Having  considered  the  matter  over,  I  came  to  the  conclusion  tha^
ihis  mesmer,sn.  does  n.e  no  good  (although  rt  mxy  do  me  no  harm),  and  also i  n"


132


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


him^ — but  the  success  of  these  was  not  very  marked,  and  they  are  not
experiments  of  which  it  is  very  easy  to  estimate  the  value  unless  they
succeed  every  time.  We  think  it  hardly  worth  while  giving  any  detail
about  them  here.

On  J uly  5th,  after  some  experiments  of  another  nature,  we  tried  a
series  of  31  guesses  of  numbers  of  two  digits  drawn  from  the  Loto  bag,
above  described.  They  were  drawn  out  by  Mr.  Smith  between  his  finger
and  thumb,  which  effectually  concealed  the  figures,  and  placed  in  a  little
box,  about  an  inch  deep,  which  he  held  in  his  hand  with  its  back  to
T.  T.'s  eyes  were  apparently  closed,  and  he  kept  his  head  very  still,
and  we  ascertained  by  experiment  that  he  would  have  had  to  move  it
several  feet  to  see  the  number.  The  impression  sometime:;  came  to  him
quickly,  and  sometimes  slowly — as  the  remarks  recorded  show.  He
was  only  told  that  he  was  to  see  numbers  of  two  figures.

UUMBEIl  DRAWN.  NUMBER  GUESSED  AND  REMARKS.


61

T.

"23.

84

T.

"A3  and  a  2,  I  believe— 32.

47

T.

"  Is  it  0  ?— 0  2  ;  it  can't  be  that  ? "

32

T.

"Looks  like  1 — can't  see  the  first  figure— 1

think  it'p.  a  6—61."

80

T.

"11,  isn't  it?  two  ones." S.  :  "Have  a  good

look." T.  :  "11."

21

T.

"  Seems  like  2  ;  25,  is  it?"

18

T.

"  I  believe  it  is  1  and  0."

53

T.

"  Can't  see  anything."  S.  :  "You'll  see  it  in  a

minute."  T. :  "  There's  a  0,  and,  I  believe,

a  2—26,  I  think."

T.

"  No " (meaning that he saw  nothing).

S. :  "  You'll  see  it  in  a  minute."  T.  :  "No,

ca  i't  see  it . . . Believe  it  is  14. "

37

T.

"  I  see  a  3  ;  there  are  three  of  them — 147."

61

T.

"That's  61.  I  think."

33

T.

"  No,  I  can't  see— can't  see  that." S.  :  "Wait

a  minute."  (Pause.) "Do  you  see  theiu

now?"  T. :  "No,  I  c-n't."  (A  long  pause.)

T.  :  "A  funny  thing  that  is— a  mixture.

5,  8— looks  like  a  3  or  an  8—3,  I  think. "

40

T.

"4,  0,  I  tliink."

21

T.

"Is  it  2?" S.  :  "Well?" T.  :  "2,  3,  I

think."  S.  :  "Sure  about  the  3?"
T.  :  "Yes."  (After  a  pause,  the  number
having  been  meanwhile  put  back  in  the
bag.)  "(Ml,  yes,"  as  if  he  got  surer  and
surer.


1  For  a  full  description  of  other  e:cperimcnts  of  this  hind  see  Proceedings  Vol.  I.
p.  25G,  Vol.  II.  p.  14-17.

There  is  an  account  in  the  Revue  de  V Iliipnotismc  for  March,  1889,  of  some  rather
similar  experiments  by  Dr.  Mesnet  which  may,  perhaps,  be  explained  by  thought-
transference,  though  as  there  was  contact  between  him  and  his  patient,  it  is  difficult  to.


Experiments  in  Thoiight-Transference.


133


KUMBER  DRAWN.

47  -  ,
60

74

2i

33
45

50


66
21

83

SO

73


83
21

Not  noted
to  our


NUMBER  GUESSED  AND  REMARKS.

T.  :  "Is  it  a5? 5  and  8."

T.  :  "6,  that's  all."  S.  :  "Are  you  sure  there's
nothing  more  ?  " T.  :  "  Oh,  yes,  61."

T.  :  "  Is  it  a  4  ?  "  "  There's  a  4  and  a  7.  No,  it's
not. Oh,  dear  no,  it's  5,  I  think— 54."

T.  :  "It's  20."  (Pause,  obviously  trying  after  the
second  digit. )  "22."

T.  :  "  It's  5  and . . .  35."

T.  :  "I  see  notliing  at  all."  (Pause.)  "No,  I
can't  see  it.  What  makes  it  .so  long  in
coming  ?  Now  I  can  see  it.  It's  a  4  and  5."

T.  :  "  V/hat  makes  them  so  long  coming?  I  see
something  like  a  2.  It's  a  2— Oh,  it's  a  9  ;
I  think  29."  S. :  "  Are  you  sure  about  the
first  one?" T.  :  "Yes,  29."

T.  :  "  Oh,  yes  ;  it's  two  sixes."

T.  :  "  Oh,  it's  a  1  and  a  2,  21.
of  them  !  "

T.  :  "Is  it  3?" S.  :  "Well,
"  Nothing  else."

T.  :  "It's  80." S.  :  "That's right."

:  "  .  .  .  such  a  lot  of  uumhers  as  this."  (T.
spoke  very  low  and  drowsily,  and  Mrs.
Sidgwiek  failed  to  catch  the  beginning  of
this  sentence.)  S.  :  "Yes,  wlien  we're
looking  for  them."  (Pause.)  S.  :  "What
are  you  looking  at?"  T.  :  "Nothing.'
S.  :  "I  thought  you  said  you  saw  a  lot  of
figures?"  T.  :  "A  '3  to  the  right.  I
believe  there's  an  8."  S.  :  "Are  you
sure  ?  "  T.  :  "  Yes  ;  693."  (S.  .said  there
Avere  only  two  figures.)  S.  :  "You  must
have  seen  the  6  twice  over,  once  reversed  as
9."  (Possibly  the  idea  of  three  figures
was  due  to  Mr.  Smith's  remark  about  a  lot
of  ligurcs. )


Ain't  there  a  lot
what  else  ?" T.  :


'  24.


;  "3,  I  think— 83."
no,  it's  reversed  38.


S.  :  "Sure?" T.  :  "Oh,


According
recollection
afterwards,  the  guess
was  partly  right.

Possibly  the  idea  of  its  being  reversed  may  have  arisen  from  Mr.
Smith's  remark  above  about  6  being  seen  reversed  as  9 — a  remark
which  had  puzzled  T.  at  the  time.  We  asked  T.  how  the  numbers
looked  when  he  saw  them.  He  said,  "They're  a  kind  of  a  white  grey-
ish-white." He  had  not  seen  the  numbers  used  in  his  v/akin"'  state.

feel  sure  that  unconscious  indications  were  excluded.  Dr.  Mesnet  held  the  Iiypnotised
ferson's  Ivand  and  she  heard  or  did  nf>t  hear  a  friend  of  Dr.  Mesnet  speaking  to  her
jiccording  as  the  latter  touched  Dr.  Mctnet's  other  hand  out  of  her  tiaht  or  not.


134


ExpevimenU  in  Thought-Tixmsference.


NUMBER  DRAWN.  NUMBER  GUE?SCD  AND  REMARKS.

33 T.  :  "A  6  and  a  4."  (After  a  pause.)  "95."

73 T. :  "3S." S.  :"Suie?" T.  :"Yes."

On  the  following  day,  July  6th,  1889,  we  tried  similar  experiments
with  Mr.  P.,  a  clerk  in  a  wholesale  business,  aged  about  19,  who  had
also  been  very  frequently  hypnotised  by  Mr.  Smith,  and  who  was  alsa
one  of  the  subjects  in  Mr.  Gurney's  experiments  described  in  Proceed-
ings, Vol.  V.  He  can  now  be  hypnotised  very  quickly  by  Mr.  Smithy
though  he  was  difficult  to  hypnotise  at  first,  and  he  exhibits  the
peculiarity  that  his  eyes  turn  upwards  as  he  goes  off  before  the  eyelids,
close.  He  is  a  lively  young  man,  fond  of  jokes,  and  with  a  good  deal
of  humour,  and  preserves  the  same  character  in  the  sleep-waking  state.
The  positions  of  agent  and  percipient  and  other  conditions  were  the
same  as  on  the  previous  day.

87 f>.  :  "Now,  P.,  you're  going  to  sec  numbers.  I

sliall  look  at  them,  and  you  will  see  them."
P.  (almost  immediately)  :"  87.  You  asked
r.ie  if  I  saw  a  number.  I  see  an  8  and  a  7."
(Number  put  awaj'.)  P.:  "I  see  nothing-
now."

10  ..J ... P.:  "18. AVIiat  are  those  numbers  on  ? I  sec  only

the  letters  like  brass  numbers  on  a  door  ;
nothing  behind  them."

24 P.  (after  a  pause)  :  "  I  keep  on  looking. , , ,  I

see  it  !  an  8  and  a  4—84."

35 P.  :  "A  3  and  a  5—35." S.  : "  How  did  that

look  ? " P.  :  "  I  saw  a  3  and  a  5,  then  35."

23 P.  :  "  88. One  behind  the  other,  then  one  popped

forward,  and  I  could  see  two  eights."  (Illus-
trated it  with  his  lingers.)

20  ^ ... P.  :  "I  can't  SCO  anything  yet." S.  :"  You  will

dii-ectly."  P.:  "2.3."  S.  :  "  Saw  that
clearly?"  P.:  "Not  so  plain  as  the
other."  S.  :  "Which  did  you  see  best?"
P.  :  "The  2."

27 .. ,„ r. :  "  T  can  see  7,  and  I  think  a  3  in  front  of  it.  I

can  see  the  7." S.  :  "Make  sure  of  the
first  figure." P.  :  "  The  7's  gone  now."
43  ••• ••• S. :  "Hero's  another  one,  P."  (This  rem, ark,  though

not  always  recorded,  almost  always  began
each  experiment,  until  July  27th,  when,  tO'
avoid  the  possibility  of  unconscious  indica-
tions, Mr.  Smith  adopted  the  plan  of  not
speaking  at  all.)  P.:  "  Another  two,  you
mean.  You  say  another  one,  but  there  are
always  two. "  S. :  "  Yes,  two. "  P. :  "  Here
it  is.  You  said  there  were  two  !  There's
only  one,  an  8."  Some  remarks  here  not
recorded.  "VVe  think  that  Mr.  Smith  said
there  were  two,  and  told  liim  to  look  asaiUi.


Experiments  in  Thougld-Transfercnce.


135


NUMBER  DRA"'N.  NUMBER  GUESSED  AND  RKMARKS,

P.  said  he  saw  a  4.  Mrs.  SiJgwick:  "Wliicli
•  came  first?"  P.  :  "The  8  first,  tlien  the
4  to  the  left,  so  that  it  would  have  been  48.
I  should  like  to  know  how  you  do  that
trick."

20 ... ... P. :  "A  2  and  an  0  ;  went  away  very  quickly  that

time."

71 P.  :  "71.'

36 P.  :  "3 . . .  36."

75 P.  :  "I  might  turn  round. Slioxild  I  see  them  just

the  same  over  there  ? "  (Changed  his
position  so  as  to  sit  sideways  in  the  chair,
and  looking  away  from  Mr.  Smith.)  S.  :
"Well,  you  might  try."  P.:  "I  doji't
think  I  see  so  well  this  way."  (He  did  not
move,  however.)  "  I  see  a  7  and  a  5 — 75.
Why  don't  you  let  them  both  come  at  once?
I  believe  I  should  see  them  better  if  you
let  me  open  my  eyes."  (No  notice  was
taken  of  this. )

17  S.  :  "Now  then,  P.,  here's  another." P.  :"  Put  it

there  at  once."  (Then,  after  some  time) :
"You've  only  put  a  4  up.  I  see  7."
S.  :  "What's  the  other  figure?"  P.:
"4  .  .  .  the  4's  gone."  S.  :  "  Have  a
look  again."  P.:  "I  see  1  now."  S.  :
"  Which  way  are  they  arranged  ? "  P. :
"The  1  first  and  the  7  second."

£2 „,  S.  : "Here's  another."  P.: "52. I  saw  that  at

once.  I'm  sure  there's  some  game  about
it."  (He  had  said  something  about  this
before,  when  the  number  was  slow  in
coming.  He  said  Mr.  Smith  was  making
game  of  him,  and  pretending  to  look  when
he  was  not  looking.)

76  ... ... P.  :  "76.  "

P.  was  now  told  that  Mrs.  Sidgwick  would  look  at  the  number,  and
that  he  would  see  it  just  the  same,  which  he  quite  accejjted.  Mrs.
Sidgwick  then  gazed  at  82,  Mr.  Smith  not  knowing  what  the  number
was.  P.  saw  nothing,  and  kept  asking  Mrs.  Sidgwick  whether  she  was
sure  she  was  looking  at  it.  After  a  considerable  time  she  handed  the
number  to  Mr.  Smith,  still  leaving  P.  under  the  im]:)ression  that  it
"was  she  who  was  looking  at  it.

Then  P.  began  as  follows  : —

82 P.  •  "I  see  8  and  4,  I  think  ;  very  soon  gone  again.

There's  2  come  up.  There  !  that's  gwie
again. "

We  then  tiled  to  obtain  results  with  Mr.  Smith  standing  behind  a
curtain  which  divided  the  room  in  which  P.  sat  from  an  adjoining  one.


136


Experivients  in  Thonght-Transference.


The  distance  between  him  and  P.  was  then  about  12ft.  P.  was
left  under  the  impression  that  Mrs.  Sidgwick  was  still  looking  at  the
numbers.

NUMBER  DRAWN. NUMBER  GUESSED  AND  REMARKS.

44  ... .„ Mrs.  Sidgwick  :  '-Do  you  see  anything?"  P. :  "No.  If

I  was  to  imagine  anything  I  chose  I  could
see  it — 88,  or  anything  ;  hut  I  wait  for  it  to
come."  (Pause.)  "  I  thought  I  saw  a  3,  but
it  wont  so  quick.  This  is  wliat  they  call
second  sight,  isn't  it — seeing  Mith  your
eyes  shut?"'

<5l ^ ..• The  conditions  were  the  same  as  with  the  last,  but

as  no  impression  came,  after  some  time  Mr.
Smitii  came  silently  into  the  room  .  and
stood  about  7ft.  or  8ft.  from  P.  There  ^^■as
still  no  impression,  and  he  moved  to  within
about  4ft.  Then,  as  there  was  still  no  im-
pression, we  tokl  P.  that  Mr.  Smith  would
look  as  well  as  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  and  tliat
he  would  then  bo  sure  to  see.  S.  :  "See
anything?"  P.:  "No."  (Pause.)  "  I  seem
to  see  something  that  turned  round.  First
a  6  that  turned  into  a  9."  S.  :  "  Do  you
see  anything  else?"  P.  :  "No.  Yes,  I  do,
a  1—91.'

40 "33."

P.  was  now  woken  up,  and  after  an  interval  ivlrs.  Sidgwick  tried  to
hypnotise  him,'  but  in  vain.  Mr.  Smith  re-hypnotised  him,  and  we
tried  the  eflect  of  dilierent  positions  and  distances.

Mr.  Smith  behind  P.  and  close  to  him.

75 S.  :  "Now  then,  P." P.  ;  "Do  you  mean  to  say

you're  going  to  try  that  thing  on  again  ?  "
S.  :  "Yes;  do  you  see  anything?"  P.  :
"No,  not  yet."  S.  :  "  What  do  you  see  ?  "
P.  "I  feel  as  if  I  saw  a  7,  but  it  went  away
again.  S.  :  "Yes;  anything  else?"  P.
"A  5."

36 P.  :  "3  and  a  6."

Mr.  Smith  a  yard  or  so  from  P.,  and  to  his  right.

72 P.:  "1  saw  72,  but  it  went  away  again. Wait  a

minute  and  Fll  see  if  it  comes  again.  Yes,
there  it  is,  72.  I  saw  it,  but  it  went  away
instantly  at  first."

43 S.  :  "Here's  another." P.  :  "Look  at  it."  (Pause.)

"  I  see  a  4 — see  it  there  still.  It  stays
there."  S.  :  Now  you'll  see  some  more."
P.  :  "  Yes,  an  8  ;  48."

Mr.  Smith  about  7ft.  from  P.,  not  quite  in  front  of  him.

49 P.:  "A  9." S.  :  "Yes?" P.:  "96."  (raase.)

"Yes,  they  come  again."


Experiments  in  lliought-Transfcrence.


137


NUMBER  DEAWN.
50

63

35

6i


57

74
14
33


S.

S.

P.
P.


P.
P.
P.


NUMBER  GUESSED  AND  REMARKS.

"  Now,  then,  P.,  here's  anotlier." P.:  "A  5
and  a  7."

"Now,  then,  here's  another  one."  P.:  "8."  S.  ;

"Yes?"  P.:  "That'sall."  (Pause.)  "2.'
"35."

"4,  3."  (Asked  in  what  order  they  came)
"  The  3  came  afterwards.  If  I  were  to  rea(
it  I  should  call  it  34  ;  but  the  4  came  first.'

"7."  S.  :"Yes."  P.:  "6—67.  I  didn't  .se'
them  both  together  that  time."

"49."

"31."

"2,  5  :  that  would  be  52."


Mr.  Smith  close  to  P.
70 I


  P.  :  "A  0—70."

A  blank  sheet  of  paper  was  now  spread  cat  on  the  table,  and  P.  was
told  that  he  was  going  to  have  his  eyes  opened  and  that  he  would  then
see  numbers  come  on  the  paper.  He  was  then  partially  a%voken  and
his  eyes  opened.  Seeing  the  paper  he  immediately  aslied  where  the
planchette  was,  alluding  to  former  experiments.  He  was  told  to  look
at  the  paper  and  see  what  came,  but  saw  notliing  for  some  time.
He  had  evidently  forgotten  all  about  the  previous  state  in  v/hich  he
had  been  guessing  numbers,  and  appeared  so  wide  a-wake  that  it  was
difficult  to  believe  that  he  was  not  in  a  completely  normal  condition
iintil  he  began  to  speak  of  some  former  experiments  in  which  we  made
him  see  hallucinatory  crosses  on  paper. Mr.  Smith  stood  behind  him.


NUMBER  DR.WN.

18


87


37


NUMBER  SEEN  ON  THE  PAPER  AND  REMARKS.

P. "23." S. : "Is  that  what  you  can  see?"

P. :  "  Yes "  (but  he  added  later  that  he

did  not  see  it  properly).
P.  :  "A  7,  0. Oh,  no,  8,  78. Funny  ! I  saw  a  7

and  a  little  0,  and  then  another  came  on

tlie  top  of  it,  and  made  an  8."
P.  :  "There's  a  4,  7." Asked  where,  he  offered  to

trace  it,^  and  drew  tlie  47,  of  which  the

following  is  a  facsimile  : —


We  had,  on  previous  occasions,  asked  him  to  trace  hallucinations.


138  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


NUMBER  DRAWN.  NUMBER  SEEN  ON  THE  PAPER  AND  REMARKS.

44 r. :  "No. I  see  5,  4;  it's  gone  again." S.  :  "All

right,  look  at  it."  P.  :  "45."  S.  :  "Sure?"
P.:  "There's  a  4; — the  other's  not  so
clear."  (Then  quickly.)  "Two  fours;  44."

As  he  looked  one  of  them  disappeared,  and  he  turned  the  paper  over
to  look  for  it  on  the  other  side ;  then  looked  back  at  the  place  where
he  saw  it  before  and  said,  "  That's  funny  !  while  I  was  looking  for  that
the  other  one's  gone."  When  looking  under  the  paper  he  noticed  some
scribbling  on  the  sheet  below  and  said,  "  Has  that  writing  anything  to
do  with  it  ? "  He  seemed  puzzled  by  the  figures,  which  were  apparently
genuine  externalised  hallucinations.  He  could  not  make  out  why  they
came,  nor  why  they  disappeared.

37  .« ... P.  (after  long  gazing)  :  "37." S.  :"  Is  that  what

you  see?"  P.:  "It's  gone.  I'm  pretty
sure  I  saw  37."

Mr.  Smith  then  looked  at  the  37  again  and  we  told  P.  to  watch
whether  it  came  bick,  but  after  a  little  while  he  said  he  thought  he
saw  29.

On  the  occasion  just  described  we  adopted  the  precaution — which
was  continued  on  subsequent  occasions — of  not  letting  Mrs.  Sidgwiok
know  what  numbers  were  drawn  till  after  they  had  been  guessed,  so  as
to  avoid  all  possibility  of  bias  in  recording  the  remarks.  She  only
knew  at  the  time  the  number  which  she  herself  tried  to  transfer.
Professor  Sidgwick  drew  the  numbers  from  the  bag  and  handed  them
to  Mr.  Smith,  holding  them  so  as  to  preclude  any  possibility  of  their
being  seen  in  a  normal  way  during  the  process.

Our  next  subject  was  Miss  B.,  a  young  lady  employed  in  a  shop.
We  had  only  two  opportunities  of  experimenting  with  her.  She  had
been  hypnotised  on  three  previous  occasions  by  Mr.  Smith,  and  once  by
another  mesmerist,  and  is  a  remarkably  good  subject.

She  came  in  on  July  9th,  1889,  when  we  were  in  the  middle  of
experiments  with  P.,  and  saw  in  her  normal  state  the  way  the  experi-
ments were  carried  out  and  what  the  figures  used  were  like.  After  she
was  hypnotised  and  we  had  tried  some  other  experiments  with  her,  we
proceeded  to  the  thought-transference.

KUMBER  DRAWN.  NUMBER  GUESSED  AND  REMARKS.

16 S.  :  "Now,  ]Miss  B.,  I'm  going  to  hang  numl)er.?

up." Miss  B.  :  "I  see  G." S.  :  "  Do  yo-,i

see  anything  else  ?  " Miss  B.  :  "No.  .  .  .

6,  I'm  sure. Yes,  1  ;  1  first  and  6  after."
C7  ... ... S.  :  "  Tliat's  all  right. Now  you'll  see  another

one." Miss  B.  :  "I  tliink  I  see  another  6.

All  sixes. You  keep  putting  up  sixes."
,„ .  :  "  Yes,  there's  a  six  ;  you'll  see  another


Experiments  in  Thougld-Transference.


139^


NUMDER  DRAWN.  NUMBER  GUESSKD  AND  REMARKS.

in  a  minute."  Miss  B.  :  "I  see  the  6.  .  .  .

There's  sometliing  more. I  can't  quite  see-
■ —a  kind  of  a  7,  I  think."
IS Miss  C.  :  "  Oh,  not  a  6  this  time  ?  " S.  :  "  No,  not

a  6." Miss  B.  :  "1  and  8."
37  ... ... S.  :  "  Now  you'll  see  another,  Miss  B." Miss  B.  i

"Oh,  3,— G  ayain." S.  :"  That's  rigl,t."
71 G.  :  "Now  here's  anotlier." Miss  B.  :  "I  can't

see  it." S.  :  "You'll  see  it  in  a  minute.""

Miss  B.  :  "I  believe  it's  another  G  and  a  1."
63  ...  Miss  B.  :  "Well,  I  really  think  6  and  another  6—

nothing  else.

62 rj.  :  "  Well,  now,  here'a  another,  Miss  B."  Miss  B.t

"6  ;  I  can't  see  the  other  figure."
53  .... ... S.  :  "Here's another  one. Miss  B." Miss  B.  :

"Another!  I  don't  see  it."  (After  a
pause.)  "I  think  I  can  see  something."
S.  :  "  \Y\mt  does  it  look  like  ?"  Miss  B.  :
"5."  S.  :  "Yes?"  Miss  B.  :  "  1  don't
see  anything  else  just  yet."  (Then,  after
a  pause '3  and  a  round."  Mrs.  Sidg-
"svlck  :  "  Is  the  round  rou*d  the  5  ?
Mi^s  B.  :  "No,  after  it;  heside  it."  S.  r
"  Then  it's  50." Miss  B.  :  "  Yes,  50."

84  ..J ... S.  :  "  Here's  another  number  going  up." Miss  B.  s-

"I  don't  see  it  yet."  (Pause.)  "I  see-
something  .  .  .  C."  S.  :  "What  else?"
MissB.  :  "4 . . . 8,  4."

15 !j.  :  "Miss  B.,  there's  another  number  going  up."

MissB.  :  "1  and  5."

Miss  B.  was  now  told  that  she  would  see  numbei's  gradually  come-
on  a  sheet  of  blank  paper  in  front  of  her,  and  gradually  disappearing
again,  and  was  then  roused  into  a  lighter  stage  of  trance,  and  h^r  eyes
opened.  She  was  told  to  look  at  the  paper.  Mr.  Smith  stood  behind
hei\  We  believe  that  in  this  stage  she  had  no  memory  of  the  previous-
one.

N-UMBER  DRAWN  NUMBER  £EEN  ON  ME  PAPER,  AND  REMARKS.

88  ... ... Miss  B.  :  "Well,  what  am  I  to  see?" (Pause.)  "I

believe  there  are  some  ligui'es  coming.  An
8  and  an  8."

She  then  traced  them  in  pencil,  and  we  give  a  facsimile  of  tlie.
tracing.


She  said  that  they  looked  reddish  in  colour,  but  as  before  reraarke.l,
she  had  seen  the  numbers  in  use.  and  may  have  been  influenced  by  thiei-


140


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


_KU;il3ER  DRAWN.  '  NUMBER  SEEN  ON  PAPER  AND  REMARKS

■15  •  S. :  "See  if  you  see  any  more,  Miss  B." Miss  I>.  :

"See  figures  — no; where  are  they?"
(Pause.) "  I  don't  see  any  figures  ;  you
■  are  choating  me." S. :  "You  will  see  some

in  a  minute."  Miss  B. :"  1  with  5."  (Traced
them  with  a  pencil.) "  Rod,  I  think."

Then  she  was  awoken  and  after  an  interval  re-hypnotised  and  trials
made  at  different  distances.

During  the  next  six  experiments,  Mr.  Smith  was  completely  silent.
Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  did  not  know  the  numbers,  carried  on  the  conversa-
tion with  Miss  B.,  but  did  not  think  it  needful  to  record  her  own
xemarks.

Mr.  Smith  behind  the  curtain  separating  the  two  rooms  and  about
12ft.  distant.

iS'UMBER  DRAWN.  NUMBER  GUESSED  AND  REMARKS.

55 .» i„ Miss  B.  :  "  Where  is  tlie  number?  I  don't  see  it.  lb

looks  somethijig  like  a  3,  I  think.  I  can
see  something.  I  think  it  is  a  3  ;  I  can't
see  it  very  well.  Something  coming.  Let
mo  see — S  again.  There's  some  6  there  ;  I
can't  quite  see.  I  believe  some  6.  I  think
I  see  6."

Mr.  Smith  in  the  room,  and  about  8ft.  from  Miss  B.

64 Miss  B.  :  "I  don't  see  it." (Pause.) "Al. Is  ifi

a  1  ? Something  coming  like  a  round  ;  8
' '  perhaps,  or  0  ;  10."

Mr.  Smith  close  to  Miss  B.,  as  at  lii'st.

65 Miss  B.  :  "  Something  round  again  ;  T  wonder  what

'■  it's  going  to  turn  to — not  0 — nor  8. It's  a

6;  65."

lliss  B.  was  now  moved  up  close  to  the  curtain  and  Mr.  Smith
-stood  behind  it.

49 Miss  B.  :  "A  4,  and  the  other  one  a  5  ;  45."

33 Miss B.  :"  Where's  the  number?" (Pause.)  "3

and  anotiier  5."

50 Miss  B.  :  "  Round  rings  again  coming  ;  6,  the  other

looks  like  a  round  ring."

■  Tie  had  another  opportunity  of  experimenting  with  Miss  B.  on
■October  30th.  On  this  occasion  6  attempts  were  made  with  Mr.  Smith
in  the  room  below  the  percipient,  and  3  with  I.Ir.  Smith  near  her,  but
-quite  silent. The  list  is  as  follows  : —

KUJIBER  DRAWN.  NUMBER  GUESSED.

Mr.  Smith  in  the  room  below.

19 1,7,  or  4 , .  ,

60 13  •  . ■  ■ ;. '  ^


Experiments  in  Thought- Transference.  141


Mr.  Smith  near  Miss  B.

UUMBER  DRAW.N.  NUMBER  GUESSED.

G8 16 This  experiment  was  interrupted.

36 63

69 69  or  61

Mr.  Smith  in  the  room  below.

14 11

82 .%

C7 32

It  would  be  tedious  were  we  to  describe  at  length  all  the  experi-
ments, which  have  occupied  us  altogether  on  twenty-five  evenings.  We-
give,  therefore,  the  results  of  trials  with  P.  and  T.  in  a  tabulated  form.

The  following  is  an  explanation  of  the  Tables. — The  left  hand
column  on  each  day  gives  the  numbers  drawn, and  the  right-
hand  column  the  numbers  guessed.  When  No.  is  printed  instead
of  a  number  it  is  because  the  actual  number  was  not  noted  down.
A  X  in  the  place  of  a  guess  means  that  the  percipient  had  no-
impression  of  any  kind.  The  successful  trials  are  printed  in  thick
type,  and  so  are  the  successful  parts  of  half  successes.  Cases  where
both  digits  were  right,  but  in  reversed  order,  are  counted  as.
successes.  An  asterisk  affixed  to  a  guess  means  that  it  was  to  some-
extent  a  second  guess  (for  particulars  of  these  see  p.  14G).  The  letter-
preceding  the  number  drawn  indicates  the  relative  position  of  agent
and  percipient,  as  follows  :  a  means  agent  close  to  percipient  (not
actually  touching)  and  in  front  of  him.  b  means  agent  two  or  three
feet  from  percipient  in  front  of  him.  c  means  any  greater  distance  of'
agent  from  percipient  in  front  of  him.  Usually  for  position  c  tha-
percipient  sat  leaning  back  in  an  arm-chair  on  one  side  of  a  full-sized
card-table,  not  quite  close  to  it  and  rather  sideways  to  it,  and  INIr.
Smith  sat  at  the  other  side  of  the  table ;  but  sometimes  Mr.  Smith
stood  10  or  12  feet  from  the  percipient,  d  means  that  the  agent  was.
behind  the  percipient  and  near  him.  e,  behind  the  percipient  and  some-
distance  off.  the  agent  about  three  feet  or  more  to  one  side  of
percipient.

Other  experiments  besides  those  with  numbers  are  given  in  the  tables,,
but  not  in  any  numerical  statements.


'  On  two  or  threo  occasions  numbers  other  than  the  Loto  numbers,  and  not  drawn
at  random,  -wei-e  looked  at  by  Mr.  Smith,  but  as  this  made  no  apparent  difference  yv&
have  not  thought  it  desirable  to  complicate  the  table  by  indicating  them.


142  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.

Table  I.

Tkials  with  p.  when  Mr.  Smith  was  is  the  Same  Room  with  Him.


J  ah/  6th.


a

87

87

J)

19

IJ

-'4

<5'4

J?

35

35

?)

23

06

))

20

2J

?)

27

37
48*

J)

48

?5

20

20

J  J

71

71

)  )

36

36

J)

75

75

)J

17

17*

)  )

52

52

76

76

82

82*

Attempt  Ijeliind
•curtain  interpola-
ted here.

6 51  91

Woken,  and  rest
Ihcre.


(i  75

75

„  36

36

/  72

72

48

48

c  ^9

g6

5"

5.7

<?,-'

„  6j

»  35

35

„  64

j4

„  57

67

»  74

49

„  14

31

»

25

a  70

70

(Roiised  here  par-

iially,  and  the  rest

done  with

open

eyes.)

(I  18

„  87

78

»  37

•'/7
44*

44

>,  37

37

July  mh.


I 32  32
,  1/

, 13  -

131

,  23  23*
,  56  56*
, 85-  8?

>  79  79*
, 10  10

,  CAT  CAT
,  Picture  \
of  Cat  j

PAW
'  ^^^^^  \BA

, 19  19

,  Picture ~|

of  ]lird  /  "
,  Diagram  x
,  N  X
,  DOG  X
No.  X


July  2\lh.


,  61


a 37  35

^3  27

83  45

23  26

71  54
(36
l/i

, ^4  5'

, Sj  jo

,  43

, 3^  54

. 4/  45

, 71  42


July  loth.


a

^6

72

^3

57

J  ■>

go

35

) »

S4

85

)  >

Si

1,2

> )

iS

27

» )

12

21

42

J?

J uly  11th.


a 7j  72

„ 21  41

„  47  4^
>.  53  53
„ 80  82

„  59  55
>.  40  JO
» 17  17

,> 57  25
53  4S
(76

,,67 J  no
(67

„  8s
„ 8/  8^
,> 34  24
„ 83  8j
73  27
„ 44  4^
» ^3  (>,4,s
„ Ss  36
Interval  here, and
other  experiments.
a 58  85

„  36  37

„  80  82

„  45  6 J

„  8?  89

b  50  47

a  16  16

^  57  75

„  59  S4

„  45  34

c  40  6j

„  34  74

^5  58

„  6f  65

'V  3r  _

W^okcn,  and  in
terval.

(Plan  of  silence
on  t!ie  part  of  all
who  knew  the  num-
ber Legun  at  this
point.)

C 16  21

,, 88  88
35  i(>
„ 43  43
Seventeen  at-
tempts behind  cur-
tain interpolated
here.

a  73  27
„ 46  II


Ex-periments  in  Thougat-lransjerence.


143


Juli/  20th.

J"((/y  30(!A.

August  nth.

August  20/ A.

a 67  65

d  60

62

c

20  34

After two  at-

„ 10  4/

»  49

49

99

71  71

tempts  outside

„ 37  91

24

S3

99

76  75

door,  with  no  im-

„ 78  78

!!  7'^

S3

99

39  39

pression.  Tlien

c 62  64

>.  5^

53

9  t

-4  24

/ No.  X

„ yg  8S

„  81

81

99

39  39

a N  0.  X

,, 48  48

,,  26

25

99

75  75

Rest  here.

Attempts  behind

»  >  -

43

99

87  87

c No.  X

•cnitain  interpo-

„  c?/

15

9  9

29  29

,, No.  X

lateci  here.

„  66

43

99

79  79*

Woken,  and

c 88  74

„  4S

7^3

99

27  72

be;;'un  Pgain.

=. ^3  53

„  87

?6

9  9

76  60

c 22  js

49  49

„  57

92

An  attempt  out-

„ 47  Ar

„ 24  24

Rest  here.

side  the  door,  with

99 3'  26

„ 48  48

c  41

10

no  imriression.  The

,, 26  4S

,, II  II

Attempts  behind

„  No.

X

same

No.  then

99 3S  63

Rest  here.

brought  in.

99 36  7S

■curtain  interpo-

c  2?

■Z3

c

No.  X

9, 43  90
Rest  here.

Jated  here.

„  66

46

Rest.

c 64  64

„  30

30

c

7S  27

c /6  46

j> 3^  3?

)>  of

27

(P.  &T.  together

9, 17  40

„ 58  85

,.  4^

40

for  next  two. )

99 40  ^0

>i  79

og

c

S6  X

99 so  ?7

Rest  hero.

15

51

99

No.  X

c 60  7,6

Attempt  outside

„ 3?  3-/

tlie  door  iiere,  with

„ 30  30

no  impression.

,, 20  2j-

Attempts  behind

c  88

J?

69

curtain  here.

S3

X

c S3  53

Rest  here.

Attempts  behind

c  79

c?9

■curtain  here.

2t)

c S£>  74

„  70

70

Rest  here.

Attempt  outside

tlio  door  here,  witli

>. j"^  9,3

no  impression.

„ 39  39

c  38

38*

3=^  2^

„  81

44

.. 45  45

„ 7/  70

144.


Experiments  in  Tlwught-Transferende.


August  2lst.

SejAcmhe

ember  2'2nd.

September  23rr/.

f  7S

X

c

55-

5^

c

S4

3^

c 83  6j

„

J5

J)

I.?

10

37

n

,, 2j  20

„  53

71

J)

8a

8-'

23

38

(P.  &  T.  together

»  44

29

5  1

4A

H

63

69

for  the  next  eight.  >

5  J

Two  trials  here

52

43

c 32  U

„  70

24

with  Mrs.  Sidgwick.

67

JO

,, 88  34

>.  49

31

c

64

64

39

63

)) 49  70

n

^3

)>

37

37

69

S8

» 4(>  17

other

experi-

^9

72

29

„ 24  S9

nients  here.

Then

j>

J9

84

32

„ 86  gi

a  rest.

>>

7j

43

35

75

„ 41  73

c  16

Si

>»

10

24

51

25

„ So  6g

„  74

43

) )

57

57

Pause

liere,  .and

»  89

30

5)

deeper  liyisnotisa-

„  76

13

)  »

29

tion.

sS

J^S

54

)  »

37

c

93

J.  4?

52

'Woken,

X

j>

84

29

„  10

39

and  in-

)»

36

9>  ^9

S3

terval.

) »

15

29

c

.V

X

J »

50

47

)>

i4

29

) )

77

14

j»

J6

X

jj
>)
>>
>)

72
90
11

48

81
50

23

n

■Exper'ments  in  Thoarjhi-Transfcrence.


145


September  '2Uh.


c  J-/
>>

"  57
(P.  &  T.  too-ether
for  tlie  next  20. )

c  59  4(>
„ 8i  63

», !(}  65

" 3^  37

"  74  57
„ ■Si  64

>. 39  23

''  4Z  93
i'.  awoken  here.
Inter  val.— P.  rc-
liypnotised,  and
positions  of  P.  &  T.
exchanged.

C 3<S  3J

83  83
» 59  59

>) 29  29

So


)>  16
„  83  80
„ /6  j6

Pause  here.  (P.
ahjne  after  this.)
c 5S  F,Ai
„ N  N
„ K  K
,, SS  X
„  BEE  B,E,E,F
„  llOIiSE  BEE
asain


October  26th.


,,  64  4,0
>.  50  50

(p.  it  T.  together
for  the  remaining
attempts  on  tliis
day.)

b  30  40
d  71  6g
). 77  21


October  21th.


>>  JO

>.  72

Pest  hen
cl  3r
„  62
>,  44


Id


>>  32

f  S4
>.  2^

„  ^7

J?


J- 7

j,2
J' 'J'
■/.^

97
32
61

3,7

46

2,3
7S

!/


f


Rest  Iiere.


35

67
60
76
7<?
79


62

53

<?/

67

70


"iVoken,  and  in-
lei  val  here.


/

71

)  J

75

75

ii

/2

5-2

J)

67

J)

J)

^3

73

j>

10

19

))

No.

96

(P.  &  T.  together.
Aftersonie  attempt,-
from  anotlier  room.

c 53  17
(P.  alone  for  next
three.)

41  28
,, 6(5  47
(P.  &T.  together
for remainder  of
tliis  day. )

c 41  ji

.> J7  41

43  2S

Woken,  and  in-
terval here,
c 73  ^3
>>  -/j

>>

Rest  here,
c 46  46

" 30  30

Attempts  made
[from  another  room
here.

c 2(>  35


October  2St/i.


38


(P.  &  T.  together
for  all  this  day.)
Aftersonieattempts
from  another  room.

c 88  go
-'O  j,-o

l> 25  I'J

..74  74
1  ause  here,
c 20  20

5^-  30
JMoie  attempts
from  another  room
here,  and  then  tried
card  -  guessing  in
same  room,
c ^  H 7  H
>,

„  4^
„

„ 9H  7H
„ 10  C K  D
,, (;»n  C Kve  C
„ K  D /  S


October  2Qth.


(P.  &  T.  together
for  all  these.)  After
attempts  down-
stairs, &c.

b  32  6,4
,!  71  21
» 43  23


October  SO//t.


(F.&T.  together.)
After  attenipt.s
doA\nstairs.

c 78  4


IP.  had  been  told  that  there  would  be  letters,  but  as  a  number  was  afterwards
spoken  of  by  mistake,  we  thought  it  better  to  take  a  number.


14.6


.Experiments  in  ThowjU-Transfercnce,


successes


Summary  of  Table  I.
All  Days.

Total  number  of  attempts

successes ... ... ... •>. •.•  '

Of  these  79,  there  were  with  digits  reversed 10

to  some  extent  second  guesses ...  9
Most probable number of complete successes by  pure
chance  W  =  4  or  5.
Successful  Days,  i.e.,  ivhen  there  ivcre  3  or  mere  successes.
ITumber  of  attempts


74


Other  Days.

Number  of  attemiits

,, successes  ... ••• ... ••• ■••  ^

Half  successes,  i.e.,  one  diyit  right  and  in  the  right  place.

Oat  of  the  170  non-successful  attempts  on  successful  days CO

Of these  the  digit  rightly  guessed  was  in  the  first  place  35

times  and  in  the  second  place  25  times.
(Most  i)robable  number  by  pure  chance + =  ^^o^'*  ^^■)

Out  of  the  104  non- successful  attempts  on  other  days ...  21

Of  these  the  digit  rightly  guessed  was  in  the  first  place  9  times

and  in  the  second  place  12  times.
(Most  probable  number  by  pure  cliance +  \°o'  =  22.)

Number  of  successes  with  Mr.  Smith  completely  silent S9

The  plan  of  silence  on  the  part  of  all  who  knew  the  number  was
begun  in  the  course  of  July  27tli  and  maintained  afterwards,
except  in  special  cases  noted  at  the  time.

Number  of  successes  with  Mr.  Smith  behind  P. 8

This  is  out  of  7  trials  on  July  6th,  the  13  first  trials  of  July  30th,
and  13  trials,  all  failures,  on  October  2Gth.
Number  of  successes  with  a  sheet  of  paper  covering  P.'s  head ... 18  or  21
We  believe  that  it  was  21,  but  it  is  not  explicitly  recorded  on
September  24th. The  plan  was  begun  on  August  17th  after
the  first  4  guesses. On  that  day  a  single  sheet  of  newspaper
was  used. Afterwards  the  sheet  was  always  double.
In  the  case  of  those  numbers  marked  with  a.sterisks  the  guess  was  not
completely  right  at  first. The  details  of  four  of  these,  which  occurred  on
July  6th,  have  been  already  given. The  rest  were  as  follows  :—

July  m.  23 - P.  :  "  73."  S. :  "Which  figure  is  the  most  distinct?'^

P.  :  "  The  3 ;  the  other's  gone  now.  2.
S.  :  "  What  number  is  it?" P.  :  "23."
5Q  P  •  "  I  see  a  2  and  a  6  .  .  .  Only  a  6  there  now."

"  ~ ■  S.  :  "What  do  you  see?"  R:"A6."

S.  :  "We'll  see  if  you  see  anothei-."
"P.  :  5—53." S.  :  "I  tliouglit  you  said


Experiments  in  ThougJit-Transference,  147


6."  P.  :  "  Yes,  Initit'sn-nne."  S.  :  "Wdl,
what  is  it  now  ? "  P.  :  "  A  3  and  a  6.  33
.  .  .  56."

,7  79  P.:  "39." S. Wliich  is  most  distinct  ? "  P.:

9-79."

JulySQth. 33  P.:  "  I  can  see  a  0." Mrs.  Sidgwick  (who  did  not

linow  the  number)  :  "  Tliat's  good— well,
it  can't  be  0  by  itself.  There  must  be
something  else  ?  "  P.  :  "  That  O's  gone.  I
can  see  3  up  there.  .  .  .  I  can  see  8."

AuguiAYith. 79 ... P.:  "89." Professor  Sidgwick  (who  did  not  know

the  numljer) :  "  Were  the  tv.'O  numbers
equally  clear?"  P.  :  "No,  8  has  gone
away  and  7  come  in  its  jdaco.  I  do  not
know  if  8  ought  to  have  been  there  at  all.'

,. Table  II.


Trials  with  T.  when  Mr.  Smith  was  in  the  Same  Room  ttith  Him.


J  Illy  5th.

July  lotJu

J  Illy  2Qik.

6/

26

«  57

16

i5

d  Emerald

Bluish

R 1
"4-

J-

„  3r

I

76

p6

Green

Green

J)

„  12

)  >

12

5^

„  Red

Red

d/

„  Ss

71

) )

24

2-?

,,  Brown

Blue

) )

8o

//

„  7S

26

Rest  here.

,,  Orange

Red  :

21

„  41

17

a

■/o

(colour)

I<?

It)

41

23

3^

35

,,  l!hie

Blue

i)

56

^6

..  31

23

J  !

15

„  Black

X

3J

59

14

„  63

63

)  J

55

,,  Red

Jied

tJ

31

>.  31

3^

))

75

73

,,  Emerald

Green

5)

6i

61

,,  20

64

))

4r

4^

Green

9}

3Z

53

99  14

X

>  )

66

6

,,  Drawing

X

5J

40

40

„  CAN

X

?  J

55

of  Key

3S

21

zj-

N

X

)  J

3-'

35

,,  Orange

Red

->i

47

5>5'

3)

59

55

(colour)

))

6o

6z

Rest  here.

J>

37

3

,,  A  Sov-

A Pen

J  J

[74

a  ^2

16

)  )

63

63

ereign

)  J

74

15-4

»  No.

X

)  )

/6

41

77

62

J>

22

22

^0

,, 70  6,1,7,2

JJ

3^

35-

t2

26

J>

45

45

21

42

))

59

77

^7

J)

66

66

,,  60

65

J  J

21

21

3<5

36

J)

<??

0
J)

69

32

J)

8o

80

40

40

))

73

»  3^^

Z4

)>

85

85

/I

4^

1)

21

24

>>  44

44  ■

>>

No.

3S

„  69

65

99

5j'

95

c  Emerald

Blue

J)

78

58

Green

Red

Red

,,  Brown

Green

70

26

>.  54

„  48

3^

148  Experiments  in  ThouQht-Transference.


August  16ih.


c  49  37
,. 52  52

71  71
»  27  27

»  I^'  15
„  24  24

35  35
„ iS  16

„ 32  32

„ i5t  51

„ 90  /2

Pause  here,
e s6  24
„ go  16

Woken  and  in-
terval.

Other  expori-
nioTits  tried  here.
Black  Blue
Light Kind  of
Blue  dark
Bed

Yellow  "White
Blue  Blue
Orange  Light

Yellow
Crimson  Liglit

Bhick


August  19th.


a 22  2^
., 49  JS
„ 22  jS
Interval,  and
other  experiments
tried  here.

c 76  7/
37  14
„ 46  67
o r  (  f  or
S7  4&'\j

37  72
J3S
lJ4

„  79  2S
„ 12  3,2.

„  53  4^3

„  90  3S

„  90  33

„  4^  23

„  44  56

„  ^S  73

„  ^7  2S

„  SO  i(>


64


September  2{ith.


August  2\st.


f  IS

„  II

„  4(>

u  4S

„  S3

"  60

53

„  2S

Pause

/  2g

„  30

„  S3

„  10

,,  &

„  A


26
23
3S

X

17

(23

'\43
3,7
here.

S7
26

31
4,7
W

z


S4

17
30

48

ss

3^


4S
72

zs

48

16
47


Pause  here.

c 2S  37


33
42
SS

30

20


go
3S
5^
17
S3


September  22)/ cL


c

63

74

)»

^3

24

))

SS

32

5  ?

S7

S3

J  J

33

27

5  J

2/

21

)5

33

So

)  J

82

29

»»

31
S7

43

SI

IS

September  23rd.


P.  &  T.  together.

c  32  33
„ 8S  8/


,.  49

) )  4'^

„  24

„  86

„  /!!

„  So


13
26

47
24
63
4.1


T.  alone

43

AO

jS

20
12
IS
70


24

3S

S7
17
46
60
lb


Pause  here,  and
sonic  other  cx[icri-
ments.


c

A3

4^

10

94

)  »

13

13

)?

2/

37

J)

23

47

)  J

43

13

?5

6g

20

J)

74

2^

5  5

69

69

Attempt  outside
the  room  here.
c 61  2g

„ 40 ^3  _
Woken,  and  in-
terval, with  other
experiments  here,
c 67  63

»  41  41

„  S6  3S

»  5/  57

„  SS  39

„  IS  67


t  All  the  witnesses  agreed  afte^■^^■ards  in  thinking  that  this  guess  had  been  right
and  noted  down  wrongly  as  reversed.


.Experiments  in  Thougfd-Transference,


149


Septe7nber


(P.  &  T.

c  59

<?/

i<5
3^
74
Si

39
43
Pause


together. )
S9
43
6i

33

15
Pi
52
39

here,  •  and


October  mh.


(P.  &
c
/


positions  of  P.  &  T.
exchansed.


c

■

39

S)

83  .

7P

))

59

93

)>

23

02

?  J

55

63

5  >

29'

47

5  J

So

■  41

J  >

38

Si

5)

71

83

5)

2,2

80

S  )

16

74

89

65

f


Pause  here.


T.

39
7^
77
bo

35


together. '

8,3  '
23
2 -.4
4,3
^,4
3,9


21
62

44
32

.■8


48
58
84
71


2,1

3
6,1

\3,2


24
05

6j
46

31
79
13^

Uj

Eest  liere.


October  27th.


67

39


3-2
35
67
Co

76
78

79.
Woken


interval  here.
b  71

75
12

32
42

23
10
Ko.


9.2
6,9

6S

69

(>,3
6,2

JO

up,  and


37
3,4
22
by
42
6,2

34
Ob


(P.  &  T.  together.)

After  attempts
from  another  room.

c 53  67

Best  hero,
c 41  I.J
>. 51  4l
„ 45  1,2

,,• 10  5:2

^Yol•;en,  and  in-
terval here,
c 13  8,3
)> 45  7,8
■?4  54
>>  J-/

49  6,3
Piest  here.

(  guess
I  not
I  waited
Uor.
„  30

Attempts  from
the  other  room
here.

c 26  24


46


October  28th.


20


(P.  &  T.  together.
After  attempts

from  another  room,
c 88  2,0
>, 10  s,9
„ 2j  g,6

„ 74  5,2
Pause  here.

j'guess
I  not

waited
Ifor.

53  70
More  attempts
from  another  room
here,  and  then  tried
cards  in  same  room,
c 2  H 7  C
5S  5S
,,4^ 5  S
„ 8E.  6T>
>, 9H  iC
„ 10  C  jC
„ QnC  KgD
„ KgD  /S


October  29th.


33


After  attempts
from  another  room.
(T.  alone,  and  with
eyes  open.)
d 28  2R
24 J  S
84 9  S  or  H
^2  or  3
\  black
32  45
5(>  23
72  47
7<5  35
2^  7G
KgC  Fig.

5iy  7  ■

4  S Kve  D
Then after  fur-
ther attempts  from
other  room,  woken,
and  interval  here.
P.  &  T.  together.
b 32  4b3
» 71  1,2
5*  43


October  30th.


(P.  &  T.  together.)
c 78  6,4


150


-Experiments  in  TIiought-Transferenc&,


Summary  of  Table  IL
All  Days.

Total  riamber  of  attempts  ... ... ... ... ,,,  263

yy  jy successes... ... ...  ... ...  34:

Of  these  in  reverse  order  ... ... ... ... ... ...  4

(Most probable number of complete successes by  pure
chance  -jy'-  =  3  or  4.)

Successful  Days,  i.e.,  when  there  were  three  or  more  successes.

Number  of  attempts ... ... ... ... ... ...  129

successes 27

Other  Days.

Number  of  attempts ... ... ... ... ... ...  134

,, successes ... ... ... ... ... ...  7

Ilalf-snceesses,  i.e.,  one  digit  right  avd  in  the  right  place.
Out  of  the  102  non-successful  attempts  on  successful  clays ... ...  of

Of  these  the  digit  rightly  guessed  was  in  the  first  place  20  times
and  in  the  second  place  16  times.
■ (Most  probable  number  by  chance  ^^  + =  21  or  22.)

Out  of  the  127  non-successful  attempts  on  other  days 2£

Of  these  the  digit  rightly  guessed  was  in  the  lirst  place  17  times

and  in. the  second  place  8  times.
(Most  probable  number  by  chance  ij-  -1-  -f^  =  about  27.)

Number  of  successes  with  Mr.  Smith  completely  silent,  viz. ,  all  those

in  August,  September,  and  October ... ... ... ...  W

Number  of  successes  with  Mr.  Smith  behind  T. ... ... ...  4

All  out  of  13  trials  on  July  2Gth  ;  4  trials  on  August  16th  were
failures.

Number  of  successes  with  paper  over  T.'^  iieaa... ... ... ...  2

This  was  begun  during  the  11th  guess  of  October  26th,  and  about
33  trials  made  in  all  under  those  conditions.

The  great  variation  in  the  amount  of  success  on  different  days  is
strikingly  shown  l^y  these  tables.  Thus  all  P.'s  attempts  on  July  24th
and  25th,  August  20th  and  21st,  September  22nd  and  23rd,  82  in
number,  pi'oduced  only  1  success— just  what  chance  might  be  expected
to  give  ;  while  in  12  trials  on  August  17th  he  had  9  successes  and  1
half  success.  Similarly  with,  T.  August  19th,  21st,  September  20th,
22nd,  October  27tli,  28th,  29th,  30th  show  in  the  aggregate  83  trials
with  1  success;  while  on  August  16th  he  was  successful  7  times  in.
16  trials.  We  have  entirely  failed  to  discover  any  cause  for  this
variation,  nor  even  whether  it  depends  on  the  agent  or  the  percipient.
Such  things  as  the  brilliant  success  on  August  16th  and  17th,  and  t^e
total  failui'e  on  August  19  th,  20th,  and  21st,  suggest  that  the  difference
is  not  in  the  percipient ;  for  why  should  P.  and  T.  vary  together  2


Experiments  in  TJiought- Transference.


151


But,  on  the  other  hand,  they  did  not  always  vary  together,  so  that  it
is  difficult  to  attribute  the  difference  entirely  to  the  agent.  Thus,  on
September  23rd,  when  P.  and  T.  were  both  guessing  at  the  same  time,
T.  was  quite  right  3  times  and  half  right  4  times  in  9  guesses  ;  while
P.  failed  totally.  During  these  experiments  Mr.  Smith  was  sitting  7
or  8  feet,  or  perhaps  more,  from  T.,  and  somewhat  nearer  to  P.  On  this
occasion  T.  had  come  in  after  we  had  begun  experiments  with  P.,  and
Ave  hypnotised  him  partly  to  get  him  out  of  the  way  and  partly  in  the
hope  that  remaining  for  a  while  in  the  hypnotic  sleep  might  render
him  more  susceptible  to  telepathic  impressions.  We  were  much
surprised  when,  without  anything  being  said  to  him  about  it,  he  began,
to  guess  numbers.*

A  similar  difference  between  P.  and  T.  showed  itself  on  the  next
day,  September  24th,  but  in  a  still  more  puzzling  way.  T.  came  in  as
on  the  23rd,  was  hypnotised,  and  set  in  the  same  position  as  before.
P.  was  failing,  and  continued  to  fail,  whereas  T.  had  fair  success — 2
successes  and  3  half  successes  in  8  trials.  After  the  8  trials  we  stopped,
awoke  P.,  had  some  talk,  exchanged  the  positions  of  P.  and  T.,  and
re-hypnotised  him.  Then,  for  no  reason  that  we  could  see,  P.  began  to
succeed  and  T.  to  fail.  Later  on  in  the  same  day  P.  made  his  most
successful  set  of  attempts  with  Mr.  Smith  outside  the  room.  During
this  he  and  T.  sat  together  on  the  same  sofa  leaning  against  one
another,  but  T.  failed  completely.

This  was  not  by  any  means  the  only  day  on  which  we  had
experience  of  temporary  runs  of  success  within  the  day  itself,  as  the
tables  clearly  show.  In  particular  it  is  remarkable  that  on  October  27th
and  28th,  amid  general  failure,  P.  should  on  each  day  have  had  two
complete  successes  running.  The  successes  on  the  27th  occurred  after
a  longish  rest  (without  awakening),  but  this  was  not  the  case  on  the
28th.  Before  the  first  success  on  the  28th  P.  was  told  that  we  would
rest  after  this  one  more,  which  may  have  had  a  stimulating  effect,  but
a  similar  promise  was  not  efficacious  on  other  occasions.  The  same
phenomenon — 2  right  guesses  in  succession  on  an  otherwise  unsuccessful
day — was  exhibited  by  T.  on  July  24tli.

These  three  pairs  of  successes  are  isolated,  not  only  from  other
successes,  but  from  half  successes ;  but  on  some  of  the  successful  days
we  find  half  successes  grouped  round  the  successes.  Thus  on  July  6th
P.  not  only  has  one  run  of  7  successes  and  another  run  of  4,  but  in  his
first  17  guesses  there  are  11  successes  and  6  half  successes — not  a

*  As  Mr.  Smith  was  not  talking,  and  no  one  else  had  been  put  in  communicatioa
■n-ith  T.,  no  information  could  be  given  to  him  as  to  when  a  fresh  number  was  being'
looked  at.  It  was  owing  to  this  that  he  made  two  attempts  at  one  of  the  numbers — 46.
P.  was  very  long — three  minutes— in  getting  any  impression  that  time,  and  T,  had
both  of  his  impressions  with  a  considerable  interval  between  them  before  P.  spoke.


132


Experiments  in  Thou-gJiUTraiisference.


single  complete  failure.  On  July  9th  and  on  July  27th  he  had  runs  of
8  successes  and  half  successes.  On  July  '2dth  a  run  of  9,  on  August  17tli
of  10,  on  September  21st  of  6.  Similarly  T.,  on  the  first  day  lie  tried,  after
beginning  with  five  complete  failures,  has,  in  the  course  of  the  next  23
trials,  only  two  which  are  not  either  successes  or  half  successes.  On
July  26th,  in  10  consecutive  trials,  there  was  only  one  complete  failure.
On  August  16th  he  began  v/ith  two  failures,  and  then  had  10  successes
and  half  successes  in  succession,  all  after  that  failing  aga'n.  As  we
have  already  pointed  out,  there  are,  on  September  23rcl,  7  successes  and
half  successes  in  his  first  9  trials,  and  on  September  24th  there  are  5  in
the  first  6  trials,  with  no  success  to  speak  of  afterwards.

Sometimes,  as  the  tables  shovv",  these  runs  of  success  seem  to  be
introduced  or  -  stopped  by  a  change  of  conditions  ;  but  this  is  by  no
means  uniformly  the  case.  And  in  this  connection  Ave  may  call
Tittention  to  two  or  three  sets  of  attempts  where  the  percipient  received
no  impression  at  all.  The  most  curious  of  these  was  on  August  20th
with  P.  "\Ye  began  with  two  attempts  while  Mr.  Smith  was  outside
the  room.  Up  to  this  date,  as  will  be  seen  in  Tables  III.  and  IV.,  no
impression  had  been  produced  under  these  conditions.  But  what  is
remarkable  on  this  occasion  is  that  the  4  succeeding  attempts  with  Mr.
Cmith  in  the  room,  and  even  quite  close  to  P.,  were  absolute  blanks.
It  was  only  after  being  woken  and  re-hypnotised  that  P.  began  to  see
numbers,  though  this  was  scarcely  an  improvement,  as  they  were  all
v/rong.

The  position  of  Mr.  Smith  relatively  to  the  percipient,  so  long  as
both  were  in  the  same  room,  did  not  seem  to  us  to  affect  tlie  success  of
the  experiments  on  tlie  whole,  but  with  Mr,  Smith  outside  the  room
our  success  was  poor,  though  still,  in  the  case  of  P.,  considerably  beyond
what  might  be  expected  by  chancOr


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference...


153


Table  III.

Trials  with  P.  vriiEW  Mr.  Smith  was  Not  in  the  Same  Pioom

WITH  Him.


.  IJr.

Smith

in  a  room  divided  by  a

Mr.  Smith  in  tlie  passa

"e  outside

curtain  from  tint  in  wliicli  P.

was.

with  the  door  closed.

P.

about  10ft.  f

■om

P.  close  to

P.  10ft.

from

P.  near  wall,  but  nob

curtain.

curtain.

wall.

touching.

July  Cth.

Juhj  2dth.

July  IQlh.

J uly  3

Uh.

Aurjmt  11th.

Sept.  2-Uh.

44

X

30

35

After  the

After

suc-

(P.  &  T.  -

51

X

12

54

experiments

cesses.

success  111  Oilc

toj-ether. )

30

5,6

recorded  in

No.

X

room.

43

43

73

2,6

the  previous

Other

ex-

Ko.  X

10

35

65

8,3

column,  and

p  e  r  i  m  e  n  t  s

59

71

26

3,7

just

after  a

and  pause.

54

59

42

4,2

complete

38

X

£0

30

July  Tall.

32

64

success  with

^7

'/7

74

58

Mr.  S

mith  in

45

2g

6o

74

Snceessful

the  room.

75

61

3,7

experiments

48

6,g.

36

5,4

-52

62

in  the  room

53

7,Z

20

24

67

86

here.

16

83

Ay  gust  20th.

17

83

86

35

38

16

zg

29

27

4,9

64

45

(First  ex-

11

58

21

23

23

peri  ni  e  n  t  s

sy

43

20

45

16

3,8

tried  this

10

6,J

17

33

85

6,5

day.)

58

2i3

16

85

48

8,3

jS'o.  X

79

58

E  X

p  e  r  i-

73

JO

No.  X

£0

39

jnents

in  tlie

69

3,8

Some  ex-

35

room

,  and

23

55

periments  in

14

81

pause

iiere.

2/

27

the  room.

sg

66

48^

5,7

3(>

5,3

with  no  im-

84

97

75

4,6

46

17

iDression,  fol-

64

37

29

Co

lowed.

t  This  must  be  wrongly  recorded,  as  there  were  no  numbers  above  90  in  the  bag.
J  This  number  was  not  drawn  at  random,  but  selected  because  P.  had  twice  had  a
Jery  vivid  veridical  impression  of  it  during  this  day's  experiment.


154'


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


Mr.  Smith  in  the  room  below  P.,

floor  only  between,

no  plaster.

October  26th.

October  28th.

Octobe

?•  29//i.

October  SOth.

(At  end  of  evening.

(i'lrst  experi-

(P. &  T.

together. )

(P.

alone.)

x^. 1 .  LOgetiicr.  ]

ments  this  eveninj^.

58

67

22  22

P.  alone.)

51

SS

21

0  J)-/

44

10

(P.  &  T.  together.)

J-r  76

47

149

37

73

<7  "'^

19

24

32

45

24

65

75

2,7

<j'  54

66

18

40

So

uciooer  z  /  c/i.

( 1 . 1.  tof^ciiiei.j

32

g6

78

46

89

73

48

19

^1 . -I.  GOijeruur

34

66

78

36

loi  tiix  uii  LUi-^  Kitxy . }

/J  2g

33

99

64

49

12

It  "i"  r>  Q  i«  /i"V'TkdVi

u  L  n  c  r  cApcii-

12

75

34

34

34  9^

niGiits,  &c.,  IiGrc.

Rest here,  and

44  2,0
licst  here.

-'''^

then  card

s  tried.

6D

Kve  D

75

(55

stairs, &c.,  here.
Tiien after  two

54  8g

pC

JC

15

27

24.  41

^0

9H

46

87

successes  upstairs.

Pause  here.

77

2&

78  8,0

6b  1,7

3S

65

71  29

34  12

24

48

82  g,o

59  2S

21

92

45  5,2

35  46

23

3,0

43  2g

7/  ^2

60

82

76  50

86

5,4

Picst  here.

Pause  here.

42  2,3

63

47

iS  57

Z8

Z9

Sg  6,3

16  4g

Pause  here.

44  62

T  54

J  p.  had  not  been  told  to  look  for  a  number  in  this  trial.


Experiments  in  ThougliUTransfercnc&.


Summary  of  Table  III.

.'1)  Number  -Of  trials  with  Mr.  Smith  behind  a  curtain  separating  tho
two  rooms —

(a)  P.  10  feet  from  curtain .., ... ,., ...  ...

(6  )  P.  close  to  curtain

(2)  Number  of  trials  with  Mr.  Smith  out  of  the  rocm  and  door  closed

(3)  Number  of  trials  with  Mr.  Smith  in  the  room  below

To  tell  «««


Number  of  successes  under  condition  (1)  {a)

(!)('')

»>  >>  »»


(2)
(3)


Total  number  of  suc;;esses  ...

In  one  of  these,  Vv-hich  occurred  under  condition  (3),  the  digits

were  reversed.

Most  probable  number  of  successes — 1  or  2.
Number  of  half  successes  under  \A\\  v/ith  correct  digits  in  second

condition  (1)  (a)  J  place

Number  of  half  successes  under  \With  first  digit  right  ...

condition  (1)  (b)  ' ,, second  digit  right...

Number  of  half  successes  under  \With  first  digit  right

condition  (2)  ' ,, second  digit  right

Number  of  half  successes  under  1  With  first  digit  right

condition  (3)  ^ second  digit  right...


37

15


-  52-
15
72

139

2
1

2

o


4


17


Number  of  cases  in  which  P.  had  no  impression;  condition  (1) (a) -

(2)


(3)


.2
5
1


156


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference,


Table  IV.


Trials  with  T.  when  Mr.  Smith  was  Not  in  the  Same  Room

V.ITil  HlJI.


Mr.  Suiithin  the  passage
outsiile  •  with  .the  duor
closed.

Mr.  Smith  in  the  room  Lelovi'  T.  Flooring  Letween  ;
no  plaster.

T.al) xit  lOfr.
fnnn  wall.

T.  near  wall,

hut  nob
touching  it.

Oct.  2Uh.

Oct.  2Sth.

Oct.

Oct.  30/A.

(At  end
of  evening
I'.'  &  T.  to-
gether. )

22  23

J2  22

70  3'

2-\  54

(V.&T.  to-
gether.)

49  6,5
65  4,9

78  20

Experiments
upstairs
here,  &c.

^'4  (^,3
69  4-5
54  7,2

-'-4  ^4
Pause  here.
6b  4,8

34  2,1
59  4,2

35  1,3
71  8,3
76  2,3

Kefit  here.
42  42
j8  2,3
89  7,2
16  6,0

Pause  Irtre.
4\  i,^
71  57

(P.&T.  to-
gether.)

'  58  6,3

57  n

A4  40
47  24
19  52

24  5\^'^
\9

66  48
32  6,4
89.  73
34  .  60
33

J2  42

Other  ex-
peri  ments,
&c. ,and  then
card  trial.
6  D  ILve
gG  3O
8G  gS

(P.  &T.  to-
gether.)

37  87

32  5,4
75  9,2
40  So

78  4,','
48  7,2

78  47
64  4g

J4  74
•,-/  70
iCesfc  bere.

75  '51
15  74

4^  8,3

i26

'7  I84

35  84
24  ^5

21  0,3

23  74
60  7,g
85  7,6
Pause  here.

63  21

38  54

Sept.  23reL

lUh.

43  x

43  10
10  34
■59  33
54  3j
30  47
17  59
45  33
75  ^9
36  45
20  37

Oct.  nth.

87  7g
58 26  _

37  54
(K&T.  to-
gether. )
12  <?5-
34  8g
19  93
liest,  and
ex  periments
upstairs,  i!i'c.,
interpolated
here.

78  8,g
71  9.1
82  0}
45  5,2
43  2,4

The  one  success  in  79  guesses  is  of  course  only  v/hat  might  be
expected  by  chance.

Though  the  success  shown  in  obtaining  good  results  with  Mr.  Smith
•  in  another  room  is,  so  far,  not  great,  we  do  not  at  all  think  that  hope
■of  better  success  ought  to  be  given  up.  There  are,  we  think,  several
points  about  the  experiments,  taken  as  a  whole,  which  look  hopeful,
as  a  discussion  of  them  will  perhaps  show.

It  will  be  noticed  that  both  in  the  experiments  with  the  curtain
between  agent  and  percipient  and  in  those  where  Mr.  Smith  stood
in  the  passage,  the  first  attempts  resulted  in  complete  blanks — ■
the  percipient  had  no  impression  at  all.  Why  this  should  have
been  it  is  hard  to  say.  We  always  tried  to  conceal  from  the
percipient  that  Mr.  Smith  had  left  the  room  or  that  there  was
iiny  change  in  the  conditions. Of  course  we  cannot  feel  cure  that


Experiments  in  TJiought-Trcmsference.  157


we  succeeded  in  concealing  it,  but  at  any  rate  the  percipients  never
alluded  to  his  absence,  never  seemed  conscious  of  it,  and  never
suggested  anything  of  the  kind  as  a  cause  of  failure.  T.  several
times  remarked  that  the  numbers  seemed  very  far  away  and  so  small
as  to  be  difficult  to  see,  but  he  did  not  seem  to  connect  this  with
the  distance  of  Mr.  Smith.  It  seems  unlikely,  therefore,  that  the
absence  of  impression  was  merely  the  effect  of  suggestion — of  an  idea
working  itself  out  in  the  pei-cipient's  mind.  It  is  perhaps  more  likely
that  the  idea  of  difficulty  in  the  agent's  mind  may  have  been  an  obstacle
to  success.  However  this  may  have  been,  it  is  noteworthy  that  the  very
first  time  we  succeeded  in  getting  any  result  at  all  with  Mr.  Smith  in  the^
passage  (September  2-tth),  we  were  very  fairly  successful — P.  obtaining  2
complete  successes  and  3  half  .successes  in  10  trials.  On  this  occasion  P.
.  n  1  T.  sat  together  on  the  sofa,  near  the  wall  on  the  side  of  the  room  in
w  .ich  the  door  was,  but  not  touching  the  wall.  It  had  been  intended
that  Mr.  Smith  should  stand  just  on  the  other  side  of  the  wall,  so  as  tO'
be  near  them,  but  with  the  wall  between.  This  plan  was,  however,
forgotten.  Mr.  Myers,  who  was  with  Mr.  Smith  drawing  the  number.s
for  him,  happened  to  take  up  that  position,  and  Mr.  Smith  stood  beyond
the  door,  so  that  there  was  not  only  the  wall  with  the  closed  door  in  it
between  him  and  the  percipients,  but  a  distance  in  a  straight  line  of
perhaps  8  or  9  feet.

We  had  no  further  opportunity  of  experimenting  in  this  room,
as  Mr.  Smith,  who  was  temporarily  occupying  the  house,  was  on
the  point  of  moving.  The  October  experiments  were  carried  on  in
an  arch  on  the  beach  at  Brighton.  It  was  divided  into  two  floors — •
the  upper  one  entirely  occupied  by  a  sitting-room,  from  which  a
staircase,  closed  by  a  door  at  the  bottom,  led  down  into  a  lobby.  In,
this  lobby,  the  door  being  closed,  Mr.  Smith  stood  or  sat  while  trying
to  influence  the  percipients  from  a  distance,  they  sitting  upstairs.  But
though  he  was  thus  below  them,  his  actual  distance  from  them  can  not,
we  think,  have  been  materially  greater  than  on  September  24th.  It  is-
possible,  of  course,  that  a  feeling  of  greater  separation  may  have
produced  a  bad  effect  on  the  experiments,  but  it  is  not  necessary  to
suppose  this,  since  the  experiments  in  different  rooms  in  October  only
shared  in  the  general  want  of  success  of  all  the  experiments  at  that
time.  October  26th  was  the  best  of  the  October  days  both  for  P.  and
T.  with  Mr.  Smith  in  the  room  with  them,  and  we  observe  that
on  this  day,  out  of  the  only  4  trials  made  when  Mr.  Smith  was  down-
stairs, P.  had  one  success  and  one  half  success  and  T.  3  half  successes.  It,
is  to  be  regretted  that  we  did  not  begin  experiments  in  different  rooms  ,
earlier  on  this  day,  but  the  success  had  not  been  striking,  and  we  waitecL
for  a  better  vein,  which  did  not  come.  On  the  whole,  though  Miss  B.'s.
want  of  success  is  an  argument  the  other  way,  the  result  of  our-


158


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference,


'experiments  rather  suggests  that  the  special  difficulty,  whatever  it  may
have  been,  of  obtaining  good  results  with  the  agent  in  one  room  and
the  percipient  in  another  was  overcome  on  September  24th,  at  least,  as
far  as  P.  was  concerned,  and  that  what  interfered  with  success  in
October,  when  by  far  the  larger  number  of  these  experiments  were  tried,
-was  some  general  difficulty.  Unfortunately,  it  seems  not  improbable
that  this  general  difficulty  may  simply  have  been  boredom  on  the  part
■of  the  percipients  in  the  hypnotic  state,  of  which  there  were  several
signs,  and  that  in  that  case  we  may  be  dependent  on  new  percipients  to
-enable  us  to  pursue  the  investigation.

"VVe  have  now  to  discuss  the  nature  of  the  impression  received.  It
was  probably  owing  to  our  own  suggestion  at  the  beginning  that  this
was  almost  always  visual,  though  it  is  possible  that  the  fact  that
Mr.  Smith's  impression  was  visual  may  have  contributed  to  this  result.
It  would  be  interesting  to  find  out  whether  a  new  percipient  could
be  similarly  made  to  have  auditory  impressions.  In  two  or  three  cases
T.  said  that  he  saw  nothing,  but  that  something  seemed  to  tell  him
that  the  number  was  so-and-so,  but  "  something  "  never  told  him  right.
The  difference  between  this  form  of  impression  and  his  more  ordinary
■one  is  well  illustrated  by  one  of  the  experiments  on  July  25th.  The
number  drawn  was  66.  T.  said,  "  Something  says  37,  is  it  1 "  Mr.
Smith  :  "  Can't  you  see  that  ? "  T.  :  "  No."  S.  :  "  Well,  I  want  you
to  tell  me  what  you  see."  T.  :  "I  can't  see  anything."  S.  :  "  Well,
look  hard."  T.  :  "  Now  it's  something— G  ?"  S.  :  "  Well  ?  "  T.  :  "  I
can't  see  anything  else."  S.  :  "  Well,  look  liard."  T.  :  "  Can't  see
anything  else."  (Pause.)  S.  :  "  Can  5'ou  see  anything  now  1  "  T.
"  I  see  a  6  ;  nothing  else."  The  number  was  then  put  away,  and  T.
was  told  that  he  saw  only  6  because  the  number  consisted  of  two  sixes.
T.  :  "  Oh,  that's  it,  is  it ;  but  I  ought  to  have  seen  two  sixes,  then,  and
I  only  saw  one."

This  last  remark  illustrates  a  characteristic  point  about  the
impressions,  namely,  that  they  were  perfectly  definite  perceptions,
not  to  be  changed  by  consciously  received  suggestions  or  by  an
exercise  of  the  imagination.  Another  illustration  may  be  given  of
this.  On  August  21st  P.  was  told  that  he  was  now  to  see  something
quite  different — not  a  number  at  all,  and  Mr.  Smith  then  looked  at
the  word  DOG.  As  after  some  time  he  had  had  no  impression  whatever,
Mrs.  Sidgwick  told  him  it  was  a  word.  As  tliis  did  not  help  him  she
idded  that  it  was  something  he  was  fond  of.  Sfcill  P.  had  no
impression,  so  she  told  him  to  try  to  see  one  letter  —the  first  letter  of
the  word.  Presently  P.  said  :  "  I  see  an  S  or  an  8 — it's  gone  again  ;  "
D[uite  regardless  of  the  fact  that  a  word  could  not  begin  with  8.

In  saying  that  the  impressions  were  perceptions — not  guesses  in  the


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.  159


proper  sense  of  the  word — we  do  not  mean  that  they  were  always  clear ;
but  when  not  clear  it  was,  so  to  speak,  clearly  perceived  that  they  were
not  clear.  It  is  somewhat  difficult  to  decide  whether  the  impressions
ought  to  be  called  hallucinations  because  the  percipients  had  their  eyes
closed,  and  we  have,  therefore,  no  clear  conception  of  what  the  aggre-
gate of  their  visual  sensations  was  and  what  relative  place  in  the
aggregate  this  particular  one  had.  The  experiments  with  open  eyes
when  the  numbers  were  seen  on  the  sheet  of  paper,  though  they
prove  that  the  impression  could  be  externalised  as  a  visual  hallucina-
tion, cannot,  of  course,  prove  that  it  had  the  same  characteristics  in
a,  different  stage  of  hypnotisation.  The  question  is  complicated  by
the  fact  that  P.  was,  at  times  at  any  rate,  —  as  his  remarks  in
the  seance  of  v/liich  the  full  account  has  been  given  show — conscious
that  he  was  not  seeing  in  an  ordinary  v/ay,  but  that  his  eyes
were  closed.  Nevertheless,  the  percipients  spoke  so  pei'sistently
•of  seeing,  seemed  so  clearly  to  locate  what  they  saw  in  a  particular
point  in  space,  and  so  clearly  at  times  expected  others  to  share  the
impression,  that  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  it  had  to  them  the
characteristics  of  a  sensation  received  through  the  eyes.  In  the  seances
described  at  length  the  reader  has  already  some  of  the  material  for
forming  a  judgment  on  this  point,  and  we  may  quote  here  a  few  more
incidents  which  seem  to  throw  light  on  it.

On  July  9th,  after  the  successful  guess  of  10,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  asked
Mr.  Smith  in  writing,  which  vv^as  our  mode  of  communication  with  each
•other  about  the  experiments,  to  tell  P,  that  he  (Mr.  Smith)  did  not
know  what  he  would  sea  now,  that  he  did  not  think  it  would  be
numbers,  but  that  P.  was  to  tell  him  whatever  it  was.  Mrs.  Sidgwick
then  handed  to  Mr.  Smith  the  letters  C  A  T,  taken  from  a  spelling
g?ome  and  arranged  in  the  lid  of  a  box  in  such  a  manner  as  to  make  it
impossible  for  P.  to  see  them  had  his  eyes  been  open.  The  experiment
was  quite  unexpected  by  Mr.  Smith,  who  had  never  seen  the  spelling-
box,  as  well  as  to  P.,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  hoping  that  the  mild  surprise
would  produce  some  interesting  result.  P,  said  excitedly  (and  we
think  pointing,  though  this  is  not  recorded  in  the  note-book) :  "There
it  is— there's  a  cat,  look."  S.  :  "  What  do  you  see  ?  "  P.  :  "  Why,
CAT;  don't  you  see  it  ?  Did  you  think  I  saw  a  black  cat  or  a
tabby  ?  I  wish  I  had  ;  I'm  very  fond  of  animals.  I  mean  the  letters."
In  this  connection  we  may  mention  another  incident  which  had  nothing
to  do  with  the  present  experiments,  but  has  some  bearing  on  the
<luestion  under  discussion.  P.,  when  left  to  himself  in  the  hypnotic
state,  usually  starts  dreams  and  hallucinations  on  his  own  account.
These  generally  relate  to  the  circumstances  of  his  every  day  life ;  for
instance,  he  will  carry  on  conversations  with  a  brother  or  companion
whom  he  imagines  to  be  present. Once,  when  left  in  tliis  way  with


160


Experiments  in  TIiought-Transference.


closed  eyes  while  we  were  attending  to  someone  else,  he  began  to  go
through  all  the  action,  with  appropriate  words,  of  petting  an  imaginary
cat  which  sat  on  his  knee  and  climbed  about  him  and  over  the  back  of
his  chair.  When  Mr.  Smith  asked  him  what  he  had  got  tliere  he
seemed  indignant  at  the  stupidity  of  the  question  because  Mr.  Smith
must  be  able  to  see  that  it  was  a  cat.

Such  remarks  as  the  following — selected  among  many — all  seem  to
show  a  belief  on  the  part  of  P.  that  he  really  sav,-  the  numbers  : — ■

On  July  29th,  48  having  been  drawn,  P.  said:  "These  two  are
plainer.  If  you  always  put  them  up  like  that  I'll  always  tell  you."
Later  on  the  same  day  48  was  drawn  again.  After  a  pause  P.  said,
with  excitement :  "That's  that  48  again,  just  as  clear  as  before."

In  another  trial  on  the  same  day,  when  20  was  drawn,  P.  said  :
"45;  shall  I  wait  to  see  if  they  change?  I  see  them  up  in  the  air
sideways  a  bit."

On  August  21st — a  day  when  we  had  no  success  at  all — 17  was
drawn,  and  P.  guessed  83,  remarking  that  they  were  "  bigger  numbers
to-night. I  seem  to  see  them  quicker."

Later  on  the  same  day  he  remarked  of  one  of  las  impressions  that
both  figures  seemed  half  ruljbed  out.  Similar  to  this  was  a  remark  he
made  on  October  30th.  The  number  drawn  was  44.  P.  said  :  "  2  and
a  0,  the  0  plainest,  but  nut  very  plain.  The  numbers  are  getting  too
old,  I  think."

On  October  29th,  in  one  of  the  tri.als  with  Mr.  Smith  downstairs,
59  having  been  drawn,  P.  said  :  "  I  can  see  5 — and  a  2,  one  after  the
other — 5  again  and  2  underneath  it.  It  was  25  afterwards.  There  it
is  now. Do  you  see  it,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  1 "

In  the  next  trial  the  impression  persisted  after  the  guess  had  been
made  and  when  we  wanted  to  go  on  to  the  next.  So  Mrs.  Sidgwick
suggested  to  P.  that  he  should  look  away  from  it.  P.  said  he  would,
then  laughed,  saying  he  had  looked  away  for  a  moment  and  then  looked
back,  and  in  that  moment  the  numbers  had  gone.  Similarly  on
October  30th,  after  guessing  a  number  (quite  wrong,  and  also
unlike  T.,  who  had  spoken  first),  P.  said  :  "I  did  not  know  there  was
another  up.  I  did  not  look,  and  there  it  was  in  front  of  me.  The  five
"was  the  clearer  of  the  two."

On  another  occasion,  October  27th,  Mr.  Smith  being  in  the  same
room  with  him,  P.  said  :  "Would  you  mind  my  sitting  a  little  nearer;,
I  can't  see  well."  He  was  told  that  the  numbers  had  been  brought
aearer,  which  satisfied  him,  but  the  guess  he  made  was  nevertheless
wrong.

T.'s  remarks  about  his  impressions  Avere  very  similar.  Thus,  on,
July  25th,  the  number  drawn  being  25,  T.  saw  nothing  for  some  time,,
then  said  :  "  A  sort  of  5." S.  :  "  Well,  what  else  V T.  :  "  5— 8— no


Exioerhnents  in  Thour/Itt-Tranxference.


161


not  8— it's  a  bad  shaped  one— 35."  S.  :  "  Sure  it's  a  3?"  T.  :  "It's
made  badly."

Again,  on  October  27tl),  the  number  drawn  being  34  and  P.  having
guessed  98,  T.  said :  "  8 — looks  like  0 — it's  a  9  -  the  0  not  quite
plain — I  think  it's  meant  for  a  9 — one  over  the  other."  And  again  in
the  next  trial :  "  It's  a  9  and  a  3 — 9  at  the  top. That  9's  very  bad."

On  September  20th.  T.  said,  in  answer  to  questions,  that  he  saw
the  numbers  right  up  in  the  corner — dark  on  a  light  ground — very
small.  He  also  complained  on  this  day  and  at  other  times  of  their
being  "  such  a  long  way  off  you  can  scarcely  see  them."

T.  gave  quite  a  different  account  of  his  impressions  v/hen  guessing
numbers  with  Mr.  Myers  as  agent.  He  did  not  then  talk  of  seeing,
though  he  had  been  told  he  would  either  see  or  hear  a  number.  When
asked  whether  he  heard  or  saw  it  he  replied,  "  No,  I  seem  to  imagine
it " ;  and  he  said  the  same  when  Mr.  Leaf  was  trying  thought-
transference  with  him.

An  interesting  point  about  the  impressions  of  the  percipients  will
already  have  been  noticed  by  the  reader,  namely,  their  frequently
gradual  development,  along  with  which  we  may  consider  the
varying  times  which  they  took  to  come.  Quickness  was  not  specially
associated  with  rightness.  On  August  16th,  T.'s  successful  attempts
varied  in  the  time  they  took  from  15  seconds  to  2 J  minutes,  and  on
August  17th,  P.  when  successful  took  from  45  seconds  to  Si-  minutes.
"\Ve  did  not  always  time  our  experiments,  so  have  no  complete  record.
The  longest  time  recorded  was  3  minutes  50  seconds.  This  was  on
September  21st;  the  impression,  when  it  came  on  that  occasion,  Avas
wrong  and  also  fleeting,  and  the  attempts  before  and  after  it  produced
no  impression  at  all.  A  rather  remarkable  experience  on  the  same  day,
however,  suggests  that  the  impression,  even  v.dien  right,  may  take  much
longer  to  come  and  may  even  be  deferred — meaning  by  that  that  it  may
be  received  by  the  percipient  after  the  agent  has  ceased  to  direct  his
mind  to  it  and  when  he  has  begun  to  try  to  convey  to  the  percipient  a
totally  different  impression.  AVhat  happened  was  this.  After  two
successive  correct  guesses  by  P.,  the  number  19  was  drawn.  We  v.-aited
for  5h  minutes,  and  then,  as  P.  had  no  impression,  gave  it  tip,  and  drew
another  number,  which  turned  out  to  be  43.  Twenty-five  seconds  after
the  new  number  was  drawn  P.  said  19.  This  was  recorded  and  another
number  drawn,  viz.,  75,  13  seconds  after  which  P.  said  43.  Thus  two
numbers  in  succession  were  rightly  given,  but  one  stage  late.  The
numbers  had  not  been  named  aloud,  and  P.  had  a  double  sheet  of  paper
over  his  head,  so  that  he  could  not  have  seen  them  even  if  they  were
handled  carelessly  after  being  given  up.  It  makes  it  less  likely  that  the
occurrence  was  due  to  chance  that  it  hajapened  in  a  run  of  successes ;
there  had  been  4  half  successes  and  2  successes  in  the  6  previous  trials.


162  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference,


Once  at  least — viz.,  in  the  experiment  of  August  17th — P.  had  his
impression  before  Mr.  Smith  looked  at  the  number.  It  was  wrong,  as
might  be  expected,  but  he  stuck  to  it  after  Mr.  Smith  began  to  look.  The
impressions  often  came  almost  immediately,  though  we  have  no  shorter
time  recorded  than  13  seconds.  One  of  the  quickest  was  a  right  giiess
of  T.'son  October  26th.  To  stimulate  their  interest,  we  had  put  P.  and
T.  en  rajyport  with  one  another  and  told  them  to  try  who  could  see  the
numbers  quickest.  Then  21  was  drawn,  and  instantly  T.  said,  "  2  and
a  1."  So  instantaneous  was  it  that  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  did  not  know
the  numl^ers,  thought  that  T.  had  guessed  at  random  and  without
waiting  for  the  usual  visual  impression,  in  order  to  be  before  P.  She
taxed  him  with  this,  but  he  declared  that  he  had  seen  it.

The  gradual  development  of  the  figures  was  of  two  kinds — either
one  figure  coming  before  the  other,  or  the  figures  forming  themselves  by
degrees.  A  good  instance  of  the  first  is  afforded  by  one  of  T.'s
successful  guesses  on  August  16  th.  The  number  was  32.  He  said  3.
Professor  Sidgwick  said  :  "  Do  you  see  only  one  ?  "  T.  :  "  Yes."
Prof.  S.  :  "Try  to  see  another."  T.  :  "2."  Mr.  Wingfield,  who  was
taking  the  time,  recorded  30  seconds  for  the  first  and  55  seconds  for  the
second.  Again,  on  July  29th,  the  number  drawn  being  30,  P.  said  :
"  I  see  3 — I  see  one  of  them  now.  Mr.  Smith,  please  look  at  both  of
them."  S.  :  "All  right,  I'm  looking  at  both  of  them."  P.  ;  "  There's
a  0."

The  following  is  a  case  of  gradual  development  of  one  of  the
figures.  It  was  on  July  27th ;  the  number  drawn  was  89  ;  P.  said  :
"  9."  S. :  "  Yes  V  P. :  "  8  in  front  of  it.  I  tliought  it  was  going  to
be  a  0  at  first."

But  one  of  T.'s  guesses  of  cards  was  as  marked  an  instance  of  gradual
development  as  any,  though  his  impression  was  not  derived  from  Mr.
Smith.  Mr.  Smith  was  downstairs  looking  at  a  9  of  clubs.  P.,  who
was  not  en  rapport  with  T.,  guessed  5  of  clubs.  Then  T.  said  :  "  Has
Mr.  Smith  put  anything  up  yet  %  Oh,  yes,  yes  (meditatively).  I  see
it  now  (then  counting),  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  5,  yes — a  black — 5  of  clubs.
Oh,  I  see  them  plain ;  5  still."

Quickness  and  clearness  did  not  necessarily  go  together  ;  for
instance,  in  one  of  the  trials  on  October  30th  (wrong,  but  made  more
quickly  than  his  recent  attempts)  P.  said,  "That's  quick,  isn't  it?"
Asked  whether  it  was  plain,  he  said,  "  Not  very,  but  it  came
suddenly  ;  the  others  took  some  time  to  form."

Nor,  again,  did  clearness  and  tightness  necessarily  go  together,
though  we  do  not  remember  that  P.  was  ever  excited  by  the  vividness
of  an  impression  except  on  certain  occasions  when  it  was  right.  T.  was
never  excited  at  all.

T.,  on  more  than  one  occasion,  began  to  guess  numbers  when  we  had


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference^


163


not  intentionally  called  his  attention  to  the  subject ;  he  had,  however,
seen  P.  doing  it  before  he  was  himself  hypnotised,  and  this  may
have  suggested  itself  to  him.  P.,  as  far  as  we  remember,  only  once  did
anything  of  the  kind,  and  that  instance  Avas  a  leather  curious  one.  He
had  been  left  in  a  deep  sleep  with  a  paper  over  his  head  and  at  a
considerable  distance  from  Mr.  Smith  and  T.,  while  we  were  trying  the
experiments  with  the  latter  with  his  eyes  open  on  October  29th.  Mr.
Smith  was  looking  at  the  4  of  spades  and  T.  had  been  describing  the
imaginary  knave  of  diamonds  which  he  saw  on  the  paper  in  front  of

him. Suddenly  P.  said  :  "  Let's  have  a  game  of  cards^  4  of  spades."

S.  :  "  What's  that  you  are  saying  ?  "  P.  :  "  About  a  4  of  spades  I  saw.
I  thought  you  were  putting  up  cards."

We  now  come  to  the  most  important  question  of  all,  namely,  how
the  impressions,  which  thus  visually  presented  themselves  to  the
percipients,  reached  their  minds.

Before  discussing  the  successful  attempts  at  divining  the  number
on  which  IMr.  Smith  was  concentrating  his  attention,  it  is  worth  notic-
ing that  in  certain  unsuccessful  attempts  when  P.  and  T.  were  guessing
together,  they  influenced  each  other,  or,  at  any  rate,  P.  influenced  T.
There  were  156  of  these  joint  trials.  In  11  cases  the  order  of  guessing
is  not  noted,  in  21,  which  we  may  call  mixed  guesses,  the  digits  were
named  singly,  and  either  alternately  by  the  two  percipients,  or  else  one
having  named  a  digit,  the  other  named  two,  and  then  the  first  finished.
In  38  cases  T.  completed  his  statement  before  P.  began ;  and  in  86  P.
similarly  guessed  first.  Now  among  these  86  cases  in  which  T.  did  not
make  his  guess  until  after  P.  had  finished,  he  guessed  the  same  two
digits  as  P.  16  times,^  in  13  of  which  the  digits  were  in  the  same  order
as  P.'s.  This  might  not  have  seemed  remarkable  if  we  had  previously  had
reason  to  suppose  that  T.  could  always  hear  P.,  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
they  were  usually  not  e7i  rapport  with  each  other— neither  apparently
knew  that  the  other  was  present,  and  when  assured  that  he  was  and
communication  attempted,  each  would  get  annoyed  with  the  other's
rudeness  in  not  answering  him,  however  much  he  raised  his  voice  and
shouted  to  him.  And  the  proportion  of  these  imitative  guesses  was
rather  larger  when  they  were  not  en  rapport  than  when  they  were.

1  One  of  our  devices  to  stimulate  their  interest  had  been  to  call  guessing-  cards  a
£ame,  the  day  before.

2  None  of  these  were  successful  guesses.  Had  they  been,  the  second  could  not
cf  course  have  been  counted.  But  though  P.  and  T.  did  not  influence  each  other  for  good,
there  is  some  reason  to  think  that  they  sometimes  influenced  each  other  for  evil— the
impression  from  the  co-percipient  overcoming  that  from  Mr.  Smith.  Thus  on  one
occasion  (September  24th),  when  the  number  draiTO  was  74,  T.  said  7,  then  P.  said
57,  upon  which  T.  said  75.  Asked  to  repeat,  he  said:  "  I  think  it  was  7,4 ;  I  said
5  but  It  was  more  like  4-had  a  tail  to  it."  P.  and  T.  were  not  m  rapport  on  this
occasion.

M  2


164


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


T.  followed  P.  when  not  en  rapport  with  him  63  times,Hn  10  of  which
his  guess  was  the  same  as  P.'s,  besides  2  where  he  gave  P.'s  digits  iu
reverse  order.  So  large  a  proportion  as  this  can  scarcely  be  due  to
chance,  and  we  could  strengthen  the  presumption  that  it  was  not,  by
an  examination  of  the  mixed  guesses  and  of  those  in  which  T.  gave
one  number  the  same  as  P.'s,  or  vice  versd.  The  influence  of  T.  on  P.
was  less  marked,  but  appeared  to  exist.  We  must  therefore  suppose
that  sounds  which  fell  unconsciously  on  the  ear  yet  produced  an  impression
on  the  mind,  of  which  the  percipient  became  aware  solely  through  its
reproduction  in  a  visual  form — a  supposition  v,^hich  is,  of  course,  entirely
in  accordance  with  observations  made  by  others.

One  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  this  is  that  for  evidential  purposes
in  psychical  research  no  reliance  can  be  placed  on  the  fact  that  a
person — whether  hypnotised  or  not — is  entirely  unaware  that  an
impression  has  reached  him  through  his  senses,  if  by  any  possibility  it
could  so  have  reached  him.  It  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  examine  the
ex]Deriments  dealt  with  in  this  paper  with  anxious  care  in  order  to  see
"whether  there  was  any  possible  channel  of  sense  through  which  the
agent's  impression  could  have  reached  the  percipients.

The  eye  is,  we  think,  absolutely  excluded.  There  were  a  sufllcienfe
number  of  successful  experiments  with  Mr.  Smith  behind  the  percipient
and  with  the  percipient's  head  covered  over,  to  make  it  xmnecessary  to
consider  the  various  possibilities  of  careless  handling  of  the  numbers^
reflection  in  the  cornea,  or  changing  facial  expression  and  gesture.

The  sense  of  touch  may  also,  we  think,  be  regarded  as  excluded.
There  was  never  any  direct  contact  betv/een  agent  and  percipient
except  in  one  or  tv/o  cases  where  it  W0.s  purposely  tried  and  did  not
produce  success,  and  it  seems  absurd  to  suppose  that  vibrations  of  the-
floor  caused  by  rhythmical  movements  of  the  agent,  of  which  he  was  him-
self unconscious  and  which  were  invisible  to  others,  can  have  been
powerful  enough  to  affect  the  percipient.

We  are  reduced,  then,  to  the  sense  of  hearing.  Hero,  again,  all  in-
dications by  leading  questions  or  changes  in  the  tone  of  voice  are  ex-
cluded by  the  success  of  the  experiments  v/hen  all  who  knew  the  num-
ber were  absolutely  silent.  There  seem  to  be  only  two  ways  in  which,
the  impression  could  have  reached  the  percipient  through  his  ears —
either  by  means  of  faint  unconscious  whispering  of  the  number  by  Mr.
Smith  in  the  effort  of  concentrating  his  attention  on  it,  or  by  means

1  It  ouffht  to  be  stated  that  in  two  of  these  cases  Mrs.  Sidgwick  repeated  the
nnmber  after  P.  before  T.  spoke.  She  was  herself,  however,  not  cn  rapport  with  T.  in
one  of  these  two,  and  as  regards  the  other,  it  did  not  appear  from  otlier  experiments
that  T.  was  easily  influenced  in  his  guesses,  consciously.

"  Compare  some  of  the  incidents  mentioned  in  the  paper  on  recent  experiments-
in  crystal  vision,  Proceedinr/s,  Vol.  V.  See  also  in  this  connection  M,  Pierre  Janet's,
interesting  volume,  L'Aiitomatisme  Psychologique.


Experiments  in  TJiought-Transference^,  IGor


of  faint  unconscious  counting  of  the  number  by  breathing,  or  some
■other  rliythmical  movement  producing  sound.  Both  suppositions
appear  to  involve  hypersesthesia  in  the  percipient,  since  the  supposed,
sounds  were  unperceived  by  attentive  bystanders,  and  nothing  else
that  we  observed  gave  us  any  reason  to  suppose  that  the  percipients
were  hypertesthetic  ;  indeed  their  apparent  unconsciousness  of  Mr.
Smith's  absence  when  he  was  in  another  room  seems  to  show  that  they
Avere  not.  But  let  us  assume  hyperesthesia  ;  let  us  also  assume,  what
we  have  no  ground  for  regarding  as  at  all  probable,  that  Mr.  Snaitlx-
may  have  whispered  or  counted  unconsciously  after  his  attention  had
been  called  to  the  danger  of  doing  so ;  and  let  us  examine  the  two
suppositions.  On  either  a  certain  nvimber  of  failures  would  almost
certaiiily  occur,  in  which  the  indications  given  would  be  imperfectly
apprehended.  - -  ■

Of  the  two  suppositions,  unconscious  whispering  seems  the  less
improbable,  because  the  concentration  of  the  mind  on  a  written  or
printed  number  with  a  view  to  having  as  intense  an  impression  of  it
fis  possible,  is  found  to  cause  a  certain  tendency  to  say  the  number
mentally,  but  no  tendency  to  count  it.  The  symbol  for  a  number  is  in
this  respect  unlike,  for  instance,  a  playing  card,  where  a  tendency  to
■count  the  pips  often  does  accompany  the  effort  to  concentrate  one's
mind  on  it.  1>  ow  any  whispering  or  faint  pronouncing  of  the  number
would  lead,  one  would  think,  to  numbers  whose  names  have  common
characteristic  letters  being  mistaken  for  each  other.  Thus  we  shovdd
expect  to  find  fours  and  fives  interchanged  because  of  the  f;  sixes  and
sevens  because  of  the  s;  perhaps  twos  and  eights,  and  ones  and  nines
"because  of  the  t  and  the  n  ;  and  possibly  fives  and  nines  because  of  the  i.
Three  would  stand  by  itself  as  quite  different  from  all  the  others.  Yf e
•confine  ourselves  to  the  single  digits,  because  the  names  of  double
numbers  are  practically  compounded  of  the  names  of  the  two  digits  of
which  they  arc  composed.

Now  if  we  examine  the  guesses  we  do  not  find  that  any  of  these
mistakes  are  prevalent.  The  follo-\ving  three  tables  show  the  numbers
drawn,  with  the  corresponding  guesses,  analysed  into  single  digits  : —


Experiments  in  Thought-Transference.


Table  V.

Guesses  Alone  on  Successful  Days,  Mr.  Smith  being  m  the
Same  Room  with  Him,


rn

S  s

Numbers  Guessed.

Totals
drawn.

E  5

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0

No  im-
pression

17

5

4

4

5

I

2

2

2

I

43

2

I

14

5

2

I

3

26

3

2

8

21

3

3

3

I

3

2

46

4

4

6

23

I

3

2

I

3

I

2

46

5

I

2

4

4

16

4

3

5

3

I

3

46

6

2

2

2

4

2

'4

2

3

I

3

2

7

I

4

I

I

4

4

27

3

>

45  '■

8

I

I

8

2

3

5

20

I

3

44

9

I

I

I

I

I

2

J  2

I

I

2/

0

2

4

I

3

2

I

2

8

22

Totals
g^iess'd

31

41

52

46

37

28

46

40

24

17

14

376

Experivients  in  Thought-Transference.


167


Table  YT.

Guesses  Alone  oy  Successful  Days,  Mr.  Smith  being  in  the
Same  Eoom  with  Him.


CO

g  «

Numbers

Guessed.

-2  c

'^^

/

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0

No  im-
pression

I

9

I

I

4

3

3

I

2

...

3

3

10

3

17

3

I

2

9

I

3

I

I

I

I

20

4

I

3

3

II

I

I

I

I

22

2

2

I

I

4

I

I

I

13

6

4

I

I

10

I

I

18

7

I

5

I

3

I

3

I

15

8

I

3

I

I

3

I

I

14

9

I

I

I

I

2

I

9

0

2

I

J

I

I

3

I

I

3

14

Totals
guess'd

S3

sg

SI

32

iS

22

9

7

8

7

I

166

168


Exj)eriments  in  Thought-Transference


Table  VII.

'All  G-'uesses  with  Mr.  SyiTir  ix  the  Same  Room  as  the  Percipients
OR  o:tly  Divided  from  them  by  a  Curtain.


i">  >

Numbers  Guessed.

3  c

""J
b  f3

J

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0

No  im-
pression

0

J

43

i3

20

17

22

13

10

13

6

2

4

I6S

2

10

54

21

12

8

9

6

8

8

4

3

14

24

54

II

15

13

II

7

9

5

3

166

4

21

16

22

52

r3

10

II

6

9

3

6

i6g

S

7

9

12

lb

35

19

7

8

7

3

5

128

6

12

II

12

12

II

46

14

13

3

,r

3

140

7

13

21

13

II

15

16

40'

8

4

2

2

145

8

II

7

26

13

13

12

14

34

7

5

S

147

9

4

5

II

2

6

3

5

6

19

9

I

71

0

7

6

10

8

9

7

8

2

6

19

8^

Totals
guess'd

142

171

201

154

147

143

126

rc5

7S

55

2g

Experiments  in  Thought-Transferencet


169


Tabla  "V.  gives  P.'s  guesses  on  successful  days,  when  he  "was
guessing  by  himself,  uninfluenced  therefore  by  T.  Table  VI.  similarly
gives  T.'s  guesses  on  successful  days.  Table  YII.  gives  all  the  guesses
of  all  the  percipients  (except  one  or  two  where  more  than  two  digits
were  guessed),  whether  joint  or  not,  when  Mr.  Smith  was  either  in  the
same  room  with  them  or  divided  from  them  only  by  a  curtain.  The
first  column  in  each  table  refers  to  the  numbers  drawn,  the  first
line  to  the  number  guessed.  If  therefore,for  example, we  want  to  see  in
Table  V.  how  many  times  5  was  guessed  as  7,  we  find  5  in  the  first  column
eind  follow  the  line  headed  by  it  till  we  come  under  7  in  the  first  line.
The  number  thus  arrived  at  namely  3,  is  the  number  of  times  5  was
guessed  by  P.  as  7  on  his  successful  days.  In  making  these  tables  we
have  counted  guesses  in  which  both  digits  were  given  in  reversed
order,  as  reversed,  so  they  ai-e  not  included  among  the  cases  of  corre-
spondence betvv'een  numbers  di-awn  and  numbers  guessed.  Aftei
allowing  for  what  v/ould  probably  have  happened  by  chance  alone,  the
number  of  guesses  with  both  digits  right  but  reversed  is  about
5  per  coat,  of  the  number  completely  right.  If,  therefore,  the  same
tendency  to  reverse  the  number  occurred  in  unsuccessful  attempts,
V/'hen  the  number  was  imperfectly  apprehended,  we  must  assume  that
about  5  per  cent,  of  the  numbers  in  the  tables  are  wrong,  when  judged
in.  relation  to  the  origin  of  the  idea  in  the  percipient's  mind.

Nov/  let  us  consider  the  effect  of  counting.  This  would  lead  to  a
tendency  to  guess  the  numbers  immediately  above  and  below  the  right
one,  .especially  in  the  larger  numbers.  Here  also  we  confine  ourselves
to  single  digits,  since  the  digits,  if  there  is  counting  at  all,  must  be
counted  separately.  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  any  one  would  count
up  to  72,  for  example,  because  he  was  concentrating  his  mind  on  that
number.  Turninr;  to  the  tables  vv^e  find  from  Table  VII.  that  eisrht
mistakes  were  made  twenty  times  or  more.  These  were  :  1  guessed  as
3  and  as  5,  2  guessed  as  3,  3  guesssed  as  2,  4  guessed  as  1  and  as  3,  7
guessed  as  2  and  8  guessed  as  3.  Of  these  eight,  only  three  could
possibly  be  explained  by  unconscious  counting,  viz.,  3  for  2,  2  for  3,
and  3  for  4.  But  of  these  the  two  first  might  equally  well  be  explained
as  results  of  the  kind  of  imperfect  vision  of  the  number  so  often
complained  of  by  the  percipients,  and  this  is  also  the  explanation
suggested  by  the  most  prevalent  mistake  of  all,  namely  8  guessed  as  3.
And  that  this  is  the  true  explanation  is  further  suggested  by  the  fact
that  3  is  very  seldom  guessed  as  8.  For  though  an  8  half  rubbed  out
might  resemble  3  could  not  so  easily  be  converted  into  a  badly

seen  8,whei'eas  with  2  and  3  the  possibility  of  mistake  would  be  recipro-
cal ;  an  imperfect  2  might  be  mistaken  for  a  3  as  easily  as  a  3  for  a  2.
On  the  whole,  therefore,  we  think  that  an  examination  of  the  facts
afibrds  no  support  worth  considering  for  the  supposition — in  itself  as


17Q  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference..


we  have  said  extremely  improbable — of  unconscious  counting  hyper-
sesthetically  heard.  Further  the  supposition  of  counting  cannot
possibly  explain  the  successful  guessing  of  CAT  and  the  guessing  of
BEEF  for  BEE.  If  this  was  the  result  of  unconscious  auditory
indications  at  all,  it  must  have  been  of  whispering,  a  supposition,  as  we
have  seen,  quite  unsupported  by  anything  in  the  guesoing  of  numbers.

Finally,  though  our  success  with  the  agent  in  another  room  was
comparatively  small,  it  was,  in  P.'s  case,  quite  sufficiently  beyond  the
probable  amount  to  afford  support  to  the  view  that  the  conditions  of
success,  whatever  they  were,  were,  at  any  rate,  independent  of  uncon-
scious auditory  indications.

Before  leaving  the  tables  we  may  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  a
decided  number-habit  is  exhibited,^  especially  by  T.,  which  led  him  to
guess  the  higher  numbers,  7,  8,  and  9,  comparatively  seldom,  and  that
this  seems  to  have  affected  successful  and  unsuccessful  guesses  alike.
The  number  9  had  of  course  a  smaller  chance  of  being  guessed  right  on
account  of  the  absence  of  numbers  above  90.  There  were  scarcely
enough  trials,  probably,  to  reveal  any  number-habit  as  regards  double
numbers,  but  the  guesses  extended  over  the  whole  range.  All  numbers
turned  up,  all  were  guessed.  Only  fourteen  were  never  guessed  right.
These  were  14,  25,  28,  33,  47,  51,  54,  55,  60,  62,  73,  77,  85,  90.  One
number,  viz.,  24  was  guessed  right  seven  times  including  two  of  W.'s
guesses  on  July  4th.  One  number,  48,  was  guessed  right  five  times.
Six  were  guessed  right  four  times,  viz.,  15,  16,  30,  35,  36,  75.  Ten
were  guessed  right  three  times,  viz.,  20,  29,  32,  37,  39,  42,  58,  71,
76,  87. The  rest  were  guessed  I'ight  either  once  or  twice.


I  It  IS  scarcely  necessary  to  remhid  our  readers  that  a  nuinber-Iialiit  affecting  the
percipipnt  only  can  have  no  tendency  to  increase  the  number  of  successful  guesses.
A  diacussion  of  this  subject  will  be  found  at  page  209,


suppiemenu  International  Congress.  '  171


SUPPLEMENT.


I.

INTERNATIONAL  CONGRESS  OF  EXPERIMENTAL
PSYCHOLOGY.

By  a.  T.  Myers,  M.D


The  Congress  of  Physiological  Psychology — Avnose  name,  however,,
was  changed  in  the  course  of  its  debates  to  that  printed  above — held  its
first  meeting  in  Paris,  August  6-1 0th.  Nearly  200  members  had
inscribed  themselves  (the  fee  being  10  francs),  and  more  than  half  of
these  attended  the  meetings,  although  the  rival  attractions  of  other
congresses  tended  to  make  attendance  somewhat  irregular.  The
j^rincipal  meetings  were  held  in  the  new  Amphitheatre  of  the  Ecole  de
Medecine,  and  the  sub-sections  met  in  the  class-rooms  adjoining,  the
governing  body  having  placed  these  very  convenient  quarters  at  the
disposal  of  the  Congress  without  payment.

Prof.  Charcot,  under  whose  presidency  the  Congress  was  convened,
was  unfortunately  prevented  from  being  present  by  indisposition,
but  Dr.  Magnan  and  Prof.  Ribot  as  Vice-Presidents,  Prof.  Richet
as  General  Secretary,  and  MM.  Gley  and  Marillier  as  Assistant
Secretaries  extended  a  courteous  welcome  to  the  foreigners  pre-
sent. Members  from  Austria,  Belgium,  Bi'azil,  Chili,  England,  Ger-
many, Holland,  Italy,  Mexico,  Roumania,  Russia  (including  Finland
and  Poland),  Salvador,  Sweden,  Switzerland,  and  the  United
States,  took  part  in  the  debates,  and  we  believe  that  members
from  other  countries  were  also  present.  The  English  Society  for
Psychical  Research  was  represented  by  the  President  and  Mrs-
Sidgwick,  Mr.  Barkworth,  Mr.  Kleiber,  Dr.  ISIyers,  and  Mr.  F.
W.  H.  Myers.  The  American  Society  of  the  same  name  was  repre-
sented by  Prof.  William  James,  Prof.  Jastrow,  and  Mr.  Riley  (Dele-
gate of  the  United  States  to  the  Exhibition).  M.  Marillier,  one  of
the  Secretaries  of  the  Congress,  is  also  Secretary  for  France  to  our
Society.  ISIany  men  well  known  in  Medicine,  Psychology,  Physiology,
and  other  branches  of  Science  were  present.  Among  them  were
MSI.  Ballet,  Bernheim  (Nancy),  Binet,  Bourru  (Ptochefort),  Carus,
Danilewsky  (Kharkoff),  Dejerine,  Delboeuf  (Liege),  Drill  (Moscow)


172


International  Congress  of


[Supploinenti


Esplnas  (Bordeaux),  Ferrari,  Fontan  (Toulon),  Forel  (Zurich),  Galton,
Grote  (Moscow),  Pierre  Janet  (Havre),  Jules  Janet,  Lapotine
(Moscow),  Liegeois  (Nancy),  Lonibroso  (Turin),  Miinsterbei'g,  Neiglick
(Relsingfors),  von  Schrenk-Notzing  (Munich),  Ploix,  de  Rochas
(Tours),  Seglas,  Tokarsky  (Moscow),  and  de  Varigny.

The  proceedings  were  opened  on  August  6th  by  an  address  from
Prof.  Ribot,  who  wortliily  filled  the  chair  in  Dr.  Charcot's  absence.
He  dwelt  with  justifiable  exultation  on  the  recent  abundant  and  varied
development  of  psychological  studies — in  the  direction  in  which  hs
lias  himself  been  a  pioneer  and  a  leader— and  pointed  out  how  this
development,  tending  as  it  does  to  substitute  a  partially  objective  and
physiological  for  a  purely  subjective  and  introspective  method,  has
caused  the  need  of  mutual  explanation  among  psychologists  to  be  more
strongly  felt.  He  concluded  by  expressing  a  hope  that  this  Inter-
national Congress  of  Psychologists  v/ould  be  the  first  of  a  series  of
similar  meetin£:s.

The  Secretary — Prof.  Ch.  Piichet — then  pi'oceeded  to  sketch  briefly
the  task  marked  out  for  the  Congress.  He  explained  that  among  the
-queslioHS  proposed  for  discussion  there  were  three  that  especially
demanded  "  collective  "  work.  Among  these  he  placed  first  the  statis-
tical inquiry  into  Hallucinations,  mentioning  the  work  that  had  been
already  done  in  this  department  by  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,
and  especially  by  Mr.  Gurney,  "  dont  la  science  deplore  la  mort  prema-
turee."  He  dwelt  on  the  importance  of  concentrated  eiTort  to  establish,
if  it  be  possible  to  establish,  by  precise  and  trustworthy  testimony,  the
fact  of  coincidental  or  "  veridical  "  hallucinations,  before  pi'oceeding  to
frame  hypotheses  to  explain  the  fact.  On  this  point  he  thought  the
Congress  would  be  unanimous. • .. \ ■  ■  ■  '

After  speaking  of  the  question  of  Heredity,  as  the  second  subject
•calling  for  collective  effort,  he  went  on  .  to  the  third,  "  qui  passionne
aujourd'hui  tous  les  psychologues,"  the  question  of  Hypnotism.  He
expressed  a  hope  that  the  rivalry  between  the  schools  of  the  Salpetrier©
and  of  Naiicy  would  soon  be  a  thing  of  the  past  ;•  dwelt  on  the  need  of
introducing  more  precisio-n  into  the  terminology  of  Hypnotism ;  and
pointed  out  that  the  proper  business  of  the  Congi-ess  was  not  to  solve
questions — which  can  only  be  done  by  the  labour  of  individual  experi-
Tlienfers — but,  by  free  mutual  communication  of  the  results  of  such
labour,  both  to  obtain  a  clear  view  of  the  questions  already  solved,  and
to  mark  out  lines  of  future  study.

The  Congress  then  divided  for  its  morning  meetings  into  four  sub-
sections, dealing  respectively  with  Hallucinations,  Heredity,  Hypnotism^
a,nd  the  Muscular  Sense.  A  fifth  section  dealing  with  "  Coloured
Audition,"  or  the  mental  association  between  certain  sounds  and  certain
•colours,  was  formed  in  the  course  of  the  proceedings. ,  \  ■  '


Supplement.]  Experimental  Psychology.  173


The  section  on  tlie  study  of  Hallucinations  met  on  August  7th,  and
discussed  the  question  whether  the  sanction  of  the  Congress  should  be
invited  for  a  further  prosecution  of  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,  <tc.,
as  already  set  on  foot  by  Prof.  Sidgwick  in  England  and  France,
and  by  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research  in  the  United
States ;  or  whether  some  modification  of  the  scheme  was  desirable.
Prof.  Pierre  Janet,  Dr.  Ballet  (the  well-known  author  of  I.e
Langage  Inte'rieivr),  and  others  urged  that  the  hallucinations  of  the
insane  or  hysterical  should  be  studied  and  recorded  a.long  with  the
casual  or  unique  hallucinations  of  sane  and  healthy  persons.  It  was
agreed  that  information  of  this  kind  also  should  be  collected,  but  that
the  "  census-paper "  should  be  adopted  practically  as  it  stood,  with
one  or  two  verbal  modifications.  A  report  to  this  eff'ect  was  presented
by  M.  MariEier  to  the  Congress  on  the  same  afternoon,  and  some
further  discussion  followed.  Prof.  Delbceuf,  of  Liege,  recommended  that
special  note  should  be  taken  as  to  the  mental  habit, — "  visual,  audile,
or  motile,"- — of  the  subjects  of  hallucinations  of  each  of  these  types,
with  which  Mr.  Galton  and  others  have  made  the  world  of  science
familiar.

The  resolution  to  continue  the  statistical  inquiiy  on  its  present  lines
was  then  agreed  to  without  any  dissentients.

Prof.  Grote,  of  Moscow,  M.  Marillier,  Prof.  James,  and  Prof.
Sidgwick  were  afterwards  designated  by  the  Committee  of  Organisa-
tion to  superintend  the  work  in  their  respective  countries.

A  "  questionnaire  "  for  "wdde  circulation  vras  also  adopted  by  the
section  on  Heredity,  which  met  under  the  presidency  of  Mr.  GaltoD,
— who  subsequently  presented  to  the  Congress  a  A^ery  interesting  report
on  the  chief  questions  in  this  department  that  appear  to  admit
of  experimental  solution  through  co-operative  work.  On  the  motion
of  Prof.  Gruber,  of  Roumania,  the  section  on  Coloured  Audition
adopted  a  similar  method  for  collecting  information.  The  section  on
Hypnotism  was,  as  had  been  expected,  the  most  largely  attended.  We
give  a  brief  account  of  some  of  the  speeches.

The  Committee  on  Hypnotism  met  first  on  ^Yednesday  morning,
August  7th.  Prop.  Delbceuf  (of  Liege)  was  elected  chairman  for
the  day,  and  Prof.  Ch.  Richet  introduced  the  discussion  on  the
terms  that  had  best  be  used  in  hypnotic  description.  Along  with  M.
Brissaud  he  had  drawn  up  definitions  of  many  of  the  chief  words,  and
he  wished  further  suggestions  and  discussion,  especially  on  "  Hypno-
tism," "Animal  Magnetism,"  and  "Somnambulism."  "Hypnotism"  was
a  word  introduced  by  Braid,  and  might  be  defined  as  an  artificially  pro-
duced somnambulism  {somnambulisme  ])rovoque).  "Somnambulism"
they  proposed  to  define  as  a  condition  analogous  to  sleep,  but  difiering
from  it  in  retaining  more  signs  of  external  impressions  i^persistance  ck


174


International  Congress  of


;  [Supplement,


quelques  flienomenes  de  la  vie  de  relation),  and  differing  also  from  the
normal  waking  state  by  showing  an  alteration  of  personality  and  a
.complete  loss  of  memory.  It  might  be  natural  or  artificially  induced.
"When  natural  it  was  a  pathological  condition,  commonest  in  young
■subjects,  and  coming  on,  as  a  rule,  during  normal  sleep.  It  might  bo
iirtificially  induced  by  some  ill-defined  manipulation  which  was  called
"magnetic,"  or  by  suggestion,  or  by  some  physical  action  such  as  gazing
.at  a  bright  body,  or  more  often  by  some  combination  of  these  causes.
"  Animal  Magnetism  "  was  a  term  which  was  not  accurately  defined  in
common  use,  but  which  could  be  used  for  all  the  agencies  which  bring
on  somnambulism  ;  for  example,  the  "  passes  "  that  were  sometimes
called  "  magnetic."  Magnetism  used  to  be  considered  an  exact  term  in
±he  16th  and  17th  centui'ies  when  applied  to  both  plants  and  animals,
ixnd  it  very  nearly  corresponded  then  to  what  was  now  called  action  at
a  distance.

In  the  discussion  that  followed  on  the  definition  of  these  terms,  MM.
Bernlieim,  Forel,  Espinas,  Liegeois,  Ch.  Richet,  and  Delboeuf  took  an
:active  part,  but  it  was  found  that  an  exact  emendation  of  any  such
difficult  phrases  as  the3e  definitions  could  not  be  reached  by  as  large  a
gathering  as  about  40  members  of  this  Committee.  Prof.  Bernheim
vigorously  expressed  his  opinion  that  our  knowledge  of  Animal
Magnetism  and  Hypnotism  was  as  yet  too  imperfect  to  allow  of  our  fixing
their  limits  exactly  ;  he  was  himself  inclined  to  keep  the  term  Animal
Magnetism  for  historic  use  as  describing  the  phenomena  of  a  past
generation  ;  to  employ  Hypnotism  as  a  newer  word  to  cover  a  large  area
as  yet  imperfectly  known,  and  which  it  would  be  premature  to  define
■exactly,  but  which  did  not  necessarily  imply  any  condition  of  sleep  ;
.and  to  restrict  Somnambulism  to  a  condition  analogous  to  sleep  and  pro-
duced by  suggestion  or  hypnotism.  Prof.  Liegeois  wished  to  give
up  the  use  of  "  Animal  Magnetism "  in  any  accurate  discussion,  as
being  a  term  based  on  an  old  mistake.  After  some  further  debate  a
decided  majority  of  the  Committee  voted  against  the  use  of
"  Hypnotism  "  and  "  Animal  Magnetism  "  as  synonymous  terms.

A  short  discussion  on  Automatism  led  quickly  to  pliilosophical
difficulties  and  was  not  pressed  to  a  division.  The  proposed  definition
of  a  subject  under  Suggestion  was  that  he  could  not  resist  the  idea
or  act  suggested.  Prof.  Bernheim,  with  whom  MM.  Liegeois  and
Forel  substantially  agreed,  protested  against  the  assumption  of  a
natural  resistance  to  suggestion  whicfi  was  implied  in  this  definition,
but  no  exact  alteration  in  the  form  of  vrords  was  agreed  upon.

Thursday  morning,  Angtist  8th. M.  Ballet  in  the  chair.

M.  OciiOHOWicz  read  a  paper  on  "  La  Sensibilite  Hypnotique."
There  were  some  people  in  the  world,  he  said,  who  were  not  hypnotisable;


Supplement.]  Exjyerimental  Psychology.  175


"that  was  a  fact  which  was  admitted  by  all.  It  led  to  the  question,
•what  qualities  made  a  man  a  good  or  a  bad  subject  ?  His  aptitude
might  be  shown  in  various  ways,  of  which  there  were  at  least  four
-which  might  be  clearly  distinguished,  viz.  :  (i.)  the  readiness  with
-which  he  could  be  hypnotised  ;  (ii.)  the  depth  of  sleep  which  could  be
•obtained ;  (iii.)  his  greater  or  less  sensitiveness  to  suggestions,  and
(iv.)  the  delicate  variations  and  elaborate  character  of  the  symptoms.
This  aptitude  seemed  to  be  innate  and  hereditary.  Statistics  on
this  point  were  wanted.  "Was  it  to  be  called  a  disease,  a  morbid
■diathesis,  or  simply  one  form  sui  generis  of  the  nervous  tem-
perament ?  Was  there  any  connection  between  this  hypnotic
■sensibility  and  hysteria,  antemia,  &c.  1  Were  any  perfectly  healthy
people  hypnotisable  ?  It  was  generally  admitted  that  by  being
frequently  hypnotised  the  subjects  became  more  sensitive,  but  it
not  determined  whether  there  were  other  ways  by  which  this
•might  be  brought  about,  and  whether  any  degree  of  unsusceptibility
might  be  overcome  by  patient  and  repeated  trial.  There  were  further
■questions  as  to  the  influence  of  race,  sex,  and  social  position  on  the
susceptibility  to  hypnotism  and  the  ready  diagnosis  of  good  subjects
from  external  signs.  He  showed  a  hypnoscope  wliich  he  had  himself
brought  into  use.  It  consisted  of  a  short  and  broad  bar  magnet  bent
into  a  circular  form  so  as  to  fit  one  of  the  fingers.  Wlien  it  had  been
worked  on  one  finger  for  a  few  minutes  it  was  often  found  that  that
iinger  was  stiff  and  to  some  extent  anesthetic.  In  his  opinion  that
symptom  was  co-extensive  with  susceptibility  to  hypnotism  and  might
be  accepted  as  a  valid  test,  whether  it  was  due  to  any  magnetic
influence  or  only  to  suggestion.

Prof.  Charles  Richet  hoped  that  the  important  questions
raised  would  meet  with  full  discussion,  and  remarked  that  in  his  expe-
rience he  had  found  some  hysterical  subjects  not  hypnotisable,  and
certainly  also  many  hypnotisable  who  were  not  hysterical.

Prof.  Bernheim  said  he  had  found  nearly  all  persons  hypnotisable;
-but  some  hysterical  subjects  were  very  difficult  to  hypnotise  and  some
who  were  not  hysterical  were  most  easily  hypnotised.  He  had  found
•hypnotism  possible  at  all  ages ;  it  was  on  the  whole  more  difficult  in
.the  educated  classes  than  the  uneducated,  as  there  was  more  personal
reserve  and  self-control  in  them.

Prof.  Charles  Richet  considered  the  French  and  Italians  as
.^aarticularly  hypnotisable  races,  though  many  further  observations  were
wanted  on  that  and  similar  points,  and  agreed  with  M.  Bernheiifi  as  to
the  greater  susceptibility  of  the  uneducated  classes.

Prof.  Delbceuf  had  found  about  75  per  cent,  of  almost  all  classes
in  Belgium  hypnotisable ;  colonels  and  generals  as  well  as  the  lower
classes.


176


International  Congress  of


[Supplement.


Prop.  H.  Sidgwick  said  he  s'aould  like  to  ask  as  a  preliniinaiy
question  in  this  discussion  whether  \vc  had  good  grounds  for  considei'ing
all  hypnotisers  of  equal  power  ?

Prof.  Forel  (of  Zui'ich)  remai'ked  that  he  had  not  found  any
difficulty,  after  a  few  weeks'  practice,  in  hypnotising  about  85  per
cent,  of  the  Swiss  on  whom  he  tried;  and  he  understood  that
Wetterstrand  in  Sweden  had  found  no  greater  difficulty  with  4,000
subjects,  and  Van  Eeden  also  in  Amsterdam.  The  hypnoscopic  test
had  not  been  found  satisfactory  in  some  Russian  experiments.

Prof.  Charles  Richet  said  that  Prof.  Sidgwick's  question  stood
much  in  need  of  an  answer  which  it  was  not  easy  to  furnish.  The
magnetisers  of  a  previous  generation  had  certainly  had  a  strong
opinion  that  the  hypnotising  power  was  much  greater  in  some  indi-
viduals t'lan  in  others.  In  his  own  experience  he  was  inclined  to  think
he  had  himself  less  capacity  for  hypnotising  now  than  he  had  had
some  20  years  ago.  It  seemed  to  him  to  be  not  a  loss  of  authority  but
of  influence.  He  could  give  no  reason  for  it,  and  personal  power  was
to  him  a  problem  of  the  very  greatest  complexity.  M.  TarchanofF  had
very  recently  exhibited  at  the  Societe  de  Biologie  some  very  delicate
electrical  experiments  which  v/ent  to  shovr  that  a  sensitive  galvanometer
revealed  an  alteration  in  a  man's  electric  condition  according  as  he
thought  of  the  left  hand  or  the  right.  If  there  was  a  perceptible
electrophysical  change  produced  in  this  way  it  was  not  impossible  that
in  hypnotism  one  agent  might  be  perceptibly  different  from  another  iix
his  physical  influence.

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  described  an  experiment  which  had  been
devised  by  Mr.  Gurney  and  repeatedly  tried  upon  a  sensitive  subject
(F.  Wells)  at  Brighton  to  test  the  difference  of  his  reaction  to  diflferenfc
individuals  without  any  oppoi'tunity  of  suggestion  by  the  ordinaiy  paths
of  sense.  The  subject  was  placed  behind  a  tall  screen  so  as  to  shut
him  off  entirely  from  the  experimenters  and  his  hands  passed  through
the  screen  and  spread  out  on  a  table  in  front  of  him.  No  contact  or
talk  was  allowed.  Over  one  finger  Mr.  Smith,  who  had  often  hypno-
tised the  subject,  held  his  hand  at  the  distance  of  an  inch  or  more ;  the
other  observers  held  their  hands  over  other  fingers  in  an  exactly  similar
manner.  In  nearly  every  case  it  was  found  that  anaesthesia  and
rigidity  were  produced  in  the  finger  over  which  was  Mr.  Smith's  hand
and  not  in  the  others.  Great  cai'e  had  been  taken  to  eliminate
suggestion,  and  the  nearly  uniform  result  pointed  to  some  specific
personal  influence.

Prof.  Delbceuf  related  a  case  in  which  he  had  found  the  delicacy
of  the  sense  of  touch  so  greatly  increased  in  a  hypnotised  subject  that
she  had  been  able  to  distinguish  every  card  in  the  pack  liy  touch  alone.
He  attributed  the results  Mr.  Myers  had  described  to  a  similar


Supplement.]


Experimental  Psychology.


177


hyperacuitj  of  feeling  which  had  enabled  the  subject  to  tell  one  hand
from  another  at  a  distance.

Mr.  Myers  observed  that  in  the  experiments  he  had  mentioned  they
had  tested  the  subject's  hands  in  other  ways  for  hypersesthesia,  but  had
found  none.

M.  Gilbert  Ballet  was  nevertheless  inclined  to  attribute  the
results  to  an  abnormally  developed  capacity  of  distinguishing  the  tem-
peratures of  different  hands  which  were  not  in  actual  contact.

Prof.  Berxheiii  thought  that  the  electrical  changes  Prof.  Piichet  had
mentioned  would  be  explained  by  the  unconscious  muscular  contraction
accompanying  the  thought  of  one  hand  or  the  other.

Prof.  Richet  replied  that  muscular  contraction  would  not  be  an
explanation  of  the  electrical  change;  it  was  more  possible  that  it  might
be  due  to  an  influence  of  attention  on  the  sweat  glands.

Friday  morning,  August  9th. Prof.  Berxiieim  in  the  chair.

After  a  short  paper  by  M.  Alliot  attempting  to  connect  the  vary-
ing conditions  of  hypnotism  with  the  electrical  conditions  of  the  human
body,  the  discussion  Avas  continued  by  M.  OcHOROWicz,  who  expressed
his  opinion  that  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism  were  not  all  explicable
by  suggestion  only,  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  infants  and  animals.
He  thought  that  there  was  more  power  in  magnets  than  could  be
explained  by  suggestion.  Pie  had  himself  observed  that  motions  which
did  not  convey  any  suggestion  had  definite  effects  ;  for  example,  trans-
vei'se  passes  over  the  arm  of  a  hypnotised  subject  diminished  its  strength
whilst  longitudinal  passes  increased  it.

Prof.  Ch.  Richet  proposed  to  classify  all  the  states  characterised
by  an  alteration  of  personal  qualities  under  three  headings,  viz.  :  (1)
spontaneous  conditions,  normal  and  pathological,  such  as  sleep,  som-
nambulism, &c.;  (2)  conditions  artificially  induced,  either  by  suggestion,
which  had  been  shown  capable  of  producing  both  niental  and  physical
change,  or  by  physical  influences,  such  as  those  of  magnets  or  electrical
conditions,  which  it  was  at  present  very  difficult  to  estimate  conclu-
sively and  to  divide  accurately  from  suggestion.  In  addition  to  these
there  were  (3)  the  further  influences  of  action  at  a  distance,  telepathy,  and
mental  suggestion,  the  proofs  of  which  were  not  by  any  means  univer-
sally regarded  as  satisfactory.  Their  science  was  at  present  embi'yonic,
and  hardly  ripe  for  discussion,  though  it  needed  careful  attention.

Prof.  Forel  thought  it  very  possible  that  the  results  of  M.  Ochoro-
wicz's  experiments  might  have  been  obtained  by  unconscious  suggestion
from  the  acts,  expression,  and  gestures  of  the  agent.  It  was  difficult
to  limit  the  amount  of  meaning  that  might  be  unconsciously  hidden
in  these  without  words.  He  was  not  at  all  wishing  to  deny  tele-
pathy, but  he  could  not  admit  that  M.  Ochorowicz  had  proved  it.  .


178


International  Congress  of


[Supplement,


'  PnoF.  H.  SiDGWiCK  hoped  that  their  attention  might  be  recalled
to  three  conditions  where  he  thought  suggestion  might  be  excluded,
viz.  :  (1)  experiments  with  animals,  (2)  with  babies,  and  (3)  at  a
distance.

Prof.  Bernheim  said  there  were  two  theories  on  these  points  ;  the
first  was  that  of  suggestion,  which  he  maintained  himself,  and  the
second  that  of  the  "  fluidists  "  who  were  there  represented  by  M.  Ochcro-
wicz,  who  maintained  some  further  action  on  the  person  than  by  the
brain  of  the  percipient.  That  he  regarded  as  possible,  but  at  present
unproved.  The  passes  and  staring  at  a  bright  object  brought  in  some
points  of  suggestion  of  sleep,  by  quiet  and  by  tiring  the  eyes.  He  did
not  wish  to  deny  the  effects  of  some  similar  actions,  but  he  interpreted
them  by  suggestion.  In  animals  he  regarded  the  state  produced  as  one
of  catalepsy,  and  similar  to  the  condition  of  men  occasionally  seen  in
some  veiy  exhausting  diseases,  such  as  typhoid  fevei'.  With  some  babies
still  at  the  breast  M.  Liebeault  had  considerable  influence  in  stopping
pain  and  digestive  discomfort  by  laying  his  hand  on  their  stomachs,  or
even,  he  believed,  by  bathing  them  with  magnetised  water,  or,  indeed,
any  water.  How  soon  children  might  become  susceptible  to  some  sug-
gestion it  was  hard  to  say ;  it  might  be  when  they  were  a  day  old,  very
probably  before  they  were  a  month.

M.  Gilbert  Ballet  was  surprised  by  the  use  of  the  word  sugges-
tion for  what  the  experimenter  did  not  expect.  If  there  was  always  a
psychical  process  to  be  callecl  suggestion  between  the  physical  agent
"which  brought  on  sleep,  and  the  sleep  resulting  from  it,  he  would  ask
what  it  consisted  in  when  sleep  was  produced  by  a  sudden  loud  noise
or  bright  light.

Prof.  Bernheim  replied  that  in  these  cases  there  was  a  fresh
awakening  of  previous  suggestions.

Prof.  Pierre  Janet  cited  two  cases  where  sleep  was  so  produced
on  a  first  trial.

Prof.  Bernheim  was  inclined,  if  the  subjects  had  never  before
heard  any  report  of  this  plan,  to  call  the  cases  catalepsy,  and  to
doubt  the  truly  hypnotic  character  of  the  results.

Prof.  Charles  Riciiet  had  been  much  interested  in  the  discus-
sion of  the  limits  of  suggestion.  If  the  use  of  the  word  was  confined
to  its  ordinary  meaning  he  thought  that  important  as  its  agency  might
be  in  the  results  of  hypnotism  it  certainly  was  not  the  sole  cause.

Prof.  Danilewsky  (of  Kharkofi")  then  went  on  to  read  his  paper  on
the  study  of  Hypnotism  in  Animals.  He  had  obtained  hypnotic  results
in  a  long  list  of  animals,  going  upwards  from  the  shrimp,  the  crab,  the
lobster,  the  sepia,  to  several  fishes  (among  them  the  cod,  the  brill,  the
torpedo-fish),  the  tadpole,  the  fi"og,  the  lizard,  the  crocodile,  the  serpent,
the  tortoise,  several  birds,  the  guinea  pig,  and  the  rabbit. He  had


Supplement.1  Experimental  Psycliology


179


generally  found  it  sufficient  to  place  the  animal  in  some  abnormal
position,  e.g.,  on  its  back,  and  keep  it  quiet  with  slight  continuous
pressure.  Under  these  conditions  it  soon  fell  into  a  condition  of  loss
•of  voluntary  movement,  and  anesthesia  of  the  skin  and  mucous  mem-
branes, so  that,  for  example,  after  a  time  the  artificial  stoppage  of  its
means  of  respiration  did  not  excite  any  appropriate  resistance,  and  the
appearance  at  the  same  time  of  some  spasms  and  convulsive  movements
gave  the  action  the  character  of  an  emotional  struggle.  Repeated
hypnotisation  lessened  the  resistance  of  the  animals,  so  that  they
became  more  and  more  susceptible.  In  some  of  the  animals  and  birds
if  injury  was  done  to  the  semi-circular  canals  in  the  ear  so  that  in-
A'oluntary  circular  motion  naturally  follov/ed,  it  was  found  possible  to
stop  this  so  long  as  they  were  hypnotised.  When  the  animal  woke  from
hypnotism  and  changed  its  position  the  circular  motion  began
again.  There  were  two  conditions  which  it  was  necessary  to
distinguish:  (1)  Cata?e;js)/,  v/hich  was  a  condition  of  arrest  of  volun-
tary movements  and  of  anaesthesia,  and  was  generally  brought
on  by  strong  and  painful  external  stimulus  ;  and  (2)  Hypnotism,  which
was  induced  without  violent  stimulus.  The  anfesthesia  of  hypnotism
and  the  emotions  of  hypnotism  were  the  result  of  the  inhibitory  power
of  the  brain ;  and  if  the  brain  was  taken  away  these  results  disappeared
also.  External  constraint  provoked  in  an  animal  a  feeling  of  inability  to
defend  itself  and  a  paralysis  of  the  will  followed.  That  was  the  first
condition  for  inducing  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism  in  animals  and
3nen.  Animals  got  their  feeling  of  irresistible  coercion  from  their  skin
and  their  bodily  cases ;  men  from  psychical  causes.  Verbal  suggestion
to  a  man  was  analogous  to  bodily  suggestion  to  an  animal  from  the
hands  of  a  hypnotiser.

Saturday  Morning. August  10th. Peof.  Espinas  in  the  chair.

M.  Babinski  was  called  upon  by  the  Chairman  to  explain  the  views
of  the  school  of  the  Salpetriere  upon  hypnotism,  and  began  by  remark-
ing that  these  views  had  been  recently  put  into  print  ^  and  supplied
some  answers  to  the  objections  raised  by  the  school  of  I^ancy.  M.
Charcot  had  studied  hypnotism  in  hystero-epileptic  patients  alone,
because  he  found  in  them  good  types  for  study.  He  did  not  deny  that
liypnotism  might  be  observed  in  otlier  patients,  and  that  the  plieno-
mena  observable  in  the  liystero-epileptics  might  not  be  observable  in
all  others.  Suggestion  was  admitted  by  the  Parisian  observers  to
be  important,  but  not  to  be  the  only  source  of  the  hypnotic  phenomena.
If  a  patient  who  was  unacquainted  with  medical  facts  and  entirely
ignorant  of  hypnotism  showed  when  hypnotised  the  contractures  whicli


Grand  et  Petit  Hypnotisme.


Archives  de  Neurologie.


1889,  Nos.  49-50.

N  2


180


Iiit&vnatlonal  ■  Congress  of


[Supplement".


"belonged  to  the  lethargic  state,  although  the  hypnotiser  had  given  him-
no  hint  whatever  by  word  or  gesture,  it  could  not  be  said  that  sugges-
tion was  the  cause.  Why  should  the  characteristic  muscular  state  be^
contracture  rather  than  paralysis,  tremor,  or  any  other  symptom  1  And
after  M.Bernheim  had  produced  hypnotic  sleep  as  he  said  by  suggestion
why  did  he  find  ansesthesia  which  he  had  not  suggested  ?  Why  did"
pressure  produce  contracture  in  the  lethargic  state  and  not  in  the
cataleptic  1  It  had  been  objected  that  the  three  consecutive  states
which  M.  Charcot  had  described, — the  lethargic,  the  cataleptic,  and  the
somnambulic, — were  themselves  the  result  of  suggestion.  But  even  if
that  were  possible  it  would  not  explain  their  occurrence  in  the  first  cases-
where  they  were  observed.  It  was  said  that  they  had  only  been  found
at  the  Salpetriere,  but  some  similar  obseiwations  had  been  made  by
Tamburini,  Seppilli,  Vizioli,  David,  and  Ladame.  Hypnotism  he  re-
garded as  a  pathological  and  not  a  physiological  state,  and  in  character
allied  to  hysteria,  for  (1)  they  had  certain  symptoms  in  common,  (2)  the
stages  of  hypnotism  wei*e  like  the  stages  of  the  hysterical  attack,  and
(3)  there  was  an  interdependence  between  hypnotism  and  hysteria  such
as  was  seen  Avith  some  other  conditions  intimately  related.  The  results
of  M.  Charcot's  experiments  on  hysterical  patients  which  had  been
25ublished  in  1882  had  not  lost  any  of  their  truth  or  value.

Prof.  Lombroso  (of  Turin)  had  tried  hypnotism  on  seventy  persons
in  Bologna. He  had  pi'oduced  a  truly  hypnotic  state  in  only  a  few
persons,  in  all  of  whom  there  was  some  morbid  nervous  condition,
but  had  noticed  what  he  should  prefer  to  call  credulity  in  majiy  of
the  lower  classes.

Prof.  Espinas  (of  Bordeaux)  had  observed  that  whilst  suggestion
was  used  without  restriction  at  Nancy,  nevertheless,  at  the  Salpeti'iere-
it  was  said  to  be  very  rarely  tried,  for  fear  of  causing  an  attack  of
hysteria. Was  that  fear  well  founded  ?

Prof.  Foeel  considered  it  possible  to  make  some  patients  hysterical
by  hypnotism,  but  that  was  only  when  very  wide  limits  were  allowed
to  that  vague  word  "  hysteria,"  and  when  hypnotism  was  used  for  a
long  time  with  the  special  attempt  of  producing  it.  There  could  be  no-
doubt  that  when  hypnotism  was  fairly  used  on  a  large  number  of  people-
it  Avas  found  that  it  was  not  confined  to,  or,  indeed,  much  helped  by
hysterical  temperaments.

M.  Babinski  admitted  that  lie  had  not  had  the  opportunity  of
studying  the  efiects  of  hypnotism  widely  on  non-hysterical  persons.

Prof.  Pierre  Janet  (of  Le  Havre)  did  not  think  that  to  be
hypnotisable  was  in  the  least  a  proof  of  being  hysterical. It  was
rather  a  sign  of  mental  and  moral  weakness,  of  an  incapacity  of  fixed.  ■
attention  ,  and  from  such  incapacity,  which  he  considered  a  definite
disease  (malaclie)]  arose  the  an£Esthesia  which  was  to  be  found  both


.Supplement.J  Experimental  PsycJiology.


181


in  hysteria  and  hypnotism.  In  his  own  trials  of  hypnotism  he  had
succeeded  in  about  80  per  cent.

Prof.  Forel  had  himself  succeeded  in  about  60  or  70  per  cent,
of  cases  when  he  began  to  practise  hypnotism,  and  in  a  lai-ge  number  o£
people  Avho  had  no  such  disease  as  Prof.  Janet  described,  but  were  per-
fectly healthy.  After  more  practice  he  had  succeeded  in  as  many  as
,90  per  cent.,  and  he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  fatigue  was  a  con-
.  dition  which  rendered  the  subjects  more  susceptible.  With  the  insane
lie  had  found  hypnotism  extremely  difficult.

Peof.  Charles  Richet  protested  against  the  word  "disease"  which
■  Prof.  Janet  had  made  use  of  for  conditions  which,  even  supposing  they
were  not  the  most  absolutely  normal,  would  certainly  not  be  included  in
what  a  doctor  would  understand  by  disease.  And  for  his  own  part  he
thought  some  hypnotisable  people  wei'e  absolutely  normal,

Prof.  Delbceuf  quite  agreed  with  Prof.  Pichet  on  this  point.  To
be  hypnotisable  depended  on  attention,  not  on  disease.  He  had  found
himself  able  to  arrest  salivation  by  self-suggestion  when  under  the
hands  of  a  dentist ;  and  one  of  the  necessary  conditions  in  his  own
case  was  the  capacity  of  concentrating  his  attention,  not  that  in-
capacity of  fixed  attention  that  Prof.  Janet  had  spoken  of.  As  to
the  Salpetriere  phenomena,  he  observed  that  after  he  had  himself  first
visited  the  Salpetriere  he  found  that  his  own  subjects  manifested
those  phenomena.  But  when  he  had  learnt  from  tlie  writings  of  the
Nancy  school  that  these  contractures,  &c.,  did  not  necessarily  occur,
they  ceased  to  occur  in  his  own  subjects.

M.  OcHOROWicz  said  his  experience  during  about  twenty  years  for
■tt'hicli  he  had  pi'actised  hj  pnotism  had  shown  him  that  the  insane  were
the  most  difficult  of  all  subjects.  The  susceptibility  to  hypnotism  he
had  found  persistent  through  middle  and  elder  life,  a  point  in  which  it
■difi"ered  markedly  from  hysteria.

Saturday  afternoon,  Azigust  10(h. Prof.  Delbceuf  in  the  chair.

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  described  some  experiments  which  he  and
other  members  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  had  made  to
test  the  possibilities  of  thought-transference  when  the  recognised
means  of  communication  through  the  senses  were  cut  off.  The  subject
was  a  healthy  person  who  was  hypnotised  and  between  whom  and  the
•experimenter  a  screen  was  in  many  cases  placed.  The  experimenter
then  drew  a  counter  on  which  was  written  a  number  of  two  figures
from  a  large  collection  of  these  in  a  bag,  and  observing  very  strict
•conditions  in  detail,  he  fixed  his  attention  on  it,  asking  the  subject
to  let  him  know  if  by  any  means  he  became  acquainted  with  it.
The  answer  was  not  correct  in  every  case,  but  the  total  number  of
correct  answers  in  a  very  long  serL-i  of  experiments  was  so  vastly


182


International  Congress.


[Supplements


greater  than  would  have  been  the  result  of  chance,  which  under  these
conditions  could  be  mathematically  calculated,  that  he  could  not  doubt
that  there  was  some  other  agency  at  work,  which  was  neither  fraud  nor
chance  but  thought-transference.

Prof.  Charles  Richet  knew  well  the  experiments  described  by  Mr-
Myers,  and  had  himself  made  some  others  which  led  to  a  similar  result.
Such  experiments,  he  thouglit,  should  be  repeated  Avidely  and  with  the
greatest  care,  for  if  the  proof  of  thought-transference  to  which  they
led  could  be  established,  without  a  doubt  it  would  be  one  of  the
greatest  discoveries  of  our  time.

Prof.  Sidgwick  remarked  that  results  of  a  similar  character  had
been  obtained  with  subjects  in  a  normal  condition  as  well  as  in
hypnotism.  At  the  same  time  the  experiments  of  himself  and  his
colleagues  seemed  to  show  that  success  was  rather  more  likely  to  be
obtained  in  the  hypnotic  than  in  the  normal  state.  He  entirely  agreed
in  the  view  that  Dioi'e  experiments  were  urgently  required.

Prof.  DELBOiUF  had  paid  some  attention  to  these  phenomena,  but  had
not  been  able  to  satisfy  himself  of  any  similar  results  in  experiments
of  his  own.  He  had  been  struck  with  a  remarkable  power  in  those
who  had  been  deeply  hypnotised  of  making  an  exact  estimate  of  time,
and  had  noticed  many  post-hypnotic  suggestions  carried  out  exactly  to
the  minute  after  an  interval  of  several  hours.

After  some  discussion  as  to  the  date  and  place  of  the  next  meeting,
it  was  unanimously  agreed  that  the  next  reunion  of  the  Congress
should  be  held  in  England  early  in  August,  1892.

It  is  hoped  that  a  Committee  of  Reception  may  be  formed  in  Eng-
land before  that  date  ;  but  in  the  meantime  a  Committee  of  Orga,nisa-
tion  was  appointed,  .which  is  to  meet  about  Christmas,  1891,  aixl
consider  the  subjects  to  be  proposed  for  discussion  at  the  Congress.  It
is  hoped  that  a  programme  of  these  subjects  may  be  printed  in  Eng-
lish, French,  and  German,  some  mouths  before  the  Congi'ess  actually
re-assembles.


Sopplement] He^port  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinat  ions.


183


AD INTERIM REPORT ON THE CENSUS  OF
HALLUCINATIONS,

Up  to  October  24th,  1889.
In  England  the  whole  number  of  answers  received  is  ;


"No."

"  Yes."

Totals.

1181

112

1293

1382

251

1633

2

2

Total

25G5

363

2928

Percentage  of  "  Yeses,"  12-4.


Of  the  persons  answering  "Yes"  64  have  as  yet  sent  no  particulars.
113 persons  have  had  more  than  one  experience,  either  the  same
repeated  more  than  once,  or  different  experiences.

The  experiences  recorded  may  be  classified  as  follows  ,•

A. — Experiences  Affecting  More  Than  One  Sense.


Visual  and  Auditory

Visual  and  Tactile

Auditory  and  Tactile

Visual,  Auditory,  and  Tactile

Total  number  of  Cases...


Non-Coincidental.

Coinci-
dental.

Represent-
ing a  Living
Person.

Represent-
ing a  Dead
Person.

Unrecog-
nised.

Totals.

4

1

7

4

16

1

1

3

7

1

1

1

3

1

1

2

6

3

10

9

28

Ad  Interim  Report  on  the


[Supplement.


B. — Experiences  Affecting  One  Sense  Only.


I.— Visual.


1.


Coincidental —

a.  Recognised  ...  ...

b.  Unrecognised
Non-coincidental —

a.  Human  apparitions  :
a.  Of  living  jjeople
/3.  Of  dead  people


1}


21


Unrecognised  .
Of  an  arm  or  hand


44
20
91
4


o9


b.  Non-huiiian  apparitions  :

a.  Of  animals

/3.  Of  inanimate  oLjects


18J


25


184


Total 205

24  of  these  are  said  to  have  been  collective  experiences  ;  viz. ,  2  coinci-
dental cases  (1  recognised  and  1  unrecognised)  4  apparitions  of  the  living,  1
of  the  dead,  16  of  unrecognised  human  beings,  and  1  of  an  inanimate  object.

In  the  above  table  30  cases  in  which  the  percipient  had  more  than  one
experience,  but  did  not  describe  them  singly,  are  counted  each  as  one  case.

II.— Auditory  (Voices).


1.


Coincidental —

a.  Recognised  ..

b.  Unrecognised
Non-coincidental —

a.  Trivial  and  often  repeated  experiences,  generally  of  thc~|

name  being  called,  sometimes  recognised  and  some- '-  43  ^
times  not

6.  Recognised. Of  Living  Persons  :

Calls  or  voices

Name  called  on  two  occasions

Short  conversation

Sentences

Familiar  words  and  phrases
Song ... ... ...  ...

Recognised. Of  Dead  persons  :
a.  Calls  or  voices

/3.  Calls  twice  repeated

y.  Sentence


22


a.
/3.

7-

d.

€.

c


15


93


d.


Unrecognised  :
Calls  or  voices
Calls  twice  repeated...

Sentences

Counting
Crooning  a  tune
Music  and  faint  voices


a.

y-
d.

e.


23  j


Total


115


6  of  these  are  said  to  have  been  collective  experiences  ;  viz.,  2  coincidental
cases  of  the  name  being  called  (the  voice  being  recognised  in  one  case  ancf
not  in  the  other),  2  recognised  living  cases  (1  call  and  1  song),  1  trivial
experience  and  1  unrecognised  case  (crooning  a  tune).


Supplemenfc.1


Census  of  Halluchiatio'As,


185


III.— Tactile

1.  Coincidental—

a.  Recognised  .„

h.  Unrecognised

2.  Non-coincidental —

a.  Recognised  touch  of  Living  person :

a.  Singtouche  1

/3.  Recurring  touches

b.  Recognised  touch  of  Dead  person  :

a.  Single  touch
fi.  Recurring  touches

c.  Unrecog  :nised

a.  Frequent  touches

/3.  Touch,  &c.,  once  ...

Total 24

One  case  of  a  single  unrecognised  touch  is  said  to  have  been  collective,
one  percipient  seeing  a  form  while  the  other  felt  a  touch.

In  this  analysis  no  account  is  taken  of  morbid  conditions  which  undoubtedly
existed  in  some  cases,  being  indeed  explicitly  mentioned  occasionally.  But
the  great  majority  of  the  percipients  were,  according  to  their  own  statements,
in  a  perfectly  normal  and  healthy  condition  at  the  time  of  their  experiences.

Also  no  attempt  has  been  made  as  yet  to  make  more  than  a  rough  estimate
of  the  possibilities  of  error  in  the  accounts  through  defects  of  memory  of
mistakes  of  inference.  In  particular,  the  probability  of  the  figure  seen
being  a  real  human  being,  or  the  sound  heard  a  real  human  voice,  in  some  of
the  collective  cases  requires  to  be  carefully  examined.

As  regards  other  countries  than  England,  we  heard  in  August  that  about
2,000  answers  had  already  been  collected  in  America,  and  Mons.  Marillier
reports  in  October  that  he  had  received  633  answers  from  France  and
Switzerland  as  follows  :


"  No."

"Yes."

Total.

From  men  ...

30G

.... 57  ...

,,.  423

From  women

161

... 49  ...

210

Total  ...

527

106

633

He  had  received  as  yet  no  particulars  from  about  50  of  the  persons
answering  yes.  Among  the  remauider,  24  of  the  experiences  are  said  to
have  been  veridical.

The  enquiry  has  also  been  commenced  in  Germany,  but  not  yet  in  Russia
nor  in  Italy.

I  may  remind  my  readers  that  a  report  on  the  census  is  to  be  made  to  the
International  Congress  of  Experimental  Psychology  in  1892,  and  that  we
should  like  by  that  time  to  have  50,000  answers.  Further  assistance  in
collecting  is  urgently  needed,  and  I  shall  be  glad  to  correspond  with  any
one  willing  to  help  in  the  work.

. .  Henry  Sidgwick.


IJ  ^


llJ^^^


22


186


S'rofessor  Pierre  Janet's


[Supplemen


III.

PROFESSOR  PIERRE  JANET'S  " AUTOMATISME
PSYCHOLOGIQUE."!
By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


The  name  of  Professor  Pierre  Janet  has  long  been  familiar  to  the  readers
of  these  Proceedings.  We  have  been  amongst  the  hrst  and  warmesb
appreciators  of  the  remarkable  articles  in  the  Revue  Philosophique  in  which
he  has  for  several  years  pa.st  recounted  the  results  of  a  series  of  experiments
on  human  automatism,  &c. ,  seldom  surpassed  for  care  in  observation  and
acumen  in  interpretation.  We  shall,  therefore,  be  prepared  to  join  cordially
in  the  welcome  which  French  savants  are  now  extending  to  M.  Janet's
these  pre'seute'e  a  la  Facultede  lettres  a  Paris  under  the  title  of  L'Automatisme
Psychologique,  "an  essay  in  experimental  psychology  upon  the  inferior  forms
of  human  activity."  This  book  contains  the  gist  of  the  above-mentioned
articles,  and  much  more  besides  ;  and  we  consider  that  it  at  once  places
M.  Janet  in  a  front  rank  of  exj^erimental  psychologists.  'It  ought,  we
think,  to  be  translated  into  English  and  other  languages,  and  studied  by  all
who  are  interested  in  researches  of  this  kind.

But  when  a  book  is  so  full  of  new  observations  and  reflections  as  this
book  is, — and  observations  in  so  difficult  a  domain, — it  is  not  by  mere  general
expressions  of  praise  that  we  shall  show  it  the  truest  respect.  Its  greatest
merit  is  that  it  opens  new  paths  ;  and  in  a  new  path  we  may  walk  side  by
side  like  explorers  rather  than  follow  in  a  leader's  steps  like  sheep.  Much
of  the  book  is  occupied  with  criticism, — reasonable  and  effective  criticism, —
on  views  which  have  been  set  forth  in  these  Proceedings ;  and  much  of  our
limited  space  must  be  given  to  an  answer  to  those  criticisms, — such  answer
as  we  make  to  an  opponent  whom  we  desire  not  to  confute  but  to  persuade.

The  work  begins  in  a  manner  unusual  in  psychological  treatises,  but,  in
our  view,  strictly  logical.  "  Total  automatism"  is  the  title  of  the  first  part,
and  "  Isolated  23sychological  phenomena"  of  the  first  chapter.  What  is
implied  in  these  titles  is  the  new,  the  experimental  method  of  getting  at  the
simj)lest  beginnings  of  human  consciousness  and  intelligence.  No  merely
imaginary  or  metaphorical  simplicity,  such  as  Condillac's  "breathing  statue,"
can  be  a  really  simple  notion,  or  afford  a  true  basis  on  which  to  upbuild  our
conceptions  of  gradually  developing  personality.

Dr.  Huglilings-Jackson  (with  whose  works,  little  known  in  France,
IM.  Janet  does  not  seem  to  be  acquainted)  has  taken  coma  as  representing  a
"lowest  level  of  evolution,"  and  has  traced  the  operation  of  nerve-centres
at  different  levels  as  they  come  into  prominence  at  successive  stages  of  the
dissolutive  process  of  an  epileptic  explosion.  What  we  want  to  produce
and  watch,  however,  is  of  course  not  the  catastrophe,  but  the  evolution
of  the  psychical  cosmos  ; — not  the  breaking  down  of  one  set  of  reservoirs

.1  L'Automatisme  Psychologique,  par  Pierre  Janet.  (Paris :  Alcan,  1889,  pp.  496).


Supplement.] "AiUomcitisme  Psychologique.''


isr


of  nerve-force  after  another,  but  the  gradual  calling  into  operation  of  higher
and  higher  connections.  And  M.  Janet  is  right,  I  think,  in  taking  the
condition  of  hypnotic  catalepsy  as  the  lowest  starting-point  which  can  be-
safely  reproduced  in  practice.  Judging  both  from  external  indications  and
from  that  memory  of  cataleptic  attitudes  which  sometimes  persists  into  a.
somnambulic  state,  the  cataleptic  subject  is  in  that  condition  of  impersonal
consciousness  which  we  must  suppose  to  exist  in  the  animal  and  in  tlie
infant,  and  which  is  occasionally  experienced  and  even  remembered  by  th&
adult,  on  his  recovery  from  anoesthetisation  by  drugs,  or  from  a  profound,
fainting-fit.  Professor  Herzen's  description  of  this  latter  experience  deserves-
quoting  here,  for  it  gives  us  probably  a  more  vivid  notion  of  "  total  automa-
tism "  than  any  mere  observation  from  outside  could  aftbrd.

"  During  the  faint,"  he  says,  "it  is  absolute  psychical  nonentity,  com-
plete absence  of  consciousness  ;  then  one  begins  to  have  a  vague,  unlimited,
infinite  feeling, — a  feeling  of  existence  in  general  witliout  any  delimitation  of
one's  own  individuality,  without  the  least  trace  of  a  distinction  between  th&
I  and  the  not-I  ;  one  is  then  an  organic  portion  of  nature,  having  conscious-
ness of  the  fact  of  one's  existence,  but  no  consciousness  of  the  fact  of  one's
organic  unity  ;  one  has,  in  two  words,  an  impersonal  consciousness  : —
sensations  which,  from  the  mere  fact  that  they  remain  isolated  cannot  h&
knovm,  but  only  felt."

By  hypnotic  catalepsy  is  here  meant  a  state  in  which  there  is  no  initiative
of  movement,  but  in  which  an  attitude  or  a  movement  can  be  impressed  from,
without  upon  the  subject, — who  will  inevitably  retain  the  attitude,  or  repeat
and  complete  the  movement.  Imagining  this  state  from  within,  and  from  a,
.  psychological  standpoint, — a  task  which  M.  Janet  has  faced  more  boldly  than
any  predecessor, — we  reach  the  following  conclusions  (p.  66)  :  "  Many
sensations  and  images  are  accompanied  by  a  bodily  movement  and  cannot
,  exist  without  producing  it  ;  evei'y  sensation  or  image  persists  in  the  con-
sciousness until  another  phenomenon  occurs  to  efface  it  ;  every  sensation  or
emotion  tends  to  develop  and  complete  itself,  and  to  manifest  itself  by-
appropriate  acts."

In  the  cataleptic  subject  we  witness  the  play  of  these  isolated  sensations
and  images,not  yet  collected  and  correlated  under  the  conception  of  a  central
personality.

Here,  then,  we  have  a  starting-point  ;  what  are  the  next  stages  on  the-
upward  road  1  From  the  cataleptic  state  (it  would  be  usually  said)  we  rise
to  the  somnambulic,  and  from  the  somnambvilic  to  the  waking  condition.
But  note  that  our  conception  of  the  somnambulic  state, — what  used  to  be
called  "  the  mesmeric  trance," — is  gi'adually  undergoing  development,  a&
more  prolonged  experiments  are  made.  When  this  state  was  only  maintained
(as  by  the  earliest  mesmerisers)  for  a  few  minutes  or  hours,  attention  was
naturally  directed  to  its  first  or  superficial  aspects, — the  habitual  antesthesia, —
the  rapport  with  the  mesmeriser  only, — the  readiness  to  receive  suggestions, —
and,  of  course,  the  alternation  of  memory,  and  forgetfulness  on  waking.
Further  experience  has  shown  that  the  phenomena  of  ansesthesia  and  of
rappoH  are  by  no  means  uniform,  and  that  suggestibility  is  by  no  means
confined  to  the  somnambulic  state,  but  often  exists  in  waking  subjects.  We
jare,in  fact,  obliged  to  admit  that  there  is  no  one  phenomenon  which  invariably


188


Professor  Pierre  Janets


[Supplement.


characterises  the  somnambulic  state  ;  and  that  all  we  can  say  is  that  the
subject  is  not  quite  the  same  as  in  tlie  waking  state,  and  that  there  is
generally  a  more  or  less  complete  forgetfulness  in  the  waking  state  of  what
has  passed  in  the  "  trance."

There  is,  I  think,  a  wider  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  these  facts  than  M.
■Janet  lias  attempted.  But  before  indicating  that  conclusion  I  must  note  the
extremely  ingenious  observation  which  our  author  has  made  as  regards  one  at
least  of  the  conditions  accompanying  and  determining  these  somnambulic
■changes  of  personality.  M.  Janet's  exi^eriments  were  made  on  27  persons,
fiW  of  them  hysterical,  ejjileptic,  or  insane  ;  and  although  tliis  limitation  of
Jiis  experience  to  diseased  subjects  has,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  in  some
ways  much  cramped  his  conceptions,  it  has  also  had  the  advantage  of
■concentrating  his  attention  upon  certain  marked  and  extreme  phenomena,
"wliicli  previous  obsei'vers  had  usually  witnessed  only  in  a  fleeting  or  accidental
way.  He  noticed,  then,  in  one  of  his  subjects  that  there  had  been  various
■lacuucc  in  her  memory  before  she  had  ever  been  hypnotised,  and  that  he
■could  not  summon  back  the  recollection  of  these  periods  even  in  her
■somnambulic  state.  But  this  was  a  subject  who  passed  through  many  forms
of  somnambulism  ;  and  in  a  new  pliase  which  she  one  day  entered  she
spontaneously  gave  an  account  of  what  had  hajipened  in  tliose  blank  periods.

M.  .Tanet  naturally  tried  to  discover  whether  this  new  somnambulism
possessed  any  special  characteristic  linking  it  with  those  previously  un-
jemembered  periods  in  Rose's  past.  He  found  that, — whereas  in  ordinary
life  and  in  all  previous  somnambulisms  she  was  wholly  antesthetic, — yet  both
in  tliis  new  sonniambulism  and  in  those  blank  periods  of  life  she  was  only
Jiemi-antesthetic, — having  recovered  tactile  and  muscular  sensibility  on  the
right  side.  Other  observations  followed, — some  of  them  of  a  very  delicate
and  ingenious  kind, — andM.  Janet  came  to  the  conclusion  (p.  109)  "that  the
^ilfcernating  memory  of  somnambules  is  due  to  a  periodical  modification,
whether  sf)ontaneous  or  induced,  in  the  state  of  their  sensibility,  and,
■consequently,  in  the  nature  of  the  images  which  serve  as  the  basis  for
complex  psychological  phenomena,  and  especially  for  language.  This
modification  finds  place  particularly  in  subjects  more-  or  less  anajsthetic  in
their  normal  state,  and  then  consists  in  the  temporary  restoration  of  a  certain
category  of  images  of  which  the  subjects  in  their  ordinary  state  have  lost
Tpossession."  Thus — adopting  the  distinctions  with  which  Mr.  Galton
has  made  us  familiar, — Leonie  is  a  visual  in  her  waking  state,  an  audile  in
her  second  state  (Leontine,  now  termed  Leonie  II.),  and  a  motile  in  her
third  state  (Leonore,  now  termed  Leonie  III.).  Each  set  of  images  forms  a
cliain  of  memory  of  its  own,  and  the  transition  from  the  predominant  use
•of  one  set  of  images  to  the  predominant  use  of  another  necessarily  involves
-a  certain  change  of  personality.

These  remarks  appear  to  me  to  suggest  an  important  field  of  observation.
-They  do  not,  indeed,  cover  the  whole  ground  ;  for  there  are  abundant  cases
■of  alternating  memory  where  the  subject  presents  no  appreciable  change  in
iuental  habits  of  the  kind  here  insisted  on.  And  I  may  add  that  M.  Janet's
observations, — in  which  states  of  hemi-ansesthesia.  play  no  small  part, — seem
to  me  to  add  confirmation  to  my  own  view  {Proceedings,  Vol.  III.,  pp.  43  and
39)  that  alterations  in  the  predominance  of  one  or  other  cerebral  hemisphere


Supplement.  ]'


"Automatisme  Psychologique."


189


have  something  to  do  with  these  changes  of  personality,  of  wliich  avitomatic
writing  is  now  recognised  as  one  of  the  most  instructive  manifestations.  I
can  scarcely  understand  why  M.  Janet  disapproves  of  this  view  (p.  415),
which  seems  to  me  entirely  consistent  with  his  own,  and  which  was  in  fact
based  in  part  upon  the  very  same  observations.  M.  Janet  refers  to  Louis
Vive,  with  his  changes  of  character  coinciding  with  the  shifting  or  disappear-
ance of  hysterical  paralyses.  I  also  referred  to  that  case  ;  and  surely  when
hemi-antesthesia  and  hemiplegia  are  amongst  the  most  marked  of  the
phenomena  with  which  we  are  dealing,  there  is  nothing  fanciful  in  assuming
that  there  are  coincidental  changes  in  the  equilibrium  of  the  cerebral  hemi-
spheres. The  suggestion — which  I  owe  to  Dr.  Ireland — that  Spiegelschrift
may  represent  the  word-vision  of  the  right  hemisphere,  still  seems  to  me
ingenious  and  probable ;  and  although  ISL  Janet  has  never  witnessed
Spiegelschrift  among  what  he  calls  "atu  assez  grand  nombre  de  snjets,"  I  must
venture  to  say  that  his  score  or  so  of  writing  subjects  (for  not  all  his  27
subjects  wrote)  is  not  for  present  purposes  a  sufficient  number  ;  and  that  I,
who  have  seen  more  writing  subjects  than  M.  Janet  has — (though  I  am  far
from  asserting  that  I  have  observed  them  with  care  or  skill  to  equal  his) —
have  witnessed  this  Spiegelschrift  in  a  good  many  independent  cases.
Unfortunately  I  cannot  say  in  how  many  ;  for  while  the  inquiry  was  a  mere
curiosity  of  my  own,  I  regarded  the  incident  as  too  common  to  need  record  ;
and  now  that  the  matter  has  become  one  of  controversial  interest,  I  am
afraid  of  suggesting  my  own  view  to  any  automatist  with  whom  I  am
concerned.

On  one  point  M.  Janet  (who  is  very  careful  and  accui-ate  in  his  citations
from  our  Proceedings  and  other  English  sources)  seems  to  base  an  objection
on  a  misconception  (p.  415)  of  the  phenomenon  which  I  am  describing.  I
draw  a  parallel  between  the  sufferer  from  verbal  cecity  and  the  writing
automatist  who  does  not  know  what  he  has  written,  and  v.dio  writes  therefore
without  the  aid  of  the  "word-picturing  centres"  of  his  left  hemisphere.
M.  Janet  supposes  that  my  automatist  is  partially  anaesthetic—"  le  me'dium
n'a  pas  la  sensation  des  mouvements."  But  he  is  not  in  any  degree  ansesthetic
in  the  cases  to  which  I  am  alluding  :  he  Itas  the  full  sensation  of  the
movements,  and  he  can  sometimes  guess  by  the  movements  what  word  he  is
writing,  although  he  has  no  mental  vision  of  tliat  word  in  his  conscious
intelligence.  My  parallel  is  therefore  a  closer  one  than  M.  Janet  has
supposed.

I  should  haTe  some  other  rejoinders  to  make  to  the  criticisms  on
pp.  415-9.  But  the  discussion  may  well  be  left  until  there  are  a  good  many
more  observations  to  analyse.  Automatic  writing  occurs,  it  is  evident,  under
more  forms  than  any  single  observer  has  yet  noted  ;  and  the  urgent  matter  is
to  get  experiments  carefuUy  made  and  recorded  in  milieux  as  different  from
each  other  as  can  be  contrived.  Let  us  not  lose  the  true  independence  of
each  experiment  by  falling  prematurely  under  the  j30u;er  of  siigijestioii  of  any^
one  theory.^

1  It  is  to  me  a  real  disappointment,  and  I  think  that  it  is  a  real  drawback  to  the
attainment  of  a  complete  view  of  the  subject,  that  there  should  apparently  be  almost
no  producible  experiments  now  made  by  those  who  beheve  that  these  automatic  writings
sometimes  emanate  from  disembodied  (or  unembodied)  minds. That  there  should  be


190


Professor  Pierre  Janet's


[Supplement.


I  now  return  to  a  statement  of  M.  Janet's,  already  cited  ;  from  -n-hich,  as
1  liave  said,  it  seems  to  me  that  conclusions  much  wider  than  his  own  may
fairly  be  drawn.  He  says, — and  I  fully  concur, — that  there  is  no  specific
•character  which  belongs  to  the  "somnambulic  state"  in  itself.  "The
somnambulic  state,"  he  remarks,  p.  125,  "  has  only  re  ktf  ice  characters;  and
can  be  determined  only  in  reference  to  another  period  of  the  subject's
existence, — the  normal  or  waking  state.  .  .  .  Somnambulism  is  a  second
■existence  which  has  no  other  character  except  that  it  is  the  second."

Taken  by  themselves,  and  detached  from  their  modifying  context,  these
very  words  might  be  used  to  express  what  I  believe  to  be  a  profound  truth, —
•which  a  great  part  of  M.  Janet's  book  is  employed  in  combating.

I  believe,  in  short,  that  we  have  no  right  to  go  a  whit  beyond  actual
•observed  facts  in  any  judgment  which  we  may  pass  as  to  the  relative
superiority  or  "normality"  of  any  of  man's  different  states.  I  refuse  to  call
my  actual  waking  state  "normal"  or  "natural"  in  any  sense  except  that  of
liabitual  or  ordinary.  It  has  been  shown  tliat  in  a  very  large  number  of
X)ersons, — many  of  whom  (as  Mr.  Wingfield's  Cambridge  subjects^)  are  excel-
lent examples  of  health  and  vigour, — certain  changes  of  memory,  sensibility,
•character,  occur  or  can  be  induced,  wliich  in  cases  where  they  are  carried
furtliest  amount  to  a  profound — even  a  permanent — even  a  salutary —
modification  of  personality.  Taking,  then,  myself  as  my  example  (lest  I
■offend  my  reader  by  supposing  him  capable  of  being  changed  for  the  better),
I  cannot  suppose  that  I  am  made  on  a  different  pattern  from  these  men
simply  because  the  empirical  modes  of  inducing  these  changes,  as  thus  far
discovered,  happen  to  have  no  effect  on  me.  I  conclude  that  I  simply  do  not
know  of  what  modifications  the  stream  of  consciousness  of  which  my  organism
is  the  basis  is  potentially  susceptible.  I  know  this  no  more  than  I  know  of
what  modifications  the  human  germ  is  susceptible.  Since  the  era  of  my
protozoic  ancestors  the  germ  which  is  now  human  has  shown  absolutely
unpredictable  potentialities.  Whatever  be  the  part  wliich  we  assign  to
external  influences  in  its  evolution,  the  fact  remains  that  the  germ  jiossessed
the  power  of  responding  in  an  indefinite  number  of  ways  to  an  indefinite
number  of  stimuli.  It  was  only  the  accident  of  its  exposure  to  certain
stimuli  and  not  to  others  which  has  made  it  what  it  now  is.  And  having
shown  itself  so  far  modifiable  as  to  acquire  these  highly  specialised  senses
which  I  possess,  it  is  doubtless  still  modifiable  in  directions  as  unthinkable  to
me  as  my  eyesight  would  have  been  untliinkable  to  the  oyster.  Nor  can  we
limit  the  rate  of  change,  which,  so  far  as  cerebral  modifications  are  con-
cerned, may  pi'obably  be  increasingly-  ra])id  as  it  has  an  increasingly  complex
material  to  work  on.  All  I  can  say  is  that  I  am  a  momentary  link  in  a
chain  of  organisms  perpetually  changing  in  accordance  with  an  unknown  j^ath
of  evolution  ;  and  my  present  conscious  condition  represents  no  norm  what-
•ever,  but  only  the  historical  fact  that  niy  ancestors'  actual  mode  of  develop-
ment was  sufficiently  suited  to  their  environment  to  keep  them  alive.

so  many  Spiritualistic  journals  in  the  world,  and  yet  so  few  attempts  either  to  prove
or  to  illustrate  this  central  article  of  faith,  is  to  me  a  never-ceasing  wonder.  I  can  only
reiterate  my  owti  anxious  desire  to  receive  records  of  experiments  from  observers  at
every  pomt  of  view.

1  See  Appendices  to  tliis  review.


■Supplement.]


"Automatisme  Psychologlque."


191


It  follows  that  so  long  as  we  are  dealing  with  mankind  from  a  rough
practical  point  of  view, — as,  for  instance,  in  therapeutics, — we  may  without
serious  error  treat  the  ordinary  state  of  health  and  intelligence  as  a  type  to
hich  aberrant  specimens  ought  to  be  recalled.  But  if  we  wish  to  engage,
•as  M.  Janet  engages,  in  a  more  original,  more  philosophical  discussion  of
man's  personality,  we  have  no  longer  the  right  to  assume  that  our  common
•empu-ical  standard  gives  any  true  measurement  of  the  potentialities  of  man.

From  among  a  good  many  passages  of  M.  Janet's  which  seem  to  me  thus
lacking  in  width  of  purview,  I  take  one  (p.  137)  where,  amid  much  which
I  hold  to  be  true  and  important  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  225),  one
phrase  occurs  which  places  our  point  of  difference  in  a  clear  light.

"  The  memories  which  persist  in  a  man's  mind  are  grouped  and  aggregated
Tound  some  one  leading  form  of  sensation  [i.e.,  as  visual  or  auditory  images,
•&C.],  which  serves  both  to  express  them  and  to  evoke  them  ;  and  when  they
^ire  sufficiently  numerous  they  form  a  system  of  which  all  the  parts  cohere  and
belong  to  the  same  memory.  A  man  perfectly  healthy  from  the  psychological
pomt  of  view  would  never  possess  more  than  one  memory  of  this  kind.and  since
.-all  the  phenomena  of  his  thought  would  be  attached  to  images  always  the
same  and  always  present  to  him,  he  would  be  able  easily  to  evoke  them  all,
and  at  any  moment.  But  no  one  is  thus  perfect ;  a  thousand  circumstances, —
passion,  sleep,  drunkenness,  illness,  diminish  or  destroy  certain  images,
revive  others,  and  change  the  whole  orientation  of  his  thought.  .Secondary
groups  of  memories  are  then  formed,  in  accordance  with  the  same  laws,
-around  certain  images  which  are  abnormal  in  his  mind  ;  [e.g.,  auditory  images
in  a  '  visual,'  &c.]  ;  these  new  images  may  vanish  and  reappear  no  more  ;  but
if  they  reproduce  themselves  periodically  or  are  brought  back  by  artifice,
they  bring  with  them^all  the  memories  %vhich  are  linked  with  them,  and  the
■different  memories  become  alternating  memories."

The  main  truth  in  this  passage  (in  my  view)  lies  in  the  description  of  the
growth  of  subsidiary  mnemonic  chains,  which  may  ultmiately  enter  into
rivalry  with  the  primaiy  mnemonic  chain  in  the  waking  individual.  The
main  originality  lies  in  the  association  of  each  new  mnemonic  chain  with  a
different  set  of  revivable  sense-images — so  that  a  "  visual "  formed  pro  tem.
into  an  audile  (to  use  Galton's  terms)  enters  by  that  verj'  fact  into  a  fresh
phase  of  personality.  This  ingenious  hypothesis  M.  Janet  has  shown  to  be
probable  in  some  instances  ; — though  I  think  that  he  presses  it  too  far.  Buf;
the  main  error  which  the  passage  (as  I  think)  contains,  lies  in  the  conception
■of  the  psychologically  healthy  or  normal  man  who  has  one  set  of  memories
only, — say  visual ;  sticks  to  that  set,  and  is  able  to  reproduce  at  will  all  the

memories  which  have  been  grouped  around  his  stock  of  visual  images,

memories  (unless  I  much  mistake  M.  Janet)  of  objects  wittingly  (sciemment)
observed  by  our  normal  man's  primary  consciousness.

Now  I  say  that  such  a  man's  memories  may  of  course  be  practically
■adequate,  but  are  certainly  not  theoretically  complete.  I  hold  that  every
impression  made  on  the  organism  (above  some  minimum  wdiich  we  cannot
guess  at)— be  it  visual,  auditory,  or  tactile,  is  in  a  certain  sense  remembered  by
some  stratum  of  that  organism,  and  is  jjotentially  capable  of  being  reproduced
in  the  primary  memory.  If  called  upon  to  defend  this  thesis  at  length,  I
should  find  various  experiments  of  M.  Janet's  own  to  add  to  the  converging


192


Professor  Pierre  Janet's


[Supplement-


mass  of  observations  which  tliis  view,  and  this  view  alone,  serves  to  explain
and  to  unite.

For  the  moment  I  must  confine  myself  to  a  single  concrete  illustration.
In  the  paper  on  crystal-gazing  which  appeared  in  Proceedings  XIV.,  the  author
gave  the  following  carefully  observed  incident.  She  saw  in  the  crystal, — as  an
externalised  hallucination  which  M.  .Janet  would  doubtless  class  as  morbid, —
a  printed  announcement,  as  though  from  the  Times  newspaper,  of  the  death,
of  a  friend,  as  to  whose  health  she  was  in  no  way  preoccupied.  On  searching
the  Times  of  the  previous  day  that  announcement  was  found.  But  Miss  X.
had  never  consciously  read  it  ; — never  rc«cZ  it,  in  the  usual  sense,  at  all.  She-
had  simply  held  that  sheet  of  the  Times  to  shade  her  face  from  the  fire  while
talking  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  with  whom  she  was  staying  at  the  time.  That  is  to
say  tlie  words  of  the  announcement  had  imprinted  tliemselves  on  her  retina,,
but  their  meaning  had  never  reached  her  mind,  in  the  usual  sense  of  the-
term, — that  is,  her  primary  consciousness.  But  when  she  looked  in  the
crystal, — used,  that  is  to  say,  an  empirical  method  for  facilitating  communica-
tion between  the  subjacent  and  the  superficial  consciovisness, — then  that
subjacent  consciousness  was  able  to  convey,  in  hallucinatory  form,  this  true-
message  to  her  primary  self.  Now  I  say  that  in  so  far  as  any  one  possesses  a,
power  of  this  sort,  and  can  acquire  cognisance,  either  by  artifice  or  by  some
spontaneous  uprush,  of  the  impressions  stored,  and  the  operations  proceeding,
in  strata  deeper  than  his  primary  consciousness,  to  that  extent  is  he  superior
and  not  inferior  to  ordinary  humanity,  more  "  noi'mal  "  than  the  average
man — if  any  norm  there  be — because  he  is  more  fully  utilising  the  possibili-
ties of  his  being.

In  Miss  X. 's  crystal-gazing  the  information  gained  is  often  trivial,  and  the-
upward-flowing  messages  interesting  mainly  in  their  theoretical  aspect.  But
there  are  phenomena  of  a  more  exciting  kind  which  must  receive  just  the  sam&
explanation.  The  differentia  (as  I  venture  to  hold)  of  genius  ; —  not  of  the
genius  which  is  a  mere  extraordinary  capacity  for  taking  pains,  but  of  the
sheer  unmistakable  creative  genius  (say  for  instance)  of  a  Mozart, — lies  in  this,
very  same  thing  ; — in  the  capacity  for  drawing  upwards  into  the  primary-
consciousness  the  results  of  operations  which  have  taken  place,  (with  nO'
effort  to  the  primary  self,  and  often  beyond  its  conscious  capacity,)  in  the
subjacent  strata  of  his  complex  intelligence.  And  if  after  this  the  man  of
genius  should  sufter  from  nervous  exhaustion,  (which  is  by  no  means  always
the  case,)  I  consider  that  he  has  accomplished  the  greater  object  at  the  cost  of
the  lesser,  and  is  no  more  morbid  thair  a  champion  sculler  is  morbid  because
on  the  day  after  a  hard-won  race  he  has  a  pain  in  his  back.  This  mention  of
the  case  of  genius  is  by  no  means  here  a  digression.  For  the  doctrine  that  le
genie  est  une  ne'vrose, — that  there  is  something  morbid  and  disequilibrated  in.
any  extraordinary  creative  powci% — is  maintained  now-a-days^  with  arguments,
closely  resembling  those  which  M.  Janet  directs  against  the  soundness  of
automatists  or  of  hypnotisable  persons.  Genius,  automatism,  hypnotisability
^hese  three  in  a  sense  must  stand  or  fall  together,  as  representing  unworked.
potentialities  of  the  human  spirit ;  accidental  or  empirical  modes  of  bringing,
*'  the  good  treasures  of  the  heart  "  into  serviceability  to  the  conscious  self.


1  See  Lombroso's  L'Homme  de  Odnie.


Supplement.) :


"A  utomatlsme  Psycholog  ique,"


193


For,  indeed,  the  capacity  of  being  hypnotised — to  return  thus  to  the
immediate  arguments  of  our  authoi- — is  surely  not,  as  he  would  have  us
believe,  an  indication  of  something  in  the  subject  already  morbid,  or  on  the,
point  of  becoming  so.  Actual  experiment  (as  we.have  seen  in  Mr.  Wingfield's.
cases). disproves  this  view  as  comj)letely  as  my  theory  could  desire.  I  ofier
in  exchange  the  following  suggestion  :  Hypnotisability  indicates  neither-
health  nor  disease  ;  but  merely  a  facility  of  communication  or  alternation
between  different  strata  of  the  personality.  The  facility  of  such  interchange
(like  other  capacities  of  strong  organic  reaction  to  given  stimuli)  may  be
harmful  or  helpful  according  to  the  circumstances  of  each  case.  It  is  probable
that  those  who  are  morbidly  unstable  to  begin  with  wUl  be  hypnotisable  also.
And  thus  it  is  found  on  the  whole  (though  with  considerable  divergence
between  observers)  that  hysterical  subjects  are  specially  hypnotisable.  But
this  fact  constitutes  no  presumption  whatever  that  all  hypnotisable  subjects
will  be  morbid.  As  well  might  one  say  that  because  drvmken  men  fall  very
sound  asleep,  therefore  everyone  who  falls  asleex)  must  be  more  or  less
drunk.

We  have  dwelt  long  on  this  important  theoretical  point  ;  for  this  too
hasty  generalisation  of  M.  Janet's  from  his  own  experiences  with  morbid
subjects  to  the  morbidity  of  all  subjects  lies  at  the  root  of  almost  all  in  his
book  to  which  our  English  experience  would  lead  us  to  demur.  I  pass
more  briefly  over  his  account  of  suggedion, — the  artificial  retrenchment  of
the  field  of  consciousness, — which  he  classes  as  one  of  the  phenomena  of
total  automatism.  In  reading  M.  Janet's  resume  of  the  power  of  suggestion,
with  his  apologies  for  again  treating  so  well-worn  a  theme,  we,  in  these
Froceedinrjs,  may  be  allowed  a  passing  reflection  on  the  extraordinary  rapidity
with  which  the  phenomena  of  hypnotic  suggestion  have  taken  their  place
among  the  common-places  of  experimental  psychology.  Hypnotic  suggestion,
though  known  to  the  early  mesmerisers,  (now  beginning  at  last  to  receive
due  honour),  in  England  as  well  as  in  France,  had,  in  this  generation,  fallen
almost  wholly  out  of  the  scientific  purview,  and  was  looked  upon  as  a
trick  of  itinerant  charlatans.  In  these  Proceedings,  however,  from  their
very  inception,  we  have  dwelt  on  the  reality  and  the  power  of  this
singular  agency.  I  suppose  that  other  English  organs  must  be  beginning  to
deal  with  the  subject  now  ;  but  during  the  seven  years'  life  of  these
Proceedings  I  cannot  remember  that  we  have  gathered  a  single  illustrative
instance  from  any  English  periodical,  or  even  any  criticism,  except  the  oft-
repeated  remark  that  the  subjects  of  suggestion  are  probably  either  paid,  or
duping  the  ox^erator.

Well-worn  though  the  subject  may  now  be,  M.  Janet  has,  as  usual,  some
ingenious  contributions  to  make  to  it.  One  of  the  most  strikhig  of  these  is
an  experiment — or  rather  a  pair  of  experiments — which  show  the  con-
vertibility of  what  I  have  elsewhere  called  active  and  passive  automatisms,
— of  suggested  action  and  suggested  liallucinoMon, — in  a  quite  novel  way.

"  There  are  no  acts,"  says  M.  Janet  (p.  148),  "  without  an  image  in  the
mind,  which,  although  associated  with  a  movement,  is  not  on  that  account
the  less  intense.  A  subject  ordered  to  lift  her  arm  has  in  her  mind  an  image
of  the  act — an  image  muscular  or  visual  as  the  case  may  be, — which  is  quite
clear  and  exactly  like  a  hallucination. For  instance,  I  bid  Marie  lift  her

O


194.


Professor  Pierre  Janets


[Supplement.


arm,  bub  I  straightway  seize  the  arm  and  arrest  the  movement.  Since  she
has  no  muscular  sensibility  on  this  side  she  does  not  feel  my  action.  A  few
moments  later  I  ask  her  where  her  arm  is,  and  she  answers  that  it  is  in  the
air,  and  that  she  sees  it.  .  .  We  have  thus  suppressed  the  action  which
under  ordinary  circumstances  masks  the  image  of  the  action,  and  have  left
this  image  isolated  [divorced  from  its  habitual  realisation].  It  is  then  seen
that  the  image  existed  in  full  completeness,  and  in  this  case  even  amounted
to  a  hallucination.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  easy  to  show  that  some  move-
ment [surely  it  would  be  safer  to  say  some  tendency  to  movement]  always
accompanies  a  suggested  hallucination.  .  .  It  is  imjiossible  to  give  to  a
visual  subject  the  visual  hallucination  of  the  movement  of  her  arm  without
the  supervention  of  an  actual  movement.  I  told  Leonie,  after  bandaging
her  eyes,  to  see  her  left  arm  rising  and  waving  in  the  air.  [Her  left  side  is
anaesthetic,  so  that  its  automatic  movements  could  give  her  no  information.]
In  a  few  moments  she  said,  '  Yes,  I  see  it ;  the  fingers  are  parted  '  ;  but  at
the  same  time  the  left  arm  [which  she  cannot  feci]  executed  just  the  move-
ment which  she  declared  that  she  saw."

The  value  or  novelty  of  each  experiment  of  this  type  can  hardly  be
judged  except  by  those  who  have  followed  pretty  closely  the  long  series  of
such  observations  which  have  of  late  been  accumulated  in  France.  It  is,  I
think,  rather  unfortunate  that  the  work  on  Hypnotism,  written  for  the
International  Scientific  Series, — though  lucid  and  ingenious  as  are  all  the
productions  of  its  fertile  authors, — should  contain  at  least  one  series  of
experiments  of  very  dubious  interpretation.  I  allude  to  the  tmnsfert,  and
especially  the  tran&fert imicliiiiuc,ox  reversal  of  emotion, supposed  to  be  effected
by  tire  agency  of  magnets  on  hysterical  subjects.  The  very  curious  experi-
ments of  Messrs.  Binet  and  Fere  on  this  point  have  received  little  real
confirmation  elsewhere ;  and  M.  Janet  is,  I  think,  probably  right  in
attributing  the  phenomena  to  unconscious  suggestion,  working  on  some
influence  of  a  vaguer  kind  which  the  magnet  may  perhaps  exert.  I  see,
indeed,  that  in  his  latest  paper  {Rev.  Phil,  October,  1889,  p.  438)  M.  Binet
himself  admits  as  an  explanation  of  this  so-called  psychical  polarisation  the
view  of  Ottolenglii  and  Lombroso  that  "  the  principal  action  of  the  magnet
on  the  organism  consists  in  suppressing  the  phenomena  previously  suggested  ;
so  that — this  phenomenon  once  effaced — association  by  contrast  comes  into
play,  and  produces  in  the  consciousness  a  negative  instead  of  a  positive
l^henomenon  "  : — i.e.,  a  reversal  of  the  hallucinatory  idea  previously  dominant.

But  I  must  pass  on  to  the  second  division  of  M.  Janet's  book, — in  which
-he  deals  with  partial  automatism  ; —  the  subconscious  acts  j^erformed  by
persons  in  a  waking  state,  in  obedience  sometimes  to  previous  suggestion  in
the  hypnotic  trance,  or  sometimes  to  commands  insinuated  into  the  waking
subject  par  distraction ; — by  whispers  or  tactile  hints  which  the  main
consciousness  of  the  subject  does  not  perceive,  but  which  induce  (say)  her
ancesthetic  liand  to  write  automatic  replies.  Automatic  we  are  forced  to  call
these  acts,  but  (as  M.  Janet  justly  insists)  we  must  not  therefore  assume  that
they  are  effected  without  a  consciousness  of  their  own.  I  must  not  here
dwell  on  the  details  of  these  ingenious  investigations,  of  many  of  which  some
■account  has  already  been  given  in  these  Proceedings.

Rather  let  me  once  more  colligate  these  and  many  similar  experiments  in


Supplement.]  "Automatisme  Psychologique."


195


a.  single  hypothesis,  and  give  to  human  personality  a  definition  as  wide  as
such  observations  seem  to  require.  I  suggest  that  every  cell  in  our  bodies
may  have  a  sajDarate  memory,  and  therefore  in  a  sense  a  rudimentary
personality  of  its  own.  Every  combination  of  cells,  every  nerve,  every
muscle,  every  limb  or  tract  of  the  body,  witli  its  brain-connections,  may  have
a  more  complex  memory  of  its  own,  and  may  recollect  and  give  account  of
incidents  of  which  the  ordinary  waking  consciousness  has  never  been  aware.
These  are  separate  memories  which  do  not  deserve  the  title  of  separate
personalities,  except  in  the  sense  in  which  that  word  may  be  applied  to  the
brute  creation.  Above  this  comes  the  immense  nervous  appai'atus
which  corresponds  to  the  human  mind  :  and  of  this  apparatus  we  habitually
use  only  some  such  proportion  as  our  English  vocabulary  bears  to  all
possible  combinations  of  the  alphabet.  The  letters  of  our  inward  alphabet
will  shape  themselves  into  many  other  dialects  ; — many  other  personalities, as
distinct  as  those  which  we  assume  to  be  ourselves,  can  be  made  out  of  our
mental  material.  In  son^e  extreme  case  these  allotropic  personalities  may
alternate  with  or  supersede  the  personalities  which  we  have  learnt  to  call  our
own.  But  in  ordinary  cases,  where  they  do  not  thus  emerge,  we  must  not
assume  that  they  are  non-existent.  It  may  be  indeed  that  they  are  not
sha23ed  into  definite  chains  of  memory — a  Lucie  II.  and  a  Lucie  III. — as  in
M.  Janet's  subjects.  It  may  be  that  the  very  formation  in  us  of  anything  so
narrow  and  confined  as  what  we  know  as  personality,  is  in  itself  a  limitation
of  our  essential  being, —  a  mere  mode  of  concentration  in  order  to  meet  the
perils  of  our  environment.  But  in  some  way  or  other — personalised  or  not
personalised — a  continuous  activity  of  our  whole  being  goes  on,  of  which  the
results  are  in  some  sense  psychical,  in  some  sense  permanent.  Every
impression  made  upon  or  within  the  organism  has  a  psychical  counterpart,
and  this,  or  the  capacity  of  reproducing  this,  is  somewhere  fixed  and  pre-
served. The  question  as  to  what  part  of  a  man's  being  enters  into  his
ordinary  consciousness  is  like  the  cpiestion  what  part  of  his  body  when  he
floats  on  the  sea,  floats  above  water.  It  is  necessary  for  his  preservation  that
a  certain  minimum  shoidd  so  float  ;  but  the  submerged  portion  is  living  with
the  same  life  as  the  portion  exposed.

Our  hypothesis,  it  is  manifest,  may  be  carried  one  step  further.  Each  of
the  personalities  within  us  is  itself  the  summation  of  many  narrower  and
inferior  memories.  It  is  conceivable  tliat  there  may  be  for  each  man  a  yet
more  comprehensive  personality — or  say  an  individuality — which  correlates
and  comprises  all  known  and  unknown  phases  of  his  being.  Such  a  notion
can  no  longer  be  dismissed  as  merely  mystical  ;  analogy  points  to  it ;  and
although  no  observation  could  fully  prove  it  there  may  well  be  observations
which  may  make  it  probable.  But  here  as  everywhere  fearless  analysis  is
the  pre-requisite  of  any  sound  construction.  We  must  not  shrink  from
pulling  ourselves  to  pieces  if  we  hope  to  find  indications  that  there  is  some-
thing in  us  larger  and  more  perdurable  than  we  had  previously  sui)posed.

An  imjjortant  chapter  of  M.  Janet's  book, — "  Desagregation  Psycholo-
gique,"— is  devoted  to  the  review  of  a  subject  where  premature  construction
has  long  hindered  necessary  analysis.  It  requires  some  courage, — perhaps
more  courage  in  France  even  than  in  England, — for  a  scientific  writer  so
much  as  to  discuiss  the  SpiriListic  literature. M.  Janet  faces  the  task,

0  2


196


Professor  Pierre  Janet's  '  isuppiements^


though  in  the  spirit  of  a  chemist  studying  the  records  of  alchemy.  Experir
mental  psychology,"  he  says,  "  began  by  being  animal  magnetism  and
spiritism  ;  let  us  not  forget  this  fact,  nor  laugh  at  our  ancestors."

His  treatment  of  the  problem  is  careful  and  candid,  and  he  has  little
difficulty  in  explaining  most  of  the  facts  accessible  to  him  on  lines  familiar  to
the  readers  of  these  Proceedings, — as  the  manifestation  of  some  disintegration
of  personality  within  the  medium  rather  than  of  some  invasion  of  a  personality
from  without.  I  say  that  ' '  most  of  the  facts  accessible  to  him  "  are  explica-
ble in  this  way.  But  there  are,  I  know,  other  facts  less  easy  of  explanation.
Never  could  there  be  a  better  moment  than  now  for  some  new  champion  of
the  Sfiiritual  explanation  of  automatic  writing  to  enter  the  field.  He  must
be  someone  capable  of  understanding  the  essential  points  as  to  evidence  of
outside  intelligence  on  which  dispassionate  critics  are  now  agreeing,  and
which  it  is  no  disgrace  to  the  earlier  Spiritualists  that  they  could  not  at  once
divine.  And  he  must  be  someone  really  patient,  really  diligent, — willing  to
bestow  on  his  experiments — what  I  much  doubt  whether  any  Spiritualist
author  has  yet  done — something  approaching  the  time  and  care  which
Janet  has  bestowed  upon  liis.  The  few  cases  which  have  been  sent  to  myself,
by  M.  Aksakof  and  others,  in  response  to  previous  appeals  of  this  kind,  are
quite  enough  to  show  the  real  importance  to  science  of  the  fullest  possible
presentation  of  that  very  theory  against  whose  rash  and  hasty  adoption  both
M.  Janet's  arguments  and  my  own  have  thus  far  been  directed.  ^

This  long  review  must  now  draw  to  a  close.  I  may  perhnps  end  it  by
quoting  a  cin-ious  example  given  by  M.  Janet  (p.  4G6)  in  his  last  chapter,  "La
Taiblesse  et  la  Force  Morales,"  to  show  how  the  tendency  to  "psychological
aiitomatism  "  is  latent  in  all  of  us,  but  gathers  force  to  manifest  itself  only
when  we  are  brought  "  below  par  "  by  fatigue  or  disease.

"  It  is  commonly  said  that  love  is  a  passion  to  wdiich  man  is  always  liable,
and  which  may  sui'prise  him  at  any  moment  of  his  life,  from  15  to  75.  This
does  not  seem  to  me  accurate  ;  and  a  man  is  not  throughout  all  his  life  and
at  every  moment  susceptible  of  falling  in  love  (cZe  devenir  amoiireux).  When
a  man  is  in  good  physical  and  moral  health,  when  he  has  easy  and  com-
plete command  of  all  his  ideas,  he  may  expose  himself  to  circumstances  the
most  capable  of  giving  rise  to  a  passion,  but  he  will  not  feel  it.  His  desires
will  be  reasonable  and  obedient  to  his  will,  leading  the  man  only  so  far  as  he-
wishes  to  go,  and  disappearing  when  he  wishes  to  be  rid  of  them.  On  the
other  hand  if  a  man  is  morally  below  the  mark  {malade  cm  moral), — if  in
consequence  of  physical  fatigue  or  excessive  intellectual  work,  or  of  violent
shocks  and  prolonged  sorrow,  he  is  exhausted,  melancholy,  distracted,  timid,
incapable  of  controlling  his  ideas, — in  a  word,  depressed,— then  he  will  fall  in

1  An  alhision  made  by  M.  Janet  to  the  Rev.  P.  H.  Newnham  (p.  392)  gives  me  an
opportunity  of  repeating  my  grateful  acknowledgTnent  of  the  kindness  and  candour
with  which  Mr.  Newnham  presented  me  with  the  original  private  note-books  containing
his  experiments, — wliich  books  I  sliall  be  glad  at  any  time  to  show  to  inquirers.  Mr.
Newnham,  who  had  lived  for  some  years  in  the  calm  but  constant  expectation  of  death,
from  disease  of  the  heart,  has  now  passed  away  ;  and  I  may  repeat  tlie  witness  of
others  who  knew  him  more  intimately  than  I,  to  the  effect  that  a  simpler,  franker
more  sane,  more  uprig-ht  character  has  rarely  been  met  with  even  in  that  profession,
whose  duties  he  fulfilled  so  earnestly  so  long  as  any  strength  to  fulfil  them  ained


Supplement!  "Automatisme  Psychologique."  197


love,  Or  receive  the  germ  of  some  kind  of  passion,  on  the  first  and  most
■trivial  occasion.  .  .  The  least  thing  is  then  enough  ;  the  sight  of  some
face,  a  gesture,  a  word,  which  previously  would  have  left  us  altogether
indifferent,  strikes  us,  and  becomes  the  starting  point  of  a  long  amoroua
malady.  Or  more  than  this,  an  object  which  had  made  no  impression  on  us,
at  a  moment  when  our  mind  was  healthier  and  not  capable  of  inoculation,
may  have  left  in  us  some  insignificant  memory  which  reappears  in  a  moment
^f  morbid  receptivity.  That  is  enough  ;  the  germ  is  sown  in  a  favourable
soil  ;  it  will  develop  itself  and  grow.

"  There  is  at  first,  as  in  every  virulent  malady,  a  period  of  incubation  ;  the
now  idea  passes  and  repasses  in  the  vague  reveries  of  the  enfeebled
consciousness  ;  then  seems  for  a  few  days  to  have  disappeared  and  to  leave
the  mind  to  recover  from  its  passing  trouble.  But  the  idea  has  done  its
work  below  the  surface  ;  it  has  become  strong  enough  to  shake  the  body  ;
and  to  provoke  movements  whose  origin  lies  outside  the  primary  consciousness.
What  is  the  surprise  of  a  sensible  man  when  he  finds  himself  piteously
returning  beneath  the  windows  of  his  charmer,  whither  his  wandering  feet
have  taken  him  without  his  knowledge  ; — or  wlien  in  the  midst  of  his  daily
work  he  hears  his  lips  murmuring  perpetually  the  well-known  name  !  .  .
Such  is  passion  in  its  reality  ;  not  as  idealised  by  fantastic  description,
but  reduced  to  its  essential  psychological  characteristics."

It  will  be  seen  that  this  eloquent  passage, — as  of  a  modernised  Lucretius,
— is  thoroughly  in  harmony  with  M.  Janet's  opinions,  as  above  discussed,
with  regard  to  the  normal  condition  and  necessary  limitations  of  the
psychical  energies  of  man.  It  is  opposed  to  the  wider  hopes  and  conceptions
which  I  have  indicated  ;  but  I  shall  not  here  again  argue  the  point  in
detail.  I  shall  leave  it  to  voi  cha  avdc  intclletto  d'amore  to  consider  whether
M.  Janet's  analysis  is  sound  or  complete, — wlietlier  such  words  as  Plato
and  Dante  have  spoken  concerning  love  are  "  descriptions  fantaisistes,"
or  living  records  of  profoundest  truth ; — whether  that  were  a  sign  of
strength  or  of  weakness, — that  most  overmastering,  most  irrational  of  all
recorded  passions,  which  yet  was  as  a  Vita  Nuova  to  one  potent  heart  : — •
which  could  prompt  to  high  effort,  and  soar  above  desire,  and  project
its  passionate  ardour  beyond  the  gulf  of  death.  For  my  part  I  have
some  fear  lest  so  soon  as  we  come  to  disbelieve  in  the  highest  facts  of
man's  past,  and  to  despair  of  surpassing  them  in  man's  future, — so  soon  as  we
-assume  that  we  have  ah'eady  attained  our  full  normal  development,  and  that
the  obscure  strivings  of  this  restless  spirit  must  lead  henceforth  nowliither
-then  by  that  very  assumption  we  shall  have  entered  upon  our  decadence,  and
invited  our  degeneration  and  decay.  .  • ,

This  review,  with  the  reviews  which  follow,  must  serve  for  the  present
•as  a  fulfilment  of  our  promise  of  a  siu-vey  of  the  existing  condition  of
hypnotism  in  France.

I  have  touched  above  on  several  of  the  points  Avhich  excited  most
controversy  at  the  recent  International  Congress  of  Experimental  Psychology,
in  whose  discussions  hypnotism  played  a  leading  part.  For  the  i-est,
the  impression  produced  by  that  Congress  was  that  of  the  increasing
■  -acceptance  of  most  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Nancy  school. Readers  o  these


198


Professor  Pierre  Janet's


(Supplement


JProoeecUngs  will  not  be  surprised  at  this  result,  which  represents  in  fact
essentially  the  triumph  of  generalisations  based  on  a  wider  experience  over
generalisations  based  on  a  narrower  experience, — narrower,  I  say,  in  spite  of
the  vast  extent  and  skilled  organisation  of  the  Salpetriere — because  the
subjects  there  submitted  to  experiment  have  been  all  of  nearly  the  same
type, — hysterical  and  epileptic  invalids.  The  school  of  Nancy  is  gaining,
ground,  with  its  demonstration  that  the  "three  stages"  of  the  grand
hypnotisme  "  under  M.  Charcot's  rule  are  rarely  reproduced  elsewhere,  anci
are  therefore  not  a  necessary  or  typical  manifestation  of  the  hypnotic  state.,
Nancy  is  gaining  ground  with  its  insistance  on  the  power  of  suggestion,  and
its  belief  in  the  hypnotisation  of  healthy  subjects.  But, — if  a  foreign
observer  may  repeat  the  warning  which  impartial  judges  like  M.  Ricliet  aro
already  uttering  in  France, — I  see  a  cloud  on  the  horizon  of  Nancy's  fame.
Its  leading  men  (except  the  veteran  Liebeault)  are  pushing  their  theory  too
far,  and  insisting  that  cdl  in  hypnotism  is  suggestion,  and  that  there  are  no
p)hysical  influences  whatever,  whether  from  passes,  metals,  or  magnets.  On
this  point  I  must  adhere  to  the  view  which  I  have  often  expressed  in  thes&
Procecdinjs,  that  passes  almost  certainly,  metals  probably,  magnets  possibly,
do  sometimes  exert  a  physical  influence  ;  and  that  we  are  yet  far  from  having
exhausted  tlie  agencies  which  operate  between  one  human  being  and  another.
Has  not  the  history  of  hypnotism  thus  far  been  a  slow  but  repeated  justifica-
tion of  those  who,  in  each  successive  controversy,  took  the  wider  and  less
exclusive  view  ?  of  those  who  recognised  most  frankly  the  magnitude,  the:
obscurity,  tlie  unpredictable  issues  of  this  ever  more  penetrating  ini|uiry
into  the  hidden  mechanism  of  man  ?


APPENDIX  L  ...  :

Mr.  Hugh  Wingfield,  who,  when  holding  a  University  appointment  as
Demonstrator  of  Physiology  at  Cambridge,  had  very  wide  opportunities  of
choosing  subjects  from  his  large  classes  of  medical  students,  sends  me  the
following  statement.

September  Gth,  1889.

I  subjoin  the  results  of  my  own  experience  of  hypnotic  subjects.

I  have  liypnotised  at  first  trial  over  170  men,  between  the  ages  of  17  and
28,  having  had  about  20  per  cent,  of  failures.

I  do  not  know  how  many  I  could  have  hypnotised  had  I  persisted,  as,  if  I
failed  once,  I  never  tried  again.

The  subjects,  witli  the  exception  of  18,  were  'all  undergraduates.  Con-
sidering the  extreme  rarity  of  hysteria  among  men  in  England,  it  is  utterly
incredible  that  I  should  have  hit  upon  170  hysterical  men  haphazard.
Besides,  I  always  refused  to  hypnotise  anyone  unless  I  believed  them  to  be
perfectly  free  from  hysteria.

In  the  only  three  cases  wliere  abnormal  symptoms  presented  themselves
during  the  hypnijtic  state  (I  cannot  say  that  the  symptoms  were  hysterical),
I  rejected  the  subjects.

In  mo-st  cases  I  did  not  test  the  subjects  for  hemi-ana;sthesia  or  other
hysterical  symptoms,  as  it  was  quite  superfluous  to  do  so  ;  but  in  certain
experiments  on  sensation  it  was  necessary  to  test  the  sensation  of  botL


snppietnent.i  *'Automat{sme  Psychologique."


199


hands  ;  and  I  have  also  sometimes  tested  the  sensation  of  both  forearms  and
the  two  sides  of  the  face  ;  yet  in  no  single  instance  could  I  detect  any
abnormality  whatever.

With  regard  to  the  other  cases,  none  so  far  as  I  know  (I  have  only
inquired  of  a  few)  had  ever  had  any  symptom  of  hysteria.

It  seems  distinctly  unfair  to  argue  that  because  hysterical  subjects  are
easily  hypnotised,  all  subjects  must  be  hysterical.  Besides  wliich,  I  very
much  doubt  the  susceptibility  of  all  hysterical  persons.  I  have  found  two
whom  I  could  scarcely  influence  at  all.  Personally,  I  am  quite  convinced  that
large  numbers  of  persons  who  have  no  symptom  of  hysteria  whatever  can  be
readily  hypnotised.

H. E.  WlNGFIELD.


APPENDIX  II.

On  the  general  question  of  the  comparative  frequency  of  hj^steria  in
France  and  England,  Dr.  A.  T.  Mj-ers  sends  me  the  following  note  : —

"The  position  of  hysteria  among  the  diseases  of  England  and  France  is
very  different.  The  '  grande  lujste'rie '  which  French  study  has  of  recent
years  defined  and  accentuated  among  nearly  all  large  collections  of  the
young  as  well  as  of  the  sick  in  France,  and  more  especially  in  Paris,  is
hard  to  find  in  England  even  when  souglit  for,  and  very  imperfect  in
its  French  equipment  of  anresthesife  and  paraasthesite  and  elaborate  sequence
of  four  periods  of  convulsion,  so  that  it  olTers  comparatively  little  op-
portunity for  testing,  for  instance,  whether  metallo-therapy  acts  purely
by  suggestion  or  not.  And  the  '■petite  hysteric,'  the  possibility  of  which
the  French  observer  can  never  forget  when  he  is  dealing  with  young  people,
especially  if  they  are  being  hypnotised,  is  out  of  the  question  for  almost
every  one  of  such  subjects  as  have  come  most  completely  under  Mr.  G.  A.
Smith's  influence  and  furnished  the  staple  of  Mr.  Gurney's  inductions.
Cases  of  it  may  be  found,  no  doubt,  in  a  few  morbid  conditions  of  health  and
surroundings  in  all  classes  in  England,  but  not  among  the  vigorous,  hard-
working telegraph  boys,  or  apprentices  to  active  trades,  who  have  to  spend
half  their  day  in  the  open  air  and  to  learn  how  to  use  their  muscles.

"  The  diftusion  of  hysteria  among  the  European  races  seems  to  be  far  from
uniform.  The  widest  experience  shows  that  the  French  have  on  the  whole
had  the  most  eases  to  deal  with  (Striimpell)  ;  and  among  them  some  of  the
most  severe  tyi^e.  The  Italians,  Spaniards,  and  Greeks  apparently  suffer
more  from  hysteria  than  the  English,  Germans,  or  Dutch.  Among  the
Sclavonic  races  there  are  occasional  limited  endemics  (Hirsch)  ;  and  the  Jews,
are  credited  with  a  large  percentage  (Grasset).


200


Binei  on  the  Consciousness  of  (Supplement'


IV.

BINET  ON  THE  CONSCIOUSNESS  OF  HYSTERICAL

SUBJECTS.!
By  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

M.  Binet  is  cloubtless  known  to  most  ot  our  readers  as  one  of  the  mosfc
ingenious  and  suggestive  of  modern  French  experimental  psychologists.  He;
has  worked  mainly  in  association  with  Dr.  Fere,  and  at  the  Salpetriere  ;  but  his
range  of  speculation  is  wide,  and  his  book  on  La  Psycliologie  du  Raisonncment,
and  his  Etudes  de  Psycliologie  Experimentale  enjoy  a  just  reputation.  The
present  article  is  an  account  of  experiments  performed  on  hysterics  ab
the  Salpetriere  ;  and  on  this  point  two  preliminary  remarks  must  be  made.
In  the  first  place,  one  feels  that  the  Salpetriere  has,  in  a  sense,  been
smothered  in  its  own  abundance.  The  richest  collection  of  hysterics  which
the  world  has  ever  seen,  it  has  also  (one  fears)  become  a  kind  of  unconscious
school  of  these  unconscious  prophets — a  milieu  wliere  the  new  arrival  learns
insensibly  from  the  very  atmosphere  of  experiment  around  her  to  adapt  her
Dwn  reflexes  or  responses  to  the  subtly-divined  expectations  of  the  operator.
One  is  inclined,  therefore,  to  wait  until  a  series  of  Salj^etriere  experiments
have  been  independently  confirmed  elsewhere  before  ofFering  them  to  ah
English  public,  wliich,  from  our  marked  poverty  in  hysterics,  is  little  likely
to  have  the  chance  of  vei'ifying  the  results  de  visu.

But  in  this  case  M.  Binet's  experiments  are  so  strikingly  in  concordance
with  the  quite  independent  results  obtained  both  by  M.  Pierre  Janet  and
by  some  of  ourselves  in  England, — and  are,  moreover,  in  themselves  so  easy
of  repetition,  if  only  a  properly  anaesthetic  subject  can  be  secured, — that
some  account  of  them  seems  due  to  the  readers  of  these  Proceedings.

In  the  second  ])lace,  it  may  be  said  that  these  are  pathological  phenomena  ;
and  that  our  Society  is  not  concerned  with  disease.  To  this  I  answer  that
these  are  not  patliological  phenomena,  but  pathological  revelations  of  normal
phenomena,  which  is  a  very  difi"erent  thing.  The  gearing  of  the  hysteric's
inward  factory  is  disconnected  ;  the  couj)lings  are  shifted  in  all  sorts  of
injurious  ways  ;  some  of  the  wheels  are  standing  still,  and  some  are  whizzing
uselessly  round  and  round.  But  the  wheelwork  is  still  all  there  ;  and  by
observing  the  various  hitches  and  stoppages  which  are  now  taking  place,  we
can  get  a  better  notion  of  the  way  tlie  power  is  applied  than  the  smoothly-
working,  carefully-boxed  machinery  of  the  healthy  subject  is  likely  to  giva
us.  Above  all,  we  must  avoid  the  assumption  that  the  hysteric  possesses
any  capacity  whatever  which  we  do  not  all  of  us  potentially  possess.  Is  the
hysteric  hypertesthetic  ?  Then  so  do  we  all  potentially  jjossess  the  acuteness
of  smell  or  sight  or  hearing  which  she  manifests.  No  fresh  anatomical
element  is  added  to  her  ear  or  eye  ;  no  fresh  physiological  projjerty  to  any
one  molecule  in  her  body. What  she  can  do,  we  can  do, — only  as  that  has  not

1  Reclierches  sur  les  Alterations  de  la  Conscience  chez  les  Hystdriques. A.  Binet
Bevuc  Philosopkique,  rebruary,  1839.


Supplement.!  \ Hysteviccd  Suhjects.


201


been  the  most  useful  way  of  exerting  our  innate  powers,  our  ancestry  has  so
arranged  us  that  those  hysterical  delicacies  of  perception  remain  in  us  latent
and  unknown.  Is  the  hysteric  dissociable  into  two  or  more  co-existent
personalities  ?  Then  so  are  we  also  presumably  dissociable  ;  our  machinery
is  made  on  the  same  plan  as  hers  ;  though  the  belt  which  for  her  has  slipped
from  the  shaft,  in  us  still  keeps  its  place,  and  holds  our  personalities  together.

Nay  more,  if  that  purely  imaginary  entity,  the  normal  man,  is  still  held
tip  before  us  as  incapable  ex  vi  termini  of  any  change  which  is  not  degener-
ation, we  shall  reply  that  after  all  it  is  one  of  the  perfections  of  a  complex:
instrument  to  admit  of  the  ready  disconnection  of  its  constituent  fiarts  ;  and
that  our  true  ideal  should  be, — neither  the  rigid  connections  of  so-called
normality,  nor  the  ungovernable  disconnections  of  hysteria, — but  a  condition
in  which  we  should  be  able  to  connect  or  disconnect  any  element  within  us
at  pleasure.  We  can  at  present  do  this  to  a  slight  extent,  and  we  account
this  power  as  a  gain.  It  is  a  gain,  for  instance,  to  be  able  to  abstract  one's
attention, — to  become  temporarily  ansesthetic  to  noises  around  one.  This  may,
indeed,  be  pushed  too  far  ;  as  we  know  that  a  soldier  cut  off  Archimedes'
head  while  that  philosopher  was  meditating  on  the  hypothenuse.  But  our
ideal  should  go  beyond  Archimedes  ; — it  should  be  to  cut  off  the  soldier's
head  with  one  of  our  personalities,  while  we  meditate  unbrokenly  on  the
hypothenuse  with  the  other.

Let  us  proceed  now  to  M.  Binet  and  his  hysterics  ;  remembering  that
just  as,  in  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer's  phrase,  "  the  mobile  in  expression  represent
the  race," — give  overt  manifestation  to  such  slight  changes  as  pass  over  the
moods  of  all  ; — so  also  do  these  far  more  profoundly  mobile  beings  "repre-
sent the  race  "  in  deeper  fashion  ; — sometimes  even  dissect  away  our  recent
nervous  acquisitions,  and  lay  bare  processes  that  correspond  to  a  long-pasfc
stage  of  evolution.

The  first  point  to  remark  is  that  the  ansesthetic  limb  of  a  hysteric  is
almost  always  capable  of  certain  simple  movements,  which  it  executes  v.^ith-
■out  the  subject's  knowledge,  or  when  concealed  from  the  subject  by  a  screen.
If  the  anesthetic  arm,  for  instance,  is  moved  m  a  certain  way,  and  then  left
to  itself,  it  continues  the  movement.  If  it  is  guided  into  writing  a  word  or
words,  and  then  left  to  itself,  it  will  repeat  the  word,  or  continue  the  sentence.
It  acts,  in  short,  very  much  as  the  subject's  planchette-writing  hand  in  Mr.
Gurney's  experiments  acted  when  fulfilling  a  post-hj'pnotic  suggestion.  Let
us  see  how  far  this  supposed  anaesthetic  arm  is  really  intelligent,  or  is  really
•susceptible  of  pain.

If  we  merely  prick  the  ansesthetic  hand  it  in  no  way  reacts, — shows  no
disposition  to  avoid  the  pin.  Perhaps  this  is  because  the  pin-prick  awakes
no  definite  conception. Let  us  try  a  more  complex  stimulus.

"We  place  in  the  right  (antesthetic)  hand  of  Amelie  Cle —  a  box  of
matches  ;  a  large  vertical  screen  prevents  the  patient  from  seeing  her  hand.
After  a  moment's  contact  the  right  hand  clasps  the  box  ;  fingers  it  ;  seems
to  recognise  it  ;  strikes  a  match  and  holds  it  alight  ;  as  the  flame  advances
the  fingers  withdraw,  as  if  they  felt  and  shunned  the  heat  ;  and  when  the
flame  nears  the  end  of  tlie  match  the  fingers  open  and  the  match  falls."
Prom  this  experiment  it  is  not  clear  whether  pain  is  felt,  or  whether  the
whole  act  is  a  mere  oiece  of  what,  in  a  normal  waking  person,  we  cal


202  Binet  on  the  Consciousness  of  [Supplement^


secondary  automatism  ; — the  repetition  of  a  familiar  series  of  actions  without
conscious  attention.

Let  us  now, — I  abbreviate  M.  Binet's  account, — give  the  match-box  to  a.
second  subject,  L.  Lavr — .  She  opens  the  box,  but  having  taken  out  a  match
imagines  it  to  be  a  pencil,  and  tries  to  write  with  it.  We  light  the  match
and  give  it  back  to  her.  She  does  not  realise  that  it  is  a  match,  and  holds
this  and  a  second  burning  match  till  they  are  consumed  or  go  out,  and  her
fingers  are  much  burnt.  This  resembles  an  imperfect  instinct ;  as  when,
ants  store  up  beads  which  the  observer  has  sown  in  their  hunting-fields.

The  result  of  the  experiment  with  another  subject,  Louise  St.  Am.,  i»
still  more  curious.  She  drops  the  burning  match,  but  then  at  once  picks  it
up  again.  This  resembles  the  tendency  of  caterpillars,  &c.,  to  go  back  to-
the  beginning  of  a  series  of  actions,  if  interrupted, ^  The  Sphex  which,  after
its  burrow  had  been,  to  its  knowledge,  emptied  of  the  prey  which  it-
wished  to  wall  uji  there,  walled  up  the  useless  burrow  all  the  same,  before
beginning  another,  was  obeying  the  same  instinct  as  Louise,  of  continuing-
the  series  of  actions  in  the  accustomed  ordci-,  without  regard  to  tlie  special
circumstances  of  the  case.  Sphex  and  anresthetic  hand  each  afforded  an
instance  of  "  lapsed  intelligence,"  nervous  adjustments  originally  acquired
by  intelligent  effort,  but  now  irrecoverably  sunk  into  routine.  "How,"'
asks  M.  Binet,  "  can  one  explain  the  preservation  of  tactile  sensibility  along-
■with  the  loss  of  sensibility  to  pain  ?  Are  there  two  orders  of  sensibility  in
connection  with  different  centres  ?  Are  there  nerves  for  pain,  a  centre  for
pain,  distinct  from  the  nerves  and  centres  of  sensation  1  Or  does  the
distinction  between  those  two  sensibilities  consist  in  a  fact  of  central
perception  ?  If  the  sensibility  to  pain  seems  to  be  suppressed  both  for  the
primary  fiersonality  and  for  the  secondary  jjersonality, — that  is  to  say,  for  the
anpesthetic  limb, — are  we  to  conclude  that  hysterical  analgesia,  in  certain
subjects,  may  be  an  absolute  destruction  of  sensibility  to  pain,  and  not  an
alteration  of  consciousness  ?  "

I  should  reply  that  we  must  not  so  conclude  in  any  absolute  manner;  but
that  all  analogy  shows  that  where  there  is  not  actual  previous  lesiozi  or
atrophy  of  the  nerves  the  injury  to  them  is  perceived  and  the  pain  is — I  do
not  say  felt,  but  recognised, — by  some  personality  or  other.  I  must  suppose
that  in  Louise  St.  Am.'s  case,  just  as  in  the  case  of  Blanche  Witt — ,  (men-
tioned in  the  review  of  Dr.  Jules  Janet's  paper,  vid.  inf.  p.  216),  there  is  a
yet  deeper  personality  which  the  experimenter  has  not  reached,  and  which
was  all  the  time  mutely  upbraiding  tlie  folly  of  the  aniestlietic  hand  in
mistaking  a  lighted  match  for  a  lead  pencil.

As  regards  the  dissociation  of  tactile  from  dolorous  sensibility,  I  may
just  remark  that  it  is  quite  possible  that  our  earliest  monocellular  ancestors-
may  have  possessed  the  pov/er  of  feeling  contact,  but  not  of  feeling  pain.
If  sensibility  to  pain  be  a  protective  character  acquired  in  the  struggle  for
existence,  the  hysterical  severance  of  the  two  sensibilities  is  less  incredible
than  it  may  at  first  appear.

The  next  point  of  interest  observed  by  M.  Binet  lies  in  the  automatic
writing  of  these  hysterical  subjects.  "  When  a  hysteric  holds  a  pen  in  her
antesthetic  hand  [concealed  by  a  screen],  in  the  attitude  appropriate

1  Darwin  in  liomanes'  Mental  Eivliition  in  Animals,  p.  179- ,  /


Supplement.]


Hysterical  Subjects^


203


■  writing,  the  pen  will  register  the  ideas  which  predominate  in  her  conscious-
ness." If  the  subject  is  told  to  think  of  a  name  or  a  number,  the  pen-
unknown  to  her  primary  self — will  write  that  name  or  number.  Or,  if  the
subject  spontaneously  thinks  of  a  number,  and  the  operator  then  lifts  a  finger
of  the  ansesthetic  hand  several  times  in  succession,  the  finger  will  stiffen
when  the  operator  has  reached  the  number  which  the  primary  self  is  thinking
of.  The  auEEsthetic  hand  can  thus  be  taught  to  indicate  the  subject's  thoughts
by  a  variety  of  gestures,  though  it  is  slow  in  learning  to  substitute  one  gesture
for  another, — e.g.,  finger-lifting  for  writing.

And  now  let  us  reverse  the  process  ;  let  us  give  the  information  first  to
the  anaesthetic  hand,  and  see  whether,  and  in  what  form,  the  same  kind  of
subterraneous  communication  will  transmit  the  intelligence  to  the  primary
self.  Let  us  take  the  simplest  form  of  experiment,  which  is  also  one  of  the
most  interesting  to  students  of  automatic  writing.

"The  first  subject  observed  was  a  hysterical  woman,  Mel — , whose  right
arm  was  anfesthetic.  She  did  not  perceive  the  passive  movements  of  a
general  kind  which  were  communicated  to  this  arm  ;  but  if  one  placed  a  pen
in  her  right  hand,  and  made  the  hand  write  a  word,  the  patient  at  once
guessed  the  word,  with  her  eyes  shut.  She  nevertheless  did  not  feel,  she
said,  the  graphic  movement  communicated  to  her  hand  ;  but  she  had  a
visual  image  of  the  word,  which  appeared  to  her  suddenly,  '  as  if  it  were
written  in  chalk  on  a  black-board.'  "

M.  Binet  appears  to  think  that  his  own  are  the  first  observations  of  this
curious  co-operation  of  the  motor  activity  of  one  phase  of  personality  with
the  visual  perceptions  of  another.  Were  he  in  the  habit  of  referring  to
English  works,  he  would  find  the  phenomenon  noted  and  illustrated  in  the
Society  for  Psychical  Research  Proceedings,  Vol.  III.,  p.  59,  &c.,  (in  a  paper
read  January,  1885),  and  formulated  (as  xx'  +  ss'  -f-  w'),  among  a  series  of
kindred  phenomena  there  described.

An  interesting  variety  in  the  experiment  is  as  follows  :  M.  Binet  desires:
the  subject  to  think  spontaneously  of  a  word.  Meantime  he  makes  her
anEesthetic  hand  write  a  certain  word  of  his  own  choice.  She  proceeds  to
utter  that  word,  under  the  impression  tliat  she  has  spontaneously  thought  of
it.  The  analogy  here  with  post-hypnotic  suggestion  is  very  marked.  The
anaesthetic  hand,  like  the  dormant  hypnotic  personality,  makes  a  suggestion
to  the  primary  personality  which  that  personality  innocently  accepts  as  its
own  spontaneous  choice.

Another  experiment  is  curious  from  the  metaphysical  question  which  it
suggests  as  to  the  distinction  between  pain  and  the  idea  of  pain.  In  the  case
of  two  hysterics,  when  the  skin  of  the  anresthetic  arm  is  pinched,  behind  a
screen,  "  the  patient,  carefully  interrogated,  with  avoidance  of  all  suggestion,
spontaneously  declares  that  she  has  the  idea  of  a  painful  sensation.  She
does  not  suffer  from  it,  for  she  is  persuaded  that  she  is  insensible,  but  she
admits  that  the  idea  of  this  pain  is  disagreeable  to  her.  There  is  tlius  a  kind
of  transformation  of  physical  pain  into  mental  pain,  like  that  which  occurs
when  one  imagines  or  recalls  to  memory  some  bodily  suffering."  The  pain,
in  fact,  as  I  have  before  said,  is  recognised  rather  than  felt;  and  it  is  a  fair
question  for  metaphysical  argument  whether  that  pain  existed  at  all.

The  phenomenon  (as  I  at  least  should  say)  wliich  is  common  to  thesa


?204


Binet  on  the  Consciousness  of  tsuppiement.


and  many  similar  experiments,  is  that"  communications  from  one  state  of
.personality  to  another, — what,  for  sheer  lack  of  a  word,  I  have  ventured
•to  call  methectic  communications  (p.  48,  note), — impress  themselves  on  the
-percipient  personality, — just  as  telepathic  communications  do, — by  means  of
visual  or  auditory  images,  or  obscure  perceptions,  which  may  develop  into
actual  hallucinations.  The  submerged  personality  is  writing  ;  it  gives  to  the
emergent  personality  the  hallucination  of  seeing  words  written  in  chalk  on  a
-board.  The  submerged  personality  is  suffering  a  definite  localised  smart ;  it
gives  to  the  emergent  personality  a  vague  quasi-hallucinatory  idea  of  pain.  -
f  Naturally  it  is'  when  visual  images  are  evoked  in  the  emergent  person-
-^ility  that  these  communications  are  most  distinct.  Nor  is  it  only  so  definite
-a  movement  as  the  writing  of  the  anissthetic  hand  which  can  get  itself
represented  in  visual  form.  "With  some  patients,"  says  M.  Binet,  "the
visual  image  determined  by  the  peripheral  excitation  [of  pinches,  &c.]
-augments  in  intensity  to  the  point  where  it  externalises  itself  as  a  hallucination.
Thus,  when  one  has  repeatedly  pricked  the  insensible  hand  of  Lav — ,  while
,she  is  occupied  in  reading,  she  presently  sees  the  book  become  covered  with
-little  black  points  which  hide  and  confuse  the  text ;  she  is  obliged  to  give  up
jreading. ' '

Here  the  annoyance  given  to  the  submerged  personality  was  represented
■to  the  emergent  personality  by  a  hallucinatory  vision,  symbolical  of  the
points  of  pain.  Compare  Mr.  Gurney's  experiment  {Proceedings,  TV. ,  p.  319),
where  the  stress  of  competition  between  the  normal  and  the  hypnotic  per-
. tonalities  represented  itself  to  the  hypnotic  personality,  when  emergent  in
-its  turn,  as  a  disturbing  hallucinatory  figure.

"P — 1  was  told  several  times,  'It  has  left  off  snowing'  ;  and  then,
when  woke  and  set  to  the  planchette,  he  was  made  to  read  aloud.  The
iivriting  which  appeared  was  :  It  has  Ifeft  sn — ,  and  while  this  was  proceeding
the  reading  was  bad  and  stumbling.  .  .  .  Re-hypnotisation  afforded  a
glimpse  of  the  condition  in  which  the  secondary  intelligence  had  found  itself.
Asked  what  he  had  been  doing,  the  subject  replied,  '  Trying  to  write.  It  has
Jeft  off  snowing.'  Asked  if  he  had  been  reading,  he  said,  'Reading  !  No,  I
haven't  been  reading,'  and  added,  'Something  seemed  to  disturb  me.'
How. was  that?  '  Something  seemed  to  keep  moving  about  in  front  of  me,
-SO  I  got  back  into  bed  again.'  Didn't  Mr.  Gurney  hold  a  book  and  make
you  read  aloud  ?  '  No,  somebody  kept  moving  about.  I  didn't  like  the  looks
of  them.  Kept  wandering  to  and  fro.  Horrible,  awful  !  I  thought  to  myself,
I'll  get  into  bed.'  "

And  now,  before  concluding,  let  us  extend  our  area  of  comparison  a  little
further  yet.  All  these  experiments  of  M.  Binet's  have  been  in  the  well-
known  Salpetriere  atmo.sphere.  They  have  all  been  concerned  with  la  malade  ;
.and  it  has  been  taken  for  granted  that  this  dissociation  of  personalities
■through  the  agency  of  local  ansesthesia  could  only  occur  on  diseased
-subjects.  It  has,  of  course,  been  assumed  also — it  wo\ild  seem  absiuxl  to
question  it, — that  the  ancesthetic  arm  was  necessarily  less  rational,  less
intelligent,  than  the  primary  personality,  which  had  apparently  the  use  of
the  head.  Let  us  see  whether  it  is  really  safe  to  make  either  the  one  or  the
other  assumption.

In  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,


Supplement.]


Hysterical  SubjecfSi


205


•Vol.  I.,  p.  549,  Professor  William  James,  of  Harvard,  who  is  a  pliysician
fis  well  as  a  psychologist,  cites  the  following  case  from  his  own  observation.

"  William  L.  Smith,  of  Concord,  Mass.,  student  at  the  Massachusetts
Institute  of  Technology,  age  21,  perfectly  healthy  and  excejitionally  intelli-
gent .  .  .  sat  with  Mr.  Hodgson  and  myself,  January  24th,  1889,  with
his  right  hand  extended  on  the  instrument  [planchette],  and  his  face  averted
and  buried  in  the  hollow  of  his  left  arm,  which  lay  along  the  table.  Care
was  taken  not  to  suggest  to  him  the  aim  of  the  inquiry,  [i.  e.,  to  test  for
antestliesia  induced  in  healthy  subjects  by  the  mere  act  of  automatic  writing. ]

"  The  planchette  began  by  illegible  scrawling.  After  ten  minutes  I
pricked  the  back  of  the  right  hand  several  times  with  a  pin — no  indication  of
feeling.  Two  pricks  on  the  left  Iiand  were  followed  by  withdrawal,  and  the
question,  '  What  did  you  do  that  for  1 '  to  which  I  replied,  '  To  find  whethex'
you  were  going  to  sleep.' The  first  legible  words  which  were  written  after

this  were,  You  hurt  me  After  some  more  or  less  illegible  writing,  I

pricked  the  right  wrist  and  fingers  several  times  again  quite  severely,  with
no  sign  of  reaction  on  S.'s  part.  After  an  interval,  however,  the  pencil
wrote  :  Don't  you  prick  me  any  more.  S.  then  said, '  My  right  hand  is  pretty
well  asleep.'  I  tested  the  two  hands  immediately,  by  pinching  and  pricking,
but  found  no  difference  between  them,  both  appareutly  normal.  S.  then  said
that  what  he  meant  by  '  asleep  '  was  the  feeling  of  '  pins  and  needles,'  which
an  insensible  limb  has  when  '  waking  up.'

"The  last  written  sentence  was  then  deciphered  aloud.  S.  laughed, having
been  conscious  only  of  the  pricks  on  his  left  hand,  and  said,  '  It's  working
those  two  pin-^jricks  for  all  they  are  worth.'

"I  then  asked  '  What  have  I  been  excited  about  to-day  1 '  May  he  correct,
doii't  know,  possibly  sleepjinfj.  '  What  do  you  mean  by  sleeping  V  Answer:
I  don't  hnoto.  You  [distinct  figure  of  a|5ut]  me  nineteen  times  and  think  Til
write  for  you."

Thus  we  see  that  local  anfesthesia  was  produced  on  the  hand  of  a  healthy
subject,  but  apparently  only  just  so  long  as  that  hand  was  writing  the
messages  of  a  submerged  self.  And  when,  on  a  later  day,  the  pencil  wa&
placed  in  the  left  hand  instead  of  the  right,  the  left  hand  took  up  the
inemories  of  the  right  hand's  previous  sufferings.

"  Here,"  says  Professor  James,  "as  the  reader  will  perceive,  we  have  the
consciousness  of  a  subject  split  into  two  parts,  one  of  which  expresses  itself
through  the  mouth,  and  the  other  through  the  hand,  whilst  both  are  in
communication  with  the  ear.  The  mouth-consciousness  is  ignorant  of  all  that
the  hand  suffers  or  does  ;  the  hand-consciousness  is  ignorant  of  pin-pricks".
inflicted  upon  other  parts  of  the  body  ;  and  of  what  more  remains  to  be
ascertained.  If  we  call  this  hand-consciousness  the  automatic  consciousness,-
then  we.  also  perceive  that  the  automatic  consciousness  may  transfer  itself
from  the  right  hand  to  the  left,  and  carry  its  own  peculiar  store  of  memories,
with  it."

Here,  then,  we  have  an  independent  experiment, — dating  from  before  the-
publication  of  M.  Binet's  experiments  above  discussed, — and  exhibiting  in  a
"  perfectly  healthy  "  subject  exactly  the  phenomena  which  M.  Binet  elicited
from  his  malades.  Perhaps  those  who  hold  that  automatism  is  always
associated  with  disease,  will  say  that  here  the  automatism  was he  solo


206


Hysterical  Subjects.


•tSupplement.


Ttianifestation  of  a  diseased  tendency  which  revealed  itself  in  no  other  way.
This  argument,  however,  is  plainly  liable  to  be  reduced  ad  absurdum  by
"the  continued  production  of  healthy  automatists.  And  after  Mr.  Gurney's
Aiid  Mr.  WingQeld's  experiments,  there  can,  I  think,  be  no  doubt  that
healthy  automatists  can  be  produced  in  any  quantity,  if  sufficient  trouble  be
taken.  But  while  in  France  we  see  well-equijjped  jjhysicians  experimenting
in  eager  rivalry  in  hospitals  teeming  with  hysterics,  we  in  England  have  no
such  organisation  either  of  researchers  or  of  subjects  for  research.  Instead
of  summoning  obedient  mcdades  in  endless  procession,  we  have  to  induce
healthy  independent  persons  to  lay  their  hands  on  planchettes  which  they
regard  as  grossly  superstitious,  or  to  hold  pencils  which  they  are  firmly
persuaded  that  no  automatism  will  ever  stir.  We  must  not  be  surprised  if
"the  French  report  a  dozen  experiments  to  our  one,  until  more  of  us  put  our
liands  to  the  wheel.  And  now  to  conclude  with  a  case  admittedly  bizarre,
admittedly  abnormal,  but  which  illustrates  with  even  absurd  unexijectedness
the  immense  variety  which  these  phenomena  of  dissociated  personality  may
-assume.  The  report,  included  in  Professor  James's  paper  above  cited,  comes
from  tlie  late  Dr.  Ira  Barrows,  of  Providence,  R.  I. ,  and  is  corroborated  by  his
surviving  partner,  and  by  the  mother  and  brother  of  the  late  patient  herself.

This  was  a  case  of  hystero-ejjilepsy,  in  the  course  of  which  the  patient
"complains  of  great  pain  in  right  arm,  more  and  more  intense,  when
suddenly  it  falls  down  by  her  side.  She  looks  at  it  in  amaaement.  Tliinks
it  belongs  to  some  one  else  ,  positive  it  is  not  hers.  .  ,  Cut  it,  prick  it,
■do  what  you  please  with  it,  she  takes  no  notice  of  it.  .  .  She  believes  it
to  be  an  arm  and  a  hand,  but  treats  it  as  if  it  had  intelligence  and  might
keep  away  from  her.  She  bites  it,  pounds  it,  pricks  it,  and  in  many  ways
seeks  to  drive  it  from  her. She  calls  it  '  Stumj)  ;  Old  Stump.' "

Now  comes  the  odd  part  of  the  story.  This  paralysed  arm,  which  used  to
write  automatically  on  its  own  account,  in  what  may  now  claim  to  be  the
orthodox  fashion,  showed  itself  in  one  way  unique  among  all  dissociated  arm-
personalities.  It  operated,  namely,  as  a  kind  of  guardian  angel  or  Dtemon
of  Socrates  ;  it  was  helpful  amid  the  hysteric  turmoil ;  it  was  perfectly
rational  ^vhile  the  unlucky  head  and  trunk  were  raving  in  frenzj'.

"  When  her  delirium  is  at  its  height,  as  well  as  at  all  other  times,  her
right  hand  is  rational,  asking  and  answering  questions  in  writiiig  ;  giving
directions,  trying  to  prevent  her  tearing  her  clothes.  When  she  pulls  out
her  hair  it  seizes  and  holds  her  left  hand.  When  .she  is  asleep  it  carries  on
conversation  the  same  ;  writes  poetry  ;  never  sleej^s  ;  acts  the  jjart  of  a  nurse
as  far  as  it  can  ;  pulls  the  bed  clothes  over  the  patient,  if  it  can  reach  them,
when  uncovered  ;  raps  on  the  head-board  to  awaken  her  mother  (who  always
sleeps  in  the  room),  if  anything  occurs,  as  spasms,"  &c.

"  Thy  right  hand,"  said  the  Psalmist,  "shall  teach  thee  terrible  things."
He  foresaw  that  the  uncontrollable  impulse,  as  against  the  enemies  of  the
Lord,  would  outrun  even  the  legitimate  thirst  for  slaughter.  But  it  needed
a  suljtler  psychology  to  teach  us  that  the  riglit  liand  may  moderate  as  well
as  madden,  may  control  instead  of  urging  the  violent  unreasoning  blow.  For
to  the  unsleeping  guardian  within  us  all  paths  of  externalisaticn  come  alike ;
while  yet  all  together  are  all  too  few,  and  glance,  voice,  hand  in  unison  caa
show  but  a  fragment  of  the  Self.


SupplemenL]


"Das  Loppel-ich,"


207


V.

"DAS  DOPPEL-TCH.'"
By  F.  W.  H.  Myeks.


We  are  glad  to  welcome  this  first  publication  of  the  Berlin  Society  for
l^xperiniental  Psychology,  a  body  whose  aims,  as  our  readers  well  know,  have
a  close  afBnity  with  our  own.  Dr.  Max  Dessoir,  secretary  of  that  society,
^ind  author  of  the  tractate  now  to  be  discussed,  is  already  known  to  us  as  the
compiler  of  an  accurate  and  serviceable  Bibliography  of  Hypnotism  and
kindred  subjects.  His  present  work,  while  consisting  mainly  of  a  careful  and
competent  digest  of  French  and  English  experiments  and  theories,  which  have
received  frequent  discussion  in  these  columns,  gives  evidence  also  of  indepen-
dent thought  and  philosophical  insight.  It  has  a  special  interest  as  one  of  the
pioneer  pamphlets  which  begin  to  mark  the  entrance  of  German  science  into
a  wide  region  of  experimental  psychology  in  which  the  Teutonic  founders  of
psycho-physiology  have  for  the  moment  been  outstripped  by  French,  and
perhaps  by  English,  inquiry.

Merely  indicating  the  lines  of  thought  which  the  earlier  part  of  the
tractate  pursues,  I  shall  reserve  my  space  mainly  for  certain  reflections
which  its  conclusion  suggests.

"  In  the  course  of  ordinary  life" — I  quote  a  passage  (p.  6)  which  gives  the
keynote  of  much  that  follows — "certain  actions  occur  which  presuppose  for
their  origination  all  the  faculties  of  the  human  spirit,  but  wliich  nevertheless
work  themselves  out  without  the  knowledge  of  the  agent.  These  actions  we
term  automatic.  Among  them  are  certain  automatic  movements,  as  the  act
of  dressing  oneself,  or  of  retracing  a  well-known  path  ;  and  some  other
automatic  performances,  such  as  counting  one's  steps,  or  adding  up  columns
of  figures.  These  latter  acts  plainly  indicate  the  existence  of  a  separate
train  of  memory  employed  upon  them.  And,  moreover,  although  they  take
place  without  the  agent's  hioivledge,  they  cannot  take  place  without  his
conscio}isness ;  they  cannot  he  tvulj  ^mconscious  acts.  They  must  in  some
fashion  belong  to  a  sw6-consciousness  which,  in  its  relation  to  the  far  more
potent  upper  consciousness,  may  best  be  understood  if  we  consider  it  as  a
secondary  consciousness.  And  if  we  regard  Consciousness  and  Memory  as
the  essential  constituents  of  an  Ego,  we  may  boldly  say  that  every  man  con-
ceals within  himself  the  germs  of  a  second  personality."

The  experiments  of  the  Berlin  Society  seem  to  have  thus  far  been  made
on  healthy  subjects  ;  and  Dr.  Dessoir  is  decidedly  opposed  to  the  vievt^  that
severance  of  personality  is  the  special  characteristic  of  hysteria.  _"In  dreams,"

1  Das  Boppel-Ich,  von  Max  Dessoir.  (Karl  Siegismund,  Berlin.)  This  forms
the fascicule  (it  is  numbered  II.,  but  a  subsequent  notice  corrects  this)  of  the
"Schriften  der  Gesellschaft  fiir  Experimental  Psj'cholog-ie  zu  Berlin."  A  second
fascicule  has  since  been  published,  containing  two  isapers,  by  Professor  Bastian  and
T.  von  Hellwald.


208


"  J)as  Doj)pel-ieh."


[Supplements


he  says,  p.  13.,  "in  states  of  intoxication,  in  accesses  of  somnambulism  or  of
epilepsy,  a  consciousness  distinct  from  llie  habitual  consciousness  assumes  tlie
sway  ;  and,  moreover,  mnemonic  chains,  more  or  less  coherent,  are  wont  to-
connect  these  isolated  periods  of  abnormality,  i  The  secondary  memory  thus-
originated  is  not  always  wholly  shut  ofFfrora  the  primary  train  of  existence, —
as  it  was  in  Macnish's  patient,  the  American  lady,  ^rather  there  is  generally
some  connection  between  the  two  memories,  as  in  the  case  of  Felida  X.  Bub
in  either  case  there  may  be  a  manifest  change  of  character  in  the  transition  to
the  secondary  self,  so  that  two  personalities-  in  every  way  disparate  may  inhabit
a  single  body.  In  the  case  of  hysterical  patients  the  dual  Ego  is  much  less-
fully  developed.  But  the  careful  study  of  their  automatic  movements  leads
to  the  same  conclusion  as  to  the  existence  and  nature  of  a  submerged  con-
sciousness as  is  suggested  by  the  inward  experience  of  healthy  men."

A  very  felicitous  experiment  (p.  19)  serves  to  illustrate  the  persistence^
throughout  healthy  waking  life,  of  a  submerged  consciousness  which  may  at
any  time  rise  to  the  surface  if  the  hypnotic  state  be  induced.

"  Several  friends  were in my  room, one  of whom, Mr.  W.,  was
reading  to  himself  while  the  rest  of  us  were  talking  with  one  another. '
Someone  happening  to  mention  the  name  of  Mr.  X.,  iii  whom  Mr.  W.  is-
much  interested,  Mr.W.  raised  his  head  and  asked  '  What  was  that  about  X?''
He  knew  nothing,  he  told  us,  of  our  previous  conversation  ;  he  had  only
heard  the  familiar  name,  as  often  happens. I  then  hypnotised  him,  with
his  consent,  and  when  he  was  pretty  deeply  entranced,  I  asked  him  again  as
to  the  conversation. To  our  great  astonishment,  he  now  repeated  to  us  the
sul)stance  of  our  whole  conversation  during  the  time  that  he  was  reading  to-
himself. In  this  case,  then,  there  was  a  perception  of  sensory  impressions, ,
but  not  in  the  consciousness  with  which  the  waking  man  worked  ; — rather  in
another  consciousness  which  found  its  first  opportunity  of  revealing  itself
in  the  hypnotic  trance."

In  this  case,  as  in  some  of  the  experiments  with  crystals  reported  in  the
last  Part  of  these  Proeeedings^v^e  find  the  unconscious  Self  noting, treasuring,
and  reproducing  certain  information,  conveyed  indeed  through  the  channel
of  the  ordinary  senses,  but  so  conveyed  that  it  never  reached  the  emergent  or-
ordinary  consciousness  of  that  same  percipient  in  whose  depths  it  was  all  the
while  being  registered.  From  this  it  is  an  easy  step  to  the  supposition  that
the  submerged  consciousness  may  stand  tin  innigsten  Zitsammenhang  mif
dem  Kurpcr"  and  that  the  somnambule  may  thus  possess  a  deeper  insight
into  his  own  organic  processes  than  belongs  to  him  in  tlie  waking  state.

"Perhaps,'' continues  Dr.  Dessoir (p.  31), "the secondary  Self'
presides  also  over  those  powers  of  perceptioir  and  action  at  a  distance-
■which  only  a  few  observers  have  as  j'et  admitted. In  experiments  on  thought- '
transference  it  is  observable  that  the. percipient  frequently  is  not  conscious  of
the  transferred  impression,  but  reproduces  it  by  automatic  word  or  drawing  ;  '
and  there  is  no  doubt  that  in  certain  subjects  the  receptivity  is  heightened  by
the  induction  of  the  hypnotic  trance,  or  of  some  analogous  state.  The

1  (Cf.  SPR.  Proceedings,  Vol.  III.  p.  225.)
2.  Dr.  Dessoir's  word  is  Individualitiiten. It  is  to  be  wished  that  a  general  agree
ment  could  be  reached  as  to  the  use  of  these  two  words. The  meaning  of  persona,  a-,
mask,  suggests  that  personality  sliould  be  used  for  the  lower  or  less  uersisteut  unitv.


Supplement.]


" Las  Doppel-ich"


209


hypnotisation  at  a  distance,  moreover,  which  French  savants  have  established
as  a  fact,  is  best  thus  explained,  by  ascribing  to  the  unconscious  Self  a  far-
reaching  range  of  perception,  and  a  power  of  developing  an  impression
telepathically  received  as  freely  as  though  it  had  arrived  by  the  ordinary
channels  of  sense."

Dr.  Dessoir,  however,  seems  to  suppose  that  in  experiments  on  thought^
transference  with  numbers,  the  "number-habit"  constitutes  a  risk  of  error
difficult  to  exclude.  Perhaps  a  few  words  on  this  subject  may  here  be  in
place  ;  since  the  number-habit  seems  sometimes  to  be  regarded  as  more  of  a
mystery,  and  sometimes  as  more  of  a  discovery,  than  it  is  in  fact.  Every
psychical  act  or  incident  of  any  kind, — perception,  image,  choice,  motor
impulse,  or  what  you  will, — is  an  extremely  complex  thing.  It  is  the  result
of  the  co-operation  of  a  great  number  of  nervous  elements,  which  cannot
possibly  work  in  exactly  the  same  way  in  any  two  persons,  or  even  for  the  same
person  at  different  times.  In  the  first  place,  for  each  of  these  complex  acts
there  will  be  a  limit  of  attainment  beyond  which  each  person  cannot  go;  as  each
man  is  found  to  have  his  "  personal  equation  "  when  the  object  is  to  observe
as  promptly  as  possible  the  transit  of  a  star.  In  the  second  place,  whenever
a  choice  between  acts  at  all  dissimilar  has  to  be  made,  there  will  be  a  ixith  of
least  resistance  common  either  to  all  mankind,  or  to  some  special  section  of
mankind.  Thus  it  is  easier  to  read  the  letter  W  than  the  letter  E,  etc.
A  great  variety  of  such  experiments  have  been  made  ;  and  we  may  safely
say  that  even  between  such  small  efforts  as  the  reading,  writing,  uttering,  ■
or  mentally  picturing  any  given  Arabic  numerals  there  must  be  some
difference  in  the  effort  required  ;  and  consequently  some  general  number-
habit  which  indicates  what  is  the  path  of  least  resistance  for  the  majoritj-  of
men.  But  where  the  difference  of  effort  is  so  slight,  the  general  or  popular
number-habit  will  be  very  weak,  and  it  may  easily  be  over-borne  in  any
given  man  by  some  idiosyncratic  i^reference.  For  in  the  third  place,  — and
this  perhaps  has  not  always  been  clearly  seen,—  there  is  liable  to  exist  in
each  man  an  idiosyncratic  preference  for  one  of  two  efforts  demonstrably
equivalent, — such  idiosyncratic  preference  depending  on  some  asymmetiy
in  his  own  mental  images.  Let  there  be  two  hazards  at  billiards  which
are  mathematically  of  identical  difficulty,  the  object-ball  needing  to  be  struck
within  the  same  limits  of  accuracy  in  each  case,  althougli  in  slightly  differing
ways, — and  you  will  find  A  choosing  one  hazard  and  B  the  other,  not  at
random,  but  in  accordance  with  some  asymmetry  in  their  respective  mental
XHctures  of  table,  balls,  and  probable  results  of  impact.  And  of  course-
this  idiosyncratic  preference — depending  perhaps  originally  on  some
inequality  of  early  experience — will  tend  to  intensify  itself,  if  yielded  to,
until  a  real  muscular  preference  is  superadded  to  the  preference  based
upon  mere  conceptual  asymmetry.

There  is  no  choice,  I  say,  however  simple  or  arbitrary — not  even  the
choice  between  heads  and  tails  or  odd  and  even — which  the  human  mind  can'
be  trusted  to  make  as  impartially  as  the  spun  penny  or  the  roulette-balL
wordd  make  it.

There  will  presumably  therefore  be  idiosyncratic  number-habits,
as  well  as  general  number-habits,  and  although  these  are  not  likely  to
become  strong  without  being  observed,  still  less  to  become  so  potent  as  to-

P


210


"Das  Loppel-ich."


[Supplement.


explain  coincidences  in  douhle-nnmhcrs  thought  of  by  two  sepamte  minds,  it
is  undoubtedly  proper  to  eliminate  this  possible  source  of  error  from  experi-
ments in  thought-transference.  We  have  made  it  a  rule,  since  our  first  few-
experiments,  to  replace  numbers  in  a  bag,  or  cards  in  the  pack,  and  shuffle
between  each  trial,  and  draw  at  random  ;  as  described,  for  instance,  in
Fhantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  34  ;  Vol.  II.,  p.  G53.1

A  moment's  thought  will  show,  however,  that  if  we  thus  anniliilate  the
influence  of  the  number-habit  in  the  ajoit,  or  person  who  offers  the  numbers
for  thought-transference,  the  existence  of  a  number-habit  in  the  percipient,
or  person  who  guesses  the  numbers,  will  in  no  way  diminish,  but  may  possibly
even  improve,  the  evidential  value  of  any  excess  of  coincidences  between  the
numbers  offered  and  the  numbers  guessed.''^  Suppose,  to  take  an  extreme
case,  that  the  percipient's  number-habit  were,  so  strong  that  he  always
guessed  a  3,  then  if  he  deserted  his  3  and  guessed  a  5  just  when  the  agent
thought  of  5  the  coincidence  would  be  much  more  striking  than  if  he  had
had  no  number-preference  of  his  own  to  overcome.  Of  course,  in  practice
there  are  no  such  gross  effects  as  this  ;  and  for  evidential  purposes  we  may
simply  neglect  the  percipient's  number-habit  if  we  take  care  to  neutralise
the  agent's  number-habit  or  card-liabit  by  making  him  draw  his  cards  or  his
numbers  at  random.

From  this  topic—  on  which  Dr.  Dessoir  touches  rather  by  the  way — I  pass
on  to  a  more  complex  problem.  Recognising  our  personality  as  no  single  or
simple  thing,  are  we  to  regard  it  as  potentially  multiplex,  or  diqylex  only  ?  ^

"  While  there  are  abundant  examples,"  says  Dr.  Dessoir  (p.  26)  "  of  a
double  consciousness,  in  the  waiving  life,  the  dreams,  and  the  alinormal  states
of  every  one  of  us,  we  find,  on  the  other  hand, that  very  few  observers  enter
the  lists  in  defence  of  the  imdtiplicity  of  the  Ego.  A  mere  tripjlicity,  indeed,
would  not  suffice.  Were  we  to  discover,  in  some  subject,  with  a  third  con-
dition like  Madame  B.'s,  that  there  were  still  intelligent  acts  which  accom-
plished themselves  below  the  level  of  that  third  consciousness,  we  should
then  strike  down  on  a  yet  deeper  layer  of  consciousness,  and  so  on  ad
infinitum.  We  should  arrive  at  a  kind  of  onion-structure  of  the  Soul  !  But
since  the  facts  are  there,  and  refuse  to  be  explained  away  by  the  facile
hypothesis  of  suggestion,  we  shall  need  the  most  patient  psychological  analysis
to  bring  us  to  our  goal.  In  the  present  position  of  our  knowledge  I  think
that  the  wisest  course  is  to  suspend  our  judgment,  and  to  be  satisfied  with
the  provisional  hypothesis  that  in  certain  cases  a  further  division  of  the
secondary  Self  has  been  established. That  a  consciousness  deejier  than  the

1  I  mention  this  because  Professor  C.  S.  Minot  has  animadverted  in  the  American
Society  for  Psychical  Research  Proceedings  on  our  early  omission  (rectified  long  before
his  article  appeared)  to  take  this  precaution.  See  American  S.P.R.  Proceedings,
Part  IV.,  for  his  criticism  and  Mr.  Hodgson's  reply.

-  Professor  Minot  hardly  seems  to  have  caught  this  point.  "  The  two  minds,"
Tie  says  (American  Pro(;cctZmr/.?,Vol  I.,  p.  86),  "were  working  differently,  each  accord-
ing to  its  own  habits;  hence  it  is  extremely  improbable  that  the  excess  of  right  guesses
was  due  to  anything  but  chance  coincidence."  In  reality,  the  habit  of  tlie  jiercipient's
mind,  if  different,  as  here  stated,  from  the  agent's  habit,  would  not  diminish,  but  in-
•creaso,  the  evidential  value  of  the  coincidences.

3  On  this  point  see  Mr.  Barkworth's  letters  in  the  S.P.R.  Journcd,  March  and
April,  1889.


Supplement.]


"  Das  Do'ppel-ich!


hypnotic  can  be  artificially  created  is  shown  by  the  Tvell-hnown  negative
hallucinations  of  hypnotised  subjects  [where  certain  objects  are  kept  out  of  the
hypnotic  consciousness  by  some  still  subjacent  intelligence].  But  for  the
formation  of  a  new  personality  we  need  a  new  mnemonic  chain  [as  well  as  a
new  consciousness], — and  this  seems  seldom  to  be  found  in  existence."

I  do  not  disagree  with  this  ;  but  I  think  that  we  may  probe  tlie  matter
still  deeper.  It  is  not  by  a  mere  counting  of  heads  (to  use  a  somewhat
inappropriate  metaphor)  that  we  must  decide  the  question  as  to  how  many
potential  personalities  we  carry  within  us.  "  Man  never  knows  how
anthropomorphic  he  is  "  ;  and  we  have  still  to  guard  against  anthropo-
morphism even  while  we  are  frankly  contemplating  ourselves  in  a  state  of
segmentation.  I  mean  that  we  must  not  let  the  unavoidable  use  of  the
word  "  personality  "  deceive  us  into  supposing  that  any  separate  conscious-
ness, any  distinct  chain  of  memory  which  rises  within  us  must  necessarily
form  a  constituent  of  a  secondary  personality  of  somewhat  the  same  scope
and  stature  as  the  first.  What  seems  really  to  happen  is  something  far  more
-complex  than  a  mere  fission  into  two  personalities, — the  second  as  good  as
the  first,  or  better.  There  is  no  persistent  plane  of  cleavage  ;  we  split
asymmetrically  ;  and  the  new  personalities  thus  formed  are  by  no  means
necessarily  homologous  with  the  old.  There  is  every  gradation  from  a
secondary  state  like  Felida  X.'s,  more  stable  than  the  primary,  to  the  week-
long  or  hour-long  "  controls  "  w^hich  sway  the  hand  and  sign  the  messages  of
the  graphic  automatist.

Or  take  the  class  of  cases  mentioned  by  Dr.  Dessoir  himself.  The  hypno-
tised A  is  told  that  B  has  left  the  room  ;  and,  consequently,  cannot  see  B.  ;
— i.e.  (as  has  been  amply  shown  by  Liegeois  and  others),  he  does  physically
see  B,  but  he  receives  a  constant,  watchful,  dominating  suggestion  from
somewhat  within  \ym\  that  B  cannot  be  seen.  This  is  what  th.ey  call  at  the
Salpetriere,  a  "  systeniatised  anaisthesia. "  The  name  is  good;  but  who
.«ystematises  the  anaesthesia  ?  What  intelligence  is  it  which  thus  prevents  A
from  "  psj'chically  S3eing  "  B,  who  is  standing  in  the  room  before  his  ej'es  ?
The  suggestion  mi  st  cjnre,  as  Dr.  Dessoir  justly  suggests,  from  a  still  subjacent
•consciousness.  But  where,  he  inquires,  is  the  chain  of  memory  belonging  to
that  consciousness,  and  needed  to  complete  a  subjacent  personality — if  such
loersonality  could  exist  ?  In  answer,  I  would  say  that  T  believe  that  by  pro-
per artifices  that  third  inhibitory  personality  could  be  tracked  in  other
moments  of  the  subject's  life.  But  waiving  tliis  point,  I  will  suppose  tliat
"the  hypothetical  tliird  ])ersonality  comes  into  being  with  the  experiment  and
Tanislies  at  its  close.  Well,  at  any  rate,  it  has  existed  dnrini-j  the  experi-
mient  ;  it  has  fulfilled  a  task  which  needed  memory,  or  at  any  rate  continuous
^attention,  prolonged  over  an  hour.  And  wliat  hard  and  fast  rule  can  we
unake  as  to  the  necessary  length  of  a  chain  of  memory  v/hich  is  to
■■constitute  a  personality?  Slust  it  last  all  life  long?  Then,  if  a  man's
brain  is  destined  to  soften  next  year,  he  is  not  a  personality  to-day.
Or,  again,  with  what  definiteness  of  exclusion  need  the  new  memory
be  shut  oflF  from  the  old  1  It  sometimes  happens,  as  Delboeuf  and  others
have  shown,  that  a  subject  who  on  waking  from  the  hypnotic  trance
remembers  nothing  can  be  led  by  artifice  to  recollect  all  that  he  has  done.
Js  his  hypnotic  personality  annulled  when  this  fusion  of  memories  is  efiFected?

p  2


212


''Das  Boppel-icli."


[Supplement.


I  have  said  thab  there  is  no  persistent  plane  of  cleavage  to  which  we  can
point  as  separating  two  or  more  personalities  within  us.  But,  of  course,  there
are  certain  planes  of  cleavage  within  us  which  (as  Hughlings-Jackson  has
shown)  we  can  in  imagination  distinguish  with  fruitful  results.  We  can  con-
ceive of  our  nervous  system  as  consisting  of  three  strata,  or  three  levels  of
evolution,  and  we  can  trace  in  dissolutive  processes  the  results  of  the  cessation
of  the  activity  of  one  stratum  after  another.^  But  this  is  not  the  kind  of  cleav-
age which  will  make  a  fresh  personality.  For  that  purpose  the  cleavage  must
not  be  horizontal,  but  to  some  extent  at  least  vertical  ;  that  is  to  say,  that
each  personality  must  include  a  certain  amount  of  work  done  by  the  highest
centres  of  all ; — as  well  as  much  work  done  by  the  middle  centres,  and  all
the  work  done  by  the  lowest  centres, — as  heart-action  and  vegetative
processes.

The  lowest  centres,  I  say,  mu<^t  go  on  working  throughout  every  change
of  personality,  or  the  machine  will  stop  altogether.  The  middle  centres —
sansory  and  motor  arrangements — may  divide  their  activities  between  several
personalities,  as  in  the  hysterical  cases  which  Messrs.  Binet  and  Janet
discuss.  We  can,  to  a  great  extent,  trace  their  lines  of  division,  and  we  can
draw  our  schemes  of  personalities,  each  possessing  such  and  such
sensory  activities,  motor  activities,  &c.  But  when  we  come  to  the-
higher  centres  the  diflicully  is  much  greater.  We  do  not  know  what
proportion  of  activities  of  higher  centres  is  needful  to  constitute  a  new
chain  of  memory,  a  separate  consciousness.  And,  moreover,  it  is  by  no-
means  clear  that  the  centres  which  for  our  waking  life  are  the  highest  are
also  the  highest  or  ruling  centres  for  some  of  these  secondary  states.  Dr.  Des-
soir  seems  to  mo  to  discern  this  fact,  but  not  fully  to  apjirehend  its  bearing  on
the  ultimate  question  as  to  what  is  the  deepest  or  original  form  of  our  Ego.  He
traces,  in  language  to  which  we  may  fully  assent,  the  rise  of  our  personality,
as  now  known,  from  the  combination  of  the  elementary  or  segmental  egos  of
which  our  "  colonial  "  ancestors  were  composed.

"Tftlienthc  perfection  of  tlie  animal  organisation  consists  in  this; —
that  from  an  original  multiplicity  of  groups  the  individual  is  developed  ; — we
are  entitled  to  regard  the  lower  nerve-centres  in  men  as  vestiges  of  an  earlier
system  of  consciousness.  Little  of  the  work  done  in  those  centres  now  arrives
at  complete  consciousness  ;  and  thence  we  may  infer  that  the  elEcacy  of  the
mechanism  is  synonymous  v/ith  its  automatism.  And  if  herewith  v/e  compare
the  fact  of  common  experience,  that  every" psychical  activity  becomes  uncon-
scious in  proportion  as  it  is  fully  developed — as  reading  passes  from  spelling
to  the  glance  over  whole  sentences  at  a  time — we  shall  have  to  consider
[normal  or  waking]  'consciousness'  as  the  subjective  expression  of  the
work  of  acquisition  which  the  mind  is  carrying  on,  as  the  accompanying
indication  of  an  incomplete  co-ordination  of  nerve-pathways,  or,  in  strictly
psychological  language,  as  the  defect  of  habit."

Regarded  either  from  the  psychical  or  from  the  physical  side,  our  highest
waking  consciousness  represents  unstable  equilibria,  processes  maintained
with  difliculty,  the  TeX^vralov  emyivi'rji.ia  of many  complex  combinations-

1  See  Dr.  Hughlings-Jackson's  Hemarks  on  Evolution  and  Dissolution  of  thi
mrvous  Si/stcm,  p.  12,  &c. (Loudon :  John  Bate  and  Sons. 18?8  )


-Supplement.]


"Das  DopioeL-icli."


213


As  Dr.  HugHings- Jackson  has  said^  :  "There  is  rio  antncratic'  mind
sitting  at  the  top  to  receive  sensations  as  a  sort  of  raw  material,  out
of  which  to  manufacture  ideas,  &c.,  and  then  to  associate  these  ideas.
Answering  to  the  constitution  (mainly  inherited)  of  the  anatomical
substrata  of  subject-consciousness,  ideas  rise  up  combined,  in  association,
&c.,  and  coining  out  of  subject-consciousness  they  then  constitute  the  object-

■  -consciousness  of  the  moment.  .  .  .  There  are  different  degrees  of  lixity
■of  nervous  arrangements,  from  those  strongly  organised,  very  automatic,
and  comparatively  settled  and  unalterable,  up  to  those  iioio  making  (nerve-
stuff  being  for  the  first  time  traversed  by  nerve-currents  developed  by  the
more  and  eaidier  organised  nervous  arrangements) ;  those  now  malciiuj  will
lie,  of  course,  least  organised,  least  automatic,  and  caj^able  of  most  modifica-
tion. The  order  from  most  strongly  organised  to  least  organised  is  the
order  from  lowesttowardshighestlayersof  thehighestcentres.  .  .  .  Many  of
the  new  recently-made  nervous  arrangements  will  be  evanescent;  I  mean  that
tliey  v/ill  soon  cease  to  be  even  the  '  potential  '  nervous  arrangements  I  spoko
of.  I  suppose  that  one  of  the  uses  of  sleep  is  to  sweep  the  higher  layers  of
the  highest  centres  clean  of  many  such  nervous  arrangements."

Now  I  maintain  that  the  sub-conscious  Self,  on  the  other  hand,  does  not
attain  manifestation  through  these  recent  and  unstable  nervous  arrangements.
Its  emergence  does  not seem  to depend  upon its securing a  lai-ger

.  share  of  the  highest  nervous  activities  of  the  conscious  self.  It  attains
its  development — advances  to  the  exercise  of  its  characteristic  i:)owers
— in  a  difierent  way.  It  advances,  not  by  passing  into  a  phase  of  mental
stress  and  friction,  such  as  that  which  corresponds  to  the  most  complex
waking  thought,  but  by  an  apparently  effortless  improvement  in  the  veri-
<licality  of  its  characteristic  hallucinatory  content.  It  begins — not  to  rack  its
lirains  for  arguments — but  placidly  to  image  forth  no  longer  false  things,  but
true.  And  this  (as  I  have  often  said)  I  believe  to  hold  good  both  for  the
subject's  own  creative  power  or  "genius,"  and  for  the  influences  tele-
jiathically  transmitted  to  him  from  other  minds.  So  far  as  the  creations  of
genius  are  concerned,  I  can  adopt  Dr.  Dessoir's  statement.

"  The  new  Psychology,"  he  says  (p.  37),  "  has  convincingly  demonstrated
that  in  every  conception  and  every  idea,  an  image  or  a  group  of  images  must
be  present.  But  since  these  images,  like  the  original  perceptions  of  which
they  are  the  recrudescence, are  always  endeavouring  to  externalise  themselves,
they  would  always  eventuate  in  actual  hallucination,  did  not  the  competition
■of  other  memory-pictures  and  of  new  sensations  hinder  their  development.
When  these  checks  are  removed, — as  in  sleep,  the  hypnotic  trance,  and  cer-
tain pathological  states, — the  hallucinatory  germ  can  unfold  itself  freely  ;
"while,  on  the  other  hand,  in  ordinary  waking  thought  we  have  to  deal  with  a
siiccession  of  uncompleted  hallucinations.  That  state  which  is  usually  taken
to  be  fundamental  in  us  is  in  effect  the  suppression  of  our  natural  tendencies  ;
:and  hallucination — commonly  regarded  as  a  merely  morbid  phenomenon —
represents,  at  least  in  its  nascent  condition,  the  main  trunk  of  our  psychical
-existence.  The  fully-conscious  life  of  the  spirit  seems  to  rest  upon  a  sub-
.fitnituiu  of  reflex  action  of  a  hallucinatory  type.  ,  ,  It  is  only  when  Imagina-


1  Op.  cit.  pp.  9,  10,  text  and  note,


'214


"  Das  JJopiDcl-ich.


[SuppTemenc


tion  13  comprehended  as  a  function  of  the  secondary  Self,  and  Hallucination,
Inspiration, Change  of  Personality,  are  understood  as  projections  from  within
outwards,  with  more  or  less  of  sensory  clothing,  — manifestations,  in  short,
of  that  exteriMli»<'}{'j  process  which  is  always  at  work  witliin  us  ; — it  is  only
then,  I  say,  that  the  creative  imagination  of  the  artist  is  understood  and
traced  to  its  root. "

With  all  this  I  concur,  and  I  have  urged  elsewhere  that  the  truest  way  of
regarding  hallucinations  is  to  consider  them  as  messages  addressed  by  a  sub-
merged to  an  emergent  stratum  of  the  personality.  These  messages  may  be
true  or  false,  meaningless  or  of  weighty  import,  according  to  the  stratum  of
the  personality  from  which  they  rise.  But  messages  from  the  sub-conscious^
of  one  sort  or  another,  they  are;  and  for  that  reason  alone  they  would  deserve
our  most  careful  analysis.  Note,  moreover,  as  an  iiKlication  of  the  way  in
which  the  unconscious  Self  works,  that  whereas  hallucinations  — visual
hallucinations  in  particular  —  often  rej)resent  the  highest  creative  pov/er  to
which  tlie  percipient's  mind  ever  attains,  they  are  developed,  nevertheless,
without  his  conscious  effort,  and  as  though  by  the  mere  act  of  releasing
somewhat  that  was  already  formed  v.dthin.  They  come  to  us  unexpected,
3onfusing;  enigm-itic  ;  but  as  with  the  golden  figures  on  Achilles'  shield,  the
hidden  Power  which  forged  them  was  master  of  its  art  indeed  : —
■iToUl  dalSaXa  ttoWci  I8vlrjcn  TTpaTTibeacriv.

And  thus  we  come  to  the  question  of  the  relative  dignity,  th  relative
reality  of  the  emergent  and  the  fundamental  Self.  "  From  the  foregoing
discussions,"  says  Dr.  Dessoir,  "it  miglit  perhaps  appear  as  though  the
dominance  of  the  sub-conscious  indicated  a  higher  condition  of  spiritual
activity.  That  is  by  no  means  the  case.  Such  dominance  can  indeed  give
facility  for  the  highest  creative  production,  but  without  itself  representing
a  high  psychical  level.  It  is  man's  oriyinal  condition,  no  doubt,  but  so  also-
is  it  his  most  primitive  condition  ;  it  works  in  the  complctest  manner,  but
not  in  the  manner  most  in  harmony  with  Reality  and  the  End  of  Life."

Now,  if  Genius  and  Ecstacy  (as  has  been  here  implied)  belong  to  the  realm-
of  tlie  Sub-conscious,  then  I  say  that  you  must  first  tell  us  what  is  Reality,
and  what  /.•>  the  End  of  Life,  before  we  decide  whether  Genius  and  Ecstacy  are
out  of  harmony  with  these.  What  is  undoubtedly  true  is  that  our  waking-
emergent  personality  is  that  which  is  best  suited  to  carry  on  the  struggle  for
existence.  Itself,  as  I  believe,  the  result  of  natural  selection,  it  inevitably
represents  that  aspect  of  our  being  which  can  best  help  us  to  overrun  the
earth.  More  than  this  we  cannot  say.  If,  as  we  get  deeper  down,  we  come-
on  ever  more  definite  indications  of  powers  and  tendencies  v/ithin  ourselves,
which  are  not  such  as  natural  selection  could  have  been  expected  to  develop,
then  we  may  begin  to  wonder  on  what  it  was  that  the  terrene  process  of
natural  selection,  as  we  have  it,  began  at  the  first  to  exercise  modifying
power.  To  such  a  question  no  answer  whatever  can  be  given  Vv-hich  is  not  in.
some  sense  mystical,  or  rather  metempirical,  as  dealing  with  hypotheses^
which  no  experience  of  ours  can  test.  But  it  should  be  understood  that
there  is  no  metaphysical,  no  physiological  answer  in  possession  of  the  field  ;:
the  competition  is  open,  the  course  is  clear.  In  the  present  disintegration,
as  it  may  be  called,  both  of  the  metaphysical  and  of  the  physiological  con-
ception of  man's  being.  Dr.  Dessoir  urges  the  loss  sustained on  the-


Supplement.]


"Das  Doppel-ich."


215


metaphysical  side.  " Man}' facts,"  he  says  (p.  40),  "which  Philosophy  is
wont  to  adduce  as  proofs  of  the  existence  of  an  immortal  soul,  may  be  equally
well  explained  by  the  existence  of  an  empirical  secondary  Self  ;  and  to  this
Self  must  Occultism  transfer  the  supersensory  faculties  of  man."  So  be  it ;
to  the  secondary,  to  the  submerged  Self  must,  not  decaying  Occultism,  but
advancing  Science  refer  whatsoever  faculties  are  not  accounted  for  by  what
we  call  normal  development,  terrene  and  traceable  evolution.

But  the  question  of  origin  will  still  remain  ;  and  it  is  not  really  a
hypothesis  wilder  than  another  if  we  suppose  it  possible  that  that  portion
of  the  cosmic  energy  which  operates  through  the  organism  of  each  one  of  us
was  in  some  sense  individualised  before  its  descent  into  generation,  and
pours  the  potentialities  of  larger  being  into  the  earthen  vessels  which  ib
fills  and  overflows.

On  points  like  these  all  that  anyone  can  fairly  claim  is  that  the  one
speculative  opinion  should  be  accorded  as  full  a  right  of  existence  as  the
other.  And — to  take  leave  at  length  of  our  author — there  is  no  lack  of
fairness  or  candour  in  Dr.  Dessoir's  statement  of  opinions  not  his  own.
Agreeing  with  him  as  I  do  for  the  most  part,  I  feel  in  disagreement  as
fully  as  in  agreement  the  value,  along  aU,  our  range  of  inq^uhy,  of  so
capable  and  painstaking  a  fellow-worker.


216


Dr.  Jules  Janet  on  Hysteria  and  [Supplement.,


YI.

DR.  JULES  JANET  ON  HYSTERIA  AND  DOUBLE
• ..  PERSONALITY.
"  '■  By  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


"  L'Hijstcrtc  et  V Ilijpnof  ittme/Vaprh  la  Theoric  de  la  Double  Pcrsonnalitd,"  is
the  title  of  a  paper  published  by  Dr.  Jules  Janet — brother  of  Prof.
Pierre  .Janet,  and  nephew  of  the  well-known  Prof.  Paul  Janet, — in  the  Revue
Scientifiiine,  May  19th,  1888.

Though  brief, the  paper  is  remarkable  from  several  points  of  view.  In  the
first  place,  it  shows  by  a  striking  example  how  far  we,  are  ivom  having
exhausted  the  possibilities  of  hypnotism, — even  as  applied  to  a  subject  who
has  been  for  years  the  object  of  hyjjnotic  treatment.  And  in  the  second
2>lace,  it  affords  a  strong  confirmation  to  the  old  view  on  which  Elliotson  and
his  group  insisted, — and  which  one  or  two  writers  in  these  Proceedings  were
for  some  years  practically  alone  in  supporting, — that  there  is  something  in
the  effect  of  "mesmeric  passes"  which  is  specifically  different  from  the
effect  of  Braidian  or  other  forms  of  stimulation.

Blanche  Witt-  is  one  of  the  best  known  personalities — or  groups  of
personalities — in  Paris.  A  liystero-epileptic  of  the  most  pronounced  type,
she  has  never  been  able  for  long  together  to  meet  the  stresses  of  ordinary
life.  She  has  long  been  an  inmate  of  the  Salpelriere  ;  and  some  of  my
readers  may  have  seen  her  exhibited  there,  at  Prof.  Charcot's  lectures,  or
l)y  the  kindness  of  Dr.  Fere  or  other  physicians,  as  the  type — I  may
almost  say  the  prototype — of  the  celebi-ated  "  three  stages  "  of  lethargy,
catalepsy,  and  somnambulism,  of  which  slie  realised  every  characteristic
detail  with  marvellous  precision.  Arrived  at  somnambulism,  her  state  could
be  no  further  changed  by  the  various  means  emjJoyed, — closing  or  opening
the  eyes,  rubbing  thetoj^  of  the  head,  startling  with  lights  or  sounds,  &c. —
and  she  was  led  back  to  waking  life  through  the  stages  in  inverse  order.

She  was  treated,  it  is  needless  to  say,  with  great  care  and  kindness  ;
and  her  hysterical  "  crises  "  were  frequently  averted  by  hypnotic  suggestion.
But  in  spite  of  all  the  skill  and  experience  brought  to  bear  on  her  case,  no
one  succeeded  in  removing, — except  for  a  few  minutes  at  a  time  by  the  action
of  gold,  magnets,  or  electricity, — the  various  permanent  "teres"  or  defects
of  sensibility,  which  signalised  her  deep-seated  hysterical  trouble.

In  all  her  states  she  was  without  feeling  of  contact,  feeling  of  position,
or  feeling  of  pain.  When  her  eyes  were  closed  (in  the  waking  state,)  she
could  not  stand  upright,  nor  close  her  hands  completely,  nor  hold  a  heavy
object.  She  could  not  hear  with  the  left  ear,  nor  see  colours  with  the  left
€ye,  whose  visual  field,  moreover,  was  greatly  restricted.

Such  was  her  condition  when  she  came  under  Dr.  Dumontjiallier's  charge
at  another  hospital, — the  Hotel  Dieu, — and  was  hypnotised  by  M.  Jules  Janet.
She  passed  as  usual  through  the  three  "  classical  "  stages. But  M.  Janet, —


t?upplement.l


Douhle  Personality.


217


without,  as  I  understand,  any  preconceived  theory  as  to  the  result, —
determined  to  try  what  a  prolongation  of  passes  would  effect.  Instead  of
opening  the  subject's  eyes  in  the  lethargic  stage, — the  regular  method  for
inducing  the  cataleptic  stage, —  he  continued  to  make  passes,  and  presently
found  that  she  passed  into  an  absolutely  inert  state, — "  the  deep  state  "  of
our  English  experiments,  in  which  no  muscular  contraction  could  be  obtained
by  pressure,  nor  did  opening  of  the  eyes  induce  catalepsy.  After  some
futher  passes  the  subject  re-awakened  into  what  seemed  at  first  sight  simply
a  more  alert  somnambulism  than  ever  before.

But  on  examining  this  new  condition  it  was  found  to  be  no  mere  slight
modification  of  states  previously  obtained,  but  a  state  reconstructed,  so  to
say,  from  top  to  bottom.  In  the  first  place,  Blanche  Witt-  was  now
perfectly  possessed  of  the  senses  of  touch, — capable  of  perceiving  contact,
j)Osition,  heat,  and  pain.  She  could  now  close  her  hands  perfectly,  and
compress  the  dynamometer  with  normal  power.  She  heard  perfectly  with  her
left  ear,  previously  deaf,  and  saw  normally  with  both  eyes.  It  was  no
longer  possible  to  inspire  in  her  any  hallucination.  In  one  point  alone  did
she  differ  from  a  normal  person  ;  namely  in  her  excessive  electivity,  or
determination  to  attend  to  her  hypnotiser  alone,  although  she  was  perfectly
capable  of  hearing  and  talking  to  other  people.

In  this  second  state,  "  Blanche  2  " — as  the  reader  will  doubtless  expect —
liad  a  full  remembrance  of  the  life  of  "Blanche  1,"  while  Blanche  1  knew
nothing  of  Blanche  2.  A  further  point  of  interest  was  the  determination  of
the  true  position  of  the  "  three  classical  stages  "  in  Blanche's  personality.
It  was  found  that  when  she  was  in  her  first  or  ordinary  somnambulism  her
memory  extended  over  the  fully-developed  state  of  Blanche  2, — so  that  we
may  consider  the  "  three  classical  stages"  as  incomplete  manifestations  of
Blanche  2,  who  had  never  till  now  been  able  to  come  fully  to  the  front.

Furthermore, —  as  the  reader  either  of  Mr.  Gurney's  or  of  Prof.  Pierre
Janet's  experiments  will  expect, — it  was  not  difficult  to  show  that  Blanche  2
really  existed  throughout  the  whole  life  of  Blanche  1.  If  colours  were
shown  to  Blanche  1  (with  her  right  eye  blinded)  and  she  failed  to  distinguish
them,  Blanche  2  nevertheless  saw  them  perfectly, — with  the  same  eye  and
.at  the  same  moment, — and,  when  summoned,  could  describe  what  she  had
seen.  Or  if  Blanche  1  were  pinched  or  pricked,  to  demonstrate  her  insensi-
"bility,  Blanche  2  felt  everything,  and,  when  summoned,  began  to  complain.
It  is  strange  to  reflect  for  how  many  years  the  dumbly-raging  Blanche  2  has
thus  assisted  at  exjjeriments  to  which  Blanche  1  submitted  with  easy
■complaisance.  It  reminds  one  of  the  difficulty  of  pleasing  both  personalities
.at  a  time  which  is  sometimes  found  when  it  is  a  question  in  which  state  to
feed  a  hypnotised  subject.  There  is  an  old  case  in  the  Zoist  where  a  young-
woman  used  to  insist  so  strongly  in  the  hypnotic  state  that  tJtcii  was  the  time
to  give  her  her  dinner,  that  the  kind  doctors  consented.  But  when  she
.awoke  and  saw  the  empty  plate,  she  would  burst  into  tears.

Once  more,  it  appeared  that  the  chloroformed  condition,  and  in  some
sense  normal  sleep  itself,  belonged  to  Blanche  2  rather  than  to  Blanche  1.
J31anche  2  could  remember  what  liad  happened  during  the  chloroformio
trance,  and  could  recount  ordinary  dreams  of  which  Blanche  1  had  no
liuowledge.  -


218


Br.  Jules  Janet  on  Hysteria  and  [Supplement.


-  On  the  whole,  then,  we  may  say  that  Blanche  2  represents — not,  indeed,-
the  complete  personality,  for  that  is  never  represented  by  any  state  of  any  of
us, — but  at  least  a  pretty  complete  group  or  co-ordination  of  the  various
elements  which  go  to  make  up  a  normal  human  being.  Blanche  1,  on  the
other  hand, is  scantily  supplied  with  these  elements  ;  she  has  only  just  enough
to  get  on  with  ; — namely,  motility,  speech,  vision  of  one  eye  and  hearing  of
one  ear.  Blanche  2  adds  to  these  vision  of  the  other  eye,  hearing  of  the
other  ear,  and  general  and  muscular  sensibility.  And  M.  Janet  urges  that
we  may  regard  this  incomplete  endowment  of  the  primary  personality,
(primary  here  only  in  the  sense  that  it  is  the  luibitual  one),  as  the  difierentia
of  hysteria.

"  In  short,"  he  says,  "  every  man  presents  two  personalities,  one
conscious  and  one  incognised  [he  justly  urges  that  this  second  person-
ality is  hien  plutut  inconcue  qri'iiiconsciente']  :  in  the  normal  man  these  are
equal,  equilibrated,  each  of  them  complete  ;  in  the  hysteric  they  are
unequal  and  disec|uilibrated  ;  one  of  them — generally  the  primary — being
incomplete,  while  the  other  remains  perfect.  .  .  Let  us  give  a  form  to
these  two  entities  constituted  by  the  two  successive  consciousnesses  ;  let  us
represent  them  by  two  persons,  walking  one  behind  the  other.  The  person
who  walks  in  front  knows  himself  but  has  no  notion  of  the  person  who  follows
him.  The  person  who  follows  knows  hhnself — and  knows  also  the  person
whom  he  sees  walking  in  front  of  him.  In  a  normal  man,  these  twO'
personages  are  both  of  them  vigorous  and  are  of  equal  stature  ;  the  second
cannot  manage  to  knock  down  the  first,  and  show  himself  openly  ;  in  order
to  do  so  he  must  await  some  temporary  feebleness  of  the  first  personage, — as
in  sleep  or  intoxication.  Sometimes,  however,  as  in  the  case  of  the  madman,
he  can  abolish  the  first  personage  and  substitute  himself.  It  is  then  that,
proud  of  the  exploit,  he  performs  the  impulsive  actions  with  which  we  are
familiar  in  some  cases  of  nervous  disease."

There  seems  to  me  to  be  some  confusion  here.  The  second  per.sonality,
represented  as  being  the  equal  of  the  first — de  taille  egale — ought  hardly  to  be
credited  with  performing  mere  mad  acts  if  it  succeeds  in  obtaining  the
mastery  over  the  first.  This  is  to  attempt  more  simijlification  than  the
facts  admit  of.  These  ades  impulsifs  must  be  regarded,  I  think,  in  many
cases  as  being  the  self-manifestation,  not  of  any  combination  of  nerve-centre  ?
(or  their  mental  correlates)  extensive  enough  to  be  the  basis  of  a  personality,
but  rather  of  some  hypertrophied  group  of  nervous  elements, — noma  idee  fixe,
existing — like  a  tumour — in  qiiasi-independence  of  the  mental  organicm  as  a
whole.  "  In  a  hysteric,"  M.  Janet  continues,  "  the  equilibrium  is  over-
thrown. The  two  personages  who  walk  in  procession  are  of  veiy  unequal
strength.  The  first  is  feeble,  dwarfed,  degraded  ;  ho  can  scarcely  stand
upi-ight  ;  the  second  is  vigorous  and  of  normal  height  ;  he  can  easily  show
himself  ;  in  order  to  do  so  sometimes  he  takes  advantage  of  the  natural  sleep
of  the  first  personage  and  takes  a  stroll  along  the  roofs, — that  is  spontaneous
somnambulism  ; — sometimes  in  mid-day  he  confuses  the  feeble  personage
who  walks  in  front  of  liim,  and  rolls  himself  on  the  ground  in  frantic
gymnastics, — that  is  the  hysterical  crisis."

Here  again  I  must  protest  against  the  ascription  of  these  senseless  habits
to  a  secondary  personality  in  the  hysterical  subject,  which  is  ex  hypothesi


Supplementi]


Double  Personality.


219'


stronger  and  saner  than  the  first.  Why  should  it  behave  thus  wildly  f
Blanche  2,  whom  M.  Janet  has  been  holding  up  as  the  type  of  a  hysteric's
second  personality,  shows,  when  fully  developed,  no  inclination  whatever  to-
violent  jjranks.  She  may  indeed — though  M.  Janet  does  not  state  this—
rememher  the  contortions  of  the  crise  ;  but  that  does  not  prove  that  she
originated  the  crise  any  more  than  she  originates  any  foulisli  act  of  the  first
personality's  doing.  Again  I  say  that  our  metaphor  cannot  be  thus-
simplified  ;  the  ci-i.!;e  does  not  strictly  form  a  part  either  of  the  first  or  of  the
second  personality  ;  it  is  the  explosion  of  a  group  of  elements  insufficient  to-
form  the  basis  of  any  stable  personality  at  all.

But  putting  aside  this  confusion  of  language  into  which,  as  it  seems  to-
me, M.  Janet  has  been  led  by  attempting  too  great  a  simplicity  of  metaphor,
and  trying  to  force  all  the  phenomena  which  Blanche  Witt-  exhibits  into  the-
caclre  of  her  first  or  of  her  second  personality,  let  us  consider  the  definite-
result,  scientific  and  practical,  which  M.  Janet  has  attained. He  has  shown

once  more  as  EUiotson  again  and  again  insisted — that  the  mesmeriser  who-

wants  to  produce  a  complete  effect,  must  go  on  unweariedly  with  his  passes  ;  .
and  not  assume  that  because  one  state,  or  several  st  ite^.are  readily  producible,
and  constantly  recur,  there  is  therefore  nothing  to  be  attained  beyond.  And,
on  the  practical  side  he  has  shown  that  no  amount  of  hysterical  disturbance,
however  prolonged  and  profound,  need  be  regarded  as  incurable.  Hysteria
is  not  a  lesion  but  a  displacement  ;  it  is  a  withdrawal,  that  is  to  say,  of
certain  nervous  energies  from  the  plane  of  the  jirimary  personality  ;  but-
those  energies  still  potentially  subsist,  and  they  can  again  be  placed,  hy
proper  management,  under  their  normal  control.

M.  Janet  tells  me  that  last  year  he  kept  Blanche  Witt-  for  months-
together  in  her  second  state,  with  much  comfort  to  her  ;  and  that  now,
though  he  has  ceased  to  attend  her,  he  understands  that  her  condition  in  the
first  state  is  much  better  than  of  old.

Another  case,i  treated  also  by  M.  Jules  Janet,  and  which  he  has  kindly-
given  me  the  opportunity  of  seeing,  is  even  more  remarkable  in  a  therapeutic-
aspect.  It  is  perhaps  the  most  marked  among  those  very  rare  cases  where  it
can  be  said  with  confidence  that  death  itself  has  been  averted  by  a  hypnotic-
change  of  personality.

From  the  age  of  13  the  patient  Marceline  R.  had  been  subject  to  a.
miserable  series  of  hysterical  troubles— chorea,  crises,  ancesthesia,  &c.  In
January,  1888,  -  the  hysterical  tendency  took  its  most  serious  form,— of
insuperable  vomiting,  which  became  so  bad  that  the  very  sight  of  a  spoonful,
of  soup  produced  distressing  spasms.  Artificial  means  of  feeding  were  tried,
with  diminishing  success,  and  in  June,  1887,  she  was  paralytic  and  so-
emaciated  that  (in  spite  of  the  rarity  of  deaths  from  any  form  of  hysteria)  her-
death  from  exhaustion  appeared  imminent.

M.  Janet  was  then  asked  to  hypnotise  her.  Almost  at  once  he  succeeded:
in  inducing  a  somnambulic  state  in  which  she  could  eat  readily  and  digest  ,
well.  Her  weight  increased  rapidly,  and  there  was  no  longer  any  anxiety  as
to  a  fatal  result. But  the  grave  inconvenience  remained  that  she  could  only

1  The  earlier  part  of  this  case  is  deoribed  in  M.  Jules  Janet's  paper,  "  Un.
Cas  d'Hysterie  Grave,"  JRevue  dc  VHy^notismc,  May,  18S9.


220


Br.  Jules  Janet  on  Hysteria  and  [Supplement.


■eat  when  hypnotised.  M.  Janet  tried  to  overcome  this  difficulty  ;  for  a  time
he  succeeded  ;  and  she  left  the  hospital  for  a  few  months.  She  soon,
liowever,  returned  in  her  old  state  of  starvation.  M.  Janet  now  changed  his
tactics.  Instead  of  trying  to  enable  her  to  eat  in  her  first  or  so-called  normal
state,  he  resolved  to  try  to  enable  her  to  live  comfortably  in  her  secondary
state.  In  this  he  gradually  succeeded,  and  sent  her  out  in  October,  1888,
■established  in  her  new  personality.  Tlie  only  inconveniences  of  this  change
seem  to  be  (1)  that  when  she  has  been  left  some  months  v/ithout  re-hypno-
tisation  a  tendency  to  hysterical  mutism  sets  in  ;  and  (2)  that  whenever  she
is  "awakened"  into  her  ^?-si  personality  she  has  lost  (like  Felida  X.)  all
memory  of  the  time  passed  in  the  second.

After  some  shorter  trials,  M.  Janet  hypnotised  her  November  12th, 1888,
and  left  her  in  lier  secondary  state  till  January  15th, 1889.  He  then  "awoke  "
her,  but  the  vomiting  at  once  returned,  and  she  again  applied  to  M.  Janet  for
help.  He  hypnotised  her,  and  left  her  in  her  second  state  till  March  31st.  He
tli3n  again  "  awoke  "  her,  with  the  same  result.  Again  he  hypnotised  her  ;
and  when  he  took  me  to  see  her  on  August  10th, she  had  been  in  the  hypnotic
state  c  jntinuously  for  three  months  and  ten  days  ; — during  which  time  she
had  successfully  passed  a  written  examination  for  the  office  of  Iios2:)ital  nurse,
Avliich  she  had  failed  to  pass  in  her  normal  state.

Wlien  we  saw  her,  August  10th, she  was  normal  in  appearance  aiad  manner,
except  for  a  certain  shortness  of  breath,  or  difficulty  of  speaking,  which  M.
Janet  exjilained  as  likely  to  develop  into  hysterical  mutism,  if  hypnotisation
were  not  renewed.  She  was  fairly  well  nourished,  and  her  expression  v/as
open  and  contented.

M.  Janet  resolved  not  merelj-  to  re-hypnotise  her,  but  to  wake  lier  and
leave  her  for  a  time  in  her  first  state,  in  order  to  see  whether  the  dysphagia
had  disappeared, — and  at  the  same  time  to  observe  whether  the  loss  of
Tecollection  of  the  events  of  the  secondary  state  was  really  complete.  He
woke  her — in  the  old  Elliotsonian  fashion — by  "reverse  passes."  Her  change
of  expression  was  very  noticeable.  The  look  of  easy  content  was  replaced  by
a  i^ained,  anxious  air.  Her  attention  was  at  once  arrested  by  some  masons  at
work  in  the  courtyard, — who  apparently  had  pulled  down  a  wall,  or  made
.some  similar  change,  since  her  last  wakening.  Asked  wliat  she  was  looking
at,  she  said  in  a  low,  timid  voice,  "  I  had  not  observed  the  alterations."
Asked  what  day  of  the  week  it  was,  she  said  "  Sunday  "  ;— and  in  fact  IMarch
eist  was  a  Sunday.  "  What  day  of  the  month  1  "  "  March  31st.  "  "  How,
then,  is  this  oleander  in  the  courtyard  in  flower?"  "  O,  sir,"  she  said,
"  those  flowers  are  only  paper."  "Feel  them!"  She  felt  them  timidly,
and  said  nothing  more.  "  What  had  you  for  breakfast  this  morning  V  "I
tried  to  take  Bonm  milk,"  This  again  referred  to  March  31st  ;— on
August  10th,  she  liad  breakfasted  on  ordinary  solid  food.  "  Drink  a
little  now."  She  attempted,  but  spasms  at  once  began,  and  she  could  not
retain  it.  We  then  left  her  ;  but  Prof.  Pierre  Janet  (who  was  also  present,)
tells  me  that  during  the  two  or  three  days  for  which  she  was  left  in  her
first  state  the  alarming  vomiting  continued  and  she  began  to  spit  blood.
"  My  brother  was  sent  for,  and  determined  to  re-hypnotise  her.  She  ■^vas
•calmed  as  if  by  enchantment,  and  is  now  in  excellent  condition.  During  her
two  'waking' days  she  made  a  number  of  serious  blunders  not  only  as  regards


Supplement.]


Double  Personality.


221


her  mobher,  but  with  lodgers  in  the  house.  Her  conduct  absolutely  proved
a  complete  forgetfulness  of  the  preceding  months.  After  making  inquiries--
from  the  various  persons  who  saw  her,  my  brother  told  me  that  he  could
retain  no  doubt  as  to  her  forgetfulness."  M.  Jules  Janet  adds  that  since  she-
has  been  replaced  in  the  second  condition  the  loss  of  flesh  has  been  rapidly
-repaired,  and  she  is  again  comfortable.

The  future  of  this  case  will  be  interesting  to  watch.  Will  the  secondary-
personality  fade  away  again,  and  leave  her  exposed  to  the  dangerous  sufferings
from  which  she  has  now  been  for  nearly  a  year  delivered  1  Or  will  she,  like-
Felida  X., thrive  on  her  radical  reconstruction,  and  live  out  her  natural  life —
whose  naturallife? — in  her  secondary  condition,  in  peace  and  quietness?  And
if  so,  are  there  any  of  the  rest  of  us  who  might  be  made  much  better  by
being  made  q,uite  diffeient  ?


222  Professor  Liegeois  on  Suggestion  and  (Supplement


vn

TROrESSOR  LTEGEOTS  ON  SUGGESTIO^T  AND  SOMNAM-
BULISM IN  RELATION  TO  JURISPRUDENCE.^
By  Walter  Leaf.

Five  years  ago, in  April,  1884:,Professor  Liegeois  read  before  the  Academie
■des  Sciences  Morales  et  Politiques  a  memoir  on  "La  Suggestion  Hypnotique
•dans  ses  Rapports  avec  le  Droit  Civil  et  le  Droit  Criminel."  The  experiments
there  recounted,  and  the  extraordinary  conclusions  to  which  they  obviously
led,  created  a  sensation  in  France  ;  they  were  introduced  to  English  readers
by  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  in  an  article  in  the  Fortniglitly  Ilevieio  for  November,
1885,  entitled  Human  Personality,  which  attracted  hardly  less  attention.
Many  will  remember  the  shock  with  which  tliey  first  read  of  the  simulated
•  crimes  which  M.  Liegeois  could  by  a  word  induce  his  subjects  to
conunit.  A  daughter  fired  point-blank  at  her  motlier's  breast  a
revolver  which  she  believed  to  be  loaded  ;  a  young  man  dis-
solved in  water  a  powder  which  he  was  told  was  arsenic,  and
.gave  it  to  his  aunt  to  drink.  When  questioned  as  to  his  act,  he  showed  the
most  complete  ignorance  of  what  he  had  done.  Hardly  less  astonishing  and
disquieting  was  the  development  given  to  the  already  known  facts  of  post-
hypnotic suggestion.  Hallucinations  had  been  produced  which  worked
themselves  out  in  action  at  a  distance  of  days,  weeks  and  even  months,  at
the  precise  place  and  hour  which  it  pleased  the  hypnotiser  to  suggest.  It
appeared  impossible  to  set  limits  to  the  power  possessed  by  the  hypnotiser
over  the  future  as  well  as  the  present,  over  the  character  as  well  as  tlie
momentary  acts,  of  a  really  susceptible  subject.

Five  years  have  expanded  this  jn'egnant  memoir  into  a  bulky  but
eminently  readable  volume  of  more  than  700  pages.  But  they  have  only
confirmed  and  extended  the  conclusions  therein  arrived  at.  The  criticisms
to  which  he  has  been  exposed  in  France  are  examined  by  Professor  Liegeois,
and  in  our  opinion  are  triumphantly  refuted-  Experiments  in  England,
Switzerland,  Belgium,  Italj',  Austria  and  Germany  have  combined  to
establish  the  views  of  the  Nancy  school  against  the  great  names  of  the
Salpetriere.

The  additions  which  the  treatise  has  received  are  not,  however,  wholly
or  even  mainly  polemical.  It  opens  with  an  excellent  review,  which  seems
•complete  so  far  as  France  is  concerned,  of  the  past  history  of  the  suggestion-
theory  ;  that  work  done  in  other  countries  should  be  to  a  great  extent
ignored,  is  only  what  one  has  learnt  to  expect.  But  with  these  limitations
it  will  be  found  an  excellent  introduction  to  the  study  of  hypnotism  ir
.general.  The  chapter  on  processes  of  hypnotisation  is  thoroughly  practical.
The  therapeutic  aspects  of  the  question,  Professor  Liegeois,  as  a  lawyer,

1  De  laSurjricstion  c-t  du  SomnamhuUsme  dans  leuis  Itapports  avec  la  Jurisprudence  €\
■la  Midecine  Legale.  Par  Jides  Liegeois,  Professeur  ala  Faculti  de  Droit  de  Nancy,  1SS9


Supplement.]  Somnamhidism  in  Relation  to  Jiirispvudence.  223


leaves  to  his  medical  colleagues,  Drs.  Liebeault,  Bernheiinand  Beaiinis,  with
the  exception  of  one  chapter,  where  he  relates  at  length  some  extraordinary
■experiments  on  vesication  by  suggestion,  carried  out  by  Focachon,  the
production  of  stigmata  by  ]\IM.  Bourru  and  Burot,  and  the  use  of  hypnotic
aniBsthesia  in  surgery.  It  is  with  Chapter  xii.  that  he  begins  the  practical
part  of  his  subject,  the  influence  which  the  new  view  of  suggestion  may  have
upon  jurisprudence.

The  facility  which  suggestion  may  give  for  the  coramissicm  with  absolute
impunity  of  the  most  terrible  crime?  is  so  obvious  that  one  uiight  at  first  be
ahnost  tempted  to  wish  that  such  knowledge  had  never  been  published
to  mankind.  But,  apart  from  the  question  of  pure  science,  it  will  be  enough
tliatthe  reader  should  glance  through  the  legal  cases  collected  by  Liegeois  to
see  that  such  a  wish  is  wrong.  He  mikes  it  cleir  enough  tliat  such  crimes
iiave already  been  sporadically  comaiitted,  and  tliat  miscarriages  of  justice
have  taken  place,  which  a  mere  state  of  ignorance  would  certainly  bring
^ibout  again  in  the  future.  It  is  essential  in  the  interests  of  the  innocent
victims  themselves  that  we  should  know  all  that  we  can  learn,  in  order  to
.save  them  from  themselves.  One  great  step  has  already  been  made  when,
we  find  that  the  most  suggestible  are  precisely  those  who  can  best  be  helped,
by  the  suggestion  that  no  one  can  have  any  influence  over  them  in  future
but  a  single  liypnotiser,  who  is,  of  course,  to  be  souglit  in  a  trustworthy
person.  M.  Liegeois  goes  on  to  consider  the  steps  to  be  taken  when  it  is  sus-
pected that  a  crime  has  been  committed  by  an  innocent  person  in  a  state  of
suggested  somnambulism.  His  method  is  ingenious,  but  we  are  afraid  de-
lusive. The  first  thing,  he  says,  is  to  appoint  a  commission  of  doctors  to
<lecide  whether  the  person  accused  is  suggestible.  TJiis  being  ascer-
tained, we  have  to  endeavour  to  circumvent  the  suggestion  given,  ex  In/po-
iliesi,  by  the  real  criminal  ;  "You  will  entirely  forget  that  I  have  given  you
this  suggestion  ;  you  will  in  no  case  be  able  to  denounce  me,  however  much
yon  may  wish  to  do  so."  Liegeois  has  made  experiments  which  show  that
such  a  device  may  be  successfully  turned.  He  gave  one  of  his  subjects  the
suggestion  that  she  had  committed  a  murder,  but  could  not  denounce  him
iis  the  real  author  of  the  crime.  Dr.  Liebeault  then  hypnotised  her  and  gave
her  the  suggestion  that  when  she  saw  "the  author  of  the  criminal  suggestion,
whoever  he  might  be,"  she  would  fall  asleep  and  perform  a  preconcerted
series  of  acts  with  regard  to  him  wiiich  v/ould  not  be  naturally  associated
with  the  idea  of  denouncing  liim.  When  Dr.  Liegeois  enter.s  the  room  slie
goes  through  tliis  Series  of  acts,  and  would  thu3  in  a  real  case  have  identified
liim  as  the  author  of  the  crime — whether  clearly  enough  to  satisfy  a  jury
remains  to  be  seen.  The  experiment  was  successfully  repeated  on  another
subject,  and  Dr.  Liegeois  concludes:  "It  is  possible  to  give  a  hypnotic
.■subject  any  suggestions  relative  to  the  author, whoever  he  be,  of  the  criuiinal
impulse,  which  are  not  expressly  and  directly  contrary  to  the  amnesia  whicli
lie  has  called  forth.  The  real  criminal  will  thus  fall  into  the  hands  of
justice,  because  it  will  have  been  impossible  for  him  to  foresee  and  remove
all  dangers  by  a  suggestion  of  amnesia,  however  large  and  comprehensive."
But  we  must  ask  Dr.  Liegeois  one  question,  wliich  he  seems  to  have  for-
gotten :  Suppose  the  real  criminal  has  after  suggesting  the  sup;>v3sed  amnesia
•added  "No  one  in  future  can  hypnotise  you  or  give  you  suggestions  but;


224


Professor  Liecfeois.


[Supplement.


myself  "  ;  how  would  he  then  begin  his  investigation  1  His  commission  of
doctors  would  report  at  the  outset  that  the  ostensible  criminal  was  not
susceptible  to  suggestion,  and  what  would  be  called  "  justice  "  must  take  its
course.

We  may  end  by  calling  attention  to  the  curious  experiments  in  negative
hallucination  described  on  pp.  701-711.  This  particular  development  is,  we
think,  quite  new.  M.  Liebeault  begins  by  giving  his  subject,  Camille  S.,
the  negative  hallucination  that  she  is  unable  either  to  see  or  to  hear  M.
Lidgeois.  She  is  awal^ened,  and  is  absolutely  unconscious  of  his  presence,  even-
to  the  extent  of  showing  no  sign  of  pain  when  he  pricks  her  with  a  pin,
though  she  feels  at  once  if  anyone  else  does  so.  He  speaks  to  her  in  his.
own  name,  but  she  takes  no  notice.  Now  comes  the  strange  part.  "  I  now
proceed  impersonally,  sjjeaking  not  in  my  own  name  but  as  though
there  were  an  inner  voice  addressing  her  from  her  own  consciousness.
Then  somnambulic  automatism  appears  as  complete  in  this  novel  and
unknown  form  as  in  any  of  the  shapes  with  which  we  are  already  familiar."

"  I  say  to  her  aloud,  '  Camille  is  thirsty  ;  she  will  go  to  the  kitchen  for
a  glass  of  water,  which  she  will  bring  in  and  put  upon  this  table.'  She  seem.'s
to  have  hc;i,vd  nothing,  but,  at  the  end  of  a  few  minutes,  she  does  what  has-
been  indicated,  and  that  with  the  lively  and  impetuous  manner  so  often
noticed  in  somnambules.  She  is  asked  wliy  she  has  brought  in  the  glass  of
water  which  she  has  jusc  placed  on  the  table.  '  What  do  you  mean?  I  hav&
not  stirred.  Tliere  is  no  glass.'  T  then  s.ay,  '  Camille  sees  the  glass,  but  it  is
not  water,  as  they  would  liave  her  believe.  It  is  a  glass  of  very  good  wine
she  will  drink  it,  and  it  will  do  her  good.'  She  executes  at  once  the  order
given  lier,  and  has  immediately  forgotten  all  about  it."

M.  Liegeois  goes  on  to  give  an  account  of  a  conversation  between
Camille  and  the  other  peisuns  present,  in  whicli  she  repeats  mechanically  as.
her  own  every  answer  to  their  questions  witli  which  he  himself  prompts  her.
Finally,  by  a  suggestion  given  in  his  own  name  he  wakes  her  up — or  rather,
for  slie  is  already  awake  except  as  regards  himself,  he  abolishes  the
negative  hallucination,  and  she  has  completely  forgotten  all  that  has-
passed.

The  conclusion  which  M.  Li^geois  draws  is  strikingly  in  harmony  witk
views  which  liave  been  developed  at  length  in  tliese  pages  by  Mr.
Myers.  "  Tliis  shows  tliat  during  a  negative  hallucination  the  sub-
ject sees  that  which  he  seems  not  to  see,  and  hears  that  wliicli  he
seems  not  to  hear.  There  are  in  him  two  personalities  ;  an  unconscious  Ego
■which  sees  and  hears,  and  a  conscious  Ego  which  neither  sees  nor  hears,  but-
to  which  suggestions  can  be  made,  passing,  if  I  may  so  express  myself,,
through  the  channel  of  the  first  Ego.  This  duplication  of  personality  is  no-
more  surprising  than  that  wliicli  has  been  established  by  Dr.  Azam  in  the
case  of  Felida  X.,"  and  one  or  two  similar  cases.  The  experiment  is-
evidently  crucial  as  proving  that  the  phenomena  of  negative  hallucination
are  purely  psycliical,  nor  pliysical,  as  MM.  Binet  and  Fere  would  have  it.
The  further  conclusions  wliich  might  be  deduced  are  more  than  can  be  con-:
sidered  here.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  no  student  of  hypnotism  can  afford  to-
neglect  this  important  work.  '''v


Supplem  ent.


Tivo  BopJcs  on  Ilyimottsm,


225


Till.

TWO  BOOKS  ON  HYPN0TIS3I.
By  Walter  Leaf,

Der  Hypnotismus,  seine  Bedeutung  und  seine  Handhnhimg,  in  Icnrzge-
fasster  Darstellung. Von  Dr.  August  Forel. Stuttgart,  1889.

Die  Suggestionstherapie  und  ihre  Technih.  Von  Dr.  Ed.  Baierlacher.
Stuttgart,  1889.

These  two  short  treatises  have  substantially  the  same  object  ;  that  of
assisting  medical  men  in  the  employment  of  hypnotism  in  ordinary  practice.
They  take  the  same  view,  both  authors  being — one  may  almost  say  "  of
course  " — thorough-going  adherents  of  the  Nancy  school.  Dr.  Baierlacher
is  a  practising  physician  in  Nuremberg  ;  Dr.  Forel,  as  it  is  hardly  necessary
to  remind  a  student  of  the  subject,  is  the  director  of  the  important  cantonal
lunatic  asylum  at  Zurich.  Neither  of  tlaem  aims  at  making  any  addition  to
the  theory  of  the  subject,  but  both  supply  interesting  evidence  from  their
own  experience.

To  take  the  common  matter  first,  it  will  be  noticed  that  both,  like
their  Nancy  teachers,  employ  suggestion  alone  for  producing  the  hyj^notic
sleep,  without  any  passes  or  prolonged  gazing  at  bright  objects.  Both
recommend  Bernheim's  modus  operandi.  "  You  place  the  patient  in  an  arm-
chair, and  make  him  look  for  a  few  seconds  up  to  one  or  two  minutes  into
your  eyes,  and  meanwhile  tell  him  in  a  loud  and  confident  but  monotonous
tone  that  he  is  going  on  famously,  that  his  eyes  are  already  swimming,  the
lids  are  heavy,  that  he  feels  a  pleasant  warmth  in  legs  and  arms.  Then  you
make  him  look  at  the  thumb  and  first  finger  of  your  left  hand,  which  you
gradually  lower,  so  that  the  eyelids  may  follow.  If  the  eyes  now  close  of
themselves  the  game  is  won.  If  not,  you  say,  '  Shut  your  eyes,'  "  and  proceed
with  suggestions  of  catalepsy,  &c.,  following  up  those  which  appear  to  be
accepted.  The  success  which  attends  this  method  is  rather  surprising  in  com-
parison with  English  experience.  Baierlacher  advises  that  the  sitting  should
be  interrupted  and  a  further  trial  postponed  for  a  time,  if  sleep,  or  at  least
some  sign  of  influence,  is  not  produced  in  half  a  minute,  or  at  most  a  minute.
He  has  attempted  hypnotism  in  146  cases,  and  failed  in  only  25.  Dr.  Forel's
percentage  of  success  is  still  higher  ;  of  the  last  105  persons  whom  he  has
attempted  to  hypnotise  only  11  were  uninfluenced  ;  a  figure  which  shows  a
decided  improvement  on  the  80  per  cent,  who  should,  according  to  Bernheim,
prove  susceptible,  and  seems  to  dispose  of  the  often-asserted  view  that  the
Latin  races  are  easier  to  influence  than  the  Teutonic.  Indeed,  Forel  lays  it
down  as  a  princii^le  that  "  every  mentally  healthy  man  is  naturally  hypno
tisable  ;  it  is  only  certain  transitory  psychical  conditions  which  can  prevent-
hypnosis."  It  is  unfortunate,  as  he  remarks,  that  his  own  position  gives  him,
little  opportunity  of  wide  experiments  with  the  mentally  healthy.  With  his
insane  patients  he  has  had  little  encouragement. One  of  them,  Mrs.  X.,


Two  Boohs  on  Hypnotism,  [Supplement.


believed  herself  to  be  Mrs.  Y.  "  I  was  able  to  hypnotise  her,  and  to  jDroduce
by  suggestion  sleep,  api^etite,  and  even  post-hypnotic  hallucinations.  But
when  I  told  her  with  all  possible  emj^hasis  during  hypnosis  that  she  now  knew
herself  to  be  Mrs.  X.  and  not  Mrs.  Y. ,  that  her  idea  was  only  an  illusion  at
which  she  could  now  laugh,  she  kept  on  shaking  her  head  so  long  as  I
continued  niy  assertions,  in  order  to  show  me  that  she  did  not  accept  the
suggestion."  "  In  suggestion,"  he  adds,  "  one  uses  the  brain  of  the  subject
as  a  machine.  In  the  case  of  the  insane  the  machine  is  out  of  gear  and  will
not  work."

,  In  spite,  however,  of  his  primary  occupation  with  these  far  from  hopeful
materials,  Dr.  Forel  has  collected  a  large  amount  of  interesting  evidence.  We
may  quote  one  or  two  of  his  more  important  experiments.  Here  is  a  curious
case  of  post-hypnotic  hallucination.

"  I  told  Miss  Z,  while  hypnotised  that  she  would  on  awaking  find  two
violets  in  the  bosom  of  her  dress,  both  natural  and  pretty,  and  that  she  was
to  give  me  the  prettier.  At  the  same  time  I  put  one  real  violet  into  her
dress.  When  she  woke  she  saw  two  violets  ;  one  was  brighter  and  prettier,
she  said,  and  she  gave  me  the  corner  of  her  white  handkerchief,  keeping  the
real  violet  herself.  I  now  asked  if  she  thought  that  both  violets  were  real,
or  if  one  of  them  was  not  one  of  those  fugitive  presents  which  she  had  on
previous  occasions  received  at  my  hands.  She  replied  that  the  brighter
violet  was  not  real,  because  it  looked  so  flattened  upon  the  handkerchief.  I
now  renewed  the  exijeriment,  suggesting  three  real  violets,  equally  dark,
sweet-smelling,  not  flattened  out,  but  tangible,  with  stalks  and  leaves  ;  but
I  gave  her  only  one  real  flower.  This  time  Miss  Z.  was  completely  deceived,
and  quite  unable  to  tell  me  whether  one,  two,  or  all  three  violets  were  real
or  suggested.  She  thought  that  all  were  real  this  time,  while  at  the  very
moment  she  was  holding  in  one  hand  a  flower,  in  the  other  nothing  but  air.
It  is  clear, therefore, that  when  the  suggestion  is  made  to  all  the  senses  at  once
it  is  completer."

The  following  very  important  case,  from  the  practical  point  of  view,  is
slightly  abbreviated  from  Dr.  Forel's  account.  "An  old  drunkard  of  70
years  of  age,  after  twice  attempting  to  cut  his  throat,  had  been  kept  in  my
asylum  from  1879  to  1887  as  a  hopeless  sot.  He  took  every  ojiportunity  of
drinking  himself  into  a  state  of  dangerous  liallucination.  At  the  same  time
he  led  all  the  plots  against  my  endeavours  to  reform  the  drunkards  in  the
•establishment,  and,  though  not  generally  malicious,  incited  the  patients
Against  the  Temperance  Society.  He  could  not  be  allowed  the  least  freedom
without  using  it  to  get  drunk.

"I  had  long  given  him  up,  but  in  1887  tried  to  hypnotise  him.  He
proved  very  suggestible,  and  in  a  few  sittings  he  was  brought  into  a  surpris-
ingly serious  state  of  mind.  His  plots  ceased  as  though  by  magic,  and  after  a
time  he  himself  asked  that  the  small  quantity  of  wine  whicli  I  had  allowed
him  as  a  hopeless  case  might  be  cut  ofi'.

"The  patient  soon  became  one  of  the  heartiest  abstainers  in  the
institution.  I  long  hesitated  to  allow  him  any  liberty,  but  finally  did  so  in
the  summer  of  1888.  His  freedom,  though  he  was  always  allowed  some
pocket  money,  was  never  abused.  He  kept  absolutely  true  to  abstinence,
became,  by  suggestion,  a  member  cf  the  Temperance  Society,  of  which  ho


Supplement.]


Two  Boohs  on  Hypnotism.


227


remains  an  active  adherent,  and  on  his  trips  to  town  drank  nothing  but
water,  coffee,  or  the  like.  His  susceptibility  to  alcohol  was  such  that  it
would  have  been  impossible  for  him  ever  to  drink  without  detection.  .  .
In  the  course  of  the  last  nine  months  he  has  been  only  occasionally  hypno-
tised for  the  purposes  of  demonstration,  but  requires  no  further  anti-alcoholie
suggestions."

Dr.  Forel's  attitude  towards  the  developments  which  have  formed  the
■chief  study  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  is  one  of  reserve.  He  says  :
*'  A  number  of  apparently  supernatural  phenomena  are  brought  up  again
and  again  by  trustv^orthy  and  honourable  persons,  which  would  seem  to
support  a  theory  such  as  that  of  Mesmer.  I  refer  to  so-called  thought-
transference  or  suggestion  mentale,  clairvoyance,  so-called  presentiments  and
premonitions.

"A  remarkable  book  in  this  point  of  view  is  Phantasms  of  the  Living.
.  .  .  No  fewer  than  600  observations  on  visions,  dreams,  presentiments,
&c. ,  are  collected.  Exact  information  is  supplied  as  to  the  trustworthiness
of  the  evidence,  and  only  clear  statements  of  credible  persons  are  admitted."
He  then  refers  briefly  to  M.  Richet's  and  our  own  results  in  thought-trans-
ference, and  concludes  :  "  It  is  excessively  difliculi:  in  all  these  experiments,
apart  from  chance  and  cheating,  to  exclude  the  self-deception  of  the  subject,
-and  in  the  last  resort,  of  the  hypnotiser  himself,  and  above  all  to  be  sure
of  the  absence  of  slight  unconscious  suggestion  and  auto-suggestion.  These
results  must  therefore  be  taken  with  the  greatest  caution."  This  is  an
utterance  with  which  we  can  hardly  quarrel.

To  turn  back  briefly  to  Dr.  Baierlacher's  book,  the  chief  interest  of  which
•consists  in  a  selection  of  cases  from  his  own  practice.  The  most  striking  of
these  is  perhaps  the  first — a  case  of  cancer  of  the  stomach  where  he  claims  to
bave  succeeded  in  entirely  relieving  pain  during  the  last  two  months  of  life,
for  periods  varying  from  a  few  hours  up  to  (apparently)  two  days  or  more,
■obtaining  natural  sleep,  which  up  to  the  time  of  his  first  attempt  was  only
imperfectly  induced  by  one  to  two  eg.  of  morphia.  At  the  same  time  he
facilitated  the  taking  of  food  by  suggestions  to  the  perverted  appetite.  The
remaining  cases  are  of  a  more  familiar  type — chiefiy  neuralgia  and  chorea.
Dr.  Baierlacher  has  the  courage  to  mention  at  the  end  more  than  a  dozen  cases
■of  complete  or  partial  failure,  a  practice  which  deserves  much  commendation
now  that  cure  by  suggestion  is  beginning  to  afford  matter  for  sensational
newspaper  articles.


1SS9.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


229


I.

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD FROM  ANOTHER
POINT OF  VIEW.

By  F.  PODMOEE.

The  first  crude  hypothesis,  that  "ghosts  "are  the  spirits  of  deceased
persons,  actually  walking  this  earth  in  quasi-material  form,  and  holding
familiar  intercourse  with  their  survivors,  is  probably  held  now  by  few
if  any  of  the  intelligent  students  of  the  evidence  amassed  by  the
Society.  It  is  not  that  this  hypothesis  has  fallen  by  the  weight  of
argument  and  evidence  arrayed  against  it ;  it  has  merely  shared  in  that
general  euthanasia  which  has  overwhelmed  many  other  pious  opinions
found  inadequate  to  the  facts.  It  has  silently  dropped  out  of  view
But,  nevertheless,  in  the  belief  certainly  of  most  of  those  who  have
contributed  experiences  of  their  own  to  our  collection,  and  of  nearly  all
those  who  have  recorded  for  us  experiences  related  to  them  by  others,
the  "ghost,"  the  thing  seen  or  heard,  manifests  intelligence,  and  bears
some  definite  relation  to  some  deceased  person  ;  a  relation  possibly
similar  to  that  suggested  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  to  exist  between
the  apparition  seen  at  the  time  of  a  death  and  the  person  whom  it
resembles.

It  is  recognised,  in  short,  that  the  phenomena  are  essentially  hallu-
cinatory, but  it  is  suggested  that  the  hallucinations  are  in  some  sense
due  to  the  agency  of  a  deceased  person,  that  they  are  possibly  a  reflec-
tion of  his  uneasy  dream ;  or,  if  that  conception  sliould  be  found  too
definite,  that  they  represent  in  some  way  the  fragmentary  thoughts  of
a  decaying  personality.

A  close  familiarity  with  the  evidence  amassed  by  the  Society  a

familiarity  extending  over  nearly  eight  years — has  led  me,  not  only  to
question  the  adequacy  and  relevance  of  the  evidence  on  which  this
belief  is  founded,  but  to  consider,  further,  whether  the  very  existence
of  the  evidence,  in  its  present  form,  may  not  be  largely  due  to  the  pre-
existence  of  that  belief  in  the  minds  of  the  witnesses.  The  hypotheses
advanced  in  the  following  paper,  it  should  be  premised,  are  purely
tentative.  I  am  fully  aware  that  the  evidence  is  at  present  far  too
meagre  to  justify  confidence  in  any  solution  of  the  problems  which  it
presents.  In  fact,  the  main  justification  for  attempting  any  solution  at
the  present  time  is  to  be  found  in  the  hope  that  such  an  attempt  may
direct  and  encourage  the  accumulation  of  further  evidence.  Moreover,
a  theory  founded  upon  the  evidence  has  recently  been  put  forward
by  Mr.  Myers.  And  it  seemed  to  me  that  the  facts,  as  so  far  ascertained,

Q


230


Phantasms  of  tJte  Beaol,


[Nov.  29,


lent  themselves  quite  as  readily  to  what  may  perhaps  be  called  an.
agnostic  interpretation;  and  that  it  would  advance  the  ultimate  solution
of  the  problem  if  laoth  views  were  fairly  represented.

It  will,  I  think,  conduce  to  clearness  if  I  here  explain  exactly  what
evidence  I  am  going  to  discuss.  It  is  the  series  of  narratives,  collected
by  the  Literary  Committee  of  the  Society,  which  has  been  classed
together  as  the  "  G."  series.  This  includes  I'ecognised  phantasms  of
dead  persons,  unrecognised  apparitions  and  voices,  and  the  mysterious
noises  which  popularly  suggest  haunting.  In  fact  the  G.  series  corre-
sponds roughly  to  the  popular  idea  of  "ghosts."  Early  in  the  course
of  the  Literary  Committee's  work  it  was  found  that  the  labour  of
studying  the  mass  of  evidence  accumulated  in  MS.  would  be  well  nigh
intolerable,  and  a  large  part  of  it  was,  therefore,  printed  at  the  expense
of  a  member  of  the  Committee — not  for  publication,  but  merely  for
the  convenience  of  the  Committee  itself.  The  cases  thus  printed  are
numbered  G.l,  G.2,  &c.  (in  the  series  we  are  dealing  with),  and  by  these
numbers  I  shall  refer  to  them.  At  a  later  date  some  of  the  narratives
were  copied,  in  manifold,  by  the  type  writer  or  cyclostyle,  and  these
subsidiary  series  are  referred  to  as  G.t.l,  G.c.l,  &c.  Files  of  these
narratives  are  kept  at  the  offices  of  the  S.P.R.,  and  can  under
certain  conditions  be  inspected  by  any  Member  or  Associate.  After  a
time  the  plan  of  printing  on  slips  was  abandoned,  and  that  of  printing
the  nari'atives  in  the  Journal  (for  private  circulation)  was  adopted
instead,  the  same  plan  of  lettering  and  numbering  being  retained.

The  evidential  standard  to  which  a  narrative  must  attain  before
being  printed  even  for  consideration  by  the  Literary  Committee  has
never,  of  course,  been  rigidly  defined.  It  has  naturally  risen  since  the
Committee  began  its  work,  but  even  now  it  should  be  borne  in  mind
Tby  Members  reading  the  Joiirnal  that  the  Committee  do  not  pledge
themselves  individually  or  collectively  to  any  estimate  of  the  value  of
a  story  as  evidence  for  supernormal  phenomena  by  printing  it  for  con-
sideration in  the  Journal.

From  the  following  review  of  the  evidence  for  "ghosts"  I  have
excluded,  except  for  illustrative  purposes,  all  cases  of  the  apparition  of
a  human  figure,  whether  recognised  or  not,  to  a  solitary  percipient,
except  when  some  connection  with  matters  outside  the  knowledge  of
the  percipient  is  established,  on  the  ground  that  there  is  nothing  in  such
a  case  to  distinguish  the  figure  from  a  purely  subjective  hallucination,
and  that  as  such,  in  the  absence  o£.  fui'ther  evidence,  we  are  bound  to
class  it.  Cases  in  whicli  the  only  phenomena  are  auditory  have  also
been  excluded.  Such  cases  stand  much  lower  in  the  evidential  scale
than  cases  which  treat  of  visual  phenomena.  The  consideration  of  them
would  not  appreciably  affect  the  conclusions  to  be  drawn,  whilst  to
introduce  them  would  cumber  the  argument.


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  View.


231


There  remain  some  200  stories,  the  majority  hitlierto  unpublished,
included  in  series  G.  of  the  Society's  evidences.  These  narratives  record
the  appai'ition  of  a  figure  either  on  separate  occasions  to  different  per-
cipients in  the  same  locality — successive  cases ;  or  to  two  or  more  persons
simultaneously — collective  cases  ;  or  to  a  solitary  percipient,  where  the
veridical  nature  of  the  phantasm  is  proved  by  some  corroborating  cir-
cumstance. A  small  proportion  of  narratives  given  at  second-hand,  or
otherwise  of  doubtful  authenticity,  have  been  included  in  the  collection,
and  these  have  been  employed  in  the  argument  to  illustrate  the  ten-
dency of  such  narratives  generally  to  merge  into  myth,  and  to  indicate
the  possible  genesis  of  some  of  their  more  remarkable  features.  In
discussing  the  narratives  in  detail  it  Avill  be  shown,  first,  that  there  are
certain  features — to  wit,  the  recognition  of  the  phantasm,  the  furnish-
ing of  information  by  it,  its  association  with  human  remains  or  with
some  past  tragedy — occurring  commonly  in  these  stories,  which
strongly  suggest  the  connection  of  the  phantasm  with  some  deceased
person.  The  stories,  however,  in  which  these  features  occur  are  almost
invariably  either  second-hand,  ov,  if  narrated  by  the  actual  percipient,
are  in  some  other  j^oint  open  to  suspicion  of  inaccuracy.  It  is  inferred,
therefore,  that  the  frequent  occurrence  of  these  features  in  narratives
which  are  evidentially  weak,  and  their  absence,  as  a  general  rule,  from
those  which  are  evidentially  strong,  indicate  that  tliere  is  a  strong
mythopceic  tendency  at  work,  moulding  ghost  stories  into  conformity
with  the  preconceived  opinions  of  the  narrator ;  that  first-hand  stories,
as  a  rule,  escape  the  effects  of  this  mythopceic  tendency  through  the
greater  sense  of  responsibility  of  the  narrators  ;  and  that  when  first-
hand stories  present  any  of  the  unusual  features  referred  to  they  are,
to  some  extent,  to  be  held  suspect.

It  Avill  be  shown,  next,  that  first-hand,  and  less  commonly  second-
hand, narratives  present  many  points — for  instance,  the  absence  of  any
apparent  motive  in  the  appearance  of  the  phantasm,  its  tendency  to
assume  various  forms,  the  liability  of  the  percipients  to  casual  and
apparently  non-veridical  hallucinations,  the  occurrence  of  phantasms
resembling  animals — difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  hypothesis  that  the
apparition  seen  is  tlie  manifestation  of  an  intelligent  entity,  and  sug-
gesting rather  that  it  is  to  be  attributed  to  casual  hallucination.

One  or  two  narratives,  given  by  the  percipients  as  "ghost"  stories,
are  then  quoted,  and  it  is  shown  that  they  may  be  attributed  to  simple
hallucination.  It  is  suggested  that  in  such  narratives  as  these  we  have
the  raw  material  of  ghost  stories;  that  a  morbid  tendency  on  the  jjart  of
the  percipient,  or  the  feeling  of  vague  alarm  caused  by  the  occurrence
of  inexplicable  sounds,  may  give  rise  to  a  hallucination  ;  and  that  this
maybe  repeated  in  the  experience  of  the  original  percipient,  or  in  that
of  others  who  have  shared  his  alarm. The  resemblance  alleged  to  exist

Q  2


232  Phantasms  of  the  Dead  [Nov.  29,


between  successive  apparitions  may  be  attriVjuted,  it  is  suggested,  partly
to  expectation  due  to  half-conscious  hints,  pai'tly  to  the  action  of  the
mythopoeic  tendency  above  referred  to,  which  operates  to  reduce  dis-
crepancies and  enhance  similarities  in  the  recollection  of  the  various
experiences.  Finally,  it  is  suggested  that  in  successive  cases,  where
these  causes  are  demonstrably  insufficient,  and  in  collective  cases
generally,  thought-transference  may  have  operated  between  the  original
percipient  and  all  who  share  a  similar  experience.

As  regards  the  numerous  instances  quoted  in  previous  papers  read
before  the  Society,  of  recognition  of  a  phantasm  by  some  marked
peculiarity,  it  is  suggested  that  thought-transference  from  the  minds  of
persons  still  living  is  in  almost  all  cases  the  explanation  more  directly
suggested  by  the  facts.  Moreover,  such  thought-transference  is  a
cause  of  whose  operation  Vv^e  have  independent  proof,  whilst  we  have
little  or  no  evidence  of  the  action  of  disembodied  intelligences.

On  the  hypothesis,  then,  that  the  apparitions  seen  in  what  are
known  as  "  haunted  "  houses  are  actually  connected  with  a  deceased
person,  there  are  certain  characteristics  for  which  we  should  be  justified
in  looking.  We  should  expect,  for  instance,  to  find  in  some  of  these
stories  evidence  tending  to  identify  the  figure  seen.  Such  evidence
"would  be  furnished  (1)  by  the  recognition  of  the  features  or  the
clothes,  or  (2)  from  correct  information  given  Ijy  the  apparition  on
matters  outside  the  knowledge  of  the  percipient.  Or,  in  cases  where
the  apparition  remained  unrecognised,  the  probability  of  its  connection
Avith  some  person  deceased  v/ould  be  greatly  strengthened  by  the  dis-
covery (3)  of  human  remains,  or  (4)  of  other  evidence  pointing  to  a
former  tragedy  in  the  locality  of  the  appearance.

(1)  As  regards  the  first  head,  it  is  not  enough,  as  already  said,
that  a  solitary  percipient  should  see  a  figure  which  he  recognises
as  resembling  that  of  some  friend  whom  he  knows  to  be  dead.
To  establish  any  claim  upon  our  consideration  the  phantasm  must
be  seen  by  more  than  one  person ;  or  appear  at  a  time  when  the
fact  of  the  death  is  not  known  to  the  percipient ;  or  the  recogni-
tion must  be  of  an  indirect  kind — that  is,  the  phantasm  must
exhibit  some  true  feature  previously  unknown  to  the  percipient ;  or
must  be  subsequently  proved  to  resemble  some  deceased  person  who
was  unknown  to  the  percipient.  Cases  coming  under  each  of  these
categories  are  alleged  to  occur,  but  for  the  sake  of  clearness  they  will
be  more  conveniently  discussed  in  the  latter  part  of  this  paper,  whick
deals  with  the  evidence  recently  brought  forward  by  Mr.  Myers  in  his
papers  in  the  Proceedings,  Parts  XIV.  and  XV.  One  exception  may,
Jhowever,  be  made.

In  those  cases  in  which,  from  a  mere  description  of  the  figure.


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiu.


233


resemblance  is  inferred  to  some  person  unknown  to  tlie  percipient,  the
evidence  must,  it  is  obvious,  as  a  general  rule  be  inconclusive.  Except
in  cases  where  there  is  some  mai'ked  physical  peculiarity  or  deformity,
it  is  difficult  to  conceive  a  verbal  description  which,  taken  alone,  would
satisfy  an  intelligent  critic  of  the  identity  of  the  person  described.  But
an  account  where  the  percipient  is  alleged  to  have  selected  a  picture  or
photograph  as  resembling  the  apparition  would  seem  to  stand  upon  a
somewhat  different  footing.  The  materials  for  recognition  are  hex'e
ampler  and  more  precise,  and  the  evidence  may  be  conveniently  dis-
cussed at  this  point.  The  results  may  be  given  in  a  few  v/ords.  There
are  six  such  cases  in  our  collection.  Of  these,  one  (G.  62)  is  third-
hand.  In  two  other  narratives  (Mr.  X.  Z.'s  case.  Proceedings,  Vol.  I.,
pp.  106-7,  and  G.  28,  Proceedings,  Vol.  III.,  p.  101)  the  evidence  of
the  percipient  is  entirely  uncorroborated  as  regards  the  recognition  of
the  picture  or  photograph.  In  the  first  case  there  is  a  very  strong
presumption  that  such  corroboration  would  have  been  forthcoming  if
the  facts  had  been  accurately  represented  in  the  percipient's  narrative ;
and  there  are  proved  inaccuracies,  which  have  led  to  the  case  being-
withdrawn.  {Journal,  Vol.  II.,  p.  3.)  And  an  element  of  weakness  is
introduced  into  the  other  case  by  the  fact  that  the  painting  which  was
recognised,  not  without  some  prompting,  was  actually  hanging  in  the
dining-room  of  the  house  in  vv^hich  the  figure  appeared,  and  might
conceivably  have  been  seen  by  the  pei'cipient  on  the  previous  day.
Moreover,  this  case  also  is  susceptible  of  another  interpretation  (see
p.  281  below).  In  tlie  fourth  case  (G-.  133)^  the  evidence  for  the  recog-
nition has,  under  a  rigid  scrutiny,  broken  down,  and  there  is  strong
ground  for  believing  that  there  was  a  mistake  of  identity,  the  supposed
ghost  being  a  real  boy.  The  two  remaining  stories  are  discussed  below
(pp.  280,  292),  and  grounds  are  shown  in  each  case  for  attributing  the
recognition  to  some  other  cause  than  the  action  of  the  deceased.  None
of  these  six  cases^  therefore,  in  which  the  apparition  of  a  person
imknown  to  the  percipient  is  alleged  to  have  been  subsequently  recog-
xiised  frorn  a  picture,  go  far  to  prove  any  connection  of  the  apparition
with  the  dead.  There  is  another  narrative  (G.  48)  in  which  the
phantasm  is  said  to  have  been  recognised  from  a  corpse  ;  but  in  this
case  the  evidence  is  third-hand,  if  not  even  more  remote.  Lastly
(G.  102),  there  is  an  alleged  recognition  of  an  article  of  dress  worn  by
a  phantasm,  but  it  is  only  at  second-hand.

(2)  I  have  found  20  cases — there  may  be  more — in  Avhich  informa-
tion outside  the  possible  range  of  the  percipient's  knowledge  is  said  to
have  been  given  by  a  phantasm,  or  in  a  dream.  Of  these  20  cases  only
two  (G.  157  and  623)  are  undoubtedly  at  first-hand. The  first  is  the

1  An  account  of  this  case — the  ghost  of  Tom  Potter — was  published  in  A2Jpari-
tions,  by  Mr.  Newton  Crosland,  pp.  45-50.


234


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


account  of  the  discovery  of  the  dead  body  of  a  suicide  through  a  di'eam.
The  evidence  here  is  insufficient;  the  person  who  was  in  a  position  to
give  the  most  conchisive  corroboration  to  the  percipient's  narrative
declined  to  answer  any  questions,  or  give  any  information  whatever.
And  the  place  where  the  body  was  found — a  neighbouring  summer-house
— seems  not  beyond  the  range  of  conjecture,  unconscious  or  otherwise.
In  G.  623  (quoted  and  discussed  in  Mr.  Myers'  ]3aper  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  VI.,  pp.  35-41),  a  skeleton  was  actually  discovered  in  a  spot
indicated  by  the  percipient,  which  he  stated  was  revealed  to  him  in  a
dream.  Unfortunately  the  percipient  was  dead  some  years  before
the  story  reached  us,  and  we  have  had  to  rely  upon  his  testimony
as  recorded.  The  case  is  discussed  at  length  below  (p.  303).  Of  the
remaining  18  narratives,  none  of  which,  as  said,  are  at  first-hand,
there  are  six  cases  in  which  a  murder  is  alleged  to  have  been  revealed
(G.  150,170,  308,  41-4,  460,  611).  There  are  two  cases  (G.  129  and
171)  in  which  information  is  given  as  to  the  condition  of  a  body
lawfully  buried;  two  cases  (G.  421  and  G.c.  600)  in  which  the  phantasm
shows  a  laudable  desire  to  discharge  his  just  debts  ;  and  there  are  eight
cases  (G.  141,  173,  304,  362,  379,  411,  412,  and  G.c.  305)  in  which
the  apparition  gives  warning  of  impending  death,  indicates  the  where-
abouts of  a  missing  will,  or  supplies  some  other  information.  Of  these,
one  (G.173)  treats  of  a  missing  will  discovered  through  the  agency  of  a
deceased  uncle.  The  story  was  never  published,  and  as,  since  its
receipt,  we  have  ascertained  that  the  narrator  is  a  young  woman  who
at  one  time  earned  a  precarious  livelihood  by  copying  articles  from
American  magazines,  and  submitting  them  as  her  own  composition  to
the  judgment  of  English  editors,  and  as  a  critical  examination  has
made  it  evident  that  the  necessary  attestations  to  the  truth  of  the
nari'ative,  purporting  to  be  written  and  signed  by  various  persons,
are  in  the  same  handwriting  variously  disguised,  it  is  perhaps  not
unreasonable  to  conjecture  that  the  story  itself  lacks  objective
foundation.

Lastly,  there  are  thi'ee  cases,  all  second-hand,  or  more  remote
(G.  138,  338,  435),  in  which  an  apparition  averts  a  catastrophe — either
suicide  or  a  serious  accident.  Thus  out  of  23  cases  in  which
a  definite  piece  of  information  is  alleged  to  have  been  given,  or  a
definite  purpose  shown,  only  two  are  at  first-hand,  and  in  both  of  these
nari'atives  the  evidence  is  incomplete,  whilst  the  facts  themselves
suggest  a  perfectly  normal  explanation.

(3)  There  are  about  13  cases  in  our  collection  in  which  human
remains  are  alleged  to  have  been  discovered  on  the  scene  of  unex-
plained ghostly  manifestations.  But  in  three  instances  only  does
the  actual  discovery  rest  upon  unquestionable  evidence  (G.  18,  154,
and  386,  quoted  in  Froceedi7igs,Yol.YI.,  Case  IX.).  In  four  other  cases


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiv.


(G.  61,  606,  G.c.  306,  617),  the  whole  of  the  evidence  is  second-
hand and  even  more  remote ;  and  in  one  of  these  (G.  61)  the  discovery
of  the  skeleton  is  explicitly  contradicted  on  evidence  which  may  be
taken  as  authoritative.  In  G.c.  900  the  evidence  for  the  finding  of  a
skeleton  rests  on  the  uncorroborated  memory  of  a  child  of  six,  Avho  does
not  profess  to  have  seen  the  skeleton  dug  up  ;  this  story  appears  to
have  been  first  committed  to  writing  nearly  50  years  after  the  alleged
event.  In  G.  456  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  Case  X.)  the  evidence  for  the
skeleton  depends  on  the  narrator's  remembrance  of  a  conversation
held  at  least  30  years  before,  and  in  G.  2  and  614  the  authority  for
tlie  alleged  discovery  is  not  given.  In  G.  331  the  story,  though
first-hand,  is  from  an  illiterate  person ;  and  the  figure  said  to  have
been  seen,  that  of  a  shadowy  woman,  has  no  obvious  connection  with,
the  remains  found,  which  were  those  of  a  baby.  InG.  156  the  evidence
for  the  finding  of  the  skeletons  is  not  first-hand,  and  the  nan-ator  is
not  inclined  to  attriljute  the  apparition  seen  "  to  otlier  than  natural
causes."  The  story,  however,  is  quoted  here  in  order  that  readers  may
be  in  a  position  to  judge  of  the  evidence  for  themselves.  We  received
the  original  account  from  JMr.  T.  J.  Norris,  Tempe,  Dalkey,  Ireland.

G.  156.

Odoher  17th,  1883.

I  send  you  particulars  of  an  apparition  seen  by  three  sons  of  the  late
Rev.  E.  L.,  for  many  years  incumbent  of  this  parish,  and  by  him  related
to  me.

About  30  years  ago,  Mr.  L. 's  three  eldest  sons  went  to  spend  the  evening-
out,  and  on  their  return  hume  they  saw,  near  Glastliun  (a  village  between
Kingstown  and  this),  three  figures  rise  from  the  ground  to  a  few
feet  above  the  ground,  and  then  slowly  vanish  into  air.  One  saw
it  and  called  the  attention  of  the  others.  They  told  their  father  on
their  return,  but  he  treated  it  as  a  delusion,  and  silenced  them  by
his  declared  belief  that  it  was  a  spirituous,  not  a  spiritual,  appearance.

They  all  entered  either  army  or  navy,  and  were  absent  when,  in  sinking
the  foundations  of  a  house,  they^  came  upon  three  skeletons.  On  the  return
to  Ireland  of  one  of  his  sons,  Mr.  L.  got  him  to  point  out  where  they  had
seen  the  appearance,  and  he  pointed  out  the  very  place  where  the  bodies  had
been  found.

Major  L.,  one  of  the  percipients,  writes  to  us  in  1884  : — ■

On  a  fine  clear  night  many  years  ago,  I  and  a  brother  walked  home
between  10  and  11  o'clock,  after  spending  the  evening  with  some  friends.  On
our  way  along  the  high  road  we  passed  a  small  villa,  situated  close  to  the  sea
shore  ;  an  open,  level  grass  lawn  lay  in  front,  reaching  to  the  road  where  we
stood,  from  which  it  was  divided  by  a  low  wall.  The  lawn  was  enclosed  on
either  side  by  walls  and  small  trees,  the  house  being  in  the  open  space  directly
opposite  to  us,  about  150  or  200  yards  distant. Our  attention  was  somehow


1  The  workmen.— P.  P.


236


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


attracted,  and  we  saw  what  appeared  to  be  three  indistinct  figures  in  white,
which  seemed  to  rise  as  it  were  from  the  ground  in  front  of  the  villa.  The
figure  in  the  centre  was  taller  than  the  others.  We  watched  for  some  time
and  finally  the  figures  subsided  just  as  they  had  risen.  I  think  there  was  a
.slight  declivity  in  the  ground  close  to  the  house,  which  was  probably  built  on
a  lower  level,  and  thus  the  effect  described  might  be  accounted  for  if  figures
had  approached  from  the  base  of  the  house.  There  were  many  houses  in
the  immediate  vicinity,  but,  so  far  as  I  can  remember,  they  were  closed  at
that  hour,  and  there  were  no  people  about.  I  feel  almost  certain  also  that
the  villa  was  not  then  occupied,  unless  it  may  have  been  by  a  caretaker.

On  arrival  at  home  we  related  Avhat  we  had  seen,  and  were  of  course
laughed  at,  and  indeed  the  matter  did  not  make  much  impression  upon  us,
and  in  a  short  time  passed  from  our  minds.  Some  years  afterwards  I  was
•serving  abroad  with  my  regiment  wlica  I  received  a  letter  from  a  member  of
my  family  who  was  present  on  the  occasion  referred  to,  recalling  my  memory
to  it,  and  stating  that  the  lawn  liad  recently  been  broken  up,  that  in  the  spot
indicated  by  us  three  skeletons  had  been  found,  and  that  the  one  in  the
centre  was  the  tallest.  I  should  add  that  there  was  no  story  or  legend
associated  with  the  place,  that  the  discovery  of  the  skeletons  caused  much
surprise,  and  that,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  no  clue  has  been  found  to  their
identity  or  history.

In  reply  to  our  questions  Major  L.  writes  : —

1st.  The  night  was  very  clear  and  briglit.  Whetlier  the  moon  was  actually
shining  I  cannot  pjositively  remember,  but  I  think  it  probable.

2nd.  My  approximate  distance  from  the  figures  was  perhaps  a  little  over
100  yards.  I  feel  sure  that  what  I  saw  was  not  an  eflect  of  mist  rising  from
damp  ground.

3rd.  I  have  never  before  liad  any  experience  of  the  sort,  or  been  the
subject  of  any  hallucination  that  I  am  aware  of.  Nor  am  I  in  this  instance
inclined  to  attribute  the  circumstance  which  I  have  narrated  to  other  than
natural  causes.  The  discovery  of  the  skeletons  was  a  vei'y  remarkable
coincidence,  but  it  may  be  nothing  more.

We  have  also  received  a  precisely  similar  account  of  the  incident
from  the  son  of  the  otlier  percipient — now  dead.

(4)  In  nearly  all  the  second-hand  narratives,  and  in  a  very  large
proportion  of  those  which  have  been  given  to  us  by  the  actual  percipi-
ents, a  tragedy  is  reported  to  have  taken  place  in  the  locality  wliere
the  manifestations  occurred.  The  tragedy  may  take  the  form  of  a
premature  death,  a  murder,  a  suicide,  sometimes  the  death  of  a  miser.
The  account  of  the  tragedy  is  often  very  circumstantial ;  but  usually
rests  upon  tradition  alone.  It  is  manifest,  therefore,  that  until  some
proof  of  the  death  has  been  adduced,  we  cannot  assume  the  report
to  afford  evidence  of  more  than  the  tendency  of  tradition  to  conform  to
preconceived  ideas  of  the  general  fitness  of  things.  In  one  case,  indeed
{Proceedings,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  106-7),  the  narrator  states  that  he  had  himself
searched  the  parish  registers,  and  ascertained  the  date  of  the  death,
or  rather  deaths,  the  tragedy  in  this  case  taking  the  form  of  a  murder,


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiv.


237


and  the  subsequent  suicide  o£  the  murderer.  The  month  and  day-
were  stated  to  correspond  with  the  date  of  the  appearance  of  the
phantasm.  As  was  stated,  however,  in  the  Joicrnal  (Vol.  II.,  p.  3),
a  prolonged  and  careful  search  of  the  registers  has  failed  to  corroborate
our  informant's  statement;  and  we  have  learnt  from  another  source  that
the  double  event  referred  to  never  took  place ;  and  that  the  alleged
murderer  actually  died  in  another  part  of  the  country,  and  at  another
time  of  year.  There  are,  however,  a  few  cases  in  v/hich  the  death,  though
no  valid  evidence  for  it  is  adduced,  is  alleged  to  have  taken  place  so
recently  that  there  is  perhaps  a  reasonable  presumption  that  the  facts
are  correctly  stated.  Some  of  these  cases  will  be  I'eferred  to  later.
There  are  also  a  few  cases  in  which  we  have  sufficient  evidence  that  the
death  did  occur  as  alleged.  In  one  such  case  (G.  182,  Journal,  Vol.  II.,
pp.  385,  et  scq.),  the  evidence  is  furnished  by  a  tombstone  in  the  parish
churchyard ;  and  it  seems  not  unlikely  that  the  tragedy,  thus  solidly
and  obtrusively  attested,  may  actually  have  been  the  cause  of  the
disturbances  in  the  house,  though  not  in  the  precise  manner  suggested
in  the  narrative.  Three  other  cases  are  given  below  (G.  187,  188, 189),
and  it  will  be  seen  that  in  at  least  two  of  these  cases  the  facts  of  the
life  and  death  were  within  the  knowledge  of  the  percipients,  and  the
person  whom  the  phantasm  was  supposed  to  resemble  had  been
known  personally  to  some  of  those  present  in  the  house.

To  sum  up  :  The  characteristics  which  we  should  expect  to  find
associated  with  these  manifestations,  if  they  are  actually  connected
with  deceased  persons,  do  not,  it  would  seem,  occur  at  all,  or  occur
very  rarely.  The  appearance  of  these  characteristics  in  some  of  the
narratives  now  under  review  is  due,  in  at  least  one  case,  to  deliberate
hoaxing  (G.  173) ;  in  a  few  other  cases,  as  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  I.,  pp.
106-7,  they  may  reasonably  be  attributed  to  hallucinations  of  memory.
Most  commonly,  however,  they  appear  to  be  the  result  of  unconscious
misrepresentation  by  the  narrator  of  the  experiences  of  others.  From
another  point  of  view  it  may  be  regarded  as  a  strong  testimony  to  the
general  accuracy  and  trustworthiness  of  the  first-hand  nari^atives  which
v/e  have  received  that,  in  spite  of  the  urgent  temptation  to  embellish-
ment thus  demonstrated,  these  characteristics  so  rarely  occur.  Con-
versely, when  they  do  occur  they  must  from  their  very  rarity  be
regarded  with  reserve.

But  we  may  learn  much,  not  only  from  v/hat  we  fail  to  find,  but
from  what  we  actually  do  find  in  the  best  attested  narratives.  We  have
seen  that  the  authentic  ghost  with  any  characteristics  to  distinguish
him  from  a  subjective  hallucination  is  rarely  recognised  :  that  he  rarely
brings  any  message  from  the  dead  to  the  living  :  that  his  connection
with  skeletons  and  tragedies  is  obscure  and  uncertain.  He  is,  in  fact,
usually  a  fugitive  and  irrelevajit  phantasm. He  .flits  as  idly  across


238  .  -  Phantasms  of  the  Dead  [Nov.  29,


the  scene  as  the  figure  cast  by  a  magic  lantern,  and  he  possesses,
apparently,  as  little  purpose,  volition,  or  intelligence.

Often  his  appearance  is  so  brief  and  so  unsubstantial  that  he  can
be  called  little  more  than  the  suggestion  of  a  figure.  He  bears  as  little
resemblance  to  the  aggrieved  miser,  the  repentant  monk,  the  unquiet
spirit  of  the  murderer  or  his  victim,  with  whom  the  teachers  of  our
childhood  and  the  dinner-parties  of  our  maturer  years  have  made  us
familiar,  as  the  Dragons  whom  Siegfried  slew  bear  to  the  winged  lizards
whose  bones  lie  buried  in  the  Sussex  Weald.  Moreover,  there  are  cer-
tain constantly  recurring  characteristics  in  these  stories  which  are
difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  hypothesis  that  the  apparitions  are  due  to
any  external  agency,  and  which  seem  to  point  to  another  explanation.

(1)  It  frequently  happens  that  the  apparition  assumes  a  difi"erent
shape  at  diff"erent  times,  or  to  speak  more  accurately,  that  different  figures
are  seen  in  the  same  house.  And  even  when  the  different  narrators  repre-
sent the  figures  seen  as  being  on  all  occasions  identical,  examination  of
their  evidence  makes  this  identity  doubtful.  Impressions  so  momentaiy
as  these  must  of  necessity  be  very  vague  and  elusive  in  the  subsequent
memory.  The  details  are  likely  to  be  filled  in  after  hearing  the
descriptions  of  others ;  so  that  features  discerned  or  believed  to  be
common  become  more  definite  in  recollection  and  discrepancies  tend  to
disappear.  In  short,  the  image  which  remains  in  the  memories  of  all
the  pei'cipients  is  apt  to  resemble  a  composite  photograph,  in  which  all
the  common  features  are  emphasised,  and  details  found  only  in  indi-
vidual cases  are  blurred  or  faintly  indicated.  Sometimes,  however,  the
diverse  character  of  the  ghost  is  no  matter  of  inference.  Tlius  in
G.  t.  314  {Journal,  Vol.  III.,  pp.  211,  et  seq.),  the  dress  of  a  female
figure  is  variously  described  by  diflerent  witnesses  as  "  greyish  or
mauve,"  "lilac  print,"  "white,"  "light,"  "red,"  "slate  coloured  silk  with
red  cloak";  and  the  hair  is  described  as  "fair,"  "dark,"  "brown,"  and
"brownish."  The  events  occurred  in  the  years  188-J-G-7,  and  the  accounts
were  written,  in  some  cases,  within  a  few  weeks  of  their  occurrence.
If  a  longer  interval  had  been  allowed  to  elapse  between  the  events
and  their  I'ecord,  it  would  seem  not  improbable  that  this  more  than
Homeric  latitude  of  colour-epithets  might  have  been  blended  into
uniformity.  From  the  same  narrative  it  appears  that,  in  addition  to
the  polychromatic  figure  or  figures  referred  to  abo^'e,  there  were  seen
in  the  same  house  by  various  percipients  a  man  with  an  evil  face  in  a
white  woi'king  suit ;  "  a  dark  swarthy-looking  man  with  very  black
whiskers,  dressed  like  a  merchant  sailor,"  and  a  "devilish  face"  and
hands  with  no  body  attached.  In  G.  16  the  narrator  and  others  see  at
one  time  the  tall  slender  figure  of  a  woman  dressed  in  black,  at
another  time  a  short  lady  in  a  dark  green  dress ;  in  G.  316  we  hear  o£
"  a  clergyman dressed  in  his  clericals,"  and  a  woman ; in  G.  388


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiv.


239


a  woman  in  white  and  a  woman  in  green  ;  in  G.  454:  a  little  girl  "in
white,  with  long  streaming  fair  hair,"  "a  man  in  a  scai'let  hunting-coat
and  top-boots,"  and  a  tall  lady  with  a  child  in  her  arms.  In  G.  463  we
have  "  a  trim  little  page  in  antique  costume,"  a  man  with  blood-
stained face,  and  a  woman  in  short-waisted  dress  and  broad  frilled  cap  ;
in  G.  468  a  man  with  a  face  "pale  to  sickliness,"  and  a  little  old  lady.
And  in  G.  168  we  make  the  acquaintance,  successively,  of  an  old
man,  a  large  white  "  waddlewayed  "  dog,  "a  white  figure  "  not  more
precisely  described,  a  stout  middle-aged  woman  with  large  flapping
frills  and  a  baby,  and  a  shower  of  blood.  (See  also  G.  19,  64,  73,  179,
181,  183,  407,  440,  477,  G.  t.  301,  and  below  G.  186,  189.)  In  two  out
of  the  very  small  number  of  cases  in  which  we  have  been  able  to  trace
the  occurrence  of  visvial  phenomena  in  the  same  house  through  two  or
more  successive  tenancies,  the  character  of  the  figures  is  found  to  vary.
(See  G.  181,  Journal,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  249,  et  seq.,  and  G.  187  below.
See  also  Proceedings,  Vol.  III.,  jjp.  117,  148.)

In  G.  146  and  G.  t.  303,  308  it  is  by  no  means  clear  that  the
apparitions  seen  on  different  occasions  bore  any  marked  resemblance.
And  speaking  generally,  the  identity  of  the  figures  seen  in  many  cases,
is  rather  assumed  from  the  absence  of  recorded  variations  than
demonstrated  by  any  detailed  agreement  in  the  accounts  received  by
us  ;  the  descriptions  given  by  different  witnesses  being  frequently  too-
vague  to  admit  of  any  precise  comparison.

Of  course,  it  may  be  argued  that  each  figure  corresponds  to  a
separate  agent,  and  tliat  when  many  diverse  apparitions  are  seen  in
one  locality, we  may  infer  that  that  locality  is  haunted  by  many  different
ghosts.  It  is  impossible  at  present  to  prove  that  this  is  not  the  true
explanation  of  the  facts.  Indeed,  if  our  imaginary  interlocutor  were  to
develope  his  hypothesis  yet  further,  and  contend  that  every  so-called
subjective  hallucination  is  due  to  post-mo7-te)n  agency  of  some  kind  or
another,  I  should  be  at  a  loss  to  prove  his  position  untenable.  But  it
is  clear  that  in  a  serious  argument  the  burden  of  proof  woitld  lie  upon
him  who  invoked  an  unknown  agency ;  and  it  is  obvious  that  the
characteristic  which  first  drew  attention  to  the  phenomena  occurring
in  "  haunted  "  houses,  and  which  more  than  any  other  still  induces  us
to  attach  weight  to  the  records,  is  the  alleged  resemblance  between  the
various  appearances.  If  this  resemblance  can  in  any  case  be  shown  to
rest  on  insufiicient  evidence,  the  explanation  by  subjective  hallucination
will  appear  the  easier  altei'native.  And  the  argumel^t  in  favour  of
adopting  this  explanation  will  be  perceptibly  strengthened  if  we  find
that  the  primary  percipient  or  one  of  the  percipients  has  had  previous
hallucinatory  experiences.  The  popular  instinct  to  assimilate  the
various  apparitions  is,  no  doubt,  founded  on  a  true  appreciation  of  the
bearing  of  the  evidence. .  ■


240


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


(2)  Agtiin,  figures  of  animals  ai-e  seen  occasionally  in  the  same  house
with  human  figures.  Thus  in  G.  38,  at  one  time  the  figure  seen  is  that
of  a  man  in  black,  at  another  that  of  a  black  dog ;  in  G.  101  the  figure
of  a  man  and  a  white  cat ;  in  G.  467  another  white  cat  is  seen,  and  a
lady  in  deep  mourning.  {Cf.  G.  43  and  168.)  In  other  cases  animals
appear  alone,  without  the  accompaniment  of  human  figures.  Thus,  in
G.  34  the  house  was  haunted  by  a  spectral  tabby  cat,  described  as  "a
very  miserable  and  unhappy  looking  creature,"  which  found  a  melancholy
diversion  in  suddenly  appearing  before  the  cook  and  causing  her  to
stumble.  In  G.  54,  which  I  quote  as  an  illustration,  a  figure  resembling
a  bull  is  seen  by  two  pei'sons  simultaneously.  Mrs.  Potter  writes  on
December  6th,  1874  : —

G.  54.

The  Rake.

Returning  from  church,  my  husband  came  to  meet  me  at  the  Wynt-gate.
Instead  of  going  straight  home,  we  v/ent  along  the  walk  leading  to  the  Dun-
geon, and  as  it  commenced  raining,  we  sheltered  vmder  one  of  the  fine  old
trees  overhanging  the  path.  We  had  not  stood  many  minutes  when  we  saw  a
large  beast,  coming  straight  towards  us.  My  husband,  thinking  it  was  one
of  the  beasts  from  the  park,  met  it,  saying,  ' '  Get  out,  you  beast, "  striking  at
it,  when,  to  our  astonishment,  it  disappeared  like  a  shadov>^.  I  must  mention
that  we  had  a  small  dog  with  us.  The  niglit  was  a  sort  of  grey  light,  and  the
animal  seemed  to  come  from  the  Dungeon  ;  in  fact,  we  thought  it  quite  close
upon  us.  We  were  not  afraid,  and  both  thouglit  that  it  was  delusion  or  a  reflec-
tion at  the  time ;  it  was  after  that  I  felt  timid  about  it,  and  never  dared
venture  near  the  old  castle  again,  where  I  had  spent  many  happy  moments  by
myself.

Elizabeth  Potter.
Benjamin  Potter.

The  above  happened  in  1858.

Miss  Gladstone  (now  Mrs.  Drew)  wrote  to  Lady  Rayleigh,  from
Hawarden,  on  December  9th,  1874  : — •

It  has  taken  a  long  time  to  get  the  old  castle  (story)  from  the  Potters.

I  see  tliey  have  omitted  to  specify  that  it  happened  in  September,
about  a  quarter  to  eight  o'clock,  and  that  the  "beast"  was  apparently  a
bull.  .  .  .  The  Potters  have  left  out  several  details  in  their  account
which  I  remember,  and  I  suppose  they  have  forgotten.  The  animal  came  so
close  tliat  she  sprang  back  and  screamed,  but  he  said,  "All  right,"  and  kicked
at  it  with  the  words,  "Get  out,  you  beast."

In  a  later  letter  Mrs.  Drew  adds  : —

Remember,  the  old  castle,  &c.,  stands  in  the  garden,  within  the  rails,
so  no  cattle,  or  sheep,  or  horses  come  inside  the  grounds.  No,  there  is  no
ghost  story  otherwise  about  the  old  castle  that  I  know  of.

With  this  account  compare  G.  123,  142,  and  608  (second-hand),
although  it  is  not  clear  that  in  these  cases  the  object  seen  may  not


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiv.


241


have  been  a  real  animal.  The  narratives  numbered  G.  121,  12-5,  144,
(third-hand),  161,  and  373  also  deal  with  apparitions  of  animals.

In  many  cases  mysterious  lights  are  seen  as  well  as  figures  of  men
or  anhnals.  (See  G.  19,  63,  76,  148,  163,  16S,  383,  G.  t.  4,  and  many
others.)

No  doubt  many  of  those  who  have  recorded  expei'ieuces  of  this  kind
hold  that,  as  the  figures  of  raen  may  be  assumed  to  represent  in  some
sort  the  "  ghosts  "  of  human  beings,  so  the  figures  of  animals  may
represent  the  ghosts  of  animals.  The  difficulties  of  such  an  interpreta-
tion are  obvious,  but  they  need  not  be  discussed  at  length  here.  Most
students  of  the  subject,  at  any  rate,  are  agreed  that  the  actual  phe-
nomena are  hallucinatory  ;  and  it  is  not  necessary,  therefore,  to  ascribe
figures  resembling  animals  to  the  agency  of  animals.  It  is  at  all  events
permissible  to  suppose  that  these  figures  are  the  products  of  some  higher
intelligence.  And  such  a  supposition  is  obviously  necessary  in  the  case
of  the  hallucinatory  lights  and  inanimate  objects  generally.

But  if  once  this  supposition  is  admitted,  the  outworks  of  the  theory
of  post-mortem  agency  are  destroyed.  To  the  popular  mind  the  things
seen  are  what  they  represent;  the  figure  of  a  man  is  the  ghostly  counter-
part of  a  man,  having  a  definite  substance  and  extension  in  space  ;  and
so  the  fio-ure  of  an  animal  is  the  o-host  of  an  animal.  The  instructed
adherents  of  the  post-mortejn  theory  reject  this  crude  view ;  but,
nevertheless,  their  position  derives  its  main  support  from  an  assump-
tion which  is  in  essence  indistinguishable  from  it — the  assumption,  to
wit,  that  the  hallucinatory  figure  necessarily  bears  some  resemblance
to  the  person  by  whose  agency  it  is,  on  the  hypothesis,  produced.  But
if  the  figures  of  animals  rnay  be,  and  the  figures  of  inanimate  objects
must  be  produced  by  a  cause  unlike  themselves,  what  ground  have  we
for  assuming  resemblance  in  the  first  case  ?  And  if  no  such  ground
can  be  shown — if  it  be  admitted  that  the  agent  may  produce  images
unlike  himself — why  should  we  restrict  our  choice  of  an  agent  in  any
case  1  Why  should  we,  in  any  case,  seek  the  agent  amongst  the  dead,
whom  we  do  not  know,  rather  than  amongst  the  living,  of  -n-liose
existence  and  powers  xvc  are  assured  'I

(3)  Another  very  noteworthy  feature  in  the  well-attested  narratives
is  that  in  many  cases  one  or  more  of  the  percipients  have  experienced
other  hallucinations,  which  may  or  may  not  ha^-e  been  shared  by  others.
Thus  in  G.  184,  30-5,  476,i  G.t.  7,  316  {Journal ,  Y ol.  lU . ,  p.  292),  and
G.c.  8,  one  of  the  percipients  in  a  collective  case,  and  in  G.  187
(below  p.  267)  two  percipients  out  of  three,  have  had  previous  "sisual
hallucinations  unshared. In  G.c.  Ill,  the  percipient  describes  four

^  Tvro  different  stories  bear  this  number  ;  the  one  here  referred  to  is  that  printed
in  the  Journal  for  May,  18S6.


242


Phantasms  of  the  Bead


[Nov.  29,


I'isual  hallucinations,  two  of  which  were  collective  and  two  unshared.
In  G.  314  and  315  the  narrator  describes  two  collective  hallucinations
of  his  own  experience.  One  of  the  two  percipients  in  a  collective
hallucination  (G.  334)  has  also  lived  in  a  "  haunted  "  house  (G.  333).
And  passing  from  coUectiA^e  to  what  may  perhaps  be  termed
"successive"  cases — i.e.,  non-collective  cases  of  the  ordinary  "haunted
house  "  type,  where  a  figure  is  seen  on  different  occasions  in  the  same
locality — we  find  that  in  G.  328  and  395  one  of  the  percipients  in
each  case  has  had  another  visual  hallucination  ;  and  in  G.c.  313,  a  lady
who  was  fortunate  enough  as  a  child  to  see  Queen  Elizabeth  in  a  house
in  the  Old  Kent-road  has  also  sent  us  accounts  of  other  hallucinations,
experienced  by  her,  not  shared  by  others.

And  finally  we  have  a  large  number  of  cases  in  which  the  same  per-
cipient or  group  of  percipients  has  witnessed  inexplicable  phenomena,
visual  or  auditory,  on  more  than  one  occasion,  and  in  more  than  one
locality.  (See  G.  7  and  41,  14  and  104,  40,  101  and  114,  108,  116,
464,  5  and  6,  475  and  6,  and  lastly  468,  474,  and  G.c.  310.)

There  are  indications  that  this  tendency  to  hallucination  is
hereditary.  In  G.  169,  for  instance,  an  unshared  hallucination  is
reported  of  a  lady,  whose  two  sisters  contribute  similar  experiences  of
their  own  in  another  house  (Proceedings,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  109-113).  In  G.  318
and  319,  various  visual  hallucinations,  all  unshared,  are  reported  to
have  been  experienced  by  two  sisters  ;  in  353  and  354,  unshared
hallucinations  are  reported  of  a  father  and  daughter  respectively ;  and
Mrs.  V.  S.,  one  of  the  percipients  in  G.  468,  474,  and  G.c.  310,
resided  in  another  house  (G.  469),  where  not  she  herself,  but  her  two
daughters,  saw  hallucinatoiy  figures.  The  daughters  have  also  had
other  experiences  of  the  kind.

These  cases,  however — and  it  is  probable  that  there  are  others
which  I  have  jjassed  over  in  an  examination  by  no  means  exhaustive —
must  be  taken  only  as  samples.

In  very  few  cases  in  our  collection  have  we  succeeded  in  obtaining
the  first-hand  testimony  of  all  the  witnesses.  Had  we  done  so,  I  can
feel  no  doubt  that  we  should  be  able  to  j^oint  to  a  much  lai'ger
number  of  cases  in  which  the  percipient's  experience  in  a  haunted
house  had  been  anticipated  by  a  solitary  hallucination  apparently
subjective.

Thus,  while  on  the  one  hand  we  have  found  very  little  trustworthy
evidence  to  connect  the  phantasm  seen  in  a  haunted  house  with  any
pei'son  deceased ;  very  little,  indeed,  to  suggest  the  intelligence,  the
personality,  or  even  the  continuity  of  the  underlying  cause,  there
are  many  constantly  recurring  features  in  the  best  authenticated
of  the  narratives  under  review  which  are  very  hard  to  reconcile  with
■any  such  hypothesis. It  is  clifiicult,  for  instance,  to  recognise  the


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  View.


243


identity  of  a  phantasm  which,  as  in  Gr.  168,  presents  itself  now  under
the  guise  of  an  old  man,  now  as  a  middle-aged  woman  with  flapping
frills  and  a  baby,  and  occasionally  as  a  "  waddlewayed  "  dog,  a  white
figure,  or  a  shower  of  blood.  Unless,  indeed,  we  suppose,  with  one  of
the  most  ingenious  of  our  critics,^  that  ghosts  suffer  from  a  want  of
co-ordination  between  the  sub-conscious  cerebral  centres,  and  that  these
Protean  transformations  are  the  result  of  aphasic  attempts  to  render
themselves  intelligible.

Seriously,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  fact  that  the  figures  seen
in  a  haunted  house  are  apt  to  assume  at  different  times  cliflierent  forms,
including  those  of  animals  and  vague  lights,  suggests  that  the  pheno-
mena are  due,  not  to  an  alien  spiritual  presence,  \mt  to  some  predis-
position to  hallucination  on  the  part  of  the  percipients.  And  the
numerous  cases  in  which  it  can  be  shown  that  the  percipients  have
experienced  other  hallucinations  of  various  kinds,  shared  and  unshared,
give  strong  confirmation  to  this  view.  If  the  possibility  be  once
admitted  that  a  casual  hallucination  may  not  only  be  repeated  in  the
experience  of  the  original  percipient,  but  may  be  communicated  by  him
to  other  persons  living  in  the  same  locality,  most  of  the  difficulties  in
the  interj)retation  of  our  evidence  disappeai'.  In  the  great  majority  of
cases  expectation  or  terror,  when  once  the  first  vision  is  bruited  abroad,
might  be  sufficient  to  account  for  its  repetition,  and  the  greater  or  less
resemblance  which  the  experience  of  later  percipients  bore  to  that  of
the  original  seer  would  be  attributable  to  hints  of  the  original  appear-
ance unconsciously  received  or  half  forgotten.  In  the  cases,  not  very
numerous,  where  there  seems  to  be  some  proof  that  no  hint  of  any  former
experience  had  reached  the  percipient,^  it  is  still  possible  to  suppose  that
any  resemblance  between  the  earlier  and  later  apparitions,  if  sub-
stantiated, is  due  to  the  operation  of  thought-transference.

I  proceed  to  give  various  narratives  as  illustrations^  beginning  with
three  cases  where  there  seems  reason  to  attribute  the  apparition  wit-
nessed by  a  single  person  to  fear,  expectation,  or^,  generally,  the
emotional  state  of  the  percipient.

The  following  case  has  been  received  from  Mr.  Joseph  Skipsey,  the
miner  poet,  now  custodian  of  the  Shakespeare  Museum  at  Stratford-
on-Avon.

G.c.  613. ^  "

When  I  was  10  years  old,  working  in  the  pit  at  Percy  Main  Colliery,
near  North  Shields,  I  yoked  a  horse  to  a  train  of  rolling  waggons  and  waited
at  a  siding,  a  spot  on  which  some  30  years  before  a  man  had  been  killed.  I

1  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  in  Castle  Perilous.

2  See  for  a  collection  of  some  of  these,  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper  on  "Phantasms  of
the  Dead,"  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  III.


244


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


had  frequently  been  at  this  pomt  before  without  thinking  about  this  circum-
stance. Upon  this  morning  it  suddenly  occurred  to  me  strongly  that  this
tragedy  had  happened  ;  I  felt  afraid  and  blew  my  light  out  lest  I  should  see
anything.  A  few  minutes  afterwards  everything  around  me  became  visible —
the  coal- wall,  the  horse,  &c.  I  was  astonished  at  this  because  there  was  no
visible  source  of  light.  I  then  heard  a  footstep  coming  and  saw  along  tlie
drift-way  a  pair  of  legs  in  short  breeches,  as  a  miner's  v/ould  be,  and  hands
hanging  down  the  sides.  The  upper  part  of  the  advancing  figure  was  shrouded
in  cloud.  The  figure  carried  no  light.  This  imperfect  figure  came  to  me,
took  hold  of  me,  and  I  felt  a  man's  grip,  but  I  also  felt  that  it  was  friendly.
It  fondled  me,  and  I  felt  both  the  hands  and  the  body.  I  looked  earnestly
for  the  face  but  saw  nothing  but  dark  cloud.  Then  the  figure  passed  me  and
disapi^eared.  I  felt  paralysed  and  unable  to  speak.  I  felt  no  fear  after  it  had
left  me,  and  I  often  went  to  the  same  place  but  saw  nothing.

On  my  telling  this  to  Tom  Gilbis,  a  miner  friend,  he  told  me  that  he  had
seen  a  light  in  a  hand  in  a  tramway  in  another  mine,  but  no  body.  The  light
swung  round  and  disappeared.

Joseph  Skipsey.

December  ISth,  1884.

The  obvious  explanation  of  the  experience  narrated  is  that  it  is  a
simple  hallucination,  rounded,  perhaps,  into  a  more  perfect  whole
in  the  memory  of  an  old  man  recounting  a  vision  of  his  childhood.
The  hallucination  may  well  have  been  due  to  terror,  caused  by  the  awe-
inspiring  surroundings — a  terror  of  which  sufficient  evidence  is  given  by
the  percipient's  action  in  blowing  out  his  light.  It  would  not,  perhaps,
be  hazardous  to  conjecture  that  under  favourable  circumstances  the
story,  if  widely  reported,  might  have  given  rise  to  a  whole  crop  of  more
or  less  similar  apparitions,  material  for  tire  story  of  a  haunted  mine.

In  the  next  case  (G.  174),  v/hich  is  extracted  from  A  Higldand  Tour
toitlb  Dr.  Candlish  (second  edition,  pp.  85-88),  by  Dr.  A.  Beith,  a  well-
known  minister  of  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland,  the  percipient's  visual
hallucination  or  dream  appears  to  have  nearly  coincided  with  a  noise
heard  by  two  other  persons  as  well  as  himself.  It  seems  not  improb-
able that  the  noise  heard  was  due  to  some  normal  agency,  and  was
itself  the  cause  of  the  vision,  which  in  the  order  of  pei'ception  preceded
it.  It  may,  for  instance,  conceivably  have  been  caused  by  the  per-
cipient in  a  state  of  somnambulism.  Dr.  Beith  himself  was  at  first
inclined  to  attribute  his  experience  to  niglitmare,  and  it  is  evident  that
he  is  by  no  means  clear  that  he  was  actually  avv^ake  until  after  the
occurrence.  •

G.  174.

[This  event  took  place  in  the  August  of  1845.  Dr.  Beith  had  been  chosen
by  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland,  together  with  Drs.
Caiidlish  and  M'Kellar,  to  make  a  tour  of  the  Highlands  and  report  on  the
condition  of  the  adherents  of  the  Free  Church  in  that  district,  who  were
at  the  time  ill-cared  for  by  the  State. Dr.  Beith  was,  on  this  occasion,


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiv.


245


the  guest  of  Mr.  Lillingston,  of  Lochalsh,  Ross-shire,  for  the  evenmg.
After  talking  for  some  time  with  his  host  he  was  shown  to  a  large  bedroom,
on  the  top  flat  of  tlie  house.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lillingston  slept  on  the
ground  floor,  so  that  between  their  bedroom  and  his  the  drawing-room  floor
intervened.  At  the  foot  of  Dr.  Beith's  bed  was  a  large  fireplace,  in  which  the
dancing  firelight  flung  shadows  on  the  curtains.  Being  very  weary  he  soon
fell  asleep.]

I  had  gone  to  bed.  After  a  little  I  fell  asleep,  and  I  slept  I  know  not
how  long.  Suddenly  I  was  av/akened  by  what  I  imagined  was  a  loud  knock
at  my  door.  I  opened  my  eyes.  The  fire  was  still  burning  ;  but  was  about
to  expire.  I  called,  ' '  Come  in. "  No  sooner  had  I  done  so  than  I  sav.'  the  door
slowly  open.  A  man  of  gigantic  stature,  of  huge  proportions,  red-haired,
half-dressed,  his  brawny  arms  bare  high  above  the  elbows,  presented  himself
to  my  view.  I  saw  him  distinctly  advance,  not  towards  me,  but  direct  to  the
fireplace,  the  glimmering  light  from  the  grate  falling  on  his  massive  frame.
He  carried  a  large  black  chest,  wdiich  appeared  to  me  to  be  studded  with  brass
nails  and  to  be  so  heavy  as  to  tax  to  the  utmost  his  strength,  strong  man  as
he  was.  I  saw  him  jjass  the  foot  of  my  bed  as  if  turning  to  the  side  of  the
fire  next  the  bed.  The  black  cliesb  seemed  to  gvovi  into  a  coffin  of  dread
dimensions.  In  that  form  I  saw  it  but  for  a  moment.  My  bed-curtain  almost
instantly  concealed  from  my  eyes  the  bearer  and  his  burden.  He  set  it  down
with  a  crash  which  startled  me,  as  I  thought,  and  which  seemed  to  shake  the
house,  and,  as  I  believed,  fairly  roused  me,  I  tried  to  look  round  to  the
fireplace,  but  saw  nothing.  Everything  was  as  I  had  left  it  on  going  into
bed.  The  vision  had  passed.  In  whatever  condition  I  had  been  pireviously,
I  felt  confident  I  was  by  that  time  thoroughly  awake.  Reflecting  on  the
incident,  I  soon  set  the  wdiole  thing  down  to  a  fit  of  nightmare,  brought  on,
perhajjs,  by  the  conversation  in  which  I  had  been  so  deeply  interested  before
retiring  to  rest,  and  which  had  somewhat  excited  my  nervous  system.  In  a
short  time  I  had  got  over  my  agitation  and  was  composing  myself  to  sleep,
when  I  again  suddenly  heard  a  knock  at  my  door.  I  raised  myself  on  my
elbow  with  a  resolution  to  be  at  the  bottom  of  it,  and  said  firmly,  perhaps
fiercely,  "Come  in."  The  door  opened  and  Mr.  Lillingston  appeared  in  his
dressing-gown,  a  light  in  his  hand.  As  he  was  in  figure  tall,  though  not
robust,  and  of  a  reddish  complexion,  his  appearance  slightly  resembled  what
I  had  previously  seen.  "Have  you  been  ill?"  "No  ;  I  am  quite  well."
"Have  you  been  out  of  bed?"  "No;  I  certainly  have  not  since  I  lay
down."  "Mrs.  Lillingston  and  I  have  been  disturbed  by  hearing  heavy
steps  in  your  room,  as  we  thought,  and  by  the  sound  of  the  tailing  of  some
"weighty  article  on  the  floor."

[At  the  breakfast-table  next  morning  the  engrossing  subject  of  conversa-
tion was  the  noise  in  Dr.  Beith's  room.  He  did  not  tell  what  he  had  seen.
The  room  was  examined  lest  some  article  of  furniture  or  a  picture  might
have  fallen,  but  both  in  it  and  in  the  drawing-room  below  everything  was  in
its  place  undisturbed. Dr.  Beith  goes  on  to  say  : — ]

I  would  have  forgotten  it  altogether,  but  the  succession  of  deaths  in
our  family,  just  a  year  after — four  children,  as  already  noted,  being  taken
from  us  within  a  few  weeks — brought  up  the  remembrance  of  what  I  had
seen  ;  and  I  felt  a  strange — an  unreasonable  inclination, I  am  willing  to  admit

B


24G


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  20,


— to  connect  the  two  things,  and  to  conclude  that  what  I  had  witnessed,  ire
the  Bahnacara  attic,  was  a  kindly  presentiment  or  pre-intimation  of  sorrow
to  come.

I  called  on  Dr.  Beith  on  Sunday,  September  l-itli,  1884,  and  heard
an  account  of  the  story  as  above  given  from  his  own  lips.

Dr.  Beith  believes  himself  to  have  been  awake  at  the  time  the  figure
entered  the  room.  He  is  quite  clear  that  he  did  not  go  to  sleep  in  the
interval  between  the  disappearance  of  the  figure  and  the  entrance  of
Mr.  Lillingston.

I  asked  him  if  it  were  possible  for  the  whole  thing  to  have  been  a
trick.  He  explained  to  me  that  the  room  was  a  very  large  one,  with
the  door  in  the  corner  opposite  to  the  bed,  so  that  no  one  could  enter  or
leave  the  room  without  being  seen.  The  fireplace  was  by  the  side  of
the  bed,  whose  curtains  hid  it,  but  when  he  sat  up  in  bed  and  looked
round  the  curtains  he  satisfied  himself  that  the  figure  was  not  thei'e.

He  has  never  experienced  a  hallucination,  or  seen  anything  else  of
the  kind.  He  has,  however,  had  other  psychical  experiences.  Dr.
Beith  had  never  heard  of  any  other  unusual  experience  in  the  house.

Another  case  of  an  isolated  phantasm  is,  ]3erhaps,  worth  quoting
as  a  curious  example  of  the  survival  of  a  mediseval  superstition.  There
is  no  need  here  to  look  beyond  the  emotional  condition  of  the  percipient
for  the  origin  of  the  hallucination,  its  precise  form  being  determined
by  her  intellectual  inheritance  and  environment.  The  story  is  in  the
words  of  the  clergyman  who  visited  the  dying  woman.

G.  104.

Aiujnst  22/w7,  1884.
I  was  once  sent  for  to  see  a  dying  old  woman,  who,  her  daughter  who
came  to  me  said,  had  something  to  say  Ijefore  she  died.  I  saw  that  the
daughter,  a  middle-aged  woman,  was  f  idl  of  curiosity  to  know  what  her  mother
had  to  say.  When  I  got  to  the  bedside  of  the  old  woman,  I  endeavoured  to
persuade  her  tliat  I  did  not  want  to  hear  anything,  and  told  the  daughter
that  she  should  not  trouble  her  mother  by  insisting  ujjon  hearing  something
out  of  mere  curiosity,  but  she  kept  saying,  "Mother,  you  know  you  said
you  would  tell  it,  you  promised,"  &c.  Thus  teased  into  making  a  confession,
she,  in  almost  her  last  breath,  said  that  after  the  funeral  of  her  husband
she  returned  to  their  bedroom,  and  (I  use  her  very  words)  "  I  saw  a  man
come  down  that  chimley,  and  a  better  looking  man  you  never  saw,  and  he
said,  'If  you  will  serve  me  you  shall  never  want.'"  I  gathered  that  she
believed  this  to  be  the  devil,  and  she  resisted  his  offer.  This  proves  to  me
that  monkish  legends  of  such  apparitions  are  not  necessarily  lies  of  those  who
first  gave  them.  The  jjoor  widow  was  in  a  frenzy  of  desolation,  and  Satanic
suggestions  took  a  shape,  or  she  fancied  they  did,  and  made  a  lasting  im-
pression upon  her  mind.  This  story  happened  30  years  ago,  and  an  old
woman  then,  in  that  class  of  life,  would  retain  much  of  the  ignorance  of  the
uneducated  in  the  last  century.

Passing  from  these  cases  of  apparently  unshared  hallucination, which,


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiu.


247.


on  the  view  now  propounded,  may  be  taken  as  the  raw  material  of  ghost
stories,  we  come  to  a  class  of  cases  wliere  a  phantasm  is  witnessed  by  two
or  more  persons  simultaneously.  There  is,  so  far  as  I  am  a\Vare,  no
evidence  for  collective  hallucination  in  the  normal  state  outside  the  phe-
nomena which  we  are  now  discussing;  and  it  is  always  open  to  the  critic
to  maintain  that  the  fact  that  a  percept  is  shared  by  more  than  one
person  is  in  itself  a  proof  of  its  claim  to  objective  reality  of  some  kind.
Such  a  critic,  however,  it  may  be  pointed  out,  will  have  to  claim  an
objective  existence  not  merely  for  apparitions  resembling  the  human
tigure,  but  for  the  bull  seen  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Potter,  the  spectral  cats
and  dogs,  the  coach  and  horses,  and  the  mysterious  lights  seen  by
other  witnesses.  But,  at  all  events,  collective  hallucination  may  be
accepted  as  a  woi-king  hypothesis,  and  if  it  is  found  to  fit  the  facts,  it
will  have  advanced  one  step  nearer  to  acceptance  as  a  vera  causa.^
It  is  interesting  to  note,  moreover,  as  bearing  upon  the  question  of  the
transference  of  hallucinations,  two  cases  in  which  contact  or  vicinity,
as  in  some  of  our  own  experiments  in  thought-transference,  appears  to
have  influenced  the  result.  In  G.  118  a  curious  phantasmagoria —
a  "  witch  fire  "  with  people  dancing  round  it — which  is  witnessed  by
several  persons,  disappears  on  the  approach  of  a  man  "  who,  being
born  in  March,  can  never  see  them."  And  in  another  story  (G.
G36),  which,  however,  is  second-hand,  the  narrator's  mother  is  said
to  have  seen  the  figure  of  a  man,  "  but  my  father  protested  that  he
did  not  see  anybody.  This  surprised  my  mother,  and,  laying  her  hand
on  my  father's  .shoulder,  she  said,  '  Oh,  George  !  do  you  not  see  him  ? '
Islj  father  thereupon  exclaimed,  '  I  see  him  now  !  '  "

It  will,  however,  no  doubt,  be  readily  admitted  that  if,  as  suggested
by  Mr.  Gurney,  a  casual  hallucination,  originating  in  the  mind  of  one
percipient,  may  by  .some  process  of  telepathy  be  transferred  to  others
in  his  immediate  vicinity,  so  that  they  also  should  share  in  his  percep-
tion, the  following  ai-e  instances  of  such  collective  hallucinations.
The  tirst  narrative  comes  from  Mrs.  Stone,  of  Walditch,  Bridport,
from  wliom  Professor  Sidgwick  received  a  viva  voce  account  of  the
incident.

G.  20.

The  date  is  a  little  uncertain,  but  I  think  it  was  the  summer  of  1830.  My
cou.sin  Emily  was  staying  with  me,  and  my  friend,  Mary  J.,  was  spending  the
day  with  us.  Emily  said,  "How  pleasant  it  would  be  to  drive  over  and  drink
tea  with  my  father  and  the  girls  this  lovely  afternoon. "  In  a  very  short  time^
we  were  driving  in  a  little  four-wheeled  carriage  to  my  uncle's  vicarage,  at.
Sydling,  about  seven  miles  from  Dorchester.  They  were  all  at  home,  delighted

1  The  question  has  been  carefully  examuied  by  Mr.  G-urney  in  Phantasms  of  the
Livinrj,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  1G8-270. See  also  Mr.  Myers"  note,  pp.  277-284.


248


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


to  see  lis,  and  we  spent  a  most  delightful  evening.  As  there  was  no  moon
we  left  early  enough  to  reach  home  before  dark.  A  most  beautiful  evening
it  was,  and  three  more  merry  girls  could  hardly  be  met  with.  Just  after
passing  Wrackleford  the  road  is  rather  elevated.  It  had  been  somewhat
dusky  before,  but  here  the  evening  glow  .showed  the  hedges,  road,  and  all
near  objects.  There  it  was  that  I  saw  the  figure  of  a  man  on  the  right-hand
side,  walking,  or  rather  gliding,  at  the  head  of  the  horse.  My  first  idea  was
that  he  meant  to  stop  us,  but  he  made  no  effort  of  the  kind,  but  kept  on  the
same  jjace  as  the  horse,  neither  faster  nor  slower.  At  first  I  thought  him  of
great  height,  but  afterwards  remarked  that  he  was  gliding  some  distance  (at
least  a  foot)  above  the  ground.  Mary  was  sitting  by  me.  I  pointed  out  in  a
low  voice  the  figure,  but  she  did  not  see  it,  and  could  not  at  any  time  during
its  appearance.  Emily  was  sitting  by  the  man-servant  on  the  front  seat;  she
heard  what  I  said,  turned  round,  and  speaking  softly,  "I  see  the  man  you
mention  distinctly."  Tlien  the  man-servant  said  in  an  awful,  frightened
voice,  "For  God"s  sake,  ladies,  don't  say  anything  !  please  keep  quiet  I"  or
words  to  that  efl^ect.  I  had  heard  that  horses  and  other  animals  feel  the
presence  of  the  supernatural ;  in  this  instance  there  was  no  starting  or  bolt-
ing ;  the  creature  went  on  at  an  even  pace,  almost  giving  the  idea  of  being
controlled  by  the  figure.  The  face  was  turned  away,  but  the  shape  of  a  man
in  dark  clothing  was  clearly  defined.  At  the  entrance  of  the  village  of  Char-
minster  it  vanished,  and  we  saw  it  no  more  ;  though  in  passing  through  the
dark  jiarts  of  the  road,  then  shadov»'ed  with  elms,  I  looked  round  in  some
little  trepidation.  We  could  never  get  much  out  of  the  man-servant,  except
that  it  was  a  ghost.  It  has  struck  me  since  whether  he  knew  more  about  it
than  he  chose  to  say.  He  was  more  terrified  at  the  time  than  either  of  us.  I
never  heard  the  road  was  haunted.

P. S.— My  cousin  and  the  man-servant  sav/  it  distinctly,  but  my  friend
was  unable  to  do  so,  though  the  figure  stood  out  jilainly  against  the  evening
light.

In  January,  1883,  Mrs.  Stone  adds  : —

My  cousin  Emily  is  not  living.  I  have  lost  sight  of  the  man-servant  for
many  years.

Miss  Henrietta  Coombs  writes,  in  August,  1883  : —

In  the  summer  of  1858  I  was  driving  in  a  pony-carriage  on  the  Wrackle-
ford road,  when  just  on  the  brow  of  the  little  liill,  before  reaching  the  dairy-
house,  the  pony  stopped  short  and  shook  all  over,  as  if  violently  frightened.
I  expected  it  to  start  off,  and  I  got  out  quickly,  as  did  my  cousin  who  was
with  me,  the  driver  remaining  in  the  cai'riage.  My  cousin,  a  military  man,
and  accustomed  to  horses,  examined  the  pony  and  could  find  no  cause  for
its  alarm  or  illness.  It  went  on  very  well  afterwards,  and  I  never  heard  that
it  had  a  similar  attack,  either  before  or  after  that  time.  I  had  forgotten  the
occurrence  until  I  heard  Mrs.  Stone  speak  of  the  appearance  she  saw  many
years  before,  when  I  exclaimed,  "  That  must  be  the  place  where  our  pony
"vvas  frightened  in '56. "

In  this  case,  it  will  be  observed,  one  of  the  persons  present  saw


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiv.


249


nothing  unusual,  a  circumstance  which  tells  strongly  in  favour  of  the
view  that  the  thing  seen  was  of  a  hallucinatory  nature.

The  next  account  was  given  to  us,  within  a  few  weeks  of  the  occur-
rence narrated,  by  the  two  ladies  named,  with  one  of  whom  I  have  had
a  personal  interview.

G.  185.

From  Mrs.  Knott,  London,  S.W.

March  5th,  1889.

The  incident  I  relate  occurred  at  this  address  early  in  February,  1889.  I
have  lived  in  this  house  four  years  and  constantly  felt  another  presence
was  in  the  drawing-room  besides  myself,  but  never  satv  any  form  until  last
month.  My  cousin  Mrs.  R.  and  myself  returned  from  a  walk  at  1.30  p.m.
The  front  door  was  opened  for  us  by  my  housekeeper,  Mrs.  E.  I  passed
upstairs  before  my  cousin,  and  on  turning  to  my  bedroom,  the  door  of  which
is  beside  the  drawing-room  door  [i.e.,  at  right  angles  to  it],  I  saw,  as  I
thought,  Mrs.  E.  go  into  the  drawing-room.  I  put  a  parcel  into  my  room
and  then  followed  her  to  give  some  order,  and  found  the  room  empty  !  My
cousin  was  going  up  the  second  flight  of  stairs  to  her  room,  and  I  called
out,  ''Did  you  open  the  drawing-room  door  as  you  passed  ?  "  "No,"  she
replied,  "Mrs.  E.  has  gone  in."  Mrs.  R.  had  seen  the  figure  more  dis-
tinctly than  I ;  it  seemed  to  pass  her  at  the  top  of  the  stairs,  and  she
thought  "How  cpiietly  Mrs.  E.  moves."  I  inquired  of  Mrs.  E.  what  she
did  after  opening  the  door  for  us,  and  she  said,  ' '  Went  to  the  kitchen  to
hasten  luncheon  as  you  were  in  a  hurry  for  it."  The  day  was  bright  &iid
there  is  nothing  on  the  stairs  that  could  cast  a  shadow.  I  quite  hope  some
day  I  may  see  the  face  of  the  figure.

From  Mrs.  R.,  Malpas,  Cheshire.

March  1st,  1889.

In  answer  to  your  letter  on  the  subject  of  the  figure  seen  at  C. -terrace,
Mrs.  K.  and  I  had  just  come  in  at  about  half -past  one  o'clock.  Mrs.  E.  (the
housekeeper)  had  opened  tlie  door.  We  went  ujDstaii's,  and  on  the  first  land-
ing are  two  rooms, one  the  drawing-room,  the  other  Mrs.  K. 's  bedroom.  She
went  into  her  room  while  I  stood  a  minute  or  two  talking  ti>  her.  Just  as  I
turned  to  go  up  the  next  flight  of  stairs  I  thought  I  saw  Mrs.  E.  pass  me
quickly  and  go  into  the  drawing-room.  Beyond  seeing  a  slight  figure  in  a
dark  dress  I  saw  nothing  more,  for  I  did  not  look  at  it,  but  just  saw  it  pass
me.  Before  I  had  got  upstairs  Mrs.  K.  called  out,  ' '  Did  you  leave
the  drawing-room  door  open?"  I  answered,  "I  did  not  go  in;  I
saw  Mrs.  E.  go  in."  Mrs.  K.  answered,  "There  is  nobody  there."
We  asked  Mrs.  E.  if  she  had  been  up  ;  she,  on  the  contrary,  had  gone
straight  down.  Also,  as  she  said,  she  would  not  have  passed  me  on  the
landing,  but  have  waited  until  I  had  gone  upstairs  ;  and  as  it  struck  me
afterivarcls,  she  could  not  have  passed  me  on  such  a  small  landing  without
touching  me,  but  I  never  noticed  that  at  the  time.  I  do  not  know  if  a
thought  ever  embodies  itself,  but  my  idea  was,  and  is,  that  as  Mrs.  E.
ran  downstairs  her  thought  went  up,  wondering  if  the  drawing-room  fire


250  Phantasms  of  the  Dead  [Nov.  29,


was  burning  brightly.  Tlie  figure  I  saw  went  into  the  room  as  if  it  had
a  purpose  of  some  sort. I  have  never  seen  anything  of  the  sort  before.

From  Mrs.  R.

March  10th,  1889.
I  am  afraid  I  cannot  give  any  very  definite  reply  to  your  questions.

(1)  "  Had  I  any  idea  of  the  house  being  haunted  ?  "  No;  and  I  do  not
think  it  is  supposed  to  be  haunted.  Mrs.  K.  has  said  that  at  times  it  has
seemed  to  her  as  if  there  was  someone  else  in  the  room  besides  herself,  but  I
think  that  is  a  feeling  that  has  come  to  most  people  some  time  or  other.

(2)  "Did  we  see  it  simultaneously  ?  "  That  I  cannot  exactly  say,  but  I
should  think  yes,  for  we  neither  of  us  said  anything  till  Mrs.  K.  called  out
to  me  to  know  if  I  had  been  in  the  drawing-room.

I  called  on  Mrs.  Knott  with  Major  Jebb,  on  February  27th,  1889, and
heard  lier  account  of  tlie  incident,  and  insjsected  the  landing  where  the
figure  was  seen.  The  landing  is  very  small  and  narrow,  but  well
lighted  by  a  wide  uncurtained  window  at  the  top  of  the  stairway,
between  the  first  and  second  floors.  Tlie  figure  was  seen  on  the  first
floor.  A  real  person  could  not  have  passed  the  two  ladies  on  the  stairs
Avithout  considerable  difficulty,  and  it  seems  impossible  that  a  real
jDBrson  could  have  passed  out  of  the  room  again  without  detection.

Mrs.  Knott  has  occupied  rooms  in  the  same  house  for  about  three
and  a-half  years.

Here  we  may  almost  see  the  story  of  a  haunted  house  in  the  making.
The  essential  elements  are  there.  We  have  the  visionary  figure  seen  by
two  persons  at  once,  and  the  mysterious  feeling  of  an  alien  presence  in
the  room.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  latter  circumstance  would  have
passed  unrecorded,  and  even  unnoticed,  but  for  the  subsequent  phantasm,
through  which  it  gained  a  retrospective  importance.  It  is  not  im-
25robable  that  in  this  case  the  phantasm  was  a  hallucination  actually
generated  by  the  same  state  which  gave  rise  to  the  eerie  feelings ;  as  in
other  cases  the  phantasm  may  have  been  the  product  of  the  uneasiness
and  vague  alarm  caused  by  inexplicable  noises.  That  there  is  a  con-
stant tendency  for  mysterious  sounds  to  bring  visual  hallucinations  in
their  train  we  see  in  many  of  the  stories.  And  wdiat  the  experience  of
the  moment  has  failed  to  produce,  the  narrator's  imagination  after  the
lapse  of  many  years  may  sometimes  prove  competent  to  supply.  In  the
story,  for  instance,  printed  in  the  Journal,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  385,  et  seq.,
(G.  182),  to  which  I  have  already  referred  (p.  237),  the  only  pheno-
mena recorded  on  first-hand  evidence  are  auditory.  But  the  narrative
originally  appeared  in  a  newspaper,  and  as  there  printed  contained
an  account  at  first-hand  of  an  apparition  of  the  orthodox  kind —
a  figure  in  military  unifoi'm,  gaunt  and  haggaixl.  But  the  per-
cipient was  only  a  child  at  the  time  of  the  alleged  appearance,  and
the  account  was  published  nearly  half  a  century  afterwards.  In  correct-


1889.]


from  AnotJier  Point  of  View.


251


ing  liis  narrative  for  us  he  requested  that  this  episode  might  be  omitted.
With  a  ^vitness  a  little  less  conscientious  or  a  little  more  imaginative,
the  figure  might  have  remained  as  the  brightest  ornament  of  the  story.
The  weakness  of  second-hand  testimony  to  apparitions  is  also  ■well
exemplified  in  this  story.  The  same  witness  reported  two  other
appearances  of  a  headless  woman  at  second-hand.  But  on  going  to  the
original  sources,  we  find  that  in  neither  case  was  anything  seen;  a
horrible  presence  was  felt  on  one  occasion,  and  steps  were  heard  leaving
the  room  on  the  other.

The  following  case  (G.  186)  presents  in  many  respects  a  typical
instance  of  a  good  haunted  house,  and  I  therefore  welcomed  the  oppor-
tunity afforded  me  in  1888  of  sleeping  in  the  house,  and  of  introducing
other  members  of  the  Society.  This  unfortunately,  however,  led
to  no  result.  The  case  is,  as  it  will  be  seen,  A-ery  recent,  and
apparitions  seem  to  have  been  seen  independently  by  two  people.
Altogether,  if  any  of  these  cases  of  wholly  unrecognised  apparitions
haunting  houses  are  to  be  attributed  to  jjost-morfem  agencies  this  would
have  a  fair  claim  to  such  origin.  I  am  myself,  however,  disposed  to
adopt  the  explanation  above  suggested,  viz.,  that  the  figures  seen  were
hallucinations,  due  to  alarm  caused  by  mysterious  sounds.

G.  186.  From  Mrs.  G.,  the  landlady  of  a  London  lodging-house.

3Iaii  im,  1888.

I  came  into  this  house  at  the  end  of  September,  1887.  On  the  first  night
I  slept  with  a  friend  in  the  back  drawing-room.  We  both  heard  in  the  course
of  the  night  a  rustling  sound  m  the  front  room,  as  if  several  ladies  in  silk
dresses  were  walking  round  the  room.

On  several  occasions  after  this,  when  sleeping  m  the  little  room  on  the
second  floor,  facing  the  top  of  the  stairs,  I  heard  these  rustling  noises  again,
and  a  noise  as  if  several  people  were  coming  upstah-s.  I  remember  once
thinking  J\Ir.  Guthrie  had  brought  some  people  home  to  sleep,  and  wondering
what  they  would  find  to  eat  for  breakfast.  At  the  same  time  I  saw  a  faint
greenish  light,  as  if  from  a  flame  which  I  could  not  see,  coming  up  the  stairs
and  disappearing  into  Sir.  Guthrie's  room.  Once  I  thought  (I  was  sleeping
with  my  door  open  then)  that  I  heard  someone  come  into  the  room,  breathing
very  heavilj^,  like  a  pig.  I  did  not  speak.  The  next  morning  Mr.  Guthrie
asked  what  I  was  doing  in  their  room  the  night  before,  and  I  said,  "  I  was  just
going  to  ask  you  the  same  question."  He  told  me  he  had  not  been  into  my
room.  After  this  I  got  frightened  and  locked  my  door,  and  then  I  used  to
leave  two  candles  ahght  in  the  room  whilst  I  slejjt.

One  Tuesday  night,  about  the  end  of  November,  I  think,  I  woke  up
at  1  a.m.  with  a  feeling  that  someone  was  in  the  room.  I  had  my  face
to  the  wall,  but  I  turned  round  and  siw  between  the  bed  and  wall  [a  dis-
tance of  three  or  four  feet  only],  just  opposite  to  me,  the  figure  of  a  woman
apparently  about  fifty,  dark  hah  and  eyes,  a  red  dress  and  a  mob  cap.  I  looked
at  her  and  asked  her  what  she  wanted.  She  bent  her  head  slowly  back,
and  I  saw  what  I  thought  at  first  was  a  very  wide  mouth. Then  I  saw  that


252


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


her  throat  was  cut.  I  was  very  frightened,  the  perspiration  came  out  on  me
like  peas,  and  I  called  out  to  her  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and
the  Holy  Ghost,  to  go  away.  She  did  not  stir,  however,  and  I  remained
looking  at  her  by  the  liglit  of  the  two  candles  in  the  room,  too  frightened  at
first  to  put  out  my  hand  and  rap  on  the  partition  Avith  the  stick  which  Mr.
Guthrie  had  lent  me  for  the  purpose.  At  last  I  managed  to  give  two  quiet
knocks.  Then  I  heard  the  two  gentlemen  knocking  at  my  door,  and  the-
figure  slowly  vanished  like  a  shadow.  I  got  out  of  bed  all  shaking  and
trembling,  and  went  with  them  downstairs  and  spent  the  rest  of  the  night  in
the  drawing-room.  My  bedroom  on  the  second  floor  has  remained  empty
since.

From  Mr.  I.  Guthrie,  a  lodger  in  the  house.

Mmj  10th,  1888.

The  curious  circumstance  wliich  you  have  asked  me  to  relate  hap-
pened between  the  hours  of  one  and  two  in  the  morning  about  Christmas,
time.

On  the  night  referred  to  I  lay  down  to  rest  about  my  usual  time,  between
11  and  12.  About  the  time  mentioned  I  awoke  suddenly  to  hear  the.
noise  as  of  a  person  in  a  silk  dress  moving  away  quietly  from  the  side  of  my
bed. It  continued  moving  until  I  heard  it  stop  in  the  adjoining  bedroom.

Immediately  the  sound  stopped  I  heard  the  woman  who  was  sleeping  in
that  room  begin  to  speak  ;  it  was,  to  me,  as  if  she  was  trying  to  wake  her
little  son,  aged  nine,  who  slept  with  her.  All  this  time  I  was  conscious  that
our  old  friend  the  ghost,  seen  before  and  expected  again,  had  once  more^
condescended  to  visit  us.  But  a  strange  weakness  in  the  legs,  to  which  I  am
subject  in  moments  like  these,  prevented  my  rising  until  a  hurried  knocking;
- — not  very  loud — was  heard  on  the  wall.  At  the  sound  my  strength  came
back  to  me,  and  I  sprang  out  of  bed,  pulled  my  brother  out  of  his  bed,
opened  the  two  doors  leading  to  [the  passage  and]  the  door  of  the  next  bed-
room, at  which  we  knocked.  It  was  at  once  opened  to  us,  and  the  woman
appeared  carrying  a  lighted  candle  in  her  hand,  and  in  a  state  of  extreme
agitation  bordering  on  prostration.  She  was  trembling  so  much  that  she
was  scarcely  able  to  stand  ;  the  perspiration  rolled  from  her  in  great  drops.
Tiie  small  room  was  completely  illuminated  by  two  or  three  candles.  Her
story  was  as  follows  ; —

She  awoke  hearing  movements  as  of  a  person  fumbling  about  the  room.
On  lookhig  up  she  saw  by  the  side  of  her  bed  a  woman  standing  in  a  red  dress,
seemingly  about  50  years  of  age,  and  witli  a  curious  cap  on.  She  fell  to
praying  and  addressed  the  ajjparition.  When  at  length  she  had  gained  the
courage  to  knock  and  we  were  to  be  heard  approaching  the  door,  the  appari-
tion leaned  back  against  the  wall  and  seemed  to  fade  away,  showing  at  the
same  time  a  deep  cut  across  the  throat  almost  separating  the  head  from  the
torso.

My  brotlier  and  I,  after  seeing  to  the  safety  of  the  woman,  searched  the
whole  house  thoroughly,  but  without  elfect,  as  we  could  see  and  hear  nothing.
At  tliis  distance  of  time  I  can  remember  a  curious  dancing  light  which
we  noticed  on  the  stairs  and  which  we  remarked  at  the  time,  but  did
not  trace  it.

Tlio  strangeness  of  the  foregoing  lies  in  the  fact  that  tlie  woman  and  I


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  View.


253


Avere  both  awakened  at  the  same  time  by  the  same  noise,  that  I  should  hear
the  noise  going  to  her  room  and  stopping  there,  and  that  she  should  hear  the
sound  as  in  her  room.  Her  story  appeared  to  me  to  agree  perfectly  with
what  I  heard  and  what  I  felt  was  going  on  in  her  room.

We  came  into  the  house  in  October,  1887,  and  for  the  first  four  months  I
and  others  had  been  troubled  with  noises  (especially  in  my  case  the  silk  dress
sound)  and  mysterious  awakenings  during  the  night.  Someone  in  every
room  in  the  house  complained  similarly.  On  two  occasions  at  least — one  I
can  swear  to — I  am  perfectly  certain  I  saw  an  apparition  in  my  room.  I
A7as  mysteriously  awakened  in  the  usual  manner,  and  on  lifting  my  eyes  saw
distinctly  in  the  middle  <jf  the  room  a  moderately  tall  female  form,  clearly
defined  and  dark  as  of  a  real  body,  which  on  my  looking  at  it  moved  towards
me  down  the  room  and  out  through  the  closed  doors,  the  rustling  noise  dying
away  in  the  distance.  I  have  not  seen  or  heard  anything  for  some  months,
but  lately  there  have  again  been  complaints  from  others  in  the  house.

This,  in  brief,  is  my  account.

I.  GUTHKIE.

Jinia  2iith,  1888.

In  reply  to  your  two  questions  I  beg  to  inform  you  that  never  had  I  reason
to  suppose  I  had  heard  or  seen  anything  supernatural  before  October  last.

I.  GUTHKIE.

From  Mr.  D.  Guthrie.

il/o;/  loth,  1888.

In  consequence  of  the  noises  that  had  been  heard  by  my  brother,  the
landlady,  and  otliers,  we  had  been  sleeping  with  swords  by  our  sides  for
several  nights  previous  to  the  night  I  am  writing  about.  On  that  night  I
was  awakened  by  my  brother,  who  threw  the  bedclothes  from  me,  exclaiming,
to  the  best  of  my  recollection,  "  I've  seen  it."  Since  then,  I  must  tell  you,
he  says  he  didn't  say  so  and  didn't  see  it,  only  felt  conscious  of  it  and  heard
it.  This  is,  however,  my  account  of  the  affair — not  his.  As  I  sprang  out  of
bed  I  heard  my  landlady  speaking  in  a  strange  manner  in  her  ov.n  room,
which  is  separated  from  mine  by  a  wooden  partition.  My  brotlier  and  I  lit
a  candle  ;  opening  the  two  doors  and  reaching  the  landing  was  tlie  work  of
an  instant,  and  standing  on  the  landing  I  distinctly  saw  a  wavering  light,
like  the  reflection  of,  say,  sunlight,  moving  down  the  staircase  wall.  As  soon
as  our  landlady  could  present  herself  she  opened  her  door,  which  was  locked,
as  both  of  ours  had  been  ;  when  she  appeared  she  was  trembling  from  head
to  foot,  and  with  perspiration  dropping  from  her  face.  She  had  all  the
apjjearance  of  a  person  who  has  just  seen  an  awful  sight.  We  saw  her  down
to  the  drawing-room  door,  which  was  also  locked  when  she  got  to  it,  and
made  a  considerable  noise  in  opening,  and  we  then  proceeded  with  candles
and  swords  to  search  the  house,  which  we  did  from  top  to  bottom,  with  the
exception  of  the  drawing-room,  which  had  been  locked,  and  Miss  H. 's  bed-
room, which  was  inaccessible  to  us,  but  we  looked  round  the  sitting-room
adjoining.  All  our  searching  proved  fruitless,  and  the  mystery  of  the  light
is  as  yet  unexjjlained.

The  noises  and  apparition  I  have  never  been  favoured  with,  and  but  for
having  seen  the  light  I  would  never  have  given  the  subject  a  second  thought;


254


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  2.9,


^mt  I  feci  confident  that  tliat  light  was  not  caused  by  the  reflection  of  our
candle,  and  am  unable  to  suggest  any  solution  of  it  tliat  would  be  satisfactory
to  myself.

D.  GUTHKIE.

il/a;/  17  th,  1888.

As  far  as  I  remember  my  brother  saw  a  dark  figure  (woman's)  move
down  the  centre  of  the  room,  approaching  from  the  window  to  the  door  and
rustling  past  hiur.  He  Avakened  with  what  he  calls  the  ' '  feeling  "  that  some-
thing was  about  tlie  room,  and  immediately  this  figure  began  to  move  towards
his  bed  and  past  it.

D.  Guthrie.
3Iay  28th,  1888.

It  is  impossible  for  me  to  remember  when  my  brother  told  me.  He  would
be  likeliest  to  speak  to  iiie  about  it  Avhen  we  were  dressing  next  morning,
but  I  am  not  prepared  to  assert  that  he  did  so.

D.  Guthrie.

From  Miss  H.

ilaij  28th,  1888.

According  to  your  request  tliat  I  should  give  you  an  account  of  what  I
heard  on  the  night  referred  to  in  the  account  you  have  received  already
from  my  aunt  [i.e.,  the  first  night  spent  in  the  house].

As  far  as  I  remember  I  was  awakened  by  a  strange  noise,  like  the  rustling
of  silk,  or  silk  handkerchiefs.

I  was  too  frightened  to  look  up  at  the  time,  and  cannot  remember  when
I  foil  asleep  again. This  has  been  repeated  several  times  since.

June  28th,  1888.

On  Wednesday  last,  the  20th  inst.,  I  went  to  Ijed  at  about  my  usual  time,
11.30  p.m.  or  a  little  later,  and,  as  far  as  I  know,  in  my  usual  health.  My
aunt,  Mrs.  G.,  and  I  occupy  one  bed,  slio  sleeping  next  to  the  wall.  I
suddenly  woke  up,  to  find  myself  sitting  upright  in  bed.  I  have  no  recollec-
tion of  liaving  been  dreaming.  It  was  just  beginning  to  dawn  (the  time,  as
I  found  out  afterwards,  must  have  been  between  2  and  .3  a.m.),  and  I  saw,
standing  up  so  near  tliat  I  could  have  touched  it,  a  tall  woman's  figure  dressed
in  black,  so  that  I  could  distinguish  no  features.  I  was  rather  frightened,  and
spoke  to  my  aunt  and  tried  to  wake  lier,  but  could  not  succeed.  The  figure
moved  slowly  away  from  me  towards  the  window  (the  bed  faced  tlie  window)
and  finally  disappeared,  as  it  were  into  the  strip  of  wall  between  the  window
and  the  fireplace.  I  did  not  get  to  sleep  again  for  some  time.  After  about
an  hour,  as  near  as  I  can  judge,  I  got  up  to  see  what  the  time  was  and  found
it  was  just  4  a.m.  After  my  aunt  got  up,  about  5  a.m.,  I  dropped  off'  to
sleep  again.

I  had,  of  course,  heard  what  Mr.  Guthrie  saw,  and  what  my  aunt  saw,
before  Christinas.  But  I  don't  think  that  my  mind  had  been  dwelling  upon
it  at  all  lately  ;  indeed,  I  had  almost  forgotten  it.  And  until  this  week  I
had  hardly  known  anything  about  the  people  who  were  coming  to  sleep  in
my  aiuit's  old  room,  so  I  don't  think  there  was  anything  to  call  uji  the  idea


18S9.]


from  Another  Point  of  View.


255


of  the  ghost  in  luy  mind.  I  was  quite  well,  too,  and  I  had  never  seen  anything
else  of  tlie  kind.  I  never  remember  to  have  either  seen  or  heard  anything
except  in  this  liouse — anything  that  was  not  really  there.

I  have  not  heard  any  of  the  noises  lately,  not  since  Christmas  in
fact.

[Signed  in  full] M.  E.  H.

Mrs.  G.  stated  that  these  inexplicable  noises  had  been  heard  by  two
successive  lodgers  on  the  drawing-room  floor,  and  that  the  first  had
left  in  consequence.  The  other  at  the  beginning  of  May,  1888,  told
Mrs.  G.  that  she  had  seen  an  apj^arition — the  figure  of  a  woman
in  a  red  dress — in  her  bedroom  in  the  course  of  the  previous  night.
We  have  not  been  able  to  trace  either  of  these  persons.

It  will  be  observed  that  noises,  which  may  have  been  due  to  normal
causes,  had  been  prevalent  in  the  house  tln-oughout  its  occupation  by
the  narrators,  who  appear  to  have  been  considerably  disturbed  by
tliem.  Indeed,  that  the  landlady  had  been  much  alarmed  is  proved  by
the  fact  that  Mi'.  Gutlirie  had  lent  her  a  stick  to  rap  the  wall,  in  case
she  should  be  again  disturbed  in  the  night.  Mrs.  G.'s  vision  and  Mr.
Guthrie's  are  apparently  independent.  Miss  H.,  however,  saw  nothing
until  long  after,  when  the  experiences  of  the  others  had  been  matter
of  common  talk  in  the  household  for  months.  Her  evidence  cannot,
therefore,  be  considered  as  possessing  much  corroborative  value.  More-
over, the  apparition  differed  materially  from  that  seen  by  Mrs.  G.  It
.should,  however,  be  stated  as  regards  both  this  case  and  that  which
immediately  follows,  as  a  fact  of  some  importance  in  assessing  the
part  played  by  expectancy  in  generating  hallucination,  that  many
members  and  associates  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  and
friends  introduced  by  them  ha^  e  slept  in  both  houses,  in  some  cases  for
several  nights  consecutively,  with  a  full  knowledge  that  inexplicable
phenomena  had  been  recently  observed.  Nothing  unusual  has,  how-
evei',  been  seen  in  either  house  by  any  person  connected  with  the
Society  ;  noi-,  with  one  or  two  doubtful  exceptions,  have  any  inexplic-
able sounds  been  heard. ^  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  houses  described
in  the  Journal,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  196,  et  seq.,  and  Voh  III.,  pp.  241,  et  seq.
(G.t.  314).  This  fact,  however,  will  appear  less  significant  if  we
bear  in  mind  that,  as  our  evidence  in  this  and  other  directions
tends  to  show,  the  proportion  of  persons  who  are  readily  susceptible  to
impressions  of  this  kind  is  not  very  large;  and  that  the  persons  who  ai-e
most  sensitive  would,  it  is  certain,  inmost  cases  be  unwilling  to  expose
themselves  to  such  an  ordeal  as  sleeping  in  a  "  haunted  "  house.

The  following  case  (G.  187)  is  remarkable  because  two  successive
sets  of  occupants  of  the  house,  without  any  communication  with  each


^  See  Appendix.


256  Phantasms  of  the  Dead  [Nov.  29,


other,  or  any  conscious  knov.'ledge  on  the  part  of  the  second  set  that
the  first  set  had  had  experiences,  were  "  haunted  "  by  sounds  and  sights.
The  whole  has  occurred  since  1882.  We  have  the  first-hand  testimony
of  most  of  the  principal  witnesses,  and  have  had  the  opportunity  of
talking-  over  their  experiences  with  them.  One  tenant  was  fairly  driven
out  of  the  house  by  the  "  ghosts."  Here,  too,  there  is  a  recent  and
well-evidenced  tragedy,  though  its  connection  with  the  apparitions  and
noises  is  not  very  clearly  established,  and  does  not,  I  think,  make  very
sti'ongly  for  the  hypothesis  of  posf-nwi-tem  agency.  The  first  account
comes  to  us  from  Miss  L.  ]Morris,whose  address  is  withheld  lest  it  should
lead  to  the  identification  of  the  house.  Miss  Morris  writes  in  June,
1888

G.  187.  June,  1888.

It  was  at  the  latter  end  of  October,  1882,  that  we  decided  on  taking  a
small  house  on  a  lease,  looking  forward  to  taking  possession  of  it  and
furnishing  it,  with  great  expectations  of  future  happiness,  and  longing  for
the  day  to  come  to  enter  it.  On  the  day  in  question  we  arrived  late  in  the
afternoijn,  and  occupied  ourselves  in  arranging  and  putting  finishing  touches
to  the  furniture,  amusing  ourselves,  and  lauglnng,  as  we  were  in  high  spirits
over  our  luck  in  finding  just  the  little  house  to  suit  us.  That  same  evening,
about  a  quarter  to  10,  I  happened  to  be  alone  in  the  front  drawing-room,
when  for  the  first  time  in  my  life  I  heard,  without  seeing  anyone,  heavy  foot-
steps tramping  round  the  drawing-room  table,  at  whicli  I  was  reading.
Naturally  I  was  surprised,  as  I  had  never  read  or  believed  in  anything  super-
natural, A  few  minutes  later  my  eldest  sister  comes  and  sits  by  my  side,
when  suddenly  she  exclaims,  turning  pale,  "  Charlotte,  there  is  some  one  who
has  got  into  the  house,  walking  about  upstairs.  I  heard  such  a  noise,  like  a
door  banging  to."  We  were  alone  at  the  time,  excepting  a  little  child
sleeping  above,  and  my  sister  had  never  fancied  such  a  thing  before.  I
replied,  "Oh,  it's  fancy."  "No,  I  heard  it  again;  listen!"  At  which  I
said,  "  I  will  take  up  the  poker  with  my  lamp  ;  you  come  too,  and  we  will
see."  "No,"  she  said,  "I  am  afraid  to  go  up,  and  will  stop  here."  So
saying  in  fun,  "I  will  go,  and  not  be  afraid,  though  10,000  men  are
against  me  !  "  I  flew  upstairs,  and  searched  everywhere — discovered  nothing
— descended  alone  to  tlie  basement,  but  with  the  same  result.

We  laughed  at  our  fears,  and  went  to  our  rooms,  but  that  night  I  could  not
sleep  at  all,  for  incessantly  round  and  round  the  room,  and  up  and  down  the
stairs,  I  heard  these  ceaseless  and  unwearying  footsteps.  I  slept,  and  they
woke  me  again,  making  me  light  my  candle,  and  look  about  me,  and  outside
the  room, to  see  if  I  could  discover  the  reason  for  the  strange  ounds.  Putting
it  down  to  noises  in  the  adjacent  house,  I  blew  out  my  light,  and  again  closed
my  eyes,  but  was  awoke  an  hour  after  by  feeling  someone  in  the  room,  and
again  hearing  the  measured  footsteps.  I  controlled  my  fears  by  not  ligliting
my  candle,  and  tried,  though  in  vain,  to  sleep.  I  said  nothing  about  the
occurrence  to  anyone  the  next  day,  but  kept  what  I  thought  must  have  been
fancy  to  myself.  Still,  the  same  experience  happened  to  me  each  night,  till
I  got  accustomed  to  it,  not  allowing  myself  to  give  way  to  fears  which.


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiv.


257


because  unseen,  could  not  be  explained,  till  an  experience  most  un-
foreseen and  strange  occurred.

It  was  three  weeks  since  we  liad  occupied  the  house  and  it  was  about  five
o'clock  one  afternoon  in  November,  and  so  light  that  I  had  no  need  of  the
gas  to  enable  me  to  read  clearly  some  music  I  was  practising,  and  which
engrossed  my  whole  attention  and  thouglit.  Having  forgotten  some  new
waltzes  I  had  laid  on  the  music  shelf  in  the  back  drawing-room,  I  left  the
piano,  and  went  dancing  gaily  along,  singing  a  song  as  I  went,  when  suddenly
there  stood  before  me,  preventing  me  getting  the  music,  the  figure  of  a
woman,  heavily  robed  in  deepest  black  from  the  head  to  her  feet ;  her  face
was  intensely  sad  and  deadly  pale.  Tliere  she  stood,  gazing  fixedly  at  me.
The  song  died  on  my  lips  ;  the  door,  I  saw,  was  firmly  closed  where  she
stood,  and  still  I  could  not  speak.  At  last  I  exclaimed,  "Oh,  auntie,  I
thought  it  was  you  !  "  believing  at  the  moment  she  or  some  strange  visitor
stood  before  me,  when  suddenly  she  vanished.

Thinking  it  was  a  trick  practised  on  me,  and  trembling  violently,  I  went
back,  not  getting  the  waltzes,  to  my  piano,  wliich  I  closed,  and  rushing
upstairs,  found  my  aunt  alone  in  her  room,  my  sisters  and  the  servant  being
out.  "Did  you  not  come  into  the  drawing-room'?"  I  asked  her.  "No,"
she  replied,  "  I  have  never  left  my  rooui  ;  I  am  coming  down  now,  though."
As  we  Avere  alone,  I  saw  no  trick  had  been  played  upon  me,  and  my  strange
vision  was  not  imagination.

Not  wishing  to  alarm  mj'  aunt,  I  did  not^communicate  my  strange  experi-
ence to  her,  nor  did  I  relate  it  subsequently  to  my  sisters  or  any  friends,
thinking,  as  they  could  not  account  for  it,  they  would  not  believe  me  if  I  did,
so  I  kept  it  as  a  secret  for  three  years,  though  I  longed  to  disclose  it  to  some
friend  who  would  believe  me,  and  not  make  fun  at  what  troubled  me  so
niucli ;  when  another,  though  different,  circumstance  occurred,  which  puzzled
US  all,  and  which  we  have  never  yet  proved.

It  was  in  June,  1884,  that  our  hall-door  bell  began  to  ring  incessantly  and
violently.  We  had  frequently  heard  at  intervals  a  ring,  and  discovered  no
one  was  at  the  door,  but  this  esi:)ecially  annoyed  us,  and  puzzled  everyone
inside  and  outside  the  house  by  the  noise  repeatedly  made.  We  had  always
put  it  down  to  "a  runaway  ring"  and  took  no  notice,  but  for  three  weeks,
at  intervals  of  a  quarter  of  an  hour  or  half  an  hour,  it  rang  unceasingly,  and
such  peals,  it  electrified  us.  We  put  ourselves  on  guard  and  carefully  watched,
Tselieving  it  a  trick.  We  had  everyone  up  from  the  basement,  out  of  connec-
tion with  the  wire,  in  the  front  drawing-room,  and  placed  the  hall  door  and
our  doors  wide  open  ;  it  v>'as  tlie  same  result :  loud  and  piercing  peals  from
the  bell,  which,  at  last,  after  three  weeks,  ^\'e  had  taken  oft',  when  we  saw  the
wire  in  connection  v/ith  it  vibrated  as  if  the  bell  was  attached  to  it.  There
were  also  loud  knocks  at  the  door,  and  no  one  there  when  we  went  to  answer;
and  I  repeatedly  heard  loud  knocks  at  my  own  room  door  the  whole  time  I  was
in  the  house.  Though  my  aunt  could  not  understand  the  communication  I
related  to  her,  she  would  not  believe  me,  and  laughed  at  my  "imaginative
fancies."  A  few  afternoons  later,  I  was  having  tea  v/ith  her  (we  had  sent
our  maid  out  shopping)  when  she  exclaimed,  "There's  a  double  knock  at  the
door."  I  ran  to  open  it  ;  on  my  way  along,  I  noticed  the  front  and  back
drawing-room  doors  were  firmly  closed,  as  I  remembered  shutting  them  as


258


Phantasms  of  tJie  Bead


[Nov.  29,


usual  when  we  took  tea  in  the  breakfast-room  adjoining.  On  answering  the
door,  no  one  was  there,  and  on  returning,  I  found  the  back  drawing-room
door  half  wide  open.  I  exclaimed  to  my  aunt,  ' '  Oh,  you  have  been  in  the
drawing-room  !  "  "I  have  never  got  up  from  the  table,"  she  said.  I  replied,
"The  door  was  wide  open  which  I  shut!"  to  which  she  said,  "What  non-
sense will  you  be  talking  next?"  and  there  the  matter  dropped.

A  few  months  later  I  had  gone  to  rest.  It  was  about  2  a.m.  I  was.
awoke  by  a  tremendovis  knock  at  my  door,  and  the  handle  turning.  Having
a  light  1  sj)rang  out  of  bed,  being  close  to  the  door,  angry,  and  being  deter-
mined to  catch  whoever  it  might  be.  No  one  was  there  !  and  on  looking
across  to  my  sisters'  room  I  saw  their  door  was  wide  open.  Believing  it
was  a  trick  on  their  part,  and  being  annoyed  at  having  been  disturbed,  I
waited  till  the  next  morning,  when  I  accused  them  of  the  trick,  but  was
amazed  to  find  they  had  been  startled  in  the  same  way,  and  put  it  down  to
a  dog  having  opened  their  door,  but  they  found  he  was  asleep,  and  they  had
previously  heard  footsteps,  and  were  too  frightened  to  move.  They  also
both  heard  tlie  door  opened.  They  assured  me  they  had  never  come  to  my
door  or  knocked  at  it,  and  I  could  see  they  were  too  startled  to  be  acting  an
untruth.  In  fact,  my  sister,  though  older  than  I,  would  not  sleep  alone  in
that  house  by  herself  after.

Another  occurrence  hajijoened  a  few  months  later  in  the  year  1885,  in  the
winter.  I  was  alone  in  the  house  with  my  aunt,  and  had  gone  (the  servant
being  out)  to  fetcli  some  wood  from  the  kitchen  cupboard.  Having  got  all
I  wanted  to  re-light  the  fire,  which  had  gone  out  in  the  drawing-room,  I
shut  to  the  doov  and  locked  it,  when  from  the  inside  came  a  tremendous
knock,  which  so  startled  me  I  quickly  ran  upstairs,  wlien  repeatedly,  as  if
beneath  my  feet  from  tlie  cupboard,  I  felt  loud  knocks  as  plainly  as  at  the
door  I  had  just  closed.  I  had  previously  laid  and  brought  the  supper,  when
just  before  going  to  my  aunt  to  say  all  was  ready,  in  the  hall  from  the
kitchen  into  tlie  housekeeper's  room  (front  room  on  basement),  I  saw  a
woman  robed  in  black  slowly  and  distinctly  walk.  (It  moved  like  gliding.)
She  was  walking  before  me,  as  it  were,  down  in  the  hall.  Believing  it  was
my  aunt,  I  went  straight  to  the  drawing-room,  and  found  her  deeply
interested  in  her  work-book,  and  found  slie  had  not  gone  downstairs  that
evening. To  her  I  did  not  connnunicate  this,  as  she  was  not  well.

A  little  time  after  she  fell  ill,  having  long  been  suffering,  and  when  a
little  later  on  we  lost  her  to  our  grief,  we  left  the  house  altogether,  as  our
lease  had  expired  just  about  that  time  ;  hut  I  give  my  testimony  I  never
knew  one  happy  day  in  it,  for  I  could  not  forget  the  peculiar  experiences  so-
frequently  happening,  and  which  seemed  to  haunt  me  wherever  I  went
about  in  it,  and  which  I  accounted  for  by  the  communication  confided  in
me  by  a  friend  of  tlie  fact  of  a  woman  liaviiig  a  few  years  back  hung
herself  there.

I  saw  Miss  L.  Morris  on  July  9th,  1888.  She  explained  to  me  that
she  and  her  aunt  (dead)  were  the  regular  occupants  of  the  house
from  October,  1882,  to  December,  1886.  Two  sisters  came  to  stay
occasionally,  and  slept,  wl.en  they  came,  in  the  little  "off"  room  on  a,
lower  level  than  the  other  bedrooms. She  believes  that  after  their


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiu.


departure  the  house  remained  empty  imtil  Mrs.  G.  took  it.  The  tenant
before  her  was  a  Miss  E.  Miss  L.  Morris  learnt  from  her  that  she
(Miss  E.)  had  lieard  or  seen  nothing  abnormal  during  her  stay  in  the
house.  jNIiss  L.  Morris, who  is  ratlier  deaf,  has  had  no  other  hallucinations.
She  told  me  that  they  had  the  boards  taken  up  to  trace  the  cause,  if
possible,  of  the  bell-ringing,  but  could  discover  nothing.  She  and  her
sister  had  frequently  watched  the  front  door  when  the  bell  was  ringing
violently.  Miss  E.  M.  Morris  told  me  of  two  occasions  (one  described
in  Miss  L.  Morris's  account )  on  which,  when  she  and  her  other  sister
were  sleeping  in  the  little  back  room,  their  door  was  opened  in  the
night  at  the  same  time  that  Miss  L.  Mori-is,  sleeping  in  another  room,
was  disturbed  by  noises.  Miss  E.  M.  Morris  also  confirmed  her  sister's
account  of  the  bell-ringing.

From  December,  1886,  until  ISTovember  of  the  following  year  the
house  remained  empty.  It  was  then  taken  by  Mrs.  G.,  a  ^^•idow  lady
with  two  children,  girls  of  about  9  and  10  respectively,  and  one
maid-servant.  Mrs.  G.  had  only  come  to  X.  about  six  months
before  taking  the  house,  and  was  entirely  ignorant  tliat  anything
unusual  had  happened  there.  The  account  which  follows,  written  at
Mr.  Gurney's  request,  in  June,  1888,  was  compiled  with  the  help  of  a
diary,  in  which  she  liad  jotted  down  from  day  to  day  brief  notices  of  any
unusual  occurrence.  This  diary  she  kindly  permitted  me  to  inspect,  and
some  extracts  from  it,  copied  by  me,  are  printed  after  the  account.

The  names  given  to  the  children  in  this  account  are  fictitious,  and
tlie  same  names  have  been  substituted  for  the  real  ones  in  the  extracts
from  the  diaiy.

From  Mrs.  G.

It  was  towards  tlie  end  of  November,  1887,  I  took  a  pretty  house
in  the  South  of  England.  I  had  never  been  in  tliat  locality
before,  and  knew  no  one  at  all  in  that  neighbourhood,  although  I  liad  for
the  last  six  months  been  living  in  another  part  of  the  town  ;  my  dear  hus-
band, an  officer  in  the  army,  dying  there  (he  had  been  badly  wounded  in  the
Mutiny),  I  resolved  to  go  into  a  quieter  part  of  the  town  and  take  a  less
expensive  house.

We  had  not  been  more  than  a  fortnight  in  our  new  home  (it  was  in
December)  when  I  was  aroused  by  a  deep  sob  and  moan.  "  Oh, "  I  thought,
"  what  has  happened  to  the  cliildi-en  1  "  I  rushed  in,  their  room  being  at
the  back  of  mine  ;  found  them  sleeping  soundly.  So  back  to  bed  I  went,
when  again  another  sob,  and  such  a  tliimip  of  somebody  or  something  very
heavy.  "  What  can  be  the  matter  ?  "  I  sat  up  in  bed,  looked  all  round  the
room,  then  to  my  horror  a  voice  (and  a  very  sweet  one)  said,  "  Oh,  do  forgive
me  I  "  three  times.  I  could  stand  it  no  more  ;  I  always  kept  the  gas  burn-
ing, turned  it  up,  and  went  to  the  maid's  room.  She  was  fast  asleep,  so  I
shook  her  well,  and  asked  her  to  come  into  my  room.  Then  in  five  minutes
the  sobs  and  moans  recommenced,  and  the  heavy  tramping  of  feet,  and  such
thumps,  like  heavy  boxes  of  plate  being  thrown  about. She  suggested  I


260


Phantasms  of  the  Bead


[Nov.  29,


should  ring  the  big  bell  I  always  keep  in  my  room,  but  I  did  nob  like  to
alarm  the  neighbourhood.  "Oh,  do,  ma'am,  I  am  sure  there  are  burglars
next  door,  and  they  will  come  to  us  next."  Anything  but  })leasant,  on  a
bitter  cold  night,  standing  bell  in  hand,  a  heavy  one,  too,  awaiting  a  burglar.
Well,  I  told  her  to  go  to  bed,  and  hearing  nothing  for  half-an-hour,  I  got
into  mine,  nearly  frozen  witli  cold  and  fright.  But  no  sooner  had  I  got  v.'arm
than  the  sobs,  moans,  and  noises  commenced  again.  I  heard  the  policeman's
steady  step,  and  I  thought  of  the  words,  ' '  What  of  the  night,  Watchman  ?
what  of  tlie  night  ? "  If  he  only  could  have  known  what  we,  a  few  paces  off,
were  going  through.  Three  times  I  called  Anne  in,  and  then  in  the  morning
it  all  died  away  in  a  low  moan.  Directly  it  was  daylight,  I  looked  in  the
glass  to  see  if  my  hair  had  turned  white  from  the  awful  night  I  spent.  Very
relieved  was  I  to  find  it  still  brown.

Of  course  nothing  was  said  to  the  children,  and  I  was  hoping  I  should
never  experience  such  a  thing  again.  I  liked  the  house,  and  the  children
were  so  bonny.  I  had  too  much  furniture  for  that  small  house,  so  stowed  it
away  in  the  room  next  to  the  kitchen,  and  we  used  the  small  room  at  the
top  of  the  kitchen  stairs  as  a  dining-room,  and  then  I  had  a  pretty  double
drawing-room,  where  I  always  stayed.  Still  the  children  had  no  play-room,
and  noplace  for  their  doves.  I  therefore  had  most  of  the  furniture  and  boxes
taken  out  and  put  in  the  back  kitchen.  It  seems  from  that  day  our  troubles
commenced,  for  the  children  were  often  alarmed  by  noises  and  a  crash  of
something,  and  did  not  like  sleeping  alone.  I  felt  a  little  uncomfortable,
and  thought  it  was  all  rather  strange,  but  had  so  much  business  affairs  to
settle,  having  no  one  else  to  help  me,  tliat  I  had  not  much  time  to  tliink.

I  was  in  the  drawing-room  deejjly  thinking  about  business  matters,  when
I  was  startled  by  Edith  giving  such  a  scream.  I  ran  to  the  door,  and  found
her  running  up,  followed  by  Florence  and  the  servant,  the  child  so  scared
and  deadly  white,  and  could  hardly  breathe.  "  Oh,  Birdie  dear,  I  liave  seen
such  a  dreadful  white  face  peeping  round  the  door  I  I  only  saw  the  head.  I
was  playing  with  Floss  (dog),  and  looking  up,  I  saw  this  dreadful  thing.
Florence  and  Anne  rushed  in  at  once,  but  saw  nothing."  I  pacified  them  by
saying  someone  was  playing  a  trick  by  a  magic  lantern,  but  after  that  for
months  they  would  not  go  upstairs  or  down  alone.

It  was  very  tiresome,  and  thinking  seriously  over  the  matter,  I  resolved
to  return  my  neighbour's  call,  which  she  honoured  me  with  the  day  after  the
first  terrible  niglit.  I  was  ushered  into  the  presence  of  two  portly  dames,
and  I  should  think  they  had  arrived  at  that  age  not  given  to  pranks.  I
looked  at  them,  and  mentally  thought,  "  That  sweet  voice  does  not  belong  to
either  of  you."  They  informed  me  they  had  lived  in  that  house  18  years,  so  I
thought  I  might  venture  to  ask  whether  anything  had  ever  taken  place  of  a
disagreeable  nature  in  my  house,  as  Ave  were  so  constantly  alarmed  by  heavy
noises,  and  that  my  eldest  daughter,  aged  10,  had  seen  a  dreadfvd  white  face
looking  round  the  door  at  her,  and  of  course  I  should  be  glad  to  know  ;  that
as  far  as  I  was  concerned,  I  feared  nothing  and  no  one,  but  if  my  children
were  frightened  I  should  leave,  but  I  liked  the  house  very  much,  and  thought
perhaps  I  might  buy  it.  They  said,  "Don't  do  that,  but  there  is  nothing  to
hurt  you,"  and  I  saw  sundry  nods  and  winks  which  meant  more,  so  in  des-
peration I  said,  "Won't  you  tell  mo  what  has  occurred?" "Well,  a  few


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiv.


261


j-ears  ago,  the  bells  commenced  to  ring,  and  there  was  quite  a  commotion,
but  then  the  former  tenant,  a  Miss  M.,  had  a  wicked  servant."  The  other
dame  replied,  "I  may  say,  a  very  wicked  servant."  Well,  I  could  not  get
much  more,  but  of  course  I  imagmed  this  very  wicked  servant  had  done
something,  and  felt  very  uneasy.

On  my  return,  Edith  said,  "Oh,  dear,  I  have  seen  such  a  little  woman
pass,  and  I  often  hear  jjitter  patter  ;  what  is  it  ?  Of  course  magic  lanterns
couldn't  do  that."  So  I  said  nothing,  and  said  I  was  too  tired  to  talk.
Tliat  night  I  felt  a  very  creeping  feeling  of  shivering,  and  thouglit  I  would
have  Florence  to  sleep  mth  me,  so  when  I  went  to  bed  about  10,  I  carried
her  in  wrapped  up  in  a  shawl,  leaving  Edith  asleep  with  the  maid.  It  was
about  11  ;  I  had  tucked  my  little  pet  in  and  was  about  to  prepare  to  go
to  sleep,  when  it  seemed  as  if  something  electric  was  in  the  room,  and  that
the  ceiling  and  roof  were  coming  on  the  top  of  us.  Tlie  bed  was  shaken,
and  such  a  thump  of  sometliing  very  hea\y.  I  resolved  not  to  risk  my
child's  life  again,  for  whatever  it  was  came  down  on  me,  she  would  be  safe  in
the  next  room  with  the  others,  but  I  dreaded  going  to  bed,  as  I  never  knew
what  might  happen  before  the  morning.

We  had  a  dreadful  night,  December  29th,  such  heavy  thumps  outside  the
bedrooms,  and  went  to  Mr.  W. ,  the  agent,  intending  to  teU  him  we  must  leave,
or  we  should  be  bereft  of  our  senses,  but  I  was  too  late  ;  the  office  was  shut,
so  I  went  to  friends  and  asked  them  to  come  and  sleep,  as  I  really  was  too
unnerved  to  remain  alone  on  New  Tear's  Eve.  They  kindly  came.  ]\Irs.  L.
said  she  heard  knocks.  They  returned  home  the  next  morning,  having  a
young  family  to  look  after.  1  then  wrote  to  a  sister-in-law  I  was  fond  of  at
Cheltenham,  and  she  came  for  a  week,  but  everything  was  quiet.  January
18th,  I  heard  three  loud  knocks  at  my  bedroom  door.  I  was  too  terrified  to
speak  for  a  minute,  and  then  called  out,  "Who's  there?  What  do  you
want  ?  "  My  terror  was  mtense,  for  I  thought,  supposing  it  is  a  burglar  !
It  was  a  great  relief  to  hear  the  children  call  out  :  ' '  Birdie,  who  is  knocking
at  your  door  ?  "  "I  wish  I  could  tell  you."  A  fortnight  previously  I  asked
a  policeman  on  duty  if  he  would  see  if  any  one  was  in  the  empty  house.  He
came  to  tell  me  it  was  securely  fastened,  and  no  one  could  get  in.  Then  I
suggested  coiners  under  the  houses,  but  he  said  they  only  go  to  old  castles.
"Well,  then  what  is  it  ?  "  He  said  a  sad  occurrence  had  taken  place  some
years  ago.  I  said,  "Oh,  dreadful  I  "  but  he  was  matter-of-fact  was  Police-
man X. ,  and  replied,  "  It  is  an  every-day  thing,  and  no  doubt  most  of  the
houses  iDeople  lived  in  something  has  liappened  in."  "But,"  I  said,  "this  is
such  a  very  strange  house,  and  we  liave  no  rest  either  by  day  or  night,  and
why  should  this  dreadfxil  white  face  appear  to  my  child  ?  "  Well,  he  didn't
believe  in  ghosts.  "  Verj-  well,"  I  said,  "will  you  kindly  catch  whoever  it
is  frightening  us,  and  let  them  be  well  punished  i  "  "But,  madam,  I  can't
catch  nothing  1  "  "  Right,  Policeman  X.,  I  knew  that  was  impossible,  but
what  am  I  to  do  ? " So  he  suggested  detectives,  but  that  wouldn't  do.

.  .  .  I  found  that  house  very  expensive,  and  I  had  to  keep  the  gas
burning  downstaii-s  and  up  all  night.  I  asked  a  young  friend  from
Richmond  to  stay,  a  clergyman's  daughter.  She  laughed  at  such  a  thing  as  a
ghost.  We  both  went  up  the  trajj-door  and  explored  the  space  over  the  bed-
room, and  next  to  the  roof  ;  it  was  veiy  dark,  but  I  took  a  candle,  and  then  dis-

S


202


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


covered  three  holes  as  large  as  a  plate  between  my  house  and  the  old  ladies'.
The  next  morning  I  walked  down  to  the  landlord  who  owns  both  houses,  and
told  him  again  what  we  were  continually  going  through  and  that  I  and
my  children  were  getting  ill,  and  that  it  was  quite  impossible  to  live  in  the
house.  He  came  ujj  on  the  following  day,  and  told  nie  that  a  woman  had
hanged  herself,  he  thought,  in  the  room  the  children  slept  in.  The  holes
were  filled  up,  and  I  thought  now  nothing  can  come  in  to  alarm  us.  What
puzzled  my  friend  was  that  the  two  old  dames  being  invalids  should  go  out
in  the  snow  and  wet  between  9  and  10  most  niglits  in  their  garden  ;  it
certainly  was  odd,  but,  of  course,  they  had  a  right  to  do  what  they  liked  in
their  own  house,  only  they  banged  the  back  door  ;  when  Anne  locked  uji  she
scarcely  made  a  sound.

Florence  was  often  saying  to  her  eldest  sister,  "You  see  it  was  your
imagination,  fori  never  see  anything."  "  Wait  till  you  do,  you  won't  forget
it  !  "  The  next  morning,  as  Florence  was  passing  the  room  on  the  stairs,
she  saw  a  man  standing  by  the  window  staring  fixedly  ;  blue  eyes,  dark  brown
hair,  and  freckles.  She  rushed  up  to  me,  looking  very  white  and  frightened  ;
the  house  was  searched  at  once,  and  nothing  seen.

I  had  forgotten  to  mention  that  the  night  after  the  knocks  came  to  my
bedroom  I  resolved  that  the  dog,  who  is  very  sharp,  should  sleep  outside,
but  oh,  that  was  worse  than  all,  for  at  a  quarter  past  12  I  looked  at  my
clock.  He  commenced  to  cry,  it  was  not  exactly  howling,  and  tore  at  the
carpet  in  a  frantic  manner.  I  threw  my  fur  cloak  on,  threw  the  door  wide
open,  and  demanded  what  was  the  matter.  The  poor  little  aninaal  was  so
delighted  to  see  me  ;  I  saw  he  had  biscuits  and  water,  and  the  children  were
then  awake,  and  asked  me  why  Floss  was  making  that  noise.  I  went  to  bed,
and  in  10  minutes  he  recommenced.  I  went  out  three  times,  and  then  made
up  my  mind  not  to  move  again,  for  I  felt  so  cold  and  angry.

Another  night  something  seemed  to  walk  to  the  children's  door,  and  turn
the  handle,  walk  up  to  the  washstand,  shake  the  bed,  and  wallc  out.  It
really  was  enough  to  shake  anyone's  nerves.  My  sister  and  brother-in-law,
Mr.  B.,  came  for  a  couple  of  nights,  but  that  was  when  I  first  went  in.  They
heard  nothing.  I  then  had  my  husband's  first  wife's  sister,  who  is  very  fond
of  me,  to  stay  over  Easter. She,  fortunately,  did  not  hear  anything.

The  children  frequently  saw  lights  in  their  bedroom,  generally  white,  and
Florence  one  night  saw  a  white  skirt  hanging  from  the  ceiling.  She  was  so
frightened  that  she  put  her  head  under  the  clothes,  and  would  not  look  again.

Then  my  solicitor  and  his  wife  came  down  for  a  night,  for  he  was  very
kind  about  my  business  matters,  as  I  understand  so  little  about  money
matters,  so  he  came  to  advise  me.  Mrs.  C.  could  not  go  to  sleep  until  four,
fis  she  heard  such  a  heavy  fall  outside  her  bedroom  door.

One  Sunday  I  was  reading  by  the  fire  in  the  drawing-room,  and  thinking
it  was  very  cosy,  when  I  heard  a  cry,  and  thinking  it  one  of  the  children
ill,  was  going  upstairs.  Editli  called  out,  "Birdie,  come  quickly;  something
has  opened  and  shut  our  door  three  times,  and  some  one  is  crying."  I  went
up,  and  we  all  heard  someone  sobbing,  but  where  it  came  from  we  could
not  tell,  but  seemed  near  the  wall.

One  day,  when  I  was  out,  the  children  were  playing  with  Anne  in  the
room  downstairs  ;  thoy  all  distinctly  heard  a  very  heavy  footfall  walk  across


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  View.


263


the  drawing-room,  play  two  notes  on  the  piano,  and  walk  out.  I  came  in
shortly  after,  astonislied  to  sse  them,  candle  in  ]iand,  looking  vuider  the  beds.
It  was  a  dreadful  time.

March  3rd  I  was  writing  in  the  drawing-room,  when  the  front  door  bell
rang  violently.  I  asked  who  it  was  ;  "No  one,  ma'am."  I  thought  I  would
stand  by  the  window,  and  presently  it  rang  again  ;  down  the  servant  came,
no  one  there,  and  after  the  third  time  I  told  her  not  to  go  to  the  door  unless
she  heard  a  knock  as  well.  I  knew  no  one  had  pulled  the  bell,  as  I  was
standing  by  the  window.

I  then  had  an  interview  with  Miss  M.,  the  former  tenant, who  told  me  she
had  gone  through  precisely  what  I  had,  but  had  said  very  little  about  it,  for
fear  of  being  laughed  at.  I  was  far  too  angry  to  take  notice  whether  anyone
laughed  or  not.  Miss  M.  said  one  afternoon  between  four  and  five  she  was
in  very  good  spirits,  and  was  playing  the  piano,  and  as  she  crossed  the  room
a  figure  enveloped  in  black,  with  a  very  white  face,  and  such  a  forlorn  look,
stood  before  her,  and  then  it  faded  away.  She  was  so  terrified,  but  did  not
tell  anyone  about  it.  For  some  time  after  she  Vi'as  ill  from  fright  on  two
occasions,  but  her  aunt  being  old  did  not  care  to  move,  and  she  was  too
much  attached  to  her  to  leave.  It  was  satisfactory  to  find  some  one  else  had
gone  through  what  we  were  daily  experiencing.  March  2Qth.  I  was  resting
in  the  drawing-room,  when  as  I  thought,  I  heard  Edith's  voice  say  three
times,  "Darling  !  "  I  ran  downstairs,  much  to  their  astonishment,  and  said,
"Well,  what  is  it  now  1 "  They  replied,  "  We  were  coming  directly,  why  did
you  come  down  ? "  "  Well,  that  is  cool  ;  why  did  you  call  me  V  "  But  we
didn't  ;  you  called  to  us  to  put  on  our  hats  at  once  as  you  were  going  into
the  town."  Anne  said  she  distinctly  heard  me  say  it  when  I  had  not  even
spoken.  I  believe  it  was  that  same  night  as  they  were  going  upstairs  to  bed,
they  saw  a  white  figure  standing  by  the  little  room. How  I  hated  tliat  room !

Well,  then  friends  suggested  I  should  have  the  floors  up,  the  chimneys
taken  out  to  see  if  there  was  any  connnunication  to  the  other  house,  ;ind  tlie
door  taken  away,  and  a  new  one  put.  One  friend  offered  to  lend  me  a
mastiff  which  iiew  at  everything  ;  another  offered  me  his  savage  bull-dcg,
which  was  always  chained  up  when  I  called  there,  and  then  last,  but  not
least,  I  was  to  have  two  detectives.  "Well,"  I  thought,  "it  is  time  to
move  ;  in  this  bitter  weather  to  have  no  floors,  no  grates,  no  door,  a
ferocious  mastiff,  and  still  worse  a  bull-dog  and  two  detectives,  a  pretty  state
of  afiairs  for  any  one  !  "  I  asked  my  landlord  to  release  me,  but  he  would
not  unless  I  paid  my  rent  up  to  Christmas.

Having  had  very  heavy  expenses  all  the  year,  I  thought  I  would  if  possible
stay  till  September,  as  the  evenings  would  be  light,  and  we  should  be  out
all  day,  but  even  that  I  was  not  allowed  to  do,  for  coming  home  from  paying
visits,  I  found  Florence  looking  deathly  white,  and  in  a  very  nervous  state,
and  in  breathless  haste  she  said  slie  had  seen  the  same  face,  but  the  figure
was  crawling  in  the  little  room  as  if  it  would  spring  on  her.  I  at  once  called
on  my  doctor,  who  advised  me  to  take  the  children  away  as  soon  as  possible,
and  let  them  be  amused,  so  I  left  my  servant  and  her  father  in  charge,  locked
my  bedroom  door,  and  took  the  key,  went  to  London,  where  Edith  was  so  ill
that  I  had  to  call  in  Dr.  F.,  and  as  soon  as  she  was  better  I  thought  I  would
remain  a  week  longer,  making  three  weeks,  so  that  she  might  go  to  a  circus


264


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


and  be  amused,  and  forget  tlie  frights  ;  but  even  that  I  Avasn't  aUowed  to
do,  for  on  Monday  I  received  a  letter  from  my  servant  to  say  they  could  not
stay  in  the  house  any  longer,  for  since  her  father  left,  her  mother  and  sister
had  slept  with  her,  and  tliey  were  all  startled  (me  night  by  hearing  someone
walk  upstairs,  throw  paper  dcjwn,  and  run  after  it,  and  the  next  night  some
one  knocked  loudly  at  my  bedroom  door,  walked  and  moved  all  the  furniture
about,  and  nothing  was  moved,  and  that  in  consequence  they  had  locked  up
the  liouse,  taking  the  doves  and  Floss  with  them,  and  leaving  food  enough
for  the  two  cats  for  throe  days.  I  got  up  early,  very  much  annoyed  about
the  horrid  house,  packed  and  came  back  Avith  the  children,  May  the  8tli.
Fortunately,  Editli  ke].)t  Avell.  IMy  banker's  Avife  kindly  met  me  at  the  station,
and  niade  me  go  back  Avitli  the  cliildren  to  lunch.  I  telegraphed  to  my  servant
to  meet  me  at  the  house,  and  Mrs.  L.  and  I  Avent  to  look  at  my  present
abode,  and  that  afternoon  agreed  to  take  it  from  the  10th  inst.  Mrs.  L.
came  up  to  sleep,  and  says  she  heard  such  thumps  and  bumps  in  the  little
room  underneath,  and  a  hissing  sound  round  the  top  of  the  bed.  I  paid  my
rent  and  left  ;  I  asked  Mr.  C.  to  v/rite  and  tell  the  landlord  he  must  let  me
off  a  quarter,  as  I  had  been  put  to  a  great  expense  through  his  house,  as  we
could  not  possibly  live  in  it,  and  avo  cleared  out  on  the  following  Thursday.
Such  a  relief  to  be  free  from  alarms  and  noises  !

And  so  ended  my  sojourn  of  five  months  in  that  very  extraordinary  house.
All  is  quite  true  that  I  have  stated,  whetlier  mortal  or  immortal  I  know  not.
I  am  glad  to  say  my  children  are  recovering,  though  Edith  is  still  very  Aveak,
and  I  am  suflcring  dreadfully  from  neuralgia,  the  result  of  the  anxiety  and
worry  I  have  gone  through. — Jnnc  Ibtli,  1888,

Mr.  Guniey  Avrote  :  —

I  had  a  long  talk  Avitli  Mrs.  G.  on  June  1.3th,  1888.  She  went  over  the
whole  history  of  her  and  her  children's  experiences  in  the  house.  She  struck
me  as  an  excellent  witness.  I  have  never  received  an  account  in  which  the
words  and  manner  of  telling  Avere  less  suggestive  of  exaggeration  or  super-
stition. Tliere  is  no  doubt  that  she  Avas  simply  turned  out  of  a  house  Avhich
otherwise  exactly  suited  her,  at  very  serious  expense  and  inconvenience.

Extracts  from  Mrs.  G.'s  diary.

January  2nd,  1888. — Anne  Avent  luime  from  four  to  10.  I  felt  A'ery
nervous  being  alone  Avith  the  cliildren,  having  been  so  alarmed  Avitli
noises  and  apparitions  before.  No.  X.  [i.e.,  police-constable]  came  totellhoAV
they  had  made  inquiries,  and  [no?]  strange  people  came  into  the  empty
house. No  noises  since  Sunday  night.

Wednesday,  January  18th. — I  heard  three  loud  knocks  at  my  bedroom
door,  just  as  I  got  into  my  bed  last  night.  So  did  the  children  and  Anne  ;
all  very  frightened.

January  30th,  1888. — At  tliree  this  morning  I  heard  soft  knocks  at  my
bedroom  door,  and  tliu  handle  certainly  Avas  tried.  1  Avas  very  much
frightened,  but  don't  Avant  to  alarm  the  cliildren.  Sliall  bring  Floss  up
to-night.

February  1st. — I  Avent  out  making  calls.  The  children  said  they  heard
footsteps  in  the  draAving-room  before  I  came  in.


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  View.


265


February  6tli. — -Florence  saw  an  apparition  in  brown  at  7.30  a.m.  I
■wasn't  up.  Edith  was  practising,  and  Anne  was  doing  the  grate  in  the
drawing-room. What  can  it  be  1

February  24th. — Bell  rang  three  times  ;  no  one  at  the  door.  [Mrs.  G.
told  me  that  she  was  standing  at  the  window. — F.P.]

March  3rd. — Heard  the  bell  ring  about  11. No  one  at  the  door.

March  20uh. — Was  lying  down  on  the  sofa,  ami  heard  a  voice  say
"  Darling,"  then  kisses.  Ran  down  to  the  children,  but  they  were  surprised,
not  having  called  rae.  Said  they  heard  me  call  them  to  get  ready  to  go  out.
I  had  not  spoken. And  on  going  to  bed  they  saw  a  figure  in  white.

April  9th. — Florence  much  frightened  at  apparition.  [About  five  in  the
afternoon.  — F.  P.  ]

(Went  to  London  on  the  19th.)

The  above  are  copies  of  extracts  from  Mrs.  G.  's  diary,  made  by  me  on
July  8tli,  1888.  At  the  same  time  Mrs.  G.  told  me,  in  connection  with  the
noises  heard  by  the  children  on  February  1st,  that  on  the  day  following  she
purposely  made  her  entry  into  the  house  very  noisy  ;  she  banged  the  front
door,  walked  heavily  into  the  drawing-room,  banged  the  lid  of  the  piano,
•'I  made  as  much  noise  as  ever  I  could,"  but  on  going  down  to  the  children,
who  were  in  the  play-room  (front  room  in  basement),  she  fnund  they  had
heard  nothing.

On  the  6th  February  Florence,  having  seeing  the  apparition  in  the  base-
ment room,  where  she  was  alone,  ran  up  to  Mrs.  G.  at  once,  much  frightened.
She  described  the  figure  as  that  of  a  man,  with  dark  brown  hair,  blue  eyes,
and  a  freckled  face.  The  figure  stared  at  her,  and  seemed  as  if  it  would  stop
•as  long  as  she  stopped. So  she  ran  away.

Mrs.  G.  also  told  me  a  thing  which  she  had  not  mentioned  in  her  account
— that  she  was  one  morning  left  alone  in  the  basement  room  about  10  a.m.,
the  children  having  gone  upstairs  to  wash  their  hands,  and  suddenly
looking  round,  she  saw  distinctly  for  a  moment  two  human  faces  at  her
elbow.  The  apparition  vanished  instantly.  She  has  had  no  other  hallucina-
tion, either  of  sight  or  hearing  ;  except  that  about  twelve  years  ago  she  and
her  husband  heard  some  noises,  for  which  they  could  not  account,  and  which
may  have  been  hallucinatory.

I  also  saw  the  children,  Edith  aged  11,  and  Florence  aged  9.  They  are
very  bright,  intelligent  children  ;  the  elder  very  pale  and  excitable.  I  could
not  examine  them  at  length  on  what  they  had  seen,  as  Mrs.  G.  was  very
anxious,  Edith  having  evidently  not  yet  recovered  from  her  illness,  that  they
should  not  be  made  to  attach  too  mucli  importance  to  the  subject,  and  I  did
not  mention  the  word  ghosts,  nor  did  they.  They  gave  me  an  account
accurately  corresponding  to  their  mother's  of  what  they  had  seen.  On  two
or  three  occasions  they  saw  a  figure  together.  But  the  figure  which  Edith  saw
alone  appeared  only  momentarily  and  then  vanished,  whilst  Florence's  man
with  freckles  was  apparently  persistent.  Edith  described  the  beautiful  hand
placed  on  the  door,  which  accompanied  the  "  white  face."  Both  were  very
I^ositive  they  had  seen  something  real,  and  Edith  stamped  her  foot  indig-
nantly when  her  mother  suggested  "imagination." "Mamma,  yon  know


266.


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


it  wasn't  imagination  I  "  They  seem  now  to  have  forgotten  a  good  deal  of
their  fright,  and  told  me  they  were  very  sorry  to  leave  the  house. — F.P.,
July  9th,  1888.

From  Anne  H.,  Mrs.  G.'s  Servant.

. -.  June  mh,  1888.

We  had  been  in  the  house  nearly  three  weeks  when  one  night  my  mistress
came  to  my  room  and  called  me,  and  said  slie  heard  someone  screaming  and
groaning  dreadfully.  I  went  into  her  room  and  I  heard  it  too ;  I  thought
someone  was  being  murdered.  It  seemed  in  the  next  house  to  me,  as  if
someone  was  being  thrown  about  dreadfully.  Then  one  afternoon  Miss
Edith  saw  a  little  woman  peef)  round  the  door  at  her ;  when  she  looked  it  was
gone ;  and  tlien  one  morning  IMiss  Florence  was  going  ii])  the  kitchen  stairs,
she  saw  a  man  standing  in  the  little  room  at  tlie  top  of  the  stairs  by  the  side
of  the  window,  looking  at  Iier  ;  and  one  afternoon  saw  the  same  man  again,
he  was  on  Iiis  hands  and  knees  under  the  table.  We  used  to  hear  noises  in
the  roof  of  a  night  as  if  someone  was  up  there  tlirowing  something  about  ;
then  it  would  seem  to  give  a  great  jump  down,  and  run  up  and  downstairs,
and  they  tried  the  handle  of  the  children's  door  ;  we  heard  something  move
across  the  room  and  back  again.  Tlic  children  heard  sometliing  run  across
the  room  and  screw  up  some  paper  over  by  the  cupboard  in  their  room,  then
go  out  again.  Tlien  we  heard  that  screaming  again ;  we  heard  it  in  the
children's  room  this  time  ;  it  was  most  dreadful.  Tlien  we  heard  some  door
shook  as  if  to  shake  it  down  ;  then  it  kept  banging  all  night  long.  We  did
not  get  to  sleep  till  between  11  and  12.  Then  we  used  to  hear  a  great-
crash  every  nig'nt  about  10  o'clock  ;  it  v/as  downstairs  in  the  kitchen.  I
used  to  think  everything  was  being  smashed  ;  tlien  one  night  it  seemed  as  if
someone  was  out  on  tlie  landing  slipping  about ;  then  we  heard  some  music  ;
it  sounded  like  a  musical  box  to  me  ;  it  played  three  times  ;  then  one  night
we  all  heard  three  loud  knocks  at  mistress's  door  ;  then  the  bells  used  to  ring.
When  I  got  upstairs  to  the  front  door  no  one  was  tliere.  It  was  the  front
door  because  no  one  else  used  to  ring.  One  day  it  rang  three  times  while  I
was  dressing.  I  went  down  each  time,  but  there  was  no  one  there  then.
One  evening  Miss  Edith  saw  some  one  standing  at  the  top  of  the  kitchen  stairs,
all  in  white,  peeping  at  her.  Tlien  Miss  Florence  went  back  and  she  saw  it
too.  One  afternoon  I  was  sitting  in  the  kitchen  with  the  door  shut  ;  I  heard
someone  go  creeping  upstairs  ;  I  looked  up  and  the  door  was  open  ;  I  went
up  directly,  but  I  could  not  see  anything  there.  Then  the  same  night  as
mistress  went  to  London  I  heard  that  screaming  again  as  if  they  was  knocking
someone  about  dreadfully.  There  was  such  a  row.  Fatlier  was  in  tlie  house  ;
he  did  not  hear  anything ;  then  he  felt  something  breathing  on  liis  face  ;  got
a  light  and  looked  about,  but  he  could  not  see  anything.  Then  lie  had  to  go
away  ;  then  my  little  sister  came  in  to  be  with  me,  and  slie  heard  them  tlirow
some  i^aper  downstairs  and  run  down  after  it,  and  bring  it  up  again.  When
I  woke  up  she  was  crying.  I  heard  the  spare  room  door  open  two  or  three
times  ;  I  had  locked  it  before  I  went  to  bed,  because  it  would  not  latch  ;
then  mother  came  in  ;  slie  did  not  get  to  sleep  all  night  for  the  noises  ;  slie
heard  someone  go  into  mistress's  room  and  begin  moving  tlie  things  about,
tlien  something  seemed  to  be  in  tlie  wall,  began  tapping  about.  Then  they
moved  some  paper  right  over  by  the  cupboard  ;  then  we  heard  someone  jump


1889.]  from  Another  Point  of  Vieio.  267


down  outside  tlie  spare  room  door.  Then  she  saw  a  face ;  it  seemed  to  come
right  through  the  wall.  Then  one  night  in  my  bedroom  I  saw  a  shadow,  it
seemed  all  in  a  heap  ;  it  went  right  along  the  window  and  shaded  right  along
the  "wall  opposite.  Tlien  I  woke  up  one  night  and  heard  such  a  row  ;  it
seemed  close  to  my  ear  like  an  alarum.  Then  a  thump  in  the  ceiling  one
afternoon.  We  heard  someone  go  right  across  the  drawing-room  and  touch
the  notes  of  the  piano  and  go  out  again.

A.  H.  (aged  21).

(I  talked  to  Anne  H.,  a  clever,  intelligent  girl,  to-day.  She  gave
me  a  graphic  description  of  the  .shadow  moving  across  the  window
and  wall  of  her  bedroom.  Has  had  no  other  hallucinations. — F.P.,  July
9tli,  1888.)

From  Miss  R.,  Surbiton.

Deak  Sir, — In  answer  to  your  letter  respecting  Mrs.  G.'s  house  in

 road,  all  I  can  tell  you  is  that  I  was  with  her  when  she  moved  into  it

and  for  a  week  after,  and  during  that  time  nothing  happened  to  disturb  us
except  the  bells  used  to  ring,  but  this  we  supposed  then  was  done  by  boys  in
the  street.  I  should  never  have  thought  of  this  again  if  subsequent  events
had  not  made  me  think  of  it.  Sorry  I  cannot  give  you  any  further  informa-
tion.— Yours  truly,  M.  R.

Mrs.  G.'s  experience  in  the  house  appears  very  quickly  to  have
become  matter  of  common  talk  in  the  town,  and  in  May  of  the  same
year,  when  the  house  was  empty,  a  party  of  three  gentlemen  obtained
access  to  it,  on  two  cliiiCTent  occasions,  for  the  purposes  of  investigation.
Their  accounts  are  given  below.

From  Mr.W.  O.  D.,  Barrister-at-Law.

July  1st,  1888.

May  23rd,  1888.— First  visit,  in  company  with  the  Rev.  G.  O.  and  Mr.  C,
solicitor.  Heard  a  bell  ring,  which  I  believe  was  not  rung  by  any
mundane  agency.  Subsequently  we  heard  a  heavy  crash,  as  it  were  of
crockery,  not  produced  by  any  visible  means.

May  28th. — Second  visit.  In  company  with  the  same  gentlemen  herein
before  mentioned  I  saw  part  of  the  dress  of  a  super-material  being.  Mr.  0.
and  Mr.  C,  who  were  in  the  room  before  me,  saw  far  more  of  the  form  than
I  did.  After  the  apparition,  the  Rev.  G.  0.  pei'formed  a  ceremony  of
exorcism,  in  which  both  myself  and  Mr.  C.  joined.  I  have  since  been  to  the
house,  but  did  not  hear  or  witness  anything  unusual.  I  am  firmly  convinced
in  my  own  mind  that  the  phenomena  we  beheld  and  the  noises  we  heard
were  the  results  of  super-material  forces.

From  the  Rev.  G.  O.

July  Srd,  1888.

I  have  not  kept  and  can't  recall  dates,  but  about  a  month  ago  I  went  to

 road,  hearing  it  was  haunted. I  v/ent  v/ith  Mr.  D.  and  Mr.  C.  and  the

agent's  son,  at  eight.  At  8.30  we  heard  bell  ringing,  but  nothing  to  account  for


268.


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


it.  Little  later  on  a  crash  and  f;ill  as  of  a  box  or  board  tumbling  down.  All
heard  this,  three  of  them  beint?  on  the  ground  floor,  I  on  the  basement.

A  few  evenings  after  we  went  the  secijnd  time,  at  nine  o'clock.  At  9.30
or  about,  as  we  were  thinking  of  leaving,  and  as  we  stood  in  hall,  I  saw
ft  form  glide  from  back  to  front  room,  and  at  same  time  my  two  friends,
who  were  beside  me  saw,  D.  a  part  of  the  figure  and  C.  the  entire.
This  was  all.  I  then  said  jirayers  for  exorcism  of  the  house  and  rest  for
the  souls. Since  then  no  more  has  been  heard.

I  may  add  I  saw  myself,  but  not  distinctly,  a  small  column  of  misty
vapour  on  the  first  occasion,  but  not  being  very  distinct,  and  not  developing
into  anything,  I  do  not  enter  into  it  here.

In  conversation  Mr.  D.,  who  appeared  to  be  a  man  of  nervous
temperament,  and  who  has  implicit  faith  in  the  ethcacy  of  the  exorcism,
told  me  that  he  had  had  no  other  hallucinations.  Mr.  O.,  he  said,
went  first  into  the  room,  and  drew  the  attention  of  the  others  to  the
figure,  whicli  disappea)-ed  almost  instantaneously.  Neither  Mr.  D.  nor
Mr.  C.  could  ronember  accurately  tlie  position  of  the  light ;  but  they
thought  it  j^robalile,  on  the  whole,  that  Mr.  O.  carried  a  light  in  his
hand,  and  that  there  was  no  other  light,  except  through  the  uncurtained
windows,  in  the  room  where  the  tigure  was  seen.  Mr.  O.,  who  is
extremely  deaf,  appears  to  have  heard  the  noise  on  the  first  evening
with  perfect  distinctness.  JMr.  O.  lias  liad  other  sensory  hallucinations
which  may  have  been  veridical.  Mr.  C.  gave  me  an  account  of  the  in-
cident corresponding  with  those  given  by  Mr.  D.  and  Mr.  O.,  except  that,
as  he  described  it,  he  only  saw  the  end  of  a  woman's  dress  disappearing
round  the  door.  Mr.  C.  also  gave  me  an  account  of  a  hallucination,
resembling  the  human  figure,  which  he  had  seen  only  a  few  weeks
previously  in  his  own  room,  when,  apparently,  in  normal  health.

We  have  been  unable,  so  far,  to  induce  Mr.  C.  to  give  us  a  written
account  of  his  experiences.

Finally,  I  subjoin  an  exti'act  from  a  newspaper  of  April  5th,  1879,
relating  to  a  suicide  which  took  place  in  the  house: —

SiiSGULAR  Case  of  Suicide. — The  Coroner  held  an  inquest  on  Satur-
day at  the  Inn,  on  the  body  of  Mrs.  M.  F.,  aged  42  years,  who  com-
mitted suicide  by  hanging  herself  on  the  previous  day. Deceased,  a

lodging-house keeper  in  road,^  had more  than  once tlireatened  to

destroy  lierself,  but  no  importance  was  attached  to  wliat  she  said.  On
Friday,  however,  .slie  sent  a  letter  to  a  friend  saying  that  she  would  never
be  seen  alive  again  in  this  world  ;  but  this,  like  her  jn-ovious  assertions,  was
regarded  as  an  empty  threat,  and  it  was  not  until  Mr.  B.  .  .  .
lodging  at  lier  house,  missed  her,  and  mentioned  tlie  fact  to  a  relative,  that
any  notice  was  taken  of  the  letter. The  house  was  then  searched,  and

^  The  nvmhcr  of  the  house  is  not  given  in  the  newspaper  report ;  but  it  has  been
ascertained  from  tlic  poHce  records  of  suicides.


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  View.


269


deceased  was  discovered  hanging  by  a  skipping-rope  to  a  peg  beliind  tlie
door  of  the  top  back  bedroom,  quite  dead. Tlie  jury  returned  a  verdict,
"  Suicide  whilst  in  a  state  of  unsound  mind."
[Date  of  Suicide— March  28th,  1879.]

Here  again  it  will  be  noticed  that  before  anything  of  an  unusual
character  is  seen  in  the  house  a  nervous  state  had  been  induced  in  the
occupants  in  each  case  by  the  unaccountable  noises  which  were  heard.
In  the  case  of  Miss  Morris  the  phantasm  was  of  a  constant  type.  But
with  the  subsequent  tenants  a  general  hallucinatory  diathesis,  almost
comparable  with  that  of  the  famous  Mrs.  A.,  appeai-s  to  have  been  estab-
lished, and  the  ghosts  are  multiform.  The  evidence  of  the  third
group  of  witnesses  possesses  little  independent  value.  All  three  were
acquainted  with  what  had  already  taken  place  in  the  house  :  their
general  attitude  towards  the  subject  is  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  one
of  their  number  afterwards  performed  an  act  of  exorcism  in  the
house,  with  all  due  ceremonial  observances  :  and  two  of  them  had
previously  ex2:)erienced  visual  hallucinations.

The  least  readily  explicable  feature  in  the  story  is  the  appearance
of  phantasms  to  two  independent  groups  of  observers,  the  second  of
whom  were  almost  certainly  ignorant  of  the  experiences  of  their  prede-
cessors. This  may  liave  been  a  mere  coincidence ;  or  the  apparitions,
which,  it  will  be  observed,  were  entirely  dissimilar,  may  have,  in  each  case,
been,  generated  by  the  alarm  caused  by  the  occurrence  of  inexplicable
noises,  themselves  possibly  to  be  explained  as  hallucinatoi'y  superstruc-
tures built  up  round  a  nucleus  of  real  sounds,  just  as  we  know  from
the  experiments  of  MM.  Binet  and  Fere  that  visual  hallucinations  may
be  constructed  on  an  external  jjoini  de  repere.  Or  it  is  permissible  to
conjecture  that  the  later  experiences  may  have  been  started  by  thought-
transference  from  Miss  Morris,  whose  thoughts,  no  doubt,  occasionally
turned  to  the  house  in  which  she  had  sufiered  so  much  agitation  and
alarm.

Readers  to  whom  such  a  conjecture  seems  beyond  the  bounds  of
probability  are  reminded  that  the  alternative  explanation  is  not  that  of
a  semi-corporeal  ghostly  entity,  capable  of  uttering  exp'ressive  sighs  and
displacing  the  kitchen  furniture.  Such  a  conception  may  conceivably
have  appeared  adequate  at  an  earlier  stage  of  the  investigation.  Such
a  conception,  in  a  less  crude  form  and  with  less  explicitness,  may  still
appeal  to  some  as  the  simplest  interpretation  of  the  facts.  But  it  is  not
held  by  Mr.  Myers.  He  has  anticipated  me  in  pointing  out  that,  how-
ever caused,  the  phenomena  are  of  the  nature  of  hallucinations.  There
has  been  no  displacement  of  the  kitchen  furniture,  the  sighs  heard  were
conveyed  by  no  aerial  vibrations.  To  him  the  manifestations  seem  to
reflect  "  a  dead  man's  incoherent  dream."  To  me  it  is  not  obvious  why


270


Phantasms  of  the  Bead


[Nov.  29,


tlie  dreams  of  tlie  living  should  possess  less  potency  than  the  imagined
dreams  of  the  unknown  dead.

So  far  there  has  been  no  attempt  to  identify  the  phantasms.  Indeed
so  many  dissimilar  figures  have  been  recorded  in  the  last  two  narratives
that  any  attempt  at  identification  must  necessarily  have  been  attended
with  considerable  ditficulties.  But,  as  already  said,  in  a  lai'ge  number  of
cases  an  attempt  is  made  to  trace  the  origin  of  the  phantasm.  The  two
following  cases  supply  very  good  examples.  In  the  first  case  (G.  188)
we  have  the  evidence  of  four  witnesses,  who  testify  to  having  seen  the
figure  of  a  child  in  the  house.  And  we  have  in  our  possession  a  certifi-
cate of  the  death  of  the  child  who,  as  stated  by  one  of  the  narrators,
died  in  the  house  some  years  before  the  apparition  was  seen.  The  first
account  is  written  by  Mrs.  H.,  wife  of  a  doctor  in  a  small  provincial
town ;  and,  as  we  learn  from  her,  Dr.  H.  has  seen  and  admitted  the
correctiiess  of  what  she  has  written,  so  that  his  evidence  is  practically
first-hand.  We  owe  this  narrative  to  Mr.  More  Adey,  of  Wotton-
under-Edge,  who  has  seen  some  of  the  persons  concerned ;  and  the
original  accounts,  which  are  undated,  appear  to  have  been  sent  to  him
in  the  latter  part  of  1883.

G.  188.

Some  years  ago  (perhaps  about  20  or  more),  we  happened  to  be  having  one
of  our  usual  small  gatlierings  for  a  musical  evening,  when  the  circumstance
happened  which  I  am  going  to  relate.  My  husband  had  been  detained  visiting
patients  until  rather  late,  returning  home  about  9  o'clock.  He  was  running
upstairs  in  his  usual  quick  way,  three  or  four  steps  at  a  time,  to  go  to  his
dressing-room  and  dress  for  the  e\  ening,  when,  on  turning  the  first  flight  of
stairs,  he  was  rather  startled  to  see  on  the  landing  (a  few  steps  higher)  a  little
child,  who  ran  before  him  into  my  room.  My  little  boy  B.,  about  two  or
three  years  of  age,  was  at  that  time  sleejjing  in  a  small  child's  bed  at  my
bedside.  Mr.  H.  followed  and  spoke,  calling  the  boy  by  name,  but  he  gave
no  answer.  The  gas  was  burning  on  the  landing  outside  my  room,  but  there
was  no  light  inside.  He  felt  about  and  on  the  bed,  but  instead  of  finding
the  child  standing  or  sitting  on  the  bed,  as  he  supposed,  he  found  him  com-
fortably tucked  in  and  fast  asleep.  A  cold  creepy  feeling- came  over  him,  for
there  had  not  possibly  been  time  for  anyone  to  get  into  the  bed,  which  was
just  behind  the  door.  He  lighted  a  candle,  searched  the  room,  and  also  savi^
that  the  boy  was  unmistakably  fast  asleep.  He  expected  to  find  one  of  the
other  children,  as  the  figure  appeared  to  l)e  taller  than  that  of  the  boy.
"VVlien  the  company  had  gone  my  liusljand  told  me  of  the  occurrence.  I  felt
quite  sure  th.it  the  mystery  could  be  solved,  and  that  we  should  find  it  had
been  one  of  tlie  children,  though  he  assured  me  tliere  could  be  no  one  in  the
room,  as  he  liad  made  a  thorough  search.

I  still  thought  he  might  be  mistaken,  and  fancied  that  it  had  been  G.
(who  was  a  year  or  tv>'o  older  than  B.),  wlio  had  escaped  out  of  the  night
nursery,  which  was  near  ;  that  she  had  been  listening  to  the  nmsic,  v.Oien  she
heard  someone  coming,  and  had  run  into  my  room  to  hide  ;  but  on  inquiring
closely  the  next  morning,  I  found  she  had  never  left  her  bed. We  did  not


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  View.


271


thiiik  much  more  about  it,  though  there  was  still  a  feeling  of  mystery,  and
we  never  named  it  to  anyone.  Some  years  afterwards  it  was  brought  to  our
minds  by  two  of  my  daughters  ha\ing  seen  a  child  veiy  early  in  the  morning;
at  the  same  time,  but  in  different  rooms.  One  of  them  only  saw  its  face.
Then,  after  a  lapse  of  years,  Miss  A. ,  while  staying  with  us,  saw  the  appari-
tion mentioned  in  her  ghost  story.  Whether  the  appearance  has  been  a
ghost  or  merely  an  optical  delusion  I  cannot  say,  but  each  of  those  who  have
seen  it  had  never  heard  the  slightest  allusion  to  anything  of  the  kind  before.
If  the  apparition  should  be  a  ghost,  I  have  thought  that  it  must  be  the  spirit
of  a  little  girl  who  died  in  part  of  our  house  before  it  was  added  to  it.  When
we  first  came  to  this  house,  about  30  years  ago,  it  was  divided  into  two,  tlie
smaller  part  being  inhabited  by  a  doctor.  His  wife  died  soon  after  we  came,
and  a  few  years  afterwards  his  little  girl.  I  used  to  see  her  when  she  was
ill,  and  I  last  saw  her  the  day  before  she  died.  She  had  fine  dark  eyes,  black
hair,  oval  face,  and  a  pale  olive  complexion.  This  description  I  find  exactly
agrees  with  those  who  have  seen  its  face.  None  of  them  had  ever  heard  me
mention  the  child  ;  indeed,  I  had  forgotten  about  her  until  hearing  of  these
ghost  stories.  I  said  it  must  be  J.  M.,  who  died  here.  Soon  after  her
death  her  father  went  abroad.  As  far  as  I  remember  the  child  vras  about
eight  or  nine  years  of  age.

From  Miss  G.  H.

I  was  up  early  one  winter's  morning  just  as  da-'.m  v>-as  breaking,  and
there  was  barely  light  enough  for  me  to  see  my  way  a,bout  the  house  ;  I  was-
feeling  tired  and  somewhat  sleej^y,  but  not  in  the  slightest  degree  nervous.

On  passing  the  door  of  a  room  at  the  head  of  the  staircase,  in  which  my
youngest  sister  slept,  I  perceived  that  it  was  open.  Taking  hold  of  tlia
handle,  I  was  about  to  shut  it  (the  door  opened  inwards),  when  I  was  startled
by  the  figure  of  a  child,  standing  in  a  corner  formed  by  a  wardi-obe  which
was  placed  against  the  wall  about  a  foot  and  a-half  from  the  doorway.
Thinking  it  vras  my  sister,  I  exclaimed,  ' '  Oh,  M. ,  you  shouldn't  startle  me
so  I  "  and  shut  the  door  ;  but  in  the  same  instant,  before  I  had  time  to  quit
my  hold  of  the  handle,  I  opened  it  again,  feeling  sure  that  it  could  not  be  my
sister  ;  and,  sure  enough,  she  was  fast  asleep  in  bed  so  far  from  the  door  that
it  woidd  not  have  been  possible  for  her  to  have  crossed  from  the  door  to  her
bedside  in  the  short  space  of  time  when  I  was  closing  the  door.  In  the
corner  where  the  child  had  been  there  was  nothing,  and  I  felt  that  I  must
have  seen  a  ghost,  for  I  was  suddenly  seized  with  a  feeling  of  horror  whicli
could  not  have  been  caused  by  anything  imaginary.  The  child  had  a  dark
complexion,  hair  and  eyes,  and  a  thin  oval  face  :  it  vras  not  white  as  when
seen  by  Miss  A.,  but  it  gave  me  a  mournful  look  as  if  full  of  trouble.  Had
it  been  a  living  cliild,  I  should  have  imagined  it  to  be  one  who  enjoyed  none
of  the  thouglitlessness  and  carelessness  of  childJiood,  but  whose  young  life,
on  the  contrary,  was  filled  witli  premature  cares.  Its  age  might  be  about  nine
or  10  ;  its  dress  I  could  not  distinguish,  as  I  only  seemed  to  see  its  head  and
face  ;  the  expression  struck  me  most ;  so  vividly  did  I  see  it  that  if  I  were
able  to  draw  I  could,  I  believe,  give  an  accurate  representation  of  it,  even
now  after  about  five  years.

On  telling  my  eldest  sister  A.  what  I  had  seen  she  said,  ' '  How  very
curious  '.  I  tliought  I  saw  something,  too,  this  morning."


272


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


T  must  tell  yuu  that  to  reach  her  bedroom  it  was  necessary  to  pass  through
mine  ;  on  tlio  morning  in  (j^uestion  as  she  looked  into  my  room  she  saw  a
iigure  standing  by  a  small  table.  Being  short-sighted  she  tliought  for  a
moment  that  it  was  I,  tliough  it  appeared  to  be  smaller  ;  and  suddenly  seized
with  a  nervous  fear,  mud  unusual  with  her,  she  called  out,  ' '  Oh  !  G. ,  wait
forme."  She  turned  for  an  instant  to  get  something  out  of  her  room,  and
when  slie  LK.iked  again  tliere  was  nothing  to  be  seen.  The  door  from  my
Tooui  into  the  passage  was  shut.  I  was  in  another  part  of  the  house  at  the
time,  and  we  were  the  only  two  members  of  the  family  out  of  bed.

From  Mrs.  A.  (formerly  Miss  H.)

I  believe  it  was  between  five  and  six  in  the  morning  my  sister  and  self
tlKJUght  we  W(.)uld  get  up  early  to  read.  We  liad  our  bedrooms  close  together,
with  the  door  in  the  middle  joining  the  rooms  always  ojjen.

My  sister  had  just  left  her  room  about  three  minutes  ;  wlien  I  looked
towards  her  I'oom  I  saw  a  little  figure  in  white  standing  near  a  table.  I  did
not  see  its  face,  l)ut  I  attribute  that  to  my  being  so  short-sighted.  Also  I  was
.so  suddenly  overcome  with  nervousness  that  I  ran  fr(jm  the  room.

During  the  morning  I  told  my  sister  what  I  had  seen  ;  then  she  gave  me
lier  account.

Asked  whether  they  had  experienced  any  other  hallucination,  Miss
G.  H.  and  Mrs.  A.  replied  in  the  negative.  Dr.  H.,  however,  explained
that  he  had  heard  nn)i'e  than  once  strange  unaccountable  noises,  and
from  a  later  letter  we  learn  that  on  one  occasion  he  had  a  visual
hallucination  after  sitting  up  three  nights  in  succession.

In  answer  to  questions,  Mrs.  H.  writes  : —

December  Uth,  1883.
Strange  tliat  she  [/.(.,  the  child  whom  the  phantasm  was  sujjposed  to
resemble]  did  not  die  in  our  house,  but  in  the  next  one  to  it,  which  has  since
heen  added.  It  was  originally  all  in  one.  It  is  since  the  two  houses  have
heen  joined  that  the  child  apjjeared,  and  to  three,  Mr.  H.,  G.,  and  Miss  A.,
in  our  old  jiart.  But  when  Mrs.  A.  saw  it,  it  was  in  the  \'ery  room  in  which
slie  died.  When  the  others  described  the  appearance  of  the  child,  tlien  it
struck  me  it  might  be  the  one  I  knevv',  and  when  I  gave  a  minute  description
of  her  they  said  it  corresponded  exactly.

******

The  first  appearance  to  Mr.  H.  was  in  winter,  but  we  do  not  remember
the  date.  On  referring  to  other  events  that  occurred  about  the  time,  I  think
it  must  have  been  between  January  1863  and  1865.  The  cliild  appeared  to
both  my  daughters  on  the  same  morning.  This  happened  in  January,  1877.
It  appeared  to  Miss  A.  in  July,  1879.

J.  M.  died  January  21st,  1854,  aged  10  years.  I  enclose  a  copy  of  the
registration  of  her  death.

April  nth,  1885.

My  husband  a  few  weeks  ago  began  to  hear  again  the  loud  knocks  which
he  menti<.)ns  in  answer  to  one  of  your  former  questions.  He  does  not  say
much  abinit  it,  but  I  see  that  he  thinks  it  is  something  supernatural.

I  want  to  persuade  liim  that  it  is  a  dream,  and  I  cannot  help  thuiking


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vino.


273


that  it  may  be,  but  I  am  trying  to  find  it  out.  I  cannot  hear  tlie  knocks.
They  ceased  for  a  few  weeks,  but  came  again  two  or  three  nights  ago.  I
have  begged  that  he  will  tell  me  when  it  comes  again,  and  I  shall  make  a
note  of  each  time,  with  the  surrounding  circumstances.

I  think  I  told  you  before  that  it  was  only  my  idea  that  the  apparition  of
the  child  might  be  one  who  died  many  years  ago  in  part  of  our  house,  then
detached,  and  I  rather  mentioned  it  in  jest  at  the  first.  Long  afterwards,
however,  and  some  time  after  the  appearance  to  Miss  A.,  when  I  gave  a
description  of  the  child,  my  daughter  G.  exclaimed  at  once  that  it  was  exactly
the  same  as  tlie  one  she  saw  (slie  had  partly  described  it  to  me  before),  and
the  same  as  the  face  Miss  A.  had  seen.  I  distinctly  remember  J.  M.  's  face,
although  I  have  forgotten  almost  everything  else  about  her.

May  20th,  1885.

I  was  only  two  nights  absent,  but  on  my  return  my  husliand  told  me  that
in  the  first  night  he  had  again  heard  the  knocks  very  loud.  This  happened  to
be  the  night  my  brother-in-law  died.  Still  I  do  not  think  the  knocks  are
from  any  supernatural  cause,  though  it  is  perhaps  worth  trying  to  find  out.
You  will  see  in  my  answers  that  when  quite  a  young  man  he  heard  noises
immediately  preceding  a  death.  He  has  never  heard  anything  of  the  kind
for  many,  many  years,  except,  I  think,  occasional  noises  within  the  last  year,
which  I  told  you  of.  It  is  now  quite  six  weeks,  or  more,  since  he  heard  a
succession  of  knocks,  that  is,  at  intervals  of  a  night  or  two.

The  following  account,  written  by  Miss  J.  A.  A.,  and  communicated
by  her  to  Mr.  H.  C.  Coote,  appeared  in  iS'oies  and  Queries  for  March
20th,  1880,  over  the  signature  of  H.  C.  C.  :—

The  following  interesting  communication  has  been  handed  to  me  by  a
young  lady,  who  is  as  intelligent  as  she  is  charming.  Her  hereditary  acumen
precludes  altogether  the  possibility  of  any  self-deceit  in  regard  to  her  own
personal  experiences  as  narrated  by  herself.

' '  What  I  am  going  to  relate  happened  to  myself  while  staying  with  some

North-country  cousins,  last  July,  at  their  house  in  shire. I  had  spent

a  few  days  there  in  the  summer  of  the  previous  year,  but  without  then  hear-
ing or  seeing  anything  out  of  the  common.  On  my  second  visit,  arriving
early  in  the  afternoon,  I  went  out  boating  with  some  of  the  family,  spent  a
very  jolly  evening,  and  finally  went  to  bed — a  little  tired,  perhaps,  with  the
day's  work,  but  not  the  least  nervous.  I  slept  soundly  until  between  three
and  four,  just  ydien  the  day  was  beginning  to  break.  I  had  been  awake  for
a  short  time  when  suddenly  the  door  of  my  bedroom  oj^ened  and  shut  again
rather  quickly.  I  fancied  it  might  be  one  of  the  servants,  and  called  out,
'Come  in  ! '  After  a  short  time  the  door  opened  agahi,  but  no  one  came  in
— at  least,  no  one  that  I  could  see.  Almost  at  the  same  time  tliat  the  door
opened  for  the  second  time,  I  was  a  little  startled  by  the  rustling  of  some
curtains  belonging  to  a  hanging  wardrobe,  which  stood  by  the  side  of  the
bed  ;  the  rustling  continued,  and  1  was  seized  with  a  most  uncomfortable
feeling,  not  exactly  of  fright,  but  a  strange,  unearthly  sensation  that  I  ivas
not  alone.  I  had  had  that  feeling  for  some  minutes,  when  I  saw  at  the  foot
of  the  bed  a  child  about  seven  or  nine  years  old.  The  child  seemed  as  if  it
were  on  the  bed,  and  came  gliding  towards  me  as  I  lay. It  was  the  figure  of


'274


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


•a  little  girl  in  her  night-dress — a  little  girl  with  dark  hair  and  a  very  white
face.  I  tried  to  speak  to  her,  but  could  not.  She  came  slowly  on  up  to  the
top  of  t'le  bed,  and  I  then  saw  her  face  clearly.  She  seemed  in  great
trouble  ;  her  hands  were  clasped  and  her  eyes  were  turned  up  with  a  look  of
entreaty,  an  almost  agonised  look.  Then,  slowly  unclasping  her  hands,  she
touched  me  on  the  shoulder.  The  hand  felt  icy  cold,  and  while  I  strove  to
speak  she  was  gone.  I  felt  more  frightened  after  the  child  was  gone  than
Lefore,  and  began  to  be  very  anxious  for  the  time  when  the  servant  would
make  her  appeariince.  Whether  I  slept  again  or  not  I  hardly  know.  But
by  the  time  the  servant  did  come  I  had  almost  persuaded  myself  that  tlie
whole  affair  Vi'as  nothing  but  a  very  vivid  nightmare.  However,  when  I
came  down  to  breakfast,  there  were  many  remarks  made  about  my  not  look-
ing v.-ell — it  was  observed  that  I  was  pale.  In  ansvv-er  I  told  my  cousins  that
I  had  had  a  most  vivid  nightmare,  and  I  remarked  if  I  was  a  believer  in
gliosts  I  should  imagine  I  had  seen  one.  Nothing  more  vras  said  at  tlie  time
n[)on  this  subject,  except  that  my  host,  who  was  a  doctor,  observed  tliat  I
had  better  not  sleep  in  tlie  room  again,  at  any  rate  not  alone.

"  So  the  following  night  one  of  my  cousins  slept  in  the  same  room  with
me.  Neither  of  us  saw  or  heard  anything  out  of  the  way  during  that  night
or  the  early  morning.  That  being  the  case,  I  persuaded  myself  that  what  I
had  seen  had  been  only  imagination,  and,  much  against  everybody's  ex-
pressed v/ish,  I  insisted  tlie  next  night  on  sleejjing  in  the  room  again,  and
nlone.  Accordingly,  having  retired  again  to  tlie  same  room,  I  was  kneeling
down  at  the  bedside  to  say  my  prayers,  when  exactly  tlie  same  dread  as
loefore  came  over  me.  The  curtains  of  the  wardrobe  swayed  about,  and  I
had  the  same  sensation  as  previously,  that  I  was  not  alone.  I  felt  too
frightened  to  stir,  when,  luckily  for  me,  one  of  my  cousins  came  in  for
something  which  she  had  left.  On  looking  at  me  she  exclaimed,  '  Have  you
seen  anything  ?' I  said,  'No,'  but  told  her  how  I  felt,  and,  without  much
persuasion  being  necessary,  I  left  the  room  with  her,  and  never  returned  to
it.  Wlien  my  hostess  learnt  what  had  happened  (as  she  did  immediately)
she  told  me  I  must  not  sleep  in  that  room  again,  as  the  nightmare  had  made
such  an  im2:)ression  on  me ;  I  should  imagine  (she  said)  all  sorts  of  things  and
make  myself  quite  ill.  I  went  to  another  room,  and  during  the  rest  of  my
visit  (a  week),  I  was  not  troubled  by  any  reappearance  of  the  little  girl.

' '  On  leaving,  my  cousin,  tlie  eldest  daughter  of  the  doctor,  went  on  a
visit  with  me  to  the  house  of  an  uncle  of  mine  in  the  same  county.  We
stayed  there  for  about  a  fortnight,  and  during  that  time  the  '  little  girl '  was
alluded  to  only  as  my  '  nightmare. '

"  In  this  I  afterwards  found  there  was  a  little  reticence,  for,  just  before
leaving  my  uncle's,  my  cousin  said  to  me,  '  I  must  tell  you  something  I  have
been  longing  to  tell  you  ever  since  I  left  home.  But  my  father  desired  me
not  to  tell  you,  as,  not  being  very  strong,  you  might  be  too  frightened.
Your  nightmare  was  not  a  nightmare  at  all,  but  the  appaiition  of  a  little  girl. '
She  then  vv^ent  on  to  tell  me  that  this  '  little  girl '  had  been  seen  three  times
before,  by  three  different  members  of  the  family,  but  as  this  was  some  nine
or  10  years  since,  they  had  almost  ceased  to  think  anything  about  it  until  I
related  my  experiences  on  the  morning  after  the  first  night  of  my  second  visit.

"  My  cousin  further  went  on  to  tell  me  that  her  younger  sister  whilst  in


1889.]


from  Anothei'  Point  of  View.


275


bed  had  one  morning,  about  daybreak,  to  her  great  surprise,  seen  a  little  girl
with  dark  liair,  standing  with  her  back  to  her,  looking  out  of  the  window.
She  took  this  figure  for  her  little  sister,  and  spoke  to  it.  The  child  not
replying  or  moving  from  her  position,  she  called  out  to  it,  '  It's  no  use
standing  like  that  ;  I  know  you.  You  can't  play  tricks  with  me.'  On  looking
round,  however,  she  saw  that  her  little  sister,  the  one  she  tliought  she  was
addressing,  and  who  was  sleeping  with  her,  had  not  moved  from  the  bed.
Almost  at  the  same  time  the  child  passed  from  the  window  into  the  room  of
her  (my  cousin's)  sister  A.,  and  the  latter,  as  she  afterwards  declared,  dis-
tinctly saw  the  figure  of  a  child  with  dark  hair  standing  by  the  side  of  a
table  in  her  room.  She  spoke  to  it,  and  it  instantly  disappeared.  The  'little
girl '  was  subsequently  again  seen,  for  the  last  time  before  I  saw  it,  by  my
cousin's  father.  Dr.  H.  It  was  in  the  early  daylight  of  a  summer's  morning,
and  he  was  going  upstairs  to  his  room,  having  just  returned  from  a  pro-
fessional visit.  On  this  occasion  he  saw  the  same  child  (he  noticed  its  dark
hair)  running  up  the  stairs  immediately  before  him,  until  it  reached  his  room
and  entered  it. When  he  got  into  the  room  it  Avas  gone.

"Thus  the  apparition  has  been  seen  three  times  by  the  family,  and  once
by  me.  I  am  the  only  one,  however,  that  has  seen  its  face.  It  has  also
never  been  seen  twice  in  the  same  room  by  any  one  else."

From  Mrs.  H.

November  2U,  1882.
The  first  part  told  by  Miss  J.  A.  of  the  appearance  of  the  little  girl  to
her  is  most  accurate,  and  is  exactly  as  she  told  it  to  us  the  morning  after,
but  the  latter  part,  which  she  has  written  from  memory,  having  heard  it
perhaps  in  a  confused  way,  is  not  quite  right.

This  is  among  the  most  interesting  and  the  strongest  examples
in  our  collection  of  the  "  successive  "  type.  It  is  evidentially  strong,
because,  in  the  first  place,  there  is  a  reasonable  presumption  that
none  of  the  percipients  had  heard  of  any  experience  previous  to
Ler  own,  and,  in  the  second  place,  the  accounts,  as  they  stand,  show  a
marked  similarity  in  the  various  appearances.  And  lastly,  from  the
record  the  apparition  appears  to  have  borne  an  unmistakable  resem-
blance to  the  child  who  had  actually  died  in  the  house  some  years
before.  The  similarity  of  the  various  appearances,  however,  and  their
common  resemblance  to  the  deceased  J.  M.  is  not  sufficiently  established
to  bear  a  very  close  scrutiny.  The  first  percipient,  Dr.  H.,  mistook
the  figure  which  he  saw  for  that  of  his  little  boy  of  two  or  three,  or  his
little  girl  of  four  years  of  age ;  a,nd  Miss  H.  (Mrs.  A.)  believed  the
figure  to  be  her  sister,  who  must  at  that  time  have  been  at  least
sixteen.  Further,  it  must  be  remembered  that  Miss  G-.  H.'s  description
— the  most  detailed  of  all — was  not  written  until  some  years  after  the
event,  and  after  the  appearance  of  the  figure  had  been  discussed  with
Mrs.  H.,  who  held  a  theory  of  her  own  on  the  matter,  and  had,  as  she
told  us,  given  to  her  daughter  a  minute  description  of  the  dead  child.

It  is  impossible  to  avoid  a  suspicion  that  under  the  circumstances


276


Thantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


the  definiteness  of  outline  in  Miss  G.  H.'s  description  may  be  due  to  a
combination  of  her  mother's  narrative  with  her  own  experience.  The
same  criticism  applies  to  Miss  J.  A.  A.'s  account,  which  was  not  written
until  some  months  after  the  event,  and  after  she  had  heard  from  her
cousin  of  the  previous  appearances.  Not  much  reliance,  I  submit,
can  Ije  placed  on  the  details  of  a  description  written  under  such
conditions.  The  most,  therefore,  that  can  be  said  is,  that  in  a  house
where  a  little  girl  is  known  to  have  died,  a  figure  resembling  a  little
child  or  young  girl  was  seen  on  four  difierent  occasions  by  four  indepen-
dent witnesses. That,  of  course,  is  a  remarkable  series  of  coincidences.

It  is  not  difficult  to  trace  the  probable  genesis  of  the  first  appear-
ance. A  liardworking  country  doctor,  who  has  on  various  occasions  in
his  life  experienced  hallucinations,  visual  and  auditory,  coming  home
late  one  evening,  after  a  long  day's  work,  sees  a  figure  bearing  a  vague
resemblance  to  one  of  his  children — a  purely  subjective  hallucina-
tion. The  later  appearances,  if  in  fact  there  was  no  communication
of  Dr.  H.'s  experience,  are  more  difficult  of  explanation.  The  two
earlier  may  have  been  the  result  of  hereditary  predisposition  to  halluci-
nation. But  it  seems  at  least  possible  that  all  three  were  due  to
thought-transference,  with  Dr.  A.,  or  perhaps  Mrs.  A.,  on  whom  the
first  appearance  seems  to  liave  made  some  impression,  as  the  agent.  In
this  way  also  the  general  resemblance  which  appears  to  have  existed
between  the  various  appearances  may  most  readily  be  accounted  for.
The  explanation  may  seem  far-fetched  and  improbable:  but  the  critic
should  be  reminded  that  we  have  much  evidence  for  the  operation  of
telepathy  between  living  minds,  but  we  have  very  little  for  the  existence
or  the  agency  of  disembodied  spirits.

In  the  next  case  the  identification  of  the  ghost  is  more  precise,  and
the  explanation,  perhaps,  more  difficult.

G.  189.

From  Mary  G.,  Nursemaid.
[This  account  was  written  by  me  from  notes  of  a  conversation  with
Mary  G.,  and  was  subsequently  corrected  and  signed  by  her.]

March  21st,  1888.

I  have  been  three  and  a-half  years  in  Mrs.  Z.'s  service  as  nursemaid.
One  night  in  November,  1885  (just  before  the  baby  came),  I  was  going  along
tlie  passage  at  about  8  p.m.  The  passage  was  very  dimly  lighted  by  the  gas
shining  through  from  the  housemaid's  cupboard.  I  saw  a  woman's  figure,
dressed  in  something  light,  coming  towards  me.  I  noticed  that  the  dress
seemed  a  little  way  above  the  ground,  and  I  thought  it  was  the  kitchen-maid.
As  she  passed  I  put  out  my  hand  to  touch  her,  but  she  moved  on  one  side,
and  again  to  the  other  side  when  I  followed  her.  At  last  she  moved  through
and  past  me  and  disappeared,  or  my  blocking  the  liglit  hid  lier  from  view.  I
could  distinguish  no  features  at  all. The  dress  was  not  quite  so  light  as


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  View.


277


white — perhaps  a  light  gi'ey.  I  did  not  see  what  kind  of  a  dress  it  was.  I
saw  the  same  figure  again  the  following  night,  in  the  same  place.  I  told  oiily
the  niurse  what  I  had  seen,  but  she  only  laughed  at  me  and  said  it  was  my
imagination,  and  I  did  not  care  to  talk  of  it  again.

I  saw  the  same  figure  once  afterwards  in  the  following  March,  after  L.
had  told  me  what  he  had  seen  :  it  was  standing  at  the  dressing-room  door
one  evening.  There  was  a  gas-light  just  outside  which  shone  full  on  the
figure.  The  figure  seemed  very  tall,  taller  than  an  average  man,  and  dressed
in  some  loose  flowing  stufl' ;  it  hid  the  chair  at  the  dressing-room  door.  I
don't  remember  anything  about  the  dress  or  the  features.  I  was  frightened
and  gave  a  scream,  and  the  nurse  came  out,  but  the  figure  was  gone.

I  have  also  before  this  seen  a  man  in  the  dressing-room —  three  times  in
one  evening.  This  was  before  L.  came.  And  once  after  this,  I  saw  a  woman
in  a  brown  dress.  But  I  have  never  seen  anything  else  of  the  kind  before  I
came  to  this  house.  I  have  often  heard  noises  of  footsteps  and  the  sound  of
a  scuffle,  and  of  somethmg  hea^'y  being  dragged  doi^Tistairs  and  so  on.  I
would  wake  up  at  night  to  hear  the  noises.  I  have  not  heard  the  noises  for
about  six  months.

From  W.  L.,  Butler.

Juhj  12th,  1886.

I  entered  Mr.  Z.'s  service  as  butler  on  the  21st  of  October,  1885.  I  had
not  been  in  the  house  three  days  before  I  heard  a  strange  noise  in  the  cellar.
It  sounded  to  me  as  if  it  were  a  lot  of  barrels  rolling,  and  planks  of  wood
being  stacked.  I  started  up  in  the  bed  and  listened  most  attentively.  I
could  hear  the  barrels  roll  one  after  the  other  quite  distinctly.  I  spoke  of  it
to  my  feUow-servants  the  next  morning,  and  I  saw  a  look  and  a  quiet  wliisper
pass  between  them.  On  the  following  night  we  retired  to  bed  a  few  minutes
past  10.  I  had  just  got  into  my  bed  when  I  heard  a  strange  noise  in  the
pantry^  which  is  adjoining  my  bedroom.  I  got  out  of  my  bed  very  quiet  and
crept  out,  but  I  saw  nothing.  I  returned  to  my  bed,  when  I  heard  a  heavy
thump  m  the  cellar.  I  arose  and  partty  dressed  myself,  took  a  light  with  me
to  the  cellar  to  see  what  was  wrong.  I  crept  do\ra  very  quiet,  but  found
everytliing  quite  still  and  everything  in  its  place,  but  on  returning  to  my
bedroom  it  commenced  again.  I  heard  doors  banging,  and  outside  of  my
door  the  noise  was  as  if  two  jjeople  were  wrestHng  one  with  the  other.  The
same  kind  of  noise  continued  for  some  considerable  time.  At  last  I  fell
asleep.  I  might  have  slept  20  minutes  when  the  noise  became  so  great  I
could  not  stay  in  bed  any  longer,  so  creef)ing  out  to  see  what  it  was,  but  I
found  I  covild  not  see  anything,  but  still  the  noise  continued  the  same.  I
stood  listening  in  the  pantry  about  10  miautes,  and  all  of  a  sudden  the
pantry  door  went  bang,  but  still  not  a  single  thing  could  I  see  move.  I
retm-ned  to  my  bed,  and  in  less  than  two  minutes  I  heard  footsteps  passing
to  and  fro  on  the  stairs,  which  are  at  the  head  of  my  bedstead  and  have  only
a  very  thin  partition  to  part.  Well,  noises  continued  the  same  for  a  con-
siderable length  of  time.  I  was  distm-bed  two  or  tliree  times  a  week.  A
nurse  who  slept  over  me  heai-d  the  same  kind  of  noises  as  I  have  described.
On  March  9th,  1886,  at  4.30  p.m.,  I  went  into  the  library  and  did  up  the  fixe  ;
on  coming  out  I  put  the  scuttle  do-wn  to  fasten  tlie  door  after  me.  On
turning  to  pick  the  scuttle  up  I  saw  a  figure  standing  before  me  ;  it  was

T


278


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


dressed  in  a  brown  garment  with  two  tassels  hanging  at  the  left  side  ;  her
figure  was  perfect  with  the  exception  of  a  head,  which  I  could  not  see,  as  it
appeared  to  me  like  a  black  mist.  I  stood  like  one  struck  dumb  for  about
10  seconds  ;  I  caught  up  the  scuttle  to  fly  when  I  felt  something  touch  my
left  side.  It  was  like  a  very  cold  hand,  and  a  very  cold  chill  passed  over  me
at  the  time.  I  felt  very  sick,  as  the  sudden  shock  was  too  much  for  my
system.  I  felt  ill  all  the  evening  after.  I  spoke  to  Mr.  Z.  on  the  following
morning.  He  did  not  seem  the  least  surin-ised  to  hear  of  it,  as  everybody
was  fully  acquainted  with  tlie  noises.  At  a  later  date  I  was  decorating  the
dinner-table  witli  flowers,  and  on  looking  up  I  saw  the  same  figure  again.  I
did  not  feel  friglitened,  as  I  wanted  to  have  a  good  look  at  it,  but  I  could  not
see  anything  more  than  on  the  last  occasion.  Well,  time  joassed  by,  and
everybody  as  well  as  myself  was  got  quite  used  to  the  ghost.  Whether  by
accident  or  not  I  cannot  say,  some  ladies  and  gentlemen  tried  table-turning,
and  found  Mr.  Z.  to  be  a  very  strong  medium.  On  the  same  evening,  as
they  were  at  the  table-turning,  I  was  putting  the  grog-tray  on  a  small  table  at
the  foot  of  the  drawing-room  stairs  when  it  appeared  exactly  in  the  same
place  I  saw  it  on  March  9th  ;  it  was  moving  very  slowly  towards  me.  I  felt
rather  timid,  and  I  stepped  into  my  pantry  rather  quick,  and  on  looking  at
the  clock  I  found  it  to  be  exactly  a  quarter  before  11.  I  retired  to  rest
shortly  after,  not  seeing  or  hearing  anything  more.

On  the  following  morning,  Saturday,  June  26th,  I  told  Mr.  Z. ;  so  he
communicated  it  to  Colonel  and  Mrs.  Y.  and  Mrs.  M.,  they  being  bosom
friends  of  one  another,  and  Mrs.  M.  being  a  medium  with  the  table.  So  they
came  down  in  the  evening  for  table-turning.

[The  narrator  here  goes  on  to  recount  a  series  of  cpiestions  jjut  to  the
"spirit,"  who  replied  by  tilting  the  table,  indicating  a  spot  in  the  cellar
■where  a  box  of  jewels  had  been  buried.]

Mr.  Z.  rang  the  bell  and  told  me  she  said  she  would  appear  at  11,  and
he  wished  me  to  be  present.  At  seven  minutes  to  11  I  went  into  the
■drawing-room  ;  then  the  medium  asked  if  she  was  coming,  and  she  said,
"  Now."  We  turned  the  gas  down  very  low  and  put  open  the  door  ;  a  gas-
light was  burning  outside  the  door,  which  threw  a  light  into  the  drawing-
room.  I  placed  my  liands  upon  the  table  and  I  felt  every  nerve  in  my  body
move,  f(_)r  it  felt  stronger  to  the  nerves  than  a  galvanic  battery.  I  took  my
hands  ofi'  and  stood  behind  Colonel  Y.'s  chair,  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Z.  at  my
left,  Mrs.  M.  and  Mrs.  Y.  next,  and  a  Mr.  J.  on  the  outside,  and  as  the
■clock  struck  11  in  it  walked  very  slowly,  and  stood  opposite  the  gallery
of  the  drawing-room.  She  api^eared  very  indistinctly  ;  the  medium  asked
lier  to  appear  clear,  and  she  immediately  raised  herself  about  three  feet  from
the  floor.  Mrs.  Z.  and  Mrs.  M.  could  see  everything  as  well  as  myself. .  She
.showed  herself  to  us  as  clear  as  possible.  Her  dress  was  the  same  shape,
"with  large  bell  sleeves  and  two  tassels  at  the  side.  The  colour  of  her  dress
■was  a  light  shiny  kind  of  Jajoanese  silk  ;  it  seemed  to  me  as  if  it  were  figured
■with  a  flower  similar  to  a  chrysanthemum.  Her  feet  seemed  to  be  standing  on
a  dark  cloud,  and  she  threw  her  arms  up  and  down  and  continually  wrung
her  hands  and  clutched  lier  hair.  Her  face  was  of  a  long  haggard-looking
appearance,  with  a  long  thin  nose.  Slie  looked  very  misei'able.  Her  hair
was  very  fair,  but  seemed  to  be  torn  to  pieces,  for  it  hung  in  one  thick-


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiu.


279


looking  mass  over  her  shoulders  nearly  to  her  waist.  Her  ears  were  very
small  and  her  eyes  were  cast  up  and  appeared  like  balls  of  iire.  She  moved
about  the  room  and  came  close  to  me  ;  her  hand  was  held  up  to  touch  me,  but
I  stepped  in  at  the  side  of  Colonel  Y.'s  chair.  I  felt  quite  ill ;  I  never  felt  so
sick  before  ;  then  every  drop  of  blood  in  my  body  seemed  to  be  frozen.  I
felt  sinking  through  the  floor.  Mr.  Z.  turned  u]3  the  gas  ;  she  disajipeared
for  a  few  minutes.  I  sat  doAra  to  rest  for  a  while.  Still  I  felt  I  had  not
seen  enough  ;  so  we  prepared  for  her  again.  I  sat  on  a  chair  in  front  of  the
table,  and  was  holding  Mr.  J.'s  hand,  when  she  appeared  in  front  of  us  again.
As  soon  as  I  said,  "There  it  is  1  "  I  felt  Mr.  J.  sniggle  up  close  to  nie,  and  he
lield  my  hand  so  tight  that  if  I  had  wanted  to  get  up  to  run  back  I  should
Lave  found  it  difficidt,  as  I  was  held  down  so  tight.  At  last  I  got  up  to  go
near  it,  as  she  wished  me  to  follow  her.  As  soon  as  I  stepped  nearer  to  her
she  turned  towards  the  door  very  slowly,  and  as  she  passed  out  of  the  door  a
flash  of  light  struck  over  the  room.  It  was  as  if  someone  had  turned  on  and
off  an  electric  light.  I  followed  to  the  cellar  but  could  not  find  anything.
We  brought  the  table  to  the  cellar,  and  she  wished  us  to  commence  to
dig  up  the  treasures  she  had  buried.  She  said  her  maid  assisted  her  to
bury  them,  and  gave  her  name  as  E.  H.  ;  but  being  Saturday  night
we  determined  to  wait  until  Monday  to  see  if  they  were  in  the  place  as
indicated. We  wished  her  good-night.

On  the  following  Monday,  June  28th,  B.  and  myself  began  to  dig  at  the
place  ;  we  removed  the  flagstones,  but  found  the  soil  had  never  been  dis-
turbed. At  last  we  came  across  a  hole  that  had  been  moved,  but  there  was
nothing  there.  I  got  the  table  and  asked  her  to  appear  over  the  spot.
After  some  time  she  stood  in  the  centre  of  the  cellar  and  said  it  was  there,
but  on  digging  we  found  nothing.  She  seemed  to  be  dreadfully  excited  ;  she
flung  her  arms  in  all  directions  on  disappearing.  B.,  the  gardener,  saw  the
flash  of  light.  After  digging  all  day  and  finding  nothing  we  were  deter-
mined to  ask  her  why  we  had  not  found  them,  when  she  declared  that  they
are  there  somewhere.  She  says  she  has  lost  the  exact  spot,  but  begged  of  us
to  help  her.

Well,  time  passed  by  and  I  saw  her  again  outside  of  the  library  door.
Dinner  being  over  I  just  left  the  dining-room,  when  she  stood  opposite
the  library  door.  It  was  about  8.30  ;  and  at  a  later  date  when  some  gentle-
men dined  here  I  saw  her  in  the  same  spot.  She  has  been  dressed  always  in
the  same  shaped  dress  ;  and  I  believe  what  she  has  answered  in  the  way  of
questions  to  be  perfectly  true,  and  that  the  jewels  or  vakiables,  or  whatever
they  may  be,  are  still  hidden  in  the  cellar,  and  she  will  haunt  this  house  till
they  are  found.  She  may  have  lost  the  spot  where  they  are  hidden,  but  still
I  believe  that  some  day  the  secret  will  be  revealed,  and  she  will  receive  the
rest  she  says  she  sliall  get  after.

I  had  a  long  talk  on  March  20th,  1888,  with  W.  L.,  a  rather
delicate,  refined  looking  man  about  30  years  old,  as  I  should  judge.
He  told  me  he  had  had  no  other  visual  hallucination,  but  he  appears
to  have  had  pre™us  experiences,  seemingly  of  an  hallucinatory  nature,
for  which  he  was  unable  to  account. He  seemed,  as  indeed  is  evident


280


Phantasms  of  tlte  Dead  [Nov.  29,


from  his  account,  to  be  of  a  nervous  and  excitable  disposition,  witli  a
full  appreciation  of  the  dramatic  situations  in  his  story.

Mr.  Z.,  in  sending  us  the  account  in  July,  188G,  writes  : —

The  above  narrative  written  by  my  butler  I  believe  to  be  true.  Person-
ally I  have  never  seen  her  (the  apparition)  but  I  certainly  have  never  had
any  reason  to  doubt  the  truth  of  the  foregoing  statement.

My  wife  has  seen  the  apparition  on  four  sejiarate  occasions.  The  chief
interest  in  this  affair  seems  to  me  to  be  in  the  utility  of  table-turning.  I
had  never  seen  any  table  manifestations  before,  and  we  only  began  it  one
evening  to  pass  away  the  time,  and  when  we  sat  down  we  had  no  more  idea
that  this  2^'irticular  spirit  would  make  itself  manifest  than  that  any  useful
results  might  possibly  accrue  from  our  amusement.  I  had  often  heard
I^eculiar  noises  in  the  house,  and  the  servants  called  the  place  "liaimted,"
but  notliing  had  ever  occurred  to  establish  the  fact  until  last  winter,  when
tlie  butler  saw  the  shadow  when  putting  coals  on  the  fire.  One  fact  seems
to  be  satisfactorily  established,  and  that  is,  two  or  three  people  out  of  a
room  full  can  see  a  spirit,  and  the  others  remain  in  ignorance  of  its  presence.
I  have  tried  on  four  occasions  to  see  it  when  it  has  apjaeared.  My  wife,  a
lady  fiaend,  and  tlie  butler  could  see  it,  but  four  other  people  present  failed
to  do  so.  In  one  place  in  tlie  narrative  the  butler  says  that  the  sjjirit
"raised  itself  "  off  the  ground.  I  had  better  explain  that  there  is  a  gallery  at
one  end  of  the  drawing-room,  and  it  was  on  to  this  the  shadow  raised  itself  ;
of  course  I  could  not  see  it  do  so,  for  I  have  mentioned  before  my  inability
to  see  it,  but  tliat  it  did  really  raise  itself  on  to  the  gallery  there  can  be  very
little  doubt,  as  all  the  people  who  saw  it  said  so  at  the  moment  the  action
took  place.

Mrs.  Z.  lias,  unfortunately,  so  far  declined  to  furnish  a  written
narrative  of  her  experiences.  At  a  personal  interview,  however,  in
March,  1888,  she  gave  me  a  very  full  account  of  her  own  share  in  the
matter,  which  entirely  corresponded  with  that  given  by  Mr.  Z.  and  the
butler.  The  seances  referred  to  lasted  for  about  six  weeks  in  June  or
July,  1886.  The  woman's  figure  described  by  W.  L.  was,  Mrs.  Z.  told
me,  also  seen  by  her  and  by  Mrs.  M.  during  these  seances,  but  at  no
other  time.  As  far  as  she  knew,  all  three  saw  the  same  figure.  Mrs.
Z.  saw  the  face  distinctly,  and  subsequently  recognised  it  in  a  photo-
graph of  a  lady  who  had  lived  in  the  house  a  few  years  previously.
Mi-s.  Z.  did  not  come  to  tlie  neighbourhood  until  some  years  after  this
lady's  death,  and  had  never  previously  seen  her,  or  any  picture  of  Ker.
She  has  had  no  other  hallucination.

As  regards  the  recognition  of  the  photograph,  Mr.  Z.  writes,  in  May,
1888  :—

You  ask  me  to  tell  you  my  account  of  the  recognition  of  the  photograjih.
I  think  that  the  butler's  recognition  does  not  amount  to  much.
It  (/.'.'.,  the  photograph)  was  lying  on  my  table  one  morning  and  on  his
coming  into  the  room  I  asked  him  if  he  had  ever  seen  anyone  like  it.  He


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiu.


281


said  the  eyes,  forehead,  and  nose  he  knew,  but  that  he  somehow  could  not
put  a  name  to  it  though  he  had  seen  the  person  several  times.  I  told  Iiim
who  it  was  sujjposed  to  be  and  then  he  said,  "  The  eyes  I  should  have  known
anywhere,  but  I  have  never  seen  the  wliole  face  so  distinctly  as  this  photo
^ives  it,"  or  words  to  that  effect.

The  second  case  is  certainly  more  remarkable.

A  gentleman  in  C,  hearing  of  the  svipposed  appearances  and  of  my  wife's
having  seen  the  ajaparition,  brought  over  half  a  dozen  photos,  amongst  others
one  of  what  is  supposed  to  be  the  spirit,  to  test  my  wife.  She  Avas  not
present  in  the  room  when  he  arrived,  but  came  in  about  a  quarter  of  an
hour  later. We  purposely  refrained  from  mentioning  the  subject  at  all.

Taking  up  the  photos  I  asked  her  if  any  of  them  reminded  her  of  a  friend,
all  the  pictures  being  about  twenty  years  old.  She  looked  tliein  through,  and
thought  one  an  early  one  of  a  friend  wlio  was  present.

I  took  up  one  and  tossed  it  across  the  tea-table,  and  only  uttered  the
words  "  Who's  that  1 "  and  she,  after  looking  at  it  for  a  moment,  said,  "  Oh,
tliat's  the  ghost — where  on  earth  did  it  come  from  ?  "

We  were  all  rather  staggered  at  her  recognition,  especially  the  gentleman
wlio  brought  the  pictures,  as  he  had  laughed  the  whole  thing  to  scorn.

Personally  I  am  no  believer  in  apparitions,  and  I  offered  a  thousand  pounds
to  anyone  who  would  show  me  the  ghost  who  so  unceremoniously  haunts  my
house.  There  the  matter  rests.  Some  jjeople  declare  they  have  seen  it,  ljut
others,  including  myself,  cannot  see  the  thing  even  when  it  is  supposed  to  be
close  to  one.

Under  tlie  conditions  described  it  must  be  admitted  to  be  possible
that  Mrs.  Z.  i-eceived  unconscious  indications,  from  the  manner
or  look  of  those  around,  of  the  answer  that  was  expected  of  her.
But  even  so,  her  recognition  of  the  photograph  was  certaiidy  a
remarkable  incident.  Our  wonder,  however,  is  somewhat  diminished
when  we  leai'n,  as  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Z.  informed  me,  that  Colonel  Y.
had  been  acquainted  with  the  deceased  lady  whom  the  phantasm  was
supposed  to  represent.  Now  Colonel  Y.  had  been  present  at  the
various  seances  a.t  which  the  figui'e  had  appeared  :  and  as  it  appears,
from  Mr.  Z.'s  account,  that  those  who  were  privileged  to  see  tlie  figure
described  at  the  time  what  they  saw  to  the  others,  we  can  conceive  it
possible  that  the  hallucination  might  take  a  definite  outline  under  tlie
guidance  of  leading  questions  and  unconscious  hints  from  the  Colonel,
who  of  all  the  spectators  was  likely  to  take  the  most  interest  in  the
details  of  the  appearance.  It  is  possible  also  that  thought-transference
may  have  aided  in  the  development  of  the  phantasm,  or  in  the  subse-
quent recognition  of  the  photograpli.  But  this  supposition  is,  perhaps,
under  the  circumstances  hardly  necessary.

The  incident  of  the  recognition  of  the  photograph  is  thus  deprived
of  much  of  its  significance  ;  but  apart  from  this  the  story  presents  some
remarkable  features. The  hallucinations  in  tliis  case  were  unusually


282


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


frequent  and  unusually  persistent ;  and  the  appearance  of  a  phantasm^
on  several  distinct  occasions,  and  for  a  period  of  certainly  some  minutes^
to  tliree  pei'sons  simultaneously,  is  a  phenomenon  perliaps  without
parallel  in  our  records.  The  appearance  of  a  phantasm  at  a  predicted
time  is  also  very  unusual,  if  not  unique,  except  when  it  is  the  result
of  post-liypnotic  suggestion.  There  are  some  jDarallel  cases  of  figures,
seen  by  several  persons  simultaneously  at  a  seance,  where  there  was
no  ground  for  suspecting  fraud.  On  the  whole,  it  seems  possible  that
the  conditions  of  a  Spiritualistic  seance,  admittedly  favourable  to  the
l^roduction  of  abnormal  states,  may  also  be  favourable  to  the  pro-
duction and  communication  of  hallucinations.

It  will  be  noticed,  moreover,  that  here  also  the  phenomena  began
Avith  noises,  wliich  appear  to  have  exercised  a  very  disturbing  influence
on  the  butler,  W.  L.  Moreover,  the  two  chief  witnesses,  and  the  only
witnesses  who  saw  any  ajDparition  when  alone,  appear  to  have  been  un-
usuallj' subject  to  impressions  of  the  kind,  and  were  not  highly  educated
persons.  I  learnt  incidentally  from  another  source  that  the  house  had
been  known  some  20  years  before  to  old  inhabitants  of  the  village  as.
the  "  Haunted  House,"  though  no  rumour  of  its  reputation  ajjpears
to  have  reached  Mr.  Z.  or  his  servants.  In  such  a  case  it  seems-
possible  that  the  phenomena  may  have  been  started  in  the  minds  of
susceptible  subjects  by  telepathic  impressions  received  from  the  outside.
As  a  correspondent  suggests,  in  writing  of  another  case,  "the  combined
expectancy  of  a  rural  population  may  have  uncomfortable  telepathic
consequences."

In  the  absence,  however,  of  Mrs.  M.'s  evidence,  and  of  a  written
statement  from  Mrs.  Z.,  both  of  which  it  is  hoped  to  obtain  on  some
future  occasion,  the  evidence  in  this  case  can  hardly  be  considered  com-
plete.

The  last  case  will  lead  us  by  an  easy  transition  to  that  large  class
of  nari'atives,  of  which  many  illustrations  have  been  given  in  the  last,
two  Parts  of  the  Proceedings,  where  the  hallucinatory  impression
appears  to  be  directly  referable  to  the  agency  of  some  known  deceased
person.  The  evidence  presented  in  many  of  these  cases  is  of  such
quality  as  to  compel  our  very  careful  consideration.  The  main  incidents
narrated  are  in  many  cases  amply  corroborated  ;  and  the  details,  it
must  be  admitted,  appear  in  most  cases  to  be  recorded  with  care.  The
question  is  no  longer,  therefore,  so  much  of  the  acceptance  of  the
evidence  as  of  its  interpretation.

For  the  sake  of  clearness,  I  will  discuss  tlie  several  narratives  *
brouglit  forward  arranged  under  separate  heads,  in  accordance  with
the  various  interpretations,  or,  rather,  modifications  of  one  primary
interpretation,  which  I  would  suggest  for  them.


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  View.


283


A. Cases  Explicahle  by  the Latency of  a  Telepathic  Impression.

In  some  of  the  cases  {e.g.,  Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  Case  IV.,  p.  412  ;
Case  IX.,  p.  432 ;  Case  XX.,  p.  45-5),  the  exact  time  of  the  death  being
indeterminate,  it  is  possible  to  refer  the  phantom  to  telepathy  fi'om
the  mind  of  the  still  living  agent.  This  explanation  may,  indeed,  be
hazarded  in  all  cases  where  the  agent  was  personally  known  to  the  per-
cipient, if  we  admit  the  possibility  of  a  telepathic  impression  lying-
latent  for  a  few  houi'S  or  days,  or  even  weeks.  {Proceedings,  Vol.  III.,
Case  of  Mr.  Wambey,  p.  91  (G.  357) ;  Case  of  Julia  X.,  p.  92  (G.  477).
Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  Case  I.,  p.  408;  Case  II.,  p.  409  ;  Case  III.,  p.  412  ;
Case  VII.,  p.  420;  Case  X.,  p.  434;  Case  XIX.,  p.  4-53;  Case  XXII.,
p.  461  ;  Case  XXVI.,  p.  468,  et  seq.)  It  is  true  that  we  have  little  posi-
tive evidence  for  the  latency  of  a  telepathic  impression.  But  there  are
a  few  of  our  so  far  recorded  cases  which  unquestionably  point  to
such  an  interpretation,  though  in  these  cases  the  latency  appears
to  have  been  only  of  a  few  hours'  duration.  Miss  X.'s  researches,
however,  in  crystal-vision  {Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  p.  486,  et  seq.)  prove
that  normal  sense  impressions  received  by  the  unconscious  self  may
remain  latent  for  a  day  or  more  before  emerging  into  consciousness  ,
and  may  then  be  externalised  as  hallucinatory  images.  So,  too,  ideas
communicated  to  a  subject  in  the  hypnotic  trance  may  remain  latent
for  many  months,  and  may  then  become  externalised  either  in  a  pre-
enjoined  action  or  in  a  sensory  hallucination.  If  we  may  rely  on  the
oft-quoted  case  of  the  girl,  once  servant  to  a  Hebrew  scholar,  who  years
afterwards,  in  an  access  of  delirium,  astonished  her  attendants  by  recit-
ing Hebrew  words  and  sentences,  we  have  an  instance  of  sensory
impressions  originally  recorded,  it  is  probable,  by  unconscious  centres,
coming  to  the  surface  in  a  pathological  condition.  And  it  is  note-
worthy that  in  one  of  the  cases  now  under  review  {Proceedings,  Vol.
v.,  Case  II.,  p.  410)  the  percipient  was  in  a  j^athological  condition,
i.e.,  recovering  from  childbirth.  And  in  another  case  {Proceedings,
Vol.  v..  Case  X.,  p.  434)  the  percipient  was  operating  with  planchette,
an  occupation  which  is  known  to  facilitate  the  emergence  of
unconscious  impressions.  So,  too,  in  the  small  group  of  cases
{Proceedings,  Vol.  III.,  p.  92,  &c.)  where  the  percipient  on  his
deathbed  becomes  aware  of  the  death  of  some  friend,  his  pathological
condition  may  be  supposed  to  have  aided  in  the  development  of
a  telepathic  impression  received  at  the  time  of  the  death.  In
cases,  however,  where  news  of  the  death  has  been  intentionally  with-
held from  the  percipient  by  those  around  him,  it  seems  easiest  to  refer
the  supernormal  intelligence  to  direct  communication  from  their  minds,
admittedly  more  or  less  pre-occupied  with  the  news.  Finally  we  must
bear  in  mind  that  from  the  very  nature  of  the  case  it  would  be  almost


284


Phantasms  of  the  Bead


[Nov.  29,


impossible  to  obtain  conclusive  evidence  of  the  latency  of  a  telepathic
impression  for  any  lengthened  period.  We  can  hardly,  therefore,  be
justified  in  assigning  any  Procrustean  limits  to  the  operation  of  this
■cause.  At  all  events,  in  our  present  ignorance,  to  postulate  an  unknown
cause  is  more  hazardous  than  to  assume  an  unproved  extension  of  the
operations  of  a  familiar  agency.

In  some  of  these  cases,  however,  the  explanation  more  directly  sug-
gested by  the  facts  is  that  of  thought-transference  from  persons  still  living
nt  the  time  of  the  vision.  This  is  most  obvious  in  Case  VII.  {Proceedings,
Vol.  v.,  p.  420),  which  I  have,  for  convenience,  included  under  this  head,
although  the  dead  persons  were  j^ersonally  unknown  to  the  percipient,
because  there  is  no  assertion  that  the  faces  were  recognised  in  the  dream.
A  Quaker  lady  in  England  has  a  clairvoyant  dream  of  a  horse  and  cart,
"with  two  young  women  unknown  to  her,  sinking  in  deep  water,  and  sub-
sequently discovers  that  her  dream  occurred  but  a  few  hours  after  the
death  of  an  unknown  niece  and  her  companion  in  Australia,  in  the  man-
ner indicated  in  the  dream.  Here,  as  indeed  is  suggested  by  Mr.  Myers,
the  dream  may  well  be  supposed  to  have  had  its  origin  in  the  mind  of  the
percipient's  bi'other,  whose  thoughts  in  his  grief  and  agitation  would  be
likely  to  turn  towards  his  relatives  in  England.  In  Case  XXII.  ( Vol.  V.,
p.  461)  Mr.  K.  sees  an  apparition  of  his  father  lying  in  his  coffin  on  the
day  and  at  the  hour,  as  he  states,  when  his  father  was  actually  buried.
This  choice  of  a  time,  inexplicable  if  we  refer  the  vision  to  the  action  of
the  dead  man,  is  seen  to  be  peculiarly  appropriate  if  we  trace  its
oi'igin  to  the  minds  of  the  mourners  at  the  graveside.  In  Case  XIX.
{Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  p.  4D3),  that  impression  may  have  come  from  the
mother  of  the  dead  child.  In  Case  II.  {Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  p.  410),
the  father  of  the  percipient  is  said  to  have  known  of  the  death,  and  to
have  known  also  that  the  news  of  the  death  would  be  of  interest  to  the
percipient.

The  very  remarkable  story  of  General  Barter  and  the  spectral
cavalcade  {Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  Case  XXVI.,  p.  468,  et  seq.)  seems  to
come  under  the  same  head.  It  is  not  inconceivable,  that  is,  that  the
vision  was  due  to  the  development  (jf  a  latent  image,  since  the  figure
represented  the  dead  man  as  he  was  during  life.  It  seems  more  plausible,
however,  to  attribute  it  to  telepathy  from  Lieutenant  Deane,  who  had
been  well  acquainted  with  the  deceased  during  the  last  few  months  of  his
life,  and  who  had  left  the  percipient  but  a  few  minutes  before.  On
the  assumption  that  the  vision  had  been  due  to  the  direct  action  of  the
deceased,  its  coincidence  with  Lieutenant  Deane's  visit  remains  unex-
plained. Another  feature  brought  out  prominently  in  the  case,  but
which  is  common  to  all  these  stories,  is  that  the  vision  is  seen  from  the
outside  ;  as  it  would  appear,  that  is,  not  to  the  principal  actor,  but  to  an
interested  spectator. It  may  even  be  suggested  that,  in  some  of  the


1889.]


from.  Another  Point  of  View.


285


cases  where  an  apparition  is  seen  at  the  time  of  death  in  the  clothes
■actually  then  worn  by  the  decedent,  or  in  the  actual  circumstances  of
death,  the  origin  of  the  vision  is  to  be  sought  in  tlie  minds  of  the
bystanders.  Tlie  difficulty  of  supposing  the  thoughts  of  the  dying  man
to  be  preoccupied  with  the  idea  of  his  own  clothes  would  thus  be
eliminated ;  for  whilst  the  clothes  of  the  dying  man  do  occupy  a
prominent  position  in  the  perception  of  the  bystanders,  they  frequently
do  not  even  enter  into  the  field  of  vision  of  the  man  himself.

In  the  great  majority  of  tlie  cases  under  consideration,  however,  the
hypothesis  of  latency  is  clearly  inadequate,  and  the  suggestion  of
thought-transference  from  the  living  requires  further  justification.

(B)  Cases  Explicable  by  Collective  Hallucination.

Frequently  the  apparition  is  seen  by  two  or  more  persons  simultane-
ously, all  of  whom  were  acquainted  with  the  presumed  agent  in  his
lifetime.  It  is  admitted  that  the  apparition  in  such  cases  is  not  the
person  whom  it  resembles  ;  that  the  popular  ideas  of  the  personality  of
the  figure  seen  are  at  fault,  and  that  it  is,  in  fact,  a  hallucinatory  image.
But  it  is  argued  that  the  collecti\'ity  of  the  impression  proves  that
it  is  in  some  sense  veridical,  and  serves  to  distinguish  it  from  a  merely
casual  hallucination.  We  must,  in  such  a  case,  it  is  contended,  look
for  the  source  of  the  apparition  in  the  mind,  or  what  part  of  it  has
survived  the  change  of  death,  of  the  person  whom  the  apparition
represents,  and  to  whom,  it  is  suggested,  it  bears  a  relation  possibly
analogous  to  the  relation  between  the  living  agents  and  the  hallucina-
tory images  discussed  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living.  Of  course,  in  the
present  state  of  our  knowledge  it  would  be  rash  to  assert  that  such
a  position  is  untenable,  or  even  difficult.  But  it  may  be  pointed  out
that  it  involves  not  one  assumption,  but  two.  It  assumes,  in  the  fii'st
place,  the  survival  after  death  of  some  form  of  consciousness,  and  in
the  second  place,  the  afiection  by  this  consciousness  of  the  minds
of  persons  still  living.  The  extraneous  evidence  for  both  these
assumptions — the  evidence,  that  is,  outside  the  records  now  under  con-
sideration— will  be  diflerently  estimated  by  difierent  inquirers.  But
from  the  scientific  standpoint  no  great  weight  can  be  attached  to  it,
and  it  may  even  be  suggested  that  the  best  evidence  for  either
assumption  is  to  be  found  in  the  facts  which  it  is  invoked  to  explain.
On  the  other  hand,  the  hypothesis  suggested  in  this  paper,  that
the  phenomena  are  due  to  telepathy  from  the  minds  of  living  persons,
advances  but  little  beyond  the  facts  already  accepted  by  most
members  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.  There  is  no  question
here  of  the  existence  of  the  supposed  agents,  nor  of  tlie  operation  under
certain  conditions  of  thought-transference.  There  is  evidence  that  a
man  can  transmit  the  image  of  some  inanimate  object — a  picture  or  a


286  ■  Phantasms  of  the  Bead  [Nov.  29,


card — from  his  own  mind  to  that  of  another  person.  There  is  evidence
also  that  he  can  cause  a  haUucinatory  image  resembling  himself  to
appear  to  another  person.  There  is  even  some  evidence  already  for
the  furtlier  action  required  by  our  hypothesis,  the  evocation  of  the
hallucinatory  image  of  some  person  other  than  the  agent.

It  may  be  admitted  that  the  evidence  in  this  last  case  is  at  present
somewhat  meagre.  But  it  can  scarcely  be  held  that  its  rarity  (unless,
indeed,  it  can  be  shown  that  we  should  be  justified  in  expecting  more
evidence  to  have  been  forthcoming)  goes  far  to  impair  the  validity  of
the  theory  as  a  working  hypothesis.  We  liave  noticed  already  (p.  284)
a  case  in  which  a  dream  of  two  dead  persons  may  plausibly  be  explained
by  telepathy  from  the  mind  of  a  living  relation.  In  the  following
narrative,  where  the  impression  took  the  form  of  a  waking  vision,  a
similar  explanation  seems  almost  inevitable.  Few,  probably,  will  look
for  the  source  of  tliis  vision  of  the  dead  child  and  his  dog  elsewhere
than  in  the  mind  of  the  mother.  The  case  was  sent  to  Mr.  Hodgson  by
Mrs.  G.,  on  the  18th  May,  1888,  and  was  published  in  the  Ai-ena,  an
American  magazine,  for  February  last.

For  nearly  two  weeks  I  have  had  a  lady  friend  visiting  us  from
Cliicago  and  last  Sunday  we  tried  the  cards  and  in  every  instance  I  told  the
colour  and  kind  ;  but  only  two  or  three  times  was  enabled  to  give  the  exact
numljer.

I  must  write  you  of  something  tliat  occurred  last  niglit  ;  after  this  lady,
whom  I  have  mentioned  above,  had  retired,  and  almost  immediately  after  we
had  extinguished  the  light,  there  suddenly  appeared  before  me  a  beautiful
lawn  and  coming  toward  me  a  chubby,  yellow-haired  little  boy,  and  by  his
side  a  brown  dog  which  closely  resembled  a  fox.  Tlie  dog  liad  on  a  brass
collar  and  the  child's  hand  was  under  the  collar  just  as  if  he  was  leading  or
pulling  the  dog.  The  vision  was  like  a  flash,  came  and  went  in  an  instant.
I  immediately  told  my  friend  and  she  said  :  ' '  Do  you  know  wliere  there  are
any  matches  '^  "  and  began  to  hurriedly  clamber  out  of  bed.  I  struck  a  light,
she  plunged  into  her  trunk,  brought  out  a  book,  and  jwisted  in  the  front  was
a  jiicture  of  her  little  boy  and  his  dog.  They  were  not  in  the  same  position
that  I  saw  them,  but  the  dog  looked  exceedingly  familiar.  Her  little  boy
passed  into  the  beyond  about  four  years  ago.  ...

Mrs.  I.  F.  corroborates  as  follows  : —

May  ISth,  1888.

I  wish  to  corroborate  the  statements  of  Mrs.  N.  G.  relative  to  ...  .
and  her  wonderful  vision  of  my  little  boy,  and  my  old  home.  Mrs.  G.  never
saw  the  place,  or  the  little  child,  and  never  even  heard  of  tlie  peculiardooking
dog,  which  was  my  little  son's  constant  companion  out  of  doors.  She  never
saw  the  photograph,  which  was  pasted  in  the  back  of  my  Bible  and  packed
away.

(Signed) I.  F.

It  is  important  to  notice  that  in  this  case  the  vision  appears  to  have


18S9.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieio.


287


been  the  sequel  of  some  experiments  in  thought-transference,  conducted
with  but  partial  success  a  day  or  two  before.  It  may  be  urged,  however,
that  the  vision  here  was  not  completely  extei'nalised.  It  was  a  picture
which  Mrs.  G.  saw,  not  a  fully  developed  phantasmal  ligure.  In  the  next
case,  however  (L.  662), which,  though  remote,  appears  to  be  well  attested
by  contemporary  evidence,  an  unusually  life-like  phantasm  was  seen  by
two  observers.  The  narrative  was  published  in  1822  by  H.  M.  "Weser-
mann.  Government  Assessor  and  Chief  Inspector  of  Roads  at  Diisseldorf,
ifcc.^  Some  speculation  of  Mesmer's  suggested  to  Wesermann  to  try  to
transfer  mental  images  to  sleeping  friends  at  a  distance  ;  all  the  more,
probably,  because  he  had  once  succeeded  in  doing  so  some  years  before,
though  at  the  time  inclined  to  attribute  his  success  to  chance.  He  first
gives  accounts  of  four  experiments  in  which  lie  was  successful  in  thus
imposing  dreams  on  his  friends.  In  his  fifth  experiment,  however,  at  a
distance  of  nine  miles,  he  succeeded  in  impressing  two  waking  percipients.
The  account  is  in  his  own  words.

A  lady  who  had  been  dead  five  years,  was  to  appear  to  Lieutenant  n

in  a  dream  at  10.30  p.m.  and  incite  him  to  good  deeds. At  half -past  10.

contrary  to  expectation,  Herr  n  had  not  gone  to  bed,  but  was  discussing

the  French  campaign  with  his  friend  Lieutenant  S.  in  the  ante-room.
Suddenly  the  door  of  the  room  oijened,  the  lady  entered  dressed  in  white,
with  a  black  kerchief  and  uncovered  head,  greeted  S.  with  her  hand  three

times  in  a  friendly  manner  ;  then  turned  to n,  nodded  to  him,  and

returned  again  through  the  doorway.

As  this  story,  related  to  me  by  Lieutenant n,  seemed  to  be  too

remarkable  from  a  psychological  point  of  view  for  the  truth  of  it  not  to  be
duly  established,  I  wrote  to  Lieutenant  S.,  who  was  living  six  miles  away,  and
asked  him  to  give  me  his  account  of  it. He  sent  me  the  following  rejaly  : —

D  n,  January  11th,  1818.

. . . On  the  IStli  of  March,  1817,  Herr  n  came  to  pay  me  a

visit  at  my  lodgings  about  a  league  from  A  . He  stayed  the  night  with

me. After  supper,  and  when  we  were  both  undressed,  I  was  sitting  on  my

bed  and  Herr  n  was  standing  by  the  door  of  the  next  room  on  the  i^oint

also  of  going  to  bed.  This  was  about  half-jjast  10.  We  were  speaking  partly
about  indifferent  subjects  and  partly  about  the  events  of  the  French  campaign.
Suddenly  the  door  out  of  the  kitchen  opened  without  a  sound,  and  a  lady

entered,  very  pale,  taller  than  Herr n,  about  five  feet  four  inches  in

height,  strong  and  broad  of  figure,  dressed  in  white,  but  with  a  large  black
kerchief  which  reached  to  below  the  waist.  She  entered  with  bare  head,
greeted  me  with  the  hand  three  times  in  complimentary  fashion,  turned

1  In  Ber  Ma(jnclisraus  und  die  AUgcmcine  Wdtsprachc,  p.  2?i€tscq.  See  the  Journal
of  the  SocieUi  for  Pstjchical  Research  for  March,  1890,  from  which  the  abo\-e  account  is
quoted.  See  also  Phantasms  of  the  Livimj,  Vol.  I.,  p.  101,  where  an  account  is  given  of
the  four  dreams  referred  to,  as  well  as  an  imperfect  version  of  the  narrative  quoted  in
the  text.  The  version  in  Phantasms  is  taken  from  the  Archiv  fiir  dm  Thicrischcn
Magnetismus,  Vol.  VI.


288


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


Tiiund  to  the  left  towards  Herr  n,  and  waved  her  hand  to  him  three

times  ;  after  which  the  figure  quietly,  and  again  without  any  creaking  of  the
door,  went  out.  We  followed  at  once  in  order  to  discover  whether  there
were  any  deception,  but  found  nothing.  The  strangest  thing  was  this,  that
our  night-watch  of  two  men,  whom  I  had  shortly  before  found  on  the
watch,  were  now  asleep,  though  at  my  first  call  they  were  on  the  alert,  and
tliat  the  door  of  the  room,  which  always  opens  with  a  good  deal  of  noise,  did
not  make  the  slightest  sound  when  ojiened  by  the  figure.

S.

Commentintj  on  this  story,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes  : —

"  Wesermann  states  that  in  his  experiments  he  concentrated  his
mind  strongly  on  the  subject  to  be  transferred.  It  is  much  to  be
regretted  that  so  little  information  is  given  to  us  as  to  his  mode  of
-action  and  as  to  other  points.  We  have  no  reason  to  think  that  those
Avith  whom  he  experimented  were  persons  whom  he  had  mesmerised,  or
with  whom  he  was  in  any  way  in  special  rap2)ort.  Lieutenant  S.,
indeed,  was  a  complete  stranger  to  him,  but  tliis  proves  little,  as  his

impression  may  have  been  received  from  Lieutenant  n.  Again

we  are  left  quite  in  the  dark  as  to  how  often  Wesermann  tried  similar
experiments,  but  it  seems  probable  that  he  sometimes  failed,  since  he
tells  us  in  a  letter  contributed  to  JVasse's  Zeitschrift  fiir  Fsychische
Aerzte,  Vol.  III.,  p.  758,  that  he  had  observed  that  these  dream-pictures
are  only  transferred  to  the  sleepers  if  they  are  of  a  kind  to  interest,
move,  or  surprise  them.  From  the  same  source  Ave  learn  that,  in  his
view,  apparitions  such  as  that  described  above  could  seldom  be  pro-
duced ;  only,  in  fact,  when  the  agent  is  brought  into  a  very  emotional
and  excited  state  about  the  subject  chosen  to  be  transferred,  and  when
the  percipient,  whetlier  owing  to  his  physical  or  his  mental  constitu-
tion, is  specially  susceptible.  He  tells  us,  however,  that  he  could  relate
more  experiments  if  space  permitted,  but  that  he  had  found  few
friends  who  obtained  such  successful  results  as  these.  In  a  paper  in
the  Archiv  fiir  den  Thierisclten  Magnetismus,  quoted  in  Phantasms  of  the
Living,  he  says  that  only  two  of  his  friends  succeeded.  On  the  other
hand  he  had  convinced  one  of  his  strongest  opponents — a  doctor  of  law
— who  had  himself  caused  his  daughter  to  dream  of  a  sudden  attack
of  illness  wliich  had  seized  him  in  the  niglit."

It  cannot  be  contended  that  in  any  of  the  stories  yet  brought
forward  the  phantasm  is  of  such  a  nature  that  it  could  not  have  emanated
from  the  mind  of  a  living  pei'son  as  the  result  either  of  a  spontaneous  or
a  premeditated  effort  of  thought-transference,  such  as  are  illustrated  in
the  two  narratives  just  given.  In  few,  if  any,  of  the  cases  can  it  even  be
held  more  probable — conceding  the  possibility  of  2^ost-mortem  agency
— that  the  phantasm  was  due  to  such  agency.  In  many  cases  the  sug-
gested alternative  is  distinctly  to  be  preferred,  on  the  internal  evidence


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  View


alone.  And  it  may  fairly  be  urged  that  the  theory  wliich  introduces-
no  new  postulates,  and  which  deals  only  with  familiar  agencies,
is  entitled  to  claim  precedence  over  any  other,  until  it  can  be  shown
that  it  fails  to  account  for  the  facts'.  For  this,  after  all,  is  the  most
crucial  test  which  it  is,  at  present,  in  our  power  to  apply.  Will  the
hypothesis  of  telepathy  from  the  living  furnish  an  equally  complete
explanation  of  the  phenomena  recorded  ?

Let  us  apply  it,  for  instance,  to  the  following  narrative  (G.  190),
which  we  owe  to  the  Rev.  W.  S.  Grignon,  who  received  from  Mrs.
Davis  in  December,  1888,  a  verbal  account  of  the  incident,  almost
identical  in  terms  with  the  narrative  here  given  : —

G.  190.

During  the  night  of  the  31st  of  December,  1882,  I  had  a  most  remark-
able vision.  I  retired  late,  having  been  with  my  daughters  to  the  midnight
service  at  the  English  Church.  Mr.  Davis,  whose  room  adjoined  mine,  is  an
invalid,  and,  not  caring  to  sit  up  so  late,  retired  before  I  left  for  the  church.
On  my  return,  judging  from  my  husband's  breathing  that  he  was  asleep,  I
did  not  inc£uire,  as  I  usually  did,  if  he  wished  anything.  I  fell  asleep  at  once,
but  was  awakened  by  an  unusual  light  in  my  room.  I  sprang  ujj  in  a
tremor,  exclaiming,  "What  is  it?"  and  saw  gliding  by  my  bed  the  figure  of  an
elderly  person  ;  it  passed  through  the  closed  door  into  Mr.  Davis's  room.  I
fell  asleep  and  did  not  wake  again  till  morniug.  I  should  say  that,  living  as
we  did  in  the  re;  de  chausse'e,  my  shutters  were  closed,  and  the  heavy
curtauis  drawn  and  pinned  together,  so  that  no  light  coidd  enter  from  the
street.  Owing  to  the  fact  that  the  next  day  was  the  first  day  of  the  year,
and  the  news  our  papers  gave  us  of  Gambetta's  death,  the  incident  was
forgotten  until  after  dinner  ;  we  dined  at  six.  I  was  still  at  the  table,  Mr.
Davis  had  gone  into  the  drawing-room,  when  he  said  to  my  youngest
daughter,  ' '  Tell  your  mother  a  ghost  visited  me  last  night  ;  she  is  not  the
only  one  they  honour. "  For  a  moment  I  could  not  speak  ;  my  apparition
was  remembered,  and  I  was,  I  confess,  frightened  by  the  remarkable
coincidence  that  Mr.  Da^'is  should  have  seen  the  same  figure  that  I  saw,  and
in  whom  he  recognised  his  mother.  I  ought  to  say  that  Mrs.  Davis  had  been
dead  then  10  years,  and  that  we  had  not  spoken  of  her  for  a  long  time.
Nothing  occurred  after  the  vision.  q  j  p^yjc..

In  reply  to  a  cpiestion  from  Mr.  Grignon,  Mrs.  Davis  adds,  in  the
same  letter  : —

I  have  had  similar  visions  but  have  always  attributed  them  to  indigestion.
This  case,  however,  is  somewhat  different,  appearing,  as  it  did,  to  Mr.  Davis
also.

Florence,  Pension  Laurent.
Februarii  21sf,  1889.
Mr.  Davis,  whose  account  is  enclosed  in  the  same  letter,  writes  : —
.  On  the  night  between  the  31st  of  December,  1882,  and  New  Tear's  Day
of  1883,  I  was  awakened  from  a  quiet  sleep  by  a  light  which  seemed  to  come
in  at  the  door  leading  to  my  wife's  chamber,  and  immediately  a  figure
appeared,  approached  the  bed,  and  leaned  down  as  if  to  kiss  me,  and


290


Phantasms  of  the  Bead


[Nov.  29,


suddenly  passed  away,  but  not  before  I  had  recognised  in  the  features  of
the  apparition  tliose  of  my  inotlier,  who  died  in  1872,  aged  81.  The  next
day  I  recollected  this  visit  and  said  to  Mrs.  D. ,  "I  can  see  ghosts  as  well  as
you;  I  saw  one  lastniglit. "  And  thereupon  I  related  the  circumstances  to
lier.  She  exclaimed,  "I  was  awakened  by  the  appearance  of  the  same
figure  and  I  knew  it  to  be  your  mother,"  whom  she  had  known  practically  all
her  life.  Nothing  came  of  the  vision.  I  never  had  any  other,  before  or  since,
wortli  relating,  certainly  none  tliat  I  can  recall.  (j  jj  p^^^yis

In  forwarding  the  account  to  us  on  tlie  25th  Februaiy,  1889,  Mr.
Grignon  writes,  with  reference  to  the  discrepancies  in  the  two
accounts  : —

A  more  important  difference  lies  in  his  stating  tliat  liis  wife  said  at  the
time,  "  I  knew  it  to  be  your  motlier,"  whereas  she  does  not  say  that  she
recognised  the  figure  at  the  moment  of  seeing  it,  describing  it  merely  as
"the  figure  of  an  elderly  person."  During  her  conversation  with  me  I
questioned  her  on  this  point  and  clearly  recollect  her  saying  that  the  face  of
the  figure  as  it  passed  was  not  turned  to  her,  and  that  she  did  not  absolutely
recognise  it,  but  she  seems  to  have  had  at  the  time  an  indefinite  sort  of
impression,  of  its  being  her  husband's  mother.  Probably  this  impression
would  have  been  strengthened  by  what  her  husband  saw,  and  with  many
persons  would  have  rapidly  grown  into  a  cert.ainti/  that  she  knew  the  figure.
I  think  it  speaks  well  for  her  accuracy  that  slie  adlieres  still  to  her  original
recollections  of  the  fact.

The  clue  to  tlie  interpretation  of  the  incident  appears  to  lie  in  Mrs.
Davis's  statement  that  she  has  liad  other  hallucinations,  which  she
believes  to  have  been  purely  subjective ;  and  that,  but  for  the  accident
of  her  husband's  sharing  it,  she  would  have  classed  as  subjective  the
experience  above  described.  But  if  we  make  the  assumption  that  a
hallucination  can  be  telepathically  transferred  :  that  is,  if  we  suppose
that  an  idea,  which  is  so  exceptional  in  its  vividness  as  to  affect  tlie
external  organs  of  sense,  is  equally  capable  with  other  less  vivid
ideas — say  of  a  card  or  a  diagram — of  being  transferred  from  one  mind
to  another,  this  difficulty  disappears.  The  figure  seen  by  Mrs.  Davis
may  still  have  been  a  purely  subjective  hallucination,  and  her  lius-
band's  vision  merely  the  reflection  of  hers.  Whether  Mrs.  Davis  did
or  did  not  believe  herself  at  the  time  to  recognise  the  figure  seems
immaterial.  On  the  first  supposition  she  transferred  to  Mr.  Davis  the
image  of  a  figure  long  familiar  to  them  both ;  on  the  other,  the  trans-
ferred image  was  slightly  modified  in  its  passage  through  Mrs.  Davis's
mind.

Mr.  Myers  has  several  cases  which  come  under  this  head.  (Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  v.,  Case  XII.,  p.  437  ;  Case  XIV.,  p.  440  ;  Case  XV.,
p.  442 — the  figures  here  being  on  most  occasions  unrecognised  ; —
Case  XVII.,  p.  447  ;  Case  XVIII.,  p.  450.i Frocecdings,  Vol.  VI.

1  Case  XVI.,  Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  p.  444,  lias  been  withdrawn.


18S9.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiv.


291


Case  II.,  p.  20  ;  Case  IV.,  p.  25-29  ;  Case  XII.,  pp.  55.)  In  all  these
cases  the  fact  of  the  death  is  known,  and  the  image  of  the  dead  person,
or  some  hallucinatory  appearance  assumed  to  have  reference  to  him,  is
seen  simultaneously  or  successively  by  two  or  more  persons  who  were
acquainted  with  him  when  alive.  In  none  of  these  cases  is  the  appa-
rition of  such  a  nature  that  it  cannot  as  plausibly  be  referred  to  a
contagious  hallucination  as  to  the  action  of  the  deceased  person  whom
it  resembles.  And  it  will  be  noticed  that  in  at  least  one  instance
(Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  Case  IV.,  p.  26)  the  lady  who  was  first  to  see
the  figure,  and  who  may  therefore  jjerhaps  be  regarded  as  the  primary
percipient,  had  experienced  a  previous  hallucination,  unshared  :  a  cir-
cumstance which  may  be  regai'ded  as  indicating  some  predisposition  to
sensory  hallucination.

(C)  Cases  Involving  an  Element  Unhnoiva  to  the  Percipient.

A  very  striking  story  [Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  Case  I.,  p.  17)  comes
to  us  from  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  in  which  a
brother  sees  an  apparition  of  his  dead  sister,  with  a  scratch  on  the
face,  which,  as  it  subsequently  appears,  was  accidentally  inflicted  by
the  mother  of  the  dead  girl  as  she  lay  in  her  coflin.  In  this  case  it
seems  much  less  likely  that  the  apparition  was  generated  by  the
deceased  than  by  her  mother,  on  whom  the  incident  of  the  scratch  had
made,  as  is  proved  by  her  own  admission,  a  painful  and  lasting
impression.  To  attribute  it  to  the  mind  of  the  dead  girl  yet  another
assumption,  beyond  the  two  general  assumptions  already  referred
to,  is  necessar)',  to  wit,  that  the  dead  have  cognisance  of  their  bodily
appearance,  not  only  during  life,  but  after  death.  The  same  remarks
will  apply  to  the  case  of  Robert  Mackenzie  (quoted  in  Proceedings,  III.,
p.  95,  et  seq.) :  but  here  it  seems  probable  that,  while  the  details  of  the
personal  appearance  of  the  corpse  oiigmated  with  one  of  the  spectators,
the  percipient's  own  mind  supplied  the  words  put  into  the  mouth  of
the  phantasm  in  the  dream.  As  Mrs.  T>.,  however,  was  actually  reading
a  letter  announcing  the  death  at  the  time  of  her  husband's  dream,  it
seems  possible  that  her  mind  may  have  originated,  or  at  least  reinforced,
the  telepathic  impression  received  by  Mr.  J).

(D)  Cases  Involving  the  Transference  of  the  Image  of  an
Unkjioivn  Person.

From  the  last  story  we  may  pass  to  a  class  of  cases  which  must  be
admitted  to  be  the  most  difficult  of  explanation  :  those,  namely,  in
which  the  percipient  is  unacquainted  with  the  person  whose  phantasmal
likeness  he  sees.  In  cases  where  the  percipient  had  known  the  dead
man  by  sight,  it  is  always  permissible  to  suppose  that  the  hallucinatory
image  (when  it  contains  no  previously  unknown  details)  has  been


292  Phantasms  of  the  Lead  [Nov.  29,,


constructed  from  the  percipient's  own  materials, the  impulse  to  the  con-
struction alone  having  come  from  an  alien  source.  But  in  the  cases  now
to  be  considered  we  have  to  suppose  the  importation  into  the  percipient's
consciousness  of  a  phantasmal  image  already  completed,  down  even  to
very  minute  details.  The  difficulty  may  be  frankly  admitted  ;  but  it
is  common  to  both  hypotheses.  It  could  only  appear  easier  for  the  spirit
of  a  dead  man  to  transmit  such  images,  because  we  believe  ourselves  to
know  something  of  the  limitations  of  ordinary  human  faculties,  whilst
we  are  free  to  ascribe  to  the  dead  whatever  powers  our  imagination
may  feign.  Of  course,  in  such  cases  we  must  be  specially  on  our  guard
against  the  dramatic  instinct  of  the  imagination,  and  the  tendency,
already  referred  to,  to  import  from  a  subs.equent  description  new  details
into  the  image  actually  seen.  And,  as  already  pointed  out,  verbal
descrij^tions  of  a  figure  or  dress  are  generally  so  vague  as  to  readily
lend  themselves  to  such  unconscious  manipulation.  We  may  suspect,
therefore,  that  in  many  of  the  cases  considered  in  this  paper,  the  re-
semblance between  the  figure  seen  and  the  figure  of  the  presumed  agent
may  have  been  exaggerated.  Our  numerous  informants  have,  no  doubt,
in  every  case  given  evidence  in  perfect  good  faith.  To  say  that  their
evidence  is  not,  on  that  account,  to  be  taken  in  all  cases  as  accurately
representing  the  facts,  is  only  to  admit  that  they  are  not  exempt  from
the  common  defects  of  observation,  memory,  and  judgment,  in  a  iield
where  such  exemption  is  a  privilege  accorded  to  very  few.  And  it
must  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  these  matters  human  testimony  is
peculiarly  liable  to  sufifer  from  the  disturbing  influence  of  the  various
affections  and  emotions  engaged.  It  would  be  extremely  difficult,  in
any  particular  case,  to  show  that  there  is  reason,  on  the  merely  general
grounds  above  referred  to,  to  suspect  exaggeration  ;  and  when  possible,,
it  would,  for  obvious  reasons,  be  undesirable.  If,  therefore,  attention
is  not  called  to  these  perturbing  elements  in  every  case,  their  effect,
should,  nevertheless,  be  allowed  for  in  estimating  the  value  of  the
evidence.  But  even  when  so  much  has  been  said,  it  still  seems  probable
that  detailed  resemblances  have,  in  some  cases,  been  observed.  In  one
case  indeed,  (^Proceedings,  Vol.  Y.,  Case  V.,  p.  416),  the  phantasm  was
subsequently  recognised  from  a  photograph.

A  case  very  similar  to  those  quoted  by  Mr.  Myers  is  given  in
Fhanfas/ris  of  the  Living  (Vol.  I.,  Case  -30,  p.  214).  Frances  Pteddell,  a,
lady's-maid,  is  watching  by  the  sick  bed  of  a  fellow-servant.  She
sees  enter  the  room  the  phantasm  of  an  old  woman,  with  a  red  shawl  over
her  .shoulders,  a  flannel  petticoat  with  a  hole  in  front,  and  a  brass.
candlestick  inker  hand  :  and  subsequently  recognised  in  the  mother  of
the  sick  woman  the  original  of  her  vision.  To  those  who  hold  that
these  phantasms  resembling  the  dead  are  in  some  fashion  produced
by  the  dead,  the  figure  seen  by  Frances  Reddell  will,  no  doubt,  be


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  View.


293


attributed  to  the  agency  of  Mrs.  Alexander,  suffering  some  spiritual
attraction  to  the  bedside  of  her  dying  daughter.  To  my  thinking,  the
vision  probably  originated  in  a  dream  of  the  dying  girl  herself,  trans-
ferred to  her  companion,  and  externalised  as  a  sensory  hallucination.
The  same  explanation  would  apply  to  the  stories,  of  not  infrequent
occurrence  in  the  annals  of  the  older  members  of  the  Society  of  Friends
and  elsewhere,  of  visions  seen  by  the  watchers  at  the  bedside  of  the
dying.  The  following  case,  which  comes  to  us  from  a  trustworthy
source,  may  be  quoted  as  an  illustration.^

G.  134.

The  story  was  given  to  us,  in  February,  1883,  by  Miss  "Walker,  of
48,  Pembroke-road,  Clifton,  Bristol,  as  her  recollection  of  what  she  had
heard  from  her  cousin.  Miss  Emmeline  Bingley,  the  percipient,  who  is
now  dead. Later,  Miss  Walker  writes  : —

The  event  narrated  took  place  when  she  was  about  20,  and  must  have
happened  in  (I  think)  1844  or  1845.  She  told  me  her  story  very  simply  and
viva  voce.  She  also  told  it  separatelij  to  my  elder  sister  in  precisely  the  same
terms. It  was  I  who  threw  it,  for  brevity's  sake,  into  the  narrative  form.

The  story  is  as  follows  : —

My  father  and  mother  had  many  children  ;  most  of  us  died  in  infancy  ;
Susanna  survived,  and  Charlotte  and  myself.  Owing  to  these  many  gaps
Susanna  was  20  years  older  than  I  was.  Father's  was  an  entailed  estate,  and
the  deaths  of  two  sons,  William,  who  died  in  boyhood,  and  John,  who  died
in  infancy,  had  been  the  great  disappointment  of  his  life.  Susanna  remem-
bered both  the  boys,  but  WUliam  was  born  and  died  long  before  my  time,  and
J ohn  died  at  about  two  years  old  when  I  was  the  baby.  Of  William  there  was
no  likeness,  but  ijou  know  John's  picture  well,  a  well-painted  full-length  oil
picture  representing  a  toddling  babe  in  white  frock  and  blue  shoes,  one  of
my  father's  prize  greyhounds  crouching  beside  him,  and  an  orange  rolling

at  his  feet  I  was  grown  up,  about  20,  Susanna  was  40,  and

Charlotte  about  30  years  old.  Father  was  declining,  and  we  lived  together
contented  and  united  in  a  pleasant  house  on  the  borders  of  Harrogate
Common.  On  the  day  about  which  I  am  writing  Charlotte  was  unwell  ;  she
had  complained  of  a  chill,  and  the  doctor  recommended  her  to  keep  in  bed.
She  was  sleeping  quietly  tliat  afternoon,  and  Susanna  sat  on  one  side  of  her
bed,  and  I  sat  on  the  other  ;  the  afternoon  sun  was  waning,  and  it  began  to
grow  dusky,  but  not  dark.  I  do  not  know  how  long  we  had  been  sitting  there,
but  by  chance  I  raised  my  head  and  I  saw  a  golden  Hght  above  Charlotte's
bed,  and  within  the  light  were  enfolded  two  Cherubs'  faces  gazing  intently
upon  her.  I  was  fascinated  and  did  not  stir,  neither  did  the  vision  fade  for
a  little  while.  At  last  I  put  my  hand  across  the  bed  to  Susanna,  and  I  only
said  this  word,  "  Susanna,  look  up  1  "  She  did  so,  and  at  once  her  counten-
ance changed. "  Oh,  Emmeline,"  she  said,  "  they  ai-e  William  and  John."

1  Given  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.,  p.  629.

■  U


294


Phcmtasms  of  the  Bead


[Nov.  29,


Then  both  of  us  watched  on  till  <all  faded  away  like  a  washed-out  picture  ;  and
ill  a  few  hours  Charlotte  died  of  sudden  inflammation.

There  is  no  need  here  to  suppose  that  the  vision  represented  in  any
sense  the  spiritual  presence  of  the  dead  brothers.  It  may  more  easily,
and  with  greater  probability,  be  referred  to  the  thoughts  of  the  dying
woman.  So,  in  a  story  communicated  by  the  late  Mr.  Archer  Gurney
to  the  Church  Times  some  years  ago,  the  vision  of  a  crown  is  said  to  have
appeared  to  the  mourners  at  the  bed  of  a  dying  child.  The  cases
in  which  music  is  said  to  have  been  heard  at  the  bedside  of  the  dying
are  susceptible  of  a  similar  interpretation  ;  the  images  traditionally
associated  with  death  thus  receiving  a  sensory  embodiment.  That  such
sounds  have  their  origin,  in  some  cases  at  least,  in  the  minds  of  the
living  the  following  narrative  tends  to  show  : — ■

L.  1070.

From  Mr.  Septimus  Allen,  Steward  of  Haileybury  College.
In  the  year  1872  I  was  living  in  Leeds,  where  I  had  the  supervision  of
one  department  of  an  engineering  works.  At  this  time  one  of  my  wife's
brothers  was  living  with  us.  He  was  a  journeyman  painter,  employed  by  a
firm  of  decorators  in  Leeds.  My  wife  had  two  brothers  and  one  sister  who
were  all  deaf  and  dumb.  This  one,  John,  had  taken  a  severe  cold  from
having  got  wet  in  the  early  morning,  and  working  all  day  in  his  damp
clothes.  A  very  bad  attack  of  rheumatic  fever  followed.  Can  you  imagine
a  man  suffering  from  intense  rlieumatic  pains,  swollen  hands  and  arms,  so
that  he  could  not  use  his  fingers,  which  were  his  only  means  of  conversation  ?
if  so,  you  can  picture  one  of  the  most  distressing  cases,  and  one,  I  hope,  we
may  never  see  the  like.  Not  a  pain  could  he  describe,  not  a  wish  could  he
make  known.  He  got  worse,  and  we  were  told  by  the  doctor  that  we
should  send  f(jr  any  members  of  the  family  that  might  desire  to  see  him.
At  this  time,  one  afternoon,  my  wife  and  I  were  at  tea  (our  two  children
were  out),  when  we  heard  pleasant  musical  sounds  in  John's  bedroom  ;
as  he  was  the  only  person  upstairs,  we  were  very  much  surprised,  and
went  up  at  once.  We  found  him  lying  upon  his  back,  with  his  eyes  fixed
upon  the  ceiling,  and  liis  face  lighted  up  with  one  of  the  brightest  of  smiles.
We  did  not  disturb  him,  but  I  fetched  in  a  gentleman,  wlio  was  our  next-
door  neighbour,  to  witness  what  we  felt  to  be  a  strange  occurrence.  After
some  little  time  (I  cannot  say  how  long  now),  Jack  awoke,  and  used
the  words  "Heaven  "  and  "  beautiful,"  as  well  as  he  could  by  the  motion  of
his  lijis  and  facial  expression.  He  also  told  us,  in  the  same  manner,
upon  becoming  more  conscious,  that  his  brother  Tom  and  sister  Harriet
were  coming  to  see  him,  and  (considering  that  they  were  also  mutes)  we
felt  that  of  all  members  of  our  family  residing  in  Herts  or  Caml^s,  these  two
were  the  least  likely  to  undertake  such  a  journey,  but  in  (perhajDs)  fifteen
minutes,  a  cab  drove  up  to  the  door,  from  which  they  alighted.  They  had
sent  no  intimation,  nor  had  anyone  else,  of  their  coming.  After  his
piartial  recovery,  when  able  to  write  or  converse  upon  his  fingers,  he  told  us
that  he  had  been  allowed  to  see  into  Heaven,  and  hear  music,  it  was
beautiful.


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiv.


295


What  were  those  musical  sounds,  and  how  did  Jack  know  that  Tom  and
Harriet  were  travelling  1  Septimus  Allen.

Haileybury  CoUege,  March,  1889.

In  answer  to  our  questions  Mr.  Allen  writes  further  : —

1.  I  have  always  had  the  idea  that  the  music  was  as  if  instrumental,  and
composed  of  many  chords,  such  as  I  imagine  woidd  be  produced  by  a  strong
current  of  wind  upon  a  harp.

2.  I  cannot  say  how  long  it  lasted,  or  whether  we  heard  it  after  we  got
into  the  room  ;  our  attention  was  given  to  John,  who  we  thought  was  dying.

3.  [The  address  of  the  house  was]  Pottery  House,  Hunslet,  Leeds.  Not
one  of  a  row  :  it  was  a  jjortion  of  what  had  been  a  large  house,  situate  in
Jack-lane. This  rougli  plan  is  as  near  correct  as  I  can  make  it  now.

Kailway


Jack  Lane


A.  House  of  Mr.  Britton,  sen. B.  House  of  Mr.  Alfred  Britton. C.  House  of  Mr.
Allen. D.  Garden  ditto. E.  Yard  ditto.

Tlie  music  could  not  have  come  from  next  door  or  from  the  street.

4.  My  brother-in-law  died  about  six  years  ago.

5.  [The  gentleman  referred  to  was]  Mr.  J ohn  Britton,  Pottery  House,
Hunslet.  We  have  not  heard  anything  of  the  Brittons  for  some  years,  and
I  think  that  we  heard  of  Mr.  John  Britton's  death  eight  or  nine  years  ago.
At  the  time  of  my  brother-in-law's  illness  a  young  clergyman  was  living  with
us,  and  my  wife  says  that  while  I  ran  for  Mr.  John  Britton  this  clergyman
went  for  the  doctor.

6.  I  do  not  think  [my  brother-in-law]  ever  heard ;  he  used  to  feel  sound
vibrations,  caused  (say)  by  an  engine  whistle  at  a  railway  station,  or  the
report  of  a  gun,  but  I  do  not  think  he  ever  heard  as  we  do.

7.  I  think  he  must  have  been  in  some  kind  of  a  trance  ;  his  eyes  were
open.

u  2


296


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


The  Rev.  L.  S.  Milford,  of  Haileybury  College,  kindly  furnishes  the
following  notes  of  an  interview  which  he  held  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Allen: —

(1)  Neither  Mr.  nor  Mrs.  Allen  have  ever  had  any  other  auditory

hallucination.

(2)  As  to  the  nature  of  the  sound,  Mrs.  Allen  says  it  resemblecJ

singing — sweet  music  without  distinguishable  words.  She  can-
not say  the  number  of  notes,  but  the  sounds  continued  until
she  reached  the  door  of  the  bedroom.  She  went  upstairs  as.
soon  as  she  heard  the  music.
Mr.  Allen's  impression  is  that  the  sound  was  that  of  an  ^Eolean
harp — i.  e. ,  not  the  ordinary  staccato  notes  of  the  harp,  but  the
sustained  full  notes  as  of  an  organ.

Mrs.  Allen's  Statement.

My  brother  was  deaf  and  dumb  from  his  liirth,  but  could  make  a  few
inarticulate  noises  which  those  accustomed  to  him  could  interpret.  No  one
else  would  have  regarded  them  as  words.  He  had  been  lying  ill  for  about  a-
fortnight  with  rheumatic  fever,  and  was  so  weak  as  to  be  unable  to  talk  on
his  fingers  to  me  as  he  usually  did.  I  had  thought  him  that  morning  rather
stronger,  and  as  the  improvement  continued  I  loft  him  to  go  do\vn  to  tea.
I  had  been  sitting  in  the  kitchen  about  five  or  six  minutes — as  the  open
staircase  communicated  with  my  brother's  bedroom  I  could  easily  hear  any
noise — when  I  was  startled  by  sounds  of  singing,  as  I  thought,  and  im-
mediately went  vipstairs,  when  the  sounds  ceased  just  before  I  reached  the
bedroom  door.  When  I  entered  the  room  my  brother  was  lying  with  his
eyes  wide  open,  gazing  into  the  far  corner  of  the  room,  away  from  the  door.
He  evidently  did  not  hear  me  coming  in,  and  continued  for  fully  twenty
minutes  in  this  state.  Although  I  stood  close  to  him  he  did  not  seem  to  show
any  sign  of  recognition,  but  went  on  smiling,  and  his  lips  moved  as  though
lie  were  in  conversation  with  someone,  although  no  sound  came  from  them.

We  had  sent  Mr.  Johnson,  the  curate  who  was  lodging  in  the  house,  to
fetch  the  doctor,  as  soon  as  I  had  called  Mr.  Allen  upstairs.  When  the
doctor  came,  my  brother  was  in  the  same  condition  as  that  in  which  I  had
found  him,  l)ut  after  the  doctor  had  given  him  a  teaspoonful  of  medicine
(ether  f)  he  seemed  to  revive  and  made  me  understand  in  his  inarticulate
speech  that  he  had  been  to  Heaven  and  had  seen  "lots  of  angels,"  his
mother,  his  sister,  and  his  little  brother.  All  this  came  out  in  broken,
disjointed  utterances.  After  this  he  seemed  to  fall  into  a  drowsy  state,  but
this  appeared  to  have  been  the  crisis  of  the  fever,  and  he  began  gradually  to
regain  strength.  He  could  not,  however,  walk  about  at  all  for  more  than
three  months.

As  soon  as  he  could  use  his  hands  he  began  at  diff"erent  times  to  tell  me
more  details  of  what  he  had  seen.  I  cannot  remember  more  than  I  have
stated  above,  but  I  am  sure  that  he  told  me  all  this  at  first,  although  the
details  were  fuller  aftei'wards.  He  also  used  the  words  "beautiful  music,"
but  I  cannot  say  whether  he  heard  svf eet  sounds  or  only  saw  ' '  harpers  liarp-
ing  with  their  harps."

I  told  Mrs.  Britton — our  next-door  neighbour — of  the  music  that  we


1S89.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiv,


297


heard,  and  my  impression  is  tliat  Mr.  Britton  came  in  and  saw  my  brother
as  he  lay.

In  March,  1883,  about  five  hours  before  my  brother's  death,  while  I  and
the  nurse  were  watching  in  tlie  room,  my  brother,  looking  just  as  he  did  on
the  former  occasion,  smiled,  and  said  quite  distinctly  and  articulately,
"Angels,"  and  "Home."

[I  have  taken  this  statement  from  Mrs.  Allen.

L. S.  MlLFOKD,

Clerk  in  Holy  Orders,
March  11th,  1889.  Assistant  Master  in  Haileybury  College.]

The  Rev.  J.  B.  J ohnson  writes  : —

I  remember  the  case  of  the  deaf  mute  to  which  you  allude.  I  was  lodging
in  the  house  at  the  time.  But  I  certainly  did  not  hear  any  strange  music,
nor  do  I  remember  hearing  either  Mr.  or  Mrs.  Allen  speak  of  it.  Deaf
mutes  sometimes  make  strange  noises  in  their  attempts  to  speak,  but  such
sounds  are  by  no  means  musical.

26,  De  Beauvoir-road,  N.  J.  B.  J.

February  2Sth,  1889.

As  the  patient  in  this  case  survived  for  some  years,  the  sounds  heard
(the  hallucinatoiy  nature  of  which  is  clearly  shown  in  the  narrative)
cannot  with  any  plausibility  be  referred  to  post-mortem  agency.

There  is  one  narrative  under  this  head  (Vol.  VI.,  Case  III.,  p.  22)
in  which  the  explanation  above  suggested  seems  peculiarly  applicable.
Madame  de  Gilibert,  as  a  child,  sees  the  phantasmal  figure  of  a  woman,
in  ■which  she  recognises,  from  a  verbal  description  furnished  "many
years  afterwards,"  a  great-aunt  whom  she  had  never  known.  The
figure  was  seen  in  the  house  of  Lord  Egremont,  the  dead  lady's  brother,
and  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  his  rooms  ;  and  it  appears  from  the  nar-
rative that  Lord  Egremont  died  shortly  after  the  appearance.  A  very
similar  story  is  that  pxinted  as  Case  II.  in  the  same  paper  (p.  20) ;  but
in  this  case  the  figure,  representing  a  lady  who  had  been  dead  some
years,  was  seen  by  three  persons  simultaneously,  all  of  whom  had  been
acquainted  with  her  in  life.  The  vision  here  appeared  a  few  hours  only
before  the  death  of  a  sister  of  the  lady  whom  the  phantasm  was  sup-
posed to  represent.  In  both  these  cases  it  is  suggested  that  the  appari-
tions, if  correctly  described,  may  have  been  due  to  thought-transference
from  the  dying  relative.  In  the  other  cases  under  this  head  {Proceedings,
Vol  v..  Cases  V.,  VL,  VIII.,  XL,  XXL,  XXIIL,  XXIV.,  XXV.;
Vol.  VI. ,  Cases  XL,  XIII.,  XIV.)  the  connection  of  the  percipient  with
the  presumed  agent  is  a  purely  local  one.  The  phantasm  appears  to  a
stranger  in  some  locality  with  which  the  deceased  was  connected  in  his
lifetime  ;  and  (except  in  the  one  case  where  a  photograph  is  recognised)
the  likeness  between  the  phantasm  and  tlie  deceased  is  only  established
by  a  subsequent  comparison  of  the  description  given  by  the  percipient


298


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29',


with  the  description  given  by  others  of  tlie  personal  appearance  of  the
deceased.  The  influence  of  the  locality  on  the  receptivity  of  the  pei'-
cipient  presents  a  real  difficulty.  It  may,  of  course,  be  argued  that  this
influence  is  only  apparent.  The  older  geologists  were  inclined  to  infer,
from  the  extreme  hardness  and  durability  of  the  primitive  rocks,  the
prevalence,  in  earlier  periods  of  geological  history,  of  widely  different
conditions  of  deposition  and  stratification.  They  failed  to  see  that  the
superior  hardness  of  the  surviving  strata  was  the  condition  of  their  sur-
vival, and  that  all  less  durable  rocks  must,  in  the  course  of  ages,  have
been  disintegrated.  So  it  may  he  argued  that  apparitions  resembling
deceased  pei'sons  may  be  comparatively  frequent,  but  that  it  is  only
when  some  connection  can  be  traced  that  the  record  attracts  any  atten-
tion. The  great  majority  have  never  found  a  sacred  bard.  Or,  con-
versely, that  these  phantasms  were  in  reality  only  casual  hallucinations^
which  have  attained  a  spurious  importance  through  an  accidental
coincidence.  Candid  readei's  will  probably,  howevex',  admit  that  the
coincidences  in  such  cases  are  too  detailed  and  too  well  authenticated  to.
be  lightly  explained  away.

For,  in  the  first  place,  there  are  several  instances  already  published
of  telepathic  affection  where  there  was  no  apparent  link  to  connect  the
agent  and  percipient.  Intimation  of  the  deaths  of  three  Dukes — Cam-
bridge, Portland,  and  Wellington — was  thus  conveyed  to  complete
sti'angers,  as  it  were  by  an  impersonal  rumour.  The  head  master  of  a
grammar  school  at  Leicester  saw  in  a  vision  the  irruption  of  water  into
the  Thames  Tunnel. ^  This  last  case  bears  some  analogy  to  the  follow-
ing narrative,  which  has  recently  been  given  to  us ;  but  in  this  case,
if  actually  telepathic,  it  seems  possible  that  the  nearness  of  the
percipient  to  the  scene  of  the  disaster  may  have  in  some  way  aided  the
impression.  Miss  Y.  writes  to  us  from  Perth  on  the  19th  January,
1890  :—
L.  1074.

One  Sunday  evening  I  was  writing  to  my  sister,  in  my  own  room  down-
stairs, and  a  wild  storm  was  raging  round  the  house  [in  Perth].  Suddenly
an  eerie  feeling  came  over  me,  I  could  not  keep  my  tliouglits  on  my  letter,
ideas  of  death  and  disaster  haunted  me  so  persistently.  It  was  a  vague  but
intense  feeling  ;  a  sudden  ghastly  realisation  of  human  tragedy,  with  no
"  where,"  "how,"  or  "when  "  about  it.

I  remember  flying  upstairs  to  seek  refuge  with  mother,  and  I  remember
her  soothing  voice  saying,  "Nonsense,  child,"  wdien  I  insisted  that  I  was  sure
"  lots  of  people  were  dying."

We  both  thouglit  it  was  a  little  nervous  attack,  and  thought  no  more
about  it.  But  when  we  heard  the  news  of  the  Tay  Bridge  disaster  next  day,
we  both  noticed  (we  received  the  news  separately  from  the  maid  when  she


1  Phantasms  of  the  Livinri,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  3G5-370.


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiv.


299


came  to  wake  us)  that  the  time  of  the  accident  coincided  witli  my  strange
experience  of  the  evening  before.

We  spoke  of  the  "coincidence"  together,  but  did  not  attach  much
importance  to  it.

I  have  never  had  any  experience  like  it,  before  or  since  ;  but  I  am
nervous  and  imaginative,  frightened  of  the  dark  and  of  ghosts,  so  I  don't
think  my  Tay  Bridge  presentiment  is  of  much  value.  A  wild  wind  like  that
is  very  uncanny  to  listen  to  when  you  are  sitting  alone,  and  is  quite  enough
in  itself  to  set  a  nervous  imagination  to  work.

Mi's.  Y.,  in  a  letter  of  the  same  date,  corroborates  her  daughter's
account  : —

On  the  night  of  the  Tay  Bridge  disaster  E.  was  sitting  alone  in  her
room,  when  she  suddenly  came  running  upstairs  to  me,  saying  that  she  had
heard  shrieks  in  the  air  ;  that  something  dreadful  must  have  happened,  for
the  air  seemed  full  of  shrieks.  She  thought  a  great  many  people  must  be
dying.  Next  morning  the  milk-boy  told  the  servant  that  the  Tay  Bridge  was
down.

In  a  later  letter,  Miss  Y.  adds  ; —

Mother  says  she  cannot  remember  my  having  any  other  experience  of  the
kind. It  happened  before  9  p.m.,  we  think.

We  learn  from  the  Times,  of  December  29th,  1879  (Monday),  that  the  acci-
dent took  place  on  the  previous  evening  (28th).  The  Edinburgli  train,  due
at  Dundee  at  7.15  p.m.,  crossed  the  bridge  during  a  violent  gale.  It  was
duly  signalled  from  the  Fife  side  as  having  entered  on  the  bridge  for  Dundee
at  7.14.  It  was  seen  running  along  the  rails,  and  then  suddenly  there  was
observed  a  flash  of  fire.  The  opinion  was  the  train  then  left  the  rails  and
went  over  the  bridge.

In  all  the  cases,  however,  under  this  head  published  by  Mr.  Myers,
the  influence  of  the  locality  is  clearly  indicated,  and  the  difficulties  of
finding  an  explanation  are,  so  far,  lessened.

These  difficulties,  moreover,  are  by  no  means  insuperable.  Readers
of  Plmtitasms  of  the  Living  will  remember  several  similar  cases  which
are  there  discussed  ;  and  will  remember  also  Mr.  Gurney's  suggested
explanation,^  that  a  similarity  of  immediate  mental  content  between
the  percipient  and  the  agent  is  the  condition  of  the  impre.ssion.  In  the
ordinary  case  of  an  apparition  at  the  time  of  death,  e.g.,  of  a  mother  to
her  son,  the  condition  of  the  appeai'ance  to  that  particular  percipient,
rather  than  to  the  man  in  the  street,  should  on  this  hypothesis
be  sought  in  the  community  of  intellectual  and  emotional  experi-
ences which  may  be  presumed  to  exist  between  near  relations  who  have
passed  a  great  part  of  their  lives  in  the  same  environment.  In  the
cases  now  under  consideration  the  substitute  for  such  far-reaching  com-
munity is  to  be  sought  in  the  immediate  and  transitory  occupation  of
both  percipient  and  agent — the  one  in  present  sensation,  the  other  in


1  Vol.  II.,  pp.  2G7-9.


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


memory — with  the  same  scene.  Such  partial  community  of  perception,
by  a  kind  of  extended  association  of  ideas,  tends,  vmder  this  hypothesis,
towards  more  complete  community,  and  the  agent  thus  imports  into
the  sensorium  of  the  percipient  the  idea  of  his  own  presence  in  the
scene  which  forms  part  of  the  present  content  of  both  minds.  Whether
this  hypothesis  be  accepted  or  not,  it  is  clear  that  the  difficulty  which
it  seeks  to  eliminate  is  common  to  both  theories ;  since  both  i-eject  the
materialistic  explanation  of  a  physical  presence  in  space,  which  the
facts  before  us  at  first  sight  seem  to  suggest,  and  both  rely  upon  some
kind  of  affection  of  mind  by  mind.  The  difficulty  cannot,  therefore,
fairly  be  urged  by  the  adherents  of  one  theory  against  the  other.

The  following  case,  taken  from  the  article  in  the  Arena  before
referred  to,  will  serve  as  a  typical  example  of  these  narratives.  Mr.
Hodgson  writes  :  "We  obtained  the  case  at  the  close  of  1888  through
the  kindness  of  Dr.  S.  T.  Armstrong,  from  a  lady  who  is  unwilling  that
her  name  should  be  used."

One  night  in  March,  1873  or  1874,  I  can't  recollect  which  year,  I  was
attending  on  the  sick  bed  of  my  mother.  About  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening
I  went  into  the  dining-room  to  fix  a  cup  of  tea,  and  on  turning  from  the
sideboard  to  tlie  table,  on  tlie  other  side  of  the  table  before  the  fire,  which
was  burning  brightly,  as  was  also  the  gas,  I  saw  standing,  with  his  hands
clasped  to  his  side  in  true  military  fashion,  a  soldier  of  about  thirty  years  of
age,  with  dark,  piercing  eyes  looking  directly  into  mine.  He  wore  a  small
cap  with  standing  feather,  his  costume  was  also  of  a  soldierly  style.  He  did
not  strike  me  as  being  a  spirit,  ghost,  or  anything  uncanny,  only  a  living
man  ;  but  after  gazing  for  fully  a  niimite  I  realised  that  it  was  nothing  of
earth,  for  he  neither  moved  his  eyes  nor  his  body,  and  in  looking  closely  I
could  see  the  fire  beyond.  I  was  of  course  startled,  and  yet  did  not  run  out
of  the  room.  I  felt  stunned.  I  walked  out  rapidly,  however,  and  turning  to
the  servant  in  the  hall  asked  her  if  she  saw  anything  ;  she  said  not.  I  went
into  my  mother's  room  and  remained  talking  for  about  an  hour,  but  never
mentioned  the  above  subject  for  fear  of  exciting  her,  and  finally  forgot  it
altogether.  Returning  to  the  dining-room,  still  in  forgetfulness  of  what  had
occurred,  but  repeating  as  above  the  turning  from  sideboard  to  table  in  act
of  preparing  more  tea,  I  looked  casually  towards  the  fire  and  there  I  saw  the
soldier  again  ;  this  time  I  was  entirely  alarmed,  and  fled  from  the  room  in
haste  ;  called  to  my  father,  but  when  he  came,  he  saw  nothing.  I  am  of  a
nervous  temperament,  but  was  not  specially  so  that  night,  was  not  reading
anything  exciting,  had  never  lieard  any  story  about  this  incident  at  all  before.
Four  years  after,  however,  my  brotlier  attended  a  boys'  school  next  door  to
this  house  and  an  old  gentleman  told  stories  of  the  old  houses  in  the  neigh-
bourliood  during  tlie  war  ;  and  one  was  about  a  soldier  who  was  murdered
and  thrown  in  the  cellar.  My  brother  told  it,  as  a  story  connected  with  our
old  home,  not  as  relating  to  my  experience  ;  for  lie  being  very  young  then,
I  don't  think  it  was  communicated  to  liim.  The  family,  however,  were  all
impressed  by  tlie  coincidence.  This  is  as  near  the  exact  state  of  facts  as
'tis  possible  to  write  after  the  lapse  of  so  many  years.


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiu.


301


In  reply  to  inquiries  we  learn  that  the  figure  of  the  soldier  occupied
precisely  the  same  i^osition  on  both  occasions  of  its  appearance,  that  it  was
visible  from  different  points  of  the  room,  and  that  the  lady  continued  to  see
the  figure  at  the  time  that  her  father  was  unable  to  see  anything.

Even  if  the  accuracy  of  the  statements  as  regards  the  past  history
of  the  house  could  be  established  on  unquestionable  evidence,  we
should  hardly  be  entitled  to  infer  so  much  as  the  probability  of  jJos<-
mortem  agency.  But,  in  fact,  the  accui'acy  of  the  statements  is
immaterial.  Taking  the  narrative  as  it  stands,  it  is  quite  sufficient,
for  the  interpretation  suggested  in  this  paper,  that  there  was  in
existence  an  old  gentleman  who  told  stories  about  this  and  other
houses  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  induced  some  of  his  auditors  to
believe  them.

Passing  to  the  stories  previously  published,  it  will  be  noticed  that  in
Case  XXT.  (Yol.  V.,  p.  460),  the  apparition  of  the  Bishop  of  St.  Brieuc,
as  seen  by  the  tenant  of  his  room,  at  the  hour  of  his  funeral,  is  a
suggestive  coincidence,  as  already  pointed  out,  on  the  one  view,  but
apparently  without  significance  on  the  other.  In  all  the  other  cases,  it
will  be  noticed,  there  are  other  persons  resident  in  the  immediate  vicinity,
in  most  cases  in  the  same  house,  to  whose  agency  the  phantasm  may  be
attributed.  As  in  not  one  of  these  cases  is  there  any  obvious,  or,  indeed,
readily  conceivable  purpose  to  be  attained  by  the  appai'ition,  the
assumption  that  it  did  so  originate  seems,  apart  from  the  considerations
previously  urged,  to  involve  less  improbability ;  for  it  can  be  shown
that  in  many  cases  tlie  minds  of  the  living  would  be  much  occupied
with  the  image  of  the  deceased.  When,  for  instance  (as  in  Proceedings
v..  Case  v.,  p.  416  ;  Case  VI.,  p.  418  ;  Case  XI.,  p.  436  ;  Case  XXIII.,
p.  462  ;  Case  XXIV.,  p.  464),  a  guest  is  occupying  a  room  in  which
a  former  tenant  had  died  within  a  comparatively  recent  period,  that
circumstance  is  likely  to  have  a  disturbing  effect  on  the  mind  of  the
host  or  other  inmates  of  the  house.  And  even  Avhen,  as  in  Case
XI.  (Vol.  VI.,  p.  53),  where  the  phantasm  of  Voltaire  is  seen,
the  death  is  a  matter  of  history,  the  knowledge  that  the  apparition
had  previously  been  seen  in  the  same  room  is  likely  to  exei'cise  the
minds  of  the  inmates  on  the  visit  of  a  new  comer.

In  some  cases  the  manner  of  the  appearance  inevitably  suggests  the
mind  of  the  spectator.  In  Case  VI.,  for  instance,  the  figure  of  an  old
woman,  in  "a  sowbacked  mutch, "a  drab-coloui'ed  petticoat,  and  a  checked
shawl,  is  seen  lying  on  a  bed  outside  the  bed-covering,  with  her  legs
drawn  up  close  to  her  body,  and  her  face  turned  to  the  wall.  This
attitude,  though  natural  enougli  if  the  vision  originated  in  the  mind
of  the  neighbour  who  had  actually  found  the  "  old  wife  "  on  her  death-
bed in  that  position,  is  difficult  to  reconcile  with  its  attribution  to
the  agency  of  the  dead  woman. . ■  ,•


302


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


In  Case  VIII.  (Vol.  V.,  -p-  422),  an  apparition  of  an  elderly  gentle-
man, which  was  ascei-tainecl  by  subsequent  description  to  resemble
Dr.  R.,  deceased  some  years  before,  was  seen  by  an  inmate  of  the
house  where  Mrs.  R.  lay  dead,  on  the  night  following  her  death.
The  vision  here  may  be  attributed  to  the  mind  of  the  surviving
daughter,  agitated  by  tlie  recent  loss  of  the  other  parent.  Why  the
hallucination  should  have  represented  Dr.  R.,  and  not  the  lady
who  had  died  a  few  hours  before,  the  one  theory  is  no  more  competent
to  explain  than  the  other.  It  will  be  observed  that  in  one  at  least  of
these  cases  the  percipient  has  had  another  hallucination.  (Vol.  VI.,
Case  XIII.,  p.  57.)

(E)  Cases  ivliere  the  Agencj/  of  tlie  Living  is  doubtfully  indicated.

There  remains  a  small  group  of  cases  {Proceedings,  Vol.  III.,  p.  91.  ;
Vol.  v..  Case  I.,  p.  409  ;  Case  III.,  p.  412  ;  Case  XX.,  p.  455)  in  which
the  hypothesis  of  living  agency  appears  at  first  sight  more  difficult.  Of
course  in  all  these  cases,  as  already  pointed  out,  it  is  conceivable  that
the  impression  was  actually  received  shortly  before  the  death  of  the
agent,  and  remained  latent  until  a  favourable  oj^portunity  offered  for
its  development.  But  such  a  supposition  seems,  under  the  circumstances,
unnecessary,  since  the  2^ossibility  of  thought-transference  from  the
minds  of  the  survivors  is  clearly  indicated  in  all  four  stories.  In  the
first  case  Mrs.  Haly  saw  the  shadow  of  an  absent  nephew  on  the  wall
of  her  room,  and  a  few  hours  afterwards  received  by  post  the  news  of
his  death  in  Australia.  In  Case  I.  (Vol.  V.)  Mr.  Tandy,  returning  from
a  visit  to  a  friend,  carried  away  in  his  pocket  a  newspaper.  That
evening  he  saw  an  apparition  of  his  friend  Canon  Robinson,  and  subse-
quently found  his  death  recorded  in  the  newspaper  which  lay  unopened
on  the  table.  The  interval  which  occurred  between  the  death  and  its
record  has  not  been  ascertained,  but  it  is  noteworthy  that  the  appari-
tion occurred  OJily  after  the  percipient's  visit  to  a  region  of  newspapers.
The  phantasm  may,  as  the  narrative  stands,  have  been  due  to  the
emergence  and  externalisation  either  of  a  telepathic  impression
received  from  the  donor  of  the  newspaper,  or  of  an  unconscious  sensory
impression  received  from  the  obituary  column  of  one  of  the  other
newsi^apers  lying  on  the  donor's  table,  as  in  the  instance  recorded
in  Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  p.  507  (No  30).  I  am  unable  on  any  theorj^  to
suggest  any  causal  connection  between  the  occurrence  of  the  phantasm
and  the  presence  of  the  newspaper  in  the  house.^  In  Mrs.  Haly's  case,
however,it  seems  not  improbable  that  there  was  a  real  connection  between
the  phantasm  and  the  receipt  of  the  annunciatory  letter. It  is  at  all

1  It  is  assumed  in  this  interpretation — what  is  implied,  though  not  expressly-
stated  in  the  narrative — tliat  tlie  obituary  notice  could  not  have  been  seen  until  the
wrapper  had  been  torn  off  the  newspaper.


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  View.


303


events  possible  that  tlie  news  had  been  received  by  other  relatives  of  the
deceased  in  England  on  the  previous  evening  (by  the  same  mail  which
brought  Mrs.  Haly's  letter),  and  that  her  vision  was  due  to  some  com-
munication from  their  minds.  If  the  vision  were  really  due  to  the
deceased,  it  must  be  I'egarded  as  singularly  unfortunate,  from  the
evidential  standpoint,  that  he  chose  such  a  time  for  delivering  his  mes-
sage :  a  time,  moreover,  peculiarly  inappropriate  for  his  own  purposes,
since  it  rendered  his  message  practically  superfluous.  So  in  the  next  case
(Vol.  v.,  Case  III.,  p.  412),  Mr.  Le  Maistre  was  drowned  on  September
27th ;  his  body  was  recovered  on  October  22nd,  and  his  apparition  was
seen  by  a  friend  on  November  3rd.  It  seems  to  me  a  fact  of  extreme
significance  that  the  message  came,  not  in  the  course  of  the  three  or
four  weeks  during  which  the  dead  man  was  supposed  to  be  alive  and
well,  but  after  the  fact  of  the  death  was  known,  and  when  the  message
itself  could  no  longer  serve  any  useful  jDurpose.i  So  again  in  Case  XX.,
the  percipient  only  dreamt  of  his  brother's  death  on  the  fourth  day
after  the  wreck  of  the  vessel,  and  soma  hours  after  the  news  had  readied
England.

Thus,  in  the  only  cases  recorded  in  which  the  mere  communication
at  the  right  time  of  the  fact  of  the  death  would  of  itself  have  afforded
some  evidence  of  the  continvied  action  of  the  dead,  such  communi-
cation is  delayed  until  the  intelligence  had  already  reached  others  in
the  vicinity  of  the  percipient  by  normal  means,  i.e.,  until  the  possi-
bility of  thought-transference  from  the  living  had  been  established.
For  the  present  I  must  regard  that  as  something  more  than  an  unfor-
tunate coincidence.

(F)  Two  Cases  of  Exceptional  Difficulty.
There  remains  to  be  noticed  but  one  case  of  all  those  as  yet  published,
that  of  William  Moir.  (Proceedings,  Vol.  VI.,  Case  VIII.,  p.  3-5.)
William  Moir,  grieve  on  a  farm  near  Banff,  alleged  that  he  was  for  some
months  troubled  by  a  constantly  recurring  dream  of  finding  a  corpse
on  a  certain  spot  near  the  farm  on  which  he  worked.  Eventually  he  did
actually  dig  on  the  spot  indicated,  and  unearthed  a  human  skeleton,
which  was  supposed  to  be  the  remains  of  a  man  who  had  mysteriously
disappeared  from  the  district  some  40  or  50  years  previously.  We
have  Moir's  written  statement,  but  he  himself  died  some  years  ago.
The  actual  finding  of  the  skeleton  by  him  rests  on  indisputable  evidence.
But  the  only  authority  cited  for  the  mysterious  disappearance  many
years  before  is  the  tradition  of  the  neighbourhood,  as  reported  by  Mrs.

1  It  is  true  that  the  narrator  si^eaks  of  the  body  as  having  been  "  buried  as  an  un-
known castaway  "  and  states  that  "we  were  the  only  friends  he  (the  deceased)  had  in
England."  But  as  she  and  her  family  received  their  first  authentic  intimation  of  the
death  from  a  notice  in  a  newspaper,  it  is  clear  that  the  body  of  the  deceased  had  been
identified.


t504


Phantasms  of  the  Bead


[Nov.  29,


Moir.  And  the  identification  of  the  skeleton  is  wlioUy  conjectural.
Moreover,  as  Moir  never  told  his  dream  until  after  its  fulfilment,  we
have  no  evidence  beyond  his  own  statement  that  such  a  dream  was
■ever  dreamt.  In  the  absence,  therefore,  of  further  evidence  as  to  the  time
.and  circumstances  in  which  the  skeleton  was  placed  where  it  was  found,
and  in  view  of  the  difliculty,  at  this  interval,  of  ascertaining  whether
or  not  there  v/as  any  disturbance  or  unusual  appeai^ance  in  the  soil  to
indicate  the  whereabouts  of  the  skeleton,  I  would  suggest  four  alter-
native explanations  of  the  story,  one  or  other  of  which  may  perhaps  be
considered  preferable  to  the  invocation  of  j)ost-iaoi'tem  agency.  (1)  That
the  dream  occurred  as  alleged,  and  was  due  to  telepathy  from  the
person  or  persons  who  placed  the  skeleton  where  it  was  found.  (2)  That
the  dream  occurred  as  alleged,  and  was  due  to  the  prior  discovery  of  the
skeleton  by  Moir  in  some  abnormal  condition,  e.g.,  somnambulism,  possi-
bly associated  v^ith  hyperfesthesia.  (3)  That  the  dream  never  actually
occurred,  but  that  an  accidental  discovery  of  the  skeleton  so  powerfully
.aff'ected  a  man  of  admittedly  nervous  temperament  as  to  give  rise  to  a
hallucination  of  memory  on  that  point.  (4)  That  the  accidental  dis-
covery of  the  skeleton  was,  in  the  first  instance,  concealed  by  Moir
through  some  superstitious  fear,  and  that  the  story  of  the  dream  was
invented  subsequently  to  account  for  the  discovery.  Between  these
various  explanations  it  seems  impossible  to  decide,  in  default  of  the
further  evidence,  which  cannot  now  be  obtained.

Finally,  I  subjoin  an  account  recently  received  which  seems  to  call
for  special  consideration  in  this  connection.  It  is  but  rarely  that
accounts  of  "ghostly"  sounds  possess  much  evidential  value,  from  the
■extreme  difficulty  of  eliminating  all  possible  physical  causes  for
auditory  phenomena.  But  in  this  case  the  hallucinatory  nature  of  the
sounds  heard  seems  conclusively  proved,  both  in  the  case  of  Mr.  B.
and  of  Lady  Z.  We  received  the  first  account  from  the  minister  of  S.,
a  small  hamlet  in  the  south  of  Scotland.

G.  191.

July  2Zrd,  1889.

It  affords  me  mucli  pleasure,  in  answer  to  your  letter  of  the  20th,  which
I  only  received  to-day,  to  give  you  an  account  of  my  experience  in  connec-
tion with  the  music  in  D.  woods,  which  ' '  does  not  seem  due  to  any  ordinary
source."

I  have  heard  it,  I  think,  four  times,  and  always  at  the  same  place,  viz.,
on  the  public  road,  wliich  runs  along  the  south  bank  of  the  Tweed,  and  which
passes,  at  the  distance  of  three-quarters  of  a  mile,  the  old  churcliyard  of  D.
The  churchyard,  from  which  the  music  always  seems  to  come,  is  south  of  the
road,  and  at  a  much  higher  elevation,  and  the  intervening  ground  is  densely
covered  with  wood.  The  first  two  or  three  times  I  lieard  the  sound,  it  was
very  faint,  but  sufficiently  distinct  to  enable  me  to  follow  the  swellings  and
cadences. I  do  not  know  why,  but  on  those  occasions  I  never  for  a  moment


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  View.


305-


thought  it  was  real  music.  Neither  did  I  think  it  anything  very  unusual,
though  the  tones  seemed  more  ethereal  than  any  I  had  heard  before.  I  am
exceedingly  fond  of  music,  and,  in  my  walks,  frequently  sing  without  sound
(if  I  may  use  such  an  expression)  tunes,  pieces,  and  "songs  without  words.""
As  there  was  on  every  occasion  a  breeze  swaying  the  branches,  I  thought  that
that,  in  my  imagination,  produced  the  result,  though  it  did  seem  strange  that
I  never  heard  anything  similar  in  other  woods.

Years  passed,  and  I  had  forgotten  all  about  the  matter,  when  I  heard  it
again,  and  I  will  not  soon  forget  the  last  performance.

Last  year  I  was  walking  up  to  X.,  to  drive  with  Sir.  and  ]\Irs.  M.  to  a
tennis  match.  "\\Tien  I  reached  the  usual  spot,  there  burst  upon  my  ear,
from  the  direction  of  the  churchyard,  what  seemed  to  be  the  splendid  roll
of  a  full  brass  and  reed  band.  It  did  not  recall  the  former  occasions,  and  I
never  for  a  moment  doubted  its  reality.  My  first  thought  was  that  Sir  T.  Z.
had  lent  his  park  for  a  Sunday-school  treat,  and  my  second  was  that  the
band  was  far  too  good,  and  the  music  of  far  too  high  a  class  for  such  a  pur-
pose. I  Vv'alked  on,  enjoying  it  thorouglily,  never  dreaming  that  I  was  not
Listening  to  good  ordinary  music,  till  it  suddenly  struck  me  that  the  sound,
though  now  faint,  ought  to  have  been  inaudible,  as  there  was  now  between
me  and  the  churchyard  the  big,  broad  shoulder  of  S.  [a  hill].  I  began  to
remember  the  other — infinitely  less  distinct — performances  I  had  heard,  and
though  not  superstitious  enough  to  believe  that  there  was  anything  which
could  not  be  explained  on  natural  grounds,  I  felt  that  the  explanation  was
beyond  my  power  of  discovery  or  conjecture.  Of  course,  I  intended  imme-
diately telling  my  friends  at  X. ,  but  my  attention  must  have  been  called  to
something  else,  as  I  did  not  do  so.  We  drove  away,  and,  after  some  time,
we  all,  except  I\Irs.  M. ,  got  out  to  walk  up  a  very  steep  hill.  Walking  at
the  side  of  the  carriage  I  told  the  most  minute  circumstances  of  my  strange
experience.  Mrs.  M.  seemed  to  take  it  very  seriously,  but  Sir.  M.  ridiculed
the  whole  aflair  as  a  freak  of  the  imagination.

I  tell  you  these  little  incidental  circumstances  to  show  you  how  indelibly
the  events  of  the  day  are  engraven  upon  my  memory.

I  had  not,  at  that  time,  heard  that  the  sounds  had  been  listened  to  by
any  other  person,  but  it  is  now  well  known  that  they  ha-ve  often  been  heard
by  Sir  T.  Z. ,  and  once  by  Lady  Z.

In  the  last  case  the  music  resembled  that  of  a  choii',  unaccompanied  by
instruments. In  my  case  there  was  nothing  resembling  vocal  music.

(Signed  in  fuU) J.  L.  B.

In  answer  to  questions,  Mr.  B.  writes  on  the  30th  of  July,  1889  : —

1.  I  have  never  had  any  other  hallucinations,  so  far  as  I  know.

2.  I  consider  it  absolutely  impossible  that  there  could  have  been  a  real
band  at  the  place.  It  could  not  have  been  there  witliout  the  permission  of
Sir  T.  Z.  or  of  his  manager.  They  were  both  at  home  at  the  tiaie.  They
both  knew  what  I  supposed  I  had  heard,  yet  neither  told  me  (and  I  see  them
often)  that  what  I  supposed  to  be  music  was  real  music.  Again,  ]Mr.  M. ,  the
parish  minister,  would  have  told  me.  I  have  been  here  18  years,  and  have
oidy  once  heard  a  brass  band  in  the  parish  of  D.  ;  even  then  it  was  only  the
absurd  Yolimteer  band  from  P.  I  don't  think  X.  is  more  musical  than
S. [Mr.  B.'s  parish.]


306


Phantasms  of  the  Bead


[Nov.  29,


3.  The  "cemetery"  is  the  churchyard  of  the  suppressed  parish  of  D.,
-which  was  divided  equally  between  S.  and  X.  The  churchyard  is  in
the  X.  half.  The  graves  were  neglected  and  have  all,  except  three  or  four,
disappeared.  The  church  became  ruinous,  and  was  converted  into  a  burial
vault  for  the  Z.  family.  I  have  been  there  very  frequently,  but  never  heard
.anything  when  I  was  there.  I  have  always,  when  I  seemed  to  hear  music,
been  on  the  public  road,  at  the  point  nearest  to  the  churchyard.  I  only
guess  the  distance  to  be  three-quarters  of  a  mile,  as  there  is  no  direct  com-
munication between  the  two  points.  It  is  necessary  to  go  round  by  D.
House.  I  shall  tell  Sir  Y.  and  Lady  Z.  about  this  correspondence  if  I  have
fin  opportunity  before  I  go  away  for  my  holiday.  Their  experience  might  be
interesting.

From  Lady  Z.

On  the  hot,  still  afternoon  of  July  12th,  1888,  I  was  sitting  resting  with
some  old  ladies  at  our  pretty  little  cemetery  chapel,  within  the  grounds  of
our  house  in  Scotland,  far  away  from  all  thoroughfare  or  roads.  Whilst  I
was  talking  I  stojDped  suddenly,  exclaiming,  "Listen  !  what  is  tliat  singing  ? '
It  was  the  most  beautiful  singing  I  had  ever  heard,  just  a  wave  of  cathedral
chanting,  a  great  many  voices,  which  only  lasted  a  few  seconds.  The  lady
said  she  heard  nothing,  and  thinking  she  might  be  deaf  I  said  nothing.  I
(piite  thought  it  miijht  be  haymakers  at  work,  and  yet  I  turned  my  head
round,  for  the  singing  was  so  close  by.  It  dawned  upon  me,  "The  Scotch
need  not  say  tliey  cannot  sing."  There  were  several  others  sitting  with  us,
but  they  heard  nothing  (which  astonished  me).  I  said  nothing  more  till  the
evening,  when  I  casually  said  to  my  husband,  "  What  was  t\\&t  singing  where
we  were  sitting  this  p.m.  1  "  thinking  he  would  rejaly,  "  Oh,  it  was  the  men
at  work  "  ;  but,  to  my  astonishment,  he  replied,  "I  have  often  heard  that
before,  and  it  is  chanting  I  hear."  (Mark,  I  had  not  said  I  had  heard  several
voices,  only  singing,  which  was  very  remarkable.)  And  then,  and  not  till
then,  I  saw  that  the  voices  could  not  have  been  human,  and  certainly  I  had
not  imagined  it.  I  had  never  heard  such  heavenly  (that  is  the  only  adjective
I  can  use)  music  before,  and  would  not  have  missed  it  for  anything.  I  was
in  no  wise  in  a  sentimental  or  fanciful  state  of  mind  when  I  heard  the  music,
but  only  talking  of  the  common  subjects  of  the  day.  This  is  my  written
statement,  and  accurately  true.

Signed  by  me  (in  full) A.  Z.
From  Sir  Y.  Z.

When  alone  at  the  cemetery  I  have  occasionally  heard,  from  within  the
chapel,  sounds  as  of  chanting.

(Signed) Y.  Z.

The  clergyman  who  procured  for  us  this  story,  the  brother  of  Lady
Z.,  explains,  in  a  letter  dated  July  13th,  1889,  that  the  cemetery
is  "  in  a  secluded  part  of  the  grounds,  at  a  good  distance  from
the  house."  He  adds:  " My  sister  has  forgotten  to  state  if  she  ever
had  any  other  similar  experience  ;  but  I  am  pretty  sure  she  never
had."

The  case  has  many  parallels  amongst  the  traditional  ghost  stories
current  in  smoking-rooms  and  round  dinner  tables,  and  in  such  volumes


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiu.


307


of  ghostly  lore  as  The  N'igJitside  of  Nature,  but  I  doubt  if  our  collection
contains  another  equally  well  authenticated  instance  of  this  type.
The  narrative,  at  first  hearing,  suggests  that  this  ethereal  music  may
have  been  an  echo  from  something  which  has  survived  the  grave.  The
surroundings  themselves  harmonise  with  such  an  explanation ;  and
there  would  be  a  peculiar  appropriateness  in  svich  requiems  of  the
dead  being  audible  only  to  the  living  representatives  of  the  house,
even  when  others  are  sitting  by.  But  how,  on  this  theory,  is  the
experience  of  Mr.  B.  to  be  explained  1  and  what  significance  can
be  attached  to  the  change  in  the  character  of  the  sounds,  from  a
chant  of  many  voices  to  the  strains  of  a  band  of  wind  instruments  1
Such  difiiculties  can  hardly  be  held  fatal  to  the  theory.  But  it
may  be  contended  that  there  is,  in  truth,  no  need  to  invoke  the
intervention  of  any  but  mortal  agencies.  Imagination,  fed  by  tradi-
tions familiar  from  childhood,  or  the  meditations  natural  to  the  place,
might  sufiice  to  suggest  strains  of  music  in  the  sound  of  the  wind
amongst  the  trees :  a  hallucinatory  idea  being  thus  built  up  on  a  basis
of  external  fact.  Such  a  hallucinatory  idea,  once  originated,  could  be
transferred  to  other  susceptible  persons  under  appropriate  conditions;
and  would  take  shape  in  accordance  with  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the  per-
cipient, or  his  surroundings  at  the  moment.  In  Lady  Z.  sitting  near
the  vault,  the  oiiginal  hallucination  would  naturally  reproduce  itself
unchanged.  To  the  traveller  along  the  high  road,  who  could  not,  under
normal  conditions,  hear  voices  singing  at  the  distance  of  three-quarters
of  a  mile,  the  transmitted  idea  would  adapt  itself  to  the  circum-
stances without  losing  its  essential  character.  Still,  I  am  not  disposed
to  deny  that,  whatever  the  explanation,  the  story  is  suggestive  and
remarkable.

To  sum  up  :  I  have  endeavoured  to  show,  from  a  scrutiny  of  the
"  ghost  "  stories  collected  by  the  Society,  that  there  is  a  strong  tendency
amongst  the  narrators  of  such  experiences  to  import  into  their  narratives
features  suggestive  of  the  presence  of  an  alien  intelligence  or  personality
behind  the  phenomena  ;  that  this  tendency  operates  with  little  restraint
amongst  the  reporters  of  the  experiences  of  others  ;  that  it  has  demon-
strably in  some  cases  afiected  the  first-hand  narratives ;  and  that  its
operation  may  be  suspected  in  other  cases  where  it  cannot  be  definitely
proved.  It  is  contended,  further,  that  in  the  great  majority  of  cases
there  is  no  sufficient  ground  for  attributing  the  phenomena  recorded  to
any  source  other  than  the  minds  of  the  percipients  themselves ;  and
that  there  are  various  characteristics  in  the  best  authenticated  narra-
tives which  strongly  suggest  that  the  phenomena  originate  simply  as
casual  hallucinations.

Lastly,  a  series  of  narratives,  in  which  the  alleged  resemblance
between  the  phantasm  and  some  person  deceased  ajopears  to  rest  on


308


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


good  evidence,  or  where  the  other  circumstances  under  which  the
phantasm  occurred  seem  to  render  its  explanation  as  a  casual  halluci-
nation inadequate  and  to  suggest  jDOSt-mortem  agency,  are  examined  in
detail,  and  an  endeavour  is  made  to  show  that  in  all  such  cases  an
alternative  explanation  may  be  found  in  the  prolonged  latency  and  sub-
sequent emergence  of  an  impression  received  from  the  dead  man  himself
before  his  death,  or  in  telepathy  from  the  minds  of  other  persons  still
living ;  and  various  circumstances  are  pointed  out  in  the  narratives
under  review  which  make  in  favour  of  such  explanations.  It  is  con-
tended, therefore,  that  there  is  no  sufficient  justification  for  invoking
fost-mortem  agency  until  either  the  theory  of  telepathy  from  the  living
has  been  proved  inadequate  to  the  facts,  or  tlie  limits  of  its  operation
have  been  explored  and  defined.

There  are  some  fine  lines  of  Rossetti's  which  are  directly  suggested
by  our  subject : —

' '  May  not  this  ancient  room  thou  sitt'st  in  dwell

In  sef)arate  living  souls  for  joy  or  pain  ?

Nay,  all  its  corners  may  be  painted  plain.
Where  Heaven  shows  pictures  of  some  life  spent  well ;

And  may  be  stamped,  a  memoi-y  all  in  vain,
Uj^on  the  sight  of  lidless  eyes  in  Hell."

That  is  a  poet's  guess,  and  poets  have  before  now  guessed  the  truth.
But  to  prove  the  conjecture  M-e  require  such  and  so  much  evidence  as
is  needed  to  establish  any  other  scientific  hypothesis.  We  are  not
entitled  to  assume  such  a  solution  of  the  problem  as  may  flatter  our
hopes  or  buttress  our  philosophy.  Rather,  when  we  are  conscious  of
an  intuitive  desire  which  impels  us  towards  belief,  we  are  boimd  to
scrutinise  the  more  rigidly  the  claims  to  our  regard.  It  is  not  assuredly
from  any  love  of  that  ungracious  role  that  I  have  played  the  part  of
devil's  advocate.

But  we  are  no  less  bound  to  be  on  our  guard  against  the  converse
tendency,  which  is  equally  unscientific.  It  may  be  admitted  that  the
evidence  before  us  is  not  sufficient  to  prove  post-mortem  agency ;  hut
we  are  not  entitled,  therefore,  to  conclude  that  the  possibility  of  such
agency  is  disproved.  The  only  legitimate  conclusion  from  such
premises  is  the  practical  one,  that  more  evidence  is  required.  On  this-
point,  at  any  rate,  I  find  myself  at  one  with  my  colleagues.  We  are  all
alike  anxious  to  receive  more  evidence,  and  we  are  all  alike  prepared  to
give  it  grateful  welcome,  and,  as  far  as  in  us  lies,  impartial  considera-
tion. In  the  present  stage  of  our  inquiry,  at  any  rate,  we  are
agreed  that  the  elaboration  of  theories  should  he  subordinated  to  the
collection  and  verification  of  evidence.  For  without  a  far  wider  basis
of  ascertained  facts,  our  rival  hypotheses  are  but  houses  built  upon  the
sand.


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  Vieiv.


309


APPENDIX.

(i.  186,  p.  251. — The  room  in  -which  Mrs.  G.  had  slept  on  the  night  of
her  vision  was  for  some  weeks  in  the  summer  of  1888  placed  at  the  disposal
of  members  of  the  Society.  The  room,  situate  on  the  second  floor,  and  look-
ing on  the  street,  was  very  small,  and  was  separated  from  the  neighbouring
room  by  a  wooden  partition.  Some  10  or  12  persons  occupied  this  room,  for
about  30  nights  in  the  aggregate,  during  the  summer  of  1888,  but  no  unusual
experience  was  recorded.  The  partition  has  now  been  pulled  down,  and  the
room  thrown  into  the  adjoining  bedroom  ;  but  the  mysterious  noises  had
ceased  some  months  before  the  change  was  made.  Nothing,  in  fact,  of  an
unusual  character  appears  to  have  taken  place  since  the  occurrence  of  the
phenomena  recorded  in  the  text.

G.  187,  p.  258. — The  subjoined  accoimt  gives  the  history  of  the  house
during  the  tenancy  of  an  Associate  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research
and  his  wife.

The  house  is  one  of  a  continuous  row,  and  the  front  door  is  approached
from  the  road  by  three  or  four  steps.  It  has  railings  in  front  and  steps  down
an  area  to  the  basement. The  rooms  are  arranged  as  follows  : —

Basement  :  Breakfast-room  in  front ;  kitchen  at  back  ;  wash-house  lead-
ing from  kitchen  and  opening  into  a  small  square  garden  about  20ft.  by  16ft. ,
planted  with  trees,  and  surrounded  by  other  gardens.

Ground  Floor  :  Sitting-room  in  front ;  bedroom  at  back  overlooking
garden  ;  small  spare  room  at  end  of  passage.

First  Floor  Landing  :  Servants'  room — over  spare  room.

First  Floor  :  Front  bedroom ;  small  slip  room  just  over  front  door — empty ;
back  bedroom  overlooking  garden.

The  house  is  situated  on  high  ground.  There  are  four  or  five  ways
of  getting  to  it  from  different  parts  of  the  town,  and  each  route  is  up
hOl.  It  is  10  minutes'  walk  from  the  railway  station  ;  and  a  very  bright  light
which  is  kept  going  there  at  night  illuminates  the  back  rooms  to  some  extent.
Shunting  operations  can  quite  easily  be  heard,  especially  when  the  wind
blows  from  the  station,  and  in  quiet  times  the  workmen  can  be  heard  as  they
call  to  one  another.  A  branch  line  between  steep  embankments  runs  at
right  angles  to  the  road,  and  tunnels  under  it  some  50  yards  from  the  house ;
but  the  traffic  on  this  line  is  not  heavy,  and  we  never  noticed  any  noise  from
that  direction,  even  when  trains  entered  or  emerged  from  the  tunnel.

I  occupied  the  " haunted  house,"  with  my  wife  and  one  maid-servant,
for  a  period  of  nearly  13i  months — or,  to  be  exact,  from  August  17th,  1888,
to  September  27 th,  1889.  During  our  tenancy  we  were  not  disturbed  by  any
startling  or  violent  manifestations,  nor  did  we  see  any  apparitions.  Several
visitors  stayed  in  the  house,  and  slept  there,  from  time  to  time,  mainly  with
the  object  of  having  experiences  if  possible,  but  I  do  not  think  many  of  them
met  with  much  reward.  In  one  or  two  cases  these  visitors  heard  noises
during  the  night  which  they  could  not  quite  account  for ;  but  in  most  instances
the  sounds  were  so  trivial  that  little  importance  was  attached  to  them.

On  137  nights  visitors  slept  in  the  house — 25  men  and  14  women  in  all.

X


310


Phantasms  of  the  Dead


[Nov.  29,


Sometimes  both  the  spare  bedrooms  on  the  first  floor  were  occupied  on  the
same  nights  by  one  or  more  persons  ;  sometimes  only  one  of  the  rooms  was
in  use.  Altogether  the  front  bedroom  was  occupied  by  visitors  on  87  nights,
and  the  back  bedroom  on  96  nights.

Although  my  wife  and  I  had  no  visual  experiences  in  the  house,  we  were
certainly  confronted  with  a  few  odd  noises — of  a  sort  which  would  undoubt-
edly have  arrested  attention  in  any  house,  no  matter  whether  it  liad  a  ghostly
reputation  or  not.  I  carefully  made  a  note  of  every  unusual  event  imme-
diately after  its  occurrence  ;  and  as  the  number  of  them  is  not  great,  I  give
the  complete  list,  taken  from  my  diary.

1888.

August  17th. — Took  up  our  abode  in  the  house.

August  20th. — My  wife  heard  a  zinc  pail,  as  she  thought,  being  rattled  in
the  siDare  room  at  the  top  of  kitchen  stairs.  There  ^vas  a  zinc  pail  in  this
room,  but  she  found  it  undisturbed.  Later  in  the  day  she  heard  a  similar
sound,  proceeding,  as  she  thought,  from  the  wash-house,  but  the  zinc  pail  in
that  place  was  found  in  its  proper  position.

August  27th. — On  two  occasions  to-day  the  front  door  bell  rang  violently.
The  first  time  no  one  was  found  at  the  door  ;  the  second  time  my  wife  was
quick  enough  to  detect  two  children  in  the  act  of  running  away.

September  4th. — When  I  returned  from  town  this  evening  my  wife  stated
that  during  the  day  she  had  twice  heard  a  crash  downstairs  like  fireirons
being  thrown  upon  the  kitchen  stove.  She  ran  downstairs  immediately  each
time,  but  found  nothing  disjjlaced  in  any  way.  After  hearing  this  account  I
went  down  with  my  wife  to  survey  the  spot,  and  as  we  were  discussing  the
matter  we  both  of  us  heard  a  loud,  sharp  noise,  like  the  crack  of  a  whip,
proceeding  apparently  from  the  sjjare  room  at  the  head  of  the  kitchen  stairs.
Getting  lights,  we  proceeded  at  once  to  the  room  ;  but  nothing  could  we  find
to  accoimt  for  the  noise. Time,  8  p.m.

September  5th. — In  the  evening  I  was  writing  at  my  desk  in  sitting-room,
and  heard  noise  like  shovels  and  fireirons  being  thrown  upon  kitchen  stove.
My  wife  was  dozing  upon  the  sofa  in  the  room  with  me,  and  I  was  surprised
that  the  noise  did  not  rouse  her.  I  ran  downstairs  at  once  and  made  an
examination,  but  there  was  nothing  whatever  to  indicate  the  cause  of  the
disturbance. Time,  9.10  p.m.

September  6th. — Arrival  of  M.  W,,  maid-servant,  who  was  given  bed-
room on  first  floor  landing.

September  21st. — I,  writing  at  my  desk,  heard  noise  overhead  (apparently
in  front  bedroom)  like  a  person  tapping  upon  the  floor  with  a  hammer,  using
about  enough  force  to  drive  tacks  in.  Eight  or  ten  knocks,  and  then  silence.
I  at  once  got  a  light  and  went  up.  Could  find  no  explanation.  Wife  out.
Oirl  in  kitchen  in  basement. Time,  8.5  p.m.

September  22nd. — Girl  casually  mentioned  to  my  wife  that  twice  in  the
early  morning  (6.45  and  7.15  a.m.)  she  had  gone  to  front  door  in  answer  to
bell,  but  had  not  found  anyone  there.

October  10th. — My  wife  and  I  were  taking  tea  in  sitting-room.  Time,
5.38.  Front  door  bell  rang.  I  at  once  went  to  window  to  find  out  who
visitor  was,  but  could  see  no  one.  While  I  stood  at  window,  thinking  visitor
must  be  standing  in  recess  of  doorway,  servant  ojiened  door. No  one  was


1889.]


from  Another  Point  of  View.


311


there.  I  therefore  "went  out  and  looked  up  and  down  the  street.  Two  lamp-
lighters on  the  other  side  were  the  only  persons  about,  and  they  assured  nie
that  they  had  not  observed  anybody  come  up  our  steps.

October  13th. — Servant  mentioned  to  my  wife  that  she  thought  queer
noises  occurred  in  the  house.  Said  often  when  in  bed  she  heard  footsteps
coming  up  and  down  stairs  by  her  door.  She  supposed  it  must  be  from  next
door,  but  it  sounded  very  close.  [The  next  house  on  the  same  side  as  our
staircase  was  empty  at  this  time.  ]

October  16th. — On  this  night  a  visitor  slept  in  front  bedroom.  He  stated
next  morning  that  about  1.30  he  had  heard  a  peculiar  crisp  noise  in  his  room,
something  like  a  silk  dress  rustling.

October  18tli. — At  5.30  p.m.  a  loud  double  knock  was  given  at  front  door.
No  one  was  found  there.  I  was  in  London,  and  my  wife  told  me  of  the
incident  upon  my  return  in  the  evening.

October  27th  and  28th. — Colonel  and  Mrs.  H.  occupied  front  bedroom
on  these  nights.  On  the  second  night  Colonel  H.  heard  mild  groans  and
loud  breathing.  It  is  probable  that  these  sounds  came  from  the  adjoining
bedroom  in  the  next  house.

November  10th. — I  was  aroused  during  the  night  by  hearing  a  tramping
noise,  api:)arently  in  the  back  bedroom  overhead.  The  noise  ceased  in  a  minute
or  less.  I  intended  to  go  up  and  explore,  but  being  only  very  slightly  awake,
I  unfortunately  fell  asleep  again  without  carrying  my  intention  into  effect.

December  9tli. — On  this  Sunday  evening  occurred  the  most  really  unac-
countable noise  of  any  yet  noticed.  I  was  in  the  house  alone,  writing  at  my
desk.  Time,  8.30.  Suddenly  I  heard  a  noise  which  seemed  to  come  from
the  hall,  outside  my  room  door.  I  can  only  comjiare  the  sound  to  that  which
would  be  made  if  half  a  brick  were  tied  to  a  piece  of  string  and  jerked  about
over  the  linoleum — as  one  might  jerk  a  reel  to  make  a  kitten  playful.  The
bumping  noise  seemed  to  commence  close  to  the  door  of  the  room  in  wliicli  I
was  sitting  ;  it  appeared  to  proceed  along  the  passage  to  the  top  of  the  kitchen
stairs — traversing  a  distance  of  some  15ft.  in  about  half  a  dozen  jumps — and
then  it  seemed  to  turn  the  staircase  corner  and  to  jump  down  three  or  four
stairs,  one  at  a  time.  I  went  out,  carrying  my  reading  lamp  with  me,  but
nothing  could  I  fiiid,  either  in  the  passage  or  down  the  kitchen  stairs.  So,
much  puzzled,  I  returned  and  resumed  my  writing.  In  about  five  minutes
tlie  bumps  began  again,  seeming  to  me  to  come  from  tlie  part  of  the  kitchen
stairs  where  they  had  previously  left  off.  This  time  I  ran  out  too  quickly  to
take  the  lamp  with  me.  Just  as  I  reached  the  head  of  the  stairs  the  knocks
stopped  again.  All  was  now  dark,  but  fearing  to  lose  time  by  returning  for
the  lamp  I  went  downstairs  backwards,  feeling  along  each  stair  with  my  hands
as  I  proceeded.  Reaching  the  bottom,  I  stejiped  into  the  kitchen  and  turned
up  the  gas  there,  but  nowhere  was  anything  to  be  seen  that  could  have  caused
the  curious  sounds.  More  perplexed  still,  I  returned  once  more  to  my
writing,  but  had  scarcely  shut  the  sitting-room  door  and  settled  myself  at  the
desk  when  three  sharp  thumps  sounded  on  the  floor  just  outside  the  door.
I  sprang  across  the  room  and  threw  the  door  open.  Nothing  was  to  be  seen.
Again  I  searched  in  all  directions — without  getting  the  slightest  hint  of  an
explanation.  The  thing  was  inexplicable,  and  it  has  remained  so  to  me  ever
since. At  any  rate,  there  are  the  facts. I  can  suggest  no  explanation.  The


S12


Phantasms  of  the  Bead


[Nov.  29,


idea  that  the  noises  really  occurred  in  the  next  (empty)  house  does  not  com-
mend itself  to  me  for  the  simple  reason  that  they  seemed  to  be  so  distinctly
in  the  places  referred  to.  I  -vras  the  only  person  in  the  house.  We  had  no
cat  at  that  time  ;  and  we  never  at  any  time  found  any  indications  of  mice  in
the  place.

December  15th. — A  most  remarkable  and  inexj^licable  noise  occurred  at
11.35  2).m.  on  this  date.

Our  bedroom  adjoined  the  sitting-room,  and  was  separated  from  it  by
curtains.  Across  one  corner  of  the  sitting-room  (one  of  the  corners  adjoining
the  bedroom)  a  piano  was  jalaced,  and  over  this  instrument,  upon  the  wall,
hung  a  guitar.  The  guitar,  as  most  people  are  probably  aware,  has  six  strings —
three  silver  and  three  gut.  On  this  night  I  had  retired  before  my  wife,  and
had  been  in  bed  about  five  minutes  ;  she  remained  in  the  sitting-room  in
order  to  say  her  prayers  by  the  fire,  as  it  was  a  very  cold  night.  In  the  midst
of  the  quietness  which  ensued  I  suddenly  heard  the  guitar  play — f>iing,  pang,
ping — pung,  pang,  ping — here  my  wife  called  out  in  a  loud,  awe-struck
whisjDer,  "Did  you  hear  that  ?  "  whilst  even  as  she  spoke  a  third  pung,  pang,
ping  sounded  clearly  through  the  rooms.  I  immediately  sprang  out  of  bed
and  rushed  in  to  her,  finding  her  kneeling  upon  the  hearth-rug  by  an  arm-
chair, staring  with  astonishment  at  the  guitar  upon  the  wall.  No  more
sounds  were  heard,  though  we  sat  waiting  by  the  fire  for  over  half  an  hour.
My  wife  told  me  that  she  had  been  distracted  once  or  twice  during  her
prayers  by  a  noise  like  someone  sweeping  their  hand  over  the  wall  paper  by
the  fireplace  and  in  the  recess  across  which  the  piano  stood.  She  had  looked
round  to  see  where  the  kitten  was  (an  extremely  lazy  Persian),  and  found
that  it  was  curled  up  asleep  behind  her.  She  said  that  when  the  guitar
sounded  its  chords  (in  arpeggio)  for  the  second  and  third  time  she  was  looking
straight  at  the  insti'ument,  and  such  critical  observation  as  she  had  at  com-
mand under  the  surprise  of  the  thing  satisfied  her  that  there  was  nothing
visible  near  it,  and  that  it  made  no  perceptible  movement.  Well,  that  is  alL
The  three  gut  strings  of  that  guitar  unmistakably  sounded  three  times  in
succession  (making  nine  notes  altogether)  when  no  person  was  touching  it,
and  no  thing  was  touching  it  as  far  as  we  could  discover.  The  first  explana-
tion that  suggests  itself  is  that  the  pegs  slipped  round  slightly  and  so  caused
the  strings  to  vilsrate  and  emit  sounds — as  often  happens  with  stringed  instru-
ments, I  am  told.  But  tlie  answer  to  that  suggestion  is,  1st,  the  sounds  were-
not  of  that  sort — they  were  more  clear  and  musical  than  the  result  of  slipping
pegs  woidd  be  ;  2nd,  it  is  extremely  improbable  that  three  pegs  would  each
slip  just  enough  to  jiroduce  the  corresponding  chord  in  a  lower  key  ;  3rd,  if
this  improbable  thing  happened  once  it  could  scarcely  happen  three  times  in
succession,  and  without  the  changes  of  pitch  being  noticed  ;  4th,  all  six
strings  of  the  guitar  ivere  pcrfcdhj  in  tune  next  day  !  So  .slii^ping  down  is  out
of  the  question.  How  to  account  for  the  fact  I  do  not  know.  I  can  only
record  it  as  it  occurred,  and  leave  it  to  others  to  estimate  the  jarobability  of
such  a  feat  being  accomplished  by  mice  (in  a  house  where  mice  were  un-
knomi),  or  by  a  moth  (in  December),  or  by  something  similar  which  escaped
our  observation.

1889.

January  13th. — When  I  came  in,  about  10.30,  my  wife  informed  me  that


1889.]  from  Another  Point  of  Vieio.  313


when  sitting  alone  during  the  evening  she  had  heard  the  guitar  make  one
note.  She  could  not  reach  the  guitar  to  see  whether  one  of  tlie  six  strings
would  give  that  note,  and  so  she  found  the  corresponding  note  on  the  piano
in  order  to  remember  it.  I  at  once  tried  the  experiment.  The  instrument
was  not  now  in  tune,  but  I  found  that  the  middle  gut  string  gave  a  note
corresponding  to  the  one  indicated  upon  the  piano.

January  24th. — To-day  our  maid-servant  (from  whom  we  believed  the
history  and  reputation  of  the  house  had  been  carefully  kept)  complained
that  she  had  heard  outside  her  bedroom  door,  in  the  morning  about  5.30  or  6,
a  loud  crash  like  a  quantity  of  bottles  being  hui'led  upon  the  floor.  We
assured  her  it  was  a  dream  ;  but  she  maintained  that  she  was  wide  awake
when  it  happened,  and  had  been  awake  for  some  time.

February  16th. — Lieut. -Colonel  S.,  Sir  L.  G.,  and  Captain  N.
occupied  the  two  bedrooms.  In  the  morning  the  two  former  reported
hearing  simultaneously  a  noise,  apparently  on  the  linoleum  between  the  open
doors  of  the  two  rooms,  like  paper  rustling  or  mortar  falling.  I  believe  they
immediately  rushed  from  their  rooms  and  met  on  the  landing.  Time  about
2  a.m.

February  15th. — My  wife's  sister,  Miss  E.  B.,  slept  in  top  back
tedroom  on  this  and  five  or  six  follov/ing  nights.  After  the  first  night  she
reported  hearing  three  loud  raps  on  her  room  door,  such  as  might  be  done
with  a  walking-stick.  She  could  not  say  quite  what  time  in  the  night  this
took  place,  but  she  is  positive  she  had  not  been  asleep.  It  might  have  been
about  1  a.m. She  did  not  hear  anything  on  the  following  nights.

June  29th. — Mrs.  V.  reported  that  when  alone  in  the  sitting-room,
between  seven  and  eight  this  evening,  she  heard  a  note  from  the  guitar.
Subsequently  Mrs.  V.  stated  that  the  note  heard  was  somewhere  about
"A  above  middle  C."  If  the  note  was  as  high  as  this  and  came  from  the
guitar  it  must  have  been  produced  by  one  of  the  gut  strings.  Mrs.  V.  had
no  idea  that  the  guitar  had  ever  done  this  sort  of  thing.  My  wife  and  I  were
out  at  the  time,  and  the  servant  was  downstairs.

From  time  to  time  I  passed  several  nights  alone  in  each  of  the  three  bed-
rooms (the  visitors'  rooms  and  the  servant's)  besides  our  own,  to  see  if  I
could  meet  with  experiences  of  any  sort,  but  nothing  ever  happened  on  these
occasions  that  I  am  aware  of.

(Signed) X.  Y.

The  present  tenant  of  the  house  (who  took  possession  on  September  28th,
1889)  wrote  to  us  on  March  13th,  1890  :—

'  I  am  sorry  to  say  we  are  thoroughly  disappointed  in  the  ghost ;  we  have
'  neither  seen  nor  heard  anything  which  even  a  believer  in  ghosts  could  lay
'  to  their  charge. '


314


A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead. [Jan.  31,


II.

A  DEFENCE  OF  PHANTASMS  OF  THE  DEAD.
By  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

The  question  whether  aught  in  man  survives  the  death  of  tlie  body
is  of  course,  and  undeniably,  the  most  important  which  researches  such
as  ours  can  ever  hope  to  solve.  It  is  moi'e  than  this  ;  it  is  the  most
important  problem  in  the  wliole  range  of  the  universe  which  can  ever
become  susceptible  of  any  kind  of  scientific  proof.  Cosmical  questions
there  may  be  whicli  in  themselves  are  of  deeper  import.  The  nature  of
the  First  Cause ;  the  blind  or  the  providential  ordering  of  the  sum  of
things ; — these  are  problems  vaster  than  any  which  atfect  only  the
destinies  of  men.  But  to  whatever  moral  certainty  we  may  attain  on
those  mightiest  questions,  we  can  devise  no  way  whatever  of  bringing
them  to  scientific  test.  Tliey  deal  with  infinity  ;  and  our  modes  of
investigation  have  grasp  only  on  finite  things.

But  the  question  of  man's  survival  of  death  stands  in  a  position
uniquely  intermediate  between  matters  capable  and  matters  incapable
of  proof.  It  is  in  itself  a  definite  problem,  admitting  of  conceivable
proof  which,  even  if  not  technically  rigorous,  might  amply  satisfy  the
scientific  mind.  And  at  the  same  time  the  conception  wliicli  it  involves
is  in  itself  a  kind  of  avenue  and  inlet  into  infinity.  Could  a  proof  of
our  survival  be  obtained,  it  would  carry  us  deeper  into  the  true  nature
of  the  universe  than  we  should  be  cari'ied  by  an  even  jjerfect  knowledge
of  the  material  scheme  of  things.  It  Avould  carry  us  deeper  both  by
achievement  and  by  promise.  Tlie  discovery  that  there  was  a  life  in
man  independent  of  Ijlood  and  brain  would  be  a  cardinal,  a  dominating
fact  in  all  science  and  in  all  philosophy.  And  the  prosjaect  thus  opened
to  human  knowledge — in  this  or  in  other  worlds — would  be  limitless
indeed.

Since,  then,  our  researches  carry  us  perforce  into  the  neighljourhood
of  a  question  so  vast  as  this,  we  must  take  care  that  we  do  not  slip  into
assuming  an  answer  without  full  consciousness  of  what  we  do.  In
Phantasms  of  the  Living  any  answer  whatever  was  exjsressly  postponed.
But  evidence  reached  us  wliich  we  could  not  refuse  to  examine ;  and
Mr.  Gurney,  as  my  readers  know,  was  at  the  time  of  his  death  actually
engaged  upon  this  very  task.  It  fell  to  my  lot  to  complete  the  paper
which  he  had  in  preparation  {Proceedings,  Part  XIV.),  and  to  add
another  (Part  XV.),  which  carried  the  evidence  somewhat  further.
But  those  papers  consisted  mainly  of  a  detailed  exposition  of  testimony  ;


1890.] A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.  315^


and  dealt  too  slightly  with  the  philosophical  aspect  of  the  question, —
the  degree  of  readiness  or  reluctance  with  which  we  ought  to  accept
the  hypothesis  of  man's  survival,  when  matched  with  other  hypotheses
wliich,  if  less  directly  suggested  by  the  evidence,  may  yet  lie  more
assuredly  within  the  realm  of  ascertainable  law.

Mr.  Podmore's  criticism  upon  my  views  expressed  in  the  above-
mentioned  papers  comes,  therefore,  opportunely.  It  should  be  answered
not  only  by  actual  rejoinder  to  its  ai'guments,  but  by  something  of
fuller  statement  as  to  the  way  in  which  our  psychical  evidence  generally
affects  the  doctrine  of  man's  survival.  For  Mr.  Podmore  starts  from  a
thorough  belief  in  the  reality  of  telepathy  between  living  men,  and
endeavours  to  explain  the  so-called  phantasms  of  the  dead  as  being  in
reality  generated  by  minds  still  clothed  in  flesh.  His  explanations,  as
he  frankly  admits,  are  many  of  them  "  far-fetched  and  improbable  "  ;
but  he  regards  them  as  less  far-fetched,  as  less  improbable,  than  the
supposition  that  anything  in  man  survives  the  tomb.

For  reasons  presently  to  be  given  I  do  not  regard  Mr.  Podmore's
intermediate  position  as  permanently  tenable.  In  one  sense,  indeed,  I
should  be  glad  to  think  it  more  plaiisible  than  I  do  ;  since  it  might  prove
a  stepping-stone  to  the  acceptance  of  evidence  which  I  believe  to  Ije  true,
but  which  is  too  strange,  too  remote  from  ordinary  experience,  to  be
readily  believed.  For  I  fear  lest  as  students  begin  to  perceive  how
closely  our  evidence  of  telepathy  between  the  living  is  linked  with
telepathy  between  the  living  and  the  dead  they  may  suffer  a  kind  of
revulsion  or  backwater,  from  dread  of  the  "mysticism"  which  to  many
minds  seems  somehow  to  adhere  to  the  facts  themselves,  however
careful  the -mode  of  their  presentation.

But  the  strongest  reason  for  immediate  reply  to  Mr.  Podmore's
criticisms  lies  in  the  danger  that  those  criticisms  should  operate  upon
possible  informants  in  a  way  which  he  deprecates  as  earnestly  as  myself.
Our  investigation  requires  that  a  constant  stream  of  evidence  should  flow
in.  It  is  only  by  perpetually  gathering  in  fresh  experiences  at  first-hand
that  we  can  maintain  a  real  difference  in  value  between  our  own  colliga-
tions of  actual  facts  and  the  loose  speculations  of  «  priori  negation  or  of
a  priori  credulity.  The  difficulty  of  collecting  this  evidence  is  very
great  already.  It  would  be  increased  if  possible  informants  were  to
suspect,  however  groundlessly,  that  their  narratives  were  examined  with
any  kind  of  prepossession,  or  their  stranger  experiences  discounted  as
proving  too  much.  On  the  other  liand,  tliis  frank  avowal  of  divergence  of
opinion  between  the  two  secretaries  to  whom  evidence  may  be  sent  may
suggest  an  additional  motive  to  our  correspondents  to  furnish  materials
which  may  help  to  decide  the  controversy  in  one  way  or  the  other.

I  must  insist  again  upon  the  deep  importance  of  the  amount
and  the  quality  of  the  records  sent  to  us. The  urgent  question  is  not


316


A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Lead. [Jan.  31,


how  our  evidence  is  to  be  interpreted  in  detail,  but  whether  or  no  it  is
to  be  set  aside  altogethei'.  Human  testimony  is  on  its  trial.  It  re-
mains, that  is  to  say,  to  be  seen  whether  Science  can  accord  to  honest
testimony  (of  a  kind  which  can  rarely  be  confirmed  by  direct  experi-
ment) a  confidence  sufficient  to  bear  the  strain  put  upon  it  by  the
marvellous  matters  for  which  that  testimony  vouches.  I  believe  that  the
veracity,  the  accuracy  of  our  informants,  taken  en  masse,  will  ulti-
mately support  that  strain,  and  that  the  world  will  be  convinced  of
veridical  apparitions  as  the  world  has  been  convinced  of  meteorites,

Meteorites, — those  other  invaders  from  the  unseen, — were  until
lately  quite  as  scornfully  rejected ;  and  naturally  rejected,  so  long  as
the  evidence  for  phenomena  so  marvellous  rested  on  antique  tradition
and  peasants'  tales.  Then  came  a  moment, — like  the  moment  which  our
inquiry  is  traversing  now, — at  which  inquiring  men  who  had  actually
spoken  with  the  peasants  and  seen  the  fragments  believed  that  stoues
had  fallen.  And  then  suddenly  the  fall  of  meteorites  was  accepted  as
a  natural  phenomenon,  an  almost  inexplicable  but  a  quite  undeniable
fact.  In  recent  papers  I  have  endeavoured  to  exhibit — so  to  say-
some  specimens  of  meteoric  dusb.  In  the  present  paper  I  must  try  do
show  the  hollowness  of  the  negative  assumption  which  for  this  inquiry
corresponds  to  Lavoisier's  famous  dictum,  "  There  are  no  stones  in  the
air ;  therefore  none  can  fall  upon  the  earth."

I  shall  not,  of  course,  debate  ab  ovo  the  well-worn  question  of  a
life  to  come.  Rather  I  shall  discuss  in  what  way  that  ancient  con-
troversy is  affected  by  tlie  discovery  of  telepathy  amongst  the  living ;
which  I  shall  here  follow  Mr.  Podmore  in  assuming  as  adequately
proved.  But  I  must  indicate  the  starting-point  from  which  my
argument  is  to  begin.  My  reader  must  understand  that  I  am  confining
myself  exclu.sively  to  the  scientific  aspect  of  the  question.  I  therefore
waive  all  reference  to  the  fact  that  the  majority  of  civilised  men
profess  at  least  to  believe  that  sufficient  evidence  of  man's  survival  has
long  ago  been  attained.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  I  protest  against
an  opposite  assumption  which  seems  to  me  to  be  almost  as  narrow,
almost  as  unphilosopliical,  as  blind  faith  in  instinct  or  in  tradition
can  possibly  be.  Because  we  men,  with  our  short  and  confined
experience,  have  as  yet  no  clear  knowledge  of  thought  or  consciousness
apart  from  the  flow  of  blood  through  a  ponderable  brain,  it  is  often
assumed  that  it  is  indefinitely  improbable  that  thought  or  consciousness
can,  anywhere  in  the  universe,  exist  except  in  such  a  connection.
This  argument  is  cogent  indeed  against  the  practice  of  mummifying  the
dead, — against  the  expectation  that  the  actual  dust  of  outworn  frames
shall  be  revivified  by  some  startling  decree.  Life,  as  we  know  it,
cannot  persist  in  connection  with  disintegrated  tissue,  a  desiccated
brain. But  what  more  than  this  can  we  affirm  ?  Amid  the  infinite


1890.] A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.  317


possibilities  of  the  Cosmos  the  persistence  of  discarnate  life  is  per  se
neither  probable  nor  improbable.  On  the  d  priori  aspect  of  the
question  science  can  have  no  more  to  say.

I  proceed  to  the  more  definite  query  as  to  how  far  a  belief  in
telepathy, — in  a  communication  between  incarnate  minds  a,part  from
the  operation  of  the  recognised  organs  of  sense, — ought  to  influence
our  belief  in  the  possibility  of  a  communication  between  minds  incar-
nate and  minds  discarnate,- — minds,  that  is  to  say,  for  which  the
recognised  organs  of  sense  are  altogether  lacking.  Mr.  Podmore  holds,
as  I  understand  him,  that  telepathy  should  make  no  difference  at  all  ;
that  here  is  simply  a  newly-recognised  law  of  nature  which  we  must
henceforth  allow  for  in  the  same  definite  manner  as  we  allow  for  the
laws  (say)  of  chemical  affinity  ; — and  with  the  same  presumption  that
any  new  combinations  which  we  come  upon  are  due  to  the  action,
under  novel  conditions,  of  this  same  identical  force.

My  own  view  is  in  one  sense  more  cautious,  but  in  another  sense
bolder.  On  the  one  hand,  I  do  not  venture  to  treat  telepathy  so  freely  as
Mr.  Podmore  treats  it, — to  draw  his  hypothetical  inferences  as  to  forms
of  it  to  wliich  experience  has  not  yet  introduced  us.  But,  on  the  other
hand,  I  regard  telepathy,  not  as  a  fact  standing  alone  and  self-sufficing,
but  as  a  first  hint  of  discoveries  which  cannot  be  circumscribed, — a
casually-reached  indication  of  some  unknown  scheme  of  things  of
which  thought-transference,  clairvoyance,  apparitions  at  death,  may  be
but  subordinate  effects  or  incidental  examples.  Unprovable  as  such  an
hypothesis  obviously  is,  it  has  the  advantage  of  putting  us  on  our  guard
against  other  hypotheses  which  make  more  pretence  to  pi'oof.  The
notion  of  brain-ivaves,  for  instance, — the  analogy  of  the  two  tuning-
forks  which  vibrate  in  unison, — was  at  first  attractive  to  many  minds.
It  seemed  comparatively  easy  to  add  this  new  vibration  to  the
numerous  systems  of  vibrations  which  we  know  or  suspect  to  be
actually  traversing  space.  Yet  this  fancy  of  brain-waves  (from  which,
by  the  way,  Mr.  Gurney  and  I  were  from  the  first  careful  to  stand
aloof)  has  become  less  and  less  plausible,  less  and  less  explanatory,  as
evidence  has  accumulated.  The  cases  on  which  such  a  conception
might  throw  light  are  everywhere  interwoven  with  cases  where  it
seems  wholly  inappropriate.

And  yet  this  idea  of  brain-waves  had  a  possibility  of  definiteness.
It  was  conceivable  that  it  might  have  been  the  key  to  all  the  pheno-
mena. There  is  not  the  same  definiteness  in  the  conception  with
which  Mr.  Podmore  replaces  it.  As  the  key  to  all  the  phenomena
inexplicable  by  more  familiar  causes  he  suggests  telepathy  between
the  living.  But  telepathy  is  not  a  simple  and  positive  conception
which  we  can  manipulate  with  confidence.  It  is  not  a  law  at  which
we  can  arrive  deductively  from  other  known  laws. Nor  is  it  even —


318


A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Bead. [Jan.  31,


like  the  law  of  gravity — an  expression  of  a  definite  universal  fact,
which  we  can  count  upon  altliough  we  cannot  arrive  at  it  deductively.

I  probably  go  beyond  Mr.  Podmore  in  holding  that  the  simplest
case  of  true  thought-transference,  if  once  admitted,  bi'eaks  down
the  purely  physiological  synthesis  of  man,  and  opens  a  doorway  out
of  materialism  which  can  never  again  be  shut.  And  I  agree  with
him  in  liolding  that  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  a  continuous  con-
nection has  been  traced  between  the  smallest  experiments  in  telepathy
and  such  complex  phenomena  as  the  phantasmal  appearance  of
a  dying  man  to  several  persons  together,  or  to  a  person  who  never
knew  him.  But  from  this  I  infer — not  that  all  these  complex
phenomena  are  merely  varieties  of  the  special  phenomenon  with  Avhich
it  was  convenient  to  begin  our  inquiry ; — but  I'ather  that  a  mixed
multitude  of  obscure  phenomena  can  now  be  seen  to  have  a  certain
kinship,  insomuch  that  the  evidence  for  each  class  strengthens  by
analogy  the  evidence  for  the  other  classes ; — while  all  classes  alike  are
probably  the  outcome  of  laws  too  remote  from  terrene  experience  to
admit  of  being  gi-asped  at  present  by  minds  like  ours.

At  the  time  when  Pliantasms  of  tJie  Living  was  written  it  seemed
to  be  accordant  with  scientific  caution  to  treat  all  the  supernormal
phenomena  there  included  as  being — whatever  else  they  might  or  might
not  be — at  any  rate  instances  of  the  direct  influence  of  one  mind  upon
another.  But  although  I  still  hold  this  as  true  in  the  main,  I  should
no  longer  wish  to  assert  it  of  every  case  given  in  that  book.  Some  of
those  cases,  for  instance,  may  be  explicable  by  clairvoyance, — by  some
energy  exercised  by  the  percipient's  mind  alone,  without  tliere  being
any  so-called  "  agent  "  in  the  afTair  at  all.  In  view  of  this  possibility
and  of  those  other  still  less  defined  possibilities  towards  which  some
of  our  evidence  obscurely  points,  it  seems  to  me  unreasonable  to  treat
telepathy  as  if  it  stood  alone  as  a  possible  explanation ; — as  if  there
were  no  rival  conceptions  in  the  psychical  field.

And,  moreover,  the  evidential  position  itself  has  considerably
changed  during  the  past  four  years.  A  large  part  of  our  evidence
for  post-mortem  apparitions  has  been  collected  since  Phantasms  of
ilie  Living  appeared.  And  as  our  evidence  now  stands  I  find  no
rational  halting-place  between  our  smallest  experimental  transferences
from  mind  to  mind  and  apparitions  generated  by  men  long  dead.  I
do  not  mean  that  each  stage  of  the  evidence  is  equally  strong.  There
are — as  has  elsewhere  been  shown — abundant  reasons,  drawn  from
the  mere  ordinary  facts  t>f  life,  which  make  it  much  harder  to  prove  a
post-mortem  apparition  to  be  veridical  than  it  is  to  prove  the  same
thing  of  an  apparition  which  coincides  with  death.  But  a  fresh
practical  difficulty  in  making  evidence  cogent  does  not  necessarily
imply  a  philosophical  gulf  between  the  more  and  the  less  easily  proved


1890.]


A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Bead.


319


phenomena.  I  suspect  that  could  we  see  all  our  phenomena  set  out  in
their  true  relations,  we  might  find  that  the  gap  between  a  phantom
generated  five  minutes  before  death  and  a  phantom  generated  five
minutes  after  death  was  not  so  broad  as  the  gap  between  the  trans-
ference of  a  card  from  mind  to  mind  and  the  impression  on  distant
persons  of  a  phantasmal  personality.  May  not  the  importance  which
we  attach  to  death  be  largely  a  subjective  thing  1  a  mere  example  of
the  way  in  which  man's  speculations  on  the  universe  are  tinged  with
an  ineradicable  anthropomorphism'?  Who  can  say  that  there  may  not
be  quite  other  points  in  our  chain  of  phenomena  at  which  a  dis-
passionate non-human  expositor  might  feel  it  more  logically  suitable  to
open  a  fresh  chapter  1

My  argument,  says  Mr.  Podmore,  stands  in  need  of  two  assump-
tions ; — that  the  dead  still  live,  and  that  they  can  communicate
"with  survivors.  Elsewhere  he  assigns  to  me  a  third  assumption, —
that  the  dead  are  conversant  with  the  aspect  of  their  body  aftei'  its
death.

I  prefer  to  put  my  theory  in  my  own  way, — as  a  single  postulate
which  will  carry  with  it  all  that  I  am  endeavouring  to  show  in  detail.
I  assume,  then,  that  the  individualised  energy  which  generates  veridical
phantasms  is  not  coeval  with  the  body.  It  has  not,  I  mean,  the  same
duration  as  the  body  ;  it  may  have  pre-existed,  and  it  may  survive.
As  to  the  details  of  this  conception, — power  of  communication,  power
of  memory,  &c., — my  view  leaves  us  Avith  regard  to  tlie  behaviour  of
phantasms  of  the  dead  just  where  we  stand  in  regard  to  the  behaviour
of  phantasms  of  the  living.  It  leaves  us,  that  is  to  say,  in  a  state  of
blank  ignorance  a  p7-io7-i, — an  ignorance  which  can  be  dispelled  by
actual  evidence  alone.

Mr.  Podmore  believes,  as  I  do,  on  the  sheer  strength  of  the  evidence,
that  Mr.  S.  H.  B.,  iov  instance  (Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  104),
was  able  by  what  we  vaguely  call  an  effort  of  will,  to  iiianifest  a  phantom
of  himself  to  several  persons  at  a  distance.  Could  we  have  anticipated
this  ?  Could  we  have  predicted  beforehand  how  that  phantom  would
behave  ?  whether  it  would  seem  to  show  intelligence  or  not  1  whether
it  would  be  perceptible  to  one  person  only  or  to  more  1  whether
Mr.  S.  H.  B.,  as  we  actually  know  him,  would  have  any  recollection  of
the  phantom's  actions  or  no  ?

We  could  have  predicted  none  of  these  things ;  and  neither  can
we  make  any  prediction  as  to  the  intelligence,  the  memory,  the  per-
ceptibility of  a  phantom — if  such  there  be — which  is  generated  after
bodily  death.  And  all  that  I  assume  is  that  whatever  the  energy
may  have  been  which  generated  the  phantom  of  the  living  S.  H.  B.,
that  energy  was  not  dependent  on  the  vitality  of  his  bodily  tissues.
Can  anyone  show  me  that  it  tvas  so  dependent? or  give  reasons


320  A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.  [Jan.„31,


why,  in  our  absolute  ignorance,  my  supposition  is  to  be  treated  as
so  much  less  likely  than  the  opposite  one?  I  claim,  indeed,  that
quite  apart  from  any  evidence  to  apparitions  after  death,  and  look-
ing only  to  the  class  of  cases  set  forth  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
there  is  good  ground  for  holding  tliat  the  energy  in  question  is  not
bound  up,  in  the  same  way  as  our  conscious  mental  energies  are
bound  up,  with  the  physiological  activity  of  the  brain.  The  concomi-
tant variations  of  bodily  health  and  mental  vigour  form,  as  we  know,
an  obvious  argument  for  the  view  that  with  the  total  cessation  of
bodily  functions  our  mental  functions  also  must  wholly  cease.  So  far
as  our  conscious  mental  activity  goes,  this  exact  concomitance  admits
of  no  provable  exception.  But  so  soon  as  ^ve  come  to  deal  with  mani-
festations of  the  unconscious  self, — of  the  profounder  strata  of  our
being, — the  case  changes  at  once.  Even  in  the  hypnotic  trance  we
observe  a  greater  independence  of  certain  corporeal  conditions, — as
when  a  hypnotised  patient  can  talk  freely  in  spite  of  a  wound  which,
in  his  waking  state,  would  keep  him  absorbed  in  his  pain.  This,  of
course,  resembles  rather  a  shutting  off  of  certain  bodily  distractions
than  the  development  of  any  new  mental  force.  Going  a  step  further,
we  find  hypnotic  hyperesthesia  increasingly  difficult  to  explain  by
anything  that  we  know  of  concomitant  bodily  states.  But  when  we
come  to  telergy, — to  the  power  of  propagating  influences  or  phan-
tasms at  a  distance,— then  the  familiar  parallelism  between  bodily
and  mental  states  assumes  a  quite  strained  and  hypothetical  air.
At  first,  indeed,  it  might  have  appeared  as  though  that  parallelism
still  subsisted.  We  spoke  of  phantasms  coincident  with  moments  of
death  or  crisis, — as  though  a  strong  upheaval  of  the  conscious  being
disengaged  some  influence  which  might  be  felt  afar  ofl".  But  as
further  cases  were  gathered  in  it  became  clear  that  the  "  crisis  "  which
facilitated  telergic  action  was  not  necessarily  a  moment  of  conscious
excitement  or  strain.  Quite  otherwise ;  for  it  was  found  that  the
"  agent,"  at  the  moment  of  the  apparition,  was  often  asleep,  or  fainting,
or  even  in  a  state  of  coma.  Not  the  moment  of  death  alone,  but  also
the  hours  of  abeyance  and  exhaustion  which  precede  death,  were  found
apt  to  generate  these  appearances.  Nor  is  the  moment  of  death  itself,
under  ordinary  circumstances,  a  moment  of  impulse  or  exaltation.  Far
oftener  it  is  an  imperceptible  extinction  of  energies  wliic  h  have  already
waned  almost  into  nothingness.

It  would,  then,  be  nearer  the  truth  to  say  that  telergic  action  varies
inversely,  than  that  it  varies  directly,  with  the  observable  activity  of
the  nervous  system  or  of  the  conscious  mind.  And  it  follows  that  the
presumption  commonly  urged  against  the  conscious  mind's  continuance
after  bodily  decay  loses  much  of  its  force  when  we  are  considering  this
new-found  form  of  mental  energy, — so  much  less  manifestly  dependent


1890.] A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.  321


upon  bodily  states. We  come  back — as  I  have  before  said — to  a.
problem  whose  conditions  are  wholly  unknown.

Turning  now  to  Mr.  Podmore's  criticisms,  we  find  that  they  fall
into  three  classes.  First,  he  gives  reasons  for  regarding  the  narratives
pointing  to  post-mortem  apparitions  as  ill-evidenced.  Secondly,  he
endeavours  to  show  that  the  details  of  those  narratives  are  not  such  as
we  should  expect  if  the  phantoms  were  really  generated  by  the  spirits
of  the  departed.  And,  thirdly,  he  suggests  ways  in  which  those
narratives  may  be  explained  by  the  agency  of  persons  still  living.

(1)  Arguing  for  his  first  j^oint,  Mr.  Podmore  repeats  a  remark  on
which  I  have  already  insisted ; — namely,  that  the  mythopceic  instinct
of  mankind  works  in  favour  of  a  type  of  "  ghost  stoiy  "  far  more  full-
flavoured, — more  pregnant  with  poetic  justice  or  with  curdling  horror,
— than  our  first-hand  cases  can  generally  claim  to  be.  It  is  so  ;  and
it  was  by  considering  those  very  cases  in  our  privately-printed  series
to  which  Mr.  Podmore  refers  in  detail  that  we  assured  ourselves  that
so  it  was.  There  is  nothing  to  be  surprised  at  here.  And,  as  I  have
said,  the  fact  that  the  mythopceic  drift  is  in  that  direction  serves  to
my  mind  to  heighten  the  presumption  in  favour  of  the  genuineness  of
cases  of  post-mortem  apparition  so  flavourless  or  so  odd  as  most  of
those  on  which  I  rely ; — corresponding  so  poorly  to  that  which  man's
fancy  loves  to  feign.  I  have  already  explained  what  I  hold  to  be  the
cause  of  the  emotional  barrenness,  the  fleeting  iiisufliciency,  of  most  of
these  projections  upon  terrene  existence  of  influences  whose  centre  is
no  longer  among  breathing  men.

And  with  regard  to  the  amount  of  that  evidence  which  I  hold  as
good,  both  Mr.  Gurney  and  I  have  always  stated  that  it  was  far  less
than  the  evidence  for  veridical  phantasms  among  the  living.  It  must
be  less, — as  I  have  again  and  again  to  repeat, — because  in  our  ignorance
of  how  the  departed  "agent"  is  faring  we  cannot  appeal  to  his  history  to-
show  some  coincidence  with  the  moment  when  this  phantasm  is  ol)served
by  his  surviving  friend.  We  have  to  leave  out  of  account  the  great
bulk  of  these  230St-mortem  appearances, — these  "  visions  of  consolation,"
■ — because  we  cannot  cite  some  entry  in  a  departed  spirit's  diary  to
prove  that  he  was  at  that  moment  endeavouring  to  manifest  himself  to
his  friend  on  earth.  But  the  evidence,  with  all  its  necessary  restric-
tions, continues  to  accumulate  ; — accumulates  (like  our  other  testimony)
just  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  energy  and  care  which  are  expended
in  collecting  and  testing  the  incidents  now  lying  in  the  memory  of  many  a.
percipient  who  will  reveal  them  only  to  skilful  persuasion.  Mr.  Podmore
knows  as  well  as  I  how  miserably  inadequate  is  all  the  energy  at  our  dis-
posal,— especially  since  the  loss  of  our  chief  and  a,blest  collector, — to
garner  up  the  harvest  of  first-hand  evidence  which  lies  ready  for  us  on
every  side. To  found  a  negative  argument  upon  the  small  number  of


S22


A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead. [Jan.  31,


cases  yet  encountered  which  point  to  man's  continuance  is  rash  indeed ; —
as  rash  as  it  was  to  argue  against  man's  antiquity  when  only  a  few  batches
of  flint  implements  had  yet  been  discovered.  It  must  never  be  for-
gotten that  we  stand  at  the  veiy  beginning  of  a  quest  which  no  assign-
fible  number  of  years  will  complete  ;  and  that  thus  far  we  have  found
tliat  almost  eveiy  solid  nucleus  of  first-hand  intelligent  testimony  to
some  special  type  of  phenomenon  has  received  with  further  search  fresh
corroboration  at  a  rate  which, — distinctly  perceptible  in  the  work  of  a
few  men  for  a  few  years, — might  easily  become  overwhelming  if  a
hundredfold  our  labour  were  applied  to  the  task  for  a  century.

(2)  But  going  on  from  the  charge  of  inadequacy  in  the  bulk  of
evidence,  Mr.  Podmore  proceeds  to  argue  that  the  characteristics  of
such  apparitions  as  seem  j^rimd  facie  to  imply  survival  of  death  are
difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  hypothesis  that  the  apparition  seen  is  the
manifestation  of  an  intelligent  entity,  and  suggest  rather  that  it  is  to
be  attributed  to  casual  hallucination.  Tlie  absence  of  apparent  motive
in  these  phantasms  seems  to  him  to  support  that  view.

I  have  ali'eady  explained  that,  in  my  view,  these  phantoms,  although
emanating  from  a  personal  intelligence,  do  not  represent  the  main
current  of  that  intelligence  ;  and  must  be  expected  to  behave — not  as
Mr.  S.  H.  B.  (to  go  back  to  that  instructive  example)  would  himself
behave  when  calling  upon  friends,  but  rather  as  his  projected  phantom
behaved  ; — with  tlie  same  dreamy  absence  of  apparent  purpose,  the
same  blank  and  fugitive  aj^peal.  I  have  contended, — not  that  this  is
all  that  is  left,  but  that  it  is  all  that  can  usually  reach  us  ;  that  the
gulf  between  disparate  modes  of  existence  is  too  great  for  any  directer
message  to  cross  it.  Nor  do  those  special  characteristics  on  which  Mr.
Podmore  dwells  seem  to  me  inconsistent  with  my  view  of  what  these
pliantoms  signify.  I  will  take  his  objections  in  the  order  of  rising
importance.

(1)  "  The  occurrence  of  phantasms  resembling  animals."  We  are
agreed  that  a  phantasmal  figure  need  not  be  directly  generated  by  a
mind  or  entity  precisely  resembling  itself.  AVithout,  therefore,  raising
the  question  of  the  continued  existence  of  animals  after  death,  we  may
maintain  that  their  presence  among  phantasms  of  the  dead  is  no  more
of  a  difiiculty  than  tlieir  appearance  among  phantasms  of  the  living.

(2)  "  The  liability  of  the  percipients  to  casual  and  apparently
non-veridical  hallucinations."  To  this  I  demur ;  and  I  should  say,  on
the  contrary,  that  in  the  cases  cited  by  Mr.  Podmore  the  other
liallucinations  which  the  percipients  had  experienced  were  of  a  type
■which,  although  not  provably  veridical,  are  at  least  so  ^JossiiZy
vei'idical  that  they  rather  improve  than  weaken  the  evidence  for
the  veridicality  of  the  special  apparition  in  question.  Let  us  take
■one  of  the  cases  cited  by  Mr.  Podmore  (FroceedinffS,  Vol.  YI.,  p.  26,


1890.] A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Bead.  323


Case  IV.)  as  a  fairly  illustrative  instance.  In  that  case  a  lady  sees  a
figure  which  she  does  not  recognise ;  her  husband  then  sees  it,  and
recognises  the  aspect  of  his  deceased  father.  Mr.  Podmore  regards  the
lady  as  the  primary  percipient  here,  and  supposes  that  she  infects  her
husband  with  the  hallucination  ;  although  he  does  not  explain  how  she
manages  to  infect  him  with  a  phantom  face  and  figure  well  known  to
him,  and  unknown  to  herself.  But  letting  tliis  pass  for  the  moment,
let  us  appraise  the  weight  of  the  objection  that  this  lady  "had  ex-
perienced a  previous  hallucination  unshared ;  a  circumstance  which  may
be  regarded  as  indicating  some  predisposition  to  sensory  hallucination."
What,  then,  was  this  pre^'ious  hallucination  1  Was  it  a  skeleton  ?  a
Turk's  head?  a  semi-human  "Mr.  Gabbage  "  1  did  it  take,  in  short,  any
of  the  familiar  forms  of  morbid  illusion  1  On  the  contrary,  it  was  the
consoling  vision  of  her  own  father,  seen  shortly  after  his  death.  Now
this  vision,  of  course,  was  not  evidential.  She  was  mourning  for  her
father,  and  grief  and  excitement  may  have  summoned  up  a  purely
subjective  figure.  I  refrain,  therefore,  from  claiming  that  vision  on  my
side ;  but  I  object  equally  to  Mr.  Podmore's  claim  ; — to  his  reckoning-
it  as  subjective  just  because,  from  the  very  nature  of  the  circumstances,
it  could  not,  even  if  veridical,  have  been  evidentially  cogent.  Mi'.
Podmore  describes  a  message  from  a  man  whose  death  is  already
known  as  "  practically  superfluous  ";  but  this  sternly  evidential  point  of
view  is  not  always  shared  by  survivors.  Nor  need  the  sorrowing  girl's
departed  father  have  been  of  opinion  (to  quote  Mr.  Podmore's  phrase
about  yet  another  case)  that  "after  the  fact  of  the  death  was  known
the  message  itself  could  no  longer  sei've  any  useful  purpose."  For
although  it  was,  no  doubt,  "  superfluous  "  for  this  gentleman  to  inform
his  daughter  that  lie  had  died,  he  might  deem  it  worth  while  to  inform
her  that  he  was  still  living.

In  short,  the  predisposition  to  sensory  hallucination  with  which
Mr.  Podmore  credits  tliis  lady  and  other  percipients  may  quite  possibly
be  a  predisposition  or  sensitiveness  to  veridical  hallucinations  ;  just  as
in  the  case  of  many  of  the  percipients  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
who  have  experiencfed  several  phantasms,  each  one  of  which  proves  to
have  been  coincidental.

(3)  Mr.  Podmore's  next  objection  deals  with  a  fact  undoubtedly
perplexing ; — but  equally  perplexing,  I  think,  whatever  be  the  theory
which  we  adopt.  I  mean  the  fact  that  several  diifereiit  phantasmal
figures  have  often  been  seen  in  the  same  house.  I  will  refrain  from
expressing  my  view  on  this  question  until  we  have  considered  the
theories  which  Mr.  Podmore  himself  suggests  for  the  explanation  of
these  post-mortem  phantoms  generally.

Mr.  Podmore's  definition  (p.  232)  of  the  nature  of  the  coincidences
needed  to  make  j^ost-mortem  apparitions  evidential  closely  follows  that


324


A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Bead. [Jan.  31,


already  given  in  several  papers  in  these  Proceedings  ;  nor  is  it  needful
to  dwell  furtlier  on  the  cases  which  he  cites  where  these  coincidences
have  not  been  established.  Such  cases  I  had  already  dismissed  from  my
argument  as  of  no  value.

Mr.  Podmore  suggests  a  possible  explanation  of  the  cases  to  which
I  do  attach  importance  by  one  or  other  of  the  following  hypotheses  : —

( 1 )  The  latency  of  the  hallucination ;  allowing  a  phantom  gener-
ated at  the  moment  of  death  to  become  first  perceptible  some  time
afterwards.

(2)  The  contagion  of  the  hallucination  ;  allowing  a  phantasmal
perception  to  be  communicated  from  the  original  pei'cipient  to  the
person  or  persons  present  with  him.

(3)  And,  still  further,  a  telepathic  infection  of  the  hallucination,
from  A,  who  has  once  seen  it  in  a  house,  to  B,  who  does  not  know  A,
and  who  has  never  heard  of  the  hallucination,  but  who  succeeds  A  as
tenant  of  the  house  in  question.

Of  these  theses  I  hold  that  (1)  represents  a  real  fact,  although  a  fact
manifestly  incapable  (as  Mr.  Podmore  allows)  of  explaining  the  bulk
of  the  evidence  on  which  I  rely.  For  (2)  I  have  as  yet  seen  no  evidence
-which  looks  to  me  plausible  ;  and  (3)  seems  to  me  a  rash  suggestion,
and  likely  to  attract  unnecessary  attack.

The  suggestion — made  by  Mr.  Gurney  in  our  earliest  papers — -
that  a  telepathic  impression  might  remain  latent  in  tlie  sub-conscious
mind  until  some  favouring  circumstances  carried  it  upwards  into
recognition, — remained  for  a  long  time  with  only  i-are  and  inferential
sixpport.  But  (as  Mr.  Podmore  justly  remarks)  Miss  X.'s  experiments
in  crystal-vision  have  called  attention  afresh  to  this  caj^acity  of  latency.
Tlie  change  which  these  experiments,  if  confirmed  and  repeated,  will
make  in  our  conceptions  on  this  point  will  be  somewhat  as  follows.  It
has  long  been  known  that  the  sub-conscious  mind  can  produce  "after-
images,"— more  or  less  externalised  pictures  of  some  person  or  object
previously  seen.  This  is  indeed  our  ordinary  explanation  of  non-
coincidental  hallucinatory  figures  of  known  persons.  But  it  was
usually  supposed  that  after-images  represented  mainly  something  on
which  the  gaze  had  been  often  or  strenuously  fixed, — as,  for  instance,
objects  seen  under  the  microscope.  Miss  X.'s  experiments,  on  the  other
hand,  suggest  that  anything  which  has  come  within  the  field  of  vision
may  be  reproduced  as  an  after-image,  whether  it  has  in  the  first  instance
been  wittingly  perceived  or  no.  And  some  of  these  crystal-visions  seem
to  liave  been  telepathic  ;  so  tliat  (although  these  contain  no  clear
example  of  latency  or  development)  we  may  conjecture  by  analogy
that  it  is  possible  for  impressions  caused  by  telepathic  impact  from  other
minds  to  remain  for  some  unknown  period  below  the  level  of  conscious-
ness, and  then  ultimately  to  rise  into  perception  in  some  hallucinatory


1890.] A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.  325


iorm.  But  in  dealing  with  phantasms  of  the  dead  this  possibility  has
already  been  expressly  allowed  for ;  and  Mr.  Podmore's  remarks  seem
to  add  little  to  what  has  been  said  (for  example)  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  Y.,
p.  431.

I  cannot,  at  any  rate,  follow  him  in  thinking  it  possible  that  General
Barter's  vision  of  Lieutenant  B.  (Vol.  V.,  p.  468)  may  be  explained  as
"  the  development  of  a  latent  image."  "  The  figure,  "  Mr.  Podmore  says,
"represented  the  agent  as  he  was  during  life."  But  an  essentia,l  part  of
the  narrative  is  that  it  represented  the  agent  decorated  with  a  "New-
gate fringe,"  as  he  never  was  when  General  Barter  had  seen  him ; —
as  he  never  was,  indeed,  when  he  was  out  riding  anywhere,  since
he  had  only  grown  that  appendage  in  the  hospital  during  his  last
illness.  Mr.  Podmore  is  surely  riding  his  theory  as  hard  as  Lieutenant
B.  rode  his  ponies  if  he  supposes  that  a  latent  image  of  a  casual  acquaint-
ance will  vivify  itself  after  nearly  a  year  with  change  of  aspect  corre-
sponding to  actual  fact, — and,  moreover,  with  an  accompaniment,  which
Mr.  Podmore  ignores,  of  marked  hallucinatory  sounds  heard  on  several
occasions  by  three  persons  at  least.  All  I  can  say  for  that  hypothesis
is  that  it  seems  to  me  a  shade  less  impossible  than  its  author's  alternative
explanation  of  the  incident,  which  will  be  discussed  below.

As  regards  Mr.  Podmore's  next  point,  the  explanation  of  collective
hallucinations  by  actual  telepathic  infection  (without  suggestion  by
word  or  gesture),  I  have  little  to  add  to  my  arguments  in  Phantasms
of  the  Living  (Vol.  II.,  p.  282  sqq.).  I  there  urged  that  if  we  wished
to  prove  that  hallucinations  can  be  directly  contagious  we  ought  to
produce  instances  of  collective  hallucination  where  other  explanations
were  out  of  place, — where  the  hallucination  was  plainly  a  subjective
affair,  and  could  not,  therefore,  be  independently  caused  in  A,  B^  and  C  at
the  same  moment.  Nor  should  there  be  difhculty  in  producing  such
cases  of  contagion,  considering  that  the  great  majority  of  hallucinations,
and  those  the  most  persistent,  are  without  question  purely  subjective
affections; — being  the  result  of  delirium,  disease,  and  insanity.  No  case
of  this  sort,  so  far  as  I  could  then  or  can  now  discover,  has  ever  been
shown  to  be  contagious,  apart  from  suggestion  by  gestui'e  or  speech.
And  even  among  the  casual  hallucinations  of  sane  persons  I  could  not,  and
cannot,  find  any  cases  where  a  hallucination  which  is  obviously  purely
subjective — as  an  after-image  or  a  fantastic  figure — has  been  shared  by
more  than  one  person.  I  must  save  space  here  by  merely  referring  to
my  earlier  discussion  ;  and  must  repeat  my  own  provisional  view  that,
until  evidence  of  the  kind  suggested  has  been  adduced,  the  fact  that  a
hallucinatory  sight  or  sound  is  perceived  by  two  or  more  persons  is
primd  facie  evideiice  that  this  sight  or  sound — albeit  not  due  to
ordinary  physical  causes — yet  has  some  generating  cause  outside  the
mind  of  either  of  the  percipients.

Y


326  A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Bead. [Jan.  31,


It  is  to  Ml".  Podmore's  third  explanatory  hypothesis,  however,
that  I  take  the  strongest  exception.  In  this  case  he  goes  far  beyond
a  suggestion  which  seemed  to  me  when  I  made  it  to  be  an  ex-
treme outpost  of  the  telepathic  theory.  In  Proceedings,  Vol  V.,
p.  420,  will  be  found  a  case  where  a  Mrs.  Green,  in  Ireland,  had  a
terrifying  dream  (at  once  communicated  to  others)  representing  a  very
unusual  scene  of  the  accidental  drowning  of  a  niece  personally  un-
known to  her,  which  scene  had  occurred  in  Queensland  more  than  12
hours  before  the  dream.  In  this  case  Mrs.  Green's  brother,  the  father
of  the  drowned  woman,  learnt  the  news  about  the  time  of  tlie  dream.
"  His  mind,"  I  remark,  "  may  have  supplied  the  link  between  the
actual  scene  and  the  dream  in  England,  and  the  scene  would  be  vividly
present  to  him  at  the  time  when  the  dream  occurred."  Amidst  the
difficulties  of  this  case,  it  seemed  to  me  possible  that  the  grief  of  Mrs.
Green's  brother  (Mr.  Allen)  might  have  generated  or  reinforced  the
telepathic  impression  which  gave  rise  to  Mrs.  Green's  dream.  For
the  first  reception  of  the  news  of  a  daughter's  violent  death  amounts
in  itself  to  a  kind  of  crisis ;  and  we  may  well  suppose  that  Mr.  Allen
had  never  experienced  such  a  moment  before.

There  is  a  great  interval  between  this  hypothesis  and  the
way  in  which  Mr.  Podmore  uses  a  similar  theoiy  to  explain  (for
instance)  the  phantasmal  sights  and  sounds  experienced  by  Mrs.  G.,
her  two  children,  and  servant  in  the  house  at  X.,  with  which  so  many
members  of  our  Society  are  now  personally  familiar  (p.  259).  In  this
case,  a  previous  occupant,  Miss  Morris,  who  had  been  much  annoyed
by  ghostly  experiences  in  the  house,  left  it  in  December,  1886.
Towards  the  end  of  November,  1887,  Mrs.  G.  entered  the  house  as  a
new  tenant.  Mrs.  G.  did  not  know  Miss  Morris,  and  had  heard  nothing
as  to  the  house's  history.  Yet  Mr.  Podmore  suggests  that  "  the  later
experiences," — i.e.,  the  ghostly  troubles  of  Mrs.  G.  and  her  family, —
"  may  have  been  started,  if  not  wholly  sustained,  by  thought-trans-
ference from  Miss  Morris,  whose  thoughts,  no  doubt,  occasionally
turned  to  the  house  in  which  she  had  suffered  so  much  agitation  and
alarm."

Let  us  consider  what  this  implies.  Miss  Morris,  who  had  left  the
house  for  a  full  year  when  the  new  disturbances  began  (December,
1887),  can  hardly  be  imagined  to  have  been  still  in  a  state  of  active
panic.  Still  we  may  suppose,  as  Mr.  Podmore  says,  that  she  at  times
thought  over  her  past  annoyances.  The  result  of  these  fatal  recol-
lections should  certainly  teach  us  to  control  our  thoughts  as  strictly  as
our  actions.  For  the  very  first  effect  of  Miss  Morris's  ponderings  was
"  a  deep  sob  and  moan,"  followed  by  a  thump  and  a  cry  of  "  Oh,  do
forgive  me  "  ; — all  disturbing  poor  Mrs.  G.,  who  had  the  ill-luck  to  find
herself  in  a  bedroom  about  which  Miss  Morris  was  possibly  thinking.


1890.] A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Bead.


327


Worse  was  to  come,  as  the  narrative  shows  (pp.  2.56  sqq.);  and  at  last
the  unconscious  Miss  Morris  drove  Mrs.  G.  out  of  the  house  in  despair.
Surely  on  this  view  the  peace  of  all  of  us  rests  on  a  sadly  uncertain
tenure  !  Many  things — experiences  quite  other  than  ghostly — have
happened  in  many  houses  on  which  former  occupants  may  look  back
with  feelings  of  regret  or  horror.  There  might  indeed  be  a  com-
plex group  of  phantasms  waiting  for  each  new  comer  if  the  accu-
mulated reminiscences  of  all  previous  inmates  took  ghostly  form  before
his  eyes.

I  will  quote  but  one  instance  more ; — the  alternative  explanation
given  by  Mr.  Podmore  for  General  Barter  s  vision  of  Lieutenant  B.
(see  p.  284  above).

"It  seems  more  plausible,"  he  says,  "to  attribute  [the  vision]  to
telepathy  from  Lieutenant  Deane,  who  had  been  well  acquainted  with
the  decedent  during  the  last  few  months  of  his  life,  and  who  had
left  the  percipient  but  a  few  minutes  before.  On  the  assumption  that
the  vision  had  been  due  to  the  direct  action  of  the  deceased,  its  coinci-
dence with  Lieutenant  Deane's  visit  remains  unexplained."

Now,  in  the  first  place,  I  do  not  see  much  "coincidence"  in  the
fact — no  unusual  one  surely  at  an  Indian  station — that  tlie  Deanes
had  been  making  an  evening  call  upon  their  friends  and  neighbours  the
Barters ; — and  I  conceive  that  all  that  this  visit  had  to  do  with  the  vision
was  that  in  reconducting  his  friends  General  Barter  happened  to  find
himself  at  the  propitious  place  and  at  a  propitious  hour  for  the  apparition
to  become  visible.  But,  apart  from  tliis,  consider  what  Mr.  Pod-
more's  view  involves.  Lieutenant  Deane,  as  he  walks  home  with
his  wife,  forms  so  intense  a  mental  picture  of  a  deceased  acquaintance
to  whom  he  certainly  was  not  much  attached ; — he  realises  so
vividly  how  Lieutenant  B.  would  look  if  he  were  riding  down  the  hill
intoxicated  after  a  "  wet  evening  "  at  mess  ; — that  his  mental  picture
externalises  itself  in  sight  and  sound  for  General  Barter  and  Genei'al
Barter's  dogs.  Now  it  is  not  logically  inconceivable  that  telepathy
might  act  in  this  way, — on  the  man  at  any  rate,  if  not  on  the  dogs.  I
am  willing  to  admit  that  a  picture  strongly  occupying  A's  mind  might
externalise  itself  to  B  as  a  phantasmal  image  in  A's  vicinity.  But  I
repeat  that  it  is  an  extraordinary  thing  tliat  this  power  of  transference
of  mental  pictures  should  operate  simply  and  solely  in  transferring
mental  pictures  of  dead  persons,  or  (as  in  the  case  of  the  house  at  X.
just  quoted)  in  transferring  mental  pictures  symbolising  horrors
experienced  by  the  mental-pictui'er  at  the  recollection  of  the  imagined
sight  of  dead  persons.  If  General  Barter  had  been  in  the  habit —
which  he  was  not — of  thus  externalising  pictures  out  of  his  friends'
minds ;  if  Lieutenant  Deane  had  been  in  the  habit — which  he  was  not
— of  pondering  with  intense  anguish  on  his  dissipated  comrade's  fate, — -


328


A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[Jan.  31,


there  might  have  been  some  plausibility  in  Mr.  Podmore's  view.  But,
as  the  case  stands,  we  have  a  right  to  ask  why  the  ordinary  interests,
the  ordinary  excitements  of  our  neighbours, — their  money-affairs,  their
love-affairs,  and  the  like, — are  not  perpetually  obtruding  themselves
upon  us  in  phantasmal  guise.  Until  they  do  so,  it  is  hardly  plausible
to  assume  a  ti-ansference  of  our  neighbours'  thoughts  or  memories
as  the  explanation  of  this  one  special  class  of  phenomena  which  point
primd  facie  to  the  influence  of  the  dead.

It  was  objected  to  us  when  we  published  our  first  evidence  for
thought-transference  tliat  such  a  possibility  was  contrary  to  the  uni-
versal experience  of  mankind  ; — that  liuman  beings  were  in  actual  fact
constantly  anxious  to  read  each  others'  minds,  and  constantly  unable
to  do  so.  To  this  we  replied  that  the  kind  and  amount  of  thought-
transference  to  which  our  experiments  pointed  was  not  such  as  to  be  of
importance  in  actual  practice,  or  to  obtrude  itself  upon  the  notice  of
anyone  who  was  not  carefully  seeking  it.  Such  has  continued  to  be
the  character  of  our  experiments  ; — decisive  (as  we  must  hold)  as  to  the
reality  of  the  power  in  question,  but  indicating  also  that  that  power  is
rare,  fleeting,  and  inconspicuous.  In  the  present  state  of  oxir  telepathic
evidence  we  must  avoid  postulating  sudden  irregular  extensions  of
this  little-known  power, — ^^just  in  oixler — like  the  Ptolemaics — "  to  save
appearances," — to  cover  somehow  all  the  observed  phenomena  without
recasting  our  much-sti'ained  theory.  "  Cycle  and  epicycle,  orb  in  orb  "  ;
— complex  and  elaborate  indeed  must  be  the  reasoning  which  would
explain  by  the  action  of  the  living  the  aj^paritions  of  the  dead.

I  recognise,  however,  that  while  dealing  thus  severally  witli  Mr.
Podmore's  hypotheses  I  have  not  yet  fully  met  the  objections  which  he
or  others  have  urged  against  my  own.  Especially  there  remains  an
objection  which,  though  capable  of  being  turned  against  Mr.  Podmore's
view  as  well  as  against  mine,  becomes,  no  doubt,  the  more  telling  as  more
and  more  significance  is  attributed  to  narratives  of  haunting  and  the
like.  I  refer  to  the  large  admixture  of  fragmentary,  meaningless  hallu-
cinations of  sight  and  sound, — mere  vague  noises,  momentary  lights,
(fee,  which  do  not  readily  suggest  intelligent  agency.  Mr.  Podmore
freely  classes  these  hallucinations  as  jDurely  subjective,  and  seenis  to
suggest  that  telepathic  hallucinations,  due  to  other  living  minds,  may-
be readily  engrafted  upon,  or  may  readily  engender,  these  merely
delusive  manifestations.  I  do  not  myself  see  much  evidence  for  such
conjunction  of  false  phantasms  with  true  ;  but  I  admit  that  something
more  than  this  demurrer  is  needed  from  me ;  that  I  ought  to  try  to
show  in  what  way  these  inchoate,  scrappy  hallucinations  are  explicable
on  my  own  scheme.  I  do  so  with  some  reluctance  ;  for  in  passing  from
Mr.  Podmore's  view  to  my  own  I  feel  that  I  reject  the  improbable  only
to  embark  upon  the  unjnovable ;  and  that  my  critics  will  hardly  be  at


1890.] A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


829


the  pains  to  separate  what  I  regard  as  evidence  from  what  I  admit  to
be  conjecture.

I  have  already  urged  that  if  once  the  possibility  of  a  direct
transference  of  ideas  and  impressions  from  mind  to  mind  be  estab-
lished,— a  transference  independent  of  sensory  organs,  and  not  aiTested
by  crowded  cities  or  by  breadth  of  sea, — then  we  must  regard  this
far-acting  power,  this  far-perceiving  sensibility,  as  indicating  the
existence  of  a  scheme  of  laws,  a  system  of  forces,  of  which  our
sciences  of  matter  are  as  powerless  to  take  account  as  our  balances
are  to  weigh  the  cosmical  ether.  Yet,  like  the  existence  and  properties
■of  that  ether,  these  spiritual  forces  may  conceivably  be  comprehended
by  inference, — detected  in  their  inconspicuous  interfusion  with  causes
better  understood.  For  the  present,  assuredly,  our  inferences,  our
conceptions,  must  be  of  the  vaguest,  most  provisional  character.

But  there  is  one  assumption  which  we  in  this  century  can  no  more
avoid  making  than  the  savage  could  avoid  ascribini^  the  movements  of
nature  to  the  action  of  spirits  bent  on  liis  weal  or  woe.  ^Yhere  his
conceptions  were  inevitably  self-centred,  ours, — be  they  true  or  false,
wise  or  unwise, — are  inevitably  naturalistic,  cosmical,  evolutionary.
And  thus  if  there  be  any  impingement  whatsoever  of  a  spiritual  world
(I  use  this  term  as  readily,  though  vaguely,  intelligible)  on  our
mundane  sphere,  we  are  forced  to  imagine  that  impingement  or
interaction  to  be  of  such  a  kind  as  would  be  recognised  by  higher
intelligences  as  subject  to  laws  not  primarily  framed  for  subservience
to  human  needs,  or  recognition  by  human  intelligences.  It  must  be
something  utterly  different  from  the  specially-authorised  interferences
which  the  mass  of  mankind  continue  to  imagine  in  this  one  realm,
although  science  has  expelled  them  from  every  other.  And  it  follows
that  since  we  have  some  evidence  that  such  impingement  exists,
it  is  not  fantastic  but  reasonable  to  consider,  in  a  broad  analogical
manner,  in  what  ways  its  manifestation  might  best  accord  with  our
notions  of  nature.

So  far  as  we  can  judge  from  the  behaviour  of  other  laws  or
forces,  which,  while  entirely  removed  from  our  direct  cognisance,  are  yet
inferred  to  produce  occasional  conspicuous  physical  effects,  we  shall  be
led  to  suppose  that  the  vast  majority  of  the  effects  produced  by  the
unseen  world  upon  our  own  are  not  definitely  recognised  by  our
intelligence.  A^'e  are  likely  to  note  only  a  few  emergent  instances, —
phenomena  specially  directed  towards  us,  or  specially  incapable  of
being  referred  to  ordinary  laws.  "  Specially  directed  towards  us,"  I
say ; — for  we  may  conjecture  that  the  law  of  intercommunication
between  the  seen  and  the  unseen  may,  like  other  laws  of  nature,
be  sometimes  utilised  by  intelligences  familiar  with  its  bearings.
"  Specially  incapable  of  being  referred  to  ordinary  causes,"  I  say  ;  —


330  A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Bead. [Jan.  31,


for  we  cannot  tell  a  frriori  after  what  fashion  such  influences  may
be  perceived.  Our  ordinary  apprehensions  are  not  of  the  facts  in
nature  theoretically  most  important,  but  of  the  facts  in  nature  most
important  for  the  preservatioir  of  our  own  bodily  organisms.  We
perceive  low  degrees  of  light  because  even  a  low  light  helped  oux'
ancestors  to  search  for  food ;  we  do  not  perceive  low  degrees  of
electricity,  because  to  those  ancestors  weak  electricity  was  wholly
unimportant.  But  the  human  organism  has  many  capacities  which
are  rarely  manifested ;  and  in  every  direction  some  few  persons  are
found  who  perceive  phenomena  unimportant  to  man's  life  and  un-
observed by  the  multitude.  The  perception  of  certain  psychical
influences  may  be  like  the  hearing  of  very  shrill  notes,  or  the
perception  of  the  presence  of  a  hidden  cat  in  the  room, — an  innate
capacity  which  from  its  practical  uselessness  has  never  yet  been  fostered
by  the  race,  and  which  consequently  reaches  its  higher  grades  only  in
a  few  chance  individuals.

Or,  again,  these  supposed  psychical  influences  may  present  them-
selves as  perceptions  too  feeble  to  allow  us  to  recognise  their  supei'-
normal  character.  Few  phenomena  are  theoretically  more  important,
or  practically  more  continuous,  than  the  fall  of  meteoric  dust  on  the
earth.  Yet  tliis  dust  has  descended  unobserved  upon  the  heads  of  all
men  in  all  ages,  and  has  only  been  recognised  when  the  falling  body
attained  a  quite  unusual  size  and  weight.

The  great  majority  of  psychical  influences  may,  on  this  analogy,  be
quite  below  the  level  at  which  tliey  could  attract  our  attention.  They
will  disturb  human  life  as  little  as  the  fall  of  cosmical  dust  disturbs
weighing  operations  conducted  in  the  open  air.  Then  when  they
attain  to  a  somewhat  greater  magnitude,  they  will  be  conspicuous  but
not  recognisable.  They  will  be  vague,  inchoate  sounds  or  sights  to
which  it  will  be  hard  to  assign  a  distinct  origin.

On  the  old  view,  that  which  was  to  be  looked  for  (if  anything  Avas
to  be  looked  for)  from  the  unseen  world  was  an  occasional  definite
apparition,  induced  by  grave  causes,  and  standing  wholly  apart  from
other  phenomena.  In  my  view,  on  the  other  hand,  we  must  look  for  a
miscellaneous  interfusion  among  terrene  phenomena  of  phenomena
generated  by  extra-tei'rene  causes.

This  conclusion  (from  which  I  can  see  nological  escape)looks  perilously
like  a  return  to  the  animistic  superstitions  of  the  savage, — or  at  least  to
the  mediieval  ascription  of  any  specially  puzzling  circumstance  to  the
agency  of  the  devil.  The  reader  will  feel  himself  in  danger  of  being
drawn  into  the  worst  possible  intellectual  company, — into  that  credulous
band  who  argue  that  because  an  incident  might  conceivably  be  super-
normal, therefore  it  is  supernormal, — and  who  resent  any  efibrt  to  refer
their  marvels  to  the  action  of  ordinaiy  laws. I  must  therefore  at  once


1890.] A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


33X


insist  that  my  object  is  a  quite  diiferent  one.  I  am  not  going  to  rest
any  evidential  claim  whatever  upon  any  phenomenon  which  might  be
due  to  ordinary  physical  causes,  or  to  mere  subjective  hallucination.
The  cases  to  which  we  appeal  as  evidence  must  be  not  vague  and
inchoate  but  distinct  and  coincidental.  All  that  I  claim  is  that  these
vague  phenomena,  surrounding  the  distinct  phenomena,  should  count
as  neutral  ground  ;  — that  they  should  not  be  used,  as  Mr.  Podmore  has
used  them,  to  discredit  those  distincter  phenomena  of  which  they
form,  in  my  view,  an  integral,  though  not  an  evidentially-valuable,
part.

This,  I  repeat,  is  the  full  extent  of  the  evidential,  the  controversial,
use  which  ought  to  be  made  of  these  obscure  phenomena.  From  a
speculative  point  of  view,  however,  there  is  more  to  be  said.  When
we  are  no  longer  trying  to  prove  that  veridical  phantasms  do  occur,  but
are  assuming  the  fact  of  their  occurrence  and  trying  to  explain  their
genesis  and  development, — then  indeed  these  inchoate,  rudimentary
phenomena  of  sight  and  sound  will  acquire  a  theoretical  importance
which  as  evidence  they  cannot  claim  to  possess.

Just  as,  in  trying  to  trace  the  causes,  say,  of  a  jiaralytic  seizure,  we
feel  it  needful  to  note  all  smaller  symptoms  which  jDrecede,  accompany,
or  follow  the  principal  shock,  so  also  in  tracking  the  genesis  of  a
veridical  hallucination  we  are  bound  to  note  all  such  minor  hallucina-
tory percepts  as  have  grouped  themselves  about  the  central  phantasm.
These  subsidiary  hallucinations  cannot  be  meaningless,  cannot  be
arbitrary ;  they  must  in  some  way  indicate  the  mode  in  which  the
unknown  energy  is  operating  to  pi'oduce  the  main  result.

A  complete  record  should,  I  think,  be  made  in  the  first  place  of
the  phenomena  which  do  accompany  veridical  hallucinations,  and  in  the
second  place  of  phenomena  Avhicli  are  frequent  in  the  hallucinations  of
the  insane,  or  in  the  plainly  subjective  hallucinations  of  sane  persons,
but  which  are  not  observed  to  accompany  hallucinations  of  a  veridical
type.  Much  of  this  task  has  already  been  performed  by  Mr.  Gurney'^ ;
and  I  will  illustrate  the  value  of  these  comparisons  by  referring  to  some
cases  where  he  has  shown  the  various  forms  of  connection  of  luminous
appearances  with  veridical  apparitions.  Sometimes  we  have  tlie
phantasmal  figure  seen  as  though  illuminated  on  a  dark  background.
Sometimes  it  appears  as  in  a  disc  or  oval  of  light.  Sometimes  its
contour  is  indistinct,  and  it  resembles  a  luminous  cloud,either  for  the  first
moments  of  its  appearance  or  throughout  all  its  stay.  Sometimes  there
is  no  figure  at  all,  but  a  phantasmal  "  ball  of  liglit,"  or  a  brilliant
difi'used glow, Avhich  seems  a  sufiiciently  unique experience,  and

J-  Phantasms  of  the  Liring,  Vol.  I.,  chap.  xi.  :  "Transient  Hallucinations  of  the
Sane,"  and  heading  "Luminosity  "  in  Index.


332  A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead. [Jan.  31,


coincides  sufi&ciently  closely  with  a  death,  to  have  some  claim  to  rank
as  a  veridical  phantasm,  l^ow  from  all  this  I  argue  that  the  phan-
tasmogenetic  agency  at  Avork — whatever  that  may  be — may  be  able
to  produce  effects  of  liglit  more  easily  than  definite  figures.  I  shall
think  it  antecedently  probable,  therefore,  that  there  will  be  many
veridical  hallucinations  which  will  not  get  beyond  this  stage  ; — which
will  produce  impressions  of  light  and  nothing  more,  yet  which  will  be
in  reality  of  just  the  same  type  as  those  which  rise  into  distinctness
and  recognition.  Wlien,  therefore,  in  our  accounts  of  "haunting "
phenomena  I  read  of  brilliant  phantasmal  lights,  apparently  meaning-
less, I  do  not  set  them  down  as  necessarily  indicating  a  tendency  on
the  percipients'  part  to  merely  subjective  hallucination.  I  claim  tliat
they  must  rank  as  ambiguous  phenomena, — telling  decisively  neither  for
nor  against  some  agency  external  to  the  percipient.  And  if  they  are
witnessed  independently  by  several  persons,  I  say  that  they  may  then
afford  strong  presumption  that  there  is  some  agency  external  to  the
percipients,  but  unable  to  impress  itself  upon  their  minds  in  any
more  developed  or  personalised  form.

A  similar  argument  will  hold  good  in  the  case  of  the  vague  hal-
lucinatory noises  which  frequently  accompany  definite  veridical  phan-
tasms, and  frequently  also  occur  apart  from  any  definite  phantasm  in
houses  reputed  haunted.  As  regards  these  inarticulate  noises,  there  is
of  course  always  a  possibility  that  they  are  real  objective  sounds,  due
to  undiscovered  physical  causes.  When  a  sound  is  sudden  and  never
repeated  it  may  often  be  impossible  to  explain  it  ;  but  T  think  that
when  any  sound,  liowever  vague  or  obscure,  is  frequently  repeated,  its
physical  cause,  if  physical  cause  it  has,  ought  to  be  detected  by  careful
investigation.  Here,  as  in  so  many  other  parts  of  our  inquiry,  nothing
is  needed  except  just  that  careful  and  exact  attention  which  has  never
yet  been  bestowed.

I  might  pursue  this  discussion  of  inchoate  manifestations  much
further,  and  might  suggest  other  phenomena,  besides  lights  and  noises,
which  may  by  analogy  have  some  supernormal  origin,  but  which  must
inevitably  remain  unrecognised.  But  for  brevity's  sake  I  will  go  on  to
another  cause  of  unrecognisability  on  which  as  yet  I  have  but  very
briefly  dwelt.  I  allude  to  the  large  part  which  local  attraction  seems
to  play  in  the  generation  of  post-mortem  phantasms.  In  Phantasms
of  the  Living  there  were  cases  which  suggested  that  during  life,  or  at
the  hour  of  death,  it  was  sometimes  a  local  rather  than  a  personal
cause  wliich  induced  or  determined  the  apparition  of  the  dying  man.
And  in  post-mortem  cases — as  our  evidence  has  shown — this  feature  is
still  more  prominent.  To  me  it  seems  tliat  it  may  well  be  only  as  an
exceptional  thing  that  any  post-mortem  phantom  is  recognised  by  any
survivor. If  once  it  is  admitted  that  phantasms  may  be  in  some  way


1890.]


A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


333


conditioned  or  attracted  by  that  form  of  assemblage  of  influences  whicli
we  term  locality,  it  is  plain  that  we  transitory  tenants  of  the  earth's
surface  can  have  no  claim  to  appropriate  all  tlie  memories  which  may
act  upon  the  departed.  If  apparitions  be  the  dreams  of  the  dead,  they
will  dream  of  affairs  of  their  own  in  which  we  have  no  share.  And  if
(as  both  Mr.  Podmore  and  I  hold)  these  phantoms  are  to  be  regarded
as  the  reflections  of  some  external  mind,  then  I  maintain — in  opposi-
tion to  him — that  they  do  at  least  priind  facie  resemble  dreams  of  the
dead  rather  than  dreams  of  the  living.

Dreams  of  the  dead,  I  suppose,  equally  well  with  dreams  of  the
living,  may  include  figures  which  are  not  the  figures  of  the  dreamers
themselves.  Such,  possibly,  may  be  the  explanation  of  the  cases  where
several  distinct  figures  are  observed  in  the  same  house.  As  in  certain
cases  in  Phcmtasms  of  tlie  Living,  the  subsidiary  figures  may  possibly
take  their  rise  in  the  shaping  imagination  of  the  principal  agent.  But,
apart  from  this,  it  seems  to  me  that  if  we  grant  to  locality  any  influence
at  all,  we  cannot  predict  in  what  way  that  influence  may  show  itself.
We  need,  I  think,  much  fuller  histories  of  what  has  happened  in
houses  now  "  haunted  "  than  we  yet  possess,  before  we  can  discuss  the
question  of  these  multiple  appearances  with  much  hope  of  result.  In  one
case — which  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  cite  in  detail — at  least  six  figures
seen  in  the  same  house  by  persons  not  cognisant  of  its  history  have
been  plausibly  identified  with  actual  personages  in  the  past.  In  this
case  the  materials  for  recognition — both  phantasmal  and  historical —
happen  to  be  unusually  full.  But  in  most  houses — in  such  houses,  for
instance,  as  that  at  Prestbury,  where  various  figures  were  seen — -the
memory  of  former  tenants  quickly  fades,  and  no  means  are  left  by  which
the  revenani  can  prove  his  identity.

The  present  paper  has  thus  far  been  mainly  concerned  with  visual
manifestations  of  the  dead,  since  these  form  the  most  convenient  group
for  comparison  with  those  phantasms  of  the  living,  from  which  I  have
tried  to  distinguish  what  I  regard  as  real  post-mortem  apparitions.
But  my  case  for  post-mortem  manifestations  does  not  rest  upon  appari-
tions alone.

It  appears  to  me  that  there  is  an  important  parallelism  running
through  each  class  of  our  experiments  in  automatism  and  each  class  of
our  spontaneous  phenomena.  Roughly  speaking,  we  may  say  that  our
experiment  and  observation  comprise  five  different  stages  of  phenomena ;
viz.,  (I.)  hypnotic  suggestion  ;  (II.)  telepathic  experiments  ;  (III.)  spon-
taneous telepathy  during  life ;  (IV. )  phantasms  at  death ;  (V. )  phantasms
after  death.  And  we  find,  I  think,  that  the  same  types  of  communi-
cation meet  us  at  each  stage  ;  so  that  this  recurrent  similarity  of  types
raises  a  presumption  that  the  underlying  mechanism  of  manifestation
at  each  stage  may  be  in  some  way  similar.


334


A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead. [Jan.  31,


Again  using  a  mere  rough  form  of  division,  we  shall  find  three  main
forms  of  manifestation  at  each  stage  ;  ( 1 )  hallucinations  of  the  senses  ;
(2)  emotional  and  motor  impulses  ;  (3)  definite  intellectual  messages.

I.  And  first  let  us  start  from  a  class  of  experiments  into  which
telepathy  does  not  enter,  but  which  exhibit  in  its  simplest  form  the
mechanism  of  the  automatic  transfer  of  messages  from  one  stratum  to
another  of  the  same  personality.  I  speak,  of  course,  of  post-hypnotic
suggestions.  Here  the  agent  is  a  living  man,  acting  in  an  ordinary
way,  hy  direct  speech.  The  unusual  feature  lies  in  the  condition  of
the  jnercipient,  who  is  hypnotised  at  the  time,  and  is  thus  undergoing
a  kind  of  dislocation  of  personality,  or  temporary  upheaval  of  an
habitually  subjacent  stratum  of  the  self.  This  hypnotic  personality,
being  for  the  time  at  the  sui-face,  receives  the  agent's  verbal  suggestion,
of  which  the  percipient's  waking  self  is  unaware.  Then  afterwards,
when  the  waking  self  has  resumed  its  usual  upper  position,  the  hypnotic
self  carries  out  at  the  stated  time  the  given  suggestion, — an  act  whose
origin  the  upper  stratum  of  consciousness  does  not  know,  but  which  is
in  efl'ect  a  message  communicated  to  the  upper  stratum  from  the  now
submerged  or  sub-conscious  stratum  on  which  the  suggestion  was  origin-
ally impressed.

And  this  message  may  take  any  one  of  the  three  leading  forms
mentioned  above  ; — say  a  hallucinatory  image  of  the  hypnotiser  or  of
some  other  person ;  or  an  impulse  to  perform  some  action ;  or  a
definite  word  or  sentence  to  be  written  automatically  by  tlie  waking-
self,  which  thus  learns  what  order  has  been  laid  upon  the  hypnotic  self
while  the  waking  consciousness  Avas  in  abeyance.

II.  Now  tui'n  to  our  experiments  in  thought-transference.  Here
again  the  agent  is  a  living  man ;  but  he  is  no  longer  operating  by
ordinary  means, — by  spoken  words  or  visiljle  gestures.  He  is  operating
on  the  percipient's  subconscious  self  by  means  of  a  telepathic  impulse,
which  he  desires,  indeed,  to  project  from  himself,  and  which  the  per-
cipient may  desire  to  receive,  but  of  whose  modus  02oerandi  the  ordinary
waking  selves  of  agent  and  percipient  alike  are  entirely  unaware.

Here  again  we  may  divide  tlie  messages  sent  into  the  same  three
main  classes.  First  come  the  hallucinatory  figures — always  or  almost
always  of  himself — which  the  agent  causes  the  percipient  to  see.
Secondly  come  impulses  to  act,  telepathically  impressed ;  as  when  (in
Madame  B.'s  case)  the  hypnotiser  desires  his  subject  to  come  to  him  at
an  liour  not  previously  notified.  And  thirdly,  we  have  a  parallel  to
the  post-hypnotic  writing  of  definite  words  or  figures  in  our  own
experiments  on  the  direct  telepathic  transmission  of  words,  figures,
cards,  etc.,  from  the  agent,  using  no  normal  means  of  communication,
to  tlie  percipient,  either  in  the  hypnotised  or  in  the  waking  state.

The  parallel  between  the  telepathic  messages  and  the  post-hypnotic


1890.] A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Bead.  335


messages  will  tlius  be  pretty  complete  if  we  regard  the  phantasmal  figures
of  Mr.  S.  H.  B.,  Baron  Schrenck,  &c.  (so  often  referred  to)/  as  really
parallel  to  the  phantasmal  figures  of  Professor  Beaunis,  (fee,  which
hypnotic  subjects  are  made  to  see.  I  admit,  however,  that  I  do  not
regard  these  two  classes  of  phantasmal  figures  as  really  parallel,  for  two
main  reasons.  In  the  first  place  the  telepathic  phantasm  (Mr.  S.  H.  B.)
is  sometimes  perceptible  to  more  than  one  person,  while  the  hypnoti-
cally suggested  phantasm  (as  thus  far  known)  is  only  perceptible  to  the
person  to  whom  the  suggestion  has  been  made.  And  in  the  second
place,  the  agent  who  projects  the  telepathic  phantasm  (Rev.  C.
Godfrey,  Mr.  Cleave),  is  sometimes  himself  more  or  less  conscious  of
being  present  with  the  percipient  ;  whereas  the  hypnotiser  who  has
ordered  that  a  semblance  of  himself  shall  appear  to  his  subject  at  a
given  date  remains  of  course  himself  quite  unafiected  by  the  halluci-
natory figure  of  himself  which  his  subject's  hypnotic  self  generates  at
the  appointed  hour.

I  conceive,  in  short,  that  in  telepathic  cases  there  is  a  transmission
from  agent  to  percipient  which  differs  profoundly  in  kind,  and  not  only
in  degree,  from  any  transmission  of  idea  or  impulse  in  which  the  agent
employs  normal  means  of  suggestion,  by  voice  or  gesture.

III.  We  come  next  to  the  spontaneous  phantasms  occurring  during
life.  Here  we  find  the  same  three  broad  classes  of  messages  ; — with  this
difference,  that  the  actual  apparitions,  which  in  our  telepathic  experi-
mentation are  thus  far  unfortunately  rare,  become  now  the  most
important  class.  I  need  not  recall  the  instances  given  in  Phantasms
of  the  Living,  &c.,  where  an  agent  undergoing  some  sudden  crisis  seems
in  some  way  to  generate  an  apparition  of  himself  seen  by  a  distant
percipient.  Important  also  in  this  connection  are  those  apparitions
of  the  double,  where  some  one  agent  (Mrs.  Stone,  Mrs.  Beaumont,  &c.)
is  seen  i-epeatedly  in  phantasmal  form  by  difi'erent  percipients  at  times
when  that  agent  is  undergoing  no  special  crisis.

Again,  among  our  telepathic  impressions  generated  (spontaneously,
not  experimentally)  by  living  agents,  we  have  cases,  which  I  need  not
here  recapitulate^  of  pervading  sensations  of  distress  ;  or  impulses  to
return  home  (Skirving,  &c.),  which  are  parallel  to  the  hypnotised
subject's  impulse  to  approach  his  distant  hypnotiser,  at  a  moment  when
that  hypnotiser  is  willing  him  to  do  so.

And  thirdly,  among  these  telepathic  communications  from  the  living
to  the  living,  we  have  definite  sentences  automatically  written,  com-
municating facts  which  the  distant  person  knows,  but  is  not  consciously
endeavouring  to  transmit. A  typical  case  of  this  kind  (Mrs.  Kirby's)

''^  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  Ixxxi-iv.,  100-110;  Vol.  II.,  pp.  G71-C.
Journal,  Vol.  II.,  p.  307.


336


A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead. [Jan.  31,


is  given  in  Journal,  Vol.  III.,  p.  298;  and  there  are  others  which  must
be  cited  in  a  future  papei\

lA^.  Passing  on  to  pliantasms  which  cluster  about  the  moment
of  death,  we  find  our  three  main  classes  of  cases  still  meeting  us.  Our
readei'S  are  familiar  with,  the  visual  cases,  where  there  is  an  actual
apparition  of  the  dying  man,  seen  by  one  or  more  persons ;  and  also
with  the  emotional  and  motor'  cases,  where  the  impression,  although
powerful,  is  not  definitely  sensory  in  character.  And  various  cases
also  have  been  j^ublished  where  the  message  has  consisted  of  definite
words,  not  always  externalised  as  an  auditory  hallucination,  but  some-
times automatically  uttered  by  the  percipient  himself  or  automatically
written  by  the  percipient,  as  in  the  case  communicated  by  Dr.  Liebeault
[Pliantasms  of  tJte  Living,  Vol.  I.,  p.  293),  wliere  a  girl  writes  the
message  announcing  her  friend's  death  at  the  time  when  that  friend
is  in  fact  dying  in  a  distant  city.

V.  And  now  I  maintain  that  in  these  post-mortem  cases  also  we
find  the  same  general  classes  persisting,  and  iii  somewhat  the  same
proportion.  Most  conspicuous  are  the  actual  apjxtritions,  with  which,
indeed,  the  preceding  pages  have  mainly  dealt.  It  is  very  rare  to  find
an  apparition  which  seems  to  impart  any  verbal  message ;  but  I  give
as  Case  I.  in  an  Appendix  a  case  of  this  kind.  As  a  rule,  however,  the
apparition  is  of  the  apparently  automatic,  purposeless  character,  already
so  fully  described.  We  have  also  the  emotional  and  motor  class  of
post-mortem  cases  (as  Moir's) ;  and  these  may,  perhaps,  be  more
numerous  in  proportion  than  our  collection  would  indicate ;  for  it  is
obvious  that  impressions  which  are  so  m^ich  less  definite  than  a  visual
hallucination  (although  they  may  be  even  more  impressive  to  the
percipient  himself)  can  rarely  be  used  as  evidence  of  communication,
witli  the  departed.

But  now  I  wish  to  point  out  that,  besides  these  two  classes  of  post-
mortem manifestations,  we  have  our  thh-d  class  also  still  persisting  ; —
we  have  definite  verbal  messages  which  at  least  purport,  and  sometimes,
I  think,  with  strong  probability,  to  come  from  the  departed.

Personally,  indeed,  I  regard  this  form  of  evidence  to  jwst-mortem
communications  as  the  most  cogent  of  all.  If  I  have  not  hitherto
touched  upon  it  in  this  series  of  papers,  this  has  not  been  from  any
indifference  to  it,  but  rather  from  a  sense  of  its  importance,  and  of
the  care  with  which  it  should  be  approached.  I  have  endeavoured  to
lead  up  to  it  by  another  series  of  discussions  on  automatic  writing  and
other  forms  of  automatism,  which  may  help  to  perform  the  preliminary
task  of  showing  to  what  sources  other  than  communication  from  the
departed  we  are  bound  to  refer  the  enormous  majority  of  genuinely
automatic  messages,  however  obtained.  For  in  no  part  of  our  whole
field  of  inquiry  have  error  and  delusion  been  more  conspicuous  than


1890.] A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Bead.


337


in  this.  The  ascription  of  the  paltriest  automatic  messages  to  the
loftiest  names — human  or  divine  ;  the  awe-struck  retaiUng  of  the
halting  verses  of  a  "  Sliakespeare,"  or  the  washy  platitudes  of  a
"St.  John," — all  this  has  been  equally  repugnant  to  science,  to  religion,
and  to  plain  common-sense.  And  short  of  extravagance  like  this,  in
the  case  of  the  great  majority  of  automatic  messages,  their  claim  to
proceed  from  the  departed  has  no  valid  foundation,  since  all  the  actual
facts  contained  in  them  have  been  known  to  the  writer,  although
they  may  be  pi'esented  or  discussed  in  a  manner  which  the  writer  does
not  anticipate,  and  which  may  seem  characteristic  of  a  departed  person.

But  a  certain  number  of  cases  remain  where  the  message  given
contains  verifiable  facts  of  which  neither  the  writer,  nor  any  one  else
present  at  the  time,  was — so  far  as  can  be  discovered — previously
awai'e.  It  then  becomes  our  business  to  consider  from  what  mind  these
messages  can  have  been  originated.

Some  cases  of  this  kind  were  cited  and  discussed  in  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research  Jo!tr««/  for  February,  1888  (Vol.  III.,  p.  21-i,  sqq.).
Others  may  be  found  in  "  M.A.  (Oxon's)  "  S^nrit  Identity,  now  out  of
print.  And  four  are  given  in  an  Appendix  to  this  paper  :  Cases  II.,
III.,  IV.,  V.  All  these  were  sent  to  me  by  our  Corresponding  IMember,
the  Hon.  A.  AksakofF,  and  three  of  them  (II.,  III.,  IV.)  have  appeared
in  his  new  work,  Animismus  tmd  Spiritismns.  Case  II.,  however,  is
here  given  with  important  additional  matter  sent  to  me  by  M.
Aksakoff,  and  Case  V.  now  appears,  I  believe,  for  the  first  time.

In  considering  such  messages  we  must  remember  that  there  is  a
possible  way  of  explaining  almost  any  message  without  postulating  the
continuance  of  personal  life  after  bodily  death.  It  is  conceivable  that
thought-transference  and  clairvoyance  may  be  pushed  to  the  point  of  a
sort  of  terrene  omniscience  ;  so  that  to  a  man's  unconscious  self  some
phantasmal  picture  should  be  open  of  all  that  men  are  doing  or  have
done, — things  good  and  evil  photographed  imperishably  in  some
inexorable  imprint  of  the  past.  In  such  a  case,  the  ajjparent  personality
of  one  departed  might  be  only  some  kind  of  i^ersisting  synthesis  of  the
psychical  impressions  which  his  transitory  existence  had  left  upon  the
sum  of  things.

All  this  might  be ;  but  before  such  a  hypothesis  as  this  could  come
within  the  range  of  possible  discussion  by  men  of  science  there  must
have  been  a  change  of  mental  attitude  so  fundamental  that  no  argu-
ment at  present  adducible  either  way  could  tell  for  much  in  the  scale.
Por  the  present  our  business  must  be  to  collect  the  truth-telling
messages,  without  pretending  to  any  absolute  certainty  as  to  their
source.  But  those  who  wish  to  prove  continued  personal  identity  must
keep  two  needs  in  view  ; — first  the  need  of  definite  facts,  given  in  the
messages,  which  were  known  to  the  departed  and  are  not  known  to  the


338


A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead. [Jan.  31,


automatist  ;  and  secondly,  the  need  of  detailed  and  characteristic  utter-
ances ;  a  moral  means  of  identification  corresponding,  say,  not  to  the
meagre  signalement  by  which  a  man  is  described  on  his  passport,  but
to  the  individual  complex  of  minute  markings  left  by  the  impression  of
a  prisoner's  thumb.

When  I  consider  how  slight,  how  careless,  how  occasional,  all
experiment  of  this  kind  lias  as  yet  been — and  yet  what  striking  frag-
ments of  evidence  have  issued  from  these  scattei'ed  attempts, — I  cannot
btit  hope  that  the  systematic  study  of  human  automatism,  human,
personality,  may  lead  to  the  gradual  discernment  of  personalities  other
than  the  automatist's,  operating  unspent  in  the  penumbra  of  his  uncon-
scious self.

I  will  not  push  my  arguments  further.  I  do  not  pretend  to
accredit  them  with  a  cogency  which  they  do  not  possess.  I  shall  have
accomplished  all  that  seems  at  present  possible  if  I  leave  my  reader
feeling  that  my  suggestions,  although  obviously  unprovable,  are  not
obviously  improbable ;  nay,  that,  were  they  once  admitted,  the  pheno-
mena, as  thus  far  known  to  us,  would  fall  easily  and  naturally  into
place.  It  must  be  for  further  evidence  to  decide  a  controversy  which,
however  anciently  debated,  is  barely  yet  becoming  ripe  for  scientific
discussion.

But  before  closing  this  paper  1  must  refer  to  two  objections  of  a
moral  kind  with  which  my  former  paper  has  been  met.  It  has  been
urged  on  the  one  hand  that  these  appai-itions  form  so  sorry,  so  distaste-
ful a  spectacle  that  they  serve  to  repel  men  from  the  study  of  psychical
phenomena  which  seem  to  lead  up  to  such  a  degradation  or  parody
of  the  hope  of  eternal  life.  And  on  the  other  hand  I  have  been
rebuked — and  here  Mr.  Podmore  has  joined  in  the  warning — for
atti'acting  premature  adherence  to  my  theories  by  holding  out  an
unwarranted  expectation  of  the  immortality  which  man's  heart  desires.
These  two  objections,  as  will  be  seen,  are  self-contradictory ;  yet  I
cannot  leave  the  one  to  answer  the  other,  nor  maintain  that  either
of  them  is  void  of  force.  At  different  moments,  and  in  different
moods,  I  have  felt  both  of  them  myself.  And  I  think  that,  diverse
as  the  charges  seem,  the  reply  that  best  meets  the  one  best  meets
the  other  also, — and  consists  in  something  of  explanation  of  the  frame
of  mind  in  which,  as  I  conceive,  we  should  enter  upon  inquiries  in  which
issues  so  vast  as  these  are  involved.

And  first  let  me  say  that  my  own  belief  as  to  the  attractive  effect
on  men's  minds  of  such  prospect  of  survival  of  death  as  this  evidence
implies  has  undergone  an  important  alteration.  In  the  Introduction
to  Phantasms  of  the  Living  I  insisted  on  the  supposed  danger  which
Mr.  Podmore  still  fears — the  danger  of  "  taking  advantage  of  men's
hopes  or  fears,"  of  "gilding  our  solid  arguments  with  the  radiance  of


1890.] A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.  339


an  unproved  surmise." It  was  natural  to  imagine  that  men  would
eagerly  welcome  any  new  light,  however  glimmering,  on  a  j^rospect
which  they  profess  to  regard  as  essential  both  to  virtue  and  to  happi-
ness. But  the  wider  experience,  the  first-hand  knowledge  of  the  real
feelings  of  men,  which  this  long  investigation  has  necessarily  brought
with  it,  have  greatly  modified  that  original  impression. I  believe  now
that  there  is  no  danger  lest  arguments  such  as  mine  should  be  too
eagerly  accepted  as  falling  in  vnth  my  readers'  wishes. I  suspect,  on
the  other  hand,  that  if  they  are  to  take  real  hold  of  men's  minds  they
will  need  to  be  driven  home  with  far  more  of  appeal  and  insistence
than  I  can  attempt  to  give  them. For  this  is  not  what  men  desire —
this  inferential,  incomplete  demonstration  that  in  some  fashion  or  other
there  is  something  which  survives  the  tomb. What  men  want  is  the
assurance  of  personal  happiness  after  death ;  or  if  they  cannot  feel
this,  they  wish  at  least  for  such  half-belief  as  may  enable  them  to  dis-
miss such  speculations  altogether. They  do  not  desire  to  know  more
about  death,  but  to  avoid  thinking  of  what  tliey  know  already. A  man
will  tell  you  in  the  same  breath  that  he  trusts  to  enter  upon  eternal
happiness  when  he  dies,  but  that  he  would  rather  not  discuss  such
depressing  subjects. Some  weak  spirits  even  invent  for  themselves  a
kind  of  new  superstition — one  knows  not  whether  further  removed
from  the  temper  of  Plato  or  of  Augustine — according  to  which  there  is
something  presumptuous  or  irreverent  in  allowing  the  mind  to  dwell  or
speculate  upon  the  serious  destiny  and  chief  concerns  of  man.  All  this,
I  do  not  doubt,  the  ministers  of  religion  well  know. They  know  that
besides  those  nobly  trustful  souls  to  whom  all  good  seems  natural  and
all  high  hopes  assured,  their  flocks  contain  a  large  percentage  of  timorous
spirits  who  ask  only  to  be  lulled  into  security  and  to  be  saved  at  any
cost  from  fear. Such  men  certainly  are  not  disposed  to  look  too  closely
at  the  evidence  for  what  they  desire. It  is  not  they  who  are  influenced
by  any  words  of  ours,  or  who  are  at  the  pains  to  follow  the  groping
steps  with  which  in  these  Proceedings  we  clamber  to  a  dubious  glimpse
of  that  Promised  Land  which  they  have  already  mapped  out  to  their
satisfaction.

Our  work,  so  far  as  I  can  tell,  is  mainly  followed  by  readers  of  a
very  diflferent  type.  There  is  an  attitude  of  mind,  becoming  yearly
commoner  among  educated  men,  which,  although  neither  cynical  nor
pessimistic,  yet  regards  the  present  without  enthusiasm  and  the  future
without  eagerness.  There  is  an  acquiescence  in  the  life  of  earth,  and
a  deep  distrust  of  the  unknown.  With  the  advance  of  knowledge,  with
the  quickening  of  imagination,  a  feeling  almost  new  in  the  world  has
arisen, — a  kind  of  shrinking  from  the  magnitude  of  Fate.  The  words
Infinity,  Eternity,  ai'e  no  longer  mere  theological  counters  ;  they  have
taken  on  an  awful  significance  from  our  growing  realisation  of  astro-


3rt0  A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead. [Jan.  31,


nomical  periods,  of  galactic  spaces — "the  gleam  of  a  million  million
of  suns."  A  soul  from  which  the  Christian  confidence  is  withdrawn
may  well  feel  that  it  is  going  forth  into  the  void, — not  as  a  child  to  his
Father's  home, — but  rather  as  a  spark  of  sentiency  involved  amid  enor-
mous forces,  and  capable  of  vmimagined  pain.  And  thus  it  comes  that
men  tacitly  desire  to  make  a  compromise  with  Fate,  to  be  satisfied
with  this  mixed  and  fleeting  life,  and  to  ignore  the  possibilities  of  the
Unknown.

Such,  as  I  observe,  is  the  prevailing  temper  which  our  evidence  has
to  meet.  That  evidence  does  not  attract,  it  rather  irritates  many  of
the  best  minds  of  our  age.  They  are  unwilling  to  reopen  the  great
problem  at  all,  and  are  naturally  the  more  unwilling  insomuch  as  the
new  evidence  itself  seems  so  perplexing  and  grotesque.  Perplexing  and
grotesque  indeed  !  I  answer ;  but  it  is  evidence  ;  and  if  any  evidence
there  be,  then  neither  can  science  continue  to  ignore  the  problem  nor
philosophy  to  assume  the  solution.  What  is  needed  is  simply  a  dis-
passionate intellectual  curiosity  bent  upon  unravelling  the  indications
of  man's  survival  after  earthly  manhood  with  the  same  candid  diligence
which  has  so  lately  unravelled  the  indications  of  man's  descent  from  the
brute.  We  need  not  fear  that  men  will  be  persuaded  too  easily  inta
such  a  temper  as  this.

Rather  is  it  to  be  apprehended, — and  here  I  have  in  view  a
different  group  of  objectors, — that  even  those  men  who  care  deeply
about  man's  future — who  welcome  any  rebuilding  of  philosophical
fabrics  which  may  encourage  hope — will  stand  aloof  from  our  scattered
unintelligible  facts,  and  will  prefer  their  own  "  cloud-capp'd  towers  "
to  any  rough  foundation-stones  which  we  can  hope  to  lay.

Yet  would  there  not  be  something  cowardly  in  a  refusal  to-
accept  the  only  definite  facts  attainable  because  they  are  not  the
kind  of  facts  which  we  should  have  best  liked  to  know  ?  And
would  there  not  be  something  childish  in  the  notion  that  the  unseen
world  must  consist  of  vague  and  ghastly  objects —

Mockeries  and  masks  of  motion  and  mute  breath.
Leavings  of  life,  the  superflux  of  death, —

simply  because  the  apparitions  which  form  at  present  our  clearest  in-
dication of  that  world's  existence  are  by  their  very  nature  fugitive  and
strange  1  As  well  mijrht  Columbus  have  turned  back  when  the
first  drift-wood  floated  out  to  him  from  America,  on  the  ground  thaf>
it  was  useless  to  discover  a  continent  consisting  only  of  dead  logs.

All  such  reluctances  and  hesitations  as  these  will  disappear  as  men
learn,  in  a  larger  sense  than  ever  before,  "  to  see  life  steadily  and  see  if^
whole," — to  maintain  in  this  unfamiliar  air  the  same  dispassionate


1890.] A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.  341


curiosity  and  steady  persistence  of  research  by  which  alone  objective
truth  in  any  direction  has  ever  been  attained  by  man.  There  is  no  fear
lest  the  Cosmos  itself  be  meaningless  or  incoherent ;  the  question  for  us
is  whether  we  men  are  ever  to  have  a  chance  of  entering  into  its  mean-
ing, recognising  its  coherence  ;  or  are  doomed  to  remain  on  the  outside
of  all  deep  significance,  and  but  to  gaze  for  a  moment  on  the  enormous
pageant  as  it  sweeps  by  us  with  an  unknown  purport  in  obedience  to
an  incognisable  Power.


APPENDIX.

Cask  I. [G.  192.]

[Communicated  by  Fralilein  Schneller,  sister-in-law  of  the  percipient,
and  known  to  F.  W.  H.  M.,  January-,  1890.]

About  a  year  ago  there  died  in  a  neighbouring  village  a  brewer,  called
Wiinscher,  with  whom  I  stood  in  friendly  relations.  His  death  ensued  after
a  short  illness,  and  as  I  seldom  had  an  opportunity  of  visiting  him,  I  knew
nothing  of  his  illness  nor  of  his  death.  On  the  day  of  his  death  I  went  to  bed
at  nine  o'clock,  tired  with  the  labours  which  my  calling  as  a  farmer  demands
of  me.  Here  I  must  observe  that  my  diet  is  of  a  frugal  kind  ;  beer  and  wine
are  rare  things  in  my  house,  and  water,  as  usual,  had  been  my  drink  that
night.  Being  of  a  veiy  healthy  constitution  I  fell  asleep  as  soon  as  I  lay
down.  In  my  dream  I  heard  the  deceased  call  out  with  a  loud  voice,  "  Boy,
make  haste  and  give  me  my  boots."  This  awoke  me,  and  I  noticed  that,  for
the  sake  of  our  child,  my  wife  had  left  the  hght  burning.  I  pondered  with
pleasure  over  my  dream,  thinking  in  my  mind  how  Wiinscher,  who  was  a
good-natured,  humorous  man,  would  laugh  when  I  told  him  of  this  dream.
Stni  thinking  on  it  I  hear  Wunscher's  voice  scolding  outside,  just  under  my
window.  I  sit  up  in  my  bed  at  once  and  listen,  but  cannot  understand  his
words.  What  can  the  brewer  want  ?  I  thought,  and  I  know  for  certain  that
I  was  much  vexed  with  him,  that  he  should  make  a  disturbance  in  the  night,
as  I  felt  convinced  that  liis  affairs  might  surely  have  waited  till  the  morrow.
Suddenly  he  comes  into  the  room  from  behind  the  linen  press,  steps  with
long  strides  past  the  bed  of  my  wife  and  the  child's  bed  ;  wildly  gesticulating
with  his  arms  all  the  time,  as  his  habit  was,  he  called  out,  ' '  What  do  you  say
to  this,  Herr  Oberamtmann  1  This  afternoon  at  five  o'clock  I  have  died."
Startled  by  this  information,  I  exclaim,  "  Oh,  that  is  not  true  I  "  He  re-
phed  :  "  Truly,  as  I  tell  you  ;  and,  what  do  you  think  1  They  want  to  bury
me  already  on  Tuesday  afternoon  at  two  o'clock,"  accentuating  his  assertions
all  the  while  by  his  gesticulations.  During  this  long  speecli  of  my  visitor,  I
examined  myself  as  to  whether  I  was  really  awake  and  not  dreaming.

I  asked  myself  :  Is  this  a  hallucination  ?  Is  my  mind  in  full  possession
of  its  faculties  ?  Yes,  there  is  the  light,  there  the  jug,  this  is  the  mirror  and
this  the  brewer  ; — and  I  came  to  the  conclusion  :  I  am  awake.  Then
the  thought  occurred  to  me.  What  will  my  wife  think  if  she  awakes  and  sees

z


342


A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  tJtc  Lead. [Jan.  31,


tlic  brewer  in  our  bedroom  1  In  this  fear  of  her  waking  up  I  turn  round  to
my  wife  and  to  my  great  relief  I  see  from  her  face,  which  is  turned  towards
me,  that  she  is  still  asleep  ;  but  she  looks  very  pale.  I  say  to  the  brewer.
"  Herr  Wiinscher,  we  will  speak  softly,  so  that  my  wife  may  not  wake  up,  it
would  he  very  disagreeable  to  her  to  find  you  here."  To  which  Wiinscher
answered  in  a  lower  and  calmer  tone.  "  Don't  ])e  afraid,  I  will  do  no  harm
to  your  wife."  Things  do  happen  indeed  for  which  we  find  no  explanation —
I  thought  to  myself,  and  said  to  Wiinscher  :  "If  this  be  true,  that  you  have
died,  I  am  sincerely  sorry  for  it  ;  I  will  look  after  your  children. "  Wiinscher
stepped  towards  me,  stretched  out  his  arms  and  moved  his  lii)s  as  though  he
V70uld  embrace  me,  therefore  I  said  in  a  threatening  tone,  and  looking  stead-
fastly at  him  with  frowning  brow  :  "  Don't  come  so  near,  it  is  disagreeable
to  me,"  and  lifted  my  right  arm  to  ward  him  off,  but  before  my  arm  reached
him  the  apparition  had  vanished.  My  first  look  was  to  my  wife  to  see  if  she
were  still  asleep.  She  was.  I  got  up  and  looked  at  my  watch,  it  was  seven
minutes  past  twelve.  My  wife  woke  up  and  asked  me  :  "To  whom  did  you
speak  so  loud  just  now?"  "Have  you  understood  anything?"  I  said.
"  No,"  she  answered  and  went  to  sleep  again.

I  impart  this  experience  to  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  in  the
belief  that  it  may  serve  as  a  new  proof  for  the  real  existence  of  telepathy.  I
must  further  remark,  that  the  brewer  luul  died  that  afternoon  at  five  o'clock
and  was  buried  on  the  following  Tuesday  at  two. — With  great  respect,

Kakl  Dignowity,

D(jber  and  Pause,  Landed  Proprietor.

Schlesien,

December  mh,  1889.

The  usual  time  for  burial  in  Germany,  adds  Fraiilein  Schneller,  is  three
<lays  after  death.  This  time  may  be  prolonged,  however,  on  application.
There  are  no  special  Aoitr.-;  fixed.

In  conversation  Fraiilein  S.  described  her  brother-in-law  as  a  man  of
strong  practical  sense  and  of  extremely  active  habits.

We  have  received  the  "  Sterbeurkunde  "  from  tlie  "  Standesbeamte  "
Siegismund,  Kreis  Sagan,  certifying  that  Karl  Wiinscher  died  Saturday,
September  15th,  1888,  at  4.30  p.m.,  and  was  buried  Tuesday,  Sejitember
18th,  1888,  at  2  p.m.

Herr  Dignowity  writes  again,  January  18th,  1890  : —

"  Frau  Wiinscher  told  me  that  the  time  of  the  burial  was  settled  in  the
death-room  immediately  after  Wiinscher's  death,  because  relations  at  a
distance  had  to  be  summoned  by  telegram.  Wiinscher  had  suffered  from
inflammation  of  tlie  lungs,  which  ended  in  spasm  of  the  heart.  During  his
illness  his  thoughts  had  been  much  occupied  with  me,  and  he  often  wondered
what  I  should  say  if  I  knew  how  ill  he  was. "

Finally,  Frau  Dignowity  (born  Schneller)  writes  from  Pause,  January
18th,  1890:—

"  I  confirm  that  my  husband  told  me  on  the  morning  of  September  16th,
1888,  that  the  brewer  Wunscher  had  given  him  intimation  of  his  death."


1890.]


A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


343


Case  II. [M.  ant.  1.3.]

In  Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  p.  4.34,  is  f;iven  a  case  translated  from  Ptujchische
Studien,  February,  1889,  pp.  67-69,  which  describes  a  conununication  made  to
Mdlle.  Emma  Stramm  concerning  the  death  of  a  M.  August  Duvanel.  M.
Aksakof  has  kindly  sent  me  additional  matter  of  high  interest  bearing  on
this  case,  which  I  liere  translate  from  his  letter  dated  May  9th,  1889  (new
style).  It  will  be  well  first  to  reprint  the  case  as  it  stood  in  Psychische
Studien,  Fehrnary,  1889, pp.  67-69.

On  January  19th,  1887  (says  M.  Aksakof),  I  received  a  visit  from  the
engineer  Kaigorodoif,  who  resides  in  Wilna.  He  nari-ated  to  me  the  follow-
ing circumstances.  He  had  as  governess  for  his  children  Mdlle.  Emma
Stramm,  a  Swiss,  from  the  town  of  Neufchatel,  who  possessed  the  gift  of
automatic  writing.  At  a  seance  held  at  nine  o'clock  on  the  evening  of
January  15th,  at  the  house  of  Herr  KaigorodofF,  at  Wilna,  the  following
communication  was  given  in  French  in  his  presence.  I  have  been  shown  the
original,  and  quote  this  from  a  copy  of  it.  The  medium,  who  was  in  her
normal  state,  asked  : —

"  Is  Lydia  here  1 "  (This  was  a  personality  which  had  manifested  itself  at
previous  sittings. )

"No,  Louis^  is  here,  and  wishes  to  impart  a  piece  of  news  (une  nouvelle)
to  his  sister."

"What  is  it  ?  "

"A  person  of  thy  acquaintance  passed  a,\yay  (est  jjartie)  about  three  o'clock
to-day."

"What  am  I  to  understand  by  this  ?  "
"  That  is  to  say, — he  is  dead."
"Who?"

"  August  Duvanel."
"What  was  his  illness?"

"The  formation  of  a  clot  of  blood  {d'un  engorgement  de  sang).  Pray  for
the  redemi^tion  of  his  soul."

Two  weeks  later,  Herr  Kaigorodoff,  who  was  again  in  Petersburg,  showed
me  a  letter  from  David  Stramm,  the  father  of  the  medium,  dated  from
Neufchatel,  on  January  18th,  1887  (new  style)  ;  thus  written  three  days
after  the  death  of  Duvanel.  This  letter  was  received  at  Wilna  on  January
23rd.  In  it  her  father  informs  her  of  the  event  in  the  following  words,  I
copy  them  literally  from  the  original : —

"  My  much  loved  daughter.  .  .  .  I  will  now  tell  thee  a  great  piece
of  news  {line  grande  nouvelle).  August  Duvanel  died  on  .lanuary  15th,  about
three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  It  was,  so  to  speak,  a  sudden  death,  for  he
had  only  been  ill  a  few  hours.  He  was  attacked  by  blood-clotting  {engarge-
Tiient  cle  sang)  when  he  was  at  the  bank.  He  spoke  very  little,  and  eveiy-
thing  that  he  said  was  for  thee.  .  .  .  He  commended  himself  to  thy
prayers. These  were  his  last  words."

1  The  name  of  a  deceased  brother  of  the  medium,  who  usually  manifests  at  her
seances.  Louis  died  in  1869,  aged  11  months.  At  the  beginning  of  the  seances,  about
the  end  of  188C,  lie  was  the  fir.st  to  comnumicate,  announcing  himself  as  his  sister's
"spirit  protector." — A. A.


S44


A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead. [Jan.  31,


The  difference  in  time  between  Wilna  and  Switzerland  is  about  an  hoiu'.
It  would  thus  be  four  o'clock  in  Wilna  when  Duvanel's  death  occurred,  and
five  hours  later  this  piece  of  news  was  communicated  by  automatic  writing.

But  who  was  Duvanel  ?  And  why  should  his  death  be  "a  great  piece  of
news  "  for  Mdlle.  Emma  Stramm  ?  In  reply  to  questions  which  I  put
to  him  in  writing,  Herr  KaigorodofF  gave  me  the  following  explanation  :
"When  Mdlle.  Emma  Stramm  lived  with  her  parents  in  Neufchatel,
this  Herr  Duvanel  wanted  to  marry  her.  But  he  was  met  with  a  decided
refusal  on  the  part  of  the  j'oung  lady.  As  her  parents,  on  the  other  hand,
were  in  favour  of  the  marriage,  and  endeavoured  to  persuade  her  to  consent
to  it,  she  resolved  to  leave  her  fatherland  and  take  a  situation  as  a  governess.
The  last  communication  she  had  with  Du\  anel  was  some  time  before  her
departure,  in  the  year  1881.  She  did  not  keep  up  any  correspondence  with
him.  She  had  seen  Duvanel's  family  only  two  or  three  times  in  all.  A  year
after  her  departure  he  left  Neufchatel,  and  remained  in  Canton  Ziirich  vnitil
his  death."

To  this  M.  Aksakof  adds,  in  a  letter  to  F.  W.  H.  M.  (May  9th,  1889)  :—
"I  have  delayed  answering  your  letter  of  April  1st,  because  on  receiving
it  I  wrote  to  Colonel  Kaigorodoft'  and  to  Mdlle.  Emma  Stramm  for
further  details,  which  seemed  to  me  needful  for  the  completion  of  our  critical
judgment  on  the  Duvanel  case.  I  have  just  received  their  letters,  dated
April  16th  and  April  18th.

I  will  begin  answering  your  questions.

(1)  This  case  was  published  in  Psychische  Stndien,  for  February,  1889,  but
it  had  been  written  hj  me  in  February,  1888,  which  explains  my  saying  that
I  had  lafchj  received  it.

(2)  I  find  in  my  book  of  memoranda  a  notice  dated  January  7th  (19th)  of
M.  Kaigorodoff's  visit  and  his  communication  concerning  the  death  of
Duvanel.

(3)  M.  Kaigorodoff'  is  a  military  engineer,  living  at  present  at  Grodno,  a
seat  of  provincial  Government  in  West  Russia.  In  the  autumn  of  1886
M.  Kaigorodoff  endeavoured  to  hypnotise  Mdlle.  Emma,  but  soon  she
began  to  speak  and  write  in  mediumistic  fashion.  (M.  Kaigorodoff' was  not
wholly  a  novice  in  Spiritualism,  having  been  present,  some  10  years  earlier,
at  a  very  elementary  series  of  seances.)  Automatic  writing,  however,  seemed
to  fatigue  the  medium,  and  the  method  of  trance-utterance  was  usually  pre-
ferred. The  medium  saw  and  described  the  [deceased]  persons  in  whoso
name  she  spoke.  M.  Kaigorodoff  asked  questions  in  Eussian,  and  the
medium  answered  in  German  or  French.  M.  Kaigorodoff,  who  was  a
widower,  naturally  desired  a  jiersonal  and  absolutely  conclusive  message
from  his  wife.  She  (the  influence  sj^eaking  through  E.S.  as  Madame  Kai-
gorodoff") replied  that  she  could  give  such  a  message  only  by  impressing  the
medium  during  her  ordinary  sleep  ;  and  she  effected  her  jiurpose  by  causing
the  medium  to  see,  in  a  dream,  a  series  of  four  scenes  [tableaux]  ;  which
Mdlle.  Emma  described  to  M.  Kaigorodoff  and  in  which  he  recognised  the
perfect  representation  of  an  episode  in  his  married  life.  These  dream-com-
munications form  a  special  feature  in  the  mediumship  of  Mdlle.  Stramm  ;  the
{same  subject  being  sometimes  thus  treated  for  a  week  continuously.

[On  this  point  M.  Aksakof  adds,  February  15th,  1890  :  "  M.  Kaigorodoff


1890.] A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Bead.  345


informs  me  of  the  following  peculiarity  of  his  wife's  (he  married  MtUIe.
Stramm  as  his  second  wife  in  1889) : — During  her  ordinary  sleep,  one  can
enter  into  conversation  with  her.  She  continues  to  sleep,  answering  ques-
tions, and  describing  the  fantastic  dreams  which  she  sees.  In  her  replies  she
generally  uses  the  third  person.  On  awaking,  she  remembers  nothing.  If
during  her  sleep  M.  Kaigorodoff  makes  some  passes  over  her  face  she
immediately  passes  into  magnetic  (somnambulic)  sleep  ;  and  the  character  of
her  conversation  entirely  changes.  In  her  ordinary  sleep  '  spirits  '  never
appear  on  the  scene  ;  in  the  secondary  form  of  sleep,  alicaijs.  A  few
reverse  passes,  and  the  magnetic  sleep  gives  place,  witli  a  sigh,  to  the
ordinary  sleep."]

(4)  As  to  your  question  v/hether  the  communications  have  or  have  not
included  "  many  definite  statements  found  to  be  untrue,"  [as  is  the  case
with  so  many  similar  series],  M.  Kaigorodoff  caimot  recollect  any  such  state-
ments. As  an  instance  to  the  contrary,  he  reminded  me  of  a  prediction  made
March  2nd,  1887,  of  which  he  informed  me  in  his  letter  of  August  25th,  1887
(still  in  my  hands).  It  was  announced  to  Mdlle.  E.  that  her  sister  (who  is  in
Switzerland)  would  be  delivered  in  five  months  of  a  boy,  who  would  not  live
more  than  three  or  four  years.  Mdlle.  Emma  did  not  even  know  at  the
time  that  lier  sister  was  exi^ecting  a  baby.  In  fact  the  sister  was  delivered  of
a  boy  at  the  end  of  July,  1887.-'

I  pass  on  to  the  case  of  Duvanel,  which  needs  some  details  to  complete  it.

The  first  question  which  presents  itself  to  the  mind  is  as  follows  :  "  What
proof  have  we  that  Mdlle.  Emma  had  not  received  a  telegram  announcing
Duvanel's  death?"  I  asked  this  question  of  M.  Kaigorodoff  by  letter  ;  I
give  an  abstract  of  his  reply.

(1)  The  death  of  Duvanel  took  place  (by  Vvalna  time)  at  about  4.30  p.m.
On  that  day,  from  7  p.m.  till  the  beginning  of  the  seance,  M.  Kaigorodoff,  as
he  positively  remembers,  was  constantly  with  Mdlle.  E.  ;  and  even  supposing
that  the  telegram  had  been  despatched  half  an  hour  after  A.D.'s  death  (1),
nevertheless  it  would  have  been  impossible  for  a  telegram  sent  from
Switzerland  to  have  been  received  and  delivered  at  WUna  in  the  shortinterval
between  5  and  7  p.m.  On  that  day,  moreover,  Mdlle.  E.  did  not  leave  the
house  after  3  p.m.

(2)  All  Mdlle.  E.  's  correspondence  was  addressed,  care  of  Colonel  Kaigoro-
doff.

(3)  The  telegram  could  not  have  been  received  without  the  knowledge  of
the  servants  and  the  children.  There  would  have  been  no  reason  for  keeping
it  secret.

(4)  The  relations  of  Mdlle.  E.  are  poor  persons,  and  there  was  not  suffi-
cient motive  for  the  immediate  communication  of  this  piece  of  news.

But  might  not  a  telegram  have  been  sent  by  the  friends  or  family  of
Duvanel  1  Considering  that  all  relations  between  Duvanel  and  Mdlle.  E.  had
been  broken  off  in  1881,  such  a  telegram  would  have  had  no  reasonable
object.  Moreover,  in  my  letter  to  Mdlle.  E.,  Iliad  begged  her  to  tell  me
what  was  the  exact  place  of  D.'s  death  and  whether  those  who  lived  with

1  One  prediction  has  since  proved  erroneous;  viz., — that  Madame  Kaigorodoif
her:jelf  would  have  a  boy  ; — whereas  her  child  is  a  girl.


346  A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead. [Jan.  31,


him  could  liave  known  her  address.  To  this  slie  repUed  in  her  letter  of  April
16th,  1889.  ' '  D.  died  in  a  little  hamlet  of  the  Canton  of  Ziirich,  called,  I
think,  Hirche,  hut  I  am  not  sure,  for  my  lirother  [from  whom  I  inquired]
had  himself  forgotten  the  name.  D.  lived  alone,  and  had  only  one  brother,
who  lived  in  another  town."  Impossible,  therefore,  that  a  telegram  should
have  been  despatched  immediately  from  that  quarter.

When  M.  Kaigorodotf  came  to  see  me  the  second  time,  in  January,  1887,
with  the  letter  of  Mdlle.  E.'s  father,  I  was  struck  with  the  identity  of  the  ex-
jjression,  "  un  engorgement  do  sang,"  employed  in  the  trance-message,
which  was  in  French,  and  also  in  the  father's  letter,  which  was  likewise
in  French,  to  explain  the  cause  of  D. 's  death.  This  identity  of  phrase
appeared  very  strange,  not  to  say  suspicious.  I  drew  M.  Kaigorodoffs
attention  to  it,  and  begged  him  to  ask  the  medium  about  it,  as  soon  as  a
stance  gave  the  opportunity.  This  identity  of  exj)ression  suggested  a
curious  action  of  telepathy.

This  is  what  M.  Kaigorodoff's  letter,  just  received,  says  on  the  subject  : — •

"On  the  day  after  the  seance  of  January  3rd  (15th),  1887,  Mdlle.  E.,
.not  exjaecting  to  receive  a  letter  from  her  father  with  the  confirmation  of
the  fact  of  D.  's  death,  wrote  to  her  sister  in  Switzerland,  stating  that  she  had
had  a  vision  as  though  D.  were  dead,  and  asking  whether  this  was  really  the
case.  The  dream  was  an  expedient  used  because  Emma's  relations  had  no
knowledge  of  Spiritualism,  still  less  of  E.'s  i^ersonal  proceedings  in  that
direction.  The  letter  of  Mdlle.  E.  's  sister  arrived  10  days  after  her  father's
letter.  The  sister,  not  knowing  that  their  father  had  already  announced  D.'.s
death,  desired  to  hide  the  fact  from  her  [for  a  reason  presently  to  be
shown]  and  answered  that  D.  was  not  dead,  but  gone  to  America."

M.  Kaigorodofi",  after  a  six  weeks'  absence,  returned  to  Wilna  at  the
beginning  of  March,  1887.  At  the  first  seance  held,  early  in  March,  he
begged  of  Louis  (the  controlling  spirit)  to  explain  the  contradiction  between
the  letters  of  the  father  and  the  sister  of  Mdlle.  E.  touching  the  death  of
Duvanel.  The  medium  was  entranced,  and  spoke  in  the  name  of  Louis.  M.
Kaigorodoff  took  notes,  and  this  is  word  fur  word  the  answer  which  was
given  : —

"He  is  dead  ;  only  his  sister  does  nut  wish  tliat  she  should  know  of  his
death,  because  it  was  not  of  a  stoppage  of  blood  {engor<jeineni)  as  I  had
written."  (The  message  of  January  3rd  (loth),  1887,  had  been  given  by.
automatic  writing,  in  French.)  "  I  could  not  tell  the  truth  frankly  {directe-
ment),  for  her  health  would  have  been  affected  by  it."

"Where  and  how,  then,  did  he  die  ?  "

"He  died  in  the  Canton  of  Zurich  ;  but  he  killed  himself,  and  she  must
not  know  it.  She  must  remain  ignorant  of  this,  for  if  she  learns,  even  in-
directly, of  his  self-inflicted  death,  her  health  may  suffer.  You  must  not
speak  to  her  of  the  matter,  for  she  suspects  the  truth."

"How  does  it  hajipen, then, that  the  identical  expression, siojjjjar/e  ofhlood,
is  found  l)oth  in  your  message  and  in  the  father's  letter  ?  "
"  It  is  I  who  inspired  him  with  that  expression."

As  you  perceive,  the  case  becomes  increasingly  complicated  and  intei'est-
ing.  In  point  of  fact,  Mdlle.  E.,  some  days  after  the  message  of  January  3rd
(15th)  did  in  fact  see  in  a  dream  Duvanel  covered  with  blood  (ensanglantS).


1890.] A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.  S4T


The  contradictory  statements  in  the  letters  (of  her  father  and  sister)  led  her
to  suspect  that  the  truth  was  being  concealed  from  her,  and  that  there  had
really  been  a  suicide.  It  was  only  in  the  autumn  of  1887,  when  Mdlle.  E.  made
a  journey  to  Switzerland  to  see  her  relations,  that  she  learnt  all  the  truth,
confirming  the  second  message.

The  fears  of  Louis  and  of  her  relations  as  to  the  bad  effect  which  the
news  of  the  suicide  might  have  upon  Mdlle.  E.  were  in  fact  exaggerated.  For
Mdlle.  E.  had  left  Switzerland  in  1881,  and  up  till  the  message  of  January
3rd  (15th),  1887,  had  received  no  news  of  Duvanel.  Some  time  after  Mdlle.
E.'s  departure  Duvanel  left  Neufchatel  for  Geneva, where  liewas  employed  at
abank ; — which  explains  the  phrase  in  the  father'sletter,sayingthat  D.  had  died
of  a  stoppage  of  blood  "  while  he  was  at  the  bank."  But  of  late  he  had  lived
in  a  little  hamlet  of  the  Canton  of  Zurich.  All  this  Mdlle.  Emma  learnt  on
her  visit  to  her  relations.

After  all  these  facts,  however,  the  problem  as  to  the  possibility  of  a  tele-
pathic influence  from  the  parents  of  Mdlle.  E.  is  not  yet  decided.  To  clear
up  this  point  we  must  know  the  exact  day  when  the  father  of  Mdlle.  E.
learnt  the  death  of  Duvanel,  and  we  must  know  the  details  he  then  heard.
If  Mdlle.  E.'s  relations  had  heard  the  news  of  D.'s  suicide  on  the  very  day  of
his  death  ;  and  if  it  had  been  decided  in  family  discussion  that  they  would
conceal  from  her  the  manner  of  his  death,  and  adojit  the  expression  "stop-
page of  blood  ";— then  one  might  still  conjecture  that  there  had  been  a  tele-
pathic transmission  of  thought.

But  the  father's  letter  was  written  January  18th,  and,  as  Mdlle.  E.  says
[in  her  letter  of  April  16th,  1889],  it  is  probable  that  the  meeting  in  the  train
[when  the  father  heard  of  Duvanel's  death  from  Duvanel's  brother]  took
place  on  the  17th,  and  thus  after  the  sitting  of  January  3rd  (15th).  In  that
case,  if  telepathy  there  were,  it  would  be  needful  to  seek  the  inspirer  (the
"  Mjent  provocateur  !")  in  some  factor  outside  the  minds  of  Mdlle.  E.  or  her
relations.

But  this  probability  is  not  enough  ;  and  the  essential  question  as  to  the
day  when  Mdlle.  E.'s  relations  learnt  the  death  of  Duvanel  is  not  yet  deter-
mined. I  will  write  again  on  this  point  to  the  ci-dcvaut  Mdlle.  Stramm,
who  is  now  Madame  KaigorodofF ;  for  the  Colonel  in  his  last  letter  to  me
announces  his  marriage  with  Mdlle.  Emma  Stramm.  I  will  beg  her  to  ask
her  father  to  fix  as  precisely  as  possible  the  day  of  his  meeting  with  Duvanel's
brother. The  reply  shall  be  sent  to  you  at  once.

Thus,  then,  we  have  in  this  case  of  Spiritualistic  communication  :  (1)  the
news  of  a  death  at  a  distance  ;  (2)  the  manner  of  death  ;  (3)  the  place  of
death;  all  unknown  to  the  medium."

On  J une  24th  (July  6th)  1889,  M.  Aksakof  again  wrote  to  me  as  follows  :
"  M.  KaigorodofF  has  had  the  kindness  to  send  me  in  original  the  letter  of
Madame  Kaigorodoft's  sister.  I  enclose  a  copy.  As  you  perceive,  the  father
learnt  the  news  of  Duvanel's  death  on  January  17th,  two  days,  therefore,
after  the  death  itself,  and  two  days  after  the  news  of  the  death  was  received
at  Wilna  in  Russia.  The  circumstance  that  this  news  was  heard  by  M.
Stramm  in  a  merely  accidental  way,  and  only  on  the  day  of  the  funeral,
proves  that  in  fact  all  relations  between  Duvanel  and  the  Stramm  family  had
been  suspended. The  letter  of  Mdlle.  Bertha  is  dated  from  Rochefort;  that  is


348  A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Bead. [Jan.  31,


a  small  town,  at  20  minutes'  railway  journey  from  Neufcliatel ;  and  it  is  there,
strictly  speaking,  and  not  at  Neufchatel,  that  the  Stramm  family  reside.

Copy  of  part  of  Mdlle.  Bertha  Stramm's  letter  to  her  sister,  Madame
KaigorodofF,  dated  Rochefort,  June  16th,  1889.

"  Duvauel  died  January  15th,  and  papa  learnt  the  news  on  the  17th,  for
lie  met  Duvanel's  brother,  who  was  setting  out  for  the  funeral.  The  brother
was  to  leave  for  America  a  few  days  later.  It  is  I  who  have  recollected  this,
by  searching  my  memory,  for  papa  is  old  and  feeble  and  does  not  now
remember  anything  of  the  matter.  I  cannot  tell  you  the  name  of  the
village  where  the  death  occurred."


The  principal  points  in  this  case  may  be  summed  up  as  follows  : —
Duvanel  dies  by  his  own  hand  in  a  Swiss  village,  where  he  lives  alone,

having  no  relations  except  a  brother  living  at  a  distance,  whom  Mdlle.

Stramm  had  never  seen  (as  M.  Kaigorodoff  informs  us  in  a  letter  of  May,

1890).

Mdlle.  Stramm's  father  does  not  hear  of  Duvanel's  death  till  two  days
later.

Five  hours  after  Duvanel's  death  an  automatic  message  announcing  it  is
written  at  Wilna  in  Russia,  by  Mdlle.  Stramm,  who  had  certainly  received
no  news  of  the  event.

From  what  mind  are  we  to  suppose  that  this  information  came  ?

Thought-transference  from  survivors  seems  here  out  of  the  question  ; —
unless  it  be  in  the  form  suggested  above,  of  a  kind  of  impersonal  thought-
transference, — a  leaking-out  of  any  fact  known  to  any  living  mind  in  such  a
way  that  any  other  mind  may  become  aware  of  it.

Leaving  aside  this  extreme  view,  we  may  next  attempt  to  account  for
Mdlle.  Stramm's  message  on  the  theory  of  latency.  We  may  suppose  that
the  telejoathic  message  came  from  the  dying  man,  but  did  not  rise  into
consciousness  until  an  ojtportunity  was  afforded  by  Mdlle.  Straunn's  sitting
down  to  write  automatically.

But  to  tliis  interpretation  there  is  an  objection  of  a  very  curious  kind.
The  message  written  by  Mdlle.  Stramm  v\^as  not  precisely  accurate.  Instead
of  ascribing  Duvanel's  death  to  suicide  it  ascribed  it  to  a  stoppage  of  blood,
"  un  engorgement  de  sang."

And  when  M.  Stramm,  three  days  after  the  death,  wrote  to  his  daughter
in  Russia  to  tell  her  of  it,  he  also  used  the  same  expression,  "un  engorgement
de  sang,"  thus  disguising  the  actual  truth  in  order  to  spare  the  feelings  of  his
daughter,  who  had  formerly  refused  to  marry  Duvanel,  and  who  (as  her
fatlier  feared)  might  receive  a  painful  shock  if  she  learnt  the  tragic  nature  of
his  end.  There  was,  therefore,  a  singular  coincidence  between  the  automatic
and  the  normally-written  message  as  to  the  death  ; — a  coincidence  which
looks  as  though  the  same  mind  had  been  at  work  in  each  instance.  But
that  mind  cannot  have  been  M.  Stramm's,  as  he  was  not  av>'are  of  Duvanel's
death  at  the  time  when  the  first  message  was  written.

And  liere  we  must  consider  the  explanation  of  the  coincidence  given  by
the  intelligence  which  controlled  the  automatic  writing.  That  intelligence
asserted  itself  to  be  a  brother  of  Mdlle.  Stramm's,  who  died  some  years
before. And  this  "  Louis  "  further  asserted  that  he  had  himself  influenced


1890.] A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Bead.


349


M.  Stramm  to  make  use  of  tlie  same  euphemistic  phrase,  ■u^ith  the  object  of
avoiding  a  shock  to  Mdlle.  Stramm  ;  for  Avhich  purpose  it  was  needful  that
the  two  messages  should  agree  in  ascribing  the  death  to  the  same  form  of
sudden  illness.

Now  if  this  be  true,  and  the  message  did  indeed  come  from  the  deceased
"Louis,"  we  have  an  indication  of  continued  existence,  and  continued
knowledge  of  earthly  afiairs,  on  the  part  of  a  person  long  dead.

But  if  we  consider  that  the  case,  as  presented  to  us,  contains  no  proof  of
"  Louis'  "  identity, — so  that  "  Louis  "  may  be  merely  one  of  those  arbitrary
names  which  the  automatist's  sub-conscious  intelligence  seems  so  prone  to
assume  ;  then  we  must  suppose  that  Duvanel  was  actually  operative  on  two
occasions  after  death, — first  inspiring  in  Mdlle.  Stramm  the  automatic
message,  and  then  modifying  in  M.  Stramm  the  message  which  the  father
might  otherwise  have  sent.

Case  III. [M.  ant.  14.]
"  PsYCHiscHE  Studien,"  December,  1889  (pp.  572-577).
From  one  of  a  series  of  articles  by  the  editor,  the  Hon.  Alexander  Aksakof.

The  sub-title  of  the  section  from  which  the  following  is  extracted
being  : — "  The  identity  of  the  personality  of  the  deceased  confirmed  by  the
imparting  of  facts  known  only  to  the  deceased,  or  which  could  only  have
been  communicated  by  him. "

I  now  return  to  my  subject,  and  conclude  this  section  with  a  case  which
I  have  received  at  first  hand.  It  belongs  not  to  the  category  of  facts
which  are  known  only  to  the  deceased,  but  to  the  category  of  those  which  could
only  be  imparted  by  the  deceased,  for  it  relates  to  a  political  secret  concern-
ing a  living  person,  which  was  revealed  by  an  intimate  friend  of  that  living
person  for  the  purpose  of  saving  him.  I  shall  set  forth  this  case  in  all
possible  detail,  because  I  consider  it  a  most  convincing  one  in  support  of  the
Spiritualistic  hypothesis.  I  will  even  express  mj'self  still  more  strongly.  I
consider  that  it  affords  as  absolute  a  proof  of  identity  as  it  is  possible  for
evidence  of  this  kind  to  present.

My  readers  are  abeady  acquainted  with  my  sister-in-law,  Mrs.  A.  von
Wiesler,  from  the  part  she  took  in  the  family  seances  held  with  me  in  the
years  1880-1883,  after  the  decease  of  my  wife.  She  has  an  only  daughter,
Sophie,  who  at  the  time  of  those  seances  was  completing  her  studies.  She
had  taken  no  part,  either  at  our  seances  or  at  anj^  others,  and  she  had  not
read  anything  about  Spiritualism.  Her  mother  also  had  not  joined  in  any
seances  except  our  own.  One  evening  in  October,  1884,  during  the  visit  of  a
distant  relative,  the  conversation  turned  upon  Spiritualism,  and  in  order  to
please  him  a  trial  with  the  table  was  arranged.  The  seance,  however,  gave
no  satisfactory  result.  It  only  showed  that  the  two  ladies  were  able  to  get
something.  On  Tuesday  evening,  January  1st,  1885,  Mrs.  von  "Wiesler
being  alone  v.'ith  her  daughter,  in  order  to  divert  her  mind  from  some  matters
which  made  her  anxious,  proposed  to  hold  a  little  seance.  An  alphabet  was
written  out  on  a  sheet  of  paper,  a  saucer  with  a  black  line  as  pointer  served
as  a  planchette,  and,  behold,  the  name  Andreas  was  indicated.  This  was
quite  natural,  for  Andreas  was  the  name  of  Sophie's  father,  the  deceased
husband  of  Mrs.  von  Wiesler. The  communication  presented  nothing  re-


f


350  A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Lead. [Jan.  31,

markable,  but  it  was  nevertheless  resolved  to  continue  the  stances  once  a
week,  on  every  Tuesday.  For  three  weeks  the  character  of  the  communica-
tions remained  unchanged. The  name  Andreas  was  continually  repeated.

But  on  the  fourth  Tuesday — .January  22nd — in  place  of  the  customary
name,  Andreas,  the  name  "  Schura  "  was  spelt  out  to  the  great  astonish-
ment of  both  sitters.  Then,  by  quick  and  precise  movements  of  the  pointer,
these  words  were  added  : —

"  It  is  given  to  thee  to  save  Nikolaus. "

"  What  does  this  mean  ?  "  asked  the  astonished  ladies.

"  He  is  compromised  as  Michael  was,  and  will  like  him  go  to  ruin.  A
band  of  good-for-nothing  fellows  are  leading  him  astray."

"  What  can  be  done  to  counteract  it  1 "

"Thou  must  go  to  the  Technological  Institute  before  3  o'clock,  let
Nikolaus  be  called  out,  and  make  an  appointment  vvith  him  at  his  house."

This  being  all  addressed  to  the  young  lady,  Sophie,  she  replied  that
it  would  be  difficult  for  her  to  carry  out  these  directions  on  account  of  the
slight  acquaintanceship  which  existed  between  her  and  JSTikolaus's  family.

"Absurd  ideas  of  propriety  !  "  was  "  Schura's  "  indignant  reply.

"But  in  what  way  shall  I  be  able  to  influence  him  ?  "  asked  Sophie.

"  Thou  wilt  speak  to  him  in  my  name."  -

"  Then  your  convictions  no  longer  remain  the  same  ?  "

' '  Revolting  error  !  "  was  the  reply.

I  must  now  explain  the  meaning  of  this  mysterious  communication.
"Schura  "  is  the  Russian  pet  name  for  Alexandrine.  Nikolaus  and  Michael
were  her  cousins.  Michael,  quite  a  young  man,  had  unfortunately  allowed
himself  to  become  entangled  by  the  revolutionary  ideas  of  our  Anarchists  or
Socialists.  He  was  arrested,  tried,  and  condemned  to  imprisonment  at  a
distance  from  St.  Petersburg,  where  he  lost  his  life  in  an  attempt  to  escape.
"  Schura"  loved  him  dearly,  and  fully  sympathised  with  his  jKilitical  convic-
tions, making  no  secret  of  it.  After  his  death,  which  occurred  in  September,
1884,  slie  was  discouraged  in  her  revolutionary  aspirations,  and  ended  her
life  by  poison,  at  the  age  of  17,  on  the  15th  of  January,  1885,  just  one  week
before  tlie  seance  above  described.  Nikolaus,  Michael's  brother,  was  then  a
student  at  the  Technological  Institute.

Mrs.  von  Wiesler  and  her  daughter  were  aware  of  these  circimi-
.stances,  for  they  had  long  been  acquainted  with  "  Schura's  "  parents,  and
with  those  of  her  cousins,  who  belong  to  the  best  society  of  St.  Petersburg.
It  will  he  oljvious  that  I  cannot  publish  the  names  of  these  families.  I  have
also  changed  those  of  the  young  people.  The  acquaintanceshii)  was,  however,
far  from  being  intimate.  They  saw  each  other  occasionally,  but  nothing
more. Later  I  will  give  further  details. We  will  now  continue  our  narrative.

Naturally,  neither  Mrs.  von  Wiesler  nor  her  daughter  knew  anything  as
to  the  views  or  secret  conduct  of  Nikolaus.  The  communication  was  just  as
unexpected  as  it  was  important.  It  involved  a  great  responsibility.  Sophie's
jjosition  was  a  very  difficult  one.  The  literal  carrying  out  of  "Schura's"
demands  was ,  for  a  young  lady,  simply  imiDossible,  merely  from  considerations
of  social  jiropriety.  What  right  could  she  have,  on  the  ground  of  simple
acquaintanceship,  to  interfere  in  family  afiairs  of  so  delicate  a  character  ?
Besides,  it  might  not be true  ; or,  quite  simply  and  most  pro  bab


1890.] A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.  35r


Nikolaus  might  deny  it.  What  position  would  she  then  find  herself  in  ?
Mrs.  von  Wiesler  knew  only  too  well,  from  the  seances  slie  had  taken  part  in
with  me,  how  little  dependence  can  be  placed  on  Spiritualistic  communica-
tions. She  counselled  her  daughter,  in  the  first  place,  to  convince  herself  of
"  Schura's  "  identity.  This  advice  was  followed  without  any  hesitation  as
one  way  out  of  the  difficulty.

On  the  following  Tuesday  "  Schura "  manifested  at  once,  and  Sophie
asked  for  a  proof  of  her  identity,  to  which Schura  "  forthwith  replied  : —

"Invite  Nikolaus,  arrange  a  seance,  and  I  will  come."

It  will  be  seen  from  this  reply  that  "Schura,"  who  during  her  life  had
learnt  to  despise  the  conventionalities  of  society,  as  is  the  custom  among  the
Socialists,  remained  true  to  her  character,  and  again  demanded  what  was
an  impossibility.  Nikolaus  had  never  been  in  Mrs.  von  Wiesler's  house.
Sophie  then  asked  for  another  proof  of  her  identity,  witliout  Nikolaus
being  brought  in  at  all,  and  requested  that  it  might  be  a  convincing  one.

"  I  will  appear  to  thee,"  was  the  reply.

"How?"^

"Thou  vdlt  see."

A  few  days  later  Sophie  was  returning  home  from  a  soiree  ;  it  was  nearly
4  a.m.  She  was  just  retuing,  and  was  at  the  door  between  her  bedroour
and  the  dining-room,  there  being  no  lights  in  tlie  latter,  when  she  saw  on
the  wall  of  the  dining-room,  in  sight  of  the  door  at  which  she  stood,  a  luminous
round  spot,  with,  as  it  were,  shoulders.  This  lasted  for  two  or  three  seconds,
and  disappeared,  ascending  towards  the  ceiling.  Sopliie  immediately  assured
herself  that  it  was  not  the  reflection  of  any  light  coming  from  the  street.

At  the  seance  on  the  following  Tuesday,  an  explanation  of  this  appearance
being  asked  for,  "  Schura  "  replied: —

"  It  was  the  outline  of  a  head  with  .shoulders.  I  cannot  appear  more
distinctly. I  ani  still  weak."

Many  other  details,  which  I  have  passed  over,  tended  to  convince  Sojjhie  of
the  reality  of  "Schura's"  identity,  yet  she  could  not  bring  herself  to  carry
out  that  which  "  Schura  "  desired  her  to  do.  She  therefore  jjroposed  as  a
suitable  compromise  that  she  should  acquaint  Nikolaus's  parents  with  what
had  occurred.

This  proposal  aroused  "Schura's"  strongest  displeasure,  expressed  by
violent  movements  of  the  saucer,  and  by  the  sentence  : —

"That  will  lead  to  nothing" ; — after  which  disparaging  epithets  follow-ed,
impossible  to  repeat  here,  especially  applicable  to  persons  of  weak  and
irresolute  character,  with  whom  the  energetic  and  decisive  "Schura"  had
no  patience — epithets  which  are  not  found  in  dictionaries,  but  which  were
expressions  used  by  ' '  Schura  "  in  her  life-time,  and  characteristic  of  her.
This  was  confirmed  in  the  sequel.

Nevertheless  Sophie  continued  to  hesitate,  and  at  each  successive
seance  "Schura"  insisted  more  and  more  imperatively  that  Sophie
must  act  at  once.  This  is  very  important  to  notice,  as  we  shall  see  later.
This  want  of  resolution  on  the  part  of  Sophie  was  ascribed  by  "  Schura  "  to
the  influence  of  Mrs.  von  Wiesler.  From  the  beginning  "  Schura  "  had
seemed  to  bear  a  grudge  against  Mrs.  von  Wiesler.  From  the  first  seance
she  addressed  Sophie  only. She  never  permitted  Mrs.  von  Wiesler  to  ask  a


352


A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead. [Jan.  31,


question.  Whenever  she  attempted  to  do  so,  she  met  her  with  a — "Be
silent— be  silent!"  Whereas  in  addressing  Sophie  she  overwhelmed  her
with  the  tenderest  expressions.

How  great  was  the  astonishment  and  consternation  of  the  ladies,  when  at
the  seance  on  the  26th  of  February  the  first  words  were  : —

"It  is  too  late.  Thou  wilt  repent  it  bitterly.  The  pangs  of  remorse  will
follow  thee. Expect  his  arrest !"

Tliese  were  "Scliura's"  last  words.  From  this  time  she  was  silent.  A
seance  was  attempted  on  the  following  Tuesday,  but  there  was  no  result.
The  seances  of  Mrs.  von  Wiesler  and  her  daughter  were  from  that  time
entirely  given  up.

While  these  seances  were  being  held,  Mrs.  von  Wiesler  naturally  kept  me
informed  of  what  transpired,  and  consulted  with  are  as  to  what  was  to  be
■done  in  view  of  the  extraordinary  character  of  "  Schura's  "  requests.  Some
time  after  they  had  ceased,  Mrs.  von  Wiesler,  to  satisfy  her  own  conscience
and  to  comfort  her  daughter,  resolved  to  communicate  the  whole  episode
to  the  parents  of  Nikolaus.  They  paid  no  attention  to  it.  Nothing
was  elicited  that  any  fault  could  be  found  with.  The  family  were
quite  satisfied  in  regard  to  Nikolaus'  conduct.  But  it  is  important  to  bear
in  mind  the  fact  that  these  Spiritualistic  communications  were  made  known
to  the  parents  before  the  final  issue.  When  during  the  remainder  of  the
year  everything  went  on  happily,  Sophie  became  fully  convinced  that  all  the
communications  were  only  lies,  and  formed  a  resolution  that  she  would
never  again  occupy  herself  with  Spiritualistic  seances.

Another  year  passed  without  any  special  event.  But  on  the  9th  of  March,
1887,  the  secret  police  suddenly  searched  Nikolaus's  rooms.  He  was
arrested  in  his  own  house,  and  v^ithin  24  hours  was  exiled  from  St.  Peters-
burg. It  came  out  later  that  his  crime  was  taking  part  in  anarchical
assemblies — assemblies  which  were  held  in  the  months  of  .January  and
February,  1885,  exactly  corresponding  with  the  time  when  "  Schura "
was  insisting  that  steps  should  then  be  taken  to  dissuade  Nikolaus  from
taking  part  in  such  meetings.  Only  now  were  the  communications  of
"  Schura"  estimated  at  their  true  value.  The  notes  which  Mrs.  von  Wiesler
had  made  were  read  again  and  again  by  the  families  both  of  "Schura"  and  of
Nikolaus.  "Schura's"  identity  in  all  those  manifestations  was  recogiused
as  incontestably  demonstrated,  in  tlie  first  place,  by  the  main  fact  in
relation  to  Nikolaus,  by  other  intimate  particulars,  and  also  by  the
totality  of  the  features  which  characterised  lier  personality.  This  mournful
occurrence  fell  like  a  fresh  thunderclap  on  Nikolaus's  family,  and  they  had
only  to  thank  God  that  the  errors  of  the  young  man  were  not  followed
by  more  fatal  results.

In  order  to  estimate  this  incident  aright  it  is  of  great  importance  to
establish  the  relations  which  existed  between  the  two  young  ladies.  I  have
requested  Madame  and  Mdlle.  Von  Wiesler  to  give  me  on  this,  as  on  the
previous  points,  a  written  memorandum  in  full  detail ;  and  from  that  memo-
randum I  extract  what  follows  [somewhat  abridged  here]  : —

"In  December,  1880,  Madame  Von  Wiesler  and  her  daughter  paid  a
Christmas  visit  to  Schura's  grandfather,  Senator  N. ,  where  Sophie  saw  Schura
for  the  first  time. Sophie  was  tlien  about  13  years  old,  and  Schura  even


1890.] A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


353


younger.  Sophie  was  astonished  to  see  Schura's  writing-table  covered  with
books  [and  had  a  talk  with  her  about  favourite  authors].  The  two  girls
often  saw  each  other  at  a  distance  in  the  recreation-room  of  their  scliool
during  the  winter,  but  Schura  was  soon  transferred  to  another  school.  [They
met  once  at  a  countiy-house  without  exchanging  a  word,  and  saw  each  othei*
once  across  a  theatre.  Sophie,  in  fact,  had  had  one  childish  talk  with
Schura  ;  Mad;ime  Von  Wiesler  had  never  had  any  real  talk  with  her.]
Hence  it  is  clear  that  the  relations  of  these  ladies  with  Schura  were  of  the
most  distant  kind,  and  that  they  could  not  know  anything  of  her  political
secrets.

Case  IV. [G.  19-3.]

From  Psmlusche  StiuJien,  March,  1889  (p.  131).
An  extract  from  an  article  by  the  editor  (the  Hon.  Alexander  Aksakof).

"  I  am  personally  acquainted  with  the  following  case  : — My  friend  and
fellow  student  at  the  Lyceum,  Privy  Councillor  (Gelieimrath)  Baron
Konstantin  K. ,  told  me,  twenty  years  ago,  that  at  the  time  of  the  death  of
his  uncle.  Baron  Paul  K.,  at  Warschau,  his  will  could  not  be  found,  though
it  was  thoroughly  searched  for  ;  and  that  it  was  discovered  in  a  secret  drawer
(Fache),  entirely  in  consequence  of  a  communication  received  by  Prince
Emile  Wittgenstein,  in  wliich  the  place  was  described."

In  Fsijeliische  Studien  for  December,  1889  (pp.  568-9),  M.  Aksakof  gives
further  particulars  as  follows  : —

"  Since  the  previous  notice  of  this  case,  I  have  made  the  acquaintance  of
Paul  von  Korf,  a  son  of  Baron  von  Korf,  who  resides  in  the  Port-strasse,
St.  Petersburg.  He  has  given  me  the  following  account  of  the  circum-
stances : —

"  His  father,  GeneralPaul  von  Korf,  died  at  Warschau  on  April  7th,  1867.
It  was  known  that  he  had  made  a  will,  but  after  his  death  it  could  not  be
found.  In  the  month  of  July,  1867,  his  sister,  the  Baroness  Charlotte  von
Wrangel,  was  living  with  her  sister-in-law,  Madame  D.  von  Obuchovr,  in  the-
town  of  Plock  (pronounced  Plozk),  not  far  from  Warschau.  Her  mother,
the  widow  of  General  von  Korf,  was  travelling  abroad  ;  and  in  her  mother's
absence  she  was  entrusted  with  the  opening  of  her  correspondence.  Among
the  letters  thus  received  and  opened  was  one  from  Prince  Emile  von
Wittgenstein  (also  abroad)  addressed  to  the  widow  of  General  von  Korf,  in
which  he  informed  lier  that  a  spiritualistic  communication  had  been  received
by  him  in  the  name  of  her  deceased  husband,  indicating  the  place  where  his  will
would  be  found.  The  Baroness  von  Wrangel,  who  knew  how  much  trouble
the  absence  of  this  will  had  given  to  her  elder  brother  [Baron  Joseph  Korf]
who  was  engaged  in  the  administration  of  the  property,  and  who  was  at  that
time  in  Warschau,  went  at  once,  witli  her  sister-in-law,  to  Warschau,  to
inform  him  of  the  important  contents  of  the  letter  of  Prince  A^on  Wittgen-
stein. Her  brother's  first  words  were  that  he  had  just  found  the  will ;  and
when  the  letter  of  Prince  von  Wittgenstein  was  read,  it  was  apparent,  to
the  astonishment  of  those  present,  that  the  place  indicated  in  the  spiritualistic
communication  where  the  will  would  be  found  was  precisely  that  in  Avhick
the  Baron  had  at  last  found  it.


354


A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[Jan.  31,


' '  Baron  Paul  von  Korf  promised  me  that  he  would  look  for  this  letter  of
Prince  von  Wittgenstein's,  which  he  liad  in  his  hand  less  than  two  years  ago,
when  arranguig  the  family  papers.  But  up  to  the  present  time  he  has  not  been
able  again  to  find  it.  He  fears  it  may  have  been  unintentionally  destroyed
with  useless  correspondence."

In  a  letter  dated  St.  Petersburg,  February  26th,  1890,  M.  Aksakof  adds
the  following  particulars,  with  two  letters,  of  which  translations  are  here
given  : —

T.  Original  letter  from  Baron  Paul  Korf  (son  of  the  Baron  Korf  whose
will  is  concerned)  to  M.  Aksakof,  countersigned  by  Baron  Paul's  sister,
Baroness  Cliarlotte  Wrangel,  and  testifying  to  the  exactness  of  the  fact  as
fstated  in  Paydtisclie  Studieii,  1888,  jJ-  568.

"Petersburg,  January  29th,  1890.
' '  Sir, — I  have  read  with  great  interest  your  communication,  inserted  in
Psxjchische  Stndien  (p.  568),  concerning  the  will  of  my  late  father.  The  facts
fire  there  related  with  perfect  accuracy.  I  am  afraid  that  I  burnt  the  letter
of  Prince  Emile  Wittgenstein  about  a  year  ago,  when  I  was  arranging  the
papers  of  my  late  father,  which  were  at  his  country  seat. — Acce^rt,  &c.,

"(Baron)  Paul  Korf."

' '  I  add  my  signature  to  that  of  my  brother,  to  confirm  the  contents  of
his  letter.  "Baroness  C.  Wrangel,  n^e  Baroness  Korf."

II.  Copy  of  a  letter  from  Prince  Emile  de  Sayn- Wittgenstein,  published
in  the  work,  Sou  venirs  rt  Corrcaj^onda  nre  du>  Prince  Emile  de  Sayn-  Wittgenstein-
Berlebourg  (Pdvis,  1889),  Vol.  II.,  p.  365.

"Warsaw,  July  im,  1867.
"  It  seems  an  age,  my  dear  parents,  since  I  have  had  any  news  of  you  ;
my  mother's  last  letter  was  dated  June  5th.  I  have  occupied  myself  mucli
with  Sj^iiritualism  of  late,  and  my  mediumistic  faculties  liave  developed
themselves  in  an  astonishing  way.  I  write  often  with  great  facility  in  various
kinds  of  writing  ;  I  have  had  direct  communications  from  the  spirit  which
haunts  Berlebourg,  a  woman  of  our  family  who  killed  herself  102  years  ago.
I  have,  moreover,  obtained  a  very  singular  result.  One  of  my  friends,
Lieut. -General  Baron  de  Korf,  deceased  some  months  since,  manifested
liimself  to  me  (without  my  liaving  thought  of  him  the  least  in  the  world),  to
enjoin  upon  me  to  indicate  to  his  family  the  jjlace  where  his  will  had  been
maliciously  hidden  ;  that  is  to  say,  in  a  chest  of  drawers  in  the  house  where
he  died.  I  did  not  know  that  the  family  were  looking  for  this  will,  and  had
not  found  it.  Well,  they  found  it  in  the  very  place  which  the  spirit  had
indicated  to  me.  It  is  a  document  of  great  importance  for  the  management
of  his  property,  and  for  the  settlement  of  questions  which  will  arise  when
bis  children  attain  their  majority. Here  are  facts  which  can  stand  criticism.

"Emile  Wittgenstein."

III.  Prince  Emile  Wittgenstein  died  in  1878,  at  Tegernsee,  in  Bavaria.

IV.  As  to  the  date  of  the  letter  of  Prince  Sayn- Wittgenstein  to  the
widow  of  Baron  Korf.  Here  is  wliat  I  have  been  able  to  learn  in  a  last
interview  with  his  son.  Baron  Paul  Korf. The  marriage  of  his  daughter.


1890.] A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


355


Baroness  Charlotte  Korf ,  with  Baron  Wrangel  took  place  at  Warsaw,  J une
17th,  1867.  A  week  after  that  event  the  Baroness  Wrangel  left,  with  her
sister-in-law,  Madame  Obuchow,  for  the  town  of  Plock,  and  her  mother
went  abroad.  At  that  date  the  will  had  not  been  found.  And  since  the
letter  of  Prince  Emile  Wittgenstein  to  his  parents,  in  whicli  he  informs  them
of  the  finding  of  the  will  by  spiritual  communication,  is  dated  J uly  17th,  1867,
it  follows  that  the  letter  of  Prince  Emile  Wittgenstein  to  the  widow  of  Baron
Korf,  enclosing  that  communication,  and  consequently  the  communication
itseK  must  have  been  received  between  June  17th  and  July  17th,  1867.

V.  As  to  the  place  where  the  will  was  found.  I  asked  Baron  Paul  Korf  :
"  Is  it  a  fact  that  the  will  was  found  '  in  a  chest  of  drawers  '  (armoire)  as  was
predicted  in  the  communication  ?  "  He  answered  :  "  That  is  what  both  my
sister  and  I  heard."

VI.  The  elder  son  of  Baron  Korf  who  busied  himself  at  Warsaw  with  the
affairs  of  the  inheritance  was  named  Baron  Joseph  Korf,  and  has  since  died.

Case  V. [S.  3.]
For  the  following  case  also  I  am  indebted  to  M.  Aksakof  : —
The  P^r^uguine  Case.

Document  I. — Copy  of  report  of  seance  held  November  18th,  1887,  in  the
house  of  M.  Nartzeff,  at  Tambof,  Russia.

Present  :  M.  A.  Nartzeff  [landed  proprietor,  belonging  to  the  Russian
nobnity,  in  the  Government  of  Tambof] ;  Madame  A.  Slepzof  [aunt  of  M.
Nartzeff]  ;  Madame  Ivanof  [M.  Nartzeff's  housekeeper]  ;  M.  N.  Touloucheff
[official  physician  of  the  Municipality  of  Tambof].

The  sitting  began  at  10  p.m.  at  a  table  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  room,
by  the  light  of  a  night-light  placed  on  the  mantelpiece.  All  doors  closed.
The  left  hand  of  each  was  placed  on  the  right  hand  of  his  neighbour,  and
each  foot  touched  the  neighbour's  foot,  so  that  during  the  whole  of  the
sitting  all  hands  and  feet  were  under  control.  Sharp  raps  were  heard  in  the
floor,  and  afterwards  in  the  wall  and  the  ceiling,  after  whicli  the  blows
sotmded  immediately  in  the  middle  of  the  table,  as  if  someone  had  struck  it
from  above  with  his  fist  ;  and  with  such  violence,  and  so  often,  that  the
table  trembled  the  whole  time.^

M.  Nartzeff  asked,  "Can  you  answer  rationally,  giving  three  raps  for
yes,  one  for  no?"  "Yes."  "Do  you  wish  to  answer  by  using  the
alphabet?"  "Yes."  "  Spell  your  name."  The  alphabet  was  repeated,
and  the  letters  indicated  by  three  raps — "Anastasie  Pereliguine."  "  I  beg
you  to  say  now  why  you  have  come  and  what  you  desire."  "  I  am  a
wretched  woman.  Pray  for  me.  Yesterday,  during  the  day,  I  died  at  the
hospital.  The  day  before  yesterday  I  poisoned  myself  with  matches. "  "  Give
us  some  details  about  yourself.  How  old  were  you  ?  Give  a  rap  for  each
year."  Seventeen  raps.  "Who  were  you?"  "I  was  housemaid.  I
poisoned  myself  with  matches."  "Why  did  you  poison  yourself  ?  "  "I  will
iiot  say. I  wQl  say  nothing  more."

1  We  cannot  here  dwell  on  these  physical  manifestations,  which  (it  is  hoped)  will  be
dealt  with  before  long  in  a  separate  paper.


356


A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Dead. [Jan.  31,


After  this,  a  heavy  table  which  was  near  the  wall,  outside  the  chain  of
hands,  came  up  rapidly  three  times,  towards  the  table  round  which  the
chain  was  made,  and  each  time  it  was  pushed  backwards,  no  one  knew  by
what  means.  Seven  raps  (the  signal  agreed  upon  for  the  close  of  the  sitting)
were  now  heard  in  the  wall ;  and  at  11.20  p.m.  the  seance  came  to  an  end.
Signed,  A.  Slepzof,  N.  Touloucheff,  A.  Naetzeff,  A.  Ivanof.

I  certify  that  this  copy  is  in  complete  accordance  with  the  original.

A.  Naetzeff.

Document  II. — The  imdersigned,  having  been  present  at  the  seance  of
November  18th,  1887,  at  the  house  of  M.  A.  N.  Nartzeff,  hereby  certify
that  they  had  no  previous  knowledge  of  the  existence  or  the  death  of
Anastasie  Perdliguine,  and  that  they  heard  her  name  for  the  first  time  at
the  above-mentioned  stance.

N.  P.  Touloucheff,  Alexis  Naetzeff,  A.  Slepzof,  A.  Ivanof.

Tambof,  Aiyril  6th,  1890.

Document  III. — Letter  of  Dr.  Touloucheff  to  M.  A.  Aksakof.

April  mil,  1890.

Sir, — At  the  sitting  held  at  M.  Nartzeff's  house,  November  18th,
1887,  we  received  a  communication  from  an  intelligence  giving  the  name  of
Anastasie  Perc^liguine.  She  asked  us  to  pray  for  her  ;  and  said  that  she  had
poisoned  herself  with  lucifer  matches,  and  had  died  on  the  17th  of  that
month.  At  the  first  moment  I  did  not  believe  this  ;  for  in  my  capacity  as
physician  of  the  municipality  I  am  at  once  informed  by  the  police  of  all
cases  of  suicide.  But  since  Pereliguine  had  added  that  her  death  had  taken
place  at  the  hospital  ;  and  since  at  Tambof  we  have  only  one  hospital,  that
of  the  "Institutions  de  Bienfaisanee,"  which  is  in  no  way  within  my  official
survey,  and  whose  authorities,  in  such  cases  as  this,  themselves  send  for  the
police  or  the  magistrate  ; — I  sent  a  letter  to  my  colleague,  Dr.  Sundblatt,
the  head  physician  of  this  hospital.  Without  explaining  my  reason  I  simply
asked  him  to  inform  me  whether  there  had  been  any  recent  case  of  suicide
at  the  hospital,  and,  if  so,  to  give  me  the  name  and  particulars.  I  have
already  sent  you  a  copy  of  his  reply,  certified  by  Dr.  Sundblatt's  own
signature.  The  original  is  at  M.  Nartzeff  s  house,  with  the  protocols  of  the
seances.

Tambof,  rue  du  Seminaire.  N.  Touloucheff.

Document  IV. — Copy  of  Dr.  Th.  Sundblatt's  letter  to  Dr.  Touloucheff.

Novemher  Idth,  1887.
My  dear  Colleague, — On  the  16th  of  this  month  I  was  on  duty  ;  and
on  that  day  two  patients  were  admitted  to  the  hospital,  who  had  poisoned
themselves  with  phosphorus.  The  first.  Vera  Kosovitch,  aged  38,  v/ife  of
a  clerk  in  the  public  service  .  .  .  was  taken  in  at  8  p.m.  ;  the  second,  a
servant  in  the  insane  ward  [a  part  of  the  hospital],  Anastasie  Pereliguine,
aged  17,  was  taken  in  at  10  p.m.  This  second  patient  had  swallowed,
besides  an  infusion  of  boxes  of  matches,  a  glass  of  kerosine,  and  at  the  time
of  her  admission  was  already  very  ill. She  died  at  1  p.m.  on  the  17th,  and


1890.]


A  Defence  of  Phantasms  of  the  Bead.


357


the  post-mortem  examination  has  been  made  to-day.  Kosovitch  died
yesterday,  and  the  ijost-mortem  is  fixed  for  to-morroiv.  Kosovitch  said  that
she  had  taken  the  phosphorus  in  an  access  of  melancholy,  but  P^religuine
did  not  state  her  reason  for  poisoning  herself.

Th.  Sundblatt.
Copy  of  letter  certified  by  Th.  Sundblatt  and  Alexis  NartzefF.

JDocnmeiit  V.— Letter  of  M.  A.  Nartzeff  to  M.  Aksakof,  May  16th,  1890.

[M.  Nartzeflf  writes  a  letter  in  English  and  one  in  French,  which  I  abridge
and  combine.]

' '  In  answer  to  your  letter  I  inform  you  that  my  aunt's  housekeeper  is  not  a
housekeeper  strictly  speaking,  but  rather  a  friend  of  the  family,  having  been
nearly  15  years  with  us,  and  possessing  our  entire  confidence.  She  could
not  have  already  learnt  the  fact  of  the  suicide,  as  she  has  no  relations  or
friends  in  Tambof,  and  never  leaves  the  house.

"  The  hospital  in  question  is  situated  at  the  other  end  of  the  town,  about
5  versts  from  my  house.  Dr.  Sundblatt  informs  me,  on  the  authority  of
the  pj'oces-verbal  of  the  inquest,  that  Pereliguine  was  able  to  read  and  write.
[This  in  answer  to  M.  Aksakof's  inquiry  whether  the  deceased  could  have
understood  al^jhabetic  communication.]

"  Sittings  were  held  at  Tambof,  April,  1885-October,  1889,  but  in  no  other
instance  were  irrefutable  proofs  obtained.  Generally  the  manifestations
were  of  a  trivial  character.  Twice  or  thrice  we  received  communications
apparently  serious,  but  on  inquiry  these  were  found  to  be  untrue."

It  is  remarkable  that  this  veridical  message  should  have  stood  alone,  but
its  correctness  obviously  was  not  due  to  chance.


358


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


III.

A  RECORD  OF  TELEPATHIC  AND  OTHER  EXPERIENCES.

BY  THE  AUTHOR  OF

"A  Record  of  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal  Vision."


[The  writer  of  the  following  paper,  who  List  year  gave  us  the  result  of  her
observations  on  Crystal  Vision,  still  desires  to  maintain  her  anonymity  for
reasons  which  appear  to  me  to  be  adequate.  On  this  account  alone  I  think
it  well  to  preface  her  paper  by  stating  that  she  publishes  this  record  of  her
experiences  at  my  request,  and  that  I  believe  it  to  have  been  composed  with
a  scrupulous  desire  to  avoid  anything  like  exaggeration  of  the  marvellous
element  in  the  experiences  which  it  records. — H.  Sidgwick.]

Throughout  the  whole  of  my  life  I  have,  as  I  believe,  possessed
some  power  of  telepathic  percipience,  or  susceptibility  to  the  action  o£
other  minds,  and  at  the  same  time  some  power  of  influencing  them  in  a
similar  way.  This  power  seems  to  me  to  be  a  thing  quite  apart,  not
implying  either  any  sj^ecial  strength  of  intellect  or  of  will  in  its  possessor,
and,  at  least  in  its  j^resent  state  of  development,  of  very  little  practical
use.  Nor  did  I  know,  until  accident  led  to  my  becoming  acquainted
with  some  of  the  work  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  in  the
winter  of  1887-88,  that  any  scientific  interest  attached  to  the  question.
Consequently  I  kept  no  proper  record,  and  only  occasionally  made  a
note  in  my  diary  when  any  very  striking  instance  occurred.  I  think  that
my  susceptibility  has  on  the  whole  become  less  acute  since  childhood,
but  on  the  other  hand  I  have,  during  the  last  few  years,  had  the
advantage  of  the  intimate  friendship  of  a  lady,  here  named  D.,  between,
whose  mind  and  my  own,  telepathic  communications  have  seemed  to
occur  with  sufficient  frequency  to  lead  us  to  regard  them  as  almost  a
matter  of  course.

When,  therefore,  I  was  asked  to  furnish  such  a  I'ecord  as  might  be
useful  in  the  discussion  of  telepathy,  the  most  obvious  thing  seemed  to
be,  in  the  first  place,  to  experiment  with  D.  in  that  definite  manner,
with  numbers,  diagrams,  &c.,  which  is  most  in  favour  with  the  investi-
gators of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  ;  and,  in  the  second  place,
to  keep  note-books  in  which  incidents  which  might  possibly  be  telepathic,
should  be  recorded  before  the  event  had  shown  whether  the  supposed
thought-transference  was  a  hit  or  a  miss.

The  note-books  will  be  submitted  to  the  reader's  judgment  at  the
end  of  this  paper.  As  regards  my  definite  experiments  on  numbers,
&c.,  with  D.,  I  have  simply  to  say  that  they  hardly  ever  succeeded.  A
few  successes  will  be  cited  below  ;  but  in  most  cases  these  experiments


1889.]


and  other  Experiences.


359


were  failures,  and  were,  moreover,  felt  by  both  of  us  to  be  such
while  they  were  actually  in  progress.  This  is  quite  in  harmony  with
my  experience  as  regards  telepathic  communications  in  general.
Whether  referring  to  matters  of  interest  and  importance,  or  not,  they
seem  to  belong  to  the  spontaneous  current  of  my  being,  and  to  be
incapable  of  being  summoned  by  conscious  effort.  This  is  to  be
regretted  from  a  scientific  point  of  view,  but  it  is  what  I  should  have
expected  from  my  knowledge  of  the  way  in  which  my  own  mind
works.  To  be  able  at  a  given  moment  to  conjure  up  a  strong  excite-
ment, to  create  a  powerful  current  of  thought  or  feeling,  is,  no  doubt,  a
most  valuable  power,  but  it  is  one  which  I,  unfortunately  for  such  a
purpose,  do  not  possess.  My  deficiency  in  this  respect  is  brought  home
to  me  by  a  trait  with  which  I  think  some  readers  will  sympathise.  I
am  extremely  fond  of  music,  and  playing  on  the  pianoforte  has  been,
from  childhood,  one  of  my  greatest  pleasures.  But  the  accomplishment,
so  far  as  its  general  application  goes,  seems  to  depend  for  its  real  value
— to  myself  certainly  and,  my  friends  tell  me,  to  others  as  well — on  the
conditions  of  its  exercise.  In  the  society  of  a  few  friends  so  intimate
that  I  can  forget  their  presence  in  the  room,  or  of  real  musicians
who  themselves  supply  both  incentive  and  support,  my  enjoyment  in
the  music  is  deep  and  real,  and  can  reach  to  others  ;  but  if  strangers
only  are  present,  or  if,  from  some  adverse  influence,  the  music  is  not  the
expression  of  a  spontaneous  mood  or  desire,  1  feel  the  mere  act  of
playing  to  be  a  thing  apart  from  myself,  comparatively  lifeless  and
uninteresting — a  performance,  in  fact,  and  nothing  more.

In  giving  accounts  of  some  of  my  experiences,  I  shall  resort  to  the
sort  of  classification  I  found  convenient  in  my  paper  on  Crystal  Vision.
It  is  observable,  however,  that  a  larger  proportion  of  the  experiences
here  recorded  than  of  those  in  the  crystal  visions  may  be  regarded  as
telepathic,  though  in  their  main  features  the  two  types  of  hallucination
are  closely  parallel,  and  the  analogy  seems  to  afford  a  clue  to  their
explanation.  As  in  the  case  of  the  crystal  visions,  it  seems  as  if  a  good
many  of  the  phenomena  are  to  be  regarded  as  messages  sent  from  the
inner  to  the  normal  self.  Such  messages  are  sometimes,  though  very
rarely,  fantastic.  Sometimes  they  are  revivals  of  memory,  sometimes
advice  founded,  as  it  were,  on  a  somewhat  wider  j^urview  than  my
ordinary  senses  comprehend.  I  do  not,  of  course,  venture  to  compare
such  warnings  with  the  "  divine  sign "  of  Socrates,  but  Plutarch's-
tradition  as  to  the  warning  voice  and  the  drove  of  pigs,  quoted  by  Mr.
Myers  in  the  last  volume  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  is  perhaps  not  too  lofty  a  story  to  be  referred  to  as  a  pretty
close  parallel  to  the  bulk  of  my  own  experiences.

To  such  monitions  I  have  from  a  very  early  age  been  subject.  One,
which  was  recorded  at  the  time  by  a  member  of  the  family,  occurred


360


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


■when  I  was  less  than  three  years  old.  The  note  of  the  fact  merely
mentions  that  I  cried  without  reason,  and  afterwards  asked  if  my
mother  wei'e  ill,  she  being  at  the  time  about  150  miles  away.  It  was
not  till  20  years  later  that  I  ascertained  that  she  was  indeed  taken
suddenly  and  very  seriously  ill  on  that  day.

Sometimes,  as  in  the  case  of  acute  antipathy,  it  may  be  supposed
that  slight  traits  which  escaped  the  conscious  observation  had  never-
theless a  powerful  influence  on  the  inner  judgment.  I  can  remember
two  children  at  different  times  among  my  casual  play-fellows,  whose
neighbourhood,  for  no  reason  that  I  could  assign,  was  to  me  always  the
occasion  of  intense  distress.  Of  their  after  history  I  know  nothing,
but  in  other  cases  of  my  antipathy,  quite  a  different  sensation  from
dislike  based  upon  experience,  my  friends  now  agree  that  the  instinct
was  justified  by  subsequent  events.

I  can  remember  as  a  child  of  six,  spending  long  lonely  afternoons  in
a  hay-loft,  as  the  only  place  where  I  was  insured  against  the  presence
of  a  frequent  visitor,  whose  advent  was  always  hailed  with  delight  by
the  rest  of  the  household,  and  who  was  ready  to  extend  to  me  the  gifts
and  notice  which  the  other  children  gladly  accepted,  but  whose  very
neighbourhood  was  a  source  of  distress,  amounting  to  physical  misery
which  at  that  period  could  only  express  itself  in  tears.  A  time  came
when  his  name  became,  for  very  sufficient  reasons,  a  forbidden  word  in
the  family.  One  such  example  would  prove  nothing,  but  like  experi-
ences extending  over  a  life-time,  incline  me  to  think,  though  I  say  it
with  diffidence  and  humility,  that,  from  whatever  cause,  I  may  aspire
to  some  such  power  of  discrimination  as  that  possessed  by  my  friend
the  dog.

I  add  a  more  recent  example.  My  friend,  Mrs.  T.  (whose  name
"will  appear  again  in  this  paper),  had  often  spoken  to  me  in  terms  of
affection  and  admiration  of  her  friend,  Mrs.  Z.  All  I  knew  of  her
from  other  sources  contributed  to  make  me  desire  her  acquaintance,
and  I  was  disappointed  that  for  some  months  I  had  no  opportunity  of
meeting  her.  One  afternoon,  calling  on  Mrs.  T.,  I  found  myself  in  the
presence  of  a  lady,  of  what  most  would  consider  attractive  appear-
ance, but  who  instantly  inspired  me  with  a  painful  sensation,  with  the
meaning  of  which  I  am  but  too  familiar,  and  who,  to  my  surprise,  was
introduced  to  me  as  Mrs.  Z.  I  could  not  recover  from  the  shock,  and
left  the  room  almost  immediately,

Mrs.  T.  writes  : —

"  Januarii  1*7 fh  [1888].
"  You  ask  if  I  remember  any  example  of  your  expressed  antipathy  ?  I  do
tlistinctly,  and  at  the  time  was  surprised  and  did  not  think  your  dislike
reasonable,  but  since  then  have  liad  cause  to  know  that  your  feeling  was  per-
fectly justified."


1889.]


and  other  Experience?!.


361


I  should  add  thai  the  conduct  which  has  afforded  the  alleged
justification  was  of  a  nature  as  to  which  there  could  be  no  difterence  of
opinion.

Sometimes,  however,  such  monitions  referred  to  facts  of  which  I
could  not  possibly  be  aware,  as  for  example  : — '

Wlien  quite  a  cliiki  I  was  returning  home  from  the  classes  I  attended,  and
by  some  accident  was  alone.  On  arriving  at  a  certain  point  in  my  walk,  a
very  strong  impression  seized  me  that  I  must  not  return  by  the  usual  way,
and,  accustomed  to  such  directions,  I  turned  into  a  very  inferior  street,  which
was  the  more  unpleasant  to  me  in  that,  as  I  have  said,  I  was,  contrary  to  habit,
alone.  I  heard  on  the  following  morning  that  at  the  hour  of  my  return  a
man  had  committed  suicide  by  throwing  himself  under  the  steam  roller,  and
that  had  I  passed  along  my  usual  route,  I  must  have  been  a  spectator  of
the  horrible  incident.

Many  cases  of  monition,  as,  for  instance,  the  being  aware  of  the
approach  of  friends  while  still  out  of  sight,  or  of  their  presence  in  a,
crowd  in  which  it  is  impossible  that  they  should  be  distinguished,  may,
perhaps,  as  in  the  case  of  antipathy,  be  I'eferred  to  some  slight  circum-
stance which  escapes  one's  conscious  observation.  As  a  child,  I  was
conscious  of  having,  in  certain  cases,  an  advantage  in  games  requiring
forethought,  in  that  I  could  sometimes  foresee  my  ojaponent's  intentions ;
and  I  remember  abandoning  my  favourite  amusement  of  chess,  on  dis-
covering that  a  schoolboy  friend,  who  knew  of  my  occasional  power  of
thought-reading,  had,  in  this  particular  instance,  observed  to  whom  it
applied,  and  would  bet  upon  my  success,  sometimes  with  ^^hi-yers  veiy
superior  to  myself.

Many  cases  also  which  are  associated  with  someone  with  whom  I  am
en  ra2)j)ort,  or  who  is  thinlcing  of  me  at  the  time,  glide  appai-ently  into
telepathy,  and  the  discovery  of  this  fact  makes  a  landmai'k  in  my
psychical  recollections.  It  is,  j^erhaps,  not  surprising  that  all  reference
to  experiences  apparently  supernormal  should  have  been  discouraged  by
my  friends,  and  that  I  should  in  consequence  have  come  to  regard  them
as  indicating  a  discreditable  condition  of  things,  to  be  minimised  and
concealed  as  far  as  possible.  However,  when  about  1-5  years  old,  it
happened  that  in  a  time  of  childish  trouble  in  which  I  had  no  one  to
share,  my  thoughts  turned  earnestly,  though  involuntaiily,  to  an  older
friend,  then  at  a  distance  (of  about  80  miles),  who  would,  I  thought,
have  given  me  the  sympathy  and  advice  of  which  I  stood  in  need.
Within  a  few  hours  my  friend  arrived,  having  found  it  impossible  to
resist  a  con\'iction,  apparently  causeless,  that  I  was  in  need  of  help.
With,  I  think,  more  wisdom  than  was  shown  by  others  who  had  before
advised  me  in  this  connection,  the  same  friend  impressed  uj^on  me  the
conviction  that,  whatever  might  be  its  source,  such  a  means  of  influenc-
ing others  was  one  to  be  neither  lightly  used,  nor  lightly  disregarded.


3-62


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


This  changed  my  attitude  in  regard  to  the  matter.  I  learned  that  what
had  seemed  only  a  kind  of  mental  deformity  might  be  at  once  a  privilege'
and  a  responsibility.  T  began  to  feel  a  greater  interest  in  its  manifesta-
tions, and,  as  I  grew  older,  to  accept  it  among  other  conditions  of  life,
as  something  external  to  myself,  not  of  my  own  choosing,  a  source
neither  of  shame  nor  of  self-congratulation,  mine  to  use,  but  seldom
mine  to  control.

To  no  one  can  such  things  be  a  greater  puzzle  than  to  myself.  Their
conditions  are  so  uncertain,  their  mode  of  operation  at  times  so  unex-
pected, their  chances  so  complex,  their  duration  so  transitory,  that  one
hestitates  to  form  conclusions.

Only  on  one  or  two  lesser  points,  and  so  far  as  my  own  experience
goes,  can  I  sjjeak  with  any  degree  of  certainty.  I  would  say  that  such
experiences,  though  sometimes  the  occasion,  are  never  the  cause,  of  any
distress  ;  the  message  conveyed  may  be  painful,  but  it  has  seldom
happened  that  it  has  been  presented  in  a  manner  to  startle  or  annoy  ;
it  is  not  followed  by  j^hysical  exhaustion,  noi'  preceded  by  any  special
conditions ;  it  is  most  to  be  looked  for  when  my  health  is  normal,  and
my  mind  at  rest.  If  of  what  is  brought  before  one's  consciousness  in
this  manner  we  may  say  that  it  is  in  fact  recollection,  the  recovering  of
knowledge  which  is  already  ours,  if  one  may  apply  the  very  great  to
the  very  small,  I  would  venture  to  say —  ;

Hence  in  a  season  of  calm  weather,
Thoiigh  inland  far  we  be,

Our  souls  have  sight  of  the  immortal  sea.  .  •

I  have  often  sought  for  any  condition,  beyond  that  of  quiet  receptive-
ness,  which  shall  promote  such  experiences.  The  result  has  been
mainly  negative.  The  only  occasion  when  I  absolutely  lost  the  power
for  any  length  of  time  (about  14  months)  was  when  I  was  exception-
ally anxious  for  its  exercise ;  after  which,  having  ceased  to  look  for
any  messages,  they  returned  suddenly,  with  perhaps  greater  vividness
and  frequency  than  ever  before.

I  have  been  congratulated  on  having  found  among  my  fiiends
several  who  fulfilled  whatever  unknown  conditions  are  necessary  for
the  interchange  of  messages  assumed  to  be  telepathic.  What  those
conditions  may  be,  or  how  far  they  are  dependent  on  myself,  I  cannot
guess.  As  I  have  already  said,  such  interchange  has  been  mainly
spontaneous.  It  has  existed  not  only  with  intimate  friends  but  with
mere  acquaintances,  and  even  with  those  whose  acquaintance  I  did  not
desire.  The  most  numerous  among  the  instances  quoted  in  this  paper
are  with  my  friend,  D.,  but  as  D.  has  had  scarcely  any  similar  psychical
experience  apart  from  myself,  it  may  be  asked  how  far  their  frequency
may  have  de^oended  on  propinquity  and  common  interests.


18S9.]


and  other  Experiences.


363


D.  writes  in  answer  to  questions  from  Mr.  Myers  : —

"  Janxiary  llth,  1888.

' '  I  am  generally  the  recipient  of  impressions,  rarely,  if  ever,  the  active
power,  and  even  in  the  cases  in  which  X.  has  become  conscious  of  actions
or  intentions  of  mine,  it  has  been  without  any  recognised  exertion  of  ^^aU  on
my  jjart  that  she  should  know  of  them,  so  much  so  that  it  often  seems  to  me
that  her  knowledge  of  much  that  I  do  has  preceded  my  action,  being,  indeed,
an  exertion  of  power  ivilling  that  I  should  do  it.  This  I  notice  particularly
in  various  instances  when  I  have  called  upon  X.  at,  as  I  supposed,  quite
tniexpected  times,  often  at  a  late  hour  when  on  my  way  home  from  a  dinner
party,  or  early  in  the  morning  before  the  usual  breakfast  time.  At  such  times
lier  greeting  has  generally  been,  '  I  knew  you  were  coming  and  left  the  door
open  for  you, '  or  '  I  have  been  playing  for  you. '  So  often  has  this  occurred
that  I  have  given  up  hope  of  a  surprise  visit,  and  have  frequently  said  to
others  that  I  know  I  am  '  expected, 'as  an  excuse  for  apparently  unseasonable
vusits  to  my  friend's  house.

' '  Especially  I  would  notice  X.  's  power  to  call  me  by  her  music,  '  jilaying
for  '  me,  as  I  always  call  it.  I  am  no  musician,  but  as  long  as  I  can
xemember,  music  has  been  associated  with  all  I  cared  for  most,  and  its
power  over  me  is  a  very  real  though  perhaps  only  sentimental  one."

The  discovery  that  the  possibility  of  such  interchange  of  thought
•existed  has  always  been  made  by  accident  rather  than  experiment.  I
■quote  in  connection  with  names  which  will  appear  again  in  my  note-
book one  or  two  early  examples.  When  a  child  of  13  I  was  taken  to
see  a  college  to  which  it  was  proposed  to  send  me  at  a  later  date  for
the  completion  of  my  studies.  It  was  during  the  vacation,  and  the
lecture  rooms  were  all  silent  and  deserted.  In  one  room,  in  an  out  of
the  way  corner,  I  saw  a  girl  seated,  looking  dii^ectly  towards  me.  I
noticed  her  dress,  the  way  in  which  her  hair  was  arranged,  and  even  a
very  slight  scar  upon  her  face,  when  the  figure  vanished.  An  unfore-
seen cii'cumstance  resulted  in  my  entering  the  college  as  a  pupil  within
a  few  weeks.  At  the  first  class  I  attended,  in  the  very  room  already
mentioned,  I  recognised  the  subject  of  my  vision,  and  though  she  did
not  for  some  weeks  vouchsafe  to  make  my  acquaintance  she  became  to
me  at  once  an  object  of  interest.  A  change  in  the  arrangement  of  the
class  led  after  a  time  to  our  sitting  side  by  side,  at  the  very  desk  at
which  I  had  in  vision  seen  her,  and  in  the  end  we  established  a  friend-
ship which  has  never  changed.  She  is  referred  to  in  the  note-book  as
my  friend  N.

N.  wiT.tes  : — ■

"I  perfectly  remember  your  appearance  at ■  College,  some  weeks

after  the  o|)ening  of  term.  In  common  with  the  whole  class  I  not  un-
n.atm'aUy  resented  the  unexpected  advent  of  a  jirobable  rival,  who,  notwith-
standing the  inferiority  of  years,  seemed  to  threaten  my  hitherto  assured
position  in  the  school. For  this  reason,  and  no  other,  we  for  some  weeks


364


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


remained  strangers,  and  I  was  much  interested  when,  ahnost  in  our  first
conversation,  you  told  me  that  some  weeks  before  your  arrival  you  had  had  a
prevision  of  my  appearance.  I  also  remember  the  singular  power  you  seemed
to  possess  over  certain  of  our  companions — over  two  in  particular,  the  one
addicted  to  elocution,  the  other  to  giggling  ;  you  aj)peared  to  be  able  to
reduce  them  to  silence  by  the  apparently  simple  process  of  fixing  your  eyes
upon  them  from  behind."

"  In  another  case,  Mrs.  T.,  mentioned  above,  whose  name  also  occurs
in  my  note-book,  permits  me  to  quote  her  own  version  of  the  matter.
I  have  known  her  as  a  kind  friend  from  my  earliest  childhood.  She
writes : —

''January  17  th  [1888].
"  It  is  only,  so  far  as  I  can  remember,  since  then  (about  five  years)  that  I
can  call  to  mind  your  seeming  influence  with  regard  to  my  visits  to  you.  I
must  say,  at  the  outset,  that  at  no  time  have  I  encouraged  myself  in  thinking
of  you  as  wanting  me,  but  usually  the  impulse  to  come  and  see  you  has  come
suddenly,  even  without  my  so  much  as  having  you  in  my  mind.  You  know
how  much  amused  I  used  to  be  when  you  greeted  me  with,  '  Oh,  here  is  Mrs.
T.,  I  knew  you  were  coming. . . .' Several  times  when  I  have  been  in

 and  felt  I  would  not  call,  and  have  gone  in  an  opposite  direction,  I  have

turned  about  and  come  to  see  you,  and  usually  found  I  was  expected. "

Mrs.  T.  then  gives  an  instance  of  having  resisted  a  sudden  impulse
to  come  to  me,  when,  after  starting  in  an  omnibus  in  an  opposite
direction,  she  felt  compelled  to  get  out  and  drive  to  my  house,  where
she  found  that  a  letter  had  been  already  written  desiring  her  to  call.
Her  husband,  a  well-known  professional  man,  testifies  to  his  remem-
brance of  her  having  frequently  said  that  she  had  been  to  see  me,  and
"  of  course  found  "  I  expected  her.

Another  incident  to  which  Mrs.  T.  refers  was  as  follows  : —

I  was  staying  with  an  invalid  relative  in  a  country  town  about  six  miles
from  the  village  where  Mrs.  T.  then  lived.  On  September  6th,  1887,  I  left
rather  suddenly,  so  that  I  was  unable  to  arrange  various  matters  to  my  satis-
faction, and  directed  my  thoughts  to  Mrs.  T.  as  a  person  more  likely  than  any
other  friend  to  be  of  use  to  me.  Just  as  I  was  leaving,  she  arrived,  in  time  to
receive  my  parting  instructions.  Her  own  account  of  the  matter  is  as
follows  : —  "I  did  not  know  you  were  going,  but  in  spite  of  wind  and  rain,
I  felt  I  must  see  you  ...  I  am  sure  that  I  had  no  previous  intention  of
coming  .  .  .  and  was,  indeed  .  .  .  unwilling  to  undertake  the  walk
to  the  station  in  such  unsettled  weather."

As  Mrs.  T.  is  now  but  seldom  within  such  distance  of  me  as  makes
an  unpremeditated  visit  possible,  I  have  had  but  few  opportunities
lately  of  attempting  to  summon  her.  I  have  examined  my  diary  for
the  early  part  of  1888  with  a  view  to  ascertain  the  proportion  of  her
sjDontaneous  visits  to  those  in  obedience  to  summons. It  appears  that


1889.]


and  other  Experiences.


365


during  four  months  (January  13th- April  27th,  1888)  she  called  at  the
house  eight  times,  out  of  which  two  visits  were  in  consequence  of  a
special  desire  on  my  part,  one  of  which  was  noted  beforehand.

I  am,  unfortunately,  obliged  to  confess  again  my  inability  to  summon
her  simply  as  an  experiment.  The  spontaneous  desire  for  her  presence
must  be,  as  in  other  instances,  the  motive  force.

In  regard  to  another  friend,  H.,  the  story  of  the  discovery  of  our
mutual  psychical  relation  will  be  found  below.  I  think  that  every
case  of  the  kind  as  it  occurs,  impresses  upon  my  mind  more  and  more
strongly  the  difficulty  of  foreseeing  its  possibility,  the  greater,  pei'haps,
in  my  case,  on  the  ground,  already  referred  to,  of  the  wholly  spontaneous
nature  of  most  of  my  experiences.

As  I  have  already  said,  directly  I  become  occujiied  with  an  experi-
ment as  such  I  am  usually  conscious  of  failure.  However,  two  or
three  cases  of  deliberate  attempts  to  read  the  thoughts  of  another  may
be  given  here,  most  of  them  instances  in  which  the  question  of  experi-
ment was  not  that  uppemiost  in  my  mind.

On  January  5th,  1889,  D.  and  I  were  reading  letters  which  had  just
arrived  by  the  post,  when  D.  remarked  as  she  was  returning  one  to  its
envelope,  ' '  You  would  never  guess  what  Miss  H.  's  Cliristian  name  is  !  you
may  ask  20  questions  and  try."  I  was  not  particularly  interested,  hut  having
asked  two, — whether  it  were  classical  or  modern,  English  or  foreign, — 1
looked  up  accidentally  at  a  recess  in  shadow,  by  the  side  of  the  fire-place,
and  read,  in  letters  of  light  on  the  dark  background,  the  name  "Willielmina, "
which  was  correct,  and  was  then  anxious  to  try  again.  "  You  are  not  likely
to  know  Miss  E.'s  name,"  suggested  D.  "  I'll  think  of  her,"  and  in  the  same
way,  after  perhaps  two  minutes'  concentration  of  thought,  and  without  any
false  shots,  "Edith"  was  supplied.  In  a  similar  manner  followed  "James,"
"George,"  and  "  Charlotte  " — of  George  only,  was  it  at  all  likely  that  I
should  liave  heard  the  name  before.  Of  the  next  tliat  was  thought  of —
"  Dora  " — 1  could  supply  only  the  final  letters,  and  asked  if  it  were  "  Clara,"
and  the  attempt  was  given  up.  When  D.  thought  of  names,  instead
of  the  owners  of  the  names,  I  had  no  success  at  all.  In  the
same  way,  when  D.  one  day  drew  a  mouse  in  my  presence,  but  not
within  sight  and  without  making  any  sound  with  her  pencil,  1  at
once  perceived  a  long  oval  witli  a  smaller  one  at  the  left  extremity  ;  but  out
of  three  drawings,  deliberately  made  as  experiments  on  the  same  day,  I  saw
the  first  correctly,  but  it  was  not  distinct  as  was  tlie  mouse — the  original  being

a  cross-potent  ,  which  in  my  reproduction  appeared  as  a  cross  witliin


a  square


,  the  terminal  crossings  having  been  extended  till  they  met  ;


the  second — a  pillar  with  its  capital — in  part  only, and  after  much  hesitation;
and  the  third  after  an  interval  of  two  hours,  during  wliich  tlie  drawing  had
been  seen  by  others,  and  so  possibly  the  ojjportunities  of  thought-trans-
ference multiplied.


SQQ


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


My  various  experiences,  as  will  be  seen  by  the  diary,  are  largely
Tinspecialised.  However,  as  I  have  already  said,  some  such  provisional
classification  as  served  in  the  case  of  the  Crystal  Visions  may  be  offered
here.  I  shall  illustrate  each  by  examples,  taken  from  the  note-book,
with  the  object  of  showing  that  the  note-book  cases,  insignificant  as  they
are,  relating  only  to  a  short  space  of  time  and  to  a  limited  circle  of
friends,  correspond,  nevertheless,  in  their  main  features  and  general
outline  with  the  wider  results  of  at  least  20  years'  experience.  It  is
obvious  that  at  this  distance  of  time  many  of  the  friends  concerned  are
scattered,  and  many  circumstances  forgotten  or  imjaerf ectly  remembered ;
I  can,  therefore,  only  oflfer  such  corroboration  as  remains  possible,  and
trust  that  the  bettei'  attested  instances  may  serve  to  create  a  belief  in
my  veracity  which  may  extend  to  others,  as  to  which  none  could  more
•desire  than  do  I  myself  better  evidence  or  further  corroboration.

It  is  evident  also  that  for  obvious  reasons  I  can  draw  for  illustration
on  part  only  of  my  recollections  and  experience.

These  I  divide  into  three  groups.

1.  The  externalisation  of  a  revival  of  memory.

2.  Monitions,  possibly  telepathic  in  their  origin,  which  may  or  may
not  be  accompanied  by  sensory  impression.

3.  Hallucinations  of  a  kind  for  which  telepathy  does  not  seem  to
afford  an  adequate  explanation.

Examples  of  the  first  class,  though  very  frequently  presented  in  the
Crystal  experiments,  are  of  rare  occurrence  among  the  cases  now  under
■consideration.  I  can  quote  one  only  in  addition  to  that  (No.  44)  which
will  be  found  in  my  note-book.  This  presents  one  exceptional  feature
in  that  it  is  the  only  experience  in  my  record  which  has  been  frequently
repeated. • • "  .

From  childhood  I  have  been  continually  aware  of  the  presence  of
a  little  old  woman,  appearing  usually  to  my  right,  and  rather  behind
me,  so  that  I  haA^e  never  seen  her  actually  face  to  face.  She  never
presents  herself  except  on  occasions  of  bodily  fatigue  or  mental  worry,
and  indeed  has  often  sei-ved  as  a  useful  warning  against  the  continuance
of  some  occupation  of  which  I  am  already  weary.

Just  as  in  my  childhood  she  would  assist  at  the  conjugation  of
French  irregular  verbs  or  the  disentanglement  of  a  German  nominative,
so  now  she  stands  at  my  elbow  after  long-continued  mental  effort,  or
accomj^anies  me  to  the  breakfast-table  after  a  sleepless  night.  Once
when  I  was  ill  she  discarded  the  large  blue  bonnet  with  which  I  had
previously  been  familiar,  and  rather  prematurely  went  into  jnourning,
which  she  still  wears.  Similar  cases  are  quoted  by  all  writers  on  morbid
psychology,  but  there  is  perhaps  reason  to  believe  that  this  figure  may
have  been  in  the  first  instance  the  creation  of  memory  and  association.

I  had  at  one  time  an  alternative  vision  still  more  unpleasaiit,  which


1889.]


and  other  Experiences.


367


I  have  now  happily  lost,  and  which  I  know  to  have  been  produced  by
the  thoughtless  teasing  of  an  elder  play-fellow.

It  therefore  seems  possible  that  some  early  shock  connected  with  an
old  woman  of  disagreeable  appearance  may  have  remained  in  my
memory,  to  be  revived  in  association  with  the  sensations  of  anxiety  or
exhaustion,  such  as  those  of  which  she  had  originally  been  the  cause.
Her  antitype  was,  I  believe,  a  cei-tain  villager,  to  whose  cottage  I  was
frequently  taken  as  a  child,  and  of  whom,  though  I  can  recall  no  special
occasion  of  shock,  my  general  imjaression  is  one  of  dislike  and
repugnance.

The  second  class  presents  naturally  many  sub-divisions.  The
simplest  kind  of  monition  is  that  without  sensory  impression,  of  which
I  have  already  given  examples  and  which  occurs  in  the  note-book
more  often  than  any  other.  The  instance  I  now  quote  presents  some
special  features.

On  the  night  of  December  IStli,  1887,  I  was  just  going  to  bed  when  I  was
seized  with  so  strong  an  impression  that  D.  was  thinking  of  me  and  that
something  was  going  to  happen,  that  I  decided  to  sit  up  over  the  fire  and
await  events.  I  have  had  occasional  warnings  of  visits  from  D. — of  which
instances  will  be  found  in  my  note-book — when  some  emergency  has  sent  her
to  me  at  untimely  hours,  sometimes  before  the  house  was  opened  in  the
morning,  or  after  I  have  retired  for  the  night,  and  my  immediate  conclusion
was  that  something  might  have  occurred  to  cause  her  to  pay  me  a  late  visit
on  her  way  home  from  a  concert  which  I  knew  her  to  be  attending  that  even-
ing. While  I  waited,  a  sudden  noise  startled  me,  and  a  heavy  jaicture  fell
from  the  wall  on  to  my  bed,  the  shivered  glass  alighting  on  the  pillow,  so
that  had  I  gone  to  bed  as  usual,  I  could  hardly  have  escaped  injury.  This
was  abovit  10.15  p.m.  D.  supplies  the  following  account:  "On  December
13th  I  was  singing  in  the  chorus  of  an  oratorio  at  a  concert.  I  found  my
thoughts  drawn  to  my  friend  X.  and  seemed  to  be  singing  with  her,  so  that
all  surroundings  were  lost  to  me.  During  the  whole  of  the  first  part  this
feeling  was  strong  upon  me,  so  much  so,  that  others  noticed  my  strange
absorption,  and  remarked  upon  it  then  and  afterwards.  The  first  part
closed  about  10. 15,  and  during  the  second,  which  began  some  10  minutes  later,
I  found  myself  free  from  anything  but  my  usual  interest  in  the  music. "  One  of
those  present,  who  remarked  upon  D.  's  jJreoccupation,  testifies  in  writing  to
her  recollection  of  the  fact.

In  the  next  example,  the  telepathic  impression,  if  such  it  were,  was
more  completely  externalised.  As  my  friend  D.  may  be  considered  the
agent,  I  quote  her  own  account  of  the  matter.

''April  13th,  1888.

"  In  the  spring  of  1881,  in  the  evening  after  dinner,  I  accidentally
set  fire  to  the  curtains  of  a  sitting-room,  and  put  myself  and  several
others  into  some  danger.  The  next  morning,  on  visiting  X.,  I  heard
from  her  that  she  had  been  much  disturbed  over-night  by  an  unaccountable
smell  of  fire,  which  she  could  not  trace,  but  which  seemed  to  follow  her


368


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


wherever  she  went."  [I  took  considerable  trouble  to  discover  the  cause,  and
was  (juieted  only  by  the  assurance  that  it  was  imperceptible  to  the  rest  of  the
household.]  "  I  was  led  to  discover  the  fire,  and  so  probably  to  save  the
house  by  what  seemed  a  chance  thought  of  X.  I  had  left  the  room,
unconscious  of  anything  wrong,  and  had  settled  to  my  work  elsewhere,
when  I  suddenly  remembered  I  had  not  put  away  some  pajoers  I  had
been  looking  at,  and  which  I  had  thought  might  wait  for  daylight,  but
a  strong  feeling  that  X.  would  insist  upon  order,  had  she  been  there,
induced  me  to  go  back,  when  I  found  the  whole  place  in  flames."

I  proceed  now  to  quote  four  cases,  all  of  visual  hallucination,  but
differing  in  type, — the  first  a  vision  of  a  friend  actually  watching  me
at  the  moment  ;  the  second  of  one  at  a  distance  but  whom  I  know  to
have  been  thinking  of  me  at  the  time  ;  the  third  of  one  in  whose
thoughts  I  may  have  been,  though  this  is  by  no  means  certain  ;  and
the  last  of  a  friend  in  supreme  danger,  whose  actual  thoughts  at  the
moment  we  are  not  likely  to  ascertain.

One  morning  I  was  walking  in  some  j^ulilic  gardens  wlien,  just  as  we
reached  the  point  wliere  tlio  path  slojjes  down  to  the  higli  road,  I  remarked
that  Mr.  L.  was  in  front  of  us.  My  companion,  whose  sight  is  longer  than
mine,  assured  me  I  was  mistaken,  but  for  once  I  was  quite  certain  of  niy
own  powers  of  vision,  and  the  hallucination  persisted  till  we  reached  the
crossing,  when  tlie  figure  disajjpeared,  so  suddenly  that  I  could  only  supjiose
he  liad  entered  one  of  the  ojiposite  shops.  [I  would  point  out  that  had  the
image  been  caused  hy  a  reflection  in  the  shop  windows,  which  tlie  distance
renders  unlikely,  I  should  have  seen  the  face,  not  the  back  of  my  friend,  as
the  seipiel  will  show.]

The  same  afternoon  we  met  Mr.  L.  at  a  garden  party  [D.  remembers
and  confirms  the  conversati(.)n]  when  I  mentioned  having  seen  him  before,
l)ut  tliat  he  had  not  waited  to  be  spoken  to.  "  It  was  you  who  wouldn't  wait,"
he  replied,  and  we  at  lengtli  discovered  that  he  had  ])een  walking  at  some
distance  behind  us,  had  tried  to  make  me  look  round,  and  had  finally  given
up  tlie  attempt  as  we  crossed  tlie  road.

I  quote  the  next  case  from  my  private  diary  of  February  20th,  1888.

While  paying  a  visit  this  afternoon,  and  talking  to  friends  who  do
not  know  M.,  and  where  nothing  could  remind  me  of  her,  I  was  suddenly
seized  with  the  conviction  that  she  wanted  me,  and  at  once  determined
to  call  upon her (though  at  some  inconvenience) on  my  way  home.

Just  as  I  arrived,  my  resolution  was  altered,  as  the  scrap  scribbled
on  the  spot  will  show.

This,  written  on  the  back  of  a  letter,  is  as  follows: — "Monday,  Feb.  20th,
1888.  I  was  about  to  call  on  M.,  but  having  reached  her  door  am  so  certain
that  she  is  at  mine,  that  I  do  not  even  incpiire,  though  I  2:)articularly  desire
to  meet  her.  I  write  in  the  carriage,  10  past  4."  [I  had  a  momentary  but
distinct  vision  of  M.  standing  against  the  background  of  my  own  front  door.]

When  I  reached  In )iiie  the  servant  told  me  that  M.  had  called  "about
four,  or  a  little  after." A  note  from  her,  received  the  next  morning,  says,


1889.]


and  other  Experiences.


369


"I  was  so  sorry  to  miss  yovi  this  afternoon.  I  couldn't  come  to  see  you
before,  I've  been  rather  ill  lately,"  and  proceeds  to  suggest  arrangements
as  to  a  scheme  of  some  interest  to  both  of  us,  and  which  she  was  anxious
to  carry  out  immediately.  I  afterwards  disco-^^ered  that  she  had  left  her
room,  in  order  to  call  upon  me,  in  defiance  of  her  doctor's  direct  injunctions.

I  quote  again  from  my  private  diary,  February  17th,  1888  : — "Saw
J.  crossing  the  road."  A  more  detailed  account  from  which  I  quote
Avas  wiitten  on  July  7th,  five  months  later  : —

"  I  was  on  my  way  to  D.,  and  told  her  on  my  arrival  that  I  knew  J.
Avas  coming,  as  I  had  seen  him  carrying  a  parcel,  which  I  described,  but  that
he  had  taken  no  notice  of  me.  She  said  I  must  be  mistaken,  as  he  was  un-
likely to  be  free  on  this  particular  morning.  About  half  an  hour  later  lie
arrived  with  the  package  in  question,  having  been  actually,  at  the  time  I  saw
him,  in  the  railway  carriage.  D.  remembers  and  corroborates  this.  I  am  clear
that  it  was  not  a  case  of  mistaken  identity  ;  there  was  no  one  else  in  sight,
and  the  figure  which  seemed  to  be,  like  myself,  directing  its  steps  towards
the  garden  gate  became  fainter  as  the  distance  lessened  between  us,  till  it
faded  entirely  away.''

The  next  case  was  communicated  in  writing  to  the  secretary  of  the
Society  for  Psychical  Research  some  months  before  I  knew  whether
there  had  been  any  coincidence  at  all.

On  December  14th,  1885,  I  went  about  11  o'clock  in  the  morning  to  visit
a  friend.  While  waiting  for  her,  alone  in  the  library,  I  became  suddenly
conscious  of  a  presence  in  the  room,  and  looking  up  met  the  fixed  gaze  of  my
friend  M.,  whom  I  knew  to  be  in  the  East.  The  face,  which  I  knew  as
one  more  than  ordinarily  calm  and  bright  in  expression,  bore  a  terrible  look
of  pain  and  apprehension.  I  recorded  it  in  my  diary  the  same  day  thus : — ' '  To

■  11  o'clock.  SawM.. Write  to  [her  mother]  when  can."  I  was  so  startled

as  to  be  for  the  moment  unable  to  control  my  agitation  when  immediately
after  my  friend  entered  the  room,  and  she  was  somewhat  jaerplexed  when,  in
answer  to  her  inquiry,  I  replied  that  I  had  seen  M. ,  of  whom  she  had  never
heard.  To  this  slie  has  testified  in  writing  as  follows  : —

''January  9th,  1888.

"I  do  not  of  course  remember  the  date,  but  I  perfectly  remember  that
one  morning  when  X.  was  here  and  my  sister  and  I  came  into  the  room  she
said  she  had  seen  M."

My  diary  for  the  next  few  days  shows  that  I  took  all  possible  op-
portunity of  inquiring  after  M.  among  her  relatives,  but  I  heard  only
that  she  was,  so  far  as  was  known,  in  her  usual  health  and  spirits.  A  few
weeks  later  I  received  a  few  pencilled  lines  from  M.  saying  that  she  was
recovering  from  a  severe  accident  in  the  hunting- field,  but  naming  no  liour
nor  date.  She  had  been  thrown  in  such  a  manner  that  her  liead  was  for
some  minutes  between  the  horse's  hoofs,  while  the  animal  was  kicking  so
violently  that  it  seemed  almost  impossible  she  should  escape  a  blow  which
must  have  caused  her  death.  M3'  friend  kept  no  diaiy,  and  was  unable,  when
afterwards  asked  to  do  so,  to  furnish  me  with  tlie  date  ;  however,  when,


870


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


in  January,  1888,  I  communicated  the  case  in  this  imperfect  form  to
Mr.  Myers,  he  urged  me  to  endeavour  to  ascertain  the  exact  date  of  the
accident  by  reference  to  the  owner  of  the  horse  wliich  M.  happened  to  be
riding.  From  him  we  learned  that  it  occurred  on  December  14th,  1885,
the  date  of  my  impression.  The  time  was,  at  M.  's  home,  about  nine
o'clock  a.m.,  and,  therefore,  taking  it  as  iive  and  a-half  hours  in  advance
of  English  time,  the  accident  preceded  my  vision  by  more  than  seven
hours.  My  friend  was  in  a  condition  of  acute  suflering  for  many  hours
after  removal  to  her  own  house,  but  was  never  unconscious  at  all.

The  next  case  is  the  only  one  I  can  at  pi-esent  offer  of  visual
hallucination  shai-ed  with  another  percipient  : —

I  was  somewhat  annoyed,  some  five  years  ago,  to  discover,  and  to  find  that
others  had  observed,  that  some  imexplained  influence  from  myself  affected  a
lady  of  whom  I  may  now  speak  as  my  friend  H.,  but  whom  at  that  time  I
knew  by  sight  only.  If  I  were  behind  her  in  the  street  she  would  leave  her
companions  to  turn  and  face  me  ;  if  I  drove  past  her,  leaning  back  in  the
carriage  and  out  of  sight,  she  would  stop  and  look  round  with  an  air  of  be-
wilderment, as  though  someone  had  called  her  ;  if  she  entered  a  crowded
room  where  I  was  already  seated  she  would  make  her  way  at  once  to  my  side
and  then  retreat,  as  much  annoyed  probably  as  I  was  myself.  She  has  in-
dependently recorded  and  her  friends  have  testified  to  many  such  instances.
I  knew  of  her  as  an  active,  useful  woman  of  unusually  strong  common-sense,
but  the  imi^ression  that  a  rapport  had,  imsought,  been  established  between
us,  made  me  chary  of  improving  an  acquaintance  which  might  add  to  its
power.  The  circumstances  under  which  our  friendship  was  established  may
be  considered  to  justify  my  early  conclusions.

On  May  16th,  1888,  we  met  at  an  evening  entertainment  at  the  house  of
a  friend.  Late  in  the  evening,  the  room  being  very  hot,  H.  was  seized  with
sudden  faintness,  and  was  assisted  into  another  I'oom.  I  followed, in  the  hope
of  being  of  use,  and  11.  was  soon  placed  upon  the  floor  in  an  unconscious  con-
dition, her  head  resting  on  my  knee.  After  some  minutes  of  unconsciousness
she  seized  my  hand  and  uttered  a  sudden  exclamation.  Following  the  direc-
tion of  her  eyes,  I  saw  a  figure — standing  a  few  feet  distant,  directly  facing
us  and  looking  down  at  H. — which,  not  being  in  evening  dress,  could  not  be
any  of  our  fellow-guests.  The  vision  was  only  momentary,  but  I  believed
that  H.  had  also  seen  it,  and  from  the  tenacity  with  which,  after  again  be-
coming unconscious,  she  clung  to  my  hand,  I  supposed  she  was  aware  that  I
had  shared  in  it.  Nothing,  however,  was  said  at  the  time  by  either  H.  or
myself,  and  the  subject  was  not  even  alluded  to,  until  some  months  later,
when  I  narrated  the  above  facts  in  her  presence  (but  after  she  also  had
indejjendently  done  so)  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research.

H.,  after  describing  the  same  vision,  writes  : —

"I  then  found  I  was  in  tlie  dining-room,  on  the  floor,  holding  your  hand,
and  with  a  sort  of  vague  feeling  that  you  knew  what  I  had  seen.  On  the
9th  of  November  following,  without  any  remark  I  handed  you  a  portrait  (of


1889.]


and  other  Experiences.


371


the  subject  of  tlie  vision)  and  you  immediately  exclaimed,  '  Just  so,  the  broad,
forehead. '  I  wondered  what  you  meant,  but  said  nothing.  Some  few
weeks  later  you  in  my  presence  were  giving  Mr.  Myers  your  account  of
the  evening  of  May  16th.  You,  too,  had  seen  the  figure,  which  you  then
described,  saying  '  the  broad  forehead  especially  struck  me,'  and  then  at
once  your  remark  was  explained. "

Later,  we  each  independently  drew  a  plan  of  the  room,  showing  the-
position  of  the  figure  to  have  been  exactly  the  same  in  both  visions.

My  diary  shows  a  good  many  subsequent  cases  of  rapport  with  the
same  friend.  They  are  all,  I  believe,  telepathic  in  origin  and  are
similar  in  kind  to  those  with  other  friends, — obedience  to  my  summons^
the  hearing  of  my  music-  at  a  distance,  or  the  perception  by  one  of
something  which  is  in  any  unusual  degree  affecting  the  other.

The  cases  hitherto  given  as  telepathic  hallucinations  have  occurred
during  the  lifetime  of  the  person  who  was  presumably  the  agent.
However,  there  are  in  my  memoranda  a  few  cases  of  sensory  halluci-
nation coincident  with  the  death  of  the  agent,  which  circumstances  or
the  lapse  of  time  make  it  possible  for  me  to  describe,  for  in  dealing
with  what  concerns  the  more  serious  side  of  life,  one  cannot  disregard
that  respect  for  the  natural  reticence  of  oneself  and  others,  the  sup-
pression of  which  alone  makes  possible  the  publication  of  private
experiences,  however  trivial.

In  the  following  case,  as  I  was  but  a  little  child  at  the  time,  and
the  lady  who  appeared  to  me  had  no  particular  interest  in  my  existence,
I  can  only  suppose  the  attraction  to  have  been  of  that  local  kind  of
which,  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  we  have  some  striking  examples.

I  was  staying  in  a  country  vicarage  in  the  North.  The  cliildren  of  the
house  were  my  constant  play-fellows.  I  was  accustomed  to  share  their
nursery,  as  they  mine,  and  was  not  likely  to  be  impressed  by  the  fact  that  my
hostess  was  from  home,  nursing  a  cousin  whom  I  had  never  known  but  as  a
chronic  invalid.  I  had  seen  her  but  seldom,  though  the  idea  of  her  was  very
familiar  to  me,  for  she  was  often  spoken  of  by  my  companions  as  a  frequent
visitor  to  the  house,  which,  I  believe,  she  regarded  as  almost  a  second  home.

One  morning  as  I  was  passing,  from  a  room  beyond,  through  the  spare
room  of  the  house,  which  Miss  H.  would  naturally  occupy  if  she  were  there
on  a  visit,  I  perceived  to  my  left  a  lady  in  walking  dress,  standing  between
the  dressing  table  and  the  window,  and  looking  intently  into  the  garden  below.
I  saw  her  face  in  profile,  but  had  not  an  instant's  doubt  that  it  was  Miss  H.,
and,  too  shy  to  speak  when  not  addressed,  I  hastened  doiviistairs  to  report
her  arrival.

As  I  passed  the  front  door,  which  may  have  been  open,  but  at  any  rate  was-
partly  glazed,  I  was  utterly  perplexed  to  see  her  again  in  the  same  position,
on  the  lawn  in  front  of  the  house. The  next  day  we  lieard  of  her  death.

I  remember  that  my  childish  interpretation  of  what  I  had  seen  was
that  she  had  been  saying  "Good-bye"  to  the  sumiy  garden  where  probably


372


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


many  happy  hours  had  Vjeen  spent,  and  which,  it  seemed  to  me  then,  it
would  be  very  hard  to  leave  for  ever.  It  may  be  worth  while  to
mention  that  the  house  had  long  been  reputed  to  be  "  haunted,"  and
that  various  stories  (difficult  to  corroborate)  are  told  of  the  return  after
death  of  some  of  its  various  occupants.  I  am,  however,  sure  that  this
had  no  influence  u2)on  my  mind  at  the  time  I  speak  of.

In  August,  1875,  I  was  visiting  at  a  country  house  in  the  Midland
counties.  I  slept  alone  in  ,i  room  on  the  ground  floor,  the  house  being  an  old
one,  and  oddly  arranged.  At  dav/n  on  Tuesday,  31st,  I  was  awakened  by
hearing  a  good  deal  of  noise  at  the  window  which  seemed  like  the  rattling  of
Venetian  blinds.  I  could  see  nothing,  as  the  bed  curtains  obscured  my  view
of  the  window,  and  concluded  that  it  was  some  foolish  joke  of  the  boys,
who  sometimes  passed  my  windows  at  an  early  hour  when  they  were  going  out
to  fish.  I  therefore  took  a  book,  and  read  quietly  till  the  noi.se  ceased,  which
was,  I  should  think,  after  about  10  minutes,  during  which  it  recurred  several
times,  at  intervals.

I  had  looked  forward  to  the  pleasure  of  disappointing  those  who  had  hoped
to  frighten  me,  by  asserting  at  l>reakfast  that  I  liad  slept  particularly  well,  and
was  myself  disappointed  at  no  inquiry  being  made,  and  at  finding  that  the  boys
had  risen  late  for  breakfast.  When  we  heard,  in  a  day  or  two,  that  my  Uncle  C.
had  died  in  London  in  the  night  of  Monday-Tuesday,  August  30tli-31st,
I  had  no  thought  of  connecting  the  two  circumstances.  However,  on  return-
ing home  in  September,  I  found  that  my  uncle's  only  son  had  had,  during
the  same  night,  a  similar  experience,  which  affected  him  so  strongly  that  he
refused  to  remain  in  the  house,  from  which  the  family  shortly  removed.  The
noise  was  described  as  a  violent  agitation  of  the  window  blinds,  and  as  of  the
removal  of  a  heavy  dressing-table  standing  in  the  window.  A  further  expe-
rience, of  which  I  do  not  know  the  particulars,  happened  on  the  same  night
to  another  relative,  but  neither  to  him  nor  to  my  cousin  am  I  permitted  to
refer,  as,  for  family  reasons,  the  subject  was  especially  painful.

This  incident  assumed  in  my  mind  a  new  importance  on  the  occasion
I  am  about  to  describe.  I  quote  from  an  account  which  I  wrote  down
on  August  8th,  1888  :—

Last  summer  I  was  staying  at  a  house  in  the  country  ;  my  room  was  at
the  top  of  the  house  and  overlooked  a  garden  and  orchard.

At  four  in  the  morning  of  Friday,  August  19tli,  1887, 1  was  awakened  by
a  sudden  noise  at  the  window.  I  had  been  suffering  from  acute  neuralgia
the  day  before,  and  after  a  strong  opiate  had  gone  to  sleep,  after  hearing  the
clock  strike  two,  and  was  naturally  impatient  at  the  disturbance.  I  tried  to
compose  myself,  but  in  vain  ;  the  noise  continued,  ajjjiarently  nearer,  though
that  might  be  consequent  on  my  more  wakeful  condition.

The  sound  proceeded  unmistakably  from  tlie  left-hand  window,  — the  two
windows  faced  the  bedstead, — and  sounded  as  if  the  latlis  of  the  Venetian
blinds  were  being  stroked  upwards  from  the  outside.  The  room  was  too
dark, — the  blinds  being  dark  green, — for  it  to  be  possible  for  me  to  see  if
they  moved,  so  I  got  up,  looked  at  the  time  (four  o'clock),  examined  the
window,  which  was  shut,  fastened  the  hasp,  returned  to  bed,  and  was  once


1889.]


and  other  Experiences.


373


more  becoming  drowsy  when  I  was  re-awakened  with  a  shock  whicli  brought
on  a  fresh  access  of  the  pain  from  which  I  had  been  suffering,  and  made
further  rest  out  of  the  question.

I  was  now  persuaded  that  the  sounds  proceeded  from  no  ordinary  cause,
but  I  took  the  precaution  of  carefully  examining  the  blind,  and  of  trying
to  reproduce  the  sound  with  my  hand.  In  this  I  succeeded,  though  the
sound  was  diminished  in  volume,  and  I  then  drew  up  the  blind,  opened  the
window  wide,  noted  the  hour  in  my  diary  (4. 20),  and  sat  in  my  easy  chair
for  perhaps  10  or  15  minutes  watching  the  starlings  and  wondering  what  it
all  meant.  At  length,  however,  I  felt  chilly,  so  shut  the  window,  leaving
the  blind  drawn  up,  went  back  to  bed  and  watched.  In  a  very  few  minutes
the  noise  began  again,  quite  as  loud  and  distinct  but  different  in  character,
rather  as  of  something  being  drawn  slowly  across  the  glass,  still  from  the  out-
side. (To  put  it  familiarly,  the  first  sound  was  a  rattle,  the  second  a  squeak.)
I  was  looking  out  the  whole  time,  and  could  see  the  starlings  on  the  telegraph
wires  which  ran  opposite,  and  at  a  few  feet  distant  from,  the  windows.  Cer-
tainly nothing  I  could  see  would  account  for  the  sounds,  which  still  continued.
There  was  no  wind,  there  was  no  ivy  on  the  house,  there  was  no  motion  in
the  telegraph  wires,  with  the  sound  of  which  I  was,  moreover,  familiar,  and  I
may  mention  what  I  am  sure  all  who  know  me  would  corroborate,  that  I  have
imusually  quick  and  accurate  hearing.  At  last,  feeling  myself  unable  to  come
to  any  conclusion  on  the  matter,  and  knowing  the  very  disastrous  effect  of
refusing  such  sleep  as  an  opiate  offers,  I  stopped  my  ears  with  wool,  the
sounds  having  in  no  degree  abated,  and  contrived  to  get  some  broken  rest.

I  now  add  the  brief  note  from  my  diary  : —

August  19th,  Friday,  4.20  a.m. — Bird  (?)  at  window  for  last  20  minutes
[added  at  9  a.m.] — and  for  another  10  minutes  after  that.  Just  sent  for
[news]paper.  E.  and  K.  S.  married.  Nothing  else  happened  as  appears
yet.  No  letters,  except  from  Horse's  Home  and  H.  Even  the  mare  is  no
worse.

Saturday,  20th. — Letter  from  XZ.  B.^  died  at  10.30.  (a.m.)  yesterday.
The  children  in  time  to  see  her  alive.

XZ.  allows  me  to  quote  from  a  letter  written  to  her  by  me,  dated  Satur-
day :—

"You  will  think  it  strange  when  I  say  that  your  sad  news  was  a  great
relief  to  me  !  I  have  had  one  of  my  strange  experiences,  which  I  may  tell
you,  but  cannot  write,  I  feel  so  shaken.  .  .  .  When  the  post  came  I
opened  all  the  letters,  of  which  there  were  three,  before  yours,  feeling  I
would  rather  anyone  else  had  bad  news  to  tell.  .  .  .  Is  it  not  strange
these  things  should  happen  to  me  in  relation  to  what  has  for  me  no  personal
interest  ? The  same  thing  exactly  happened  when  my  uncle  died."

I  now  pass  on  to  Class  III.

In  my  paper  on  Crystal-gazing  I  had  to  face  one  difficult  point,  then,
as  now,  with  some  reluctance,  aware  of  the  difficulties  which  it  presents,

1  B.,  a  lady  whom  I  had  known  long,  but  not  intimately.  I  can,  however,  easily
conceive  that,  for  special  reasons,her  mind  might  turn  towards  me  even  at  so  supreme  a
moment.

2  B


374


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


and  still  more  of  my  own  entire  inability  to  arrive  at  any  conclusion.
I  again  can  only  offer,  aware  that  they  may  appear  to  injure  the  rest  of
the  paper,  such  facts  in  my  experience  as  compel  one  to  consider  the
perplexing  question.  Can  prevision  be  possible  ?

The  fall  of  the  jaicture  already  quoted,  a  case  which  somewhat
suggests  the  same  question,  followed  upon  a  j^ure  premonition  without
sensory  hallucination.  I  proceed  to  give  two  cases  in  which  the  exter-
nalisation  was  exceptionally  clear.  In  the  first  I  can  add  little  to  the
accuracy  of  the  story  as  told  by  my  friend  D.,  and  written  out  by  her
at  the  request  of  Mr.  Myers  on  January  17th,  1888.  We  had  both
previously  and  independently  told  him  the  story.

"About  eight  years  ago  (Api'il,  1882)  X.  and  I  were  staying  in  a  country
house,  in  a  neighbourhood  <|uite  strange  to  us  both.  One  morning,  soon
after  our  arrival,  we  drove  with  a  party  of  four  or  five  others  in  a  waggonette
to  the  neighbouring  town,  and  on  our  return,  as  we  came  in  sight  of  the
house,  X.  remarked  to  our  hostess,  'You  have  very  early  visitors  ;  who  are
your  friends  V  "

[I  was  sitting  either  beside  or  immediately  beliind  our  host  who  was
driving,  and  what  had  first  attracted  my  attention  was  the  sight,  as  I
believed,  of  fresh  wheel-marks.]

"  We  all  turned  to  find  the  cause  of  the  question,  but  could  see  no  one,
and  as  we  were  still  in  view  of  the  front  door,  on  which  X. 's  eyes  were  fixed,
we  asked  her  what  she  could  possibly  be  dreaming  of.  She  then  described
to  us,  the  more  minutely  that  we  all  joined  in  absolute  denial  of  the
existence  of  anything  at  all,  the  appearance  of  a  dog-cart  standing  at  the
door  of  the  house,  with  a  white  horse,  and  two  men,  one  of  whom  had  got
down,  and  was  talking  to  a  terrier  ;  she  even  commented  on  the  dress  of  one
of  the  gentlemen,  who  was  wearing  an  ulster,  she  said,  a  detail  which  we
certainly  should  not  have  supposed  it  possilale  for  her  to  recognise  at  such  a
distance  from  the  spot.  As  we  went  up  the  drive  X.  drew  attention  to
fresh  wheel-marks,  but  here  also  we  were  all  unable  to  see  as  she  did,  and
when  we  arrived  at  the  house  and  found  no  sign  of  cart  or  visitors,  and  on
inquiry  learned  that  no  one  had  been  near  in  our  absence,  we  naturally
treated  the  whole  story  as  a  mistake,  caused  by  X.'s  somewhat  short-sight.

"Shortly  after,  she  and  I  were  in  an  ujjstairs  room  in  the  front  of  the  house,
when  the  sound  of  wheels  was  heard,  and  I  went  to  tlie  window  to  see  who
it  might  be.  '  There's  your  dog-cart  after  all  !  '  I  exclaimed,  for  there,
before  the  door,  was  the  identical  cart  as  X.had  described  it,  correct  in  every
detail,  one  of  the  gentlemen — having  got  down  to  ring  the  bell — being  at  that
moment  engaged  in  playing  with  a  small  fox-terrier.  The  visitors  were
strangers  to  our  friends, — officers  from  the  barracks  near,  who  had  driven  over
with  an  invitation  to  a  ball."

C,  having  read  over  D.'s  account,  had  added,  "  This  is  substantially  the
same  account  as  I  heard  from  one  of  the  party  in  the  carriage."  Mr.  Myers
adds,  ' '  I  heard  C. ,  an  old  family  servant,  tell  the  story  indeiJendently  with
the  same  details."

Both  D.  and  I  were  surprised  at  her  accurate  knowledge  of  the  story,  which
she  had  not  learnt  from  us,  but  from  another  lady  present  on  the  occasion.


1889.]


and  other  Experiences.


375


It  is  from  no  want  of  will  that  in  the  next  case  I  can  offer  at
present  no  corroboration.  The  strangers  present  on  the  occasion  were
the  mere  chance  acquaintances  of  a  seaside  boarding-house,  whom  I  have
not  been  able  to  trace,  though  I  still  hope  to  find  one  of  the  party,  a
lady  with  whom  I  have  some  slight  independent  acquaintance.  My
own  companion  at  the  time,  was  too  deaf  to  catch  the  passing  conversa-
tion, and  was  not  afterwards  told  of  the  circumstances.  There  is  also
no  reference  to  them  in  my  letters  to  near  friends,  which,  I  think,  is
owing  to  the  fact  that  we  had  passed  through  recent  sorrow,  and  were
occupied  with  other  matters.

I  quote  from  an  account  of  the  facts  which  I  wrote  down  on
February  9th,  1888.

In  August,  1885,  we  were  staying  in  a  private  boarding-house.  I  was
recovering  from  illness,  and  for  tlie  sake  of  curtailing  the  meal-time  as  far  as
possible,  never  entered  the  dining-room  till  everyone  was  seated.

One  evening,  as  I  chanced  to  look  across  the  table,  immediately  after  my
entrance  into  the  room  (my  seat  was  very  near  the  door),  my  eyes  being
somewhat  dazzled  by  tlie  blaze  of  gaslight  following  upon  the  darkness  of  the
long  passages  I  had  just  traversed,  I  observed,  as  I  supposed,  a  new  arrival
in  the  chair  diametrically  opposite  to  my  own.  The  lady  who  was  usually  my
vis-a-vis  was  tall,  dark,  high-coloured,  and  often  wore  a  light  dress, — my  new
opposite  neighbour  sat  much  lower,  was  small,  pale  in  colouring,  and  appeared
to  have  a  quantity  of  something  black  below  her  face  with  a  shining  bar  some-
where near  her  left  ear.  I  am  slow-sighted  and  do  not  see  anything  distinctly
at  the  first  moment,  and  my  attention  was  too  much  struck  by  her  brilliant
ornament  to  allow  me  to  observe  her  features.  Before  I  had  time  to  remark
anything  further,  I  was  addressed  in  the  very  lively  tones  of  Mrs.  S.,  my  more
familiar  vis-a-vis,  who  asked  "what  I  was  staring  at  ?  "  and  "  why  I  did  not
sit  down  ?  "  This  at  once  dispelled  the  vision,  the  new-comer  entirely  dis-
appeared, and  I  found  that,  someone  having  left  the  house  that  day,  the  seats
had  been  rearranged,  and  that  Mrs.  S.  alone  occupied  the  space  which  had
formerly  been  given  to  two.  I  gave  a  brief  explanation  of  my  conduct  and
took  my  seat.

The  next  evening,  on  entering  the  room,  I  noticed  that  the  eyes  of  my
neighbours  were  following  me  with  a  certain  air  of  merriment.  I  looked  across
the  table,  and  observing  nothing  unusual,  laughingly  asked  Mrs.  S.  what  she
had  done  with  her  diamonds,  when  she  made  some  unintelligible  answer,  and
with  a  gesture  directed  my  attention  to  the  lady  on  my  right,  who  proved  to
be  my  phantom  friend  of  the  night  before,  but  seated  exactly  opposite  the
spot  where  I  had  then  seen  her.  She  was  small,  fair,  and  dressed  in  black,
with  a  cloud  of  black  lace  fastened  on  her  left  shoulder  with  an  ornament
too  audacious  for  an  Englishwoman  to  venture  upon, — a  bar  at  least  three
inches  long,  of  black  enamel  and  diamonds.  The  lady  proved  to  be  an  American
who  had  arrived  in  the  town  only  the  night  before,  having  stayed  at  an  hotel
till  she  should  find  some  quieter  abode.

Unfortunately  I  had  during  my  illness  temporarily  dropped  my  life-long
habit  of  keeping  a  diary,  so  that  I  have  no  contemporary  account  of  the  fact.

2  B  2


376


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


In  <a  book  in  whicli  I  preserve  notes  of  books,  conversations,  &c.,  in  which
dates,  however,  are  not  frequent,  I  find  two  passing  references  to  the  dia-
monds. One  which  seems  to  have  been  made  on  August  27th  begins,  "Good
story  to-night  from  Mrs.  S.,  apropos  of  a  non-existent  diamond  brooch  I
'saw.'  "  The  other,  made  apparently  on  the  following  evening,  says,  "  Mrs.
S.  told  another  story  to-night,  a  consequence  of  discovering  that  my  diamonds
really  have  an  existence  after  all."

I  will  conclude  my  pajDer  with  the  note-books  to  which  I  referred  at
the  beginning.  Together  with  notes  of  the  quasi-experimental  kind,
made  before  we  knew  that  the  impression  received  was  veridical,  or
the  supposed  transmission  successful,  we  have  thought  it  worth  while
to  note,  as  soon  as  we  were  aware  of  them,  a  number  of  coincidences
not  recorded  beforehand  ;  as  these  may  serve  to  give  some  measure  of
the  frequency  of  such  occurrences  in  our  everyday  life.  As  regards
both  classes  of  entries  I  must  warn  the  reader  about  to  embark  on  the
perusal  of  the  following  pages  that  he  will  constantly  feel  that  the
transmitted  message  is  just  as  intrinsically  unimportant  as  the  trans-
ference of  a  card  or  a  number,  and  perhaps  more  tedious  to  read  about.
I  am  quite  conscious  of  this  triviality,  and  of  what  looks  like  the
egotism  of  insisting  on  the  details  of  slight  incidents  in  a  very  unevent-
ful existence.  I  can  only  hope  that  all  this  may  serve  as  an  indication
of  fidelity  to  fact ;  for  certainly  my  friend  and  I,  if  we  had  given  free
play  to  imagination,  could  have  painted  our  telepathic  intercourse  in
more  exciting  colours.  Since  our  attention  has  l^een  turned  to  the
subject,  few  incidents  have  been  recorded  of  a  graver  type,  and  in  fact,
as  will  easily  be  supposed,  where  there  has  been  a  message  of  deeper
interest,  it  has  been  needful  to  suppress  mention  of  it,  as  involving-
affairs  of  others  which  I  have  no  right  to  publish.  But  if  telepathy
exist  as  a  natural  fact,  there  seems  no  reason  for  assuming  that  it  is  less
likely  to  manifest  itself  on  trivial,  than  on  serious  occasions,  and  the
unimportance  of  the  incident  diminishes  its  evidential  value  only  so  far
as  it  diminishes  the  improbability  of  the  coincidence.  This  it  un-
doubtedly sometimes  does,  though  not,  I  think,  always.

I  begin  with  D.'s  note-book,  and  give  all  her  entries  for  the  year
1888.  They  are  given  in  most  cases  exactly  as  written,  but  in  a  few
it  has  been  necessary  to  alter  or  add  a  word  or  two,  to  conceal  identity.
D.  has  not  made  it  clear  in  her  notes  whether  they  were  made  before
she  knew  if  her  impression  were  correct  or  not,  and,  except  in  cases  where
the  deficiency  is  supjslied  by  internal  evidence,  I  have  therefore  to  trust
to  her  memory  on  this  important  jjoint.  I  have  marked  with  an
asterisk,  those  entries  which,  to  the  best  of  her  present  belief,  were  written
down  before  she  knew  wdiether  they  were  justified  by  fact.  As  will  be
seen,  my  own  recollection  confirms  hers  in  some  cases.  I  borrowed  the
notebook  for  examination  on  May  5th  and  November  3rd,  1888,  and


1889.]


and  other  Experiences.


377


on  June  12th,  1889,  and  on  each  occasion  copied  the  entries  into  my
own  note-book,  and  added  notes  giving  confirmatory  evidence  from  my
own  private  diary,  from  letters,  or,  when  these  sources  failed,  from  my
recollection.  The  substance  of  these  notes,  in  some  cases  abbreviated,
I  give  after  each  corresjDonding  entry.  Remaiks  added  afterwards  are
enclosed  in  square  brackets.  D.'s  entries  are  piinted  in  italics  to  dis-
tinguish them  from  my  notes.  It  may  be  as  well  to  state  that  no
entries  having  any  possible  psychical  relation  to  D.  occur  in  my  private
diary  other  than  those  quoted.  My  own  note-book  did  not  begin  till
May.

It  will  be  observed  that  of  the  20  entries  which  D.  believes  she
made  before  testing  their  truth,  two  relate  to  impressions  as  to  books,
and  1 4  to  impressions  as  to  my  music.  Of  these  only  one  is  wr  ong,  and
on  that  occasion  I  was  wishing  to  play.  In  10  of  the  musical  cases  the
specific  piece  is  noted,  and  in  1 3  the  hour  is  noted.  These  were  always
right  except  in  the  one  case  of  failure,  which  comes  under  both  heads.

One  more  remark  before  proceeding  to  the  note-book.  Though  I
have  included  a  period  of  12  months  it  should  not  count  as  more  than
nine,  for  D.  and  I  were,  for  about  three  months  during  the  year,  under
the  same  roof,  when  she  discontinued  her  notes.

'■*■(!)  Januarrj  6th.  Tried  several  books  ratJier  than  Shirley,  Wordsworth,
and  the  Broxmiings. Finally  took  to  Villette.

In  my  private  diary  for  January  6th,  1888,  I  find  the  following  entry  : —

9. 30  (my  clock  is  slow),  I  have  been  trying  to  make  D.  read  after  my
choice  whether  she  will  or  no  !  I  tried  Mrs.  Browning,  but  gave  it  up  because
I  remembered  the  chances  were  in  favour  of  my  choosing  it,  as  I  have  a  new
copy.  Next  I  took  up  my  commonplace  book  for  a  suggestion,  and  my  eyes
fell  on  a  quotation  from  "  the  Professor."  I  shut  my  eyes  and  began  to  recall
the  story,  which  involved  more  concentration  of  power  than  reading  it.  This
for  about  20  minutes.

Saturday  7th. — Tried  to  "lead  up"  to  last  night's  occupation  with  D.,  but
she  said  nothing  as  to  choice  of  books.

Sunday  January  8th. — Satisfactory  after  all.  D.  confessed,  without  being
questioned,  that  on  Friday  night  .  .  .  she  hesitated  over  Browning  (R.
not  Mrs. )  and  finally  chose  Villette,  the  plot  of  which  is  the  same  as  that  of
the  Professor.

(2)  January  13th. Home  5.30  ;  found  X.  playiiuj  for  me.

From  my  private  daii'y  I  find  (noted  beforehand)  that  I  wished  to  com-
municate with  D.,  and,  knowing  that  she  had  engagements  for  both  afternoon
and  evening,  and  might  not  return  home  meanwhile,  so  that  a  note  sent
to  her  house  might  not  reach  her,  I  tried  the  experiment  of  playing  to
her  at  5.30,  on  the  chance  of  her  hearing  me.  I  chose  the  hour,  one  at  which
I  never  or  very  rarely  play,  that,  should  she  hear,  she  might  guess  a  special
intention.  She  heard,  and  came  shortly  after,  saying  at  once,  "  You  have
been  calling  me."

(3)  January  19th. To  see  X.,  evening,  9.30,  found  her  ivaitivfj.


878


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


On  reference  to  my  private  diary  I  find  that  on  this  evening  D.  called  at
an  unusual  hour,  after  I  had  gone  to  my  room.  Found  me  waiting  for
her,  and  my  expectation  already  noted,  my  private  diary  open  at  the  page
waiting  for  her  signature,  which  she  added.  Thus,  "  Sent  for  [D.]  9.15-9.30."
"Came  9.35,  door  open  ready.  [D.]"  This  was  not  a  deliberate  experiment,
but  I  had  wanted  especially  to  see  her,  and  my  desire,  lirst  formulated  while
playing  about  8  o'clock,  passed  into  expectation  at  9.15,  and  certainty  at  9.30,
when  I  heard  her  call,  i.e.,  a  peculiar  whistle  used  by  either  when  entering
the  house  to  summon  the  other.  [In  fact,  she  did  not  whistle,  nor,  when  she
was  still  4  or  5  minutes'  distance  from  the  house,  which  she  entered  with  a
latch-key,  could  I  have  heard  her  had  she  done  so.]

(4)  Jaimarij  21st. Walked  to  J.' s  house. Started  home  at  5.30.

D.  tells  me  this  means  "started  home  in  conscious  obedience  to  sum-
mons." As  she  keeps  this  note-book  solely  to  record  such  summons,  &c.,
she  would  not  enter  the  fact  of  an  ordinary  walk.

This  incident  is  recorded  at  length  in  my  jjrivate  journal.  D.  had
started  for  J.'s  house  in  the  morning.  Not  knowing  whether  she  had
returned  home  or  not,  I  sent  off  a  note,  dated  5.30,  asking  her  to  come  to
me  at  once.  This  I  supplemented  by  x^laybig  to  her  for  half  an  hour.  At
0.30  she  arrived,  saying  I  had  called  her  at  5.30  before  she  left  J.'s — train
and  walk  from  door  to  door  about  50  minutes.  I  had  entered  the  summons
in  a  note-book  about  six  o'clock.  She  found  the  note  at  home  on  her  return
after  seeing  me.

(5)  Jamtary  22nd. To  X.,  7.45.

I  had  not  intentionally  called  D.,  but  she  had  been  much  in  my  mind
this  morning,  and  she  tells  me  .she  had  to  come,  though  to  pay  a  visit
at  7.45  a.m.  required  considerable  energy.  Unfortunately  I  had  not
noted  down  my  expectation  of  her  visit,  but  the  fact  that  I  had  opened  my
door  to  listen  for  her  arrival,  after  hearing  her  whistle,  was  evidence  for
her  that  I  was  looking  for  her  coming.  I  had  heard  the  whistle  some
minutes  before  she  entered  the  house.  Of  course  she  had  not  whistled,  nor,
had  she  done  so,  covdd  I  have  literally  heaixl  her.

*(G)  January  23rd. SoHH.ets,  E.  B.  B.,  10.30.

[In  my  private  diary  written  about  10  p.m.,  I  find,  "Sonnets,  viii-ix. ,
E.  B.  B."]  I  had  had  no  thought  of  exj^eriment  in  the  first  instance,  but
simply  desired  that  D.  should  read  these,  having  myself,  after  reading  them,
been  struck  by  their  appositeness  to  a  subject  we  had  that  day  discussed.
Next  day  D.  said,  "What  were  you  doing  at  10.30  last  night,  to  make  me
get  out  a  book  when  I  was  only  sleepy  and  wanted  to  go  to  bed  ? "  The
note  in  her  book  was  made,  if  not  at  the  time,  certainly  before  discussing
the  matter  with  me.

(7)  Fcbruarij  24f/i. Flun-ers  in  nciv  alhiun  all  the  evoiing.

There  is  no  entry  in  my  di.iry  about  this,  but  I  remember  perfectly  that  on
seeing  D.  on  Saturday  morning,  the  25th,  she  said  at  once,  "  What  did  you
desire  me  to  do  last  night?"  and  I  answered,  "I  suppose  you  must  have
been  arranging  my  dried  flowers,  as  I  was  suddenly  possessed,  with  the  idea
that  you  wanted  the  ferns,  and  I  spent  the  evening  looking  them  out."
There  was  no  reason  why  D.  should  have  done  the  work  then, — probability
was  against  it,  as  not  a  likely  thing  to  do  by  gaslight,  after  dinner.


1889.]


and  other  Experiences,


379


(8)  February  25th.  Talked  of  R.  E.  and  the  N.'s.  Accident  to  X.
Flowsrs  from  B.  W. Wrote  to  X.  at  6. 25. Note  dated  6. 20  received  later.

This  entry  was  made  on  the  following  day,  Sunday,  after  some  talk  with
me.  I  was  alone  all  Saturday,  and  my  mind,  had  been  scene  painting  even
more  vividly  than  usual.  On  Sunday  I  happened  to  refer  to  some  flowers
that  D.  had  sent  me  from  B.  W.  in  April,  '85,  and  which  there  was  no
reason  I  should  specially  remember.  Later  I  also  referred  to  an  accident
I  had  met  with  some  time  ago,  and  then  D.  said,  "What  has  made  you
speak  of  these  things?"  and  when  I  explained  that  I  had  been  "going
over"  both  occurrences  on  Saturday  she  said  that  might  account  for
the  vivid  manner  in  which,  for  no  reason,  both  scenes  had  presented
themselves  to  her  on  Saturday  afternoon.  An  hour  later  I  said,  "Another
scene  I  was  picturing  yesterday  you  could  not  have  thought  of,  for  I  never
described  it  to  you,"  and  began  to  speak  of  a  certain  party  at  the  N.'s  4  years
before,  at  which  she  had  not  been  present,  and  at  which  J.  and  I  had  amused
ourselves  with  watching  R.  E.  D.  was  much  surprised,  and  told  me  that  she
had  spent  quite  a  long  time  the  day  before,  trying  to  construct  a  picture  of  the
scene,  and  so  far  as  our  place  in  the  room,  which  of  the  B.  's  many  rooms,
and  the  subject  of  our  talk  were  concerned,  quite  correctly.  She  knew  that
R.  E.  had  been  present,  but  not  that  he  had  been  our  particular  amusement.
Probably  any  of  the  two  or  three  hundred  j^eojDle  present  would  have  been
better  worth  our  attention. [Recorded  in  my  private  diary.]

D.  's  final  entry  refers  to  our  having  within  five  minutes  each  written  to
the  other.  D.  wrote,  says  her  note,  because  she  "  had  to  write,"  I,  because
I  was  conscious  that  she  was  sending  a  messenger,  who  arrived  with  the  one
note  just  as  I  was  fastening  up  another  for  him  to  take  back.

(9)  March  2)irf. Note  to  X.  for  nothing,  hnt  because  she  wanted  it.

No,  I  didn't  want  it,  but  D.'s  servants  had  forgotten  to  forward  something
I  required,  and  for  which  it  was  not  convenient  for  me  to  send.  D.  became
aware  that  I  wanted  sojnething,  but,  unfortunately  for  me,  more  exact
information  failed  her.

*(10)  March  6th.  Sellers,  7.30.  [Meaning  that  she  had  an  hallucination
of  hearing  me  play.]

No  note  in  my  diary  on  this  point.  It  was  quite  a  likely  time  for  me
to  play,  but  there  was  no  special  reason  why  I  should  be  playing  the  music
referred  to,  as  in  fact  I  was.  D.  asked  me  the  next  day  what  I  had  played
and  showed  me  her  entry.

*  (11)  March  7th. Beethoven  u-altzes,  10.

Yes.  Ten  a.m.  is  quite  in  my  practising  time,  but  that  particular  music
was  against  probability.  [This  was  recorded  in  my  private  diary  after  D.  had
asked  me  as  to  my  occupation  of  the  morning,  showing  entry.]

*  (12)  March  Stlt.  No  practise.  [Meaning  that  she  was  aware  that  I
had  not  played  at  my  usual  hour.]

True. I  very  rarely  neglect  my  morning  practise,  but  on  this  day  was
otherwise  occupied,  as  my  private  diary  shows.
*(13)  March  mil. Music,  7.30-8.

[March  10th  will  be  found  below,  omitted  for  convenience  of  grouping.]
*{U)  March  mil. 7.40.  3Iusic.


380


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


*(15)  March  14f/i..  9.30  a.m.  [Music]  Evening  of  same  clay.  Nothing
hut  organs  and  bands,  poiyidar  airs  and  Mihado. 1  Flash  of  Henselt  9  (p.m.).

*  (16)  March  15th. 9-10. 1  Faint  Henselt.

I  remember  that  when  D.  showed  me  these  entries  I  was  specially
interested.  I  was  practising  at  the  time  some  music  of  Henselt's  she  had
never  heard,  and  was  playing  this  on  all  live  occasions.  D.  notes  it  on  the
first  3  vaguely  as  "Music,"  something  which  she  did  not  recognise.  On
the  14th  I  played  it  over  to  her,  and  afterwards  she  recognised  it  imperfectly.
I  was  practising  it  for  her,  knowing  she  would  like  it,  so  that  she  was  much
in  my  mind  at  the  time.

[Mr.  Myers,  who  read  this  portion  of  the  diary  on  July  27tli,  '88,  has
added  under  the  second  entxy  of  the  14th:  "  D.  explains  that  on  trying
to  hearX.,  she  only  heard  vague  memories  of  music.  X.  was  not  playing
then.  Thus  the  wish  to  hear  did  not  produce  it.  In  answer  to  the
question,  '  How  is  the  music  heard  ? '  D.  exijlains  that  it  is  sometimes
externalised  as  distant  sound,  sonietimes  it  is  only  the  idea  of  being  called
by  music."]

*  (17)  March  10th.  1 Music,  9.30-10  a.m.

My  private  diary  gives  a  full  account  of  the  occasion  referred  to.  On
the  previous  day  I  had  told  D.  I  was  going  to  call  on  V.  directly  after
breakfast,  and  would  go  on  to  her  about  11.15.  By  the  first  post  on
Saturday  I  received  a  request  from  V.  that  I  would  postpone  my  visit.  I
therefore  devoted  the  hour  thus  gained  to  the  piano,  and  proceeded
afterwards  to  D.'s  house,  arriving  about  a  quarter  to  11.  She  then  showed
me  her  note  of  a  fact  which  had  caused  her  some  bewilderment,  and  indeed
anxiety,  as  to  the  cause  of  my  change  of  plan.

*  (18)  March  IGth. Bad  night ;  frightened. Knew  X.  \vas  worried.
This  refers  to  vague  perception  that  I  was  in  trouble. I  believed  that  I

had  concealed  the  fact  for  three  days  with  entire  success.

*  (19)  March  Vtth.  Wanted  X.  Wonldnt  ask  her  [to  come].  E.  insisted
on  going  for  her  in  spite  of  cdl  dissu-asion. X.  came.

The  upshot  of  this  was  that  I  remained  at  D.'s  house  to  sleep,  and  fell
seriously  ill  that  night.  My  doctor  congratulated  me  on  the  good  luck  of  my
happening  to  be  in  the  hand  of  my  inestimable  nurse  D.  I  should  add  that  my
doctor's  opinion,  for  which  I  particularly  asked,  was  that  this  attack  could
not  have  been  foreseen.  [Nevertheless,  in  reading  this  and  the  previous
entry  again,  I  cannot  but  see  how  easily  both  occasions  may  be  accounted  for
in  a  perfectly  ordinary  manner.  But  this  was  not  my  feeling  at  the  time
nor  D.'s.]

The  following  entries,  (20)  to  (27)  inclusive  were  made  while  D.  and  I
were  in  different  and  distant  counties.
(20)  August  15th. Hellers  9.10-25.

Cp.  letter  from  D.  dated  August  15th,  "  I  did  hear  you  playing  to-night,
somewhere  about  9. 9-30  ?  .  .  .  there  seemed  to  be  some  Heller  about,
possibly  because  I  was  alone . . . for  a  little. "

*(21)  August  17th. Slumber  song,  7.35-50.

Cj).  letter  dated  August  17th,  "Were  you  playing  the  Slumber  song
before  dinner  this  evening  ?  "

I  read  these  passages  (from  D.'s  letters)  to  my  hostess  immediately  on


1889.]


and  other  Experiences.


381


receiving  the  letters,  and  on  both  occasions  she  remembered  that  I  had  in
fact  played  the  music  spoken  of  at  the  time  mentioned.

(From  letter  from  hostess,  Februry  6th,  '89.)  I  perfectly  remember  the
events  to  which  you  refer  as  having  happened  when  you  were  staying  with
me  last  August,  namely,  that  on  one  occasion  you  played  on  the  piano  before
going  out  for  a  drive,  and  on  another  after  dinner,  and  that  you  read  aloud
to  us  at  breakfast  an  extract  from  a  letter  from  [D.]  referring  to  these  and
naming  the  correct  hour.  I  do  not  remember  the  dates,  but  feel  sure  that  on
neither  occasion  had  there  been  time  for  her  to  hear  of  it  from  you.  [Signed.]

[My  friend  has  reversed  the  order  of  the  two  circumstances.  The  first
occasion  was  after  dmner,  the  second,  when  waiting  for  the  carriage  to  take
us  out  earlier  in  the  evenmg,  about  7.20-30.]

(22)  A%ujHst  mil. Sent,  drawing  to  X.

On  August  17th  I  received  a  letter  from  D.  asking,  "Isn't  there
something  you  can  set  me  to  do  for  you  here  ? "  and  at  once  remembered
that  I  wanted  her  to  copy  a  certain  print  for  me,  which  I  could  not
send  to  her  till  I  returned  home  on  August  18th.  She  was,  I  am  certain,
unaware  that  I  possessed  this  picture,  nor  have  I  ever  seen  another  like
it  elsewhere.  On  the  19th,  I  sought  it  out,  and  put  it  in  an  envelope,
with  my  instructions,  but  it  had  not  been  posted,  when  I  received  from
D.  a  drawing  almost  exactly  like  that  I  was  wishing  she  should  make.
The  two  copies  are  of  the  same  head  in  different  positions.  In  the
letter  which  accompanied  this  D.  says  merely,  ' '  I  have  tried  to  copy
this  for  your  amusement."  [The  copy  from  which  hers  was  taken  happened
to  hang  in  the  hall  of  the  house  in  which  D.  and  her  family  were  spending
the  summer.]

*  (23)  August  20th.  Dreamt  X.  ivrote  to  smj,  Can  I  come  to  yon  Se2}-
tember  Uth  ?  "

August  21st.  Letter  from  X.  dated  19th,  about  drawing  [as  above],  and
message,  as  in  dream  [i.e.,  asking  to  come  on  September  11th].

A  later  date  had  been  previously  arranged  for  my  visit  to  D.,  and  the
sudden  readjustment  was  consequent  on  a  change  in  the  plans  of  other
friends.

*  (24)  September  1st. Half  letter  ?
September  2nd.  Yes.

After  finishing  a  letter  to  D.  on  August  31st,  quite  complete  in  itself,
I  wrote  a  long  postscript,  which  after  all  I  kept  back,  and  sent  by  the  next
post.

(25)  September  ord.  Tired  and  X.  Jcnew.  (Refers  to  a  period  of  three
days.)

"Tired"  here  stands  for  "out  of  spirits."  I  was  conscious  of  D.'s
depression,  which  was  certainly  not  indicated  in  her  letters,  which  I  have
re-read  to  make  sure  of  this.  It  arose  from  a  cause  of  which  I  was  entirely
ignorant.

€'2).  letter  from  me  to  D.,  dated  September  2nd.  "  "What  is  wrong  ?  Are
you  hurried,  or  worried,  or  what  is  the  matter  ?  I  am  not  hap^jy  about  you."

*  (26)  September  11th. Halle,  9  a.  m.

No. I  was  not  playing  ;  only  thinking  of  music,  and  wanting  to  play.
(27)  The  following  entries  are  grouped  together  in  D.'s  note-book,  and


382


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


as  they  are  out  of  place  were  presiimaljly  made  from  her  private  diary  after
she  knew  of  tlie  photograph.

Aurjiist  12th.  Wanted  a  picture  of  X.,  talked  about  it,  said  I'd  set  my
JieaH  on  it  for  this  autumn,  but  didn't  see  how  I  was  to  get  it  nou\  N.B. — ■
Thought  I  should,  though.

13th  to  18th.  Tliought  of  my  pictiwe  most  days.  Watched  letters  for  hint
of  possibility.  Tried  to  find,  out  X.'s  train  up  on  Saturday.  Will  she  have  time
to  see  ? Or  on  Monday  ? . . . Evidently  not  Saturday — train  too  late.

19th.  No  hint  of  plan  [i.e.,  in  X.'s  letters,  as  to  possibility  of  photograph
being  taken  that  day]. Time  to-morroiv.

20th. No  letter. Photo  instead  ? Hear  to-morrow.

21st.  Letter  to-day  from  X.,  saying,  "No  time  to  do  my  shopping,  etc."
[i.e.,  in  passing  through  London,  where  D.  imagined  that  a  photograph  might
be  taken].  Can't  help  it  !  Time  or  no  time  my  picture  will  come,  and  I'm
sure  that  II.  is  mixed  up  in  it  somehow.  Perhap)s  she  told  X.  I  wanted  the
picture. .  .

Op.  from  D. 's  letters.

Atujust  21st. We  must  get  another  [portrait  taken]  soon.
22nd. I  must  have  a  new  one.

SOWi.  When  your  packet  came  to-day,  I  made  sure  it  was  a  photograph,
but  how  o)'  when  it  could  have  been  taken  I  don't  know,  when  I  come  to  think.

On  August  9th,  without  any  hint  or  suggestion  from  D.,  and  unknown  to
anyone  but  H.,  I  made  arrangements  with  the  photographer  for  a  large
portrait.  On  Monday,  20th,  the  likeness  was  taken,  as  I  passed  through
London. D.  was  never  told  of  the  fact  till  September  13th.

H.  corroborates  my  reference  to  lier  share  in  the  matter,  and  is  confident
of  having  given  no  sort  of  hint  oi  her  knowledge  that  D.'s  wish,  when  first
mentioned  (August  12th),  was  already  on  the  way  to  become  an  accomplished
fact.

(28)  October  3rd. At  J.' s  house. No  time  for  eggs.

I  wanted  some  new-laid  eggs,  and  it  occurred  to  me  that  D.  could  get  me
some  on  her  way  from  J.  's  (four  miles  away  from  home)  if  I  had  but
remembered  to  ask  her.  About  4  p.m.  I  thought  of  trying  to  make  her  get
some,  and  was  disappointed  when  she  came  in  without  any.  I  made  no
remark  at  the  time,  but  the  next  day  D.  said,  "  I  very  nearly  brouglib  you
Some  eggs  yesterday,  I  fancied  you  wanted  me  to  do  so,  but  I  had  to  hurry
to  catch  my  train."

D.  goes  to  the  village  in  question  about  once  a  week,  and  during  the  last
3  years  may  have  brought  me  eggs  two  or  three  times,  so  the  commission
was  not  a  very  probable  one.

D.  adds  later.  "  Probably  I  left  by  the  4.20  train,  passing  the  shop  some
five  minutes  earlier  "  [so  that  my  desire  was  a  little  delayed  in  transmission,
or  reached  her  consciousness  at  sight  of  the  means  to  execute  it].

(29)  October  Uh. Portraits  early,  X.  hieiv  it.

While  I  was  at  breakfast  I  felt  that  D.  had  received  the  portraits
[which  there  was  no  special  reason  to  expect]  and  that  she  would  bring
them  at  once,  and  went  out  on  to  the  balcony  for  some  time  to  watch  for
her. [She  came  about  9.30  a.m.]

{30}  October  nth. Ccdled  expectedly,  G.30.


1889.]


and  other  Experiences.


383


D.  and  I  were  each  supjjosecl  to  be  "  At  Home,"  so  that  I  had  good
reason  for  not  expecting  to  see  her.  About  6  1  felt  she  was  conung,  and
when  she  arrived  was  waiting  for  her  on  the  stairs,  though  there  were
visitors  in  the  drawing-room.  ^

(31)  October  14d.h.  Came  into  church,  2nd  lesson,.  Out  of  sight,  not  out  of
mind.

I  had  no  reason  to  expect  to  see  D.  in  cliurch,  indeed  she  had  promised
to  fetch  me  after  service,  but  during  the  second  lesson  I  felt  her  enter,
though  absolutely  out  of  sight.  On  meeting  her  outside  the  door  in  going
out,  I  said  at  once,  "You  have  been  in  church,  you  came  in  during  the
second  lesson. " [D.  corroborates  this.]

H.,  who,  though  I  was  not  aware  of  it,  was  sitting  behind  me  in  church,
adds: — ''I  saw  that  X.  was  aware  of  D. 's  arrival,  which  I  at  the  same
moment  had  seen,  which  she  could  not."

(32)  October  26th. Called  late,  9.30,  door  open  ready.

I  wrote  the  following  note  in  my  pocket-book: — "9.15.  Something
■wrong  with  D.  If  she  does  not  come  I  must  go  to  her.  Friday."

I  had  been  ujo  late  the  night  before  and  wanted  rest,  but  felt  it  impossible
to  go  to  bed,  D.  seemed  to  be  whistling  for  me.  [As  before  explained,  the
usual  signal  when  either  entered  the  house.]  I  left  my  door  ajar  after
writing  the  above  note,  and  was  waiting  when  she  came.  She  wanted  immediate
help,  and  had  driven  round  to  fetch  me,  having  only  waited  till  she  thought
I  should  be  alone. [D.  corroborates  this.]

"-(33)  Nooemher  ISth.  Chopin  Dead  March,  War  March  Athalie,  7.13-
8  p.m.

*(34)  November  25th. Lieder,  7.30.

*(35)  November  26t.]i. Lied,  never  gets  finished.  5.15-20.

On  each  of  the  above  three  occasions  D.  asked  me  next  day  what  I  had
played  and  found  she  was  right.  My  playing  of  the  Lied  on  November
26th  was  interrupted  by  the  arrival  of  visitors,  and  the  unfinished  air
naturally  haunted  me.  D.  writes  :  "  On  the  day  in  question  H.  and  I  were
together.  I  said  to  her  that  I  could  hear  you  playing — a  Lied  we  both  asso-
ciated with  you — but  that  you  never  got  beyond  a  certain  part,  which  seemed
to  be  repeated.  H.  replied,  '  It  is  strange  you  should  say  that.  I  can't
hear  her,  but  I  have  been  seeing  her  at  the  piano  for  some  minutes.'  "  [H.
corroborates  this.  ]

My  own  special  note-book  was  begun  in  iMay,  1888,  and  continued
till  November,  1889,  a  period  of  18  months,  but  it  will  ah-eady  have
been  observed  that  records  of  psychical  impressions,  both  before  and
after  fulfilment,  had  been  made  in  my  private  diary  before  that  date  ;
and  during  the  18  months  in  question  I  have  preferred  to  record  some
things  which  I  believe  to  have  psychical  significance  in  my  private
diary  rather  than  in  my  special  note-book.  I  give  here  all  the
contemporaneous  entries  in  my  note-book  except  nine. Of  these  one

1  In  reference  to  cases  29  and  30,  D.  -writes  :  "I  distinctly  remember  that  on  each
of  these  occasions,  your  first  remark  was  '  I  knew  you  were  coming,  I've  been  watch-
ing for  you  some  time.' On  the  first  occasion  you  asked  at  once  for  the  photograph."


384


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


was  a  visual  hallucination  recorded  before  what  I  believe  to  have
been  its  cause  was  known  to  me.  I  consider  it  to  be  a  good  case,  but
for  private  reasons  do  not  wish  to  publish  it.  The  other  eight  omitted
entries  were  all  made  after  the  coincidence  was  known  to  me.  One  of
them  is  omitted  for  private  reasons,  and  seven  of  them  because,  though
I  thought  otherwise  at  the  time,  I  am  now  disposed  to  attiibute  them
to  mere  chance  coincidence.  In  thus  dismissing  them  I  would  not,
however,  be  understood  to  imply  that  others  may  not  also  depend  upon
■chance,  but  only  that  I  believe  them, — as  do  the  friends  to  whom  they
refer — to  be  something  more.

I  have  not  in  all  cases  given  the  entries  from  my  note-book
verbatim.  In  some  cases  I  have  abbreviated  considerably,  in  others
altered  the  wording  to  conceal  identity.  In  no  case,  however,  have  I
altered  the  notes  so  as  to  affect  any  inference  connected  with  jDsychical
research  that  may  be  drawn  from  them,  and  I  have  asked  Mrs.  H.
Sidgwick  to  compare  my  printed  version  with  the  original  and  verify
this.i

As  in  the  case  of  D.'s  diary  I  have  marked  entries  made  before  the
event  was  known  with  an  asterisk.  There  are  twenty-seven  of  these
entries  made  beforehand,  and  of  these  three,  namely  (33)  and  (48),  in
which  I  was  the  percipient,  and  (6)  where  I  attempted  to  impress  D.,
must  be  regarded  as  failures,  and  (35)  and  (45)  as  doubtfully  veridical.
The  other  twenty-two  entries  seem  to  me  to  have  been  justified  by  facts.
It  is,  however,  sometimes  difficult  to  judge  how  far  the  apparent  success
may  be  attiibuted  to  chance,  and  each  reader  must  estimate  this  for
himself.  It  will  be  noticed  that  two  of  the  successful  impressions  (12)
and  (46)  were  negative  ;  or,  more  properly,  they  are  records  of  the
absence  of  expected  impression — it  being  afterwards  found  that  the
expected  cause  had  not  occurred.  These  seem  to  me  to  have  a  certain
interest  as  showing  that  expectation  does  not — necessarily,  at  least —
produce  these  impressions.

In  two  of  the  successful  cases  recorded  beforehand,  (2)  and  (21),  I
was  the  agent,  my  friends  D.  and  H.  respectively  being  the  percipients.
I  was  also  the  agent,  though  without  any  definite  intention  on  my  part,
in  six  of  the  cases  recorded  after  the  event; — D.  being  the  percipient  in
(3),  (4),  a  negative  case,  and  (7),  and  H.  in  (20),  (22),  and  (25).  All
these  successful  cases  of  agency  are  connected  with  my  music.  Perhaps
laecause  it  is  my  most  complete  means  of  self-expression,  I  find  in  it
also  the  readiest  method  of  concentration,  and,  therefore,  have  often
availed  myself  of  it  when  wishing  to  communicate  with  friends  at  a
distance,  playing  for  a  few  minutes — not  with  the  intention  that  they
shall  necessarily  hear  the  music,  though  that  happens  at  times,  but

1  I  have  carefully  compared  X.'s  note-books  witli  the  printed  version  and  can
entirely  confirm  what  she  says  above.— E.  M.  Sidgwick.


1889.]


and  other  Experiences.


385


mainly  that  they  shall  become  aware  of  the  direction  of  my  thoughts  at
the  moment.  D.,  and,  as  will  be  seen,  also  H.,  have  still  more  often
recorded  the  hearing  of  my  music  without  any  intention  on  my  part,
pi'obably  because  my  own  thoughts  have  been  thereby  focussed  and
absorbed.  In  the  same  way,  some  years  ago,  a  friend  at  a  distance,
deeply  interested  in,  but  not  sharing  my  studies,  would  often  know
with  ^'^'hat  particular  subject,  sometimes  with  what  book,  I  was  occupied
at  the  time,  occasionally  at  very  unlikely  hours.

It  may  be  worth  callmg  attention  to  the  fact  that  of  my  fifty-five
entities,  fifteen  (seven  recorded  beforehand  and  eight  after)  relate  to
D.,  and  twelve  (four  recorded  beforehand  and  eight  after)  to  H.  In
one  case  (17),  not  recorded  beforehand,  there  seems  to  have  been
mutual  percipience  between  H.  and  myself.  I  have  thought  that  it
would  be  convenient  to  separate  the  cases  relating  to  D.  and  H.  in
printing  the  note-book,  though  the  chronological  order  is,  of  course,
thereby  sacrificed.

(1)  June  3rd.  I  am  to-day  reminded  of  something  which  happened  a
fortnight  ago  and  for  which  there  is  a  note  in  niy  diary  of  May  21st.  D.  told
me  that  afternoon  that  soon  after  we  first  became  acquainted  she  had  heard
me  play  an  air  with  which  she  had  childish  associations  and  which  she  would
like  to  hear  again,  but  as  she  could  neither  remember  the  tune  nor  its
name,  and  as  it  was  at  least  ten  years  since  she  had  heard  me  play  it,  it  did
not  seem  likely  that  her  deshe  should  be  gratified.  I  played  several  old
tunes,  of  which  I  thought  one  might  be  that  in  question,  hut  did  not  succeed
in  recalling  what  she  wished.  Perhaps  an  hour  later,  when  we  were  sitting
in  another  room,  talking  of  things  quite  apart  from  the  music,  I  suddenly
had  the  feeling  that  the  tune  wanted  was  at  my  finger  tips.  I  started  up,
called  my  friend  and  hurried  down  to  the  piano.  On  the  stairs  someone
spoke  to  me,  but  I  dared  not  wait  to  answer,  for  the  music  seemed  to  be
getting,  so  to  speak,  less  tangible  every  instant.  By  the  time  I  reached  the
instrument,  only  a  few  bars  remained  in  my  possession,  but  my  friend  at
once  recognised  them  as  the  long  lost  melody.  I  had  no  idea  what  it  was,
though  I  thought  I  had  heard  it  before,  and  try  as  I  would  I  could  not
recall  the  remainder.

To-night  I  have  quite  accidentally  found  it  to  be  a  fragment  of  a  Sonata,
of  Mozart,  m  a  volume  I  have  certainly  not  played  from  for  years.

*(2)  niursday,  J}i)ie  7th. 5.40  p.m.

I  don't  know  whether  D. ,  who  is  away  from  home,  will  expect  me  to  write-
to  her  to-day,  so  I  am  going  to  compromise  by  trying  to  make  her  know  I
am  tlunking  of  and  playmg  to  her.  I  shall  play  from  now  till  6.45,  about  an
hour.

Friday,  June  Sth.  I  met  D.  at  the  station  this  afternoon,  and  almost
the  first  C[uestion  she  asked  was,  "  What  w^ere  you  doing  about  6  o'clock  last
evening  ?"  She  had  been  out  for  a  walk  and  was  just  settling  again  to  her
occupation  when  she  became  aware  of  me.  This  lasted  about  half  an  hour,
she  says. [Not  entered  in  D.'s  diary,  but  read  over  and  endorsed  by  her.]

(3)  June  14:th.  I  was  expecting  D.  between  5.30  and  6  o'clock,  and


386


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


after  tea  went  to  the  piano,  impatient  for  her  coming,  as  I  wanted  her
particularly.  Occupied  with  other  thoughts  I  played  a  waltz  of  Beethoven,
rather  absently,  two  or  three  times.  About  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  I  had
left  the  piano,  D.  came  in  and  said,  "How  you  have  been  playing  that
HofFnung  !  "  [meaning  that  the  music  had  persisted  in  attracting  her  atten-
tion]. She  had  been  detained  by  visitors,  and  had  heard  it  with  the
impression  that  I  particularly  needed  her.

(4)  J)dy7th.  It  is  perhaps  worth  noting  that  D.  said  to  me  a  day  or
two  ago  that  she  hoped  she  was  not  losing  the  power  of  hearing  my  music
at  a  distance,  for  she  had  not  done  so  for  at  least  a  fortnight.  I  had  not
told  her  that,  except  a  little  company  playing  which  does  not  count,  I  had
not  touched  the  piano  for  nearly  three  weeks,  a  fact  almost  unprecedented
in  the  last  few  years  of  my  existence.

■*(5)  Ji'hj  lAt!i'.  I  sat  up  till  10.30  this  evening  expecting  D.,  though  it
seemed  imjjrobable,  almost  impossible,  she  should  come.  I  have  not  called
ber,  so  where  my  fancy  came  from  I  don't  know.  Now  I  have  given  her
up  and  come  to  my  room.  [D.  had  been  spending  the  day  at  some  distance
-and  had  gone  upon  a  somewhat  troublesome  and  unpleasant  business.]

Juhj  15/7/.  D.  said  to-day,  without  Ijeing  questioned,  that  on  her  way
home  last  evening  [this  would  have  been  about  10  p.m.]  she  had  tried  to
contrive  a  visit  to  me,  but  having  friends  with  her,  had  not  been  able  to
manage  it. (Endorsed  by  D. )

*  (6)  JiilijlStlt.  2. 10j).«i.  There  is  a  tremendous  thunderstorm  going  on.
While  at  lunch,  1.30  to  2,  my  thoughts  turned  to  D.,  who  is  at  K.  Then  I
remembered  an  occasion  years  ago  when  we  were  there  in  a  storm,  and  the
corner  where  we  sat,  and  wondered  if  she  would  remember  it.  Now  I  am
desiring  that  she  should  find  the  place  and  go  there.

This  proved  a  failure.

July  20th.  Not  quite.  T>.  mentioned  to-day  that  during  the  storm  the
picture  of  our  dark  corner  had  occurred  to  her,  and  she  had  remembered  its
whereabouts  and  thought  had  I  been  there  we  would  have  sought  its  shelter
again.

(7)  July  19th.  Under  date  July  7th  I  referred  to  D.'s  not  having
"  heard"  me  play  for  some  time.  To-day  I  played  again  from  about  7  (p.m.)
to  7.40,  and  I  was  not  surprised  when  at  8.30  D.  appeared  saying  that  I
had  been  calling  her,  and  she  had  come  directly  she  could  get  away.
(Endorsed  by  D.) [I  had  not  intended  to  call  D.]

(8)  Jiihj  21st.  I  had  been  accompanying  a  friend  on  the  piano  and
then  tried  to  play  a  solo,  but  though  I  can  generally  play  from  memory
for  hours,  nothing  would  come.  At  last  in  despair  I  left  the  piano,  and
found  myself  asking  my  friend  for  a  song  I  particularly  didn't  want,  and
which  was  found  after  some  difhculty.  D.  says  she  had  determined  that  I
should  play  that,  not  knowing  that  I  really  disliked  doing  so.  I  think  this
is  the  first  time  D.  has  intentionally  influenced  me  in  this  way.  I  ought  to
say  that  yesterday  I  had  said  to  D.  that  the  song  had  haunted  me,  and  she
had  remarked  she  should  like  to  hear  it  again,  to  which  I  I'eturned  no
answer.

D.'s  note  oil  above.  (Made  a  little  later.)  "I  should  like  to  add  to  this
that  there  were  three  things  in  my  mind  when  X.  sat  down  to  the  piano.


1889.]


and  other  Experiences.


387


(1)  the  song,  Avhich  I  hardly  thought  our  friend  could  smg  tliat  day,  (2)  a
reverie,  an  old  favourite,  (3)  a  recently  heard  Impromptu  of  Schumann.
X.  tried  several  things,  could  remember  nothing  to  her  own  satisfaction,  and
finally  stopped  with  the  exclamation,  '  It's  all  D.'s  fault,  she  wants  some-
thing else,'  and  then  added,  playing  the  first  few  bars  of  (2),  'This  is
it,  but  I  can't  jilay  it  now,  will  this  do  1 '  beginning  (3),  and  then  asked  for
the  song."

(9)  July  21th.  I  spent  this  morning  vfith  V.  D.  walked  with  me
to  the  house,  but  I  particularly  asked  her  not  to  call  for  me,  as  I  did
not  wish  to  be  tied  as  to  time,  and  she  agreed.  I  left  about  one  o'clock
and  crossed  over  into  another  street  at  right  angles.  After  going  about  50
yards  I  felt  impelled  to  return  to  my  starting  point.  This  happened  again,
and  yet  again,  to  my  great  annoyance,  as  I  was  anxious  to  get  home.  On
my  return  for  the  third  time,  I  waited  a  few  minutes,  and  looking  carefully
in  all  directions,  saw  nothing  to  detain  me,  and  at  that  moment  got  leave  to
return  home.  At  some  little  distance  I  met  D. ,  who  had,  after  all,  come  to  fetch
me, — reached  a  point  from  which  she  could  see  me,  though  quite  out  of  the
range  of  my  vision,  just  as  I  was  looking  about  for  the  cause  of  my  hindrance,
and,  at  the  moment  when  I  had  the  impulse  to  start,  was  waving  an  umbrella
to  indicate  which  of  two  ways,  equally  convenient,  I  should  take.  Had
I  started  homeward  as  I  originally  intended,  we  should  have  missed
each  other,  as  D.  approached  me  from  the  other  direction.  (D.  endorses
this.)

(10)  AtKjnst  4f/i.  D.  and  I  were  in  the  train  this  morning.  We  had
not  spoken  for  some  time,  when  suddenly  I  had  an  impulse  to  say,
"What  time  would  you  like  me  to  go  to  S.  to-morrow?"  [referring  to  a
place  which  had  not  been  mentioned  between  us,  but  which  she  frequently
visited,  though  I  had  not  done  so  for  nearly  five  years].  D.  was  a  good  deal
startled,  and  confessed  that  she  had  been  resolving  to  restrain  a  desire  to  ask
me  to  accompany  her  the  next  day, — a  vi'ish  I  had  certainly  no  reason  to
expect. (D.  endorses  this  )

*  (11)  AiKjust  9th.  7.35  p. Hi.  D.  called  me  just  now  in  tones  of  excite-
ment and  pleasure.  As  she  left  me  an  hour  ago  with  the  prospect  before
her  of  a  very  dull  evening  T  am  glad  she  should  be  finding  things  pleasanter
than  she  expected.

August  10th.  1  have  asked  D.  about  this.  In  fact,  she  found  an  unex-
pected source  of  entertainment  about  7.30,  and  remembers  exclaiming  in
much  delight,  at  one  particular  moment.  She,  for  special  reasons,  associates
what  was  pleasing  her  with  me. (D.  endorses  this.)

*  (12)  November  20th.  D.  has  been  disappointed  by  the  non-arrival
of  a  picture  which  she  has  been  anxiously  expecting  for  some  days.
To-day  she  decided  to  wait  no  longer,  and  (in  my  hearing)  told  a  maid  to
drive  to  the  frame-maker's  and  bring  it  home.  Knowing  that  she  would
i-eturn  about  4.30  or  5  o'clock,  I  told  D.  that  I  would  "listen"  about  that
time  (that  I  might  hear  her  exclamations  of  satisfaction  or  the  contrary).
It  is  now  7  o'clock  and  nothing  has  happened.

November  21st.  Servant  prevented  from  going  after  all.  (D.  corroborates
and  signs  this.)

*(13)  November  28th. 10.25  (p.m.). Has  D.  got  the  picture?  She  is


388


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


excited  about  something.  We  did  not  expect  it  till  the  31st.  I  thought  I
heard  her  about  8. 15,  but  now  certainly.

D.'s  note  on  above.  I  opened  the  picture  just  after  8,  and  at  8.15  was
writing  to  X.  to  tell  her  of  its  arrival.  H.  and  I  were  looking  at  it  together,
about  10.20-30,  H.  having  called  on  her  way  home  from  a  concert  where  I
had  sent  her  word  of  the  long-expected  arrival.

*  (14)  Jaiiitarij  29tli.,  1889.  Knew  D.  was  sending  for  letter.  Just
written  10  to  5. {Later  note). At  5  o'clock  D. 's  note  came,  dated  10  to  5.

In  D.'s  note-book  under  this  date  is  the  entry  : — "  Letter  10  to  5  o'c.
Do.  10  to  5  o'c.  from  X."

P.S.  ill  diary  dated  November  8th,  '89.  My  note  referred  to  above  still
exists.  It  begins  :  "  You've  been  jsestering  me  the  whole  afternoon,  you
and  H.  between  you  I  "  H.,  asked  at  the  time  by  D. ,  said  she  was  walking
with  a  friend  between  3  and  4,  talking  of  me.

(15)  March  5th.  This  morning  I  walked  to  D.'s  house,  expecting
to  find  her  ready  to  go  out  with  me  at  ten  o'clock  according  to
previous  arrangement.  As  I  came  in  sight  of  the  house  I  saw  her
come  down  the  path,  pass  through  the  garden  gate  and  turn  quickly
into  a  road  under  the  garden  palings  in  the  opposite  direction  from  me.
I  was  surprised  that  she  slKiuld  not  have  seen  me  in  spite  of  my  signals,  and
annoyed  at  her  leaving  the  house  exactly  at  the  time  arranged  for  my  arrival.
The  clock  struck  while  I  was  in  the  hall  speaking  to  the  maid,  she  said
that  D.  had  gone  out  a  few  minutes  before,  and  could  not  under-
stand my  saying  that  I  had  that  moment  seen  her  leave  the  house.
About  two  minutes  past  ten  D.  returned,  having  been  to  the  post-office,  the
walk  there  and  back  taking  six  or  seven  minutes,  so  that  she  must  have  started
five  minutes  before  I  saw  her.  She  says  she  was  obliged  to  go  to  the  post  and  had
hurried,  her  mind  occupied  with  the  fear  of  my  arriving  in  her  absence.
[The  maid  assured  me  that  no  one  else  had  left  the  house,  and  it  would  have
been  almost  impossible  to  mistake  any  one  else  for  a  figure  witli  which  I  am
so  familiar.]

(16)  August  19th.  I  have  believed  for  some  time  past  that  H.  was
sensitive  to  my  influence,  but  as  I  have  never  spoken  to  her  on  the
subject,  though  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  she,  too,  is  aware  of  it,
I  have  not  been  able  to  record  instances.  However,  two  have  occurred
to-day  in  which  there  seems  to  be  more  than  chance  coincidence.  I  was
about  to  take  a  walk  to  a  place  a  short  distance  from  home,  and  desired
companionship.  I  thought  of  H.,  who,  however,  has  never  been  associated
with  me  in  any  such  way,  and  wished  that  it  were  ]3ossible  to  communicate
with  her.  About  10.45  I  heard  the  bell,  and  hastened  to  open  the  door
myself,  certain  that  it  was  H.  She  had  been  unable  to  resist  an  impulse  to
come  and  tell  me  that  she  would  like  to  go  out  with  me  this  morning,  but
would  not  be  at  liberty  to  do  so.  [H.  a  few  weeks  later  read  over  and
endorsed  this  statement  in  my  diary.]

(17)  I  ari-anged  to  go  out  with  her  at  15  to  4  (p.m.)  when  she  was  to  call
for  me,  and  I  said  I  would  stay  in  till  that  time.  In  the  end  I  changed  my
mind,  and  went  ovit  intending  to  be  home  before  the  hour  appointed.  As  I
was  returning,  in  a  hansom,  rather  late  for  my  ai)pointment  and  very
anxious  to  reach  the  house  before  H.'s  arrival,  I  had  a  sudden  impulse  to


1889.]


and  other  Experiences.


389


direct  the  cabman  to  drive  down  a  side  street,  not  the  nearest  way.  Half-way
down  I  found  H.  standing,  apparently  waiting.  She  was  on  her  way  to  me,
but  suddenly  found  herself  unable  (conscious  that  the  impulse  to  wait  came
from  me)  to  get  beyond  the  point  where  I  found  her, — still  at  some  distance
from  our  house. (H.  has  endorsed  this  entry.)

(18)  November  3rd.  10.40  p.m.  H.  very  strongly  in  my  mind  to-night.
I  saw  her  this  afternoon,  but  nothing  that  occurred  is  any  reason  for  feeling
that  she  particularly  wants  me.  I  began  a  letter  to  her  about  half  an  hour
ago,  but  gave  it  up,  with  the  feeling  that  I  would  rather,  if  she  has  anything
to  say,  she  should  tell  me  without  hint  from  me.  But  I  have  no  reason  for
any  such  feeling.

Note  on  above  by  H.  ; — "This  same  evening  a  strong  desire  came  over
me  to  tell  X. . . . [of  certain  private  matters  of  which  X.  had  no
knowledge]. About  7.15  (p.m.)  I  wrote  an  account  for  her  to  read  .
but  much  later,  between  10  and  11  (p.m.),  I  decided  not  to  send  it,  but  to
talk  to  her  instead."

(19)  December  Wi.  I  was  sitting  alone  about  10  minutes  ago,  it  is  now  9.50
(p.m.),  when  I  heard  steps,  and  felt  a  presence,  and  that  someone  was  wanting
me.  Now  and  then,  in  an  emergency,  D.  has  come  to  me  at  a  late  hour,  but
knowing  her  to  be  confined  to  the  house  j  ust  now,  I  was,  contrary  to  custom,
very  much  frightened.  Almost  immediately  after,  however,  I  heard  my
name  called,  distinctly  twice,  and  I  think  faintly  again.  I  knew  at  once  it
was  not  D.,  for  she  never  uses  my  formal  Christian  name  ;  this  excludes  also
many  other  friends.  I  cannot  say  I  recognised  the  voice,  which,  tliough
clear,  seemed  a  long  way  olF,  but  I  think  it  may  have  been  H. ,  who  at
present  is  at  [a  place  distant  about  50  miles].

December  10th.  Spoke  of  this  to  D.,  who  agrees  it  was  probably  H.
(Endorsed  by  D.)

From  H.'s  note-book,  December  9th,  1888  : — "I  was  sitting  alone  this
evening  in  a  partly  darkened  room,  with  a  book  X.  had  given  me  on  my
lap,  and  had  let  my  thoughts  wander  away.  I  started  up  suddenly,  and
called  X.'s  name  two  or  tliree  times, — she  must  have  heard  me,  I  am
afraid,  and  I  have  disturbed  and  perhaps  worried  her  unnecessarily.  The
time  must  have  been  about  9.30  or,  may  be,  rather  later."  ^

(20)  December  31st.  D.  had  a  letter  from  H.  this  morning  dated  yester-
day, asking,  "  Is  X.  playing  now  ?  (5.45)"  In  fact  I  icas  playing,  though
the  hour  was  unusual.  D.  was  not  well,  and  had  been  indoors  all  day,
and  I  played  before  instead  of  after  dinner  for  the  sake  of  change  for  her.
(Endorsed  by  D.)

From  H. 's  note-book,  December  30th.  5.50  (p.m.)  X.  has  just  begun
to  iilay.

* {21)  December  31st.  This  evening  I  played  from  8.30  to  9.30  .  .  .
One  thing  I  believe  has  made  itself  heard  which  I  played  for  H.  PerhajJS
I  shall  know. (Endorsed  by  D.)

January  2 1  id,  1889.  Letter  from  H.,  dated  January  1st,  says,  "You
played  to  me  last  night  and  I  thank  you, — you  helped  me."

1  It  may  be  worth  mentioning  that  twice  subsequently,  both  times  in  the  middle  of
the  day,  H.  notes  a  strong-  impulse,  which  she  however  suppressed,  to  call  my  name  in.
moments  of  anxiety,  but  I  Avas  not  aware  of  anj'  corresponding  impression.


390


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


(22)  Jamiarij  "ItJi.  Letter  to  D.  from  H.  dated  6th,  "  I  heard  X.  playing
(i.e.,  last  night).  Did  she  leave  off  about  9.15-20?"  D.'s  note-book,
January  5th,  shows:  "X.  played  8.30-9.20."

In  connection  with  H.'s  impressions  at  the  time  concerninsf  me,  the  following-
entry  in  her  diary  for  January  11th,  1889,  is  worth  mentioning  : — "  8.15  (a.m.)  Some-
thing wrong  with  X.  and  D.  I  shall  know  soon."  Within  about  an  hour  she  received
a  telegram  desiring  her  to  meet  me  at  the  station  the  same  afternoon  ;  the  fact  being
that  I,  then  visiting  in  a  distant  county,  had,  .soon  after  eight  the  same  morning,
received  bad  news  which  necessitated  my  immediate  return, — when  D.,  unable  to
accompany  me,  had  at  once  conceived  the  notion  of  asking  H.  to  meet  and  otlierwise
assist  me.

(23)  January  loth.  H.  arranged  to  go  out  with  me  if  possible  this
morning  at  11  o'clock — was  not  sure  if  she  could  leave  home  so  early.  At
10.20  I  was  so  sure  she  had  started  that  I  at  once  dressed  for  walking,
and  was  ready  when  she  arrived  at  10.30,  half  an  hour  before  her  time.  (H.
endorses  this. )

(24)  April  15i/(.  This  morning  D.  and  H.  agreed  to  fetch  me  at
one  o'clock.  I  was  ready  a  few  minutes  before,  and  was  starting  to
meet  them  when  I  felt  impelled  to  walk  in  the  direction  contrary  to  that
from  which  they  would  naturally  come.  After  a  few  paces,  I  heard  H.
hurrying  after  me.  She  said  tliat  slie  and  D.  had  [without  my  knowledge]
made  plans  for  the  morning  which  would  have  resulted  in  their  joining  me
from  the  direction  I  had  taken,  but  at  the  last  moment  D.  had  been  obliged
to  go  elsewhere. (H.  endorses  this.)

(25)  May  11th.  This  morning  I  was  ready  before  the  time  when  H.  was
to  come  for  me,  and  so  sat  down  to  the  piano,  to  try  to  make  her  hear  me.  I
had  hardly  played  five  minutes  wlien  H.  came  in  saying,  "  You  began  that
just  as  I  turned  the  corner  three  minutes  ago,  I  heard  the  opening  bars."
[I  know  from  experiment  that  it  is  not  possible  to  hear  my  piano  outside  the
liouse,  even  when  standing  immediately  below  the  drawing-room  windows.]

[H.'s  note-book  gives  a  similar  account  but  j^laces  it  on  the  16th  instead
of  the  17th. Probably  the  error  is  mine.]

*  (26)  August  20th.  "Saw"  H.'s  vmibrella  on  my  chest  of  drawers  at
6.30  this  morning.  Has  she  found  it  ?  [Premonition  :]  She  will  meet  me
at  B.  station  to-day.

[H.  had  a  few  days  before  lost  an  umbrella  she  particularly  valued.  I
was  going  to  j^ay  a  visit  at  her  house,  and  B.  was  three  stations  before  the
end  of  my  journey.]

Evening  of  same  day.  (1)  H.  says  she  woke  at  6.30.  Saw  it  was  raining
and  feared  I  should  not  come.  (2)  She  came  to  B.  station  (not  a  likely
thing  to  do)  just  as  my  train  was  leaving,  but  saw  me  and  got  into  another
carriage.

(27)  November  2nd.  I  went  to  visit  D.  this  afternoon.  [When
approaching  the  house]  I  saw  H.  standing  inside  the  gate,  six  yards  from  me,
dressed  in  a  costume  which  I  have  not  seen  since  last  winter.  I  was  not
thinking  of  her  at  the  time.  I  knew  she  was  ill  in  bed  and  therefore  was  not
surprised  to  find  that  no  one  was  inside  the  gate  nor  anyone  near.  I  said  at
once  to  D.,  "  Notice  the  time,  something  has  happened  to  H."  It  was  4.20
(p.m.). At  six  we  went  together  to  impure  after  H.,  and  asked  her  what  she


1889.]


and  other  Experiences.


391


had  been  doing  or  thinking  of  at  4.20.  We  were  disappointed  when  she
owned  to  not  having  tliought  of  me,  or  of  anytiaing  of  consequence — nothing
in  fact  except  that  she  hoped  to  be  well  enough  to  bring  B.  to  see  D.  on
Monday,  and  that  as  this  would  be  her  first  time  of  going  out  she  must
put  on  her  winter  clothing  [in  which  I  had  seen  the  figure].  (D.  and  H.
endorse  this.)

*(28)  November  oth,  5.15  p.m.  I  was  wondering  just  now  whether  H.
had  been  well  enough  to  go  out,  when  I  saw  in  the  silver  stand  of  the  lamp
the  view  from  the  nursery  window  at  D.'s,  with  H.  and  B.  in  the  road.

November  QtJi..  At  tea  yesterday  C.  told  D.  she  had  seen  H.  and  B.  walk-
ing slowly  by.  D.  writes  :  ''I  remember  this,  and  that  X.  showed  us  the
above  entry  in  her  note-book  immediately  after."

*(29)  May  3rd,  1888.  2  p.m.  Here  is  a  premonition  !  Mrs.  Y.  will  call.
I  keep  "hearing"  her  carriage,  which  has  a  jingle  peculiar  to  itself.  On
the  whole  it  seems  unlikely,  as  not  only  did  I  tell  her  I  should  be  away  this
week,  but  I  hear  she  is  away  too. We  shall  see.

4.45.  Heard  her  jingling  horses  stop  at  the  door  five  minutes  ago, —
heard  no  ring — looked  out — nothing  visible.

5.30.  Enter  M.  Sorry  to  call  so  late,  waited  on  purpose  "  till  Mrs.  Y.
had  had  time  to  go."  Explains — Mrs.  Y.  lunched  with  her  and  said  then  she
would  come  to  me  at  tea-time.  Mrs.  Y.  expressed  her  intention  while  at
lunch. I  fii'st  heard  her  bells  at  about  1.45. However,  here  she  isn't.

3Iay  4:th.  Wrote  to  Mrs.  Y.  to  ask  where  she  was  yesterday  between
four  and  five,  and  if  she  thought  of  me.

May  7 til.  She  writes,  "Yes,  I  thought  of  you  on  Tliursday,  but  earlier
than  the  time  mentioned.  I  had  hoped  to  come  and  see  you  but  found
after  all  I  could  not  manage  it."

(30)  May  11th.  I  read  a  question  ofi'V. 's  mind  to-day  and  wrote  down  the
answer  before  she  had  spoken  it  [the  answer  is  preserved].  I  was  writing  and
felt  irritable  enough — when  she  began  slowly,  "  Do-you-know?" — to  present
rather  a  cross  face  when  I  looked  up.  This  or  something  else  made  her
stop  and  I  saw  the  question  coming  and  scribbled  down  1442  before  saying
"Go  on,"  when  she  asked,  "  What  is  the  date  of  the  invention  of  printing  ?  "
"V.  was  reading  in  a  magazine. There  was  nothing  to  lead  up  to  this.

(31)  May  IQth.  In  the  light  of  a  letter  from  R.F.  received  this  morn-
ing I  copy  the  following  from  my  private  diary: —

Thursday,  January  12th. I  wonder  if  anything  is  wrong  at  ?  I  have

been  worried  all  day  about  N.F.  without  knowing  why.  I  don't  tliink
I  owe  her  a  letter  and  don't  like  to  write  with  no  better  excuse  than  my  own
fidget.  Nothing  has  occurred  to  suggest  the  thought  of  her,  which  makes
me  the  more  uneasy.

January  14th. N.F.  in  my  mind  again. Wonder  why  1
January  25th. Thought  constantly  of  N.F.  Hope  all  is  well  with  all
of  them.

The  letter  referred  to,  dated  May  13th,  from  a  sister  of  this  friend,  tells
me  that  N.F.  has  been  very  seriously  ill,  and  was  during  January  "between
life  and  death."  [Further  inquiries  sIkjw  that  her  most  critical  condition
was  "  about  the  middle  of  the  month."]

*(32)  June  lat,  1888. lam  haunted  to-day  with  thoughts  of  T.R.,  an


892


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


uninteresting  member  of  an  uninteresting  family.  Nothing  has  happened  to
put  liim  into  my  head,  but  all  sorts  of  trifling  circumstances  about  him  have
been  recurring  to  my  memory  all  day.  I  don't  owe  the  R.  's  a  call,  so  there
is  no  reason  why  they  should  be  on  my  mind,  and  though  I  respect  them
highly,  I  have  neither  affection  for  nor  interest  in  any  one  of  them.  Mon-
day is  their  "  at  home  "  day,  and  I  will  make  a  point  of  calling  next  week  to
see  if  anything  has  happened  to  T.

Saturday,  June  2'iid.  Not  long  to  wait.  A  letter  from  V.  this  morn-
ing, asking  for  my  congratulatio)is  for  her  sister  engaged  yesterday  to
T.R. Never  more  surprised  in  my  life  !

*(33)  June 'Mil.  iito'7  p.m.,  at  intervals.  Haunted  this  evening  by  a.
smell  of  sweetbriar,  so  much  so  tliat  I  was  about  to  exclaim,  how  strong  the
scent  was  after  the  rain,  when  T  remembered  we  hadn't  had  any — nor,  as  it
happens,  any  scented  flowers.  ...  It  is  strong  enough  to  impress  me
strongly,  and  no  one  else  observes  it. [This  was  never  explained.]

(34)  June  12f/(.  I  had  been  thinking  a  goi^d  deal  of  Mrs.  T.,  and
hoping  to  see  her  soon  though  not  consciously  calling  upon  her  to  come
[See  p.  364].  About  4.30  I  heard  the  click  of  her  silver-handled  umbrella,
as  it  was  laid  on  the  table  outside  the  door,  and  the  rustle  of  a  parcel  laid
beside  it,  and  wondered  I  had  not  heard  the  door-bell.  Nothing  further
happened  till  about  10  minutes  later  when  the  bell  rang,  I  heard  the  door
opened,  and  the  same  sounds  followed,  though  not  more  vividly  than  before,
and  Mrs.  T.  entered  saying,  "  You  ought  to  want  something  important  this
time, — my  husband  has  rheumatic  gout  and  my  coming  was  most  incon-
venient."

*{3b)  June  mh. "10.5  a.m. J.  is  shouting,  ' Powler.' Cat  found  ?"

These  words  I  scrawled  in  a  pocket-book  just  as  I  was  going  out,  the  very
minute  the  impression  occurred.  J.'s  pet  cat,  whom  we  all  valued,  had  been
lost  for  more  than  a  week,  and  we  were  all  in  some  anxiety  as  to  his  fate.
Yelling  the  cat's  name  at  him  is  a  frequent  habit  of  his  master's.  About
two  o'clock  a  telegram  arrived  to  say  the  cat  had  come  home.  This  I  gather
was  about  one  o'clock.  [So  my  impres.sion  was  premature.  1  find  on  inquiry
that  J.'s  meeting  with  the  cat  did  occui',  in  fact,  about  one  o'clock,  though
it  had  returned  home  some  hours  earlier.]

*  (36)  June  21st.  I  had  a  very  strong  impression  [not  visual]  this
morning  that  N.  was  present  with  me,  and  the  sensation  has  renewed  itself
very  strongly  just  now,  3  (p.m.).  With  a  notion  she  may  want  some  help
of  me  I  have  written  her  a  note  (on  an  indifferent  matter)  requiring  an
answer,  so  as  to  give  her  a  ready  opportunity  of  telling  me,  if  she  will,
what  is  in  her  mind.

July  1st.  N.  has  been  here  this  evening, — tells  me  she  half  decided  to
come  to  me  on  Thursday,  21st,  in  reference  to  a  matter  which  required
immediate  decision,  but  liad  not  time  to  do  so.

*(37)  June  21st.  "Saw"  K.  to-day  in  a  hansom,  which  proved  on
nearer  approach  to  be  empty. Spoke  of  it  to  D.

June  22nd.  E.K.  mentioned  incidentally  tliat  K.  had  arrived  to-day  and
that  she  heard  of  this  sudden  and  somewhat  inconvenient  movement  yester-
day morning  by  telegram.

(38)  July  11th. My  doctor  has  been  anxious  that  I  should  spend  part  of


1889.]


and  other  Experiences.


393


the  autumn  at  [a  German  Bath],  but  so  many  practical  difficulties  presented
themselves  that  I  had  almost  given  up  the  idea.  By  what  seemed  a  fortunate
coincidence  I  have  received  from  a  lady  with  whom  I  am  but  recently
acquainted,  an  unexpected  invitation  to  pay  lier  a  long  visit  at  the  very  place
my  doctor  suggests.  I  promised  her  an  early  reply,  with  every  intention  of
sending  a  grateful  acceptance.  Though  my  friends  have  consented  to  the
plan,  my  mind  insisted  on  framing  sentences  in  which  to  refuse  the  tempting
oifer,  and  in  sjjite  of  inclination  I  found  myself  incapable  of  producing  any
letter  which  should  not  decline  the  proposition,  and  this  letter,  on  July  6th,
I  finally  despatched.  On  July  7th  T  received  a  visit  from  the  friend  through
whom  I  had  made  the  acquaintance  of  the  lady  who  sent  me  the  invitation,
and  for  the  first  time  learnt  certain  facts  concerning  her  which,  though
not  in  themselves  discreditable,  would,  had  I  kno\ra  of  them  earlier,  have
been  quite  suthcient  to  deter  me  from  identifying  myself  with  her  movements.

*(39)  Juhj  9th. It  struck  me  this  morning  that  S.T.  might  as  well  do

my  business  in  and  save  me  a  journey,  and  also  that  as  his  mother  is  coming

to  lunch  to-morrow  he  is  very  likely  to  fetch  her  away,  and  I  can  speak  to  him
about  it  then.  Since  then  my  mind  has  been  dictating  what  seems  a  fairly
senseless  note,  so  persistently,  that  I  write  it  down  to  see  what  happens.

' '  Yi5u'd  much  better  come  to  tea  with  me  than  go  to  see  J.  to-morrow,
for  two  good  reasons  : — (1)  I  shall  be  in  and  I  want  you,  and  (2)  J.  will  be
out,  and  he  doesn't."

I  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  S.T.  is  going  to  J.'s  to-morrow,  and  I
have  good  reason  for  believing  that  J.  will  be  at  home,  as  I  understood  that
D.  was  going  to  lunch  at  his  house.

J nhj  10th.  Mrs.  T.  announced,  as  soon  as  she  arrived  to-day,  that  she
could  stay  all  day  to  help  me  with  something,  for  on  returning  home  after
some  early  shopping  this  morning  she  found  that  S.  had  gone  out  leaving
word  that  he  was  going  to  see  J.  and  should  not  be  in  to  lunch.  D.  also
called  early  to  say  she  had  changed  her  plans,  having  heard  from  J.  that
he  was  obliged  to  go  out  for  the  day. (D.  endorses  this.)

*(40)  Auijust  bth.  I  had  some  papers  I  particularly  wanted  to  deliver  in
person  to  Mrs.  M.,  and  for  this  purpose  went  by  train  [to  the  place,  three
miles  away,  in  which  she  lives].  As  I  was  turning  out  of  the  station,  I  had
a  so  distinct,  though  but  momentary,  vision  of  her  in  my  own  neighbourhood,
that  feeling  it  to  be  useless  to  call  at  her  house,  I  nearly  turned  aside  to
pay  another  visit.  However,  I  thought  I  might  as  well  dispose  of  my  parcel,
and  did  so.  She  was  out,  but  has  not  called  here.  I  am  often  able  to  follow
her  movements  at  a  distance  and  am  disappointed  this  has  failed.  [She
appeared  to  be  standing  near  a  florist's  shop  in  the  main  road,  as  if  about
to  turn  in  the  direction  of  our  house.  She  wore  a  white  dress,  and  I
distinctly  saw  the  background  of  flowers.]  The  next  day  I  received  from
her  a  note,  which  I  now  quote  : — "I  have  been  in  your  neighbourhood  to-day
about  the  time  you  were  in  mine, — [shopping]  at  G.'s  and  nearly  called  on
you."

[G.'s  shop  is  exactly  opposite  that  near  which,  in  my  vision,  she  appeared
to  be  standing,  and  I  have  ascertained  that  she  was  wearing  a  white  dress.]

(41)  August  9th.  This  morning  I  was  on  the  balcony,  when  I  heard  A.
calling  my  name  in  an  impatient  manner. Knowing  that  she  was  in  the


A  Record  of  Telepathic


[Oct.  25,


room  behind  the  drawing-room,  and  that  I  could  not  [as  has  since  been
proved  by  experiment]  really  have  heard  her,  I  was  tempted  to  dismiss  the
sound  as  fancy.  On  again  hearing  my  name,  I  returned  into  the  house,  but
not  till  I  readied  the  landing  beyond  the  drawing-room  did  I  find  that  she
was  really  calling  me.  She  liad  dropped  the  stick  without  which  she  cannot
walk,  and  was  a  prisoner  till  someone  should  come  to  her  help.

(42)  August 'dfh.  8.30  p.m.  A  few  minutes  since,  I  was  watering  some
flowers  on  the  landing,  and  was  about  to  replace  the  water-can  in  my
room  when,  hearing  the  maid  preparing  it  for  the  night,  closing  the  window,
drawing  the  curtains,  &c.,  &c.,  I  waited  below  till  she  should  come  down.
To  my  surprise  slie  came  lyjstairs  directly  after,  followed  by  a  new  house-
maid. I  suggested  that  someone  had  already  done  my  room,  but  she
declared  I  was  mistaken.  She  had  but  just  before  been  telhng  the  new
maid,  in  detail,  what  there  was  to  do,  and  had  come  upstairs  to  see  it  done.
I  was  so  convinced  by  the  sounds  I  had  heard  that  I  went  with  them  to  see,
but  of  course  found  the  window  still  open,  and  the  room  in  its  usual  day-time
condition.

(43)  August  10th.  I  am  leaving  town  to-morrow  and  so  am  very
busy.  A  new  maid  happened  to  be  answering  the  door,  and  when  I  said  I
did  not  V\'ant  to  see  anyone  who  might  call,  unless  it  were  M.,  she  naturally
asked  "what  sort  of  a  lady  "  M.  was.  I  was  about  to  describe  her  as  tall,
fair,  &c.,  when  a  vision  of  N.  came  so  vividly  before  me  that  I  had  to  say
''small,  dark,  dressed  in  black."  [I  was  speaking  to  the  maid  in  the  hall.  As  I
stood  on  the  bottom  stejD  of  the  stairs,  the  figure  of  N.  appeared  to  be
standing  behind  the  maid  as  if  she  had  just  entered  the  house.]  I  was
wondering  what  the  result  would  be,  whether  M.  would  be  sent  away  or  IST.
announced  as  M.,  when  N.  herself  appeared  to  pay  a  hurried  visit  on  a
matter  of  some  consequence,  and  she  said  more  than  once,  "  I  was  so  afraid  I
should  not  find  you  at  home,"  &c.  [Honesty  obliges  me  to  add  that  N. ,
for  the  first  and  last  time  in  my  15  years'  expei'ience  of  her,  was  dressed  in
white  !  ]

(44)  August  26i/i..  I  was  walking  alone  tliis  morning  and  wandered
into  the  cricket  field.  While  resting  on  one  of  the  seats  it  occurred  to  my
mind  that  a  brother  who  went  abroad  14  years  ago  had  been  a  member  of
the  club  that  owned  this  ground.  Tlien  I  tried  to  recall  his  appearance,  but
my  memory  refused  to  supjily  the  recpiired  picture,  in  sjiite  of  diligent  con-
juring up  of  suitable  backgi'ounds,  our  old  home,  the  garden,  or  the  stables.
At  last  I  took  to  my  book  and  soon  forgot  all  else.  Suddenly  I  felt  that
someone  was  near,  and  looked  up,  somewhat  startled.  A  man  stood  facing
me,  at  a  distance  of  perhaps  12  feet.  A  second  glance  showed  me  that  it
was  the  very  brother  whose  image  I  had  in  vain  tried  to  recall.  The  figure
was  very  distinct,  so  much  so  that  I  feel  it  will  remain  in  my  memory  as  a
particularly  vivid  portrait.  The  shock  made  me  involuntarily  close  my  eyes,
— when  I  looked  again,  there  was  nothing.

*  (45)  October  11th.  12.. 30.  I  have  just  had  a  momentary  l)ut  very  distinct
vision  of  Z.  I  was  writing — not  thinking  of  anything  which  could  in  any
way  suggest  the  thought  of  her, — paused  for  want  of  a  word  and  was  staring
at  nothing, — when,  for  an  instant,  I  found  her  great  sad  eyes  fixed  upon  me.
Almost  before  I  consciously  recognised  her,  the  face  had  vanished.  She


1889.]


and  other  Experiences.


395


has  always  had  bad  health, — Is  she  dead  ?  If  so,  why  should  she  apiaear  to
me  ? It  is  months  since  I  heard  from  any  of  the  family.

b  o'clock  p.  m.  This  is  [perhaps]  in  some  sort  explained  more  cheerfully
than  my  mind  had  suggested.  Z.  's  mother  has  just  left  the  house.  She  and
her  two  elder  daughters  have  come  here  on  business  leaving  Z.  at  home.
[I  have  had  no  opportunity  of  finding  out  wdiat  Z.  was  doing.]
*  (46)  October  31si.  Heard  that  a  matter  of  great  importance  to  M.
is  to  be  decided  to-day.  I  declined  to  lunch  with  another  friend  because  I
thought  the  jjerception  of  M.'s  distress  and  anxiety  would  (according  to
custom  when  she  is  in  trouble,  whatever  the  distaiace  between  us)  so  occupy
my  sympathies  as  to  unfit  me  for  other  occupations.  On  the  contrary,  it  has
required  an  effort  to  keep  her  in  mind  at  all  continuously,  and  1  cannot  help
wondering  whether  something  may  perhaps  have  occurred  to  delay  the
decision .

Norember  'drcl.  Letter  from  M.  "The  question  will  not  be  decided  ujion
for  some  weeks."

*(47)  November  24t/i.  Spent  yesterday  afternoon  with  D.  and  H,,  but  was
so  causelessly  distraite  that  they  sent  me  to  the  piano  to  soothe  myself.
After  playing  in  the  darkened  room  for  some  time,  I  stoj)ped  and  said  to  D.,
"  It  is  M.,— but  it  is  not  bad  news,  1  am  glad  now."  I  then  stopped  and
went  home.

D.  endorses  this.  H.  writes,  "I  did  not  hearX. 's  remark  to  D.,  but  X.
repeated  it  to  me  a  few  minutes  later  when  I  was  driving  home  with  her."

November  21th.  Letter  from  M.  this  morning.  The  matter  was  settled
on  Friday,  23rd.  She  says,  "  Settled  as  I  wished,"  and  speaks  of  being  much
relieved  in  mind.

*(48)  November  2dth.  I  was  sitting  reading,  about  six  o'clock  this  morn-
ing, holding  a  pencil  in  my  right  hand.  Suddenly  my  liand  began  to  write.
I  diverted  my  attention  by  the  first  device  which  presented  itself — counting-
the  curtain  rings.  This  was  not  easy,  and  before  I  had  finished  my  hand
stopped. I  had  written,  without  stops  or  capitals —

"  Not  to  be  thought  of  think  of  your  mother  unfiUial  (s/'c)  too  far  not  to
be  thought  of."

I  could  think  of  nothing  to  which  these  remarks  seemed  in  any  degree  to
apply,  except  to  the  fact  of  which  I  had  heard  this  afternoon  that  S.  B.  had
received  an  excellent  appointment  in  a  distant  country  and  was  to  sail
shortly.  However,  as  his  mother  was  particularly  pleased  about  it,  there-
can  be  nothing  unfilial  in  his  conduct.  My  instinct  applies  the  words  to
S.  B.,  but  they  are  so  unsuitable  that  it  is  perhaps  altogether  a  mere
accident.

(49)  Jannarij  8th,  1889.  Htard  sad  news  of  the  loss  of  S.  B.'s  vessel.
Is  this  connected  with  my  overwlielming  but  unexplained  depression  on
Wednesday  and  Thursday  (2nd  and  3rd) — climax  Thursday  afternoon,  3  to
to  5  o'clock  ?

*(50)  Februarij  17t]i.  This  morning  about  11.30-40  as  D.  and  I.  were
walking, — speaking  of  matters  in  no  way  connected  with  M., — I  v--as  so
strongly  impressed  by  the  sense  of  lier  at  that  moment  wanting  me  that  I
spoke  of  it  to  D.,  saying  that  if  I  did  but  know  her  address  I  would  write  to
her. [She  was  then  travelling  abroad.]


396


A  Record  of  Telepatliic


[Oct.  25,


Fehrxiary  IWi.  Letter  from  M.  this  morning,  written  on  the  17th,  begging
me  to  send  her  news  of  myself  at  once,  or  if  ill  to  get  D.  to  do  so.

Note  added  ten  days  later  : — "  M.  says  mine  was  one  of  several  letters
written  on  the  17th  l)et\yeen  10  and  lunch.

(51)  Jiwie  IMh.  I  was  on  my  way  to  see  L.  this  afternoon  and  wondering
a  little  anxiously  whether  she  would  be  at  home.  Looking  up,  I  saw  on  the
opposite  side  of  the  road,  walking  towards  me,  B.,  looking  straight  at  me  and
laughing,  but  showing  no  consciousness  of  my  presence.  I  stopped,  thinking
he  would  cross  and  would  tell  me  if  L.  were  at  home,  and  so  save  me  perhaps
a  useless  walk,  having  probably  come  from  her  house.  A  carriage  passed
and  when  I  looked  across  again  there  was  no  one  visible.  Tlie  road  is  quite
straight  and  no  one  could  have  had  time  to  get  out  of  sight.  When  I  reached
L.'s  house,  the  maid  said  at  once,  "They  liave  all  gone  away  to  Mr.  B.'s
wedding. " I  had  not  heard  of  this.

*  (52)  Av^gtist  2nd.  Before  going  downstairs  to  breakfast  and  to  receive
my  letters  I  note  a  dream,  very  trifling  in  its  character,  but  which,  having
occurred  twice,  has  impressed  me  strongly.

I  was  very  sleepless  and,  as  usual,  a  trifle  started  up  to  worry  me,  the
fact  that  I  owed  Mrs.  C.  2s.  6d.  Every  time  I  got  in  the  least  sleepy  I  woke
up  witli  the  burden  of  my  annoyance  at  having  forgotten  it.  At  last  I  got  up,
and,  to  comfort  my  conscience,  took  2s.  6d.  out  of  my  jjurse  and  laid  it  on  the
table  to  remind  me  of  my  debt.  I  woke  out  of  my  first  sleep  with  the  vague
sense  of  having  done  wrong,  but  remembering  I  had  done  all  I  could  to  repair
it,  went  to  sleep  again  and  dreamt  that  a  letter  was  in  my  hand  from
Mrs.  C,  and  that  I  knew  it  was  to  tell  me  I  did  not  owe  her  anything.  When
I  woke  it  was  light,  and  after  reading  for  some  time  I  went  to  sleep  again  and
dreamt  I  opened  Mrs.  C.'s  envelope  and  a  jDostal  order  dropped  out,  and  that
I  said  to  her  maid,  "  So  you  see  it  was  she  who  owed  me  money  after  all."
It  was  very  vivid.

10  o'clock.  Mrs.  C.  writes  to  say,  Will  I  make  a  further  purchase  for  her,
and  encloses  5s.  order  which,  with  my  2s.  6d.,  will  be  right  !

(53)  September  7 ih.  I  expected  N.  to-daj',  but  as  she  did  not  arrive  by
the  train  she  mentioned  I  gave  her  up,  and  went  for  a  walk.  I  was
returning  down  a  steep  hill,  when  I  saw  [the  figure  of]  N.  at  the  bottom,
moving,  rather  than  walking,  along  the  road  which  crossed  my  path  at
right  angles  [and  at  perhaps  40  yards  distance].  I  saw  only  the  upper
part  of  her  figure,  but  that  appeared  witli  sufficient  distinctness  for  me  to
notice  that  she  wore  a  brown  dress  witli  a  black  cape,  and  black  bonnet.  I
waved  my  handkerchief,  but  she  disajipeared.  On  reaching  the  bottom  of  the
hill  I  found  a  hansom  cab,  in  which  N.  was  seated,  waiting  at  the  corner.

On  reaching  home  I  asked  her  at  once  to  write  down  what  had  happened,
and  I  quote  from  her  account.  "  My  immediate  question  as  X.  joined  me  in
the  cab  was.  How  did  you  know  I  was  in  the  hansom  1  You  could  not
possibly  have  seen  me  through  the  window.  The  path  which  X.  was  descend-
ing was  at  right  angles  to  the  road,  along  which  the  cab  was  driving  at  a
smart  pace,  and  through  the  side-window  I  caught  only  a  glimpse  of  a
figure  waving  a  handkerchief,  which  from  the  signal  I  guessed  to  be  hers,
and  so  stopped  the  cab.  I  was  dressed  in  a  dark  brown  dress,  black  bonnet,
and  black  cape."


1889.]


and  other  Experiences.


397


[I  should  add  that  the  figure  as  I  saw  it  was  apparently  much  nearer  to
me  tlian  was  her  actual  presence,  also  that  though  I  saw  her  against  a  dark,
moving  background  probably  suggested  by  the  hansom,  a  cab  was  a  very
frequent  object  on  the  road,  which  was  that  direct  from  the  station.]

*  (54)  October  14i/i.  S.T.  constantly  in  my  mind  to-day.  Spoke  of
it  to  D.  Nothing  to  suggest  this.  Perhaps  Mrs.  T.  is  in  the  neighbour-
hood and  is  coming  to  see  me.

October  lotlt..  Letter  from  Mrs.  T.  written  yesterday.  We  do  not
profess  to  correspond,  but  [she  writes  to  tell  me  some  good  news  of  S.].

(55)  October  25th.  Went  to  a  meeting.  Asked  N.  to  meet  me
there,  but  she  wrote  to  say  she  should  not  have  time.  While  the
meeting  was  going  on  I  saw  her  to  our  right,  several  rows  in  front,
apparently  standing  between  tlie  seats,  facing  us  and  staring  at  me,
but  when  I  tried  to  catch  her  eye  she  showed  no  recognition,  and
when  I  pointed  her  out  to  the  friend  who  was  with  me  she  could  not  see
her.  I  afterwards  found  that  she  was  sitting  behind  us  and  had  come  in  late
just  before  I  saw  her.

[The  friend  who  was  with  me  writes  :  "  X.  twice  drew  my  attention  to  the
place  where  N.  ujasn't ;  she  was  sitting  by  the  door  quite  at  the  back,  and
we  didn't  see  her  till  we  went  out,  when  we  spoke  of  this  to  her."  N.
endorses  this.]

The  task  of  arranging  this  record  of  experiences  brings  to  my  view,
even  more  forcibly  than  before,  their  evidential  deficiency.  For  the
most  part,  it  may  be  said  that  the  incidents  which  are  well  attested
are  trivial,  and  that  those  which  in  themselves  look  striking  lack
corroboration.  This  is  almost  inevitable  in  the  case  of  one  who
has  but  lately  interested  herself  in  the  observation  of  such  phenomena
in  any  but  their  personal  relation,  recording  them  only  when  they
affected  the  interests  of  herself  or  of  those  around  her.  As,  however,  I
cannot  suppose  them  to  be  of  rare  occurrence,  I  shall  feel  that  this
paper  has  served  its  purpose  if  it  should  suggest  to  others  to  record,
with  more  accuracy  and  continuity,  phenomena  of  a  similar  kind.
Lives  more  varied  and  eventful  will  no  doubt  afibrd  exjaeriences  extend-
ing to  a  further  horizon,  and  ranging  oyqv  a  wider  field.


398


Experimental  Comjxtrison,  d'c.


[March  28,


IV.

EXPERIMENTAL  COMPARISON  BETWEEN  CPIANCE  AND
THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  CORRESPONDENCE
OF  DIAGRAMS.

By  Lieut.-Colonel  G.  Le  M.  Taylor.

As  may  be  seen  on  reference  to  the  Proceedings  of  the  American
Society  for  Psychical  Research,  VoL  I.,  Part  IV.,  Professor  Minot  has
induced  510  peojole  each  to  di'aw  for  him  10  diagrams  on  a  postal
card ;  he  has  thus  ol:itained  about  5,000  diagrams.  These  he  has
tabulated  in  various  ways,  and  made  the  following  deductions  affecting
the  inference  drawn  in  England  fi-om  certain  expeiiments  by  diagrams
in  thought-transference  made  by  our  Society.  Mr.  Minot  finds  a  great
tendency  among  his  respondents  to  draw  certain  particular  diagrams,
and  also  when  these  diagrams  are  drawn  there  is  a  tendency  to  draw
them  early  in  a  series.  He  thinks  "  that  the  same  visual  images  arise
in  many  of  us  with  approximately  the  same  readiness,"  and  that  owing
to  this  tendency  during  experiments  such  as  those  reported  in  the
Proceedings  of  the  English  S.P.R.,  "thought-transference  might  be
simulated  and  a  proof  of  its  reality  obtained  which  would  seem  over-
whelming so  long  as  the  law  of  relative  frequency  was  disregarded  as
an  explanation,"  and  adds,  "  Until  this  is  done  it  appears  prematui-e
to  accept  these  experiments  as  valid  proofs  of  thought-transference."

After  reading  Mr.  Minot's  paper,  it  occurred  to  me  to  try  to  put  his
theory  to  a  practical  test.  With  this  object  I  prepared  40  sheets  of
paper  by  marking  off"  on  each  side  25  square  spaces  headed,  "  Please
draw  25  diagrams  without  receiving  suggestions  from  any  person,  one
in  each  of  the  spaces  below,  running  down  each  column  in  succession,
beginning  at  the  top  of  No.  1."  I  numbered  the  columns  from  left  to
right,  and  on  each  jiaper  wrote,  "  Begin  on  this  side,"  and  lastly  before
issue  marked  each  j^aper,  1  A  (agent),  1  P  (jjercipient),  2  A,  2  P,
*fec.,  &c.

These  forms  I  gave  to  my  friends,  who  kindly  did  as  requested,  and
I  thus  obtained  2,000  diagrams  which  may  be  imagined  to  represent
the  result  of  20  experiments  in  "thought-transference"  of  50  trials
each,  l^ut  with  the  element  of  the  transference  of  thought  eliminated.

On  comparing  my  "  Agent  "  papers  with  the  "  Percipient  "  papers
of  the  same  number,  I  found  only  one  absolute  correspondence,  namely,
a,  square  which  came  second  in  each  of  the  two  papers  mai'ked  No.  13.
I  found  10  cases  in  which  there  was  such  a  correspondence  in  idea  that


1890.]


Experimental  Comparison,  &c.


399


they  would,  I  thiiili,  have  been  considered  more  or  less  successes  had
the  experiments  been  real,  and  9  in  which,  though  the  ideas  were
different,  if  they  had  been  badly  expressed,  they  might  have  been  mis-
taken for  successes  owing  to  a  likeness  in  shape.

The  accompanying  lithographs  are  exact  copies  of  the  above-
mentioned  20  pairs  of  diagrams,  and  give  an  idea  of  how  far  the  cor-
respondence is  carried.  There  are,  besides,  about  -10  pairs  ha-s-iug  some
features  in  common,  but  v/hich  are  not  similar  enough  to  be  counted.
The  rest  of  the  diagrams  which  fall  together  in  corresponding  A's  and
P's  are  quite  unlike.  It  must  be  remembered,  when  making  these
■comparisons,  that  though  a  larger  number  will  fall  together  by  chance
the  more  far-fetched  the  correspondences  are  made,  the  more  will  also
fall  together  in  a  genuine  experiment.  I  should  feel  bound  in  the
latter  case  not  to  count  any  correspondence  as  due  to  thought-
transference  unless  there  was  a  marked  likeness  in  tlie  diagrams
concerned,  and  am  consequently  inclined  to  be  guided  by  the  same
rule  in  considering  the  j^i'esent  series.

At  most,  then,  without  the  aid  of  thoiTght-ti'ansference,  20  successes
were  obtained  in  1,000  trials.  How  does  this  result  compare  with  the
experiments  published  in  the  Pj-oceerfwi^^/s  of  the  S.P.R.?  Looking  over
the  diagrams  figured  in  Vol.  I.,  I  find  that  in  42  attempts,  of  which
31  are  reproduced  in  the  volume  in  question,  there  are  13  corre-
spondences so  near  that,  had  they  been  found  in  my  collection,  I
should  have  noted  them,  namely —

Of  those  beginning  page  83,  Vol.  I.,  Nos.  4,  6,  and  9.

„  „ 175, „ „ „ 1,  3,  4,  10,  11,  1.3,  16,  17,

;  18,  and  22.

Mr.  Minot's  "  law  of  relative  frequency  "  has  had  no  very  marked
tendency  to  simulate  thought-transference  in  my  20  experiments,
and  this  under  conditions  singularly  favourable  for  the  development
of  such  a  law,  seeing  that  all  my  respondents  were  people  of  the  same
■class,  acquaintances,  and  living  in  the  same  neighbourhood.

Now,  passing  to  a  consideration  of  the  collection  as  2,000  separate
diagrams,  I  have  classed  them  much  as  Mr.  Minot  has  his  5,000,  but
found  two  difficulties  in  doing  so.  First,  there  is  the  difficulty,  when  the
diagram  is  complex,  as  many  of  mine  are,  of  determining  to  which  class
it  should  belong.  For  example,  I  have  the  picture  of  a  man  in  a  boat
on  a  lake  ;  should  I  call  it  a  man,  a  boat,  or  a  landscape  1  Second,  the
question  arises  how  comprehensive  a  class  may  be  made.  Mr.  Minot
classes  horses,  dogs,  and  cats  separately,  and  all  other  animals  together,
tut  I  only  have  5  cats  against  8  rabbits,  8  butterflies,  and  no  less
than  46  birds.

Table  I.  shows  that,  though  a  tendency  to  draw  certain  diagrams


400


Experimental  Comparison,  &c. [March  28,


does  exist,  those  oftenest  repeated  in  Mr.  Minot's  collection  are  not-
the  same  as  those  which  occur  most  frequently  in  mine.  GeometiicaL
figures  were  preferred  by  Mi'.  Minot's  respondents,  while  mine  drew
diagrams  representing  men,  animals,  and  flowers  more  often  than  any
others  ;  both,  however,  show  a  partiality  for  words  and  letters  of  the
alphabet.

If  the  classes  were  made  to  contain  objects  so  nearly  alike  that,  had
any  two  of  them  fallen  together  as  "  original  "  and  "  reproduction"  in
an  experiment  in  thought-transference,  the  tiial  would  have  been
considered  a  success,  the  tendency  in  my  collection  to  repetition  would
fall  below  that  in  Mr.  Minot's.  How  far  below  it  is  difficult  ta
estimate  without  comparing  Mr.  Minot's  diagrams  with  mine,  and
even  then  the  estimate  would  altogether  depend  on  how  near  a  corre-
spondence the  calculator  considered  necessary  for  a  "success."  If  we
consider  only  those  diagrams  in  each  collection  the  names  of  which  fix
both  the  shape  and  the  idea,  leaving  only  the  size  undefined,  such  as
circles,  squai'es,  equilateral  triangles,  hearts,  itc,  and  neglect  those  the
short  names  given  to  which  do  not  define  them,  Mr.  Minot's  diagrams
are  repeated  90  times  each  on  an  average,  mine  only  5.  If  the  whole
of  Mr.  Minot's  pictures  which  are  repeated  more  than  4  times  are
taken,  the  average  of  repetition  is  33  for  each,  as  compai-ed  Avith  14  in
my  series.  The  pertinent  question  is,  of  course,  not  how  many  diagrams
are  repeated  a  few  times,  but  how  many  times  a  few  of  the  most  fre-
quently drawn  diagrams  are  repeated.

From  Table  II.  it  appears  that  the  ideas  conveyed  by  my  diagrams
differ  from  those  conveyed  by  the  American  diagrams  a  good  deal,,
owing,  no  doubt,  chiefly  to  different  surroundings.  Many  of  my
diagrams  are  complex  rather  than  simple.  I  recognise  in  my  series
little  evidence  of  a  "  mental  trick,"  though  as  I  am  conscious  of  having
such  myself,  I  have  no  doubt  that  this  habit  accounts  for  some  of  the
diagrams,  as  when  the  only  5  "  mouths  "  pictured  are  drawn  by  three
sisters.  Some  of  my  pictures  owe  their  origin  to  what  was  easiest  to
draw,  or  to  what  the  artists  thought  they  could  do  best.  Many  are
suggested  by  surrounding  objects,  and  many  are  due  to  the  mind
recui'ring  to  objects  constantly  encountered  in  the  daily  occupations  of
the  rejjroducer  ;  but  I  do  not  think  that  any  one  of  these  reasons  should
be  assigned  as  a  cause  for  reproduction  more  than  any  other.

Table  III.  corresponds  with  Mr.  Minot's  Table  VII.,  and  shows  the
average  place  of  the  10  most  frequently  repeated  diagrams  in  the  two
collections.  I  have  not  only  given  the  average  place  of  the  diagram
"  when  it  is  drawn,"  but  Avhen  it  is  omitted,  taking  it  in  the  latter  case
as  51st.  My  10  most  freiiuently  repeated  diagrams,  when  drawn,  show
no  tendency  to  come  either  early  or  late  in  the  series.  Mr.  Minot's  10
most  frequent  come  with  me  a  little  early. When  every  paper  is


1890.]


Experimental  Comparison,  &c.


401


inclutled,  whether  it  contains  the  diagram  concerned  or  not,  my  most
frequent  10  come  late,  and  Mr.  Minot's  veiy  late  in  my  series.

I  do  not  tind  among  my  respondents  any  tendency  to  draw  the
most  frequently  repeated  diagrams  eai'ly.

If,  however,  a  striking  tendency  does  exist  to  give  preference  to
certain  diagrams  and  to  draw  these  early  in  a  series,  but  not  to  repeat
them  when  once  di'awn,  the  pi'eferential  ones  will  soon  be  run  through
in  a  number  of  trials  of  thought-transference,  and  then  will  follow
figures  for  which  the  reverse  of  a  preference  exists.  If  thought-trans-
ference were  simulated  by  the  tendency  above  mentioned,  we  should
find  in  a  series,  first,  an  abnormal  number  of  successes,  then  the  proper
number  due  to  chance,  and  towards  the  end  remarkably  few  satisfac-
tory results. But  this  does  not  appear  to  be  the  case.


Table  I.


Mr.  Minot's
Series.

Present
Series.

Order  of
frequency.

Percentage  of
repetition.

Order  of
frequency.

Percentage  of
repetition.

Circles...

1

4-17

20

•65

Squares

•2

3-47

25

•45

Equilateral  triangles

3

319

21

•60

Crosses

4

3-19

12

1-25

Letters  of  tlie  alphabet

1  -63

3

2^50

Diamonds

5

1-59

29

■25

Oblongs  horizontal  ...

6

1  '55

32

•05

Inscribed  circles

1  'OO

21

■60

Stars  ...

1-53

22

■55

Faces  profile  to  left...

8

1-19

10

r45

Houses

9

111

8

r7o

Rhombi

111

25

■45

Scrawls

10

1-05

5

2-10

Other  animals

11

•95

2

3^80

Flowers

12

■91

6

2^05

Leaves

13

•89

23

•50

Hexagons

14

•83

31

•10

Cubes...

•83

29

■20

[\^  Riglit-angled  triangles

15

•71

32

■05

Figures  of  men

16

•63

1

5-20

Scrolls...

)  1

•63

32

■05

Inscribed  squares  ...

>  J

•63

30

•15

Hearts

>  )

•63

23

•50

Oblongs  vertical

17

•61

30

•15

Squares  with  crosses

18

•59

29

•20

Octagons

19

•55

31

•10

Faces  not  in  profile

20

•53

11

r40

2  E


402


■Experimental  Comparison,  ti-c. [March  28,


Mr.  Minot's
Series.


o

o

a

lei

ue

O

0)

1-4

o  .

fcC  o

Cj


Present
Series.


o

o

c

s

a>

o

O)

Right-angled  triangles
Moons...

Hour-glasses

Card  spots

Spirals

Pentagons

Flags

Digits ...  ...

Rigli  t  angles

Arrows
Books  ...
Sliips  ...

Trees

Tools  ...

(Jnatrefoils

Buttles

Boots  ...

Mugs  ...
Hands...

Hats ...  ■

Suns  ...

Horses

Cats

Vases

Anchors

Apples

Eyes

Faces  profile  to  right

Steps

Dishes
Branches

Signs  of  music

Pitchers

Chairs

Keys  ...

Skulls

Punctuation  marks...

Dogs

Clocks  and  Watches
Architectural  plans
Engines  (locomotives)


21

•47

32

•05

47

4:U

Uo

oo

61

■±u

O  f

■  oo
oo

ol

lU

5  )

•  OQ
OO

o.>

Uo

Oft

zo

•  01
Ol

00

>  5

oi

Ol

00

1  ?

or

oU

lo

20

•  on

•on

-OO

10

•OA

2,i

•  OT

1  o
1  Z

1  .iO

lU

1  4:0

•27

28

•25

28

•25

32

■05

»  »

•25

11

1-40

29

•23

23

•50

30

•19

31

•10

•19

24

•45

31

•17

7

r90

;  1

•17

23

•50

•>  )

•17

19

•70

J  )

•17

27

•30

5  J

17

on

•  OA

>  5

•17

29

•20

)  >

•17

31

•10

)  »

•17

28

•25

•15

29

•20

)  »

•15

29

•20

32

■15
■13

•13

28

•25

33

■11

?  T

■11

29

•20

5  )

■11

23

•50

>  )

•11

31

•10

?  »

■11

30

•15

34

■09

17

•80

)  )

■09

17

•80

J  >

•09

29

•20

i  )

■09

29

•20

1890.]


Exjperimental  Comparison,  &c.


403


Table  II.


1  Number  of  repetitions.

Order  of  frequency.

Percentage  of  repetitions

i  Number  of  repetitions.

Order  of  frequency.

104

1

Glengarrys

4

26

Cocked  hats  ...

3

26

Cardinal's

o

14

Military  helmets

3

14

oliah  s  hat

3

8

Military  forage  caps...

o

6

Straw  hats

2

5

(Rest  one  each).

2

Houses —

1  '70

34

8

2

Churches

11

2

Landscapes...

1  '55

31

9

76

2

I  rees

1'45

29

10

8

r ciLcfs  pionie  uo  leiu  ...

1'45

29

10

8

ijottles

1  "40

28

\\

/

Faces  not  in  profile

1"40

28

11

7

Ships —

1  •25

25

12

6

Cutters

14

4

lioats  ...

5

3

Steamers

4

2

k5llipS

2

2

Cresses —  ...

r25

25

12

2

Latin  ...

(3

2

St.  Andrew  ...

5

St.  George

4

50

Malta  ...

4

46

4

Latin  inclined

2

5

l<ortincation  plans

1-50

22

13

5

Women —  ...

1-05

21

14

4

Simple...

10

4

Working

6

3

1  laying

5

2

Musical  instruments —  ...

•95

19

15

2

Banjos...

4

2

4

2

Guitars

3

xloins  ...

3

42

5

(Rest  one  each).

41

6

IJOOKS

•90

18

16

4

17....  i  4-

)  J

18

3

Pipes

IS

3

i^ogs

•80

16

17

2

Fans...

•75

15

18

2

Pens...

•70

14

19

2

Hor.ses

14

19

Swords

14

19

38

7

Circles

•65

13

20

9

Boxes

13

20

Men  —

Playing

Simple...

Working-
Complicated  ...

Fighting

Being  hanged

Reading

Eiding

Fishing

Shooting
"  Other  Animals  " —

Rabbits

Butterflies

Asses  ..

Pig«

Lions  ...

Cows

Beetles
Elephants

Rats

Lizards

Sheei)

(Rest  one  each).
Letters  and  Words
Birds—

Swans  ...

Ducks

Owls

Hens

Cocks  ...

Storks  ...

Parrots

Doves  ...

Dead  birds
(Best  one  each).
Scrawls
Flowers —  ...

Primroses

Snowdrops

Fuchsia

Chrysanthemums
Tulips  ...
Forget-me-nots
(Rest  one  each).

Hats —

"Stovepipe.s"...


c
a
so

C


5-20


3^80


2^50
2^30


2^10
2^05


1^90


404<  Experimental  Comparison,  &c. [March  28..


Percentage  of  repetitions

Number  of  repetitions.

Order  of  frequency.

Percentage  of  repetitions.

Number  of  repetitions.

i  Order  of  frequency.

J>;its  (tennis)

•65

13

20

-17-  ill

Vegetables

•30

6

27

JL  opogi dpiiiCtii  pitins

•60

12

21

i  aoie.s

6

27

Digits

» »

12

21

Targets

"

6

27

Jugs

12

21

btOOlS

"

6

27

Equilateral  triangles

12

21

Spoons

6

27

^jraies

•55

11

22

Fistois

6

27

Fish  (single)

"

11

22

Lamps  (house)

6

27

riags

11

22

Coins

6

27

Cannon

11

'22

Uliairs

6

27

Circles  with  inscribed  figs.

•50

10

23

I)  ..4-  . /  ^..i  ..1  - 4- \

Uats  (cricket)

6

27

Keys

>  )

10

23

Oats  ...

6

27

Uoots

J  )

10

23

Brooms

•25

5

28

Leaves

'  '

10

23

iieiis...

5

28

Suns...

10

23

Brushes

5

28

±1  earts

10

23

Feet ...

5

28

Umbrellas  ...

10

23

Jjaiis  (cricket)

5

28

\v  laps

•45

9

24

Carriages  ...

"

5

28

Watches

9

24

jiyes...

5

28

A\  ine-glasses ...  ...

9

24

Ancient  helmets  ...

5

28

Hands ... ...  ...

9

24

ivites ... ...  ...

5

28

Guns

9

24

iViOUTtlS ...  ...

5

28

Candlesticks

9

24

Nets  (tennis)

5

28

fttais

•40

8

25

Pencils

5

28

liliombi

■40

8

25

Raih\'ays

5

28

Squares

8

25

Saucepans  ...

5

28

E<|uiljiteral triangles  in-

jjaiis [looh] ...

5

28

terlaced

8

25

Music  scores

5

28

lea  cups

8

25

Diamonds  ...

5

28

Tumblers

5  )

8

25

Scissors

5

28

Moons ...  ...

?  )

8

25

ioois

5

28

ijreait  (loat)

J  )

8

25

Teapots

5

28

Knives

»  >

8

25

Arro'ws ...  ...

•20

4

29

Inkstand

; »

8

25

Anchors

4

29

Card  spots  ...

) »

8

25

Architectural  designs

4

29

Balloons

8

25

Chains

4

29

OiOCRs

■35

7

26

Squares  with  crosses

4

29

Spades

)  5

7

26

Jiais  ...

4

29

Snakes

)  »

1

26

Shoes  (horse) ..  ...

4

29

Envelopes  ...

1  T

7

26

JjOcomotives

4

29

Kettles

)  »

7

26

Faces  profile  to  right

4

29

Forks

J  »

7

26

Vases

4

29

Spectacles  ...

»  1

7

26

Cubes

4

29

Baskets

)  »

7

26

Steps

4

29

JJows

7

26

(The  rest  four  times  or  less

Axes

)  1

7

26

repeated).

1890.]


Experimental  Comparison,  &c.


405


Table  III.


Ten  most  frequently  repeated  diagrams — present  collection.


Men

25-7

30-8

"  Other  animals  "...

24-8

27-4

Letters  of  alphabet

29-4

37-3

Birds

25-7

32-7

Scrawls

21-8

34-9

Flowers

24-9

35-7

Hats

30-0

37-5

Houses

23-3

34  0

Landscapes

21-4

35-5

Trees

23-5

36-6

Average  place

2o-05

34-24

Ten  most  frequently  repeated  diagi-ams  of  Mr.  Minot's  collection.


Circles

16-4

37-6

Squares

12-1

43-2

Equilateral  triangles

7-8

41-9

Crosses

13-1

24-1

Letters  of  the  alphabet

29-4

37-3

Diamonds

13-2

46-2

Oblongs  horizontal

9-0

49-9

Inscribed  circles

20-2

40-6

Stars

22-8

43-2

Faces  profile  to  left

20-9

34-5

Average  place

16-49

39-85

406


General  Meetings


GENERAL  MEETINGS.


The  thirty -fourth,  thii'ty- fifth,  thirty -sixth,  and  thirty -seventh
-General  Meetings  of  the  Society  were  lield  at  tlae  "Westminster  Town
Hall  on  October  25th  and  November  29th,  1889,  and  on  January  31st
and  March  28th,  1890,  at  which  the  preceding  four  papers  were  read
in  whole  or  in  part.


Supplement.]  Brs.  Dufciy  and  Azam  on  Clairvoyance.  &c.  407


SUPPLEMENT.
I.

OBSERVATIONS  OK  CLAIRYOYAFCE,  kc.
By  Drs.  Dufay  a:nd  Azam.


Most  of  our  readers  are  already  familiar  at  least  with  the  name  of  the
Societe  de  Psychologie  Physiologique,  founded  in  Paris,  in  1885,  under  the
presidency  of  M.  Charcot,  and  including  in  France  such  names  as  Beaunis,
Janet,  Ribot,  Richet,  Sully-Prudhomme,  Taine,  &c.  The  bulletins  of  this
Society  contain  many  papers  of  interest  ;  most  of  which  are  accessible  to
the  general  reader  in  the  Bevue  P}iilosopluq_ue,  where  they  are  generally  first
printed.  With  the  permission  of  the  Society,  and  through  the  kind  help  of
Miss  Porter,  we  are  enabled  to  priirt  here  a  somewhat  condensed  translation
of  two  papers  laid  before  the  Society  iu  1888,  by  Dr.  Dufay,  formerly  a
practising  physician  at  Blois,  and  now  a  Senator  of  France.  These  papers
were  published  in  the  Revue  Philosophig;ue  for  September,  1888,  and
February,  1889.

I.

Co:ntkibutiok  to  the  Study  of  Somnambulism  produced  at  a  Distance
and  without  the  knowledge  of  the  subject.

In  an  experiment  of  this  nature,  I  was  successful  one  day  with  a  lady
whom  (with  her  consent),  I  was  in  the  habit  of  putting  into  the  magnetic
sleep.

I  had  recommended  my  patient,  Madame  A. ,  who  was  extremely  nervous,
to  give  up  all  stimulant,  especially  champagne.  I  was  not  only  her  medical
attendant,  but  also  a  friend  of  the  house,  and  was  often  invited  to  dine
there.  One  evening  I  noticed  that  my  patient  had  allowed  champagne  to  be
poured  into  her  glass,  and  was  about  to  raise  it  to  her  lips.  Fearing  to  be
inconsiderate  in  reminding  her  that  she  was  disobeying  orders,  and  gazing
fixedly  at  her — without  her  noticing  it,  I  believe, — 1  willed  intently  that  she
should  sleep,  so  that  she  should  not  be  able  to  drink.  And  she  remained,  in
fact,  with  her  arm  hanging  in  a  state  of  cataleptic  rigidity,  and  with  open
eyes,  though  without  looking  in  my  direction,  said  in  a  reproachful  tone  :
"Ah  !  doctor,  you  are  cruel  !  "  Then  she  fell  quite  asleep,  and  when,  at
the  end  of  several  minutes,  I  woke  her,  she  declared  that  she  had  quite
forgotten  my  order  :  that  only  at  the  moment  when  she  was  raising  her
glass,  had  she  felt  that  I  was  preventing  her  from  drinking  :  that  this  had
annoyed  her  very  much,  but  that  she  had  not  been  able  to  disobey  .  .  .
and  here  her  memory  failed.

It  may  be  asked  whether  the  fear  that  I  might  prevent  her  drinking  her

2  F  2


408 Brs.  Dufay  and  Azam  on  Clairvoyance,  £c.  [Supplement.


champagne  had  not  been  sufficient  to  produce  the  self-suggestion,  from
whence  resulted  the  incident  that  I  have  just  related  ;  but  as  neither  self-
suggestion  nor  expectant  attention  was  known  of  at  that  time,  I  find  the
occurrence  headed  in  my  notes  :  "  Somnambulism  produced  at  a  distance,
and  without  tlie  subject  being  aware  of  it."  At  the  j^resent  time  I  should
share  M.  Richet's  doubt,  if  I  had  not  entire  confidence  in  Madame  A.'s
assertion,  made  subsequently  by  her  when  in  the  somnambulic  state,  that  she
had  not  thought  of  my  prohibition.

In  connection  with  this  patient,  I  may,  perhaps,  be  allowed  a  digression,  .
which  is  not  without  a  certain  interest.  It  is  an  example  of  the  extraordi-
nary development  of  memory  observable  during  somnambulism — whether
spontaneous  or  induced.  Madame  A.  who  was  exjjecting  a  first  confine-
ment, was  in  the  habit  of  remaining  in  bed  till  mid-day  :  one  morning  when
I  went  to  see  how  she  was,  I  found  her  in  tears  and  so  shaken  with  sobs  that
she  was  unable  to  pronounce  a  word.  I  handed  her  a  pencil  and  a  sheet  of
pai^er,  begging  her  to  write  down  what  had  hapjoened.  With  a  trembling
hand  she  then  wrote  :  "  The  mother  resides  at  Blois  ...  a  son  .  .  .
great  joy  !  Croup,  the  hideous  monster,  attacking  the  poor  little  one,  seized
it  by  the  throat  "

Here  she  uttered  a  piercing  cry,  and  was  seized  with  violent  convulsions.
I  hastened  to  place  my  hand  on  her  forehead,  so  as  to  bring  about  sleep  and
composure,  and,  if  possible,  to  prevent  any  serious  misfortune.  The  sobs,
while  becoming  less  and  less  frequent,  continued  some  minutes,  and  then
the  attack  passed  over.

In  the  words  written  down  by  Madame  A.  I  had  recognised  some  frag-
ments of  Victor  Hugo's  verse,  and  I  was  not  long  in  discovering  at  the  foot
of  the  bed  his  volume  of  Contemplations,  which  her  husband  had  brought
in  an  hour  before,  without  having  read  it  himself.  By  an  mifortunate
accident,  the  poor  woman's  eyes  had  fallen  on  the  piece  entitled  "  Le
Revenant,"  the  reading  of  wliich  had  caused  her  all  the  greater  emotion,
because  the  scene  was  laid  at  Blois,  and  her  imagination  suggested  to  her
grave  anxieties  as  to  the  health  of  the  unborn  child,  whom  she  so  ardently
longed  for.

At  last  tlie  storm  had  abated,  respiration  was  slow  and  regular  ;  the  eyes
remained  closed,  deeply  sunk  in  their  sockets  and  surrounded  by  broad, dark
circles.  Her  right  hand  moved  continuously,  which  led  us  to  suppose  that
tlie  sleeper  dreamt  that  she  was  writing.  ^

We  decided  to  settle  this  :  I  again  put  the  pencil  between  her  fingers,
and  her  husband  having  placed  a  large  sheet  of  paper  on  the  stiff  cover  of  a
piece  of  music  to  serve  as  a  desk,  I  asked  her  v/'hetlier,  now  that  she  had
recovered  her  composure,  she  felt  able  to  write  down,  from  the  first  line  to
the  last — and  there  are  102  of  them — the  little  drama  tliat  had  so  upset  her.

Then,  with  her  eyes  still  closed,  she  set  to  work. The  lines  were

1  This  takes  place,  moreover,  in  the  normal  .state,  wlion  in  a  lialf  sleep,  the  brain
automatically  continues  the  day's  work,  and  one  dreams  of  altering  a  phrase  already
witten,  or  of  finishing  a  page  already  commenced.  The  right  hand  becomes  the  seat  of
slight  contractions,  more  fibrillar  tlian  muscular,  which  direct  the  movements  of  the
fingers  necessary  to  form  the  letters  and  words  expressing  the  thought  of  the  moment.
Tliis  coiTclative  phenomenon,  altliougli  very  frequent,  often  passes  unobserved.


Supplement.]  JDrs.  JDiifciy  and  Azam  on  Clairvoyance,  Sc.  409


certainly  occasionally  confused,  running  one  upon  the  other  in  spite  of  the
trouble  that  we  took  to  guide  the  paper,  but  that  was  because  her  fore-arm
remained  motionless,  and  only  the  fingers  moved  the  pencil  :  still  there  was
no  error  of  rhythm  or  of  rhyme,  only  the  punctuation  was  entirely  wanting.

"  How  many  times  have  you  read  these  verses  1  "  I  asked  Madame  A.,
as  soon  as  she  had  finished.

"  Only  once  :  I  had  not  the  courage  to  begin  again."

And  I  did  not  doubt  her  word,  because  though  jjeople  in  the  somnam-
bulic state  may  occasionally  refuse  to  reply  to  a  question  put  to  them,  it  is
impossible  for  them  to  lie.  When,  two  hours  later,  I  had  just  aroused  her,
she  repeated  that  she  had  not  read  a  second  time  these  102  lines,  written
out  from  memory  during  sleep,  and  of  which  she  could  not  remember  four
consecutively  now  that  she  was  awake.

The  previous  year  I  had  been  witness  of  a  similar  occurrence  with  this
same  lady,  who  was  an  excellent  musician.  One  of  her  friends  had  received
the  score  of  a  new  opera,  and  took  it  to  show  to  her.  My  patient  set  to
work  to  study  the  overture,  which  greatly  pleased  her  ;  then  she  glanced
througli  the  first  act,  and  at  the  end  of  an  hour  her  friend  took  away  the
score,  promising  to  let  her  have  it  again  in  a  few  days.  The  following  day
I  was  received  witli  the  exclamation  :  ' '  Ah  !  doctor,  if  you  had  only  come
last  evening,  you  would  have  heard  something  that  would  have  given  you
pleasure,"  and  she  told  me  of  the  loan  of  the  score.

I  suggested  that  as  she  liad  played  the  overture,  and  found  it  so  charm-
ing, she  should  do  me  the  kindness  of  letting  me  hear  it.  But  she  expressed
herself  quite  unable  to  remember  eight  or  ten  jDages  of  music,  which  she
liad  only  played  through  once  :  then,  guessing  that  I  wished  to  make  an
experiment,  she  declared  herself  willing  to  submit,  in  order  that  she  and  her
liusband  should  laugh  together  over  my  failure.

As  usual,  the  simple  touch  of  my  hand  on  her  forehead  produced  im-
mediate sleep,  and  her  head  sank  forward  on  her  chest :  but  when  one  hand
was  placed  on  the  keys  of  the  piano  the  head  suddenly  regained  its  upright
position,  and  vigorously-grasped  chords  announced  the  commencement  of  the
piece.  From  the  beginning  to  the  end  there  was  not  a  single  liesitation.  Her
husband  and  I  looked  at  each  other  in  amazement.  Never  afterwards,  even
with  the  music  before  her,  was  her  execution  more  perfect.

When,  by  means  of  certain  passes,  from  within  outwards,  made  behind
her  head,  I  had  put  an  end  to  the  sleep,  the  artist  turned  towards  us  with  a
mocking  exjiression  :  "There,"  she  said,  laughing,  "I  was  quite  sure  that
your  experiment  would  not  succeed. "  It  was  in  vain  for  us  to  assure  her
that  it  had  been  a  complete  success,  she  would  not  believe  it.  She  only
admitted  it  when  she  was  again  put  to  sleej).

But  to  return  to  our  subject,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  production  of  sleep  at
a  distance.

At  one  time,  when  medical  attendant  at  the  theatre  at  Blois,  I  had  to
attend  a  young  actress,  who  was  subject  to  frequent  Protean  exliibitions  of
hysterical  passion.  Laying  aside  purely  medical  considerations,  which  would
involve  me  in  a  fresh  digression,  I  only  extract  from  my  notes  what  concerns
the  special  subject  now  occupying  me.

The  first  time  that  I  was  called  to  Mdlle.  B. ,  I  found  her  seated  on  the


410 Brs.  Diifay  and  Azavi  on  Clairvoyance,  dr.  [Supplement.


carpet,  near  to  a  large  fire,  her  clothes  torn,  and  ready,  so  she  told  me,  to
throw  herself  into  the  grate,  if  I  did  not  succeed  in  subduing  the  fury  that
was  consuming  her.  I  questioned  her  as  to  the  cause  of  this  attack  of  anger  ;
she  maintained  silence  ;  her  jaws  tightly  clenched,  her  eye-balls  convulsively
turned  upwards,  her  limbs  rigid  ;  .  .  .  then  a  sudden  shock  stretched
her  on  the  floor,  from  whence  I  moved  her  on  to  her  bed,  in  a  state  of
tetanic  rigidity  and  general  anaesthesia.

My  hand  had  hardly  been  a  minute  on  her  forehead,  when  the  muscular
contraction  disappeared  :  a  flood  of  tears  and  a  succession  of  deejj  sighs  put
an  end  to  the  scene,  and  the  poor  girl  was  then  able  to  slip  into  her  bed,
making  a  thousand  excuses,  and  assuring  me  of  her  gratitude.  As  to  the
cause  of  her  great  rage,  she  knew  of  none.  She  then  sought  my  hand  and
lifted  it  to  her  forehead,  saying  that  it  gave  her  a  delicious  sensation  of  well-
being  ;  afterwards  she  fell  into  a  drowsy  state,  which  I  allowed  to  last  for
some  hours,  while  one  of  her  companions  watched  her,

I  witnessed  similar  attacks  seven  or  eight  times  during  the  two  months
that  the  company  remained  at  Blois  ;  but  after  my  third  visit  it  was  sufficient
to  command  Mdlle.  B.  to  sleep,  or  even  to  fix  my  eyes  on  hers,  in  order
immediately  to  produce  a  perfect  calm  ;  moreover  the  attacks  became  less  and
less  violent,  and  she  felt  strong  and  refreshed  after  an  hour  of  magnetic  sleep.

I  said  just  now  that  I  had  managed  to  hypnotise  Mdlle.  B.  by  a  word  or
a  look,  but  I  did  not  think  that  without  real  contact  it  could  succeed,  unless
I  was  close  to  her  at  the  time.  Having  always  noticed  that  intelligence  is
much  more  highly  developed  in  the  somnambulic  state,  I  had  sometimes
hypnotised  this  very  indilferent  little  actress  by  merely  telling  her,  just  as
she  was  about  to  make  her  apj^earance  on  the  scene,  that  she  was  going  to
sleep,  which  always  procured  her  a  great  success  with  the  public.  It  is  a
circumstance  of  this  nature  which  introduces  lier  into  my  present  subject.

One  evening  I  arrived  late  at  the  theatre.  The  manager  was  waiting
anxiously  for  me  in  his  oflice  ;  he  had  changed  the  order  of  the  pieces  and  put
the  "Caprice  "  at  the  end  of  the  entertainment,  because  he  had  just  been
informed  by  telegram  that  his  "grande  coquette  "  had  missed  the  train,  which
was  to  have  brought  her  fr(jni  Tours  to  Blois.  But  he  was  relying  on  my
assistance  to  substitute  Mdlle.  B.  without  damaging  the  performance.

"  Does  she  so  much  as  know  her  part  ?  "  I  asked  liim.

"  She  has  seen  it  played  several  times,  but  she  has  not  rehearsed  it."

' '  Have  you  expressed  any  hope  that  I  might  come  to  her  assistance  ?  "

' '  I  took  care  not  to  do  that  :  any  doubt  as  to  her  talents  would  have  been
sufticient  to  have  produced  one  of  her  attacks. "

' '  Very  well,  do  not  let  her  know  I  am  here.  I  will  take  advantage  of  this
opportunity  to  make  a  very  interesting  experiment. "

I  did  not  show  myself  on  the  stage,  but  took  my  place  in  a  close  box  at
the  far  end  of  the  house,  which  happened  to  be  unoccupied,  and  the  grating
closed.  Then,  drawing  myself  together,  I  willed  intently  that  Mdlle.  B.
might  fall  asleep.

It  was  then  half-j^ast  ten.  I  learned  at  the  end  of  the  performance  that
at  this  same  time  the  young  artist,  stojjping  in  the  middle  of  her  toilette,
suddenly  sank  down  on  the  sofa  in  her  room,  begging  the  dresser  to  let  her
rest  a  little.  After  a  few  minutes  of  drowsiness  she  got  up,  finished  dressing


Supplement.]  Brs.  Bufay  and  Azam  on  Clairvoyance,  &c.  411.


herself,  and  went  clown  to  the  stage.  When  the  curtain  rose  I  was  not  very
confident  of  the  success  of  my  experiment,  not  then  knowing  what  had  taken
place  in  the  actress'  dressing-room  ;  but  I  was  not  long  in  satisfying  myself,
merely  by  seeing  tlie  action  and  attitude  of  my  subject.  >She  had  retained
in  her  memory  this  part  which  she  had  not  learnt,  but  had  only  seen  played,
and  acquitted  herself  marvellously.  There  was,  however,  another  suggestion
that  I  must  unconsciously  have  given  her,  when  mentally  ordering  her  to
play  tlie  comedy,  and  that  was  to  put  herself  cn  rapport  with  the  other
characters  in  the  piece,  since  without  that  somnambulists  only  see  and  hear
the  person  who  has  put  them  to  sleep.  However  that  may  be,  I  was  obliged
to  awaken  Mdlle.  B.  in  order  that  she  might  take  part  in  the  supper  which
was  given  by  the  delighted  manager.  ^

She  then  remembered  having  thrown  herself  on  the  sofa,  just  as  she  had
put  on  one  of  her  gloves,  and,  finding  herself  seated  there  again,  she  imagined
that  we  had  come  to  tell  her  that  the  curtain  was  rising  for  the  "  Caprice."
It  was  only  on  seeing  her  companions  surrounding  her,  and  congratulating
her  on  her  progress,  that  she  understood  what  had  taken  place,  and  thanked
me  with  a  glance.^

If  it  be  objected  that  she  liad  expected  my  arrival,  then  suspected  my
presence,  or,at  least,my  influence  which  had  been  so  favourable  to  her  talent
on  other  occasions,  and  that  self-suggestion  had  even  in  this  case  produced
somnambulism — I  have  no  reply  to  make.

*  *  *  *  *

Among  my  other  patients,  to  whom  induced  somnambulism  brought
undeniable  relief,  there  is  one  whose  history  fitly  finds  a  place  here.

Madame  C.  was  35  years  of  age,  of  a  nervous  temperament,  and  slightly
rheumatic.  For  some  time  she  had  been  subject  to  periodical  attacks  of
headache  and  sickness,  which  the  usual  remedies  had  failed  to  relieve.
Under  these  circumstances,  I  did  not  hesitate  to  try  the  effect  of  magnetism
on  my  first  visit  to  her.  At  the  end  of  five  minutes  the  pain  passed
ofl"  and  the  sickness  ceased,  and  on  every  subsequent  occasion  the  same
thing  took  place. If  my  arrival  was  delayed,  the  troubles  continued  ;  but

1  All  those  whom  I  have  seen  in  the  somnambulic  state,  whether  spontaneous  or
induced,  were  unable  to  perform  the  movements  of  deghitition.  If  this  is  a  general
rule,  it  has  at  least  one  exception,  because  Dr.  Azam's  F^lida  would  not  pass  months
in  her  "situation  seconde  "  without  taking  nourishment.

Had  I  then  known  of  the  possibility  of  suggestion,  it  is  probable  that  I  might  have
enabled  my  jjatients  to  eat.  It  ought  to  be  as  easy  to  put  an  end  to  a  pharyngeal
ansesthesia,  as  to  cause,  as  has  been  done,  the  appearance  of  bleeding  stigmata  and
of  blisters  on  tlie  skin.

-  With  respect  to  the  forgetfulness  of  what  had  taken  place  during  an  attack  of
somnambulism,  I  have  published  in  the  JRcvue  Scicntijiquc  of  December  1st,  1883,  the
case  of  a  young  servant  girl,  who,  thinking  that  her  mistress'  jewels  were  not  safe  in
the  drawer  where  she  had  put  them,  hid  them  in  another  piece  of  furnitiire,  wlieie
they  seemed  to  her  to  be  safer.  Accused  of  having  stolen  them,  and  despite  her  denials
(which  were  quite  sincere),  she  was  put  in  prison.  One  day,  in  paying  a  professional
visit  at  the  prison,  I  recognised  her,  having  seen  her  serving  at  the  house  of  one  of  my
colleagues.  Knowing  her  to  bo  somnambulic,  I  put  her  to  sleep,  and  she  then  related
to  me  what  she  had  done,  and  was  much  distressed  at  having  no  recollection  of  it  when
awake.  I  made  her  repeat  her  declaration  before  the  examining  magistrate,  who,  after
verification,  had  her  set  at  liberty.  _  .


412 Brs.  Bufay  and  Azam  on  Clairvoyance,  &c.  [Supplement


hardly  had  I  pulled  the  bell,  and  before  the  door  was  opened,  Madame  C.
fell  into  a  calm  sleep.  It  was  quite  a  different  thing  if  anyone  else  rang  the
bell,  for  then  the  invalid  complained  bitterly  of  the  noise  that  was  splitting
her  head.

Later  on  she  eveia  felt  my  ajiproach  from  the  further  end  of  the  street  :
"  Ah  !  what  happiness  !  "  she  would  say,  "  here  is  the  doctor  coming,  I  feel
myself  cured  !  "  and  Monsieur  C.  would  open  the  window  to  make  certain  of
it,  and  would  see  me  in  the  distance.  And  his  wife  never  made  a  mistake.
Sometimes  he  would  try  to  encourage  her  by  telling  her  that  he  saw  me
coming,  but  she  knew  that  this  was  not  true,  and  the  sickness  continued.

In  a  case  of  this  sort,  how  could  I  hesitate  to  make  an  attempt  at
influencing  lier  from  a  distance  ?  Moreover  I  was  driven  to  it  by  circumstances.
At  the  height  of  an  attack.  Monsieur  C. ,  who  had  already  been  twice  to
fetch  me,  discovered  where  I  was  to  be  found.  Being  with  a  patient  whom
I  could  not  leave  for  several  hours,  I  assured  Monsieur  C,  without  being  at
all  certain  of  it  myself,  that  his  wife  would  be  asleep  and  cured  when  he
got  home  again.  I  had  the  satisfaction  of  verifying  this  three  hours  later,
when  I  ordered  a  profound  sleep  to  last  till  the  following  day,  which  repaired
the  fatigues  of  the  morning.  "Thus  the  possibility  of  magnetising  at  a
distance  is  not  to  be  doubted,"  say  my  notes.  But  now-a-days  the
objection  of  self-suggestion  presents  itself  :  I  was  expected  ;  Monsieur  C.  had
promised  to  bring  me  with  him.

Am  I  going  to  find  a  more  convincing  examj^le  ?  Yes,  certainly.  It
was  however  an  act  of  simple  curiosity  without  any  therapeutic  aim.
Madame  C.  was  in  fierfect  health,  but  her  name  hajjijening  to  be  mentioned
in  my  hearing,  the  idea  struck  me  that  I  would  mentally  order  her  to  sleep,
without  her  wishing  it  this  time,  and  also  without  her  suspecting  it.  Then,
an  hour  later,  I  went  to  her  house  and  asked  the  servant  who  opened  the
door,  whether  an  instrument,  which  I  had  mislaid  out  of  my  case,  had  been
found  in  Madame  C.  's  room.

"  Is  not  that  the  doctor's  voice  that  I  hear  ?  "  asked  Monsieur  C.
from  the  top  of  the  staircase  ;  "  beg  him  to  come  up.  Just  imagine,"  he
said  to  me,  "  I  was  going  to  send  for  you.  Nearly  an  hour  ago  my  wife
lost  consciousness,  and  her  mother  and  I  have  not  been  able  to  bring
her  to  her  senses.  Her  mother,  who  wished  to  take  her  into  the  country,
is  distracted. .  .

I  did  not  dare  to  confess  myself  guilty  of  this  catastrophe,  but  was
betrayed  by  Madame  C,  who  gave  me  her  hand  saying,  "You  did  well  to
j)ut  me  to  sleep.  Doctor,  because  I  was  going  to  allow  myself  to  be  taken
away,  and  then  I  should  not  have  been  able  to  finish  my  embroidery."

"  You  have  another  piece  of  embroidery  in  hand  ?  "

"Yes  :  a  mantle-border  .  .  .  for  your  birthday.  You  must  not
look  as  though  you  knew  about  it,  when  I  am  awake,  because  I  want  to  give
you  a  surprise."

"  Make  yourself  easy  as  to  that,  you  will  see  me  just  as  surprised  as
grateful  the  day  when  you  make  me  this  valuable  present.  But  why  do  you
mention  it  to  me  now  ?  "

"  Because  you  ought  to  know  why  I  am  pleased  at  not  being  able  to  go
away."


Supplement.]  Di's.  Dufctij  and  Azcim  on  Clairvoyance,  &c.  413


I  then  explained  to  the  husband  and  the  mother  that  I  had  allowed  myself
to  make  an  experiment,  and  it  was  settled  amongst  us  that  Madame  C.
should  not  be  told  of  it.  I  then  woke  her  as  usual  by  means  of  passes  from
within  outwards  in  front  of  her  eyes,  and  she  was  told  that  she  had  fallen
asleep  after  lunch,  while  reading  the  newspaper,  which  did  not  astonisli  her
at  all.

This  truly  appears  to  me  to  be  sleep  produced  at  a  distance  and  without
the  knowledge  of  the  subject.  But  what  is  one  to  understand  by  the  word
distance  ?  A  metre,  five  or  six  metres,  a  half  or  a  whole  kilometre  'I  Up  to
the  present  time,  these  are  the  distances  from  which  I  have  operated  on
Madame  A.,  Mdlle.  B.,  and  Madame  C.i

I  repeated  the  experiment  many  times  with  the  last  mentioned  subject,  and
always  with  success,  which  was  a  great  help  to  me  when  unable  to  go  to  her
at  once  when  sent  for.  I  even  completed  the  experiment  by  also  waking  her
from  a  distance,  solely  by  an  act  of  volition,  which  formerly  I  should  not
have  believed  possible.  The  agreement  in  time  was  so  perfect  that  no  doubt
could  be  entertained.-

To  conclude,  I  was  about  to  take  a  lioliday  of  six  weeks,  and  should  thus
be  absent  when  one  of  the  attacks  was  due.  So  it  was  settled  between  M.  C.
and  myself  tliat,  as  soon  as  the  headache  began,  he  should  let  me  know  by
telegraph  ;  that  I  should  then  do  from  afar  oif  what  succeeded  so  well  near
at  hand  ;  that  after  five  or  six  hours  I  should  endeavour  to  awaken  the
patient ;  and  that  M.  C.  should  let  me  know  by  means  of  a  second  telegram
whether  the  result  had  been  satisfactory.  He  had  no  doubt  about  it  ;  I  was
less  certain. Madame  C.  did  not  know  that  I  "was  going  away.

The  sound  of  meanings  one  morning  announced  to  M.  C.  that  the
moment  had  come  ;  without  entering  his  wife's  room  he  ran  to  the  telegraph
ofiice,  and  I  received  his  message  at  10  o'clock.  He  returned  home  again  at
that  same  hour,  and  found  his  wife  asleep  and  not  suffering  any  more.  At  four
o'clock  I  willed  that  she  should  wake,  and  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening  I
received  a  second  telegram;  "  Satisfactory  result,  woke  at  four  o'clock.
Thanks."

And  I  was  tlien  in  the  neighbourhood  of  SuUy-sur-Loire,  28  leagues — 112
kilometres — from  Blois.

Is  all  this  possible  ?  Certainly  not,  if  one  refuses  to  admit  as  possible
what  one  cannot  explain.  It  was  this  explanation  that  I  was  waiting  for
before  publishing  my  observations,  which  were  written  from  day  tu  day
without  any  fixed  object  ;  but  I  could  not  resist  M.  Richet's  invitation,  and
yielded  to  it  without,  however,  having  any  pretensions  to  ofiering  a,n
important  contribution  to  modern  psycho-physiological  science.

It  may  be  objected,  specially  in  my  last  ubservation,  that  I  had  been

1  Dr.  Gibert  has  produced  sleep  at  a  distance  in  a  subject  who  was  not  forewarned,
from  one  end  of  the  room  to  the  other,  and  finally  from  Graville  to  Havre,  a  distance
of  two  kilometres.  Dr.  Hericourt  has  several  times  produced  sleep  from  one  house
to  another  at  a  greater  or  less  distance— always  without  the  knowledge  of  the
subject. [See  Rcvuc  Philosophiquc,  February,  18SC  ]

-  M.  Ch.  Richet,  when  house  surgeon  at  Beaujon,  put  one  of  his  patients  to  sleep
from  a  distance,  and  also  awakened  her,  without  seeing  her,  and  without  being  seen  by
her  ;  moreover  he  mentally  suggested  an  action,  which  she  performed.


414 Drs.  Dafay  and  Azam  on  Clairvoyance,  c&c.  [Supplement.


the  victim  of  a  deception  ;  that  M.  C.  had  played  upon  my  credulity  by
announcing  to  me  that  things  had  taken  place  in  the  way  tliat  I  had  almost
predicted.  To  this  I  slKjuld  reply,  that  my  credulity  is  far  from  being  excessive;
that  M.  C.  Avas  an  earnest  man,  incapable  of  the  idea  of  deception,  and  too
anxious  about  his  wife's  health  not  to  have  begged  me  to  come  at  once  to  her
aid — as  had  been  arranged  before  my  departure — if  the  symptoms,  which  so
greatly  terrified  him,  had  continued  after  the  time  which  he  considered
necessary  for  me  to  receive  his  first  telegram.

I  had  no  doubt  as  to  tlie  reality  of  action  at  a  (perhaps  unlimited)  distance,
wlien  I  observed  this  case,  about  25  years  ago.  But  now,  so  much  am  I
struck  by  tlie  improbability  of  tlie  story,  that  I  am  more  ready  to  admit  that
Madame  C,  at  tlie  moment  when  the  pain  and  sickness  commenced,  thought
that  her  husband  had  heard  her  moans  and  had  hurried  to  secure  my  assist-
ance, since  she  was  vniaware  of  my  absence  ;  tliat  her  conviction  that  I
should  give  her  relief  as  usual  had  sufficed  to  produce  sleep  by  self-suggestion,
and  that  the  waking  had  taken  place  under  the  same  influence,  after  a  lapse
of  time  sensibly  equivalent  to  that  during  which  I  usually  caused  her  to  sleep.
The  agreement  in  time  would  be  a  simple  coincidence,  explicable,  moreover,
on  the  above  hypothesis,  and  by  the  time  of  despatching  the  first  telegram,
without  any  certain  relation  of  cause  and  eflect.  I  regret  not  having  repeated
the  exjjeriment  in  a  modified  form,  that  is  to  say,  by  making  Madame  C.
believe  that  I  was  away  and  could  not  be  informed  of  her  illness.

However  that  may  be,  can  these  facts,  as  well  as  many  others  not  less  well
authenticated,  justify  a  belief  in  the  reality  of  knowledge  not  acquired  by
study,  or,  to  be  more  specific,  can  a  jjerson  in  the  somnambulic  state,  for
example,  make  a  medical  diagnosis,  and  give  therapeutical  advice  based  on
this  diagnosis  1  Certainly  not,  if  he  has  not  studied  medicine.  The  somnam-
bulic state  develops  the  cerebral  faculties — probably  by  withdrawing  all
distraction,  internal  and  external — but  it  does  not  create  them.

The  magnetised  or  hypnotised  subject  invents  nothing.  If  he  is  questioned,
it  can  be  shown  that  he  remembers  better  than  when  in  the  normal  state
what  he  has  previously  seen,  heard,  studied,  and  felt  ;  that  his  impressions
are  keener  and  more  frankly  set  forth.  His  superiority  consists  in  tlie
exalted  condition  of  liis  memory.  The  same  applies  to  natural  somnambulism.  ^

But  tlie  natural  somnambulist,  like  the  insane  person,  has  sjiontaneous
illusions  and  hallucinations,  while  in  the  hypnotised  subject  they  have  to  be
suggested.  In  natural  somnamljulism  imagination  plays  the  principal  j^art  ;
it  is  a  dream  in  action.  The  liypnotised  person  is  an  automaton,  entirely
passive  ;  while  the  somnambulist  is  inspired  by  his  own  imagination,  without
the  need  of  an  external  influence,  but  is  also  in  danger  of  following  it.
This  is  the  distinguishing  diagnosis  that  my  observations  permit  me  to  make.

Now,  what  is  the  action  of  tlie  various  processes  by  means  of  which  the
somnamlnilic  or  hypnotic  state  is  brought  about  'I  Is  it  nervous  radiation,
electro-magnetic  influence,  an  eflect  of  polarisation  ?  Do  these  different
causes  constitute  a  single  one  1 Perhaps  the  future  may  learn  this.  But

J  Mdlle.  R.  L.  tlius  expresses  this  fact,  Rjieaking  of  herself  as  two  persons,  and
in  the  negro  speech  that  is  habitual  with  her  in  the  somnambulic  state:  "  I  do  not
understand  wliy  tlie  fiUc  hctc  (that  is  to  say,  she  herself  in  the  noriual  state)  does
not  remember  that ;  me  knows  it  well,  me  is  perfectly  sure  of  it."


Supplement.]  Drs.  Dufaij  and  Azam  on  Clairvoyance,  dr.  415


for  these  cases  of  influence  at  a  distance,  exercised  without  the  know-
ledge of  the  subject,  what  is  the  conductor  that  links  the  agent  to  the
percipient  ?  How  does  this  influence  reach  the  person  aimed  at  and  no
other  ? It  is  doubtful  wliether  this  problem  will  ever  be  solved.

I  have  confined  myself  to  the  statement  of  facts,  leaving  of  necessity  their
theoretical  explanation  to  the  jirogressive  evolution  of  science.  The  serious
consequences  that  follow,  from  both  the  philosophic  and  legal  point  of  view,
will  not  escape  anyone,  especially  if  suggestions  fulfilled  after  a  lapse  of  time
be  taken  into  consideration, — but  with  these  I  have  not  had  to  concern
myself  here.

Dr.  Dufay.

Blois,  May,  1888.

II.

After  reading  the  Reoue  Philosopluque,  of  September  1st,  1888,  which
included  the  above  communication,  Dr.  Azam  wrote  to  Dr.  Dufay  : —

I  myself,  and  I  believe  many  otlier  medical  men,  have  observed  cases
of  this  or  of  a  similar  nature.  I  will  quote  two,  in  which  I  think  I  took
all  necessary  precautions  before  being  convinced  of  their  truth.

1st.  About  1853  or  1854,  I  had  under  my  care  a  young  woman  with
confirmed  hysteria  :  nothing  was  easier  than  to  put  her  to  sleep  by  various
means.  I  consider  myself  entitled  to  state  that,  while  holding  her  hand,  my
unspoken  tlioughts  were  transferred  to  her,  but  upon  this  I  do  not  insist,
error  and  fraud  being  possible.

But  the  transmission  of  a  definite  sensation  seemed  to  me  to  be  absolutely
certain.  This  is  how  I  proceeded  :  Having  put  the  patient  to  sleep,  and
seated  myself  by  her  side,  I  leaned  towards  her  and  dropped  my  handkerchief
behind  her  chair  ;  then  while  stooping  to  lift  it  up,  I  quickly  put  into  my
moutli  a  pinch  of  common  salt,  which, unknown  to  her,  I  had  beforehand  put
into  the  right-hand  pocket  of  my  waistcoat.  The  salt  being  absolutely  without
smell,  it  was  impossible  that  the  patient  should  have  known  that  I  had  some
in  my  mouth  ;  but  as  soon  as  I  raised  myself  again  I  saw  her  face  express
disgust,  and  she  moved  her  lips  about.  "  That  is  very  nasty,"  she  said  ;
"  why  did  you  put  salt  into  my  mouth  ?  "  ^

I  have  repeated  this  experiment  several  times  with  other  inodorous
substances,  and  it  has  always  succeeded.  I  rejjort  this  fact  alone  because  it
seems  to  me  to  be  certain.  It  thus  follows  that  under  certain  circumstances,
by  the  intervention  of  the  hand,  the  transmission  of  a  definite  sensation  can
take  place  between  the  operator  and  the  subject  in  the  hypnotic  trance.  Not
at  a  distance,  and  solely  by  the  force  of  the  will,  as  in  the  cases  you  report,
but  very  nearly  so.

2nd.  One  day,  about  1878  or  1879,  my  old  friends  Dr.  Mesnet,  a  celebrated
physician  and  member  of  the  "  Academic  de  Medecine,"  in  Paris,  and  the
Dr.  M.  whose  keen  intellect  and  knowledge  constitute  him  an  authority  on
forensic  medicine,  showed  me  some  experiments  in  the  garden  of  their
private  asylum,  which  impressed  me  most  vividly  ;  one  of  them  has
especially  remained  in  my  memory.

1  Wliat  would  have  been  the  restilt  if  the  operator  had  mentally  willed  the  subject
to  experience  a  sweet  taste  ? — (Dr.  D.)


416  I)rs.  Dufay  and  Azam  on  Clairvoyance,  d'C.  [Supplement.


Tlie  subject  was  a  young  workman,  who  had  already  suffered  from  attacks
of  spuntaneous  somnambulism.  Having  been  put  into  the  somnambulic
state  by  M.  Mesnet,  several  experiments  were  made,  but  one  alone  is
sufficiently  clear  in  my  memory  to  allow  of  my  reporting  it.

We  experimented  in  a  i^avilion  at  the  bottom  of  a  large  garden  with  many
avenues  of  trees.  We  had  previously  arranged  among  ourselves,  and  quite
unknown  to  the  young  man,  that  we  would  make  him  walk  about  the  garden,
and  that  at  a  certain  point  in  one  of  the  avenues  (which  point  we  had  noted
by  the  position  of  some  fallen  leaves),  the  subject,  freely  strolling  about,
should  be  stopped  by  an  imaginary  and  impassable  obstacle.  M.  Mesnet,
who  alone  was  in  communication  with  him,  was  mentally,  and  at  a  distance,
to  impress  this  command  upon  him.

All  took  place  as  had  been  arranged  :  called  by  M.  Mesnet,  the  young
man  followed  tlie  chosen  path,  and  was  suddenly  arrested  as  though  by  a
wall.  M.  Mesnet  continuing  to  call,  the  face  of  the  subject  assumed  an
expression  of  anguish  and  of  rage  :  "I  cannot, — I  cannot  pass,"  he  said  in
a  hopeless  manner.

I  know,  my  dear  colleague,  that  enthusiasts  in  the  question  of  magnetism
or  hyjjnotisni  would  see  nothing  in  this  case  but  what  was  most  ordinary  ;
for  me  it  is  important,  because  the  23i'ecautions  taken,  the  good  faith  and
■competence  of  the  witnesses,  and  the  purely  scientific  aim  pursued,  abso-
lutely preclude  the  notion  of  illusion  or  deception.  My  colleagues  and  I,  all
three  familiar  with  hysterical  patients,  know  how  to  suspect  and  mistrust,
and  in  questions  of  the  sort  incline  rather  to  stop  short  of  the  truth  than  to
^o  beyond  it.

It  is  thus  possible,  according  to  the  preceding  statements,  that  a  person
in  a  condition  of  induced  somnambulism  may  perceive  a  definite  sensation,
ielt  by  the  operator,  and  only  communicated  to  him  by  thought.  It  is  also
possible  to  obey  a  definite  order  so  impressed  upon  him  from  a  distance,  as
we  have  just  seen.

I  will  not  here  lay  before  you  all  the  reflections  that  occur  to  me  on  the
subject  ;  a  letter  is  hardly  the  place  to  do  this  ;  but  I  cannot  resist  com-
paring these  facts  with  those  which  you  report.

Communication  at  a  distance  between  two  individuals,  without  the  em-
l)loyment  of  tlie  usual  means,  is  a  point  they  possess  in  common  ;  but  in
those  which  you  report  the  distance  is  greater,  and  there  is  no  known
medium  of  communication.  In  fact,  on  this  matter  of  distance  hangs  the
whole  question,  and  this  implies  the  supj)Osition  of  a  special  force.  I  am  told
that  this  is  the  "  force  neurique  " — give  it  what  name  you  please,  it  is  none
the  less  certain  that  it  exists.

Extraordinary  as  it  may  be,  it  has  its  analogues,  which  we  cannot  explain
any  better.  The  principal  analogue  is  the  magnet  ;  it  acts  at  a  distance
across  media  which  stop  many  other  forces  ;  the  magnetised  needle,  drawn
by  a  power  which  is  enormous,  though  inaccessible  to  our  senses,  always
turns  in  the  same  direction,  and  its  inclination  and  declination  indicate  a
gigantic  centre  of  attraction.

Can  we  explain  these  phenomena  ?  By  no  means  ;  not  any  better,  I
repeat,  than  we  are  able  to  explain  tlie  facts  tliat  I  report.  But  is  this  saying
that  a  time  may  not  come  when  these  questions  will  be  fathomed  ? For  my


Supplement.]  X'r.s.  Dufay  and  Azam  on  Clairvoyance,  &c.  417


part,  I  believe  that  such  a  time  will  come,  but  that  we  shall  not  see  it. —
Dr.  Azam.

*****

No  one  (continues  Dr.  Dufay)  will  discredit  the  observations  of  my
honourable  colleague  of  Bordeaux.  Those  who  are  acquainted  with  the
history  of  magnetism  and  induced  somnambulism,  and  are  conversant  with
modern  progress,  will  scarcely  be  astonished  at  them.  Will  those  which  I  am
about  to  relate  be  received  with  the  same  amount  of  confidence  ?  I  may  say
at  once  that  the  contrary  will  neither  astonish  nor  pain  me,  because  vmless
I  had  seen — seen  with  my  own  eyes— I  do  not  know  whether  I  should  have
believed  or  not.

Before  entering  into  the  subject  it  would  perhaps  be  as  well  for  me  to
mention  an  episode  which  might  serve  to  show  how  little  I  am  inclined
towards  credulity. Here  it  is  in  a  few  lines  : —

Before  quitting  Paris  in  1845,  I  had  the  curiosity  to  consult  several
so-called  "lucid"  somnambulists,  who  at  that  time  were  enjoying  a  great
reputation.  I  kept  a  monkey  in  my  room  in  those  days,  who  permitted  me  t&
cut  off  a  lock  of  hair  from  underneath  his  body,  and  Seemed  to  observe  with
great  interest  the  care  I  took  to  enclose  this  small  portion  of  his  person  in  a
double  envelope,  questioning  me  meanwhile  with  an  anxious  look.

The  first  expert  to  whom  I  submitted  my  little  packet,  turned  it  well
over  between  her  fingers,  handled  it  in  evei'y  possible  way,  and  then
remarked  to  me — not  without  due  consideration  for  my  feelings — that  my
good  grandmother,  to  whom  this  lock  of  hair  belonged,  suffered  from  cancer
of  the  liver,  a  very  serious  malady,  but  which  could  nevertheless  be  cured,  if
the  treatment  about  to  be  ordered  were  adhered  to.  I  preserved  my  gravity
while  the  "  Barnum  "  wrote  out  at  the  lady's  dictation  a  prescription  too
stupid  to  be  preserved.

For  another  "  extra-lucid  "  somnambulist,  my  packet  contained  a  lock  of
hair, ' '  cut  from  the  head  of  one  who  was  dear  to  me,  but  in  whom  I  ought  to
place  no  confidence."  It  was  the  same  thing  with  a  third,  who  gave  me  an
anatomical  description  of  the  diseased  organs  of  the  person  to  whom  the  hair
belonged,  quite  unsurpassably  fantastic.

I  was  thus  ill  prepared  to  swallow  the  hocus  pocus  of  "  extra-lucid  "  artists.

Only  one  of  the  somnambulists  whom  I  have  observed,  was  endowed
with  mental  vision  ;  this  was  the  servant  of  my  colleague  M.  Girault,  of
Onzain  (Loir  et  Cher),  the  story  of  whose  misfortune  in  being  unjustly  accused
and  imprisoned  for  theft,  I  have  already  related.  In  a  state  of  spontaneous
somnambulism  she  had  changed  the  jjlace  of  some  jewels  belonging  to  her
mistress, in  order  more  effectually  to  secure  them  from  the  danger  of  thieves, —
a  precautionary  measure  of  which  she  had  no  recollection  in  her  waking  state.

Dr.  Girault  had  several  times  shown  me  most  interesting  experiments
with  this  girl,  whom  he  magnetised  nearly  every  day.  When  he  was
summoned  into  the  country,  he  put  Marie  to  sleep  and  questioned  her  as  to
the  state  of  the  invalid  he  was  about  to  visit  ;  and  by  this  means,  he  said,
he  knew  positively — we  will  only  say  approximately — what  drugs  he
ought  to  take  with  him.  I  hasten  to  add  that  I  have  never  been  able  to
verify  Marie's  clairvoyance  in  her  diagnoses  either  at  a  distance  or  near  at.
hand  :  but  what  I  have  myself  seen  I  will  now  relate.


418  Drs.  Dufay  and  Azani  on  Clairvoyance,  dr.  [Supplement.


On  the  15th  of  June,  1855,  I  was  paymg  a  visit  in 'the  neighbourhood  of
Onzain,  (at  Varenne,  16  kilometres  from  Blois),  staying  with  a  client  of
mine,  whose  daughter  was  about  to  be  married.  We  had  been  talking  of
M.  Girault's  Egeria,  when  all  at  once  Mdlle.  de  S.,  a  charming  creolo  from
the  Island  of  Reunion,  seized  me  by  the  hands,  and  led  me  into  a  corner  of
the  room,  begging  me  to  fetch  the  famous  somnambulist,  as  she  had  the
greatest  desire  to  question  her  as  to  the  real  character  of  her  future  husband.
As  was  natural,  I  complied  with  this  childish  fancy,  and,  an  hour  later,
returned  with  Dr.  Girault  and  his  servant.

Put  to  sleep  by  a  few  passes,  Marie  was  placed  en  rapport  with  Mdlle.
de  S.,  those  present  discreetly  keeping  at  a  distance,  as  the  young  enquirer
wished  to  be  the  only  recipient  of  the  revelations  of  the  Pythoness.

For  my  part,  I  did  not  attach  any  great  scientific  interest  to  the  very
animated  colhnj^uy  taking  place,  being  doubtful  of  the  reality  of  the
phenomena,  and  suspecting  Marie  of  playing  an  amiable  part  before  Mdlle.
de  S.  by  drawing  the  most  enchanting  portrait  of  the  absent  one.  She
(Mdlle.  de  S.)  was  in  fact  in  a  state  of  rajiture,  stamping  her  feet,  clapping
her  hands,  and  laughing  gaily. .  .

Then  with  lightning  rapidity,  the  comedy  changed  to  tragedy  ;  the  poor
somnambulist  panted  and  breathed  with  difficulty,  tears  flowed,  a  cold
perspiration  moistened  her  brow,  and  she  called  on  Dr.  Girault  for
assistance.

"  What  is  the  matter,  Marie  ?  .  . . What  are  you  suffering  from  ?"
"Ah  ! Sir. . .  Ah  ! Sir  .  .  . how  terrible  ! he  is  dead  !  "
"  Who  is  dead  1 Is  it  one  of  my  patients  'I  "

"  The  son  of  Limoges,  the  rope-maker  .  .  .  you  know  ...  in  the
Crimea  ...  he  has  just  died. Poor  folks  I Poor  folks  !  "

"  Come,  come,  my  child,  be  calm,  doubtless  you  have  had  a  dream,  a  bad
dream."

"  A  dream  !  .  .  .  But  I  am  not  asleep,"  (such  is  the  assurance  of  all
somnambulists).  "  I  see  him  ...  he  has  just  drawn  his  last  breath.
Poor  boy  ! Look  at  him."

And  she  turned  her  eyes  to  a  part  of  the  room  which  she  also  indicated
with  her  hand.  She  wanted  to  run  away,  but  she  had  hardly  risen  from  her
chair  when  she  fell  back  ;  her  legs  were  unable  to  carry  her.

It  was  a  long  time  before  she  was  calmed,  and  when  M.  Girault  had
awakened  her  she  was  still  suffering  from  great  discomfort,  which  she
attributed  to  an  indigestion,  having  no  recollection  of  wliat  had  taken  place.

What  had  caused  her  all  at  once  to  think  of  the  young  soldier  ?  It  was
known  in  the  village  that  the  father  was  anxious, — not  having  received
news  of  his  son.  Was  she  concerned  about  it  through  sympathy  with  the
family,  or  in  consequence  of  a  tenderer  feeling  which  the  idea  of  Mdlle.  de
S.'s  marriage  may  have  awakened  in  her  at  this  moment  1

However  this  may  have  been,  some  time  after  Limoges  received  the  news
of  the  death  of  his  son,  which  liad  taken  place  at  Dalmate  (is  this  the  name
of  a  French  ambulance  ?)  near  to  Constantinople  on  the  15th  of  June  1855 —
that  is  to  say  the  very  day  that  Marie  had  her  vision.

This  reminds  one  of  an  account  by  Gregory  of  Tours,  according  to  whom
Saint  Ambrose  having  fallen  asleeji  while  saying  mass  in  the  Cathedral  at


Supplement.]  Dvs.  Dufay  and  Azam  on  Clairvoyance,  &c.  419


Milan,  dreamt  that  Saint  Martin  had  just  died  at  Tours,  which  did  take
place  exactly  on  that  day  and  at  the  time  of  mass.

.  *  *  *  *

Some  time  after  I  received  a  visit  from  Dr.  Girault,  who  had  been
speaking  to  me  of  his  relative  Madame  D.,  then  under  my  care.  He  had
just  seen  her,  had  found  her  convalescent  and  recommended  some  amusement.
Madame  D.,  however,  was  still  unable  to  leave  her  chair.  "  There  is  only  one
thing  that  could  amuse  me,"  she  said  to  him,  "and  that  is  that  you  should
bring  your  somnambulist  here,  and  show  me  some  of  the  incredible
phenomena  that  you  are  always  telling  me  of,  and  which  I  never  see.  I
shall  invite  some  friends  just  as  incredulous  as  I  am,  I  warn  you."

In  order  that  there  should  be  no  suspicion  of  a  pre-arranged  scene
between  him  and  his  servant.  Dr.  Girault  had  promised  to  get  me  to  arrange
the  programme  of  the  seance — the  wrapping  up,  for  instance,  of  certain
packets  so  as  to  disguise  the  nature  of  their  contents,  which  contents  Dr.
Girault  himself  was  not  to  know.  These  little  packets  were  to  be  given  to
the  somnambulist,  who  was  to  find  out  what  was  inside  them.  Thus  the
matter  was  settled  and  the  day  iixed.

I  had  already  put  aside  for  the  purpose  a  few  objects,  not  of  common
use,  in  order  that  chance  should  not  too  greatly  assist  our  clairvoyante,
when  I  received  a  letter  from  Algiers,  from  the  commander  of  an  infantry
battalion,  whom  I  had  known  in  the  garrison  at  Blois.  He  related  to  me
several  episodes  of  his  life  in  the  desert,  and  especially  spoke  of  his  health,
which  had  been  very  much  tried.  He  had  been  sleeping  under  canvas
during  the  rains,  and  this  had  resulted  in  violent  dysentery,  both  in  his  case
and  in  that  of  the  majority  of  his  comrades.

I  placed  this  letter  in  an  envelope  without  address  or  post-mark,  and
carefully  stuck  down  the  edges  :  then  I  put  the  whole  thing  into  a  second
envelope  of  a  dark  colour,  and  closed  it  in  like  manner.

On  the  day  appointed  I  arrived  a  little  late  at  Madame  D's.  Marie  was
already  asleep,  and  was  thus  unaware  of  my  presence,  merely  knowing  that  I
was  to  be  there.  The  ten  or  twelve  people  assembled  in  the  room  were  simply
stupefied  by  what  they  had  just  seen  ;  the  somnambulist  having  correctly
discerned  the  contents  of  several  packets,  which  they  had  prepared  in  the  way
that  I  had  prepared  mine.  But  I  left  my  own  in  my  pocket,  so  as  to  avoid
monotony  in  the  experiments,  only  slipping  my  letter  into  the  hand  of  a
lady  present,  and  intimating  by  a  sign  that  it  was  to  be  passed  on  to  Dr.
Girault.  He  received  it  without  knowing  that  it  came  from  me,  and  placed
it  between  Marie's  hands.

I  did  not  notice  whether  her  eyes  were  open  or  shut,  but,  as  will  be
readily  understood,  that  is  a  matter  of  no  importance  in  such  a  case.

"  What  have  you  got  in  your  hand  'I "  asked  Dr.  Girault.

"  A.  letter."

"  To  whom  is  it  addressed  ?  "
"To  M.  Dufay."
"By  whom?"

"A  military  gentleman  whom  I  do  not  know."

"And  what  does  this  military  gentleman  speak  of  in  his  letter  ?  "

"He  is  ill. He  speaks  of  his  illness."


420  Drs.  Dufay  and  Azam  on  Clairvoyance,  &c.  [Supplement.


"Is  it  an  illness  that  you  can  name  ?  "

"  Oh  !  yes,  very  well  .  .  .  it  is  like  the  old  woodcutter's  of  Mesland,
which  has  not  yet  been  stopped."

' '  Very  well,  I  understand,  dysentery.  Now  listen,  Marie.  I  think  it
would  give  great  pleasure  to  M.  Dufay  if  you  were  to  go  and  see  his  friend,
the  officer,  so  as  to  bring  him  reliable  information."

"  Oh  1  it  is  too  far  . . .  it  would  be  a  long  voyage."

"Well,  but  start  without  losing  time. We  are  waiting  for  you."

(After  a  long  silence  :)  "  I  cannot  get  on  .  .  .  there  is  water,  a  lot  of
water."

"And  you  do  not  see  any  bridge  ?  "
"  There  certainly  is  no  bridge."

' '  But  perhaps  there  is  a  boat  to  go  across  in,  as  between  Onzain  and
Chaumont  ? " (The  bridge  at  Chaumont  on  the  Loire  was  not  then  built.)

"Boats  . . .  yea  ;  but  this  Loire  frightens  me, — a  regular  inundation."

"Come,  come,  take  courage  and  embark."  (I'Ong  silence  ;  agitation;
pallor  ;  some  nausea). "  Have  you  nearly  arrived  ?  "

"  I  am  arriving,  but  have  been  very  much  fatigued,  and  I  do  not  see
anyone  on  the  shore. "

"  Land  and  go  on  :  you  will  find  some  one  at  last."

"  There,  there  ...  I  see  peojjle  .  .  .  nothing  but  women  in  white.
But  no,  on  the  contrary,  they  all  have  beards."

"Very  well.  Go  to  them  and  ask  them  where  you  will  find  the  military
gentleman."

(After  a  silence)  "  They  do  not  speak  as  we  do  ;  I  have  been  obliged  to
wait  while  they  called  a  little  boy  with  a  red  cap,  by  whom  I  was  able  to
make  myself  understood.  He  took  me  on  himself,  and  slowly,  because  we
were  walking  in  sand. "

"  And  the  gentleman  ?  "

' '  There  he  is. He  has  on  red  trousers  and  an  officer's  cap.  But  he  looks
very  ill  and  is  so  thin  !  It  is  sad  that  he  has  not  had  any  of  your  medicine."'
"  Has  he  told  you  what  caused  his  illness  ?  "

"  Yes,  he  showed  me  his  bed,  three  planks  on  pickets,  above  damp  sand."

"  Good,  thank  you,  now  advise  him  to  go  to  the  hospital  where  he  will  be
better  treated,  and  you  come  back  to  Blois."

(With  great  animation.)  "  It  is  time  that  I  did  return,  for  do  you  not
see  that  the  innkeeper  is  giving  his  own  horse  the  oats  which  we  brought
with  us  for  Bichette."  (The  accusation  could  not  be  verified,  but  it  is  not
at  all  improbable.)

I  then  requested  my  colleague  to  open  the  letter  and  read  it  aloud.  He
was  not  the  least  astonished  of  the  company  :  the  success  had  surpassed  his
hopes.

It  cannot  be  assumed  that  Marie  read  his  thoughts,  when  he  did  not
know  the  contents  of  the  letter.  (Later  on  he  said  that  he  had  suspected
that  the  letter  came  from  Algiers,  when  the  girl  suffered  from  nausea.)  Can
she  have  read  my  thoughts  without  having  been  put  en  rapport  with  me,
merely  having  heard,  before  being  magnetised,  that  I  was  to  be  present

1  Dr.  Girault  had  great  confidence  in  the  astringent  action  of  plantain,  of  which  his
.servant  had  often  seen  him  make  v  arious  preparations.


Supplement.]  Brs.  Dufay  and  Azam  on  Clairvoyance,  &c.


421


at  the  seance  ?  How  useless  appears  the  minute  precaution  of  bandaging
the  eyes  of  a  true  somnambulist  when  her  lucidity  is  being  put  to  the
proof.

Was  it  even  necessary  that  Marie  should  have  had  the  mysterious  letter
in  her  hands  ?  Would  she  not  have  read,  or  rather  felt,  the  contents  just
as  well,  if  this  letter  had  been  in  my  pocket,  or  even  in  my  house,  on  my
writing-table,  or  elsewhere  ?

These  are  experiments  which  have  still  to  be  made. But  to  continue.

It  is  in  the  prison  of  Blois  that  we  next  encounter  Marie,  under  circum-
stances which  I  have  already  made  known.  Owing  to  judicial  formalities,
she  was  not  set  at  liberty  the  same  day  that  her  innocence  had  been  proved.

The  following  day  I  was  sent  for  very  early,  on  account  of  a  suicide
which  had  just  taken  place.  A  prisoner,  accused  of  assassination,  had
strangled  himself  with  his  neck-handkerchief,  one  end  of  which  he  had
fastened  to  the  foot  of  his  bed,  which  was  fixed  to  the  floor.  Laid  prone  on
the  flags  of  the  cell,  he  had  had  the  courage  to  push  himself  backwards
with  his  hands,  untU  the  slip-knot  iu  the  handkerchief  drew  up  and  caused
strangulation.  The  body  was  already  cold  when  I  arrived,  at  the  same  time
as  the  procurator  and  the  examining  magistrate.

The  procurator,  to  whom  the  magistrate  had  related  the  somnambulic
scene  of  the  preceding  day,  expressed  a  desire  to  see  Marie,  and  I  proposed
to  him  to  take  advantage  of  what  had  just  taken  place  to  question  the  girl  as
to  the  criminal  who  had  thus  executed  justice  on  himself.  The  magistrates
eagerly  accepted  my  proposition.  I  cut  ofi'  a  piece  of  the  handkerchief  and
wrapped  it  up  in  several  sheets  of  paper,  which  I  then  tied  up  firmly.

Arrived  at  the  women's  ciuarters,— they  had  just  left  their  dormitory,—
we  begged  the  sister  to  lend  us  her  room  ;  I  signed  to  Marie  to  follow  us,
without  saying  a  word  to  her,  and  put  her  to  sleep  by  merely  placing  my
hand  on  her  forehead.  Then  I  drew  the  packet  from  my  pocket  and  put
it  between  her  hands.

At  that  moment  the  poor  girl  started  on  her  seat  and  flung  the  packet
from  her  with  horror,  angrily  crying  out  that  she  would  not  "touch  that."
Now  it  is  well  known  that  suicides  in  prisons  are  kept  secret  as  long  as
possible  ;  in  the  building  nothing  had  as  yet  transpired  as  to  the  tragedy
which  had  taken  place  ;  even  the  sister  herself  was  ignorant  of  it.

"  What  do  you  think  that  this  paper  contains  ?  "  I  asked  when  calm  had
been  partially  restored.

"  It  is  something  that  has  been  used  to  kill  a  man."

"A  knife  perhaps  ;  or  a  pistol  ?  "

"  No,  no,  a  string  ...  I  see  ...  I  see  ...  it  is  a  neck  hand-
kerchief ...  he  has  hanged  himself.  .  .  But  make  that  gentleman  sit
down,  who  is  standing  behind  me,  he  is  trembling  so  that  his  limbs  camiot
support  him."  (This  was  one  of  the  two  magistrates,  who  was  so  overcome
with  what  he  saw,  that  he  was  in  fact  trembling  in  every  limb.)

"  Can  you  tell  me  when  this  took  place  ?  "

"  Why  here,  you  know  very  well.  .  . .  It  is  a  prisoner."

"And  why  was  he  in  prison  ?  "

"  For  having  assassinated  a  man  who  had  asked  to  get  up  into  his  cart  "
"  How  did  he  kill  him  ?  "

2  G


422


Dvs.  Dafay  and  Azam  on  Clairvoyance,  &c.  [Supplement.


"  Bj'  striking  blows  with  his  gouet."

This  is  the  name  used  in  Loir  et  Cher  for  a  sort  of  hatchet  with  a  short
handle,  a  broad  long  blade  turned  over  at  the  end  like  a  jmrrot's  beak.  It
is  very  much  used  in  the  country,  especially  by  cooiiers  and  woodmen.  In
fact  it  was  a  (jdHet  that  I  had  suggested  in  my  medico-legal  rej^ort,  as  being
the  instrument  probably  used  by  the  murderer.

So  far  Marie's  replies  had  taught  us  nothing  that  we  did  not  know
before.  At  this  moment  the  examining  magistrate  drew  me  apart,
and  whispered  in  my  ear  that  the  goitet  had  not  been  found.

"  What  has  been  done  with  this  gouet  1  " I  asked.

"  What  has  been  done  ?  .  .  .  wait  ...  it  was  thrown  into  a  pool.
... I  can  see  it  quite  well  at  the  bottom  of  the  water."

And  she  described  the  place  whei'e  the  pool  was  situated,  with  sufficient
exactness  to  permit  of  a  search,  which  was  made  that  same  day  in  the  presence
of  a  superintendent  of  police,  and  resulted  in  the  discovery  of  the  instrument
of  crime.

We  did  not  know  this  result  till  the  evening,  but  already  the  scepticism
of  the  magistrates  was  much  shaken.  I  asked  them  if  they  would  profit  by
the  lucidity  of  our  somnambulist,  to  clear  up  certain  obscure  points  :  but  this
they  refused,  considering  it  dishonourable  to  employ  a  means  of  inquiry  that
could  not  be  placed  at  the  disposal  of  tlie  defence.  These  scruples,
honourable  at  first  sight,  appear  to  me  to  be  exaggerated  ;  for  the  use  of  the
somnambulist  might  just  as  easily  result  in  the  recognition  of  innocence,  as
in  the  discovery  of  guilt.  Be  that  as  it  may,  in  order  to  satisfy  their
curiosity,  I  begged  the  sister  to  borrow  from  some  of  the  inmates  any  little
objects  belonging  to  them,  such  as  a  ring,  or  an  ear-ring,  and  to  tie  them  up
into  packets  hiding  their  form.  This  she  did  with  intelligence,  though
viewing  with  great  disapproval  practices  which  appeared  to  her  to  be  the
work  of  Satan.  And  Marie  told  us  exactly  the  circumstances  which  had
brought  about  the  condemnation  of  the  iirisoners.

This  girl  has  left  the  country  ;  T  have  heard  it  said  that  she  married.  It
would  be  interesting  to  know  whether  she  is  still — should  I  say  gifted,  or
afflicted  ? — with  somnambulism,  spontaneous  or  induced,  or  if  her  children
have  inherited  this  nervous  disease.

These  cases  of  mental  vision — or  double  sight,  or  magnetic  lucidity —
which  I  have  just  related  took  place  during  induced  somnambulism  ;  those
which  are  to  follow  were  observed  during  sjiontaneous  attacks.

One  of  my  fellow  citizens,  M.  Badaire,  formerly  director  of  the  "  dcole
normale,"  first  at  Gueret,  then  at  Blois,  having  read  in  the  newspaper  an
extract  from  my  communication  to  the  Societe  de  Psychologie  Physiologique,
has  since  told  me  that  he  also  once  knew  a  very  remarkable  somnambulist.
He  was  one  of  the  pupil  teachers  at  the  school  at  Gu(?ret,  and  almost  every
night,  after  an  hour  or  two  of  normal  sleep,  fell  into  tlie  somnambulic  state,
and  executed  acts  which  excited  the  astonishment  of  the  teachers  and  of
his  comrades.  Some  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  were  also  permitted
to  witness  these  phenomena.

Dr.  Cressant,  the  medical  officer,  was  specially  interested  in  the  boy,  and
begged  the  director  to  write  out  for  him  a  rejiort,  which  he  proposed  to


Supplement.]  Dvs.  Dufciy  cincl  Azcim  on  Clairvoyance,  &c.


423


address  to  the  "Academic  des  Sciences. M.  Badaire  has  been  kind
enough  to  copy  this  report,  and  I  cannot  do  better  than  place  it  in  extenso
before  the  Society.

Gueret,  Fehruary  5th,  1860.

Sir, — In  compliance  with  your  expressed  desire,  I  have  the  honour  of
sending  you  a  summary  of  some  of  the  phenomena  of  natural  somnambulism
which  we  have  had  the  opportunity  of  observing  in  young  Theophile
Janicaud,  pupil-teacher  in  the  ecole  normale  of  la  Creuse.

M.  Simonet,  his  brother-in-law  (assistant  master),  informs  me  that
Janicaud  was  subject  to  frequent  attacks  of  somnambulism  from  about  the
age  of  eight  to  ten.  After  that  date  they  ceased  almost  entirely  until  he
was  nineteen.

During  the  first  year  that  he  was  at  school,  we  noticed  nothing
unusual  in  him  ;  but  during  the  excessive  heat  in  the  months  of  June  and
July,  1859,  the  condition  of  young  Janicaud  completely  changed,  and  attacks
of  somnambulism  occurred  every  night,  with  a  frequency  which  soon  gave
cause  for  anxiety  as  to  his  health.  In  a  few  weeks  he  was  so  much  altered
as  to  be  hardly  recognisable  even  to  the  members  of  his  family.  His  eyes
were  sunken,  tired,  and  haggard  ;  and  an  extreme  thinness  took  the  place  of
robust  health.

Every  evening  he  got  up,  walked  about  the  dormitory,  descended  to  the
study  to  work  in  the  dark,  or  wandered  about  the  gardens  for  hours  at  a
time,  after  which  he  went  back  to  bed.  He  had  all  the  appearance  of  being
awake,  with  the  exception  of  a  particular  tone  in  his  voice  when  he  sang  or
replied  to  questions.

Naturally  of  a  timid  and  shy  nature,  he  became  merry,  even  facetious  in
the  somnambulic  state.  He  was  sharp  at  repartee,  expressing  himself  with  the
greatest  facility,  and  pitilessly  exposing  any  incorrect  emijloyment  of  terms.

One  night,  despite  our  attentive  watching,  Janicaud  left  the  dormitory
without  the  assistant  master  or  any  of  the  pupils  noticing  it.  The  next
morning  when  it  was  time  to  get  up  he  was  in  his  bed  like  the  rest  of  them,
but  his  pillow  aiid  his  watch  had  disappeared.  From  his  fatigue  and  his
exhausted  aspect,  it  was  evident  that  he  must  have  been  up  during  the  night.
Search  was  made  all  over  the  house  and  the  surrounding  garden,  but  without
success.  At  last,  during  the  day,  something  white  was  seen  on  the  zinc  roof
of  the  infirmary  :  it  was  Janicaud's  pillow  which  he  had  put  there  during  the
night,  with  his  watch  and  a  bunch  of  flowers  from  the  garden.  Some  marks
discovered  on  a  glass  frame,  indicated  the  perilous  path  which  the
somnambulist  must  have  followed  in  order  to  mount  the  roof,  and  also  to
descend  from  it.  In  his  waking  state  it  is  evident  that  he  could  not  have
attempted  such  an  ascent,  without  the  certain  jjrospect  of  a  dangerous  fall.

The  risks  run  by  Janicaud  during  these  nocturnal  expeditions,  soon
necessitated  precautions  for  his  safety.  Every  night  he  was  secured  by  a
padlocked  band  round  his  wrist,  fastened  to  the  end  of  an  iron  chain  which

^According  to  information  obtained  from  the  secretary  of  the  institute,  Dr.  Cressant
did  not  carry  out  his  project.  Like  myself,  and  many  other  medical  men,  he  probaljly
drew  back  in  face  of  the  disapprobation  which  these  questions  then  encountered  in  the
official  world  of  science.


424


Drs.  Dvfoy  and  Azam  on  Clairvoyance,  &e.  [Supplement.


was  riveted  to  the  bed  ;  but  this  was  soon  seen  to  be  insufficient,  for  when
his  somnambulic  state  came  on,  liis  hand  contracted  so  that  it  slipped
tlirough  the  band,  and  it  became  necessary  to  attach  him  by  the  leg  above
the  ankle.

One  evening  about  11  o'clock,  Janicaud,  having  escaped  from  the  dormi-
tory, knocked  at  the  door  of  my  bedroom  :

"I  have  just  arrived  from  Vendome,"  he  said,  "and  have  come  to  give
you  the  news  of  your  family.  M.  and  Mme.  Arnault  are  well,  and  your
little  son  has  four  teeth."

"As  you  have  seen  them  at  Vendome,  could  you  go  back  again  and  tell
me  where  they  are  at  present  ?  "

' '  Wait  ...  I  am  there  .  .  .  They  are  sleeping  in  a  room  on  the  first
floor  ;  their  bed  is  at  the  farther  end  of  the  room,  to  the  left.  The  nurse's
bed  is  to  the  right,  and  Henry's  cradle  close  to  it."

The  description  of  the  room  and  the  position  of  the  beds  were  perfectly
exact,  and  the  following  day  I  received  a  letter  from  my  father-in-law  telling
me  that  my  child  had  cut  his  fourth  tooth.

A  few  days  later,  Janicaud  came  to  me  at  about  the  same  time,  telling  me
that  he  had  again  come  from  Vendome,  and  that  an  accident  had  happened
to  the  child  during  the  day.  My  wife,  being  much  startled,  anxiously
inquired  what  the  accident  was.

"Oh  !  do  not  be  frightened,  Madame,  reassure  yourself,  there  will  be  no
serious  consequences,  whatever  the  doctor,  who  is  now  with  the  child,  may
think.  If  I  had  kno^vn  that  I  should  have  caused  you  so  much  alarm,  I
should  not  have  spoken  of  it. It  will  lie  nothing."

The  next  morning  I  wrote  to  my  father-in-law  to  tell  him  what  Janicaud
had  said,  and  begged  for  news  of  the  child  by  return  of  post.  The  answer
was  that  he  was  perfectly  well,  and  that  no  accident  had  taken  place.

But  in  the  month  of  September,  when  I  went  home  for  the  holidays,  I
learnt  the  whole  truth,  which  my  father-in-law,  on  the  advice  of  the  doctor,
had  hidden  from  me.  He  told  me  that  at  the  time  when  Janicaud  came  to
tell  me  that  an  accident  had  happened,  the  doctor  did  not  expect  the  child  to
live  through  the  night.  During  the  day  the  nurse,  having  got  hold  of  the
key  of  the  cellar,  had  become  completely  intoxicated,  and  the  child  having
been  fed  by  her  when  in  this  condition,  was  seized  with  violent  sickness,
Avhich  endangered  his  life  for  several  daj^s.

One  night  Janicaud  suddenly  jumped  up  in  bed,  and  turning  to  one  of
his  companions  said  :

"See,  Roullet,  how  careless  you  are.  I  certainly  told  you  to  shut  the
door  of  the  bookbinding  workshop,  but  you  did  not  do  it,  and  a  cat,  in  eating
the  paste,  has  just  knocked  over  the  dish,  which  is  broken  into  five
pieces."

Someone  went  down  at  once  to  the  workshop,  and  it  was  found  that  what
the  somnambulist  had  said  was  perfectly  correct.

The  following  night  he  related  how  he  saw  on  the  Gleny  road  the  body  of
a  man,  who  had  been  drowned  while  bathing  in  the  Creuse,  and  that  he
was  being  brought  to  Gueret  in  a  carriage.  Next  day  I  made  inquiries,  and
heard  that  an  inhabitant  of  the  town  had  really  been  drowned  the  previous
day  at  Gleny,  and  that  his  body  had  been  brought  to  Gueret  during  the


Supplement.]  Drs.  Diiftiy  and  Azani  on  Clairvoyance,  <L-c.


425


night. But  nobody  in  the  house,  not  even  in  the  town,  had  known  of  the
accident  the  day  before.  ^

M.  Badaire  continues  to  report  as  follows  : —

M.  Simonet,  the  assistant  master,  and  Janicaud's  brother-in-law,  once
consulted  him  when  in  the  somnambulic  state,  about  his  child,  who  had  been
suflFering  for  some  months  from  a  cyst  behind  the  ear,  which  the  doctors
feared  might  result  in  decay  of  the  bone.  Janicaud  pronounced  their  fears
groundless,  and  recommended  the  use  of  a  certain  herb,  which  grew  in  the
garden,  and  which  he  undertook  to  gather  for  them.^

But  the  somnambulist,  walking  barefoot,  accidentally  stepped  upon  a
thorn,  and  the  shock  woke  him  before  the  plant  was  secured.'

The  child  recovered  soon  after,  as  Janicaud  had  said  it  would.

One  night  Janicaud  went  to  the  director  (M.  Badaire)  begging  for  leave
to  go  out  and  post  a  letter  which  he  had  just  written  to  a  former  pupil,  to
whom  he  was  much  attached.  As  this  was  of  course  impracticable,  he  was
told  that  it  should  be  posted  for  him,  and  M.  Badaire  ran  ujjstairs  to  wake
the  assistant  master  and  ask  him  to  watch  the  boy  in  his  absence.  He
then  went  straight  to  Dr.  Cressant  and  the  two  together  examined  the
letter.  It  was  an  eloquent  and  touching  expression  of  sadness  consequent
on  the  departure  of  his  friend,  and  an  earnest  prayer  that  constant  corre-
spondence might  mitigate  his  jjain.  ' '  The  dream  in  which  thy  troubled  .
imagination  is  wandering,  carries  thee  back,  if  only  for  a  moment, to  the  side
of  him  who  mourns  thy  absence.  Thy  right  hand  resting  on  thy  heart,
betrays  to  me  the  secret  of  thy  sadness.  Thy  left  hand,  lying  open  on  thy
disordered  bed,  seems  as  though  ready  to  grasp  that  of  him  who  reads  into
thy  soul."  *

A  more  recent  event  serves  to  show  the  rapidity  with  which  Janicaud
wrote  during  somnambulism.  Just  before  retiring  to  bed  the  pupil-
teachers  had  been  given  the  subject  of  an  exercise  in  style  for  the  following
day  :  one  of  them  suspecting  that  Janicaud  would  write  his  composition
during  the  night,  provided  himself  with  a  pencil  and  paper.  Accordingly
about  half. past  ten  the  boy  attempted  to  get  up,  but  finding  himself  chained
to  his  bed,  begged  one  of  his  companions  to  give  him  writing  materials.
This  was  done  ;  and  in  the  dark,  with  his  night-caji  drawn  over  his  face,"  and
an  assistant  master  and  several  pupils  grouped  round  him,  he  began  to  speak
with  a  loud  voice,  his  pencil  at  the  same  time  moving  rapidly.  In  a  few
minutes  the  spoken  words  were  neatly  written  down  and  covered  two
pages.

1  Facts  of  the  same  description  are  reported  by  Dr.  Macario  (Du  Sommeil,  des  reves,
et  du  somnambulisiiie,  1857),  who  borrowed  them  froni  F.  Lebeuf.  Here  also  it  is  a
case  of  spontaneous  somnambulism. {Dr.  D.)

-  Possibly  comfrey,  of  whose  astringent  properties  Janicaiid  may  have  heard.
(Dr.  D.)

3  When  he  got  up  in  the  sleeping  state,  he  always  dressed  himself  completely  with
the  exception  of  his  feet.

■*  Dr.  Uressant  had  expressed  a  desire  to  know  what  Janicaud  wrote  in  the
somnambulic  state,  M.  Badaire  having  frequently  told  him  that  his  style  was  then  very
superior  to  what  it  was  in  his  normal  state.

^  He  always  did  this,  having  been  teased  by  his  companions,  and  accused  of  acting
his  somnambulism.


426 Drs.  Dafay  and  Azam  on  Clairvoyance,  &c.  [Supplement.


His  health  now  giving  cause  for  alarm,  he  was  sent  home  for  change  and
exercise,  and  while  away  suffered  very  few  attacks,  and  these  only  during
the  first  few  days.  One  which  took  place  two  days  after  joining  his  family
deserves  some  notice.  He  rose  up  during  the  night  with  the  fixed  determina-
tion of  going  fishing.  M.  Simonet  decided  to  accompany  him,  and  before
starting  succeeded  in  inducing  him  to  alter  the  nature  of  his  excursion,  and  go
and  visit  a  relative  residing  some  distance  off.  This  was  done,  Janicaud  being
luidisturbed  from  his  sleeping  condition,  either  by  the  noise  of  barking  dogs,  or
by  the  fatigues  of  the  walk.  At  last  he  decided  upon  going  home,  and  on  the
way  having  come  to  a  narrow  and  dangerous  path  by  the  river,  his  brother-
in-law  begged  him  to  be  careful  as  to  where  he  put  his  foot.  Janicaud,
however,  assured  him  that  he  could  see  the  better  of  the  two,  and  as  a  proof
asked  his  companion  whetlier  he  saw  the  match  which  was  under  his  left
foot.  M.  Simonet  at  once  felt  under  his  foot,  and  sure  enough  found  a
match  there.  Not  only  was  it  very  dark,  but  Janicaud  with  his  night-cap
drawn  over  his  face  was  some  30  paces  ahead.

Noteworthy,  too,  were  the  means  which  he  used  to  take  to  free  himself
from  his  chain  at  night.  Once  with  a  jien-knife  he  cut  oif  a  small  portion  of
a  window-sash  close  at  hand,  and  from  it  modelled  a  key,  with  which  he
easily  undid  his  padlock.

M.  Badaire  concludes :  It  may  not  be  useless  to  make  an  obser-
vation of  possible  interest  from  a  scientific  point  of  viev/ — which  is  that
during  an  attack  of  somnambulism  Janicaud  is  perfectly  conscious  of  the  state
in  wliich  he  finds  himself.  Indeed,  he  is  generally  very  well  pleased  at
his  condition,  and  if  attempts  are  made  to  awaken  him,  begs  that  it  may  not
be  done,  as  he  is  so  much  hapiner  than  in  his  waking  state.  Nevertheless,
after  each  attack  he  suffers  greatly  from  fatigue,  and  his  appearance  is
noticeably  altered.  Ought  this  fatigue  to  be  attributed  to  the  extraordinary
activity  of  his  faculties  during  somnambulism,  or  may  it  be  the  result  of
the  shock  which  he  sustains  in  jiassing  from  one  state  to  another "?

Once  awake,  Janicaud  has  not  the  least  recollection  of  what  has  taken
place  in  his  somnambulic  state.  But  in  each  attack  he  remembers  perfectly
all  that  has  been  said  and  done  in  the  preceding  ones.

In  his  natural  state,  Janicaud  has  an  uncertain  memory  and  retains  what
he  learns  with  difficulty  ;  but  on  several  occasions  when  he  has  been  study-
ing his  history  lessons  in  bed,  the  assistant  master  has  taken  the  book  from
his  hand  and  the  somnambulist  lias  then  repeated  the  five  or  six  pages  which
he  had  just  read  without  omitting  a  syllable.  Awakened  immediately  after,
he  had  no  recollection  of  what  he  had  just  read  and  repeated.

Badaire.  1

*******
Before  forwarding  his  report  to  Dr.  Cressant,  M.  Badaire  had  called
together  the  teachers  and  pupils  of  the  Ecole  Normale  and  had  read  it  aloud
to  them,  asking  them  if  they  had  any  observations  to  make.  All  declared  it
to  be  scrupulously  accurate.  A  copy  of  it  had  also  been  sent  to  M.  Thery,
then  rector  at  Clermont-Ferrand,  who  was  acquainted  with  some  of  the

1  M.  Janicaud  married  ahnost  as  soon  as  he  left  the  Ecole  Normale,  and  has  since
had  only  one  attack  of  somnambuUsm,  which  was  a  few  days  after  his  marriage.  He
has  since  become  Master  of  the  primary  school  in  La  Creuse.


[Supplement.  Dvs.  Dufay  cmd  Azam  on  Clairvoyance,  &c.


427


circumstances,  and  who  was  specially  interested,  having  had  occasion  to
observe  similar  phenomena  at  the  Lycee  at  Versailles,  of  which  he  had  been
head  master.

Many  points  of  similarity  will  be  perceived  between  the  account  of
Janicaud  and  that  of  Mdlle.  R.  L.  {Rsvue  Scie.ntifiq_ue,  July  loth,  1876.  p.
69),  but  there  are  also  differences.

The  attacks  were  almost  daily  with  both  .Janicaud  and  Mdlle.  R.  L.  ;  but
though  the  latter  sometimes  passed  from  normal  sleep  into  somnambulism
(like  Janicaud)  it  generally  happened  that  she  fell  into  that  condition  while
in  the  waking  state.  Both  passed  from  somnambulism  into  normal  sleep,  and
then  woke  in  an  ordinary  manner,  without  suspecting  the  modifications  that
had  taken  place  in  their  sleep.  Both,  when  in  the  somnambulic  state,
remembered  perfectly  all  that  had  taken  place  in  former  attacks,  and  were  also
conscious  of  the  events  of  their  normal  existence,  whereas  in  the  normal
state,  they  were  completely  ignorant  of  all  that  they  had  thought  and  done
during  somnambulism.  This  is  what  constituted  double  personality  in  both
of  them,  only  it  was  more  comjilete  in  Mdlle.  R.  L.,  who  during  her
abnormal  existence  spoke  of  her  waking  self  as  of  another  person,  calling  it
la  fille  bete.  With  both  of  them  there  was  considerable  development  of
memory  and  intelligence  during  the  attacks.

When  it  was  thought  desirable  to  put  an  end  to  an  attack,  without
"waiting  for  a  Sfjontaneous  transition  into  normal  sleep,  it  was  necessary
(according  to  M.  Badaire)  to  firmly  press  Janicaud's  tliighs,  or  to  flash  a
bright  light  before  his  eyes  ;  but  the  slightest  touch  on  the  skin  of  the  neck
or  mucous  membrane  of  the  pharynx  sufficed  in  the  case  of  Mdlle.  R.  L.
Both  strongly  resisted  any  attempts  to  bring  about  this  result.

Both  walked  about  and  worked  in  the  dark,  but  Mdlle.  R.  L.  used  her
eyes :  she  was  no  longer  short-sighted,  but  laid  aside  her  spectacles,  throwing
back  her  head  so  as  to  bring  the  pupil  behind  the  opening  of  the  eyelid,
which  was  much  contracted,  owing  to  the  drooping  of  the  upper  eyelid.  ^

Janicaud,  on  the  contrary,  saw  without  the  intervention  of  the  physical
organs  of  sight.

Finally  there  is  one  considerable  difi'erence.  Janicaud  perceived  things  at
a  distance  as  well  as  though  near  at  hand  ;  he  jjresented  in  his  spontaneous
somnambulism  this  phenomenon  of  mental  vision  or  double  sight,  usually  only
observed  in  induced  somnambulism.

Blois,  September,  1888.


1  When  I  mentioned  in  my  article  in  the  Jtevite  Scientifiquc  (July  15th,  1876)  this
removal  of  short-sightedness  in  ]SIdlle.  R.  L.,  I  put  forward  the  hypothesis  of  its  being-
due  to  the  relaxation  of  the  motor  muscles  of  the  eye  ;  the  drooping  and  partial
paralysis  which  occurs  at  the  same  time  leads  one  to  think  that  all  the  infra-orbital
muscles,  at  least,  lose  their  tonicity.


General  Meetings.


429


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON

May  9th,  1890.

The  thii-ty-mnth  General  IMeeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the
Westminster  Town  Hall,  on  May  9th,  1890.

The  President,  Professor  Sidgwick,  in  the  Chair.

Papers  on  "  Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance  "  were
read  by  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Professor  O.  Lodge,  and  Mr.  Walter
Leaf. These  are  printed  below.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON

July  11th,  1890.

The  fortieth  General  IMeeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the
Westminster  Town  Hall,  on  July  11th,  1890.

The  President,  Professor  Sidgwick,  in  the  Chair.

The  President  gave  a  second  address  on  the  Census  of  Hallucina-
tions, which  is  printed  below.

Mr.  Myers  read  the  fii'st  part  of  a  "  Provisional  report  on  alleged
movements  of  objects,  without  contact,  occurring  not  in  the  ^Dresence  of
a  paid  medium,"  which  it  is  proposed  to  publish  in  a  future  number  of
the  Proceedinffs.


■  L
Address  by  the  President.

SECOND ADDRESS ON THE CENSUS  OF
HALLUCINATIONS.

It  is  now  just  about  a  year  since  I  gave  my  last  ad  interim  report
on  our  Census  of  Hallucinations  at  a  General  Meeting  of  the  Society.
The  progress  made  during  this  interval  has  not  quite  realised  my
expectations;  in  particular,  I  am  a  little  disappointed  by  the  limited
amount  of  interest  shown  in  the  work  by  Members  and  Associates  of
the  Society.  We  have  now  in  our  Society  about  700  Members  and
Associates,  (not  counting  the  American  ones,)  and  as  I  pointed  out
before,  if  all  of  them  would  collect  25  answers  and  induce  one  friend  to
do  the  same — a  task  which  ought  not,  generally  speaking,  to  be  very
difficult, — we  should  thus  get  35,000  answers,  and  this  number,  though
not  so  large  as  I  should  like,  would  probably  enable  us  to  calculate
from  the  census  itself,  with  sufficient  approximation  to  accuracy,  the

2  u


430


Tlie  Census  of  Hallucinations.


[July  11,


proportion  of  coincidental  to  non-coincidental  phantasms.  The  impor-
tance of  this  result,  as  relieving  us  from  the  necessity  of  forming  a
conjectural  estimate  of  the  size  of  the  circle  from  which  our  "  veridical "
cases  are  drawn,  was  explained  in  my  last  address.  At  present,  how-
ever, only  about  74  Members  or  Associates  have,  so  far  as  we  know,
given  any  help,  and  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  great  efforts  made  by
some  of  these — which  T  most  gratefully  acknowledge — and  for  help
received  from  outsi<lpis,  we  should  not  have  attained  to  our  present
modest  number  (jf  answers — 6,481.

Of  the  6,481  people  whose  answers  we  have,  727,  or  about  11  per
cent.,  answer  in  the  affirmative,  and  751  experiences  are  described. i
These  may  be  divided  into  474  cases  where  the  sense  of  sight  was
affected,  219  cases  where  voices  were  heard  without  any  accompanying
visual  impression,  and  56  cases  where  the  impression  Avas  only  on  the
sense  of  touch,  besides  2  where  the  touch  was  accompanied  by  a
non-vocal  auditory  impression.  In  about  48  out  of  the  whole  number,
more  than  one  sense  A\"as  jiffected,  besides  26  more  in  which,  along  with
a  visual  or  tactual  impression,  some  non-vocal  sounds  occurred,  which
do  not  come  within  the  scope  of  the  present  inquiry.  It  is  often
difficult  in  the  case  of  sounds,  and  especially  of  non-vocal  sounds,  such
as  rustling,  footsteps,  S:c.,  to  ascertain  whether  they  were  hallucinatory
or  not.

Out  of  the  751  cases,  98,  or  about  13  per  cent.,  maybe  called  coinci-
dental ;  that  is,  they  are  cases  in  which  the  hallucination  has  coincided
in  time  with  some  condition  of  another  person,  who  may  be  regarded
as  the  agent,  in  such  a  way  as  to  suggest  a  causal  connection  between
that  condition  and  the  hallucination.

Some  of  these  experiences  that  I  have  called  coincidental  must  be
admitted  to  fall  under  Mr.  Gurney's  head,  "ambiguous."  On  the  other
hand,  among  cases  classed  as  non-coincidental,  there  are  a  certain
number  which  there  is  some  reason  to  regard  as  other  than  purely
subjective.  Thus  there  are  6  cases  of  the  figure  and  1  of  the  voice  of
dead  persons  phantasmally  seen  or  heard  when  the  percipient  was
unaware  of  the  death.  There  are  9  cases  (7  of  an  unrecognised  figure,
1  of  a  recognised  living  person,  and  1  of  a  recognised  dead  person)
where  ap2iarently  the  same  figure  is  independently  seen  by  more  than
■one  person  on  different  occasions.  In  one  of  these  a  figure  in  a  brown
dress  with  broad  lace  collar  and  golden  hair  was  seen  by  three  persons
on  different  occasions  in  a  certain  house,  two  of  these  experiences

1  Of  the  persons  who  have  had  experiences,  121  have  given  no  particulars.  On
the  other  hand,  217  persons  liave  liad  more  than  one  experience.  A  large  propnrtii>n
of  these,  however,  were  recurrent  experiences  of  a  trivial  kind,  sucli  as  hearing  the
name  called,  or  feeling  touches.  We  have  counted  recurrent  experiences  not  described
singly  as  one.


1890.]


The  Census  of  Hallucinations.


431


being  certainly  independent  —  that  is,  the  second  percipient  knew
nothing  about  the  experience  of  the  first.  The  figure  was  afterwards
thought  to  be  recognised  as  that  of  a  living  lady  dressed  similarly ;
but  as  only  a  part  of  the  ghost's  face  was  seen,  the  recognition  can
hardly  be  counted  on.

Finally,  there  are  66  collective  cases— cases,  that  is,  in  which  more
than  one  person  shares  the  expei'ience — besides  12  collective  cases
which  have  been  already  counted  as  coincidental.  These  are  the
numbers  if  we  count  the  persons  answering  our  question  who  ha^'e
seen  "  collective  phantasms."  But,  as  sometimes  more  than  one  of  the
joint  percipients  is  included  among  these,  the  whole  number  of
phantasms  collectively  seen  and  heard  is  rather  smaller,  viz.  :  10
coincidental  ones  and  55  non-coincidental  ones — 65  in  all,  of  which
47  were  visual  as  regards  at  least  one  of  the  percipients.  The
number  would  be  still  further  reduced  by  excluding  from  it  those  cases
where  there  seems  to  be  a  possibility  that  the  figure  seen  or  the  voice
heard  was  not  hallucinatory  at  all  but  real.  Precisely  how  large
this  reduction  should  be  we  can  only  guess,  but  I  will  give  one  of
our  reasons  for  thinking  that  some  reduction  is  necessary.  We  find
that  out  of  the  visual  collective  cases,  more  than  half  occurred  out  of
■dooi's,  while  of  the  visual  cases  occurring  to  a  single  percipient,  only
about  one  seventh  occurred  out  of  doors.  Now,  though  some  supposed
apparitions  seen  out  of  doors  are  quite  as  obviously  true  hallucina-
tions as  some  of  those  seen  indoors,  still,  speaking  generally,  there
seem  to  be  several  reasons  v.iiy  real  human  beings  are  more  likely
to  be  mistaken  for  apparitions  out  of  doors  than  indoors.  In  the  first
place,  if  a  figure  appears  in  a  room  its  distance  is  seldom  great  enough
to  make  recognition  doubtful,  so  that  cases  of  mistaken  identity  are
less  likely  to  occur  indoors.  Further,  if  the  figure  be  unrecognised,
this  can  seldom  be  regarded  as  evidence  of  its  hallucinatory  character
out  of  doors,  while  it  often  would  afford  evidence  indoors,  since  it  is
not  usual  for  strangei-s  to  walk  into  our  I'ooms  without  any  one  in  the
house  knowing  anything  about  it.  And,  again,  the  mode  of  appearance
and  disappearance  of  the  figure  is  much  more  often  cleai'ly  impossible
for  a  real  person  indoors  than  it  is  out  of  doors.  The  figure  may,  for
instance,  go  through  a  locked  door,  or  through  the  wall,  or  into  a  room
into  which  it  is  at  once  followed,  and  where  it  is  not  found.  Out  of
doors  it  is  often  difficult  to  prove  that  the  vanished  figure  has  not
simply  turned  into  a  house,  or  been  hidden  by  an  inter\'ening  bush  or
other  obstacle,  especially  since  its  distance  is  often  much  greater  than
that  of  a  hallucinatory  figure  seen  in  the  house.

After  making  all  allowances,  however,  there  remains  a  certain
number  of  collective  cases  in  which  the  objects  seen  can  hardly  have
been  real  people  or  things.


432


The  Census  of  Hallucinations.


[July  11,


Now  granting  that  collective  hallucinations  really  occur — and,
apart  from  this  census,  we  have  by  this  time  accumulated  a  good  deal
of  evidence  of  the  fact — they  are  obviously  of  great  theoretical  impor-
tance in  considei'ing  the  nature  and  origin  of  hallucinations.  I  there-
fore propose  to  make  a  few  remarks  on  them  this  evening.  The  most
obvious  explanation  of  the  "coUectiveness"  of  a  hallucination  is  that  ifc
has  for  both  percipients  some  common  origin  independent  of  either  of
them.  This  common  oi'igin  might  be  telepathic,  some  other  mind
aiiecting  them  both  similarly  and  simultaneously,  or  it  might  be  what
I  may  call  "  physical  suggestion,"  by  which  I  mean  some  real  external
cause, — say  a  sound  like  a  footstep — starting  by  "  suggestion"  a  similar
hallucination  in  botli  of  them.  Now  though  it  seems  not  improbable
that  the  hallucination  is  sometimes  produced  telepathically  in  both
percipients  at  once  by  some  other  mind,  living  or  dead,  this  can  hardly
be  the  explanation  always.  For  instance,  it  is  unlikely  that  a  psychical
cause  external  to  Ijoth  percipients  made  two  girls  at  a  dancing  class
simultaneously  see  a  chair  in  the  middle  of  the  floor  where  no  chair
was,  or  produced  for  two  other  percipients  an  appearance  of  a  grey
object  about  the  size  of  a  man's  head,  which  rose  and  fell  again  near
them  as  they  sat  at  luncheon.  It  is  equally  arbitrary  to  explain  by
external  psychical  agency  cases  where  the  phantasm  collectively  seen,
rejiresents  a  living  person  who  was  in  no  unusual  condition  at  the  time.
For  instance,  two  young  ladies  and  their  brother  going  along  the  passage
one  day  saw  their  father  going  upstairs.  One  of  them  also  heard  his
footsteps  while  the  other  two  were  struck  by  the  absence  of  sound.
Though  none  of  them  saw  him  very  distinctly,  they  all  independently
felt  convinced  at  the  moment  that  it  was  their  father  ;  but  their  father
was  at  the  time  sitting  Cjuietly  reading  in  the  dining-room  and  it
could  not  have  been  any  other  real  human  being.

As  regards  the  second  possible  hypothesis,  that  what  I  have  called
jDhysical  suggestion  is  the  common  origin  of  the  hallucination  in  the
two  percipients,  it  may  reasonably  be  asked  whether  we  have  any
evidence  that  a  hallucination  is  ever  thus  produced.  We  know,  of
course,  that  verbal  suggestion  will  often  make  hypnotised  people  see
hallucinations,  but  it  is  a  great  step  from  this  to  assuming  that  halluci-
nations can  be  produced  in  this  way  in  the  case  of  jDeople  in  a  normal
state,  and  it  is  a  still  further  step  to  assume  as  possible  the  non-verbal
and  therefore  less  definite  suggestion,  which  is  all  that  we  can  suppose
to  occur  in  the  present  cases.  Hallucinations,  however,  are  so  rare  in
the  experience  of  most  of  us  that  it  may  fairly  be  argued  that  when
Ave  see  them  we  are  not  quite  in  a  normal  state,  and  I  think  there  is
reason  to  l^elieve  that  self-suggestion  sometimes  operates  during  a
hallucination,  for  it  is  sometimes  difficult  otherwise  to  account  for  the
occasional  agreement  of  tvro  senses. For  instance,  a  lady  in  the  dark


1890.]


The  Census  of  Hallucinations.


433


first  feels  her  husband's  presence,  then  putting  out  her  hand,  feels  his
coat-sleeve,  and  then  hears  him  speak.  The  husband,  meanwhile,  is
absent  and  vividly  imagining  himself  to  be  bringing  her  bad  news.  A
reflected  hallucination  such  as  I  mentioned  in  my  last  address  is
again  an  instance  of  the  operation  of  self-suggestion  during  a  halluci-
nation, though  only  one  sense  is  affected.

But  in  these  cases  it  is  hallucination  that  leads  to  further  halluci-
nation. It  is  a  different  question  whether  real  sounds  ever  lead  to
\dsual  and  other  hallucinations  by  suggestion.  It' appears  to  me  prob-
able from  the  evidence  that  in  some  cases  they  do  and  that  muscular
sensations  suggesting  touches  do  so  also,  but  it  is  diificult  to  prove  tliis
because  it  is  difficult  to  prove  that  the  sounds  and  touches  are  not
themselves  hallucinatory  :  I  will,  however,  give  one  instance  from  the
Census  collection  of  a  case  primd  facie  collective  where  the  probability
that  a  real  sound  wrongly  interpreted  led  to  different  visual  experiences
appears  to  me  very  strong.  Two  sisters  within  hearing  of  the  front
door,  and  within  sight  of  different  parts  of  the  passage  leading  from  it
to  the  living  rooms,  but  not  within  sight  of  each  other,  heard  their
father's  latch-key  in  the  door  and  heard  him  come  in.  One  of  them
(who  is  now  dead)  then  saw  her  father,  and  the  other  saw  his  clog  pass
the  door  of  the  room  Avhere  she  was.  It  was  their  father's  habit  to
take  a  walk  with  his  dog  and  return  about  this  hour,  but  on  the  par-
ticular afternoon  in  question  he  and  the  dog  were  dozing  in  the  dining-
room.  The  same  explanation  might  be  applied  in  any  other  case  'primd
facie  collective,  in  which  there  was  a  common  perception  of  sounds
possibly  real,  but  diverse  visual  hallucinations.  But  it  does  not  seern
applicable  to  cases  where  the  things  seen  are  decidedly  more  alike  than
one  can  easily  suppose  they  would  be  from  the  slight  amount  of  sug-
gestion received.

This  difliculty  also  occurs  in  connection  with  a  third  explanation  of
collective  hallucinations,  viz.,  that  A  sees  a  hallucination  first  and  then
conveys  it  by  word  or  gesture  to  B.  In  certain  cases  this  is  plausible.
Hecognised  figures  might  be  suggested  by  a  brief  exclamation,  and  in
some  cases  it  is  clear  that  one  percipient  was  aware  that  the  other  saw
something  before  he  saw  it  himself.  But  it  is  diflicult  to  see  how  an
unfamiliar  figure  could  be  so  suggested,  and  the  detailed  resemblances
in  our  collective  cases  are  sometimes  of  too  marked  a  character  for  us
easily  to  suppose  that  they  were  the  result  of  comparing  notes  after-
■^vards  and  pseudo-memory.  Mox^eover,  our  informants  have  sometimes
taken  pains,  according  to  their  recollection,  to  avoid  any  conscious
suggestion  to  one  another.

There  remains  a  fourth  hypothesis,  viz.,  that  the  hallucination  of
one  percipient  is  caused  by  mental  suggestion  or  thought-transference
from  the other. This hypothesis  avoids  the  difiiculty  as  to  the


434


The  Census  of  Halliicinations.


[July  11,


similarity  of  the  two  hallucinations,  since  it  seems  quite  as  likely  that
the  genei'al  idea  as  to  form,  colour,  &c.,  of  a  hallucination  seen  by  A
should  be  conveyed  telepathically  to  B,  as  that  the  general  idea  of  the
form  and  colour  of  what  the  agent  was  looking  at  in  Mr.  Guthrie's
exjjeriments  should  be  conveyed  to  the  percipients.  Another  difficulty
attaching  to  the  hyjjothesis  of  suggestion  is  avoided  or  reduced  by
supposing  thought-transference  to  operate.  It  would  be  a  remarkable
coincidence  that,  at  the  moment  when  A  is  having  an  unusual
experience,  B  should  be  in  the  nnusual  state  in  which  he  can  be  made
to  see  the  same  thing  by  oitlinary  suggestion.  But  if  our  -s'iew  about
veridical  apparitions  is  correct  it  would  seem  that  a  "  telepathic
impact  "  is  itself  sometimes  a  cause  of  hallucination  in  the  person  to
whom  the  idea  is  transferred.  For  instance,  to  take  an  experimental
case — when  Baron  A'on  Schrenk-Notzing  tried,  as  an  experiment,  to
make  a  lady  think  of  him,  she  saw  his  face  before  her,  without  any
intention  on  his  part  of  producing  a  hallucination.  It  must  be  ad-
mitted that  we  have  at  present  no  crucial  instance  sho\\'ing  that  the  act
of  expeiiencing  a  hallucination  is  a  condition  specially  likely  to  cause
a  telepathic  communication  with  another  mind.  There  are,  however,
one  or  two  cases  in  which  such  a  transfer  seems  to  have  occurred.  I
may  remind  you  of  one  in  PJiantasms  of  the  Living  (Vol.  II.,  p.  198),
qvioted  from  the  note-book  of  Philip  Lord  Chesterfield.  Waking  one
morning  he  saw  a  thing  standing  like  a  white  sheet,  with  a  knot  at
the  top,  and  his  wife,  who  was  40  miles  away,  saw  on  the  same
morning  and  at  the  same  hour  "  a  thing  all  in  white  with  a  black
face"  standing  by  her  bed.

I  may  approj^riately  conclude  my  address  with  an  account  of  an
experiment  made  only  yesterday  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  which  points
strongly  in  the  same  direction.  With  the  assistance  of  Mr.  G.  A.
Smith,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  has  been  trying  experiments  in  thought-
transference  with  hypnotised  persons.  Two  of  these  were  yesterday
hypnotised  in  different  rooms.  We  will  call  them  Mr.  P.  and  Miss  B.
You  ai'e  no  doubt  aware  that  good  hypnotic  subjects  can  be  made  to-
have  post-hypnotic  hallucinations — e.g.,  if  told  while  hypnotised  that
they  will  see  some  specified  object  when  they  awake,  they  do  see  it.
though  there  is  nothing  of  the  sort  there.  Mr.  Smith  told  Mr.  P.  on  this,
occasion  that  Mrs.  Sidgwick  would  show  him  a  picture,  and  then  went
out  of  the  room  and  told  Miss  B.  that  she  would  see  a  picture  which  Mr.
P.  would  show  her  when  her  eyes  were  ojjen.  While  he  was  away  Mrs.
Sidgwick  told  Mi".  P.  that  she  was  going  to  show  him  a  picture  of  a  goat-
chaise  with  two  goats.  Then  Mr.  Smith  came  back,  awoke  Mr.  P.,  and
left  again  immediately.  After  which  Mrs.  Sidgwick  gave  Mr.  P.  a  blank
card  as  a  picture  and  he  almost  immediately  saw  on  it  the  picture  of
the  goatchaise  and  two  goats  and  Avas  much  pleased  with  it.  Mrs.


1890.]


The  Census  of  Halluciuatiovs.


435


Sidgwick  asked  him  to  take  it  upstairs  and  slio'w'  it  to  Miss  B.,  but  to
be  careful  not  to  tell  her  what  it  Avas — to  let  her  see  for  herself.  This
he  immediately  did.  JNIiss  B.  at  first  only  saw  something  black  on  the
card,  then  by  degrees  she  saw,  first  some  wheels,  then  "a  nice  little  wee
carriage,"  and  presently  some  animals  in  front,  which  she  identified  as
t'-.vo  goats.  As  this  was — so  far  as  oMrs.  Sidg\\'ick  can  judge — without
aay  information  from  Mr.  P.  through  the  ordinary  channels  of  sense
as  to  the  nature  of  what  he  saw,  it  seems  to  be  a  case  of  collective
hallucination  and  one  which  "\\'as  conveyed  to  Miss  B.  by  thought-
transference  from  Mr.  P.  Had  !Mr.  Smith  knoA\  n  what  Mr.  P.  saw  on
the  card,  we  might  supjDose  that  he  caused  Miss  B.  to  see  the  picture
by  thought-transference,  but  no  one  but  Mr.  P.  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick
knew  what  he  saw,  and  she  has  no  reason  to  thinlv  that  she  can  convey
ideas  telepathically  to  Miss  B.  She  fails  when  she  tries,  while  Mr.  P.
lias  on  other  occasions  succeeded.


436


A  Record  of  Ohservations  of


I


II.

A  RECORD  OF  OBSERVATIONS  OF  CERTAI^f
PHENOMENA  OF  TRANCE.

(1)  INTRODUCTION.
By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.

It  is  proposed  in  this  and  in  a  following  Part  of  the  Proceedings  to
give  some  account  of  a  series  of  observations  directed  to  certain  trance-
phenomena  which  occur  in  the  case  of  a  lady  named  Mrs.  Piper.  Many
of  these  obsei-vations  have  been  carried  on  in  America  by  Professor
William  J ames,  Mr.  Hodgson,  and  others  ;  but  for  a  period  of  two
months  and  a-half  the  phenomena  were  witnessed  by  an  English
group  of  observers.  There  is  much  variety  in  the  phenomena,  and
much  difficulty  in  their  interpretation  ;  and  we  shall  endeavoui-  to  give
the  independent  opinion  of  each  observer,  and  so  to  select  and  analyse
the  records  cited  as  to  give  the  reader  full  material  for  forming  a
judgment  of  his  own.  Professor  Lodge,  Mr.  Leaf,  and  myself,  who  are
editing  the  records,  have  no  theory  which  we  wish  to  impose  upon  the
reader.  On  certain  external  or  preliminary  points,  as  will  be  seen,  not
we  three  alone,  but  all  who  have  had  adequate  opportunity  of  judgment,
are  decisively  agreed.  But  on  the  more  delicate  and  interesting  question
as  to  the  origin  of  the  trance-utterances  we  cannot  unite  in  any  absolute
Adew.  We  agree  only  in  maintaining  that  the  utterances  show  that
knowledge  has  been  acquired  by  some  intelligence  in  some  supernormal
fashion ; — and  in  urging  on  experimental  psychologists  the  duty  of
watching  for  similar  cases,  and  of  analysing  the  results  in  some  such
Avay  as  we  have  endeavoured  to  do.

The  study  of  trance-utterances,  indeed,  is  at  first  sight  distasteful ;
since  real  and  pretended  trance-utterances  have  notori(jusly  Ijeen  the
vehicle  of  nmch  conscious  and  unconscious  fraud.  But  we  urge  that,
just  as  the  j^hysical  and  psychical  phenomena  of  hysteria — long
neglected  as  a  mere  jungle  of  trickeries — are  now  analysed  with
adequate  security  against  deception,  and  with  most  fruitful  results,  so
also  these  utterances  are  now  capable  of  being  rationally  studied, —
thanks  to  the  advance  in  the  comprehension  of  automatic  phenomena
which  French  and  English  effort  during  the  last  few  years  has  achieved.

These  utterances,  although  they  often  occur  in  hysterical  subjects,
seem  to  have  no  necessary  connection  with  hysteria.  Nor  again  have
we  any  real  ground  for  calling  them  morljid  2)er  se,  although  their
excessive  repetition  may  lead  to  morbid  states. All  that  we  can  safely


Certain  P?ienomena  of  Trance.


437


say  is  tha,t  they  are  a  form  of  automatism  ;  that  they  constitute  one  of
many  classes  of  phenomena  which  occur  in  sane  subjects  without
entering  the  normal  waking  consciousness  or  forming  part  of  the
habitual  chain  of  memory.

In  previous  discussions  in  these  pages  we  have  divided  automatism
into  active  and  passive  types  ^ ;  active  automatism  consisting  of  such
phenomena  as  automatic  writing  and  trance-utterance — passive,  of
hallucinations  of  sight,  hearing,  &c.  "  The  automatism  may  be  called
active  if  it  finds  a  motor  chamiel,  passive  if  it  finds  a  sensory  channel,
but  the  impulse  whence  it  originates  may  be  much  the  same  in  the  one
case  as  in  the  other."

In  the  paper  from  which  I  cjuote  I  remarked  on  the  unsubstantial
character  of  trance-utterances  in  general.  "  Trance-addresses  are
eminently  barren  of  fact  ;  they  generally  show  little  more  than  a
mere  power  of  improvisation,  which  may  either  be  fraudulently
practised,  or  may  be  a  characteristic  faculty  of  the  unconscious  self."

"When,  therefore,  we  were  informed  by  trusted  witnesses, — by  Pro-
fessor William  James,  who  is  a  physician  as  well  as  a  psychologist,  and
by  Mr.  Hodgson,  whose  acumen  in  the  detection  of  imposture  has  been
proved  in  more  fields  than  one, — that  the  utterances  of  Mrs.  Piper's
trance  did  in  their  view  unquestionably  contain  facts  of  which  Mrs.
Piper  in  her  waking  state  was  wholly  ignorant,  some  inquiry  into  the
character  of  this  trance  seemed  to  fall  in  the  direct  line  of  our  work.
Although  Mrs.  Piper  is  not  actually  a  "  malade  " — as  the  French  are
wont  to  term  their  subjects  of  experiment, — her  case,  from  the  inquirer's
point  of  view,  resembles  that  of  the  well-known  "  Madame  B.,"  or  any
other  semi-pathological  case  which  needs  prolonged  study  outside  the
walls  of  a  hospital.  "VVe  have  not,  however,  asked  the  Council  to  devote
any  part  of  the  Society's  funds  to  this  inquiry.  The  Society  as  such  i.s
in  no  way  committed  to  the  investigation,  nor  responsible  for  any  view
at  which  the  small  group  of  observers  may  have  ai'rived.

However  the  specific  trance-utterances  may  be  interpreted,  the  case
as  a  v/hole  is  a  rare  and  remarkable  one.  It  is  an  instance  of  automa-
tism of  that  extreme  kind  where  the  upheaval  of  sub-conscious  strata
is  not  merely  local,  but  affects,  so  to  say,  the  whole  psychical  area  ;
— where  a  secondary  consciousness  not  only  crops  up  here  and  there
through  the  primary,  but  for  a  time  displaces  it ; — where,  in  short,  the
whole  personality  appears  to  suffer  intermittent  change.

As  a  general  rule,  where  changes  of  personality  thus  complete  and
persistent  have  been  carefully  noted  they  have  seemed  to  depend  either
on  hypnotisation,  or  upon  some  cerebral  injury.  Cases  like  Mrs.
Piper's  are  indeed  recorded  in  Spiritualistic  literature  ;  but  my  own
visits  to  some  half-dozen  "professional  trance-mediums"  had  left  me

1  Vol.  v.,  p.  534,  &c.


438


A  Record  of  Ohservatioris  of


with  little  hope  that  any  evidence  o£  value  for  our  purposes  would  be
forthcoming  from  such  sources.  There  was,  therefore,  much  of  novelty
in  this  case  ;  and  at  the  same  time  there  was  thus  much  of  favourable
prognostic, — that  experiment  with  Madame  B.  and  others  had  already
shown  that  a  secondary  personality  is  a  state  propitious  for  the
emergence  of  telejjathic  or  clairvoyant  phenomena.

Mrs.  Piper's  case  has  been  more  or  less  continuously  observed  by
Professor  James  and  others  almost  from  the  date  of  the  first  sudden
inception  of  the  trance,  si;)me  five  years  ago.  Mr.  Hodgson  has  been
in  the  habit  of  bringing  acquaintances  of  his  own  to  ]\Ii's.  Piper,  with-
out giving  their  names  ;  and  many  of  these  have  heaixl  from  the  trance-
utterance  facts  about  their  dead  relations,  etc.,  which  they  feel  sure  that
Mrs.  Piper  could  not  have  known.  Mr.  Hodgson  also  had  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Piper  watched  or  "  shadowed  "  by  j^rivate  detectives  for  some  weeks,
with  the  view  of  discovering  whether  Mr.  Piper  (who  is  emj)loyed
in  a  large  store  in  Boston,  U.S.A.)  went  about  inquiring  into  the
affairs  of  possible  "sitters,"  or  whether  Mrs.  Piper  received  letters  from
friends  or  agents  conveying  information.  This  inquiry  was  pushed
pretty  closely,  but  absolutely  nothing  was  discovered  which  could  throw
suspicion  on  Mi's.  Piper, — who  is  now  aware  of  the  procedui'e,  but  has
the  good  sense  to  recognise  the  legitimacy — I  may  say  the  scientific
necessity — of  this  kind  of  proljation.

It  was  thus  shown  that  Mi's.  Piper  made  no  discoverable  attempt
to  acquire  knowledge  even  about  j^ersons  whose  coming  she  had  reason
to  expect.  Still  less  could  she  have  been  aware  of  the  private  concerns
of  persons  brought  anonymously  to  her  house  at  Mr.  Hodgson's  choice.
And  a  yet  further  obstacle  to  such  clandestine  knowledge  was  intro-
duced by  her  removal  to  England — at  our  request — in  November,  1889.
Professor  Lodge  met  her  on  the  Liverpool  landing-stage,  November
19th,  and  conducted  her  to  a  hotel,  where  I  joined  her  on  November
20th,  and  escorted  her  and  her  children  to  Cambridge.  She  stayed  first
in  my  house  ;  and  I  am  convinced  that  she  brought  with  her  a  very
slender  knowledge  of  English  affairs  or  English  people.  The  servant
who  attended  on  her  and  on  her  two  young  children  was  chosen  by
myself,  and  was  a  young  woman  from  a  country  village  whom  I  had
full  reason  to  believe  to  be  both  trustworthy  and  also  quite  ignorant
of  my  own  or  my  friends'  aftairs.  For  the  most  part  I  had  myself  not
determined  upt)n  the  persons  whom  I  would  invite  to  sit  with  her.  I
chose  these  sitters  in  great  measure  by  chance  ;  several  of  them  were
not  resident  in  Cambridge ;  and  (except  in  one  or  two  cases  where
anonymity  would  ha^-e  been  hard  to  preserve)  I  brought  them  to  her
under  false  names, — sometimes  introducing  them  only  when  the  trance
had  already  begun.

In  one  sitting,  for  instance,  which  will  be  cited  below,  I  learnt  by


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


439


accident  that  a  certain  lady,  here  styled  Mrs.  A.,  was  in  Cambridge  ; —
a  private  lady,  not  a  member  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,
who  had  never  before  visited  my  house,  and  whose  name  had  certainly
never  been  mentioned  before  Mrs.  Piper.  I  introduced  this  lady  as
Mrs.  Smith ; — and  I  think  that  when  the  reader  is  estimating  the
correct  facts  which  were  told  to  her,  he  may  at  any  rate  dismiss  from
his  mind  the  notion  that  Mrs.  Piper  had  been  able  either  to  divine  that
these  facts  would  be  wanted, — or  to  get  at  them  even  if  she  had  known
that  her  success  depended  on  their  production  on  that  day.

Mrs.  Piper  while  in  England  was  twice  in  Cambridge,  twice  in
London,  and  twice  in  Liverpool,  at  dates  arranged  by  ourselves  ;  her
sitters  (almost  always  introduced  under  false  names)  belonged  to
several  quite  different  social  groups,  and  were  frequently  unacquainted
with  each  other.  Her  correspondence  was  addressed  to  my  care,  and  I
believe  that  almost  every  letter  which  she  received  was  shown  to  one
or  other  of  us.  When  in  London  she  stayed  in  lodgings  which  we
selected  ;  when  at  Liverpool,  in  Professor  Lodge's  house  ;  and  when  at
Cambridge,  in  Professor  Sidgwick's  or  my  ov/n.  No  one  of  her  hosts,,
or  of  her  hosts'  wives,  detected  any  suspicious  act  or  word.

We  took  great  pains  to  avoid  giving  information  in  talk ;  and  a
more  complete  security  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  we  were  ourselves
ignorant  of  many  of  the  facts  given  as  to  our  friends'  relations,  etc.  In
the  case  of  Mrs.  Verrall,  for  instance,  (cited  below,)  no  one  in  Cambridge
except  Mrs.  Yerrall  herself  could  have  supplied  the  bulk  of  the  infor-
mation given  ;  and  some  of  the  facts  given  (as  will  be  seen)  Mrs.  Verrall
herself  did  not  know.  As  regards  my  own  affairs,  I  have  not  thought
it  worth  while  to  cite  in  extenso  such  statements  as  might  possibly
have  been  got  up  beforehand ;  since  Mrs.  Piper  of  course  knew  that  I
should  be  one  of  her  sitters.  Such  facts  as  that  I  once  had  an  aunt,
"  Cordelia  Marshall,  more  commonly  called  Corrie,"  might  have  been
learnt, — though  I  do  not  think  that  they  were  learnt, — from  printed  or
other  sources.  But  I  do  not  think  that  any  larger  proportion  of  such
accessible  facts  was  given  to  me  than  to  an  average  sitter,  previously
unknown ;  nor  were  there  any  of  those  subtler  points  which  could  so
easily  have  been  made  by  dint  of  scrutiny  of  my  books  or  papers.  On
the  other  hand,  in  my  case,  as  in  the  case  of  several  other  sitters,  there
were  messages  ^Durporting  to  come  from  a  friend  who  has  been  dead
many  years,  and  mentioning  circumstances  which  I  believe  that  it
would  have  been  quite  impossible  for  Mrs.  Piper  to  have  discovered.

I  am  also  acquainted  with  some  of  the  facts  given  to  other  sitters,
and  suppressed  as  too  intimate,  or  as  involving  secrets  not  the  property
of  the  sitter  alone.  I  may  say  that  so  far  as  my  own  personal  con-
viction goes,  the  utterance  of  one  or  two  of  these  facts  is  even  more
conclusive  of  supernormal  knowledge  than  the  correct  statement  of


440


A  Record  of  Observations  of


dozens  of  names  of  relations,  &c.,  which  the  sitter  had  no  personal
motive  for  concealing.

On  the  whole,  I  believe  that  all  observers,  both  in  America  and
in  England,  who  have  seen  enough  of  Mrs.  Piper  in  both  states  to  be
able  to  form  a  judgment,  will  agree  in  affirming  (1)  that  many  of  the
facts  given  could  not  have  been  learnt  even  by  a  skilled  detective ;
(2)  that  to  learn  others  of  them,  although  possible,  would  have  needed
an  expenditure  of  money  as  well  as  of  time  which  it  seems  impossible
to  suppose  that  Mrs.  Piper  could  have  met ;  and  (3)  that  her  conduct
has  never  given  any  ground  whatever  for  supposing  her  capable  of
fr-aud  or  trickery.  Few  persons  have  been  so  long  and  so  carefully
obsei'ved ;  and  she  has  left  on  all  observers  the  impression  of  thorough
uprightness,  candour,  and  honesty.

Less  than  this  it  Avould  not  be  fair  to  say.  But,  on  the  other  hand,
it  must  be  remembered  that  the  personal  honesty  of  Mrs.  Piper,  in  the
waking  state,  covers  only  a  part  of  our  difficulties.  We  are  dealing  with
an  honest  subject,  and  with  a  genuine  trance ;  but  it  by  no  means
follows  that  the  trance-personality  is  as  honest  as  the  waking  one.
Analogy  would  be  against  such  an  assumption.  It  may  be  remembered
that  in  Mr.  and  Mis.  Newnham's  case  of  thought-transference,  mani-
fested by  planchette-writing,!  the  unconscious  self  of  Mrs.  Newnham,
which  in  some  wa,y  learnt  the  questions  Avhich  Mr.  Newnham  was
writing  down,  exhibited  at  times  a  tiickiness  and  a  pretension  to  know-
ledge that  it  did  not  possess,  which  were  quite  foreign  to  Mrs.
Newnham's  conscious  mind.  With  other  automatic  messages, — whether
conveyed  by  table-tilting,  planchette-writing,  or  ordinary  automatic
script, — the  case  is  much  the  same.  Even  though  the  messages  may
usually  seem  straightforward  enough,  times  will  coine  when  the  responses
degenerate, — when  silly  jokes,  or  manifest  unti'uths,  or  violent  expressions
■are  written,  pei-haps,  over  and  over  again.  This  seems  to  go  with
fatigue  in  the  automatist,  and  to  show  some  want  of  co-ordination.

Mrs.  Piper's  trance-condition  is  markedly  subject  to  these  forms  of
degeneration.  As  will  be  more  fully  described  later  on,  she  passes  with
slight  convulsions  into  a  condition  in  v^'hich  a  personality  calling  itself
"  Dr.  Phinuit  "  comes  to  the  front.  And  "  Phinuit " — to  use  his  own
appellation  for  brevity's  sake — is  by  no  means  above  "  fishing."  His
ways  of  extracting  information  from  the  sitter,  under  the  guise  of  giving
it,  will  be  described  in  detail  by  Mr.  Leaf.  Different  trances,  and
different  parts  of  the  same  trance,  varied  greatly  in  quality.  There  were
some  interviews  throughout  which  Phinuit  hardly  asked  any  (juestion,
and  hardly  stated  anything  which  was  not  true.  There  were  others
throughout  which  his  utterances  showed  not  one  glimmer  of  real  know-
ledge, but  consisted  wholly  of  fishing  questions  and  random  assertions.

^Phantasms  of  the  Licing,  Vol,  I.,  p.  03.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


441


These  trances  cannot  always  be  induced  at  pleasure.  A  state  of
quiet  expectancy  or  "  self-suggestion  "  will  usually  bring  one  on  ;  but
sometimes  the  attempt  altogether  fails.  "VVe  never  attempted  to  induce
the  trance  by  hypnotism.  I  understand,  indeed,  that  Mrs.  Piper  has
never  been  deeply  hypnotised,  although  Professor  Richet  tried  on  her
some  experiments  of  suggestion  in  the  waking  state,  and  found  her
somewhat  "  suggestible."  On  the  other  hand,  the  trance  has  occasionally
appeared  when  it  was  not  desired.  The  first  time  that  it  occurred,
(as  Mrs.  Piper  informs  us,)  it  came  as  an  unwelcome  surprise.  And
Mrs.  Piper  believes — our  evidence  lies  in  her  own  inference  from  her  own
sensations — that  the  access  has  several  times  come  upon  her  during
sleep,  exhausting  her  for  the  succeeding  day.  An  instance  of  this  kind
occurred  at  Cambridge.  Before  going  to  bed  she  had,  at  my  request,
and  for  the  first  time  in  her  life,  been  looking  into  a  crystal,  with  the
desire  to  see  therein  some  hallucinatory  figure  which  might  throw  light
on  the  nature  of  the  mysterious  secondary  personality.  She  saw  nothing;
but  next  morning  she  looked  exhausted,  and  said  that  she  thought  that
she  had  had  an  access  during  the  night.  The  next  time  that  she  went
into  a  trance  Phinviit  said  he  had  come  and  called,  arid  no  one  had
answered  him.  It  appeared  as  though  the  concentration  of  thought
upon  the  crystal  had  acted  as  a  kind  of  self-suggestion,  and  had  induced
the  secondary  state,  when  not  desired.

The  trance  when  induced  generally  lasted  about  an  hour.  On  one
occasion  in  my  house,  and  I  believe  once  at  least  in  America,  it  only
lasted  for  about  a  minute.  Phinuit  only  had  time  to  say  that  he  could
not  remain,  and  then  the  habitual  moaning  began,  and  Mrs.  Piper
came  to  herself.

There  was  often  a  marked  difference  between  the  first  few  minutes
of  a  trance  and  the  remaining  time.  On  such  occasions  almost  all  that
was  of  value  would  be  told  in  the  first  few  minutes  ;  and  the  remainino-
talk  would  consist  of  vague  generalities  or  mere  repetitions  of  what  had
already  been  given.  Phinuit,  as  will  be  seen,  always  professed  himself
to  be  a  spirit  communicating  with  spirits  ;  and  he  used  to  say  that  he
remembered  their  messages  for  a  few  minutes  after  "entering  into  the
medium,"  and  then  became  confused.  He  v>-as  not,  however,  apparently
able  to  depart  when  his  budget  of  facts  v/as  empty.  There  seemed  to
be  some  irresponsible  letting-off  of  energy  which  must  continue  until
the  original  impulse  was  lost  in  incoherence.

We  shall  endeavour  to  set  forth  our  series  of  observations  fully
and  fairly,  giving  as  far  as  jjossible  the  actual  view  of  each  observer,
and  withholding  no  judgment  of  an  unfavourable  kijid.  We  had
at  first  hoped  to  have  printed  all  our  evidence  in  this  Part  of
the  Proceedings  ;  but  Mr.  Hodgson's  collection  of  American  testimony,
with  account  of  medical  examination,  has  been  unavoidably  delayed,


442


A  Record  of  Observations  of


and  must  be  postponed  to  the  next  Part.  Pi-ofessor  Lodge  and
Mr.  Leaf  have  given  a  full  account  of  the  English  sittings,  and
a  paper  by  Professor  William  James,  of  Harvard  University,  con-
cludes the  batch  of  evidence  which  we  can  at  present  offer.  It  is
possible  that  Mrs.  Piper  may  visit  England  again,  and  we  shall  be  glad
of  any  criticisms  which  may  assist  in  the  difficult  task  of  giving  stability
and  precision  to  these  fleeting  and  often  incoherent  phenomena.  But
even  as  our  evidence  stands,  the  reader  will  thus  have  much  material
from  which  to  form  his  own  opinion  as  to  the  origin  of  the  know-
ledge,— some  of  it  plainly  acquired,  I  think,  in  some  supernormal
way, — which  these  trance-utterances  show.  But  I  would  warn  him
against  coming  to  any  definite  conclusion  on  the  strength  of  this  case
alone.  Phinuit's  utterances  must  be  judged,  I  think,  as  but  one  item
in  the  long  roll  of  automatic  messages  of  many  kinds  which  are  only
now  beginning  to  be  collected  and  analysed.  I  regard  it  as  proved
that  these  phenomena  afford  evidence  of  large  extensions — telepathic
or  clairvoyant — of  the  noimal  powers  of  the  human  spirit.  It  is
possible  that  Phinuit's  knowledge  is  thus  derived  from  a  telepathic  or
clairvoyant  faculty,  latent  in  Mrs.  Piper,  and  manifesting  itself  in
ways  with  which  previous  experiment  has  not  made  us  familiar.  On  the
other  hand,  the  wide  class  of  "automatic  messages"  includes  phenomena
of  very  various  types,  some  of  which  certainly  point  prinid  facie  to  the
intervention, — perhaps  the  very  indirect  intervention, — of  the  surviving
personalities  of  the  dead.  If  such  instances  of  communication  from
extra-terrene  minds  should  ultimately  find  acceptance  with  Science,
then  Phinuit's  messages,  with  all  their  drawbacks,  and  all  their  incon-
sistency, will  have  fair  claijn  to  be  added  to  the  num]:)er.


I

Certain


Phenomena


of  Trance.


443


■  '  (2)  PART  I.

By  Professor  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.

Account  of  sittings  ivith  3frs.  Pijjer.
Formal  Report.

At  the  request  of  Mr.  Myers  I  undertook  a  share  iu  the  investiga-
tion of  a  case  of  apparent  clairvoyance.

It  is  the  case  of  a  lady  who  appears  to  go  off  into  a  trance  when  she
pleases  to  will  it  under  favourable  surroundings,  and  in  that  trance  to
talk  volubly,  with  a  manner  and  voice  quite  different  from  her  ordinary
manner  and  voice,  on  details  concerning  which  she  has  had  no
information  given  her.

In  this  abnormal  state  her  speech  has  reference  mainly  to  people's
relatives  and  friends,  living  or  deceased,  about  whom  she  is  able  to  hold
a  conversation,  and  with  whom  she  appears  more  or  less  familiar.

By  introducing  anonymous  strangers,  and  by  catechising  her  myself
in  various  ways,  I  have  satisfied  myself  that  much  of  the  information
she  possesses  in  the  ti'ance  state  is  not  acquired  by  ordinary  common-
place methods,  but  that  she  has  some  unusual  means  of  acquiiing
information.  The  facts  on  which  she  discourses  are  usually  within  the
knowledge  of  some  person  present,  though  they  are  often  entirely  out
of  his  conscious  thought  at  the  time.  Occasionally  facts  have  been
narrated  which  have  only  been  verihed  afterwards,  and  which  are  in
good  faith  assei'ted  never  to  have  been  known  ;  meaning  thereby  that
they  have  left  no  trace  on  the  conscious  memory  of  any  person  present
or  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  that  it  is  highly  improbable  that  they
were  ever  knf)wn  to  such  persons.

She  is  also  in  the  trance  state  able  to  diagnose  diseases  and  to
specify  the  owners  or  late  owners  of  portable  property,  under  circum-
stances which  preclude  the  application  of  ordinary  methods.

In  the  midst  of  this  lucidity  a  number  of  mistaken  and  confused
.statements  are  frequently  made,  having  little  or  no  apparent  meaning
or  application.

Concerning  the  particular  means  by  which  she  acquires  the  different
kinds  of  information,  there  is  no  sufficient  evidence  to  make  it  safe  to
draw  any  conclusion.  I  can  only  say  with  certainty  that  it  is  by
none  of  the  ordinaiy  methods  known  to  Physical  Science.

Oliver  J.  Lodge.

jVatj,  1890.

The  above  careful  statement  does  not  convey  any  vivid  idea  of  the
actual  occurrences,  nor  does  it  impart  such  information  as  is  needed  by
persons  not  already  familiar  with  the  subject  before  they  read  the


44)4


A  Record  of  Observations  of


detailed  report ;  hence  it  may  be  ^permissible  to  amplify  it  by  a  more
descriptive  and  less  cautiously  worded  account  of  my  expeiience,
accompanied  by  a  preliminary  examination  of  such  elucidatory  hypo-
theses as  suggest  themselves  ;  premising  that  for  evidence  the  report  of
the  sittings  must  be  appealed  to,  not  this  narrative  account.

Regarding  the  manner  of  the  sitting,  it  may  be  convenient  to  print
here,  as  sufEciently  representative  of  what  happens,  and  as  embodying"
what  it  is  necessary  somewhere  to  say  concerning  Mrs.  Piper's  initial
acquaintance  with  me,  a  statement  I  wrote  shortly  after  my  first
sitting.

Prdimbuiry  datemciit  written  December  1st,  1889.

Mrs.  Piijer  arrived  in  England  on  November  19tli  in  the  Cunard  steamer
Scijthta  from  Boston,  and  as  Mr.  Myers  was  called  away  to  Edinbui-gh  on
that  day,  I  met  the  steamer  at  his  request  and  conveyed  the  lady  to  the
hotel  aj^artments  he  had  taken  for  her.

I  was  a  complete  stranger,  but  was  introduced  sufficiently  by  a  note  Mr.
Myers  had  left  with  the  hotel  Commissionaire,  \vho  also  met  the  steamer  and
saw  the  luggage  through  the  Custom  House.  In  the  course  of  the  drive  to
the  hotel  with  Mrs.  Piper  and  her  two  little  girls,  I  mentioned  tliat  I  had  a
good  many  children  ;  in  fact,  seven.  I  also  told  her  that  I  was  a  Professor  at
a  college  in  tlie  city.  At  the  hotel  I  left  her,  and  though  I  called  next  day
just  to  see  tliat  she  was  all  right,  I  told  her  no  more  about  myself,  nor  was;
she  in  the  least  inquisitive.  She  was  naturally  tired  after  the  journey,  and
absorbed  with  the  children.  That  evening  Mr.  Myers  arrived,  and  next  day
escorted  her  to  his  house  in  Cambridge.

I  remained  at  work  in  Liverpool  till  November  29tli,  wlien  I  travelled  to
London  to  attend  the  Royal  Society  dinner  the  following  day.  And  on  the
morning  of  this  day,  the  30th,  I  met  Mr.  Myers  at  King's  Cross,  and
travelled  to  Caml)ridge  with  him  by  the  9.5  a.m.  train,  reaching  his  house
abi)ut  11.  Mrs.  Piper  was  soon  ready  and  vre  commenced  a  sitting.  I  sat
facing  Mrs.  Piper  in  a  partially  darkened  room,  and  Mr.  Myers  was  within
earshot  on  the  other  side  of  curtains,  taking  note  of  what  was  said.  Mrs.
Piper  sat  still,  leaning  forward  in  her  chair,  and  holding  my  hands.  For
some  time  she  could  not  go  off,  but  at  last  she  said,  "  Oh,  I  am  going,"  the
clock  happened  to  strike  one  (for  a  half  hour),  and  slie  twitched  convulsively,
ejaculated  "  don't, "  and  v/ent  into  apparent  epilepsy.  [I  had  seen  epilepsy
several  times  before  and  recognised  many  of  the  ordinary  and  obvious
symptoms  ;  not,  of  course,  pretending  to  speak  medically.]  Gradually  she
Ijecame  (juiet,  and  still  holding  my  right  hand,  cleared  her  throat  in  a  male
voice,  and  with  distinctly  altered  and  hardened  features,  eyes  closed  and  rm-
used  the  whole  time.  Having  been  told  what  to  expect  and  how  to  humour
this  impersonation,  I  said,  "Well,  Doctor,"  upon  which  he  [for  it  sounded  like
a  man,  and  I  quite  forgot  that  it  was  a  woman  who  was  speaking  for  the  rest
of  the  sitting :  the  vi^hole  manner  and  conversation  was  masculine]  introduced
liimself  as  "Dr.  Phinuit,"  and  we  made  the  usual  commonjilace  remarks.
I  found  it  difficult  to  know  what  to  say,  but  I  said  I  had  heard  of  him  from
Myers,  and  he  said,  "  Ha  I  Myers,  is  he  here  ?  He  wasn't  here  last  time  I
came,"  upon  whic Mr.  Myers  rci>lied,  "  Yes,  I  am  here,  Doctor." He  said


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


445


a  few  more  words  to  Mr.  Myers,  and  then  asked  me  if  there  was  anything  I
wanted  to  ask  him,  at  the  same  time  pvitting  his  hand  on  my  head  and
feeling  all  over  it,  saying  he  wanted  to  become  acquainted  with  me,  that  I  was
"a  nice  fellow,"  "worked  too  hard,"  "had  a  full  head,"  and  such  like
things,  as  he  probably  would  say  to  anyone  engaged  in  similar  pursuits.  I
asked  him  if  he  could  tell  me  anything  about  my  relations,  upon  which  he
began  a  rambling  and  excited  conversation  consisting  of  short  sentences  and
curious  snatches  and  jerks,  with  occasional  wanderings  into  momentary
(apparent)  irrelevance,  but  every  now  and  again  coming  to  a  point
energetically  and  hammering  it  into  me  with  insistence  both  verbal  and
manual.  Of  this  conversation  Mr.  Myers  took  as  complete  notes  as  was
possible,  and  I  have  not  been  able  to  supplement  his  notes  very  materially,
except  perhaps  liere  and  there  with  a  touch  which  had  escaped  him.

The  occasional  irrelevance  faintly  coming  in  every  now  and  then  amid
the  more  constant  coherent  and  vigorous  communication,  reminded  me
of  listening  at  a  telephone,  where,  whenever  your  main  correspondent  is  silent,
you  liear  the  dim  and  meaningless  fragments  of  a  city's  gossip,  till  back  again
comes  the  voice  obviously  addressed  to  you  and  speaking  with  firmness  and
decision.

The  record  follows  later  (p.  465).  The  details  given  of  mj'  family  are  just
such  as  one  might  imagine  obtained  by  a  perfect  stranger  surrounded  by
the  whole  of  one's  relations  in  a  group  and  able  to  converse  freely  but  hastily
with  one  after  the  other  ;  not  knowing  them  and  being  rather  confused  with
their  number  and  half -understood  messages  and  personalities,  and  having  a
special  eye  to  their  physical  weaknesses  and  defects.  A  person  in  a  liurry  thus
trying  to  tell  a  stranger  as  much  about  his  friends  as  he  could  in  this  way
gather  would  seem  to  me  to  be  likely  to  make  much  the  same  kind  of  com-
munication as  was  actually  made  to  me.

In  order  to  gain  further  experience,  my  wife  invited  Mrs.  Pijjer  to
Our  house  between  the  dates  December  18th  and  December  27th,  1889  ;
and  again  between  the  dates  January  30th  and  February  5th,  1890,
when  she  sailed  for  New  York.

During  these  days  we  had  22  sittings,  and  I  devoted  my  whole  time
to  the  business,  being  desirous  of  making  the  investigation  as  complete
and  satisfactory  as  possible  while  the  opportunity  lasted.

Mrs.  Piper  pretends  to  no  knowledge  as  to  her  own  ^sowers,  and
I  believe  her  assertion  that  she  is  absolutely  ignorant  of  all  that  she
has  said  in  the  trance  state.  She  appears  to  be  anxious  to  get  the
phenomenon  elucidated,  and  hopes  by  sitting  to  scientific  investigators
to  have  light  thrown  on  her  abnormal  condition,  about  which  she
expresses  herself  as  not  cjuite  comfortable.  She  perfectly  appreciates
the  reasonableness  of  withholding  information  from  her  ;  assents  with
a  smile  to  a  sudden  stop  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence,  and  in  general
is  quite  uninquisitive.  All  this  innocency  may,  of  course,  be  taken
as  perfection  of  acting,  but  it  deprives  her  of  the  great  advantage
(assuming  fraudulent  intention  for  the  moment)  of  controlling  the-
circumstances  after  the  manner  of  a  conjurer;  and  prevents  her  front

2  I


446


A  Record  of  Observations  of


being  the  master  of  her  own  time  and  movements.  The  conti'ol  of  the
experiments  was  thus  entirely  in  my  own  hands,  and  this  is  an  essential
ingredient  for  satisfactory  testimony.

The  initial  question  to  be  satisfactorily  answered  before  anything
can  be  held  worth  either  investigating  or  recording  concerns  the
honesty  of  Mrs.  Piper  herself.

That  there  is  more  than  can  be  exj^lained  by  any  amount  of  either
conscious  or  unconscious  fraud,  that  the  phenomenon  is  a  genuine
one  however  it  is  to  be  explained,  I  now  regard  as  absolutely  certain  ;
and  I  make  the  following  two  statements  with  the  utmost  confidence  : — ■

(i.)  Mrs.  Pij^er's  attitude  is  not  one  of  deception.

(ii.)  No  conceivable  deception  on  the  part  of  Mrs.  Piper  can  explain
the  facts.

I  will  not  take  up  time  by  doing  more  than  enumerating  some  of  the
methods  of  imposture  which  suggest  themselves  to  an  inquirer  as
preliminary  possibilities  to  be  guarded  against. Such  as  : —

Inquiiy  by  paid  agents.

Inquiry  by  correspondence.

Catechism  of  servants  or  children.

Research  in  Family  Bibles.

Study  of  photograph  albums.

Use  of  directories  and  biogi'aphies.

Prowling  about  the  house  at  night  with  skeleton  keys.
Bribing  servants  to  name  the  sitter.
The  question  of  good  faith  is  so  vital  that  before  taking  leave  of
this  part  of  the  subject  I  will  make  the  following  statements  : —

1 .  Mrs.  Piper's  correspondence  was  small,  something  like  three  letters
a  week,  even  when  the  children  were  away  from  her.  The  outsides  of
her  letters  nearly  always  passed  through  my  hands,  and  often  the
insides,  too,  by  her  permission.

2.  The  servants  were  all,  as  it  happened,  new,  having  been  obtained
by  my  wife  through  ordinary  local  inquiries  and  registry  offices,  just
about  the  time  of  Mrs.  Piper's  visit.  Consequently  they  were  entirely
ignorant  of  family  connections,  and  could  have  told  nothing,  however
largely  they  had  been  paid.

The  ingenious  suggestion  has  been  made  that  they  were  her  spies.
Knowing  the  facts,  I  will  content  myself  with  asserting  that  they  had
absolutely  no  connection  with  her  of  any  sort.

3.  The  photograph  albums  and  Family  Bibles  were  hidden  by  me
the  morning  of  the  day  after  she  arrived  at  my  house.  I  had  intended
to  do  it  sooner.  This  is  manifestly  a  weak  point.  Like  many  such
things,  it  sounds  worse  than  it  is.  The  more  important  books  were  in
my  study,  and  into  it  she  did  not  go  till  just  before  the  first  sitting.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


447


One  or  two  photographs  she  did  look  at,  and  these  are  noted.  The
safest  thing  is  to  assume  that  she  may  have  looked  at  everything  about
the  house.

4.  In  order  to  be  able  to  give  better  evidence,  I  obtained  permission
and  immediately  thereafter  personally  overhauled  the  whole  of  her
luggage.  Directories,  biographies,  Men  of  the  Time,  and  such-like
books  were  entirely  absent.  In  fact  there  were  scarcely  any  books
at  all.

5.  The  eldest  child  at  home  was  aged  nine,  and  the  amount  of
information  at  his  disposal  was  fairly  well  known  to  us.  My  wife  was
sceptically  inclined,  and  was  guarded  in  her  utterances  ;  and  though  a
few  slips  could  hardly  be  avoided — and  one  or  two  of  these  were  rather
unlucky  ones — they  were  noted  and  are  recorded.

6.  Strange  sitters  frequently  arrived  at  11  a.m.,  and  I  admitted
them  myself  straight  into  the  room  where  we  were  going  to  sit ;  they
were  shortly  afterwai'ds  introduced  to  Mrs.  Piper  under  some  assumed
name.

7.  Occasionally,  when  the  sitter  came  in  an  evening  and  took  a
meal  first,  the  correct  name  was  apt  to  leak  out.  Even  then  it  seems  to
me  that  a  portentous  and  impossible  memory  would  be  needed  to  select
from  the  entire  mass  of  facts  which  had  been  previously  (by  impossible
hypothesis)  hunted  up  and  memorialised  for  the  circle  of  my  and  many
other  people's  acquaintance,  and  to  affix  the  correct  parcel  to  the
appropriate  individual.

8.  The  whole  attitude  of  Mrs.  Piper  was  natural,  uninquisitive,
ladylike,  and  straightforward.  If  anything  was  noticeable  it  was  a
trace  of  languor  and  self -absorption,  very  natural  under  the  trying
condition  of  two  long  trances  a  day.

Her  whole  demeanour  struck  everyone  who  became  intimate  with
her  as  utterly  beyond  and  above  suspicion.

9.  The  trance  is,  to  the  best  of  my  belief,  a  genuine  one.  In  it
Mrs.  Piper  is  (sometimes,  at  least,)  insensible  to  pain,  as  tested  by
suddenly  pushing  a  needle  into  her  hand,  which  causes  not  the  slightest
flinching ;  and  her  pulse  is  affected  beyond  what  I  can  imagine  to
be  the  control  of  volition.  Of  the  genuineness  of  the  trance  I  have
not  the  remotest  doubt,  and  only  say  no  more  about  it  because  it  is
a  question  for  medical  witnesses  (p.  441).

Cheating  being  supposed  out  of  the  question,  and  something  which
may  briefly  be  described,  at  least  by  a  non-psychologist,  as  a  duplex
or  trance  personality  being  conceded,  the  next  hypothesis  is  that  her
trance  personality  makes  use  of  information  acquired  by  her  in  her
waking  state,  and  retails  what  it  finds  in  her  sub-consciousness  without
any  oi'dinary  efibrt  of  memory.

2  I  2


448


A  Record  of  Observations  of


It  is  au  interesting  question  whether  any  facts  instilled  into  the
waking  Mi's.  Piper  can  be  recognised  in  the  subseciuent  trance  speech
]\Iy  impi'ession  at  one  time  was  that  the  trance  information  is  practically
independent  of  what  specific  facts  Mrs.  Piper  may  happen  to  know.
The  evidence  now  seems  to  me  aljout  evenly  balanced  on  either  sitie.
Whether  the  trance  sj^eech  could  give,  say,  scientific  facts,  or  a  foreign
language,  or  anything  in  its  nature  entirely  beyond  her  ken,  I  am
unable  to  say.  Definite  ex^^eriments  may  ha^'e,  and  I  hope  have,  been,
directed  to  each  of  these  questions,  but  not  yet  by  me.  I  want  to
attack  these  questions  next  time  I  have  a  chance.  So  far  as  my  pr'esent
experience  has  gone,  I  do  not  feel  sure  how  far  Mrs.  Piper's  knowledge
or  ignorance  of  specific  facts  has  an  appreciable  influence  on  the  com-
munication of  her  trance  personality.  But  certainly  the  great  inass-
of  facts  retailed  by  this  pei'sonality  are  wholly  outside  of  Mrs.  Piper's
knowledge  ;  in  detail,  though  not  in  kind.

The  jJersonality  active  and  speaking  in  the  trance  is  aj^parently  so
distinct  from  the  personality  of  Mrs.  Piper  that  it  is  permissible  and
convenient  to  call  it  by  another  name.  It  does  not  differ  from  her  as
Hyde  did  from  Jekyll,  by  being  a  jaersonification  of  the  ^^cious  portion
of  the  same  iudi\-idual.  Thei-e  is  no  sjiecial  contrast,  any  more  than
there  is  any  special  similarity.  It  strikes  one  as  a  different  personality
altogether,  and  the  name  by  which  it  inti'oduces  itself  when  asked,  viz.^
"Dr.  Phinuit,"  is  as  convenient  as  any  other,  and  can  be  used  wholly
irrespective  of  hypothesis.

I  would  not  in  using  this  name  be  understood  as  thereby  committing-
myself  to  any  hyp(ithesis  regarding  the  nature  of  this  a2:)parently  distinct
and  individual  mind.  At  the  same  time  the  name  is  useful  as
expressing  compactly  what  is  naturally  pi'ominent  to  the  feeling  of  any
sitter,  that  he  is  not  talking  to  Mrs.  Pij^er  at  all.  The  manner,  mode
of  thought,  tone,  trains  of  idea,  are  all  diflerent.  You  are  speaking-
no  longer  to  a  lady  l>ut  to  a  man,  an  old  man,  a  medical  man.  All  this
cannot  but  be  vividly  felt  even  by  one  who  considered  the  impersona-
tion a  consummate  piece  of  acting.

Whether  such  a  man  as  Dr.  Phinuit  ever  existed  I  do  not  Ivnow,
nor  from  the  evidential  point  of  view  do  I  greatly  care.  It  will  he
interesting  to  have  the  fact  ascertained  if  possible  ;  but  I  cannot  see
that  it  will  much  affect  the  c|uestion  of  genuineness.  For  that  he  did
not  ever  exist  is  a  thing  practically  impossible  to  prove.  While,  if  he
did  exist,  it  can  be  easily  supposed  that  Mrs.  Pijaer  took  care  enough
that  her  impersonation  should  have  so  much  rational  basis  (p.  520).

It  can  be  objected,  why  if  he  was  a  French  doctor  has  he  so  entirely
forgotten  his  French  ?  For  though  he  speaks  in  a  Frenchified  manner,  I
am  told  that  he  cannot  sustain  a  conversation  in  that  language.  I  am
unable  to  meet  this  objection,  by  anything  l)eyond  the  obvious  sugges-


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


44-9


tion  that  Mrs.  Piper's  brain  is  the  medium  utilised,  and  that  she  is  like-
wise ignorant.  But  one  would  think  that  it  would  be  a  sufficiently
patent  objection  to  deter  an  impersonatoi'  from  assuming  a  rcj/e  of  purely
unnecessary  difficulty,  and  one  which  it  was  impossible  satisfactorily  to
maintain.

Admitting,  however,  that  "  Dr.  Phinuit "  is  probably  a  mere  name
for  Mrs.  Piper's  secondary  coiisciousiiess,  one  cannot  help  being  struck
by  the  singular  correctness  of  his  medical  diagnoses.  In  fact  the
medical  statements,  coinciding  as  they  do  with  truth  just  as  well  as
those  of  a  regular  physician,  but  given  without  any  ordinary  examina-
tion and  sometimes  without  even  seeing  the  patient,  must  be  held  as
part  of  the  evidence  establishing  a  strong  ■prima  facie  case  for  the
existence  of  some  abnormal  means  of  acquiring  information.  Not  that
it  is  to  be  supposed  that  he  is  more  infallible  than  another.  I  have
one  definite  case  of  distinct  error  in  a  diagnosis  (p.  547).

Proceeding  now  on  the  assumption  that  I  may  speak  henceforth  of  Dr.
Phinuit  as  of  a  genuine  individual  intelligence,  whether  it  be  a  usually
latent  portion  of  Mrs.  Piper's  intelligence,  or  whether  it  be  something
distinct  from  her  mind  and  the  education  to  which  it  has  been
subjected,  I  go  on  to  consider  the  hyjjotheses  which  still  remain  un-
examined.

And  first  we  have  the  hypothesis  of  fishery  on  the  part  of  Di-.
Phinuit,  as  distinguished  from  tiickery  on  the  part  of  Mi-s.  Piper.  I
mean  a  system  of  ingenious  fishing  :  the  utilisation  of  trivial
indications,  of  every  intimation,  audible,  tactile,  muscular,  and  of
little  shades  of  manner  too  indefinable  to  name  ;  all  these  excited  in
the  sitter  by  skilful  guesses  and  well-directed  shots,  and  their  nutri-
ment extracted  with  supei'human  cu.nning.

Now  this  hypothesis  is  not  one  to  be  lightly  regarded,  or  ever  wholly
set  aside.  I  regard  it  as,  to  a  certain  extent,  a  vera  causa.  At  times
Dr.  Phinuit  does  fish.  Occasionally  he  guesses  ;  and  sometimes  he  ekes
out  the  scantiness  of  his  information  from  the  resources  of  a  lively
imaginatioia.

Whenevei'  his  sujiply  of  information  is  abundant  there  is  no  sign
of  the  fishing  process.

At  other  times  it  is  as  if  he  were  in  a  difficult  position, — only  able
to  gain  information  from  very  indistinct  or  inaudible  sources,  and  yet
wishful  to  convey  as  much  information  as  jDossible.  The  attitude  is
then  as  of  one  straining  after  eveiy  clue,  and  making  use  of  the
•slightest  indication,  whether  received  in  normal  or  aluiormal  ways :  not
indeed  obviously  distinguishing  between  information  received  from
the  sitter  and  information  received  from  other  sources.

The  fishing  process  is  most  marked  when  Mrs.  Piper  herself
either  is  not  feeling  well  oi-  is  tired. Dr.  Phinuit  seems  to  experience


450


A  Record  of  Observations  of


moi'e  difficulty  then  in  obtaining  information ;  and  vv'hen  he  does  not
hsh  he  .sim25ly  draws  upon  his  memory  and  retails  old  facts  which  he
has  told  before,  occasionally  Avith  additions  of  his  own  which  do  not
improve  them.  His  memory  seems  to  be  one  of  extraordinary  tenacity
and  exactness,  but  not  of  infallibility  ;  and  its  lapses  do  introduce
error,  both  of  defect  and  excess.

He  seems  to  be  under  some  compulsion  not  to  be  silent.  Possibly
the  trance  would  cease  if  he  did  not  exert  himself.  At  any  rate  he
chatters  on,  and  one  has  to  discount  a  good  deal  of  conversation  which
is  obviously,  and  sometimes  confessedly,  introduced  as  a  stop-gap.

He  is  rather  proud  of  his  skill,  and  does  not  like  to  be  told  he  is
wrong  ;  1)ut  when  he  waxes  confidential  he  admits  that  he  is  not
infallible  :  "  he  does  the  best  he  can,"  he  says,  but  sometimes  "  every-
thing seems  dark  to  him,"  and  then  he  flounders  and  gropes,  and
makes  mistakes.

It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  this  floundering  is  always  most  con-
spicuous in  presence  of  a  stranger.  On  the  contrary,  if  he  is  in  good
form  he  will  rattle  ofi"  a  stranger's  connections  pretty  glibly,  being  in-
deed sometimes  oppressed  Avith  the  rush  and  volume  of  the  information
available  ;  while,  if  he  is  in  bad  trim,  he  will  fish  and  retail  stale  news
(especially  the  latter)  to  quite  an  old  hand,  and  one  who  does  not  scruple
to  accuse  him  of  his  delinquencies  when  they  become  conspicuous.

This  fallibility  is  unfortunate,  but  I  don't  know  that  we  should
expect  anything  else  ;  anyhow  it  is  not  a  question  of  what  we  exjject,
but  of  what  we  get.  If  it  were  a  question  of  what  I  for  one  had
expected,  the  statement  of  it  would  not  be  worth  the  writing.

Personally  I  feel  sure  that  Phinuit  can  hardly  help  this  fishing-
process  at  times.  He  does  the  best  he  can,  but  it  would  be  a  great
improvement  if,  when  he  realises  that  conditions  are  unfavourable,  he
would  say  so  and  hold  his  peace.  I  have  tried  to  impress  this  upon
him,  with  the  eflect  that  he  is  sometimes  confidential,  and  says  that  he
is  having  a  bad  time ;  but  after  all  he  probably  knows  his  own  busi-
ness best,  because  it  has  several  times  happened  that  after  half  an  hour
of  more  or  less  worthless  padding,  a  few  minu.tes  of  valuable  lucidity
have  been  attained.

I  have  laid  much  sti-ess  upon  this  fishery  hypothesis  because  it  is  a
fact  to  be  taken  into  consideration,  because  it  is  occasionally  an  un-
fortunately conspicuous  fact,  and  because  of  its  deterrent  eflect  on  a,
2iovice  to  whom  that  aspect  is  first  exposed.

But  in  thus  laying  stress  I  feel  that  I  am  producing  an  erroneous
and  misleading  impression  of  proportion.  I  have  spoken  of  a  few  minutes'
lucidity  to  an  intolerable  deal  of  padding  as  an  occasional  experience,  but
in  the  majority  of  the  sittings  held  in  my  presence  the  converse  propor-
tion better  represents  the  facts.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


451


I  am  familiar  with  muscle-reading  and  other  simulated  "  thought-
transference  "  methods,  and  prefer  to  avoid  contact  whenever  it  is
possible  to  get  rid  of  it  without  too  much  fuss.  Although  Mrs.  Piper
always  held  somebody's  hand  while  preparing  to  go  into  the  trance,
she  did  not  always  continue  to  hold  it  when  speaking  as  Phinuit.  She
did  usually  hold  the  hand  of  the  person  she  was  speaking  to,  but  was
often  satisfied  for  a  time  with  some  other  person's,  sometimes  talking
right  across  a  room  to  and  about  a  stranger,  but  preferring  them  to
come  near.  On  several  occasions  she  let  go  of  everybodj^,  for  half-hours
together,  especially  when  fluent  and  kept  well  supplied  with  "  relics."

I  have  now  to  assert  with  entire  confidence  that,  pressing  the
ingenious-guessing  and  unconscious-indication  hypothesis  to  its  utmost
limit,  it  can  only  be  held  to  account  for  a  very  few  of  Dr.  Phinuit's
statements.

It  cannot  in  all  cases  be  held  to  account  for  medical  diagnoses,
afterwards  confirmed  by  the  regular  practitioner.

It  cannot  account  for  minute  and  full  details  of  names,  circumstances,
and  events,  given  to  a  cautious  and  almost  silent  sitter,  sometimes  with-
out contact.  And,  to  take  the  strongest  case  at  once,  it  cannot  account
for  the  narration  of  facts  outside  the  conscious  knowledge  of  the  sitter
or  of  any  person  present.

Rejecting  the  fishery  hypothesis,  then,  as  iusufticient  to  account
for  many  of  the  facts,  we  are  driven  to  the  only  remaining  known
cause  in  order  to  account  for  them : — viz.,  thought-transference,  or
the  action  of  mind  on  mind  independently  of  the  ordinary  channels  of
communication.  Whether  "  thought-transference  "  be  a  correct  term
to  apply  to  the  process  I  do  not  pretend  to  decide.  That  is  a  question
for  psychologists.

It  may  be  within  the  reader's  knowledge  that  I  regard  the  fact
of  genuine  "  thought-transference "  betv/een  persoiis  in  immediate
proximity  (not  necessarily  in  contact)  as  having  been  established
by  direct  and  simple  experiment ;  and,  except  by  reason  of  paucity
of  instance,  I  consider  it  as  firmly  grounded  as  any  of  the  less  familiar
facts  of  nature  such  as  one  deals  with  in  a  laboratory.  {Proceedings
S.P.R.,  Vol.  II,  p.  189).

I  speak  of  it  therefore  as  a  known  cause,  i.e.,  one  to  wliich  there
need  be  no  hesitation  in  appealing  in  order  to  explain  facts  which
without  it  would  be  inexplicable.

The  Phinuit  facts  are  most  of  them  of  this  nature,  and  I  do  not
hesitate  to  assert  confidently  that  thouglit-transference  is  the  most
commonplace  explanation  to  u-Ji  ich  it  is  possible  to  appeal.

I  regard  it  as  having  been  rigorously  proved  befoi-e,  and  as  therefore
requiring  no  fresh  bolstering  tip ;  but  to  the  many  who  have  not  made
experiments  on  the subject,  and  are  therefore naturally  sceptical


452


A  Record  of  Observations  of


concerning  even  thought-transference,  the  record  of  the  Phinuit  sittings
will  afi'ord,  I  think,  a  secure  basis  for  faith  in  this  immaterial  mode  of
communication, — this  apparently  direct  action  of  mind  on  mind.

But,  Avhereas  the  kin<I  of  thought-transference  which  had  been  to
my  own  knowledge  experimentally  proved  was  a  hazy  and  difficult
recognition  Ijy  one  pei-son  of  objects  kept  as  vividly  as  j^ossible  in  the
consciousness  of  another  pei'son,  the  kind  of  thought-transference
necessary  to  explain  these  sittings  is  of  an  altogether  freer  and  higher
order, — a  kind  which  has  not  yet  been  expeiimentally  proved  at
all.  Facts  are  related  which  are  not  in  the  least  present  to  the
consciousness  of  the  sitter,  and  they  are  often  detailed  glibly  and
vividly  without  delay  ;  in  very  difierent  style  from  the  tedious  and
hesitating  dimness  of  the  percipients  in  the  old  thought-transference
experiments.

But  that  is  natural  enough,  when  we  consider  that  the  percipient
in  those  experiments  had  to  preserve  a  mind  as  vacant  as  possible.
For  no  process  of  inducing  mental  vacancy  can  be  so  perfect  as  that  of
going  into  a  trance,  whether  hypnotic  or  other.

Moreover,  although  it  was  considered  desirable  to  maintain  the
object  contemplated  in  the  consciousness  of  the  agent,  a  shrewd
suspicion  was  even  then  entertained  that  the  unconscious  part  of  the
agent's  brain  might  be  perhaps  equally  effective.

Hence  one  is  at  liberty  to  apjjly  to  these  Phinuit  records  the  hypo-
thesis of  thought-transference  in  its  most  developed  state :  absolute
vacuity  on  the  pavt  of  the  percipient,  acted  on  by  an  entirely  sub-con-
scious or  unconscious  portion  of  the  sitter's  brain.

In  this  form  one  feels  that  much  can  be  explained.  If  Dr.  Phinuit
tells  one  how  many  children,  or  brothers,  or  sisters  one  has,  and  their
names;  the  names  of  fatlier  and  mother  and  grandmother,  of  cousins  and
of  aunts  ;  if  he  brings  appropriate  and  charactei'istic  messages  from
well-known  relatives  deceased  ;  all  this  is  explicable  on  the  hypothesis
of  free  and  ea,sy  thought-transference  from  the  sub-consciousness  of  the
sitter  to  the  sensitive  medium  of  the  trance  personality.^

So  strongly  was  I  impressed  with  this  view  that  after  some  half-
dozen  sittings  I  ceased  to  feel  much  interest  in  being  told  things,
however  minute,  obscure,  and  inaccessible  they  might  be,  so  long  as
they  were,  or  had  been,  within  the  knowledge  either  of  myself  or  of
the  sitter  for  the  time  being.

1  For  instance,  in  the  course  of  my  interviews,  all  ray  six  brothers  (adult  and
scattered)  and  one  sister  living  were  correctly  named  (two  with  some  help),  and  the
existence  of  the  one  deceased  was  mentioned.  My  father  and  his  father  were  likewise
named,  with  several  uncles  and  aunts.  My  wife's  father  and  stepfathei'  were  named
in  full,  both  Christian  and  surname,  with  full  identifying  detail.  I  only  quote  these
as  examjiles  ;  it  is  quite  unnecessary  as  well  as  unwise  to  attach  any  evidential  weight
to  statements  of  this  sort  made  during  a  sojourn  in  one's  house.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


453


At  the  same  time  it  ought  to  be  constantly  borne  in  mind  that
this  kind  of  thought-transference  without  consciously  active  ageiicy
has  never  been  experimentally  pro\ed.  Certain  facts  not  otherwise
apparently  explicable,  such  as  those  chronicled  in  Fliantasms  of  tlie
Living,  have  suggested  it,  but  it  is  really  only  a  possible  hypothesis
to  which  appeal  has  been  made  whenever  any  other  explanation  seems
out  of  the  question.  But  until  it  is  actually  established  by  experiment
in  the  same  way  that  conscious  mind  action  has  been  established,  it
cannot  be  regarded  as  either  safe  or  satisfactory ;  and  in  pursuing  it
we  may  be  turning  our  backs  on  S(jme  truer  but  as  yet  jDerhaps
unsuggested  clue.  I  feel  as  if  this  caution  were  necessary  for  nryself  as
well  as  for  other  members  of  the  Society.

On  reading  the  record  it  will  be  apparent  that  while  "Phinuit"
frequently  speaks  in  his  own  person,  i-elating  things  which  he  himself
discovers  by  what  I  supi^ose  we  must  call  ostensible  clairvoyance,  some-
times he  represents  himself  as  in  connnunication — not  always  quite
easy  and  distinct  communication,  esj3ecially  at  hrst,  but  in  communica-
tion— with  one's  relatives  and  friends  who  have  departed  this  life.

The  messages  and  communications  from  these  persons  are  usually
given  through  Phinuit  as  a  reporter.  And  he  reports  sometimes  in  the
third  person,  sometimes  in  the  hrst.  Occasionally,  but  very  seldom,
Phinuit  seems  to  give  uj)  his  place  altogether  to  the  other  personality,
friend  or  relative,  who  then  communicates  with  something  of  his  old
manner  and  incUviduality  ;  becoming  often-impressive  and  realistic.

This  last  I  say  is  rare,  but  with  one  or  two  personages  it  occurs,
subject  to  reservations  to  be  mentioned  directly  ;  and  when  it  does,
Phinuit  does  not  appear  to  know  what  has  been  said.  It  is  quite  as
if  he  in  his  turn  evacuated  the  body,  just  as  Mrs.  Piper  had  done,
while  a  third  personality  utilises  it  for  a  time.  The  voice  and  mode  of
address  are  once  more  changed,  and  more  oi-  less  recall  the  A^oice  and
manner  of  the  person  represented  as  communicating.

The  communications  thus  oljtained,  though  they  show  traces  of  the
individuality  of  the  person  represented  as  speaking,  are  frequently
vulgarised  ;  and  the  speeches  are  more  commonplace,  and  so  to  say
cheaper,  than  what  one  would  suppose  likely  from  the  person  himself.
It  can,  of  course,  be  suggested  that  the  necessity  of  woi-king  thi-ough  the
brain  of  a  person  not  highly  educated  may  easily  be  sujjposed  capable  of
<lulling  the  edge  of  refinement,  and  of  rendering  messages  on  abstruse
subjects  impossible.

Among  sitters,  I  may  mention  Gerald  Kendall,  late  of  Trinity
College,  Cambridge,  Piincipal  of  University  College,  Liverpool.  He
was  introduced  as  Mr.  Roberts,  and  a  sitting  was  immediately  com-
menced. The  names  of  his  brothers  were  all  given  correctly  at  this  or


454


A  Record  of  Observations  of


at  the  evening  sitting  of  the  same  day,  with  many  specific  details  which
were  correct.

He  brought  with  him  a  locket,  and  received  communications  and
reminiscences  purporting  to  come  from  the  deceased  friend  whom  it
commemorated,  some  of  them  at  present  incompletely  verified  by  reason
of  absence  of  persons  in  America,  some  of  them  apparently  incorrect,
but  those  facts  which  he  knew  correctly  stated  in  such  a  way  as  to
satisfy  him  that  chance  guessing  and  all  other  commonplace  surmises
were  absurdly  out  of  the  question. (Sittings  37  and  38.)

Another  sitter  was  E.  C.  K.  Gonner,  Lecturer  on  Economics  at
University  College,  Liverpool,  introduced  as  Mr.  McCunn,  another
colleague  with  whom  he  hoped  to  be  confused.  He  bi'ought  a  book
belonging  to  his  mother,  still  living  in  London,  and  had  many  correct
details  concerning  her  family  and  surroundings  related  to  him.

Many  of  his  own  family  were  also  mentioned  ;  l)ut,  whether  because
of  the  book  or  otherwise,  his  mother's  influence  seemed  more  powerful
than  his  own ;  and,  several  times,  relatives,  though  otherwise  sj^oken  of
correctly,  were  mentioned  in  terms  of  their  relationship  to  the  elder
generation.  Phinuit,  however,  seemed  conscious  of  these  mistakes  and
several  times  corrected  himself ;  as  for  instance  :  Your  brother  William — •
no,  I  mean  your  uncle,  her  brother.

This  Uncle  William  was  a  good  instance.  He  had  died  before  Gonner
was  born,  but  he  had  l^een  his  mother's  eldest  brother,  and  his
sudden  death  had  heen  a  great  shock  to  her — one  in  fact  from  which  she
was  a  long  time  recovering.  Phinuit  described  him  as  having  been  killed
with  a  hole  in  his  head,  like  a  shot  hole,  and  yet  not  a  shot,  more  like
a  blow  : — the  fact  being  that  he  met  his  death  in  a  Yorkshire  election
riot,  a  stone  striking  him  on  the  head. (Sitting  No.  39,  p.  490.)

Sj^eaking  of  deaths,  I  may  also  mention  the  case  of  my  M'ife's  father
who  died  when  she  was  a  fortnight  old  in  a  dramatic  and  pathetic
fashion.  Phinuit  described  the  circumstances  of  his  death  rather  vividly.
The  cause  of  death  of  her  stepfather  also,  which  was  perfectly  definite,
was  also  jDrecisely  grasped.  The  fall  of  her  own  father  down  the  hold
of  his  ship  and  his  consequent  leg-pain  were  clearly  stated.  My  wife
was  present  on  these  occasions,  and  of  course  had  been  told  of  all  these
incidents,  and  remembered  them. (Sitting  No.  36,  pp.  472,  &c.)

Another  sitter  was  a  medical  practitioner  in  Liverpool,  introduced
anonymously,  who  was  told  a  number  of  facts,  not  all  of  them  correct ;
but  the  name,  tastes,  and  defect  of  one  little  deaf  and  dumb  girl  of
whom  he  is  very  fond  were  vividly  stated.  My  children  are  not
acquainted  with  his. (Sittings  42  and  43.)

Another,  a  very  impromptu  and  inconvenient  sitter,  was  a  short-
hand clerk  whom  I  had  introduced  as  a  note-taker,  but  whose  relatives
were  represented  as  clamouring  for  a  conversation  with  him  ;  and  I


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


455


must  needs  be  turned  out  of  the  room  while  Phinuit  "  straightened
out,"  as  he  called  it,  the  young  fellow's  connections.  A  fair  part  of
what  was  said  is  perfectly  true,  so  he  says,  but  other  parts  he  either
denies  or  is  unable  to  verify. (Sitting  48,  p.  519.)

One  of  the  best  sitters  was  my  next-door  neighbour,  Isaac  0.
Thompson,  F.L.S.,  to  whose  name  indeed,  before  he  had  been  in  any
way  introduced,  Phinuit  sent  a  message  purporting  to  come  from  his
father.  Three  generations  of  his  and  of  his  wife's  family  living  and
dead  (small  and  compact  Quaker  families)  were,  in  the  coui-se  of  two  or
three  sittings,  conspicuously  mentioned,  with  identifying  detail ;  the
main  informant  representing  himself  as  his  deceased  brother,  a  young^
Edinburgh  doctor,  whose  loss  had  been  mourned  some  20  years  ago.
The  familiaiity  and  touchingness  of  the  messages  communicated  in  this,
particular  instance  were  very  rema.rkable,  and  can  by  no  means  be
reproduced  in  any  printed  rejDort  of  the  sitting.  (Nos.  45,  50,  80,
81,  and  83.)

Their  case  is  one  in  which  very  few  mistakes  were  made,  the  details,
standing  out  vividly  correct,  so  that  in  fact  they  found  it  impossible
not  to  believe  that  their  relatives  were  actually  speaking  to  them.
This  may  sound  absurd,  but  it  correctly  represents  the  impression  pro-
duced by  a  favourable  series  of  sittings,  and  it  is  for  that  reason  I
mention  it  now.

Simple  events  occurring  elsewhere  during  the  sitting  were  also-
detected  by  Dr.  Phinuit  in  their  case,  better  than  in  any  other  I  know
of. (For  instance,  the  "rings"  episode,  on  p.  546.)

Another  rather  remarkable  case  arrived  towards  the  end  of  my
series  of  sittings,  when  this  friend  of  mine  was  present.  A  message
interpolated  itself  to  a  gentleman  living  in  Liverpool,  known,  but  not  at
all  intimately  known,  to  both  of  us,  and  certainly  outside  of  our
thoughts — the  head  of  the  Liverpool  Post-ofSce,  Mr.  P^ich.  The
message  purported  to  be  from  a  son  of  his  who  had  died  suddenly  a  few
months  ago,  and  whom  I  had  never  seen ;  though  my  friend  had,  it
seems,  once  or  twice  spoken  to  him.

He  addressed  my  friend  by  name  and  besought  him  to  convey  a
message  to  his  father,  who,  he  said,  was  much  stricken  by  the  blow,
and  who  was  suflering  from  a  recent  occasional  dizziness  in  his  head,
so  that  he  felt  afraid  he  should  have  to  retire  from  business.  Other
little  things  were  mentioned  of  an  identifying  character ;  and  the
message  was,  a  few  days  later,  duly  conveyed.  The  facts  stated  were
admitted  to  be  accurate ;  and  the  father,  though  naturally  inclined  to
be  sceptical,  confessed  that  he  had  indeed  been  more  than  ordinarily
troubled  at  the  sudden  death  of  his  eldest  son,  because  of  a  recent;
unfortunate  estrangement  between  them  which  would  otherwise  have;
been  only  temporary.


456


A  Record  of  Ohservatlons  of


The  only  thought-transference  explanation  I  can  reasonably  offer
him  is  that  it  was  the  activity  of  his  own  mind,  operating  on  the  sensitive
bi'ain  of  the  medium,  of  whose  existence  he  knew  absolutely  nothing,
and  contriving  to  send  a  delusive  message  to  itself  !

One  thing  about  which  the  son  seemed  anxious  was  a  certain  black
case  which  he  asked  us  to  speak  to  his  father  about,  and  to  say  he  did
not  want  lost.  The  father  did  not  know  what  case  was  meant :  but  I
have  heard  since  indirectly  that  on  his  death-bed  the  son  was  calling  out
about  a  black  case,  though  I  cannot  learn  that  the  particulai'  case  has
been  yet  securely  identihed. (No.  83,  p  554.)

Contemplating  these  and  such  like  communications,  I  could  not  help
feeling  that  if  it  be  really  a  case  of  thought-transference  at  all,  it  is
thought-transference  of  a  surprisingly  vivid  kind,  the  proof  of  which
wuukl  be  very  valuable,  supposing  it  were  the  coi'rect  explanation  of  the
phenomenoii.

But  I  felt  doubtful  if  it  were  the  correct  explanation.  One  must  not
shut  one's  eyes  to  the  possibility  that  in  pursuing  a  favourite  hypothesis
one  may  after  all  be  on  the  wrong  tack  altogether.

A  known  hypothesis  must  be  stretclied  to  the  utmost  before  one  is
willing  to  admit  an  unknown  one  :  and  indeed  to  abandon  this  last
known  link  of  causation  as  inadequate  to  sustain  the  growing  weight
of  facts  was  an  operation  not  to  be  lightly  undertaken.  And  yet  I  felt
.^rave  doubts  whether  it  would  really  suffice  to  explain  the  facts  ;
whether  indeed  it  went  any  distance  toward  their  explanation.

Things  were  sometimes  told  to  me  and  to  others  so  entirely  foreign
to  our  conscious  thought  that  at  lirst  they  were  not  recognised  as  true
or  intelligible,  and  only  gradually  or  by  subsequent  explanation  was  the
meaning  clearly  perceived.

But  something  of  the  same  experience  is  gone  through  in  dreams  ;
one  sometimes  feels  surprised  at  the  turn  a,  dream  conversation  is
taking,  and  has  the  feeling  also  occasionally  of  learning  something  new.
Hence  this  argument  is  not  of  much  strength  taken  alone.

Another  argument  bases  itself  on  the  mistakes  which  Dr.  Phinuit
•sometimes  unaccountably  made.  One  noteworthy  instance  is  called
attention  to  by  one  of  my  sitters,  whose  father,  in  the  midst  of
much  that  was  correct  and  striking,  was  rej^oited  as  saying  that  his
name  was  John.  Now  his  son,  the  sitter,  was  vividly  conscious  that
liis  deceased  fathei-'s  name  was  not  John,  but  Avas  Peter.  No  know-
ledge of  this,  however,  was  shown  by  Phinuit ;  though,  by  subsequently
several  times  quoting  the  name  as  Thomas,  he  seemed  to  show  con-
.sciousness  that  there  had  been  an  error  somewhere. (Sitting  39.)

The  only  explanation  of  this  that  I  can  sugge.st,  beyond  mere  bungle
.and  error,  is  that  /  was  in  the  room  also  taking  notes,  and  though  I  of
course  knew  the  surname,  I  was  quite  ignorant  of  the  Christian  name,


Certcnn  Phenomena  of  Trance.


457


and  was  naturally  as  well  satisfied  with  John  oi"  Thomas  as  with  any-
thing else.  I  simply  recorded  all  that  was  said  in  a  quite  unbiassed
manner.

Conceivably,  therefore,  the  trance-person  ma}',  for  that  item  of
information,  have  been  reading  my  brain  instead  of  the  sitter's;  but  a
mass  of  other  facts  were  given,  known  to  him  and  not  at  all  known  to
me  ;  so  that,  as  I  say,  the  hypothesis  of  thought-transference  has  to  be
wriggled  and  stretched  a  little.

However,  I  was  willing  to  stretch  it  to  any  required  length,  so
long  as  it  would  not  actually  snap.  But  feeling  that  it  did  not  really
commend  itself,  I  endea^-oured  to  apply  some  crucial  tests.

And  the  first  was  a  few  childreii's  alphabet  letters,  pinched  up  at  ran-
dom, put  in  a  pill  box  without  looking,  and  sealed  by  me  in  the  presence
of  Prof.  Carey  Foster  a  month  or  so  previously.  This  box  I  now  handed
to  "  Dr.  Phinuit  "  and  asked  him  what  was  inside  it,  telling  him  at  the
same  time  that  no  one  on  earth  knew,  and  requesting  him  to  do  his  best.

He  immediately  asked  for  a  pencil,  and  holding  the  box  to  his
forehead,  shaking  it  a  little  at  intervals,  as  if  to  disentangle  the  contents
and  bring  them  more  clearly  before  him,  wrote  down  sojne  letters  on  a
bit  of  cardboard  held  for  him.

I  thanked  him,  and  next  morning,  for  better  security,  asked  him  to
try  again.  He  did,  and  wrote  down  just  the  same  letters,  e-\'en  to  the
extent  of  saying  which  way  they  happened  to  face  in  the  box.

I  wrote  two  accounts  of  the  contents  of  the  box,  one  to  Mr.  Myers
and  one  to  Prof.  Carey  Foster,  under  seal,  telegraphing  to  him  to  know
if  he  were  at  home  and  ready  to  receive  the  box,  assure  himself  that  it
had  not  been  tamjjered  with  (though  indeed  it  had  not  been  out  of  my
possession  all  the  time),  and  then  to  open  it  and  write  out  the  letters
and  their  aspects,  in  full  detail,  before  opening  my  sealed  account.
He  replied,  "Yes,"'  and  I  sent  him  the  box  registered  and  insured.

All  the  letters  were  wrong  but  two.

According  to  chance,  if  they  had  been  pinched  from  a  single
alphabet,  two  should  have  been  guessed  right.  The  Ijox  from  which
they  had  been  pinched  contained  many  alphabets,  but  practically  the
conclusion  of  the  exj^eriment  was  utterly  negati\'e.  The  letters  had
not  been  read. (Sitting  No.  40,  p.  493.  )

This  experiment  inclined  me  strongly  to  some  thought-transference
explanation,  as  distinct  from  what  seemed  to  me  the  more  unknown  and
vague  region  of  clairvoyance.

If  the  letters  themselves  could  be  really  directly  jDercei^-ed,  the  fact
that  they  existed  in  nobody's  mind  could  not  matter.  But  if  minds
only  could  be  read,  then  it  was  essential  that  someone  somewhere  should
be  cognisant  of  the  letters.

I  do  not  mean  that  it  would  do  to  base  so  clear  a  conclusion  on  the


458


A  Record  of  Observations  of


result  of  one  negative  experiment.  It  is  an  experiment  which  I  want
to  repeat  again  and  again  ;  though  Phinuit  doesn't  much  care  for  this
kind  of  thing,  and  says  it  strains  him.

If  the  experiment  had  succeeded  it  would  have  established  clair-
TOyance :  whatever  that  may  mean.  I  am  unable  to  grasp  its  meaning.
It  seems  to  me  a  violent  hypothesis  and  last  resort,  and  I  do  not  feel
■driven  to  it  yet.

I  have  also  handed  to  "Dr.  Phinuit "  epistles,  which  I  had  read
indeed  but  forgotten  ;  and  one  of  these  was  partially  read.  [p.  335.
Sitting  No.  78.]  Pie  does  not  profess  to  be  good  at  this  sort  of  thing ;
and  usually  fails,  at  least  in  my  experience,  to  give  more  than  a  vague
and  unsatisfactory  general  resume  of  the  subject  matter — too  vague  to
be  of  any  evidential  use.  I  have  not,  however,  tried  this  kind  of  experi-
ment often,  finding  that  it  apparently  exhausts  the  power  uselessly.

All  this  seemed  to  me  to  strengthen  the  hypothesis  of  thought-trans-
ference so  far  as  it  went.

So  I  set  to  work  to  try  and  obtain,  by  the  regular  process  of  com-
munication which  suits  this  particular  medium,  facts  which  were  not
■only  out  of  my  knowledge  but  which  never  could  haA'e  been  in  it.

Unfortunately,  in  giving  an  account  of  these  experiments,  it  is
necessary  to  mention  occasionally  trivial  details  concerning  one's  rela-
tions which  would  ordinarily  be  inconsequential  or  even  impertinent.
The  occasion  is  the  excuse.

It  happens  that  an  uncle  of  mine  in  London,  now  quite  an  old  man,
and  one  of  a  surviving  three  out  of  a  very  large  family,  had  a  twin
brother  who  died  some  twenty  or  more  years  ago.  I  interested  him
generally  in  the  subject,  and  wrote  to  ask  if  he  would  lend  me  some
relic  of  this  bi'other.  By  morning  post  on  a  certain  day  I  received  a
cuiious  old  gold  watch,  which  this  brother  had  worn  and  been  fond  of  ;
and  that  same  morning,  no  one  in  the  house  having  seen  it  or  knowing
anything  aliout  it,  I  handed  it  to  Mrs.  Piper  when  in  a  state  of  trance.

I  was  told  almost  immediately  that  it  had  belonged  to  one  of  my
uncles — one  that  had  been  mentioned  before  as  having  died  from  the
effects  of  a  fall — one  that  had  been  very  fond  of  Uncle  Robert,  the
name  of  the  survivor — that  the  v/atch  was  now  in  possession  of  this
same  Uncle  Robert,  with  whom  he  was  anxious  to  communicate.  After
some  difficulty  and  many  wrong  attempts  Dr.  Phinuit  caught  the  name,
Jerry,  short  for  Jer-emiah,  and  said  emphatically,  as  if  a  third  person  was
speaking,  "This  is  my  watch,  and  Robert  is  my  brother,  and  I  am
here.  Uncle  Jerry,  my  watch."  All  this  at  the  first  sitting  on  the
very  morning  the  watch  had  arrived  by  post,  no  one  but  myself  and
a  shorthand  clerk  who  happened  to  have  been  introduced  for  the  first
time  at  this  sitting  by  me,  and  v.'hose  antecedents  are  well  known
to  me,  being  present. (No.  44.)


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


459


Ha\ing  thus  ostensibly  got  into  communication  through  some  means
or  other  v/ith  what  purported  to  be  a  deceased  relative,  whom  I  had
indeed  known  slightly  in  his  later  years  of  blinchiess,  but  of  whose  early
life  I  knew  nothing,  I  poiiited  out  to  him  that  to  make  Uncle  Robert
aware  of  his  presence  it  would  be  well  to  recall  trivial  details  of  their
boyhood,  all  of  which  I  would  faithfully  report.

He  quite  caught  the  idea,  and  proceeded  during  several  successive
sittings  ostensibly  to  instruct  Dr.  Phinuit  to  mention  a  number  of  little
things  such  as  would  enable  his  brother  to  recognise  him.

References  to  his  blindness,  illness,  and  main  facts  of  his  life  were
comparatively  useless  from  my  point  of  view  ;  but  these  details  of  boy-
hood, two-thirds  of  a  century  ago,  were  utterly  and  entirely  out  of  my
ken.  My  father  was  one  of  the  younger  members  of  the  family,  and
only  knew  these  brothers  as  men.

"  Uncle  Jerry  "  recalled  episodes  such  as  s^vimming  the  creek  when
they  were  boys  together,  and  running  some  risk  of  getting  drowned ;
killing  a  cat  in  Smith's  field  ;  the  possession  of  a  small  rifle,  and  of  a
long  pecuUar  skin,  like  a  snake-skin,  which  he  thought  was  now  in
the  possession  of  Uncle  Robert.  (Nos.  44  and  46,  especially  pp.  503,
515,  516,  517.)

All  these  facts  have  been  more  or  less  completely  verified.  But  the
interesting  thing  is  that  his  twin  brother,  from  whom  I  got  the  watch,
and  with  whom  I  v,-as  thus  in  a  sort  of  communication,  could  not
remember  them  all.  He  recollected  something  about  swimming  the
■creek,  though  he  himself  had  merely  looked  on.  He  had  a  distinct
recollection  of  having  had  the  snake-skin,  and  of  the  box  in  which  it
"was  kept,  though  he  does  not  know  where  it  is  now.  But  he  altogether
denied  killing  the  cat,  and  could  not  recall  Smith's  field.

His  memoiy,  however,  is  decidedly  failing  him,  and  he  was  good
enough  to  write  to  another  brother,  Frank,  living  in  Cornwall,  an  old
sea  captain,  and  ask  if  he  had  any  better  remembrance  of  certain  facts
- — of  course  not  gi'V'ing  any  inexplicable  reasons  for  asking.  The  result
of  this  inquiry  was  triumjshantly  to  \andicate  the  existence  of
Smith's  field  as  a  place  near  their  home,  where  they  used  to  play,  in
Barking,  Essex  ;  and  the  kilhng  of  a  cat  by  another  brother  was  also
recollected  ;  while  of  the  swimming  of  the  creek,  near  a  mill-race,  full
details  were  given,  Frank  and  Jerry  being  the  heroes  of  that  foolhardy
episode. (See  notes  at  end  of  first  series,  p.  526.)

Some  of  the  other  facts  given  I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  get
verified.  Perhaps  there  are  as  many  unverified  as  verified.  And  some
things  appear,  so  far  as  I  can  make  out,  to  be  false.  One  little  thing  I
could  verify  myself,  and  it  is  good,  inasmuch  as  no  one  is  likely  to  have
had  any  recollection,  even  if  they  had  any  knowledge,  of  it.  Phinuit
told  me  to  take  the  watch  out  of  its  case  (it  was  the  old-fashioned  turnip


460  A  Record  of  Observations  of

variety)  and  examine  it  in  a  good  light  afterwards,  and  I  should  see
some  nicks  near  the  handle  which  Jerry  said  he  had  cut  into  it  with  his
knife  (p.  518).

Some  faint  nicks  are  there.  I  had  never  had  the  watch  out  of  its
case  Ijefoi'e ;  l^eing,  indeed,  careful  neither  to  finger  it  myself  nor  to  let
anyone  else  finger  it.

I  never  let  Mi-s.  Piper  in  her  waking  state  see  the  watch  till  quite
towards  the  end  of  the  time,  when  I  purposely  left  it  lying  on  my  desk
while  she  came  out  of  the  trance.  Before  long  she  noticed  it,  with
natural  curiosity,  evidently  becoming  conscious  of  its  existence  then
for  the  first  time.

I  may  say  here  that  Dr.  Phinuit  has  a  keen  "  scent " — shall  I
call  it  ? — for  trinkets  or  personal  valuables  of  all  kinds.  He  recognised
a  ring  which  my  wife  wears  as  ha"s  ing  been  given  "  to  me  for  her  "  by  a
specihed  aunt  just  before  her  death  (p.  516),  of  which  he  at  another
time  indicated  the  cause  fairly  well.  He  called  for  a  locket  which  my
wife  sometimes  wears,  but  had  not  then  on,  which  had  belonged  to  her
father  40  years  ago.  (No.  36.)  He  recognised  my  father's  watch,
asked  for  the  chain  belonging  to  it,  and  was  still  unsatisfied  for  want  of
some  appendage  which  I  coulil  not  think  of  at  the  time,  but  which  my
wife  later  on  reminded  me  of,  and  Phinuit  at  another  sitting  seized,  as
a  seal  whicli  had  been  usually  woi'ii  with  it,  and  which  had  belonged
to  my  grandfather. (Nos.  50  and  79.)

He  pulled  my  sister's  watch  out  of  her  pocket  and  said  it  had  been
her  mother's,  but  disconnected  the  chain  and  said  that  didn't  belong,
which  was  (juite  right.  (No.  83.)  Even  little  pocket  things,  such  as
fruit-knives  and  corkscrews,  he  also  assigned  to  their  late  owners ;  and
once  he  quite  unexjaectedly  grijjped  the  arm  of  the  chair  Mrs.  Piper  was
sitting  in,  which  had  never  been  mentioned  to  him  in  any  way,  and  said
that  it  had  Itelonged  to  my  Aunt  Anne.  It  was  quite  true  :  it  was  an
old-fashioned  ordinary  type  of  armchair  which  she  valued  and  had  had
re-upholstered  for  us  as  a  wedding  present  1 2  years  ago.  Phinuit,  by  the
way,  did  not  seem  to  realise  that  it  was  a  chair :  he  asked  what  it  was
and  said  he  took  it  for  part  of  an  organ. (No.  82,  p.  548.)

But  perhaps  the  best  instance  of  a  recognised  object  was  one
entrusted  to  me  by  a  gentleman  abroad,  quite  a  recent  friend  f)f  mine,
with  whom  I  had  been  staying  recently, — a  chain  which  had  belonged
to  his  father.  (The  name  of  this  friend  I  conceal,  in  case  he  might  not
wish  it  published.)

The  package  was  delivered  by  hand  one  evening  at  my  house,  and,
by  good  luck,  I  happened  to  meet  the  messenger  and  receive  it  direct.
Next  morning  I  handed  it  to  Dr.  Phinuit,  saying  only,  in  response  to
his  feeliiig  some  difficulty  about  it,  that  it  did  not  belong  to  a  relative.
He  said  it  l^elongecl  to  an  old  man  and  had  his  son's  influence  on  it. ,  Next


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


461


sitting  I  tried  the  chain  again,  and  he  very  soon  reported  the  old  gentle-
man as  present,  and  recognising  the  chain  but  not  recognising  me.  I
explained  that  his  son  had  entrusted  me  with  it;  on  which  Phinuit  said
the  chain  belonged  now  to  "George  Wilson,"  away  for  health,  a  preacher,
and  a  lot  of  other  details  all  known  to  me,  and  all  correct.  The  old
gentleman  was  then  represented  as  willing  to  write  his  name.  A  name
was  written  in  the  backward  manner  Phinuit  sometimes  affects.  It
was  legible  afterwards  in  a  mirror  as  James  "Wilson.  Now,  the  name
of  his  father  I  was  completely  ignorant  of (p.  538).

I  explained  to  the  old  gentleman,  if  one  may  use  such  a  phrase
merely  for  the  sake  of  brevity  and  as  accurately  expressing  the  state  of
behaviour  one  has  to  put  oneself  into  in  this  investigation  in  order  to
obtain  good  results — I  say  I  explained  to  the  old  gentleman  that
his  son  desired  to  hear  from  him,  and  asked  him  to  be  good  enough  to
prove  his  identity.

Whereupon,  at  intervals,  a  number  of  specific  though  trivial  facts
were  mentioned.  They  ^\'ere  frequently  admitted  to  be  trivial  in  an
apologetic  way,  but  nevertheless  would  serve  as  good  evidence ;  better
than  more  conspicuous  ones  indeed.

I  took  them  down  as  well  as  I  could,  knowing  absolutely  nothing  of
the  correctness  or  incorrectness  of  most  of  them.  Such  facts  as  I  did
know  were  connect.  Hence  I  had  good  hopes  of  another  crucial  test
here.

Everything  which  I  knew  being  stated  correctly,  if  all  those  things
which  I  did  not  know  should  turn  out  inaccurate  or  false,  I  should  be
forcibly  impelled  towards  a  direct  thought-transference  explanation  for
this  entire  set.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  these  things  of  which  I  had  absolutely
never  heard  or  dreamt  should  turn  out  true,  then  some  further  step
must  be  taken. (Nos.  78-83.)

In  this  state  I  continued  for  several  months.  For  though  I  seiat
out  to  Africa  a  transcript  of  the  e^^idence,  it  was  only  three  weeks  ago-
that  I  received  any  reply (p.  530).

The  reply  is  important  and  distinct.  It  recognises  the  correctness-
of  those  things  which  I  knew,  and  it  asserts  the  total  incorrectness  of
those  things  of  which  I  was  ignorant.  So  far  as  this  series  of  facts  goes,
therefore,  the  hypothesis  of  a  direct  thought-transferential  means  of
obtaining  information  is  immensely  strengthened.  I  can  indeed
hardly  resist  the  conclusion  that  the  series  of  facts  purporting  to  be
related  by  the  elder  Mr.  Wilson  have  no  more  substantiality  than  a
dream  of  my  own ;  that  I  was,  so  to  speak,  dreaming  by  proxy,  and
imposing  upon  myself,  through  the  mouth  of  the  medium,  a  number  of
statements  such  as  it  is  not  difficult  to  imagine  reported  to  one  in  a
dream. I  trust  I  am  making  it  clear  that  I  was  not  the  least  in

2  K


462


A  Record  of  Observations  of


a  dreamy  or  somnolent  condition ;  but  -whereas  in  a  dream  some
automatic  part  of  the  brain  imposes  on  one's  consciousness  a  collection
of  imaginary  facts,  so  this  same  automatic  pai-t  of  my  brain  may  hare
been  imposing  on  Dr.  Phinuit,  and  leading  him  to  tell  me,  in  what  was
apparently  good  faith,  a  series  of  imaginary  episodes :  deluding  us
both  into  supj)0sing  it  possible  that  they  had  a  basis  of  truth,  i

The  result  of  the  experiment  is  thus  definite,  though  it  would  be
a  rather  I'apid  induction  to  draw  a  general  conclusion  from  it.  It  is  to
be  remembered  that  I  did  obtain,  in  the  case  of  my  uncle,  a  statement
of  things  quite  unknown  to  me.

The  difference,  of  course,  is  that  these  were  relatives ;  and  though
some  of  the  events  happened  almost  before  my  father  was  Ijorn,  yet  he
might  have  heard  some  gossi])  about  them  in  his  boyhood.  It  is  far
more  unlikely  that  I  myself  had  ever  heard  anything  about  them,
because  of  lapse  of  time  and  other  circumstances,  but  the  possibility  of
even  this  can  hardly  l^e  excluded  in  the  case  of  events  which  have
occurred  in  a  family,  even  in  the  elder  genei'ation  of  it.

I  can  only  say  that  I  have  not  the  slightest  recollection  of  ever
having  heaixl  them.  Somebody  living  knew  them,  of  course,  or  else  they
could  not  have  been  verified  ;  but  they  Avere  not  known  to  anyone
present.  (See  further  remarks,  p.  527  ;  also  Index,  p.  649.)

Something  of  the  same  sort  was  suggested  by  an  experiment  my
friend  Mr.  Gonner  had  arranged  at  an  early  sitting.  (No.  39.)  He  had
combined  with  his  sister  in  London  to  watch  their  mothei'  at  a  certain
hour  on  a  certain  day,  not  telling  her  anything  about  it,  but  at  the
same  time  trying  to  coax  her  into  doing  something  extraordinary,  for
reasoirs  to  be  afterwards  explained.  We  found  afterwards  that  the
selection  of  an  unusual  proceeding  consisted  in  driving  round  Regent's
Park  in  a  hansom  cab  in  the  wet.  And  this  is  what  she  was  doing
during  the  time  her  son  was  sitting  at  Liverpool,  with  Dr.  Phinuit,  hold-
ing a  little  book  of  hers  to  Mrs.  Piper's  head.  He  had  carefully  not
arranged  or  suggested  anything  as  a  suitable  proceeding,  but  he  had  a
presentiment  that  some  not  very  striking  occurrence  would  probably  be
deemed  sutficient.  It  is  impossible  to  say  that  the  idea  of  a  possible
outdoor  excursion  may  not  have  been  latent  in  his  mind.

We  wei'e  completely  ignorant  of  what  was  going  on  in  London,  but
Dr.  Phinuit  described  the  surroundings  of  the  old  lady  and  the  two
girls  who  vv  ere  with  her — described  her  as  being  over-persuaded  to  go
out,  though  she  didn't  want  to,  and  as  going  cleaiiy  through  the
■operation  of  outdoor  dressing:  several  minute  actions,  such  as  opening

^  It  may  be  just  worth  mentioning  tliat  although  "James"  was  not  the  name  of
Mr.  Wilson's  father  (whose  name  was  George,  the  .same  a.s  his  own),  yet  it  was  the
name  of  his  grandfatlier  ;  and  that  some  of  the  statements  of  events  would  have  a
truer  ring  if  they  had  purported  to  come  from  the  grandfather.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


463


a  box,  taking  up  a  photograph  from  dressing-table  to  look  at,  and  so
on,  being  mentioned  correctly.  But  there  he  stopped.  We  did  not
get  to  Regent's  Park  and  the  cab,  though  that  was  the  stage  reached
while  he  was  speaking,  but  he  stopped  short  at  the  stage  reached  just
about  when  the  sitting  began ;  though  he  said  he  was  describing  the
present  moment  (p.  488).  More  experiments  of  this  nature  are  wanted,
and  very  likely  have  been  made  by  others.  I  do  not  pretend  that  this
experiment  by  itself  is  quite  satisfactory,  but  it  is  striking  as  far  as  it
goes,  and  the  thought-transference  aspect  of  it  is  this : —

The  events  could  not  have  been  obtained  from  our  minds,  for  we
knew  nothing  of  them.  The  book  established,  we  will  suppose,  rajyport
with  the  old  lady,  but  this  rapport  must  have  been  very  one-sided,  for
she  knew  nothing  whatever  about  our  proceedings  ;  nor  did  her  com-
panion, the  young  lady  who  accompanied  her.  [See  notes  at  end  of
first  series,  p.  529.]  If  experiments  like  this  can  be  got  to  succeed
definitely,  we  seem  driven  to  sujjpose  that  the  mind  of  a  neutral  uncon-
scious person  can  be  read  at  any  distance,  even  though  engaged  in
other  things  and  thinking  other  thoughts,  connection  being  established
by  some  link,  such  as  a  bit  of  jewellery,  an  old  letter,  or  a  lock  of
hair,  and  sometimes  no  connection  being  established  at  all.

There  is  no  doubt  a  step  further,  or,  as  it  is  often  thought,  an
alternative  step,  which  some  enthusiastic  persons  are  indignant  with  us
for  not  bemg  able  to  take  at  once.  I  don't  know  whether  to  call  it  a  step
further  or  an  alternative  step.  The  step  is  to  suppose  that  thought-
transference  can  go  on  from  the  very  persons  who  are  ostensibly  speaking
and  sending  messages.  This  hypothesis  is  one  that  obtrudes  itself
constantly ;  and  the  reports  are  necessarily  saturated  with  its  language
and  atmosphere.  It  is  difficult  not  to  be  occasionally  impelled  towards
it,  so  vividly  is  it  presented,  and  yet  I  hardly  know  whether  it  is
possible  seriously  to  contemplate  it  as  an  explanation.

To  the  obvious  and  superficial  aspect,  the  setting  of  the  communica-
tions, the  Spiritualistic  hypothesis  lends  itself  naturally  ;  and,  since  it
seems  the  natural  mode  for  the  trance-personality  to  express  itself,  it  is
impossible  to  conduct  a  satisfactory  series  of  sittings,  or  to  give  a  faith-
ful report  of  them,  without  employing  its  terminology ;  but  whether  it
really  assists  towards  an  explanation  of  the  phenomena,  or  whether  it
is  even  capable  of  scientific  statement  and  examination,  I  do  not  feel
competent  to  exjDress  an  opinion.

It  is  a  puzzling  matter  to  incorporate  into  science  the  recently-
established  fact  of  an  extraordinary  or  apparently  direct  action  between
mind  and  mind,  both  possessing  brains ;  and  a  kind  of  disembodied
action  seems  likely  to  be  still  more  puzzling.

Even  if  such  a  hypothesis  could  be  intelligently  granted  I  do  not
see  that  it  would  explain  all  the  facts. Not  those  last  related,  fur

2  K  2


A  Record  of  Observations  of


instance  ;  nor  Phinuit's  skill  in  recognising  diseases  and  contemporary
events.  Thought-transference  does  better  for  some  of  these  ;  but  I
hardly  think  it  serves  for  a^ll.  This  is  a  very  important  point,  and  if
I  discuss  it  further  I  should  pi-efer  to  do  so  after  examining  the  entire
record  of  facts  and  contemplating  them  as  a  whole.

If  we  reject  ordinaiy  thought-transference  as  inadequate,  it  seems
HS  if  we  should  be  driven  to  postulate  direct  clair^'oyance  ;  to  suppose
that  in  a  trance  a  person  is  able  to  enter  a  region  where  miscellaneous
information  of  all  kinds  is  readily  available  ;  where,  for  instance,  time-
and  space  are  not  ;  so  that  everything  that  has  happened,  whether  at
a  distance  or  close  at  haiid,  whether  long  ago  or  recently,  can  be  seen
or  heard  and  described.  Letters  in  a  box,  for  instance  (which,  though
not  read  in  my  case,  are  said  to  be  sometimes  read),  might  be  read  on
this  hyijothesis  by  harking  l^ack  to  the  time  before  they  were  put  in  ;
or,  if  we  assume  it  possible  to  see  the  future  also,  by  looking  forward
to  the  time  when  they  were  taken  out.  A  fourth  dimension  of  space  is
known  to  get  ovev  diificulties  like  this,  and  an  omnipresent  time  is  very
like  a  fourth  dimension.

Then,  again,  old  facts,  such  as  the  boyish  acts  related  of  my  uncle,
must  be  supposed  narrated  not  by  him  nor  by  his  agency  at  all,  but  by
Mrs.  Piper,  a  direct  onlooker  at  the  past  in  her  state  of  trance.

I  see  no  way  of  getting  round  such  an  elastic  hypothesis  as  this.  It
could  explain  anything  and  everything  ;  but  is  it  not  rather  like  j^ostu-
l.-iting  omniscience,  and  considering  that  an  explanation  ?  It  is  all  very
well  to  call  a  thing  clairvoyance,  but  the  thing  so  called  stands  just  as
rauch  in  need  of  explanation  as  before.

Undoubtedly  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  trance  state  has  access  to  some
abnormal  sources  of  information,  and  is  for  the  time  cognisant  of  facts
which  happened  long  ago  or  at  a  distance  ;  but  the  question  is  how  she
becomes  cognisant  of  them.  Is  it  by  going  up  the  stream  of  time  and
witnessing  those  actions  as  they  occurred  ;  or  is  it  through  information
received  from  the  still  existent  actors,  themselves  dimly  remembering^
and  relating  them ;  or,  again,  is  it  through  the  influence  of  contemporary
and  otherwise  occupied  minds  holding  stores  of  forgotten  information  in
their  brains  and  oftering  them  unconsciously  to  the  perception  of  the
entranced  pei'son  ;  or,  lastly,  is  it  by  falling  back  for  the  time  into  a
one  Universal  Mind  of  which  all  ordinary  consciousnesses  past  and
present  are  but  portions  ?  I  do  not  know  which  is  the  least  ex-
travagant supposition.

Possibly  some  hyj^othesis  more  simple  than  any  of  these  may  be,
or  by  German  psychologists  has  been,  invented,  but  at  present  I  feel  as
if  it  were  unlikely  that  any  one  explanation  will  lit  all  the  facts.  It
rather  feels  as  if  we  Avere  at  the  beginning  of  what  is  practically  a
fresh  branch  of  science  ;  and  that  to  pretend  to  frame  explanations,


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


465


except  in  the  most  tentative  and  elastic  fashion  for  the  purpose  of
"threading  the  facts  together  and  suggesting  fresh  fields  for  experiment,
is  as  premature  as  it  would  have  been  for  Galvani  to  have  expounded
the  nature  of  Electricity,  or  Copernicus  the  laws  of  Comets  and
JMeteors.


DETAILED  REPORT  OF  SITTIXGS.

Here  follows  a  mention  of  every  sitting  I  had  vv^ith  Mrs.  Piper,
iiimibered  so  as  to  fit  in  chronological  order  with  the  sittings  superin-
tended by  other  persons.  Sometimes  the  report  is  fairly  full — some-
times much  abbi-e^-iated.  It  would  be  tedious  to  quote  everything,  and
I  use  what  judgment  I  can  to  give  a  fair  estimate  of  the  proceedings.

AATien  it  happens  that  the  notes  taken  permit  of  a  very  full  report,
such  a  report  is  once  or  twice  given ;  but  it  will,  I  hope,  be  realised
that  this  is  done  to  increase  the  vivichiess  of  the  report,  not  by  any
means  with  the  idea  that  every  word  said  is  important.  In  one  sense,
indeed,  it  may  be  impossible  for  anyone  to  tell  at  this  stage  of  the
inquiry  what  is  really  important  and  what  is  not.  All  one  can  do  is  to
preserve  the  original  records  for  the  purpose  of  testing  such  theories  as
may  be  forthcoming  in  the  future.

When  the  failures  or  successes  oiTer  anything  obviously  instructive,
or  -nlien  they  are  unintelhgible  to  strangers  v.-ithout  explanation,  I
append  a  note  to  them  ;  at  other  times  I  pass  them  by  with  merely
sufficient  indication  to  show  whether  they  are  fairly  cori-ect  or  fairly
incorrect.

As  already  explained,  it  is  convenient  to  call  ilrs.  Piper  in  the
trance-state  "  Dr.  Phinuit,"  because  that  is  what  she  then  calls  hei'self.
A  little  confusion  between  masculine  and  feminine  pronouns  may  be
thus  introduced,  but,  on  the  whole,  it  assists  the  expi'ession  of  facts.

The  first  sitting  in  which  I  took  part  was  at  ilr.  Myers"  house  in
Cambridge  under  circumstances  related  above  (p.  444).  It  ranks  No.  16
in  the  complete  series.

Sitting  No.  16,  at  Camhridge,  November  SOth,  1889,  11.30  a.m.

Oliver  Lodge,  holding  hands. F.  W.  H.  31.  in  another  part  of  room,
•other  side  of  curtains,  taking  notes.
After  preliminaries  : —
Have  you  anything  to  ask  me  ?

O.  L.  (as  instructed  beforehand  by  F.  W.  H.  M.) :  "  Can  you  tell  me
:iibout  my  relations  ?

I  get  your  mother's  influence.  She's  very  near  to  you,  a  good  mother  to
jou.

0.  L.  (stupidly  indicatmg  the  fact  of  decease)  : Tes,  she  was."
She  comes  close  to  you  in  the  spirit  world. Your  father  is  in  the  spirit
iilso.


46G


A  Record  of  Observations  of


"Yes."

Also  an  uncle,  brother  of  your  mother,  in  the  spirit.
"  What  is  his  name  ?  "

Don't  get  his  name. Who's  Alfred  ? He  is  in  the  body.
"Yes."

There  is  an  uncle  in  tlie  spirit,  your  mother's  Ijrother.
"Yes."

Do  you  know  Margaret  ?
"No."

This  is  your  wife's  aunt — name  not  quite  Margaret — M — A — R.  Mary,
that's  tile  name. She  is  a  near  relation  of  your  wife.
"  Don't  know  her."

There  is  an  uncle  William  belongs  to  the  lady  whose  name  I  was  trying
to  get.  He  is  in  the  spirit.  Tlie  aunt  is  in  the  body.  She  has  a  sister  in
the  spirit  who  passed  out  years  ago.

"Very  likely. Don't  know."

Note.  —  Tliis  William  and  Mary  episode  meets  with  a  probable  explana-
tion further  on.

There  is  one  called  [Ella. Who  called  Tliomas  T— H— O— M. He  is
grandfather — no,  fatlier — of  your  wife.
[This  is  not  the  case.]
Did  you  have  a  brcjtlier  who  went  away  several  years  ago  ?
"Yes."

You  have  not  heard  from  him  for  a  long  time  ?
"No."

Not  for  four  or  five  mfmths  at  least.
"  Longer  than  that."

Well,  you  will  hear  from  him  soon.}  I  jaerceive  his  influence  a  long  way
off,  and  he  is  thinking  of  you.

"  Can  you  tell  me  where  my  brother  is  ?  "

A — f — Africa.

"No."

A — m. Aus — Austra — what  you  call  Australia.

' '  Well,  he  went  to  Australia,  but  he  is  not  there  now. '

I  get  his  influence  from  Australia.

"  What  sort  of  fellow  is  he  1 "

A  sort  of  happy-go-lucky  fellow — taking  the  world  as  it  is — wanting  to
see  a  good  deal  of  it.  Rather  positive,  likes  to  keep  his  own  ideas.  Not  so
deep  in  mind  as  you  are,  but  deep  in  feeling.  Feels  a  great  deal.  He  is
just  planning  a  letter  for  you  to  get.  Note  this.  This  is  something  you;
don't  know.

"Well,  I  will."

[This  about  my  Ijrother  is  practically  true,  except  that  he  is  in  America,
to  the  best  of  my  belief,  at  tlie  present  time,  certainly  not  Australia,,
tliough  he  was  tliere  several  years  ;  of  course  I  cannot  answer  for
the  prediction  nor  any  i)art  of  it  at  present.  (See  Note  1  at  end  of
sitting  ;  also  p.  513.)]

You  have  a  son  in  the  body — a  smart  boy — clever,  ljut  not  very  strong —
weak — delicate. If  you  take  good  care  of  him  he  will  make  a  line  man  ;  but


Certain  Phenornena  of  Trance.


467


I  can't  see  his  etlierial  plainly — not  continuing  plainly. He  is  ill — he  has
got  worms  Ijadly — I  can  see  liis  physical,  and  worms  ;ill  inside  hini.
"  Ought  he  to  go  to  school  ?  "

By  no  means.  You  ought  to  keep  him  at  home  and  nurse  him,  and  give
him  vermifuge.  You  will,  won't  you  ?  Worms  are  his  chief  trouble  ;  they
consume  his  food,  his  stomacli  is  filled  with  slime  ;  he  feels  nausea  ;  no
ambition  ;  rather  irritable.

[All  this  about  my  eldest  boy  is  painfully  true,  except  that  it  is  perhaps
a  little  exaggerated.  We  had  suspected  worms  before,  and  per-
ceiving the  outside  symptoms  correctly  described  as  above,  we  took
the  matter  in  hand  seriously,  and  after  acting  for  some  days  under
medical  advice  we  estalilished  the  truth  of  the  above  statement
precisely.  ]

"  Can  you  tell  me  what  his  favourite  pursuit  is  ?  "

[This  I  asked  l.)ecause  he  exhibits  a  remarkable  and  constant  hankering
after  architecture,  spending  all  his  spare  time  when  not  feeling  sick
and  headachy  in  drawing  plans  of  houses  and  in  reading  about
buildings. 'The  reply  was  utterly  wide  of  the  mark.]

Pursuit  1  oh,  takes  an  interest  in  natural  things  ;  is  musical.

There  is  an  Alice,  do  you  know  an  Alice  1  That's  a  girl,  that's  not  her
name — there  are  two  influences.  Wait  a  bit,  there's  a  baby — a  little  chap,  a
boy.

"Right."

The  next  a  boy,  the  next  a  girl,  the  next  a  bf)y,  the  next  a  boy — what  a
lot  of  children  you  have  !

One  has  got  a  spot  right  here  (touching  forehead  just  under  hair),  a  mark
— a  small  scar,  also  on  cheek  bone  under  ear  (indicating  with  finger).  One
has  something  the  matter  here  (touching  calf  of  leg).

"Yes."

[Some  of  the  children  have  marks ;  one  has  a  birthmark  under  hair,  and
one  a  small  permanent  scar  on  neck,  mider  ear,  neither  consciously
remembered  Ijy  me  at  the  time  ;  but  among  so  many  there  need  be
nothing  but  coincidence.  Statements  not  sufficiently  precise  to  be
useful  evidence.  The  girl  is  really  youngest  but  one  ;  but  I  hardly
ku<.)w  where  she  comes  without  thinking.]

The  one  with  the  trouble  in  calf  of  leg  is  the  same  influence  as  before —
it's  not  the  one  with  the  worms  but  it's  the  same  influence,  isn't  that  curious  ?
"  Yes,  but  I  don't  know  myself  which  it  is."

[My  impression  was  that  one  of  them  might  have  rheumatism  in  his  leg,
for  I  knew  his  lieels  had  troubled  him  in  walking,  and  our  doctor
had  recently  pronounced  it  rlieumatism.  It  is  the  one  most  like  my
eldest  boy.  Possibly  this  fact,  vaguely  running  in  my  mind,  may
account  for  the  above  vague  and  unsatisfactory  statements.  (See,
however.  Note  2,  p.  469.)]

Have  you  got  a  George,  J — O — R — G — E  1
"No."

Who  does  Arthiu-  belong  to  ? You  ?
"No."

(To  F.  W.  H.  M.)  That's  yours,  isn't  it,  Fred  1
"Yes."


408


A  Record  of  Obseivjations  of


It's  the  fourth  from  the  baby  that  has  the  trouble  in  calf.  It's  a  girl  ;  no,
I  get  confused.  I  will  tell  you  directly.  There's  a  baby,  then  a  boy,  then  a
girl,  then  a  boy,  then  a  boy  fourth  from  I)a1)y  tluit  has  trouble  on  right  leg.
That's  his,  it's  a  boy.

"Yes."

[The  one  whom  I  had  vaguely  in  my  mnid  does  happen  to  be  the
fourth,  but  tliere  was  nothing  really  tlie  matter  when  I  got  back.
His  heels  still  trouble  him  at  times,  rheumatic  apparently.  (See
Note  2  at  end.)]

It's  another  that's  a  girl. You  call  one  Charles.
"No."

It's  spelt  with  a  C.

"I  have  got  a  brother  Charles  ;  but  never  mind  the  children,  they  are  too
many,  and  I  get  confused  among  them  often  myself."

Ah,  ha,  well  you  needn't  wonder  at  me  then.

"  No. Tell  me  about  other  relations,  my  mother,  for  instance."

I  get  your  mother's  influence,  but  not  clear  yet.  Who  is  Elizabeth  ?
You  have  a  great  many  relations.

"That's  true."

Do  you  know  Uncle  William  ?
"No."

I  like  that  influence — a  nice  influence  tliat — serious — rather  depressed.
"  No,  I  don't  know  whom  you  mean."

This  "Uncle  William"  was  mentioned  before  [see  above)  and  not
understood  by  me,  and  to  the  only  Uncle  William  of  my  wife's  the
description  now  given  does  not  at  all  api)ly.  But  on  mentioning  it  to
her,  she  recognised  the  Aunt  Mary  and  Uncle  William  as  her  mother
and  stepfather — the  latter  liaving  adopted  her  from  childhood  and
become  very  fond  of  her  and  her  children  ;  and  to  liim  the  descrip-
tion applies  exactly  :  exceijt  of  course  the  kinshijj  erroneously
mentioned.  (Phinuit  corrected  this  himself  at  a  later  sitting,  pp.
47 4,  495,  and  subsequently  gave  his  full  name,  p.  .504. )  Next  follows
the  most  striking  and  impressive  element  of  the  whole  sitting ;  with-
out which,  indeed,  it  would  have  been  vague  and  unsatisfactory — too
much  apparent  guessing  and  too  little  precisely  accurate  ;  but  now
the  manner  became  more  earnest  and  energetic  and  continuous.

Anne — A — N — N.  This  is  your  best  influence.  If  you  liad  had  this
influence  all  your  life  you  would  have  been  the  better,  mind  that.  This  is
not  the  mother,  but  one  of  the  best  influences  that  ever  struck  you — like  a
sister.  Of  all  the  influences  in  your  life  I  like  her  the  best.  She  is  nearer  to
me  than  any  other  spirit — dearer  to  you  than  anyone  else.  She  is  in  the
spirit. You  have  a  letter  or  had  one  from  her,  but  they  are  all  gone.

She  will  watch  over  you  ;  her  influence  will  always  be  witli  you.  She  will
.always  come  to  you  when  you  are  getting  truth  ;  when  you  are  being
deceived  she  will  not  be  there.  You  met  her  a  long  time  ago.  She  sends
much  love.  She  looked  after  you.  If  you  were  in  trouble,  it  pained  her.
She  had  care  of  you  in  a  way.  Aunt  Anne — on  your  mother's  side — a  sister
of  your  mother's — they  always  called  lier  Aunt  Anne.  Your  mother  passed
out,  and  then  she  had  charge  of  you.  Have  you  got  a  little  old-fashioned
picture  of  her,  on  a  small  card  ?

"Yes."


Certain  Fhenomena  of  Trance.


469


[The  probability  of  the  existence  of  some  portrait  is,  of  course,  great,
but  it  is  perhaps  worth  noting  that  a  couple  of  old  carte  de  visite  size
photographs  are  all  I  have  of  her.]

If  you  would  look  at  that  picture,  and  realise  her  presence,  she  would
know  it.  She  is  here  now.  "  My  boy,  I  am  with  you.  I  am  Aunt  Anne.
I  tried  to  help  you.  I  had  little  means  (distinct,  but  rapid  talk — too  rapid
to  get  down  ;  all  impressively  delivered),  poor  surroundings  ;  but  I  did  all  I
could. I  would  have  done  more  if  I  could. I  have  got  the  baby."

"What  baby?"

I  don't  know,  it's  one  of  yours — a  girl — a  little  thing  ;  no,  wait  a  bit,
that's  wrong — the  girl's  in  the  body  ;  it's  a  little  boy  in  the  spirit  she's  look-
ing after.  There  are  two,  a  boy  particularly.  I  don't  see  tlie  other  much.
This  is  a  boy  in  the  spirit,  she's  got  that.  She  says,  "  God  keep  you  as  you
are."  That  spirit  makes  me  feel  weak,  tickling  in  throat  and  breast  (feeling
all  over  her  chest  and  mine),  bronchial  trouble,  a  little  asthmatic, — pneumonia,
a  little  husky  when  she  talks  to  me — clears  her  throat.  A  trouble  here  (feeling
<;hest  and  stomach),  a  trouble  in  stomacli,  and  at  last  passed  out  of  the  body
with  that  illness,  inflammation.  Hair  on  top  of  head  very  plain  ;  put  back,
tied  up  at  back — not  frizzled,  plain.  A^ery  neat  in  her  dress,  firm  expression
about  the  mouth.  Your  mother  passed  out  first.  I  can't  tell  you  about
your  mother  now.

[All  this  about  my  aunt  is  practically  true  as  it  stands,  except  that  the
immediate  cause  of  death  was  an  operation  for  cancer  in  the  breast.
The  nature  of  the  pain  Vv-as  indicated  to  me  more  clearly  by  the
graspings  and  hand  indications  of  Dr.  Phinuit  on  Mrs.  Pijjer's  body
than  by  his  words.  The  messages  from  my  aunt  were  delivered
very  much  in  her  own  serious  manner,  and  conform  closely  to  my
notions  of  her.  (See  also  next  page.)  As  to  the  unverifiable  portions :
it  is  true  that  I  have  lost  two  children,  one  a  boy  soon  after  birth,  the
other  stillborn,  and  asserted  at  the  time  to  have  been  a  boy,  but
rather  carelessly.]  [Fiuihcr  note  added  July,  1890. — The  following-
are  extracts  from  our  docttir's  note-book:  "Mrs.  L.,  Ap.  1,  1882.
Male,  stillborn  ;  probably  dead  10  days."  " Oct.  31,  1884.  Male
child  ;  died  one  hour  after  birth. "]

I  will  tell  you  about  your  mother  and  father  next  time.

Then  followed  predictions  for  two  years  and  five  years  hence,  which  it  is
unnecessary  to  print.  Also  a  statement  regarding  a  complaint  and
a  pain  under  the  shoulder  blade  attributed  to  my  wife,  both  with
fair  correctness,  but  the  latter  past  rather  than  present.

I  begin  to  feel  Vv-eak.  I  must  go.  Myers  1  Myers  '  (and  gradually  Mrs.
Piper  came  to  herself.)

Olivek  J.  Lodge.
Further  Notes  on  Sitting  No.  16,  written  May,  1890.

(1)  I  have  had  no  letter  from  my  brother  in  America.  A  letter
has  come  to  another  brother.  (2)  The  boy  mentioned  as  having  trouble
in  calf  of  leg  may  have  had  it  latent,  for  he  now  complains  of  a  good
deal  of  pain  in  it  and  walks  very  little.  It  used  to  be  in  his  heels,  but
is  now  in  his  left  calf.  I  need  hardly  say  that  this  is  not  a  case  of
propter  hoc;  he  had  not  been  told  anything  about  it,  and  only  in
editing  the  old  notes  do  I  perceive  the  coincidence.


470


A  Record  of  Observations  of


After  an  interval  the  Liverpool  series  of  sittings  began  ;  the  first
being  No.  36  in  the  complete  series.  Among  a  good  deal  that  is  non-
evidential  or  rambling,  there  are  some  striking  pieces  of  lucidity  here,
and  I  judge  it  fairest  not  to  curtail  the  report  of  the  sitting,  because
that  would  mean  skimming  off  the  cream  too  much.  Mrs.  Piper
arrived  at  my  house  the  evening  of  Wednesday  before  Christmas.
Next  day  at  noon  my  wife  and  I  sat  with  her.  Being  holiday  time  I
gave  up  the  whole  of  my  time  to  her  and  knew  all  her  ^proceedings.

Sittinrj  No.  36.  First  of  tliose  at  Livei'pool.  Tliursday,  December  19th,
12  noon.

Present  :  O.  and  M.  Lodge.  O.  L.  holding  hands.  M.  L.  sitting
at  distance,  quite  quiet,  ready  to  take  notes.

Ha,  I  know  you. D(_)n't  yovi  see  I  know  you  ? Where's  Myers  ?
"  He  is  away."

Give  my  regards. Where  do  you  come  from  1
"  Well,  you  know  that,  I  expect."

Yes,  I  know  you.  You  are  the  man  going  to  have  (the  things  predicted
before).

You've  got  the  little  fellow  with  something  the  matter  with  his  leg.  I
remember  all  about  it,  you  see. Who's  that  influence  over  there  ?
"  Can  you  tell  me  wlio  it  is  ?  "

(Feeling  out  in  air  with  hand) That's — you  know  your  lady  I  told  you
of  '  that's  lier — that's  Marie.
*' Yes,  quite  i-ight."

I  see  her  father  and  mother,  too,  and  Uncle  .Joseph. Uncle  Joe,  that's
his  nickname  ;  and  Gcird(.in. Do  jou  know  Gordon  ?
"No."

It's  a  friend  of  her  father. Uncle  William  is  connected  with  Mary,  too.

[Her  father's  nickname  was  "Jack,"  not  Joe.  I  cannot  find  that  lie  had
a  friend  Gordon. A  particular  friend  of  his  was  Geo.  Broughton.]

Here's  Aunt  Anne.  That's  your  Aunt  Anne.  She  is  so  pleased  to  be
able  to  speak  to  you.  "Good  land."  [This  was  said  in  a  voice  strangely
like  liers,  Init  as  if  sjieaking  with  great  difticulty.]  Very  happy  and  contented.
I  am  not  dead,  my  son,  I  am  living.  I  can  see  you ;  I  sec  the  struggles  you
have  been  through.  I  have  tried  to  help  you  often.  Do  you  believe  her  ?
speak  to  her. [See  also  pp.  468,  514,  516,  536,  &c.]

"Are  you  doing  what  you  expected  to  be  doing  ?  "

(Confused  words,  and  then)  Listening  to  tlie  children,  looking  after  them  r
as  I  expected.

[No  meaning  in  this.  The  answer  to  my  question  might  have  had  a
meaning.]

You  know  me. Y(ni  realise  where  I  am  and  the  more  you

Tliere  has  Ijeen  a  change  in  your  surroundings  since  and  I  grow  still

iu  spirit  just  as  you  grow  in  body.

Dr.  P.  :  Marie,  you  come  here  ;  tell  her  to  come  here.

[My  wife  came  and  for  some  little  time  the  notes  were  interrupted,  till
I  could  get  my  riglit  hand  free,  and  then  were  imperfect.  I  put  down
the  substance  from  good  memory  as  follows. Written  same  day.]


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  471

You  are  not  very  well,  not  so  well  as  you  might  be, but  never  mind,  don't
worry,  you'll  get  all  right,  and  your  boy  will  get  all  right.  Don't  you  go
and  be  anxious,  you  let  him  alone.  He'll  come  right.  He's  better  now.  I
told  you  before  what  was  the  matter,  didn't  I  ?  He's  in  a  looser  condition,
not  so  tight.  I  told  you  what  to  do  with  him.
"  Yes,  we  did  it."
You  were  wise,  he  is  better.

[The  boy  was  away  in  Staffordshire,  but  this  fact  Dr.  Phinuit  did  m.it
at  i^resent  get  hold  of.  Mrs.  Piper  knew  it.  She  had  not  seen
him  ;  and  did  not  see  him.  ]

And  that  little  female,  too,  is  all  right. [Evidently  meaning  our  one  girl.}
Mary,  there  are  two  Mary's. Mother  and  daughter. The  motlier  is  in
the  body  [correct]  ;  two  Mary's. You're  like  your  mother  and  j'ou're  like
Violet. You're  halfway  between  mother  and  Violet. [Violet  is  the  name  of
her  daughter.] But  you're  your  father's  child.
M.  L.  :  "Tell  me  about  my  father."

Yes,  well,  I  will  ;  he  thought  a  lot  of  you  ;  he  was  a  good  fellow  ;  he  was
not  in  the  body  long  enough,  that's  what's  the  matter  with  him — a  good,
open,  generous  fellow.  I  can  hardly  hear  him,  he  is  so  weak  ;  it's  so  long
ago.  He  says  you  have  got  something  of  his,  where  is  it  ?  (feeling  at  her
throat)  ;  he  says  if  you  had  this  it  would  help  him,  and  make  him  stronger.
He  has  great  difficulty  in  coming  back.  It's  a  little  ornament  with  his  hair
in — a  bit  of  hair  in — a  bit  of  child's  hair — a  little  bit  of  his  own  hair  too.
Bring  it.

She  went  upstairs  to  fetch  an  old  locket,  with  a  hair  ornament  inside —
nobody's  hair  in  particular.  [See  note  below.]  While  she  was  away
he  went  on  to  me  : — ■

He  jjassed  out  so  long  ago  ;  she  was  ljut  a  little  thing — [she  was  a  fort-
night old  when  he  died] — that  makes  it  so  hard  for  him  to  realise  her.  It's-
just  as  liard  for  them  to  speak  to  you  as  for  you  to  speak  to  them.  (Locket
brought  and  felt  by  Dr.  P.)  Yes,  this  will  help  him  ;  now  don't  hurry  me.
He'll  come  back  soon  stronger,  and  I'll  get  a  long  message  from  him.
(Here  rough  notes  begin  again.)

Uncle  Robert  :  that's  yours  (to  O).

"Yes."

Ah,  he's  a  good  man,  a  fine  sort  of  fellow.  On  your  father's  side.
Confound  him,  why  is  not  he  on  your  mother's  side  ?  She  was  so  good.  He's-
done  a  lot  of  good  in  his  life,  and  would  do  more  ;  but  with  Dick,  Tom
and  Harry  against  him  what's  the  use  nowadays  ?  [Rather  characteristic
sort  of  speech.] Aunt  Anne  knows  him  well.

Now,  wait  a  bit.  (to  M.)  Riley  ;  no,  that's  not  the  name — Lundey —
Lindon. No,  can't  get  it  yet.

(To  O.)  Then  Henry  ;  you  know  Henry  ?

(To  M.)  George,  J.  G.,  a  cousin  ;  this  is  your  wife's  influence.  A  cousin
passed  away  on  the  water.  Cousin  married,  and  the  gentleman  passed  out  at
sea,  round  the  sea.  Voice  not  distinct.  I'll  get  the  name  directly — faint
whispering  only.

This  seems  all  a  muddle. I  suppose  now  that  he  was  fishing  for  the
name  that  comes  next ;  but  it  was  not  fishing  with  our  conscious


472


A  Record  of  Observations  of


help,  for  we  did  not  guess  what  he  was  after.  When  the  name
came,  it  came  briskly  and  pat.

Alex — that's  it.  That's  the  influence  I've  been  telling  you  of  and  trying
to  get.  Tliat's  the  influence  of  this  locket.  Alex — ander  ;  Alexander —
that's  his  name.  Tliis  locket  belonged  to  him,  and  he  gave  it  your  mother
and  you  got  it  from  her.

[My  wife's  father's  name  was  Alexander,  and  he  was  intimately  called
Alex.]

"Yes,  that's  right."

He  had  an  illness,  and  passed  out  with  it.  He  had  something  wrong  with
the  heart.  His  voice  is  very  weak  ;  he  tries  to  sjDeak  arid  his  breath  comes
in  gasps.  He  tried  to  speak  to  Mary,  his  wife,  and  stretched  out  liis  hand
to  her,  but  couldn't  reach  her  and  fell  and  passed  away.  That's  the  last
thing  he  remembers  in  this  mortal  body,  and  when  he  thinks  of  himself
back  here  he  feels  the  pain  back  too.  They  had  given  him  some  liquid  a
few  hours  before,  which  didn't  agree  witli  him  very  well.  He  remembers
that ;  it  was  the  last  thing  he  took.

Note. — The  death  of  her  father  was  as  follows  (related  by  her  mother)  :

His  health  liad  been  broken  by  tropical  travel  and  yellow  fever,  and
his  heart  was  weak,  (for  instance,  his  life  could  not  be  in.sured).
Shortly  after  marriage  he  went  on  what  was  intended  to  be  a  last
voyage,  and  returned  only  three  months  liefore  his  wife  was  confined.
Thirteen  days  after  the  confinement,  which  had  been  very  severe,
and  the  strain  of  which  liad  made  him  faint,  he  entered  liis  wife's
room  half  dressed  and  holding  a  handkerchief  to  his  mouth,  which
was  full  of  blood.  He  stretched  out  his  hand  to  her,  removed  the
handkerchief,  and  tried  to  speak,  but  only  gasped  and  fell  on  the
floor. Very  soon  he  was  dead.

Regarding  the  "liquid,"  I  am  unable  to  find  any  existing  recollection,
but  he  was  being  attended  by  a  doctor  and  was  taking  medicine  at
the  time.

As  to  the  next  episode,  he  had  broken  his  leg  l)y  falling  down  the  hold
of  his  ship  once,  an.d  in  certain  states  of  the  v/eather  it  used  to  pain
him.  It  was  the  right  leg,  and  although  my  wife's  impression  was
that  the  locality  specified  was  incorrect — that  it  really  was  above
the  knee — on  inquiry  from  her  mother  we  find  that  the  jjlace
indicated  below  is  perfectly  right. [See  also  p.  493.]

He  feels  a  pain  in  his  right  leg  too,  something  had  hapjDened  to  it
(rubbing  leg),  something  from  a  fall  here  (below  the  knee).  It  gave  him
Y>am  at  times — had  to  prop  it  up. [See  just  aboA'e.]

This  locket  heljis  him  to  remember  ;  you  didn't  have  it  at  first,  the  other
Mary  had  it.  (Gasping.)  "  Alex,  love  to  Mary,  his  wife."  He  makes  me  feel
weak.

How  that  shakes  ujj  old  memories  and  brings  her  near  him  again.  Wait  a
little  (still  grasping  locket),  he  will  be  aljle  to  remember  exact  place  v/here
he  got  this.  (Pause.)

There's  a  little  one's  hair  connected  with  it  ;  he's  not  clear  about  the
hair.  I  don't  want  to  seem  inquisitive,  but  has  it  been  put  in  since  you
had  it  1

"No,  I  thhik  not."

Well,  he's  mixed  on  the  hair,  it's  too  confused  to  see. His  wife's  in  the


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


473


body  ;  she  was  a  good  one.  Trouble  witli  teetli  when  he  was  with  her —
trouble  with  teeth. [See  note.]

Hullo,  he's  got  funny  buttons,  big,  bright.  He  wears  these  buttons  and
things  on  his  shoulders,  a  sort  of  uniform  dress.  He's  gone  back  and
changed  his  dress  since  he  was  here  before.  A  uniform.  He  has  been  a
commander,  an  officer,  a  leader  ;  not  military,  but  a  commander  ;  it  was
through  this  that  he  got  this  locket  and  hair.

He  used  to  go  about  a  good  deal,  travel,  he  got  this  (locket)  one  of  his.
journeys. This  was  got  from  the  North. He  went  to  Scotland  at  one  time.

Note. — The  locket  is  one  he  got  on  one  of  his  voyages,  but  no  one:
knows  where,  neitlier  does  it  matter.  It  is  correct  to  say  that  it  is
a  locket  containing  haii",  but  it  does  not  contain  hair  in  the  ordinary
sense  ;  it  contains  a  little  picture — a  landscape — beautifully  worked
in  (presumably  human)  hair,  but  nobody's  in  particular.  It  looks
more  like  sepia  than  haii-.  The  "  trouble  with  teeth,"  which  to  m&
sounded  vague,  turns  out  on  inquiry  to  be  definite,  for  their  short
married  life  was  a  good  deal  disturbed  by  toothache  ;  he  used  to
go  to  the  dentist  with  her  and  be  much  grie^•ed  by  her  pain.  There-
were  several  episodes  about  teeth,  and  once  there  was  an  adminis-
tration of  chloroform  which  proved  nearly  fatal,  so  that  she  has-
never  had  chloroform  for  anything  since.  (My  wife's  mother  lives
in  Stafibrdshire,  and  was  in  Staffordshire  all  the  time  of  the  sittings  ;.
knowing  nothing  about  them  at  the  time.  My  wife,  however,
remembers  having  heard  the  toothache  spoken  of.)  Tlie  episode-
about  changing  his  clothes  is  sufliciently  ludicrous  ;  but  lie  did  have-
a  coat  with  brass  buttons,  and  it  led  to  the  practically  correct
perception  of  his  profession  (captain  in  merchant  service),  and  a
little  further  on  Phinuit  suddenly  brings  out  the  word  Cap'n  in
connection  with  him,  but,  in  a  curious  and  half  puzzled  way,  applies-
it  to  me.  It  remained  my  Phinuit  nickname  to  the  end,  though
quite  inapplicable.

Your  mother  has  got  a  good  picture  of  him  taken  a  long  time  ago,  pretty
good,  old-fashioned,  but  not  so  bad  of  hun.  Yes,  pretty  good.  He  looks-
like  that  now. He  looks  younger  than  he  did. That's  particularly  so.

[It  is  an  amateur  painting  done  by  someone  on  board  his  vessel.
Atrocious  as  a  picture,  but  likeness  caught.  It  is  kept  in  a  pillow-
case in  a  locked  cupboard.  No  one  in  house  had  seen  it  except
wife  and  myself,  and  I  had  quite  forgotten  its  existence,  even  after
it  was  mentioned.]

M.  :  "  Can  you  tell  me  about  my  other  father  ?  "

Oh,  he  don't  care  for  him  ;  eh,  Cap'n  !  A  good  man,  honoured  and
respected,  but  with  wretched  ideas.  A  man  to  the  letter,  cranky.  But  you
like  him,  he  was  good  to  you.

"Yes."

(My  wife  returned  to  her  distance  and  notes  here.)
Now,  Captain,  what  can  I  do  for  you  ?

"Tell  me  about  this  letter"  (handing  him  a  sealed  one  taken  at  random  by
my  wife  from  a  packet  of  12  sealed  envelopes  which  I  had  arranged  the  night
before.  The  contents  of  many  I  knew,  and  I  knew  something  about  all,
but  I  didn't  now  knov/  which  was  which. Phinuit  put  it  to  his  head).

Well,  I'll  try,  but  I  wish  you  had  given  it  me  before  when  I  was  stronger.
This  letter  has  a  gentleman's  influence  in  it. Do  you  know  about  it  ?


474


A  Record  of  Observations  of


"No."  ■  "  ..■ '  -  ..

You  want  to  know  for  your  own  interest  %  • .  ;

"Yes."  •  ...  ...

Haven't  you  read  it

"  I  may  have  read  it,  but  don't  know  it  now."

Well,  there  is  a  spirit  in  it,  and  a  gentleman  in  the  body  and  a  lady  ;  it's
an  engagement  about  a  meeting,  making  inquiry,  line  of  work  ;  looks  like
Myers'  influence — can't  see  clearly  now.  Give  it  me  next  time,  and  don't
look  at  it  between.

"  All  right."  [I  did  not  give  it  again.  I  looked  at  it  afterwards.
Statement  indefinite,  not  exactly  wrong.]

Which  of  your  uncles  was  it  had  a  fall,  all  shaken  up  %  Caused  great
anxiety  among  these  friends,  and  it  ended  in  spirit  leaving  body '?  You  don't
remember  your  mother  much  %

"Yes,  I  do."

Well,  she  passed  out  some  time  ago,  15  years.
"Not  so  long."

Very  near  15  years,  if  you  think  ;  her  spirit  has  advanced  a  good  way.
[She  died  in  1879.]
"  Has  slie  a  message  ?"  '  ■

Well,  you  see  it's  difficult.  Not  that  she  isn't  near  you  ;  she  is  near  you,
but  when  I  come,  a  stranger,  she  won't  tell  me  anything.  [Ratlier  cliarac-
teristic]  She  passsed  out  before  Aunt  Anne.  [Correct.]  Who  is  Sarah?
someone  they  call  Sarah — an  aunt  by  marriage.  And  Harriet.  Miss  White  —
no,  Mrs.  White  ;  slie  is  connected  with  that  lady's  father.  She  sends  her  love.
[Mrs.  White  was  his  sister,  and  is  dead.  We  know  nothing  about
"Sarah"  or  "  Harriet."]

O.  L.  :  "  Tell  me  about  Uncle  William  you  mentioned  last  time"  [pjj.
466,  468,  and  470].

He  belongs  to  that  lady  and  to  her  mother. He's  her  father,  too.

M.  :  "  Tell  me  about  him."

Never  saw  a  spirit  so  happy  and  contented.  He  was  depressed  in  life —
had  the  blues  like  old  Harry,  but  he's  quite  contented  now.  It's  a  damn  sight
better  here.  He  had  trouble  here  (prodding  himself  in  lower  part  of  stomach
and  afterwards  me  over  bladder).  Trouble  there,  in  bowels  or  something.
I  feel  pain  all  here.  Had  pain  in  head,  right  eye  funny  (touched  right
eye).  Pain  down  here,  too  (al)domen  again),  stopjDage  urine  ;  had  an
ojjeration,  and  after  that  it  was  worse,  more  inflammation,  and  with  it  he
passed  out.  He  wasn't  happy  in  life.  He  had  nausea  and  was  misunder-
•stood.  He  had  ideas  that  he  didn't  exjiress.  It's  damned  hard  lines  on  a
man  to  be  misunderstood. (Getting  weak  and  rambling,  soon  after  went.)

[The  stepfather  to  whom  this  reters  used  to  have  severe  lits  of
depression,  more  than  ordinary  blues.  His  right  eye  had  a  droop
in  it.  He  had  stone  in  bladder,  great  trouble  with  urine,  and  was
ojjerated  on  towards  the  end  by  Sir  Henry  Thompson.  He  was  a
very  silent  religious  man. See  also  p.  504.]


At  the  next  sitting  Principal  Rendall  arrived  quietly,  and  was
secreted  by  me  in  the  study  while  Mrs.  Piper  was  upstairs,  I  intending


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


475


to  bring  him  out  after  the  trance  had  come  on.  But  on  her  coming
down  for  a  sitting  she  surmised  someone  was  present,  so  I  introduced
him  "  as  Mr.  Roberts,  and  the  sitting  immediately  began  :  Principal
ilendall  sitting  at  first  at  a  little  distance  from  us.  Here  follow  the
notes  in  full.  It  must  be  stated,  with  reference  to  the  precise
description  of  my  mother  and  my  wife's  stepfather,  that  Mrs.  Piper
had  seen  photographs  of  both  the  night  before.

Sitting  No.  37. December  20th,  1889.  11.0—12.30.

Present :  G.  H.  Ptendall  (introduced  as  Roberts),  O.  Lodge  and
Mrs.  Lodge.  (Notes  are  verbatim,  as  compiled  from  double  version
taken  down  by  those  present,  and  with  hands  disengaged.  Written
up,  with  bracketed  annotations,  by  Rendall.)

Lodge  holding  hands.

Hn  !  (feeling  head)  Good  Lord  !  I  know  you.  I  have  seen  you  before.
I  was  to  talk  with  your  mother  :  quite  a  stout  lady,  your  mother  ;  hair
parted  in  the  middle,  don't  you  know  ;  dark  eyes,  hair  down  in  the  middle
(touching  parting)  ;  an  iniijortant-looking  lady  ;  very  good-looking  ;  very
fond  of  you  ;  wants  to  send  her  love  ;  glad  to  hear  from  you  ;  wants  ti)  get  to
you. [Correct,  but  see  above.] Tell  Charley

O.  L.  :  "  You  mean  lier  son  by  that  name  ?  "

Yes.  Say  that  he  has  been  a  little  bit  unfortunate,  but  will  come  out
all  right  if  he  goes  on  trying.  She  sends  that  as  a  message,  because  she
could  speak  to  you,  but  not  to  him. [Message  intelligible.]

How's  Mary  ?  God  bless  her.  Give  her  my  love.  Also  to  Roljert  ;
Uncle Robert,  you know, that is  the  Robert. (Waiting  a  minute.)

Also  Olive. I've  forgotten  that  name. Yes,  Oliver,  O — L — I — V  E  R,

two  Olivers,  father  and  son  ;  that  makes  two,  and  at  the  same  time.  It  was
two  years  ago,  before  your  mother .... You  were  ill,  you  know.

O.  L.  :  "111  with  what  1 I  don't  remember."

Why,  ill  with  measles.

[O.  L.  had  a  serious  attack  in  1872  or  1873.  His  father's  name  was
also  Oliver.]

O.  L.  :  "  Oh  yes,  measles."

Are  you  quite  well  now  ? She  wants  to  know.

O.  L.  :  "  Yes,  quite  well."

No  harm  to  your  constitution  ? Nothing  in  y(iur  system  ?
O.  L.  :  "No."

Well,  three  cheers  for  that.  Then  she  sjDoke  about  you.  Glad  to  hear
from  you.  .  .  .  Confound  it,  someone  else.  There's  some  other  spirit
ivho  is  here.  (Feeling  about,  but  pacified  by  Mrs.  L.  's  hand,  who  was  beckoned
to  come  near.)  Do  you  know  .  .  .  ?  Among  them  there's  Thomson,
a,n  old  gentleman  (and  he  says)  "Take  good  care  of  Ted";  who  the
devil  that  is  I  don't  know,  someone  in  the  Viody.  Sends  love  to  his  son,  who
is  not  to  take  the  journey  ;  it  will  be  bad  fur  him  if  he  does.

[0.  L.  understcxxl  this  to  possibly  refer  to  his  neighbour  Thompson,  who
has  a  son  Ted,  and  this  explanation  was  confirmed  later.  (Sitting
No.  45,  p.  508.) Journey  episode  not  specially  intelligible.]


476


A  Record  of  Ohser rations  of


(Feeling  about.)  Tliere's  ;i  gentleman  or  lady  here  that  has  got  an  aunt
burst  out  fif  the  body,  with  water,  don't  you  know.  Drojisical  something.
Aunt,  mother,  or  .si.ster.  [Unintelligible.]  There's  someone  else  here.  Mary,
are  you  here  1  Well,  heaven  bless  you,  then.  Two  fathers  you  had.
Fortunate  to  have  two  fathers.  One  father  with  ever  such  a  lot  of  white
hair  and  beard.  Beard — no  moustachios  (feeling  round  face) — beard  down
the  cheeks.  [M.  L.'s  stepfather  had  sjiecially  notable  white  hair,  whiskers,
and  lieard,  as  described  ;  but  see  remark  on  p.  475.]

O.  L.  :  "  Moustachios  ?  "

No,  no  moustachios,  like  you  and  me.

().  L.  :  "  Have  you  got  moustachios,  doctor?"

Yes,  I  have  moustachios  like  that  (feeling  0.  L.'s  moustache).  Can't
you  see  ?

O.  L.  :  "No."

Mary,  dear,  you  are  fortunate  to  have  two  fathers.  .Two  of  them,,
William  and  Alec.  Two  fathers  here.  William  told  me  he  used  to  sulfer  a
good  deal  of  pain  ;  that  is  why  he  was  so  dejjressed  in  life.  Glad  to  get  rid
of  material  body  and  take  on  spiritual.  Alec — he  took  a  long  voyage  over
the  water,  and  got  that  (locket)  at  that  time  ;  he  had  the  pain.  (Rubbing
about  right  leg. )  He  found  that  on  one  of  his  voyages.  There's  a  little
child's,  and  a  lady's  hair  in  it.  Did  you  lind  out  about  your  governor-
falling  into  the  water  ?  [The  stepfather  and  father  are  here  correctly  dis-
tinguished and  named.]

"  No."

What  ?  not  found  out  yet  ? Take  things  as  you  go  along,  as  I  say  ;  and
not  too  slow  about  it. You  know  Mr.  Clifford  1
O.  L.  :  "Know  Mr.  Clifford?  who?"

He  is  in  the  body  ;  father's  in  the  spirit.  He  wants  to  send  his  love  to
him. Says  he  knows  him  very  well. [This  was  unintelligible.]

(Medium  here  felt  about  in  air  searchingly  with  disengaged  left  hand.)
Thei'e  is  another  influence  here.  What  the  devil  are  you  doing?  (Accepting-
invitation,  G.  H.  R.  here  took  hand  relinquished  by  O.  L.)  Ha  !  Well,  I
don't  object  to  you. How  are  you  just  now  ?

R.  :  "All  right,  doctor."

Is  your  heart  all  right  ?  (Medium  here  felt  over  chest,  gradually  bringing
hand  lower  towards  stomach.)  Heart  all  sound,  and  stomach — stomach  all
right — but  it  isn't  quite,  it's  a  little  gastric,  eh  ?  [Correct.]  You'll  live  a
long  time  yet,  you  will.  You've  got  a  good  deal  to  do.  Kind  of  unfortunate
.sort  of  chap.  I  see  you  with  your  books  and  papers — lots  of  books  round
you.  A  lot  in  your  brain.  You  do  a  deal  of  thinking  ?  Don't  he  ?  You're
a  kind  of  good  fellow  after  all.  I  don't  object  to  you,  do  you,  Cajjtain?
(addressing  O.  L.) — a  good  sort  of  cliap.

R.  :  "  Have  you  ever  met  me  before  ?  "

No. I've  never  seen  you  l)efore.

R.  :  "  Have  we  any  friends  in  common  ?  "

You  be  lianged  I No  1 How  should  we  ?

R.  :  "I  thought  I  might  have  had  friends  you  had  met  ?  "

Well,  we  have.  Don't  you  be  too  much  in  a  hurry.  You  wasn't  born
in  a  minute. Who's  Ncigiram  ? How  do  you  pronounce  it  ? Nugcry  ?

R.  :  "I  don't  understand."


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


477


You  are  a  i^retty  good  kind  of  fellow,  after  all.  How's  your  brother  ?  T
know  your  brothers.

E.  :  "Yes;  well,  which  one '?  "

One,  two,  three,  four — four  brothers,  that's  all.

R.  :  "All  besides  me  '?  "  [A  leading  question.  As  a  fact,  I  have  three
brothers  living,  and  one  deceased.]

Yes,  four  in  all  ;  with  you,  five  altogether.  [Correct.]

B.  :  "Any  sisters?"
(Medium  appeared  to  take  no  notice  of  this  interrogation,  but  continued. )

One,  two,  three,  four — that's  right,  isn't  it  ?  Yes,  yes,  I  know  it — that,
don't  include  you.  There's  four  that 's  got  to  be  told  about.  One  is  a
mighty  erratic  sort  of  fellow.  [Correct.]  Caia't  keep  easy.  He  wants  to
see  something  of  the  world.  He'll  get  on  though — he'll  make  his  way.
One  of  your  brothers  met  with  an  accident  a  little  while  ago — he  hurt  his
head. And  one  of  his  fingers — quite  badly.

R.  :  "Is  his  head  all  right  1  "

Yes,  he's  right.

R.  :  "  Which  finger  was  it  he  hurt '?  "
It  was  his  second  finger.

(Medium  here  felt  for  and  took  hold  of  second  finger  of  disengaged  left
hand.)

R.  :  "Which  hand?"

It  was  his  right  hand — here.

Medium  took  second  finger  of  right  hand,  in  jjlace  of  left,  and  indicated
injury  near  top  joint,  on  side  (if  I  remember  right)  removed  from
thumb.  [Unverified,  and  not  within  my  knowledge  at  present.
Brother  out  of  reach,  in  America.]

R.  :  "How  is  it?  "

How  ? He's  George. (See  note.) I  judge  it  is  pretty  sore  yet. It  was
huii:,  but  it's  healing. Perhaps  you  don't  believe  that,  buc  it's  true.
R.  :  "  I'll  take  your  word  for  it."

He  has  a  cough  trouble — here,  in  throat.  He's  a  roving  disposition,  but
he'll  accomplish  something  ;  he'll  get  on.  I  see  three  children.  He's  gone
away. How's  Alfred  ?  Alfred.

R.  :  "  Who  is  Alfred  ?  "

Alfred— that's  connected  with  you.  A--L— F— R— E— D.  Alfred.  A
brother  Alfred.

R.  :  "My  brother?"

Don't  you  know  him  ?  not  your  brother.  There's  an  uncle  and  a  cousin
as  well  by  that  name.  You  gentlemen  must  straighten  it  out.  I've  got
mixed.  That's  you,  Cap'n.  You've  both  got  Alfreds.  You  have  got  Alfred,  a
cousin. (Correct  of  G.  H.  R.)  He  has  a  brother  Alfred. (Correct  of  0.  J.  L.)

O.  L.  :  "That's  all  right,  doctor."

A  real  good  fellow  you  are.  You  write  a  good  deal.  You  spend  a  lot  of
time  writing,  and  I  see  your  books.  I  see  your  desk,  and  books  all  round,
and  all  the  ajjparatus.  You  are  a  clever  man,  somehow.  There's  another
brother,  William.  (Not  true  of  G.  H.  R.)  Will.  W— I— L— L.  He's  with
me.  He  was  young  ;  he  passed  out  young.  He  sends  his  love  to  you.
That's  not  your  William.

2  L


478


A  Record  of  Observations  of


At  this  point,  my  right  hand  being  engaged  v/ith  medium's  liand,  I  used
my  left  somewhat  awkwardly  to  take  out  of  my  right-hand  trouser
l^ocket  a  small  locket  I  had  brought.  The  locket  contained  minia-
ture head,  faced  by  ring  of  hair,  of  a  first  [dep]  cousin,  named
Agnes,  who  died  of  consumption  in  18ii9,  and  with  wliom  from
ten  to  eighteen  I  had  warm  cousinly  friendsliip.  The  intimacy  was
familiar  and  unconstrained,  but  never  romantic.

What  are  you  fishing  for  there  ?

R.  :  "  It  is  a  keepsake  I  brought  with  me.  I  thouglit  you  might  be  able
to  tell  me  about  it. Shall  I  give  it  you  ?  "

Medium's  disengaged  hand  vfas  offered,  and  I  placed  in  it  the  locket —
onyx  front,  witli  gold  back.  Throughout  dialogue  it  remained  in
medium's  hand,  who  from  time  to  time  moved  or  felt  it.  The  locket
laad  a  three-letter  monogram  engraved  on  back,  but  in  compli-
cated design,  quite  impossible,  I  should  think,  to  decipher  by  finger
touch.  It  was  certainly  not  read  by  eye,  and  the  locket  remained
closed  from  first  to  last.

That's  an  old  friend — a  lady  named  Alice  connected  with  that.  Al-lice.

Sounded  Al-leese,  v,'ith  a  pause,  doubling  the  L  rather  constrainedly,  but
spelt  out  A— L— I— C— E.

R.  :  "You  have  not  got  tlie  name  cpiite  right.  What  had  she  to  do  v/ith
me  ? "

You've  had  that  a  long  time.  And  I  want  to  sort  it  out.  It  is  a  lady
connected  with  this. (Two  or  three  slight  feminine  coughs  were  given.)

It  is  the  cough  she  remembers — she  passed  out  with  a  cough. She  i
trying  to  tell  me  the  name. An-nese — An-nese.

The  name  was  said  with  effort  at  the  n — n,  and  with  French  pronuncia-
tion, much  like  gaguer,  almost  as  English  An;/ese,  and  repeated
several  times,  as  though  trying  to  get  sound  correct.

R.  :  "  Agnes. Can't  you  say  Agnes  ?  "

That  is  it.  Anyese — Anyese.  (Still,  and  throughout  remainder  of  talk
keejjing  to  the  French  gn  articulation.)  I  cannot  say  it  quite  right.  She
passed  out  with  the  cough.  [Correct.]  Is  so  surprised  to  hear  of  you — quite
difficult  to  recognise  you.  She  used  to  own  this  [No],  and  it  makes  her
hajjpy  that  you  have  it.  She  has  brown  hair.  She  asks,  do  you  want  to  talk
to  her  ?  Agnes.  Agnes.  I  couldn't  say  it  right.  She  keeps  bowing  her
head.  I  can't  pronounce  the  name.  She's  got  greyish  eyes,  and  brown  hair.
[Correct.]  She's  i:)retty,  looks  very  pretty.  Then  when  she  passed  out  she
lost  her  flesh — but  she  looks  better  now — looks  more  like  the  picture  you  have
in  here — rather  fleshier.  [It  is  from  lAoto  at  somewhat  rounder  and  more
girlish  stage.]  She  thinks  a  great  deal  of  you,  she  says.  There  was  a  book
when  she  was  in  the  body  connected  witli  you  and  her — a  little  book  and
some  verses  in  it.  [In  June  I  remembered  that  I  had  her  Rouudell  Palmer's
JBook  of  Praise,  as  keepsake.]  She's  got  a  mother  in  tlie  body.  [Correct.]
Mira  [unknov/n]  is  round  with  her.  And  she  has  a  sister  in  the  body.
[Correct.] That's  her  hair,  in  there. [Yes,  hair  in  locket,  faced  by  photo.]

R.  :  "What  about  her  sister  ?  "

What  of  her  sister  1  Her  sister's  not  been  very  well  of  late.  She  coughs
a  little.  It  was  after  they  went  away  from  the  place  where  they  live.  She
had  some  difficulty  with  her  head.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


479


[Correct  as  to  ill-health,  owing  to  which  she  was  absent  from  home  ;  but
the  head  unaffected.]

R.  :  "Who?"

The  sister  in  the  body — liad  trouble  with  her  head. She  married  after
Agnes  passed  out. [Correct.] She  says  Frank.
R.  :  "  What  about  Frank  1 Who's  Frank  ?  "

Frank's  a  brother  [A.  had  no  brother  Frank] — or  brother-in-law.  She's
calling  for  him.  Her  father  had  rheumatism.  [Fatlier  had  slight  rheumatism,
biut  not  anything  serious  or  troublesome.]  Aren't  you  very  much  interested
in  her  ?  She  remembers  her  trouble,  when  she  comes  back.  It  was  a  great
mistake.  I  tell  you  one  thing.  They  took  a  little  trip  for  her  health
[Correct.  A.  went  to  Cannes  in  consumption,  and  died  there],  and  it  did
lier  no  good.  She  gradually  failed.  At  the  last  it  was  a  kind  of  hemor-
rhage— violent — that  took  her  away.  [Probably  true.  Her  death  was  quite
sudden  at  last.  Parents,  telegraphed  for  from  Rome,  arrived  too  late.  Never
heard  details.]

R.  :  "  Tell  her  I  have  a  little  memento  of  that  trip — that  her  friends  gave
me,  and  I  have  always  kept."

[This  was  for  test,  to  see  whether  medium  read  my  tlioughts  directly.
The  vase  was  given  me  after  A.'s  death.]

She  smiles — keeps  smiling — pleasantly. Is  it  the  book  '?

R.  :  "  No  ;  it's  not  the  book.  Ask  her  if  she  knows  or  can  guess  what  it
is."  [I  do  possess  a  book,  given  as  keepsake.  This  I  only  remembered  when
reading  proof  of  these  notes  after  six  months'  interval :  as  said  above.]

I'll  ask  her.  She  seems  to  recognise  this  little  thing  (the  locket).  She
gave  it  you. [Incorrect — locket  the  gift  of  a  relative  after  A.'s  death.]

R.  :  "  What  was  it  ? Say  it  was  an  article,  when  she  had  gone  away."

She  doesn't  know  it.  I  can't  tell  you  what  it  was,  unless  it  was  her
pencil.  If  I  could  read  your  head,  I  could  tell  you.  I  can't,  and  I  have  to
wait  for  her  to  tell  me.

R.  :  "Ask  her  if  she  remembers  having  any  little  thing  at  i«6Ze  (f/ttifc',
■when  she  was  away  on  the  trip,  at  meals  or  on  the  talile."

She  is  trying  to  think.  She  had  so  many  things,  of  course  she  had.  No,
she  can't  seem  to  remember  it.  She  is  very  much  surprised  to  see  you  ;
very  happy  at  seeing  you,  but  she  feels  confused.

R.  :  "  It  was  a  little  blue  vase,  in  which  tliey  used  to  put  her  flowers,
violets,  &c. Does  she  remember  it  ?  "

Now  she  is  laughing.  Well,  she's  very  glad  they  gave  you  that ;  and
that  you  keep  it.  You  see,  although  spirits  know  a  great  deal,  they  can't
see  some  things,  don't  know  everything  ;  they  go  on  to  different  ideas.
From  when  she  was  a  very  little  girl,  she  knevv^  you  very  well.  You  have
got  some  letters  from  her  belonging  to  you. [True,  I  believe.]

R.  :  "  Has  she  any  messages  ?  "

She  sends  her  love  to  Lu.

[She  had  a  friend,  called  Louie — I  have  not  seen,  and  hardly  heard  of
her  since  deatli  of  A.]

R.  :  "Who  isLu?"

She  had  a  great  friend  named  Lu.  She  was  very  fond  of  her.  Cin'fc
you  give  it  to  her  1


480


A  Record  of  Observations  of


R.  :  "  Who  iw  Lu  ?  in  the  body  ?  "

Oh,  Lu  hasn't  passed  out.  She  is  in  the  body.  She  was  very  fond  of
her.  She  wrote  for  her  in  her  autograph  book  ;  .she  remembers  that.  "In
Friendship  Memory  ever —  "  Tlio.se  were  some  of  the  words.  "  Friendship
and  Memory  ever  "  was  part  of  the  sentence  of  the  autograpli.  [Not  yet
verified.]

R.  :  "  Say  I  tliink  I  know  whom  .she  means  by  Lu.  Ask  her  to  describe
her."

She  was  tallish — a  rather  pretty  girl.  (Correct  general  de.scription.)  She-
doesn't  look  quite  as  she  used  to  now.  She  is  a  little  faded  like,  and  altered..
But  slie's  cpiite  well.

R.  :  "Lsshe  married?"

Yes,  she's  married.

R.  :  "  Then  what  is  her  name  ?  I  haven't  seen  her  for  years,  and  I  can't
send  message  unless  I  know  her  name,  her  husband's  name."

She  speaks  in  a  hoarse  whisper.  I  will  try  and  hear — can't  well  catch  it..
B.  it  begins  ;  Charle.s — Charles  is  her  hu.sband.

R.  :  "  What  surname  ?  "

Barran,  Berrat,  Barrat,  Behrend,  Mehrend.

[Husband's  true  surname  I  discover  to  be  Daniel. Christian  name  not
yet  found  out  (he  being  in  S.  America).]

R.  :  "I  can't  hear  clearly — can  you  .spell  it  1  "
Burran  it  .sounds. B — U — R — R — A — N — Burran.
R.  :  "  Very  good. I'll  find  her  out  if  I  can."

There's  a  young  fellow  here,  named  George  Henry  Smith.  [Not  within
my  memory.]  He  has  brothers,  Fred  and  Henry.  He  used  to  go  to  school
with  you.  He  had  red  liair.  The  boys  used  to  make  fun  of  him,  and  so
did  you  to(.>. He  didn't  like  you. And  there's  a  spirit  Stevenson.

R.  :  "  What  Stevenson  ?  "

Stevenson — he's  a  good  fellow — lie's  fir.st-class — smart  too — he's  a  good
fellow. He  never  got  into  trouble — not  from  his  own  fault.
R.  :  '■  Describe  him."

He's  a  little  fuller  in  the  face  than  you  are.  Eyes  are  blue — bluish  tint
— with  a  high  foreliead.  I  don't  see  him  very  clearly.  He's  a  good  fellow
— a  friend  of  yours. Still  in  the  body.

[Unknown  to  me. The  only  Stevenson  I  know  does  not  correspond  at
all. Neither  do  I  recall  a  G.  H.  Smith.]

Well,  you  keep  on  with  your  writing.  And  there's  a  journey  for  you  ;  you
keep  on  with  it.  You'll  have  a  jolly  good  time.  You'll  never  regret  going.
And  you'll  go  to  another  country.  It's  a  funny  world,  and  you  knock  about
a  go(Kl  deal.  He  covers  a  good  deal  of  ground,  don't  he  ?  He  gets  it  up,
and  tells  us  all. He  lectures  a  bit,  eh  ?

I'm  going  to  have  a  talk  with  Agnes,  and  find  out  things.  You  bring  this
((■  e.,  the  locket,  vidiich  was  at  this  point  returned)  to  me  again.

Who  am  I  ?  I'm  Dr.  P. — the  spirits  d(_>n't  know  me.  I  have  to  seek
about,  if  I  am  to  find  the  spirits.  I've  got  to  find  the  spirits  and  then
I'll  tell  you  all  about  it.  You  missed  her  when  she  went  away,  didn't  you  ?
Slie's  happy,  thanks  you,  &c.  Had  you  the  friend  who  was  sent  to  the
hospital — who  passed  out  with  small-pox  long  ago  ?


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


481


R.  : "  I  know  nothing  about  it. "

Who  is  this  funny  aunt  of  yours  '?  She's  kind  of  kinie.  Do  you  like  her  1
It  is  a  kind  of  funny  thing.  She's  got  something  the  matter  with  her  foot.
She  sprained  it  one  time.  It  was  a  little  lower  down.  She  turned  her  ankle,
not  so  very  long  ago,  it  was  stepjjing  down. It  is  that  foot,  there.

During  this  talk  medium,  who  first  touclied  leg  above  knee,  gradually
jjassed  hand  down  shin  to  the  left  ankle,  and  there  let  hand  rest
awhile,  pressing  and  slightly  massaging  under-ankle  at  exact  place
where  a  somewhat  severe  sprain  of  seven  months'  standing  still
made  its  effects  felt.

R.  :  "  What  aunt  ? How  came  the  accident  ? I  have  several  aunts."

She  comes  on  your  mother's  side.  It  aches  still.  It's  your  aunt's  foot.
It  was  done  a  little  while  back.  She  stepjjed  down  out  of  carriage.  It  was
the  fleshy  one  ;  if  you  don't  know,  you  go  and  find  out.  Why  the  devil  don't
you  ?  I  like  to  tell  these  people  what  they  don't  know.  She  hurt  her
ankle.  It's  quite  well  now,  only  a  little  troublesome  at  times.  [The  aunt  in
■question  had  no  accident  or  sprain.]

I  see  Agnes.  She's  bowing.  I'll  tell  you  lots  of  tilings  next  time.  You've
got  that  picture  of  hers,  you  keejJ  it.  It's  a  good  one.  She  looks  a  little
tired,  that's  all.  Her  father  used  to  have  rheumatism.  What  about  that
sister  1


In  the  evening  of  same  day  Mr.  Rendall  came  again,  and  there  was  also
present  Mr.  Gonner,  introduced  as  Mr.  McCunn,  but  I  accidentally  used  his
;right  name  once  in  Mrs.  Piper's  presence,  though  she  did  not  seem  to  attend.
It  was  a  mistake  thus  to  crowd  people  in  and  led  to  some  confusion,  but  it
was  with  an  inexperienced  idea  of  economising  time  that  I  did  it ;  I  wanted
JMr.  Gonner  to  have  a  good  sitting  the  following  morning,  when  he  had
iirranged  for  an  experiment.

Sittiny  No.  38. December  20th,  1889. 5.15—0.30 p.m.

Present  :  0.  J.  Lodge,  Mrs.  Lodge,  E.  C.  Gonner,  G.  H.  Rendall.

First  portion  compiled  from  verbatim  notes  taken  down  by  O.  .J.  L.
and  E.  C.  Gr. Notes  written  out  and  annotated  hy  Rendall.

(Rendall  holding  medium's  right  hand. )

I  know  you.  I've  seen  you  before.  I  remember.  I  never  met  you  in
the  body,  but  I  met  you  about  a  week  ago.

[Sole  meeting  occurred  on  morning  of  same  day  at  earlier  seance.]

R.  :  "  Do  you  remember  what  we  were  talking  about  ?  "

I  saw  another  before — a  big,  tall  man,  bald  head,  high  forehead,  good-
liearted  sort  of  fellow.  Your  mother's  in  the  spirit.  I  saw  him  first,  then
you.  He's  a  friend  of  mine — a  good  fellow.  I  see  him  now.  Ah  !  there
he  is.  You're  the  gentleman.  Come  here  and  be  polite  and  say.  How  do
_you  do  ?

[Description  true  of  O.  J.  L. ,  who  was  present  also  at  morning  seance.
Both  his  and  my  mother  are  dead.]

(O.  J.  L.  shook  hands  with  medium.)

What's  that  ? Give  me  that.

R.  :  "The  little  thing  I  showed  you  before  ?  "  ■


4S2


A  Record  of  Observations  of


Yes,  give  it  me. That's  what  I  wanted.

(Here  R.  handed  to  medium  tlie  loclvet  on  which  conversation  turned  in
the  morning.)

Now  I  remember.  I  was  hunting  for  this.  I  have  found  out  a  good
deal  about  her  and  about  you.

R.  :  "  Have  you  seen  her  since  1  "

Yes,  I  have  seen  her.  Her  friend  was  Lulu — her  husband's  name  was
Charles  Burnet.

(Name  this  time  quite  distinct,  and  different  from  morning.)

Who's  that  man  over  there  ?  (Meaning  E.  C.  G.,  who  was  present  for
first  time.)  He's  not  very  well.  He  has  pain  at  the  back  of  the  head;
neuralgia,  cold. He  slept  in  too  much  damp. [Not  specially  applicable.]

Dr.  P.  here  became  annoyed  at  presence  of  others — impatient  at  sound
of  writing,  &c.  Gonner  went  out,  but  that  was  not  enough  ;  he  wished,
all  to  leave,  having  private  communications  to  make.  At  beginning  of
seance,  Mrs.  P.  had  ex2:)ressly  asked  Mrs.  Lodge  to  remain  in  room  if  she
could  spare  the  time,  and  wa,s  not  too  mucli  tired,  preferring  the  presence  of
some  lady.

I  want  those  other  people  out  of  the  room  !  Let  them  go  out.  Send
tliem  all  away,  &c.

All  retired,  Dr.  P.  saying  I  might  call  for  tliem  again  when  he  had  don&
with  me.  During  absence  he  was  somewhat  more  free  and  voluble  than  at
other  times,  but  in  main  volubility  was  of  cr)n\-entional  type,  with  gene-
ralities of  affectionate  messages,  &c.  I  several  times  asked  to  re-admit
others,  but  lie  generally  demurred  or  put  question  by'  or  took  no  notice.
Finally  I  said  I  really  must  call  my  friends  in,  for  they  wouldn't  like  miss-
ing so  much  of  his  cr)mpany.  And  he  said,  ' '  Very  well,  call  them  if  you
will."

The  following  notes  are  from  memory,  written  down  on  same  evening.
Oi  their  general  correctness  I  am  quite  certain,  and  I  have  introduced
nothing  that  did  not  occur.  Exact  loonls,  or  exact  order,  of  conversation  I
cannot  guarantee.

R.  :  "  Well,  doctor,  they  have  gone  now  ;  what  have  you  to  say  ?  "

I've  a  message,  but  I  didn't  like  to  say  it  all  before  a  lot  of  people.  A.
is  looking  very  pleased,  and  says  she  is  so  glad  to  hear  from  you.  She's
particularly  glad  about  that  little  blue  vase.

(A  good  deal  of  this  kind  of  thing.)

R.  :  "  There  isn't  very  much  in  all  that — was  tliere  nothing  particular  to
say,  if  we  were  to  be  alone  ?  "

Yes.  A.  Vi^ould  like  to  say  she  thinks  a  great  deal  of  you — she  always
did — only  she  doesn't  like  to  say  that  before  other  people.  Spirits  are  just,
like  you  peojile  in  the  body.  She's  modest  and  retiring.  That's  in.
character,  isn't  it,  eh  ?  She  always  was — she  was  always  fond  of  you — only,,
of  course,  she  couldn't  say  so  then,  any  more  than  now  before  other  jDeople.

R.  :  "Ask  her  wliether  she  remembers  our  last  meeting,  when  or  where;
it  was."

Yes,  it  was  before  she  went  on  the  j<jurney — [True.  I  believe  I  saw  her
last  at  Harrow,  wliere  I  lived,  and  where  I  vras  then  a  boy  in  the  school.]


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trnnce.


483


— before  the  cough  came,  and  she  went  abroad.  She  was  riglit  then.  Don't
you  remember  the  flushes  on  her  cheek  ?  little  flying  flushes,  hectic  like.

R.  :  "  Well,  yes — that  may  be  all  right.  Can  she  remember  any  other
incident  or  meeting  1 "

Yes,  it  was  a  concert.  [Quite  possible — but  I  do  not  remember.  Tlie
terminal  school  concert  was  quite  an  event  in  school  life,  to  which  any  friends
staying  with  us  went.  But  I  have  no  special  remembrance.  That  her
sister  was  there  also  is  not  very  likely,  and  the  next  words  seemed  to  me
inconsequent.]  You  went  with  her  to  the  concert — at  a  school.  Lots  of
people  there,  singing  and  so  on.

R.  :  "  I  don't  remember  it. What  school?  ask."

She  can't  say  what  school.  It  was  her  sister's.  Her  sister  was  there.
Singing.

R.  :  "  Who  was  singing  ?  "

Her  sister's  it  was. She  was  there  too.

Doctor  talked — I  think  at  this  point — about  a  brother  Will,  of  whom  I
(G.  H.  R.)  said  I  knew  nothing.  Also  talked  of  walking  together
under  trees  on  a  Thursday  evening.  (I  rememl^er  one  wood  walk,
but  it  was  a  Sunday,  after  church.  None  other  in  particular.  This
walk  was  in  my  mind.)

She  says  Charlie,  Charlie.

R.  :  "  What  Charlie — who  was  he  ?  "

Brother  Charlie.

R.  :  "Whose  brother?"

Why,  her  brother  Charlie,  of  course. Cliarlie  and  Eric.

About  this  name  I  could  not  be  absolutely  certain,  but  it  sounded
unmistakable.  Her  sister  (subsequently  to  A.'s  death)  married  a
Charlie,  and  the  eldest  son  is  named  Eric.

"Charlie  and  Eric,  did  you  say  ?  "

Yes,  of  course,  Charlie  and  Eric.  She  says  Charlie  is  ill — he's  been  away
from  home.  [This  C.  had  been  away  from  home,  but  for  wife's  health
rather  than  his  own.]  Something  wrong  here,  you  know  (feeling  low  in
throat),  in  the  throat,  but  it'll  be  all  right. It's  nothing  much..

She  sends  love  to  her  mother.  She's  in  the  body.  Tell  her  she's  quite
happy.  She'll  l^e  glad  to  hear  that — quite  happy.  They've  a  picture  of  her  ;
there  are  floAvers  about  it  sometimes. Do  you  know  that  1

R.  :  "No."

Well,  they  have.  You  see,  they'll  show  it  you,  and  just  you  ask  them.
Fancy  you  not  knowing  that  !

R.  :  "  Does  A.  know  about  me,  what  happens  to  me,  what  I  ;un  doing  ? "

She  thinks  of  you  very  often.

R.  :  "Does  she  know  where  I  live  ?  "

No,  it's  a  town  where  she  has  never  been.  [Correct.]

R. :  "  Can  she  see  things  about  me  ?  Does  she  know  whether  I  am  married  ?"

[To  this  question  I  got  no  answer.  The  doctor  went  off  on  his  own
lines.]

Fred  !  Fred  1 She  keeps  saying  Fred  !  Fred  I  nothing  but  Fred.

R.  :  "Who's  Fred?"

I  don't  know  ;  how  should  I  ?

R.  :  "  Fred  what  ?  "  •


484


A  Record  of  Observations  of


Why,  Fred  Graves. (So  I  heard  name.) It's  always  Fred.

R.  :  "I  never  heard  of  such  a  person. Ask  who  Fred  Graves  is."

Why,  Fred's  your  erratic  brotlier  [correct,  and  his  customary  name  ;  in
morning  called  by  his  never  used  name,  George] — the  roving  one.  Your
brother  Fred,  you  know.

R.  :  "  Yes,  well  ;  niy  brother  Fred  ?  What  of  him  ?  has  she  any  message  ?
I  could  send  one."

No,  she  sends  him  good  wishes.  But  she  didn't  kn(.)W  liim  much —
wasn't  familiar  witli  him,  don't  you  know  ;  not  when  she  was  in  body.
[Correct.]

R.  :  "  Does  she  remember  my  other  brothers  ?  "

Yes,  Arthur. A — R — T — H — U — R.  Arthur,  she  knew  him  l^est  [correct]
— sends  her  love. Tliere  were  four  of  you  ;  she  sends  love  to  all.
R.  :  "  What  were  their  names  ? I'll  give  the  mes.sage."
Charlie.

R.  :  "  My  brother,  do  you  mean  ?  "

Yes,  Charlie. Charlie,  Fred,  Arthur.

R.  :  "  Who  was  the  fourth  '? Tell  me  the  name."

(A  pause  and  effort — doctor  went  to  ask. Tlien)  Hern  (said  with  effort).

R.  :  "Hern  ? That's  not  right."

Henny.

R.  :  "  Did  you  say  Henry  ?  "

(Doctor  returned  to  obscure  Hern,  and  Ern. Then) It  begins  with  H.
R.  :  "That's  not  right. I  can't  take  the  message  when  she  can't  remember
the  name. Try  again. "

Ern— Erny—A  mold— A— R— N— O—L  — D .

(U.  J.  L.,  E.  C.  G.,  and  Mrs.  L.  here  re-entered.  I  said  A.  had  been
sending  messages  to  niy  brothers,  but  could  not  get  the  name  of
one  of  them  right.  From  this  point  verbatim  notes  from  O.  J.  L.
and  E.  C.  G.  are  resumed.)

Medium  (suddenly)  :  Ernest— that's  the  youngest.  E— R— N— E— S— T
— Ernest.  [Correct.]

Arthur  and  Ernest,  and  Charlie  and  Fred.  [CmTect,  and  full  list  of
brothers,  not  in  order  of  age.]  She  remembers  more  than  you  do.  What
do  you  think  she  says  to  me  ?  She  says,  don't  swear,  doctor  ;  she  did,  sure
as  you  live.  Who  is  it  they  call  Bob  ?  Robert.  That  belongs  to  you,
Cajotain. (Said  to  0.  J.  L.)

R.  :  "  Does  she  meet  any  of  my  relatives  ?  "

She's  very  dear  to  you.  They've  got  some  pencil  drawings  of  hers
at  home.  [I  am  told  that  this  is  so.]  You  go  and  see  her  mother — and  see
them.  (4o  at  once.  They  are  little  drawings,  and  see  her  picture  too.  You
go  away.

Here  Gonner  t(3ok  medium's  hand,  and  notes  were  taken  by  C).  J.  L.
and  G.  H.  R.

(To  G.  H.  R.)  I  have  not  told  you  all.  Tliere  is  a  good  deal  to  say  yet.
(Mr.  Gonner  took  hands.)

Hn  !  Where  do  you  come  from  ?  Hn  !  You're  anotlier  good  fellow,  too
I  say,  he  is  a  good  fellow,  Captain.

G.  :  "  Can  you  tell  me  anytlnng  of  my  relatives  or  friends  ?"

What  relatives  ?


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


485


G.  :  "Oh,  my  father,  mother,  anyone."

Yes,  about  your  fatlier  and  mother,  brotliers  and  sisters,  luicles  and
aunts,  anything  you  like.  I  have  seen  your  mother.  No,  it  is  the  other
fellow's  mother.  She  was  tlie  one  that  told  me  about  Fred's  linger,  about
it  being  hurt.  There's  a  little  child  around  with  her — that's  passed  out  of
the  body.  [Correct  of  G.  H.  E.,  whose  mother  died  from  general  debility
ensuing  on  confinement. The  child — a  daughter — lived  only  a  few  hours.]

Florence,  who  is  Florence  1  Florence  got  the  headache,  dark  eyes  and
•dark  hair.  Lying  down  at  present.  Got  artistic  taste,  don't  you  know  ;
paints,  paints  all  round  lier,  you  know,  blackboard,  brushes  and  things  on
the  table.

G.  :  "Who  is  Florence  ?  "

Why  she  has  a  friend.  Miss  Whiteman,  if  y(.)U  must  know.  Do  you
know  now  wIk.i  I  mean  ?

G.  :  "No,  not  in  the  least."

AVell,  then,  say  so,  can't  you?  Florence's  friend  she  was.  She  had
trouble  with  the  head;  lying  down. [See  Sitting  No.  40,  and  p.  40-1:.]

Kendall  here  at  medium's  solicitation  again  took  hands.  Notes  from
O.  J.  L.  and  E.  C.  G.

Don't  you  remember  the  evening  at  the  concert  ?  when  you  went  to  hear
the  singing  ?  She  remembers  it.  She  used  to  have  a  green  hat,  with  green
ribbon — and  a  little  feather  on  it — little  bits  on  there  (toucliing  top  of
G.  H.  R. 's  head). They've  got  that  hat  at  home  now. [Not  yet  verified.]

Harriet.  There's  Harriett  Who  the  devil  is  Harriet?  D(.)  you
remember  Harriet '] She  wants  you  to  go  and  see  her.

A  Miss  Harriet  R.  (always  in  the  family  called  Miss  Harriet)  was  one
of  two  sisters  who  brought  up  A.,  while  her  parents  were  in
India. She  accompairied  her  to  Cannes,  and  nursed  her  in  last
illness  and  death. Miss  H.  R.  died  in  1889.
R.  :  "Ah  !  How  is  Harriet  ?  "

She's  in  the  body.  She's  cpiite  well  for  her.  Go  and  see  her  for  Heaven's
sake.  But  there's  another  lady  there,  too,  who  would  like  to  speak  with
you,  but  she  cannot.  She's  in  spirit — passed  out,  from  some  difticulty  with
her  heart.  It's  your  mother.  It  was  bad  condition  of  heart  and  stomach.
She  has  light  hair — blue  eyes — straiglit.  Very  clear  complexi(jn  and  pretty
mouth.  Very  pleasant  looking  lady.  I  can't  get  to  talk  with  her.  (Pause.)
It's  a  friend  of  your  father  who  had  the  small-jjox,  and  he  jDassed  out.  He
was  thrown  overboard.  His  name  was  Arthur.  [To  this  I  can  get  no
clue.]  Oh  !  Lord  !  there's  a  pain  in  the  ankle — it  was  stej^ping  out  of  the
carriage. It  hurts  me.

Medium  here  felt  down  leg  to  my  sprained  ankle,  took  it  up  on  cliair,
and  massaged  it  for  awhile  at  injured  place.

R.  :  "  Do  you  know  Charlie  ?  "

He  had  trouble  here — had  an  abscess — it  was  there  (feeling  at  neck,  near
glands)  in  the  neck,  and  something  the  matter  with  the  head.  He  got  fever,
iind  his  head  was  wrong. There  was  a  place  on  the  neck.

This  brother  died  after  prolonged  epilepsy,  conjecturally  originating
with  scarlet  fever.  Before  his  death  he  did,  from  time  to  time,
suffer  from  boils  at  back  of  neck,  but  I  learn  there  was  neither
abscess  nor  boil  at  place  indicated.


486


A  Record  of  Observations  of


R.  :  "Tell  me  about  Charlie."

That  is  a  brother  I  am  talking  about — he  passed  out  of  the  body  with  a
fever. There  was  a  place  on  the  side  of  the  neck.
R.  :  "Can  you  speak  with  C.  ?  "
Isn't  that  so  ?

R.  :  "  Well,  has  he  any  message  V

He  sends  his  love  to  you  all. Love  to  Arthur. That's  all  I  hear.
(At  this  jjoint  became  disconnected.)

[The  following  deserves  to  be  added,  as  it  alone  gives  surname.  Mr.
Rendall's  name  was  never  used  in  Mrs.  P.  's  presence.  He  was  introduced
as  Mr.  Roberts.]

Extract  from  Sundaij  sitting  v:itli  0.  J.  L.,  December  22rul,  1889.

Hullij,  here's  a  spirit,  Charlie  Randall— R— A — N — D— A— L— L —
wants  to  send  love  to  all  liis  folks,  and  says  very  happy.  Can  you  sort  that
out  ?

"Whom  does  he  belong  to  ?  "

I  don't  know.  I'll  ask  him.  He  belongs  to  George,  Fred,  Arthur,  (grunt,
indistinguishable)  [Ern,  I  presume. — G.  H.  R.],  Agnes'  gentleman,  that  one
that  was  here,  you  know.  .  .

"Yes,  all  right. I'll  send  message."

Notes  by  G.  H.  R.  •

Regarding  the  two  seances,  I  was  quite  convinced  of  tlie  genuineness  of
the  phenomena.  There  appeared  to  me  no  opening  for  preconcerted  fraud,
and  an  impostor  could  gain  little  or  nothing  either  by  feigning  trance  state
or  adopting  such  an  unnatural  imjjersonation  as  an  Americanised  Frenchman,,
with  familiarly  slangy  manner.

The  knowledge  connnunicated  by  medium  appeared  to  me  to  extend
beyond  the  possibility  of  chance  coincidence.  The  names  of  all  my  four
brothers  were  given  correctly,  and  also  death  of  my  mother,  eldest  brother,,
and  (vaguely)  death  of  infant  sister.

Any  jjrevious  getting  up  of  the  case  seems  to  me  impossible.  I  never
thought  of  the  locket  till  jjreceding  night,  and  have  not  worn  it  for  years..
The  lady  was  a  relative  by  marriage,  who  died  nearly  20  years  back,  and
whose  existence  or  family  was  to  the  best  of  my  belief  unknown  to  any  one
in  Liverpool.

Compared  with  the  correct  statements,  the  inaccuracies  were  slight ;  few
names  were  given  wrong  (two  or  three  only),  but  several  names  or  "  spirits  "
Vi^ere  introduced  to  whom  I  had  no  clue.  There  certainly  seemed  confusion
of  personalities  and  relationsliips,  both  of  the  sj^irits  and  of  those  present,  as
though  the  communicant  (doctor)  had  muddled  up  peojjle.  One  curious
freak  of  confusion  was  the  association  (recurring  morning  and  evening)  of
my  sprained  ankle  with  the  personality  of  my  maternal  aunt,  who,  on
v/riting,  I  found  had  had  no  sprain  or  accident.

Some  of  the  easiest  questions  (on  any  fraud  supi^osition)  were  nxanswered,
e.g.,  "Did  A.  know  whether  I  was  married?"  And  there  were  obvious
inaccuracies,  such  as  "I  met  you  a  week  ago,"  relating  to  morning
interview.

As  for  thought-transference,  I  could  not  trace  conscious  action  of  my
own  mind  on  the  medium. Things  were  said  constantly  that  I  did  not


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


487


expect,  and  that  were  not  in  my  mind  ;  other  things  strongly  present  to
my  mind  were  (1)  quite  outside  medium's  knowledge,  or  (2)  confusedly
guessed  at,  or  (3)  referred  to  in  quite  unexpected  terms  or  connections —
e.g.,  my  brother  was  correctly  called  George  ;  but  he  would  never  have  come
into  my  head  by  that  name,  by  which  (though  his  first  name  in  order)  he  has-
never  been  known  or  called.  At  the  same  time,  statements  lying  outside
my  own  knowledge,  in  the  most  crucial  cases,  furnishing  the  most  direct
criteria  (e.f/.,  proper  names  unknown  to  me),  proved  incorrect  upon
verification.

I  have  no  theory.  The  account  of  phenomena  given  by  the  entranced
medium,  viz.,  confused  communications  with  other  intelligences  of  persons
dead  or  living  (Vjut  particularly  dead),  is  not  out  of  accord  with  the  facts  ;
but  nothing  occurred  to  convince  me  that  this  was  the  only  admissible
explanation.

G.  H.  Rendall.


In  the  next  sitting,  when  Mr.  Gonner  only  was  j^resent  with  me,,
there  is  a  great  deal  that  is  incoherent  and  confused.  Some  of  it  appears
explicable  by  supposing  that  the  family  of  Mr.  Gonner's  mother  are
being  mentioned,  instead  of  his  own.  But  this  is  obviously  a  too  elastic
hypothesis  to  Ije  woi'th  strictly  examining  or  annotating  on.  The  notes,
might  be  abbreviated  with  advantage  were  it  not  that  there  are  a  few
important  incidents  which  it  is  probably  l^ettei'  to  give  in  their  full
setting.

Sittincj  No.  39.  Satiirdaij  mornliuj,  December  21sf,  1889,  leginnimj  at  II
o'clock  a.m.

Present  :  E.  C.  K.  Gonner  and  0.  L.  only.  ■

(0.  L.  sat  with  Mrs.  P.  but  changed  over  to  Gonner  while  she  was  going
.off,  so  that  Dr.  P.  found  Gonner  there.)

Ah,  I  know  you.  I've  seen  you  with  another  gentleman.  Wliere's  tlie
book  ?

Referring  to  a  book  given  to  E.  C.  K.  G.  by  raother,  and  in  liands  of
the  medium  on  previous  occasion.

"  Here  it  is. Do  you  remember  what  you  said  about  it  ?  "

Oh  yes,  I'm  not  a  damned  fool.  It's  your  mother's  influence.  Mother,,
brother,  and  sister  with  me.  Sister  named  Mary.  [Wrong.]  There's  a  good
deal  for  you  to  do  next  year — new  sphere,  new  line — indefinite  to  me,  quite
a  distance  ahead.  Something  for  you  to  interest  yourself  in  other  ijeople.
You've  got  a  lady  in  the  body.  Annie  [Right.  Note  E.],  talking  to  me.
Sister  and  mother  both  together.  [True.]  Someone  calling  for  ed — head  ;
what's  matter  with  head  ?  Something  ed  in  the  body  ;  kind  of  anxious  about
him,  anxious  about  the  ed. Ed,  not  Fred,  it's  ed.

"  Anything  else  ?  Edward  ?  "

Edward,  that's  it. The  lady's  influence  is  in  body  ;  the  mother's  is  in
spirit. But  there's  a  difliculty  of  a  lady  at  a  distance.
"  Lady  at  distance  ?  "

Eight  of  them. Lady  at  distance,  quite  ill,  tco  bad. She  has  a  trouble


488


A  Record  of  Ohservations  of


in  stomach  through  heart,  a  little  cough,  weak  state  of  blood.  It's  an  aunt
who  is  not  well.

"Which  aunt?"  ■ ■  .

The  only  aunt  that's  ill  at  a  distance. [All  this  unintelligible.]

"  What's  her  name  ?  "

How  can  she  tell  me  when  she's  in  the  body  ?  Eight  of  you.  Eight
in  all.  Six  in  all  there  has  been,  and  father  and  mother  make  eight.
{Note  F.]

About  here  the  sitter  indicated  dissent,  and  Dr.  P.  said:  "Well,  I  believe
I'm  mixing  you  ujj  with  the  other  fellow  who  sat  with  you.  Captain,
don't  mix  two  fellows  up  again.  Can't  sort  them  out  properly.
Afraid  I  can't  get  much  of  you,  but  I  would  like  to.  I  get  the
boc.)k  though."

Four  in  body  and  in  spirit  two.  One  passed  out  very  little.  Two
-children  passed  out.  There  were  two,  didn't  you  know  that  ?  One  before  it
hardly  lived,  and  another  very,  very  small.  Four  in  body — no,  five  in  body.
Mother,  father,  yourself,  three  sisters,  one  brother,  and  yourself,  three
brothers  and  two  sisters. [All  wrong  as  applied  to  E.  C.  G. See  Note  F.]

How's  Annie  ? A  little  nervous  she  is.

"Why?"

She's  good  right  to  be.  Condition  makes  her  so.  She's  writing  at  this
minute. (11.25.  Wrong.)

Your  mother  is  very  near  me  ;  she's  the  one  got  trouble  in  head.

O.  L.  :  "  Tell  him  about  his  mother  and  what  she's  doing  now.  It's  very
imiDortant. " [See  comments  at  end  of  sitting.  Note  A.]

Ha,  ha  !  I'll  tell  you  wliy  it's  imjjortant,  because  he  don't  know  it
himself.  I  read  your  tlioughts  then.  I  can't  generally.  Your  mother  is
just  this  minute  fixing  her  hair,  putting  a  thing  through  her  hair  (indicating)
and  putting  it  through  her  hair  in  a  room  with  a  cot  in  it,  up  high.  Did  you
know  she  had  some  trouble  with  her  head  ? [Note  A.]

"  No."

Long  distance  between  you  and  your  mother,  sejiaration  between  you.
She's  in  another  place. [Yes,  in  London.] And  who's  William  ?
"  Well,  who  is  he  ?"
I  think  that's  a  brother.
"  My  brother  ?  "

No,  her  brother  William. That's  an  uncle. [Correct, Note  B.]  Then

I  get  She's  fixing  something  to  her  throat  and  putting  on  a  wrajj  here,

round  here,  and  now  she  has  lifted  up  the  lid  of  a  box  on  a  stand.
•(11.30.)  [Note  A.]  She's  pretty  well,  but  had  little  trouble  with  liead  and
stomach  just  a  few  hours  ago,  a  little  pain  and  indigestion  ;  she  has  taken
hot  drink  for  it.  Within  a  day  or  two  she  heard  of  tlie  death  of  a  friend.
I  see  an  outside  jilace,  high — high  hills,  you  know,  high  kind  of  mountainous
place,  an  outlook — a  very  pretty  outlook — a  relatit)n  of  hers  is  thei'e  ;  it
looks  like  Australia.  It's  a  gentleman  that's  tliere,  a  relation  of  your  mother.
Never  mind  him. I'll  go  back  to  your  mother. [Note  C]

Tliere's  been  some  news,  some  correspondence  reached  the  large  building
where  your  mother  is.  She  has  had  a  cold.  A  young  lady  is  witli  her,  and
I  should  think  it',s  her  daughter  ;  a  very  nice  girl.  She  draws  somewhat,  and
jaeedlework  and  reads  a  great  deal. There's  a  pretty  girl  with  light  hair


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


489


and  bluish  eyes.  She's  speaking  to  your  mother  at  this  minute.  [This  is  all
practically  correct,  except  the  relationship.]

"  Is  her  hair  long  or  short  ?  " [See  Note  E.]

How  do  you  mean ''. It's  fuzzj'  light  haii-. She's  a  little  j^ale,  sort  of
smding  ;  nice  teeth. Your  mother  is  giving  out. [Note  A.] Your  mother-
had  trouble  in  leg,  kind  of  rheumatic. There's  a  young  lady,  not  Annie,
with  light  hair,  light  complexion,  good  influence. [This  is  the  daughter.];
There  are  five  of  them  altogether — a  mother,  tvro  sisters,  and  two  brothers.

"  I  think  not."

Well,  they  are  either  sisters  or  sisters-in-law.  If  j'ou've  got  no  brother-
married,  and  if  you've  got  no  lady,  I  can  get  yoiur  sister  all  right — otherwise
I  get  them  mixed.  Your  lady  has  got  three  sisters  [she  has  five],  four  of
them  in  all  ;  that's  aU  there  is  tliat  I  can  get.  Her  sisters  are  your  sisters  in.
a  way.

"  Can  you  get  my  father  :  "

Your  father's  not  with  you. He's  coming  soon. I  see  hmi  coming.  At
first  I'm  afraid  I  got  you  mixed  with  that  other  gentleman. Can't  do  twa
people  at  once. Whose  little  boy's  that  ? Yours  ? It's  one  of  youi's.  I
think  it  belongs  to  Mira. Here's  a  spirit  named  Charles. Speak  to  him.
Well,  Charles,  are  you  coming  to  see  us  in  town  ?  "

He's  bowing  his  head.  Uncle  Charles,  he's  in  the  sjiirit.  Yes,  he  is.
That's  two  people.  He's  comiected  with  WiHiani.  He's  the  mother's-
brotlier.  Two  brothers.  That's  right.  There's  one  named  Henry  in
Australia. J.  H.  [Note  C]  Is  that  yours,  Captain  ?

O.  L.  :  "  Don't  think  so  ;  possibly."

"  Can  you  get  my  father  ?  "

Your  father's  in  spirit.  He  can  come,  but  we  must  wait  f<:>r  him.  He-
scarcely  knows  j^ou're  here  yet.

Who's  Emma  ?  Your  father  is  calling  Emily.  Do  you  know  Eliza —
Elizza — Lizzie  ?  She  is  in  the  body.  Name  Lizabeth.  It's  her  influence  I
get  through  the  book.  Tliey  call  her  Lizzie— L— I— ZEE— ZEE~I—E.
Your  father  says  so. [See  Note  D.]

He's  here  now. (Speaking  in  whisper.) "Take  God's  blessing  to  Lizzie.
Faithful  always. Truest  and  most  kmd  heart  and  most  spiritual  mother
there  could  have  been."

He's  quite  surprised  to  see  you  again.  You're  changed — gromi — changed
a  great  deal. You  remember  him,  don't  you  ?

"Yes."

Well,  he  remembers  you,  but  you'-S'e  changed.  You  had  an  illness  a  little
while  ago,  about  10  years  ago.  It  was  universally  known  hy  your  spirit
friends,  and  since  that  you  look  difierent.  It  was  a  verj-  disturbing  ilhiess —
a  fever.  [See  notes.]  He  had  some  trouble  with  his  heart  and  stomach
and  bowels.  When  he  sent  that  message  to  your  mr)tlier  he  whisjiered  it
to  her.

"  Has  she  a  daughter  ?  "

Yes,  got  a  daughter  in  the  body — named  after  her — but  she's  got  anothei--
name,  too.  [Note  D.]  Your  father  jDut  up  his  fingers  to  say  two.  He  has  a.
high  forehead  and  a  beard. I  must  talk  to  him  again.

John  Gordon — Gonder — Gorman — Gonner. [Christian  name  -^vrong.]


490


A  Record  of  Ohservations  of


"Who's  that?"

This  gentleman  talkhig  to  me.  "Elizabeth  Gonner,  Lizzie,  that's  right.
Father,  God  bless  them." [See  Notes  and  Note  D.]

(Desultory  remarks,  and  then  suddenly)  :  William  was  good.  He  doesn't
Tcnow  you,  but  a  good  fellow.  One  passed  out  with  an  accident.  That  was
William.  He  was  ill  a  long  time.  It  was  through  his  head  ;  he's  holding
his  head  here  ;  it's  like  a  shot,  but  it  isn't  a  shot,  it's  a  hit  there  on  his  head.
He  doesn't  feel  it  now,  of  course,  but  when  he  comes  back  here  he
remembers  it.  I  can't  get  him  closer.  [Note  B.]  They  all  like  your  mother
so  much. You  ought  to  think  a  lot  of  her.

"I  do."

Well,  if  you  don't  you  ought  to  be  scarified.  I'll  have  to  talk  to  your
father  and  find  out  more  about  you  all.  Your  sister's  talking  to  your  lady.
[Very  likely,  as  by  this  time  the  drive  [Note  A]  would  be  just  over.]

"  Do  you  see  cousin  Harold  in  the  spirit  ?  "

Ah  !  that  I  took  to  be  your  brother. He's  got  a  lot  of  books  about
liim,  coughs  a  little  bit. The  two  little  ones  were  your  brothers,  not  him.
' '  I  don't  kno\y  them. " [Note  F.]

True,  you  don't  know.  They  hardly  existed.  But  don't  forget,  one's
your  own  brother,  and  one  by  an  aunt.  They  went  together,  and  they  seem
like  brothers.  I'll  tell  you.  Did  you  know  your  father  had  rheumatism?
Well,  he  had,  all  over  him,  and  trouble  with  bowels  and  kidneys,  and  passed
out  with  trouble  here  (abdomen);  that  illness  took  him  out.  [Not  incorrect.]
Stomach  and  head,  and  there  was  another  trouble  with  William  through
head — an  accident.

Don't  have  two  people  again.  Captain.  I  got  confused  with  you  at  first.
Tv/o  people  are  too  much. Ask  me  anything  you  like.

"  Can  you  tell  me  what  this  letter  is  ?  "

It's  a  general  letter  about  an  engagement.  Going  somewhere  to  keeij  an
engagement.  It's  been  with  you  some  time.  Can't  see  name.  I'll  see  you
again.  Your  mother  didn't  want  to  go,  but  they  wanted  her  to  go,  and  she
made  up  her  mind  she  would. So  she  went. [Note  A.]  Captain

(And  Mrs.  Piper  came  round.)
Notes  taken  and  written  out  by  0.  J.  L.  soon  after.

Extract  from.  Sitting  {No.  40)  hij  O.L.,  at  7  j'.m.  on  Satnrdau  evening,
December  21st,  1889.  Liveriwol.
Dr.  Phinuit  said  : —

That  gentleman  I  saw  last,  I've  seen  his  father  since  I  went  away.  His
name's  Tiiomas,  Thomas  Gonner.  There  are  two  Thomases.  Botli  Thomas.
[Wrong  :  see  Notes.]  His  mother  just  as  I  left  was  brushing  something,
and  had  a  little  thing  looking  at  it.  Slie  had  a  frame,  a  little  picture,  looking
at  it.  She  took  it  up  and  looked  steadily  at  it  and  then  brushing  something.
That's  hovf  I  left  her.  When  I  saw  her  first  she  was  fixing  her  hair,  and
had  something  on  the  top  of  it,  and  was  fixing  something  round  her  throat,
find  she  took  iip  a  pencil  and  wrote  something.  But  just  as  I  left  she  was
looking  at  a  picture  and  brushing  something. [Note  A.]

(That's  all  he  said  on  this  subject  this  evening.)

Written  at  10  p.m.  same  evening  and  posted  same  night  to  E.  C.  K.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


491


Gonner,  12,  Marlborough-place,  Sfc.  John's  Wood,  London.  Posted
before  any  hearing  from  Gonner  of  the  result  of  the  morning  sitting
which  he  had  same  day  at  from  11  to  12  noon;  morning  sitting  ending
about  12.15,  I  should  thinlc,  pos.sibly  at  12.  Incidents  mentioned  at
11.30  had  the  time  noticed;  they  ran  from  11.25  to  11.32,  Greenwich
time.

Oliver  J.  Lodge.
Notes  on  above  Sitting.  No.  39.

With  reference  to  this  interview  there  are  several  points  deserving
attention.  Some  of  these  are  of  sufficient  importance  to  be  treated  of
separately,  but  a  few  remarks  of  a  more  general  character  may  precede  any
such  attempts  at  detail.

That  Mrs.  Piper  was  acquainted  with  my  history  and  circumstances  is
higlily  improbable  ;  not  only  was  she  unaware  before  she  came  to  Liver-
pool that  I  should  sit  to  her,  but  I  was  introduced  to  her  under  the  name  of  a
colleague  and  not  in  my  own.  Any  theory  as  to  previous  investigation
falls  necessarily  to  the  ground,  for  even  had  she  been  able  to  discover  the
antecedents  of  Professor  Lodge's  colleagues,  she  would  in  consequence  of
this  safeguard  have  been  led  to  attribute  my  relations  and  circumstances  to
another,  his  to  me.  As  will,  however,  be  seen,  in  the  course  of  the  inter-
view she  uttered  my  name  "  Gonner"  (p.  489).

Though  in  many  instances  she  gave  cuiious  details  of  events  or  jjersons,
these  were  produced  with  great  difficulty  and  generally  surrounded  with  much
that  was  inaccurate  and  confused.  At  times,  too,  she  was  uncertain,  and
seemed  hardly  able  to  attain  to  accuracy  in  her  information.  She  was  uncer-
tain as  to  the  number  of  my  brothers  and  sisters  (p.  488),  wrong  botli  in  her
remark  to  me  (p.  489),  and  afterwards  to  Professor  Lodge  (j^.  490)  as  to  my
father's  Christian  name.  In  consequence  her  power,  genuine  though  it  may
appear  to  be,  seems  imperfect,  and  in  consequence  her  information  is
inaccurate.

This,  however,  must,  I  think,  have  a  very  considerable  Ijearing  on  the  plain
theory  of  thought-transference.  Let  us  grant  that  I  was  aware  of  the  death
■and  attendant  circumstances  of  the  death  of  my  "uncle  William,"  yet  at  the
time  I  was  unconscious  of  them  ;  unaware,  indeed,  at  the  moment  as  to  whom
she  was  referring  when  she  mentioned  William  for  tlie  first  time  (p.  488).
But  when  she  was  speaking  of  my  father  and  searching  after  his  name,  I  was
keenly  conscious  that  it  was  Peter  and  nijt  John.  Again  when  (p.  489)  she
stated  that  my  father  was  x^resent  but  did  not  know  me — that  I  had  been
changed  by  an  illness  and  consequently  hardly  recognisable  by  my  spirit
friends — I  thought  distinctly  enough  that  my  illness  was  some  eight  years
back,  my  father's  death  but  two  and  a-half.

Did  she  then  give  any  accurate  information  which  could  not  be  accounted
for  by  thought-transference  ?  She  told  me  (p.  488)  tliat  within  a  day  or  two
my  mother  heard  of  the  death  of  a  friend.  If  she  referred  to  the  days  pre-
ceding the  interview  she  was  v/rong,  if  following,  right,  since  a  very  old
friend  of  my  mother's  died  that  very  (Saturday)  morning.  But  this  question
concerns  a  point  which  will  be  touched  on  in  one  of  the  notes.

Note  A. — In  preparation  foi'  the  interview  I  had  written  and  asked  my


492


A  Record  of  Ohscrvations  of


sister  (Ellen  Elizaljetli  Gonner)  to  persuade  my  mother  to  do  something  that
was  unusual  for  her  Ijetween  the  hours  of  11  and  12  Saturday  morning  ;  and
to  observe  what  she  did.  My  motlier  was  not  to  know,  and  did  not  know,
that  she  was  doing  tliis  at  my  request.  )Saturday  morning,  at  a  few  minutes
l:)ef(.)re  11,  slie  prepared  herself  for  going  out  to  take  a  drive  in  a  hansom  cab,
this  striking  her  as  an  unusual  procedure,  as  it  was  raining.  Such  preparation
inv(jlved  touching  the  head  in  tlie  putting  on  of  her  Ijonnet,  of  lier  neck  and
shoulders  when  she  put  on  her  cloak  (p.  488).  Then  she  was  specially  observed
to  take  lior  mutt'  l)ox  from  her  wardrobe,  to  place  it  on  a  table,  lift  the  lid,
and  take  lier  iinifl'  out  (p.  488).  On  her  dressing-table  there  stands  a  small
photograph  of  my  father,  which  she  very  frequently  takes  up  and  looks  at
intently  (p.  490).  Whether  she  did  this  on  the  occasion  in  question  cannot
be  ascertained,  as  it  is  one  of  those  ordinary  actions  tlie  performance  of  which
makes  no  impression.  She  cannot,  liowever,  l^e  said  to  have  Ijeen  suffering
from  her  head.  There  is  a  wooden  half-tester  in  her  room,  which  might
conceivably  be  called  a  "cot."  [See  also  notes  at  end  of  this  series,  p.  529.]
Tliere  is  here  a  general  correspondence  between  her  actions  at  three  or
four  minutes  to  11,  and  those  attributed  to  her  by  the  medium  at  11.25 —
11.30.  But  the  seance  was  beginning  at  11,  and  the  medium  began  at  once
witli  my  mother.  It  is  then  an  interesting  matter  to  examine  whether  she
Avas  trying  to  discover  what  my  mother  was  engaged  ujoon  at  the  moment  or
to  recall  her  actions  as  she  last  perceived  them.

Note  B. — The  instant  reference  to  William  (p.  488)  in  connection  with  my
mother  seems  to  indicate  a  connection  between  the  medium  and  my  mother,
rather  than  a  connection  between  the  medium  and  myself.  My  uncle,
William  Carter,  was  killed  in  an  election  riot  in  Yorkshire,  near  Wakefield,
1837,  by  a  stone  which  struck  him  on  the  head  (p.  490).  The  news  of  his.
death  was  a  terrible  shock  to  my  mother,  wIkj  was  then  at  school  in
Germany.

I  think  tliat  the  reference  "  a  long  time  "  means  that  he  was  ill  and  died
a  long  time  back  ;  so  at  least  did  I  understand  it  at  the  sitting.

Note  C. — No  bi'other  of  my  mother's  died  in  Australia  (p.  488).
About  tlie  name  of  the  place  the  medium  seemed  uncertain  (p.  488).  One  of
my  uncles  died  in  India  of  cholera.  His  name,  however,  was  not  Henry
though  his  initials  were  J.  H.  (John  Halliley  Carter)  (p.  489).  I  did  not  know
the  existence  of  his  second  name.

Note  D. — My  mother's  name  is  Elizal^eth  (pp.  489-90).  She  was  invari-
ably called  Lizzie  by  my  father.  My  sister's  name  is  Ellen  Ellizabeth
Gonner  (p.  489).

Note  E.  —  "Annie  "  (p.  487)  is  the  name  of  the  young  lady  to  whom  I  am
engaged.  Beyond  the  one  fact  of  her  name,  the  descrijation  was  too  vague
to  afford  much  proof  of  knowledge  of  any  kind,  though  correct  as  far  as  it
goes.  "  Is  her  hair  short  or  long  ?"  (p.  489),  This  question  I  asked,  having-
been  informed  by  letter  that  she  had  had  her  hair  cut  quite  short.  The
answer  of  the  medium  clearly  conveyed  the  impression  that  such  was  not  the
case  ;  and  I  concluded  that  it  was  an  instance  of  error.  On  reaching  London
I  found  to  my  surprise  that  it  was  correct, — that  her  hair  had  not  been  cut
short  after  all.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


493


Note  F. — These  instances,  I  tliink,  show  that  Mrs.  Pii^er's  information,
though  genuine  and  remarkable,  was  not  invariably  accurate,  a  conclusion
greatly  fortified  when  the  remainder  of  the  sitting  is  taken  into  account.

They  indicate,  perhaps,  one  other  jjoint  of  interest.  Mrs.  Piper  seems  to  /
have  been  in  communication  witli  my  mother's  mind,  to  all  seeming  as
complete  as  tliat  which  she  maintained  with  mine.  Sometimes  she  ajsjoeared,
indeed,  nearer  to  my  mother.  In  consequence,  at  tliese  times  tliere  was
some  confusion  between  her  brothers  and  my  own  (p.  488).  She  had  several
brothers  who  died  in  infancy. I  had  none.

Written  by  way.  of  comment  on  and  in  explanation  of  record  of  interview
of  December  21st,  1889,  as  taken  by  Professor  Lodge.

January  loth,  1890.  E.  C.  K.  Gonxer.


Sitting  No.  40. Saturday  ereninij,  1  p.m.,  December  21d,  1889.
.  Present :  O.  J.  L.  alone,  taking  notes  himself.

(I  sat  to  Mrs.  Piper  witli  my  hands  crossed,  so  that  after  the  trance  came
on  it  was  my  right  liand  that  was  released  and  left  hand  kejit ;  I  was  thus
able  to  take  rough  notes. )

That  man's  father's  name  was  Thomas  ;  both  Thomas  .  .  .  (and
so  on,  as  reported  and  annotated  as  appendix  to  previous  sitting,  p.  490).

Mary's  father  used  to  be  on  board  ship,  and  he  fell  and  hurt  his  leg.
Fell  through  a  hole  in  the  boat.  [Correct.]  Can't  remember  where  he  got
that  article.  It  was  on  one  of  his  voyages  ;  but  Mary  may  remember.
[Does  not.]  Her  second  father  is  William  ;  tliat  is  the  one  with  the  white
liead.  The  first  one  was  Alexander  Marsliall.  [All  correct.  This  is  the
first  appearance  of  the  surname  ;  it  came  (|uite  pat. See  also  p.  472.]

There  is  one  named  Clara. You  liave  a  sister  named  Florence.

"No."

Well,  Florence  belongs  to  you  ;  it  is  your  Florence.  She  has  the  friend
Wliiteman.  (See  Sitting  No.  38,  p.  485.)  But  there  are  two  Florences.
There's  a  Florence  in  some  other  cormtry.  One  paints  and  the  other  doesn't
paint.  One's  married  and  the  other  isn't  married.  It  is  the  one  wlio
doesn't  paint  who  is  married.

[This  is  an  insignificant  communication,  but  see  Note  A  below, and  p. 500.]

Here  followed  a  prediction,  and  soon  afterwards  the  personality  seemed
to  change  to  that  of  a  deceased  male  friend,  whom  I  will  call  Mr.  E.,
of  whom  I  had  lianded  in  a  letter.  The  speaker  now  called  me
"Lodge,"  in  his  natural  manner  (a  name  which  Phinuit  himself
never  once  used),  and  we  had  a  long  conversation,  mainly  non-
evidential,  but  with  a  reference  to  some  private  matters  which  were
said  to  be  referred  to  as  proof  of  identity,  and  which  are  well
adapted  to  the  purpose.  They  were  absolutely  unknown  to  me,  but
have  been  verified  through  a  common  friend.  Among  other  things
we  discussed  Phinuit  (see  also  pp.  517  and  553),  and  I  said  that  I
wanted  to  try  him  with  some  unknown  cardboard  letters  in  a  sealed
box,  but  doubted  if  it  were  of  much  use. The  voice  said  ;

By  all  means  try. All  these  experiments  must  be  tried.

"  Well,  tell  him  it's  very  important."

Yes. Here  he  is  coming  back.

Now  then,  what  is  it  you  want  of  me  1

2  M


494


A  Record  of  Observations  of


"I  ivant  you,  doctor,  to  tell  me  what's  in  this  box,  please.  No  one
knows."

Give  me  a  pencil  (putting  the  box  to  top  of  medium's  head).
A  pencil  was  handed  to  him  and  he  wrote  on  cardboard,  slowly,
L K Q U C  N
and  then  dropped  the  pencil. [See  Note  B,  and  also  p.  495.]
I  gave  him  another  jjill  hox  in  which  were  letter's  I  did  know.
"  Thank  you. Can  you  do  these  too  ?  "

I'll  try.  No,  I  can't,  I  am  dazed  with  that  other  Ijox,  and  besides  I  am
getting  too  \veak. Try  me  earlier  on  another  time. I  am  going  now.

Note  A. — I  happen  to  have  two  cousins  Florence,  one  married  and
abroad,  and  who,  so  far  as  I  knov/,  does  not  paint.  I  wrote  to  my  other  cousin
Florence  (who  paints  and  is  not  married),  asking  if  she  had  a  friend  Miss  or
Mrs.  Whitema,n,  or  Whyteman,  whom  she  had  seen  lately  and  had  something
the  matter  with  lier  head,  a  headache  or  something.  She  sent  a  postcard  to
say  "No,  what  on  earth  do  you  mean  ?  " Next  day  another  postcard  to  say: —

' '  Whytehead  won't  do,  will  it  ?  I  am  this  very  day  returning  such  a  one's
call,  and  drinking  tea  it  has  struck  me  on  re-reading  your  letter  as  being
something  like  the  name  you  inquire  aliout. . . . She  is  lately  married."

(It  is  perhaps  more  than  a  little  far-fetched  to  suggest  that  Dr.  Phinuit
may  have  caught  tlie  name  wrongly,  and  on  being  corrected  hy  the  syllable
"head"  have  proceeded  to  say  that  she  had  sometliing  wrong  with  her  head!)

Note  B. — This  was  a  very  carefully  planned  experiment.  Some  children's
card  letters  pinched  by  me  out  of  a  box  containing  a  good  many  aljthabets  at
the  house  of  Professor  Carey  Foster  were  put  into  a  pill  box  without  looking
at  them,  and  sealed  up  very  carefully  in  his  presence,  using  his  seal,  &c.  All
this  was  done  on  November  29tl!,  preparatory  to  my  Cambridge  visit.

After  Dr.  Phinuit  had  ostensibly  read  the  letters  I  wrote  two  accounts,
with  full  details  of  the  letters  and  their  apparent  position  in  the  box.  One  I
sent  to  Mr.  Myers,  the  other  under  seal  to  Professor  Carey  Foster,  asking  him
to  wire  if  he  were  at  home  and  could  open  the  box.  He  did  wire,  and  I  sent  him
the  hox.  He  opened  it  carefully  and  wrote  out  every  detail,  before  having
read  my  sealed  statement.  The  letters  actually  in  box  were  :  W — A — II — K
— D— N— E~D.

There  is  thus  no  connectiofi  v/hatever  (beyond  chance)  between  the  two
statements,  and  the  experiment  completely  failed.

The  next  sitting  was  a  very  poor  one,  with  a  lot  of  rambling  talk.
In  it  occurred  a  little  squabljle  between  Dr.  Phinuit  and  myself,
because  I  remonstrated  v/ith  him  for  fishing  and  talking  vaguely
instead  of  holding  his  tongue.  He  said  it  was  all  dark,  no  good  to-
day ;  that  the  medium  couldn't  be  feeling  well,  and  so  on.  The  only
incidents  worth  recording  are  here  stated.

Sitting  Nu.  41. Noon,  Sunday  morning,  December  22)ul,  1889.
Present  :  O.  L.,  M.  L.,  and  for  the  first  time  Alfred  Lodge  (p.  512).
O.  L.  holding  hand. Notes  taken  by  M.  and  A.  L.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


495


I  liavu  had  a  talk  with  your  uncle,  the  one  that  had  a  fall,  and  passed  out
of  the  body. He  doesn't  remember  much  about  you.
"I  don't  know  wliich  one  }^;)U  mean."
Too  bad. He's  connected  with  Uncle  Robert.

I  handed  in  the  box  of  letters  again,  and  he  wrote  them  dowii  as  before,
but  not  so  distinctly — L — K — Q — N — U — C.

Soon  after  occurred  the  episode  of  "Charlie  Randall,"  as  reiDorted  afc
end  of  Sitting  38.

He  said  something  jocular  about  my  wife's  stejj father  being  her  uncle,
evidently  referring  to  the  mistake  he  had  made  in  at  first  calling
him  Uncle  WiUiam. (See  Sitting  No.  16,  p.  468.)

Asked  to  tell  us  about  liimself  if  he  couldn't  say  anything  about  other
I^eople,  he  said  his  wife  liad  been  Mary  Latimer,  and  that  she  (or
he  ? )  had  a  sister  Josephine.  Born  in  Marseilles. (See  also  p.  520. )

(That  was  all  of  the  slightest  moment.  Such  things  as  telling  Alfred
that  "there  are  two  Charleys  and  two  Henrys  in  j'our  family,"
though  it  happens  to  be  true,  are  obviously  not  worth  the  C[uoting. )

After  this  occurred  two  sittings,  Nos.  42  and  4.3,  at  which  a  medical
man  practising  in  Liverpool  was  introduced,  without  notice,  by  the
name  of  Dr.  Jones.  He  came  again  the  same  evening  and  brought
his  wife.  This  time,  unfortunately,  they  were  admitted  by  a  servant,
who  announced  their  names.  Phinuit  did  not  mention  it,  howe^'er.
The  full  account  of  these  sittings  is  long,  and  would  require  a  great
deal  of  annotation  to  make  the  details  clear.  For  the  sake  of
brevity,  I  propose  merely  to  abstract  them.  There  are  a  number  of
erroneous  statements,  some  of  them  to  be  partially  accounted  for  by
the  fact  that  Dr.  and  Mrs.  C.  are  cousins  (a  fact  Phinuit  did  not
ascertain),  and  that  he  mixed  their  relatives  at  the  second  sitting.
The  family  seems  to  be  a  very  large  one.  I  quote  later  the  misstate-
ments, but  first  I  pick  out  the  correct  ones  or  those  which  require
comment.  I  may  say  that  Dr.  C.  was  almost  entirely  silent.  Occasion-
ally he  assented  with  a  grunt,  but  I  found  afterwards  that  he  was
assenting  to  wrong  quite  as  much  as  to  right  statements.  I  hardly
ever  knew  what  was  rioht  and  what  wrona;  as  I  took  the  notes.  He
was  thus  an  excellent  though  trying  sitter.  Phinuit  was  in  one  of
his  most  loquacious  moods,  or  he  would  not  have  progressed  so  well.
Towards  the  end  one  could  see  he  began  to  get  tired  of  his  own
monologue. (See  also  his  remarks,  p.  499.)

Sittiiuj  No.  42. Monday  morning,  December  23rd.

Present :  Dr.  C.  (introduced  as  Dr.  Jones)  and  O.  J.  L.
[The  following  is  an  abstract  of  the  correct,  or  subsequently  corrected
■or  otherwise  noteworthy,  statements.]

"You  have  a  little  lame  girl,  lame  in  the  thigh,  aged  13  ;  either  second  or
third.  She's  a  little  daisy.  I  do  like  her.  Dark  eyes,  the  gentlest  of  the
lot ;  good  deal  of  talent  for  music. She  will  be  a  brilliant  v/oraan  ;  don't


49G


A  Record  of  Ohservations  of


forget  it.  She  has  more  sympathy,  more  mind,  more — quite  a  little  daisy.
She's  got  a  mark,  a  curious  little  mark,  when  you  look  closely,  over  eye,  a.
scar  through  forehead  over  left  eye.  Tlie  boy's  erratic  ;  a  little  tiling,  but  a
little  devil.  Pretty  good  when  you  know  him.  He'll  make  an  architect
likely.  Let  him  go  to  school.  His  mother's  too  nervous.  It  will  do  him.
good.  [Tliis  was  a  subject  in  dispute.]  You  have  a  boy  and  two  girls  and  a.
baby  ;  four  in  the  body.  It's  the  little  lame  one  I  care  for.  There  are  twO'
mothers  connected  with  you,  one  named  Mary.  Your  aunt  passed  out  with
cancer.  You  have  indigestion,  and  take  hot  water  for  it.  You  have  had  a.
bad  exi^erience.  You  nearly  slipped  out  once  on  the  water.  [Dangerous-
yacht  accident  last  summer.  Above  statements  are  correct  except  the  lame-
ness. See  next  sitting.]

Sitftiitj  Nu.  43. Moiiilo]!  crenriui,  Decemher  23rrf.

Present :  Dr.  and  Mrs.  C.  and  O.  J.  L.  [Statement  correct  when,
not  othei'wise  noted.]

"How's  little  Daisy?  She  will  get  over  her  cold.  But  there's  something:
the  matter  with  her  head.  There's  somebody  round  you  lame  and  somebody
hard  of  hearing.  That  little  girl  has  got  music  in  her.  This  lady  is  fidgety..
There  are  four  of  you,  four  going  to  stop  with  you,  one  gone  out  of  the  body..
One  got  irons  on  his  foot.  Mrs.  Allen,  in  her  surroundings  is  the  one  witli.
iron  on  leg.  [Allen  "was  maiden  name  of  mother  of  lame  one.]  There's,
about  400  of  your  family.  There's  Kate  ;  you  call  her  Kitty.  She's  the  one
that's  kind  of  a  crank.  Trustworthy,  ljut  cranky.  She  will  fly  oft'  and  get
married,  she  will.  Thinks  she  knows  everything,  she  does.  [This  is  the^
nurse-girl,  Kitty,  aliout  whom  they  seem  to  have  a  joke  that  she  is  a  walking
comiiendium  of  information.]  (An  envelope  with  letters  written  inside,
]Sr — H — P — O — Q,  was  here  handed  in,  and  Phinuit  wi'ote  down  B — J — R —
O — I — S,  not  in  the  best  of  tempers.)  A  second  cousin  of  your  mother's
drinks.  The  little  dark-eyed  one  is  Daisy.  I  like  her.  She  can't  hear
very  well.  The  lame  one  is  a  sister's  child.  [A  cousin's  child,  the  one  nee
Allen,  really.]  The  one  that's  deaf  in  her  head  is  the  one  that's  got  the^
music  in  her.  Tliat's  Daisy,  and  she's  going  to  have  tlie  paints  I  told  you  of..
[Fond  of  painting.]  She's  growing  np  to  be  a  beautiful  woman.  She  ought  to
have  a  paper  ear.  [An  artificial  drum  had  been  contemplated.]  You  have  an.
Aunt  Eliza.  There  are  three  Maries,  INIary  the  mother,  Mary  tlie  mother,
Mary  the  mother.  [Grandmotlier,  aunt,  and  granddaughter.  ]  Three  brothers
and  two  sisters  your  lady  has.  Three  in  tlie  Ijody.  There  were  eleven  in
yovir  family,  two  j^assed  out  small.  [Onlj'  know  of  nine.]  Fred  is  going  to
pass  out  suddenly.  He  married  a  cousin.  He  writes.  He  lias  sliining  things.
Lurijueftes.  He  is  away.  He's  got  a  catchy  trouble  with  heart  and  kidneys,,
and  will  j^ass  out  suddenly.  [Not  the  least  likely.  It  is  ratlier  odd  that  the
surname  of  this  "Fred,"  not  given  here,  was  once  mentioned,  either
accidentally  or  otherwise,  in  a  totally  difl'erent  connection  in  Sitting  38
(p.  484)  ;  being  then,  of  course,  quite  unintelligible.]

Notes. — The  most  striking  part  of  this  sitting  is  the  prominence  given,
to  Dr.  C.'s  favourite  little  daughter,  Daisy,  a  child  very  intelligent  and  of  a
very  sweet  disposition,  but  quite  deaf  ;  although  her  training  enables  her  to
go  to  school  and  receive  ordinary  lessons  with  other  children. At  the  first


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


497


sitting  slie  is  suiDposed  erroneously  to  be  lame,  but  at  the  second  sitting  this
is  corrected  and  explained,  and  all  said  about  lier  is  practically  correct,
including  the  cold  she  then  had.  Mrs.  Piper  had  had  no  ojiportunity  what-
-ever  of  knowing  or  hearing  of  the  C.  children  by  ordinary  social  means.  We
barely  know  them  ourselves.  Phinuit  grasped  the  child's  name  gradually,
using  it  at  first  as  a  mere  description.  I  did  not  know  it  myself.  Dr.
Phinuit  is  lavish  witli  predictions,  such  as  the  one  at  the  end,  which  fre-
quently, I  think  usually,  fail.  I  deeply  regret  to  say  that  his  predictions
regarding  Daisy  are  likewise  false,  for  she  caught  tlie  influenza,  and  the
announcement  of  her  death  is  in  to-day's  paper. — June,  1890.
The  following  is  a  summary  of  the  false  assertions  : —

Erroneocs  Statements.

At  Sitting  42  :—

"Your  lady's  Fanny;  well,  there  is  a  Fanny.  [No.]  Fred  has  liglit
liair,  brownisli  moustache,  prominent  nose.  [No.]  Your  thesis  was  some
.-special  thing. I  should  say  about  lungs. "  [No.]

At  Sitting  43  :—

"  Your  mother's  name  was  Elizabeth.  [No.]  Her  father's  lame.  [No.]
•Of  your  children  there's  Eddie  and  Willie  and  Fainiie  or  Annie  and  a  sister
'that  faints,  and  Willie  and  Katie  (no,  Katie  don't  count)  [being  the  nurse],
-and  Harry  and  the  little  dark-eyed  one,  Daisy.  [All  wrong  except  Daisy.]
One  j^assed  out  with  sore  throat.  [No.]  The  boy  looks  about  8.  [No,
4.]  Your  wife's  father  had  something  wrong  with  leg  ;  one  named
William.  [No.]  Your  grandmother  had  a  sister  who  married  a  Howe —
Henry  Howe.  [Unknown.]  There's  a  Thomson  connected  with  you  [no],
and  if  you  look  you  will  find  a  Howe  too.  Your  brother  the  captain
[correct],  with  a  lovely  wife,  who  has  brown  hair  [c(jrrect],  has  had  trouble
in  head  [no],  and  has  two  girls  and  a  boy." [No,  three  girls.]

Dr.  C.  permits  me  to  append  the  following  note  of  his  on  the  case,
"written  some  time  later : —  •  ■

' '  The  trance  state  seemed  natural  ;  but  had  more  voluntary  movement
-than  I  had  ever  seen  in  an  epileptic  attack.  The  entire  change  in  Mrs.
Piper's  manner  and  behaviour  is  unlike  an  intentional  eflbrt,  and  it  is
possible  she  herself  believes  that  the  conditions  mean  something  outside  of
lierself .  With  regard  to  tlie  result,  the  misses  seem  to  balance  tlie  hits,  and
the  '  reading '  is  not  so  impressive  as  the  '  sitting. '  After  reading  over
your  notes  I  think  they  consist  of  a  certain  amount  of  thought-reading
and  a  large  amount  of  skilful  guessing."

At  the  next  sitting  I  had  arranged  for  a  shoi-tliand  writer  to  be
pi'esent,  and  take  everything  down  as  neai'ly  verbatim  as  possible.

It  is  not  a  very  favoni-able  sitting,  and  the  only  special  importance
•attaching  to  it  is  owing  to  the  fact  that  it  was  by  parcel  post  that  morn-
ing that  the  watch  arrived  which  was  mentioned  in  the  introductiou
(p.  458);  but  as  this  was  one  of  the  few  sittings  for  which  the  report  was
•attempted  to  be  made  \'erbatim  I  think  that  space  must  be  spared  for
its  insertion  in  full  ;  it  being  understood,  I  hope,  that  the  full  report  is


498


A  Record  of  Ohservations  of


given  in  order  to  convey  a  better  notion  of  the  whole  manner  of  a  sitting-
other  than  a  tirst  one,  i.e.,  one  conducted  by  a  stranger.  It  will  be
perceived  that  by  this  time  we  converse  pretty  freely  with  the  Phinuit
personality,  in  order  to  draw  him  out.  In  the  early  sittings  I  had
been  leticent,  and  I  had  introduced  reticent  strangers,  until  I  had
completely  satisfied  myself  of  the  existence  of  some  kind  of  power,  and
of  the  honesty  of  Mrs.  Piper  ;  I  was  now  anxious  to  push  the  experi-
ment  further,  so  as  to  distinguish  if  possible  between  mind-reading  and
clairvoyance  proper  :  I  wanted  to  get  something  Avhich  I  did  not
know.  It  was  with  this  object  that  I  had  written  for  the  watch  ;  and
it  was  with  this  in  A"iew  that  I  sometimes  now  saved  time  by  convey-
ing some  common  bit  of  information  myself.  Such  a  jDroceeding  may
have  been  less  judicious  than  I  deemed  it,  but  whatever  I  already  knew
it  was  but  of  little  advantage  to  be  told ;  I  had  already  ascertained
that  Phinuit  could  do  that ;  I  wanted  to  be  told  something  that  I  could
afterwards  verify,  and  it  seemed  to  me  that  Phinuit  got  on  better
^vhen  one  gave  his  powers  some  sort  of  confidence,  and  did  not  continue
■to  ask  trivial  testing  questions  such  as  "  How  many  brothers  have  I
got  1 "  Such  questions  are  pi'oper  enough  for  strangers  to  ask  ;  but
after  a  time  Phinuit  gets  impatient  with  an  old  sitter  unless  he  goes,
on  to  more  reasonable  matter.  In  our  ignorance  of  the  mode  of  mind-
action  involved  it  may  be  rash  to  surmise,  but  I  think  it  probable
that  a  sitter  really  and  not  only  scientifically  anxious  to  gain  infor-
mation on  some  subject  would  be  likely  to  get  the  best  results  ;  and  I
endeavoured  to  put  myself  as  nearly  as  possible  into  the  appi'opriate
attitude  for  receiving  information.  I  perceive  that  it  has  a  ludicrous,
tffect  in  print.

I  wish,  moreovei',  to  point  out  that  the  A"iew  to  be  taken  of  this  and
some  later  sittings  depends  entirely  on  the  view  one  takes  of  Mrs.
Piper's  personal  honesty.  It  is  by  strangers  that  this  must  be  and  has
been  tested.  Since  she  knew  she  was  to  stay  with  me  it  cannot  he
denied  that  a  fraudulent  and  industrious  person  could  manage  tO'
secure  infoi-mation  concerning  my  relatives  (p.  527).  Once  more  I  repeat
(for  what  it  is  woi'th)  that  I  am  convinced  that  that  is  not  the  way  it
was  done  ;  but  the  real  evidence  on  such  a  point  must  rest  on  the  inter-
views with  suddenly  introduced  strangers.

In  the  annexed  report  nothing  is  jDurposely  omitted.  The  occasional
dots  only  mean  that  the  speech  was  too  rapid  or  too  inaudible  for  the
stenographer.  The  latter  in  writing  out  his  notes  has  prefixed  to  all
Phinuit's  speeches  the  symbol  "Dr.,"  and  I  have  left  it  so.  But  for
greater  clearness,  and  in  order  to  indicate  the  changes  of  voice  and
manner,  which  were  sometimes  only  partial  but  were  occasionally
marked,  I  have  altered  this  prefix  in  a  few  j^laces  to  the  initial  of  the
jjersonality  supposed  to  be  speaking, putting  a  query-mark  at  the-


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


499


doubtful  places  where  I  do  not  know  whether  Phinuit  intended  us  to
suppose  that  he  was  reporting  in  the  first  person,  or  that  he  had
temporarily  qiiitted  his  post.  Nothing  at  all  depends  on  these  ^Drefixes,
they  merely  assist  an  understanding  of  how  the  dialogue  sounded  ;
and  it  was  only  very  occasionally  that  the  changed  voice  and  manner
resembled  that  of  the  person  supposed  to  be  speaking  sufficiently  to
excite  intei'est.  It  will,  of  course,  be  perceived  that,  in  even  a
successful  imitation  of  voice  and  manner,  there  need  only  be  a  trifle  of
executive  skill  in  addition  to  mind-reading.

Sitting  No.  44. Noon. December  24^/^,  1889.

Present :  O.  J.  L.  ;  later,  M.  L.  also ;  with  Biiscoe  taking  shorthand
notes  all  the  time. (Verbatim  report,  as  a  specimen  taken  at  random.)

Dr.  :  "  How  do  you  do,  Doctor  ?  "  (Evidently  referring  to  the  last  sitter,
Dr.  C.)

O.  L.  : "  H'm. I  am  very  well,  thank  you. "

Dr.  :  'Ullo,  I  thought  it  was  the  Doctor. You  know  I  saw  him  last."
O.  L.  :  "  Yes,  you  did."

Dr.  :  ' '  Two  times.  Well,  I  thought  it  was  him,  don't  you  know.  I  will
see  him  again  some  time."

O.  L.  :  "Well,  how  is  the  medium  to-day  ?  "
Dr.  :  "  Oh,  pretty  well."

0.  L.  :  "  You  gave  the  Doctor  (i.e.,  Dr.  C.)  a  very  good  sitting  "  (p.  495).

Dr.  :  "  Very  good  what  ?  "

O.  L.  :  "  You  told  him  a  lot  of  things."

Dr.  :  "I  told  him  all  I  could  hear,  but  it  was  a  terribly  conqjlicated
family.  I  cannot  keep  so  many  things  quite  clear,  and  they  do  not  talk
enough. They  were  too  reserved,  you  know,  and  too  c|uiet. "

O.  L.  :  "  They  were  afraid  of  interrupting  you. They  meant  well. "

Dr.  :  ' '  Yes,  they  are  all  right ;  but  you  know  they  should  recognise  their
friends,  and  if  they  don't  do  that  then  .  .  .  well,  it  does  not  seem  cordial.
When  you  meet  your  friends  you  may  at  least  say  '  How  are  you  V  "

O.  L.  :  "  Have  you  seen  any  of  my  friends  ?  "

Dr.  :  "I  have. I  saw  your  uncle,  don't  you  know."

O.  L.  :  "  Any  more  of  my  relations  ?  "

Dr.  :  "Yes,  I  have.  There  are  two  Olivers  in  your  family.  Two.
There  is  an  Oliver  and  Alfred,  brothers,  you  know.  [Yes.]  Who's  that  fellow
there  ?  "

O.  L.  :  "That  is  only  my  clerk."  [He  is  really  clerk  to  the  College
Registrar.]

Dr.  :  "  How  are  you  V

(Clerk)  E.  B.  :  "I  am  very  well."

Dr.  :  "Glad  to  see  someone  is  well."

Dr.  to  O.  L.  :  "Do  you  know  those  letters  the  D(,)ctor  gave  me  ?  "  [Refer-
ring to  some  letters  written  inside  au  envelope  and  handed  in  at  previous
sitting.]

O.  L.  :  "Yes,  I  know."

Dr.  :  ' '  You  should  not  use  him  for  your  things.  You  should  give  them
me  yourself."


500


A  Record  of  Ohservations  of


O.  L.  :  "It  was  his  doing.  We  liad  arranged  before  the  sitting  to  try
tliat  ;  it  was  his  idea."

Dr.  :  "But  it  rather  bothered  me  at  the  time. They  were  'P.O.Q.,

." [These  are  three  of  them  now  (p.  496).]
O.  L.  :  "  You  did  not  get  them  right."
Dr.  :  "I  know  I  got  them  right."

O.  L.  :  "  They  were  not  quite  right,  but  never  mind  them. There  is  a
question  I've  got  for  you. "
Dr.  :  "What?"

O.  L.  :  "I  want  to  ask  you  about  this  watch,  if  you  please  "  (p.  458).

Dr.  :  "  About  what  1 What  do  you  want  to  know  V

O.  L.  :  "  Well,  I  want  to  know  to  whom  it  belonged."

Dr.  :  "He  is  in  the  sjjirit.  He  used  to  work  with  little  wheels.  I  see
him  in  a  room  with  little  wheels  with  figvu-es  on  them.  He  had  to  do  with  a
something  that  had  little  wheels."

O.  L.  :  "No,  no  ;  I  don't  mean  the  man  who  made  the  watch.  I  mean
the  gentleman  who  used  to  wear  it."

Dr.  :  "  Well,  confound  it,  is  not  that  what  I  am  telling  you  ?  It's  a  funny
old  thing.  It  has  been  through  the  wars,  I  should  think.  Curious  old
watch." (Fingering  it.)

O.  L.  :  "  Do  you  know  anything  about  it  1 "

Dr.  :  "It  belonged  to  one  of  your  uncles."

O.  L.  :  "Did  it  belong  to  anyone  who  had  something  to  do  with  little
wheels  ?  "

Dr.  :  "Well,  it  did  reallj',  and  this  was  given  to  liim  by  his  father.

Little  round  wheels,  with  figures  on.  Given  him  by  his  father.
I  will  bring  him.  He  is  the  one  like  Uncle  Robert,  and  he  is  tlie  one  who  met
with  an  accident.  He  had  a  fall  in  the  body,  don't  you  know.  He  writes  to
Uncle  Robert  and  Uncle  Charles. Tliat  is,  brother  Charles,  I  mean  to  say."

O.  L.  :  "  Brother  of  him  ?  "

Dr.  :  "Yes,  and  Oliver."

O.  L.  :  "Is  he  there  now  1  "

Dr.  :  "Ay,  right  here."

O.  L.  :  "  Would  he  send  a  message  to  Uncle  Robert?"
Dr.  :  ' '  O — L — I — V — E — R,  that's  his  name,  I  know. No,  no,  that's
Oliver's  name."

0.  L.  :  "Who  does  he  mean  by  tliat  ?  "

Dr.  :  "  That  is  his  brother.  Look  here,  if  I  get  this  mixed  up  you  won't
bother  me,  will  you?  Oliver  is  the  name  he  gave.  He  had  a  brother  Oliver,
and  a  father  Oliver,  and  a  nephew  Oliver.  [Correct.]  And  then  there
is  Henry— H—E—N—R—Y."

O.  L.  :  "Yes."

Dr.:  "But  that  is  your  brother.  There  is  another  brother.  Then
there's  Ellen.  '

O.  L.  :  "  Sister  of  me?"

Dr.  :  "No,  he  has  got  sister  Helen.  I  got  that  mixed,  didn't  I  ?  But
wait  a  minute,  confound  it. Did  you  find  out  whi)  FLjrence  was  yet  ?  "

O.  L.  :  "She  says  she  has  not  got  a  friend  Mrs.  VVhiteman."  [See  Sittings
38  and  40,  pp.  485  and  494.]


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


501


Dr.  :  ' '  Miss  Whiteman — whether  I  said  Miss  or  Mrs.  I  am  not  sure. '
O.  L.  :  "I  wrote  to  the  one  that  paints,  and  is  not  married."
Dr.  :  "I  told  you  one  of  them  painted  and  the  other  one  didn't."
O.  L.  :  "Yes,  you  did."

Dr.  (returning  to  the  watch) :  "Say,  do  you  know  lie  has  got  a  brother
Cliarley,  one  Robert,  one  Oliver?  [True.]  Did  you  ever  see  such  a  many
brothers  ? Did  you  ever  ?" [There  were  over  twenty.]

"J — 0 — H — N. Do  you  know  him? Well,  John  . But  you  know

hini.  There  was  a  John.  Well,  he  is  in  the  spirit.  And  you  do  not  know
him? Well,  you  are  stujjid."

O.  L.  :  "  Do  you  mean  the  one  I  was  asking  about  ?  "

Dr.  :  "  I  do  mean  him."

O.  L.  :  "Oh,  I  know  him,  Vnit  you  have  not  got  it  quite  right.  Let  us
hear  his  name  1 "

Dr.  :  "  It  is  J  . Confound  it. He  is  telling  it  to  me  ;  telling  about

Lis  brothers  too."

O.  L.  :  "I  should  be  very  glad  if  you  would  get  liim  to  speak."

Dr.  :  "  His  name's  Jonathan,  confound  it.  [No.]  Don't  you  sujjpose  I
can  hear  it?  Well,  I  can  hear  it  anyhow.  J — 0~N — A— T— H — A — N.
Why  don't  you  talk  about  some  of  the  rest  of  them  ?  f4o  on  to  talk  about
the  rest,  and  let  me  talk  to  him. I  will  bring  him  I'iglit  up  close  to  me."

0.  L.  :  "I  want  to  send  word  to  Uncle  Robert."

Dr.  :  ' '  That  is  the  man  I  am  always  talking  about.  I  told  you  about  him. ' '
O.  L.  : "  Get  him  to  tell  us  about  when  they  were  young. All  he
knows."

Dr.  :  "  I  shall  get  great  good  things  for  you  out  of  him. He's  a  very
bright  man. Great  deal  to  do  with  this  thing  "  (the  watch).
0.  L.  :  "  Yes,  I  got  it  on  purpose  for  you."
Dr.  :  "Little  wheels  with  figures  on  them."
O.  L.  :  "  What  are  those  things  ?  "
Dr.  :  "Well,  I  believe— yes."
O.  L.  :  "What  were  they  for  ? "

Dr.  :  ' '  Don't  you  see  these  little  round  things  with  figures  on  ?  They  are
wheels  ;  like  round  wheels  exactly.  Musical  things,  with  little  figures  on  all
round  them."

O.  L.  :  "Would  they  be  for  calcidation  ?"

Dr.  :  "I  cannot  tell  the  idea  of  them. You  know  what  I  mean.  Like
draught  (?  draft). And  then  these  figures  are  marked. He  is
showing  a  plate. I  see  them. I  tell  you,  Captain,  that  this  is  right."
0.  L.  :  "  He  used  to  do  calculations."

Dr.  :  "I  tell  you,  and  you  ask  Robert. If  you  don't  know  it  he  will,  and
that  will  be  all  the  better. Here's  your  father."
O.  L.  :  "  How  is  my  father?  "

Dr.  :  ' '  Your  father  is  all  right.  Do  you  hear  that  answer  ?  He  is  all
right.  There  are  two  gentlemen  talking  to  me.  One's  father,  other's  uncle.
Your  father  ....  sends  his  respects  to  you  all.  He  is  a  very  nice
man,  got  these  things  like  you  round  here,  don't  you  know."  (Beard  and
whiskers.)  [True.]

O.  L.  :  "  Send  my  love  to  my  father."


502


A  Record  of  Ohs&rvations  of


Dr.  :  "I  will."

O.  L.  :  "  And  ;ilso  to  my  mother."

Dr.  ;  ' '  Oh,  yes.  He  and  your  mother  are  together.  There  was  a  separa-
tion for  a  long  wliile.  She  went  out  of  the  body  first,  and  then  he  followed
her  [correct],  met  her,  and  happy."

Dr.  :  ' '  Joseph,  the  one  that  owned  the  watch  1 Don't  you  suppose  I  can

hear  it  1 It  is  J — 0. How  the  d  do  you  pronounce  it  ? I  tell  you  that

is  right.  Oh,  I  see,  I  see,  you  remember  Joseph,  Joe,  a  cousin  of  yours,  that
passed  out  of  the  body  when  he  had  a  fever  ?  No  ?  A  little  fellow,  do  you
know  1  And  he  had  the  fever,  and  he  is  your  mother's  brother's  child,  or
sister's  child,  I  cannot  tell  you  which,  and  he  is  in  the  spirit.  [Unintelligible.]
Your  mother's  here  now. "

(J.  L.  :  "  She  began  a  message  to  me  which  you  forgot,  about  my  sister."

Dr.  :  "She  sent  a  message  to  Charley  and  to  Oliver."

O.  L.  :  "  Yes,  but  you  began  one  to  my  sister,  but  did  not  finish."

Dr.  ;  "I  told  you  as  much  as  I  heard,  and  some  one  else  sjDoke."

O.  L.  :  "Yes  ;  but  try  and  get  the  rest  now."

Dr.  :  "I  want  you  to  tell  her  to  make  the  change.  It  is  the  best  thing
she  can  do,  and  will  help  her.  She  is  quite  unsettled  in  her  mind,  and  she
says  that  if  she  would  she  would  be  better  after,  and  this  as  regards  her  life,
do  you  see She  wants  her  to  make  uj)  her  mind  and  settle  in  your
surroundings.  In  yours  because  she  points  to  you,  and  to  do  this  it  will  be
better  for  her,  as  she  intended  to  do  first.  And  it  will  be  better  for  you  all.
I  tell  you,  my  friend,  your  mother  says  it,  your  aunt  says  it,  and  your  father
says  it.  Now,  if  you  believe  anything  I  can  tell  it.  Your  mother  says  it,
your  Aunt  Anne  says  it,  and  I  know  them  all.  Your  Uncle  John  says  it.
J"0 — H— N  (do  you  see  ?)  says,  Tell  your  sister  Ellen— Ellenr — Ellenelly

(now,  then,  what  the  d  is  her  name  ?)  to  settle  in  your  surroundings,  as  she

intended  to  d<j  first.  I  don't  know  v/hat  it  means.  Because  she  is  very  much
unsettled,  and  slae  does  not  know  which  to  do,  and  it  will  be  better  for  you,
your  welfare,  f(jr  the  family,  for  her,  and  you,  now.  And  she  is  strong
enough  for  it.  Best  thing  she  can  do.  She  will  be  better,  and  do  you  think
about  it." [See  Note  C,  p.  507  ;  see  also  pp.  513,  514,  531,  532,  and  539.]

0.  L.  :  "Thank  you."

Dr.  :  "  And  you  tell  her,  if  you  like,  that  I  said  so,  that  they  told  me,
and  that  I  told  you,  and  if  ...  .  What  do  you  think  of  that  ?  Be-
cause the  change  of  air,  and  tlie  surroundings,  tlie  busy  occupation,  and
the  responsi'oility  of  her  life,  will  do  her  good,  and  take  her  out  of  herself,
and  from  tliiuking  of  her  physical  condition  ;  better  for  her  every  way.  Well,
if  you  don't  Ituliuve  that  ....  I  will  stake  my  word  of  honour  that
is  the  truth. What  do  you  think  of  that  ?  " [See  Note  C]

O.  L.  :  "Are  they  all  there  still  ?  "

Dr.  :  ' '  One  difficulty  that  I  have  is  to  make  your  luicle  conscious  of  this
[watch],  and  the  other  is  getting  the  sj^irit  to  speak  to  you.  He  had  a  fall
in  the  body  [true]  ;  passed  out  of  the  body  long,  long  time.  Rather
difficult  for  me  to  talk  to  him,  do  you  see  ?  Because  he  passed  out  when  you
were  young  and  you  do  not  know  so  much  about  him,  and  at  the  same  time
he  does  not  seem  to  take  an  interest  in  you."

0.  L.  :  "  No,  but  he  does  in  Uncle  Robert  V


Certain  Fhenoviena  of  Trance.


503


Dr.  :  ' '  He  is  the  one  v/ho  went  with  youi"  Uncle  Robert  to  try  tlie
experiment.  [Unintelligible.]  They  started  out  together,  but  it  did  not  suit
him  just  well,  and  gave  it  up  [incorrect]  and  went  into  ....  then
worked  with  the  figures. What  do  you  call  them  ?  "

0.  L.  :  "  He  used  to  do  calculations."

Dr.  :  "What  the  d  are  calculations  1  "

0.  L.  :  "Well,  the  fact  is  he  belonged  to  an  insurance  company.  They
have  to  calculate  how  long  peoj^le  are  likely  to  live.  They  do  that  by  figures."

Dr.  :  "It  comes  like  a  composition,  and  all  .  .  .  with  figures  like  you
read  out  sheets  of  music,  and  they  have  got  little  round  wheels  with  letter.s
on  them.  That  is  a  seal.  The  little  wheels,  you  know,  vfith  figures  on  them.
Seals.  Little  marks  with  figures  on  them.  Go  and  look.  He  v.-ill  tell  you.
Do  you  know,  Uncle  Robert  is  very  much  interested.  .  .  .  He  thinks
everything  of  Uncle  Roljert,  and  he  was  with,  liim  in  tlie  same  business.  [See
Note  A.'\  They  started  out  together,  and  then  he  gave  it  up  and  came  here.
What  do  you  think  of  that  ?  It  is  true.  He  and  your  Uncle  Robert  had
their  pictures  taken  together.  He  had  his  hat  on.  A  long  while  ago.  Had
it  taken  in  tin.  Little  bit  of  paper  pasted  on  the  .  .  .  He  was  sitting-
do\ra.  The  other  standing  up.  Tall  hats  on.  Well,  there,  he  remembers
that.  [See  Note  U.]  And  Uncle  Robert  owns  this,  (watch)  and  he  left  it
with  him."

0.  L.  :  "Uncle  Robert  only  sent  it  me  this  morning.  It  came  by  post
just  now."

[Phinuit  now  impersonated  the  late  owner  of  the  watch,  my  uncle
Jerry  :— ]

V.  J.  :  "Very  good. Say  God  bless  Robert  and  I  would  like  to  see
him. You  are  my  nephew,  aren't  you  ? "
0.  L.  :  "Yes."

U.  J.  :  "I  knov>-  you,  seems  to  me  I  do.  Yes.  I  used  to  know  you,  but
you  were  a  little  shaver  then  ;  a  very  deep  thinker.  Used  to  think  a  great
deal ;  more  than  the  rest  of  the  boys.  AVhat  about  Alfred  and  all  those
fellows?"

O.  L.  :  "  They  remember  you. Especially  Henry. "

U.  J.  ;  "  Yes,  Henry  remembers  me  ;  and  you,  you  remember  me  in
connection  with  your  aunt.  I  used  to  see  your  aunt  there  a  great  deal  ;  and
how  wonderfully  you  have  changed.  Oh,  dear,  you  are  like  the  rest  of  the
family — pretty  tall."

O.  L.  :  "Uncle Robert  would  be  glad  to  hear  from  you,  sir."

U.  J.  :  "  Ask  him  if  he  remembers  the  pictures  1  He  has  got  the  ring  I
used  to  have,  and  the  cliain.  Had  a  little  square  thing  in  the  centre  of  the
chain,  right  here.  Robert  will  remember  it.  Ask  him  what  he  has  done
with  my  books. He  has  got  them,  I  am  sure. He  will  tell  you."

O.  L.  :  "Do  you  remember  anything  when  you  were  young  ?  "

U.  J.  :  "Yes.  I  pretty  nigh  got  drowned.  I  remember  that.  (With  a
short  characteristic  laugh.)  Tried  to  swim  the  creek,  and  we  fellows,  all  of
us,  got  into  a  little  boat.  We  got  tipped  over.  He  will  remember  it.  Ask
him  if  he  rememljers  tliat  about  swimming  the  creek. "  [See  notes  at  end  of
this  series  (p.  526),  where  it  will  be  found  that  the  "  boat  "  is  inaccurate  :  it
should  be  a  platform.]


504


A  Record  of  Observations  of


O.  L.  :  "I  ^yill."

U.  J.  or  Dr.  :  "  And  he  and  I  went  gunning.  Got  soaked  through.  Plenty
■f>f  good  tinies  we  have  had  together,  jtlenty  of  good  times,  and  Robert  will
remember  it.  And  I  want  him  to  know  that  I  live,  and  if  you  send  these
messages  you  tell  him  that  I  sent  all  this.  How  you  have  grown.  Let  me  see
how  tall  you  are.  [O.  L.  standing  up.]  Tliat  is  not  so  bad.  Sit  down.  Where
•do  you  suppose  you  would  go  if  you  kept  on,  you  might  go  tlu'ough  tlie  roof,
but  you  had  better  stop  so.  How  are  you  getting  on  with  your  work  1
You  have  to  make  pe<_)ple  know  that  you  are  here.  That  is  a  great  difficulty. "
[All  this  is  mere  padding,  of  course. "  Gunning  "  is  rank  American.]

O.  L.  :  "  Do  you  often  want  to  talk  to  them  ?  "

Dr.  :  ' '  Who  is  Jack  1  Will  you  tell  me  who  tliat  is  ? James  (spelling
it),  that  is  your wife's)  cousin."
O.  L.  :  "I  don't  know."

Dr.  :  "  But  you  have  always  said  you  did  not  know  him.  Now  I  think  you
are  stupid.  Why  don't  you  know  ?  this  cousin  of  hers  is  bound  to  make  him-
self known.  Here  is  William  T— O— M— K— I— N— S— O— N.  Yes,  that
is  right.  William  Tomkinson.  He  is  an  old  man,  with  white  hair  and  beard,
and  he  has  nothing  here  (moustache).  He  passed  out  with  trouble  with  the
bladder. [All  correct. See  pp.  474,  476.]

O.  L.  :  "Would  he  like  to  see  Marie  ?  Won't  my  uncle  send  his  name
to  Robert?"

Dr.  :  "Yes.  He  lost  his  pocket-book  one  time  with  considerable  money
in  it,  William  did.  [Likely  enough.  A  clerk  of  his  decamped  with  a  large
sum  once.]  That  is  William  now.  William  is  here — Tomkinson,  and  he
wants  to  send  his  love  to  Mary,  and  he  says  if  Mary  will  only  keep  quiet,
that  there  is  something  troubling  her,  and  that  if  she  will  only  just  keep
quiet  a  little  and  not  worry  too  much  she  will  be  much  better.  Tell  her  her
father  says  that  :  her  numlier  2  father  "  (pp.  468,  474,  476,  and  537).

O.  L.  :  "I  will  tell  lier. " [Here  I  summoned  my  wife.]

Dr.  :  "That  Dr.  {i.e.,  Dr.  C.  again)  had  two  mothers.  And  tell  her
that  I  would  like  very  much  to  see  her."

Mrs.  L.  :  "  She  still  thinks  of  him. She  thinks  of  him  always."

W.  Tomkinson  :  "She  was  very  kind  to  me  and  did  a  great  deal  for  me.
She  could  have  done  nothing  more  when  I  was  ill."

Mrs.  L.  :  "  Tell  him  how  grieved  I  was."

W.  T.  or  Dr.  :  "I  know  it  ;  but  my  suffering  was  all  over  in  a  little  while.
I  never  suffered  since.  Be  a  good  girl  ;  courage  is  everything.  Keep  up  ;
■do  your  l^est.  You  can  take  my  word  you  will  come  out  all  riglit,  and  be
well.  Now  that  is  a  good  deal.  You  will  positively  be  well  and  free  from
difficulties  that  now  trouble  you  in  the  material  life."

Dr.  :  "Wait  a  minute,  and  I  will  speak  to  hhu  too.  That  is  Alec  (p.  472),
and  Alec  says  the  same.  Nc^thing  fought  for  nothing  won,  but  patience  and
|)erseverance  overcome  all  things.  Be  jjatient  and  you  will  not  suffer  long.
William  and  Alec  say  the  same."

W.  T.  :  "  Ask  tlie  little  girl  if  she  rememl^ers  my  illness.  I  never  was  so
Avell  after  that  operation." [Possibly  true.]

Mrs.  L.  :  "  We  thought  you  were  better  for  a  time."

W.  T.  :  "I  never  was. I  was  only  temporarily  relieved  then. It  would


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


come  on  again. Until  I  was  relieved  of  my  sufferings,  God  only  knows  what
I  did  suft'er. [His  last  24  hours  were  one  constant  agony.] I  am  not
depressed  any  more. I  am  happy  now,  and  I  have  got  a  good  home."
Mi-s.  L.  :  "  And  why  were  you  misunderstood  ?  "

W.  T.  or  Dr.  :  ' '  Because  they  could  not  understand  my  temijex'ament,  my
disjjosition,  my  peculiarity  ;  but  that  was  my  physical  state.  I  have  seen  it
now  ;  that  makes  me  feel  liajjpy,  Marie.  If  you  ever  think  ....  of
me. Speak  to  me,  my  child."

Mrs.  L.  :  "Yes,  I  do,  but  am  grieved."

Dr.  ?:  "Why?"

Mrs.  L.  :  "  Grieved  that  you  should  have  been  misunderstood."

Dr.  1 :  "It  was  not  their  fault  exactly.  It  was  the  com2:)laint  I  told  you
of,  when  I  spoke  to  you  before.  I  have  seen  you  before,  haven't  11  It  was
not  their  fault  ;  it  was  not  mine.  I  could  not  heljj  it,  but  I  used  to  seem  so^
dejjressed  ;  it  seemed  there  was  nothing  of  good  in  life  for  me  ;  but  there  is-
something  here  for  me,  tliank  God."

Mrs.  L.  :  "  But  you  enjoyed  life,  and  wanted  to  stay  in  the  body."

Dr.  l :  "I  did,  but  at  last  I  was  glad  to  be  relieved,  and  I  am  happy  now-
I  am  not  dead,  for  I  still  live.  I  am  not  material.  You  are  looking  with
wonder.  I  am  here  and  I  see  you  both.  I  see  you  all.  I  am  not  dead.  My
body  is,  but  I  am  not."

Mrs.  L.  :  "And  you  see  the  children,  don't  you  1 "

Dr.  ? :  "I  see  them  all,  every  one  of  them."

Mrs.  L.  :  "  Do  you  see  that  little  one  you  were  so  fond  of  1 "

Dr.  ?  :  "I  do,  and  Marie,  too.  I  remember  her  wlien  she  was  a  little
thing.  God  bless  her.  She  would  be  a  funny  little  thing.  Little  body.
No  selfishness  in  her.  She  was  a  good  cliild.  God  bless  her.  Marie,
dear,  don't  be  so  grieved."

Mrs.  L.  :  "  Do  you  remember  little  V.  ?  "

Dr.  ?  :  "  I  do  remember."

O.  L.  :  "  Where  is  he  now  ?  "

Dr.?:  "  He  is  with  Mary.  [I.e.,  his  grandmother  :  true.]  He  is  better
there,  and  we  are  going  to  take  good  care  of  him,  that  nothing  serious  happens.
You  remember.  See  if  we  don't  take  good  care  of  him,  in  your  life,  not  in
ours. Our  intere.st  is  very  great,  very  large,  and  we  could  do  a  great  deal."

Dr.:  "And,  Marie,  dear,  do  not  worry ;  be  l;rave  ;  keep  him  where  he  is.
Keep  him  from  noise  and  confusion,  for  a  time.  The  change  will  do  him
good  ;  and  do  not  let  him  get  over-worked.  Do  not  send  him  to  school.
Let  him  stay  at  licjme  and  rest  well,  and  get  strong.  His  nerves  are  weak,
but  he  will  get  better.  He  will  pull  tlirough,  and  come  out  all  right.  He
lias  got  worms.  Yes,  he  has  got  tliem  still  ;  but  lie  will  outgrow  it,  and.
make  a  fine  boy.  Do  not  worry.  I  don't  tell  you  that  to  encourage  you,  but
"because  it  is  true."

Mrs.  L.  :  "  Are  they  little  or  are  they  big  worms  ?  "

Dr.  :  "Large,  not  small,  but  large  worms;  that  is — they  are  not  tape-
worms. No."  [True.]

Mrs.  L.  :  "What  should  we  give  him  ?"

Dr.  ;  "You  give  him  vermifuge  to  take.  Suggest  some."  [N.B. — This  is-
not  the  usual  Phinuit  method  of  prescription :  it  is  quite  exceptional.  ]


506


A  Record  of  Observations  of


O.  L.  :  "Mercury?"  -  .

Dr.  :  "No,  too  strong. Weaken  liim."  ■
Mrs.  L.  :  "  Santonin  ? Scammony  1 Quassia  1 "

Dr.  :  "  Yes,  scammony  is  good.  Give  him  that  with  quassia  alternately."
O.  L.  :  "Both  injected  ?"

Dr.  :  ' '  Yes.  Best  thing  of  the  lot.  Do  you  know  who  Jerry — J — E —
E— R—Y— is  ? "

O.  L.  ;  "Yes. Tell  him  I  want  to  hear  from  him."

U.  J.  :  "Tell  Rohert,  Jerry  still  lives.  He  will  be  very  glad  to  hear  from
me.  This  is  my  watch,  and  Robert  is  my  brother,  and  I  am  here.  Uncle
Jerry — my  watch." (Impressively  spoken.)

O.  L.  :  "  Do  you  see  Aunt  Anne  now  1  "

Dr.  :  ' '  Yes,  she  looks  tlie  same  identical ;  always  the  same  Aunt  Anne.
. . . We  took  good  care  of  him. You  little  woman,  didn't  we  ?"
Mrs.  L.  :  "  About  my  boy  ?  "

Dr.  :  "He  will  come  out  all  right.  He  is  thin  ;  pale  ;  he  looks  a  little
tired  ;  he  is  nervous  ;  he  is  a  little  saint,  that  fellow  ;  he  is  a  good  little
fellow,  and  one  of  the  be.st.  Isn't  he  ?  He  is  good  ;  one  of  the  best ;  he  is
nervous,  that's  what's  the  matter  witli  hint.  He  means  well.  Not  a  better
boy  in  the  country  than  he  is;  He  is  nervous,  irritable,  excitable.  Can't
allow  it.  I  did  not  intend  to  say,  but  I  can  see  tlie  foundation — that  doctor's
boy  [Sitting  42]  is  a  perfect  little  devil,  and  full  of  it  as  he  can  stick.  If
ever  anybody  did  he  will  outgrow  it,  and  come  out  iirst-class.  Fiendish  little
nature.  Tlie  other  little  fellow,  domineering.  I  tell  you  you  have  got  a
great  comfort  in  that  boy."

Mrs.  L.  :  "  Will  he  live  to  l)e  a  man  1 "

Dr.  :  "Fretting!  It  is  all  bosh,  and  you  had  better  be  asleep  than
fretting  about  people.  Do  as  I  told  you.  He  will  come  out  all  right.  That's
"what's  the  matter.  Give  him  hot  water  to  drink.  Give  him  it  to  drink  at
night.  He  should  sometime.  You  give  it  to  him.  Tell  liim  to  take  it.
You  make  the  vermifuge  I  told  you.  There  is  no  chance  of  his  going.  You
v/ill  see  him  cliange.  His  nerves  won't  l)e  so  wrong.  Show  some  discretion ;
have  sense.  Take  good  care  of  yourself,  Marie,  Vv^e'll  take  good  care  of  him.
Change  will  do  him  good.  Tliere  is  others  in  your  surroundings  that  needs
looking  after  just  as  much  and  more.  You  need  not  Vi^orry  about  any  of
them  for  the  present.  It  is  all  riglit.  It  will  be  all  right.  God  knows  best,
but  you  know  wliat  I  told  you.  Captain  (p.  4r>9).  I  can't  help  it.  In  other
matters  you  need  not  fret. You  will  liave  comfort  in  that  boy  yet."

Mrs.  L.  :  "What  about  tlie  little  girl  ?  "

Dr.  :  "She's  all  right,  no  fear  aljout  that.  You  need  not  worry  about
her  at  all.  I  told  you  she  will  have  many  little  pull-downs,  drawbacks,
disagreeable  days.  She  will  come  out  all  right.  Be  a  great  companion,
don't  you  fear.  She  is  a  good  one — going  on,  too,  just  as  she  is.  She  is  not
going  to  be  cut  off,  tliat  I  know.  I  will  stake  my  word  of  honour  on  it.
But  God  knovv's.  What  He  told  me  to  say,  and  what  He  allows  me  to  know,
I  know  and  no  more.  I  can't  lielp  getting  mixed  up  sometimes  ;  and  it  makes
me  mad.  I'd  like  to  be  all  straight,  not  crooked.  I  do  take  care  of  you.
When  the  voice  of  Dr.  Phinuit  is  no  longer  heard  in  tlie  body,  remember
you  had  a  friend  in  me,  and  one  who  will  always  look  after  you,  no  matter


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


507


Tvhat  one  says  about  me.  I  go  on.  I  fight,  fight  theni  all  ;  and  they  will
always  do.  .  ■  .  .  Get  good  for  me  to  do.  God  bless  you  all,  and  the  best
■wishes.  Captain  I  Is  there  anything  else  ?  I  will  speak  to  you  again.  Doctor  !  "

Notes.

A.  The  facts  concerning  what  is  often  referred  to  not  at  all  clearly  as
the  joint  business  life  of  my  two  uncles  are,  I  am  told,  as  follows.  Uncle  Jerry,
when  young,  was  mathematical  master  at  Lucton  School,  in  Herefordshire.
Then  he  became  actuary  to  the  Palladium  Life  Insurance  Company.  When
that  ceased  to  exist,  he  became  secretary  to  a  salvage  association  in  the
City,  and  head  clerk  at  Lloyd's.  Uncle  Robert  was  all  along  secretary  of  the
Marine  Insurance  Company.  Tlie  businesses  were  thus  not  very  distinct,  but
they  never  technically  "  worked  together,"  though  after  Uncle  Jerry  became
bilind  he  used  to  go  every  day  into  the  City  and  sit  through  business  hours  in
Uncle  Robert's  office,  where,  as  a  boy,  I  have  often  seen  him.

B.  The  facts  concerning  the  photographs  are  these.  There  are  two  framed
photographs  of  Uncle  Jerry,  and  both  these  I  remember  having  often  seen.  A
print  of  one  of  them  is  in  the  house,  and  hence  Mrs.  Piper  may  possibly  have
seen  it  ;  but  it  is  an  ugly  thing,  relegated  to  some  attic.  I  suppose  it  belongs
to  the  early  days  of  amateur  photography.  It  consists  of  a  gate  in  the  middle
of  some  iron  railings,  and  standing  by  each  gatepost  is  a  man  in  a  tall  hat.
One  of  these  men  is  Uncle  Jerry,  the  other  is  not  Uncle  Roljert,  but  a  friend
of  both,  the  late  Major  Cheere  ;  I  thought  at  the  time  that  it  was  the  much
more  intimate  friend  of  both,  Mr.  Robert  Cheere.

The  other  photograj^h  referred  to  is  a  better  one.  I  have  since  had  it
sent  me  from  London.  In  it  Uncle  Jerry  is  sitting  down  blind  on  a  garden
seat,  probably  at  Mr.  Cheere's,  and  near  him  is  sitting  a  son  of  one  of  the
gardeners,  to  whom  he  is  giving  a  lesson  in  algebra.

The  mention  made  by  Phinuit  is  ambiguous  as  to  whether  it  refers  to  two
pictures  with  figures  in  difi:erent  attitudes  in  each,  or  whether  it  means  one
picture  with  two  figures  in  diiferent  attitudes.  My  impression  at  the  time
"vvas  the  latter,  and  my  conscious  memory  was  not  able  to  correct  this.  But
they  are  shortly  afterwards,  and  again  later  on,  spoken  of  in  the  plural,
showing  that  tv^^o  pictures  were  really  meant  (p.  531).

C.  The  welfare  of  my  only  sister,  Eleanor,  commonly  called  Nellie,  much
younger  than  tlie  brothers,  and  left  in  their  charge,  is  naturally  a  care  to  us,
and  the  advice  given  and  subsequently  iterated  again  and  again  by  Phinuit,
as  the  one  message  which  my  mother  was  anxious  to  send,  is  extremely
jiatural.  Mrs.  Piper  had  not  seen,  nor  so  far  as  I  know  heard  of,  my  sister,
Tvho  was  in  Stafi"ordshire  during  this  first  series  ;  but  at  the  second  series  of
sittings  she  was  present  on  a  short  visit.  The  state  of  her  health  has  for
some  time  made  her  place  of  abode  and  study  a  serious  consideration,  and
the  necessary  indecision  has  been  naturally  disquieting  to  herself,  as  stated.
See  also  many  subsequent  sittings,  e.tj.,  No.  46  of  this  series  (pi).  513,  514,

■  and  532).

The  next  sitting  was  the  first  with  our  neighbours  the  Thompsons  _
(p.  455). Mrs.  Piper  had  been  introduced  to  them  a  day  or  two  before,
and  liked  them  particularly ;  they  are  too  near  neighbours  to  attempt
making  strangers  of. Their  children  also  she  had  seen  more  or  less  :


508


A  Record  of  Ohservations  of


though  no  other  relatives.  The  rejjort  might  be  abbreviated,  but  por-
tions not  evidentially  important  may  be  interesting  as  conveying  a  good
idea  of  Phinuit's  manner.

Sittinf/ No.  45. TiK':iday  evening,  9.^0  p.m. December  24dl\,  1889.

Present:  O.  L.,  Mi',  and  Mrs.  Thompson,  and  A.  L.  (p.  494)  taking-
notes.

O.  L.  holding  hands. Mr.  and  Mrs.  T.  some  way  off".

' '  Holloa,  Captain,  I've  ])een  talking  to  your  friends.  Had  a  long  talk  with.
Uncle  Jerry.  He  renieiubers  you  now,  as  a  boy  with  Aunt  Anne  [this  is.
exactly  how  he  would  remember  me],  but  you  were  kind  of  small.  He  knew
you  but  he  didn't  know  me  very  well ;  wondered  what  the  devil  I  wanted
trying  to  talk  to  him  and  how  I  got  here."

"Yes,  he  remembers  his  watch — it's  in  possession  of  Robert.  He  used  tO'
call  him  Bob.  (Took  cratch  in  hands.)  Ha  !  well,  this  watch  came  from
Russia — yes — Uncle  Jerry  said  so."  [Unlikely.]

' '  I  say,  those  were  insurance  papers,  those  things  I  told  you  about,,
insurance  papers  with  seals  on  them. Do  you  know  ? "

O.  L.  :  "No,  I  don't."

"  Well,  you  tell  that  to  Bol.),  he'll  know  all  aliout  it."  [No.]
"Jerry  tells  me  he  had  a  ring  which  he  used  to  wear  on  little  finger  of
left  hand  ;  it  had  a  little  sfc<:)ne,  a  stone,  a  carbuncle  in  it.  The  stone  had  a.
little  nick  in  it  (on  one  side  ?),  it  came  from  Italy.  A  clumsy  thing.  He  says,
he  tells  this  and  will  tell  other  things  to  pi'ove  his  identity  to  Bob,  and  let
him  know  he's  there.  All  specific  facts  he  will  tell  him.  [In  saying  this,
sentence  Phinuit  curiously  imitated  the  manner  of  U.  J.]  They  used  to  put
a  coat  with  a  strap  on  over  his  shoulder  and  jolay  at  soldiers,  and  they  got
shut  up  in  a  room  once  and  couldn't  get  out,  the  key  wouldn't  turn,  and  they
had  a  job  to  get  them  out."
O.  L.  :  "  Where  was  that  ?  "

"Wait  a  bit,  I'll  ask  him. That  was  at  your  grandmother's,  at  his  home."
[None  of  this  can  I  get  verified. The  ring  is  definite  enough,  but

nothing  is  known  of  it,  and  it  is  extremely  unlikely  that  he  ever

wore  a  ring.]
"  Who  are  those  people  over  there  ?  "
O.  L.  :  "Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thompson."

' '  Oh  I  why  that's  the  gentleinan  to  whom  his  father  sent  his  love  and
said  something  about  Ted. Didn't  you  tell  him  ?  " [Note  A.']

0.  L.  :  "Yes,  I  did,  but  wasn't  sure  you  meant  him. "  [See  pp.  475  and  511.],

"Of  C(.iurse  I  did.  They're  a  couj)le,  they  are.  One  wants  to  do  some-
thing and  the  other  doesn't." [Note  i?.]

"Haven't  they  a  daughter  1 Ask  them."

O.  L.  :  "  Have  you  a  daughter  1 "

Mrs.  T.  :  "Yes."

"  Well,  she's  kind  of  pretty,  and  wears  her  hair  fuzzy  and  down  behind.
[Correct.]  She  wants  to  d<.)  something — they  want  her  not  to — well,  let  her
do  it — it's  all  right."

"The  lady  has  an  uncle  John  by  marriage.  [Correct.]  One  of  the
daughters  is  musical  and  the  other  is  artistic.  It's  the  musical  one,  the
oldest  of  the  two,  she  wants  to  do  something." [See  p.  525.]


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


509


(Watch  again.)  "You  ask  Bob  if  he  remembers  Fido.  He  thought
more  of  that  than  of  any  single  thing  he  had. " [Remembers  nothing  about  it.]

"Here,  send  those  folks  over  here."  [Mrs.  T.  came  from  otlier  side  of
room.] "  You're  tired,  Siss,  that's  what  you  are. " Mrs.  T.  :  "Yes."

"  \Vell,  Uncle  John's  wife  says  that  girl's  going  to  make  a  change — and
it's  the  best  thing  for  her.  Let  her  do  it.  Then  another  spirit  named
William  connected  with  the  gentleman  ;  he  wants  the  same  thing. "  [Note  D.  ]

"Come  over."  (Mr.  T.  came.)  "Well,  here's  a  good  sort  of  fellow.
Fir!5t-rate  chap.  Ullo,  you  had  a  fall  on  the  ice.  Shook  you  up  a  bit.
Not  much,  but  kind  of  gave  you  a  bound." Mr.  T.  :  "Yes." [Note  i/.]

"  That's  nothing,  got  over  it. Do  you  know  Richard,  Rich,  Mr.  Rich  ?  "

Mrs.  T.  :  "  Not  well,  I  knew  a  Dr.  Rich." [Note  J'.]

"That's  him,  he's  jjassed  out.  He  sends  kindest  regards  to  his  father..
There  is  something  about  William. I'll  get  hold  of  it."

"I  say.  Captain,  your  friends  have  a  lot  to  tell  you,  they're  just  clamour-
ing to  get  at  you. AVhy  the  devil  don't  you  give  them  a  chance  ?  "

O.  L.  :  "Well,  I  will  next  time."

"There's  Marion — Agnes. Ha,  ha,  I  got  it  that  time — Adnes— Agnes.
Mrs.  T.  :  "Agnes,  all  right."

"  How's  William  ?  He's  all  right.  He's  come  on  cj^uite  surprising.  He
holds  his  own  j^retty  well,  he  used  to  have  rheumatism,  but  now  doing  well.
He's  almighty  set — kind  of  positive." [Note  if.]

"  Agnes  is  going  away,  going  to  leave  you — a  joyous  go — let  her  go."

Mrs.  T.  :  "For  ever?"

"No,  no,  for  a  bit. Let  her  go."

Mrs.  T.  :  "Who  is  she  ?"

"I  should  say  she's  a  daughter."

Mrs.  T.  :  "Yes,  she's  going  to  school."

"  Good,  that's  the  be.st  thing  you've  done." [Note  (?.]

Mrs.  T.  :  "  But  there's  another  daughter."

"Ah,  that's  Titmouse."

Mrs.  T.  :  "  Is  that  her  name  ?  "

"It  spells  with  a  T — a  devilish  funny  name.  She's  a  case,  she  is.
She  knows  a  good  deal,  and  is  fond  of  books.  Which  is  it  that  recites
occasionally — is  it  the  tall  one  ?  [Note  J.]  That  one  with  the  black  hair,
she's  a  good  one — going  to  be  a  great  comfort  to  you.  She's  a  good-natured
little  thing,  smart  and  pretty.  Isn't  she,  Alfred?  I  know  her  father  thinks,
so  too  ;  don't  you,  father  ?  [Note  G.  ]  Which  is  it  you  call  Ted  ?  He's-
kind  of  lazy  little  thing.  He  likes  to  be  helped  in  putting  his  boots  and
clothes  on.  He's  a  little  inclined  to  be  cUmipish.  [Note  il.]  That  one
beginning  with  T  is  more  demure  than  the  others,  not  quite  so  much  fizz  in'
her  as  in  the  others — quiet — something  like  her  motlier.  Theosojjhy  ?  How
do  you  caU  that  ?  "  [Note  J.]

Mrs.  T.  :  "Theodora."

"Ah,  yes,  Theo  Dora.  Well,  it's  a  grand  name  when  you've  got  hold  of
it. There  were  two  Williams,  were  there  not  ?  " Mr.  T.  :  "  Yes."

"One  you  call  Will — he's  your  brother.  [Right.]  I  think  your  Uncle
William  broke  his  arm." Mr.  T.  :  "  No."

"Well,  he  broke  something,  it  was  his  leg  down  there  below  the  knee —


510


A  Record  of  Ohservafions  of


some  time  ago.  He  had  considerable  ditticulty  with  it  and  used  to  walk  with
a  stick. [Notei.] You  have  four  children."

Mrs.  T.  :  "  Yes,  but  you've  only  told  us  about  three."

"Well,  the  other's  a  Ijoy  :  nothing  to  say  about  him."  [No,  robust  little
girl,  never  mentioned  by  Pliinuit. Known  to  Mrs.  Piper.]

"  It's  a  good  thing  you've  got  over  that  trouble  here  (stomach).  Kind  of
heavy  at  times,  but  it's  Ijetter.  [Note  31.]  One  of  your  father's  ears  was  a
little  deaf.  Old  gentleman,  high  forehead,  beard,  no  moustache.  Hesitates
a  little  in  speech. Wasn't  he  jjaralysed  ?  " [Note  iV.]

Mr.  T.  :  "No,  I  think  not."

"Yes,  he  was.  Passed  out  in  consequence.  Ask  me  any  questions. "
(Handed  a  bottle  of  unknown  chemical,  asking,  "  What's  this  ?  ")

"  It's  strong.  It's  in  pill  form.  It's  got  salicylate  of  soda  in  it.  That's
good  for  rheumatism.  You  had  better  not  take  it  at  all.  Who  ^Jrepared
it?  " (Extracting  cork  and  pinching  bits  to  pieces  in  fingers.)

"Well,  they  had  better  prepare  one  more  and  die.  There's  a  little  bit  of
cinchona  in  it,  jjrepared  with  sugar. Don't  you  take  it. "

[Wrong  ;  it  turned  out  to  be  sulphate  of  iron  in  wrapped-up  bottle.  It
was  purjjosely  unknown.]

(Watch  handled  again. It  was  a  repeater,  and  happened  to  go  off.)

"Hullo,  I  didn't  do  that.  Jerry  did  tliat,  to  remind  you  of  him.  Here,
take  it  away — it  goes  springing  off — it's  alive."

Mrs.  T.  :  "What  can  we  do  for  Theodora's  headaches?"

"Nerves  of  stomacli  out  of  order.  Have  you  got  anything  of  hers  to  give
me  ?  "

O.  L.  :  "  Go  and  get  a  lock  of  her  hair."  (Mr.  T.  went  next  door  for
that  purpose.)

"It  was  Uncle  Jerry,  tlie  one  that  had  tlie  fall.  I'll  bring  you  some  more
news  of  liim.  Give  me  l)ack  liis  nine-shooter."  (Meaning  the  watch.)
[Here  hair  was  brought  in,  and  O.  L.  and  A.  L.  were  ordered  l)y  Dr.  P.
to  "  clear  out,"  which  they  did.]

"  I  don't  care  to  talk  diseases  before  everybody.  [Note  0.]  Confound
it,  I  saw  your  influence  before  anyone  else  here.  Didn't  the  Captain  tell
you?  [pp.  475,  508].  You  lost  your  purse,  and  if  you  had  told  me  I  could
have  found  it.  Your  Uncle  William  takes  interest  in  you,  and  so  does
your  father.  Mighty  mean  trick  about  the  purse  I  Lord  !  done  as  quick  as  a
fly.  [Note  P.]  Who  is  the  lady  wears  a  cap  in  the  spirit?  She  don't  part
her  hair  in  the  middle — she  sends  her  love  to  you  (Mrs.  T.)."  ■

Mrs.  T.  :  "  Perhaps  it  is  my  mother."

"  Well,  I  see  more  than  a  dozen  ladies,  but  she  wears  a  lace  cap.  There
was  some  throat  trouble  in  your  motlier.  (Indicating.)  [Note  ().]  The
mother  of  one  of  you  is  in  the  body.  I  tliink  it  is  the  gentleman's.  She  is  an
angel — she  is  a  good  woman — has  some  trouble  with  ankle — left  one — it
catches  her. Slie  will  l»e  with  you  f(jr  some  time." [Note  B.]

O.  L.  :  "  Do  you  know  Mr.  Thompson's  brother  ?  "

"No,  l)ut  I'll  find  him  for  you.  I  don't  see  liim,  but  will  look  him  up.
Captain,  I  told  a  gentleman  named  Hodgson  I  would  look  up  his  father  ;  and
lie  said  in  the  meantime  your  medium  will  he  liunting  up  people  in  another
country  ;  isn't  he  a  crank  ?  "


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


511


"  Here's  your  brother  "  (to  Mr.  T.).  "I  have  I^eeii  t(j  hunt  hiui  up.  I
see  he  was  called  Ted,  too.  Isn't  tliat  -vvliere  you  get  name  Ted  from  1 "
[Their  son  is  called  Ted; pp.  475,  508].

Mr.  T.  :  "  Yes,  he  was  named  after  Uncle  Ted."

"What  about  the  horse— H~0—R—S--E  ?  Yes,  liorse  ;  it  is  lame."
[Don't  understand  reference  to  horse.]

"He  says,  'Tell  Isaac  to  be  good  to  mother  always;  as  he  has  been.
You  have  a  good  picture  of  me.'  " Mr.  T. "  Yes."

"  When  you  look  at  it  think  of  me,  and  I'll  l)e  there.  I  shall  be  with
^ou  spiritually."

[Here  he  asked  for  pencil  and  scrawled  a  few  woi'ds,  getting  very  weak.
Writing  just  legible  afterwards  in  mirror  as  "Ted" — "Isaac"
— "Horse" — "Dear  Brother."  Mr.  Thompson  does  not  under-
stand "  horse  "  allusion.  His  mother's  horse  is  not  lame.  The
liorse  she  previously  had  for  10  years,  and  sold  two  years  ago,  is
now  quite  lame,  but  that  is  a  most  trivial  circumstance.  Mr.
Thompson's  name  is  Isaac,  but  his  brotlier  usually  called  him  Ike].

^'For  pity's  sake,  brotlier,  give  my  love  to  our  mother."

[Here  he  seemed  to  be  gone  altogether,  but  the  voice  returned  faintly
once  more.]

' '  '  Annie. ' Who's  Fanny  1  " Mr.  T.  ' '  My  sister. Yes  ?  "
"  Give  my  love  to  Fanny."

(This  was  the  last  effort,  and  very  faint.) [See  also  No.  47,  p.  518.]

(Mrs.  Piper  was some little time  coming to,  and  seemed  rather
exhausted  after  this  sitting. )

Notes,

A.  Mr.  T.'s  father  and  brother  Ted  both  died  over  20  years  ago.

B.  Had  just  been  discussing  a  proposition  on  which  they  took  different
views.

D.  Both  uncles'  names  correct.

m.  It  is  several  years  since  Mr.  T.  had  a  fall  vn  the  ice,  and  he  does  not
xememljer  any  jjarticular  fall.

F.  Met  Dr.  Rich  (who  died  two  years  since)  (mce,  but  hardly  knew  him,
nnd  his  name  was  not  Richard. [See  also  later  sitting.  No.  83,  p.  554.]

G'.  Second  daughter  Agnes,  aged  15.  (Correct  description  ;  rather  the
favourite  of  A.  L.  and  Mr.  T.  as  hinted. — O.  L.)  Going  to  boarding-school  for
first  time,  but,  as  it  has  tvu'ned  out  since,  she  ran  away  home  a  week  after
going,  through  being  unhajjpy  there,  and  did  not  return  to  that  school.  [See
later  sittings,  Nos.  80  and  81,  pp.  540,  541  and  54().]

H.  Fairly  correct  description  of  Mr.  T.  's  brother  William.

/.  Mr.  T.'s  eldest  daughter,  Theodora.  Correct  except  as  to  reciting
occasionally.

K.  Very  correct  description  of  Mr.  T.'s  little  son  Ted  (eight  years  old).

L.  Refers  to  Mr.  T.'s  brother  William  (JT),  and  to  his  Uncle  William.
Latter  lived  most  of  his  later  life  in  America,  but  cannot  ascertain  that  lie
•ever  broke  his  leg  or  arm. (Am  writing  to  question  relations  in  America. )

M.  Correct  reference  to  an  illness  of  Mr.  T.'s.

N.  Incorrect  reference  to  Mr.  T.'s  father,  who  died  suddenly  of  fatty
degeneration.

2  N  2  "


512


A  Record  of  Observations  of


0.  Mr.  T.  'w  claugliter's  (7)  headaches  well  described,  and  some  very  old-
fashioned  herb  remedies  suggested,  with  the  recommendation  to  see  him
(Dr.  P.)  again  in  six  weeks  if  not  cured.

P.  Mr.  T.  was  robbed  of  his  purse  in  London  30  years  ago — serious-
matter  to  him  then.

Q.  Remarkably  correct  description  of  Mrs.  T.  's  mother,  who  always  wore-
lace  caps  and  with  ribljons  to  hide  a  lump  on  throat — she  parted  her  hair  at
side.

B.  Mr.  T. 's  mother,  aged  81,  living  in  Cheshire.  The  statement  about
pain  in  ankle  was  true  ;  she  had  rheumatic  pains  in  left  ankle  at  the  time.

Note  added  hij  Mr.  T.,  August,  1890. — Referring  to  Note  L  above,  and
the  asserted  lameness  of  my  Uncle  William,  I  liave  just  received  the  following-
reply  from  my  cousin  in  Toronto,  to  whom  I  wrote  making  inquiries  : —

"July  19,  1890.  I  am  certain  that  father  never  In-oke  either  his  arm  or  his-
leg.  He  had,  however,  a  g(.)od  deal  of  trouble  fn.im  swelling  in  his  ankles-
and  the  lower  part  of  his  legs,  during  the  latter  part  of  his  life,  while  in
Virginia.  Looking  over  mother's  old  letters  from  Chailottesville,  this  morn-
ing, we  found  several  references  to  his  being  laid  up  from  this  cause,  and  also-
to  a  swelling  of  the  hand,  which  afflicted  him  a  good  deal.  I  cannot  recall
anything  at  any  other  period  of  his  life  in  any  way  corresponding  to  youi-
questions."

Sittinrj  No.  46. Christmas  Da II,  ld,m. 11.40  a.m.
Present  :  O.  L.  and  Alfred  Lodge,  Professor  of  Mathematics  at
Cooper's  Hill  (taking  notes).

"  How  are  you,  Captain  ? Wlio  have  you  got  to  see  us  this  time  ?  "
O.  L.  :  "  No  one. We  are  having  this  to  ourselves." (Handing  in  a-
letter.)

"How's  Mr.  Tliompson ■?  He's  all  riglit,  is  he?  I  am  pleased  lie  was
here.  Hmv  are  you,  Alfred  '?  Aunt  Anne  told  me  to  ask  you  who  had  her'
books."

A.  L.  :  "  They  were  divided,  and  some  sold."

"  Give  me  some  things  of  Aunt  Anne's,  and  give  me  Uncle  Jerry's  watcli
again. Do  you  remember  when  Jerry  and  Bob  moved  ?  " "  No."

' '  They  did.  They  changed  into  some  new  building.  Bob  will  remember,
and  it  was  just  about  the  time  he  had  the  watch,  years  ago.  [Not  clearly
intelligible.]  Uncle  Robert  hasn't  been  very  well  lately  ;  been  feeling-
poorly."

"Yes."

"  He  does  more  good  than  anyone.  He  is  eccentric,  but  open  and  kind-
hearted.  But  not  very  well.  Uncle  Jerry  saw  him  a  few  hours  ago.  He  was
lying  down  and  resting  on  a  couch — so  he  is  now — there  is  a  large  picture
jusc  over  couch,  a  fine  old  clock  on  the  right  as  you  go  in,  and  a  large  chair
and  desjts.  Who's  that  old  lady  there  ? — in  another  ajjartment — very
simple,  modest-looking  old  lady — nothing  jDeculiar  ;  j)lain,  neat-looking,
got  a  funny  frill  round  her  neck  and  a  big  pin  (?)  instead  of  collar.  Her
dress  is  with  figures,  stripes  all  over  it,  little  black  marks  ;  black  dress  witli
little  marks  all  over  it.  Very  kind-hearted,  but  kind  of  a  fickle  person
more  or  less. There's  a  young  girl,  kind  of  stovit,  not  been  there  very  long.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


513


Ashe's  just  made  a  call.  Got  a  little  bundle  in  her  hand.  A  caller  of  some
kind.  Now  you  know.  There's  a  domestic  upstairs  brushing  or  dusting
■something." [See  Note  J..]

"Aunt  Anne  wants  to  know  where  her  very  dark  brown  cloak  is  ;  if
Eleanor  has  it.  A  funny-looking  thing  ;  is  that  what  you  call  sealskin  ?  She
■would  like  Ellen  to  have  it.  They  want  Ellenr — Ellenelly — Ellen  to  make  a
■change  in  her  surroundings,  for  her  good,  at  least  until  Alfred  is  settled.
She  is  all  mixed  up  now.  [True.]  She  should  come  into  your  surroundings,
the  work  will  be  good  for  lier,  it  will  take  her  out  of  herself.  Give  her
something  to  think  about,  it  will  be  better  for  her  physically  and  every  way.
Your  mother  says  so,  Uncle  Jerry  says  so.  Uncle  John  says  so,  your  mother
and  father  say  so,  and  Aunt  Anne  says  so.  There  now,  they  are  very
anxious  about  it."  [See  Note  G  to  No.  44,  p.  507  ;  also  pp.  502,  514,  531,
.and  539.]

0.  L.  :  "  But  they  must  send  her  name  better."
Give  me  a  pencil.  (Wrote  on  back  of  letter  while  holding  it  to  foreliead
the  word  "Nellie"  distinctly.)  [Her  name  is  Eleanor,  but  she  is  nearly
always  called  Nellie.]  There,  that's  her  name,  and  that's  your  Aunt  Anne's
writing  ;  she  wrote  it.  [Not  unlike.  See  Note  B.']  This  was  a  Russian
watch — the  Emperor  of  Russia  once  liad  it.  [Know  nothing  of  this.]  I
.say,  do  you  know  Captain — Mr.  Wheeler A  friend  of  Bob's."

"No."'

"  He  says  he  will  know  him — he's  in  spirit.  He  was  once  connected  with
the  navy,  or  with  artillery,  or  something  ;  at  any  rate,  he  was  an  officer.
And  Charles  Mason,  do  you  know  him  ?  "

"No."

"  He  was  connected  with  insurance.  He  had  a  scar  on  his  face.  He
remembers  Jerry."  [Cannot  find  out  about  these  persons  ;  I  learn  that
ihere  was  an  Alfred  Mason  who  knew  him.]

"This  letter  is  from  your  mother,  I  know."  [Correct.]

0.  L.  :  "Yes."

"  You  ought  to  have  gone  and  seen  your  mother  before  she  passed  out."

0.  L.  :  "I  didn't  know  she  was  ill. I  had  seen  her  a  week  before."

"  She  was  very  ill.  You  should  have  known,  and  gone.  Your  mother
.says  Henry  is  a  long  way  oS,  and  you  liave  not  heard  of  him  for  some  time,
but  you  will  soon. "

0.  L.  :  "I  haven't  heard  yet." [See  note  to  Sitting  No.  IG,  p.  466.]

"  Oh,  that  will  be  all  riglit.  He's  in  Australia.  He's  had  trouble  with
diis  head."

O.  L. :  "I  wish  you  C(juld  tell  us  exactly  where  he  is.  We  none  of  us  know. "

' '  I  will  get  your  mother  or  your  father  to  go  and  find  his  address.  Mr.
Davies'  friend's  sister  in  another  country  wanted  to  find  her  brother,  and  I
i;old  her  where  he  was,  and  she  f^iuiad  him  at  the  number  in  Regent-street.
He  had  been  gone  for  twelve  years."

(J.  L.  :  "Well,  please  find  Henry  like  that." [See  p.  522.]

"  T  will  try.  Your  lirother — he's  a  rattle-headed  sort  of  fellow.  He  was
in  California  at  one  time.  He's  knocked  about  a  good  deal.  He's  bound  to
find  his  way  through  the  world,  no  fear.  Who  does  Aunt  Anne  call  Arthur  ?
Is  he  a  cousin  of  yours  V


514


A  Record  of  Observations  of


O.  L.  :  "Yes,  I  suppose  so."  [A  cousin  of  wlionislie  thought  a  good  deal.|
"  Oh  dear,  tliere's  something  very  bad  about  tliis.  Here's  a  little  chikl
called  Stevenson — two  of  them — one  named  Mannie  Minnie)  wants  to-
send  her  love  to  her  father  in  tlie  body  and  the  mother  in  the  body — she  had
sore  throat  and  passed  out.  He  is  very  bad,  and  has  gone  away,  very
unhappy.  She's  clinging  to  me  and  begging  me  to  tell  you  that  she's  littl&
Mannie  Stevenson,  and  tliat  lier  father's  almost  dead  with  grief — he  sits
crying,  crying  dreadful,  and  he's  gone  away  very  unhappy.  Tell  him  she's  not
dead,  but  sends  her  love  to  him  ;  and  tell  liim  not  to  cry."

O.  L.  :  "  Can  she  send  lier  name  any  better  ?  "

"Oh,  they  called  her  Pet,  and  when  she  was  ill  they  called  her  Birdie..
And  tell  mamma,  too,  do."

"Well,  I  will  if  I  can." [Have  not  been  able  to  identify  these  people.]

"  Oh  dear.  I'm  surrounded  by  friends.  They  all  want  to  speak.  Your-
father's  name  was  01i\'er. Do  you  know  it,  Alfred  ? ''

"Yes."

"  What  does  he  say  about  coming  (  !)  here  ?  He  had  something  to  do  with
Bob  bef(.>re  he  passed  out.  It  was  the  last  place  he  went  to.  [See  Note  C'.j
At  his  last  interview  lie  didn't  feel  very  ^\■ell.  He  wants  to  know  whether
Alfred  has  got  his  mind  made  ujj  yet."

A.  L.  :  "Yes,  pretty  well  now."

"He's  got  a  lot  of  young  men  all  round him,  Alfred  has,  talking  to-
them. Wh;it  is  it  ? Are  you  a  professor  too  ?  "
A.  L.  :  "Yes,  I  am  now."

"  What  have  you  to  d<.)  with  the  sun  and  the  moon  ?  Your  work  is  going-
on  sjjlendidly.  It  wants  patience  and  perseverance.  Captain,  your  friends,
are  very  anxious  about  Nelly.  They  know  she's  not  been  feeling  well.  Let
her  be  in  your  surroundings  for  a  little  while.  It  will  do  her  good.  If  you
can't  see  it  now  you  Avill  see  it  in  the  future.  It  will  do  her  much  good  if  she
makes  that  change.  It's  true,  I  tell  you.  They  know  what  they  are  talking
about.  It  will  be  good  for  you  all.  Our  jioor  little  Alfred  can't  see  it  as  we
can.  He  wants  her  in  his  surroundings  to  he  with  him.  Your  mother  says,
it's  not  wise,  not  yet,  anyhow.  Perhaps  later  on.  It's  infinitely  better  that
she  should  be  with  you  now.  She  says  distinctly,  '  She  must  be  in  Oliver's
surroundings  for  a  while. '  [All  this  advice  would  be  exceedingly  important  if
it  could  be  depended  on  ;  I.e.,  it  is  a  subject  on  which  advica  is  wanted.  See
notes  on  p.  507.  Her  keeping  house  for  Alfred  was  one  of  the  floating  ideas.]
Because  she's  not  very  well — not  feeling  at  all  well.  She  can  content  herself  in
your  surroundings.  It  will  give  her  responsibility  and  take  her  out  of  herself
until  some  other  change  is  made.  It  is  of  the  utmost  physical  and  mental
importance.  Do  you  understand  ? — physical  and  mental.  They  see  her  now.
She  is  now  writing  (12.20) — has  got  a  little  i^encil.  [She  would  be  in  church
then,  in  Staffordshire.]  I  have  got  Aunt  Anne  as  well  as  your  father  and
mother.  Isn't  this  curious  that  I  can  talk  to  you  now  ?  You  know  I  told  you
that  if  ever  I  found  it  j^ossible  to  communicate  with  you  I  would.  I  said  so-
before  I  jmssed  out,  and  here  I  am  talking  to  you." [See  also  p.  470.]

O.  L.  :  "Yes,  I  remember  perfectly.'' [Note  Z>.]

"  Alfred,  you  will  be  liappier  now  that  you  are  more  settled  in  your  mind.
You  will  be  hajipy,  and  contented,  and  respected. You  will  have  to  go  tcf


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


515


Uncle  Bob  for  information  about  things  you  don't  know.  That  looks  like
Uncle  Bob,  that  one  that  sits  there.  Just  as  you  go  in  at  the  door  on  the
left  side  where  the  old  lady  is  with  figures  on  her  dress,  there's  a  picture  up
there,  a  good  picture.  Do  you  know  about  Uncle  Jerry's  gun,  a  little  rifle  1 —
he  thinks  Bob  has  it.  Tliey  were  out  with  it  together  long  ago.  [I  find  he
had  a  rifle  :  pp.  526-528.]  Bob  is  nearly  finislied  up.  Well,  it's  a  good  thing  ;
his  brain  is  tired,  he's  getting  old.  What's  he  been  doing  with  the  church  ?
He  gave  something  to  it  the  other  day  only.  [Often  does,  and  gave  to
Barking  Churcli  not  long  ago,  but  nothing  particularly  noteworthy.]  Aunt
Anne,  she  had  lots  of  books,  what  became  of  them?"
"Several  of  us  had  some."

"Tell  Charley  I  am  not  dead  but  living  and  happy  in  the  sjiirit.  [Charley
was  her  nephew  and  adopted  son,  now  in  Canada.  ]  Your  uncle  has  remem-
bered a  great  deal.  It  isn't  easy.  Spirits  forget  much  that  happened  in  the
body,  tliey  have  other  interests.  Wherever  you  go  either  of  you  I  will
do  all  I  can  for  you.  Caj^tain,  I'm  going  to  talk  with  your  father  and  find
out  Henry's  address  from  him,  and  then  you  write  as  I  tell  you."

"  I  certainly  will."

"  He's  the  mo.st  erratic  and  unsettled  of  the  family.  If  I  could  have  taken
you  into  my  house  and  surroundings  a  little  earlier  it  would  have  been  better
for  you. That's  Aunt  Anne. But  it  can't  be  helped  now."

"  I  am  very  grateful  for  what  you  did."

' '  To  appreciate  my  advice  is  one  thing,  to  remember  me  is  another.
Don't  forget  me,  my  boy.  Jerry  says,  '  Do  you  know  Bob's  got  a  long
skin — a  skin  like  a  snake's  skin — upstairs,  that  Jerry  got  for  him  V  It's  one
of  the  funniest  things  you  ever  saw.  Ask  him  to  show  it  you.  [Ntite  i?.]
Oh,  hear  them  talking  1  Captain  1  "

Notes.

A.  I  have  ascertained  tliat  on  Christmas  morning  he  went  to  church,  si>
the  surroundings  depicted  are  not  contemporaneous.  Neither  are  they  very
specific  or  accurate.  He  did  have  to  lie  down  and  rest  on  a  couch  a  good  deal
at  tliis  time,  and  I  knew  it.  The  description  (_)f  the  room  is  not  identifying  :
the  thing  on  tlie  right  as  you  go  in  is  not  a  clock.  There  was  a  young  visitor
in  the  house,  but  not  a  caller.  The  old  lady  in  the  black  dress  with  Ijlack
figures  on  is  the  only  definitely  correct  item.  I  have  since  seen  the  dress,
ascertained  that  it  was  the  one  probably  worn  on  Christmas  Day,  and  should
describe  it  myself  as  above  (ji.  512).

i).  This  writing  was  not  "mirror-writing."  Usually  when  Phinuit
wrote  on  card  held  in  front  of  him  tlie  writing  was  perverted  so  as  to  be
legible  in  a  mirror  ;  sometimes  each  letter  was  right  but  the  order  perverted.
Single  letters  like  capitals  were  made  properly.  But  when  the  writing  was
done  on  paper  held  to  Mrs.  Piper's  forehead,  i.e.,  with  the  hand  turned  round
— pencil  towards  face — as  in  the  present  instance,  the  writing  was  ordinary.
The  handwriting  is  hardly  good  enough  for  me  to  identify  it  with  my  aunt's,
or  to  discriminate  it  securely  from  Mrs.  Piper's.

C.  I  have  since  asked  at  Highgate  whether  my  father  had  been  there  not
long  before  he  died,  and  one  of  my  cousins  at  once  rejDlied,  "  Yes,  it  was  the
la.st  place  he  went  to,"  exactly  in  Phinuit's  words  (p.  514).  It  seems  to  have
een  a  pleasant  and  remembered  visit. Doubtless,  however,  I  had  known


516


A  Record  of  Observations  of


something  about  it  at  the  time.  The  remarks  to  A.  L. ,  next  following,
are,  as  it  happens,  extremely  natural  observations.

D.  Doubtless  a  common  enough  incident ;  hut  it  was  very  seriously  said,
nnd  my  aunt  is  tlie  only  person  who  ever  said  it  to  me  :  she  was  troubled
rtbout  my  nascent  scepticism. The  plirase  "jaassedout"  is  Phinuit-ese.

H.  This  episode  of  the  skin  is  noteworthy.  I  cannot  imagine  that  I  ever
had  any  knowledge  of  it.  Here  is  my  Uncle  Robert's  account  of  it  when  I
asked  liim  about  it :  "Yes,  a  crinkly  thin  skin,  a  curious  thing;  I  had  it  in
a  box,  I  remember  it  well.  Oh,  as  distinct  as  possible.  Haven't  seen  it  for
years,  but  it  was  in  a  box  with  his  name  cut  in  it ;  the  same  box  with  some
of  his  i^apers. "

Sitting  No.  47. Evenliuj  of  Chridmas  Day,  1889,  C.20  p.m.
Present  :  O.  J.  L.  and  A.  L.  (taking  notes).

' '  Captain,  do  you  know  that  as  I  came  I  met  the  medium  going  out,  and
she's  crying. Why  is  that  ?  "

O.  L.  :  "Well,  the  fact  is  she's  separated  from  her  children  for  a  few
days,  and  she  is  feeling  rather  low  about  it."

"How  are  you,  Alfred?  I've  your  mother's  influence  strong.  (Pause.)
By  George  !  that's  Aunt  Anne's  ring  (feeling  ring  I  had  put  on  my  hand  just
before  sitting),  given  over  to  you.  And  Oily  dear,  that's  one  of  the  la.st
things  I  ever  gave  you.  It  was  one  of  the  last  things  I  said  to  you  in  the
body  when  I  gave  it  you  for  Mary.  I  said,  '  For  her,  through  you. '  "  [This
is  precisely  accurate.  The  ring  was  her  most  valuable  trinket,  and  it  was
given  in  the  way  here  stated  not  long  before  her  death.  See  also  pp.  468,
470,  514.]

O.  L.  :  "Yes,  I  remember  perfectly. "

"  I  tell  you  I  know  it.  I  shall  never  forget  it.  Keep  it  in  memory  of
me,  for  I  am  not  dead.  Each  spirit  is  not  so  dim  (?)  that  it  cannot  recollect
its  belongings  in  the  body.  They  attract  vis  if  there  has  been  anything
.special  about  them.  I  tell  you,  my  boy,  I  can  see  it  just  as  plain  as  if  I  were
in  the  body.  It  was  the  last  thing  I  gave  you,  for  her,  through  you,  always
in  remembrance  of  me.  (Further  conversation  and  advice,  ending)  Convince
yourself,  and  let  others  do  the  same.  We  are  all  liable  to  make  mistakes  ;
but  you  can  see  for  yourself. Here's  a  gentleman  wants  to  speak  to  you."

"Lodge,  how  are  you?  I  tell  you  I'm  living,  not  dead.  That's  me.
You  know  me,  don't  you  ?  "

O.  L.  :  "  Yes.  Delighted  to  see  you  again."  [Mr.  E.  See  also  pp.  493,
524,  552.]

"  Don't  give  it  up,  Lodge.  Cling  to  it.  It's  the  best  thing  you  have.
It's  coarse  in  tlie  beginning,  but  it  can  be  ground  down  fine.  You'll  know
best  and  correct  (?).  It  can  only  come  through  a  trance.  You  have  to  put
her  in  a  trance. You've  got  to  do  it  that  way  to  make  yourself  known."

O.  L.  :  "Is  it  bad  for  the  medium ?  "

"It's  the  only  way.  Lodge.  In  one  sense  it's  bad,  but  in  another  it's
good.  It  is  her  work.  If  I  take  jjossession  of  the  medium's  body  and  she
goes  out,  then  I  can  use  her  organism  to  tell  the  world  important  truths.
There  is  an  infinite  power  above  us.  Lodge,  believe  it  fully.  Infinite  over
all  ;  most  marvellous.  One  can  tell  a  medium,  she's  like  a  ball  of  light.
You  look  as  dark  and  material  as  possible,  but  we  find  two  or  three  lights


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


517


«liining.  It's  like  a  series  of  rooms  with  candles  at  one  end.  Must  use
•analogy  to  express  it.  When  you  need  a  light  you  use  it,  wlien  you  have
finished  you  put  it  out.  They  are  like  transparent  windows  to  see  through.
Lodge,  it's  a  puzzle.  It's  a  puzzle  to  us  here  in  a  way,  though  we  under.stand
it  better  than  you.  I  work  at  it  hard.  I  do.  I'd  give  anything  I  possess
to  find  out.  I  don't  care  for  material  things  now,  our  interest  is  much
:greater.  I'm  studying  hard  how  to  communicate  ;  it's  not  easy.  But  it's
only  a  matter  of  a  short  time  before  I  shall  be  able  to  tell  the  world  all  sorts
■of  things  through  one  medium  or  another.  [And  so  on  for  some  time.]
Lodge,  keep  up  your  courage,  there  is  a  quantity  to  hope  for  yet.  Hold  it
up  for  a  time.  Don't  be  in  a  hurry.  Get  facts  ;  no  matter  what  tliey  call
you,  go  on  investigating.  Test  to  fullest.  Assure  yourself,  then  publisli.
Tt  will  be  all  right  in  the  end — no  question  about  it. It's  true."

O.  L.  :  "You  have  seen  my  Uncle  Jerry,  haven't  you  ?  "

' '  Yes,  I  met  him  a  little  while  ago — a  very  clever  man — liad  an  interest-
ing talk  with  him."

O.  L.  :  "  What  sort  of  person  is  this  Dr.  Pliinuit  I  "

' '  Dr.  Pliinuit  is  a  peculiar  type  of  man.  He  goes  about  continually,  and
is  thrown  in  with  everybody.  He  is  eccentric  and  quaint,  but  good-hearted.
I  wouldn't  do  the  things  he  does  for  anything.  He  lowers  himself  some-
times— it's  a  great  pity.  He  has  very  curious  ideas  about  things  and  people  ;
he  receives  a  great  deal  about  people  from  themselves  ( And  he  gets
expressions  and  phrases  that  one  doesn't  care  for,  vulgar  phrases  he  picks  up
by  meeting  uncanny  people  through  the  medium.  These  things  tickle  him,
and  he  goes  about  rej^eating  them.  He  has  to  interview  a  great  number  of
people,  and  has  no  easy  berth  of  it.  A  high  type  of  man  couldn't  do  the
work  he  does.  But  he  is  a  good-hearted  old  fellow.  Good-bye,  Lodge.
Here's  the  Doctor  coming."

O.  L.  :  "Good-bye,  E. Glad  to  have  had  a  chat  vvith  you."

[Doctor's  voice  reappears.]  "This  [ring]  belongs  to  your  aunt.  Your
Uncle  Jerry  tells  me  to  ask.  .  .  ,  By  the  way,  do  you  know  Mr.  E.'s
been  here  ;  did  you  hear  him  ?  "  '

O.  L.  :  "  Yes,  I've  had  a  long  talk  with  him."

"Wants  you  to  ask  Uncle  Bob  about  his  cane.  He  whittled  it  out  him-
self. It  has  a  crooked  handle  with  ivory  on  the  top.  Bob  has  it,  and  has
initials  cut  in  it.  [There  is  a  stick,  but  description  inaccurate.]  He  has  the
skin  also,  and  the  ring.  And  he  remembers  Bob  killing  the  cat  and  tying
its  tail  to  the  fence  to  see  him  kick  before  he  died.  He  and  Bob  and  a  lot
of  the  fellows  all  together,  in  Smith's  field  I  think  he  said.  Bob  knew
Smith.  And  the  way  they  j)layed  tit-tat-too  on  the  window-pane  on  All
Hallows'  Eve,  and  they  got  caught  that  night  too.  [Concerning  Smith's
field  and  the  cat-killing  see  notes  on  p.  527.]  Aunt  Anne  wants  to  know
about  her  sealskin  cloak. Wlio  was  it  went  to  Finland,  or  Norway  ?  "

O.  L.  :  "Don't  know."

"  Do  you  know  Mr.  Clark  ? — a  tall  dark  man,  in  the  body."
O.  L.  :  "I  think  so."

' '  His  brother  wants  to  send  his  love  to  him.  Your  Uncle  J erry,  do  you
know,  has  been  talking  to  Mr.  E.  They  h;ive  become  very  friendly.
E.  has  lieen  explaining  things  to  him. Uncle  Jerry  says  he  will  tell  all


518


A  Record  of  Ohservations  of


the  facts,  and  all  abmit  families  near,  anil  so  on,  tliat  he  can  recall.  He
says  if  you  will  remember  all  this  and  tell  his  brother,  he  will  know.  If
lie  doesn't  fully  vmderstand  he  must  come  and  see  me  himself,  and  I  will  tell
liim. How's  Mary  ?  "

O.  L.  :  "Middling,  not  vei'y  well."

"Glad  she's  going  away.  [She  was,  to  the  Continent.  Mrs.  Piper
knew  it.]  William  is  glad.  His  wife  used  to  be  very  distressed  about
liim. You  remember  his  big  chair  where  he  used  to  sit  and  think."

O.  L.  :  "Yes,  very  well."

' '  He  often  goes  and  sits  down  there  now.  Takes  it  easy,  he  says.  He
used  to  sit  opposite  a  window  sometimes  with  his  head  in  his  hands,  and
think,  and  think,  and  think.  [This  was  at  his  office.]  He  lias  grown  younger
in  looks,  and  mucli  happier.  It  was  Alec  that  fell  through  a  hole  in  the
boat,  Alexander  Marshall,  her  first  father.  [Correct,  as  before.]  Where's
Thompson?  the  one  that  lost  the  jnirse  "  (p.  510).

().  L.  :  "  Yes,  I  know."

"  Well,  I  met  his  In-other  and  he  sent  love  to  all — to  sister  Fanny,  he  told
me  specially.  He  tried  to  say  it  just  as  he  was  going  out,  but  had  no  time —
was  too  weak."

O.  L.  :  "  Oh  yes,  we  just  heard  him."  [See  end  of  Sitting  No.  45,  p.  511.]
"Oh,  you  did;  that's  all  right. She's  an  angel,  he  has  seen  her  to-day.
Tell  Ike  I'm  very  grateful  to  him. Tell  Ike  the  girls  will  come  out  all  right..
Ted's  mother  and  . . . And  how's  Susie?  Give  Susie  my  love  "  (p.  523).

0.  L.  :  "I  couldn't  tind  that  Mr.  Stevenson  you  gave  me  a  message  to.
What's  his  name  ?" [p.  514.]

"What,  little  Minnie  Stevenson.  Don't  you  know  his  name  is  Henry?
Yes,  Henry  Stevenson.  Mother  in  spirit,  too,  not  far  away.  Give  me  that
watch.  [Trying  to  open  it.]  Here,  open  it.  Take  it  out  of  its  case.  Jerry
says  he  took  his  knife  (_>nce  and  made  some  little  marks  up  here  with  it,  up
here  near  the  handle,  near  the  ring,  some  little  cuts  in  the  watch.  Look  at
it  afterwards  in  a  good  light  and  you  will  see  them."

[There  is  a  little  engraved  landscape  in  the  place  described,  but  some  of
tlie  skylines  have  l)een  cut  unnecessarily  deeji,  I  tliink,  apparently
out  of  miscliief  or  idleness.  Certainly  I  knew  nothing  of  this,  and
had  never  before  had  the  watch  out  of  its  case. — O.  J.  L.  See  also
P-  528.]

Sittiuij  Nil.  48. Nooii;  Beccndicr  2m.

Present :  O.  L.,  A.  L.,  M.  L.,  and  Briscoe  (taking  notes).

"  Hn  I  How  are  you,  Captain?  You  are  all  right.  What  have  you
done  with  Aunt  Anne's  ring  ?  Well,  give  it  to  me.  I  told  her  all  about
that.  She  was  very  much  pleased  that  you  had  kept  it  all  that  while.  Very
good  thing,  wasn't  it  ?  She  said  that  she  was  very  sorry  that  Charley  ate
tlie  l)ird — the  chicken — and  made  himself  sick.  He  has  had  a  trouble  with
his  stomach.  Her  Charley.  [Mentioned  also  near  end  of  Sitting  No.  46.]
And  he  has  been  troubled  for  some  little  time.  The  bird  made  him  sick.
Some  kind  of  bird.  Quite  sick.  It  troubled  him  a  good  deal.  You  write
ajid  ask  him.  But  it  is  so.  You  will  find  it  was.  He  will  tell  you.  [He  is
in  Canada,  but  I  have  written  to  find  out.]  (See  note,  p.  520.)  Was  a  little
feverish  with  it. That's  what  is  the  matter."


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


519


O.  L.  :  "Anything  else  ?  "

"Not  jjarticulaiiy,  and  if  you  ask  you  will  find  it  so.  I  tell  you  this-
"because  you  don't  know  it,  and  that  is  the  kind  of  thing  you  like."

After  some  vague  talk  and  some  remonstrance  at  the  number  of  persons
present,  Phinuit  began  referring  to  clerk  (wlio  continued  taking  notes  at  a
distance),  saying  : —

' '  He  has  the  blues,  that  little  fellow  [no]  ;  he  is  thinking  of  going  away,  and
lie  will  go  soon  to  another  part  of  the  w^orld.  [Was  thinking  of  it  some  year.s-
ago.]  Your  brother  has  had  a  tooth  out.  [True.]  Your  aunt  told  me
that.  [Name  wrong.]  She's  with  me;  j-ou  don't  know"  her.  Your  grandmother
is  a  nice  old  lady.  First  name  is  Ennna  ;  she's  in  spirit.  [Name  of  grand-
mother was  Fanny.]  You  tell  him  to  ask  his  mother.  Who  is  George  Edward
H.  ? — he  hurt  his  hand,  that  fellow  you  (Briscoe)  saw  at  the  party,  right
through  palm,  had  it  sprained.  Yt)ur  brother  knows  him  too.  [Don't  recog-
nise this  at  all.]  You  were  at  a  party  talking  to  a  fair  girl  [incorrect],  and
this  gentleman,  George  Edward,  is  connected  witli  her,  and  a  brother  Fred.
[No  notion  of  all  this.]  You  look  it  uj),  you're  too  busy  now.
(Still  referring  to  clerk.)  That  fellow's  name  is  Ed.  .  .  ."  (Went  on
about  Uncle  Jerry  and  other  things.  .  .  .  And  then:)  "There  seem,s^
to  be  some  of  that  fellow's  friends  about  here  whom  I  can't  avoid.  There's  a
lot,  and  I  can't  get  things  straight.  You  will  have  to  let  me  talk  to  him  and
get  all  his  influence,  and  then  I  will  talk  to  the  rest  of  you.  I  can't  help  it.
Get  out. You  don't  mind  me,  do  j'ou  1 "

[Exeunt  O.  L.,  A.  L.,  and  M.  L.]

(Clerk  now  came  and  took  one  hand,~taking  brief  notes  with  the  other.)

"Your  relations  make  me  get  mixed  ;  they  confuse  me  when  I'm  talking
to  the  CajDtain,  so  if  I  mention  anyone  belonging  to  you  you  must  tell  me,  that
we  may  keep  things  straight.  There's  an  old  lady  in  the  spirit  talking  to  me,
and  her  influence  disturbs  me.  [Grandmother  died  a  few  years  ago.]  Ask
youx  brother  if  he  don't  know  those  jjeople  at  party,  and  that  fellow  who
hurt  his  hand,  George  Edward  H.,  and  he's  got  a  brother  Fred.  You  have
a  cousin  Charley  [true]  that  stops  in  your  home  [no,  his  brother  used  to],  and
a  cousin  named  Harry.  [True.]  There  are  six  in  your  family,  four  boj's  and
two  girls.  [Correct.]  The  sister  is  Minnie.  [Correct.]  She  is  cranky,  stupid
sometimes  [true],  but  slie  will  gTow  tiut  of  that.  Your  mother  has  a  pain  in
her  head  sometimes.  [No.]  Minnie  is  musical.  [Not  particularly.]  One  brother
writes  a  great  deal.  [I  do  myself.]  Your  name  is  Ed.  [Correct.]  Your  grand-
mother keeps  calling  Ed.  You  ask  about  those  people  I  told  you  of,  and
you  will  find  it's  true.  [Have  made  diligent  inquiries  ineffectually.]  I  want
the  Captain.  See  you.  Captain,  that  fellow-'s  straight.  Now%  then,  Alfred,
and  Marie.  Got  straiglitened  out  a  little  bit  ?  That's  all  right.  Here,.
Alfred,  I've  got  to  talk  to  you. All  the  rest  skip."

[All  retire  but  A.  L.]

[He  then  gave  Alfred  the  name  and  general  description  of  tlie  ladj-
to  whom  he  had  quite  recently  become  engaged,  v.'ith  some  details  of
her  family,  the  latter  not  without  some  groping  ;  the  Christian  name
of  the  lady  (Winifred)  was  written  on  paper  without  any  groping.
Then  Uncle  Jerry  was  represented  as  speaking  and  giving  good,
advice,  also  saying  he  had  been  to  France  after  an  illness  [which  I.


520


A  Record  of  Observations  of


find  is  true].  Then  some  predictions  and  a  lot  of  unverifiable
talk  about  things  in  general  (souls  and  spirits,  &c.),  with  the
following  assertions  concerning  Phinuit  himself  ; — ]

' '  I  have  been  30  to  35  years  in  spirit,  I  think.  I  died  when  I  was  70  of
leprosy,  very  di.sagreeable.  I  had  been  to  Australia  and  Switzerland.  My
wife's  name  was  Mary  Latimer.  I  had  a  sister  Josephine  (p.  495).  John  was
my  father's  name.  I  studied  medicine  at  Metz,  where  I  took  my  degree  at  30
years  old,  married  at  35. Get  someone  to  look  all  this  up,  and  take  pains

about  it. Look  up  the  town  of  ,  also  the  Hotel  Dieu  in  Paris. I  was

born  in  Marseilles,  am  a  Southern  French  gentleman.  Find  out  a  woman
named  Carey.  Irish.  Mother  Irish,  father  French.  I  had  compassion  on
lier  in  the  hosi^ital.  My  name  is  John  Phinuit  Schlevelle  (or  '?  Clavelle),  but
I  was  always  called  Dr.  Phinuit.  Do  you  know  Dr.  Clinton  Perry  ?  Find
him  at  Dupuytren,  and  this  woman  at  the  Hotel  Dieu.  There's  a  street
named  Dupuytren,  a  great  street  for  doctors.  .  .  .  This  is  my  business
now,  to  communicate  with  those  in  the  body,  and  make  them  believe  our
existence."

Note  added  Scjytember,  1890. — Concerning  the  episode  recorded  at  the
beginning  of  the  above  sitting  :  I  wrote  to  a  cousin  who  had  emigrated  last
October  to  join  her  brother  (the  "Charley"  referred  to)  in  Manitoba,
asking  her  if  he  liad  eaten  any  particular  bird  about  Christmas  time  which
had  disagreed  with  him.  Only  recently  have  I  got  full  information  on  the
.subject,  the  unsportsmanlike  character  of  the  act  possibly,  but  more  likely
the  difficulty  of  realising  any  sense  in  the  inquiry,  being  responsible  for  some
of  the  delay. The  evidence  now  obtained  is  as  follows  : —

"The  boys  shot  a  prairie  hen  as  they  were  coming  home  one  night,  near
the  beginning  of  December,  out  of  season,  when  there  was  a  fine  for  killing
these  birds.  So  we  had  to  hide  it.  It  was  hung  for  about  a  fortnight,  and
A  few  days  before  Christmas  we  eat  it,  Charley  eating  most.  The  bird  didn't
make  him  ill,  but  he  was  ill  at  the  time,  having  the  grippe.  He  went  to
town  either  that  night  or  next  day,  and  was  certainly  worse  when  he
returned."


Sitting  No.  49. Afternoon  of  Decemher  2m,  1889.
Present  :  O.  L.,  alone;  afterwards  M.  L.  also.

[After  a  good  deal  of  Phinuit  conversation,  O.  L.  trying  to  get  some
facts  within  his  own  knowledge  only,  without  any  definite  success.  Uncle
Jerry  was  reported  as  being  on  the  scene,  and  0.  L.  took  notes.]

[Dr.  P.]  "  Oliver  and  started  for  school  one  day  and  played  by  the

way.  Their  mother  followed  and  gave  them  a  tuning,  and  kept  them  in  all
the  time.  He  had  a  suit  of  wliite  clothes  with  a  little  check  in  them,  your
father  had.  They  built  up  a  kind  of  see-saw,  and  tore  his  coat,  and  for  that
he  got  two  days'  hard  study.  [Can't  verify  any  of  this.  It  is  true  that  their
mother  was  somewhat  of  a  martinette.]  The  boys  bouglit  a  fishing
tackle,  went  out  in  a  boat,  and  got  caught  in  a  storm.  The  aunt,  your
father's  sister,  Fanny,  she  screened  Oliver  out  of  it,  and  dried  his  clothes
for  him.  [It  is  true  that  Fanny  v^'as  the  oidij  sister,  and  was  sufficiently
older  to  make  this  ejDisode  likely.]  Jerry  went  to  Paris  and  wrote  back
to  Bob  about  the  things  he  had  seen  and  done.  He  and  Bob  planned  one  day


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


521


to  go  away  together  to  another  part  of  your  country  ;  they  were  gone  several
months,  their  mother  begging  and  imploring  them  to  come  home.  Soon  after
this  she  was  taken  ill.  [None  of  this  true  of  J.  and  B.  May  have  been  true
of  two  other  brothers.  Something  of  the  kind  was,  but  cannot  fix  it.]  Don't
forget  the  ring,  ask  him  about  that,  and  about  swimming  the  creek.  He's
got  a  piece  of  statuary  there,  Jerry  bought  it  himself  with  his  own
money.  A  man  with  a  sack  over  his  shoulder,  his  arm  to  his  side,
with  elbow  projecting,  looking  down  seriously,  a  dog  by  his  side.  [Cannot
verify  this.]  Your  Uncle  Robert's  in  London.  [True.]  He,  Bob,  and
your  father  went  to  see  the  animals  in  London,  and  that  was  another  fright
your  grandmother  got.  Y(jur  uncle  had  an  Uncle  Richard.  .Jerry  wanted  to
go  into  the  jewellery  business  [nonsense],  but  that  slumped  through.  When
Jerry  went  to  school  he  drew  out  plans.  One  was  a  lawyer.  There  was  a  sort
of  break-up  in  the  family.  Have  you  seen  an  old  de.sk,  an  old-fashioned  desk
high  up  in  the  house,  at  the  back  V  [None  of  this  is  any  good.  There  is  an
old  desk  of  his,  but  that's  a  matter  of  course.]

O.  L.  :  "No.  Do  you  remember  the  fall  you  spoke  of?"  [See  many
pre^'ious  sittings;  but  see  also  pp.  528  and  557.]

"I  fell,  I  fell  near  a  building,  and  never  was  well  after  it.  We  were
riding  at  the  time,  and  I  hit  my  head,  and  all  the  facts  aljout  that  I  can't
remember.  I  was  thrown,  and  I  remember  tlie  ljuilding  just  as  I  turned
round  it.  Collision.  (?  Coliseum.)  Narrow  escaj^e.  My  head  troubled
me  a  good  deal,  and  I  hurt  my  leg  and  my  back  and  my  head.  Shook  me  up
all  over.  I  was  not  senseless.  The  blindness  came  from  the  fall.  I  can  see
fast  enough  now."

Note. — This  is,  I  believe,  correct,  but  within  my  knowledge.  I  remember
having  been  told  that  he  had  a  severe  fall  from  his  horse  when
middle-aged  ;  it  injured  his  spine,  and  gradually  total  blindness^
came  on.  I  have  no  recollection  of  him  except  blind.  I  feel  as  if  I
had  a  dim  recollection  of  having  been  told  that  it  was  near  the
Colisevnii  that  he  fell,  but  do  not  know  that  it  was  so.

"  Bob's  the  soul  of  honour.  He  does  a  lot  of  good,  and  he'll  do  more
good  yet.  He's  troubled  with  rheumatism  a  little.  His  thoughts  are  con-
fused, and  his  memory  is  troubled.  He  doesn't  remember  quite  so  well.
[All  quite  true.]  Does  he  remember  the  Smith's  field  and  the  Smith  boys  ?"
"No  ;  I'm  sorry  to  say  he  does  not."  [See,  however,  pp.  527  and  557.]
' '  And  I  had  stacks  and  stacks  of  papers  of  all  kinds,  and  I  don't  know
where  they  are.  I  think  Bob  has  tliem.  [Yes,  he  has.]  Rfjbert  is  trying
to  read  something  now.  [5.20.]  Whatever  is  it?  [It  is  true  that  he  was
trying  to  refresh  his  memory  by  looking  up  old  papers  of  U^ncle  Jerry's  ;
but  precise  time  unverified.  ]  Jerry  says,  '  Oliver,  I  am  not  dead,  and  if
they  think  so  they're  mistaken.  I  am  living,  and  conscious  of  you  all. ''
[Here  I  handed  in  a  chain.]  This  is  Oliver's  [i.e.,  my  father's  :  true].
He's  here  now.  I  couldn't  do  for  you,  my  son,  as  I  would  like  to.  Fate  was.
against  me,  too,  for  a  time." (Here  was  an  interval  oi  unnoted  things.)  '

(Then  came  Mrs.  Lodge,  and  Pliinuit  began  to  diagnose  her  illness,
which  he  did  very  exactly,  and  to  prescribe  for  her.  The  prescription
was  wild  carrot  infusion  and  laudanum  lotions,  with  precise  and
minute  instructions.  The  prescriptions  have  done  good.  The
complaint  has  been  a  long-standing  one. See  also  p.  54(5.)


522


A  Record  of  Observations  of


(Here  slie  handed  in  a  fruit  knife.)  "  Tliis  is  William's.  [Right.]  Your
mother  has  got  his  watch  and  chain.  [Right.]  She  will  never  get  married
again.  She  has  a  picture  of  him.  They  talked  about  having  it  cojjied."
[Right.]

M.  L.  :  "  What  sort  of  picture  ?  "
"  It'.s  a  jminting  of  him."
M.  L.  :  "Who  did  it  ?  "

"  Wait  a  bit,  I'll  ask  him.  Oh  I  see,  you  d(.)ue  it  yourself.  [True,  and  he
used  to  be  pleased  with  it.]  He  says  so.  It's  a  good  one.  You're  a  good
little  girl,  Mary. I  say,  do  you  know  who  Isabella  is  ?  "

M.  L.  :  "  Yes,  yes."

"  Oh,  it  is  splendid  ;  you  never  saw  her  .sad.  Though  she  had  her
troubles,  too."

M.  L.  :  "She  had,  indeed."

"She  is  as  beautiful  as  ever,  and  as  pure  as  the  snow.  She's  a  good
creature.  I  tell  you,  you  dear  thing,  to  l^e  as  Ijrave  as  I  was — always  do  the
best  you  can  ;  do  what  your  conscience  tells  you.  Take  that  advice  from
Isabella.  Oh,  what  larks  we  had  !  <)h  !  (Laughing  all  over.)  Do  you
remember  Clara  ?  (Laughing  again,  and  jigging  about  in  chair.)  I'll  sing  for
you.  Why,  Mary  dear,  who  ever  thought  to  see  you  again  like  this,  and
Oliver  too  ? Oh,  such  fun  I What  shall  I  do  for  you  now  I'm  here  1  "

M.  L.  :  "  Sing  us  one  of  your  songs."

"  Shall  I  ?  You  used  to  sing  and  play  some  yourself.  Your  pajja  and  I
have  more  fun  than  you  could  shake  a  stick  at.  Mary,  how  fat  you  are  !
Where  are  your  crimps?  (Feeling  hair.)  You  used  to  crimp  it.  [True.]
Getting  lazy,  eh  ?  Well,  this  is  fun  to  see  you  again.  Oh,  I  do  feel  so  happy.
{Dr.  P.  chuckling.)  She  whistled,  and  away  she  goes.  I  never  saw  such
merry  girl  as  that,  never.  How  happy  she  is.  Mary,  it's  about  time
you  brightened  up."

[This  extraordinary  episode  was  very  realistic,  and  represented  our
memory  of  a  bright-dis]iosit.ioned  aunt  by  marriage  of  my  wife's.
See  also  next  sitting,  p.  524.]

"Captain,  Henry  is  at  127,  Regent-street,  Philadelphia. I  couldn't  get
it  right  before.  I  thought  it  was  Australia  (p.  51">).  You  write  to  him  there."
O.  L.  :  "I  certainly  will."
[I  have,  but  felt  sure  there  could  be  no  Regent-street  in  Philadelphia.

Since  then  my  brother  has  written  from  New  York.]
"  Alfred's  gone  to  see  Dick. [He  had  gone  to  stay  with  another  brother,
3iot  Dick  ;  Mrs.  Piper  knew  where  he  had  gone.] You  think  I'll  raise  Old
Harry  about  Nelly,  don't  you  ?  "
"  How  do  you  mean  ?  "

"  Make  difliculties  with  the  otlier  lir(jthers.  [I  had  that  idea  about  Dick.]
Has  your  Dr.  William  asked  about  the  horse  1  "

[Dr.  C.'s  name  is  William,  but  I  know  nothing  about  a  horse  in
connection  with  him.]

"Here's  a  spirit  named  Thomas  ;  who's  that?  " O.  L.  :  "I  don't  know."
"  Do  you  have  to  do  with  a  college,  Captain  ?  " 0.  L.  :  "Yes."
"Well,  this  one  had  to  do  with  it. He  was  talking  to  me  when  I  was  at
that  young  fellow.''


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


523


O.  L.  :  "What's  his  name?"

"  It's  not  Edmund  nor  Frank.  James,  John.  No.  He's  very  anxious
to  talk  to  you,  trying  all  he  can  to  speak  to  you,  seems  awfully  jjleased  to  see
you  again  ;  but  he  can't  speak  plain."

(Suspecting  whom  it  might  be,  I  got  out  a  jjliotograiih  and  asked),  "  Is
that  he  ?  "

"Yes,  that's  him.  A  vessel  burst,  and  he  went  nut  suddenly.  [True.]
His  blood  stopjjed  immediately.  I  wanted  to  go,  he  says.  My  head  wasn't
quite  level."  [His  death  was  said  to  be  due  to  the  bursting  of  a  vessel  in  his
head,  but  I  knew  that  the  cause  of  this  was  a  pistol-bullet.]

O.  L.  :  "Ah,  I  thought  so."

' '  'Ullo,  here's  two  come  for  him.  However  did  that  man  come  here  1
They  have  taken  him  back.  He  is  not  with  us  yet.  He  saw  you  and  burst
out."

(Mrs.  L.  handed  in  a  hat.)  "  Tliat's  William's.  [True,  p.  504.]  That's  my
hat.  Glad  to  see  it.  Mary's  managed  the  place  splendidly.  [True.]  There
is  one  of  the  boys  there  with  her. ' '

M.  L.  :  "  Yes  ;  little  V."

"  I  see  him,  dear  little  chap.  Where's  my  sticks  Yes,  that's  it.  You
believe  I'm  here,  don't  you  ?  You  remember  my  sitting  in  that  big  chair
with  arms  to  it,  and  my  feet  jaropped  up,  wlien  I  was  ill  ?  "  [This  is  correct.
His  feet  were  propped  and  rolled  up,  in  a  special  big  chair.]

"  And  I  used  to  get  up  and  walk  about  with  this  stick.  The  other  was
crooked,  with  a  big  handle.  That  was  the  last  one.  [True.  This  "  other  "
stick  has  been  verified,  and  it  is  the  last  one.  It  has  a  large  knob.  We  did
not  know  of  it.]  (Umbrella  brought  in.)  Tliat's  my  umbrella.  That's  the
-handle  ;  yes. I, remember  the  things  well."

The  next  sitting  is  chiefly  one  with  our  neighbours,  ]\Ir.  and  ]Mrs.
Thompson.  Mr.  Thompson's  mother  is  an  old  Quaker  lady,  living  on
the  Cheshire  side  of  the  Mersey.  In  this  sitting  Mrs.  Piper  mentioned
all  Mr.  T.'s  brothers  and  sisters  by  name,  as  Avell  as  liis  wife  and
■children — except  the  third  daughter,  Sylvia,  wIkj  was  dismissed  as  a
boy  in  an  earlier  sitting,  a  child  in  robust  health.  3Irs.  Piper  had  given
the  Thompsons  a  previous  sitting,  see  pp.  508  and  518,  where  "Ike"
and  "  Susie  "  are  Mr.  and  Mrs.  T.  (See  also  pp.  540,  544,  55.3.)  They
■cannot,  for  evidential  purposes,  be  considered  as  strangers.  At  the
same  time,  although  we  have  known  them  well  for  eight  years,  many
of  the  things  said  were  unknown  to  us.  Some  (jf  the  note-taking  aiad
jnost  of  the  annotations  are  by  Mr.  Thompson.

Sittiiuj  No.  50,  and  last  of  first  series. Evenliuj  vf  Dccemher  26^/),  1889.

Present :  O.  L.,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thompson  ;  and  later  M.  L.  also.

(I  handed  in  a  fresh  watch,  and  Phinuit  said  it  had  been  my  father's.
,£True.]  He  also  seized  the  chain,  hitched  the  two  together,  and  felt  about  for
■something  to  go  on  at  the  other  end  ;  trying  on  watch-key,  but  not  being  satisfied
Avith  it,  and  groping  for  some  time.  [See  No.  75,  p.  5.36.]  Then  he  repeated),
"  Henry  is  now  at  127,  Regent-street,  Philadelphia  ;  that's  so.  [No.]  (To
Mrs. T.):  How's  Ted? [Her  son.] Your  motlier  sends  her  love,  and


524


A  Record  of  Observations  of


wants  to  know  wliere  her  two  rings  are  ?  She  had  two.  [Don't  know  about
rings.]  She  has  the  cap  on,  and  hair  parted  on  one  side.  [Correct.]  Your
mother  sends  her  love  to  you,  Susie.  [Usual  name.]  She  takes  care  of  a
little  bit  of  a  l^aby  in  the  spirit  that  belonged  to  you.  It  puts  its  hand
uj)  like  that.  It  hardly  lived  with  you  at  all ;  but  it  lives  in  the  spirit.
Your  mother  takes  care  of  it,  and  your  sister  in  the  spirit.  [Mrs.  T. 's-
child,  a  boy,  died  in  birth.  Mr.  T.  happens  to  have  had  one  j^revious
sitting  with  a  niedium,  viz.  Miss  Fowler,  14  years  ago,  and  curiously
she,  too,  asserted  that  this  child  was  under  the  care  of  Mrs.  T.'s  mother.]
Emily  is  in  the  body.  [Mrs.  T.'s  sister;  right.]  (To  Mr.  T.) :  Ted  is  a,
great  deal  with  your  mother  ;  she  says,  '  My  poor  boy, '  and  often  thinks,
about  him.  [An  unlikely  expression  for  Mrs.  T.,  sen.,  but  she  does  often
think  about  hini.]  He  is  studying  still,  and  writes  a  great  deal,  and  helf)s-
a  lot  of  young  fellows.  [He  was  a  promising  medical  student  at  Edinburgh,,
and  died  just  after  taking  his  degree.]  Don't  let  them  think  I  am  dead.
Tell  motlier  and  Fanny  I  am  alive."  [Fanny  is  his  surviving  sister  (p.  518)].

(To  Mrs.  L.  )  :  "Aunt  Izzie  wants  to  talk  to  you.  [See  previous  sitting,
p.  522.  '  Isabella  '  ;  Aunt  Izzie  was  her  familiar  name.]  Shall  I  sing  to  you  ?
What  would  you  like  ?  You  have  not  been  well  lately.  Are  you  glad  to  hear
of  Aunt  Izzie  1  I  could  almost  come  back  and  die  over  again  to  see  you.  You.
tell  Mary  that  her  sister  Isabel  still  lives  ;  tell  her  she  has  done  nobly  ;  telL
her  William  and  I  are  together.  That  lazy  gardener  !  [This  message  is.
exceedingly  intelligible.  The  Mary  referred  to  is  my  wife's  mother,  recently
widowed,  and  left  with  a  house  and  garden  to  manage  in  Staffordshire.
"Aunt  Izzie  "  had  been  staying  with  her  quite  recently,  at  a  time  when  the-
gardener  was  troublesome.]  (Then  the  voice  and  manner  changed,  as  in
Sittings  40  and  47. )  Don't  give  up  a  good  thing.  Lodge.  .  .  .  Who  is
here  ?  "

0.  L.  :  "This  is  my  wife."

"How  do  you  do,  Mrs.  Lodge? (Shaking  hands.) I  remember  having-
tea  with  you  once." [The  ostensible  s^jeaker,  Mr.  E.,  had  done  so.]
0.  L.  :  "Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thompson."

"Yes,  I  rememljer  you,  I  think. [They  had  once  naet.]  Good-bye,
Lodge  ;  don't  divulge  my  secrets  " (p.  493).
O.  L.  :  "  No,  all  right  ;  good-bye."

(Dr.  P.  again,  to  Mr.  T.):  "  Ted  is  asking  about  George.  Don't  forget  to
tell  him  I  asked  about  him,  and  send  my  love.  [George  is  a  brother.]  (To
Mrs.  T.):  Susie,  I  don't  like  Alice  and  Maud  ;  friends  of  one^of  your  girls."
[Don't  know  them.]

Mr.  T.  :  "  Can  you  tell  me  about  my  other  sister  ?  "

"Sarah— no — Eliza-Maria — that's  it.  She's  all  right.  We  are  together
and  happy.  That's  Ted's  sister  and  Ike's  sister.  She  and  Ted  and  father
are  all  together.  Slie  teaches  entirely,  and  is  very  religious.  But  she
doesn't  know  you  (Mrs.  T.)  in  spectacles.  (Took  them  ofl'.)  That's  right;
now  I  know  you."

[Remarkably  correct  description  of  Mr.  T.  's  sister,  Eliza  Maria,  who  died
27  years  ago. Mrs.  T. (then unmarried)  did  not  then  wear
spectacles,  but  knew  her  well.]
(To  Mrs.  T.)  :  "I  see  your  fatlier,  mother,  and  two  sisters. [These  have
died.] I  am  not  acquainted  with  your  father. I  am  going  to  be  candid,  and


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


525


can't  tell  you  what  he  does.  I  will  see  if  I  can  find  him.  (A  pause.
Laughing.)  Your  father  is  covered  from  top  to  toe  with  paint.  His  room  in
covered  with  pictures  all  round.  We  have  everything  of  that  kind  with  us.
He  is  so  happy — wouldn't  come  back  for  anything. "

[Mrs.  T. 's  father  made  painting  and  art  his  entire  hobby  for  all  time
spared  from  business,  and  regretted  not  being  able  to  live  for  it.]

' '  Your  father  says  he  is  going  to  take  charge  of  one  of  your  girls,  and
teach  her  how  to  paint.  Theosophy  it  is.  If  I  don't  speak  true  may  I  never
speak  again.  He  will  assist  her  spiritually — inspire  her.  [Mrs.  T.  's  eldest
daughter  Theodora  is  very  fond  of  painting.  ]  The  other  one  is  going  to  take
U2)  music — the  dark-haired  one.  [Incorrect.  Slie  has  no  musical  faculty —
she  paints,  too,  a  little.]  (To  Mrs.  T.) :  Your  sister  curled  her  hair  in  a  very
funny  way  (indicating).  [Correct.]  Maria,  your  sister,  I  see  her.  [Correct.]
Maria  sends  her  love  to  Emily.  [A  living  sister.]  What  a  romp  you  used  to
be.  Here,  Ike,  I  wish  you  could  hear  all  your  people  have  to  say.  They  all
talk  at  once."

Mr.  T.  :  "  How  very  inconsiderate. "

' '  So  would  you  and  your  brothers,  if  you  hadn't  spoken  to  your  mother
for  20  years.  [Time  about  riglit.]  Eliza-Maria  and  Ted  and  your  father  all
think  of  you  a  great  deal.  Fanny  is  very  good  to  mother,  always  witli  her.
[Correct.]  I'm  sorry  to  say,  Ike,  I've  some  bad  news  for  you.  You  are  going-
to  lose  a  dear  friend — not  a  relative,  but  a  good  friend,  rather  suddenly  within
the  next  four  moiiths.  [Not  happened  yet.  ]  What  are  all  those  little  bottles
I  see  about  you  ?  "

Mr.  T.  :  "  I  have  none  on  me."

"  No,  but  I  see  a  great  lot.  Aconite,  Belladonna,  Mercurius,  Nux  Vomica,
and  the  devil  knows  what  else.  [These  and  many  other  drugs  Mr.  T.  uses  in
his  business.]  (Mrs.  L.  handed  a  piece  of  hair.)  Too  weak  to  tell  you  now,
and  it's  too  old. It  belonged  to  one  of  these  spirits." [So  far  correct.]

(0.  L. ,  giving  a  letter)  ' '  Good-bye,  doctor.  You  are  going  to  this
gentleman. "

(Dr.  P.,  putting  it  to  head)  "That's  from  Walter.  I  know  him.  [Yes,
Mr.  Leaf,  but  Mrs.  Piper  knew  she  was  going  there.]  Cap'n,  I'm  going  tO'
leave  you.  God  bless  you  and  keep  you  in  His  holy  keeping.  God  bless,
you,  Susie,  Ike,  Marie,  and  Captain  !  Cap'n,  I  liate  to  leave  you,  but  I've
got  to  go.  An  rcvoir,  an  revoir  !  Marie,  I've  got  to  go,  but  not  for  long  ;
liope  to  see  you  soon  again.  Cai)'n,  speak  to  me  again.  Good-bye,  good-bye,
good-bye.

End  of  the  First  Series  of  Liverpool  Sittings.


Notes  to  this  Series  of  Sittings.
My  main  object  in  this  series  has  been  to  discriminate  between
unconscious  thought-transference  and  direct  clairvoyance,  by  obtaining
information  wholly  unknown  to  anyone  present.  Most  of  the  com-
munications purporting  to  come  from  my  uncle  Jerry  answered  per-
fectly to  this  description,  and  the  only  difficulty  was  to  get  them^
verified.  As  indicated  in  Note  E,  p.  516,  my  uncle  Robert  (sur-
viving twin  brother  of  Uncle  Jerry)  has  verified  the  snake's  skin,  but

2  0


526


A  Record  of  Observations  of


he  could  only  remember  indistinctly  the  episode  of  swimming  the  creek
;xnd  neai-ly  getting  drowiied,  on  which  stress  was  laid  by  Phinuit  (first
mentioned  p.  503),  and  had  no  recollection  of  some  other  incidents.
But  he  was  good  enough  to  write  to  the  only  other  surviving
brother  of  those  concerned,  living  in  Cornwall,  and  by  this  means  to
obtain  for  me,  what  by  no  other  means  I  should  have  been  likely  to
obtain,  the  following  document,  which  I  copy  and  print  in  full.  The
communication  from  Uncle  Robert  to  Uncle  Frank  was  a  bald  list  of
questions,  not  likely  to  excite  pseudo-memory.  The  family  was  an
enormous  one,  and  my  father  was  one  of  the  youjigest  members  of  it.
He  was  born  in  1826;  his  father  at  the  time  being  61,  and  Uncle  Jerry
being  16.  The  family  left  Barking  for  Elsworth  in  1838  or  1839.  I
was  born  in  1851.

Statement  made  by  Uncle  Frank  to  Uncle  Robert,  received  by  me
February  2nd,  1890  (see  end  of  No.  80,  below,  p.  542):—

' '  About  the  summer  of  the  year  1828,  I  am  not  sure  of  the  date  within  a
year  or  two,  a  large  party  (those  forming  it  as  far  as  my  memory  serves  me
being  Messrs.  Wm.  Whitbourne,  James  Sharpe,  Henry  Sharpe,  Frank  Whit-
bourne,  my  brothers  Robert,  Jeremiah,  Charles,  and  inyself,  and  some  others
whom  I  cannot  recollect  without  help)left  Barking,  some  in  Henry  Sharpe's  boat
and  otliers  walking  to  Ilford,  the  oliject  being  to  beat  the  River  Rodin  from
Ilford  to  Barking,  and  catch  a  large  lot  of  fish  in  nets  arranged  for  the  pur-
pose at  the  Six  Gates.  We  did  beat  the  river,  wading  where  depth  of  water
admitted,  and  swimming  tlie  deep  parts,  the  non-swiuimers  walking  along
tlie  banks  of  the  river.  Tlie  whole  thing  was  a  failure,  for  we  caught  only  a
very  few  fish,  and  concluded  that  tliey  liad  managed  to  slip  jjast  us  on  the
journey.  On  arriving  at  Barking  the  elders  of  the  party  went  home  to  get
dry  clothes,  and  the  young  ones  conmienced  tlie  usual  rougli  play.  Jerry  and
I  were  larking  togetlier  on  the  taill^oard  of  the  water-mill  ;  one  pushed  the
other  and  sent  liini  di:»wn  tlie  slippery  platform,  and  then  there  was  a  struggle
together,  which  resulted  in  both  Ijeing  sent  into  the  mill-stream,  which  was
running  fast  owing  to  tlie  six  gates  being  open.  There  was  nothing  left  but
to  swim  with  the  stream  to  a  bank  about  three  or  four  hundred  yards  oft'.
We  had  all  our  clotlies  on  except  shoes  and  stockings.

The  quays  at  Barking  were  crowded  with  people,  men,  women,  and
•children,  drawn  there  to  see  a  smack  launched.  These  good  people  made  a
great  noise,  some  cheering  the  swimmers  in  the  mill  pool,  others  screaming
They  will  he  drowned,"  "Tliey  will  be  drowned."  One  of  them,  viz.,  a
Mr.  Smith,  a  publican,  looked  over  the  cpiay  ;  I  saw  his  face  quite  jilain  and
heard  him  say,  '  'What's  the  odds  if  they  are,  it's  only  two  of  them  d — d  young
Lodges."  As  we  were  swimming  our  best  my  hat  washed  or  got  off" and  was
left  behind  a  yard  or  two,  and  as  soon  as  I  missed  it  I  swam  back  and
recovered  it,  much  to  the  amusement  of  the  onlookers.  We  got  all  right  to
the  landing-place  and  even  thought  of  endeavouring  to  swim  back  again
against  tlie  stream.

Jerry  liad  a  rifle  such  as  you  describe  (p.  515),  at  the  Palladium,  but  I
[know]  nothing  about  it.  I  was  only  home  once  while  he  was  at  the  Palladium,
.and  tlien  only  for  a  very  short  time.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


527


I  remember  iiotliing  of  tlie  snake  skin.

I  know  notliiug  of  his  making  any  calculations,  by  wheels  or  otherwise.

I  remember  his  having  an  old  repeater— how  he  came  by  it  I  do  not
know — it  was  often  requiring  the  watclimaker,  yet  Jerry  seemed  to  value  it
very  much.

I  never  recollect  a  photo  with  you  and  Jerry  together  (p.  503).

I  recollect  there  was  a  field  at  Barking  called  Smith's  field.  I  think  it
was  the  field  at  the  top  or  upper  part  of  Glenny's  Part,  and  liounded  part
of  the  pond  we  used  to  fish  in.  It  was  half  field  and  half  garden  (p.  517  ;
see  also  p.  556).

The  only  cat-killing  I  can  remember  is  our  brother  Charles  killing  Mrs.
Cannon's  cat  and  burying  it  behind  one  of  the  lilac  trees (jjp.  517, 521, 541).

Once  more,  I  must  repeat  that  the  importance  attaching  to  the
references  made  in  the  sittings  to  these  events  must  depend  very  much
on  the  view  taken  of  the  genuineness  of  the  ti'ance  and  of  Mrs.  Piper's
honesty.  Given  that  she  is  a  cheat,  she  must  be  supposed  a  cheat  of
exceptional  ability  and  with  the  command  of  very  superior  assistance ;
and  it  is  just  conceivable  that  such  a  one,  by  sending  a  skilled  agent
down  to  Bai'king  and  interviewing  the  oldest  inhabitants,  might  hit
upon  someone  who  as  a  hoj  had  witnessed  the  creek  episode.  The
task  does  not  strike  me  as  an  easy  one,  but  possibly  it  might  be  done.
It  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  Mrs.  Piper  herself  made  effective
inquiries,  because  her  proceedings  all  the  time  in  England  were  well
known,  and  she  was  under  bargain  to  sit  regulai-ly  every  day.
Having  obtained  her  information  she  would  pi'oceed  to  lead  up  to  it  by
frequently  mentioning  my  uncle  who  had  a  fall ;  just  in  the  way  that
Phinuit  did.  It  was  dovibtless  this  fi'equent  i-eference  that  caused  me
to  think  of  sending  for  the  watch  and  getting  more  details.  The  cat
incident,  and  the  rifle,  may  be  dismissed  as  shots ;  and  I  suppose  the
watch-scratches  and  the  snake  skin  can  be  eluded  somehow.

So  much  a  sceptic  might  be  allowed  ;  though  in  the  face  of  wliat
seems  to  me  such  extreme  improljabilities  that  only  tlie  imjDi-obability  of
any  other  conclusion  enaljles  one  to  face  them  with  patience.

But  when  the  interviews  with  strangers  are  contemplated  in  addi-
tion, interviews  which  compel  assent  to  some  abnormal  powers,  and
thereby  remove  any  necessity  for  the  exercise  of  an  elaborate  and
costly  system  of  impostui-e,  then  I  confess  that  for  my  own  part  I  am
even  more  sceptical  of  the  power  of  any  human  being  to  obtain  the
information  by  ordinaiy  meaiis  and  under  the  given  circumstances
than  I  am  of  the  possibility  of  the  possession  by  the  human  mind  of
latent  or  nascent  powers  hitherto  only  obscurely  recognised  and  imper-
fectly developed.  (See  Appendix,  p.  555.)

Further  Notes.  September,  1890.

There  are  one  or  two  further  annotations  which  I  am  able  now  to
make.


2  0  2


528


A  Record  of  Observations  of


AVitli  regard  to  the  marks  on  Uncle  J erry's  watch  (p.  518),  it  appears
from  a  letter  below  that  it  is  unlikely  that  he  made  them  himself,,
and  accoi'dingly  if  any  importance  is  to  be  attached  to  their
detection  by  Dr.  Phinuit  inside  the  certainly  unopened  case,  it  is-
probably  of  the  directly  percipient  or  clairvoyant  order,  rather  than,  as-
he  represented  it,  of  information  received  and  transmitted  as  a  message..
The  same  letter  likewise  casts  some  doubt  on  the  importance  of  the-
"fall  from  a  horse  "  so  frequently  mentioned  (e.g.,  p.  521).  I  clearly
remember  having  been  told  when  a  boy  of  Uncle  Jerry  having  had  a
serious  fall  which  inflicted  some  injury  to  the  spine,  and  was  the-
probable  cause  of  his  blindness.  Hence  it  would  appear  likely  that-
this  item  may  have  been  extracted  by  Dr.  Phinuit  fi-om  my  mind^
unless  further  information  confirms  its  position  as  a  really  influential
event. (See  also  notes  at  end  of  Second  Series,  p.  557.)

The  letter  is  from  my  cousin,  eldest  son  of  Uncle  Robert,  senior  to-
me, and  much  more  intimate  with  the  London  branch  of  the  family
than  I  ever  was.

E.rtract  from  letter.
Great  Gearies,  Ilforcl,  September  16th,  1890.

As  you  wished  ine  to  send  you  notes  of  anything  that  struck  me  in  the
report  of  Mrs.  Piper's  sittings — here  goes.

Uncle  Jerry  died  on  the  12th  March,  1869.  I  have  always  understood
that  his  blindness  was  attributed  to  locomotor  ataxy,  and  I  never  heard  of  his.
liaving  so  bad  a  fall  from  his  horse  as  you  mention  in  your  notes.  He  had  a
slight  fall  once  in  Rotten  Row,  I  think,  and  I  remember  his  telling  me  that
as  a  piece  of  affectation  he  appeared  in  the  Row  the  next  day  with  one  foot
in  a  shipper,  liaving  S2:irained  his  ankle.

I  remember  his  having  a  rifle  and  sword  which  he  kept  in  his  lousiness
desk  at  tlie  Palladium,  as  he  at  that  time  belonged  to  a  rifle  club  (it  was  long
before  the  Volunteer  movement),  and  perhaps  that  is  what  is  meant  by
"  yjlaying  at  soldiers." I  do  not  remember  any  snake  skin  (p.  516).

The  marks  on  the  watch  I  do  not  think  were  made  by  him,  as  I  cannot
remember  his  having  a  repeater  until  he  lost  his  sight.  The  term  "little
shaver  "  (p.  503)  fits  his  method  of  exi^ression  to  a  T.  The  swimming  the
creek,  &c.,  ttc,  have  been  so  well  described  by  the  skipper  that  I  need
only  say  I  knew  of  its  having  been  d(jne  from  l)oth  (I  believe)  of  the
performers.

(Signed) Robeut  Lodge.

The  other  incident  in  favour  of  direct  clair^'oyance  and  against
thought-transference  of  any  recogirised  kind,  ^-iz.,  the  experiment
contrived  by  Mr.  Gonner  (pp.  462  and  487),  has  had  its  value  rather
strengthened  by  further  inquiry  and  by  interview  with  the  ladies
concerned  in  London.  It  was  a  carefully  arranged  experiment,
planned  by  him  and  me  together  in  Liverpool,  and  carried  out  in  a
satisfactory  manner  through  the  kind  aid  of  his  relations  in  London.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


529


The  problem  was  to  remove  thought-transference  to  as  many  orders  of
remoteness  as  jaossible.  He  therefore  wrote  to  his  sister,  Miss  Gonner,
giving  her  full  particulars  of  what  was  wanted.  Their  mother  was  to  be
requested  to  decide  on  and  do  something  uncommon  at  a  specified  hour,
without  letting  Miss  Gonner  know  what  it  was  ;  neither  was  she  to
have  any  inkling  whatever  as  to  a  reason  for  the  request,  nor  to  know
that  it  was  connected  with  her  son.  I  find  that  all  this  was  scrupu-
lously done.  With  the  aid  of  Miss  Ledlie  (the  lady  correctly  desci-ibed
and  named  as  "  Annie "  by  Phinuit),  who  likewise  knew  nothing-
whatever  as  to  reasons,  the  mother  was  prevailed  upon  to  accede
to  the  request ;  and  she  accordingly  decided  to  go  out  under
perfectly  unlikely  circumstances,  accompanied  by  Miss  Ledlie,  both
ladies  being  very  much  puzzled  to  account  for  the  singular  and  vague
request  on  the  part  of  Miss  Gonner.  The  latter  lady,  who  was  the
only  one  of  the  trio  who  had  any  idea  of  the  reason,  purposely
.absented  herself  from  the  house  before  any  decision  was  made  as  to
what  should  be  done.  The  diiving  round  the  park  on  a  wet  Saturday
morning,  though  sufiiciently  incongruous  to  astonish  even  the  cab-
man, was  an  unfoi'tunately  passive  kind  of  perfonnance  to  select ;  but
considering  the  absence  of  every  kind  of  information  or  clue  to  the
reason  for  doing  anything,  the  wonder  is  that  anything  whatever  was
done.  Miss  Ledlie  reports  that  after  Miss  Gonner  had  left  the  house
she  and  Mrs.  Gonner  decided  what  to  do,  and  a  vehicle  was  sent  for.
Just  about  11  she  ran  vipstairs  to  see  if  Mrs.  Gonner  was  ready,
and  saw  her  come  out  of  her  room  to  a  landing  cupboard,  take  a  box
out  of  it,  put  it  on  a  ledge,  open  it  and  take  out  a  muff,  very  much  as
described  hy  Phinuit  half  an  hour  later.  She  had  her  cloak  and
things  on  then,  and  the  cloak  is  ti'oublesome  to  hook,  so  that  there
would  be  a  good  deal  of  apparently  fixing  things  round  the  neck.  The
taking  up  and  looking  at  the  photograph  would  almost  certainly
be  done  before  going  out,  though  it  was  not  actually  seen.  The
"taking  up  a  pencil  to  write,"  and  the  "brushing  something,"  if  by
"something"  is  meant  a  garment,  are  unlikely  actions.  Although  the
.success  was  far  from  complete,  Phinuit  distinctly  left  us  in  Liverpool
Avith  the  impression  that  "going  out"  was  the  thing  selected  to  be
done.

.The  episode  of  Miss  Ledlie's  hair  not  having  Ijeen  cut  shoi-t,  when
Mr.  Gonner,  having  been  told  in  fun  that  it  had,  felt  dissatisfied  with
Phinuit's  I'eply  (p.  489)  implying  that  there  was  nothing  special  to  say
about  its  length — dissatisfaction  which  he  expressed  to  me, — is  likewise
good  as  against  ordinary  thought-transference.

The  incident  at  the  beginning  of  Sitting  No.  48,  about  "  Charley
■mating  a  bird,"  is  also  rather  striking.  I  did  not  think  much  of  it  at
'the  time  because  it  seemed  an  unlikely  thing  to  get  distinctly  verified ;


530


A  Record  of  Observations  of


but,  as  recorded  in  the  note  at  end  of  sitting  (p.  520),  special  cir-
cumstances connected  with  it  happen  to  have  made  it  a  definite
incident  clearly  remembered.


Second  Series.

After  an  interval,  during  which  we  went  abroad,  Mrs.  Piper
visited  us  again  on  her  way  back  to  the  States.  She  was  now  not  sO'
A\ell  in  health,  ajiparently  rather  fatigued  by  her  stay  in  London,,
which  she  imagined  did  not  suit  her,  and  beginning  to  long  to  get
home  again.  On  the  whole  I  think  the  lucidity  of  "  Dr.  Phinuit  "  was-
less  than  it  was  during  the  earlier  series  ;  the  communications  from
my  uncle,  for  instance,  add  very  little  to  the  facts  previously  given  ;.
and  the  "George  Wilson"  ejsisodes,  referred  to  on  p.  461,  which  at  the
time  seemed  likely  to  furnish  satisfactory  positive  evidence  in  favour  of
clairvoyance,  ha-s-e  turned  out  in  the  02:)posite  sense,  as  the  following-
letter  clearly  indicates  : —

Letter  from  Mi:  Wilson,  abroad.

April  2nd,  1890.

My  deak  Lodge, — Your  letter  witli enclosure  reached  me  as  I  was-

leaving  ■  and  I  could  do  Jiotliing  till  I  arrived  here. And  now,  after

ctinsideration,  I  think  I  shall  say  but  little.

The  statements  made  through  the  medium  fall  intt)  two  classes :  (1)  Those-
whicli  relate  to  matters  known  to  you.  (2)  Those  you  could  not  know — as,
for  example,  either  my  jjresent  circumstances  or  my  past  life.  What  is  said
imder  the  former  head  is,  as  you  would  see,  more  or  less  c(.)rrect.  What  is.
said  under  tlie  latter  is  entirely  /jycorrect.  Were  you  here  I  would  go  into-
detail,  but  as  you  have  not  the  MSS.  this  could  not  easily  be  done.  On  the-
matter  generally  I  pass  no  opinion. The  evidence  is  too  narrow.

And,  in  general,  the  kind  of  old  man  represented  is  the  antipodes  of  the^
dignified  precise  character  of  my  father.  He  was  calm  and  clear-headed,,
hated  all  fuss,  and,  like  most  of  the  Government  officials,  avoided  all  jjublic
appearances.  He  detested  bad  grammar,  and  drew  up  Government  2)apers.
of  almost  painful  accuracy.

Added  September,  1890.
Recently,  my  wife  has  suggested  that  some  of  the  statements  seem  to
refer  moi'c  prubably  to  my  grandfather,  whose  name  was  James,  and  -who-
was  somewhat  of  a  "  iKU'ering  "  old  man,  sucli  as  is  represented.  I  am  not
able  to  verify  the  statements  from  tins  point  of  view,  but  he  did  own  his;
house,  and  very  likely  made  some  additions  to  it  [as  stated  on  jj.  543],

Subsequently  I  got  him  to  return  his  copy  of  the  evidence  with
annotations,  and  these  are  transciilied  into  their  appropriate  places,
below,  Ijegiuning  at  p.  539.

During  the  second  series  of  sittings  my  sister  E.  C.  L.,  frequently
mentioned  in  the  first  series,  was  with  us  on  a  shm-t  A'isit,  and  often;


Certain  Phenomena  of  Travce.


531


took  notes  for  me.  There  was  a  good  deal  of  repetition  of  statements
made  in  the  eai'lier  series,  and  though  I  abbreviate  the  notes  as  much
as  possible  so  as  to  print  only  the  more  apparently  evidential  portions,
I  quote  some  of  these  i-epetitions  in  full,  esiDecially  all  those  having
reference  to  my  Uncle  Jerry,  because  at  this  time  a  number  of  the
facts  had  not  been  verified,  and  some  are  still  unverified.  The  letter
of  partial  verification  from  Uncle  Frank  to  Uncle  Robert,  printetl  aljo^•e,
reached  me  about  the  middle  of  the  second  series  ;  and  I  read  it  to
Phinuit  on  the  day  it  ariived,  as  leported  below.  Mrs.  Piper  arrived
from  London  on  Januaiy  .30th,  and  next  day  was  held  a  sitting,  which
numbers  itself  77  in  the  entire  English  series.

iSitting  No.  77. {Fird after intvrcal.) Fridaij,  Jamianj  Sl.sf,  1890.

11  ((.(().  to  12.30 j^J.m.

Present  :  0.  L.,  M.  L.,  and,  for  iirst  time,  E.  C.  L.

After  recognitions  and  greetings,  and  saying  that  Myers  had  told  him  to
take  care  of  the  medium  and  not  stay  too  long,  he  began  sending  messages
about  my  sister,  but  sjjeedily  became  aware  of  someone  present  and  recog-
nised her  with  "Hallo,  by  George,  that's  Nelly."  [See  p.  507,  Note  C]
Then  he  pretended  to  carry  on  a  one-sided  conversation,  as  if  talking  to
other  people  about  her,  and  presently  reported  that  he  was  Ijeing  asked  to
prescribe  for  her.  Tlien  he  broke  off  with,  "Here,  Cajjtain,  did  you  ask
Robert  about  swimmhig  tlie  creek  ?  "

O.  L.  :  "Yes,  I  did,  and  he  remembers  something  about  it  ;  but  he  calls
it  tlie  pool,  and  says  it  was  the  other  boys  that  swam  it."

"  Ah,  that's  so. Yes,  he's  right. I  didn't  remember  quite  exactly."

O.  L.  :  "Do  you  know  he  can't  remember  about  that  ring?  He  never
knew  you  to  wear  a  ring  "  [p.  508].

"Yes,  I  did,  but  it  was  a  lung  time  ago.  It's  true,  and  he  has  got  it
somewhere. There  was  a  stone  in  it. Did  he  remember  about  the  skin  ?  "

0.  L.  :  "Yes,  he  did."

"  Oh,  he  remembered  that. Well,  isn't  it  a  funny  thing  ?  "

0.  L.  :  "  He  remembers  it,  but  doesn't  seem  to  have  it  now,  and  I  have
not  seen  it  " [p.  516].

"Well,  does  he  remember  about  the  phot  ograplis  ;  one  of  the  pictures
.standing  and  one  sitting  '?" [No.  44,  p.  507.]

0.  L.  :  "Yes,  and  I  have  seen  them."

"  Aren't  they  queer  ?  "

O.  L.  :  "Yes,  and  I've  seen  the  t;dl  hats  on,  which  you  mentiuned  ;  but
it  was  not  Uncle  Roljert  that  was  photographed  witli  you."

"No?  Well  it  was  a  Robert.  Robert  stmiething.  Let  me  think.  .
You  will  have  to  excuse  me  a  bit,  I  can't  recollect  just  now. Do  you  know
tliat  Robert  got  hurt  some  time  ago  ?  "

0.  L.  :  "No."

"  Yes,  you  do  ;  had  a  sick  turn — had  an  attack,  and  has  never  been  quite
the  same  Uncle  Robert  since."

O.  L.  :  "Yes,  that's  so."  '
(Then  a  number  of  communications  2:)ur23orting  t(j  l^e  from  the  same  persons


532


A  Record  of  Observations  of


as  were  represented  as  sending  messages  in  previous  sittings,  and  to  much
the  same  effect.)

0.  L.  :  "  We  couldn't  make  out  about  those  'little  wheels.'  "
' '  They  were  only  seals  on  insurance  papers.  He  was  trying  to  tell  me
about  them  and  I  couldn't  quite  get  his  meaning  ;  it  was  my  mistake.  You
know  when  they  issue  insurance  papers  to  people  tliere's  a  stamp — a  seal —
put  on,  and  they  looked  like  wheels.  Did  you  ask  about  that  old  lady  who
ivas  witli  Uncle  Robert '?  Who  is  she — quite  an  old  lady  ?  "
O.  L.  :  "  His  wife,  I  suppose."

"You  must  look  these  things  up.  And  did  you  ask  about  that  statue —
that  marble  thing?" [p.  521J.

0.  L.  :  "  Yes,  I  did,  l)ut  he  can't  remember  it."

"Well,  tliat's  stupid.  He's  got  it,  I  tell  you.  You  go  tliere  and  hunt
about  the  liouse  and  you'll  find  it.  A  little  statue.  And  that  ring,  he  has
got  that  somewhere,  among  my  jewellery — what  little  I  liad.  That's  there,
too,  somewhere  " [pp.  .508,  537].

0.  L.  :  "Another  thing  Uncle  Robert  can't  remember  is  'Fido"'(p.  509).

"  What,  not  remember  the  dog  I  Well,  that's  stupid.  Sam  will  remem-
ber that. Ask  Sam." [Knows  nothing  about  it.]

O.  L.  :  "  And  the  cat  ;  he  denies  the  cat."

"Ask  the  rest  of  the  boys  about  the  cat. You  remind  Robert  of  the
Smith  boys  (p.  521),  and  tlien  he  will  remember  the  cat."
O.  L.  :  "  I  have,  but  he  can't  fix  them."

"  Come  here,  Siss  (to  Nellie). Your  father  wants  me  to  look  at  you.
Oh,  you're  not  at  all  right. You're  wrong."
E.  C.  L.  :  "Oh,  I'm  pretty  well."

"You  feel  pretty  well,  but  you're  not.  You  haven't  a  right  circulation
at  all.  You  are  what  they  call  ancemic,"  Szc.  [Full  medical  details  given
at  considerable  length,  all  true,  and  pi-escriptions  practically  identical  with
what  had  Ijeen  tried  by  London  and  Malvern  consulting  pliysicians.  Then
advice  given  to  stay  with  me  instead  of  elsewhere,  much  as  in  Nos.  44  and
46,  pp.  502,  513,  514,  and  539.]


A  sitting  was  attempted  the  same  evening,  but  it  failed.  Mrs.  Pijaer
could  not  go  into  the  trance  ;  so  after  20  minutes'  trial  it  was  abandoned.

The  next  morning  I  had  arranged  for  a  friend  to  arrive  at  11  o'clock.
Mrs.  Piper  was  ready  and  waiting  in  my  study  before  that  time,  and  I  went
outside  tlie  gate  to  meet  him.  Unfortmiately,  as  he  entered,  my  wife  met
him  accidentally  in  the  hall,  and  conversed  for  some  two  minutes  while  I
was  in  tlie  .study  with  Mrs.  Piper.  The  door  was  ajar,  and  thougli  I  did
not  overhear  anything  particular  Mrs.  Pijjer  remarked  that  they  should  not
be  talking  within  earsliot  like  that.  It  is  impossible  to  say  how  mucli  she
either  consciously  or  unconsciously  heard,  and  the  incident  prevents  me
from  Ijeing  able  to  consider  Mr.  Lund  as  an  anonymous  stranger,  as  I  had
intended.

A  second  sitting  ought  always  to  be  given  to  a  stranger,  as  speedily  after
the  first  as  j^ossible.  A  single  experience  of  so  novel  a  kind  can  hardly  ever
be  satisfactory. Shortness  of  time  jirevented  it  in  the  j^resent  instance.

I  began  the  sitting,  to  start  Mrs.  Piper  oft',  Mr.  Lund  sitting  pretty  near.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


533


-He  was,  however,  called  by  Phiimit  immediately,  and  I  sat  at  a  desk  and
*ook  notes,  except  during  part  of  the  time  when  I  was  turned  out.  My  notes
nvere  afterwards  handed  to  Mv.  Lund,  who  drew  up  the  report  appended.

Sitting  No.  78. February  Id,  1890. 11  a.m.
Present  :  ]N[r.  Lund,  and  most  of  the  time  O.  L.

The  sitting  began  by  Mrs.  Piper  going  off  into  the  trance  state  and  veiy
^soon  asking,  "Where's  Mr.  London?"  She  made  several  attempts  to
.arrive  at  my  real  name,  Lund,  but  failed,  saying  that  she  couldn't  pronounce
it.  She  said  I  had  passed  tln-ough  a  lot  of  difhculties,  was  a  rum  fellow,  liad
Jiad  many  troubles  and  trials,  was  a  good  man.

Here  she  asked  Lodge  to  leave  the  room.  She  then  told  me  accurately
what  children  I  had— one  boy  who  at  this  very  time  was  absent  and  ill —
■eldest  girl  inclined  to  domineer— second  giil  devoted  to  music— third  giii
Tvould  need  much  watching.  For  myself,  had  had  throat  trouble  [correct],
■which  would  trouble  no  more.  Head  now  the  greatest  fear.  Surrounded  by
people  who  wished  to  do  me  harm,  especially  one  dark  man  [unknown].  Had
four  sisters  and  one  brother  [correct]— one  sister  an  angel,  and  one  kind  of
fussy.  (Then  Lodge  returned,  and  tried  some  experiment  of  his  own  :  see
Ijelow.)

"Do  you  know  that  man  Wallace  ?  Who  is  that  ?  Do  you  call  him
'Charles'  1  [L^nknown.]  You  had  a  fire  a  little  time  ago— no— a  long  time
ago. Some  little  thing  got  burnt. " [Right,  a  carpet.]

Ultimately  she  said  it  was  a  carpet,  after  calling  it  drapery  and  tapestry.

' '  Your  lady  had  a  pain  in  her  back  ;  not  yet  very  well  ;  it  made  her  a  little
depressed  ;  tell  her  not  to  worry  so,  and  don't  be  so  devilish  fussy.  You  tell
her  I  like  her.  Your  boy  is  not  right.  He  took  a  cold— had  fever,  and  now
he's  weak.  He's  picking  up  slowly  ;  give  him  Cjuinine.  If  you  don't  look
after  him,  he  gets  run  down.  He  gets  tired  from  past  illness.  [True.]  Just
now  he's  very  miserable  and  looking  at  a  book." (Time  12.45.)

Said  she  saw  me  writing— lots  of  paper,  books,  pamphlets,  soft  things,
manuscripts,  all  round  me — public  man — talks  to  people.

"  You  write  on  these  pamphlet  things.  That's  what  made  your  throat
bad. You  lecture."

I  asked,  "Where  is  my  wife  now  ?  "

"  She's  brushing  something— in  this  way  (taking  up  bottom  of  her  dress).
She's  got  something  on  her  head— going  on  a  journey— talking  to  some  one,
and  brushing  down  a  cloak-like  thing." (12.48.) [See  notes.]

"  Who  is  it  you  call  Lira  ?  tlie  lady's  sister  [unknowm]  ;  Lorina,  Eleanor,
Caterina,  a  sister,  two  names— one's  Emma,  a  sister,  comaected  with  you
through  marriage  ? Do  you  know  Thomas  ?  "

"I'm  Thomas,"  I  replied.

' '  He'll  know  me— Thomas— Lon— Lund— Tom  Lund. That's  your  sister
that's  saying  it."

Slie  then  referred  back  to  the  fire,  and  said  a  carriage  was  upset  near  me.
"Another  gentleman  and  yourself  were  in  it— a  long  while  ago."  [Can't
remember  any  such  accident.]

She  then  spoke  again  of  my  family  and  children  ;  spoke  of  Tom  No.  2
[wrong],  "  with  disposition  and  mind  like  his  father."


534


A  Record  of  Observations  of


Here  came  in  a  reference  to  a  brother  of  Dr.' Lodge,  who  had  returned  to
room.

She  said  I  was  away  when  n^y  youngest  sister  jiassed  out ;  not  with  her  ;
a  long  way  oS.  No  chance  to  see  her.  She  had  Wue  eyes  and  brown  hair —
a  very  pretty  girl.  Pretty  mouth  and  teeth  ;  plenty  of  expression  in  them.
Slie  tlien  tried  to  find  tlie  name  ;  and  went  tlirougli  a  long  list  ;  at  last  said
it  had  "  ag  "  in  the  middle,  and  that's  all  she  could  find.  She  had  changed  a
great  deal. She  was  much  younger,  and  been  in  spirit  a  long  time.

' '  But  it's  your  sister — Maggie — that's  it — she  says  you  are  brother  Tom
— no,  her  name's  '  Margie. '  Too  bad  you  were  not  at  home — it  was  one
f)f  the  sorrows  that  followed  Tom  all  his  life.  [Correct.]  He'll  never
forget  it."

I  said  :  "  Ask  her  how  it  was  I  wasn't  there  ?  "
She  said  :  "  I'm  getting  weak  now — au  revoir."


She  sent  nie  two  messages  at  following  sittings — one  February  1st.
Evening  : —

Tliat  I  was  studying  for  a  degree,  and  had  an  illness,  and  tliat  is  why  I
wasn't  there  when  my  sister  passed  out.

"  He  went  away  to  study,  and  having  an  illness  couldn't  come  home.
That  is  wliat  she  remembers."  [Incorrect.]

The  next  was  on  Sunday  morning,  February  2nd  : —

"Where's  the  preacher — Tom?  He's  yelling  away  for  all  lie's  worth.
Two  sisters  and  a  In-other  [deceased]  have  gone  to  hear  hini.  He's  a  very
hard  man. He  would  hardly  believe  me."

Tlien  came  some  account  of  what  I  was  saying  in  my  sermon  (p.  541).

"Do  you  know  wlio  Joseph  and  Harriet  are? — Something  in  connection
with  him."  [Unknown.]


Notes  hij  Mr.  Lund.

With  regard  to  my  experience  of  Mrs.  Piper,  I  do  not  feel  that  I  saw
enough  to  form  data  for  any  satisfactory  conclusion.  What  imj^ressed  nae
most  was  the  way  in  which  she  seemed  to  feel  for  information,  rarely  telling
me  anything  of  importance  right  ofi'  the  reel,  but  carefully  fishing,  and  then
following  up  a  lead.  It  seemed  to  me  that  when  she  got  on  a  right  tack,
the  nervous  and  uncontrollable  movement  of  one's  muscles  gave  her  the
signal  that  slie  was  right  and  might  steam  ahead.

In  some  points  she  was  entirely  out  of  it — e.g.,  carriage  accident — the
daiiqerovs  darl;  man — Joseph  ami  Harriet — and  eqjccially,  my  style  of
preaching. Notliing  could  be  a  more  ludierous  caricature  than  tliis  last.

In  otliers,  whicli  I  will  name,  she  made  statements  which  singularly
tallied  with  the  truth — e.f/.,  my  son  icw-s  ill,  and  my  wife  was  going  to  see
him.  I  f(.)und  that  at  the  very  time  given  she  left  tlie  house  witli  a  cloak
o)i  lier  arm,  and  liriislied  her  dress  in  tlie  way  imitated  liy  Mrs.  Piper.

Still  I  am  Ijound  to  say  that  witliin  earshot  of  Mrs.  Piper — before  the
sitting — T  tuld  Mrs.  Lodge  of  my  son's  illness  in  Manchester,  and  my  w'ife's
proposed  visit  to  him,  and  Mrs.  L.  addressed  me  hij  my  name  of  Lund.

It  is  quite  true  that  a  carpet  was  recently  burnt  at  our  house  ;  that  my


Certain  Phenometia  of  Trance.


535


■wife  worries  over  her  duties  too  mucli  for  comfort  and  health  ;  that  I  live  in
a  room  full  of  MSS.

But  without  doubt  the  feature  of  this  sitting  was  the  reference  to  my
youngest  sister,  who  died  of  diphtlieria  in  my  absence  quite  30  years  ago^
and  whose  death  was  a  heartaching  sorrow  of  many  years.  Not  only  did
she  hit  the  name  "Maggie,"  but  even  the  pet  name  "Margie,"  which  I
had  quite  forgotten.  However,  the  reason  afterwards  alleged  for  my  absence
at  her  death  was  quite  wrong.

I  accepted  the  trance  condition  on  Dr.  Lodge's  autliority  ;  otherwise  I
should  have  felt  bound  to  test  it.

Altogether  there  was  such  a  mixture  of  the  true  and  false,  the  absurd
and  rational,  the  vulgar  commonplace  of  the  crafty  fortune-teller  with
startling  reality,  that  I  have  no  theory  to  offer — merely  the  above  facts.  I
should  require  much  more  evidence  than  I  yet  have,  and  with  much  more
careful  testing  of  it,  to  convince  me  (1)  that  Mrs.  Piper  was  unconscious  ;
(2)  that  there  was  any  thought-reading  beyond  the  clever  guessing  of  a.
person  trained  in  that  sort  of  work  ;  (3)  that  there  was  any  ethereal  com-
munication witli  a  spirit-Avorld.  I  did  not  like  the  sudden  weakness
experienced  when  I  pressed  my  supposed  sister  for  the  reason  of  my  absence
at  her  death,  and  the  delay  wanted  for  giving  a  rej^ly.

That  the  subject  is  full  of  interest  I  admit,  and  I  should  like  to  jDursue
it ;  but  I  am  far  from  convinced  at  present  that  we  have  evidence  on  which
to  build  a  new  theory.

Ajrril  26th,  1890.

T.  W.  M.  Lund,  M.A.,
Chaplain  of  the  School  for  the  Blind,  Liverpool.


To  tliisO.  L.  adds  tJie  fvlloirhuj  incident  irliiult  occurred  ilii riiiij  this  sitting,  hut
wliicli  had  no  connection,  icitli.  T.  ^V.  M.  L.

(Chain  handed  to  Phinuit  by  0.  L. ,  the  package  having  been  delivered
by  hand  to  O.  L.  late  the  previous  evening.  He  had  just  opened  the  jiackage,
glanced  at  the  contents,  and  hastily  read  a  letter  inside,  then  wraj^ped  all  up
again  and  stored  them.  The  chain  had  been  sent  by  the  friend  whom  it  has.
been  agreed  to  call  George  Wilson  ;  it  had  belonged  to  his  father.)

' '  This  belongs  to  an  old  gentleman  that  passed  out  of  the  body—  a  nice
old  man.  I  see  something  funny  here,  something  the  matter  with  heart,
paralytic  something.  Give  me  the  wrajjpers,  all  of  them."  [i.e..  The  papers
it  came  in  ;  a  letter  among  them.  Medium  held  tlieni  to  top  of  her  head,
gradually  flicking  away  the  blank  ones.  She  did  not  inspect  them.  She
was  all  the  while  holding  with  her  other  hand  Mr.  Lund,  who  knew  nothing
whatever  about  the  letter  or  the  chain.]

"Who's  dear  Lodge?  Who's  Poole,  Toodle,  Poodle?  Whatever  does,
that  mean  ?  "

0.  L.  :  "I  haven't  the  least  idea."

"Is  there  J.  N.  W.  here?  Poole.  Then  there's  Sefton.  S-e-f-t-o-n.
Pool,  hair.  Yours  truly,  J.  N.  W.  That's  it  ;  I  send  hair.  Poole.  J.
N.  W. Do  you  understand  that  1  "

O.  L.  :  "No,  only  partially."


.53G


A  Record  of  Observations  of


"  Who's  Mildred,  Milly  ?  something  connected  witli  it,  and  Alice;  and
witli  hiin,  too,  I  get  Fanny. There's  his  son's  influence  on  it."

[Note  by  0.  L. — I  found  afterwards  that  the  letter  began  "Dear
Dr.  Lodge,"  contained  the  words  "  Sefton  Drive  "  and  "  Cook  "  so
written  as  to  look  like  Poole.  It  also  said  "  I  send  you  some  hair,"
and  finished  "yours  sincerely,  J.  B.  W.  "  ;  the  "B"  being  not
uiJike  an  "N."  The  name  of  the  sender  was  not  mentioned  in  the
letter.  ]

Bitfuiii  No.  79.  Fchrnavij  Id,  1890.  7.30  jj.m.
Present :  O.  L.,  E.  C.  L.,  and  part  of  the  time  M.  L.
' '  How  are  you.  Captain  ?  Didn't  know  I  was  going  to  see  you.  I  didn't  see
you  after  I  got  your  uncle's  message.  There  was  that  gentleman  here  who
<loes  good.  I  caught  up  liis  sister  and  asked  her.  She  said  ho  was  studying,
for  a  degree,  you  know — taking  a  degree,  and  that  took  him  away.  He  was
studying  and  liad  an  illness,  and  that's  why  he  wasn't  there  when  she  iiassed
■out.  He  went  away  to  study,  and  having  an  illness  couldn't  come  home.
That's  what  she  remembers.  His  name  is  Lund,  her  brother,  Tom  Lund,  and
he  lias  lots  of  boys,  girls,  women,  and  men  round  him.  He  writes  things  and
then  he  in-eaches  them.  Tries  to  make  people  good.  What  we  used  to  call  a
clergyman,  slie  says  so,  followed  a  good  work."  [See  notes  to  jirevious
sitting.]

"Oliver  says  that's  the  thing  he  used  to  liave  (feeling  old  seal  on  my
■chain),  that  was  his  on  his  chain,  and  when  he  called  for  it  you  didn't  let
him  have  it."

0.  L.  :  "Yes,  I  know.  I  stupidly  didn't  know  what  was  wanted  then. "
■(See  Sitting  No.  50,  p.  523.)

"You  know  Arthur  (Which  ?),  all  the  Arthur  there  is.  (Yes.)  He  has
liad  a  sorrow." [Unverified  yet.]

[Here  M.  L.  entered  with  our  second  boy,  who  had  begged  to  see  Dr.
Phinuit,  all  the  children  being  curious  about  the  strange  voice.  Phinuit
innnediately  personated  A.  A.  (pp.  468,  470,  514,  516,  548).]

"  Mary,  bring  him  here.  You  dear  little  fellow.  God  bless  you.  That's
what's  his  name.  Oliver  dear,  have  I  lost  my  memory  ^  That's  Burney,  Bury
B,  Bodie  Brodie."

"Yes,  Brodie."  [The  name  Burney  is,  as  it  happens,  a  natural  one  to
■occur  first  to  A. A.]

' '  I  remember  you,  my  dear,  when  you  were  quite  small — light  hair — a
chubby  little  thing. You  don't  remember  Aunt  Anne  ?  "

"No."

"  He  was  the  last,  I  think. Let's  see,  another  older  and  another
younger. Yes,  three. One  older  and  one  younger. "
M.  L.  :  "Yes,  there  were  three."

"But  this  was  my  boy.  Oliver,  wasn't  tliat  the  last?  Seems  to  me
.another  one  that  I  saw."

O.  L.  :  "Yes,  thi-ee  altogether. "

"  Another  boy. Three  boys. One  named  after  your  father  "  (to  M.  L. ).

M.  L.  :  "Yes." [The  third  is  named  Alexander  Marshall,  p.  493.]

"  That  was  the  last."  (Further  friendly  remarks  to  Brodie  about  his  les-


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


537


sons  and  so  on. Some  from  Phiniiit  speaking  in  his  own  person. Ending  :)■
"Glad  to  see  that  fellow :  done  me  good.  Good-bye,  Brodie.  That's  a  piece  to
make  a  man  of. Let  him  go. Oh,  tell  Sam,  Jerry  says  he  killed  the  cat.
It  was  accidental. [Nonsense.] That  boy  is  a  deep  thinker. Can't  Robert
remember  the  Smith  boys  ?  "  (p.  521).
"No."

"It's  stupid. And  that  ring,  he  had  it  on  a  chain,  a  chain  with  a  seal
on  it. Robert  has  got  it."
O.  L.  :  "Is  it  on  a  chain  ?  "

"  No,  the  ring  has  been  removed,  but  it's  in  his  surroundings. It's  not-
on  the  chain  now. Nell,  how's  your  heart  1 Smashed  yet  1  "
E.  C,  L.  :  "My  what?"

"No,  no,  it's  has  had  his  heart  smashed." [Conventionally  true. J

(Then  W.  Tomkinson  (p.  504)  was  represented  as  saying  that  M.  L.  (his
step-daughter)  had  given  him  his  umbrella,  the  one  with  a  horse  shoe  at  the
end  of  it,  and  that  was  why  he  was  fond  of  it.  M.  L.  denied  this,  but  it
■was  adhered  to  vigorously,  and  at  last  she  admitted  liaving  chosen  it  for
liim.  This  was  at  once  claimed  as  the  same  thing  and  as  being  tlie  cause  of
his  feeling  for  it,  the  paying  for  it  being  of  no  consequence. )

(Next  0.  L.  handed  in  "  George  Wilson's  "  chain,  the  same  chain  as  was
first  tried  at  the  morning  sitting,  p.  535.)

"What  the  Old  Harry  have  you  there?  Does  that  belong  in  your
family?"

0.  L.  :  "No."

"  Well,  what  else  do  you  want? I'm  a  very  ambitious  man  and  like  to-
be  employed."

(Here  I  gave  him  a  snuff-box  that  had  come  that  morning  from  a  la\vj'er
in  London  by  parcel  post.)

"A  gentleman  sent  you  this. What's  it  got  to  do  with  the  chain  ?  "
O.  L.  :  "Nothing."

"Oh,  well,  you  know  Tom,  connected  with  this.  It's  very  curious,  but
do  you  know  that  uncle  of  yours  turns  up  over  tliis,  the  one  in  the  body  ?'
His  influence  is  all  over  it ;  he  must  have  handled  it.  Your  uncle  in  the^
body  sent  it  you."

O.  L.  :  "  Well,  he  got  it  sent."

"  Yes,  it's  got  his  influence,  but  in  connection  with  the  other  uncle.  It
comes  from  the  same  uncle. It  belonged  to  Uncle  Jerry. "
•  O.  L.  :  "  Quite  right."

"  That's  his.  A  little  case  it  used  to  have.  [Don't  know,  but  as  it  was^
a  presentation  it  is  probable.]  He  got  it  through  Robert  somehow.  Thinks.
Robert  gave  it  him. A  powder  box,  isn't  it  ?  "

O.  L.  :  "  A  snufl'  box."

"Yes,  a  powder  box. It's  been  in  Robert's  possession. It  belonged  to
Uncle  Jerry  years  ago,  very  long  ago,  he  can  hardly  remember  it. (Feeling-  -
it.) Has  it  got  a  glass  top  ? — a  glazed  top  ?  "

O.  L.  :  "No,  it's  metal,  but  it's  polished."

"Glazed. Well,  he  just  remembers  it. I'll  ask  him  all  about  it.  What
else  do  you  want  ?  "

O.  L.  :  "  Don't  forget  the  chain."


538


A  Record  of  Observations  of


"  That  thing  bothers  me.  There's  an  old  gentleman  in  connection  with
it — very  eccentric.  A  nice  old  gentleman.  That  chain  doesn't  do  me  much
good."

O.  L.  :  "  Well,  I  exj^ect  it's  hard  because  it's  not  a  relation."

"Oh,  well,  he  may  recognise  it.  Your  own  friends  come  to  you.  A
strange  spirit  is  rather  difficult,  but  they  sometimes  come  to  their  things.
The  old  gentlenaan  is  here  now,  but  it's  difficult  talking  to  a  stranger. "

O.  L.  :  "  You  told  me  it  had  his  son's  influence  on  it.  Well,  tell  liim  his
son  entrusted  me  with  it,  in  the  Impe  that  he  might  send  a  message  to  him."

"  Oood. Who's  George,  George  W  ,  W . . s,  o,  n,  AVi

Something  like  Wallinson.  I  can  hear  him  pronc.iunce  it  indistinctly,  Wi —
Witson,  W,  i,  1,  s,  o,  n. Mr.  Wilson,  my  chain."

O.  L.  :  "  Yes,  that's  right."

"Tell  my  son  I'm  living,  I'm  not  dead.  Tell  him  I'm  recovered.  I've
110  trouble  (witli  my  legs  ?)  now,  I  had  a  little  difficulty  with  them.  This
is  new  to  me. You  are  a  stranger,  but  that's  my  chain."'

O.  L.  :  "  Yes,  sir,  I'm  a  stranger,  but  a  friend  of  your  son's,  and  he  will
be  very  glad  to  hear  from  you. I  shall  send  him  all  you  say."

"  Tell  my  son  to  come  and  see  me.  He's  been  very  ill.  [True.]  I've
been  to  see  him.  He  has  gone  away  for  his  health.  [True.]  He's  done  a
lot  of  good."

O.  L.  :  "  Will  you  send  him  some  message  to  recognise  you  by  ?  "

"  I  will  soon.  This  is  quite  new  tome.  I  didn't  know  I  could  speak,
but  a  light  came  to  me.  I  have  been  to  earth  before,  but  couldn't  speak.
Tell  him  I'm  very  fond  <jf  liim.  Ask  him  where  my  watch  is.  That's  the
best  I  can  do  now,  but  I  will  come  again."

O.  L.  :  "Will  you  send  him  your  name,  sir  ?  '

"  W,  i,  1.  I  will  write  it  for  you.  Show  him  the  cliain  again.  Hold  it
lip.  (Medium  writes.)  There,  that's  my  full  name. "  [Wrote  James  Wilson
backwards,  illegilile  till  afterwards  in  mirror.]

O.  L.  :  "Is  this  his  name  ?  "

' '  Yes,  tliat's  right.  You  know  J oe,  don't  y(  )U  ? — J,  a,  m,  e,  s.  [Name
ind<nown  to  me.  See  notes.]  He's  a  dear  old  man,  but  I  can't  hold  him,
he's  gone.  He  was  quite  weak  while  writing.  I  can't  do  everything.
William  insists  on  Mary  having  given  him  that  umbrella.  Tliat's  why  he
liked  it  and  valued  it.  If  a  person  chooses  a  thing  for  you  she  gives  it  you.
It  doesn't  matter  who  pays  for  it  "  (p.  537).

O.  L.  :  "I  quite  agree  with  you."

"  Nelly,  have  you  got  yoiu-  medicine  ?  "

E.  C.  L.  :  "No."

"She  Hi.H.si  take  it  (and  so  on,  insisting  on  her  taking  it,  which  she  had
not  intended  to  do).  Nell,  how  do  you  suppose  I  knew  tlie  name  of  tlie  man
•owning  the  chain  ?  "

E.  C.  L.  :  "I  can't  imagine."

"No,  can  you  tell  a  body's  name  like  that?"

"No."

"No,  it  will  be  a  good  test,  to  him  and  to  the  world.  Be  a  good  girl.
Clod  watch  over  y<ni,  bless  you,  and  all  good  si)irits  guide  and  helji  you.
I'll  see  you  again. I  must  go. Aa  revoir."


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


539


j\^o(es  by  Mr.  Wilson.

1.  (With  reference  to  description  of  the  late  OA^^ner  of  the  chtiin  as
*'an  eccentric  nice  old  gentleman.")  My  father  was  anything  but
eccentric ;  calm,  methodical,  an  official  in  type.

2.  He  never  had  anything  the  matter  witli  his  legs  to  my
knowledge.

3.  His  name  was  George. My  grandfather's  name  was  James.


Sitting  No.  80. Frhrnanj  2/«/,  1890. 11.20  a.m.

Present :  E.  C.  L.  and  O.  L. (E.  C.  L.  holding  hands. O.  L.  taking

notes.)

"  That's  Nellie.  I  have  had  a  talk  with  your  father  and  mother  all  ahoufc
you  (p.  502).  .  .  .  She  knows  well  you  must  not  be  a  nurse,  you  could  n(jt
stand  it.  [Tliis  liad  been  her  wish.]  You  had  better  stay  with  her  son
Oliver,  your  brother,  to  help  with  the  children  .  .  .  to  help  hiui  with
liis  writing  .  .  .  [and  so  on  for  a  long  time,  witli  much  homely  advice
of  a  practical  kind  ending  :] Now,  Nelly,  what  do  you  want  ']  "

E.  C.  L.  :  "  Will  you  tell  me  about  tlie  brother  a  little  older  than  I  am  ?  "

"  Which  is  he  ?  There's  Oliver,  Alfred,  Frank.  Frank  has  had  some-
thing to  do  with  you  lately. "

E.  C.  L.  :  "  Yes,  I've  been  staying  there."

"And  Charles,  and  there's  Urn. "

E.  C.  L.  :  "It's  Ernest  I  mean."

"  I  was  trying  to  say  it — I  can't  say  Ernest  properly.  Leave  him  alone,
he's  best  where  he  is,  he's  not  amljitious,  he's  lazy  [and  so  on,  with  fairly  true
Account  of  this  brother  and  of  Charley  also,  ending  :]  You  stop  worrying,  little
Miss,  you  can't  do  everything  for  all  your  brothers.  Let  me  talk  to  the  Cap-
tain now.  I  saw  Mr.  Wilson,  the  one  who  owned  the  chain.  He  told  me  to
ask  you  to  remind  (George  [right  name]  of  the  time  when  he  tried  to  give  him
a  start  in  business.  He  did  start  him  once,  and  then  George  l^acked  out.
And  George  wanted  another  line  of  work,  and  after  a  little  difficulty  he
got  into  it,  and  has  done  well.  [On  all  these  things  see  notes  at  end.]
Does  he  remember  when  his  mother  was  ill  he  wanted  a  bit  of  money  ?  He
has  gone  away  now.  He  has  been  very  ill.  Has  been  miserable,  George  has.
He  seems  to  have  got  charge  of  some  house — got  the  run  of  it.  [Pre-
cisely true.]  I'm  mighty  glad  he's  more  contented.  It's  a  kind  of  place  for
people  to  visit,  you  know.  I  had  a  long  pipe  with  a  crooked  handle,  he
wants  to  know  if  George  has  got  that.  His  father  sent  him  a  cheque  once,
find  he  didn't  get  it  for  a  long  time.  He  liad  a  lot  of  bother  about  it  ;  it  had
been  mislaid  in  the  post.  Does  George  remember  the  fall  the  old  man  liad  1
He  got  over  it,  and  liis  legs  don't  trouble  him  mnv.  What's  lie  done  with
the  watch  ? Ask  him  how  William  is  ?  "

O.  L. :  "Would  he  send  his  name  more  particularly  to  avoid  chance  of
mistake? "

"Why,  he  did. He  wrote  it  for  his  son."
O.  L.  :  "Oh,  that  was  his  name  then  T'

' '  Certainly.  Has  he  got  those  books  I  gave  him  ?  A  long  lot  of  them.
He's  asking  something  about  Mr.  Bradley,  in  connection  with  George."


540


A  Record  of  Observations  of


O.  L.  :  "Oil,  thiit's  very  odd;  does  lie  know  him?"

"Yes,  his  father  remembers  Mr.  Bradley  through  his  son,  and  he  has  got.
with  him  the  father  of  Mr.  Bradley  in  the  spirit.  William.  He  will  know.
He's  going  to  get  well.  He  seems  to  have  got  a  friend  named  Cook  ;
business  friends.  [T.  Cook  and  Sons  possibly  (?),  but  only  friends  in  the  sense-
of  forwarding  correspondence,  &c.,  while  he  was  travelling.]  He  was  a  little^
stubborn  when  young,  but  a  good  boy.  What  has  he  done  with  my  cane  ?'
He  lives  somewhere  in  your  neighbourhood."

"Yes,  he  does."

"And  has  got  a  friend  named  Bradley  [true] — a  very  great  friend  of  his.
He  thought  first  of  being  a  doctor.  I  had  a  difficulty  with  that  fellow  at-
first,  but  he's  been  a  capital  son. Who  are  you  '?  "

"  My  name  is  Lodge,  and  lam  a  friend  of  your  son.  I  will  write  all  you.
say  to  him."

"Give  my  warmest  love  to  him.  A  quiet  and  patient  lady  was  his-
motlier.  He  got  his  disposition  from  her.  He  has  got  a  portrait  of  me,  a
good  one,  but  it  has  been  enlarged  and  changed  since  I  passed  out.  I'm
glad  he  followed  in  his  father's  footsteps.  He  has  gone,  delighted.  A  nice
old  man. "

[Most  of  "Mr.  Wilson's"  statements  can  only  be  verified  by  communica-
tion with  his  son,  now  in  Africa. See  notes.]

' '  Wasn't  it  curious  that  Robert  started  to  business  one  time  and  a  curious,
physical  condition  came  on  ;  he  v/ent  home  and  stayed,  and  has  never  beeix
there  since. Jerry  told  me  so." [Exactly  true  at  the  time.]

O.  L.  :  "  When  you  see  him  again  i-emind  him  of  his  brother  Frank."

"All  right,  I  will.  Here's  Ted  Thompson,  he  says  it  was  only  the  child's.
erratic  condition,  but  a  good  thing  really,  and  it  will  come  out  all  right.  We
knew  it  was  going  to  hajipen,  but  didn't  think  it  worth  bothering  about.  The
child's  a  bit  erratic.  She  was  afraid  of  being  snubbed.  What  on  earth  is  he:
talking  about  ?  He  don't  want  me  to  know  what  he  means.  He  says  :  '  Tell
Ike  it's  all  right  ;  "  try  again  "  never  was  beat.  It  will  come  out  all  right.
And  tell  Susie  too.'  "

[Mr.  Thompson  had  been  much  troubled  by  a  young  daughter  having
run  home  from  school.  This  hajjpcned  since  the  first  series  of
sittings.  (See  No.  45,  Note  G.  See  also  just  below,  and  pp.  544,  546.)-
Nothing  had  been  said  al:)out  it,  and  I  was  curious  to  see  whether
Dr.  Pliiuuit  would  get  hold  of  it.  The  Thompsons  had  not  been  iit
during  this  present  series.  "Ike"  and  "Susie"  arc  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Thompson. See  also  pp.  511,  518,  523,  &c.]

"  Maria's  all  right,  tell  them.  She  passed  out  at  12  years  old.  [True.]'
He  sends  his  love  to  his  mother. Who  are  you  ? "

O.  L.  :  "I  am  a  friend  of  your  brother  and  live  next  door.  I  hope  he
will  be  able  to  come  and  see  you  next  time  if  you  will  come  again.  He  is
a  goi)d  friend  of  mine."

"  Tliat  will  be  very  kind  of  you.  I  do  not  wish  to  intrude  or  take  up  your
time,  but  if  you  can  ari'ange  this  it  will  be  vei-y  kind.  I  was  going  to  be  a
physician  myself,  but  was  cut  ofi^.  [True.]  I  do  not  regret  it.  Hapjjiness
reigns  in  my  veins.  And  tell  Ike,  if  you  please,  to  go  and  see  mother  often,,
and  that  Fanny  had  better  stay  with  her  for  the  present.  He  wiU  under-
stand." [Quite  intelligible.]


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


541


"Ask  him  not  to  let  trivial  things  bother  him.  He  has  been  fretting  lately.
Send  her  to  another  place  and  she  won't  fly  back  again.  She  was  a  little  bit
homesick.  There  are  a  good  many  have  done  it  before,  and  will  do  it  again.
Don't  lay  it  up  against  her  for  too  long.  [Quite  intelligible  and  useful  advice.]
Tell  them  I  am  unseen  but  in  peace  and  happiness.  Remember  me  to  Ike,
and  if  you  will  let  me  see  him  again  I  shall  be  grateful.  I  do  not  want  to
annoy  you  but  he  was  my  brother  and  I  am  very  fond  of  him."

O.  L.  :  "Right. He  shall  be  here  when  you  come  next"  (pp.  544,  553).

' '  Robert.  Who  is  Helen  1  That's  the  one  who  gave  you  the  snuff-box.
It  was  Jerry's  ;  there  are  letters  upon  it,  my  letters."

O.  L.  "Yes,  an  inscrijjtion."  (See  also  pp.  537  and  549.)

"I  remember  it  faintly.  Oliver  remembers  that  too.  It  was  given
to  me  by  some  friend  of  mine.  I  v»-ill  try  and  remember  about  it.  But
it's  not  easy  to  bring  back  these  little  things.  I  have  very  imf)ortant  things
to  do.  We  all  have.  One  very  important  thing  is  to  look  after  that  little
girl."

"Where's  the  preacher,  Tom?  He's  yelling  away  for  all  he's  worth  [12.15,
at  this  time  he  would  be  preaching].  Two  sisters  and  a  brother  liave  gone
to  hear  him.  Do  you  know  he's  a  very  hard  man  ?  lie  would  hardly  believe
about  me  "  (p.  535).

0.  L.  :  "  No,  I  think  lie  wouldn't. Can  you  hear  what  he's  saying  ?  "

"I'll  go  and  pick  up  something.  I  can  hear  him,  'For  He  is  the  resurrec-
tion and  the  life  ;  blessed  are  ye  who  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus.'  He's
preaching  about  love  your  neighbour  as  yourself.  Teaching  them  all  that
sort  of  thing  about  loving  your  neighbour,  that  sort  of  thing.  '  Lifted  up
and  after  seven  days  He  rose.'  That's  all  I  can  hear."  (See  Notes  on  p.  534.)

"Do  you  know  who  Joseph  is,  and  Harriet  ?  "

"No."

' '  Something  in  connection  with  him.  Nellie,  you  are  a  God-blessed  little
girl. Don't  get  down. Keepujj. "

(Here  "  L^ncle  Jerry"  tried  to  write  the  inscription  on  snuff-box.  He
wrote  and  said,  "Presented  to  J.,"  but  could  do  no  more.)  [That  is  how  it
begins. See  also  p.  549.]

' '  William  and  Alec  both  send  their  love  to  Maiy,  and  will  take  care
of  her  mother. Take  good  care  of  his  hat  [?]."

(Feeling  for  Nellie's  watch,  and  taking  it  out  of  her  pocket.)

"  It's  got  your  mother's  influence  on  it.  Keep  it.  Glad  you  got  it.  You
are  welcome  to  it,  child. Keeji  it."

[The  watch  had  not  been  mentioned  or  thought  of.  It  had  been  her
mother's.]

' '  Oh,  Ted  Tlioiinison  says  the  little  mat  that  the  child  made  is  very
pretty." [Don't  know  about  this.]

' '  Here's  J erry  again.  Ask  Frank  if  he  remembers  the  shot  gun.  And  how
we  hid  behind  a  dove-cot  and  shot  peas  through  a  fence  at  the  neighbour's
pigeons.  He  won't  forget  it.  [Can't  remember  this.]  And  how  vv-e  skated
once  and  he  fell  flat  and  got  his  seat  all  wet." [Very  likely.]

O.  L.  :  "Y"es,  I  will.  Uncle  Frank  remembered  about  the  cat  killing.
He  says  it  was  Charles  that  killed  it  "  (p.  527).

[Shouting.] "  Charles  it  was  1 Yes,  that's  right. It  was  Charles.  I

2  p


542


A  Record  of  Observations  of


remember  it  perfectly.  I  had  forgotten  which  one  it  was.  And  does  lie
remember  the  Smiths  V  (pp.  517,  521,  557).

O.  L.  :  "He  remembers  the  Smiths'  field  ;  not  the  boys.  He  remembers
the  field  and  has  written  an  account  of  it. I  will  read  it."

(Here  read  part  of  Uncle  Frank's  letter,  printed  at  end  of  first  series,
p.  526,  which  had  arrived  to-day.)

"  Yes,  that's  it  ! I  see  it ! I'm  yomig  again  !  "

O.  L.  :  "He  remembers  also  swimming  the  creek. I'll  read  that  !  "

(Read.)  [Medium  shouted,  laughed,  and  banged  away  at  Nellie's  knees
as  the  reading  proceeded.  Specially  excited  at  the  mention  of  ' '  Glenny's
Part."]  "I  never  expected  to  recall  all  that.  It's  delightful.  You  have
given  me  much  pleasure."

[Further  conversation  of  a  non-evidential  order  about  Uncle  Frank's
letter.]

Notes  hy  Mr.  Wilson.

4.  ("With  reference  to  "starting  his  son  in  business.")  I  never  was
in  any  kind  of  business  nor  thought  of  it.  Was  fond  of  farming  and
woi-ked  at  it  with  an  uncle  once.

5.  (With  reference  to  possession  of  a  "  long  pipe.")  My  father
abominated  smoking.

6.  Do  not  remember  about  miscarriage  of  any  cheque,  or  any  fall.

7.  I  never  thought  of  being  a  doctor.  [Note  hy  0.  L. — It  is
rather  curious  that  when  this  was  said  I  thought  it  correctly  repre-
sented something  I  had  been  told  by  Mr.  W.  I  perceive  now  that  it
was  quite  wrong,  and  that  I  had  been  told  something  about  farming.
A  gi'eat  deal  of  this  looks  obviously  like  thought-transference.]

8.  I  have  got  his  cane. The  portrait  has  not  been  enlarged.


Bitthuj  No.  81. Fehruafij  2nd.  Evening.
Present :  O.  L.  mid  M.  L.  Afterwards  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thompson  and

daughter.

(O.  L.  holding  hands,  and  giving  Mr.  Y/ilson's  chain.)
"  How  are  you  ? I've  got  here  again. Nellie,  come  here."
O.  L.  :  " She's  not  here. That's  Mary."

"  Oh,  Marie.  Wait  a  bit,  Marie.  You  won't  mind,  will  you  ?  There's  a
gentleman  here  specially  wants  to  speak,  Mr.  Wilson.  How  do  you  do,  Mr.
L  ."

().  L.  :  "  Lodge  my  name  is."

' '  How  do  you  do,  Mr.  Lodge  ?  I  knov/  you  a  little  better  now.  I  have  met  a
friend  of  yours,  an  uncle,  I  think  ;  also  a  friend  of  your  father's — your  father
in  fact.  I  have  been  talking  to  them.  I  shall  be  able  to  help  in  this  work.
Tell  me  why  you  want  to  know  about  me."

O.  L.  :  "Well,  sir,  your  son,  being  interested  in  what  I  told  him,  wanted
greatly  to  come  and  see  you  if  he  could,  but  he  couldn't  just  now.  So  as
next  best  he  entrusted  me  with  your  chain,  and  asked  me  to  get  messages  for
Jiim,  especially  concerning  things  that  I  do  not  know."

"  Why  about  things  you  don't  know  1 "


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


543


O.  L.  :  "  Well,  because  if  I  knew  things  it  would  seem  as  if  T  had  some-
how imjDressed  them  from  my  mind  upon  that  of  the  medium,  instead  of
their  having  come  dii'ect  from  you,  and  this  would  be  no  evidence  of  your
existence."

"I  see  your  idea,  but  what  do  you  mean  by  the  medium  ?  That  woman
I  saw  just  now  ?  " 0.  L. :  "Yes."

"  Well,  do  you  know  I  am  a  very  happy  man.  I  have  had  the  power  often
of  saeing  my  son,  and  I  have  watched  his  course  with  great  uiterest,  but  I
did  not  know  I  could  speak.  I  am  grateful  to  you  for  helping  me  to  speak.
I  remember  when  George  was  ill  v.'hile  taking  his  degree,  lie  had  to  come
liome,  and  had  a  great  deal  of  fever.  Overwork,  and  going  among  young
men.  He  has  not  been  strong  since.  He  is  rather  delicate.  [Correct.]
He  has  a  great  deal  of  preaching  to  do,  and  that  tires  him,  but  he  must
be  much  respected."

"He  is  indeed."

"  Tes,  he  is  a  good  boy.  I  have  been  sorry  for  his  illness,  but  the  rest
lie  is  going  to  take  will  do  him  good.  It  Avould  be  a  great  pleasure  to  see
]iim  here  so  that  I  could  speak."

0.  L. :  "I  hope  it  can  be  managed  later ;  ineanwliile  send  him  facts  so  that
lie  may  feel  assured  it  is  yourself.  "

"I  will  try.  Ask  if  he  remembers  my  light  grej'  suit.  He  was  a  quiet  boy.
I  built — built  once.  I  had  a  chimney  taken  out  and  a  new  one  put  in.  I
was  afraid  of  their  taking  cold  in  my  house,  so  I  had  the  chimney  repaired.
It  was  a  leaky  bad  bit  of .  .  .  .  And  I  put  a  flight  of  stairs  to  the  left  of
the  chimney,  to  the  left  as  near  as  I  can  recall."

"  On  one  side  the  chimney  ?  "

"On  one  side  the  chimney.  It  was  quite  an  improvement  when  it  was
done.  And  behind  that  was  my  study.  I  had  a  lot  of  books.  You  didn't
know  I  got  hurt."

"No."

"I  got  hurt.  I  was  going  across  the . . . boat . . . George  looks
careworn,  do  you  know  ?  "
"  Yes,  he  does."

' '  I  was  going  across  ...  I  slipped  in  stepping  off  the  boat  and  hurt
a  knee  badly.  It  troubled  me  a  good  deal.  I  had  to  have  it  propped  up  on
a  chair,  and  it  pained  me."

O.  L.  :  "I  will  send  this  to  your  son.  You  speak  of  having  seen  him.
Did  he  ever  know  of  it  ?  "

' '  I  have  been  to  see  him.  I  have  come  very  close  and  he  has  thought  he
heard  me." [He  has  had  feelings  of  the  kmd.]

"  How  did  he  hear  you  ?  "

"  Once  he  was  in  bed  and  I  rustled  the  drapery.  He  thought  he  heard
me.  He  feels  sometimes  as  if  I  was  very  near  him,  and  at  those  times  I  am
near  him.  I  should  not  have  been  here  but  for  this  chain.  A  dear  boy
George  is. I  have  got  another  boy  with  me. How  is  Mr.  Bradley  ?  "

O.  L. :  "  Pretty  well,  but  surely  you  didn't  knov,-  him  ?  "

"No,  but  I  have  seen  George  with  him.  They  are  friends.  I  know  what
they  know.  I  am  not  dead,  and  when  we  take  a  close  interest  we  can  tell
Avhat  happens. He  is  a  good  man  and  kind-hearted. He  and  George  seem


544


A  Record  of  Ohservatiovs  of


friends.  It  is  not  easy  to  remembei'  things.  You  see  I  was  quite  an  old
gentleman  and  the  things  I  knew  long  ago  he  wouldn't  know  and  they
wouldn't  interest  him.  His  trip  will  do  him  good.  Do  you  know  his  family  ?
He  has  three  now,  and  a  girl.  I  know  three  ^jerfectly,  but  the  youngest  1
thiirk  is  a  girl. " [No,  four  l)oys.]

"He  has  let  liis  beard  grow.  He  did  have  it  cut  oft",  very  stujjid.  He  has--
a  beard  now,  but  he  cut  it  oft'  at  one  time. [True.] Who  is  that  'I  "

O.  L.  :  "My  wife."

' '  How  do  you  d(_i,  Mrs.  Lodge  1  I  am  glad  to  make  your  acquaintance  as  a.
friend  of  my  scm's.  Tell  him  the  thing  of  most  importance  is  to  take  care  of
his  healtli.  After  my  teeth  came  out  they  bothered  me  very  much.  Tliese-
things  seem  silly  now,  but  then  they  bothered  me,  and  he  will  know.  Oh,,
he's  gone,  waving  his  hand,  nice  old  gentleman.  Do  you  know  Dr.
Thompson  1 "

O.  L.  ;  "Dr.  who?  Oh,  Ted  Thompson?"  (pp.  511,  518,  523,  541,  553)..
"  Who  is  it  calls  me  Ted  Thompson  ?  Nay,  I'm.  much  obliged  to  you,  but
wliy  ?  "

O.  L. :  "Well,  it's  merely  because  I  hear  your  brother  calling  you  so.  I.
should  have  said  Dr.  Thompson.  Your  brother  is  in  tlie  next  room,  and  L
Avill  call  him. "

(Mr.  and  Mrs.  T.  and  daughter  had  entered  the  liouse  quietly  during  the
sitting,  so  as  to  be  ready  if  wanted.)

"Thank  you  very  much.  I  am  grateful."  [Mr.  and  Mrs.  T.  and  Theodora,
came  in.]

"Ike,  come  here. I  can't  stay  long. I've  got  to  tell  you  something,
Ai'e  there  people  listening  ?  "
Mr.  T.  :  "  Only  friends."

"It  was  a . . . Don't  worry  too  much  about  what  you  have  been
worrying  about." [See  pp.  540,  541,  and  546.]
Mr.  T.  :  "No,  I  won't."

"All  right.  Ike,  they  are  all  right.  Your  family  are  right.  Just
as  sure  as  that  a  spirit  lives  your  family  will  do  well ;  no  harm  coming  to  anjr
of  you.  Ike,  I  wish  you  were  where  I  am.  Mother  is  failing.  Yes,  her
head  is  failing,  and  she  has  trouble  with  her  ears. You  didn't  know  that."

Mr.  T.  :  "No,  I  didn't."

"  She  has.  Ike,  don't  go  to  sleej).  She  has  got  cold  in  one  ear.  [This-
turned  out  on  inquiry  to  be  true.  It  was  cj[uite  unsuspected.]  I  have  seen
her  with  something  tied  over  it.  She  is  going  to  stay  with  you  some  time-
yet."

Mr.  T.  :  "Oh,  I'm  glad  of  that."

"  Yes,  ljut,  Ike,  let  Fanny  stay  with  her.  She  will  stay  in  the  body,  but
she's  losing  ground.  You  understand  me,  Ike.  What  can  I  do  for  you?"'
[The  next  portion,  although  wholly  non-evidential,  is  printed  as  a  specimen-
of  the  kind  of  conversation  that  often  occurs  if  allowed.]

Mr.  T.  :  "How  are  you  occupied  ?"

"  My  time  is  occupied  in  writing.  It  is  difftcult  to  explain,  l)ut  whatever'
we  break  off'  in  the  body  we  can  go  on  with.  I  write  a  great  deal.  I  write-
often  for  others.  We  often  help  a  poor  fellow.  You  know  there  are  people
who  commit  suicide,  they  have  taken  their  own  life,  and  their  spirits  are


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


545


.-sorely  depressed  for  a  time,  but  after  a  bit  we  are  able  to  lieliD  them.  That
is  my  work,  helping  others  and  those  that  are  weak.  It  is  splendid  here.
J!^othing  to  feed .  You  remember  people  used  to  eat.  The  material  l^ody  is
matter  ;  that  goes  to  dust,  but  we  live  on.  God  is  very  good  to  us  all.  It's
-a  mistake  not  to  believe  in  God."
"And  Christ?"

"Do  you  know  who  Christ  was  ?  It's  a  great  mystery,  Ike.  You  know  we
■were  taught  that  He  was  the  Son  of  God  ;  well.  He  was  a  reflexion  of  God
sind  we  are  a  reflexion  of  Him."

"  Do  you  ever  see  Him  ?  "

' '  Occasionally  we  do,  but  not  often  ;  He  is  far  superior  to  us  ;  infinitely
superior."

"  And  to  everybody  ?  "

"Yes,  to  everybody.  He  is  the  real  reflexion,  we  are  secondary  reflexions.
■Oh,  I  feel  as  if  I  wish  I  knew  everybody.  I  am  out  of  all  aches  and  pains.  I
left  you  suddenly.  Your  sister  has  scores  of  children  to  teach.  This  place
is  divided  up  into  parts.  Here,  on  the  earth,  there  is  water  between  two
■countries  ;  so  there  is  a  separation  between  the  good  and  the  bad  side.  Look
liere,  if  you  took  Susie's  life,  Susie  would  pass  into  the  bright  side  in  peace  ;
afterwards  you  would  not,  but  you  would  see  her  and  that  would  be  your
punishment.  It's  as  when  you  look  through  a  screen  ;  you  can  see  people
but  they  can't  see  you.  Once  lately  a  man  broke  through  and  came  here,  but
two  attendants  took  him  back  (p.  523).  We  never  tire.  There's  no  night,  it'.s
.all  day.  I  remember  days  and  nights  down  with  you.  Ike,  some  day  I'll  meet
j'our  hands  outstretched  and  if  possible  I  will  come  ;  if  possible.  My  mother
lias  caught  cold.  She's  failing.  Tell  her  I  Live  her,  love  her  .still,  and  when
she  looks  at  my  picture,  as  she  often  does,  I  stand  and  look  at  her  and  say,
'  If  you  only  knew  how  near  I  was  to  you.'  Do  you  know  where  my  watch
iind  chain  are  ?"

Mr.  T.  :  "Ah,  where  is  it

"  I  will  get  father  to  help  me  look  it  up."

Mr.  T. :  "Yes,  he  should  know. Do  you  know  who  this  is?"  [Theodora.]
"Did  I  ever  see  her  ? N"o,  I  never  knew  her."
Mr.  T.  :  "  No,  you  did  not."

"  Theo-ora,  Theodora,  Theo  "

Mr.  T.  :  "Yes,  Theodora."

"  Y(_iu  have  got  a  boy  named  after  me  ?  "

Mr.  T.  :  "Yes."

"It  was  my  father's  chain.  I  will  try  and  remember  about  it,  and  come
#igain.  (Manner  and  voice  here  suddenly  changed  to  Phinuit's.)  Ullo  !
How  are  you,  Thompson,  and  you,  you  little  miss  ?  You've  got  headaches.
Have  you  had  that  sage  tea  yet  ?  "

"No."

' '  Well,  you're  a  stupid  lot.  Wliy  don't  you  take  it,  and  what  are  yoa
ifretting  about  ?  worrying,  thinking  you've  lost  something.  What  have  you
lost?"

Theodora  :  "Oh,  a  paint-box.''

"  It's  not  lost  at  all.  You  will  tind  it  in  a  drawer  on  the  left-hand  side —
in  a  drawer. Go  upstairs  and  right,  left,  right."


546


A  Record  of  Observations  of


Theodora  :  "Tell  me  again."

"Well,  you  go  in  at  the  front,  then  you  turn  to  the  right  and  go  upstairs,
then  you  go  to  the  riglit,  and  then  to  the  left,  then  on  the  right,  and  on
tlie  left-hand  side."

Theodora:  "A  bedroom?"

"No,  not  quite  right."

Theodora:  "It  must  be  the  schoolroom?"

"  That's  it.  It'.s  not  a  drawer,  but  quite  like  a  drawer.  Not  a  desk,  but
like  a  desk.  Well,  it's  there,  in  left-hand  drawer  among  some  papers.  Your
uncle  told  me  that.  Go  and  find  it  when  you  get  back.  It's  not  lost  at  all.'"
[The  description  applies  exactly  to  the  place  it  is  usually  kept  in,  but  it  Ls.
not  there  now.]

Mrs.  T.  :  "  Is  that  the  one  that  said  he  would  help  her?  "

"Yes.  He's  quite  a  passion  for  it;  never  tired  of  talking  about  that  girl^
and  aljout  painting.  She's  got  it  in  her,  it  will  come  out.  What  a  fuss  aljout.
rings.  You  don't  want  rings,  so  don't  make  a  fuss  about  them.  [Theodora,
while  coming  very  quietly  to  the  liouse  (after  the  sitting  had  begun  witlr
O.  J.  L.),  remembered  she  liad  forgotten  some  rings  she  had  intended  to'
bring,  and  wanted  to  go  back  for  them,  but  was  not  allowed.  Nothing  had
been  said  or  thought  about  them  further.]  What  are  you  bothering  about?'
(to  Mrs.  T.) You're  fretting."

Mrs.  T.  :  "Well,  I'm  very  tired."

"What  is  it  ? One  of  those  girls  ?  "

Mrs.  T.  :  "  What  girls  ?  "

' '  Those  girls  that  do  tlie  washing,  wliat  do  you  call  them,  servants.  The
daik  one  and  little  one,  little  but  funny.  [Correct  descrijDtion  of  one  of
them,  who  has  turned  out  rather  badly.]  You  needn't  fret  about  that..
That's  nothing. "

Mrs.  T.  :  "  What  about  my  second  daughter  ?  "

"The  dai'k  one?  Oh,  she's  all  right.  That's  nothing.  She's  a  good  girl..
I  like  her.  She's  very  sensitive,  and  was  afraid  of  Ijeing  snubbed,  didn't
like  it,  felt  a  bit  homesick.  She's  going  away  again  and  going  to  be  all  right-
Put  her  back  up  a  bit,  but  it  will  never  hurt.  Don't  mind.  She  took  ui>
her  traps,  and  away  she  went." [All  correct,  see  pp.  511  and  540.]

Mrs.  T.  :  "  Ought  we  to  send  her  back  ? "

"  Send  her  to  another  place. Bless  you,  I  like  it. Wliore  her  heart  is.
her  body  ought  to  be. It  will  be  all  right  in  the  end."
Mrs.  T.  :  "  And  it  has  not  injured  her  character  ?  "

"Character!  Pooh!  Not  a  bit.  She  showed  a  good  bit  of  courage  to
get  home  again.  I  rather  enjoy  those  things.  She  just  took  it  into  her
head.  She's  impulsive,  and  off  she  went.  Ha  !  ha  !  She'll  take  another-
start,  and  tliis  time  she'll  stick  to  it.  Don't  you  fret.  Mary,  you  come  here  ;.
let  those  people  clear  out. You  have  been  taking  carrot."

M.  L.  :  "Yes,  you  told  me  to  "  (p.  521).

"Yes,  I  know.  Well,  now  you  have  taken  plenty  of  that.  Get  some  Uvre^
Ursi.  Do  you  know  what  that  is  ?  (No.)  Well,  it's  mountain  cranberry.
Get  some  of  those  leaves.  You  can  get  the  infusion,  but  leaves  are  better
because  pure.  Let  them  steep  and  take  a  wineglassful  before  going  to  bed.
Take  it  instead  of  carrot  for  three  weeks  and  then  carrot  again.  (Medical


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


547


details  gone  into,  accurate  in  general,  but  one  statement  Trhicli  turned  out
false.  Prescribed  also  for  third  boy,  viz.,  2oz.  Huxum's  tincture  of  cinchona,
2oz.  French  dialysed  iron,  and  4oz.  druggists'  simple  syrup  ;  a  teasjjoonful
after  shaking  in  wineglass  of  water,  with  a  few  drops  of  lemon  juice  or
other  acid.)  He  has  a  pain  here  when  he  runs,  blood  poor,  &c.  [Details
correct.]  Give  him  milk,  lime  water,  and  eggs."  (Further  advice  to  M.
L.,  who,  having  had  the  influenza  badly,  was  in  low  sf)irit3,  vrith  attempts  to
cheer  her.)

Azotes  by  Jlr.  Wilson.

9.  I  was  not  ill  while  taking  my  degree.

10.  I  remember  no  special  light  grey  suit.

11.  My  mother's  name  was  not  Mary,  and  I  never  had  a  sister  or  a
brother.

12.  All  about  building  stairs  and  chimney  completely  unintelligible.
My  father  always  i-ented  our  houses.  [See  p.  5.30.]

13.  He  never  had  an  unsound  tooth.


Sitting  No.  82. Fehruary  3n7,  1890.  Morning.
Present  :  O.  L.  and  E.  C.  L.

"Ullo,  Captain,  I'ra  first  rate.  Got  a  lot  of  things  to  do  for  you.  I've  been
talking  to  your  friends  and  the  Thompson's.  I  haven't  liurt  myself,  but  I've
been  busy.  Take  care  of  your  boy,  and  Mary  do  what  I  told  her.  Here's
Mr.  Wilson  ;  give  me  that  chain.  (Given.)  Mr.  Wilson  had  sister  Ellen —
Eleanor ;  she  passed  out  of  body  before  he  did.  These  Uttle  things  will  be  of
interest  to  George,  although  so  trivial.  He  had  a  few  books  given  him  by  the
Rev.  Mr.  Clark.  He  thinks  George  has  them,  but  is  not  sure  of  that.  He
had  lots  of  books."

O.  L. :  "Your  son  is  anxious  to  talk  to  you,  and  I  hope  he  will,  but  he's
abroad  now."

"Yes,  he  knows.  They  lived  near  the  water  ;  you  didn't  know  that.
They  did  once.  They  moved  after  George's  illness.  That  was  when  the
chimney  was  fixed. Do  you  understand  that?"

O.  L.  :  "Yes,  Mr.  Wilson  told  me  about  the  chimney"  (i.e.,  through
the  medium  at  previous  sitting).

'■  Oh,  he  did.  Well,  and  he  says  he  and  George's  mother  travelled  over,
and  got  some  pieces  of  foreign  wood  inlaid.  Shape  of  box,  inlaid.  When  he
crossed  the  Channel,  he  told  you  this  before,  he  fell  and  hurt  his  knee  as  lie
was  steppmg  off  the  boat.  No  gang  plank — what  you  call  it.  Mr.  Bradley
I've  only  seen  ^vith  George  since  I  passed  out."

0.  L.  :  "Did  you  speak  of  Mr.  Bradley's  father?  "

' '  Yes  ;  I  know  his  father  and  his  brother.  They  had  a  grandfather,
Thomas,  the  Bradleys  had.  You  look  these  things  up.  Endless  amount  of
trouble.  .  .  .  One  of  them  is  connected  with  the  Civil  Service,  one  of
the  Bradleys.  It  would  have  been  sensible  if  the  child's  teeth  had  been
taken  out  sooner,  as  soon  as  they  got  loose.  Tell  George  I  said  that.  What
can  I  do  for  you  ? Did  you  tell  the  Rev.  Thomas  about  his  preaching  %  "

0.  L.  :  "I  vrill ;  but  I  don't  think  you  got  his  sermon  right  "  (p.  541).


548


A  Record  of  Observations  of


"  I  know  I  got  it  right. Mr.  Wilson  wants  to  know — Uxbiiry. "
O.  L.  :  "Did  they  live  tliere  ?  "

"It's  a  place  that's  got  shire  on  to  it. Chestershire  (t) — Uxbridge.  Ux-
bridge. Is  there  such  a  place  ?  "
"Yes."

"He  used  to  know  a  Mr.  Boys."
"At  Uxbridge?"

"  That's  right.  There,  you've  got  enougli.  I  don't  think  you  will  get
much  more  from  him. He's  gone."

0.  L.  :  "  Ask  him  to  go  to  his  son  and  see  what  lie  is  doing,  and  come
back  and  tell  me,  please  "  (p.  552).

"  I'll  ask  him.  Do  you  know  your  Uncle  Jerry  was  more  pleased  with
those  things  you  told  him — those  about  Charles  and  that — than  anybody  ?
He  was  tickled  all  over  (p.  542).  What  have  yim  done  with  his  watch  ?
Has  it  gone  back  to  Robert  ?  "

"  Yes,  I  returned  it."

"Oh,  why  didn't  you  keep  it  a  Ijit  longer  ?  When  you  see  Robert  ask
him  about  the  rug — hair  rug — fur  rug  of  U)icle  Jei'iy's.  What  has  he  done
with  it — a  brown  far  rug  ? Do  you  remember  the  wheels  i  "

O.  L.  :  "Yes,  I  was  puzzled  aljout  them."

"Well,  it's  seals. Did  you  know  Jerry's  books  ?  "

O.  L.  :  "No,  not  much."

"  He  had  a  history  of  .  .  .  Hullo  1  liere's  Aunt  Anne.  (Feeling  arm
of  chair  medium  sat  in,  and  pinching  and  rubl)ing  it  for  next  few  minutes.)
Alfred's  got  some  of  her  books,  hasn't  he  i  "

"  Yes,  a  few."

"  Who  was  it  had  the  birds  V
"I  don't  know."

"  We  went  shooting,  we  boys,  and  killed  some  ducks.  Tlie  skipper  will
remember  that.  What  a  little  devil  he  was.  He  couldn't  ])e  tamed  or  done
anything  with.  His  mother  had  a  lot  <.if  trouble  with  liim.  [Uncle  Frank  is
often  called  "the  skipper."  The  description  probably  applies  to  him  well
enough.]  Aunt  Anne's  here  (p.  ooG).  She  says,  '  That  was  mine  ' — this  thing.
[Good.  It  had  never  been  asked  about  <:)r  mentioned.  It  was  her  wedding
present.] What  is  it  ?  "

O.  L.  :  "  It's  the  arm  of  a  chair."

"  Oh,  it's  like  the  arm  of  an  (jrgan  or  something."

O.  L.  :  "  It's  quite  right. Aunt  Anne  gave  me  this  chair."

"  She  knows  she  did.  And  there  was  another  thing,  a  little  stool ;
where's  that  ?  "

O.  L.  :  "I  don't  know  that."

"Yes,  a  little  flat  stool  used  to  be  under  the  table.  Who's  got  it?
Covered  with  soft  stuff'.  Youv  father  wants  to  kn(jw  how  you  got  his  watch
and  how  Nelly  got  yoin- mother's. "

O.  L.  :  "Well,  we  thought  it  was  pr(.iper  for  her  to  have  it."

"Yes,  quite  right.  The  only  girl.  They  are  very  pleased.  Aunt  Anne  is
vexed  you  didn't  have  more  of  lier  Ijooks."

O.  L.  :  "I  did  have  some."

' '  Yes,  but  very  few. Well,  my  hoy,  are  you  still  seeking  for  inf orma-


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


549


tion?"  0.  L.  :  "  Yes,  but  not  for  much  longer  just  now."  "Do  you  want
ito  know  about  Cliarlie  ? He's  in  Canada."

"I'm  anxious  about  Charlie,  but  I  don't  worry."  "You've  done  the  best.
Have  you  a  photograiih  of  me,  Nelly  ?  "

E.  C.  L  :  "Yes,  one  with  Charlie  and  Edith."

"You  have  that  too,  Oliver  1 "

0.  L.  :  "  Yes,  I  have  it."

"Aunt  Anne  was  very  fond  of  you.  She  wishes  she  could  have  done  more
■for  you .  Your  friends  are  not  much  here.  Strange  people  seem  to  bother
them.  It's  too  bad  about  Robert's  health.  I  would  like  to  know  what  he
did  with  that  ring  of  mine. [Feeling  snuff-box  inside.] Is  it  gold  in  it?"

O.  L.  :  "Yes,  it's  gilt  inside."

' '  How's  Mary  ?  Going  to  rest  now  and  take  good  care  ?  Do  you  know
Hichard,  a  brother  Richard  ?  "

E.  C.  L.  :  "Yes,  what  of  him  V

"  Do  you  want  to  know  anything  about  him  ?  "

E.  C.  L.  :  "Yes,  how  is  he?"

"He's  pretty  well;  hasn't  been  Vvrell  ;  but  pretty  well  now. Did  you
find  those  creases  in  Uncle  Jerry's  watch  near  the  handle  ? "  (p.  518).
"Yes."

"  Do  you  know  if  Uncle  Jerry  smoked  ?  "
"  No."

"Well,  he  didn't.  Mr.  Wilson  had  a  long  pipe  which  was  given  him.
XTncle  Jerry  had  a  thing  that  looked  like  a  pipe  but  wasn't.  Uncle  Jerry  has
Jjeen  to  see  Robert  and  is  coming  back.  Nelly,  come  here  and  talk  to  me  a
bit.  (More  vague  talk.)  You  should  take  egg  and  milk  and  brandy  some-
times. Go  and  fetch  your  aunt's  ring,  Captain,  and  that  handle  belonging
to  your  uncle." [Went  for  ring  ;  did  not  understand  "handle,"  p.  550.]

' '  That's  right. Where's  the  handle  ? ' '

O.  L.  :  "Don't  know  what  you  mean."

"Ullo,  here's  Jerry.  Aunt  Anne  has  been  to  fetch  him.  See  what  good
the  ring  is.  Look  here,  Oliver,  I  have  been  trying  to  remember  about  this
box  ;  it  seems  to  me  that  before  I  went  into  insurance  I  used  to  teach,  and
that  this  was  given  me  by  my  pupils."  [Correct,  it  was  given  him  by  the
boys  of  the  Lucton  Grammar  School,  where  in  early  life  he  was  mathematical
master.  An  insciiption  on  it  in  small  character  asserts  the  fact.  See  also  p.  541.]

O.L.  :  "Yes,  that's  so.  Do  you  know  where  it  was  that  you  used  to
teach  ? "

' '  No,  it's  so  long  ago.  How  long  have  I  been  here  ?  It  must  have  been
20  or  30  years."

O.  L.  :  "Yes,  fully  20  years."

"  And  that  was  given  me  long  before  that."

O.  L.  :  "I  will  tell  you  when  it  was  given  you.  It  is  dated  1836,  and
now  it's  1890. Fifty-four  years."

"Yes,  that's  a  long  time. Tell  me  where  it  was  ? "
O.  L.  :  "It  vfas  Lucton."

"Oh,  oh,  yes.  Yes,  I  used  to  teach  there,  and  it  was  given  me  by  the
b)oys.  It  has  been  a  tremendous  job  to  remember  it.  Frank  was  full  of  life —
full. . . . He  crawled  under  the  thatch  once  and  hid. Wliat  a  lot  of


550


A  Record  of  Ohservations  of


mischief  he  was  capable  of  doing.  He  would  do  anything  ;  go  without  shirt,
swop  hats,  anything.  There  was  a  family  near  named  Rodney.  He  pounded
one  of  their  boys  named  John.  Frank  got  the  best  of  it,  and  the  boy  ran  ;
how  he  ran  !  His  father  threatened  Frank,  but  he  escaped  ;  he  always
escaped.  He  could  crawl  througli  a  smaller  hole  than  another.  He  could
shin  up  a  tree  quick  as  a  monkey.  What  a  boy  he  was  1  I  remember  his
fishing.  I  remember  that  boy  wading  up  to  his  middle.  I  thought  he'd  catcli
his  death  of  cold,  but  he  never  did."  [See  notes  at  end  of  series,  p.  557.]
O.  L.  :  "  No,  he's  an  t>ld  man  now."

"  Send  him  my  warm  love. Do  you  know,  Oliver,  I  can't  remember  the
friend  who  was  photographed  with  me  that  you  say  is  Robert  something."
O.  L.  :  "No. Shall  I  tell  you?"
"  Well,  vdiat  do  you  think  '! Had  you  better  ?  "
O.  L.  :  "I  fear  you  won't  remember  it  in  time  now."
"What  do  you  think,  Nelly ?  "
E.  C.  L.  :  "Yes,  you  would  like  to  know  it  now."

O.  L.  :  "  It  was  Robert  Cheere."  [I  find  later  that  this  is  wrong:  it
was  another  member  of  the  same  family.]

"Oh  !  Oh,  Lord  !  Oh  !  Ah  well  I  (pause)  Do  you  know  where  lie  is  ?
(No.)  Well,  he's  here.  Here  is  your  father.  Oliver,  my  son,  why  don't
y<;)U  wear  my  watch  1  "

"I've  got  a  better  one."

"Well,  but  the  chain  '?  and  fix  this  thing  to  it  again.  I  daresay  yours  is
a  bit  smarter,  and  more  boyish,  but  if  I  was  you  I  v/ould  wear  my  chain  a  bit.
I  am  rather  troubled  at  not  having  done  more  for  you  l)oys.  I  wish  I
had  done  more,  but  you  won't  treasure  it  up  against  us  1 "

O.  L.  :  "  Certainly  not."

"  Give  me  that  handle  (p.  549) — your  father's  corkscrew."
0.  L.  :  "  Oh,  that  thing."

' '  Yes,  that's  it.  He  tells  me  to  open  it.  (Opened  it,  and  pulled  out
screw.) You  knew  this  was  yonr  father's."

O.  L. :  "  Well,  it  was  my  mother's,  I  thought."

' '  But  his  too. It's  like  that  umbrella  (p.  5.37). They  botli  had  it. "

O.  L.  :  "  Won't  my  mother  come  and  speak  herself  ?  "

"  She  has  sent  message. She  can't  come  and  speak  herself."

O.  L. :  "Mr.  E.  does." (Referring  to  Sittings  40  and  47.)

"You  are  greedy.  Yes,  Mr.  E.  does,  but  Mr.  E.  is  a  scientific  man,  who
has  gone  into  these  things.  He  comes  and  turns  me  out  sometimes.  It
would  be  a  very  narrow  place  into  which  Mr.  E.  couldn't  get."

J\'o(es  hy  Mr.  Yfilsoti.

14.  Don't  think  he  had  a  sister  Ellen,  or  friend  Mr.  Clark.  I  find
on  inquiiy  that  my  grandfather  had  friends  of  that  name.

15.  Inlaid  box,  accident  on  crossing  Channel,  reference  to  child's
teeth,  ITxbridge,  stag's  head  [next  page],  all  unintelligible.


Sittiiifi  JSfo.  83,  (Old  last  in  England. Munday  Evodwj,  Fehrn.arii  3rd.

7.30  to  9.45.

Present :  O.  L.,  E  C.  L.,  and  afterwards  Mr.  and  Mrs.  T.  and  M.  L.


Certahl  Phenomena  of  Trance.


551-


"  UUo,  ITelly. Come  here,  Capt;iin. It  looks  as  if  someone  had  iDassed
out  suddenly,  quite  recently. One  of  your  uncles,  I  think. "
"Which?"

' '  I  can't  see  ;  they  are  all  busy  round  him.  A  lot  of  people  are  bustling'
about.  I  don't  knovt'  who  it  is.  I  tliink  someone  has  passed  out  or  just
passing  out.  I  can't  tell  you  anything  more.  There  is  something  ■wrong,
anyway." [7.45  p.m.]

O.  L.  :  '"If  he  is  passed  out  you  can  see  him."

"  Not  a  bit.  You  make  nothing  of  a  spirit  that's  just  passed  out.  They
are  all  strange  and  don't  knov,'  where  they  are.  Your  jjeople  seem  all  l:)usy.
Do  you  know  if  one  of  your  uncles  is  ill  1  " 0.  L.  :  "No,  not  particularly."

"How's  Charles?  " O.  L.  :  "Oh,  he  passed  out  long  ago."

"Yv^ell,  how's  Sam  ?" O.  L.  :  "I  don't  know  ;  pretty  well,  I  think."

"  Well,  I  can't  tell  you  anything  more  about  it.  But  I  think  it's  Sam.  It's-
either  Sam  or  in  his  surroundings.  [Uncle  Sam,  I  find  by  writing,  was  ill  on
Saturday  and  Sunday  and  had  to  see  a  doctor,  but  was  right  again  on
Monday.  A  son  was  invalided  at  home,  and  died  some  months  later  ;  but
no  coincidence  can  be  claimed  for  that.]  (To  Nelly,  whose  watch  had  been,
handed  to  medium.)  This  is  your  mother's.  Your  mother  wants  you  to
take  your  medicine.  Do  you  remember  the  little  one  that  passed  out  of  the
body  1 "

E.  C.  L.  :  "No,  but  I  know  there  was  one."

"Well,  he's  here  with  her.  But  you  wouldn't  know  him  now.  He's-
grownup."

E.  C.  L.  :  "  Then  they  do  grow?  "

"  Certainly.  He's  about  35,  I  should  say.  [The  brother  referred  to,  who-
died  aged  five  weeks,  would  have  been  33.]  They  all  look  about  35  here.
She  wants  to  know  did  you  have  her  brown  dress  1 "

"No."

"And  her  ring. And  she  had  a  pin,  a  brooch  thing,  and  a  pair  of  buttons-
to  hook  into  sleeves. Where  are  they  all  ?  "
E.  C.  L.  :  "I'm  afraid  I  don't  know."

' '  But  some  one  ought  to  know.  And  I  had  a  little  pocket-knife  with  four
blades  in  it.  Where  is  that  ?  And  a  cameo  pin  and  a  little  neck  chain  that
used  to  be  yours  when  you  were  small.  Three  rings  you  know  I  had.  Where
are  they?"

O.  L.  :  "  I  supjDose  Alfred  knows. "
, "Well,  look  wp  my  things. You,  Nelly,  ought  to  have  them. This  is
my  watch,  but  that's  ni:)t  my  chain  ;  where's  my  chain  ?  "

E.  C.  L.  :  "  I  don't  know.  This  is  a  chain  Mary  vrore.  She  kept  the
watch  for  me."

"  The  brooch  you  ought  to  have  with  a  large  stone  in  it.  It  belonged  to
my  mother,  your  grandmother."

"  Wliere  are  the  Smiths  ? Do  you  know  the  Howards  ?  "
O.  L.  :  "No."

"  Here's  Mr.  Wilson  again.  I  had  a  stag's  head  that  I  cut  out  of  wood
myself  when  I  was  young.  I  wish  that  it  could  be  found.  It's  a  small  thing
but  it  was  a  piece  of  work. I  did  it  with  my  knife."

O.  L.  :  "Well,  I  will  ask  your  son."


552


A  Record  of  Observations  of


"  T  have  been  to  see  him. "

0.  L. :  "  Do  you  see  him  now What  is  he  doing  ?"

"George  has  been  writing  out  something — manuscript. He  and  another
have  been  riding  out  together."
"  Do  you  mean  on  a  horse  1  "

"No,  in  a  vehicle,  and  George  has  been  showing  papers.  Tliey  are  out
togetlier.  [Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wilson  were  at  this  time  taking  a  long  railway
journey.]  Ask  him  if  he  remembers  that  old  long  clock.  It  used  to  be  my
father's.  I  don't  know  that  I  can  remember  much  more.  There  are  a  good
many  people  here  wanting  to  speak.  I  will  not  stay  any  longer.  Give  my
best  love  to  my  son.  Good-bye."

"Good-bye,  Mr.  Wilson."

"He's  going  away — up,  up — there  [following  with  finger],  with  a  stout
lady,  brown  hair,  parted  down  middle,  straight  nose,  full  of  face,  hair  at  back
brought  over  top  of  head — sort  of  French  arrangement.  Blue-grey  eyes.  Small
V(']iite  cap  on  front  of  head."

"Here's  Mr.  E.  (p.  516) ;  Lodge,  don't  loose  hold  of  a  good  thing.  I  could
have  done  much  for  the  Society  if  I  had  lived,  but  I  can  do  still  more  now.
It  is  wonderfully  difficult  to  communicate.  All  the  time  I've  been  here  I  have
only  found  two  mediums  besides  this  one.  Miss  X.  is  one  ;  very  honest.
The  other  is  that  Miss  Fowler.  I  have  been  there  once.  Disgusting
surroundings,  but  I  v/ent.  Yes,  she's  a  true  medium.  More  people  might
be  mediums,  but  many  won't  when  they  can."

"  What  constitutes  a  medium  ?  "

"Not  too  much  spirituality,  and  not  too  much  animalism.  Not  the  highest
XDeople,  and  not  the  lowest.  Sympatlietic,  and  not  too  self-conscious.  Able
to  let  their  minds  be  given  up  to  another.  That  sort  of  person,  easily
influenced.  Many  could,  but  their  pride  and  a  sense  of  self  comes  in  and
spoils  it.  As  to  the  physical  things :  mostly  fraud.  The  rest  electricity.
[The  supposed  speaker  was  not  the  least  likely  to  refer  things  to  electricity
in  this  casual  fashion.]  A  person's  nerves  are  doing  things  they  don't  know
what. They  are  often  not  conscious  when  they  move  things."

"  It's  like  automatic  writing  then  ?  "

'  •  Something.  Often  the  bells  and  noises  are  made  by  them  when  under
the  control  of  some  other  sjiirit,  and  then  the  message  may  be  genuine.
Trance  things  and  automatic  writing  are  good.  Often  good.  Otlier  things
sometimes;  but  mostly  fraud.  (Further  talk  of  this  kind  for  some  time.)
Who  is  this?"

O.  L.  :  "It's  my  sister."

"  Oh,  pleased  to  make  your  acipiaintance. I  didn't  meet  you,  I  think."
E.  C.  L.  :  "  No,  I  never  saw  you."

"  Glad  to  see  you  now. I  wrote  a  little  book  once. (Title  given.)  Did
you  ever  read  it  ?  "
"No."

' '  You  might  by  chance  be  interested  in  it.  Lodge,  I  will  show  you  some
verses  I  have  written  up  here  some  day.  Phinuit  will  be  coming  back  soon.
He's  a  good  old  man.  He  has  a  hard  jilace.  I  wouldn't  do  the  work  he  does
for  anything.  Seeing  all  manner  of  jjeople  and  hunting  up  their  friends,  and
<jften  he  has  hard  work  to  persuade  them  that  they  are  really  wanted."


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


553


O.  L.  :  "Is  he  reliable?"

"Not  perfectly.  He  is  nut  a  bit  infallible.  He  mixes  things  terribly
sometimes.  He  does  his  be.st.  He's  a  good  old  man  ;  Ijut  he  does  get  con-
fused, and  when  he  can't  hear  distinctly  he  fills  it  up  himself.  He 'does  in-
vent things  occasionally,  he  certainly  does.  Sometimes  he  has  very  hard,
work. "

O.  L.  :  "  Are  his  medical  prescriptions  any  good  1 "

"Oh,  he's  a  shrewd  doctor.  He  knows  his  business  thoroughly.  He  can
see  into  people  and  is  very  keen  on  their  complaints.  Yes,  lie  is  very  good
in  that  way,  very  good."

O.  L.  :  "Can  he  see  ahead  at  all  ? Can  anyone  1  "

"I  can't.  I  haven't  gone  into  that.  I  think  Phinuit  can  a  little  some-
times. He  can  do  wonderful  things.  He  has  studied  these  things  a  good  deal.
He  can  do  many  tilings  that  I  can't  do.  He  can  look  up  people's  friends  and
say  what  tliey  are  doing  sometimes  in  an  extraordinary  way.  But  he  is  far
from  being  infallible."

O.  L.  :  "  The  Thompsons  are  waiting  in  next  room.  Shall  I  call  them
in?"

"  The  T]i(3mpsons  ?  Oh,  I  know.  I  met  them  at  your  house  once  at  dinner,
I  think.  [Yes.]  No,  I  don't  .specially  want  to  see  them.  Well,  Lodo-e,  I
must  be  going.  Good-bye.  Stick  to  a  good  thing  and  don't  give  it  up.  °  G»
on  with  the  investigation.  I  ^vill  help  you.  This  will  be  the  thing  of  the
future  and  will  increase  people's  happiness.  More  mediums  will  arise  and
communication  will  be  easier.  Good-bye."

[Here  medium  seemed  to  sleep  a  few  moments  and  then  woke  up  ac'ain
m  the  Phinuit  manner,  putting  out  hand  and  feeling  sitter's  head.]

"Eh!  what:  Oh,  ye.s.  All  right.  Look  here,  Mr.  E.  has  been  here.
He  told  me  to  express  his  regret  that  he  had  not  said  good-bye  to  Miss
Lodge. Here's  Dr.  Thompson  " (p.  544).

(Mr.  and  Mrs.  T.  had  recently  come  in  and  now  came  near. )

"  Joy  be  with  you. God  bless  her. Your  brother  wants  to  see  you.
How's  the  sage  tea  ?  "

Mrs.  T.  :  "  It's  being  made. "

"I  have  thought  about  tliat  watch  and  chain,  but  I  can't  find  it.  I  have
looked  all  over. "

Mr.  T.  :  "No,  I'm  afraid  it's  gone. An  accident  happened  to  it,  and  it
was  sold. "

"  Oh,  it  seems  to  me  it  was  given  to  me,  and  that  there  was  an  inscrip-
tion on  it. Presented  to  me  where  I  worked,  because  they  appreciated  me. "
Mr,  T.  :  "  Yes,  there  was  an  inscription."
"What  was  that  inscription  ?  "
Mr.  T.  :  "Yes,  what  was  it?''

"It  was  given  me  where  I  studied.  It  was  an  appreciation  from  some  of
my  friends,  I  tliink.  I  did  a  friend  a  service.  [He  took  a  friend's  epileptic
son  througli  Egypt,  and  it  was  for  this  that  the  watch  was  given,  in  addition
to  his  fee.] Ike,  did  you  ever  hear  from  me  and  from  father  before  ? "

Mr.  T.  :  "No,  never  before  just  lately."

"That's  a  mistake,  Ike. You  heard  once  before  ;  some  time  ago.  You
shouldn't  forget."


554


A  Record  of  Ohservations  of


Mr.  T.  :  "  Oli,  yes,  so  I  did,  many  year,?  ago.  For  the  moment  I  did  not
think  of  it."  [Referring  to  an  okl  inter\-iew  which  his  friends  had  liad  with
some  medium  at  Bristol,  when  vivid  ]iersonal  messages  from  Dr.  T.  were
likewise  supposed  to  be  sent.]

"  Yes,  and  I  sent  a  message  to  mother  before.  Don't  forget  me,  Ike.
Have  you  seen  mother  lately  ?  you  have  not  seen  her  to-day  ?  "

Mr.  T.  :  "  No,  not  to-day,  but  yesterday  I  did."

"She  has  had  trouble  with  her  head.  I  am  looking  after  her.  How's
"William  ? He  went  on  to  Scotland,  I  think."

Mr.  T.  :  "  You  said  you  wrote  a  great  deal. How  can  you  write  ?  "

"  It  is  the  same  thing  to  us.  The  nearest  thing  to  it.  We  are  very  busy,
Ike,  but  we  are  never  weary  of  pi'aising  and  thanking  God  for  our  creation
and  preservation.  That  is  our  chief  employment.  (Dr.  P.)  Susie,  your  father
sends  his  love  to  little  Miss  here.  Has  she  found  her  paint-box  yet  1  "(p.  545).

Mrs.  T.  :  "No."

' '  Why  doesn't  she  go  and  look  for  it  You  go  into  door,  and  from  there
go  upstairs,  then  to  right,  then  to  left,  and  into  room  where  papers  are."

Mrs.  T.  :  "Yes,  that's  where  it  is  usually  kept,  and  where  it  ought  to  be,
but  it's  not  there  now,  she  says."

"Let  her  look  again.  She'll  find  it.  [Not  fi>und  it.]  Here's  your
mother,  too.  She  has  a  little  funny  e;i})  on  her  head  down  over  her  ears,  and
two  ladies  with  her.  They  say  tliey're  your  sisters.  One  quite  young,  and
■one  a  little  older.  One  is  a  fat  little  tiling  with  funny  little  curls  all  over
Jiere." [All  correct.]

Mrs.  T.  :  "Yes,  I  remember."

"Well,  she  wears  it  just  the  same  now. Where's  her  ring?  Another  little
ring  with  a  top  to  it  Ijelonged  to  one  of  these  ladies."
Mrs.  T.  :  "I  don't  remember  it."

"  How  stupid  you  are  ! Perhaps  the  Captain  can  explain. Your  father

will  help  that  girl  Theo  to  jDaint. Nice  man  he  is. Here's  Dr.  Rich.

[See  also  p.  511,  Note  F.]  It  is  very  kind  of  this  gentleman  [i.e.,  Dr.
Phinuit]  to  let  me  speak  to  you.  Mr.  Thompson,  I  want  you  to  give  a
message  to  father."

Mr.  T.  :  "I  will  give  it."

"  Tliank  you  a  thousand  times,  it  is  vei'y  good  of  you.  You  see  I  passed
<jut  rather  suddenly.  Fatlier  ^vas  very  much  troubled  about  it  and  he  is
troubled  yet.  He  hasn't  got  over  it.  Tell  liim  I  anr  alive — that  I  send  my
love  to  him.  Where  are  my  glasses  ?  (feeling)  I  used  to  wear  glasses.  [True.]
I  think  he  has  them,  and  some  of  my  books.  There  Avas  a  little  black  case
I  had,  I  think  he  has  that  too — I  don't  want  that  lost.  Sometimes  he  is
bothered  about  a  dizzy  feeling  in  his  head — nervous  about  it,  but  it  is  of  no
consequence. "

Mr.  T.  :  "What  does  your  father  do  ? "

(Took  up  a  card  and  appeared  to  write  on  it  and  pretended  to  put
stamp  in  corner.)  "He  attends  to  this  sort  of  thing.  Mr.  Thompson,  if  you
will  give  this  message  I  will  lielp  you  in  many  ways. I  can  and  I  will."

[Mr.  Rich,  sen.,  is  head  of  Liverpool  Post-oflice.  His  son,  Dr.  Rich,  was
almost  a  stranger  to  Mr.  Thompson  and  ijuite  a  stranger  to  me.
The  father  was  much  distressed  aljout  liis  son's  death,  we  find.  Mr.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


555


Thompson  has  since  been  to  see  him  and  given  him  the  message.
He  considers  the  episode  very  extraordinary,  and  inexijlicable  except
by  fraud  of  some  kind.  Tlie  phrase,  "Thank  you  a  thousand
times,"  he  asserts  to  be  cliaracteristic,  and  he  admits  a  recent  slight
dizziness.  It  is  not  easy  to  identify  the  "black  case,"  but  it  is
reported  that  on  his  death-bed  his  son  frequently  mentioned  one.
■  '  The  only  person  able  to  give  first-hand  evidence  on  this  point  is  at
present  absent  in  Germany.]

"  Now,  all  you  people  come  here. "

"  Good-bye,  Susie. Good-bye,  Ike. Good-bye,  Nelly."
"  Now,  all  clear  out  and  let  me  talk  to  Marie."

(Long  conversation  of  a  paternal  kind,  with  thoroughly  sensiljle  advice.

Then  O.  L.  returned.)
"  Captain,  it's  not  good-bye,  it's  on  revoir,  and  you  shall  liear  of  me  vi'hen
I've  gone  away. "

O.  L.  :  "How  can  I  ?"

"  Oh,  I  will  tell  some  gentleman  a  message  and  he  v/ill  write  it  for  me.
You'll  see. "

"  An  revolr,  an  revoir,"  &c.

End  of  Secund  Series  of  Sittings  at  Liveiyool.


Appendix.

Referring  to  a  remark  in  the  notes  on  p.  527,  about  the  conceiv-
able mission  of  an  agent  to  Barking  to  make  inquiries,  it  struck  us  that
it  might  be  instructive  to  actually  send  one  and  see  what  could  be  thus
gleaned:  with  the  objects  (1)  of  verifying  such  of  the  facts  mentioned  about
my  uncles  as  had  not  yet  been  verified,  and  (2)  of  incidentally  learning  how
much  could  in  this  way,  after  so  long  an  interval  and  such  great  changes  in
the  neighbourhood,  be  gleaned.

I  accordingly  gave  full  instructions  to  a  confidential  and  skilled  agent,
and  I  append  his  series  of  reports  ;  for  th(3ugh  they  do  not  add  much  to  our
information  they  yet  seem  to  me  instructive  in  various  indirect  ways.

October  2nd,  1890.

I  .spent  yesterday  in  Barking  making-  inquiries.  The  result  is  not  very  exciting,
but  there  is  a  chance  of  better  things,  for  I  have  made  an  appointment  to  meet  an  old
man  next  Monday,  83  years  old,  who  has  lived  at  Barking  all  his  life,  and  is  credited
with  a  long  and  reliable  memory.  He  was  away  on  business,  and  not  likely  to  return
before  Monday.  I  saw  other  old  men,  in  different  parts  of  the  town,  but  their
memories  did  not  go  back  far  enough.  Tv.'o  of  them  remembered  when  the  Rev.
Oliver  Lodge  was  curate  in  charge,  and  that  as  boy.s  they  had  a  nickname  for  him  ;
"but  they  could  recall  none  of  the  thing.s  we  need.  They  knew  that  there  were  se^'eral
"  young  Lodges."

It  is  a  custom  in  Barking  to  call  fields  and  lanes  after  persons  connected  with
them— generally  the  landlord  ;  and  there  seems  to  be  an  impression  among  the  old
people  that  there  were  more  Smiths  than  one  Avith  fiekls.  However,  a  workman  on
■some  "black  works"  told  me  tliat  his  old  fatlier  actually  lives  now  in  a  place  that
used,  long  ago,  to  be  called  "  Snnth's  field  "  occasionally.  I  went  to  this  spot,  but  it
was  late  in  the  evening,  and  the  old  man  \v3.s,  either  out  or  would  not  answer  when  I
knocked.  It  is  probably  the  riglit  field,  however,  for  it  is  at  the  npjjer  part  o£
■"  Glenny's  Park"  (is  it  Park  or  Part?),  it  has  ponds  and  creeks  where  fishing  might
be  done,  and  the  river  Rodin  is  close  by. I  have  made  arrangements  to  examine  the


556


A  Record  of  Ohservations  of


old  ordnancs  map.s  in  the  Surveyor's  Office  at  tlie  Town  Hall  on  Mondaj-.  No  one
seemed  able  to  identify  the  Smith  hoi/s ;  but  if  I  can  fix  this  Smith  from  the  maps  it  may
make  it  easier  to  trace  the  hoiis.

A  builder,  named  Drake,  who  has  lived  in  Barking  a  good  many  years,  M'as  rather
helpful.  He  can  remember  Messrs.  William  and  Frank  Whitboui-n — they  were  father
and  son,  and  the  younger  one  s  name  was  really  Francis.  He  also  remembers  James-
and  Henry  Sharp — they  are  buried  in  the  old  churchyard,  and  Drake  had  to  renovate
their  tombstones  quite  recently.

This  is  all  I  have  been  able  to  get  at  up  to  the  present.  It  now  depends  upon  the
old  man  aged  83  (Wm.  Bailey)  and  the  ordnance  map.  If  the  old  man  Bailey  i.s-
a  failure  I  know  of  nothing  else  to  do. I  expect  to  find  Smith's  field  all  right.

October  Tth,  1800.

Further  inquiries  at  Barking  have  not  enabled  me  to  make  any  definite  discoveries
of  the  required  sort.  The  old  man  (Bailey)  proved  a  failure,  he  could  remember  no
more  than  the  other  old  ]ieo]ile — which  was  very  little,  as  you  know.  The  field  I
hoped  might  be  Smiths  field  is  not  the  right  one,  for  I  find  that  though  a  Messrs..
Smith  and  Kinsie  had  it  between  1840  and  1850,  it  belonged  to  a  Venables  family  for-
a  great  many  years  before  tlien — certainly  in  1828.

I  found  another  promising  old  man,  Mr.  Forge,  between  70  and  80,  who  was  born,
in  the  town  and  has  had  much  ti)  do  with  parish  business,  ha^'ing  been  an  overseer-
for  many  years  in  the  past.  He  could  not  be  brought  to  remember  any  of  the  things
we  want ;  but  he  told  me  where  an  old  assessment  book  was  stored  away  at  the  Town
Hall.  I  therefore  called  upon  the  Town  Clerk  and  prevailed  upon  him  to  come  to  the-
T(jwn  Hall  to  inspect  this  boolc.  He  came,  and  Icindly  examined  both  this  and  many
other  likely  books,  some  going  back  as  far  as  1827,  but  not  a  trace  of  Smith's  field
could  we  find  in  any  of  them.  The  Tovvn  Clerk  (who  is  also  an  overseer),  a  very
intelligent  and  pleasant  man,  has  been  connected  with  parish  afifairs  all  his  life,  and
he  did  all  in  his  power  to  help.  He  knows  one  or  two  old  people  living  on  the  outskirts,
of  the  parish,  and  will  tap  their  memories  for  lis  ;  he  declared  that  they  were  so-
uneducated  and  suspicious  that  it  would  be  useless  for  me  to  visit  them.

Mr.  Samuel  Glenney,  a  descendant  of  the  "  Glenney's  Part  "  people,  who  is  now
Vestry  Clerk,  having  control  of  local  plans  and  assessment  books,  and  who  has  lived
in  the  neighbourhood  over  .50  years,  cannot  remember  a  Smith's  field  adjoining  any  of
their  family  property.

I  examined  an  ordnance  map,  dated  1863,  at  the  Town  Hall.  There  are  three
"  Glenny's  "  Parts  shown,  pretty  close  together,  near  the  vicarage  and  glebe  land.
Only  one  of  these  plots  had  a  pond — now  filled  up  of  course,  for  all  the  neighbourhood
is  built  upon — and  on  the  corner  of  this  plot  a  smith;/  is  marked.  Now  it  is  not;
improba)jle  that  this  fact  may  have  given  ri.se  to  the  field  being  called  "Smith's  field  " —
at  any  rate  by  the  school  boys ;  and  if  so,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  assessment
books  and  plans  fail  to  show  the  place  under  that  name.  The  supiiosition  is  not  so-
unlikely,  for  the  Barking  people  have  a  way  of  giving  names  to  localities  in  this
manner  ;  for  instance,  there  is  a  lane  belonging  to  one  man  but  named  after  another
man  who  happens  to  have  a  slaughter-house  at  the  end  of  it.  It  seems  quite  probable
that  the  field  with  the  smithy  in  it  would  get  called  "Smith's  field,"  even  though  it
l.)elonged  in  reality  to  Mr.  Glenney,  and  the  fact  that  there  were  two  other  fields  be-
longing to  members  of  the  (ilenney  family  quite  close  by  seems  to  make  it  more
probable.  At  any  rate  this  field  with  the  smithy  in  it  was  the  only  one  that  appears  to
have  had  anything  of  a  pond.  The  smithy  stood  at  the  corner  of  the  field,  and  would
have  been  passed  on  the  way  from  the  vicarage  to  the  pond,  which  latter  was  halfway
down  the  field  on  one  side  of  it.  [See  next  page.]  But  still,  although  this  theory  will
give  us  a  Smith's  field  independent  of  assessment  books  and  maps,  it  will  not  give  us;
a  il/;-.  Smith,  nor  will  it  help  us  to  discover  the  Smith  hoys.  There  is  only  one  remaining
chance— the  Rr  nt  Guarantee  Socictij.  This  society  collects  the  tithes  for  the  parish  of
Barking,  and  the  secretary  is  said  to  pos.sess  old  records  which  may  put  us  on  the  right
road.  I  have  written  to  make  an  appointment  with  this  gentleman,  who  is  only  at
the  office,  in  London,  on  certain  days.


Certain  Phenomeiut  of  Trance.


557


I  could  not  find  a  Rodney  family  iti  tlie  local  dii'ectory  of  recent  date— a  very
imperfect  jiroduction.  Nor  were  old  inhabitants  able  to  remember  such  a  family
living  in  the  neighbourhood  50  or  60  years  back.  Are  you  sure  there  ivas  a  family  ?
There  might  have  been  a  Jolm  Rodney  without  a  family  of  Rodneys  [p.  550,  and
■below].

Mrs.  Piper  has  certainly  beaten  me.  My  inquiries  in  modern  Barking  yield  less
information  than  she  gave.  Yet  the  most  skilful  agent  cnukl  have  done  no  more  than
secure  the  assistance  of  tlie  local  record  keepers  and  the  oldest  inhabitants  living.  I
liave  failed  up  to  the  present  to  prove  from  records  that  there  was  a  Smitli's  field,  and
therefox-e  cannot  trace  the  Smith  boys.  I  cannot  find  anyone  who  remembers  the
■creek  incident ;  nor  can  I  learn  anything  whatever  about  Mrs.  Cannon  from  the  old
people.

(Mohcr  IWi,  1890.

The  Tithe  Collecting  Afjcnoj  is  a  failure.  The  secretary  has  no  old  records,  and
110  possible  means  whatever  of  assisting  us  to  discover  Smith's  field.  I  have  no  further
ideas  at  present. Can  you  suggest  anytliing?

(r.  Albert  Smith.

Additioxal  Notes.

Octfjher  23j-c?,  1890.

In  order  to  obtain  verification  or  the  opposite  for  as  many  of  the  state-
ments regarding  things  unkn(jwn  to  me  as  possible,  I  wrote  at  last  to  uiy
uncle  Frank  in  Cornwall  (p.  523),  informing  him  fully  of  the  circumstances
of  the  investigation  and  requesting  his  aid.  He  complains  that  his  memory
is  not  so  good  now  as  it  was  even  six  months  ago,  but  he  has  favoured  me
v.ith  soine  information  which  is  useful  so  far  as  it  goes.  Tlie  following
•are  extracts  from  his  letters  : —

(Referring  to  episode  mentioned  on  -p.  550.)  "I  recollect  very  well  my  fight  with
a.  boy  ill  the  cow-field.  It  took  place  when  I  was  ten  years  old  (about  1822),  and  I
supi^ose  a  bit  of  a  boy -bully.  We  had  no  quarrel  but  merely  fought  to  see  which
was  best  man,  and  vi'hen  my  opponent  considered  he  had  had  enough,  instead  of
S'iving  in  in  the  usual  manner,  he  bolted  like  a  lamp-lighter.  The  reason  I  reniemlier
so  well  about  this  is  because  before  the  fight  the  general  opinion  was  tliat  the  other
boy  would  beat  me  easily,  and  as  a  result  of  my  success  a  boy  two  years  older  and
much  bigger  and  stronger  than  myself  was  picked  out  from  the  village  to  fight  me,
and  gave  me  a  tremendous  thrashing. At  eleven  I  was  sent  to  sea.

"  I  dcn't  at  all  recollect  the  name  of  the  boy  who  ran  away."  "I  recollect  his
father  saying  if  he  caught  hold  of  me  he  would  give  me  a  good  hiding.''

(In  answer  to  a  question  as  to  how  "  Smith's  field  ''  (p.  527)  came  by  its  name,  and
v/hether  it  had  anything  to  do  with  a  smithy,  p.  556. )  "  There  was  a  blacksnuth's  shop
near  the  town  end  of  tliis  field,  but  I  do  not  think  it  had  any  reference  to  tlie  name  of
the  field.  It  was  called  Smitli's  field  because  the  occupier's  name  was  Smith,  I  believe."'

(In  answer  to  a  question  about  the  "Smith  boys,"  p.  521.)  "There  was  a  man
named  Smith,  a  publican,  the  same  who  made  the  remark  about  the  '  d— d  young-
Lodges.  '  (See  notes  at  end  of  First  Series. )  He  had  children,  but  I  remember  nothing
of  them  except  one  boy,  and  the  reason  I  recollect  him  is  because  the  parish  of  Barking
had  the  nomination  of  a  boy  for  the  Bluecoat  School.  I  was  nominated  by  my  peo'ile
and  a  young  Smith  by  his  ;  Smith  was  elected,  and  consequently  the  vi'hole  course  of
my  life  was  changed."

(In  answer  to  cj^uestions  about  Uncle  Jerry,  p.  521.)  "I  do  not  tliink  the  fall  from
a  horse  had  anything  to  do  with  bringing  on  his  blindness.  He  was  always  nenr-
sighted,  and  used  to  wear  spectacles  at  school,  but  I  do  not  think  I  was  in  England
at  the  time  of  his  fall."  "  I  recollect  nothing  whatever  about  any  ring  of  his  "  (refer-
ring to  a  statement  on  p.  508).


.558


A  liecord  of  Ohservations  of


(3) PART  II.
By  Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.

The  series  of  sittings  held  by  Mrs.  Piper  at  Liverpool  forms  a  set-
distinct  to  some  extent  from  the  rest  in  quality  as  well  as  in  matter,,
and  has  therefore  been  treated  apart,  for  convenience'  sake,  by
Professor  Lodge.  It  was  remarkable,  as  compared  with  those  which  ha.ve-
now  to  be  considered,  for  a  high  level  of  success.  At  Cambridge,  as  ia
London,  success  and  failure  alternated  in  a  puzzling  manner.  In  a-
large  number  of  cases  particles  of  intuition  were  embedded  in  a  mass-
of  vague,  unintelligible,  or  distinctly  "  fishing  "  conversation.  Tlie^
sittings,  however,  have  the  advantage  of  throwing  a  great  deal  of  light-
npon  the  working  of  the  medium's  secondary  personality,  and  deserve-
therefore  as  careful  study  as  those  of  more  uniform  cjuality.  The  plan
adopted  in  dealing  witli  them  has  been  to  set  out  first  the  most  remark-
able from  an  e\"idential  point  of  view,  and  then  a  few  of  those  which
give  the  most  unfavourable  side  of  Dr.  Pliinuit's  personality  ;  for  as  a-
distinct  personality  we  shall  have  to  regard  him.  The  remainder  are-
collected  in  the  Apjaendix  in  an  abbreviated  form.

Before  entering  upon  details,  it  is  necessary  to  give  a  general  view
of  the  conditions  under  which  the  London  sittings  took  place.  Mr.-
Myers  has  already  done  this  for  Cambridge.  In  London  tlie  same
precautions  were  of  course  taken  to  introduce  all  sitters,  not  previously
known  to  Mrs.  Piper,  under  feigned  names.  The  possibility  of  gaining
information  by  local  gossip,  which  has  to  be  taken  into  account  in
CamV)ridge  and  even  in  Liverj^ool,  was  here  excluded  by  the  circum-
stances of  the  case  ;  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  another  supposed
.source  of  information,  tliat  l)y  inquiry  from  servants.  The  first  nine-
sittings  were  held  at  Mrs.  Piper's  lodgings,  No,  27,  Montagu-street,
W.C.  The  owners  of  the  lodgings  could  not  jsossibly  have  known
anything  of  Dr.  Myers,  by  whom  the  arrangements  were  made..
When  Mrs.  Pijjer  came  to  London  for  the  second  time,  .she  was  lodged
at  a  private  hotel  not  far  from  my  residence,  where  the  possibility  of
information  was  equally  excluded.  She  sat  several  times  at  my  house,
and  dined  there  on  one  occasion  ;  but  she  was  under  close  observation
all  the  time,  and  it  is  pei-fectly  certain  that  she  had  no  chance  of
"  pumping  "  any  of  the  servants,  nor  indeed  are  any  of  the  statements-
which  she  made  such  as  could  possibly  be  accounted  for  by  such
channels  of  information.  One  sitting,  perhaps  the  most  remarkable  of
the  series,  took  place  at  Mr.  Clarke's  house  at  Harrow.  Here  it  may
he  said  that  there  was  a  possible  source  of  inquiry ;  for  Mrs.  Piper  had
not  only  met  Mr.  Clarke  in  America,  but  had  crossed  the  Atlantic  on


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


559


the  same  steamer  with  him  ;  and  it  will  be  sugo;estecI,  no  doubt,  that
slie  had  succeeded  in  j^umping  him  as  to  his  wife's  family  in  the  course
of  conversation.  That  any  man  could  have  imparted  unconsciously
such  curious  and  unusual  family  histoi'ies  as  those  told  to  Mrs.  Clarke
Avould  be  amazing  enough.  The  supposition  is  simply  impossible  to  those
who  have  had  the  opportunity  of  watching  Mrs.  Piper,  and  estimating  tlie
singularly  limited  range  of  her  conversation,  and  its  inadequacy  for  the
subtle  designs  attributed  to  it.  Moreover,  some  of  the  facts  stated  were
unknown  to  Mr.  Clarke  himself  till  he  heard  them  asserted  by  the
medium  and  confirmed  by  his  wife.  Both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Clarke  are
intimately  known  to  me  ;  and  no  better  evidence  than  theirs  could
possibly  be  desired.  Mrs.  Clarke  is  a  G-erman  by  birth,  and  has  been
in  England  only  since  her  marriage.  The  facts  stated  to  her  refer
entirely  to  members  of  her  family  in  Germany.  Nothing  short  of  a
detective  employed  by  Mrs.  Piper  in  Munich  would  have  availed  to
get  her  the  knowledge  which  she  showed  on  the  occasion  of  her  sitting
with  Mrs.  Clarke.

The  same  may  be  said  of  the  only  two  other  London  sittings  which
are  published  at  length,  as  being  of  evidential  importance.  My  sister-
in-law,  Mrs.  H.  Leaf,  was  introduced  to  Mrs.  Piper  at  the  lodgings
in  Manchester-street,  where  Mrs.  Piper  had  arrived  the  day  before,
and  was  immediately  told  a  number  of  facts  of  almost  all  of  which  I  was
myself  quite  ignorant,  as  they  referred  to  various  cousins  of  hers  whose
names  I  had  not  to  my  knowledge  ever  heard.  Mr.  Pye  is  a  friend
whom  I  have  known  for  many  years,  but  of  whose  family  I  know  only
one  or  two  members.  What  was  stated  to  him  was  entirely  outside
my  own  knowledge.  Of  the  other  sittings  the  most  remarkable  was
undoubtedly  Miss  "  Gertrude  C.'s."  As  will  be  seen  from  her  report.
Appendix,  Nos.  29  and  31,  the  best  part  of  this  was  of  so  private  a
nature  that  practically  very  little  can  be  published.  Of  the  facts  which
have  had  to  be  reserved  it  is  quite  clear  that  no  means,  not  even  tlie
most  astute  detective,  could  have  obtained  knowledge  of  them  ;  they
were  secrets  which  were  tlie  property  of  one,  or  at  most  of  two  or
three  persons.

In  addition  to  this  there  is  the  conviction  which  I  strongly  feel,  in
common,  I  think,  with  all  those  who  have  seen  much  of  Mrs.  Piper,
that  she  is  absolutely  honest.  This  of  course  refers  to  her  normal
state  :  as  to  the  view  to  be  taken  of  the  Phinuit  personality  there  will
be  more  to  be  said  hereafter.  But  as  to  the  first  and  most  obvious
question,  whether  she  consciously  acquii'es  knowledge  with  regard  to-
iler sitters,  with  the  intention  of  deceiving,  I  may  say  most  positively
that  I  regard  such  a  supposition  as  entirely  untenable.

The  question  of  the  amount  of  communication  existing  between  the
two  states  is  in  the  nature  of  the  case  obscure,  and  the  evidence,  so  far

2  Q  2


560


A  Record  of  Ohservatkms  of


r.s  I  have  been  able  to  see,  is  mainly  negative.  Dr.  Piiinuit  makes  many
statements  which  may  easily  liave  ])een  learnt  by  Mrs.  Piper  ;  he'in
several  cases,  for  instance,  took  pains  to  describe  the  personal  appear-
Jince  of  his  sitters.  On  the  other  hand,  knowledge  aljont  them  and  their
surronndings,  which  Mrs.  Piper  certainly  possessed,  was  not  as  a  rule
given  hy  Phinuit.  It  may  of  course  be  said  that  this  was  done  in  order
to  obscure  his  methods,  and  I  am  inclined,  judging  from  what  I  have
seen  of  the  chai-acter  of  Phinuit,  his  shrewdness  and  his  desire  to
appear  marvellous,  to  think  that  this  is  very  possible  ;  though  it  seems
somewhat  inconsistent  with  the  difierent  course  taken  by  him  in  the
cases  just  mentioned,  and  still  more  with  his  habit  of  noting  correc-
tions or  hints  given  him  during  a  sitting,  and  attempting  to  bring
them  out  after  a  short  interval  as  though  tliey  were  his  own.  One
observation  bearing  on  this  point  was  made  by  Mrs.  Verrall.  In  her
three  sittings,  her  eldest  girl  was  frequently  mentioned,  but  her  name,
wliich  she  had  never  nientioned  to  Mrs.  Piper,  was  not  given.  After
her  last  sitting,  No.  63,  she  purposely  took  an  opportunity  of  calling
the  child  "  Heleii  "  in  Mrs.  Piper's  presence.  At  the  very  next  sitting
where  Mrs.  Yerrall  was  mentioned,  that  of  Mrs.  B.,  No.  66,  Helen  was
named  by  Dr.  Phinuit.  There  is  therefore  ground  for  supposing  that,
as  in  the  case  of  other  secondary  personalities  vvdiich  have  been  studied,
the  abnormal  state  is  conscious  of  what  goes  on  in  the  normal,  but  not
vice  versa  ,•  but  that  this  connexion  is  purposely  obscured.  That  Dr.
Piiinuit  is  what  he  gives  himself  out,  the  spirit  of  a  dei)arted  Marseillais
physician,  I  may  say  at  once  that  I  do  not  see  the  least  ground  for
believing.  His  own  word  does  not,  in  view  of  his  moral  standard,  apart
from  other  considerations,  carry  even  a  presumption  of  veracity  ;  nor
has  a  single  one  of  tlie  numerous  statements  he  has  made  as  to  his  life
on  earth  proved  capable  of  veritication.  On  the  other  side  his  complete
ignorance  of  Frencli  is  a  positive  ground  for  disljelieving  him,  and  one
which  he  lias  never  been  able  to  explain.

Phinuit  in  fact  exhibits  just  the  low  moral  tone  which  we  so  often
find  in  table-talking,  planchette,  and  other  manifestations,  as  we  now
regard  them,  of  the  secondary  self.  He  swears  freely,  and  indulges  ia
slang  of  the  vulgar  New  England  sort,  in  a  way  quite  alien  from  the
manners  of  Mrs.  Piper.  This  is  of  coui'se  a  trifle  ;  but  it  is  more  serious
when  we  find  him  continually  making  attempts  to  deceive.  If  he  is
not  able  to  make  a  right  statement,  he  is  always  I'eady  with  a  guess  of
more  or  less  ingenuity  to  conceal  his  ignorance,  or  at  least  with  some
ambiguity  or  subterfuge  which  should  make  a  show  of  turning  the
difliculty.  Hardly  a  sitting  passed  without  his  making  at  least  a  few
statements  which  were  altogetlier  wrong.  It  is  this  Vvhicli  consti-
tutes the  chief  obstacle  to  coming  to  a  positive  decision  as  to  many  of
the  facts.


Certain


Phenomeva


of  Trance.


561


We  must  therefore  attempt  to  give  some  idea  of  the  methods  which
were  employed  to  obtain  direction  from  the  sitters  in  case  correct
knowledge  failed  ;  or,  if  this  information  could  not  be  extracted,  to
make  lucky  guessing  supply  its  place.  For  this  purpose  two  of  the
woi'st  sittings  have  been  given  fully,  that  the  reader  may  form  his  own
opinion.  Miss  Johnson's  first  sitting  has  also  been  published,  with  a
commentary  which  will  show  how  hard  it  is  to  be  sure  that  fishing  does
not  enter  into  statements  which  may  at  first  seem  satisfactory.

In  thus  taking  the  part  of  an  advocatus  diaholi,  and  pressing  to  the
utmost  all  objections  which  can  be  urged  against  the  genuineness  of
the  phenomena,  it  is  almost  inevitable  that  one  should  give  a  somewhat
misleading  perspective  of  the  impression  which  the  evidence  has  pro-
duced upon  a  spectator.  In  order  so  far  as  possible  to  correct  this
impression  at  the  outset,  I  repeat  with  all  emphasis  that  the  con-
jectural analysis  of  Phinuit's  methods  is  very  far  from  covering  all  the
statements  which  he  made.  His  supposed  fishing  was  employed,  if  at
all,  only  when  the  supernormal  power  was  for  a  time  in  abeyance ;
possibly  it  is  only  an  imagination  of  my  own.  But  even  with  all  risk
of  being  misunderstood,  it  seems  essential  that  this  side  should  be  put
forward,  if  only  to  show  that  the  investigators  were  fully  alive  to  all
the  various  methods  by  which  it  might  be  possible  to  take  advantage
of  their  credulity  or  carelessness.  The  more  I  consider  the  whole  of
the  evidence,  the  more  I  remain  convinced  that  it  gives  proof  of  a  I'eal
supernormal  power,  subject,  however,  under  conditions  at  which  we  can
hardly  even  guess,  to  periods  of  temporary  eclipse.

Unfortunately  it  is  not  possible  to  reduce  the  chances  of  a  right
guess  to  anything  like  numerical  values.  In  a  fevv  cases  only  can  we
even  form  an  approximation.  Take,  for  instance,  a  favourite  state-
ment :  "  You  have  a  father  and  motlier,  one  (or  both)  in  the  body
(or,  in  the  spirit),"  as  the  case  may  be.  Here  evidently  the  possible
alternatives  are  four,  and  tlie  chances  against  a  right  guess  would  seem
to  be  three  to  one.  But  it  is  evident  that  the  apparent  age  of  the
sitter  would  give  a  certain  additional  help  to  a  guess.  In  some  cases,
v/ith  an  elderly  sitter,  the  statement,  ''  You  have  both  parents  in  the
spirit,"  would  be  almost  a  certainty.

So  again  with  the  case  of  names.  Phinuit  was  not  fond  of  giving
surnames,  but  at  times  he  did  so.  Sometimes  he  w;xs  strikingly  right ;
at  other  times  he  condescended  to  such  phrases  as  "You  know  Smith,"
or  "  How  is  Harris  ?  "  with  less  success  than  might  have  been  expected.
But  it  is  hopeless  here  to  attempt  to  say  wliat  the  chances  of  success
are.  In  the  case  of  Cliristian  names  the  case  is  not  really  better.  If
we  had  to  deal  only  with  utterances  such  as  "  Then  I  get  a  William,"  or
"  There  is  a  Henry  in  your  surroundings,"  we  might  have  formed  some
rough  idea  of  the  pi'oportion  of  persons  of  whom  this  would  be  true.


562


A  Record  of  Observations  of


But  the  case  becomes  hopeless  when  this  sort  of  thing  is  mixed  up  with
"  You  have  a  brother  John  ;  no — a  brother-in-hxw."  It  is  only  possible
to  record  the  fact  that  such  expressions  were  frequently  used,  thattliey
were  sometimes  successful  and  sometimes  wrong,  and  that  they  are  so
obviously  tainted  witli  the  suspicion  of  being  used  for  purposes  of
fishing  that  they  are  of  no  value  as  evidence.  A  rough  counting  of  the
Jiumber  of  Christian  names  given  shows  that  William  Avas  the  most
frequent,  and  the  most  often  right  ;  but  this  is  only  what  would  be
expected  on  the  hypothesis  either  of  fraud  or  of  imperfect  though
authentic  information,  since  William  is  the  commonest  male  Chiistian
name  in  England.  Some  names  were,  however,  given  with  a  frequency
which  leads  to  the  supposition  that  they  were  systematically  employed
for  fishing  with.  One  of  them  is  Alec  or  Alex,  which  met  with  much
more  success  than  would  have  been  supposed  likely  in  a  series  of  sittings
held  south  of  the  Tweed.  Another  name  was  "  Ed."  This  was  one  of
the  commonest.  As  Mr.  Barkworth  points  out,  it  has  the  advantage  of
standing  for  the  four  names  Edward,  Edwin,  Edgar,  and  Edmund.
Once,  when  none  of  these  was  recognised  by  a  sitter,  it  was  apparently
turned  into  "Head";  "what's  the  matter  with  head  ? "  (p.  487).
Another  name  is  "  Loo,"  whicli  has  the  useful  property  of  standing  at
need  either  for  a  woman,  Louisa,  or  a  man,  Louis.  Cases  in  whicli  it
was  successful  in  both  functions  will  be  found  among  the  records.

A  certain  vagueness  and  imperfection  of  pronunciation,  consistent
with  Pliinuit's  assumption  of  French  origin,  was  also  taken  advantage
of  in  order  to  increase  the  latitude  with  which  names  could  be  clianged
from  one  to  another.  Thus  Mary  was  always  called  Marie,  which
evidently  made  it  easy  to  change  to  Maria  when  necessary.  Alice  is  made
to  do  duty  for  Agnes  (see  Professor  Rendall's  sitting,  p.  478),  and  in
Miss  Johnson's  sitting  (p.  609)  it  will  be  found  that  John  is  clianged  into
C-eorge  by  an  ingenious  process.  It  is  of  course  possible  that  in  these
cases  the  real  reason  of  the  uncertainty  may  have  been  that  given  by
Phinuit,  that  his  modes  of  obtaining  knowledge  were  not  clear  ;  but  as
a  matter  of  evidence  we  must  assume  that  in  all  cases  tlie  changes  were
only  a  means  of  obtaining  direct  information  from  the  sitter.

It  is  probable  that  here  a  certain  amount  of  muscle-reading  was
called  into  play  as  a  guide  to  a  right  conclusion.  The  medium  usually
.sat  with  the  hand  of  the  sitter  pressed  to  her  forehead.  The  attitude
is  a  favourite  one  with  so-called  thought-reading  performers.  Uncon-
scious indications  would  no  doubt  be  given  when  the  name  first  guessed
was  anywhere  near  the  mark,  and  would  easily,  hy  known  methods,  be
followed  up  to  a  completely  right  conclusion.  The  same  means  may
have  been  used  in  the  localisation  of  comj^laints.  A  very  common
statement  was  that  some  relation  of  the  sitter  was  lame  in  the  knee,
or  still  more  commonly  that  he  had  rheumatism  there.  This  was  usually


Certain  Phenomoia  of  Trance.


563


■Ticcompanied  by  a  grasping  of  tlie  knee,  which  suggests  muscle-reading.
In  one  case  the  suffering  was  followed  downwards  and  rightly  located
in  the  toe.^  At  other  times  the  pain  was  said  to  be  in  the  liead — head-
.aches  or  neuralgia.  This  was  equally  accompanied  by  feeling  over  the
sitter's  head.  Not  only  are  rheumatism  and  lieadaches  two  of  the
'Commonest  of  complaints,  and  the  most  likely  to  be  guessed  right,  but
tlie  knee  and  the  head  were  the  most  accessible  portions  of  the  sitter's
frame,  and  tliose  about  which  unconscious  information  could  best  be
^iven.  "  Suflering  from  a  cold,"  too,  was  a  favourite  diagnosis.  As  the
sittings  took  place  in  December  and  January,  and  the  later  ones  during
tlie  height  of  the  influenza  epidemic,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that
this  was  generally  admitted  to  be  correct.

I  have  now  gone  through  all  the  possible  explanations  of  divinatio)!
by  fraud  whicli  after  a  careful  study  of  the  whole  of  the  evidence  I  am
able  to  suggest.  It  will  be  found  that  they  are  far  fi'om  covering  the
■whole  of  the  facts.  But  they  will  show  that  we  must  assume  as  worth-
Jess  all  single  Christian  names  even  when  given  as  those  of  a  definite
relation.  We  can  take  names  as  positive  evidence  only  when  correctly
given  in  series  and  without  fishing.

Another  peculiarity  of  Dr.  Phinuit's,  which  does  not  tend  to  raise
our  opinion  of  his  veracity,  nor  indeed  of  his  shrewdness,  has  been
noticed  by  several  sitters.  This  is  that  when  a  statement  of  his  has
been  corrected,  or  information  directly  given  him,  by  the  sitter,  he
■would  take  no  notice  of  it  at  the  time,  but  bring  it  out  after  a  while  as
if  it  were  an  original  piece  of  knowledge  of  his  own.  The  device  is  too
transparent  to  need  mucli  notice,  though,  as  Pliinuit  has  had  a  lai'ge
expeiience  of  his  business,  it  is  likely  enough  that  he  has  found  it
useful  at  times.

There  will  of  coarse  be  no  presumption  in  favour  of  Phinuit's
veracity  when  he  represents  the  messages  he  gives  as  being  told  to  him
(by  the  defunct  friends  of  the  sitter.  The  question  whether  this  may
not  after  all  be  the  easiest  explanation  is,  however,  definitely  raised  by
the  material  befoi'e  us,  and  is  by  far  the  most  serious  point  which  we
have  to  face.  It  is  our  first  duty  to  see  if  we  cannot  find  an  explana-
tion without  recourse  to  a  supposition  which  is  to  most  of  us  one  of  the
least  probable  that  could  be  made.

Setting  aside  the  hypothesis  that  Mrs.  Piper  in  her  normal  state
learns  the  facts  which  Phinuit  communicates,  as  untenable,  and  tlie
alternative,  that  Phinuit  obtains  them  during  the  sittings,  partly  by
ingenious  and  systematic  guessing,  partly  by  help  unconsciously
furnished  to  him  by  the  sitters,  as  insufficient,  there  remains  a  third  :
that  he  obtains  thein  by  a  process  of  thought-transference  from  the
fitter's  mind.

1  See  No.  GO,  p.  044  ;  and  compare  p.  010.


564


A  Record  of  Ohser  vat  ions  of


Will  thought -transference  then  suffice  to  explain  the  vrhole  of  the'
puzzling  facts  -which  we  have  to  deal  v/ith  ?  My  own  belief  is  that  it
Avill.  Indeed  it  is  only  in  a  very  few  cases  that  the  question  arises  at
all.  The  primary  point  is  naturally  to  know  if  the  sitter  was  told
anytliing  wliich  was  not  and  could  not  have  been  within  his  own  know-
ledge, l)ut  wliich  yet  turns  out  to  be  true.  Nothing  short  of  this  will
give  us  a  valid  division  between  thought-transference  and  communi-
cation from  intelligences  other  than  our  own.

'Now  thought-transference  in  th.e  jJi't'sent  case,  if  thought-transfer-
ence there  be,  is  concerned,not  with  the  normal  consciousness,  but  witli
what  we  now  call  the  sub-consciousness.  It  has  nothing  to  do  with
thought-reading  as  commonly  understood,  in  which  it  is  necessary  that
the  agent  should  steadily  fix  his  thoughts  upon  the  idea  or  picture
v/hich  he  desires  to  transfer  to  the  mind  of  the  pei'cipient.  The
thoughts  ■which  are  transfei-red  are  by  no  means,  as  a  I'ule,  those  which
were  uppermost  in  the  sitter's  mind  at  the  time  ;  the  statements  made-
are  rather  of  old  and  often  half- forgot  ten  facts,  while  distinct  attempt.s-
.sometimes  made  by  the  sitter  to  obtain  a  deliverance  as  to  particular
matters  wliich  he  had  ^-i\idly  before  him  resulted  as  a  rule — I  cannot
say  if  always — in  failure.

Now  we  know  little  enough  as  yet  about  the  sub-consciousness  ;  but
we  have  at  least  good  grounds  for  supposing  that  no  impression  once
made  upon  it  is  ever  lost.  The  conscious  memory  is  in  itself  no  guide
as  to  what  the  contents  of  the  sub-consciousness  may  or  may  not  be.
There  is  no  need,  therefore,  to  assume,  at  our  present  stage  of  know-
ledge, anything  more  than  this  unlimited  retentiveness  of  the  sub-
consciousness and  the  power  of  reading  it,  in  order  to  account  for  the-
reproduction  of  anything  whatever  which  may  at  any  time  have  been-
presented  to  the  consciousness.  And  who  can  say  definitely  what  he-
may  not  have  heai'd  in  childhood,  for  instance,  in  the  conversations  of
his  elders  ;  things  which  lie  did  not  understand,  and  wliich  may  have-
long  since  passed  out  of  the  conscious  memory  of  the  elders  themselveSj,
if  they  still  live  and  can  be  asked  ?  There  is  nothing  more  wonderfuL"
in  the  supposed  reproduction  of  such  casual  knowledge,  thouglit-
transference  once  granted,  than  in  the  familiar  case  of  the  Hebrew
repeated  by  the  delirious  peasant  girl,  learnt  unconsciously  from  the-
recitations  of  her  former  master.  Take,  for  instance,  the  messages  sent
by  Uncle  Jerry  to  Professor  Lodge.  The  story  of  swinmiing  the  creek
is  striking  enough,  but  what  jiroof  can  there  be  that  it  was  not  told  by
Uncle  Jerry  himself  or  one  of  his  brothers  to  Professor  Lodge  in  his,
childhood  ?  If  it  was,  then  in  Professor  Lodge's  brain  it  must  have-
been  ever  since,  ready  to  be  deciphered  by  any  intelligence  possessed  o£
the  means  of  reading  a  sul)-consciousness.

The  assumption  of  thought-reading  as  a  I'eality  leads  us  fartlier,  into


Certain  Phevoraena  of  Trance.


565


regions  of  pure  hypothesi-i,  which  cannot,  however,  be  ignored  when  such
an  alternative  liypothesis  is  set  up  for  our  acceptance  as  the  communi-
cation of  departed  spirits  with  the  living.  If  thouglit-trausfei'ence  is
possible  at  all,  it  seems  likely  that  it  is  a  function  of  tlie  under  self,  not
of  the  upper  self,  for  it  is  in  manifestations  of  the  under  self  that  we
have  had  our  best  experimental  proofs  ;  in  the  hypnotic  sleep  and  in
automatic  w-riting,  where  the  functions  of  the  upper  self  are  for  the  time
suspended.  If  then  this  under  self,  of  whose  woi'kings  we  are  only  sa
irregularly  and  so  imperfectly  conscious,  has  such  susceptibility  to
otlier  minds  at  all,  it  is  no  wild  assumption  to  suppose  that  it  is
continually  receiving  impressions  from  other  minds,  indeed  from  every
other  mind  in  the  tiiiiverse,  with  varying  clearness  and  force  depending
on  some  conditions  which  we  cannot  at  present  even  guess  at.  Only
under  certain  rare  conditions  do  such  impacts  succeed  in  transferring
themselves  to  the  upper  consciousness,  in  the  form  of  hallucination  or
automatic  action.  Still  more  rarely  do  we  find  another  sub-conscious-
ness so  susceptible  that,  like  an  instrument  of  extreme  delicacy,  it  is
able  to  record  the  impression  which  such  past  impacts  have  made  u^^on
us.  The  physical  analogies  of  such  a  solidarity  of  all  minds  are  obvious
enough,  but  must  not  be  pressed.  It  is  sufficient  to  say  that,  once
granting  the  reality  of  thought-transference  acting  between  strata  of
personality  of  whose  existence  we  are  only  sporadically  conscious,  such
a  theory  in  itself  contains  nothing  more  bewildering  or  less  conceivable
than  the  mutual  interaction  of  all  the  material  particles  of  the  universe
asserted  in  the  law  of  gravitation.

Such  a  hypothesis  wotild  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  we  can  have
no  experimental  proof  of  the  existence  of  departed  spirits.  For  there
can  be  no  certainty  that  anything  which  was  once  in  any  human  mind,
even  if  no  longer  in  being,  was  not  once  recorded  in  another  with
clearness  enougli  to  enable  its  transmission  and  ultimate  recovery.
The  possibility  of  the  existence  of  other  than  liuman  intelligences
still  would  be  within  the  range  of  proof  ;  for  it  is  quite  conceivable
that  knowledge  might  be  cojtveyed  to  us  v^■hich  v/as  never  in  any  living;
human  mind  at  all.

This,  however,  is  not  of  vital  importance  for  our  present  jatirpose  :  for
so  far  as  I  can  see  the  few  facts  stated  wliich  the  sitters  declare  were
unknown  to  them  at  the  time  may  all  be  explained  either  by  successful
guessing  or  by  forgotten  knowledge  of  childhood  or  of  later  years.
Still,  as  the  hypothesis  of  spiritual  communication  is  in  the  field,  it  ia
well  to  show  that  a  natural,  if  as  yet  quite  arbitrary,  dedtiction  from
theories  which  we  believe  to  be  proved  will  accouitt  for  all  phenomena
which  might  be  brought  forward  in  support  of  the  existence  of  disem-
bodied spirits  capable  of  making  themselves  known  to  us.

Among  the  different  sittings  will  be  found  a  few  cases  of  attempted


566


A  Record  of  Observations  of


clairvoyance — the  description  of  actions  which  were  being  performed
^at  the  moment  by  persons  in  a  different  place  from  that  where  the
fitting  was.  These  were  in  many  cases  complete  failures.  They  gener-
ally referred  to  people  well  known  to  the  sitter,  and,  where  compara-
tively accurate,  they  hardly  surpassed  what  might  be  explained  by
thought-transference  from  the  sitter's  mind,  as  he  would  naturally  be
■able  to  give  a  pretty  good  guess.  This,  for  instance,  would  explain  the
account  given  to  Mrs.  Verrall  in  No.  63  ;  slie  knew  that  it  was  the
time  when  her  husband,  a  tutor  of  Trinity,  would  Ije  likely  to  be  seeing
liis  pupils.  Miss  Johnson,  too,  in  No.  67,  would  have  an  idea  of  the
probable,  or  at  least  possible  surroundings  of  her  brother  at  the  time.
Mrs.  Sidgwick  has  reported  upon  the  experiments  which  she  and  her
husband  made  together  ;  they  cannot  be  considered  very  cogent,  as  it
is  imjDossible  to  apply  any  calculation  of  chances  to  them.  The
•account  given  to  Mrs.  B.  of  the  actions  of  Mrs.  Verrall,  No.  66,  is
more  unusual  in  its  character,  but  Mrs.  B.  is  well  acquainted  with
Mrs.  Verrall,  and  her  experiments  in  "crystal-gazing,"'  so  that  a  chance
■coincidence  is  by  no  means  ovit  of  the  question.  The  most  difficult
•of  all  these  experiments  to  explain  is  that  of  Mr.  Conner's,  p.  4-88,
where  the  actions  of  his  mother  in  London  at  the  time,  or  rather  a  few
minutes  before,  were  told  with  a  close  approach  to  accuracy.  Here
again,  however,  but  for  the  assurance  that  Mrs.  (lonner  was  not  in
the  habit  of  going  out  of  doors  at  the  time  referred  to,  one  would  have
said  that  the  action  of  putting  on  out-of-door  clothing  at  11  o'clock
a.m.  was  not  beyond  the  possibility  of  a  right  guess.  If,  however,  this
theory  of  mere  guessing  be  not  accepted,  we  should  have  to  recur  to
the  idea  of  a  real  telepathic  thought-transfei'ence  operating  at  the
time  from  Mrs.  Gonner  to  her  son,  and  read  as  soon,  as  the  impression
reached  the  mind  of  the  sitter,  who  thus  acted  at  the  same  time  as
percipient  and  agent.  There  seems  to  me  to  be  no  a  ^jriori  ground
■against  such  an  idea ;  but  the  experiments  made  were  too  few,  and  tlie
pi'oportion  of  failures  was  too  large  to  allow  any  weight  whatever  to
be  laid  upon  them.

A  word  may  be  said  as  to  the  prophecies  which  were  freely  given
to  all  the  sitters,  but  which  have  been  omitted  from  the  sittings
reported  in  brief,  as  having  obviously  no  evidential  value.  Some  of
them  referred  to  the  comparatively  distant  future,  and  ha^e  not  had
time  to  fulfil  themselves.  This,  however,  does  not  much  matter,  as  some
have  had  their  opportunity  and  have  missed  it,  or  at  best  have  fulfilled
themselves  about  as  fairly  as  the  forecasts  of  a  sensible  man  would  be
likely  to  do.  See,  for  instance,  Mr.  Clarke's  notes,  Nos.  3,  p.  569,  and  21,
p.  572.  There  has  not  been  a  single  case  to  indicate  that  Phinuit
has  any  power  of  foi'etelling  the  future  superior  to  that  of  his  sitters.

Everything,  therefore,  so  far  as  I  have  yet  seen,  points  to  thought-


Certain  PJiMiwraewx  of  Tro.  iue.


567


transference  being  an  adequate  explanation  of  the  phenomena,  at  least
if  vre  give  to  it  the  extension  which  has  been  indicated  above,  that
Phinidt  was  able  to  detect  mental  impressions  transferred  to  his  sitters
from  those  closely  connected  with  them,  and  transferred  at  the  very
time  of  the  sitting.  Several  instructive  incidents  point  directly
against  any  knowledge  derived  from  the  spirits  of  the  dead.  For
instance,  in  Mrs.  H.  Leafs  first  sitting  a  question  was  put  about
''•Harry,"  whose  messages  Phinuit  purported  to  be  giving  :  "Did  he
leave  a  wife  ^o  answer  was  given  to  this  at  the  time,  but  in
■accordance  with  Phinuit's  frequent  practice  the  supposed  hint  was
stored  up  for  future  use  :  and  at  3Irs.  H.  Leaf's  next  sitting  she  was
told,  "Harry  sends  his  love  to  liis  w^ife.''"  JJ'ow,  as  a  matter  of  fact
Harry  never  was  married.  In  Mrs.  B.'s  second  sitting  and  in  Mrs.
A.''s  account  of  her  brother "s  suffering  in  the  arm,  wrong  facts  M-ere
stated  which  corresponded  to  the  sitter's  belief  This  evidently
indicates  thought-transference,  not  spiritual  communication.  See  also
Mr.  Clarke's  note  as  to  the  statement  that  a  man  had  been  left  to  look
after  his  house  in  England,  and  as  to  his  suspicions  of  his  friend."  In
a  few  cases  only  sitters  thought  that  the  course  of  their  own  ideas  was
followed  as  fresh  ones  were  suggested  to  them  by  the  remarks  made  by
Phinuit  ;  but  the  evidence  for  this  is  naturally  not  clear.  Mr.  Pye
mentions  an  instance  in  his  report.^

On  the  whole,  then,  the  efiect  which  a  careful  study  of  all  the  reports
of  the  English  sittings  has  left  in  my  mind  is  this  :  That  Dr.  Phiauit
is  only  a  name  for  Mi-s.  Piper  s  secondary  personality,  assuming  the
name  and  acting  the  part  mth  the  aptitude  and  consistency  which  is
shown  by  secondary  pei-sonalities  in  other  known  cases  ;  that  in  this
abnormal  state  there  is  a  quite  exceptional  power  of  reading  the
contents  of  the  minds  of  sitters  ;  but  that  this  power  is  far  from
complete.  It  gets  only  glimpses  of  what  is  stored  up  in  the  memory,
and  this  without  any  clear  distinction  of  that  which  is  present  to  the
mind  at  the  time  from  the  forgotten  memories,  if  the  phrase  may  be
xised,  of  the  past.  The  stray  hints  thus  caught  may  sometimes  faU
together  into  consistent  groups,  in  which  case  we  have  a  successful
sitting  ;  or,  and  this  is  more  usual,  they  may  present  themselves  only
as  fragments.  Phinuit  is  excessively  desirous  of  impressing  himself
upon  his  hearers  as  a  being  of  superhuman  powers  :  and  when  he  gets
but  fragmentaiy  pictures  he  does  not  hesitate  to  piece  them  together
with  guesswork,  often  of  the  AvUdest  kind.  Sometimes  he  gets  not
even  a  glimpse  of  what  the  sitter's  mind  contains ;  he  then  has  recourse
to  guessing  pure  and  simple.  In  his  guessing  he  shrewdly  takes
advantage  of  help  afforded  him  by  his  sitters,  throwing  out  general

i  See  p.  595.  3  pp_  571^  573

-  See  Api>eadix  Xo.  53. '  p.  COO.


568


A  Record  of  OhservaUons  of


statements,  and  watching  the  eftect  they  produce  in  order  to  guide
himself.  It  is  probable,  but  by  no  means  certain,  that  he  also  gets  help
from  muscle-reading,  chiefly  in  the  location  of  complaints.  He  takes
ad^'antage  of  any  hints  that  may  be  thrown  out,  and  attempts  to  dress
them  up  as  statements  of  his  own,  bringing  them  out  after  an  interval
in  order  that  their  real  origin  may  be  forgotten.  In  short,  he  omits
no  means  of  disguising  liis  .  ignorance,  even  descending  at  times  to
downright  denial  of  what  he  has  just  said  in  order  to  cover  a  blunder.

It  is  unfortunate  that  the  statements  which  he  makes  are  rarely  or
never  of  such  a  nature  as  to  admit  even  an  approximate  application  of
the  doctrine  of  chances,  especially  as  we  ha\'e  nothing  like  verbatim
reports  of  most  of  the  sittings,  and  the  amount  of  fishing  can  only  be
estimated  when  the  exact  words  are  known.

The  reader  must,  however,  form  his  own  judgmeiats  from  the  repoi'ts
themselves,  which  Ave  now  proceed  to  give.  They  are  mostly  but
partial  a,ccounts  from  rough  notes  made  at  the  time,  and  in  some  oases
supplemented  hy  the  sitter's  meinory.  But  in  order  that  a  fair  idea
may  be  formed  of  what  a  sitting  was  really  like,  one,  that  of  Mrs..
Herbert  Leaf,  has  been  printed  at  length  from  shorthand  notes,  not
indeed  vei'batim,  but  containing,  I  believe,  almost  everything  that  was
said  with  the  exception  of  the  repetitions  and  inaccuracies  of  expression
which  are  usual  in  conversation,  and  in  no  way  affect  the  evidence.
It  will  be  seen  that  there  is  a  great  mass  of  verbiage  used  apparently
only  to  fill  up  the  time,  and  so  far  as  can  be  judged  not  of  the  least
importance  in  the  way  of  getting  Phinuit  any  information.  It  would
have  been  but  a  waste  of  trouble  and  expense  to  attempt  a  reproduction
of  this  in  every  case.  The  same  sitting  Avill  give  a  good  example
of  the  "tailing  ofl""  which  was  so  often  observed  towards  the  end  of  a.
sitting,  and  wliicli  has  been  already  noticed  by  Mr.  Myers.  It  may  be
remarked  that  this  is  the  opposite  of  what  would  have  been  expected
if  information  was  mainly  extracted  from  the  sitters  themselves  ;
for  it  would  seem  obvious  that  the  more  Phinuit  guessed  the  better  he
WDuld  be  al>le  to  piece  his  knov/ledge  together,  so  tliat  the  end  of  a
sitting,  like  the  last  cai'ds  of  a  hand  at  wliist,  should  sliow  more  know-
ledge and  less  conjecture  than  the  beginning.

We  take  first  the  sitting  of  Mr.  J.  T.  Clarke  at  Professor
James's  liouse  at  Choeoiaia,  New  Hampshire.  Although  this  does  not,
strictly  speaking,  belong  to  the  English  series,  it  is  more  conveniently
given  here,  as  several  allusions  were  made  to  it  in  the  subsequent
sitting  witli  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Clarke  at  their  house  in  Harrow.  Mr.
Clarke  was  in  September,  1889,  on  a  hurried  business  visit  to  Amei'ica.
Though  it  would  have  been  easy  for  Mrs.  Piper  to  acquire  knowledge
of  his  relations  and  friends  in  Boston,  it  will  be  seen  that  what  was
told  him  was  entirely  about  his  English  surroundings,  of  which  she


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


5G9


could  have  learnt  little  or  nothing  on  tlie  otlier  side  of  the  Atlantic.
His  wife  and  children  have  never  been  in  America.  The  annotations
are  by  Mr.  Clarke.

Glwcoriia,  Nev)  Hampshire,  in  house  of  Dr.  JVilliani  James,
September  20th,  1889.

Sitting  with  Mr.  Clarke,  Mr.  Hodgson  taking  notes.  Mr.  Clarke  fixes
his  mind  steadily  upon  a  certain  house,  and  visualises  memljers  of  family  ;
of  tliis  no  recognition  by  medium,  who  begins  :

Why  1  I  know  you  1  I  have  seen  your  influence  somewhere  before  I  vrhat
fire  you  duing  over  here  1

1.  This  secondary consciousness,  the  clairvoyant  or  thought-reading

consciousness  (_)f  the  medium,  had  become  acquainted  with  my
individuality  through  frec[uent  sittings  with  intimate  friends.  It
had  seen  me  as  they  knew  me,  under  difterent  surroundings.  It  had
in  former  sittings  with  these  friends  made  mention  of  me  and  of  my
mother.

Oh  1  there  is  lots  of  trouble  over  you,  l)lack  clouds  all  over  you  ;  but  I
see  light  beyond  ;  you  will  come  out  all  riglit.  It  is  financial  trouble  that  I
mean. You  will  wade  through  it  all  right  in  the  end.

2.  Correct. My  visit  to  America  was  determined  by  a  financial  failure,

the  loss  from  which  I  was  then  endoa^■ouring  to  minimise.

"  How  long  hence  ? "

Four  months  or  four  months  and  adialf.  There  arc  parties  that  haven't
dealt  honourably  with  you.

3.  The  prediction  is,  as  the  case  has  proved,  valueless. As  for  the

accusation  against  the  "parties"  referred  to,  we  have  in  it  a
peculiarly  interestmg  point.  The  statement  in  itself  was  absolutely
untrue.  I  was  soon  thereafter  ahle  to  assure  myself  that  the
action  of  the  men  in  question  had  been  entirely  honourable  and
loyal  towards  me  and  my  interests,  but  niy  mind  at  the  time
undeniably  entertained  some  aiJprehcnsion  lest  the  facts  should
prove  to  have  been  otherndse.  This  dread  did  not  even  amount  to
a  S'Uspicion  which  I  could  have  formulated,  or  would  have  admitted
to  myself,  still  less  to  others,  and  the  detection  of  such  a  lurking
distrust  is  particularly  interesting  as  an  evidence  of  the  closeness  of
communication  existing  Ijetween  mind  and  mind,  under  this  abnor-
mal mental  condition.  Compare  the  similar  case  remarked  upon
in  Note  15.

I  see  your  lady  in  the  spirit,  your  mother, — have  seen  her  before.

4.  As  to  the  acquaint;ince  of  this  secondary  consciousness  of  the  medium

v.dth  the  individuality  of  my  mother,  see  Note  1.

(There  followed  a  clear  account  of  my  ov>'n  concejotion  of  my  mother,
Tecently  deceased,  wdiose  constant  presence  in  my  mind  readily  accounts
for  the  frequent  mentions  of  her.)

You've  also  got  a  lady  in  the  body,  your  wife.  You  Avon't  find  her  very
well.

5.  Prophecy  wrong. My  wife  never  Ijetter  in  health.

Do  you  know  a  man  named  Williams — no,  wait  !  Williamson  ?  (Reply,
No.") Tall,  rather  dark,  first  name  Henery  (.sfc). He  will  come  into  your
surroundings  soon — he  wdll  have  something  to  do  with  your  papers  and  with


570


A  Record  of  Observations  of


law.  He  will  look  after  your  interests  and  get  you  out  all  right.  You  will
meet  him  very  soon — within  a  few  weeks.

6.  Interesting  point. The  name  of  the  lawyer  intrusted  with  the  defence

of  my  interests  in  the  financial  trouble  before  referred  to,  viz.,
Lambertson,  had  been  communicated  to  me  10  days  previous  to  the
sitting,  and  was  written  down  by  me  in  a  note-book,  and  then  com-
pletely forgotten.  I  could  not  have  correctly  recalled  it  by  an  effort
of  the  memory,  but  might  have  come  about  as  near  to  it  in  sound  and
lengtli  as  did  tlie  clairvoyant.  I  have  never  known  anybody
named  Williamson.  The  description  of  the  personal  apijearance-
and  the  mention  of  the  Christian  name  are  consequently  wholly
gratuitous.

Part  of  your  interest  is  in  the  ground  ;  you  came  near  being  "  left "  in  ia
this  business,  but  are  not  altogether.

7.  Correct. Property  consisted  of  a  town  lot  and  buildings,  and  I  cer-

tainly felt  that  I  had  come  near  losing  it.

"Tell  me  about  my  mother."

Your  mother  is  with  us. She  is  here  and  happy  in  the  spirit.

8.  This,  I  take  it,  is  the  way  that  mediums,  burdened  with  the  conven-

tional views  and  the  phrases  customary  in  Spiritualistic  circles,  find
it  most  natural  to  express  the  conception  which  tliey  receive  front
another  mind  of  a  person  being  a  memory,  an  image  of  the  mind  as
opposed  to  a  living  reality.  That  which  is  borne  in  my  mind  as  a-
visualisation  appears  in  the  clairvoyant  phraseology  as  a  spirit-
See  in  this  regard  the  indication  remarked  upon  in  Note  16.

Who  is  this  M.,  your  cousin  ?  Your  mother  says  she  is  not  very  well.
She  is  getting  better,  but  she  will  continue  weak.

9.  The  health  of  the  person  referred  to,  though  improved  at  the  time,

had  caused  both  myself  and  my  mother  much  solicitude.  I  have
noticed,  however,  that  the  phrase,  "  Your  mother  says  "  or  "Your
mother  tells  me "  has  no  j^iii'ticidar  significance.  Witness  the-
trivial  instance  of  the  lost  jjocket-knife,  to  be  mentioned  later.
Note  25.

"  Can  you  see  my  children  ?  "

Wait.  .  .  .  Wlio  is  this  about  you  that  is  musical,  that  plays  tlie-
j)iano  (imitating  action  of  fingers)  ?  Ah,  it  is  your  lady  in  the  body.  She  is-
not  very  well  just  now — she  is  suffering  from  rheumatism.

10.  My  wife  plays  the  jDiano  much.  As  to  her  health,  my  own  solicitude
was  undoubtedly  father  to  the  prophecy,  wliicli  was  altogether
wrong.  My  wife  was  well,  and  lias  never  suffered  from  rheumatism.

"Do you  see  my  children  ?"

No,  not  at  all  yet ;  I  shall  directly.  Wait.  Who  is  this  Fred  that
comes  together  with  your  mother?

11.  A  cousin  lost  at  sea  10  years  ago,  under  peculiarly  shocking  circum-
stances. His  death  made  a  great  impi'ession  upon  me.

Is  he  not  your  cousin  ?
"Yes."

He  comes  with  your  mother. Siie  knows  liim  better  now  than  she  did
before  death. . . . Who  is  this  uncle  of  yours  named  John  ?
"  I  have  no  Uncle  John."
Yes,  yes,  you  have — the  man  that  married  your  aunt.


Cc'liahl  Phenomena  of  Trance.


571


' '  No,  you  are  wrong  ; the  man  that  married  my aunt was  called
Philip."

Well,  I  think  I  know. (Changes  subject,  grumbling.)

12.  As  the  dialogue  sliows,  I  had  entirely  ft)rgotten  for  the  moment  that
an  aunt  of  mine  had  indeed  married  a  man  named  John,  with  whoni
I  liad  formerly  had  some  correspondence.  I  did  not  recollect  this
until  the  following  day.  This  is  a  clear  instance  of  the  metliod  in
which  the  clairvoyant  may  draw  from  the  reservoir  of  our  conscious-
ness, as  it  were,  and  can  even  recall  to  us  facts  which  we  have-
temporarily  forgotten.

Why  1  you  are  a  funny  fellow — you  are  covered  with  paint  from  head  to-
foot. Your  mother  says  it  is  too  bad.

13.  T  Irad  been  much  interested  in  painting  the  walls  of  a  room,  in  the
house  of  my  friend,  for  some  days  previously.

I'd  like  to  know  who  this  H.  is,  that  you  are  going  to  see.  Take  good
care  of  that  man.  He  is  a  tricky  one.  Don't  let  him  get  you  into  his
j5ower.

14.  Tliis  is  an  altogether  unjust  accusation,  based  upon  an  unwarrant-
able distrust  entertained  by  me  at  the  time  with  respect  to  the
friend  named,  whom  I  had  not  seen  for  14  years.  This  distrust,
was  S(.)on  removed  altogether  by  a  closer  acquaintance  with  facts.
This  case  is  precisely  like  that  refei-red  to  in  Note  3.  I  sliould,
certainly  not  have  been  willing  to  admit  that  I  felt  susjiicious
of  H.,  even  to  myself,  still  less  to  another.  Yet  here  this  unjust
and  ungenerous  suspicion  was  j^roclaimed  to  me  by  the  clairvoyant^
and  I  cannot  altogether  deny  its  existence.

(At  this  point  the  medium  spoke  across  the  room  to  Mr.  Hodgson,  calling
him  by  name,  and  making  some  unimportant  personal  communications.  Mr.
Hodgson  was  sitting  at  a  distance  of  20ft.  from  us,  behind  a  screen.  This
leads  to  the  interesting  question  how  far  and  how  easily  the  mind  of  the
clairvoyant  can  be  transferred  from  the  sitter  to  another  person.  Cair  the
clairvoyant  inform  A  of  what  is  passing  in  the  mind  of  B  ?  This  seems  to
me  the  most  momentous  problem  before  us.  The  recognition  and  direction
of  a  power  such  as  this  may  lead  to  a  moral  revolution  in  the  life  of  the
human  race.)

Here  is  your  Rebecca  1

(Clarke  and  Hodgs-on  both  ask  "  mine  "  ? Each  having  relatives  of  that
name.)

(To  Clarke)  :  Your  Rebecca,  your  little  girl. She  runs  around  and  gives
her  hand  to  everyone  about  her.

"Is  there  another  little  one  with  her?"

Yes,  there  are  three  of  your  people  together  there  now.

15.  My  wife  and  two  children.

"  How  is  Rebecca  ?  "
"Very  well.

"  Where  is  she  now  ?  "

She  is  in  the  spirit. That  is  to  say,  her  .spirit's  here,  but  her  body  is  at  a
distance.

16.  A  noteworthy  instance  of  the  way  in  which  this  term  is  used  by  the
medium. My  child  was  in  Germany  at  the  time,  and  thus  lived


572


A  Reco7rl  of  Observations  of


rathei-  in  my  memory  tiiaii  in  my  djiily  view.  Hence,  although  the
medium  felt  that  whe  was  alive  ("  Her  body  is  at  a  distance  '"),  her
l^ersonality  was  yet  spoken  of  as  "in  the  spirit." Compare  Note  8.

You  will  soon  have  a  surprise.  It  is  a  photograjih  of  your  boy  tliat  is
being  made  for  you. It  is  unfinished  as  yet,  l)ut  will  surprise  you.

17.  An  evident  failure  on  the  part  of  the  medium  to  comprehend  some
of  my  ideas  :  I  was  at  that  time  taking  photographs  which  vi-ere  not
to  1)0  developed,  and  consequently  could  not  be  seen,  until  my  return
to  England.  Hence  a  photi  :graph  appears  in  her  ^-ersionas  a  surprise
which  some  other  person  is  preparing  for  mo.

There  are  five  of  you  :  yourself,  your  two  children,  j'ourlady  in  the  body,
iind  your  lady  in  the  spirit.

18.  This  is  ray  constant  feeling — the  "we  are  seven"  of  my  sur-
roundings.

What  are  these  tickets  that  you  have  in  your  pocket  '.  Tliere  are  figures
■on  them  stamjped  in  red,  and  they  are  signed  with  names  underneath.  They
v/ill  be  of  value  to  you,  you  will  get  something  out  of  tliem.

"  No,  I  have  notliing  of  the  kind  in  my  pocket.  '

19.  Knowing  that  I  had  left  my  pocket-book  of  ]i;i]iers  elsewhere,  I
denied  having  anytliing  of  tlie  kind  about  me.  I  had  forgotten  for
the  moment  that  I  had,  earlier  in  the  day,  taken  two  chetpies  to  be
cashed,  and  had  thrust  them  into  my  inside  pocket,  folded  up.
Tliese  cheques  were  endorsed  on  the  Ijack  as  described,  and  were
stamped  with  large  and  peculiar  red  nund)ers  ;  I  particidarly
remember  glancing  at  these  numbers,  and  verifying  the  endorse-
ments. Another  instance  of  underlying  memory.

"  Wliere  is  mj^  wife  V

She  is  across  country. She  has  Ijeen  away.

20.  My  wife  liad  intended  to  go  to  Germany  from  England,  soon  after
my  sudden  departure  for  the  United  States.  I  did  not  positively
hwiv  that  she  was  away  from  home,  but  I  should  have  assumed  it  as
well-nigh  certain.

Tliere  is  a  young  man  and  an  old  lady  with  her.

(There  followed  an  accurate  interpretation  of  my  estimate  of  the
characters  of  these  two  persons,  v/ho  I  knew  must  be  together  with  my
v/ife.)  .  .  .  The  young  man  is  coming  back  again.  ;  he  is  going  still
more  across  country.

21.  Correct.  I  knew  that  my  brother-in-law  had  to  return  from  the
Tyrol  to  his  home  on  the  Baltic.

.  (Further  reference  to  my  motlier  descriltiiig  lier  character  and
representing  her  as  she  lives  in  my  memory.)  .  .  .  Th^t  is  an  old-
fashioned  portrait  of  her,  not  very  good,  but  better  than  nothing.  ("Where  ?
Which  one  ?  ") It  is  at  home. I  mean  the  one  with  tlie  collarette.

22.  A  sufficient  indication  of  one  of  the  few  portraits  of  my  mother.

Wlio  is  this  funny-footed  fellow  of  yours,  the  one  with  the  club-feet  and
the  funny  shoes  ?  Your  mother  says  it  is  an  injustice  to  you,  too  bad — but
it  will  come  out  all  right.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  573

23.  Correct. My  boy  was  born  with  club-feet,  and.  wears  machine
boots.

Why  !  you've  changed  your  house  recently.
"No."

Yes,  your  lady  has  changed  her  house.

' '  Well,  you  may  mean  that  she  is  away  from  her  house,  that  is  true.  Now
describe  the  house  in  which  we  live  generally."

Yes.  Wait  a  minute.  I  will  go  into  the  door  at  the  side.  What  is  that
tall,  old-fashioned  thing  in  the  back  room  ? Ah,  it  is  a  big  clock.

24.  Correct.

"Now  go  into  the  kitchen."

Yes.  No  one  here  now  (10  p.m.  in  New  Hampshire,  3  a.m.  in  England).
A  fat  person,  a  cook  has  been  here.  Big  man,  with  a  dark  moustache,  has
also  been  here  a  good  while  during  the  day,  and  has  left  his  influence  here.

"Who  is  he?"

He  has  been  put  here  to  watch  the  place.
"Is  he  trustworthy  and  faithful  ?  "
Yes,  he  is  trustworthy.

25.  Interesting  error.  It  was  arranged  on  my  leaving  England  that,  in
case  the  servant  should  object  to  being  left  in  tlie  house  alone
during  the  absence  of  my  wife  in  Germany,  a  policeman  should
be  hired  to  guard  the  house  and  to  live  in  it.  At  tlie  time  of  the
sitting  I  had  not  heard  how  this  had  turned  out,  and  was  quite
ready  to  supfiose  that  a  man  was  watching  in  the  house.  In
point  of  fact,  however,  there  was  nobody  in  the  house  excepting
the  servant  and  a  young  girl,  of  which  latter,  as  I  knew  nothing,
the  clairvoyant  naturally  made  no  mention.  Note  the  imaginaiy
details,  "  big  man, "  "  dark  moustache, "  "trustworthy";  and  com-
pare these  with  similar  imaginary  details  in  cases  of  hypnotic
suggestion,  e.(/.,  Forel,  Hypnotismus,  p.  45,  &c.

You  have  lost  your  knife  ! Your  mother  tells  me  that.

26.  A  sufficiently  trivial  communication  from  a  mother  to  her  only  child.
"Where  is  it?"

Ola,  it  is  gone  ;  you  never  will  see  it  again.

27.  This  loss  had  vexed  me,  as  the  knife  had  been  made  to  order.  I
had  lost  it  shortly  before  leaving  England.  The  prophecy  proved
to  be  signally  wrong,  as  the  knife  was  restored  to  me  soon  after  my
return.

"Describe  the  other  room  on  the  ground  floor  now."
Yes. I  see  a  long  piano. What  is  that  high  thing  that  comes  forward
on  top  of  the  piano  ? Ah,  I  see  ;  it  is  the  lid.

28.  Clock  and  piano  are  respectively  cliief  features  of  the  two  rooms.

"  What  colour  is  the  wall  paper  of  this  room  ?  "

Let  me  see. It  is  yellowish,  witli  gi>ld  pattern  and  gold  spots.

29.  Correct.

In  short,  many  things  that  I  knew,  even  some  things  that  I  had  forgotten,
the  clairvoyant  could  tell  me  correctly,  albeit  somewhat  confusedly.  She
made  all  the  mistakes  that  .1  should  have  made  at  the  time,  and  her  pro-
2)hecies  were  quite  as  erroneous  as  any  that  I  might  have  invented  myself.


574


A  Record  of  Ohservations  of


One  sees  the  contents  of  one's  mind  as  in  a  warped  and  flawy  mirror.
Or,  to  take  the  case  from  the  other  side,  the  secondary  consciousness  of  the
medium  seems  able  to  get  occasional  glimpses  at  the  panorama  of  one's
memory  as  througli  the  rents  in  a  veil.  No  doubt  Phinuit  gives  the  fullest
and  best  results  when  left  vmquestioned,  to  tell  what  he  can.  If  pressed  to
fill  up  the  broad  expanses  of  the  picture  remaining  between  the  patches
which  he  sees,  he  is  obliged,  despite  his  pretensions  to  supernatural  know-
lodge,  to  take  refuge  in  awkward  evasions  and  "shufiiing, " — in  guesswork,
often  clearly  based  upon  hints  unconsciously  afforded  by  the  sitter, — or,
when  all  else  fails,  in  incoherent  and  unmeaning  talk.  Yet,  while  fully
recognising  these  repelling  features  of  the  manifestation,  I  am  yet  convinced
that  there  is  enough  that  is  genuine  remaining  to  prove  the  existence  of  a
direct  communication  between  mind  and  mind  during  the  trance  state.  A
single  success,  exceeding  tlie  limits  of  coincidence  (and  it  is  undeniable  that
there  are  many  such),  proves  the  possibility  ;  the  multitude  of  failures
merely  indicate  the  difficalty  and  uncertainty.

J.  T.  C.

The  remaining  sittings  all  belong  to  the  English  series,  and  are
numbered  in  the  order  in  which  they  actually  took  place.  The  full
list  of  them  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix.  The  first  which  we
take  is  closely  connected  with  the  last  given.  It  took  place  at  Mr.
Clai'ke's  house,  and  it  was  of  course  impossible  to  conceal  from  Mrs.
Piper  the  identity  of  Mi's.  Clarke.  No  theory  of  chance  will  suffice
to  account  for  the  curious  list  of  definite  facts  about  Mrs.  Clarke's
family  which  were  correctly  stated  by  Phinuit ;  the  possibility  of  their
acquisition  by  external  jneans  has  already  been  considered.

52.  (Sitting  on  December  29th,  1889,  at  3,  College-road,  Harrow.  Pre-
sent :  J.  T.  Clarke  and  W.  Leaf  ;  afterwards  Mrs.  Clarke.)
Sitting  began  at  3.50  p.m.  ;  trance  came  on  at  4.3.

Four  envelopes  had  been  provided,  marked  A,  B,  C,  D.  A  contained
the  statement,  "  Charles  I.  was  beheaded  in  1649."  B  contained  the  lines,
Weep  no  more,  woful  shepherds,  weep  no  more,  for  Lycidas  yoiu'  sorrow
is  not  dead."  C  contained  a  rough  diagram  of  a  six-pointed  star.  D
contained  a  reader's  slip  from  the  British  Museum,  bearing  the  name  of  a
book.  The  contents  of  A  vv^ere  known  to  W.  L.  alone  ;  of  B  and  C  to  both
W.  L.  and  J.  T.  C.  ;  of  D  to  no  one,  the  slip  having  been  drawn  at  random
by  Mrs.  Clarke  from  2,000  similar  slips,  and  enclosed  in  the  envelope
without  having  been  looked  at.

Dr.  P.  began,  to  Clarke  :  I  know  j'ou  ;  you  are  the  fellow  that  has  got
the  little  girl  Rebecca,  that  is  going  to  grow  up  such  a  fine  woman.

*  1.  Repetition  of  words  used  in  previous  sitting  at  Chocorua,  New

Hampshire,  September  20th,  1889.

Where  is  Hodgson  1

*  2.  During  my  former  sitting  Mr.  Hodgson  was  present  in  the  room  and

shared  the  conversation  with  me. — J.  T.  C.

You  are  the  fellow  that  has  got  the  hole  in  the  ground  with  the  black


Certain  Phenomena  of  Tra/nce.


575


tilings  in  it.  ("Coals?")  Of  course,  do  you  think  I  am  a  fool?  Tliere  is
something  to  come  from  that  hole  yet,  because  I  see  light  beyond  it.

*  3.  In  the  former  sitting  mention  had  been  made  of  a  town  lot  and

buildings  as  "interest  in  the  ground."  The  vagueness  of  this
reference  is  here  developed,  by  a  question  intended  to  be
misleading,  into  definite  error.  See  Note  7  of  preceding  account. —
J.  T.  C.

Your  mother  sends  her  love  to  you  ;  she  stays  with  you.
J.  T.  C.  :  "What  was  her  middle  name  ? "
I  will  ask  and  find  out  for  you.

(The  envelojie  marked  C  is  now  given  to  her.)  "Tell  me  what  is  in  there."
(She  asks  for  the  other  one  that  is  with  it.  B  is  then  handed  to  her.  She
Tubs  both  on  her  hair.)

*  4.  The  knowledge  of  tlie  fact  that  a  second  envelope  existed  was

apparently  derived  from  my  consciousness,  as  but  one  envelope  had
been  produced. — J.  T.  C.

Do  you  know,  I  have  been  in  these  surroundings  before.

*5.  See  description  of  this  house  in  former  sitting.

There  was  a  lady  passed  out  of  the  body  here  once.

*  6.  My  mother.

What  is  the  matter  with  you  ? (To  J.  T.  C.)

J.  T.  C.  :  "I  am  grieved  about  the  lady  that  passed  out  of  the  Ijody."

She  is  all  right ;  she  is  with  yoa.  You  are  the  fellow  that  has  got  a
mother-in-law.  .  .  .  (Correctly  describes  character  as  estimated  by
J.  T.  C.)  That's  a  letter,  that  one.  (Shows  B.)  It  makes  me  feel  funny,
that  one.  It  is  something  written — a  letter.  You  know  what  I  mean.
What's  this  ? (Shows  B  again.) There's  an  illness  round  this  one.

"  Is  it  a  long  letter  V

No,  that's  not  a  long  one  ;  it's  what  you  call  an  illness  round  that  one.
(Various  repetitions  of  the  same  idea  follow.)

*  7.  The  secondary  consciousness  gradually  became  more and  more

corifused  by  these  four  sealed  envelopes.  1'he  medium  had
previously  picked  out  the  envelope  B  three  times  from  among  the
rest,  and  afterwards  referred  to  D  as  "  that  book  that  j'ou  have  in
your  hand." — J.  T.  C.

(Mrs.  Clarke  entered  the  room  at  this  point.)

J.  T.  C.  :  "  Now  tell  me  what  this  is." (A  given.)

There  is  French  writing  in  that ;  somebody  French  wrote  it.  He  wants
to  know  the  name  of  the  spirit  that  wrote  to  him  first.  It  is  written  by
somebody  named  Charles,  and  somebody  named  Fred  has  handled  it.

*  8.  It  is  possible  that  the  name  Charles  may  have  been  a  reading  of  the

first  name  in  the  written  sentence  ;  but  it  is  evidently  connected
with  my  first  acquaintance  with  the  medium  in  the  company  of  Dr.
Charles  Richet  and  Mr.  Frederic  Myers.  M.  Richet  had  asked  a
similar  question  in  one  of  his  sittings  ;  see  p.  620. — W.  L.

(D  is  shown. ) ' '  What  is  in  that  ? ' '

That's  only  a  note  ;  it  does  not  amount  to  anything.  That's  about  an
engagement. (Told  it  is  not  so,  says)  :  It  has  a  lady's  influence  on  it — your

2  R  2


57G


A  Record  of  Observations  of


mother's. (Again  t(.)kl  this  is  wrong. )  You  see  this  is  something  new  to  me  j
I  am  not  accustomed  to  do  these  things  for  i^eople.
How's  M.  ?

*  10.  A  lady  who  had  been  present  at  tlie  close  of  mv  sitting  in  New

Hampshire.— J.  T.  C.

"  She  is  very  well  ;  l)ut  tell  me  about  these  letters."
(Some  desultory  remarks  ;  then) —

Don't  you  know  about  tliat  time  I  saw  you  before  ?  I  told  you  about  the
boy  ;  how  is  the  little  fellow  that  has  got  the  funny  feet '?

*11.  "Funny  feet,"  expression  used  in  former  sitting. See  Note  24  o£
former  account.

He's  coming  out  all  right.  You  are  the  one  that  made  me  describe  the
piano.

*  12.  Note  25  to  former  sitting.

J.  T.  C.  :  "  Well,  can  you  tell  me  wliat  there  is  in  the  room  over  this  ?  "'
I  see  a  funny  looking  bed  (pointing).
"What  is  on  the  bed?"

There  is  a  thick-looking  (|uilt.  What  do  you  call  it  ?  Hens'  feathers —
down  ?

*  13.  Correct. A  f  Jerman  pluuieau.
That  little  fellow  is  in  there.

*14.  Wrong.

Then  there  is  a  cliair  just  there  (pointing)  that's  got  a  funny  thing  on  the
back  of  it  ;  it's  got  arms.

*  15.  Correct.

And  right  here  is  a  case  (pointing).  It  has  got  a  door  to  it,  and  a  little
hasp  to  it. It  has  your  influence  ujjon  it.

*  16.  Correct. A  writing-case,  the  covers  of  wliicli  I  liad  repaired  and

inlaid.  Position  of  objects  in  room  correctly  indicated  by  pointing.
—J.  T.  C.

There  is  a  book  there.

J.  T.  C.  :  "  Tell  me  the  title  of  the  book."

There  is  more  than  one  book  there. (To  Mrs.  Clarke)  :  How  are  you^
"sis"? What's  that  little  long  thing  right  here? There's  a  shelf  right
there  (pointing),  and  little  books  that  belong  there.
*17.  Correct.

J.  T.  C.  :  "  Tell  me  the  name  of  some  of  the  books."

There's  a  life  of  L— E— A— C— R. L— E— A— C— E— R.

W.  L.  :  "Spell  that  name  again."

Le  L— E— A— T— H— E— N— .  .  .  .  Isn't  that  a  funny-looking  book^
and  letters  on  tlie  Ijack  ?

J.  T.  C.  :  "What  do  the  letterson  the  back  say  ?  "

Look,  there's  a  History  of  Rome. It  is  a  history  book. P — A — S — H —
E — R. (She  apparently  tries  to  say  Persia. ) Who  is  J oe  ?
J.  T.  C.  :  "I  am  Joe."

There  were  two  Joes  in  the  family.  One  is  the  grandfather  and  one  the
son  ;  father  and  son.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


577


*18.  My  uncle  and  cousin,  but  ]wt  father  and  son. — J.  T.  C.
Who  is  Turner  ? T— U— R— E— R.
J.  T.  C.  :  "The  great  painter."
Well,  you  are  the  man  that  was  painting.

*  19.  See  former  account,  Note  14.

(Then  after  some  desultory  conversation)  :  What  do  you  call  that  ]  Letui  ?
That's  French.  D.  L.  Letui  ;  that  is  on  that  book  you  have  in  your  hand.
D.  L.  Letui,  Turner.  Yes,  Turner.  (Here  the  envelopes  are  taken  up
iigain,  pulled  about,  and  finally  thrown  across  the  room  ;  they  are  named  A,
B,  C,  and  D,  in  each  case  wrongly.  The  title  of  the  book  did  not  contain
.the  name  Turner.)

How  do  you  spell  Deluther — Luther  l He  is  connected  with  you.

J.  T.  C.  :  "  Well,  who  is  this  Luther  ? Was  he  my  uncle  ?  "

Or  your  aunt  ? Your  uncle,  of  course.

20.  Luther  was  my  father's  Christian  name.  My  question  was  intended
to  mislead.— J.  T.  C.

(After  some  more  aimless  remarks,  Mrs.  C.  takes  the  medium's  hand.)
.Ah,  this  is  the  lady  I  told  you  about  ;  I  know  lier.  She  is  tlie  one  that  has
got  a  funny  mother  and  a  nice  father,  and  two  good  brothers  and  another  one
that  is  not  so  good.

*  21.  Wrong  ;  I  have  only  one  brother. — A.  C.

Three  brothers — 1,  2,  3,  4.  One  of  her  brothers  is  going  a  long  way  off.
His  name  is  Harold.

*  22.  Wrong.  This  name  Harold  liad  been  repeatedly  thrown  out  during

the  session.  May  possibly  apply  to  one  of  my  friends  wlio  has  a
brother  Harold  gone  a  long  way  off  (to  Australia),  and  another  one
who  is  not  so  good  (a  scapegrace,  in  fact). — A.  C.

And  she  has  got  a  brother  named  Henry.

*23.  Correct.
J.  T.  C.  :  "  Has  she  got  any  sisters  ? "  ■
Yes,  one.

Mrs.  C.  :  "  What  is  iny  sister's  name  ?  "

What  a  question  ! Who  Avould  ask  for  her  own  sister's  name  ?  (Follows
.•an  accurate  account  of  the  character  of  Mrs.  C.'s  mother.)
Mrs.  C.  :  "  Tell  me  about  my  sister."

She  is  all  right ;  I  rather  like  her.  She  lias  got  a  relative  named  Ada.
^ . . Your  sister's  name  is  Susan  Mary.

*  24.  My  sister's  name  is  Selnia. — A.  C.

How  is  Henry  ? Is  it  that  one  that  was  ill  or  is  it  your  father  1

*  25.  My  brother  Henry  had  a  most  severe  illness  a  few  years  ago. — A.C.

Your  father  has  got  the  rheumatism.

Mrs.  C.  :  "  He  had  not  the  day  before  yesterday."

Well,  then,  he  has  got  it  now.  (Proj^hecy  wrong.)  How  is  your  Uncle
William  ?

*  26.  This  remark  about  William  was  probably  addressed  to  me  ;  it  is  a

common  name  in  our  family,  and  always  turns  up  with  reference  to
me  when  I  am  present. — W.  L.


578


A  Record  of  Observations  of


Mrs.  C.  :  "  I  have  no  Uncle  William. "  •

How  is  M.  (trying  to  get  at  the  German  pronunciation  of  the  name)  ?
Somebody  belonging  to  you  is  called  M.  (Says  name  rightly.)  She  is  the
one  that  has  got  tlie  trouble  with  her  ankle,  instead  of  your  father.  I  was.
getting  her  influence  all  the  time  with  your  father.  She  is  very  self-willed,,
but  she  has  got  a  pretty  good  disijosition.  She  has  got  sisters  ;  there  is  E>
and  there  is  one  who  paints.

*  27.  Correct. [See  Note  29.]

(At  tliis  point  J.  T.  C.  and  W.  L.  are  sent  out  of  the  room,  and  ar&
absent  about  25  minutes.  The  following  notes  were  v/ritten  down  by  Mrs.
Clarke  on  the  same  evening.)

(Of  Mrs.  C,  while  the  others  are  going.)  She  has  a  headache  ;  I'll  cure-
it.  (Rubbing  hand  over  head.)  .  .  .  Here  is  your  Uncle  C.  He  i,*
in  the  spirit.

*28.  Correct.

Who  is  Wallace  ?

Mrs.  C.  :  "I  don't  know  him."

He  is  connected  with  you  ;  he  is  your  cousin.

Mrs.  C.  "No,  he  is  Joe's  cousin. Do  you  want  Joe  to  come  back  ?  "
No,  I  want  to  talk  to  you  about  your  Uncle  C. There  is  someone  with,
him — E. He  is  your  cousin. Well  (imiiressivcly),  he  sends  his  love  to  you.
"Is  he  in  the  body?"
No,  he  is  in  the  spirit.
"How  did  lie  die?"

There  was  something  the  matter  with  liis  heart,  and  with  his  liead.  He-
says  it  was  an  accident. He  wants  me  to  tell  you  that  it  was  an  accident.
He  wants  you  to  toll  liis  sisters. There's  M.  and  E.  ;  they  are  sisters-
of  E. And  there  is  their  mother. She  suffers  here  (pointing  to  abdomen).
Now,  how  do  you  think  I  know  this  ?

"  I  don't  know."

E.  told  me.  His  mother  has  been  very  unhappy  about  his  death.  He
begs  you,  for  God's  sake,  to  tell  them  that  it  was  an  accident — that  it  was  his.
head  ;  that  he  was  hurt  there  (makes  motion  of  stal^bing  heart)  ;  that  lie
had  inherited  it  from  his  father.  His  father  was  off  his  mind  ;  you  know
what  I  mean — crazy.  But  the  others  are  all  right,  and  will  be.  And  he
wants  you  to  tell  them  that  his  body  is  dead,  but  that  he  is  living.  He  and
liis  father  are  just  trying  to  take  comfort  in  each  other.  They  are  a  little
apart  ;  they  are  not  with  the  others  in  the  spirit.  And  he  wants  to  send  his'
love  to  Walter,  his  friend — not  this  Walter.  He  has  a  friend  named  Walter,
hasn't  he  ?

"  I  don't  remember." [No  such  friend  known,

*  29.  A  striking  account  of  my  uncle's  family  in  Germany. The  names

and  facts  are  all  correct.  The  father  was  disturbed  in  his  mind  for
the  last  three  years  of  his  life,  in  consequence  of  a  fall  from  his
horse.  The  son  committed  suicide  in  a  fit  of  melancholia  by  stabbing
his  heart,  as  described.  The  sister  referred  to  as  lame  was  bedridden,
for  10  years. One  of  the  sisters  is  a  painter  by  profession. — A.  C.

Did  you  know  your  mother  had  dreadful  headaches  ?  That's  the  reason
she  is  so  nervous. E.  told  me  that  about  his  aunt.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


570


*30.  My  motlier  formerly  suffered  from  severe  headaches. — A.  C.
Here's  M. — not  the  M.  who  hurt  her  ankle,  hut  another. She  is  your
aunt.

*  Correct.

"Is  she  in  the  body  1"

No,  she  is  in  the  spirit. Now,  how  do  you  think  T  know  that  ?
"Did  you  see  her  ?  "

Yes,  she  is  here,  and  wants  to  speak  to  you.
"  What  does  she  say  about  her  husband  ?  "

She  says  he  has  changed  his  life  since.  She  does  not  like  it  that  he
mai'ried  again.

"  Does  she  like  the  one  whom  lie  has  married  1  "

Oh,  she  loves  her  dearly.  But  she  does  not  like  him  to  have  married
again  so  soon.  He  married  her  sister.  Two  brothers  married  two  sisters.
Her  husband  has  children  now.  There  are  two  boys.  And  there  are  Max
and  Richard,  or  Dick,  as  they  call  him  ;  they  are  with  your  uncle's  children.

*  31.  Accurate  description  of  the  family  of  another  uncle. His  wife  died

childless,  and  he  soon  after  inarried  her  sister,  by  whom  he  has
children. His  brother  had  jjreviously  married  a  third  sister. — A.C.

Now,  wliat  do  you  tliink  of  this  ?  Don't  you  think  I  can  tell  you  many
things  ? You  just  ask  about  anybody  you  like  and  I'll  tell  you.

*32.  It  struck  me  how  desirous  this  secondary  consciou.sness  was  that  its
communications  should  be  considered  extraordinary.  Evidently
suffering  under  the  failure  in  satisfying  the  envelope  tests,  it  had
begun  by  asking  me  :  "  Do  j'ou  think  I  am  a  fool  ?  " — A.  C.

Mrs.  C.  :  "  Tell  me  about  my  childhood."

Shall  I  tell  you  how  you  ran  away  (chuckling)  with  that  man — that  boy,  I
mean  ?  You  were  a  little  devil  to  do  that.  It  worried  your  mother  almost
to  death.

*  33.  When  five  years  old  I  rambled  off  with  two  boys,  staying  hours

away  from  home,  an  event  which  in  my  family  is  jestingly  referred
to  as  my  running  away. — A.  C.

When  yon  came  back  you  kept  away  from  your  motlier.
"  Did  I  feel  ashamed  ?  "

Not  exactly  ;  but  when  you  have  run  away  you  do  keep  away  from  your
mother.

"Tell  me  about  my  schooldays."
Oh,  you  were  a  little  devil  at  school.

*  Wrong. —J.  T.  C.
There  was  a  fat  teacher.

*34.  Not  identifiable.
And  there  was  a  girl  called  Florence,  with  red  hair.
"  I  don't  remember  her."

No  ? But  you  do  remember  having  run  away  with  that  hoy.  There's
Fred — Alfred,  that  was  the  name  of  the  boy.
"No."

And  who  is  E. — no,  that  is  not  it,  E.  H.  (giving  correct  names,  both
family  and  Christian)  ? (W.  L.  and  J.  T.  C.  enter  the  room.) Shall  I  tell


580


A  Record  of  Observations  of


Walter  what  I  have  told  you?  ("Yes.")  I  told  her  she  has  a  cousin  E.
in  the  spirit  who  passed  out  by  accident,  not  jjurposely  ;  he  put  a  knife
tlirough  his  heart.  He  was  rather  insane.  He  got  it  through  his  father  ;
he  was  insane,  too.  He  has  got  a  sister  M.  in  the  l)ody  ;  she  is  a  little  lame.
And  his  mother  is  concerned  about  the  loss  of  him  because  he  took  his  own
life  by  accident,  and  he  wants  to  send  a  message  that  he  did  not  do  it
purposely,  but  because  he  could  not  help  it.  He  says,  ' '  For  Heaven's  sake
tell  lier  so  quick."  There's  nothing  the  matter  with  the  rest  of  them  ;  they
will  get  on  all  right.  Then  she  has  got  an  aunt  M.  in  the  spirit  that
has  got  a  husband  in  the  body.  He  has  got  some  children  and  sons,  and  she
has  passed  out  and  he  has  married  lier  sister.  He  married  her  sister,  and  two
brothers  married  two  sisters.  E.  and  M.  are  sisters,  and  both  are  sisters
of  E.  This  little  devil  ran  away  at  one  time  when  she  was  a  little  girl
■ — ran  away  with  a  boy  and  worried  the  mother  almost  to  death.  Then  she
got  ashamed  of  it  afterwards.  E.  does  not  seem  to  be  with  the  other
spirits  much.  He  is  with  his  father,  and  he  and  his  father  stay  with  one
another.  .  .  .  Your  mother  has  headaches  ;  that  is  what  caused  her  to
be  nervous.  .  .  .  Joe,  liow  is  Wallace  ?  I  mean  your  cousin  Wallace  1
He  is  kind  of  unhappy.

*  35.  Christian  name  of  a  cousin  now  dying  of  consi.nnption. — J.  T.  C.

How  is  H.  E.  (correctly  giving  both  Christian  and  family  name)  ?

J.  T.  C.  :  "He  is  all  right."

jSTo,  he  is  not  all  right  ;  he  is  kind  of  tricky.

*  36.  This  same  accusation,  based  upon  an  unjust  susi^icion,  had  been

made  in  the  former  sitting  witli  me.  See  Note  15  to  jjreviovis
accoiuit.  I  am  positive  that  the  medium  in  her  primary  conscious-
ness has  never  heard  either  of  these  names. — J.  T.  C.

He  is  selfish. You  don't  think  so  ?
J.  T.  C.  :  "No,  Idon't  think  so."
Well,  then,  you're  "left."

J.  T.  C.  :  "What  were  you  telling  about  Alfred  ?  "

I  didn't  tell  you  anything.  (Stertorous  breathing.  Exclamation  :  "Joe  !  "
Gradual  awakening. )

Sitting  closed  at  5.20.

In  answer  to  an  inquiry  as  to  any  symptoms  of  fishing  while  she
was  alone  with  the  medium,  Mrs.  Clarke  writes  as  follows  : —

"I  think  I  may  safely  say  that  there  were  only  two  (juestions  of  mine
whicli  could  at  all  have  helped  the  medium  in  any  attempts  at  fisliing.
These  were  both  about  what  my  Aunt  M.  said  C(_incerning  her  husband.
My  inquiry  may  possilily  have  insinuated  his  ha\'ing  done  a  tiling  which
might  hurt  the  feelings  of  any  first  wife,  Init,  liowever  suggestive  of  blame,
could  scarcely  have  served  as  a  hint  at  liis  marriage  Avith  the  deceased  wife's
sister,  even  to  the  mind  of  one  living  under  Englisli  law.

"  I  may,  of  course,  liave  helped  her  unconsciously,  but  I  hardly  tliink  so,
because  the  questions  referred  to  remained  in  my  mind  as  a  mistake  on  my
jjart.  Moreover,  I  constantly  felt  during  the  interview  that  I  had  to  guard
against  talking  to  her  as  to  a  friend  of  my  relatives,  which  I  was  temjited  to
do,  as  her  remarks  about  them  were  as  appreciative  as  if  she  actually  knew


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


581


them.  Some  few  of  the  facts  she  gave  me  were  unknown  to  anyone  out  of
<3ermany,  even  to  my  husband.  The  more  important  events — my  uncle's
find  aunt's  death  and  my  cousin's  suicide,  which  happened  respectively  28,
15,  and  12  years  ago — were  known  to  only  two  jjersons  in  England  besides  my
husband.  It  is  absolutely  impossible  that  Mrs.  Piper  got  at  the  facts  through
information  derived  from  these  jiersons.

' '  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  true  tliat  on  the  first  mention  of  the  name  the
facts  associated  witli  my  cousin  rushed  into  my  mind  witli  such  veliemence
that,  if  there  h&  any  p(jssibility  of  communication  from  mind  to  mind,  I
certainly  helped  her  in  that  way.  This  does  not  apply  to  my  '  running  away, '
of  which  I  had  no  thought  when  I  asked  her  about  my  childhood.  This  fact
was,  nevertheless,  brought  out  without  the  slightest  hesitation,  even  more
directly  than  the  others,  and  with  a  burst  of  laughter."

4.  Mrs.  A. {See  p.  4.39.) Novemher  iUh.

Mrs.  A.  is  anxious  that  her  real  name  should  be  concealed.  It
lias  therefore  been  necessary  to  call  her  three  sisters,  who  also  sat  with
Mrs.  Piper,  "  Mrs.  B.,"  "  Miss  Emily  C,"  and  "  Miss  Gertrude  C."  The
Christian  names  which  occur  have  also  been  changed  to  names  which  as
far  as  possible  are  as  usual  as  the  real  ones.  The  correct  names  will  be
given  to  students,  if  desired,  in  confidence.

Mrs.  A.  was  on  a  brief  visit  to  Mrs.  B.  at  Cambridge  on  November
34th,  and  had  come  to  call  at  Mr.  Myers'  house  on  the  morning  of  that
<lay.  She  was  introduced  to  Mrs.  Piper  and  taken  upstairs  to  sit  in  a
few  minutes.  It  is  therefoi'e  in  the  highest  degree  improbable  that
Mrs.  Piper  could  have  had  any  opportunity  of  learning  anything  about
lier  beforehand.  She  was  of  course  introduced  under  another  name
than  her  own. The  following  notes  were  taken  by  Mr.  Myers.

I  see  a  sister,  ...  in  the  body.  She  has  not  been  well  ;  has
changed  her  surroundings.

[The  name  given  was  an  api^roach  to  the  right  name  of  one  sister,  which
was  afterwards  given  correctly. It  is,  however,  not  correct  to  say
that  tlie  sister  in  question  has  "changed  her  surroundings."]
I  see  Jessie  Poder  (?). [Not  recognised.]

You  have  three  sisters  and  two  brothers  in  the  body  ;  an  elderly
gentleman  in  the  spirit,  your  father.  [Right.]

One  of  your  brothers  has  a  funny  arm,  the  right  ;irm  jiaralysed  ;  very
funny  (points  to  a  place  a  little  above  the  elbow  on  inside  of  arm).  That  is
sore,  it  is  lame.  It  is  on  the  cord  and  hurts  him,  troubles  him  a  good  deal.
I  think  I  could  help  him.  It  has  been  coming  some  time.  He  can't  use  his
arm,  it  aches.  He  is  a  smart  fellow  and  could  do  a  great  deal  of  good  if  he
could  use  his  arm.  Show  me  some  article  belonging  to  him.  The  lump
keeps  growing.  He  is  a  nice  fellow  and  has  done  a  great  deal  of  good.  He
will  do  more  if  he  can  use  his  arin. I  can't  see  the  future  about  that.

[This  is  a  correct  descrijjtion  of  Mrs.  A.'s  eldest  brother,  who  suffers
from  writer's  cramp,  which  seriously  hinders  him  in  his  profession.
There  is  a  lump  on  the  arm  which  gives  him  pain  ;  but  it  is  signifi-
cant that  it  is  in  fact  below  the  elbow,  not  aljove  it.  B\it  Mrs.  A.  at
the  time  believed  it  to  be  above  the  elbow,  as  it  was  described  to  her.]


582


A  Record  of  Observations  of


A  spiriD  Jusepli  conies  near  to  you  ;  an  uncle  on  the  father's  side.  [JSTofc
recognised.]

Timothy  is  the  nearest  spirit  you  have  got  to  you  ;  some  call  him  Tim  ;
he  is  your  father.  Timothy  was  your  grandfather  also.  Your  father  tells  me
about  S.W. — Stay,  I  can't  get  that,  I  must  wait.  Your  motlier  had  trouble
in  the  stomach  ;  she  is  in  the  spirit-world.  Your  father  had  trouble  in  heart
and  head. Myers'  father  passed  away  from  disease  of  the  heart.

[Except  the  allusion  to  "  S.W.,"  which  is  not  recognisable,  the  above  is
all  true,  if  the  "  trouble  in  heai-t  and  head"  be  taken  to  refer  to
Mr.  Myers'  father,  as  seems  to  be  intended.]

I  see  Laurie,  Lausia. [Not  recognised.]

You  have  a  brother  Jim,  James,  in  the  body.  He  is  so  funny  ;  it  is  hard,
to  get  at  him.  He  is  kind  of  stubborn,  self-v>dlled.  A  little  quiet  influence
manages  him,  but  he  is  wilful  if  puslied.  He  comes  with  the  same  influence
as  your  father.

[This  is  a  true  description  of  Mrs.  A.'s  second  brother.  Mr.  Myers  now
asked  what  the  father  Timothy  was  interested  in  ;  what  kind  of
things  lie  did  in  earth-life,  or  cared  for  now.]

He  is  interested  in  the  Biljle — a  clergyman.  He  used  to  preach.  He
has  a  Bible  with  him,  he  goes  on  reading  and  advancing.  He  is  li^dng  with
your  mother  just  tlie  same  as  on  earth.  He  has  been  in  the  spirit-world  longer
than  she  has.  Your  mother  is  a  little  nervous.  I  can't  get  her  to  come  near.
Your  father  lias  a  solemn  graceful  manner,  as  he  had  on  earth.  He  had
trouble  with  liis  throat — irritation  (points  to  bronchial  tubes).  The  boys
used  to  call  him  Tim  at  college.

[Tlie  above  statements  are  all  correct,  so  far  as  they  can  be  verified.]
H(.)well,  a  friend  of  his,  has  passed  over.  [Not  known.]
This  is  tlie  first  time  your  father  has  sjioken  to  you  since  he  passed  out.
You  may  hear  fo(.)tsteps.  You  do  a  great  deal  of  work.  Sometimes  you  get
a  little  blue  and  depressed.  You  exercise  your  body.  Do  you  like  tliat
j^icture  of  your  father  in  the  hall  ?  (here  confused  as  to  whether  oil  or
crayon  ;  not  photograjjh).  He  has  a  high  collar  and  a  garb  partly  white  :
white  in  front,  round  neck,  like  a  high  collar,  and  dark  waistcoat.  He  had
a  prominent  nose,  his  eyes  very  clear  and  grey,  bluish  grey  ;  a  good-sized
man.  (Here  confused  talk  as  to  colour  of  eyes.  Dr.  P,  says  he  is  not  good
at  colours,  and  shuffles  about.)  Brownish  grey,  hazel  ;  your  eyes  are  lighter
than  his.  He  has  a  firm  exjjression  round  the  mouth,  a  determined  ex-
jiression.

[Tlie  account  of  tlie  j^ortrait  is  not  very  satisfactory  ;  but  it  is  true  that
there  is  a  large  oil  portrait  of  him  in  Mrs.  A.'s  sisters'  house  in
ecclesiastical  garb,  something  as  stated. His  eyes  were  brown.]

Who  is  Yilles—Vyl—Mylde— Wildes  ;  H.  Joseph  Wildes  ?  A  friend  of.
your  father's,  used  to  be  in  the  same  church.  (Explained  as  parishioner.)
He  was  shaky  in  his  faith  ;  he  had  an  idea  of  changing  his  views,  and  did  not
quite  satisfy  your  father.  Now  he  believes.  Harriet  knows  about  this  and
will  tell  you.  Sarali  is  also  in  the  spirit,  his  mother,  a  member  of  the  church
where  your  father  preached.  Henry  Smith  or  Smythe  v/as  a  j^arisliioner  ;
his  sister  is  Laurie.

[None  of  the  above  names  or  persons  were  recognised.]


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


583


I  don't  like  the  WAy  you  are  situated.  You  l^ave  too  much  to  do.  You
are  unsettled.  You  are  about  to  make  a  change.  Your  mother  advises  it.
A  fleshy  lady  of  dark  complexion,  a  teaclier  whom  you  talked  to  a  fortnight
ago,  will  be  of  great  use  to  you. [Not  recognised.]

You  have  a  mother  in  the  spirit  ;  lier  name  is  Alice.  She  is  calling  and
says,  "Tell  Isabel  not  to  be  so  nervous,  because  she  is  too  nervous  altogether."
That's  for  you. "  She  is  injuring  herself."

JThe  mother's  name  was  rightly  given.]

There's  a  bright  little  boy  in  the  body,  the  grandson  of  Alice.  [Right.]
Why  is  Tim  bemg  continually  halloed  ']  Annie  is  in  the  body,  one  of  you.
[This  was  wrong,  but  was  apparently  an  attempt  at  the  name  of  one  of  the
sisters.]

Isabel,  the  daughter  of  Alice,  is  nervous. She  is  here  with  this  lady.

[Dr.  P.  does  not  seem  here  to  recognise  that  the  sitter  herself  is
"Isabel."  The  name  actually  given  was  nearly,  but  not  quite
correct.]

Alice  is  talking  about  lier  daughter  Isabel  and  her  eldest  grandson.  He
is  going  to  make  a  noble  fellow,  though  at  one  time  they  almost  despaired  of
him.  He  would  have  been  better  off  if  he  had  not  had  his  own  way  too
much.  He  is  a  peculiar  boy,  very  self- willed  ;  he  has  had  his  own  way  too
much.  Physically  he  is  not  very  well.  I  have  not  heard  his  name,  he  is  the
eldest,  the  crank  of  the  family.

[This  is  not  at  all  a  correct  description  of  the  eldest  grandson.  It  is
true  that  he  was  at  one  time  so  iU  as  to  be  the  cause  of  great
anxiety,  but  the  account  of  his  cliaracter  is  quite  wide  of  the
mai'k.]

"Which  one  is  musical  ?  It  is  the  youngest  is  most  musical  altogether.
It  is  your  mother  who  thinks  so. It  is  a  girl. Alice's  youngest  is  a  girl.

[Correct ;  but  there  seems  to  be  confusion  between  the  children  of
Alice  and  of  Isabel.  Dr.  P.  at  this  point  was  rambling  and
indistinct.]

The  father  says,  tell  Alice  in  the  body  not  to  go  where  she  is  intending  to
go  ;  something  to  do  with  singing.

[This  may  have  been  intended  to  apply  to  the  second  sister,  but  the
allusion  was  not  recognised.]

You  will  be  able  to  do  better  in  a  short  time.  Don't  be  depressed  ;.
there  are  many  dark  clouds  in  the  next  months,  but  it  will  result  in  good.
Your  father  is  very  much  respected,  and  i^reaches  to  people  as  he  did  in  the
material  world. Is  there  a  girl  of  his  called  Eliza — no,  Alice  ?

[Here  Mr.  Myers  whispered  to  Mrs.  A.,  "  You  have  not  a  sister  of  that
name  V  Mrs  A.  replied,  "  Yes,  Alice  Jane  "  (Mrs.  B.).  This  may
have  been  the  means  by  which  the  second  name  Jane,  presently
given,  was  obtained.]

Dr.  P.  now  obtained  the  name  of  the  youngest  sister,  here  called
Gertrude,  by  four  steps  of  gradual  apjjroximatiun.  It  is  possible  that  he
may  have  here  been  somewhat  helped  by  unconscious  indication  on  the  part
of  the  sitter.  "  Tell  Gertrude  to  be  brave  and  not  get  despondent  with  hei-
burdens,  and  I  will  help  her."

Isabel  made  an  uirfortunate  change ;  a'year  or  two  has  elapsed  since  then.


584


A  Record  of  Observations  of


She  luis  heiidaclies  whicli  come  from  the  stomach  ;  go  to  her  and  ask  her.
[Wrong.]

Jane,  that  is  Alice  Jane,  my  daughter.  I  see  her  playing  the  j^iano.  Let
lier  continue  playing  ;  she  will  accomplish  her  undertaking.

[The  last  words  have  no  recognised  meaning.  Mrs.  B.  was  not  playing
the  piano  at  the  time.]

Take  your  father's  advice  and  be  patient.  I  left  matters  somewhat
misettled.  Your  surroundings  are  not  what  they  should  be.  Have  you
iDroken  up  your  home '?  One  of  your  sisters  has  not  been  well — headaches
originating  from  the  stomach.  One  studies  music  very  hard  ;  it  makes  her
head  ache.  [True.]  Tell  Jim  to  listen  to  good  advice  once  in  a  way  ;  it
will  be  good  for  him.

Although  this  sitting  contains  a  considerable  number  of  unrecognised
fiitatements,  the  pi'oportion  of  wrong  ones  is  veiy  small,  and  those
which  are  right  are  quite  beyond  the  reach  of  mere  chance.  The
most  striking  are  the  list  of  names  of  the  brothers,  father,  gi'andfatlier,
and  mother,  all  given  quite  light  without  fishing  ;  and  the  account  of
the  brother's  suffering  with  his  arm.  Note  the  error  in  the  real  place
of  the  lump  as  pointing  to  thought-transference  from  the  sitter's  mind.

o.  Mrs.  Vermll,  Nueemher  25th. Fird  siUimj. From.  Mr.  Mijcrs  Notes.

You  look  like  Fannie.  Who  is  Henry  ?  The  spirit  Henry  comes  to
you  ;  conies  very  near.  And  then  there  is  Annie.  Have  you  had  a
lieadache  to-day  ?  You  are  a  medium,  a  little.  Do  you  know  S — I — M — M,
S— I— M— E— S,  SIMS  I

[Nothing  known  about  tins  ;  Mrs.  Verrall  liad  not  had  a  headache.]

How  is  your  sister  ?  There  is  a  weakness  about  her  ;  she  is  not  well —
weak  ;  trouble  in  cliest  and  bronchial  tubes  ;  she  coughs  at  times,  takes  cold
very  easily.  [Right.]

Who  do  you  call  Kate  1  You  have  a  cousin  Kate.  [Right.]  I  don't  like
her,  she  hangs  back.  You  have  been  reading — studying.  You  will
iiccoiuplish  it.  Go  on  though  you  get  tired.  You  are  wrapped  up  in  that
sort  of  thing.

You  have  a  sister  in  the  body.  I  like  her  influence.  She  must  be  very
careful  or  her  weakness  will  increase.  Who  is  Wilson  ?  He  is  some  one  who
has  treated  her.

Mrs.  V.  :  "  Not  quite  Wilson."

Dr.  P.  :  Williamson  ?

Mrs.  V.  :  "No."

Dr.  P.  :  — Ison — olson — well,  it  ends  in — Ison.
[Right  so  far. The  full  name  was  supplied  by  Mrs.  Y.]
Dr.  P.  :  I  don't  like  his  treatment ;  he  gives  her  ({uinino. Her  system
is  all  full  of  it ;  T  don't  like  it.

[Mrs.  Verrall  at  the  time  denied  that  her  sister  had  been  treated  with
Ciuinine  during  a  severe  illness,  pneumonia,  two  years  ago.  Her
sister  when  asked said the  same. But it  was  sulisequently


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


585


ascertained,  by  reference  to  the  prescription,  that  she  had  been
taking  quinine  for  some  time  without  knowing  it.]

You  and  slie  are  alone  in  a  way  ;  she  cares  niucli  for  you,  though  she  does-
not  always  show  it.

[Mrs.  Yerrall  has  only  one  sister  alive  and  no  brother.]

I  like  better  the  tall  man  wliom  she  had  in  the  fii'st  place  ;  his  influence
is  better  for  her.

[This  was  understood  as  referring  to  a  change  of  medical  attendants  which
had  taken  place  during  the  sister's  illness,  the  junior  partner  having-
been  called  in  at  first.  On  the  second  day  the  senior  partner  came
and  ordered  the  quinine,  but  the  second  physician  was  as  tall  as  th&
first.]

You  have  got  another  sister  in  the  spirit ;  she  comes  to  me  and  is
interested.  [Right.]  I  get  your  mother's  and  father's  intlvience  and  anothex'
gentleman,  a  brother  of  hers,  or  his — Kate — who's  Kate  ? — Your  father  is  in
the  natural  life  and  your  mother  too. [Right.] Who  is  Maria  ?

Mrs.  \.  :  "My  mother  ?  "

Dr.  P.  :  Yes,  Maria. I  said  Marie,  Maria.

[The  mother's  name  is  Maria,  but  she  is  commonly  called  Marie  by  some
of  her  relations.]

It  is  you  that  have  got  the  William.  [Not  known,  but  see  below.]  Alice
— whom  do  you  call  Carrie — Caroline — it  is  not  Alice  but  Carrie.  Carrie  is.
very  near  you  and  loves  you.

[Carrie  is  the  name  of  a  deceased  cousin,  once  an  intimate  friend  of  Mrs.
Yerrall.]

How  is  that  gentleman  of  yours  ?  He  is  kind  of  cranky.  Excuse  me,
he  does  get  too  nervous,  and  then  it  is  hard  for  you.  You  with  your  children
are  four  of  you  ;  so  there  are  four  in  your  own  home,  your  old  home — father,
mother,  two  sisters  ;  now  you,  your  gentleman,  two  children.  [Right.]
There  are  no  brothers  of  yours,  you  never  had  any.  [Right.]  You  have  father
and  mother  in  this  life,  and  an  uncle  in  the  spirit.  [Right.]  I  see  your
father's  influence  round  the  uncle,  but  he  likes  yorn-  mother  best  ;  he  sends
liis  love  to  her.

[My  father's  eldest  brother,  now  dead,  was  particularly  foiid  of  my
mother. — Mrs.  Y.]
There  is  a  child  in  the  body  ;  a  little  stifl'ness — a  boy — no,  a  girl.  That
leg  too.  This  leg  is  the  worst.  The  muscles  are  strained,  not  lubricated
properly.  If  you  rub  them  with  your  hands  the  knees  will  be  as  good  as
anyone's.  She  will  be  able  to  move  her  knees.  Rub  every  night  and
morning.

Mrs.  V.  : "  What  is  the  condition  called  ?  "

Dr.  P.  :  A  drawing  of  the  muscles  ;  they  are  too  tight.  One  knee  is
worse  than  the  other.

[The  left  knee  was  here  indicated.  It  is  a  fact  that  Mrs.  Yerrall's  baby,
a  girl,  suffered  from  want  of  j)ower  in  the  lower  limbs,  and  that  the
left  knee  was  the  worst.  But  it  is  not  correct  to  say  that  there  was
straining  or  want  of  lubrication  of  the  muscles  of  the  knee,  though
the  tendons  of  the  heels  were  somewhat  contracted.]
You  have  fewer  spirit  friends  than  almost  anyone.  There  is  another
child,  quite  bright,  quite  smart. It  will  bo  very  nnisical.


586


A  Record  of  Ohservations  of


Mrs.  V.  :  "A  boy  or  a  girl  ?  "

Dr.  P.  :  A  boy.  [Wrong.]  You  liave  lia'd  that  child's  hair  fixed
peculiarly,  but  after  all  it  is  a  girl ;  a  girl  sure  enough,  but  she  looks  like  a
fury.

[The  elder  child's  hair  was  at  the  time  badly  cut,  and  like  a  boy's.]
One  of  your  relatives  has  a  little  difficulty  ;  one  is  a  little  deaf  ;  is  that
your  mother  ? A  difficulty  in  one  ear. Not  your  father  or  mother. I  can't
tell  whether  it  is  a  lady  or  a  gentleman  that  is  deaf.

[Here  Dr.  P.  is  evidently  doing  a  little  fishing.  Mrs.  Y.  has  a  relative,
a  sister-in-law,  who  has  had  a  good  deal  of  difficulty  in  one  ear.]

Your  sister  in  the  spirit  passed  out  of  the  body  in  a  fever.  [Wrong.]
You  know  Artliurton,  Atherton,  Alverton,  Alberton.  Then  there  was  a
gentleman  friend  of  your  father's  who  passed  out  with  kidney  trouble.  Who
is  that  got  burnt  out  ?  Elvert  Louis  ;  Albert  Lewis.  Do  you  know  Mr.
Lewis  in  the  body  ? Are  they  connected  with  your  father  or  husband  ?

[Nothing  can  be  made  of  this  except  that  Mrs.  Verrall's  father  once  had
a  clerk  named  Albert  Louis  Adhemar  ;  he  was  certainly  alive  a  few
weeks  before  the  sitting.]

F— R — E— D— E— R— I— C— K,  Frederick,  that's  your  father's  name  :
no,  it's  not  quite  that. F — II — E — D  ;  no,  nor  that. It's  between  the  two.
[My  father's  name  is  Frederic,  without  the  k. — Mrs.  V.]
You  have  John  in  the  natural  world,  on  your  father's  side  ;  his  sister's
son  :  no,  his  brother's  son. [Right.] Then  there  is  William  very  near  your
motlier  ;  not  her  brother,  no,  her  uncle. No,  I  don't  know.

[Mrs.  V.'s  mother  has  a  cousin  ^yilliam,  a  very  intimate  friend,  more  like
a  brother  than  a  cousin.  Also  an  uncle  William,  the  father  of  the
cousin  William.]

You  are  going  a  long  way  oif  from  your  present  surroundings.  I  see
father  and  mother  and  one  sister  together.  [Right.]  Another  sister  goes
al)out  in  the  spirit-world.  [Right.]  Sometimes  you  get  wretchedly  dis-
couraged ;  people  bother  you.  When  tilings  go  wrong  you  get  awfully  upset.
Your  liusband  studies  and  teaches  ;  what  do  you  call  it — Professor  ?  A  kind
of  bookman,  a  literary  man.  [Right.]

10.  Mrs.  Vevrall. Second  sitting. November  27th,  18S9.

Ah,  Carrie  has  got  a  message  for  you.  Who  is  Mrs.  Smith?  In  your
household.  (No.)  Well,  in  your  immediate  surroundings.  I  saw  lier  when
I  v/as  present  with  you.  She  is  a  nice  girl,  a  nice  young  girl,  but  not  so
trustworthy  as  some  of  your  other  friends.

[This  is  quite  meaningless.  The  only  lady  of  the  name  of  Smith  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  "  immediate  surroundings  "  is  a  Miss  Smith,  a  neighbour,
to  whom  the  description  does  not  in  the  least  aj^ply.]

Marie,  Maria  (French  pronunciation),  how's  she  ?  Your  mother  I  mean.
Wilson — now,  who's  Wilson  ?  (The  doctor  ?)  No,  not  the  doctor.  Keyon,
who  is  Keyon  ?  Who  is  the  tall  man  who  rides  with  your  husband  ?  Not
rides,  writes.  Your  husband  lectures,  talks  a  great  deal.  He  is  a  nice  man,
I  like  him. Who  writes  with  him  ?

[All  this  is  unintelligible. For  "  Keyon,"  see  pp.  588-9.]

Carrie  was  sick  in  the  chest  when  she  passed  away — consum^jtioii.  She


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


587


says  she  is  happy,  so  is  her  mother.  Tou  did  not  know  her  mother.  Well,
Carrie  and  her  mother  were  not  congenial  in  the  body,  but  they  understand
one  another  now. Carrie  had  a  little  sister  who  passed  out  as  an  infant.

[The  only  friend  of  the  name  of  Carrie  who  is  dead,  the  wife  of  a  cousin,
died  of  inflammation  of  the  lungs.  Her  mother  died  at  her  birth,
and  her  step-mother  was  by  her  believed  to  be  her  own  mother,  and
as  a  child  she  used  to  reproach  herself  for  not  loving  her  as  a  cliild
ought  to  love  its  mother.  There  was  an  infant  sister,  the  child  of
the  step-mother,  which  died  at  two  jnonths  old.  Mrs.  Yerrall
writes  :  "  This  I  have  never  known  "  (till  inquuy  was  naade  on  this
occasion),  "  at  least  that  is  my  imj^ression.  The  husband  of  Carrie
did  not  know  it,  but  found  the  event  recorded  in  the  Family  Bible.
I  knew  Carrie  very  well,  and  it  is,  of  course,  possible  that  she  may
have  mentioned  the  baby  sister  to  me,  but  I  had  so  little  knowledge  of
the  fact  that  I  thought  the  medium's  statement  mistaken,  and
neither  my  mother,  who  was  very  intimate  with  Carrie,  nor  my
sister  knew  of  the  '  infant  sister.'  "]

Bragan— who's  that  ?  No,  B— R— I— G  -H— T— O— N.  (Mrs.  V.  :
"  The  name  of  a  to^vn  ?  ")  No,  it  is  not  that.  Lucy  in  the  body  is  a  friend
of  yours. She  is  not  well — toothache.

[The  only  friend  of  Mrs.  V.  who  is  named  Lucy  had  not  toothache,  nor
anything  the  matter  witli  her  at  this  time.  Mrs.  Verrall's  old  home
is  at  Brighton.]

Ada  D  .  .  .  has  lots  of  trouble,  a  bad  influence  is  round  her.  Her
mother  is  telling  me  about  her — lots  of  sickness,  trouble  in  head.  A  relative
is  ill,  sore  inside,  deadly  sick  with  digestive  trouble.  It  is  very  troviblesome,
she  is  much  tied  (-s/c),  nervous,  hates  to  see  people.  It  is  her  gentleman  v\-ho
is  ill.  He  is  advanced,  not  very  young  ;  he  has  been  troubled  a  long  time.
The  doctors  are  perplexed,  she  is  very  worried  ;  her  gentleman  is  sick,  oh,  so
sick  !  liver,  heart,  and  stomach.  Tliey  sent  him  away,  and  he  came  back
worse.  It  is  mother  and  father  that  tell  me,  in  the  spirit,  her  mother  and
father,  no,  his  father. He  is  not  treated  properly.

[This  lady,  whose  Christian  and  surname  were  correctly  given  in  full,  had
already  been  mentioned  to  Mrs.  B.  (App.,  No.  6,  p.  621.)  The
description  of  her  husband's  illness  is  not  good.]

How  is  tliat  eldest  young  one  that  has  got  its  hair  croj^ped  ofl'  ?  And  the
baby  ? Rub  its  legs.

[See  Mrs.  V.'s  first  sitting.]
Eliza,  your  Eliza  ;  is  she  well  ?  And  Nellie  connected  with  Eliza  ?
["  I  have  a  cook  of  this  name;  her  sister  who  lately  left  me  is  called
Ellen  by  me,  but  Nellie  by  her  friends." — Mrs.  Verrall.]
Your  sister  in  the  spirit  speaks. What  is  her  name  1 What  did  I  call
you  1 Mrs.  Reed,  R — E — A — D — E. Miss  Emerson  is  a  friend  of  your
gentleman.

[Mrs.  Reade  is  m^t  identified.  Dr.  Yerrall  when  ipiite  a  boy  knew  a
Miss  Emberson.]

Mary,  a  sister  Mary.  Louise,  Louisa,  no,  Lizzie,  your  husband's  sister.
There  is  another  sister  Anna.  Mirah,  Mara,  Marion  is  the  yi.umgest  sister.
Another,  not  so  near,  is  Anna — no,  I  told  you  her.  Why  do  I  give  you  four
names  ? There  are  only  two  sisters.


588


A  Record  of  Observed  ions  of


Mrs.  V.  :  "You  are  sj^eaking  of  sisters  and  sisters-in-law."  "
Two  sisters,  like  you,  and  two  sisters-in-law.

[Dr.  Verrall  has  two  sisters  named  Annette  (eldest)  and  Marion
(youngest).  He  has  two  sisters-in-law  called  Mary  Elizabeth,
generally  known  as  Lizzie,  and  Anna.  Thus,  allowing  for  th&
confusion  of  Anna  and  Annette,  the  statement  is  correct.]

Your  husband's  aunt  is  called  Catherine,  Caroline.  Oh,  how  he
lectures — not  you,  other  peoijle.  He's  positive.  So's  your  eldest  daughter  ;
she's  like  him,  oh,  like  him.  The  other  sister  is  Alice,  Allie ;  I  can't  get  it  quite.
Who's  How?  no,  not  How  ;  what  do  you  call  it?  (Mrs.  V.  :  "  Hugh?")
That's  it. Alice,  Allie,  no,  can't  get  it. (Mrs.  V.  :  "Annette.")

[Dr.  Yerrall's  youngest  brother  is  called  Hugh.  He  is  confident  that  he
never  had  an  aunt  Catherine  or  Caroline.]

Ellums,  Vellums,  what's  that  ?  That's  you.  Mrs.  Vcnnals,  V— E— R—
N— I— L— S,  Yerils,  Y— E— R— I— L.

Mrs.  Y.  :  "What  is  my  Christian  name  ?  "

Mary,  Maria. No,  M— A— R— . It's  like  Mary  Yerrall.

[Mrs.  Yerrall's  Christian  name  is  Margaret,  and  she  is  called  May.  She
notes  that  the  li  of  ]\Iary  was  haitlly  sounded.]

Mrs.  Y.  :  "  Tell  me  of  my  mother's  relations  ;  "

Who  -ivas  the  teacher  ?  There  was  a  grandfatlier  lame,  very  lame,
rheumatism  ;  the  father's  father,  lame,  crutches.  You  know  Henry,  he
sends  his  love.  Tliere  are  two  Henrys,  one  the  father's  side,  one  on  the
mother's.  The  two  Henrys  came  to  another  gentleman  by  mistake.  One
belongs  to  the  lame  grandfather,  his  son  ;  the  other  to  the  mother  ;  not  hei'
son  nor  brother — father,  perhaps,  or  grandfather.  Your  grandfather  had  a.
sister  Susan.  The  other  Henry — there  is  an  old-fashioned  picture  with  a.
collar  turned  down,  liair  old-fasliioned  way — a  jJainting  done  liy  one  of  the
family,  n(jt  you.

["  Grandf.ather  lame  ;  this  is  true  of  my  father's  father.  But  he  never
had  I'heumatism  ;  his  lameness  was  due  to  an  accident.  '  Henry '  -
I  had  an  uncle  Henry  whom  I  never  knew,  a  son  of  the  lame  grand-
fatlier. There  is  a  portrait  of  him  by  his  mother  which  she  valued
very  much.  It  shows  him  as  a  young  man,  a  grown-up  hjoking  boy.
The  other  Henry  was  an  uncle  of  my  mother's.  I  have  written  tO'
ask  if  my  grandfather  had  a  sister  Susan."  Sulisequently  Mrs.
Yerrall  writes  : — "  I  hear  that  my  grandfather  had  a  sister  Susan.
She  was  Ijorn  in  1701,  and  after  her  marriage  went  out  to  Canada
and  lived  near  Hamilton  on  Lake  Ontario.  But  a  son  remained  in.
England.  Members  of  my  grandfatlier 's  family  liave  kept  up  com-
munication with  some  of  my  relations,  though  not  with  our  branch,,
notably  with  the  uncle  who  married  a  Mrs.  Keeley.  The  uncle
Henry  wIkjsc  joortrait  was  described  to  me  went  out  to  Canada  to-
join  tlie  Susan  branch.  It  is  certainly  very  astonishing  that  Dr.  P.
shi  luld  kiK  )W  a  fact  of  which  I  certainly  never  knew.  My  grandfather
had  entirely  lirokeu  with  all  his  family  except  a  sister  Mary,  and
never  mentioned  them  to  me.  This  infcjrmatioii  is  derived  from
papers  in  my  grandmother's  handwriting.  My  father  knew  notliing^
of  this  Susan. "]

Keyon,  what's  her  name  ?  Your  grandmother's  sister,  no,  grandmother
"was  Wilson,  no,  Williams.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


589


[Williams  was  the  maiden  name  of  Mrs.  Y.'s  great  grandmother.]
Stanford,  Sanford,  a  relative  of  yours. How  is  Fanny  ']
[Mrs.  V.  knows  nothing  of  these  names.]

Kelon,  Keley,  that's  it. What  relation  is  she  ?
Mrs.  V.  :  "  My  uncle  married  a  Mrs.  Keeley."
[Mrs.  Keeley  was  tlie  name  of  a  widow  who  was  the  second  wife  of  Mrs.
V.'s  uncle.]

Oh,  what  a  mixture — doulile  marriages  !  Your  aunt  married  your  uncle  ;
I  mean,  she  was  your  aunt  after  she  married  liim.  Mrs.  Keeley  was  the
second  wife  and  had  a  first  husband.  George,  that's  the  brother  of  the
inicle's  first  wife.

["  George  was  the  name  of  the  brother  of  my  uncle's  first  wife.  I  find
that  he  is  still  alive,  but  is  now  called  Jasper,  his  other  name.  I
have  lately  heard  a  great  deal  about  Jasper,  but  had  no  idea  he  was
the  '  George '  of  whom  I  used  to  hear  from  my  cousin,  John
Merrifield,  when  we  were  both  children."]

I  like  the  teacher.  ("Who?")  Music  teacher;  yoiu-  aunt,  father's
sister. She  is  a  lady,  she  is  living.

["  My  father's  sister  taught  music  certainly,  jtossibly  painting  too."]

John:  what  is  he?  A  tall  dark  man,  had  a  lot  of  land.  No — John,
cousin  on  father's  side.

["I  have  a  cousin  John,  but  the  description  is  not  correct."]

Aunt  Jane,  Jennie. No,  not  an  aunt  ;  what  do  you  call  her  aunt  for  1

["  A  friend  of  mine  is  called  Aunt  Jane  by  my  child."]

The  special  interest  of  these  sittings  lies  in  the  facts  told  to  Mrs.

Verrall,  of which  she  was  certainly  ignorant  at  the  time. Many  of

them  may  be  explained  as  mere  unconscious  recollections  of  childhood,

but  it  is  dithcult  to  feel  that  this  adequately  accounts  for  the  mention

of  Susan  as  the  grandfather's  sister. The  correct  statement  about  the

quinine  (pp.  584-5)  is  curious,  but  would  have  been  more  striking  if

the  remedy  had  been  less  common.

The  following  sitting  is  printed  nearly  \'erbatim  from  shoithand

notes,  in  order  to  give  a  fair  idea  of  the  verbiage  which  formed  the

greater  part  of  most  of  the  sittings : —

51.  Sitting  on.  December  28tt,  1889,  33,  Manchester-atreet.  Fre^ent  :  Mrs.
Herbert  Leaf,  and  Walter  Leaf  reportimj.  Mrs.  H.  Leaf  was  introduced
as  "  Miss  Thompson."

I  see  you.  How  are  you,  you  lady  ?  I  say,  Captain  1  Captain,  come
here.

["Captain"  is  the  name  by  which  Dr.  Phinuit  speaks  of  Professor'
Lodge.]

W.  L.  :  "The  captain  is  not  here. "

Oh,  then,  that's  you,  Walter  '? Where  are  we  now  ? Where  be  I  ?
W.  L.  :  "In  London."

How  do  you  do,  Sis  ? Are  you  pretty  well  ? You  are  not  sick  ? No  ?-


590


A  Record  of  Observations  of


That's  very  good.  I  have  got  a  great  deal  to  tell  you,  lady.  You  have  made
one  great  mistake  in  your  life.  That  was  a  Lad  one.  If  you  had  not  made
that  mistake  you  would  have  been  better  oft".  That's  a  young  gentleman
that  came  into  your  life,  and  you  didn't  care  much  aljout  him.  [The  refer-
ence of  this  is  quite  clear  and  unmistakeable.]

Do  you  know  who  Frank  is  ?  That's  a  lady,  lier  name  is  Frances,
F— R— A— N— C— E— S. How  do  you  spell  that  ?

[My  sister  Emily's  third  name  is  Frances. — R.  M.  L.]

Well,  William  sends  his  love  to  you  (W.  L.)  ;  that's  your  father  ;  he  is  in
the  spirit. [Wrong  ;  but  see  Apj3.,  Nos.  31  and  55.]

(Here  I  am  asked  to  leave  the  room  ;  I  beg  to  stay,  and  am  allowed  to  do
so.— W.  L.)

Well,  there  is  nothing  like  pleasing  those  people  there  in  the  body,  if  you
can. I  want  to  tell  this  lady  about  her  sisters.

There  is  a  doctor  round  this  lady.  How  is  he  l  The  name  is  William,  I
get  the  influence.  That  makes  two  Williams,  one  round  Walter  and  one
round  you.

[This  "  William  "  could  be  easily  identified,  but  he  is  not  a  doctor.]

I  get  your  grandfather's  influence,  he  was  lame  and  had  trouble  through
here,  in  the  leg.  [Wrong.]  That's  on  your  mother's  side.  Don't  you  think
you  are  pretty  'I  I  do.  You  are  a  very  pretty  giil.  You  have  got  a  gentle-
man, though,  in  the  body.  [True.]  What  do  you  think  of  that  ?  He  is  a  very
nice  gentleman,  he  is  not  a  crank.  He  is  kind  of  nervous,  but  he  is  very
nice.  Now  the  grandfather's  influence,  the  one  that  is  lame  ;  he  is  connected
v/ith  your  mother.

R.  M.  L.  :  "That  is  not  right."

There  is  one  of  your  grandfathers  that  is  lame.

R.  M.  L.  :  "I  never  heard  of  it."

He  has  got  something  the  matter  with  the  right  leg.  You  ask  about  it  ;
it  is  through  his  leg  here.

R.  M.  L.  :  "Is  it  the  one  that  had  something  the  matter  with  his  ear  ?  "
It  is  the  same  one  that  had  the  trouble  in  his  ear.  [Wrong.]
R.  M.  L  :  "  Where  did  he  live  t  "

I  don't  know. I  can't  tell  the  names  of  places. I  can't  tell  names  of
towns,  sometimes  I  can  tell  names  of  countries. How  about  that  letter  you
gilt  a  little  while  ago  ?  Are  you  going  to  see  tliat  friend  who  wrote  ?  She
will  come  into  your  surroundings  suddenly  ;  I  know  that  is  a  fact.
[The  allusion  to  a  letter  is  incorrect.]

He  is  nervous,  Walter  is  :  isn't  he  ?  How  is  Gertrude  ?  Is  not  she  a  nice
girl  ?

[An  allusion  to  Miss  Gertrude  C]
How  is  your  sister  ?  She  has  got  a  cough.  She  is  better,  I  think  ;  she
has  got  a  cold.  She  has  got  trouble  in  the  throat,  and  in  the  head  a  little.
Particularly  through  here  in  the  tliroat ;  she  will  get  quite  well  again.  But
■she  is  such  a  limb,  she  is  full  of  Old  Harry.  She  has  a  very  lively  disposition.
She  has  got  a  great  deal  in  her.  (What  is  her  name  ?)  Do  you  know  her  ?
she  has  got  a  cold.  She  has  had  something  the  matter  with  her  throat.  She
■Jias  got  sometliing  the  matter  with  her  head.


Certain  Fhenomena  of  Trance.


591


["This  is  a  quite  incorrect  account  both  of  the  character  and  ill-health
<jf  my  sister."]

Who  is  Mary  ?  That  is  this  lady's  aunt. She  has  passed  out  of  the  body.

[This  is  correct. She  is  my  mother's  sister.]
H.  M.  L.  :  "  Wlien  did  she  leave  this  world  ?  "
A  little  while  ago. She  is  in  the  spirit.

[She  died  in  '83.]
R.  M.  L.  :  "Was  she  good  ?  "

What  a  funny  question  I What  do  you  mean  by  good  ? She  is  a  very
nice  lady. She  is  a  lady  tliat  would  come  back  in  the  spirit  ;  at  the  same
time  she  is  very  sad. At  the  same  time  she  is  in  the  spirit,  she  lives  and
sees  you. ... I  get  your  mother's  influence  now.
R.  M.  L.  :  "  She  is  in  the  spirit,  is  she  not  I  "
No.  [Riglit.]  I  want  to  get  your  mother's  influence  nearer  to  me.
There  is  a  lady  in  your  family  that  married  twice. She  had  two  liusbands,
fTrue  of  a  maternal  aunt.] I  will  tell  you  about  her. I  get  this  spirit  that
sends  love  to  your  mother. She  is  in  the  body,  your  mother. But  Mary  is
in  the  sjjirit  ;  she  sends  love  to  your  mother.

R.  M.  L.  :  "  What  about  the  one  that  married  two  husbands  "
There  are  two  influences,  one  is  in  tlie  sjjirit,  one  in  tlie  body. [True  if
reference  is  to  husbands.] One  of  her  husbands  was  a  kind  of  crank.  Then
one  of  them  passed  out  and  she  married  again. That  makes  two. TJic  first
one  passed  out  by  an  accident.

[He  is  believed  to  have  been  murdered  during  the  Indian  Mutiiiy,  with
the  (jther  European  males  of  the  station,  in  a  church  at  Sli;ihje-
hanpore.  The  exact  manner  of  his  death  is  not  known.  See  the
allusions  below  to  a  "  large  building  "  and  "passing  out  all  )nixed  up
with  somebody  else,  he  and  a  lot  of  other  gentlemen."]

R.  M.  L.  :  "Is  the  second  one  alive  now  '? "

He  had  some  trouble  through  his  heart,  right  through  there.  He  passed
out  very  suddenly.  He  passed  out  by  accident.  At  the  same  time  it
sifl'ected  his  heart. [This  evidently  refers  to  tlie  Jird  husband.]

R.  M.  L.  :  "  Where  did  he  pass  out  ? In  what  sort  of  place  ?  "

There  was  a  building  at  the  corner  of  a  street,  a  quite  large  building
running  back  a  little  way.

Then  there  is  Emily. That  was  her  influence  I  was  telling  you  of.
[A  sister. See  above.]

R.  M.  L.  :  "  How  is  Emily  ?  "

Not  very  well,  I  will  tell  you  that  much.  I  mean  she  was  not  very  well  ;
I  know  there  was  trouble  through  here  (indicates  abdomen)  like  2)eritonitis.
She  sufi"ered  very  much  indeed.

[She  has  been  very  ill  with  internal  malady,  though  not  peritonitis.]

R.  M.  L. :  "  Can  you  tell  me  aljout  my  brothers  ?  "

I  get  you  a  little  mixed  up  with  Walter.  Does  William  belong  to  you  or
to  him  ?

W.  L. :  "  There  is  one  William  that  belongs  to  me. You  told  us."
Well,  you  have  got  a  William  on  the  fatlier's  side. That's  the  fatlier'.'i
brother  ;  and  lie  ( W.  L. )  has  got  the  father. He  is  a  little  older  th  in  liis,


592


A  Record  of  Observations  of


(W.  L.'s)  ffither.  He  has  got  a  William  in  the  spirit,  that  is  his  father,  at
least,  he  says  fatlier  tt>  iiie  ;  that  is  all  I  can  hear  from  him.  There's  t^vo
Walters  in  liis  family  ;  then  tliere  is  William,  who  is  father  in  some  way  to'
liim.  Then  with  you  I  get  George,  G — E — O — R — G — E.  I  like  him  ;  he^
is  in  the  Ijody,  ;in(l  there  is  one  in  the  spirit.  He  has  got  a  brother  in  th&
spirit,  he  wants  to  send  his  lo^-e  to  liiin.

[Mrs.  H.  L.  has  an  uncle  Willia.ni,  her  father's  brother,  and  a  cousin
George  who  has  lost  a  brother,  the  "  Harry  "  who  is  named  shortly
afterwards.  It  is  also  correct  that  there  are  two  Walters  in  my
family,  as  I  have  an  uncle  of  that  name.  Note  the  correction  of  the-
statement  that  William  is  my  father,  which  had  been  made  to  me  at
my  previous  sitting.  (See  App.,  No.  30.)  Mrs.  Piper  had  in  the
interval  learnt  by  personal  introduction  that  my  fatlier  is  not  in  the-
spirit,  and  may  probably  have  found  out  that  his  name  is  not
William.— W.  L.]

R.  M.  L.  :  "  What  is  the  name  of  the  brother  in  the  spirit  ?  "

She  has  g(.>t  an  uncle  William,  he  is  the  fatlier 's  brother.  There  is  a.
George  connected  with  you  ;  at  the  same  time  there  is  ;i  father's  brother
whose  name  is  William,  that  is  on  the  fathei-'s  side.  Then  on  the  mother's,
side,  Mary  is  your  mother's  sister,  that  is  in  the  sjiirit.  That  makes  two.
George  is  in  the  body.  Then  there  is  Alice  that  is  connected  with  you ;  that
is  a  cousin.  No,  not  Alice  ;  Alice,  Elsie,  Elice.  Is  that  yours,  Walter,  or
this  lady's  ?  Charlotte  ;  tliat  is  connected  with  you.  With  you.  Sis.  Mary
says,  give  my  love  to  Cliarlotte.  Is  not  she  a  friend  of  yours  ?  (No.)  That
name  is  in  the  body.  That  is  connected  with  Walter,  then  ?  (No.)  I  used
to  like  Walter,  but  I  don't  like  him  any  more.  He  is  too  nervous.  He  geta
kind  of  cross,  because  I  don't  tell  everybody  in  your  family  at  once.

[Charlotte  is  not  known. F(.)r  Alice,  see  below.]

N<jw  that  is  what  I  want  to  tell  you  about.  There  are  six  of  you,  and
that  is  all.  How  do  you  suppose  I  know  ?  Then  there  is  one,  two,  three,
four,  two  sisters  and  two  lirothers,  that  makes  four,  and  then  there  is  one  iix

the  sjjirit. Then  there  is  one  of  them  tlieie  is  Uncle  George

coirfound  him,  I  can't  get  George  right !  He  is  in  the  body  :  he  is  connected
with  you.  He  is  your  George.  Then  I  get  Harry,  that's  the  brother.  A
brother  of  his,  George's.  It  is  not  your  brotlier  at  all,  but  George's  brother.
Tlu»t  would  make  it  brother-in-law.

[The  number  of  lirothers  and  sisters  is  exactly  right.  The  sister  "in  tli&
s]>irit"  is  the  Agnes  who  played  such  a  ])rominent  part  in
Professor  Reiidall's  sitting,  of  whicli  we  had  not  then  heard.  She
was  called  "Alice  "  at  first  to  him,  so  it  is  possible  that  "Alice
above  may  be  meant  for  the  name.  But  it  has  a  significant  bear-
ing on  the  Spiritualist  exphmation  that  there  is  no  recognition  here
of  tlie  identity.  Indeed,  the  next  paragraph  seems  to  imply  that
the  "one  in  the  spirit  "  is  a  brother,  which  is  wrong.  There  is  no-
iiudc  George.]

Is  that  your  cousin  George  ?  Tlien  there  is  cousin  Harry  ;  they  are  botli
pretty  good,  but  he  has  got  the  most  quiet  disposition.  Harry  is  here,  I  get
his  influence  very  strong.  Then  I  get  your  brother  and  Harry  together.
They  want  to  send  their  love  to  you  and  to  George  in  the  body.  One  of
them  went  away  from  home.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


593


R.  M.  L.  :  "  Wliicli  was  it  went  away  from  home — my  brother  or  my
cousin  ?  "

Your  brother  ;  he  went  away  and  was  gone  quite  a  long  time,  and  was  in
Si  different  c<iuntry  from  your  own.

[The  name  "  Harry  "  is  riglit,  but  tlie  statement  al)out  liis  disposition  is
ambiguous  here.  It  is  made  clear  fuither  on.  One  of  my  brothers
is  in  the  Indian  Civil  Service,  and  has  been  a  long  time  away.  —
R.  M.  L.]

Wlio  the  devil  is  Arthur  A— R— T— H— U— R  ?  He  is  talking  to

me.  He  is  almighty  jjeculiar.  He  thinks  a  good  deal  and  writes  a  good
deal,  and  bothers  his  head  with  other  matters  a  good  deal.  lie  always
wants  to  know  wliat  is  going  on.  He  is  in  the  material  form.  Artluir  comes
nearer  to  you  than  the  rest. What  do  you  make  of  that  I

[Tliis  is  not  in  the  least  a  correct  description  of  my  cousin  Arthur,  an
artist,  nor  is  tliere  any  recognition  of  his  identity  with  one  of  the
half-brothers  sjjoken  of  to  Professor  Rendall.]

How  is  your  gentleman  !  He  is  kind  of  funny.  Do  you  know,  I  like
lum,  and  he  has  got  an  opinion  of  his  own.  At  the  same  time  he  is  good
a,nd  thinks  a  good  deal  of  you.  But  sometimes  he  doesn't  show  it.  I  am
not  going  into  all  your  secrets  till  I  get  you  alone.

She  has  had  two  gentlemen.  You  didn't  fancy  the  first  one.  (A  few
lines  are  omitted  here  containing  some  perfectly  true  remarks  about  tlie  "first
gentleman.")

Do  you  know  Benson  ? (No.) Who  is  that  cousin  tliat  married  Benson  I
'Tlie  name  is  something  like  that.
[No  such  name  recognised.]

Do  you  know  Gertrude  C.  (full  name  given)  ?  And  Emily  ?  She  is  not
rso  pretty,  but  she  is  a  nice  girl.  What  a  nice  little  girl  you  are.  But  you
■tlo  fidget  sometimes  badly.  Do  you  know  the  spirit  that  jjassed  out  of  the
body  in  the  water  ?  He  was  drownied.  He  wants  to  send  his  lo-\'e  to  the
girls,  and  if  he  sees  them  again  he  wants  to  tell  them  something  ;  Emily  and
those  girls.

W.  L.  :  "  What  is  his  name  (  "

He  has  got  a  brother  H.,  and  wants  to  send  liini  liis  love.  His  name
is  Charley. He  is  calling  it,  anyway. He  is  connected  with  him,  anyway.

[This  refers  to  Miss  Emily  C.'s  second  sitting,  Ap]).  No.  34.  H.'s
brother,  who  was  buried  at  sea,  was  not  called  Cliarley,  but  left  a
son  of  that  name.]

You  have  got  a  Charles  wluj  is  connected  with  y<ju  ;  William.  Cousin
'George,  Cousin  Harry. [Right.] Do  you  tliink  Harry  is  a  crank  ?
R.  M.  L.  :  "I  have  not  seen  him  for  a  long  time."

Do  you  think  George  is  I  He  is  more  quiet,  m(n-e  gentlemanly,  but
Harry  has  got  more  spunk  in  him,  more  devilry.  Harry  is  the  one  that  was
not  understood  ;  I  tell  you  that  because  he  told  me  so.  There  is  one  with
me,  and  George  that  is  here  in  the  body.  He  sends  liis  love  to  his  brother
'George.

[This  is  a  perfectly  correct  account  of  the  difference  in  character  of  the
two  bro tilers.]

There  is  Arthur  c<)nnected  with  you,  A — R — T — H — U — R  ;  he  is  in  the


594


A  Record  of  Observations  of


Ijotly ;  lie  is  peculiai'  as  well  as  the  rest. He  seems  to  be  connected  with  you
in  a  dirt'erent  line  from  tlmse  others. He  is  nob  a  brother, but  he  is  con-
nected Avith  you. I  think  that  is  your  gentleman's  l)rother,  or  your  gentle-
man. How  the  devil  do  you  call  him  '!
R.  M.  L.  :  "He  is  a  first  cousin."

Well,  he  is  not  a  brother  of  those  gentlemen  ;  he  comes  in  a  different
line.  He  does  not  belong  to  them,  but  this  Harry  that  speaks  to  me  speaks,
about  Arthur.

[I  have  an  uncle  and  a  first  cousin  Arthur,  but  description  does  not  apply
to  either.— R.  M.  L.]
There  is  a  little  child  round  you. The  little  body  of  a  child. It  belonged
to  your  avuit  tliut  is  in  the  spirit,  that  passed  out  years  and  years  ago ;  you
will  have  to  ask  your  mother  about  it. You  will  find  that  it  is  a  little  child
that  never  li^^ed  in  the  body.

R.  M.  L.  :  "Whose  child  was  that  ?"

The  child  does  not  know  whose  child  she  was.  Don't  you  see,  tlie  child
was  too  young.  I  can't  get  it  to  talk  to  me.  I  see  this  little  one  ;  it  belongs,
either  to  an  aunt  or  a  cousin. Your  mother  will  know  about  it.

[This  is  not  known  to  be  correct  of  the  child  of  an  aunt  oi-  cousin.  Mrs.
Leaf  had  herself  lost  a  babj',  Ijorn  dead.]

Who  is  Annie  ?  It  is  Annie  that  is  asking  this.  And  an  uncle  of  Annie's.
That  is  connected  with  you  ;  that  is  William,  your  uncle  William.

[Annie  is  sister of Harry  and  George,  and niece of my  father's-
youngest  brother  William.]

Then  there  is  another  uncle  that  is  connected  with  you.  I  do  like  him  ;
he  is  a  nice  fellow.  He  is  one  I  am  talking  about.  He  has  passed  out  of  the
l)(jdy. Do  you  know  who  J—  O — S — E — P — H  is  ? Josephine  ? J osie  ?

R.  M.  L.  :  "No."

[The  name  of  Josephine,  Josie,  turned  up  in  other  sittings  and  was  noi:
recognised.]

Wait  a  minute  ;  Harry  used  to  know  a  giil  of  the  name  of  Josephine,  it
was  what  they  called  her.  It  is  connected  with  George  now  in  the  liody  ;  he-
knows  who  she  is.  I  don't  think  the  lady  here  knows  it.  I  am  going  to  tell
you  all  about  her  relatives.  There  is  the  one  who  passed  out  in  the  building.
He  is  the  uncle  here  now. That  is  Emily's.

R.  M.  L.  :  "Uncle?"

Emily's  uncle.  That  is  the  one  that  jjassed  out  of  the  body  suddenly.
And  your  aunt  had  two  husbands.  He  passed  out  like  that  ;  all  mixed  up'
with  somebody  else,  he  and  a  lot  of  other  gentlemen.  His  Ijiviin  is  a  little-
bit  upset  ;  he  wants  to  know  you  and  wants  to  reccignise  you.

R.  M.  L.  :  "  Did  he  ever  see  me  in  the  body  ?  "

He  never  saw  you  in  the  body.  You  were  a  little  thing.  This  is  a  long
time  ago. At  the  same  time  he  thinks  that  he  knows  you.

[He  was  killed  some  years  before  Mrs.  Leaf  was  born. From  this  point
it  will  be  seen  that  the  sitting  became  rambling,  and  almost  every
statement  made  was  wrong  or  meaningless.]
How  is  E— D  ?  Edward  ?  No  ;  F— R— E— D. That's  it  ;  how's  Fred  ?
Fred  Smith  ?  He  is  in  the  l)ody  ;  Fred  Smith.  He  is  connected  with  George.
Y(»ur  aunt  is  constantly  with  liim. Is  not  she  funny  ?  She  is  the  queerest


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


595


Jack  among  them  all.  Oh  Lord  !  You  don't  like  her  very  well.  You  don't
care  about  her  very  much.  She  is  very  self-opinionated  and  thinks  too
darned  much  about  herself,  and  she  is  no  better  than  anybody  else.

R.  M.  L.  :  "  Harry  is  the  one  I  want  to  hear  about."

He  is  the  one  you  don't  like,  and  he  is  rather  big,  he  thinks  a  good  deal
of  himself.

R.  M.  L.  :  "  How  did  he  pass  out  of  the  body  ?  "

Well,  it  was  your  vnicle  passed  out  by  accident.  He  had  trouble
here  through  the  chest  ;  that's  fever,  fever.  He  has  put  his  hand  on  his
head  ;  tliat  is  where.  That  is  Harry.  He  passed  out  with  it.  He  did  not
know  anybody  before  he  passed  out.  His  head  was  dizzy.  Then  he  had
trouble  through  tlie  chest.
[He  died  of  cliolera.]

R.  M.  L  :  "Where  did  he  pass  out  ?  "

That  is  some  way  from  you,  not  in  England.  [Right  ;  it  was  in  India.]
He  had  bleeding,  something  bled.  He  remembers  tliat,  before  he  passed  out
of  the  body.  He  had  trouble  tlu'ough  here,  through  the  chest,  through  the
lungs.  That  was  his  trouble,  and  he  passed  out.  You  know  he  went  tr>
school  at  some  time  ;  this  troubled  him  there.  Then  he  had  an  attack
through  here,  through  liis  heai't  ;  at  last  it  infected  his  heart,  and  theii
he  passed  out  with  it.

R.  M.  L.  :  '•  Did  they  bury  him  soon,  or  was  it  a  long  time  V  '

They  sent  the  body  away  ;  he  is  living.  That  was  a  long  while  ago.  He
troubles  me  a  little  ;  but  d(>n't  you  like  him  ?  Too  bad  ;  he  was  funny  ;
given  to  a  roving  disposition.

R.  M.  L.  :  "  Did  he  leave  a  wife  ?"

In  the  body  '>

R.  M.  L.  :  "Yes.  "

What  was  that  trouljle  ? What  do  you  call  it  ?
R.  M.  L.  :  "In  the  chest  ?"

Yes. Do  you  know,  he  lost  some  blood  before  he  passed  out  ;  he  had
trouble  with  his  head,  that  was  all  covered  with  spots '?
W.  L.  :  "Not  small-pox  ?"

No,  he  had  not.  He  had  trouble  through  his  chest  and  raised  some  blood
before  he  passed  out.  And  then  he  had  an  attack  with  his  heart.  He
remembers  this  trouble.

At  the  same  time  there  is  tliis  lady  that  George  knows  about  in  the  body.
Tell  him  that  Harry  is  not  dead  but  alive  ;  but  he  does  not  seem  well  to
realise  that  he  can  talk  to  you.  Meantime  I  will  talk  to  him  and  get  him
to  come  here  and  talk  to  you. He  can  tell  you  more  next  time.

Walter,  is  not  she  a  nice  little  girl  ?  You  know  the  gentleman  ;  is  not  he
a  kind  fellow  ?  He  knows  a  great  deal.  He  does  his  best  to  do  right ;  and
whatever  he  does  he  does  conscientiously.  He  is  inclined  to  be  nervous  and
set  ;  but  don't  you  mind  if  he  is  a  little  bit  set.  I  don't  think  Hari'y  ever
knew  him  ;  he  passed  out  before  you  got  hitched.

[Correct ;  Harry  died  August,  1887,  and  I  was  married  the  following
September.— R.  M.  L.]

Who  do  you  call  Dick  ?  Somebody  calls  him.  Dick  ;  Richard  his  name  is,
they  call  him  Dick. That  is  a  second  cousin.


596


A  Record  of  Observations  of


R.  M.  L.  :  "  My  gentleman's  second  cousin  ?  "

Yes.  He  is  in  the  body.  That  is  connected  with  your  gentleman.  He
has  got  a  moustache.  Your  gentleman  is  fine.  He  is  pretty  good-looking,
but  I  don't  like  that  light  coat  he  wears.  He  used  to  wear  it,  but  he  has  left  it
off  now.  The  dark  one  he  wears  looks  better,  with  that  fuzzy  thing,
velveteen.  Where  did  he  get  that  ring  ?  That  is  Walter  that  has  got  the
ring.  What  is  that  piano  ?  P — I — A — N — O  'I  I  got  that  near  your  mother.
How  is  Harry's  wife,  do  you  know  ?  Harry  is  a  kind  of  crank.
[Harry  never  married. All  this  jiart  is  nonsense.]

R.  M.  L.  :  "  Can  you  tell  me  my  gentleman's  name  '] "

Hai'ry  went  to  another  country  and  passed  out  away,  so  he  can't  tell  his
name. He  will  know  all  about  it. But  who  is  it  they  call  Fred  Smith  ?

R.  M.  L.  :  "Can  you  tell  me  who  it  is  that  I  call  '  Mr.  Man  '  ?  "

Mr.  Man  ?  That  is  a  very  familiar  thing  with  me,  your  Mr.  Man.  It  is
not  Harry  ?  nor  George  ?  nor  your  uncle  ?  Do  you  call  your  gentleman  Mr.
Man  ?  Then  the  gentleman's  father  ?  I  give  it  up.  Wliom  do  you  call
Mr.  Man  ?

R.  M.  L.  :  "  It  is  only  a  dog,  my  collie,  that  I  call  Mr.  Man."

Ah,  he  is  Mr.  Man  sure  enough.  Now  I  will  tell  you  what  I  will  do  with
you.  I  will  tell  you  all  al)out  them  next  time.  I  will  impiire  about  your
s])irit  friends.  You  have  got  a  long  life  before  you  and  a  very  pleasant  one  ;
but  I  don't  see  any  children  ;  no  children.

R.  M.  L.  :  "  Can  you  tell  me  about  something  I  lost  three  years  ago  1  "

Something  shiny,  y<3U  mean  ?  It  was  a  ring  in  gold,  something  round.
Something  you  wore  here.  (Indicates  neck,  then  wrist.)  Round  the  wrist
she  wore  it.  It  was  a  pin.  It  was  a  funny  looking  thing.  You  lost  that  in
the  evening.  I  will  trace  that  for  you,  and  tell  you  next  time.  If  there
is  anything  else  you  would  like  me  to  tell  you,  I  will  ;  but  I  could  not  tell
you  who  you  call  Mr.  Man.  (To  W.  L.  :  She  must  come  and  see  me  again.)
You  take  things  patiently,  but  you  get  worried  and  fidgety  when  that  man
of  yours  gets  tired.  He  is  set,  but  he  means  well.  I  like  him.  He  has  got
some  sense  and  some  brain,  that  fellow.  ...  I  want  to  tell  about  the
six  of  you,  five  besides  yourself.  I  will  tell  you  about  your  bracelet,  where
you  lost  it.

[A  gold  bracelet  is  what  I  asked  about  ;  I  lost  it  one  evening.]
You  had  a  new  book  to  put  pictures  in,  that  card-looking  thing  that  runs
along  with  string.  It  is  a  book-looking  thing,  a  big  book.  I  can  see  it  quite
well.  Who  gave  it  to  her  ?  .  .  .  Do  you  know,  your  uncle  had  some
trouble  ;  he  passed  out  with  trouble.  He  had  a  bad  accident.  What  a  good
girl  you  are. Do  you  think  I  am  a  crank  ?

Trance  passed  off  at  12.15.

56.  Slttiiifi  of  JanruAry  Id,  1890,  at  6,  Sii.'isex-2)laee. Present, W.  A.  Pye
and  W.  L.

Mr.  Pye  had  been  ]jreviously  introduced  as  Mr.  Wilson,  ])ut  his  real
name  had  accidentally  been  mentioned  before  Mrs.  Pijoer.  It  is,  liowever,
extremely  improbable  that  she  heard  it.

After  the  usual  preliminary  conversation,

Now  your  mother's  family,  brothers  and  sisters,  and  all  together,  if  we
take  the  children,  there  are  five.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


597


^Y.  A.  p.  :  "Alive?"
No,  live  in  all  ;  one,  two,  three,  four,  five.
W.  A.  P.  :  "  My  own  brothers  and  sisters  ? "
There  are  more  than  five,  as  you  are  now.
W.  A.  P.  :  "There  are  sLx."

Where  the  dickens  is  the  sixth  gone  now  ?  Tliere's  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  not
counting  liiniself .  There  are  four  brothers  and  two  sisters.  Alive  in  tlie
natural  life  there  are  four  boys  besides  j'ourseH.  You  are  right  ;  there  is
four  boys  and  two  girls.  The  little  one,  the  youngest  one,  I  don't  see  at  all.
There  are  five,  no  six,  alive  not  including  yourself.  Then  two  in  the  spii'it,
<),  7,  8.  Tliere  are  six  in  the  body  and  you  make  tlie  seventh.  Tlien  there
■are  1,  2,  3,  4,  there  are  four  in  all.  Besides  that  there  are  three  others  in
the  body,  and  tlien  there  is  one  in  tlie  body  that  I  can't  see  at  all  well,  the
youngest  one.  Tliere  are  one,  two,  three  in  the  spirit,  and  six  in  the  Ijody.
(Note  A.)

Five  of  them  I  can  tell  you  about.  One  of  them  is  named  Henry,  he  is
called  Harry.  Then  there  is  Marie,  M — A — R — I — A.  Then  there  is
another  named  Will,  W— I— L— L— I— A— M. There  is  two.

W.  A.  P.  :  "  Will  is  myself,  he  is  not  my  brother."'

Then  there  is  another  one  with  a  curious  name,  spells  with  a  J.  That
is  in  the  spuit. There  is  one  Ed  ;  E— D— W— A— R— D.
W.  A.  P.  :  •■  No  ;  that  is  not  quite  right."
Ed,  Edmund,  or  Edwin. That  is  it ;  they  call  him  Ed.
W.  A.  P.  :  "  The  name  was  Edmund."

Don't  you  call  it  Ed.  I  Well,  I  do.  Edmund.  That  is  not  a  very  easy
name  to  speak.  Then  there  is  Will,  W — I — L — L,  and  another,  and  Henry
and  Ed.  Then  there's  one  named  John,  and  that  is  an  uncle,  and  there  is
one  named  Maria,  and  that  is  an  aunt. (Note  B.)

There's  two  names  quite  alike  ;  tliere's  one  who  is  deaf  (touching  the
left  ear)  :  he  has  some  trouble  througli  here,  on  tliat  side.  Don't  you  know,
what  you  call  things  in  the  head  ?  Gathering,  rising  in  the  head.  Troubles
just  here.

W.  A.  P.  "  In  the  left  ear  ?  "

That  must  be  an  uncle.

W.  A.  P.  :  "  There  is  one  name  you  liave  not  menti(3ned  :  can  you  tell  me
about  the  brother  with  the  cirrious  name  ? "
You  don't  mean  Edmund  ?
W.  A.  P.  ;  "No.  '

Well,  I  will  find  it  before  I  get  through.  There  is  this  little  girl  in  the
spirit  with  me,  a  little  bit  of  a  child,  and  three  boys.  The  next  one  has  got
short  hair  ( !').  By  little  girl  I  mean  one  between  14  and  15.  Then  there
is  two  boys.  One  of  your  brothers  is  away — two  of  them  in  fact  are
away.  One  is  a  long  distance  away.  You  will  hear  from  that  brother  pretty
soon.  He  is  doing  first-rate.  He  has  had  a  very  discouraging  time,  but  it
is  better  now.  Then  tliere  is  one  of  you  called  Walter  ;  that  is  connected
with  you. {Note  C.)

Wlio  is  Alick  ? Alex  ?

W.  A.  P.  :  "I  don't  know."

He  is  not  connected  with  you. Ask  Walter. Tliere  are  two  of  tliem.


598


A  Record,  of  Observations  of


Your  l;uly  has  got  two  sisters,  one  of  tlieiu  with  her,  living,  and  one  out.
There  is  one  with  her  ;  I  don't  like  her.  I  like  your  lady  very  much.
She  is  kind  of  nervous,  but  she  does  a  great  deal,  she  is  patient.  Iler  sister
is  quite  peculiar  ;  she  is  kind  of  fussy  ;  she  likes  to  have  her  own  way.
(Note  I).)

There  is  one,  two  Where  are  all  your  children  ?

W.  A.  P.  :  "  You  said  just  now  there  is  an  Alick  ;  can  you  tell  me  about
him  ? "

I  will  get  the  influence  stronger.  Don't  you  call  one  of  your  sisters
Allie  ?  (This  was  very  indistinct  and  I  could  not  tell  whether  Allie  or  Annio
"was  said  at  first,  the  second  mention  was  "  Annie." — W.  A.  P.)

W.  A.  P.  :  "Not  quite."

Annie.  That  is  your  ov/n  sister,  and  that's  the  lady's  sister,  and  her
father's  name  is  Henry.  (No.)  Is  it  her  brother?  (No.)  Her  father?
(No.)  Well,  it  is  connected  with  her.  You  ask  her  when  you  get  home  who
Alick  is.  You  say  you  don't  know  Alick.  Well,  he  will  come  to  you  soon.
Now  I  am  gi->ing  to  try  and  get  your  brothers  and  sisters  nearer.  Which  of
them  was  it  that  hurt  his  leg  ?

W.  A.  P.  :  "I  don't  know."

It  is  here.  Which  was  it  had  a  fall  ?  He  wiis  on  the  ice  and  got  hurt.
It  is  through  here.  (Through  the  wrist.)  You  ask.  One  of  them  is  hurt
through  there.  One  has  trouble  with  his  stomach,  indigestion,  dyspepsia.
Then  I  get  this  trouble  through  here.

W.  A.  P.  :  "  Which  is  it  has  trouble  with  his  stomach  ?  "

Harry  has  got  trouble  with  his  wrist,  and  Ed  with  his  stomach.  {Note.  E.)

Walter  has  something  to  do  witli  books.  He  has  books  and  papers  all  the
time.  He  is  in  the  flesh  where  he  has  to  do  with  books  ;  he  has  to  look
them  over. One  of  theiu  has  glasses  on  his  nose  and  another  one  has  got

trouble in his stomach. Then there is one with  Who is  Rich,

R— I— C— H  l  They  call  him  Dick.  Tell  Walter  that  from  me.  One  of
them  has  not  been  well  ;  very  sick  ;  she  is  getting  better.

W.  A.  P.  :  "  Which  of  the  sisters  is  that  ? "

It  is  the  elder.

W.  A.  P.  :  "  Can  you  get  the  brother  with  the  curious  name  ?  "
No.

W.  A.  P.  :  "  You  have  not  told  me  anything  about  my  parents."

She  has  had  cold  and  some  trouble  tlirough  the  chest  ;  she  has  not  been
well  at  all.  She  will  get  out  all  right.  Then  there  was  a  little  child  came
into  your  family  not  long  ago.

You  made  a  change  for  the  better  about  two  years  ago.  (No.)  Well
j)erhaps  it  was  longer  ago  ;  it  was  in  connection  with  yc>ur  work,  in  your
business  life. Yon  have  clianged  your  hc)me  surroundings. {Note  F.)

You  were  with  an  elderly  lady  at  t)ne  time.  Was  it  your  lady's  mother  ?
She  was  in  the  suri'oundings  in  the  body  some  years  ago.  Now  she  is  with
me.  Wasn't  she  in  the  suii'oundings  of  this  old  lady  ?  She  was  one  passed
out  with  cancer.  That  is  one  I  want  to  tell  you  about.  That  comes  very
close.  She  knows  I  am  speaking  to  you  and  wants  me  to  tell  you.  Slie  had
cancer  in  one  part  of  the  body.  (Here  some  reference  was  made  to  Mr.  P.'s
wife  ;  the  notes  are  imperfect.)


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


599


W.  A.  P.  :  "Can  you  tell  me  any  more  about  her  aunt  ?  The  one  that
passed  out  with  cancer  ?  "

That  is  another  sister  ;  it  is  older  than  that  one.  What  you  call  the  short
one.  She  is  tlie  elder.  Oh,  that  is  not  your  mother  ;  not  your  own  mother.
(Note  G.)

(Here  AV.  L.,  wlio  has  been  taking  notes  from  outside,  enters  the  room.
Dr.  P.  says  )

I  liave  been  telling  him  about  liis  five  bi'others  and  sisters.  He  has  got
six  ;  I  can't  tell  him  about  the  other  one.  I  see  the  brother  that  is  away  ;
then  tliere  is  Bert.  ("  Bert  "  appears  to  be  a  reminiscence  of  my  brother
Herbert,  his  name  is  spoken  directly  after  without  any  connection. — W.  L.)
Bert  belongs  to  him.  There  are  5,  5,  5.  Five  different  brothers  and  sisters  ;
and  three  in  the  spirit.  I  keep  getting  Bert's  influence.  Their  names  are
Willy,  W— I— L— L,  Edward,  and  Harry.  That's  three.  Then  there  is  a
sister  Anna.  Herbert  I  Then  there  is  one  named  Charles,  Charley.  You
don't  know  him.  That  is  one  of  them.  There  is  one  in  a  building  with
books.  That's  not  you,  because  you  are  Will.  That  is  the  one  I  call  Ed.
(NoteH.)

(Here  tlif  medium  complained  of  being  "mixed";  kept  on  calling  fur
Walter,  Herbert,  and  Rosie  ;  apologised  for  being  stupid,  and  said  it  was
not  usual.  Mrs.  H.  Leaf  came  into  the  room.  The  only  coiniected  state-
ments were — )

Rosie,  do  you  know  Leicester?  No,  you  don't.  Do  you  know  Loolie  ?
("Yes." — See  Mrs.  H.  Leaf's  second  sitting.)  She's  all  right,  isn't  she?
Will,  I  want  to  talk  to  you  again  about  the  friend  that  passed  out  with  con-
sumption, and  the  lady  that  passed  out  with  cancer,  and  all  your  brothers.
I  told  you  about  your  sister  who  is  ill,  very  ill,  ill  with  something  in  the
throat.  You  do  talk  to  people  everlastingly.  You  have  got  a  good  many
friends,  a  lot  of  them. Who  is  that  that  plays  the  piano,  Will  ?

W.  A.  P.  :  "  Well,  there  are  a  good  many."

Rosie  i)lays,  she  plays  nicely.  You  have  got  a  lady  round  you  that  plaj's,
too.

After  tliis  Dr.  P.  became  incoherent,  and  kejjt  calling  out,  "Walter,  help
me,  help  me  ;  I  can't  turn  round."  The  trance  passed  off  very  slowly  and
with  unusual  symptoms.  The  medium,  on  coming  to,  appeared  to  be  very
jDrostrate  and  distressed.

Remarks  by  W.  A.  Pye  on  the  sitting  of  January  1st,  1890.

(A)  The  number  of  my  mother's  family — my  own  brothers  and  sisters,
was  at  last  correctly  given.  The  very  little  verbal  help  given  by  me  is
mentioned  in  the  notes.  My  mother's  family  consisted  of  seven  sons  and
three  daughters,  of  whom  two  sons  and  a  daughter  are  dead.  My  father  has
a  second  family  of  a  son  and  two  daughters  who,  witli  their  mother,  are  alive.

When  the  number  "five"  was  first  mentioned  I  felt  at  the  moment  a
little  puzzled,  not  knowing  whether  both  dead  and  alive  were  meant,  or  only
the  latter.  From  tliat  time  I  mentally  separated  them  into  three  groups,  my
living  brotliers  and  sisters,  those  who  are  dead,  and  my  half  sisters  and
brother.

(B)  Names  now  being  mentioned,  I  «"ill  give  for  comparison  those  of  my
parents  and  their  children.


mo


A  Record  of  Observations  of


Father— Kellow  John. Mother— Mary.
Their  cliildren — Daughters  : —

Mary  Chesney,  called  Minnie — alive.

Editli  May— dead.

Alice  Sybil,  sometimes  called  Aggy— alive.
Sons  : —

Edmvnid,  sometimes  called  Numbs — dead.

Kellow  Charles — dead.

Randall  Howell — alive.

William  Arthur  (myself),  usually  "  Will."

Walter.

Harry.

Charles,  generally  Cliarlie  (see  Note  H).
My  father's  second  family  :  —
Catharine.

Winifred,  called  Winnie.
John  Hay  ward.

It  will  be  seen  that  my  own  name  was  tlie  only  one  given  with  absolute
■exactness  at  this  time,  my  brother  Harry  liaving  been  so  baptised.  I  did
not  at  first  connect  the  name  I  heard  as  Maiie  with  my  sister  Mary,  partly
because  she  is  so  generally  called  Minnie  that  her  real  name  seldom  occurs
to  me,  but  still  more,  I  think,  in  consequence  of  the  word  being  immediately
jifterwards  spelt  M — A — R — I — A,  which  caused  me  at  once  to  connect  it
with  an  aunt  Maria,  witli  whom  I  have  had  a  good  deal  to  do.

My  eldest  brother  is  as  frequently  called  "Numl^s"  as  "Edmund"
fimongst  us,  but  never  to  my  knowledge  "  Ed  "  or  any  such  abbreviation.

Tlie  mention  of  a  brother  with  a  curious  name  made  me  at  once  think  of
my  In-cjther  Kellow,  but  neither  now  nor  later  on  did  I  get  any  closer  indica-
tion of  him.

By  this  time  the  impression  was  strong  on  my  mind  that  the  medium
was  able  in  some  way  to  correct  her  impressions  or  suggestions  by  means  of
niy  conscious  thought.  Thus  I  thought  definitely  of  a  number,  my  six  living
brothers  and  sisters,  or  tlie  four  brothers,  or  the  three  xif  my  father's  second
family,  and  these  numbers  seemed  shortly  to  be  given.  Un  the  spelling  of
tlie  word  Maria,  given  as  a  sister,  I  thought  of  my  aunt  Maria,  and  a  little
later  on  she  was  so  desciibed.  There  were  many  otlier  instances  during  the
sitting.

C.  Tlie  only  names  alike  in  our  family  are  those  of  my  father  and  brother
Kellow,  and  mother  and  eldest  sister.  It  is  (jf  course  usual  to  find  children
named  after  their  parents,  especially  when  there  are  so  many  of  them.

I  cannot  trace  this  deafness  or  comjilaint  of  the  ear  to  any  lirother  or
sister.  My  eldest  sister's  husband  is  deaf  in  the  left  ear  to  such  a  degree
that  in  walking  or  speaking  with  him  it  is  necessary  to  take  care  to  be  on
the  other  side.  This  peculiarity  would,  I  l)elieve,  at  once  occur  to  me  were  I
to  tliink  of  him.

The  little  tcirl  referred  to  I  cannot  trace.  I  liave  since  remembered  that
niy  eldest  sister  many  years  ago  lost  an  infant  daugliter,  but  this  did  not
occur  to  me  at  ths  time.  None  connected  with  me  have  died  at  the  age  of
14  or  15  that  I  can  recall. My  sister  Edith  died  when  21  years  old.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


GOl


At  that  date  (January  1st)  two  brothers  were  away  as  mentioned,
Walter  in  Scotland,  and  the  youngest,  Charlie,  was.  correctly  described  as
being  a  long  distiaice  away,  as  he  has  been  for  some  years  in  China  ;  other-
wise the  description  of  liinr  does  not  specially  apply.

I  do  not  remember  the  mention  of  Walter's  or  any  name  here,  but  the
shorthand  notes  are  probably  right.  He  is  not  specially  connected  witli  m&
now,  but  is  next  to  me  in  age,  and  for  some  time  we  lived  together,  and  have
always  been  great  companions.

D.  This  mention  .of  Alick,  Alec,  or  Alex  is  rather  peculiar.  Mr.  Leaf
thinks  that  it  was  a  reference  to  a  previous  sitting,  and  the  "  Walter  "  I  was.
instructed  to  ask  might  apply  to  him.  (Both  the  father  and  brother  of  Mr.s.
H.  Leaf  were  called  "  Aleck." — W.  L.)  At  first  I  did  not  i-emember  any  one
of  the  name  except  slight  acquaintances,  but  after  a  few  minutes  recollected
one,  now  dead,  who  was  closely  connected  with  my  wife.  In  the  next  section  it
will  be  seen  that,  with  this  in  mind,  I  asked  for  further  particulars  and  was-
soon  after  referred  to  her  for  them.  Iir  this  case,  also,  there  were  two  of  th&
name,  father  and  son.

Or,  again,  the  reference  might  be  taken  as  applying  to  an  "Alec"  of
whom  my  wife  and  I  had  heard  a  few  days  previously  as  being  engaged  to  be
married  to  another  friend  of  hers,  and  more  esijecially  of  her  brothers  and
sisters  who  live  in  Stirling,  where  my  brother  Walter  was  at  the  time.  In
this  case  the  "Walter"  to  be  asked  might  be  taken  to  mean  him  ;  and  he
has  since  told  me,  on  my  reading  the  notes  over  to  him,  that  lie  at  once  took
the  reference  to  ajDply  to  this  engagement,  of  which  he  had  naturally  heard  a
great  deal.

My  wife  has  three  sistei's,  not  two,  and  all  liviiig  ;  one,  married  to  my
brother  Walter,  lives  in  London,  but  some  distance  from  us  ;  the  other
two  are  living  witli  their  parents  in  Scotland.  The  liking  to  have  their  own
way  may  be  taken  as  strictly  correct  of  niy  sisters-in-law, — as  of  other
ladies.

E.  I  have  seven  children  and  regret  that  I  here  interrupted  the  medium
to  put  the  question  about  "Alick,"  to  which  I  have  referred  in  the  last
section.

I  was  expecting  the  names  "Anna"  or  "  Annie, "  the  former  being  that
of  my  wife's  sister  (afterwards  given  as  a  sister,  see  Note  H)  and  the  latter
a  sister  of  a  very  dear  friend  of  ours  who  died  of  cancer  about  two  years
ago,  and  who  might  perhaps  be  taken  as  referred  to  as  the  elder  sister,  "what
you  call  the  short  one,"  later  on.  As  stated  in  the  notes,  I  did  not
clearly  hear  whether  the  name  first  said  was  "  Allie  "  or  "  Annie,"  but  it
.seems  to  have  been  the  former.  My  sister,  "Alice"  (as  mentioned  before),  is
sometimes  called  "  Aggy,"  never  "  Allie,"  so  far  as  I  am  aware;  but  "Allie"
and  "Annie"  are,  of  course,  very  similar  to  "Alice"  and  "Anna,"  who
would  have  been  correctly  described  if  so  given.

My  wife  has  no  relation  of  the  name  of  Henry.

None  of  my  brotliers,  so  far  as  I  know,  have  been  seriously  hurt  in  the  leg
or  wrist,  or  have  had  a  fall  on  the  ice  to  be  remembered.  Dyspepsia  might
be  taken  as  ajaplying  to  two  or  three,  and  Edmund,  the  one  mentioned,  died
of  a  kindred  complaint.

I  ought,  perhaps,  to  mention  that,  on  inquiry,  there  is  an  indistinct


A  Record  of  Ohservo.tions  of


history  of  injury  ti)  Harry's  wrist  ;  but  he  does  not  liiiuself  recollect  any
]3articulars.

F.  Here,  again,  I  did  not  notice  the  mention  of  my  liruther  Walter's  name,
but  I  immediately  recognised'  the  description  as  applying  to  him.  His
consulting-room  has  bookshelves  round  two  sides  of  it,  and  he  hal)itually  sits
at  a  table  covered  v/ith  papers,  the  (Quantity  of  wliich  has  struck  me.
Recently  a  book  on  Surgery,  which  he  is  publishing,  and  tlie  fact  of  having  to
considt  some  public  libraries  with  reference  to  some  siu'gical  lectures,  have
been  discussed  between  us  and  connected  with  him  in  my  mind.

Both  Harry  and  I  wear  glasses  when  reading.

I  cannot  think  of  any  connection  called  Richard  or  Dick,  and  understood
the  "Walter"  here  to  refer  to  Mr.  Leaf.  (The  name  "Dick"  was  urged
upon  my  Ijrotlier  and  me  in  our  joint  sitting,  but  not  recognised. — W.  L.)

Ab(jut  a  week  previously  we  had  heard  from  my  eldest  sister  that  she
Iiad  been  ailing,  and  had  been  to  To^iuay  for  change.  She  did  not  refer  to
lier  indisposition  as  serious,  and  mentioned  that  she  was  much  better  ;  but
t;ie  news  was  the  subject  of  convei'sation  Ijetween  my  Avife  and  myself,  as  we
liad  not  heard  of  her  Ijeing  unwell.

My  mother  is  dead,  as  already  mentioned.  If  this  Vi'ere  intended  to  apply
to  my  step-mother  or  mother-in-law,  as  might,  perhaps,  be  inferred  fi'om  the
remark  made  a  little  later — {Section  G,  "Oh,  that  is  not  your  motlier,  not
your  own  mother  ") — the  description  would  be  partly  correct  as  botli  liave
recently  suffered  from  severe  colds,  though  not,  I  believe,  more  than  usually
affecting  the  chest  or  throat.  It  occurred  to  me  at  the  time  as  applying  to
my  steiJ-mother.  (Judging  from  the  context  and  Phinuit's  freipient  habit
of  ignoring  questions,  it  seems  to  me  to  refer  to  the  sister.  In  an}'  case  it  is
a  matter  of  no  evidential  importance. — W.  L.)

My  youngest  child  is  under  two  years  old,  but  the  statement  here  made
\\'ould  have  been  equally  ti'ue  at  any  time  within  the  last  13  yeai's.

I  moved  to  my  present  liouse  about  five  years  ago,  and  neaiiy  two  years
previous  to  that  date  did  make  some  rather  important  changes  in  my  business.

G.  I  liave  never  resided  with  any  elderly  lady,  as  I  miderstood  tliis  first
I'emark  to  imply  ;  but  the  whole  of  this  section  is  ^•ery  interesting  to  me,  for
reasons  which,  to  explain,  I  nuist  state  at  some  length.

Within  the  last  two  years,  or  a  little  more,  we  have  lost  l^y  some  form  of
malignant  growth  (I  have  since  the  sitting  heard  a  dcnibt  as  to  whether  iu
one  case  it  was  ever  defined  as  cancer)  two  to  whom  my  wife  and  I  were
much  attached  ;  one  tlie  friend  referred  to  in  Note  E,  who  died,  aged
37,  and  the  other  an  aunt  of  my  wife's,  who  was  in  her  fiOth  year.

I  was  sitting  with  the  latter  a  few  months  before  her  deatli  and  we  were
talking  of  our  religious  beliefs,  oiu-  descriptions  of  ^^-llich  differed.  I  was
saying  that  in  matters  where  I  was  not  as  definitely  convinced  as  of  the  facts
that  I  was  sitting  wliere  I  was,  or  that  two  and  two  made  four,  I  preferred  to
.say  only  that  I  did  not  know,  and  that  this  referred  for  me  to  the  question
of  a  life  after  death.  Her  exact  reply  I  forget,  but  I  then,  or  very  soon
afterwards,  said,  in  reference  to  some  allusion  by  her  of  her  death  being
probably  not  far  off,  and  of  her  differing  from  me,  "Well,  if  so,  and  if  you  can
send  me  any  message,  let  me  know."  I  am  not  sure  of  the  exact  words,  bub
I  think  that  these  are  correct.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


603


I  had  110  sooner  spoken  than  tlie  tliought  occurred  to  me  that  I  h.ad  said
something  which  I  should  very  likely  forget,  but  tliat  it  was  not  improbable
that  the  fact  of  my  having  made  the  request  would  bring  about  its  apparent
fulfilment  tlirough  some  unconscious  cerebration,  and  I  remember  regret-
ting the  words.  To  the  best  of  my  recollection  I  had  not,  up  to  the
time  that  tlie  word  cancer  was  first  used,  thought  of  this  lady  at  all  during
the  sitting,  although  of  the  other  one,  whom  I  liave  mentioned,  I  certainly
had,  and  was  hoping  for  some  mention  of  her.

My  wife's  aunt  lived  with  her  mother,  a  very  old  lady  of  nearly  90,
from  whom  we  had  heard  that  morning  ;  and  there  was  in  the  letter  a
mention  of  our  loss.

H.  From  this  point  tlie  notes  do  not  appear  to  me  to  call  for  much
remark.  The  mention  of  Anna  and  Charlie  (see  Sectio)is  E  and  C)  is  to  be
noticed,  and  there  is  a  rather  curious  difference  between  my  idea  of  what
v/as  said  in  the  phrase,  "The  friend  that  passed  out  with  consumption,"  Szc,
and  Mr.  Leaf's  notes,  which  I  am  satisfied  are  correct.  The  word  whicli  I
was  confident  I  had  heard  was  "sister"  and  not  "friend,"  and  my  sister
Edith  did  die  of  consumption.  We  were  very  deeply  attached  to  each  other
smd  I  had  been  looking  for  a  mention  of  her  name.

I  have  no  sister  who  can  be  called  ill.  The  remarks  about  myself  are
perhaps  correct,  and  that  my  wife  plays  the  piano  is  certainly  true.

If  I  may  make  a  few  general  remarks  on  my  impressions  of  the  sitting  as
a  whole,  I  should  say  that  I  put  aside  as  utterly  out  of  the  question  any  idea
of  collusion,  or  conscious  deception  by  the  medium  of  herself  or  any  other
person.  It  seems  to  me  to  be  equally  inconceivable  that,  the  correctness  of
tlie  statements  can  be  explained  by  coincidence  only  ;  but  if,  in  a  state  of
suspended  volition,  sensory  powers  can  be  raised  to  the  point  of  being  able
to  read  some  of  the  minor  thoughts  of  another  person,  I  think  that  all  the
incidents  of  this  sitting  are  easily  accounted  for.  I  have  already  alluded  to
the  strong  impression  I  gathered  tliat  ideas  of  numljer,  or  names,  or  such  like,
that  I  formulated  during  the  time,  were  in  some  way  conveyed  to  the  medium
■and  stated  later  by  her  ;  although  some  of  the  most  striking  references  made
Y/ere  not,  so  far  as  I  could  judge,  in  my  conscious  thought  at  all.

I  am,  of  course,  quite  alive  to  the  fact  that  it  would  be  absurd  to  generalise
from  a  single  instance  like  this,  and  I  understand  that  other  sittings  have  left
very  different  imjjressions.  I  feel,  therefore,  that  there  may  possibly  be  a
better  explanation  than  the  f)ne  which  suggests  itself,  of  the  communication  of
?5ome  stratum  or  strata  of  thought  (so  to  speak),  to  a  perception  out  of  the
power  of  all  but  a  few,  which  is  only  active  when'comljiiied  with  an  abnormal
state  of  the  brain.  W.  A.  P.

We  now  proceed  to  the  notes  taken  of  some  thoronglily  misatis-
iactory  sittings,  in  order  to  give  a  fair  idea  of  the  methods  by  which
guessing  was  carried  on  in  cases  whei'e  there  seems  to  have  been  a
■complete  absence  of  any  supernormal  means  of  information.

19.  Professor  A.  Macalister,  F.R.S.  Deccmhcr  2nd,  1889.  Notes  hj  the
■sitter.

I  want  to  tell  you  about  your  mother.  It  is  a  long  time  since  you  saw
her. She  is  well  and  happy. She  has  passed  (jut,  she  is  in  the  spirit.


604.


A  Record  of  Observations  of


There  was  a  hard  tiiuo  in  your  life  a  few  years  ago,  a  difficulty  in  getting
on  as  you  would  like  regarding  home  life  and  pecuniary  circumstances.
[As  I  got  my  first  jirofessorsliip  at  the  age  of  22,  this  is  not  accurate.]

You  had  an  uncle  who  left  home  and  went  to  another  part  of  the  world,
and  never  wrote  till  a  little  while  ago.  That  was  in  the  body.  He  went  to
anotlier  part  oi  the  world — followed  the  water — connected  on  your  father's
.side.

[I  never  had  an  uncle  who  left  (jreat  Britain.  Had  five  uncles  on  my
father's  side  ;  none  of  them  followed  the  sea.]

You  have  four  uncles.
[I  liave  had  seven  uncles  ;  none  now  living.]

I  get  your  mother's  influence.  There  was  a  sister  of  hers  who  passed  out
of  the  ))ody  before  hei'.  There  is  also  a  brother  in  the  sjjirit  and  tliree  iix
the  body.

[My  mother  had  no  sister,  only  a  half-sister  whom  she  never  saw.  She
had  only  one  brother  who  died  in  1849.]

One  called  Eliza  is  your  sister,  I  get  her  ethereally.  Also  Maiy,  and  then  '
anotlier.  There  are  two  Marys  connected  with  you,  one  in  the  body,  one  in.
the  sjjirit.  Also  Eliza.  Then  there  is  Ellen — not  (j^uite  that,  nearly  so.
Elian,  Ellen — is  it  that  or  Helen  ?  I  get  the  name  both  ways.  (Asked,
"  Is  she  in  the  body  or  the  si)irit  ?  ")  Two  names,  one  in  the  body,  Ellen
in  the  body,  Helen  in  the  spirit.  There  is  Mary  Ellen.  Then  there  i&
Helen. Three  of  tliem — one  is  the  mother,  the  other  is  the  sister.

[I  had  a  sister  Lizzie,  never  called  Elizabeth.  She  died  when  I  was  an
infant.  I  never  had  a  relation  named  Ellen.  My  mother's  name
was  Margaret.  I  have  a  sister  Helen  alive,  the  only  one  of  my
family  of  that  name.]

Tliere  are  Helen  and  Mary,  one  is  a  mother  and  the  other  a  sister.  A
sister  Helen  and  a  mother  Mary,  and  this  comes  in  connection  with  you  and
a  sister  Mary.  Helen  is  in  the  matei-ial  world  ;  anothei'  sister  Mary  in  the
spirit,  and  your  mother. Then  I  get  Eliza  in  the  body. That  makes  four.

There  is  something  the  matter  with  you  hei'e — in  someone  connected  witli
you.  (Here  she  felt  the  knob  on  my  knee,  a  j^erfectly  natural  though  an
unusually  large  one.)  That's  the  fatlier's  influence  I  get ;  he  has  something
the  matter  with  his  knee.  (Asked,  "  Is  he  in  the  body  or  the  spirit?  is  it
his  left  knee  or  his  right  knee?")  That  one  (points  to  sitter's  left  knee).  Can
you  find  anyone  connected  with  you  in  the  jjliysical  world  who  has  something
the  matter  with  his  knee?  ("No.")  Let  me  know  if  it  is  wrong.  ("  Yes,  we
will.")

I  get  a  lady  connected  witli  you  on  your  mutlior's  side  in  the  body  who  is
sick.  (Points  to  lower  part  of  breastbone.  Asked,  "  Is  she  sick  at  jjresent  ?  ")
She  suffers  from  it  a  little  ;  she  has  been  much  worse.  I  should  say  she  was
an  aunt.

[My  mother's  family  ;ire  all  dead  but  one,  who  is  perfectly  well.]

Her  name  is  Lucy.  ("  No,  I  have  no  relation  of  that  name.")  Through
the  stomach  and  through  the  heart.  (''I  never  had  a  relation  with  that
name.") You  never  had  any  brothers  or  sisters,  did  you?  ("Yes,  I  had.")

Here  Professor  Macalister  was  sent  out  of  tlie  room  for  two  minutes,


Cerfahl  Phenomena  of  Trance.


605


and  in  liis  absence  was  said  to  Mr.  Myers  to  have  tliree  brotliers.  On  his
return  : —

Thei'e  are  six  of  y(_iu  ;iltogether,  four  in  the  hody,  two  in  the  siJU'it.
Four  besides  yourself  in  the  body,  two  brotliers  and  yourself,  two  sisters,  and
one  in  tlie  spirit,  six  altogether.  One,  Helen,  has  jjassed  out.  Mary  has
passed  out.  Tliere  is  one  J\lai"y  in  the  body.  There  are  five  of  j'ou  in  the
body  and  one  in  the  spirit.  There  is  an  aunt  Mary  in  the  body.  Your
sister  Marj'  has  been  in  the  spirit  some  time.

[There  were  four  sisters,  three  of  whom  are  dead.  Helen  only  lives.
Two  brothers,  one  of  vrhom  is  dead. Mj^aunt  Marj'  died  in  1853.]

Had  you  an  uncle  of  the  name  of  Al  ?  ("  No.")  Tlien  there's  Elizabetli.
That's  one.  Six  of  you,  take  j'ou  all  together.  ("Right. "')  Two  brothers
find  yourseK,  that  makes  three,  no  more. ("  Right.'")

AVhicli  one  do  a'ou  call  Henry  ?  ("He  is  no  relation."")  His  name  is
Stafford. A' friend  of  one  of  your  brothers,  perhaps  I ("I  don't  know.")

[I  ne^'er  had  any  relation  Hemy,  and  only  once  knew  a  jjerson  named
Stafl:"i)rd,  as  a  student  20  years  ago.  I  h-Axn  only  spoken  to  him  once
to  my  knowledge.  I  know  nothing  about  liim,  and  neither  of  my
brothers  knew  him.]

Then  there  is  a  Cxeorge,  a  brother.  He  has  a  particular  friend  called
Henry,  a  scliool-fellow.  ("Is  George  older  or  younger  than  I  ?  ")  I  don't
know.

[My  son  is  the  first  George  in  the  family  ;  he  is  named  after  a  friend,  no
relation.]

You  have  a  sister  that  has  had  some  trouble  in  the  stomach. Not  so
troublesome  as  it  has  Ijeen. (She  is  in  the  body.)
[Here  I  let  Mrs.  Piper  see  my  inky  finger.]

Do  you  wvitQ  ?  (''  Yes.")  I  see  paper  before  you.  ("  Can  you  tell  me  the
subject  of  the  ■niiting  1 ")  You  have  been  \\Titing  an  article,  like  a  lecture  :
then  you  deliver  it.  I  can't  tell  the  time  when  you  wrote  it.  ( "  What  was
the  subject  ? "')  It  looks  like  the  medical  world  ;  the  laws  of  habit  and  the
way  to  live  and  that  sort  of  thing  :  literary  work,  the  laws  of  science.  I  see
lectures.  Then  there's  a  book.  You  want  to  write  together.  You  c)ught  to
[I  have  not  written  a  lecture  for  three  or  four  years.]

Professor  Macalister  adds  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Myers  : — ■

"I  am  quite  satisfied  that  Mrs.  Piper  is  one  of  tlie  many  persons  wlio
show  that  protean  and  obscure  state  that  for  want  of  a  better  term  we  call
hystero-epilepsy.  Like  most  others  who  shovv  induced  phenomena  of  that
kind  she  is  easily  led  and  quite  wide  awake  enough  all  through  to  profit  by
suggestions.  I  let  her  see  a  blotch  of  ink  on  my  finger,  and  she  said  that  I
vras  a  writer.  I  had  just  before  felt  her  pulse,  so  she  said  I  -(^Tote  on  medical
subjects.  I  have  when  I  bend  my  knee  a  very  strongly  marked  ridge  on  the
bone,  which  becomes  unusually  prominent.  (I  used  to  have  in  my  old  walking
days  unusually  powerful  muscles  in  my  legs.)  She  felt  this  and  then  made
the  guess  of  there  being  something  wrong  with  my  knee,  shielding  herself
when  I  said  this  was  wrong  by  saying  it  was  my  father's.  In  sh(jrt,  except
the  guess  about  my  sister  Helen,  who  is  alive,  there  was  not  a  single
guess  which  was  nearly  right. Helen  is  not  an  uncommon  Scotch  r.arae.


G03


A  Beeord  of  Ob^ercaflons  of


and  she  has  been  in  Cambridge.  Mrs.  Piper  is  not  anajsthetic  duriiig  the
s<;)-called  trance,  and  if  you  ask  my  private  opinion  it  is  that  tlie  wlirile  thing
is  an  imposture  and  a  ijoor  one.  I  have  often  seen  a  mucli  better  fit  gob
up  to  order  ;  and  my  sister  Helen,  who  sometimes  amuses  herself  and  other
paople  by  chiromancy  according  to  the  simple  mechanical  rules  of  D'Argen-
tigny,  makes  often  very  much  luckier  guesses  than  did  your  jjythoness.
I  was  very  much  interested  in  seeing  how  nearly  she  was  trapped  into
forgetting  to  nuiffie  and  disguise  her  voice  ■when  I  pulled  at  her  eyelid.  '

An  equally  unsatisfactory  sitting,  leading  to  an  equally  justifiable
incredulity  on  the  pait  of  the  sitter,  is  that  of  Mr.  Thomas  Barkworth.
As  he  has  given  the  main  points  fully  in  his  remarks,  it  seems  needless
to  set  out  the  original  notes  at  full  length,  and  we  therefore  confine
<nirselves  to  his  report.  -  .  -

21.  Mr.  T.  Barhrorth.  Dn-nnberSrd.
Mr.  Barkworth  gi\'es  the  following  report: —

"  In  connuencing  the  seance  1  held  the  medium's  liands,  which  v,-ere  icy
cold  and  did  not  seem  to  gather  warmth.  Pulse  very  feeble,  often  (juite
imperceptible,  and  somewhat  rajjid.  The  medium  seemed  to  find  my
influence  rmcongenial  ;  she  complained  more  tlian  once  that  I  had  done
something  to  her,  that  her  head  was  l:)ad.  that  she  felt  queer,  had  never  felt
so  before,  &c.  She  continually  groaned  as  if  in  suffering.  After  long  wait-
ing Mr.  Myers  took  my  place  with  nuich  better  results.  She  went  through
a  kind  of  struggle  or  crisis,  confined  to  the  ujiper  part  of  the  body,  and
immediately  emerged  in  the  character  of  'Dr.  Phinuit,'  with  a  mannish
voice,  a  more  marked  American  or  German-American  accent  than  she  usually
has,  and  considerable  freedonr  of  language,  ^^'e  then  entered  into  a  conver-
sation, of  which  Mr.  Myers  took  notes,  but  my  inijiression  is  very  strong  that
no  notes  taken  in  longhand  could  be  sufficient.  Tlie  conversation  was  very
inter jectional,  and  interspersed  with  (|ueries  and  ejacidations  to  which  it  was
difficult  to  avoid  giving  compromising  answers.  Tluis,  '  Tlie  name  begins
with  F,  doesn't  it  now  ? '  '  Yes. '  '  Didn't  I  tell  you  so  ? '  Having  got
so  far,  the  ((uestion  was  practically  narrowed  to  Francis  or  Frederick,  and  I
asked  her  wliich  it  was.  After  repeating  the  names  two  or  three  times  back-
wards and  fcn'wards  she  ultimately  decided  im  Frederick,  which  was  correct.
About  the  age  at  which  Frederick  left  the  w<,)rld  there  was  a  regular  fencing
match,  of  whicli  I  think  it  highly  probable  I  g(->t  the  worst.  '  Was  he  an
old  man,  a  young  man,  or  a  child  ( '  I  asked.  At  a  comparatively  early
stage  of  the  in(pury  I  got  it  tliat  he  was  not  an  old  man.  but  beyond  this  I
could  not  get.  Slie  kejjt  on  going  all  round  the  question  in  a  way  which
w^ould  have  driven  a  cross-examining  bariistei'  frantic,  but  the  only  definite
statement  I  got  was  tliat  Frederick  had  a  \'ery  hnd  memory  ;  wliicli,  as
Frederick  was  only  three  weeks  old  wlien  lie  died,  did  not  seem  very
appropriate.  I  tried  to  stick  to  tlic  form  of  ((uestion,  '  A  young  man  or  a
child  ?  '  But  it  is  impossible  in  the  game  of  question  and  answer  which  was
carried  on  to  be  sure  that  I  did  not  give  some  indication  of  the  answer.  At
langth  she  decided  that  he  was  only  '  That  Iiigli,'  i.i'.,  about  2ft.  And  here  I
would  remark  that  my  light  hand  was  holding  lier  left  hand  all  the  time.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


607


l-Tothing  would  be  easier  on  the  Cumberland  and  Bishop  principle  than  for  a
thought-reader  to  detect  by  the  unconscious  pressure  of  the  hand  when  he
was,  as  children  say,  'hot'  or  'cold.'  It  is  noticeable  that  whenever  a
question  which  admitted  of  no  verbal  strategy  was  put,  such  as,  '  What  is
my  name  ? '  or  '  Where  is  my  wife  >.  '  Mrs.  Piper  at  once  coiifessed  she
■could  not  tell.  On  the  other  hand,  when  it  came  to  the  names  of  my  family,
which  happens  to  be  a  large  one,  her  task  was  obviously  much  easier.  John,
dham.  Henry,  and  Thomas  are  not  very  unconnnon  names,  and  it  is  not
v.urprising  that  she  .should  have  hit  upon  them  correctly.  It  is  possible  to
liave  many  brothers,  but  only  one  father  ;  and  accordingly,  ^^•hile  .she
succeeded  in  fitting  the  former  with  one  or  other  of  the  above  names,  she
■quite  failed  with  the  latter,  to  whom  she  attributed  my  own  name,  and  -ivith
equal  incorrectness  some  of  my  own  peculiarities,  as  though  relying  on  a
fannly  likeness.  In  the  case  of  another  brother  whom  I  asked  for  she  said
liis  name  was  Ed,  which  would,  of  course,  do  equally  well  for  Edward,
E^dmund,  Edgar,  or  Edwin.  Still  I  do  not  wish  to  minimise  the  fact  that
T\-ithin  these  limits  she  was  right,  or  that  she  ultimately  fixed  ujjon  Edmund,
whicli  was  right  too.

' '  In  describing  places  she  was  even  less  successful.  She  professed  to
describe  my  house.  Here,  again,  the  description  part<jok  of  tlie  same
character.  '  "^^lien  you  go  in  there  is  a  room  to  the  right '  is,  of  course,  true
■of  at  least  lialf  the  houses  in  existence.  But  when  she  came  to  describe  the
room  she  became  so  involved  that  I  could  not  foUow  her.  '  Here  on  the
left,'  '  round  this  side, '  'opposite,'  &c.,  followed  each  other  in  bewildering
succession,  and  I  think  anyone  with  powerful  prepossessions  could  have
easily  read  liis  knowledge  into  her  statements.  It  happens,  however,  -that
my  house  has  one  peculiar  feature  no  one  would  be  likely  to  gue.ss,  viz.,  two
square  halls  one  behind  the  other.  When  asked  accordingly  what  was  the
npartment  straight  in  front  beyond  the  entry,  she  made  attempts  to  describe
a  sitting-room  furnished,  and  failed  entirely  to  say  what  it  was  that  ran  all
filong  one  side — in  fact,  the  staircase.  She  was  correct  in  only  one  point,  viz.,
i\  '  case  in  a  recess '  ;  there  being  in  fact  an  old  packing  case  under  the  staiis,
"but  whether  this  was  the  kind  of  case  and  recess  she  meant  tlie  reader  must
decide  for  himself.  The  only  other  point  I  remember  was  that  she  told  me
one  of  my  internal  organs  was  out  of  order,  in  which  I  take  the  liljerty  of
differing  from  her  ;  whereas  she  failed  to  indicate  an  accidental  injury  to  the
foot,  which  had  existed  for  some  time.

"  Once  she  used  the  expression  'what  the  devil,'  and  it  certainly  seemed
to  me  that  there  was  a  momentary  hesitation  in  bringing  it  out,  such  as
would  be  more  natural  to  a  person  of  gentle  manners,  which  Mrs.  Piper  in
her  normal  state  certainly  has,  than  to  the  boisterous  and  rough-spoken
Dr.  Phinuit.

' '  In  describing  my  house  I  at  one  point  sought  to  lead  her  to  another
part  than  the  one  she  was  engaged  on  ;  when  she  replied,  '  Wait  a  bit  :  I  am

not  out  of  the  first  room  yet,'  or,  '  Wait  till  I  get  out  of  the  front  room  '

words  which  clearly  indicated  that  her  '  familiar '  was  present  in  spirit  in  my
liouse,  near  London,  while  he  was  claiming  to  speak  througli  her  lips  at
Cambridge.  As  I  never  heard  it  claimed  for  the  'spirits  '  that  they  could  be
in  two  places  at  once,  the  incident  appears  fatal  to  the  Spiritualistic  hypothesis


GOS


A  Record  of  Ohservatlons  of


in  her  case,  though,  of  course,  it  would  not  exchide  clairvoyance,  supposing
lier  descrijjtion  of  the  premises  had  been  correct,  which,  however,  it  was  not>

' '  The  impression  left  on  my  mind  after  this  one  seance,  putting  aside  what
I  have  heard  of  the  experiences  of  others,  and  subject  to  correction  on
further  trials,  is  that  Mrs.  Pijier's  powers  are  of  the  ordinary  thought-reading-
kind,  dependent  upon  her  hold  of  the  visitor's  hand  :  and  on  tliis  supposition
my  only  wonder  is  that  she  was  not  more  successful."

The  next  case  which  we  give  is  one  of  a  doubtful  character,  as  i':
is  possibly  explicable,  with  some  straining,  on  the  hypothesis  of  lucky-
guessing.  It  is  well  I'epoi-ted,  so  the  reader  can  judge  whether  the-
hypothetical  account  of  the  supposed  method  used  hj  Dr.  Phinuit  is  or
is  not  correct.

7.  Mi!^>i  AUcc  Johnson. No iv mhe y  2(U]u  188^),  11  a.m.
(From  Miss  Johnson's  memory  and  Mr.  Myers'  notes  taken  at  the  time.)
I  know  foiu-  of  your  family — and  one  besides.

A.  J.  :  "Is  that  all  ?  Can't  you  see  any  more  ?  "  (This  in  answer  to  her
question  as  to  whether  she  was  riglit.  I  may  have  said,  "  There  were  mora
tlian  four. ")

1^0,  it's  not  all,  but  those  are  all  I  can  see  at  jjresent. What  I  say  is  true.
There  are  those,  and  there  may  be  otliers  that  I  shall  see  soon.
Thei-e  are  four  sisters,  including  yourself,  and  f(_)ur  brothers.
[True.]

I  know  one  sister — Eliza  (first  called  her  Elise).  I  saw  her  a  little
while  ago,  hut  slie  did  not  see  me. I  can  see  her  now.

[My  sister,  Fanny  Eliza,  is  always  called  Fanny,  and  never  uses  even  the
initial  of  her  second  name  in  signing  her  name,  unless  it  is
necessary.]

Two  brothers  are  with  you — nearer  tlian  the  otliers.
A.  J.  :  "  Do  yiiu  mean  that  I  care  for  them  more  ?  "
No,  but  they  are  nearer  always — ethereally  present.

[These  two  as  identified  by  future  remarks  about  them  are  nearer  to  me
ill'  agr  tlia.n  tlie  (itlier  two,  l)ut  pri)l)ably  this  is  not  what  is  meant.]

The  eldest  one  h  n  iks  far  off.
[He  was  in  London  at  the  time.]

One  brother  is  not  well — has  had  iniserable  health  a  long  time — most  of
his  life — no  prospect  of  liis  getting  better.  (Various  details  were  given
here.  In  the  middle  of  this  description,  I  at  first  said,  "Oh,"  dubiously,
thinking  of  my  youngest  brother  to  whom  the  description  w  ould  not  apply —
gradually  realising  which  one  she  meant,  I  said  "Yes"  several  times  as  slie
went  on.)

[I  thought  this  at  tlie  time  a  fairlj'  accurate  description  of  my  second
brother's  health,  according  to  my  knowledge  of  it.  Our  family
<loctor,  t<.)  Vv  hom  I  showed  this  part,  says,  "  The  definite  parts  of
the  rejjort  seem  to  me  erroneous  both  by  excess  and  defect,  and  the
terms  used  are  liopelessly  collocpiial,  and  therefore  vague  and
meaningless."]

All  of  you  are  inclined  to  be  a  little  bit  positive,  you  have  your  own
ideas,  and  people  can't  knock  them  out  of  you. I  think  that  is  a  good


Ceiialn  Phenoracna  <>f  Trance.


point— it  is  better  tlian  being  trivial  and  tickle.  But  sometimes  yon  don't
■get  on  with  tlie  world  at  large  on  account  of  this.  .  .  .  (feeling  my
Land  and  fingers). What's  that  writing  you  are  doing  i

A.J.  :  "  I'm  not  writing  anything  just  now.  Do  yon  mean  something
tlvat  I  have  written  lately  '.  "

Yes.

A.  J.  :  ''I  do  write  a  good  deal."

Yes,  I  know  you  do.  I  like  the  way  yon  write.  Tliafs  interesting  to
me. You  express  yourself  well. You  note  things. . . . Ed — Ed — Ed.

A.J.  :  "  What  is  Ed.  I  I  don't  think  I  know  anyone  with  a  name  like
tliat."

E— D— R— A  ;  E— D— A  ;  I— D— A.

A.  J.  :  "Oh,  Ida — yes."  (Some  discussion  as  to  how  to  pronounce  the
name.)

Ida  comes  very  close  to  you — lias  a  stroiig  influence.  I  liave  seen  the
same  with  another  lad;/.

[I  know  no  one  of  tlie  name  of  Ida  at  all  intimately.]
I  get  also  Lu,  Lulie — Louie. That's  what  you  call  him,  isn't  it  ?  In  your
family. You  spell  it  Lewis — he  is  very  closely  connected  witli  you.
A.  J.  :  "  Do  you  mean  one  of  my  brothers  or  sisters  ? ''
No,  but  very  closely  connected.

A.  J.  :  "I  knov,-  someone  of  that  name — not  a  near  relation."
[A  Mr.  Lotiis  Dyer  married  my  tirst  cousin.  The  name  is  spelt  Louis,  but
his  wife  likes  to  prt)nounce  the  s.  Other  people  generally  don't.  I
have  only  known  him  very  recently  and  rathei'  sliglitly.]

(At  this  point  Mr.  Myers  vrent  away. )

Now  I  will  tell  you  more  about  your  family. Y(.iu  liave  a  brotlier  John.
A.  J.  :  "No."

[Could  she  by  any  chance  have  heard  my  eldest  sister's  nickname  of
"  Johnnie  "  ?]

Well,  then,  James  ?

A.  J.  :  "No.  None  of  my  brotliers  has  a  Cluistian  name  like  that."
(This  was  partly  to  see  if  she  v^-ould  take  a  hint  as  to  the  surname.)

Jo,  or  Joseph. I  know  it  begins  with  J. J — E — O — R,  J  E  0  R

G— E,  GE~0RGE."  (Several  eflbrts  to  which  I  gradually  assented.)  I
like  him  as  well  as  any  ni  tliem.

[My  eldest  brother's  name  is  George.]

He  is  getting  on  as  well  as  any— or  better.  [Not  incorrect.]  He  is
very  nice.  He  gets  on  with  people.  (Slie  identified  him  ^^•ith  tlie  eldest
biother  before  mentioned.)

There  is  one  of  you— Alice.  [My  name.]  I  don't  like  her  much.  (She
<lid  not  identify  this  person  witli  me.)  Slie  is  very  positive— very— what  do
you  call  it?  (Waving  her  hand  in  a  contemptuous  and  expressive  way,  and
iising  a  very  scornful  tone  to  imitate  the  person  referred  to.)

A.  J.  :  "  Stand-offish  r'

Yes — that's  just  the  word — very  determined.
A.  J.  :  "  Perhaps  she  may  improve  sometime  ?  "

Yes  (dubi(.jusly),  v.hen  she  has  liad  more  exjierience,  seen  more  of  life.


GIO


A  Record  of  Observation <  of


There  in  another,  Eliza — I  like  her  much  better — she  is  musical,  more  sedate:
than  Alice — has  more  sense — more  in  her,  as  nuisical  peoj)le  often  liave,  but
Khe  is  rather  flighty. [Eliza  (Fanny)  is  very  musical.]

Your  brother — the  one  who  has  bad  health — (feeling  my  knee).
What  is  this  ?

A.  J.  :  "That  is  my  knee."

Oh  yes,  I  knc)W,  but  it  is  here — something  is  hurting  him  (feeling  all  over
my  left  leg,  down  to  the  foot  and  finally  locating  the  pain  in  the  great  toe)_
He  has  a  bad  jjlace  here  that  hurts  him  when  lie  walks — has  had  it  for  some
time — it  bleeds  sometimes.

A.  J.  :  "I  didn't  know  tliat,  ljut  perhajis  he  did  not  tell  me."

Yes — anyhow  it's  true — you  ask  him.

A.  J.  :  "  Which  foot  did  you  say  it's  on  1  "

Mrs.  Piper  (after  much  calculation,  as  she  was  facing  me  so  that  our  right
and  left  hands  were  reversed — felt  my  right  leg  all  over,  coming  down  to  the
foot  and  finally  decided  on  the  right  great  toe) : "There — that's  the  place."

[This  brother  was  a  good  deal  troubled  by  blisters  while  walking  in  York-
shire last  Aiigust.  He  does  not  remember  on  what  part  of  his  feet
they  were.  I  knew  at  the  time,  being  with  him,  that  he  had  blisters-
then  ;  but  had  quite  forgotten  it  afterwards.  He  liad  not  any  at  the
time  of  my  seance.  My  youngest  brother,  however,  who  is  also  in
bad  health,  has  one  just  Jiow  at  the  point  mentioned  corresponding
to  the  descriittion,  and  this  I  had  never  heard  of  till  after  the  s(^ance.]'

Mrs.  Piper  then  began  to  talk  about  me,  and  I  asked  her  if  she  knew"
what  my  employment  was,  or  what  subject  I  had  studied.  She  said,  "It  i.s-
some  kind  of  art — but  learnt  or  got  largely  out  of  Ijooks.  It  is  a  sort  of  pi'o-
fession,  such  as  doctoring  is — like  a  doctor  or  a  lawyer."

A.  J.  :  "Yes,  liem  I''  (Dubiously,  at  several  points. )

You  teach — ah,  yes,  that's  it.  [True.]

A.  J.  :  "What  subject  do  I  teach  ?  "

It  is  not  French  or  German.  (Slie  had  ascertained  at  a  very  early  stage-
in  the  conversation,  l)y  asking  me — tliat  I  C(jvdd  iKit  talk  French  and  did  not
know  much  of  it.) Is  it  (.-Jreek  or  Latin  1

A.  J.  :  "No."

Then  what  is  it  ? Tell  me.

A.  J.  :  "  Natural  Science."
[At  about  this  stage  Mr.  Myers  came  back.]

Mrs.  Piper :  Your  name  is — Aliza — Lizia,  L — I — C — I — A.  (Tried  to  spe  I
it  several  times  beginning  with  L — at  last  began  with  A,  I  remarking  that  t
"was  somewhere  near,  as  .she  asked  me  if  it  wasn't  right.  Finally  she  got  at
Alicia,  and  I  had  to  explain  what  my  name  was  and  how-  to  jironounce  it.)

George  I  like — your  brother — not  the  sick  one — he  is  getting  on.

Tlie  otlier  bnjther  who  has  bad  health — his  name  is  Will — Will —
W — I — L — L — I — A — M.  [True.  This  name  came  out  gradually,  with  n
mistakes  or  corrections.  I  am  not  sure  that  she  had  not  mentioned  it  befoi'e
— anyhow  it  seemed  clear  to  me  that  she  kejjt  his  identity  distinct  in  her
mind  all  the  time,  and  never  mixed  him  up  with  any  of  the  others,  whereas
I  could  not  always  make  out  which  sister  she  was  referring  to  when  she  spoke
of  them,  and  I  fancied  she  did  not  keep  them  distinct  in  lier  own  mind.]

There  is  your  sister,  Eliza. This  lady  (to  Mr.  Myers — meaning  me)  is.


Certain  Plie noniena  of  Trance.


GU


a  teacher,  she  teaches  suiuething  in  tlie  way  uf  a  sort  of  art.  It  is  yow  that
know  Annie — no — Fanny.

A.  J.  : Yes,  I  know  a  Fanny."

Do  you  know  a  young  la<ly  who  passed  away  with  consumption?
A.  J.  :  "  WeH,  I  think  I  may  know  more  than  one."

She  has  sandy  hair,  blue  eyes,  peaked  nose.  She  is  troubled  now  about
her  mother,  who  is  still  in  the  body.

[A  cousin  of  mine  who  had  very  fair  hair  and  blue  eyes  died  of  con-
sumption a  few  years  ago  ;  but  her  mother  had  died  before  her.]

Had  you  an  aunt  wlio  died  of  cancer  ?

A.  J.  :  "  Not  that  I  know  of,  but  I  might  not  liavo  known."
It  is  what  I  call  cancer.

A.  J.  :  "  Was  it  a  relation  of  my  mother's — her  sister  '? "

No,  a  relation  of  your  father's.
[My  father's  step-mother  died  of  cancer.]

You  are  to  have  good  luck  next  year — a  great  advance  in  your  profes-
sion— your  jiosition.  You  have  had  some  trying  things  happening  to  you
this  last  year — but  you  are  going  to  siTCceed  better. It pay  Ijetter.

A.  J.  :  "  Do  you  mean  that  I  shall  get  more  money,  or  merely  tliat  it  will
be  in  a  general  way  advantageous  ?  "

It  will  pay  in  a  pecuniary  way.  I  give  you  this  as  a  test.  .  ,  .  Ytiu
used  to  live  in  a  little  did  place  in  the  country.

A.  J.  :  "I  don't  flunk  I  ever  did."

Oh  yes,  you  have  forgotten.  I  see  the  jilace.  I  see  your  father's
influence  round  it. He  will  know  about  it. It  is  a  little  old  country  place.

[I  have  always  lived  in  Cambridge,  where  I  was  born  ;  but  my  father's
family  came  from  a  small  country  town  to  Cambridge,  where  he  also
was  born.]

There  is  a  spiritual  influence  on  you  now,  having  a  great  effect  on  you,
and  it  will  have  more.  .  .  .  Your  mother  is  in  the  spirit  [true],  but  your
father  is  still  in  tlie  body,  but  I  see  his  spiritual  influence — like  the  influence
of  Mrs.  Myers  (exjDlaining  that  she  meant  Mr.  Myers'  mother).

Your  father  is  a  dreamy  sort  of  man — he  often  does  not  see  thing.s —
because  he  is  thinking  his  own  thoughts.  He  does  not  notice--he  is —
(pausing  for  a  word).

A.  J.  :  "Absent-minded?"

Yes — that's  it — absent-minded.
[This  is  not  very  correct.]

Ah  (feeling  her  cheek  and  jaw),  there  is  a  sort  of  numbne.ss
liere. What  is  it  ? Is  he  paralysed  i

A.  J.  :  "No — oh  nfi — he  is  not  paralysed. "  (Then  she  began  to  feel  my
face  and  under  my  chin,  finally  coming  to  the  angle  between  the  chin  and
throat).

This  is  the  place. Thei'e  is  a  peculiar  condition  here.

A.  J.  :  "Do  you  mean  in  the  tln-oat,  or  further  up  in  the  mouth  ?"

Here  (touching  me  quite  at  the  top  of  the  throat).  Not  quite  in  the
tliroat, — at  the  root  of  the  tongue.  (She  wavered  a  little  in  the  exact
localisation  of  the  part  ati'ected.)  There  is  something  curious  about  him
in  the  top  of  his  throat — when  he  talks  it  catches  in  his  throat — at  roots


(312


A  liecord  of  Observations  of


of  tonijue.  Sometimes  when  lie  goes  to  say  a  thing  he  can't — tlien  again  he
can  talk  as  well  as  anyone.  Speech  seems  to  be  cut  oft'  for  a  moment — he
stiimmers  a  little  (she  cleared  her  tliroat  to  illustrate  how  he  did  it).
Sometimes  this  troubles  him  much — then  he  is  not  troubled  at  all.

[This  description  seemed  to  me  and  to  all  of  my  family  (including  my
father)  to  whom  I  repeated  it  to  be  remarkably  good  and  accurate.]

(Din  ing  the  description  of  my  father's  throat,  I  at  first  answered,  "  Oh,"
in  a  doubtful  way,  thinking  of  something  else  suggested  to  me  by  her  first
ivoi'ds  and  gestures.  Then  I  saw  this  did  not  lit,  and  thought  of  the  other
thing,  which  she  was  really  describing.  I  pi'obably  assented  to  her  descrip-
tion at  various  points. )

Yom-  brother,  the  invalid,  is  touchy  from  his  weakness.

She  then  felt  my  head  and  passed  her  hand  over  my  eyes.  She  could
feel  my  spectacles — remarking,  "You  must  not  try  your  eyes  too  much.
You  will  have  headaches  if  you  read  t(jo  much  1  .  .  .  [My  eyes  are
rather  weak,  but  not  easily  tired  by  reading.]  I  like  your  sister  Eliza  better
than  any  of  the  girls.  There  is  another  who  is  musical,  and  another — whom
you  call  Nellie — or  Ellen."' [My  eldest  sister,  Lucy,  is  rather  musical.]

A.  J.  :  "No."

Well,  then,  Nettie  or  Kettie.

A.  .J.  ;  ''No,  not  exactly."
[My  second  sister  is  named  Harriet,  and  ah\-ays  called  Hatty.]

Well,  I  can't  tell  what  her  nanie  is — she  is  neither  Eliza — nor  the  ruusical
one. She  uses  a  brush. (Stroking  my  hand  as  if  with  a  small  soft  brush.)

A.J.  :  "Brush?"  (Doubtfully — thinking  of  a  hair-brusli.)

Yes — she  jmints — [true] — a  jtaint-brush — I  can  see  the  ))aintings  very
clearly.  She  will  succeed  in  that  well,  if  she  goes  on  with  it.  Anyhow,  she  will
succeed,  whatever  she  does.  She  is  going  to  have  an  easy  life.  No  evil
will  come  to  her. William  is  going  to  have  a  fall  soon. He  will  he  badly  hurt.

Janet  (name  spelt  and  repeated  several  times),  your  sister's  very
intimate  fiiend.  (meaning  apparently  the  sister  last  sjioken  of),  has  great
influence.  .  .  .  F — R — E,  Janet.  (Fre  I  take  for  an  attempt  to  liegin  to
apell  frii-'iiil ■) She  is  not  aware  of  how  great  her  influence  is.

[We  have  a  cousin  of  this  name,  who  is  much  younger  than  my  sister.
My  sister  also  has  an  intimate  fiiend,  named  Lucy,  v»'ho  is  always
called  Janet  by  some  of  her  friends,  but  not my  sister.]

Which  (_)f  yom'  sisters  went  out  to  a  party  the  other  night  ]
A.  J.  :  "  Two  of  them  went."

They  are  going  again  soon.  I  see  them  going — they  have  the  invitation
ncnv — it  is  very  near  to  them.

In  all  the  above  there  is  very  little — though  there  are  certainly  some
points — in  the  descrijjtious  of  c]iar((rfe,:'i  of  vai'ious  members  of  my  family
that  I  should  think  incorrect  ;  in.  spite  of  the  generality  of  most  of  the
terms  used,  they  struck  me  as  being  rather  specially  applicable — as  far  as
they  went — on  the  wIkjIc.  This  is  not  quite  adequately  represented  in  tlie
parts  of  the  conversation  that  I  have  recorded,  because  I  cannot  remember
the  words  sufficiently,  but  I  had  the  impression  that  the  medium  had  more
definite  and  more  accurate  notions  of  the  characters  th;in  I  have  been  able  to
reproduce  in  what  I  can  remember  of  her  words.  A.  J.


C'erhitn  Phenomena  of  Tncaee.


G13


This  sitting  is  carefully  reported,  and  is  one  of  the  moi'e  successful.
It  is,  h(.)wever,  to  some  extent,  open  to  the  suspicion  of  systematic
guessing.  I  theiefore  j^iopouncl  the  following  hypothesis  as  to  the
process  which  Phinuit  may  have  employed  ;  though  I  cannot  help
feeling  that  the  assumj^tions  made  are  in  many  cases  rather  A'iolent.  I
must,  however,  say  that  the  suggestion  of  a  supposed  connexion  with
Mrs.  A.  and  Mrs.  B.  is  not  so  gratuitous  as  it  might  seem  ;  it  is  based
iipon  the  use  of  a  name  which  had  to  be  changed  in  their  rep«jrts.

The  first  guess  is  at  the  number  of  the  family  ;  an  average  number",
four,  is  taken,  with  "  one  besides thrown  in  in  case  four  be  t<.io  few.
If,  on  the  othei-  hand,  the  number  be  too  large,  the  one  besides  will  be
■exjjlained  as  referring  to  a  "  relative  in  the  spirit.''  But  the  sitter
^ives  some  indicatitjn  tliat  there  are  more  than  four  ;  the  next  guess  is
right.

Four  sisters  possibly  suggests  that  the  sitter  may  be  some  con-
nexion of  Mi-s.  A.  and  Mrs.  B.  who  have  sat  I'ecently.  These  ladies
had  been  said  to  ha^'e  two  bi'others,  lightly  ;  Init  it  had  not  appeared
that  they  liad  no  more.  Hence  "  two  bi'others  are  near  you  always,''
but  the  eldest  brother  "looks  a  long  way  off,"  because  he  had  not  yet
been  introduced  u.pon  the  stage,  if  he  existed.  The  theory  is,  however,
.soon  fouiid  to  be  wrong,  and  is  given  up.  The  allusioji  to  the  sister
Elise  or  Eliza,  "  I  saw  her  a  little  while  ago,  but  she  did  not  see  me,"
also  contains  obvious  possibilities  of  hedging;  for  it  might  be  explained
whether  the  sister  had  already  sat  or  not.  If  she  had  sat,  the  explana-
tion would  of  course  be,  "  I  was  in  the  spirit."

We  then  come  to  the  favourite  fishing  name  "  Ed.''  This  is  not
recognised  in  any  of  its  forms,  and  is  therefore  changed  to  Ida,  a  name
which,  as  Phinuit  had  found,  was  familiar  to  several  of  his  sitters.  In
this  case,  however,  it  is  unsuccessful.  Then  another  fishing  name,  Loo.
This  is  partially  acknowledged.  Two  very  common  names,  John  and
James,  ai'e  tried  in  vain,  but  probably  with  enough  indication  on  the
.sitter's  part  to  encourage  Phinuit  to  effect  a,  bold  transition  to  George  ;
light  at  last.

The  knee  as  usual  is  selected  as  a  site  for  a  complaint  foi-  i-easons
given  previously.  It  is  evident  that  here  indications  given  by  the
.sitter  may  have  led  to  the  correct  location  of  the  l:»r()ther's  suffering  in
the  foot.

Teaching  as  the  sitter's  occupation  is  only  guessed  correctly  after
thi-ee  failures  ;  it  is  a  likely  one  at  Cambridge.  The  name  is  got  at
like  others  from  a  vague  beginning.  "  Aliza"  would  lead  equally,  with
the  latitude  which  Phinuit  allows  liimself,  to  Elizabeth  or  Louisa.
"  William  "  is  correct,  but  it  is  the  commonest  man's  name,  and  could
probably,  if  desired,  be  altered  to  Waltei-,  or  made  into  one  of  the
common  surnames,  Williams,  Wilson,  &c. Yi,>u  know  Annie  or


614.


A  Record  of  Observations  of


Fannie  "  is  again  a  guess  which  would  probaljly  succeed  with  a  hirge
majority  of  jienple.

"  Had  you  an  aunt  who  (Ued  of  cancer  "  is  a  fishing  question  such
as  was  asked  of  many  sitters.  Having  a  partially  favourable  reply,
Dr.  Pliinuit  begins  to  hedge  about  the  cancer,  but  with  doubtful  success.
The  "  lady  who  passed  out  with  consumption  "  is  another  obvious  sort
of  leading  question  :  ljut  the  description  given,  though  general  enough,
is  not  recognised  at  the  time,  so  the  matter  is  quietly  droi^ped.  The
guess  about  the  house  in  the  country  is  wrong,  but  "mother  in  the
spirit  and  fathei-  in  the  body"  is  right;  it  has  already  been  pointed
out  that  the  chances  are  at  most  three  to  one  against  it.

The  description  of  the  father's  character  is  not  at  all  correct.  Then
comes  the  feeling  of  cheek  and  jaw  ;  "  there  is  a  sort  of  numbness  here  ;
what  is  it  ? "  The  following  description  slowly  worked  out  was  possibly
guided  by  unconscious  hints.

Passing  over  the  obvious  conclusion  drawn  from  the  spectacles  and
the  likely  guess  that  out  of  four  sisters  one  is  at  least  considered
musical  by  hei;  family,  and  that  another  one  paints,  we  come  to
"Nellie  or  Ellen."  This  might,  of  course,  be  Helen  or  Eleanor  ;  but
in  default  of  these  it  is  made  to  do  duty  for  Nettie  or  Kettie  (Kate,
Catherine).  Janet  would,  of  course,  have  been  made  into  Jane  if  required.

But  even  this  hyjiothesis  leaves  out  of  sight  many  collateral  facts
which  seem  to  surpass  the  possibilities  of  chance.  For  instance,
though  the  number  of  the  family  was  i-ight  at  the  second  attempt,  yet
it  is  not,  as  in  the  first  attempt,  a  mere  number,  but  has  the  additional
and  correct  detail,  "four  sisters  and  four  brothers."  The  fact  of  a
previi_)us  guess  ha^'ing  been  made  does  not  by  any  means  reduce  to  a
negligible  quantity  the  chances  against  the  correctness  of  a  guess  like
this.

Moreover,  if  muscle-reading  came  into  play,  it  led  to  the  reading  of
unconscious,  n.  it  conscious,  thought.  For  Miss  J ohnson  did  not  know
at  the  time  of  the  sitting  that  her  father's  step-mother  had  died  of
cancer,  and  ^\■as,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  thinking  about  an  aunt  whose
death  she  fancied — wrongly,  as  it  turned  out — might  have  been  due  to
this  cause.  So,  with  I'egard  to  the  brother's  suffering  in  the  foot,  this
was  either  a  rather  incorrect  account  of  the  blisters  which  had  troubled
one  brother,  some  m<inths  before — which  Miss  Johnson  had  at  the  time
foro-otten — or  a  correct  account  of  the  state  of  another  In-other,  about
which  she  had  not  then,  heard.  Consitlering  that  muscle-i-eading  in  an
ordinary  way  depends  entirely  on  the  sitter's  concentration  upon  a
given  thought,  it  is  no  d(jubt  straining  the  theory  to  assume  it  as  an
ex2:ilanation  where  attention  is  certainly  directed  elsewhei'e.

E\-en  on  the  most  unfavourable  view,  therefore,  it  seems  necessary
to  assume  more  than  chance  and  skill  in  order  to  explain  this  sitting.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


615


Repokt  of  Professor  and  Mrs.  Sidcwick.


As  Mrs.  Piper  stayed  in  our  house  neai'ly  a  week,  it  is  perhaps
fitting  that  we  should  make  a  short  separate  report,  though  ^\'e  have
httle  to  add  to  what  has  been  said  by  JVLr.  Leaf.

In  the  first  place  we  must  record  our  comj^lete  belief  in  ]Mrs.  Piper's
honesty ;  a  belief  which  was  duIv  confirmed  as  our  ac(piaintance  witli
her  became  more  thorough.

We  had  ourselves  nine  sittings  with  her,  four  at  Mr.  Myers'  house
and  five  at  our  own,  and  we  arranged  for  and  took  notes  of  five  others.
In  three  of  these  the  sitters,  namely,  Mrs.  Vei'rall,  Mrs.  B.,  and  Miss  Alice
Johnson,  were  selected  as  having  been  TDreviuusly  more  or  less  successful  ;
and  in  two  of  them  the  sitters,  Mr.  Gale  and  Mr.  Konstanim,  were
strangers,  introduced  anonymously  and  unexpectedly,  and  in  a  way
which  made  it  certain  that  information  could  not  with  the  best  will
have  been  got  up  beforehand  about  them.  Mr.  Konstamm  was  a
stranger  to  oui'selves  and  hail  never  Ijeen  tu  the  house  before.

Our  contribution  to  the  investigation  may  be  divided  into  three
heads.

(1)  Attempts  to  get  from  Di'.  Phiuuit  specific  facts  known  to  our-
selves and  known  to  deceased  persons  with  some  of  whom  he  professed
to  be  in  communication.  This  was  in  our  case  a  complete  failure,
•unless  we  include  under  this  head  the  attempts  of  Dr.  Phinuit  to  give
the  names  of  Mr.  Sidgwick's  uncles,  which  ^^•ere  specially  encouraged
through  several  sittings.  Here  the  success  attained  appears  to  us
woi'th  mentioning,  though  not  by  itself  decisively  excluding  mere
chance.  Six  out  of  seven  of  these  names  were  ultuuately  given  cor-
rectly, and  correctly  di\ide<i  between  the  tw(.)  sides  of  the  family.
But  the  only  uncommon  name  was  omitted,  and  fixe  wrong  names  were
guessed  before  the  final  result  was  arri\-ed  at.

(2)  Attemjjts  to  get  descriptions  of  what  certain  j^ersons  were
doing  at  the  moment,  the  person  in  question  sometimes  (on  seven  occa-
sions) occupying  him-  or  herself  specially  with  a  view  to  the  experi-
ment, and  sometimes  (on  thi-ee  occasions)  being  merely  engaged  in  his
or  her  ordinary  avocations,  ljut  in  each  case  those  with  Mrs.  Pijier
being  unaware  of  the  exact  nature  of  the  occupation.  Some  idea  of
the  result  of  these  experiments  may  be  gathered  from  the  abstracts  of
the  seances.  To  examine  into  the  exact  degree  of  success  which
attended  them  would  take  up  more  space  than  the  I'esult  would  be
worth.  "\Ye  will  merely  say  that,  though  inconclusive,  we  think  they
were  not  altogether  unpromising,  and  that  if  further  opportunity
otfered  it  would  be  worth  Avhile  to  j^ursue  this  line  of  investigation
further.


{316


A  Record  of  Oh>^<'i-vatlons  of


With  these  expei'iments  ma}'  be  classed  a  luoclification  of  them  tried
ivs  likely  to  be  easier,  namely,  attempts  to  aiiswei"  the  questions,  "How
many  fingers  is  So-and-so  holding  up  ? "'  the  jjei'soii  in  question  being  in
the  room  behind  a  screen.  Dr.  Phinuit  rather  took  to  this  form  of
e.xpeiiment  and  insisted  on  trying  it  sojnetimes  when  the  sitters  might
have  jJi'cferred  something  else.  His  success,  however,  was  not  very
startling  though  probably  beyond  whut  chance  would  produce.  It
r;eemed,  too,  to  confirm  the  view  that  his  success  in  other  things  was
supernormal ;  since,  so  fai'  as  the  small  nuiiiber  of  trials  enables  us  to
iudge,  he  succeeded  in  this  with  sitters  whom  he  succeeded  well  with
otherwise. The  following  table  gives  a  summary  of  the  results  : —


Sitters.

Number  of  Guesses.

Right  at
first  guess.

Right
at  secdiid
guess.

Doubtful.

Wrong.

Total.

Mrs.  Verrall

Mrs.  B

Miss  A.  Johnson

Mr.  Sidgwick

Mrs.  Sidgwick

2
2
3
1
1

i

i
1

1
1

...

'2

7
1

5

3
6
10
3
7

T..tal

9

0
*j

2

15

29

Niiniber  of  Fingers
held  up.

Right  at
first  guess.

Riglit

at  second
guess.

Doubtful.

Wrong.

Number  of
times  held
up.

10

9, 8,  7
()
5
4
3
2
1
0

1

'2

2
3
1

1
2

'2

i
5
1
2
1
4
1

1
0

1

7

4
4
6
5
1

Tot.nl

9

0

2

1.5

29

Dr.  Phinuit  generally  specified  the  fingers  but  was  often  confused
;is  to  which  liand  they  belonged  to.  Ignoring  tlie  difference  between
tlie  two  hands,  his  guesses  as  to  \\'hich  fiiigers  were  held  up,  when  he
wiiH  more  or  less  right  as  to  the  number,  vt^ere  right  or  wrong  as
f(.illov>'s  : —


Certain  Plienomeaa  of  Tnni'-r.  G17


Sitters,

Number  of  Gue.s.ses.

Eight  at
first  a'uess.

Right
at  second
guess.

Doubtful.

Partially
wrong.

Total.

Mrs.  Yen-all

Mrs.  B

Miss  A.  Johnson

Mr.  Sidgwick

Mrs.  Sidgwick

2-
2

1

1

1

1
1

31
1

1

3
4
3
2
2

Total

o
O

3

4

1

14

(3)  Under  the  third  head  we  put  all  the  information  \'olunteered  by
Dr.  Phiunit.  There  is  little  under  this  head  to  add  to  what  Mr.  Leaf
has  said  in  his  summary  of  the  reports  of  the  seances.  Dr.  Phinuit
clearly  comiected  us  together  as  husband  and  wife  and  later  gave  our
name,  though,  as  we  believe,  no  clue  as  to  our  identity  had  been  given,
and  we  had  been  introduced  at  Mr.  flyers'  house  separately  and
anonjTuously,  and  had  not  been  seen  together.  He  also,  as  will  be  seen
from  the  abstracts  of  seances,  made  a  few  strikingly  correct  statements
about  us  and  pei'sons  connected  Avith  us,  but  these  Avere  so  much  mixed
up  with  what  was  false  or  A'ague  that  it  is  impossible  to  attach  much
evidential  xalne  to  them.  His  degree  of  success  was  very  decidedly
greater  with  Mr.  Gale  and  Mr.  Konstamm,  especially  tlie  former,  and
we  are  disposed  to  attach  some  imj^ortance  to  these  sittings.

In  conclusion  we  may  say  that,  while  our  own  experience  taken  by
itself  would  not  establish  Dr.  Phinuit's  claim  to  sup>ernormally  acquired
knowledge,  it  seems  to  us  to  support  to  some  extent  that  claim,
which  from  the  reports  of  others  we  belie-\"e  to  be  justitied.

P.S. — By  Mrs.  Sidgwick.

On  my  own  account  I  should  like  to  add  one  or  two  remarks  to  our
joint  I'eport  printed  above.  I  was  jaresent  either  as  sitter  or  as
reporter — sometimes  both — at  all,  except  one,  of  the  sittings  at  our
own  house,  and  had,  therefore,  some  opportunity  of  observing  the
difference  between  Phinuit's  manner  at  good  sittings  and  at  bad  ones.
I  should  characterise  all  those  in  which  I  was  myself  the  sitter  as  bad  ;
comparatively  little  knowledge  of  my  affairs  was  shown,  and  Phinuit's
manner  was  correspondingly  hesitating  and  uncertain,  and  his  com-
munications full  of  vague  guesses  and  "fishing." The  effect  both  on

1  One  of  these  was  doubtful  and  the  others  not  sufficiently  specified  in  our  notes,,
but  I  believe  all  were  right.

2  One  of  these  was  all  10  fingers  :  so  the  number  lieing  right  there  was  no  further
doubt.


(ilS  A  Record  of  Ohservations  of


liimself  and  on  me  was  wearying  and  depressing,  iiiid  it  is,  I  think,
quite  likely  that  this  depression  reacted  again  on  his  "  lucidity,"  and
rendered  success  hopeless.  At  a  good  sitting  this  guessing  and  "fish-
ing "'  seemed  at  times  quite  absent.  The  sitting  which  impressed  me
most  strongly  in  this  way  was  No.  6-1,  tliat  of  ]Mr.  H.  Gale  (of  which  Mr.
Leaf  has  given  an  abridged  account,  p.  G4i'),  and  this  although  one  or
two  of  the  things  said  to  Mr.  Konstamm  \vere  pei'haps  more  striking.
Mr.  Gale's  sitting,  like  many  others,  became  vague  and  more  incoherent
towards  the  end,  but  during  all  the  earlier  part  of  it  Phinuit  gave  the
impression  of  really  knowing  what  he  was  talking  ab(.iut.  He  described
Mr.  Gale's  father  and  mother  as  if  he  had  them  Ijefore  him  ;  in  a  bad
liglit,  perhaps,  or  rather  far  off,  so  that  he  could  not  make  them  out
with  absolute  distinctness,  but  still  as  if  he  were  trying  to  describe
what  he  saw,  not  at  all  as  if  he  were  guessing.  I  was  absolutely
ignoi'ant  of  the  facts  myself,  and  my  impression  is  that  it  was  as  much
Phinuit's  manner  as  Mr.  Gale's  which  made  me  feel  at  the  time  that  a
true  account  was  being  given.

Another  point  of  some  interest  is  the  question  of  tlie  importance  of
verbatim  reports  of  the  se'ances.  It  has  often  Ijeen  said  that  it  is  only
by  shorthand  reports  that  the  weak  points  of  the  seances  can  be  fully
brought  out.  There  is  no  douljt  that  full  reports  are  valuable  in  this
way,  but  I  think  that  they  would  sometimes  ))ring  i.iut  strong  points  as
well  as  weak  ones.  I  felt,  while  I  wrote  as  fast  as  T  could  (without
shorthand)  for  Mr.  Gale,  that  a  verbatim  report  would  have  brought
out  many  details  which  I  was  forced  to  omit  or  could  do  but  scant
justice  to.

On  the  other  hand,  the  evidential  value  of  a  sliorthand  report  may
easily  be  overrated.  When  so  much  may  depend  on  manner,  gesture,
and  tone  of  voice,  in  Phinuit  and  tlie  sitter,  tlie  fullest  shorthand

rejxtrt  cannot  he  complete.


Professor  C.  Riciiet's  PiKpoirr.

Madame  P.  forme,  pour  ainsi  dire,  la  transition  entre  les  mediums
spirites  voyants  tels  qu'cjn  les  connait  en  Amerique,  et  les  somnambules
tels  que  nous  les  connaissons  en  France.

On  ne  I'endort  pas  par  le  jirocede  des  passes  magnetiques,  mais  elle
entre  en  trance  pour  ainsi  dire  spontanement.

Ce  n'est  pas  cependant  tout-a-fait  sjjontanemcnt  ;  car  elle  a  besoiii
pour  sa  trance  de  saisir  la  main  de  quelqu'un.  Alors  elle  prend  la  main
pendant  quelques  minutes  en  restant  en  siloice  et  dans  une  demi-
obscurite.  Au  bout  de  quelque  temps — de  o  a  15  minutes — elle  est
prise  de  petites  convulsions  spasmodiques  qui  v<)nt  en  s'exagerant,  en


Certain  Flie aorae'iKt  of  Trance.


cia


se  termiiiatit  jjar  uue  j^stite  crise  epileptiforme  tres  nioderee.  Au  sortir
de  cette  crise  elle  toinbe  dans  un  etat  de  stupeur,  a\'ec  respiration  un
peu  stertoreuse,  qui  dure  pres  d'une  ou  deux  minutes  ;  puis,  tout  d'un
coup,  elle  sort  de  cette  stupeur  par  un  eclat  de  voix.  Sa  voix  a  change;
C3  n'est  plus  Madame  P.  qui  est  la,  mais  un  auti'e  personnage,  le
Dr.  Phinuit,  qui  parle  avec  une  grosse  voix,  a  allures  viriles,  avec  un
accent  melange  de  patois  negre,^  de  Francais,  et  de  dialecte  Americain.

II  s'agit  de  savoir  si  le  Dr.  Phinuit  jn'esente  reellement  des
phenomenes  de  lucidite,  et  si  les  noms  qu'il  doniie  de  diffe rents  person-
iiages,  vus  ou  entendus  autfiur  de  Tol^servateur,  s'appliquent  a  des
I'ealiti^s.

II  est  a  noter  que  dans  la  plupart  des  experiences  Tobservateur  ne
quitte  pas  la  main  de  Madame  P.

Voici  maintenant  le  resultat  de  nies  observations,  au  point  de  vue  de
cette  lucidite.

Le  2^1'emier  nom  qu'elle  m'ait  donne  est  le  wm\  Marie  Anne  ;
niais  elle  ne  Ta  pas  donne  en  reponse  a  une  question  veiiantdema  part.
Or,  il  se  trouve  que  ce  nom  de  Max-ie  Anne  a  ete  mele  a  un  episode  de
ma  jeunesse  qu'il  serait  trop  long  de  raconter  ici,  et  C[ui  etait,  en  tout
cas,  absolument  inconnu  de  toutes  les  personnes  se  trouvant  a  Cambridge.

Je  lui  ai  deraande  quelques  details  sur  Marie  Anne  ;  elle  ne  m'a  dit
que  des  erreurs,  sauf  ce  fait,  qui  est  exact,  qu'elle  demeurait  pres  de  la
luaison  d'ecole.

Madame  P.  ne  connaissait  pas,  parait-il,  mon  nom  ;  mais  j'admets
comme  tres  possible  qu'elle  I'ait  appris,  soit  des  personnes  de  la  maison
layant  prononce  par  inadvertence,  soit  qu'elle  Fait  devinc  d'apres  ma
iiationalite.  (Elle  a  frequente  pendant  deux  ans  Mr.  William  James
-et  Mr.  Hodgson  J  et  a  lu  les  Proceedings  "de  la  Societe  Americaine  de
Ilecherches  Psychiques.)  Elle  ni'a  dit  que  je  m'appelais  Charles,  et  que  je
faisais  de  la  medecine.  Alors  je  lui  ai  parle  de  mow  grand-pere  :  elle
ni'a  dit  qu'il  s'appelait  Charles  comme  moi,  ce  qui  est  exact,  quoique  ]e
lui  eusse  dit  que  c'etait  le  pere  de  ma  mere.  Elle  a  ajoute  qu'il
s'appelait  Rich.Jiet,  et  elle  a  precise  chaque  lettre  sans  etre  aidee  par  moi
et  spontanement.  Mais  je  ne  puis  attacher  a  ces  faits  une  importance
primordiale,  car  il  est  fort  possible  qu'elle  connut — inconsciemment —
mon  nom.

Alors  je  lui  ai  demande  quelques  details  sur  mon  grand-pere.  Elle
n'a  rien  pu  dire,  ou  du  moins  n'a  dit  que  des  erreurs  meme  tres  gros-

isieres  etnombreuses  ;  m'assurant  qu'il  etait  soldat — chimiste — medecin

•que  je  demeurais  chez  lui — qu'il  avait  un  chien  ;  tous  faits  inexacts.  Je
lui  ai  dit  qu'il  avait  traduit  en  Francais  un  auteur  Americain.  II  lui  a
ete  impossible  de  dire  lequel.  Elle  a  dit,  Henry  Ja.mes,  Hawthorne,
<&e.,  sans  pouvoir  dire  Franklin.

>Comme  elle  parlait  de  chien,  je  lui  ai  demande  d'un  petit  chien  que


C20


A  Recoi'd  of  Oh'^ervaftons  of


j'avais  et  qui  est  mort.  EUe  m'a  dit  sans  liesiter  Pick.  Or  ce  fait  est
bieu  inipijrtant,  et  c 'est,  a  niou  sens,  le  meilleur  resultat  quelle  ait
donne  ;  car  mon  chien  s'appelait  Dick;  et  il  faut  admettre  quelle  ne
savait  absolumeut  pas  ce  nom,  inconim  a  Cambridge  comme  a  Boston.

D'autres  demandes  sur  le  nombre  des  enfants  ont  ete  suivies
d'ab^olu  insucces.  Elleadit  successivement,  4 — 3 — 2 — 5 — 1,  sanspouToir
dire  le  nombi'e  exact,  non  plus  que  les  nonis.

Le  lendonain,  pense  a  lui  deraander  le  nom  d  une  personne  do  mn,
famille  morte  depuis  longtemps,  et  dont  le  nom  a  ete  donne  pour  moi
dans  les  premieres  experiences  de  spiritisme  que  j'ai  faites.  Jen  parle
a  M.  Myers  dans  le  cours  tie  la  journee,  sans  lui  dire  le  nom  de  cette
persoinie,  absolument  inconnu  de  lui  et  de  tout  le  monde.  De  plus,  je
pense,  mentalement,  qu'il  serait  interessant  de  demander  quelque.s
details  encore  sur  mon  grand-pere,  en  partieulier  le  petit-nom  de  ma
grand'-mere  ;  mais  je  n'en  dis  rien  a  personne.

Or,  dans  le  cours  de  I'experienee  du  lundi,  donnant  la  main  a  Mile.
X.,  elle  a  dit  le  nom  de  Louise,  qui  ne  s'appliquait  pas  du  tout  a
Mile.  X.,  et  qui  est  precisement  le  nom  que  je  chercliais.  Elle  a  difc
en  outre  le  nom  de  Renoi,  qui  ne  s'apj)liquait  a  rien  relativement  a  Mile.
X,  mais  ou  sont  les  premiei-es  lettres  du  nom  de  mon  grand-pere,  nom
qu'elle  ne  connaissait  jias.  (Ce  nom  a  ete  imprime  cependant  dans  les
Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.)  Tl  est  vrai  que  ni  le
nom  de  Louise  ni  le  nom  de  Renoi  n'ont  ete  par  Madame  Piper  attribuei>
a  mi)i  ou  a  quelques  personnes  de  ma  famille;  ce  qui  ote  enormement  de
valeur  a  leur  signitication,  puisqu'en  les  disant  Madame  Pij^er  ne
.s  adressait  pas  a  moi,  mais  a  Mile.  X.

S'adre.ssant  a  moi,  Madame  Piper  nie  dit,  "  Jevous  2>arlerai  d'vlf?e/rt."
Or  Adela  est  le  nom  de  ma  gi'ajid-mere.  11  est  vrai  que  Madame  Piper
iie  jieut  me  dire  quelles  etaient  mes  connexions  de  famille  avec  Adela.

Pour  etre  complet,  je  dois  mentionner  un  fait  curieux.  Elle  me  dit,
"Vous  avez  des  pilules  dans  votre  poche,"  et  en  les  toucliant  avec  le
doigt,  les  palpant,  et  les  epluchant — sans  y  gouter — elle  dit  hardiment
et  sans  hesiter,  "  C'est  de  la  quinine  ";  ce  qui  est  exact.  L'experience
eiifc  ete  bien  j^lus  interessante  s'il  se  fiit  agi  d"autre  chose  de  moins
commun  que  la  quinine. (Compare  "  cinchona,"  p.  510. — W.  L.)

Bref,  pour  resumer  ces  faits,  il  n'y  a  dans  mes  experiences  avec
Madame  Piper  qu'un  seul  fait  incontestable  de  lucidite:  car  je  n'attaclie
de  valeur  absolue  qu'aux  reponses  faites  a  une  question.  C'est  le  nom  de
Pick  pour  Dick  :  alors  que  certainement  lienne  pouvait  le  lui  indiquer.
C'est  le  hasard  ou  bien  la  lucidite  ;  ce  ne  pent  etre  autre  chose.

Quant  a  la  bonne  foi  (consciente),  elle  est  absolument  certaine  ;  et
pour  tout  observateur  habitue  a  voir  les  soinnambules,  I'etat  de  Madame
Piper  est  tout-a-fait  le  meme  que  I'etat  de  somnambules  en  sommeil
magnetique,  avec  transformations  de  personnalite.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


621


Appendix.

Complete  List  of  Sittixgs  held  by  Mrs.  Piper  when  in  England.


1,  2,  3.  With  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Miicrs.
These  sittings  were  held  in  oixler  to  gain  familiaiity  with  the  pheno-
mena, and  no  full  notes  were  taken.  Various  correct  statements  were
made  about  members  of  Mr.  Myers'  family :  that  he  had  a  father  in  the
spirit  and  a  mother  in  the  body  ;  that  he  had  two  brothers,  Ernest  and
Arthur,  but  no  sisters  ;  that  his  father  was  named  Fredeiic  and  had
been  a  clergyman  :  that  his  wife  had  a  father,  named  Charles,  in  the
spirit,  and  a  brother,  Charles,  in  the  body,  and  two  sisters,  Ella  (real
name  Elsie)  and  Lollie  (real  name  Dolly)  ;  that  his  mother  had  a
sister  Mary,  or  Marianne,  and  a  brother  John.  None  of  these  statements
can  be  considered  to  have  evidential  value,  as  they  could  probably  have
been  "got  up  "  even  in  America.

4.  November  2m. With Mrs.  A." See  detailed  report,  j).  5S1.

5.  Novemher  ibtli. With  Mrs.  Verrall. See  detailed  report,  p.  584.

6.  November  25th. With  "  Mrs.  B."

"Mrs.  B."  is  a  sister  of  "Mrs.  A.,"  and  various  facts  about  the
family  stated  to  the  latter  and  repeated  to  the  former  ai'e  omitted.
The  Christian  names  given  are  changed  for  the  reasons  explained
on  p.  581.

"Mrs.  B.,"  on  entering  the  room  while  the  medium,  whom  she  had
not  seen  before,  was  in  a  state  of  trance,  was  immediately  addressed  by
her  name.

This  is  Jennie.  I'm  so  glad  to  see  you.  Yes,  I  like  you,  you  are  a
nice  person.  Did  Isabel  tell  you  all  the  things  I  told  her  yesterday  about
your  brotliers  and  sisters  and  your  father  and  mother  ?

Mrs.  B  :  "Yes,  she  told  me  many  of  them.  But  how  do  you  know  that
slie  and  I  have  any  connexion  1  "

Dr.  P.  :  I  felt  the  same  influence ;  and,  besides,  your  father  told  me.  He
spoke  to  me  of  you,  Alice  Jane  (and  here  he  spelt  the  second  name).

Here  facts  about  the  family  were  repeated. Then,  breakhig  off  .suddenly  :

But  have  you  not  been  very  ill  lately  ?

Mrs.  B.  :  "  Yes,  I  have."

More  repetition  of  names  of  family  ;  tlie  medium  was  again  unable  to
give  the  name  of  the  sister  who  had  remained  unnamed  in  Mrs.  A.  's  sitting.
Dr.  P.  asks,  ' '  L,  Loo,  do  you  know  what  I  mean  ?  Is  there  no  one  of.  this,
name  ? "

Mrs.  B.  :  "No"'  (but  see  next  sitting).

Dr.  P.  :  Silent  again.  Then,  "A~D— E,  A— D— A,  Ada  ;  don't  yon
know  tlie  name  ?  "

Mrs.  B.  :  "Yes,  but  it  is  not  the  name  of  my  sister.  I  have  a  great
friend  of  that  name. Can  you  tell  me  anything  about  her  1 ''

2  u


622


A  Record  of  Observations  of


Dr.  P.  :  Yes,  she  is  a  remarkable  ijerson.  She  has  had  a  great  deal  of
trouble  in  her  life  which  she  certainly  has  not  deserved.  But  I  think  she
has  better  times  in  store.  (This,  tliough  vague  enough,  is  correct  as  far  as
it  goes.)

Mrs.  B.  :  "Can  you  tell  me  anything  about  my  home  and  my  sur-
roundings '?  "

In  reply  to  this  question  descriptions  were  given  of  various  rooms  and
objects,  none  of  which  v,^ere  correct,  excejjt  that  close  by  where  Mrs.  B.
lived  was  a  large  building,  a  sort  of  school.

Dr.  P.  (after  a  pause)  :  Tell  me  who  is  Sarah  who  lives  in  your
house  ?  .  : . . .

Mrs.  B.  :  "  She  is  the  parlour-maid."

Dr.  P.  :  She  is  a  good  girl,  but  slie  has  funny  ways.  She  fidgets  about  a
good  deal. She  let  something  drop  a  few  days  ago.

(Mrs.  B.  remarks:  "This  I  thought  at  the  time  was  not  true,  but' after-
wards I  remember  that  Sarah  had  come  to  me  on  my  return  from  London  a
few  days  ago,  to  say  that  while  I  was  away  she  had  broken  a  coloured  claret
glass  which  made  up  a  set  which  are  not  often  used.")

Dr.  P.  then  gave  a  very  incorrect  account  of  "  Mr.  B. 's  "  character,  but
said  rightly,  ' '  He  teaches  something — what  you  call  a  professor,  I  suppose  ;
and  spends  a  great  deal  of  time  over  his  books  and  gets  very  tired  with  work
sometimes.  .  .  .  Tell  me  who  is  Matilda."  Mrs.  B.  says:  "For  a
moment  I  could  not  think  of  anyone  of  the  name,  and  he  rather  impatiently
asked  me  the  question  again."  "  She  was  staying  with  you  a  few  days  ago.
She  is  your  liusband's  mother — your  mother-in-law  it  is  called,  I  think."

Dr.  P.  then  gave  a  description  of  tlie  lady  in  question,  which  Mrs.  B.
considered  correct,  but  which  can  hardly  be  quoted  as  evidential.

Mrs.  B.  asked  if  Dr.  P.  knew  anything  about  a  friend  of  hers  abroad.

Dr.  P.  asked  :  A  man  or  a  woman  ?  .  ...

Mrs.  B.  replied  :  "A  woman."

Dr.  P.  said  :  She  is  better  than  she  was,  and  I  think  will  go  on  well.
This  rejily  was  unsatisfactory  to  Mrs.  B.

The  remarkable  points  about  this  sitting  are,  the  immediate
recognition  of  the  sitter  before  she  had  even  spoken,  so  that  even  the
tone  of  voice  could  have  been  no  guide  ;  and  the  description  of  Mrs.  B.'s
mother-in-law  by  name.  Here  there  could  clearly  have  been  no  guidance
on  Mrs.  B.'s  pai't,  as  she  did  not  recognise  the  person  spoken  of  till  she
was  told  that  it  was  her  mother-in-laAv.  The  other  statements  made
could  possibly  be  explained  either  by  fishing  or  by  a  slight  knowledge
of  local  gossip.  The  question  about  Sarah  may  evidently  have  been  of
the  former  class  ;  when  it  was  once  known  that  she  was  a  pai'lour-maid,
it  was  a  fairly  safe  guess  to  say  that  she  had  recently  let  something
drop.

7.  Noi-cmher  26th. With  Miss  Alice  Johnson,. Sec  2h  G08,

8.  Now.mbey  26th. With  Mrs.  R.  Sidgtvick.

Mrs. Sidgwick  was  introduced  anonymously. The notes  were
written  out  from  her  recollection  immediately  after  tlie  sitting,  Mr.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


623


Myei's  having  been  sent  out  of  the  room.  The  following  were  the
correct  statements  made  : —

That  the  sitter  had  a  father,  mother,  and  brother  in  the  spirit-world  ;
that  the  brother  had  come  there  since  the  mother  ;  that  Mrs.  S.  had  two
sisters  both  alive  ;  that  her  husband  studied  much  ;  that  his  father  was  ui
the  spirit-world  ;  that  she  and  her  husband  were  both  anxious  to  learn  the
truth  ;  and  that  the  dead  brother  had  in  his  lifetime  anxiously  sought  for  facts.

' '  These  various  statements  scattered  through  the  sitting  were,  I  think,
the  only  true  ones  made  without  fishing  about  at  all.

"  Dr.  Phinuit  allowed  me  no  brothers  at  first  exce^jt  the  one  in  the  spirit-
wrorld,  but  ultimately  added  '  Arthur  '  (right),  after  trying  to  fit  that  name
on  to  the  one  in  the  other  world.  I  told  him  before  the  end  of  the  sitting
that  I  had  three  brothers  alive.  He  said  my  husband's  name  was  Henry  with
very  'little  previous  hesitation,  though  at  one  point  he  tentatively  suggested
that  Henry  was  an  Earl ;  and  he  praised  him  a  good  deal.  He  settled  that
I  had  no  children,  but  only  after  trymg  to  induce  me  to  own  to  a  very  smart
young  man  as  my  son.  Failing  in  this  he  identified  the  smart  young  man
jis  a  person  of  the  name  of  Smith  and  a  pupil  of  my  husband's.  (Cannot  be
identified.)  He  correctly  gave  William  as  the  name  of  my  husband's  father,
find  Charles  as  the  name  of  a  dead  uncle,  and  Robert  as  the  name  of  a  living
uncle  of  mine,  but  this  was  only  after  trying  whether  these  names  would  do
for  other  relatives.  He  gave  a  prediction  about  my  uncle.  (Not  yet
lealised  nor  likely  to  be.)  He  said  that  my  mother  had  died  of  general
weakness  of  several  organs,  in  particular  the  heart.  This  was  fairly  accurate,
though  rather  indefinite.  I  thought  it  pretty  good.  He  gave  mj^  mother's
colouring  wrong,  however,  fair  brown  hau'  turn.ed  greyish,  but  fair  brown
liair  is  a  good  description  of  my  own.  He  said  that  I  had  taken  care  of  my
"brother  in  his  illness.  Later  on  in  the  seance  I  asked  what  he  had  died
•of,  or  how  he  died,  I  forget  which  ;  he  said  correctly  of  an  accident,  of  a
fall,  hurt  his  head.  But  he  went  on  to  speak  of  care  of  him  after  the
accident,  which  was  wrong.  He  said  he  was  engaged  in  studying  and  had
"been  cut  ofip  in  the  midst  of  work,  which  is  true.  He  spoke  of  an  Abbie,  or
Addie,  Adelaide,  and  was  pleased  when  I  admitted  that  I  had  an  aunt  of  that
name.  He  said  that  she  had  left  a  child,  which  was  tvwe.  (She  died  when
the  child,  now  grown  up,  was  born.  It  was  I,  not  Phinuit,  who  identified
Adelaide  as  an  aunt.)

"But  a  great  many  names  were  mentioned  and  even  jDressed  which  I  can-
not connect  with  anyone  at  all.  He  attempted  to  describe  my  house,  but  as
far  as  I  understood  it  was  all  wrong,  except  that  a  dark-haired  young-
person,  said  to  be  very  faithful,  and  engaged  in  brushing,  might  do  for  the
parlour-maid.  He  was  very  anxious  that  I  should  recognise  a  woman  whom
lie  named  variously  Alison,  Ellison,  Harrison,  and  who  died  of  some  affec-
tion of  the  throat  and  bronchial  tubes,  and  who  was  connected  with  a  Louisa.
I  have  a  cousin  named  Louisa,  but  that  does  not  give  any  clue.  Neverthe-
less he  insisted  on  my  remembering  about  this  person  and  trying  to  recognise
lier.  He  also  gave  me  as  a  test  that  my  brother  Artliur  had  been  worried —
husiness  troubles — a  person  named  George  unfaithful — but  all  would  come
right. This  '  test '  is  very  inappropriafe  in  connexion  with  my  brother,

2  u  2


624


A  Record  of  Ohservations  of


Arthur  Balfour.  Any  '  gettius  up '  of  me  and  my  family  must  have  led  t  i>
more  accurate  knowledge  respecting  him."

It  is  evident  that  so  many  vague  statements,  mixed  with  so  much
that  is  wrong,  can  have  no  e^'idential  value.  The  only  interest  of  the-
sitting  lies  in  the  fact  that  thei-e  was  clearly  no  "getting  uj)"  of
Mi"s.  Sidgwick's  family,  or,  at  all  events,  if  anything  had  been  got  up,  it
was  n,i)t  applied  to  her.

9.  N<nrw.lH_'r27fh. Professor  G.  H.  DarxvU,,  F.R.S.

On  arriving  at  Mr.  Myers'  house  I  saw  the  medium  for  ahout  lialf  a.
minute  in  the  drawing-room,  and  was  introduced  as  Mr.  Smitli.

The  first  part  of  the  sitting  was  devoted  to  my  ailments.  This  was-
certainly  a  keen  medical  diagnosis,  hut  it  was,  I  think,  not  more  than  a  doctor
might  venture  to  say  from  inspection  of  me  ^\hen  he  knew  that  he  was  to  he-
rewarded  for  a  correct  diagnosis,  and  not  to  sufier  for  a  wrong  one.  I  was.
said  to  study,  or  think  nuich  ;  this  is  a  safe  conjectiu'e  in  a  university  town,,
when  the  observer  is  fortified  l)y  observation.

The  second  half  of  the  sitting  was  devoted  to  my  friends.  Not  a  single-
name  or  person  was  named  correctly,  although  perliajis  8  or  10  were-
named.  My  father  was  referred  to  by  three  different  Christian  names,  all
incori'ect.  I  was  said  to  ha\"e  two  children  (ccjrrect),  and  after  changing'
about  the  sexes  several  times,  they  were  got  correct.  On  this  occasion  J  was.
to  correct  the  medium  wlien  she  was  in  error.

10.  Noncmha-  21th. Mrs.  VcrralL Second  sitfhtij. See  j).  586.

11.  Noremher  28tli. Mr.  F.  W.  II.  Myers. Foinih  sHtliKj.

At  this  sitting  tlie  name  of  "William  Shedgwick"  was  given.  Mr.  Myers
was  told  "to  remember  it  and  tell  that  gentleman.''  Mr.  E.  was  stated  to
be  present.  "Do  you  know  someone  called  Lyttelton?  His  father  is  here  ;
and  wants  to  send  his  love  to  his  son."  Asked  if  he — Mr.  E. — has  ever  com-
municated tlirough  anyone  else,  he  writes  "X,  Miss  X."  (with  one  letter
of  name  wrcjng. It  had  ))een  given  witli  the  same  error  in  America).

Hei-e  there  is  nothing  that  can  be  called  evidential.  The  statement
that  Mr.  E.  had  comnuniicated  througli  Miss  X.  had  already  been
given  in  America.

12.  Noreriilier  29f/f. Mrs.  B. Sironil  slit'uuj. Mrs.  B.'s  report.

I  am  glad  to  see  you,  Jennie.  I  like  you  very  much.  You  are  Alice
Jane.  Your  name  is  Jane,  l)ut  you  are  called  Jennie.  You  will  have  a
present  quite  soon.  It  Avill  come  in  a  parcel,  and  there  will  he  something
red  about  it.

Mrs.  B.  :  "Have  you  found  out  any  more  about  ....  since  I
saw  you  l "

Here  Dr.  Phinuit  told  me  some  remarkal)le  and  inimistakable  facts
;ibout  a  friend  abroad  which  are  quite  unknown  to  anyone  here,  and  which
are  too  intimate  to  write  down.  They  were  given  me  as  I  believed  them  to
be,  but  I  now  find  that  in  one  jiarticular  my  belief  was  in  error.

Mrs.  B.  :  "  Do  you  remember  mentioning  the  name  Lof>,  the  other  day?
"What  do  you  know  of  Loo?"  (After  the  last  sitting  I  had  recollected  a  friend
who  was  ci)mnionly  known  by  tlie  name  of  Lew.)


Cfji'tain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


G25


Dr.  Pliimiit  thought  for  a  moment.  "Do  you  mean  a  man  or  a  woman?"
Then  he  quickly  contimwd,  "Of  course  you  mean  a  man;  L— E — W — I — S."'
<The  name  was  spelt  deliberately  without  any  hesitation;  it  was  correct.)
"He  has  not  been  very  well ;  he  has  had  a  bad  cold.  He  has  a  great  many
worries  ;  he  has  mental  worries  beside  domestic  and  tinancial  worries.''
Here  Dr.  Phinuit  asked  me,  "  Who  is  Nib,  or  Xeb  '.  "  but  I  could  not  trace
the  nauie.  Since  then  I  have  thought  it  probably  was  an  attempt  at  Ned,
which  is  tlie  name  of  Lewis's  Ijrother.  Dr.  Pliinuit  also  made  attempts  to
lind  the  name  of  my  sister  which  he  failed  to  get  last  time.  He  made  various
efforts,  which  seemed  to  be  a  confusion  Ijetween  her  two  names,  but  gave
the  first  letter  of  the  name  required  correctly.  He  again  referred  to  the
In-other  Avith  the  bad  arm,  and  then  went  on,  "You  remember  I  talked  last
time  about  Ada.  Her  husband  is  very  ill.''  The  place  and  nature  of  his
illness  were  indicated  with  ajjjn'cjximate  accuracy,  and  his  surname  was  spelt
■quite  deliberately.

Mrs.  B.  :  "Do  you  kmjw  what  my  sister  Isabel  is  doing  at  present,  or
vrhere  she  is  ?

Dr.  Phinuit  said  something  about  her  being  with  her  sisters,  but  evidently
<\id  not  know  at  all.

Mis.  B.  :  "Do  you  know  whom  I  went  to  see  on  my  way  here  tliis
morning  '. ''

Dr.  P.  :  Yes,  a  man  ;  he  is  a  remarkable  man.  He  has  a  prominent
nose,  dark  hair  and  beard,  and  what  a  funny  hat  or  cap  he  is  wearing  '.  His
•surroundings  are  most  comfortable  ;  I  can  see  liis  arm-chaii-  by  the  fire  and
|)ictures  round  his  room,  and  it  looks  out  into  a  courtyard,  a  veiy  old  looking
place.  Doesn't  he  stammer  or  speak  in  a  funny  way  ?  You  knew  Ivli-.  E.  ?
,He  sends  you  his  kind  respects  and  his  love  to  his  sister  Ellen,  who  is  in
the  body. Rosamund  and  Eliza  are  in  the  spiiit. [Names  right.]

jMrs.  B.  :  "  Can  you  tell  me  what  my  husband  is  doing  at  present  I ''
Dr.  P.  : Yes,  he  is  sitting  at  a  desk  in  a  room  like  a  library,  with  a
darge  book  and  papers  round  him.

This  sitting  contains  two  remarkable  pieces  of  evidence  which  seem
.quite  beyond  the  suspicion  of  ha^-ing  been  got  up  ;  lii-st  the  statement
-about  the  friend  abj-oad,  which  Mrs.  B.  is  confident  could  not  have
been  known  to  anyone  in  the  town  hut  herseK ;  and,  secondly,  the
^description  of  her  friend  whom  slie  had  called  to  see  on  the  way  to

Mr.  Myers"  liouse. The  account  of  31r.  could  harfUy  be  applied

to  any  other  friend,  and  is  characteristic  of  some  of  the  points  which
would  strike  a  stranger,  ljut  it  is  not  correct  to  say  that  he  stammers,
.-.ilthough  his  manner  of  speaking  is  remarkably  deliberate.  The  only
hypothesis  to  explain  it  on  any  ground  except  thought-transference  is
that  Mrs.  Piper  had  obtained  accurate  descriptions  of  all  Mrs.  B.'s
iriends  in  Cambridge,  and  liad  accidentally  succeeded  in  guessing  at  the
one  on  wliom  she  had  called  a  few  minutes  before.

Thought-transference  is  enough  to  acc(.unt  for  all  that  was  said,
and  is  strongly  suggested  by  the  error  in  detail  in  the  facts  about  the
•distant  friend,  which  coincided  with  3Irs.  B.'s  own  belief.


G2G


A  Record  of  Observations  of


13.  Norember  29th. Mi:  Oscar  BrownUig.

This  was  a  short  sitting,  Mr.  Browning  following  "Mrs.  B."  The  trance
L'ndeil  after  a  very  few  minutes. Mr.  Browning  gives  the  following  report :

Dr.  Phinuit  told  me  that  I  was  a  good  fellow,  that  I  smoked  too  much,  and
described  a  smoking  cap  which  I  habitually  wear.  He  said  that  there  was  a-
spirit  closely  connected  with  me  named  Mariana — my  mother's  name  ;  that
she  wore  a  cameo  brooch  with  a  head  upon  it,  which  is  quite  true,  and  that
she  wanted  to  know  where  it  was.  He  spoke  also  of  two  other  sjiirits,  William
jxnd  Ai'thur,  elder  brothers  who  are  dead,  the  last  two  who  died,  and  the  only
two  I  knew  well.  He  also  said  that  my  grandfather's  name  was  Thomas,,
which  is,  I  Ijelieve,  true  of  both  my  grandfathers,  and  that  his  wife's  name
was  KSarah.  I  do  not  know  whether  tliis  is  true  or  not.  (Mr.  Browning  sulj-
sequently  found  that  it  was  not  true  of  his  grandmf)ther,  but  that  the  wife  of
an  uncle,  also  a  Thomas,  was  named  Sarah.)  He  also  said  that  I  was  over-
worked, and  should  not  work  so  hai'd,  which  is  probably  true.  He  also  said
that  I  had  had  a  good  deal  of  trouble,  which  is  true,  but  that  it  was  now
coming  to  an  end.  He  ;ilso  spoke  about  an  uncle  George,  but  not  very  clearly.
I  asked  him  where  my  nephews  are,  the  sons  of  Arthur.  He  said  that  one
was  in  Australia  and  one  in  Philadelphia,  but  I  do  not  know  whether  this  is
true.  (Mr.  Bi-owning  has  subsequently  ascertained  that  one  was  in  fact  in
I'hiladelphia  at  the  time  ;  he  was  known  to  be  in  America.  The  other  was-
l)elieved  to  he  in  India,  but  may  have  gone  to  Australia  ;  this  has  not  yet
been  ascertained).  He  also  spoke  of  my  sister,  and  desciibed  her  in  a  way
which  is  absolutely  ti'ue.  At  the  same  time  it  is  not  tlie  iirst  thing  which
would  have  occurred  to  me  to  say  aljout  her,  but  it  probably  would  have  been
the  first  thing  my  mother  would  have  said.

Althougli  many  of  the  matters  stated  by  Phinuit  were  und(_)u])tedly  known
t;)  me,  they  were  not  all  in  my  mind  at  the  time.  After  the  interview  I  had
the  sti'ong  impressi(jn  that  the  communications  came  from  my  mother,  who
had  died  aliout  six  months  before,  although  Phinuit  did  not  at  all  seek  to-
convey  this  impression.

In  this  sitting  tliere  seems  to  ha\"e  been  clear  thought-transference..
It  would  seem  that  hardly  anything  definitely  wrong  was  said  ;  and
J\lr.  Browning  says  that  he  hardly  spoke  at  all,  so  that  no  assistance-
can  have  been  given  by  the  sitter.  The  more  interesting  question
remains  as  to  whether  there  is  evidence  of  more  than  thought-
tran.sference.  This  dej^ends  largely  on  whether  it  is  ultimately  found
out  that  Mr.  Browning's  nephew,  supposed  to  be  in  India,  was  really
in  Australia.  The  fact  that  one  was  in  Philadelphia,  though  this  was
not  known  to  the  sitter,  is  of  less  weight.  The  name  of  the  town  may
b'e  no  more  than  a  bold  guess,  correct  by  chance  ;  and  is  to  some
(extent  discounted  wlien  we  find  that  in  one  of  the  Liverjjool  sittings  a
l)erson  was  wrongly  said  to  be  in  Philadelphia,  in  a  street  which  turns
out  to  be  non-existent.  This  tends  to  prove  that  Philadelphia  is  a
name  used  by  Phinuit  for  pui-posesof  fishing.  Moreover,  Mr  Browning
lias  since  informed  me  that  some  months  ago  his  mother  had  received  a.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


G27


letter  from  the  nephew  in  Philadelphia  and  read  it  to  him,  but  without
informino'  him  where  it  was  written  from.

14.  November  29tli.  Professor  G.  H.  Darwin,  second  sitting.  The
folloivinrj  report  is  given  hij  the  sitter  : —

The  medium  spoke  of  my  sister,  and  corrected  herself  to  sister-in-law,
giving  the  name  right,  and  of  my  brother,  with  no  name,  who  was  very  ill.
The  illness,  although  wrongly  specified,  was  more  or  less  in  the  right  region.
A  spirit  named  D — A — R — W — I — N,  spelt,  not  i)ronounced,  sent  a  message.
I  was  told  that  I  had  two  children  (right),  both  boys  (wrong),  and  that  they
were  good-tempered  (right).  There  was  other  vague  information  about  them
not  worth  recording.  My  father  was  dead  (information  derived  from  previous
sitting),  my  mother  living,  wliich  I  believe  was  also  known  in  the  same  way  ;
certain  ailments  of  my  mother  were  named  (wholly  wrong).  My  wife  was
said  to  have  a  pain  in  the  left  side  which  tlie  medium  localised  exactly,
and  my  wife  was  said  to  think  that  it  was  due  to  her  heart,  but  the  medium
said  it  arose  from  the  spleen.  The  day  before  my  wife  had  complained  of
some  pain  in  the  left  side,  but  it  was  localised  by  the  medium  wrongly  by  six
inches,  and  my  wife  knew  it  was  not  due  to  the  heart  or  spleen  ;  on  this  day
she  had  no  pain.  My  wife  was  said  to  have  had  an  abscess  (wrong).  My
eldest  boy  (a  girl)  was  said  to  suffer  from  relaxed  throat,  but  the  seat  of  the
ailment  was  the  glottis.  She  had  been  having  a  slight  sore  throat  the  day
before,  but  I  think  it  was  nearly  or  quite  well  on  this  day.  She  has
certainly  some  very  slight  tendency  to  stammer.

Almost  every  statement  made  could  have  been  given  if  the  medium  could
have  discovered  my  name  and  a  few  fragments  of  Cambridge  talk  between  the
first  sitting  and  the  second.  The  only  things  which  appear  to  me  even  at
all  remarkable  are  the  statements  about  my  wife  and  child,  which  will  liave
been  seen  to  contain  much  error.  In  the  second  sitting  it  was  agreed  tliat  I
should  not  correct  the  medium  when  wrong,  and  this  appears  to  me  far
preferable  to  the  plan  adopted  in  the  first,  v.dien  she  was  corrected.  I
remain  wholly  unconvinced  either  of  any  remarkable  powers  or  of  thought-
transference.

15.  November  29t]i . Professor  Henry  Sirhpricl:.

The  sitter,  who  was,  like  the  others,  introduced  anonyniLiusly,  v.'as
apparently  regarded  at  once  as  tlie  husband  of  the  lady  of  Sitting  8,  and
told  that  he  had  no  children  ;  that  his  father  was  William,  and  was  in  the
spirit;  that  he  was  a  doctor  of  laws,  that  is,  a  doctor  of  "study,"  not  of
medicine.  This  was  all  riglit.  He  was  then  told  that  liis  wife  was  sitting  in
a  large  chair,  talking  to  another  lady,  and  wearing  something  on  her  head.
This  was  so  far  right  ;  Mrs.  Sidgwick  was  at  the  time  sitting  as  described,
with  a  blue  handkerchief  on  her  head,  put  on  with  a  view  to  the  experiment,
and  talking  to  Miss  Alice  Johnson.  It  was,  however,  wrongly  stated  that
she  was  in  a  room  "  on  tlie  light-hand  side  of  your  apjirtment  as  you  go  in,"
and  that  the  lady  with  her  had  a  bonnet  on.  He  was  afterwards  correctly  said
to  have  two  brothers,  the  eldest  William,  mid  was  told  that  his  own  name  was
Henry.  A  "fairly  correct"  account  of  his  brother  William  was  given.  But
all  this  was  mixed  up  with  so  large  a  proportion  of  untrue,  unverifiable,  or  con-
fused statements,  as  almost  entirely  to  deprive  tlie  sitting  of  evidential  value.


G28


A  Record  of  Ohscrvaftonn  of


1C>.  Noreni.he)- 3Qtii. Professor  0.  Loilge.  See  It'ts  ddailed  rq^ort,  2}-
17.  Deeember  1st. Dr.  A.  T.  Mijers.

The  sitter'.s  ailments  were  pretty  correctly  descrilicd,  and  some  old-
fashioned  remedies  were  recommended  for  them.  He  was  .said  to  have  been
at  school  at  "  Chelter  "  (Cheltenham  ?).  Several  names  were  given  as  those
of  friends,  but  were  ncjt  in  any  case  recognised.  The  sitting  is  of  no  value
as  evidence.

18.  December  1st. Mr.  A.  Hierl-Denmco.

Mr.  Deronco  is  a  German  gentleman  who  resided  for  some  time  at
Cambridge,  and  was  well  known  to  Mr.  Myers.

Tlie  sitter  was  told  that  he  had  a  friend  in  the  body  named  Edward
(wrong).  Was  asked  if  he  knew  Williams?  jSTo.  "That  ring  has  your
mother's  influence  :  you  have  had  it  a  long  time.  (Right.)  There  has  been
a  little  difticulty  here,  near  the  lieart  ;  your  brother  has  had  it.  (Right.)
Another  ring,  a  newer  influence  ;  you  have  not  had  this  so  long."  (Riglit.)  He
was  told  then  about  his  mother.  "She  is  in  the  body  ;  she  has  headaches.
(Right.)  She  is  lying  down,  not  in  bed,  not  very  far  away,  in  another
person's  house."  On  inquiry,  Mr.  Deronco  found  that  his  mother  was  at  the
time  lying  on  a  sofa,  but  she  was  in  her  own  house,  and  a  long  way  off,  in
Germany.  Then  followed  various  confused  and  apparently  wrong  state-
ments. Then  :  ' '  Your  brother  had  trouble  with  a  cougli,  and  on  close
examination  they  found  that  the  nerve  of  the  heart  was  weak.  He  has  had
a  sniall  gastric  difiiculty.  He  is  a  smart  fellow,  a  good  brain,  writes  a  good
deal."  All  tliis  Mr.  Deronco  .says  is  right.  "Your  brother  is  older  and
taller  tlian  you.  A  different  type  of  man."  (Right.)  The  name  Anna  was
given  and  rec(.tgnised.  "  A  spirit  named  Mariana  Brinvning  sends  her  love
to  her  son  George."  (See  sitting  No.  12.  Mrs.  Browning  liad  a  brother
George,  but  no  son  of  that  name.)  Mr.  Deronco's  brotlier  was  de-
scribed as  "going  into  a  large  building  wliere  there  area  lot  of  books;
then  into  an  oftice-like  place,  with  a  desk  in  it  and  writing  materials.  A
dark  fellow,  called  John,  with  him,  who  is  dishonest."  This  was  all  wrong.
Then,  after  much  hesitation,  the  medium  said  that  Mr.  Deronc(_)'s  brother  was
]>ainthig  a  picture.  Asked:  "  Are  there  many  figures  ?"  Dr.  Phinuit  said  :
"  I  sec  one  head  ;  it  is  side-face."  It  appeared,  after  inquiry  in  Germany,
tliat  Mr.  Deronco's  In-other  ' '  was  at  tliat  moment  jminting,  and  that  the
picture  was  really  a  portrait  of  J\Ianfred,  a  single  figure  en  profil."  Dr.
Phinuit  also  made  some  statements  as  to  Mr.  Deronco's  past  history,  which
were  true,  Vmt  which  are  not  for  publication.  He  was  also  told  correctly
that  he  liad  one  cousin  Max  and  another  Albert.  At  the  beginning  of  the
.sitting  he  was  said  to  be  "kind  of  French."  At  the  end  he  was  told  :
"  You  are  not  French  but  German."

The  statements  in  this  sitting  were  mostly  riglit  ;  if  taken  by
theuiseh'es  they  might  possibly  admit  the  supposition  of  chance
success.

19.  Professor  A.  MacAlister,  F.E.S. December  2iul. See  p.  (iQ3.

20.  Mrs.  H.  Sidijwkl. Second  sitting. December  3rd.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  was  now  clearly  identified  as  the  wife  of the  sitLer


Certain  Phenomena  of  Tranre.


629


of  Xo.  15.  "I  saw  you  througli  the  medium,  I  saw  you  talking  to  another
Jady. "  (See  Sitting  15.)  Frank  was  now  clearly  identified  as  a  brother.
"  Who  is  Hellener  l  "  may  have  been  an  attempt  to  get  at  Mrs.  Sidgwick's
Christian  name,  Eleanor,  but  looks  susiiiciously  like  a  fishing  question.  A
lady  friend  with  toothache  was  not  identified.  Various  unrecognised  name's
were  given.  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  mother  and  her  house  were  minutely  but  quite
wrongly  described.  Frank,  Artliur,  Charles,  and  Edward  were  given  as  the
names  of  her  brothers  ;  the  two  first  were  right,  and  Charles  is  the  second
jiame  of  another  deceased  brother,  but  not  the  one  by  which  he  was  always
called. Her  husband's  surname  was  given  as  "  Hedgwick,  Hedgestone. "

The  answei's  to  various  test-questions  put  by  Mi's.  Sidgwick  wei'e
promised  Init  iiever  given. In  short,  the  sitting  A\  as  a  failure.

21.  Mi:  T.  Barkivortli. Dcremhcr  3nl. ,SVc  2'-  <>0«.

22.  Professor  H.  Hiihjrrii:];. Second  sittiiuj. JJi'Ceinhi:r  Afh.

The  statements  made  at  this  sitting  appear  t(j  have  been  wholly
Avrong,  except  in  so  far  as  they  were  repetitions  <it'  what  had  been
previously  said  either  to  Pi'ofessor  ov  Mrs.  Sidgwick.

23.  Professor  C.  Bidu't. December  Gtli. See  Ids  s]peciul  report,  p.  018.

24.  Miss  X. December  7th.

Miss  X.  was  introduced,  veiled,  to  the  medium  in  the  trance  state,
immediately  after  her  arri^•al  at  Mr.  IMyers'  house.  She  was  at  once
recognised,  and  named.  "You  are  a  medium;  you  write  when  you  don't
want  to.  You  have  got  Mr.  E.'s  influence  about  you.  Tliis  is  Miss  X.
that  I  told  you  about."  She  was  subsequently  addressed  l)y  her  Christian
name,  one  of  similar  sound  being  first  used  but  corrected  immediately.

A  large  part  of  the  statements  made  at  tliis  and  the  following
sittings  were  quite  correct,  but  in  nearly  all  cases  (.)f  so  pri^'ate  and
personal  a  natui-e  that  it  is  impossible  to  publish  them.  Only  fragments,
therefore,  can  he  given,  with  the  proper  names  omitted.  But  these
sittings  were  pei'haps  the  most  successful  and  c(.)nvincing  of  the  whole
series.

"  You  know  that  military-looking  gentleman  with  the  big  coat  on  and  the
funny  buttons  on  the  pads  here,  on  the  collar.  It  is  someone  A^ery  near  you
in  the  spirit. "  This  is  a  correct  description,  so  far  ;is  it  goes,  of  a  near
relation.

"  Howells  speaks  ;  he  tells  me  he  knows  the  Martins,  your  friends  ;  tliey
know  one  of  my  books." These  names  were  not  recognised.

"  Y^ou  see  flowers  sometimes  (Asked,  "What  is  my  favourite  flower  1
There  is  a  spirit  who  would  know.")  "Pansies.  No,  delicate  pink  roses.
You  have  tliem  about  you,  spiritually  as  well  as  physically."  Miss  X.  has
on  a  certain  day  in  every  montli  a  present  of  delicate  pink  roses.  She
frequently  has  hallucinatory  visions  of  flowers.

"  There  is  an  old  lady  in  the  spirit  wearing  a  caj)  who  is  fond  of  you —
your  grandmother.  She  is  the  mother  of  the  clergyman's  wife's  motlier.  (Not
correct.)  She  wears  a  lace  collar  and  a  lug  brooch,  bluisli-grey  eyes,  dark  liair


630


A  Record  of  Observations  of


turned  greyisli,  with  a  black  ribbon  running  througli  it  ;  rather  prominent
nose,  and  peaked  chin  ;  named  Anne."  Tliis  is  a  correct  description  of  a
friend  of  Miss  X.,  whom  she  was  in  the  habit  of  calling  Granny.

On  two  occasions  Dr.  Phinuit  desired  that  witnesses  should  leave
the  room,  a  request  which  as  it  hapjjens  was  quite  justilied  by  the  very
personal  and  private  nature  of  the  facts  which  he  quite  correctly  com-
municated. Intermixed  with  these  were  the  followin<>-,  which  Miss  X.
supplies  from  her  own  notes,  made  on  each  occasion  within  two  or  three
hours.  Dr.  Phinuit  described  an  entertainment  at  which  Miss  X.  had
been  present,  her  position  in  the  room,  the  appearance  of  her  companion,
including  a  mai'ked  personal  jieculiarity,  and  its  cause,  giving  the
Christian  name  of  the  same  friend  and  the  suV)ject  of  their  convei-sation,
and  the  cii'cumstances  of  Miss  X.'s  return  home — all  with  absolute
correctness,  except  as  to  time,  which  was  said  to  have  been  "last
evening,"  whereas  it  was  the  evening  before.

25.  3Iit;s  X. Second  sitthnj. December  8th.

Professor  Charles  Piichet  and  Walter  Leaf  were  also  present ;  the
latter  only  for  a  few  minutes  at  the  beginning.  He  was  at  once  called
"VVfdter  when  the  trance  came  on,  hut  the  evidential  value  of  this  is
diminished  by  the  fact  that  Mi-.  Myers  had  accidentally  used  his
surname  in  the  medium's  presence  before  the  trance.  It  was  added,
"  Walter  has  a  stiff  arin,"  which  may  be  a  reference  to  his  having
suffered  from  writer's  cramp  ;  but  this  was  not  alluded  to  in  subsequent
sittings.

Miss  X.  was  told  that  her  mother's  sister  was  named  Sarah.  It  was  said
that  she  was  in  the  body,  but  this  was  corrected  to  "  in  tlie  spirit  "  after  a

question. Her  l^rothers'  names  were  given  as  G  ,  A  ,  W  ,  A — ■ — ,

B  ,  correctly,  all  but  B  being  very  common  ;  but  in  the  case  of  A

and  B  only  at  the  secoiid  attemjjb,  .John  and  Walter  having  been  first

given  instead. W  was  the  name  of  a  brotlier  who  had  died  in  infancy,.

and  whom  Miss  X.  had  never  known.  Bliss  X.  at  first  denied  that  tlie  name:
was  coiTect,  liaving  usually  heard  of  him  Ijy  his  second  name  H  ,  but  after-
wards rem&mljered  that  W  was  correct. She  was  furtlier  told  riglitly

that  A was  an  artist,  and  B the  handsomest  of  the  family.  A

medallion  which  slie  showed  was  stated  to  be  given  by  a  friend  whose  very
rare  Cliristian  and  surname  were  riglitly  obtained,  the  one  after  hesitation
but  no  false  shots,  the  other  at  the  second  attempt.

Two  names  of  which  Professor  Eicliet  had  been  thinking  were  given
without  any  connexion.  They  were  "Louise"  and  "Adele."  (See  his
report. )

26.  il//.ss  A'. ThirJ  sltthvj. December  9th.

Experiments  were  tried  in  the  reading  of  closed  envelopes,  but
without  success.  The  question  was  asked,  "  What  was  the  name  of
the  spirit  which  communicated  with  Richet  at  the  first  seance  he  ever
attendetl  1 "  and  the  incorrect  answer  "  Marianne  "  was  given.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


631


Mrs.  Piper  now  left  Cambridge  and  came  to  London,  where  the
following  sittings,  to  No.  35,  took  place,  at  her  lodgings,  No.  27,
Montagu-street,  "VV.C.

27.  Mr.  F. December  llth.

Mr.  F.,  a  member  of  the  Council  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Kesearch,  wishes  his  name  to  be  kept  private.  After  describing  the
phenomena  of  the  trance,  he  continues  : —

The  personification,  which  I  shall  speak  of  as  "  tlie  doctor,"  claimed  to
be  a  departed  spirit,  and  professed  to  see  confusedly  my  friends,  <ainouncing
correctly  the  persons  of  my  fatlier's  family,  and  nearly  coirectly  of  my  own.
He  seemed  to  be  trying  by  guesses  and  questions  to  extract  as  well  as  to
give  information.  Many  of  his  statements  were  wholly,  and  some  partially,
incorrect,  but  some  of  them  were  so  imaccoiuitably  correct  that  they  are
worthy  of  record. It  seems  impossible  that  they  were  mere  guesses.

The  doctor  said  that  I  had  an  uncle  named  William,  but  I  could  recol-
lect no  one  of  an  older  generation  of  this  name,  and  said  so.  He  reialied
that  he  was  certainly  right,  and  asked  me  to  think  it  over  carefully.  After
some  rambling,  he  came  back  to  the  subject,  and  said  that  he  was  certainly
right,  and  that  the  portrait  of  my  uncle  William  was  just  to  the  left  as  one
would  enter  my  room,  and  that  it  was  a  superior  painting.  I  then,  for  the
fu-st  time,  remembered  that  I  had  a  great-uncle  of  this  name  whom  I  had
never  seen,  and  whose  portrait  hung  in  the  place  named.  No  one  out  of  my
family,  and,  indeed,  not  all  the  members  of  it,  knew  his  name,  which  had
scarcely  ever  been  mentioned  iir  our  h(.)me  conversations.  The  doctor  said
that  he  was  a  good  and  able  man.  The  facts  are  that  his  principal  distinction
had  been  in  his  intimate  association  with  Wilberforce  and  Clarkson  in  tlie
agitation  for  the  abolition  of  the  slave  trade.

The  doctor  stated  that  my  father  was  deaf  in  the  left  ear.  Ho  was  deaf
in  one  ear,  which  I  believe  to  liave  been  the  left.  Standing  alone  this  might,
seem  a  mere  guess.

He  stated  that  I  had  lost  a  child,  six  or  seven  years  old,  of  scarlet  fever..
This  was  true,  save  the  age,  which  was  10  years.  He  also  said  that  I  had
lost  a  child  in  infancy,  which  was  true  of  a  child  of  five  years.

He  said  that  I  had  lost  a  near  relative,  named  Mary,  by  cancer,  which
was  true  of  a  sister-in-law  ;  but  he  added  the  name  of  Caroline,  which  was-
incorrect.

He  said  that  my  son  had  an  intimate  friend  named  Harold,  which  was
true,  but  added  that  his  father  was  watching  him  from,  the  spirit-world.  His
father  is  alive.

He  said  that  I  had  supposed  myself  likely  to  die  of  heart  disease,  but
that  I  had  a  heart  in  good  action,  and  reliable  till  I  should  reach  a  hundred
years,  and  that  whatever  might  be  the  symptoms,  they  came  from  the  spleen,
and  meant  no  danger.  The  facts  are,  that  about  eight  years  ago  several
physicians  had  told  me  that  I  had  not  long  to  live,  because  of  the  diseased
action  of  my  heart  ;  but  this  proved  to  be  an  entire  mistake,  as  I  am  now
ecpial  to  long  and  swift  ascents  without  inconvenience.

He  said  that  my  younger  brother  suffered  from  a  weakening  diarrhcsa,


A  Record  of  Ohser  vat  io  ns  of


which  weakened  his  bh.ioJ,  and  that  he  (jver-exerted  himself.  Tliis  is  prc-
'cisely  true.

Had  I  sujjposed  the  doctor  to  be  an  individual,  or  personality,  I  sliould
liave  .said  tliat  he  was  a  coar.se,  crafty  person,  endeavouring  by  leading
■st.atements,  probable  in  the  history  of  anyone  at  my  time  of  life,  to
ni:ike  .successful  guesses,  and  get  out  information  from  me.  I  noted  that
Avhen  I  corrected  any  statement  he  would  pass  on  to  other  things,  and  after
i\  time  make  the  statement  according  to  iTiy  correction.  Yet  I  gave  no  clue
to  the  remarkable  descriptions,  whiuli  were  correct.

But  after  malting  every  allowance  for  tliis,  ;ind  after  reck<jning  all
tlie  numerou.s  ermrs,  some  of  the  statements  fi'oin  one  who  till  a  few  hours
before  was  a  j)erfect  stranger  from  across  the  Atlantic,  not  known  to  a  single
memljer  of  my  family,  and  never  a  visitor  to  my  house,  were  so  remarkable
as  to  convince  me  of  a  real  and  subtle  jjower  at  w<jrk  which  is  beyond  my
solution,  but  which  I  attribute  to  mind-transference.

In  this  sitting  the  most  noticeable  points  are  the  exact  location  of
tlie  uncle's  portrait,  as  a  means  of  recalling  him  to  the  sitter's  memory;
■and  the  singulai'ly  accurate  statements  about  his  past  illness.  .

28.  Mi\  F. Hrcoiul  xittiiuj. iJrrrmhrr  12///.

Mrs.  Piper  again  to-day  went  into  the  most  singular  condition  of  seeming
to  be  acted  upon  by  the  French  "doctor."  She  told  correctly  that  my
nrotlier  had  died  while  I  was  beyond  a  great  \vater.  I  was  at  the  time  in
Switzerland  and  my  mother  in  America,  the  year  being  1874.  The  doctor
dwelt  on  a  Thomas  connected  with  my  father's  family,  and  on  a  Mary  given
to  drinking.  A  Scotcli  gardener  named  Thomas  was  a  very  prominent
memlDer  of  my  father's  household  foi'  nearly  thirty  years,  and  his  wife  Mary
was  intemperate.  He  described  my  elder  l)rother  as  living  among  and
wilting  books,  and  said  emphatically,  "Your  older,  not  your  younger
brotlier. "  My  older  brother  was  a  librarian,  and  passed  liis  life  among  books,
aiid  also  wi'ote  s(jme  works.

But  a  descriptiiin  of  my  uncle  William  l)efcire  referred  t(.)  and  of  liis
<)ccupati(jn  was  almost  wholly  wrong  ;  he  was  said  to  be  a  military  otticer  in
■care  of  W(_iunded  men,  whereas  he  was  a  Quaker  philantliropist.  The
2)erformanee  was  thoroughly  unsatisfactory,  and  I  gave  my  place  to  Miss  C.

The  whole  thing,  tlie  convulsions  at  the  beginning  and  end,  the  coarse
voice,  the  rough,  familiar  and  half  profane  words  used  in  the  conversation,
the  manifest  efl'ort  to  hedge  when  a  mistake  liad  been  made,  and  the
pr<jfanation  of  sacred  memories  by  idle,  unmeaning,  and  mostly  untrue  or
imly  half  true  statements,  all  left  a  profound  sense  of  distress  on  my  mind,
iind  an  unwillingness,  save  for  the  sake  of  duty,  to  enter  on  such  a  jjer-
formance  again.  Yet  I  am  utterly  unable  to  conceive  of  how  tlie  statements
■should  be  occasi(.)nally  so  strangely  true,  sa^^e  )jy  the  process  of  unconscious
mind-transference,  and  this  I  have  to  acknowledge  only  imperfectly  accounts
for  all  the  facts.

29.  Gn-trtnle  C. First  sHiiiuj. Lkannhrr  12th.

This  sitting  was  a  continuation  of  that  of  Mr.  F.  Notes  taken  by
Dr.  Myers. Miss  Gertrude  and  Miss  Emily  C.  are  sisters  of  Mrs.  A.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


63^


and  Mi's.  B.  The  leal  names  are  not  given  lov  reasons  explained  in  the-
note  to  Mrs.  A.'s  sitting.  Only  an  outline  of  the  sittings  is  published,
as  the  really  evidential  statements  were  of  so  confidential  a  character
that  they  cannot  l)e  made  known.  Miss  C.  was  introduced  as  "Miss
Jones.''

The  sitting  began  witli  a  repetition  of  vari(.)us  tilings  wliich  had  been
already  told  to  Mrs.  A.  and  Mrs.  B.  Mrs.  B.'s  husband  was  mentioned  by
liis  Christian  and  surname,  but  the  usual  wrong  description  of  his  character
was  given.  "Gertrude"  was  mentioned  l)y  name,  but  apparently  not
identified  at  first  witli  the  sitter.  Dr.  PInnuit  promised  to  give  the  name  of
Mrs.  A.'s  husband,  but  never  did  so.  A  personal  description  of  a  friend
was  given,  whicli  was  right,  but  of  no  evidential  value,  as  tlie  friend  in
question  was  ah'eady  well  known  to  the  medium.  He  was  said  to  have  a
brother  William,  which  was  wrong  ;  and  a  young  cousin  in  the  spirit-world,
but  witliout  any  desciiption  ])y  which  she  could  be  identified.  Several  names
were  mentioned  which  the  sitter  could  not  connect  with  anyone.

30.  Mr.  Walter  Leaf . Ihrrmhcr  12th.

Pliinuifc  made  a  number  of  statements  about  my  family,  some  right  but
more  wrong.  He  said  that  my  mother  had  two  sisters,  which  was  corrected
into  "there  are  two  mother's  sisters;  that's  your  mother,  that  is  one,  and
lier  sister,  that  is  two."  In  this  form  it  is  correct.  He  wrongly  said  that
my  aunt  lived  at  some  distance  from  us,  and  tliat  she  suffered  from  her
stomach  ;  but  riglitly  that  slie  suffered  from  lier  throat.  He  afterwards  gave
a  fairly  good  acc(  lunt  of  her  cliaracter  :  ' '  she  is  almighty  set.  Not  obstinate,
but  fixed  in  her  ways  ;  she  has  ideas  and  you  can't  change  them,  old-maidish
in  fact.  She  is  very  generous  and  does  lots  of  good."  My  mother's  brother
was  wrongly  said  to  have  died  long  ago.

I  was  wrongly  told  that  I  liad  two  brothers.  One  was  said  to  suffer  from
headaches  througli  the  temples.  This  I  denied  at  the  time,  but  afterwards
found  was  correct.  Tlie  other  was  said  to  have  died  long  ago.  This  is  quite
wrong ;  I  never  had  a  second  V>rother.  I  was  rightly  told  that  1  had  no  sisters.
I  was  also  told  there  was  William,  whose  inffuence  was  round  me.  This  is
true,  as  I  have  liad  a  grandfatlier,  an  uncle,  and  two  cousins  of  that  name.
In  a  later  sitting  William  was  said  to  be  my  fathei',  wliicli  is  wrong.

A  message  was  given  jjurporting  to  come  from  Eduumd  Gurney.  In  the
course  of  it  I  was  told  "there  are  two  letters,  one  about  an  appointment,
one  about  an  engagement. "  I  asked,  "  Wliat  sort  of  engagement  ?  "  "  It  is
an  engagement  aliout  work  and  studies.  The  letter  is  in  a  little  drawer
in  the  desk  ;  look  at  it  and  read  it  over."  When  tins  was  said,  I
remembered  tliat  I  had  kejit  a  letter  written  to  me  many  yeais  ago  hy
Ednmnd  Gurney,  announcing  his  engagement  to  be  married.  This  I  knew
would  be  in  a  certain  drawer  in  my  desk.  On  looking,  I  found  that  there
were,  in  fact,  two  letters,  botli  on  the  same  subject,  one  of  which  I  liad
forgotten. Neither  of  tliem  was  in  connexion  with  work  or  studies.

Various  names  were  given  as  those  of  friends  of  nnne,  but  I  did  not
recognise  any  of  them.  Dr.  Myers  was  sent  out  of  the  I'oom,  and  various
statements  about  my  private  affairs  were  made,  some  of  winch  were  qinte
wrong. Others  were  right,  but  I  do  not  regard  them  as  being  of  an  evi-


634


A  Record  of  Ohservations  of


deutial  nature,  as  tliey  might  possiljly  have  been  acciuired  from  ancjther  of
Mrs.  Piper's  sitters.  Nothing  in  tlie  sitting  can  be  regarded  as  of  any
importance,  as  it  is  certainly  witliin  the  range  of  successful  guessing  that
I  should  liave  kept  two  letters  from  Edmund  Gvn-ney.

31.  Miss  Gertrude  C. Second  sitting. December  13tl(.

Dr.  Phinuit  began  hy  announcing  that  he  had  again  seen  Miss  C.'s
father,  and  said  that  he  was  born  in  Ireland.  Asked  "  Where  ?  "  he  said,
fifter  much  hesitation  and  confusion,  "In  the  northern  part,  near
D— 0— L— I— N."  This  is  wrong;  Miss  C.'s  father  Avas  born  in
Cork.  Two  of  the  sisters  were  described,  with  some  correctness.  ''Then
there  is  another;  she  is  musical."  This  must  refer  to  the  sitter.  "A.
is  a  friend  of  the  one  who  plays  ;  she  paints  a  little  and  plays  a  little."
Miss  Gertrude  C.  has  a  friend  named  A.  who  plays  a  little,  l)ut  does  not
paint.

The  eldest  brother,  liitherto  si^oken  of  by  Dr.  Pliiuuit  l^y  liis  first  name
Timothy,  is  now  called  by  his  seccjnd  name  Frank,  that  by  which  he  is
always  known  in  the  family.  The  Christian  name  of  the  thii'd  sister  was
also  given  for  the  first  time,  with  the  remark,  "  It  is  a  queer  name."

An  attempt  to  get  Dr.  Phinuit  to  read  the  contents  of  a  sealed  envelope,
in  which  was  a  piece  of  paper  with  the  v/ords  "  Iliad,"  "La France,"  written
by  Dr.  Myers  but  not  known  to  Miss  C,  was  a  complete  failure.  The
■envelope  was  said  to  contain  a  lock  of  Frank's  hair.

"  Then  there  is  a  Mary  in  the  spirit  ;  Mary — something  with  an  X  ;
M— U— L— L— E— R.  (Miss  C.  supplied  Max.)  She  had  dark  brown  hair
find  was  very  intimate  with  you.  You  went  to  school  together.  Slie  talks
of  you." This  is  correct.

Miss  C.  :  "Do  you  know  Freddy  ?  "

"Yes,  I  tried  to  tell  you  about  him  before,  but  I  could  not  get  at  liis  name.
F— R— E— D— E— R— I— C— K  is  his  name.  You  call  him  Freddy.  He
liked  you  very  mucli,  he  thinks  of  you.  Do  you  know  his  father  ?  He
passed  out  of  the  body  after  Freddy."  It  is  true  tliat  the  friend  referred  to
died  before  his  father.

"Mary  Max  Miiller  told  me  to  ask  Gertrude  if  she  remembers  when  she
went  to  school  with  her.  She  tliinks  of  you  and  says  you  were  very  bright.
She  passed  out  of  the  body  with  consumption  ;  slie  had  a  cough  ;  she  is
trying  to  get  back  and  talk  to  you.  She  v.'ill  come."  Tlie  lady  in  question
died  of  heart  disease,  not  of  consumption.

The  sitting  closed  with  a  very  caustic  but  true  and  characteristic  account
of  an  aunt,  expressed  witli  mucli  humour.

With  respect  to  the  confidential  statements  at  this  and  the  preceding
sitting,  Miss  Gertrude  C.  writes  : —

When- Dr.  Phinuit  sent  Dr.  Myers  out  of  the  room,  at  the  first  sitting,  ifc
was  to  tell  me  about  a  friend  of  mine  whose  conjugal  relations  were  rather
complicated.  Dr.  Phinuit  did  not  commit  himself  to  very  definite  facts,  Vjut
as  far  as  he  went  he  was  correct.  At  the  moment  this  friend  \\-as  mucli  on  my
mind.  And  Dr.  Phinuit  said  S(jme  things  about  her  character,  ^n\t  nothing
out  of  the  way. He  gave  no  name  nor  attempt  at  any.

The  facts  he  told  me  about  myself  were  certainly  sucli  as  he  would  not


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


635


have  been  likely  to  guess  at,  and  he  nienti(jnecl  names  wliich  lie  Iiad  no
possible  reason  for  connecting  with  me.  The  facts  he  told  were  rather
striking,  and  so  far  as  one  can  tell  were  not  known  to  anyone  but  myself.
Here  he  did  commit  himself  to  definite  facts,  and  true  ones  too,  which  could
not  have  referred  to  any  but  one  person.

32.  Mr.  H.  D.  Rollcstvn,  M.B. December  13th.

IVIr.  RoUeston  was  introduced  as  Mr.  Johnson.  A  few  correct
statements  were  made  to  him,  among  a  large  number  that  were  wrong.
The  correct  statements  were  : —

That  his  family  consisted  of  seven  persons  ;  tliat  F.  0.  was  a  friend  and  a
good  one,  mentally  in  sympathy,  trustworthy  and  sensible.  (This  is  per-
fectly correct  ;  the  Cliristian  and  surname  vrere  gi\'en  riglitly,  thougli  it
should  be  added  that  tliey  are  both  rather  common.)  That  a  friend  lias
taken  a  trip  on  the  continent  because  his  throat  and  chest  trouble  him.  (A
hrother  had  started  a  few  days  before  for  the  South  of  Europe  witli  cough  and
a  little  bronchitis,  but  mainly  on  account  of  heart  trouble  after  rheumatism. )
One  of  the  brothers  was  correctly  said  to  be  named  Willie.  A  few  more
vague  statements  were  approximately  correct,  but  of  no  value.

The  only  point  of  interest  is  the  mention  of  F.  C.  Even  though  the
names  were  not  unusual,  the  chances  are  evidently  enormous  against
their  being  rightly  combined  for  a  casual  sitter.  The  lady  in  question
had  no  connexion  whatever  with  any  other  sitters,  nor  was  her  name
mentioned  by  Dr.  Phinuit  before  or  after.  She  was  irot  living  in
Xiondon,  and  it  is  almost  impossible  to  suppose  tliat  the  fact  had  been
got  up.

33.  Miss  Emily  C. First  sittiiu/. December  im.

Miss  C.  was  introduced  as  Mrs.  Robinson.  Notes  were  taken  by
Dr.  Myers.

Miss  C.  was  immediately  recognised  by  lier  Christian  name,  and  told  slie
had  been  polishing  something  shiny.  Miss  C.  had  that  morning  been
polishing  some  photographic  slides,  a  job  which  had  been  giving  her  a  great
■deal  of  trouljle  and  work.

Dr.  Phinuit  mentioned  the  Christian  name  of  a  fi-iend  wliicli  Miss  C.
xecognised  and  told  some  details  which  were  partly  ti'ue.  He  tlien  mentioned
fill  her  brotliers  and  sisters  by  name,  as  well  as  Mrs.  B.  's  husband.  All  tliese
names  had  been  previously  given  to  the  other  sitters.  He  asked  after  Mrs.
A.'s  little  boy,  but  not  by  name.

Miss  C.  :  "  Do  you  know  Isabel's  husband  ?  "

"Yes,  I  like  him.  I  will  try  and  find  his  name.  Is  it  Richard  ?  (Wrong.)
Do  you  know  Henry?  He  is  Isabel's  husband's  brother."  (Riglit.)  Dr.
Phinuit  said  there  was  a  relation  of  Mis.  A.  and  her  husband  called  Knight,
wild  is  not  recognised,  though  they  have  a  connexion  by  marriage  who  is  a
knight.  Messages  were  then  given  from  Miss  C.'s  father  and  mother  of  the
same  import  as  those  told  to  the  other  sitters.

A  fairly  accurate  description  of  . another  friend,  wlio  was  named,  vras  then


63G


A  Record  of  Ohservations  of


given.  '■  YdU  liave  an  uncle  C.  in  the  spirit-world  and  nu  aunt  by  marriage
called  Jane.  Yi.iu  have  a  cousin  C.  and  an  aunt  whose  name  ends  in  — on.
You  have  an  aunt  E.  ;  you  also  have  an  aunt  who  is  a  long  w^ay  off.

Of  the  ijreceding  statements  it  is  true  that  Miss  C.  has  an  uncle  C.  iw
the  spirit,  a  cousin  C,  and  an  aunt  of  the  name  given  (the  same-
who  had  been  j)reviously  de.scribed  to  Miss  Gertrude  C).  She  has-
anotlier  aunt  who  is  in  tlie  South  of  Fi-a.nce.  She  had  an  ;iunt  Jane^
luit  l^y  Ijlood,  not  by  marriage.  It  is  po.ssible,  however,  that  Dr.
Phiuuit  was  alluding  to  an  intimate  friend  called  Jane,  whose  name
ends  in  — on,  and  who  is  sometimes  jocularly  called  aunt.  In  the-
next  sitting  Miss  C.  was  told  that  it  was  her  friend  Jane,  not  an
aunt,  who  was  referred  to.  (See  also  end  of  Mrs.  Yerrall's  second
sitting,  p.  589.)

Miss  C.  :  "  Do  you  know  E.  in  the  spirit-world  '?  "

"I  have  seen  her  and  she  sends  you  her  love."  Dr.  Phinuit  gave  a  slight):
description  of  E.,  which  ^vas  right  as  far  as  it  went.  "  Slie  was  ^'ery  fond  of
you,  Emily  ;  she  had  some  trouble  with  her  head,  and  died  in  child-birth.'"
(This  is  right,  but  there  is  some  confusion  between  the  names  E.  and  Ada.)
Dr.  Phinuit  then  returned  to  the  brothers'  names,  which  he  got  confused,
trying  to  make  out  that  there  was  a  third  brother  of  the  name  of  Frederic,
who  was  afterwards  said  to  he  Dr.  Myers'  brother.  Dr.  Myers  spoke  of
Miss  C.  as  Mrs.  Robinson,  a  name  which  Dr.  Phinuit  indignantlj'  re])udiated.
"  That  lady's  name  is  Emily. She  is  not  Mrs."

"  You  have  a  friend  called  H  ..."  (The  name  given  is  a  very  unusual
one,  probahly  uiuque  as  a  Christian  name.  Miss  C.  had  a  note  addressed  to
him  in  her  mufl',  which  was  lying  ou  the  table.  A  clever  conjurer  could  nt>
doubt  have  taken  an  opportunity  of  seeing  this.)

Miss  C.  asked  after  another  friend  by  name.  Dr.  Phinuit  said  he  knew
lier,  but  described  her  personal  appearance  vaguely  and  not  correctlj'.  ' '  You
have  an  uncle  who  is  a  little  lame  and  gouty."  (Right.)  To  Dr.  Myers:
"She  has  been  polishing  glass  ;  glass  things  to  drink  out  of . "  (See  above.)
"You  darned  a  lot  of  white  linen  about  a  week  ago."  (Wrong.)  A.  was
again  mentioned.  (See  Miss  Gertrude  C.'s  sitting,  ]).  (>34.)  "  She  is  dark  and
has  dark  eyes  ;  she  is  not  exactly  prettj',  ljut  nice-looking."  (Right.)  MLss  C.
was  said  to  ))e  mote  like  her  father  than  any  of  tlic  family.  This  would  prob-
ably be  generallj'  said.

34.  il/ZsN  Emily  C. Second  sifflmj. Ikccmher  Kith.

Full  notes  taken  by  Walter  Leaf.

The  sitting  began  with  some  confusion  as  to  tlie  brothers'  names.  Miss  C.
was  told  that  she  had  lost  a  purse  some  time  ago.  Tliis  is  wrong.  Some
Christian  names  were  given  but  not  recognised.  H.  .  .  .,  who  was  spr)ken  of
in  the  last  sitting,  was  again  mentioned,  and  said  to  be  a  friend,  but  not  much
of  a  friend.  Dr  Phinuit  said  he  knew  his  father,  and  mother,  and  brother.
(These  form  his  family.)  Asked  the  name  of  his  l)rother,  he  failed  to  give  it,
but  said  tliat  the  bi'other  "was  drowned;  ho  passed  out  in  the  water."
(H.'s  brother  died  and  was  buried  at  sea.)

A  photograph  of  Edmund  Gurney  was  given  to  the  medium,  who  pressed
it  against  her  forehead,  front  outwards,  without  looking  at  it,  so  far  as  could
be  seen. It  was  correctly  recognised. Anotlier  photograph  of  a  deceased


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


637


friend  of  W.  L.'s  was  then  given  to  her,  but  she  coukl  make  nothing  of  it.  A
sealed  letter,  the  contents  of  whicli  were  known  to  Miss  C,  was  given  her.
(The  note  was  to  tlie  efiect  that  the  writer's  sister  had  got  the  influenza,  and
could  not  come  to  keep  an  appointment.)

Dr.  P.  :  C)h,  there  is  an  illness  described  in  there.

Miss  C.  :  "  What  sort  of  illness  ?  Bad  ?  "

Dr.  P.  :  No,  a  very  slight  one,  the  illness  of  a  friend.  (After  some  more
questioning. ) It  is  a  friend,  and  she  has  a  cold,  and  the  thing  is  chiefly  that.

Another  letter  was  shown,  the  contents  of  wliich  were  not  known  to
Miss  C. This  was  said  to  be  an  invitation  ;  wrongly.

There  was  then  much  repetition  of  former  matter,  in  the  course  of  wliich
Dr.  Phinuit  promised  to  give  Miss  C.'s  surname  to  W.  L.  wlien  he  next  saw
him.  This  was  done  at  the  evening  sitting  on  the  same  day.  Miss  C.  was
told  that  she  had  had  a  dream  about  being  on  the  water,  of  which  she  knows
nothing.  After  a  great  deal  of  vague  and  desultoi'y  talk  the  sitting  closed
without  anything  more  of  an  evidential  nature.

m.  Mr.  H.  Wimifield  and  Mr.  Walter  Lmf. December  IQth.

Mr.  Le;if  lield  the  medium's  hand  throughout.  The  tii'st  messages  were
to  him,  about  his  "  father  "  William,  who  was  said  "  not  to  lecture  and  not
to  write  "  but  to  be  "a  sort  of  tradesman.''  This  is  true  of  his  grandfather
William.  After  this  the  talk  was  chiefly  addressed  to  Mr.  W.,  wlio  was
rightly  said  to  have  ;i  father,  mother,  three  sisters,  and  two  brothers.  He
was  also  truly  told  that  he  had  a  grandfather  named  John,  a  relative  named
Ai-thur,  and  that  one  of  his  brothers  was  a  long  way  off  across  the  water,
and  had  been  av-^ay  a  long  time.  But  a  large  number  of  statements  made
and  names  given  were  wholly  wrong,  and  the  only  interesting  point  is  that
the  number  of  the  family  was  given  with  confidence,  and  without  any  fishing.

After  this  Mrs.  Piper  left  London  for  Liverpool,  where  tlie  next
L5  sittings,  ISTos.  36  to  50,  were  held.  These  are  all  discussed  in  Mr.
Lodge's  separate  rejiort  (pp.  470-525).  After  her  return  to  London,  Mrs.
Piper  lodged  in  a  private  hotel  in  Manchester-street,  where  Nos.  51,
57,  and  58  were  held  ;  52  took  place  at  Mr.  Clai'ke's  house  at  Harrow;
53  to  56  at  Mr.  Leaf's  residence  ;  59  at  Dr.  Myers'.

51.  31  r».  Herbert  Leaf.  Fird  sittintj. December  28th. /See  jj.  589.

52.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  J.  T.  Clarle. December  29th. See  j).  574.

53.  Mr».  Herbert  Leaf. Second,  .'iittimj. December  SOth.

This  was  a  very  confused  and  unsatisfactory  sitting.  The  only
right  statement  definitely  made  was  that  Mrs.  Leaf  had  an  aunt  who
married  a  Mr.  Wood.  She  was  told  that  her  name  was  Rosie,  but  she
had  been  called  by  this  name  l)efore  Dr.  Phinuit,  as  well  as  before
Mrs.  Piper.  What  was  said  about  the  lost  bracelet  (see  p.  596)
distinctly  implied  that  it  had  been  stolen  by  a  servant  ;  whereas  it  had
been  lost  \\  liile  Mrs.  Leaf  was  walking  in  London  with  a  friend.  The
name  of  Loolie  or  Lulu  was  given  ;  this  is  the  name  of  Harry's  sister.
But  she  was  wrongly  said  to  be  in  the  spirit. Hariy  sent  his  love  to

. 2  X


638


A  Record  of  Observations  of


his  wife.  George  was  said  to  have  made  a  change  for  his  good  ;  it  is
true  that  he  has  been  recently  given  a  good  appointment.  Many  names
"svere  given  as  friends  of  Mrs.  Leaf's  father,  but  were  quite  unrecognised.

54.  Mr.  S.  G.  Shattock. December  3lst.

Only  imperfect  notes  of  this  sitting  were  taken,  though  a  shorthand
writer  was  present,  as  she  and  Mr.  "Walter  Leaf  were  sent  out  of  the
room  by  Dr.  Phinuit  for  the  greater  part  of  the  time.  The  following-
report  by  Mr.  Shattock,  however,  contains  all  the  piincipal  statements,
set  out  separately  with  comments  : —

"  You  have  two  brotliers,  Ixith  in  the  spirit,"  subsequently  corrected  by
the  medium  into  "one  in  the  body  and  one  in  the  spirit."  I  have  a  brother
in  the  body  ;  one  in  the  spirit  is  a  wrong  statement  or  guess.  There  is
nothing  which  can  be  construed  into  it. Tliis  I  know  for  certain.

"  You  have  a  friend  named  Arthur.  He  is  at  present  ill,  and  likely  to
pass  away."  I  have  an  acquaintance  of  the  name,  but  I  could  not  without
some  delay  find  out  if  tliere  is  any  truth  in  the  last  part  of  the  statement.
He  is  a  person  of  about  middle  age  with  whom  my  acquaintance  has  long
since  dropped.

' '  There  is  a  child  who  has  passed  out  of  the  body  witli  scarlet  fever  con-
nected with  you."  Medium  stated  this  to  be  the  child  of  an  aunt.  The
statement  is  not  correct,  as  I  have  no  aunt  on  either  side.

"  Yovxr  father  Thomas  has  got  the  rheumatism."  Hei'e  the  medium
grasped  my  left  knee.  My  father's  name  is  not  Thomas.  He  has  muscular
rheumatism  of  the  ordinary  kind  now  and  then  in  various  parts  of  the  body,
but  no  marked  articular  rheumatism.

"You  have  an  uncle  Henry."  The  medium  started  with  the  name,  and
it  was  I  who,  after  some  delay,  volunteered  the  statement  that  I  had  an
uncle  of  the  name,  in  order  to  open  up  the  way  for  further  statements.

So,  when  the  medium  stated  that  my  father's  name  was  Thomas,  I
volunteered  the  statement  that  I  had  an  uncle  of  the  name.  After  this  the
medium  said,  "  I  get  yovu"  father's  influence,  and  then  I  get  Thomas."

' '  You  made  a  mistake  in  your  life. It  was  a  long  while  ago. You  made
a  start  in  life,  and  it  did  not  prove  to  be  very  successful,  and  then  you  made
another,  and  the  second  did."
This  is  not  true.

"Then  I  get  no  sisters."  This  is  true,  but  was  not  a  direct  statement
of  the  medium.  It  was  made  after  a  conversation  which  led  me  to  say  I  had
no  sisters.

"  There  are  two  little  boys,  and  one  of  them  is  very  fidgety  and  nervous.
Tliat  is  the  eldest  ;  he  likes  to  have  his  own  way.  The  other  is  quieter  in
disposition,  and  easier  to  get  on  with.  This  gentleman's  lady  is  not  well,
but  she  will  he  better,  she  will  get  out  right."  These  statements  I  did  not
at  all  lead  up  to.  They  were  given  without  any  delay  on  the  part  of  the
medium,  and  they  are  the  truth,  though  not  the  whole  truth,  as  there  is  a
tliird  boy  dead. But  the  statement  as  it  stands  is  satisfactory.

After  various  incorrect  or  unverifiable  statements,  ' '  You  have  a  lady
friend. Who  is  .this  ? Lea?" (pronouncing  the  syllables  separately).


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.  639

After  some  waiting  I  volunteered  the  statement  that  I  knew  a  lady  called
Lena.  The  medium  afterwards  made  Lea  into  Lena,  i^ronouncing  the  word
"Leana."

Mr.  Shattock  remarks  : — •

Tlie  only  statements  of  any  note  coming  direct  from  tlie  medium  were
those  concerning  the  two  boys.  Of  the  others,  some  are  quite  erroneous  ;
otlier.s  of  such  a  general  nature  that  no  importance  can  be  attached  to  them  ;
find  others  were  so  largely  due  to  myself  that  tliey  can  hardly  be  called  the
medium's.

I  take  it  for  granted  that  tlie  medium  was  not  simulating  another  state  ;
that  lias,  of  course,  been  tested  on  previous  occasions  ;  though  whether  this
were  so  or  not  would  not  alter  the  facts  of  tlie  case.  For  there  is  no  reason
why,  in  a  quasi-hypnotic  state,  the  subject  should  not  act  much  as  in  the
waking  state  ;  and  it  is  of  course  well-known  that  in  such  a  condition  decep-
tion may  be  had  recourse  to.  There  is  nothing  incredible,  tlierefore,  in
])elioving  that  Mrs.  Piper  knows  nothing  of  what  occurs  in  the  trance,
thougli  while  in  the  trance  she  may  act  in  a  very  ordinary  way,  so  far  as  any
manifestation  of  mental  processes  goes.

Thouglit-reading  or  transference,  I  think,  there  cannot  be  in  the  case  ;
for  as  Mrs.  Piper  asserted  that  no  concentration  of  thought  was  necessary,  I
did  not  attempt  anything  of  the  kind.  Much  of  what  she  said  was  the  last  I
fihould  have  thought  of.  Muscle-reading  seems  altogether  out  of  the
question.  So  that  I  cannot  but  think  tliat  the  statements  made  are  only
.shrewd  guesses,  made  on  a  carefully  planned  system.  She  seemed  to  me  to
feel  the  way  by  throwing  out  a  stray  name,  or  making  a  general  statement.
There  is,  moreover,  a  way  she  has  of  combining  results  or  explaining  away
misstatements  that  is  noteworthy.

When  it  is  remembered  that  the  sitting  occuijied  some  three-quarters  of
an  hour,  and  that  tlie  only  really  true  statements  of  any  note  were  those  I
liave  already  mentioned,  there  is  no  need,  it  seems  to  me,  to  assume  any
other  power  in  the  medium  than  that  I  have  mentioned.  Of  course  a  large
series  of  observations  may  point  to  a  different  conclusion.

55.  Walter  Leaf  and  Serhert  Leaf. Dccenihei' 31st.

Mr.  H.  Leaf  had  not  seen  the  medium  at  all  till  lie  came  into  the  room
jifter  the  trance  had  commenced.  After  some  talk,  and  the  mention  of  a
name  wliich  was  not  recognised.  Dr.  Pliiiiuit  suddenly  said,  ' '  Tell  Rosie's
gentleman  to  come  in."  (Rosie  is  Mrs.  H.  Leaf,  see  her  second  sitting.)
Mr.  H.  Leaf,  who  had  been  sitting  on  the  other  side  of  tlic  table,  came  and
took  the  medium's  hand.  Dr.  Phinuit  says  :  ' '  You  are  Rosie's  gentleman,
what  you  call  her  husband.  There  is  a  Charles  about  you.  I  get  the  same
influence  with  both  of  you  ;  why,  you  are  brothers.  Walter,  this  is  tlie  one  I
t(jld  you  about  that  had  the  pain  in  his  liead  (indicates  right  temple).  It  is
i\  sort  of  neuralgia.  Charles  must  be  your  father  ;  Walter,  I  thought  that
William  was  your  father  till  I  got  this  other  influence,  but  now  I  see  that
Charles  is  your  father,  and  William  is  your  grandfatlier,  your  father's  father."

For  the  neuralgia  see  my  first  sitting,  p.  6.33  ;  the  place  was  riglitly
indicated.  The  name  of  our  father  is  Charles,  and  his  fatlier  was
William  as  stated.


A  Record  of  Ohservat'lovs  of


After  this  everything  wa.s  cnnfuwutl  and  unintelligiljle.  Asked  by  H.  L_
what  his  occupation  was,  Dr.  Phinuit  began  witli  what  woukl  better  have
suited  me.  He  tlien  went  on  to  a  description  of  which  nothing  at  all  could,
be  made,  and  gave  ^'ague  descriptions  of  persons  wliich  might  be  explained,
as  certain  friends  of  my  brother's.  But  the  whole  thing  was  vmsatisfactory.
It  was,  however,  riglitly  said  that  our  mother's  mother  was  named  Elizabeth,,
ljut  wrongly  that  she  had  a  little  scar  on  the  left  temple.  Tlien  Dr.  Phinuit
suddenly  said,  "Robert."  Asked,  "What  is  that  name  ? "  he  said,  "No,
not  Robert,  Herbert.  Tliat's  who  you  are.  Your  grandfather  sends  his  love-
to  the  two  brothers,  Walter  and  Herbert."

The  recognition  of  the  connexion  between  Mr.  H.  L.  and  his  wife  and
Lrother  was  striking.  The  medium  had  certainly  not  seen  Mr.  H.  L.  in  his-
normal  state,  and,  so  far  as  coidd  be  told,  did  not  see  him  in  the  trance.  Sh»
was  sitting  witli  her  head  bent  down  and  eyes  closed  as  usu;il.  She  had,  how-
ever, had  opportunities  of  learning  tliat  our  father's  name  was  Charles,  as  she-
had  been  introduced  to  him  in  the  flesh  some  days  before.  It  is  possible  that
the  name  Herbert  had  slipped  out  in  her  presence.  But  I  do  not  think  it
liad. Elizal.)eth  as  maternal  granduK  ither  may  have  been  a  mere  guess. — W.  L>

m.  Mr.  W.  A.  Pije. Jainiat-;/ Id,  1890. See  ildailed  report,  p.  596.

After  this  sitting  there  were  several  intervals,  owing  to  the  ill-health
of  Mrs.  Piper. The  next  sittings  were  : —

57.  With  Mr.  II.  J.  Hood. January  6th.
58.  i>/r.  H.  J.  Rood  and  Mr.  C.  C.  Mcasey. January  7th.

There  is  nothing  to  report  about  these  two  sittings  except  that  all
the  statements  made  in  tliem  were  either  wrong  or  confused  and
unintelligible.  Nothing  whatever  occurred  to  give  evidence  of  the
slightest  power  of  thought-transference  or  any  similar  capacity.

59.  3Ir.  Ileiideiijh  lJ\'d(jirood. Jannartj  lUli,

The  sitter  was  inti-oduced  as  Mr.  Wood.  8ome  correct  statement.>
were  made  in  this  sitting  but  almost  without  exception  after  a  great
deal  of  beating  aljout  and  some  help  from  the  sitter.

Mr.  W.  -was  ti.ild  that  he  had  a  friend  John  Hensleigh.  (Riglit.)  This
was  first  given  as  John  Henry,  and  tlien  spelt  Hensley,  Hensly,  being-
reached  only  after  many  attempts,  and  with  tlie  help  of  Mr.  W.,  who  said
that  the  letter  after  HEN  was  S.  Phinuit  said  that  his  grandfather  was.
lame  in  the  left  leg  (indicating  tlie  knee).  Sir  Josiah  Wedgwood  had  a  leg
amputated  on  account  of  troul)le  in  the  knee.  Mr.  Wedgwood  did  not  know
wliich  leg  it  was.  But  from  subsequent  inquiry  it  seems  to  have  been  the
right.  He  was  correctly  said  to  liave  had  a  sister  Ann,  which  Mr.  W.  did  not
know  at  the  time  to  be  true.  Mr.  Wedgwood  was  rightly  told  he  had  a  son
named  Hensleigh,  and  his  wife  a  sister  Mary  Elizabeth.  (Mr.  W.  is  not
sure  that  the  fir\st  name  was  Mary).  A  little  boy,  "I  think  a  grandson,'"
was  said  to  have  been  ill  and  to  have  changed  his  residence  ;  it  was  also  said
that  he  had  a  brother  who  had  died  very  young.  Tliis  was  true  of  a  grand-
son who  had  come  to  visit  Mr.  H.  W.  after  an  illness. Mr.  W.  was  said  to


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


G41


have  had  three  hruthers,  all  passed  out,  and  no  wisters.  Awked,  "Do  you
Jvnow  that  my  second  son  has  had  an  accident?"  Dr.  Phinuit,  after  some
.fencing,  said  that  it  was  from  a  fall,  and  that  a  rib  on  the  left  side  was
•broken  or  bent.  This  was  correct,  but  was  not  stated  dii'ectly,  Init  only  after
:much  questioning.  Mr.  W.  's  lady  was  said  to  have  had  a  fall,  ' '  in  fact  two
of  them  had."  It  is  true  that  both  his  wife  and  her  sister  had  very  severe
ialls,  and  suffered  much  fiom  them.

After  this  Mrs.  Piper  returned  to  Canilnidge.  Sittings  60  to  69
inclusive  took  place  at  Professor  Sidgwiek's  house,  and  some  remarks
■about  them  will  be  found  in  Professor  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  report
ij).  615). Sittings  70  to  76  wei'e  at  Mr.  Myers'  house.

60.  Mrs.  SiJiin-id;. Tliir.J  Mfuuf. Jaihiianj  Idth.

The  names  Hensleigh  (spelt  right)  and  Wedgwood  were  given,  and  ulti-
'mately  referred  to  the  same  person.  [See  No.  59.]  Mr.  Sidgwick's  actions
Avere  wrongly  described,  but  it  is  noteworthy  that  he  was  said  to  be  "standing

his  head,"  a  jihrase  which  he  had  jocosely  used  in  Mrs.  Pijjer's  absence
■to  describe  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  what  he  was  going  to  do.  "Vases  "  were  men-
tioned, aj^parently  in  connection  with  her  brother  F.  This  was  probably  a  mere
.wuess  at  the  thing  belonging  to  hini  which  Mrs.  Sidgwick  had  asked  about
in  a  former  sitting.  But  the  idea  may  have  come  from  Mrs.  S.,  as  she  had  been
thinking  of  a  vase  of  his  earlier.  A  picture  hanging  in  F.'s  room,  about  which
Mrs.  Sidgwick  had  asked  before,  was  wrongly  described.  The  name  of  Ellie
>jr  Allie  was  given  and  recognised  by  the  sitter.

61.  ilf/'s.  Sidyivick. FoKiiJi  sittiiuj. Jaimanj  I'.Uh.

Mr.  Sidgwick  was  rightly  said  to  be  sitting  with  his  feet  up.  But  Dr.  P.
.•said  "  on  a  chair"  ;  they  were  on  the  stand  of  a  wicker  table  turned  upside
<lown,  and  the  rest  of  his  actions  were  wrongly  given.  The  sitter's  father  was
•rightly  said  to  have  died  when  she  was  a  child,  and  to  have  gone  abroad  and
never  to  have  been  so  well  afterwai'ds.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  was  also  told  rightly
that  she  had  a  sister  who  paints,  and  was  different  from  the  rest  of  the  family.
Dut  a,  number  of  names  and  statements  were  wrong  or  not  recognised.

62.  Professor  H.  8i(J(jiri(:h. Thlril  sIUukj. Jaitiionj  20tJi.

A  partially  light  account  of  Mi's.  Sidgwick's  actions  in  another  room  was
rgiven.  "  She  is  reclining  with  something  drawn  over  the  back  of  her  head
.and  chest — a  cloth  thing  ;  she  is  reading."  But  the  cloth  thing  was  wrongly
said  to  be  dark.  It  was  really  a  doctor's  scarlet  hood.  "Alex"  was  said
to  be  connected  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick.  (She  had  an  uncle  Alexander,  ne"\'er
jcalled  "Alex,"  however.)  The  names  of  three  of  Mr.  Sidgwick's  uncles
were  rightly  given,  but  two  wrong  ones  were  added.  Mr.  S.  was  told  rightly
that  he  had  two  aunts  on  the  mother's  side.

63.  Mm.  Vfirmll. Thlnl  :<ittiiri. .Tainianj  20th..
Mrs.  V.  was  told  that  the  jjortrait  of  her  uncle  Henry  (see  p.  588)  was
■done  by  her  grandmother  (right). That  this  uncle  had  gone  away  years  ago,
:jind  that  none  of  the  family  knew  what  liad  become  of  him  (right).  That
'Carrie  has  a  George  in  the  body  (wrong). That  she  had  t-\vo  lii'others  in  the


642


A  Record  of  Observations  of


spirit  (right),  and  a  father  in  the  body  (wrong).  That  Mrs.  V.  's  mother  had
an  only  brother  in  the  spirit  (riglit).  That  Louis  was  a  name  in  her  mother's
family  (right),  her  husband  ?  No,  her  brother.  (Wrong  :  she  had  an  uncle
Louis.)  Asked  what  Dr.  Verrall  was  doing  at  the  moment.  Dr.  P.  said
rightly  that  he  was  sitting  at  a  kind  of  desk,  and  had  been  reading,  but  had
put  his  book  down  in  order  to  talk  to  another  gentleman  who  had  just  com&
in.  Professor  Sidgwick  was,  however,  wrongly  said  to  he  walking.  Phinuit
also  attempted  to  describe  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  wliat  Mrs.  Veri'all  was  doing  :
the  latter  leaving  the  room  for  the  purpose.  The  description  given  was  not
wrong  but  was  too  vague  to  have  much  evidential  value.

64.  Mr.  Harlow  Gale. {Sec  p.  615.) Janiiafij  22nd,  1890.

This  sitting  was  chiefly  occupied  with  a  description  of  different  members
of  the  sitter's  family,  which  he  recognised  as  strikingly  accurate.  The^
following  are  the  most  important  ])(_)ints  : — What  is  that  thing  your  father-
wears  over  his  shoulders  ?  He  looks  i^uite  important  in  it.  He  wears  it
because  of  his  throat. He  is  in  a  different  place  from  here.

Mr.  Tiale  says  that  tlie  most  noticeable  point  in  his  father's  appearance-
is  a  white  silk  liandkerchief  which  he  wears  because  of  a  sensitive-
ness of  his  throat. He  lives  in  Minnesota.

Your  father  is  a  queer  genius — dreamy.  He  does  not  do  much  ;  he
leaves  that  to  someone  else.  He  has  an  office,  a  desk,  books,  &c.  His.
2-)eculiarities  strike  me  very  much.

Mr.  Gale  says  that  this  is  all  right,  as  far  as  it  goes.

William,  a  brother.  He  is  small,  a  bright  little  fellow,  dark  eyes,  clear'
complexion,  a  pretty  fellow,  smart  as  a  cricket.

Mr.  Gale  says  that  this  is  a  correct  account  of  his  brother  AVilliam,  a,
boy  of  16  ;  except  that  he  is  some  5ft.  Tin.  in  height,  whereas  th&
medium  indicated  with  her  hand  a  height  of  not  more  than  dft.

You  have  got  a  sister.  She  sings,  and  inlays  two  different  instruments  :
one  with  keys  and  one  with  strings — particularly  the  one  witli  keys.  She  is
a  little  younger  than  you,  pr(jbaV)ly  ;  but  her  age  is  difficult  to  tell  from  her
appearance. She  is  older  than  William.

Mr.  Gale  has  a  sister  younger  tlian  himself  and  older  than  his  brother
William.  She  sings,  and  plays  the  piano  well,  but  does  not  play
any  stringed  instrument.

There  is  a  minister  in  your  family,  an  uncle,  in  the  sjDirit.  Tall,  fine
physique  ;  wears  spectacles  ;  with  a  high  forehead  ;  something  like  you.  He
is  your  father's  brother.  He  died  some  little  time  ago — away  from  you,
across  the  water.  He  died  suddcidy.  (Asked  what  denomination  he  be-
longed to.  Dr.  P.  could  not  tell.)  He  used  to  wear  a  caj^e — a  long  coat  thing,.
He  was  not  Episcopal,  l)ut  like  a  Methodist — that  sort  of  doctrine.

Mr.  Gale  had  an  uncle,  his  father's  brother,  who  was  a  Baptist-
missionary  in  Minnesota.  The  descrii;)tion  of  him  is  accurate,
exceijt  that  he  would  not  be  considered  a  tall  man.  He  died  sud-
denly 15  years  ago  while  travelling  in  Palestine.  He  never  wore
a  cajje  at  home,  but  had  one  made  before  leaving  for  his  trip  to
Palestine,  to  wear  on  his  overcoat.

There  are  five  of  you. — After  some  counting  and  a  little  help  from  Mr^


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


643


Gale,  Dr.  P.  said  that  there  were  five  not  counting  the  mother,  three  boys
and  a  girl,  fatlier  and  mother.  (Right.)

Dr.  P.  then  attempted  to  get  the  name  of  the  second  brother,  trying-
George,  Geord,  Jordan,  Jorge,  but  finally  giving  it  up.  The  brother's  second
name  is  Griggs,  but  he  is  never  called  by  it.  Dr.  P.  went  on  :  "  He  gets
round  about  the  boys  as  well  as  anyone.  He's  got  many  friends  ;  they  all
like  him.  He  is  very  happy-go-lucky — musical — he  can  do  everything,
whistle,  sing,  and  dance.  He  is  not  far  away.  He  has  lots  of  letters  and
friends.  Girls  like  him  very  much.  He  is  studying  to  be  a  lawyer  or
doctor,  or  something  of  that  sort.  He  gets  into  different  costumes  and  acts.
Do  they  call  him  Jack  ?  John?  They  call  liim  Pete  ;  they  call  liim  every-
thing."

None  of  these  names  were  right,  though  lie  is  called  by  many  names.
Nor  is  he  studying  for  a  profession.  In  other  respects  the  state-
ments are  accurate.  This  brother  is  the  only  one  of  Mr.  Gale's
family  who  is  not  far  away,  in  Ameiica.  The  name  of  Will  Adams
was  given  as  that  of  a  friend  ;  but  the  brother  has  only  tlie  slightest
acquaintance  with  a  man  of  that  name.

A  correct  description  was  given  of  Mr.  Gale's  mother.  She  was  said  to
look  very  young  for  her  age.  "She  and  William  are  more  like  one  another
than  the  rest  of  the  family.  She  is  small  and  rather  dai'k."  These  and  other
traits  given  are  said  by  Mr.  Gale  to  be  strikingly  correct.

The  name  Edward  was  then  tried,  and  apjjlied  to  brother,  father,  and
uncle,  all  wronglj-.

When  your  mother  went  away  it  did  her  a  great  deal  of  good  ;  she  had  a
cold  on  her  chest. She  has  been  staying  witli  an  elderly  gentleman.

Mr.  Gale's  mother  took  a  trip  for  hei'  healtli  last  spring,  and  returned
greatly  improved. But  notliing  is  known  of  the  elderly  gentleman.

Your  grandfather  on  your  mother's  side  was  lame.  (Asked  "All  his
life  ?")  No  ;  but  that  one  time.  You  don't  remember  that,  but  your  motlier
will  tell  you.

Mr.  Gale  finds  tliat  his  maternal  grandfather  was  lame  from  a  stroke  of
paralysis  for  some  10  months.  He  rememljers  nothing  of  this,  as
he  did  not  see  his  grandfather  during  this  time.

Edward  ;  is  he  your  uncle  or  your  cousin  1 I  don't  like  him,  and  I  don't
know  that  anyone  did. He  don't  seem  to  get  on  somehow.
Mr.  Gale  recognises  this  as  a  cousin.

Tlie  name  of  Alice  was  given,  and  finally  said  to  belong  to  Edwai'd's
sister.  This  was  right  ;  but  she  was  wrongly  said  to  be  musical.  After  this
the  statements  made  were  mostly  wrong.  Tlie  name  of  Williams  was  given  :
"It  was  your  uncle,  I  think  ;  a  relative  connected  by  marriage.  I  think  on
the  mother's  side."

Mr.  Gale  remarks  :  "I  have  a  second  cousin  on  my  motliei''s  side  named
Mrs.  Williams,  whom  we  always  call  aunt,  however.  She  has  been
a  widow  many  years,  and  I  never  saw  her  liusljand. "

65.  Mrs.  H.  Sidywich. Fifth  sitting. Janiianj  22nd.
There  was  apparently  an  attempt  to  give  the  name  of  Cecil  as  connected
with  the  sitter's  mother. An  uncle  John  and  aunt  Mary  were  rightly  given
to  Professor  S. After  a  number  of  guesses  a  letter  sent  by  Mrs.  Verrall  was


644


A  Record  of  Observations  of


referred  to  her.  Mrs.  S.  was  said  to  have  two  Franks  connected  with  her
and  a  Gerry  (pronounced,  not  spelt)  who  was  much  witli  Frank.  Tliis  was
SI  1  far  tiue  ;  but  G.  was  said  not  to  be  in  the  body,  and  probably  there  was
confusion  witli  Professor  Lodge's  uncles  Jerry  and  Fivink.  A  large  number
of  names  were  given  which  were  wrcjng.

m.  Mr-i.  B. Tli'tnl  sittimj. Jannar<j  22nd.

Mrs.  Verrall  was  rightly  said  to  be  at  the  moment  looking  ij  a  sort  of
glass  thing  and  turning  it  over  ;  "a  kind  of  round-looking  thing,  not  a  l)all,
but  sometliing  like  it."  "A  girl  with  her,  her  daughter  ;  not  the  one  with
the  knees,  named  Helen.  Helen's  hair  looks  better  than  it  did  before."  (See
p.  586.)  Vague  allusions  were  made  to  the  illness  of  Mrs.  B. 's  brother  and
her  sister-in-lav,r.  Mrs.  Verrall's  letter  shown  was  rightly  said  to  have  the
influence  of  her  sister  and  her  husband.

67.  Miss  Alice  Johnson. Second  sitti)tij. Jannanj  2Sid.

A  match-box  shown  was  rightly  recognised  as  belonging  to  a  brother.
"  He  is  reading  this  moment,  he  has  his  feet  up  on  a  chair  and  is  leaning
back.  He  is  in  a  corner  room,  you  go  up  steps  to  get  to  it.  There  is  a  kind
of  map  or  picture  to  the  left,  something  tliat  stands  ujj  ;  like  that  (screen).
He  is  alone.  At  the  right-hand  is  a  desk."  This  was  all  correct,  except-
ing (  ?)  the  statement  that  he  was  alone  at  tlie  time.  A  "  rather  appropriate  "
description  of  his  character  was  given.  "  He  is  fairer  than  you  and  has  more
colour. "  An  attemj^ted  description  of  the  actions  of  Miss  Johnson's  sister
was  wrong.  Miss  J. 's  watch-chain  Wcis  felt.  "That  is  your  influence,  you
bought  it  yourself "  (right).  A  cheque  was  giveii  to  the  medium  whose
eyes  remained  closed  ;  she  felt  it  and  said,  "  It  has  got on  it."

68.  Professor  II.  iSid(j>cicl\ Fourth,  sitting. Janiuinj  23rd.

The  names  of  Professor  Sidgwick's  uncles  were  at  last  given  correctly,
as  William,  Henry  and  John  on  the  mother's  side,  and  John,  Robert  and
.James  on  the  f;ither's.  But  one,  Christopher,  was  omitted.  Finger-guessing
was  not  successful,  and  a  description  given  of  what  Mrs.  Veri'all  was  doing
at  the  time  was  completely  wrong.

69.  Mr.  Edivin  Ma.c  Konstmnm. (See  j).  615.) First  sittimj. Jaiinai-ij  24:tJi.

After  some  vague  and  wrong  statements  the  sitter  was  told  rightly  that
there  Avere  five  in  his  family,  not  counting  father  and  mother.  That  he  had
a  sister  Fannie — Annie — whose  head  was  hurt ;  that  she  had  a  pain  in  the
top  of  her  head  and  confusion,  coming  from  a  fall  while  riding.  This  is  true
of  a  sister  named  Angela.  One  of  his  parents,  afterwards  specified  as  his
mother,  was  said  to  have  a  pain  in  the  foot.  This  was  afterwards  localised
in  the  toe,  after  feeling  the  sitter's  foot  all  over.  "There  is  a  fulness
there  ;  something  is  gone  there."  The  latter  statement  is  true.  His  father
was  truly  said  to  have  had  a  positive  mind.  "Your  younger  sister  has  fair
hair  ;  she  is  lively.  She  is  studying  ;  she  stands  back  and  puts  her  hands  up
(making  a  gesture).  Elocution — you  call  it  acting."  This  is  true  ;  as  Mr.
K. 's  youngest  sister  is  an  actress  and  Mr.  K.  thought  that  the  "standing
back,"  &c.,  applied  well  to  his  sister's  manner  in  acting.  Some  rather  vague
remarks  about  a  picture  of  her  were  taken  by  the  sitter  to  allude  to  the  fact
that  she  had  recently  been  j^hotograjjlied  in  a  wig. The  next  sister  was  rightly


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


G45


said  to  be  more  quiet.  "  What  has  your  mother  done  to  the  house  ?  Your
father  says  it  is  all  changed  round."  This  was  accepted  by  the  sitter  as  corre-
sponding to  facts.  But  with  tliis  was  a  very  large  proportion  of  wrong  or
unrecognised  statements.  The  medium  was  quite  unable  to  tell  liim  of  a
comjjlaint  from  which  he  was  suffering,  even  after  a  great  deal  of  (j^uestion-
ing  and  help.  .  .

70.  Mr.  F.  W.  E.  Myers. Fifth  sitting. Jmntaru  24f7i.

71.  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers. Si.dh  sitting. January  2bth.

In  tliese  sittings  some  private  facts  as  to  deceased  friends  were  given  as
to  wliich  it  is  practically  imjjossible  that  Mrs.  Piper  could  have  acquired
any  information.

72.  Mr.  E.  M.  Koiistamm. Second  sitting. January  25th.

The  greater  part  of  this  sitting  was  taken  up  with  extensions  of,  and  addi-
tions to,  statements  made  at  the  preceding.  Tlie  sitter  was  told  rightly  that
his  name  was  Edwin,  after  several  attempts.  His  surname  was  given  as
"Kelliston";  and  he  was  said  to  have  no  second  Christian  name.  It  should
be  mentioned  that  his  surname  was  not  known  to  Mr.  Mj'ers,  in  whose  house
the  sitting  took  pl-Ace.  He  was  said  to  have  an  aunt  in  the  spirit  named
"Adda";  lie  has  a  deceased  aunt  named  Adele.  He  was  rightly  said  to
have  three  nephews,  sons  of  his  sisters,  all  boys,  two  of  them  brothers.
Asked  about  "Julian,"  Dr.  P.  descriljed  him  correctly,  and  said  that  he  had
mental  trouble,  of  wliich  he  gave  a  true  account,  includino-  an  unusual  cir-
cumstance.  Mr.  K.  was  told  that  he  knew  one  Allen,  a  smart  fellow,  but
lame.  Tliis  the  sitter  is  inclined  to  refer  to  Mr.  Rider  Haggard's  "Allan
Quatermain, "  whose  adventures  he  had  just  been  reading.  This  would
evidently  be  important  if  it  could  be  verified,  but  unfortunately  the  name  is
not  one  which  can  be  regarded  as  anything  but  a  possil:)le  means  of  fishing.
It  is  not  characteristic  enough  to  be  of  any  value.  There  was  less  which  was
quite  wrong  in  tliis  sitting  than  in  the  preceding.

73.  Mr.  H.  Bahington  Smith. January  2Qth.

Nothing  of  significance  occurred  in  this  sitting  with  the  exception  of  a
description  of  Mr.  Smith's  occui^ation,  where  a  j)retty  good  account  was
given  of  the  portfolios  in  which  it  is  his  business  to  enter  reports  in  the
Education  Office.  This  began,  however,  with  the  wrong  statement,  "You
have  got  a  number  of  papers  before  you  with  pictures  on  them — pictures  of
difi'erent  colours.  They  have  got  to  do  witli  your  life."  Then  the  description
became  correct.  "Books  in  connexion  with  you;  some  of  them  open  and
some  folded.  Some  of  them  with  browai  covers  and  letters  on  the  back.
Teaching  books,  not  school  books  ;  brownish  covers,  not  fancy  books.
Different  sheets  laid  on  them  in  different  ways.  They  are  large  (here  the
hands  were  held  about  one  foot  apart)  ;  about  two  or  three  inches  thick.
There  are  sheets  in  tliem  ;  you  write  in  them.  Tliey  are  not  like  (jrdinary
books.  You  are  writing  lines  in  them.  Tliey  look  white  inside.  There  ai'e
lines  running  down,  figures  and  names  and  dates.  Figures  dnwn  below,  like
book-keeping  ;  not  exactly,  but  on  the  same  lines.  Not  books  you  read
from,  but  instruction  books — not  to  teach  from,  but  what  you  note  your
interest  in." Asked,  "Interest  on  money?" "No;  transactions — things


64-6


A  Record  of  Observations  of


that  are  going  on. "  Tliis  was  followed  by  a  quite  wrong  description  of  the
office  itself,  and  by  statements  about  the  sitter's  family  of  which  only  a  few
common  Christian  names  were  right.  .

74.  3Trn.  Z. Fird  sitting. January  21th.

75.  Mrs.  Z. Second  sitting. January  28Wi.

Mrs.  Z.,  a  lady  who  was  mourning  for  a  near  relation,  gave  so  many  hint.s
that  Mr.  Myers,  in  the  course  of  taking  notes,  guessed  much  more  of  the
facts  tliaii  Pliinuit  succeeded  in  giving.  Phinuit,  as  occasionally  happened,
seemed  so  obstinately  bent  upon  some  erroneous  ideas  of  his  own  that  he
would  pay  no  attention  to  Mrs.  Z.'s  leading  questions.

70.  Pi'ofessor  Alexander,  of  liio  de  Janeiro. January  29th.

Professor  Alexander  reports  as  follows  : —

Mrs.  Piper  being  entranced,  told  me  that  I  had  seen  many  spirits  and
mortals  and  many  cranks  ;  that  I  worked  hard  for  truth,  had  travelled  much,
&c.  ;  hut  on  mentioning  three  European  countries  (France,  Germany,  and
Switzerland)  she  Avas  right  in  only  one.  She  declared  that  I  had  seen  many
ups  and  downs,  and  that  my  life  had  been  a  sad  one  ;  that  I  seemed  to  be
surrounded  with  books.  The  name  of  my  father  was  correctly  given,  as.
well  as  that  of  Ellen,  which  belonged  to  a  cousin  of  mine,  and  tlie  presence
of  a  spirit  brother  was  announced  (I  have  lost  two  brothers).  My  mother
(who  lias  also  passed  away)  was  described  as  an  elderly  lady,  and  was  said  to
be  witli  him.  Afterwards  she  reverted  to  the  travelling,  and  guessed  cor-
rectly that  I  had  lately  undertaken  a  long  sea  voyage.

The  characteristics  presented  by  Mrs.  Piper  in  her  trance  and  when
recovering  from  it  are  such  as  I  have  seen  in  other  trance  mediums.  There
is  no  doubt  that  the  trance  is  a  genuine  one.

The  above  guesses  are,  with  the  exception  of  the  countries  mentioned,
all  more  or  less  correct.  They  are,  of  course,  rather  vague,  but  that  is
natural  in  a  first  sitting.

A.  Alexander.

For  the  remaining  sittings,  from  77  on,  which  took  jjlace  at  Liver-
pool, see  Professor  Lodge's  reports,  pp.  530-555.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


647


(4) INDEX TO ITEMS IN  PARTS I. and  II.

specially  difficult  to  explain  by  direct  thougiit-teansference  :
i.e.,  by  any  agency  exerted  by  the  sitter.
By  Professor  Lodge.


Unless  the  evidence  now  given  be  held  to  constitute  a  sufficiently
strong  proof  that  the  performances  of  tliis  particular  "  medium  "  are
2iot  explicable  by  cunning  and  imposture,  it  is  premature  to  examine
further  into  their  significance.  But  as  soon  as  it  can  be  unreservedly
granted  that  it  is  allowable  to  dismiss  this  hypothesis  then  it  seems  to
me  that  the  best  plan  is  to  dismiss  it  thoroughly  and  waste  no  more
time  over  it.

Fi'om  this  point  of  view  there  remains  the  hypothesis  that  the
information  is  derived  from  the  sittei''s  mind  in  some  way  or  other :
e.g.,  (a)  by  question  and  answer  ;  (b)  by  muscular  and  other  semi-occult
and  unconscious  signalling  ;  (c)  by  direct  mind-reading,  or  influence  of
the  sitter's  thought,  conscious  or  otherwise,  acting  on  the  enti'anced
person  as  percipient.  I  do  not  pi-opose  to  ciitically  distinguish  between
these  three  methods,  although  the  hrst  is  very  ancient,  the  second  only
recently  recognised  in  its  full  development  and  power,  while  the  third
is  only  in  process  of  being  accepted  by  scientihc  men.

A  large  number  of  instances  can  be  easily  found  which  are  not
explicable  by  either  (a)  or  (b),  and  to  all  those  who  have  hitherto
.spent  any  labour  over  the  records  it  has  become  clear  that  either  (c)  or
some  even  less  admissible  hypothesis  is  necessary  to  explain  a  large
portion  of  the  results.

Without  assuming  that  this  conviction  ^^■ill  commend  itself  to-
eveiybody  who  may  henceforth  make  a  detailed  study  of  the  matter,,
it  does  seem  likely  that  to  the  majority  it  will.  And  so,  until
evidence  to  the  contrary  is  forthcoming,  I  conclude  that  it  will  save
time  to  accept  it  jarovisionally  and  thus  to  narrow  the  question  which
faces  us  to  the  following  :  Is  thought-transfei'ence  from  the  sittei',  of
however  free  and  unconscious  a  kind,  a  complete  and  sufficient  mode  of
accounting  for  the  facts  ?  Mr.  Leaf  dehnitely  takes  the  position  that
in  his  opinion  it  is  sufficient,  and,  considering  the  large  amount  of
labour  he  has  spent  on  the  documents,  his  opinion  is  entitled  to  very
great  weight.  For  myself,  I  am  not  so  convinced,  but  I  cordially
admit  the  difficulty  of  any  disj^roof  of  his  position.

If  one  met  a  sti-anger  in  a  railway-cai'riage  who  professed  to  ha\'e
returned  from  the  Colonies  where  he  had  met  one's  friends  or  relations,
of  whom  he  showed  knowledge  in  some  decided  ways,  it  would  not  at


■048


A  Record  of  Ohservatlons  of


iiist  occur  to  one  to  doubt  his  veracity,  even  though  he  was  a  little
hazy  about  the  nauies  of  relatives,  and  occasionally  mixed  things  up;
nor  would  you  stigmatise  him  as  a  deceivei'  if  he  occasionally  made
use  of  information  supplied  by  yourself  in  course  of  conversation.
But  directly  it  was  suggested  that  he  might  be  a  thought-reader,  detail-
ing to  you  the  unconscious  contents  of  your  own  mind,  it  would  not  be
easy  rigorously  to  disprove  the  suggestion,  especially  if  subsequent
access  to  the  fiiends  chiefly  mentioned  were  denied  you.  This  is,  how-
ever, very  nearly,  the  problem  befoi-e  us.

Let  it  be  cleai-ly  understood  that  the  first  question  is  whether  any
I'eading  of  the  mind  of  the  sitter  can  be  considered  sufficiently  effica-
cious. That  some  mind  is  read  I  should  think  jnost  probable  ;  the
question  is  not  between  mind-reading  and  something  quite  distinct ;  it
is  between  reading  the  mind  of  the  sitter  and  reading  the  mind  of
someone  else.  There  is  yet  another  kind  of  mind-reading,  if  such  it
can  be  called,  which,  though  difficult  to  formulate  and  contemplate,
yet  frequently  suggests  itself,  viz.,  the  gaining  of  knowledge  through
■some  hidden  community  of  mind,  through  the  existence  of  some  central
world-mind,  an  idealistic  conception  not  unknown  in  philosophy ;  but
it  is  sufficient  for  tlie  present  to  indicate  this  as  a  possible  notion  and
pass  on.

There  aie  three  methods  of  reading  the  mind  <)f  the  sitter,  labelled
■above  («),  (6),  and  (c).  Methods  of  extracting  information  from  distant
jDersons  ai'e  fewer.  Correspondence  is  one ;  telepathy  may,  I  suppose,  be
fissumed  to  be  another.  The  only  method  known  to  science  of  extract-
ing infoi'mation  from  deceased  pei'sons  is  the  discovery  of  documents.

Now,  in  respect  of  correspondence  and  documents  it  is  comparatively
easy  to  be  assured  as  to  the  use  or  non-use  of  these  methods  in  any
particular  case.  Eliminating  them,  if  anything  is  obtained  inexplicable
l)y  the  agency  of  the  sitter,  it  is  to  telepathy  that  we  must  look  for  a
possible  explanation.  Telepathy  from  distant  j^ersons  if  that  is  in  any
way  feasible,  telepathy  from  deceased  persons  only  as  a  last  I'esort,  but
telepathy  of  some  kind,  as  distinct  from  any  conceivable  method  of
extracting  information  from  persons  present:  that  seems  to  be  the  alter-
native hypothesis,  to  an  examination  of  wliich  we  hud  oui'selves  forced
by  an  attentive  study  of  the  I'ecords.

Now,  as  Ml'.  Leaf  says,  only  occasionally  d(.)es  the  questiiin  aiise  ;
most  facts  asserted  are,  of  course,  within  the  knowledge  of  the  sitter,
f\\v\  none  of  those  are  of  any  use  for  the  purpose  of  discrimination  ;
but  every  now  and  then  facts,  often  very  trivial  but  apparently  not
within  the  knowledge  of  the  sitter,  have  Ijeen  assei-ted,  and  have  been
more  or  less  clearly  verified  afterwards;  and  in  order  to  assist  a  special
study  of  these  data,  with  the  view  of  examining  how  far  they  are  really
valuable,  I  have  made  an  index  to  them,  which  I  append.


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


That  the  statements  are  made  in  a  hazy  and  ill-detined  manner  is.
obvious  on  the  sui-face.  We  are  e^'idently  2iot  in  a  i-egion  of  clear  and
exact  knowledge.  Events  are  dimly  perceived,  and  error  is  mixed
with  truth,  but  we  must  take  things  as  we  find  them.  The  question  is,
are  any  facts  perceived  at  all,  no  matter  how  dimly,  which  could
not  possibly  have  been  known  to  any  person  present  ?

iSome  of  the  following  points  are  stronger  than  others,  and  some
are  admittedly  weak.  I  at  one  time  indicated  against  each  that  par-
ticular "  explanation  "'  which  might  with  least  forcing  be  conceived  to
apply  to  that  particular  case.  In  most  of  such  hypothetical  explana-
tions "  thought-transference  from  lapsed-memory "  was  postulated  ;
information  derived  from  some  i^revious  sitter  was  also  a  possibility
not  to  be  ignored.  Wherever  both  of  these  were  obv  iously  inappli-
cable one  had  to  fall  back  upon  "  coincidence  "  or  "  chance  "  ;  and  in
sevei'al  cases  not  even  these  would  do.  I  now  decide  to  omit  all  these
gratuitous  suggestions ;  anyone  can  supply  them  if  he  thinks  fit,  and
eveiyone  must  decide  for  himself,  after  a  study  of  the  record,  wh-at
explanatifm  is  the  least  unlikely  and  Ikjw  far  any  explanation  is  really
adequate.

List  of  Incidents  unknovn  to,  or  forgotten  by,  or  iinJinotcaUe  to.


2)ersons  2Jresent.


1.  of  Sittlnrf.

Chief  Sitter.

Incident.  Page

16

0.  Lodge

.. Trouble  in  boy's  calf  of  leg

467

36  ...

Mrs.  Lodge

. Alex.  Marshall  hurt  hehnv  the  knee

472

37  ...

Rendall

. . Book  as  keepsake

479

39  ...

G  onner

. Going  out  of  mother

488

39  ...

Hair  not  cut  short  ...

489

40  ...

0.  Lodge

,. Private  affairs  of  "Mr.  E."

493

44  ...

Swimming  the  creek ...

503

45  ...

Mr.  Thompson  .

. . Lameness  of  L^ncle  William

510

46  ...

0.  Lodge

. . Dress  of  old  lady  with  Uncle  R.  ...

512

46  ...

J?

. Last  visit  of  0.  L.'s  father  to  Uncle

R

514

46  ...

)> • '

Snake  .skin

515

47  ...

. . Smith's  field  ...

517

47  ...

Cuts  in  watcli

518

48  ...

Charley  and  tile  V)ird

518

49  ...

Mrs.  Lodge

. Last  stick  of  W.  T

523

78  ...

Mr.  Lund

. . Pet  name  "  Margie  "

535

78  ...

.. Letter  signed  J.  B.  "W".  partially

read...

535

81  ...

Mr.  Thompson  .

Cold  in  mother's  ear...

544

82  ...

0.  Lodge

Circumstances  of  Uncle  F.'s  school

fight

550

83  ...

Mr.  Thompson  .

. . Epis(jde  of  Dr.  Rich

554

U.S.  ...

J.  T.  Clarke  .

Uncle  J ohn  by  marriage

570

U.S.  ...

Red-.stamped  cheques  in  pocket , . .

572

650


A  Record  of  Observations  of


of  Sittinf/.

Chief  Sitter.

Ineident.  Page

5  ...

Mrs.  Verrall

. Prescription  of  quinine

584

10  ...

. Carrie's  infant  sister

587

10  ...

J )  •

. Grandfather's  sister  Susan  ...

588

10  ...

?  9  ■

. Name  George  for  brother  of  uncle's

first  wife  ...

589

7  ...

Mis.s  Johnson

. Blister  on  brother's  great  toe

610

13  ...

Oscar  Browning  .

. Nephew  in  Philadelphia

626

15  ...

Prof.  Sidgwick  ..

. Mrs.  S.,  with  something  on  head,

talking  to  lady

627

18  ...

Mr.  Deronco

Mt>ther  lying  on  sofa

628

18  ...

. Brother  painting  a  profile  ...

628

25  ...

Miss  X.

. . Infant  brother  William

630

27  ...

Mr.  F.

.. Uncle  William

631

30  ...

Walter  Leaf

. Two  Gurney  letters  ...

633

61  ...

Mrs.  Sidgwick

. Prof.  S.  sitting  with  his  feet  up  ...

641

62  ...

Prof.  Sidgwick

., Mrs.  S.  reclining  witli  cloth  over

head  and  chest

641

63  ...

Mrs.  Yerrall

. . Dr.  V.  reading  at  desk  and  stijpping

to  talk  to  visitor  ...

642

64  ...

Mr.  Gale

.. Temporary  lameness  of  grandfather

643

66  ...

Mrs.  B.

Mrs.  Verrall  looking  in  glass  globe,

her  daughter  with  her  ...

644

67  ...

Miss  Johnson

.. Brother  reading  with  feet  up  in

corner  room

644

75  ...

Mrs.  Z.

... Ex  coidrarid... ...  ...

646

Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


651


(5)  PART  III.
By  Professor  William  James.


Dear  Mr.  Myers,

You  ask  for  a  record  of  my  own  experiences  with  Mrs.
Piper,  to  be  incorporated  in  the  account  of  her  to  be  published  in  your
^Proceedings.  I  regret  to  be  unable  to  furnish  you  with  any  direct
notes  of  sittings  beyond  those  which  Mr.  Hodgson  will  have  already
supplied.  I  admit  that  in  not  having  taken  more  notes  I  was  most
derelict,  and  can  only  cry  ^jeccovi.  The  excuse  (if  it  be  one)  for  my
negligence  was  that  I  wished  primarily  to  satisfy  myself  about  Mrs.
Piper ;  and  feeling  that  as  evidence  for  others  no  notes  but  steno-
graphic notes  would  have  value,  and  not  being  able  to  get  these,  I
seldom  took  any.  I  still  think  that  as  far  as  influencing  public  opinion
goes,  the  bare  fact  that  So-and-so  and  So-and-so  have  been  convinced  by
their  personal  experience  that  "  there  is  something  in  mediumship  is
the  essential  thing.  Public  opinion  follows  leaders  much  more  than  it
follows  evidence.  Professor  Huxley's  bare  "  endorsement  "  of  Mrs
Piper,  e.g.,  would  be  more  effective  than  volumes  of  notes  by  such  as  I
Practically,  however,  I  ought  to  have  taken  them,  and  the  sight  of  your
more  scientific  methods  makes  me  doubly  rue  my  sins.

Under  the  circumstances,  the  only  thing  I  can  do  is  to  give  you
my  present  state  of  belief  as  to  Mrs.  Piper's  powers,  with  a  simple
account  from  memory  of  the  steps  which  have  led  me  to  it.

I  made  Mrs.  Piper's  acquaintance  in  the  autumn  of  1885.  My
wife's  mother,  Mrs.  Gibbens,  had  been  told  of  her  by  a  friend,  during
the  previous  summer,  and  never  having  seen  a  medium  before,  had
paid  her  a  visit  out  of  curiosity.  She  returned  with  the  statement
that  Mrs.  P.  had  given  her  a  long  string  of  names  of  members  of  the
family,  mostly  Christian  names,  together  with  facts  about  the  j^ersons
mentioned  and  their  relations  to  each  other,  the  knowledge  of  which
on  her  part  was  incomprehensible  without  sujiernoi'mal  powers.  My
■sister-in-law  went  the  next  day,  with  still  better  results,  as  she  related
them.  Amongst  other  things,  the  medium  had  accurately  described
the  circumstances  of  the  writer  of  a  letter  which  she  held  against  her
forehead,  after  Miss  G.  had  given  it  to  her.  The  letter  was  in  Italian,
and  its  writer  was  known  to  but  two  persons  in  this  country.

[I  may  add  that  on  a  later  occasion  my  wife  and  I  took  another
letter  from  this  same  person  to  Mrs.  P.,  who  went  on  to  sjaeak  of  him
in  a  way  which  identified  him  unmistakably  again.  On  a  third
occasion,  two  years  later,  my  sister-in-law  and  I  being  again  with  Mrs,


652


A  Record  of  Observations  of


P.,  she  reverted  in  her  trance  to  these  letters,  and  then  ga\-e  us  the
writer's  name,  which  she  said  she  had  not  been  able  to  get  on  the-
former  occasion.]

But  to  revert  to  the  beginning.  I  remember  playing  the  esprit  fort
on  that  occasion  before  my  feminine  relatives,  and  seeking  to  explain
by  simple  considerations  the  marvellous  character  of  the  facts  which
they  Ijrought  back.  This  did  not,  however,  prevent  me  from  going-
myself  a  few  days  later,  in  company  with  my  Avife,  to  get  a  direct
personal  impression.  The  names  of  none  of  us  up  to  this  meeting  had
been  announced  to  Mrs.  P.,  and  Mrs.  J.  and  I  were,  of  course,  careful
to  make  no  reference  to  our  relatives  who  had  preceded.  The  medium,
however,  when  entranced,  repeated  most  of  the  names  of  "  spirits
whom  she  had  announced  on  the  two  formei'  occasions  and  added  others.
The  names  came  with  difficulty,  and  were  only  gradually  made  perfect.
My  wife's  father's  name  of  Gibbens  was  announced  first  as  Niblin,  then
as  Giblin.  A  child  Herman  (whom  we  had  lost  the  previous  yeai-)  had
his  name  spelt  out  as  Heri'in.  I  think  that  in  no  case  were  both-
Christian  and  surnames  given  on  this  visit.  But  t\\Q  facts  predicated  of
the  persons  named  made  it  in  many  instances  impossible  not  to  recognise
the  particular  individuals  who  were  talked  about.  We  took  particulai-
pains  on  this  occasion  to  give  the  Phinuit  control  no  help  over  his
difficulties  and  to  ask  no  leading  questions.  In  the  light  of  subseque)it-
experience  I  believe  this  not  to  be  the  best  policy.  For  it  often  happens,
if  you  give  this  trance-personage  a  name  or  some  small  fact  for  the  lack
of  which  he  is  brought  to  a  standstill,  that  he  will  then  start  off  with  a,
copious  flow  of  additional  talk,  containing  in  itself  an  abundance  of
"tests."

My  impression  after  this  first  visit  was,  that  Mrs.  P.  was  either
possessed  of  supernoi-mal  j^owers,  or  knew  the  members  of  my  wife's
family  hj  sight  and  had  by  some  lucky  coincidence  become  acquainted
with  such  a  multitude  of  their  domestic  circumstances  as  to  produce
the  startling  impression  which  she  did.  My  later  knowledge  of  her
sittings  and  personal  acquaintance  with  her  has  led  me  aljsolutely  to-
re] ect  the  latter  explanation,  and  to  believe  that  she  has  supernormal
j^owers.

I  v  isited  her  a  dozen  times  that  winter,  sometimes  alone,  sometimes
with  my  wife,  once  in  company  with  the  Rev.  M.  J.  Savage.  I  sent  a
large,  number" of  persons  to  her,  wishing  to  get  the  results  of  as  many
first  sittings  as  possible.  I  made  aj^j^ointments  myself  for  most  of  these
people,  whose  names  were  in  no  instance  announced  to  the  medium.  In
the  spring  of  1886  I  published  a  brief  "Report  of  the  Committee  on
Mediumistic  Phenomena  "  in  the  rroceedingfi  of  the  Amei-ican  Society
for  Psychical  Research,  of  which  the  following  is  an  extract : — •

"I  have  myself  witnessed  a  dozen  of  her  trances,  and  have  testimony  at


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


653


fir.st  hand  from  25  sitters,  all  but  one  of  whom  were  virtually  introduced,
to  Mrs.  P.  by  myself.'  C)f  five  of  the  sittings  we  have  verhatiiii  steno-
graphic reports.  Tweh'e  of  the  sitters,  who  in  most  cases  sat  singly,  got  no-
thing from  the  jnediuui  but  unknown  names  or  trivial  talk.  Fovu-  of  these
were  members  of  the  Society,  and  of  their  sittings  verbatim  reports  were
taken.  Fifteen  of  the  sitters  were  surprised  at  the  commiaiications  they
received,  names  and  facts  being  mentioned  at  the  first  interview  which  it
sesmed  imjirobable  should  have  been  known  to  the  medium  in  a  normal  way.
The  probability  that  she  possessed  no  clue  as  to  the  sitter's  identity  was,  I
believe,  in  each  and  all  of  these  15  cases,  sufficient.  But  of  only  one  of
them  is  there  a  stenographic  report  ;  so  that,  unfortunately  for  the  medium,
the  evidence  in  her  favour  is,  although  more  abundant,  less  exact  in  quality
than  some  of  that  which  will  be  counted  against  her.  Of  these  15
sitters,  five,  all  ladies,  were  blood  relatives,  and  two  (I  myself  being  one)
were  men  connected  by  marriage  with  the  family  to  which  they  belonged.
Two  other  connections  of  this  family  are  included  in  the  12  who  got
nothing.  The  medium  slunvcd  a  most  startling  intimacy  with  tins  family's
att'airs,  talking  of  many  m-atters  known  to  no  one  outside,  and  which  gossip
could  not  possibly  have  conveyed  to  her  ears.  The  details  would  prove
nothing  to  the  reader,  unless  printed  iii,  e.rteikso,  with  full  notes  by  the
sitters.  It  reverts,  after  all,  to  jiersonal  conviction.  My  own  conviction  is
not  evidence,  but  it  seems  fitting  to  record  it.  I  am  persuaded  of  the
medium's  honesty,  and  of  the  genuineness  of  her  trance  ;  and  although  at
first  disposed  to  think  that  the  '  hits  '  she  made  were  either  lucky  coinci-
dences, or  the  result  of  knowledge  on  her  part  of  who  the  sitter  was  and  of
his  or  her  family  affairs,  T  now  1)elieve  her  to  be  in  possession  of  a  power  as
yet  unexplained."

I  also  made  during  this  winter  an  attempt  to  see  whether  Mrs.
Piper's  medium-trance  had  any  community  of  nature  with  ordinary
liypnotic  trance. I  wrote  in  the  report : —

' '  My  first  two  attempts  to  hypnotise  her  were  unsuccessful.  Between
the  second  time  and  the  third,  I  suggested  to  her  '  conti-ol '  in  the  medium-
trance  that  he  should  make  her  a  mesmeric  subject  forme.  He  agreed.  (A
suggestion  of  this  sort  made  Ijy  the  operator  in  one  h  ijpnotic  trance  would
jtrobably  have  some  eftect  on  the  next.)  She  became  partially  hyjjnotised
on  the  third  tiial  ;  but  the  ettect  was  so  slight  that  I  ascrilje  it  rather  to  the
effect  of  repetition  than  to  the  suggestion  made.  By  tlie  fifth  trial  she  had
become  a  pretty  good  hypnotic  subject,  as  far  as  muscular  phenomena  and
automatic  imitations  of  speech  and  gesture  go  ;  but  I  could  not  affect  her
consciousness,  or  otherwise  get  her  beyond  this  point.  Her  condition  in  this
semi-hypnosis  is  very  different  from  her  medium-trance.  The  latter  is
characterised  by  great  muscular  unrest,  even  her  ears  moving  vigorously  in  a
way-  impossible  to  her  in  her  waking  state.  But  in  hypnosis  her  muscular
relaxation  and  weakness  are  extreme.  She  often  jnakes  several  efforts  to  speak-

I I  ti-ied  then,  and  luive  tried  since,  to  get  written  accounts  from  these  sitters,  in
most  cases  in  vain.  The  few  written  statements  whicli  I  have  got  are  in  Mr.
Hodgson's  hands,  and  will  doubtless  be  sent  you  with  the  rest  of  the  material  which
he  will  submit.

2  Y


G54


A  Record  of  Observations  of


ere  her  voice  becomes  audible  ;  and  to  get  a  strong  contraction  of  the  hand,
for  example,  express  manipulation  and  suggestion  must  be  practised.  The
automatic  imitations  I  spoke  of  are  in  the  first  instance  very  weak,  and  only
become  strong  after  repetition.  Her  pupils  contract  in  tlie  medium-trance.
Suggestions  to  the  '  control '  that  he  should  make  her  recollect  after  the
medium-trance  what  she  had  been  saying  were  accepted,  bvit  had  no  result.
In  the  hypnotic-trance  such  a  suggestion  will  often  make  the  patient
remember  all  that  has  happened.

' '  No  sign  of  thought-transference — as  tested  by  card  and  diagram  guess-
ing— has  been  found  in  her,  either  in  the  hypnotic  condition  just  described,
or  immediately  after  it  ;  although  her  'control '  in  the  medium-trance  has
said  that  he  would  bring  them  about.  So  far  as  ti-ied  (only  twice),  no  right
guessing  of  cards  in  the  medium-trance.  No  clear  signs  of  thought-transfer-
ence, as  tested  by  the  naming  of  cards,  during  the  waking  state.  Trials  of
the  '  willing  game, '  and  attempts  at  automatic  writing,  gave  similarly
negative  results.  So  far  as  the  evidence  goes,  then,  her  medium-trance
seems  an  isolated  feature  in  her  psychology.  This  would  of  itself  be  an  im-
portant result  if  it  could  be  estalilished  and  generalised,  but  the  record  is
obviously  too  imperfect  tov  confident  conclusions  to  he  drawn  from  it  in  any
direction."

Hei'e  I  dropped  my  inquiries  into  Mrs.  Piper's  mediumshi2D  for  a
period  of  about  two  years,  having  satisfied  myself  that  there  was  a
genuine  mystery  there,  but  being  over-freighted  with  time-consuming
duties,  and  feeling  that  any  adequate  cii'cumnavigation  of  the
plienomena  would  be  too  protracted  a  task  for  me  to  aspire  just  then
to  undertake.  I  saw  her  once,  half-accidentally,  howevei',  during  that
interval,  and  in  the  spring  of  1889  saw  her  four  times  again.  In  the
fall  of  1889  she  paid  us  a  visit  of  a  week  at  our  country  house  in  New
HamjDshire,  and  I  then  learned  to  know  her  pei'sonally  better  than  ever
before,  and  had  conlii-med  in  me  the  belief  that  she  is  an  absolutely
simple  and  genuine  person.  No  one,  when  challenged,  can  give
"  evidence  "  to  others  for  such  beliefs  as  this.  Yet  we  all  live  by  them
from  day  to  day,  and  practically  I  should  be  willing  now  to  stake  as
jiiuch  money  on  Mrs.  Piper's  honesty  as  on  that  of  anyone  I  know,
and  am  quite  satisfied  to  leave  my  reputation  for  wisdom  or  folly,  so
far  as  human  nature  is  concerned,  to  stand  or  fall  l)y  this  declai'ation.  -

As  for  the  explanation  of  her  trance-phenomena,  I  have  none  to
offer.  The  primd  facie  theory,  which  is  that  of  spirit-conti'ol,  is  hard
to  reconcile  Mdtli  the  extreme  triviality  of  most  of  the  communications.
What  real  spirit,  at  last  alile  to  revisit  his  wife  on  this  earth,  but
would  find  sometliing  better  to  say  than  that  she  liad  elianged  the  place
of  his  photograj)!!  1  And  yet  that  is  the  sort  oi  remai-k  to  which  the
spirits  introduced  by  the  mysterious  Phinuit  are  apt  to  confine  them-
selves. I  must  admit,  however,  that  Phinuit  has  other  moods.  He
has  several  times,  when  my  wife  and  myself  were  sitting  together  with
Jiim,  suddenly  started  off  on  long  lectui'es  to  us  about  our  inward  defects


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


655


and  outward  shortcomings,  which  were  very  earnest,  as  well  as  subtile
morally  and  psychologically,  and  impressive  in  a  high  degree.  These
discourses,  though  given  in  Phinuit's  own  person,  were  very  different
in  style  from  his  more  usual  talk,  and  probably  supei'ior  to  anything
"that  the  medium  could  produce  in  the  same  line  in  her  natural  state.
Phinuit  himself,  however,  bears  every  appearance  of  being  a  fictitious
l^eing. His  French,  so  far  as  he  has  been  able  to  display  it  to  me,  has
been  limited  to  a  few  phrases  of  salutation,  which  may  easily  have
liad  their  rise  in  the  medium's  "  unconscious  "  memory ;  he  has  never
been  able  to  understand  my  French ;  and  the  crumbs  of  information
which  he  gives  about  his  earthly  career  are,  as  you  know,  so  few,  vague,
and  unlikely  sounding,  as  to  suggest  the  romancing  of  one  whose  stock
of  materials  for  invention  is  excessively  reduced. He  is,  however,  as  he
actually  shows  himself,  a  definite  human  individual,  with  immense  tact
and  patience,  and  great  desire  to  please  and  be  regarded  as  infallible.
With  respect  to  the  rough  and  slangy  style  which  he  so  often  affects,
it  should  be  said  that  the  Spiritualistic  tradition  here  in  America  is  all
in  favour  of  the  "spirit-control"  being  a  gi'otesque  and  somewhat  saucy
personage. The  Zeitgeist  has  always  much  to  do  with  shaping  trance-
phenomena,  so  that  a  "control"  of  that  temperament  is  what  one  would
naturally  expect. Mr.  Hodgson  will  already  have  informed  you  of  the
similarity  between  Phinuit's  name  and  that  of  the  "  control  "  of  the
medium  at  whose  house  Mrs.  Piper  was  first  entranced. The  most
I'emai'kable  thing  about  the  Phiimit  personality  seems  to  me  the  extra-
ordinary tenacity  and  minuteness  of  his  memory. The  medium  has
been  visited  by  many  hundreds  of  sitters,  half  of  them,  perhaps,  being
strangers  who  have  come  but  once. To  each  Phinuit  gives  an  hour-
f ul  of  disconnected  fragments  of  talk  about  persons  living,  dead,  or
imaginary,  and  events  past,  future,  or  unreal. What  normal  waking
memory  could  keep  this  chaotic  mass  of  stuff  together  ? Yet  Phinuit
■does  so ;  for  the  chances  seem  to  be,  that  if  a  sitter  should  go  back  after
years  of  interval,  the  medium,  when  once  entranced,  would  recall  the
minutest  incidents  of  the  earlier  interview,  and  begin  by  recapitulating
much  of  what  had  then  been  said. So  far  as  I  can  discover,  Mrs.
Piper's  waking  memory  is  not  remarkal)le,  and  the  whole  constitution
of  her  trance-memory  is  something  which  I  am  at  a  loss  to  understand.
But  I  will  say  nothing  more  of  Phinuit,  because,  aided  by  our  friends  in
France,  you  are  already  systematically  seeking  to  establish  or  disprove
him  as  a  former  native  of  this  world.

Phinuit  is  generally  the  medium  of  communication  between  other
spirits  and  the  sitter.  But  two  other  soi-disant  spirits  have,  in  my  pre-
sence, assumed  direct  "control"  of  Mrs.  Piper.  One  purported  to  be  the
late  Mr.  E.  The  other  was  an  aunt  of  mine  who  died  last  year  in
i^ew  York. I  have  already  sent  you  the  only  account  T  can  give  o£


G56


A  Record  of  Ohservations  of


my  earliest  experiences  with  the  "  E.  control."  The  first  messages-
came  through  Phinuit,  about  a  year  ago,  when  after  two  years  of  non-
inteix-ourse  with  INIi's.  Piper,  she  lunched  one  day  at  our  house  and
giive  my  wife  and  myself  a  sitting  afterwards.  It  was  bad  enough  ;
and  I  confess  that  the  human  being  in  me  was  so  nmch  stronger  than
the  man  of  science  thfxt  I  Avas  too  disgusted  with  Phinuit's  tiresome
twaddle  eA^en  to  note  it  down.  When  later  the  phenomenon  developed
into  pretended  direct  sjaeech  from  E.  himself  I  regretted  this,  for  a
complete  lecord  would  have  Ijeen  useful.  I  can  now  merely  say  that
neither  then,  nor  at  any  other  time,  was  there  to  my  mind  the  slightest
inner  verisimilitude  in  the  personation.  But  the  failure  to  j^roduce  a
more  plausible  E.  s^Deaks  diiectly  in  favour  of  the  non-participation.
of  the  medium's  cousc/o?'..'?  mind  in  the  pei/formance.  iShe  could  so  easily
luive  coached  lierself  to  be  more  effective.

Her  trance-talk  about  my  own  family  shows  the  same  innocence..
The  sceptical  theory  of  her  successes  is  that  she  keeps  a  sort  of  detec-
tiA'e  bureau  open  uf)on  the  world  at  large,  so  that  whoever  may  call  is^
pretty  sure  to  find  her  prepared  with  facts  about  his  life.  Few  things
could  have  been  easier,  in  Boston,  than  for  Mrs.  Piper  to  collect  facts-
about  my  own  father's  family  for  use  in  my  sittings  with  her.  But
although  my  father,  my  mothei',  and  a  deceased  brother  were  repeatedly
announced  as  present,  nothing  Imt  their  bare  names  ever  came  out,,
except  a  hearty  message  of  thanks  from  my  father  that  I  had  "  pub-
lished the  book."  I  had  published  his  Literary  Remains ;  but  when
Phinuit  was  asked  "what  book?"  all  he  could  do  was  to  spell  the
letters  L,  I,  and  say  no  more.  If  it  be  suggested  that  all  this  was  but
a  refinement  of  cunning,  for  that  such  skilfully  flistri))uted  reticences-
are  what  bring  most  credit  in  to  a  medium,  I  nmst  deny  the  proposition
i)i  toto.  I  have  seen  and  heard  enough  of  sittings  to  be  sure  that  a
medium's  tiump  cards  are  promptitude  and  completeness  in  her
revelations.  It  is  a  mistake  in  general  (howcA'er  it  may  occasionally,,
as  now,  be  cited  in  her  fa^'our)  to  keep  back  anything  she  knows.
Phinuit's  stuml>ling,  spelling,  and  otherwise  imperfect  ways  of  bringing
out  his  facts  is  a  great  drawback  with  most  sitters,  and  yet  it  is  habitual
with  him.

The  aunt  who  purported  to  "  take  control "'  directly  was  a  much
better  pei'sonation,  having  a  good  deal  of  the  cheery  strenuousness  of
speech  of  the  original.  She  spoke,  by  the  way,  on  this  occasion,  of  the
condition  of  health  <.if  two  memljers  of  the  family  in  New  York,  of
which  we  knew  nothing  at  the  time,  and  which  was  afterwards  cor-
roborated by  letter.  We  have  repeatedly  heard  from  Mrs.  Piper  in
trance  things  of  wdiich  we  were  not  at  the  moment  aware.  If  tlie
supernormal  element  in  the  phenomenon  be  thought-tran-sference  it  it*
certainly  not  that  of  the  sitter's  conscious  thought. It  is  rather  the-


Certain  Phenomemi  of  Trance.


657


i-eservoir  of  his  potential  knowledge  which  is  tapped  ;  and  not  always
■that,  but  the  knowledge  of  some  distant  living  person,  as  in  the
incident  last  quoted.  It  has  sometimes  even  seemed  to  me  that  too
much  intentness  on  the  sitter's  part  to  have  Phinuit  say  a  certain  thing
-acts  as  a  hindrance.

Mrs.  Blodgett,  of  Holyoke,  Mass.,  and  lier  sister,  devised,  befoi'e
"the  latter  died,  what  would  have  been  a  good  test  of  actual  spirit-
return.  The  sister,  Miss  H.  W.,  wrote  upon  her  deathbed  a  letter,
sealed  it,  and  gave  it  to  Mi's.  B.  After  her  death  no  one  living
knew  what  woids  it  contained.  Mrs.  B.  not  then  knowing  Mrs.  Piper,
entrusted  to  me  the  sealed  letter,  and  asked  me  to  give  Mi's.  Piper  some
.articles  of  the  deceased  sister's  personal  apparel,  to  help  her  to  get  at
its  contents.  This  commission  I  perfoinied.  Mrs.  P.  gave  correctly
the  full  name  (which  even  I  did  not  know)  of  the  writer,  and  finally,
-after  a  delay  and  ceremony  which  occupied  several  weeks  on  Phinuit's
part,  dictated  what  purported  to  be  a  copy  of  the  letter.  This  I
•compared  with  the  original  [oi  which  Mrs.  B.  peiinitted  me  to  bi'eak
"the  seal) ;  but  the  two  letters  had  nothing  in  common,  nor  were
•any  of  the  numerous  domestic  facts  alluded  to  in  the  medium's  letter
-acknowledged  by  Mrs.  Blodgett  to  be  ct)rrect.  Mrs.  Piper  was  equally
unsuccessful  in  two  later  attempts  which  she  made  to  reproduce  tlie
contents  of  this  document,  altliough  both  times  the  revelation  purpor  ted
to  come  direct  from  its  deceased  writer.  It  would  be  hard  to  devise  a
better  test  than  this  would  have  been,  had  it  immediately  succeeded,  for
the  exclusion  of  thought-transfereiice  from  living  mintls.

My  mothei--in-law,  on  her  return  from  Europe,  spent  a  morning
A'ainly  seeking  for  her  Ijank-book.  Mrs.  Piper,  on  being  shortly  aftei-
wards  asked  where  this  book  was,  described  the  place  so  exactly  that  it
was  instantly  found.  I  was  told  by  her  that  the  spirit  of  a  boy  named
Hobert  F.  was  the  companion  of  my  lost  infant.  The  F.'s  weie
cousins  of  my  wife  living  in  a  distant  city.  On  my  return  liome  I
mentioned  the  incident  to  my  wife,  saying,  "Your  cousin  did  lose  a
baby,  didn't  she  1  but  Mrs.  Piper  was  Avrong  about  its  sex,  name,  and
nge.  "  I  then  learned  that  Mi's.  Piper  had  been  quite  I'ight  in  all
"those  particulai's,  and  that  mine  was  the  wrong  impression.  But,
obviously,  for  the  source  of  revelations  such  as  these,  one  need  not  go
behind  the  sitter's  own  storehouse  of  forgotten  or  unnoticed  exijeri-
ences.  Miss  X.'s  experiments  in  crystal-gazing  prove  how  strangely
these  survive.  If  thought-ti'ansference  Ije  tlie  clue  to  be  followed
in  interpreting  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-iitterances  (and  that,  as  far  as  my
experience  goes,  is  what,  far  more  than  any  supranumdane  instillations,
the  phenomena  f:eem  on  their  face  to  be)  we  must  admit  that  the
transference  "  need  not  he  of  the  conscious  or  even  the  unconscious
thought  of  the  sittei',  but  must  ofteii  be  of  the  thought  of  some  person


658


A  Record  of  Ohaer vat  Ions  of


far  away.  Thus,  on  my  mutliev-in-law's  second  A'isit  to  the  medium
she  was  told  that  one  of  her  daugliters  was  sutfeiiug  from  a  severe
pain  in  lier  back  on  that  day.  This  altogether  unusual  occuri'ence,
unknown  to  the  sitter,  proved  to  be  true.  The  announcement  to  my
wife  and  brother  of  my  aunt's  death  in  New  Yoik  before  Ave  had
received  the  telegi-am  (Mr.  Hodgson  has,  I  believe,  sent  you  an  account
of  this)  may,  on  tlie  other  hand,  have  been  occasioned  by  the  sitters'
conscious  appiehension  of  the  evejit.  This  particular  incident  is  a-
"  test  "  of  the  sort  which  one  readily  quotes  ;  but  to  my  mind  it  was.
far  less  convincing  than  the  innumerable  small  domestic  matters  of
which  Mi's.  Piper  incessantly  talked  in  hei'  sittings  with  members  o£
my  family.  With  the  afiairs  of  my  wife's  maternal  kinsfolk  in
particular  her  acquaintance  in  trance  was  most  intimate.  Some  of
them  wei'e  dead,  some  in  California,  some  in  the  State  of  Maine.  She-
characterised  them  all,  living  as  well  as  deceased,  spoke  of  their
i"elati(>ns  to  each  other,  of  their  likes  and  dislikes,  of  their  as  yet
unpublished  practical  plans,  and  hardly  ever  made  a  mistake,  though,,
as  usual,  tliere  was  veiy  little  system  or  continuity  in  anything  that
came  out.  A  normal  person,  unacquainted  with  the  family,  could  not
possibly  have  said  as  mucli  ;  one  acquainteil  witli  it  could  hardly  have-
avoided  saying  more.

The  most  convincing  things  said  about  m)^  own  immediate  house-
hold were  either  very  intimate  f)r  very  trivial.  Unfortunately  the
former  tliiiags  cannot  A\'ell  be  published.  Of  the  trivial  things,  I  have
foi'gotten  the  greater  number,  but  the  following,  rarce.  nantes,  may  serve-
as  samples  of  tlieir  class  :  She  said  that  we  had  lost  recently  a  rug,,
and  I  a  waistcoat.  [She  wrongly  accused  a  person  of  stealing  the  rug,,
which  was  afterwards  found  in  the  house.]  She  told  of  my  killing  a
grey-and-white  cat,  with  ether,  and  described  how  it  had  "  spun  lound
and  i-()und''  before  dying.  She  told  how  my  New  Yoi-k  aunt  had  w  ritten
a  letter  to  my  wife,  warning  her  against  all  mediums,  and  then  went  off
on  a  most  amusing  criticism,  full  of  traits  rlfs,  of  the  excellent  woman's,
character.  [Of  course  no  one  but  my  wife  and  I  knew  the  existence  of
the  letter  in  question.]  She  was  strong  on  the  events  in  our  mirsery,
and  gave  stiil^ing  advice  during  our  first  visit  to  her  about  the  way  to-
deal  with  certain  "tantrums"  of  our  second  child,  '"little  Eilly-boy,"  as;
she  called  him,  reproducing  his  nursery  name.  She  told  how  the  crib
creaked  at  night,  how  a  cei-tain  rocking-chair  creaked  mysteriously,  how
my  wife  had  heard  footsteps  on  the  stairs,  etc.,  etc.  Insignificant  a.s
these  things  sound  when  read,  the  accumulation  of  a  large  number  of
them  has  an  irresistible  effect.  And  I  repeat  again  what  I  said  before,,
that,  taking  everything  that  I  know  of  Mrs.  P.  into  account,  the  result
is  to  make  me  feel  as  absolutely  certain  as  I  am  of  any  personal  fact  in
the  world  that  she  knows  things  in  her  trances  which  she  cannot  possibly


Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance.


659


have  heard  in  her  waking  state,  and  that  the  definitive  philosophy  of
her  trances  is  yet  to  be  found.  The  limitations  of  her  trance-informa-
tion, its  discontinuity  and  fitfulness,  and  its  apjDarent  inability  to
develop  beyond  a  certain  point,  although  they  end  by  rousing  one's
moral  and  human  impatience  with  the  phenomenon,  yet  are,  from  a
scientific  point  of  view,  amongst  its  most  interesting  peculiarities,  since
where  there  are  limits  there  are  conditions,  and  the  discovery  of  these
is  always  the  beginning  of  explanation.

This  is  all  that  I  can  tell  you  of  Mrs.  Piper.  I  wish  it  were  more
"scientific." But,  valeat  quantum  I  it  is  the  best  I  can  do.


060


General  Meeting.


PKOCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON

October  31st,  1890.

The  forty-lirst  General  Meeting  of  the  S(jciety  -was  held  at  the
Westminster  Town  Hall,  on  October  31st,  1890.

Mr.  Peaesall  Smith  in  the  Chair.

Mr.  T.  Barkworth  read  a  paper  on  "  Some  Recent  Experiments  in
Planchette  Writing,"  which  it  is  proposed  to  publish  in  a  future
juimber  of  the  Proceedings.

The  paper  l)y  Professor  William  James,  of  Harvard,  on  "  Observa-
tions of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance,"  made  with  Mrs.  Piper,  which  is
i:)rinted  al)ove,  was  read  by  his  brother,  ]N[r.  Henry  James.


.Supplement.]


Second  Ad  Tnterini  jReport.


CGI


SUPPLEMENT.
I.

SECOND AD INTERIM REPORT ON THE CENSUS  OF

HALLUCINATIONS,

Up  to  July  11th,  ISOO.


In  England  tlie  tutal  number  of  answers  received  up  to  this  date  is  :


"No."

"  Yes."

Totals.

From  men

2646

218

28*54

From  women

3108

50!)

3617

5754

727

6481

Percentage  of  affirmative  an.swers,  11 'l.

Of  the  persons  answering  "  Yes  "  121  have  as  yet  sent  no  jjarticulars.

Tlie  number  of  j)ersons  who  have  had  more  tlian  one  experience,  eitlier
the  same  repeated  more  than  once  or  different  experiences,  i.s  217.  Of  these,
90  have  had  only  auditory  or  tactile  experiences,  generally  of  a  trivial  kind.
When  a  percipient  has  had  more  than  one  experience,  but  has  not  descriljed
them  singly,  his  exjieriences  are  counted  together  as  one  case  in  the  follow-
ing tables.

The  experiences  recorded  have  been  classitied  as  folLjws  :

A. — Experiences  Affectino  Moke  Than  One  Sense.
I. — Coincidental.


Represeiitin

A  Living
Person,

A  Pead
Pei.son.

An
Inanimate
Object.

Totals.

Visual  and  Auditory

8

1

o

11

Visual  and  Tactile

2

2

Auditory  and  Tactile

1

1

Visual,  Auditory,  and  Tactile

2

2

13

1

2

16

6G2


Second  Ad  Interim  Report  on  the  [Supplement.


II. — Non-Coincidental.


Visual  and  Auditory
Visual  and  Tactile  . . ,
Auditory  and  Tactile


Representing

A  Living  Person.

A  Deail  Person .

9  S

Part  of  Human
Figure  otlier
than  Head.

An  Animal.

An  Inanimate
Object.

-M
O

H

6

15

9

2

1

3

36

o
»J

4

2

1

1

1

12

o
O

1

2

1

7

2

1

3

14

20

14

o

K>

2

5

58

It  is  by  no  means  certain  tliat  tlie  affection  of  Imth  senses  was  in  all  cases
liallucinatory — rustlini;-,  footsteps,  &c.,  may  sometimes  have  been  real
Sounds,  and  touches  real  muscular  sensations.

Of  the  coincidental  visual  and  auditory  cases,  2,  viz.,  those  re^jresenting
an  inanimate  object,  are  said  to  have  been  collective.  Of  the  non-
coincidental  visual  and  auditory  cases,  5,  viz.,  1  of  an  unrecognised  person,
1  of  an  animal,  2  of  an  inanimate  object,  and  1  of  a  recognised  living
person,  are  also  said  to  have  been  collective.  In  the  last  case  the  experience
of  two  out  of  the  three  perci]>ients  was  visual  only.

B. — Experiences  Affecting  One  Sense  Only.

I. — Visual.

1.  Coincidental —

«.  Human  apparitions  :

n.  Of  living  people

/3.  Unrecognised
b.  Non-human  apparitions  :

a.  Of  animals  (symbolic)  ...

/3.  Oi  inanimate  objects  ...

2.  Non-coincidental —

«.  Huraan  ajiparitions  :
a.  Of  living  people

13.  Of  dead  people  ... ... ... ... ...  >

y.  Unrecognised ... ... ... ... ... ^71/  317

8.  Any  part  of  figure  other  than  head 8-^  y  365

b.  Non-lnnnan  apparitions  :
a.  Of  animals

13.  Of  inanimate  objects  ...


311
6)


2)
4f


\-  43


It}  48j


Total


408


Of  these,  52  (6  coincidental  and  46  non -coincidental  cases)  are  said  to  have
been  collective  experiences. The  coincidental  collective  cases  consist  of


Supplement.]


Census  of  Hallucinations.


GG-3


3  apparitions  of  a  living  jjerson,  1  unrecognised,  and  2  of  inanimate  objects  ;
and  the  non-coincidental  collective  cases  consist  of  6  aj^paritions  of  a  living
person,  2  of  a  dead  person,  and  29  unrecognised,  1  of  an  animal,  and  8  of
inanimate  objects.

II. — Auditory  (Hujiak  Voices).

1.  Coincidental —

((.  Recognised  living  :

Name  called... ... ... ... ... ... 11  "|

Woitls  other  than  percipient's  name ... ... 12  V 25  !

Crying  or  sobbing  ... ... ... ... ...  2

h.  Unrecognised  :

Name  called... ... ... ... 2  "j

Words  other  than  percijiient's  name ... ...  6J

2.  Non-c<.iincidental —

«.  Recognised. Of  living  j^ersons  :

Name  called  on  one  occasion...  ... ...  26

Words  other  than  percipient's  name ... ...  6

Voices  heard  (once  or  more) ... ... ...  5

Song  ... ... ... ... ... ...  1

Screams ... ... ... ... ... ...  1

h.  Recognised. Of  dead  persons  :

Name  called  on  one  occasion ... ... ...  10

Words  other  than  percipient's  name ... ...  ii

Voices  heard  (once  or  more) ... ... ...  4

c.  Name  called  on  more  than  one  occasion,  voice  either  recog-

nised or  not

d.  Unrecognised  :

Name  called  on  one  occasion ... ... ...  20

Words  other  than  percipient's  name ... ...  21

^'^oices  heard  (once  or  more) ... ... ...  14

"  Crooning  "  a  tune 1

Music  and  faint  voices ... ... ... ...  1

Shriek 1

Total

Of  these,  19  (4  coincidental  and  15  non-coincidental)  are  said  to  have
been  collective  experiences.  The  4  coincidental  collective  cases  consist  of  2
cases  of  calls,  1  of  words  in  a  recognised  voice,  and  1  of  a  call  in  an  unrecog-
nised voice.  Tlie  non-coincidental  collective  cases  are  4  cases  of  calls,  2  of
words,  and  1  of  a  song  in  the  voice  of  a  living  person,  1  of  words  in  the  voice
of  a  dead  jjerson,  1  of  the  voice  of  a  dead  person,  1  of  calls  occurring  on
three  occasions  to  the  same  two  percipients,  and  5  unrecognised  cases  (3  of
words,  1  of  voices,  and  1  of  "crooning  "  a  tune).

III.— Tactile.

1.  Coincidental —

a.  Recognised  touch  of  a  living  person ... ...  2  "l  ^

b.  Unrecognised ... ... ... ... ...  4  /


i


20>


G3-


58-


21J


Second  Ad  Intcrlui  Report.


[Supplement.


2.  Non-coincident;il —

«.  Recognised  touch  of  a  living  per.sim  :

a.  Single  touch

^.  Recurring  touches
h.  Recognised  touch  of  a  dead  person  :

n.  Single  touch

/3.  Recurring  touches
c.  Unrecognised  :

a.  Single  touch,  &c.

fi.  Frequent  touches

.  Total


3/


2.
19


1}


4  50


44


5(5


<)ne  ease  of  a  single  unrecognised  touch  is  said  to  have  Vjeen  collective,
one  percipient  seeing  a  form  when  tlie  other  felt  a  touch.

I  must  make  the  same  reserves  as  to  possibilities  of  error,  and,  in  a  few
cases,  morbid  conditions  in  tlie  jjercipients,  as  in  my  last  i-ejjort.


Tlie  iuipiiry  is  also  proceeding  in  Aniei'ica,  France,  Germany,  and  Italy,
but  we  have  not  received  any  detailed  repoi'ts  from  these  countries.

T  may  again  remind  my  readeis  that  a  lejx^rt  on  tlie  Census  is  to  Ije  made
to  the  International  Congress  of  Experimental  Psychology  in  1892,  and  that
we  should  like  Ijy  that  time  to  have  50,000  answers.  Further  assistance  in
Collecting  is  ui'gently  needed,  and  I  shall  be  glad  to  correspond  with  anyone
willing  to  help  in  the  work.  Letters  should  be  addressed.  Professor  Sidg-
wick,  Cambridge.

Henry  Sidgwick.

P.S. — In  America  the  collection  is  being  carried  on  Ijy  Professor  William
James,  Harvard  University,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  wlio  may  be  applied  to  for
the  necessary  forms,  and  in  France  l)y  Mons.  Leon  Marillier,  7,  Rue
Michelet,  Paris.


Supplement.] Ahscikofs  Animismv.s  anJ  S2'>ii'(f i-'^riiu-'>:


665.


IT.

REVIEW  OF  A.  AKSAKOF'S  ANIMISMUS  AND
SPIRITISMUS.

By  F.  W.  H.  Myers.


Animism  and  Sjiii'itisiti, ;  an  AUvnipt  at  a  Critical  Investigation  of  Me  din  mint  ic
Phenomena,  with,  sjxcial  reference  to  the  Hypotheses  of  Scdhici nation  and
of  the  Unconscious ;  an  Answer  to  Dr.  E.  von,  Hartmann's  n-orl\  Der
Spiritisinns."  By  Alexander  N.  Aksakof.  Tp.  xli.,  768,  in  two
volumes  octavo. Oswald  Miitze,  Leipsic,  1890.

This  work  calls  for  serious  notice,  alike  on  account  of  the  position  and
character  of  its  author,  and  of  the  original  thought  and  indejiendent  research
to  which  the  hook  itself  bears  witness.  Tliere  are  few  men  living  wlio  have
jjursued  these  inquiries  with  such  persistent  energy  as  M.  Aksakof.  His
personal  investigations  must  have  involved  journeys  of  several  thousands  of
miles  ;  and  he  has  for  many  years  published  at  Leipsic  the  montlily  journal,
Psychische  Studien,  which  is  honourably  distinguished  by  absence  of  fanati-
cism or  2J(irti  pris;  its  sub-editor,  Herr  Wittig,  being  no  Spiritualist,  but
explaining  all  supernormal  phenomena  by  the  action  of  telepathy  and  of
the  unconscious  Self.

Through  the  medium  of  his  journal,  or  by  direct  communication,  M.
Aksakof  has  supplied  our  own  Society  with  some  very  imijortant  pieces  of
evidence  ;  and  in  the  verification  and  corroboration  of  these  cases  he  has
spared  no  pains.

The  primary  object  of  his  present  work  is  of  a  controversial  nature.  In
1888  Dr.  von  Hartmann,  the  distinguished  author  of  Pheitonienoloipj  and
Tlie  Philosophu  of  the  Unconscious,  published  a  sliort  work  on  Spiritualism,
-which  was  translated  by  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey  for  English  readers  in  1885,  in
Light,  from  the  office  of  which  paper  it  can  be  obtained  in  pamphlet  form.

In  this  work  Dr.  von  Hartmann  provisionally  accepted  tlie  bulk  of
Spiritualistic  phenomena  as  reported,  but  endeavoured  to  explain  them
without  admitting  the  agency  of  any  minds  except  those  of  the  medium  and
sitters.  His  principal  assumptions,  as  summarised  by  M.  Aksakof  {Yo\.  I.,
p.  xxiv.),  are  as  follows  : —

1.  A  nervous  force,  which  can  produce  mechanical  and  plastic  effects
outside  the  human  body.

2.  Hallucinations  [often  collective],  supported  by  this  same  nervous
force,  and  sometimes  producing  physical  and  plastic  effects.

3.  A  hidden,  unrealised,  somnambulic  consciousness  (nnheivusstes  Beifiisst-
sein)  existing  throughout  the  subject's  normal  life,  wliicli  jierceives  the
whole  present  and  past  life  of  another  man,  through  teleijatliic  insight  into
liis  intellectual  content.

4.  Finally,  Dr.  von  Hartmann  assumes  that  this  same  C(jnsciousness
sometimes  becomes  possessed  of  a  clairvoyant  power  ;  brings  tlie  subject


666


Review  of  A.  Ahsakofs


[Supplement.


into  relation  with  the  absolute,  and  consequently  bestows  upon  him  a  know-
ledge of  everything  which  is  or  which  has  been.

To  this  M.  Aksakof  replies  by  accepting  the  facts  as  assumed  by  Dr.
von  Hartmann,  and  by  urging  that  tliat  philosopher's  theories  (with
which,  so  far  as  they  go,  M.  Aksakof  in  the  main  concurs)  do  not  explain
or  cover  the  whole  of  the  assumed  facts  ;  some  of  whicli  facts  need  the
hypothesis  of  an  intervening  intelligence  outside  the  intelligences  of  the
living  persons  concerned.  I  may  say  at  once  that  oii.  the  data  as  assumed  I
think  that  M.  Aksakof  has  the  better  of  his  opponent.  But  the  value  of
this  victory  is  diminished  by  the  looseness  of  the  jjremises  on  which  the
arguments  on  each  side  are  founded.  Dr.  von  Hartmann  was  by  no  means
bound,  I  think,  to  admit  so  much  as  lie  has  admitted.  Many  of  the  incidents
to  which  botli  lie  and  M.  Aksakof  apjieal  seem  to  me  to  rest  on  very
insufficient  proof.  And  M.  Aksakof's  book  would  consequently  have  been
to  us  of  more  value  had  its  aim  l)een  of  a  iiioi'e  evidential  and  a  less  contro-
versial character.

But  while  tlius  premising  tliat  there  must  be  mucli  mure  evidential  work
done  before  any  controversy  of  this  kind  can  l>e  considered  as  finally  settled,
we  may  gladly  allow  that  in  the  hands  of  tliese  two  veiy  capable  logicians
the  controversy  has  l)een  made  the  occasion  of  presenting  many  psychological
prolilems  under  a  far  more  reasonable,  a  far  more  sohihle,  aspect  than  they
have  been  wont  to  wear  in  Spiritualistic  manuals.  M.  Aksakof  has  written
with  adequate  knowledge  of  wliat  experimental  psychology  has  done  within,
the  last  few  years  in  France  and  England  to  throw  light  on  liuman  automa-
tism, and  the  workings  of  the  subconscious  Self  ;  and  his  own  temper  of
mind  is  free  frum  liaste  or  fanaticism.  One  or  two  passages  from  liis  i)reface
will  best  indicate  his  attitude : —

"Since  !  lirst  interested  myself,  in  the  year  1855,  in  the  Spiritualistic
movement,  I  have  never  ceased  t(.)  study  it  in  all  its  details, — in  all  parts  of
the  world,  and  in  all  literatures.  At  first  I  learnt  the  facts  from  the  testi-
mony of  others  :  it  was  not  until  the  year  1870  that  I  attended  my  first
.seance  in  an  intimate  circle  of  friends  selected  by  myself.  I  was  not  sur-
prised to  find  that  tlie  phenomena  were  sucli  as  others  liad  asserted  tliem  to
be  ;  and  I  formed  the  deej)  conviction  that  these  facts,  veritably  existing  in
Nature,  must  form  a  firm  basis  for  the  gradual  upbuilding  of  a  new  science,
which  might  \io\d  the  promise,  perhaps,  of  solving  in  tlie  remote  future  the
main  riddle  of  human  life.  I  did  what  I  could  to  make  these  facts  known,
nnd  to  draw  upon  them  tlie  attention  of  open-minded  men.

"  Meanwliile,  however,  a  change  was  taking  place  in  my  own  inward
fittitude.  I  suppose  that  every  intelligent  oliserver,  on  his  lirst  ac([uaintance
with  these  phenomena,  is  struck  with  two  indubitable  facts  :  firstly,  the
<jbviously  automat k  character  of  so-called  Spiritualistic  manifestations,  and,
secondly,  the  frequent  falsitij — shameless  and  conspicuous — of  their  in-
tellectual content.  The  illustrious  names  with  which  these  communications
.are  usually  signed  are  the  liest  proof  that  the  messages  are  at  any  rate  not
that  which  they  in'eteiid  to  be.  And  similarly  with  the  simpler  pliysical
phenomena  it  is  evident,  on  the  one  hand,  that  they  occur  without  the
slightest  conscious  co-operation  on  the  medium's  part, — while  yet,  on  the
JDther  hand,  tliere  is  at  lirst  sight  nothing  to  justify  their  ascription  to  the


Supplement.]


Animlsmus  and  S^yiritismv..^!.


667


agency  of  'spirits.'  It  is  only  gradually — when  certain  iiheni)niona  of  an
intellectual  type  have  compelled  us  to  recognise  an  intelligent  power  outside
the  medium — tliat  one  forgets  one's  first  impression  and  learns  to  look  with
3nore  re.spect  on  the  Spiritualistic  hypothesis.  And  thus,  while  the  materials
which  I  had  collected  by  reading  and  experience  seemed  abundant,  their
explanation  was  hard  to  find.  And  on  the  other  hand,  as  years  went  on,  the
weak  side  of  Spiritualism  became  increasingly  conspicuous.  The  vulgarity  of
the  messages,  the  barrenness  of  their  intellectual  content,  the  mystifications
and  falsehoods  involved  in  the  majority  of  the  manifestations,  the  unsuit-
ability  of  the  jihysical  phenomena  for  systematic  experiment,  the  credulity,
infatuation,  fanaticism  of  Spiritists  and  Spiritualists,  and,  finally,  the  fraud
which  made  its  entrance  into  the  inquiry  along  with  dark  seances  and
materialisations,  a  fraud  whose  prevalence  was  brought  home  to  me,  not  only
by  the  writings  of  others,  but  by  my  own  personal  experiences  in  the  course
of  investigation  with  the  most  renowned  professional  nrediums; — in  a  word,  a
whole  mass  of  new  doubts,  objections,  and  perplexities  intensified  the  original
difliculty  of  the  problem  l)efore  me.  .  .  .  Under  the  influence  of  such
impressions,  I  often  bethought  myself  of  the  great  illusi(:)ns  tlirough  which
mankind  have  passed  in  the  course  of  their  intellectual  development,  and  asked
myself  whether  of  tliese  illusions  Spiritualism  might  not  ))e  the  last.

"  I  first  saw  light  breaking  in  upon  me,  when  a  critical  study  of  the  facts
had  forced  me  to  the  conclusion  that  every  type  of  mediumistic  phenomenon
is  capable  of  being  produced  by  the  unconscious  action  of  living  men  ;  that
consequently  the  unconscious  psychical  activity  of  our  being  is  neither
2mreUj  psychical  in  character,  nor  is  confined  within  the  periphery  of  our
bodily  frames  ;  but  that  it  can  overstep  the  l^ounds  of  the  body,  and  can
exert,  either  within  or  without  the  body,  activities  of  a  physical,  nay  even
of  a  plastic  kind.  It  is  to  this  wide  field  of  jihenomena, — wider  perhaps
than  the  field  of  Spiritualism  i^roper, — that  I  have  gi^'en  the  name  of
Animism.

"It  is  highly  important  to  recognise  and  study  the  working  of  the  uncon-
scious element  in  our  nature — most  of  all  in  those  its  most  complex  and
extreme  manifestations  which  Animism  reveals  to  us.  From  this  standpoint
alone  can  we  judge  aright  of  Sj^iritualism  itself.  For  if  aught  within  us
survives  the  body,  that  must  be  this  unconscious  element,  or  say  this  inner
consciousness,  which,  although  at  present  hidden  from  us,  yet  constitutes
the  original  principle  of  each  individuality.

"  And  thus  for  the  due  comprehension  of  mediumistic  phenomena  we  have
not  one  hypothesis  only,  but  three  hypotheses  :  each  of  tlieiu  i»(:)ssessing  full
right  to  be  invoked  for  the  explanation  of  a  certain  seiies  of  facts  ;  the  facts
themselves  lieing  thus  reducible  under  three  main  categories,  which  we  may
designate  by  the  following  names  : —

"I.  Persuiiism^i-s  (or  change  of  personality)  may  stand  for  those  uncon-
scious psychical  phenomena  which  are  produced  within  the  limits  of  the
medium's  own  body  ;  those  tntra-medinmistic  phenomena,  whose  distinguish-
ing characteristic  is  the  assumption  of  a  personality  strange  to  that  of'  the
medium.  Of  this  class  are  the  elementary  phenomena  of  mediumship, — the
conversations  through  table-tilting,  writing  mediumship,  and  unconscious
utterance. We  have  here  the  first  and  simplest  manifestation  of  the  duplica-


668


Review  of  A.  Aksakof's


[Supplement,


tiou  of  ciiiisuiiiusues.s,  —  tliat  fuiidainental  phenomenon  of  mediunisliip.  The
facts  imder  this  lieading  reveal  to  us  the  duality  of  our  psychical  being, —
the  non-identity  of  tlie  individual,  inner,  unconscious  Self  with  the  personal,
outer,  conscious  Self.  They  show  us  that  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the
psychical  being  does  not  lie  in  the  personal  Ego;  that  this  last  is  but  the
plienonienal  manifestation  of  the  noumenal  individuality  ;  and  tliat  conse-
quently the  (necessarily  personal)  elements  of  this  phenomenal  self  may
assume  a  manifold  character, — normal,  abnoi'mal,  or  fictive, — according  to-
the  condition  of  the  organism,  in  sleep,  somnanibulism,  or  mediumistic
activity.

"II.  Under  tlie  name  of  Animism,  we  include  unconscious  j^sychical
phenomena,  which  show  themselves  outside  tlie  limits  of  the  medium's  body,
— e.dra-meil iinnistic  (Operations,  as  thought-transference,  telepathy,  telekinesis
{Fernvirkiiiifi),  or  movements  of  objects  without  contact,  and  finally  materiali-
sation. We  liave  liere  tlie  highest  manifestation  of  tlie  psychical  duplication  ;
the  elements  of  the  personality  overstep  the  limits  of  this  1)ody,  and  mani-
fest themselves  at  a  distance  not  only  in  psychical,  but  also  in  physical,  and
even  plastic  oiJeration,  up  to  tlie  point  of  complete  oxternalisation  or
objectification.  Tlius  it  is  proved  that  a  jisychical  element  may  be  not  merely
a  simple  plienomenon  of  consciousness,  but  an  actual  centre  of  force,  which
tliinks  and  organises  ; — which  can  sometimes  organise  a  visible  or  invisible
duplicate  of  a  given  cirgan  of  the  body,  and  which  thus  acts  iqion  tlie  jiliysical
world.

"III.  Under  tlie  name  of  (S/)/f/f we  include  phenomena,  resembling-
botli  Personalisation  and  Animism,  but  which  we  must  ascribe  to  some  extra-
niediuniistic  and  extra-terrene  cause.  We  have  here  the  earthly  manifestation
of  the  individuality  tliruugh  tlie  help  of  those  elements  of  personality  which
have  been  able  to  cling  round  the  centre  of  individuality  after  its  severance
from  the  body,  and  which  can  manifest  themselves  through  mediunisliip, —
that  is  to  say,  through  associaticjn  with  the  corjiorate  psychical  elements  of
some  living  l:)eing.  The  phenomena  of  Spiritism  must  therefore  resemble  in
their  general  form  those  of  Pei'sonalisation  and  of  Animism,  and  differ  only
in  their  intellectual  content,  which  affcjrds  evidence  of  an  independent-
personality." (Yol.  I.,  pp.  xxv.-xxxii.)

From  the  point  of  \-iew  of  a  believer  in  all  these  phenomena,  this  classi-
fication has  great  merit. It  forms  a  marked  advance  on  the  merely  empirical
arrangements,  with  all  phenomena  alike  referred  to  the  action  of  "sjiirits,
with  which  the  propounders  of  these  tenets  have  too  often  rested  content.
A  few  remarks  on  the  terms  which  M.  Aksakof  employs  may  be  useful  here.

In  the  first  place  it  is  iiiipoitant  to  keep  the  term  Spiritism  (or
Spiritualism)  for  phenomena  where  the  intervention  of  spirits  is  meant  to  be
asserted.

At  present  much  confusion  exists,  owing  partly  to  the  fact  that  various-
movements  of  human  limbs,  not  due  to  the  conscious  agency  of  the  owner  of
the  limb,  and  therefore  called  automatic,  were  first  observed  or  described  by
men  who  attributed  them  to  tlie  agency  of  the  departed.  Thus  automatic
writing, — which  happens  to  be  now  mainly  discussed  by  French  doctors  in
anything  but  a  mystical  spirit, — is  still  indiscriminately  called  in  some  quarters  '
a  "  Si)iritualistic  phenomenon,"  although  it  ought  not  to  be  so  designated  i


Supplement.]


Animismus  and  Spiritismus.


669


unless  the  speaker  means  distinctly  to  assert  that  a  spirit  is  prompting  the
message.

Moreover,  the  word  "  Spiritualism  "  is  itself  ambiguous.  It  had  already
been  appropriated  in  France  to  the  school  of  philosophy  opposed  to
materialism,  before  it  was  vised  for  the  belief  in  manifestations  of  tlie
departed.

It  seems,  therefore,  better  to  give  the  term  "Spiritism"  to  this  special
belief.  At  present  "  Spiritism  and  Spiritualism"  are  sometimes  opposed  to
each  other  with  a  kind  of  sectarian  connotation, — Spiritism  involving  a  belief
in  re-iiicarnation  on  this  planet,  which  Spiritualism  denies.  But  this  difference
of  speculative  view  can  easily  be  expressed  in  a  more  direct  way.  And  if  these
phenomena  are  to  be  disj)assionately  studied,  it  is  most  desirable  that  they
should  bear  no  question-beggmg  or  sectarian  titles.

For  the  alleged  movements  without  contact,  which  form  an  im2)(_)rtant
branch  of  "so-called  Spiritualistic  phenomena,"  M.  Aksakof's  new  word
"  telekinetic "  seems  to  me  the  best  attainable.  It  need  not,  of  course,
imply  an  actual  actio  in  didans,  without  any  intervening  medium,  but  rather
an  action  exercised  upon  a  body  so  situated  with  regard  to  the  assumed
agent  that  no  exercise  of  any  known  force  would  Iiave  originated  the  body's
movement.  Again,  M.  Aksakof  uses  the  term  "  telesomatic "  for  the
phenomena  of  so-called  "materialisation," — the  formation  of  "spirit-hands"
and  the  like.  Elsewhere  he  calls  these  phenomena  "plastic."  Inasmuch  as
other  material  objects  are  asserted  to  be  thus  supernormally  formed,  besides
quasi-human  bodies,  it  would  be  better,  I  think,  to  give  the  name  teleplastic
to  all  this  class  of  alleged  phenomena.

To  many  of  my  readers  this  may  seem  to  be  an  elaborate  bestowal  of
specific  names  upon  some  fine  specimens  of  the  genus  Cliimcera.  But  if  these
alleged  phenomena  are  to  be  discussed  at  all,  we  must  have  names  to  call
them  by  ;  and  M.  Aksakof's  effort  to  avoid  the  confused  and  misleading
terminology  at  present  in  vogue  should,  I  think,  be  warmly  encouraged  by
disputants  on  either  side.

M.  Aksakof  still,  however,  retains  one  word  which  seems  to  me  tlie  most
barbarous  and  the  most  question-begging  of  all,  viz.,  the  word  medium,
with  its  intolerable  derivatives  medivmism  and  mediumistic  ; — as  though  one
were  to  say  magnif  mism'  for  magnitude,  ov  jMn'iimistic  for  small.

But  the  main  objection  is  to  the  implied  assumption  that  the  "  medium  "'
is  acting  as  an  intermediary  between  the  spirit-world  and  our  own.  This  is
just  the  question  in  disjmte  ;  and  it  is  surely  better  to  keep  to  the  word
"  automatist, "  understanding  this  to  mean  that  the  person  who  is  producing
the  phenomena  is  not  producing  them  by  any  conscious  means.

But  aparb  from  these  details,  it  is  plain  that  from  the  standpoint  at
which  many  of  our  own  readers  have  arrived  M.  Aksakof's  lieading  of
Animismus  will  be  seen  to  include  phenomena  wliich  to  us  are  situated  on
the  two  sides  of  a  formidable  gulf.  "To  telepathy  we  are  in  these  Proceedings
fully  accustomed  ;  but  the  movement  of  objects,  the  interference  with  the
ponderable  world, — \vhich  M.  Aksakof  sets  down  as  merely  one  among  the
effects  of  telergic  activity, — this  alleged  jiJinsical  action  has  liitherto  seemed
to  most  of  U3  to  be  far  less  conclusively  denionstrated.  If  it  is  to  be  in-
cluded among  the  supernormal  powers  of  the  human  organism,  we  should

2  Z


670


Revieiu  of  A.  Aksakof's


[Supplement.


assuredly  desire  to  see  more  cases  wliere  it  has  been  exercised  under  definite
conditions,  and  with  no  possibility  of  fraud.  M.  Aksakof  touches,  I  think,
the  centre  of  the  problem  when  he  suggests  that  hypnotic  suggestion  ought, —
if  this  power  truly  exist — to  enable  us  to  evoke  its  action  experimentally
in  a  suitable  subject.  Thus,  where  we  already  have  (as  in  Mr.  Cleave's
often  quoted  case)  an  appearaw^e  of  the  hypnotised  subject  to  the  distant
person  on  whom  his  thoughts  are  fixed,  we  should  have  some  physical  effect
also,  coincident  with  that  appearance,  and  indicating  that  the  entranced
person  was  modifying  the  material  world  in  wliat  M.  Aksakof  terms  a
telekinetlc  manner.

"Just  as  hypnotism  has  in  our  days  become  an  instrument  through  which
certain  phenomena  of  psychical  automatism,  or  disintegration  of  conscious-
ness, can  be  summoned  at  will  and  subjected  to  exjjeriment,  even  so  we
;illow  ourselves  to  hope  that  through  the  instrumentality  of  hyj^notisni
nearly  all  the  phenomena  of  Animism  may  before  long  be  subjected  to  the
control  of  definite  experiment.  We  hope  that  hgpiuitic  suggestion  will
.succeed  in  carrying  this  psychical  disintegration  beyond  the  limits  of  the
body,  in  jjroducing  at  will  an  action  upon  the  physical  world.  That  will  be
the  first  step  towards  a  similarly  voluntary  origination  oi  plastic  action
as  well,  so  that  the  phenomenon  known  as  '  materialisation  '  may  receive
scientific  acceptance.

"And  when  Personality  is  thus  analysed,  psychological  experiment  will
strike  down  to  human  individuality  ;  that  transcendental  core  of  indissoluble
forces,  round  which  the  complex  and  separable  elements  of  Personality  are
grouped  and  cling." (Vol.  I.,  i>.  xxxvi.)

M.  Aksakof,  however,  while  fully  recognising  the  desirability  of  experi-
ment of  the  above  kind,  is  nevertheless  convinced  that  ample  j^roof  already
exists  of  many  classes  of  physical  phenomena  ;  and,  moreover,  that  some  of
these  classes  (as  "  spirit-phiitography  ")  demonstrate  the  influence  of  an
intelligent  agency  outside  the  mind  of  any  person  present.  Into  his  review
of  physical  phenomena  I  must  not  here  follow  him  in  detail.  A  committee
of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  (as  my  readers  may  jjerhaps  remember)
is  engaged  on  this  same  in(|uiry,  and  what  has  to  l^e  said  on  the  matter  will
be  better  said  elsewhere.  Yet  I  may  just  suggest  that  in  the  event  of  the
translation  of  M.  Aksakof 's  book  into  French  or  English  the  list  of  cases
which  he  (juotes  might  well  undergo  revision.  I  observe  the  names  of  certain
mediams  whose  marvels  would  need  a  great  deal  of  testimojiy  to  establish
them,  and  of  certain  witnesses  whose  testimony  would  go  but  small  way
t«  )wards  establishing  any  marvels  whatever.  And  some  other  cases  are  at  that
jierplexing  point  where  the  evidence  for  them  is  just  too  strong  to  ignore,  but
just  too  weak  to  rely  on.  There  are,  however,  certain  other  cases  which —
however  isolated  and  startling — are  yet  so  well  evidenced  that  attention
sliould  certainly  V)e  drawn  to  them  as  often  as  j^ossible,  in  the  hope  that
other  observers  may  attemjit  to  obtain  similar  results.  Such  are  the
transcendental  photographs  taken  by  Mr.  Beattie  and  (especially)  by  Prof.
Wagner  ;  hard  to  explain  cither  by  fraud  or  by  accident,  yet  not  hitherto
sufficiently  supported  by  careful  experiments  of  like  kind  to  compel
conviction.

But  I  pass  on  to  the  second  volume,  v>']iich  consists  mainly  of  an  analysi.-*


Supplement.]


Animisrims  and  Spiritisynus.


G71


of  the  contents  of  communications  supernornially  received,  with  a  view  to
deciding  whether  anything  in  those  connnunications  compels  us  to  look
Jjeyond  the  medium's  mind  for  its  source  and  derivation.

And  here  the  gi'eater  number  of  the  jjoints  which  our  authi^r  suggests  are
capable  of  being  directly  tested  by  experiments  which  have  nothing  mystical
or  unscientific  about  them.  For  they  are,  as  I  have  s  iid,  mainly  (piestions
iis  to  the  content  of  aidoinafic  mi'mirjes.

'Now  we  may  fairly  claim  that  automatic  writing  and  cognate  fi:)rm.s
of  "mes.sage"  are  now  accepted  as  genuine  and  important  phenomena,
throwing  liglit  upon  the  workings  of  subconscious  strata  of  the  mind.  What
the  psychology  of  ten  years  ago  ignored  as  mere  fraud  or  fancy,  the  experi-
mental psychologist  of  to-day  recognises  as  a  necessary  aid  to  diagnosis.

And  on  the  other  hand,  any  Spiritualist  who,  like  M.  Aksakof,  writes
with  knowledge  and  moderation,  admits  that  the  mere  fact  of  automatic  writing-
does  not  necessarily  prove  the  intervention  of  an  intelligence  other  than  that
of  the  automatist  himself,  or  of  some  other  living  person,  whose  kmjwledge
may  be  transmitted  to  the  automatist  hy  a  telepathic  undercurrent  from
mind  to  mind.

With  these  admissions  on  both  sides  the  points  to  observe  in  experiments
in  automatism  are  sufficiently  clear,  however  much  opini<jns  may  difter  as  to
the  reliance  to  be  placed  on  the  accuracy  of  any  given  observer.

I  regard  some  of  the  cases  which  M.  Aksakof  cites  as  being  too  remote
find  too  loosely  described  to  carry  much  weight.  But  tlie  headings  or  rubrics
inider  which  they  are  groujied  seem  soundly  chosen,  and  there  is  no  reason
why  furtlier  experiments  should  not  be  made  in  almost  every  class,  if  pains
fire  taken  to  select  suitable  automatists.

1.  As  a  first  stejo  among  the  proofs  of  an  external  agency  in  the  messages,
M.  Aksakof  takes  those  cases  v.diere  the  message  is  given  against  the
siutomatist's  desire,  or  contains  advice,  injunctions,  &c.,  contrary  to  his
•conscious  will.

Cases  of  tliis  sort  are  not  uncommon  ;  and  it  is  interesting  to  trace  the
■differences  of  character,  &c. ,  between  the  two  personalities.  But  we  infer
from  the  classical  case  of  Leonie  I. ,  II. ,  III. ,  and  from  other  cases,  that  the
subconscious  self  may  set  itself  in  oj^position  to  the  conscious  self  ;  nor  can
we  limit  the  extent  to  which  this  war  of  v-^ills  may  be  carried.

2.  Somewhat  similar  are  the  cases  where  the  substance  of  the  jnessage
contravenes  the  automatist's  speculative  or  religious  ideas.  The  case  of
"M.A.  (Oxon.),"  given  in  his  work,  l^j^irit  Teacliinrj.-i,  is  a  striking  instance
of  this  kind.  In  that  case  the  automatist  was  converted  from  ordinary
Anglican  orthodoxy  to  a  much  broader  view  of  spiritual  evolution.  In
another  case,  privately  printed  under  the  title  of  Straruje  Tmd>;,  a  few
years  ago,  the  automatist  was  a  Unitarian,  and  was  converted  l^y  his  own
a,utomatic  writings  to  Trinitarian  views.  I  have  known  other  instances  of
this  kind.  But,  of  course,  we  can  have  no  rigorous  proof  that  these  efiective
arguments  did  not  proceed  from  the  writer's  own  brain.

3  and  4.  Similar  remarks  apply  to  the  cases  where  tlie  communications
appear  to  be  either  hnlow  or  above  the  writer's  level  of  character  and  in-
telligence. Startling  although  they  often  are,  these  manifestations  of  somc-
tliing  within  us  either  more  debased  or  more  exalted  tlian  we  had  sui^posed


672


Review  of  A.  Aksahofs


[Supplements


can  hardly  be  pressed  as  rigorous  proofs  of  an  external  influence.  In  some-
of  the  cases  cited  (in  the  Edwin,  Drood  case,  for  instance)  our  author,  I
think,  much  overrates  the  intrinsic  value  of  the  messages  given.

5.  It  has  occasionally  lieen  stated  that  infants  or  very  young  children
have  written,  &c. ,  automatically.  Could  this  l)e  proved  (and  I  do  not  think
M.  Aksakof's  cases  adequate  to  prove  it),  we  should  still  have  an  alternative
view.  Such  a  manifestation  might  possibly  show  an  inward  development  of
the  unconscious  self  in  advance  of  that  of  the  conscious  self,  rather  tliaix
any  influence  from  external  intelligences.

6.  The  next  heading  is  a  very  important  one.  It  is  asserted  that
messages  liave  frequently  been  given  by  automatic  speech  or  writing  in  a
tongue  imknown  to  the  automatist.  U^j  to  this  date  this  thesis  has  mainly
rested  on  some  strong  testimony  given  by  Judge  Edmonds,  an  upright  and
sagacious  man, — but  one  who  unhappily  was  content  to  set  down  his-
experiences  without  the  details  and  corroborations  which  would  now  add  so-
mucli  value  to  the  record.  In  every  case  where  this  utterance  in  an  unknown
tongue  is  asser!;ed  the  actual  words  used  should  be  given,  in  order  to  assure-
the  reader  that  they  are  more  tlian  such  trivial  phrases  as  the  unconscious-
self  may  easily  have  noted  and  retained,  as  in  the  case  given  Proceedijigs^
Vol.  II.,  p.  2)5.

This  subject  has  been  repeatedly  alluded  to  in  our  Pivccediinjs,  and  fresh
observations  are  much  to  be  desired.

7.  Of  a  somewhat  similar  type  are  the  anomalous  cases  under  M.
Aksakof's  next  heading.  One  of  these  is  especially  noteworthy,  but  cannot
be  reproduced  without  the  use  of  the  Russian  alphabet.  In  a  message
written  by  the  late  Madame  Aksakof  (ajjparently  in  a  state  of  ti-ance)  Russian,
letters  were  used  to  represent  English  letters,  which  they  resembled  in  form,
while  totally  different  in  phonetic  value.  The  case  is  a  complex  one,  and
(excluding  the  supposition  of  external  agency)  woidd  imj^ly  an  elaborate
mystification,  conducted  l)y  Madame  Aksakof's  unconscious  self,  by  the  aid  of
knowledge  telepathically  drawn  from  her  husband's  mind.  Absurd  as  sucli
a  hypothesis  may  sound,  we  have  only  to  refer  to  our  often-cited  case  of  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Newnham  (where  the  messages  themselves  expressly  claimed  to
originate  in  Mrs.  Newnham's  mind),  to  sliow  that  it  must  be  taken  into
account  as  a  quite  possible  exjjlanation.

8.  The  next  heading  is  the  important  one  of  "  Conununications  of  facts^
unknown  to  the  medium  and  sitters."

In  some  of  these  cases  the  medium  or  automatist  appears  to  have  indicated
the  jiosition  t)f  objects  in  dai'kness,  or  to  have  read  concealed  words,  &c.

For  this  there  is  mucli  old,  and  some  recent  evidence  ;  but  "Clairvoyance  "
of  this  kind  resemliles  rather  an  extension  of  the  automatist's  own  per-
ceptivity than  the  effect  of  an  external  influence.

In  other  cases  (as  tlie  Cardnso  case,  given  in  the  iSucIcfji  for  F^ychiml
Bi'scKi-rli.  Journal,  January,  1887,  and  June,  1889),  and  some  of  "  M.A-
(Oxon.)'s"  experiences,  the  facts  given  consist  in  the  reproduction  of  words
from  a  l)ook  ;  and  even  admitting  that  those  words  have  never  fallen  within
the  automatist's  visual  held,  we  may  still  think  it  more  probable  that  his
unconscious  self  has  obtained  clairvoyant  access  (so  to  say)  to  the  words  in


Supplement.]


Anrmismiis  and  Sp/i-ittsmw^.


G73


•question,  rather  tlian  that  an  external  intelligence  has  communicated  so
xnimeaninc;  a  message.

Perhaps  the  strongest  case  under  this  lieading  is  the  Dn  vcuiel  case,  already
published  by  us,  in  fuller  detail,  tlu-ough  M.  Aksakof's  kind  permission,  in
jProceedings  XA^I.

9.  The  previously-unknown  fact  is  of  covn-se  of  special  interest  when  it
•concerns  a  deceased  person  never  before  heard  of  by  any  of  those  present.

The  few  well-attested  case?  of  this  kind, — one  of  which,  the  Pereliguine
■case,  was  contributed  by  M.  Aksakof  to  ouv  Proceedingii 'KYI., — are  of  the
:greatest  possible  interest,  and  need  further  discussion  than  can  here  be
^iven.

But  I  must  i^rotest,  in  passing,  against  M.  Aksakof's  citation  of  messages
"from  the  "Message  Department"  of  tlie  Banner  of  Light.  I  have  analysed
many  of  those  messages,  and  have  usually  found  them  to  consist  of  a  m.ere
reproduction  of  announcements  of  deaths  which  have  already  apj^eared  in
newspapers,  or  to  present  other  suspicious  circumstances.

10.  Tlie  next  heading  is  one  which,  even  if  better  attested,  could  hardly
■exclude  a  telepathic  explanation.  "The  carrying  of  messages  for  great
distances," — transference  from  one  group  of  observers  to  another  of  some
definite  communication  not  previously  agreed  upon, — has  been  very  rarely
recorded.  Professor  Hare, — the  American  chemist  well  known  in  the  early
days  of  Spiritualism, — records  a  case  of  this  kind  in  his  own  experience,  but
lie  seems  never  to  have  been  able  to  repeat  the  experiment.  It  must  bo
added  that  fe^v-  serious  endeavours  would  seem  to  have  been  made  hy  anyone
to  procure  this  plienonienon.

And,  indeed,  with  regard  to  this  Vi'hole  series  of  possible  experiments  the
same  criticism  holds  good.  M.  Aksakof's  painstaking  collection  of  evidence
incidentally  brings  out  a  fact  which  he  has  by  no  means  aimed  at  proA'ing, —
a  fact  which  some  less  judicious  partisans  of  his  ideas  might  even  refuse  to
Jidmit, — but  which  forms  in  reality  the  strongest  argument  for  careful  and  per-
iiistent  investigation  into  the  whole  range  of  these  jjlienomena.  That  fact
is  the  scantiness,  the  desultoriness,  the  superficiality,  of  such  investigation
:as  they  have  yet  received.  If  a  series  of  incidents  so  profoundly  interesting
.as  some  of  those  which  M.  Aksakof  quotes  have  already  rewarded  such
•casual,  amateurish  inquiries  as  most  (I  do  not  say  all)  of  those  which  he
describes, — then  what  may  we  not  expect  when  careful  and  jiersevering
•-attention  shall  be  given  to  these  long-tabooed  topics  by  the  scientific  world  !
T'or  myself  personally  I  may  say  that,  although  I  make  large  deductions
from  M.  Aksakof's  mass  of  evidence,  yet  it  seems  to  me  that  his  review  of
the  history  of  the  subject  has  plainly  shown  that  in  no  other  direction  what-
ever have  results  so  striking  already  rewarded  so  sm^Ul  an  expenditure  of
■serious  or  systematic  toil.

The  inquiry,  so  to  say,  has  been  ])assing  througli  the  /n))iifl(//e  stage,
but  has  not  yet  reached  the  agrioiJfinxtl.  The  scattered  observers  have
vrandered  among  spontaneous  plienomena,  and  have  cropped  enough  for
their  own  sj^iritual  food.  They  have  not  yet  settled  down  to  steady  labour,
nor  worked  the  ground  with  the  plough  of  experiment,  nor  built  the  barns
•of  systematic  record  to  which  posterity  may  commit  an  ever  amjiler  store.

And  I  am  not  speaking  only  i;>f  the  obvious  deficiency  in  specially  trained


Al'siihjfs  Animi-'^imm  and  Spirlti-nnm.  [Supplement.


observers  of  the  calibre  of  Mr.  Crooke?.  I  rather  wish  to  point  out  how
few  men  tliere  have  been  Hke  the  author  of  tliese  volumes  himself  ; — men
wlio,  without  pretending  to  excejitional  scientific  attainments,  have  expended
on  these  problems  the  persevering  sagacity,  the  lifelong  devotion,  l)y  which
in  common  life,  as  in  exact  inquiries,  all  great  results  must  needs  be  won.
More  such  men  there  well  might  be ;  and  in  M.  Aksakof  they  have  assuredly
an  example  to  follow.  I  will  conclude  this  review  with  a  few  words  in  ^\'hich
our  author  resumes  the  labour  of  his  life.

"  One  last  word  !  In  the  decline  of  life  I  ask  myself  sometimes,  'Have
I  in  truth  done  well,  to  have  devoted  so  much  time  and  toil  and  money  to
the  study  and  the  imblicatioii  of  facts  in  this  domain  ?  Have  I  not  struck
into  a  blind  road  ?  followed  an  illusive  hope  ?  Have  I  not  wasted  my  existence,
with  no  result  to  justify  all  my  pains  V  Yet  always  I  seem  to  hear  the  same
re2>ly  :  'A  life  on  earth  can  have  no  higher  aspiration  than  to  demonstrate
the  transcendental  nature  of  man's  being, — to  prove  him  called  to  a  destiny
loftier  than  the  phenomenal  existence  which  alone  he  knows.'  I  cannot,  then,
regret  that  I  have  devoted  my  whole  life  to  the  pursuance  of  this  aim  ;
.•ilthough  it  be  by  methods  which  Science  shuns  or  spurns, — methods  whicli  I
hold  far  trustier  than  any  other  which  Science  has  to  show.  And  if  it  be  in
the  end  my  lot  to  have  laid  one  stone  of  that  temj^le  of  the  Spirit,  upbuilt
from  century  to  century  by  men  true  of  heart, — this  will  be  the  liighest  and
the  only  recompense  which  ever  I  strove  to  gain.'' (Vol.  I.,  pp.  xL,  xli. )

F.  W.  H.  M.


Edmund  Gurney  Library.


G75


EDMUND GURNEY  LIBRARY.


SUPPLEMENTARY  CATALOGUE,  1890.


Additions  since  the  list  in  "Proceedings,"  Vol.  V.


ENGLISH.

Bernheim  (Prof.  H.,  M.D.),  Suggestive  Therapeutics  :  A  Treatise

on  the  Nature  and  Uses  of  Hypnotism. From  the  French.

2nd Edition, by C.  A.  Herter,  M.D., of New  York

New  York  and  London,  1889
BiNET  (Alfred)  and  Fekk  (Charles),  Animal  Magnetism.  2nd

Edition. From  tlie  French  London,  1888

Bjornstrom  (Fredrik,  M.D.),  Hypnotism  : Its History  and

Present  Development. From  the  Swedish  Nev  York,  1889

Bramwell  (Dr.  R.  Milne),  Hypnotic  Anajsthesia  in  Surgery

(British  Medical  Journal,  April  5th,  1890) London,  1890

Charcot (Prof.  J. M.), Hypnotism  and Crime  (Nen:  York

Forum,  February,  1890) New  York,  1890

Double  Feusonauty  {British  3Iedical  Journal,  May  17th,  1890)

London,  1890

Jackson  (J.  Hughlings,  M.D.,  F.R.S.),  The  Croonian  Lectures:
On  the  Evolution  and  Dissolution  of  the  Nervous  System

London.,  1884

 Remarks  on  the  Evolution  and  Dissolution  of  the  Nervous

System,  No.  I  London,  1888

KR-iEFT-EBiNG  (Dr.  R.  von).  An  Experimental  Study  in  the
Domain  of  Hypnotism.  From  the  German,  by  Charles  G.
Chaddock,  M.D  New  York,  1889

Moll  (Albert,  M.D.),  Hypnotism. From  the  German  (2  copies)

London,  1890

Myers  (Dr.  A.  T.),  Hypnotism  at  Home  and  Abroad  (rej^rinted

from  the  Practitioner,  March,  1890) London,  1890

Osgood  (Hamilton,  M.D.),  The  Therapeutic  Value  of  Suggestion
during  the  Hypnotic  State,  and  Report  of  35  Cases.  {Boston
Medical  and  Sunjiccd  Journcd,  May  1st  and  8th,  1890.)  1890
Prince  (Morton,  M.D.),  Revelations  of  Hypnotism,  Post-Hyp-
notic Suggestion,  Automatic  Writing  and  Double  Personality.
[Also  report  of  discussion  on  this  Paper.]  (Boston  Medical  and
Surgiccd  Journal,  Maij  15th  and  22nd,  1890.)  Boston,  U.S.A.,  1890
Raue  (C.  G.,  M.D.),  Psychology  as  a  Natural  Science  applied  to


the  Solution  of  Occult  Psychic  Phenomena  Philadelpliia,  1889

SjnTH(Dr.  R.  Percy)  and  Myers  (Dr.  A.  T.),  The  Treatment  of
Insanity  by  Hypnotism  (reprinted  from  the  Jovrncd  of  Mented
Science,  AjJril,  1890) London,  1890


676


Edmund  Gurney  Library.


TuCKEY  (C.  Lloyd,  M.D.),  Psyclio-Therapeiitics  ;  or  Treatment
by  Hypnotism  and  Suggestion.  2nd  Edition.  Revi.sed  and
enlarged London,  1890


FRENCH.

AzAM  (Dr.),  Amnesie  Periodique  ou  Dedoublement  de  la  Per-

sonnalite  Bordeaux,  1877

Beaunis  (Professor  H.),  Les  Sensations  Internes Paris,  1889

 L'Evolution  du  Systeme  Nerveux  ...Paris,  1890

Bbrtkand  (Alexandre),  Du  Magnetisme  Animal  en  France  Paris,  1826
BiNET  (A.),  Les  Perceptions Liconscientes  de  I'Hypnotisme  (iieiiHe

Scientijiqve,  23yd  Feb.,  1889,  p.24:l)  Paris,  1889

BoNJEAN  (Alljert), L'Hypnotisme  et  la Suggestion  Mentale

(2  cojyies) Paris,  1890

CoNGRES International de Psychologic Physiologique  (1889)

(Compte  Rendu  du) Paris,  1890

CoNGRE.s  (Premier)  International  de  I'Hyj^notisme,  Experimental

et  Therajjeutique Paris,  1890

Delbceuf  (Prof.  J.),  Le  Magnetisme  Animal Paris,  1889

 Magnetiseurs  et  Medecins  Paris,  1890

•  L'Hypnotisme  Applique  aux  Alterations  de

I'Organe  Yisuel Paris,  1890

DuFRESNOY  (L'Abbe L.),  Recueil  de  Dissertations  Anciennes

et  Nouvelles  sur  les  Apimritions,  les  Visions  et  les  Songes.

2  vols Paris,  1752

Feri5  (Ch.),  De  I'Etat  des  Forces  chez  les  Epileptiques 1888

 ,Note  sur  le  Temps  de  Reaction  cliez  les  Hysteriques  et  chez

les  Epilei^tiques 1889

GoYARD  (Dr.),  Le  Magnetisme  Contcmpurain  et  la  Medecine

Pratique Paris,  1888

Janet  (Prof.  Pierre),  L'Automatisme  Pwychologique Paris,  1889

LiEBEAULT  (Dr.  A. A.),  Le  Sommeil  Provoque  et  les  Etats

Analogues Paris,  1889

LoMBROSo  (Prof.  Cesare),  LAnthropologie  Criminelle Paris,  1890

LuYS  (Dr.  J.),  Lecons  Cliniques  sur  les  Principaux  Phenomenes

de  I'Hypnotisme Paris,  1890

 Les  Emotions  dans  I'Etat  d'Hypnotisme  et  I'Action  a  Dis-
tance des  Substances  Medicamenteuses  ou  Toxiques  ...Paris,  1890
Marin  (Dr.  Paul),  L'Hy]moti,sme  Theorique  et  Pratique  conipre-

nant  les  Procedes  d'Hypnotisation  Paris,  n.d.

Revue  des  Sciences  Hypnotiques,  Vol.  I  Paris,  1887-8

SiMONiN  (Amedee  H.),  Solution  du  Probleme  de  la  Suggestion

Hypnotique  Paris,  1880

TissiiS  (Dr.  Ph.),  Les  Reves;  Physiologic  et  Pathologic  Paris,  1890

GERMAN.

Arndt  (W.),  Beitriige  zu  der  durch  Animalische  Magnetismus

zeither  bewirkten  Erscheinungen  Leipzig,  1816

Bruoelmann  (Dr.  W.),Ueber  den  Hypnotismus  und  seine  Verwer-

tung  in  der  Praxis  Berlin,  1889


Edmund  Gwrney  Lihranj.


G77


BuciiNEK  (Prof.  Dr.  L.),  D;is  kiinftige  Lebeu  and  die  moderne

Wissenscliaft Lcip:.i(j,  1889

 Frenides urid Eigenes aus deiii geistigeii Leben  der

(iegeiiwart  Leip-:i<i,  1890

Debay  (A.),  Die  Mysterieii  des  Sclilafes  und  Magnetismus.  2  i-ols.

From  the  French  Stuttgart,  1855

Dessoir  (Max),  Das  Dojipel-Ich  (2  copies) Berlin,  1889

 Erster  Nachtrag  zur  Bibliographie  des  Modernen  Hypno-

tismus  Bciiiii,  1890

Du  Prel  (Carl),  Das  Zweite  Gesicht  Bredan,  n.d.

ExPERiHBNTAL-PsYCHOLOGiE  (Schriften  der  Gesellschaft  fiir,  zu

Berlin) Leip:.l<j,  1890

I.  Dessoir  (Max),  Das  Doppel-Ich.

II.  III. Bastian  (Adulph),  Ueber  Psychische  Beol)achtungen
bei  Naturvolkern.  Helhvald  (F.  von).  Die  Magiker  Indiens.

IV.  Bentivegni  (A.  von),  Die  Hypnose  und  ihre  civikeclitliche
Bedeutung.

FoREL  (Prof.  Dr.  Aug.),  Einige  Therapeutische  Versuche  mit
dem  Hypnotismus,  bei  Geisterkriinken.  {Correspoiulcnz-Blatt
fiir  Sdviveizer  Aerzte,  15tli  Avj.,  1887) Basle,  1887

 Der  Hypnotismus,  seine  Bedeutung  und  seine  Handhabung

Stiitt<jart,  1889

Gerster  (Dr.  Carl)  und  Du  Prel  (Carl),  Professor  Mendel  in

Berlin  und  der  Hypnotismus  Lcipziy,  1890

Herij^g  (Dr.),  Ueber  Hypnotismus  Berlin,  1888

HucKEL  (Dr.  Amand),  Die  Rolle  der  Suggestion  bei  gewissen

Erscheinungen  der  Hysterie  und  des  Hypnotismus  Jena,  1888

KERNER(Dr.  Justinus),  ErinnerungenanF.  A.  Mesmer. ..  J^/'cni/./oif,  1856

Krafft-EbinCt  (Dr.  R.  von),  Eine  experiuientelle  Studie  auf  dem

Gebiete  des  Hypnotismus. 2nd  Edition Stutttjart,  1889

L.iMBERT  (Franz),  Hypnotismus  und  Elektrizitiit  im  alten  Aegypten

{Sphinx,  January,  1888),  1888

Lehmann  (Alfred,  Phil.  D.),  Die  Hypnose  und  die  damit  ver-

wandten  normalen  Zustiinde  Letpziij,  1890

LuDwiG  (Dr.  Wilhelm),  Spaziergiinge  eines  Wahrheitsuchers  ins

Reich  der  Mystik Leipzig,  1890

Mesmer  (Dr.  F.  A.),  Allgemeine  Erliiuterungen  ilber  den  Mag-
netismus und  den  Somnambulismus Halle,  1812

 Mesnierismus,  oder  System  der  Weclisel-

wirkungen,  &c.,  herausg.  von  Wolfart  (Dr.  K.  C.)  Berlin,  1814

Moll  (Dr.  Albert),  Der  Hypnotismus  (1st  and  2nd  editions)

Berlin,  1889-90

Most  (Dv.  G.  F.),  Die  Sympathetischen  Mittel  und  Curmethoden

Eostorl;  1842

Munsterberg  (Dr.  Hugo),  Die  Willenshandlung Freiburg,  1888

 Beitriige  zur  Exjoerimentellen  Psychologie  Freiburg,  1889

Oblzelt-Newin  (Albert),  Ueber  Phantasie  Vorstellungen  ...Graz,  1889
Preyer  (Prof.  W.),  Der  Hypnotismus.  Voiiesungen  gehalten  an

der  K.  Friedreich  Wilhelms  Universitiit  zu  Berlin  ...Vienna,  1890

Reich  (Dr.  Eduard),  Physiologic  des  Magischen  Leipzig,  1890

Reichenbach  (Freiherr  von),  Odische  Erwiederungen  ...Vienna,  1856
Santanelli  (Prof.  Ferdinand),  Geheime  Philosojohie  oder  Magisch-

Magnetische  Heilkunde. From  the  Latin  Stuttgart,  1855


678  Edmund  Gurney  Library.

St.  J.,  DiePsycliologiselie  Becleutung  cles  Gedaukenlesens  LeqnUj,  1885
Wesermann  (H.M.),  Der  Magiietisinus  iind  die  Allgomeiiie  Welt-

spraclie Creveld,  1822

ITALIAN.

Aechivio  di  Psicliiatria,  Scienze  Penali  ed  Antropologia  Criniinale.

Vol.  X.,  Parts  i.-iv  Tiiriu,  1889

LoMBROSO  (Cesare),  Studi  sull,  Ipnotismo,  con  ricerche  Optalnios-

copiche  del  Pi'ofessore  Raymond,  e  dei  Professor!  Bianchi  e

Sommer  sulla  polarizzazione  psichica.  3rd  Edition  Twin,  188T

Ottolbnghi  (S.)  e  Lombroso  (C),  Nuovi  Studi  sull'  Ipnotismo  e

sulla  Credulitii Tunn,  1889

Sarlo (Francesco  di),Suir  Inconsciente,  1'  Ipnotismo,  lo  Spiritisrao,

la  Lettura  del  Pensiero  {liivida  speriuicutiiJe  di  Frcn(itria,Y(A.

XYI.,  Fasc.  iii.)  Eecjyio-EmUia,  1890


SWEDISH.

Wetterstrand  (Dr.  Otto  G.),  Om  Hypnotismens  anwiindandei

den  Praktiska  Medicinen Sfocldtohn,  1888


A  full  catalogue  of  the  hoolis  in>  the  Ednvtmd  Gurney  Lihmrij  was  printed
at  the  end  of  Vol.  V.  of  the  Proceedings.  Some  separate  copies  of  the  catalogue
lire  still  onhan.d,  and  can  be  obtained  from  the  Secretanj.


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


670


LIST  OF  MEMBERS  AND  fiSSOCIATES.

{December,  1890.)


PRESIDENT.
Professor  Hexry  Sidgwick,  Cambridge.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.

The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  4,  Carlton-gardens,  S.W
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  Royal  College  of  Science,  Dublin.
The  Marquis  of  Bute,  K.T.,  Mount  Stuart,  Rothesay,  Isle  of  Bute.
The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  Rose  Castle,  Carlisle.
John  R.  Hollonu,  Esq.,  1,  Upper  Berkeley-street,  Portman-sqviare,  W,
Richard  H.  Hutton,  Esq.,  Englefield  Green,  Staines.
Professor  William  James,  Harvard,  U.S.A.
S.  P.  Langley,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washing-ton,  U.S.A.
Hon.  Roden  Noel,  Livingstone  House,  Burgess  Hill,  Sussex.
Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.
The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Ripon,  The  Palace,  Ripon,
Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  Esq,,  94,  Gower-street,  London,  W.

COUNCIL  FOR  1890.
Professor  J.  C.  Adams,  F.E.S.
G.  W.  Balfour,  M.P.
Thomas  Barkworth.


Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.

G.  P.  Bidder,  Q.C.
The  Earl  of  Crawfokd  and

Balcarres,  F.R.S.
William  Crookes,  F.R.S.
Eev.  a.  T.  Fryer.
Lieut. -Col.  J.  Hartley.
Walter  Leaf,  Litt.D.
Professor  Oliver  J.  Lodge,  F.R.S.
Professor  Macalister,M.  D.  ,  F.  R.  S.

HON.  TREASURER.

H.  Arthur  Smith,  1,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C

HON.  SECRETARIES.
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Frank  Podmore,  12,  Millbank-street,  Westminster,  S.W.

SECRETARY  FOR  FRANCE.
Leon  Marillier,  7,  Rue  Michelet,  Paris.


A.  T.  Myers,  M.D.
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.
Frank  Pod.more.
Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.
C.  Lockhart  Robertson,  M.D.
H.  Arthur  Smith.
H.  Babington  Smith,
R.  Pearsall  Smith.
J.  Herbert  Stack.
Professor  J.  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.
J.  Venn,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.

H. E.  WiNGFIELD.


■680


List  of  Mcnibevs  and  Associates.


SECRETARY  FOR  THE  UNITED  STATES.
lliciiARD  Hodgson,  5,  Boylston  Place,  Boston,  Mass.

ASSISTANT-SECRETARY.
Edward  T.  Bennett,  19,  Buckingham-street,  Adelphi,  London,  W.C.

HONORARY  MEMBERS.
Professor  J.  C.  Adams,  LL.D.,  F.Pi.S.,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge.
William  Crookes,  F.Pt.S.,  7,  Kensington  Park-gardens,  London,  W.
The  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone,  M.P.,  Hawarden  Castle,  Chester.
Sir  Frederick  Leigiiton,  Bart.,  P.Pu.A.,  2,  Holland  Park-road,  W.
John  Ruskin,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.,  Brantwood,  Coniston,  Lancashire.
Lord  Tennyson,  Farringford,  Freshwater,  Isle  of  Wiglit.
Alfred  P^ussel  Wallace,  F.Pv..G.S.,  Corfe  View,  Parkstone,  Dorset.
•G.  F.  Watts,  R.A.,  Little  Holland  House,  London,  W.

CORRESPONDING  MEMBERS.
Alexander  N.  Aksakof,  6,  Nevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg.
Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa,  906,  PJo  Janeiro.
Professor  H.  Beaunis,  28,  Rue  de  Courcelles,  Paris.
Professor  Bernheiji,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy.

Professor  H.  P.  Bowditch,  M.D.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Cambridge,
Mass.,  U.S.A.

Professor  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  College,  Nev\^  York,  U.S.A.
Max  Dessoir,  27,  Kothener  Strasse,  Berlin,  W.
Dr.  Fere,  37,  Boulevard  St.  Michel,  Paris.

Professor  G.S.FuLLERTON,PennsylvaniaUniversity,Philadelphia,U.S.  A.

Professor  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A-

Dr.  Eduard  von  Hartmann,  Gross-Lichterfelde,  Germany.

Professor  Pierre  Janet,  Havre,  France.

Mahadeva  Vishnu  Kane,  B.A.,  Dharwar,  Bombay.

Professor  Kovalevsky,  The  University,  Kharkof,  Russia.

Dr.  a.  a.  Liebeault,  Nancy,  Frsince.

Professor  J.  Liegeois,  Nancy,  France.

Professor  C.  Lombroso,  43,  Corso  Oporto,  Turin,  Italy.

Hans  Natge,  Berlin-Tempelliof,  Berlin.

Professor  E.  C.  Pickering,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,  Mass., U.S.A.
Dr.  F.  Freiiierr  Goeler von Ravensburg, i,  Nettelbeckstrasse,
Berlin,  W.

Tii.  RiBOT,  Office  of  tlie  Eecue  Fhilosophiqite,  Paris.
Professor  Charles  Richet,  15,  Rue  de  I'Universite,  Paris.
Dr. Freiiierr  von  Sciirenk-Notzinc;, 29,  Herzog-Wilhelmstrasse,
Munich.

H.  Taine,  Mentlion  St.  Bernard,  Haute  Savoie,  France.
Professor  N.  Wagner,  Imperial  University,  St.  Petersburg.


List  of  Memhevs  and  Associates.


681


MEMBERS.

AsHBURTON,  The  Lady,  Kent  House,  Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.
Atkinson,  Miss  E.  A.,  44,  Percy -gardens,  Tynemoutli.
Balfour,  The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  4,  Carlton  gardens,  S.W.
Balfour,  Lady  Frances,  32,  Addison-road,  London,  W.
Balfour,  G.  W.,  M.P.,  67,  Addison-i-oad,  London,  W.
Balfour,  Miss,  4,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Balliston,  W.  H.  T.,  6,  Down-street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.
Banister,  Major  Fitzgerald  M.,  R.  A.,  J iinior  Army  and  oSTavy  Club, W>
Barber,  Mrs.  J.  W.,  Ferndene,  Abbeydale,  near  Sheffield.
Barkwortii,  Thomas,  J. P.,  West  Hatch,  Chigwell,  Essex.
Barrett,  Professor  W.  F.,  F.R.S.E.,  Kingstown,  Co.  Dublin.
Barrett,  Mrs.,  4.3,  Hyde  Park-square,  London,  AV.
Barrington,  Hon.  Eric,  62,  Cadogan-place,  London,  S.W.
Beatty,  Octavius,  Gorse  Cottage,  Wimbledon,  Surrey.
Bective,  Lady',  39,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.
Bennett,  Edward  T.,  Devonshire  House,  Richmond,  near  London.
Berens,  Rev.  Randolph,  M.A.,  14,  Prince's-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Best,  R.  Lloyd  Storr,  Burlington-crescent,  Goole.
Beveridge,  Erskine,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B.
Bidder,  G.  P.,  Q.C.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Bidder,  Mrs.  G.  P.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.
Biddulph,  The  Lady  Elizabeth  P.,  19,  Ennismore-gardens,  S.W.
Blaquiere,  Mrs.  Charles  de,  1,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  N.W.
Boucher,  Mrs.,  c/o  Miss  Lutley,  West-street,  Wiveliscombe,  Somerset.
Brajiwell,  John  Milne,  M.B.,  Goole,  Yorksliire.
Bridson,  Joseph  PtiOGWAv,  Belle  Isle,  Windermere.
Bryce,  J.  P.,  J. P.,  Bystock,  near  Exmouth,  Devon.
BuNDY',  Colonel  John  C,  Chicago,  U.S.A.
BusHELL,  Rev.  W.  D.,  M.A.,  Harrow  on-the-Hill.
Bute,  The  Marquis  of,  K.T.,  jMount  Stuart,  Rotliesay,  Isle  of  Bute.
Carpenter,  Major  G.  W.Wallace,  28,  Ashley-place,  Victoria-st.,  S.W.
Castle,  Robert,  9,  Canterbury-road,  Oxford.
Cave,  Charles  J.  P.,  13,  Lowndes-square,  London,  S.W.
Chiltoff,  a.,  M.D.,  University  of  Kharkof,  Russia.
Clarke,  Robert  H.,  M.A.,  M.B.  Camb.,  M.R.C.S.,  Clarence  Lodge,
Redhill.

Clive,  The  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.
Close,  Rev.  Maxwell  H.,  M.A.,  University  Club,  Dublin.
Coffin,  Walter  H.,  F.L.S.,  94,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Coles,  Donald  A.,  M.D.,  Sydney  House,  Sutton  Court-road,  Chiswick,W.
Crawford  and  Balcarres,  The  Earl  op,  F.R.S.,  2,  Cavendish-square,
London,  W.

Crawshay,  Robert,  16,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W,


GS2


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Dakin,  Rev.  Edward,  Selsley,  Stroud,  Gloucestershire.

Dakyns,  Hkxry  Graham,  M.A.,  3,Uioper  Belgrave-road,  Clifton, Bristol.

Dawkin,  William,  61,  CliftDii-street,  Larkhall-lane,  S.W.

De  Grey,  The  Countess,  1,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Dixon,  Edward  Travers,  Cave  House,  Cambridge.

DoDGSOX,  Rev.  Charles  Lutwidge,  M.A.,  Christ  Church,  Oxford.

Downing,  Charles,  Athelston,  High-road,  Streathani,  London,  S.W.

DowsoN,  Mrs.,  L.K.Q.C.P.,  L.R.C.S.I.,  20,  Westgate-terrace,  Redcliffe-

square,  London,  S.W.
DuGDALE,  Mrs.  Stratford,  Merevale  Hall,  Atherstone.
Elder,  Frederick,  21,  Cleveland-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Elder,  Mrs.,  Campden  House,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Elder,  Miss  M.  C,  Campden  House,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Elworthy,  Arthur  K.,  Foxdown,  Wellington,  Somerset.
Elwyn,  Rev.  Canon,  M.  a.,  Master's  Lodge,  Charterliouse,  London,  E.C.
End,  J.  C,  Wood  Hall,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.
Falcke,  Dudley  C,  5,  Pump-court,  Temple,  London,  E.G.
Florence,  Ernest  B.,  33,  Redclilfe-squa] e,  South  Kensington,  S.W.
Flower,  Mrs.  Cyril,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring.
Ford,  Mrs.  Gerard,  58,  Marine  Parade,  Brighton.
FoRSTER,  Anthony,  6,  Anglesea-terrace,  Gensing-gardens,  St.  Leonards-

on-Sea.

Fountain,  Alfred,  Saffron  Walden.

li'uEER,  Miss,  6,  W^estbourne  Grove-terrace,  London,  W.

Fry,  Lewis  George,  13,  Thurlov.r-road,  Hampstead,  N.W.

Gardner,  Herbert,  M.P.,  46,  Down-street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.

Garry,  Francis  N.,  M.A.,  St.  Mary's  Vicarage,  Reading.

Gary,  Baron  Raymond  de,  17,  Ptue  d'Anjou  St.  Honore,  Paris.

Gaussen,  Mrs.  L.  D.,  Marton,  Basechurch,  Salop.

GooDiiART,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  M.A.,  St.  Barnabas  Vicarage,  Sheffield.

Graham,  William  W.,  4,  E!m-court,  Temple,  London,  E.C.

Grant,  Thomas,  Shirley  House,  Maidstone.

Griffin,  Francis  Charles,  Junior  Athenajum  Club,  Piccadilly,  W.

Gurney,  PtEV.  Alfred,  M.A.,  St.  Barnabas  Parsonage,  Pimlico,  S.W.

Gurney,  Henry  G.,  3,  Regent-street,  London,  W.

<  tURNEY',  Mrs.  Russell,  3,  Orme-square,  London,  W.

Harrison,  Willi^ui,  The  Horsehills,  Wolverliampton.

Hayes,  Frederick  W.,  12;  Westcroft-square,  Ravenscourt  Park,  W.

Henley,  Hon.  Ernest,  Watford  Court,  Rugby.

Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Hogg,  Henry  R.,  M.A.,  JMelbourne  Club,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Hollond,  John  R.j  1,  Upper  Berkeley-street,  Portman-square,  W.
Holt,  H.  Sherwin,  Wave  Cottage,  Chelmsford.
HooDj  H.  J.,  M.A.,  115,  St.  George's-road,  London,  S.W.


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


683


Hooper,  Gordon,  L.D.S.R.O.S.,  2],  New  Cavendish-st.,  Harlej'-st.,AV.
Hughes,  Major  Henry  Morgan,  F.R.G.S.,  Birchington,  Margate.
Hume,  A.  O.,  C.B.,  The  Chalet,  Kingswcod-road,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.
Hutchinson,  Frederick  W.  H.,  B.A.,  1,  Eniinanuel-road,  Cambridge.
Jameson,  F.,  6,  Westbourne  Park-villas,  London,  W.
Jameson,  Miss,  Glencormac,  Bray,  Ireland.

Jebr,  Major  J.  de  Witt,  17,  Queen-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.
Jebb,  J.  Gladwyn,  11,  Chester-place,  Hyde  Park-square,  London,  W,
Jeune,  Mrs.,  37,  Wimpole-street,  London,  W.

Joyce,  S.,  Junr.,  European  Telegraph  Works,  Pownall-road,  Dalston,  E.

Kay,  H.  a.,  71,  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.

Kelso,  Commander,  R.N.,  Horkesby  Park,  Colchester.

Kingston,  H.  D.  R.,  M.B.,  Stormont  Lodge,  Willesden,  N".W.

Knowles,  Ernest,  Ingleliurst  Park-road,  Bolton-le-Moors.

Lafone,  Alfred  W.,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  Walton-on-Thames.

Lafone,  Harold,  B.A.,  Hanworth  Park,  Feltham,  Middlesex.

Lamplugh,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Yalding  Vicarage,  IVIaidstone.

Leap,  Walter,  Litt.  D.,  Old  Change,  London,  E.G.

Leycester,  Mrs.,  6,  Cheyne-walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Leyson,  Miss  Kate,  Penscynnor,  Neath,  South  Wales.

Lincoln,  The  Very  Rev.  The  Dean  of,  The  Deanery,  Lincoln.

MacColl,Rev.Canon  Malcolm,M. A., Devonshire  Club,  St. James's, S.W.

Macfarlane,  a.  W.,M.D.,  F.R.C.P.  (Edin.),  6,  Manchester-square, W.

Mackay,  Mrs.,  7,  Buckingham-gate,  London,  S.W.

Macqueen,  Mrs.,  Grosvenor  Mansions,  7G,  Victoria-street,  S.W.

JNIanders,  H.,  F.R.C.S.,  Agincourt  House,  Yorktown,  Farnborough

Station,  Hants.
Marshall,  John  William,  M.A.,  The  Holt,  Godalming.
jNLarten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78,  Vanbrugh  Park,  Blackheath,  S.E.
Massey,  Charles  C,  124,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Matthews, FrankH., M.A.,  Ivy  Villa,Beulah  Hill.Upper  Norwood,  S.E
MiLFORD,  The  Lady,  16,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  W.
Money,  Colonel  Gerard  Noel,  C.B.,F.R.G.S.
Money-Coutts,  Francis  Burdett,  Ancote,  Weybridge.
IMONTEFIORE,  F.,  4,  Great  Stanhope-street,  London,  W.
Morell,  J.  D.,  LL.D.,  Clevelands,  Fitzjohn's-avenue,  London,  N.W.
M'ount-Temple,  The  Lady,  Shelley  House,  Chelsea,  S.W.
Murray- Aynsley,  Mrs.,  Great  Brampton,  near  Hereford.
Myers,  A.  T.,  M.D.,  9,  Ijower  Berkeley-street,  London,  W.
Myers,  Frederic  W.  H.,  M.A.,  Leckhampton  House,  Candn-idge.
Naidu,  C.  v..  Downing  College,  Cambridge.
Nelson,  Rev.  George,  LL.D.,  Centerville,  Park-road,  Worthing.
Newbold,  Miss  A.,  9,  Claro-terrace,  Richmond-road,  S.W.
Newmann,  Oscar  P.,  84,  Newman-street,  London,  W.  •  ' ' "


684


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


NiciiOLL,  Iltyd  B  ,  The  Ham,  Cowbridge,  South  Wales.
Parker,  Edward  W.,  Little  E.ock,  Arkansas,  U.S.A.
Pasciikofp^  a.,  Quai  Gagarine,  10,  St.  Petersburg.  -
Pease,  Edward  R.,  2,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  N.W.
PiLCHER,  Giles  Theodore,  33,  Nottingham  place,  London,  W.
PoDMORE,  Frank,  M.A.,  12,  Millbank-street,  London,  S.W.
Porter,  Miss,  16,  Pvussell-square,  London,  W.O.
Porter,  Miss  A.

Powvs,  Hox.  Mrs.  Fox,  29,  Albion-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  "W.
Pye,  William  A.,  2-i,  Daleham-gardens,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
E/AYLEiGH,  Clara  Lady,  90,  Onslow-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Ridley',  Hexry  N.,  M.A.,F.L.S.,20,Portsea-place,Connanglit-square,W,
Robertson,  C.  Lockiiart,  M.D.,  Guns  Green,  Tlie  Drive,  Wimbledon..
Rogers,  E.  Dawson,  Rose  Villa,  Clmrcli  End,  Fincliley,  N.
Rogers,  PtEV.  E.H.,  M.  A.,  Vicarage,  Thames  Ditton,  Kingston-on-Thames,
Rogers,  George  Frederick,  B.A.,  24,  St.  Andrew's-street,  Cambridge..
Ross,  A.  Galt,  7,  Edinburgh-terrace,  Victoria-road,  London,  W.
Russell,  The  Earl,  Amberley  Cottage,  Maidenhead.
Rylands,  Thomas  G.,  F.L.S.,F.G.S.,Highfields,Thelwall,  nr. Warrington.
Sands,  Mrs.Mahlon,  EUerslie,  E.hinebeck-on-Hudson,  New  York,U.S.A.
Scott,  Sydney  C,  Hatherleigh,  28,  The  Avenue,  Gipsy  Hill,London,S.E,
Shove, Miss Edith, K.Q.C.P.I.,  M.B.,  25, St.  Mark's-crescent,

Regent's  Park,  N.W.
Sidgwick,  Professor  Henry,  Hill  Side,  Chesterton-road,  Cambridge.
SiDGWiCK,  Mrs,  H.,  Hill  Side,  Chesterton-road,  Cambridge.
Sidgwick,  Arthur,  M.A.,  64,  Woodstock-road,  Oxford.
Sims,  F.  Manley,  F.R.C.S.,  12,  Hertford-street,  Mayfair,  W^
SiSLEY',  Richard,  M.B.,  Park-row,  Knightsbridge,  London,  W.
Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  1,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.
Smith,  Martin  Ridley^,  13,  Upper  Belgrave-street,  London,  S.W.
Smith,  R.  Pearsall,  44,  Grosvenor-road,  London,  S.W.

SOLOVIOFF,  WsEVOLOD.
SOLTYKOFF,  PrINCE  AlEXIS.

Stack,  J.  Herbert,  30,  Kensington  Pai-k-gardens,  London,  W.

Stanhope,  The  Right  Hon.E.,  M.P.,  23,  Eccle.ston-square,London,S.W.

Stanley,  Henry  M.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  2,  Richmond-terrace,  S.W.

Stapelton,  Josiah  G.,  47,  Lee-terrace,  Lewisliam,  S.E.

Stead,  Williaji  T.,  Mowbray  House,  Norfolk-street,  Strand,  W.C.

Stearn,  H.  T.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Stock,  St.  George,  M.A.,  8,  Museum-villas,  Oxford.

Stogdon,  John  Cole,  M.A.,  18,  Clement's  Inn,  London,  W.C.

Sturgis,  Julian,  M.A.,  2,  Gloucester-place,  Portman-square,  London,  W.

Swan,  Joseph  Wilson,  Lauriston,  Bromley,  Kent.

Talbot,  The  Lady  Edmund,  26,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.


Li>it  of  31  embers  and  Associates.


685


Talbot,  Mrs.,  19,  Porchester-gardens,  Bayswater,  London,  W.
Tancred,  Mr.s.  Clement,  2,  Princes'  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W.
Tattersall,  Robert  W.,  31,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.
Taylor,  Rev.  Charles  J.,  M.A.,  The  Larches,  Banstead,  Surrey.
Taylor,  Miss  Edith,  37,  Wellington-road,  Harborne,  near  Birmingham.
Taylor,  Lieut.-Colonel  G.  L.  Le  M.,  Royal  Military  College,  Cam-

berley,  Snriey.
Tebb,  Mrs.,  Rede  Hall,  near  Burstow,  by  Horley,  Surrey.
Thomson,  Professor  J.  J.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Thorpe,  Mrs.  Mary',  Lenton  House,  Lenton,  Nottingham.
Tuckey,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  14,  Green-street,  Grosvenor-square,  W.
Vacher,  William  H.,  54,  Addison  Mansions,  Kensington,  S.W.
VicarSj  G.  R.,  M.D.,  Bridge  House,  Revesby,  Boston,  Lincolnshire.
Webb,  Godfrey,  13,  A^ictoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Wedgwood,  Hensleigh,  M.A.,  94,  Gower-street,  London,  W.C.
Welldon,  Rev.  J.  E.  C,  M.A.,  Harrow-on-the-IIill,  IMiddlesex.
Westlakb,  Ernest,  F.G.S.,  Fordingbridge,  Salisbury.
Whitear,  Rev.  W.,  B.A.,  107,  Florence-road,  Finsbury  Park,  N.
Willmott,  Miss  R.,  Warley-place,  Great  Warley,  Essex.
Wilson,  David  H.,  M.A.,  Rosemont,  Hyeres,  France.
WiNGFiELD,H.E.,M.A.,CaiusHouse,Vicarage-rd.,Battersea-square,S.W.
AViSDEN,  Thomas  Faulconer  M.,  Broadwater,  near  Worthing.
AVoodhouse,  G.  H.,  Heath  Bank,  Bolton.

AVooDRUFFE,  Miss  Adelaide,  3,  Prince's  Mansions,  A^'ictoria-street,  S.AA^
AVyndham,  Hon.  Percy,  44,  Belgrave-square,  London,  S.AV.
YoRKE,  Hon.  Alexander,  32a,  Orchard-street,  London,  AA^.

HONORARA"  ASSOCIATES.
Curtis,  Miss  Mary,  Laugharne,  St.  Clears,  South  Wales.
Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  4,  Ujaper  Vernon-street,  London,  AV.C.
Grubb,  Edward,  M.A.,  Rye  Croft,  Fulford-road,  Scarborough.
James,  Captain,  10,  Hereford-road,  Bayswater,  London,  AV.
Jenkins,  E.  A-^aughan,  Energlyn,  31,  St.  Mai-garet's-road,  Oxford.
Keulemans,  J.  G.,  4,  St.  Mark's-crescent,  R,egent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
Kleiber,  Joseph,  St.  Petersburg.

Maodonald,  Rev.  J.  A.,  43,  Hill  Side-road,  Stamford  Hill,  London,  N.
NiSBET,  E.  T.,  13,  The  Crescent,  Gateshead.
Robertson,  Miss  N.,  11,  Kilburn-square,  London,  N.AA".
Saxby,  Mrs.,  Mount  Elton,  Clevedon.

ScuDAMORE,  Mrs.,  36,  Albion-road,  Stoke  Newington,  London,  N.
Shield,  Mrs.,  Bowers  Gitford  Rectory,  Essex.
SuDGEN,  Rev.  E.  H.,  B.A.,  B.Sc,  Bradford,  Yorkshire.
AValwyn,  Mrs.,  9,  Sion  Hill,  Clifton,  Bristol.
AYiNGFiELD,  jNIrs.,  84,  Cadogaii-place,  S.AV.

3  A


G86


List  of  Memhcrs  and  Associates.


ASSOCIATES.
Adair,  Mrs.,  Glenavon,  Cookstowii,  Co.  Tyrone.

Adams,  Rev.  J.  M.Goold,  M. A.,  TlieViearage,  Ptossclowney,  Londonderry.

Adams,  Mrs.,  The  Ob.servatory,  Cambridge.

Ai>fSLiE,  AiNSLiE  Douglas,  15,  Lower  Grosvenor-place,  S.W.

Allen,  C.  F.  Egerton,  B.A.,  HeyAvood  Cottage,  Tenby.

Allen,  Henry  .J.,  Ferndene,  Blackrock,  Co.  Dublin.

Allen,  Rev.  W.  O.  B.,  140,  Cambridge-street,  London,  S.W.

Anderson,  James  Arbutiinot,  4G,  Warwick-gardens,  Kensington,  W.

Amery,  W.  C,  168,  Edmund-street,  Birmingliam.

Argles,  Miss  Edith  M.,  44,  Nelson-square,  Blaekfriars-road,  S.E.

Arkwrigiit,  Walter  George,  Adbury  House,  Newbury.

Arnott,  T.  Davidson,  Port  of  Spain,  Trinidad,  B.W.T.

AsiiCROFT,  Rev.  Thomas,  The  Manse,  West  Leigh,  near  jNIanchester.

Ashton,  Arthur  J.,  M.A.,  Congregational  School,  Caterhara,  Surrey.

Bacchus,  Mrs.,  The  Manor  House,  Lillington,  near  Leamington.

Badelier,  Emile,  Rangoon,  British  Burmah.

Baillie,  Edmund  J.,  F.L.S.,  Woodbine,  Eaton-road,  Chester.

Ball,  Thomas  Stanley,  Spring  Bank,  Fulwood,  near  Preston.

Bartholomew,  Colonel,  Bantry  Lodge,  Glengaritf,  Co,  Cork.

Barton,  Mrs.  Alfred,  8,  Lexham-gardens,  Kensington,  W.

Barkworth,  Lieut.  John  R.,  R.E.,  West  Hatch,  Chigwell,  Essex.

Bates,  Colonel  Charles  Ellison,  35,  Oxford-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  W.

Bates,  Miss,  care  of  London  and  County  Bank,  Maidstone.

Bayfield,  Rev.  Matthew  A.,  M.A.,  Christ's  College,  Brecon.

Beazley,  Lieutenant-Oolonel  George  G.,  74,  Redclitfe-square,  S.W.

Becket,  Miss  Maria,  Hotel  Vendome,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Beer,  Mrs.,  14,  Stratton-street,  Piccadilly,  London,  AV.

Bellasis,  Major  G.  M.,  c/o  H.  S.  King  and  Co.,  45,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.

Benson,  Mrs.,  Lambeth  Palace,  London,  S.E.

Bergen,  Axel  von,  Harewood  Hill,  Darlington.

Bergen,  Dr.  Carl  von,  32,  Karlavagen,  Stockholm.

Berrey,  Walter  F.  M.,  M. A., Western  Lodge, Clapham  Common,  S.W.

Berriker,  George  T.,  Calvert,  Maryland,  U.S.A.

Bevan,  Rev.  C.B.,  M.A.,  30,  St.  A?idrew's-road,  Southsea.

Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131,  Gloucester-road,  London,  S.W.

Bewley,  Miss  Mary  M.,  Netherton  House,  Clapham  Common,  S.W

Bickford-Smitii,  R.A.H.,  B.A.,  19,EiKlymion-road,  Brixton  Rise,S.W.

BiCKNELL,  Rev.  Clarence,  M.A.,  Villa  Rose,  Bordighera,  Italy.

Bicknell,  Norman  L.,  Foxgrove,  Beckenhani,  Kent.

Bidder,  George  P.,  Junr.,  Ravensbui-y  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.

Bird,  George,  M.D.,  49,  Welbeck-street,  London,  W.

BiRKS,  Rev.  Edward  B.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Blackie,  Miss  J.  L.,  10,  Stratford -place,  London,  W.


Ztsf  of  Members  and  Associates.


0S7


Blackwell,  Elizabeth,  M.D.,  Ptock  House,  Hastings.
Blumentiial,  jMadame,  43,  Hyde  Park  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Bois,  Herbert  G.,  4,  Clarendon-place,  Hyde  Park -square,  "\V.
BoLDERO,  Lieut.-Gexeral  G.  N.,  20,  Westbourne-gardens,  Folkestone.
BoLLAND,  Mrs.,  7,  Cranbury-terrace,  Southampton.
Bonus,  Arthur  E.,  c,  o  A.  Scott  and  Co.,  Rangoon,  Burinab.
Bonus,  Joseph,  Major-General,  R.E.,  The  Cedars,  StraNvberry  Hill,
near  London.

BoscQ  DE  Beaumont,  G.  du,  Airel  (Manche),  France.

BosTOCK,  Miss  E.  A.,  Penmaen  Gower,  Swansea.

Bowden-Sjiith,  Mrs.,  Highclei-e  Rectory,  Newbury.

BowNESs,  William  Wilson,  20,Campden-grove,  Kensington, London, W.

Bramston,  Miss  M.,  41,  Ding  wall-road,  Croydon.

Brandretii,  Henry  S.,  Fairliolme,  Weybridge.

Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

Brazier,  John  J.,  Ebowe  Villa,  Soutlicote-road,  Bournemouth.

Brett,  George,  The  College,  Weston-super-Mare.

Brewster,  Mrs.  F.,  10,  Park-terrace,  Nottingham.

Brill,  Alice  B.,  M.D.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Britten,  James,  F.L.S.,  18,  West-square,  Southwark,  S.E.

Brown,  Mrs.,  21,  South-street,  Park-lane,  W.

Brown,  Miss  Johnson,  Edgbaston  House,  Pittville,  Cheltenham.

Browne,  Edward  G.,  B.A.,  Pembroke  College,  Cambridge.

Browning,  Oscar,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Brownlow,  The  Countess,  Ashridge,  Berkhamsted.

Bruhns,  Theodore,  Simferopol,  Russia.

Bryce,  Miss  Kathleen,  1-5,  Notting  Hill-square,  Canipden  Hill,  W.

Buck,  Sir  E.  C,  Civil  Service,  Simla,  India.

Buckle,  W.  T.,  M.B.  (Lond.),  5,  Vicarage  Villas,  Willesden,  N.

Buckler,  AV.  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Bull,  William  J.,  11,  New  Inn,  Strand,  London,  W.C.

Bullock,  Mrs.,  Cedars  Lodge,  Mitcliam,  Surrey.

Burt,  Percival  J.,  16,  Leadenhall-street,  London,  E.C.

Burton,  Mrs.,  Longner  Hall,  Shrew.sbury.

Burton,  Mrs.,  1,  Iddesleigh  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W.

Butcher,  Miss,  22,  Collingham-place,  London,  S.W.

Butler,  G.  W.,  B.A.,F.G.S.,  Blenheim  Lodge,  Surbiton,  Surrey.

Buxton,  Mrs.  Sydney,  1-5,  Eaton-place,  London,  S.W.

Cairo,  Mrs.,  3,  Lyndhurst-gardens,  South  Hampstead,  London,  N.W,

Caldecott,  Rev.  Alfred,  M.A.,  57,  Chesterton-road,  Cambridge.

Oampbell,  James  A.,  Barbreck,  via  Lochgilphead,  Argyll,  N.B.

Campbell,  Robert  Allen,  C.E.,  St.  Louis,  Mo..  U.S.A.

Cannon,  Mrs.,  Hillcot,  Sharpies,  near  Bolton.

Carleton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Leir,  Greywell  Hall,  Winchfield.

3  A  2


GS8


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Caudee,  Miss,  care  of  Messrs.  Brown,  Shipley  and  Co.,  Founders-

conrt,  Lotlibury,  London,  E.G.
Cave-Browne-Cave,  Mrs.  T.,  Burnage,  Streatham  Common,  S.W.
Cazalet,  Mrs.,  Creneliurst,  Dorking.
Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Stocken  Hall,  Htretton,  Oakham.
Chandler,  Rev.  H.  0.  D.,  M.A.,  Waterbeach  Vicarage,  Camluridge,
CiiARLESWORTii,  Miss  A.  M.,  Hertford  Heath  Vicarage,  Herts.  .
Chase,  Capt.  AV.  Ht.  L.,  V.C,  S.C.,  Quetta  District,  Beluchistan.
Chattock,  Arthur  P.,  University  College,  Bristol.
Church,  Mrs.  Mary  M.,  Ashland,  Schuylkill  Co.,  Pennsylvania,  U.S.  A,
Clavequin,  Edward,  Munster  Lodge,  Monkstown,  Dublin.
Clayton,  Charles  E.,  Hillcote,  Highcroft-villas,  Brighton.
Clemens,  S.  L.,  Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Colchester,  Rev.  H.B.,  M.A.,  1,  Leinster-p]ace,Paddington,London,W,
Collins,  Sir  Robert  H.,  K.C.B.,  Broom  Hill,  Claremont,  Esher.
Colthurst,  Lady,  47,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.
CoLviLE,  Colonel  Henry  E.,  C.B.,  24,  Chapel-st.,  Belgrave-square,
CoRT  VAN  DER  LiNDEN,  Professok  P.  VV.  A.,  Groningen,  Holland.
CouEs,  Dr.  Elliott,  1726,  N.  Street,  N.W.  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Cox,  John,  M.A.,  McGill  Univei'sity,  Montreal,  Canada.
Cowan,  Mrs.,  Valleyfield,  Penicuik,  N.B.

Crawford,  W.  C,  1,  Lockharton  gardens,  Slateford,  Midlothian,  N.B.

Crespo,  J.  Charters,  Rio  Maior,  Portugal.

Crews,  Richard  G.,  Glenholme,  Mount  Park,  Ealing,  W.

Guo^VE,  W.  Leadham,  2i,  Cornwall-road,  AVestbourne  Park,  W.

Crowther,  William  F.,  Hailsham^  Sussex.

Cunningham,  G., D.M.D. (Harvard, U.S.A.), 2, King's  Parade,
Cambridge.

Cunningham,  Rev.  AV.,  D.D.,  2,  St.  Paul's-road,  Cambridge.

CzYNSKi,  Professor  C.  L.

Daintrey,  Charles  J.,  Petworth,  Sussex.

Dai:\vin,  AIrs.  Francis,  AVychtield,  Huntingdon-road,  Cambridge.

Darley,  Lady,  Quambi,  WooUohra,  New  South  Wales.

Darell-Brown,  Mrs.,  1,  Douro-villas,  Cheltenham.

Davey,  S.  John,  2,  Addiscombe-terrace,  Addiscombe,  Surrey.

Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  Tlie  Western  and  Brazilian  Telegraph  Company,

Caixa.,  453,  Rio  Janeiro,  Brazil.
Debenham,  Ernest  Ridley,  B.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Devlin,  Richard  Theodore,  Poste-restante,  Alonaco,  France.
Dickinson,  Goldsworthy  L.,  M.A.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Dickinson,  Mrs.,  Bramblebury,  AVandsworth  Common,  S.AV.
DiCKSEE  Frank,  A.R.A.,  80,  Peel-street,  Campden  Hill,  London,  AV,
Dill,  J.  F.  Gordon,  AI.A.,  M.B.,  6,  Brunswick-f)lace,  Brighton.
DoBBiE,  A.  W.,  Gawler-place,  Adelaide,  South  Australia,


List  of  Members  a  nd  Associates.


GH9


DouBLEDAY,  Mrs.  Frances  G.,  care  of  Diexel,  Harris  and  Co.,  37,

Boulevard  Haussmann,  Paris.
DovETON,  r.  B.,  Glencroft  House,  Lyndliurst-road,  Exeter.
DuNX,  Edmund  A.,  92,  Regent-street,  London,  W.
Eardley,  Lady,  i,  Lancaster-street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Earle,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  5,  Bryanston-square,  London,  W.
Edelstex,  Joiix  a.,  Quernfield,  Latchford,  Warrington.
Egertox,  jNIiss  JEary  L.,  Wliitwell  Hall,  York.
Elliot,  The  Hex.  Mrs.,  63,  Wimpole-street,  London,  W.
Elliott,  Sir  Charles  Alfred,  K.C.S.I.,  LL.B.,  Calcutta.
Ellis,  Johx  Edward,  M.P.,  40,  Pont-street,  London,  S.W.
Ellis,  Mrs.  Robert,  i,  Rylett-road,  Ravenscourt  Park,  London,  W.
Ellisox,  Rev.  Johx  H.,  4,  Warwick-square,  London,  S.W.
Eltox,  Oliver,  M.A.,  58,  Flanders-road,  Bedford  Park,  W.
Elvey,  Miss  Mary  M.,  Finborough-road,West  Brompton,  London,  S.W.
EvAXS,  Kirkham,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

EVAXS,  Mrs.,  The  Great  House,  Llanmaes,  near  Cowbridge,  Glaniorgan.
Earxcombe,  George  Richard,  B.A.,  40,  Belgrave-street,  Birmingham.
Eeildixo,  Hex.  EvERARD,  iSTewnham  Paddox,  Lutterworth.
EitzGerald,Desmoxd  G.,M.S.T.E.,46,  Loughborough-rd.,  Brixton,  S.W.
Eletcher,  Rev.  W.  Roby,  M.A.,  A'ice-Chancellor  of  the  University  of

Adelaide,  Soutli  Australia.
J'ORJETT,  C,  66,  Quentin-road,  Lea,  London.
Eox,  St.  George  Laxe,  66,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.W.
Eraser,  Lt.-Col.  A.  T.,  R.E.,  Public  Works  Dptmt.,  Madras  Presidency.
Freemax,  Miss  Adelaide  C,  Belgrave  Mansions,  Grosveuor-gardens,

London,  S.W.

Fry,  Oliver  A.,  M.A.,  141,  Portsdown-road,  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.

Fry,  R.  E.,  B.A.,  1,  Palace  Houses,  Bayswater  Hill,  London,  W.

•Oardixer,  Rev.  Edward  R.,  M.A.,  Fawley  Vicarage,  AVantage.

Gell,  Rev.  A.  W.  Hamiltox,  Winslade,  Exeter.

CiESSSiAXX,  GusTAV.,  JuNR.,  Zwolfers  Gasthof,  Altmansdorf,  Vienna.

GiBSOX,  Mrs.  Sumxer,  Iridge-place,  Hurst  Green,  Sussex.

<tladstoxe,  Miss  Catuerixe  Axxie,  Shedfield  Cottage,  Botley,  Hants.

■Glover,  John  J.  T.,  124,  Stephen's  Green,  W.,  Dublin.

•Godfrey,  Mrs.,  c/o  Col.C.W.  Godfrey,  Bombay  StafF  Corps,  Poona,  India.

GooDMAX,  Roger  K,  B.A.,  B.Sc,  Brookfield,  Cambridge.

-GoRixG,  Lady,  Sti-ettington,  Chichester.

■Graham,  Hexry  R.,  8,  Marble  Arch,  London,  W.

Oraham,  J.  W.,  B.A.,  The  Daltou  Hall,  Victoria  Park,  Manchester.

Graxtham,  F.  W.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

■Greex,  Miss  Mariax,  The  High  School,  Spring  IMount,  Blackburn.
<4reig,  Rev.  David,  M.A  ,  Cottenham  Rectory,  Cambridge.
Orier,  Captaix  George  R.,  Neyland,  R.S.O,,  Pembrokeshire.


GOO


List  of  Members  a  nd  Associates.


GitiFFiTii,  RoBEiiT  W.,  M.A.,  The  Old  Heuse,  Llandaft.
Gpaaxox,  E,ev.  William  S.,  M.A.,  Essenden,  Hatfield,  Herts.
Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  jSTational  Liberal  Club,  London,  S.W.
Gudgeon,  James,  Stowmarket.
GuixNESs,  Miss  Henrietta,

Gunton,  PtEV.  Charles  F.,  M.A.,  Farlani  Yicarage,  Milton,  Carlisle.
GuNTON,  Rev.  F.,  M.A.,  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge.
GuRNEY, Rev. F., M. A., St.  John's  Cottage,  BoveyTraceyjNewton Abbott,
Habgoox),  William,  M.D.  (Brussels),  M.R.C.S.,  Middlesex  Countj-

Lunatic  Asylum,  Banstead  Downs,  Sutton,  Surrey.
Haokett,  James  F.,  B.A.,  71,  King  William-street,  Adelaide,  Australia.
Hansford,  Charles.  3,  Alexandra-terrace,  Dorchester.
Hargreaves,  Miss,  69,  Alexandra-road,  Southporfc.
Harland,  Henry,  Author's  Club,  1 9,  West  24th-street,]Srew  York,  U.S.A.
Harpur,  Rev.  George,  B.A.,  Clifton  Vicarage,  Newark.
Harris,  J.  Ciiantry",  A^eiv  Zecdand  TimesO&ce,Wellmgton,  New  Zealand.
Hartley,  Lieut.-Colonel  J.,  LL.D.,  D.L.,  The  Old  Downs,  Hartley,

near  Fawkham,  via  Dartford.
Hastie,  Miss,  11,  Ashbui'n-place,  Cromwell-road,  S.W.
Heaton,  Charles,  M.R.C.S.,  Watford,  Herts.

Henniicee-Major,  The  Hon.  Mar\-,  6,  Grafton-street,  London,  W.

Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1,  Argyll-villas,  Cheltenham.

Herbert.  Hon.  Auberon,  M.A.,  Burley,  Ringwood,  Hants.

Herringham,  Mrs.,  22,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C.

HiBBS,  Reginald  R.,  13,  St.  Lawrence-road,  North  Kensington,  W.

HiGGiN,  F.  C,  Killiney  Castle,  Killiney,  Co.  Dublin.  .

Hill,  Miss  E.  D.,  Lrstowe,  Cheltenham.

Hill,  Henry,  The  Park,  Nottingham.

Hill.  W.  Scott,  47,  Manor-place,  Edinburgh.  -
Hills,  Mrs.,  Corby  Castle,  Carlisle.
Hogg,  Miss  A.  M.  M.,  Berry  Head  House,  Brixliam.
Holland,  Mrs.,  Niddry  Lodge,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Holstein,  Madame  Alexandra  de,  29,  Avenue  de  Wagram,  Pariji,
Hook,  Rev.  Cecil,  IM.A.,  Hook  Memorial  Vicarage,  Leeds.
Hopkinson,Professor  A.,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  The  Lodge, 32,  Herne  Hill,S.E-
HoRNE,  Alderson,  10,  Norfolk-street,  London,  W.
Howard,  Harry  W.,  Maitland  House,  Greenwich,  S.E.
Howe,  E.  R.  J.  Gambier,  7,  New-square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C_
HowoRTH,  Henry  H.,  M.P.,  Derby  House,  Eccles,  near  Manchester.
Hubbe-Sciileiden,  Dr.  J.  U.,  Neuhausen,  iiear  Munich.
HuDDLESTON,  Mrs.,  Llwynderw,  Welshpool,  Montgomeryshire.
Hughes,  Frank  Septimus,  12,  Millbank-street,  S.W.
HuME-RoTiiERY,  J.  H.,  B.Sc.  (Lond.),  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Humphreys,  Edward  H.  P.,  Denmark  Hill,  London,  S.E.


list  of  Mciuhers  and  Associates.


691


HuTCHiNS,  D.  E.  ,  Budleigli  tSalterton,  Devon.  -
Innes,  Lieut. -Colonel  P.  R.,  11,  Oheniston-gardens,  London,  W.
Ieving,  Lewis  A.,  Surgeon-Major,  Government  House,  Ganesh  Ivhind,
Bombay.

Jacksox,  AVilliaji  H.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  Penwartha,  Weston-super-Mare.

Jeaffresox,  Rev.H.  H.,M.A.,  115,  Clifton  Hill,  St.  John's  Wood,  N.W.

Jebb,  Rev.  H.  Gladwyn,  M.A.,  Firbeck  Hall,  Rotherham.

Jebb,  Mrs.,  Springfield,  ISTewnliam,  Cambridge.

Jenxings,  Mrs.,  Lyndhurst,  iSTiglitingale-lane,  Clapham,  S.W.

JoHNsox,  William  Erxest,  B.A.,  Llandalf  House,  Cambridge.

JoxEs,  Sir  Lawrexce  J.,  Bart.,  Ci-anmer  Hall,  Pakeuham,  Norfolk.

JoxES,  Miss  Coxstaxce,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.

Kaxe,  J.  G.  AuRiOL,  Sloperton  I-odge,  Kingstown,  Co.  Dublin.

Kat,  Walmsley  p..  Bank-terrace,  Darwen.

Keatixge,  Mrs.  R.  H.,  12,  Onslow-square,  South  Kensington,  S.W.

Keexe,  Rev.  James  B.,  M.A.,  The  Rectory,  Isavan,  Co.  Meatli.

Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  M.A.,  2,  Lloyd-place,  Biackheath, London,  S.E.

Ker,  C.  B.,  M.D.,  Hadley  House,  Cheltenham.

KniBER,  Mrs.,  3,  Roland-gardens,  South  Kensington,  London,  S.W.

Kxox,  JSTatiiaxiel  A.,  Adelaide  Club,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Koxstahji,  Edv>'ix  M.,  Kings  College,  Cambridge.

Lach-Szyrma,  Rev.  W.  S.,  M.A.,F.R.H.S.,Barking3ide  Vicarage,  Ilford.

Laxcastee,  Erxest  Le  C,  M.B.,  St.  George's  Hospital,  S.W.

Larkex,  Rev.  E.  P.,  B.A.,  Gatton  Tower,  Reigate.

La  Touche,  Mrs.,  Harristown,  Brannoxtown,  Co.  Kildare,  Ireland.

Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  Old  Change,  London,  E.C.

Leigh,  W,  Austex,  M.A.,  2,  Norfolk-crescent,  Hyde  Park,  London, W.
Leoxard,  Arthur  G.,  M.A.,  11,  Highbury  Hill,  London,  N.
Lewis,  C.  AV.  ^[axsel,  Stradey  Castle,  Llanelly,  Carmarthenshire.
Leymarie,  p.  G.,  5,  Rue  des  Petits  Champs,  Paris.
Lilly,  William  Samuel,  J. P.,  27,  Michael's  grove,  S.W.
JjIMOXD,  Miss  Catherixe,  15,  Eaton-terrace,  London,  S.W.
LiXDSAY,  Miss  Beatrice,  Bohemia,  Port  St.  Mary,  Isle  of  Man.
LixDSAY,  Robert,  L.R.C.S.,  M.B.,  59,  Caversham-road,  London,  N.W.
Lloyd,  Fraxcis,  Grenadier  Guards,  43,  Rutland-gate,  London,  S.W.
Lodge,  Professor  O.  J.,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.,  21,  Waverley-road,  Liverpool.
Loxgstaff,  George  B.,  M.A.,  M.B.  (Oxon.),  Highlands,  Putney  Heath,
London,  S.W.

Lymixgtox,  Yiscouxtess,  Hurstbourne  Park,  Whitchurch,  Hants.
Macalister,  Professor,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Cambridge.
Macky,  Dr.,  4,  Curzon-street,  Mayfair,  W.

Maclagax,  Miss  M.  M.,  4,  West  Cromwell-road,  London,  S.W.
MaoNaughtox,  Rev.  Samuel,  M.A.,  Rose  Bank,  Addison-road,  Preston.
Maitlaxd,  Edward,  B.A.,  1,  Studio-buildings,  Thurloe-square,  S.W.


692


Lid  of  Members  and  Associates.


Major,  Albert,  77,  Clapham-road,  London,  N.W.
Malden,  William E.  P.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Malmesbury,  Susan  Countess  of,  25,  Sloanc-gardens,  S.W.
Marjoribanks,  Lady,  Tillmouth  Park,  Cornhill-on-Tweed,  Northumber-
land.

Marshall,  Arthur,  13,  Belsize-a venue,  London,  N.W.

Marshall,  George  W.,  LL.D.,  F.S.A.,  Holmbush,  Upper  Richmond-

I'oad,  Putney,  S.W.
Marshall,  Henry  William,  Quorn,  South  Australia.
Marshall,  William  Cecil,  M.A.,  28,  Bedford-square,  London,  W.C.
Marshall,  Mrs.,  50,  Eaton-place,  Brighton.
Marson,  Gervase,  3,  Park-road,  Southport.

Martin,  Mrs.  E.  G.,  42,  Rue  Gambetta,  Honfleur  (Calvados),  France.
Martin,  W.  R.,  65,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Mason,  Miss  M.  H.,  Morton  Hall,  Retford,  Notts.
MATiiEvvs,G.B.,B.A.,9,Menai  View-teiTace,UpperBangor,North  Wales.
Max,  Professor  Gabriel,  17,  Heustrasse,  Municli.
McKerlie,  Miss  Helen  G.,  Monkstown,  Co.  Dublin.
McLaren,  Mrs.  C,  45,  Harrington-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Miller,  Robert,  6,  Chester-street,  Edinburgh.

Miller,  Mrs.  W.  Pitt,  Merlewood,  Grange-over-Sand^,  Lancashire.

Milman,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  17,  Southwell-gardens,  London,  S.AV.

MiLNES,  George  Hutchinson,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.

Minot,  Dr.  C.  Sedgwick,  25,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  U.S.A.

Mitchell,  Mrs.  C.  W.,  Jesmond  Towers,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.

MoLESWORTH,  SiR  GuiLFORD  L.,  K.C.I.E.,  Simla,  India.

Money,  Charles  L.,  Northbrook  Cottage,  Petersfield.

Monteagle,  The  Lord,  K.P.,  3,  South  Eaton-place,  London,  S.W.

Montgomery,  Mrs.,  9,  Hartley-road,  Exmouth.

Moore,  Major-General  Montgomery,  Dover.

MoRisoN,  Mrs.  Miller,  Morison  House,  Hetland,  Ruth  well,  N.B.

MORISON,  Theodore,  M.A.,  Aligarh,  N.W.P.,  India.

MoRDAN,  Miss  C.  E.,  15,  Queen-square,  W.C.

Moul,  Mrs.  2,  Prince's  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  S.W.

MouLE,  John,  Codicote,  Welwyn,  Herts.

MouLTON,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  14,  Ptue  Pierre  Cliasson,  Paris.

MuNRO,  Henry  Acland,  B.A.,  17,  Vincent-squave,  S.W.

Murray,  Colonel  Hugh  H.,  R.A.,  28,  Gower-street,  London,  W.C.

Murray,  Oswald,  3S,  Parliament  Hill-road,  Hampstead,  N.AV.

Murray,  Sydney  .J.,  70,  Cecile  Park,  Crouch  Hill,  London.

Murray,  R.  M.,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.R.O.P.(Ediu.),  10,  Hope-st.,  Edinburgh.

Musk,  Miss  Agnes,  Market-place,  Mildenhall,  Suflblk.

Myers,  Mrs.,  Brandon  House.  Cheltenham.

Myers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  Leckham|3ton  House,  Cambridge.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Mylnk,  Mks.,  122,  Gloucester-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Neild,  Frederick,  The  Yews,  Fernliurst,  Sussex.
Neate,  Percy  John,  F.G.S.,  M.M.E.,  Medway  Iron  Works,  Rochester.
Nelson,  Mrs.  Essington,  42,  Eardley-crescent,  South  Kensington,  S.W.
ISTewsom,  Joiix,  The  American  Trading  Company,  Yokohama,  Japan.
Neville,  Francis  Henry,  M.A.,  Sidney  Sussex  College,  Cambridge.
Newton,  Rev.  Richard  Heber,  East  Hampton,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Nichols,  Miss  Irene,  Lawford  Hall,  Manningtree.
NiciiOLLS,  Rev.  T.B.,  M.A.,  St.  Oswald's  College,  Tynemouth.
Nicholson,  Sir  Charles,  Bart.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  M.D.,  The  Grange,

Totteridge,  Herts.
NoAKES,  D.  W.,  23,  Nelson-street,  Greenwich,  S.E.
Noel,  Hon.  Roden,  Livingstone  House,  Burgess  Hill,  Sussex.
Norris,  William  Alfred,  Pine  Hill,  Ore,  Hastings,
Oman,  Mrs.,  St.  Philip's  Lodge,  Painswick-road,  Cheltenham.
Oman,  Charles  W.  C,  M.A.,  All  Souls'  College,  Oxford.
O'Neill,  Gregory  L.,  M.B.,  140,  Elizabeth-st.,  Sydney,New South  Wales.
OpiE;  Edward  A.  D.,  J. P.,  Pirie-street,  Adelaide.
Pagan,  Miss  C,  Marston  Lodge,  Harrow-on-the-Hill.
Paget,  Lady,  The  Embassy,  Vienna.

Paice,  WillIxVM,  M.A.,20,Blandford-road,Bedford  Park,  Cliiswick,  S.W.

Parker,  jNIiss  E.  A.,  The  Elms,  Gosforth,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.

Parry,  Rev.  William  Edwards,  B. A.,  1,  Bell-terrace,  Clewer,Windsor.

Passingham,  Mrs.,  11,  Morton-crescent,  Exmoutli.

Peake,  C.  W.,  B.A,,  c/o  Mr.  Wood,  High-street,  Newport,  Salop.

Perry,  Edwin  C,  M.A.,  The  College,  Guy's  Hospital,  Loudon,  S.E.

Plumaier,  J.  W.,  Cockermouth.

Pollock,  Miss,  50,  Weymouth-street,  London,  W.

PoNSONBY,  Hon.  Mrs.,  2,  Wilton-terrace,  Belgrave-square,  S.W.

PoNSONBY,  Miss,  Glensouthwell,  Rathfarnham,  Co.  Dublin.

Pope,  George  H.,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  Merchants'  Hall,  Bristol.

Portal,  J.  Spencer,  Malshanger,  Basingstoke.

Porter,  William  Henry',  Ballymacool,  Letterkenny.

PosTGATE,  Professor  J.  P.,  Litt.D.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Powell,  George  Thompson,  Rotherwood,  Sydenham  Hill,  S.E.

Powles,  Lewis  Charles.  M.A.,  Bushey,  Herts.

Praed,  Mrs.  Campbell,  16,  Talbot-square,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Preble.  W.  P.,  Junr.,  237,  Broadway,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Pribitkof,  v.,  23,  Troitzky  Pereoulok,  St.  Petersburg.
Prothero,  Mrs.,  63,  Trumpington-street,  Cambridge.
Pym,  Mrs.  Angela,  Bankside,  Lunham-road,  Upper  Norwood,  S.E.
Radnor,  The  Countess  of,  8,  Ennismore-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Raleigh,  Walter  A.,  M.A.,  27,  Ladbroke-road,  London,  W.
Raper,  R.  W.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Oxford.


694


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


Kawson,  Hexry  G.,  68,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S,W.
Reichel,  Principal  H.  E.,  M.A.,  Universiby  College,  Bangor,  Nortis
Wales.

Reynolds,  Colonel  H.  C,  Tliorncliffe,  Cheltenham.

E,EYNOLL\s,  Mrs.,  Millington  House,  Thelwail,  near  Warrington.

EiDDiPORD,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Barnwood  Cottage,  near  Gloucester.

Ridley,  Miss,  18,  Belsize  Park,  London,  N.W.

RiGG,  Thomas  S.  J.,  B.A.,  General  Post  OxHce,  Sydney.

Ritchie,  Miss,  131,  Claphani-road,  London,  S.W.

Roberts,  William  Johnson,  liG,  Pembroke-road,  Dublin.

Roberts,  Rev.  William  Yv^.,  Brook  Dene,  1-1,  Strawberry  Hill-road,

Twickenham,  S.W.
Robin,  Perc?  A.,  B.A.,  George-street,  Parkside,  Adelaide,  Australia.
Robinson,  Mrs.  Lionel,  19,  Kensington-square,  London,  W.
Roger,  W.  Wallace,  31,  Tavistock-square,  London,  W.C.
Rosenbach,  Dr.  P.,  Kaiserliche  Medicinische  Akademie,  St.  Petersburg--,
Ross,  Joseph  Carne,  M.D.,  Parsonage  ISTook,  Withington,  Manchester.
Rouse,  Rolla  E.,  M.D.,  2,  Tisbury-road,  West  Brighton.
Roxburgh,  R.,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.E.,  1,  Victoria-bdgs., Weston-super-Mare.
Russell,  John,  B.A.,  IG,  Somerstield-road,  Finsbury  Park,  London,  N,
Sampson,  Colonel  Dudley,  Buxshalls,  Lindfield,  Haywards  Heath.
Sams,  Rev.  George  P.,  M.A.,  Emberton  Rectory,  Newport  Pagnell.
Saunders,  Latimer  Henry,  Trevone,  Padstow.
Saunders,  Thomas  Bailey,  M.A.,  13,  "Hyde  Park  Gate,  S.W.
Sawyer,  R.  D.,  Sliervvood-buildings,  corner  of  .57th-street  and  6tli-

avenue.  New  York  City,  L^.S.A.
Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  B.A.,  Gersau,  Ijake  of  Lucerne,  Switzerland.
Scholefield,  Rev.  C.  C,  M.A.,  Eton  College,  Windsor.
Schram,  Miss  Lilian  M.E.,  178,  Earl's  Court-road^  S.W.
Sellin,  Professor  C.W.,  5,  Wrangelstrasse,  Hoheluft,  Hamburg.
Seymour,  Captain  Edward  H.,  R.N.,  9,  Ovington-square,  S.W.
Shad  well.  Miss  Blanche,  21,  Nottingham-place,  London,  W.
Sheavyn,  Robert  F.,  Long-street,  Atherstone.
Sheppard,  W.  F.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
SiiERBURN,  H.  A.,  Savings  Bank  Department,  General  Post  Office,  E.G.
SiiiLTON,  Alfred  J.,  F.C.S.,  3G,  Castle-street,  Reading.
Shuttle  worth,  John,  Withington,  Manchester.
Sidebotham,  Edward  J.,  Earlsdene,  Bowden,  Cheshire.
Simpson,  PtEGiNALD  Yv'ynne,  B.A.,  14,  Cornwall-gardens,  S.W,
Skene,  Miss  F.  M.  F.,  13,  New  Inn  Hall-street,' Oxford.
Sladen,  Douglas  B.  W.

Sloman,  Rev.  Arthur,  M.A.,  The  School  House,  Birkenhead.
Sloman,  Samuel  George,  Jun.,  39,  West-street,  Farnham.
Smart,  J.  Naish,  Sydney  House,  Burnham.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


G05


Smith,  Rev.  Canox,  M.A.,  Etlielstou  House,  7,  Esplanade,  Tenby.

Smith,  G.  Albert,  Manstone  Cottage,  St.  Lawrence,  Kent.

Smith,  George  M.,  Custom  House,  Amble,  Northumberland.

Smith,  H.  Babingtox,  B.A.,  Eiverbank,  Putney,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  John  George,  Jun.,  Hill  House,  Surbiton.

Smith,  Rev.  Canon  R.  Tkavers,  B.D.,  Vicarage,  Clyde-road,  Dublin.

Smith,  Miss  J.  M.,  52,  Stanhope-gardens,  Queen's  Gate,  S.W.

SiMiTH,  Mrs.  Richard,  174,  Cromwell-road,  London,  S.W.

Snape,  Mrs.,  Markland  Hill,  Heaton,  Bolton.

SoLovov,  Michael,  9,  Mokovaia,  St.  Petersburg.

Spencer,  Miss  Georgiana  M.,  2r>,  York -street,  Portman-square,  W,

Sperling,  Arthur,  J. P.,  Lattenbury  Hill,  St.  Ives,  Hunts.

Stackhouse,  ilRS.  M.  p.,  Stackhouse,  Settle.

Staplev,  x\lfred  M.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.

Stepney,  Hon.  Lady,  3,  Chesham-street,  London,  S.W.

Stevenson,  George,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlayl-  Co.,  Hastings-st.,  Calcutta.

Stilljian,  W.  J.,  3,  Challoner-street,  AVest  Kensington,  W.

Stone,  Miss  Edith  L.,  Shute  Hay,  Walditch,  Bridport.

Stout,  George  F.,  B.A.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.

Stuart,  Morton  G.,  Nevv  University  Club,  St.  James's- street,  S.W.

Sturge,  Miss  Emily,  Tyndall's  Park,  Clifton,  Bristol.

Sturges,  Mrs. William,  32,  Charles-street,  Berkeley-square,  London, W,

Swan,  0.  A.,  10,  Delamere-street,  London,  S.W.

SwANwicK,  Miss  Anna,  23,  Cumberland-terrace,  London,  K.W.

Symonds,  John  Addington,  M.A.,  Davos-Platz,  Switzerland.

Symons,  Miss  Jessie  H.,  91,  Wigmore-street,  London,  W.

Tattersall,  James  Granville,  Hanover-square  Club,  London,  W.

Tattersall,  Wm.,  90,  High-street,  Oxford.

Taunton,  Mrs.  E.  H.,  Brook  A-^ale,  Witton,  near  Birmingham.
Taylor, Rev.  Arnold  D.,  B. A.,  Churchstanton  Rectory,Honiton,  Devon,
Thackeray,  Mrs.  W.  C,  Montague  House,  Vanbrugh  Park,  Black-
heath,  S.E.

Thompson,  Isaac  C,  F.L.S.,  F.R.M.S.,  Woodstock,  Waverley-road,
Livex'pool.

Todd,  Mrs.,  Maclean,  Clarence  River,  New  South  Wales.
Theobald,  Morell,  62,  Granville  Park,  Lewisham,  S.E.
Thurstan,  Frederici:,  W.,  M.A.,  La  Martiniere,Lucknow,  India.
Thurtell,  Ellis,  M.A.,  The  Cokehurst,  East  Farleigh,  Maidstone.
Trench,  Rev.  F.  Ciienevix,M.A.,  St.  John  Baptist,  Tuebrook,  Liverpool..
Trench,  J.  Townsend,  J.P.,  Kenmare,  Ireland.

Trevor,  Rev.  Thom.as  Warren,  M.A.,  Penmon  Vicarage,  Beaumai-is..
Tuker,  Miss  Mildred  A.R.,  4,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,  N.W.^
Tyrer,  Mrs.  AV.,  Woodleigh,  Prescot.

Underwood,  Rev.  Canon  C.  AY.,  M.A.,  Histon  A^icarage,  Cambridge,


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Vailati,  Professor  Giovanni,  Crema,  Italy.
Venman,  Hezekiah,  20,  Pimlico-road,  London,  S.W.
Venn,  J.,  D.Sc,  F.  R.S.,  Caius  College,  Cambridge.
Verrall,  Mrs.,  Selwyn-gardens,  Cambridge.

Villamarina,  The  Marciiesa  di,  Palazza  Pteale,  Quii'inale,  Rome.
Vincent,  Maria  Lady,  Villa  Plora,  Cannes,  France.
Vivian,  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

VoRES,  Arthur,  M.R.C.S.,  8,  Mansfield-street,  Cavendish-square,  W.

"Walker,  Reginald  T.,  27,  Ilanover-square,  Leeds.

Ward,  The  Hon.  Miss,  Castle  Ward,  Downpatrick.

Wardrop,  Mrs., 10,  Lower  Belgrave-street,  Eaton-square,  S.W.

Warrand,  Mrs.,  Bught,  Inverness,  N.B.

Warter,  M  rs.  TathAiM,  1 0,  Upper  Phillimore-gardens,  Kensington,  W.
Wassell,  H.  a.,  F.R.A.S.jAddenbrook  Villa^Old  Swinford, Stourbridge.
WATERiiousE,C.II.,M.D.,.56,KarlLudwig  Strasse,Ober-Dobliiag, Vienna.
Watson,  Mrs.  W.  C,  39,  Gloucester-square,  London,  W.
Wemyss,  Miss  A.,  Wash  well  House,  Painswick,  Gloucestershire.
WiiERRY',  G.  E.,  F.R.C.S.,  Corpus-buildings,  Cambridge.
Whishaw,  Mrs.  Berniiard,  27,  Upper  Bedford-jjlace,  W.C.
Whitridge,  Frederick  W.,  University  Club,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Wickham,  Mrs.,  7,  Comeragh-road,  West  Kensington,  W.
WiGAN,  W.  L.,  Larkfield,  near  Maidstone.

Willett,  Mrs.,  Bedales,  Lindtield,  near  Haywards  Heath,  Sussex.
Williams,  Lady,  Llaufoist,  Clifton  Down,  Bristol.
Williams,  A.  C.  Redsiiawe,  63,  Queen  Victoria-street,  E.G.
AVilliams,  Miss  S.,  The  Ptcservoir,  Edgbaston,  near  Birmingham.
Wilson,  Herbert  W.,  The  Woodlands,  Athlone.
Wingfield,  Mrs.  Edward,  40,  Albion-street^  Hyde  Park,  W.
Witherby,  Arthur  George,  B.A.,  117a,  Earl's  Court-road,  S.W.
Withers,  John  James,  B.A.,  2,  Museum  Cliambers,  Bury-street,

Bloomsbury,  W.C.
Wittig,  Gregor  G,  2,  Kornerstrasse,  Leipzig.
Wood,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  Newent  Rectory,  Gloucestershire.
Wood,  Mrs.  T.,  The  Avenue,  Colchester.

Woodhead,  John  E.,  171,  West  Washington-street,  Chicago,  U.S.A.
WoRSLEY,  Mrs.,  Bromley  College,  Kent.

Wright,  Arthur  J.,  M.A.,  Kensington  Palace  Mansions,  London, W.
Wyld,  George,  M.D.,  41,  Courtfield-road,  South  Kensington,  S.W.
Young,  Rev.  Charles  John,  F.R.A.S.,  Stafford-place,  Halifax.
Young,  Professor  William  H.,  Columbus,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
Youngman,  Miss,  Hillside,  St.  Margaret's,  Ipswich.

N.B. — Members  and  Associates  are  rerjuestecl  to  send  information  of  any
C'lange  of  address  to  tlie  Assistant- Secretary,  19,  Buckingliani-street,  Adelphi,
London,  W.C.


Lid  of  Members  and  Associates.  697


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES  OF  THE  AMERICAN  BRANCH.

(NOVEMBEK,  1890.)


All  Addresses  arc  "  U.S.A."  except  v^hen  anuther  Country  is  named.
"  M"  after  a  name  indicates  full  Member.


Abbot,  Dr.  S.  L.,  90,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Adams,  Brooks,  23,  Court-street,  Boston,  Mass.  [M.]
Adams,  Mrs.  George  E.,  530,  Belden-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Agassiz,  George  R.,  14,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Albree,  John,  Juxr.,  122,  Concord-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Albree,  Joseph,  20,  Market-street,  Allegheny,  Pa.
Alexander,  L.  L.,  Omo  Ranch  (Crystal  Mine),  Cal.
Alexander,  Mrs.  Kezia  E.,  Birmingham,  Mich.  (Hon.  Associate.)
Almy^  Francis,  Buffalo,  K.Y.
Auel,  Mrs.  C,  65,  Lefferts-place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Andrew,  Miss  Elizabeth  L.,  Old  Colony  Hill,  Hingham,  Mass.
Andrew,  Hon.  John  F.,  corner  of  Gloucester-street  and  Commonwealth-
avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Andrews,  jVErs.  J.  A.,  307,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  INIass.
Annes,  a.  L.,  416,  3rd-avenue  S.,  Wausau,  Wis.
Arnold,  J.  N.,  19,  College-street,  Providence,  R.I.
Atkinson,  C.  F.,  46,  ^Mason-building,  Boston,  Mass.
Austen,  Professor  Peter  T.,  New  Brunswick,  N.J.
Austin,  Henry  W.,  9,  Hamilton-place,  Boston,  Mass.
Ayers,  George  D.,  Maiden,  Mass.
Bache,  Dr.  Dallas,  Fort  Riley.  Kansas.
Badeau,  General  Adam,  Jamaica,  Long  Island,  X.Y.
Baker,  Alfred  L.,  1,712,  Michigan-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Baldwin,  Henry'  C,  172,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Bancroft^  Mrs.  John  C,  1,623,  H-street,  Washington,  D.C.
Barnes,  T.  W.^  c/o  Messrs.  Houghton,  Mifflin  &  Co.,  4,  Park-st.,  Boston.
Bartlett,  James  W.  .  Lock  Box  66,  Dover,  N.H.
Beaumont,  Mrs.  L.  A.,  79,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Behrens,  Arthur  W.,  Hotel  Warwick,  Newport  News,  Virginia.
BiGELOW,  Horace  P.,  Waterville,  Oneida  County,  N.Y.


Lhf  of  Members  and  Associo.fes.


BiOELOw,  AVesley,  Studio-building,  Ti-euiont-street,  Boston,  Mass.
BiGELOW,  Dr.  W.  S.,  go,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
BiRDSALL,  Dr.  W.  E,.,  144,  East  47tli-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Blake,  Fraxcis,  Keevvaydin,  Weston,  Auburndale,  P.O.,  Mass.
Blodgett,  C,  M.D.,  238,  Maple-streefc,  Holyoke,  Mass.
BowDiTCii,  C.  p.,  28,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.
BowDiTCH,  Professor  H.  P.,  Harvard  Medical  Scliool,  Boston,  Mass.
BowDiTCii,  Dr.  H.  I.,  113,  Boylstou-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Bowen,  Dr.  J.  T.,  14,  Marlborougli-street,  Boston,  Mass.
BowKER,  Dr.  S.  D.,  1,732  Woodland-avenue,  Kansas  City,  Mo.
Bradley,  Mrs.  W.  L.,  Hinghani,  Mass.
Braggiotti,  Isidore,  208,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Briggs,  Dr.  E.  C,  125,  Marlborougli-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Brimmer,  Martin,  47,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Bromberg,  Fredeihck  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama.
Brooks,  Rev.  Phillips,  233,  Clarendon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Brown,  John  F.,  16,  Baldwin-street,  Newton,  Mass.
Brown,  Mrs.  J.  F.,  IG,  Baldwin-street,  Newton,  Mass.
Crown,  Dr.  S.,  Hotel  Normandie,  Broadway  and '  38tli-sti'eet,  New-
York  City,  N.Y.
Browne,  G.  H.,  1G,  Garden-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Bruen,  Mrs.,  79,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Buck,  Albert  H.,  19,  East  38tli-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
BuppETT,  Dr.  E.  p.,  520,  Bergen-avenue,  Jersey  City  Heights,  N.J.
Bullard,  Dr.  W.  N.,  89,  Marlborougli-street,  Boston,  Mass.
BuNDY,  Colonel  John  C,  92,  La  Salle-street,  Chicago,  III.
Burrows,  Mrs.  Thomas,  The  Ontario,  Chicago,  111.
BuRSLEY',  Miss  A,  E.,  453,  Marl  borough -street,  Boston,  Mass.
Bush,  A.  P.,  149,  Pearl-street,  Boston,  Mass.
liuTLER,  Miss  Virginia,  Stockbridge,  Mass.

Carey,  A.  A.,  c/o  H.  L.  Morris,  IG,  E.vchange-pl.,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Carnochan,  Couvehneur  M.,  1,  Nassau-st.,  New  York  City,  N.Y.  [M.]
Carr,  Lucien,  Peabody  Museum,  Cambridge,  Mass,
Case,  Miss  Marion  R.,  120,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Oatlin,  Captain  R.,  Soldiers'  Home,  Washington,  D.C.
Chadbourne,  R.  AV.,  First  National  Bank,  Columbus,  Wis.
Chandler,  Miss  Grace,  Forest  Hill-street,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.
Chandler,  Horace  P.,  47,  Devonshire-street,  Boston,  Mass.
OhaxdleRj  Mrs.  Horace  P.,  Forest  Hill-street,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.
Chapin,  Irving,  5,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Ohapman,  B.  H.,  24,  Main-street,  Kansas  City,  Mo.
OiiASE,  G.  B.,  234,  Deacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Cheney,  Mrs.  E.  D.,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.

OiiENOWiTH,  Mrs.  C.  Van  D.,  113,  Columbia  Heights,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.


List  of  Members  and  Assoeiafes.


699


Claypole,  Professor  E.  W.,  Akron,  Ohio.

Cochran,  Mrs.  A.  P.,  1,306,  First-street,  Louisville,  Ky.

Coffin,  Charles  A.,  178,  Devonshire-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Coffin,  Charles  F.,  417,  "The  Rookery,"  Chicago,  111.

Coffin,  C.  P.,  209,  Washington-street,  Room  3,  Boston,  Mass.

Cole,  Mrs.  Helen  B.,  500,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Cook,  Mrs.  Ellen  K.,  Davenport,  Iowa.

Cooper,  James,  P.O.  Box  1,912,  Montreal,  Quebec,  Canada.

Cope,  Professor  Edward  D.,  2,102,  Pine-street,  Philadelphia,  P;i.

CoRNiNC4,  Mrs.  M.  S.,  121,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Cory,  C.  B.,  S,  Arlington-street,  Boston,  Mass.  [M.]

CowLES,  Dr.  E.,  McLean  Asylum,  iSomerville,  Mass.

Co.v,  Miss,  285,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Craig,  John  W.,  Box  291,  San  Bernardino,  Cal.  [M.]

Craigie,  Ernest,  13-1,  Peel-street,  3Iontreal,  Canada.

Crane,  Charles  R.,  297,  South  Ashlaird-avenue,  Chicago,  111.

Crosby,  Professor  W.  C,  Society  Natural  History,  Boston,  Mass.

Cross,  Professor  C.  R.,  Institute  of  Technology,  Boston,  Mass.

Curtis,  Allen,  51,  Devonshire-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Curtis,  Mrs.  Greely  S.,  28,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

CuRTLS,  Professor  John  G.,  127,  East  35tli-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.

Curtis,  ^Y.  E.,  14,  West  20tli-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.

Cutler,  Arthur  H.,  20,  West  43rd-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.

Dallas,  George  M.,  233,  South  Fourth-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Dana,  J.  C,  Public  Library,  Denver,  Col.

Davidson,  Thomas,  239,  West  105th-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Decker,  W.  S.,  Muskegon,  Mich.

Delafield,  Mrs.  L.  L.,  20,  North  Washington-sq  ,  New  York  City,  N.Y.

Dexter,  Arthur,  Somerset  Club,  Boston,  Mass.

Dexter,  Samuel,  48,  Brattle-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Dickinson,  Mrs.  S.  L.,  c/o  Messrs.  Hayden  and  Dickinson,  Denver,  CoL

Dietrick,  Mrs.  Ellen  B.,  160,  Nesvbury-street,  Boston,  Mass.

DiMMOCK,  George,  61,  Sacramento-street,  Cambridge,  3Iass.

Dodge,  J.  T.,  1,818,  Broadway,  West  Superior,  Wis.

Dole,  Nathan  H.,  "  Hedgecote,"  Glen-road,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.

Dorr,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  18,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

DorRj  George  B.,  18,  Commonwealtli-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Drown,  Edward  S.,  Episcopal  Theological  School,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Drom"n,  Professor  T.  ^l.,  Institute  of  Technology,  Boston,  Mass.

Drown,  T.  Pickering,  351,  Congress-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Ducey',  William  L.,  Muskegon,  Mich.

Dunham,  Miss  E,  L.,  37,  East  36th-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Dunham,  Dr.  T.,  c/o  Dr.  C.  Dunham,  Irviiigton-on-Hudson,  N.Y.  [M.]
Dunham,  Dr.  W.  R.,  Troy,  N.H.


700


Z/.sf  of  Members  and  Associate^.


Dunning,  Mks.  F.  A.  B.,  804,  East  Gorham-street,  Madison,  Wis.
Edes,  Dr.  Robert  T.,  1,216,  18th-street,  Washington,  D.C.
EdwxVrds,  Mrs.  Mary  H.,  Keene,  N.H.
Ellis,  Miss,  140,  East  49th-street.,  New  York  City,  KY.
Ellis,  Miss  Lucy,  114,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Elwell,  Mrs.  F.  E.,  Sandwich,  Mass.

Elwell,  Mrs.  M.  H.,  82,  Montague-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.

Emmons,  S.  F.,  U.S.  Geological  Survey,  Box  591,  Washington,  D.C.

Ernst,  Dr.  H.  C,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,  Mass.

EsTY,  Professor  William  C,  Amherst  College,  Amherst,  Mass.

Evans,  Mrs.  Edwin  T.,  189,  North-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Evans,  Miss  Ella  K.,  186,  North-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.

Evans,  Frederick,  Junr.,  Npav  York  Tribune,  New  York  City,  N.Y.

Evans,  Mrs.  Glendower,  12,  Otis-place,  Boston,  Mass.

Everett,  Professor  0.  C,  53,  Garden-street,  Oambiidge,  Mass.

Everts,  Dr.  Orpheus,  Supt.  Cincinnati  Sanitarium,  College  Hill,  Ohio.

Fay,  Miss  May  M.,  East  Orange,  N.J.

Felton,  Thomas  C,  Pevere  House,  Boston,  Mass,

Fillmore,  Dr.  C.  W.,  150,  Point-street,  Providence,  li.I.

Fletcher,  J.  B.,  31,  Thayer  Hall,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Flower,  Mrs.  J.  M.,  361,  Superior-sti-eet,  Chicago,  111.

FoOTE,  Dr.  E.  B.,  120,  Lexington-avenue,  New  York  City,  N.Y.

Forbes,  John  C,  10,  Ord-street,  Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada.

Forbes,  John  M.,  89,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Frotiiingham,  Dr.  Langdon,  University  of  Neb.,  Lincoln,  Neb.

FnOTHiNGiiAM,  O.  B.,  118,  Marlborougli-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Frotiiingham,  P.  R.,  Eighth-street,  New  Bedford,  Mass.

Fullerton, Professor  G.  S., 4,1 16, Spruce-street, West  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Gage,  J.  Lyman,  470,  North  State-street,  Chicago,  111.

Gale,  Harlow  S.,  75,  Sternwarten-strasse,  IIIr,  Leipzig.  [M.]

CtARDINER,  Dr.  Edward  G.,  Institute  of  Technology,  Boston,  Mass.

Gardiner,  Professor  H.  N.,  23,  Craft 's-avenue,  Northamjjton,  Mass.

(tArdner,  Mrs.  John  L.,  152,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Ma.ss.

Gerrish,  Dr.  F.  H.,  Portland,  Maine.

Gibbens,  Jos.  M.,  153,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Gilbert,  G.  K.,  AVashington,  D.C.

Gilbert,  Dr.  Mary  A.,  15,  East  llth-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Giles,  Mrs.  Grace  M.,  19,  Baltimore  Block,  Atlanta,  Georgia.
GiLMAN,  Benjamin  I.,  202,  Cascade-avenue,  Colorado  Springs,  Col.
Gooding,  Miss  Mary,  Box  116,  Fryeburg,  Maine.

(tOODridge,  Mrs.  Frederick,  250,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
(Graham,  Professor  Andrew  J.,  744,  Broadway,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Gray,  Mrs.  John  C,  176,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Greene,  Dr.  William  H.,  204,  North  36tli-stieet,  Philadelphia,  Pa.


JAst  of  Members  and  Associates.


701


Greenough,  Mrs.  D.  S.,  Junr.,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.
Gridley,  J.  N.,  Virginia,  111.

Gripfing,  Mrs.  0.  R.,  c/o  H.  Griifing,  School  of  Arts, Columbia  Coll.,  K  Y.
GrovEr,  Rev.  G.  W.,  Nashua,  N.H.

Grower,  George  G.,  Ansonia  Brass  and  Copper  Co.,  Ansonia,  Conn.

Hale,  George  S.,  5,  Exeter-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Hall,  Miss  Harriet  M.,  5i,  College-street,  Providence,  R.I.

Hall,  Professor  James,  New  York  State  Museum,  Albany,  N.  Y.  .

Hall,  Dr.  T.  P.,  Clark  University,  Worcestei',  Mass.

Hamilton,  Dr.  A.  McLane,  20,  East  29th-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.

Hardaway,  W.  a.,  M.D.,  2,710,  Olive-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Hardex,  Judge  William  D.,  Savannah,  Georgia.

Harris,  Pv,ev.  J.A.,D.D.,  St.  Paul's  Rectory,  Chestnut  Hill,  Philadelphia.
Harris,  William  T.,  LL.D.,  914,  23rd-street,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.
Harwood,  C.  H,,  Harvard  Medical  School^  Boston,  Mass.
Hartshorx,  Miss  Cornelia,  150,  Waterman-street,  Providence,  R.I.
Hascall,  Mrs.  Myra  Fisk,  117,  Waverley -place.  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Haslett,  O.  C,  452,  Speai'-street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.
Haven,  Dr.  Henry  C,  200,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Haworth,  George  D.,  20,  Groveland  Park,  Chicago,  111.
Haynes,  Henry  W.,  239,  Beacon- street,  Bo.ston,  Mass.
Heard,  John,  Junr.,  Hotel  Oxford,  Huntingdon-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Hedges,  Mrs.  Sidney  M.,  76,  Highland-streetj  Roxbury,  Mass.
Hemenway,  Augustus,  Readville,  Mass.

Higginson,  Colonel  T.  W.,  25,  Buckingham-street,  Cambridge,  Mass,

Hill,  Mrs.  Caroline  I.,  Reservoir-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  5,  Boylston-place,  Boston,  Mass.

Hoffman,  Professor  F.  S.,  Union  College,  Schenectady,  N.Y.

HoLBROOK,  Dr.  M.  L.,  46,  East  21st-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.

Holmes,  Rev.  Samuel  V.  V..  Richfield  Springs,  N.Y.

Holt,  Henry,  29,  West  23rd-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.  [M.]

HoMANS,  Mrs.  C.  D.,  134,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Hooper,  Miss  E.  R.,  141,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Hooper,  N.  L.,  5G,  Chestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Hopkins,  Dr.  Samuel  A.,  235,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

HowLAND,  Miss  N.  L.,  82,  Worcester-street,  Boston,  Mass,

Hubbard,  Gardiner  G.,  Washington,  D.C.

Hudson,  Woodward,  Concord,  Mass.  [M.]

Hull,  Mrs.  George  C,  1,012,  Francis-street,  St.  Joseph,  IMo.

Hunt,  F.  C,  the  Winfield  Mortgage  and  Trust  Co.,  Winfield,  Kansas.

Hunt,  Colonel  Leavitt,  Elmsholme,  Weathersfield,  Vermont.

Hurley,  A.M.,  corner  of  Firstand  Monmouth  sts.,  Independence,Oregon.

Hutchinson,  Dr.  Mahlon,  103,  State-street,  Chicago,  111.

James,  Mrs.  G,  A.,  8,  Mount  Vernon-place,  Boston,  Mass.

3  B


702


List  of  Mfrrthers  (ind  Afisocialps.


James,  Dr.  H.  F.,  2,G27,  Olive-street,  St.  Louis," Mo.

James,  Professor  William,  95,  Irving-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Jastrow,  Dr.  Joseph,  University  of  Wisconsin,  Madison,  Wis.

Jayne,  Professor  H.,  1,826,  Chestnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Jayne,  H.  La  Barre,  208,  South  Fifth-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Jenks,  Mrs.  P.  A.,  290,  Marlboro'-streefc,  Boston,  Mass.

Jewktt,  Mary  B.,  Buchtis  College,  Akron,  Ohio.

Johnson,  Charles  P.,  Box  492,  405,  Main-street,  Worcester,  Mass.

Johnson,  Miss  Charlotte  H.,  123,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Johnson,  Miss  Cornellia  F.,  123,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

JuDAH,  J.  H.,  c/o  Francis  Smith,  Caldwell  and  Co.,  Cotton  Exchange

Building,  Mempliis,  Tenn.
Kehew,  Mrs.  ^^''ILLIAM  B.,  317,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Kelsoe,  W.  A.,  1,331,  Soutli  13th-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Kent,  Miss  Annie,  G4,  Montague-street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Kiddle,  Professor  TTenry,  7,  East  130th-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y,
Kimball,  Benjamin,  8,  Congress-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Kimball,  Miss  Hannah  P.,  325,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Kitching,  Miss  Edith  H.,  141,  West  GOth-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
KiTCHiNG,  Mrs.  H.  B.,  141,  West  60th-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Lang,  B.  J.,  Messrs.  Chickering  and  Sons,  Boston,  Mass.
Langley,  Professor  S.  P.,  Smithsoniaii  Institute,  Washington,  D.C.
Latham,  Miss  V.  A.,  B.Sc,  58,  East  University -ave.,  Ann  Arbor,  Midi.
Lathrop,  John,  10,  Gloucester-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Lawrence,  Mrs.  Amory  A.,  59,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Leffingwell,  Dr.  Albert,  Dansville,  N.Y.

Leonhardt,  J.  S.,  M.Sc,  M.D.,  1,452,  O. -street,  Lincoln,  Nebraska.
Lewis,  Miss  Anna  H.,  20,  Sacramento-street,  Cambridge,  JNIass.
LiBBEY,  Professor  William,  Junr.,  Princeton,  N.J.
LiVERMORE,  Mrs.  Mary,  9,  Emerson-street,  Melrose,  Mass.
LoGKWOOD,  Colonel  J.  S.,  146,  Franklin-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Lodge,  Mrs.  H.  C,  1,721,  Rhode  Island-avenue,  Washington,  D.C.  [M.]
Lodge,  Mrs.  John  E.,  31,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Logan,  W.  S.,  58,  William-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.  [M.]
Long,  George  E.,  Jos.  Dixon  Crucible  Company,  Jei-sey  City,  N.J.
LouNSBERRY,  C.  A.,  U.S.  Land  OlHce,  Pierre,  South  Dakota.
LuKENS,  Dr.  Anna,  1,068,  Lexington-avenue,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Lyman,  Charles  W.,  120,  AVest  63rd-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Macdonald,  Dr.  B.  C,  34,  Parraenter-street,  Boston,  Mass.
McHenry,  Mrs.  J.  Howard,  Pikesville,  Balto.  Co.,  Ind.
McLane,  Mrs.  W.  L.,  222,  West  23rd-street,  New  York,  N.Y.
Macqueary,  Rev.  Howard,  Canton,  Ohio.
Macy,  Mrs.  Arthur,  17,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Manning,  Miss  Abby  F.,  129,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.


Lid  of  Members  and  Associates.


70S


Mauquand,  Professor  Allax,  Princeton,  N.J.

Marshall,  Hesuy  Rutgers,  74,  Wall-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Marshall,  Professor  John  P.,  College  Hill,  Mass.
Masox,  Miss  Ellex  F.,  1,  Walnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Mason,  Miss  Ida,  1,  Walnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Mason,  H.  L.,  39,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Matthews,  N.,  Juxk.,  28,  Court-street,  Boston,  Mass.
McCabe,  W.  Gordon,  University  School,  Petersburg,  Virginia.
McLrEE,  W.  J.,  U.  8.  Geological  )Survey,  Washington,  D.C.  •.
McIlwraith,  H.  p.,  Muskegon,  Mich.  ,
McVicKER,  J.  H.,  Me  V^icker's  Theatre,  Chicago,  111.
Mendenhall,  Dr.  Neureus,  Jamestown,  Guildford  Co.,  N.C.
MetcalPj  L.  S.,  253,  Fifth-avenue,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
MiLBURX,  John  George,  1,168,  Delaware-avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Miller,  Mrs.  G.  S.,  Osv/ego,  N.Y.

Miller,  Mrs.  H.  F.,  Hotel  Langham,  Washington-street,  Boston,  iMass.
Millet,  Josiah  B.,  1-30,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Millikex,  George,  3,614,  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Mills,  Professor  C.  K.,  1,909,  Chestnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Mixot,  Professor  Cjiarles  S.,  22,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Moxcrieff,  Mrs.  Helen,  London,  Ontario,  Canada.
Moore,  Dr.  P.,  233,  East  14th-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Morris,  Mrs.  J.,  31,  Washington-S'^uare  West,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Morris,  Mrs.  Marian  Loxgfellow,  27,  School-street,  Boston,  Mass.  "
jMujiford,  James  C,  14,  Mount  Yernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.  -•
Newcomb,  C.  A.,  1,14.5,  AVoodward-avenue,  Detroit,  Mich. ■■  ■.  '
Newcojib,  Professor  Sijiox,  Washington,  D.C.
Newell,  Miss  Lavixia  H.,  25-5,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Newtox,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  781,  Madison-avenue,  New  York  City.
Nichols,  Miss  A.  B.,  211,  St.  James's-place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Nichols,  Mrs.  F.  P.,  211,  St.  James's-place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
NiMS,  F.  A.,  Muskegon,  Mich.

NoRRis,  John  M.,  Diamojid  City,  Meagher  Co.,  Montana.
NoYES,  Lieutenant  Charles  R.,  West  Point,  N.Y.
NoYES,  Dr.  William,  McLean  Asylum,  Somerville,  Mass.
NuNX,  Dr.  Richard  J.,  119  1-2,  York-street,  Savannah,  Georgia.
Okie,  Mrs.  Howard,  192,  Dartmouth-street,  Boston,  Mass.
OsBORXE,  General  F.  A.,  236,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Osborne,  Professor  F.  W.,  491,  Classon-avenue,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.
Page,  Dr.  F.  AY.,  Hotel  Cluny,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Palfrey,  Captain  Carl  F.,  Oswego,  N.Y.
Palmer,  Mhs.  Potter,  100,  Lake  Shore-drive,  Chicago,  111.
Park,  Dr.  Roswell,  510,  Delaware-avenue,  Buffalo,  N.Y.
Parker,  ^^'ILL1AM  L.,  339,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.


704


Lid  of  Members  and  Associoies.


Parkman,  Francis,  50,  Chestuut-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Parkman,  Henry,  15,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Parkman,  Miss  Mary  R.,  31,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Patrick,  Professor  G.  T.  W.,  Iowa  City,  Iowa.
Peabody,  Miss  Fanny,  247,  Berkeley-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Peabody,  John  E.,  183,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Peckiiam,  Dr.  Grace,  25,  Madison-avenue,  New  York  City,  Is.Y.
Peckiiam,  Orville;  52,  Astor  street,  Chicago,  111.
Pedigo,  Dr.  Lewis  G.,  Loek  Box  259,  Roanoke,  Virginia.
Pellew,  George,  Ivatonah,  KY.

Pendleton,  Miss,  1,522,  Locust-street,  Philadelph  ia,  Pa.
Penfield,  .Sophia,  M.D.,  Danbury,  Conn.

Perkins,  Miss  E.,  Hotel  Hamilton,  220,  Clarendon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Phillips,  Mrs.  J.  C,  J unr.,  corner  of  Berkeley  and  Marlborough  streets,
Boston,  Mass.

Platt,  J .  C,  333-335,  Fourth-avenue,  New  York  City,  N. Y.
Plummer,  J.  W.,  52,  East  Lake-street,  Chicago,  111.
Porter,  Mrs.  Maria  S.,  286,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Powers,  Fred.  Perry,  1,213,  K-street,  Washington,  D.C.
Pratt,  J.  H.,  Spring  Hill,  Kansas.

Preble,  W.  P.,  Junr.,  237,  Broadway,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Preston,  Mrs.  William  G.,  Hotel  Berkeley,  Boston,  Mass.
Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  71,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
PuMPELLY,  Raphael,  Newport,  R.I.

Putnam,  Miss  Annie  C,  63,  Marlborougli-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  Dr.  Charles  P.,  63,  IMarlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Putnam,  GEORfiE,  24,  Quincy-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Putnam,  Dr.  James  J.,  lOG,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  ]\[ass.

QuiNBY,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Bridgewater,  Mass.

QuiNCY,  Josiah,  82,  Charles-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Ransom,  Frank  H.,  8,  Mercer-circle,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Ransom,  Paul  C,  1,298,  Main-street,  Buflalo,  N.Y.

Rees,  Mrs.  Janet  Ruutz,  Wayside,  Scarsdale,  N.Y.

Richardson,  Dr.  W.  L.,  225,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

RiCKER,  James  W.,  City  Collector,  City  Hall,  Boston,  Mass.

RiDEiNG,  W.  H.,  Allerton-street,  Brookline,  Mass.

Riley,  Professor  C.  V.,  Sunbury,  Wyoming- avenue,  Washington,  D.C.

Riopel,  Rev.  Dr.  S.,  Valcartier  Village,  Quebec  Co.,  Canada.

Ritchie,  John,  Junr.,  Box  2,725,  Boston,  Mass.

Rivers,  Miss  Mary,  Milton,  Mass.

RoBBiNs,  Miss  A.  M.,  7,  Pemberton-square,  Boston,  Mass.
RoBBiNs,  Miss  H.  L.,  116,  West  21st-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
Robinson,  Mrs.  Moncure,  Jun.,  Airdrie,  Paoli,  Chester  Co,,  Penn.
Rodman,  Miss  Dama,  174,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.


Lid  of  Members  and  Associates.


705


Ropes,  John  C,  99,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.  .
RoTcii,  Miss  Joanna,  Milton,  Mass.

RowLiNSKi,  Robert  A.,  Jones  and  Abercom-streets,  Savannah,  Georgia.
RoYCE,  Professor  Josiaii,  Irving-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Salter,  William  M.,  516,  North-avenue,  Chicago,  111.
Sampson,  Charles  E.,  193,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Sargent,  Professor  C.  S.,  Brookline,  Mass.

Sargent,  Mrs.  Winthrop,  207,  Commonwealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Satterlee,  Walter,  148,  East  18th-street,  Few  York  City,  N.Y,

Savage,  Rev.  M.  J.,  25,  Concord-square,  Boston,  Mass.

Sawyer,  G.  C,  Utica  Academy,  Utica,  N.Y.

Sawin,  Rev.  T.  P.,  The  Manse,  120,  Ist-street,  Troy,  N.Y.

ScuDDER,  Samuel  H.,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Sellers,  Professor  Coleman,  3,301,  Baring-street,  Philadelphia,  Penn,
Shaw,  Miss  Emma  G.,  84,  Huntingdon-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
Shaw,  Mrs.  Quincy  A.,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.
Shimmin,  Miss  Blanche,  229,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Shufeldt,  Dr.  R.  W.,  Smithsonian  Institute,  Washington,  D.C.
Smith,  Francis,  Muskegon,  Mich.

Smith,  Mrs.  Mott,  101,  Newbury-street,  Boston,  Mass.  [M.]

Smith,  Philip  Sherwood,  261,  Geoi-gia-street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.  [M.]

Smith,  R.  Pearsall,  44,  Grosvenor-road,  London,  S.AV.,  England.

Smith,  William  Hawley,  Peoria,  111.

Stearns,  Francis  P.,  College  Hill,  Mass.

Stebbins,  Giles  B.,  335,  Fort-street,  West,  Detroit,  Mich.

Steedman,  J.  C.  W.,  A.M.,  M.D.,  2,803,  Pine-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.

Stokes,  J.  N.  P.,  42,  Beck  Hall,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Stone,  Charles  W.,  68,  Chestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Stone,  Mrs.  Richard,  Junr.,  18,  Chestnut-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Stone,  Colonel  W.  L.,  Jersey  City,  N.J.

Storer,  Albert,  40,  State-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Storer,  Malcolm,  182,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Strauss,  Albert,  124,  West  97th-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.

Street,  Miss  Ida  M.,  78e,  East  Washington-street,  Ann  Arbor,  Mich.

Sumner,  Dr.  A.  M.,  150,  Commonweadth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.

Talbot,  Edward  A.,  2,  Elmo-street,  Dorchester,  Mass.

Tappan,  Miss  M.  A.,  247,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Taylor,  Edward  AVyllys,  43,  Hancock-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Thayer,  Dr.  D.,  Hotel  Lafayette,  200,  Columbus-avenue,  Boston,  Mass

Thompson,  Dr.  W.,  1,426,  Walnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

Tiiorndike,  S.  Lothrop,  2,  Pemberton-squai-e,  Boston,  Mass.

Thorne,  C.  H.,  Brownsville,  Texas.

Thorpe,  Joseph  G.,  Jitnr.,  115,  Brattle-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Toy,  Professor  C.  H.,  7,  Lowell-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.


706


Lif<i  of  Members  and  Associate^.


TuRXBULL,  Miss  K.  E.,  113,  East  39tli-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
TuRXER,  MRi.J.B.jThe Argyle, Westchester- j)k.  Extension, Boston, IMass.
Turner,  Miss  Mary  J.,  11,  Faxon-avenue,  Quincy,  Mass.
TuTTLE,  A.  B.,  100,  West  89th-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
TuTTOX,  Mrs.  Sara,  203,  South  Main-street,  South  Bend,  lud.
TwEEDV,  Edmuxd,  Newport,  R.I.
Tyler,  J.  C,  Kalamazoo,  Mich.

Tyson,  Mrs..  George,  311,  Dartmouth-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Van  Norden,  Rev.  C,  D.D.,  Ehuira  Colleoe,  Elmira,  N.Y.

Van  Norden,  Theodore  L.,  16,  West  48th-street,  New  York  City,  N.Y.

Van  Sly'ke,  J.  M.,  23,  North  Pinckney-street,  Madison,  Wis.

Vorse,  Albert  W.,  Wellesley  Hills,  Mass.

Wads  WORTH,  Dr.  O.  F.,  139,  Boylston-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Wallace,  Mrs.  Maria,  Murray  Hill  Hotel,  New  York,  N.Y.

Walley,  Henshaw  B.,  -10,  State-street  (P.O.  Box  3,417),  Boston,  Mass.

Ward,  W.  E.,  Port  Chester,  N.Y.

Waring,  Mrs.  George,  Newport,  R.T.

Warner,  Joseph  B.,  39,  Court-street,  Boston,  Mass.

Warren,  Dr.  J.  W.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,  Mass.

Watson,  Sereno,  Cambridge,  Mass.

Watson,  Professor  William,  107,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Watson,  Dr.  Williaii  H.,  720,  Geuesse  street,  Utica,  N.Y.
Watts,  H.  M.,  "The  Press,"  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Webster,  David  L  ,  332,  Beacon  street,  Boston,  Mass.
Wednesday  Morning  Club,  The  President  of  the,  Pittsfield,  Mass.
Weitbuecht,  Mrs.  M.  B.,  244,  Farriugdoii-avenue,  St.  Paul,  Minn.
Weld,  Mrs.  J.  Gould,  119,  East  23rd-3treet,  New  York  City,  N.Y.
AVestbrook,  Dr.  R.  B.,  1,707,  Oxford-street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Wheeler,  William,  Concord,  Mass.

White,  Miss  Alice  B.,  213,  Commoawealth-avenue,  Boston,  Mass.
AVhite,  Miss  Amy,  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.

White,  Mrs.  Charles  T.,  213,  Commonwealth-avenue, Boston,  Mass.
White,  Professor  Frances  E.,  1,423,  North  16th-st.,  Philadelphia,  Pa,
Whiting,  Harold,  9,  Waterham-street,  Cambridge,  Mass.
Whitman,  Mrs.  Henry,  77,  Mount  Vernon-street,  Boston,  Mass.
Whitman,  P^ussell,  1,007,  The  Tacoma,  Chicago,  III
AVniTON,  Rev.  James  M.,  Ph.D  ,  Treraont,  New  York  City.
WiiiTTiER,  John  Greenleaf,  Danvers,  Mass.  .
WiLLARD,  Miss  Frances  E.,  Evanston,  111.
Williams,  Rev.  W.  H.,  14,  Chestnut-street,  Wakefield,  Mass.
WiLMARTH,  Mrs.  Mary  H.,  222,  Michigan-avejiue,  Chicago,  111.
Wilson,  Mrs.  •John  L.,  Box  19,  Framingham,  Mass.
Wilson,  Jos.  M.,  43-3,  Chestnut-street,  Philadelphia,  Penii;i.
WiLTSE,  Dr.  a.  S.,  Skiddy,  Kansas. (Hon.  Aasociule.)  ...


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


707


WoLCOTT,  Mrs.  Roger,  173,  Commonwealth-a^-enue,  Boston,  Mass.
AYooDCOCK,  Percv,  ■•  Waterniche,"  Brockville,  Canada.
Wright,  James  A.,  1,127,  Sherbrook-street,  Montreal,  Canada.
"Wright,  Dr.  Joseph  P.,  Lieut.-Colonel,  Medical  Department  U.S.A.,

Fort  Leavenworth,  Kansas.
Wynne,  Mrs.  M.  Y.,  36,  Marlborough-street,  Boston,  Mass.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


INDEX TO VOLUME  VI

1889-90.


...  270

Adey,  Moee,  Case  contributed  by ■■■  „  . ' ' Rg^-iew of  . . .  665

Aksakof,  Alexander  N.,  "  Aninnsmus  and  Spmtismu., by, ^^^^  ^^^^

Cases  contributed  by ... ■ •  ■  g^g
Alexander,  Prof.,  Notes  of  Seances  Nvith  Mrs.  Piper •■•  ••

1=^:::^;^?^^^^^^^  -  -  -  6.

^^'"^'trgnised  Apparitions  occurring  more  than  a  Year  after  Death.

F.  W.  H.  Myers  on  --^
„ Instances 1.,  20,  22,  2-:,  '^'^'^^^^^..J.^^  55,  57,  59,  60

„ Skeletons  and  Tragedies,  connection  between,  and  ...  35,  42,  45,^^^

Sec  also  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.
Armstrong,Dr.S.T.,  Case  contributed  by ... -  •  3.5^3.^

Automatic  Messages  (Tilts  and)  ... •■■ ^  -  343^349,353,355,671,672
Writing,  Instances  of... •■•  „, '  . ,94  202,

„  °  by  Hypnotised  Subjects 88,  91,  96,  189,^194,^^

... 85-97,  174

Automatism,  Phenomena  of  ...  ■  p,  -"^^ance  &c  .  ...  •■•  ^07
Azam.  Drs.  Dufay  and.  Observations  on  Clairvoyance.  .Vc.


B.


. 66,  94,  188,  194

B.,  MADAME,  Case  of.  (Leonie)  .  •  f;„„„,ess) ... ...  179,180

Babinski,M.,  Remarks  on  Hypnotism  (Pa^^i^^^^^^^^  ,.22

Badaire.  M..  Case  of  Somnambulism  ^.^^^^^  u^^  jj^le  Xechnik.'' Review
Baierlacher,  Dr.  E..  "  Die  Suggestionstherapie  und  ihie ^25


ii


Index  to  Vol.  VI.


Ballet,  Dr.,  Remarks  on  Hypnotism,  &c. '(Paris  Congress)  173,  177,  178

Barkworth,  Thos.,  on  Duplex  Personality 84

„  „ Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 606,629

Barrow,  Dr.  Ira,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of ... ... ... ... ...  206

Beith,  Dr.  A.,  Case  recorded  by  244

Bernheim,  Prof.,  Remarks  on  Hypnotism,  &c.  (Paris  Congress) 174,  175,

177,  178

Bevan,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by ... ... .. 43

Binet,  M.  A.,  "  Recberches  sur  les  Alterations  de  la  Conscience  chez  les

Hysteriques,"  by,  Review  of 200

Bingley,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by 293

Browning,  Oscar,  Notes  of  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper  626

C.

Clairvoyance,  M.  Ch.  Richet,  Experiments  in 66

Drs.  Dufay  and  Azam  on ... 407

,,  Evidence  pointing  to  Independent ...  424,426

Clarke,  J.  T.,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 568,  569-581,  637

Coote,  H.  C,  Case  recorded  by ... ... ... 273

Council  of  the  Society.  See  Officers  and  Council.
Crookes,  William.,  F.R.S.,  Notes  of  Seances  with  D.  D.  Home 98

D.

Danilewsky,  Prof.,  on  Hypnotic  Experiments  with  Animals  (Paris

Congress)  ... ... ... 178

Darwin,  Prof.  G.  H.,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 624,  627

Davis,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by... ... 289

Delbreuf,  Prof.,  Remarks  on  Hypnotism,  &c.  (Paris  Congress) 173,  174,

175,  176,  181

Deronco,  A.  Hierl,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper ...  628

Dessoir,  Dr.  Max,  "  Das  Doppel-Ich,"  by,  Review  of 207

Dignowity,  Karl,  Case  contributed  by  ... 341

Dufay,  Drs.  Azam  and,  Observations  on  Clairvoyance, by 407

Duplex  Personality,  Thos.  Barkworth  on 84

Dr.  Dessoir  on 210-215

See  also  Multiplex  Personality .

E.

EspiNAS,  Prof.,  Remarks  on  Hypnotism,  &e.  (Paris  Congress)  ..,  174,  180
Evidence,  Canons  of,  in  P.sychical  Research,  Prof.  Sidgwick  on 1

F.

Fere,  Dr.,  Cases  recorded  by 34,  85

Forel,  Dr.  A.,  "  Der  Hypnotismus,"  by.  Review  of  225


Remarks  on  Hypnotism,  &c.  (Paris  Congress)  174,  176,  177,

180,  181


Index  to  Vol.  VI.


Ill


Gale,  Harlow,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper 642

Gamier,  Dr.  Paul,  Case  recorded  by 86

Gibert,  M.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of  413

Gilibert,  Madame  de.  Case  contributed  by 22

Girault,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of  417

Grant,  Cameron,  Case  contributed  by 31

Grignon,  Rev.  W.  S.,  Case  contributed  by 289

Gurney,  Edmund,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of 88,  176,  181,  204

,, "  Edmund  Gurney  Memorial  Library,"  Supplementary

Catalogue 675

Guthrie,  J.  and  D.,  Case-contributed  by 252,253

H.

Hall,  A.  W.,  Case  contributed  by 53

Hallucinations,  New  Census  of .'. 7,  172,  173,  183,  429,  661

,,  ,,  Ad  Interim  Reports 183,  661

Happerfield,  C,  Case  contributed  by 29

Hericourt,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of 413

Hodgson,  R.,  Case  contributed  by 286

Home,  D.  D.,  Evidence  as  to  the  Mediumship  of 98

Hood,  H.  J.,  Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper 640

Hypnotism 67-83,  85,  86,  88,  91,  94,  95,  129-170,  176,  177-182,  186-199,

200-212,  216-221,  222-227,  407-422,  653,  654

Action  at  a  Distance 288,  407,  412,  413

Analogy  between,  and  certain  phases  of.  Normal  Consciousness ...  84

Animals,  Hypnotic  Experiments  with 178,  179

Automatic  Writing  by  Hypnotised  Subjects  88,  91,  96,  189,  194,  202-206

Curative  Effects  of 219,  220,  221,  226,  227,  408-413

Hypnotic  Amnesia 223,  224

Anoesthesia 201-206,  216,  224

Clairvoyance 66-83,  418-422

• ,, Hallucinations,  Negative 224

,, Hyper;esthesia 176,  177

Memory 96,  408,  409,  410,  411,  417

,,  Suggestion

■  ,,  ,, Crimes  suggested  ... ... ... ... ...  222

Human  Personality  in  Light  of  68,  77,  78,  187-
■ • '  192,  194-197,  200-206,  207-215,  216-221,

■  ■ .  222-224,  225-226,  427

„  ,, Post-Hypnotic 91,  224,  226,  416

Self 94

Hysteria  and.  Connection  between  175,  179,  180,  181,  198,  199-207,

216,  225

Jurisprudence  and.  Prof.  Liegeois  on 222

Thought-Transference  Experiments 128,  434,  435

Cards 162,  163

Colours 129,  130,  147,  148

Numbers 1.30-141,  142-158,  160-163,  166-170

,, Tables  and  Summaries  of  Results ...  141-150,  153-156,  166-168
Words 147,  158,  159,  170


IV


Index  to  Vol.  VI.
I,


Intemperance  Cured  by  Hypnotism 226,  227

International  Congress  of  Experimental  Psychology,  Report  of ... ...  171

J.

Jame.s,  Pkof.  VV.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of 205,  653,  654

,,  Report  on  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper 665

Janet,  Dr.  Jules,  "  L'llysterie  et  I'Hypnotisme,  d'apres  la  Thcorie  de  la

Double  Personnalite,"  by.  Review  of ... 216

Janet,  Prof.  Pierre,  "  L'Automati.sme  Psychologique,"  by,  Review  of ...  186
,,  ,,  Remarks  on  Hypnotism,  &c.  ^Paris  Congress)  173,  178,  180

Janicaud,  Theophile,  Case  of 422

Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper  ...  608,  616,  617,  622,  644
Jurisprudence  and  Hypnotism  in  Relation  to  Crime  ... ... 222

K.

Knott,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 249

Konstamm,  Edwin  Max,  Notes  of  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper... ... 644,  645

L.

Leaf,  Herbert,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 639

,,  ,, Mrs.,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 589,637

,, Walter,  Litt.D.,  Report  on  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance ... ...  558

,,  ,,  ,, Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 558,  633,  637,  639

,,  ,, Reviews,  "  Der  Hypnotismus,"  by  Dr.  A.  Forel ... ...  225

,,  ,, Suggestion  and  Somnambulism  in  Relation  to

Jurisprudence,  by  Prof.  Liegeois ... ...  222

,,  ,, "  Die  Suggestionstlierapie  und  ihre  Technik,"  liy

Dr.  Ed.  Baierlacher ... ... 225

Library,  "  Edmund  Gurney  "  Supplementary  Catalogue,  1890 675

Liegeois,  Prof.,  Remarks  on  Hypnotism,  &c.  (Paris  Congress) ... ...  174

.,  ,, "  De  la  Suggestion  et  du  Somnambulisjne  dans  leurs

Rapports  avec  la  Jurisprudence,"  by,  Review  of  ...  222
Lodge,  Prof,  Oliver,  F.R.S.,  Report  on  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance  443,  647
,,  ,,  ,, Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper  ... ... ...  465

Lombroso,  Prof.,  Remarks  on  Hypnotism,  &c.  (Paris  Congress) 180

M.

Macalister,  Prof.  A.,F.R.S.,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 60,3,  628

Magniisson,  Mr.,  Case  contributed  by ... 31

Massey,  C.  C,  Seance  with  Mrs,  Piper  640

McKay,  Rev.  C. ,  Case  contributed  by 33

Meetings  of  the  Society 1,7,  406,  429,  660

Mesnet,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of  96,  415,  416

Minot,  Prof.,  On  Diagram-habit  as  bearing  on  the  Validity  of  certain
Experiments  in  Thought-Transference  ;  criticised  by  Colonel  Taylor  398,  401


_  Index  to  Vol.  VI.  v

Moir,  William,  Finding  of  a  Skeleton  through  a  Dream  of 35,  303

Montague,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 41,  42

Morris,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by 256,  259,  309


Multiplex  Personality,  Phenomena  pointing  to 68,  77,  78,  84-97,  186-197,

200-215,  216-221,  224,  226,  427

See  also  Duplex  Personalitij, Hi/pnotism,  and

Secondary  Consciousness.

Myers,  Dr.  A.  T. ,  Note  on  Hypnotism  and  Hysteria 199

,,  ,, Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper 628

,,  ,, Report  of  the  International  Congress  of  Experimental

Psychology 171

,, F.  W.  H.,  Phantasms  of  the  Dead,  a  Defence  of 314

,,  ,, Recognised  Apparitions  a  Year  after  Death 13

,,  ,, Record  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance ...  436

,.  ,,  ,, Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 621,  645

,,  ,, Report  of  Hypnotic  Experiments  of  the  Society  at  Paris

Congress 176,  177,  181

,,  ,, Reviews,  "Animismus  and  Spiritismus,"  by  A.  Aksakof  665

,, "  L'Automatisme  Psychologique,"  by  Prof.  P.  Janet  ...  186

,, "  Das  Doppel-Ich,"  by  Dr.  Max  Dessoir 207

,,  ,, "  Recherches  sur  les  Alterations  de  la  Conscience  chez

les  Hysteriques,'.'  by  A.  Binet 200

.,  ,, "  L'Hysterie  et  I'Hypnotisme,"  by  Dr.  Jules  Janet ...  216

N.

Nartzeff,  M.  a..  Case  contributed  by 355

Norris,  T.  J.,  „ 235

0.

OCHOROWICZ,  M.,  on  Hypnotism  (Paris  Congress) 174,  175,  177,  181

Officers  and  Council  of  the  Society 679

Owen,  R.  Dale,  Cases  recorded  by 32,  33,  54

P.

Paris,*  International  Congress  of  Experimental  Psychology  at 171

Pearson,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by 20

Pennee,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 60

Peieliguine  Case,  The 355

Personality.  Sec  Duplex  and  MuUipilcx,  and  Secondary  Consciousness.

Phantasms  of  the  Dead,  Myers,  F.  \Y.  H.,  a  Defence  of 314

,,  ,,  Podmore,  F.,  on 229

Instances 235,  240,  244,  246,  247,  249,  251-256,
270,  276,  283,  284,  286-288,  289,

290-294,  297-304,  309,  341
See  also  Apparitions.
Piper,  Mrs.,  Record  of  Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of  Trance

through  the  Mediuraship  of  436

Pittar,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 53


VI


Index  to  Vol.  VI.


Podmore,  Frank,  on  Phantasms  of  the  Dead ... 'J29

Potter,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by ... 240

Presidential  Addresses 1,7,429

Probabilities,  Calculus  of,  in  connection  with  Psychical  Research 66,  67,

. 72-75,  82,  128,  209,  210,  398,  401-405

Psychology,  International  Congress  of,  Experimental ...  ■ 171

Pye,  W.  A.,  Notes  of  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper ... ... ....  596,640

11.

R.,  Marceline,  Case  of '  219-221

Reviews  186,  200,  207,  216,  222,  225,  665

Ribot,  Prof.,  Presidential  Address  at  Paris  Congress... ... ... ...  172

Ricliet,  M.  Ch  ,  Hypnotic  Lucidity,  or  Clairvoyance 66

Remarks  on  Hypnotism,  &c.  (Paris  Congresis) ...  172182

Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 618,  629

Rolleston,  H.  D.,  Notes  of  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 635

Romilly,  Hugh  Hastings,  Case  contributed  by 55

S.

SCHNELLER,  Fraulein,  Case  contributed  by  341

Secondary  Consciousness,  Phenomena  of —

. Hypnotic  68,85,86,88,91,95,96,97,186-197,201-200,207-215,

216,  221,  222-224,  226,  427

Normal 84-97,  191,  192,  196,  197,  207,  208,  210-215

Shattock,  S.  G.,  Notes  of  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 633

Sidgwick,  Prof.,  Presidential  Addresses,  Canons  of  Evidence  in  Psychical

Research 1

,,  ,,  ,,  Nev7  Census  of  Hallucinations  7, 429

,, Remarks  on  Hypnotism,  &c.  (Paris  Congress)  173,  176,

178,  182

,, and  Mrs.,  Experiments  in  (Hypnotic)  Thought-Traus-

ference 128,  434

„  „  „ Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 615,  622,  628,  629,

641,  643,  644

Skipsey,  Joseph,  Case  contributed  by  243

Smith,  H.  Babington,  Seance  Avith  Mrs.  Piper ...  645

Smith,  G.  A.,  and  Prof,  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  Experiments  in  (Hypnotic)

Thought-Transference • 128,4.34

Society  for  Psychical  Research—

General  Meetings,  Ordinary 1,  7,  406,  429,  660

Members,  Associates,  and  Hon.  Members 679

,,  ,,  ,,  ,, American  Branch 697

Officers  and  Council  679

Somnambulism,  Natural,  A  Case  of 422-427

Spiritualism —

Aksakof,  A.,  on  "  Animismus  and  Spiritismus  " 665

,,  Automatic  Messages  given  through  Mediums  343,

349,  353,  355

Crookes,  William,  F.R.S.,  Experiments  with  D.  D.  Home 98

Janet,  Prof.,  on ..  196

Piper,  Mrs.,  Observations  of  Trance  Plienomena  through  the

Mediumship  of  436


Index  to  Vol.  VI.


vii


Stone,  Mrs. ,  Case  contributed  by  247

Stramm,  Mdlle.  Emma,  Automatic  Messages  through .... 343

■ •  ■ ■•■ T.- ■■  ; - '  ■/•

Taylor,  Lieut. -Col.  G.  le  M.,  Experimental  Comparison  between

Cliance  and  Thought-Transfei-ence  in  Correspondence  of  Diagrams  ...  398

Telepathic  and  other  Experiences,  a  Record  of ... ... 358

,, Experimental 365,  376,  377-397

,,  ,,  Hallucinations,  Auditory  or  Visual —

Death,  coincident  with ... 371,  372,  373

Living 368-370

Premonitory 374,  375

. „  ,„ Memory  Externalised  revived ... ... 366,  367

„  „ Monitions ... 359-361,367,368

Spontaneous 359-361,  363,  364,  366,  367,  368,  370-375

Thought-Transference —

,, Prof,  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  Experiments  in ... 128

,, Number-habit,  and 209,210

,, Taylor,  Lieut. -Col.  G.  Le  M. ,  Comparison  between  Chance  and  398

Trance,  A  Record  of  Observations  of  Certain  Phenomena  of ... 436  664


V.


Verrall,  Mrs.,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 584,  615,  621,  641

• ■  W.

Walker,  Mis.S,  Case  contributed  by ... 293

Wedgwood,  Hensleigh,  Seances  with  Mrs.  Piper 640

Wesermann,  H.  M.,  Experiments  of 287,  288

Wiesler,  Mrs.  and  Miss  von.  Automatic  Messages  through  ... 349

Wingfield,  Hugh  E.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of 198

,,  ,, Seance  with  Mrs.  Piper ... ...  637

Witt.,  Blanche,  Case  of .. ., ...  216-218

Wittgenstein,  Prince  Emile  von.  Automatic  Messages  through 353

'  X.

X. ,  Mlss,  Crystal  Gazing  192

,, Record  of  Telepathic  and  other  Experiences 358
